===PAGE:63===
1 - Nutritional Disorders
Chapter 1. Nutrition: General Considerations
Introduction
Nutrition is the science of food and its relationship to health. Nutrients are chemicals in foods that are
used by the body for growth, maintenance, and energy. Nutrients that cannot be synthesized by the body
and thus must be derived from the diet are considered essential. They include vitamins, minerals, some
amino acids, and some fatty acids. Nutrients that the body can synthesize from other compounds,
although they may also be derived from the diet, are considered nonessential. Macronutrients are
required by the body in relatively large amounts; micronutrients are needed in minute amounts.
Lack of nutrients can result in deficiency syndromes (eg, kwashiorkor, pellagra) or other disorders (. Excess intake of macronutrients can lead to obesity ( and related disorders; excess intake of
micro-nutrients can be toxic. Also, the balance of various types of nutrients, such as how much
usaturated vs saturated fat is consumed, can influence the development of disorders.
Macronutrients
Macronutrients constitute the bulk of the diet and supply energy and many essential nutrients.
Carbohydrates, proteins (including essential amino acids), fats (including essential fatty acids),
macrominerals, and water are macronutrients. Carbohydrates, fats, and proteins are interchangeable as
sources of energy; fats yield 9 kcal/g (37.8 kJ/g); proteins and carbohydrates yield 4 kcal/g (16.8 kJ/g).
Carbohydrates:
Dietary carbohydrates are broken down into glucose and other monosaccharides.
Carbohydrates increase blood glucose levels, supplying energy. Simple carbohydrates are composed of
small molecules, generally monosaccharides or disaccharides, which increase blood glucose levels
rapidly. Complex carbohydrates are composed of larger molecules, which are broken down into
monosaccharides. Complex carbohydrates increase blood glucose levels more slowly but for a longer
time. Glucose and sucrose are simple carbohydrates; starches and fiber are complex carbohydrates.
The glycemic index measures how rapidly consumption of a carbohydrate increases plasma glucose
levels. Values range from 1 (the slowest increase) to 100 (the fastest increase, equivalent to pure glucose
—see
Table 1-1
). However, the actual rate of increase also depends on what foods are consumed with the
carbohydrate.
Carbohydrates with a high glycemic index may increase plasma glucose to high levels rapidly. It is
hypothesized that, as a result, insulin levels increase, inducing hypoglycemia and hunger, which tends to
lead to consumption of excess calories and weight gain. Carbohydrates with a low glycemic index
increase plasma glucose levels slowly, resulting in lower postprandial insulin levels and less hunger,
which probably makes consumption of excess calories less likely. These effects are predicted to result in
a more favorable lipid profile and a decreased risk of obesity, diabetes mellitus, and complications of
diabetes if present.
Proteins:
Dietary proteins are broken down into peptides and amino acids. Proteins are required for
tissue maintenance, replacement, function, and growth. However, if the body is not getting enough
calories from dietary sources or tissue stores (particularly of fat), protein may be used for energy.
As the body uses dietary protein for tissue production, there is a net gain of protein (positive nitrogen
balance). During catabolic
[Table 1-1.
Glycemic Index of Some Foods]
states (eg, starvation, infections, burns), more protein may be used (because body tissues are broken
down) than is absorbed, resulting in a net loss of protein (negative nitrogen balance). Nitrogen balance is
best determined by subtracting the amount of nitrogen excreted in urine and feces from the amount of
===PAGE:64===
nitrogen consumed.
Of the 20 amino acids, 9 are essential amino acids (EAAs); they cannot be synthesized and must be
obtained from the diet. All people require 8 EAAs; infants also require histidine.
The weight-adjusted requirement for dietary protein correlates with growth rate, which decreases from
infancy until adulthood. The daily dietary protein requirement decreases from 2.2 g/kg in 3-mo-old infants
to 1.2 g/kg in 5-yr-old children and to 0.8 g/kg in adults. Protein requirements correspond to EAA
requirements (see
Table 1-2
). Adults trying to increase muscle mass need very little extra protein beyond the requirements in
the table.
The amino acid composition of protein varies widely. Biological value (BV) reflects the similarity in amino
acid composition of protein to that of animal tissues; thus, BV indicates what percentage of a dietary
protein provides EAAs for the body. A perfect match is egg protein, with a value of 100. Animal proteins in
milk and meat have a high BV (~90); proteins in cereal and vegetables have a lower BV (~40), and some
derived proteins (eg, gelatin) have a BV of 0. The extent to which dietary proteins supply each other's
missing amino acids (complementarity) determines the overall BV of the diet. The recommended daily
allowances (RDA) for protein assumes that the average mixed diet has a BV of 70.
Fats:
Fats are broken down into fatty acids and glycerol. Fats are required for tissue growth and hormone
production. Saturated fatty acids, common in animal fats, tend to be solid at room temperature. Except for
palm and coconut oils, fats derived from plants tend to be liquid at room temperature; these fats contain
high levels of monounsaturated fatty acids or polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs).
Partial hydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids (as occurs during food manufacturing) produces trans
fatty acids, which are solid or semisolid at room temperature. In the US, the main dietary source of trans
fatty acids is partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, used in manufacturing certain foods (eg, cookies,
crackers, chips) to prolong shelf-life. Trans fatty acids may elevate LDL cholesterol and lower HDL; they
may also independently increase the risk of coronary artery disease.
Essential fatty acids (EFAs) are linoleic acid, an
ω
-6 (n-6) fatty acid, and linolenic acid, an
ω
-3 (n-3) fatty
acid. Other
ω
-6 acids (eg, arachidonic acid) and other
ω
-3 fatty acids (eg, eicosapentaenoic acid,
docosahexaenoic acid) are required by the body but can be synthesized from EFAs.
EFAs (see also p.
) are needed for the formation of various eicosanoids (biologically active lipids),
including prostaglandins, thromboxanes, prostacyclins, and leukotrienes. Consumption of
ω
-3 fatty acids
may decrease the risk of coronary artery disease.
[Table 1-2.
Essential Amino Acid Requirements in mg/kg Body Weight]
Requirements for EFAs vary by age. Adults require amounts of linoleic acid equal to at least 2% of total
caloric needs and linolenic acid equal to at least 0.5%. Vegetable oils provide linoleic acid and linolenic
acid. Oils made from safflower, sunflower, corn, soya, primrose, pumpkin, and wheat germ provide large
amounts of linoleic acid. Marine fish oils and oils made from flax-seeds, pumpkin, soy, and canola provide
large amounts of linolenic acid. Marine fish oils also provide some other
ω
-3 fatty acids in large amounts.
Macrominerals:
Na, Cl, K, Ca, P, and Mg are required in relatively large amounts per day (see
Tables 1-3
,
1-4
, and
5-2
).
Water:
Water is considered a macronutrient because it is required in amounts of 1 mL/kcal (0.24 mL/kJ)
of energy expended, or about 2500 mL/day. Needs vary with fever, physical activity, and changes in
climate and humidity.
[Table 1-3.
Macrominerals]
===PAGE:65===
[Table 1-4.
Recommended Dietary Reference Intakes* for Some Macronutrients, Food and Nutrition
Board, Institute of Medicine of the National Academies]
Micronutrients
Vitamins and minerals required in minute amounts (trace minerals) are micronutrients (see
Chs. 4
and
).
Water-soluble vitamins
are vitamin C (ascorbic acid) and 8 members of the vitamin B complex: biotin,
folate, niacin, pantothenic acid, riboflavin (vitamin B
), thiamin (vitamin B
), vitamin B
(pyridoxine), and
vitamin B
(cobalamin).
Fat-soluble vitamins
are vitamins A (retinol), D (cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol), E (
α
-tocopherol), and
K (phylloquinone and menaquinone).
Only vitamins A, E, and B
are stored to any significant extent in the body; the other vitamins must be
consumed regularly to maintain tissue health.
Essential trace minerals
include chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, selenium,
and zinc. Except for chromium, each of these is incorporated into enzymes or hormones required in
metabolism. Except for deficiencies of iron and zinc, micromineral deficiencies are uncommon in
developed countries (see
Chapter 5
).
Other minerals (eg, aluminum, arsenic, boron, cobalt, fluoride, nickel, silicon, vanadium) have not been
proved essential for people. Fluoride, although not essential, helps prevent tooth decay by forming a
compound with Ca (CaF
), which stabilizes the mineral matrix in teeth.
All trace minerals are toxic at high levels, and some (arsenic, nickel, and chromium) may cause cancer.
Other Dietary Substances
The daily human diet typically contains as many as 100,000 chemicals (eg, coffee contains 1000). Of
these, only 300 are nutrients, only some of which are essential. However, many nonnutrients in foods are
useful. For example, food additives (eg, preservatives, emulsifiers, antioxidants, stabilizers) improve the
production and stability of foods. Trace components (eg, spices, flavors, odors, colors, phytochemicals,
many other natural products) improve appearance and taste.
Fiber:
Fiber occurs in various forms (eg, cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, gums). It
increases GI motility,
prevents constipation, and helps control diverticular disease. Fiber is thought to accelerate the elimination
of cancer-causing substances produced by bacteria in the large intestine. Epidemiologic evidence
suggests an association between colon cancer and low fiber intake and a beneficial effect of fiber in
patients with functional bowel disorders, Crohn's disease, obesity, and hemorrhoids. Soluble fiber
(present in fruits, vegetables, oats, barley, and legumes) reduces the postprandial increase in blood
glucose and insulin and can reduce cholesterol levels.
The typical Western diet is low in fiber (about 12 g/day) because of a high intake of highly refined wheat
flour and a low intake of fruits and vegetables. Increasing fiber intake to about 30 g/day by consuming
more vegetables, fruits, and high-fiber cereals and grains is generally recommended. However, very high
fiber intake may reduce absorption of certain minerals.
Nutritional Requirements
Good nutrition aims to achieve and maintain a desirable body composition and high potential for physical
and mental work. Balancing energy intake with energy expenditure is necessary for a desirable body
weight. Energy expenditure depends on age, sex, weight (see
Table 1-4
), and metabolic and physical
activity. If energy intake exceeds expenditure, weight is gained. Taking in about 100 calories/day more
than needed results in a weight gain of about 4 to 5 kg in a year. If energy intake is less than expenditure,
weight is lost.
===PAGE:66===
Daily dietary requirements for essential nutrients also depend on age, sex, weight, and metabolic and
physical activity. Every 5 yr, the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences/National
Research Council and the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) issues the dietary reference intakes
(DRIs) for protein, energy, and some vitamins and minerals (see
Tables 1-4
,
4-1
, and
5-2
). For vitamins and minerals about which less is known, safe and adequate daily dietary
intakes are estimated.
Pregnant women ( and infants ( have special nutritional needs.
The USDA publishes the Food Guide Pyramid, which specifies the number of recommended daily
servings of various food groups. The recommendations are individualized based on age, sex, and
physical activity (see
Table 1-5
). Generally, the recommended intake decreases with aging because physical activity tends to
decrease, resulting in less energy expended. The new Food Guide Pyramid emphasizes the following:
• Increasing consumption of whole grains
• Increasing consumption of vegetables and fruits
• Substituting fat-free or low-fat milk products (or equivalents) for whole-fat milk products
• Reducing consumption of saturated fats and trans fatty acids
• Exercising regularly
Adequate fluid intake is also important.
Fats should constitute ≤ 30% of total calories, and saturated and trans fatty acids should constitute <
10%. Excess intake of saturated fats contributes to atherosclerosis. Substituting polyunsaturated fatty
acids for saturated fats can decrease the risk of atherosclerosis. Routine use of nutritional supplements is
not necessary or beneficial; some supplements can be harmful. For example, excess vitamin A can lead to
hypervitaminosis A, with headaches, osteoporosis, and rash.
Nutrition in Clinical Medicine
Nutritional deficiencies can often worsen health outcomes (whether a disorder is present or not), and
some disorders (eg, malabsorption) can cause nutritional deficiencies. Also, many patients (eg, elderly
patients during acute hospitalization) have unsuspected nutritional deficiencies that require treatment.
Many medical centers have multi-disciplinary nutrition support teams of physicians, nurses, dietitians, and
pharmacists to help the clinician prevent, diagnose, and treat occult nutritional deficiencies.
Overnutrition may contribute to chronic disorders, such as cancer, hypertension, obesity, diabetes
mellitus, and coronary artery disease. Dietary restrictions are necessary in many hereditary metabolic
disorders (eg, galactosemia, phenylketonuria).
Evaluation of Nutritional Status
Indications for nutritional evaluation include undesirable body weight or body composition, suspicion of
specific deficiencies or toxicities
[Table 1-5.
Recommended Dietary Intake for 40-yr-Olds with Moderate Physical Activity*]
of essential nutrients, and, in infants and children, insufficient growth or development. Nutritional status
should be evaluated routinely as part of the clinical examination for infants and children, the elderly,
people taking several drugs, people with psychiatric disorders, and people with systemic disorders that
last longer than several days.
===PAGE:67===
Evaluating general nutritional status includes history, physical examination, and sometimes tests. If
undernutrition is suspected, laboratory tests (eg, albumin levels) and skin tests for delayed
hypersensitivity may be done (. Body composition analysis (eg, skinfold measurements, bioelectrical impedance analysis) is used to
estimate percentage of body fat and to evaluate obesity (.
History includes questions about dietary intake, weight change, and risk factors for nutritional deficiencies
and a focused review of systems (see
Table 2-1
. A dietitian can obtain a more detailed dietary history. It usually includes a list of foods
eaten within the previous 24 h and a food questionnaire. A food diary may be used to record all foods
eaten. The weighed ad libitum diet, in which the patient weighs and writes down all foods consumed, is
the most accurate record.
A complete physical examination, including measurement of height and weight and distribution of body
fat, should be done. Body mass index (BMI)—weight(kg)/height(m)
, which adjusts weight for height (see
Table 6-2
, is more accurate than height and weight tables. There are standards for growth and
weight gain in infants, children, and adolescents (.
Distribution of body fat is important. Disproportionate truncal obesity (ie, waist/hip ratio > 0.8) is
associated with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disorders, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus more
often than fat located elsewhere. Measuring waist circumference in patients with a BMI of < 35 helps
determine whether they have truncal obesity and helps predict risk of diabetes, hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia, and cardiovascular disorders. Risk is increased if waist circumference is > 102 cm
(> 40 in) in men or > 88 cm (> 35 in) in women.
Nutrient-Drug Interactions
Nutrition can affect the body's response to drugs; conversely, drugs can affect the body's nutrition.
Foods can enhance, delay, or decrease drug absorption. Foods impair absorption of many antibiotics.
They can alter metabolism of drugs; eg, high-protein diets can accelerate metabolism of certain drugs by
stimulating
cytochrome P-450. Eating grapefruit can inhibit cytochrome P-450 34A, slowing metabolism of
some drugs (eg, amiodarone, carbamazepine, cyclosporine, certain Ca channel blockers). Diets that alter
the bacterial flora may markedly affect the overall metabolism of certain drugs. Some foods affect the
body's response to drugs. For example, tyramine, a component of cheese and a potent vasoconstrictor,
can cause hypertensive crisis in some patients who take monoamine oxidase inhibitors and eat cheese.
Nutritional deficiencies can affect drug absorption and metabolism. Severe energy and protein
deficiencies reduce enzyme tissue concentrations and may impair the response to drugs by reducing
absorption or protein binding and causing liver dysfunction. Changes in the GI tract can impair absorption
and affect the response to a drug. Deficiency of Ca, Mg, or zinc may impair drug metabolism. Vitamin C
deficiency decreases activity of drug-metabolizing enzymes, especially in the elderly.
Many drugs affect appetite, food absorption, and tissue metabolism (see
Table 1-6
). Some drugs (eg, metoclopramide) increase GI motility, decreasing food absorption. Other
drugs (eg, opioids, anticholinergics) decrease GI motility. Some drugs are better tolerated if taken with
food.
Certain drugs affect mineral metabolism. For example, diuretics, especially thiazides, and corticosteroids
can deplete body K, increasing susceptibility to digoxin-induced cardiac arrhythmias. Repeated use of
laxatives may deplete K. Cortisol, desoxycorticosterone, and aldosterone cause marked Na and water
retention, at least temporarily; retention is much less with prednisone, prednisolone, and some other
corticosteroid analogs. Sulfonylureas and lithium can impair the uptake or release of iodine by the thyroid.
Oral contraceptives can lower blood zinc levels and increase copper levels. Certain antibiotics (eg,
tetracyclines) reduce iron absorption, as can certain foods (eg, vegetables, tea, bran).
Certain drugs affect vitamin absorption or metabolism. Ethanol impairs thiamin utilization, and isoniazid
interferes with niacin and pyridoxine metabolism. Ethanol and oral contraceptives inhibit folate (folic acid)
===PAGE:68===
absorption. Most patients receiving phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone, or phenothiazines develop folate
deficiency, probably because hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing enzymes are affected. Folate
supplements may
[Table 1-6.
Effects of Some Drugs on Nutrition]
make phenytoin less effective. Anticonvulsants can cause vitamin D deficiency. Malabsorption of vitamin
B
can occur with use of aminosalicylic acid, slow-release K iodide, colchicine, trifluoperazine, ethanol,
and oral contraceptives. Oral contraceptives with a high progestin dose can cause depression, probably
because of metabolically induced tryptophan deficiency.
Food Additives and Contaminants
Additives:
Chemicals are often combined with foods to facilitate their processing and preservation or to
enhance their desirability. Only amounts of additives shown to be safe by laboratory tests are permitted in
commercially prepared foods.
Weighing the benefits of additives (eg, reduced waste, increased variety of available foods, protection
against food-borne illness) against the risks is often complex. For example, nitrite, which is used in cured
meats, inhibits the growth of
Clostridium botulinum
and improves flavor. However, nitrite converts to
nitrosamines, which are carcinogens in animals. On the other hand, the amount of nitrite added to cured
meat is small compared with the amount from naturally occurring food nitrates converted to nitrite by the
salivary glands. Dietary vitamin C can reduce nitrite formation in the GI tract. Rarely, some additives (eg,
sulfites) cause food hypersensitivity (allergy) reactions. Most of these reactions are caused by ordinary
foods (.
Contaminants:
Sometimes limited amounts of contaminants are allowed in foods because the
contaminants cannot be completely eliminated without damaging the foods. Common contaminants are
pesticides, heavy metals (lead, cadmium, mercury), nitrates (in green leafy vegetables), aflatoxins (in nuts
and milk), growth-promoting hormones (in dairy products and meat), animal hairs and feces, and insect
parts.
FDA-estimated safe levels are levels that have not caused illness or adverse effects in people. However,
demonstrating a causal relationship between extremely low level exposures and adverse effects is
difficult; long-term adverse effects, although unlikely, are still possible. Safe levels are often determined
by consensus rather than by hard evidence.
===PAGE:69===
Chapter 2. Undernutrition
Introduction
Undernutrition is a form of malnutrition. (Malnutrition also includes overnutrition—see
Chapter 6
).
Undernutrition can result from inadequate ingestion of nutrients, malabsorption, impaired
metabolism, loss of nutrients due to diarrhea, or increased nutritional requirements (as occurs
in cancer or infection). Undernutrition progresses in stages; each stage usually takes
considerable time to develop. First, nutrient levels in blood and tissues change, followed by
intracellular changes in biochemical functions and structure. Ultimately, symptoms and signs
appear.
Risk Factors
Undernutrition is associated with many disorders and circumstances, including poverty and social
deprivation. Risk is also greater at certain times (ie, during infancy, early childhood, adolescence,
pregnancy, breastfeeding, and old age).
Infancy and childhood:
Infants and children are particularly susceptible to undernutrition because of
their high demand for energy and essential nutrients. Because vitamin K does not readily cross the
placenta, neonates may be deficient, so all are given a single injection of vitamin K within 1 h of birth to
prevent hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, a life-threatening disorder (see pp.
and
). Infants fed only breast milk, which is typically low in vitamin D, are given supplemental vitamin D;
they can develop vitamin B
deficiency if the mother is a vegan. Inadequately fed infants and children
are at risk of protein-energy undernutrition (PEU—previously called protein-energy malnutrition) and
deficiencies of iron, folate (folic acid), vitamins A and C, copper, and zinc. During adolescence, nutritional
requirements increase because the growth rate accelerates. Anorexia nervosa ( may affect
adolescent girls in particular.
Pregnancy and breastfeeding:
Requirements for nutrients increase during pregnancy and
breastfeeding. Aberrations of diet, including pica (consumption of nonnutritive substances, such as clay
and charcoal), may occur during
pregnancy. Anemia due to iron deficiency is common, as is anemia due
to folate deficiency, especially among women who have taken oral contraceptives. Vitamin D deficiency is
common during late pregnancy, predisposing the child to decreased bone mass.
Old age:
Aging—even when disease or dietary deficiency is absent—leads to sarcopenia (progressive
loss of lean body mass), starting after age 40 and eventually amounting to a muscle loss of about 10 kg
(22 lb) in men and 5 kg (11 lb) in women. Undernutrition contributes to sarcopenia, and sarcopenia
accounts for many of the complications of undernutrition (eg, decreased nitrogen balance, increased
susceptibility to infections). Causes of sarcopenia include the following:
• Decreased physical activity
• Decreased food intake
• Increased levels of cytokines (particularly interleukin-6)
• Decreased levels of growth hormone and mechano growth factor (insulin-like growth factor-3)
• In men, decreasing androgen levels
Aging decreases basal metabolic rate (due mainly to decreased fat-free mass), total body weight, height,
and skeletal mass; aging increases mean body fat (as a percentage of body weight) to about 30% (from
20%) in men and to 40% (from 27%) in women.
From age 20 to 80, food intake decreases, especially in men. Anorexia due to aging itself has many
causes, including reduced adaptive relaxation of the stomach's fundus, increased release and activity of
===PAGE:70===
cholecystokinin (which produces satiation), and increased leptin (an anorectic hormone produced by fat
cells). Diminished taste and smell can decrease eating pleasure but usually decrease food intake only
slightly. Anorexia may have other causes (eg, loneliness, inability to shop or prepare meals, dementia,
some chronic disorders, use of certain drugs). Depression is a common cause. Occasionally, anorexia
nervosa (sometimes called anorexia tardive in the elderly), paranoia, or mania interferes with eating.
Dental problems limit the ability to chew and subsequently to digest foods. Swallowing difficulties (eg, due
to strokes, other neurologic disorders, esophageal candidiasis, or xerostomia) are common. Poverty or
functional impairment limits access to nutrients.
The institutionalized elderly are at particular risk of PEU. They are often confused and may be unable to
express hunger or preferences for foods. They may be physically unable to feed themselves. Chewing or
swallowing may be very slow, making it tedious for another person to feed them enough food.
In the elderly, particularly the institutionalized elderly, inadequate intake and often decreased absorption
or synthesis of vitamin D, increased demand for vitamin D, and inadequate exposure to sunshine
contribute to osteomalacia (.
Disorders and medical procedures:
Diabetes, some chronic disorders that affect the GI tract, intestinal
resection, and certain other GI surgical procedures tend to impair absorption of fat-soluble vitamins,
vitamin B
, Ca, and iron. Gluten enteropathy, pancreatic insufficiency, or other disorders can result in
malabsorption. Decreased absorption possibly contributes to iron deficiency and osteoporosis. Liver
disorders impair storage of vitamins A and B
and interfere with metabolism of protein and energy
sources. Renal insufficiency predisposes to protein, iron, and vitamin D deficiencies. Anorexia causes
some patients with cancer or depression and many with AIDS to consume inadequate amounts of food.
Infections, trauma, hyperthyroidism, extensive burns, and prolonged fever increase metabolic demands.
Any condition that increases cytokines may be accompanied by muscle loss, lipolysis, low albumin levels,
and anorexia.
Vegetarian diets:
Iron deficiency can occur in ovo-lacto vegetarians (although such a diet can be
compatible with good health). Vegans may develop vitamin B
deficiency unless they consume yeast
extracts or Asian-style fermented foods. Their intake of Ca, iron, and zinc also tends to be low. A fruit-only
diet is not recommended because it is deficient in protein, Na, and many micronutrients.
Fad diets:
Some fad diets result in vitamin, mineral, and protein deficiencies; cardiac, renal, and
metabolic disorders; and sometimes death. Very low calorie diets (< 400 kcal/day) cannot sustain health
for long.
Drugs and nutritional supplements:
Many drugs (eg, appetite suppressants, digoxin) decrease
appetite; others impair nutrient absorption or metabolism. Some drugs (eg, stimulants) have catabolic
effects. Certain drugs can impair absorption of many nutrients; eg, anticonvulsants can impair absorption
of vitamins.
Alcohol or drug dependency:
Patients with alcohol or drug dependency may neglect their nutritional
needs. Absorption and metabolism of nutrients may also be impaired. IV drug addicts typically become
undernourished, as do
[Table 2-1.
Symptoms and Signs of Nutritional Deficiency]
alcoholics who consume ≥ 1 quart of hard liquor/day. Alcoholism can cause deficiencies of Mg, zinc, and
certain vitamins, including thiamin.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms vary depending on the cause and type of undernutrition (see p.
and
Chs. 4
and
).
Evaluation
===PAGE:71===
Diagnosis is based on results of medical and diet histories, physical examination, body composition
analysis (, and selected laboratory tests.
History:
History should include questions about dietary intake (see
Fig. 2-1
), recent changes in weight, and risk factors for undernutrition, including drug and alcohol use.
Unintentional loss of ≥ 10% of usual body weight during a 3-mo period indicates a high probability of
undernutrition. Social history should include questions about whether money is available for food and
whether the patient can shop and cook.
Review of systems should focus on symptoms of nutritional deficiencies (see
Table 2-1
). For example,
impaired night vision may indicate vitamin A deficiency.
Physical examination:
Physical examination should include measurement of height and weight,
inspection of body fat distribution, and anthropometric measurements of lean body mass. Body mass
index (BMI = weight(kg)/height(m)
) adjusts weight for height (see
Table 6-2
. If weight is < 80% of what is predicted for the patient's height or if BMI is ≤ 18,
undernutrition should be suspected. Although these findings are useful in diagnosing undernutrition and
are acceptably sensitive, they lack specificity.
[Fig. 2-1.
Mini nutritional assessment.]
The mid upper arm muscle area estimates lean body mass. This area is derived from the triceps skinfold
thickness (TSF) and mid upper arm circumference. Both are measured at the same site, with the patient's
right arm in a relaxed position. The average mid upper arm circumference is about 32 ± 5 cm for men and
28 ± 6 cm for women. The formula for calculating the mid upper arm muscle area in cm
is as follows:
This formula corrects the upper arm area for fat and bone. Average values for the mid upper arm muscle
area are 54 ± 11 cm
for men and 30 ± 7 cm
for women. A value < 75% of this standard (depending on
age) indicates depletion of lean body mass (see
Table 2-2
). This measurement may be affected by physical activity, genetic factors, and age-related
muscle loss.
Physical examination should focus on signs of specific nutritional deficiencies. Signs of PEU (eg, edema,
muscle wasting, skin changes) should be sought. Examination should also focus on signs of conditions
that could predispose to nutritional deficiencies, such as dental problems. Mental status should be
assessed, because depression and cognitive impairment can lead to weight loss.
The widely used Subjective Global Assessment (SGA) uses information from the patient history (eg,
weight loss, change in intake, GI symptoms), physical examination findings (eg, loss of muscle and
subcutaneous fat, edema, ascites), and the clinician's judgment of the patient's nutritional status. The
Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA) has been validated and is widely used, especially for elderly patients
(see
Fig. 2-1
). The Simplified Nutrition Assessment Questionnaire (SNAQ), a simple, validated method of
predicting future weight loss, may be used (see
Fig. 2-2
).
Testing:
The extent of laboratory testing needed is unclear and may depend on the patient's
circumstances. If the cause is obvious and correctable (eg, a wilderness survival situation), testing is
probably of little benefit. Other patients may require more detailed evaluation.
Serum albumin measurement is the laboratory test most often used. Decreases in albumin and other
proteins (eg, prealbumin [transthyretin], transferrin, retinol-binding protein) may indicate protein deficiency
or PEU. As undernutrition progresses, albumin decreases slowly; prealbumin, transferrin, and retinolbinding protein decrease rapidly. Albumin measurement is inexpensive and predicts morbidity and
===PAGE:72===
mortality better than measurement of the other proteins. However, the correlation of albumin with
morbidity and mortality may be related to nonnutritional as well as nutritional factors. Inflammation
produces cytokines that cause albumin and other nutritional protein markers to extravasate, decreasing
serum levels. Because prealbumin, transferrin, and retinol-binding protein decrease more rapidly during
starvation than does albumin, their measurements are sometimes used to diagnose or assess the severity
of acute starvation. However, whether they are more sensitive or specific than albumin is unclear.
Total lymphocyte count, which often decreases as undernutrition progresses, may be determined.
Undernutrition causes a marked decline in CD4+ T lymphocytes, so this count may not be useful in
patients who have AIDS.
Skin tests using antigens can detect impaired cell-mediated immunity in PEU and in some other disorders
of undernutrition (.
Other laboratory tests, such as measuring vitamin and mineral levels, are used selectively to diagnose
specific deficiencies.
[Table 2-2.
Mid Upper Arm Muscle Area in Adults]
[Figure 2-2.
Simplified Nutrition Assessment Questionnaire (SNAQ).]
Protein-Energy Undernutrition
Protein-energy undernutrition (PEU), previously called protein-energy malnutrition, is an energy
deficit due to chronic deficiency of all macronutrients. It commonly includes deficiencies of
many micronutrients. PEU can be sudden and total (starvation) or gradual. Severity ranges from
subclinical deficiencies to obvious wasting (with edema, hair loss, and skin atrophy) to
starvation. Multiple organ systems are often impaired. Diagnosis usually involves laboratory
testing, including serum albumin. Treatment consists of correcting fluid and electrolyte deficits
with IV solutions, then gradually replenishing nutrients, orally if possible.
In developed countries, PEU is common among the institutionalized elderly (although often not suspected)
and among patients with disorders that decrease appetite or impair nutrient digestion, absorption, or
metabolism. In developing countries, PEU affects children who do not consume enough calories or
protein.
Classification and Etiology
PEU is graded as mild, moderate, or severe. Grade is determined by calculating weight as a percentage
of expected weight for length or height using international standards (normal, 90 to 110%; mild PEU, 85 to
90%; moderate, 75 to 85%; severe, <75%).
PEU may be primary or secondary. Primary PEU is caused by inadequate nutrient intake.
Secondary PEU
results from disorders or drugs that interfere with nutrient use.
Primary PEU:
Worldwide, primary PEU occurs mostly in children and the elderly who lack access to
nutrients, although a common cause in the elderly is depression. PEU can also result from fasting or
anorexia nervosa. Child or elder abuse may be a cause.
In children, chronic primary PEU has 2 common forms: marasmus and kwashiorkor. The form depends on
the balance of nonprotein and protein sources of energy. Starvation is an acute severe form of primary
PEU.
Marasmus (also called the dry form of PEU) causes weight loss and depletion of fat and muscle. In
developing countries, marasmus is the most common form of PEU in children.
Kwashiorkor (also called the wet, swollen, or edematous form) is associated with premature abandonment
===PAGE:73===
of breastfeeding, which typically occurs when a younger sibling is born, displacing the older child from the
breast. So children with kwashiorkor tend to be older than those with marasmus. Kwashiorkor may also
result from an acute illness, often gastroenteritis or another infection (probably secondary to cytokine
release), in a child who already has PEU. A diet that is more deficient in protein than energy may be more
likely to cause kwashiorkor than marasmus. Less common than marasmus, kwashiorkor tends to be
confined to specific parts of the world, such as rural Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific islands. In
these areas, staple foods (eg, yams, cassavas, sweet potatoes, green bananas) are low in protein and
high in carbohydrates. In kwashiorkor, cell membranes leak, causing extravasation of intravascular fluid
and protein, resulting in peripheral edema.
Starvation is a complete lack of nutrients. It occasionally occurs when food is available (as in fasting or
anorexia nervosa) but usually occurs because food is unavailable (eg, during famine or wilderness
exposure).
Secondary PEU:
This type most commonly results from the following:
• Disorders that affect GI function: These disorders can interfere with digestion (eg, pancreatic
insufficiency), absorption (eg, enteritis, enteropathy), or lymphatic transport of nutrients (eg,
retroperitoneal fibrosis, Milroy's disease).
• Wasting disorders: In wasting disorders (eg, AIDS, cancer) and renal failure, catabolism causes cytokine
excess, resulting in undernutrition via anorexia and cachexia (wasting of muscle and fat). End-stage
heart failure can cause cardiac cachexia, a severe form of undernutrition; mortality rate is particularly
high. Factors contributing to cardiac cachexia may include passive hepatic congestion (causing
anorexia), edema of the intestinal tract (impairing absorption), and, in advanced disease, increased O
requirement due to anaerobic metabolism. Wasting disorders can decrease appetite or impair
metabolism of nutrients.
• Conditions that increase metabolic demands: These conditions include infections, hyperthyroidism,
pheochromocytoma, other endocrine disorders, burns, trauma, surgery, and other critical illnesses.
Pathophysiology
The initial metabolic response is decreased metabolic rate. To supply energy, the body first breaks down
adipose tissue. However, later when these tissues are depleted, the body may use protein for energy,
resulting in a negative nitrogen balance. Visceral organs and muscle are broken down and decrease in
weight. Loss of organ weight is greatest in the liver and intestine, intermediate in the heart and kidneys,
and least in the nervous system.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of moderate PEU can be constitutional or involve specific organ systems. Apathy and irritability
are common. The patient is weak, and work capacity decreases. Cognition and sometimes
consciousness are impaired. Temporary lactose deficiency and achlorhydria develop. Diarrhea is common
and can be aggravated by deficiency of intestinal disaccharidases, especially lactase (.
Gonadal tissues atrophy. PEU can cause amenorrhea in women and loss of libido in men and women.
Wasting of fat and muscle is common in all forms of PEU. In adult volunteers who fasted for 30 to 40
days, weight loss was marked (25% of initial weight). If starvation is more prolonged, weight loss may
reach 50% in adults and possibly more in children.
In adults, cachexia is most obvious in areas where prominent fat depots normally exist. Muscles shrink
and bones protrude. The skin becomes thin, dry, inelastic, pale, and cold. The hair is dry and falls out
easily, becoming sparse. Wound healing is impaired. In elderly patients, risk of hip fractures and pressure
(decubitus) ulcers increases.
With acute or chronic severe PEU, heart size and cardiac output decrease; pulse slows
===PAGE:74===
[Table 2-3.
Values Commonly Used to Grade the Severity of Protein-Energy Undernutrition]
and BP falls. Respiratory rate and vital capacity decrease. Body temperature falls, sometimes contributing
to death. Edema, anemia, jaundice, and petechiae can develop. Liver, kidney, or heart failure may occur.
Cell-mediated immunity is impaired, increasing susceptibility to infections. Bacterial infections (eg,
pneumonia, gastroenteritis, otitis media, UTIs, sepsis) are common in both forms of PEU. Infections result
in release of cytokines, which cause anorexia, worsen muscle wasting, and cause a marked decrease in
serum albumin levels.
Marasmus in infants causes hunger, weight loss, growth retardation, and wasting of subcutaneous fat
and muscle. Ribs and facial bones appear prominent. Loose, thin skin hangs in folds.
Kwashiorkor is characterized by peripheral and periorbital edema. The abdomen protrudes because
abdominal muscles are weakened, the intestine is distended, the liver enlarges, and ascites is present.
The skin is dry, thin, and wrinkled; it can become hyperpigmented and fissured and later hypopigmented,
friable, and atrophic. Skin in different areas of the body may be affected at different times. The hair can
become thin, reddish brown, or gray. Scalp hair falls out easily, eventually becoming sparse, but eyelash
hair may grow excessively. Alternating episodes of undernutrition and adequate nutrition may cause the
hair to have a dramatic "striped flag" appearance. Affected children may be apathetic but become irritable
when held.
Total starvation is fatal in 8 to 12 wk. Thus, certain symptoms of PEU do not have time to develop.
Diagnosis
• Diagnosis usually based on history
• To determine severity: BMI, serum albumin, total lymphocyte count, CD4+ count, serum transferrin
• To diagnose complications and consequences: CBC, electrolytes, BUN, glucose, Ca, Mg, phosphate
Diagnosis can be based on history when dietary intake is markedly inadequate. The cause of inadequate
intake, particularly in children, needs to be identified. In children and adolescents, child abuse and
anorexia nervosa should be considered.
Physical examination findings can usually confirm the diagnosis. Laboratory tests are required if dietary
history does not clearly indicate inadequate caloric intake. Measurement of serum albumin, total
lymphocyte count, CD4+ T lymphocytes, transferrin, and response to skin antigens may help determine
the severity of PEU (see
Table 2-3
) or confirm the diagnosis in borderline cases. Many other test results
may be abnormal: eg, decreased levels of hormones, vitamins, lipids, cholesterol, prealbumin, insulin
growth factor-1, fibronectin, and retinol-binding protein. Urinary creatine and methylhistidine levels can be
used to gauge the degree of muscle wasting. Because protein catabolism slows, urinary urea level also
decreases. These findings rarely affect treatment.
Laboratory tests are required to identify causes of suspected secondary PEU. C-reactive protein or
soluble interleukin-2 receptor should be measured when the cause of undernutrition
is unclear; these
measurements can help determine whether there is cytokine excess. Thyroid function tests may also be
done.
Other laboratory tests can detect associated abnormalities that may require treatment. Serum
electrolytes, BUN, glucose, and possibly levels of Ca, Mg, and phosphate should be measured. Levels of
serum glucose, electrolytes (especially K, occasionally Na), phosphate, Ca, and Mg are usually low. BUN
is often low unless renal failure is present. Metabolic acidosis may be present. CBC is usually obtained;
normocytic anemia (usually due to protein deficiency) or microcytic anemia (due to simultaneous iron
deficiency) is usually present.
===PAGE:75===
Stool cultures should be obtained and checked for ova and parasites if diarrhea is severe or does not
resolve with treatment. Sometimes urinalysis, urine culture, blood cultures, tuberculin testing, and a chest
x-ray are used to diagnose occult infections because people with PEU may have a muted response to
infections.
Prognosis
Children:
In children, mortality varies from 5 to 40%. Mortality rates are lower in children with mild PEU
and those given intensive care. Death in the first days of treatment is usually due to electrolyte deficits,
sepsis, hypothermia, or heart failure. Impaired consciousness, jaundice, petechiae, hyponatremia, and
persistent diarrhea are ominous signs. Resolution of apathy, edema, and anorexia is a favorable sign.
Recovery is more rapid in kwashiorkor than in marasmus.
Long-term effects of PEU in children are not fully documented. Some children develop chronic
malabsorption and pancreatic insufficiency. In very young children, mild intellectual disability may develop
and persist until at least school age. Permanent cognitive impairment may occur, depending on the
duration, severity, and age at onset of PEU.
Adults:
In adults, PEU can result in morbidity and mortality (eg, progressive weight loss increases
mortality rate for elderly patients in nursing homes). In elderly patients, PEU increases the risk of
morbidity and mortality due to surgery, infections, or other disorders. Except when organ failure occurs,
treatment is uniformly successful.
Treatment
• Usually, oral feeding
• Possibly avoidance of lactose (eg, if persistent diarrhea suggests lactose intolerance)
• Supportive care (eg, environmental changes, assistance with feeding, orexigenic drugs)
• For children, feeding delayed 24 to 48 h
Worldwide, the most important preventive strategy is to reduce poverty and improve nutritional education
and public health measures.
Mild or moderate PEU, including brief starvation, can be treated by providing a balanced diet, preferably
orally. Liquid oral food supplements (usually lactose-free) can be used when solid food cannot be
adequately ingested. Diarrhea often complicates oral feeding because starvation makes the GI tract more
likely to move bacteria into Peyer's patches, facilitating infectious diarrhea. If diarrhea persists
(suggesting lactose intolerance), yogurt-based rather than milk-based formulas are given because people
with lactose intolerance can tolerate yogurt. Patients should also be given a multivitamin supplement.
Severe PEU or prolonged starvation requires treatment in a hospital with a controlled diet. The first
priority is to correct fluid and electrolyte abnormalities (see
Chapter 97
) and treat infections. Next is to supply
macronutrients orally or, if necessary (eg, when swallowing is difficult), through a feeding tube, a
nasogastric tube (usually), or a gastrostomy tube. Parenteral nutrition is indicated if malabsorption is
severe (.
Other treatments may be needed to correct specific deficiencies, which may become evident as weight
increases. To avoid deficiencies, patients should take micronutrients at about twice the recommended
daily allowance (RDA) until recovery is complete.
Children:
Underlying disorders should be treated. For children with diarrhea, feeding may be delayed 24
to 48 h to avoid making the diarrhea worse; during this interval, children require oral or IV rehydration.
Feedings are given often (6 to 12 times/day) but, to avoid overwhelming the limited intestinal absorptive
capacity, are limited to small amounts (< 100 mL). During the first week, milk-based formulas with
supplements added are usually given in progressively increasing amounts; after a week, the full amounts
===PAGE:76===
of 175 kcal/kg and 4 g of protein/kg can be given. Twice the RDA of micronutrients should be given,
using commercial multivitamin supplements. After 4 wk, the formula can be replaced with whole milk plus
cod liver oil and solid foods, including eggs, fruit, meats, and yeast.
Energy distribution among macronutrients should be about 16% protein, 50% fat, and 34% carbohydrate.
An example is a combination of powdered cow's skimmed milk (110 g), sucrose (100 g), vegetable oil (70
g), and water (900 mL). Many other formulas (eg, whole [full-fat] fresh milk plus corn oil and maltodextrin)
can be used. Milk powders used in formulas are diluted with water.
Usually, supplements should be added to formulas:
• Mg 0.4 mEq/kg/day IM is given for 7 days.
• B-complex vitamins at twice the RDA are given parenterally for the first 3 days, usually with vitamin A,
phosphorus, zinc, manganese, copper, iodine, fluoride, molybdenum, and selenium.
• Because absorption of oral iron is poor in children with PEU, oral or IM iron supplementation may be
necessary.
Parents are taught about nutritional requirements.
Adults:
Underlying disorders should be treated. For example, if AIDS or cancer results in excess cytokine
production, megestrol acetate or medroxyprogesterone may improve food intake. However, because
these drugs dramatically decrease testosterone in men (possibly causing muscle loss), testosterone
should be replaced. Because these drugs can cause adrenal insufficiency, they should be used only
short-term (< 3 mo).
In patients with functional limitations, home delivery of meals and feeding assistance are key.
An orexigenic drug, such as the cannabis extract dronabinol, should be given to patients with anorexia
when no cause is obvious or to patients at the end of life when anorexia impairs quality of life. An
anabolic steroid (eg, enanthate, nandrolone, testosterone) or growth hormone can benefit patients with
cachexia due to renal failure and possibly elderly patients (eg, by increasing lean body mass or possibly
by improving function).
Correction of PEU in adults generally resembles that in children; feedings are often limited to small
amounts. However, for most adults, feeding does not need to be delayed. A commercial formula for oral
feeding can be used. Daily nutrient supply should be given at a rate of 60 kcal/kg and 1.2 to 2 g of
protein/kg. If liquid oral supplements are used with solid food, they should be given at least 1 h before
meals so that the amount of food eaten at the meal is not reduced.
Treatment of institutionalized elderly patients with PEU requires multiple interventions:
• Environmental measures (eg, making the dining area more attractive)
• Feeding assistance
• Changes in diet (eg, use of food enhancers and caloric supplements between meals)
• Treatment of depression and other underlying disorders
• Use of orexigenics, anabolic steroids, or both
The long-term use of gastrostomy tube feeding is essential for patients with severe dysphagia; its use in
patients with dementia is controversial. Increasing evidence supports the avoidance of unpalatable
therapeutic diets (eg, low salt, diabetic, low cholesterol) in institutionalized patients because these diets
decrease food intake and may cause severe PEU.
===PAGE:77===
Complications of treatment:
Treatment of PEU can cause complications (refeeding syndrome),
including fluid overload, electrolyte deficits, hyperglycemia, cardiac arrhythmias, and diarrhea. Diarrhea is
usually mild and resolves; however, diarrhea in patients with severe PEU occasionally causes severe
dehydration or death. Causes of diarrhea (eg, sorbitol used in elixir tube feedings,
Clostridium difficile
if
the patient has received an antibiotic) may be correctable. Osmotic diarrhea due to excess calories is rare
in adults and should be considered only when other causes have been excluded.
Because PEU can impair cardiac and renal function, hydration can cause intravascular volume overload.
Treatment decreases extra-cellular K and Mg. Depletion of K or Mg may cause arrhythmias.
Carbohydrate metabolism that occurs during treatment stimulates insulin release, which drives phosphate
into cells. Hypophosphatemia can cause muscle weakness, paresthesias, seizures, coma, and
arrhythmias. Because phosphate levels can change rapidly during parenteral feeding, levels should be
measured regularly.
During treatment, endogenous insulin may become ineffective, leading to hyperglycemia. Dehydration
and hyperosmolarity can result. Fatal ventricular arrhythmias can develop, possibly caused by a
prolonged QT interval.
Carnitine Deficiency
Carnitine deficiency results from inadequate intake of or inability to metabolize the amino acid
carnitine. It can cause a heterogeneous group of disorders. Muscle metabolism is impaired,
causing myopathy, hypoglycemia, or cardiomyopathy. Infants typically present with
hypoglycemic, hypoketotic encephalopathy. Most often, treatment consists of dietary Lcarnitine.
The amino acid carnitine is required for the transport of long-chain fatty acyl coenzyme A (CoA) esters
into myocyte mitochondria, where they are oxidized for energy. Carnitine is obtained from foods,
particularly animal-based foods, and via endogenous synthesis.
Causes of carnitine deficiency include the following:
• Inadequate intake (eg, due to fad diets, lack of access, or long-term TPN)
• Inability to metabolize carnitine due to enzyme deficiencies (eg, carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency,
methylmalonicaciduria, propionicacidemia, isovalericacidemia)
• Decreased endogenous synthesis of carnitine due to a severe liver disorder
• Excess loss of carnitine due to diarrhea, diuresis, or hemodialysis
• A hereditary disorder in which carnitine leaks from renal tubules
• Increased requirements for carnitine when ketosis is present or demand for fat oxidation is high (eg,
during a critical illness such as sepsis or major burns; after major surgery of the GI tract)
• Decreased muscle carnitine levels due to mitochondrial impairment (eg, due to use of zidovudine)
• Use of valproate
The deficiency may be generalized (systemic) or may affect mainly muscle (myopathic).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and the age at which symptoms appear depend on the cause. Carnitine deficiency may cause
muscle necrosis, myoglobinuria, lipid-storage myopathy, hypoglycemia, fatty liver, and hyperammonemia
with muscle aches, fatigue, confusion, and cardiomyopathy.
===PAGE:78===
Diagnosis
In neonates, carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency is diagnosed using mass spectrometry to screen
blood. Prenatal diagnosis may be possible using amniotic villous cells. In adults, the definitive diagnosis is
based on acylcarnitine levels in serum, urine, and tissues (muscle and liver for systemic deficiency;
muscle only for myopathic deficiency).
Treatment
• Avoidance of fasting and strenuous exercise
• Dietary interventions, based on cause
Carnitine deficiency due to inadequate dietary intake, increased requirements, excess losses, decreased
synthesis, or (sometimes) enzyme deficiencies can be treated by giving L-carnitine 25 mg/kg po q 6 h.
All patients must avoid fasting and strenuous exercise. Consuming uncooked cornstarch at bedtime
prevents early morning hypoglycemia. Some patients require supplementation with medium-chain
triglycerides and essential fatty acids (eg, linoleic acid, linolenic acid). Patients with a fatty acid oxidation
disorder require a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet.
Essential Fatty Acid Deficiency
Essential fatty acid (EFA) deficiency is rare, occurring most often in infants fed diets deficient in
EFAs. Signs include scaly dermatitis, alopecia, thrombocytopenia, and, in children, growth
retardation. Diagnosis is clinical. Dietary replenishment of EFAs reverses the deficiency.
The EFAs linoleic and linolenic acid are substrates for the endogenous synthesis of other fatty acids that
are needed for many physiologic processes, including maintaining the integrity of skin and cell
membranes and synthesizing prostaglandins and leukotrienes. For example, eicosapentaenoic acid and
docosahexaenoic acid, synthesized from EFAs, are important components of the brain and retina.
For EFA deficiency to develop, dietary intake must be very low. Even small amounts of EFAs can prevent
EFA deficiency. Cow's milk has only about 25% of the linoleic acid in human milk, but when ingested in
normal amounts, it has enough linoleic acid to prevent EFA deficiency. Total fat intake of people in many
developing countries may be very low, but the fat is often vegetable based, with large amounts of linoleic
acid and enough linolenic acid to prevent EFA deficiency.
Babies fed a formula low in linoleic acid, such as a skim-milk formula, can develop EFA deficiency. EFA
deficiency used to result from long-term TPN if fat was not included. But now, most TPN solutions include
fat emulsions to prevent EFA deficiency. In patients with fat malabsorption or increased metabolic needs
(eg, because of surgery, multiple trauma, or burns), laboratory evidence of EFA deficiency may be
present without clinical signs.
Dermatitis due to EFA deficiency is generalized and scaly; in infants, it can resemble congenital
ichthyosis. The dermatitis increases water loss from the skin.
Diagnosis is usually clinical; however, laboratory assays are now available in large research centers.
Treatment consists of dietary EFAs, reversing the deficiency.
===PAGE:79===
Chapter 3. Nutritional Support
Introduction
Many undernourished patients need nutritional support, which aims to increase lean body mass. Oral
feeding can be difficult for some patients with anorexia or with eating or absorption problems. Behavioral
measures that sometimes enhance oral intake include the following:
• Encouraging patients to eat
• Heating or seasoning foods
• Providing favorite or strongly flavored foods
• Encouraging patients to eat small portions
• Scheduling around meals
• Assisting patients with feeding
If behavioral measures are ineffective, nutritional support—oral, enteral tube, or parenteral nutrition—is
indicated, except sometimes for dying or severely demented patients (.
Predicting Nutritional Requirements
Nutritional requirements are predicted so that interventions can be planned. Requirements can be
estimated by formulas or measured by indirect calorimetry. Indirect calorimetry requires use of a metabolic
cart (a closed rebreathing system that determines energy expenditure based on total CO
production),
which requires special expertise and is not always available. Thus, total energy expenditure (TEE) and
protein requirements usually are estimated.
Energy expenditure:
TEE varies based on the patient's weight, activity level, and degree of metabolic
stress (metabolic demands); TEE ranges from 25 kcal/kg/day for people who are sedentary and not under
stress to about 40 kcal/kg/day for people who are critically ill. TEE equals the sum of
• Resting metabolic rate (RMR, or resting energy expenditure rate), which is normally about 70% of TEE
• Energy dissipated by metabolism of food (10% of TEE)
• Energy expended during physical activity (20% of TEE)
Undernutrition can decrease RMR up to 20%. Conditions that increase metabolic stress (eg, critical
illness, infection, inflammation, trauma, surgery) can increase RMR but rarely by > 50%.
The Mifflin-St. Jeor equation estimates RMR more precisely and with fewer errors than the commonly
used Harris-Benedict equation, usually providing results that are within 20% of those measured by
indirect calorimetry. The Mifflin-St. Jeor equation estimates RMR as follows:
Men
: kcal / day = 66 + (13.7 × wt[kg]) + (5 × height[cm]) - (6.8 × age)
Women
: kcal / day = 665 + (9.6 × wt[kg]) + (1.8 × height[cm]) - (4.7 × age)
TEE can be estimated by adding about 10% (for sedentary people) to about 40% (for people who are
critically ill) to RMR.
Protein requirements:
For healthy people, protein requirements are estimated at 0.8 g/kg/day.
However, for patients with metabolic stress or kidney failure and for elderly patients, requirements may be
higher (see
===PAGE:80===
Table 3-1
).
Assessing Response to Nutritional Support
There is no gold standard to assess response. Clinicians commonly use indicators of lean body mass
such as the following:
• Body mass index (BMI)
• Body composition analysis
• Body fat distribution (see pp.
and
)
Nitrogen balance, response to skin antigens, muscle strength measurement, and indirect calorimetry can
also be used.
[Table 3-1.
Estimated Adult Daily Protein Requirement]
Nitrogen balance,
which reflects the balance between protein needs and supplies, is the difference
between amount of nitrogen ingested and amount lost. A positive balance (ie, more ingested than lost)
implies adequate intake. Precise measurement is impractical, but estimates help assess response to
nutritional support. Nitrogen intake is estimated from protein intake: nitrogen (g) equals protein (g)/6.25.
Estimated nitrogen losses consist of urinary nitrogen losses (estimated by measuring urea nitrogen
content of an accurately obtained 24-h urine collection) plus stool losses (estimated at 1 g/day if stool is
produced; negligible if stool is not produced) plus insensible and other unmeasured losses (estimated at
3 g).
Response to skin antigens
, a measure of delayed hypersensitivity, often increases to normal as
undernourished patients respond to nutritional support. However, other factors can affect response to
skin antigens.
Muscle strength
indirectly reflects increases in lean body mass. It can be measured quantitatively, by
hand-grip dynamometry, or electrophysiologically (typically by stimulating the ulnar nerve with an
electrode).
Levels of acute-phase reactant
serum proteins (particularly short-lived proteins such as prealbumin
[transthyretin], retinol-binding protein, and transferrin) sometimes correlate with improved nutritional
status, but these levels correlate better with inflammatory conditions.
Enteral Tube Nutrition
Enteral tube nutrition is indicated for patients who have a functioning GI tract but cannot ingest enough
nutrients orally because they are unable or unwilling to take oral feedings. Compared with parenteral
nutrition, enteral nutrition has the following advantages:
• Better preservation of the structure and function of the GI tract
• Lower cost
• Probably fewer complications, particularly infections
Specific indications
for enteral nutrition include the following:
• Prolonged anorexia
• Severe protein-energy undernutrition
===PAGE:81===
• Coma or depressed sensorium
• Liver failure
• Inability to take oral feedings due to head or neck trauma or neurologic disorders
• Critical illnesses (eg, burns) causing metabolic stress
Other indications may include bowel preparation for surgery in seriously ill or undernourished patients,
closure of enterocutaneous fistulas, and small-bowel adaptation after massive intestinal resection or in
disorders that may cause malabsorption (eg, Crohn's disease).
Procedure:
If tube feeding is needed for ≤ 4 to 6 wk, a small-caliber, soft nasogastric or nasoenteric (eg,
nasoduodenal) tube made of silicone or polyurethane is usually used. If a nasal injury or deformity makes
nasal placement difficult, an orogastric or other oroenteric tube can be placed.
Tube feeding for > 4 to 6 wk usually requires a gastrostomy or jejunostomy tube, placed endoscopically,
surgically, or radiologically. Choice depends on physician capabilities and patient preference.
Jejunostomy tubes are useful for patients with contraindications to gastrostomy (eg, gastrectomy, bowel
obstruction proximal to the jejunum). However, these tubes do not pose less risk of tracheobronchial
aspiration than gastrostomy tubes, as is often thought. Jejunostomy tubes are easily dislodged and are
usually used only for inpatients.
Feeding tubes are surgically placed if endoscopic and radiologic placement is unavailable, technically
impossible, or unsafe (eg, because of overlying bowel). Open or laparoscopic techniques can be used.
Formulas:
Liquid formulas commonly used include feeding modules and polymeric or other specialized
formulas.
Feeding modules
are commercially available products that contain a single nutrient, such as proteins,
fats, or carbohydrates. Feeding modules may be used individually to treat a specific deficiency or
combined with other formulas to completely satisfy nutritional requirements.
Polymeric formulas
(including blenderized food and milk-based or lactose-free commercial formulas)
are commercially available and generally provide a complete, balanced diet. For oral or tube feedings,
they are usually preferred to feeding modules. In hospitalized patients, lactose-free formulas are the most
commonly used polymeric formulas. However, milk-based formulas tend to taste better than lactose-free
formulas. Patients with lactose intolerance may be able to tolerate milk-based formulas given slowly by
continuous infusion.
Specialized formulas
include hydrolyzed protein or sometimes amino acid formulas, which are used for
patients who have difficulty digesting complex proteins. However, these formulas are expensive and
usually unnecessary. Most patients with pancreatic insufficiency, if
given enzymes, and most patients with
malabsorption can digest complex proteins. Other specialized formulas (eg, calorie- and protein-dense
formulas for patients whose fluids are restricted, fiber-enriched formulas for constipated patients) may be
helpful.
Administration:
Patients should be sitting upright at 30 to 45° during tube feeding and for 1 to 2 h
afterward to minimize incidence of nosocomial aspiration pneumonia and to allow gravity to help propel
the food. Tube feedings are given in boluses several times a day or by continuous infusion. Bolus feeding
is more physiologic and may be preferred for patients with diabetes. Continuous infusion is necessary if
boluses cause nausea.
[Table 3-2.
Complications of Enteral Tube Nutrition]
For bolus feeding, total daily volume is divided into 4 to 6 separate feedings, which are injected through
===PAGE:82===
the tube with a syringe or infused by gravity from an elevated bag. After feedings, the tube is flushed with
water to prevent clogging.
Nasogastric or nasoduodenal tube feeding
often causes diarrhea initially; thus, feedings are usually
started with small amounts of dilute preparations and increased as tolerated. Most formulas contain 0.5,
1, or 2 kcal/mL. Formulas with higher caloric concentration (less water per calorie) may cause decreased
gastric emptying and thus higher gastric residuals than when more dilute formulas with the same number
of calories are used. Initially, a 1-kcal/mL commercially prepared solution may be given undiluted at 50
mL/h or, if patients have not been fed for a while, at 25 mL/h. Usually, these solutions do not supply
enough water, particularly if vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, or fever has increased water loss. Extra water
is supplied as boluses via the feeding tube or IV. After a few days, the rate or concentration can be
increased as needed to meet caloric and water needs.
Jejunostomy tube feeding
requires greater dilution and smaller volumes. Feeding usually begins at a
concentration of ≤ 0.5 kcal/mL and a rate of 25 mL/h. After a few days, concentrations and volumes can
be increased to eventually meet caloric and water needs. Usually, the maximum that can be tolerated is
0.8 kcal/mL at 125 mL/h, providing 2400 kcal/day.
Complications:
Complications are common and can be serious (see
Table 3-2
).
Total Parenteral Nutrition
Parenteral nutrition is by definition given IV.
Partial parenteral nutrition
supplies only part of daily nutritional requirements, supplementing oral
intake. Many hospitalized patients are given dextrose or amino acid solutions by this method.
Total parenteral nutrition
(TPN) supplies all daily nutritional requirements. TPN can be used in the
hospital or at home. Because TPN solutions are concentrated and can cause thrombosis of peripheral
veins, a central venous catheter is usually required.
Parenteral nutrition should not be used routinely in patients with an intact GI tract. Compared with enteral
nutrition, it causes more complications, does not preserve GI tract structure and function as well, and is
more expensive.
Indications:
TPN may be the only feasible option for patients who do not have a functioning GI tract or
who have disorders requiring complete bowel rest, such as the following:
• Some stages of Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis
• Bowel obstruction
• Certain pediatric GI disorders (eg, congenital GI anomalies, prolonged diarrhea regardless of its cause)
• Short bowel syndrome due to surgery
Nutritional content:
TPN requires water (30 to 40 mL/kg/day), energy (30 to 60 kcal/kg/day, depending
on energy expenditure), amino acids (1 to 2.0 g/kg/day, depending on the degree of catabolism), essential
fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals (see
Table 3-3
). Children who need TPN may have different fluid requirements and need more energy (up to
120 kcal/kg/day) and amino acids (up to 2.5 or 3.5 g/kg/day).
Basic TPN solutions are prepared using sterile techniques, usually in liter batches according to standard
formulas. Normally, 2 L/day of the standard solution is needed. Solutions may be modified based on
laboratory results, underlying disorders, hypermetabolism, or other factors.
Most calories are supplied as carbohydrate. Typically, about 4 to 5 mg/kg/day of dextrose is given.
Standard solutions contain up to about 25% dextrose, but the amount and concentration depend on other
===PAGE:83===
factors, such as metabolic needs and the proportion of caloric needs that are supplied by lipids.
Commercially available lipid emulsions are often added to supply essential fatty acids and triglycerides;
20 to 30% of total calories are usually supplied as lipids. However, withholding lipids and their calories
may help obese patients mobilize endogenous fat stores, increasing insulin sensitivity.
Solutions:
Many solutions are commonly used. Electrolytes can be added to meet the patient's needs.
Solutions vary depending on other disorders present and patient age, as for the following:
• For renal insufficiency not being treated with dialysis or for liver failure: Reduced protein content and a
high percentage of essential amino acids
• For heart or kidney failure: Limited volume (liquid) intake
•
For respiratory failure: A lipid emulsion that provides most of nonprotein calories to minimize CO
production by carbohydrate metabolism
• For neonates: Lower dextrose concentrations (17 to 18%)
Beginning TPN administration:
Because the central venous catheter needs to remain in place for a
long time, strict sterile technique must be used during insertion and maintenance. The TPN line should
not be used for any other purpose. External tubing should be changed every 24 h with the first bag of the
day. In-line filters have not been shown to decrease complications. Dressings should be kept sterile and
are usually changed every 48 h using strict sterile techniques. If TPN is given outside the hospital,
patients must be taught to recognize symptoms of infection, and qualified home nursing must be
arranged.
The solution is started slowly at 50% of the calculated requirements, using 5% dextrose to make up the
balance of fluid requirements. Energy and nitrogen should be given simultaneously. The amount of
regular insulin given (added directly to the TPN solution) depends on the plasma glucose level; if the
level is normal and the final solution contains 25% dextrose, the usual starting dose is 5 to 10 units of
regular insulin/L of TPN fluid.
Monitoring:
Progress should be followed on a flowchart. An interdisciplinary nutrition team, if available,
should monitor patients. Weight, CBC, electrolytes, and BUN should be monitored often (eg, daily for
inpatients). Plasma glucose should be monitored every 6 h until patients and glucose levels become
stable. Fluid intake and output should be monitored continuously. When patients become stable, blood
tests can be done much less often.
Liver function tests should be done. Plasma proteins (eg, serum albumin, possibly transthyretin or retinolbinding protein), PT, plasma and urine osmolality, and Ca, Mg, and phosphate should be measured
twice/wk. Changes in transthyretin and retinol-binding protein reflect overall clinical status rather than
nutritional status alone. If possible, blood tests should not be done during glucose infusion. Full nutritional
assessment (including BMI calculation and anthropometric measurements—see pp.
and
) should be
repeated at 2-wk intervals.
Complications:
About 5 to 10% of patients have complications related to central venous access.
[Table 3-3.
Basic Adult Daily Requirements for Total Parenteral Nutrition]
Catheter-related sepsis occurs in about ≥ 50% of patients. Glucose abnormalities (hyperglycemia or
hypoglycemia) or liver dysfunction occurs in > 90% of patients.
Glucose abnormalities
are common. Hyperglycemia can be avoided by monitoring plasma glucose
often, adjusting the insulin dose in the TPN solution and giving subcutaneous insulin as needed.
Hypoglycemia can be precipitated by suddenly stopping constant concentrated dextrose infusions.
Treatment depends on the degree of hypoglycemia. Short-term hypoglycemia may be reversed with 50%
dextrose IV; more prolonged hypoglycemia may require infusion of 5 or 10% dextrose for 24 h before
===PAGE:84===
resuming TPN via the central venous catheter.
Hepatic complications
include liver dysfunction, painful hepatomegaly, and hyperammonemia. They can
develop at any age but are most common among infants, particularly premature ones (whose liver is
immature).
• Liver dysfunction may be transient, evidenced by increased transaminases, bilirubin, and alkaline
phosphatase; it commonly occurs when TPN is started. Delayed or persistent elevations may result
from excess amino acids. Pathogenesis is unknown, but cholestasis and inflammation may contribute.
Progressive fibrosis occasionally develops. Reducing protein delivery may help.
• Painful hepatomegaly suggests fat accumulation; carbohydrate delivery should be reduced.
• Hyperammonemia can develop in infants, causing lethargy, twitching, and generalized seizures. Arginine
supplementation at 0.5 to 1.0 mmol/kg/day can correct it.
If infants develop any hepatic complication, limiting amino acids to 1.0 g/kg/day may be necessary.
Abnormalities of serum electrolytes and minerals
should be corrected by modifying subsequent
infusions or, if correction is urgently required, by beginning appropriate peripheral vein infusions. Vitamin
and mineral deficiencies are rare when solutions are given correctly. Elevated BUN may reflect
dehydration, which can be corrected by giving free water as 5% dextrose via a peripheral vein.
Volume overload
(suggested by > 1 kg/day weight gain) may occur when patients have high daily
energy requirements and thus require large fluid volumes.
Metabolic bone disease
, or bone demineralization (osteoporosis or osteomalacia), develops in some
patients given TPN for > 3 mo. The mechanism is unknown. Advanced disease can cause severe
periarticular, lower-extremity, and back pain. Temporarily or permanently stopping TPN is the only known
treatment.
Adverse reactions to lipid emulsions
(eg, dyspnea, cutaneous allergic reactions, nausea, headache,
back pain, sweating, dizziness) are uncommon but may occur early, particularly if lipids are given at > 1.0
kcal/kg/h. Temporary hyperlipidemia may occur, particularly in patients with kidney or liver failure;
treatment is usually not required. Delayed adverse reactions to lipid emulsions include hepatomegaly, mild
elevation of liver enzymes, splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and, especially in premature
infants with respiratory distress syndrome, pulmonary function abnormalities. Temporarily or permanently
slowing or stopping lipid emulsion infusion may prevent or minimize these adverse reactions.
Gallbladder complications
include cholelithiasis, gallbladder sludge, and cholecystitis. These
complications can be caused or worsened by prolonged gallbladder stasis. Stimulating contraction by
providing about 20 to 30% of calories as fat and stopping glucose infusion several hours a day is helpful.
Oral or enteral intake also helps. Treatment with metronidazole, ursodeoxycholic acid, phenobarbital, or
cholecystokinin helps some patients with cholestasis.
Nutritional Support for Dying or Severely Demented Patients
Anorexia or loss of appetite is common among dying patients (. Behavioral measures (eg,
using flexible feeding schedules, feeding slowly, giving small portions or favorite or strongly flavored
foods) can often increase oral intake. A small amount of a favorite alcoholic drink, given 30 min before
meals, may also help. Certain antidepressants, megestrol acetate, and dronabinol may stimulate appetite.
Metoclopramide enhances gastric emptying, but it may take 1 to 2 wk to reach peak effectiveness.
Advanced dementia eventually leads to inability to eat; sometimes affected patients are given tube
feedings. However, there is no convincing evidence that tube feedings prolong life, provide comfort,
improve function, or prevent complications (eg, aspiration, pressure ulcers).
Tube feedings and parenteral nutrition cause discomfort and are usually not indicated for patients who
===PAGE:85===
are dying or too demented to eat. Forgoing nutritional support may be difficult for family members to
accept, but they should understand that patients are usually more comfortable eating and drinking as they
choose. Sips of water and easy-to-swallow foods may be useful. Supportive care, including good oral
hygiene (eg, brushing the teeth, moistening the oral cavity with swabs and ice chips as needed, applying
lip salve), can physically and psychologically comfort the patients and the family members who provide
the care.
Counseling may help family members who are dealing with anxieties about whether to use invasive
nutritional support.
===PAGE:86===
Chapter 4. Vitamin Deficiency, Dependency, and Toxicity
Introduction
Vitamins may be fat soluble (vitamins A, D, E, and K) or water soluble (B vitamins and vitamin C). The B
vitamins include biotin, folate, niacin, pantothenic acid, riboflavin (B
), thiamin (B
), B
(eg, pyridoxine),
and B
(cobalamins). For dietary requirements, sources, functions, effects of deficiencies and toxicities,
blood levels, and usual therapeutic dosages for vitamins, see
Tables 4-1
and
4-2
.
Dietary requirements for vitamins (and other nutrients) are expressed as daily recommended intake (DRI).
There are 3 types of DRI:
•
Recommended daily allowance (RDA):
RDAs are set to meet the needs of 97 to 98% of healthy
people.
•
Adequate intake (AI):
When data to calculate an RDA are insufficient, AIs are based on observed or
experimentally determined estimates of nutrient intake by healthy people.
•
Tolerable upper intake level (UL):
ULs are the largest amount of a nutrient that most adults can
ingest daily without risk of adverse health effects.
In developed countries, vitamin deficiencies result mainly from poverty, food faddism, drugs (see p.
and
Table 4-3
), alcoholism, or prolonged and inadequately supplemented parenteral feeding. Mild vitamin
deficiency is common among frail and institutionalized elderly people who have protein-energy
undernutrition. In developing countries, deficiencies can result from lack of access to nutrients.
Deficiencies of water-soluble vitamins (except vitamin B
) may develop after weeks to months of
undernutrition. Deficiencies of fat-soluble vitamins and of vitamin B
take > 1 yr to develop because the
body stores them in relatively large amounts. Intake of vitamins sufficient to prevent classic vitamin
deficiencies (like scurvy or beriberi) may not be adequate for optimum health. This area remains one of
controversy and active research.
Vitamin dependency results from a genetic defect involving metabolism of a vitamin. In some cases,
vitamin doses as high as 1000 times the DRI improve function of the altered metabolic pathway. Vitamin
toxicity (hypervitaminosis) usually results from taking megadoses of vitamin A, D, C, B
, or niacin.
Because many people eat irregularly, foods alone may provide suboptimal amounts of some vitamins. In
these cases, the risk of certain cancers or other disorders may be increased. Because of this risk, routine
daily multivitamin supplements are sometimes recommended.
Biotin and Pantothenic Acid
Biotin acts as a coenzyme for carboxylation reactions essential to fat and carbohydrate metabolism.
Adequate intake for adults is 30
μ
g/day. Pantothenic acid is widely distributed in foods; it is an essential
component of coenzyme A. Adults probably require about 5 mg/day. A beneficial role for pantothenic acid
supplementation in lipid metabolism, RA, or athletic performance remains unproved. Isolated deficiency of
biotin or pantothenic acid virtually never occurs.
Folate
Folate (folic acid) is now added to enriched grain foods in the US. Folate is also plentiful in various plant
foods and meats, but its bioavailability is greater when it is in supplements
[Table 4-1.
Recommended Daily Intakes for Vitamins]
or enriched foods than when it occurs naturally in food.
===PAGE:87===
Folates are involved in RBC maturation and synthesis of purines and pyrimidines. They are required for
development of the fetal nervous system. Absorption occurs in the duodenum and upper jejunum.
Enterohepatic circulation of folate occurs. Folate supplements
[Table 4-2.
Sources, Functions, and Effects of Vitamins]
do not protect against coronary artery disease or stroke (by lowering homocysteine levels); their role in
reducing the risk of various cancers is unclear. The upper limit for folate intake is 1000
μ
g; higher doses
(up to 5 mg) are recommended for women who have had a baby with a neural tube defect. Folate is
essentially nontoxic.
Folate Deficiency
Folate deficiency is common. It may result from inadequate intake, malabsorption, or use of various drugs.
Deficiency causes megaloblastic anemia (indistinguishable from that due to vitamin B
deficiency).
Maternal deficiency increases the risk of neural tube birth defects. Diagnosis requires laboratory testing
to confirm. Measurement of neutrophil hypersegmentation is sensitive and readily available. Treatment
with oral folate is usually successful.
Etiology and Pathophysiology
The most common causes are inadequate intake (usually in patients with undernutrition or alcoholism),
increased demand (eg, due to pregnancy or breastfeeding), and impaired absorption (eg, in tropical
sprue, due to certain drugs). Deficiency can also result from inadequate bioavailability and increased
excretion (see
Table 4-4
).
Prolonged cooking destroys folate, predisposing to inadequate intake. Intake is sometimes barely
adequate (eg, in alcoholics). Liver stores provide only a several-month supply.
Alcohol interferes with folate absorption, metabolism, renal excretion, and enterohepatic reabsorption, as
well as intake. 5-Fluorouracil, metformin, methotrexate, phenobarbital, phenytoin, sulfasalazine,
triamterene, and trimethoprim impair folate metabolism.
In the US, many dietary staples (eg, cereals, grain products) are routinely enriched with folate, tending to
reduce risk of deficiency.
[Table 4-3.
Potential Vitamin-Drug Interactions]
Symptoms and Signs
Folate deficiency may cause glossitis, diarrhea, depression, and confusion. Anemia may develop
insidiously and, because of compensatory mechanisms, be more severe than symptoms suggest.
Folate deficiency during pregnancy increases the risk of fetal neural tube defects and perhaps other brain
defects (.
Diagnosis
• CBC and serum vitamin B
and folate levels
CBC may indicate megaloblastic anemia indistinguishable from that of vitamin B
deficiency. If serum
folate is < 3
μ
g/L or ng/mL (< 7 nmol/L), deficiency is likely. Serum folate reflects folate status unless
intake has recently increased or decreased. If intake has changed, erythrocyte (RBC) folate level better
reflects tissue stores. A level of < 140
μ
g/L or ng/mL (< 305 nmol/L) indicates inadequate status. Also, an
increase in the homocysteine level suggests tissue folate deficiency (but the level is also affected by
===PAGE:88===
vitamin B
and vitamin B
levels, renal insufficiency, and genetic factors). A normal methylmalonic acid
(MMA) level may differentiate folate deficiency from vitamin B
deficiency because MMA levels rise in
vitamin B
deficiency but not in folate deficiency.
Treatment
• Supplemental oral folate
Folate 400 to 1000
μ
g po once/day replenishes tissues and is usually successful even if deficiency has
resulted from malabsorption. The normal requirement is 400
μ
g/day.
[Table 4-4.
Causes of Folate Deficiency]
(CAUTION:
In patients with megaloblastic anemia, vitamin B
deficiency must be ruled out before
treating with folate. If vitamin B
deficiency is present, folate supplementation can alleviate the
anemia but does not reverse and may even worsen neurologic deficits
.) For pregnant women, the
recommended daily allowance (RDA) is 600
μ
g/day. For women who have had a fetus or infant with a
neural tube defect, the recommended dose is 1000 to 5000
μ
g/day.
Niacin
Niacin (nicotinic acid, nicotinamide) derivatives include nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP), which are coenzymes in oxidation-reduction
reactions. They are vital in cell metabolism. Because dietary tryptophan can be metabolized to niacin,
foods rich in tryptophan (eg, dairy products) can compensate for inadequate dietary niacin.
Niacin Deficiency
Dietary niacin deficiency (causing pellagra) is uncommon in developed countries. Clinical
manifestations include the "three Ds": localized pigmented rash (dermatitis); gastroenteritis
(diarrhea); and widespread neurologic deficits, including cognitive decline (dementia).
Diagnosis is usually clinical, and dietary supplementation (oral or, if needed, IM) is usually
successful.
Etiology
Primary deficiency results from extremely inadequate intake of both niacin and tryptophan, which usually
occurs in areas where maize (Indian corn) constitutes a substantial part of the diet. Bound niacin, found in
maize, is not assimilated in the GI tract unless it has been previously treated with alkali, as when tortillas
are prepared. Corn protein is also deficient in tryptophan. The high incidence of pellagra in India among
people who eat millet with a high leucine content has led to the hypothesis that amino acid imbalance may
contribute to deficiency. Deficiencies of protein and many B vitamins commonly accompany primary niacin
deficiency.
Secondary deficiency may be due to diarrhea, cirrhosis, or alcoholism. Pellagra also may occur in
carcinoid syndrome (tryptophan is diverted to form 5-hydroxytryptophan and serotonin) and in Hartnup
disease (absorption of tryptophan by the intestine and kidneys is defective).
Symptoms and Signs
Pellagra is characterized by skin, mucous membrane, CNS, and GI symptoms. Advanced pellagra can
cause a symmetric photosensitive rash, stomatitis, glossitis, diarrhea, and mental aberrations. Symptoms
may appear alone or in combination.
Skin symptoms
include several types of lesions, which are usually bilaterally symmetric. The distribution
of lesions—at pressure points or sun-exposed skin—is more pathognomonic than the form of the lesions.
Lesions can develop in a glovelike distribution on the hands (pellagrous glove) or in a boot-shaped
===PAGE:89===
distribution on the feet and legs (pellagrous boot). Sunlight causes Casal's necklace and butterfly-shaped
lesions on the face.
Mucous membrane symptoms
affect primarily the mouth but may also affect the vagina and urethra.
Glossitis and stomatitis characterize acute deficiency. As the deficiency progresses, the tongue and oral
mucous membranes become reddened, followed by pain in the mouth, increased salivation, and edema of
the tongue. Ulcerations may appear, especially under the tongue, on the mucosa of the lower lip, and
opposite the molar teeth.
GI symptoms
early in the deficiency include burning in the pharynx and esophagus and abdominal
discomfort and distention. Constipation is common. Later, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur.
Diarrhea is often bloody because of bowel hyperemia and ulceration.
CNS symptoms
include psychosis, encephalopathy (characterized by impaired consciousness), and
cognitive decline (dementia). Psychosis is characterized by memory impairment, disorientation, confusion,
and confabulation; the predominant symptom may be excitement, depression, mania, delirium, or
paranoia.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is clinical and may be straightforward when skin and mouth lesions, diarrhea, delirium, and
dementia occur simultaneously. More often, the presentation is not so specific. Differentiating the CNS
changes from those in thiamin deficiency is difficult. A history of a diet lacking niacin and tryptophan may
help establish the diagnosis. A favorable response to treatment with niacin can usually
confirm it. If
available, laboratory testing can help confirm the diagnosis, particularly when the diagnosis is otherwise
unclear. Urinary excretion of N
-methylnicotinamide (NMN) is decreased; < 0.8 mg/day (< 5.8
μ
mol/day)
suggests a niacin deficiency.
Treatment
• Nicotinamide and other nutrients
Because multiple deficiencies are common, a balanced diet, including other B vitamins (particularly
riboflavin and pyridoxine), is needed. Nicotinamide is usually used to treat deficiency, because
nicotinamide, unlike nicotinic acid (the most common form of niacin), does not cause flushing, itching,
burning, or tingling sensations. Nicotinamide is given in doses ranging from 40 to 250 mg/day po in
divided doses 3 to 4 times a day.
Niacin Toxicity
Niacin (nicotinic acid) in large amounts is sometimes used to lower low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) cholesterol and triglyceride levels and to increase high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol levels. Symptoms may include flushing and, rarely, hepatotoxicity.
Immediate- and sustained-release preparations of niacin (but not nicotinamide) may improve lipid levels.
Flushing, which is prostaglandin-mediated, is more common with immediate-release preparations. It may
be more intense after alcohol ingestion, aerobic activity, sun exposure, and consumption of spicy foods.
Flushing is minimized if niacin is taken after meals or if aspirin (325 mg) is taken 30 to 45 min before
niacin. The chance of severe flushing can be reduced by starting immediate-release niacin at a low dose
(eg, 50 mg tid) and increasing it very slowly. At intermediate doses (1000 mg/day), triglyceride levels
decrease 15 to 20%, and HDL cholesterol levels increase 15 to 30%. Reductions in LDL cholesterol are
modest (< 10%). Higher doses of niacin (3000 mg/day) reduce LDL cholesterol 15 to 20% but may cause
jaundice, abdominal discomfort, blurred vision, worsening of hyperglycemia, and precipitation of
preexisting gout. People with a liver disorder probably should not take high-dose niacin.
Hepatotoxicity may be more common with some sustained-release preparations. Some authorities
===PAGE:90===
recommend checking levels of uric acid, serum glucose, and plasma transaminases every 6 to 8 wk until
the dose of niacin has been stabilized.
Riboflavin
Riboflavin (vitamin B
) is involved in carbohydrate metabolism as an essential coenzyme in many
oxidation-reduction reactions. Riboflavin is essentially nontoxic.
Riboflavin Deficiency
Riboflavin deficiency usually occurs with other B-vitamin deficiencies. Symptoms and signs
include sore throat, lesions of the lips and mucosa of the mouth, glossitis, conjunctivitis,
seborrheic dermatitis, and normochromicnormocytic anemia. Diagnosis is usually clinical.
Treatment consists of oral or, if needed, IM riboflavin.
Primary riboflavin deficiency results from inadequate intake of fortified cereals, milk, and other animal
products. The most common causes of secondary deficiency are chronic diarrhea, malabsorption
syndromes, liver disorders, hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, long-term use of barbiturates, and chronic
alcoholism.
Symptoms and Signs
The most common signs are pallor and maceration of the mucosa at the angles of the mouth (angular
stomatitis) and vermilion surfaces of the lips (cheilosis), eventually replaced by superficial linear fissures.
The fissures can become infected with
Candida albicans
, causing grayish white lesions (perleche). The
tongue may appear magenta. Seborrheic dermatitis develops, usually affecting the nasolabial folds, ears,
eyelids, and scrotum or labia majora. These areas become red, scaly, and greasy.
Rarely, neovascularization and keratitis of the cornea occur, causing lacrimation and photophobia.
Diagnosis
The lesions characteristic of riboflavin deficiency are nonspecific. Riboflavin deficiency should be
suspected if characteristic signs develop in a patient with other B vitamin deficiencies. Diagnosis can be
confirmed by a therapeutic trial or laboratory testing, usually by measuring urinary excretion of riboflavin.
Treatment
Riboflavin 5 to 10 mg/day po is given until recovery. Other water-soluble vitamins should also be given.
Thiamin
Thiamin (vitamin B
) is widely available in the diet. Thiamin is involved in carbohydrate, fat, amino acid,
glucose, and alcohol metabolism. Thiamin is essentially nontoxic.
Thiamin Deficiency
Thiamin deficiency (causing beriberi) is most common among people subsisting on white rice
or highly refined carbohydrates in developing countries and among alcoholics. Symptoms
include diffuse polyneuropathy, high-output heart failure, and Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.
Thiamin is given to help diagnose and treat the deficiency.
Etiology
Primary thiamin deficiency is caused by inadequate intake of thiamin. It is commonly due to a diet of
highly refined carbohydrates (eg, polished rice, white flour, white sugar). It also develops when intake of
other nutrients is inadequate; it often occurs with other B vitamin deficiencies.
===PAGE:91===
Secondary thiamin deficiency is caused by increased demand (eg, due to hyperthyroidism, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, strenuous exercise, or fever), impaired absorption (eg, due to prolonged diarrhea), or
impaired metabolism (eg, due to hepatic insufficiency). In alcoholics, many mechanisms contribute to
thiamin deficiency; they include decreased intake, impaired absorption and use, increased demand, and
possibly an apoenzyme defect.
Pathophysiology
Deficiency causes degeneration of peripheral nerves, thalamus, mammillary bodies, and cerebellum.
Cerebral blood flow is markedly reduced, and vascular resistance is increased.
The heart may become dilated; muscle fibers become swollen, fragmented, and vacuolized, with
interstitial spaces dilated by fluid. Vasodilation occurs and can result in edema in the feet and legs.
Arteriovenous shunting of blood increases. Eventually, high-output heart failure may occur.
Symptoms and Signs
Early symptoms are nonspecific: fatigue, irritability, poor memory, sleep disturbances, precordial pain,
anorexia, and abdominal discomfort.
Dry beriberi
refers to peripheral neurologic deficits due to thiamin deficiency. These deficits are bilateral
and roughly symmetric, occurring in a stocking-glove distribution. They affect predominantly the lower
extremities, beginning with paresthesias in the toes, burning in the feet (particularly severe at night),
muscle cramps in the calves, pains in the legs, and plantar dysesthesias. Calf muscle tenderness,
difficulty rising from a squatting position, and decreased vibratory sensation in the toes are early signs.
Muscle wasting occurs. Continued deficiency worsens polyneuropathy, which can eventually affect the
arms.
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome,
which combines Wernicke's encephalopathy ( and
Korsakoff's psychosis (, occurs in some alcoholics who do not consume foods fortified with
thiamin. Wernicke's encephalopathy consists of psychomotor slowing or apathy, nystagmus, ataxia,
ophthalmoplegia, impaired consciousness, and, if untreated, coma and death. It probably results from
severe acute deficiency superimposed on chronic deficiency. Korsakoff's psychosis consists of mental
confusion, dysphonia, and confabulation with impaired memory of recent events. It probably results from
chronic deficiency and may develop after repeated episodes of Wernicke's encephalopathy.
Cardiovascular (wet) beriberi
is myocardial disease due to thiamin deficiency. The first effects are
vasodilation, tachycardia, a wide pulse pressure, sweating, warm skin, and lactic acidosis. Later, heart
failure develops, causing orthopnea and pulmonary and peripheral edema. Vasodilation can continue,
sometimes resulting in shock.
Infantile beriberi
occurs in infants (usually by age 3 to 4 wk) who are breastfed by thiamin-deficient
mothers. Heart failure (which may occur suddenly), aphonia, and absent deep tendon reflexes are
characteristic.
Because thiamin is necessary for glucose metabolism, glucose infusions may precipitate or worsen
symptoms of deficiency in thiamin-deficient people.
Diagnosis
• Favorable response to thiamin
Diagnosis is usually based on a favorable response to treatment with thiamin in a patient with symptoms
or signs of deficiency. Similar bilateral lower-extremity polyneuropathies due to other disorders (eg,
diabetes, alcoholism, vitamin B
deficiency, heavy metal poisoning) do not respond to thiamin. Singlenerve neuritides (mononeuropathies—eg, sciatica) and multiple mononeuropathies (mononeuritis
multiplex) are unlikely to result from thiamin deficiency.
===PAGE:92===
Electrolytes, including Mg, should be measured to exclude other causes. For confirmation in equivocal
cases, erythrocyte transketolase activity and 24-h urinary thiamin excretion may be measured.
Diagnosis of cardiovascular beriberi can be difficult if other disorders that cause heart failure are present.
A therapeutic trial of thiamin can help.
Treatment
• Supplemental thiamin, with dose based on clinical manifestations
Ensuring that dietary supplies of thiamin are adequate is important regardless of symptoms. Because IV
glucose can worsen thiamin deficiency, alcoholics and others at risk of thiamin deficiency should receive
IV thiamin 100 mg before receiving IV glucose solutions.
For mild polyneuropathy, thiamin 10 to 20 mg po once/day is given for 2 wk. For moderate or advanced
neuropathy, the dose is 20 to 30 mg/day; it should be continued for several weeks after symptoms
disappear. For edema and congestion due to cardiovascular beriberi, thiamin 100 mg IV once/day is given
for several days. Heart failure is also treated.
For Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, thiamin 50 to 100 mg IM or IV bid must usually be given for several
days, followed by 10 to 20 mg once/day until a therapeutic response is obtained. Anaphylactic reactions
to IV thiamin are rare. Symptoms of ophthalmoplegia may resolve in a day; improvement in patients with
Korsakoff psychosis may take 1 to 3 mo. Recovery from neurologic deficits is often incomplete in
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome and in other forms of thiamin deficiency.
Because thiamin deficiency often occurs with other B vitamin deficiencies, multiple water-soluble vitamins
are usually given for several weeks. Patients should continue to consume a nutritious diet, supplying 1 to
2 times the daily recommended intake of vitamins; all alcohol intake should stop.
Vitamin A
Vitamin A (retinol) is required for the formation of rhodopsin, a photoreceptor pigment in the retina. Vitamin
A helps maintain epithelial tissues. Normally, the liver stores 80 to 90% of the body's vitamin A. To use
vitamin A, the body releases it into the circulation bound to prealbumin (transthyretin) and retinol-binding
protein.
β
-Carotene and other provitamin carotenoids, contained in green leafy and yellow vegetables
and deep- or bright-colored fruits, are converted to vitamin A. Carotenoids are absorbed better from
vegetables when they are cooked or homogenized and served with some fats or oils.
Retinol activity equivalents (RAE) were developed because provitamin A carotenoids have less vitamin A
activity than preformed vitamin A; 1
μ
g retinol = 3.33 IU.
Synthetic vitamin analogs (retinoids) are being used increasingly in dermatology. The possible protective
role of
β
-carotene, retinol, and retinoids against some epithelial cancers is under study. However, risk of
certain cancers may be increased after
β
-carotene supplementation.
Vitamin A Deficiency
Vitamin A deficiency can result from inadequate intake, fat malabsorption, or liver disorders.
Deficiency impairs immunity and hematopoiesis and causes rashes and typical ocular effects
(eg, xerophthalmia, night blindness). Diagnosis is based on typical ocular findings and low
vitamin A levels. Treatment consists of vitamin A given orally or, if symptoms are severe or
malabsorption is the cause, parenterally.
Etiology
Primary vitamin A deficiency is usually caused by prolonged dietary deprivation. It is endemic in areas
such as southern and eastern Asia, where rice, devoid of
β
-carotene, is the staple food. Xerophthalmia
due to primary deficiency is a common cause of blindness among young children in developing countries.
===PAGE:93===
Secondary vitamin A deficiency may be due to decreased bioavailability of provitamin A carotenoids or to
interference with absorption, storage, or transport of vitamin A. Interference with absorption or storage is
likely in sprue, cystic fibrosis, pancreatic insufficiency, duodenal bypass, chronic diarrhea, bile duct
obstruction, giardiasis, and cirrhosis. Vitamin A deficiency is common in prolonged protein-energy
undernutrition not only because the diet is deficient but also because vitamin A storage and transport is
defective. In children with complicated measles, vitamin A can shorten the duration of the disorder and
reduce the severity of symptoms and risk of death.
Symptoms and Signs
Impaired dark adaptation of the eyes, which can lead to night blindness, is an early symptom.
Xerophthalmia (which is nearly pathognomonic) results from keratinization of the eyes. It involves drying
(xerosis) and thickening of the conjunctivae and corneas. Superficial foamy patches composed of
epithelial debris and secretions on the exposed bulbar conjunctiva (Bitot's spots) develop. In advanced
deficiency, the cornea becomes hazy and can develop erosions, which can lead to its destruction
(keratomalacia).
Keratinization of the skin and of the mucous membranes in the respiratory, GI, and urinary tracts can
occur. Drying, scaling, and follicular thickening of the skin and respiratory infections can result. Immunity
is generally impaired.
The younger the patient, the more severe are the effects of vitamin A deficiency. Growth retardation and
infections are common among children. Mortality rate can exceed 50% in children with severe vitamin A
deficiency.
Diagnosis
• Serum retinol levels, clinical evaluation, and response to vitamin A
Ocular findings suggest the diagnosis. Dark adaptation can be impaired in other disorders (eg, zinc
deficiency, retinitis pigmentosa, severe refractive errors, cataracts, diabetic retinopathy). If dark
adaptation is impaired, rod scotometry and electroretinography are done to determine whether vitamin A
deficiency is the cause.
Serum levels of retinol are measured. Normal range is 28 to 86
μ
g/dL (1 to 3
μ
mol/L). However, levels
decrease only after the deficiency is advanced because the liver contains large stores of vitamin A. Also,
decreased levels may result from acute infection, which causes retinol-binding protein and transthyretin
(also called prealbumin) levels to decrease transiently. A therapeutic trial of vitamin A may help confirm
the diagnosis.
Prevention
The diet should include dark green leafy vegetables, deep- or bright-colored fruits (eg, papayas,
oranges), carrots, and yellow vegetables (eg, squash, pumpkin). Vitamin A-fortified milk and cereals, liver,
egg yolks, and fish liver oils are helpful. Carotenoids are absorbed better when consumed with some
dietary fat. If milk allergy is suspected in infants, they should be given adequate vitamin A in formula
feedings. In developing countries, prophylactic supplements of vitamin A palmitate in oil 60,000 RAE
(200,000 IU) po every 6 mo are advised for all children between 1 and 5 yr of age; infants < 6 mo can be
given a one-time dose of 15,000 RAE (50,000 IU), and those aged 6 to 12 mo can be given a one-time
dose of 30,000 RAE (100,000 IU).
Treatment
• Vitamin A palmitate
Dietary deficiency is traditionally treated with vitamin A palmitate in oil 60,000 IU po once/day for 2 days,
followed by 4500 IU po once/day. If vomiting or malabsorption is present or xerophthalmia is probable, a
===PAGE:94===
dose of 50,000 IU for infants < 6 mo, 100,000 IU for infants 6 to 12 mo, or 200,000 IU for children > 12 mo
and adults should be given for 2 days, with a third dose at least 2 wk later. The same doses are
recommended for infants and children with complicated measles. Infants born of HIV-positive mothers
should receive 50,000 IU (15,000 RAE) within 48 h of birth. Prolonged daily administration of large doses,
especially to infants, must be avoided because toxicity may result.
For pregnant or breastfeeding women, prophylactic or therapeutic doses should not exceed 10,000 IU
(3000 RAE)/day to avoid possible damage to the fetus or infant.
Vitamin A Toxicity
Vitamin A toxicity can be acute (usually due to accidental ingestion by children) or chronic. Both
types usually cause headache and increased intracranial pressure. Acute toxicity also causes
nausea and vomiting. Chronic toxicity also causes changes in skin, hair, and nails; abnormal
liver test results; and, in a fetus, birth defects. Diagnosis is usually clinical. Unless birth defects
are present, adjusting the dose almost always leads to complete recovery.
Acute vitamin A toxicity in children may result from taking large doses (> 100,000 RAE [> 300,000 IU]),
usually accidentally. In adults, acute toxicity has occurred when arctic explorers ingested polar bear or
seal livers, which contain several million units of vitamin A.
Chronic toxicity in older children and adults usually develops after doses of > 30,000 RAE (> 100,000
IU)/day have been taken for months. Megavitamin therapy is a possible cause, as are massive daily
doses (50,000 to 120,000 RAE [150,000 to 350,000 IU]) of vitamin A
or its metabolites, which are
sometimes given for nodular acne or other skin disorders. Adults who consume > 1500 RAE (> 4500
IU)/day of vitamin A may develop osteoporosis. Infants who are given excessive doses (6,000 to 20,000
RAE [18,000 to 60,000 IU]/day) of water-miscible vitamin A may develop toxicity within a few weeks. Birth
defects occur in children of women receiving isotretinoin (which is related to vitamin A) for acne treatment
during pregnancy.
Although carotene is converted to vitamin A in the body, excessive ingestion of carotene causes
carotenemia, not vitamin A toxicity. Carotenemia is usually asymptomatic but may lead to carotenodermia,
in which the skin becomes yellow. When taken as a supplement,
β
-carotene has been associated with
increased cancer risk; risk does not seem to increase when carotenoids are consumed in fruits and
vegetables.
Symptoms and Signs
Although symptoms may vary, headache and rash usually develop during acute or chronic toxicity. Acute
toxicity causes increased intracranial pressure. Drowsiness, irritability, abdominal pain, nausea, and
vomiting are common. Sometimes the skin subsequently peels.
Early symptoms of chronic toxicity are sparsely distributed, coarse hair; alopecia of the eyebrows; dry,
rough skin; dry eyes; and cracked lips. Later, severe headache, pseudotumor cerebri, and generalized
weakness develop. Cortical hyperostosis of bone and arthralgia may occur, especially in children.
Fractures may occur easily, especially in the elderly. In children, toxicity can cause pruritus, anorexia, and
failure to thrive. Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly may occur.
In carotenodermia, the skin (but not the sclera) becomes deep yellow, especially on the palms and soles.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is clinical. Blood vitamin levels correlate poorly with toxicity. However, if clinical diagnosis is
equivocal, laboratory testing may help. In vitamin A toxicity, fasting serum retinol levels may increase from
normal (28 to 86
μ
g/dL [1 to 3
μ
mol/L]) to > 100
μ
g/dL (> 3.49
μ
mol/L), sometimes to > 2000
μ
g/dL (> 69.8
μ
mol/L). Hypercalcemia is common.
===PAGE:95===
Differentiating vitamin A toxicity from other disorders may be difficult. Carotenodermia may also occur in
severe hypothyroidism and anorexia nervosa, possibly because carotene is converted to vitamin A more
slowly.
Prognosis
Complete recovery usually occurs if vitamin A ingestion stops. Symptoms and signs of chronic toxicity
usually disappear within 1 to 4 wk. However, birth defects in the fetus of a mother who has taken
megadoses of vitamin A are not reversible.
Treatment
Vitamin A is stopped.
Vitamin B
Vitamin B
includes a group of closely related compounds: pyridoxine, pyridoxal, and pyridoxamine. They
are metabolized in the body to pyridoxal phosphate, which acts as a coenzyme in many important
reactions in blood, CNS, and skin metabolism. Vitamin B
is important in heme and nucleic acid
biosynthesis and in lipid, carbohydrate, and amino acid metabolism.
Vitamin B
Deficiency and Dependency
Because vitamin B
is present in most foods, dietary deficiency is rare. Secondary deficiency
may result from various conditions. Symptoms can include peripheral neuropathy, a pellagralike syndrome, anemia, and seizures, which, particularly in infants, may not resolve when
treated with anticonvulsants. Impaired metabolism (dependency) is rare; it causes various
symptoms, including seizures, intellectual disability, and anemia. Diagnosis is usually clinical;
no laboratory test readily assesses vitamin B
status. Treatment consists of giving oral vitamin
B
and, when possible, treating the cause.
Dietary deficiency, though rare, can develop because extensive processing can deplete foods of vitamin
B
. Secondary deficiency most often results from protein-energy undernutrition, malabsorption,
alcoholism, use of pyridoxine-inactivating drugs (eg, anticonvulsants, isoniazid, cycloserine, hydralazine,
corticosteroids, penicillamine), or excessive loss. Rarely, it results from increased metabolic demand (eg,
in hyperthyroidism).
Rare inborn errors of metabolism can affect pyridoxine metabolism.
The role of vitamin B
deficiency in increasing plasma homocysteine levels and in contributing to vascular
disorders is under study.
Symptoms and Signs
Deficiency causes a pellagra-like syndrome, with seborrheic dermatitis, glossitis, and cheilosis, and, in
adults, can cause depression, confusion, EEG abnormalities, and seizures. Rarely, deficiency or
dependency causes seizures in infants. Seizures, particularly in infants, may be refractory to treatment
with anticonvulsants. Normocytic, microcytic, or sideroblastic anemia can also develop.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Vitamin B
deficiency should be considered in any infant who has seizures, any patient who has seizures
refractory to treatment with anticonvulsants, and any patient with deficiencies of other B vitamins,
===PAGE:96===
particularly in patients with alcoholism or protein-energy undernutrition. Diagnosis is usually clinical.
There is no single accepted laboratory test of vitamin B
status; measurement of serum pyridoxal
phosphate is most common.
Treatment
• Pyridoxine
• Elimination of risk factors when possible
For secondary deficiency, causes (eg, use of pyridoxine-inactivating drugs, malabsorption) should be
corrected if possible. Usually, pyridoxine 50 to 100 mg po once/day corrects the deficiency in adults. Most
people taking isoniazid should also be given pyridoxine 30 to 50 mg/day. For deficiency due to increased
metabolic demand, amounts larger than the daily recommended intake may be required. For most cases
of inborn errors of metabolism, high doses of pyridoxine may be effective.
Vitamin B
Toxicity
The ingestion of megadoses (> 500 mg/day) of pyridoxine (eg, taken to treat carpal tunnel syndrome or
premenstrual syndrome although efficacy is unproved) may cause peripheral neuropathy with deficits in a
stocking-glove distribution, including progressive sensory ataxia and severe impairment of position and
vibration senses. Senses of touch, temperature, and pain are less affected. Motor and central nervous
systems are usually intact.
Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is to stop taking vitamin B
. Recovery is slow and, for some patients,
incomplete.
Vitamin B
Cobalamin is a general term for compounds with biologic vitamin B
activity. These compounds are
involved in nucleic acid metabolism, methyl transfer, and myelin synthesis and repair. They are necessary
for the formation of normal RBCs.
Food-bound vitamin B
is released in the stomach's acid environment and is bound to R protein
(haptocorrin). Pancreatic enzymes cleave this B
complex (B
-R protein) in the small intestine. After
cleavage, intrinsic factor, secreted by parietal cells in the gastric mucosa, binds with vitamin B
. Intrinsic
factor is required for absorption of vitamin B
, which takes place in the terminal ileum.
Vitamin B
in plasma is bound to transcobalamins I and II. Transcobalamin II is responsible for delivering
vitamin B
to tissues. The liver stores large amounts of vitamin B
. Enterohepatic reabsorption helps
retain vitamin B
. Liver vitamin B
stores can normally sustain physiologic needs for 3 to 5 yr if B
intake stops (eg, in people who become vegans) and for months to 1 yr if enterohepatic reabsorption
capacity is absent.
Large amounts of vitamin B
seem to be nontoxic but are not recommended for regular use (ie, as a
general tonic).
Vitamin B
Deficiency
Dietary vitamin B
deficiency usually results from inadequate absorption, but deficiency can
develop in vegans who do not take vitamin supplements. Deficiency causes megaloblastic
anemia, damage to the white matter of the spinal cord and brain, and peripheral neuropathy.
Diagnosis is usually made by measuring serum vitamin B
levels. The Schilling test helps
determine etiology. Treatment consists of oral or parenteral vitamin B
. Folate (folic acid)
should not be used instead of vitamin B
because folate may alleviate the anemia but allow
===PAGE:97===
neurologic deficits to progress.
Etiology
Inadequate vitamin B
intake is possible in vegans but is otherwise unlikely. Breastfed babies of vegan
mothers may develop vitamin B
deficiency by age 4 to 6 mo because their
[Table 4-5.
Causes of Vitamin B
Deficiency]
liver stores (which are normally extensive) are limited and their rapid growth rate results in high demand.
Vitamin B
deficiency usually results from inadequate absorption (see
Table 4-5
and p.
), which, in
the elderly, most commonly results from decreased acid secretion. In such cases, crystalline vitamin B
(such as that available in vitamin supplements) can be absorbed, but food-bound vitamin B
is not
liberated and absorbed normally. Inadequate absorption may occur in blind loop syndrome (with
overgrowth of bacteria) or fish tapeworm infestation; in these cases, bacteria or parasites use ingested
vitamin B
so that less is available for absorption. Vitamin B
absorption may be inadequate if ileal
absorptive sites are destroyed by inflammatory bowel disease or are surgically removed. Less common
causes of inadequate vitamin B
absorption include chronic pancreatitis, gastric surgery, malabsorption
syndromes, AIDS, use of certain drugs (eg, antacids, metformin), repeated exposure to nitrous oxide, and
a genetic disorder causing malabsorption in the ileum (Imerslund-Graesbeck syndrome).
Pernicious anemia
is often used synonymously with vitamin B
deficiency. However, pernicious
anemia specifically refers to anemia resulting from vitamin B
deficiency caused by an autoimmune
metaplastic atrophic gastritis with loss of intrinsic factor (. Patients with classic pernicious
anemia, most commonly younger adults, are at increased risk of stomach and other GI cancers.
Subacute combined degeneration
refers to degenerative changes in the nervous system due to
vitamin B
deficiency; they affect mostly brain and spinal cord white matter. Demyelinating or axonal
peripheral neuropathies can occur.
Symptoms and Signs
Anemia usually develops insidiously. It is often more severe than its symptoms indicate because its slow
evolution allows physiologic adaptation. Occasionally, splenomegaly and hepatomegaly occur. Various GI
symptoms, including weight loss and poorly localized abdominal pain, may occur. Glossitis, usually
described as burning of the tongue, is uncommon.
Neurologic symptoms develop independently from and often without hematologic abnormalities. In early
stages, decreased position and vibratory sensation in the extremities is accompanied by mild to moderate
weakness and hyporeflexia. In later stages, spasticity, extensor plantar responses, greater loss of position
and vibratory sensation in the lower extremities, and ataxia emerge. These deficits may develop in a
stocking-glove distribution. Tactile, pain, and temperature sensations are usually spared but may be
difficult to assess in the elderly.
Some patients are also irritable and mildly depressed. Paranoia (megaloblastic madness), delirium,
confusion, spastic ataxia, and, at times, postural hypotension may occur in advanced cases. The
confusion may be difficult to differentiate from age-related dementias, such as Alzheimer's disease.
Diagnosis
• CBC and vitamin B
and folate levels
• Sometimes methylmalonic acid levels or Schilling test
===PAGE:98===
Diagnosis is based on CBC and vitamin B
and folate levels. It is important to remember that severe
neurologic disease may occur without anemia or macrocytosis.
CBC detects megaloblastic anemia. Tissue deficiency and macrocytic indexes may precede the
development of anemia. A vitamin B
level < 200 pg/mL (< 145 pmol/L) indicates vitamin B
deficiency.
The folate level is measured because vitamin B
deficiency must be differentiated from folate deficiency
as a cause of megaloblastic anemia; folate supplementation can mask vitamin B
deficiency and may
alleviate megaloblastic anemia but allow the neurologic deficits to progress or even accelerate.
When clinical judgment suggests vitamin B
deficiency but the vitamin B
level is low-normal (200 to
350 pg/mL [145 to 260 pmol/L]) or hematologic indexes are normal, other tests can be done. Measuring
serum methylmalonic acid (MMA) levels may be useful. An elevated MMA level supports vitamin B
deficiency but may be due to renal failure. MMA levels can also be used to monitor the response to
treatment. MMA levels remain normal in folate deficiency; homocysteine levels may be elevated with
either vitamin B
or folate deficiency. Less commonly, holotranscobalamin II (transcobalamin II-B
complex) content is measured; when holotranscobalamin II is < 40 pg/mL (< 30 pmol/L), vitamin B
is
deficient.
After deficiency is diagnosed, additional tests may be indicated for younger adults but usually not for the
elderly. Unless dietary vitamin B
is obviously inadequate, measurement of serum gastrin levels or
autoantibodies to intrinsic factor may be done; sensitivity and specificity of these tests may be poor.
Schilling test:
The Schilling test is useful only if diagnosing intrinsic factor deficiency is important, as in
classic pernicious anemia. This test is not necessary for most elderly patients. The Schilling test
measures absorption of free radiolabeled vitamin B
. Radiolabeled vitamin B
is given orally, followed
in 1 to 6 h by 1000
μ
g (1 mg) of parenteral vitamin B
, which reduces uptake of radiolabeled vitamin
B
by the liver. Absorbed radiolabeled vitamin B
is excreted in urine, which is collected for 24 h. The
amount excreted is measured, and the percentage of total radiolabeled vitamin B
is determined. If
absorption is normal, ≥ 9% of the dose given appears in the urine. Reduced urinary excretion (< 5% if
kidney function is normal) indicates inadequate vitamin B
absorption. Improved absorption with the
subsequent addition of intrinsic factor to radiolabeled vitamin B
confirms the diagnosis of pernicious
anemia. The test is often difficult to do or interpret because of incomplete urine collection or renal
insufficiency. In addition, because the Schilling test does not measure absorption of protein-bound vitamin
B
, the test does not detect defective liberation of vitamin B
from foods, which is common among the
elderly. The Schilling test repletes vitamin B
and can mask deficiency, so it should be done only after all
other diagnostic tests and therapeutic trials.
If malabsorption is identified, the Schilling test can be repeated after a 2-wk trial of an oral antibiotic. If
antibiotic therapy corrects malabsorption, the likely cause is intestinal overgrowth of bacteria (eg, blindloop syndrome).
Treatment
• Supplemental vitamin B
Vitamin B
1000 to 2000
μ
g po can be given once/day to patients who do not have severe deficiency or
neurologic symptoms or signs. A nasal gel preparation of vitamin B
is available at a higher price. Large
oral doses can be absorbed by mass action, even when intrinsic factor is absent. If the MMA level
(sometimes used to monitor treatment) does not decrease, patients may not be taking vitamin B
. For
more severe deficiency, vitamin B
1 mg IM is usually given 1 to 4 times/wk for several weeks until
hematologic abnormalities are corrected; then it is given once/mo.
Although hematologic abnormalities are usually corrected within 6 wk (reticulocyte count should improve
within 1 wk), resolution of neurologic symptoms may take much longer. Neurologic symptoms that persist
===PAGE:99===
for months or years become irreversible. In most elderly people with vitamin B
deficiency and dementia,
cognition does not improve after treatment. Vitamin B
treatment must be continued for life unless the
pathophysiologic mechanism for the deficiency is corrected.
Infants of vegan mothers should receive supplemental vitamin B
from birth.
Vitamin C
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) plays a role in collagen, carnitine, hormone, and amino acid formation. It is
essential for wound healing and facilitates recovery from burns. Vitamin C is also an antioxidant, supports
immune function, and facilitates the absorption of iron.
Vitamin C Deficiency
In developed countries, vitamin C deficiency can occur as part of general undernutrition, but
severe deficiency (causing scurvy) is uncommon. Symptoms include fatigue, depression, and
connective tissue defects (eg, gingivitis, petechiae, rash, internal bleeding, impaired wound
healing). In infants and children, bone growth may be impaired. Diagnosis is usually clinical.
Treatment consists of oral vitamin C.
Severe deficiency results in scurvy, a disorder characterized by hemorrhagic manifestations and abnormal
osteoid and dentin formation.
Etiology
In adults, primary deficiency is usually due to inadequate diet. The need for dietary vitamin C is increased
by febrile illnesses, inflammatory disorders (particularly diarrheal disorders), achlorhydria, smoking,
thyrotoxicosis, iron deficiency, cold or heat stress, surgery, burns, and protein deficiency. Heat (eg,
sterilization of formulas, cooking) can destroy some of the vitamin C in food.
Pathophysiology
Formation of intercellular cement substances in connective tissues, bones, and dentin is defective,
resulting in weakened capillaries with subsequent hemorrhage and defects in bone and related
structures.
Bone tissue formation becomes impaired, which, in children, causes bone lesions and poor bone growth.
Fibrous tissue forms between the diaphysis and the epiphysis, and costochondral junctions enlarge.
Densely calcified fragments of cartilage are embedded in the fibrous tissue. Subperiosteal hemorrhages,
sometimes due to small fractures, may occur in children or adults.
Symptoms and Signs
In adults, symptoms develop after weeks to months of vitamin C depletion. Lassitude, weakness,
irritability, weight loss, and vague myalgias and arthralgias may develop early.
Later, symptoms related to defects in connective tissues develop. Follicular hyperkeratosis, coiled hair,
and perifollicular hemorrhages may develop. Gums may become swollen, purple, spongy, and friable; they
bleed easily in severe deficiency. Eventually, teeth become loose and avulsed. Secondary infections may
develop. Wounds heal poorly and tear easily, and spontaneous hemorrhages may occur, especially as
ecchymoses in the skin of the lower limbs or as bulbar conjunctival hemorrhage.
Other symptoms and signs include femoral neuropathy due to hemorrhage into femoral sheaths (which
may mimic deep venous thrombosis), lower-extremity edema, and painful bleeding or effusions within
joints.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:100===
• Usually, skin or gingival findings and risk factors
Diagnosis is usually made clinically in a patient who has skin or gingival signs and is at risk of vitamin C
deficiency. Laboratory confirmation may be available. Anemia is common. Bleeding, coagulation, and PT
are normal.
Skeletal x-rays can help diagnose childhood (but not adult) scurvy. Changes are most evident at the ends
of long bones, particularly at the knee. Early changes resemble atrophy. Loss of trabeculae results in a
ground-glass appearance. The cortex thins. A line of calcified, irregular cartilage (white line of Fraenkel)
may be visible at the metaphysis. A zone of rarefaction or a linear fracture proximal and parallel to the
white line may be visible as only a triangular defect at the bone's lateral margin but is specific. The
epiphysis may be compressed. Healing subperiosteal hemorrhages may elevate and calcify the
periosteum.
Laboratory diagnosis, which requires measuring blood ascorbic acid, is sometimes done at academic
centers. Levels of < 0.6 mg/dL (< 34
μ
mol/L) are considered marginal; levels of < 0.2 mg/dL (< 11
μ
mol/L)
indicate vitamin C deficiency. Measurement of ascorbic acid levels in the WBC-platelet layer of
centrifuged blood is not widely available or standardized.
In adults, scurvy must be differentiated from arthritis, hemorrhagic disorders, gingivitis, and protein-energy
undernutrition. Hyperkeratotic hair follicles with surrounding hyperemia or hemorrhage are almost
pathognomonic. Bleeding gums, conjunctival hemorrhages, most petechiae, and ecchymoses are
nonspecific.
Treatment
• Nutritious diet with supplemental ascorbic acid
For scurvy in adults, ascorbic acid 100 to 500 mg po tid is given for 1 to 2 wk, until signs disappear, and
followed by a nutritious diet supplying 1 to 2 times the daily recommended intake. In scurvy, therapeutic
doses
of ascorbic acid restore the functions of vitamin C in a few days. The symptoms and signs usually
disappear over 1 to 2 wk. Chronic gingivitis with extensive subcutaneous hemorrhage persists longer.
Prevention
Vitamin C 75 mg po once/day for women and 90 mg po once/day for men prevents deficiency. Smokers
should consume an additional 35 mg/day. Five servings of most fruits and vegetables (recommended
daily) provide > 200 mg of vitamin C.
Vitamin C Toxicity
The upper limit for vitamin C intake is 2000 mg/day. Up to 10 g/day of vitamin C are sometimes taken for
unproven health benefits, such as preventing or shortening the duration of viral infections or slowing or
reversing the progression of cancer or atherosclerosis. Such doses may acidify the urine, cause nausea
and diarrhea, interfere with the healthy antioxidant-prooxidant balance in the body, and, in patients with
thalassemia or hemochromatosis, promote iron overload. Intake below the upper limit does not have toxic
effects in healthy adults.
Vitamin D
Vitamin D has 2 main forms: D
(ergocalciferol) and D
(cholecalciferol); the latter is the naturally
occurring form and the form used for low-dose supplementation. Vitamin D
is synthesized in skin by
exposure to direct sunlight (ultraviolet B radiation) and obtained in the diet chiefly in fish liver oils and salt
water fish. In some developed countries, milk and other foods are fortified with vitamin D. Human breast
milk is low in vitamin D, containing an average of only 10% of the amount in fortified cow's milk.
Requirements for vitamin D increase with age because skin synthesis declines. Sunscreen use and dark
skin pigmentation also reduce skin synthesis of vitamin D.
===PAGE:101===
Vitamin D is a prohormone with several active metabolites that act as hormones. Vitamin D is metabolized
by the liver to 25(OH)D, which is then converted by the kidneys to 1,25(OH)
D (1,25dihydroxycholecalciferol, calcitriol, or active vitamin D hormone). 25(OH)D, the major circulating form, has
some metabolic activity, but 1,25(OH)
D is the most metabolically active. The conversion to 1,25(OH)
D
is regulated by its own concentration, parathyroid hormone (PTH), and serum concentrations of Ca and
phosphate.
[Table 4-6.
Actions of Vitamin D and its Metabolites]
Vitamin D affects many organ systems (see
Table 4-6
), but mainly it increases Ca and phosphate
absorption from the intestine and promotes normal bone formation and mineralization. Vitamin D and
related analogs may be used to treat psoriasis, hypoparathyroidism, renal osteodystrophy, and possibly
leukemia and breast, prostate, and colon cancers; they may also be used for immunosuppression.
Vitamin D Deficiency and Dependency
Inadequate exposure to sunlight predisposes to vitamin D deficiency. Deficiency impairs bone
mineralization, causing rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults and possibly contributing
to osteoporosis. Treatment usually consists of oral vitamin D; Ca and phosphate are
supplemented as needed. Prevention is often possible. Rarely, hereditary disorders cause
impaired metabolism of vitamin D (dependency).
Vitamin D deficiency is a common cause of rickets and osteomalacia, but these disorders may also result
from other conditions, such as various renal tubular disorders, familial hypophosphatemic (vitamin Dresistant) rickets (, chronic metabolic acidosis, hypoparathyroidism (which reduces vitamin D
absorption), inadequate dietary Ca, and disorders or drugs that impair the mineralization of bone matrix.
Vitamin D deficiency causes hypocalcemia, which stimulates production of PTH, causing
hyperparathyroidism. Hyperparathyroidism increases absorption, bone mobilization, and renal
conservation of Ca but increases excretion of phosphate. As a result, the serum level of Ca may be
normal, but because of hypophosphatemia, bone mineralization is impaired.
Etiology
Vitamin D deficiency may result from the following.
Inadequate exposure or intake:
Inadequate direct sunlight exposure (or sunscreen use) and
inadequate intake usually occur simultaneously to result in clinical deficiency. Susceptible people include
the elderly (who are often undernourished and are not exposed to enough sunlight), and certain
communities (eg, women and children who are confined to the home or who wear clothing that covers the
entire body and face). Inadequate vitamin D stores are common among the elderly, particularly those who
are house-bound, institutionalized, or hospitalized or who have had a hip fracture. Recommended direct
sunlight exposure is 5 to 15 min (suberythemal dose) to arms and legs, or face, arms and hands, at least
3 times a week.
Reduced absorption:
Malabsorption can deprive the body of dietary vitamin D; only a small amount of
25(OH)D is recirculated enterohepatically.
Abnormal metabolism:
Vitamin D deficiency may result from defects in the production of 25(OH)D or
1,25(OH)
D. People with a chronic renal disorder commonly develop rickets or osteomalacia because
renal production of 1,25 (OH)
D is decreased and phosphate levels are elevated. Hepatic dysfunction
can also interfere with production of active vitamin D metabolites.
Type I hereditary vitamin D-dependent rickets is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by absent
or defective conversion of 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)
D in the kidneys. X-linked familial hypophosphatemia
===PAGE:102===
reduces vitamin D synthesis in the kidneys. Many anticonvulsants and glucocorticoid use increase the
need for vitamin D supplementation.
Resistance to effects of vitamin D:
Type II hereditary vitamin D-dependent rickets has several forms
and is due to mutations in the 1,25(OH)
D receptor. This receptor affects the metabolism of gut, kidney,
bone, and other cells. In this disorder, 1,25(OH)
D is abundant but ineffective because the receptor is not
functional.
Symptoms and Signs
Vitamin D deficiency can cause muscle aches, muscle weakness, and bone pain at any age.
Vitamin D deficiency in a pregnant woman causes deficiency in the fetus. Occasionally, deficiency severe
enough to cause maternal osteomalacia results in rickets with metaphyseal lesions in neonates. In young
infants, rickets causes softening of the entire skull (craniotabes). When palpated, the occiput and
posterior parietal bones feel like a ping pong ball. In older infants with rickets, sitting and crawling are
delayed, as is fontanelle closure; there is bossing of the skull and costochondral thickening.
Costochondral thickening can look like beadlike prominences along the lateral chest wall (rachitic rosary).
In children 1 to 4 yr, epiphyseal cartilage at the lower ends of the radius, ulna, tibia, and fibula enlarges;
kyphoscoliosis develops, and walking is delayed. In older children and adolescents, walking is painful; in
extreme cases, deformities such as bowlegs and knock-knees develop.
Tetany is caused by hypocalcemia and may accompany infantile or adult vitamin D deficiency. Tetany may
cause paresthesias of the lips, tongue, and fingers; carpopedal and facial spasm; and, if very severe,
seizures. Maternal deficiency can cause tetany in neonates.
Osteomalacia predisposes to fractures. In the elderly, hip fractures may result from only minimal trauma.
Diagnosis
• Levels of 25(OH)D (D
+D
)
Diagnosis may be suspected based on any of the following:
• A history of inadequate sunlight exposure or dietary intake
• Symptoms and signs of rickets, osteomalacia, or neonatal tetany
• Characteristic bone changes seen on x-ray
X-rays of the radius and ulna plus serum levels of Ca, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, PTH, and
25(OH)D are needed to differentiate vitamin D deficiency from other causes of bone demineralization.
Assessment of vitamin D status and serologic tests for syphilis can be considered for infants with
craniotabes based on the history and physical, but most cases of craniotabes resolve spontaneously.
Rickets can be distinguished from chondrodystrophy because the latter is characterized by a large head,
short extremities, thick bones, and normal serum Ca, phosphate, and alkaline phosphatase levels.
Tetany due to infantile rickets may be clinically indistinguishable from seizures due to other causes. Blood
tests and clinical history may help distinguish them.
Bone changes, seen on x-rays, precede clinical signs. In rickets, changes are most evident at the lower
ends of the radius and ulna. The diaphyseal ends lose their sharp, clear outline; they are cup-shaped and
show a spotty or fringy rarefaction. Later, because the ends of the radius and ulna have become
noncalcified and radiolucent, the distance between them and the metacarpal bones appears increased.
The bone matrix elsewhere also becomes more radiolucent. Characteristic deformities result from the
bones bending at the cartilage-shaft junction because the shaft is weak. As healing begins, a thin white
===PAGE:103===
line of calcification appears at the epiphysis, becoming denser and thicker as calcification proceeds.
Later, the bone matrix becomes calcified and opacified at the subperiosteal level.
In adults, bone demineralization, particularly in the spine, pelvis, and lower extremities, can be seen on xrays; the fibrous lamellae can also be seen, and incomplete ribbonlike areas of demineralization
(pseudofractures, Looser's lines, Milkman's syndrome) appear in the cortex.
Because levels of serum 25(OH)D reflect body stores of vitamin D and correlate with symptoms and signs
of vitamin D deficiency better than levels of other vitamin D metabolites, 25(OH)D (D
+D
) measurement
is generally considered the best way to diagnose deficiency. Goal 25(OH)D levels are 30 to 40 ng/mL
(about 75 to 100 nmol/L); whether higher levels may be beneficial remains uncertain.
If the diagnosis is unclear, serum levels of 1,25(OH)
D and urinary Ca concentration can be measured. In
severe deficiency, serum 1,25(OH)
D is abnormally low, usually undetectable. Urinary Ca is low in all
forms of the deficiency except those associated with acidosis.
In vitamin D deficiency, serum Ca may be low or, because of secondary hyperparathyroidism, may be
normal. Serum phosphate usually decreases, and serum alkaline phosphatase usually increases. Serum
PTH is elevated.
Type I hereditary vitamin D-dependent rickets results in normal serum 25(OH)D, low serum 1,25(OH)
D
and Ca, and normal or low serum phosphate.
Treatment
• Correction of Ca and phosphate deficiencies
• Supplemental vitamin D
Ca deficiency (which is common) and phosphate deficiency should be corrected. As long as Ca and
phosphate intake is adequate, adults with osteomalacia and children with uncomplicated rickets can be
cured by giving vitamin D 40
μ
g (1600 IU) po once/day. Serum 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)
D begin to
increase within 1 or 2 days. Serum Ca and phosphate increase and serum alkaline phosphatase
decreases within about 10 days. During the 3rd wk, enough Ca and phosphate are deposited in bones to
be visible on x-rays. After about 1 mo, the dose can usually be reduced gradually to the usual
maintenance level of 10 to 15
μ
g (400 to 600 IU) once/day. If tetany is present, vitamin D should be
supplemented with IV Ca salts for up to 1 wk (. Elderly patients may need 25 to ≥ 50
μ
g (1000
to ≥ 2000 IU) daily to maintain a 25(OH)D level > 30 ng/mL (> 75 nmol/L); this dose is higher than the
recommended daily allowance (RDA) for people > 70 yr (600 IU) and may exceed the current upper limit
of 2000 IU/day.
Because rickets and osteomalacia due to defective production of vitamin D metabolites are vitamin Dresistant, they do not respond to the doses usually effective for rickets due to inadequate intake.
Endocrinologic evaluation is required because treatment depends on the specific defect. When 25(OH)D
production is defective, vitamin D 50
μ
g (2000 IU) once/day increases serum levels and results in clinical
improvement. Patients with kidney disorders often need 1,25(OH)
D supplementation.
Type I hereditary vitamin D-dependent rickets responds to 1,25(OH)
D 1 to 2
μ
g po once/day. Some
patients with type II hereditary vitamin D-dependent rickets respond to very high doses (eg, 10 to 24
μ
g/day) of 1,25(OH)
D; others require long-term infusions of Ca.
Prevention
Dietary counseling is particularly important in communities whose members are at risk of vitamin D
deficiency. Fortifying unleavened chapati flour with vitamin D (125
μ
g/kg) has been effective among Indian
immigrants in Britain. The benefits of sunlight exposure for vitamin D status must be weighed against the
increased skin damage and skin cancer risks.
===PAGE:104===
increased skin damage and skin cancer risks.
All breastfed infants should be given supplemental vitamin D 5
μ
g (200 IU) once/day from birth to 6 mo; at
6 mo, a more diversified diet is available. For adolescents at risk, a single IM dose of ergocalciferol 2.5
mg (100,000 IU) given in the fall can maintain adequate 25(OH)D levels throughout the winter. The
recommended daily allowance (RDA) for vitamin D is 400 IU for people aged 51 to 70 and
600 IU for
those >70; many consider this intake too low, and the 2005 Dietary Guidelines for Americans
recommends that healthy older adults consume 1000 IU/day.
Vitamin D Toxicity
Usually, vitamin D toxicity results from taking excessive amounts. Marked hypercalcemia
commonly causes symptoms. Diagnosis is typically based on elevated blood levels of 25(OH)D.
Treatment consists of stopping vitamin D, restricting dietary Ca, restoring intravascular volume
deficits, and, if toxicity is severe, giving corticosteroids or bisphosphonates.
Because synthesis of 1,25(OH)
D (the most active metabolite of vitamin D) is tightly regulated, vitamin D
toxicity usually occurs only if excessive doses (prescription or megavitamin) are taken. Vitamin D 1000
μ
g
(40,000 IU)/day causes toxicity within 1 to 4 mo in infants. In adults, taking 1250
μ
g (50,000 IU)/day for
several months can cause toxicity. Vitamin D toxicity can occur iatrogenically when hypoparathyroidism is
treated too aggressively (.
Symptoms and Signs
The main symptoms result from hypercalcemia. Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting can develop, often
followed by polyuria, polydipsia, weakness, nervousness, pruritus, and eventually renal failure.
Proteinuria, urinary casts, azotemia, and metastatic calcifications (particularly in the kidneys) can develop.
Diagnosis
• Hypercalcemia plus risk factors or elevated serum 25(OH)D levels
A history of excessive vitamin D intake may be the only clue differentiating vitamin D toxicity from other
causes of hypercalcemia. Elevated serum Ca levels of 12 to 16 mg/dL (3 to 4 mmol/L) are a constant
finding when toxic symptoms occur. Serum 25(OH)D levels are usually elevated > 150 ng/mL (> 375
nmol/L). Levels of 1,25(OH)
D, which need not be measured to confirm the diagnosis, may be normal.
Serum Ca should be measured often (weekly at first, then monthly) in all patients receiving large doses of
vitamin D, particularly the potent 1,25(OH)
D.
Treatment
• IV hydration plus corticosteroids or bisphosphonates
After stopping vitamin D intake, hydration with IV normal saline and corticosteroids or bisphosphonates
(which inhibit bone resorption) are used to reduce blood Ca levels.
Kidney damage or metastatic calcifications, if present, may be irreversible.
Vitamin E
Vitamin E is a group of compounds (including tocopherols and tocotrienols) that have similar biologic
activities. The most biologically active is
α
-tocopherol, but
β
-,
γ
-, and
δ
-tocopherols, 4 tocotrienols, and
several stereoisomers may also have important biologic activity. These compounds act as antioxidants,
which prevent lipid peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in cellular membranes. Plasma tocopherol
levels vary with total plasma lipid levels. Normally, the plasma
α
-tocopherol level is 5 to 20
μ
g/mL (11.6 to
46.4
μ
mol/L). High-dose vitamin E supplements do not protect against cardiovascular disorders;whether
===PAGE:105===
supplements can protect against Alzheimer's disease, tardive dyskinesia, and prostate cancer among
smokers is controversial.
Although the amount of vitamin E in many fortified foods and supplements is given in IU, current
recommendations are to use mg.
Vitamin E Deficiency
Dietary vitamin E deficiency is common in developing countries; deficiency among adults in
developed countries is uncommon and usually due to fat malabsorption. The main symptoms
are hemolytic anemia and neurologic deficits. Diagnosis is based on measuring the ratio of
plasma
α
-tocopherol to total plasma lipids; a low ratio suggests vitamin E deficiency. Treatment
consists of oral vitamin E, given in high doses if there are neurologic deficits or if deficiency
results from malabsorption.
Vitamin E deficiency causes fragility of RBCs and degeneration of neurons, particularly peripheral axons
and posterior column neurons.
Etiology
In developing countries, the most common cause is inadequate intake of vitamin E. In developed
countries, the most common causes are disorders that cause fat malabsorption, including
abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome, due to genetic absence of apolipoprotein B), chronic
cholestatic
hepatobiliary disease, pancreatitis, short bowel syndrome, and cystic fibrosis. A rare genetic
form of vitamin E deficiency without fat malabsorption results from defective liver metabolism.
Symptoms and Signs
The main symptoms are mild hemolytic anemia and nonspecific neurologic deficits. Abetalipoproteinemia
results in progressive neuropathy and retinopathy in the first 2 decades of life (.
Vitamin E deficiency may contribute to retinopathy of prematurity (also called retrolental fibroplasia) in
premature infants and to some cases of intraventricular and subependymal hemorrhage in neonates.
Affected premature neonates have muscle weakness.
In children, chronic cholestatic hepatobiliary disease or cystic fibrosis causes neurologic deficits, including
spinocerebellar ataxia with loss of deep tendon reflexes, truncal and limb ataxia, loss of vibration and
position senses, ophthalmoplegia, muscle weakness, ptosis, and dysarthria.
In adults with malabsorption, vitamin E deficiency very rarely causes spinocerebellar ataxia because
adults have large vitamin E stores in adipose tissue.
Diagnosis
• Low
α
-tocopherol level or low ratio of serum
α
-tocopherol to serum lipids
Without a history of inadequate intake or a predisposing condition, vitamin E deficiency is unlikely.
Confirmation usually requires measuring the vitamin level. Measuring RBC hemolysis in response to
peroxide can suggest the diagnosis but is nonspecific. Hemolysis increases as vitamin E deficiency
impairs RBC stability.
Measuring the serum
α
-tocopherol level is the most direct method of diagnosis. In adults, vitamin E
deficiency is suggested if the
α
-tocopherol level is < 5
μ
g/mL (< 11.6
μ
mol/L). Because abnormal lipid
levels can affect vitamin E status, a low ratio of serum
α
-tocopherol to lipids (< 0.8 mg/g total lipid) is the
most accurate indicator in adults with hyperlipidemia.
In children and adults with abetalipoproteinemia, serum
α
-tocopherol levels are usually undetectable.
===PAGE:106===
Treatment
• Supplemental
α
-tocopherol
If malabsorption causes clinically evident deficiency,
α
-tocopherol 15 to 25 mg/kg po once/day should be
given. However, larger doses given by injection are required to treat neuropathy during its early stages or
to overcome the defect of absorption and transport in abetalipoproteinemia.
Prevention
Although premature neonates may require supplementation, human milk and commercial formulas have
enough vitamin E for full-term neonates.
Vitamin E Toxicity
Many adults take relatively large amounts of vitamin E (
α
-tocopherol 400 to 800 mg/day) for months to
years without any apparent harm. Occasionally, muscle weakness, fatigue, nausea, and diarrhea occur.
The most significant risk is bleeding. However, bleeding is uncommon unless the dose is > 1000 mg/day
or the patient takes oral coumarin or warfarin. Thus, the upper limit for adults aged ≥19 yr is 1000 mg for
any form of
α
-tocopherol. Recent analyses of previous studies report that high vitamin E intakes may
increase the risk of hemorrhagic stroke and premature death.
Vitamin K
Vitamin K
(phylloquinone) is dietary vitamin K. Dietary fat enhances its absorption. Infant formulas
contain supplemental vitamin K. Vitamin K
refers to a group of compounds (menaquinones) synthesized
by bacteria in the intestinal tract; the amount synthesized does not satisfy the vitamin K requirement.
Vitamin K controls the formation of coagulation factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX, and X in the liver. Other
coagulation factors dependent on vitamin K are protein C, protein S, and protein Z; proteins C and S are
anticoagulants. Metabolic pathways conserve vitamin K. Once vitamin K has participated in formation of
coagulation factors, the reaction product, vitamin K epoxide, is enzymatically converted to the active form,
vitamin K hydroquinone.
The actions of vitamin K-dependent proteins require Ca. The vitamin K-dependent proteins, osteocalcin
and matrix
γ
-carboxy-glutamyl (Gla) protein, may have important roles in bone and other tissues. Forms of
vitamin K are common therapy for osteoporosis in Japan and other countries.
Vitamin K Deficiency
Vitamin K deficiency results from extremely inadequate intake, fat malabsorption, or use of
coumarin anticoagulants. Deficiency is particularly common among breastfed infants. It impairs
clotting. Diagnosis is suspected based on routine coagulation study findings and confirmed by
response to vitamin K. Treatment consists of vitamin K given orally or, when fat malabsorption
is the cause or risk of bleeding is high, parenterally.
Vitamin K deficiency decreases levels of prothrombin and other vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors,
causing defective coagulation and, potentially, bleeding.
Etiology
Worldwide, vitamin K deficiency causes infant morbidity and mortality. Vitamin K deficiency causes
hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, which usually occurs 1 to 7 days postpartum. In affected neonates,
birth trauma can cause intracranial hemorrhage. Neonates are prone to vitamin K deficiency because of
the following:
• The placenta transmits lipids and vitamin K relatively poorly.
===PAGE:107===
• The neonatal liver is immature with respect to prothrombin synthesis.
• Breast milk is low in vitamin K, containing about 2.5
μ
g/L (cow's milk contains 5000
μ
g/L).
• The neonatal gut is sterile during the first few days of life.
Late hemorrhagic disease (occurring 3 to 8 wk postpartum) is usually associated with breastfeeding,
malabsorption, or a liver disorder. If the mother has taken phenytoin anticonvulsants, coumarin
anticoagulants, or cephalosporin antibiotics, the risk of both types of hemorrhagic disease is increased.
In healthy adults, dietary vitamin K deficiency is uncommon because vitamin K is widely distributed in
green vegetables and the bacteria of the normal gut synthesize menaquinones. However, biliary
obstruction, malabsorption, cystic fibrosis, and resection of the small intestine can contribute to vitamin K
deficiency.
Coumarin anticoagulants interfere with the synthesis of vitamin K-dependent coagulation proteins (factors
II, VII, IX, and X) in the liver. Certain antibiotics (particularly some cephalosporins and other broadspectrum antibiotics), salicylates, megadoses of vitamin E, and hepatic insufficiency increase risk of
bleeding in patients with vitamin K deficiency.
Symptoms and Signs
Bleeding is the usual manifestation. Easy bruisability and mucosal bleeding (especially epistaxis, GI
hemorrhage, menorrhagia, and hematuria) can occur. Blood may ooze from puncture sites or incisions.
Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn and late hemorrhagic disease in infants may cause cutaneous, GI,
intrathoracic, or, in the worst cases, intracranial bleeding. If obstructive jaundice develops, bleeding—if it
occurs—usually begins after the 4th or 5th day. It may begin as a slow ooze from a surgical incision, the
gums, the nose, or GI mucosa, or it may begin as massive bleeding into the GI tract.
Diagnosis
• Usually, prolonged PT that decreases after phytonadione
Vitamin K deficiency or antagonism (due to coumarin anticoagulants) is suspected when abnormal
bleeding occurs in a patient at risk. Blood coagulation studies can preliminarily confirm the diagnosis. PT,
usually reported as the INR, is prolonged, but PTT, thrombin time, platelet count, bleeding time, and
levels of fibrinogen, fibrin-split products, and D-dimer are normal. If phytonadione (USP generic name for
vitamin K
) 1 mg IV significantly decreases PT within 2 to 6 h, a liver disorder is not the likely cause, and
the diagnosis of vitamin K deficiency is confirmed. Some centers can detect vitamin K deficiency more
directly by measuring the serum vitamin level. The serum level of vitamin K
ranges from 0.2 to 1.0 ng/mL
in healthy people consuming adequate quantities of vitamin K
(50 to 150
μ
g/day). Knowing vitamin K
intake can help interpret serum levels; recent intake affects levels in serum but not in tissues.
More sensitive indicators of vitamin K status, such as PIVKA (
P
rotein
I
nduced in
V
itamin
K A
bsence or
A
ntagonism) and under-carboxylated osteocalcin, are under study.
Treatment
• Phytonadione
Whenever possible, phytonadione should be given po or sc. The usual adult dose is 5 to 20 mg. (Rarely,
even when phytonadione is correctly diluted and given slowly, IV replacement can result in anaphylaxis or
anaphylactoid reactions.) INR usually decreases within 6 to 12 h. The dose may be repeated in 6 to 8 h if
INR has not decreased satisfactorily. Phytonadione 2.5 to 10 mg po is indicated for
nonemergency
correction of a prolonged INR in patients taking anticoagulants. Correction usually occurs within 6 to 8 h.
When only partial correction of INR is desirable (eg, when INR should remain slightly elevated because of
===PAGE:108===
a prosthetic heart valve), lower doses (eg, 1 to 2.5 mg) of phytonadione can be given.
In infants, bleeding due to deficiency can be corrected by giving phytonadione 1 mg sc or IM once. The
dose is repeated if INR remains elevated. Higher doses may be necessary if the mother has been taking
oral anticoagulants.
Prevention
Phytonadione 0.5 to 1 mg IM (or 0.3 mg/kg for preterm infants) is recommended for all neonates within 6 h
of birth to reduce the incidence of intracranial hemorrhage due to birth trauma and of classic hemorrhagic
disease of the newborn (increased bleeding risks 1 to 7 days after birth). It is also used prophylactically
before surgery. Some clinicians recommend that pregnant women taking anticonvulsants receive
phytonadione 10 mg po once/day for the 1 mo or 20 mg po once/day for the 2 wk before delivery. The low
vitamin K
content in breast milk can be increased by increasing maternal dietary intake of phylloquinone
to 5 mg/day.
Vitamin K Toxicity
Vitamin K
(phylloquinone) is not toxic when consumed orally, even in large amounts. However,
menadione (a synthetic, water-soluble vitamin K precursor) can cause toxicity and should not be used to
treat vitamin K deficiency.
===PAGE:109===
Chapter 5. Mineral Deficiency and Toxicity
Introduction
Six macrominerals are required by people in gram amounts. Four (Na, K, Ca, and Mg) are cations; two (Cl
and P) are accompanying anions (. Daily requirements range from 0.3 to 2.0 g. Bone, muscle,
heart, and brain function depend on these minerals.
Nine trace minerals (microminerals) are required by people in minute amounts: chromium, copper, iodine,
iron, fluorine, manganese, molybdenum, selenium, and zinc. (For sources, functions, effects of deficiency
and toxicity, and dietary requirements, see
Tables 5-1
and
5-2
.) All trace minerals are toxic at high levels; some minerals (arsenic, nickel, and chromium) may be
carcinogens.
Mineral deficiencies (except of iodine, iron, and zinc) do not often develop spontaneously in adults on
ordinary diets; infants are more vulnerable because their growth is rapid and intake varies. Trace mineral
imbalances can result from hereditary disorders (eg, hemochromatosis, Wilson's disease), kidney dialysis,
parenteral nutrition, or restrictive diets prescribed for people with inborn errors of metabolism.
Chromium
Only 1 to 3% of biologically active trivalent chromium (Cr) is absorbed. Normal plasma levels are 0.05 to
0.50
μ
g/L (1.0 to 9.6 nmol/L). Chromium potentiates insulin activity and increases the growth rate in
undernourished children. Supplements do not enhance muscle size or strength in men.
Deficiency:
Four patients receiving long-term TPN developed possible chromium deficiency, with
glucose intolerance, weight loss, ataxia, and peripheral neuropathy. Symptoms resolved in 3 who were
given trivalent chromium 150 to 250 mg.
Toxicity:
High doses of trivalent chromium given parenterally cause skin irritation, but lower doses given
orally are not toxic. Exposure to hexavalent chromium (CrO
) in the workplace may irritate the skin, lungs,
and GI tract and may cause perforation of the nasal septum and lung carcinoma.
Copper
Copper is a component of many body proteins; almost all of the body's copper is bound to copper
proteins. Unbound (free) copper ions are toxic. Genetic mechanisms control the incorporation of copper
into apoproteins and the processes that prevent toxic accumulation of copper in the body. Copper
absorbed in excess of metabolic requirements is excreted through bile.
[Table 5-1.
Trace Minerals]
Acquired Copper Deficiency
If the genetic mechanisms controlling copper metabolism are normal, dietary deficiency rarely causes
clinically significant copper deficiency. The only reported causes are kwashiorkor, persistent infantile
diarrhea (usually associated with a diet limited to milk), severe malabsorption (as in sprue), and excessive
zinc intake.
Deficiency may cause neutropenia, impaired bone calcification, and hypochromic anemia not responsive
to iron supplements.
Diagnosis is based on low serum levels of copper and ceruloplasmin, although these tests are not always
reliable. Treatment is directed at the cause, and copper 1.5 to 3 mg/day po (usually as copper sulfate) is
given.
===PAGE:110===
Inherited Copper Deficiency
(Menkes Syndrome)
Inherited copper deficiency occurs in male infants who inherit a mutant X-linked gene. Incidence is about
1 in 50,000 live births. Copper is deficient in the liver, serum, and essential copper proteins, including
cytochrome-c oxidase, ceruloplasmin, and lysyl oxidase.
Symptoms are severe intellectual disability, vomiting, diarrhea, protein-losing enteropathy,
hypopigmentation, bone changes, and arterial rupture; the hair is sparse, steely, or kinky.
Diagnosis
• Serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels
• Serum levels of dopamine, norepinephrine, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, and dihydroxyphenylglycol in
infants at risk
Diagnosis is based on low copper and ceruloplasmin levels in serum, although these tests are not always
reliable. Because early diagnosis and treatment seem to result in a better prognosis, the disorder is
ideally detected before age 2 wk. However, diagnostic accuracy of these tests is limited. Thus, infants at
risk (eg, those with a family history) can be screened by measuring dopamine, norepinephrine,
dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, and dihydroxyphenylglycol in serum. A dihydroxyphenylacetic
acid:dihydroxyphenylglycol ratio of > 4 seems to indicate deficiency, and a dopamine:norepinephrine ratio
of > 0.2 seems to confirm it.
Treatment
• Copper histidine
Parenteral copper is usually given as copper histidine 250
μ
g sc bid to age 1 yr, then 250
μ
g sc once/day
until age 3 yr; monitoring kidney function is essential during treatment. Despite early treatment, many
children have abnormal neurodevelopment.
Acquired Copper Toxicity
Acquired copper toxicity can result from ingesting or absorbing excess copper (eg, from ingesting an
acidic food or beverage that has had prolonged contact with a copper container). Self-limited
gastroenteritis with nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur.
[Table 5-2.
Guidelines for Daily Intake of Minerals]
More severe toxicity results from ingestion (usually with suicidal intent) of gram quantities of a copper salt
(eg, copper sulfate) or from absorption of large amounts through the skin (eg, if compresses saturated
with a solution of a copper salt are applied to large areas of burned skin). Hemolytic anemia and anuria
can result and may be fatal.
Indian childhood cirrhosis, non-Indian childhood cirrhosis, and idiopathic copper toxicity are probably
identical disorders in which excess copper causes cirrhosis. All seem to be caused by ingesting milk that
has been boiled or stored in corroded copper or brass vessels. Recent studies suggest that idiopathic
copper toxicity may develop only in infants with an unknown genetic defect.
Diagnosis usually requires liver biopsy, which shows Mallory hyalin bodies.
Treatment
• Chelation
===PAGE:111===
• Supportive measures
For copper toxicity due to ingesting grams of copper, prompt gastric lavage is done. Copper toxicity that
causes complications such as hemolytic anemia, anuria, or hepatotoxicity is also treated with either oral
penicillamine 250 mg q 6 h to 750 mg q 12 h (1000 to 1500 mg/day in 2 to 4 doses) or dimercaprol 3 to 5
mg/kg IM q 4 h for 2 days, then q 4 to 6 h (see also
Table 340-4
and copper salts in
Table 340-8
). If used early, hemodialysis may be effective. Occasionally, copper toxicity is fatal despite
treatment.
Inherited Copper Toxicity
(Wilson's Disease)
Inherited copper toxicity results in accumulation of copper in the liver and other organs. Hepatic
or neurologic symptoms develop. Diagnosis is based on a low serum ceruloplasmin level, high
urinary excretion of copper, and sometimes liver biopsy results. Treatment consists of a lowcopper diet and chelation, usually with penicillamine or dimercaprol.
Wilson's disease is a progressive disorder of copper metabolism that affects 1 person in 30,000. Affected
people are homozygous for the mutant recessive gene, located on chromosome 13. Heterozygous
carriers, who constitute about 1.1% of the population, are asymptomatic.
Pathophysiology
The genetic defect impairs copper transport. The impaired transport decreases copper secretion into the
bile, thus causing the copper overload and resultant accumulation in the liver, which begins at birth. The
impaired transport also interferes with incorporation of copper into the copper protein ceruloplasmin, thus
decreasing serum levels of ceruloplasmin.
Hepatic fibrosis develops, ultimately causing cirrhosis. Copper diffuses out of the liver into the blood, then
into other tissues. It is most destructive to the brain but also damages the kidneys and reproductive
organs and causes hemolytic anemia. Some copper is deposited in Descemet's membrane of the cornea,
causing Kayser-Fleischer rings.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually develop between ages 5 and 40. In almost half of patients, particularly adolescents,
the first symptom is hepatitis—acute, chronic active, or fulminant. But hepatitis may develop at any time.
In about 40% of patients, particularly young adults, the first symptoms reflect CNS involvement. Motor
deficits are common, including any combination of tremors, dystonia, dysarthria, dysphagia, chorea,
drooling, and incoordination. Sometimes the first symptoms are cognitive or psychiatric abnormalities. In 5
to 10% of patients, the first symptom is incidentally noted gold or greenish gold Kayser-Fleischer rings or
crescents (due to copper deposits in the cornea), amenorrhea or repeated miscarriages, or hematuria.
Diagnosis
• Slit-lamp examination for Kayser-Fleischer rings
• Serum ceruloplasmin and 24-h urinary copper excretion
• Sometimes confirmation by penicillamine provocation test or liver biopsy
Wilson's disease should be suspected in people < 40 with any of the following:
• An unexplained hepatic, neurologic, or psychiatric disorder
• An unexplained persistent elevation in hepatic transaminases
===PAGE:112===
• A sibling, parent, or cousin with Wilson's disease
• Fulminant hepatitis
If Wilson's disease is suspected, slit-lamp examination for Kayser-Fleischer rings is required, and serum
ceruloplasmin and copper levels and 24-h urinary copper excretion are measured. Transaminase levels
are also often measured; high levels are consistent with the diagnosis.
Kayser-Fleischer rings:
These rings plus typical motor neurologic abnormalities or a decrease in
ceruloplasmin are nearly pathognomonic for Wilson's disease. Rarely, these rings occur in other liver
disorders (eg, biliary atresia, primary biliary cirrhosis), but ceruloplasmin levels should be unaffected.
Ceruloplasmin:
Serum ceruloplasmin (normally 20 to 35 mg/dL) is usually low in Wilson's disease but
can be normal. It can also be low in heterozygous carriers and those with other liver disorders (eg, viral
hepatitis, drug- or alcohol-induced liver disease). A low ceruloplasmin level in a patient with a
KayserFleischer ring is diagnostic. Also, a level of < 5 mg/dL is highly suggestive regardless of clinical findings.
Serum copper:
Despite the copper accumulation in the body, serum copper levels are decreased
because of the decreased ceruloplasmin levels.
Urinary copper excretion:
In Wilson's disease, 24-h urinary copper excretion (normally, ≤ 30
μ
g/day) is
usually > 100
μ
g/day. If serum ceruloplasmin is low and urinary copper excretion is high, diagnosis is
clear. If levels are equivocal, measuring urinary copper excretion after penicillamine is given
(penicillamine provocation test) may confirm the diagnosis; this test is not usually done in adults because
cutoff values are not well-established.
Liver biopsy:
In unclear cases (eg, elevated transaminases, no Kayser-Fleischer rings, indeterminate
values for ceruloplasmin and urinary copper), the diagnosis is made by doing a liver biopsy to measure
hepatic copper concentration. However, false-negative results may occur because of a sampling error
(due to large variations in copper concentrations in the liver) or fulminant hepatitis (causing necrosis that
releases large amounts of copper).
Screening:
Because early treatment is most effective, screening is indicated for anyone who has a
sibling, cousin, or parent with Wilson's disease. Screening consists of a slit-lamp examination and
measurement of transaminase levels, serum copper and ceruloplasmin, and 24-h urine copper excretion.
If any results are abnormal, liver biopsy is done to measure hepatic copper concentration. Infants should
not be tested until after age 1 yr because ceruloplasmin levels are low during the first few months of life.
Children < 6 yr with normal test results should be retested 5 to 10 yr later.
Genetic testing is under investigation.
Prognosis
Prognosis is usually good, unless disease is advanced before treatment begins. Untreated Wilson's
disease is fatal, usually by age 30.
Treatment
• Penicillamine or another chelating drug if needed to remove accumulated copper
• Low-copper diet
• For maintenance, lifelong low-dose chelation therapy or oral zinc
Continual, lifelong treatment is mandatory regardless of whether symptoms are present. Accumulated
copper should be removed with chelating drugs. A low-copper diet (eg, avoiding beef liver, cashews,
black-eyed peas, vegetable juice, shellfish, mushrooms, and cocoa) and use of either low-dose chelation
===PAGE:113===
therapy or oral zinc can prevent copper from accumulating.
Penicillamine is the most commonly used chelating drug but has considerable toxicity (eg, fever, rash,
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, proteinuria). Cross-reactivity may occur in people with penicillin allergy.
Patients > 5 yr are given oral doses of 62.5 mg q 6 h to 250 mg q 12 h (250 to 500 mg/day in 2 to 4
doses) and slowly increased to a maximum of 250 mg q 6 h to 750 mg q 12 h (1000 to 1500 mg/day in 2
to 4 doses). Younger children are given 10 mg/kg bid or 6.7 mg/kg tid (20 mg/kg/d) po. Pyridoxine 25 mg
po once/day is given with penicillamine. Occasionally, use of penicillamine is associated with worsening
neurologic symptoms.
Trientine hydrochloride is an alternative treatment to penicillamine. Doses are 375 to 750 mg po bid or
250 to 500 mg po tid (750 to 1500 mg/day).
Zinc acetate 50 mg po tid can prevent reaccumulation of copper in patients who cannot tolerate
penicillamine or trientine or who have neurologic symptoms that do not respond to the other drugs.
(CAUTION:
Penicillamine or trientine must not be given with zinc because either drug can bind zinc,
forming a compound with no therapeutic effect
.)
Poor long-term adherence to drug therapy is common. After 1 to 5 yr of therapy, lower dose maintenance
drug therapy can be considered. Regular follow-up care with an expert in liver disease is recommended.
Liver transplantation may be lifesaving for patients who have Wilson's disease and fulminant hepatic
failure or severe hepatic insufficiency refractory to drugs.
Fluorine
Most of the body's fluorine (F) is contained in bones and teeth. Fluoride (the ionic form of fluorine) is
widely distributed in nature. The main source of fluoride is fluoridated drinking water.
Deficiency:
Fluorine deficiency can lead to dental caries and possibly osteoporosis. Fluoridation of
water that contains < 1 ppm (the ideal) reduces the incidence of dental caries. If a child's drinking water is
not fluoridated, oral fluoride supplements can be prescribed.
Toxicity:
Excess fluorine can accumulate in teeth and bones, causing fluorosis. Drinking water
containing > 10 ppm is a common cause. Permanent teeth that develop during
high fluoride intake are
most likely to be affected. Exposure must be much greater to affect deciduous teeth.
The earliest signs are chalky white, irregularly distributed patches on the surface of the enamel; these
patches become stained yellow or brown, producing a characteristic mottled appearance. Severe toxicity
weakens the enamel, pitting its surface. Bony changes, including osteosclerosis, exostoses of the spine,
and genu valgum, can develop but only in adults after prolonged high intake of fluoride.
No tests to diagnose toxicity are available.
Treatment involves reducing fluoride intake; eg, in areas with high fluoride water levels, patients should
not drink fluoridated water or take fluoride supplements. Children should always be told not to swallow
fluoridated toothpastes.
Iodine
In the body, iodine (I) is involved primarily in the synthesis of 2 thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T
) and
triiodothyronine (T
). Iodine occurs in the environment and in the diet primarily as iodide. In adults, about
80% of the iodide absorbed is trapped by the thyroid gland. Most environmental iodine occurs in
seawater as iodide; a small amount enters the atmosphere and, through rain, enters ground water and
soil near the sea. Thus, people living far from the sea and at higher altitudes are at particular risk of
deficiency. Fortifying table salt with iodide (typically 70
μ
g/g) helps ensure adequate intake (150
μ
g/day).
Requirements are higher for pregnant (220
μ
g/day) and breastfeeding (290
μ
g/day) women.
===PAGE:114===
Iodine Deficiency
Deficiency is rare in areas where iodized salt is used but common worldwide. Iodine deficiency develops
when iodide intake is < 20
μ
g/day. In mild or moderate deficiency, the thyroid gland, influenced by thyroidstimulating hormone (TSH), hypertrophies to concentrate iodide in itself, resulting in colloid goiter.
Usually, patients remain euthyroid; however, severe iodine deficiency in adults may cause hypothyroidism
(endemic myxedema). It can decrease fertility and increase risk of stillbirth, spontaneous abortion, and
prenatal and infant mortality. Severe maternal iodine deficiency retards fetal growth and brain
development, sometimes resulting in birth defects, and, in infants, causes cretinism, which may include
intellectual disability, deaf-mutism, difficulty walking, short stature, and sometimes hypothyroidism.
Diagnosis
• Assessment of thyroid structure and function
Diagnosis in adults and children is usually based on thyroid function, examination for goiter, and imaging
tests identifying abnormalities in thyroid function and structure (. All neonates should be screened by measuring the TSH level.
Treatment
• Iodide with or without levothyroxine
Infants with iodine deficiency are given L-thyroxine 3
μ
g/kg po once/day for a week plus iodide 50 to 90
μ
g po once/day for several weeks to quickly restore a euthyroid state. Children are treated with iodide 90
to 120
μ
g once/day. Adults are given iodide 150
μ
g once/day. Iodine deficiency can also be treated by
giving levothyroxine. Serum TSH levels are monitored in all patients until the levels are normal (ie, < 5
μ
IU/mL).
Iodine Toxicity
Chronic toxicity may develop when intake is > 1.1 mg/day. Most people who ingest excess amounts of
iodine remain euthyroid. Some people who ingest excess amounts of iodine, particularly those who were
previously deficient, develop hyperthyroidism (Jod-Basedow phenomenon). Paradoxically, excess uptake
of iodine by the thyroid may inhibit thyroid hormone synthesis (called Wolff-Chaikoff effect). Thus, iodine
toxicity can eventually cause iodide goiter, hypothyroidism, or myxedema. Very large amounts of iodide
may cause a brassy taste in the mouth, increased salivation, GI irritation, and acneiform skin lesions.
Patients exposed to frequent large amounts of radiographic contrast dyes or the drug amiodarone also
need to have their thyroid function monitored.
Diagnosis is usually based on thyroid function and imaging test findings (, which are
correlated with clinical data. Iodine excretion may be more specific but is not usually measured. Treatment
consists of correcting thyroid abnormalities and, if intake is excessive, dietary modification.
Iron
Iron (Fe) is a component of hemoglobin, myoglobin, and many enzymes in the body.
Heme iron, contained
mainly in animal products, is absorbed much better than nonheme iron (eg, in plants and grains), which
accounts for > 85% of iron in the average diet. However, absorption of nonheme iron is increased when it
is consumed with animal protein and vitamin C.
Deficiency:
Iron deficiency is one of the most common mineral deficiencies in the world. It may result
from the following:
• Inadequate iron intake, common in infants, adolescent girls, and pregnant women
• Malabsorption (eg, celiac sprue)
===PAGE:115===
• Chronic bleeding
Chronic bleeding due to colon cancer is a serious cause in middle-aged people and the elderly.
When deficiency is advanced, microcytic anemia develops (.
In addition to anemia, iron deficiency may cause pica (a craving for nonfoods) and spoon nails and is
associated with restless leg syndrome. Rarely, iron deficiency causes dysphagia due to postcricoid
esophageal web.
Diagnosis involves CBC, serum ferritin, and possibly measurement of transferrin saturation (iron
capacity).
All people with moderate or severe iron deficiency and some people with mild deficiency require iron
supplementation.
Toxicity:
Iron may accumulate in the body because of
• Iron therapy given in excessive amounts or for too long
• Repeated blood transfusions
• Chronic alcoholism
• Overdose of iron
Iron overload can also result from an inherited iron overload disease (hemochromatosis—, a
potentially fatal but easily treatable genetic disorder in which too much iron is absorbed.
Hemochromatosis affects > 1 million Americans.
An overdose of iron is toxic (, causing vomiting, diarrhea, and damage to the intestine and
other organs.
Diagnosis is similar to that for iron deficiency.
Treatment often involves deferoxamine, which binds with iron and is excreted in urine.
Manganese
Manganese (Mn), necessary for healthy bone structure, is a component of several enzyme systems,
including manganese-specific glycosyltransferases and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. Median
intake is between 1.6 and 2.3 mg/day; absorption is 5 to 10%.
Deficiency has not been conclusively documented, although one experimental case in a volunteer
resulted in transient dermatitis, hypocholesterolemia, and increased alkaline phosphatase levels.
Toxicity is usually limited to people who mine and refine ore; prolonged exposure causes neurologic
symptoms resembling those of parkinsonism or Wilson's disease.
Molybdenum
Molybdenum (Mo) is a component of coenzymes necessary for the activity of xanthine oxidase, sulfite
oxidase, and aldehyde oxidase.
Genetic and nutritional deficiencies of molybdenum have been reported but are rare. Genetic sulfite
oxidase deficiency was described in 1967 in a child. It resulted from the inability to form the molybdenum
coenzyme despite the presence of adequate molybdenum. The deficiency caused intellectual disability,
seizures, opisthotonus, and lens dislocation.
===PAGE:116===
Molybdenum deficiency resulting in sulfite toxicity occurred in a patient receiving long-term TPN.
Symptoms were tachycardia, tachypnea, headache, nausea, vomiting, and coma. Laboratory tests
showed high levels of sulfite and xanthine and low levels of sulfate and uric acid in the blood and urine.
Ammonium molybdate 300
μ
g/day IV caused dramatic recovery.
A case of molybdenum toxicity may have occurred in 1961; it caused goutlike symptoms and
abnormalities of the GI tract, liver, and kidneys.
Selenium
Selenium (Se) is a part of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase, which metabolizes hydro-peroxides formed
from polyunsaturated fatty acids. Selenium is also a part of the enzymes that deiodinate thyroid
hormones. Generally, selenium acts as an antioxidant that works with vitamin E. Some epidemiologic
studies associate low selenium levels with cancer. In children with Down syndrome, selenium
supplements may help prevent bacterial infections. Plasma levels vary from 8 to 25
μ
g/dL, depending on
selenium intake. Diagnosis is usually clinical; sometimes blood glutathione peroxidase is measured.
Deficiency:
Deficiency is rare, even in New Zealand and Finland, where selenium intake
is 30 to 50
μ
g/day, compared with 100 to 250
μ
g/day in the US and Canada. In certain areas of China, where intake
averages 10 to 15
μ
g/day, selenium deficiency predisposes patients to Keshan disease, an endemic viral
cardiomyopathy affecting primarily children and young women. This cardiomyopathy can be prevented
but not cured by sodium selenite supplements of 50
μ
g/day po. Patients receiving long-term TPN have
developed selenium deficiency with muscle pain and tenderness that responded to a selenomethionine
supplement. In Siberian Russia and China, growing children with selenium deficiency may develop
chronic osteoarthropathy (Kashin-Beck disease). Selenium deficiency may contribute synergistically with
iodine deficiency to the development of goiter and hypothyroidism.
Diagnosis is made clinically or sometimes by measuring glutathione peroxidase activity or plasma
selenium, but neither of these tests is readily available. Treatment consists of sodium selenite 100
μ
g/day
po.
Toxicity:
At high doses (> 900
μ
g/day), selenium causes toxicity. Manifestations include hair loss,
abnormal nails, dermatitis, peripheral neuropathy, nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, irritability, and a garlic odor of
the breath. Toxic levels of plasma selenium are not well defined.
Zinc
Zinc (Zn) is contained mainly in bones, teeth, hair, skin, liver, muscle, leukocytes, and testes. Zinc is a
component of several hundred enzymes, including many nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)
dehydrogenases, RNA and DNA polymerases, and DNA transcription factors as well as alkaline
phosphatase, superoxide dismutase, and carbonic anhydrase. A diet high in fiber and phytate (eg, in
whole-grain bread) reduces zinc absorption.
Deficiency:
Dietary deficiency is unlikely in healthy people. Secondary zinc deficiency can develop in the
following:
• Some patients with hepatic insufficiency (because the ability to retain zinc is lost)
• Patients taking diuretics
• Patients with diabetes mellitus, sickle cell disease, chronic renal failure, or malabsorption
• Patients with stressful conditions (eg, sepsis, burns, head injury)
• Elderly institutionalized and homebound patients (common)
Maternal zinc deficiency may cause fetal malformations and low birth weight.
===PAGE:117===
Zinc deficiency in children causes impaired growth and impaired taste (hypogeusia). Other symptoms and
signs in children include delayed sexual maturation and hypogonadism. In children or adults, symptoms
include hypogonadism, alopecia, impaired immunity, anorexia, dermatitis, night blindness, anemia,
lethargy, and impaired wound healing.
Zinc deficiency should be suspected in undernourished patients with typical symptoms or signs. However,
because many of the symptoms and signs are nonspecific, clinical diagnosis of mild zinc deficiency is
difficult. Laboratory diagnosis is also difficult. Low albumin levels, common in zinc deficiency, make serum
zinc levels difficult to interpret; diagnosis usually requires the combination of low levels of zinc in serum
and increased urinary zinc excretion. If available, isotope studies can measure zinc status more
accurately.
Treatment consists of elemental zinc 15 to 120 mg/day po until symptoms and signs resolve.
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
(a rare, once fatal autosomal recessive disorder) causes malabsorption
of zinc. Psoriasiform dermatitis develops around the eyes, nose, and mouth; on the buttocks; and in an
acral distribution. The disorder also causes hair loss, paronychia, impaired immunity, recurrent infection,
impaired growth, and diarrhea. Symptoms and signs usually develop after infants are weaned from breast
milk. In such cases, doctors suspect the diagnosis. If deficiency is diagnosed, zinc sulfate 30 to 150
mg/day po usually results in complete remission.
Toxicity:
The recommended upper limit for zinc intake is 40 mg/day. Toxicity is rare. Ingesting doses of
elemental zinc ranging from 100 to 150 mg/day for prolonged periods interferes with copper metabolism
and causes low blood copper levels, RBC microcytosis, neutropenia, and impaired immunity; higher
doses should be given only for short periods of time and the patient should be followed closely. Ingesting
larger amounts (200 to 800 mg/day), usually by consuming acidic food or drink from a galvanized (zinccoated) container, can cause anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Metal fume fever, also called brassfounders' ague or zinc shakes, is caused by inhaling industrial zinc oxide fumes; it results in neurologic
damage. Symptoms usually resolve after 12 to 24 h in a zinc-free environment.
===PAGE:118===
Chapter 6. Obesity and the Metabolic Syndrome
Obesity
Obesity is excess body fat; consequences depend not only on the absolute amount but also on
the distribution of the fat. Complications include cardiovascular disorders, diabetes mellitus,
many cancers, cholelithiasis, fatty liver and cirrhosis, osteoarthritis, reproductive disorders in
men and women, psychologic disorders, and premature death. Diagnosis is based on body
mass index (BMI—calculated from height and weight) and waist circumference. BP, fasting
plasma glucose, and lipid levels should be measured. Treatment includes physical activity,
dietary and behavioral modification, and sometimes drugs or surgery.
Prevalence of obesity in the US is high and is increasing, particularly among children and adolescents
(see
Table 6-1
).
Prevalence is more than twice as high at age 55 as at age 20. Obesity is twice as common among women
in a lower socioeconomic group as among those in a higher group. Prevalence among black and white
men does not differ significantly, but it is higher among black women than white women. More than 50%
of black women ≥ 40 yr are obese; > 80% are overweight.
In the US, obesity and its complications cause as many as 300,000 premature deaths each year, making
it second only to cigarette smoking as a preventable cause of death.
[Table 6-1.
Changes in Prevalence of Obesity According to Nhanes]
Etiology
Almost all cases of obesity result from a combination of genetic predisposition and a chronic imbalance
between energy intake, energy utilization for basic metabolic processes, and energy expenditure from
physical activity.
Genetic factors:
Heritability of BMI is about 66%. Genetic factors may affect the many signaling
molecules and receptors used by parts of the hypothalamus and GI tract to regulate food intake (see
Sidebar 6-1
). Rarely, obesity results from abnormal levels of peptides that regulate food intake (eg, leptin)
or abnormalities in their receptors (eg, melanocortin-4 receptor).
Genetic factors also regulate energy expenditure, including BMR, diet-induced thermogenesis, and
nonvoluntary activity-associated thermogenesis. Genetic factors may have a greater effect on the
distribution of body fat, particularly abdominal fat (see
Metabolic Syndrome
, than on the amount
of body fat.
Environmental factors:
Weight is gained when caloric intake exceeds energy needs. Important
determinants of energy intake include portion sizes and the energy density of the food. High-fat foods,
processed foods, and diets high in refined carbohydrates, soft drinks, fruit juices, and alcohol promote
weight gain. Diets high in fresh fruit and vegetables, fiber, and complex carbohydrates, with water as the
main fluid consumed, minimize weight gain. A sedentary lifestyle promotes weight gain.
Regulatory factors:
Prenatal maternal obesity, prenatal maternal smoking, intrauterine growth
restriction, and insufficient sleep can disturb weight regulation. About 15% of women permanently gain ≥
20 lb with each pregnancy. Obesity that persists beyond early childhood makes weight loss in later life
more difficult.
Drugs, including corticosteroids, lithium, traditional antidepressants (tricyclics, tetracyclics, and
monoamine oxidase inhibitors [MAOIs]), benzodiazepines, and antipsychotic drugs, often cause weight
gain.
Uncommonly, weight gain is caused by one of the following disorders:
===PAGE:119===
• Brain damage caused by a tumor (especially a craniopharyngioma) or an infection (particularly those
affecting the hypothalamus), which can stimulate consumption of excess calories
• Hyperinsulinism due to pancreatic tumors
• Hypercortisolism due to Cushing's syndrome, which causes predominantly abdominal obesity
• Hypothyroidism (rarely a cause of substantial weight gain)
Sidebar 6-1 Pathways Regulating Food Intake
Preabsorptive and postabsorptive signals from the GI tract and changes in plasma nutrient levels provide
short-term feedback to regulate food intake:
• GI hormones (eg, glucagon-like peptide 1 [GLP-1], cholecystokinin [CCK]) reduce food intake.
• Ghrelin, secreted primarily by the stomach, increases food intake.
• Leptin, secreted from adipose tissue, informs the brain as to how much fat is stored; high leptin levels
correlate with increased body fat.
The hypothalamus integrates various signals involved in the regulation of energy balance and then
activates pathways that increase or decrease food intake:
• Neuropeptide Y (NPY), agouti-related peptide (ARP),
α
-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (
α
-MSH),
cocaine- and amphetamine-related transcript (CART), orexin, and melanin-concentrating hormone
(MCH) increase food intake.
• Corticotropic hormone (CRH) and urocortin decrease it.
Eating disorders:
At least 2 pathologic eating patterns may be associated with obesity:
•
Binge eating disorder
is consumption of large amounts of food quickly with a subjective sense of loss
of control during the binge and distress after it (. This disorder does not include
compensatory behaviors, such as vomiting. Prevalence is 1 to 3% among both sexes and 10 to 20%
among people entering weight reduction programs. Obesity is usually severe, large amounts of weight
are frequently gained or lost, and pronounced psychologic disturbances are present.
•
Night-eating syndrome
consists of morning anorexia, evening hyperphagia, and insomnia. At least 25
to 50% of daily intake occurs after the evening meal. About 10% of people seeking treatment for severe
obesity may have this disorder. Rarely, a similar disorder is induced by use of a hypnotic such as
zolpidem.
Similar but less extreme patterns, classified as eating disorders not otherwise specified (EDNOS),
probably contribute to excess weight gain in more people. For example, nocturnal eating contributes to
excess weight gain in many people who do not have night-eating syndrome.
Complications
Complications of obesity include the following:
• Metabolic syndrome
• Diabetes mellitus
===PAGE:120===
• Cardiovascular disease
• Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (fatty liver)
• Gallbladder disease
• Gastroesophageal reflux
• Obstructive sleep apnea
• Reproductive system disorders
• Many cancers
• Osteoarthritis
• Social and psychologic problems
Insulin resistance, dyslipidemias, and hypertension (the metabolic syndrome) develop, often leading to
diabetes mellitus and coronary artery disease (. These complications are more likely in patients
with fat that is concentrated abdominally, a high serum triglyceride level, a family history of type 2
diabetes mellitus or premature cardiovascular disease, or a combination of these risk factors.
Obesity is also a risk factor for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (which may lead to cirrhosis) and for
reproductive system disorders, such as a low serum testosterone level in men and polycystic ovary
syndrome in women.
Obstructive sleep apnea can result if excess fat in the neck compresses the airway during sleep.
Breathing stops for moments, as often as hundreds of times a night (. This disorder, often
undiagnosed, can cause loud snoring and excessive daytime sleepiness and increases the risk of
hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, and metabolic syndrome.
Obesity may cause the obesity-hypoventilation syndrome (Pickwickian syndrome). Impaired breathing
leads to hypercapnia,
reduced sensitivity to CO
in stimulating respiration, hypoxia, cor pulmonale, and
risk of premature death. This syndrome may occur alone or secondary to obstructive sleep apnea.
Osteoarthritis and tendon and fascial disorders may result from obesity. Skin disorders are common;
increased sweat and skin secretions, trapped in thick folds of skin, are conducive to fungal and bacterial
growth, making intertriginous infections especially common. Being overweight probably predisposes to
cholelithiasis, gout, deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, and many cancers (especially
colon and breast cancers).
Obesity leads to social, economic, and psychologic problems as a result of prejudice, discrimination, poor
body image, and low self-esteem. For example, people may be underemployed or unemployed.
Diagnosis
• BMI
• Waist circumference
• Sometimes body composition analysis
In adults, BMI, defined as weight (kg) divided by the square of the height (m
), is used to screen for
overweight or obesity. BMI of 25 to 29.9 kg/m
indicates overweight; BMI ≥ 30 kg/m
indicates obesity
(see
Table 6-2
). However, BMI is a crude screening tool and has limitations in many subpopulations. BMI is
===PAGE:121===
age- and race-specific; its use is limited in children and the elderly. In children and adolescents,
overweight is BMI at the ≥ 95th percentile based on age- and sex-specific Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) growth charts at the CDC web site.
Asians, Japanese, and many aboriginal populations have a lower cut-off (23 kg/m
) for overweight. In
addition, BMI may be high in muscular athletes who lack excess body fat, and normal or low in formerly
overweight people who have lost muscle mass.
The risk of metabolic and cardiovascular complications due to obesity is determined more accurately by
the following:
• Other risk factors, particularly a family history of type 2 diabetes or premature cardiovascular disease
• Waist circumference
• Serum triglycerides
The waist circumference that increases risk of complications due to obesity varies by ethnic group and
sex:
• White men: > 93 cm (> 36.6 in), particularly > 101 cm (> 39.8 in)
• White women: > 79 cm (> 31.1 in), particularly > 87 cm (> 34.2 in)
• Asian Indian men: > 78 cm (> 30.7 in), particularly > 90 cm (> 35.4 in)
• Asian Indian women: > 72 cm (> 28.3 in), particularly > 80 cm (> 31.5 in)
Body composition analysis:
Body composition—the percentage of body fat and muscle—is also
considered when obesity is diagnosed. Although probably unnecessary in routine clinical practice, body
composition analysis can be helpful if clinicians question whether elevated BMI is due to muscle or
excessive fat.
The percentage of body fat can be estimated by measuring skinfold thickness (usually over the triceps) or
determining mid upper arm area (.
Bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) can estimate percentage of body fat simply and noninvasively. BIA
estimates percentage of total body water directly; percentage of body fat is derived indirectly. BIA is most
reliable in healthy people and in people with only a few chronic disorders that do not change the
percentage of total body water (eg, moderate obesity, diabetes mellitus). Whether measuring BIA poses
risks in people with implanted defibrillators is unclear.
Underwater (hydrostatic) weighing is the most accurate method for measuring percentage of body fat.
Costly and time-consuming, it is used more often in research than in clinical care. To be weighed
accurately while submerged, people must fully exhale beforehand.
Imaging procedures, including CT, MRI, and dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA), can also estimate
the percentage and distribution of body fat but are usually used only for research.
Other testing:
Obese patients should be screened for obstructive sleep apnea with an instrument such
as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and often the apnea-hypopnea index (total number of apnea or
hypopnea episodes occurring per hour of sleep—. This disorder is often underdiagnosed,
and obesity increases the risk.
Fasting glucose and lipid levels should be measured routinely in patients with a large waist circumference
or a family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus or premature cardiovascular disease.
===PAGE:122===
Prognosis
Untreated, obesity tends to progress. The probability and severity of complications are proportional to the
absolute amount of fat, the distribution of the fat, and absolute muscle mass. After weight loss, most
people return to their pretreatment weight within 5 yr, and
[Table 6-2.
Body Mass Index (BMI)]
accordingly, obesity requires a lifelong management program similar to that for any other chronic disorder.
Treatment
• Nutrition management
• Physical activity
• Behavioral therapy
• Drugs (eg, sibutramine, orlistat)
• Bariatric surgery
Weight loss of even 5 to 10% improves overall health and well-being and in particular helps reduce risk of
cardiovascular disorders and type 2 diabetes. Weight loss can lead to improvement in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea, but sometimes a lot of weight must be lost for the disorder to resolve.
Support from health care practitioners, peers, and family members and various structured programs can
help with weight loss and weight maintenance.
Nutrition:
A normal eating pattern is important. People who miss breakfast tend to passively consume too
many calories later in the day. Patients should eat small meals and avoid or carefully choose snacks.
Low-fat (particularly very low saturated fat), high-fiber diets with modest calorie restriction (by 600
kcal/day) and substitution of some protein for carbohydrate seem to have the best long-term outcome.
Fresh fruits and vegetables and salads should be substituted for refined carbohydrates and processed
food, and water for soft drinks or juices. Alcohol consumption should be limited to moderate levels. Foods
with a low glycemic index (see
Table 1-1
 and marine fish oils or monounsaturated fats derived from plants (eg, olive oil) reduce
the risk of cardiovascular disorders and diabetes. Low-fat dairy products are also part of a healthy diet.
Patients need an adequate amount of vitamin D, preferably obtained by exercising outdoors in the
sunshine.
Use of meal replacements has proven efficacy; use can be ongoing or intermittent. Diets that require
unusual eating habits should be avoided. They are unlikely to be maintained, and weight increases when
patients resume previous poor eating habits. Diets of < 1200 kcal/day cannot be sustained, but such diets
are sometimes needed to achieve rapid short-term weight loss (eg, to prepare for surgery, to lessen
obstructive sleep apnea). Diets of < 800 kcal/day do not produce greater weight loss and are less well
tolerated.
Physical activity:
Exercise increases energy expenditure, BMR, and diet-induced thermogenesis.
Exercise also seems to regulate appetite to more closely match caloric needs. Other benefits include
• Increased insulin sensitivity
• Improved lipid profile
• Lower BP
• Better aerobic fitness
===PAGE:123===
• Improved psychologic well-being
Strengthening (resistance) exercises increase muscle mass. Because muscle tissue burns more calories
at rest than does fat tissue, increasing muscle mass produces lasting increases in
BMR. Exercise that is
interesting and enjoyable is more likely to be sustained. A combination of aerobic and resistance exercise
is better than either alone.
Behavioral therapy:
Behavioral therapy aims to improve eating habits and physical activity level. Rigid
dieting is discouraged in favor of healthy eating. Common-sense measures include the following:
• Avoiding high-calorie snacks
• Choosing healthful foods when dining out
• Eating slowly
• Substituting a physically active hobby for a passive one
Social support, cognitive therapy, and stress management may help, particularly during the lapses usually
experienced during any long-term weight loss program. Self-monitoring is useful, and maintenance of a
diet diary is particularly effective.
Drugs:
Drugs may be used if BMI is > 30 or if BMI is > 27 and patients have complications (eg,
hypertension, insulin resistance). Most weight loss due to drug treatment is modest (5 to 10%) at best and
occurs during the first 6 mo; not all patients benefit. Drugs are more useful for maintaining weight loss but
must be continued indefinitely for weight loss to be maintained. Premenopausal women taking
systemically acting drugs for weight control should use contraception.
Sibutramine is a centrally acting appetite suppressant that produces dose-related weight loss. The usual
starting dose is 10 mg po once/day; the dose can be decreased to 5 mg or increased to 15 mg. Common
adverse effects are headache, dry mouth, insomnia, and constipation; the most common serious one is
hypertension. Cardiovascular disorders, particularly poorly controlled hypertension, are contraindications.
Orlistat inhibits intestinal lipase, decreasing fat absorption and improving serum glucose and lipids.
Because orlistat is not absorbed, systemic effects are rare. Flatus, oily stools, and diarrhea are common
but tend to resolve during the 2nd yr of treatment. A dose of 120 mg po tid should be taken with meals
that include fat. A vitamin supplement should be taken at least 2 h before or after taking orlistat.
Malabsorption and cholestasis are contraindications; irritable bowel syndrome and other GI disorders may
make orlistat difficult to tolerate. Orlistat is available OTC.
Other OTC weight-loss drugs are not recommended. Some (eg, caffeine, ephedrine, guarana,
phenylpropanolamine) may be marginally effective, but their adverse effects outweigh their advantages.
Others (eg, brindleberry, L-carnitine, chitosan, pectin, grapeseed extract, horse chestnut, chromium
picolinate, fucus vesiculosus, ginkgo biloba) have not been shown to be effective and may have adverse
effects.
Surgery:
Surgery is the most effective treatment for extremely obese patients (.
Special Populations
Obesity is a particular concern in children and the elderly.
Children:
Childhood obesity is even more worrisome than adult obesity. For obese children,
complications are more likely because children are obese longer. About 20 to 25% of children and
adolescents are overweight or obese. Risk factors for obesity in infants are low birth weight and maternal
obesity, diabetes, and smoking. After puberty, food intake increases; in boys, the extra calories are used
to increase protein deposition, but in girls, fat storage is increased.
===PAGE:124===
For obese children, psychologic complications (eg, poor self-esteem, social difficulties, depression) and
musculoskeletal complications can develop early. Some musculoskeletal complications, such as slipped
capital femoral epiphyses, occur only in children. Other early complications may include obstructive sleep
apnea, insulin resistance, hyperlipidemia, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Risk of cardiovascular,
respiratory, metabolic, hepatic, and other obesity-related complications increases when these children
become adults.
Risk of obesity persisting into adulthood depends partly on when obesity first develops:
• During infancy: Low risk
• Between 6 mo and 5 yr: 25%
• After 6 yr: > 50%
• During adolescence if a parent is obese: > 80%
In children, preventing further weight gain, rather than losing weight, is a reasonable goal. Diet should be
modified, and physical activity increased. Increasing general activities and play is more likely to be
effective than a structured exercise program. Participating in physical activities during childhood may
promote a lifelong physically active lifestyle. Drugs and surgery are avoided but, if complications of
obesity are life threatening, may be warranted.
Measures that control weight and prevent obesity in children may benefit public health the most. Such
measures should be implemented in the family, schools, and primary care programs.
The elderly:
In the US, the percentage of obese elderly people has been increasing.
With aging, body fat increases and is redistributed to the abdomen, and muscle mass is lost, largely
because of physical inactivity, but decreased androgens and growth hormone (which are anabolic) and
inflammatory cytokines produced in obesity may also play a role.
Risk of complications depends on
• Body fat distribution (increasing with a predominantly abdominal distribution)
• Duration and severity of obesity
• Associated sarcopenia
Increased waist circumference, suggesting abdominal fat distribution, predicts morbidity (eg,
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease) and mortality risk better in the elderly than does
BMI.
For the elderly, increased physical activity is usually preferable to dietary restriction unless restricted
mobility prohibits activity; in such cases, caloric restriction may be needed to reduce weight enough to
restore mobility. Physical activity also improves muscle strength, endurance, and overall well-being.
Activity should include strengthening and endurance exercises.
Regardless of whether caloric restriction is considered necessary, nutrition should be optimized.
Weight-loss drugs such as sibutramine or fluoxetine are not recommended for the elderly because the
possible benefits do not outweigh the adverse effects. However, orlistat may be useful for obese elderly
patients, particularly those with diabetes mellitus or hypertension. Surgery is usually best avoided,
although it has proven efficacy and benefits outweigh risks in carefully selected patients.
Prevention
===PAGE:125===
Regular physical activity and healthy eating improve general fitness, can control weight, and help prevent
obesity and diabetes mellitus. Even without weight loss, exercise decreases the risk of cardiovascular
disorders. Dietary fiber decreases the risk of colon cancer and cardiovascular disorders. Sufficient and
good-quality sleep, management of stress, and moderation of alcohol intake are also important.
Bariatric Surgery
Bariatric surgery is the surgical alteration of the stomach, intestine, or both to cause weight
loss.
In the US, bariatric surgery is done over 200,000 times annually, accounting for almost two thirds of all
bariatric operations done worldwide. Development of safer laparoscopic approaches has made this
surgery more popular.
Indications
To qualify for bariatric surgery, patients should
• Have acceptable operative risk
• Be well-informed and motivated
• Have unsuccessfully tried all reasonable nonsurgical methods to lose weight and manage obesityassociated complications
• Have a BMI of > 40 kg/m
or a BMI > 35 kg/m
plus a serious complication (eg, diabetes, hypertension,
obstructive sleep apnea, high-risk lipid profile) that could be expected to be meaningfully reduced with a
weight loss of 5 to 10%
Contraindications include uncontrolled major depression or psychosis, binge eating disorders, current
drug or alcohol abuse, severe coagulopathy, and inability to comply with nutritional requirements,
including lifelong vitamin replacement (when indicated). Whether bariatric surgery is appropriate for
patients < 18 or > 65 yr is controversial.
Procedures
• Restrictive procedures (adjustable gastric banding, vertical banded gastroplasty)
• Malabsorptive procedures (Roux-en-Y gastric bypass)
Most procedures can be done laparoscopically, but the approach depends on the type of procedure as
well as patient weight. Morbidity and mortality tend to be lower with laparoscopic than with open surgery.
However, if patients weigh ≥ 180 kg, open surgery is more likely to be successful. In about 8% of cases
overall (fewer with experienced surgeons), surgery begun laparoscopically must be finished as open
surgery.
Procedures can be restrictive, malabsorptive, or both.
Restrictive procedures:
Restrictive procedures limit the volume of the stomach available for ingested
food. This limited volume helps restrict food intake, probably because of earlier satiety. The effects can
be partially defeated by patients who consume more high-calorie liquid foods (eg, milk shakes, alcohol),
which pass through the restricted portion quicker.
Purely restrictive procedures include adjustable gastric banding and vertical banded gastroplasty.
[Fig. 6-1.
Adjustable gastric banding.]
===PAGE:126===
Adjustable gastric banding accounts for about 15% of bariatric procedures done in the US; it is much
more common in Europe and is growing in popularity in the US. It is the 2nd most common bariatric
procedure. A band is placed around the upper part of the stomach to divide the stomach into a small
upper pouch and a larger lower pouch. Saline can be injected into the band via a subcutaneous access
port. When saline is injected, the band expands, decreasing the size of the passageway through the
stomach. As a result, the upper pouch fills more quickly, sending a message to the brain that the stomach
is full; patients eat smaller meals and lose substantial amounts of weight over time. This procedure is
usually done laparoscopically. Saline can be removed to make the passageway larger. Even though
weight loss from gastric banding is slightly less than that from Roux-en-Y, morbidity and mortality are
much less and gastric banding can be reversed if necessary.
Vertical banded gastroplasty
is no longer commonly done. A stapler is used to divide the stomach into
a small upper pouch and a larger lower pouch. A nonexpandable plastic band is placed around the
opening where the upper pouch empties into the lower pouch.
Malabsorptive procedures:
Malabsorptive procedures, such as biliopancreatic diversion with a
duodenal switch and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, result in ingested food bypassing parts of the stomach
and small intestine, creating malabsorption, which leads to weight loss. These procedures are also
restrictive.
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery
accounts for about 80% of bariatric procedures in the US. It can
often be done laparoscopically. A small part of the proximal stomach is detached from the rest, creating a
stomach pouch of < 30 mL. Because stomach volume is smaller, satiety occurs earlier. Also, food
bypasses part of the stomach and small intestine, where it is normally absorbed, reducing the amount of
food and calories absorbed. The pouch is connected to the proximal jejunum with a narrow opening,
producing even more restriction. The segment of bypassed proximal small intestine (and thus the
bypassed stomach) is attached to the distal small intestine, enabling bile acids and pancreatic enzymes to
mix with GI contents; this mixing limits malabsorption and nutritional deficiencies. Because a
gastrojejunostomy is created, symptoms similar to the dumping-syndrome may occur after high glycemic
loads; symptoms (light-headedness, diaphoresis, nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea) may inhibit the
consumption of such foods by adverse conditioning.
Biliopancreatic diversion with a duodenal switch
accounts for < 5% of bariatric procedures done in
the US. Part of the stomach is removed, causing restriction. The remaining part empties into the
duodenum. The duodenum is cut
[Fig. 6-2.
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery.]
and attached to the ileum, bypassing much of the small intestine, including the sphincter of Oddi (where
bile acids and pancreatic enzymes enter); malabsorption results. This procedure is technically demanding
but can sometimes be done laparoscopically. Malabsorption and nutritional deficiencies often develop.
Preoperative Evaluation
Evaluation should determine whether patients have a psychologic commitment to the lifestyle changes
and whether operative risks are acceptable. Sleep apnea testing is done.
Extensive preoperative evaluation is probably unnecessary. However, for certain morbidly obese patients
(BMI > 50 kg/m
), examining the cardiac, pulmonary, GI, metabolic, and psychologic systems helps
identify patients with acceptable operative risk and helps select the appropriate procedure. For these
patients, routine preoperative tests may include
•
Liver function tests:
Increased liver enzymes, especially ALT, are common but do not contraindicate
surgery.
•
Kidney function tests:
If renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate are increased, proteinuria is
===PAGE:127===
more likely and renal clearance of drugs may be increased. Thus, drug dosages may need to be
adjusted.
•
ECG and echocardiography:
These tests are needed because identifying heart failure and pulmonary
hypertension clinically in morbidly obese patients is difficult. Signs of heart failure (eg, increased jugular
venous pressure, hepatomegaly, pulmonary crackles) are hard to identify when body fat is excessive.
Pulmonary hypertension is also difficult to identify because many patients cannot exercise to the point
where exertional dyspnea, fatigue, or syncope would result. Pulmonary hypertension is diagnosed if
echocardiography shows tricuspid regurgitation and ECG shows tall R waves, right axis deviation, and
right ventricular strain.
•
Sleep study:
Polysomnography ( can confirm obstructive sleep apnea, which is common, and determine its severity. An apneahypopnea index of > 30 signals high
risk of morbidity and premature death. Obstructive sleep apnea
does not contraindicate surgery but is done to help plan for use of continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) postoperatively.
Risks
The most common perioperative complication is wound infection (in about 3%); the most common late
complication is anastomotic stomach stenosis (in about 5%).
Other early complications include wound infection, incisional hernia, small-bowel obstruction, GI bleeding,
ventral hernia, deep venous thrombosis, and pneumonia. These complications can cause significant
morbidity, prolong hospitalization, and increase costs.
The most common cause of early (within about 6 wk) postoperative death (in up to 0.5%) is pulmonary
embolism, followed by anastomotic leak. Tachycardia may be the only early sign of anastomotic leak.
Less common causes of early postoperative death are MI, pneumonia, and bowel obstruction.
Later problems may include prolonged nausea and vomiting secondary to small-bowel obstruction, and
anastomotic stenosis. Nutritional deficiencies (eg, protein-energy undernutrition, vitamin B
deficiency)
may result from inadequate intake, inadequate supplementation, or malabsorption. Malodorous flatulence,
diarrhea, or both may develop, particularly after malabsorptive procedures. Ca and vitamin D absorption
may be impaired, causing deficiencies and sometimes hypocalcemia and secondary hyperparathyroidism.
With prolonged vomiting, thiamin deficiency may occur. After Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, iron deficiency
may result. Patients may have symptoms of reflux, especially after biliopancreatic diversion with a
duodenal switch. After rapid weight loss, cholelithiasis may develop.
Eating habits may be disordered. Adjusting to new eating habits can be difficult.
Prognosis
Overall, 30-day postoperative risk of death is 0.2 to 1%. Risk is higher in elderly patients and in patients
who have had an open procedure, who are extremely morbidly obese (> 50 kg), or who have established
organ failure. Risk of death may be lowest with laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. Risk of death is
almost 3 times higher in hospitals that do < 50 of these procedures/yr than in those that do >150
procedures/yr. The American Society of Bariatric Surgery may designate hospitals with better results as a
Center of Excellence, based on resources and excellent short- and long-term outcomes.
In most patients, comorbidities (eg, insulin insensitivity, dyslipidemias, hypertension, obstructive sleep
apnea, polycystic ovary syndrome, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis) tend to resolve.
Average loss of excess weight (real weight minus ideal weight) is about 60%, or about 40 to 60 kg in most
patients. Depending on the procedure, excess weight loss can vary between 50% and 70%; loss tends to
be lower with gastric banding and somewhat higher with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. In many patients,
weight loss, although initially rapid, plateaus after about 2 yr; then patients may slowly regain weight.
===PAGE:128===
Mood and work and personal relationships usually improve.
Long-term follow-up data are not yet available because these procedures are relatively new.
Follow-up
Patients should be monitored every 4 to 6 wk while weight loss is rapid (usually about the first 6 mo after
surgery), then every 6 to 12 mo. Weight and BP are checked, and eating habits are reviewed. Blood tests
(usually CBC, electrolytes, glucose, BUN, creatinine, albumin, and protein) and liver function tests are
done at each visit. If alkaline phosphatase is increased, parathyroid hormone level is measured; if
parathyroid hormone level is abnormal, bone density is monitored. If weight loss exceeds about 9 kg (20
lb)/mo, visits should be scheduled at least monthly, and blood tests should include Mg, phosphorus,
vitamin B
, and iron levels. Nutritional supplementation is sometimes necessary.
Metabolic Syndrome
Metabolic syndrome (syndrome X, insulin resistance syndrome) is characterized by a clustering
of risk factors for cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus. They commonly include
excess intra-abdominal fat, insulin resistance, and ≥ 1 of the following: elevated serum
triglyceride levels, decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level, and
hypertension. Causes, complications, diagnosis, and treatment are similar to those of obesity.
In developed countries, metabolic syndrome is a serious problem. It is very common; in the US, > 40% of
people > 50 yr may have it. Children and adolescents can develop
[Table 6-3.
Criteria Often Used for Diagnosis of Metabolic Syndrome*]
metabolic syndrome, but in these age groups, no definition is established.
Development of metabolic syndrome depends on distribution as well as amount of fat. Excess fat in the
abdomen (called apple shape), particularly when it results in a high waist-to-hip ratio (reflecting a
relatively low muscle-to-fat mass ratio), increases risk. The syndrome is less common among people who
have excess subcutaneous fat around the hips (called pear shape) and a low waist-to-hip ratio (reflecting
a higher muscle-to-fat mass ratio).
Excess abdominal fat leads to excess free fatty acids in the portal vein, increasing fat accumulation in the
liver. Fat also accumulates in muscle cells. Insulin resistance develops, with hyperinsulinemia. Glucose
metabolism is impaired, and dyslipidemias and hypertension develop. Serum uric acid levels are typically
elevated, and a prothrombotic state (with increased levels of fibrinogen and plasminogen activator
inhibitor I) and an inflammatory state develop. Patients have an increased risk of obstructive sleep apnea.
Other risks include nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, chronic kidney disease, polycystic ovary syndrome (for
women), and low serum testosterone, erectile dysfunction, or both (for men).
Diagnosis
• Waist circumference and BP
• Fasting plasma glucose and a lipid profile
Screening is important. A family history plus measurement of waist circumference and BP are part of
routine care. If patients with a family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, particularly those ≥ 40 yr, have a
waist circumference greater than that recommended for race and sex, fasting plasma glucose and a lipid
profile must be determined.
Metabolic syndrome has many different definitions, but it is most often diagnosed when ≥ 3 of the
following are present: excess abdominal fat, a high fasting plasma glucose level, hypertension, a high
triglyceride level, and a low HDL cholesterol level (see
Table 6-3
).
===PAGE:129===
Treatment
• Healthy diet and exercise
• Sometimes metformin
• Management of cardiovascular risk factors
Optimally, the management approach results in weight loss based on a healthy diet and regular physical
activity, which includes a combination of aerobic activity and resistance training, reinforced with
behavioral therapy. Metformin, an insulin sensitizer, may be useful. Weight loss of ≈ 7% may be sufficient
to reverse the syndrome, but if not, each feature of the syndrome should be managed to achieve
recommended targets; available drug treatment is very effective.
Other cardiovascular risk factors (eg, smoking cessation) also need to be managed. Increased physical
activity has cardiovascular benefits even if weight is not lost.
===PAGE:130===
2 - Gastrointestinal Disorders
Chapter 7. Approach to the Patient With Upper GI Complaints
Introduction
Upper GI complaints include chest pain (, chronic and recurrent abdominal pain, dyspepsia,
lump in the throat, halitosis (, hiccups, nausea and vomiting, and rumination. Some upper GI
complaints represent functional illness (ie, no physiologic cause found after extensive evaluation).
History:
Using open-ended, interview-style questions, the physician identifies the location and quality of
symptoms and any aggravating and alleviating factors. Psychologic stress factors must be specifically
sought. Because a psychiatric disorder does not preclude physiologic disease, the significance of vague,
dramatic, or bizarre complaints should not be minimized.
Patients report symptoms differently depending on their personality, the impact of the illness on their life,
and sociocultural influences. For example, nausea and vomiting may be minimized or reported indirectly
by a severely depressed patient but presented with dramatic urgency by a histrionic one.
Physical examination:
Inspection of the abdomen with the patient supine may show a convex
appearance when bowel obstruction, ascites, or, rarely, a large mass is present. Auscultation to assess
bowel sounds and determine presence of bruits should follow. Percussion elicits hyperresonance
(tympany) in the presence of bowel obstruction and dullness with ascites and can determine the span of
the liver. Palpation proceeds systematically, beginning gently to identify areas of tenderness and, if
tolerated, palpating deeper to locate masses or organomegaly. Digital rectal examination with testing for
occult blood and (in women) pelvic examination complete the evaluation of the abdomen.
Testing:
Patients with acute, nonspecific symptoms (eg, dyspepsia, nausea) and an unremarkable
physical examination rarely require testing. Findings suggesting significant disease (alarm symptoms)
should prompt further evaluation:
• Anorexia
• Anemia
• Blood in stool (gross or occult)
• Dysphagia
• Fever
• Hepatomegaly
• Pain that awakens patient
• Persistent nausea and vomiting
• Weight loss
Chronic or recurrent symptoms, even with an unremarkable examination, also warrant evaluation. Specific
GI tests are discussed in
Chapter 9
.
Chronic and Recurrent Abdominal Pain
Chronic abdominal pain (CAP) persists for more than 3 mo either continuously or intermittently.
Intermittent pain may be referred to as recurrent abdominal pain (RAP).
Acute abdominal pain
is
discussed elsewhere. CAP occurs any time after 5 yr of age. Up to 10% of children require evaluation for
RAP. About 2% of adults, predominantly women, have CAP (a much higher percentage of adults have
===PAGE:131===
some type of chronic GI symptoms, including nonulcer dyspepsia and various bowel disturbances).
Nearly all patients with CAP have had prior medical evaluation that did not yield a diagnosis after history,
physical, and basic testing.
Pathophysiology
Functional abdominal pain syndrome (FAPS) is pain that persists > 6 mo without evidence of physiologic
disease, shows no relationship to physiologic events (eg, meals, defecation, menses), and interferes with
daily functioning. FAPS is poorly understood but seems to involve altered nociception. Sensory neurons
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord may become abnormally excitable and hyperalgesic due to a
combination of factors. Cognitive and psychologic factors (eg, depression, stress, culture, secondary
gain, coping and support mechanisms) may cause efferent stimulation that amplifies pain signals,
resulting in perception of pain with low level inputs and persistence of pain long after the stimulus has
ceased. Additionally, the pain itself may function as a stressor, perpetuating a positive feedback loop.
In addition, menopause increases GI symptoms in several disorders including irritable bowel syndrome,
inflammatory bowel disease, endometriosis, and nonulcer dyspepsia.
Etiology
Perhaps 10% of patients have an occult physiologic illness (see
Table 7-1
); the remainder have a functional process. However, determining whether a particular
abnormality (eg, adhesions, ovarian cyst, endometriosis) is the cause of CAP symptoms or an incidental
finding can be difficult.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should elicit pain location, quality, duration, timing and frequency of
recurrence, and factors that worsen or relieve pain (particularly eating or moving bowels). A specific
inquiry as to whether milk and milk products cause abdominal cramps, bloating, or distention is needed,
because lactose intolerance is common, especially among blacks.
Review of systems
seeks concomitant GI symptoms such as gastroesophageal reflux, anorexia,
bloating or "gas," nausea, vomiting, jaundice, melena, hematuria, hematemesis, weight loss, and mucus
or blood in the stool. Bowel symptoms, such as diarrhea, constipation, and changes in stool consistency,
color, or elimination pattern, are particularly important.
In adolescents, a diet history is important because ingestion of large amounts of cola beverages and fruit
juices (which may contain significant quantities of fructose and sorbitol) can account for otherwise
puzzling abdominal pain.
Past medical history
should include nature and timing of any abdominal surgery and the results of
previous tests that have been done and treatments that have been tried. A drug history should include
details concerning prescription and illicit drug use as well as alcohol.
Family history of RAP, fevers, or both should be ascertained, as well as known diagnoses of sickle cell
trait or disease, familial Mediterranean fever, and porphyria.
Physical examination:
Review of vital signs should particularly note presence of fever or tachycardia.
General examination should seek presence of jaundice, skin rash, and peripheral edema. Abdominal
examination should note areas of tenderness, presence of peritoneal findings (eg, guarding, rigidity,
rebound), and any masses or organomegaly. Rectal examination and (in women) pelvic examination to
locate tenderness, masses, and blood are essential.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
===PAGE:132===
• Fever
• Anorexia, weight loss
• Pain that awakens patient
• Blood in stool or urine
• Jaundice
• Edema
• Abdominal mass or organomegaly
Interpretation of findings:
Clinical examination alone infrequently provides a firm diagnosis.
Determining whether CAP is physiologic or functional can be difficult. Although the presence of red flag
findings indicates a high likelihood of a physiologic cause, their absence does not rule it out. Other hints
are that physiologic causes usually cause pain that is well localized, especially to areas other than the
periumbilical region. Pain that wakes the patient is usually physiologic. Some findings suggestive of
specific disorders are listed in
Table 7-1
.
Functional CAP may result in pain similar to that of physiologic origin. However, there are no associated
red flag findings, and psychosocial features are often prominent. A history of physical or sexual abuse or
an unresolved loss (eg, divorce, miscarriage, or death of a family member) may be a clue.
The Rome criteria for diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome are the presence of abdominal pain or
discomfort for at least 3 days/mo in the last 3 mo along with at least 2 of the following: (1) improvement
with defecation; (2) onset (of each episode of discomfort) associated with a change in frequency of
defecation; and (3) change in consistency of stool.
Testing:
In general, simple tests (including urinalysis, CBC, liver tests, ESR, amylase, and lipase) should
be done. Abnormalities in these tests, the presence of red flag findings, or specific clinical findings
mandate further testing, even if previous assessments have been negative. Specific tests depend on the
findings (see
Table 7-1
) but typically include CT of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast, upper GI
endoscopy or colonoscopy, and perhaps small-bowel x-rays or stool testing.
The benefits of testing patients with no red flag findings are unclear. Those > 50 should probably have a
colonoscopy; those ≤ 50 can be observed or have CT of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast if an
imaging study is desired. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), ERCP, and
laparoscopy are rarely helpful in the absence of specific indications.
Between the initial evaluation and the follow-up visit, the patient (or family, if the patient is a child) should
record any pain, including
[Table 7-1.
Physiologic Causes of Chronic Abdominal Pain]
its nature, intensity, duration, and precipitating factors. Diet, defecation pattern, and any remedies tried
(and the results obtained) should also be recorded. This record may reveal inappropriate behavior
patterns and exaggerated responses to pain or otherwise suggest a diagnosis.
Treatment
Physiologic conditions are treated.
If the diagnosis of functional CAP is made, frequent examinations and tests should be avoided because
they may focus on or magnify the physical complaints or imply that the physician lacks confidence in the
diagnosis.
===PAGE:133===
There are no modalities to cure functional CAP; however, many helpful measures are available. These
measures rest on a foundation of a trusting, empathic relationship among the physician, patient, and
family. Patients should be reassured that they are not in danger; specific concerns should be sought and
addressed. The physician should explain the laboratory findings and the nature of the problem and
describe how the pain is generated and how the patient perceives it (ie, that there is a constitutional
tendency to feel pain at times of stress). It is important to avoid perpetuating the negative psychosocial
consequences of chronic pain (eg, prolonged absences from school or work, withdrawal from social
activities) and to promote independence, social participation, and self-reliance. These strategies help the
patient control or tolerate the symptoms while participating fully in everyday activities.
Drugs such as aspirin, NSAIDs, H
receptor blockers, proton pump inhibitors, and tricyclic
antidepressants can be effective. Opioids should be avoided because they invariably lead to dependency.
Cognitive methods (eg, relaxation training, biofeedback, hypnosis) may help by contributing to the
patient's sense of well-being and control. Regular follow-up visits should be scheduled weekly, monthly, or
bimonthly, depending on the patient's needs, and should continue until well after the problem has
resolved. Psychiatric referral may be required if symptoms persist, especially if the patient is depressed
or there are significant psychologic difficulties in the family.
School personnel should become involved for children who have CAP. Children can rest briefly in the
nurse's office during the school day, with the expectation that they return to class after 15 to 30 min. The
school nurse can be authorized to dispense a mild analgesic (eg, acetaminophen). The nurse can
sometimes allow the child to call a parent, who should encourage the child to stay in school. However,
once parents stop treating their child as special or ill, the symptoms may worsen before they abate.
Key Points
• Most cases represent a functional process.
• Red flag findings indicate a physiologic cause and need for further assessment.
• Testing is guided by clinical features.
• Repeated testing after physiologic causes are ruled out is usually counterproductive.
Dyspepsia
Dyspepsia is a sensation of pain or discomfort in the upper abdomen; it often is recurrent. It may be
described as indigestion, gassiness, early satiety, postprandial fullness, gnawing, or burning.
Etiology
There are several common causes of dyspepsia (see
Table 7-2
).
Many patients have findings on testing (eg, duodenitis, pyloric dysfunction, motility disturbance,
Helicobacter pylori
gastritis, lactose deficiency, cholelithiasis) that correlate poorly with symptoms (ie,
correction of the condition does not alleviate dyspepsia).
Nonulcer (functional) dyspepsia
is defined as dyspeptic symptoms in a patient who has no
abnormalities on physical examination and upper GI endoscopy.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should elicit a clear description of the symptoms, including whether
they are acute or chronic and recurrent. Other elements include timing and frequency of recurrence, any
difficulty swallowing, and relationship of symptoms to eating or taking drugs. Factors that worsen
===PAGE:134===
symptoms (particularly exertion, certain foods or alcohol) or relieve them (particularly eating or taking
antacids) are noted.
Review of systems
seeks concomitant GI symptoms such as anorexia, nausea, vomiting, hematemesis,
weight loss, and bloody or black (melanotic) stools. Other symptoms include dyspnea and diaphoresis.
Past medical history
should include known GI and cardiac diagnoses, cardiac risk factors (eg,
hypertension, hypercholesterolemia), and the results of previous tests that have been done and
treatments that have been tried. Drug history should include prescription and illicit drug use as well as
alcohol.
Physical examination:
Review of vital signs should note presence of tachycardia or irregular pulse.
General examination should note presence of pallor or diaphoresis, cachexia, or jaundice. Abdomen is
palpated for tenderness, masses, and organomegaly. Rectal examination is done to detect gross or occult
blood.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
[Table 7-2.
Some Causes of Dyspepsia]
• Acute episode with dyspnea, diaphoresis, or tachycardia
• Anorexia
• Nausea or vomiting
• Weight loss
• Blood in the stool
• Dysphagia or odynophagia
• Failure to respond to therapy with H
blockers or proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
Interpretation of findings:
Some findings are helpful (see
Table 7-2
).
A patient presenting with a single, acute episode of dyspepsia is of concern, particularly if symptoms are
accompanied by dyspnea, diaphoresis, or tachycardia; such patients may have acute coronary ischemia.
Chronic symptoms that occur with exertion and are relieved by rest may represent angina.
GI causes are most likely to manifest as chronic complaints. Symptoms are sometimes classified as ulcerlike, dysmotility-like, or reflux-like; these classifications suggest but do not confirm an etiology. Ulcer-like
symptoms consist of pain that is localized in the epigastrium, frequently occurs before meals, and is
partially relieved by food, antacids, or H
blockers. Dysmotility-like symptoms consist of discomfort rather
than pain, along with early satiety, postprandial fullness, nausea, vomiting, bloating, and symptoms that
are worsened by food. Reflux-like symptoms consist of heartburn or acid regurgitation. However,
symptoms often overlap.
Alternating constipation and diarrhea with dyspepsia suggests irritable bowel syndrome or excessive use
of OTC laxatives or antidiarrheals.
[Table 7-3.
Some Oral Drugs for Dyspepsia]
Testing:
Patients in whom symptoms suggest acute coronary ischemia, particularly those with risk
factors, should be sent to the emergency department for urgent evaluation, including ECG and serum
cardiac markers.
===PAGE:135===
For patients with chronic, nonspecific symptoms, routine tests include CBC (to exclude anemia caused by
GI blood loss) and routine blood chemistries. If results are abnormal, additional tests (eg, imaging studies,
endoscopy) should be considered. Because of the risk of cancer, patients > 45 and those with new-onset
red flag findings should undergo upper GI endoscopy. For patients < 45 with no red flag findings, some
authorities recommend empiric therapy for 2 to 4 wk with antisecretory agents followed by endoscopy in
treatment failures. Others recommend screening for
H. pylori
infection with a C
-urea breath test or
stool assay (. However, caution is required in using
H. pylori
or any other nonspecific findings
to explain symptoms.
Esophageal manometry and pH studies are indicated if reflux symptoms persist after upper GI endoscopy
and a 2- to 4-wk trial with a PPI.
Treatment
Specific conditions are treated. Patients without identifiable conditions are observed over time and
reassured. Symptoms are treated with PPIs, H
blockers, or a cytoprotective agent (see
Table 7-3
).
Prokinetic drugs (eg, metoclopramide, erythromycin) given as a liquid suspension also may be tried in
patients with dysmotility-like dyspepsia. However, there is no clear evidence that matching the drug class
to the specific symptoms (eg, reflux vs dysmotility) makes a difference. Misoprostol and anticholinergics
are not effective in functional dyspepsia. Drugs that alter sensory perception (eg, tricyclic
antidepressants) may be helpful.
Key Points
• Coronary ischemia is possible in a patient with acute "gas."
• Endoscopy is indicated for those > 45 or with red flag findings.
• Empiric treatment with an acid blocker is reasonable for those < 45 without red flag findings. Those who
do not respond in 2 to 4 wk require further evaluation.
Hiccups
Hiccups (hiccough, singultus) are repeated involuntary spasms of the diaphragm
followed by sudden
closure of the glottis, which checks the inflow of air and causes the characteristic sound. Transient
episodes are very common. Persistent (> 2 days) and intractable (> 1 mo) hiccups are uncommon but
quite distressing.
Etiology
Hiccups follow irritation of afferent or efferent diaphragmatic nerves or of medullary centers that control
the respiratory muscles, particularly the diaphragm. Hiccups are more common among men.
Cause is generally unknown, but transient hiccups are often caused by the following:
• Gastric distention
• Alcohol consumption
• Swallowing hot or irritating substances
Persistent and intractable hiccups have myriad causes (see
Table 7-4
).
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should note duration of hiccups, remedies tried, and relationship of
===PAGE:136===
onset to recent illness or surgery.
Review of systems
seeks concomitant GI symptoms such as gastroesophageal reflux and swallowing
difficulties; thoracic symptoms such as cough, fever, or chest pain; and any neurologic symptoms.
Past medical history
should query known GI and neurologic disorders. A drug history should include
details concerning alcohol use.
Physical examination:
Examination is usually unrewarding but should seek signs of chronic disease
(eg, cachexia). A full neurologic examination is important.
Red flags:
The following is of particular concern:
• Neurologic symptoms or signs
Interpretation of findings:
Few findings are specific. Hiccups after alcohol consumption or surgery may
well be related to those events. Other possible causes (see
Table 7-4
) are both numerous and rarely a
cause of hiccups.
Testing:
No specific evaluation is required for acute hiccups if routine history and physical examination
are unremarkable; abnormalities are pursued with appropriate testing.
Patients with hiccups of longer duration and no obvious cause should have testing, probably including
serum electrolytes, BUN and creatinine, chest x-ray, and ECG. Upper GI endoscopy and perhaps
esophageal pH monitoring should be considered. If these are unremarkable, brain MRI and chest CT may
be done.
[Table 7-4.
Some Causes of Intractable Hiccups]
Treatment
Identified problems are treated (eg, proton pump inhibitors for gastroesophageal reflux disease, dilation
for esophageal stricture).
For symptom relief, many simple measures can be tried, although none are more than slightly effective:
PaCO
can be increased and diaphragmatic activity can be inhibited by a series of deep breath-holds or
by breathing deeply in to and out of a paper bag. (CAUTION:
Plastic bags can cling to the nostrils and
should not be used
.) Vagal stimulation by pharyngeal irritation (eg, swallowing dry bread, granulated
sugar, or crushed ice; applying traction on the tongue; stimulating gagging) may work. Numerous other
folk remedies exist.
Persistent hiccups are often recalcitrant to treatment. Many drugs have been used in anecdotal series.
Baclofen, a
γ
-aminobutyric acid agonist (5 mg po q 6 h increasing to 20 mg/dose), may be effective. Other
drugs include chlorpromazine 10 to 50 mg po tid as needed, metoclopramide 10 mg po bid to qid, and
various anticonvulsants (eg, gabapentin). Additionally, an empiric trial of proton pump inhibitors may be
given. For severe symptoms, chlorpromazine 25 to 50 mg IM or IV can be given. In intractable cases, the
phrenic nerve may be blocked by small amounts of 0.5% procaine solution, with caution being taken to
avoid respiratory depression and pneumothorax. Even bilateral phrenicotomy does not cure all cases.
Key Points
• The cause is usually unknown.
• Rarely, a serious disorder is present.
• Evaluation is typically unrewarding but should be pursued for hiccups of long duration.
• Numerous remedies exist, none with clear superiority (or perhaps even effectiveness).
===PAGE:137===
Lump in Throat
Lump in the throat (globus sensation, globus hystericus) is the sensation of a lump or mass in the throat,
unrelated to swallowing, when no mass is present. (If a mass is present, see p.
.)
Etiology
No specific etiology or physiologic mechanism has been established. Some studies suggest that elevated
cricopharyngeal (upper esophageal sphincter) pressure or abnormal hypopharyngeal motility occur during
the time of symptoms. The sensation may also result from gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) or
from frequent swallowing and drying of the throat associated with anxiety or another emotional state.
Although not associated with stress factors or a specific psychiatric disorder, globus sensation may be a
symptom of certain mood states (eg, grief, pride); some patients may have a predisposition to this
response.
Disorders that can be confused with globus sensation include cricopharyngeal (upper esophageal) webs,
symptomatic diffuse esophageal spasm, GERD, skeletal muscle disorders (eg, myasthenia gravis,
myotonia dystrophica, polymyositis), and mass lesions in the neck or mediastinum that cause esophageal
compression.
Evaluation
The main goal is to distinguish globus sensation from true
dysphagia
(, which suggests a
structural or motor disorder of the pharynx or esophagus.
History: History of present illness
should elicit a clear description of the symptom, particularly as to
whether there is any pain with swallowing, difficulty swallowing (including sensation of food sticking).
Timing of symptoms is important, particularly whether it occurs with eating or drinking or is independent of
those activities; association with emotional events should be queried specifically.
Review of systems
seeks weight loss (as evidence of a swallowing disorder) and symptoms of muscle
weakness.
Past medical history
should include known neurologic diagnoses, particularly those causing weakness.
Physical examination:
The neck and floor of the mouth are palpated for masses. The oropharynx is
inspected (including by direct laryngoscopy). Swallowing (of water and a solid food such as crackers)
should be observed. Neurologic examination with particular attention to motor function is important.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Neck or throat pain
• Weight loss
• Abrupt onset after age 50
• Pain, choking, or difficulty with swallowing
• Regurgitation of food
• Muscle weakness
• Palpable or visible mass
• Progressive worsening of symptoms
===PAGE:138===
Interpretation of findings:
Symptoms unrelated to swallowing, with no pain or difficulty with swallowing,
or sensation of food sticking in the throat in a patient with a normal examination imply globus sensation.
Any red flag findings or abnormal findings on examination suggest a mechanical or motor disorder of
swallowing. Chronic symptoms that occur during unresolved or pathologic grief and that may be relieved
by crying suggest globus sensation.
Testing:
Those with findings typical of globus sensation need no testing. If the diagnosis is unclear or the
clinician cannot adequately visualize the pharynx, testing as for dysphagia is done. Typical tests include
plain or video esophagography, measurement of swallowing time, chest x-ray, and esophageal
manometry.
Treatment
Treatment involves reassurance and sympathetic concern. No drug is of proven benefit. Underlying
depression, anxiety, or other behavioral disturbances should be managed supportively, with psychiatric
referral if necessary. At times, communicating to the patient the association between symptoms and mood
state can be beneficial.
Key Points
• Globus symptoms are unrelated to swallowing.
• Tests are not needed unless symptoms are related to swallowing, examination is abnormal, or there are
red flag findings.
Nausea and Vomiting
(For nausea and vomiting in infants and children, see p.
.)
Nausea, the unpleasant feeling of needing to vomit, represents awareness of afferent stimuli (including
increased parasympathetic tone) to the medullary vomiting center. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of
gastric contents caused by involuntary contraction of the abdominal musculature when the gastric fundus
and lower esophageal sphincter are relaxed.
Vomiting should be distinguished from regurgitation, the spitting up of gastric contents without associated
nausea or forceful abdominal muscular contractions. Patients with achalasia or a Zenker's diverticulum
may regurgitate undigested food without nausea.
Complications:
Severe vomiting can lead to symptomatic dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities
(typically a metabolic alkalosis with hypokalemia) or rarely to an esophageal tear, either partial (MalloryWeiss) or complete (Boerhaave's syndrome). Chronic vomiting can result in undernutrition, weight loss,
and metabolic abnormalities.
Etiology
Nausea and vomiting occur in response to conditions that affect the vomiting center. Causes may
originate in the GI tract or CNS or may result from a number of systemic conditions (see
Table 7-5
).
The most common causes are the following:
• Gastroenteritis
• Drugs
• Toxins
===PAGE:139===
Cyclic vomiting syndrome is an uncommon disorder characterized by severe, discrete attacks of vomiting
or sometimes only nausea that occur at varying intervals, with normal health between episodes. It is most
common in childhood (mean age of onset 5 yr) and tends to remit with adulthood. The condition may be
associated with migraine headaches, possibly representing a migraine variant.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should elicit frequency and duration of vomiting; its relation to
possible precipitants such as drug or toxin ingestion, head injury, and motion (eg, car, plane, boat,
amusement rides); and whether vomitus contained bile (bitter, yellow-green) or blood (red or "coffee
ground" material). Important associated symptoms include presence of abdominal pain and diarrhea; the
last passage of stool and flatus; and presence of headache, vertigo, or both.
Review of systems
seeks symptoms of causative disorders such as amenorrhea, breast swelling
(pregnancy); polyuria, polydipsia (diabetes); and hematuria, flank pain (kidney stones).
Past medical history
should ascertain known causes such as pregnancy, diabetes, migraine, hepatic or
renal disease, cancer (including timing of any chemotherapy or radiation therapy), and previous
abdominal surgery (which may cause bowel obstruction due to adhesions). All drugs and substances
ingested recently should be ascertained; certain substances may not manifest toxicity until several days
after ingestion (eg, acetaminophen, some mushrooms).
Family history of recurrent vomiting should be noted.
Physical examination:
Vital signs should particularly note presence of fever and signs of hypovolemia
(eg, tachycardia, hypotension, or both).
General examination should seek presence of jaundice and skin rash.
On abdominal examination, the clinician should look for distention and surgical scars; listen for presence
and quality of bowel sounds (eg, normal, high-pitched); percuss for tympany; and palpate for tenderness,
peritoneal findings (eg, guarding, rigidity, rebound), and any masses, organomegaly, or hernias. Rectal
examination and (in women) pelvic examination to locate tenderness, masses, and blood are essential.
Neurologic examination should particularly note mental status, nystagmus, meningismus (eg, stiff neck,
Kernig's or Brudzinski's signs), and ocular signs of increased intracranial pressure (eg, papilledema,
absence of venous pulsations, 3rd cranial nerve palsy) or subarachnoid hemorrhage (retinal
hemorrhage).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Signs of hypovolemia
• Headache, stiff neck, or mental status change
• Peritoneal signs
• Distended, tympanitic abdomen
Interpretation of findings:
Many findings are suggestive of a cause or group of causes (see
Table 7-5
).
Vomiting occurring shortly after drug or toxin ingestion or exposure to motion in a patient with an
unremarkable neurologic and abdominal examination can confidently be ascribed to those causes, as
may vomiting in a woman with a known pregnancy and a benign examination. Acute vomiting
accompanied by diarrhea in an otherwise
[Table 7-5.
Some Causes of Nausea and Vomiting]
healthy patient with a benign examination is highly likely to be infectious gastroenteritis; further
===PAGE:140===
assessment may be deferred.
Vomiting that occurs at the thought of food or that is not temporally related to eating suggests a
psychogenic cause, as does personal or family history of functional nausea and vomiting. Patients should
be questioned about the relationship between vomiting and stressful events because they may not
recognize the association or even admit to feeling distress at those times.
Testing:
All females of childbearing age should have a urine pregnancy test. Patients with severe
vomiting, vomiting lasting over 1 day, or signs of dehydration on examination should have other laboratory
tests (eg, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose, urinalysis, and sometimes liver tests). Patients with red
flag findings should have testing appropriate to the symptoms (see
Table 7-5
).
The assessment of chronic vomiting usually includes the previously listed laboratory tests plus upper GI
endoscopy, small-bowel x-rays, and tests to assess gastric emptying and antral-duodenal motility.
Treatment
Specific conditions, including dehydration, are treated. Even without significant dehydration, IV fluid
therapy (0.9% saline 1 L, or 20 mL/kg in children) often leads to reduction of symptoms. In adults, various
antiemetics are effective (see
Table 7-6
). Choice of agent varies somewhat with the cause and severity of symptoms. Typical use is the
following:
• Motion sickness: Antihistamines, scopolamine patches, or both
• Mild to moderate symptoms: Prochlorperazine or metoclopramide
• Severe or refractory vomiting and vomiting caused by chemotherapy: 5-HT
antagonists
Obviously, only parenteral agents should be used in actively vomiting patients.
For psychogenic vomiting, reassurance indicates awareness of the patient's discomfort and a desire to
work toward relief of symptoms, regardless of cause. Comments such as "nothing is wrong" or "the
problem is emotional" should be avoided. Brief symptomatic treatment with antiemetics can be tried. If
long-term management is necessary, supportive, regular office visits may help resolve the underlying
problem.
Key Points
• Many episodes have an obvious cause and benign examination and require only symptomatic treatment.
• Physicians should be alert for signs of an acute abdomen or significant intracranial disorder.
• Pregnancy should always be considered in females of childbearing age.
Rumination
Rumination is the (usually involuntary) regurgitation of small amounts of food from the stomach (most
often 15 to 30 min after eating) that are rechewed and, in most cases, again swallowed. Patients do not
complain of nausea or abdominal pain.
[Table 7-6.
Some Drugs for Vomiting]
Rumination is commonly observed in infants. The incidence in adults is unknown, because it is rarely
reported by patients themselves.
Etiology
===PAGE:141===
Patients with achalasia or a Zenker's diverticulum may regurgitate undigested food without nausea. In the
majority of patients who do not have these obstructive esophageal conditions, the pathophysiology is
poorly understood. The reverse peristalsis in ruminants has not been reported in humans. The disorder is
probably a learned, maladaptive habit and may be part of an eating disorder. The person learns to open
the lower esophageal sphincter and propel gastric contents into the esophagus and throat by increasing
gastric pressure via rhythmic contraction and relaxation of the diaphragm.
Symptoms
Nausea, pain, and dysphagia do not occur. During periods of stress, the patient may be less careful
about concealing rumination. Seeing the act for the first time, others may refer the patient to a physician.
Rarely, patients regurgitate and expel enough food to lose weight.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes endoscopy, esophageal motility studies, or both
Rumination is usually diagnosed through observation. A psychosocial history may disclose underlying
emotional stress. Endoscopy or an upper GI series is necessary to exclude disorders causing mechanical
obstruction or Zenker's diverticulum. Esophageal manometry and tests to assess gastric emptying and
antral-duodenal motility may be used to identify a motility disturbance.
Treatment
• Behavioral techniques
Treatment is supportive. Drug therapy generally does not help. Motivated patients may respond to
behavioral techniques (eg, relaxation, biofeedback, training in diaphragmatic breathing [using the
diaphragm instead of chest muscles to breathe]). Psychiatric consultation may be helpful.
Functional GI Illness
Often, no physiologic cause for GI complaints is found, even after extensive evaluation. Such patients are
said to have functional illness, which accounts for 30 to 50% of referrals to gastroenterologists.
Functional illness may manifest with upper and/or lower GI symptoms.
The reasons for functional symptoms are not clear. Some evidence suggests that such patients have
visceral hypersensitivity, a disturbance of nociception in which they experience discomfort caused by
sensations (eg, luminal distention, peristalsis) that other people do not find distressing. In some patients,
psychologic conditions such as anxiety (with or without aerophagia), conversion disorder, somatization in
depression, or hypochondriasis are associated with GI symptoms. Psychologic theories hold that
functional symptoms may satisfy certain psychologic needs. For example, some patients with chronic
illness derive secondary benefits from being sick. For such patients, successful treatment of symptoms
may lead to development of other symptoms.
Many referring physicians and GI specialists find functional GI complaints difficult to understand and treat,
and uncertainty may lead to frustration and judgmental attitudes. Physicians should avoid ordering
repeated studies or multiple drug trials for the insistent patient with inexplicable complaints. When
symptoms are not suggestive of serious illness, the physician should wait rather than embark on another
diagnostic or therapeutic plan. In time, new information may direct evaluation and management.
Functional complaints are sometimes present in patients with physiologic disease (eg, peptic ulcer,
esophagitis); such symptoms may not remit even when a physiologic illness is addressed.
===PAGE:142===
Chapter 8. Approach to the Patient With Lower GI Complaints
Introduction
Lower GI complaints include constipation, diarrhea, gas and bloating, abdominal pain (see also p.
),
and rectal pain or bleeding (see
Chapter 21
). As with upper GI complaints, lower GI complaints result from
physiologic illness or represent a functional disorder (ie, no radiologic, biochemical, or pathologic
abnormalities found even after extensive evaluation). The reasons for functional symptoms are not clear.
Evidence suggests that patients with functional symptoms may have disturbances of motility, nociception,
or both; ie, they perceive as uncomfortable certain sensations (eg, luminal distention, peristalsis) that
other people do not find distressing.
No bodily function is more variable and subject to external influences than defecation. Bowel habits vary
considerably from person to person and are affected by age, physiology, diet, and social and cultural
influences. Some people have unwarranted preoccupation with bowel habits. In Western society, normal
stool frequency ranges from 2 to 3/day to 2 to 3/wk. Changes in stool frequency, consistency, volume, or
composition (ie, presence of blood, mucus, pus, or excess fatty material) may indicate disease.
Constipation
Constipation is difficult or infrequent passage of stool, hardness of stool, or a feeling of incomplete
evacuation.
Many people incorrectly believe that daily defecation is necessary and complain of constipation if stools
occur less frequently. Others are concerned with the appearance (size, shape, color) or consistency of
stools. Sometimes the major complaint is dissatisfaction with the act of defecation or the sense of
incomplete evacuation after defecation. Constipation is blamed for many complaints (abdominal pain,
nausea, fatigue, anorexia) that are actually symptoms of an underlying problem (eg, irritable bowel
syndrome [IBS], depression). Patients should not expect all symptoms to be relieved by a daily bowel
movement, and measures to aid bowel habits should be used judiciously.
Obsessive-compulsive patients often feel the need to rid the body daily of "unclean" wastes. Such
patients often spend excessive time on the toilet or become chronic users of cathartics.
Etiology
Acute constipation suggests an organic cause, whereas chronic constipation may be organic or functional
(see
Table 8-1
).
In many patients, constipation is associated with sluggish movement of stool through the colon. This
delay may be due to drugs, organic conditions, or a disorder of defecatory function (ie, pelvic floor
dysfunction). Patients with disordered defecation do not generate adequate rectal propulsive forces, do
not relax the puborectalis and the external anal sphincter during defecation, or both. In IBS, patients have
symptoms (eg, abdominal discomfort and altered bowel habits) but generally normal colonic transit and
anorectal functions. However, IBS-disordered defecation may coexist.
Excessive straining, perhaps secondary to pelvic floor dysfunctions, may contribute to anorectal
pathology (eg, hemorrhoids, anal fissures, and rectal prolapse) and possibly even to syncope. Fecal
impaction, which may cause or develop from constipation, is also common among elderly patients,
particularly with prolonged bed rest or decreased physical activity. It is also common after barium has
been given by mouth or enema.
Changes with aging:
Constipation is common among elderly people because of low-fiber diets, lack of
exercise, coexisting medical conditions, and use of constipating drugs. Many elderly people have
misconceptions about normal bowel habits and use laxatives regularly. Other changes that predispose the
elderly to constipation include increased rectal compliance and impaired rectal sensation (such that larger
rectal volumes are needed to elicit the desire to defecate).
===PAGE:143===
Evaluation
History:
A lifetime history of the patient's stool frequency, consistency, need to strain or use perineal
maneuvers (eg, pushing on the perineum, gluteal region, or recto-vaginal wall) during defecation, and
satisfaction after defecation should be obtained, including frequency and duration of laxative or enema
use. Some patients deny previous constipation
[Table 8-1.
Causes of Constipation]
but, when questioned specifically, admit to spending 15 to 20 min per bowel movement. The presence,
amount, and duration of blood in the stool should also be elicited.
Symptoms of metabolic (eg, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus) and neurologic (eg, spinal cord injury)
disorders and systemic symptoms (eg, weight loss) should also be sought. Prescription and
nonprescription drug use should be assessed, with specific questioning about anticholinergic and opioid
drugs.
Physical examination:
A general examination is done to look for signs of systemic disease, including
fever and cachexia. Abdominal masses should be sought by palpation. A rectal examination should be
done not only for fissures, strictures, blood, or masses (including fecal impaction) but also to evaluate
anal resting tone (the puborectalis "lift" when patients squeeze the anal sphincter), perineal descent
during simulated evacuation, and rectal sensation. Patients with defecatory disorders may have increased
anal resting tone (or anismus), reduced (ie, < 2 cm) or increased (ie, > 4 cm) perineal descent, and/or
paradoxical contraction of the puborectalis during simulated evacuation.
Red flags:
Certain findings raise suspicion of a more serious etiology of chronic constipation:
• Distended, tympanitic abdomen
• Vomiting
• Blood in stool
• Weight loss
• Severe constipation of recent onset/worsening in elderly patients
Interpretation of findings:
Certain symptoms (eg, a sense of anorectal blockage, prolonged or difficult
defecation), particularly when associated with abnormal (ie, increased or reduced) perineal motion during
simulated evacuation, suggest a defecatory disorder. A tense, distended, tympanitic abdomen, particularly
when there is nausea and vomiting, suggests mechanical obstruction.
Patients with IBS typically have abdominal pain with disordered bowel habits (. Chronic
constipation with modest abdominal discomfort in a patient who has used laxatives for a long time
suggests slow-transit constipation. Acute constipation coincident with the start of a constipating drug in
patients without red flag findings suggests the drug is the cause. New-onset constipation that persists for
weeks or occurs intermittently with increasing frequency or severity, in the absence of a known cause,
suggests colonic tumor or other causes of partial obstruction. Excessive straining or prolonged or
unsatisfactory defecation, with or without anal digitation, suggests a defecatory disorder. Patients with
fecal impaction may have cramps and may pass watery mucus or fecal material around the impacted
mass, mimicking diarrhea (paradoxic diarrhea).
Testing:
Testing is guided by clinical presentation.
Constipation with a clear etiology (drugs, trauma, bed rest) may be treated symptomatically without further
study. Patients with symptoms of bowel obstruction require flat and upright abdominal x-rays, possibly a
water-soluble contrast enema to evaluate for colonic obstruction, and possibly a CT scan or barium x-ray
===PAGE:144===
of the small intestine (see also p.
). Most patients without a clear etiology should have sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy and a laboratory
evaluation (CBC, thyroid-stimulating hormone, fasting glucose, electrolytes, and Ca).
Further tests are usually reserved for patients with abnormal findings on the previously mentioned tests or
who do not respond to symptomatic treatment. If the primary complaint is infrequent defecation, colonic
transit times should be measured with radiopaque markers or scintigraphy. If the primary complaint is
difficulty with defecation, anorectal manometry and rectal balloon expulsion should be assessed.
Treatment
• Possibly discontinuation of causative drugs (some may be necessary)
• Increase in dietary fiber
• Possibly trial with a brief course of osmotic laxatives
Any identified conditions should be treated.
Agents used to treat constipation are summarized in
Table 8-2
. Laxatives should be used judiciously. Some (eg, phosphate, bran, cellulose) bind drugs and
interfere with absorption. Rapid fecal transit may rush some drugs and nutrients beyond their optimal
absorptive locus. Contraindications to laxative and cathartic use include acute abdominal pain of
unknown origin, inflammatory bowel disorders, intestinal obstruction, GI bleeding, and fecal impaction.
Diet and behavior:
The diet should contain enough fiber (typically 15 to 20 g/day) to ensure adequate
stool bulk. Vegetable fiber, which is largely indigestible and unabsorbable, increases stool bulk. Certain
components of fiber also absorb fluid, making stools softer and facilitating their passage. Fruits and
vegetables are recommended sources, as are cereals containing bran. Fiber supplementation is
particularly effective in treating normal-transit constipation but is not very effective for slow-transit
constipation or defecatory disorders.
[Table 8-2.
Agents Used to Treat Constipation]
Behavioral changes may help. Patients should try to move their bowels at the same time daily, preferably
15 to 45 min after breakfast, because food ingestion stimulates colonic motility. Initial efforts at regular,
unhurried bowel movements may be aided by glycerin suppositories.
Explanation is important, but it is difficult to convince obsessive-compulsive patients that their attitude
toward defecation is abnormal. Physicians must explain that daily bowel movements are not essential,
that the bowel must be given a chance to function, and that frequent use of laxatives or enemas (> once/3
days) denies the bowel that chance.
Types of laxatives:
Bulking agents (eg, psyllium, Ca polycarbophil, methylcellulose) act slowly and
gently and are the safest agents for promoting elimination. Proper use involves gradually increasing the
dose—ideally taken tid or qid with sufficient liquid (eg, 500 mL/day of extra fluid) to prevent impaction
—until a softer, bulkier stool results. Bloating may be reduced by gradually titrating the dose of dietary
fiber to the recommended dose, or by switching to a synthetic fiber preparation such as methylcellulose.
Osmotic agents contain poorly absorbed polyvalent ions (eg, Mg, phosphate, sulfate), polymers (eg,
polyethylene glycol), or carbohydrates (eg, lactulose, sorbitol) that remain in the bowel, increasing
intraluminal osmotic pressure and thereby drawing water into the intestine. The increased volume
stimulates peristalsis. These agents usually work within 3 h.
In general, osmotic laxatives are reasonably safe even when used regularly. However, Na phosphate
should not be used for bowel cleansing because it may rarely cause acute renal failure even after a single
use for bowel preparation. These events occurred primarily in elderly patients, those with preexisting
renal disease, and those who were taking drugs that affect renal perfusion or function (eg, diuretics, ACE
===PAGE:145===
inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers). Also, Mg and phosphate are partially absorbed and may be
detrimental in some conditions (eg, renal insufficiency). Na (in some preparations) may exacerbate heart
failure. In large or frequent doses, these drugs may upset fluid and electrolyte balance. Another approach
to cleansing the bowel for diagnostic tests or surgery or sometimes for chronic constipation uses large
volumes of a balanced osmotic agent (eg, polyethylene glycol-electrolyte solution) given orally or via
NGT.
Secretory or stimulant cathartics (eg, phenolphthalein, bisacodyl, anthraquinones, castor oil,
anthraquinones) act by irritating the intestinal mucosa or by directly stimulating the submucosal and
myenteric plexus. Although phenolphthalein was withdrawn from the US market after animal studies
suggested the compound was carcinogenic, there is no epidemiologic evidence of this in humans.
Bisacodyl is an effective rescue drug for chronic constipation. The anthraquinones senna, cascara
sagrada, aloe, and rhubarb are common constituents of herbal and OTC laxatives. They pass unchanged
to the colon where bacterial metabolism converts them to active forms. Adverse effects include allergic
reactions, electrolyte depletion, melanosis coli, and cathartic colon. Melanosis coli is a brownish black
colorectal pigmentation of unknown composition. Cathartic colon refers to alterations in colonic anatomy
observed on barium enema in patients with chronic stimulant laxative use. It is unclear whether cathartic
colon, which has been attributed to destruction of myenteric plexus neurons by anthraquinones, is caused
by currently available agents or other neurotoxic agents (eg, podophyllin), which are no longer available.
There does not seem to be an increased risk of colon cancer with long-term anthraquinone use.
Enemas can be used, including tap water and commercially prepared hypertonic solutions.
Emollient agents (eg, docusate, mineral oil) act slowly to soften stools, making them easier to pass.
However, they are not potent stimulators of defecation. Docusate is a surfactant, which allows water to
enter the fecal mass to soften and increase its bulk.
Fecal impaction:
Fecal impaction is treated initially with enemas of tap water followed by small enemas
(100 mL) of commercially prepared hypertonic solutions (eg, Na phosphate). If these do not work, manual
fragmentation and disimpaction of the mass is necessary. This procedure is painful, so perirectal and
intrarectal application of local anesthetics (eg, lidocaine 5% ointment or dibucaine 1% ointment) is
recommended. Some patients require sedation.
Key Points
• Drug causes are common (eg, chronic laxative abuse, use of anticholinergic or opioid drugs).
• Clinicians should be wary of bowel obstruction when constipation is acute and severe.
• Symptomatic treatment is reasonable in the absence of red flag findings and after excluding pelvic floor
dysfunction.
Dyschezia
(Disordered Evacuation; Dysfunction of Pelvic Floor or Anal Sphincters; Functional Defecatory Disorders;
Dyssynergia)
Dyschezia is difficulty defecating. Patients sense the presence of stool and the need to
defecate but are unable. It results from a lack of coordination of pelvic floor muscles and anal
sphincters. Diagnosis requires anorectal testing. Treatment is difficult, but biofeedback may be
of benefit.
Etiology
Normally, when a person tries to defecate, rectal pressure rises in coordination with relaxation of the
external anal sphincter. This process may be affected by one or more dysfunctions (eg, impaired rectal
contraction, excessive contraction of the abdominal wall, paradoxic anal contraction, failure of anal
relaxation) of unclear etiology. Functional defecatory disorders may manifest at any age. In contrast,
===PAGE:146===
Hirschsprung's disease, which is due to an absent recto-anal inhibitory reflex, is almost always diagnosed
in infancy or childhood.
Symptoms and Signs
The patient may or may not sense that stool is present in the rectum. Despite prolonged straining,
evacuation is tedious or impossible, frequently even for soft stool or enemas. Patients may complain of
anal blockage and may digitally remove stool from their rectum or manually support their perineum or
splint the vagina to evacuate. Actual stool frequency may or may not be decreased.
Diagnosis
Rectal and pelvic examinations may reveal hypertonia of the pelvic floor muscles and anal sphincters.
With bearing down, patients may not demonstrate the expected anal relaxation and perineal descent.
With excessive straining, the anterior rectal wall prolapses into the vagina in patients with impaired anal
relaxation; thus rectoceles are usually a secondary rather than a primary disturbance. Long-standing
dyschezia with chronic straining may cause a solitary rectal ulcer or varying degrees of rectal prolapse or
excessive perineal descent or an enterocoele. Anorectal manometry and rectal balloon expulsion,
occasionally supplemented by defecatory or magnetic resonance proctography, are necessary to
diagnose the condition.
Treatment
Because treatment with laxatives is unsatisfactory, it is important to assess anorectal functions in patients
with refractory constipation. Biofeedback therapy can improve coordination between abdominal
contraction and pelvic floor relaxation during defecation, thereby alleviating symptoms. However, pelvic
floor retraining for defecatory disorders is highly specialized and available at select centers only. A
collaborative approach (physiotherapists, dietitians, behavior therapists, gastroenterologists) is
necessary.
Diarrhea
(See also
Chs. 17
and
. For diarrhea in children, see p.
.)
Stool is 60 to 90% water. In Western society, stool amount is 100 to 200 g/day in healthy adults and 10
g/kg/day in infants, depending on the amount of unabsorbable dietary material (mainly carbohydrates).
Diarrhea is defined as stool weight > 200 g/day. However, many people consider any increased stool
fluidity to be diarrhea. Alternatively, many people who ingest fiber have bulkier but formed stools but do
not consider themselves to have diarrhea.
Complications:
Complications may result from diarrhea of any etiology. Fluid loss with consequent
dehydration, electrolyte loss (Na, K, Mg, Cl), and even vascular collapse sometimes occur. Collapse can
develop rapidly in patients who have severe diarrhea (eg, patients with cholera) or are very young, very
old, or debilitated. HCO
loss can cause metabolic acidosis. Hypokalemia can occur when patients have
severe or chronic diarrhea or if the stool contains excess mucus. Hypomagnesemia after prolonged
diarrhea can cause tetany.
Etiology
Normally, the small intestine and colon absorb 99% of fluid resulting from oral intake and GI tract
secretions—a total fluid load of about 9 of 10 L daily. Thus, even small reductions (ie, 1%) in intestinal
water absorption or increases in secretion can increase water content enough to cause diarrhea.
There are a number of causes of diarrhea (see
Table 8-3
). Several basic mechanisms are responsible for most clinically significant diarrheas: increased
osmotic load, increased secretions, and decreased contact time/surface area. In many disorders, more
than one mechanism is active. For example, diarrhea in inflammatory bowel disease results from mucosal
destruction, exudation into the lumen, and from multiple secretagogues and bacterial toxins that affect
===PAGE:147===
enterocyte function.
[Table 8-3.
Some Causes of Diarrhea*]
Osmotic load:
Diarrhea occurs when unabsorbable, water-soluble solutes remain in the bowel and
retain water. Such solutes include polyethylene glycol, Mg salts (hydroxide and sulfate), and Na
phosphate, which are used as laxatives. Osmotic diarrhea occurs with sugar intolerance (eg, lactose
intolerance caused by lactase deficiency). Ingesting large amounts of hexitols (eg, sorbitol, mannitol,
xylitol) or high fructose corn syrups, which are used as sugar substitutes in candy, gum, and fruit juices,
causes osmotic diarrhea because hexitols are poorly absorbed. Lactulose, which is used as a laxative,
causes diarrhea by a similar mechanism. Overingesting certain foodstuffs (see
Table 8-4
) can cause osmotic diarrhea.
Increased secretions:
Diarrhea occurs when the bowels secrete more electrolytes and water than they
absorb. Causes of increased secretions include infections, unabsorbed fats, certain drugs, and various
intrinsic and extrinsic secretagogues.
Infections (eg, gastroenteritis; discussed in
Chapter 16
) are the most common causes of secretory diarrhea.
Infections combined with food poisoning are the most common causes of acute diarrhea (< 4 days in
duration). Most enterotoxins block Na
+
-H
+
exchange, which is an important driving force for fluid
absorption in the small bowel and colon.
Unabsorbed dietary fat and bile acids (as in malabsorption syndromes and after ileal resection) can
stimulate colonic secretion and cause diarrhea.
Drugs may stimulate intestinal secretions directly (eg, quinidine, quinine, colchicine, anthraquinone
cathartics, castor oil, prostaglandins) or indirectly by impairing fat absorption (eg, orlistat).
Various endocrine tumors produce secretagogues, including vipomas (vasoactive intestinal peptide),
gastrinomas (gastrin), mastocytosis (histamine), medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (calcitonin and
prostaglandins), and carcinoid tumors (histamine, serotonin, and polypeptides). Some of these mediators
(eg, prostaglandins, serotonin, related compounds) also accelerate intestinal transit, colonic transit, or
both.
Reduced contact time/surface area:
Rapid intestinal transit and diminished surface area impair fluid
absorption and cause diarrhea. Common causes include small-bowel or large-bowel resection or bypass,
gastric resection,
[Table 8-4.
Dietary Factors that May Worsen Diarrhea]
and inflammatory bowel disease. Other causes include microscopic colitis (collagenous or lymphocytic
colitis) and celiac sprue.
Stimulation of intestinal smooth muscle by drugs (eg, Mg-containing antacids, laxatives, cholinesterase
inhibitors, SSRIs) or humoral agents (eg, prostaglandins, serotonin) also can speed transit.
Evaluation
History:
Duration and severity of diarrhea, circumstances of onset (including recent travel, food
ingested, source of water), drug use (including any antibiotics within the previous 3 mo), abdominal pain
or vomiting, frequency and timing of bowel movements, changes in stool characteristics (eg, presence of
blood, pus, or mucus; changes in color or consistency; evidence of steatorrhea), associated changes in
weight or appetite, and rectal urgency or tenesmus should be noted. Simultaneous occurrence of
diarrhea in close contacts should be ascertained.
Physical examination:
Fluid and hydration status should be evaluated. A full examination with attention
to the abdomen and a digital rectal examination for sphincter competence and occult blood testing are
important.
===PAGE:148===
Red flags:
Certain findings raise suspicion of an organic or more serious etiology of diarrhea:
• Blood or pus
• Fever
• Signs of dehydration
• Chronic diarrhea
• Weight loss
Interpretation of findings:
Acute, watery diarrhea in an otherwise healthy person is likely to be of
infectious etiology, particularly when travel, possibly tainted food, or an outbreak with a point-source is
involved. Acute bloody diarrhea with or without hemodynamic instability in an otherwise healthy person
suggests an enteroinvasive infection. Diverticular bleeding and ischemic colitis also manifest with acute
bloody diarrhea. Recurrent bouts of bloody diarrhea in a younger person suggest inflammatory bowel
disease. In the absence of laxative use, large-volume diarrhea (eg, daily stool volume > 1 L/day) strongly
suggests an endocrine cause in patients with normal GI anatomy. A history of oil droplets in stool,
particularly if associated with weight loss, suggests malabsorption.
Diarrhea that consistently follows ingestion of certain foods (eg, fats) suggests food intolerance. Recent
antibiotic use should raise suspicion for antibiotic-associated diarrhea, including
Clostridium difficile
colitis.
The symptoms can help identify the affected part of the bowel. Generally, in small-bowel diseases, stools
are voluminous and watery or fatty. In colonic diseases, stools are frequent, sometimes small in volume,
and possibly accompanied by blood, mucus, pus, and abdominal discomfort. In irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS), abdominal discomfort is relieved by defecation, associated with more loose or frequent stools, or
both. However, these symptoms alone do not discriminate IBS from other diseases (eg, inflammatory
bowel disease). Patients with IBS or rectal mucosal involvement often have marked urgency, tenesmus,
and small, frequent stools (.
Extra-abdominal findings that suggest an etiology include skin lesions or flushing (mastocytosis), thyroid
nodules (medullary carcinoma of the thyroid), right-sided heart murmur (carcinoid), lymphadenopathy
(lymphoma, AIDS), and arthritis (inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease).
Testing:
Acute diarrhea (< 4 days) typically does not require testing. Exceptions are patients with signs of
dehydration, bloody stool, fever, severe pain, hypotension, or
toxic features—particularly those who are
very young or very old. These patients should have a CBC and measurement of electrolytes, BUN, and
creatinine. Stool samples should be collected for microscopy, culture, fecal leukocyte testing, and, if
antibiotics have been taken recently,
C. difficile
toxin assay.
Chronic diarrhea (> 4 wk) requires evaluation, as does a shorter (1 to 3 wk) bout of diarrhea in
immunocompromised patients or those who appear significantly ill. Initial stool testing should include
culture, fecal leukocytes (detected by smear or measurement of fecal lactoferrin), microscopic
examination for ova and parasites, pH (bacterial fermentation of unabsorbed carbohydrate lowers stool
pH < 6.0), fat (by Sudan stain), and electrolytes (Na and K). If no standard pathogens are found, specific
tests for
Giardia
antigen and
Aeromonas
,
Plesiomonas
, coccidia, and microsporidia should be requested.
Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy with biopsies should follow to look for inflammatory causes.
If no diagnosis is apparent and Sudan stain is positive for fat, fecal fat excretion should be measured,
followed by small-bowel enteroclysis or CT enterography (structural disease) and endoscopic small-bowel
biopsy (mucosal disease). If evaluation still yields negative findings, assessment of pancreatic structure
and function ( should be considered for patients who have unexplained steatorrhea.
Infrequently, capsule endoscopy may uncover lesions, predominantly Crohn's disease or NSAID
enteropathy, not identified by other modalities.
===PAGE:149===
The stool osmotic gap, which is calculated 290 - 2 × (stool Na + stool K), indicates whether diarrhea is
secretory or osmotic. An osmotic gap < 50 mEq/L indicates secretory diarrhea; a larger gap suggests
osmotic diarrhea. Patients with osmotic diarrhea may have covert Mg laxative ingestion (detectable by
stool Mg levels) or carbohydrate malabsorption (diagnosed by hydrogen breath test, lactase assay, and
dietary review).
Undiagnosed secretory diarrhea requires testing (eg, plasma gastrin, calcitonin, vasoactive intestinal
peptide levels, histamine, urinary 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid [5-HIAA]) for endocrine-related causes. A
review for symptoms and signs of thyroid disease and adrenal insufficiency should be done. Surreptitious
laxative abuse must be considered; it can be ruled out by a fecal laxative assay.
Treatment
• Fluid and electrolytes for dehydration
• Possibly antidiarrheals for nonbloody diarrhea in patients without systemic toxicity
Severe diarrhea requires fluid and electrolyte replacement to correct dehydration, electrolyte imbalance,
and acidosis. Parenteral fluids containing NaCl, KCl, and glucose are generally required. Salts to
counteract acidosis (Na lactate, acetate, HCO
) may be indicated if serum HCO
is < 15 mEq/L. An oral
glucose-electrolyte solution can be given if diarrhea is not severe and nausea and vomiting are minimal
(. Oral and parenteral fluids are sometimes given simultaneously when water and electrolytes must
be replaced in massive amounts (eg, in cholera).
Diarrhea is a symptom. When possible, the underlying disorder should be treated, but symptomatic
treatment is often necessary. Diarrhea may be decreased by oral loperamide 2 to 4 mg tid or qid
(preferably given 30 min before meals), diphenoxylate 2.5 to 5 mg (tablets or liquid) tid or qid, codeine
phosphate 15 to 30 mg bid or tid, or paregoric (camphorated opium tincture) 5 to 10 mL once/day to qid.
Because antidiarrheals may exacerbate
C. difficile
colitis or increase the likelihood of hemolytic-uremic
syndrome in
Shiga
toxin-producing
Escherichia coli
infection, they should not be used in bloody diarrhea
of unknown cause. Their use should be restricted to patients with watery diarrhea and no signs of
systemic toxicity. However, there is little evidence to justify previous concerns about prolonging excretion
of possible bacterial pathogens with antidiarrheals.
Psyllium or methylcellulose compounds provide bulk. Although usually prescribed for constipation, bulking
agents given in small doses decrease the fluidity of liquid stools. Kaolin, pectin, and activated attapulgite
adsorb fluid. Osmotically active dietary substances (see
Table 8-4
) and stimulatory drugs should be
avoided.
Key Points
• In patients with acute diarrhea, stool examination (cultures, ova and parasites,
C. difficile
cytotoxin) is
only necessary for those who have prolonged symptoms (ie, > 1 wk) or red flag findings.
• Antidiarrheals should be used cautiously if there is a possibility of
C. difficile
,
Salmonella
, or shigellosis.
Gas-Related Complaints
The gut contains < 200 mL of gas, whereas daily gas expulsion averages 600 to 700 mL after consuming
a standard diet plus 200 g of baked beans. About 75% of flatus is derived from
colonic bacterial
fermentation of ingested nutrients and endogenous glycoproteins. Gases include hydrogen (H
),
methane (CH
), and carbon dioxide (CO
). Flatus odor correlates with H
sulphide concentrations.
Swallowed air (aerophagia) and diffusion from the blood into the lumen also contribute to intestinal gas.
Gas diffuses between the lumen and the blood in a direction that depends on the difference in partial
===PAGE:150===
pressures. Thus, most nitrogen (N
) in the lumen originates from the bloodstream, and most H
in the
bloodstream originates from the lumen.
Etiology
There are 3 main gas-related complaints: excessive belching, distention (bloating), and excessive flatus,
each with a number of causes (see
Table 8-5
). Infants 2 to 4 mo of age with recurrent crying spells often appear to observers to be in pain,
which in the past has been attributed to abdominal cramping or gas and termed colic. However, studies
show no increase in H
production or in mouth-to-cecum transit times in colicky infants. Hence, the cause
of infantile colic remains unclear (.
Excessive belching:
Belching (eructation) results from swallowed air or from gas generated by
carbonated beverages. Aerophagia occurs normally in small amounts during eating and drinking, but
some people unconsciously swallow air repeatedly while eating or smoking and at other times, especially
when anxious or in an attempt to induce belching. Excessive salivation increases aerophagia and may be
associated with various GI disorders (eg, gastroesophageal reflux disease), ill-fitting dentures, certain
drugs, gum chewing, or nausea of any cause.
Most swallowed air is eructated. Only a small amount of swallowed air passes into the small bowel; the
amount is apparently influenced by position. In an upright person, air is readily belched; in a supine
person, air trapped above the stomach fluid tends to be propelled into the duodenum. Excessive
eructation may also be voluntary; patients who belch after taking antacids may attribute the relief of
symptoms to belching rather than to antacids and may intentionally belch to relieve distress.
Distention (bloating):
Abdominal bloating may occur in isolation or along with other GI symptoms in
patients with functional disorders (eg, aerophagia, nonulcer dyspepsia, gastroparesis, irritable bowel
syndrome) or organic disorders (eg, ovarian cancer, colon cancer). However, excessive intestinal gas is
not clearly linked to these complaints. In most healthy people, 1 L/h of gas can be infused into the gut
with minimal symptoms. It is likely that many symptoms are incorrectly attributed to "too much gas."
On the other hand, some patients with recurrent GI symptoms often cannot tolerate small quantities of
gas: Retrograde colonic distention by balloon inflation or air instillation during colonoscopy often elicits
severe discomfort in some patients (eg, those with irritable bowel syndrome) but minimal symptoms in
others. Similarly, patients with eating disorders (eg, anorexia nervosa, bulimia) often misperceive and are
particularly stressed by symptoms such as bloating. Thus, the basic abnormality in patients with gasrelated symptoms may be a hypersensitive intestine. Altered motility may contribute further to symptoms.
Excessive flatus:
There is great variability in the quantity and frequency of rectal gas passage. As with
stool frequency, people who complain of flatulence often have a misconception of what is normal. The
average number of gas passages is about 13 to 21/day. Objectively recording flatus frequency (using a
diary kept by the patient) is a first step in evaluation.
Flatus is a metabolic byproduct of intestinal bacteria; almost none originates from swallowed air or backdiffusion of gases (primarily N
) from the bloodstream. Bacterial metabolism yields significant volumes of
H
, CH
, and CO
.
H
is produced in large quantities in patients with malabsorption syndromes and after ingestion of certain
fruits and vegetables containing indigestible carbohydrates (eg, baked beans), sugars (eg, fructose), or
sugar alcohols (eg, sorbitol). In patients with disaccharidase deficiencies (most commonly lactase
deficiency), large amounts of disaccharides pass into the colon and are fermented to H
. Celiac disease,
tropical sprue, pancreatic insufficiency, and other causes of carbohydrate malabsorption should also be
considered in cases of excess colonic gas.
CH
is also produced by colonic bacterial metabolism of the same foods (eg, dietary fiber). However,
about 10% of people have bacteria that produce CH
but not H
.
===PAGE:151===
CO
is also produced by bacterial metabolism and generated in the reaction of HCO
-
and H
+
. H
+
may
come from gastric HCl or from fatty acids released during digestion of fats—the latter sometimes
produces several hundred mEq of H
+
. The acid products released by bacterial fermentation of
unabsorbed carbohydrates in the colon may also react with HCO
-
to produce CO
. Although bloating
may occasionally occur, the rapid diffusion of CO
into the blood generally prevents distention.
[Table 8-5.
Some Causes of Gas-Related Complaints]
Diet accounts for much of the variation in flatus production among individuals, but poorly understood
factors (eg, differences in colonic flora and motility) may also play a role.
Despite the flammable nature of the H
and CH
in flatulence, working near open flames is not
hazardous. However, gas explosion, even with fatal outcome, has been reported during jejunal and
colonic surgery and colonoscopy, when diathermy was used during procedures in patients with
incomplete bowel cleaning.
Evaluation
History:
Patients with belching should have the history directed at finding the cause of aerophagia,
especially dietary causes.
In patients complaining of gas, bloating, or flatus, the relationship between symptoms and meals (both
timing and type and amount of food), bowel movements, and exertion should be explored. Certain
patients, particularly in the acute setting, may use the term "gas" to describe their symptoms of coronary
ischemia. Changes in frequency and color and consistency of stool are sought. History of weight loss is
noted.
Physical examination:
The examination is generally normal, but in patients with bloating or flatus, signs
of an underlying organic disorder should be sought on abdominal, rectal, and (for women) pelvic
examination.
Red flags:
The following findings are of concern:
• Weight loss
• Blood in stool (occult or gross)
Interpretation of findings:
Chronic, recurrent bloating or distention relieved by defecation and
associated with change in frequency or consistency of stool but without red flag findings suggests irritable
bowel syndrome.
Long-standing symptoms in an otherwise well young person who has not lost weight are unlikely to be
caused by serious physiologic disease, although an eating disorder should be considered, particularly in
young women. Bloating accompanied by diarrhea, weight loss, or both (or only after ingestion of certain
foods) suggests a malabsorption syndrome.
Testing:
Testing is not indicated for belching unless other symptoms suggest a particular disorder.
Testing for carbohydrate intolerance (eg, lactose, fructose) with breath tests should be considered
particularly when the history suggests significant consumption of these sugars. Testing for small-bowel
bacterial overgrowth should also be considered, particularly in patients who also have diarrhea, weight
loss, or both, preferably by aerobic and anaerobic culture of small-bowel aspirates obtained during upper
GI endoscopy. Testing for bacterial overgrowth with H
breath tests, generally glucose-H
breath tests, is
prone to false-positive (ie, with rapid transit) and false-negative (ie, when there are no H
-producing
bacteria) results. New, persistent bloating in middle-aged or older women (or those with an abnormal
pelvic examination) should prompt pelvic ultrasonography to rule out ovarian cancer.
===PAGE:152===
Treatment
Belching and bloating are difficult to relieve because they are usually caused by unconscious aerophagia
or increased sensitivity
to normal amounts of gas. Aerophagia may be reduced by eliminating gum and
carbonated beverages, cognitive behavioral techniques to prevent air swallowing, and management of
associated upper GI diseases (eg, peptic ulcer). Foods containing unabsorbable carbohydrates should be
avoided. Even lactose-intolerant patients generally tolerate up to 1 glass of milk drunk in small amounts
throughout the day. The mechanism of repeated belching should be explained and demonstrated. When
aerophagia is troublesome, behavioral therapy to encourage open-mouth, diaphragmatic breathing and
minimize swallowing may be effective.
Sidebar 8-1 Essay on Flatulence
(First printed in the 14
th
Edition of
The Merck Manual
)
Flatulence, which can cause great psychosocial distress, is unofficially described according to its salient
characteristics: (1) the "slider" (crowded elevator type), which is released slowly and noiselessly,
sometimes with devastating effect; (2) the open sphincter, or "pooh" type, which is said to be of higher
temperature and more aromatic; (3) the staccato or drumbeat type, pleasantly passed in privacy; and (4)
the "bark" type (described in a personal communication) is characterized by a sharp exclamatory eruption
that effectively interrupts (and often concludes) conversation. Aromaticity is not a prominent feature.
Rarely, this usually distressing symptom has been turned to advantage, as with a Frenchman referred to
as "Le Petomane," who became affluent as an effluent performer who played tunes with the gas from his
rectum on the Moulin Rouge stage.
Drugs provide little benefit. Results with simethicone, an agent that breaks up small gas bubbles, and
various anticholinergics are poor. Some patients with dyspepsia and postprandial upper abdominal
fullness benefit from antacids, a low dose of tricyclic antidepressants (eg, nortriptyline 10 to 50 mg po
once/day), or both to reduce visceral hypersensitivity.
Complaints of excess flatus are treated with avoidance of triggering substances (see
Table 8-5
).
Roughage (eg, bran, psyllium seed) may be added to the diet to try to increase colonic transit; however,
in some patients, worsening of symptoms may result. Activated charcoal can sometimes help reduce gas
and unpleasant odor; however, it stains clothing and the oral mucosa. Charcoal-lined undergarments are
available. Probiotics (eg, VSL#3) may also reduce bloating and flatulence by modulating intestinal
bacterial flora. Antibiotics are useful in patients with documented bacterial overgrowth.
Functional bloating, distention, and flatus may run an intermittent, chronic course that is only partially
relieved by therapy. When appropriate, reassurance that these problems are not detrimental to health is
important.
Key Points
• Testing should be guided by the clinical features.
• Clinicians should be wary of new-onset, persistent symptoms in older patients.
===PAGE:153===
Chapter 9. Diagnostic and Therapeutic GI Procedures
Introduction
Diagnostic tests and therapeutic procedures available for patients with GI disorders include acid-related
tests, endoscopy, laparoscopy, manometry, nuclear scans, x-ray contrast studies, nasogastric or intestinal
intubation, anoscopy and sigmoidoscopy, abdominal paracentesis, electrogastrography, and electrical
impedance testing. CT, MRI, and ultrasonography are also commonly done for GI disorders, and
sometimes angiography is used. The selection of procedures is discussed in subsequent chapters.
ERCP, percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, and liver biopsy are discussed in
Chapter 24
.
Acid-Related Tests
Acid-related tests are used to ascertain the effectiveness of acid-blocking drugs. All require nasogastric or
nasoesophageal intubation. Complications are very rare. Patients must have nothing by mouth (npo) after
midnight.
Ambulatory pH Monitoring
Ambulatory 24-h esophageal pH monitoring is currently the best available test for quantifying esophageal
acid exposure. The principal indications are
• To document excessive acid exposure in patients without endoscopic evidence of esophagitis
• To evaluate the effectiveness of medical or surgical treatments
A thin tube containing a pH probe is positioned 5 cm above the lower esophageal sphincter. The patient
records symptoms, meals, and sleep for 24 h. Esophageal acid exposure is defined by the percentage of
the 24-h recording time that the pH is < 4.0. Values > 3.5% are considered abnormal. However, symptoms
may not correlate with acid exposure or the presence of esophagitis. This may be because symptoms
may result from nonacidic as well as acidic refluxate. Multichannel intraluminal impedance testing allows
for recognition of major acid, minor acid, nonacid, and gas reflux, all of which can cause reflux symptoms.
Gastric Analysis
Samples of stomach contents obtained via NGT are used to measure gastric acid output in a basal and
stimulated state. This information may be useful in a patient who develops a recurrent ulcer after surgical
vagotomy for peptic ulcer disease. In this case, a positive acid response to stimulation (sham feeding)
indicates an incomplete vagotomy. The test also is used to evaluate a patient with elevated serum gastrin
levels. Hyperchlorhydria in the presence of elevated gastrin usually indicates Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Hypochlorhydria in the presence of elevated gastrin indicates impairment of acid output, such as occurs
in pernicious anemia, atrophic gastritis, and Menetrier's disease and after inhibition of gastric acid
secretion by potent antisecretory drugs.
To do gastric analysis, an NGT is inserted and the gastric contents are aspirated and discarded. Gastric
juice is then collected for 1 h, divided into four 15-min samples. These samples represent basal acid
output.
Endoscopy
Flexible endoscopes equipped with video cameras can be used to view the upper GI tract from pharynx to
upper duodenum and the lower GI tract from anus to cecum (and, sometimes, terminal ileum). Several
other diagnostic and therapeutic interventions also can be done endoscopically. The potential to combine
diagnosis and therapy in one procedure gives endoscopy a significant advantage over procedures that
provide only imaging (eg, x-ray contrast studies, CT, MRI) and often outweighs endoscopy's higher cost
and need for sedation.
Diagnostic procedures include the use of ultrasound-equipped endoscopes to evaluate blood flow or
===PAGE:154===
provide imaging of lesions. Endoscopic ultrasound can provide information (eg, the depth and extent of
lesions) that is not available via conventional endoscopy. Other diagnostic procedures include cell and
tissue sample collection by brush or biopsy forceps.
Screening colonoscopy is recommended for patients at high risk of colon cancer and for everyone ≥ 50.
Colonoscopy should be done every 10 yr for patients with no risk factors and with a normal initial
colonoscopy. CT colonography ( is an alternative to colonoscopy for screening for colonic
tumors.
Therapeutic endoscopic procedures include removal of foreign bodies; hemostasis by thermal
coagulation, laser photocoagulation, variceal banding, or sclerotherapy; debulking of tumors by laser or
bipolar electrocoagulation; dilation of webs or strictures; stent placement; reduction of volvulus or
intussusception; and decompression of acute or subacute colonic dilatation.
Absolute contraindications
to endoscopy include
• Shock
• Acute MI
• Peritonitis
• Acute perforation
• Fulminant colitis
Relative contraindications include poor patient cooperation, coma (unless the patient is intubated), and
cardiac arrhythmias or recent myocardial ischemia.
Patients taking anticoagulants or chronic NSAID therapy can safely undergo diagnostic endoscopy.
However, if there is a possibility
that biopsy or photocoagulation will be done, these drugs should be
stopped for an appropriate interval before the procedure. Oral iron-containing drugs should be stopped 4
to 5 days before colonoscopy, because certain green vegetables interact with iron to form a sticky residue
that is difficult to remove with a bowel preparation and interferes with visualization. The American Heart
Association no longer recommends endocarditis prophylaxis for patients having GI endoscopy.
Routine preparations for endoscopy include no solids for 6 to 8 h and no liquids for 4 h before the
procedure. Additionally, colonoscopy requires cleansing of the colon. A variety of regimens may be used,
but all typically include a full or clear liquid diet for 24 to 48 h and some type of laxative, with or without an
enema. A common laxative preparation involves having the patient drink a high-volume (4 L) balanced
electrolyte solution over a period of 3 to 4 h before the procedure. Patients who cannot tolerate this
solution may be given Mg citrate, Na phosphate, lactulose, or other laxatives. Enemas can be done with
either Na phosphate or tap water. Phosphate preparations should not be used in patients with renal
insufficiency.
Endoscopy generally requires IV sedation and, for upper endoscopy, topical anesthesia of the throat.
Exceptions are anoscopy and sigmoidoscopy (, which generally require nothing. The overall
complication rate of endoscopy is 0.1 to 0.2%; mortality is about 0.03%. Complications are usually drug
related (eg, respiratory depression); procedural complications (eg, aspiration, perforation, significant
bleeding) are less common.
Video capsule endoscopy:
In video capsule endoscopy (wireless video endoscopy), patients swallow a
capsule containing a camera that transmits images to an external recorder. This noninvasive technology
provides diagnostic imaging of the small bowel that is otherwise difficult to obtain. This procedure is
particularly useful in patients with occult GI bleeding. Capsule endoscopy is more difficult in the colon;
products and procedures are under development.
Laparoscopy
===PAGE:155===
Diagnostic laparoscopy is a surgical procedure used to evaluate intra-abdominal or pelvic pathology (eg,
tumor, endometriosis) in patients with acute or chronic abdominal pain and operability in patients with
cancer. It also is used for lymphoma staging and liver biopsy.
Absolute contraindications
include
• A coagulation or bleeding disorder
• Poor patient cooperation
• Peritonitis
• Intestinal obstruction
• Infection of the abdominal wall
Relative contraindications include severe cardiac or pulmonary disease, large abdominal hernias, multiple
abdominal operations, and tense ascites.
CBC, coagulation studies, and type and Rh testing are done before laparoscopy. X-rays of the chest and
abdomen (kidneys, ureters, and bladder) are also taken. Laparoscopy is done with sterile technique in an
operating room or a well-equipped endoscopy suite. The patient is given local anesthesia plus IV sedation
and analgesia with an opioid and short-acting sedative (eg, midazolam, propofol).
The procedure involves insertion of a pneumoperitoneum needle into the peritoneal cavity and infusion of
nitrous oxide to distend the abdomen. After the opening is enlarged, a peritoneoscope is inserted into the
abdomen and the abdominal contents are examined. Surgical instruments for biopsy and other
procedures are inserted through separate openings. When the procedure is completed, the nitrous oxide
is expelled by the patient with a Valsalva maneuver and the cannula is removed. Complications can
include bleeding, bacterial peritonitis, and perforation of a viscus.
Manometry
Manometry is measurement of pressure within various parts of the GI tract. It is done by passing a
catheter containing solid-state or liquid-filled pressure transducers through the mouth or anus into the
lumen of the organ to be studied. Manometry typically is done to evaluate motility disorders in patients in
whom structural lesions have been ruled out by other studies. Manometry is used in the esophagus,
stomach and duodenum, sphincter of Oddi, and rectum. Aside from minor discomfort, complications are
very rare. Patients must have nothing by mouth (npo) after midnight.
Esophageal manometry:
This test is used to evaluate patients with dysphagia, heartburn, or chest
pain. It measures the pressure in the upper and lower esophageal sphincters, determines the
effectiveness and coordination of propulsive movements, and detects abnormal contractions. Manometry
is used to diagnose achalasia, diffuse spasm, systemic sclerosis, and lower esophageal sphincter
hypotension
and hypertension. It also is used to evaluate esophageal function before certain therapeutic
procedures (eg, antireflux surgery, pneumatic dilation for achalasia).
Gastroduodenal manometry:
In this test, transducers are placed in the gastric antrum, duodenum, and
proximal jejunum. Pressure is monitored for 5 to 24 h in both fasting and fed states. This test is used
mainly in patients who have symptoms suggestive of dysmotility but normal gastric emptying studies.
Barostat:
This is a pressure-sensing device that is placed in the stomach to measure gastric
accommodation. The device consists of a plastic balloon and an electronic controller that varies the
amount of air in the balloon to maintain constant pressure. This device is used mainly in research studies
assessing sensory threshold and altered visceral perception, particularly in functional GI disorders.
Anorectal manometry:
This test evaluates the anorectal sphincter mechanism and rectal sensation in
===PAGE:156===
patients with incontinence (and sometimes constipation) by means of a pressure transducer in the anus. It
can help diagnose Hirschsprung's disease and provide biofeedback training for fecal incontinence.
Nuclear Scans
Gastric emptying
can be measured by having the patient ingest a radiolabeled meal (solid or liquid) and
observing its passage out of the stomach with a gamma camera. Because this test cannot differentiate
physical obstruction from gastroparesis, further diagnostic studies typically are done if emptying is
delayed. The test also is useful in monitoring response to promotility drugs (eg, metoclopramide,
erythromycin).
Bleeding scans
use
99m
Tc-labeled RBCs, or occasionally
99m
Tc-labeled colloid, to determine the origin
of lower GI hemorrhage before surgery or angiography. Active bleeding sites are identified by focal areas
of tracer that conform to bowel anatomy, increase with time, and move with peristalsis. Bleeding scans
are useful mainly for colonic bleeding in patients with significant hemorrhage and an unprepared bowel, in
whom endoscopic visualization is difficult.
A
Meckel scan
identifies ectopic gastric mucosa (as in a Meckel's diverticulum) by using an injection of
99m
Tc pertechnetate, which is taken up by mucus-secreting cells of the gastric mucosa. Focal uptake
outside of the stomach and in the small bowel indicates a Meckel's diverticulum.
X-Ray and Other Imaging Contrast Studies
X-ray and other imaging contrast studies visualize the entire GI tract from pharynx to rectum and are most
useful for detecting mass lesions and structural abnormalities (eg, tumors, strictures). Single-contrast
studies fill the lumen with radiopaque material, outlining the structure. Better, more detailed images are
obtained from double-contrast studies, in which a small amount of high-density barium coats the mucosal
surface and gas distends the organ and enhances contrast. The gas is injected by the operator in doublecontrast barium enema, whereas in other studies, intrinsic GI tract gas is adequate. In all cases, patients
turn themselves to properly distribute the gas and barium. Fluoroscopy can monitor the progress of the
contrast material. Either video or plain films can be taken for documentation, but video is particularly
useful when assessing motor disorders (eg, cricopharyngeal spasm, achalasia).
The main contraindication to x-ray contrast studies is suspected perforation, because free barium is
highly irritating to the mediastinum and peritoneum; water-soluble contrast is less irritating and may be
used if perforation is possible. Older patients may have difficulty turning themselves to properly distribute
the barium and intraluminal gas.
Patients having upper GI x-ray contrast studies must have nothing by mouth (npo) after midnight. Patients
having barium enema follow a clear liquid diet the day before, take an oral Na phosphate laxative in the
afternoon, and take a bisacodyl suppository in the evening. Other laxative regimens are effective.
Complications are rare. Perforation can occur if barium enema is done in a patient with toxic megacolon.
Barium impaction may be prevented by postprocedure oral fluids and sometimes laxatives.
An
upper GI examination
is best done as a biphasic study beginning with a double-contrast examination
of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum, followed by a single-contrast study using low-density barium.
Glucagon 0.5 mg IV can facilitate the examination by causing gastric hypotonia.
A
small-bowel meal
is done by using fluoroscopy and provides a more detailed evaluation of the small
bowel. Shortly before the examination, the patient is given metoclopramide 20 mg po to hasten transit of
the contrast material.
Enteroclysis
(small-bowel enema) provides still better visualization of the small bowel but requires
intubation of the duodenum
with a flexible, balloon-tipped catheter. A barium suspension is injected,
followed by a solution of methylcellulose, which functions as a double-contrast agent that enhances
visualization of the small-bowel mucosa.
===PAGE:157===
A
barium enema
can be done as a single-or double-contrast study. Single-contrast barium enemas are
used for potential obstruction, diverticulitis, fistulas, and megacolon. Double-contrast studies are
preferred for detection of tumors.
CT scanning of the abdomen:
CT scanning using oral and IV contrast allows excellent visualization of
both the small bowel and colon as well as of other intra-abdominal structures.
CT enterography
provides optimal visualization of the small-bowel mucosa; it is preferably done by
using a multidetector CT (MDCT) scanner. Patients are given a large volume (1350 mL) of 0.1% barium
sulfate before imaging. For certain indications (eg, obscure GI bleeding, small-bowel tumors, chronic
ischemia), a biphasic contrast-enhanced MDCT study is done.
CT colonography
(virtual colonoscopy) generates 3D and 2D images of the colon by using MDCT and a
combination of oral contrast and gas distention of the colon. Viewing the high-resolution 3D images
somewhat simulates the appearance of optical endoscopy, hence the name. Optimal CT colonography
technique requires careful cleansing and distention of the colon. Residual stool causes problems similar
to those encountered with barium enema because it simulates polyps or masses. Three-dimensional
endoluminal images are useful to confirm the presence of a lesion and to improve diagnostic confidence.
CT enterography and CT colonoscopy have largely supplanted standard small-bowel series and barium
enema examinations.
GI Procedures for the Generalist
Nasogastric or Intestinal Intubation
Nasogastric or intestinal intubation is used to decompress the stomach. It is used to treat gastric atony,
ileus, or obstruction; remove ingested toxins, give antidotes (eg, activated charcoal), or both; obtain a
sample of gastric contents for analysis (volume, acid content, blood); and supply nutrients.
Contraindications
include
• Nasopharyngeal or esophageal obstruction
• Severe maxillofacial trauma
• Uncorrected coagulation abnormalities
Esophageal varices previously have been considered a contraindication, but evidence of adverse effects
is lacking.
Several types of tubes are available. A Levin or Salem sump tube is used for gastric decompression or
analysis and rarely for short-term feeding. A variety of long, thin, intestinal tubes are used for long-term
enteral feeding (.
For intubation, the patient sits upright or, if unable, lies in the left lateral decubitus position. A topical
anesthetic sprayed in the nose and pharynx helps reduce discomfort. With the patient's head partially
flexed, the lubricated tube is inserted through the nares and aimed back and then down to conform to the
nasopharynx. As the tip reaches the posterior pharyngeal wall, the patient should sip water through a
straw. Violent coughing with flow of air through the tube during respiration indicates that the tube is
misplaced in the trachea. Aspiration of gastric juice verifies entry into the stomach. The position of larger
tubes can be confirmed by instilling 20 to 30 mL of air and listening with the stethoscope under the left
subcostal region for a rush of air.
Some smaller, more flexible intestinal feeding tubes require the use of stiffening wires or stylets. These
tubes usually require fluoroscopic or endoscopic assistance for passage through the pylorus.
===PAGE:158===
Complications are rare and include nasopharyngeal trauma with or without hemorrhage, pulmonary
aspiration, traumatic esophageal or gastric hemorrhage or perforation, and (very rarely) intracranial or
mediastinal penetration.
Anoscopy and Sigmoidoscopy
Anoscopy and sigmoidoscopy are used to evaluate symptoms referable to the rectum or anus (eg, bright
rectal bleeding, discharge, protrusions, pain). There are no absolute contraindications. Patients with
cardiac arrhythmias or recent myocardial ischemia should have the procedure postponed until the
comorbid conditions improve; otherwise, patients will need cardiac monitoring. Per changes in American
Heart Association guidelines, these procedures no longer require endocarditis prophylaxis.
The perianal area and distal rectum can be examined with a 7-cm anoscope, and the rectum and sigmoid
with either a rigid 25-cm or a flexible 60-cm instrument. Flexible sigmoidoscopy is much more comfortable
for the patient and readily permits photography and biopsy of tissue. Considerable skill is required to pass
a
rigid sigmoidoscope beyond the rectosigmoid junction (15 cm) without causing discomfort.
Sigmoidoscopy is done after giving an enema to empty the rectum. IV drugs are usually not needed. The
patient is placed in the left lateral position. After external inspection and digital rectal examination, the
lubricated instrument is gently inserted 3 to 4 cm past the anal sphincter. At this point, the obturator of the
rigid sigmoidoscope is removed, and the instrument is inserted further under direct vision.
Anoscopy may be done without preparation. The anoscope is inserted its full length as described above
for rigid sigmoidoscopy, usually with the patient in the left lateral position. Complications are exceedingly
rare when the procedure is done properly.
Abdominal Paracentesis
Abdominal paracentesis is used to obtain ascitic fluid for testing. It also can be used to remove tense
ascites causing respiratory difficulties or pain or as a treatment for chronic ascites.
Absolute contraindications
include
• Severe, uncorrectable disorders of blood coagulation
• Intestinal obstruction
• An infected abdominal wall
Poor patient cooperation, surgical scarring over the puncture area, and severe portal hypertension with
abdominal collateral circulation are relative contraindications.
CBC, platelet count, and coagulation studies are done before the procedure. After emptying the bladder,
the patient sits in bed with the head elevated 45 to 90°. In patients with obvious and marked ascites, a
point is located at the midline between the umbilicus and the pubic bone and is cleaned with an antiseptic
solution and alcohol. In patients with moderate ascites, precise location of ascitic fluid by abdominal
ultrasound is indicated. Under sterile technique, the area is anesthetized to the peritoneum with lidocaine
1%. For diagnostic paracentesis, an 18-gauge needle attached to a 50-mL syringe is inserted through the
peritoneum (generally a popping sensation is noted). Fluid is gently aspirated and sent for cell count,
protein or amylase content, cytology, or culture as needed. For therapeutic (large-volume) paracentesis, a
14-gauge cannula attached to a vacuum aspiration system is used to collect up to 8 L of ascitic fluid.
Postprocedure hypotension caused by fluid redistribution is rare as long as interstitial (leg) edema is
present.
Hemorrhage is the most common complication. Occasionally, with tense ascites, prolonged leakage of
ascitic fluid occurs through the needle site.
Other Testing Procedures
===PAGE:159===
Electrogastrography
measures gastric electrical activity with adhesive cutaneous electrodes. This
procedure is useful in patients with gastroparesis.
In
electrical impedance testing
, an electrical sensor is placed in the distal esophagus to assess
nonacid reflux, which is common among patients receiving gastric antisecretory drugs and among infants
with reflux disease.
===PAGE:160===
Chapter 10. GI Bleeding
Introduction
GI bleeding can originate anywhere from the mouth to the anus and can be overt or occult. The
manifestations depend on the location and rate of bleeding.
Hematemesis is vomiting of red blood and indicates upper GI bleeding, usually from an arterial source or
varix. Coffee-ground emesis is vomiting of dark brown, granular material that resembles coffee grounds. It
results from upper GI bleeding that has slowed or stopped, with conversion of red Hb to brown hematin
by gastric acid.
Hematochezia is the passage of gross blood from the rectum and usually indicates lower GI bleeding but
may result from vigorous upper GI bleeding with rapid transit of blood through the intestines.
Melena is black, tarry stool and typically indicates upper GI bleeding, but bleeding from a source in the
small bowel or right colon may also be the cause. About 100 to 200 mL of blood in the upper GI tract is
required to cause
melena, which may persist for several days after bleeding has ceased. Black stool that
does not contain occult blood may result from ingestion of iron, bismuth, or various foods and should not
be mistaken for melena.
Chronic occult bleeding can occur from anywhere in the GI tract and is detectable by chemical testing of a
stool specimen. Acute, severe bleeding also can occur from anywhere in the GI tract. Patients may
present with signs of shock. Those with underlying ischemic heart disease may develop angina or MI
because of hypoperfusion.
GI bleeding may precipitate portal-systemic encephalopathy ( or hepatorenal syndrome
(kidney failure secondary to liver failure—.
Etiology
There are many possible causes (see
Table 10-1
), which are divided into upper GI (above the ligament of Treitz), lower GI, and small bowel.
Bleeding of any cause is more likely, and potentially more severe, in patients with chronic liver disease
(eg, caused by alcohol abuse or chronic hepatitis), in those with hereditary coagulation disorders, or in
those taking certain drugs. Drugs associated with GI bleeding include anticoagulants (eg, heparin,
warfarin), those affecting platelet function (eg, aspirin and certain other NSAIDs, clopidogrel, SSRIs), and
those affecting mucosal defenses (eg, NSAIDs).
Evaluation
Stabilization with airway management, IV fluids, or transfusions is essential before and during diagnostic
evaluation.
History: History of present illness
should attempt to ascertain quantity and frequency of blood
passage. However, quantity can be difficult to assess because even small amounts (5 to 10 mL) of blood
turn water in a toilet bowl an opaque red, and modest amounts of vomited blood appear huge to an
anxious patient. However, most can distinguish among blood streaks, a few teaspoons, and clots.
Patients with hematemesis should be asked whether blood was passed with initial vomiting or only after
an initial (or several) nonbloody emesis.
Patients with rectal bleeding should be asked whether pure blood was passed; whether it was mixed with
stool, pus, or mucus; or whether blood simply coated the stool. Those with bloody diarrhea should be
asked about travel or other possible exposure to GI pathogens.
[Table 10-1.
Common Causes of GI Bleeding]
===PAGE:161===
Review of symptoms
should include presence of abdominal discomfort, weight loss, easy bleeding or
bruising, previous colonoscopy results, and symptoms of anemia (eg, weakness, easy fatigability,
dizziness).
Past medical history
should inquire about previous GI bleeding (diagnosed or undiagnosed); known
inflammatory bowel disease, bleeding diatheses, and liver disease; and use of any drugs that increase
the likelihood of bleeding or chronic liver disease (eg, alcohol).
Physical examination:
General examination focuses on vital signs and other indicators of shock or
hypovolemia (eg, tachycardia, tachypnea, pallor, diaphoresis, oliguria, confusion) and anemia (eg, pallor,
diaphoresis). Patients with lesser degrees of bleeding may simply have mild tachycardia (heart rate >
100). Orthostatic changes in pulse (a change of > 10 beats/min) or BP (a drop of ≥ 10 mm Hg) often
develop after acute loss of ≥ 2 units of blood. However, orthostatic measurements are unwise in patients
with severe bleeding (possibly causing syncope) and generally lack sensitivity and
specificity as a
measure of intravascular volume, especially in elderly patients.
External stigmata of bleeding disorders (eg, petechiae, ecchymoses) are sought, as are signs of chronic
liver disease (eg, spider angiomas, ascites, palmar erythema) and portal hypertension (eg, splenomegaly,
dilated abdominal wall veins).
A digital rectal examination is necessary to search for stool color, masses, and fissures. Anoscopy is done
to diagnose hemorrhoids. Chemical testing of a stool specimen for occult blood completes the
examination if gross blood is not present.
Red flags:
Several findings suggest hypovolemia or hemorrhagic shock:
• Syncope
• Hypotension
• Pallor
• Diaphoresis
• Tachycardia
Interpretation of findings:
The history and physical examination suggest a diagnosis in about 50% of
patients, but findings are rarely diagnostic and confirmatory testing is required.
Epigastric abdominal discomfort relieved by food or antacids suggests peptic ulcer disease. However,
many patients with bleeding ulcers have no history of pain. Weight loss and anorexia, with or without a
change in stool, suggest a GI cancer. A history of cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis suggests esophageal
varices. Dysphagia suggests esophageal cancer or stricture. Vomiting and retching before the onset of
bleeding suggests a Mallory-Weiss tear of the esophagus, although about 50% of patients with MalloryWeiss tears do not have this history.
A history of bleeding (eg, purpura, ecchymosis, hematuria) may indicate a bleeding diathesis (eg,
hemophilia, hepatic failure). Bloody diarrhea, fever, and abdominal pain suggest ischemic colitis,
inflammatory bowel disease (eg, ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease), or an infectious colitis (eg,
Shigella
,
Salmonella
,
Campylobacter
, amebiasis). Hematochezia suggests diverticulosis or angiodysplasia. Fresh
blood only on toilet paper or the surface of formed stools suggests internal hemorrhoids or fissures,
whereas blood mixed with the stool indicates a more proximal source. Occult blood in the stool may be the
first sign of colon cancer or a polyp, particularly in patients > 45 yr.
Blood in the nose or trickling down the pharynx suggests the nasopharynx as the source. Spider
angiomas, hepatosplenomegaly, or ascites is consistent with chronic liver disease and hence possible
esophageal varices. Arteriovenous malformations, especially of the mucous membranes, suggest
===PAGE:162===
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome). Cutaneous nail bed and GI
telangiectasia may indicate systemic sclerosis or mixed connective tissue disease.
Testing:
Several tests are done to help confirm the suspected diagnosis.
• CBC and often other laboratory studies
• NGT for all but those with minimal rectal bleeding
• Upper endoscopy for suspected upper GI bleeding
• Colonoscopy for lower GI bleeding (unless clearly caused by hemorrhoids)
CBC should be obtained in patients with occult blood loss. Those with more significant bleeding also
require coagulation studies (eg, platelet count, PT, PTT) and liver function tests (eg, bilirubin, alkaline
phosphatase, albumin, AST, ALT). Type and crossmatch are done if bleeding is ongoing. Hb and Hct may
be repeated up to every 6 h in patients with severe bleeding. Additionally, one or more diagnostic
procedures are typically required.
Nasogastric aspiration and lavage should be done in all patients with suspected upper GI bleeding (eg,
hematemesis, coffee-ground emesis, melena, massive rectal bleeding). Bloody nasogastric aspirate
indicates active upper GI bleeding, but about 10% of patients with upper GI bleeding have no blood in the
nasogastric aspirate. Coffee-ground material indicates bleeding that is slow or stopped. If there is no sign
of bleeding, and bile is returned, the NGT is removed; otherwise, it is left in place to monitor continuing or
recurrent bleeding. Nonbloody, nonbilious return is considered a nondiagnostic aspirate.
Upper endoscopy (examination of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum) should be done for upper GI
bleeding. Because endoscopy may be therapeutic as well as diagnostic, it should be done rapidly for
significant bleeding but may be deferred for 24 h if bleeding stops or is minimal. Upper GI barium x-rays
have no role in acute bleeding, and the contrast used may obscure subsequent attempts at angiography.
Angiography is useful in the diagnosis of upper GI bleeding and permits certain therapeutic maneuvers
(eg, embolization, vasoconstrictor infusion).
Flexible sigmoidoscopy and anoscopy may be all that is required acutely for patients with symptoms
typical of hemorrhoidal bleeding. All other patients with hematochezia should have colonoscopy, which
can be
done electively after routine preparation unless there is significant ongoing bleeding. In such
patients, a rapid prep (5 to 10 L of polyethylene glycol solution delivered via NGT or by mouth over 3 to 4
h) often allows adequate visualization. If colonoscopy cannot visualize the source and ongoing bleeding is
sufficiently rapid (> 0.5 to 1 mL/min), angiography may localize the source. Some angiographers first take
a radionuclide scan to focus the examination, because angiography is less sensitive than the radionuclide
scan.
Diagnosis of occult bleeding can be difficult, because heme-positive stools may result from bleeding
anywhere in the GI tract. Endoscopy is the preferred method, with symptoms determining whether the
upper or lower GI tract is examined first. Double-contrast barium enema and sigmoidoscopy can be used
for the lower tract when colonoscopy is unavailable or the patient refuses it. If the results of upper
endoscopy and colonoscopy are negative and occult blood persists in the stool, an upper GI series with
small-bowel follow-through, small-bowel endoscopy (enteroscopy), capsule endoscopy, technetiumlabeled colloid or RBC scan, and angiography should be considered.
Treatment
• Secure airway if needed
• IV fluid resuscitation
• Blood transfusion if needed
===PAGE:163===
• In some, angiographic or endoscopic hemostasis
Hematemesis, hematochezia, or melena should be considered an emergency. Admission to an ICU, with
consultation by both a gastroenterologist and a surgeon, is recommended for all patients with severe GI
bleeding. General treatment is directed at maintenance of the airway and restoration of circulating
volume. Hemostasis and other treatment depend on the cause of the bleeding.
Airway:
A major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with active upper GI bleeding is aspiration of
blood with subsequent respiratory compromise. To prevent these problems, endotracheal intubation
should be considered in patients who have inadequate gag reflexes or are obtunded or unconscious
—particularly if they will be undergoing upper endoscopy.
Fluid resuscitation:
IV fluids are initiated as for any patient with hypovolemia or hemorrhagic shock (see
p.
): healthy adults are given normal saline IV in 500- to 1000-mL aliquots until signs of hypovolemia
remit—up to a maximum of 2 L (for children, 20 mL/kg, that may be repeated once). Patients requiring
further resuscitation should receive transfusion with packed RBCs. Transfusions continue until
intravascular volume is restored and then are given as needed to replace ongoing blood loss.
Transfusions in older patients or those with coronary artery disease may be stopped when Hct is stable at
30 unless the patient is symptomatic. Younger patients or those with chronic bleeding are usually not
transfused unless Hct is < 23 or they have symptoms such as dyspnea or coronary ischemia.
Platelet count should be monitored closely; platelet transfusion may be required with severe bleeding.
Patients who are taking antiplatelet drugs (eg, clopidogrel, aspirin) have platelet dysfunction, often
resulting in increased bleeding. Platelet transfusion should be considered when patients taking these
drugs have severe ongoing bleeding, although a residual circulating drug (particularly clopidogrel) may
inactivate transfused platelets. Fresh frozen plasma should be transfused after every 4 units of packed
RBCs.
Hemostasis:
GI bleeding stops spontaneously in about 80% of patients. The remaining patients require
some type of intervention. Specific therapy depends on the bleeding site. Early intervention to control
bleeding is important to minimize mortality, particularly in elderly patients.
For peptic ulcer, ongoing bleeding or rebleeding is treated with endoscopic coagulation (with bipolar
electrocoagulation, injection sclerotherapy, heater probes, or laser). Non-bleeding vessels that are visible
within an ulcer crater are also treated. If endoscopy does not stop the bleeding, surgery is required to
oversew the bleeding site. If medical management does not control gastric acid secretion, surgeons do
acid-reduction surgery ( at the same time.
Active variceal bleeding can be treated with endoscopic banding, injection sclerotherapy, or a transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunting (TIPS) procedure.
Severe, ongoing lower GI bleeding caused by diverticula or angiomas can sometimes be controlled
colonoscopically by electrocautery, coagulation with a heater probe, or injection with dilute epinephrine.
Polyps can be removed by snare or cautery. If these methods are ineffective or unfeasible, angiography
with embolization or vasopressin infusion may be successful. However, because collateral blood flow to
the bowel is limited, angiographic techniques have a significant risk of bowel ischemia or infarction unless
super-selective catheterization techniques are used.
In most series, the rate of ischemic complications is
< 5%. Vasopressin infusion has about an 80% success rate for stopping bleeding, but bleeding recurs in
about 50% of patients. Also, there is a risk of hypertension and coronary ischemia. Furthermore,
angiography can be used to localize the source of bleeding more accurately. Surgery may be used in
patients with continued bleeding (requiring > 4 units transfusion/24 h), but localization of the bleeding site
is very important. Blind hemicolectomy (with no preoperative identification of the bleeding site) carries a
much higher mortality risk than does directed segmental resection. However, assessment must be
expeditious so that surgery is not unnecessarily delayed.
Acute or chronic bleeding of internal hemorrhoids stops spontaneously in most cases. Patients with
refractory bleeding are treated via anoscopy with rubber band ligation, injection, coagulation, or surgery.
===PAGE:164===
Geriatrics Essentials
In the elderly, hemorrhoids and colorectal cancer are the most common causes of minor bleeding. Peptic
ulcer, diverticular disease, and angiodysplasia are the most common causes of major bleeding. Variceal
bleeding is less common than in younger patients.
Massive GI bleeding is tolerated poorly by elderly patients. Diagnosis must be made quickly, and
treatment must be started sooner than in younger patients, who can better tolerate repeated episodes of
bleeding.
Key Points
• Rectal bleeding may result from upper or lower GI bleeding.
• Orthostatic changes in vital signs are unreliable markers for serious bleeding.
• About 80% of patients stop bleeding spontaneously; various endoscopic techniques are usually the first
choice for the remainder.
Varices
Varices are dilated veins in the distal esophagus or proximal stomach caused by elevated
pressure in the portal venous system, typically from cirrhosis. They may bleed massively but
cause no other symptoms. Diagnosis is by upper endoscopy. Treatment is primarily with
endoscopic banding and IV octreotide. Sometimes a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunting procedure is needed.
Portal hypertension ( results from a number of conditions, predominantly liver cirrhosis. If
portal pressure remains higher than inferior vena caval pressure for a significant period, venous
collaterals develop. The most dangerous collaterals occur in the distal esophagus and gastric fundus,
causing engorged, serpentine submucosal vessels known as varices. These varices partially decompress
portal hypertension but can rupture, causing massive GI bleeding. The trigger for variceal rupture is
unknown, but bleeding almost never occurs unless the portal/systemic pressure gradient is > 12 mm Hg.
Coagulopathies caused by liver disease may facilitate bleeding. NGT passage in a patient with varices
has not been shown to trigger bleeding.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients typically present with sudden, painless, upper GI bleeding, often massive. Signs of shock may be
present. Bleeding is usually from the distal esophagus, less often from the gastric fundus. Bleeding from
gastric varices also may be acute but is more often subacute or chronic.
Bleeding into the GI tract may precipitate portal-systemic encephalopathy in patients with impaired
hepatic function.
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy
• Evaluation for coagulopathy
Both esophageal and gastric varices are best diagnosed by endoscopy, which may also identify varices at
high risk of bleeding (eg, those with red markings). Endoscopy is also critical to exclude other causes of
acute bleeding (eg, peptic ulcer), even in patients known to have varices; perhaps as many as one third
of patients with known varices who have upper GI bleeding have a nonvariceal source.
Because varices are typically associated with significant hepatic disease, evaluation for possible
coagulopathy is important. Laboratory tests include CBC with platelets, PT, PTT, and liver function tests.
===PAGE:165===
Bleeding patients should have type and crossmatch for 6 units of packed RBCs.
Prognosis
In about 80% of patients, variceal bleeding stops spontaneously. Nevertheless, mortality is high, often >
50%. Mortality depends primarily on severity of the associated liver disease rather than on the bleeding
itself. Bleeding is often fatal in patients with severe hepatocellular impairment (eg, advanced cirrhosis),
whereas patients with good hepatic reserve usually recover.
Surviving patients are at high risk of further variceal bleeding; typically, 50 to 75% have recurrence within
1 to 2 yr. Ongoing endoscopic or drug therapy significantly lowers this risk, but the overall effect on longterm mortality seems to be marginal, probably because of the underlying hepatic disease.
Treatment
• Fluid resuscitation
• Endoscopic banding (sclerotherapy second choice)
• IV octreotide
• Possibly a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting (TIPS) procedure
Management of hypovolemia and hemorrhagic shock is as described above and in
Chapter 226
. Patients with
coagulation abnormalities (eg, elevated INR) should be given 1 to 2 units of fresh frozen plasma and 2.5
to 10 mg vitamin K IM (or IV if severe).
Because varices are invariably diagnosed during endoscopy, primary treatment is endoscopic.
Endoscopic banding of varices is preferred over injection sclerotherapy. At the same time, IV octreotide (a
synthetic analog of somatostatin, which may also be used) should be given. Octreotide increases
splanchnic vascular resistance by inhibiting the release of splanchnic vasodilator hormones (eg,
glucagon, vasoactive intestinal peptide). The usual dose is a 50
μ
g IV bolus, followed by infusion of 50
μ
g/h. Octreotide is preferred over previously used agents such as vasopressin and terlipressin, because
it has fewer adverse effects.
If bleeding continues or recurs despite these measures, emergency techniques to shunt blood from the
portal system to the vena cava can lower portal pressure and diminish bleeding. A TIPS procedure is the
emergency intervention of choice. TIPS is an invasive radiologic procedure in which a guidewire is
passed from the vena cava through the liver parenchyma into the portal circulation. The resultant
passage is dilated by a balloon catheter, and a metallic stent is inserted, creating a bypass between the
portal and hepatic venous circulations. Stent size is crucial. If the stent is too large, portal-systemic
encephalopathy results because of diversion of too much portal blood flow from the liver. If the stent is
too small, it is more likely to occlude. Surgical portacaval shunts, such as the distal spleno-renal shunt,
work by a similar mechanism but are more invasive and have a higher immediate mortality.
Mechanical compression of bleeding varices with a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube or one of its variants
causes considerable morbidity and should not be used as primary management. However, such a tube
may provide life-saving tamponade pending decompression with a TIPS or surgical procedure. The tube
is a flexible NGT with one gastric balloon and one esophageal balloon. After insertion, the gastric balloon
is inflated with a fixed volume of air, and traction is applied to the tube to pull the balloon snugly against
the gastroesophageal junction. This balloon is often sufficient to control bleeding, but if not, the
esophageal balloon is inflated to a pressure of 25 mm Hg. The procedure is quite uncomfortable and may
result in esophageal perforation and aspiration; thus, endotracheal intubation and IV sedation are often
recommended.
Liver transplantation can also decompress the portal system but is a practical option only for patients
already on a transplant list.
===PAGE:166===
Long-term medical therapy of portal hypertension (with
β
-blockers and nitrates) is discussed elsewhere
(. Treatment of portal-systemic encephalopathy may be needed (.
Vascular GI Lesions
Several distinct congenital or acquired syndromes involve abnormal mucosal or submucosal
blood vessels in the GI tract. These vessels may cause recurrent bleeding, which is rarely
massive. Diagnosis is by endoscopy and sometimes angiography. Treatment is endoscopic
hemostasis; occasionally, angiographic embolization or surgical resection may be needed.
Vascular ectasias
(angiodysplasias, arteriovenous malformations) are dilated, tortuous vessels that
typically develop in the cecum and ascending colon. They occur mainly in people > 60 and are the most
common cause of lower GI bleeding in that age group. They are thought to be degenerative and do not
occur in association with other vascular abnormalities. Most patients have 2 or 3 lesions, which are
typically 0.5 to 1.0 cm, bright red, flat or slightly raised, and covered by very thin epithelium. Vascular
ectasias also occur in association with a number of systemic diseases (eg, renal failure, cirrhosis, CREST
syndrome [calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly,
telangiectasias]— and after radiation to the bowel.
Gastric antral vascular ectasia
(watermelon stomach) consists of large dilated veins running linearly
along the stomach, creating a striped appearance suggestive of a watermelon.
The condition occurs
mainly in older women and is of unknown etiology.
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
(Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome—see also p.
) is an
autosomal dominant disorder that causes multiple vascular lesions in various parts of the body, including
the entire GI tract. GI bleeding rarely occurs before age 40.
Dieulafoy's lesion
is an abnormally large artery that penetrates the gut wall, occasionally eroding
through the mucosa and causing massive bleeding. It occurs mainly in the proximal stomach.
Arteriovenous malformations
and
hemangiomas
, both congenital disorders of blood vessels, can
occur in the GI tract but are rare.
Symptoms and Signs
Vascular lesions are painless. Patients often present with heme-positive stools or modest amounts of
bright red blood from the rectum. Bleeding is often intermittent, sometimes with long periods between
episodes. Patients with upper GI lesions may present with melena. Major bleeding is unusual.
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy
Vascular lesions are most commonly diagnosed endoscopically. If routine endoscopy is nondiagnostic,
small-bowel endoscopy, capsule endoscopy, intraoperative endoscopy, or visceral angiography may be
required.
99m
Tc-labeled RBC scans are less specific but may help localize the lesion enough to facilitate
endoscopy or angiography.
Treatment
• Endoscopic coagulation
Endoscopic coagulation (with heater probe, laser, argon plasma, or bipolar electrocoagulation) is effective
for many vascular lesions. Vascular ectasias often recur, although there is some evidence that oral
estrogen-progesterone combinations may limit recurrence.
Mild recurrent bleeding can be treated simply with chronic iron therapy. More significant bleeding that is
===PAGE:167===
unresponsive to endoscopic measures may require angiographic embolization or surgical resection.
However, rebleeding occurs in about 15 to 25% of surgically treated patients.
===PAGE:168===
Chapter 11. Acute Abdomen and Surgical Gastroenterology
Introduction
Acute abdomen refers to abdominal symptoms and signs of such severity or concern that disorders
requiring surgery should be considered. The primary symptom is acute abdominal pain. Chronic
abdominal pain is discussed in
Chapter 7
.
Acute Abdominal Pain
Abdominal pain is common and often inconsequential. Acute and severe abdominal pain, however, is
almost always a symptom of intra-abdominal disease. It may be the sole indicator of the need for surgery
and must be attended to swiftly: Gangrene and perforation of the gut can occur < 6 h from onset of
symptoms in certain conditions (eg, interruption of the intestinal blood supply caused by a strangulating
obstruction or an arterial embolus). Abdominal pain is of particular concern in patients who are very young
or very old and those who have HIV infection or are taking immunosuppressants.
Textbook descriptions of abdominal pain have limitations because people react to pain differently. Some,
particularly elderly people, are stoic, whereas others exaggerate their symptoms. Infants, young children,
and some elderly people may have difficulty localizing the pain.
Pathophysiology
Visceral pain
comes from the abdominal viscera, which are innervated by autonomic nerve fibers and
respond mainly to the sensations of distention and muscular contraction—not to cutting, tearing, or local
irritation. Visceral pain is typically vague, dull, and nauseating. It is poorly localized and tends to be
referred to areas corresponding to the embryonic origin of the affected structure. Foregut structures
(stomach, duodenum, liver, and pancreas) cause upper abdominal pain. Midgut structures (small bowel,
proximal colon, and appendix)
cause periumbilical pain. Hindgut structures (distal colon and GU tract)
cause lower abdominal pain.
Somatic pain
comes from the parietal peritoneum, which is innervated by somatic nerves, which respond
to irritation from infectious, chemical, or other inflammatory processes. Somatic pain is sharp and well
localized.
Referred pain
is pain perceived distant from its source and results from convergence of nerve fibers at
the spinal cord. Common examples of referred pain are scapular pain due to biliary colic, groin pain due
to renal colic, and shoulder pain due to blood or infection irritating the diaphragm.
Peritonitis:
Peritonitis is inflammation of the peritoneal cavity. The most serious cause is perforation of
the GI tract (, which causes immediate chemical inflammation followed shortly by infection from
intestinal organisms. Peritonitis can also result from any abdominal condition that causes marked
inflammation (eg, appendicitis, diverticulitis, strangulating intestinal obstruction, pancreatitis, pelvic
inflammatory disease, mesenteric ischemia). Intraperitoneal blood from any source (eg, ruptured
aneurysm, trauma, surgery, ectopic pregnancy) is irritating and results in peritonitis. Barium causes
severe peritonitis and should never be given to a patient with suspected GI tract perforation. Peritoneosystemic shunts, drains, and dialysis catheters in the peritoneal cavity predispose a patient to infectious
peritonitis, as does ascitic fluid. Rarely, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis occurs, in which the peritoneal
cavity is infected by blood-borne bacteria.
Peritonitis causes fluid shift into the peritoneal cavity and bowel, leading to severe dehydration and
electrolyte disturbances. Adult respiratory distress syndrome can develop rapidly. Kidney failure, liver
failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation follow. The patient's face becomes drawn into the
masklike appearance typical of hippocratic facies. Death occurs within days.
Etiology
Many intra-abdominal disorders cause abdominal pain (see
===PAGE:169===
Fig. 11-1
); some are trivial but some are immediately life threatening, requiring rapid diagnosis and
surgery. These include ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), perforated viscus, mesenteric
ischemia, and ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Others (eg, intestinal obstruction, appendicitis, severe acute
pancreatitis) are also serious and nearly as urgent. Several extra-abdominal disorders also cause
abdominal pain (see
Table 11-1
).
Abdominal pain in neonates, infants, and young children has numerous causes not encountered in adults,
including meconium peritonitis, pyloric stenosis, esophageal webs, volvulus of a gut with a common
mesentery, imperforate anus, intussusception, and intestinal obstruction caused by atresia.
Evaluation
Evaluation of mild and severe pain follows the same process, although with severe abdominal pain,
therapy sometimes proceeds simultaneously and involves early consultation with a surgeon. History and
physical examination usually exclude all but a few possible causes, with final diagnosis confirmed by
judicious use of laboratory and imaging tests. Life-threatening causes should always be ruled out before
focusing on less serious diagnoses. In seriously ill patients with severe abdominal pain, the most
important diagnostic measure may be expeditious surgical exploration. In mildly ill patients, watchful
waiting may be best.
History:
A thorough history usually suggests the diagnosis (see
Table 11-2
). Of particular importance are pain location (see
Fig. 11-1
) and characteristics, history of
similar symptoms, and associated symptoms. Concomitant symptoms such as gastroesophageal reflux,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, jaundice, melena, hematuria, hematemesis, weight loss, and
mucus or blood in the stool help direct subsequent evaluation. A drug history should include details
concerning prescription and illicit drug use as well as alcohol. Many drugs cause GI upset. Prednisone or
immunosuppressants may inhibit the inflammatory response to perforation or peritonitis and result in less
pain and leukocytosis than might otherwise be expected. Anticoagulants can increase the chances of
bleeding and hematoma formation. Alcohol predisposes to pancreatitis.
Known medical conditions and previous abdominal surgeries are important to ascertain. Women should
be asked whether they are pregnant.
Physical examination:
The general appearance is important. A happy, comfortable-appearing patient
rarely has a serious problem, unlike one who is anxious, pale, diaphoretic, or in obvious pain. BP, pulse,
state of consciousness, and other signs of peripheral perfusion must be evaluated. However, the focus
[Fig. 11-1.
Location of abdominal pain and possible causes.]
[Table 11-1.
Extra-Abdominal Causes of Abdominal Pain]
of the examination is the abdomen, beginning with inspection and auscultation, followed by palpation and
percussion. Rectal examination and pelvic examination (for women) to locate tenderness, masses, and
blood are essential.
Palpation begins gently, away from the area of greatest pain, detecting areas of particular tenderness, as
well as the presence of guarding, rigidity, and rebound (all suggesting peritoneal irritation) and any
masses. Guarding is an involuntary contraction of the abdominal muscles that is slightly slower and more
sustained than the rapid, voluntary flinch exhibited by sensitive or anxious patients. Rebound is a distinct
flinch upon brisk withdrawal of the examiner's hand. The inguinal area and all surgical scars should be
palpated for hernias.
Red flags:
Certain findings raise suspicion of a more serious etiology:
• Severe pain
• Signs of shock (eg, tachycardia, hypotension, diaphoresis, confusion)
===PAGE:170===
• Signs of peritonitis
• Abdominal distention
Interpretation of findings:
Distention, especially when surgical scars, tympany to percussion, and highpitched peristalsis or borborygmi in rushes are present, strongly suggests bowel obstruction. Severe pain
in a patient with a silent abdomen who is lying as still as possible suggests peritonitis; location of
tenderness suggests etiology (eg, right upper quadrant suggests cholecystitis, right lower quadrant
suggests appendicitis) but may not be diagnostic. Back pain with shock suggests ruptured AAA,
particularly if there is a tender, pulsatile mass. Shock and vaginal bleeding in a pregnant woman suggest
ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Ecchymoses of the costovertebral angles (Grey Turner's sign) or around the
umbilicus (Cullen's sign) suggest hemorrhagic pancreatitis but are not very sensitive for this disorder.
History is often suggestive (see
Table 11-2
). Mild to moderate pain in the presence of active peristalsis of
normal pitch suggests a nonsurgical disease (eg, gastroenteritis) but may also be the early manifestations
of a more serious disorder. A patient who is writhing around trying to get comfortable is more likely to
have an obstructive mechanism (eg, renal or biliary colic).
Previous abdominal surgery makes obstruction from adhesions more likely. Generalized atherosclerosis
increases the possibility of MI, AAA, and mesenteric ischemia. HIV infection makes infectious causes and
drug adverse effects likely.
Testing:
Tests are selected based on clinical suspicion.
• Urine pregnancy test for all women of childbearing age
• Selected imaging tests based on suspected diagnosis
Standard tests (eg, CBC, chemistries, urinalysis) are often done but are of little value due to poor
specificity; patients with significant disease may have normal results. Abnormal results do not provide a
specific diagnosis (the urinalysis in particular may show pyuria or hematuria in a wide variety of
conditions), and they can also occur in the absence of significant disease. An exception is serum lipase,
which strongly suggests a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. A bedside urine pregnancy test should be done
for all women of childbearing age because a negative result effectively excludes ruptured ectopic
pregnancy.
An abdominal series, consisting of flat and upright abdominal x-rays and upright chest x-rays (left lateral
recumbent abdomen and anteroposterior chest x-ray for patients unable to stand), should be done when
perforation or obstruction is suspected. However, these plain x-rays are seldom diagnostic for other
conditions and need not be automatically done. Ultrasound should be done for suspected biliary tract
disease or ectopic pregnancy (transvaginal
[Table 11-2.
History in Patients with Acute Abdominal Pain]
probe). Ultrasound can also detect AAA but cannot reliably identify rupture. Noncontrast helical CT is the
modality of choice for suspected renal stones. CT with oral contrast is diagnostic in about 95% of patients
with significant abdominal pain and has markedly lowered the negative laparotomy rate. However,
advanced imaging must not be allowed to delay surgery in patients with definitive symptoms and signs.
Treatment
Some clinicians feel that providing pain relief before a diagnosis is made interferes with their ability to
evaluate. However, moderate doses of IV analgesics (eg, fentanyl 50 to 100
μ
g, morphine 4 to 6 mg) do
not mask peritoneal signs and, by diminishing anxiety and discomfort, often make examination easier.
Key Points
===PAGE:171===
• Life-threatening causes should be looked for first.
• Pregnancy should be ruled out in women of childbearing age.
• Signs of peritonitis, shock, and obstruction should be sought.
• Blood tests are of minimal value.
Acute Mesenteric Ischemia
Acute mesenteric ischemia is interruption of intestinal blood flow by embolism, thrombosis, or
a low-flow state. It leads to mediator release, inflammation, and ultimately infarction. Abdominal
pain is out of proportion to physical findings. Early diagnosis is difficult, but angiography and
exploratory laparotomy have the most sensitivity; other imaging modalities often become
positive only late in the disease. Treatment is by embolectomy, revascularization of viable
segments, or resection; sometimes vasodilator therapy is successful. Mortality is high.
Pathophysiology
The intestinal mucosa has a high metabolic rate and, accordingly, a high blood flow requirement (normally
receiving 20 to 25% of cardiac output), making it very sensitive to the effects of decreased perfusion.
Ischemia disrupts the mucosal barrier, allowing release of bacteria, toxins, and vasoactive mediators,
which in turn leads to myocardial depression, systemic inflammatory response syndrome (,
multisystem organ failure, and death. Mediator release may occur even before complete infarction.
Necrosis can occur as soon as 10 to 12 h after the onset of symptoms.
Three major vessels serve the abdominal contents: the celiac trunk, the superior mesenteric artery
(SMA), and the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). The celiac trunk supplies the esophagus, stomach,
proximal duodenum, liver, gallbladder, pancreas, and spleen. The SMA supplies the distal duodenum,
jejunum, ileum, and colon to the splenic flexure. The IMA supplies the descending colon and sigmoid
colon and the rectum. Collateral vessels are abundant in the stomach, duodenum, and rectum; these
areas rarely develop ischemia. The splenic flexure is a watershed between the SMA and IMA and is at
particular risk of ischemia.
Etiology
Mesenteric blood flow may be disrupted on either the venous or arterial sides. In general, patients > 50
are at greatest risk and have the types of occlusions and risk factors shown in
Table 11-3
. However, many patients have no identifiable risk factors.
Symptoms and Signs
The early hallmark of mesenteric ischemia is severe pain but minimal physical findings. The abdomen
remains soft, with little or no tenderness. Mild tachycardia may be present. Later, as necrosis develops,
signs of peritonitis appear, with marked abdominal tenderness, guarding, rigidity, and no bowel sounds.
The stool may be heme-positive (increasingly likely as ischemia progresses). The usual signs of shock
develop and are frequently followed by death.
Sudden onset of pain suggests but is not diagnostic of an arterial embolism, whereas a more gradual
onset is typical of venous thrombosis. Patients with a history of postprandial abdominal discomfort (which
suggests intestinal angina) may have arterial thrombosis.
[Table 11-3.
Causes of Acute Mesenteric Ischemia]
Diagnosis
• Clinical diagnosis more important than diagnostic tests
===PAGE:172===
• Mesenteric angiography if diagnosis unclear
Early diagnosis is particularly important because mortality increases significantly once intestinal infarction
has occurred. Mesenteric ischemia must be considered in any patient > 50 with known risk factors or
predisposing conditions who develops sudden, severe abdominal pain.
Patients with clear peritoneal signs should proceed directly to the operating room for both diagnosis and
treatment. For others, selective mesenteric angiography is the diagnostic procedure of choice. Other
imaging studies and serum markers can show abnormalities but lack sensitivity and specificity early in the
course of the disease when diagnosis is most critical. Plain abdominal x-rays are useful mainly in ruling
out other causes of pain (eg, perforated viscus), although portal venous gas or pneumatosis intestinalis
may be seen late in the disease. These findings also appear on CT, which may also directly visualize
vascular occlusion—more accurately on the venous side. Doppler ultrasonography can sometimes
identify arterial occlusion, but sensitivity is low.
MRI is very accurate in proximal vascular occlusion, less
so in distal vascular occlusion. Serum markers (eg, creatine kinase, lactate) rise with necrosis but are
nonspecific findings that are seen later. Intestinal fatty acid binding protein in the urine may prove
valuable in the future as an early marker.
Prognosis
If diagnosis and treatment take place before infarction occurs, mortality is low; after intestinal infarction,
mortality approaches 70 to 90%. For this reason, clinical diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia should
supersede diagnostic tests, which may delay treatment.
Treatment
• Surgical: Embolectomy, revascularization, or resection
• Angiographic: Vasodilators or thrombolysis
• Long-term anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy
If diagnosis is made during exploratory laparotomy, options are surgical embolectomy, revascularization,
and resection. A "second look" laparotomy may be needed to reassess the viability of questionable areas
of bowel. If diagnosis is made by angiography, infusion of the vasodilator papaverine through the
angiography catheter may improve survival in both occlusive and nonocclusive ischemia. A 60-mg bolus is
given over 2 min, followed by an infusion of 30 to 60 mg/h. Papaverine is useful even when surgical
intervention is planned and is sometimes given during and after surgical intervention as well. In addition,
for arterial occlusion, thrombolysis or surgical embolectomy may be done. The development of peritoneal
signs at any time during the evaluation suggests the need for immediate surgery. Mesenteric venous
thrombosis without signs of peritonitis can be treated with papaverine followed by anticoagulation with
heparin and then warfarin.
Patients with arterial embolism or venous thrombosis require long-term anticoagulation with warfarin.
Patients with nonocclusive ischemia may be treated with antiplatelet therapy.
Acute Perforation
Any part of the GI tract may become perforated, releasing gastric or intestinal contents into the
peritoneal space. Causes vary. Symptoms develop suddenly, with severe pain followed shortly
by signs of shock. Diagnosis is usually made by the presence of free air in the abdomen on
imaging studies. Treatment is with fluid resuscitation, antibiotics, and surgery. Mortality is high,
varying with the underlying disorder and the patient's general health.
Etiology
Both blunt and penetrating trauma can result in perforation of any part of the GI tract (see
Table 11-4
). Swallowed foreign bodies, even sharp ones, rarely cause perforation unless they become
===PAGE:173===
impacted, causing ischemia and necrosis from local pressure. Foreign bodies inserted via the anus may
perforate the rectum.
Symptoms and Signs
Esophageal, gastric, and duodenal perforation tends to manifest suddenly and catastrophically, with
abrupt onset of acute abdomen with severe generalized abdominal pain, tenderness, and peritoneal
signs. Pain may radiate to the shoulder.
Perforation at other GI sites often occurs in the setting of other painful, inflammatory conditions. Because
such perforations are often small initially and frequently walled off by the omentum, pain often develops
gradually and may be localized. Tenderness also is more focal. Such findings can make it difficult to
distinguish perforation from worsening of the underlying disorder or lack of response to treatment.
In all types of perforation, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia are common. Bowel sounds are quiet to absent.
Diagnosis
• Abdominal series
• If nondiagnostic, abdominal CT
An abdominal series (supine and upright abdominal x-rays and chest x-rays) may be diagnostic, showing
free air under the diaphragm in 50 to 75% of cases. As time passes, this sign becomes more common. A
lateral chest x-ray is more sensitive for free air than a posteroanterior x-ray. If the abdominal series is
nondiagnostic, abdominal CT usually with oral and IV and/or rectal contrast may be helpful. Barium
should not be used if perforation is suspected.
Treatment
• Surgery
• IV fluids and antibiotics
[Table 11-4.
Some Causes of GI Tract Perforation]
If a perforation is noted, immediate surgery is necessary because mortality caused by peritonitis
increases rapidly the longer treatment is delayed. If an abscess or an inflammatory mass has formed, the
procedure may be limited to drainage of the abscess.
An NGT is inserted before operation. Patients with signs of volume depletion should have urine output
monitored with a catheter. Fluid status is maintained by adequate IV fluid and electrolyte replacement. IV
antibiotics effective against intestinal flora should be given (eg, cefotetan 1 to 2 g bid, or amikacin 5
mg/kg tid plus clindamycin 600 to 900 mg qid).
Appendicitis
Appendicitis is acute inflammation of the vermiform appendix, typically resulting in abdominal
pain, anorexia, and abdominal tenderness. Diagnosis is clinical, often supplemented by CT or
ultrasound. Treatment is surgical removal.
In the US, acute appendicitis is the most common cause of acute abdominal pain requiring surgery. Over
5% of the population develops appendicitis at some point. It most commonly occurs in the teens and 20s
but may occur at any age.
Other conditions affecting the appendix include carcinoids, cancer, villous adenomas, and diverticula. The
appendix may also be affected by Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis with pancolitis.
===PAGE:174===
Etiology
Appendicitis is thought to result from obstruction of the appendiceal lumen, typically by lymphoid
hyperplasia, but occasionally by a fecalith, foreign body, or even worms. The obstruction leads to
distention, bacterial overgrowth, ischemia, and inflammation. If untreated, necrosis, gangrene, and
perforation occur. If the perforation is contained by the omentum, an appendiceal abscess results.
Symptoms and Signs
The classic symptoms of acute appendicitis are epigastric or periumbilical pain followed by brief nausea,
vomiting, and anorexia; after a few hours, the pain shifts to the right lower quadrant. Pain increases with
cough and motion.
Classic signs are right lower quadrant direct and rebound tenderness located at
McBurney's point (junction of the middle and outer thirds of the line joining the umbilicus to the anterior
superior spine). Additional signs are pain felt in the right lower quadrant with palpation of the left lower
quadrant (Rovsing sign), an increase in pain from passive extension of the right hip joint that stretches
the iliopsoas muscle (psoas sign), or pain caused by passive internal rotation of the flexed thigh
(obturator sign). Low-grade fever (rectal temperature 37.7 to 38.3° C [100 to 101° F]) is common.
Unfortunately, these classic findings appear in < 50% of patients. Many variations of symptoms and signs
occur. Pain may not be localized, particularly in infants and children. Tenderness may be diffuse or, in rare
instances, absent. Bowel movements are usually less frequent or absent; if diarrhea is a sign, a
retrocecal appendix should be suspected. RBCs or WBCs may be present in the urine. Atypical symptoms
are common among elderly patients and pregnant women; in particular, pain is less severe and local
tenderness is less marked.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Abdominal CT if necessary
• Ultrasound an option to CT
When classic symptoms and signs are present, the diagnosis is clinical. In such patients, delaying
laparotomy to do imaging tests only increases the likelihood of perforation and subsequent complications.
In patients with atypical or equivocal findings, imaging studies should be done without delay. Contrastenhanced CT has reasonable accuracy in diagnosing appendicitis and can also reveal other causes of
an acute abdomen. Graded compression ultrasound can usually be done quickly and uses no radiation
(of particular concern in children); however, it is occasionally limited by the presence of bowel gas and is
less useful for recognizing nonappendiceal causes of pain. Appendicitis remains primarily a clinical
diagnosis. Selective and judicious use of radiographic studies may reduce the rate of negative
laparotomy.
Laparoscopy can be used for diagnosis as well as definitive treatment; it may be especially helpful in
women with lower abdominal pain of unclear etiology. Laboratory studies typically show leukocytosis
(12,000 to 15,000/
μ
L), but this finding is highly variable; a normal WBC count should not be used to
exclude appendicitis.
Prognosis
Without surgery or antibiotics, mortality is > 50%.
With early surgery, the mortality rate is < 1%, and convalescence is normally rapid and complete. With
complications (rupture and development of an abscess or peritonitis), the prognosis is worse: Repeat
operations and a long convalescence may follow.
Treatment
===PAGE:175===
• Surgical removal
• IV fluids and antibiotics
Treatment of acute appendicitis is open or laparoscopic appendectomy; because treatment delay
increases mortality, a negative appendectomy rate of 15% is considered acceptable. The surgeon can
usually remove the appendix even if perforated. Occasionally, the appendix is difficult to locate: In these
cases, it usually lies behind the cecum or the ileum and mesentery of the right colon. A contraindication to
appendectomy is inflammatory bowel disease involving the cecum. However, in cases of terminal ileitis
and a normal cecum, the appendix should be removed.
Appendectomy should be preceded by IV antibiotics. Third-generation cephalosporins are preferred. For
nonperforated appendicitis, no further antibiotics are required. If the appendix is perforated, antibiotics
should be continued until the patient's temperature and WBC count have normalized or continued for a
fixed course, according to the surgeon's preference. If surgery is impossible, antibiotics—although not
curative—markedly improve the survival rate. When a large inflammatory mass is found involving the
appendix, terminal ileum, and cecum, resection of the entire mass and ileocolostomy are preferable. In
late cases in which a pericolic abscess has already formed, the abscess is drained either by an
ultrasound-guided percutaneous catheter or by open operation (with appendectomy to follow at a later
date). A Meckel's diverticulum in a patient under the age of 40 should be removed concomitantly with the
appendectomy unless extensive inflammation around the appendix prevents the procedure.
Hernias of the Abdominal Wall
A hernia of the abdominal wall is a protrusion of the abdominal contents through an acquired or
congenital area of weakness or defect in the wall. Many hernias are asymptomatic, but some
become incarcerated or strangulated, causing pain and requiring immediate surgery. Diagnosis
is clinical. Treatment is elective surgical repair.
Abdominal hernias are extremely common, particularly among males, necessitating about 700,000
operations each year in the US.
Classification
Abdominal hernias are classified as either abdominal wall or groin hernias. Strangulated hernias are
ischemic from physical constriction of their blood supply. Gangrene, perforation, and peritonitis may
develop. Incarcerated and strangulated hernias cannot be reduced manually.
Abdominal wall hernias include umbilical hernias, epigastric hernias, Spigelian hernias, and incisional
(ventral) hernias. Umbilical hernias (protrusions through the umbilical ring) are mostly congenital, but
some are acquired in adulthood secondary to obesity, ascites, pregnancy, or chronic peritoneal dialysis.
Epigastric hernias occur through the linea alba. Spigelian hernias occur through defects in the
transversus abdominis muscle lateral to the rectus sheath, usually below the level of the umbilicus.
Incisional hernias occur through an incision from previous abdominal surgery.
Groin hernias include inguinal hernias and femoral hernias. Inguinal hernias occur above the inguinal
ligament. Indirect inguinal hernias traverse the internal inguinal ring into the inguinal canal, and direct
inguinal hernias extend directly forward and do not pass through the inguinal canal. Femoral hernias
occur below the inguinal ligament and go into the femoral canal.
About 75% of all abdominal hernias are inguinal. Incisional hernias comprise another 10 to 15%. Femoral
and unusual hernias account for the remaining 10 to 15%.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients complain only of a visible bulge, which may cause vague discomfort or be asymptomatic.
Most hernias, even large ones, can be manually reduced with persistent gentle pressure; placing the
patient in the Trendelenburg position may help. An incarcerated hernia cannot be reduced but has no
===PAGE:176===
additional symptoms. A strangulated hernia causes steady, gradually increasing pain, typically with
nausea and vomiting. The hernia itself is tender, and the overlying skin may be erythematous; peritonitis
may develop depending on location, with diffuse tenderness, guarding, and rebound.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
The diagnosis is clinical. Because the hernia may be apparent only when abdominal pressure is
increased, the patient should be examined in a standing position. If no hernia is palpable, the patient
should cough or perform a Valsalva maneuver as the examiner palpates the abdominal wall. Examination
focuses on the umbilicus, the inguinal area (with a finger in the inguinal canal in males), the femoral
triangle, and any incisions that are present.
Inguinal masses that resemble hernias may be the result of adenopathy (infectious or malignant), an
ectopic testis, or lipoma. These masses are solid and are not reducible. A scrotal mass may be a
varicocele, hydrocele, or testicular tumor. Ultrasound may be done if physical examination is equivocal.
Prognosis
Congenital umbilical hernias rarely strangulate and are not treated; most resolve spontaneously within
several years. Very large defects may be repaired electively after age 2 yr. Umbilical hernias in adults
cause cosmetic concerns and can be electively repaired; strangulation and incarceration are unusual but,
if happen, usually contain omentum rather than intestine.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
Groin hernias should be repaired electively because of the risk of strangulation, which results in higher
morbidity (and possible mortality in elderly patients). Repair may be through a standard incision or
laparoscopically.
An incarcerated or strangulated hernia of any kind requires urgent surgical repair.
Ileus
(Paralytic Ileus; Adynamic Ileus; Paresis)
Ileus is a temporary arrest of intestinal peristalsis. It occurs most commonly after abdominal
surgery, particularly when the intestines have been manipulated. Symptoms are nausea,
vomiting, and vague abdominal discomfort. Diagnosis is based on x-ray findings and clinical
impression. Treatment is supportive, with nasogastric suction and IV fluids.
Etiology
In addition to postoperative causes, ileus also results from intraperitoneal or retroperitoneal inflammation
(eg, appendicitis, diverticulitis, perforated duodenal ulcer), retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal hematomas
(eg, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, lumbar compression fracture), metabolic disturbances (eg,
hypokalemia), or drugs (eg, opioids, anticholinergics, sometimes Ca channel blockers). Ileus sometimes
occurs in association with renal or thoracic disease (eg, lower rib fractures, lower lobe pneumonias, MI).
Gastric and colonic motility disturbances after abdominal surgery are common. The small bowel is
typically least affected, with motility and absorption returning to normal within hours after surgery.
Stomach emptying is usually impaired for about 24 h or more. The colon is often most affected and may
remain inactive for 48 to 72 h or more.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:177===
Symptoms and signs include abdominal distention, vomiting, and vague discomfort. Pain rarely has the
classic colicky pattern present in mechanical obstruction. There may be obstipation or passage of slight
amounts of watery stool. Auscultation reveals a silent abdomen or minimal peristalsis. The abdomen is
not tender unless the underlying cause is inflammatory.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes x-rays
The most essential task is to distinguish ileus from intestinal obstruction. In both conditions, x-rays show
gaseous distention of isolated segments of intestine. In postoperative ileus, however, gas may
accumulate more in the colon than in the small bowel. Postoperative accumulation of gas in the small
bowel often implies development of a complication (eg, obstruction, peritonitis). In other types of ileus, xray findings are similar to obstruction; differentiation can be difficult unless clinical features clearly favor
one or the other. Water-soluble contrast studies may help differentiate.
Treatment
• NGT
• IV fluids
Treatment involves continuous nasogastric suction, npo status, IV fluids and electrolytes, a minimal
amount of sedatives, and avoidance of opioids and anticholinergic drugs. Maintaining an adequate serum
K level (> 4 mEq/L [> 4 mmol/L]) is especially important. Ileus persisting > 1 wk probably has a
mechanical obstructive cause, and laparotomy should be considered. Sometimes colonic ileus can be
relieved by colonoscopic decompression; rarely, cecostomy is required. Colonoscopic decompression is
helpful in treating pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie's syndrome), which consists of apparent obstruction at the
splenic flexure, although no cause can be found by contrast enema or colonoscopy for the failure of gas
and feces to pass this point. Some clinicians use IV neostigmine (requires cardiac monitoring) to treat
Ogilvie's syndrome.
Intestinal Obstruction
Intestinal obstruction is significant mechanical impairment or complete arrest of the passage of
contents through the intestine. Symptoms include cramping pain, vomiting, obstipation, and
lack of flatus. Diagnosis is clinical, confirmed by abdominal x-rays. Treatment is fluid
resuscitation, nasogastric suction, and, in most cases of complete obstruction, surgery.
Mechanical obstruction is divided into obstruction of the small bowel (including the duodenum) and
obstruction of the large bowel. Obstruction may be partial or complete. About 85% of partial small-bowel
obstructions resolve with nonoperative treatment, whereas about 85% of complete small-bowel
obstructions require operation.
Etiology
Overall, the most common causes of mechanical obstruction are adhesions, hernias, and tumors. Other
general causes are diverticulitis, foreign bodies (including gallstones), volvulus (twisting of bowel on its
mesentery), intussusception (telescoping of one segment of bowel into another—, and fecal
impaction. Specific segments of the intestine are affected differently (see
Table 11-5
).
Pathophysiology
In simple mechanical obstruction, blockage occurs without vascular compromise. Ingested fluid and food,
===PAGE:178===
digestive secretions, and gas accumulate above the obstruction. The proximal bowel distends, and the
distal segment collapses. The normal secretory and absorptive functions of the mucosa are depressed,
and the bowel wall becomes edematous and congested. Severe intestinal distention is self-perpetuating
and progressive, intensifying
[Table 11-5.
Causes of Intestinal Obstruction]
the peristaltic and secretory derangements and increasing the risks of dehydration and progression to
strangulating obstruction.
Strangulating obstruction is obstruction with compromised blood flow; it occurs in nearly 25% of patients
with small-bowel obstruction. It is usually associated with hernia, volvulus, and intussusception.
Strangulating obstruction can progress to infarction and gangrene in as little as 6 h. Venous obstruction
occurs first, followed by arterial occlusion, resulting in rapid ischemia of the bowel wall. The ischemic
bowel becomes edematous and infarcts, leading to gangrene and perforation. In large-bowel obstruction,
strangulation is rare (except with volvulus).
Perforation may occur in an ischemic segment (typically small bowel) or when marked dilation occurs.
The risk is high if the cecum is dilated to a diameter ≥ 13 cm. Perforation of a tumor or a diverticulum may
also occur at the obstruction site.
Symptoms and Signs
Obstruction of the small bowel
causes symptoms shortly after onset: abdominal cramps centered
around the umbilicus or in the epigastrium, vomiting, and—in patients with complete obstruction
—obstipation. Patients with partial obstruction may develop diarrhea. Severe, steady pain suggests that
strangulation has occurred. In the absence of strangulation, the abdomen is not tender. Hyperactive,
high-pitched peristalsis with rushes coinciding with cramps is typical. Sometimes, dilated loops of bowel
are palpable. With infarction, the abdomen becomes tender and auscultation reveals a silent abdomen or
minimal peristalsis. Shock and oliguria are serious signs that indicate either late simple obstruction or
strangulation.
Obstruction of the large bowel
usually causes milder symptoms that develop more gradually than
those caused by small-bowel obstruction. Increasing constipation leads to obstipation and abdominal
distention. Vomiting may occur (usually several hours after onset of other symptoms) but is not common.
Lower abdominal cramps unproductive of feces occur. Physical examination typically shows a distended
abdomen with loud borborygmi. There is no tenderness, and the rectum is usually empty. A mass
corresponding to the site of an obstructing tumor may be palpable. Systemic symptoms are relatively mild,
and fluid and electrolyte deficits are uncommon.
Volvulus
often has an abrupt onset. Pain is continuous, sometimes with superimposed waves of colicky
pain.
Diagnosis
• Abdominal series
Supine and upright abdominal x-rays should be taken and are usually adequate to diagnose obstruction.
Although only laparotomy can definitively diagnose strangulation, careful serial clinical examination may
provide early warning. Elevated WBCs and acidosis may indicate that strangulation has already occurred.
On plain x-rays, a ladderlike series of distended small-bowel loops is typical of small-bowel obstruction
but may also occur with obstruction of the right colon. Fluid levels in the bowel can be seen in upright
views. Similar, although perhaps less dramatic, x-ray findings and symptoms occur in ileus (paralysis of
the intestine without obstruction—; differentiation can be difficult. Distended loops and fluid
levels may be absent with an obstruction of the upper jejunum or with closed-loop strangulating
obstructions (as may occur with volvulus). Infarcted bowel may produce a mass effect on x-ray. Gas in the
bowel wall (pneumatosis intestinalis) indicates gangrene.
===PAGE:179===
In large-bowel obstruction, abdominal x-ray shows distention of the colon proximal to the obstruction. In
cecal volvulus, there may be a large gas bubble in the mid-abdomen or left upper quadrant. With both
cecal and sigmoidal volvulus, a contrast enema shows the site of obstruction by a typical "bird-beak"
deformity at the site of the twist; the procedure may actually reduce a sigmoid volvulus. If contrast enema
is not done, colonoscopy can be used to decompress a sigmoid volvulus but rarely works with a cecal
volvulus.
Treatment
• Nasogastric suction
• IV fluids
• IV antibiotics if bowel ischemia suspected
Patients with possible intestinal obstruction should be hospitalized. Treatment of acute intestinal
obstruction must proceed simultaneously with diagnosis. A surgeon should always be involved.
Supportive care is similar for small- and large-bowel obstruction: nasogastric suction, IV fluids (0.9%
saline or lactated Ringer's solution for intravascular volume repletion), and a urinary catheter to monitor
fluid output. Electrolyte replacement should be guided by test results, although in cases of repeated
vomiting serum Na and K are likely to be depleted. If bowel ischemia or infarction is suspected, antibiotics
should be given (eg, a 3rd-generation cephalosporin, such as cefotetan 2 g IV) before laparotomy.
Specific measures:
Obstruction of the duodenum in adults is treated by resection or, if the lesion
cannot be removed, palliative gastrojejunostomy (for treatment in children, .
Complete obstruction of the small bowel is preferentially treated with early laparotomy, although surgery
can be delayed 2 or 3 h to improve fluid status and urine output in a very ill, dehydrated patient. The
offending lesion is removed whenever possible. If a gallstone is the cause of obstruction, it is removed
through an enterotomy, and cholecystectomy need not be done. Procedures to prevent recurrence should
be done, including repair of hernias, removal of foreign bodies, and lysis of the offending adhesions. In
some patients with early postoperative obstruction or repeated obstruction caused by adhesions, simple
intubation with a long intestinal tube (many consider a standard NGT to be equally effective), rather than
surgery, may be attempted in the absence of peritoneal signs.
Disseminated intraperitoneal cancer obstructing the small bowel is a major cause of death in adult
patients with GI tract cancer. Bypassing the obstruction, either surgically or with endoscopically placed
stents, may palliate symptoms briefly.
Obstructing colon cancers can often be treated by a single-stage resection and anastomosis. Other
options include a diverting ileostomy and distal anastomosis. Occasionally, a diverting colostomy with
delayed resection is required.
When diverticulitis causes obstruction, perforation is often present. Removal of the involved area may be
very difficult but is indicated if perforation and general peritonitis are present. Resection and colostomy
are done, and anastomosis is postponed.
Fecal impaction usually occurs in the rectum and can be removed digitally and with enemas. However, a
fecal concretion alone or in a mixture (ie, with barium or antacids) that causes complete obstruction
(usually in the sigmoid) requires laparotomy.
Treatment of cecal volvulus consists of resection and anastomosis of the involved segment or fixation of
the cecum in its normal position by cecostomy in the frail patient. In sigmoidal volvulus, an endoscope or a
long rectal tube can often decompress the loop, and resection and anastomosis may be deferred for a
few days. Without a resection, recurrence is almost inevitable.
===PAGE:180===
Intra-Abdominal Abscesses
Abscesses can occur anywhere in the abdomen and retroperitoneum. They mainly occur after
surgery, trauma, or conditions involving abdominal infection and inflammation, particularly
when peritonitis or perforation occurs. Symptoms are malaise, fever, and abdominal pain.
Diagnosis is by CT. Treatment is with drainage, either surgical or percutaneous. Antibiotics are
ancillary.
Etiology
Intra-abdominal abscesses are classified as intraperitoneal, retroperitoneal, or visceral (see
Table 11-6
). Many intra-abdominal abscesses develop after perforation of a hollow viscus or colonic
cancer. Others develop by extension of infection or inflammation resulting from conditions such as
appendicitis, diverticulitis, Crohn's disease, pancreatitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, or indeed any
condition causing generalized peritonitis. Abdominal surgery, particularly that involving the digestive or
biliary tract, is another significant risk factor: The peritoneum may be contaminated during or after surgery
from such events as anastomotic leaks. Traumatic
[Table 11-6.
Intra-Abdominal Abscesses]
abdominal injuries—particularly lacerations and hematomas of the liver, pancreas, spleen, and intestines
—may develop abscesses, whether treated operatively or not.
The infecting organisms typically reflect normal bowel flora and are a complex mixture of anaerobic and
aerobic bacteria. Most frequent isolates are aerobic gram-negative bacilli (eg,
Escherichia coli
and
Klebsiella
) and anaerobes (especially
Bacteroides fragilis
).
Undrained abscesses may extend to contiguous structures, erode into adjacent vessels (causing
hemorrhage or thrombosis), rupture into the peritoneum or bowel, or form a cutaneous fistula.
Subdiaphragmatic abscesses may extend into the thoracic cavity, causing an empyema, lung abscess, or
pneumonia. An abscess in the lower abdomen may track down into the thigh or perirectal fossa. Splenic
abscess is a rare cause of sustained bacteremia in endocarditis that persists despite appropriate
antimicrobial therapy.
Symptoms and Signs
Abscesses may form within 1 wk of perforation or significant peritonitis, whereas postoperative abscesses
may not occur until 2 to 3 wk after operation and, rarely, not for several months. Although manifestations
vary, most abscesses cause fever and abdominal discomfort ranging from minimal to severe (usually near
the abscess). Paralytic ileus, either generalized or localized, may develop. Nausea, anorexia, and weight
loss are common.
Abscesses in Douglas' cul-de-sac, adjacent to the colon, may cause diarrhea. Contiguity to the bladder
may result in urinary urgency and frequency and, if caused by diverticulitis, may create a colovesical
fistula.
Subphrenic abscesses may cause chest symptoms such as nonproductive cough, chest pain, dyspnea,
and shoulder pain. Rales, rhonchi, or a friction rub may be audible. Dullness to percussion and decreased
breath sounds are typical when basilar atelectasis, pneumonia, or pleural effusion occurs.
Generally, there is tenderness over the location of the abscess. Large abscesses may be palpable as a
mass.
Diagnosis
• Abdominal CT
• Rarely, radionuclide scanning
===PAGE:181===
CT of the abdomen and pelvis with oral contrast is the preferred diagnostic modality for suspected
abscess. Other imaging studies, if done, may show abnormalities; plain abdominal x-rays may reveal
extraintestinal gas in the abscess, displacement of adjacent organs, a soft-tissue density representing the
abscess, or loss of the psoas muscle shadow. Abscesses near the diaphragm may result in chest x-ray
abnormalities such as ipsilateral pleural effusion, elevated or immobile hemidiaphragm, lower lobe
infiltrates, and atelectasis.
CBC and blood cultures should be done. Leukocytosis occurs in most patients, and anemia is common.
Occasionally, radionuclide scanning with indium
-labeled leukocytes may be helpful in identifying intraabdominal abscesses.
Prognosis
Intra-abdominal abscesses have a mortality rate of 10 to 40%. Outcome depends mainly on the patient's
primary illness or injury and general medical condition rather than on the specific nature and location of
the abscess.
Treatment
• IV antibiotics
• Drainage: Percutaneous or surgical
All intra-abdominal abscesses require drainage, either by percutaneous catheters or surgery. Drainage
through catheters (placed with CT or ultrasound guidance) may be appropriate given the following
conditions: Few abscess cavities are present; the drainage route does not traverse bowel or
uncontaminated organs, pleura, or peritoneum; the source of contamination is controlled; and the pus is
thin enough to pass through the catheter.
Antibiotics are not curative but may limit hematogenous spread and should be given before and after
intervention. Therapy requires drugs active against bowel flora, such as a combination of an
aminoglycoside (eg, gentamicin 1.5 mg/kg q 8 h) and metronidazole 500 mg q 8 h. Single-agent therapy
with cefotetan 2 g q 12 h is also reasonable. Patients previously given antibiotics or those who have
hospital-acquired infections should receive drugs active against resistant aerobic gram-negative bacilli
(eg,
Pseudomonas
) and anaerobes.
Nutritional support is important, with the enteral route preferred. Parenteral nutrition should begin early if
the enteral route is not feasible.
Ischemic Colitis
Ischemic colitis is a transient reduction in blood flow to the colon.
Necrosis may occur but is usually limited to the mucosa and submucosa, only occasionally causing fullthickness necrosis necessitating surgery. It occurs mainly in older people (> 60) and is thought to be
caused by small-vessel atherosclerosis.
Symptoms are milder and of slower onset than those of acute mesenteric ischemia and consist of left
lower quadrant pain followed by rectal bleeding. Diagnosis is made by colonoscopy; angiography or
magnetic resonance angiography is not indicated. Treatment is supportive with IV fluids, bowel rest, and
antibiotics. Surgery is rarely required. About 5% of patients have a recurrence. Occasionally, strictures
develop at the site of the ischemia several weeks later, necessitating surgical resection.
===PAGE:182===
Chapter 12. Esophageal and Swallowing Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Esophageal Cancer
on p.
and
Esophageal Atresia
)
The swallowing apparatus consists of the pharynx, upper esophageal (cricopharyngeal) sphincter, the
body of the esophagus, and the lower esophageal sphincter (LES). The upper third of the esophagus
and the structures proximal to it are composed of skeletal muscle; the distal esophagus and LES are
composed of smooth muscle. These components work as an integrated system that transports material
from the mouth to the stomach and prevents its reflux into the esophagus. Physical obstruction or
disorders that interfere with motor function (motility disorders) can affect the system.
The patient's history suggests the diagnosis almost 80% of the time. The only physical findings in
esophageal disorders are cervical and supraclavicular lymphadenopathy caused by metastasis, swellings
in the neck caused by large pharyngeal diverticula or thyromegaly, and prolonged swallowing time (the
time from the act of swallowing to the sound of the bolus of fluid and air entering the stomach—normally ≤
12 sec—heard by auscultation with the stethoscope over the epigastrium). Watching the patient swallow
may help diagnose aspiration or nasal regurgitation. Most esophageal disorders require specific tests for
diagnosis.
Dysphagia
Dysphagia is difficulty swallowing. The condition results from impeded transport of liquids, solids, or both
from the pharynx to the stomach. Dysphagia should not be confused with globus sensation (, a
feeling of having a lump in the throat, which is unrelated to swallowing and occurs without impaired
transport.
Complications:
Dysphagia can lead to tracheal aspiration of ingested material, oral secretions, or both.
Aspiration can cause acute pneumonia; recurrent aspiration may eventually lead to chronic lung disease.
Prolonged dysphagia often leads to inadequate nutrition and weight loss.
Etiology
Dysphagia is classified as oropharyngeal or esophageal, depending on where it occurs.
Oropharyngeal dysphagia:
Oropharyngeal dysphagia is difficulty emptying material from the
oropharynx into the esophagus; it results from abnormal function proximal to the esophagus. Patients
complain of difficulty initiating swallowing, nasal regurgitation, and tracheal aspiration followed by
coughing.
Most often, oropharyngeal dysphagia occurs in patients with neurologic conditions or muscular disorders
that affect skeletal muscles (see
Table 12-1
).
Esophageal dysphagia:
Esophageal dysphagia is difficulty passing food down the esophagus. It results
from either a motility disorder or a mechanical obstruction (see
Table 12-2
).
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
begins with duration of symptoms and acuity of onset. Patients
should describe what substances cause difficulty and where they feel the disturbance is located. Specific
concerns include whether patients have difficulty swallowing solids, liquids, or both; whether food comes
out their nose; whether they drool or have food spill from their mouth; and whether they cough or choke
while eating.
[Table 12-1.
Some Causes of Oropharyngeal Dysphagia]
===PAGE:183===
Review of symptoms
should focus on symptoms suggestive of neuromuscular, GI, and connective
tissue disorders and on the presence of complications. Important neuromuscular symptoms include
weakness and easy fatigability, gait or balance disturbance, tremor, and difficulty speaking. Important GI
symptoms include heartburn or other chest discomfort suggestive of reflux. Symptoms of connective
tissue disorders include muscle and joint pain, Raynaud's phenomenon, and skin changes (eg, rash,
swelling, thickening).
Past medical history
should ascertain known diseases that may cause dysphagia (see
Tables 12-1
and
12-2
).
Physical examination:
Examination focuses on findings suggestive of neuromuscular, GI, and
connective tissue disorders and on the presence of complications.
General examination should evaluate nutritional status (including body weight). A complete neurologic
examination is essential, with attention to any resting tremor, the cranial nerves (note the gag reflex may
normally be absent; this absence is thus not a good marker of swallowing dysfunction), and muscle
strength. Patients who describe easy fatigability should be observed performing a repetitive action (eg,
blinking, counting aloud) for a rapid decrement in performance.
[Table 12-2.
Some Causes of Esophageal Dysphagia]
The patient's gait should be observed, and balance should be tested. Skin is examined for rash and
thickening or texture changes, particularly on the fingertips. Muscles are inspected for wasting and
fasciculations and are palpated for tenderness. The neck is evaluated for thyromegaly or other mass.
Red flags:
Any dysphagia is of concern, but certain findings are more urgent:
• Symptoms of complete obstruction (eg, drooling, inability to swallow anything)
• Dysphagia resulting in weight loss
• New focal neurologic deficit, particularly any objective weakness
Interpretation of findings:
Dysphagia that occurs in conjunction with an acute neurologic event is likely
the result of that event; new dysphagia in a patient with a stable, long-standing neurologic disorder may
have another etiology. Dysphagia for solids alone suggests mechanical obstruction; however, a problem
with both solids and liquids is nonspecific. Drooling and spilling food from the mouth while eating or nasal
regurgitation suggests an oropharyngeal disorder. Regurgitation of a small amount of food on lateral
compression of the neck is virtually diagnostic of pharyngeal diverticulum.
Patients who complain of difficulty getting food to leave the mouth or of food sticking in the lower
esophagus are usually correct about the condition's location; the sensation of dysphagia in the upper
esophagus is less specific.
Many findings suggest specific disorders (see
Table 12-3
) but are of varying sensitivity and specificity and thus do not rule in or out a given cause;
however, they can guide testing.
Testing:
A barium swallow (with a solid bolus, usually a marshmallow or tablet) should be done. If this
test shows obstruction, endoscopy (and possibly biopsy) should be done to rule out malignancy. If the
barium swallow is negative or suggestive of a motility disorder, esophageal motility studies should be
done. Other tests for specific causes are done as suggested by findings.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the specific cause. If complete obstruction occurs, emergent upper endoscopy is
essential. If a stricture, ring, or web is found, careful endoscopic dilation is performed. Pending resolution,
===PAGE:184===
patients with oropharyngeal dysphagia may benefit
[Table 12-3.
Some Helpful Findings in Dysphagia]
from evaluation by a rehabilitation specialist. Sometimes patients benefit from changing head position
while eating, retraining the swallowing muscles, doing exercises that improve the ability to accommodate
a food bolus in the oral cavity, or doing strength and coordination exercises for the tongue. Patients with
severe dysphagia and recurrent aspiration may require a gastrostomy tube.
Geriatrics Essentials
Chewing, swallowing, tasting, and communicating require intact, coordinated neuromuscular function in
the mouth, face, and neck. Oral motor function in particular declines measurably with aging, even in
healthy people. Decline in function may have many manifestations:
• Reduction in masticatory muscle strength and coordination is common, especially among patients with
partial or complete dentures, and may lead to a tendency to swallow larger food particles, which can
increase the risk of choking or aspiration.
• Drooping of the lower face and lips caused by decreased circumoral muscle tone and, in edentulous
people, reduced bone support, is an aesthetic concern and can lead to drooling, spilling of food and
liquids, and difficulty closing the lips while eating, sleeping, or resting. Sialorrhea (saliva leakage) is
often the first symptom.
• Swallowing difficulties increase. It takes longer to move food from mouth to oropharynx, which increases
the likelihood of aspiration.
After age-related changes, the most common causes of oral motor disorders are neuromuscular disorders
(eg, cranial neuropathies caused by diabetes, stroke, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,
multiple sclerosis). Iatrogenic causes also contribute. Drugs (eg, anticholinergics, diuretics), radiation
therapy to the head and neck, and chemotherapy can greatly impair saliva production. Hyposalivation is a
major cause of delayed and impaired swallowing.
Oral motor dysfunction is best managed with a multidisciplinary approach. Coordinated referrals to
specialists in prosthetic dentistry, rehabilitative medicine, speech pathology, otolaryngology, and
gastroenterology may be needed.
Key Points
• All patients complaining of esophageal dysphagia should undergo upper endoscopy to rule out cancer.
• If the upper endoscopy is normal, biopsies should be obtained to rule out eosinophilic esophagitis.
• Treatment is geared toward the cause.
Cricopharyngeal Incoordination
In cricopharyngeal incoordination, the cricopharyngeal muscle (the upper esophageal sphincter) is
uncoordinated. It can cause a Zenker's diverticulum (. Repeated aspiration of material from the
diverticulum can lead to chronic lung disease. The condition can be treated by surgical section of the
cricopharyngeal muscle.
Obstructive Disorders
(See also
Benign Esophageal Tumors
and
Esophageal Cancer
)
Lower Esophageal Ring
===PAGE:185===
(Schatzki's Ring, B Ring)
A lower esophageal ring is a 2- to 4-mm mucosal stricture, probably congenital, causing a
ringlike narrowing of the distal esophagus at the squamocolumnar junction.
These rings cause intermittent dysphagia for solids. This symptom can begin at any age but usually does
not begin until after age 25. The swallowing difficulty comes and goes and is especially aggravated by
meat and dry bread. Symptoms usually occur only when the esophageal lumen is < 12 mm in diameter
and never when it is > 20 mm. If the distal esophagus is adequately distended, barium x-rays usually
show the ring. Instructing the patient to chew food thoroughly is usually the only treatment required in
wider rings, but narrow-lumen rings require dilation by endoscopy or bougienage. Surgical resection is
rarely required.
Esophageal Web
(Plummer-Vinson Syndrome; Paterson-Kelly Syndrome; Sideropenic Dysphagia)
An esophageal web is a thin mucosal membrane that grows across the lumen.
Rarely, webs develop in patients with untreated severe iron-deficiency anemia; they develop even more
rarely in patients without anemia. Webs usually occur in the upper esophagus, causing dysphagia for
solids. They are best diagnosed by barium swallow. Webs resolve with treatment of the anemia but can
be easily ruptured during esophagoscopy.
Dysphagia Lusoria
Dysphagia lusoria is caused by compression of the esophagus from any of several congenital
vascular abnormalities.
The vascular abnormality is usually an aberrant right subclavian artery arising from the left side of the
aortic arch, a double aortic arch, or a right aortic arch with left ligamentum arteriosum. The dysphagia
may develop in childhood or later in life as a result of arteriosclerotic changes in the aberrant vessel.
Barium swallow shows the extrinsic compression, but arteriography is necessary for absolute diagnosis.
Most patients require no treatment, but surgical repair is sometimes done.
Motility Disorders
Achalasia
(Cardiospasm; Esophageal Aperistalsis; Megaesophagus)
Achalasia is a neurogenic esophageal motility disorder characterized by impaired esophageal
peristalsis, a lack of lower esophageal sphincter relaxation during swallowing, and an elevation
of lower esophageal sphincter resting pressure. Symptoms are slowly progressive dysphagia,
usually to both liquids and solids, and regurgitation of undigested food. Evaluation typically
includes barium swallow, endoscopy, and sometimes manometry. Treatments include dilation,
chemical denervation, and surgical myotomy.
Achalasia is thought to be caused by a loss of ganglion cells in the myenteric plexus of the esophagus,
resulting in denervation of esophageal muscle. Etiology of the denervation is unknown, although a viral
cause is suspected, and certain tumors may cause achalasia either by direct obstruction or as a
paraneoplastic process. Chagas disease, which causes destruction of autonomic ganglia, may result in
achalasia.
Increased pressure at the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) causes obstruction with secondary dilation
of the esophagus. Esophageal retention of undigested food is common.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:186===
Achalasia occurs at any age but usually begins between ages 20 and 60. Onset is insidious, and
progression is gradual over months or years. Dysphagia for both solids and liquids is the major symptom.
Nocturnal regurgitation of undigested food occurs in about 33% of patients and may cause cough and
pulmonary aspiration. Chest pain is less common but may occur on swallowing or spontaneously. Mild to
moderate weight loss occurs; when weight loss is pronounced, particularly in elderly patients whose
symptoms of dysphagia developed rapidly, achalasia secondary to a tumor of the gastroesophageal
junction should be considered.
Diagnosis
• Barium swallow
• Esophageal manometry
The preferred test is barium swallow, which shows absence of progressive peristaltic contractions during
swallowing. The esophagus is dilated, often enormously, but is narrowed and beaklike at the LES. If
esophagoscopy is done, there is dilation but no obstructing lesion. The esophagoscope usually passes
readily into the stomach; resistance raises the possibility of an inapparent cancer or stricture. To exclude
cancer, a retroflexed view of the gastric cardia, biopsies, and brushings for cytology should be obtained.
Esophageal manometry is usually done and typically shows aperistalsis, increased LES pressure, and
incomplete sphincteric relaxation during swallowing.
Achalasia must be differentiated from a distal stenosing carcinoma and a peptic stricture, particularly in
patients with systemic sclerosis (, in whom esophageal manometry may also show
aperistalsis. Systemic sclerosis is usually accompanied by a history of Raynaud's phenomenon and
symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), due to low or absent LES pressure.
Achalasia due to cancer at the gastroesophageal junction can be diagnosed by CT of the chest and
abdomen or by endoscopic ultrasound.
Prognosis
Pulmonary aspiration and the presence of cancer are the determining prognostic factors.
Nocturnal
regurgitation and coughing suggest aspiration. Pulmonary complications secondary to aspiration are
difficult to manage. Incidence of esophageal cancer in patients with achalasia may be increased; this
point is controversial.
Treatment
• Balloon dilation of the LES
• Alternatively, botulinum toxin injection or surgical myotomy
No therapy restores peristalsis; treatment aims at reducing the pressure (and thus the obstruction) at the
LES. Pneumatic balloon dilation of the LES is indicated initially. Results are satisfactory in about 85% of
patients, but repeated dilations may be needed. Esophageal rupture and secondary mediastinitis
requiring surgical repair occur in < 2% of patients. Nitrates (eg, isosorbide dinitrate 5 to 10 mg
sublingually before meals) or Ca channel blockers (eg, nifedipine 10 mg po tid) are of limited
effectiveness but may reduce LES pressure enough to prolong the time between dilations.
Achalasia can also be treated by chemical denervation of cholinergic nerves in the distal esophagus by
direct injection of botulinum toxin type A into the LES. Clinical improvement occurs in 70 to 80% of
patients, but results may last only 6 mo to 1 yr.
A Heller myotomy, in which the muscular fibers in the LES are cut, is usually reserved for patients who do
not respond to dilation; its success rate is about 85%. It can be done via laparoscopy or thoracoscopy
and may be a viable alternative to dilation as primary therapy. Symptomatic GERD occurs after surgery in
===PAGE:187===
about 15% of patients.
Symptomatic Diffuse Esophageal Spasm
(Spastic Pseudodiverticulosis; Rosary Bead or Corkscrew Esophagus)
Symptomatic diffuse esophageal spasm is part of a spectrum of motility disorders
characterized variously by nonpropulsive contractions, hyperdynamic contractions, or elevated
lower esophageal sphincter pressure. Symptoms are chest pain and sometimes dysphagia.
Diagnosis is by barium swallow or manometry. Treatment is difficult but includes nitrates, Ca
channel blockers, botulinum toxin injection, and antireflux therapy.
Abnormalities in esophageal motility correlate poorly with patient symptoms; similar abnormalities may
cause different or no symptoms in different people. Furthermore, neither symptoms nor abnormal
contractions are definitively associated with histopathologic abnormalities of the esophagus.
Symptoms and Signs
Diffuse esophageal spasm typically causes substernal chest pain with dysphagia for both liquids and
solids. The pain may waken the patient from sleep. Very hot or cold liquids may aggravate the pain. Over
many years, this disorder may evolve into achalasia.
Esophageal spasms can cause severe pain without dysphagia. This pain is often described as a
substernal squeezing pain and may occur in association with exercise. Such pain may be
indistinguishable from angina pectoris.
Some patients have symptoms that combine those of achalasia and diffuse spasm. One such combination
has been called vigorous achalasia because it features both the food retention and aspiration of
achalasia and the severe pain and spasm of diffuse spasm.
Diagnosis
• Barium swallow
• Esophageal manometry
• Possibly testing for coronary ischemia
Alternative diagnoses include coronary ischemia. Definitive confirmation of an esophageal origin for
symptoms is difficult. Barium swallow may show poor progression of a bolus and disordered,
simultaneous contractions or tertiary contractions. Severe spasms may mimic the radiographic
appearance of diverticula but vary in size and position. Esophageal manometry ( provides the
most specific description of the spasms. Contractions are usually simultaneous, prolonged or multiphasic,
and possibly of very high amplitude ("nutcracker esophagus"). However, spasms may not occur during
testing. Lower esophageal sphincter (LES) pressure elevation or impaired relaxation is present in 30% of
patients. Esophageal scintigraphy and provocative tests with drugs (eg, edrophonium chloride 10 mg IV)
have not proved helpful.
Treatment
• Ca channel blockers
• Botulinum toxin injection
Esophageal spasms are often difficult to treat, and controlled studies of treatment methods are lacking.
Anticholinergics, nitroglycerin, and long-acting nitrates have had limited success. Ca channel blockers
given orally (eg, verapamil 80 mg tid, nifedipine
10 mg tid) may be useful, as may injection of botulinum
toxin type A into the LES.
===PAGE:188===
Medical management is usually sufficient, but pneumatic dilation and bougienage, or even surgical
myotomy along the full length of the esophagus, may be tried in intractable cases.
Esophageal Diverticula
An esophageal diverticulum is an outpouching of mucosa through the muscular layer of the
esophagus. It can be asymptomatic or cause dysphagia and regurgitation. Diagnosis is made by
barium swallow; surgical repair is rarely required.
There are several types of esophageal diverticula, each of different origin.
• Zenker's (pharyngeal) diverticula are posterior outpouchings of mucosa and submucosa through the
cricopharyngeal muscle, probably resulting from an incoordination between pharyngeal propulsion and
cricopharyngeal relaxation.
• Midesophageal (traction) diverticula are caused by traction from mediastinal inflammatory lesions or,
secondarily, by motility disorders.
• Epiphrenic diverticula occur just above the diaphragm and usually accompany a motility disorder
(achalasia, diffuse esophageal spasm).
Symptoms and Signs
A Zenker's diverticulum fills with food that might be regurgitated when the patient bends or lies down.
Aspiration pneumonitis may result if regurgitation is nocturnal. Rarely, the pouch becomes large, causing
dysphagia and sometimes a palpable neck mass.
Traction and epiphrenic diverticula are rarely symptomatic, although their underlying cause may be.
Diagnosis
All diverticula are diagnosed by videotaped barium swallow.
Treatment
• Usually none
• Sometimes surgical resection
Specific treatment is usually not required, although resection is occasionally necessary for large or
symptomatic diverticula. Diverticula associated with motility disorders require treatment of the primary
disorder. For example, case reports suggest doing a cricopharyngeal myotomy when resecting a Zenker's
diverticulum.
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
Incompetence of the lower esophageal sphincter allows reflux of gastric contents into the
esophagus, causing burning pain. Prolonged reflux may lead to esophagitis, stricture, and rarely
metaplasia or cancer. Diagnosis is clinical, sometimes with endoscopy, with or without acid
testing. Treatment involves lifestyle modification, acid suppression using proton pump
inhibitors, and sometimes surgical repair.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is common, occurring in 30 to 40% of adults. It also occurs
frequently in infants, typically beginning at birth.
Etiology
===PAGE:189===
The presence of reflux implies lower esophageal sphincter (LES) incompetence, which may result from a
generalized loss of intrinsic sphincter tone or from recurrent inappropriate transient relaxations (ie,
unrelated to swallowing). Transient LES relaxations are triggered by gastric distention or subthreshold
pharyngeal stimulation.
Factors that contribute to the competence of the gastroesophageal junction include the angle of the
cardioesophageal junction, the action of the diaphragm, and gravity (ie, an upright position). Factors
contributing to reflux include weight gain, fatty foods, caffeinated or carbonated beverages, alcohol,
tobacco smoking, and drugs. Drugs that lower LES pressure include anticholinergics, antihistamines,
tricyclic antidepressants, Ca channel blockers, progesterone, and nitrates.
Complications:
GERD may lead to esophagitis, peptic esophageal ulcer, esophageal stricture, Barrett's
esophagus, and esophageal adenocarcinoma (. Factors that contribute to the development of
esophagitis include the caustic nature of the refluxate, the inability to clear the refluxate from the
esophagus, the volume of gastric contents, and local mucosal protective functions. Some patients,
particularly infants, aspirate the reflux material.
Symptoms and Signs
The most prominent symptom of GERD is heartburn, with or without regurgitation of
gastric contents into
the mouth. Infants present with vomiting, irritability, anorexia, and sometimes symptoms of chronic
aspiration. Both adults and infants with chronic aspiration may have cough, hoarseness, or wheezing.
Esophagitis may cause odynophagia and even esophageal hemorrhage, which is usually occult but can
be massive. Peptic stricture causes a gradually progressive dysphagia for solid foods. Peptic esophageal
ulcers cause the same type of pain as gastric or duodenal ulcers, but the pain is usually localized to the
xiphoid or high substernal region. Peptic esophageal ulcers heal slowly, tend to recur, and usually leave a
stricture on healing.
Diagnosis
• Clinical diagnosis
• Endoscopy for those not responding to empiric treatment
• 24-h pH testing for those with typical symptoms but normal endoscopy
A detailed history points to the diagnosis. Patients with typical symptoms of GERD may be given a trial of
therapy. Patients who do not improve, or have long-standing symptoms or symptoms of complications,
should be studied. Endoscopy, with cytologic washings and biopsy of abnormal areas, is the test of
choice. Endoscopic biopsy is the only test that consistently detects the columnar mucosal changes of
Barrett's esophagus. Patients with unremarkable endoscopy findings who have typical symptoms despite
treatment with proton pump inhibitors should undergo 24-h pH testing (. Although barium
swallow readily shows esophageal ulcers and peptic strictures, it is less useful for mild to moderate reflux;
in addition, most patients with abnormalities require subsequent endoscopy. Esophageal manometry may
be used to guide pH probe placement and to evaluate esophageal peristalsis before surgical treatment.
Treatment
• Head of bed elevated
• Coffee, alcohol, fats, and smoking avoided
• Proton pump inhibitors
Management of uncomplicated GERD consists of elevating the head of the bed about 15 cm (6 in) and
avoiding the following: eating within 2 to 3 h of bedtime, strong stimulants of acid secretion (eg, coffee,
alcohol), certain drugs (eg, anticholinergics), specific foods (eg, fats, chocolate), and smoking.
===PAGE:190===
Drug therapy is with a proton pump inhibitor. For example, adults can be given omeprazole 20 mg,
lansoprazole 30 mg, or esomeprazole 40 mg 30 min before breakfast. In some cases, proton pump
inhibitors may be given bid. Infants and children may be given these drugs at an appropriate lower single
daily dose (ie, omeprazole 20 mg in children > 3 yr, 10 mg in children < 3 yr; lansoprazole 15 mg in
children ≤ 30 kg, 30 mg in children > 30 kg). These drugs may be continued long-term, but the dose
should be adjusted to the minimum required to prevent symptoms. H
blockers (eg, ranitidine 150 mg at
bedtime) or promotility agents (eg, metoclopramide 10 mg po 30 min before meals and at bedtime) are
less effective.
Antireflux surgery (usually via laparoscopy) is done on patients with serious esophagitis, large hiatal
hernias, hemorrhage, stricture, or ulcers. Esophageal strictures are managed by repeated balloon
dilation.
Barrett's esophagus may or may not regress with medical or surgical therapy. Because Barrett's
esophagus is a precursor to adenocarcinoma, endoscopic surveillance for malignant transformation is
recommended every 1 to 2 yr. Surveillance has uncertain cost-effectiveness in patients with low-grade
dysplasia but is important in high-grade dysplasia in patients who are unable to undergo surgical
resection. Alternatively, Barrett's esophagus may be treated with endoscopic mucosal resection,
photodynamic therapy, cryotherapy, or laser ablation.
Hiatus Hernia
Hiatus hernia is a protrusion of the stomach through the diaphragmatic hiatus. Most hernias are
asymptomatic, but an increased incidence of acid reflux may lead to symptoms of
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Diagnosis is by barium swallow. Treatment is directed
at symptoms of GERD if present.
Etiology
Etiology is usually unknown, but a hiatus hernia is thought to be acquired through stretching of the fascial
attachments between the esophagus and diaphragm at the hiatus (the opening through which the
esophagus traverses the diaphragm).
Pathophysiology
In a sliding hiatus hernia (the most common type), the gastroesophageal junction and a portion of the
stomach are above the diaphragm. In a paraesophageal hiatus hernia,
the gastroesophageal junction is in
the normal location, but a portion of the stomach is adjacent to the esophagus in the diaphragmatic
hiatus. Hernias may also occur through other parts of the diaphragm (.
A sliding hiatus hernia is common and is an incidental finding on x-ray in > 40% of the population;
therefore, the relationship of hernia to symptoms is unclear. Although most patients with GERD have
some degree of hiatus hernia, < 50% of patients with hiatus hernia have GERD.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with a sliding hiatus hernia are asymptomatic, but chest pain and other reflux symptoms can
occur. A paraesophageal hiatus hernia is generally asymptomatic but, unlike a sliding hiatus hernia, may
incarcerate and strangulate. Occult or massive GI hemorrhage may occur with either type.
Diagnosis
• Barium swallow
A large hiatus hernia is often discovered incidentally on chest x-ray. Smaller hernias are diagnosed with a
barium swallow.
===PAGE:191===
Treatment
• Sometimes a proton pump inhibitor
An asymptomatic sliding hiatus hernia requires no specific therapy. Patients with accompanying GERD
should be treated with a proton pump inhibitor. A paraesophageal hernia should be reduced surgically
because of the risk of strangulation.
Infectious Esophageal Disorders
Esophageal infection occurs mainly in patients with impaired host defenses. Primary agents
include
Candida albicans
, herpes simplex virus, and cytomegalovirus. Symptoms are
odynophagia and chest pain. Diagnosis is by endoscopic visualization and culture. Treatment is
with antifungal or antiviral drugs.
Esophageal infection is rare in patients with normal host defenses. Primary esophageal defenses include
saliva, esophageal motility, and cellular immunity. Thus, at-risk patients include those with AIDS, organ
transplants, alcoholism, diabetes, undernutrition, cancer, and motility disorders.
Candida
infection may
occur in any of these patients. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections occur
mainly in AIDS and transplant patients.
Candida:
Patients with
Candida
esophagitis usually complain of odynophagia and, less commonly,
dysphagia. About two thirds of patients have signs of oral thrush (thus its absence does not exclude
esophageal involvement). Patients with odynophagia and typical thrush may be given empiric treatment,
but if significant improvement does not occur in 5 to 7 days, endoscopic evaluation is required. Barium
swallow is less accurate.
Treatment is with fluconazole 200 mg po or IV for one dose, then 100 mg po or IV q 24 h for 14 to 21
days. Alternatives include the azoles (eg, itraconazole, voriconazole, ketoconazole) or echinocandins (eg,
caspofungin). Topical therapy has no role.
HSV and CMV:
These infections are equally likely in transplant patients, but HSV occurs early after
transplantation (reactivation) and CMV occurs 2 to 6 mo after. Among AIDS patients, CMV is much more
common than HSV, and viral esophagitis occurs mainly when the CD4+ count is < 200/
μ
L. Severe
odynophagia results from either infection.
Endoscopy, with cytology or biopsy, is usually necessary for diagnosis. HSV is treated with IV acyclovir 5
mg/kg q 8 h for 7 days or valacyclovir 1 g po tid. CMV is treated with ganciclovir 5 mg/kg IV q 12 h for 14
to 21 days with maintenance at 5 mg/kg IV 5 days/wk in immunocompromised patients. Alternatives
include foscarnet and cidofovir.
Mallory-Weiss Syndrome
Mallory-Weiss syndrome is a nonpenetrating mucosal laceration of the distal esophagus and
proximal stomach caused by vomiting, retching, or hiccuping.
Initially described in alcoholics, Mallory-Weiss syndrome can occur in any patient who vomits forcefully. It
is the cause of about 5% of episodes of upper GI hemorrhage. Most episodes of bleeding stop
spontaneously; severe bleeding occurs in about 10% of patients who require significant intervention,
such as transfusion or endoscopic hemostasis (by injection of ethanol, polidocanol, or epinephrine or by
electrocautery). Intra-arterial infusion of pitressin or therapeutic embolization into the left gastric artery
during angiography may also be used to control bleeding. Surgical repair is rarely required.
Esophageal Rupture
Esophageal rupture may be iatrogenic during endoscopic procedures or other instrumentation
or may be spontaneous (Boerhaave's syndrome). Patients are seriously ill, with symptoms of
mediastinitis. Diagnosis is by esophagography with a water-soluble contrast agent. Immediate
===PAGE:192===
surgical repair and drainage are required.
Endoscopic procedures are the primary cause of esophageal rupture, but spontaneous rupture may
occur, typically related to vomiting, retching, or swallowing a large food bolus. The most common site of
rupture is the distal esophagus on the left side. Acid and other stomach contents cause a fulminant
mediastinitis and shock. Pneumomediastinum is common.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include chest and abdominal pain, vomiting, hematemesis, and shock. Subcutaneous
emphysema is palpable in about 30% of patients. Mediastinal crunch (Hamman's sign), a crackling sound
synchronous with the heartbeat, may be present.
Diagnosis
• Chest and abdominal x-rays
• Esophagography
Chest and abdominal x-rays showing mediastinal air, pleural effusion, or mediastinal widening suggest the
diagnosis. Diagnosis is confirmed by esophagography with a water-soluble contrast agent, which avoids
potential mediastinal irritation from barium. CT of the thorax detects mediastinal air and fluid but does not
localize the perforation well. Endoscopy may miss a small perforation.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
Pending surgical repair, patients should receive broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg, gentamicin plus
metronidazole or piperacillin/tazobactam) and fluid resuscitation as needed for shock. Even with
treatment, mortality is high.
===PAGE:193===
Chapter 13. Gastritis and Peptic Ulcer Disease
Introduction
Acid is secreted by parietal cells in the proximal two thirds (body) of the stomach. Gastric acid aids
digestion by creating the optimal pH for pepsin and gastric lipase and by stimulating pancreatic
bicarbonate secretion. Acid secretion is initiated by food: the thought, smell, or taste of food effects vagal
stimulation of the gastrin-secreting G cells located in the distal one third (antrum) of the stomach. The
arrival of protein to the stomach further stimulates gastrin output. Circulating gastrin triggers the release
of histamine from enterochromaffin-like cells in the body of the stomach. Histamine stimulates the parietal
cells via their H
receptors. The parietal cells secrete acid, and the resulting drop in pH causes the antral
D cells to release somatostatin, which inhibits gastrin release (negative feedback control).
Acid secretion is present at birth and reaches adult levels (on a weight basis) by age 2. There is a decline
in acid output in elderly patients who develop chronic gastritis, but acid output is otherwise maintained
throughout life.
Normally, the GI mucosa is protected by several distinct mechanisms: (1) Mucosal production of mucus
and HCO
creates a pH gradient from the gastric lumen (low pH) to the mucosa (neutral pH). The mucus
serves as a barrier to the diffusion of acid and pepsin. (2) Epithelial cells remove excess hydrogen ions
(H
+
) via membrane transport systems and have tight junctions, which prevent back diffusion of H
+
ions.
(3) Mucosal blood flow removes excess acid that has diffused across the epithelial layer. Several growth
factors (eg, epidermal growth factor, insulin-like growth factor I) and prostaglandins have been linked to
mucosal repair and maintenance of mucosal integrity.
Factors that interfere with these mucosal defenses (particularly NSAIDs and
Helicobacter pylori
infection) predispose to gastritis and peptic ulcer disease.
NSAIDs promote mucosal inflammation and ulcer formation (sometimes with GI bleeding) both topically
and systemically. By inhibiting prostaglandin production via blockage
of the enzyme cyclooxygenase
(COX), NSAIDs reduce gastric blood flow, reduce mucus and HCO
secretion, and decrease cell repair
and replication. Also, because NSAIDs are weak acids and are nonionized at gastric pH, they diffuse
freely across the mucus barrier into gastric epithelial cells, where H
+
ions are liberated, leading to cellular
damage. Because gastric prostaglandin production involves the COX-1 isoform, NSAIDs that are selective
COX-2 inhibitors have fewer adverse gastric effects than other NSAIDs.
Helicobacter pylori
Infection
H. pylori
is a common gastric pathogen that causes gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, gastric
adenocarcinoma, and low-grade gastric lymphoma. Infection may be asymptomatic or result in
varying degrees of dyspepsia. Diagnosis is by urea breath test and testing of endoscopic
biopsy samples. Treatment is with a proton pump inhibitor plus two antibiotics.
H. pylori
is a spiral-shaped, gram-negative organism that has adapted to thrive in acid. In developing
countries, it commonly causes chronic infections and is usually acquired during childhood. In the US,
infection is less common among children but increases with age: by age 60, about 50% of people are
infected. Infection is most common among blacks, Hispanics, and Asians.
The organism has been cultured from stool, saliva, and dental plaque, which suggests oral-oral or fecaloral transmission. Infections tend to cluster in families and in residents of custodial institutions. Nurses
and gastroenterologists seem to be at high risk because bacteria can be transmitted by improperly
disinfected endoscopes.
Pathophysiology
Effects of
H. pylori
infection vary depending on the location within the stomach. Antral-predominant
===PAGE:194===
infection results in increased gastrin production, probably via local impairment of somatostatin release.
Resultant hypersecretion of acid predisposes to prepyloric and duodenal ulcer. Body-predominant
infection leads to gastric atrophy and decreased acid production, possibly via increased local production
of IL-1
β
. Patients with body-predominant infection are predisposed to gastric ulcer and adenocarcinoma.
Some patients have mixed infection of both antrum and body with varying clinical effects. Many patients
with
H. pylori
infection have no noticeable clinical effects.
Ammonia produced by
H. pylori
enables the organism to survive in the acidic environment of the stomach
and may erode the mucus barrier. Cytotoxins and mucolytic enzymes (eg, bacterial protease, lipase)
produced by
H. pylori
may play a role in mucosal damage and subsequent ulcerogenesis.
Infected people are 3 to 6 times more likely to develop stomach cancer.
H. pylori
infection is associated
with intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the gastric body and antrum but not cancer of the gastric cardia.
Other associated cancers include gastric lymphoma and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
lymphoma, a monoclonally restricted B-cell tumor.
Diagnosis
• For initial diagnosis: Serologic tests
• For confirmation of cure: Urea breath test or stool antigen assay
Screening of asymptomatic patients is not warranted. Tests are done during evaluation for peptic ulcer
and gastritis. Posttreatment testing is typically done to confirm eradication of the organism. Different tests
are preferred for initial diagnosis and posttreatment.
Noninvasive tests:
Laboratory and office-based serologic assays for antibodies to
H. pylori
have
sensitivity and specificity of > 85% and are considered the noninvasive tests of choice for initial
documentation of
H. pylori
infection. However, because qualitative assays remain positive for up to 3 yr
after successful treatment and because quantitative antibody levels do not decline significantly for 6 to 12
mo after treatment, serologic assays are not usually used to assess cure.
Urea breath tests use an oral dose of
C- or
C-labeled urea. In an infected patient, the organism
metabolizes the urea and liberates labeled CO
, which is exhaled and can be quantified in breath
samples taken 20 to 30 min after ingestion of the urea. Sensitivity and specificity are > 90%. Urea breath
tests are well suited for confirming eradication of the organism after therapy. False-negative results are
possible with recent antibiotic use or concomitant proton pump inhibitor therapy; therefore, follow-up
testing should be delayed ≥ 4 wk after antibiotic therapy and 1 wk after proton pump inhibitor therapy. H
blockers do not affect the test.
Stool antigen assays seem to have a sensitivity and specificity near that of urea breath tests, particularly
for initial diagnosis; an office-based test is under development.
Invasive tests:
Endoscopy is used to obtain mucosal biopsy samples for a rapid urease
test (RUT) or
histologic staining. Bacterial culture is of limited use because of the fastidious nature of the organism.
Endoscopy is not recommended solely for diagnosis of
H. pylori;
noninvasive tests are preferred unless
endoscopy is indicated for other reasons.
The RUT, in which presence of bacterial urease in the biopsy sample causes a color change on a special
medium, is the diagnostic method of choice on tissue samples. Histologic staining of biopsy samples
should be done for patients with negative RUT results but suspicious clinical findings, recent antibiotic
use, or treatment with proton pump inhibitors. RUT and histologic staining each have a sensitivity and
specificity of > 90%.
Treatment
• Antibiotics (various regimens) plus a proton pump inhibitor
===PAGE:195===
Patients with complications (eg, gastritis, ulcer, cancer) should have the organism eradicated. Eradication
of
H. pylori
can even cure some cases of MALT lymphoma (but not other infection-related cancers).
Treatment of asymptomatic infection has been controversial, but the recognition of the role of
H. pylori
in
cancer has led to a recommendation for treatment. Vaccines, both preventive and therapeutic (ie, as an
adjunct to treatment of infected patients), are under development.
H. pylori
eradication requires multidrug therapy, typically antibiotics plus acid suppressants. Proton pump
inhibitors suppress
H. pylori
, and the increased gastric pH accompanying their use can enhance tissue
concentration and efficacy of antimicrobials, creating a hostile environment for
H. pylori
.
Triple therapy is recommended. Oral omeprazole 20 mg bid or lansoprazole 30 mg bid, plus clarithromycin
500 mg bid, plus amoxicillin 1 g bid (or, for penicillin-allergic patients, metronidazole 500 mg bid) for 14
days, cures infection in > 95% of cases. This regimen has excellent tolerability. Ranitidine bismuth citrate
400 mg po bid may be substituted for the proton pump inhibitor.
Quadruple therapy with a proton pump inhibitor bid, tetracycline 500 mg and bismuth subsalicylate or
subcitrate 525 mg qid, and metronidazole 500 mg tid is also effective but more cumbersome.
Infected patients with duodenal or gastric ulcer require continuation of the acid suppression for at least 4
wk.
Treatment is repeated if
H. pylori
is not eradicated. If two courses are unsuccessful, some authorities
recommend endoscopy to obtain cultures for sensitivity testing.
Gastritis
Gastritis is inflammation of the gastric mucosa caused by any of several conditions, including
infection (
Helicobacter pylori
), drugs (NSAIDs, alcohol), stress, and autoimmune phenomena
(atrophic gastritis). Many cases are asymptomatic, but dyspepsia and GI bleeding sometimes
occur. Diagnosis is by endoscopy. Treatment is directed at the cause but often includes acid
suppression and, for
H. pylori
infection, antibiotics.
Gastritis is classified as erosive or nonerosive based on the severity of mucosal injury. It is also classified
according to the site of involvement (ie, cardia, body, antrum). Gastritis can be further classified
histologically as acute or chronic based on the inflammatory cell type. No classification scheme matches
perfectly with the pathophysiology; a large degree of overlap exists. Some forms of gastritis involve acidpeptic and
H. pylori
disease. Additionally, the term is often loosely applied to nonspecific (and often
undiagnosed) abdominal discomfort and gastroenteritis.
Acute gastritis is characterized by PMN infiltration of the mucosa of the antrum and body.
Chronic gastritis implies some degree of atrophy (with loss of function of the mucosa) or metaplasia. It
predominantly involves the antrum (with subsequent loss of G cells and decreased gastrin secretion) or
the corpus (with loss of oxyntic glands, leading to reduced acid, pepsin, and intrinsic factor).
Erosive Gastritis
Erosive gastritis is gastric mucosal erosion caused by damage to mucosal defenses. It is
typically acute, manifesting with bleeding, but may be subacute or chronic with few or no
symptoms. Diagnosis is by endoscopy. Treatment is supportive, with removal of the inciting
cause. Certain ICU patients (eg, ventilator-bound, head trauma, burn, multisystem trauma)
benefit from prophylaxis with acid suppressants.
Causes of erosive gastritis include NSAIDs, alcohol, stress, and less commonly radiation, viral infection
(eg, cytomegalovirus), vascular injury, and direct trauma (eg, nasogastric tubes).
Superficial erosions and punctate mucosal lesions occur. These may develop as soon as 12 h after the
===PAGE:196===
initial insult. Deep erosions, ulcers, and sometimes perforation may occur in severe or untreated cases.
Lesions typically occur in the body, but the antrum may also be involved.
Acute stress gastritis
, a form of erosive gastritis, occurs in about 5% of critically ill patients. The
incidence increases with duration of ICU stay and length of time the patient is not receiving enteral
feeding. Pathogenesis likely involves hypoperfusion of the GI mucosa, resulting in impaired mucosal
defenses. Patients with head injury or burns may also have increased secretion of acid.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with mild erosive gastritis are often asymptomatic, although some complain of dyspepsia,
nausea, or vomiting. Often, the first sign is hematemesis, melena, or blood in the nasogastric aspirate,
usually within 2 to 5 days of the inciting event. Bleeding is usually mild to moderate, although it can be
massive if deep ulceration is present, particularly in acute stress gastritis. Acute and chronic erosive
gastritis are diagnosed endoscopically.
Diagnosis
Acute and chronic erosive gastritis are diagnosed endoscopically.
Treatment
• For bleeding: Endoscopic hemostasis
• For acid suppression: A proton pump inhibitor or H
blocker
In severe gastritis, bleeding is managed with IV fluids and blood transfusion as needed. Endoscopic
hemostasis should be attempted, with surgery (total gastrectomy) a fallback procedure. Angiography is
unlikely to stop severe gastric bleeding because of the many collateral vessels supplying the stomach.
Acid suppression should be started if the patient is not already receiving it.
For milder gastritis, removing the offending agent and using drugs to reduce gastric acidity (
may be all that is required.
Prevention
Prophylaxis with acid-suppressive drugs can reduce the incidence of acute stress gastritis. However, it
mainly benefits certain high-risk ICU patients, including those with severe burns, CNS trauma,
coagulopathy, sepsis, shock, multiple trauma, mechanical ventilation for > 48 h, hepatic or renal failure,
multiorgan dysfunction, and history of peptic ulcer or GI bleeding.
Prophylaxis consists of IV H
blockers, proton pump inhibitors, or oral antacids to raise intragastric pH >
4.0. Repeated pH measurement and titration of therapy are not required. Early enteral feeding also can
decrease the incidence of bleeding.
Acid suppression is not recommended for patients simply taking NSAIDs unless they have previously had
an ulcer.
Nonerosive Gastritis
Nonerosive gastritis refers to a variety of histologic abnormalities that are mainly the result of
H. pylori
infection. Most patients are asymptomatic. Diagnosis is by endoscopy. Treatment is
eradication of
H. pylori
and sometimes acid suppression.
Pathology
Superficial gastritis:
Lymphocytes and plasma cells mixed with neutrophils are the predominant
infiltrating inflammatory cells. Inflammation is superficial and may involve the antrum, body, or both. It is
===PAGE:197===
usually not accompanied by atrophy or metaplasia. Prevalence increases with age.
Deep gastritis:
Deep gastritis is more likely to be symptomatic (eg, vague dyspepsia). Mononuclear cells
and neutrophils infiltrate the entire mucosa to the level of the muscularis, but exudate or crypt abscesses
seldom result, as might be expected by such infiltration. Distribution may be patchy. Superficial gastritis
may be present, as may partial gland atrophy and metaplasia.
Gastric atrophy:
Atrophy of gastric glands may follow in gastritis, most often longstanding antral
(sometimes referred to as type B) gastritis. Some patients with gastric atrophy have autoantibodies to
parietal cells, usually in association with corpus (type A) gastritis and pernicious anemia.
Atrophy may occur without specific symptoms. Endoscopically, the mucosa may appear normal until
atrophy is advanced, when submucosal vascularity may be visible. As atrophy becomes complete,
secretion of acid and pepsin diminishes and intrinsic factor may be lost, resulting in vitamin B
malabsorption.
Metaplasia:
Two types of metaplasia are common in chronic nonerosive gastritis: mucous gland and
intestinal.
Mucous gland metaplasia (pseudopyloric metaplasia) occurs in the setting of severe atrophy of the
gastric glands, which are progressively replaced by mucous glands (antral mucosa), especially along the
lesser curve. Gastric ulcers may be present (typically at the junction of antral and corpus mucosa), but
whether they are the cause or consequence of these metaplastic changes is not clear.
Intestinal metaplasia typically begins in the antrum in response to chronic mucosal injury and may extend
to the body. Gastric mucosa
cells change to resemble intestinal mucosa—with goblet cells, endocrine
(enterochromaffin or enterochromaffin-like) cells, and rudimentary villi—and may even assume functional
(absorptive) characteristics. Intestinal metaplasia is classified histologically as complete (most common)
or incomplete. With complete metaplasia, gastric mucosa is completely transformed into small-bowel
mucosa, both histologically and functionally, with the ability to absorb nutrients and secrete peptides. In
incomplete metaplasia, the epithelium assumes a histologic appearance closer to that of the large
intestine and frequently exhibits dysplasia. Intestinal metaplasia may lead to stomach cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with
H. pylori
-associated gastritis are asymptomatic, although some have mild dyspepsia or
other vague symptoms.
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy
Often, the condition is discovered during endoscopy done for other purposes. Testing of asymptomatic
patients is not indicated. Once gastritis is identified, testing for
H. pylori
is appropriate.
Treatment
• Eradication of
H. pylori
• Sometimes acid-suppressive drugs
Treatment of chronic nonerosive gastritis is
H. pylori
eradication (. Treatment of asymptomatic
patients is somewhat controversial given the high prevalence of
H. pylori
-associated superficial gastritis
and the relatively low incidence of clinical sequelae (ie, peptic ulcer disease). However,
H. pylori
is a
class J carcinogen; eradication removes the cancer risk. In
H. pylori
-negative patients, treatment is
directed at symptoms using acid-suppressive drugs (eg, H
blockers, proton pump inhibitors) or antacids.
===PAGE:198===
Postgastrectomy Gastritis
Postgastrectomy gastritis is gastric atrophy developing after partial or subtotal gastrectomy
(except in cases of gastrinoma).
Metaplasia of the remaining corpus mucosa is common. The degree of gastritis is usually greatest at the
lines of anastomosis.
Several mechanisms are responsible: bile reflux, which is common after such surgery, damages the
gastric mucosa; loss of antral gastrin decreases stimulation of parietal and peptic cells, causing atrophy;
and vagotomy may result in a loss of vagal trophic action.
There are no specific symptoms of gastritis. Postgastrectomy gastritis often progresses to severe atrophy
and achlorhydria. Production of intrinsic factor may cease with resultant vitamin B
deficiency (which
may be worsened by bacterial overgrowth in the afferent loop). The relative risk of gastric
adenocarcinoma seems to increase 15 to 20 yr after partial gastrectomy; however, given the low absolute
incidence of postgastrectomy cancer, routine endoscopic surveillance is probably not cost effective, but
upper GI symptoms or anemia in such patients should prompt endoscopy.
Uncommon Gastritis Syndromes
Menetrier's disease:
This rare idiopathic disorder affects adults aged 30 to 60 and is more common
among men. It manifests as a significant thickening of the gastric folds of the gastric body but not the
antrum. Gland atrophy and marked foveolar pit hyperplasia occur, often accompanied by mucous gland
metaplasia and increased mucosal thickness with little inflammation. Hypoalbuminemia (the most
consistent laboratory abnormality) caused by GI protein loss may be present (protein-losing gastropathy).
As the disease progresses, the secretion of acid and pepsin decreases, causing hypochlorhydria.
Symptoms are nonspecific and commonly include epigastric pain, nausea, weight loss, edema, and
diarrhea. Differential diagnosis includes (1) lymphoma, in which multiple gastric ulcers may occur; (2)
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, with extensive infiltration of monoclonal B
lymphocytes; (3) Zollinger-Ellison syndrome with associated gastric fold hypertrophy; and (4) CronkhiteCanada syndrome, a mucosal polypoid protein-losing syndrome associated with diarrhea. Diagnosis is
made by endoscopy with deep mucosal biopsy or full-thickness laparoscopic gastric biopsy.
Various treatments have been used, including anticholinergics, antisecretory drugs, and corticosteroids,
but none have proved fully effective. Partial or complete gastric resection may be necessary in cases of
severe hypoalbuminemia.
Eosinophilic gastritis:
Extensive infiltration of the mucosa, submucosa, and muscle
layers with
eosinophils often occurs in the antrum. It is usually idiopathic but may result from nematode infestation.
Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, and early satiety. Diagnosis is by endoscopic biopsy of involved
areas. Corticosteroids can be successful in idiopathic cases; however, if pyloric obstruction develops,
surgery may be required.
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma:
This rare condition is characterized by
massive lymphoid infiltration of the gastric mucosa, which can resemble Menetrier's disease.
Gastritis caused by systemic disorders:
Sarcoidosis, TB, amyloidosis, and other granulomatous
diseases can cause gastritis, which is seldom of primary importance.
Gastritis caused by physical agents:
Radiation and ingestion of corrosives (especially acidic
compounds) can cause gastritis. Exposure to > 16 Gy of radiation causes marked deep gastritis, usually
involving the antrum more than the corpus. Pyloric stenosis and perforation are possible complications of
radiation-induced gastritis.
Infectious (septic) gastritis:
Except for
H. pylori
infection, bacterial invasion of the stomach is rare and
mainly occurs after ischemia, ingestion of corrosives, or exposure to radiation. On x-ray, gas outlines the
===PAGE:199===
mucosa. The condition can manifest as an acute surgical abdomen and has a very high mortality rate.
Surgery is often necessary.
Debilitated or immunocompromised patients may develop viral or fungal gastritis with cytomegalovirus,
Candida
, histoplasmosis, or mucormycosis; these diagnoses should be considered in patients with
exudative gastritis, esophagitis, or duodenitis.
Autoimmune Metaplastic Atrophic Gastritis
Autoimmune metaplastic atrophic gastritis (AMAG) is an inherited autoimmune disease that
attacks parietal cells, resulting in hypochlorhydria and decreased production of intrinsic factor.
Consequences include atrophic gastritis, B
malabsorption, and, frequently, pernicious
anemia. Risk of gastric adenocarcinoma increases 3-fold. Diagnosis is by endoscopy. Treatment
is with parenteral vitamin B
.
Patients with AMAG have antibodies to parietal cells and their components (which include intrinsic factor
and the proton pump H
+
,K
+
-ATPase). AMAG is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Some patients
also develop Hashimoto's thyroiditis and 50% have thyroid antibodies; conversely, parietal cell antibodies
are found in 30% of patients with thyroiditis.
The lack of intrinsic factor leads to vitamin B
deficiency that can result in a megaloblastic anemia
(pernicious anemia— or neurologic symptoms (subacute combined degeneration—.
Hypochlorhydria leads to G-cell hyperplasia and elevated serum gastrin levels (often >1000 pg/mL).
Elevated gastrin levels lead to enterochromaffin-like cell hyperplasia, which occasionally undergoes
transformation to a carcinoid tumor.
In some patients, AMAG may be associated with chronic
Helicobacter pylori
infection, although the
relationship is not clear. Gastrectomy and chronic acid suppression with proton pump inhibitors cause
similar deficiencies of intrinsic factor secretion.
The areas of atrophic gastritis in the body and fundus may manifest metaplasia. Patients with AMAG have
a 3-fold increased relative risk of developing gastric adenocarcinoma.
Diagnosis is made by endoscopic biopsy. Serum B
levels should be obtained. Parietal cell antibodies
can be detected but are not measured routinely. The issue of surveillance endoscopy for cancer
screening is unsettled; follow-up examinations are unnecessary unless histologic abnormalities (eg,
dysplasia) are present on initial biopsy or symptoms develop. No treatment is needed other than
parenteral replacement of vitamin B
.
Peptic Ulcer Disease
A peptic ulcer is an erosion in a segment of the GI mucosa, typically in the stomach (gastric
ulcer) or the first few centimeters of the duodenum (duodenal ulcer), that penetrates through
the muscularis mucosae. Nearly all ulcers are caused by
Helicobacter pylori
infection or NSAID
use. Symptoms typically include burning epigastric pain that is often relieved by food.
Diagnosis is by endoscopy and testing for
H. pylori
. Treatment involves acid suppression,
eradication of
H. pylori
(if present), and avoidance of NSAIDs.
Ulcers may range in size from several millimeters to several centimeters. Ulcers are delineated from
erosions by the depth of penetration;
erosions are more superficial and do not involve the muscularis
mucosae. Ulcers can occur at any age, including infancy and childhood, but are most common among
middle-aged adults.
Etiology
===PAGE:200===
H. pylori
and NSAIDs disrupt normal mucosal defense and repair, making the mucosa more susceptible to
acid.
H. pylori
infection is present in 50 to 70% of patients with duodenal ulcers and 30 to 50% of
patients with gastric ulcers. If
H. pylori
is eradicated, only 10% of patients have recurrence of peptic ulcer
disease, compared with 70% recurrence in patients treated with acid suppression alone. NSAIDs now
account for > 50% of peptic ulcers.
Cigarette smoking is a risk factor for the development of ulcers and their complications. Also, smoking
impairs ulcer healing and increases the incidence of recurrence. Risk correlates with the number of
cigarettes smoked per day. Although alcohol is a strong promoter of acid secretion, no definitive data link
moderate amounts of alcohol to the development or delayed healing of ulcers. Very few patients have
hypersecretion of gastrin (
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
—.
A family history exists in 50 to 60% of children with duodenal ulcer.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms depend on ulcer location and patient age; many patients, particularly elderly patients, have
few or no symptoms. Pain is most common, often localized to the epigastrium and relieved by food or
antacids. The pain is described as burning or gnawing, or sometimes as a sensation of hunger. The
course is usually chronic and recurrent. Only about half of patients present with the characteristic pattern
of symptoms.
Gastric ulcer
symptoms often do not follow a consistent pattern (eg, eating sometimes exacerbates
rather than relieves pain). This is especially true for pyloric channel ulcers, which are often associated
with symptoms of obstruction (eg, bloating, nausea, vomiting) caused by edema and scarring.
Duodenal ulcers
tend to cause more consistent pain. Pain is absent when the patient awakens but
appears in mid-morning, is relieved by food, but recurs 2 to 3 h after a meal. Pain that awakens a patient
at night is common and is highly suggestive of duodenal ulcer. In neonates, perforation and hemorrhage
may be the first manifestation of duodenal ulcer. Hemorrhage may also be the first recognized sign in later
infancy and early childhood, although repeated vomiting or evidence of abdominal pain may be a clue.
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy
• Sometimes serum gastrin levels
Diagnosis of peptic ulcer is suggested by patient history and confirmed by endoscopy. Empiric therapy is
often begun without definitive diagnosis. However, endoscopy allows for biopsy or cytologic brushing of
gastric and esophageal lesions to distinguish between simple ulceration and ulcerating stomach cancer.
Stomach cancer may manifest with similar manifestations and must be excluded, especially in patients
who are > 45, have lost weight, or report severe or refractory symptoms. The incidence of malignant
duodenal ulcer is extremely low, so biopsies of lesions in that area are generally not warranted.
Endoscopy can also be used to definitively diagnose
H. pylori
infection, which should be sought when an
ulcer is detected.
Gastrin-secreting cancer and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome should be considered when there are multiple
ulcers, when ulcers develop in atypical locations (eg, postbulbar) or are refractory to treatment, or when
the patient has prominent diarrhea or weight loss. Serum gastrin levels should be measured in these
patients.
Complications
Hemorrhage:
Mild to severe hemorrhage is the most common complication of peptic ulcer disease.
Symptoms include hematemesis (vomiting of fresh blood or "coffee ground" material); passage of bloody
stools (hematochezia) or black tarry stools (melena); and weakness, orthostasis, syncope, thirst, and
sweating caused by blood loss.
===PAGE:201===
Penetration (confined perforation):
A peptic ulcer may penetrate the wall of the stomach. If adhesions
prevent leakage into the peritoneal cavity, free penetration is avoided and confined perforation occurs.
Still, the ulcer may penetrate into the duodenum and enter the adjacent confined space (lesser sac) or
another organ (eg, pancreas, liver). Pain may be intense, persistent, referred to sites other than the
abdomen (usually the back when caused by penetration of a posterior duodenal ulcer into the pancreas),
and modified by body position. CT or MRI is usually needed to confirm the diagnosis. When therapy does
not result in healing, surgery is required.
Free perforation:
Ulcers that perforate into the peritoneal cavity unchecked by adhesions
are usually
located in the anterior wall of the duodenum or, less commonly, in the stomach. The patient presents with
an acute abdomen. There is sudden, intense, continuous epigastric pain that spreads rapidly throughout
the abdomen, often becoming prominent in the right lower quadrant and at times referred to one or both
shoulders. The patient usually lies still because even deep breathing worsens the pain. Palpation of the
abdomen is painful, rebound tenderness is prominent, abdominal muscles are rigid (boardlike), and bowel
sounds are diminished or absent. Shock may ensue, heralded by increased pulse rate and decreased BP
and urine output. Symptoms may be less striking in elderly or moribund patients and those receiving
corticosteroids or immunosuppressants.
Diagnosis is confirmed if an x-ray or CT shows free air under the diaphragm or in the peritoneal cavity.
Upright views of the chest and abdomen are preferred. The most sensitive view is the lateral x-ray of the
chest. Severely ill patients may be unable to sit upright and should have a lateral decubitus x-ray of the
abdomen. Failure to detect free air does not exclude the diagnosis.
Immediate surgery is required. The longer the delay, the poorer is the prognosis. When surgery is
contraindicated, the alternatives are continuous nasogastric suction and broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Gastric outlet obstruction:
Obstruction may be caused by scarring, spasm, or inflammation from an
ulcer. Symptoms include recurrent, large-volume vomiting, occurring more frequently at the end of the day
and often as late as 6 h after the last meal. Loss of appetite with persistent bloating or fullness after
eating also suggests gastric outlet obstruction. Prolonged vomiting may cause weight loss, dehydration,
and alkalosis.
If the patient's history suggests obstruction, physical examination, gastric aspiration, or x-rays may
provide evidence of retained gastric contents. A succussion splash heard > 6 h after a meal or aspiration
of fluid or food residue > 200 mL after an overnight fast suggests gastric retention. If gastric aspiration
shows marked retention, the stomach should be emptied and endoscopy done or x-rays taken to
determine site, cause, and degree of obstruction.
Edema or spasm caused by an active pyloric channel ulcer is treated with gastric decompression by
nasogastric suction and acid suppression (eg, IV H
blockers). Dehydration and electrolyte imbalances
resulting from protracted vomiting or continued nasogastric suctioning should be vigorously sought and
corrected. Prokinetic agents are not indicated. Generally, obstruction resolves within 2 to 5 days of
treatment. Prolonged obstruction may result from peptic scarring and may respond to endoscopic pyloric
balloon dilation. Surgery is necessary to relieve obstruction in selected cases.
Recurrence:
Factors that affect recurrence of ulcer include failure to eradicate
H. pylori
, continued
NSAID use, and smoking. Less commonly, a gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome) may be the cause.
The 3-yr recurrence rate for gastric and duodenal ulcers is < 10% when
H. pylori
is successfully
eradicated but > 50% when it is not. Thus, a patient with recurrent disease should be tested for
H. pylori
and treated again if the tests are positive.
Although long-term treatment with H
blockers, proton pump inhibitors, or misoprostol reduces the risk of
recurrence, their routine use for this purpose is not recommended. However, patients who require NSAIDs
after having had a peptic ulcer are candidates for long-term therapy, as are those with a marginal ulcer or
prior perforation or bleeding.
===PAGE:202===
Stomach cancer:
Patients with
H. pylori
-associated ulcers have a 3- to 6-fold increased risk of gastric
cancer later in life. There is no increased risk of cancer with ulcers of other etiology.
Treatment
• Eradication of
H. pylori
(when present)
• Acid-suppressive drugs
Treatment of gastric and duodenal ulcers requires eradication of
H. pylori
when present ( and
a reduction of gastric acidity. For duodenal ulcers, it is particularly important to suppress nocturnal acid
secretion.
Methods of decreasing acidity include a number of drugs, all of which are effective but which vary in cost,
duration of therapy, and convenience of dosing. In addition, mucosal protective drugs (eg, sucralfate) and
acid-reducing surgical procedures may be used. Drug therapy is discussed elsewhere.
Adjuncts:
Smoking should be stopped, and alcohol consumption stopped or limited to small amounts of
dilute alcohol. There is no evidence that changing the diet speeds ulcer healing or prevents recurrence.
Thus, many physicians recommend eliminating only foods that cause distress.
Surgery:
With current drug therapy, the number of patients requiring surgery has declined dramatically.
Indications include perforation, obstruction, uncontrolled or recurrent bleeding, and, although rare,
symptoms that do not respond to drug therapy.
Surgery consists of a procedure to reduce acid secretion, often combined with a procedure to ensure
gastric drainage. The recommended operation for duodenal ulcer is highly selective, or parietal cell,
vagotomy (which is limited to nerves at the gastric body and spares antral innervation, thereby obviating
the need for a drainage procedure). This procedure has a very low mortality rate and avoids the morbidity
associated with resection and traditional vagotomy. Other acid-reducing surgical procedures include
antrectomy, hemigastrectomy, partial gastrectomy, and subtotal gastrectomy (ie, resection of 30 to 90% of
the distal stomach). These are typically combined with truncal vagotomy. Patients who undergo a
resective procedure or who have an obstruction require gastric drainage via a gastroduodenostomy
(Billroth I) or gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II).
The incidence and type of postsurgical symptoms vary with the type of operation. After resective surgery,
up to 30% of patients have significant symptoms, including weight loss, maldigestion, anemia, dumping
syndrome, reactive hypoglycemia, bilious vomiting, mechanical problems, and ulcer recurrence.
Weight loss
is common after subtotal gastrectomy; the patient may limit food intake because of early
satiety (because the residual gastric pouch is small) or to prevent dumping syndrome and other
postprandial syndromes. With a small gastric pouch, distention or discomfort may occur after a meal of
even moderate size; patients should be encouraged to eat smaller and more frequent meals.
Maldigestion
and steatorrhea caused by pancreaticobiliary bypass, especially with Billroth II
anastomosis, may contribute to weight loss.
Anemia
is common (usually from iron deficiency, but occasionally from vitamin B
deficiency caused by
loss of intrinsic factor or bacterial overgrowth) in the afferent limb, and osteomalacia may occur. IM
vitamin B
supplementation is recommended for all patients with total gastrectomy but may also be given
to patients with subtotal gastrectomy if deficiency is suspected.
Dumping syndrome
may follow gastric surgical procedures, particularly resections. Weakness,
dizziness, sweating, nausea, vomiting, and palpitation occur soon after eating, especially hyperosmolar
foods. This phenomenon is referred to as early dumping, the cause of which remains unclear but likely
involves autonomic reflexes, intravascular volume contraction, and release of vasoactive peptides from
the small intestine. Dietary modifications, with smaller, more frequent meals and decreased carbohydrate
===PAGE:203===
intake, usually help.
Reactive hypoglycemia
or
late dumping
(another form of the syndrome) results from rapid emptying of
carbohydrates from the gastric pouch. Early high peaks in blood glucose stimulate excess release of
insulin, which leads to symptomatic hypoglycemia several hours after the meal. A high-protein, lowcarbohydrate diet and adequate caloric intake (in frequent small feedings) are recommended.
Mechanical problems
(including gastroparesis and bezoar formation— may occur secondary
to a decrease in phase III gastric motor contractions, which are altered after antrectomy and vagotomy.
Diarrhea is especially common after vagotomy, even without a resection (pyloroplasty).
Ulcer recurrence
, according to older studies, occurs in 5 to 12% after highly selective vagotomy and in 2
to 5% after resective surgery. Recurrent ulcers are diagnosed by endoscopy and generally respond to
either proton pump inhibitors or H
blockers. For ulcers that continue to recur, the completeness of
vagotomy should be tested by gastric analysis,
H. pylori
eliminated if present, and Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome ruled out by serum gastrin studies.
Drug Treatment of Gastric Acidity
Drugs for decreasing acidity are used for peptic ulcer, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD—, and many forms of gastritis. Some drugs are used in regimens for treating
H. pylori
infection. Drugs
include proton pump inhibitors, H
blockers, antacids, and prostaglandins.
Proton pump inhibitors:
These drugs are potent inhibitors of H
+
,K
+
-ATPase. This enzyme, located in
the apical secretory membrane of the parietal cell, plays a key role in the secretion of H
+
(protons).
These drugs can completely inhibit acid secretion and have a long duration of action. They promote ulcer
healing and are also key components of
H. pylori
eradication regimens. Proton pump inhibitors have
replaced H
blockers in most clinical situations because of greater rapidity of action and efficacy.
Proton pump inhibitors include esomeprazole, lansoprazole, and pantoprazole, all available orally and IV,
and omeprazole and rabeprazole, available only orally in the US (see
Table 13-1
). Omeprazole is available without a prescription in the US. For uncomplicated duodenal ulcers,
omeprazole 20 mg po once/day or lansoprazole 30 mg po once/day is given for 4 wk. Complicated
duodenal ulcers (ie, multiple
[Table 13-1.
Proton Pump Inhibitors]
ulcers, bleeding ulcers, those > 1.5 cm, or those occurring in patients with serious underlying illness)
respond better to higher doses (omeprazole 40 mg once/day, lansoprazole 60 mg once/day or 30 mg bid).
Gastric ulcers require treatment for 6 to 8 wk. Gastritis and GERD require 8 to 12 wk of therapy; GERD
additionally requires long-term maintenance.
Long-term proton pump inhibitor therapy produces elevated gastrin levels, which lead to
enterochromaffin-like cell hyperplasia. However, there is no evidence of dysplasia or malignant
transformation in patients receiving this treatment. Some may develop vitamin B
malabsorption.
H
blockers:
These drugs (cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, available IV and orally; and nizatidine
available orally) are competitive inhibitors of histamine at the H
receptor, thus suppressing gastrinstimulated acid secretion and proportionately reducing gastric juice volume. Histamine-mediated pepsin
secretion is also decreased.
H
blockers are well absorbed from the GI tract, with onset of action 30 to 60 min after ingestion and
peak effects at 1 to 2 h. IV administration produces a more rapid onset of action. Duration of action is
proportional to dose and ranges from 6 to 20 h. Doses should often be reduced in elderly patients.
For duodenal ulcers, once daily oral administration of cimetidine 800 mg, ranitidine 300 mg, famotidine 40
===PAGE:204===
mg, or nizatidine 300 mg given at bedtime or after dinner for 6 to 8 wk is effective. Gastric ulcers may
respond to the same regimen continued for 8 to 12 wk, but because nocturnal acid secretion is less
important, morning administration may be equally or more effective. Children ≥ 40 kg may receive adult
doses. Below that weight, the oral dosage is ranitidine 2 mg/kg q 12 h and cimetidine 10 mg/kg q 12 h.
For GERD, H
blockers are now mostly used for pain management. Gastritis heals with famotidine or
ranitidine given bid for 8 to 12 wk.
Cimetidine has minor antiandrogen effects expressed as reversible gynecomastia and, less commonly,
erectile dysfunction with prolonged use. Mental status changes, diarrhea, rash, drug fever, myalgias,
thrombocytopenia, and sinus bradycardia and hypotension after rapid IV administration have been
reported with all H
blockers, generally in < 1% of treated patients but more commonly in elderly patients.
Cimetidine and, to a lesser extent, other H
blockers interact with the P-450 microsomal enzyme system
and may delay metabolism of other drugs eliminated through this system (eg, phenytoin, warfarin,
theophylline, diazepam, lidocaine).
Antacids:
These agents neutralize gastric acid and reduce pepsin activity (which diminishes as gastric
pH rises to > 4.0). In addition, some antacids adsorb pepsin. Antacids may interfere with the absorption of
other drugs (eg, tetracycline, digoxin, iron).
Antacids relieve symptoms, promote ulcer healing, and reduce recurrence. They are relatively
inexpensive but must be taken 5 to 7 times/day. The optimal antacid regimen for ulcer healing seems to
be 15 to 30 mL of liquid or 2 to 4 tablets 1 h and 3 h after each meal and at bedtime. The total daily
dosage of antacids should provide 200 to 400 mEq neutralizing capacity. However, antacids have been
superseded by
acid-suppressive therapy in the treatment of peptic ulcer and are used only for short-term
symptom relief.
In general, there are 2 types of antacids: absorbable and nonabsorbable. Absorbable antacids (eg, Na
bicarbonate, Ca carbonate) provide rapid, complete neutralization but may cause alkalosis and should be
used only briefly (1 or 2 days). Nonabsorbable antacids (eg, aluminum or Mg hydroxide) have fewer
systemic adverse effects and are preferred.
Aluminum hydroxide is a relatively safe, commonly used antacid. With chronic use, phosphate depletion
occasionally develops as a result of binding of phosphate by aluminum in the GI tract. The risk of
phosphate depletion increases in alcoholics, undernourished patients, and patients with renal disease
(including those receiving hemodialysis). Aluminum hydroxide causes constipation.
Mg hydroxide is a more effective antacid than aluminum but may cause diarrhea. To limit diarrhea, many
proprietary antacids combine Mg and aluminum antacids. Because small amounts of Mg are absorbed,
Mg preparations should be used with caution in patients with renal disease.
Prostaglandins:
Certain prostaglandins (especially misoprostol) inhibit acid secretion by decreasing the
generation of cyclic AMP that is triggered by histamine stimulation of the parietal cell, and enhance
mucosal defense. Synthetic prostaglandin derivatives are used predominantly to decrease the risk of
NSAID-induced mucosal injury. Patients at high risk of NSAID-induced ulcers (ie, elderly patients, those
with a history of ulcer or ulcer complication, those also taking corticosteroids) are candidates to take
misoprostol 200
μ
g po qid with food along with their NSAID. Common adverse effects of misoprostol are
abdominal cramping and diarrhea, which occur in 30% of patients. Misoprostol is a powerful abortifacient
and is absolutely contraindicated in women of childbearing age who are not using contraception.
Sucralfate:
This drug is a sucrose-aluminum complex that dissociates in stomach acid and forms a
physical barrier over an inflamed area, protecting it from acid, pepsin, and bile salts. It also inhibits
pepsin-substrate interaction, stimulates mucosal prostaglandin production, and binds bile salts. It has no
effect on acid output or gastrin secretion. Sucralfate seems to have trophic effects on the ulcerated
mucosa, possibly by binding growth factors and concentrating them at an ulcer site. Systemic absorption
of sucralfate is negligible. Constipation occurs in 3 to 5% of patients. Sucralfate may bind to other drugs
and interfere with their absorption.
===PAGE:205===

===PAGE:206===
Chapter 14. Bezoars and Foreign Bodies
Introduction
Food and other ingested materials may collect and form solid masses within the GI tract.
Bezoars
A bezoar is a tightly packed collection of partially digested or undigested material that is unable
to exit the stomach. It often occurs in patients with abnormal gastric emptying, especially those
that have diabetic gastroparesis, as well as after gastric surgery. Many bezoars are
asymptomatic, but some cause symptoms of gastric outlet obstruction. Some can be dissolved
enzymatically, others removed endoscopically, and some require surgery.
Partially digested agglomerations of vegetable matter are called phytobezoars; agglomerations of hair are
called trichobezoars. Pharmacobezoars are concretions of medication (particularly common with
sucralfate and aluminum hydroxide gel). Many other substances have been found in bezoars.
Etiology
Trichobezoars, which can weigh several kg, most commonly occur in patients with psychiatric
disturbances who chew and swallow their own hair. Phytobezoars often occur in patients who have
undergone a Billroth I or II partial gastrectomy, especially when accompanied by vagotomy.
Hypochlorhydria, diminished antral motility, and incomplete mastication are the main predisposing factors;
these factors are more common
among the elderly, who are thus at higher risk of bezoar formation.
Others include diabetic gastroparesis and gastroplasty for morbid obesity. Consumption of persimmons (a
fruit containing the tannin shibuol, which polymerizes in the stomach) has been known to cause bezoars
that require surgery in > 90% of cases. Persimmon bezoars often occur in epidemics in regions where the
fruit is grown.
Symptoms and Signs
Most bezoars cause no symptoms, although postprandial fullness, nausea and vomiting, pain, and GI
bleeding may occur.
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy
Bezoars are detectable as a mass lesion on most tests (eg, x-ray, ultrasound, CT) that may be done to
evaluate upper GI symptoms. They may be mistaken for tumors; upper endoscopy is usually done. On
endoscopy, bezoars have an unmistakable irregular surface and may range in color from yellow-green to
gray-black. An endoscopic biopsy that yields hair or plant material is diagnostic.
Treatment
• Observation
• Sometimes manual removal via endoscopy
• Sometimes enzymatic therapy
If initial diagnosis is made by endoscopy, removal can be attempted at that time. Fragmentation with
forceps, wire snare, jet spray, or even laser may break up bezoars, allowing them to pass or be extracted.
Metoclopramide 40 mg IV over 24 h or 10 mg IM q 4 h for several days may increase peristalsis and aid
gastric emptying of fragmented material.
If endoscopy was not initially done, treatment is based on symptoms. Asymptomatic patients that have a
===PAGE:207===
bezoar discovered incidentally during testing for other reasons do not necessarily require intervention. In
some cases, a trial of enzymatic therapy can be attempted. Enzymes include papain (10,000 U with each
meal), meat tenderizer (5 mL [1 tsp] in 8 oz of clear liquid before each meal), or cellulase (10 g dissolved
in 1 L water, consumed over 24 h for 2 to 3 days). If enzymatic therapy is unsuccessful, or if patients are
symptomatic, endoscopic removal may be tried. Rocklike concretions and trichobezoars usually require
laparotomy.
Foreign Bodies
A variety of foreign bodies may enter the GI tract. Many pass spontaneously, but some become
impacted, causing symptoms of obstruction. Perforation may occur. The esophagus is the most
common (75%) site of impaction. Nearly all impacted objects can be removed endoscopically,
but surgery is occasionally necessary.
Undigestible objects may be intentionally swallowed by children and demented adults. Denture wearers,
the elderly, and inebriated people are prone to accidentally swallowing inadequately masticated food
(particularly meat), which may become impacted in the esophagus. Smugglers who swallow drug-filled
balloons, vials, or packages to escape detection (body packers or body stuffers) may develop intestinal
obstruction. The packaging may rupture, leading to drug overdose.
Esophageal foreign bodies:
Foreign bodies usually lodge in an area of esophageal narrowing such as
at the cricopharyngeus or aortic arch or just above the gastroesophageal junction. If obstruction is
complete, patients retch or vomit. Some patients drool because they are unable to swallow secretions.
Immediate endoscopic removal is required for sharp objects, coins in the proximal esophagus, and any
obstruction causing significant symptoms. Also, button batteries lodged in the esophagus may cause
direct corrosive damage, low-voltage burns, and pressure necrosis and thus require prompt removal.
Other esophageal foreign bodies may be observed for a maximum of 12 to 24 h. Glucagon 1 mg IV
sometimes relaxes the esophagus enough to allow spontaneous passage. Other methods, such as use of
effervescent agents, meat tenderizer, and bougienage, are not recommended. Endoscopic removal is the
treatment of choice. Removal is best achieved using a forceps, basket, or snare with an overtube placed
in the esophagus to prevent aspiration.
Sometimes, foreign bodies scratch the esophagus but do not become lodged. In such cases, patients may
report a foreign body sensation even though no foreign body is present.
Gastric and intestinal foreign bodies:
Foreign bodies that pass through the esophagus are
asymptomatic unless obstruction or perforation occurs. Of the foreign bodies that reach the stomach, 80
to 90% pass spontaneously, 10 to 20% require nonoperative intervention, and ≤ 1% require surgery.
Thus, most intragastric foreign bodies can be ignored. However, objects larger than 5 × 2 cm
rarely pass
the stomach. Sharp objects should be retrieved from the stomach because 15 to 35% will cause intestinal
perforation, but small round objects (eg, coins and button batteries) can simply be observed. The patient's
stools should be searched, and if the object does not appear, x-rays are taken at 48-h intervals. A coin
that remains in the stomach for > 4 wk or a battery showing signs of corrosion on x-ray that remains in the
stomach for > 48 h should be removed. A hand-held metal detector can localize metallic foreign bodies
and provide information comparable to that yielded by plain x-rays.
Patients with symptoms of obstruction or perforation require laparotomy. Ingested drug packages are of
great concern because of the risk of leakage and consequent drug overdose. Patients with symptoms of
drug toxicity should have immediate laparotomy with interim medical management of symptoms (eg,
benzodiazepines for cocaine toxicity). Asymptomatic patients should be admitted to the hospital. Some
clinicians advocate oral polyethylene glycol solution as a cathartic to enhance passage of the material;
others suggest surgical removal. The best practice is unclear.
Most foreign objects that have passed into the small intestine usually traverse the GI tract without
problem, even if they take weeks or months to do so. They tend to be held up just before the ileocecal
valve or at any site of narrowing, as is present in Crohn's disease. Sometimes objects such as toothpicks
===PAGE:208===
remain within the GI tract for many years, only to turn up in a granuloma or abscess.
Rectal foreign bodies:
Gallstones, fecaliths, and swallowed foreign bodies (including toothpicks and
chicken and fish bones) may lodge at the anorectal junction. Urinary calculi, vaginal pessaries, or surgical
sponges or instruments may erode into the rectum. Foreign bodies, sometimes bizarre and/or related to
sexual play, may be introduced intentionally but become lodged unintentionally. Some objects are caught
in the rectal wall, and others are trapped just above the anal sphincter.
Sudden, excruciating pain during defecation should arouse suspicion of a penetrating foreign body,
usually lodged at or just above the anorectal junction. Other manifestations depend on the size and shape
of the foreign body, its duration in situ, and the presence of infection or perforation.
Foreign bodies usually become lodged in the mid rectum, where they cannot negotiate the anterior
angulation of the rectum. They can be felt on digital examination. Abdominal examination and chest x-rays
may be necessary to exclude possible intraperitoneal rectal perforation.
If the object can be palpated, a local anesthetic is given by sc and submucosal injections of 0.5%
lidocaine or bupivacaine. The anus is dilated with a rectal retractor, and the foreign body is grasped and
removed. If the object cannot be palpated, the patient should be hospitalized. Peristalsis usually moves
the foreign body down to the mid rectum, and the above routine can be followed. Removal via a
sigmoidoscope or proctoscope is rarely successful, and sigmoidoscopy usually forces the foreign body
proximally, delaying its extraction. Regional or general anesthesia is infrequently necessary, and
laparotomy with milking of the foreign body toward the anus or colotomy with extraction of the foreign
body is rarely necessary. After extraction, sigmoidoscopy should be done to rule out significant rectal
trauma or perforation. Removal of a rectal foreign body may be of high risk and should be done by a
surgeon or gastroenterologist skilled in foreign body removal.
===PAGE:209===
Chapter 15. Pancreatitis
Introduction
Pancreatitis is classified as either acute or chronic. Acute pancreatitis is inflammation that resolves both
clinically and histologically. Chronic pancreatitis is characterized by histologic changes that are
irreversible and progressive and that result in considerable loss of exocrine and endocrine pancreatic
function. Patients with chronic pancreatitis may have a flare-up of acute disease.
Pancreatitis can affect both the exocrine and endocrine functions of the pancreas. Pancreatic acinar cells
secrete bicarbonate and digestive enzymes into ducts that connect the pancreas to the duodenum at the
ampulla of Vater (exocrine function). Pancreatic
β
-cells secrete insulin directly into the bloodstream
(endocrine function).
Acute Pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas (and, sometimes, adjacent tissues) caused
by the release of activated pancreatic enzymes. The most common triggers are biliary tract
disease and chronic heavy alcohol intake. The condition ranges from mild (abdominal pain and
vomiting) to severe (pancreatic necrosis and a systemic inflammatory process with shock and
multiorgan failure). Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation and serum amylase and lipase
levels. Treatment is supportive, with IV fluids, analgesics, and fasting.
Etiology
Biliary tract disease and alcoholism account for ≥ 80% of acute pancreatitis cases. The remaining 20%
result from myriad causes (see
Table 15-1
).
Pathophysiology
The precise mechanism by which obstruction of the sphincter of Oddi by a gallstone or microlithiasis
(sludge) causes pancreatitis is unclear, although it probably involves increased ductal pressure.
Prolonged alcohol intake (> 100 g/day for > 3 to 5 yr) may cause the protein of pancreatic enzymes to
precipitate within small pancreatic ductules. Ductal obstruction by these protein plugs may cause
premature activation of pancreatic enzymes. An alcohol binge in such patients can trigger pancreatitis, but
the exact mechanism is not known.
A number of genetic mutations predisposing to pancreatitis have been identified. One, an autosomal
dominant mutation of the cationic trypsinogen gene, causes pancreatitis in 80% of carriers; an obvious
familial pattern is present. Other mutations have lesser penetrance and are not readily apparent clinically
except through genetic testing. The genetic abnormality responsible for cystic fibrosis increases the risk
of recurrent acute as well as chronic pancreatitis.
Regardless of the etiology, pancreatic enzymes (including trypsin, phospholipase A
, and elastase)
become activated within the gland itself. The enzymes can damage tissue and activate complement and
the inflammatory cascade, producing cytokines. This process causes inflammation, edema, and
sometimes necrosis. In mild pancreatitis, inflammation is confined to the pancreas; the mortality rate is <
5%. In severe pancreatitis, there is significant inflammation, with necrosis and hemorrhage of the gland
and a systemic inflammatory response; the mortality rate is 10 to 50%. After 5 to 7 days, necrotic
pancreatic tissue may become infected by enteric bacteria.
[Table 15-1.
Some Causes of Acute Pancreatitis]
Activated enzymes and cytokines that enter the peritoneal cavity cause a chemical burn and third spacing
of fluid; those that enter the systemic circulation cause a systemic inflammatory response that can result
in acute respiratory distress syndrome and renal failure. The systemic effects are mainly the result of
===PAGE:210===
increased capillary permeability and decreased vascular tone, which result from the released cytokines
and chemokines. Phospholipase A
is thought to injure alveolar membranes of the lungs.
In about 40% of patients, collections of enzyme-rich pancreatic fluid and tissue debris form in and around
the pancreas. In about
half, the collections resolve spontaneously. In others, the collections become
infected or form pseudocysts. Pseudocysts have a fibrous capsule without an epithelial lining.
Pseudocysts may hemorrhage, rupture, or become infected.
Death during the first several days is usually caused by cardiovascular instability (with refractory shock
and renal failure) or respiratory failure (with hypoxemia and at times adult respiratory distress syndrome).
Occasionally, death results from heart failure secondary to an unidentified myocardial depressant factor.
Death after the first week is usually caused by multiorgan system failure.
Symptoms and Signs
An acute attack causes steady, boring upper abdominal pain, typically severe enough to require large
doses of parenteral opioids. The pain radiates through to the back in about 50% of patients; rarely, pain
is first felt in the lower abdomen. Pain usually develops suddenly in gallstone pancreatitis; in alcoholic
pancreatitis, pain develops over a few days. The pain usually persists for several days. Sitting up and
leaning forward may reduce pain, but coughing, vigorous movement, and deep breathing may accentuate
it. Nausea and vomiting are common.
The patient appears acutely ill and sweaty. Pulse rate is usually 100 to 140 beats/min. Respiration is
shallow and rapid. BP may be transiently high or low, with significant postural hypotension. Temperature
may be normal or even subnormal at first but may increase to 37.7 to 38.3° C (100 to 101° F) within a few
hours. Sensorium may be blunted to the point of semicoma. Scleral icterus is occasionally present. The
lungs may have limited diaphragmatic excursion and evidence of atelectasis.
About 20% of patients experience upper abdominal distention caused by gastric distention or
displacement of the stomach by a pancreatic inflammatory mass. Pancreatic duct disruption may cause
ascites (pancreatic ascites). Marked abdominal tenderness occurs, most often in the upper abdomen.
There may be mild tenderness in the lower abdomen, but the rectum is not tender and the stool is usually
negative for occult blood. Mild-to-moderate muscular rigidity may be present in the upper abdomen but is
rare in the lower abdomen. Rarely, severe peritoneal irritation results in a rigid and boardlike abdomen.
Bowel sounds may be hypoactive. Grey Turner's sign (ecchymoses of the flanks) and Cullen's sign
(ecchymoses of the umbilical region) indicate extravasation of hemorrhagic exudate.
Infection in the pancreas or in an adjacent fluid collection should be suspected if the patient has a
generally toxic appearance with elevated temperature and WBC count or if deterioration follows an initial
period of stabilization.
Diagnosis
• Serum markers (amylase, lipase)
• Once pancreatitis is diagnosed, CT usually done
Pancreatitis is suspected whenever severe abdominal pain occurs, especially in a patient with significant
alcohol use or known gallstones. Conditions causing similar symptoms include perforated gastric or
duodenal ulcer, mesenteric infarction, strangulating intestinal obstruction, dissecting aneurysm, biliary
colic, appendicitis, diverticulitis, inferior wall MI, and hematoma of the abdominal muscles or spleen.
Diagnosis is made by clinical suspicion, serum markers (amylase and lipase), and the absence of other
causes for the patient's symptoms. Thus, a broad range of tests is done, typically including CBC,
electrolytes, Ca, Mg, glucose, BUN, creatinine, amylase, and lipase. Other routine tests include ECG and
an abdominal series (chest, flat, and upright abdomen). A urine dipstick for trypsinogen-2 has sensitivity
and specificity of > 90% for acute pancreatitis. Ultrasound and CT are not generally done specifically to
diagnose pancreatitis but are often used to evaluate acute abdominal pain (see p.
===PAGE:211===
).
Laboratory tests:
Serum amylase and lipase concentrations increase on the first day of acute
pancreatitis and return to normal in 3 to 7 days. Lipase is more specific for pancreatitis, but both enzymes
may be increased in renal failure and various abdominal conditions (eg, perforated ulcer, mesenteric
vascular occlusion, intestinal obstruction). Other causes of increased serum amylase include salivary
gland dysfunction, macroamylasemia, and tumors that secrete amylase. Both amylase and lipase levels
may remain normal if destruction of acinar tissue during previous episodes precludes release of sufficient
amounts of enzymes. The serum of patients with hypertriglyceridemia may contain a circulating inhibitor
that must be diluted before an elevation in serum amylase can be detected.
Amylase:creatinine clearance ratio does not have sufficient sensitivity or specificity to diagnose
pancreatitis. It is generally used to diagnose macroamylasemia when no pancreatitis exists. In
macroamylasemia, amylase bound to serum immunoglobulin falsely elevates the serum amylase level.
Fractionation of total serum amylase into pancreatic type (p-type) isoamylase and salivary-type (s-type)
isoamylase increases the accuracy of serum amylase. However, the level of p-type also increases in
renal failure and in other severe abdominal conditions in which amylase clearance is altered.
The WBC count usually increases to 12,000 to 20,000/
μ
L. Third-space fluid losses may increase the Hct
to as high as 50 to 55%, indicating severe inflammation. Hyperglycemia may occur. Serum Ca
concentration falls as early as the first day because of the formation of Ca "soaps" secondary to excess
generation of free fatty acids, especially by pancreatic lipase. Serum bilirubin increases in 15 to 25% of
patients because pancreatic edema compresses the common bile duct.
Imaging:
Plain x-rays of the abdomen may disclose calcifications within pancreatic ducts (evidence of
prior inflammation and hence chronic pancreatitis), calcified gallstones, or localized ileus in the left upper
quadrant or the center of the abdomen (a "sentinel loop" of small bowel, dilation of the transverse colon,
or duodenal ileus). Chest x-ray may reveal atelectasis or a pleural effusion (usually left-sided or bilateral
but rarely confined to the right pleural space).
Ultrasound should be done if gallstone pancreatitis is suspected (and another etiology is not obvious) to
detect gallstones or dilation of the common bile duct (which indicates biliary tract obstruction). Edema of
the pancreas may be visualized, but overlying gas frequently obscures the pancreas.
CT with IV contrast is generally done to identify necrosis, fluid collections, or pseudocysts once
pancreatitis has been diagnosed. It is particularly recommended for severe pancreatitis or if a
complication ensues (eg, hypotension or progressive leukocytosis and elevation of temperature). IV
contrast facilitates the recognition of pancreatic necrosis; however, it may cause pancreatic necrosis in
areas of low perfusion (ie, ischemia). Thus, contrast-enhanced CT should be done only after the patient
has been adequately hydrated.
If pancreatic infection is suspected, fluid obtained by percutaneous CT-guided needle aspiration of cysts
or areas of fluid collection or necrosis may reveal organisms on Gram stain or culture. The diagnosis is
supported by positive blood cultures and, particularly, by the presence of air bubbles in the
retroperitoneum on abdominal CT. The advent of magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP) may make the selection of pancreatic imaging simpler.
Prognosis
In edematous pancreatitis, mortality is < 5%. In pancreatitis with necrosis and hemorrhage, mortality is 10
to 50%. In pancreatic infection, mortality is usually 100% without extensive surgical debridement or
drainage of the infected area.
CT findings correlate with prognosis. If CT is normal or shows only mild pancreatic edema (Balthazar
class A or B), the prognosis is excellent. Patients with peripancreatic inflammation or one area of fluid
collection (classes C and D) have a 10 to 15% incidence of abscess formation; the incidence is over 60%
in patients with two or more areas of fluid collection (class E).
===PAGE:212===
Ranson's prognostic signs
help predict the prognosis of acute pancreatitis. Five of Ranson's signs can
be documented at admission:
• Age > 55 yr
• Plasma glucose > 200 mg/dL (> 11.1 mmol/L)
• Serum LDH > 350 IU/L
• AST > 250 UL
• WBC count > 16,000/
μ
L
The rest of Ranson's signs are determined within 48 h of admission:
• Hct decrease > 10%
• BUN increase > 5 mg/dL (> 1.78 mmol/L)
• Serum Ca < 8 mg/dL (< 2 mmol/L)
• Pao
< 60 mm Hg (< 7.98 kPa)
• Base deficit > 4 mEq/L (> 4 mmol/L)
• Estimated fluid sequestration > 6 L
Mortality increases with the number of positive signs: If < 3 signs are positive, the mortality rate is < 5%; if
≥ 3 are positive, mortality is 15 to 20%.
The APACHE II index (see
Table 222-4
, calculated on the second hospital day, also correlates with prognosis.
Treatment
• Fluid resuscitation
• Fasting
• Drugs, including adequate analgesia and acid blockers
• Antibiotics for pancreatic necrosis
• Drainage of infected pseudocysts or areas of necrosis
Adequate fluid resuscitation is essential; up to 6 to 8 L/day of fluid containing appropriate electrolytes may
be required. Inadequate fluid therapy increases the risk of pancreatic necrosis.
Fasting is indicated until acute inflammation subsides (ie, cessation of abdominal tenderness and pain,
normalization of serum
amylase, return of appetite, feeling better). Fasting can last from a few days in
mild pancreatitis to several weeks. TPN should be initiated in severe cases within the first few days to
prevent undernutrition.
Pain relief requires parenteral opioids, which should be given in adequate doses. Although morphine may
cause the sphincter of Oddi to contract, this is of doubtful clinical significance. Antiemetic agents (eg,
prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg IV q 6 h) should be given to alleviate vomiting. An NGT is required only if
significant vomiting persists or ileus is present.
===PAGE:213===
Parenteral H
blockers or proton pump inhibitors are given. Efforts to reduce pancreatic secretion with
drugs (eg, anticholinergics, glucagon, somatostatin, octreotide) have no proven benefit.
Severe acute pancreatitis should be treated in an ICU, particularly in patients with hypotension, oliguria,
Ranson's score ≥ 3, APACHE II ≥ 8, or pancreatic necrosis on CT > 30%. In the ICU, vital signs and urine
output are monitored hourly; metabolic parameters (Hct, glucose, and electrolytes) are reassessed every
8 h; ABG is determined as needed; central venous pressure line or Swan-Ganz catheter measurements
are determined every 6 h if the patient is hemodynamically unstable or if fluid requirements are unclear.
CBC, platelet count, coagulation parameters, total protein with albumin, BUN, creatinine, Ca, and Mg are
measured daily.
Hypoxemia is treated with humidified O
via mask or nasal prongs. If hypoxemia persists or adult
respiratory distress syndrome develops, assisted ventilation may be required. Glucose > 170 to 200
mg/dL (9.4 to 11.1 mmol/L) should be treated cautiously with sc or IV insulin and carefully monitored.
Hypocalcemia generally is not treated unless neuromuscular irritability occurs; 10 to 20 mL of 10% Ca
gluconate in 1 L of IV fluid is given over 4 to 6 h. Chronic alcoholics and patients with documented
hypomagnesemia should receive Mg sulfate 1 g/L of replacement fluid for a total of 2 to 4 g, or until levels
normalize. If renal failure occurs, serum Mg levels are monitored and IV Mg is given cautiously. With
restoration of normal Mg levels, serum Ca levels usually return to normal.
Heart failure should be treated (. Prerenal azotemia should be treated by increased fluid
replacement. Renal failure may require dialysis (usually peritoneal).
Antibiotic prophylaxis with imipenem can prevent infection of sterile pancreatic necrosis, although the
effect on reducing mortality is unclear. Infected areas of pancreatic necrosis require surgical debridement,
but infected fluid collections outside the pancreas may be drained percutaneously. A pseudocyst that is
expanding rapidly, infected, bleeding, or likely to rupture requires drainage. Whether drainage is
percutaneous, surgical, or endoscopic depends on location of the pseudocyst and institutional expertise.
Peritoneal lavage to wash out activated pancreatic enzymes and inflammatory mediators has no proven
benefit.
Surgical intervention during the first several days is justified for severe blunt or penetrating trauma or
uncontrolled biliary sepsis. Although > 80% of patients with gallstone pancreatitis pass the stone
spontaneously, ERCP with sphincterotomy and stone removal is indicated for patients who do not improve
after 24 h of treatment. Patients who spontaneously improve generally undergo elective laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. Elective cholangiography remains controversial.
Chronic Pancreatitis
Chronic pancreatitis is persistent inflammation of the pancreas that results in permanent
structural damage with fibrosis and ductal strictures, followed by a decline in exocrine and
endocrine function. It can occur as the result of chronic alcohol abuse but may be idiopathic.
Initial symptoms are recurrent attacks of pain. Later in the disease, some patients develop
malabsorption and glucose intolerance. Diagnosis is usually made by imaging studies such as
ERCP, endoscopic ultrasound, or secretin pancreatic function testing. Treatment is supportive,
with dietary modification, analgesics, and enzyme supplements. In some cases, surgical
treatment is helpful.
Etiology
In the US, 70 to 80% of cases result from alcoholism, and 15 to 25% are idiopathic. However, recent data
suggest that alcohol is becoming less of a cause. Less common causes include hereditary pancreatitis,
hyperparathyroidism, and obstruction of the main pancreatic duct caused by stenosis, stones, or cancer.
In India, Indonesia, and Nigeria, idiopathic calcific pancreatitis occurs among children and young adults
(tropical pancreatitis).
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:214===
Similar to acute pancreatitis, the mechanism of disease may be ductal obstruction by protein plugs. The
protein plugs may result from excess secretion of glycoprotein-2 or a
deficiency of lithostatin, a protein in
pancreatic fluid that inhibits Ca precipitation. If obstruction is chronic, persistent inflammation leads to
fibrosis and alternating areas of ductal dilation and stricture, which may become calcified. Neuronal
sheath hypertrophy and perineural inflammation occur and may contribute to chronic pain.
After several years, progressive fibrosis leads to loss of exocrine and endocrine function. Diabetes
develops in 20 to 30% of patients within 10 to 15 yr of onset.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with episodic abdominal pain. About 10 to 15% have no pain and present with
malabsorption. Pain is epigastric, severe, and may last many hours or several days. Episodes typically
subside spontaneously after 6 to 10 yr as the acinar cells that secrete pancreatic digestive enzymes are
progressively destroyed. When lipase and protease secretions are reduced to < 10% of normal, the
patient develops steatorrhea, passing greasy stools or even oil droplets, and creatorrhea (the presence
of undigested muscle fibers in the feces). Symptoms of glucose intolerance may appear at this time.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion
• Abdominal CT
• Sometimes magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), endoscopic ultrasonography, or
ERCP
Diagnosis can be difficult because amylase and lipase levels are frequently normal because of significant
loss of pancreatic function. In a patient with a typical history of alcohol abuse and recurrent episodes of
acute pancreatitis, detection of pancreatic calcification on plain x-ray of the abdomen may be sufficient.
However, such calcifications typically occur late in the disease and then are visible in only about 30% of
patients. In patients without a typical history, pancreatic cancer must be excluded as the cause of pain:
abdominal CT is recommended. CT can show calcifications and other pancreatic abnormalities (eg,
pseudocyst or dilated ducts) but still may be normal early in the disease.
The primary options for patients with normal CT findings include ERCP, endoscopic ultrasonography, and
secretin pancreatic function testing. These tests are quite sensitive, but ERCP precipitates acute
pancreatitis in about 5% of patients. MRCP may prove an acceptable alternative.
Late in the disease, tests of pancreatic exocrine function become abnormal. A 72-h test for stool fat is
diagnostic for steatorrhea but cannot establish a cause. The secretin test collects pancreatic secretions
via a duodenal tube for analysis but is done in only a few centers. Levels of serum trypsinogen and fecal
chymotrypsin and elastase may be decreased. In the bentiromide test and the pancreolauryl test,
substances are given orally, and urine is analyzed for cleavage products generated by pancreatic
enzymes. All such exocrine tests are less sensitive than ERCP or endoscopic ultrasonography early in the
disease.
Treatment
• IV fluids
• Fasting
• Drugs, including adequate analgesia and acid blockers
• Pancreatic enzyme supplements
===PAGE:215===
• Sometimes drainage of pseudocysts (surgical or endoscopic)
A relapse requires treatment similar to acute pancreatitis with fasting, IV fluids, and analgesics. When
feeding resumes, the patient must eschew alcohol and consume a low-fat (< 25 g/day) diet (to reduce
secretion of pancreatic enzymes). An H
blocker or proton pump inhibitor may reduce acid-stimulated
release of secretin, thereby decreasing the flow of pancreatic secretions. Too often, these measures do
not relieve pain, requiring increased amounts of opioids, with the threat of addiction. Medical treatment of
chronic pancreatic pain is often unsatisfactory.
Pancreatic enzyme supplementation may reduce chronic pain by inhibiting the release of cholecystokinin,
thereby reducing the secretion of pancreatic enzymes. Supplementation is more likely to be successful in
mild idiopathic pancreatitis than in alcoholic pancreatitis. Enzymes are also used to treat steatorrhea.
Various preparations are available, and a dose providing at least 30,000 U of lipase should be used. Nonenteric coated tablets should be used, and they should be taken with meals. An H
blocker or proton
pump inhibitor should be given to prevent acid breakdown of the enzymes.
Favorable clinical responses include weight gain, fewer bowel movements, elimination of oil droplet
seepage, and improved well-being. Clinical response can be documented by showing a decrease in stool
fat after enzyme therapy. If steatorrhea is particularly severe and refractory to these measures, mediumchain triglycerides can be provided as a source of fat (they are absorbed without pancreatic enzymes),
reducing
other dietary fats proportionally. Supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, K) should be
given, including vitamin E, which may minimize inflammation.
Surgical treatment may be effective for pain relief. A pancreatic pseudocyst, which may cause chronic
pain, can be decompressed into a nearby structure to which it firmly adheres (eg, the stomach) or into a
defunctionalized loop of jejunum (via a Roux-en-Y cystojejunostomy). If the main pancreatic duct is dilated
> 5 to 8 mm, a lateral pancreaticojejunostomy (Puestow procedure) relieves pain in about 70 to 80% of
patients. If the duct is not dilated, a partial resection is similarly effective; either distal pancreatectomy (for
extensive disease at the tail of the pancreas) or Whipple procedure (for extensive disease at the head of
the pancreas) is done. Operative approaches should be reserved for patients who have stopped using
alcohol and who can manage diabetes that may be intensified by pancreatic resection.
Some pseudocysts can be drained endoscopically. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided denervation of the
celiac plexus with alcohol and bupivacaine may provide pain relief. If there is significant stricture at the
papilla or distal pancreatic duct, ERCP with sphincterotomy, stent placement, or dilatation may be
effective.
Oral hypoglycemic drugs rarely help treat diabetes caused by chronic pancreatitis. Insulin should be given
cautiously because the coexisting deficiency of glucagon secretion by
α
-cells means that the
hypoglycemic effects of insulin are unopposed and prolonged hypoglycemia may occur.
Patients are at increased risk of pancreatic cancer. Worsening of symptoms, especially with development
of a pancreatic duct stricture, should prompt an evaluation for cancer. Evaluation may include brushing
strictures for cytologic analysis or measuring serum markers (eg, CA 19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen).
===PAGE:216===
Chapter 16. Gastroenteritis
Introduction
(See also
Food Allergy
on p.
and
Mushroom Poisoning
)
Gastroenteritis is inflammation of the lining of the stomach and small and large intestines. Most
cases are infectious, although gastroenteritis may occur after ingestion of drugs and chemical
toxins (eg, metals, plant substances). Symptoms include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
and abdominal discomfort. Diagnosis is clinical or by stool culture, although immunoassays are
increasingly used. Treatment is symptomatic, although parasitic and some bacterial infections
require specific anti-infective therapy.
Gastroenteritis is usually uncomfortable but self-limited. Electrolyte and fluid loss is usually little more than
an inconvenience to an otherwise healthy adult but can be grave for people who are very young (, elderly, or debilitated or who have serious concomitant illnesses. Worldwide, an estimated 3 to 6
million children die each year from infectious gastroenteritis.
Etiology
Infectious gastroenteritis may be caused by viruses, bacteria, or parasites. Many specific organisms are
discussed further in the Infectious Diseases section.
Viruses:
The viruses most commonly implicated are
• Rotavirus
• Norovirus
Viruses are the most common cause of gastroenteritis in the US. They infect enterocytes in the villous
epithelium of the small bowel. The result is transudation of fluid and salts into the intestinal lumen;
sometimes, malabsorption of carbohydrates worsens symptoms by causing osmotic diarrhea. Diarrhea is
watery. Inflammatory diarrhea (dysentery), with fecal WBCs and RBCs or gross blood, is uncommon. Four
categories of viruses cause most gastroenteritis: rotavirus and calicivirus (predominantly the norovirus
[formerly Norwalk virus]) cause the majority of viral gastroenteritis, followed by astrovirus and enteric
adenovirus.
Rotavirus is the most common cause of sporadic, severe, dehydrating diarrhea in young children (peak
incidence, 3 to 15 mo). Rotavirus is highly contagious; most infections occur by the fecal-oral route. Adults
may be infected after close contact with an infected infant. The illness in adults is generally mild.
Incubation is 1 to 3 days. In temperate climates, most infections occur in the winter. Each year in the US,
a wave of rotavirus illness begins in the Southwest in November and ends in the Northeast in March.
Norovirus most commonly infects older children and adults. Infections occur year-round. Norovirus is the
principal cause of sporadic viral gastroenteritis in adults and of epidemic viral gastroenteritis in all age
groups; large waterborne and food-borne outbreaks occur. Person-to-person transmission also occurs
because the virus is highly contagious. Incubation is 24 to 48 h.
Astrovirus can infect people of all ages but usually infects infants and young children. Infection is most
common in winter. Transmission is by the fecal-oral route. Incubation is 3 to 4 days.
Adenoviruses are the 4th most common cause of childhood viral gastroenteritis. Infections occur yearround, with a slight increase in summer. Children < 2 yr are primarily affected. Transmission is by the
fecal-oral route. Incubation is 3 to 10 days.
In immunocompromised patients, additional viruses (eg, cytomegalovirus, enterovirus) can cause
gastroenteritis.
===PAGE:217===
Bacteria:
The bacteria most commonly implicated are
•
Salmonella
•
Campylobacter
•
Shigella
•
Escherichia coli
(especially serotype O157:H7)
Bacterial gastroenteritis is less common than viral. Bacteria cause gastroenteritis by several mechanisms.
Certain species (eg,
Vibrio cholerae
, enterotoxigenic strains of
E. coli
) adhere to intestinal mucosa
without invading and produce enterotoxins. These toxins impair intestinal absorption and cause secretion
of electrolytes and water by stimulating adenylate cyclase, resulting in watery diarrhea.
Clostridium
difficile
produces a similar toxin when overgrowth follows antibiotic use (.
Some bacteria (eg,
Staphylococcus aureus
,
Bacillus cereus
,
Clostridium perfringens
) produce an
exotoxin that is ingested in contaminated food. The exotoxin can cause gastroenteritis without bacterial
infection. These toxins generally cause acute nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea within 12 h of ingestion of
contaminated food. Symptoms abate within 36 h.
Other bacteria (eg,
Shigella
,
Salmonella
,
Campylobacter
, some
E. coli
subtypes) invade the mucosa of
the small bowel or colon and cause microscopic ulceration, bleeding, exudation of protein-rich fluid, and
secretion of electrolytes and water. The invasive process and its results can occur whether or not the
organism produces an enterotoxin. The resulting diarrhea contains WBCs and RBCs and sometimes
gross blood.
Salmonella
and
Campylobacter
are the most common bacterial causes of diarrheal illness in the US.
Both infections are most frequently acquired through undercooked poultry; unpasteurized milk is also a
possible source.
Campylobacter
is occasionally transmitted from dogs or cats with diarrhea.
Salmonella
can be transmitted by undercooked eggs and by contact with reptiles. Species of
Shigella
are the 3rd
most common bacterial cause of diarrhea in the US and are usually transmitted person to person,
although food-borne epidemics occur.
Shigella dysenteriae
type 1 (not present in the US) produces
Shiga toxin, which can cause hemolytic-uremic syndrome (.
Several different subtypes of
E. coli
cause diarrhea. The epidemiology and clinical manifestations vary
greatly depending on the subtype: (1) Enterohemorrhagic
E. coli
is the most clinically significant subtype
in the US. It produces Shiga toxin, which causes bloody diarrhea (hemorrhagic colitis).
E. coli
O157:H7 is
the most common strain of this subtype in the US. Undercooked ground beef, unpasteurized milk and
juice, and contaminated water are possible sources. Person-to-person transmission is common in the day
care setting. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome is a serious complication that develops in 2 to 7% of cases,
most commonly among the young and old. (2) Enterotoxigenic
E. coli
produces two toxins (one similar to
cholera toxin) that cause watery diarrhea. This subtype is the most common cause of traveler's diarrhea.
(3) Enteropathogenic
E. coli
causes watery diarrhea. Once a common cause of diarrhea outbreaks in
nurseries, this subtype is now rare. (4) Enteroinvasive
E. coli
causes bloody or nonbloody diarrhea,
primarily in the developing world. It is rare in the US.
Several other bacteria cause gastroenteritis, but most are uncommon in the US.
Yersinia enterocolitica
can cause gastroenteritis or a syndrome that mimics appendicitis. It is transmitted by undercooked pork,
unpasteurized milk, or contaminated water. Several
Vibrio
species (eg,
V. parahaemolyticus
) cause
diarrhea after ingestion of undercooked seafood.
V. cholerae
sometimes causes severe dehydrating
diarrhea in the developing world.
Listeria
causes food-borne gastroenteritis.
Aeromonas
is acquired from
swimming
in or drinking contaminated fresh or brackish water.
Plesiomonas shigelloides
can cause
diarrhea in patients who have eaten raw shellfish or traveled to tropical regions of the developing world.
Parasites:
The parasites most commonly implicated are
===PAGE:218===
•
Giardia
•
Cryptosporidium
Certain intestinal parasites, notably
Giardia intestinalis
(
lamblia
—, adhere to or invade the
intestinal mucosa, causing nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and general malaise. Giardiasis occurs in every
region of the US and throughout the world. The infection can become chronic and cause a malabsorption
syndrome. It is usually acquired via person-to-person transmission (often in day care centers) or from
contaminated water.
Cryptosporidium parvum
causes watery diarrhea sometimes accompanied by abdominal cramps, nausea,
and vomiting. In healthy people, the illness is self-limited, lasting about 2 wk. In immunocompromised
patients, illness may be severe, causing substantial electrolyte and fluid loss.
Cryptosporidium
is usually
acquired through contaminated water.
Other parasites that can cause symptoms similar to those of cryptosporidiosis include
Cyclospora
cayetanensis
and, in immunocompromised patients,
Cystoisospora
(
Isospora
)
belli
, and a collection of
organisms referred to as microsporidia (eg,
Enterocytozoon bieneusi
,
Encephalitozoon intestinalis
).
Entamoeba histolytica
(amebiasis) is a common cause of subacute bloody diarrhea in the developing
world and occasionally occurs in the US.
Symptoms and Signs
The character and severity of symptoms vary. Generally, onset is sudden, with anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, borborygmi, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea (with or without blood and mucus). Malaise,
myalgias, and prostration may occur. The abdomen may be distended and mildly tender; in severe cases,
muscle guarding may be present. Gas-distended intestinal loops may be palpable. Borborygmi are
present even without diarrhea (an important differential feature from paralytic ileus). Persistent vomiting
and diarrhea can result in intravascular fluid depletion with hypotension and tachycardia. In severe cases,
shock, with vascular collapse and oliguric renal failure, occurs.
If vomiting is the main cause of fluid loss, metabolic alkalosis with hypochloremia can occur. If diarrhea is
more prominent, acidosis is more likely. Both vomiting and diarrhea can cause hypokalemia.
Hyponatremia may develop, particularly if hypotonic fluids are used in replacement therapy.
In viral infections, watery diarrhea is the most common symptom; stools rarely contain mucus or blood.
Rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants and young children may last 5 to 7 days. Vomiting occurs in 90% of
patients, and fever > 39° C (> 102.2° F) occurs in about 30%. Norovirus typically causes acute onset of
vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea, with symptoms lasting only 1 to 2 days. In children, vomiting is
more prominent than diarrhea, whereas in adults, diarrhea usually predominates. Patients may also
experience fever, headache, and myalgias. The hallmark of adenovirus gastroenteritis is diarrhea lasting
1 to 2 wk. Affected infants and children may have mild vomiting that typically starts 1 to 2 days after the
onset of diarrhea. Low-grade fever occurs in about 50% of patients. Astrovirus causes a syndrome similar
to mild rotavirus infection.
Bacteria that cause invasive disease (eg,
Shigella
,
Salmonella
) are more likely to result in fever,
prostration, and bloody diarrhea. Bacteria that produce an enterotoxin (eg,
S. aureus
,
B. cereus
,
C.
perfringens
) usually cause watery diarrhea.
Parasitic infections typically cause subacute or chronic diarrhea. Most cause nonbloody diarrhea; an
exception is
E. histolytica
, which causes amebic dysentery. Fatigue and weight loss are common when
diarrhea is persistent.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
===PAGE:219===
• Stool testing in select cases
Other GI disorders that cause similar symptoms (eg, appendicitis, cholecystitis, ulcerative colitis) must be
excluded. Findings suggestive of gastroenteritis include copious, watery diarrhea; ingestion of potentially
contaminated food (particularly during a known outbreak), untreated surface water, or a known GI irritant;
recent travel; or contact with similarly ill people.
E. coli
O157:H7-induced diarrhea is notorious for
appearing to be a hemorrhagic rather than an infectious process, manifesting as GI bleeding with little or
no stool. Hemolyticuremic syndrome may follow as evidenced by renal failure and hemolytic anemia (see
p.
). Recent oral antibiotic use (within 3 mo) must raise suspicion for
C. difficile
infection (.
Stool testing:
If a rectal examination shows occult blood or if watery diarrhea persists > 48 h, stool
examination (fecal WBCs, ova, parasites) and culture are indicated. However, for
the diagnosis of
giardiasis or cryptosporidiosis, stool antigen detection using an enzyme immunoassay has a higher
sensitivity. Rotavirus and enteric adenovirus infections can be diagnosed using commercially available
rapid assays that detect viral antigen in the stool, but these are usually done only to document an
outbreak.
All patients with grossly bloody diarrhea should be tested for
E. coli
O157:H7, as should patients with
nonbloody diarrhea during a known outbreak. Specific cultures must be requested because this organism
is not detected on standard stool culture media. Alternatively, a rapid enzyme assay for the detection of
Shiga toxin in stool can be done; a positive test indicates infection with
E. coli
O157:H7 or one of the
other serotypes of enterohemorrhagic
E. coli
. (NOTE:
Shigella
species in the US do not produce Shiga
toxin.)
Adults with grossly bloody diarrhea should usually have sigmoidoscopy with cultures and biopsy.
Appearance of the colonic mucosa may help diagnose amebic dysentery, shigellosis, and
E. coli
O157:H7 infection, although ulcerative colitis may cause similar lesions. Patients with recent antibiotic
use should have a stool assay for
C. difficile
toxin.
General tests:
Serum electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine should be obtained to evaluate hydration and
acid-base status in patients who appear seriously ill. CBC is nonspecific, although eosinophilia may
indicate parasitic infection.
Treatment
• Oral or IV rehydration
• Consideration of antidiarrheal agents if there is no suspicion of
C. difficile
or
E. coli
O157:H7 infection
• Antibiotics only in select cases
Supportive treatment is all that is needed for most patients. Bed rest with convenient access to a toilet or
bedpan is desirable. Oral glucose-electrolyte solutions, broth, or bouillon may prevent dehydration or treat
mild dehydration. Even if vomiting, the patient should take frequent small sips of such fluids: vomiting may
abate with volume replacement. For patients with
E. coli
O157:H7 infection, rehydration with isotonic IV
fluids may attenuate the severity of any renal injury should hemolytic-uremic syndrome develop. Children
may become dehydrated more quickly and should be given an appropriate rehydration solution (several
are available commercially—see also p.
). Carbonated beverages and sports drinks lack the correct ratio of glucose to Na and thus are not
appropriate for children < 5 yr. If the child is breastfed, breastfeeding should continue. If vomiting is
protracted or if severe dehydration is prominent, IV replacement of volume and electrolytes is necessary
(.
When the patient can tolerate fluids without vomiting and the appetite has begun to return, food may be
gradually restarted. There is no demonstrated benefit from restriction to bland food (eg, cereal, gelatin,
bananas, toast). Some patients have temporary lactose intolerance.
===PAGE:220===
Antidiarrheal agents are safe for patients > 5 yr with watery diarrhea (as shown by heme-negative stool).
However, antidiarrheals may cause deterioration of patients with
C. difficile
or
E. coli
O157:H7 infection
and thus should not be given to any patient with recent antibiotic use or heme-positive stool, pending
specific diagnosis. Effective antidiarrheals include loperamide 4 mg po initially, followed by 2 mg po for
each subsequent episode of diarrhea (maximum of 6 doses/day or 16 mg/day), or diphenoxylate 2.5 to 5
mg tid or qid in tablet or liquid form.
If vomiting is severe and a surgical condition has been excluded, an antiemetic may be beneficial. Agents
useful in adults include prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg IV tid or qid, or 25 mg per rectum bid; and
promethazine 12.5 to 25 mg IM tid or qid, or 25 to 50 mg per rectum qid. These drugs are usually avoided
in children because of lack of demonstrated efficacy and the high incidence of dystonic reactions.
Antimicrobials:
Empiric antibiotics are generally not recommended except for certain cases of traveler's
diarrhea or when suspicion of
Shigella
or
Campylobacter
infection is high (eg, contact with a known
case). Otherwise, antibiotics should not be given until stool culture results are known, particularly in
children, who have a higher rate of infection with
E. coli
O157:H7 (antibiotics increase the risk of
hemolytic-uremic syndrome in patients infected with
E. coli
O157:H7).
In proven bacterial gastroenteritis, antibiotics are not always required. They do not help with
Salmonella
and prolong the duration of shedding in the stool. Exceptions include immunocompromised patients,
neonates, and patients with
Salmonella
bacteremia. Antibiotics are also ineffective against toxic
gastroenteritis (eg,
S. aureus
,
B. cereus
,
C. perfringens
). Indiscriminate use of antibiotics fosters the
emergence of drug-resistant organisms. However, certain infections do require antibiotics (see
Table 16-1
).
The use of probiotics, such as lactobacillus, is generally safe and may have some benefit in relieving
symptoms. They can be given in the form of yogurt with active cultures.
[Table 16-1.
Selected Oral Antibiotics for Infectious Gastroenteritis*]
For cryptosporidiosis, nitazoxanide may be helpful in immunocompetent patients. The dose is 100 mg po
bid for children 1 to 3 yr, 200 mg po bid for children 4 to 11 yr, and 500 mg po bid for children ≥ 12 yr and
adults.
Prevention
A new oral pentavalent rotavirus vaccine is available that is safe and effective against the majority of
strains responsible for disease. This vaccine is now part of the recommended infant vaccination schedule
and is given at 2, 4, and 6 mo of age (.
Prevention of infection is complicated by the frequency of asymptomatic infection and the ease with which
many agents, particularly viruses, are transmitted from person to person. In general, proper procedures
for handling and preparing food must be followed. Travelers must avoid potentially contaminated food and
drink.
Breastfeeding affords some protection to neonates and infants. Caregivers should wash their hands
thoroughly with soap and water after changing diapers, and diaper-changing areas should be disinfected
with a freshly prepared solution of 1:64 household bleach (one fourth cup diluted in 1 gallon of water).
Children with diarrhea should be excluded from child care facilities for the duration of symptoms. Children
infected with enterohemorrhagic
E. coli
or
Shigella
should also have two negative stool cultures before
readmission to the facility.
Traveler's Diarrhea
(Turista)
Traveler's diarrhea is gastroenteritis that is usually caused by bacteria endemic to local water.
===PAGE:221===
Symptoms include vomiting and diarrhea.
Diagnosis is mainly clinical. Treatment is with
ciprofloxacin or azithromycin, loperamide, and replacement fluids.
Etiology
Traveler's diarrhea may be caused by any of several bacteria, viruses, or, less commonly, parasites.
However, enterotoxigenic
Escherichia coli
is most common.
E. coli
is common in the water supplies of
areas that lack adequate purification. Infection is common among people traveling to developing
countries. Norovirus infection has been a particular problem on some cruise ships.
Both food and water can be the source of infection. Travelers who avoid drinking local water may still
become infected by brushing their teeth with an improperly rinsed toothbrush, drinking bottled drinks with
ice made from local water, or eating food that is improperly handled or washed with local water. People
taking drugs that decrease stomach acid (antacids, H
blockers, and proton pump inhibitors) are at risk of
more severe illness.
Symptoms and Signs
Nausea, vomiting, borborygmi, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea begin 12 to 72 h after ingesting
contaminated food or water. Severity is variable. Some people develop fever and myalgias. Most cases
are mild and self-limited, although dehydration can occur, especially in warm climates.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Specific diagnostic measures are usually not necessary. However, fever, severe abdominal pain, and
bloody diarrhea suggest more serious disease and should prompt immediate evaluation.
Treatment
• Fluid replacement
• Sometimes antimotility drugs
• Rarely antibiotics (eg, ciprofloxacin, azithromycin)
The mainstay of treatment is fluid replacement and an antimotility drug such as loperamide 4 mg po
initially, followed by 2 mg po for each subsequent episode of diarrhea (maximum of 6 doses/day or 16
mg/day), or diphenoxylate 2.5 to 5 mg po tid or qid in tablet or liquid form. Antimotility drugs are
contraindicated in patients with fever or bloody stools and in children < 2 yr. Iodochlorhydroxyquin, which
may be available in some developing countries, should not be used because it may cause neurologic
damage.
Generally, antibiotics are not necessary for mild diarrhea. In patients with moderate to severe diarrhea (≥
3 loose stools over 8 h), antibiotics are given, especially if vomiting, abdominal cramps, fever, or bloody
stools are present. For adults, ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid for 3 days or levofloxacin 500 mg po once/day
for 3 days is recommended. Azithromycin 250 mg po once/day for 3 days or rifaximin 200 mg po tid for 3
days may also be used. For children, azithromycin 5 to 10 mg/kg po once/day for 3 days is preferred.
Prevention
Travelers should dine at restaurants with a reputation for safety and avoid foods and beverages from
street vendors. They should consume only cooked foods that are still steaming hot, fruit that can be
peeled, and carbonated beverages without ice served in sealed bottles (bottles of noncarbonated
beverages can contain tap water added by unscrupulous vendors); uncooked vegetables should be
avoided. Buffets and fast food restaurants pose an increased risk.
===PAGE:222===
Prophylactic antibiotics are effective in preventing diarrhea, but because of concerns about adverse
effects and development of resistance, they should probably be reserved for immunocompromised
patients.
Drug- and Chemical-Related Gastroenteritis
Many drugs cause nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea as adverse effects. A detailed drug history must be
obtained. In mild cases, cessation followed by reuse of the drug may establish a causal relationship.
Commonly responsible drugs include antacids containing Mg, antibiotics, antihelminthics, cytotoxics (used
in cancer therapy), colchicine, digoxin, heavy metals, laxatives, and radiation therapy. Use of antibiotics
may lead to
Clostridium difficile
-induced diarrhea (.
Iatrogenic, accidental, or intentional heavy-metal poisoning frequently causes nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, and diarrhea.
Laxative abuse, sometimes denied by patients, may lead to weakness, vomiting, diarrhea, electrolyte
depletion, and metabolic disturbances.
Various plants and mushrooms cause a syndrome of gastroenteritis (.
===PAGE:223===
Chapter 17. Malabsorption Syndromes
Introduction
Malabsorption is inadequate assimilation of dietary substances due to defects in digestion, absorption, or
transport. Malabsorption can affect macronutrients (eg, proteins, carbohydrates, fats), micronutrients (eg,
vitamins, minerals), or both, causing excessive fecal excretion, nutritional deficiencies, and GI symptoms.
Pathophysiology
Digestion and absorption occur in three phases: (1) intraluminal hydrolysis of fats, proteins, and
carbohydrates by enzymes—bile salts enhance the solubilization of fat in this phase; (2) digestion by
brush border enzymes and uptake of end-products; and (3) lymphatic transport of nutrients.
Malabsorption occurs when any of these phases is impaired.
Fats:
Pancreatic enzymes split long-chain triglycerides into fatty acids and monoglycerides, which
combine with bile acids and phospholipids to form micelles that pass through jejunal enterocytes.
Absorbed fatty acids are resynthesized and combined with protein, cholesterol, and phospholipid to form
chylomicrons, which are transported by the lymphatic system. Medium-chain triglycerides are absorbed
directly.
Unabsorbed fats trap fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K) and possibly some minerals, causing deficiency.
Bacterial overgrowth results in deconjugation and dehydroxylation of bile salts, limiting the absorption of
fats. Unabsorbed bile salts stimulate the colon, causing diarrhea.
Carbohydrates:
Enzymes on microvilli lyse carbohydrates and disaccharides into constituent
monosaccharides. Colonic bacteria ferment unabsorbed carbohydrates into CO
, methane, H
, and
short-chain fatty acids (butyrate, propionate, acetate, and lactate). These fatty acids cause diarrhea. The
gases cause abdominal distention and bloating.
Proteins:
Enterokinase, a brush border enzyme, activates trypsinogen into trypsin, which converts many
pancreatic proteases into their active forms. Active pancreatic enzymes hydrolyze proteins into
oligopeptides, which are absorbed directly or hydrolyzed into amino acids.
Etiology
Malabsorption has many causes (see
Table 17-1
). Some malabsorptive disorders (eg, celiac sprue) impair the absorption of most nutrients,
vitamins, and trace minerals (global malabsorption); others (eg, pernicious anemia) are more selective.
[Table 17-1.
Causes of Malabsorption]
Pancreatic insufficiency causes malabsorption if > 90% of function is lost. Increased luminal acidity (eg,
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome) inhibits lipase and fat digestion. Cirrhosis and cholestasis reduce hepatic bile
synthesis or delivery of bile salts to the duodenum, causing malabsorption. Other causes are discussed
elsewhere in this chapter.
Symptoms and Signs
The effects of unabsorbed substances include diarrhea, steatorrhea, abdominal bloating, and gas. Other
symptoms result from nutritional deficiencies. Patients often lose weight despite adequate food intake.
Chronic diarrhea is the most common symptom and is what usually prompts evaluation of the patient.
Steatorrhea—fatty stool, the hallmark of malabsorption—occurs when > 7 g/day of fat are excreted.
Steatorrhea causes foul-smelling, pale, bulky, and greasy stools.
Severe vitamin and mineral deficiencies occur in advanced malabsorption; symptoms are related to the
===PAGE:224===
specific nutrient deficiency (see
Table 17-2
). Vitamin B
deficiency may occur in blind loop syndrome or after extensive resection of the
distal ileum or stomach.
Amenorrhea may result from undernutrition and is an important manifestation of celiac sprue in young
women.
Diagnosis
• Diagnosis typically clinically apparent
• Blood tests to screen for consequences of malabsorption
• Stool fat testing to confirm malabsorption (if unclear)
• Cause diagnosed with endoscopy, contrast x-rays, or other tests based on findings
Malabsorption is suspected in a patient with chronic diarrhea, weight loss, and anemia. The etiology is
sometimes obvious. For example, those with malabsorption due to chronic pancreatitis usually have had
prior bouts of acute pancreatitis. Patients with celiac sprue can present with classic lifelong diarrhea
exacerbated by gluten products and may have dermatitis herpetiformis. Those with cirrhosis and
pancreatic cancer can present with jaundice. Abdominal distention, excessive flatus, and watery diarrhea
occurring 30 to 90 min after carbohydrate ingestion suggest deficiency of a disaccharidase enzyme,
usually lactase. Previous extensive abdominal operations suggest short bowel syndrome.
If the history suggests a specific cause, testing should be directed to that condition (see
Fig. 17-1
). If no cause is readily apparent, blood tests can be used as screening tools (eg, CBC, RBC
indices, ferritin, vitamin B
, folate, Ca, albumin, cholesterol, PT). These results may suggest a diagnosis
and direct further investigation.
[Table 17-2.
Symptoms of Malabsorption]
Macrocytic anemia should prompt measurement of serum folate and B
levels. Folate deficiency is
common in mucosal disorders involving the proximal small bowel (eg, celiac sprue, tropical sprue,
Whipple's disease). Low B
levels can occur in pernicious anemia, chronic pancreatitis, bacterial
overgrowth, and terminal ileal disease. A combination of low B
and high folate levels is suggestive of
bacterial overgrowth, because intestinal bacteria use vitamin B
and synthesize folate.
Microcytic anemia suggests iron deficiency, which may occur with celiac sprue. Albumin is a general
indicator of nutritional state. Low albumin can result from poor intake, decreased synthesis in cirrhosis, or
protein wasting. Low serum carotene (a precursor of vitamin A) suggests malabsorption if intake is
adequate.
Confirming malabsorption:
Tests to confirm malabsorption are appropriate when symptoms are vague
and the etiology is not apparent. Most tests for malabsorption assess fat malabsorption because it is
relatively easy to measure. Confirmation of carbohydrate malabsorption is not helpful once steatorrhea is
documented. Tests for protein malabsorption are rarely used because fecal nitrogen is difficult to
measure.
[Fig. 17-1.
Suggested evaluation for malabsorption.]
[Table 17-3.
Small-Bowel Mucosal Histology in Certain Malabsorptive Disorders]
Direct measurement of fecal fat from a 72-h stool collection is the gold standard for establishing
steatorrhea but unnecessary with gross steatorrhea of obvious cause. However, this test is available
routinely in only a few centers. Stool is collected for a 3-day period during which the patient consumes ≥
===PAGE:225===
100 g fat/day. Total fat in the stool is measured. Fecal fat > 7 g/day is abnormal. Although severe fat
malabsorption (fecal fat ≥ 40 g/day) suggests pancreatic insufficiency or small-bowel mucosal disease,
this test cannot determine the specific cause of malabsorption. Because the test is messy, unpleasant,
and time consuming, it is unacceptable to most patients and difficult to do.
Sudan III staining of a stool smear is a simple and direct, but nonquantitative, screening test for fecal fat.
Acid steatocrit is a gravimetric assay done on a single stool sample; it has a reported high sensitivity and
specificity (using 72-h collection as the standard). Near-infrared reflectance analysis (NIRA)
simultaneously tests stool for fat, nitrogen, and carbohydrates and may become the preferred test in the
future.
Measurement of elastase and chymotrypsin in the stool can also help differentiate pancreatic and
intestinal causes of malabsorption; both are decreased in pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
The D-xylose absorption test, if available, can be done if the etiology is not obvious. It is the best
noninvasive test to assess intestinal mucosal integrity and differentiate mucosal from pancreatic disease.
This test has a reported specificity of 98% and sensitivity of 91% for small-bowel malabsorption.
D-Xylose is absorbed by passive diffusion and does not require pancreatic enzymes for digestion. A
normal D-xylose test in the presence of moderate to severe steatorrhea indicates pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency rather than small-bowel mucosal disease. Bacterial overgrowth syndrome can cause
abnormal results because the enteric bacteria metabolize pentose, thus decreasing the D-xylose available
for absorption.
After fasting, the patient is given 25 g of D-xylose in 200 to 300 mL of water po. Urine is collected over 5
h, and a venous sample is obtained after 1 h. Serum D-xylose < 20 mg/dL or < 4 g in the urine sample
indicates abnormal absorption. Falsely low levels can also occur in renal diseases, portal hypertension,
ascites, or delayed gastric emptying time. This test is rarely used today. In addition, an abnormal D-xylose
test will require an endoscopic examination with biopsies of the small-bowel mucosa. As a result, smallbowel biopsy has replaced this test to establish intestinal mucosal disease.
Diagnosing the cause of malabsorption:
More specific diagnostic tests (eg, upper endoscopy,
colonoscopy, barium x-rays) are indicated to diagnose several causes of malabsorption.
Endoscopy with small-bowel biopsy is done when mucosal disease of the small bowel is suspected or if
the D-xylose test is abnormal in a patient with massive steatorrhea. Aspirate from the small bowel can be
sent for bacterial culture and colony count to document bacterial overgrowth. Histologic features on smallbowel biopsy (see
Table 17-3
) can establish the specific mucosal disease.
Small-bowel x-rays (eg, small-bowel follow-through, enteroclysis) can detect anatomic conditions that
predispose to bacterial overgrowth. These include jejunal diverticula, fistulas, surgically created blind
loops and anastomoses, ulcerations, and strictures. Abdominal flat plate x-ray may show pancreatic
calcifications indicative of chronic pancreatitis. Barium contrast studies of the small bowel are neither
sensitive nor specific but may have findings suggestive of mucosal disease (eg, dilated small-bowel
loops, thinned or thickened mucosal folds, coarse fragmentation of the barium column).
Tests for pancreatic insufficiency (eg, secretin stimulation test, bentiromide test, pancreolauryl test, serum
trypsinogen, fecal elastase, fecal chymotrypsin— are done if history is suggestive but are not
sensitive for mild pancreatic disease.
The
C-xylose breath test helps diagnose bacterial overgrowth.
C-xylose is given orally, and the
exhaled
CO
concentration is measured. Catabolism of ingested xylose by the overgrowth flora causes
CO
to appear in exhaled breath.
The H
breath test measures the exhaled H
produced by the bacterial degradation of carbohydrates. In
patients with disaccharidase deficiencies, enteric bacteria degrade nonabsorbed carbohydrates in the
===PAGE:226===
colon, increasing exhaled H
. The lactose-H
breath test is useful only to confirm lactase deficiency (see
p.
) and is not used as an initial diagnostic test in the work-up of malabsorption.
The Schilling test assesses malabsorption of vitamin B
. Its 4 stages determine whether the deficiency
results from pernicious anemia, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, bacterial overgrowth, or ileal disease.
• Stage 1: The patient is given 1
μ
g of radiolabeled cyanocobalamin po concurrent with 1000
μ
g of
nonlabeled cobalamin IM to saturate hepatic binding sites. A 24-h urine collection is analyzed for
radioactivity; urinary excretion of < 8% of the oral dose indicates malabsorption of cobalamin.
• Stage 2: If stage 1 is abnormal, the test is repeated with the addition of intrinsic factor. Pernicious
anemia is present if this normalizes absorption.
• Stage 3: Stage 3 is done after adding pancreatic enzymes; normalization in this stage indicates
cobalamin malabsorption secondary to pancreatic insufficiency.
• Stage 4: Stage 4 is done after antimicrobial therapy with anaerobic coverage; normalization after
antibiotics suggests bacterial overgrowth.
Cobalamin deficiency secondary to ileal disease or ileal resection results in abnormalities in all stages.
Tests for less common causes of malabsorption include serum gastrin (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome),
intrinsic factor and parietal cell antibodies (pernicious anemia), sweat chloride (cystic fibrosis), lipoprotein
electrophoresis (abetalipoproteinemia), and serum cortisol (Addison's disease).
Bacterial Overgrowth Syndrome
Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth can occur from alterations in intestinal anatomy or GI motility,
or lack of gastric acid secretion. This condition can lead to vitamin deficiencies, fat
malabsorption, and undernutrition. Diagnosis is by breath test or quantitative culture of
intestinal fluid aspirate. Treatment is with oral antibiotics.
Under normal conditions, the proximal small bowel contains < 10
bacteria/mL, mainly gram-positive
aerobic bacteria. This low bacterial count is maintained by normal peristalsis, normal gastric acid
secretion, mucus, secretory IgA, and an intact ileocecal valve.
Etiology
Usually, bacterial overgrowth occurs when anatomic alterations promote stasis of intestinal contents.
These conditions include small-bowel diverticulosis, surgical blind loops, postgastrectomy states
(especially in the afferent loop of a Billroth II), strictures, or partial obstruction. Intestinal motility disorders
associated with diabetic neuropathy, systemic sclerosis, amyloidosis, and idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction can also impair bacterial clearance. Achlorhydria and idiopathic changes in intestinal motility
may cause bacterial overgrowth in elderly people.
Pathophysiology
The excess bacteria consume nutrients, including vitamin B
and carbohydrates, leading to caloric
deprivation and vitamin B
deficiency. However, because the bacteria produce folate, this deficiency is
rare. The bacteria deconjugate bile salts, causing failure of micelle formation and subsequent fat
malabsorption. Severe bacterial overgrowth also damages the intestinal mucosa. Fat malabsorption and
mucosal damage can cause diarrhea.
Symptoms and Signs
Many patients are asymptomatic and present with only weight loss or nutrient deficiencies.
Some have
significant diarrhea or steatorrhea.
===PAGE:227===
Diagnosis
•
C-xylose breath test or quantitative culture of intestinal aspirate
• Upper GI series with small-bowel follow-through
Some clinicians advocate response to empiric antibiotic therapy as a diagnostic test. However, because
bacterial overgrowth can mimic other malabsorptive disorders (eg, Crohn's disease) and adverse effects
of the antibiotics can worsen symptoms, establishing a definitive etiology is preferred.
The standard for diagnosis is quantitative culture of intestinal fluid aspirate showing bacterial count >
/mL. This method, however, requires endoscopy. Breath tests, using substrates like glucose,
lactulose, and xylose, are noninvasive and easy to do. The
C-xylose breath test seems to perform
better than the other breath tests. In addition, an upper GI series with small-bowel follow-through should
be done to identify predisposing anatomic lesions.
Treatment
• Oral antibiotics (various)
Treatment is with 10 to 14 days of oral antibiotics. Empiric regimens include tetracycline 250 mg qid,
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 250 to 500 mg tid, cephalexin 250 mg qid, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
160/800 mg bid, and metronidazole 250 to 500 mg tid or qid. Antibiotics should be changed based on
culture and sensitivity results. Underlying conditions and nutritional deficiencies (eg, vitamin B
) should
be corrected.
Carbohydrate Intolerance
Carbohydrate intolerance is the inability to digest certain carbohydrates due to a lack of one or
more intestinal enzymes. Symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal distention, and flatulence.
Diagnosis is clinical and by an H
breath test. Treatment is removal of the causative
disaccharide from the diet.
Pathophysiology
Disaccharides are normally split into monosaccharides by disaccharidases (eg, lactase, maltase,
isomaltase, sucrase [invertase]) located in the brush border of small-bowel enterocytes. Undigested
disaccharides cause an osmotic load that attracts water and electrolytes into the bowel, causing watery
diarrhea. Bacterial fermentation of carbohydrates in the colon produces gases (H
, CO
, and methane),
resulting in excessive flatus, bloating and distention, and abdominal pain.
Etiology
Enzyme deficiencies can be congenital, acquired (primary), or secondary. Congenital deficiencies are
rare.
Acquired lactase deficiency (primary adult hypolactasia) is the most common form of carbohydrate
intolerance. Lactase levels are high in neonates, permitting digestion of milk; in most ethnic groups (80%
of blacks and Hispanics, almost 100% of Asians), the levels decrease in the post-weaning period
rendering older children and adults unable to digest significant amounts of lactose. However, 80 to 85%
of whites of Northwest European descent produce lactase throughout life and are thus able to digest milk
and milk products. It is unclear why the normal state of > 75% of the world's population should be labeled
a "deficiency."
Secondary lactase deficiency occurs in conditions that damage the small-bowel mucosa (eg, celiac sprue,
===PAGE:228===
tropical sprue, acute intestinal infections). In infants, temporary secondary disaccharidase deficiency may
complicate enteric infections or abdominal surgery. Recovery from the underlying disease is followed by
an increase in activity of the enzyme.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are similar in all disaccharidase deficiencies. A child who cannot tolerate lactose
develops diarrhea after ingesting significant amounts of milk and may not gain weight. An affected adult
may have watery diarrhea, bloating, excessive flatus, nausea, borborygmi, and abdominal cramps after
ingesting lactose. The patient often recognizes this early in life and avoids eating dairy products.
Symptoms typically require ingestion of more than the equivalent of 8 to 12 oz of milk. Diarrhea may be
severe enough to purge other nutrients before they can be absorbed. Symptoms may be similar to and
can be confused with irritable bowel syndrome (.
Diagnosis
• Clinical diagnosis
• H
breath test for confirmation
Lactose intolerance can usually be diagnosed with a careful history supported by
dietary challenge.
Patients usually have a history of intolerance to milk and dairy foods. The diagnosis is also suggested if
the stool from chronic or intermittent diarrhea is acidic (pH < 6) and can be confirmed by an H
breath or
a lactose tolerance test.
In the H
breath test, 50 g of lactose is given orally and the H
produced by bacterial metabolism of
undigested lactose is measured with a breath meter at 2, 3, and 4 h postingestion. Most affected patients
have an increase in expired H
of > 20 ppm over baseline. Sensitivity and specificity are > 95%.
The lactose tolerance test is less specific. Oral lactose (1.0 to 1.5 g/kg body weight) is given. Serum
glucose is measured before ingestion and 60 and 120 min after. Lactose-intolerant patients develop
diarrhea, abdominal bloating, and discomfort within 20 to 30 min, and their serum glucose levels do not
rise > 20 mg/dL (< 1.1 mmol/L) above baseline. Low lactase activity in a jejunal biopsy specimen is
diagnostic, but endoscopy is needed to obtain a specimen and is not routine.
Treatment
• Dietary restriction
Carbohydrate malabsorption is readily controlled by avoiding dietary sugars that cannot be absorbed (ie,
following a lactose-free diet in cases of lactase deficiency). However, because the degree of lactose
malabsorption varies greatly, many patients can ingest up to 12 oz (18 g of lactose) of milk daily without
symptoms. Yogurt is usually tolerated because it contains an appreciable amount of lactase produced by
intrinsic
Lactobacilli
.
For symptomatic patients wishing to drink milk, lactose in milk can be predigested by the addition of a
commercially prepared lactase, and pretreated milk is now available. Enzyme supplements should be an
adjunct to, not a substitute for, dietary restriction. Lactose-intolerant patients must take Ca supplements
(1200 to 1500 mg/day).
Celiac Sprue
(Nontropical Sprue; Gluten Enteropathy; Celiac Disease)
Celiac sprue is an immunologically mediated disease in genetically susceptible people caused
by intolerance to gluten, resulting in mucosal inflammation, which causes malabsorption.
Symptoms usually include diarrhea and abdominal discomfort. Diagnosis is by small-bowel
===PAGE:229===
biopsies showing characteristic though not specific pathologic changes of villous atrophy that
resolve with a strict gluten-free diet.
Etiology
Celiac sprue is a hereditary disorder caused by sensitivity to the gliadin fraction of gluten, a protein found
in wheat; similar proteins are present in rye and barley. In a genetically susceptible person, glutensensitive T cells are activated when gluten-derived peptide epitopes are presented. The inflammatory
response causes characteristic mucosal villous atrophy in the small bowel.
Epidemiology:
Celiac sprue mainly affects whites of northern European descent. Prevalence estimates
based on serologic screens (sometimes confirmed by biopsy) indicate the disorder is present in about
1/300 in Europe and perhaps 1/250 in the US overall (but there may be significant variation among
regions in the US).
The disease affects about 10 to 20% of 1st-degree relatives. Female:male ratio is 2:1. Onset is generally
in childhood but may occur later.
Symptoms and Signs
The clinical presentation varies; no typical presentation exists. Some patients are asymptomatic or have
only signs of nutritional deficiency. Others have significant GI symptoms.
Celiac sprue can manifest in infancy and childhood after introduction of cereals into the diet. The child
has failure to thrive, apathy, anorexia, pallor, generalized hypotonia, abdominal distention, and muscle
wasting. Stools are soft, bulky, clay-colored, and offensive. Older children may present with anemia or
failure to grow normally.
In adults, lassitude, weakness, and anorexia are most common. Mild and intermittent diarrhea is
sometimes the presenting symptom. Steatorrhea ranges from mild to severe (7 to 50 g fat/day). Some
patients have weight loss, rarely enough to become underweight. Anemia, glossitis, angular stomatitis,
and aphthous ulcers are usually seen in these patients. Manifestations of vitamin D and Ca deficiencies
(eg, osteomalacia, osteopenia, osteoporosis) are common. Both men and women may have reduced
fertility.
About 10% have dermatitis herpetiformis, an intensely pruritic papulovesicular rash that is symmetrically
distributed over the extensor areas of the elbows, knees, buttocks, shoulders, and scalp. This rash can
be induced by a high-gluten diet. Celiac sprue is also associated with diabetes mellitus, autoimmune
thyroid disease, and Down syndrome.
Diagnosis
• Serologic markers
• Small-bowel biopsy
The diagnosis is suspected clinically and by laboratory abnormalities suggestive of malabsorption. Family
incidence is a valuable clue. Celiac sprue should be strongly considered in a patient with iron deficiency
without obvious GI bleeding.
Confirmation requires a small-bowel biopsy from the second portion of the duodenum. Findings include
lack or shortening of villi (villous atrophy), increased intraepithelial cells, and crypt hyperplasia. However,
such findings can also occur in tropical sprue, severe intestinal bacterial overgrowth, eosinophilic
enteritis, lactose intolerance, and lymphoma.
Because biopsy lacks specificity, serologic markers can aid diagnosis. Anti-tissue transglutaminase
antibody (AGA) and anti-endomysial antibody (EMA—an antibody against an intestinal connective tissue
protein) each have sensitivity and specificity > 90%. These markers can also be used to screen
===PAGE:230===
populations with high prevalence of celiac sprue, including 1st-degree relatives of affected patients and
patients with diseases that occur at a greater frequency in association with celiac sprue. If either test is
positive, the patient should have a diagnostic small-bowel biopsy. If both are negative, celiac sprue is
extremely unlikely. These antibodies decrease in titer in patients on a gluten-free diet and thus are useful
in monitoring dietary compliance.
Other laboratory abnormalities often occur and should be sought. They include anemia (iron-deficiency
anemia in children and folate-deficiency anemia in adults); low albumin, Ca, K, and Na; and elevated
alkaline phosphatase and PT.
Malabsorption tests are not specific for celiac sprue. If done, common findings include steatorrhea of 10
to 40 g/day and abnormal results with D-xylose and (in severe ileal disease) Schilling tests.
Prognosis
Mortality is 10 to 30% without a gluten-free diet. With proper diet, mortality is < 1%, mainly in adults who
have severe disease at the outset. Complications include refractory sprue, collagenous sprue, and
intestinal lymphomas. Intestinal lymphomas affect 6 to 8% of patients with celiac sprue, usually
manifesting after 20 to 40 yr of disease. The incidence of other GI cancers (eg, carcinoma of the
esophagus or oropharynx, small-bowel adenocarcinoma) also increases. Adherence to a gluten-free diet
can significantly reduce the risk of cancer.
Treatment
• Gluten-free diet
• Supplements to replace any serious deficiencies
Treatment is a gluten-free diet (avoiding foods containing wheat, rye, or barley). Gluten is so widely used
(eg, in commercial soups, sauces, ice creams, hot dogs) that a patient needs a detailed list of foods to
avoid. Patients are encouraged to consult a dietitian and join a celiac support group. The response to a
gluten-free diet is usually rapid, and symptoms resolve in 1 to 2 wk. Ingesting even small amounts of food
containing gluten may prevent remission or induce relapse.
Small-bowel biopsy should be repeated after 3 to 4 mo of a gluten-free diet. If abnormalities persist, other
causes of villous atrophy (eg, lymphoma) should be considered. Lessening of symptoms and
improvement in small-bowel morphology are accompanied by a decrease in AGA and EMA titers.
Supplementary vitamins, minerals, and hematinics may be given, depending on the deficiencies. Mild
cases may not require supplementation, whereas severe cases may require comprehensive replacement.
For adults, replacement includes ferrous sulfate 300 mg po once/day to tid, folate 5 to 10 mg po once/day,
Ca supplements, and any standard multivitamin. Sometimes children (but rarely adults) who are seriously
ill on initial diagnosis require bowel rest and TPN.
If a patient responds poorly to gluten withdrawal, either the diagnosis is incorrect or the disease has
become refractory. Corticosteroids can control symptoms in the latter case.
Infection and Infestation
Acute bacterial, viral, and parasitic infections may cause transient malabsorption, probably as a result of
temporary, superficial damage to the villi and microvilli. Chronic bacterial infections of the small bowel are
uncommon, apart from blind loops, systemic sclerosis, and diverticula. Intestinal bacteria may use up
dietary vitamin B
and other nutrients, perhaps interfere with enzyme systems, and cause mucosal
injury.
Intestinal Lymphangiectasia
(Idiopathic Hypoproteinemia)
===PAGE:231===
Intestinal lymphangiectasia is obstruction or malformation of the intramucosal lymphatics
of the
small bowel. It primarily affects children and young adults. Symptoms include those of
malabsorption, with edema and growth retardation. Diagnosis is by small-bowel biopsy.
Treatment is usually supportive.
Malformation of the lymphatic system is congenital or acquired. Congenital cases usually manifest in
children and young adults (mean age of onset: 11 yr). Males and females are equally affected. In acquired
cases, the defect may be secondary to retroperitoneal fibrosis, constrictive pericarditis, pancreatitis,
neoplastic tumors, and infiltrative disorders that block the lymphatics.
Impaired lymphatic drainage leads to increased pressure and leakage of lymph into the intestinal lumen.
Impairment of chylomicron and lipoprotein absorption results in malabsorption of fats and protein.
Because carbohydrates are not absorbed through the lymphatic system, their uptake is not impaired.
Symptoms and Signs
Early manifestations include massive and often asymmetric peripheral edema, intermittent diarrhea,
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Some patients have mild to moderate steatorrhea. Chylous pleural
effusions (chylothorax) and chylous ascites may be present. Growth is retarded if onset is in the first
decade of life.
Diagnosis
• Endoscopic small-bowel biopsy
• Sometimes contrast lymphangiography
Diagnosis usually requires endoscopic small-bowel biopsy, which shows marked dilation and ectasia of
the mucosal and submucosal lymphatic vessels. Alternatively, contrast lymphangiography (injection of
contrast material via the pedal vein) can show abnormal intestinal lymphatics.
Laboratory abnormalities include lymphocytopenia and low levels of serum albumin, cholesterol, IgA, IgM,
IgG, transferrin, and ceruloplasmin. Barium studies may show thickened, nodular mucosal folds that
resemble stacked coins. D-Xylose absorption is normal. Intestinal protein loss can be shown by using
chromium-51-labeled albumin.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Sometimes surgical resection or repair
Abnormal lymphatics cannot be corrected. Supportive treatment includes a low-fat (< 30 g/day), highprotein diet containing medium-chain triglyceride supplements. Supplemental Ca and fat-soluble vitamins
are given. Intestinal resection or anastomosis of the abnormal lymphatics to the venous channels may be
beneficial. Pleural effusions should be drained by thoracentesis.
Short Bowel Syndrome
Short bowel syndrome is malabsorption resulting from extensive resection of the small bowel.
Symptoms depend on the length and function of the remaining small bowel, but diarrhea can be
severe, and nutritional deficiencies are common. Treatment is with small feedings,
antidiarrheals, and sometimes TPN or intestinal transplantation.
Common reasons for extensive resection are Crohn's disease, mesenteric infarction, radiation enteritis,
cancer, volvulus, and congenital anomalies.
===PAGE:232===
Because the jejunum is the primary digestive and absorptive site for most nutrients, jejunal resection
significantly reduces nutrient absorption. In response, the ileum adapts by increasing the length and
absorptive function of its villi, resulting in gradual improvement of nutrient absorption.
The ileum is the site of vitamin B
and bile acid absorption. Severe diarrhea and bile acid malabsorption
result when > 100 cm of the ileum is resected. Notably, there is no compensatory adaptation of the
remaining jejunum. Consequently, malabsorption of fat, fat-soluble vitamins, and vitamin B
occurs. In
addition, unabsorbed bile acids in the colon result in secretory diarrhea. Preservation of the colon can
significantly reduce water and electrolyte losses. Resection of the terminal ileum and ileocecal valve can
predispose to bacterial overgrowth.
Treatment
• TPN
• Eventual oral feeding if > 100 cm of jejunum remain
• Antidiarrheals, cholestyramine, proton pump inhibitors, vitamin supplements
In the immediate postoperative period, diarrhea is typically severe, with significant electrolyte losses.
Patients typically require TPN and intensive monitoring of fluid and electrolytes (including Ca and Mg). An
oral iso-osmotic solution of Na and glucose (similar to WHO oral rehydration formula— is slowly introduced in the postoperative phase once the patient stabilizes and stool output is < 2
L/day.
Patients with extensive resection (< 100 cm of remaining jejunum) and those with excessive fluid and
electrolyte losses require TPN for life.
Patients with > 100 cm of jejunum left can achieve adequate nutrition through oral feeding. Fat and
protein in the diet are usually well tolerated, unlike carbohydrates, which contribute a significant osmotic
load. Small feedings reduce the osmotic load. Ideally, 40% of calories should consist of fat.
Patients who have diarrhea after meals should take antidiarrheals (eg, loperamide) 1 h before eating.
Cholestyramine 2 to 4 g taken with meals reduces diarrhea associated with bile acid malabsorption.
Monthly IM injections of vitamin B
should be given to patients with a documented deficiency. Most
patients should take supplemental vitamins, Ca, and Mg.
Gastric acid hypersecretion can develop, which can deactivate pancreatic enzymes; thus, most patients
are given H
blockers or proton pump inhibitors.
Small-bowel transplantation is advocated for patients who are not candidates for long-term TPN and in
whom adaptation does not occur.
Tropical Sprue
Tropical sprue is an acquired disease, probably of infectious etiology, characterized by
malabsorption and megaloblastic anemia. Diagnosis is clinical and by small-bowel biopsy.
Treatment is with tetracycline and folate for 6 mo.
Etiology
Tropical sprue occurs chiefly in the Caribbean, southern India, and Southeast Asia, affecting both natives
and visitors. The illness is rare in visitors spending < 1 mo in areas where the disease is endemic.
Although etiology is unclear, it is thought to result from chronic infection of the small bowel by toxigenic
strains of coliform bacteria. Malabsorption of folate and vitamin B
deficiency result in megaloblastic
anemia. The incidence of tropical sprue is decreasing, perhaps because of increasing use of antibiotics
for acute traveler's diarrhea.
===PAGE:233===
Symptoms and Signs
Patients commonly have acute diarrhea with fever and malaise. A chronic phase of milder diarrhea,
nausea, anorexia, abdominal cramps, and fatigue follows. Steatorrhea is common. Nutritional
deficiencies, especially of folate and vitamin B
, eventually develop after several months to years. The
patient may also have weight loss, glossitis, stomatitis, and peripheral edema.
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy with small-bowel biopsy
• Blood tests to screen for consequences of malabsorption
Tropical sprue is suspected in people who live in or have visited areas where the disease is endemic and
who have megaloblastic anemia and symptoms of malabsorption. The definitive test is upper GI
endoscopy with small-bowel biopsy. Characteristic histologic changes (see
Table 17-3
) usually involve the
entire small bowel and include blunting of the villi with infiltration of chronic inflammatory cells in the
epithelium and lamina propria. Celiac disease and parasitic infection must be ruled out.
Additional laboratory studies (eg, CBC; albumin; Ca; PT; iron, folate, and B
levels) help evaluate
nutritional status. Barium small-bowel follow-through may show segmentation of the barium, dilation of
the lumen, and thickening of the mucosal folds. D-Xylose absorption is abnormal in > 90% of cases.
However, these tests are not specific or essential for diagnosis.
Treatment
• Long-term tetracycline
Treatment is tetracycline 250 mg po qid for 1 or 2 mo, then bid for up to 6 mo, depending on disease
severity and response to treatment. Folate 5 to 10 mg po once/day should be given for the first month
along with vitamin B
1 mg IM weekly for several weeks. Megaloblastic anemia promptly abates, and the
clinical response is dramatic. Other nutritional replacements are given as needed. Relapse may occur in
20%. Failure to respond after 4 wk of therapy suggests another condition.
Whipple's Disease
(Intestinal Lipodystrophy)
Whipple's disease is a rare systemic illness caused by the bacterium
Tropheryma whippelii
.
Main symptoms are arthritis, weight loss, and diarrhea. Diagnosis is by small-bowel biopsy.
Treatment is with a minimum 1 yr of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
.
Whipple's disease predominately affects white men aged 30 to 60. Although it affects many parts of the
body (eg, heart, lung, brain,
serous cavities, joints, eye, GI tract), the mucosa of the small bowel is almost
always involved. Affected patients may have subtle defects of cell-mediated immunity that predispose to
infection with
T. whippelii
. About 30% of patients have HLA-B27.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical presentation varies depending on the organ systems affected. Usually, the first symptoms are
arthritis and fever. Intestinal symptoms (eg, watery diarrhea, steatorrhea, abdominal pain, anorexia,
weight loss) usually manifest later, sometimes years after the initial complaint. Gross or occult intestinal
bleeding may occur. Severe malabsorption may be present in patients diagnosed late in the clinical
course. Other findings include increased skin pigmentation, anemia, lymphadenopathy, chronic cough,
serositis, peripheral edema, and CNS symptoms.
===PAGE:234===
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy with small-bowel biopsy
The diagnosis may be missed in patients without prominent GI symptoms. Whipple's disease should be
suspected in middle-aged white men who have arthritis and abdominal pain, diarrhea, weight loss, or
other symptoms of malabsorption. Such patients should have upper endoscopy with small-bowel biopsy;
the intestinal lesions are specific and diagnostic. The most severe and consistent changes are in the
proximal small bowel. Light microscopy shows periodic acid-Schiff-positive macrophages that distort the
villus architecture. Gram-positive, acid fast-negative bacilli (
T. whippelii
) are seen in the lamina propria
and in the macrophages. Confirmation by electron microscopy is recommended.
Whipple's disease should be differentiated from intestinal infection with
Mycobacterium aviumintracellulare
(MAI), which has similar histologic findings. However, MAI stains positive with acid fast.
PCR testing may be useful for confirmation.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
• Late relapse a possibility
Untreated disease is progressive and fatal. Many antibiotics are curative (eg, tetracycline,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, chloramphenicol, ampicillin, penicillin, cephalosporins). Treatment is
initiated with ceftriaxone (2 g IV daily) or with procaine (1.2 million units IM once/day) or penicillin G (1.5 to
6 million units IV q 6 h) plus streptomycin (1.0 g IM once/day for 10 to 14 days). This regimen is followed
by a long-term course of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg po bid for 1 yr). Sulfa-allergic
patients may substitute oral penicillin VK or ampicillin. Prompt clinical improvement occurs, with fever and
joint pains resolving in a few days. Intestinal symptoms usually abate within 1 to 4 wk.
Some authorities do not recommend repeat small-bowel biopsies because macrophages may persist for
years after treatment. However, others recommend repeat biopsy after 1 yr. In the latter approach,
electron microscopy is needed to document bacilli (not just macrophages). Relapses are common and
may occur years later. If relapse is suspected, small-bowel biopsies should be done (regardless of
affected organ systems) to determine presence of free bacilli.
===PAGE:235===
Chapter 18. Irritable Bowel Syndrome
(Spastic Colon)
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is characterized by abdominal discomfort or pain that is
accompanied by at least two of the following: relief by defecation, change in frequency of stool,
or change in consistency of stool. The cause is unknown, and the pathophysiology is
incompletely understood. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is symptomatic, consisting of dietary
management and drugs, including anticholinergics and agents active at serotonin receptors.
Etiology
The cause of IBS is unknown. No anatomic cause can be found on laboratory tests, x-rays, and biopsies.
Emotional factors, diet, drugs, or hormones may precipitate or aggravate GI symptoms. Historically, the
disorder was often considered as purely psychosomatic. Although psychosocial factors are involved, IBS
is better understood as a combination of psychosocial and physiologic factors.
Psychosocial factors:
Psychologic distress is common among patients with IBS, especially among
those who seek medical care. Some patients have anxiety disorders, depression, or a somatization
disorder. Sleep disturbances also
coexist. However, stress and emotional conflict do not always coincide
with symptom onset and recurrence. Some patients with IBS seem to have a learned aberrant illness
behavior (ie, they express emotional conflict as a GI complaint, usually abdominal pain). The physician
evaluating patients with IBS, particularly those with refractory symptoms, should investigate for
unresolved psychologic issues, including the possibility of sexual or physical abuse. Psychosocial factors
also affect the outcome in IBS.
Physiologic factors:
A variety of physiologic factors seem to be involved in IBS symptoms. Factors
include altered motility, visceral hyperalgesia, and various genetic and environmental factors.
Visceral hyperalgesia refers to hypersensitivity to normal amounts of intraluminal distention and
heightened perception of pain in the presence of normal quantities of intestinal gas; it may result from
remodeling of neural pathways in the brain-gut axis. Some patients (perhaps 1 in 7) have reported their
IBS symptoms began after an episode of acute gastroenteritis (termed postinfectious IBS). A subset of
patients with IBS has autonomic dysfunctions. However, many patients have no demonstrable physiologic
abnormalities, and even in those that do, the abnormalities may not correlate with symptoms.
Constipation may be explained by slower colonic transit, and diarrhea may be explained by faster colonic
transit. Some patients with constipation have fewer colonic high amplitude-propagated contractions,
which propel colonic contents over several segments. Conversely, excess sigmoid motor activity may
retard transit in functional constipation.
Postprandial abdominal discomfort may be attributed to an exaggerated gastro-colonic reflex (the colonic
contractile response to a meal), the presence of colonic high amplitude-propagated contractions,
increased intestinal sensitivity (visceral hyperalgesia), or a combination of these. Fat ingestion may
exaggerate hypersensitivity.
Hormonal fluctuations affect bowel functions in women. Rectal sensitivity is increased during menses but
not during other phases of the menstrual cycle. The effects of sex steroids on GI transit are subtle. The
role of small-bowel bacterial overgrowth in IBS is controversial.
Symptoms and Signs
IBS tends to begin in the teens and 20s, causing bouts of symptoms that recur at irregular periods. Onset
in late adult life is less common but not rare. Symptoms rarely rouse the sleeping patient. Symptoms are
often triggered by food, particularly fats, or by stress.
Patients have abdominal discomfort, which varies considerably but is often located in the lower quadrant,
steady or cramping in nature, and relieved by defecation. In addition, abdominal discomfort is temporally
===PAGE:236===
associated with alterations in stool frequency (increased in diarrhea-predominant IBS and decreased in
constipation-predominant IBS) and consistency (ie, loose or lumpy and hard). Pain or discomfort related
to defecation is likely to be of bowel origin; that associated with exercise, movement, urination, or
menstruation usually has a different cause. Although bowel patterns are relatively consistent in most
patients, it is not unusual for patients to alternate between constipation and diarrhea. Patients may also
have symptoms of abnormal stool passage (straining, urgency, or feeling of incomplete evacuation), pass
mucus, or complain of bloating or abdominal distention. Many patients also have symptoms of dyspepsia.
Extraintestinal symptoms (eg, fatigue, fibromyalgia, sleep disturbances, chronic headaches) are common.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation, based on Rome criteria
• Screening for organic causes with basic laboratory tests and sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy
• Other tests for patients with red flag findings (rectal blood, weight loss, fever)
Diagnosis is based on characteristic bowel patterns, time and character of pain, and exclusion of other
disease processes through physical examination and routine diagnostic tests. Diagnostic testing should
be more intensive when the following red flag findings are present either at initial presentation or at any
time after diagnosis: older age, fever, weight loss, rectal bleeding, vomiting. Because patients with IBS
can develop organic conditions, testing for other conditions should also be considered in patients who
develop alarm symptoms or markedly different symptoms during the course of IBS. Common illnesses that
may be confused with IBS include lactose intolerance, drug-induced diarrhea, post-cholecystectomy
diarrhea, laxative abuse, parasitic diseases (eg, giardiasis), eosinophilic gastritis or enteritis, microscopic
colitis, and early inflammatory bowel disease. However, uninflamed colonic diverticula do not cause
symptoms, and their presence should not be considered explanatory.
The bimodal age distribution of patients with inflammatory bowel disease makes it imperative to evaluate
both younger and older
patients. In patients > 60 with acute symptoms, ischemic colitis should be
considered. Patients with constipation and no anatomic lesion should be evaluated for hypothyroidism
and hyperparathyroidism. If the patient's symptoms suggest malabsorption, tropical sprue, celiac disease,
and Whipple's disease must be considered. Defecatory disorders should be considered as a cause of
constipation in patients who report symptoms of difficult defecation. Rare causes of diarrhea include
hyperthyroidism, medullary cancer of the thyroid, or carcinoid syndrome, gastrinoma, vipoma, and
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. However, secretory diarrhea caused by vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP),
calcitonin, or gastrin is typically accompanied by stool volumes > 1000 mL daily.
History:
Particular attention should be given to the character of the pain, bowel habits, familial
interrelationships, and drug and dietary histories. Equally important are the patient's overall emotional
state, interpretation of personal problems and quality of life. The quality of the patient-physician
interaction is key to diagnostic and therapeutic efficacy.
The
Rome criteria
are standardized symptom-based criteria for diagnosing IBS. The Rome criteria
require the presence of abdominal pain or discomfort for at least 3 days/mo in the last 3 mo along with ≥ 2
of the following: (1) improvement with defecation, (2) onset (of each episode of discomfort) associated
with a change in frequency of defecation, or (3) change in consistency of stool.
Physical examination:
Patients generally appear to be healthy. Palpation of the abdomen may reveal
tenderness, particularly in the left lower quadrant, at times associated with a palpable, tender sigmoid. A
digital rectal examination, including a test for occult blood, should be done on all patients. In women, a
pelvic examination helps rule out ovarian tumors and cysts or endometriosis, which may mimic IBS.
Testing:
The diagnosis of IBS can reasonably be made using the Rome criteria as long as patients have
no red flag findings, such as rectal bleeding, weight loss, and fever, or other findings that might suggest
another etiology. Many patients with IBS are overtested; however, CBC, biochemical profile (including
liver tests), ESR, stool examination for ova and parasites (in those with diarrhea predominance), thyroidstimulating hormone and Ca for those with constipation, and flexible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy
===PAGE:237===
should be done. During flexible fiber-optic proctosigmoidoscopy, introduction of the instrument and air
insufflation frequently trigger bowel spasm and pain. The mucosal and vascular patterns in IBS usually
appear normal. Colonoscopy is preferred for patients > 50 with a change in bowel habits, particularly
those with no previous IBS symptoms, to exclude colonic polyps and tumors. In patients with chronic
diarrhea, particularly older women, mucosal biopsy can rule out possible microscopic colitis.
Additional studies (such as ultrasound, CT, barium enema x-ray, upper GI esophagogastroduodenoscopy,
and small-bowel x-rays) should be undertaken only when there are other objective abnormalities. Fecal
fat excretion should be measured when there is a concern about steatorrhea. Testing for celiac sprue and
small-bowel x-rays are recommended when malabsorption is suspected. Testing for carbohydrate
intolerance should be considered in appropriate circumstances.
Intercurrent disease:
Patients with IBS may subsequently develop additional GI disorders, and the
clinician must not summarily dismiss their complaints. Changes in symptoms (eg, in the location, type, or
intensity of pain; in bowel habits; in constipation and diarrhea) and new symptoms or complaints (eg,
nocturnal diarrhea) may signal another disease process. Other symptoms that require investigation
include fresh blood in the stool, weight loss, very severe abdominal pain or unusual abdominal distention,
steatorrhea or noticeably foul-smelling stools, fever or chills, persistent vomiting, hematemesis, symptoms
that wake the patient from sleep (eg, pain, the urge to defecate), and a steady progressive worsening of
symptoms. Patients > 40 are more likely than younger patients to develop an intercurrent physiologic
illness.
Treatment
• Support and understanding
• Normal diet, avoiding gas-producing and diarrhea-producing foods
• Increased fiber intake constipation
• Loperamide for diarrhea
• Possibly tricyclic antidepressants
Therapy is directed at specific symptoms. An effective therapeutic relationship is essential for effectively
managing IBS. Patients should be invited to express not only their symptoms but also their understanding
of their symptoms and the reasons prompting a visit to the health care practitioner (eg, fear of serious
disease). Patients should be educated about the disorder (eg, normal bowel physiology and the bowel's
hypersensitivity to stress and food) and reassured, after appropriate tests, about the absence of a serious
or life-threatening
disease. Appropriate therapeutic goals (eg, expectations regarding the normal course
or variability in symptoms, adverse effects of drugs, the appropriate and available working relationship
between the physician and the patient) should be established. Finally, patients can benefit by being
actively involved in the management of their condition. When successful, this can enhance the patient's
motivation to adhere to treatment, foster a more positive physician-patient relationship, and mobilize the
coping resources of even the most chronically passive patients. Psychologic stress, anxiety, or mood
disorders should be identified, evaluated, and treated. Regular physical activity helps relieve stress and
assists in bowel function, particularly in patients with constipation.
Diet:
In general, a normal diet should be followed. Meals should not be overly large, and eating should be
slow and paced. Patients with abdominal distention and increased flatulence may benefit from reducing or
eliminating beans, cabbage, and other foods containing fermentable carbohydrates. Reduced intake of
sweeteners (eg, sorbitol, mannitol, fructose), which are constituents of natural and processed foods (eg,
apple and grape juice, bananas, nuts, and raisins), may alleviate flatulence, bloating, and diarrhea.
Patients with evidence of lactose intolerance should reduce their intake of milk and dairy products. A lowfat diet may reduce postprandial abdominal symptoms.
Dietary fiber supplements may soften stool and improve the ease of evacuation. A bland bulk-producing
agent may be used (eg, raw bran, starting with 15 mL [1 tbsp] with each meal, supplemented with
===PAGE:238===
increased fluid intake). Alternatively, psyllium hydrophilic mucilloid with two glasses of water may be used.
However, excessive use of fiber can lead to bloating and diarrhea, so fiber doses must be individualized.
Occasionally, flatulence may be reduced by switching to a synthetic fiber preparation (eg,
methylcellulose).
Drug therapy:
Drug therapy is directed toward the dominant symptoms. Anticholinergic drugs (eg,
hyoscyamine 0.125 mg po 30 to 60 min before meals) may be used for their antispasmodic effects.
Serotonin receptor modulation may be of benefit. Tegaserod, a 5HT4 agonist, stimulates motility and
alleviates constipation. In 2007, tegaserod was withdrawn from the market because, in clinical trials, it
slightly increased the incidence of cardiovascular ischemic events (ie, MI, unstable angina pectoris,
stroke) compared with placebo. Tegaserod has since been reintroduced under a restricted program. The
chloride channel activator lubiprostone may help patients with constipation.
In patients with diarrhea, oral diphenoxylate 2.5 to 5 mg or loperamide 2 to 4 mg may be given before
meals. The dose of loperamide should be titrated upward to reduce diarrhea while avoiding constipation.
For many patients, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) help relieve symptoms of diarrhea, abdominal pain,
and bloating. These drugs are thought to reduce pain by down-regulating the activity of spinal cord and
cortical afferent pathways arriving from the intestine. Secondary amine TCAs (eg, nortriptyline,
desipramine) are often better tolerated than parent tertiary amines (eg, amitriptyline, imipramine, doxepin)
because of fewer anticholinergic, sedating antihistaminic, and
α
-adrenergic adverse effects. Treatment
should begin with a very low dose of a TCA (eg, desipramine 10 to 25 mg once/day at bedtime),
increasing as necessary and tolerated up to about 100 to 150 mg once/day. SSRIs are also useful,
particularly for patients with anxiety or an affective disorder, but may exacerbate diarrhea. 5HT3
antagonists (eg, alosetron) may benefit female patients with severe diarrhea refractory to other drugs.
Because alosetron is associated with ischemic colitis, its use is restricted.
Preliminary data suggest that certain probiotics (eg,
Bifidobacterium infantis
) alleviate IBS symptoms,
particularly bloating. The beneficial effects of probiotics are not generic to the entire species but specific
to certain strains. Certain aromatic oils (carminatives) can relax smooth muscle and relieve pain caused
by cramps in some patients. Peppermint oil is the most commonly used agent in this class.
Psychologic therapies:
Cognitive-behavioral therapy, standard psychotherapy, and hypnotherapy may
help some IBS patients.
===PAGE:239===
Chapter 19. Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Introduction
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which includes Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis (UC), is a
relapsing and remitting condition characterized by chronic inflammation at various sites in the GI tract,
which results in diarrhea and abdominal pain.
Inflammation results from a cell-mediated immune response in the GI mucosa. The precise etiology is
unknown, but evidence suggests that the normal intestinal flora trigger an immune reaction in patients
with a multifactorial genetic predisposition (perhaps involving abnormal epithelial barriers and mucosal
immune defenses). No specific environmental, dietary, or infectious causes have been identified. The
immune reaction involves the release of inflammatory mediators, including cytokines, interleukins, and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF).
Although Crohn's disease and UC are similar, they can be distinguished in most cases (see
Table 19-1
). About 10% of colitis cases are considered indeterminate. The term colitis applies only to
inflammatory disease of the colon (eg, ulcerative, granulomatous, ischemic, radiation-induced, infectious).
Spastic (mucous) colitis is a misnomer sometimes applied to a functional disorder, irritable bowel
syndrome (.
Epidemiology:
IBD affects people of all ages but usually begins before age 30, with peak incidence from
14 to 24. IBD may have a second smaller peak between ages 50 and 70; however, this later peak may
include some cases of ischemic colitis.
IBD is most common among people of Northern European and Anglo-Saxon origin and is 2 to 4 times
more common among Ashkenazi Jews than in non-Jewish whites. The incidence is lower in central and
southern Europe and lower still in South America, Asia, and Africa. However, the incidence is increasing
among blacks and Latin Americans living in North America. Both sexes are equally affected. First-degree
relatives of patients with IBD have a 4- to 20-fold increased risk; their absolute risk may be as high as
7%. Familial tendency is much higher in Crohn's disease than in UC.
[Table 19-1.
Differentiating Crohn's Disease and Ulcerative Colitis]
Several gene mutations conferring a higher risk of Crohn's disease (and some possibly related to UC)
have been identified.
Cigarette smoking seems to contribute to development or exacerbation of Crohn's disease but decreases
risk of UC. NSAIDs may exacerbate IBD.
Extraintestinal Manifestations
Crohn's disease and UC both affect organs other than the intestines. Most extraintestinal manifestations
are more common in UC and Crohn's colitis than in Crohn's disease limited to the small bowel.
Extraintestinal manifestations are categorized in 3 ways:
1. Disorders that usually parallel (ie, wax and wane with) IBD flare-ups. These disorders include
peripheral arthritis, episcleritis, aphthous stomatitis, erythema nodosum, and pyoderma gangrenosum.
Arthritis tends to involve large joints and be migratory and transient. One or more of these parallel
disorders develops in more than one third of patients hospitalized with IBD.
2. Disorders that are clearly associated with IBD but appear independently of IBD activity. These
disorders include ankylosing spondylitis, sacroiliitis, uveitis, and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Ankylosing spondylitis occurs more commonly in IBD patients with the HLA-B27 antigen. Most patients
with spinal or sacroiliac involvement have evidence of uveitis and vice versa. Primary sclerosing
cholangitis, which is a risk factor for cancer of the biliary tract, is strongly associated with UC or Crohn's
colitis. Cholangitis may appear before or concurrently with the bowel disease or even 20 yr after
colectomy. Liver disease (eg, fatty liver, autoimmune hepatitis, pericholangitis, cirrhosis) occurs in 3 to
===PAGE:240===
5% of patients, although minor abnormalities in liver function tests are more common. Some of these
conditions (eg, primary sclerosing cholangitis) may precede IBD by many years and, when diagnosed,
should prompt an evaluation for IBD.
3. Disorders that are consequences of disrupted bowel physiology. These disorders occur mainly in
severe Crohn's disease of the small bowel. Malabsorption may result from extensive ileal resection and
cause deficiencies of fat-soluble vitamins, vitamin B
, or minerals, resulting in anemia, hypocalcemia,
hypomagnesemia, clotting disorders, and bone demineralization. In children, malabsorption retards
growth and development. Other disorders include kidney stones from excessive dietary oxalate
absorption, hydroureter and hydronephrosis from ureteral compression by the intestinal inflammatory
process, gallstones from impaired ileal reabsorption of bile salts, and amyloidosis secondary to longstanding inflammatory and suppurative disease.
Thromboembolic disease may occur as a result of multiple factors in all 3 categories.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• 5-Aminosalicylic acid
• Corticosteroids
• Immunomodulating drugs
• Anticytokine drugs
• Sometimes antibiotics (eg, metronidazole, ciprofloxacin) and probiotics
Several classes of drugs are helpful for IBD. Details of their selection and use are discussed under each
disorder.
5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA, mesalamine):
5-ASA blocks production of prostaglandins and
leukotrienes and has other beneficial effects on the inflammatory cascade. Because 5-ASA is active only
intraluminally and is rapidly absorbed by the proximal small bowel, it must be formulated for delayed
absorption when given orally. Sulfasalazine, the original agent in this class, delays absorption by
complexing 5-ASA with a sulfa moiety, sulfapyridine. The complex is cleaved by bacterial flora in the lower
ileum and colon, releasing the 5-ASA. The sulfa moiety, however, causes numerous adverse effects (eg,
nausea, dyspepsia, headache), interferes with folate (folic acid) absorption, and occasionally causes
serious adverse reactions (eg, hemolytic anemia or agranulocytosis and, rarely, hepatitis or pneumonitis).
Reversible decreases in sperm count and motility occur in up to 80% of men. If used, sulfasalazine should
be given with food, initially in a low dosage (eg, 0.5 g po bid) and gradually increased over several days
to 1 to 2 g bid to tid. Patients should take daily folate supplements 1 mg po and have CBC and liver tests
every 6 to 12 mo. Acute interstitial nephritis secondary to mesalamine occurs rarely; periodic monitoring of
renal function is advisable because most cases are reversible if recognized early.
Newer drugs that complex 5-ASA with other vehicles seem almost equally effective but have fewer
adverse effects. Olsalazine (a 5-ASA dimer) and balsalazide (5-ASA conjugated to an inactive compound)
are cleaved by bacterial azoreductases (as is sulfasalazine). These drugs are activated mainly in the
colon and are less effective for proximal small-bowel disease. Olsalazine dosage is 500 to 1500 mg po
bid, and balsalazide is 2.25 g po tid. Olsalazine sometimes causes diarrhea, especially in patients with
pancolitis.
This problem is minimized by gradual escalation of dose and administration with meals.
Other forms of 5-ASA use delayed-release coatings. Asacol (typical dose 800 to 1200 mg po tid) is 5-ASA
coated with an acrylic polymer whose pH solubility delays release of the drug until entry into the distal
ileum and colon. Pentasa (1 g po qid) is 5-ASA encapsulated in ethylcellulose microgranules that release
35% of the drug in the small bowel. Two once/day formulations of mesalamine (Lialda, Apriso) are
available; this less frequent dosing may improve adherence.
===PAGE:241===
5-ASA is also available as a suppository (500 or 1000 mg at bedtime or bid) or enema (4 g at bedtime or
bid) for proctitis and left-sided colon disease. These rectal preparations are effective for both acute
treatment and long-term maintenance in proctitis and left-sided colon disease, and they have incremental
benefit in combination with oral 5-ASA.
Corticosteroids:
Corticosteroids are useful for acute flare-ups of most forms of IBD when 5-ASA
compounds are inadequate. However, corticosteroids are not appropriate for maintenance. IV
hydrocortisone 300 mg/day or methylprednisolone 60 to 80 mg/day by continuous drip or in divided doses
is used for severe disease; oral prednisone or prednisolone 40 to 60 mg once/day may be used for
moderate disease. Treatment is continued until symptoms remit (usually 7 to 28 days) and then tapered
by 5 to 10 mg weekly to 20 mg once/day. Treatment is then further tapered by 2.5 to 5 mg weekly while
instituting maintenance therapy with 5-ASA or immunomodulators. Adverse effects of short-term
corticosteroids in high doses include hyperglycemia, hypertension, insomnia, hyperactivity, and acute
psychotic episodes.
Hydrocortisone enemas or foam may be used for proctitis and left-sided colon disease; as an enema, 100
mg in 60 mL of isotonic solution is given once/day or bid. The enema should be retained in the bowel as
long as possible; instillation at night, with the patient lying on the left side with hips elevated, may prolong
retention and extend distribution. Treatment, if effective, should be continued daily for about 2 to 4 wk,
then every other day for 1 to 2 wk, and then gradually discontinued over 1 to 2 wk.
Budesonide is a corticosteroid with a high (> 90%) first-pass liver metabolism; thus, oral administration
may have a significant effect on GI tract disease but minimal adrenal suppression. Oral budesonide has
fewer adverse effects than prednisolone but is not as rapidly effective and is typically used for less severe
disease. Budesonide may be effective in maintaining remission for 3 to 6 mo but has not yet proved
effective for long-term maintenance. Dosage is 9 mg once/day. It is also available outside the US as an
enema.
Immunomodulating drugs:
Azathioprine and its metabolite 6-mercaptopurine inhibit T-cell function.
They are effective long-term and may diminish corticosteroid requirements and maintain remission for
years. These drugs often require 1 to 3 mo to produce clinical benefits, so corticosteroids cannot be
withdrawn until at least the 2nd month. Dosage of azathioprine is usually 2.5 to 3.0 mg/kg po once/day
and 6-mercaptopurine 1.5 to 2.5 mg/kg po once/day but varies depending on individual metabolism. Signs
of bone marrow suppression must be monitored with regular WBC count (biweekly for 1 mo, then every 1
to 2 mo). Pancreatitis or high fever occurs in about 3 to 5% of patients; either is an absolute
contraindication to rechallenge. Hepatotoxicity is rarer and can be screened by blood tests every 6 to 12
mo. Newly available blood tests that measure the activity of one of the enzymes that metabolize
azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine and that directly measure metabolite levels may sometimes be helpful
in ensuring safe and effective drug dosages.
Methotrexate 15 to 25 mg po or sc weekly is of benefit to many patients with corticosteroid-refractory or
corticosteroid-dependent Crohn's disease, even those who have not responded to azathioprine or 6mercaptopurine. Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, and asymptomatic liver function test
abnormalities. Folate 1 mg po once/day may diminish some of the adverse effects. Alcohol use, obesity,
diabetes, and possibly psoriasis are risk factors for hepatotoxicity. Patients with these conditions should
have a liver biopsy after a total dose of 1.5 g, but otherwise, concerns over hepatotoxicity are too often
exaggerated. Pulmonary toxicity can also occur with methotrexate therapy.
Cyclosporine, which blocks lymphocyte activation, may benefit patients with severe UC unresponsive to
corticosteroids and who may otherwise require colectomy. Its only well-documented use in Crohn's
disease is for patients with refractory fistulas or pyoderma. Initial dose is 4 mg/kg IV in continuous infusion
over 24 h; responders are converted to an oral dose of 6 to 8 mg/kg once/day with early introduction of
azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine. Long-term use (> 6 mo) is contraindicated by multiple adverse effects
(eg, renal toxicity, seizures, opportunistic infections, hypertension, neuropathy). Generally, patients are
not
offered cyclosporine unless there is a reason to avoid the safer curative option of colectomy. If the
drug is used, trough blood levels should be kept between 200 to 400 ng/mL and
Pneumocystis jirovecii
prophylaxis should be considered during the period of concomitant corticosteroid, cyclosporine, and
===PAGE:242===
antimetabolite treatment. Tacrolimus, an immunosuppressant also used in transplant patients, seems as
effective as cyclosporine.
Anticytokine drugs:
Infliximab, certolizumab, and adalimumab are antibodies to TNF. These agents may
be useful in Crohn's disease; additionally infliximab may be beneficial in UC for refractory or
corticosteroid-dependent disease. Several anti-interleukin antibodies and interleukins may decrease the
inflammatory response and are being studied for Crohn's disease. An antibody to leukocyte adhesion
molecules (natalizumab) is approved as monotherapy for the most refractory cases of Crohn's disease;
other analogs (eg, vedolizumab) are also being studied.
Infliximab is given as a single IV infusion of 5 mg/kg over 2 h. Monotherapy with infliximab is clearly
effective for both induction and maintenance of remission, but some studies suggest better short-term
results when infliximab is initiated in combination with a thiopurine (eg, azathioprine). Ideally, infliximab
would eventually be stopped and patients would be maintained on the antimetabolite, but this strategy
has not been validated in controlled studies. Corticosteroid tapering may begin after 2 wk. The initial
infliximab infusion is usually followed by repeat infusions at weeks 2 and 6. Subsequently, it is given every
8 wk or at intervals determined by the patient's clinical course. Adverse effects during infusion (infusion
reaction) include immediate hypersensitivity reactions (eg, rash, itching, sometimes anaphylactoid
reactions), fever, chills, headache, and nausea. Delayed hypersensitivity reactions have also occurred.
Anti-TNF drugs given subcutaneously (eg, adalimumab) do not cause infusion reactions, although they
may cause local erythema, pain, and itching (injection site reaction). Patients who are intolerant or who
have lost their initial response to infliximab may respond to adalimumab therapy.
Several patients have died of sepsis after infliximab use, so it is contraindicated when uncontrolled
bacterial infection is present. Furthermore, TB reactivation has been attributed to this drug; therefore,
screening by PPD and chest x-ray is required before its use. Lymphoma, demyelinating disease, and liver
and hematologic toxicity are other potential concerns with anti-TNF antibody treatment. Other
anticytokine, anti-integrin, and growth factors are under investigation, as is leukopheresis therapy to
deplete activated immunocytes.
Antibiotics and probiotics:
Antibiotics may be helpful in Crohn's disease but are of limited use in UC.
Metronidazole 500 to 750 mg po tid for 4 to 8 wk may control mild Crohn's disease and help heal fistulas.
However, adverse effects (particularly neurotoxicity) often preclude completion of treatment. Ciprofloxacin
500 to 750 mg po bid may prove less toxic. Many experts recommend metronidazole and ciprofloxacin in
combination. Rifaximin, a nonabsorbable antibiotic, at a dose of 200 mg po tid is also being studied as
treatment for active Crohn's disease.
Various nonpathogenic microorganisms (eg, commensal
Escherichia coli
,
Lactobacillus
species,
Saccharomyces
) given daily serve as probiotics and may be effective in preventing pouchitis (,
but other therapeutic roles have yet to be clearly defined. Therapeutic infestation with the parasite
Trichuris suis
has been tried in an effort to stimulate T2-helper cell immunity and may decrease disease
activity in UC.
Supportive care:
Most patients and their families are interested in diet and stress management.
Although there are anecdotal reports of clinical improvement on certain diets, including one with rigid
carbohydrate restrictions, controlled trials have shown no benefit. Stress management may be helpful.
Crohn's Disease
(Regional Enteritis; Granulomatous Ileitis or Ileocolitis)
Crohn's disease is a chronic transmural inflammatory disease that usually affects the distal
ileum and colon but may occur in any part of the GI tract. Symptoms include diarrhea and
abdominal pain. Abscesses, internal and external fistulas, and bowel obstruction may arise.
Extraintestinal symptoms, particularly arthritis, may occur. Diagnosis is by colonoscopy and
barium contrast studies. Treatment is with 5-aminosalicylic acid, corticosteroids,
immunomodulators, anticytokines, antibiotics, and often surgery.
===PAGE:243===
Pathophysiology
Crohn's disease begins with crypt inflammation and abscesses, which progress to tiny focal aphthoid
ulcers. These mucosal lesions
may develop into deep longitudinal and transverse ulcers with intervening
mucosal edema, creating a characteristic cobblestoned appearance to the bowel.
Transmural spread of inflammation leads to lymphedema and thickening of the bowel wall and mesentery.
Mesenteric fat typically extends onto the serosal surface of the bowel. Mesenteric lymph nodes often
enlarge. Extensive inflammation may result in hypertrophy of the muscularis mucosae, fibrosis, and
stricture formation, which can lead to bowel obstruction. Abscesses are common, and fistulas often
penetrate into adjoining structures, including other loops of bowel, the bladder, or psoas muscle. Fistulas
may even extend to the skin of the anterior abdomen or flanks. Independently of intra-abdominal disease
activity, perianal fistulas and abscesses occur in 25 to 33% of cases; these complications are frequently
the most troublesome aspects of Crohn's disease.
Noncaseating granulomas can occur in lymph nodes, peritoneum, the liver, and all layers of the bowel
wall. Although pathognomonic when present, granulomas are not detected in about half of patients with
Crohn's disease. The presence of granulomas does not seem to be related to the clinical course.
Segments of diseased bowel are sharply demarcated from adjacent normal bowel ("skip areas"); hence,
the name regional enteritis. About 35% of Crohn's disease cases involve the ileum alone (ileitis); about
45% involve the ileum and colon (ileocolitis), with a predilection for the right side of the colon; and about
20% involve the colon alone (granulomatous colitis), most of which, unlike ulcerative colitis (UC), spare
the rectum. Occasionally, the entire small bowel is involved (jejunoileitis). The stomach, duodenum, or
esophagus is clinically involved only rarely, although microscopic evidence of disease is often detectable
in the gastric antrum, especially in younger patients. In the absence of surgical intervention, the disease
almost never extends into areas of small bowel that are not involved at first diagnosis.
There is an increased risk of cancer in affected small-bowel segments. Patients with colonic involvement
have a long-term risk of colorectal cancer equal to that of UC, given the same extent and duration of
disease.
Symptoms and Signs
The most common initial manifestation is chronic diarrhea with abdominal pain, fever, anorexia, and
weight loss. The abdomen is tender, and a mass or fullness may be palpable. Gross rectal bleeding is
unusual except in isolated colonic disease, which may manifest similarly to UC. Some patients present
with an acute abdomen that simulates acute appendicitis or intestinal obstruction. About 33% of patients
have perianal disease (especially fissures and fistulas), which is sometimes the most prominent or even
initial complaint. In children, extraintestinal manifestations frequently predominate over GI symptoms;
arthritis, FUO, anemia, or growth retardation may be a presenting symptom, whereas abdominal pain or
diarrhea may be absent.
With recurrent disease, symptoms vary. Pain is most common and occurs with both simple recurrence and
abscess formation. Patients with severe flare-up or abscess are likely to have marked tenderness,
guarding, rebound, and a general toxic appearance. Stenotic segments may cause bowel obstruction,
with colicky pain, distention, obstipation, and vomiting. Adhesions from previous surgery may also cause
bowel obstruction, which begins rapidly, without the prodrome of fever, pain, and malaise typical of
obstruction due to a Crohn's disease flare-up. An enterovesical fistula may produce air bubbles in the
urine (pneumaturia). Draining cutaneous fistulas may occur. Free perforation into the peritoneal cavity is
unusual.
Chronic disease causes a variety of systemic symptoms, including fever, weight loss, undernutrition, and
extraintestinal manifestations (.
The Vienna Classification and its recent Montreal modification categorize Crohn's disease into 3 principal
patterns: (1) primarily inflammatory, which after several years commonly evolves into either (2) primarily
stenotic or obstructing or (3) primarily penetrating or fistulizing. These different clinical patterns dictate
===PAGE:244===
different therapeutic approaches. Some genetic studies suggest a molecular basis for this classification.
Diagnosis
• Barium x-rays of the stomach, small bowel, and colon
• Abdominal CT (conventional or CT enterography)
• Sometimes magnetic resonance (MR) enterography, upper endoscopy, and/or colonoscopy
Crohn's disease should be suspected in a patient with inflammatory or obstructive symptoms or in a
patient without prominent GI symptoms but with perianal fistulas or abscesses or with otherwise
unexplained arthritis, erythema nodosum, fever, anemia, or (in a child) stunted growth. A family history of
Crohn's disease also increases the index of suspicion. Similar symptoms and signs (eg, abdominal pain,
diarrhea) may be caused by other GI disorders. Differentiation from UC (see
Table 19-1
) may be an issue
in the 20% of cases in which Crohn's disease is confined to the colon. However, because treatment is
similar, this distinction is critical only when surgery or experimental therapy is contemplated.
Patients presenting with an acute abdomen (either initially or on relapse) should have flat and upright
abdominal x-rays and an abdominal CT scan. These studies may show obstruction, abscesses or fistulas,
and other possible causes of an acute abdomen (eg, appendicitis). Ultrasound may better delineate
gynecologic pathology in women with lower abdominal and pelvic pain.
If initial presentation is less acute, an upper GI series with small-bowel follow-through and spot films of
the terminal ileum is preferred over conventional CT. However, newer techniques of CT or MR
enterography, which combine high-resolution CT or MR imaging with large volumes of ingested contrast,
are becoming the procedures of choice in some centers. These imaging studies are virtually diagnostic if
they show characteristic strictures or fistulas with accompanying separation of bowel loops. If findings are
questionable, CT enteroclysis or video capsule enteroscopy may show superficial aphthous and linear
ulcers. Barium enema x-ray may be used if symptoms seem predominantly colonic (eg, diarrhea) and may
show reflux of barium into the terminal ileum with irregularity, nodularity, stiffness, wall thickening, and a
narrowed lumen. Differential diagnoses in patients with similar x-ray findings include cancer of the cecum,
ileal carcinoid, lymphoma, systemic vasculitis, radiation enteritis, ileocecal TB, and ameboma.
In atypical cases (eg, predominantly diarrhea, with minimal pain), evaluation is similar to suspected UC,
with colonoscopy (including biopsy, sampling for enteric pathogens, and, when possible, visualization of
the terminal ileum). Upper GI endoscopy may identify subtle gastroduodenal involvement even in the
absence of upper GI symptoms.
Laboratory tests should be done to screen for anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and electrolyte abnormalities.
Liver function tests should be done; elevated alkaline phosphatase and
γ
-glutamyl transpeptidase levels
in patients with major colonic involvement suggest possible primary sclerosing cholangitis. Leukocytosis
or increased levels of acute-phase reactants (eg, ESR, C-reactive protein) are nonspecific but may be
used serially to monitor disease activity.
Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies are present in 60 to 70% of patients with UC and in only
5 to 20% of patients with Crohn's disease. AntiSaccharomyces cerevisiae
antibodies are relatively
specific for Crohn's disease. However, these tests do not reliably separate the 2 diseases. They have
uncertain value in cases of indeterminate colitis and are not recommended for routine diagnosis.
Prognosis
Established Crohn's disease is rarely cured but is characterized by intermittent exacerbations and
remissions. Some patients have severe disease with frequent, debilitating periods of pain. However, with
judicious medical therapy and, where appropriate, surgical therapy, most patients function well and adapt
successfully. Disease-related mortality is very low. GI cancer, including cancer of the colon and small
bowel, is the leading cause of excess Crohn's disease-related mortality.
===PAGE:245===
Treatment
• Loperamide or antispasmodics for symptom relief
• 5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) or antibiotics
• Other drugs depending on symptoms and severity
• Sometimes surgery
Details of specific drugs and dosages are discussed elsewhere.
General management:
Cramps and diarrhea may be relieved by oral administration of loperamide 2 to 4
mg or antispasmodic drugs up to 4 times/day (ideally before meals). Such symptomatic treatment is safe,
except in cases of severe, acute Crohn's colitis, which may progress to toxic megacolon as in UC.
Hydrophilic mucilloids (eg, methylcellulose or psyllium preparations) sometimes help prevent anal irritation
by increasing stool firmness. Dietary roughage is to be avoided in stricturing disease or active colonic
inflammation.
Mild to moderate disease:
This category includes ambulatory patients who tolerate oral intake and
have no signs of toxicity, tenderness, mass, or obstruction. 5-ASA (mesalamine) is commonly used as
first-line treatment, although its benefits for small-bowel disease are modest at best. Pentasa is the most
effective formulation for disease proximal to the terminal ileum; Asacol is effective in distal ileal disease. All
formulations are roughly equivalent for Crohn's colitis, although none of the newer preparations rival
sulfasalazine for efficacy on a dose-for-dose basis.
Antibiotics are considered a first-line agent by some clinicians, or they may be reserved for patients not
responding to 4 wk of 5-ASA; their use is strictly empiric. With any of these drugs, 8 to 16 wk of treatment
may be required.
Responders should receive maintenance therapy.
Moderate to severe disease:
Patients without fistulas or abscesses but with significant pain,
tenderness, fever, or vomiting, or those who have not responded to treatment for mild disease, require
corticosteroids, either oral or parenteral, depending on severity of symptoms and frequency of vomiting.
Oral prednisone or prednisolone may act more rapidly and reliably than oral budesonide, but budesonide
has somewhat fewer adverse effects and is considered the corticosteroid of choice in many centers,
especially in Europe. Patients not responding to corticosteroids, or those whose doses cannot be
tapered, should receive azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, or possibly methotrexate. Infliximab is preferred
by some as a second-line agent after corticosteroids, and even as a first-line agent in preference to
corticosteroids, but it is contraindicated in active uncontrolled infection.
Obstruction is managed initially with nasogastric suction and IV fluids. Obstruction due to uncomplicated
Crohn's disease should resolve within a few days and therefore does not require parenteral nutrition;
absence of prompt response indicates a complication or another etiology and demands immediate
surgery.
Fulminant disease or abscess:
Patients with toxic appearance, high fever, persistent vomiting,
rebound, or a tender or palpable mass must be hospitalized for administration of IV fluids and antibiotics.
Abscesses must be drained, either percutaneously or surgically. IV corticosteroids should be given only
when infection has been ruled out or controlled. If there is no response to corticosteroids and antibiotics
within 5 to 7 days, surgery is usually indicated.
Fistulas:
Fistulas are treated initially with metronidazole and ciprofloxacin. Patients who do not respond
in 3 to 4 wk may receive an immunomodulator (eg, azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine), with or without an
induction regimen of infliximab for more rapid response. Cyclosporine is an alternative, but fistulas often
relapse after treatment. Severe refractory perianal fistulas may require temporary diverting colostomy but
almost invariably recur after reconnection; hence, diversion is more appropriately considered a
===PAGE:246===
preparation for definitive surgery or at best an adjunct to infliximab rather than a primary treatment.
Maintenance therapy:
Patients who require only 5-ASA or an antibiotic to achieve remission can be
maintained on this drug. Patients requiring acute treatment with corticosteroids or infliximab generally
require azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate, or infliximab for maintenance. Systemically active
corticosteroids are neither safe nor effective for long-term maintenance, although budesonide has been
shown to delay relapse with fewer adverse effects. Patients who respond to infliximab for acute disease
but who are not well maintained on antimetabolites may stay in remission with repeat doses of infliximab 5
to 10 mg/kg at 8-wk intervals. Monitoring during remission can be done by following symptoms and blood
tests and does not require routine x-rays or colonoscopy (other than regular surveillance for dysplasia
after 7 to 8 yr of disease).
Surgery:
Even though about 70% of patients ultimately require an operation, surgery is always done
reluctantly. It is best reserved for recurrent intestinal obstruction or intractable fistulas or abscesses.
Resection of the involved bowel may ameliorate symptoms but does not cure the disease, which is likely
to recur even after resection of all clinically apparent lesions. The recurrence rate, defined by endoscopic
lesions at the anastomotic site, is > 70% at 1 yr and > 85% at 3 yr; defined by clinical symptoms, it is
about 25 to 30% at 3 yr and 40 to 50% at 5 yr. Ultimately, further surgery is required in nearly 50% of
cases. However, recurrence rates seem to be reduced by early postoperative prophylaxis with 6mercaptopurine, metronidazole, or possibly infliximab or 5-ASA. Moreover, when surgery is done for
appropriate indications, almost all patients have improved quality of life.
Ulcerative Colitis
Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic inflammatory and ulcerative disease arising in the colonic
mucosa, characterized most often by bloody diarrhea. Extraintestinal symptoms, particularly
arthritis, may occur. Long-term risk of colon cancer is high. Diagnosis is by colonoscopy.
Treatment is with 5-aminosalicylic acid, corticosteroids, immunomodulators, anticytokines,
antibiotics, and occasionally surgery.
Pathophysiology
UC usually begins in the rectum. It may remain localized to the rectum (ulcerative proctitis) or extend
proximally, sometimes involving the entire colon. Rarely, it involves most of the large bowel at once.
The inflammation caused by UC affects the mucosa and submucosa, and there is a sharp border
between normal and affected tissue. Only in severe disease is the muscularis involved. In early cases, the
mucous membrane is erythematous, finely granular, and friable, with loss of the normal vascular pattern
and often with scattered hemorrhagic areas. Large mucosal ulcers with copious purulent exudate
characterize severe disease. Islands of relatively normal or hyperplastic inflammatory mucosa
(pseudopolyps) project above areas of ulcerated mucosa. Fistulas and abscesses do not occur.
Toxic or fulminant colitis
occurs when transmural extension of ulceration results in localized ileus and
peritonitis. Within hours to days, the colon loses muscular tone and begins to dilate. The terms toxic
megacolon or toxic dilation are discouraged because the toxic inflammatory state and its complications
can occur without frank megacolon (defined as transverse colon > 6 cm diameter during an exacerbation).
Toxic colitis is a medical emergency that usually occurs spontaneously in the course of very severe colitis
but is sometimes precipitated by opioid or anticholinergic antidiarrheal drugs. Colonic perforation may
occur, which increases mortality significantly.
Symptoms and Signs
Bloody diarrhea of varied intensity and duration is interspersed with asymptomatic intervals. Usually an
attack begins insidiously, with increased urgency to defecate, mild lower abdominal cramps, and blood
and mucus in the stools. Some cases develop after an infection (eg, amebiasis, bacillary dysentery).
When ulceration is confined to the rectosigmoid, the stool may be normal or hard and dry, but rectal
discharges of mucus loaded with RBCs and WBCs accompany or occur between bowel movements.
===PAGE:247===
Systemic symptoms are absent or mild. If ulceration extends proximally, stools become looser and the
patient may have > 10 bowel movements per day, often with severe cramps and distressing rectal
tenesmus, without respite at night. The stools may be watery or contain mucus and frequently consist
almost entirely of blood and pus.
Toxic or fulminant colitis manifests initially with sudden violent diarrhea, fever to 40° C (104° F),
abdominal pain, signs of peritonitis (eg, rebound tenderness), and profound toxemia.
Systemic symptoms and signs, more common with extensive UC, include malaise, fever, anemia,
anorexia, and weight loss. Extraintestinal manifestations (particularly joint and skin complications— are most common when systemic symptoms are present.
Diagnosis
• Stool cultures and microscopy (to exclude infectious causes)
• Sigmoidoscopy with biopsy
Initial presentation:
Diagnosis is suggested by typical symptoms and signs, particularly when
accompanied by extraintestinal manifestations or a history of previous similar attacks. UC should be
distinguished from Crohn's disease (see
Table 19-1
) but more importantly from other causes of acute
colitis (eg, infection; in elderly patients, ischemia).
In all patients, stool cultures for enteric pathogens should be done, and
Entamoeba histolytica
should be
excluded by examination of fresh stool specimens. When amebiasis is suspected because of
epidemiologic or travel history, serologic titers and biopsies should be done. History of prior antibiotic use
or recent hospitalization should prompt stool assay for
Clostridium difficile
toxin. Patients at risk should
be tested for HIV, gonorrhea, herpesvirus, chlamydia, and amebiasis. Opportunistic infections (eg,
cytomegalovirus,
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
) or Kaposi's sarcoma must also be considered in
immunosuppressed patients. In women using oral contraceptives, contraceptive-induced colitis is
possible; it usually resolves spontaneously after hormone therapy is stopped.
Sigmoidoscopy should be done; it allows visual confirmation of colitis and permits direct sampling of stool
or mucus for culture and microscopic evaluation, as well as biopsy of affected areas. Although visual
inspection and biopsies may be nondiagnostic, because there is much overlap in appearance among
different types of colitis, acute, self-limited, infectious colitis can usually be distinguished histologically
from chronic idiopathic UC or Crohn's colitis. Severe perianal disease, rectal sparing, absence of
bleeding, and asymmetric or segmental involvement of the colon indicate Crohn's disease rather than UC
(see
Table 19-1
). Colonoscopy is usually unnecessary initially but should be done electively if
inflammation has extended proximal to the reach of the sigmoidoscope.
Laboratory tests should be done to screen for anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and electrolyte abnormalities.
Liver function tests should
be done; elevated alkaline phosphatase and
γ
-glutamyl transpeptidase levels
suggest possible primary sclerosing cholangitis. Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies are
relatively specific (60 to 70%) for UC. AntiSaccharomyces cerevisiae
antibodies are relatively specific for
Crohn's disease. However, these tests do not reliably separate the 2 diseases and are not recommended
for routine diagnosis. Other possible laboratory abnormalities include leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, and
elevated acute-phase reactants (eg, ESR, C-reactive protein).
X-rays are not diagnostic but occasionally show abnormalities. Plain x-rays of the abdomen may show
mucosal edema, loss of haustration, and absence of formed stool in the diseased bowel. Barium enema
shows similar changes, albeit more clearly, and may also show ulcerations, but the enema should not be
done during an acute presentation. A shortened, rigid colon with an atrophic or pseudopolypoid mucosa is
often seen after several years' illness. X-ray findings of thumbprinting and segmental distribution are more
suggestive of intestinal ischemia or possibly Crohn's colitis rather than of UC.
Recurrent symptoms:
Patients with known disease and a recurrence of typical symptoms should be
examined, but extensive testing is not always required. Depending on duration and severity of symptoms,
===PAGE:248===
sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy may be done and a CBC obtained. Cultures, ova and parasite
examination, and
C. difficile
toxin assay should be done when there are atypical features to the relapse
or when there is an exacerbation after prolonged remission, during a contagious outbreak, after antibiotic
exposure, or whenever the clinician is suspicious.
Fulminant symptoms:
Patients require further evaluation during severe flare-ups. Flat and upright
abdominal x-rays should be taken; they may show megacolon or intraluminal gas accumulated over a
long, continuous, paralyzed segment of colon—a result of lost muscle tone. Colonoscopy and barium
enema should be avoided because of the risk of perforation. CBC, ESR, electrolytes, PT, PTT, and type
and crossmatch should be obtained.
The patient must be watched closely for progressive peritonitis or perforation. Percussion over the liver is
important because loss of hepatic dullness may be the first clinical sign of free perforation, especially in a
patient whose peritoneal signs are suppressed by high-dose corticosteroids. Abdominal x-rays are taken
every 1 or 2 days to follow the course of colonic distention and to detect free or intramural air.
Prognosis
Usually, UC is chronic with repeated exacerbations and remissions. In about 10% of patients, an initial
attack becomes fulminant with massive hemorrhage, perforation, or sepsis and toxemia. Complete
recovery after a single attack occurs in another 10%.
Patients with localized ulcerative proctitis have the best prognosis. Severe systemic manifestations, toxic
complications, and malignant degeneration are unlikely, and late extension of the disease occurs in only
about 20 to 30%. Surgery is rarely required, and life expectancy is normal. The symptoms, however, may
prove stubborn and refractory. Moreover, because extensive UC may begin in the rectum and spread
proximally, proctitis should not be considered localized until it has been observed for ≥ 6 mo. Localized
disease that later extends is often more severe and more refractory to therapy.
Colon cancer:
The risk of colon cancer is proportional to the duration of disease and amount of colon
affected, but not necessarily to the clinical severity of the attacks. Some recent studies suggest that
sustained microscopic inflammation is a risk factor, and that use of aminosalicylate to control inflammation
is protective. Cancer begins to appear by 7 yr from onset of illness in patients with extensive colitis. The
cumulative likelihood of cancer is about 3% at 15 yr, 5% at 20 yr, and 9% at 25 yr, representing an annual
risk of about 0.5 to 1% after the 10th yr. There is probably no higher absolute cancer risk among patients
with childhood-onset colitis independent of the longer duration of disease. However, patients who have
inflammatory bowel disease and primary sclerosing cholangitis are at a higher risk of cancer from the time
of colitis diagnosis.
Regular colonoscopic surveillance, preferably during remission, is advised for patients with disease
duration > 8 to 10 yr (except for those with isolated proctitis). Endoscopic biopsies should be taken every
10 cm throughout the colon. Newer techniques, especially chromoendoscopy, may better identify areas of
suspicion in preference to totally random biopsies. Any grade of definite dysplasia within an area affected
by colitis is liable to progress to more advanced neoplasia and even cancer and is a strong indication for
total colectomy unless the dysplasia is strictly confined to a discrete, completely excisable polyp. It is
important to distinguish definite neoplastic dysplasia from reactive or regenerative atypia secondary to
inflammation. However, if the dysplasia is unequivocal, delaying colectomy in favor of
repeated follow-up
surveillance is a risky strategy. Pseudopolyps have no prognostic significance but may be difficult to
distinguish from neoplastic polyps; thus, any suspect polyp should undergo excision biopsy.
The optimal frequency of colonoscopic surveillance has not been established, but some authorities
recommend every 2 yr during the 2nd decade of disease and annually thereafter.
Long-term survival after diagnosis of colitis-related cancer is about 50%, a figure comparable to that for
colorectal cancer in the general population.
Treatment
===PAGE:249===
• Loperamide and dietary management for symptom relief
• 5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA)
• Corticosteroids and other drugs depending on symptoms and severity
• Anticytokine drugs
• Sometimes surgery
Details of specific drugs and regimens are discussed elsewhere.
General management:
Avoiding raw fruits and vegetables limits trauma to the inflamed colonic mucosa
and may lessen symptoms. A milk-free diet may help but need not be continued if no benefit is noted.
Loperamide 2 mg po bid to qid is indicated for relatively mild diarrhea; higher oral doses (4 mg in the
morning and 2 mg after each bowel movement) may be required for more intense diarrhea. Antidiarrheal
drugs must be used with extreme caution in severe cases because they may precipitate toxic dilation.
Mild left-sided disease:
Patients with proctitis, or colitis that does not extend proximally beyond the
splenic flexure, are treated with 5-ASA (mesalamine) enemas once/day or bid depending on severity.
Suppositories are effective for more distal disease and are usually preferred by patients. Corticosteroid
and budesonide enemas are slightly less effective but should be used if 5-ASA is unsuccessful or not
tolerated. Once remission is achieved, dosage is slowly tapered to maintenance levels. Oral 5-ASA drugs
theoretically have some incremental benefit in lessening the probability of proximal spread of disease.
Moderate or extensive disease:
Patients with inflammation proximal to the splenic flexure or left-sided
disease unresponsive to topical agents should receive an oral 5-ASA formulation in addition to 5-ASA
enemas. High-dose corticosteroids are added for more severe symptoms; after 1 to 2 wk, the daily dose is
reduced by about 5 to 10 mg each wk. Immunomodulater therapy with azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine
can be used in patients who are refractory to maximal doses of 5-ASA and would otherwise need longterm corticosteroid therapy. Additionally, infliximab is beneficial in some patients and may be considered
for those refractory to immunomodulator or corticosteroid therapy as well as those who are corticosteroid
dependent.
Severe disease:
Patients with > 10 bloody bowel movements per day, tachycardia, high fever, or severe
abdominal pain require hospitalization to receive high-dose IV corticosteroids. 5-ASA may be continued. IV
fluids and blood transfusion are given as needed for dehydration and anemia. The patient must be
observed closely for the development of toxic megacolon. Parenteral hyperalimentation is sometimes
used for nutritional support but is of no value as primary therapy; patients who can tolerate food should
eat.
Patients who do not respond within 3 to 7 days should be considered for IV cyclosporine or infliximab or
else for surgery. Patients who do respond to a corticosteroid regimen are switched within a week or so to
prednisone 60 mg po once/day, which may be gradually reduced at home based on clinical response.
Patients who are started on IV cyclosporine and respond to therapy are switched to oral cyclosporine and
concomitant azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine. Oral cyclosporine is continued for about 3 to 4 mo, during
which time corticosteroids are tapered and cyclosporine levels are closely monitored. Some clinicians
recommend prophylaxis against
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia during the interval of overlapping
treatment with corticosteroids, cyclosporine, and an antimetabolite.
Fulminant colitis:
If fulminant colitis or toxic megacolon is suspected, the patient should (1) stop all
antidiarrheal drugs; (2) take nothing by mouth and have inserted a long intestinal tube attached to
intermittent suction; (3) receive aggressive IV fluid and electrolyte therapy with 0.9% NaCl, and potassium
chloride and blood as needed; (4) be treated with high-dose IV corticosteroid or cyclosporine; and (5)
receive antibiotics (eg, metronidazole 500 mg IV q 8 h and ciprofloxacin 500 mg IV q 12 h).
Having the patient roll over in bed from the supine to prone position every 2 to 3 h may help redistribute
colonic gas and prevent progressive distention. Passage of a soft rectal tube may also be helpful but
===PAGE:250===
must be done with extreme caution to avoid bowel perforation.
If intensive medical measures do not produce definite improvement within 24 to 48 h, immediate surgery
is required or the patient may die of sepsis caused by bacterial translocation or even perforation.
Maintenance therapy:
After effective treatment of a flare-up, corticosteroids are tapered based on
clinical response and then stopped because they are ineffective as maintenance. Patients should remain
on 5-ASA drugs indefinitely—oral or rectal, depending on location of disease—because stopping
maintenance therapy often allows disease relapse. Dosage intervals for rectal preparations may be
gradually lengthened to every 2nd or 3rd day.
Patients who cannot be withdrawn from corticosteroids should be given azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine.
Also, infliximab is becoming more widely accepted as maintenance therapy for UC as well as for Crohn's
disease.
Surgery:
Nearly one third of patients with extensive UC ultimately require surgery. Total proctocolectomy
is curative: Life expectancy and quality of life are restored to normal, the disease does not recur (unlike
Crohn's disease), and the risk of colon cancer is eliminated.
Emergency colectomy is indicated for massive hemorrhage, fulminating toxic colitis, or perforation.
Subtotal colectomy with ileostomy and rectosigmoid closure or mucous fistula is usually the procedure of
choice because most critically ill patients cannot tolerate more extensive surgery. The rectosigmoid stump
may be electively removed later or may be used for ileoanal anastomosis with a pouch. The intact rectal
stump should not be allowed to remain indefinitely because of the risk of disease activation and malignant
transformation.
Elective surgery is indicated for cancer, symptomatic strictures, growth retardation in children, or, most
commonly, intractable chronic disease resulting in invalidism or corticosteroid dependence. Colectomy is
also done for high-grade and perhaps even low-grade mucosal dysplasia confirmed on pathologic
consultation, unless the dysplasia is limited exclusively to a completely excisable polyp. Severe colitisrelated extraintestinal manifestations (eg, pyoderma gangrenosum), now better controlled by intensive
medical therapies, are only rarely indications for surgery.
The elective procedure of choice in patients with normal sphincter function is restorative proctocolectomy
with ileoanal anastomosis. This procedure creates a pelvic reservoir or pouch from distal ileum, which is
connected to the anus. The intact sphincter allows continence, typically with 8 to 10 bowel
movements/day. Pouchitis is an inflammatory reaction occurring after this procedure in about 50% of
patients. It is thought to be related to bacterial overgrowth and is treated with antibiotics (eg, quinolones).
Probiotics may be protective. Most cases of pouchitis are readily controlled, but 5 to 10% prove refractory
to all medical therapy and require conversion to a conventional (Brooke) ileostomy. For a minority of
patients who are older, who have well-established families and lifestyles, who have poor sphincter tone or
cannot tolerate frequent bowel movements, or who are simply unable or unwilling to face the
consequences of frequent or chronic pouchitis, the Brooke ileostomy remains the procedure of choice.
In any event, the physical and emotional burdens imposed by any form of colon resection must be
recognized, and care should be taken to see that the patient receives all the instructions and all the
medical and psychologic support that is necessary before and after surgery.
===PAGE:251===
Chapter 20. Diverticular Disease
Introduction
Diverticula are saclike mucosal outpouchings that protrude from a tubular structure. True diverticula
contain all layers of the parent structure. False or pseudodiverticula are mucosal projections through the
muscular layer. Esophageal ( and Meckel's diverticula are true diverticula. Colonic diverticula
are pseudodiverticula; they cause symptoms by trapping feces and becoming inflamed or infected,
bleeding, or rupturing.
Diverticulosis
Diverticulosis is the presence of multiple diverticula in the colon, probably resulting from a
lifelong low-fiber diet. Most diverticula are asymptomatic, but some become inflamed or bleed.
Diagnosis is by colonoscopy or barium enema. Treatment varies depending on manifestation.
Diverticula occur anywhere in the large bowel—usually in the sigmoid but rarely below the peritoneal
reflection of the rectum. They vary in diameter from 3 mm to > 3 cm.
Patients with diverticula usually have
several of them. Diverticulosis is uncommon in people < 40 but becomes common rapidly thereafter;
essentially every 90-yr-old person has many diverticula. Giant diverticula, which are rare, range in
diameter from 3 to 15 cm and may be single.
Pathophysiology
Diverticula are probably caused by increased intraluminal pressure leading to mucosal extrusion through
the weakest points of the muscular layer of the bowel—areas adjacent to intramural blood vessels.
Diverticula are more common among people who eat a low-fiber diet; however, the mechanism is not
clear. One theory is that increased intraluminal pressure is required to move low-bulk stool through the
colon. Another theory is that low-stool bulk causes a smaller diameter colon, which by Laplace's law
would have increased pressure.
The etiology of giant diverticula is unclear. One theory is that a valvelike abnormality exists at the base of
the diverticulum, so bowel gas can enter but escapes less freely.
Symptoms and Signs
Most (70%) diverticula are asymptomatic, 15 to 25% become painfully inflamed (diverticulitis), and 10 to
15% bleed painlessly. The bleeding is probably caused by erosion of the adjacent vessel by local trauma
from impacted feces in the diverticulum. Although most diverticula are distal, 75% of bleeding occurs from
diverticula proximal to the splenic flexure. In 33% of patients (5% overall), bleeding is serious enough to
require transfusion.
Diagnosis
• Usually colonoscopy
Asymptomatic diverticula are usually found incidentally during barium enema or colonoscopy.
Diverticulosis is suspected when painless rectal bleeding develops, particularly in an elderly patient.
Evaluation of rectal bleeding typically includes colonoscopy, which can be done electively after routine
preparation unless there is significant ongoing bleeding. In such patients, a rapid preparation (5 to 10 L of
polyethylene glycol solution delivered via NGT over 3 to 4 h) often allows adequate visualization. If
colonoscopy cannot visualize the source and ongoing bleeding is sufficiently rapid (> 0.5 to 1 mL/min),
angiography may localize the source. Some angiographers first do a radionuclide scan to focus the
examination.
Treatment
• High-fiber diet
===PAGE:252===
• Sometimes angiographic or endoscopic treatment of bleeding
Treatment of diverticulosis aims at reducing segmental spasm. A high-fiber diet helps and may be
supplemented by psyllium seed preparations or bran. Low-fiber diets are contraindicated. The intuitive
injunction to avoid seeds or other dietary material that might become impacted in a diverticulum has no
established medical basis. Antispasmodics (eg, belladonna) are not of benefit and may cause adverse
effects. Surgery is unwarranted for uncomplicated disease. Giant diverticula, however, require surgery.
Diverticular bleeding stops spontaneously in 75% of patients. Treatment is often given during diagnostic
procedures. If angiography was done for diagnosis, ongoing bleeding can be controlled in 70 to 90% of
patients by intraarterial injection of vasopressin. In some cases, bleeding recurs within a few days and
requires surgery. Angiographic embolization effectively stops bleeding but leads to bowel infarction in up
to 20% of patients and is not recommended. Colonoscopy allows heat or laser coagulation of vessels or
injection of epinephrine. If these measures fail to stop bleeding, segmental resection or subtotal
colectomy is indicated.
Diverticulitis
Diverticulitis is inflammation of a diverticulum, which can result in phlegmon of the bowel wall,
peritonitis, perforation, fistula, or abscess. The primary symptom is abdominal pain. Diagnosis
is by CT. Treatment is with antibiotics (ciprofloxacin, or a 3rd-generation cephalosporin plus
metronidazole) and occasionally surgery.
Diverticulitis occurs when a micro or macro perforation develops in a diverticulum, releasing intestinal
bacteria. The resultant inflammation remains localized in about 75% of patients. The remaining 25% may
develop abscess, free intraperitoneal perforation, bowel obstruction, or fistulas. The most common
fistulas involve the bladder but may also involve the small bowel, uterus, vagina, abdominal wall, or even
the thigh.
Diverticulitis is most serious in elderly patients, especially those taking prednisone or other drugs that
increase the risk of infection. Nearly all serious diverticulitis occurs in the sigmoid.
Symptoms and Signs
Diverticulitis usually manifests with pain or tenderness in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen and
fever. Peritoneal signs (eg, rebound or guarding) may be present, particularly with abscess or free
perforation. Fistulas may manifest as pneumaturia, feculent vaginal discharge, or a cutaneous or
myofascial infection of the abdominal wall, perineum, or upper leg. Patients with bowel obstruction have
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal distention. Bleeding is uncommon.
Diagnosis
• Abdominal CT
• Colonoscopy after resolution
Clinical suspicion is high in patients with known diverticulosis. However, because other disorders (eg,
appendicitis, colon or ovarian cancer) may cause similar symptoms, testing is required. Abdominal CT
with oral and IV contrast is preferred, although findings in about 10% of patients cannot be distinguished
from colon cancer. Colonoscopy, after resolution of the acute infection, is necessary for definitive
diagnosis.
Treatment
• Varies with severity
• Liquid diet, oral antibiotics for mild disease
===PAGE:253===
• IV antibiotics, npo for more severe disease
• CT-guided percutaneous drainage of abscess
• Sometimes surgery
A patient who is not very ill is treated at home with rest, a liquid diet, and oral antibiotics (eg, ciprofloxacin
500 mg bid amoxicillin/clavulanate 500 mg tid plus metronidazole 500 mg qid). Symptoms usually subside
rapidly. The patient gradually advances to a soft low-fiber diet and a daily psyllium seed preparation. The
colon should be evaluated after 2 to 4 wk with a colonoscopy or barium enema. After 1 mo, a high-fiber
diet is resumed.
Patients with more severe symptoms (eg, pain, fever, marked leukocytosis) should be hospitalized, as
should patients taking prednisone (who are at higher risk of perforation and general peritonitis).
Treatment is bed rest, npo, IV fluids, and IV antibiotics (eg, ceftazidime 1 g IV q 8 h plus metronidazole
500 mg IV q 6 to 8 h).
About 80% of patients can be treated successfully without surgery. An abscess may respond to
percutaneous drainage (CT guided). If response is satisfactory, the patient remains hospitalized until
symptoms are relieved and a soft diet is resumed. A colonoscopy or barium enema is done ≥ 2 wk after
symptoms have resolved.
Surgery:
Surgery is required immediately for patients with free perforation or general peritonitis and for
patients with severe symptoms that do not respond to nonsurgical treatment within 48 h. Increasing pain,
tenderness, and fever are other signs that surgery is needed. Surgery should also be considered in
patients with any of the following: ≥ 2 previous attacks of mild diverticulitis (or one attack in a patient <
50); a persistent tender mass; clinical, endoscopic, or x-ray signs suggestive of cancer; and dysuria
associated with diverticulitis in men (or in women who have had a hysterectomy), because this symptom
may presage perforation into the bladder.
The involved section of the colon is resected. The ends can be reanastomosed immediately in healthy
patients without perforation, abscess, or significant inflammation. Other patients have a temporary
colostomy with anastomosis carried out in a subsequent operation after inflammation resolves and the
patient's general condition improves.
Meckel's Diverticulum
Meckel's diverticulum is a congenital sacculation of the distal ileum occurring in 2 to 3% of
people. It is usually located within 100 cm of the ileocecal valve and often contains heterotopic
gastric tissue, pancreatic tissue, or both. Symptoms are uncommon but include bleeding, bowel
obstruction, and inflammation (diverticulitis). Diagnosis is difficult and often involves
radionuclide scanning and barium studies. Treatment is surgical resection.
Pathophysiology
In early fetal life, the vitelline duct running from the terminal ileum to the umbilicus and yolk sac is normally
obliterated by the 7th wk. If the portion connecting to the ileum fails to atrophy, a Meckel's diverticulum
results. This congenital diverticulum arises from the antimesenteric margin of the intestine and contains
all layers of the normal bowel. About 50% of diverticula also contain heterotopic tissue of the stomach
(and thus contain parietal cells that secrete HCl), pancreas, or both.
Only about 2% of people with Meckel's diverticulum develop complications. Although diverticula are
equally common among males and females, males are 2 to 3 times more likely to have complications.
Complications include the following:
•
Bleeding
===PAGE:254===
• Obstruction
• Diverticulitis
• Tumors
Bleeding is more common among young children (< 5 yr) and occurs when acid secreted from ectopic
gastric mucosa in the diverticulum ulcerates the adjacent ileum. Obstruction can occur at any age but is
more common among older children and adults. In children, obstruction is most likely caused by
intussusception of the diverticulum. Obstruction may also result from adhesions, volvulus, retained foreign
bodies, tumors, or incarceration in a hernia (Littre's hernia). Acute Meckel's diverticulitis can occur at any
age, but its incidence peaks in older children. Tumors, including carcinoids, are rare and occur mainly in
adults.
Symptoms and Signs
In all ages, intestinal obstruction is manifested by cramping abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Acute
Meckel's diverticulitis is characterized by abdominal pain and tenderness typically localized below or to
the left of the umbilicus; it is often accompanied by vomiting and is similar to appendicitis except for
location of pain.
Children may present with repeated episodes of painless, bright red rectal bleeding, which is usually not
severe enough to cause shock. Adults may also bleed, typically resulting in melena rather than frank
blood.
Diagnosis
• Based on symptoms
• Radionuclide scan for bleeding
• CT for pain
Diagnosis is difficult, and tests are chosen based on presenting symptoms. If rectal bleeding is suspected
to originate from a Meckel's diverticulum, a
99m
Tc pertechnetate scan may identify ectopic gastric
mucosa and hence the diverticulum. Patients presenting with abdominal pain and focal tenderness should
have a CT scan with oral contrast. If vomiting and signs of obstruction are predominant, flat and upright xrays of the abdomen are done. Sometimes diagnosis is made only during surgical exploration for
presumed appendicitis; whenever a normal appendix is found, Meckel's diverticulum should be
suspected.
Treatment
• Surgery
Patients with intestinal obstruction caused by Meckel's diverticulum require early surgery. For detailed
treatment of intestinal obstruction, see p.
.
A bleeding diverticulum with an indurated area in the adjacent ileum requires resection of this section of
the bowel and the diverticulum. A bleeding diverticulum without ileal induration requires only resection of
the diverticulum.
Meckel's diverticulitis also requires resection. Small, asymptomatic diverticula encountered incidentally at
laparotomy need not be removed.
Diverticular Disease of the Stomach and Small Bowel
Diverticula rarely involve the stomach but occur in the duodenum in up to 25% of people. Most duodenal
===PAGE:255===
diverticula are solitary and occur in the second portion of the duodenum near the ampulla of Vater
(periampullary). Jejunal diverticula occur in about 0.26% of patients and are more common among
patients with disorders of intestinal motility. Meckel's diverticulum occurs in the distal ileum.
Duodenal and jejunal diverticula are asymptomatic in > 90% of cases and are usually detected
incidentally during radiologic or endoscopic investigation of the upper GI tract for an unrelated disease.
Rarely, small-bowel diverticula bleed or become inflamed, causing pain and nausea. Some even
perforate. For poorly understood reasons, patients with periampullary diverticula are at increased risk of
gallstones and pancreatitis. Treatment is surgical resection; however, the clinician should be cautious of
recommending surgery for patients with a diverticulum and vague GI symptoms (eg, dyspepsia).
===PAGE:256===
Chapter 21. Anorectal Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Foreign Bodies
on p.
and
Anorectal Cancer
)
The anal canal begins at the anal sphincter and ends at the anorectal junction (pectinate line,
mucocutaneous junction, dentate line), where there are 8 to 12 anal crypts and 5 to 8 papillae. The canal
is lined with anoderm, a continuation of the external skin. The anal canal and adjacent skin are
innervated by somatic sensory nerves and are highly susceptible to painful stimuli. Venous drainage from
the anal canal occurs through the caval system, but the anorectal junction can drain into both the portal
and caval systems. Lymphatics from the anal canal pass to the internal iliac nodes, the posterior vaginal
wall, and the inguinal nodes. The venous and lymphatic distributions determine how malignant disease
and infection spread.
The rectum is a continuation of the sigmoid colon beginning at the level of the 3rd sacral vertebra and
continuing to the anorectal junction. The rectal lining consists of red, glistening glandular mucosa, which
has an autonomic nerve supply and is relatively insensitive to pain. Venous drainage occurs through the
portal system. Lymphatic return from the rectum occurs along the superior hemorrhoidal vascular pedicle
to the inferior mesenteric and aortic nodes.
The sphincteric ring encircling the anal canal is composed of the internal sphincter, the central portion of
the levators, and components of the external sphincter. Anteriorly, it is more vulnerable to trauma, which
can result in incontinence. The puborectalis forms a muscular sling around the rectum for support and
assistance in defecation.
History:
History should include the details of bleeding, pain, protrusion, discharge, swelling, abnormal
sensations, bowel movements, incontinence, stool characteristics, use of cathartics and enemas, and
abdominal and urinary symptoms. All patients should be asked about anal intercourse and other possible
causes of trauma and infection.
Physical examination:
Examination should be done gently and with good lighting. It consists of external
inspection, perianal and intrarectal digital palpation, abdominal examination, and rectovaginal bidigital
palpation. Anoscopy and rigid or flexible sigmoidoscopy to 15 to 60 cm above the anal verge are often
included (. Inspection, palpation, and anoscopy and sigmoidoscopy are best done with the
patient in the left lateral (Sims') position or inverted on a tilt table. In cases of painful anal lesions, topical
(lidocaine 5% ointment), regional, or even general anesthesia may be required. If it can be tolerated, a
cleansing phosphate enema may facilitate sigmoidoscopy. Biopsies, smears, and cultures may be taken,
and x-ray examination done if indicated.
Anal Fissure
(Fissure in Ano; Anal Ulcer)
An anal fissure is an acute longitudinal tear or a chronic ovoid ulcer in the squamous epithelium
of the anal canal. It causes severe pain, sometimes with bleeding, particularly with defecation.
Diagnosis is by inspection. Treatment is local hygiene, stool softeners, and sometimes
botulinum toxin injection.
Anal fissures are believed to result from laceration by a hard or large stool, with secondary infection.
Trauma (eg, anal intercourse) is a rare cause. The fissure may cause internal sphincter spasm,
decreasing blood supply and perpetuating the fissure.
Symptoms and Signs
Anal fissures usually lie in the posterior midline but may occur in the anterior midline. Those off the
midline may have specific etiologies, particularly Crohn's disease. An external skin tag (the sentinel pile)
may be present at the lower end of the fissure, and an enlarged (hypertrophic) papilla may be present at
===PAGE:257===
the upper end.
Infants may develop acute fissures, but chronic fissures are rare. Chronic fissures must be differentiated
from cancer, primary lesions of syphilis, TB, and ulceration caused by Crohn's disease.
Fissures cause pain and bleeding. The pain typically occurs with or shortly after defecation, lasts for
several hours, and subsides until the next bowel movement. Examination must be gentle but with
adequate spreading of the buttocks to allow visualization.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by inspection. Unless findings suggest a specific cause, further studies are not
required.
Treatment
• Stool softeners
• Protective ointments, sitz baths
• Nitroglycerin ointment or botulinum toxin type A injection
Fissures often respond to conservative measures that minimize trauma during defecation (eg, stool
softeners, psyllium, fiber). Healing is aided by use of protective zinc oxide ointments or bland
suppositories (eg, glycerin) that lubricate the lower rectum and soften stool. Topical anesthetics (eg,
benzocaine, lidocaine) and warm (not hot) sitz baths for 10 or 15 min after each bowel movement and prn
give temporary relief.
Topical nitroglycerin 0.2% ointment, nifedipine cream 0.2% or 0.3%, arginine gel, and injections of
botulinum toxin type A into the internal sphincter relax the anal sphincter and decrease maximum anal
resting pressure, allowing healing. When conservative measures fail, surgery (internal anal
sphincterotomy or controlled anal dilation) is needed to interfere with the cycle of internal anal sphincter
spasm.
Anorectal Abscess
An anorectal abscess is a localized collection of pus in the perirectal spaces. Abscesses usually
originate in an anal crypt. Symptoms are pain and swelling. Diagnosis is primarily by
examination and CT or pelvic MRI for deeper abscesses. Treatment is surgical drainage.
An abscess may be located in various spaces surrounding the rectum and may be superficial or deep. A
perianal abscess is superficial and points to the skin. An ischiorectal abscess is deeper, extending across
the sphincter into the ischiorectal space below the levator ani; it may penetrate to the contralateral side,
forming a "horseshoe" abscess. An abscess above the levator ani (ie, supralevator abscess) is quite deep
and may extend to the peritoneum or abdominal organs; this abscess often results from diverticulitis or
pelvic inflammatory disease. Crohn's disease (especially of the colon) sometimes causes anorectal
abscess. A mixed infection usually occurs, with
Escherichia coli
,
Proteus vulgaris
,
Bacteroides
,
streptococci, and staphylococci predominating.
Symptoms and Signs
Superficial abscesses can be very painful; perianal swelling, redness, and tenderness are characteristic.
Deeper abscesses may be less painful but cause toxic symptoms (eg, fever, chills, malaise). There may
be no perianal findings, but digital rectal examination may reveal a tender, fluctuant swelling of the rectal
wall. High pelvirectal abscesses may cause lower abdominal pain and fever without rectal symptoms.
Sometimes fever is the only symptom.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:258===
• Clinical evaluation
• Rarely examination under anesthesia or CT
Patients who have a pointing cutaneous abscess, a normal digital rectal examination, and no signs of
systemic illness do not require imaging. Those with any findings suggestive of a deeper abscess or
Crohn's disease should have an examination under anesthesia at the time of drainage. Higher
(supralevator) abscesses require CT to determine the intra-abdominal source of sepsis.
Treatment
• Incision and drainage
• Antibiotics for high-risk patients
Prompt incision and adequate drainage are required and should not wait until the abscess points. Many
abscesses can be drained as an in-office procedure; deeper abscesses may require drainage in the
operating room. Febrile, neutropenic, or diabetic patients or those with marked cellulitis should also
receive antibiotics (eg, ciprofloxacin 500 mg IV q 12 h and metronidazole 500 mg IV q 8 h,
ampicillin/sulbactam 1.5 g IV q 8 h). Antibiotics are not indicated for healthy patients with superficial
abscesses. Anorectal fistulas may develop after drainage.
Anorectal Fistula
(Fistula in Ano)
An anorectal fistula is a tubelike tract with one opening in the anal canal and the other usually in
the perianal skin. Symptoms are discharge and sometimes pain. Diagnosis is by examination
and sigmoidoscopy. Treatment often requires surgery.
Fistulas arise spontaneously or occur secondary to drainage of a perirectal abscess. Predisposing
causes include Crohn's disease and TB. Most fistulas originate in the anorectal crypts; others may result
from diverticulitis, tumors, or trauma. Fistulas in infants are congenital and are more common among
boys. Rectovaginal fistulas may be secondary
to Crohn's disease, obstetric injuries, radiation therapy, or
cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
A history of recurrent abscess followed by intermittent or constant discharge is usual. Discharge material
is purulent, serosanguineous, or both. Pain may be present if there is infection. On inspection, one or
more secondary openings can be seen. A cordlike tract can often be palpated. A probe inserted into the
tract can determine the depth and direction and often the primary opening.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sigmoidoscopy
Diagnosis is by examination. Sigmoidoscopy should follow to rule out Crohn's disease. Hidradenitis
suppurativa, pilonidal sinus, dermal suppurative sinuses, and urethro-perineal fistulas must be
differentiated from cryptogenic fistulas.
Treatment
• Various surgical procedures
===PAGE:259===
• Medical treatment if caused by Crohn's disease
In the past, the only effective treatment was surgery, in which the primary opening and the entire tract are
unroofed and converted into a "ditch." Partial division of the sphincters may be necessary. Some degree
of incontinence may occur if a considerable portion of the sphincteric ring is divided. Alternatives to
conventional surgery include advancement flaps, biologic plugs, and fibrin glue instillations into the
fistulous tract.
If diarrhea or Crohn's disease is present, fistulotomy is inadvisable because of delayed wound healing.
For patients with Crohn's disease, metronidazole, other appropriate antibiotics, and suppressive therapies
can be given (. Infliximab is very effective in closing fistulas caused by Crohn's disease.
Fecal Incontinence
Fecal incontinence is involuntary defecation.
Fecal incontinence can result from injuries or diseases of the spinal cord, congenital abnormalities,
accidental injuries to the rectum and anus, procidentia, diabetes, severe dementia, fecal impaction,
extensive inflammatory processes, tumors, obstetric injuries, and operations involving division or dilation
of the anal sphincters.
Physical examination should evaluate gross sphincter function and perianal sensation and rule out fecal
impaction. Anal sphincter ultrasonography, pelvic and perineal MRIs, pelvic floor electromyography, and
anorectal manometry are also useful.
Treatment
• Program of stool regulation
• Perineal exercises, sometimes with biofeedback
• Sometimes a surgical procedure
Treatment includes a bowel management program to develop a predictable pattern of defecation. The
program includes intake of adequate fluid and sufficient dietary bulk. Sitting on a toilet or using another
customary defecatory stimulant (eg, coffee) encourages defecation. A suppository (eg, glycerin,
bisacodyl) or a phosphate enema may also be used. If a regular defecatory pattern does not develop, a
low-residue diet and oral loperamide may reduce the frequency of defecation.
Simple perineal exercises, in which the patient repeatedly contracts the sphincters, perineal muscles, and
buttocks, may strengthen these structures and contribute to continence, particularly in mild cases.
Biofeedback (to train the patient to use the sphincters maximally and to better appreciate physiologic
stimuli) should be considered before recommending surgery in well-motivated patients who can
understand and follow instructions and who have an anal sphincter capable of recognizing the cue of
rectal distention. About 70% of such patients respond to biofeedback.
A defect in the sphincter can be sutured directly. When there is insufficient residual sphincter for repair,
particularly in patients < 50 yr of age, a gracilis muscle can be transposed. Some centers attach a
pacemaker to the gracilis muscle, as well as an artificial sphincter; these or other experimental
procedures are available in only a few centers in the US, as research protocols. Alternatively, a Thiersch
wire or other material can be used to encircle the anus. When all else fails, a colostomy can be
considered.
Hemorrhoids
(Piles)
Hemorrhoids are dilated veins of the hemorrhoidal plexus in the lower rectum. Symptoms
===PAGE:260===
include irritation and bleeding. Thrombosed hemorrhoids are painful. Diagnosis is by
inspection
or anoscopy. Treatment is symptomatic or with endoscopic banding, injection sclerotherapy, or
sometimes surgery.
External hemorrhoids are located below the dentate line and are covered by squamous epithelium.
Internal hemorrhoids are located above the dentate line and are lined by rectal mucosa. Hemorrhoids
typically occur in the right anterior, right posterior, and left lateral zones. They occur in adults and
children.
Symptoms and Signs
Hemorrhoids are often asymptomatic, or they may simply protrude. Pruritus ani is not commonly caused
by hemorrhoids.
External hemorrhoids may become thrombosed, resulting in a painful, purplish swelling. Rarely, they
ulcerate and cause minor bleeding. Cleansing the anal region may be difficult.
Internal hemorrhoids typically manifest with bleeding after defecation; blood is noted on toilet tissue and
sometimes in the toilet bowl. Internal hemorrhoids may be uncomfortable but are not as painful as
thrombosed external hemorrhoids. Internal hemorrhoids sometimes cause mucus discharge and a
sensation of incomplete evacuation.
Strangulated hemorrhoids occur when protrusion and constriction occlude the blood supply. They cause
pain that is occasionally followed by necrosis and ulceration.
Diagnosis
• Anoscopy
• Sometimes sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy
Most painful hemorrhoids, thrombosed, ulcerated or not, are seen on inspection of the anus and rectum.
Anoscopy is essential in evaluating painless or bleeding hemorrhoids. Rectal bleeding should be
attributed to hemorrhoids only after more serious conditions are excluded (eg, by sigmoidoscopy or
colonoscopy).
Treatment
• Stool softeners, sitz baths
• Rarely excision for thrombosed external hemorrhoids
• Injection sclerotherapy or rubber band ligation for internal hemorrhoids
Symptomatic treatment is usually all that is needed. It is accomplished with stool softeners (eg, docusate,
psyllium), warm sitz baths (ie, sitting in a tub of tolerably hot water for 10 min) after each bowel movement
and prn, anesthetic ointments containing lidocaine, or witch hazel (hamamelis) compresses (which soothe
by an unknown mechanism). Pain caused by a thrombosed hemorrhoid can be treated with NSAIDs.
Infrequently, simple excision of the hemorrhoid may relieve pain rapidly; after infiltration with 1% lidocaine,
the thrombosed portion of the hemorrhoid is excised, and the defect is closed with an absorbable suture.
Bleeding hemorrhoids can be treated by injection sclerotherapy with 5% phenol in vegetable oil. Bleeding
should cease at least temporarily.
Rubber band ligation is used for larger, prolapsing internal hemorrhoids or those that do not respond to
conservative management. With mixed internal and external hemorrhoids, only the internal component
should be rubber band ligated. The internal hemorrhoid is grasped and withdrawn through a stretched
1/2-cm diameter band, which is released to ligate the hemorrhoid, resulting in its necrosis and sloughing.
One hemorrhoid is ligated every 2 wk; 3 to 6 treatments may be required. Sometimes, multiple
===PAGE:261===
hemorrhoids can be ligated at a single visit.
Infrared photocoagulation is useful for ablating small internal hemorrhoids, hemorrhoids that cannot be
rubber band ligated because of pain sensitivity, or hemorrhoids that are not cured with rubber band
ligation. Laser destruction, cryotherapy, and various types of electrodestruction are of unproven efficacy.
Surgical hemorrhoidectomy is required for patients who do not respond to other forms of therapy.
Significant postoperative pain is common, as is urinary retention and constipation. Stapled
hemorrhoidopexy is an alternative procedure for circumferential hemorrhoids, although its advantages
and the indications have yet to be defined.
Levator Syndrome
Episodic rectal pain caused by spasm of the levator ani muscle.
Proctalgia fugax
(fleeting pain in the rectum) and
coccydynia
(pain in the coccygeal region) are
variants of levator syndrome. Rectal spasm causes pain, typically unrelated to defecation, usually lasting
< 20 min. The pain may be brief and intense or a vague ache high in the rectum. It may occur
spontaneously or with sitting and can waken the patient from sleep. The pain may feel as if it would be
relieved by the passage of gas or a bowel movement. In severe cases, the pain can persist for many
hours and recur frequently. The patient may have undergone various rectal operations for these
symptoms, with no benefit.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Physical examination can exclude other painful rectal conditions (eg, thrombosed hemorrhoids, fissures,
abscesses). Physical examination is often normal, although tenderness or tightness of the levator muscle,
usually on the left, may be present. Occasional cases are caused by low back or prostate disorders.
Treatment
• Analgesics, sitz baths
• Sometimes electrogalvanic stimulation
Treatment consists of explanations to the patient of the benign nature of the condition. An acute episode
may be relieved by the passage of gas or a bowel movement, by a sitz bath, or by a mild analgesic. When
the symptoms are more intense, physical therapy with electrogalvanic stimulation applied to the lower
rectum is usually effective. Skeletal muscle relaxants or anal sphincter massage under local or regional
anesthesia can be tried, but the benefit is unclear.
Pilonidal Disease
Pilonidal disease refers to an acute abscess or chronic draining sinus in the sacrococcygeal
area.
Pilonidal disease usually occurs in young, hirsute, white males but can also occur in women. One or
several midline or adjacent-to-the-midline pits or sinuses occur in the skin of the sacral region and may
form a cavity, often containing hair. The lesion is usually asymptomatic; infected lesions are painful.
Treatment of an acute abscess is by incision and drainage. Usually, one or more chronic draining sinuses
persist and must be extirpated by excision and primary closure or, preferably, by an open technique (eg,
cystotomy, marsupialization). Antibiotics are generally not needed.
Proctitis
===PAGE:262===
Proctitis is inflammation of the rectal mucosa, which may result from infection, inflammatory
bowel disease, or radiation. Symptoms are rectal discomfort and bleeding. Diagnosis is by
sigmoidoscopy, usually with cultures and biopsy. Treatment depends on etiology.
Proctitis may be a manifestation of sexually transmitted disease, certain enteric infections (eg,
Campylobacter
,
Shigella
,
Salmonella
), inflammatory bowel disease, or radiation treatments; it may be
associated with prior antibiotic use. Sexually transmitted pathogens cause proctitis more commonly
among homosexual men. Immunocompromised patients are at particular risk of infections with herpes
simplex and cytomegalovirus.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, patients report rectal bleeding or passage of mucus. Proctitis resulting from gonorrhea, herpes
simplex, or cytomegalovirus may cause intense anorectal pain.
Diagnosis
• Proctoscopy or sigmoidoscopy
• Tests for syphilis and
Clostridium difficile
Diagnosis requires proctoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, which may reveal an inflamed rectal mucosa. Small
discrete ulcers and vesicles suggest herpes infection. Smears should be sent for culture of
Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia
sp, enteric pathogens, and viral pathogens. Serologic tests for syphilis and stool
tests for
C. difficile
toxin are done. Sometimes mucosal biopsy is needed. Colonoscopy may be valuable
in some patients.
Treatment
• Various treatments depending on cause
Infective proctitis can be treated with antibiotics. Homosexual men with nonspecific proctitis may be
treated empirically with ceftriaxone 125 mg IM once (or ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid for 7 days), plus
doxycycline 100 mg po bid for 7 days. Antibiotic-associated proctitis is treated with metronidazole (250 mg
po qid) or vancomycin (125 mg po qid) for 7 to 10 days.
Radiation proctitis is usually effectively treated with topical formalin carefully applied to the affected
mucosa. Alternative treatments include topical corticosteroids as foam (hydrocortisone 90 mg) or enemas
(hydrocortisone 100 mg or methylprednisolone 40 mg) bid for 3 wk, or mesalamine (4 g) enema at
bedtime for 3 to 6 wk. Mesalamine suppositories 500 mg once/day or bid, mesalamine 800 mg po tid, or
sulfasalazine 500 to 1000 mg po qid for ≥ 3 wk alone or in combination with topical therapy may also be
effective. Patients unresponsive to these forms of therapy may benefit from a course of systemic
corticosteroids.
Pruritus Ani
Pruritus ani is anal and perianal itching.
The perianal skin tends to itch, which can result from numerous causes (see
Table 21-1
).
[Table 21-1.
Causes of Pruritus Ani]
Occasionally, the irritation is misinterpreted by the patient as pain, so other causes of perianal pain (eg,
abscess) should be ruled out.
Diagnosis is based on the appearance of the anal skin and relevant information from the history. The skin
typically shows dullness and thickening, although the underlying pathology is often obscured by
===PAGE:263===
excoriation caused by scratching and secondary infection. A scraping of local skin is taken to rule out a
fungal infection, and a stool sample should be examined for ova and parasites. Visible lesions should be
biopsied.
Foods suspected of causing pruritus ani should be eliminated from the diet. Clothing should be loose, and
bed clothing light. After bowel movements, the patient should cleanse the anal area with absorbent cotton
or plain soft tissue moistened with water. Liberal, frequent dusting with nonmedicated talcum powder or
cornstarch helps combat moisture. Hydrocortisone acetate 1% ointment, applied sparingly qid, may
relieve symptoms. Systemic causes and parasitic or fungal infections must be treated specifically.
Rectal Prolapse and Procidentia
Rectal prolapse is painless protrusion of the rectum through the anus. Procidentia is complete
prolapse of the entire thickness of the rectum. Diagnosis is by inspection. Surgery is usually
required in adults.
Transient, minor prolapse of just the rectal mucosa often occurs in otherwise normal infants. Mucosal
prolapse in adults persists and may progressively worsen.
Procidentia is complete prolapse of the entire thickness of the rectum. The primary cause is unclear. Most
patients are women > 60.
Symptoms and Signs
The most prominent symptom is protrusion. It may only occur while straining or while walking or standing.
Rectal bleeding can occur, and incontinence is frequent. Pain is uncommon unless incarceration occurs.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, or barium enema
To determine the full extent of the prolapse, the clinician should examine the patient while the patient is
standing or squatting and straining. Rectal procidentia can be distinguished from hemorrhoids by the
presence of circumferential mucosal folds. Anal sphincter tone is usually diminished. Sigmoidoscopy,
colonoscopy, or barium enema x-rays of the colon must be done to search for other disease. Primary
neurologic disorders (eg, spinal cord tumors) must be ruled out.
Treatment
• Elimination of causes of straining
• For infants and children: Sometimes strapping buttocks together
• For adults: Sometimes surgery
In infants and children, conservative treatment is most satisfactory. Causes of straining should be
eliminated. Firmly strapping the buttocks together with tape between bowel movements usually facilitates
spontaneous resolution of the prolapse. For simple mucosal prolapse in adults, the excess mucosa can
be excised. For procidentia, an abdominal operation may be required. In patients who are very old or in
poor health, a wire or synthetic plastic loop can encircle the sphincteric ring (Thiersch's procedure). Other
perineal operations (eg, Delorme or Altemeier procedure) can be considered.
===PAGE:264===
Chapter 22. Tumors of the GI Tract
Introduction
Various benign and malignant tumors can develop anywhere in the GI tract. Tumors of the mouth are
discussed in
Chapter 55
.
Benign Esophageal Tumors
Although there are many types of benign esophageal tumors, most are of little consequence except for
causing annoying swallowing symptoms ( and rarely ulceration or bleeding. Leiomyoma, the
most common, may be multiple but usually has an excellent prognosis.
Esophageal Cancer
The most common malignant tumor in the proximal two thirds of the esophagus is squamous
cell carcinoma; adenocarcinoma is the most common in the distal one third. Symptoms are
progressive dysphagia and weight loss. Diagnosis is by endoscopy, followed by CT and
endoscopic ultrasound for staging. Treatment varies with stage and generally includes surgery
with or without chemotherapy and radiation. Long-term survival is poor except for those with
local disease.
Esophageal cancer accounts for an estimated 15,500 cases and 13,900 deaths in the US annually.
Squamous cell carcinoma:
About 8000 cases occur annually in the US. It is more common in parts of
Asia and in South Africa. In the US, it is 4 to 5 times more common among blacks than whites, and 2 to 3
times more common among men than women.
The primary risk factors are alcohol ingestion and tobacco use (in any form). Other factors include
achalasia, human papillomavirus, lye ingestion (resulting in stricture), sclerotherapy, Plummer-Vinson
syndrome, irradiation of the esophagus, and esophageal webs. Genetic causes are unclear, but 50% of
patients with tylosis (hyperkeratosis palmaris et plantaris), an autosomal dominant disorder, have
esophageal cancer by age 45, and 95% have it by age 55.
Adenocarcinoma:
Adenocarcinoma occurs in the distal esophagus. Its incidence is increasing; it
accounts for 50% of esophageal carcinoma in whites. It is 4 times more common among whites than
blacks. Alcohol is not an important risk factor, but smoking is contributory. Adenocarcinoma of the distal
esophagus is difficult to distinguish from adenocarcinoma of the gastric cardia invading the distal
esophagus.
Most adenocarcinomas arise in Barrett's esophagus, which results from chronic gastroesophageal reflux
disease and reflux esophagitis. In Barrett's esophagus, a metaplastic, columnar, glandular, intestine-like
mucosa with brush border and goblet cells replaces the normal stratified squamous epithelium of the
distal esophagus during the healing phase of acute esophagitis when healing takes place in the
continued presence of stomach acid.
Other malignant tumors:
Less common malignant tumors include spindle cell carcinoma (a poorly
differentiated variant of squamous cell carcinoma), verrucous carcinoma (a well-differentiated variant of
squamous cell carcinoma), pseudosarcoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, adenosquamous carcinoma,
cylindroma (adenoid cystic carcinoma), primary oat cell carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, carcinoid tumor,
sarcoma, and primary malignant melanoma.
Metastatic cancer constitutes 3% of esophageal cancer. Melanoma and breast cancer are most likely to
metastasize to the esophagus; others include cancers of the head and neck, lung, stomach, liver, kidney,
prostate, testis, and bone. These tumors usually seed
the loose connective tissue stroma around the
esophagus, whereas primary esophageal cancers begin in the mucosa or submucosa.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:265===
Early-stage esophageal cancer tends to be asymptomatic. When the lumen of the esophagus becomes
constricted to < 14 mm, dysphagia commonly occurs. The patient first has difficulty swallowing solid food,
then semisolid food, and finally liquid food and saliva; this steady progression suggests a growing
malignant process rather than a spasm, benign ring, or peptic stricture. Chest pain may be present,
usually radiating to the back.
Weight loss, even when the patient maintains a good appetite, is almost universal. Compression of the
recurrent laryngeal nerve may lead to vocal cord paralysis and hoarseness. Compression of sympathetic
nerves may lead to Horner's syndrome, and nerve compression elsewhere may cause spinal pain,
hiccups, or paralysis of the diaphragm. Malignant pleural effusions or pulmonary metastasis may cause
dyspnea. Intraluminal tumor involvement may cause odynophagia, vomiting, hematemesis, melena, iron
deficiency anemia, aspiration, and cough. Fistulas between the esophagus and tracheobronchial tree
may cause lung abscess and pneumonia. Other findings may include superior vena cava syndrome,
malignant ascites, and bone pain.
Lymphatic spread to internal jugular, cervical, supraclavicular, mediastinal, and celiac nodes is common.
The tumor usually metastasizes to lung and liver and occasionally to distant sites (eg, bone, heart, brain,
adrenal glands, kidneys, peritoneum).
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy with biopsy
• Then CT and endoscopic ultrasound
There are no screening tests. Patients suspected of having esophageal cancer should have endoscopy
with cytology and biopsy. Although barium x-ray may show an obstructive lesion, endoscopy is required
for biopsy and tissue diagnosis.
Patients in whom esophageal cancer is identified require CT of the chest and abdomen to determine
extent of tumor spread. If CT results are negative for metastasis, endoscopic ultrasound should be done
to determine the depth of the tumor in the esophageal wall and regional lymph node involvement.
Findings guide therapy and help determine prognosis.
Basic blood tests, including CBC, electrolytes, and liver function, should be done.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends greatly on stage, but overall is poor (5-yr survival: < 5%) because many patients
present with advanced disease. Patients with cancer restricted to the mucosa have about an 80%
survival rate, which drops to < 50% with submucosal involvement, 20% with extension to the muscularis
propria, 7% with extension to adjacent structures, and < 3% with distant metastases.
Treatment
• Surgical resection, often combined with chemotherapy and radiation
Treatment decisions depend on tumor staging, size, location, and the patient's wishes (many choose to
forgo aggressive treatment).
General principles:
Patients with stage 0, I, or IIa disease (see
Table 22-1
) respond well to surgical resection; preoperative chemotherapy and radiation provide
additional benefit. Those with stage IIb and III have poor survival with surgery alone; response and
survival are enhanced by preoperative (neoadjuvant) use of radiation and chemotherapy to reduce tumor
volume before surgery. Patients unable or unwilling to undergo surgery may receive some benefit from
combined radiation and chemotherapy. Radiation or chemotherapy alone is of little benefit. Patients with
stage IV disease require palliation and should not undergo surgery.
===PAGE:266===
After treatment, patients are screened for recurrence by endoscopy and CT of the neck, chest, and
abdomen at 6-mo intervals for 3 yr and annually thereafter.
Patients with Barrett's esophagus require intense long-term treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease
( and endoscopic surveillance for malignant transformation at 3- to 12-mo intervals depending
on the degree of metaplasia.
Surgery:
En bloc resection for cure requires removal of the entire tumor, proximal and distal margins of
normal tissue, all potentially malignant lymph nodes, and a portion of the proximal stomach sufficient to
contain the distal draining lymphatics. The procedure requires gastric pull-up with esophagogastric
anastomosis, small-bowel interposition, or colonic interposition. Pyloroplasty is required to ensure proper
gastric drainage because esophagectomy necessarily results in bilateral vagotomy. This extensive
surgery may be poorly tolerated by patients > 75 yr, particularly those
[Table 22-1.
Staging Esophageal Cancer*]
with underlying cardiac or pulmonary disease (ejection fraction < 40%, or forced expiratory volume in 1
sec [FEV] < 1.5 L/min). Overall, operative mortality is about 5%.
Complications of surgery include anastomotic leaks, fistulas, and strictures; bilious gastroesophageal
reflux; and dumping syndrome. The burning chest pain of bile reflux after distal esophagectomy can be
more annoying than the original symptom of dysphagia and may require subsequent Roux-en-Y
jejunostomy for bile diversion. An interposed segment of small bowel or colon in the chest has a tenuous
blood supply, and torsion, ischemia, or gangrene of the interposed bowel may result.
External beam radiation therapy:
Radiation is usually used in combination with chemotherapy for
patients who are poor candidates for curative surgery, including those with advanced disease. Radiation
is contraindicated in patients with tracheoesophageal fistula because tumor shrinkage enlarges the
fistula. Similarly, patients with vascular encasement by tumor may experience massive hemorrhage with
tumor shrinkage. During the early stages of radiation therapy, edema may worsen esophageal
obstruction, dysphagia, and odynophagia. This problem may require esophageal dilation or preradiation
placement of a percutaneous gastrostomy feeding tube. Other adverse effects of radiation therapy
include nausea, vomiting, anorexia, fatigue, esophagitis, excess esophageal mucus production,
xerostomia, stricture, radiation pneumonitis, radiation pericarditis, myocarditis, and myelitis (spinal cord
inflammation).
Chemotherapy:
Tumors are poorly responsive to chemotherapy alone. Response rates (defined as ≥
50% reduction in all measurable areas of tumor) vary from 10 to 40%, but responses generally are
incomplete (minor shrinkage of tumor) and temporary. No drug is notably more effective than another.
Most commonly, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil are used in combination. However, several other drugs,
including mitomycin, doxorubicin, vindesine, bleomycin, and methotrexate, also are active against
squamous cell carcinoma.
Palliation:
Palliation is directed at reducing esophageal obstruction sufficiently to allow oral intake.
Suffering caused by esophageal obstruction can be significant, with salivation and recurrent aspiration.
Options include manual dilation procedures (bougienage), orally inserted stents, radiation therapy, laser
photocoagulation, and photodynamic therapy. In some cases, cervical esophagostomy with feeding
jejunostomy is required.
Relief provided by esophageal dilation rarely lasts more than a few days. Flexible metal mesh stents are
more effective at maintaining esophageal patency. Some plastic-coated models can also be used to
occlude tracheoesophageal fistulas, and some are available with a valve that prevents reflux when the
stent must be placed near the lower esophageal sphincter.
Endoscopic laser therapy can palliate dysphagia by burning a central channel through the tumor and can
be repeated if needed. Photodynamic therapy uses an injection of porfimer sodium, a hematoporphyrin
===PAGE:267===
derivative that is taken up by tissues and acts as a photosensitizer. When activated by a laser beam
directed on the tumor, this substance releases cytotoxic oxygen singlets that destroy tumor cells. Patients
receiving this treatment must avoid sun exposure for 6 wk after treatment because the skin is also
sensitized to light.
Supportive care:
Nutritional support by enteral or parenteral supplementation enhances the tolerability
and feasibility of all treatments.
An endoscopically or surgically placed feeding tube provides a more distal
route for feeding when the esophagus is obstructed.
Because nearly all cases of esophageal cancer are fatal, end-of-life care should always aim to control
symptoms, especially pain and inability to swallow secretions (see also p.
). At some point, many
patients need substantial doses of opioids. Patients should be advised to make end-of-life care decisions
early in the course of disease and to record their wishes in an advance directive (.
Stomach Cancer
Etiology of stomach cancer is multifactorial, but
Helicobacter pylori
plays a significant role.
Symptoms include early satiety, obstruction, and bleeding but tend to occur late in the disease.
Diagnosis is by endoscopy, followed by CT and endoscopic ultrasound for staging. Treatment is
mainly surgery; chemotherapy may provide a temporary response. Long-term survival is poor
except for those with local disease.
Stomach cancer accounts for an estimated 21,000 cases and over 11,000 deaths in the US annually.
Gastric adenocarcinoma accounts for 95% of malignant tumors of the stomach; less common are
localized gastric lymphomas ( and leiomyosarcomas. Stomach cancer is the 2nd most
common cancer worldwide, but the incidence varies widely; incidence is extremely high in Japan, China,
Chile, and Iceland. In the US, incidence has declined in recent decades to the 7th most common cause of
death from cancer. In the US, it is most common among blacks, Hispanics, and American Indians. Its
incidence increases with age; > 75% of patients are > 50 yr.
Etiology
Helicobacter pylori
infection is the cause of most stomach cancer. Autoimmune atrophic gastritis ( and various genetic factors (see
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors
 are also risk factors.
Dietary factors are not proven causes.
Gastric polyps can be precursors of cancer. Inflammatory polyps may develop in patients taking NSAIDs,
and fundic foveolar polyps are common among patients taking proton pump inhibitors. Adenomatous
polyps, particularly multiple ones, although rare, are the most likely to develop cancer. Cancer is
particularly likely if an adenomatous polyp is > 2 cm in diameter or has a villous histology. Because
malignant transformation cannot be detected by inspection, all polyps seen at endoscopy should be
removed. The incidence of stomach cancer is generally decreased in patients with duodenal ulcer.
Pathophysiology
Gastric adenocarcinomas can be classified by gross appearance:
• Protruding: The tumor is polypoid or fungating.
• Penetrating: The tumor is ulcerated.
• Superficial spreading: The tumor spreads along the mucosa or infiltrates superficially within the wall of
the stomach.
• Linitis plastica: The tumor infiltrates the stomach wall with an associated fibrous reaction that causes a
rigid "leather bottle" stomach.
• Miscellaneous: The tumor shows characteristics of ≥ 2 of the other types; this classification is the
===PAGE:268===
largest.
Prognosis is better with protruding tumors than with spreading tumors because protruding tumors become
symptomatic earlier.
Symptoms and Signs
Initial symptoms are nonspecific, often consisting of dyspepsia suggestive of peptic ulcer. Patients and
physicians alike tend to dismiss symptoms or treat the patient for acid disease. Later, early satiety
(fullness after ingesting a small amount of food) may occur if the cancer obstructs the pyloric region or if
the stomach becomes nondistensible secondary to linitis plastica. Dysphagia may result if cancer in the
cardiac region of the stomach obstructs the esophageal outlet. Loss of weight or strength, usually
resulting from dietary restriction, is common. Massive hematemesis or melena is uncommon, but
secondary anemia may follow occult blood loss. Occasionally, the first symptoms are caused by
metastasis (eg, jaundice, ascites, fractures).
Physical findings may be unremarkable or limited to heme-positive stools. Late in the course,
abnormalities include an epigastric mass; umbilical, left supraclavicular, or left axillary lymph nodes;
hepatomegaly; and an ovarian or rectal mass. Pulmonary, CNS, and bone lesions may occur.
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy with biopsy
• Then CT and endoscopic ultrasound
Differential diagnosis commonly includes peptic ulcer and its complications.
Patients suspected of having stomach cancer should have endoscopy with multiple biopsies and brush
cytology. Occasionally, a biopsy limited to the mucosa misses tumor tissue in the submucosa. X-rays,
particularly double-contrast barium studies, may show lesions but rarely obviate the need for subsequent
endoscopy.
Patients in whom cancer is identified require CT of the chest and abdomen to determine extent of tumor
spread. If CT is negative for metastasis, endoscopic ultrasound should be done to determine the depth of
the tumor and regional lymph node involvement. Findings guide therapy and help determine prognosis.
Basic blood tests, including CBC, electrolytes, and liver function tests, should be done to assess anemia,
hydration, general condition, and possible liver metastases. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) should be
measured before and after surgery.
Screening:
Screening with endoscopy is used in high-risk populations (eg, Japanese) but is not
recommended in the US. Follow-up screening for recurrence in treated patients consists of endoscopy
and CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. If an elevated CEA dropped after surgery, follow-up should
include CEA levels; a rise signifies recurrence.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends greatly on stage but overall is poor (5-yr survival: < 5 to 15%) because most patients
present with advanced disease. If the tumor is limited to the mucosa or submucosa, 5-yr survival may be
as high as 80%. For tumors involving local lymph nodes, survival is 20 to 40%. More widespread disease
is almost always fatal within 1 yr. Gastric lymphomas have a better prognosis and are discussed in
Ch.
.
Treatment
• Surgical resection, sometimes combined with chemotherapy, radiation, or both
===PAGE:269===
Treatment decisions depend on tumor staging and the patient's wishes (some may choose to forgo
aggressive treatment—.
Curative surgery involves removal of most or all of the stomach and adjacent lymph nodes and is
reasonable in patients with disease limited to the stomach and perhaps the regional lymph nodes (< 50%
of patients). Adjuvant chemotherapy or combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy after surgery may
be beneficial if the tumor is resectable.
Resection of locally advanced regional disease results in a 10-mo median survival (vs 3 to 4 mo without
resection).
Metastasis or extensive nodal involvement precludes curative surgery, and at most, palliative procedures
should be undertaken. However, the true extent of tumor spread often is not recognized until curative
surgery is attempted. Palliative surgery typically consists of a gastroenterostomy to bypass a pyloric
obstruction and should be done only if the patient's quality of life can be improved. In patients not
undergoing surgery, combination chemotherapy regimens (5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, mitomycin,
cisplatin, or leucovorin in various combinations) may produce temporary response but little improvement
in 5-yr survival. Radiation therapy is of limited benefit.
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors are tumors of the GI tract derived from mesenchymal precursor cells in
the gut wall. They result from mutations of a growth factor receptor gene,
CKIT
. Some are caused by
previous radiation therapy to the abdomen for other tumors.
Tumors are slow growing, and malignant potential varies from minimal to significant. Most (60 to 70%)
occur in the stomach, 20 to 25% in the small bowel, and a small number in the esophagus, colon, and
rectum. Average age at presentation is 50 to 60.
Symptoms vary with location but include bleeding, dyspepsia, and obstruction. Diagnosis is usually by
endoscopy, with biopsy and endoscopic ultrasound for staging. Treatment is surgical removal. The role of
radiation and chemotherapy is unclear, but the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib has been beneficial.
Small-Bowel Tumors
Small-bowel tumors account for 1 to 5% of GI tumors (over 5000 cases in the US annually).
Benign tumors
include leiomyomas, lipomas, neurofibromas, and fibromas. All may cause abdominal
distention, pain, bleeding, diarrhea, and, if obstruction develops, vomiting. Polyps are not as common as
in the colon.
Adenocarcinoma
, a malignant tumor, is uncommon. Usually it arises in the duodenum or proximal
jejunum and causes minimal symptoms. In patients with Crohn's disease, the tumors tend to occur distally
and in bypassed or
inflamed loops of bowel; adenocarcinoma occurs more often in Crohn's disease of the
small bowel than in Crohn's disease of the colon.
Primary malignant
lymphoma
( arising in the ileum may cause a long, rigid segment. Smallbowel lymphomas arise often in long-standing untreated celiac sprue.
Carcinoid tumors
( occur most often in the small bowel, particularly the ileum, and the
appendix, and in these locations are often malignant. Multiple tumors occur in 50% of cases. Of those > 2
cm in diameter, 80% have metastasized locally or to the liver by the time of operation. About 30% of
small-bowel carcinoids cause obstruction, pain, bleeding, or carcinoid syndrome. Treatment is surgical
resection; repeat operations may be required.
Kaposi's sarcoma
(, first described as a disease of elderly Jewish and Italian men, occurs in
an aggressive form in Africans, transplant recipients, and AIDS patients, who have GI tract involvement 40
to 60% of the time. Lesions may occur anywhere in the GI tract but usually in the stomach, small bowel,
===PAGE:270===
or distal colon. GI lesions usually are asymptomatic, but bleeding, diarrhea, proteinlosing enteropathy,
and intussusception may occur. A second primary intestinal cancer occurs in ≤ 20% of patients; most
often it is lymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma, or adenocarcinoma of the
GI tract. Treatment depends on the cell type and location and extent of the lesions.
Diagnosis
• Enteroclysis
• Sometimes push endoscopy or capsule video endoscopy
Enteroclysis (sometimes CT enteroclysis) is probably the most common study for mass lesions of the
small bowel. Push endoscopy of the small bowel with an enteroscope may be used to visualize and
biopsy tumors. Capsule video endoscopy can help identify small-bowel lesions, particularly bleeding sites;
a swallowed capsule transmits 2 images/sec to an external recorder. The original capsule is not useful in
the stomach or colon because it tumbles in these larger organs; a colon capsule camera with better optics
and illumination is under development for use in these larger-diameter organs.
Treatment
• Surgical resection
Treatment is surgical resection. Electrocautery, thermal obliteration, or laser phototherapy at the time of
enteroscopy or surgery may be an alternative to resection.
Polyps of the Colon and Rectum
An intestinal polyp is any mass of tissue that arises from the bowel wall and protrudes into the
lumen. Most are asymptomatic except for minor bleeding, which is usually occult. The main
concern is malignant transformation; most colon cancers arise in a previously benign
adenomatous polyp. Diagnosis is by endoscopy. Treatment is endoscopic removal.
Polyps may be sessile or pedunculated and vary considerably in size. Incidence of polyps ranges from 7
to 50%; the higher figure includes very small polyps (usually hyperplastic polyps or adenomas) found at
autopsy. Polyps, often multiple, occur most commonly in the rectum and sigmoid and decrease in
frequency toward the cecum. Multiple polyps may represent familial adenomatous polyposis (.
About 25% of patients with cancer of the large bowel also have satellite adenomatous polyps.
Adenomatous (neoplastic) polyps
are of greatest concern. Such lesions are classified histologically as
tubular adenomas, tubulo-villous adenomas (villoglandular polyps), or villous adenomas. The likelihood of
cancer in an adenomatous polyp at the time of discovery is related to size, histologic type, and degree of
dysplasia; a 1.5-cm tubular adenoma has a 2% risk of containing a cancer vs a 35% risk in 3-cm villous
adenomas. Serrated adenomas, a somewhat more aggressive type of adenoma, may develop from
hyperplastic polyps.
Nonadenomatous (nonneoplastic) polyps
include hyperplastic polyps, hamartomas, juvenile polyps,
pseudopolyps, lipomas, leiomyomas, and other rarer tumors. Juvenile polyps occur in children, typically
outgrow their blood supply, and autoamputate some time during or after puberty. Treatment is required
only for uncontrollable bleeding or intussusception. Inflammatory polyps and pseudopolyps occur in
chronic ulcerative colitis and in Crohn's disease of the colon. Multiple juvenile polyps (but not sporadic
ones) convey an increased cancer risk. The specific number of polyps resulting in increased risk is not
known.
Symptoms and Signs
Most polyps are asymptomatic. Rectal bleeding, usually occult and rarely massive, is the most frequent
complaint. Cramps, abdominal pain, or obstruction may occur with a
large lesion. Rectal polyps may be
palpable by digital examination. Occasionally, a polyp on a long pedicle may prolapse through the anus.
===PAGE:271===
Large villous adenomas may rarely cause watery diarrhea that may result in hypokalemia.
Diagnosis
• Colonoscopy
Diagnosis is usually made by colonoscopy. Barium enema, particularly double-contrast examination, is
effective, but colonoscopy is preferred because polyps also may be removed during that procedure.
Because rectal polyps are often multiple and may coexist with cancer, complete colonoscopy to the
cecum is mandatory even if a distal lesion is found by flexible sigmoidoscopy.
Treatment
• Complete removal during colonoscopy
• Sometimes follow with surgical resection
• Follow-up surveillance colonoscopy
Polyps should be removed completely with a snare or electrosurgical biopsy forceps during total
colonoscopy; complete excision is particularly important for large villous adenomas, which have a high
potential for cancer. If colonoscopic removal is unsuccessful, laparotomy should be done.
Subsequent treatment depends on the histology of the polyp. If dysplastic epithelium does not invade the
muscularis mucosa, the line of resection in the polyp's stalk is clear, and the lesion is well differentiated,
endoscopic excision and close endoscopic follow-up should suffice. Patients with deeper invasion, an
unclear resection line, or a poorly differentiated lesion should have segmental resection of the colon.
Because invasion through the muscularis mucosa provides access to lymphatics and increases the
potential for lymph node metastasis, such patients should have further evaluation (as in colon cancer
—.
The scheduling of follow-up examinations after polypectomy is controversial. Most authorities recommend
total colonoscopy annually for 2 yr (or barium enema if total colonoscopy is impossible), with removal of
newly discovered lesions. If 2 annual examinations are negative for new lesions, colonoscopy is
recommended every 2 to 3 yr.
Prevention
Aspirin and COX-2 inhibitors may help prevent formation of new polyps in patients with polyps or colon
cancer.
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a hereditary disorder causing numerous colonic
polyps and resulting in colon carcinoma by age 40. Patients are usually asymptomatic but may
have heme-positive stool. Diagnosis is by colonoscopy and genetic testing. Treatment is
colectomy.
FAP is an autosomal dominant disease in which ≥ 100 adenomatous polyps carpet the colon and rectum.
The disorder occurs in 1 in 8,000 to 14,000 people. Polyps are present in 50% of patients by age 15, and
95% by 35. Cancer develops before age 40 in nearly all untreated patients.
Patients also can develop various extracolonic manifestations (previously termed Gardner's syndrome),
both benign and malignant. Benign manifestations include desmoid tumors, osteomas of the skull or
mandible, sebaceous cysts, and adenomas in other parts of the GI tract. Patients are at increased risk of
cancer in the duodenum (5 to 11%), pancreas (2%), thyroid (2%), brain (medulloblastoma in < 1%), and
liver (hepatoblastoma in 0.7% of children < 5).
===PAGE:272===
Symptoms and Signs
Many patients are asymptomatic, but rectal bleeding, typically occult, occurs.
Diagnosis
• Colonoscopy
• Genetic testing of patient and 1st-degree relatives
• Offspring screened for hepatoblastoma
Diagnosis is made by finding > 100 polyps on colonoscopy. Diagnosed patients should have genetic
testing to identify the specific mutation, which should then be sought in 1st-degree relatives. If genetic
testing is unavailable, relatives should be screened with annual sigmoidoscopy beginning at age 12,
reducing frequency with each decade. If no polyps are evident by age 50, screening frequency is then the
same as for average-risk patients.
Children of parents with FAP should be screened for hepatoblastoma from birth to age 5 yr with annual
serum fetoprotein levels and possibly liver ultrasound.
Treatment
• Colectomy
• Endoscopic surveillance of remainder of GI tract
• Perhaps aspirin or coxibs
Colectomy should be done at the time of diagnosis. Total proctocolectomy, either with ileostomy or
mucosal proctectomy and ileoanal pouch, eliminates the risk of cancer. If subtotal colectomy (removal of
most of the colon, leaving the rectum) with ileorectal anastomosis is done, the rectal remnant must be
inspected every 3 to 6 mo; new polyps must be excised or fulgurated. Aspirin or coxibs may inhibit new
polyp formation. If new ones appear too rapidly or prolifically to remove, excision of the rectum and
permanent ileostomy are needed.
After colectomy, patients should have upper endoscopy every 6 mo to 4 yr, depending on the number of
polyps (if any) in the stomach and duodenum. Annual physical examination of the thyroid, and possibly
ultrasound, also is recommended.
Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease with multiple hamartomatous
polyps in the stomach, small bowel, and colon along with distinctive pigmented skin lesions.
Patients are at a significantly increased risk of GI and non-GI cancers; possibly the genetic defect
involves a tumor suppressor gene. GI cancers include those of the pancreas, small intestine, and colon.
Non-GI cancers include those of the breast, lung, uterus, and ovaries.
The skin lesions are melanotic macules of the skin and mucous membranes, especially of the perioral
region, lips and gums, hands, and feet. All but the buccal lesions tend to fade by puberty. Polyps may
bleed and often cause obstruction or intussusception.
Diagnosis is suggested by the clinical picture. Genetic testing is not routinely available but should be
considered. First-degree relatives should be evaluated and have routine surveillance for cancers, but
there is no firm consensus on specific tests and intervals.
Colonic polyps larger than 1 cm typically are removed.
===PAGE:273===
Colorectal Cancer
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is extremely common. Symptoms include blood in the stool or change
in bowel habits. Screening is with fecal occult blood testing. Diagnosis is by colonoscopy.
Treatment is surgical resection and chemotherapy for nodal involvement.
CRC accounts for an estimated 153,000 cases and 52,000 deaths in the US annually. In Western
countries, the colon and rectum account for more new cases of cancer per year than any anatomic site
except the lung. Incidence begins to rise at age 40 and peaks at age 60 to 75. Overall, 70% of cases
occur in the rectum and sigmoid, and 95% are adenocarcinomas. Colon cancer is more common among
women; rectal cancer is more common among men. Synchronous cancers (more than one) occur in 5% of
patients.
Etiology
CRC most often occurs as transformation within adenomatous polyps. Serrated adenomas are particularly
aggressive in their malignant transformation. About 80% of cases are sporadic, and 20% have an
inheritable component. Predisposing factors include chronic ulcerative colitis and granulomatous colitis;
the risk of cancer increases with the duration of these disorders.
Populations with a high incidence of CRC eat low-fiber diets that are high in animal protein, fat, and
refined carbohydrates. Carcinogens may be ingested in the diet but are more likely produced by bacterial
action on dietary substances or biliary or intestinal secretions. The exact mechanism is unknown.
CRC spreads by direct extension through the bowel wall, hematogenous metastasis, regional lymph node
metastasis, perineural spread, and intraluminal metastasis.
Symptoms and Signs
Colorectal adenocarcinoma grows slowly, and a long interval elapses before it is large enough to cause
symptoms. Symptoms depend on lesion location, type, extent, and complications.
The right colon has a large caliber, a thin wall, and its contents are liquid; thus, obstruction is a late event.
Bleeding is usually occult. Fatigue and weakness caused by severe anemia may be the only complaints.
Tumors sometimes grow large enough to be palpable through the abdominal wall before other symptoms
appear.
The left colon has a smaller lumen, the feces are semisolid, and cancer tends to encircle the bowel,
causing alternating constipation and increased stool frequency or diarrhea. Partial obstruction with colicky
abdominal pain or complete obstruction may be the initial manifestation. The stool may be streaked or
mixed with blood. Some patients present with symptoms of perforation, usually walled off (focal pain and
tenderness), or rarely with diffuse peritonitis.
In rectal cancer, the most common initial symptom is bleeding with defecation. Whenever
[Table 22-2.
Staging Colorectal Cancer*]
rectal bleeding occurs, even with obvious hemorrhoids or known diverticular disease, coexisting cancer
must be ruled out. Tenesmus or a sensation of incomplete evacuation may be present. Pain is common
with perirectal involvement.
Some patients first present with symptoms and signs of metastatic disease (eg, hepatomegaly, ascites,
supraclavicular lymph node enlargement).
Diagnosis
===PAGE:274===
• Colonoscopy
Screening tests:
Early diagnosis depends on routine examination, particularly fecal occult blood (FOB)
testing. Cancer detected by this method tends to be at an earlier stage and hence more curable. For
average-risk patients, FOB testing should be done annually after age 50, with flexible sigmoidoscopy
every 5 yr. Some authorities recommend colonoscopy every 10 yr instead of sigmoidoscopy. Colonoscopy
every 3 yr may be even better. Screening of patients with high-risk conditions (eg, ulcerative colitis) is
discussed under the specific condition.
CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy) generates 3D and 2D images of the colon using multidetector row
CT and a combination of oral contrast and gas distention of the colon. Viewing the high-resolution 3D
images somewhat simulates the appearance of optical endoscopy, hence the name. It has some promise
as a screening test for people who are unable or unwilling to undergo endoscopic colonoscopy but is less
sensitive and highly interpreter dependent. It avoids the need for sedation but still requires thorough
bowel preparation, and the gas distention may be uncomfortable. Additionally, unlike with optical
colonoscopy, lesions cannot be biopsied during the diagnostic procedure.
Video capsule endoscopy of the colon has many technical problems and is not currently acceptable as a
screening test.
Diagnostic tests:
Patients with positive FOB tests require colonoscopy, as do those with lesions seen on
sigmoidoscopy or imaging study. All lesions should be completely removed for histologic examination. If a
lesion is sessile or not removable at colonoscopy, surgical excision should be strongly considered.
Barium enema x-ray, particularly a double-contrast study, can detect many lesions but is somewhat less
accurate than colonoscopy and is not preferred as follow up to a positive FOB test.
Once cancer is diagnosed, patients should have abdominal CT, chest x-ray, and routine laboratory tests
to seek metastatic disease and anemia and to evaluate overall condition.
Elevated serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels are present in 70% of patients with CRC, but this
test is not specific and therefore is not recommended for screening. However, if CEA is high
preoperatively and low after removal of a colon tumor, monitoring CEA may help to detect recurrence
earlier. CA 199 and CA 125 are other tumor markers that may be similarly used.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends greatly on stage (see
Table 22-2
). The 10-yr survival rate for cancer limited to the
mucosa approaches 90%; with extension through the bowel wall, 70 to 80%; with positive lymph nodes,
30 to 50%; and with metastatic disease, < 20%.
Treatment
• Surgical resection, sometimes combined with chemotherapy, radiation, or both
Surgery:
Surgery for cure can be attempted in the 70% of patients presenting without metastatic
disease. Attempt to cure consists of wide resection of the tumor and its regional lymphatic drainage with
reanastomosis of bowel segments. If there is ≤ 5 cm of normal bowel present between the lesion and the
anal verge, an abdominoperineal resection is done, with permanent colostomy.
Resection of a limited number (1 to 3) of liver metastases is recommended in select nondebilitated
patients as a subsequent procedure. Criteria include those whose primary tumor has been resected,
whose liver metastases are in one hepatic lobe, and who have no extrahepatic metastases. Only a small
number of patients with liver metastases meet these criteria, but 5-yr postoperative survival is 25%.
Adjuvant therapy:
Chemotherapy (typically 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin) improves survival by 10 to
30% in colon cancer patients with positive lymph nodes. Rectal cancer patients with 1 to 4 positive lymph
nodes benefit from combined radiation and chemotherapy; when > 4 positive lymph nodes are found,
===PAGE:275===
combined modalities are less effective. Preoperative radiation therapy and chemotherapy to improve the
resectability rate of rectal cancer or decrease the incidence of lymph node metastasis are gaining favor.
Follow-up:
Postoperatively, colonoscopy should be done annually for 5 yr and every 3 yr thereafter if no
polyps or tumors are found. If preoperative colonoscopy was incomplete because of an obstructing
cancer, a "completion" colonoscopy should be done 3 mo after surgery.
Additional screening for recurrence should include history, physical examination, and laboratory tests (eg,
CBC, liver function tests) every 3 mo for 3 yr and then every 6 mo for 2 yr. Imaging studies (CT or MRI)
are often recommended at 1-yr intervals but are of uncertain benefit for routine follow up in the absence
of abnormalities on examination or blood tests.
Palliation:
When curative surgery is not possible or the patient is an unacceptable surgical risk, limited
palliative surgery (eg, to relieve obstruction or resect a perforated area) may be indicated; median
survival is 7 mo. Some obstructing tumors can be debulked by endoscopic laser treatment or
electrocoagulation or held open by stents. Chemotherapy may shrink tumors and prolong life for several
months.
Newer drugs used singly or in drug combinations include capecitabine (a 5-fluorouracil precursor),
irinotecan, and oxaliplatin. Monoclonal antibodies such as bevacizumab, cetuximab, and panitumumab
are also being used with some effectiveness. No regimen is clearly more effective for prolonging life in
patients with metastatic CRC, although some have been shown to delay disease progression.
Chemotherapy for advanced colon cancer should be managed by an experienced chemotherapist who
has access to investigational drugs.
When metastases are confined to the liver, ambulatory hepatic artery infusion with floxuridine or
radioactive microspheres via an implantable sc pump or an external pump worn on the belt may offer
more benefit than systemic chemotherapy; however, these therapies are of uncertain benefit. When
metastases are also extrahepatic, intrahepatic arterial chemotherapy offers no advantage over systemic
chemotherapy.
Anorectal Cancer
The most common anorectal cancer is adenocarcinoma. Squamous cell (nonkeratinizing squamous cell or
basaloid) carcinoma of the anorectum accounts for 3 to 5% of distal large-bowel cancers. Basal cell
carcinoma, Bowen's disease (intradermal carcinoma), extramammary Paget's disease, cloacogenic
carcinoma, and malignant melanoma are less common. Other tumors include lymphoma and various
sarcomas. Metastasis occurs along the lymphatics of the rectum and into the inguinal lymph nodes.
Risk factors include infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), chronic fistulas, irradiated anal skin,
leukoplakia, lymphogranuloma venereum, and condyloma acuminatum. Gay men practicing receptive anal
intercourse are at increased risk. Patients with HPV infection may manifest dysplasia in slightly abnormal
or normal-appearing anal epithelium (anal intraepithelial neoplasia—histologically graded I, II, or III).
These changes are more common among HIV-infected patients, particularly gay men. Higher grades may
progress to invasive carcinoma. It is unclear whether early recognition and eradication improve long-term
outcome; hence, screening recommendations are unclear.
Wide local excision is often satisfactory treatment of perianal carcinomas. Combination chemotherapy
and radiation therapy result in a high rate of cure when used for anal squamous and cloacogenic tumors.
Abdominoperineal resection is indicated when radiation
and chemotherapy do not result in complete
regression of tumor and there are no metastases outside of the radiation field.
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Carcinoma
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma (HNPCC) is an autosomal dominant disorder
responsible for 3 to 5% of cases of colorectal cancer (CRC). Symptoms, initial diagnosis, and
treatment are similar to other forms of CRC. HNPCC is suspected by history and is confirmed by
genetic testing. Patients also require surveillance for other cancer, particularly endometrial and
===PAGE:276===
ovarian cancer.
Patients with one of several known mutations have a 70 to 80% lifetime risk of developing CRC.
Compared to sporadic forms of colon cancer, HNPCC occurs at a younger age (mid 40s), and the lesion
is more likely to be proximal to the splenic flexure. The precursor lesion is usually a single colonic
adenoma, unlike the multiple adenomas present in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP),
the other main hereditary form of CRC.
However, similar to FAP, numerous extracolonic manifestations occur. Nonmalignant disorders include
cafe-au-lait spots, sebaceous gland tumors, and keratoacanthomas. Common associated cancers include
endometrial and ovarian tumors (39% risk of endometrial and 9% risk of ovarian by age 70). Patients also
have an elevated risk of cancer of the ureter, renal pelvis, stomach, biliary tree, and small bowel.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are similar to other forms of CRC, and diagnosis and management of the tumor
itself are the same. The specific diagnosis of HNPCC is confirmed by genetic testing. However, deciding
who to test is difficult because (unlike FAP) there is no typical clinical appearance. Thus, suspicion of
HNPCC requires a detailed family history, which should be obtained in all younger patients identified with
CRC.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria followed by testing for microsatellite instability (MSI)
• Genetic testing for confirmation
To meet the Amsterdam II criteria for HNPCC, all three of the following historical elements must be
present:
• Three or more relatives with CRC or an HNPCC-associated cancer
• CRC involving at least two generations
• At least one case of CRC before age 50
Patients meeting these criteria should have their tumor tissue tested for MSI, a DNA abnormality. If MSI is
present, genetic testing for specific HNPCC mutations is indicated. Other authorities use additional
criteria (eg, Bethesda criteria) to initiate MSI testing. If MSI testing is not available locally, the patient
should be referred to an appropriate center.
Patients with confirmed HNPCC require ongoing screening for other cancers. For endometrial cancer,
annual endometrial aspiration or transvaginal ultrasound is recommended. For ovarian cancer, options
include annual transvaginal ultrasound and serum CA 125 levels. Prophylactic hysterectomy and
oophorectomy are also options. Urinalysis may be used to screen for renal tumors.
First-degree relatives of patients with HNPCC should have colonoscopy every 1 to 2 yr beginning in their
20s, and annually after age 40. Female 1st-degree relatives should be tested annually for endometrial
and ovarian cancer. More distant blood relatives should have genetic testing; if results are negative, they
should have colonoscopy at the frequency for average-risk patients.
Treatment
• Surgical resection
The most common treatment is resection of the index lesion with frequent surveillance for another colon
cancer and any associated tumors in other organs. Because most HNPCC tumors occur proximal to the
splenic flexure, subtotal colectomy, leaving the rectosigmoid intact, has been suggested as an alternative.
===PAGE:277===
In either case, close follow up is needed.
Pancreatic Cancer
Pancreatic cancer, primarily ductal adenocarcinoma, accounts for an estimated 37,000 cases
and 33,000 deaths in the US annually. Symptoms include weight loss, abdominal pain, and
jaundice. Diagnosis is by CT. Treatment is surgical resection and adjuvant chemotherapy and
radiation therapy. Prognosis is poor because disease is often advanced at the time of diagnosis.
Most pancreatic cancers are exocrine tumors that develop from ductal and acinar
cells. Pancreatic
endocrine tumors are discussed below.
Adenocarcinomas of the exocrine pancreas arise from duct cells 9 times more often than from acinar
cells; 80% occur in the head of the gland. Adenocarcinomas appear at the mean age of 55 yr and occur
1.5 to 2 times more often in men. Prominent risk factors include smoking, a history of chronic pancreatitis,
and possibly long-standing diabetes mellitus (primarily in women). Heredity plays some role. Alcohol and
caffeine consumption do not seem to be risk factors.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms occur late. By diagnosis, 90% of patients have locally advanced tumors that have involved
retroperitoneal structures, spread to regional lymph nodes, or metastasized to the liver or lung.
Most patients have severe upper abdominal pain, which usually radiates to the back. The pain may be
relieved by bending forward or assuming the fetal position. Weight loss is common. Adenocarcinomas of
the head of the pancreas cause obstructive jaundice (often causing pruritus) in 80 to 90% of patients.
Cancer in the body and tail may cause splenic vein obstruction, resulting in splenomegaly, gastric and
esophageal varices, and GI hemorrhage. The cancer causes diabetes in 25 to 50% of patients, leading to
symptoms of glucose intolerance (eg, polyuria and polydipsia).
Diagnosis
• CT or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
• CA 19-9 antigen to follow (not for screening)
The preferred tests are an abdominal helical CT or MRCP. If CT or MRCP shows apparent unresectable
or metastatic disease, a percutaneous needle aspiration of an accessible lesion might be considered to
obtain a tissue diagnosis. If CT shows a potentially resectable tumor or no tumor, MRCP or endoscopic
ultrasound may be used to stage disease or detect small tumors not visible with CT. Patients with
obstructive jaundice may have ERCP as the first diagnostic procedure.
Routine laboratory tests should be done. Elevation of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin indicate bile duct
obstruction or liver metastases. Pancreas-associated antigen CA 19-9 may be used to monitor patients
diagnosed with pancreatic carcinoma and to screen those at high risk. However, this test is not sensitive
or specific enough to be used for population screening. Elevated levels should drop with successful
treatment; subsequent increases indicate progression. Amylase and lipase levels are usually normal.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies with stage but overall is poor (5-yr survival: < 2%), because many patients have
advanced disease at the time of diagnosis.
Treatment
• Whipple procedure
• Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy
===PAGE:278===
• Symptom control
About 80 to 90% of cancers are considered surgically unresectable at time of diagnosis because of
metastases or invasion of major blood vessels. Depending on location of the tumor, the procedure of
choice is most commonly a Whipple procedure (pancreatoduodenectomy). Adjuvant therapy with 5fluorouracil (5-FU) and external beam radiation therapy is typically given, resulting in about 40% 2-yr and
25% 5-yr survival. This combination is also used for patients with localized but unresectable tumors and
results in median survival of about 1 yr. Newer drugs (eg, gemcitabine, irinotecan, paclitaxel, oxaliplatin,
carboplatin) may be more effective than 5-FU-based chemotherapy, but no drug, singly or in combination,
is clearly superior in prolonging survival. Patients with hepatic or distant metastases may be offered
chemotherapy as part of an investigational program, but the outlook is dismal with or without such
treatment and some patients may choose to forego it.
If an unresectable tumor is found at operation and gastroduodenal or bile duct obstruction is present or
pending, a double gastric and biliary bypass operation is usually done to relieve obstruction. In patients
with inoperable lesions and jaundice, endoscopic placement of a bile duct stent relieves jaundice.
However, surgical bypass should be considered in patients with unresectable lesions if life expectancy is
> 6 to 7 mo because of complications associated with stents.
Symptomatic treatment:
Ultimately, most patients experience pain and die. Thus, symptomatic
treatment is as important as controlling disease. Appropriate end-of-life care should be discussed (see
also p.
).
Patients with moderate to severe pain should receive an oral opioid in doses adequate to provide relief.
Concern about addiction should not be a barrier to effective pain control. For chronic pain, long-acting
preparations (eg, transdermal fentanyl, oxycodone, oxymorphone) are usually best. Percutaneous or
operative splanchnic
(celiac) block effectively controls pain in most patients. In cases of intolerable pain,
opioids given sc or by IV, epidural, or intrathecal infusion provides additional relief.
If palliative surgery or endoscopic placement of a biliary stent fails to relieve pruritus secondary to
obstructive jaundice, the patient can be managed with cholestyramine (4 g po once/day to qid).
Phenobarbital 30 to 60 mg po tid to qid may be helpful.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is treated with tablets of porcine pancreatic enzymes (pancrelipase).
The patient should take enough to supply 16,000 to 20,000 lipase units before each meal or snack. If a
meal is prolonged (as in a restaurant), some of the tablets should be taken during the meal. Optimal
intraluminal pH for the enzymes is 8; thus, some clinicians give a proton pump inhibitor or H
blocker 2
times/day. Diabetes mellitus should be closely monitored and controlled.
Cystadenocarcinoma
Cystadenocarcinoma is a rare adenomatous pancreatic cancer that arises as a malignant degeneration of
a mucous cystadenoma and manifests as upper abdominal pain and a palpable abdominal mass.
Diagnosis is made by abdominal CT or MRI, which typically shows a cystic mass containing debris; the
mass may be misinterpreted as necrotic adenocarcinoma or pancreatic pseudocyst. Unlike ductal
adenocarcinoma, cystadenocarcinoma has a relatively good prognosis. Only 20% of patients have
metastasis at the time of operation; complete excision of the tumor by distal or total pancreatectomy or by
a Whipple procedure results in a 65% 5-yr survival.
Intraductal Papillary-Mucinous Tumor
Intraductal papillary-mucinous tumor (IPMT) is a rare cancer resulting in mucus hypersecretion and ductal
obstruction. Histology may be benign, borderline, or malignant. Most (80%) occur in women and in the tail
of the pancreas (66%).
Symptoms consist of pain and recurrent bouts of pancreatitis. Diagnosis is made by CT, sometimes along
with endoscopic ultrasonography, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, or ERCP. Benign and
===PAGE:279===
malignant disease cannot be differentiated without surgical removal, which is the treatment of choice.
With surgery, 5-yr survival is > 95% for benign or borderline cases, but 50 to 75% for malignant tumors.
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Pancreatic endocrine tumors arise from islet and gastrin-producing cells and often produce many
hormones. They have 2 general manifestations. Nonfunctioning tumors may cause obstructive symptoms
of the biliary tract or duodenum, bleeding into the GI tract, or abdominal masses. Functioning tumors
hypersecrete a particular hormone, causing various syndromes (see
Table 22-3
). These clinical syndromes can also occur in multiple endocrine neoplasia, in which tumors or
hyperplasia affects two or more endocrine glands, usually the parathyroid, pituitary, thyroid, or adrenals
(.
Treatment for functioning and nonfunctioning tumors is surgical resection. If metastases preclude curative
surgery, various antihormone treatments may be tried for functioning tumors. Because of tumor rarity,
chemotherapy trials have not identified definitive treatment. However, streptozotocin has selective activity
against pancreatic islet cells and is commonly used, either alone or in combination with 5-fluorouracil or
doxorubicin. Some centers use chlorozotocin and interferon.
Insulinoma
An insulinoma is a rare pancreatic
β
-cell tumor that hypersecretes insulin. The main symptom is
fasting hypoglycemia. Diagnosis is by a 48- or 72-h fast with measurement of glucose and
insulin levels, followed by endoscopic ultrasound. Treatment is surgery when possible. Drugs
that block insulin secretion (eg, diazoxide, octreotide, Ca channel blockers,
β
-blockers,
phenytoin) are used for patients not responding to surgery.
Of all insulinomas, 80% are single and may be curatively resected if identified. Only 10% of insulinomas
are malignant. Insulinoma occurs in 1/250,000 at a median age of 50 yr, except in multiple endocrine
neoplasia (MEN) type I (about 10% of insulinomas), when it occurs in the 20s. Insulinomas associated
with MEN type I are more likely to be multiple.
Surreptitious administration of exogenous insulin can cause episodic hypoglycemia mimicking insulinoma.
Symptoms and Signs
Hypoglycemia secondary to an insulinoma occurs during fasting. Symptoms are insidious and may mimic
various psychiatric and
[Table 22-3.
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors]
neurologic disorders. CNS disturbances include headache, confusion, visual disturbances, motor
weakness, palsy, ataxia, marked personality changes, and possible progression to loss of consciousness,
seizures, and coma. Symptoms of sympathetic stimulation (faintness, weakness, tremulousness,
palpitation, sweating, hunger, nervousness) are often present.
Diagnosis
• Insulin level
• Sometimes C-peptide or proinsulin levels
• Endoscopic ultrasound
Plasma glucose should be measured during symptoms. If hypoglycemia is present (glucose < 40 mg/dL
[2.78 mmol/L]), an insulin level should be measured on a simultaneous sample. Hyperinsulinemia of > 6
μ
U/mL (42 pmol/L) suggests an insulin-mediated cause, as does a serum insulin to plasma glucose ratio
> 0.3 (
μ
U/mL)/(mg/dL).
===PAGE:280===
Insulin is secreted as proinsulin, consisting of an
α
chain and
β
chain connected by a C peptide. Because
pharmaceutical insulin consists only of the
β
chain, surreptitious insulin administration can be detected by
measuring C-peptide and proinsulin levels. In patients with insulinoma, C peptide is ≥ 0.2 nmol/L and
proinsulin is ≥ 5 pmol/L. These levels are normal or low in patients with surreptitious insulin
administration.
Because many patients have no symptoms (and hence no hypoglycemia) at the time of evaluation,
diagnosis requires admission to the hospital for a 48- or 72-h fast. Nearly all (98%) with insulinoma
develop symptoms within 48 h of fasting; 70 to 80% within 24 h. Hypoglycemia as the cause of the
symptoms is established by Whipple's triad: (1) Symptoms occur during the fast; (2) symptoms occur in
the presence of hypoglycemia; and (3) ingestion of carbohydrates relieves the symptoms. Hormone levels
are obtained as described above when the patient is having symptoms.
If Whipple's triad is not observed after prolonged fasting and the plasma glucose after an overnight fast is
> 50 mg/dL (> 2.78 mmol/L), a C-peptide suppression test can be done. During insulin infusion (0.1
U/kg/h), patients with insulinoma fail to suppress C peptide to normal levels (≤ 1.2 ng/mL [≤ 0.40 nmol/L]).
Endoscopic ultrasonography has > 90% sensitivity and helps localize the tumor. PET also may be used.
CT has not proved useful, and arteriography or selective portal and splenic vein catheterization is
generally unnecessary.
Treatment
• Surgical resection
• Diazoxide or sometimes octreotide for hypoglycemia
Overall surgical cure rates approach 90%. A small, single insulinoma at or near the
surface of the
pancreas can usually be enucleated surgically. If a single large or deep adenoma is within the pancreatic
body or tail, if there are multiple lesions of the body or tail (or both), or if no insulinoma is found (an
unusual circumstance), a distal, subtotal pancreatectomy is done. In < 1% of cases, the insulinoma is
ectopically located in peripancreatic sites of the duodenal wall or periduodenal area and can be found
only by diligent search during surgery. Pancreatoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) is done for
resectable malignant insulinomas of the proximal pancreas. Total pancreatectomy is done if a previous
subtotal pancreatectomy proves inadequate.
If hypoglycemia continues, diazoxide starting at 1.5 mg/kg po bid with a natriuretic can be used. Doses
can be increased up to 4 mg/kg. A somatostatin analog, octreotide (100 to 500
μ
g sc bid to tid), is variably
effective and should be considered for patients with continuing hypoglycemia refractory to diazoxide.
Patients who respond may be converted to a long-acting octreotide formulation given as 20 to 30 mg IM
once/mo. Patients using octreotide may also need to take supplemental pancreatic enzymes because
octreotide suppresses pancreatic enzyme secretion. Other drugs that have modest and variable effect on
insulin secretion include verapamil, diltiazem, and phenytoin.
If symptoms are not controlled, chemotherapy may be tried, but response is limited. Streptozotocin has a
30 to 40% response rate, and when combined with 5-fluorouracil, a 60% response rate lasting up to 2 yr.
Other agents include doxorubicin, chlorozotocin, and interferon.
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome
(Z-E Syndrome; Gastrinoma)
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is caused by a gastrin-producing tumor usually located in the
pancreas or the duodenal wall. Gastric acid hypersecretion and peptic ulceration result.
Diagnosis is by measuring serum gastrin levels. Treatment is proton pump inhibitors and
surgical removal.
===PAGE:281===
Gastrinomas occur in the pancreas or duodenal wall 80 to 90% of the time. The remainder occur in the
splenic hilum, mesentery, stomach, lymph node, or ovary. About 50% of patients have multiple tumors.
Gastrinomas usually are small (< 1 cm in diameter) and grow slowly. About 50% are malignant. About 40
to 60% of patients with gastrinoma have multiple endocrine neoplasia (.
Symptoms and Signs
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome typically manifests as aggressive peptic ulcer disease, with ulcers occurring in
atypical locations (up to 25% are located distal to the duodenal bulb). However, as many as 25% do not
have an ulcer at diagnosis. Typical ulcer symptoms and complications (eg, perforation, bleeding,
obstruction) can occur. Diarrhea is the initial symptom in 25 to 40% of patients.
Diagnosis
• Serum gastrin level
• CT, scintigraphy, or PET to localize
The syndrome is suspected by history, particularly when symptoms are refractory to standard acid
suppressant therapy.
The most reliable test is serum gastrin. All patients have levels > 150 pg/mL; markedly elevated levels of
> 1000 pg/mL in a patient with compatible clinical features and gastric acid hypersecretion of > 15 mEq/h
establish the diagnosis. However, moderate hypergastrinemia can occur with hypochlorhydric states (eg,
pernicious anemia, chronic gastritis, use of proton pump inhibitors), in renal insufficiency with decreased
clearance of gastrins, in massive intestinal resection, and in pheochromocytoma.
A secretin provocative test may be useful in patients with gastrin levels < 1000 pg/mL. An IV bolus of
secretin 2
μ
g/kg is given with serial measurements of serum gastrin (10 and 1 min before, and 2, 5, 10,
15, 20, and 30 min after injection). The characteristic response in gastrinoma is an increase in gastrin
levels, the opposite of what occurs in those with antral G-cell hyperplasia or typical peptic ulcer disease.
Patients also should be evaluated for
Helicobacter pylori
infection, which commonly results in peptic
ulceration and moderate excess gastrin secretion.
Once the diagnosis has been established, the tumor or tumors must be localized. The first test is
abdominal CT or somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, which may identify the primary tumor and metastatic
disease. PET or selective arteriography with magnification and subtraction is also helpful. If no signs of
metastases are present and the primary is uncertain, endoscopic ultrasonography should be done.
Selective arterial secretin injection is an alternative.
Prognosis
Five- and 10-yr survival is > 90% when an isolated tumor is removed surgically vs 43% at 5 yr and 25% at
10 yr with incomplete removal.
Treatment
• Acid suppression
• Surgical resection for localized disease
• Chemotherapy for metastatic disease
Acid suppression:
Proton pump inhibitors are the drugs of choice: omeprazole or esomeprazole 40 mg
po bid. The dose may be decreased gradually once symptoms resolve and acid output declines. A
maintenance dose is needed; patients need to take these drugs indefinitely unless they undergo surgery.
Octreotide injections, 100 to 500
μ
g sc bid to tid, may also decrease gastric acid production and may be
===PAGE:282===
palliative in patients not responding well to proton pump inhibitors. A long-acting form of octreotide can be
used 20 to 30 mg IM once/mo.
Surgery:
Surgical removal should be attempted in patients without apparent metastases. At surgery,
duodenotomy and intraoperative endoscopic transillumination or ultrasound help localize tumors. Surgical
cure is possible in 20% of patients if the gastrinoma is not part of a multiple endocrine neoplasia
syndrome.
Chemotherapy:
In patients with metastatic disease, streptozocin in combination with 5-fluorouracil or
doxorubicin is the preferred chemotherapy for islet cell tumors. It may reduce tumor mass (in 50 to 60%)
and serum gastrin levels and is a useful adjunct to omeprazole. Patients with metastatic disease are not
cured by chemotherapy.
Vipoma
A vipoma is a nonβ
pancreatic islet cell tumor secreting vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP),
resulting in a syndrome of watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and achlorhydria (WDHA syndrome).
Diagnosis is by serum VIP levels. Tumor is localized with CT and endoscopic ultrasound.
Treatment is surgical resection.
Of these tumors, 50 to 75% are malignant, and some may be quite large (7 cm) at diagnosis. In about 6%,
vipoma occurs as part of multiple endocrine neoplasia (.
Symptoms and Signs
The major symptoms are prolonged massive watery diarrhea (fasting stool volume > 750 to 1000 mL/day
and nonfasting volumes of > 3000 mL/day) and symptoms of hypokalemia, acidosis, and dehydration. In
half, diarrhea is constant; in the rest, diarrhea severity varies over time. About 33% have diarrhea < 1 yr
before diagnosis, but 25% have diarrhea ≥ 5 yr before diagnosis. Lethargy, muscular weakness, nausea,
vomiting, and crampy abdominal pain occur frequently. Flushing similar to the carcinoid syndrome occurs
in 20% of patients during attacks of diarrhea.
Diagnosis
• Confirmation of secretory diarrhea
• Serum VIP levels
• Endoscopic ultrasonography, PET, or scintigraphy can localize
Diagnosis requires demonstration of secretory diarrhea (stool osmolality is close to plasma osmolality,
and twice the sum of Na and K concentration in the stool accounts for all measured stool osmolality).
Other causes of secretory diarrhea and, in particular, laxative abuse must be excluded (. In
such patients, serum VIP levels should be measured (ideally during a bout of diarrhea). Markedly
elevated levels establish the diagnosis, but mild elevations may occur with short bowel syndrome and
inflammatory diseases. Patients with elevated VIP levels should have tumor localization studies, such as
endoscopic ultrasonography, PET, and octreotide scintigraphy or arteriography to localize metastases.
Electrolytes and CBC should be measured. Hyperglycemia and impaired glucose tolerance occur in ≤
50% of patients. Hypercalcemia occurs in 50% of patients.
Treatment
• Fluid and electrolyte replacement
• Octreotide
• Surgical resection for localized disease
===PAGE:283===
Initially, fluids and electrolytes must be replaced. Bicarbonate must be given to replace fecal loss and
avoid acidosis. Because fecal losses of water and electrolytes increase as rehydration is achieved,
continual IV replacement may become difficult.
Octreotide usually controls diarrhea, but large doses may be needed. Responders may benefit from a
long-acting octreotide formulation given 20 to 30 mg IM once/mo. Patients using octreotide may also need
to take supplemental pancreatic enzymes because octreotide suppresses pancreatic enzyme secretion.
Tumor resection is curative in 50% of patients with a localized tumor. In those with metastatic tumor,
resection of all visible tumor may provide temporary relief of symptoms. The combination of streptozocin
and doxorubicin may reduce diarrhea and tumor mass if objective response occurs (in 50 to 60%).
Chemotherapy is not curative.
Glucagonoma
A glucagonoma is a pancreatic
α
-cell tumor that secretes glucagon, causing hyperglycemia and
a characteristic skin rash. Diagnosis is by elevated glucagon levels and imaging studies. Tumor
is localized with CT and endoscopic ultrasound. Treatment is surgical resection.
Glucagonomas are very rare but similar to other islet cell tumors in that the primary and metastatic lesions
are slow-growing: 15-yr survival is common. Eighty percent of glucagonomas are malignant. The average
age at symptom onset is 50 yr; 80% of patients are women. A few patients have multiple endocrine
neoplasia type I.
Symptoms and Signs
Because glucagonomas produce glucagon, the symptoms are the same as those of diabetes. Frequently,
weight loss, normochromic anemia, hypoaminoacidemia, and hypolipidemia are present, but the most
distinctive clinical feature is a chronic eruption involving the extremities, often associated with a smooth,
shiny, vermilion tongue and cheilitis. The exfoliating, brownish red, erythematous lesion with superficial
necrolysis is termed necrolytic migratory erythema.
Diagnosis
• Serum glucagon level
• CT and endoscopic ultrasonography to localize
Most patients with glucagonoma have glucagon levels > 1000 pg/mL (normal < 200). However, moderate
elevations occur in renal insufficiency, acute pancreatitis, severe stress, and fasting. Correlation with
symptoms is required. Patients should have abdominal CT followed by endoscopic ultrasonography; MRI
or PET may be used if CT is unrevealing.
Treatment
• Surgical resection for localized disease
• Chemotherapy for metastatic disease
• Octreotide to suppress glucagon production
Resection of the tumor alleviates all symptoms. Unresectable, metastatic, or recurrent tumors are treated
with combination streptozocin and doxorubicin, which may decrease levels of circulating immunoreactive
glucagon, lessen symptoms, and improve response rates (50%) but are unlikely to improve survival.
Octreotide injections partially suppress glucagon production and relieve the erythema, but glucose
tolerance may also decrease because octreotide decreases insulin secretion. Octreotide may quickly
reverse anorexia and weight loss caused by the catabolic effect of glucagon excess. Patients who
===PAGE:284===
respond may be converted to a long-acting octreotide formulation given 20 to 30 mg IM once/mo. Patients
using octreotide may also need to take supplemental pancreatic enzymes because octreotide suppresses
pancreatic enzyme secretion.
Locally applied, oral, or parenteral zinc may cause the erythema to disappear, but resolution may occur
after simple hydration or IV administration of amino or fatty acids, suggesting that the erythema is not
solely caused by zinc deficiency.
===PAGE:285===
3 - Hepatic and Biliary Disorders
Chapter 23. Approach to the Patient With Liver Disease
Introduction
The liver is the most metabolically complex organ. Hepatocytes (liver parenchymal cells) perform the
liver's metabolic functions:
• Formation and excretion of bile during bilirubin metabolism (see
Sidebar 23-1
)
• Regulation of carbohydrate homeostasis
• Lipid synthesis and secretion of plasma lipoproteins
• Control of cholesterol metabolism
• Formation of urea, serum albumin, clotting factors, enzymes, and numerous other proteins
• Metabolism or detoxification of drugs and other foreign substances
At the cellular level, portal triads consist of adjacent and parallel terminal branches of bile ducts, portal
veins, and hepatic arteries that border the hepatocytes (see
Fig. 23-1
). Terminal branches of the hepatic veins are in the center of hepatic lobules. Because blood
flows from the portal triads past the hepatocytes and drains via vein branches in the center of the lobule,
the center of the lobule is the area most susceptible to ischemia.
Pathophysiology
Liver disorders can result from a wide variety of insults, including infections, drugs, toxins, ischemia, and
autoimmune disorders. Occasionally, liver disorders occur postoperatively (. Most liver
disorders cause some degree of hepatocellular injury and necrosis, resulting in various abnormal
laboratory test results and, sometimes, symptoms.
[Fig. 23-1.
Organization of the liver.]
Symptoms may be due to liver disease itself (eg, jaundice due to acute hepatitis) or to complications of
liver disease (eg, acute GI bleeding due to cirrhosis and portal hypertension).
Sidebar 23-1 Overview of Bilirubin Metabolism
The breakdown of heme produces bilirubin (an insoluble waste product) and other bile pigments. Bilirubin
must be made water soluble to be excreted. This transformation occurs in 5 steps: formation, plasma
transport, liver uptake, conjugation, and biliary excretion.
Formation:
About 250 to 350 mg of unconjugated bilirubin forms daily; 70 to 80% derives from the
breakdown of degenerating RBCs, and 20 to 30% (early-labeled bilirubin) derives primarily from other
heme proteins in the bone marrow and liver. Hb is degraded to iron and biliverdin, which is converted to
bilirubin.
Plasma transport:
Unconjugated (indirect-reacting) bilirubin is not water soluble and so is transported in
the plasma bound to albumin. It cannot pass through the glomerular membrane into the urine. Albumin
binding weakens under certain conditions (eg, acidosis), and some substances (eg, salicylates, certain
antibiotics) compete for the binding sites.
Liver uptake:
The liver takes up bilirubin rapidly but does not take up the attached serum albumin.
===PAGE:286===
Conjugation:
Unconjugated bilirubin in the liver is conjugated to form mainly bilirubin diglucuronide, or
conjugated (direct-reacting) bilirubin. This reaction, catalyzed by the microsomal enzyme glucuronyl
transferase, renders the bilirubin water soluble.
Biliary excretion:
Tiny canaliculi formed by adjacent hepatocytes progressively coalesce into ductules,
interlobular bile ducts, and larger hepatic ducts. Outside the porta hepatis, the main hepatic duct joins the
cystic duct from the gallbladder to form the common bile duct, which drains into the duodenum at the
ampulla of Vater.
Conjugated bilirubin is secreted into the bile canaliculus with other bile constituents. In the intestine,
bacteria metabolize bilirubin to form urobilinogen, much of which is further metabolized to stercobilins,
which render the stool brown. In complete biliary obstruction, stools lose their normal color and become
light gray (clay-colored stool). Some urobilinogen is reabsorbed, extracted by hepatocytes, and reexcreted in bile (enterohepatic circulation). A small amount is excreted in urine.
Because conjugated bilirubin is excreted in urine and unconjugated bilirubin is not, only conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia (eg, due to hepatocellular or cholestatic jaundice) causes bilirubinuria.
Despite necrosis, the liver can regenerate itself. Even extensive patchy necrosis can resolve completely
(eg, in acute viral hepatitis). Incomplete regeneration and fibrosis, however, may result from injury that
bridges entire lobules or from less pronounced but ongoing damage.
Specific diseases preferentially affect certain hepatobiliary structures or functions (eg, acute viral hepatitis
is primarily manifested by damage to hepatocytes or hepatocellular injury; primary biliary cirrhosis, by
impairment of biliary secretion; and cryptogenic cirrhosis, by liver fibrosis and resultant portal venous
hypertension). The part of the hepatobiliary system affected determines the symptoms, signs, and
laboratory abnormalities (see also
Chapter 24
). Some disorders (eg, severe alcoholic liver disease) affect
multiple liver structures, resulting in a combination of patterns of symptoms, signs, and laboratory
abnormalities.
The prognosis of serious complications is worse in older adults, who are less able to recover from severe
physiologic stresses and to tolerate toxic accumulations.
Evaluation
History:
Various symptoms may develop, but few are specific for liver disorders:
• Common nonspecific symptoms include fatigue, anorexia, nausea, and, occasionally, vomiting,
particularly in severe disorders.
• Loose, fatty stools (steatorrhea) can occur when cholestasis prevents sufficient bile from reaching the
intestines. Patients with steatorrhea are at risk of deficiencies of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K).
Common clinical consequences may include osteoporosis and bleeding.
• Fever can develop in viral or alcoholic hepatitis.
• Jaundice (, occurring in both hepatocellular dysfunction and cholestatic disorders, is the
most specific symptom. It is often accompanied by dark urine and light stools.
• Right upper quadrant pain due to liver disorders usually results from distention (eg, by passive venous
congestion or tumor) or inflammation of the liver capsule.
• Erectile dysfunction and feminization develop; however, these symptoms may reflect the effects of
alcohol more than liver disorders.
Family history, social history, and drug and substance use history should note risk factors for liver
disorders (see
===PAGE:287===
Table 23-1
).
Physical examination:
Abnormalities detectable on a physical examination usually do not develop until
late in the course of the disease. Some common findings suggest a cause (see
Table 23-2
).
Ascites
Ascites is free fluid in the peritoneal cavity. The most common cause is portal hypertension.
Symptoms usually result from abdominal distention. Diagnosis is based on physical
examination and often ultrasonography or CT. Treatments include bed rest, dietary Na
restriction, diuretics, and therapeutic paracentesis. Ascitic fluid can become infected
(spontaneous bacterial peritonitis), often with pain and fever. Diagnosis of infection involves
analysis and culture of ascitic fluid. Infection is treated with antibiotics.
[Table 23-1.
Risk Factors for Liver Disorders]
Etiology
Ascites can result from chronic, but not acute, liver diseases.
Hepatic causes
include the following:
• Portal hypertension (accounts for > 90% of hepatic cases), usually due to cirrhosis
• Chronic hepatitis
• Severe alcoholic hepatitis without cirrhosis
• Hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
Portal vein thrombosis does not usually cause ascites unless hepatocellular damage is also present.
Nonhepatic causes
include the following:
• Generalized fluid retention associated with systemic diseases (eg, heart failure, nephrotic syndrome,
severe hypoalbuminemia, constrictive pericarditis)
• Peritoneal disorders (eg, carcinomatous or infectious peritonitis, biliary leak due to surgery or another
medical procedure)
• Less common causes, such as renal dialysis, pancreatitis, SLE, and endocrine disorders (eg,
myxedema)
Pathophysiology
Mechanisms are complex and incompletely understood. Factors include altered Starling's forces in the
portal vessels (low oncotic pressure due to hypoalbuminemia plus increased portal venous pressure),
avid renal Na retention (urinary Na concentration is typically < 5 mEq/L), and possibly increased hepatic
lymph formation.
Mechanisms that seem to contribute to renal Na retention include activation of the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system; increased sympathetic tone; intrarenal shunting of blood away from the cortex;
increased formation of nitric oxide; and altered formation or metabolism of ADH, kinins, prostaglandins,
and atrial natriuretic factor. Vasodilation in the splanchnic arterial circulation may be a trigger, but the
specific roles and interrelationships of these abnormalities remain uncertain.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:288===
Small amounts of ascitic fluid cause no symptoms. Moderate amounts cause increased abdominal girth
and weight gain. Massive amounts may cause nonspecific diffuse abdominal pressure, but actual pain is
uncommon and suggests another cause of acute abdominal pain (. If ascites results in
elevation of the diaphragm, dyspnea may occur. Symptoms of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP)
may include new abdominal discomfort and fever.
Signs include shifting dullness on abdominal percussion and a fluid wave. Volumes < 1500 mL may not
cause physical findings. Massive ascites causes tautness of the abdominal wall and flattening of the
umbilicus. In liver diseases or peritoneal disorders, ascites is usually isolated or disproportionate to
peripheral edema; in systemic diseases (eg, heart failure), the reverse is usually true.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography or CT unless physical findings make diagnosis obvious
• Often tests of ascitic fluid
Diagnosis may be based on physical examination if there is a large amount of fluid, but imaging tests are
more sensitive. Ultrasonography and CT reveal much smaller volumes of fluid (100 to 200 mL) than does
physical examination. SBP is suspected if a patient with ascites also has abdominal pain, fever, or
unexplained deterioration.
Diagnostic paracentesis ( should be done if any of the following occur:
• Ascites is newly diagnosed.
• Its cause is unknown.
• SBP is suspected.
[Table 23-2.
Interpretation of Some Physical Findings]
About 50 to 100 mL of fluid is removed and analyzed for gross appearance, protein content, cell count
and differential, cytology, culture, and, as clinically indicated, acid-fast stain, amylase, or both. In contrast
to ascites due to inflammation or infection, ascites due to portal hypertension produces fluid that is clear
and straw-colored, has a low protein concentration, a low PMN count (< 250 cells/
μ
L), and, most reliably,
a high serum-to-ascites albumin concentration gradient, which is the serum albumin concentration minus
the ascitic albumin concentration. Gradients > 1.1 g/dL are relatively specific for ascites due to portal
hypertension. In ascitic fluid, turbidity and a PMN count > 250 cells/
μ
L indicate SBP, whereas bloody fluid
can suggest a tumor or TB. The rare milky (chylous) ascites is most common with lymphoma.
Treatment
• Bed rest and dietary Na restriction
• Sometimes spironolactone, possibly plus furosemide
• Sometimes therapeutic paracentesis
Bed rest and dietary Na restriction (2000 mg/day) are the first and least risky treatments for ascites due to
portal hypertension. Diuretics should be used if rigid Na restriction fails to initiate diuresis within a few
days. Spironolactone is usually effective (in oral doses ranging from 50 mg once/day to 200 mg bid). A
loop diuretic (eg, furosemide 20 to 160 mg po usually once/day or 20 to 80 mg po bid) should be added if
spironolactone is insufficient. Because spironolactone can cause K retention and furosemide K depletion,
the combination of these drugs often provides optimal diuresis with a lower risk of K abnormalities. Fluid
restriction is indicated only for treatment of hyponatremia (serum Na < 120 mEq/L). Changes in body
weight and urinary Na determinations reflect response to treatment. Weight loss of about 0.5 kg/day is
===PAGE:289===
optimal because the ascitic compartment cannot be mobilized much more rapidly. More aggressive
diuresis depletes fluid from the intravascular compartment, especially when peripheral edema is absent;
this depletion may cause renal failure or electrolyte imbalance (eg, hypokalemia) that may precipitate
portal-systemic encephalopathy. Inadequate dietary Na restriction is the usual cause of persistent ascites.
Therapeutic paracentesis is an alternative. Removal of 4 L/day is safe; many clinicians infuse IV salt-poor
albumin (about 40 g/paracentesis) at about the same time to prevent intravascular volume depletion.
Even single total paracentesis may be safe. Therapeutic paracentesis shortens the hospital stay with
relatively little risk of electrolyte imbalance or renal failure; nevertheless, patients require ongoing
diuretics and tend to reaccumulate fluid more rapidly than those treated without paracentesis.
Techniques for the autologous infusion of ascitic fluid (eg, the LeVeen peritoneovenous shunt) often
cause complications and are generally no longer used. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting
(TIPS) can lower portal pressure and successfully treat ascites resistant to other treatments, but TIPS is
invasive and may cause complications, including portal-systemic encephalopathy and worsening
hepatocellular function.
Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is infection of ascitic fluid without an apparent source.
Manifestations may include fever, malaise, and symptoms of ascites and worsening hepatic
failure. Diagnosis is by examination of ascitic fluid. Treatment is with cefotaxime or another
antibiotic.
SBP is particularly common in cirrhotic ascites, especially among alcoholics. This infection can cause
serious sequelae or death. The most common bacteria causing SBP are gram-negative
Escherichia coli
and
Klebsiella pneumoniae
and gram-positive
Streptococcus pneumoniae
; usually only a single
organism is involved.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients have symptoms and signs of ascites. Discomfort is usually present; it typically is diffuse,
constant, and mild to moderate in severity.
Signs of SBP may include fever, malaise, encephalopathy, worsening hepatic failure, and unexplained
clinical deterioration. Peritoneal signs (eg, abdominal tenderness and rebound) are present but may be
somewhat diminished by the presence of ascitic fluid.
Diagnosis
• Diagnostic paracentesis
Clinical diagnosis of SBP can be difficult; diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion and liberal use of
diagnostic paracentesis, including
culture. Transferring ascitic fluid to blood culture media before
incubation increases the sensitivity of culture to almost 70%. PMN count of > 250 cells/
μ
L is diagnostic of
SBP. Blood cultures are also indicated. Because SBP usually results from a single organism, finding
mixed flora on culture suggests a perforated abdominal viscus or contaminated specimen.
Treatment
• Cefotaxime or another antibiotic
If SBP is diagnosed, an antibiotic such as cefotaxime 2 g IV q 4 to 8 h (pending Gram stain and culture
results) is given for at least 5 days and until ascitic fluid shows < 250 PMNs/
μ
L. Antibiotics increase the
chance of survival. Because SBP recurs within a year in up to 70% of patients, prophylactic antibiotics
are indicated; quinolones (eg, norfloxacin 400 mg po once/day) are most widely used.
Antibiotic prophylaxis in ascitic patients with variceal hemorrhage decreases the risk of SBP.
===PAGE:290===
Fatty Liver
(Hepatic Steatosis)
Fatty liver is excessive accumulation of lipid in hepatocytes, the most common liver response
to injury.
Fatty liver develops for many reasons, involves many different biochemical mechanisms, and causes
different types of liver damage. Clinically, it is most useful to distinguish fatty liver due to pregnancy or
alcoholic liver disease ( from that occurring in the absence of pregnancy and alcoholism
(nonalcoholic fatty liver disease [NAFLD]). NAFLD includes simple fatty infiltration (a benign condition)
and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, a less common but more important variant.
(See also the American Gastroenterological Association's Medical Position Statement and Technical
Review on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.)
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is a syndrome that develops in patients who are not
alcoholics; it causes liver damage that is histologically indistinguishable from alcoholic
hepatitis. It develops most often in patients with at least one of the following risk factors:
obesity, dyslipidemia, and glucose intolerance. Pathogenesis is poorly understood but seems to
be linked to insulin resistance (eg, as in obesity or metabolic syndrome). Most patients are
asymptomatic. Laboratory findings include elevations in aminotransferase levels. Biopsy is
required to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment includes elimination of causes and risk factors.
NASH (sometimes called steatonecrosis) is diagnosed most often in patients between 40 yr and 60 yr but
can occur in all age groups. Many affected patients have obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, or
dyslipidemia.
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiology involves fat accumulation (steatosis), inflammation, and, variably, fibrosis. Steatosis
results from hepatic triglyceride accumulation. Possible mechanisms for steatosis include reduced
synthesis of very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) and increased hepatic triglyceride synthesis (possibly
due to decreased oxidation of fatty acids or increased free fatty acids being delivered to the liver).
Inflammation may result from lipid peroxidative damage to cell membranes. These changes can stimulate
hepatic stellate cells, resulting in fibrosis. If advanced, NASH can cause cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients are asymptomatic. However, some have fatigue, malaise, or right upper quadrant abdominal
discomfort. Hepatomegaly develops in about 75% of patients. Splenomegaly may develop if advanced
hepatic fibrosis is present and is usually the first indication that portal hypertension has developed.
Patients with cirrhosis due to NASH can be asymptomatic and may lack the usual signs of chronic liver
disease.
Diagnosis
• Presence of risk factors
• Absence of hepatitis B and C and excessive alcohol intake
• Liver biopsy
The diagnosis should be suspected in patients with risk factors such as obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus,
or dyslipidemia and in patients with unexplained laboratory abnormalities suggesting liver disease. The
===PAGE:291===
most common laboratory abnormalities are elevations in aminotransferase levels. Unlike in alcoholic liver
disease, the ratio of AST/ALT in NASH is usually < 1. Alkaline phosphatase
and
γ
-glutamyl transpeptidase
(GGT) occasionally increase. Hyperbilirubinemia, prolongation of PT, and hypoalbuminemia are
uncommon.
For diagnosis, strong evidence (such as a history corroborated by friends and relatives) that alcohol
intake is not excessive (eg, is < 20 g/day) is needed. Serologic tests should show absence of hepatitis B
and C infection (ie, hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibody should be negative). Liver
biopsy should reveal damage similar to that seen in alcoholic hepatitis, usually including large fat droplets
(macrovesicular fatty infiltration). Indications for biopsy include unexplained signs of portal hypertension
(including splenomegaly or cytopenia) and unexplained elevations in aminotransferase levels that persist
for > 6 mo in a patient with diabetes, obesity, or dyslipidemia.
Imaging tests, including ultrasonography, CT, and particularly MRI, may identify hepatic steatosis.
However, these tests cannot identify the inflammation typical of NASH and cannot differentiate NASH
from other causes of hepatic steatosis.
Prognosis
Prognosis is controversial. Probably, most patients do not develop hepatic insufficiency or cirrhosis.
However, some drugs (eg, cytotoxic drugs) and metabolic disorders are associated with acceleration of
NASH. Prognosis is often good unless complications (eg, variceal hemorrhage) develop.
Treatment
• Elimination of causes and control of risk factors
The only widely accepted treatment goal is to eliminate potential causes and risk factors. Such a goal
may include discontinuation of drugs or toxins, weight loss, and treatment for dyslipidemia or
hyperglycemia. Preliminary evidence suggests that thiazolidinediones can help correct biochemical and
histologic abnormalities in NASH. Many other treatments (eg, ursodeoxycholic acid, vitamin E,
metronidazole, metformin, betaine, glucagon, glutamine infusion) have not been proved effective.
Jaundice
Jaundice is a yellowish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes caused by
hyperbilirubinemia. Jaundice becomes visible when the bilirubin level is about 2 to 3 mg/dL (34
to 51
μ
mol/L).
Pathophysiology
Most bilirubin is produced when Hb is broken down into unconjugated bilirubin (and other substances).
Unconjugated bilirubin binds to albumin in the blood for transport to the liver, where it is taken up by
hepatocytes and conjugated with glucuronic acid to make it water soluble. Conjugated bilirubin is
excreted in bile into the duodenum. In the intestine, bacteria metabolize bilirubin to form urobilinogen.
Some urobilinogen is eliminated in the feces, and some is reabsorbed, extracted by hepatocytes,
reprocessed, and re-excreted in bile (enterohepatic circulation—.
Mechanisms of hyperbilirubinemia:
Hyperbilirubinemia may involve predominantly unconjugated or
conjugated bilirubin.
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia
is most often caused by ≥ 1 of the following:
• Increased production
• Decreased hepatic uptake
• Decreased conjugation
===PAGE:292===
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia
is most often caused by ≥ 1 of the following:
• Dysfunction of hepatocytes (hepatocellular dysfunction)
• Slowing of bile egress from the liver (intrahepatic cholestasis)
• Obstruction of extrahepatic bile flow (extra-hepatic cholestasis)
Consequences:
Outcome is determined primarily by the cause of jaundice and the presence and
severity of hepatic dysfunction. Hepatic dysfunction can result in coagulopathy, encephalopathy, and
portal hypertension (which can lead to GI bleeding).
Etiology
Although hyperbilirubinemia can be classified as predominantly unconjugated or conjugated, many
hepatobiliary disorders cause both forms.
Many conditions (see
Table 23-3
), including use of certain drugs (see
Table 23-4
), can cause jaundice, but the most common causes overall are
• Inflammatory hepatitis (viral hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, toxic hepatic injury)
• Alcoholic liver disease
• Biliary obstruction
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should include onset and duration of jaundice. Hyperbilirubinemia
can cause urine to darken before
[Table 23-3.
Mechanisms and Some Causes of Jaundice in Adults]
jaundice is visible. Therefore, the onset of dark urine indicates onset of hyperbilirubinemia more
accurately than onset of jaundice. Important associated symptoms include fever, prodromal symptoms
(eg, fever, malaise, myalgias) before jaundice, urine and stool color, pruritus, steatorrhea, and abdominal
pain (including location, severity, duration, and radiation). Important symptoms suggesting severe disease
include nausea and vomiting, weight loss, and possible symptoms of coagulopathy (eg, easy bruising or
bleeding, tarry or bloody stools).
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including weight loss and abdominal
pain (cancer); joint pain and swelling
[Table 23-4.
Some Drugs and Toxins that Can Cause Jaundice]
(autoimmune or viral hepatitis, hemochromatosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, sarcoidosis); and missed
menses (pregnancy).
Past medical history
should identify known causative disorders, such as hepatobiliary disease (eg,
gallstones, hepatitis, cirrhosis); disorders that can cause hemolysis (eg, hemoglobinopathy, G6PD
deficiency); and disorders associated with liver or biliary disease, including inflammatory bowel disease,
infiltrative disorders (eg, amyloidosis, lymphoma, sarcoidosis, TB), and HIV infection or AIDS.
Drug history should include questions about use of drugs or exposure to toxins known to affect the liver
(see
Table 23-4
) and about vaccination against hepatitis.
===PAGE:293===
Surgical history should include questions about previous surgery on the biliary tract (a potential cause of
strictures).
Social history should include questions about risk factors for hepatitis (see
Table 23-5
), amount and duration of alcohol use, injection drug use, and sexual history.
Family history should include questions about recurrent, mild jaundice in family members and diagnosed
hereditary liver disorders. The patient's history of recreational drug and alcohol use should be
corroborated by friends or family members when possible.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for fever and signs of systemic toxicity (eg, hypotension,
tachycardia).
General appearance is noted, particularly for cachexia and lethargy.
Head and neck examination includes inspection of the sclerae and tongue for icterus and the eyes for
Kayser-Fleischer rings. Mild jaundice is best seen by examining the sclerae in natural light; it is usually
detectable when serum bilirubin reaches 2 to 2.5 mg/dL (34 to 43
μ
mol/L). Breath odor should be noted
(eg, for fetor hepaticus).
The abdomen is inspected for collateral vasculature, ascites, and surgical scars. The liver is palpated for
hepatomegaly, masses, nodularity, and tenderness. The spleen is palpated for splenomegaly. The
abdomen is examined for umbilical hernia, shifting dullness, fluid wave, masses, and tenderness. The
rectum is examined for gross or occult blood.
Men are checked for testicular atrophy and gynecomastia.
The upper extremities are examined for Dupuytren's contractures.
Neurologic examination includes mental status assessment and evaluation for asterixis.
The skin is examined for jaundice, palmar erythema, needle tracks, vascular spiders, excoriations,
xanthomas (consistent with primary biliary cirrhosis), paucity of axillary and pubic hair, hyperpigmentation,
ecchymoses, petechiae, and purpura.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Marked abdominal pain and tenderness
• Altered mental status
• GI bleeding (occult or gross)
• Ecchymoses, petechiae, or purpura
Interpretation of findings: Severity of illness
is indicated mainly by the degree (if any) of hepatic
dysfunction. Ascending cholangitis is a concern because it requires emergency treatment.
Severe hepatic dysfunction is indicated by encephalopathy (eg, mental status change, asterixis) or
coagulopathy (eg, easy bleeding, purpura, tarry or heme-positive stool), particularly in patients with signs
of portal hypertension
[Table 23-5.
Some Risk Factors for Hepatitis]
(eg, abdominal collateral vasculature, ascites, splenomegaly). Massive upper GI bleeding suggests
variceal bleeding due to portal hypertension (and possibly coagulopathy).
Ascending cholangitis is suggested by fever and marked, continuous right upper quadrant abdominal
===PAGE:294===
pain; acute pancreatitis with biliary obstruction (eg, due to a common duct stone or pancreatic
pseudocyst) may manifest similarly.
Cause of jaundice
may be suggested by the following:
• Acute jaundice in the young and healthy suggests acute viral hepatitis, particularly when a viral
prodrome, risk factors, or both are present; however, acetaminophen overdose is also common.
• Acute jaundice after acute drug or toxin exposure in healthy patients is likely due to that substance.
• A long history of heavy alcohol use suggests alcoholic liver disease, particularly when typical stigmata
are present.
• A personal or family history of recurrent, mild jaundice without findings of hepatobiliary dysfunction
suggests a hereditary disorder, usually Gilbert syndrome.
• Gradual onset of jaundice with pruritus, weight loss, and clay-colored stools suggests intrahepatic or
extrahepatic cholestasis.
• Painless jaundice in elderly patients with weight loss and a mass but with minimal pruritus suggests
biliary obstruction caused by cancer.
Other examination findings can also be helpful (see
Table 23-6
).
Testing:
The following are done:
• Blood tests (bilirubin, aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase)
• Usually imaging
• Sometimes biopsy or laparoscopy
Blood tests include measurement of total and direct bilirubin, aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase
levels in all patients. Results help differentiate cholestasis from hepatocellular dysfunction (important
because patients with cholestasis usually require imaging tests):
• Hepatocellular dysfunction: Marked aminotransferase elevation (> 500 U/L) and moderate alkaline
phosphatase elevation (< 3 times normal)
• Cholestasis: Moderate aminotransferase elevation (< 200 U/L) and marked alkaline phosphatase
elevation (> 3 times normal)
• Hyperbilirubinemia without hepatobiliary dysfunction: Mild hyperbilirubinemia (eg, < 3.5 mg/dL [< 59
μ
mol/L]) with normal aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase levels
Also, patients with hepatocellular dysfunction or cholestasis have dark urine due to bilirubinuria because
conjugated bilirubin is excreted in urine; unconjugated bilirubin is not. Bilirubin fractionation also
differentiates conjugated from unconjugated forms. When aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase
levels are normal, fractionation of bilirubin can help suggest causes, such as Gilbert syndrome or
hemolysis (unconjugated) vs Dubin-Johnson syndrome or Rotor's syndrome (conjugated).
Other blood tests are done based on clinical suspicion and initial test findings, as for the following:
• Signs of hepatic insufficiency (eg, encephalopathy, ascites, ecchymoses) or GI bleeding: Coagulation
profile (PT/PTT)
• Hepatitis risk factors (see
Table 23-5
) or a hepatocellular mechanism suggested by blood test results:
===PAGE:295===
Hepatitis viral and autoimmune serologic tests
• Fever, abdominal pain, and tenderness: CBC and, if patients appear ill, blood cultures
[Table 23-6.
Findings Suggesting a Cause of Jaundice]
Suspicion of hemolysis can be confirmed by a peripheral blood smear.
Imaging is done if pain suggests extrahepatic obstruction or cholangitis or if blood test results suggest
cholestasis.
Abdominal ultrasonography usually is done first; usually, it is highly accurate in detecting extrahepatic
obstruction. CT and MRI are alternatives. Ultrasonography is usually more accurate for gallstones, and
CT is more accurate for pancreatic lesions. All these tests can detect abnormalities in the biliary tree and
focal liver lesions but are less accurate in detecting diffuse hepatocellular disorders (eg, hepatitis,
cirrhosis).
If ultrasonography shows extrahepatic cholestasis, other tests may be necessary to determine the cause;
usually, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) or ERCP is used. ERCP is more
invasive but allows treatment of some obstructive lesions (eg, stone removal, stenting of strictures).
Liver biopsy is not commonly required but can help diagnose certain disorders (eg, disorders causing
intrahepatic cholestasis, some kinds of hepatitis, some infiltrative disorders, Dubin-Johnson syndrome,
hemochromatosis, Wilson's disease). Biopsy can also help when liver enzyme abnormalities are
unexplained by other tests.
Laparoscopy (peritoneoscopy) allows direct inspection of the liver and gallbladder without the trauma of a
full laparotomy. Unexplained cholestatic jaundice warrants laparoscopy occasionally and diagnostic
laparotomy rarely.
Treatment
The cause and any complications are treated. Jaundice itself requires no treatment in adults (unlike in
neonates—. Itching, if bothersome, may be relieved with cholestyramine 2 to 8 g po bid.
However, cholestyramine is ineffective in patients with complete biliary obstruction.
Geriatrics Essentials
Symptoms may be attenuated or missed in the elderly; eg, abdominal pain may be mild or absent in acute
viral hepatitis. A sleep disturbance or mild confusion resulting from portosystemic encephalopathy may be
misattributed to dementia.
Key Points
• Acute jaundice, particularly with a viral prodrome, in the young and healthy suggests acute viral
hepatitis.
• Painless jaundice in elderly patients with weight loss, an abdominal mass, and minimal pruritus suggests
biliary obstruction caused by cancer.
• Aminotransferase levels of > 500 U/L and alkaline phosphatase elevation < 3 times normal suggest
hepatocellular dysfunction.
• Aminotransferase levels of < 200 U/L and alkaline phosphatase elevation > 3 times normal suggest
cholestasis.
• Significant hepatic dysfunction is indicated by altered mental status and coagulopathy.
===PAGE:296===
Inborn Metabolic Disorders Causing Hyperbilirubinemia
Hereditary or inborn metabolic disorders may cause unconjugated or conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
• Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia: Gilbert syndrome, Crigler-Najjar syndrome, and primary shunt
hyperbilirubinemia
• Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia: Dubin-Johnson syndrome and Rotor's syndrome
Gilbert Syndrome
Gilbert syndrome is a presumably lifelong disorder in which the only significant abnormality is
asymptomatic, mild, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. It can be mistaken for chronic hepatitis or other liver
disorders. Gilbert syndrome may affect as many as 5% of people. Although family members may be
affected, a clear genetic pattern is difficult to establish.
Pathogenesis may involve complex defects in the liver's uptake of bilirubin. Glucuronyl transferase activity
is low, though not as low as in Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II. In many patients, RBC destruction is also
slightly accelerated, but this acceleration does not explain hyperbilirubinemia. Liver histology is normal.
Gilbert syndrome is most often detected in young adults serendipitously by finding an elevated bilirubin
level, which usually fluctuates between 2 and 5 mg/dL (34 and 86
μ
mol/L) and tends to increase with
fasting and other stresses.
Gilbert syndrome is differentiated from hepatitis by fractionation that shows predominantly unconjugated
bilirubin, otherwise normal liver function test results, and absence of urinary bilirubin. It is differentiated
from hemolysis by the absence of anemia and reticulocytosis. Treatment is unnecessary. Patients
should
be reassured that they do not have liver disease.
Crigler-Najjar Syndrome
This rare inherited disorder is caused by deficiency of the enzyme glucuronyl transferase. Patients with
autosomal recessive type I (complete) disease have severe hyperbilirubinemia. They usually die of
kernicterus by age 1 yr but may survive into adulthood. Treatment may include phototherapy and liver
transplantation. Patients with autosomal dominant type II (partial) disease (which has variable
penetrance) often have less severe hyperbilirubinemia (< 20 mg/dL [< 342
μ
mol/L]) and usually live into
adulthood without neurologic damage. Phenobarbital 1.5 to 2 mg/kg po tid, which induces the partially
deficient glucuronyl transferase, may be effective.
Primary Shunt Hyperbilirubinemia
This rare, familial, benign condition is characterized by overproduction of early-labeled bilirubin.
Dubin-Johnson Syndrome and Rotor's Syndrome
Dubin-Johnson syndrome and Rotor's syndrome cause conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, but without
cholestasis, causing no symptoms or sequelae other than jaundice. In contrast to unconjugated
hyperbilirubinemia in Gilbert syndrome (which also causes no other symptoms), bilirubin may appear in
the urine. Aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase levels are usually normal. Treatment is
unnecessary.
Dubin-Johnson syndrome:
This rare autosomal recessive disorder involves impaired excretion of
bilirubin glucuronides. It is usually diagnosed by liver biopsy; the liver is deeply pigmented as a result of
an intracellular melanin-like substance but is otherwise histologically normal.
Rotor's syndrome:
This rare disorder is clinically similar to Dubin-Johnson syndrome, but the liver is not
pigmented, and other subtle metabolic differences are present.
===PAGE:297===
Portal Hypertension
Portal hypertension is caused most often by cirrhosis (in developed countries), schistosomiasis
(in endemic areas), or hepatic vascular abnormalities. Consequences include esophageal
varices and portal-systemic encephalopathy. Diagnosis is based on clinical criteria, often in
conjunction with imaging tests and endoscopy. Treatment involves prevention of GI bleeding
with endoscopy, drugs, or both and sometimes with portocaval shunting.
The portal vein, formed by the superior mesenteric and splenic veins, drains blood from the abdominal GI
tract, spleen, and pancreas into the liver. Within reticuloendotheliumlined blood channels (sinusoids),
blood from the terminal portal venules merges with hepatic arterial blood. Blood flows out of the sinusoids
via the hepatic veins into the inferior vena cava.
Normal portal pressure is 5 to 10 mm Hg (7 to 14 cm H
O), which exceeds inferior vena caval pressure
by 4 to 5 mm Hg (portal venous gradient). Higher values are defined as portal hypertension.
Etiology
Portal hypertension results mainly from increased resistance to flow, which commonly arises from disease
within the liver itself or uncommonly from blockage of the splenic or portal vein or impaired hepatic
venous outflow (see
Table 23-7
). Increased flow volume is a rare cause, although it often contributes to portal hypertension in
cirrhosis and in hematologic disorders that cause massive splenomegaly.
Pathophysiology
In cirrhosis, tissue fibrosis and regeneration increase resistance in the sinusoids and terminal portal
venules. However, other potentially reversible factors contribute; they include contractility of sinusoidal
lining cells, production of vasoactive substances (eg, endothelins, nitric oxide), various systemic
mediators of arteriolar resistance, and possibly swelling of hepatocytes.
Over time, portal hypertension creates portal-systemic venous collaterals. They may slightly decrease
portal vein pressure but can cause complications. Engorged serpentine submucosal vessels (varices) in
the distal esophagus and sometimes in the gastric fundus can rupture, causing sudden, catastrophic GI
bleeding. Bleeding rarely occurs unless the portal pressure gradient is > 12 mm Hg. Gastric mucosal
vascular congestion (portal hypertensive gastropathy) can cause acute or chronic bleeding independent
of varices. Visible abdominal wall collaterals are common; veins radiating from the umbilicus (caput
medusae) are much rarer and indicate extensive flow in the umbilical and periumbilical veins.
[Table 23-7.
Most Common Causes of Portal Hypertension]
Collaterals around the rectum can cause rectal varices that can bleed.
Portal-systemic collaterals shunt blood away from the liver. Thus, less blood reaches the liver when portal
flow increases (diminished hepatic reserve). In addition, toxic substances from the intestine are shunted
directly to the systemic circulation, contributing to portal-systemic encephalopathy (. Venous
congestion within visceral organs due to portal hypertension contributes to ascites via altered Starling's
forces. Splenomegaly and hypersplenism ( commonly occur as a result of increased splenic
vein pressure. Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and, less commonly, hemolytic anemia may result.
Portal hypertension is often associated with a hyperdynamic circulation. Mechanisms are complex and
seem to involve altered sympathetic tone, production of nitric oxide and other endogenous vasodilators,
and enhanced activity of humoral factors (eg, glucagon).
Symptoms and Signs
Portal hypertension is asymptomatic; symptoms and signs result from its complications. The most
dangerous is acute variceal bleeding (. Patients typically present with sudden painless upper
===PAGE:298===
GI bleeding, often massive. Bleeding from portal hypertensive gastropathy is often subacute or chronic.
Ascites, splenomegaly, or portal-systemic encephalopathy may be present.
Diagnosis
• Usually, clinical evaluation
Portal hypertension is inferred in a patient with chronic liver disease by the presence of collateral
circulation, splenomegaly, ascites, or portal-systemic encephalopathy. Proof requires direct portal
pressure measurement by a transjugular catheter, which is invasive and usually not done. Imaging may
help when cirrhosis is suspected. Ultrasonography or CT often reveals dilated intra-abdominal collaterals,
and Doppler ultrasonography can determine portal vein patency and flow.
Esophagogastric varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy are best diagnosed by endoscopy, which
may also identify predictors of esophagogastric variceal bleeding (eg, red markings on a varix).
Prognosis
Mortality during acute variceal hemorrhage may exceed 50%. Prognosis is predicted by the degree of
hepatic reserve and the degree of bleeding. For survivors, the bleeding risk within the next 1 to 2 yr is 50
to 75%. Ongoing endoscopic or drug therapy lowers the bleeding risk but decreases long-term mortality
only marginally. For treatment of acute bleeding, see pp.
and
.
Treatment
• Ongoing endoscopic therapy and surveillance
•
β
-Blockers with or without isosorbide mononitrate
• Sometimes portal vein shunting
When possible, the underlying disorder is treated. Long-term treatment of esophagogastric varices that
have bled is a series of endoscopic banding sessions to obliterate residual varices, then periodic
surveillance endoscopy for recurrent varices.
Long-term drug therapy for varices that have bled involves
β
-blockers; these drugs lower portal pressure
primarily by diminishing portal flow, although the effects vary. Propranolol (40 to 80 mg po bid) or nadolol
(40 to 160 mg
po once/day) is preferred, with dosage titrated to decrease heart rate by about 25%.
Adding isosorbide mononitrate 10 to 20 mg po bid may further reduce portal pressure. Combined longterm endoscopic and drug therapy may be slightly more effective than either alone. Patients who do not
adequately respond to either treatment should be considered for transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunting (TIPS) or, less frequently, a surgical portocaval shunt. TIPS creates a stent between the portal
and hepatic venous circulation within the liver. Although TIPS may result in fewer immediate deaths than
surgical shunting, particularly during acute bleeding, maintenance of patency may require repeat
procedures because the stent may become stenosed or occluded over time. Long-term benefits are
unknown. Liver transplantation may help some patients.
For patients with varices that have not yet bled,
β
-blockers lower the risk of bleeding.
For bleeding due to portal hypertensive gastropathy, drugs can be used to decrease portal pressure. A
shunt should be considered if drugs are ineffective, but results may be less successful than for
esophageal variceal bleeding.
Because it rarely causes clinical problems, hypersplenism requires no specific treatment, and
splenectomy should be avoided.
Portal-Systemic Encephalopathy
===PAGE:299===
Portal-systemic encephalopathy is a neuropsychiatric syndrome. It most often results from high
gut protein or acute metabolic stress (eg, GI bleeding, infection, electrolyte abnormality) in a
patient with portal-systemic shunting. Symptoms are mainly neuropsychiatric (eg, confusion,
flapping tremor, coma). Diagnosis is based on clinical findings. Treatment usually is correction
of the acute cause, restriction of dietary protein, and oral lactulose.
Portal-systemic encephalopathy better describes the pathophysiology than hepatic encephalopathy or
hepatic coma, but all 3 terms are used interchangeably.
Etiology
Portal-systemic encephalopathy may occur in fulminant hepatitis caused by viruses, drugs, or toxins, but it
more commonly occurs in cirrhosis or other chronic disorders when extensive portal-systemic collaterals
have developed as a result of portal hypertension. Encephalopathy also follows portal-systemic
anastomoses, such as surgically created anastomoses connecting the portal vein and vena cava
(portacaval shunts, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting [TIPS]).
Precipitants:
In patients with chronic liver disease, acute episodes of encephalopathy are usually
precipitated by reversible causes. The most common are the following:
• Metabolic stress (eg, infection; electrolyte imbalance, especially hypokalemia; dehydration; use of
diuretic drugs)
• Disorders that increase gut protein (eg, GI bleeding, high-protein diet)
• Nonspecific cerebral depressants (eg, alcohol, sedatives, analgesics)
Pathophysiology
In portal-systemic shunting, absorbed products that would otherwise be detoxified by the liver enter the
systemic circulation, where they may be toxic to the brain, particularly the cerebral cortex. The
substances causing brain toxicity are not precisely known. Ammonia, a product of protein digestion, is an
important cause, but other factors (eg, alterations in cerebral benzodiazepine receptors and
neurotransmission by
γ
-aminobutyric acid [GABA]) may also contribute. Aromatic amino acid levels in
serum are usually high and branched-chain levels are low, but these levels probably do not cause
encephalopathy.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of encephalopathy tend to develop in progressive stages (see
Table 23-8
).
Symptoms usually do not become apparent until brain function is moderately impaired. Constructional
apraxia, in which patients cannot reproduce simple designs (eg, a star), develops early. Agitation and
mania can develop but are uncommon. A characteristic flapping tremor (asterixis) is elicited when patients
hold their arms outstretched with wrists dorsiflexed. Neurologic deficits are symmetric. Neurologic signs in
coma usually reflect bilateral diffuse hemispheric dysfunction. Signs of brain stem dysfunction develop
only in advanced coma, often during the hours or days before death. A musty, sweet breath odor (fetor
hepaticus) can occur regardless of the stage of encephalopathy.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Often adjunctive testing with psychometric evaluation, ammonia level, EEG, or a combination
• Exclusion of other treatable disorders
===PAGE:300===
[Table 23-8.
Clinical Stages of Portal-Systemic Encephalopathy]
Diagnosis is ultimately based on clinical findings, but testing may help:
• Psychometric testing may reveal subtle neuropsychiatric deficits, which can help confirm early
encephalopathy.
• Ammonia levels are usually done.
• An EEG usually shows diffuse slow-wave activity, even in mild cases, and may be sensitive but is not
specific for early encephalopathy.
CSF examination is not routinely necessary; the only usual abnormality is mild protein elevation.
Other potentially reversible disorders that could cause similar manifestations (eg, infection, subdural
hematoma, hypoglycemia, intoxication) should be ruled out. If portal-systemic encephalopathy is
confirmed, the precipitating cause should be sought.
Prognosis
In chronic liver disease, correction of the precipitating cause usually causes encephalopathy to regress
without permanent neurologic sequelae. Some patients, especially those with portacaval shunts or TIPS,
require continuous therapy, and irreversible extrapyramidal signs or spastic paraparesis rarely develops.
Coma (stage 4 encephalopathy) associated with fulminant hepatitis is fatal in up to 80% of patients
despite intensive therapy; the combination of advanced chronic liver failure and portal-systemic
encephalopathy is often fatal.
Treatment
• Treatment of the cause
• Bowel cleansing using oral lactulose or enemas
• Dietary protein restriction
Treating the cause usually reverses mild cases. Eliminating toxic enteric products is the other goal and is
accomplished using several methods. The bowels should be cleared using enemas or, more often, oral
lactulose syrup, which can be tube-fed to comatose patients. This synthetic disaccharide is an osmotic
cathartic. It also lowers colonic pH, decreasing fecal ammonia production. The initial dosage, 30 to 45 mL
po tid, should be adjusted to produce 2 or 3 soft stools daily. Dietary protein should be about 1.0
mg/kg/day, primarily from vegetable sources. Oral nonabsorbable antibiotics such as neomycin and
rifaximin are effective for hepatic encephalopathy. Rifaximin is usually preferred because neomycin is an
aminoglycoside, which can precipitate ototoxicity or nephrotoxicity.
Sedation deepens encephalopathy and should be avoided whenever possible. For coma caused by
fulminant hepatitis, meticulous supportive and nursing care coupled with prevention and treatment of
complications increase the chance of survival. High-dose corticosteroids, exchange transfusion, and
other complex procedures designed to remove circulating toxins generally do not
improve outcome.
Patients deteriorating because of fulminant hepatic failure may be saved by liver transplantation.
Other potential therapies, including levodopa, bromocriptine, flumazenil, Na benzoate, infusions of
branched-chain amino acids, keto-analogs of essential amino acids, and prostaglandins, have not proved
effective. Complex plasma-filtering systems (artificial liver) show some promise but require much more
study.
Systemic Abnormalities in Liver Disease
Liver disease often causes systemic symptoms and abnormalities (see
Portal-Systemic Encephalopathy
===PAGE:301===
.
Circulatory Abnormalities
Hypotension in advanced liver failure may contribute to renal dysfunction. The pathogenesis of the
hyperdynamic circulation (increased cardiac output and heart rate) and hypotension that develop in
advanced liver failure or cirrhosis is poorly understood. However, peripheral arterial vasodilation probably
contributes to both. Factors that may contribute in cirrhosis may include altered sympathetic tone,
production of nitric oxide and other endogenous vasodilators, and enhanced activity of humoral factors
(eg, glucagon).
For specific disorders of hepatic circulation (eg, Budd-Chiari syndrome), see
Chapter 29
.
Endocrine Abnormalities
Glucose intolerance, hyperinsulinism, insulin resistance, and hyperglucagonemia are often present in
patients with cirrhosis; the elevated insulin levels reflect decreased hepatic degradation rather than
increased secretion, whereas the opposite is true for hyperglucagonemia. Abnormal thyroid function tests
may reflect altered hepatic handling of thyroid hormones and changes in plasma binding proteins rather
than thyroid abnormalities.
Sexual effects
are common. Chronic liver disease commonly impairs menstruation and fertility. Males
with cirrhosis, especially alcoholics, often have both hypogonadism (including testicular atrophy, erectile
dysfunction, decreased spermatogenesis) and feminization (gynecomastia, female habitus). The
biochemical basis is not fully understood. Gonadotropin reserve of the hypothalamicpituitary axis is often
blunted. Circulating testosterone levels are low, resulting mainly from decreased synthesis but also from
increased peripheral conversion to estrogens. Levels of estrogens other than estradiol are usually
increased, but the relationship between estrogens and feminization is complex. These changes are more
prevalent in alcoholic liver disease than in cirrhosis of other etiologies, suggesting that alcohol, rather
than liver disease, may be the cause. In fact, evidence indicates that alcohol itself is toxic to the testes.
Hematologic Abnormalities
Anemia
is common among patients with liver disease. Contributing factors may include blood loss, folate
(folic acid) deficiency, hemolysis, marrow suppression by alcohol, and a direct effect of chronic liver
disease.
Leukopenia
and
thrombocytopenia
often accompany splenomegaly in advanced portal hypertension.
Clotting and coagulation abnormalities
are common and complex. Hepatocellular dysfunction and
inadequate absorption of vitamin K may impair liver synthesis of clotting factors. An abnormal PT,
depending on the severity of hepatocellular dysfunction, may respond to parenteral phytonadione (vitamin
K
) 5 to 10 mg once/day for 2 to 3 days. Thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and
fibrinogen abnormalities also contribute to clotting disturbances in many patients.
Renal and Electrolyte Abnormalities
Renal and electrolyte abnormalities are common, especially among patients with ascites.
Hypokalemia
may result from excess urinary K loss due to increased circulating aldosterone, renal
retention of ammonium ion in exchange for K, secondary renal tubular acidosis, or diuretic therapy.
Management consists of giving oral KCl supplements and withholding K-wasting diuretics.
Hyponatremia
is common even though the kidneys may avidly retain Na (see
Ascites
; it
usually occurs with advanced hepatocellular disease and is difficult to correct. Relative water overload is
more often responsible than total body Na depletion; K depletion may also contribute. Water restriction
and K supplements may help; use of diuretics that increase free water clearance is
controversial. Saline
solution IV is indicated only if profound hyponatremia causes seizures or if total body Na depletion is
===PAGE:302===
suspected; it should be avoided in patients with cirrhosis and fluid retention because it worsens ascites
and only temporarily increases serum Na levels.
Advanced liver failure can alter acid-base balance, usually causing metabolic alkalosis. BUN levels are
often low because of impaired liver synthesis; GI bleeding causes elevations because of an increased
enteric load rather than renal impairment. When GI bleeding elevates BUN, normal creatinine values tend
to confirm normal kidney function.
Renal failure
in liver disease may reflect
• Rare disorders that directly affect both the kidneys and the liver (eg, carbon tetrachloride toxicity)
• Circulatory failure with decreased renal perfusion, with or without frank acute tubular necrosis
• Functional renal failure, often called hepatorenal syndrome
Hepatorenal syndrome:
This syndrome consists of progressive oliguria and azotemia in the absence of
structural damage to the kidney; it usually occurs in patients with fulminant hepatitis or advanced cirrhosis
with ascites. Its unknown pathogenesis probably involves extreme vasodilation of the splanchnic arterial
circulation, leading to decreased central arterial volume. Neural or humoral reductions in renocortical
blood flow follow, resulting in a diminished glomerular filtration rate. Low urinary Na concentration and
benign sediment usually distinguish it from tubular necrosis, but prerenal azotemia may be more difficult to
distinguish; in equivocal cases, response to a volume load should be assessed.
Once established, renal failure due to hepatorenal syndrome is usually rapidly progressive and fatal (type
1 hepatorenal syndrome), although some cases are less severe, with stable low-grade renal insufficiency
(type 2).
Liver transplantation is the only accepted treatment for type 1 hepatorenal syndrome; transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunting (TIPS) and vasoconstrictors show some promise, but more study is
needed.
The Asymptomatic Patient With Abnormal Laboratory Test Results
Because aminotransferases and alkaline phosphatase are included in commonly done laboratory test
panels, abnormalities are often detected in patients without symptoms or signs of liver disease. In such
patients, the physician should obtain a history of exposure to possible liver toxins, including alcohol,
prescription and nonprescription drugs, herbal teas and remedies, and occupational or other chemical
exposures.
Aminotransferases:
Mild isolated elevations of ALT or AST (< 2 times normal) may require only repeat
testing; they resolve in about one third of cases. If abnormalities are present in other laboratory tests, are
severe, or persist on subsequent testing, further evaluation is indicated as follows:
• Fatty liver should be considered; it can often be recognized clinically (.
• Patients should be screened for hepatitis B and C (.
• Patients > 40 should be screened for hemochromatosis (.
• Patients < 30 should be screened for Wilson's disease (.
• Most patients, especially young or middle-aged women, should be screened for autoimmune disorders.
• Patients at risk should be screened for malaria and schistosomiasis.
If at this point the results are negative, screening for
α
-antitrypsin deficiency ( is indicated. If
the entire evaluation reveals no cause, liver biopsy may be warranted.
===PAGE:303===
Alkaline phosphatase:
Isolated elevation of alkaline phosphatase levels in an asymptomatic patient
requires confirmation of hepatic origin by showing elevation of 5´-nucleotidase or
γ
-glutamyl
transpeptidase. If hepatic origin is confirmed, liver imaging, usually with ultrasonography or magnetic
resonance cholangiopancreatography, is indicated. If no structural abnormality is found on imaging,
intrahepatic cholestasis is possible and may be suggested by a history of exposure to drugs or toxins.
Infiltrative diseases and liver metastases (eg, due to colon cancer) should also be considered. In women,
antimitochondrial antibody should be obtained. Persistent unexplained elevations or suspicion of
intrahepatic cholestasis warrants consideration of liver biopsy.
Postoperative Liver Dysfunction
Mild liver dysfunction sometimes occurs after major surgery even in the absence of preexisting liver
disorders. This dysfunction
usually results from hepatic ischemia or poorly understood effects of
anesthesia. Patients with preexisting well-compensated liver disease (eg, cirrhosis with normal liver
function) usually tolerate surgery well. However, surgery can increase the severity of some preexisting
liver disorders; eg, laparotomy may precipitate acute liver failure in a patient with viral or alcoholic
hepatitis.
Postoperative jaundice:
Diagnosis of postoperative jaundice requires liver laboratory tests. Timing of
symptoms also aids in diagnosis.
Multifactorial mixed hyperbilirubinemia is the most common reason for postoperative jaundice. It is caused
by increased formation of bilirubin and decreased hepatic clearance. This disorder most often occurs
after major surgery or trauma requiring multiple transfusions. Hemolysis, sepsis, resorption of
hematomas, and blood transfusions can increase the bilirubin load; simultaneously, hypoxemia, hepatic
ischemia, and other poorly understood factors impair hepatic function. This condition is usually maximal
within a few days of operation. Hepatic insufficiency is rare, and hyperbilirubinemia typically resolves
slowly but completely. Liver laboratory tests can often differentiate multifactorial mixed hyperbilirubinemia
from hepatitis. In multifactorial mixed hyperbilirubinemia, severe hyperbilirubinemia with mild
aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase elevations are common. In hepatitis, aminotransferase levels
are usually very high.
Postoperative hepatitis:
Ischemic postoperative "hepatitis" results from insufficient liver perfusion, not
inflammation. The cause is transient perioperative hypotension or hypoxia. Typically, aminotransferase
levels increase rapidly (often > 1000 units/L), but bilirubin is only mildly elevated. Ischemic hepatitis is
usually maximal within a few days of operation and resolves within a few days.
Halothane-related hepatitis can result from use of anesthetics containing halothane or related agents. It
usually develops within 2 wk, is often preceded by fever, and is sometimes accompanied by a skin rash
and eosinophilia.
True postoperative hepatitis is now rare. It used to result mainly from transmission of hepatitis C virus
during blood transfusion.
Postoperative cholestasis:
The most common cause of postoperative cholestasis is extrahepatic biliary
obstruction due to intra-abdominal complications or drugs given postoperatively. Intrahepatic cholestasis
occasionally develops after major surgery, especially after abdominal or cardiovascular procedures
(benign postoperative intrahepatic cholestasis). The pathogenesis is unknown, but the condition usually
resolves slowly and spontaneously. Occasionally, postoperative cholestasis results from acute acalculous
cholecystitis or pancreatitis.
===PAGE:304===
Chapter 24. Testing for Hepatic and Biliary Disorders
Introduction
Diagnosis of liver and biliary system disorders may include laboratory tests, imaging tests, and liver
biopsy. Individual tests, particularly those of liver biochemistry and excretion, often have limited sensitivity
and specificity. A combination of tests often best defines the cause and severity of disease. Useful
algorithms (eg, Model of End-Stage Liver Disease [MELD], Child-Pugh score) have incorporated clinical
and laboratory features to predict survival in patients with decompensated cirrhosis.
Laboratory Tests
Laboratory tests are generally effective for the following:
• Detecting hepatic dysfunction
• Assessing the severity of liver injury
• Monitoring the course of liver diseases and the response to treatment
• Refining the diagnosis
Many tests of liver biochemistry and excretory performance are called liver function tests. However, rather
than assessing liver function, several of these tests measure liver enzymes that are released into the
bloodstream (eg, release of aminotransferases from injured liver cells or of alkaline phosphatase due to
cholestasis). Only certain tests actually assess liver
function by evaluating hepatobiliary excretion (eg,
bilirubin) or the liver's synthetic capability (eg, PT, usually reported as the INR; albumin).
The most useful laboratory tests to screen for liver disorders are serum aminotransferases (the most
commonly used liver function tests), bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase. Certain patterns of biochemical
abnormalities help distinguish hepatocellular injury from impaired bile excretion (cholestasis—see
Table 24-1
). Tests that detect viral hepatitis, liver inflammation, or altered immunoregulation include
hepatitis serologic tests ( and measurement of immunoglobulins, antibodies, and
autoantibodies.
A few laboratory tests are diagnostic by themselves; they include the following:
• IgM antibody to hepatitis A virus (anti-HAV) for acute hepatitis A
• Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) for hepatitis B
• Antibody to hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV) and HCV-RNA for hepatitis C
• Antimitochondrial antibody for primary biliary cirrhosis
• Serum ceruloplasmin (reduced) and urinary copper (elevated) for Wilson's disease
• Serum
α
-antitrypsin for
α
-antitrypsin deficiency
•
α
-Fetoprotein for hepatocellular carcinoma
Tests for Liver Injury
Aminotransferases:
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) leak from
damaged cells; thus, these enzymes are sensitive indicators of liver injury. Markedly high values (> 500
IU/L; normal, ≤ 40 IU/L), which indicate acute hepatocellular necrosis or injury, usually result from the
following:
===PAGE:305===
• Acute viral hepatitis
• Toxin- or drug-induced hepatitis
• Ischemic hepatitis or hepatic infarction
High levels continue usually for days or, in viral hepatitis, for weeks. The degree of elevation may not
reflect the extent of liver injury. Serial measurements better reflect severity and prognosis than does a
single measurement. A fall to normal indicates recovery unless accompanied by an increase in bilirubin
and in PT or INR (which indicates fulminant liver failure). Fulminant liver failure results in fewer liver cells
that can leak enzymes.
Aminotransferase levels may also be markedly high in the following:
• Acute exacerbation of autoimmune hepatitis
• Reactivation of chronic hepatitis B
• Acute Budd-Chiari syndrome
• Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
• Passage of a common duct stone
Modest elevations (300 to 500 IU/L) persist in chronic liver disorders (eg, chronic hepatitis, alcoholic
hepatitis) and in biliary obstruction, except when passage of a common duct stone can transiently result
in markedly high levels, sometimes into the thousands.
Mild increases (< 300 IU/L) are nonspecific and often present in disorders such as
[Table 24-1.
Common Patterns of Laboratory Test Abnormalities]
•
Cirrhosis secondary to viral hepatitis
• Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
• Cholestatic liver disorders
• Hepatocellular cancer
Aminotransferases can be normal in certain liver disorders, such as
• Hemochromatosis
• Methotrexate- or amiodarone-induced liver injury
• Chronic hepatitis C
• NAFLD
Elevated ALT is somewhat specific for liver injury. Because AST is present in the heart, skeletal muscle,
kidneys, and pancreas, elevated AST may reflect rhabdomyolysis or injury to one of these organs. In most
liver disorders, the ratio of AST to ALT is < 1. However, in alcohol-related liver disease, the ratio is
characteristically > 2 because pyridoxal-5´-phosphate is deficient in alcoholic patients; it is required for
ALT synthesis but is less essential for AST synthesis. This deficiency also explains why elevations of ALT
and AST are low (< 300 IU/L) in alcoholic patients.
===PAGE:306===
Lactate dehydrogenase:
LDH, commonly included in routine analysis, is present in many other tissues
and is insensitive and nonspecific for hepatocellular injury. LDH is typically elevated in ischemic hepatitis
and cancers that extensively infiltrate the liver.
Tests for Cholestasis
Bilirubin:
Bilirubin, the pigment in bile, is produced from the breakdown of heme proteins, mostly from
the heme moiety of hemoglobin in senescent RBCs. Unconjugated (free) bilirubin is insoluble in water
and thus cannot be excreted in urine; most unconjugated bilirubin is bound to albumin in plasma. Bilirubin
is conjugated in the liver with glucuronic acid to form the more water-soluble bilirubin diglucuronide.
Conjugated bilirubin is then excreted through the biliary tract into the duodenum, where it is metabolized
into urobilinogens (some of which are reabsorbed and resecreted into bile), then into orange-colored
urobilins (most of which are eliminated in feces). These bile pigments give stool its typical color.
Hyperbilirubinemia results from one or more of the following:
• Increased bilirubin production
• Decreased liver uptake or conjugation
• Decreased biliary excretion (
Normally, total bilirubin is mostly unconjugated, with values of < 1.2 mg/dL (< 20
μ
mol/L). Fractionation
measures the proportion of bilirubin that is conjugated (ie, direct, so-called because it is measured
directly, without the need for solvents). Fractionation is most helpful for evaluating neonatal jaundice and
for evaluating elevated bilirubin when other liver test results are normal, suggesting that hepatobiliary
dysfunction is not the cause.
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia
(indirect bilirubin fraction > 85%) reflects increased bilirubin
production (eg, in hemolysis) or defective liver uptake or conjugation (eg, in Gilbert syndrome). Such
increases in unconjugated bilirubin are usually < 5 times normal (to < 6 mg/dL [<100
μ
mol/L]) unless there
is concurrent liver injury.
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia
(direct bilirubin fraction > 50%) results from decreased bile formation or
excretion (cholestasis). When associated with other liver function test abnormalities, a high serum
bilirubin indicates hepatocellular dysfunction. Serum bilirubin is somewhat insensitive for liver dysfunction.
However, the development of severe hyperbilirubinemia in primary biliary cirrhosis, alcoholic hepatitis,
and acute liver failure suggests a poor prognosis.
Bilirubinuria
reflects the presence of conjugated bilirubin in urine; bilirubin spills into urine because
blood levels are markedly elevated, indicating severe disease. Unconjugated bilirubin is water insoluble
and bound to albumin and so cannot be excreted in urine. Bilirubinuria can be detected at the bedside
with commercial urine test strips in acute viral hepatitis or other hepatobiliary disorders, even before
jaundice appears. However, the diagnostic accuracy of such urine tests is limited. Results can be falsely
negative when the urine specimen has been stored a long time, vitamin C has been ingested, or urine
contains nitrates (eg, due to UTIs). Similarly, increases in urobilinogen are neither specific nor sensitive.
Alkaline phosphatase:
Increased levels of this hepatocyte enzyme suggest cholestasis. Results may
not be specific because alkaline phosphatase consists of several isoenzymes and has a widespread
extrahepatic distribution (eg, in the placenta, the small intestine, WBCs, kidneys, and particularly bone).
Alkaline phosphatase levels increase to ≥ 4 times normal 1 to 2 days after onset of biliary obstruction,
regardless of the site of obstruction. Levels may remain elevated for several days after the obstruction
resolves because
the half-life of alkaline phosphatase is about 7 days. Increases of up to 3 times normal
occur in many liver disorders, including
• Hepatitis
===PAGE:307===
• Cirrhosis
• Space-occupying lesions (eg, carcinoma)
• Infiltrative disorders (eg, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, TB, metastases, abscesses)
• Syphilitic hepatitis (alkaline phosphatase may be disproportionately elevated compared with the modest
changes in other liver tests)
Isolated elevations (ie, when other liver test results are normal) may accompany
• Focal liver lesions (eg, abscess, tumor)
• Partial or intermittent bile duct obstruction (eg, stone, stricture, cholangiocarcinoma)
• Syphilitic hepatitis
• Occasionally, infiltrative disorders
Isolated elevations also occur in the absence of any apparent liver or biliary disorder, as in the following:
• Some cancers without apparent liver involvement (eg, bronchogenic carcinoma, Hodgkin lymphoma,
renal cell carcinoma)
• After ingestion of fatty meals (because of an enzyme produced in the small intestine)
• Pregnancy (because of an enzyme produced in the placenta)
• Children and adolescents who are still growing (because of bone growth)
• Chronic renal failure (because of an enzyme produced in the intestine and bone)
Levels of
γ
-glutamyl transpeptidase or 5´-nucleotidase, which are more specific to the liver, can
differentiate hepatic from extrahepatic sources of alkaline phosphatase better than fractionation of
alkaline phosphatase, which is technically difficult. Also, in otherwise asymptomatic elderly people, an
increase in alkaline phosphatase usually originates in bone (eg, in Paget's disease) and does not require
further investigation for liver injury.
5´-Nucleotidase:
Increases in levels of this enzyme are as sensitive as alkaline phosphatase for
detecting cholestasis and biliary obstruction but are more specific, almost always indicating hepatobiliary
dysfunction. Because levels of alkaline phosphatase and 5´-nucleotidase do not always correlate, one
can be normal while the other is increased.
γ
-Glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT):
Levels of this enzyme increase in hepatobiliary dysfunction,
especially cholestasis, and correlate loosely with levels of alkaline phosphatase and 5´-nucleotidase.
Levels do not increase because of bone lesions, during childhood, or during pregnancy. However, alcohol
and certain drugs (eg, some anticonvulsants, warfarin) can induce hepatic microsomal (cytochrome P450) enzymes, markedly increasing GGT and thus somewhat limiting its specificity.
Tests of Hepatic Synthetic Capacity
PT and INR:
PT may be expressed in time (sec) or, preferably, as a ratio of the patient's measured PT to
the laboratory's control value (INR—. The INR is more accurate than PT for monitoring
anticoagulation. PT or INR is a valuable measure of the liver's ability to synthesize fibrinogen and vitamin
K-dependent clotting factors: factors II (prothrombin), V, VII, and X. Changes can occur rapidly because
some of the involved clotting factors have short biologic half-lives (eg, 6 h for factor VII). Abnormalities
indicate severe hepatocellular dysfunction, an ominous sign in acute liver disorders. In chronic liver
disorders, an increasing PT or INR indicates progression to liver failure. The PT or INR does not increase
===PAGE:308===
in mild hepatocellular dysfunction and is often normal in cirrhosis.
A prolonged PT and an abnormal INR can result from coagulation disorders such as a consumptive
coagulopathy or vitamin K deficiency. Fat malabsorption, including cholestasis, can cause vitamin K
deficiency. In chronic cholestasis, marked hepatocellular dysfunction can be ruled out if vitamin K
replacement (10 mg sc) corrects PT by ≥ 30% within 24 h.
Serum proteins:
Hepatocytes synthesize most serum proteins, including
α
- and
β
-globulins, albumin,
and most clotting factors (but not factor VIII, produced by the vascular endothelium, or
γ
-globulin,
produced by B cells). Hepatocytes also make proteins that aid in the diagnosis of specific disorders:
•
α
-Antitrypsin (absent in
α
-antitrypsin deficiency)
• Ceruloplasmin (reduced in Wilson's disease)
• Transferrin (saturated with iron in hemochromatosis)
• Ferritin (greatly increased in hemochromatosis)
These proteins usually increase in response to damage (eg, inflammation) to various tissues, so that
elevations may not specifically reflect liver disorders.
Serum albumin
commonly decreases in chronic liver disorders because of an increase in volume of
distribution (eg, due to ascites), a decrease in hepatic synthesis, or both. Values
< 3 g/dL (< 30 g/L)
suggest decreased synthesis, caused by one of the following:
• Advanced cirrhosis (the most common cause)
• Alcoholism
• Chronic inflammation
• Protein undernutrition
Hypoalbuminemia can also result from excessive loss of albumin from the kidneys (ie, nephrotic
syndrome), gut (eg, due to proteinlosing gastroenteropathies), or skin (eg, due to burns or exfoliative
dermatitis).
Because albumin has a half-life of about 20 days, serum levels take weeks to increase or decrease.
Other Laboratory Tests
Ammonia:
Nitrogen compounds that enter the colon (eg, ingested protein, secreted urea) are degraded
by resident bacteria, liberating ammonia. The ammonia is then absorbed and transported via the portal
vein to the liver. The healthy liver readily clears the ammonia from the portal vein and converts it to
glutamine, which is metabolized by the kidneys into urea to be excreted. In patients with portal-systemic
shunting, the diseased liver does not clear ammonia, which then enters the systemic circulation, possibly
contributing to portal-systemic (hepatic) encephalopathy. Elevated ammonia levels occur in hepatic
encephalopathy, but levels may be falsely low or high. In advanced liver disorders, the following may
increase ammonia levels:
• High-protein meals
• GI bleeding
• Hypokalemia
• Metabolic alkalosis
===PAGE:309===
• Certain drugs (eg, alcohol, barbiturates, diuretics, opioids, valproate)
• High-dose chemotherapy
• Parenteral nutrition
• Renal insufficiency
• Extreme muscle exertion and muscle wasting
• Salicylate intoxication
• Shock
• Ureterosigmoidostomy
UTI with a urease-producing organism (eg,
Proteus mirabilis
)
Because the degree of elevation in the ammonia level correlates poorly with severity of hepatic
encephalopathy, this level has limited usefulness in monitoring therapy.
Serum immunoglobulins:
In chronic liver disorders, serum immunoglobulins often increase. However,
elevations are not specific and are usually not helpful clinically. Levels increase slightly in acute hepatitis,
moderately in chronic active hepatitis, and markedly in autoimmune hepatitis. The pattern of
immunoglobulin elevation adds little information, although different immunoglobulins are usually very high
in different disorders:
• IgM in primary biliary cirrhosis
• IgA in alcoholic liver disease
• IgG in autoimmune hepatitis
Antimitochondrial antibodies:
These heterogeneous antibodies are positive, usually in high titers, in >
95% of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. They are also occasionally present in the following:
• Autoimmune hepatitis
• Drug-induced hepatitis
• Other autoimmune disorders, such as connective tissue disorders, myasthenia gravis, autoimmune
thyroiditis, Addison's disease, and autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Antimitochondrial antibodies can help determine the cause of cholestasis because they are usually
absent in extrahepatic biliary obstruction and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Other antibodies:
Other antibodies may help in diagnosis of the following:
• Autoimmune hepatitis: Smooth muscle antibodies against actin, antinuclear antibodies (ANA) that
provide a homogeneous (diffuse) fluorescence, and antibodies to liver-kidney microsome type 1 (antiLKM1) are often present.
• Primary biliary cirrhosis: Antimitochondrial antibody is key to the diagnosis.
• Primary sclerosing cholangitis: Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) can help
raise the index of suspicion.
===PAGE:310===
Isolated abnormalities of any of these antibodies are never diagnostic and do not elucidate pathogenesis.
α
-Fetoprotein (AFP):
AFP, a glycoprotein normally synthesized by the yolk sac in the embryo and then
by the fetal liver, is elevated in neonates and hence the pregnant mother. AFP decreases rapidly during
the first year of life, reaching adult values (normally, < 10 to 20 ng/mL or < 10 to 20 mg/L depending on
the laboratory) by the age of 1 yr. An increase in AFP, no matter how small, should prompt consideration
of primary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Serum AFP generally correlates with tumor size,
differentiation and metastatic involvement. Because small tumors may produce low levels of AFP,
increasing values suggest the presence of HCC, especially when tumors are > 3 cm diameter. AFP also
helps predict prognosis.
Mild AFP elevations also occur in acute and chronic hepatitis, probably reflecting liver regeneration; AFP
can occasionally increase to 500 ng/mL in fulminant hepatitis. High AFP levels can occur in a few other
disorders (eg, embryonic teratocarcinomas, hepatoblastomas in children, some hepatic metastases from
GI tract cancers, some cholangiocarcinomas), but these circumstances are not common and usually can
be differentiated based on clinical and histopathologic grounds.
Sensitivity, specificity, and peak levels of AFP in patients with HCC vary by population, reflecting
differences in factors such as hepatitis prevalence and ethnicity. In areas with a relatively low prevalence
of hepatitis (eg, North America and western Europe), AFP cutoff values of 20 ng/mL have a sensitivity of
39 to 64% and a specificity of 76 to 91%. However, not all HCCs produce AFP. Thus, AFP is not an ideal
screening test but does have a role in detecting HCC. Levels exceeding normal (> 20 ng/mL), especially
when increasing, strongly suggest HCC. In cirrhotic patients with a mass and a high value (eg, > 200
ng/mL), the predictive value is high. The combined use of AFP and ultrasonography currently provides
the best surveillance.
Imaging Tests
Imaging is essential for accurately diagnosing biliary tract disorders and is important for detecting focal
liver lesions (eg, abscess, tumor). It is limited in detecting and diagnosing diffuse hepatocellular disease
(eg, hepatitis, cirrhosis).
Ultrasonography:
Ultrasonography, traditionally done transabdominally and requiring a period of fasting,
provides structural, but not functional, information. It is the least expensive, safest, and most sensitive
technique for imaging the biliary system, especially the gallbladder. Ultrasonography is the procedure of
choice for
• Screening for biliary tract abnormalities
• Evaluating the hepatobiliary tract in patients with right upper quadrant abdominal pain
• Differentiating intrahepatic from extrahepatic causes of jaundice
• Detecting liver masses
The kidneys, pancreas, and blood vessels are also often visible on hepatobiliary ultrasounds.
Ultrasonography can measure spleen size and thus help diagnose splenomegaly, which suggests portal
hypertension.
Use of endoscopic ultrasonography may further refine the approaches to hepatobiliary abnormalities.
Ultrasonography can be difficult in patients with intestinal gas or obesity and is operator-dependent.
Endoscopic ultrasonography incorporates an ultrasound transducer into the tip of an endoscope and thus
provides greater image resolution even when intestinal gas is present.
Gallstones
cast intense echoes with distal acoustic shadowing that move with gravity. Transabdominal
ultrasonography is extremely accurate (sensitivity > 95%) for gallstones > 2 mm in diameter. Endoscopic
ultrasonography can detect stones as small as 0.5 mm (microlithiasis) in the gallbladder or biliary system.
===PAGE:311===
Transabdominal and endoscopic ultrasonography can also identify biliary sludge (a mixture of particulate
material and bile) as low-level echoes that layer in the dependent portion of the gallbladder without
acoustic shadowing.
Cholecystitis
typically causes
• A thickened gallbladder wall (> 3 mm)
• Pericholecystic fluid
• An impacted stone in the gallbladder neck
• Tenderness on palpation of the gallbladder with the ultrasound probe (ultrasonographic Murphy's sign)
Extrahepatic obstruction
is indicated by dilated bile ducts. On transabdominal and endoscopic
ultrasounds, bile ducts stand out as echo-free tubular structures. The diameter of the common duct is
normally < 6 mm, increases slightly with age, and can reach 10 mm after cholecystectomy. Dilated ducts
are virtually pathognomonic for extrahepatic obstruction in the appropriate clinical setting.
Ultrasonography can miss early or intermittent obstruction that does not dilate the ducts. Transabdominal
ultrasonography may not reveal the level or cause of biliary obstruction (eg, sensitivity for common duct
stones is < 40%). Endoscopic ultrasonography has a better yield.
Focal liver lesions
> 1 cm in diameter can usually be detected by transabdominal ultrasonography. In
general, cysts are echo-free; solid lesions (eg, tumors, abscesses) tend to be echogenic. Carcinoma
appears as a nonspecific solid mass. Ultrasonography has been used to screen for hepatocellular
carcinoma in patients at high risk (eg, with chronic hepatitis B, cirrhosis, or hemochromatosis). Because
ultrasonography can localize focal lesions, it can be used to guide aspiration and biopsy.
Diffuse disorders
(eg, cirrhosis, sometimes fatty liver) can be detected with ultrasonography. Ultrasound
elastography can measure liver stiffness as an index of hepatic fibrosis. In this procedure, the transducer
emits a vibration that induces an elastic shear wave. The rate at which the wave is propagated through
the liver is measured; liver stiffness speeds this propagation.
Doppler ultrasonography:
This noninvasive method is used to assess direction of blood flow and
patency of blood vessels around the liver, particularly the portal vein. Clinical uses include
• Detecting portal hypertension, (eg, indicated by significant collateral flow and the direction of flow)
• Assessing the patency of liver shunts (eg, surgical portocaval, percutaneous transhepatic)
• Evaluating portal vein patency before liver transplantation and detecting hepatic artery thrombosis after
transplantation
• Detecting unusual vascular structures (eg, cavernous transformation of the portal vein)
• Assessing tumor vascularity before surgery
CT:
CT is commonly used to identify hepatic masses, particularly small metastases, with an accuracy of
about 80%. It is considered the most accurate imaging technique. CT with IV contrast is accurate for
diagnosing cavernous hemangiomas of the liver as well as differentiating them from other abdominal
masses. Neither obesity nor intestinal gas obscures CT images. CT can detect fatty liver and the
increased hepatic density that occurs with iron overload. CT is less helpful than ultrasonography in
identifying biliary obstruction but often provides the best assessment of the pancreas.
Cholescintigraphy:
After patients fast, an IV technetium-labeled iminodiacetic compound (eg, hydroxy or
diisopropyl iminodiacetic acid [HIDA or DISIDA]) is injected; these substances are taken up by the liver
and excreted in bile, then enter the gallbladder.
===PAGE:312===
In acute calculous cholecystitis, which is usually caused by impaction of a stone in the cystic duct, the
gallbladder does not appear on a scintigraphic scan because the radionuclide cannot enter the
gallbladder. Such nonvisualization is diagnostically quite accurate (except for false-positive results in
some critically ill patients). However, cholescintigraphy is rarely needed clinically to diagnose acute
cholecystitis.
If acalculous cholecystitis is suspected, the gallbladder is scanned before and after administration of
cholecystokinin (used to initiate gallbladder contraction). The decrease in scintigraphic counts indicates
the gallbladder ejection fraction. Reduced emptying, measured as the ejection fraction, suggests
acalculous cholecystitis.
Cholescintigraphy also detects bile leaks (eg, after surgery or trauma) and anatomic abnormalities (eg,
congenital choledochal cysts, choledochoenteric anastomoses). After cholecystectomy, cholescintigraphy
can quantitate biliary drainage; biliary drainage helps identify sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.
Radionuclide liver scanning:
Ultrasonography and CT have largely supplanted radionuclide scanning,
which had been used to diagnose diffuse liver disorders and mass lesions of the liver. Radionuclide
scanning shows the distribution of an injected radioactive tracer, usually technetium (
99m
Tc sulfur
colloid), which distributes uniformly within the normal liver. Space-occupying lesions > 4 cm, such as liver
cysts, abscesses, metastases, and tumors, appear as defects. Diffuse liver disorders (eg, cirrhosis,
hepatitis) decrease liver uptake of the tracer, with more appearing in the spleen and bone marrow. In
hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome), liver uptake is decreased except in the caudate lobe
because its drainage into the inferior vena cava is preserved.
Plain x-ray of the abdomen:
Plain x-rays are not usually useful for diagnosis of hepatobiliary disorders.
They are insensitive for gallstones unless the gallstones are calcified and large. Plain x-rays can detect a
calcified (porcelain) gallbladder. Rarely, in gravely ill patients, x-rays show air in the biliary tree, which
suggests emphysematous cholangitis.
MRI:
MRI images blood vessels (without using contrast), ducts, and hepatic tissues. Its clinical uses are
still evolving. MRI is superior to CT and ultrasonography for diagnosing diffuse liver disorders (eg, fatty
liver, hemochromatosis) and for clarifying some focal defects (eg, hemangiomas). MRI also shows blood
flow and therefore complements Doppler ultrasonography and CT angiography in the diagnosis of
vascular abnormalities and in vascular mapping before liver transplantation.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is more sensitive than CT or ultrasonography in
diagnosing common bile duct abnormalities, particularly stones. Its images of the biliary system and
pancreatic ducts are comparable to those obtained with ERCP and percutaneous transhepatic
cholangiography, which are more invasive. Thus,
MRCP is a useful screening tool when biliary
obstruction is suspected and before therapeutic ERCP (eg, for simultaneous imaging and stone removal)
is done.
ERCP:
ERCP combines endoscopy through the second portion of the duodenum with contrast imaging of
the biliary and pancreatic ducts. The papilla of Vater is cannulated through an endoscope placed in the
descending duodenum, and the pancreatic and biliary ducts are then injected with a contrast agent.
ERCP provides detailed images of much of the upper GI tract and the periampullary area, biliary tract,
and pancreas. ERCP can also be used to obtain tissue for biopsy. ERCP is the best test for diagnosis of
ampullary cancers. ERCP is as accurate as endoscopic ultrasonography for diagnosis of common duct
stones. Because it is invasive, ERCP is used more for treatment (including simultaneous diagnosis and
treatment) than for diagnosis alone. ERCP is the procedure of choice for treating biliary and pancreatic
obstructing lesions, as for
• Removal of bile duct stones
• Stenting of strictures (inflammatory or malignant)
• Sphincterotomy (eg, for sphincter of Oddi dysfunction)
===PAGE:313===
Morbidity from a diagnostic ERCP with only injection of contrast material is about 1%. Adding
sphincterotomy raises morbidity to 4 to 9% (mainly due to pancreatitis and bleeding). ERCP with
manometry to measure sphincter of Oddi pressure causes pancreatitis in up to 25% of patients.
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC):
With fluoroscopic or ultrasound guidance, the
liver is punctured with a needle, the peripheral intrahepatic bile duct system is cannulated above the
common hepatic duct, and a contrast agent is injected.
PTC is highly accurate in diagnosing biliary disorders and can be therapeutic (eg, decompression of the
biliary system, insertion of an endoprosthesis). However, ERCP is usually preferred because PTC causes
more complications (eg, sepsis, bleeding, bile leaks).
Operative cholangiography:
A contrast agent is directly injected during laparotomy to image the bile
duct system.
Operative cholangiography is indicated when jaundice occurs and noninvasive procedures are equivocal,
suggesting common duct stones. The procedure can be followed by common duct exploration for removal
of biliary stones. Technical difficulties have limited its use, particularly during laparoscopic
cholecystectomy.
Liver Biopsy
Liver biopsy provides histologic information about liver structure and evidence of liver injury (type and
degree, any fibrosis); this information can be essential not only to diagnosis but also to staging,
prognosis, and management. Although only a small core of tissue is obtained, it is usually representative,
even for focal lesions.
Liver biopsy is usually done percutaneously at the bedside or with ultrasound guidance. Ultrasound
guidance is preferred because its complication rate is slightly lower and it provides opportunity to
visualize the liver and target focal lesions.
Indications:
Generally, biopsy is indicated for suspected liver abnormalities that are not identified by less
invasive methods or that require histopathology for staging (see
Table 24-2
). Biopsy is especially valuable
[Table 24-2.
Indications for Liver Biopsy*]
for detecting TB or other granulomatous infiltrations and for clarifying graft problems (ischemic injury,
rejection, biliary tract disorders, viral hepatitis) after liver transplantation. Serial biopsies, commonly done
over years, may be necessary to monitor disease progression.
Gross examination and histopathology are often definitive. Cytology (fine-needle aspiration), frozen
section, and culture may be useful for selected patients. Metal content (eg, copper in suspected Wilson's
disease, iron in hemochromatosis) can be measured in the biopsy specimen.
Limitations of liver biopsy include
• Sampling error
• Occasional errors or uncertainty in cases of cholestasis
• Need for a skilled histopathologist (some pathologists have little experience with needle specimens)
Contraindications:
Absolute contraindications to liver biopsy include
• Patient's inability to remain still and to maintain brief expiration for the procedure
===PAGE:314===
• Suspected vascular lesion (eg, hemangioma)
• Bleeding tendency (eg, INR > 1.2 despite receiving vitamin K, bleeding time > 10 min)
• Severe thrombocytopenia (< 50,000/mL)
Relative contraindications include profound anemia, peritonitis, marked ascites, high-grade biliary
obstruction, and a subphrenic or right pleural infection or effusion. Nonetheless, percutaneous liver
biopsy is sufficiently safe to be done on an outpatient basis. Mortality is 0.01%. Major complications (eg,
intra-abdominal hemorrhage, bile peritonitis, lacerated liver) develop in about 2% of patients.
Complications usually become evident within 3 to 4 h—the recommended period for monitoring patients.
Other routes:
Transjugular venous biopsy of the liver is more invasive than the percutaneous route; it is
reserved for patients with a severe coagulopathy. The procedure involves cannulating the right internal
jugular vein and passing a catheter through the inferior vena cava into the hepatic vein. A fine needle is
then advanced through the hepatic vein into the liver. Biopsy is successful in > 95% of patients.
Complication rate is low; 0.2% bleed from puncture of the liver capsule.
Occasionally, liver biopsy is done during surgery (eg, laparoscopy); a larger, more targeted tissue sample
can then be obtained.
===PAGE:315===
Chapter 25. Drugs and the Liver
Introduction
Interaction between drugs and the liver can be categorized as follows:
• Effects of liver disease on drug metabolism
• Liver injury caused by drugs
• Effects of hepatic drug metabolism (eg, induction of hepatic enzymes, 
The number of possible interactions is vast.
Effects of Liver Disease on Drug Metabolism
Liver disease may have complex effects on drug clearance, biotransformation, and pharmacokinetics.
Pathogenetic factors include alterations in intestinal absorption, plasma protein binding, hepatic extraction
ratio, liver blood flow, portal-systemic shunting, biliary excretion, enterohepatic circulation, and renal
clearance. Sometimes alterations increase levels of bioavailable drug, causing normal drug doses to have
toxic effects. However, levels and effects for an individual drug are unpredictable and do not correlate
well with the type of liver injury, its severity, or liver function test results. Thus, no general rules are
available for modifying drug dosage in patients with liver disease.
Clinical effects can vary independent of drug bioavailability, especially in chronic liver disease; eg,
cerebral sensitivity to opioids and sedatives is often enhanced in patients with chronic liver disease.
Thus, seemingly small doses of these drugs given to cirrhotic patients may precipitate encephalopathy.
The mechanism of this effect probably involves alterations in cerebral drug receptors.
Adverse drug reactions do not appear to be more likely in patients with advanced liver disease; however,
such patients may tolerate any hepatic adverse effects of drugs less well.
Liver Injury Caused by Drugs
Many drugs (eg, statins) commonly cause asymptomatic elevation of hepatic enzymes (ALT, AST, alkaline
phosphatase). However, clinically significant liver injury (eg, with jaundice, abdominal pain, or pruritus) or
impaired liver function—ie, resulting in deficient protein synthesis (eg, with prolonged PT or with
hypoalbuminemia)—is rare.
The term drug-induced liver injury (DILI) may be used to mean clinically significant liver injury or all
(including asymptomatic) liver injury. DILI includes injury caused by medicinal herbs, plants, and nutritional
supplements as well as drugs.
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of DILI varies depending on the drug (or other hepatotoxin) and, in many cases, is
not entirely understood. Drug-induced injury mechanisms include covalent binding of the drug to cellular
proteins resulting in immune injury, inhibition of cell metabolic pathways, blockage of cellular transport
pumps, induction of apoptosis, and interference with mitochondrial function.
In general, the following are thought to increase risk of DILI:
• Age ≥ 18 yr
• Obesity
• Pregnancy
===PAGE:316===
• Concomitant alcohol consumption
• Genetic polymorphisms (increasingly recognized)
Patterns of liver injury:
DILI can be predictable (when injury usually occurs shortly after exposure and
is dose-related) or unpredictable (when injury develops after a period of latency and has no relation to
dose). Predictable DILI (commonly, acetaminophen-induced) is a common cause of acute jaundice and
acute liver failure in the US. Unpredictable DILI is a rare cause of severe liver disease. Subclinical DILI
may be underreported.
Biochemically, 3 types of liver injury are generally noted (see
Table 25-1
):
•
Hepatocellular:
Hepatocellular hepatotoxicity generally manifests as malaise and
[Table 25-1.
Potentially Hepatotoxic Drugs]

right upper quadrant abdominal pain, associated with marked elevation in aminotransferase levels (ALT,
AST, or both), which may be followed by hyperbilirubinemia in severe cases. Hyperbilirubinemia in this
setting is known as hepatocellular jaundice and, according to Hy's law, is associated with mortality rates
as high as 50%. If hepatocellular liver injury is accompanied by jaundice, impaired hepatic synthesis,
and encephalopathy, chance of spontaneous recovery is low, and liver transplantation should be
considered. This type of injury can result from drugs such as acetaminophen and isoniazid.
•
Cholestatic:
Cholestatic hepatotoxicity is characterized by development of pruritus and jaundice
accompanied by marked elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase levels. Usually, this type of injury is
less serious than severe hepatocellular syndromes, but recovery may be protracted. Substances known
to lead to this type of injury include amoxicillin/clavulanate and chlorpromazine. Rarely, cholestatic
hepatotoxicity leads to chronic liver disease and vanishing bile duct syndrome (progressive destruction
of intrahepatic bile ducts).
•
Mixed:
In these clinical syndromes, neither aminotransferase nor alkaline phosphatase elevations are
clearly predominant. Symptoms may also be mixed. Drugs such as phenytoin can cause this type of
injury.
Diagnosis
• Identification of characteristic patterns of laboratory abnormalities
• Exclusion of other causes
Presentation varies widely, ranging from absent or nonspecific symptoms (eg, malaise, nausea, anorexia)
to jaundice, impaired hepatic synthesis, and encephalopathy. Early recognition of DILI improves
prognosis.
Identification of a potential hepatotoxin and a pattern of liver test abnormalities that is characteristic of the
substance (its signature) make the diagnosis likely.
Because there is no confirmatory diagnostic test, other causes of liver disease, especially viral, biliary,
alcoholic, autoimmune, and metabolic causes, need to be excluded. Drug rechallenge, although it can
strengthen evidence for the diagnosis, should usually be avoided. Suspected cases of DILI should be
reported to MedWatch (the FDA's adverse drug reaction monitoring program).
Treatment
• Early drug withdrawal
Management emphasizes drug withdrawal, which, if done early, usually results in recovery. In severe
===PAGE:317===
cases, consultation with a specialist is indicated, especially if patients have hepatocellular jaundice and
impaired liver function, because liver transplantation may be required. Antidotes for DILI are available for
only a few hepatotoxins; such antidotes include
N
-acetylcysteine for acetaminophen toxicity and silymarin
or penicillin for
Amanita phalloides
toxicity.
Prevention
Efforts to avoid DILI begin during the drug development process, although apparent safety in small
preclinical trials does not ensure eventual safety of the drug after it is in widespread use. Postmarketing
surveillance, although often voluntary in the US, can call attention to potentially hepatotoxic drugs.
Routine monitoring of liver enzymes has not been shown to decrease the incidence of hepatotoxicity. Use
of pharmacogenomics may allow tailoring of drug use and avoidance of potential toxicities in susceptible
patients.
===PAGE:318===
Chapter 26. Alcoholic Liver Disease
Alcohol consumption is high in most Western countries. In the US, > 10% of people abuse or are
dependent on alcohol. The male:female ratio is about 2:1. Disorders that occur in alcohol abusers, often
in sequence, include
• Fatty liver (in > 90%)
• Alcoholic hepatitis (in 10 to 35%)
• Cirrhosis (in 10 to 20%)
Hepatocellular carcinoma may also develop, especially in association with iron accumulation.
Risk Factors
The main causative factors in alcoholic liver disease are
• Quantity and duration of alcohol use (usually > 8 yr)
• Sex
• Genetic and metabolic traits
• Nutritional status
Quantity of alcohol:
Among susceptible people, a linear correlation generally exists between the amount
and duration of alcohol use and the development of liver disease.
Alcohol content is estimated to be the beverage volume (in mL) multiplied by its percentage of alcohol.
For example, the alcohol content of 40 mL of an 80-proof (40% alcohol) beverage is 16 mL by volume.
Each mL contains about 0.79 g of alcohol. Although values can vary, the percentage of alcohol averages
2 to 7% for most beers and 10 to 15% for most wines. Thus, a 12-oz glass of beer contains about 3 to 10
g of alcohol, and an 8-oz glass of wine contains about 10 to 15 g.
Risk increases markedly for men who drink > 40 g, particularly > 80 g, of alcohol/day for > 10 yr (eg, 3 to
6 cans of beer, 3 to 6 shots of hard liquor, 4 to 8 glasses of wine). For cirrhosis to develop, consumption
must usually be > 80 g/day for > 10 yr. If consumption exceeds 230 g/day for 20 yr, risk of cirrhosis is
about 50%. But only some chronic alcohol abusers develop liver disease. Thus, variations in alcohol
intake do not fully explain variations in susceptibility, indicating that other factors are involved.
Sex:
Women are more susceptible to alcoholic liver disease, even after adjustment for body size. Women
require only 20 to 40 g of alcohol to be at risk—half of that for men. Risk in women may be increased
because they have less alcohol dehydrogenase in their gastric mucosa; thus, first-pass oxidation of
alcohol is decreased.
Genetic factors:
Alcoholic liver disease often runs in families, suggesting genetic factors (eg, deficiency
of cytoplasmic enzymes that eliminate alcohol).
Nutritional status:
Undernutrition, particularly protein-energy undernutrition, increases susceptibility, as
does a diet high in unsaturated fat and obesity.
Other factors:
Other risk factors include iron accumulation in the liver (not necessarily related to iron
intake) and concomitant hepatitis C.
Pathophysiology
Alcohol absorption and metabolism:
Alcohol (ethanol) is readily absorbed from the stomach, but most
===PAGE:319===
is absorbed from the small intestine. Alcohol cannot be stored. A small amount is degraded in transit
through the gastric mucosa, but most is catabolized in the liver, primarily by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)
but also by cytochrome P-450 2E1 (CYP2E1) and the microsomal enzyme oxidation system (MEOS).
Metabolism via the ADH pathway involves the following:
• ADH, a cytoplasmic enzyme, oxidizes alcohol into acetaldehyde. Genetic polymorphisms in ADH account
for some individual differences in blood alcohol levels after the same alcohol intake but not in
susceptibility to alcoholic liver disease.
• Acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), a mitochondrial enzyme, then oxidizes acetaldehyde to acetate.
Chronic alcohol consumption enhances acetate formation. Asians, who have lower levels of ALDH, are
more susceptible to toxic acetaldehyde effects (eg, flushing); the effects are similar to those of
disulfiram, which inhibits ALDH.
• These oxidative reactions generate hydrogen, which converts nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
to its reduced form (NADH), increasing the redox potential (NADH/NAD) in the liver.
• The increased redox potential inhibits fatty acid oxidation and gluconeogenesis, promoting fat
accumulation in the liver.
Chronic alcoholism induces the MEOS (mainly in endoplasmic reticulum), increasing
its activity. The main
enzyme involved is CYP2E1. When induced, the MEOS pathway can account for 20% of alcohol
metabolism. This pathway generates harmful reactive O
species, increasing oxidative stress and
formation of O
-free radicals.
Hepatic fat accumulation:
Fat (triglycerides) accumulates throughout the hepatocytes for the following
reasons:
• Export of fat from the liver is decreased because hepatic fatty acid oxidation and lipoprotein production
decrease.
• Input of fat is increased because the decrease in hepatic fat export increases peripheral lipolysis and
triglyceride synthesis, resulting in hyperlipidemia.
Hepatic fat accumulation may predispose to subsequent oxidative damage.
Endotoxins in the gut:
Alcohol changes gut permeability, increasing absorption of endotoxins released
by bacteria in the gut. In response to the endotoxins (which the impaired liver can no longer detoxify), liver
macrophages (Kupffer cells) release free radicals, increasing oxidative damage.
Oxidative damage:
Oxidative stress is increased by
• Liver hypermetabolism, caused by alcohol consumption
• Free radical-induced lipid peroxidative damage
• Reduction in protective antioxidants (eg, glutathione, vitamins A and E), caused by alcohol-related
undernutrition
• Binding of alcohol oxidation products, such as acetaldehyde, to liver cell proteins, forming neoantigens
and resulting in inflammation
• Accumulation of neutrophils and other WBCs, which are attracted by lipid peroxidative damage and
neoantigens
• Inflammatory cytokines secreted by WBCs
===PAGE:320===
Accumulation of hepatic iron, if present, aggravates oxidative damage. Iron can accumulate in alcoholic
liver disease through ingestion of iron-containing fortified wines; most often, the iron accumulation is
modest. This condition must be differentiated from hereditary hemochromatosis.
Resultant inflammation, cell death, and fibrosis:
A vicious circle of worsening inflammation occurs:
Cell necrosis and apoptosis result in hepatocyte loss, and subsequent attempts at regeneration result in
fibrosis. Stellate (Ito) cells, which line blood channels (sinusoids) in the liver, proliferate and transform into
myofibroblasts, producing an excess of type I collagen and extracellular matrix. As a result, the sinusoids
narrow, limiting blood flow. Fibrosis narrows the terminal hepatic venules, compromising hepatic perfusion
and thus contributing to portal hypertension. Extensive fibrosis is associated with an attempt at
regeneration, resulting in liver nodules. This process culminates in cirrhosis.
Pathology
Fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis, and cirrhosis are often considered separate, progressive manifestations of
alcoholic liver disease. However, their features often overlap.
Fatty liver
(steatosis) is the initial and most common consequence of excessive alcohol consumption.
Fatty liver is potentially reversible. Macrovesicular fat accumulates as large droplets of triglyceride and
displaces the hepatocyte nucleus, most markedly in perivenular hepatocytes. The liver enlarges.
Alcoholic hepatitis
(steatohepatitis) is a combination of fatty liver, diffuse liver inflammation, and liver
necrosis (often focal)—all in various degrees of severity. The damaged hepatocytes are swollen with a
granular cytoplasm (balloon degeneration) or contain fibrillar protein in the cytoplasm (Mallory or alcoholic
hyaline bodies). Severely damaged hepatocytes become necrotic. Sinusoids and terminal hepatic venules
are narrowed. Cirrhosis may also be present.
Alcoholic cirrhosis
is advanced liver disease characterized by extensive fibrosis that disrupts the normal
liver architecture. The amount of fat present varies. Alcoholic hepatitis may coexist. The feeble
compensatory attempt at hepatic regeneration produces relatively small nodules (micronodular cirrhosis).
As a result, the liver usually shrinks. In time, even with abstinence, fibrosis forms broad bands, separating
liver tissue into large nodules (macronodular cirrhosis—.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually become apparent in patients during their 30s or 40s; severe problems appear about a
decade later.
Fatty liver
is often asymptomatic. In one third of patients, the liver is enlarged and smooth, but it is not
usually tender.
Alcoholic hepatitis
ranges from mild and reversible to life threatening. Most patients with moderate
disease are undernourished and present with fatigue, fever, jaundice, right upper quadrant pain, tender
hepatomegaly, and sometimes a hepatic bruit. About 40% deteriorate soon after hospitalization, with
consequences ranging from mild (eg, increasing
jaundice) to severe (eg, ascites, portal-systemic
encephalopathy, variceal bleeding, liver failure with hypoglycemia, coagulopathy). Other manifestations of
cirrhosis may be present.
Cirrhosis,
if compensated, may be asymptomatic. The liver is usually small; when the liver is enlarged,
fatty liver or hepatoma should be considered. Symptoms range from those of alcoholic hepatitis to the
complications of end-stage liver disease, such as portal hypertension (often with esophageal varices and
upper GI bleeding, splenomegaly, ascites, and portal-systemic encephalopathy). Portal hypertension may
lead to intrapulmonary arteriovenous shunting with hypoxemia (hepatopulmonary syndrome), which may
cause cyanosis and nail clubbing. Acute renal failure secondary to progressively decreasing renal blood
flow (hepatorenal syndrome) may develop. Hepatocellular carcinoma develops in 10 to 15% of patients
with alcoholic cirrhosis.
Chronic alcoholism,
rather than liver disease, causes Dupuytren's contracture of the palmar fascia,
===PAGE:321===
vascular spiders, and peripheral neuropathy. In men, chronic alcoholism causes signs of hypogonadism
and feminization (eg, smooth skin, lack of male-pattern baldness, gynecomastia, testicular atrophy,
changes in pubic hair). Undernutrition may lead to multiple vitamin deficiencies (eg, of folate and thiamin),
enlarged parotid glands, and white nails. In alcoholics, Wernicke's encephalopathy and Korsakoff's
psychosis result mainly from thiamin deficiency. Hepatitis C occurs in > 25% of alcoholics; this
combination markedly worsens the progression of liver disease.
Rarely, patients with fatty liver or cirrhosis present with Zieve's syndrome (hyperlipidemia, hemolytic
anemia, and jaundice).
Diagnosis
• Confirmed history of alcohol use
• Liver function tests and CBC
• Sometimes liver biopsy
Alcohol is suspected as the cause of liver disease in any patient who chronically consumes excess
alcohol, particularly > 80 g/day. History should be confirmed by family members. Patients can be
screened for alcoholism using the CAGE questionnaire (need to
C
ut down,
A
nnoyed by criticism,
G
uilty
about drinking, and need for a morning
E
ye-opener). There is no specific test for alcoholic liver disease,
but if the diagnosis is suspected, liver function tests (PT; serum bilirubin, aminotransferase, and albumin
levels) and CBC are done to detect signs of liver injury and anemia.
Elevations of aminotransferases are moderate (< 300 IU/L) and do not reflect the extent of liver damage.
The ratio of AST to ALT is ≥ 2. The basis for low ALT is a dietary deficiency of pyridoxal phosphate
(vitamin B
), which is needed for ALT to function. Its effect on AST is less pronounced. Serum
γ
-glutamyl
transpeptidase (GGT) increases, more because ethanol induces this enzyme than because patients have
cholestasis or liver injury or use other drugs. Serum albumin may be low, usually reflecting undernutrition
but occasionally reflecting otherwise obvious liver failure with deficient synthesis. Macrocytosis with an
MCV > 100 fL reflects the direct effect of alcohol on bone marrow as well as macrocytic anemia resulting
from folate deficiency, which is common among undernourished alcoholics. Indexes of the severity of liver
disease are
• Serum bilirubin, which represents secretory function
• PT or INR, which reflects synthetic ability
Thrombocytopenia can result from the direct toxic effects of alcohol on bone marrow or from
splenomegaly, which accompanies portal hypertension. Neutrophilic leukocytosis may result from
alcoholic hepatitis, although coexisting infection (particularly pneumonia and spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis) should also be suspected.
Imaging tests are not routinely needed for diagnosis. If done for other reasons, abdominal
ultrasonography or CT may suggest fatty liver or show evidence of splenomegaly, portal hypertension, or
ascites. Ultrasound elastrography measures liver stiffness and thus detects advanced fibrosis. This
valuable adjunct can obviate the need for liver biopsy to check for cirrhosis and help assess prognosis. Its
exact role is under study.
If abnormalities suggest alcoholic liver disease, screening tests for other treatable forms of liver disease,
especially viral hepatitis, should be done. Because features of fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis, and cirrhosis
overlap, describing the precise findings is more useful than assigning patients to a specific category,
which can only be determined by liver biopsy.
Not all experts agree on the indications for liver biopsy. Proposed indications include the following:
• Unclear clinical diagnosis (eg, equivocal clinical and laboratory findings, unexplained persistent
===PAGE:322===
elevations of aminotransferase levels)
• Clinical suspicion of > 1 cause of liver disease (eg, alcohol plus viral hepatitis)
• Desire for a precise prediction of prognosis
Liver biopsy confirms liver disease, helps identify excessive alcohol use as the likely cause, and
establishes the stage of liver injury. If iron accumulation is observed, measurement of the iron content and
genetic testing can eliminate hereditary hemochromatosis ( as the cause.
For stable patients with cirrhosis,
α
-fetoprotein measurement and liver ultrasonography should be done to
screen for hepatocellular carcinoma (.
Prognosis
Prognosis is determined by the degree of hepatic fibrosis and inflammation. Fatty liver and alcoholic
hepatitis without fibrosis are reversible if alcohol is avoided. With abstinence, fatty liver completely
resolves within 6 wk. Fibrosis and cirrhosis are irreversible.
Certain biopsy findings (eg, neutrophils, perivenular fibrosis) indicate a worse prognosis. Proposed
quantitative indexes to predict severity and mortality use primarily laboratory features of liver failure such
as prothrombin time, creatinine (for hepatorenal syndrome) and bilirubin levels. The Maddrey discriminant
function is calculated from the formula:
4.6 × (PT - control PT)
+
serum bilirubin
For this formula, bilirubin level is measured in mg/dL (converted from bilirubin in
μ
mol/L by dividing by 17).
A value of > 32 is associated with a high short-term mortality rate (eg, after 1 mo, 35% without
encephalopathy and 45% with encephalopathy). Other indexes include the Model for End-Stage Liver
Disease (MELD), Glasgow alcoholic hepatitis score, and Lille model.
Once cirrhosis and its complications (eg, ascites, bleeding) develop, the 5-yr survival rate is about 50%;
survival is higher in patients who abstain and lower in patients who continue drinking.
Coexisting iron accumulation or chronic hepatitis C increases risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Treatment
• Abstinence
• Supportive care
• Corticosteroids and enteral nutrition for severe alcoholic hepatitis
• Sometimes transplantation
Restricting alcohol intake:
Abstinence is the mainstay of treatment; it prevents further damage from
alcoholic liver disease and thus prolongs life. Because compliance is problematic, a compassionate team
approach is essential. Behavioral and psychosocial interventions can help motivated patients; they
include rehabilitation programs and support groups (, brief interventions by primary care
physicians, and therapies that explore and clarify the motivation to abstain (motivational enhancement
therapy).
Drugs, if used, should only supplement other interventions. Opioid antagonists (naltrexone or nalmefene)
and drugs that modulate
γ
-aminobutyric acid receptors (baclofen or acamprosate) appear to have a short-
===PAGE:323===
term benefit by reducing the craving and withdrawal symptoms. Disulfiram inhibits aldehyde
dehydrogenase, allowing acetaldehyde to accumulate; thus, drinking alcohol within 12 h of taking
disulfiram causes flushing and has other unpleasant effects. However, disulfiram has not been shown to
promote abstinence and consequently is recommended only for certain patients.
Supportive care:
General management emphasizes supportive care. A nutritious diet and vitamin
supplements (especially B vitamins) are important during the first few days of abstinence. Alcohol
withdrawal requires use of benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam). In patients with advanced alcoholic liver
disease, excessive sedation can precipitate hepatic encephalopathy and thus must be avoided.
Severe acute alcoholic hepatitis commonly requires hospitalization, often in an intensive care unit, to
facilitate enteral feeding (which can help manage nutritional deficiencies) and to manage specific
complications (eg, infection, bleeding from esophageal varices, specific nutritional deficiencies,
Wernicke's encephalopathy, Korsakoff's psychosis, electrolyte abnormalities, portal hypertension, ascites,
portal-systemic encephalopathy—see elsewhere in THE MANUAL).
Specific treatment:
Corticosteroids (eg, prednisolone 40 mg/day po for 4 wk, followed by tapered doses
improve outcome in patients who have severe acute alcoholic hepatitis and who do not have infection, GI
bleeding, renal failure, or pancreatitis.
Other than corticosteroids and enteral feeding, few specific treatments are clearly established.
Antioxidants (eg,
S
-adenosyl-L-methionine, phosphatidylcholine, metadoxine) show promise in
ameliorating liver injury during early cirrhosis but require further study. Therapies directed at cytokines,
particularly
tumor necrosis factorα
(TNFα
), and aiming to reduce inflammation have had mixed results in
small trials. Pentoxifylline, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor that inhibits TNFα
synthesis, has some benefit.
In contrast, when biologic agents that inhibit TNFα
(eg, infliximab, etanercept) are used, risk of infection
outweighs benefit. Drugs given to decrease fibrosis (eg, colchicine, penicillamine) and drugs given to
normalize the hypermetabolic state of the alcoholic liver (eg, propylthiouracil) have no proven benefit.
Antioxidant remedies, such as silymarin (milk thistle) and vitamins A and E, are ineffective.
Liver transplantation
can be considered if disease is severe. With transplantation, 5-yr survival rates
are comparable to those for nonalcoholic liver disease—as high as 80% in patients without active liver
disease and 50% in those with acute alcoholic hepatitis. Because up to 50% of patients resume drinking
after transplantation, most programs require 6 mo of abstinence before transplantation is done.
===PAGE:324===
Chapter 27. Fibrosis and Cirrhosis
Introduction
In hepatic fibrosis, excessive connective tissue accumulates in the liver; this tissue represents scarring in
response to chronic, repeated liver cell injury. Commonly, fibrosis progresses, disrupting hepatic
architecture and eventually function, as regenerating hepatocytes attempt to replace and repair damaged
tissue. When such disruption is widespread, cirrhosis is diagnosed. To develop, cirrhosis usually requires
> 6 mo of liver disease but can occur more rapidly (eg, during infancy with biliary atresia, after liver
transplantation for severe liver disease secondary to chronic hepatitis B or C).
Fibrosis
Hepatic fibrosis is overly exuberant wound healing in which excessive connective tissue builds
up in the liver. The extracellular matrix is overproduced, degraded deficiently, or both. The
trigger is chronic injury, especially if there is an inflammatory component. Fibrosis itself causes
no symptoms but can lead to portal hypertension (the scarring distorts blood flow through the
liver) or cirrhosis (the scarring results in disruption of normal hepatic architecture and liver
dysfunction). Diagnosis is based on liver biopsy. Treatment involves correcting the underlying
condition when possible.
Various types of chronic liver injury can cause fibrosis (see
Table 27-1
). Self-limited, acute liver injury (eg, acute viral hepatitis A), even when fulminant, does not
necessarily distort the scaffolding architecture and hence does not cause fibrosis, despite loss of
hepatocytes. In its initial stages, hepatic fibrosis can regress if the cause is reversible (eg, with viral
clearance). After months or years of chronic or repeated injury, fibrosis becomes permanent. Fibrosis
develops even more rapidly in mechanical biliary obstruction.
Pathophysiology
Activation of the hepatic perivascular stellate cells (Ito cells, which store fat) initiates fibrosis. These and
adjacent cells proliferate, becoming contractile cells termed myofibroblasts. These cells produce
excessive amounts of abnormal matrix (consisting of collagen, other glycoproteins, and glycans) and
matricellular proteins. Kupffer cells (resident macrophages), injured hepatocytes, platelets, and
leukocytes aggregate. As a result, reactive O
species and inflammatory mediators (eg, platelet-derived
growth factor, transforming growth factors, and connective tissue growth factor) are released. Thus,
stellate cell activation results in abnormal extracellular matrix, both in quantity and composition.
Myofibroblasts, stimulated by endothelin-1, contribute to increased portal vein resistance and increase
the density of the abnormal matrix. Fibrous tracts join branches of afferent portal veins and efferent
hepatic veins, bypassing the hepatocytes and limiting their blood supply. Hence, fibrosis contributes both
to hepatocyte ischemia (causing hepatocellular dysfunction) and portal hypertension. The
[Table 27-1.
Disorders and Drugs that Can Cause Hepatic Fibrosis]
extent of the ischemia and portal hypertension determines how the liver is affected. For example,
congenital hepatic fibrosis affects portal vein branches, largely sparing the parenchyma. The result is
portal hypertension with sparing of hepatocellular function.
Symptoms and Signs
Hepatic fibrosis itself does not cause symptoms. Symptoms may develop secondary to the primary
disorder or to portal hypertension. Portal hypertension with splenomegaly is often asymptomatic unless
complications, such as variceal GI bleeding, ascites, or portal-systemic encephalopathy, develop.
Eventually, cirrhosis supervenes.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:325===
• Biopsy
Hepatic fibrosis is suspected in patients who have an underlying disorder or take a drug that could cause
fibrosis or who have unexplained abnormalities in liver function or enzymes. Noninvasive tests (eg,
serologic markers) are under study but are not yet ready for routine clinical use. Imaging tests such as
ultrasonography, CT, and MRI may detect findings associated with fibrosis (eg, portal hypertension,
splenomegaly, cirrhosis) but are not sensitive to parenchymal fibrosis itself. Liver biopsy is currently the
only means of detecting hepatic fibrosis. Biopsy is indicated to clarify the diagnosis (eg, nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis) and stage its progress (eg, in chronic hepatitis C to determine
whether fibrosis is present or whether it has progressed to cirrhosis).
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
Because fibrosis represents a response to hepatic damage, primary treatment should focus on the cause
(removing the basis of the liver injury). Such treatment may include eliminating HBC or HCV in chronic
viral hepatitis, abstaining from alcohol in alcoholic liver disease, removing heavy metals such as iron in
hemochromatosis or copper in Wilson's disease, and decompressing bile ducts in biliary obstruction.
Treatments aimed at reversing the fibrosis are usually too toxic for long-term use (eg, corticosteroids,
penicillamine) or have no proven efficacy (eg, colchicine). Other antifibrotic treatments are under study.
Simultaneous use of multiple antifibrotic drugs may eventually prove most beneficial.
Cirrhosis
Cirrhosis is a late stage of hepatic fibrosis that has resulted in widespread distortion of normal
hepatic architecture. Cirrhosis is characterized by regenerative nodules surrounded by dense
fibrotic tissue. Symptoms may not develop for years and are often nonspecific (eg, anorexia,
fatigue, weight loss). Late manifestations include portal hypertension, ascites, and, when
decompensation occurs, liver failure. Diagnosis often requires liver biopsy. Cirrhosis is usually
considered irreversible. Treatment is supportive.
Cirrhosis is a leading cause of death worldwide. The causes of cirrhosis are the same as those of fibrosis
(see
Table 27-1
). In developed countries, most cases result from chronic alcohol abuse or chronic
hepatitis C. In parts of Asia and Africa, cirrhosis often results from chronic hepatitis B. Cirrhosis of
unknown etiology (cryptogenic cirrhosis) is becoming less common as many specific causes (eg, chronic
hepatitis C, steatohepatitis) are identified. Injury to the bile ducts also can result in cirrhosis, as occurs in
mechanical bile duct obstruction, primary biliary cirrhosis (, and primary sclerosing cholangitis
(.
Pathophysiology
There are 2 primary factors:
• Hepatic fibrosis
• Regenerating liver cells
In response to injury and loss, growth regulators induce hepatocellular hyperplasia (producing
regenerating nodules) and arterial growth (angiogenesis). Among the growth regulators are cytokines and
hepatic growth factors (eg, epithelial growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor, transforming growth factorα
, tumor necrosis factor). Insulin, glucagon, and patterns of intrahepatic blood flow determine how and
where nodules develop.
Angiogenesis produces new vessels within the fibrous sheath that surrounds nodules. These vessels
connect the hepatic artery and portal vein to hepatic venules, restoring the intrahepatic circulatory
===PAGE:326===
pathways. Such interconnecting vessels provide relatively low-volume, high-pressure venous drainage
that cannot accommodate as much blood volume as normal. As a result, portal vein pressure increases.
Such distortions in blood flow contribute to portal hypertension, which increases because the
regenerating nodules compress hepatic venules.
The progression rate from fibrosis to cirrhosis and the morphology of cirrhosis vary from person to
person. Presumably, the reason for such variation is the extent of exposure to the injurious stimulus and
the individual's response.
Complications:
Portal hypertension ( is the most common serious complication; it can
manifest as GI bleeding from esophageal, gastric, or rectal varices or portal hypertensive gastropathy.
Portal hypertension can be massive. Cirrhosis can cause other cardiovascular complications. Vasodilation
and intrapulmonary right-to-left shunting and ventilation/perfusion mismatch can result in hypoxia
(hepatopulmonary syndrome). A cardiac myopathy can also accompany cirrhosis.
Ascites can develop, with a risk of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Splenic congestion with
hypersplenism may occur, resulting in splenomegaly, platelet sequestration, and consequent cytopenia.
Progressive loss of hepatic architecture impairs function, leading to hepatic insufficiency; it manifests as
coagulopathy, renal failure (hepatorenal syndrome—, and hepatic encephalopathy.
Hepatocytes secrete less bile, contributing to cholestasis and jaundice. Less bile in the intestine causes
malabsorption of dietary fat (triglycerides) and fat-soluble vitamins. Malabsorption of vitamin D may
contribute to osteoporosis. Undernutrition is common. It may result from anorexia with reduced food intake
or, in patients with alcoholic liver disease, from malabsorption due to pancreatic insufficiency.
Blood disorders are common. Anemia results from hypersplenism, chronic GI bleeding, folate deficiency
(particularly in patients with alcoholism), and hemolysis. Clotting may be impaired because of
coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia. Coagulopathy results from impaired hepatic synthesis of the factors
necessary for clotting, malabsorption of vitamin K due to impaired bile secretion into the duodenum, or
both. Thrombocytopenia may be caused by hypersplenism (platelet sequestration), alcohol excess
(directly inhibiting the bone marrow), or both. Pancytopenia also occurs with alcoholism.
Hepatocellular carcinoma frequently complicates cirrhosis, particularly cirrhosis resulting from chronic
hepatitis B and C viruses, hemochromatosis, alcohol-related liver disease,
α
antitrypsin deficiency, or
glycogen storage disease.
Histopathology:
Cirrhosis is characterized by regenerating nodules and fibrosis. Incompletely formed
liver nodules, nodules without fibrosis (nodular regenerative hyperplasia), and congenital hepatic fibrosis
(ie, widespread fibrosis without regenerating nodules) are not true cirrhosis.
Cirrhosis can be micronodular or macronodular. Micronodular cirrhosis is characterized by uniformly small
nodules (< 3 mm in diameter) and thick regular bands of connective tissue. Typically, nodules lack lobular
organization; terminal (central) hepatic venules and portal triads are distorted. With time, macronodular
cirrhosis often develops. The nodules vary in size (3 mm to 5 cm in diameter) and have some rather
normal lobular organization of portal triads and terminal hepatic venules. Broad fibrous bands of varying
thickness surround the large nodules.
Collapse of the normal hepatic architecture is suggested by the
concentration of portal triads within the fibrous scars. Mixed cirrhosis (incomplete septal cirrhosis)
combines elements of micronodular and macronodular cirrhosis. Differentiation between these
morphologic types of cirrhosis has limited clinical value.
Symptoms and Signs
Cirrhosis may be asymptomatic for years. One third of patients never develop symptoms. Often, the first
symptoms are nonspecific; they include generalized fatigue (due to cytokine release), anorexia, malaise,
and weight loss (see
Table 27-2
). The liver is typically palpable and firm, with a blunt edge, but is sometimes small and difficult
to palpate. Nodules usually are not palpable.
===PAGE:327===
Clinical signs that suggest a chronic liver disorder or chronic alcohol use but are not specific for cirrhosis
include muscle wasting, palmar erythema, parotid gland enlargement, white nails, clubbing, Dupuytren's
contracture, spider angiomas (< 10 may be normal), gynecomastia, axillary hair loss, testicular atrophy,
and peripheral neuropathy.
Once complications of cirrhosis develop, decompensation inexorably ensues.
Diagnosis
• Liver function tests, coagulation tests, CBC, and serologic tests for viral cause
• Sometimes biopsy
• Identification of cause based on clinical evaluation and selective testing
General approach:
Cirrhosis is suspected in patients with manifestations of any of its complications (see
Table 27-2
), particularly portal hypertension or ascites. Early cirrhosis should be considered in patients
with nonspecific
[Table 27-2.
Common Symptoms and Signs Due to Complications of Cirrhosis]
symptoms or characteristic laboratory abnormalities detected incidentally during laboratory testing,
particularly in patients who have a disorder or take a drug that might cause fibrosis.
Testing seeks to detect cirrhosis and any complications and to determine its cause.
Laboratory tests:
Diagnostic testing begins with liver function tests, coagulation tests, CBC, and
serologic tests for viral causes (eg, hepatitis B and C). Laboratory tests alone may increase suspicion for
cirrhosis but cannot confirm or exclude it. Liver biopsy becomes necessary if a clear diagnosis would lead
to better management and outcome.
Test results may be normal or may indicate nonspecific abnormalities due to complications of cirrhosis or
alcoholism. ALT and AST levels are often modestly elevated. Alkaline phosphatase and
γ
-glutamyl
transpeptidase (GGT) are often normal; elevated levels indicate cholestasis or biliary obstruction.
Bilirubin is usually normal but increases when cirrhosis progresses, particularly in primary biliary cirrhosis
(. Decreased serum albumin and a prolonged PT directly reflect impaired hepatic synthesis
—usually an end-stage event. Albumin can also be low when nutrition is poor. Serum globulin increases
in cirrhosis and in most liver disorders with an inflammatory component. Anemia is common and usually
normocytic with a high RBC distribution width. Anemia is often multifactorial; contributing factors may
include chronic GI bleeding (usually causing microcytic anemia), folate nutritional deficiency (causing
macrocytic anemia, especially in alcohol abuse), hemolysis, and hypersplenism. CBC may detect
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, or pancytopenia.
Diagnostic imaging:
Imaging tests are not highly sensitive or specific for the diagnosis of cirrhosis by
themselves, but they can often detect its complications. In advanced cirrhosis, ultrasonography shows a
small, nodular liver. Ultrasonography also detects portal hypertension and ascites.
CT can detect a nodular texture, but it has no advantage over ultrasonography. Radionuclide liver scans
using technetium-99m sulfur colloid may show irregular liver uptake and increased spleen and bone
marrow uptake. MRI is more expensive than other imaging tests and has little advantage.
Identification of the cause:
Determining the specific cause of cirrhosis requires key clinical information
from the history and examination, as well as selective testing. Alcohol is the likely cause in patients with a
documented history of alcoholism and clinical findings such as gynecomastia, spider angiomas
(telangiectasia), and testicular atrophy plus laboratory confirmation of liver damage (AST elevated more
than ALT) and liver enzyme induction (a greatly increased GGT). Fever, tender hepatomegaly, and
jaundice suggest the presence of alcoholic hepatitis.
===PAGE:328===
Detecting hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and IgG antibodies to hepatitis B (IgG anti-HBc) confirms
chronic hepatitis B. Identifying serum antibody to hepatitis C (anti-HCV) and HCV-RNA points to hepatitis
C.
If common causes such as alcohol or viral hepatitis are not confirmed, other less common causes are
sought:
• Presence of antimitochondrial antibodies (in 95%) suggests primary biliary cirrhosis.
• Strictures and dilations of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts seen on magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) suggest primary sclerosing cholangitis.
• Increased serum Fe and transferrin and possibly results of genetic testing suggest hemochromatosis.
• Decreased serum ceruloplasmin and characteristic copper test results suggest Wilson's disease.
• Hypergammaglobulinemia and presence of autoantibodies (eg, antinuclear or anti-smooth muscle
antibodies) indicate autoimmune hepatitis.
Liver biopsy:
If clinical criteria and noninvasive testing are inconclusive, liver biopsy is usually done. Its
sensitivity approaches 100%. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), often associated with obesity,
diabetes, or the metabolic syndrome, may be evident on ultrasound scans but requires liver biopsy for
confirmation. In obvious cases of cirrhosis with a marked coagulopathy, portal hypertension, ascites, and
liver failure, biopsy is not required when results would not change management.
Monitoring:
Patients with cirrhosis, particularly if due to chronic viral hepatitis B or C or
hemochromatosis, should be screened for hepatocellular carcinoma (eg, measuring
α
-fetoprotein levels
and ultrasonography every 6 to 12 mo—.
Prognosis
Prognosis is often unpredictable. It depends on factors such as etiology, severity, presence of
complications, comorbid conditions, host factors, and effectiveness of therapy. Patients who continue to
drink alcohol, even
small amounts, have a very poor prognosis. The Child-Turcotte-Pugh scoring system
uses clinical and laboratory information to stratify disease severity, surgical risk, and overall prognosis
(see
Tables 27-3
and
27-4
).
Treatment
• Supportive care
In general, treatment is supportive and includes stopping injurious drugs, providing nutrition (including
supplemental vitamins), and treating the underlying disorders and complications. Doses of drugs
metabolized in the liver should be reduced. All alcohol and hepatotoxic substances must be avoided.
Withdrawal symptoms during hospitalization should be anticipated in patients who have cirrhosis and
have continued to abuse alcohol.
Patients with varices need therapy to prevent bleeding (. Liver transplantation is indicated for end-stage liver failure in suitable candidates.
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis
Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is an autoimmune liver disorder characterized by the
progressive destruction of intrahepatic bile ducts, leading to cholestasis, cirrhosis, and liver
failure. Patients usually are asymptomatic at presentation but may experience fatigue or have
symptoms of cholestasis (eg, pruritus, steatorrhea) or cirrhosis (eg, portal hypertension,
===PAGE:329===
ascites). Laboratory tests reveal cholestasis, increased IgM, and, characteristically,
antimitochondrial antibodies in the serum. Liver biopsy may be necessary for diagnosis and
staging. Treatment includes ursodeoxycholic acid, cholestyramine (for pruritus),
[Table 27-3.
Child-Turcotte-Pugh Scoring System]
[Table 27-4.
Interpretation of the Child-Turcotte-Pugh Scoring System]
supplementary fat-soluble vitamins, and, ultimately for advanced disease, liver transplantation.
Etiology
PBC is the most common liver disease associated with chronic cholestasis in adults. Most (95%) cases
occur in women aged 35 to 70. PBC also clusters in families. A genetic predisposition, perhaps involving
the X chromosome, probably contributes. There may be an inherited abnormality of immune regulation. An
autoimmune mechanism has been implicated; antibodies to antigens located on the inner mitochondrial
membranes occur in > 95% of cases. These antimitochondrial antibodies (AMAs), the serologic hallmarks
of PBC, are not cytotoxic and are not involved in bile duct damage. PBC is associated with other
autoimmune disorders, such as RA, systemic sclerosis, Sjogren's syndrome, CREST syndrome,
autoimmune thyroiditis, and renal tubular acidosis.
T cells attack the small bile ducts. CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes directly target biliary epithelial cells. The
trigger for the immunologic attack on bile ducts is unknown. Exposure to foreign antigens, such as an
infectious (bacterial or viral) or toxic agent, may be the instigating event. These foreign antigens might be
structurally similar to endogenous proteins (molecular mimicry); then the subsequent immunologic
reaction would be autoimmune and self-perpetuating. Destruction and loss of bile ducts lead to impaired
bile formation and secretion (cholestasis). Retained toxic materials such as bile acids then cause further
damage, particularly to hepatocytes. Chronic cholestasis thus leads to liver cell inflammation and scarring
in the periportal areas. Eventually, hepatic inflammation decreases as hepatic fibrosis progresses to
cirrhosis.
Autoimmune cholangitis is sometimes considered to be a separate disorder. It is characterized by
autoantibodies, such as antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), anti-smooth muscle antibodies, or both and has a
clinical course and response to treatment that are similar to PBC. However, in autoimmune cholangitis,
AMAs are absent.
Symptoms and Signs
About half of patients present without symptoms. Symptoms or signs may develop during any stage of the
disease and may include fatigue or reflect cholestasis (and the resulting fat malabsorption, which may
lead to vitamin deficiencies and osteoporosis), hepatocellular dysfunction, or cirrhosis.
Symptoms usually develop insidiously. Pruritus, fatigue, and dry mouth and eyes are the initial symptoms
in > 50% of patients and can precede other symptoms by months or years. Other initial manifestations
include right upper quadrant discomfort (10%); an enlarged, firm, nontender liver (25%); splenomegaly
(15%); hyperpigmentation (25%); xanthelasmas (10%); and jaundice (10%). Eventually, all the features
and complications of cirrhosis occur. Peripheral neuropathy and other autoimmune disorders associated
with PBC may also develop.
Diagnosis
• Liver function tests
• Antimitochondrial antibodies
• Ultrasonography and often MRCP
• Liver biopsy
===PAGE:330===
In asymptomatic patients, PBC is detected incidentally when liver function tests detect abnormalities,
typically elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase and
γ
-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT). PBC is suspected
in middle-aged women with classic symptoms (eg, unexplained pruritus, fatigue, right upper quadrant
discomfort, jaundice) or laboratory results suggesting cholestatic liver disease: elevated alkaline
phosphatase and GGT but minimally abnormal aminotransferases (ALT, AST). Serum bilirubin is usually
normal in the early stages; elevation indicates disease progression and a worsening prognosis.
If PBC is suspected, liver function tests and tests to measure serum IgM (increased in PBC) and AMA
should be done. ELISA tests are 95% sensitive and 98% specific for PBC; false-positive results can occur
in autoimmune hepatitis (type 1). Other autoantibodies (eg, ANAs, anti-smooth muscle antibodies,
rheumatoid factor) may be present. Extrahepatic biliary obstruction should be ruled out. Ultrasonography
is often done first, but ultimately MRCP and sometimes ERCP are necessary.
Unless life expectancy is
short or there is a contraindication, liver biopsy is usually done. Liver biopsy confirms the diagnosis; it
may detect pathognomonic bile duct lesions, even in early stages. As PBC progresses, it becomes
morphologically indistinguishable from other forms of cirrhosis. Liver biopsy also helps stage PBC, which
has 4 histologic stages:
• Stage 1: Inflammation, abnormal connective tissue, or both, confined to the portal areas
• Stage 2: Inflammation, fibrosis, or both, confined to the portal and periportal areas
• Stage 3: Bridging fibrosis
• Stage 4: Cirrhosis
Autoimmune cholangitis is diagnosed when AMAs are absent in a patient who otherwise would be
diagnosed with PBC.
Prognosis
Usually, PBC progresses to terminal stages over 15 to 20 yr, although the rate of progression varies. PBC
may not diminish quality of life for many years. Patients who present without symptoms tend to develop
symptoms over 2 to 7 yr but may not do so for 10 to 15 yr. Once symptoms develop, median life
expectancy is 10 yr. Predictors of rapid progression include the following:
• Rapid worsening of symptoms
• Advanced histologic changes
• Older patient age
• Presence of edema
• Presence of associated autoimmune disorders
• Abnormalities in bilirubin, albumin, PT, or INR
The prognosis is ominous when pruritus disappears, xanthomas shrink, jaundice develops, and serum
cholesterol decreases.
Treatment
• Arresting or reversing liver damage
• Treating complications (chronic cholestasis and liver failure)
• Eventually, doing liver transplantation
===PAGE:331===
All alcohol use and hepatotoxic drugs should be stopped. Ursodeoxycholic acid (15 mg/kg po once/day)
decreases liver damage, prolongs survival, and delays the need for liver transplantation. About 20% of
patients do not have biochemical improvement after ≥ 4 mo; they may have advanced disease and
require liver transplantation in a few years. Other drugs proposed to decrease liver damage have not
improved overall clinical outcomes or are controversial.
Pruritus may be controlled with cholestyramine 6 to 8 g po bid. This anionic-binding drug binds bile salts
and thus may aggravate fat malabsorption. If cholestyramine is taken long-term, supplements of fatsoluble vitamins should be considered. Cholestyramine can decrease absorption of ursodeoxycholic acid,
so these drugs should not be given simultaneously.
Some patients with pruritus respond to ursodeoxycholic acid and ultraviolet light; others may warrant a
trial of rifampin or an opioid antagonist, such as naltrexone. Patients with fat malabsorption due to bile
salt deficiency should be treated with vitamins A, D, E, and K. For osteoporosis, weight-bearing exercises,
bisphosphonates, or raloxifene may be needed in addition to Ca and vitamin D supplements. In later
stages, portal hypertension ( or complications of cirrhosis ( require treatment.
Liver transplantation has excellent results. The general indication is decompensated liver disease
(uncontrolled variceal bleeding, refractory ascites, intractable pruritus, and hepatic encephalopathy).
Survival rates after liver transplantation are > 90% at 1 yr, > 80% at 5 yr, and > 65% at 10 yr. AMAs tend
to persist after transplantation. PBC recurs in 15% of patients in the first few years and in > 30% by 10 yr.
So far, recurrent PBC after liver transplantation has a benign course. Cirrhosis rarely occurs.
===PAGE:332===
Chapter 28. Hepatitis
Introduction
Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver characterized by diffuse or patchy necrosis. Major causes are
specific hepatitis viruses, alcohol, and drugs. Less common causes include other viral infections (eg,
infectious mononucleosis, yellow fever, cytomegalovirus infection) and leptospirosis. Parasitic infections
(eg, schistosomiasis, malaria, amebiasis), pyogenic infections, and abscesses that affect the liver are not
considered hepatitis. Liver
involvement with TB and other granulomatous infiltrations is sometimes called
granulomatous hepatitis, but the clinical, biochemical, and histologic features differ from those of diffuse
hepatitis.
Various systemic infections and other illnesses may produce small focal areas of hepatic inflammation or
necrosis. This nonspecific reactive hepatitis can cause minor liver function abnormalities but is usually
asymptomatic.
Some types of infectious and noninfectious liver inflammation are summarized (see
Table 28-1
).
Acute Viral Hepatitis
Acute viral hepatitis is diffuse liver inflammation caused by specific hepatotropic viruses that
have diverse modes of transmission and epidemiologies. A nonspecific viral prodrome is
followed by anorexia, nausea, and often fever or right upper quadrant pain. Jaundice often
develops, typically as other symptoms begin to resolve. Most cases resolve spontaneously, but
some progress to chronic hepatitis. Occasionally, acute viral hepatitis progresses to acute
hepatic failure (fulminant hepatitis). Diagnosis is by liver function tests and serologic tests to
identify the virus. Good hygiene can prevent acute viral hepatitis. Depending on the specific
virus, preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis may be possible using vaccines or serum
globulins. Treatment is usually supportive.
(See also Neonatal Hepatitis B Virus Infection )
Acute viral hepatitis is a common, worldwide disease that has different causes; each type shares clinical,
biochemical, and morphologic features. Liver infections caused by nonhepatitis viruses (eg, Epstein-Barr
virus, yellow fever virus, cytomegalovirus) generally are not termed acute viral hepatitis.
Etiology
At least 5 specific viruses appear to be responsible (see
Table 28-2
). Other unidentified viruses probably also cause acute viral hepatitis.
Hepatitis A virus (HAV):
HAV is a single-stranded RNA picornavirus. It is the most common cause of
acute viral hepatitis and is particularly common among children and young adults. In some countries, >
75% of adults have been exposed. HAV spreads primarily by fecal-oral contact and thus may occur in
areas of poor hygiene. Waterborne and food-borne epidemics occur, especially in underdeveloped
countries. Eating contaminated raw shellfish is sometimes responsible. Sporadic cases are also common,
usually as a result of person-to-person contact. Fecal shedding of the virus occurs before symptoms
develop and usually ceases a few days after symptoms begin; thus, infectivity often has already ceased
when hepatitis becomes clinically evident. HAV has no known chronic carrier state and does not cause
chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV):
HBV is the most thoroughly characterized and complex hepatitis virus. The
infective particle consists of a viral core plus an outer surface coat. The core contains circular doublestranded DNA and DNA polymerase, and it replicates within the nuclei of infected hepatocytes. A surface
coat is added in the cytoplasm and, for unknown reasons, is produced in great excess.
HBV is the 2nd most common cause of acute viral hepatitis. Prior unrecognized infection is common but is
===PAGE:333===
much less widespread than that with HAV. HBV is often transmitted parenterally, typically by contaminated
blood or blood products. Routine screening of donor blood for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) has
nearly eliminated the previously common posttransfusion transmission, but transmission through needles
shared by drug users remains common. Risk of HBV is increased for patients in renal dialysis and
oncology units and for hospital personnel in contact with blood. The virus may be spread through contact
with other body fluids (eg, between sex partners, both heterosexual and homosexual; in closed
institutions, such as mental health institutions and prisons), but infectivity is far lower than that of HAV,
and the means of transmission is often unknown. The role of insect bites in transmission is unclear. Many
cases of acute hepatitis B occur sporadically without a known source.
HBV, for unknown reasons, is sometimes associated with several primarily extrahepatic disorders,
including polyarteritis nodosa, other connective tissue diseases, membranous glomerulonephritis, and
essential mixed cryoglobulinemia. The pathogenic role of HBV in these disorders is unclear, but
autoimmune mechanisms are suggested.
Chronic HBV carriers provide a worldwide reservoir of infection. Prevalence varies widely according to
several factors, including geography (eg, < 0.5% in North America and northern Europe, > 10% in some
regions of the Far East). Vertical transmission from mother to infant is common (.
[Table 28-1.
Selected Diseases or Organisms Associated with Liver Inflammation]
Hepatitis C virus (HCV):
HCV is a single-stranded RNA flavivirus. Six major HCV subtypes exist with
varying amino acid sequences (genotypes); these subtypes vary geographically and in virulence and
response to therapy. HCV can also alter its amino acid pattern over time in an infected person, producing
quasispecies.
Infection is most commonly transmitted through blood, primarily when parenteral drug users share
needles, but also through tattoos or body piercing. Sexual transmission and vertical transmission from
mother to infant are relatively rare. Transmission through blood transfusion has become very rare since
the advent of screening tests for donated blood. Some sporadic cases occur in patients without apparent
risk factors. HCV prevalence varies with geography and other risk factors.
HCV infection sometimes occurs simultaneously with specific systemic disorders, including essential
mixed cryoglobulinemia, porphyria cutanea tarda (about 60 to 80% of porphyria patients have HCV
infection, but only a few patients infected with HCV develop porphyria), and glomerulonephritis; the
mechanisms are uncertain. In addition, up to 20% of patients with alcoholic liver disease harbor HCV. The
reasons for this high association are unclear because concomitant alcohol and drug use accounts for only
a portion of cases. In these patients, HCV and alcohol act synergistically to exacerbate liver damage.
Hepatitis D virus (HDV):
HDV, or delta agent, is a defective RNA virus that can replicate only in the
presence of HBV. It occurs uncommonly as a co-infection with acute hepatitis B or as a superinfection in
chronic
hepatitis B. Infected hepatocytes contain delta particles coated with HBsAg. Prevalence of HDV
varies widely geographically, with endemic pockets in several countries. Parenteral drug users are at
relatively high risk, but HDV (unlike HBV) has not widely permeated the homosexual community.
Hepatitis E virus (HEV):
HEV is an enterically transmitted RNA virus. Outbreaks of acute HEV infection,
often waterborne and linked to fecal contamination of the water supply, have occurred in China, India,
Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, Russia, and central and northern Africa. These outbreaks have epidemiologic
characteristics similar to HAV epidemics. Sporadic cases also occur. No outbreaks have occurred in the
US or in Western Europe. Like HAV, HEV does not cause chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis, and there is no
chronic carrier state.
Symptoms and Signs
General:
Acute infection tends to develop in predictable phases. Infection begins with an incubation
period (see
Table 28-2
), during which the virus multiplies and spreads without symptoms. The prodromal,
or pre-icteric, phase follows, causing nonspecific symptoms, such as profound anorexia, malaise, nausea
and vomiting, and often fever or right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Urticaria and arthralgias
===PAGE:334===
occasionally occur, especially in HBV infection. After 3 to 10 days, the urine darkens, followed by jaundice
(the icteric phase). Systemic symptoms often regress, and the patient feels better despite worsening
jaundice. During the icteric phase, the liver is usually enlarged and tender, but the edge of the liver
remains soft and smooth. Mild splenomegaly occurs in 15 to 20% of patients. Jaundice usually peaks
within 1 to 2 wk and then fades during a 2- to 4-wk recovery phase. Appetite usually returns after the first
week. Acute viral hepatitis usually resolves spontaneously 4 to 8 wk after symptom onset.
Sometimes anicteric hepatitis, a minor flulike illness without jaundice, is the only manifestation. It occurs
more often than icteric hepatitis in patients with HCV infection and in children with HAV infection.
Recrudescent hepatitis occurs in a few patients and is characterized by recurrent manifestations during
the recovery phase. Manifestations of cholestasis may develop during the icteric phase (called cholestatic
hepatitis) but usually resolve. When they persist, they cause prolonged jaundice, elevated alkaline
phosphatase, and pruritus, despite general regression of inflammation.
Virus-specific:
HAV often does not cause jaundice and may not cause any symptoms. It almost
invariably resolves after the acute infection, although there can be early recrudescence.
HBV causes a wide spectrum of liver diseases, from a subclinical carrier state to severe or fulminant
acute hepatitis, particularly in the elderly, in whom mortality can reach 10 to 15%. Five to 10% of all
patients with HBV develop chronic hepatitis or become inactive carriers. Cirrhosis can develop.
Hepatocellular carcinoma can ultimately develop in chronic HBV infection, even without being preceded
by cirrhosis.
HCV may be asymptomatic during the acute infection. Its severity often fluctuates, sometimes with
recrudescent hepatitis and
[Table 28-2.
Characteristics of Hepatitis Viruses]
roller-coaster aminotransferase levels for many years or even decades. HCV has the highest rate of
chronicity (about 75%). The resultant chronic hepatitis is usually asymptomatic or benign but progresses
to cirrhosis in 20 to 30% of patients; cirrhosis often takes decades to appear. Hepatocellular carcinoma
can result from HCV-induced cirrhosis but results only rarely from chronic infection without cirrhosis
(unlike in HBV infection).
Acute HDV infection typically manifests as unusually severe acute HBV infection (co-infection), an acute
exacerbation in chronic HBV carriers (superinfection), or a relatively aggressive course of chronic HBV
infection.
HEV may be severe, especially in pregnant women.
Diagnosis
• Liver function tests (AST and ALT elevated out of proportion to alkaline phosphatase, usually with
hyperbilirubinemia)
• Viral serologic testing
• PT measurement
Initial diagnosis:
Acute hepatitis must first be differentiated from other disorders that cause similar
symptoms. In the prodromal phase, hepatitis mimics various nonspecific viral illnesses and is difficult to
diagnose. Anicteric patients suspected of having hepatitis based on risk factors are tested initially with
nonspecific liver function tests, including aminotransferases, bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase. Usually,
acute hepatitis is suspected only during the icteric phase. Thus, acute hepatitis should be differentiated
from other disorders causing jaundice (see
Fig. 28-1
and p.
).
===PAGE:335===
Acute hepatitis can usually be differentiated from other causes of jaundice by its marked elevations of
AST and ALT (typically ≥ 400 IU/L). ALT is typically higher than AST, but absolute levels correlate poorly
with clinical severity. Values increase early in the prodromal phase, peak before jaundice is maximal, and
fall slowly during the recovery phase. Urinary bilirubin usually precedes jaundice. Hyperbilirubinemia in
acute viral hepatitis varies in severity, and fractionation has no clinical value. Alkaline phosphatase is
usually only moderately elevated; marked elevation suggests extrahepatic cholestasis and prompts
imaging tests (eg, ultrasonography). Liver biopsy generally is not needed unless the diagnosis is
uncertain. If laboratory results suggest acute hepatitis, particularly if ALT and AST are > 1000 IU/L, PT is
measured. Manifestations of portal-systemic encephalopathy, bleeding diathesis, or prolongation of INR
suggest fulminant hepatitis (.
If acute hepatitis is suspected, efforts are next directed toward identifying its cause. A history of exposure
may provide the only clue of drug-induced or toxic hepatitis. The history should also elicit risk factors for
viral hepatitis. Prodromal sore throat and diffuse adenopathy suggest infectious mononucleosis rather
than viral hepatitis. Alcoholic hepatitis is suggested by a history of drinking, more gradual onset of
symptoms, and presence of vascular spiders or signs of chronic alcohol use or chronic liver disease (see
also p.
); aminotransferase levels rarely exceed 300 IU/L, even in severe cases. Also, unlike in viral
hepatitis, AST is typically higher than ALT, although this difference by itself does not reliably differentiate
the two. In uncertain cases, liver biopsy usually distinguishes alcoholic from viral hepatitis.
Serology:
In patients with findings suggesting acute viral hepatitis, the following studies are done to
screen for hepatitis viruses A, B, and C:
• IgM antibody to HAV (IgM anti-HAV)
• HBsAg
• IgM antibody to hepatitis B core (IgM anti-HBc)
• Antibody to HCV (anti-HCV)
If any are positive, further serologic testing may be necessary to differentiate acute from past or chronic
infection (see
Tables 28-3
,
28-4
, and
28-5
). If serology suggests hepatitis B, testing for hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and antibody to hepatitis
B e antigen (anti-HBe) is usually done to help determine the prognosis and to guide antiviral therapy. If
serologically confirmed HBV is severe, anti-HDV is measured. If the patient has recently traveled to an
endemic area, IgM anti-HEV should be measured if the test is available.
HAV
is present in serum only during acute infection and cannot be detected by clinically available tests.
IgM antibody typically develops early in the infection and peaks about 1 to 2 wk after the development of
jaundice. It diminishes within several weeks, followed by the development of protective IgG antibody (IgG
anti-HAV), which persists usually for life. Thus, IgM antibody is a marker of acute infection, whereas IgG
anti-HAV indicates only previous exposure to HAV and immunity to recurrent infection.
HBV
has at least 3 distinct antigen-antibody systems that can be tested: HBsAg, hepatitis B core antigen
(HBcAg), and HBeAg. HBV-DNA can also be tested. HBV surface coat can be detected in serum as
HBsAg. HBsAg characteristically appears during the incubation period, usually 1 to 6 wk before clinical or
biochemical
[Fig. 28-1.
Simplified diagnostic approach to possible acute viral hepatitis.]
illness develops, and implies infectivity of the blood. It disappears during convalescence. However,
HBsAg is occasionally transient. The corresponding protective antibody (anti-HBs) appears weeks or
months later, after clinical recovery, and usually persists for life; thus, its detection indicates past HBV
infection and relative immunity. In 5 to 10% of patients, HBsAg persists and antibodies do not develop;
these patients become asymptomatic carriers of the virus or develop chronic hepatitis.
===PAGE:336===
HBcAg reflects the viral core. It is detectable in infected liver cells but not in serum except by special
techniques. Antibody to HBcAg (anti-HBc) generally appears at the onset of clinical illness; thereafter,
titers gradually diminish, usually over years or life. Its presence with anti-HBs indicates recovery from
previous HBV infection. Anti-HBc is also present in chronic HBsAg carriers, who do not mount an anti-HBs
response. In acute infection, anti-HBc is mainly of the IgM class, whereas in chronic infection, IgG antiHBc predominates. IgM anti-HBc is a sensitive marker of acute HBV infection and occasionally is the only
marker of recent infection, reflecting a window between disappearance of HBsAg and appearance of
anti-HBs.
HBeAg is a protein derived from the viral core (not to be confused with hepatitis E virus).
[Table 28-3.
Hepatitis A Serology]
Present only in HBsAg-positive serum, HBeAg tends to suggest more active viral replication and greater
infectivity. In contrast, presence of the corresponding antibody (anti-HBe) suggests lower infectivity. Thus,
e antigen markers are more helpful in prognosis than in diagnosis. Chronic liver disease develops more
often among patients with HBeAg and less often among patients with anti-HBe.
In patients with active HBV infection, HBV-DNA can be detected in the serum with special testing,
although this testing is not routinely available.
In
HCV
, serum antibody to HCV (anti-HCV) almost always implies active infection; it is not protective. AntiHCV usually appears within 2 wk of acute infection but is sometimes delayed; however, HCV-RNA is
positive. In a small proportion of patients, anti-HCV merely reflects prior exposure with clearance of the
virus rather than active infection. In such cases, ALT and AST levels are usually normal. In unclear cases,
HCV-RNA is measured.
[Table 28-4.
Hepatitis B Serology*]
[Table 28-5.
Hepatitis C Serology]
In
HDV
, anti-HDV implies active infection. It may not be detectable until weeks after the acute illness.
In
HEV
, the test for IgM anti-HEV is not routinely available. In a patient with endemic exposure and
compatible clinical findings, anti-HEV suggests acute HEV infection.
Biopsy:
Biopsy is usually unnecessary but, if done, usually reveals similar histopathology regardless of
the specific virus: patchy cell dropout, acidophilic hepatocellular necrosis, mononuclear inflammatory
infiltrate, histologic evidence of regeneration, and preservation of the reticulin framework. HBV can
occasionally be diagnosed based on the presence of ground-glass hepatocytes (caused by HBsAgpacked cytoplasm) and using special immunologic stains for the viral components. However, these
findings are unusual in acute HBV and are much more common in chronic HBV infection. HCV causation
can sometimes be inferred from subtle morphologic clues. Liver biopsy may help predict prognosis in
acute hepatitis but is rarely done solely for this purpose. Complete histologic recovery occurs unless
extensive necrosis bridges entire acini (bridging necrosis). Most patients with bridging necrosis recover
fully. However, some cases progress to chronic hepatitis.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Occasionally postexposure prophylaxis
No treatments attenuate acute viral hepatitis except, occasionally, postexposure immunoprophylaxis.
Alcohol should be avoided because it
can increase liver damage. Restrictions on diet or activity, including
commonly prescribed bed rest, have no scientific basis. Most patients may safely return to work after
jaundice resolves, even if AST or ALT levels are slightly elevated. For cholestatic hepatitis,
===PAGE:337===
cholestyramine 8 g po once/day or bid can relieve itching. Viral hepatitis should be reported to the local or
state health department.
Prevention
Because treatments have limited efficacy, prevention of viral hepatitis is very important. Good personal
hygiene helps prevent transmission, particularly fecal-oral transmission, as occurs with HAV and HEV.
Blood and other body fluids (eg, saliva, semen) of patients with acute HBV and HCV and stool of patients
with HAV are considered infectious. Barrier protection is recommended, but isolation of patients does little
to prevent spread of HAV and is of no value in HBV or HCV infection. Posttransfusion infection is
minimized by avoiding unnecessary transfusions and screening all donors for HBsAg and anti-HCV.
Screening has decreased the incidence of posttransfusion hepatitis, probably to about 1/100,000 units of
blood component transfused.
Immunoprophylaxis can involve active immunization using vaccines and passive immunization.
HAV:
Preexposure HAV prophylaxis should be provided for travelers to highly endemic areas. It should
also be considered for military personnel, day-care center employees, diagnostic laboratory workers, and,
because they have an increased risk of fulminant hepatitis from HAV, patients with chronic liver disorders
(including chronic hepatitis C). Several vaccines against HAV are available, each with different doses and
schedules; they are safe, provide protection within about 4 wk, and provide prolonged protection
(probably for > 20 yr).
Standard immune globulin, formerly immune serum globulin, prevents or decreases the severity of HAV
infection and should be given to family members and close contacts of patients for postexposure
prophylaxis; 0.02 mL/kg IM is generally recommended, but some experts advise 0.06 mL/kg (3 to 5 mL for
adults).
HBV:
Vaccination in endemic areas has dramatically reduced local prevalence. Pre-exposure
immunization has long been recommended for people at high risk. However, selective vaccination of highrisk groups in the US and other nonendemic areas has not substantially decreased the incidence of HBV;
thus, vaccination is now recommended for all US residents < 18 beginning at birth. Universal worldwide
vaccination is desirable but is too expensive to be feasible.
Two recombinant vaccines are available; both are safe, even during pregnancy. Three IM deltoid
injections are given: at baseline, at 1 mo, and at 6 mo. Children are given lower doses, and
immunosuppressed patients and patients receiving hemodialysis are given higher doses.
After vaccination, levels of anti-HBs remain protective for 5 yr in 80 to 90% of immunocompetent
recipients and for 10 yr in 60 to 80%. Booster doses of vaccine are recommended for patients receiving
hemodialysis and immunosuppressed patients whose anti-HBs is < 10 mIU/mL.
HBV postexposure immunoprophylaxis combines vaccination with hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG), a
product with high titers of anti-HBs. HBIG probably does not prevent infection but prevents or attenuates
clinical illness. For infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers, an initial dose of vaccine plus 0.5 mL of HBIG
is given IM in the thigh immediately after birth. For anyone having sexual contact with an HBsAg-positive
person or percutaneous or mucous membrane exposure to HBsAg-positive blood, 0.06 mL/kg of HBIG is
given IM within days, along with vaccine. Any previously vaccinated patient sustaining a percutaneous
HBsAg-positive exposure is tested for anti-HBs; if titers are < 10 mIU/mL, a booster dose of vaccine is
given.
HCV, HDV, and HEV:
A vaccine is now available for hepatitis E; it appears to have about 95% efficacy in
preventing symptomatic infection in males and is safe. Efficacy in other groups, duration of protection,
and efficacy in preventing asymptomatic infection are unknown. No product exists for immunoprophylaxis
of HCV or HDV. However, prevention of HBV prevents HDV. The propensity of HCV for changing its
genome hampers vaccine development.
Fulminant Hepatitis
===PAGE:338===
Fulminant hepatitis is a rare syndrome of massive necrosis of liver parenchyma and a decrease
in liver size (acute yellow atrophy) that usually occurs after infection with certain hepatitis
viruses, exposure to toxic agents, or drug-induced injury.
HBV is sometimes responsible, and up to 50% of cases of fulminant hepatitis B involve HDV coinfection.
Fulminant hepatitis with HAV is rare but may be more likely in people with preexisting liver disorders. The
role of HCV remains uncertain.
Patients rapidly deteriorate because portal-systemic encephalopathy develops, often followed by coma
within hours or a few days, sometimes with cerebral edema. Bleeding commonly results from hepatic
failure or disseminated intravascular coagulation, and functional renal failure (hepatorenal syndrome
— may develop. Increasing PT, portal-systemic encephalopathy, and particularly renal failure
are ominous.
Meticulous nursing care and aggressive treatment of complications improve the outcome. However,
emergency liver transplantation provides the best hope for survival. Survival in adults is uncommon
without transplantation; children tend to do better. Patients who survive usually recover fully.
Chronic Hepatitis
Chronic hepatitis is hepatitis that lasts > 6 mo. Common causes include hepatitis B and C
viruses, autoimmune mechanisms (autoimmune hepatitis), and drugs. Many patients have no
history of acute hepatitis, and the first indication is discovery of asymptomatic
aminotransferase elevations. Some patients present with cirrhosis or its complications (eg,
portal hypertension). Biopsy is necessary to confirm the diagnosis and to grade and stage the
disease. Treatment is directed toward complications and the underlying condition (eg,
corticosteroids for autoimmune hepatitis, antiviral therapy for viral hepatitis). Liver
transplantation is often indicated for end-stage disease.
Etiology
Hepatitis lasting > 6 mo is generally defined as chronic, although this duration is arbitrary. Hepatitis B
virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) are frequent causes of chronic hepatitis; 5 to 10% of cases of
HBV infection, with or without hepatitis D virus (HDV) co-infection, and about 75% of cases of HCV
infection become chronic. Hepatitis A and E viruses are not causes. Although the mechanism of chronicity
is uncertain, liver injury is mostly determined by the patient's immune reaction to the infection.
Many cases are idiopathic. A high proportion of idiopathic cases have prominent features of immunemediated hepatocellular injury (autoimmune hepatitis), including the following:
• The presence of serologic immune markers
• An association with histocompatibility haplotypes common in autoimmune disorders (eg, HLA-B1, HLAB8, HLA-DR3, HLA-DR4)
• A predominance of T lymphocytes and plasma cells in liver histologic lesions
• Complex in vitro defects in cellular immunity and immunoregulatory functions
• An association with other autoimmune disorders (eg, RA, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, proliferative
glomerulonephritis)
• A response to therapy with corticosteroids or immunosuppressants
Sometimes chronic hepatitis has features of both autoimmune hepatitis and another chronic liver disorder
(eg, primary biliary cirrhosis, chronic viral hepatitis). These conditions are called overlap syndromes.
===PAGE:339===
Many drugs, including isoniazid, methyldopa, nitrofurantoin, and, rarely, acetaminophen, can cause
chronic hepatitis. The mechanism varies with the drug and may involve altered immune responses,
cytotoxic intermediate metabolites, or genetically determined metabolic defects.
Other causes of chronic hepatitis include alcoholic hepatitis and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Less often,
chronic hepatitis results from
α
-antitrypsin deficiency or Wilson's disease.
Cases were once classified histologically as chronic persistent, chronic lobular, or chronic active hepatitis.
A more useful recent classification system specifies the etiology, the intensity of histologic inflammation
and necrosis (grade), and the degree of histologic fibrosis (stage). Inflammation and necrosis are
potentially reversible; fibrosis generally is not.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical features vary widely. About one third of cases develop after acute hepatitis, but most develop
insidiously de novo. Many patients are asymptomatic, especially in chronic HCV infection. However,
malaise, anorexia, and fatigue are common, sometimes with low-grade fever and nonspecific upper
abdominal discomfort. Jaundice is usually absent. Often, particularly with HCV, the first findings are signs
of chronic liver disease (eg, splenomegaly, spider nevi, palmar erythema). A few patients with chronic
hepatitis develop manifestations of cholestasis. In the autoimmune variant, especially in young women,
manifestations may involve virtually any body system and can include acne, amenorrhea, arthralgia,
ulcerative colitis, pulmonary fibrosis, thyroiditis, nephritis, and hemolytic anemia.
Chronic HCV is occasionally associated with lichen planus, mucocutaneous vasculitis, glomerulonephritis,
porphyria cutanea tarda,
and perhaps non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma. About 1% of patients develop
symptomatic cryoglobulinemia with fatigue, myalgias, arthralgias, neuropathy, glomerulonephritis, and skin
rashes (urticaria, purpura, or leukocytoclastic vasculitis); asymptomatic cryoglobulinemia is more
common.
Diagnosis
• Liver function test results compatible with hepatitis
• Viral serologic tests
• Possibly autoantibodies, immunoglobulins,
α
-antitrypsin level, and other tests
• Usually biopsy
• Serum albumin and PT
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with suggestive symptoms and signs, incidentally noted elevations
in aminotransferase levels, or previously diagnosed acute hepatitis. Liver function tests are needed if not
previously done and include serum ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin. Aminotransferase
elevations are the most characteristic laboratory abnormalities. Although levels can vary, they are typically
100 to 500 IU/L. ALT is usually higher than AST. Amino-transferase levels can be normal during chronic
hepatitis if the disease is quiescent, particularly with HCV. Alkaline phosphatase is usually normal or only
slightly elevated but is occasionally markedly high. Bilirubin is usually normal unless the disease is severe
or advanced. However, abnormalities in these laboratory tests are not specific and can result from other
disorders, such as alcoholic liver disease, recrudescent acute viral hepatitis, and primary biliary cirrhosis.
If laboratory results are compatible with hepatitis, viral serologic tests are done to exclude HBV and HCV
(see
Tables 28-4
and
28-5
). Unless these tests indicate viral etiology, further testing is required. The first
tests done include autoantibodies, immunoglobulins, and
α
-antitrypsin level. Children and young adults
are screened for Wilson's disease with a ceruloplasmin level. Marked elevations in serum
immunoglobulins suggest chronic autoimmune hepatitis but are not conclusive. Autoimmune hepatitis is
normally diagnosed based on the presence of antinuclear (ANA), anti-smooth muscle, or anti-liver/kidney
===PAGE:340===
microsomal type 1 (anti-LKM1) antibodies at titers of 1:80 (in adults) or 1:20 (in children).
Unlike in acute hepatitis, biopsy is necessary. Mild cases may have only minor hepatocellular necrosis
and inflammatory cell infiltration, usually in portal regions, with normal acinar architecture and little or no
fibrosis. Such cases rarely develop into clinically important liver disease or cirrhosis. In more severe
cases, biopsy typically shows periportal necrosis with mononuclear cell infiltrates (piecemeal necrosis)
accompanied by variable periportal fibrosis and bile duct proliferation. The acinar architecture may be
distorted by zones of collapse and fibrosis, and frank cirrhosis sometimes coexists with signs of ongoing
hepatitis. Biopsy is also used to grade and stage the disease.
In most cases, the specific cause of chronic hepatitis cannot be discerned via biopsy alone, although
cases caused by HBV can be distinguished by the presence of ground-glass hepatocytes and special
stains for HBV components. Autoimmune cases usually have a more pronounced infiltration by
lymphocytes and plasma cells. In patients with histologic but not serologic criteria for chronic autoimmune
hepatitis, variant autoimmune hepatitis is diagnosed; many have overlap syndromes.
Serum albumin and PT should be measured to determine severity; hepatic insufficiency is suggested by
low serum albumin or prolonged PT. If symptoms or signs of cryoglobulinemia develop during chronic
hepatitis, particularly with HCV, cryoglobulin levels and rheumatoid factor should be measured; high levels
of rheumatoid factor and low levels of complement suggest cryoglobulinemia.
Patients with chronic HBV infection should be screened annually for hepatocellular cancer with
ultrasonography and serum
α
-fetoprotein measurement, although the cost-effectiveness of this practice is
debated. Patients with chronic HCV infection should be similarly screened only if cirrhosis is present.
Prognosis
Prognosis is highly variable. Chronic hepatitis caused by a drug often regresses completely when the
offending drug is withdrawn. Without treatment, cases caused by HBV can resolve (uncommon), progress
rapidly, or progress slowly to cirrhosis over decades. Resolution often begins with a transient increase in
disease severity and results in seroconversion from hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) to antibody to hepatitis
B e antigen (anti-HBe). Co-infection with HDV causes the most severe form of chronic HBV infection;
without treatment, cirrhosis develops in up to 70% of patients. Untreated chronic hepatitis due to
HCV
produces cirrhosis in 20 to 30% of patients, although development may take decades. Chronic
autoimmune hepatitis usually responds to therapy but sometimes causes progressive fibrosis and
eventual cirrhosis.
Chronic HBV infection increases the risk of hepatocellular cancer. The risk is also increased in chronic
HCV infection, but only if cirrhosis has already developed (.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Treatment of cause (eg, corticosteroids for autoimmune hepatitis, antivirals for HBV, interferons for HCV)
Treatment goals include management of complications (eg, ascites, encephalopathy) and treatment of the
cause. Drugs that cause hepatitis should be stopped. Underlying disorders, such as Wilson's disease,
should be treated. In chronic hepatitis due to HBV, prophylaxis for contacts of patients may be helpful
(; corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs should be avoided because they enhance
viral replication. No prophylactic measures are required for contacts of patients with HCV infection.
Autoimmune hepatitis:
Corticosteroids, with or without azathioprine, prolong survival. Prednisone is
usually started at 30 to 40 mg po once/day, then tapered to the lowest dose that maintains
aminotransferases at normal or near-normal levels. Some experts give concomitant azathioprine 1 to 1.5
mg/kg po once/day; others add azathioprine only if low-dose prednisone fails to maintain suppression.
Most patients require long-term, low-dose maintenance treatment. Liver transplantation may be required
for end-stage disease.
===PAGE:341===
HBV:
Antiviral treatment is indicated for patients with elevated aminotransferase levels, clinical or biopsy
evidence of progressive disease, or both. The goal is to eliminate HBV-DNA. Treatment may need to be
continued indefinitely and thus may be very expensive; stopping treatment prematurely can lead to
relapse, which may be severe. However, treatment may be stopped if HBeAg converts to anti-HBe or if
tests for HBsAg become negative. Drug resistance is also a concern. Six antiviral drugs—entecavir,
adefovir, lamivudine, interferonα
(INFα
), pegylated INFα
2a (peginterferonα
2a), and telbivudine—are
available (see
Table 28-6
).
First-line treatment is usually with an oral antiviral drug, such as entecavir (a nucleoside analogue) or
adefovir (a nucleotide analogue). Combination therapy has not proved superior to monotherapy.
Entecavir appears to have higher antiviral potency than other commonly used drugs. Resistance to
entecavir is uncommon, but the drug has not been in widespread clinical use for very long. Dosage is 0.5
mg po once/day; however, patients who have previously taken
[Table 28-6.
Comparison of Drugs Commonly Used to Treat Chronic Viral Hepatitis B*]
a nucleoside analogue should take 1 mg po once/day. Dose reduction is required in patients with renal
insufficiency. Serious adverse effects appear to be uncommon so far, although the drug can induce
tumors in animals.
Adefovir is also relatively potent. Dosage is 10 mg po once/day. Adefovir may cause renal dysfunction, so
serum creatinine level must be measured periodically and the dose reduced if necessary.
Alternatively, lamivudine (a nucleoside analogue) 100 mg po once/day is given. It has few adverse effects,
which is one of its advantages over other antiviral drugs used to treat chronic HBV infection. INFα
(usually IFNα
2b), formerly first-line treatment, can be used. Dosage is 5 million IU sc once/day or 10
million IU sc 3 times/wk for 4 mo. In about 40% of patients, this regimen eliminates HBV-DNA and causes
seroconversion to anti-HBe; a successful response is usually presaged by a temporary increase in
aminotransferase levels. The drug must be given by injection and is often poorly tolerated. The first 1 or 2
doses cause an influenza-like syndrome. Later, fatigue, malaise, depression, bone marrow suppression,
and, rarely, bacterial infections or autoimmune disorders can occur. In patients with advanced cirrhosis,
IFNα
can precipitate hepatic failure and is therefore contraindicated. Other contraindications include
renal failure, immunosuppression, solid organ transplantation, cytopenia, and substance abuse. In a few
patients, treatment must be stopped because of intolerable adverse effects. The drug should be given
cautiously or not at all to patients with ongoing substance abuse or a major psychiatric disorder.
Pegylated IFNα
2 can also be given. Dosage is 180
μ
g sc once/wk. Adverse effects are similar to those of
INFα
but may be less severe.
Telbivudine is a new drug that has greater efficacy than lamivudine but has high rates of resistance.
Liver transplantation should be considered for end-stage liver disease caused by HBV, but the infection
aggressively attacks the graft, and prognosis is less favorable than when liver transplantation is done for
other indications. Long-term posttransplantation therapy with lamivudine improves the outcome.
HCV:
For chronic hepatitis due to HCV, treatment is indicated if aminotransferase levels are elevated and
biopsy shows active inflammatory disease with evolving fibrosis. Treatment aims to permanently eliminate
HCV-RNA (sustained response), which is associated with permanent normalization of aminotransferase
and cessation of histologic progression.
Combination therapy with pegylated IFNα
plus ribavirin has the best results. Pegylated IFNα
2b 1.5
μ
g/kg
sc once/wk and pegylated IFNα
2a 180
μ
g sc once/wk have comparable results. Ribavirin 500 to 600 mg
po bid is usually given, although 400 mg bid may be sufficient for viral genotypes 2 and 3.
HCV genotype and viral load are determined before treatment because results influence treatment.
===PAGE:342===
Genotype 1 is the most common type but is relatively resistant to treatment. Combination therapy is given
for 1 yr; a sustained response rate of about 45 to 50% overall occurs. Results are more favorable in
patients with early disease and less favorable in those who already have cirrhosis. HCV viral load should
be measured at 3 mo and treatment stopped if RNA has not declined by at least 2 log levels compared
with pretreatment values.
Less common genotypes 2 and 3 respond more favorably. Combination therapy is required for only 6 mo
and gives an overall sustained response rate of about 75%. Longer treatment does not improve the
results.
Adverse effects of pegylated IFN are similar to those of IFNα
but may be less severe; contraindications
are also similar (see above).
Ribavirin is usually well tolerated but commonly causes anemia due to hemolysis; dosage should be
decreased if hemoglobin falls to < 10 g/dL. Ribavirin is teratogenic for both men and women,
necessitating contraception until 6 mo after completion of treatment. Patients who cannot tolerate ribavirin
should be given pegylated IFNα
, but results are not as good as with combination treatment. Ribavirin
monotherapy is of no value.
In most adult transplantation centers, advanced cirrhosis due to HCV is now the most common indication
for liver transplantation. Although HCV recurs in the graft, the course is usually indolent, and long-term
survival rates are relatively high.
===PAGE:343===
Chapter 29. Vascular Disorders of the Liver
Introduction
The liver has a dual blood supply. The portal vein (which is rich in nutrients and relatively high in O
)
provides two thirds of blood flow to the liver. The hepatic artery (which is O
-rich) supplies the rest. The
hepatic veins drain the liver into the inferior vena cava. When portal vein blood flow increases, hepatic
artery flow decreases and vice versa (the hepatic arterial buffer response). This dual, reciprocally
compensatory blood supply provides some protection from hepatic ischemia in healthy people.
Despite its dual blood supply, the liver, a metabolically active organ, can be injured by
•
Ischemia:
Ischemia results from reduced blood flow, reduced O
delivery, increased metabolic activity,
or all three.
•
Insufficient venous drainage:
The cause may be focal or diffuse obstruction. Manifestations of focal
venous obstruction depend on the location. Diffuse venous congestion causes congestive hepatopathy.
Reduced venous outflow from the liver (originating in the hepatic veins or within the liver itself, usually
from cirrhosis) results in portal hypertension.
•
Specific vascular lesions:
The hepatic artery, hepatic vein, or portal vein may be involved. In peliosis
hepatis, the vascular lesion occurs in the sinusoids (microvascular anastomoses between the portal
and hepatic veins).
Hepatic Ischemia
Diffuse ischemia can cause ischemic hepatitis; focal ischemia can cause hepatic infarction or ischemic
cholangiopathy. Hepatic infarction results from hepatic artery disorders.
Ischemic Hepatitis
(Acute Hepatic Infarction; Hypoxic Hepatitis; Shock Liver)
Ischemic hepatitis is diffuse liver damage due to an inadequate blood or O
supply.
Causes are most often systemic:
• Impaired hepatic perfusion (eg, due to heart failure or acute hypotension)
• Hypoxemia (eg, due to respiratory failure or carbon monoxide toxicity)
• Increased metabolic demand (eg, due to sepsis)
Focal lesions of the hepatic vasculature are less common causes. Ischemic hepatitis may develop when
hepatic artery thrombosis occurs during liver transplantation or when a sickle cell crisis is associated with
portal vein thrombosis (thus compromising the dual blood supply to the liver). Centrizonal necrosis
develops without liver inflammation (ie, not a true hepatitis).
Symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, and tender hepatomegaly.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation and liver function tests
• Doppler ultrasonography, MRI, or arteriography
Ischemic hepatitis is suspected in patients who have risk factors and laboratory abnormalities:
===PAGE:344===
• Serum aminotransferase increases dramatically (eg, to 1000 to 3000 IU/L).
• LDH increases within hours of ischemia (unlike acute viral hepatitis).
• Serum bilirubin increases modestly, only to ≤ 4 times its normal level.
• PT/INR increases.
Diagnostic imaging helps define the cause: Doppler ultrasonography, MRI, or arteriography can identify
an obstructed hepatic artery or portal vein thrombosis.
Treatment
• Hepatic reperfusion
Treatment is directed at the cause, aiming to restore hepatic perfusion, particularly by improving cardiac
output and reversing any hemodynamic instability.
If perfusion is restored, aminotransferase decreases over 1 to 2 wk. In most cases, liver function is fully
restored. Fulminant liver failure, although uncommon, can occur in patients with preexisting cirrhosis.
Ischemic Cholangiopathy
Ischemic cholangiopathy is focal damage to the biliary tree due to disrupted flow from the
hepatic artery via the peribiliary arterial plexus.
Common causes of ischemic cholangiopathy include vascular injury during orthotopic liver transplantation
or laparoscopic cholecystectomy, graft-rejection injury, chemoembolization, radiation therapy, and
thrombosis resulting from hypercoagulability disorders. Bile duct injury (ischemic necrosis) results,
causing cholestasis, cholangitis, or biliary strictures (often multiple).
Symptoms (eg, pruritus, dark urine, pale stools), laboratory tests, and imaging studies indicate
cholestasis.
The diagnosis is suspected when cholestasis is evident in patients at risk, particularly after liver
transplantation. Ultrasonography is the 1st-line diagnostic imaging test for cholestasis, but most patients
require magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, ERCP, or both to rule out other causes such as
cholelithiasis or cholangiocarcinoma.
Treatment is directed at the cause. After liver transplantation, such treatment includes antirejection
therapy and possible retransplantation. Biliary strictures warrant endoscopic balloon dilation and stenting.
Congestive Hepatopathy
(Passive Hepatic Congestion)
Congestive hepatopathy is diffuse venous congestion within the liver that results from rightsided heart failure (usually due to a cardiomyopathy, tricuspid regurgitation, mitral insufficiency,
cor pulmonale, or constrictive pericarditis).
Moderate or severe right-sided heart failure increases central venous pressure, which is transmitted to
the liver via the inferior vena cava and hepatic veins. Chronic congestion leads to atrophy of hepatocytes,
distention of sinusoids, and centrizonal fibrosis, which, if severe, progresses to cirrhosis (cardiac
cirrhosis). The basis for liver cell death is probably sinusoidal thrombosis that propagates to the central
veins and branches of the portal vein, causing ischemia.
Most patients are asymptomatic. However, moderate congestion causes right upper quadrant discomfort
===PAGE:345===
(due to stretching of the liver capsule) and tender hepatomegaly. Severe congestion leads to massive
hepatomegaly and jaundice. Ascites may result from the transmitted central venous hypertension;
infrequently, splenomegaly results. With transmitted central venous hypertension, the hepatojugular reflex
is present, unlike in hepatic congestion due to Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Congestive hepatopathy is suspected in patients who have right-sided heart failure, jaundice, and tender
hepatomegaly. Liver biochemistries are modestly abnormal: unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (total
bilirubin < 3 mg/dL), elevated (usually < 2 to 3 fold) aminotransferases, and prolonged PT/INR. Any ascitic
fluid has a high albumin content (> 25 g/L) and serum ascites/albumin gradient. (≥ 1.1). Because the
laboratory abnormalities are nonspecific, recognition of congestive hepatopathy is ultimately clinical. The
liver disorder is more important as an index of the severity of heart failure than as a diagnosis by itself.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying heart failure.
Hepatic Artery Disorders
The hepatic artery may be occluded. Uncommonly, aneurysms develop.
Hepatic Artery Occlusion
Causes of hepatic artery occlusion include thrombosis (eg, due to hypercoagulability disorders, severe
arteriosclerosis, or vasculitis), emboli (eg, due to endocarditis, tumors, therapeutic embolization, or
chemoembolization), iatrogenic causes (eg, ligation during surgery), vasculitis (via nonthrombotic
mechanisms), structural arterial abnormalities (eg, hepatic artery aneurysm), eclampsia, cocaine use, and
sickle cell crisis. Usually, the result is an hepatic infarct. In patients with a liver transplant or preexisting
portal vein thrombosis, hepatic artery thrombosis causes ischemic hepatitis (. Because of the
liver's dual blood supply, the liver is somewhat resistant to ischemic hepatitis and infarction.
Hepatic artery occlusion does not elicit symptoms without hepatic infarction or ischemic hepatitis. Hepatic
infarction may be asymptomatic or cause right upper quadrant pain, fever, nausea, vomiting, and
jaundice. Leukocytosis and a high aminotransferase level are common.
Diagnosis
• Vascular imaging
Diagnosis of hepatic artery occlusion is confirmed by imaging with Doppler ultrasonography, usually
followed by angiography.
The choice between CT angiography, magnetic resonance angiography, and
celiac arteriography largely depends on availability and expertise. CT may detect a wedge-shaped area
of low attenuation.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause.
Aneurysms
Aneurysms of the hepatic artery are uncommon. They tend to be saccular and multiple. Causes include
infection, arteriosclerosis, trauma, and vasculitis. Untreated aneurysms may cause death by rupturing into
the common bile duct (causing hemobilia), peritoneum (causing peritonitis), or adjacent hollow viscera.
Hemobilia may cause jaundice, upper GI bleeding, and abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant.
===PAGE:346===
Diagnosis is suspected if typical symptoms occur or if imaging tests detect an aneurysm. Doppler
ultrasonography, followed by contrast CT, is required for confirmation.
Treatment is embolization or surgical ligation.
Hepatic Vein Disorders
Obstruction of hepatic venous outflow can occur in extrahepatic vessels (Budd-Chiari syndrome) or
intrahepatic vessels (veno-occlusive disease) but often occurs in both. Obstruction results in congestion
of the sinusoids, hepatomegaly, portal hypertension, reduced portal blood flow, ascites, and
splenomegaly.
Budd-Chiari Syndrome
Budd-Chiari syndrome is obstruction of hepatic venous outflow that originates anywhere from
the small hepatic veins inside the liver to the inferior vena cava and right atrium. Manifestations
range from no symptoms to fulminant liver failure. Diagnosis is based on ultrasonography.
Treatment includes supportive medical therapy and measures to establish and maintain venous
patency, such as thrombolysis, decompression with shunts, and long-term anticoagulation.
Etiology
In the Western world, the most common cause is a clot obstructing the hepatic veins and the adjacent
inferior vena cava. Clots commonly result from the following:
• Thrombotic conditions (eg, protein C or S deficiency, antiphospholipid syndrome, antithrombin III
deficiency, factor V Leiden mutation, pregnancy, oral contraceptive use)
• Hematologic disorders (eg, myeloproliferative disorders such as polycythemia and paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinopathy)
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Connective tissue disorders
• Trauma
• Infection (eg, hydatid cyst, amebiasis)
• Tumor invasion of the hepatic vein (eg, hepatocellular or renal cell carcinoma)
Sometimes Budd-Chiari syndrome begins during pregnancy and unmasks a previously asymptomatic
hypercoagulability disorder.
The cause of obstruction is often unknown. In Asia and South Africa, the basic defect is often a
membranous obstruction (webs) of the inferior vena cava above the liver, likely representing
recanalization of a prior thrombus in adults or a developmental flaw (eg, venous stenosis) in children.
This type of obstruction is called obliterative hepatocavopathy.
Budd-Chiari syndrome usually develops over weeks or months. When it does, cirrhosis and portal
hypertension tend to develop.
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations range from none (asymptomatic) to fulminant liver failure or cirrhosis. Symptoms vary
depending on whether the obstruction occurs acutely or over time.
Acute obstruction (in about 20%) causes fatigue, right upper quadrant pain, nausea, vomiting, mild
===PAGE:347===
jaundice, tender hepatomegaly, and ascites. It typically occurs during pregnancy. Fulminant liver failure
with encephalopathy is rare. Aminotransferase levels are quite high
Chronic outflow obstruction (developing over weeks to months) may be rather asymptomatic in some
patients until it progresses or may cause fatigue, abdominal pain, and hepatomegaly. Lower-extremity
edema and ascites may result from venous obstruction, even in the absence of cirrhosis. Cirrhosis may
develop, leading to variceal bleeding, massive ascites, splenomegaly, hepatopulmonary syndrome (, or a combination. Complete obstruction of the inferior vena cava causes edema of the abdominal
wall and legs plus visibly tortuous superficial abdominal veins from the pelvis to the costal margin.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation and liver function tests
• Vascular imaging
Budd-Chiari syndrome is suspected in patients with
• Hepatomegaly, ascites, liver failure, or cirrhosis when there is no obvious cause (eg, alcohol abuse,
hepatitis) or when the cause is unexplained
• Abnormal liver function test results and risk factors for thrombosis
Liver function tests are usually abnormal; the pattern is variable and nonspecific. Imaging usually begins
with abdominal Doppler ultrasonography, which can show the direction of blood flow and the site of
obstruction. Magnetic resonance angiography and CT are useful if ultrasonography is not diagnostic.
Conventional angiography (venography with pressure measurements and arteriography) is necessary if
therapeutic or surgical intervention is planned. Liver biopsy is done occasionally to diagnose the acute
stages and determine whether cirrhosis has developed.
Prognosis
Without treatment, most patients with complete venous obstruction die of liver failure within 3 yr. For
patients with incomplete obstruction, the course varies.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Restoration and maintenance of adequate venous outflow
Treatment varies according to its onset (acute vs chronic) and severity (fulminant liver failure vs
decompensated cirrhosis vs stable or asymptomatic). The cornerstones of management are
• Giving supportive therapy directed at complications (eg, ascites, liver failure, esophageal varices)
• Decompressing the congested liver (ie, maintaining venous outflow)
• Preventing propagation of the clot
Aggressive interventions (eg, thrombolysis, stents) are used when the disease is acute (eg, within 4 wk
and in the absence of cirrhosis). Thrombolysis can dissolve acute clots, allowing recanalization and so
relieving hepatic congestion. Radiologic procedures have a major role using angioplasty, stenting, and
portosytemic shunts. For caval webs or hepatic venous stenosis, decompression via percutaneous
transluminal balloon angioplasty with intraluminal stents can maintain hepatic outflow. When dilation of a
hepatic outflow narrowing is not technically feasible, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting
(TIPS) and various surgical shunts can provide decompression by diversion into the systemic circulation.
Portosystemic shunts are generally not used if hepatic encephalopathy is present; such shunts worsen
===PAGE:348===
liver function. Further, shunts tend to thrombose, especially when associated with hematologic disorders.
Long-term anticoagulation is often necessary to prevent recurrence. Liver transplantation may be
lifesaving in patients with fulminant disease or decompensated cirrhosis.
Veno-Occlusive Disease
(Sinusoidal Obstruction Syndrome)
Hepatic veno-occlusive disease is caused by endothelial injury, leading to nonthrombotic
occlusion of the terminal hepatic venules and hepatic sinusoids, rather than of the hepatic veins
or inferior vena cava (as in Budd-Chiari syndrome).
Venous congestion causes portal hypertension and ischemic necrosis (which leads to cirrhosis).
Common causes include
• Irradiation
• Graft-vs-host disease resulting from bone marrow or hematopoietic cell transplantation
• Pyrrolizidine alkaloids in crotalaria and senecio plants (eg, medicinal bush teas) and other herbs (eg,
comfrey)
• Other hepatotoxins (eg, dimethylnitrosamine, aflatoxin, azathioprine, some anticancer drugs)
Initial manifestations include sudden jaundice, ascites, and tender, smooth hepatomegaly. Onset is within
the first 3 wk of transplantation in bone marrow or hematopoietic cell recipients, who either recover
spontaneously within a few weeks (or sometimes, with mild cases, after an increase in
immunosuppressant therapy) or die of fulminant liver failure. Other patients have recurrent ascites, portal
hypertension, splenomegaly, and, eventually, cirrhosis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation and liver function tests
• Ultrasonography
•
Sometimes invasive tests (eg, liver biopsy, measurement of portal-hepatic venous pressure gradient)
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with unexplained clinical or laboratory evidence of liver disease,
particularly in those with known risk factors, such as bone marrow or hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Laboratory results are nonspecific: elevated aminotransferase and conjugated bilirubin levels. PT/INR
becomes abnormal when disease is severe. Ultrasonography shows retrograde flow in the portal vein. If
the diagnosis is unclear, invasive tests become necessary—eg, liver biopsy or measurement of the portalhepatic venous pressure gradient (a pressure gradient > 10 mm Hg suggests veno-occlusive disease).
Measuring the pressure across the liver entails inserting a catheter percutaneously into a hepatic vein
and then wedging it into the liver. This wedged pressure reflects portal vein pressure. (An exception is
portal vein thrombosis; in this case, the pressure is normal despite portal hypertension.)
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Treatment of cause
• For progressive disease, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting or transplantation
===PAGE:349===
Ursodeoxycholic acid helps prevent graft-vs-host disease in bone marrow or hematopoietic cell transplant
recipients. Management includes withdrawing the causative agent (such as herbal teas) and providing
supportive therapy. Most patients have mild to moderate disease and do quite well. Those that progress
may require transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting (TIPS) for relief of portal hypertension.
However, in 25%, veno-occlusive disease is severe, accompanied by fulminant liver failure. Liver
transplantation is a last resort.
Portal Vein Disorders
Nearly all portal vein disorders obstruct portal vein blood flow and cause portal hypertension (.
Obstruction can be
• Extrahepatic—portal vein thrombosis due to a hypercoagulable state, vessel wall lesion (eg,
pylephlebitis, omphalitis), an adjacent lesion (eg, pancreatitis, tumor), or congenital atresia of the portal
vein
• Intrahepatic (eg, microvascular portal vein obstruction as in schistosomiasis, primary biliary cirrhosis,
sarcoidosis, noncirrhotic portal hypertension)
Portal Vein Thrombosis
Portal vein thrombosis causes portal hypertension and consequent GI bleeding from varices,
usually in the lower esophagus or stomach. Diagnosis is based on ultrasonography. Treatment
involves control of variceal bleeding (usually with endoscopic banding, IV octreotide, or both),
prevention of recurrence using
β
-blockers and sometimes surgical shunts and thrombolysis for
acute thrombosis.
Etiology
Common causes vary by age group (see
Table 29-1
).
Symptoms and Signs
Acute portal vein thrombosis is commonly asymptomatic unless associated with another event, such as
pancreatitis (the cause), or another complication, such as mesenteric venous thrombosis. Most often,
clinical features—splenomegaly (especially in children) and variceal hemorrhage—develop chronically
secondary to portal hypertension. Ascites is uncommon (10%) in postsinusoidal portal hypertension.
Ascites may be precipitated when cirrhosis is also present or when serum albumin (and thus oncotic
pressure) deceases after high-volume fluid resuscitation for a major GI bleed.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation and liver function tests
• Doppler ultrasonography
Portal vein thrombosis is suspected in patients with the following:
• Manifestations of portal hypertension without cirrhosis
• Mild abnormalities in liver function or enzymes plus risk factors such as neonatal umbilical infection,
childhood appendicitis, or a hypercoagulability disorder
Doppler ultrasonography is usually diagnostic, showing diminished or absent portal vein flow and
sometimes the thrombus. Difficult cases may require MRI or CT with contrast. Angiography may be
required to guide shunt surgery.
===PAGE:350===
[Table 29-1.
Common Causes of Portal Vein Thrombosis*]
Treatment
• For some acute cases, thrombolysis
• Long-term anticoagulation
• Management of portal hypertension and its complications
In acute cases, thrombolysis is sometimes successful, best reserved for recent occlusion, particularly in
hypercoagulable states. Anticoagulation does not lyse clots but has some value for long-term prevention
in hypercoagulable states despite the risk of variceal bleeding. In neonates and children, treatment is
directed at the cause (eg, omphalitis, appendicitis). Otherwise, management is directed at the portal
hypertension and its complications (; treatment can include octreotide IV (a synthetic analog of
somatostatin) and endoscopic banding to control variceal bleeding and nonselective
β
-blockers to prevent
rebleeding. These therapies have decreased the use of surgical shunts (eg, mesocaval, splenorenal),
which can become occluded and have an operative mortality rate of 5 to 50%. Transjugular intrahepatic
portosytemic shunting (TIPS) is not recommended. TIPS requires monitoring (including frequent
angiography) to assess patency, may become blocked, and may not adequately decompress the liver.
Peliosis Hepatis
Peliosis hepatis is typically an asymptomatic disorder in which multiple blood-filled cystic
spaces develop randomly in the liver.
Measuring a few millimeters to about 3 cm in diameter, the cysts of peliosis hepatis often lack a cell lining
and are surrounded by hepatocytes. Some have an endothelial cell lining, accompanied by dilated
hepatic sinusoids. The cause is probably damage to the sinusoidal lining cells. Peliosis hepatis is
associated with use of hormones (eg, anabolic steroids, oral contraceptives, glucocorticoids), tamoxifen,
vinyl chloride, vitamin A, and, particularly in kidney transplant recipients, azathioprine.
Peliosis hepatis is usually asymptomatic, but occasionally cysts rupture, resulting in hemorrhage and
sometimes causing death. Some patients develop overt liver disease, characterized by jaundice,
hepatomegaly, and liver failure.
Mild cases may be detected incidentally during imaging tests done because liver function test results are
slightly abnormal or for other reasons. Ultrasonography or CT can detect cysts.
===PAGE:351===
Chapter 30. Liver Masses and Granulomas
Introduction
Liver masses include cysts, benign tumors, primary liver cancers, and metastatic liver cancer. Certain
drugs and disorders can result in granuloma formation in the liver.
Hepatic Cysts
Isolated cysts are commonly detected incidentally on abdominal ultrasonography or CT. These cysts are
usually asymptomatic and have no clinical significance. The rare congenital polycystic liver is commonly
associated with polycystic disease of the kidneys ( and other organs. It causes progressive
nodular hepatomegaly (sometimes massive) in adults. Nevertheless, hepatocellular function is remarkably
well preserved, and portal hypertension rarely develops.
Other hepatic cysts include the following:
• Hydatid (echinococcal) cysts (
• Caroli's disease, which is rare, autosomal recessive, and characterized by segmental cystic dilation of
intrahepatic bile ducts (often becoming symptomatic in adulthood, with stone formation, cholangitis, and
sometimes cholangiocarcinoma)
• True cystic tumors (rare)
Benign Liver Tumors
Benign liver tumors are relatively common. Most are asymptomatic, but some cause hepatomegaly, right
upper quadrant discomfort, or intraperitoneal hemorrhage. Most are detected incidentally on ultrasound or
other scans. Liver function tests are usually normal or only slightly abnormal. Diagnosis is usually
possible with imaging tests but may require biopsy. Treatment is needed only in a few specific
circumstances.
Hepatocellular adenoma:
Hepatocellular adenoma is the most important benign tumor to recognize. It
occurs primarily in women of childbearing age, particularly those taking oral contraceptives, possibly via
estrogen's effects. Most adenomas are asymptomatic, but large ones may cause right upper quadrant
discomfort. Rarely, adenomas manifest as peritonitis and shock due to rupture and intraperitoneal
hemorrhage. Rarely, they become malignant.
Diagnosis is often suspected based on ultrasound or CT results, but biopsy is sometimes needed for
confirmation.
Adenomas due to contraceptive use often regress if the contraceptive is stopped. If the adenoma does
not regress or if it is subcapsular or > 5 cm, surgical resection is often recommended.
Focal nodular hyperplasia:
This localized hamartoma may resemble macronodular cirrhosis
histologically. Diagnosis is usually based on MRI or CT with contrast, but biopsy may be necessary.
Treatment is rarely needed.
Hemangiomas:
Hemangiomas are usually small and asymptomatic; they occur in 1 to 5% of adults.
These tumors often have a characteristic highly vascular appearance. Rupture is rare, even when tumors
are large. Hemangiomas are found incidentally during ultrasonography, CT, or MRI. Treatment is usually
not indicated.
In infants, hemangiomas often regress spontaneously by age 2 yr. However, large hemangiomas
occasionally cause arteriovenous shunting sufficient to cause heart failure and sometimes consumption
coagulopathy. In these cases, treatment may include high-dose corticosteroids, sometimes diuretics and
digoxin to improve heart function, interferonα
(given sc), surgical removal, selective hepatic artery
===PAGE:352===
embolization, and, rarely, liver transplantation.
Other benign tumors:
Lipomas (usually asymptomatic) and localized fibrous tumors (eg, fibromas) rarely
occur in the liver.
Benign bile duct adenomas are rare, inconsequential, and usually detected incidentally. They are
sometimes mistaken for metastatic cancer.
Primary Liver Cancer
Primary liver cancer is usually hepatocellular carcinoma. The first manifestations of liver cancer are
usually nonspecific, delaying the diagnosis. Prognosis is usually poor.
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma (hepatoma) usually occurs in patients with cirrhosis and is common in
areas where infection with hepatitis B and C viruses is prevalent. Symptoms and signs are
usually nonspecific. Diagnosis is based on
α
-fetoprotein (AFP) levels, imaging
tests, and
sometimes liver biopsy. Screening with periodic AFP measurement and ultrasonography is
sometimes recommended for high-risk patients. Prognosis is poor when cancer is advanced,
but for small tumors that are confined to the liver, ablative therapies are palliative and surgical
resection or liver transplantation is sometimes curative.
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most common type of primary liver cancer and results in about 14,000
deaths annually in the US. However, it is more common outside the US, particularly in East Asia and subSaharan Africa; incidence generally parallels geographic prevalence of chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection.
Etiology
Hepatocellular carcinoma is usually a complication of cirrhosis.
The presence of HBV increases risk of hepatocellular carcinoma by > 100-fold among HBV carriers.
Incorporation of HBV-DNA into the host's genome may initiate malignant transformation, even in the
absence of chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis.
Other disorders that cause hepatocellular carcinoma include cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis C virus
(HCV) infection, hemochromatosis, and alcoholic cirrhosis. Patients with cirrhosis due to other conditions
are also at increased risk.
Environmental carcinogens may play a role; eg, ingestion of food contaminated with fungal aflatoxins is
believed to contribute to the high incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in subtropical regions.
Symptoms and Signs
Most commonly, previously stable patients with cirrhosis present with abdominal pain, weight loss, right
upper quadrant mass, and unexplained deterioration. Fever may occur. In a few patients, the first
manifestation of hepatocellular carcinoma is bloody ascites, shock, or peritonitis, caused by hemorrhage
of the tumor. Occasionally, a hepatic friction rub or bruit develops.
Occasionally, systemic metabolic complications, including hypoglycemia, erythrocytosis, hypercalcemia,
and hyperlipidemia, occur. These complications may manifest clinically.
Diagnosis
•
α
-Fetoprotein (AFP) measurement
• Imaging (CT, ultrasonography, or MRI)
===PAGE:353===
Diagnosis is based on AFP measurement and an imaging test. In adults, AFP signifies dedifferentiation of
hepatocytes, which most often indicates hepatocellular carcinoma; 40 to 65% of patients with the cancer
have high AFP levels (> 400
μ
g/L). High levels are otherwise rare, except in teratocarcinoma of the testis,
a much less common tumor. Lower values are less specific and can occur with hepatocellular
regeneration (eg, in hepatitis). Other blood tests, such as AFP-L3 (an AFP isoform) and desγ
-
carboxyprothrombin, are being studied as markers to be used for early detection of hepatocellular
carcinoma.
Depending on local preferences and capabilities, the first imaging test may be contrast-enhanced CT,
ultrasonography, or MRI. Hepatic arteriography is occasionally helpful in equivocal cases and can be
used to outline the vascular anatomy when ablation or surgery is planned.
If imaging shows characteristic findings and AFP is elevated, the diagnosis is clear. Liver biopsy, often
guided by ultrasonography or CT, is sometimes indicated for definitive diagnosis.
Staging:
If a hepatocellular carcinoma is diagnosed, evaluation usually includes chest CT without
contrast, imaging of the portal vein (if not already done) by MRI or CT with contrast to exclude
thrombosis, and sometimes bone scanning.
Hepatocellular carcinoma is staged based on the following (American Cancer Society classification
system—see
Table 30-1
):
• T: How many primary tumors, how big they are, and whether the cancer has spread to adjacent organs
• N: Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes
• M: Whether the cancer has metastasized to other organs of the body
Numbers (0 to 4) are added after T, N, and M to indicate increasing severity. The letter X means no
assessment is possible.
Screening:
An increasing number of hepatocellular carcinomas are being detected through screening
programs. Screening patients with cirrhosis is reasonable, although this measure is controversial and has
not been shown to reduce mortality. One common screening method is AFP measurement and
ultrasonography every 6 or 12 mo. Many experts advise screening patients with longstanding hepatitis B
even when cirrhosis is absent.
Treatment
• Transplantation if tumors are small and few
[Table 30-1.
Staging Hepatocellular Carcinoma*]
For single tumors < 5 cm or ≤ 3 tumors ≤ 3 cm that are limited to the liver, liver transplantation results in
as good a prognosis as liver transplantation done for noncancerous disorders. Alternatively, surgical
resection may be done; however, the cancer usually recurs.
Ablative treatments (eg, hepatic arterial chemoembolization, intratumoral ethanol injection, cryoablation,
radiofrequency ablation) provide palliation and slow tumor growth; they are used when patients are
awaiting liver transplantation.
If the tumor is large (> 5 cm), is multifocal, has invaded the portal vein, or is metastatic (ie, stage III or
higher), prognosis is much less favorable (eg, 5-yr survival rates of about 5% or less). Radiation therapy
is usually ineffective. Some newer chemotherapeutic regimens are promising.
Prevention
===PAGE:354===
Use of vaccine against HBV eventually decreases the incidence, especially in endemic areas. Preventing
the development of cirrhosis of any cause (eg, via treatment of chronic hepatitis C, early detection of
hemochromatosis, management of alcoholism) can also have a significant effect.
Other Primary Liver Cancers
Other primary liver cancers are uncommon or rare. Diagnosis usually requires biopsy. Prognosis is
typically poor. Some cancers, if localized, can be resected. With resection or liver transplantation, survival
may be prolonged.
Fibrolamellar carcinoma:
This distinct variant of hepatocellular carcinoma has a characteristic
morphology of malignant hepatocytes enmeshed in lamellar fibrous tissue. It usually occurs in young
adults and has no association with preexisting cirrhosis, HBV, HCV, or other known risk factors. AFP
levels are rarely elevated. Prognosis is better than that for hepatocellular carcinoma, and many patients
survive several years after tumor resection.
Cholangiocarcinoma:
This tumor originates in the biliary epithelium. It is common in China, where
underlying infestation with liver flukes is believed to contribute. Elsewhere, it is less common than
hepatocellular carcinoma; histologically, the two may overlap. Primary sclerosing cholangitis greatly
increases risk of cholangiocarcinoma.
Hepatoblastoma:
Although rare, hepatoblastoma is one of the most common primary liver cancers in
infants, particularly those with a family history of familial adenomatous polyposis (. It can also
develop in children. Some patients with hepatoblastoma present with precocious puberty caused by
ectopic gonadotropin production, but the cancer is usually detected because of deteriorating general
health and a right upper quadrant mass. An elevated AFP level and abnormal imaging test results may
help in the diagnosis.
Angiosarcoma:
This rare cancer is associated with specific chemical carcinogens, including industrial
vinyl chloride.
Metastatic Liver Cancer
Liver metastases are common in many types of cancer, especially those of the GI tract, breast,
lung, and pancreas. The first symptoms of metastases are usually nonspecific (eg, weight loss,
right upper quadrant discomfort); they are sometimes the first symptoms of the primary cancer.
Liver metastases are suspected in patients with weight loss and hepatomegaly or with primary
tumors likely to spread to the liver. Diagnosis is usually supported by an imaging test, most
often ultrasonography, spiral CT with contrast, or MRI with contrast. Treatment usually involves
palliative chemotherapy.
Metastatic liver cancer is more common than primary liver cancer and is sometimes the initial clinical
manifestation of cancer originating in the GI tract, breast, lung, or pancreas.
Symptoms and Signs
Early liver metastases may be asymptomatic. Nonspecific symptoms of cancer (eg, weight loss, anorexia,
fever) often develop first. The liver may be enlarged, hard, or tender; massive hepatomegaly with easily
palpable nodules signifies advanced disease. Hepatic bruits and pleuritic-type pain with an overlying
friction rub are uncommon but characteristic. Splenomegaly is occasionally present, especially when the
primary cancer is pancreatic. Concomitant peritoneal tumor seeding may produce ascites, but jaundice is
usually absent or mild initially unless a tumor causes biliary obstruction.
In the terminal stages, progressive jaundice and hepatic encephalopathy presage death.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:355===
• CT with contrast or MRI with contrast
• Sometimes biopsy
Liver metastases are suspected in patients with weight loss and hepatomegaly or with primary tumors
likely to spread to the liver. If metastases are suspected, liver function tests are often done, but results
are usually not specific for the diagnosis. Alkaline phosphatase,
γ
-glutamyl transpeptidase, and
sometimes LDH typically increase earlier or to a greater degree than do other test results;
aminotransferase levels vary. Imaging tests have good sensitivity and specificity. Ultrasonography is
usually helpful, but CT with contrast or MRI with contrast is often more accurate.
Liver biopsy guided by imaging provides the definitive diagnosis and is done if other tests are equivocal
or if histologic information (eg, cell type of the liver metastasis) may help determine the treatment plan.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the extent of metastasis. With solitary or very few metastases due to colorectal
cancer, surgical resection may prolong survival. Depending on characteristics of the primary tumor,
systemic chemotherapy may shrink tumors and prolong life but is not curative; hepatic intra-arterial
chemotherapy sometimes has the same effect but with fewer or milder systemic adverse effects.
Radiation therapy to the liver occasionally alleviates severe pain due to advanced metastases but does
not prolong life. Extensive disease is fatal and is best managed by palliation for the patient and support
for the family (.
Hematologic Cancers and the Liver
The liver is commonly involved in advanced leukemia and related blood disorders. Liver biopsy is not
needed. In hepatic lymphoma, especially Hodgkin lymphoma, the extent of liver involvement determines
staging and treatment but may be difficult to assess. Hepatomegaly and abnormal liver function tests may
reflect a systemic reaction to Hodgkin lymphoma rather than spread to the liver, and biopsy often shows
nonspecific focal mononuclear infiltrates or granulomas of uncertain significance. Treatment is directed at
the hematologic cancer.
Hepatic Granulomas
Hepatic granulomas have numerous causes and are usually asymptomatic. However, the
underlying disorder may cause extrahepatic manifestations, hepatic inflammation, fibrosis,
portal hypertension, or a combination. Diagnosis is based on liver biopsy, but biopsy is
necessary only if a treatable underlying disorder (eg, infection) is suspected or if other liver
disorders need to be ruled out. Treatment depends on the underlying disorder.
Hepatic granulomas, although sometimes insignificant, more often reflect clinically relevant disease. The
term granulomatous
hepatitis is often used to describe the condition, but the disorder is not true hepatitis,
and the presence of granulomas does not imply hepatocellular inflammation.
Etiology
Hepatic granulomas have many causes (see
Table 30-2
.); drugs and systemic disorders (often infections) are more common causes than primary liver
disorders. Infections must be identified because they require specific treatments. TB and schistosomiasis
are the most common infectious causes worldwide; fungal and viral causes are less common. Sarcoidosis
is the most common noninfectious cause; the liver is involved in about two thirds of patients, and
occasionally, clinical manifestations of sarcoidosis are predominantly hepatic.
Granulomas are much less common in primary liver disorders; primary biliary cirrhosis is the only
important cause. Small granulomas occasionally occur in other liver disorders but are not clinically
significant.
===PAGE:356===
Idiopathic granulomatous hepatitis
is a rare syndrome of hepatic granulomas with recurrent fever,
myalgias, fatigue, and other systemic symptoms, which often occur intermittently for years. Some experts
believe it is a variant of sarcoidosis.
Pathophysiology
A granuloma is a localized collection of chronic inflammatory cells with epithelioid cells and giant
multinucleated cells. Caseation necrosis or foreign body tissue (eg, schistosome eggs) may be present.
Most granulomas occur in the parenchyma, but in primary biliary cirrhosis, granulomas may occur in the
hepatic triads.
Granuloma formation is incompletely understood. Granulomas may develop in response to poorly soluble
exogenous or endogenous irritants. Immunologic mechanisms are involved.
Hepatic granulomas rarely affect hepatocellular function. However, when granulomas are part of a
broader inflammatory reaction involving the liver (eg, drug reactions, infectious mononucleosis),
hepatocellular dysfunction is present. Sometimes inflammation causes progressive hepatic fibrosis and
portal hypertension, typically with schistosomiasis and occasionally with extensive sarcoidal infiltration.
Symptoms and Signs
Granulomas themselves are typically asymptomatic; even extensive infiltration usually causes only minor
hepatomegaly and little or no jaundice. Symptoms, if they occur, reflect the underlying condition (eg,
constitutional symptoms in infections, hepatosplenomegaly in schistosomiasis).
[Table 30-2.
Causes of Hepatic Granulomas]
Diagnosis
• Liver function tests
• Imaging
• Biopsy
Hepatic granulomas are suspected in patients with
• Conditions that commonly cause granulomas
• Unexplained hepatic masses found during imaging tests
• Occasionally, when an imaging test is done to evaluate asymptomatic elevations in liver enzymes,
particularly alkaline phosphatase
When granulomas are suspected, liver function tests are usually done, but results are nonspecific and are
rarely helpful in diagnosis. Alkaline phosphatase (and
γ
-glutamyltransferase) is often mildly elevated but
occasionally may be markedly elevated. Other test results may be normal or abnormal, reflecting
additional hepatic damage (eg, widespread
hepatic inflammation due to a drug reaction). Usually, imaging
tests, such as ultrasonography, CT, or MRI, are not diagnostic; they may show calcification (if granulomas
are long-standing) or filling defects, particularly with confluent lesions.
Diagnosis is based on liver biopsy. However, biopsy is usually indicated only to diagnose treatable
causes (eg, infections) or to rule out nongranulomatous disorders (eg, chronic viral hepatitis). Biopsy
sometimes detects evidence of the specific cause (eg, schistosome eggs, caseation of TB, fungal
organisms). However, other tests (eg, cultures, skin tests, laboratory tests, imaging tests, other tissue
specimens) are often needed.
===PAGE:357===
In patients with constitutional or other symptoms suggesting infection (eg, FUO), specific measures are
taken to increase the diagnostic sensitivity of biopsy for infections; eg, a portion of the fresh biopsy
specimen is sent for culture, or special stains for acid-fast bacilli, fungi, and other organisms are used.
Often, cause cannot be established.
Prognosis
Hepatic granulomas caused by drugs or infection regress completely after treatment. Sarcoid granulomas
may disappear spontaneously or persist for years, usually without causing clinically important liver
disease. Progressive fibrosis and portal hypertension (sarcoidal cirrhosis) rarely develop.
In schistosomiasis, progressive portal scarring (pipestem fibrosis) is typical; liver function is usually
preserved, but marked splenomegaly and variceal hemorrhage can occur.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder. When the cause is unknown, treatment is usually
withheld, and follow-up with periodic liver function tests is instituted. However, if symptoms of TB (eg,
prolonged fever) and deteriorating health occur, empiric antituberculous therapy may be justified.
Corticosteroids may benefit patients with progressive hepatic sarcoidosis, although whether these drugs
prevent hepatic fibrosis is unclear. However, corticosteroids are not indicated for most patients with
sarcoidosis and are warranted only if TB and other infections can be excluded confidently.
===PAGE:358===
Chapter 31. Gallbladder and Bile Duct Disorders
Introduction
The liver produces about 500 to 600 mL of bile each day. Bile is isosmotic with plasma and consists
primarily of water and electrolytes but also organic compounds: bile salts, phospholipids (mostly lecithin),
cholesterol, bilirubin, and other endogenously produced or ingested compounds, such as proteins that
regulate GI function and drugs or their metabolites. Bilirubin is a degradation product of heme compounds
from worn-out RBCs and is the pigment that gives bile its yellow-green color.
Bile salts (bile acids) are the major organic component in bile. The liver uses active transport to secrete
bile salts into the canaliculus, the cleft between adjacent hepatocytes. Canalicular transport is the ratelimiting step in bile formation. Once secreted, bile salts draw other bile components (particularly Na
+
and
water) into the canaliculus by osmosis. Bile salts are also biologic detergents that enable the body to
excrete cholesterol and potentially toxic compounds (eg, bilirubin, drug metabolites). The function of bile
salts in the duodenum is to solubilize ingested fat and fat-soluble vitamins, facilitating their digestion and
absorption. From the liver, bile flows from the intrahepatic collecting system into the right or left hepatic
duct, then into the common hepatic duct.
During fasting, about 75% of the bile secreted passes from the common hepatic duct into the gallbladder
via the cystic duct. The rest flows directly into the common bile duct (formed by the junction of the
common hepatic and cystic ducts) into the duodenum. During fasting, the gallbladder absorbs up to 90%
of bile water, concentrating and storing bile.
Bile empties from the gallbladder into the common bile duct. The common bile duct joins with the
pancreatic duct to form the ampulla of Vater, which empties into the duodenum. Before joining the
pancreatic duct, the common bile duct tapers to a diameter of ≤ 0.6 cm.
The sphincter of Oddi, which surrounds both the pancreatic duct and the common bile duct, includes a
sphincter for each duct. Bile does not normally flow retrograde into the pancreatic duct. These sphincters
are highly sensitive to cholecystokinin and other gut hormones (eg, gastrin-releasing peptide) and to
alterations in cholinergic tone (eg, by anticholinergic drugs).
Eating releases gut hormones and stimulates cholinergic nerves, causing the gallbladder to contract and
the sphincter of Oddi to relax. As a result, the gallbladder empties 50 to 75% of its contents into the
duodenum. Conversely, during fasting, an increase in sphincter tone facilitates gallbladder filling.
Bile salts are poorly absorbed by passive diffusion in the proximal small bowel; most intestinal bile salts
reach the terminal ileum, which actively absorbs 90% into the portal venous circulation. Returned to the
liver, bile salts are efficiently extracted, promptly modified (eg, conjugated if they arrive in the free form),
and secreted back into bile. Bile salts circulate through this pathway from liver to gut to liver—the
enterohepatic circulation—10 to 12 times/day.
Cholelithiasis
Cholelithiasis is the presence of one or more calculi (gallstones) in the gallbladder. In
developed countries, about 10% of adults and 20% of people > 65 yr have gallstones. Gallstones
tend to be asymptomatic. The most common symptom is biliary colic; gallstones do not cause
dyspepsia or fatty food intolerance. More serious complications include cholecystitis; biliary
tract obstruction (from stones in the bile ducts or choledocholithiasis), sometimes with infection
(cholangitis); and gallstone pancreatitis. Diagnosis is usually by ultrasonography. If
cholelithiasis causes symptoms or complications, cholecystectomy is necessary.
Risk factors for gallstones include female sex, obesity, increased age, American Indian ethnicity, a
Western diet, and a family history. Most disorders of the biliary tract result from gallstones.
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:359===
Biliary sludge
is often a precursor of gallstones. It consists of Ca bilirubinate (a polymer of bilirubin),
cholesterol microcrystals, and mucin. Sludge develops during gallbladder stasis, as occurs during
pregnancy or use of TPN. Most sludge is asymptomatic and disappears when the primary condition
resolves. Alternatively, sludge can evolve into gallstones or migrate into the biliary tract, obstructing the
ducts and leading to biliary colic, cholangitis, or pancreatitis.
There are several types of gallstones.
Cholesterol stones
account for > 85% of gallstones in the Western world. For cholesterol gallstones to
form, the following is required:
• Bile must be supersaturated with cholesterol. Normally, water-insoluble cholesterol is made water
soluble by combining with bile salts and lecithin to form mixed micelles. Supersaturation of bile with
cholesterol most commonly results from excessive cholesterol secretion (as occurs in obesity or
diabetes) but may result from a decrease in bile salt secretion (eg, in cystic fibrosis because of bile salt
malabsorption) or in lecithin secretion (eg, in a rare genetic disorder that causes a form of progressive
intrahepatic familial cholestasis).
• The excess cholesterol must precipitate from solution as solid microcrystals. Such precipitation in the
gallbladder is accelerated by mucin, a glycoprotein, or other proteins in bile.
• The microcrystals must aggregate and grow. This process is facilitated by the binding effect of mucin
forming a scaffold and by retention of microcrystals in the gallbladder with impaired contractility due to
excess cholesterol in bile.
Black pigment stones
are small, hard gallstones composed of Ca bilirubinate and inorganic Ca salts
(eg, Ca carbonate, Ca phosphate). Factors that accelerate stone development include alcoholic liver
disease, chronic hemolysis, and older age.
Brown pigment stones
are soft and greasy, consisting of bilirubinate and fatty acids (Ca palmitate or
stearate). They form during infection, inflammation, and parasitic infestation (eg, liver flukes in Asia).
Gallstones grow at about 1 to 2 mm/yr, taking 5 to 20 yr before becoming large enough to cause
problems. Most gallstones form within the gallbladder, but brown pigment stones form in the ducts.
Gallstones may migrate to the bile duct after cholecystectomy or, particularly in the case of brown pigment
stones, develop behind strictures as a result of stasis and infection.
Symptoms and Signs
About 80% of people with gallstones are asymptomatic. The remainder have symptoms ranging from
biliary-type pain (biliary colic)
to cholecystitis to life-threatening cholangitis. Biliary colic is the most
common symptom.
Stones occasionally traverse the cystic duct without causing symptoms. However, most gallstone
migration leads to cystic duct obstruction, which, even if transient, causes biliary colic. Biliary colic
characteristically begins in the right upper quadrant but may occur elsewhere in the abdomen. It is often
poorly localized, particularly in diabetics and the elderly. The pain may radiate into the back or down the
arm. Episodes begin suddenly, become intense within 15 min to 1 h, remain at a steady intensity (not
colicky) for up to 12 h (usually < 6 h), and then gradually disappear over 30 to 90 min, leaving a dull ache.
The pain is usually severe enough to send patients to the emergency department for relief. Nausea and
some vomiting are common, but fever and chills do not occur unless cholecystitis has developed. Mild
right upper quadrant or epigastric tenderness may be present; peritoneal findings are absent. Between
episodes, patients feel well.
Although biliary-type pain can follow a heavy meal, fatty food is not a specific precipitating factor.
Nonspecific GI symptoms, such as gas, bloating, and nausea, have been inaccurately ascribed to
gallbladder disease. These symptoms are common, having about equal prevalence in cholelithiasis,
===PAGE:360===
peptic ulcer disease, and functional GI disorders.
Little correlation exists between the severity and frequency of biliary colic and pathologic changes in the
gallbladder. Biliary colic can occur in the absence of cholecystitis. If colic lasts > 12 h, particularly if it is
accompanied by vomiting or fever, acute cholecystitis or pancreatitis is likely.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography
Gallstones are suspected in patients with biliary colic. Abdominal ultrasonography is the method of choice
for detecting gallbladder stones; sensitivity and specificity are 95%. Ultrasonography also accurately
detects sludge. CT, MRI (, and oral cholecystography (rarely available now, although quite
accurate) are alternatives. Endoscopic ultrasonography accurately detects small gallstones (< 3 mm) and
may be needed if other tests are equivocal. Laboratory tests usually are not helpful; typically, results are
normal unless complications develop. Asymptomatic gallstones and biliary sludge are often detected
incidentally when imaging, usually ultrasonography, is done for other reasons. About 10 to 15% of
gallstones are calcified and visible on plain x-rays.
Prognosis
Patients with asymptomatic gallstones become symptomatic at a rate of about 2%/yr. The symptom that
develops most commonly is biliary colic rather than a major biliary complication. Once biliary symptoms
begin, they are likely to recur; pain returns in 20 to 40% of patients/yr, and about 1 to 2% of patients/yr
develop complications such as cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis, cholangitis, and gallstone pancreatitis.
Treatment
• Laparoscopic cholecystectomy for symptomatic stones
• Expectant for asymptomatic stones; sometimes stone dissolution
Most asymptomatic patients decide that the discomfort, expense, and risk of elective surgery are not
worth removing an organ that may never cause clinical illness. However, if symptoms occur, gallbladder
removal (cholecystectomy) is indicated because pain is likely to recur and serious complications can
develop.
Surgery:
Surgery can be done with an open or laparoscopic technique.
Open cholecystectomy, which involves a large abdominal incision and direct exploration, is safe and
effective. Its overall mortality rate is about 0.1% when done electively during a period free of
complications.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice. Using video endoscopy and instrumentation
through small abdominal incisions, the procedure is less invasive than open cholecystectomy. The result
is a much shorter convalescence, decreased postoperative discomfort, improved cosmetic results, yet no
increase in morbidity or mortality. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is converted to an open procedure in 2
to 5% of patients, usually because biliary anatomy cannot be identified or a complication cannot be
managed. Older age typically increases the risks of any type of surgery.
Cholecystectomy effectively prevents future biliary colic but is less effective for preventing atypical
symptoms such as dyspepsia. Cholecystectomy does not result in nutritional problems or a need for
dietary limitations. Some patients develop diarrhea, often because bile salt malabsorption in the ileum is
unmasked. Prophylactic cholecystectomy is
warranted in asymptomatic patients with cholelithiasis only if
they have large gallstones (> 3 cm) or a calcified gallbladder (porcelain gallbladder); these conditions
increase the risk of gallbladder carcinoma.
Stone dissolution:
For patients who decline surgery or who are at high surgical risk (eg, because of
===PAGE:361===
concomitant medical disorders or advanced age), gallbladder stones can sometimes be dissolved by
ingesting bile acids orally for many months. The best candidates for this treatment are those with small,
radiolucent stones (more likely to be composed of cholesterol) in a functioning nonobstructed gallbladder
(indicated by normal filling detected during cholescintigraphy or oral cholecystography or by absence of
stones in the neck).
Ursodeoxycholic acid 8 to 10 mg/kg/day po dissolves 80% of tiny stones < 0.5 cm in diameter within 6
mo. For larger stones (the majority), the success rate is much lower, even with higher doses of
ursodeoxycholic acid. Further, after successful dissolution, stones recur in 50% within 5 yr. Most patients
are thus not candidates and prefer laparoscopic cholecystectomy. However, ursodeoxycholic acid can
help prevent stone formation in morbidly obese patients who are losing weight rapidly after bariatric
surgery or while on a very low calorie diet.
Stone fragmentation (extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy) to assist stone dissolution and clearance is
now unavailable.
Cholecystitis
Cholecystitis, which is inflammation of the gallbladder, can be acute or chronic.
Acute Cholecystitis
Acute cholecystitis is inflammation of the gallbladder that develops over hours, usually
because a gallstone obstructs the cystic duct. Symptoms include right upper quadrant pain and
tenderness, sometimes accompanied by fever, chills, nausea, and vomiting. Abdominal
ultrasonography detects the gallstone and sometimes the associated inflammation. Treatment
usually involves antibiotics and cholecystectomy.
Acute cholecystitis is the most common complication of cholelithiasis. Conversely, ≥ 95% of patients with
acute cholecystitis have cholelithiasis. When a stone becomes impacted in the cystic duct and
persistently obstructs it, acute inflammation results. Bile stasis triggers release of inflammatory enzymes
(eg, phospholipase A, which converts lecithin to lysolecithin, which then may mediate inflammation). The
damaged mucosa secretes more fluid into the gallbladder lumen than it absorbs. The resulting distention
further releases inflammatory mediators (eg, prostaglandins), worsening mucosal damage and causing
ischemia, all of which perpetuate inflammation. Bacterial infection can supervene. The vicious circle of
fluid secretion and inflammation, when unchecked, leads to necrosis and perforation. If acute
inflammation resolves, the gallbladder becomes fibrotic and contracted and does not concentrate bile or
empty normally—features of chronic cholecystitis.
Acute acalculous cholecystitis:
Acalculous cholecystitis is cholecystitis without stones. It accounts for
5 to 10% of cholecystectomies done for acute cholecystitis. Risk factors include the following:
• Critical illness (eg, major surgery, burns, sepsis, or trauma)
• Prolonged fasting or TPN (both predispose to bile stasis)
• Shock
• Immune deficiency
• Vasculitis (eg, SLE, polyarteritis nodosa)
The mechanism probably involves inflammatory mediators released because of ischemia, infection, or bile
stasis. Sometimes an infecting organism can be identified (eg,
Salmonella
sp or cytomegalovirus in
immunodeficient patients). In young children, acute acalculous cholecystitis tends to follow a febrile
illness without an identifiable infecting organism.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:362===
Most patients have had prior attacks of biliary colic or acute cholecystitis. The pain of cholecystitis is
similar in quality and location to biliary colic but lasts longer (ie, > 6 h) and is more severe. Vomiting is
common, as is right subcostal tenderness. Within a few hours, Murphy's sign (deep inspiration
exacerbates the pain during palpation of the right upper quadrant and halts inspiration) develops along
with involuntary guarding of upper abdominal muscles on the right side. Fever, usually low grade, is
common.
In the elderly, the first or only symptoms may be systemic and nonspecific (eg, anorexia, vomiting,
malaise, weakness, fever). Sometimes fever does not develop.
Acute cholecystitis begins to subside in 2 to 3 days and resolves within 1 wk in 85% of patients.
Complications:
Without treatment, 10% of patients develop localized perforation, and 1% develop free
perforation and peritonitis. Increasing abdominal pain, high fever, and rigors with rebound tenderness or
ileus suggest empyema (pus in the gallbladder), gangrene, or perforation. When acute cholecystitis is
accompanied by jaundice or cholestasis, partial common duct obstruction is likely, usually due to stones
or inflammation. Other complications include the following:
• Mirizzi's syndrome: Rarely, a gallstone becomes impacted in the cystic duct or Hartman's pouch and
compresses and obstructs the common bile duct, causing cholestasis.
• Gallstone pancreatitis: Gallstones pass from the gallbladder into the biliary tract and block the
pancreatic duct.
• Cholecystoenteric fistula: Infrequently, a large stone erodes the gallbladder wall, creating a fistula into
the small bowel (or elsewhere in the abdominal cavity); the stone may pass freely or obstruct the small
bowel (gallstone ileus).
Acute acalculous cholecystitis:
The symptoms are similar to those of acute cholecystitis with
gallstones but may be difficult to identify because patients tend to be severely ill (eg, ICU setting) and
may be unable to communicate clearly. Abdominal distention or unexplained fever may be the only clue.
Untreated, the disease can rapidly progress to gallbladder gangrene and perforation, leading to sepsis,
shock, and peritonitis; mortality approaches 65%.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography
• Cholescintigraphy if ultrasonography results are equivocal or if acalculous cholecystitis is suspected
Acute cholecystitis is suspected based on symptoms and signs.
Transabdominal ultrasonography is the best test to detect gallstones. The test may also elicit local
abdominal tenderness over the gallbladder (ultrasonographic Murphy's sign). Pericholecystic fluid or
thickening of the gallbladder wall indicates acute inflammation.
Cholescintigraphy is useful when results are equivocal; failure of the radionuclide to fill the gallbladder
suggests an obstructed cystic duct (ie, an impacted stone). False-positive results may be due to the
following:
• A critical illness
• Receiving TPN and no oral foods (because gallbladder stasis prevents filling)
• Severe liver disease (because the liver does not secrete the radionuclide)
• Previous sphincterotomy (which facilitates exit into the duodenum rather than the gallbladder)
===PAGE:363===
Morphine provocation, which increases tone in the sphincter of Oddi and enhances filling, helps eliminate
false-positive results.
Abdominal CT identifies complications such as gallbladder perforation or pancreatitis.
Laboratory tests are done but are not diagnostic. Leukocytosis with a left shift is common. In
uncomplicated acute cholecystitis, liver function tests are normal or only slightly elevated. Mild cholestatic
abnormalities (bilirubin up to 4 mg/dL and mildly elevated alkaline phosphatase) are common, probably
indicating inflammatory mediators affecting the liver rather than mechanical obstruction. More marked
increases, especially if lipase (amylase is less specific) is elevated > 2-fold, suggest bile duct obstruction.
Passage of a stone through the biliary tract increases aminotransferases (ALT, AST).
Acute acalculous cholecystitis:
Acute acalculous cholecystitis is suggested if a patient has no
gallstones but has ultrasonographic Murphy's sign or a thickened gallbladder wall and pericholecystic
fluid. A distended gallbladder, biliary sludge, and a thickened gallbladder wall without pericholecystic fluid
(due to low albumin or ascites) may result simply from a critical illness. CT identifies extrabiliary
abnormalities. Cholescintigraphy is more helpful; failure of a radionuclide to fill may indicate edematous
cystic duct obstruction. Giving morphine helps eliminate a false-positive result due to gallbladder stasis.
Treatment
• Supportive care (hydration, analgesics, antibiotics)
• Cholecystectomy
Management includes hospital admission, IV fluids, and analgesia with an NSAID (ketorolac) or an opioid.
Nothing is given orally, and nasogastric suction is instituted if vomiting or an ileus is present. Parenteral
antibiotics are usually initiated to treat possible infection, but evidence of benefit is lacking. Empiric
coverage, directed at gram-negative enteric organisms, involves IV regimens such as ceftriaxone 2 g q 24
h plus metronidazole 500 mg q 8 h, piperacillin/tazobactam 4 g q 6 h, or ticarcillin/clavulanate 4 g q 6 h.
Cholecystectomy cures acute cholecystitis and relieves biliary pain. Early cholecystectomy
is generally
preferred, best done during the first 24 to 48 h in the following situations:
• The diagnosis is clear and patients are at low surgical risk.
• Patients are elderly or have diabetes and are thus at higher risk of infectious complications.
• Patients have empyema, gangrene, perforation, or acalculous cholecystitis.
Surgery may be delayed when patients have an underlying severe chronic disorder (eg, cardiopulmonary)
that increases the surgical risks. In such patients, cholecystectomy is deferred until medical therapy
stabilizes the comorbid disorders or until cholecystitis resolves. If cholecystitis resolves, cholecystectomy
may be done ≥ 6 wk later. Delayed surgery carries the risk of recurrent biliary complications.
Percutaneous cholecystostomy is an alternative to cholecystectomy for patients at very high surgical risk,
such as the elderly, those with acalculous cholecystitis, and those in an ICU because of burns, trauma, or
respiratory failure.
Chronic Cholecystitis
Chronic cholecystitis is long-standing gallbladder inflammation almost always due to gallstones.
Chronic cholecystitis almost always results from gallstones and prior episodes of acute cholecystitis
(even if mild). Damage ranges from a modest infiltrate of chronic inflammatory cells to a fibrotic, shrunken
gallbladder. Extensive calcification due to fibrosis is called porcelain gallbladder.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:364===
Gallstones intermittently obstruct the cystic duct and so cause recurrent biliary colic. Such episodes of
pain are not necessarily accompanied by overt gallbladder inflammation; the extent of inflammation does
not correlate with the intensity or frequency of biliary colic. Upper abdominal tenderness may be present,
but usually fever is not. Fever suggests acute cholecystitis. Once episodes begin, they are likely to recur.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography
Chronic cholecystitis is suspected in patients with recurrent biliary colic plus gallstones. Ultrasonography
or another imaging test usually shows gallstones and sometimes a shrunken, fibrotic gallbladder. The
diagnosis is made in patients with a history of recurrent biliary colic and evidence of gallstones on
ultrasonography. Cholescintigraphy may show nonvisualization of the gallbladder but is less accurate.
Treatment
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is indicated to prevent symptom recurrence and further biliary
complications. This procedure is particularly valid for the porcelain gallbladder associated with gallbladder
carcinoma.
Acalculous Biliary Pain
Acalculous biliary pain is biliary colic without gallstones, resulting from structural or functional
disorders; it is sometimes treated with laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Biliary colic can occur in the absence of gallstones, particularly in young women. Acalculous biliary pain
accounts for up to 15% of laparoscopic cholecystectomies. Common causes of such biliary pain include
the following:
• Microscopic stones—not detected by routine abdominal ultrasonography
• Abnormal gallbladder emptying
• An overly sensitive biliary tract
• Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
• Hypersensitivity of the adjacent duodenum
• Possibly gallstones that have spontaneously passed
Some patients eventually develop other functional GI disorders.
Diagnosis
Acalculous biliary pain is suspected in patients with biliary colic when diagnostic imaging cannot detect
gallstones. Imaging should include ultrasonography and, where available, endoscopic ultrasonography
(for small stones < 1 cm). Abnormal laboratory tests may reveal evidence of a biliary tract abnormality (eg,
elevated alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, ALT, or AST) or a pancreatic abnormality (eg, elevated lipase)
during an episode of acute pain. Cholescintigraphy with cholecystokinin infusion measures gallbladder
emptying (ejection fraction); potentially interfering drugs such as Ca channel blockers, opioids, and
anticholinergics should not be used. ERCP with biliary manometry detects sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.
The best diagnostic approach remains problematic.
Treatment
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy improves outcomes for patients with microscopic stones and possibly
===PAGE:365===
abnormal gallbladder motility. The role of laparoscopic cholecystectomy or endoscopic sphincterotomy
remains problematic. Drug therapies have no proven benefit.
Postcholecystectomy Syndrome
Postcholecystectomy syndrome is occurrence of abdominal symptoms after cholecystectomy.
Postcholecystectomy syndrome occurs in 5 to 40% of patients. It refers to presumed gallbladder
symptoms that continue or that develop after cholecystectomy or to other symptoms that result from
cholecystectomy. Removal of the gallbladder, the storage organ for bile, normally has few consequences
on biliary tract function or pressures. In about 10%, biliary colic appears to result from functional or
structural abnormalities of the sphincter of Oddi, resulting in altered biliary pressures or heightened
sensitivity.
The most common symptoms are dyspepsia or otherwise nonspecific symptoms rather than true biliary
colic. Papillary stenosis, which is rare, is fibrotic narrowing around the sphincter, perhaps caused by
trauma and inflammation due to pancreatitis, instrumentation (eg, ERCP), or prior passage of a stone.
Other causes include a retained bile duct stone, pancreatitis, and gastroesophageal reflux.
Diagnosis
• ERCP with biliary manometry or biliary nuclear scanning
• Exclusion of extrabiliary pain
Patients with postcholecystectomy pain should be evaluated as indicated for extra-biliary as well as biliary
causes. If the pain suggests biliary colic, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, ALT, amylase, and lipase should
be measured, and ERCP with biliary manometry or biliary nuclear scanning should be done. Elevated
liver enzymes suggest sphincter of Oddi dysfunction; elevated amylase and lipase suggest dysfunction of
the sphincter's pancreatic portion.
Dysfunction is best detected by biliary manometry done during ERCP, although ERCP has a risk of
inducing pancreatitis. Manometry shows increased pressure in the biliary tract when pain is reproduced. A
slowed hepatic hilum-duodenal transit time on a scan also suggests sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.
Diagnosis of papillary stenosis is based on a clear-cut history of recurrent episodes of biliary pain and
abnormal liver (or pancreatic) enzyme tests.
Treatment
Endoscopic sphincterotomy can relieve recurrent pain due to sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, especially if
due to papillary stenosis. It is controversial for patients who have postcholecystectomy pain and no
objective abnormalities.
Choledocholithiasis and Cholangitis
Choledocholithiasis is the presence of stones in bile ducts; the stones can form in the
gallbladder or in the ducts themselves. These stones cause biliary colic, biliary obstruction,
gallstone pancreatitis, or cholangitis (bile duct infection and inflammation). Cholangitis, in turn,
can lead to strictures, stasis, and choledocholithiasis. Diagnosis usually requires visualization
by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography or ERCP. Early endoscopic or surgical
decompression is indicated.
Stones may be described as
• Primary stones (usually brown pigment stones), which form in the bile ducts
• Secondary stones (usually cholesterol), which form in the gallbladder but migrate to the bile ducts
===PAGE:366===
• Residual stones, which are missed at the time of cholecystectomy (evident < 3 yr later)
• Recurrent stones, which develop in the ducts > 3 yr after surgery
In developed countries, > 85% of common duct stones are secondary; affected patients have additional
stones located in the gallbladder. Up to 10% of patients with symptomatic gallstones also have
associated common bile duct stones. After cholecystectomy, brown pigment stones may result from stasis
(eg, due to a postoperative stricture) and the subsequent infection. The proportion of ductal stones that
are pigmented increases with time after cholecystectomy.
Bile duct stones may pass into the duodenum asymptomatically. Biliary colic occurs when the ducts
become partially obstructed. More complete obstruction causes duct dilation, jaundice, and, eventually,
cholangitis (a bacterial infection). Stones that obstruct the
[Table 31-1.
Causes of Bile Duct Obstruction]
ampulla of Vater can cause gallstone pancreatitis. Some patients (usually the elderly) present with biliary
obstruction due to stones that have caused no symptoms previously.
In
acute cholangitis,
bile duct obstruction allows bacteria to ascend from the duodenum. Most (85%)
cases result from common bile duct stones, but bile duct obstruction can result from tumors or other
conditions (see
Table 31-1
). Common infecting organisms include gram-negative bacteria (eg,
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella
sp,
Enterobacter
sp); less common are gram-positive bacteria (eg,
Enterococcus
sp) and mixed anaerobes (eg,
Bacteroides
sp,
Clostridia
sp). Symptoms include abdominal
pain, jaundice, and fever or chills (Charcot's triad). The abdomen is tender, and often the liver is tender
and enlarged (often containing abscesses). Confusion and hypotension predict about a 50% mortality
rate and high morbidity.
Recurrent pyogenic cholangitis
(Oriental cholangiohepatitis, hepatolithiasis) is characterized by
intrahepatic brown pigment stone formation. This disorder occurs in Southeast Asia. It consists of sludge
and bacterial debris in the bile ducts. Undernutrition and parasitic infestation (eg,
Clonorchis sinensis
,
Opisthorchis viverrini
) increase susceptibility. Parasitic infestation can cause obstructive jaundice with
intrahepatic ductal inflammation, proximal stasis, stone formation, and cholangitis. Repeating cycles of
obstruction, infection, and inflammation lead to bile duct strictures and biliary cirrhosis. The extrahepatic
ducts tend to be dilated, but the intrahepatic ducts appear straight because of periductal fibrosis.
In AIDS-related cholangiopathy or cholangitis, direct cholangiography may show abnormalities similar to
those in primary sclerosing cholangitis or papillary stenosis (ie, multiple strictures and dilations involving
the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts). Etiology is probably infection, most likely with
cytomegalovirus,
Cryptosporidium
sp, or microsporidia.
Diagnosis
• Liver function tests
• Ultrasonography
Common duct stones should be suspected in patients with jaundice and biliary colic. Fever and
leukocytosis further suggest acute cholangitis. Elevated levels of bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, ALT, and
γ
-glutamyltransferase are consistent with extrahepatic obstruction, suggesting stones, particularly in
patients with features of acute cholecystitis or cholangitis.
Ultrasonography may show stones in the gallbladder and occasionally in the common duct (less
accurate). The common duct is dilated (> 6 mm in diameter if the gallbladder is intact; > 10 mm after a
cholecystectomy). If the ducts are not dilated early in the presentation (eg, first day), stones have
probably passed. If doubt exists, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is highly
accurate for retained stones. ERCP is done if MRCP is equivocal; it can be therapeutic as well as
===PAGE:367===
diagnostic. CT, though less accurate than ultrasonography, can detect liver abscesses.
For suspected acute cholangitis, CBC and blood cultures are essential. Leukocytosis is common, and
aminotransferases may reach 1000 IU/L, suggesting acute hepatic necrosis, often due to
microabscesses. Blood cultures guide antibiotic choice.
Treatment
• ERCP and sphincterotomy
If biliary obstruction is suspected, ERCP and sphincterotomy are necessary to remove the stone.
Success rate exceeds 90%; up to 7% of patients have complications (eg, bleeding pancreatitis, infection
with fibrosis and subsequent duct stricture). Laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which is not as well suited for
operative cholangiography or common duct exploration, can be done electively following ERCP and
sphincterotomy. Mortality and morbidity after open cholecystectomy with common duct exploration are
higher. In patients at high risk of complications with cholecystectomy (eg, the elderly), sphincterotomy
alone is an alternative.
Acute cholangitis is an emergency requiring aggressive supportive care and urgent removal of the stones,
endoscopically or surgically.
Antibiotics are given, similar to those used for acute cholecystitis (
An alternative regimen for very ill patients is imipenem and ciprofloxacin, plus metronidazole to cover
anaerobes.
For recurrent pyogenic cholangitis, management aims to provide supportive care (eg, broad-spectrum
antibiotics), eradicate any parasites, and mechanically clear the ducts of stones and debris
endoscopically (via ERCP) or surgically.
Sclerosing Cholangitis
Sclerosing cholangitis refers to chronic cholestatic syndromes characterized by patchy
inflammation, fibrosis, and strictures of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts.
Progression obliterates the bile ducts and leads to cirrhosis, liver failure, and sometimes
cholangiocarcinoma.
Sclerosing cholangitis may be primary (with no known cause) or secondary due to immune deficiencies
(congenital in children, acquired in adults as AIDS cholangiopathy) often associated with superimposed
infections (eg, cytomegalovirus,
Cryptosporidium
), histiocytosis X, or use of drugs (eg, intraarterial
floxuridine). Both primary and secondary sclerosing cholangitis cause similar inflammatory and fibrosing
lesions scarring the bile ducts. Other causes of bile duct strictures are choledocholithiasis, postoperative
biliary stricture, ischemic bile duct injury (during liver transplantation), congenital biliary abnormalities,
cholangiocarcinoma, and parasitic infestations.
Diagnosis of biliary strictures and dilations requires imaging techniques such as ultrasonography and
cholangiography. Treatment focuses on relieving biliary obstruction (eg, dilating and stenting strictures)
and, when possible, eradicating responsible organisms or treating the cause (eg, HIV).
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), the most common form of sclerosing cholangitis, has no
known cause. However, 80% of patients have inflammatory bowel disease, most often
ulcerative colitis. Other associated conditions include connective tissue disorders, alloimmune
disorders, and immunodeficiency syndromes, sometimes complicated by opportunistic
infections. Fatigue and pruritus develop insidiously and progressively. Diagnosis is by
cholangiography (magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography or ERCP). Liver
transplantation is indicated for advanced disease.
Most (70%) patients with PSC are men. Mean age at diagnosis is 40 yr.
===PAGE:368===
Etiology
Although the cause is unknown, PSC is associated with inflammatory bowel disease, which is present in
80% of patients. About 5% of patients with ulcerative colitis and about 1% with Crohn's disease develop
PSC. This association and the presence of several autoantibodies (eg, anti-smooth muscle and
perinuclear antineutrophilic antibodies [pANCA]) suggest immune-mediated mechanisms. T cells appear
to be involved in the destruction of the bile ducts, implying disordered cellular immunity. A genetic
predisposition is suggested by a tendency for the disorder to develop in multiple family members and a
higher frequency in people with HLAB8 and HLADR3, which are often correlated with autoimmune
disorders. An unknown trigger (eg, bacterial infection, ischemic duct injury) probably causes PSC to
develop in genetically predisposed people.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually insidious, with progressive fatigue and then pruritus. Jaundice tends to develop later.
About 10 to 15% of patients present with repeated episodes of right upper quadrant pain and fever,
possibly due to ascending bacterial cholangitis. Steatorrhea and deficiencies of fat-soluble vitamins can
develop. Persistent jaundice harbingers advanced disease. Symptomatic gallstones and
choledocholithiasis tend to develop in about 75% of patients. Some patients, asymptomatic until late in
the course, first present with hepatosplenomegaly or cirrhosis. PSC tends to slowly and inexorably
progress. The terminal phase involves decompensated cirrhosis, portal hypertension, ascites, and liver
failure. The time from diagnosis to liver failure is about 12 yr.
Despite the association between PSC and inflammatory bowel disease, the two diseases tend to run
separate courses. Ulcerative colitis may appear years before PSC yet tends to have a milder course
when associated with PSC. Similarly, total colectomy does not change the course of PSC. The presence
of both diseases increases the risk of colorectal carcinoma, regardless of whether a liver transplantation
has been done for PSC. Cholangiocarcinoma develops in 10 to 15% of patients.
Diagnosis
• Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
PSC is suspected in patients with unexplained abnormalities in liver biochemical tests, particularly in
those with inflammatory bowel disease. A cholestatic pattern is typical: elevated alkaline phosphatase and
γ
-glutamyltransferase (GGT) rather than aminotransferases. Gamma globulin and IgM levels tend to be
increased. Anti-smooth muscle antibodies and pANCA are usually positive. Antimitochondrial antibody,
positive in primary biliary cirrhosis, is characteristically negative.
Imaging of the hepatobiliary system begins with ultrasonography to exclude extrahepatic biliary
obstruction. Although ultrasonography or CT can show ductal dilation, diagnosis requires
cholangiography to show multiple strictures and dilations in the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts.
Imaging should begin with MRCP. ERCP is usually a 2nd choice because it is invasive. Liver biopsy is
generally not required for diagnosis; when done, it shows bile duct proliferation, periductal fibrosis,
inflammation, and loss of bile ducts. With disease progression, periductal fibrosis extends from the portal
regions and eventually leads to secondary biliary cirrhosis.
Measurement of serum tumor markers and ERCP surveillance with brush cytology should be done
regularly to check for cholangiocarcinoma.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• ERCP dilation for major (dominant) strictures
• Transplantation for recurrent bacterial cholangitis or complications of end-stage liver disease
===PAGE:369===
Asymptomatic patients usually require only monitoring (eg, physical examination and liver biochemical
tests twice/yr). Ursodeoxycholic acid (up to 15 mg/kg/day reduces itching and improve biochemical
markers but not survival. Chronic cholestasis ( and cirrhosis require supportive treatment.
Episodes of bacterial cholangitis warrant antibiotics and therapeutic ERCP, as needed. If a single stricture
appears to be the major cause of obstruction (a dominant stricture, found in about 20% of patients),
ERCP dilation (with brush cytology to check for tumors) and stenting can relieve symptoms.
Liver transplantation is the only treatment that improves life expectancy in patients with PSC and offers a
cure. Recurrent bacterial cholangitis or complications of end-stage liver disease (eg, intractable ascites,
portal-systemic encephalopathy, bleeding esophageal varices) are reasonable indications for liver
transplantation.
AIDS Cholangiopathy
AIDS cholangiopathy is biliary obstruction secondary to biliary tract strictures caused by
various opportunistic infections.
Before the advent of highly active antiretroviral therapy, cholangiopathy occurred in 25% of patients with
AIDS, especially in those with a low CD4 count (< 100/
μ
L). The most common pathogen is
Cryptosporidium parvum
. Others include cytomegalovirus, microsporidia, and
Cyclospora
sp. Papillary
stenosis or intrahepatic or extrahepatic sclerosing cholangitis develops in most patients. Over half have
both.
Common symptoms include right upper quadrant and epigastric pain and diarrhea. A few patients have
fever and jaundice. Severe pain usually indicates papillary stenosis. Milder pain suggests sclerosing
cholangitis. The diarrhea reflects small-bowel infection, often cryptosporidiosis.
Diagnosis
• Usually ERCP and ultrasonography
ERCP provides the diagnosis, identification of the causal organism by small-bowel biopsy, and a
therapeutic opportunity to relieve strictures. Ultrasonography is noninvasive and very accurate (> 95%).
CT and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography likely have supportive roles.
Liver biochemistry is consistent with cholestasis, especially a high alkaline phosphatase level.
Treatment
• Endoscopic procedures
Endoscopic sphincterotomy can markedly relieve pain, jaundice, and cholangitis in patients with papillary
stenosis. Isolated or dominant strictures can be stented endoscopically. Although the cause is an
infectious agent, antimicrobial therapy alone does not relieve the biliary tract damage or its sequelae.
Because of its use in primary sclerosing cholangitis, ursodeoxycholic acid may have a role in treating
intrahepatic ductal sclerosis and cholestasis.
Tumors of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts
Gallbladder and bile duct tumors can cause extrahepatic biliary obstruction. Symptoms may be
absent but often are constitutional or reflect biliary obstruction. Diagnosis is based on
ultrasonography plus CT cholangiography or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography.
Prognosis is grim. Mechanical bile drainage can often relieve pruritus, recurrent sepsis, and
pain due to biliary obstruction.
Cholangiocarcinomas
and other bile duct tumors are rare (1 to 2/100,000 people) but are usually
malignant. Cholangiocarcinomas occur predominantly in the extrahepatic bile ducts: 60 to 70% in the
perihilar region (Klatskin tumors), about 25% in the distal ducts, and the rest in the liver. Risk factors
===PAGE:370===
include primary sclerosing cholangitis, older age, infestation with liver flukes, and a choledochal cyst.
Gallbladder carcinoma
is uncommon (2.5/100,000). It is more common among American Indians,
patients with large gallstones (> 3 cm), and those with extensive gallbladder calcification due to chronic
cholecystitis (porcelain gallbladder). Nearly all (70 to 90%) patients also have gallstones. Median survival
is 3 mo. Cure is possible when cancer is found early (eg, incidentally at cholecystectomy).
Gallbladder polyps
are usually asymptomatic benign mucosal projections that develop in the lumen of
the gallbladder. Most are < 10 mm in diameter and composed of cholesterol ester and triglycerides; the
presence of such polyps is called cholesterolosis. They are found in about 5% of people during
ultrasonography. Other, much less common benign polyps include adenomas (causing adenomyomatosis)
and inflammatory polyps. Small gallbladder polyps are incidental findings that do not require treatment.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with cholangiocarcinomas present with pruritus and painless obstructive jaundice, typically
at age 50 to 70 yr. Early perihilar tumors may cause only vague abdominal pain, anorexia, and weight
loss. Other features include acholic stool, a palpable mass, hepatomegaly, or a distended gallbladder
(Courvoisier's sign, with distal cholangiocarcinoma). Pain may resemble that of biliary colic (reflecting
biliary obstruction) or may be constant and progressive. Sepsis (acute cholangitis), though unusual, may
be induced by ERCP.
Manifestations of gallbladder carcinoma may range from incidental findings at cholecystectomy done for
biliary pain to cholelithiasis to advanced disease with constant pain, weight loss, and an abdominal mass
or obstructive jaundice.
Most gallbladder polyps cause no symptoms.
Diagnosis
Cholangiocarcinomas are suspected when extrahepatic biliary obstruction is unexplained. Laboratory test
results reflect the degree of cholestasis. In patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis, serum
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and cancer antigen (CA) 19-9 levels are used for surveillance to detect
the development of cholangiocarcinoma. Diagnosis is based on ultrasonography (or endoscopic
ultrasonography) and CT cholangiography or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. When
these methods are inconclusive, ERCP with percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) becomes
necessary. ERCP not only detects the tumor but also, with brushings, can provide a tissue diagnosis,
sometimes making ultrasonography- or CT-guided needle biopsy unnecessary. Contrast-enhanced CT
assists in staging.
Gallbladder carcinomas are better defined by CT than by ultrasonography. Open laparotomy is necessary
to determine disease extent, which guides treatment.
Treatment
• For cholangiocarcinomas, stenting (or another bypass procedure) or occasionally resection
For cholangiocarcinoma, stenting or surgically bypassing the obstruction relieves pruritus, jaundice, and
perhaps fatigue.
Hilar cholangiocarcinomas with CT evidence of spread are stented via PTC or ERCP. Distal duct
cholangiocarcinomas are stented endoscopically with ERCP. If cholangiocarcinoma appears localized,
surgical exploration determines resectability by hilar resection or pancreaticoduodenectomy. However,
successful resection is uncommon.
Liver transplantation is not indicated because of the high recurrence rate. Effectiveness of adjuvant
chemotherapy and radiation therapy for cholangiocarcinomas is unproved as yet.
===PAGE:371===
Many gallbladder carcinomas are treated symptomatically.The Merck Manual of Diagnosis & Therapy, 19th Edition Chapter 31. Gallbladder & Bile Duct Disorders
===PAGE:372===
4 - Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders
Chapter 32. Approach to the Patient With Joint Disease
Introduction
Some musculoskeletal disorders affect primarily the joints, causing arthritis. Others affect primarily the
bones (eg, fractures, Paget's disease, tumors), muscles or other extra-articular soft tissues (eg,
fibromyalgia), or periarticular soft tissues (eg, polymyalgia rheumatica, bursitis, tendinitis, sprain). Arthritis
has myriad possible causes, including infection, autoimmune disorders, crystal-induced inflammation, and
noninflammatory tissue degeneration (eg, osteoarthritis). Arthritis may affect single joints (monarthritis) or
multiple joints (polyarthritis) in a symmetric or asymmetric manner. Joints may suffer fractures or sprains
(see elsewhere in THE MANUAL).
History
The clinician should focus on systemic and extra-articular symptoms as well as joint symptoms. Many
symptoms, including fever, chills, malaise, weight loss, Raynaud's syndrome, mucocutaneous symptoms
(eg, rash, eye irritation or pain, photosensitivity), and GI or cardiopulmonary symptoms, can be associated
with various joint disorders.
Pain is the most common symptom of joint disorders. The history should address the character, location,
severity, factors that aggravate or relieve pain, and time frame (new-onset or recurrent). The clinician
must determine whether pain is worse when first moving a joint or after prolonged use and whether it is
present upon waking or develops during the day. Usually, pain originating from superficial structures is
better localized than pain originating from deeper structures. Pain originating in small distal joints tends to
be better localized than pain originating in large proximal joints. Joint pain can be referred from extraarticular structures or from other joints. Arthritis often causes aching pain, whereas neuropathies often
cause burning pain.
Stiffness may mean weakness, fatigue, or fixed limitation of motion to patients. The clinician must
separate the inability to move a joint from reluctance to move a joint because of pain. Characteristics of
stiffness may suggest a cause, as in the following:
• Discomfort that occurs with motion when attempting to move a joint after a period of rest occurs in
rheumatic disease. Duration of stiffness after beginning joint motion reflects its severity.
• The theater sign (stiffness upon standing that necessitates walking slowly after sitting for several hours)
is common in osteoarthritis.
• Stiffness is more severe and prolonged in inflammatory joint disorders.
• Morning stiffness in peripheral joints that lasts > 1 h can be an important early symptom of RA (see
Table 32-1
).
• In the low back, morning stiffness that lasts > 1 h may reflect spondylitis.
Fatigue is a desire to rest that reflects exhaustion. It differs from weakness, inability to move, and
reluctance to move due to pain with movement.
Instability (buckling of a joint) may suggest weakness of the ligaments or other structures that stabilize the
joint, which are assessed by stress testing. Buckling occurs most often in the knee and most often results
from an internal joint derangement.
Physical Examination
Each involved joint should be inspected and palpated, and the range of motion should be estimated. With
polyarticular disease, certain nonarticular signs (eg, fever, wasting, rash) may reflect systemic disorders.
===PAGE:373===
The rest position of joints is noted, along with any erythema, swelling, deformity, and skin abrasions or
punctures. Involved joints are compared with their uninvolved opposites or with those of the examiner.
Joints are gently palpated, noting the presence and location of tenderness, warmth, and swelling.
Determining whether tenderness is present along the joint line or over tendon insertions or bursae is
particularly important. Soft masses, bulges, or tissues that fill normal concavities or spaces (representing
joint effusion or synovial proliferation) are noted. Palpation of
[Table 32-1.
Distinguishing Inflammatory vs Noninflammatory Features in Joint Disease by Features]
swollen joints can sometimes differentiate among joint effusion, synovial thickening, and capsular or bony
enlargement. Small joints (eg, the acromioclavicular, tibiofibular, radioulnar) can be the source of pain that
was initially believed to arise from a nearby major joint. Bony enlargement (often due to osteophytes) is
noted.
Active range of motion (the maximum range through which the patient can move the joint) is measured
first, using a goniometer; limitation may reflect weakness, pain, or stiffness as well as mechanical
abnormalities. Then passive range of motion (the maximum range through which the examiner can move
the joint) is assessed; passive limitation generally reflects mechanical abnormalities (eg, scarring,
swelling, deformities) rather than weakness or pain. Active and passive movement of an inflamed joint
(eg, due to infection or gout) may be very painful.
Patterns of joint involvement should be noted. Symmetric involvement of multiple joints is common in
systemic diseases (eg, RA); monarticular (involving one joint) or asymmetric oligoarticular (involving ≤ 4)
joint involvement is more common in osteoarthritis and psoriatic arthritis. Small peripheral joints are
commonly affected in RA, and the larger joints and spine are affected more in spondyloarthropathies.
However, a pattern of involvement may not be apparent in early disease.
Crepitus, a palpable or audible grinding produced by motion, is noted. It may be caused by roughened
articular cartilage or by tendons; crepitus-causing motions should be determined and may suggest which
structures are involved.
Specific features should be sought at each joint.
Elbow:
Synovial swelling and thickening caused by joint disease occur in the lateral aspect between the
radial head and olecranon, causing a bulge. Full 180° extension of the joint should be attempted.
Although full extension is possible with nonarthritic or extra-articular problems such as tendinitis, its loss is
an early change in arthritis. The area around the joint is examined for swellings. Rheumatoid nodules are
firm, occurring especially along the extensor surface of the forearm. Tophi are sometimes visible under
the skin as cream-colored aggregates and indicate gout. Swelling of the olecranon bursa occurs over the
tip of the olecranon, is cystic, and does not limit joint motion; infection, trauma, gout, and RA are possible
causes. Epitrochlear nodes occur above the medial epicondyle; they can result from inflammation in the
hand but can also suggest sarcoidosis or lymphoma.
Shoulder:
Because pain can be referred to areas around the shoulder, shoulder palpation should include
the glenohumeral, acromioclavicular, and sternoclavicular joints, the coracoid process, clavicle, acromion
process, subacromial bursa, biceps tendon, and greater and lesser tuberosities of the humerus, as well
as the neck. Glenohumeral joint effusions may cause a bulge between the coracoid process and the
humeral head. Possible causes include RA, osteoarthritis, septic arthritis, Milwaukee shoulder (, and other arthropathies.
Limited motion, weakness, pain, and other disturbances of mobility caused by rotator cuff impairment can
be quickly identified by having the patient attempt to abduct and raise both arms above the head and then
to slowly lower them. Muscle atrophy and neurologic abnormalities should be sought.
Knee:
At the knee, gross deformities such as swelling (eg, joint effusion, popliteal cysts), quadriceps
muscle atrophy, and joint instability may be obvious when the patient stands and walks. With the patient
===PAGE:374===
supine, the examiner should palpate the knee, identifying the patella, femoral condyles, tibial tuberosity,
tibial plateau, fibular head, medial and lateral joint lines, popliteal fossa, and quadriceps and patellar
tendons. The medial and lateral joint lines correspond to locations of the medial and lateral menisci and
can be located by palpation while slowly flexing and extending the knee. Tender extra-articular bursae
such as the anserine bursa below the medial joint line should be differentiated from true intra-articular
disturbances.
Detection of small knee effusions is often difficult and is best accomplished using the bulge sign. The
knee is fully extended and the leg slightly externally rotated while the patient is supine with muscles
relaxed. The medial aspect of the knee is stroked to express any fluid away from this area. Placement of
one hand on the suprapatellar pouch and gentle stroking or pressing on the lateral aspect of the knee
can create a fluid wave or bulge, visible medially when an effusion is present. Larger effusions can be
identified visually or by balloting the patella. Joint effusion can result from many joint diseases, including
RA, osteoarthritis, gout, and trauma.
Full 180° extension of the knee is attempted to detect flexion contractures. The patella is tested for free,
painless motion.
Hip:
Examination begins with gait evaluation. A limp is common in patients with significant hip arthritis. It
may be caused by pain, leg shortening, flexion contracture, muscle weakness, or knee problems. Loss of
internal
rotation (often the earliest change in hip osteoarthritis or any hip synovitis), flexion, extension, or
abduction can usually be demonstrated. Placement of one hand on the patient's iliac crest detects pelvic
movement that might be mistaken for hip movement. Flexion contracture can be identified by attempting
leg extension with the opposite hip maximally flexed to stabilize the pelvis. Tenderness over the femoral
greater trochanter suggests bursitis (which is extra-articular) rather than an intra-articular disorder. Pain
with passive range of motion (assessed by internal and external rotation with the patient supine and the
hip and knee flexed to 90°) suggests intra-articular origin. However, patients may have simultaneous
intra-articular and extra-articular disorders.
Other:
Hand examination is discussed elsewhere (see p.
and
Polyarticular Joint Pain
.
Foot and ankle examination is discussed in
Chapter 44
. Examination of the neck and back is discussed elsewhere.
Testing
Laboratory testing and imaging studies often provide less information than do the history and physical
examination. While some testing may be warranted in some patients, extensive testing is often not.
Blood tests:
Some tests, although not specific, can be helpful in supporting the possibility of certain
systemic rheumatic diseases, as for the following:
• Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and complement in SLE
• Rheumatoid factor and anticitrullinated peptide (CCP) in RA
• HLA-B27 in spondyloarthropathy (occasionally useful)
• Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) in certain vasculitides (occasionally useful)
Tests such as WBC count, ESR, and C-reactive protein may help determine the likelihood that arthritis is
inflammatory due to infectious or other systemic disorders, but these tests are not highly specific or
sensitive. For example, an elevated ESR or C-reactive protein level suggests inflammation or may be due
to aging or a large number of nonarticular inflammatory conditions (eg, infection, cancer). Also, such
markers may not be elevated in all inflammatory disorders.
Imaging studies:
Imaging studies are often unnecessary. Plain x-rays in particular reveal mainly bony
abnormalities, and most joint disorders do not affect bone primarily. However, imaging may help in the
initial evaluation of relatively localized, unexplained persistent or severe joint and particularly spine
===PAGE:375===
abnormalities; they may reveal primary or metastatic tumors, osteomyelitis, bone infarctions, periarticular
calcifications (as in calcific tendinitis), or other changes in deep structures that may escape physical
examination. If chronic RA, gout, or osteoarthritis is suspected, erosions, cysts, and joint space narrowing
with osteophytes may be visible. In pseudogout, Ca pyrophosphate deposition may be visible in intraarticular cartilage.
For musculoskeletal imaging, plain x-rays may be obtained first, but they are often less sensitive,
particularly during early disease, than MRI, CT, or ultrasonography. MRI is the most accurate study for
fractures not visible on plain x-rays, particularly in the hip and pelvis, and for soft tissues and internal
derangements of the knee. CT is useful if MRI is contraindicated or unavailable. Ultrasonography,
arthrography, and bone scanning may help in certain conditions, as can biopsy of bone, synovium, or
other tissues.
Arthrocentesis:
Arthrocentesis is the process of puncturing the joint with a needle to withdraw fluid. If
there is an effusion and arthrocentesis is done correctly, fluid can generally be withdrawn. Examination of
synovial fluid is the most accurate way to exclude infection, diagnose crystal-induced arthritis, and
otherwise determine the cause of joint effusions. It is indicated in all patients with severe or unexplained
monarticular joint effusions and in patients with unexplained polyarticular effusions.
Arthrocentesis is done using strictly sterile technique. Infection or other rash over the site used to enter
the joint is a contraindication. Preparations for collecting samples should be made before doing the
procedure. Local anesthesia, with lidocaine or difluoroethane spray, is often used. Many joints are
punctured on the extensor surface to avoid nerves, arteries, and veins, which are usually on the joint's
flexor surface. A 20-gauge needle can be used for most larger joints. Smaller joints of the upper and lower
extremities are probably easier to access using a 22- or 23-gage needle. As much fluid as is possible
should be removed. Specific anatomic landmarks are used (see
Figs. 32-1
,
32-2
, and
32-3
).
Metacarpophalangeal joints, metatarsophalangeal joints, and interphalangeal joints of the hands and feet
are punctured similarly to each other, using a 22- or 23-gauge needle. The needle is inserted dorsally, to
either side of the extensor tendon. Distraction of the joint is sometimes useful to open the joint space and
allow easier access.
[Fig. 32-1.
Arthrocentesis of the shoulder.]
Synovial fluid examination:
At the bedside, gross characteristics of the fluid are assessed, such as its
color, turbidity, and viscosity. Viscosity can be assessed using the string sign. The length of a viscous
string of joint fluid dropped from the syringe is normally > 3 cm. Inflammation decreases viscosity,
shortening the length of the string.
Gross characteristics allow many effusions to be tentatively classified as noninflammatory, inflammatory,
or infectious (see
Table 32-2
). Effusions can also be hemorrhagic. Each type of effusion suggests certain joint diseases
(see
Table 32-3
). So-called noninflammatory effusions are actually mildly inflammatory but tend to suggest
diseases such as osteoarthritis, in which inflammation is not severe.
Laboratory tests commonly done on joint fluid include cell count, leukocyte differential, Gram stain and
culture (if infection is a concern—, and wet drop examination for cells and crystals. However,
the exact tests often depend on which diagnoses are suspected.
Microscopic examination of a wet drop preparation of synovial fluid for crystals (only a single drop of fluid
from a joint is needed), using polarized light, is essential for definitive diagnosis of gout, pseudogout, and
other crystal-induced arthritides (. A polarizer over the light source and another polarizer
between the specimen and the examiner's eye allow visualization of crystals with a shiny white
birefringence. Compensated polarized light is provided by inserting a first-order red plate, as is found in
===PAGE:376===
commercially available microscopes. The effects of a compensator can be reproduced by placing 2 strips
of clear adhesive tape on a glass slide and placing this slide over the lower polarizer. Such a homemade
system should be tested against a commercial polarizing microscope. The most common crystals seen
are those diagnostic of gout (monosodium urate, negatively birefringent needle-shaped crystals) and
pseudogout (Ca pyrophosphate, positively birefringent square-ended crystals). If crystals appear atypical
in a wet drop, several less common crystals (cholesterol, liquid lipid crystals, oxalate, cryoglobulins) or
artifacts (eg, depot corticosteroid crystals) should be considered.
Other synovial fluid findings that occasionally make or suggest a specific diagnosis include the following:
• Specific organisms (identifiable by Gram or acid-fast stain)
• Marrow spicules or fat globules (caused by fracture)
• Reiter's cells (monocytes on Wright's-stained smears that have phagocytized PMNs), which appear most
often in reactive arthritis
• Amyloid fragments (identifiable by Congo red stain)
• Sickled RBCs (caused by sickle cell hemoglobinopathies)
[Fig. 32-2.
Arthrocentesis of the elbow.]
[Table 32-2.
Classification of Synovial Effusions]
Monarticular Joint Pain
Monarticular pain may originate from the joint itself or surrounding structures. There may be pain
(arthralgia) or also inflammation (arthritis) with redness, warmth, and swelling. Pain may occur only with
use, suggesting a mechanical problem (eg, osteoarthritis, tendinitis), or also at rest, suggesting
inflammation (eg, crystal disease, septic arthritis). There may or may not be fluid within the joint (effusion).
Prompt assessment is essential to exclude infection. It is important to remember that acute monarticular
arthritis is sometimes the initial manifestation of some types of polyarticular arthritis (eg, psoriatic arthritis,
RA).
Pathophysiology
Monarticular pain may originate
• Within a joint (intra-articular)
• Around a joint (periarticular)
Intra-articular disorders may be inflammatory (eg, infectious, rheumatoid, crystal deposition arthritis) or
noninflammatory (eg, osteoarthritis, internal derangement).
Periarticular disorders include bursitis and tendinitis.
Crystal-induced arthritis is usually caused by monosodium urate crystals (gout) or Ca pyrophosphate
dihydrate crystals (pseudogout).
Etiology
At all ages, injury is the most common cause of acute monarticular joint pain; history of trauma is usually
obvious.
[Fig. 32-3.
Arthrocentesis of the knee.]
===PAGE:377===
[Table 32-3.
Differential Diagnosis Based on Synovial Fluid Classification*]
Among young adults, the most common nontraumatic causes are the following:
• Disseminated gonococcal infection
• Periarticular syndromes
Among older adults, the most common nontraumatic causes are the following:
• Osteoarthritis
• Crystal-induced disease (gout or pseudogout)
• Periarticular syndromes
The most dangerous cause at any age is acute infectious arthritis, because it requires acute operative
intervention (saline washout of the joint) and antibiotics to minimize permanent damage to the joint and to
prevent sepsis and death.
At all ages, rare causes include adjacent osteomyelitis, avascular necrosis, pigmented villonodular
synovitis, hemarthrosis (eg, in hemophilia or coagulopathies), and tumors (see
Table 32-4
).
Evaluation
Acute monarticular joint pain requires especially rapid diagnosis because some of its causes, particularly
infectious (septic) arthritis and crystal-induced arthritis, require rapid treatment.
[Table 32-4.
Some Causes of Monarticular Joint Pain]
Evaluation should determine whether the joint or periarticular structures are the cause of symptoms and
whether there is inflammation. If inflammation is present or the diagnosis is unclear, symptoms and signs
of polyarticular and systemic disorders should be sought and all joints should be examined.
History: History of present illness
should focus on the acuity of onset (eg, abrupt, gradual), whether
the problem is new or recurrent, and whether other joints have caused pain in the past. Also, temporal
patterns (eg, diurnal variation, persistent vs intermittent), exacerbating and mitigating factors (eg, cold
weather, activity), and any recent or past trauma to the joint should be noted. Patients should be
specifically asked about unprotected sexual contact (possible gonococcal infection), tick bites,
and
residence in or travel to an area where Lyme disease is endemic.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including fever (infection), urethritis
(gonococcal arthritis), and previous unexplained illness with rash (Lyme arthritis).
Past medical history
should identify known joint disorders (particularly gout, osteoarthritis) and any
known conditions that may cause monarticular joint pain (eg, coagulopathy, bursitis, tendinitis,
hemoglobinopathy). Drug history should be reviewed for any use of anticoagulants or diuretics and for
chronic corticosteroid use. A family history should also be obtained.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for fever. Examination of the head, neck, and skin
should note any signs of conjunctivitis, psoriatic plaques, mucosal lesions, ecchymoses, or malar rash.
Genital examination should note any discharge or other findings consistent with sexually transmitted
diseases.
Joints are inspected for deformities, erythema, and swelling. Range of motion is assayed, first actively
and then passively; any crepitus on joint motion is noted.
===PAGE:378===
Palpation is done to detect warmth, identify any effusion, and localize the area of tenderness. Of
particular importance is whether the tenderness is directly over the joint line or adjacent to it (helping to
differentiate an intra-articular from a periarticular disorder). Sometimes, compression of the joint without
flexing or extending it (eg, pushing on the end of the great toe for patients with pain in the 1st
metatarsophalangeal joint), sometimes with slight rotation, also helps differentiate intra-articular from
periarticular disorders; this maneuver is not particularly painful for patients with tendinitis or bursitis but is
quite painful for those with arthritis. If the patient can tolerate it, the joint is stressed with various
maneuvers to identify disruption of cartilage or ligaments (eg, in the knee, valgus and varus tests, anterior
and posterior drawer tests, Lachman's test, and McMurray's test). Comparison with the contralateral
unaffected joint often helps detect more subtle changes.
Large effusions in the knee are typically readily apparent. The examiner can check for minor knee
effusions by pushing the suprapatellar pouch inferiorly and then pressing medially on the lateral side of
the patella on an extended knee. This maneuver causes swelling to appear on the medial side.
Periarticular structures also should be examined to look for discrete soft swelling at the site of a bursa
(bursitis), point tenderness at the insertion of a tendon (tendinitis), and point tenderness over a tendon
with fine crepitus (tenosynovitis).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Erythema, warmth, effusion, and decreased range of motion
• Fever
• Acute-onset joint pain in a sexually active young adult
• Skin breaks with cellulitis adjacent to the affected joint
• Underlying bleeding disorder, hemoglobinopathy, or anticoagulation
• Extra-articular or systemic symptoms
Interpretation of findings:
Antecedent trauma suggests a fracture, meniscal tear, or hemarthrosis. In the
absence of trauma, history and physical examination may suggest a cause, but testing is often necessary
to rule out serious causes.
Acuteness of onset is a very important feature. Severe joint pain that develops over hours suggests
crystal-induced arthritis or, less often, infectious arthritis. A previous attack of crystal-induced arthritis with
development of similar symptoms suggests recurrence. Gradual onset of pain is typical of RA or
noninfectious arthritis but can result from certain infectious arthritides (eg, mycobacterial, fungal).
Pain during rest and on initiating activity suggests inflammatory arthritis, whereas pain worsened by
movement and relieved by rest suggests mechanical disorders (eg, osteoarthritis).
Pain worse with active than with passive joint motion may indicate tendinitis or bursitis; intra-articular
inflammation generally restricts active and passive range of joint motion severely.
Increased warmth and erythema suggest inflammation, but erythema is often absent during inflammation.
Tenderness or swelling at only one side of a joint, or away from the joint line, suggests an extra-articular
origin (eg, in ligaments, tendons, or bursae); findings on several aspects of the joint suggest an intraarticular cause.
Although gout can involve many different single joints or combinations of joints, acute, painful
monarticular arthritis of the metatarsophalangeal joint of a great toe (podagra) is especially suggestive.
The presence of systemic findings can help narrow the diagnosis. Urethritis can suggest gonococcal
infection (although gonococcal arthritis often develops in patients without symptoms of urethritis). Fever is
===PAGE:379===
indicative of septic joint, crystal-induced arthropathy, or
osteomyelitis. Symptoms indicating dermatologic,
cardiac, or pulmonary involvement suggest diseases that are more commonly associated with
polyarticular joint pain.
Testing:
Joint aspiration (arthrocentesis) should be done in patients with an effusion or other signs of
inflammation (eg, erythema, warmth, fever). Studies of the joint fluid should include WBC count with
differential (to determine whether the effusion is bloody or inflammatory), Gram stain and cultures, and
microscopic examination for crystals. Finding crystals in synovial fluid confirms crystal-induced arthritis
but does not rule out coexisting infection. A noninflammatory synovial fluid (eg, < 2000/
μ
L WBCs or <
75% neutrophils) should lead to consideration of osteoarthritis, soft-tissue injury, or viral infection.
X-rays usually are done unless the cause is clearly a flare-up of a known disorder (eg, gout) or is a
clinically obvious bursitis or tendinitis, which can often be diagnosed without further testing.
Other imaging tests (eg, CT, MRI, bone scan) are adjunctive and are done depending on what diagnoses
are being considered (see
Table 32-4
).
Blood tests (eg, ESR, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anticyclic citrullinated peptide [CCP]
antibody, HLA-B27 testing) may help support an early diagnosis of a noninfectious inflammatory arthritis.
Treatment
Overall treatment is directed at the underlying disorder.
Joint inflammation is usually treated symptomatically with NSAIDs. Pain without inflammation is usually
more safely treated with acetaminophen. Joint immobilization with a splint or sling can sometimes relieve
pain. Heat therapy may relieve muscle spasm around joints. Cold therapy may be analgesic in
inflammatory joint diseases.
Physical therapy after the acute symptoms have lessened is useful to maintain range of motion and
strengthen surrounding muscles.
Key Points
• Atraumatic joint pain should prompt consideration of degenerative disease, crystal-induced arthropathy,
infection, or cancer.
• Arthrocentesis is mandatory to rule out infection in a joint that is red, warm, and swollen.
• Disseminated gonococcal infection is the most common cause of acute nontraumatic monarthritis in
young adults, whereas osteoarthritis is the most common cause in older adults.
• Crystals in synovial fluid confirm crystal-induced arthritis but do not rule out coexisting infection.
• Joint pain that is still unexplained after arthrocentesis and x-ray should be evaluated with MRI to rule out
uncommon etiologies (eg, occult fracture, avascular necrosis, pigmented villonodular synovitis).
Polyarticular Joint Pain
Joints may simply be painful (arthralgia) or also inflamed (arthritis), with redness, warmth, and swelling.
Pain may occur only with use or also at rest, and there may or may not be fluid within the joint (effusion).
A useful initial distinction is whether pain is present in one joint (monarticular) or multiple joints
(polyarticular). When multiple joints are affected, different terms can be used:
• Arthritis involving ≤ 4 joints, particularly when it occurs in an asymmetric fashion, is oligoarticular or
pauciarticular arthritis.
===PAGE:380===
• Arthritis involving > 4 joints, usually in a symmetric fashion, is polyarticular arthritis.
Pathophysiology
Polyarticular arthralgia can originate from arthritis or from extra-articular disorders (eg, polymyalgia
rheumatica, fibromyalgia). Pain caused by intra-articular disorders may be secondary to an inflammatory
arthritis (eg, infection, RA, crystal deposition) or a noninflammatory process (eg, osteoarthritis).
Inflammatory arthritis may involve peripheral joints only (eg, hands, knees, feet) or both peripheral and
axial joints (eg, sacroiliac, apophyseal, discovertebral, costovertebral).
Etiology
Peripheral oligoarticular and polyarticular arthritis have specific, likely causes (see
Table 32-5
); the presence or absence of axial involvement helps limit possibilities. However, in many
patients, arthritis is often transient and resolves without diagnosis or may not fulfill the criteria for any
defined rheumatic disease.
Acute polyarticular arthritis is most often due to the following:
• Infection (usually viral)
• Flare of a rheumatic disease
[Table 32-5.
Some Causes of Polyarticular Joint Pain]
Chronic polyarticular arthritis in adults is most often due to the following:
• RA (inflammatory)
• Osteoarthritis (noninflammatory)
Chronic polyarticular arthritis in children is most often due to the following:
• Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Evaluation
Evaluation should determine whether the joints or periarticular structures are the cause of symptoms and
whether there is inflammation or effusion. If inflammation is present or the diagnosis is unclear, symptoms
and signs of systemic disorders should be sought.
History: History of present illness
should identify the acuity of onset (eg, abrupt, gradual), temporal
patterns (eg, diurnal variation, persistent vs intermittent), chronicity (eg, acute vs longstanding), and
exacerbating factors (eg, cold weather, activity). Patients should be specifically asked about unprotected
sexual contact (possible gonococcal infection) and tick bites or residence in a Lyme-endemic area.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms and signs of causative disorders (see
Tables 32-5
and
32-6
).
[Table 32-6.
Some Suggestive Findings in Polyarticular Joint Pain]
Past medical history
and family history should identify known rheumatic disorders and other conditions
capable of causing joint symptoms (see
Table 32-5
).
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for fever.
Examination of the head, neck, and skin should note any signs of conjunctivitis, iritis, mucosal lesions,
===PAGE:381===
sinonasal abnormalities, lymphadenopathy, ecchymoses, skin ulcers, psoriatic plaques, purpura, or malar
rash.
Cardiopulmonary examination should note any signs of acute inflammatory disease or serositis (eg,
murmur, pericardial rub, muffled heart sounds, bibasilar dullness consistent with pleural effusion).
Genital examination should note any discharge, ulcers, or other findings consistent with sexually
transmitted diseases.
Musculoskeletal examination should note muscular point tenderness associated with fibromyalgia. Joint
examination begins with inspection for deformities, erythema, swelling, or effusion and then proceeds to
palpation and estimation of pain and crepitus with active and passive range of motion. Comparison with
the contralateral unaffected joint often helps detect more subtle changes. Examination should note
whether the distribution of affected joints is symmetric.
Periarticular structures also should be examined for discrete, soft swelling at the site of a bursa (bursitis),
point tenderness at the insertion of a tendon (tendinitis), and point tenderness over a tendon with fine
crepitus (tenosynovitis).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Hot, swollen, red joints
• Any extra-articular symptoms (eg, fever, rash, plaques, ulcers, conjunctivitis, iritis, murmur, purpura)
Interpretation of findings:
An important initial element is whether pain originates in the joints, spine, or
both or in other structures such as bones, tendons, bursae, muscles, other soft-tissue structures, or
nerves. Pain that worsens with active rather than passive joint motion may indicate tendinitis or bursitis;
intra-articular inflammation generally restricts active and passive range of joint motion severely.
Tenderness or swelling at only one side of a joint, or away from the joint line, suggests an extra-articular
origin (eg, in ligaments, tendons, or bursae); findings on several aspects of the joint suggest an intraarticular cause. Pain that is diffuse and described inconsistently or vaguely may result from fibromyalgia
or functional disorders.
If the joints, spine, or both are involved, differentiating inflammatory from noninflammatory disorders may
help. Clinical findings of prominent morning stiffness, nontraumatic joint swelling, and fever or weight loss
are suggestive of an inflammatory disorder, but testing is often helpful.
Examination of the hand joints may yield other clues (see
Table 32-6
) and may help differentiate
osteoarthritis from RA (see
Table 32-7
).
Back pain with arthritis suggests ankylosing spondylitis a reactive or psoriatic arthritis, or fibromyalgia.
[Table 32-7.
Differential Features of the Hand in RA and Osteoarthritis]
Testing:
The following tests are of particular importance:
• Arthrocentesis
• Serologic testing
• Usually ESR
Arthrocentesis is mandatory in most patients with a new effusion and can help rule out infection and
crystal arthropathy as well as distinguish between an inflammatory and noninflammatory process. Other
tests may be needed to identify specific disorders (see
Table 32-5
).
===PAGE:382===
If the specific diagnosis cannot be established clinically and if determining whether arthritis is
inflammatory may help determine the diagnosis, ESR and C-reactive protein may be done. A low ESR
makes inflammatory causes (eg, rheumatic disease, gout, infection, vasculitis) less likely but does not rule
them out. Elevated results argue more strongly for inflammation, but they are very nonspecific, particularly
in older adults.
Once a diagnosis of a systemic disease is thought to be most likely, supportive serologic testing for
antinuclear antibodies, double-stranded DNA, rheumatoid factor, anticyclic citrullinated peptide, and
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies may assist in making the diagnosis.
Treatment
The underlying disorder is treated. Systemic diseases may require either immunosuppression or
antibiotics as determined by the diagnosis. Joint inflammation is usually treated symptomatically with
NSAIDs. Pain without inflammation is usually more safely treated with acetaminophen. Joint
immobilization with a splint or sling can sometimes relieve pain. Heat therapy may relieve muscle spasm
around joints, and cold therapy may be analgesic in inflammatory joint diseases. For cases of chronic
arthritis, continued physical activity is encouraged.
Geriatrics Essentials
Osteoarthritis is by far the most common cause of arthritis in older people. RA most commonly begins
between ages 30 and 40, but in up to one third of patients, it develops after the age of 60. Because
paraneoplastic phenomena also can cause inflammatory polyarthritis, cancer should be considered in
older adults in whom new-onset RA is suspected.
Key Points
• The differential diagnosis of polyarticular joint pain can be narrowed by considering how many joints are
affected, whether inflammation is present, and whether any extra-articular signs are present.
• Chronic arthritis is most often caused by juvenile idiopathic arthritis in children and osteoarthritis and RA
in adults.
• Acute polyarticular arthritis is most often due to infection, gout, or a flare of rheumatic disease.
• Arthrocentesis is mandatory in most cases of a new effusion and can help rule out infection and crystalinduced arthropathy as well as distinguish between an inflammatory and noninflammatory process.
===PAGE:383===
Chapter 33. Autoimmune Rheumatic Disorders
Introduction
Autoimmune rheumatic disorders include eosinophilic fasciitis, mixed connective tissue disease,
polymyositis and dermatomyositis, relapsing polychondritis, Sjogren's syndrome, SLE, and systemic
sclerosis. RA and the spondyloarthropathies and their variants (see
Chapter 35
) are also immune mediated.
The triggers and precise pathophysiology remain unknown for all these disorders, although many aspects
of pathogenesis are becoming clearer. Patients with most autoimmune rheumatic disorders are at
increased risk of atherosclerosis.
Eosinophilic Fasciitis
Eosinophilic fasciitis (EF) is an uncommon disorder characterized by symmetric and painful
inflammation, swelling, and induration of the arms and legs. Diagnosis is by biopsy of skin and
fascia. Treatment is with corticosteroids.
The cause of EF is unknown. The disorder occurs mostly in middle-aged men but can occur in women
and children.
Symptoms and Signs
The disease often begins after strenuous physical activity (eg, chopping wood). The initial features are
pain, swelling, and inflammation
of the skin and subcutaneous tissues, followed by induration, creating a
characteristic orange-peel configuration most evident over the anterior surfaces of the extremities. The
face and trunk are occasionally involved. Restriction of arm and leg movement usually develops
insidiously. Contractures commonly evolve, secondary to induration and thickening of the fascia, but the
process may also involve tendons, synovial membranes, and muscle. Typically, EF does not involve the
fingers and toes (acral areas). Muscle strength is unimpaired, but myalgia and arthritis may occur. Carpal
tunnel syndrome may also occur.
Fatigue and weight loss are common. Rarely, aplastic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and lymphoproliferative
processes develop.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
EF should be suspected in patients with typical symptoms. The cutaneous manifestations may suggest
systemic sclerosis; however, patients with systemic sclerosis usually also have Raynaud's syndrome,
acral involvement, telangiectasia, and visceral changes (eg, esophageal dysmotility). All of these are
absent in EF.
Diagnosis is confirmed by en bloc biopsy, which should be deep enough to include fascia and adjacent
muscle fibers. Characteristic findings are inflammation of the fascia, with or without eosinophils.
Blood tests are not diagnostic, but CBC shows eosinophilia (in early active disease), and serum protein
electrophoresis shows polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. CBC should be done in all patients because
the presence of eosinophilia helps in the diagnosis. Autoantibodies are usually absent. MRI, although not
specific, can show thickened fascia, the increased signal intensity in the superficial muscle fibers
correlating with the inflammation.
Prognosis
Although the long-term outcome varies, EF is often self-limited and uncomplicated.
Treatment
===PAGE:384===
• Oral prednisone
Most patients respond rapidly to high doses of prednisone (40 to 60 mg po once/day followed by gradual
reduction to 5 to 10 mg/day as soon as the fascitis resolves). Continued low doses may be required for 2
to 5 yr. Some patients require longer courses and possibly other drugs (eg, hydroxychloroquine,
cyclosporine). NSAIDs and H
blockers (eg, cimetidine) also have been used to treat EF.
Monitoring with CBCs is advised because of the occasional hematologic complications.
Mixed Connective Tissue Disease
Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is an uncommon, specifically defined, overlap
syndrome characterized by clinical features of SLE, systemic sclerosis, and polymyositis with
very high titers of circulating antinuclear antibody to a ribonucleoprotein antigen. Hand
swelling, Raynaud's syndrome, polyarthralgia, inflammatory myopathy, esophageal
hypomotility, and pulmonary dysfunction are common. Diagnosis is by the combination of
clinical features, antibodies to ribonucleoprotein, and absence of antibodies specific for other
autoimmune diseases. Treatment varies with disease severity and organ involvement but
usually includes corticosteroids and sometimes additional immunosuppressants.
MCTD occurs worldwide and in all races, with a peak incidence in the teens and 20s. About 80% of
people who have this disease are women. The cause is unknown. In some patients, the disorder evolves
into classic systemic sclerosis or SLE.
Symptoms and Signs
Raynaud's syndrome may precede other manifestations by years. Frequently, the first manifestations
resemble early SLE, systemic sclerosis, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, or even RA. Whatever the initial
manifestation, limited disease tends to progress and become widespread, and the clinical pattern
changes over time.
The most frequent finding is swelling of the hands that eventually causes a sausage-like appearance of
the fingers. Skin findings include lupus or dermatomyositis-like rashes. Diffuse systemic sclerosis-like skin
changes and ischemic necrosis or ulceration of the fingertips may occasionally develop.
Almost all patients have polyarthralgias, and 75% have frank arthritis. Often the arthritis is nondeforming,
but erosive changes and deformities similar to those in RA (eg, boutonniere and swan-neck deformities)
may be
present. Proximal muscle weakness with or without tenderness is common.
Renal disease occurs in about 10% and is often mild but occasionally causes morbidity or mortality.
Sometimes pulmonary involvement is the most serious complication. Heart failure can occur. Sjogren's
syndrome may develop. A trigeminal sensory neuropathy develops more frequently in MCTD than in other
systemic autoimmune diseases. It may be the presenting feature and is considered the most frequent
CNS manifestation.
Diagnosis
• Testing for antinuclear antibodies (ANA), extractable nuclear antigen (ENA), and ribonucleoprotein
(RNP)
• Organ involvement determined as clinically indicated
MCTD should be suspected when additional overlapping features are present in patients appearing to
have SLE, systemic sclerosis, polymyositis, or RA.
Tests for ANA and antibody to ENA and RNP antigen are done first. If results of these tests are
compatible with MCTD (eg, RNP antibodies very high, positive ANA), tests for rheumatoid factors, anti Jo1 (anti-histidyl t-RNA synthetase), antibodies to the ribonuclease-resistant Smith (Sm) component of ENA,
===PAGE:385===
and double-stranded DNA are done to exclude other possible diagnoses.
Further evaluation depends on symptoms and signs; manifestations of myositis, renal involvement, or
pulmonary involvement prompt tests of those organs (eg, CK, MRI, electromyogram, or muscle biopsy for
diagnosis of myositis).
Almost all patients have high titers (often > 1:1000) of fluorescent ANA that produce a speckled pattern.
Antibodies to ENA are usually present at very high titers (> 1:100,000). Antibody to RNP is present,
whereas antibody to the ribonuclease-resistant Sm component of ENA is absent.
Rheumatoid factors are frequently positive, and titers are often high. The ESR is frequently elevated.
Prognosis
The overall 10-yr survival rate is 80%, but prognosis depends largely on which manifestations
predominate. Patients with features of systemic sclerosis and polymyositis have a worse prognosis.
Patients are at increased risk of atherosclerosis. Causes of death include pulmonary hypertension, renal
failure, MI, colonic perforation, disseminated infection, and cerebral hemorrhage. Some patients have
sustained remissions for many years without treatment.
Treatment
• NSAIDs or antimalarials for mild disease
• Corticosteroids for moderate to severe disease
• Sometimes other immunosuppressants
General management and initial drug therapy are tailored to the specific clinical problem and are similar to
those of SLE. Most patients with moderate or severe disease respond to corticosteroids, particularly if
treated early. Mild disease is often controlled by NSAIDs, antimalarials, or sometimes low-dose
corticosteroids. Severe major organ involvement usually requires higher doses of corticosteroids (eg,
prednisone 1 mg/kg po once/day) and additional immunosuppressants. If patients develop features of
myositis or systemic sclerosis, treatment is as for those diseases.
All patients should be closely monitored for atherosclerosis. Patients on long-term corticosteroid therapy
should receive osteoporosis prophylaxis.
Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are uncommon systemic rheumatic disorders characterized
by inflammatory and degenerative changes in the muscles (polymyositis) or in the skin and
muscles (dermatomyositis). The most specific skin signs are Gottron's papules over the
knuckles and a periorbital heliotropic rash. Manifestations include symmetric weakness, some
tenderness, and later atrophy, principally of the proximal limb girdle muscles. Complications
can include visceral involvement and cancer. Diagnosis is by clinical findings and abnormalities
on muscle tests, which may include muscle enzymes, MRI, electromyography, and muscle
biopsy. Treatment is with corticosteroids, sometimes combined with immunosuppressants or IV
immune globulin.
The female:male ratio is 2:1. These disorders may appear at any age but occur most commonly from age
40 to 60 or, in children, from age 5 to 15.
Etiology
The cause seems to be an autoimmune reaction to muscle tissue in genetically susceptible people.
Familial clustering occurs, and HLA subtypes DR3, DR52, DR6 seem to be the genetic predisposition.
Possible inciting events include viral myositis and underlying cancer. Picornavirus-like structures have
===PAGE:386===
been found in muscle cells, but their significance is not known, and viruses can trigger similar disorders in
animals. The association of cancer with dermatomyositis (much less so with polymyositis) suggests that a
tumor may incite myositis as the result of an autoimmune reaction against a common antigen in muscle
and tumor.
Pathophysiology
Pathologic changes in both disorders include cellular damage and atrophy, with variable degrees of
inflammation. Muscles in the hands, feet, and face are affected less than other skeletal muscles.
Involvement of visceral muscles in the pharynx and upper esophagus and occasionally the heart,
stomach, or intestines can impair the functions of those organs. High blood levels of myoglobin from
rhabdomyolysis can damage the kidneys. Inflammation may occur in joints and lungs, especially in
patients with antisynthetase antibodies.
Dermatomyositis is characterized by immune complex deposition in the vessels and is considered a
complement-mediated vasculopathy. In contrast, the main pathophysiologic abnormality in polymyositis is
direct T cell-mediated muscle injury.
Classification
Myositis has been divided into several subtypes:
• Primary idiopathic polymyositis can occur at any age and does not involve the skin.
• Primary idiopathic dermatomyositis is similar to primary idiopathic polymyositis but also involves the skin.
• Polymyositis or dermatomyositis associated with cancer can occur at any age but is most common
among older adults; the cancer can develop up to 2 yr before or after the myositis.
• Childhood dermatomyositis can be associated with systemic vasculitis.
• Polymyositis or dermatomyositis can occur with an associated disorder such as progressive systemic
sclerosis, mixed connective tissue disease, RA, SLE, or sarcoidosis.
Inclusion body myositis is a separate disorder that has clinical manifestations similar to chronic idiopathic
polymyositis; however, it develops at an older age, frequently involves distal muscles (eg, hand and feet
muscles), has a longer duration, responds poorly to therapy, and has a different histologic appearance.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset of polymyositis may be acute (particularly in children) or insidious (particularly in adults).
Polyarthralgias, Raynaud's syndrome, dysphagia, pulmonary symptoms, and constitutional complaints
(notably fever, fatigue, and weight loss) may also occur.
Muscle weakness
may progress over weeks to months. However, it takes destruction of 50% of muscle
fibers to cause symptomatic weakness (ie, muscle weakness indicates advanced myositis). Patients may
have difficulty raising their arms above their shoulders, climbing steps, or rising from a sitting position.
Patients may become wheelchair-bound or bedridden because of weakness of pelvic and shoulder girdle
muscles. The flexors of the neck may be severely affected, causing an inability to raise the head from the
pillow. Involvement of pharyngeal and upper esophageal muscles may impair swallowing and predispose
to aspiration. Muscles of the hands, feet, and face escape involvement. Limb contractures may eventually
develop.
Joint manifestations
include polyarthralgia or polyarthritis, often with swelling, effusions, and other
characteristics of nondeforming arthritis, which occur in about 30% of patients. However, joint
manifestations tend to be mild. They occur more often in a subset with Jo-1 or other antisynthetase
antibodies.
===PAGE:387===
Visceral involvement
(except that of the pharynx and upper esophagus) is less common in polymyositis
than in some other rheumatic disorders (eg, SLE, systemic sclerosis). Occasionally, and especially in
patients with antisynthetase antibodies, interstitial pneumonitis (manifested by dyspnea and cough) is the
most prominent manifestation. Cardiac arrhythmias (including conduction disturbances and abnormal
systolic time intervals) can occur but are often asymptomatic. GI symptoms, more common among
children with associated vasculitis, may include hematemesis, melena, and ischemic bowel perforation.
Skin changes
, which occur in dermatomyositis, tend to be dusky and erythematous. Periorbital edema
with a purplish appearance
(heliotrope rash) is specific for dermatomyositis. The rash may be slightly
elevated and smooth or scaly; it may appear on the forehead, V of the neck and shoulders, chest and
back, forearms and lower legs, elbows and knees, medial malleoli, and radiodorsal aspects of the
proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints (Gottron's papules—also a relatively specific
finding). The base and sides of the fingernails may be hyperemic or thickened. Desquamating dermatitis
with splitting of the skin may evolve over the radial aspects of the fingers. The primary skin lesions
frequently fade completely but may be followed by secondary changes (eg, brownish pigmentation,
atrophy, scarring, vitiligo). Subcutaneous calcification may occur, particularly in children.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Muscle biopsy (definitive)
Polymyositis should be suspected in patients with proximal muscle weakness with or without muscle
tenderness. Dermatomyositis should be suspected in patients with a heliotropic rash or Gottron's papules,
even without polymyositis, and in patients with symptoms of polymyositis and any skin findings compatible
with dermatomyositis. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis share certain clinical findings with systemic
sclerosis or, less frequently, with SLE or vasculitis. Establishing the diagnosis requires as many as
possible of the following 5 criteria:
• Proximal muscle weakness
• Characteristic rash
• Elevated serum muscle enzymes (CK, or if this is not elevated, aminotransferases or aldolase)
• Characteristic electromyographic or MRI abnormalities
• Muscle biopsy changes (the definitive test)
Muscle biopsy
excludes some similar conditions such as inclusion body myositis and postviral
rhabdomyolysis. Biopsy findings can be variable, but chronic inflammation and muscle degeneration and
regeneration are typical. A definite diagnosis made by muscle biopsy is recommended before treatment of
polymyositis to exclude other muscle disorders. To increase the sensitivity of the biopsy results, the
biopsy sample should be obtained from a muscle that has one or more of the following characteristics:
• Weakness on clinical examination
• Inflammation identified on MRI
• Contralateral pair of a muscle shown to be abnormal on electromyography
Laboratory studies
can increase or decrease suspicion for the disorder, assess its severity, identify
overlaps, and help detect complications. Autoantibodies should be tested. Antinuclear antibodies are
positive in up to 80% of patients. Detailed testing of the antinuclear antibodies (ANA), when present, is
important in identifying other overlap syndromes, most often those with another autoimmune disorder.
About 30% of patients have myositis-specific autoantibodies: antibodies to aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
(anti-synthetase antibodies), including anti-Jo-1; antibodies to signal recognition particle (SRP—anti-SRP
===PAGE:388===
antibodies); and antibodies to Mi-2, a nuclear helicase. The relationship between these autoantibodies
and disease pathogenesis remains unclear, although antibody to Jo-1 is a significant marker for fibrosing
alveolitis, pulmonary fibrosis, arthritis, and Raynaud's syndrome.
Periodic measurement of CK is helpful in monitoring treatment. However, in patients with widespread
muscle atrophy, levels are occasionally normal despite chronic, active myositis. Muscle biopsy, MRI, or
high CK levels can often differentiate a relapse of polymyositis from corticosteroid-induced myopathy.
Aldolase is a less specific marker for muscle injury than CK.
Cancer screening
is recommended by some authorities for any adult who has dermatomyositis or for
patients ≥ 60 yr who have polymyositis because these patients often have unsuspected cancers.
Screening should include a physical examination that includes breast, pelvis, and rectum (with occult
blood testing); CBC; biochemical profile; mammogram; carcinoembryonic antigen; urinalysis; chest x-ray;
and any other tests appropriate based on patient's age. Additional investigation should be based on
history and physical examination findings. Some authorities recommend CT of the chest, abdomen, and
pelvis. Younger patients without symptoms of cancer need not undergo screening.
Prognosis
Long remissions (even apparent recovery) occur in up to 50% of treated patients within 5 yr, more often in
children. Relapse, however, may still occur at any time. Overall 5-yr survival rate is 75% and is higher in
children. Death in adults is preceded by severe and progressive muscle weakness, dysphagia,
undernutrition, aspiration pneumonia, or respiratory
failure with superimposed pulmonary infection.
Polymyositis tends to be more severe and resistant to treatment in patients with cardiac or pulmonary
involvement. Death in children may be a result of bowel vasculitis. Cancer, if present, generally
determines the overall prognosis.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes immunosuppressants (eg, methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine, IV immune globulin)
Physical activities should be modestly curtailed until the inflammation subsides. Corticosteroids are the
drugs of choice initially. For acute disease, adults receive prednisone ≥ 40 to 60 mg po once/day. Serial
measurements of CK provide the best early guide of therapeutic effectiveness, falling toward or reaching
normal in most patients in 6 to 12 wk, followed by improved muscle strength. Once enzyme levels have
returned to normal, prednisone can be gradually reduced. If muscle enzyme levels rise, the dose is
increased. Patients who seem to recover can have treatment gradually withdrawn with close monitoring,
but most adults require chronic maintenance with prednisone (up to 10 to 15 mg/day). Children require
initial doses of prednisone of 30 to 60 mg/m
once/day. In children, it may be possible to stop prednisone
after ≥ 1 yr of remission.
Occasionally, patients treated chronically with high-dose corticosteroids become increasingly weak
because of a superimposed corticosteroid myopathy.
If a patient does not to respond to corticosteroids, depends on a high to moderate dose of corticosteroids,
or develops a corticosteroid myopathy or another complication that necessitates stopping or decreasing
prednisone, immunosuppressants (eg, methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine, IV immune globulin)
should be tried. Some patients have received only methotrexate (generally in higher doses than used for
RA) for ≥ 5 yr. IV immune globulins can be effective in some patients refractory to drug treatment, but the
prohibitive cost has precluded comparative trials. Some clinicians combine prednisone with an
immunosuppressant. Other possible emerging therapies include anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) agents
and rituximab.
Myositis associated with tumors, metastatic disease, or inclusion body myositis usually is more refractory
to corticosteroids. Cancer-associated myositis may remit if the tumor is removed.
===PAGE:389===
People with an autoimmune disorder are at higher risk of atherosclerosis and should be closely
monitored. Patients on long-term corticosteroid therapy should receive osteoporosis prophylaxis.
Relapsing Polychondritis
Relapsing polychondritis is an episodic, inflammatory, and destructive disorder involving
primarily cartilage of the ear and nose but also potentially affecting the eyes, tracheobronchial
tree, heart valves, kidneys, joints, skin, and blood vessels. Diagnosis is by a combination of
clinical, laboratory, imaging, and sometimes biopsy findings. Treatment usually requires
prednisone and other immunosuppressants.
Relapsing polychondritis affects men and women equally; onset typically is in middle age. An association
with RA, systemic vasculitis, SLE, and other connective tissue disorders suggests an autoimmune
etiology.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute pain, erythema, and swelling most commonly affect the pinna cartilage. Nasal cartilage
inflammation is the next most common, followed by arthritis that varies from arthralgias to symmetric or
asymmetric nondeforming arthritis involving large and small joints, with a predilection for the
costochondral joints. The next most common manifestations, in decreasing order of frequency, are
inflammation of the eye (eg, conjunctivitis, scleritis, iritis, keratitis, chorioretinitis); cartilaginous tissue of
the larynx, trachea, or bronchi (causing hoarseness, cough, and tenderness over the laryngeal cartilage);
internal ear; cardiovascular system (eg, aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, pericarditis, myocarditis,
aortic aneurysms, aortitis); kidney; and skin. Bouts of acute inflammation heal over weeks to months, with
recurrences over several years. Various rashes can develop.
Advanced disease can lead to destruction of supporting cartilage, causing floppy ears; saddle nose;
pectus excavatum; and visual, auditory, and vestibular abnormalities. Tracheal narrowing can lead to
dyspnea, pneumonia, or even tracheal collapse. Coexisting systemic vasculitis (leukocytoclastic vasculitis
or polyarteritis nodosa), myelodysplastic syndrome, or cancer is possible.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Sometimes biopsy
Diagnosis is established if the patient develops at least 3 of the following:
• Bilateral chondritis of the external ears
• Inflammatory polyarthritis
• Nasal chondritis
• Ocular inflammation
• Respiratory tract chondritis
• Auditory or vestibular dysfunction
Biopsy of involved cartilage, most often the pinna, is helpful if clinical diagnosis is not clear-cut.
Laboratory tests are done. They are not specific but may help to exclude other disorders. Synovial fluid
analysis reveals mild inflammatory changes that are nonspecific but help to rule out an infectious process.
Blood tests may show normocytic-normochromic anemia, leukocytosis, elevated ESR or
γ
-globulin levels,
and occasionally positive rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), or, in up to 25%, antineutrophil
===PAGE:390===
cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). Abnormal renal function may indicate an associated vasculitis. A positive
c-ANCA test (ANCA that are reactive mainly to proteinase-3) suggests Wegener's granulomatosis, which
can cause similar findings (.
The upper and lower airways should be evaluated, including complete spirometric testing and chest CT,
when the diagnosis is made.
Prognosis
Mortality after 5 yr is 30%, from collapse of laryngeal and tracheal structures or from cardiovascular
complications such as large-vessel aneurysm, cardiac valvular insufficiency, or systemic vasculitis.
Treatment
• NSAIDs or dapsone for mild ear disease
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes methotrexate or other immunosuppressants (eg, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide,
azathioprine)
Mild recurrent ear disease may respond to NSAIDs in anti-inflammatory doses, or dapsone (50 to 100 mg
po once/day). However, most patients are treated with prednisone 30 to 60 mg po once/day, with tapering
of the dose as soon as there is a clinical response. Some patients require chronic use. In such patients,
methotrexate 7.5 to 20 mg po once/wk can reduce the requirement for corticosteroids. Very severe cases
may require other immunosuppressants, such as cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, or azathioprine (. None of these therapies has been tested in controlled trials or has been shown to decrease
mortality. If tracheal narrowing causes stridor, a tracheostomy or stent may be needed. More extensive
tracheobronchial collapse may require tracheal reconstruction. Eye disease may sometimes be
recalcitrant to treatment, especially when involving the sclera, and carries a poor prognosis.
All patients should be closely monitored for atherosclerosis given the risk of premature atherosclerosis in
systemic vasculitides. Patients on long-term corticosteroid therapy should receive osteoporosis
prophylaxis.
Sjogren's Syndrome
Sjogren's syndrome (SS) is a relatively common chronic, autoimmune, systemic, inflammatory
disorder of unknown cause. It is characterized by dryness of the mouth, eyes, and other
mucous membranes due to lymphocytic infiltration of the exocrine gland and secondary gland
dysfunction. Sjogren's syndrome can affect various exocrine glands or other organs. Diagnosis
is by specific criteria relating to eye, mouth, and salivary gland involvement, autoantibodies,
and (occasionally) histopathology. Treatment is symptomatic.
SS occurs most frequently among middle-aged women. SS is classified as primary when there is no other
associated disease. In about 30% of patients with autoimmune disorders such as RA, SLE, systemic
sclerosis, mixed connective tissue disease, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, primary biliary cirrhosis, or chronic
autoimmune hepatitis, SS develops and, in such cases, is classified as secondary. Genetic associations
have been found (eg, HLADR3 antigens in whites with primary SS).
Pathophysiology
Salivary, lacrimal, and other exocrine glands become infiltrated with CD4+ T cells and with some B cells.
The T cells produce inflammatory cytokines (eg, IL-2, interferonγ
). Salivary duct cells also produce
cytokines, eventually damaging the secretory ducts. Atrophy of the secretory epithelium of the lacrimal
glands causes desiccation of the cornea and conjunctiva (keratoconjunctivitis sicca—.
Lymphocytic infiltration and intraductal cellular proliferation in the parotid gland cause luminal narrowing
and in some cases formation of compact cellular structures termed myoepithelial islands; atrophy of the
===PAGE:391===
gland can result. Dryness and GI mucosal or submucosal atrophy and diffuse infiltration by plasma cells
and lymphocytes may cause symptoms (eg, dysphagia).
Symptoms and Signs
Glandular manifestations:
SS often affects the eyes or mouth initially and sometimes exclusively. Dry
eyes can cause irritation and photosensitivity. In advanced cases, the cornea is severely damaged,
epithelial strands hang from the corneal surface (keratitis filiformis), and vision can be impaired.
Diminished saliva (xerostomia) results in difficulty chewing and swallowing, secondary
Candida
infection,
tooth decay, and calculi in the salivary ducts. Taste and smell may be diminished. Dryness may also
develop in the skin and in mucous membranes of the nose, throat, larynx, bronchi, vulva, and vagina.
Dryness of the respiratory tract may cause cough. Alopecia may occur. Parotid glands enlarge in 33% of
patients and are usually firm, smooth, and mildly tender. Chronic salivary gland enlargement is rarely
painful unless there is obstruction or infection.
Extraglandular manifestations:
Joint disease in SS is typically nonerosive and nondeforming.
Arthralgias occur in about 50% of patients. Arthritis occurs in about 33% of patients and is similar in
distribution to RA but is not erosive.
Other common extraglandular manifestations include generalized lymphadenopathy, Raynaud's
syndrome, parenchymal lung involvement (which is common but infrequently serious), and vasculitis.
Vasculitis can occasionally affect the peripheral nerves (causing peripheral polyneuropathy or
mononeuritis multiplex) or CNS or cause rashes (including purpura) and glomerulonephritis. Kidney
involvement can cause renal tubular acidosis, impaired concentrating ability, kidney stones, or interstitial
nephritis. Pseudolymphoma, malignant lymphoma, or Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia can develop;
patients develop non-Hodgkin lymphoma at 40 times the normal rate. Chronic hepatobiliary disease and
pancreatitis (exocrine pancreatic tissue is similar to that of salivary glands) may also occur.
Diagnosis
• Eye symptoms, oral symptoms, and eye and salivary gland testing
• Autoantibodies
• Sometimes salivary gland biopsy
SS should be suspected in patients with gritty or dry eyes or dry mouth, enlarged salivary glands,
peripheral neuropathy, purpura, or unexplained renal tubular acidosis. Such patients should receive
diagnostic tests that can include evaluation of the eyes and salivary glands and serologic tests. Different
criteria have been proposed for classification of SS. The latest modifications to the American-European
classification criteria for SS were proposed in 2002. These criteria were not developed for use in routine
clinical practice, and not every patient who receives a clinical diagnosis of SS fulfills the proposed criteria
(usually > 3 of 6 manifestations). The 6 manifestations are eye symptoms, oral symptoms, positive eye
tests, salivary gland involvement, autoantibodies, and histopathology.
Eye symptoms
are ≥ 3 mo of either dry eyes or use of tear substitutes ≥ 3 times/day; slit-lamp
examination may also confirm dry eyes.
Oral symptoms
are > 3 mo of daily dry mouth sensation, daily use of liquids to aid in swallowing, or
swollen salivary glands.
Eye signs
include evaluation by Schirmer's test, which measures the quantity of tears secreted in 5 min
after irritation from a filter paper strip placed under each lower eyelid. A young person normally moistens
15 mm of each paper strip. Most people with SS moisten < 5 mm, although about 15% of test results are
false-positive and 15% are false-negative. Ocular staining with an eyedrop of rose bengal or lissamine
green solution is highly specific. Slit-lamp examination showing a fluorescein tear breakup in < 10 sec is
also suggestive.
===PAGE:392===
Salivary gland involvement
can be confirmed by abnormally low saliva production (≤ 1.5 mL/15 min) as
measured by salivary flow, sialography, or salivary scintiscanning, although these tests are used less
often.
Autoantibodies
(serologic criteria) have limited sensitivity and specificity. They include antibodies to Ro
(SS-A autoantibodies—see
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
 or to nuclear antigens (termed La
or SS-B autoantibodies), antinuclear antibodies, or an elevated level of antibodies against
γ
-globulin.
Rheumatoid factor is present in > 70% of patients. ESR is elevated in 70%, 33% have anemia, and up to
25% have leukopenia.
Histopathology
is assessed by biopsy of minor salivary glands in the buccal mucosa.
Salivary gland
biopsy is usually reserved for patients in whom the diagnosis cannot be established by autoantibody
testing or when a major organ is involved. Histopathologic involvement is confirmed if labial minor salivary
glands show multiple large foci of lymphocytes with atrophy of acinar tissue.
Most common causes of dry eyes and dry mouth (sicca symptoms) are aging and drugs, but when parotid
enlargement occurs in addition to sicca symptoms, diseases such as hepatitis C, HIV, bulimia, and
sarcoidosis should be differentiated from SS.
Prognosis
SS is chronic, and death may occasionally result from pulmonary infection and, rarely, from renal failure or
lymphoma. Associated systemic autoimmune disorders may dictate prognosis.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment for sicca symptoms
• Avoidance of aggravating factors
• Occasionally oral corticosteroids or cyclophosphamide
SS should be initially managed by topical therapy of dry eyes and dry mouth. Other systemic
manifestations of SS should be treated depending on the severity and the involved organ. Recognition of
therapies for other conditions that can exacerbate dryness complaints is crucial. Hydroxychloroquine 200
to 400 mg po once/day is usually given to halt the progression of the disease and for the treatment of
arthralgias.
Dry eyes should be treated with lubricating eye preparations (initially drops such as hypromellose or
methylcellulose and an OTC ointment at bedtime). Other treatments include drainage (punctal) duct
closure and topical cyclosporine. Skin and vaginal dryness can be treated with lubricants.
Mouth dryness may be avoided by sipping fluids throughout the day, chewing sugarless gum, and using a
saliva substitute containing carboxymethylcellulose as a mouthwash. Drugs that decrease salivary
secretion (eg, antihistamines, antidepressants, other anticholinergics) should be avoided. Fastidious oral
hygiene and regular dental visits are essential. Stones must be promptly removed, preserving viable
salivary tissue. The pain of suddenly enlarged salivary glands is generally best treated with warm
compresses and analgesics. Pilocarpine 5 mg po tid to qid or cevimeline HCl 30 mg po tid can stimulate
salivary production but should be avoided in patients with bronchospasm and closed-angle glaucoma.
Aggressive systemic treatment is occasionally indicated. It is usually reserved for patients with associated
diseases (eg, severe vasculitis or visceral involvement); corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 1 mg/kg po
once/day) or cyclophosphamide 5 mg/kg po once/day may be used.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
(Disseminated Lupus Erythematosus)
===PAGE:393===
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, multisystem, inflammatory disorder of
autoimmune etiology, occurring predominantly in young women. Common manifestations may
include arthralgias and arthritis; malar and other skin rashes; pleuritis or pericarditis; renal or
CNS involvement; and hematologic cytopenias. Diagnosis requires clinical and serologic
criteria. Treatment of severe ongoing active disease requires corticosteroids, often
hydroxychloroquine, and sometimes immunosuppressants.
Of all cases, 70 to 90% occur in women (usually of child-bearing age). SLE is more common among
blacks and Asians than whites. It can affect patients of any age, including neonates. Increased awareness
of mild forms has resulted in a worldwide rise in reported cases. In some countries, the prevalence of SLE
rivals that of RA. SLE may be precipitated by currently unknown environmental triggers that cause
autoimmune reactions in genetically predisposed people. Some drugs (eg, hydralazine, procainamide,
isoniazid) cause a reversible lupus-like syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical findings vary greatly. SLE may develop abruptly with fever or insidiously over months or years
with episodes of arthralgias and malaise. Vascular headaches, epilepsy, or psychoses may be initial
findings. Manifestations referable to any organ system may appear. Periodic exacerbations (flares) may
occur.
Joint manifestations:
Joint symptoms, ranging from intermittent arthralgias to acute polyarthritis, occur
in about 90% of patients and may precede other manifestations by years. Most lupus polyarthritis is
nondestructive and nondeforming. However, in long-standing disease, deformities without bone erosions
may develop (eg, the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints may rarely develop ulnar drift or
swan-neck deformities without bony or cartilaginous erosions [Jaccoud's arthritis]).
Skin and mucous membrane manifestations
(see also p.
): Skin lesions include malar butterfly
erythema (flat or raised) that generally spares the nasolabial folds. The absence of papules and pustules
helps distinguish SLE from rosacea. A variety of other erythematous, firm, maculopapular lesions can
occur elsewhere, including exposed areas of the face and neck, upper chest, and elbows. Skin blistering
and ulceration are rare, although recurrent ulcers on mucous membranes (particularly the central portion
of the hard palate near the junction of the hard and soft palate, the buccal and gum mucosa, and the
anterior nasal septum) are common. Generalized or focal alopecia is common during active phases of
SLE. Panniculitis can cause subcutaneous nodular lesions. Vasculitic skin lesions may include mottled
erythema on the palms and fingers, periungual erythema, nail-fold infarcts, urticaria, and palpable
purpura. Petechiae may develop secondary to thrombocytopenia. Photosensitivity occurs in most
patients.
Cardiopulmonary manifestations:
Cardiopulmonary symptoms commonly include recurrent pleurisy,
with or without pleural effusion. Pneumonitis is rare, although minor impairments in pulmonary function
are common. Severe pulmonary hemorrhage occasionally occurs. Prognosis has traditionally been poor
but seems to be improving, possibly because of better early, aggressive, critical care. Other complications
include pulmonary emboli, pulmonary hypertension, and shrinking lung syndrome. Cardiac complications
include pericarditis (most commonly), pericardial effusion, and myocarditis. Serious, rare complications
are coronary artery vasculitis, valvular involvement, and Libman-Sacks endocarditis. Accelerated
atherosclerosis is an increasing cause of morbidity and mortality. Congenital heart block can develop in
neonates.
Adenopathy and splenic manifestations:
Generalized adenopathy is common, particularly among
children, young adults, and blacks. Splenomegaly occurs in 10% of patients. The spleen may develop
periarterial fibrosis.
Neurologic manifestations:
Neurologic symptoms can result from involvement of any part of the central
or peripheral nervous system or meninges. Mild cognitive impairment is common. There may also be
headaches, personality changes, ischemic stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage, seizures, psychoses,
organic brain syndrome, aseptic meningitis, peripheral neuropathies, transverse myelitis, or cerebellar
dysfunction.
===PAGE:394===
Renal manifestations:
Renal involvement can develop at any time and may be the only manifestation of
SLE. It may be benign and asymptomatic or progressive and fatal. Renal lesions can range in severity
from a focal, usually benign, glomerulitis to a diffuse, potentially fatal, membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis. Common manifestations include proteinuria (most often), an abnormal urinary
sediment manifested by RBC casts and leukocytes, hypertension, and edema.
Obstetric manifestations:
Obstetric manifestations include early and late fetal loss. In patients with
antiphospholipid antibodies, the risk of recurrent miscarriages is increased. Pregnancy can be successful
(, particularly after 6 to 12 mo of remission, but SLE flares are common during pregnancy.
Pregnancy should be timed for when disease is in remission. During pregnancy, the patient should be
monitored closely for any disease flare or thrombotic events by a multidisciplinary team that includes a
rheumatologist, an obstetrician who specializes in high-risk pregnancies, and a hematologist.
Hematologic manifestations:
Hematologic manifestations include anemia (often autoimmune
hemolytic), leukopenia (usually lymphopenia, with < 1500 cells/
μ
L,), and thrombocytopenia (sometimes
life-threatening autoimmune thrombocytopenia). Recurrent arterial or venous thrombosis,
thrombocytopenia, and a high probability of obstetric complications occur in patients with antiphospholipid
antibodies. Thromboses probably account for many of the complications of SLE, including obstetric
complications.
GI manifestations:
GI manifestations can result from bowel vasculitis or impaired bowel motility. In
addition, pancreatitis can result from SLE or from its treatment with corticosteroids or azathioprine.
Manifestations may include abdominal pain from serositis, nausea, vomiting, manifestations of bowel
perforation, and pseudo-obstruction. SLE rarely causes parenchymal liver disease.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Cytopenias
• Autoantibodies
SLE should be suspected in patients, particularly young women, with any of the symptoms and signs.
However, early-stage SLE can mimic other connective (or nonconnective) tissue disorders, including RA if
arthritic symptoms predominate. Mixed connective tissue disease can mimic SLE but also may involve
features of systemic sclerosis, rheumatoid-like polyarthritis, and polymyositis or dermatomyositis.
Infections (eg, bacterial endocarditis, histoplasmosis) can mimic SLE and may develop as a result of
treatment-caused immunosuppression. Disorders such as sarcoidosis and paraneoplastic syndromes can
also mimic SLE.
Laboratory testing differentiates SLE from other connective tissue disorders. Routine testing should
include the following:
• Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
• CBC
• Urinalysis
• Chemistry profile including renal and liver enzymes
The diagnosis is especially likely if ≥ 4 of the criteria in
Table 33-1
are present at any time but is still possible if < 4 criteria are present. If the diagnosis is
suspected but not established, additional testing for autoantibodies can be useful. Establishing the
diagnosis may require repeated evaluations over months or years.
===PAGE:395===
Fluorescent ANA:
The fluorescent test for ANA is the best screen for SLE; positive ANA tests (usually in
high titer: > 1:80) occur in > 98%. However, positive ANA tests can also occur in RA, other connective
tissue disorders, cancers, and even in the general population. The false-positive rate varies from about
3% for ANA titers of 1:320 to about 30% for ANA titers of 1:40 among healthy controls. Drugs such as
hydralazine, procainamide, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-
α
antagonists can produce positive ANA
results as well as a lupus-like syndrome; the ANA eventually becomes negative if the drug is stopped.
Positive ANA should prompt more specific testing such as anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies; high
titers are highly specific for SLE but occur in only 25 to 30% of people with SLE.
Other ANA and anticytoplasmic antibodies:
The ANA test is very sensitive, but it is not specific for
SLE; thus, evidence of other autoantibodies is needed to establish the diagnosis. They include Ro [SSA],
La [SSB], Smith [Sm], ribonucleoprotein [RNP], and double-stranded DNA. Ro is predominantly
cytoplasmic; anti-Ro antibodies are occasionally present in ANA-negative SLE patients presenting with
chronic cutaneous lupus. Anti-Ro is the causal antibody for neonatal lupus and congenital heart block.
Anti-Sm is highly specific for SLE but, like anti-double-stranded DNA, is not sensitive. Anti-RNP occurs in
patients with SLE, mixed connective tissue disease, and occasionally other systemic autoimmune
disorders and systemic sclerosis.
[Table 33-1.
Criteria for the Classification of SLE*]
Other blood tests:
Leukopenia (usually lymphopenia) is common. Hemolytic anemia may occur.
Thrombocytopenia in SLE may be difficult or impossible to differentiate from idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura except that patients have other features of SLE. False-positive serologic tests for syphilis occur
in 5 to 10% of SLE patients. These test results may be associated with the lupus anticoagulant and a
prolonged PTT. Abnormal values in one or more of these assays suggest the presence of
antiphospholipid antibodies (eg, anticardiolipin antibodies), which should then be measured directly by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Antiphospholipid antibodies are associated with arterial or
venous thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, and, during pregnancy, spontaneous abortion or late fetal death
but may be present in asymptomatic patients.
Other tests help monitor disease severity and determine the need for treatment. Serum complement levels
(C3, C4) are often depressed in active disease and are usually lowest in patients with active nephritis.
ESR is elevated frequently during active disease. C-reactive protein levels are not necessarily elevated.
Renal involvement:
Screening for renal involvement begins with urinalysis. RBC and WBC casts
suggest active nephritis. Urinalysis should be done at regular intervals, even for patients in apparent
remission, because kidney disease may be asymptomatic. Renal biopsy is usually not necessary for
diagnosis of SLE or to confirm renal involvement but is helpful in evaluating the status of renal disease
(ie, active inflammation vs postinflammatory scarring) and guide therapy. Patients with chronic renal
insufficiency and mostly sclerotic glomeruli are not likely to benefit from aggressive immunosuppressive
therapy.
Prognosis
The course is usually chronic, relapsing, and unpredictable. Remissions may last for years. If the initial
acute phase is controlled, even if very severe (eg, with cerebral thrombosis or severe nephritis), the longterm prognosis is usually good. The 10-yr survival in most developed countries is > 95%. Improved
prognosis is in part due to earlier diagnosis and more effective therapies. More severe disease requires
more toxic therapies, which increase risk of mortality. Examples of such complications include infection
from immunosuppression or osteoporosis from long-term corticosteroid use. Increased risk of coronary
artery disease can contribute to premature death.
Treatment
• NSAIDs and often antimalarials for mild disease
• Corticosteroids and often immunosuppressants for severe disease
===PAGE:396===
To simplify therapy, SLE should be classified as mild (eg, fever, arthritis, pleurisy, pericarditis, headache,
rash) or severe (eg, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenic purpura, massive pleural and pericardial
involvement, significant renal damage, acute vasculitis of the extremities or GI tract, florid CNS
involvement).
Mild or remittent disease:
Little or no therapy may be needed. Arthralgias are usually controlled with
NSAIDs. Antimalarials help, particularly when joint and skin manifestations are prominent.
Hydroxychloroquine 200 mg po once/day or bid reduces the frequency of SLE flares. Alternatives include
chloroquine 250 mg po once/day and quinacrine 50 to 100 mg po once/day. Hydroxychloroquine can
rarely cause retinal toxicity. The eyes should be examined at 12-mo intervals.
Severe disease:
Corticosteroids are first-line therapy. A combination of prednisone and
immunosuppressants is recommended in active, serious CNS lupus, vasculitis especially affecting viscera
or nerves, or active lupus nephritis. Prednisone is usually given in doses of 40 to 60 mg po once/day, but
the dose may vary according to the manifestation of SLE. Oral azathioprine 1 to 2.5 mg/kg once/day or
oral cyclophosphamide 1 to 4 mg/kg once/day can be used as an immunosuppressant. For renal
involvement, cyclophosphamide is usually given in intermittent IV pulses instead of daily oral doses; eg,
about 500 mg to 1 g/m
IV (together with mesna and fluid loading to protect the bladder) monthly for 6 mo
and then once q 3 mo for 18 mo (less frequently if there is renal or hematologic toxicity—see
Table 33-2
).
In CNS lupus or other critical crises, methylprednisolone 1 g by slow (1-h) IV infusion on 3 successive
days is often the initial treatment, followed by IV cyclophosphamide, as mentioned previously.
Mycophenolate mofetil is an alternative to cyclophosphamide therapy for patients with active kidney
disease who have preserved kidney function. IgG 400 mg/kg IV once/day for 5 consecutive days may be
useful for refractory thrombocytopenia. Patients
[Table 33-2.
Protocol for Chemotherapy with Cyclophosphamide and IV Mesna]
with end-stage renal disease can undergo kidney transplantation, as an alternative to dialysis, with a
successful outcome, especially if their disease has been in remission.
Improvement of severe SLE often takes 4 to 12 wk. Thrombosis or embolism of cerebral, pulmonary, or
placental vessels requires short-term treatment with heparin and longer treatment with warfarin, if the
diagnosis of antiphospholipid syndrome is confirmed. The target INR is usually 3.
Suppressive therapy:
For most patients, the risk of flares can be decreased without prolonged highdose corticosteroids. Chronic disease should be treated with the lowest dose of corticosteroids and other
drugs that control inflammation (eg, antimalarials, low-dose immunosuppressants). Treatment should be
guided by clinical features primarily, although anti-double-stranded DNA antibody titers or serum
complement levels may be followed. Other pertinent blood and urine tests may be used to assess specific
organ involvement. Anti-double-stranded DNA antibody titers or serum complement levels may not parallel
nonrenal disease flares. If a patient needs long-term high-dose corticosteroids, alternative oral
immunosuppressants should be considered. Ca, vitamin D, and bisphosphonate therapy should be
considered in patients taking corticosteroids long term.
Focal complications and coexisting medical conditions:
All patients should be closely monitored for
atherosclerosis. Long-term anticoagulation is vital in patients with antiphospholipid antibodies and
recurrent thrombosis (.
If a pregnant patient has antiphospholipid antibodies, thrombotic complications can be limited with
corticosteroids (prednisone ≤ 30 mg po once/day), low-dose aspirin, or anticoagulation with heparin. Daily
heparin given subcutaneously with or without one baby aspirin throughout the 2nd and 3rd trimesters may
be the most successful prophylactic measure.
Variant Forms of Lupus
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE):
DLE, also sometimes called chronic cutaneous lupus
===PAGE:397===
erythematosus, is a set of skin changes that can occur as part of lupus, with or without systemic
involvement. Skin lesions begin as erythematous plaques and progress to atrophic scars. They cluster in
light-exposed areas of the skin, such as the face, scalp, and ears. Untreated, lesions extend and develop
central atrophy and scarring. There may be widespread scarring alopecia. Mucous membrane
involvement may be prominent, especially in the mouth.
Patients presenting with typical discoid lesions should be evaluated for SLE. Antibodies against doublestranded DNA are almost invariably absent in DLE. Although it does not differentiate DLE from SLE,
biopsy can rule out other disorders (eg, lymphoma or sarcoidosis). Biopsy should be done from the active
margin of a skin lesion.
Early treatment can prevent permanent atrophy. Exposure to sunlight or ultraviolet light should be
minimized (eg, using potent sunscreens when outdoors). Topical corticosteroid ointments (particularly for
dry skin) or creams (less greasy than ointments) tid to qid (eg, triamcinolone acetonide 0.1 or 0.5%,
fluocinolone 0.025 or 0.2%, flurandrenolide 0.05%, betamethasone valerate 0.1%, and, particularly
betamethasone dipropionate 0.05%) usually cause involution of small lesions; they should not be used
excessively or on the face (where they cause skin atrophy). Resistant lesions can be covered with plastic
tape coated with flurandrenolide. Alternatively, intradermal injection with triamcinolone acetonide 0.1%
suspension (< 0.1 mL per site) may resolve lesions, but secondary atrophy frequently follows.
Antimalarials (eg, hydroxychloroquine 200 mg po once/day or bid) can help, including for facial lesions. In
resistant cases, combinations (eg, hydroxychloroquine 200 mg/day plus quinacrine 50 to 100 mg po
once/day) may be required for months to years.
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE):
SCLE is a variant form of SLE in which skin
involvement is prominent. Patients with SCLE develop extensive recurring rashes. Annular or
papulosquamous lesions may develop on the face, arms, and trunk. Lesions are usually photosensitive
and can develop hypopigmentation but rarely scar. Arthritis and fatigue are common in SCLE, but
neurologic and renal manifestations are not. Patients may be ANA-positive or ANA-negative. Most have
antibodies to Ro (SSA). Infants whose mothers have Ro antibodies may have congenital SCLE or
congenital heart block. SCLE should be treated similarly to SLE.
Systemic Sclerosis
(Scleroderma)
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a rare chronic disease of unknown cause characterized by diffuse
fibrosis, degenerative changes, and vascular
abnormalities in the skin, joints, and internal
organs (especially the esophagus, lower GI tract, lungs, heart, and kidneys). Common
symptoms include Raynaud's syndrome, polyarthralgia, dysphagia, heartburn, and swelling and
eventually skin tightening and contractures of the fingers. Lung, heart, and kidney involvement
accounts for most deaths. Diagnosis is clinical, but laboratory tests help with confirmation.
Specific treatment is difficult, and emphasis is often on treatment of complications.
SSc is about 4 times more common among women than men. It is most common among people aged 20
to 50 and is rare in children. SSc can develop as part of mixed connective tissue disease.
Etiology
Immunologic mechanisms and heredity (certain HLA subtypes) play a role in etiology. SSc-like syndromes
can result from exposure to vinyl chloride, bleomycin, pentazocine, epoxy and aromatic hydrocarbons,
contaminated rapeseed oil, or L-tryptophan.
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiology involves vascular damage and activation of fibroblasts; collagen and other extracellular
proteins in various tissues are overproduced.
In SSc, the skin develops more compact collagen fibers in the reticular dermis, epidermal thinning, loss of
===PAGE:398===
rete pegs, and atrophy of dermal appendages. T cells may accumulate, and extensive fibrosis in the
dermal and subcutaneous layers develops. In the nail folds, capillary loops dilate and some microvascular
loops are lost. In the extremities, chronic inflammation and fibrosis of the synovial membrane and surfaces
and periarticular soft tissues occur.
Esophageal motility becomes impaired, and the lower esophageal sphincter becomes incompetent;
gastroesophageal reflux and secondary strictures can develop. The intestinal muscularis mucosa
degenerates, leading to pseudodiverticula in the colon and ileum. Interstitial and peribronchial fibrosis or
intimal hyperplasia of small pulmonary arteries can develop; if long-standing, pulmonary hypertension can
result. Diffuse myocardial fibrosis or cardiac conduction abnormalities occur. Intimal hyperplasia of
interlobular and arcuate arteries can develop within the kidneys, causing renal ischemia and
hypertension.
SSc varies in severity and progression, ranging from generalized skin thickening with rapidly progressive
and often fatal visceral involvement (SSc with diffuse scleroderma) to isolated skin involvement (often just
the fingers and face) and slow progression (often several decades) before visceral disease develops.
The latter form is termed limited cutaneous scleroderma or CREST syndrome (calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's
syndrome, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, telangiectasias). In addition, SSc can overlap with other
autoimmune rheumatic disorders—eg, sclerodermatomyositis (tight skin and muscle weakness
indistinguishable from polymyositis) and mixed connective tissue disease.
Symptoms and Signs
The most common initial symptoms and signs are Raynaud's syndrome and insidious swelling of the
distal extremities with gradual thickening of the skin of the fingers. Polyarthralgia is also prominent. GI
disturbances (eg, heartburn, dysphagia) or respiratory complaints (eg, dyspnea) are occasionally the first
manifestations.
Skin and nail manifestations:
Swelling of the skin is usually symmetric and progresses to induration. It
may be confined to the fingers (sclerodactyly) and hands, or it may affect most or all of the body. The skin
eventually becomes taut, shiny, and hypopigmented or hyperpigmented; the face becomes masklike; and
telangiectases may appear on the fingers, chest, face, lips, and tongue. Subcutaneous calcifications may
develop, usually on the fingertips (pulps) and over bony eminences. Trophic ulcers are common,
especially on the fingertips, overlying the finger joints, or over calcinotic nodules. Abnormal capillary and
microvascular loops in the nails can be seen with an ophthalmoscope or dissecting microscope.
Joint manifestations:
Polyarthralgias or mild arthritis can be prominent. Flexion contractures may
develop in the fingers, wrists, and elbows. Friction rubs may develop over the joints, tendon sheaths, and
large bursae.
GI manifestations:
Esophageal dysfunction is the most frequent visceral disturbance and occurs in most
patients. Dysphagia (usually retrosternal) usually develops first. Acid reflux can cause heartburn and
stricture. Barrett's esophagus occurs in one third of patients and predisposes to complications (eg,
stricture, adenocarcinoma). Hypomotility of the small bowel causes anaerobic bacterial overgrowth that
can lead to malabsorption. Air may penetrate the damaged bowel wall and be visible on x-rays
(pneumatosis intestinalis). Leakage
of bowel contents into the peritoneal cavity can cause peritonitis.
Distinctive wide-mouthed diverticula can develop in the colon. Biliary cirrhosis may develop in patients
with CREST syndrome.
Cardiopulmonary manifestations:
Lung involvement generally progresses indolently, with substantial
individual variability, but is a common cause of death. Lung fibrosis can impair gas exchange, leading to
exertional dyspnea and restrictive disease with eventual respiratory failure. Acute alveolitis (potentially
responsive to therapy) can develop. Esophageal dysfunction can lead to aspiration pneumonia.
Pulmonary hypertension may develop, as can heart failure, both of which are poor prognostic findings.
Pericarditis with effusion or pleurisy can occur. Cardiac arrhythmias are common.
Renal manifestations:
Severe, often sudden renal disease (renal crisis) may occur, most commonly in
the first 4 to 5 yr and in patients with diffuse scleroderma. It is usually heralded by sudden, severe
===PAGE:399===
hypertension.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Usually antinuclear antibodies (ANA), Scl-70 (topoisomerase I), and anticentromere antibodies
SSc should be considered in patients with Raynaud's syndrome, typical musculoskeletal or skin
manifestations, or unexplained dysphagia, malabsorption, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension,
cardiomyopathies, or conduction disturbances. Diagnosis can be obvious in patients with combinations of
classic manifestations, such as Raynaud's syndrome, dysphagia, and tight skin. However, in some
patients, the diagnosis cannot be made clinically, and confirmatory laboratory tests can increase the
probability of disease but do not rule it out.
Serum ANA and Scl-70 antibody should be obtained. ANA are present in ≥ 90%, often with an
antinucleolar pattern. Antibody to centromeric protein (anticentromere antibody) occurs in the serum of a
high proportion of patients with CREST syndrome and is detectable on the ANA. Scl-70 antigen is a DNAbinding protein sensitive to nucleases. Patients with diffuse scleroderma are more likely than those with
CREST to have anti-Scl-70 antibodies. Rheumatoid factor also is positive in one third of patients.
If lung involvement is suspected, pulmonary function testing, chest CT, and echocardiography can begin
to define its severity. Acute alveolitis is often detected by high-resolution chest CT.
Prognosis
The course depends on the type of SSc but is often unpredictable. Typically, progression is slow. Overall
10-yr survival is about 65%. Most patients with diffuse skin disease eventually develop visceral
complications, which are the usual causes of death. Prognosis is poor if cardiac, pulmonary, or renal
manifestations are present early. Heart failure may be intractable. Ventricular ectopy, even if
asymptomatic, increases the risk of sudden death. Acute renal insufficiency, if untreated, progresses
rapidly and causes death within months. Patients with CREST syndrome may have disease that is limited
and nonprogressive for long periods; visceral changes (eg, pulmonary hypertension caused by vascular
disease of the lung, a peculiar form of biliary cirrhosis) eventually develop, but the course is often
remarkably benign.
Treatment
• Treatment directed at symptoms and dysfunctional organs
No drug significantly influences the natural course of SSc overall, but various drugs are of value in
treating specific symptoms or organ systems. NSAIDs can help arthritis. Corticosteroids may be helpful if
there is overt myositis or mixed connective tissue disease but may predispose to renal crisis.
Penicillamine, long used for treatment of skin thickening, has not shown clear efficacy in recent trials.
Various immunosuppressants, including methotrexate, azathioprine, and cyclophosphamide, may help
pulmonary alveolitis. Successful lung transplantation has been reported. Epoprostenol (prostacyclin) and
bosentan may be helpful for pulmonary hypertension. Ca channel blockers, such as nifedipine 20 mg po
tid or as an extended-release formulation, or angiotensin receptor blockers, such as losartan 50 mg po
once/day, may help Raynaud's syndrome. Patients should dress warmly. IV infusions of prostaglandin E1
(alprostadil) or epoprostenol or sympathetic blockers can be used for digital ischemia. Reflux esophagitis
is relieved by frequent small feedings, high-dose proton pump inhibitors, and sleeping with the head of
the bed elevated. Esophageal strictures may require periodic dilation; gastroesophageal reflux may
possibly require gastroplasty.
Tetracycline 500 mg po bid or another broad-spectrum antibiotic can
suppress overgrowth of intestinal flora and may alleviate malabsorption symptoms. Physiotherapy may
help preserve muscle strength but is ineffective in preventing joint contractures. No treatment affects
calcinosis.
===PAGE:400===
For acute renal crisis, prompt treatment with an ACE inhibitor can dramatically prolong survival. Blood
pressure is usually, but not always, controlled. The mortality rate of renal crisis remains high. If end-stage
renal disease develops, it may be reversible, but dialysis and transplantation may be necessary.
===PAGE:401===
Chapter 34. Vasculitis
Introduction
Vasculitis is inflammation of blood vessels, often with ischemia, necrosis, and occlusive changes. It can
affect any blood vessel—arteries, arterioles, veins, venules, or capillaries. Most damage results when
inflammation narrows vessels and causes tissue necrosis. Clinical manifestations of specific vasculitic
disorders are diverse and depend on the size of the involved vessels and the organs affected by
ischemia.
Etiology
Vasculitis may be primary or secondary. Primary vasculitis results from an inflammatory response that
targets the vessel walls and has no known cause. Secondary vasculitis may be triggered by an infection,
a drug, or a toxin or may occur as part of another inflammatory disorder or cancer.
Pathophysiology
Histologic description of an affected vessel should include the following:
• A description of vessel wall damage
• The nature of the inflammatory infiltrate in the vessel wall (eg, granulomatous, nongranulomatous,
leukocytoclastic vasculitis)
• A description of healing responses (eg, intimal hypertrophy, fibrosis)
Certain features (eg, predominant inflammatory cells, location of inflammation) suggest particular
vasculitic processes and may aid in the diagnosis (see
Table 34-1
). For example, in many acute lesions, the predominant inflammatory cells are PMNs; in chronic
lesions, lymphocytes predominate.
Inflammation may be segmental or involve the entire vessel. At sites of inflammation, varying degrees of
cellular inflammation and necrosis or scarring occur in one or more layers
[Table 34-1.
Histologic Clues to Diagnosis of Vasculitic Disorders]
[Table 34-2.
Classification of Vasculitic Disorders]
of the vessel wall. Inflammation in the media of a muscular artery tends to destroy the internal elastic
lamina.
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis is a histopathologic term used to describe findings in small-vessel vasculitis. It
refers to breakdown of inflammatory cells that leaves small nuclear fragments (nuclear debris) in and
around the vessels. Inflammation is transmural, rarely necrotizing, and nongranulomatous. PMNs
predominate early; later, lymphocytes predominate. Resolution of the inflammation tends to result in
fibrosis and intimal hypertrophy. Intimal hypertrophy or secondary clot formation can narrow the arterial
lumen and accounts for tissue ischemia or necrosis.
Classification
Vasculitic disorders can be classified according to the size of the predominant vessel affected (see
Table
34-2
). However, there is often substantial overlap.
Symptoms and Signs
Size of the affected vessels helps determine clinical presentation (see
Table 34-2
).
===PAGE:402===
Regardless of the size of the vessels involved, patients can present with symptoms and signs of systemic
inflammation (eg, fever, night sweats, fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, arthralgias, arthritis). Some
manifestations are life- or organ-threatening and require immediate treatment. They include alveolar
hemorrhage, rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, mesenteric ischemia, orbital pseudotumor
threatening the optic nerve (in Wegener's granulomatosis), and vision loss in patients with giant cell
arteritis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) tests
• Biopsy
• Angiography
Systemic vasculitis is suspected in patients with the following:
• Symptoms or signs characteristic of vasculitis (eg, mononeuritis multiplex, leukocytoclastic vasculitis)
• Ischemic manifestations (eg, ischemic stroke, limb claudication, mesenteric ischemia) out of proportion
to a patient's risk factors for atherosclerosis
•
Unexplained combinations of symptoms in more than one organ system that are compatible with
vasculitis (eg, hypertension, myalgias), particularly when symptoms of a systemic illness are present
Primary vasculitic disorders are diagnosed based on the presence of characteristic symptoms, physical
findings, compatible laboratory test results, and exclusion of other causes (ie, secondary vasculitis).
Histologic examination is done whenever possible and may point to a particular vasculitic disorder (see
Table 34-1
).
Routine laboratory tests are done. Most results are nonspecific but can help support the diagnosis. Tests
usually include CBC, ESR or C-reactive protein, serum albumin and total protein, and tests for ANCA.
Often, patients present with elevated ESR or C-reactive protein, anemia due to chronic inflammation,
elevated platelets, and low serum albumin and total protein. Freshly voided urine must be tested for
RBCs, RBC casts, and protein to identify renal involvement. Serum creatinine levels should be checked
and monitored. Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are uncommon.
Detection of ANCA may support the diagnosis of Wegener's granulomatosis, Churg-Strauss syndrome, or
microscopic polyangiitis. Standardized tests for ANCA include immunofluorescence staining and enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Immunofluorescence staining of ethanol-fixed neutrophils can
detect the cytoplasmic pattern of cANCA or the perinuclear pattern of pANCA. Then solid-phase ELISA is
used to check for antibodies specific for the major autoantigens: proteinase-3 (PR3), which correlates
with the cANCA staining pattern, or myeloperoxidase (MPO), which correlates with the pANCA staining
pattern. Because false-positives occur, ANCA should be measured only when one of these vasculitic
disorders is clinically suspected.
Other useful laboratory tests include hepatitis B and C serologic testing, testing for the presence of
cryoglobulins, and complement levels to diagnose viral or cryoglobulinemic vasculitis. Further testing is
determined by clinical findings. A chest x-ray should be done to check for infiltrates, but high-resolution
noncontrast CT of the chest may be needed to check for subtle findings, such as small nodules or
cavities. Bilateral diffuse infiltrates suggest possible alveolar hemorrhage, which requires immediate
diagnosis and treatment. Other imaging tests may be required. For example, magnetic resonance
angiography of large blood vessels and the aorta is useful for diagnosis and monitoring when such
vessels appear affected. If symptoms suggest mononeuritis multiplex, electromyography is done.
===PAGE:403===
Because vasculitic disorders are rare and treatment may have severe adverse effects, tissue biopsy is
done to confirm the diagnosis whenever possible. Usually, clinical findings suggest the best site for
biopsy. For example, if clinical and electromyographic findings suggest mononeuritis multiplex with
dysfunction of a specific peripheral nerve, tissue around arteries supplying the nerve is biopsied. Usually,
biopsies of unaffected tissue are much less likely to provide positive results.
Because vasculitis is often segmental or focal, biopsy may not show inflammation even when a vessel is
affected. Sampling from multiple areas or long segments of a vessel may increase diagnostic sensitivity.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide to induce remission of life- or organ-threatening disorders
• Tapering or elimination of corticosteroids and substitution of methotrexate or azathioprine to maintain
remission
Treatment depends on the etiology and extent and severity of disease. For secondary vasculitic
disorders, removing the cause (eg, infection, drug, cancer) can help.
For primary vasculitic disorders, treatment aims to induce and maintain remission. Remission is induced
by using cytotoxic immunosuppressants and high-dose corticosteroids, usually for 3 to 6 mo, until
remission occurs or disease activity is acceptably reduced. Adjusting treatment to maintain remission
usually takes longer, on average > 1 or 2 yr. During this period, the goal is to eliminate corticosteroids or
reduce their dose and to use less potent immunosuppressants as long as needed.
Induction of remission:
For less severe forms of vasculitis, low doses of corticosteroids and less potent
immunosuppressants (eg, methotrexate, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil) may be used.
Severe, rapidly progressive and life- or organ-threatening vasculitis (eg, causing alveolar hemorrhage,
rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, or mesenteric ischemia) is a medical emergency requiring hospital
admission and immediate treatment. Treatment consists of the following:
•
Corticosteroids:
High-dose corticosteroids (also called pulse corticosteroids) are often prescribed.
Methylprednisolone 15 mg/kg
or 1 g IV once/day for 3 days may be used. Oral prednisone is given
concurrently. A dose of 1 mg/kg once/day is given for about 4 wk until patients improve. The dose is
then tapered slowly, as tolerated, usually by 10 mg every week to 40 mg/day, by 5 mg every 2 wk to 20
mg/day, by 2.5 mg every 2 wk to 10 mg/day, and by 1 mg every month from there on until the drug is
stopped. Changes in this tapering schedule may be necessary if the patient fails to improve or relapses.
•
Cyclophosphamide:
A dose of 2 mg/kg po once/day is usually recommended for at least 3 mo or until
remission occurs. The WBC count must be closely monitored, and the dose must be adjusted to avoid
leukopenia. (WBC count should be maintained at > 3500/
μ
L.) If patients cannot tolerate oral
cyclophosphamide, are unlikely to take oral drugs as directed, or have a high risk of bladder cancer, IV
cyclophosphamide may be used. The recommended cumulative dose of cyclophosphamide is 0.75 to 1
g/m
monthly. The dose should be reduced in patients with significant renal insufficiency. Patients
taking cyclophosphamide should also be given prophylactic treatment against
Pneumocystis jirovecii
.
Acrolein, a product of cyclophosphamide degradation, is toxic to the bladder epithelium and can lead to
hemorrhagic cystitis. For patients who have taken cyclophosphamide long term, risk of cystitis is
increased, and some develop transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. During cyclophosphamide
therapy, careful hydration is needed to reduce the risk of bladder hemorrhage, cystitis, and bladder
cancer. Mesna binds acrolein and is mixed together with the IV cyclophosphamide infusion. One milligram
of mesna is added for each milligram of cyclophosphamide. Recurrence of hematuria, especially without
casts and dysmorphic red cells, should prompt a referral for urologic evaluation. Cystoscopy and renal
imaging should be done to exclude cancer.
Remission maintenance:
Corticosteroids are tapered to zero or to the lowest dose that can maintain
remission. Usually, methotrexate (with folate) or azathioprine is prescribed to replace cyclophosphamide
===PAGE:404===
because these drugs have a better adverse effects profile. The duration of this treatment varies, from one
year to several years. Patients with frequent relapses may need to take immunosuppressants indefinitely.
Long-term use of corticosteroids can have significant adverse effects. Patients who are taking such
therapy should be given Ca and vitamin D supplements and bisphosphonates to help prevent or minimize
osteoporosis; bone density should be monitored yearly.
Behcet's Syndrome
Behcet's syndrome is a multisystem, relapsing, chronic vasculitic disorder with prominent
mucosal inflammation. Common manifestations include recurrent oral ulcers, ocular
inflammation, genital ulcers, and skin lesions. The most serious manifestations are blindness,
neurologic or GI manifestations, venous thromboses, and arterial aneurysms. Diagnosis is
clinical, using international criteria. Treatment is mainly symptomatic but may involve
corticosteroids for acute severe ocular or neurologic manifestations or immunosuppressants
for severe chronic lesions.
Behcet's syndrome involves small and large arteries and veins. Arterial thrombosis and superficial and
deep venous thrombosis often occur.
The syndrome occurs nearly equally in men and women, typically beginning during their 20s.
Occasionally, the syndrome develops in children. Incidence varies by location. Behcet's syndrome is most
common along the silk route from the Mediterranean to China; it is uncommon in the US.
The cause is unknown. Immunologic (including autoimmune) and viral or bacterial triggers have been
suggested, and HLA-B51 is associated with cases from Turkey, Iran, China, Korea, and Japan.
Neutrophil infiltration is detected in biopsy specimens from oral aphthous ulcers and erythema nodosum
and pathergy lesions, but no histologic changes are pathognomonic.
Symptoms and Signs
Mucocutaneous:
Almost all patients have recurrent painful oral ulcers resembling those of aphthous
stomatitis; in most, these ulcers are the first manifestations. The ulcers are round or oval, 2 to 10 mm in
diameter, and shallow or deep with a central yellowish necrotic center; they can occur anywhere in the
oral cavity, often in clusters. Ulcers last 1 to 2 wk. Similar ulcers occur on the penis and scrotum, on the
vulva where they are painful, or in the vagina where they may cause little or no pain.
Cutaneous lesions are common and may include acneiform lesions, nodules, erythema nodosum,
superficial thrombophlebitis, pyoderma gangrenosum-type lesions, and palpable purpura.
Pathergy (an erythematous papular or pustular response to local skin injury) is defined as a papule > 2
mm that appears 24 to 48 h after oblique insertion of a 20- to 25-gauge needle into the skin. Pathergy has
occurred in many parts of the world but is less common among North American and northern European
patients than among Middle Eastern and Asian patients.
Ocular:
The eyes are affected in 25 to 75% of patients. The following may occur:
• Relapsing uveitis or iridocyclitis (most common) often manifests as pain, photophobia, and red eye.
• Hypopyon (a layer of pus visible in the anterior chamber) may occur.
• Uveitis is typically bilateral and episodic, often involves the entire uveal tract (panuveitis), and may not
resolve completely between episodes.
• Choroiditis, retinal vasculitis, vascular occlusion, and optic neuritis may irreversibly impair vision and
even progress to blindness.
===PAGE:405===
Musculoskeletal:
Relatively mild, self-limiting, and nondestructive arthralgias or frank arthritis, especially
in the knees and other large joints, occur in 50% of patients. Sacroiliac inflammation can occur.
Vascular:
Superficial and deep venous thromboses are common. Large vessels are affected in about
one third of patients. Perivascular and endovascular inflammation may lead to hemorrhage, stenosis,
aneurysms, and thrombosis in arteries and veins. Superior and inferior vena cava occlusion, Budd-Chiari
syndrome, and other venous obstructive lesions can also occur.
Disease of the aorta and large blood vessels may be life threatening. Hemoptysis may occur if fistulas
between the pulmonary artery and bronchus develop.
Neurologic and psychiatric:
CNS involvement is less common but is serious. Onset may be sudden or
gradual. The first manifestations may be parenchymal involvement with pyramidal signs, small-vessel
disease with a multiple sclerosis-like pattern, aseptic meningitis or meningoencephalitis, or dural sinus
thrombosis.
Psychiatric disorders including personality changes and dementia may develop years later. Peripheral
neuropathy, common in other vasculitic disorders, is uncommon in Behcet's syndrome.
GI:
Abdominal discomfort, abdominal pain, and diarrhea with intestinal ulcers, occurring primarily in the
ileum and colon and closely resembling Crohn's disease, may occur.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
Behcet's syndrome should be suspected in young adults with recurrent oral aphthous ulcers, unexplained
ocular findings, or genital ulcers. Diagnosis is clinical and may require months because many of the
manifestations are nonspecific and can be insidious.
International criteria
for diagnosis include recurrent oral ulcers (3 times in 1 yr) and 2 of the following:
• Recurrent genital ulcers
• Eye lesions
• Skin lesions
• Positive pathergy test with no other clinical explanation
Laboratory tests (eg, CBC, ESR or C-reactive protein, serum albumin and total protein levels) are done.
Results are nonspecific but characteristic of inflammatory disease (elevated ESR, C-reactive protein, and
α
- and
γ
-globulins; mild leukocytosis).
Differential diagnosis includes reactive arthritis, SLE, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, ankylosing
spondylitis, and herpes simplex infection. Behcet's syndrome has no single pathognomonic finding but
may be distinguished by its combinations of relapsing symptoms with spontaneous remissions and
multiple organ involvement, particularly in patients with recurrent, deep mucosal ulcers.
Prognosis
Behcet's syndrome typically has a waxing and waning course characterized by exacerbations and
remissions. Mucocutaneous and ocular lesions and arthralgias are often worse early in the disease. CNS
and large-vessel manifestations, if they develop, typically occur later. Occasionally, the syndrome results
in death, usually due to neurologic, vascular (eg, aneurysms), or GI manifestations. Many patients
eventually go into remission.
Treatment
===PAGE:406===
• Colchicine, thalidomide, etanercept, and interferon for mucosal disease
• Azathioprine or cyclosporine for eye disease
• Cyclophosphamide and chlorambucil for refractory or life-threatening disease
Treatment depends on the clinical manifestations.
Mucosal disease can be managed symptomatically. Colchicine 0.6 mg po bid may decrease the frequency
and severity of oral or
genital ulcers and may be effective for erythema nodosum and arthralgias.
Thalidomide 100 to 300 mg po once/day may be used to treat oral, genital, and skin lesions, but lesions
may recur when treatment is stopped. Etanercept 50 mg sc once/wk or 25 mg sc twice/wk may suppress
mucocutaneous lesions. Etanercept can be given if colchicine is ineffective. Interferon alfa-2a 6 million
units sc 3 times/wk can also be given if colchicine is ineffective.
Azathioprine 2.5 mg/kg po once/day helps preserve visual acuity and prevent new eye lesions.
Azathioprine is also useful for mucocutaneous lesions and arthralgia. Cyclosporine 5 to 10 mg/kg po
once/day may be reserved for patients with severe ocular manifestations and may be used with
azathioprine to treat refractory uveitis. Interferon alfa-2a 6 million units sc 3 times/wk and infliximab (a
tumor necrosis factor inhibitor) 3 to 10 mg/kg IV at 0, 2, 4, and then every 8 wk show promise for patients
with ocular manifestations.
Cyclophosphamide and chlorambucil are used in patients with refractory disease, life-threatening
conditions (eg, pulmonary aneurysms), or CNS manifestations.
The efficacy of corticosteroids is unsubstantiated, despite their wide use. Topical corticosteroids may
temporarily relieve ocular manifestations and most oral lesions. However, topical or systemic
corticosteroids do not alter the frequency of relapses. A few patients with severe uveitis or CNS
manifestations respond to high-dose systemic corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 60 to 80 mg po once/day).
Whether immunosuppressants should be added to anticoagulation therapy when patients have
thromboses has not been established.
Churg-Strauss Syndrome
(Allergic Angiitis and Granulomatosis)
Churg-Strauss syndrome is a pulmonary and systemic small-vessel necrotizing vasculitis,
characterized by extravascular granulomas, eosinophilia, and tissue infiltration by eosinophils.
It tends to occur in people with adult-onset asthma, allergic rhinitis, nasal polyposis, or a
combination. Diagnosis is best confirmed by biopsy. Treatment is primarily with corticosteroids
and, for severe disease, addition of other immunosuppressants.
Churg-Strauss syndrome occurs in about 3 people/million. Mean age at onset is 48.
Churg-Strauss syndrome is characterized by extravascular necrotizing granulomas (usually containing
eosinophilic infiltrates), eosinophilia, and tissue infiltration by eosinophils. However, these abnormalities
rarely coexist. The vasculitis typically affects pulmonary and systemic arteries and veins. Any organ can
be affected, but the lungs, skin, cardiovascular system (eg, as coronary artery vasculitis), kidneys,
peripheral nervous system, sinuses, joints, and GI tract are most commonly affected. Occasionally,
pulmonary capillaritis may cause alveolar hemorrhage.
Etiology
The cause is unknown. However, an allergic mechanism, with tissue directly injured by eosinophils and
neutrophil degranulation products, may be involved. Activation of T lymphocytes seems to help maintain
eosinophilic inflammation. The syndrome occurs in patients who have adult-onset asthma, allergic rhinitis,
===PAGE:407===
nasal polyposis, or a combination. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies (ANCA) are sometimes
present.
Symptoms and Signs
The syndrome has 3 phases, which may overlap:
• Prodromal: This phase may persist for years. Patients have allergic rhinitis, nasal polyposis, asthma, or
a combination.
• 2nd phase: Peripheral blood and tissue eosinophilia is typical. Clinical presentation, which may
resemble Loffler's syndrome, includes chronic eosinophilic pneumonia and eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
• 3rd phase: Potentially life-threatening vasculitis develops. Systemic symptoms (eg, fever, malaise,
weight loss, fatigue) are common.
However, the phases do not necessarily follow one another consecutively, and the time interval between
them varies greatly.
Various organs and systems may be affected:
•
Respiratory:
Asthma, often with onset during adulthood, occurs in most patients. Sinusitis is common,
typically without severe necrotizing inflammation. Sinusitis causes facial pain and increases nasal
discharge. Patients may be short of breath. Cough and hemoptysis, due to alveolar hemorrhage, may
be present. Transient patchy pulmonary infiltrates are common.
•
Neurologic:
Neurologic manifestations are common. Mononeuritis multiplex occurs in
up to three
fourths of patients. CNS involvement is rare but can include confusion, seizures, and coma, with or
without cranial nerve palsies or evidence of cerebral infarction.
•
Cutaneous:
The skin is affected in about one half of patients. Nodules and papules appear on extensor
surfaces of extremities. They are caused by extravascular palisading granulomatous lesions with
central necrosis. Purpura or erythematous papules, due to leukocytoclastic vasculitis with or without
prominent eosinophilic infiltration, may develop.
•
Musculoskeletal:
Occasionally, arthralgias, myalgias, or even arthritis can occur, usually during the
vasculitic phase.
•
Cardiac:
Heart failure, MI, coronary artery vasculitis (possibly with MI), valvular disorders, or pericarditis
may develop. The predominant histopathologic finding is eosinophilic myocarditis.
•
GI:
Up to one third of patients present with GI symptoms (eg, abdominal pain, diarrhea, bleeding) due to
eosinophilic gastroenteritis or mesenteric ischemia due to vasculitis.
•
Renal:
The kidneys are affected less often than in other vasculitic disorders associated with ANCA.
Typically, pauci-immune (few if any immune complexes), focal segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis
with crescent formation is present; eosinophilic or granulomatous inflammation of the kidneys is rare.
Renal, cardiac, or neurologic involvement indicates a worse prognosis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Routine laboratory tests
• Biopsy
===PAGE:408===
Criteria for classification from the American College of Rheumatology consist of the following:
• Asthma
• Eosinophilia of > 10% in peripheral blood
• Paranasal sinusitis
• Pulmonary infiltrates, sometimes transient
• Histologic evidence of vasculitis with extravascular eosinophils
• Mononeuritis multiplex or polyneuropathy
If ≥ 4 criteria are present, sensitivity is 85%, and specificity is 99.7%.
Testing aims to establish the diagnosis and the extent of organ involvement and to distinguish ChurgStrauss syndrome from other eosinophilic disorders (eg, parasitic infections, drug reactions, acute and
chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, idiopathic hypereosinophilic
syndrome). Diagnosis is suggested by clinical findings and results of routine laboratory tests but should
usually be confirmed by biopsy of lung or other affected tissue.
Blood tests and chest x-rays are done, but results are not diagnostic. CBC with differential is done to
check for eosinophilia. Peripheral blood eosinophilia is also a marker of disease activity. IgE and Creactive protein levels and ESR are determined periodically to evaluate inflammatory activity. Electrolyte
levels are measured and urinalysis is done to check for evidence of renal involvement and to follow its
severity.
Serologic testing is done. It detects ANCA in up to 50%; if ANCA is detected, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is done to check for specific antibodies. Perinuclear ANCA (p-ANCA) with
antibodies against myeloperoxidase is the most common result, but ANCA is not specific for ChurgStrauss syndrome.
Chest x-ray often shows transient patchy pulmonary infiltrates.
Biopsy of the most accessible affected tissue should be done if possible.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
Systemic corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment. When to add other immunosuppressants is not
clear, but Churg-Strauss syndrome is generally treated the same way as Wegener's granulomatosis (see
p.
) or microscopic polyangiitis (. Recombinant interferon alfa-2a 3 million units sc daily has
been used when the syndrome is refractory to other drugs or when eosinophilic inflammation is difficult to
control.
Cutaneous Vasculitis
Cutaneous vasculitis affects small or medium-sized vessels in the skin and subcutaneous
tissue. This disorder may be limited to the skin or be part of systemic vasculitis. Purpura,
ulcers, livedo reticularis, or nodules may develop. Diagnosis requires biopsy. Treatment
depends on etiology and extent of disease.
Common causes include serum sickness, infections (eg, hepatitis C), cancers, rheumatologic
or other
autoimmune disorders, and hypersensitivity to drugs.
Vessel inflammation often results from immune complex deposition, but other pathogenetic mechanisms
===PAGE:409===
may be involved. Predominantly cutaneous vasculitis is a leukocytoclastic vasculitis, so-called because
inflammation disrupts leukocytes, resulting in deposition of nuclear debris (leukocytoclasis) in the vessel
wall.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients may present with skin symptoms such as lesions, including palpable purpura, urticaria, ulcers,
livedo reticularis, and nodules. If cutaneous vasculitis occurs as part of a systemic vasculitis, symptoms
may also include fever, arthralgias, other organ involvement, or a combination.
Diagnosis
• Exclusion of systemic vasculitis clinically and by routine tests (eg, CBC, ESR, urinalysis, chest x-ray,
serum creatinine)
• Biopsy
• Tests for the cause of vasculitis (eg, cryoglobulins, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies [ANCA],
hepatitis B and C antibodies, complement levels)
A diagnosis of vasculitis limited to the skin requires a complete history and physical examination, focusing
on excluding manifestations of inflammation or vasculitis in other organs, as in the following:
• Lungs: Shortness of breath, cough, hemoptysis, and signs of consolidation
• Kidneys: New-onset hypertension or edema
• Nerves: New-onset asymmetric weakness or paresthesias
• Intestine: New-onset abdominal pain, diarrhea, and bloody stools
Urinalysis should exclude blood, protein, and RBC casts. A chest x-ray is needed to check for infiltrates
(suggesting alveolar hemorrhage). CBC and other blood tests are needed to check for anemia, to
determine platelet count and serum creatinine level, and to check for elevated levels of acute-phase
reactants (eg, ESR, C-reactive protein).
A skin biopsy is done, optimally within 24 to 48 h after vasculitic lesions appear. Diagnostic yield depends
on the depth of the biopsy. Generally, punch biopsy or excision biopsy into the subcutis is preferred; these
biopsies can sample small and medium-sized vessels. Shave biopsy is usually inadequate.
If histologic examination detects the following, cutaneous vasculitis is confirmed:
• Infiltration of the vessel wall by inflammatory cells, resulting in disruption and destruction of the vessel
wall
• Intramural and intraluminal fibrin deposition (fibrinoid necrosis)
• Extravasation of RBCs
• Nuclear debris (leukocytoclasis)
Direct immunofluorescence staining is needed to check for IgA, IgM, and IgG and complement deposition
in and around the vessel wall, which suggests an immune complex-mediated process and supports the
diagnosis. Further testing to establish the cause of vasculitis includes checking for cryoglobulins, ANCA,
and hepatitis B and C antibodies, measuring complement levels, and tests for any clinically suspected
disorders that can cause vasculitis.
Treatment
===PAGE:410===
• Antihistamines and sometimes low-dose corticosteroids to treat skin lesions
• Trial of colchicine, hydroxychloroquine, or dapsone to prevent recurrences
Treatment is first directed at any identified cause. If no cause is identified and vasculitis is limited to the
skin, treatment is minimal and conservative. Support hose and antihistamines may be sufficient. If this
treatment is ineffective, low-dose corticosteroids can be tried.
If lesions recur, colchicine, hydroxychloroquine, or dapsone may prevent further recurrences. Rarely,
stronger immunosuppressants (eg, azathioprine, methotrexate) are used, particularly if lesions ulcerate.
Giant Cell Arteritis
(Temporal Arteritis; Cranial Arteritis; Horton's Disease)
Giant cell arteritis involves predominantly the thoracic aorta, large arteries emerging from the
aorta in the neck, and extracranial branches of the carotid arteries. Simultaneous polymyalgia
rheumatica is common. Focal symptoms and signs may include headaches, visual
disturbances, temporal artery tenderness, and pain in the jaw muscles during chewing. Fever,
weight loss, malaise, and fatigue are also common. ESR and C-reactive protein are typically
elevated. Diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by temporal artery biopsy. Treatment with highdose corticosteroids and aspirin is usually effective and prevents vision loss.
Giant cell arteritis is a relatively common form of vasculitis in the US and Europe. Incidence varies
depending on ethnic background. Autopsy studies suggest that the disorder may be more common than is
clinically apparent. Women are affected more often. Mean age at onset is about 70, with a range of 50 to
> 90. About 40 to 60% of patients with giant cell arteritis have polymyalgia rheumatica. The intracranial
vessels are usually not affected.
Pathophysiology
Vasculitis may be localized, multifocal, or widespread. The disorder tends to affect arteries containing
elastic tissue, most often the temporal, cranial, or other carotid system arteries. The aortic arch branches,
coronary arteries, and peripheral arteries can also be affected. Mononuclear cell infiltrates in the
adventitia form granulomas containing activated T cells and macrophages. Multinucleated giant cells,
when present, cluster near the disrupted elastic lamina. The intimal layer is markedly thickened, with
concentric narrowing and occlusion of the lumen.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms may begin gradually over several weeks or abruptly.
Patients may present with systemic symptoms such as fever (usually low-grade), fatigue, malaise,
unexplained weight loss, and sweats. Some patients are initially diagnosed as having FUO. Eventually,
most patients develop symptoms related to the affected arteries.
Severe, sometimes throbbing headache (temporal, occipital, frontal, or diffuse) is the most common
symptom. It may be accompanied by scalp pain elicited by touching the scalp or combing the hair.
Visual disturbances include diplopia, scotomas, ptosis, blurred vision, and loss of vision (which is an
ominous sign). Brief periods of partial or complete vision loss (amaurosis fugax) in one eye may be
rapidly followed by permanent irreversible loss of vision. If untreated, the other eye may also be affected.
However, complete bilateral blindness is uncommon. Vision loss is caused by arteritis of branches of the
ophthalmic artery or posterior ciliary arteries, which leads to ischemia of the optic nerve. Funduscopic
findings may include ischemic optic neuritis with pallor and edema of the optic disk, scattered cotton-wool
patches, and small hemorrhages. Later, the optic nerve atrophies. Rarely, central blindness results from
infarction in the occipital cortex caused by arterial lesions in the distal cervical region or base of the brain.
===PAGE:411===
Intermittent claudication (ischemic muscle pain) may occur in jaw muscles and muscles of the tongue or
extremities. Jaw claudication is noted especially when firm foods are chewed.
Neurologic manifestations, such as strokes and transient ischemic attacks, can result when the carotid or
vertebrobasilar arteries or branches are narrowed or occluded.
Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissection of the aorta are serious, often late, complications.
Diagnosis
• ESR, C-reactive protein, and CBC
• Biopsy, usually of the temporal artery
Giant cell arteritis is suspected in patients > 55 if any of the following develops, especially if they also
have symptoms of systemic inflammation:
• A new type of headache
• Any new symptom or sign compatible with ischemia of an artery above the neck
• Jaw pain during chewing
• Temporal artery tenderness
• Unexplained subacute fever or anemia
The diagnosis is more likely if patients also have symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica.
Physical examination may detect swelling and tenderness, with or without nodularity or erythema, over
the temporal arteries. Temporal arteries can become prominent. A temporal artery that rolls under the
examiner's fingers, rather than collapses, is abnormal. The large arteries of the neck and limbs and the
aorta should be evaluated for bruits.
If the diagnosis is suspected, ESR, C-reactive protein, and CBC are determined. In most patients, ESR
and C-reactive protein are elevated; anemia of chronic disease is common. Occasionally, platelets are
elevated, and serum albumin and total protein, measured for other reasons, are low. Mild leukocytosis is
commonly detected but is nonspecific.
If the diagnosis is suspected, biopsy of an artery is recommended. Because inflamed segments often
alternate with normal segments, a segment that appears abnormal should be sampled if possible. Usually,
the temporal artery is biopsied, but the occipital artery can also be biopsied if it appears abnormal. The
optimal length of the temporal artery to remove is unclear, but 5 cm is recommended if possible.
Treatment should not be delayed to do the biopsy. Biopsy can be done up to 2 wk or perhaps more after
treatment is started because the inflammatory infiltrate is slow to resolve.
If patients have pulse deficits, the aorta and its branches are imaged (see
Table 34-3
.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Low-dose aspirin
Treatment should be started as soon as giant cell arteritis is suspected, even if biopsy is going to be
delayed for several days.
===PAGE:412===
Corticosteroids are the cornerstone of treatment. Corticosteroids rapidly reduce symptoms and prevent
vision loss in most patients. The optimal initial dose, tapering schedule, and total length of treatment are
debated. For most patients, an initial dose of prednisone 40 to 60 mg po once/day (or equivalent) for 4
wk, followed by gradual tapering, is effective. If patients have visual disturbances, an initial dose of IV
methylprednisolone 500 to 1000 mg once/day for 3 to 5 days can be tried in an attempt to help prevent
further decline in vision, particularly in the contralateral eye.
If symptoms lessen, prednisone can be tapered gradually from doses of up to 60 mg/day based on the
patient's response, usually as follows: by 5 to 10 mg/day every week to 40 mg/day, by 2 to 5 mg/day
every week to 10 to 20 mg/day, then by 1 mg/day every month thereafter until the drug is stopped. ESR
alone should not be used alone to evaluate patient response (and disease activity). Clinical symptoms
must also be used.
Most patients require at least 2 yr of treatment with corticosteroids. Long-term use of corticosteroids can
have significant adverse effects and thus should be limited if possible. More than one half of patients
taking these drugs have drug-related complications. Consequently, alternative therapies are being
studied. If patients cannot tolerate corticosteroids or if symptoms return when the dose is tapered,
methotrexate 0.3 mg/kg/wk may be useful.
Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors have not been shown to be effective.
Low-dose aspirin (100 mg po once/day) may help prevent ischemic events and should be prescribed for
all patients unless contraindicated.
Henoch-Schonlein Purpura
Henoch-Schonlein purpura is vasculitis that affects primarily small vessels. It occurs most often
in children. Common manifestations include palpable purpura, arthralgias, GI symptoms and
signs, and glomerulonephritis. Diagnosis is clinical in children but usually warrants biopsy in
adults. Disease is usually self-limited. Corticosteroids can relieve arthralgias and GI symptoms
but do not alter the course of the disease. Progressive glomerulonephritis may require highdose corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide.
In Henoch-Schonlein purpura, IgA-containing immune complexes are deposited in small vessels of the
skin and other sites, with consequent activation of complement. Possible inciting antigens include viruses
that cause URIs, streptococcal infection, drugs, foods, insect bites, and immunizations. Focal, segmental
proliferative glomerulonephritis is typical but mild.
Symptoms and Signs
The disease begins with a sudden palpable purpuric rash typically occurring on the feet, legs, and arms
and as a strip across the buttocks. The purpura may start as small areas of urticaria that become
indurated and palpable. Crops of new lesions may appear over days to several weeks. Many patients
also have fever and polyarthralgia with periarticular tenderness and swelling of the ankles, knees, hips,
wrists, and elbows.
GI symptoms are common and include colicky abdominal pain, abdominal tenderness, and melena.
Intussusception occasionally develops in children. Stool may test positive for occult blood.
Symptoms usually remit after about 4 wk but often recur at least once after a disease-free interval of
several weeks. In most patients, the disorder subsides without serious sequelae; however, some patients
develop chronic renal failure.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy of skin lesions
===PAGE:413===
The diagnosis is suspected in patients, particularly children, with typical skin findings. It is confirmed by
biopsy of skin lesions when leukocytoclastic vasculitis with IgA in the vessel walls is identified. Biopsy is
unnecessary if clinical diagnosis is clear in children. Urinalysis is done; hematuria, proteinuria, and RBC
casts indicate renal involvement. CBC and renal function tests are done.
If renal function is deteriorating, renal biopsy may help define the prognosis. Diffuse glomerular
involvement or crescent formation in most glomeruli predicts progressive renal failure.
Treatment
• Primarily corticosteroids and symptomatic measures
If the cause is a drug, it has to be stopped. Otherwise, treatment is primarily symptomatic. Corticosteroids
(eg, prednisone 2 mg/kg up to a total of 50 mg po once/day) may help control abdominal pain and are
occasionally needed to treat severe joint pain or renal disease. Pulse IV methylprednisolone followed by
oral prednisone and cyclophosphamide can be given to attempt to control inflammation when the kidneys
are severely affected. However, the effects of corticosteroids on renal manifestations are not clear.
Microscopic Polyangiitis
Microscopic polyangiitis is a systemic pauci-immune necrotizing vasculitis that affects mainly
small vessels. It may begin as a pulmonary-renal syndrome with rapidly progressing
glomerulonephritis and alveolar hemorrhage, but the pattern of disease depends on the organs
affected. Diagnosis is by biopsy. Treatment, which depends on disease severity, includes
corticosteroids and immunosuppressants.
Microscopic polyangiitis is rare (about 13 to 19 cases/million). Pathogenesis is unknown. Like immune
complex-associated vasculitis (eg, SLE, cryoglobulinemia, serum sickness, Henoch-Schonlein purpura),
microscopic polyangiitis affects small vessels. Polyarteritis nodosa can cause some manifestations similar
to the small vessel vasculitides, such as mononeuritis multiplex and bowel ischemia. Microscopic
polyangiitis can be distinguished from immune complex-associated vasculitis and polyarteritis nodosa by
the following:
• Microscopic polyangiitis affects predominantly small vessels, unlike polyarteritis nodosa, which affects
medium-sized muscular arteries.
• Microscopic polyangiitis, unlike polyarteritis nodosa, may cause glomerulonephritis and may affect the
lungs and cause alveolar hemorrhage.
• Immune complex deposits are scarce or absent (ie, pauci-immune) in contrast to immune complexassociated vasculitis.
Clinical manifestations resemble those of Wegener's granulomatosis except that granulomatous
destructive lesions are absent and the upper respiratory tract is usually not severely affected. In both
disorders, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) may be present. Microscopic polyangiitis can
occur in patients with viral hepatitis B or C.
Symptoms and Signs
Usually, a prodromal illness with systemic symptoms of fever, weight loss, myalgia, and arthralgia occurs.
Other symptoms depend on which organs and systems are affected:
•
Renal:
The kidneys are affected in up to 90% of patients. Hematuria, proteinuria (sometimes > 3 g/24
h), and RBC casts are present. Without prompt diagnosis and treatment, renal failure may follow
rapidly.
•
Cutaneous:
About one third of patients have a purpuric rash at the time of the diagnosis. Nail bed
infarcts and splinter hemorrhages may occur; digital ischemia occurs rarely.
===PAGE:414===
•
Respiratory:
If the lungs are affected, alveolar hemorrhage may occur, followed by pulmonary fibrosis.
Rapid-onset dyspnea and anemia, with or without hemoptysis and bilateral patchy infiltrates (seen on
chest x-ray) may be due to alveolar hemorrhage, a medical emergency that requires immediate
treatment. Mild symptoms of rhinitis, epistaxis, and sinusitis may occur; however, if the upper
respiratory tract is severely affected, the cause is more likely to be Wegener's granulomatosis.
•
GI:
GI symptoms include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and bloody stools.
•
Neurologic:
If the nervous system is affected, mononeuritis multiplex that affects peripheral or cranial
nerves usually occurs. Cerebral hemorrhage, infarction, seizures, or headache rarely results from
cerebral vasculitis.
•
Cardiac:
Rarely, the heart is affected.
•
Ocular:
If the eyes are affected, episcleritis usually results.
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings
• Tests for ANCA and C-reactive protein and routine laboratory tests
• Biopsy
Microscopic polyangiitis may mimic many other disorders because its manifestations vary. The disorder
should be suspected in patients who have unexplained combinations of GI symptoms or signs, alveolar
hemorrhage, episcleritis, and peripheral neuropathy. Laboratory tests and sometimes x-rays are done, but
the diagnosis is usually confirmed by biopsy.
Tests include CBC, ESR, C-reactive protein, urinalysis, serum creatinine, and tests
for ANCA. ESR, Creactive protein levels, and WBC and platelet counts are elevated, reflecting systemic inflammation.
Anemia of chronic disease is common. An acute drop in Hct suggests alveolar hemorrhage or hemorrhage
in the GI tract. Urinalysis (to check for hematuria, proteinuria, and cellular casts) should be done, and
serum creatinine should be measured periodically to check for renal involvement.
Immunofluorescence staining can detect ANCA; this test is followed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) to check for specific antibodies. At least 60% of patients have ANCA, usually perinuclear
ANCA (p-ANCA) with antibodies against myeloperoxidase.
Biopsy of the most accessible involved tissue should be done to confirm vasculitis. Renal biopsy may
detect focal segmental pauci-immune necrotizing glomerulonephritis with fibrinoid necrosis of the
glomerular capillary wall, leading to formation of cellular crescents.
In patients with respiratory symptoms, chest x-ray is done to check for infiltrates. Bilateral patchy infiltrates
suggest alveolar hemorrhage even in patients without hemoptysis.
If patients have dyspnea and bilateral infiltrates, bronchoscopy should be done immediately to check for
alveolar hemorrhages. Blood coming from both lungs and all bronchi, with more blood coming as the
bronchoscope goes deeper in the airways, indicates active alveolar hemorrhage. Hemosiderin-laden
macrophages appear within 24 to 72 h after onset of hemorrhage and may persist for up to 2 mo.
Treatment
• When vital organs are affected, corticosteroids plus cyclophosphamide
• For less severe cases, corticosteroids plus azathioprine or methotrexate
===PAGE:415===
Treatment is similar to that of Wegener's granulomatosis. Cyclophosphamide given daily plus
corticosteroids improves survival when vital organs are affected. However, induction and maintenance
regimens vary, and adjunctive therapies such as plasma exchange and pulse IV methylprednisolone may
or may not be used.
Less severe cases may be managed with corticosteroids plus azathioprine or methotrexate.
Polyarteritis Nodosa
(Polyarteritis; Periarteritis Nodosa)
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis that typically affects mediumsized muscular arteries and occasionally affects small muscular arteries, resulting in secondary
tissue ischemia. The kidneys, skin, joints, muscles, peripheral nerves, and GI tract are most
commonly affected, but any organ can be. However, the lungs are usually spared. Patients
typically present with systemic symptoms (eg, fever, fatigue). Diagnosis requires a biopsy or
arteriography. Treatment with corticosteroids and immunosuppressants is often effective.
PAN is rare (about 2 to 33 cases/million). It affects mainly middle-aged adults, and incidence increases
with aging, peaking in people in their 50s.
Etiology
Most cases are idiopathic. About 20% of patients have hepatitis B or C.
The cause is unknown, but immune mechanisms appear to be involved. The variety of clinical and
pathologic features suggests multiple pathogenic mechanisms. Drugs may be a cause. Usually, no
predisposing antigen is identified. Patients with certain lymphomas and leukemias, RA, or Sjogren's
syndrome may develop a systemic vasculitis similar to PAN.
Pathophysiology
PAN is characterized by segmental, transmural necrotizing inflammation of muscular arteries, most
commonly at points of bifurcation. Unlike other vasculitic disorders, PAN does not involve postcapillary
venules or veins. Lesions in all stages of development and healing are usually present. Early lesions
contain PMNs and occasionally eosinophils; later lesions contain lymphocytes and plasma cells.
Granulomatous inflammation does not occur. Intimal proliferation with secondary thrombosis and
occlusion leads to organ and tissue infarction. Weakening of the muscular arterial wall may cause small
aneurysms and arterial dissection. Healing can result in nodular fibrosis of the adventitia.
Mostly commonly affected are the kidneys, skin, peripheral nerves, joints, muscles, and GI tract. Often
affected are the liver and heart. Renal ischemia and infarction occur, but glomerulonephritis is not a
feature of PAN. Purpura is not a characteristic of PAN.
Symptoms and Signs
PAN mimics many disorders. The course may be acute and prolonged, subacute and fatal after several
months, or insidious, chronic, and debilitating. Symptoms depend mainly on location and severity of the
arteritis and
extent of secondary ischemia. Only one organ or organ system may be affected.
Patients typically present with fever, fatigue, night sweats, loss of appetite, weight loss, and generalized
weakness. Myalgias with areas of focal ischemic myositis and arthralgias are common. Affected muscles
are tender and weak. Arthritis may occur.
Symptoms and signs vary, depending on organ or organ system predominantly affected:
•
Peripheral nervous system:
Patients usually present with asymmetric peripheral neuropathy, such as
mononeuritis multiplex with signs of motor and sensory involvement of the peroneal, median, or ulnar
===PAGE:416===
nerves. As additional nerve branches are affected, patients may appear to have a distal symmetric
polyneuropathy.
•
CNS:
Headache and seizures can result. In a few patients, ischemic stroke and cerebral hemorrhage
occur, sometimes resulting from hypertension.
•
Renal:
If small and medium-sized arteries in the kidneys are affected, patients may have hypertension,
oliguria, uremia, and a nonspecific urinary sediment with hematuria, proteinuria, and no cellular casts.
Hypertension may worsen rapidly. Rupture of renal arterial aneurysms can cause perirenal hematomas.
In severe cases, multiple renal infarcts with lumbar pain and gross hematuria may occur. Renal
ischemia and infarction can lead to renal failure.
•
GI:
Vasculitis of the liver or gallbladder causes right upper quadrant pain. Perforation of the gallbladder
with acute abdomen may occur. Vasculitis of medium-sized mesenteric arteries causes abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting (with or without bloody diarrhea), malabsorption, intestinal perforation, and acute
abdomen. Aneurysms may develop in hepatic or celiac arteries.
•
Cardiac:
Some patients have coronary artery disease, which is usually asymptomatic, but may cause
angina. Heart failure may result from ischemic or hypertensive cardiomyopathy
•
Cutaneous:
Livedo reticularis, skin ulcers, tender erythematous nodules, bullous or vesicular eruptions,
infarction and gangrene of fingers or toes, or a combination may occur. The nodules in PAN resemble
erythema nodosum (inflammation of subcutaneous fat), but in PAN, necrotizing vasculitis occurs within
the walls of medium-sized arteries, usually located in the deep dermis and subcutaneous fat.
•
Genital:
Orchitis with testicular pain and tenderness can occur.
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings
• Biopsy
• Arteriography if no clinically involved tissue is available for biopsy
PAN may be suspected in patients with unexplained fever, abdominal pain, renal failure, hypertension,
arthralgia, muscle tenderness or weakness, subcutaneous nodules, skin ulcers, pain in the abdomen or
extremities, or rapidly developing hypertension. If patients have insidious, nonspecific symptoms,
diagnosis is much more difficult. The diagnosis is further clarified when clinical findings are combined with
certain laboratory results and other causes are excluded. PAN is also suspected in patients with systemic
symptoms or signs and peripheral (usually multiple) neuritis involving major nerve trunks (eg, radial,
peroneal, sciatic) in a bilaterally symmetric or asymmetric fashion (mononeuritis multiplex).
Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy showing necrotizing arteritis or by arteriography showing the typical
aneurysms in medium-sized arteries. Magnetic resonance angiography may show microaneurysms, but
some abnormalities may be too small for it to detect. Thus, magnetic resonance angiography is not the
test used primarily for diagnosis. Biopsy of clinically uninvolved tissue is usually useless because the
disease is focal; biopsy should target sites suggested by clinical evaluation. Samples of subcutaneous
tissue, sural nerve, and muscle, if thought to be involved, are preferred to samples from the kidneys or
liver. If clinical findings are absent or minimal, electromyography and nerve conduction studies may help
select the site of muscle or nerve biopsy. If skin lesions are present, surgical skin biopsies that include
deeper dermis and subcutaneous fat should be done. (Punch biopsies of the skin that sample the
epidermis and superficial dermis miss the lesions of PAN.) Even though microscopic lesions in the testes
are common, testicular biopsy should not be done if testicular symptoms are absent and if other possible
sites are accessible because the yield is low. Also, men may be reluctant to have testicular biopsy.
Laboratory tests are nonspecific. Leukocytosis up to 20,000 to 40,000/
μ
L, proteinuria, and microscopic
hematuria are the most common abnormalities. Patients may have thrombocytosis, markedly elevated
===PAGE:417===
ESR, anemia caused by blood loss or renal failure, hypoalbuminemia, and elevated serum
immunoglobulins. AST and ALT are often mildly
elevated. Testing for hepatitis B and C should be done.
Other testing (eg, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies [ANCA], rheumatoid factor, anticyclic citrullinated
peptides [CCP], antinuclear antibodies [ANA], C3 and C4 complement levels, cryoglobulin levels, nuclear
antigens and antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens such as anti-Smith, anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB,
and anti-RNP) is done if the clinical presentation suggests other diagnoses, such as RA, SLE, or
Sjogren's syndrome.
Prognosis
Without treatment, 5-yr survival is < 15%. With treatment, 5-yr survival is > 80% but may be lower for
patients with hepatitis B. Prognosis is better if disease remission is achieved within 18 mo after diagnosis.
The following findings are associated with a poor prognosis:
• Renal insufficiency
• GI involvement
• Neurologic involvement
Treatment
• Corticosteroids alone or with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, or azathioprine, depending on disease
severity
• Addition of lamivudine and plasma exchange for patients with hepatitis B
Treatment depends on the severity of the disease. For systemic symptoms but no serious neurologic,
renal, GI, or cardiac manifestations, corticosteroids may be sufficient, at least initially. For severe disease
with neurologic, renal, GI, or cardiac manifestations, cyclophosphamide plus corticosteroids may improve
outcome. For moderate disease, corticosteroids plus methotrexate or azathioprine can be used.
Hypertension should be treated aggressively; ACE inhibitors are effective.
Hepatitis B-related PAN:
Treatment aims at rapidly suppressing inflammation, then eliminating the virus
and inducing seroconversion via plasma exchange. A short course of corticosteroids is used for a few
weeks. Lamivudine 100 mg po once/day is given for a maximum of 6 mo. A lower dose is used in patients
with renal insufficiency. Plasma exchanges are scheduled as follows: 3 times/wk for 3 wk, 2 times/wk for 2
wk and once/wk until hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) converts to hepatitis B e antibody (anti-HBe) or until
clinical recovery is sustained for 2 to 3 mo. Although this approach has not been proved to improve
survival when compared with immunosuppressive therapy only, it may reduce the risk of long-term
complications of hepatitis B and suppress the side effects of long-term treatment with corticosteroids and
immunosuppressants.
Traditional treatment with corticosteroids, sometimes with cytotoxic immunosuppressants (mainly
cyclophosphamide), was often effective in the short term but did not prevent relapses and complications
(eg, chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis) due to persistence of the hepatitis B virus.
Polymyalgia Rheumatica
Polymyalgia rheumatica is a syndrome closely associated with giant cell (temporal) arteritis. It
affects adults > 55. It typically causes severe pain and stiffness in proximal muscles, without
weakness or atrophy, and nonspecific systemic symptoms. ESR is markedly elevated.
Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment with low-dose corticosteroids is effective.
Polymyalgia rheumatica affects adults > 55; the female:male ratio is 2:1.
Because polymyalgia rheumatica is closely associated with giant cell arteritis (, some
===PAGE:418===
authorities consider the two disorders to be different phases of the same process. Polymyalgia
rheumatica appears to be more common. A few patients with polymyalgia rheumatica develop giant cell
arteritis, but 40 to 60% of patients with giant cell arteritis have polymyalgia rheumatica. Polymyalgia
rheumatica may precede or occur simultaneously with giant cell arteritis.
Etiology and pathogenesis are unknown. Whether symptoms result from vasculitis is unclear; they
probably result from low-grade axial synovitis and bursitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Polymyalgia rheumatica is characterized by bilateral proximal aching of the shoulder and hip girdle
muscles and the back (upper and lower) and neck muscles. Stiffness in the morning is typical. Shoulder
symptoms may reflect proximal bursitis (eg, subdeltoid, subacromial) and less often bicipital tenosynovitis
or joint synovitis. Discomfort is worse in the morning and is occasionally severe enough to prevent
patients from getting out of bed and from doing simple activities. The pain may
make patients feel weak,
but objective muscle weakness is not a feature of the disorder.
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings
• Exclusion of other causes
Polymyalgia rheumatica is suspected in elderly patients with typical symptoms, but other possible causes
must be excluded. Tests include ESR, CBC, thyroid-stimulating hormone levels, and CK. In > 80 % of
patients, ESR is markedly elevated, often > 100 mm/h, usually > 50 mm/h (Westergren method).
Electromyography, biopsy, and other tests (eg, rheumatoid factor), which are normal in polymyalgia
rheumatica, are sometimes done to rule out other clinically suspected diagnoses.
The following findings in polymyalgia rheumatica distinguish it:
• From RA: Chronic small joint synovitis (although some joint swelling may be present), erosive or
destructive lesions, rheumatoid nodules, and rheumatoid factor are absent.
• From polymyositis: Pain rather than weakness predominates; muscle enzyme levels and
electromyography and muscle biopsy results are normal.
• From hypothyroidism: Thyroid function test results and muscle enzyme levels are normal.
• From multiple myeloma: Monoclonal gammopathy is absent.
• From fibromyalgia: Symptoms are more localized, and ESR is typically elevated.
Treatment
• Prednisone
Prednisone started at 15 to 20 mg po once/day results in dramatic improvement. If giant cell arteritis is
thought to be present, the dose should be higher, and temporal artery biopsy should be done. As
symptoms subside, corticosteroids are tapered to the lowest clinically effective dose, regardless of ESR.
Some patients are able to stop corticosteroids in ≤ 1 yr; others require small doses for years. NSAIDs are
rarely sufficient.
In elderly patients, physicians should watch for and treat complications of corticosteroid use (eg,
diabetes, hypertension). Patients taking prednisone long term should be given a bisphosphonate to
prevent osteoporosis.
Because patients may develop giant cell arteritis, they should be instructed to immediately report
===PAGE:419===
headache, muscle pain during chewing, and, particularly, visual disturbances to their physician.
Takayasu's Arteritis
(Pulseless Disease; Occlusive Thromboaortopathy; Aortic Arch Syndrome)
Takayasu's arteritis is an inflammatory disease affecting the aorta, its branches, and pulmonary
arteries. It occurs predominantly in young women. Etiology is unknown. Vascular inflammation
may cause arterial stenosis, occlusion, dilation, or aneurysms. It causes asymmetric pulses and
symptoms and signs of arterial obstruction. Diagnosis is by aortic arteriography or magnetic
resonance angiography. Treatment is with corticosteroids and, for organ-threatening ischemia,
vascular interventions such as bypass surgery.
Takayasu's arteritis is rare. It is more common among Asians but occurs worldwide. Female:male ratio is
8:1, and age at onset is typically 15 to 30. In North America, annual incidence is estimated to be 2.6
cases/million.
Etiology
The cause is unknown. Cell-mediated immune mechanisms may be involved and may be similar to those
in giant cell arteritis.
Pathophysiology
Takayasu's arteritis affects primarily large elastic arteries. The most commonly affected are the
innominate and subclavian arteries, aorta (mainly the ascending aorta and the arch), common carotid
arteries, and renal arteries. Most patients have stenoses or occlusions. Aneurysms occur in about one
third of patients. Usually, the wall of the aorta or its branches thickens irregularly, with intimal wrinkling.
When the aortic arch is affected, orifices of the major arteries emerging from the aorta may be markedly
narrowed or even obliterated by intimal thickening. In one half of patients, pulmonary arteries are also
affected.
Histologically, early changes consist of adventitial mononuclear infiltrate with perivascular cuffing of the
vasa vasorum. Later, intense mononuclear inflammation of the media may occur, sometimes accompanied
by granulomatous changes, giant cells, and patchy necrosis of the media. Morphologic changes may be
indistinguishable from those of giant cell arteritis. Panarteritic inflammatory infiltrates cause marked
thickening of the affected artery and subsequent luminal narrowing and occlusion.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with only focal symptoms that reflect hypoperfusion of the
affected organ or limb.
Takayasu's arteritis may have 3 stages:
• Systemic disease, usually with systemic, nonspecific symptoms (eg, fever, malaise, night sweats, weight
loss, arthralgias, fatigue)
• Vascular inflammatory phase, with ischemic manifestations that may wax and wane
• Inactive (burned-out) disease, sometimes with acute or progressive occlusion (including thrombosis)
Only one third of patients have systemic symptoms at presentation or recall having had such symptoms.
Repetitive arm movements and sustained arm elevation may cause pain and fatigue. Arterial pulses in
arms and legs may be diminished and asymmetric. Bruits are often audible over the subclavian arteries,
brachial arteries, carotid arteries, abdominal aorta, or femoral arteries. Reduced BP in one or both arms is
common.
When the carotid and vertebral arteries are affected, cerebral blood flow decreases, leading to dizziness,
===PAGE:420===
syncope, orthostatic hypotension, headaches, transient visual disturbances, transient ischemic attacks, or
strokes. Stenotic lesions in a subclavian artery near the origin of a patent vertebral artery can cause
posterior circulation neurologic symptoms or syncope when the arm is used (called subclavian steal
syndrome). Retrograde flow through the vertebral artery supplies the subclavian artery distal to the
stenosis, and vasodilation of the arterial bed in the upper limb during exercise compromises posterior
cerebral blood flow.
Angina pectoris or MI may result from narrowing of the coronary artery orifice due to aortitis or coronary
arteritis. Aortic regurgitation may occur if the ascending aorta is markedly dilated. Heart failure can
develop.
Obstruction of the descending thoracic aorta sometimes causes signs of aortic coarctation (eg,
hypertension, headache, leg claudication). Renovascular hypertension may develop if the abdominal
aorta or renal arteries are narrowed.
Pulmonary arteries are often affected, sometimes causing pulmonary hypertension. Because Takayasu's
arteritis is chronic, collateral circulation can develop. Thus, ischemic ulcerations or gangrene due to
obstruction of the arteries to the extremities is rare.
Diagnosis
• Aortic arteriography or magnetic resonance angiography
• Monitoring of disease activity
The diagnosis is suspected when symptoms suggest ischemia of organs supplied by the aorta or its
branches or when peripheral pulses are decreased or absent in patients at low risk of atherosclerosis
and other aortic disorders, especially in young women. In these patients, arterial bruits and right-left or
upper extremity-lower extremity discrepancies in pulses or in BP also suggest the diagnosis. Confirmation
of the diagnosis requires aortic arteriography or magnetic resonance angiography to evaluate all
branches of the aorta. Characteristic findings include stenosis, occlusion, irregularities in arterial lumens,
poststenotic dilation, collateral arteries around obstructed vessels, and aneurysms.
BP is measured in both arms. However, measurement can be difficult. If both subclavian arteries are
severely affected, systemic BP can be accurately measured only in the legs. If the disorder affects both
subclavian arteries in patients with coarctation of the descending aorta or involvement of both iliac or
femoral arteries, BP cannot be accurately measured. Then, central arterial pressure must be measured
via angiography to detect occult hypertension, which can cause complications.
Laboratory tests are nonspecific and not helpful in diagnosis. Common findings include anemia of chronic
disease, elevated platelet levels, occasionally elevated WBC counts, and elevated ESR and C-reactive
protein.
Once Takayasu's arteritis is diagnosed, disease activity must be monitored to look for the following:
• New systemic symptoms, which may reflect active arthritis or infection (secondary to
immunosuppression therapy)
• Evidence of inflammation detected by blood tests (although markers of inflammation may miss active
arteritis)
• Development of stenosis, aneurysms, or ischemic symptoms in previously unaffected arteries, as
assessed with periodic imaging (usually magnetic resonance angiography)
Periodic imaging of the aorta and large arteries is important (see
Table 34-3
) because the disorder may
progress silently, without clinical symptoms or evidence of inflammation in blood. Once the disorder is
diagnosed, BP should be measured periodically in an unaffected limb because hypertension must be
controlled.
===PAGE:421===
Disorders that mimic Takayasu's arteritis must be excluded. They include inherited connective tissue
disorders (eg, Ehlers-Danlos or Marfan syndrome), vascular infections (tuberculous, fungal, or syphilitic),
fibromuscular
[Table 34-3.
Imaging Tests Used in Takayasu's Arteritis]
dysplasias, disorders causing arterial thrombosis (eg, hypercoagulable states), and idiopathic
inflammatory conditions (eg, ankylosing spondylitis with aortitis, Cogan's or Behcet's syndrome, Kawasaki
disease, sarcoidosis); all can affect large vessels.
Prognosis
For 20% of patients, the course is monophasic. For the rest, the course is relapsing and remitting or
chronic and progressive. Even when symptoms and laboratory abnormalities suggest quiescence, new
lesions occur and are evident on imaging studies. A progressive course and the presence of
complications (eg, hypertension, aortic regurgitation, heart failure, aneurysms) predict a less favorable
prognosis.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes immunosuppressants
• Antihypertensives
• Vascular interventions
Drugs:
Corticosteroids are the cornerstone of treatment. The optimal dose, tapering schedule, and
length of treatment have not been determined. Treatment with corticosteroids alone induces remission in
most patients. Prednisone is usually used. The starting dose is 1 mg/kg po once/day for 1 to 3 mo; the
dose is then tapered slowly over several months. Lower starting doses may also induce remission. About
one half of patients relapse when the drug is tapered or stopped, despite initial response.
Methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, and tumor
necrosis factor
inhibitors (eg, etanercept, infliximab) have been used in some patients. They can be tried if
corticosteroids are insufficiently effective or cannot be tapered. Methotrexate is given with a
corticosteroid. Often, the starting dose is 0.3 mg/kg once/wk, which is increased up to 25 mg/wk.
Mycophenolate mofetil can also be tried. Cyclophosphamide should be considered in patients with
coronary vasculitis or other serious complications thought to be due to active arteritis.
An antiplatelet drug (eg, aspirin 325 mg po once/day) is frequently used because platelet-mediated
occlusion cannot be excluded. Hypertension should be treated aggressively; ACE inhibitors may be
effective.
Procedures:
Vascular intervention, usually a bypass procedure, may be needed to reestablish blood flow
to ischemic tissues if drug therapy is ineffective. Indications include the following:
• Severe hypertension that is refractory to medical management because renal artery stenosis is present
(although reocclusion and thrombosis of grafts is common)
• Ischemia in the extremities that interferes with daily activities
• Ischemia of cerebral arteries
• New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II heart failure secondary to a discrete coronary artery
stenosis or occlusion
===PAGE:422===
• Cardiac ischemia caused by stenosis of the coronary arteries
• Coarctation of the aorta
• Dissection or enlargement of an aortic aneurysm
Bypass grafting preferably with an autologous graft has the best patency rates. The anastomosis should
be made at disease-free sites of the affected arteries to help prevent aneurysm formation and occlusion.
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) has few risks and may be effective for short
lesions. But long-term restenosis rates seem much higher than those with bypass grafting. Vascular
stenting is usually not recommended because the restenosis rate is high.
For aortic regurgitation, valvular surgery with aortic root replacement may be necessary.
Wegener's Granulomatosis
Wegener's granulomatosis is characterized by necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, small
and medium-sized vessel vasculitis, and focal necrotizing glomerulonephritis, often with
crescent formation. Typically, the upper and lower respiratory tract and the kidneys are affected,
but any organ may be. Symptoms vary depending on the organs and systems affected. Patients
may present with upper and lower respiratory tract symptoms (eg, recurrent nasal discharge or
epistaxis, cough), followed by hypertension and edema, or with symptoms reflecting multiorgan
involvement. Diagnosis usually requires biopsy. Treatment is with corticosteroids plus an
immunosuppressant. Remission is usually possible, although relapses are common.
Wegener's granulomatosis occurs in about 1/25,000 people; it is most common among whites but can
occur in all ethnic groups and at any age. Mean age at onset is 40.
The cause is unknown, although immunologic mechanisms play a role. Most patients with active
generalized disease have antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA).
Pathophysiology
Characteristically, granulomas form with histiocytic epithelioid cells and often with giant cells. Plasma
cells, lymphocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils are present. Inflammation affects tissues as well as
vessels; vasculitis may be a small or large component of the disease. Micronecrosis, usually with
neutrophils (microabscesses), occurs early. Micronecrosis progresses to macronecrosis. A central area of
necrosis (called geographic necrosis) is rimmed by lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, and giant
cells. A zone of fibroblastic proliferation with palisading histiocytes may surround the area.
Nonspecific chronic inflammation and tissue necrosis occurs in the nose. The lungs are most likely to
display the full spectrum of histopathologic abnormalities. In the kidneys, the most common finding is a
proliferative crescentic focal glomerulonephritis with necrosis and thrombosis of individual loops or larger
segments of the glomerulus. Vasculitic lesions and disseminated granulomas occur only occasionally.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset may be insidious or acute; the full spectrum of the disease may take years to evolve. Some
patients present initially with upper and lower respiratory tract symptoms; at some point later, the kidneys
are affected. In other patients, onset of systemic manifestations is relatively acute; several organs and
systems, such as the upper respiratory tract,
peripheral nervous system (causing mononeuritis multiplex),
kidneys (causing glomerulonephritis), and lower respiratory tract (causing hemorrhage, lung nodules,
cavities, or a combination), are simultaneously affected.
•
Upper respiratory tract:
Sinus pain, serosanguineous or purulent discharge, and epistaxis may occur.
The mucosa appears granular (like cobblestones) and is friable; ulcers, thick dark crusts, and septal
===PAGE:423===
perforation are common. Nasal chondritis can occur with swelling, pain, and collapse of the nasal
bridge (saddle nose). Patients may report recurrent sinusitis that has responded inadequately to
multiple antibiotic regimens and has required one or more sinus operations before diagnosis.
Secondary infections (eg, due to
Staphylococcus aureus
) may develop. Subglottic stenosis may
develop, causing symptoms such as pain in the larynx, hoarseness, dyspnea, wheezing, and stridor.
•
Ears:
Otitis, sensorineural hearing loss, vertigo, and chondritis may occur. The middle ear, inner ear,
and mastoids are often affected.
•
Eyes:
Eyes may appear red and swollen. Nasolacrimal duct inflammation and obstruction may affect the
eye; conjunctivitis, scleritis, uveitis, or retinal vasculitis may also occur. Inflammatory infiltrates in the
retro-orbital space (orbital pseudotumor) can cause proptosis, compression of the optic nerve, and
blindness. Extension into the extraocular muscles leads to diplopia. If serious eye symptoms develop,
evaluation and treatment are required immediately to prevent permanent vision loss.
•
Lower respiratory tract:
Respiratory manifestations are common. Inflammation of the major bronchi
and branches can cause localized wheezing, postobstructive pneumonia, and atelectasis. Single or
multiple pulmonary nodules, with or without cavitation, and parenchymal infiltrates, sometimes cause
symptoms, such as chest pain, shortness of breath, and productive cough. Dyspnea with bilateral
infiltrates, with or without hemoptysis, may indicate alveolar hemorrhage, and must be evaluated
immediately.
•
Heart:
Coronary artery disease may occur, but rarely.
•
Musculoskeletal system:
Patients may present with myalgias, arthralgias, or nonerosive inflammatory
arthritis.
•
Skin:
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis, tender subcutaneous nodules, papules, livedo reticularis, or pyoderma
gangrenosum may develop.
•
Nervous system:
Vasculitis may cause ischemic peripheral neuropathy, brain lesions, or extension of
lesions from contiguous sites. Lesions that originate in the sinuses or middle ear may extend directly to
the retropharyngeal area and base of the skull, leading to cranial neuropathy, proptosis, diabetes
insipidus, or meningitis.
•
Kidneys:
Symptoms and signs of glomerulonephritis develop. Urinary sediment may be abnormal, and
serum creatinine may increase rapidly. Edema and hypertension may result. Rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis, which is life threatening, can develop.
•
Other organs:
Occasionally, an inflammatory mass occurs in the breasts, kidneys, prostate, or other
organs.
Diagnosis
• Routine laboratory tests, including urinalysis
• Tests for ANCA
• Biopsy for definitive diagnosis
Wegener's granulomatosis should be suspected in patients with chronic, unexplained respiratory
symptoms and signs (including otitis media in adults), particularly if manifestations in other organ
systems, especially the kidneys, also suggest the disorder. Routine laboratory tests are done, but ANCA
testing and biopsy yield the most specific findings.
Routine laboratory tests include ESR or C-reactive protein, CBC with differential, serum albumin and total
protein, serum creatinine, urinalysis, 24-h urine protein, and chest x-ray. In most patients with active
disease, ESR and C-reactive protein are elevated, and serum albumin and total protein are decreased;
===PAGE:424===
anemia, thrombocytosis, and mild to moderate eosinophilia are detected. Dysmorphic RBCs and RBC
casts, detected during urinalysis, indicate glomerular involvement. Proteinuria may be detected. Serum
creatinine may be increased.
Serologic testing to detect ANCA is followed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to check for
specific antibodies. Most patients with active disease have cytoplasmic ANCA (cANCA), with antibodies
against proteinase-3 (PR3); these findings plus characteristic clinical findings suggest Wegener's
granulomatosis.
Some patients with other disorders (eg, bacterial endocarditis, TB) test positive for ANCA. If characteristic
clinical findings are absent, a positive ANCA result does not confirm Wegener's granulomatosis. ANCA
testing should not be used to guide treatment. During apparent remission, ANCA may
increase or ANCA
test results may change from negative to positive. In some of these patients, symptoms do not recur; in
others, symptoms recur or worsen soon after the test is done or during the next few weeks, months, or
sometimes years.
Biopsy should be done if possible to confirm the diagnosis. Clinically abnormal sites may be biopsied first,
but lung biopsy is most likely to detect characteristic findings. Open thoracotomy provides the best access
to affected tissue. Biopsies of lung or sinus tissue are cultured to exclude infection. Renal biopsy may be
necessary to confirm the diagnosis and to exclude other causes, especially if serum creatinine is
elevated. Biopsy results may also provide histologic information that can help guide treatment (eg, renal
fibrosis, which is irreversible with immunosuppressive treatment).
Differential diagnosis includes other vasculitic disorders that affect small and medium-sized vessels.
Polyarteritis nodosa is unlikely if lung involvement is prominent and glomerulonephritis is present.
Infections, especially due to slow-growing fungi or acid-fast organisms should be ruled out by staining and
by culture of the sampled tissues. RA should not be diagnosed based only on the presence of rheumatoid
factor, which is present in one half of patients with Wegener's granulomatosis.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the extent of the disorder—whether it is limited to nasal and pulmonary lesions,
with little or no systemic involvement, or it affects many organs, causing severe systemic vasculitis.
Use of immunosuppressants for severe disease has dramatically improved prognosis. With treatment,
complete remission is possible for about 70% of patients, but about one half of them eventually relapse;
relapse may occur when treatment is stopped or many years after it is stopped. Resuming or increasing
treatment can usually control the disorder. However, the disease or treatment causes significant morbidity
in 90% of patients.
Treatment
• Emergency treatment with corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide for severe disease
• Corticosteroids and methotrexate for less severe disease
• Kidney transplantation if necessary
Treatment depends on the severity of disease. A multidisciplinary approach is required for multiorgan
disease; a rheumatologist, an otorhinolaryngologist, a pulmonologist, and sometimes a nephrologist may
be included.
Patients who have severe life- or organ-threatening manifestations (eg, alveolar hemorrhage, rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis, mononeuritis multiplex with motor involvement) require immediate
treatment and hospital admission. These patients require high-dose corticosteroids and
cyclophosphamide (. The role of rituximab in severe or refractory disease is under study.
For less severe disease, corticosteroids and methotrexate are used. Methotrexate or azathioprine is used
===PAGE:425===
to maintain remission.
Irrigation of sinuses with saline, with or without mupirocin 2% nasal ointment, helps minimize crusting and
secondary staphylococcal infections.
Treatment of subglottic stenosis is difficult. Systemic immunosuppressants may not be effective.
Intralesional injection of long-acting corticosteroids, with gentle progressive dilation, markedly improves
outcomes and helps prevent unnecessary tracheostomies.
Patients should be taught about the disorder so that relapses can be detected early. Patients should learn
how to test their urine for blood and protein and be instructed to notify their physician at the first sign of
hematuria.
Kidney transplantation has been successful; the risk of relapse after transplantation is reduced compared
with maintenance dialysis treatment (possibly in part due to use of immunosuppressants to prevent
rejection).
===PAGE:426===
Chapter 35. Joint Disorders
Introduction
Joint disorders may be inflammatory (RA, spondyloarthropathies, crystal-induced arthritis) or relatively
less inflammatory (osteoarthritis, neurogenic arthropathy). Crystal-induced arthritis and infectious arthritis
are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic systemic autoimmune disease that primarily involves the
joints. RA causes damage mediated by cytokines, chemokines, and metalloproteases.
Characteristically, peripheral joints (eg, wrists, metacarpophalangeal joints) are symmetrically
inflamed, leading to progressive destruction of articular structures, usually accompanied by
systemic symptoms. Diagnosis is based on specific clinical, laboratory, and imaging features.
Treatment involves drugs, physical measures, and sometimes surgery. Disease-modifying
antirheumatic drugs help control symptoms and slow disease progression.
RA affects about 1% of the population. Women are affected 2 to 3 times more often than men. Onset may
be at any age, most often between 35 yr and 50 yr, but can be during childhood (see
Juvenile Idiopathic
Arthritis
 or old age.
Etiology
Although RA involves autoimmune reactions, the precise cause is unknown; many factors may contribute.
A genetic predisposition has been identified and, in white populations, localized to a shared epitope in the
HLA-DR
β
locus of class II histocompatibility antigens. Unknown environmental factors (eg, viral
infections) are thought to play a role.
Pathophysiology
Prominent immunologic abnormalities include immune complexes produced by synovial lining cells and in
inflamed blood vessels. Plasma cells produce antibodies (eg, rheumatoid factor [RF]) that contribute to
these complexes, but destructive arthritis can occur in the absence of RF. Macrophages also migrate to
diseased synovium in early disease; increased macrophage-derived lining cells are prominent along with
vessel inflammation. Lymphocytes that infiltrate the synovial tissue are primarily CD4+ T cells.
Macrophages and lymphocytes produce pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (eg, tumor necrosis
factors [TNF], granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF], various ILs, interferonγ
) in
the synovium. Release of inflammatory mediators probably contributes to the systemic and joint
manifestations of RA.
In chronically affected joints, the normally thin synovium thickens and develops many villous folds. The
synovial lining cells produce various materials, including collagenase and stromelysin, which contribute to
cartilage destruction, and IL-1 and TNFα
, which stimulate cartilage destruction, osteoclast-mediated
bone absorption, synovial inflammation, and prostaglandins (which potentiate inflammation). Fibrin
deposition, fibrosis, and necrosis are also present. Hyperplastic synovial tissue (pannus) releases these
inflammatory mediators, which erode cartilage, subchondral bone, articular capsule, and ligaments. PMNs
on average make up about 60% of WBCs in the synovial fluid.
Rheumatoid nodules develop in about 30% of patients with RA. They are granulomas consisting of a
central necrotic area surrounded by palisaded histiocytic macrophages, all enveloped by lymphocytes,
plasma cells, and fibroblasts. Nodules and vasculitis can also develop in visceral organs.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually insidious, often beginning with systemic and joint symptoms. Systemic symptoms include
early morning stiffness of affected joints, generalized afternoon fatigue and malaise, anorexia, generalized
===PAGE:427===
weakness, and occasionally low-grade fever. Joint symptoms include pain, swelling, and stiffness.
The disease progresses most rapidly during the first 6 yr, particularly the first year; 80% of patients
develop some permanent joint abnormalities within 10 yr. The course is unpredictable in individual
patients.
Joint symptoms are characteristically symmetric. Typically, stiffness lasts > 60 min after rising in the
morning but may occur after any prolonged inactivity. Involved joints become tender, with erythema,
warmth, swelling, and limitation of motion. The joints involved include the following:
• Wrists and the index and middle metacarpophalangeal joints (most commonly involved)
•
Proximal interphalangeal joints
• Metatarsophalangeal joints
• Shoulders
• Elbows
• Hips
• Knees
• Ankles
However, virtually any joint except uncommonly the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints may be involved.
The axial skeleton is rarely involved except for the upper cervical spine. Synovial thickening is detectable.
Joints are often held in flexion to minimize pain, which results from joint capsular distention.
Fixed deformities, particularly flexion contractures, may develop rapidly; ulnar deviation of the fingers with
an ulnar slippage of the extensor tendons off the metacarpophalangeal joints is typical, as are swan-neck
and boutonniere deformities (see
Fig. 43-2
. Joint instability can also occur. Carpal tunnel syndrome can result from wrist
synovitis compressing the median nerve. Popliteal (Baker's) cysts can develop, causing calf swelling and
tenderness suggestive of deep venous thrombosis.
Extra-articular manifestations:
Subcutaneous rheumatoid nodules are not usually an early sign but
eventually develop in up to 30% of patients, usually at sites of pressure and chronic irritation (eg, the
extensor surface of the forearm, metacarpophalangeal joints, occiput). Visceral nodules, usually
asymptomatic, are common in severe RA. Other extra-articular signs include vasculitis causing leg ulcers
or mononeuritis multiplex, pleural or pericardial effusions, pulmonary nodules, pulmonary infiltrates or
fibrosis, pericarditis, myocarditis, lymphadenopathy, Felty's syndrome, Sjogren's syndrome, scleromalacia,
and episcleritis. Involvement of the cervical spine can cause atlantoaxial subluxation ( and
spinal cord compression (; it may worsen with extension of the neck (eg, during endotracheal
intubation).
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Serum rheumatoid factor (RF) or anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP)
• X-rays
RA should be suspected in patients with polyarticular, symmetric arthritis, particularly if the wrists and 2nd
and 3rd metacarpophalangeal joints are involved. Criteria for the diagnosis of RA are listed in
Table 35-1
. The presence of ≥ 4 criteria suggests the diagnosis. Other causes of symmetric polyarthritis,
===PAGE:428===
particularly hepatitis C, must be excluded. Patients should have a serum RF test, hand and wrist x-rays,
and baseline x-rays of affected joints to document future erosive changes.
[Table 35-1.
Diagnosing Rheumatoid Arthritis*]
RFs, antibodies to human
γ
-globulin, are present in about 70% of patients with RA. However, RF, often in
low titers, occurs in patients with other diseases, including other connective tissue diseases (eg, SLE),
granulomatous diseases, chronic infections (eg, viral hepatitis, subacute bacterial endocarditis, TB), and
cancers. Low RF titers can also occur in 3% of the general population and 20% of the elderly. An RF titer
measured by latex agglutination of > 1:80 or a positive anti-CCP test supports the diagnosis of RA.
Anti-CCP antibodies have high specificity (90%) and sensitivity (96%) for RA and, like RF, predict a worse
prognosis.
X-rays show only soft-tissue swelling during the first months of disease. Subsequently, periarticular
osteoporosis, joint space (articular cartilage) narrowing, and marginal erosions may become visible.
Erosions often develop within the first year but may occur any time. MRI seems to be more sensitive and
detects earlier articular inflammation and erosions. In addition, abnormal subchondral bone signals (eg,
bone marrow lesions, bone marrow edema) around the knee suggest progressive disease.
If RA is diagnosed, additional tests help detect complications and unexpected abnormalities.
CBC with
differential should be obtained. A normochromic (or slightly hypochromic)-normocytic anemia occurs in
80%; Hb is usually > 10 g/dL. If Hb is ≤ 10 g/dL, superimposed iron deficiency or other causes of anemia
should be considered. Neutropenia occurs in 1 to 2% of cases, often with splenomegaly (Felty's
syndrome). Acute-phase reactants (eg, thrombocytosis, elevated ESR, elevated C-reactive protein) reflect
disease activity. A mild polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia often occurs. ESR is elevated in 90% of
patients with active disease.
Synovial fluid examination is necessary with any new-onset effusion to rule out other disorders and
differentiate RA from other inflammatory arthritides (eg, septic and crystal-induced arthritis). In RA, during
active joint inflammation, synovial fluid is turbid, yellow, and sterile, with reduced viscosity and usually
10,000 to 50,000 WBCs/
μ
L; PMNs typically predominate, but > 50% may be lymphocytes and other
mononuclear cells. Crystals are absent.
Differential diagnosis:
Many disorders can simulate RA:
• Crystal-induced arthritis
• Osteoarthritis
• SLE
• Sarcoidosis
• Reactive arthritis
• Psoriatic arthritis
• Ankylosing spondylitis
RF can be nonspecific and is often present in several autoimmune diseases; the presence of anti-CCP
antibodies is more specific for RA.
Some patients with crystal-induced arthritis may meet criteria for RA; however, synovial fluid examination
should clarify the diagnosis. The presence of crystals makes RA unlikely. Joint involvement and
subcutaneous nodules can result from gout, cholesterol, and amyloidosis as well as RA; aspiration or
biopsy of the nodules may occasionally be needed.
===PAGE:429===
SLE usually can be distinguished if there are skin lesions on light-exposed areas, hair loss, oral and
nasal mucosal lesions, absence of joint erosions in even long-standing arthritis, joint fluid that often has <
2000 WBCs/
μ
L (predominantly mononuclear cells), antibodies to double-stranded DNA, renal disease,
and low serum complement levels. In contrast to RA, deformities in SLE are usually reducible because of
the lack of erosions and bone or cartilage damage. Arthritis similar to RA can also occur in other
rheumatic disorders (eg, polyarteritis, systemic sclerosis, dermatomyositis, or polymyositis) or there can
be features of more than one disease, which suggests an overlap syndrome or mixed connective tissue
disease.
Sarcoidosis, Whipple's disease, multicentric reticulohistiocytosis, and other systemic diseases may
involve joints; other clinical features and tissue biopsy sometimes help differentiate these conditions.
Acute rheumatic fever has a migratory pattern of joint involvement and evidence of antecedent
streptococcal infection (culture or changing antistreptolysin-O titer); in contrast, RA has an additive
arthritis.
Reactive arthritis ( can be differentiated by antecedent GI or GU symptoms; asymmetric
involvement and pain at the Achilles insertion of the heel, sacroiliac joints, and large joints of the leg;
conjunctivitis; iritis; painless buccal ulcers; balanitis circinata; or keratoderma blennorrhagicum on the
soles and elsewhere.
Psoriatic arthritis ( tends to be asymmetric and is not usually associated with RF, but
differentiation may be difficult in the absence of nail or skin lesions. DIP joint involvement and severely
mutilating arthritis (arthritis mutilans) is strongly suggestive, as is the presence of a diffusely swollen
(sausage) digit. Ankylosing spondylitis ( may be differentiated by spinal and axial joint
involvement, absence of subcutaneous nodules, and negative RF test.
Osteoarthritis ( can be differentiated by the joints involved; the absence of rheumatoid
nodules, systemic manifestations, or significant amounts of RF; and synovial fluid WBC counts <
2000/
μ
L. Osteoarthritis of the hands most typically involves the DIP and proximal interphalangeal joints.
RA does not affect the DIP joints.
Prognosis
RA decreases life expectancy by 3 to 7 yr, with heart disease, infection, and GI bleeding accounting for
most excess mortality; drug treatment, cancer, as well as the underlying disease may be responsible.
At least 10% of patients eventually are severely disabled despite full treatment. Whites and women have
a poorer prognosis, as do patients with subcutaneous nodules, advanced age at disease onset,
inflammation in ≥ 20 joints, early erosions, cigarette smoking, high ESR, and high levels of RF or antiCCP.
Treatment
• Supportive measures (eg, nutrition, rest, physical measures, analgesics)
•
NSAIDs
• Drugs that modify disease progression
Treatment involves a balance of rest and exercise, adequate nutrition, physical measures, drugs, and
sometimes surgery.
Rest and nutrition:
Complete bed rest is rarely indicated, even for a short time; however, a program
including judicious rest should be prescribed. An ordinary nutritious diet is generally sufficient. Rarely,
patients have food-associated exacerbations; no specific foods have been noted to exacerbate RA. Food
and diet quackery is common and should be discouraged. Substituting
ω
-3 fatty acids (in fish oils) for
dietary
ω
-6 fatty acids (in meats) may partially relieve symptoms by transiently decreasing production of
inflammatory prostaglandins.
===PAGE:430===
Physical measures:
Joint splinting reduces local inflammation and may relieve severe symptoms. Cold
may be applied to reduce pain from temporary worsening in one joint. Orthopedic or athletic shoes with
good heel and arch support are frequently helpful; metatarsal supports placed posteriorly to painful
metatarsophalangeal joints decrease the pain of weight bearing. Molded shoes may be needed for
severe deformities. Self-help devices enable many patients with debilitating RA to perform activities of
daily living.
Exercise should proceed as tolerated. During acute inflammation, passive range-of-motion exercise helps
prevent flexion contractures. Heat therapy can be helpful. Range-of-motion exercises done in warm water
are helpful because heat improves muscle function by reducing stiffness and muscle spasm. However,
contractures can be prevented and muscle strength can be restored more successfully after inflammation
begins to subside; active exercise (including walking and specific exercises for involved joints) to restore
muscle mass and preserve range of joint motion should not be fatiguing. Flexion contractures may require
intensive exercise, casting, or immobilization (eg, splinting) in progressively more stretched-open
positions. Paraffin baths can warm digits and facilitate finger exercise. Massage by trained therapists,
traction, and deep heat treatment with diathermy or ultrasonography may be useful.
Surgery:
Surgery must always be considered in terms of the total disease and patient expectations. For
example, deformed hands and arms limit crutch use during rehabilitation; seriously affected knees and
feet limit benefit from hip surgery. Reasonable objectives for each patient must be determined, and
function must be considered. Surgery may be done while the disease is active.
Arthroplasty with prosthetic joint replacement is indicated if damage severely limits function; total hip and
knee replacements are most consistently successful. Prosthetic hips and knees cannot tolerate vigorous
activity (eg, competitive athletics). Excision of subluxed painful metatarsophalangeal joints may greatly aid
walking. Thumb fusions may provide stability for pinch. Neck fusion may be needed for C1-2 subluxation
with severe pain or potential for spinal cord compression. Arthroscopic or open synovectomy can relieve
joint inflammation but only temporarily unless disease activity can be controlled.
Drugs for RA
The goal is to reduce inflammation as a means of preventing erosions and progressive deformity.
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are used early, often in combination. Other drug
classes, including biologic agents, TNFα
antagonists, and IL-1 receptor antagonists, seem to slow the
progression of RA. NSAIDs are of some help for the pain of RA but do not prevent erosions or disease
progression. Sometimes low-dose systemic corticosteroids (prednisone < 10 mg daily) are added to
control severe polyarticular symptoms, usually with the objective of replacement with a DMARD. Intraarticular depot corticosteroids can control severe monarticular or even oligoarticular symptoms. The
optimal combinations of drugs are not yet clear. However, some data suggest that certain combinations of
drugs from different classes (eg, methotrexate plus other DMARDs, a rapidly tapered corticosteroid plus a
DMARD, methotrexate plus a TNFα
antagonist or an IL-1 receptor antagonist, a TNFα
antagonist or an
IL-1 receptor antagonist plus a DMARD) are more effective than using DMARDs alone sequentially or in
combination.
NSAIDs:
Aspirin is no longer used for RA, as effective doses are often toxic. Only one NSAID should be
given at a time (see
Table 35-2
), although patients may also take aspirin at ≤ 325 mg/day for its antiplatelet cardioprotective
effect. Because the maximal response for NSAIDs can take up to 2 wk, doses should be increased no
more frequently than this. Doses of drugs with flexible dosing can be increased until response is maximal
or maximum dosage is reached. All NSAIDs treat the symptoms of RA and decrease inflammation but do
not alter the course of the disease.
NSAIDs inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes and thus decrease production of prostaglandins. Some
prostaglandins under COX-1 control have important effects in
[Table 35-2.
NSAID Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis]
===PAGE:431===
many parts of the body (ie, they protect gastric mucosa and inhibit platelet adhesiveness). Other
prostaglandins are induced by inflammation and are produced by COX-2. Selective COX-2 inhibitors, also
called coxibs (eg, celecoxib), seem to have efficacy comparable to nonselective NSAIDs and are less
likely to cause GI toxicity; however, they do not seem less likely to cause renal toxicity.
NSAIDs other than coxibs should be avoided in patients with previous peptic ulcer disease or dyspepsia.
Other possible adverse effects of all NSAIDs include headache, confusion and other CNS symptoms,
increased BP, worsening of hypertension, edema, and decreased platelet function. The effect of NSAIDs
on cardiovascular risk is still unclear. Creatinine levels can rise reversibly because of inhibited renal
prostaglandins; less frequently, interstitial nephritis can occur. Patients with urticaria, rhinitis, or asthma
from aspirin can have the same problems with these other NSAIDs.
Traditional DMARDs:
(See
Table 35-3
for specific dosage information and adverse effects of other drugs used to treat RA.)
These drugs seem to slow the progression of RA and are indicated in nearly all patients with RA. They
differ from each other chemically and pharmacologically. Many take weeks or months to have an effect.
About two thirds of patients improve overall, but complete remissions are uncommon. Many result in
evidence of decreased damage on imaging studies, presumably reflecting decreased disease activity.
They have minimal immediate analgesic effects, so NSAIDs or low-dose corticosteroids must often be
continued. Patients should be fully apprised of the risks of DMARDs and monitored carefully for evidence
of toxicity.
Combinations of DMARDs may be more effective than single drugs. For example,
hydroxychloroquine,
sulfasalazine, and methotrexate together are more effective than methotrexate alone or the other two
together. Also, combining a DMARD with another drug, such as methotrexate plus a TNFα
antagonist or
an IL-1 receptor antagonist or a rapidly tapered corticosteroid, may be more effective than using DMARDs
alone.
Methotrexate
is a folate antagonist with immunosuppressive effects at high dose. It is anti-inflammatory
at doses used in RA. It is very effective and has a relatively rapid onset (clinical benefit often within 3 to 4
wk). Methotrexate should be used with caution, if at all, in patients with hepatic dysfunction or renal
failure. Alcohol should be avoided. Supplemental folate, 1 mg po once/day, reduces the likelihood of
adverse effects. CBC, AST, ALT, and albumin and creatinine levels should be determined about every 8
wk. Rarely, a liver biopsy is needed if liver function test findings are persistently twice the upper limit of
normal or more and the patient needs to continue to use methotrexate. Severe relapses of arthritis can
occur after withdrawal of methotrexate. Paradoxically, rheumatoid nodules may enlarge with methotrexate
therapy.
Hydroxychloroquine
can also control symptoms of mild RA. Funduscopic examination should be done
and visual fields should be assessed before and every 12 mo during treatment. The drug should be
stopped if no improvement occurs after 9 mo.
Sulfasalazine
can alleviate symptoms and slow development of joint damage. It is usually given as
enteric-coated tablets. Benefit should occur within 3 mo. Enteric coating or dose reduction may increase
tolerability. CBCs should be obtained after 1 to 2 wk and then about every 12 wk during therapy. AST and
ALT should be obtained at about 6-mo intervals and whenever the dose is increased.
Leflunomide
interferes with an enzyme involved with pyrimidine metabolism. It is about as effective as
methotrexate but is less likely to suppress bone marrow, cause abnormal liver function, or cause
pneumonitis.
Parenteral
gold compounds
are not commonly used anymore.
Corticosteroids:
Systemic corticosteroids decrease inflammation and other symptoms more rapidly and
to a greater degree than other drugs. They also seem to slow bone erosion. However, they do not
prevent joint destruction, and their clinical benefit often diminishes with time. Furthermore, rebound often
follows the withdrawal of corticosteroids in active disease. Because of their long-term adverse effects,
===PAGE:432===
many doctors recommend that corticosteroids are given to maintain function only until another DMARD
has taken effect.
Corticosteroids may be used for severe joint or systemic manifestations of RA (eg, vasculitis, pleurisy,
pericarditis). Relative contraindications include peptic ulcer disease, hypertension, untreated infections,
diabetes mellitus, and glaucoma. The risk of latent TB should be considered before corticosteroid therapy
is begun.
Intra-articular injections
of depot corticosteroids may temporarily help control pain and swelling in
particularly painful joints. Triamcinolone hexacetonide may suppress inflammation for the longest time.
Triamcinolone acetonide and methylprednisolone acetate are also effective. No single joint should be
injected with a corticosteroid more than 3 to 4 times a year, as too-frequent injections may accelerate joint
destruction (although there are no specific data from humans to support this effect). Because injectable
corticosteroid esters are crystalline, local inflammation transiently increases within a few hours in < 2% of
injections. Although infection occurs in only < 1:40,000, it must be considered if pain occurs > 24 h after
injection.
Immunomodulatory, cytotoxic, and immunosuppressive drugs:
Treatment with azathioprine,
cyclosporine (an immunomodulatory drug), or cyclophosphamide provides efficacy similar to DMARDs.
However, these drugs are more toxic, particularly cyclophosphamide. Thus, they are used only for
patients in whom treatment with DMARDs has failed or to decrease the need for corticosteroids. They are
used infrequently unless there are extra-articular complications. For maintenance therapy with
azathioprine, the lowest effective dose should be used. Low-dose cyclosporine may be effective alone or
when combined with methotrexate. It may be less toxic than azathioprine and cyclophosphamide.
Biologic agents:
Biologic response modifiers other than TNFα
antagonists can be used to target B cells
or T cells.
Rituximab
is an anti-CD 20 antibody that depletes B cells. It can be used in refractory patients.
Response is often delayed but may last 6 mo. The course can be repeated in 6 mo. Mild adverse effects
are common, and analgesia, corticosteroids, diphenhydramine, or a combination may need to be given
concomitantly. Rituximab is given only to patients who have not improved after using a TNF inhibitor and
methotrexate.
Abatacept
, a soluble fusion cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) Ig, is indicated for
patients with RA with an inadequate response to other DMARDs.
[Table 35-3.
Other Drugs Used to Treat RA]
Other agents: Anakinra
is a recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist. IL-1 is heavily involved in the
pathogenesis of RA. Infection and leukopenia can be a problem, particularly when given in combination
with a TNF antagonist.
TNFα
antagonists
(eg, adalimumab, etanercept, and infliximab) reduce the progression of erosions and
reduce the number of new erosions. Although not all patients respond, many have a prompt, dramatic
feeling of well being, sometimes with the first injection. Inflammation is often dramatically reduced.
Although there are some differences among agents, the most serious problem is infection, particularly
with reactivated TB. Patients should be screened for TB with PPD. Etanercept, infliximab, and
adalimumab can and probably should be used with methotrexate. High-dose infliximab should not be used
in patients with severe heart failure.
Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is a group of rheumatic diseases that begins at or before age
16. Arthritis, fever, rash, adenopathy, splenomegaly, and iridocyclitis are typical of some forms.
Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment involves NSAIDs and disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs.
===PAGE:433===
JIA is uncommon. The cause is unknown, but there seems to be a genetic predisposition and an
autoimmune pathophysiology. JIA may be similar to adult RA (, but most forms are slightly
different.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with JIA can have joint stiffness, swelling, effusion, pain, and tenderness. JIA may interfere with
growth and development. Micrognathia (receded chin) due to early closure of mandibular epiphyses may
occur. Iridocyclitis may develop, which may cause conjunctival injection, pain, and photophobia but can
be asymptomatic; scarring and glaucoma with band keratopathy can result. The initial symptoms and
signs of JIA tend to fall into 3 possible patterns.
Systemic onset
(Still's disease) occurs in about 20% of patients. High fever, rash, splenomegaly,
generalized adenopathy, and serositis with pericarditis or pleuritis are common. These symptoms may
precede the development of arthritis. Fever (quotidian) is often highest in the afternoon or evening and
may persist for up to 2 wk. A typical transient rash often appears with the fever or may be diffuse and
migratory, with urticarial or macular lesions.
Pauciarticular onset
is characterized by involvement of ≤ 4 joints. It occurs in about 40% of patients,
usually young girls. Iridocyclitis is most common in pauciarticular JIA, developing in nearly 20%. Many
affected older boys have the HLA-B27 allele. Most of these boys subsequently develop classic features
of one of the spondyloarthropathies (eg, ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis).
Polyarticular onset
involves ≥ 5 joints, often ≥ 20. It occurs in the remaining 40% of patients and is often
similar to adult RA. Arthritis tends to be symmetric and develop slowly.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Rheumatoid factor (RF) and antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
JIA should be suspected in children with symptoms of arthritis, signs of iridocyclitis, generalized
adenopathy, splenomegaly, or unexplained rash or fever lasting more than a few days. Diagnosis is
primarily clinical. Patients suspected of having JIA should be tested for RF, ANA, and ESR because these
tests may be helpful in diagnosing JIA and distinguishing its subtypes. In Still's disease, RF and ANA are
absent. In pauciarticular-onset JIA, ANA are present in up to 75% and RF is absent. In polyarticular-onset
JIA, RF usually is negative, but in some patients, mostly adolescent girls, it can be positive.
To diagnose iridocyclitis, slit-lamp examination should be done, even in the absence of ocular symptoms.
A recently diagnosed patient with pauciarticular onset should have an eye examination every 3 to 4 mo,
and a patient with polyarticular onset should have an eye examination about every 6 mo.
Prognosis
Complete remissions occur in 50 to 75% of treated patients. Patients with polyarticular onset and a
positive RF have a less favorable prognosis.
Treatment
• Drugs that slow disease progression
• Usually NSAIDs
Similar to the therapy of patients with adult RA, disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs),
particularly the biologic agents, have dramatically changed the therapeutic approach.
Symptoms may be reduced with NSAIDs. Naproxen 5 to 10 mg/kg po bid, ibuprofen 5 to 10 mg/kg po qid,
===PAGE:434===
and indomethacin 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg po tid are among the most useful. Salicylates are rarely used because
of their possible role in causing Reye's syndrome (.
Except for severe systemic disease, systemic corticosteroids can usually be avoided. When necessary,
the lowest possible dose is used (eg, oral prednisone, 0.0125 to 0.5 mg/kg qid, or the same daily dose
given once or twice daily). Growth retardation, osteoporosis, and osteonecrosis are the major hazards of
prolonged corticosteroid use in children. Intra-articular depot corticosteroids can be given. The dosage for
children is adjusted based on weight. Children may need to be sedated for intra-articular injection.
Methotrexate is useful for pauciarticular and polyarticular disease. Adverse effects are monitored as in
adults. Bone marrow depression and hepatic toxicity are monitored with CBC, AST, ALT, and albumin.
Occasionally, sulfasalazine is used, especially in cases of suspected spondyloarthropathy. IM gold and
penicillamine are rarely used.
Etanercept, used as in adults, blocks tumor necrosis factorα
(TNFα
) and is often effective; 0.4 mg/kg sc
(up to a maximum of 25 mg) is given twice/wk. Anakinra is particularly effective in some patients with
systemic-onset disease.
Physical therapy, exercises, splints, and other supportive measures help prevent flexion contractures.
Adaptive devices can improve function and minimize unnecessary stresses on inflamed joints. Iridocyclitis
is treated with ophthalmic corticosteroid drops and mydriatics (.
Seronegative Spondyloarthropathies
(Seronegative Spondyloarthritides)
Seronegative spondyloarthropathies share certain clinical characteristics (eg, back pain, uveitis, GI
symptoms, rashes). Some are strongly associated with the HLA-B27 allele. Clinical and genetic
similarities suggest that they also share similar causes or pathophysiologies. Rheumatoid factor (RF) is
negative in the spondyloarthropathies (hence, why they are called seronegative spondyloarthropathies).
They include ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and other disorders.
Ankylosing Spondylitis
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a systemic disorder characterized by inflammation of the axial
skeleton, large peripheral joints, and digits; nocturnal back pain; back stiffness; accentuated
kyphosis; constitutional symptoms; aortitis; cardiac conduction abnormalities; and anterior
uveitis. Diagnosis requires showing sacroiliitis on x-ray. Treatment is with NSAIDs or tumor
necrosis factor antagonists and physical measures that maintain joint flexibility.
AS is 3 times more frequent in men than in women and begins most often between ages 20 and 40. It is
10 to 20 times more common among 1st-degree relatives of AS patients than in the general population.
The risk of AS in 1st-degree relatives with the HLA-B27 allele is about 20%. Increased prevalence of
HLA-B27 in whites or HLA-B7 in blacks supports a genetic predisposition. However, the concordance rate
in identical twins is only about 50%, suggesting that environmental factors contribute. The
pathophysiology probably involves immune-mediated inflammation.
Symptoms and Signs
The most frequent manifestation is back pain, but disease can begin in peripheral joints, especially in
children and women, and rarely with acute iridocyclitis (iritis or anterior uveitis). Other early symptoms and
signs are diminished chest expansion from diffuse costovertebral involvement, low-grade fever, fatigue,
anorexia, weight loss, and anemia.
Back pain—often nocturnal and of varying intensity—eventually becomes recurrent. Morning stiffness,
typically relieved by activity, and paraspinal muscle spasm develop. A flexed or bent-over posture eases
back pain and paraspinal muscle spasm; thus, kyphosis is common in untreated patients. Severe hip
arthritis can eventually develop. In late stages, the patient has accentuated kyphosis, loss of lumbar
===PAGE:435===
lordosis, and fixed bent-forward posturing, with compromised pulmonary function and inability to lie flat.
There may be peripheral potentially deforming joint involvement, sometimes involving the digits
(dactylitis). Achilles tendinitis can occur.
Systemic manifestations occur in one third of patients. Recurrent, acute anterior uveitis is common but
usually self-limited; uncommonly it becomes protracted and severe enough to impair vision. Neurologic
signs occasionally result from compression radiculitis or sciatica, vertebral fracture or subluxation, or
cauda equina syndrome (. Cardiovascular manifestations can include aortic insufficiency, aortitis, angina, pericarditis, and
cardiac conduction abnormalities (which may be asymptomatic). Dyspnea, cough, or hemoptysis can
result from nontuberculous fibrosis or cavitation of an upper lobe of the lung; secondary infection with
Aspergillus
can develop. Rarely, AS results in secondary amyloidosis. Subcutaneous nodules do not
develop.
Diagnosis
• Lumbosacral spine imaging
• Blood tests (ESR, C-reactive protein, and CBC) or explicit clinical criteria (modified New York criteria)
AS should be suspected in patients, particularly young men, with nocturnal back pain and kyphosis,
diminished chest expansion, Achilles tendinitis, or unexplained anterior uveitis. A 1st-degree relative with
AS should heighten suspicion. Patients should generally be tested with ESR, C-reactive protein, and
CBC. IgM, RF, and antinuclear antibodies are needed only if peripheral arthritis suggests other
diagnoses. No laboratory test is diagnostic, but results can increase suspicion for the disorder or rule out
other disorders than can simulate AS. If, after these tests, AS is still suspected, patients should undergo
imaging of the lumbosacral spine; demonstration of sacroiliitis on x-ray strongly supports the diagnosis.
Alternatively, AS can be diagnosed by the modified New York criteria. Using these criteria, the patient
must have imaging study evidence of sacroiliitis and one of the following:
• Restriction of lumbar spinal motion in both the sagittal (looking from the side) and frontal (looking from
the back) planes
• Restriction of chest expansion, adjusted for age
• A history of inflammatory back pain
Historical features that distinguish inflammatory back pain from noninflammatory back pain include onset
at ≤ 40 yr, gradual onset, morning stiffness, improvement with activity, and duration ≥ 3 mo before seeking
medical attention.
ESR and other acute-phase reactants (eg, C-reactive protein) are inconsistently elevated in patients with
active AS. Tests for RF and antinuclear antibodies are negative. The HLA-B27 genetic marker is not of
diagnostic value.
The earliest x-ray abnormalities are pseudowidening from subchondral erosions, followed by sclerosis or
later narrowing and eventually fusion in the sacroiliac joints. Changes are symmetric. Early changes in
the spine are upper lumbar vertebral squaring with sclerosis at the corners; spotty ligamentous
calcification; and one or two evolving syndesmophytes. Late changes result in a "bamboo spine"
appearance, resulting from prominent syndesmophytes, diffuse paraspinal ligamentous calcification, and
osteoporosis; these changes develop in some patients on average over 10 yr.
Changes typical of AS may not become visible on plain x-rays for years. CT and MRI show changes
earlier, but there is no consensus regarding their role in routine diagnosis.
A herniated intervertebral disk can cause back pain and radiculopathy similar to AS, but the pain is limited
to the spine, usually causes more sudden symptoms, and causes no systemic manifestations or
===PAGE:436===
laboratory test abnormalities. If necessary, CT or MRI can differentiate it from AS. Involvement of a single
sacroiliac joint suggests a different spondyloarthropathy, possibly infection. Tuberculous spondylitis can
simulate AS (.
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)
occurs primarily in men > 50 yr and may resemble AS
clinically and on x-ray. Patients uncommonly have spinal pain, stiffness, and insidious loss of motion. Xray findings in DISH include large ossifications anterior to spinal ligaments (the calcification appears as if
someone poured candle wax in front and on the sides of the vertebrae), bridging several vertebrae and
usually starting at the lower thoracic spine, eventually affecting the cervical and lumbar spine. There is
often subperiosteal bone growth along the pelvic brim and at insertion of tendons (such as the Achilles
tendon insertion). However, the anterior spinal ligament is intact and frequently bulging, and sacroiliac
and spinal apophyseal joints are not eroded. Additional differentiating features are stiffness that is not
accentuated in the morning and a normal ESR.
Prognosis
AS is characterized by mild or moderate flares of active inflammation alternating with periods of little or no
inflammation. Proper treatment in most patients results in minimal or no disability and in a full, productive
life despite back stiffness. Occasionally, the course is severe and progressive, resulting in pronounced
incapacitating deformities.
Treatment
• NSAIDs
• Sulfasalazine, methotrexate, or tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antagonists
• Exercises and supportive measures
The goals of treatment are relieving pain, maintaining joint range of motion, and preventing end-organ
damage. Because the condition may cause lung fibrosis, cigarette smoking is discouraged.
NSAIDs reduce pain and suppress joint inflammation and muscle spasm, thereby increasing range of
motion, which facilitates exercise and prevents contractures. Most NSAIDs work in AS, and tolerance and
toxicity dictate drug choice. The daily dose of NSAIDs should be as low as possible, but maximum doses
may be needed with active disease. Drug withdrawal should be attempted only slowly, after systemic and
joint signs of active disease have been suppressed for several months.
Sulfasalazine may help reduce peripheral joint symptoms and laboratory markers of inflammation. Dosage
should be started at 500 mg/day and increased by 500 mg/day at 1-wk intervals to 1 to 1.5 g bid
maintenance. Peripheral joint symptoms may also abate with methotrexate (. Systemic
corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, and most disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs have no proven
benefit and should generally not be used. TNFα
antagonists (eg, etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab) are
effective treatments for inflammatory back pain.
For proper posture and joint motion, daily exercise and other supportive measures (eg, postural training,
therapeutic exercise) are vital to strengthen muscle groups that oppose the direction of potential
deformities (ie, the extensor rather than flexor muscles). Reading while lying prone and pushing up on the
elbows or pillows and thus extending the back may help keep the back flexible. Because chest wall
motion can be restricted, which impairs lung function, cigarette smoking, which also impairs lung function,
is strongly discouraged.
Intra-articular depot corticosteroids may be beneficial, particularly when one or two peripheral joints are
more severely inflamed than others, thereby compromising exercise and rehabilitation. They may also
help if systemic drugs are ineffective. Corticosteroids injected into the sacroiliac joints may occasionally
help severe sacroiliitis.
For acute uveitis, topical corticosteroids and mydriatics are usually adequate. If severe hip arthritis
===PAGE:437===
develops, total hip arthroplasty may lessen pain and improve flexibility dramatically.
Reactive Arthritis
Reactive arthritis is an acute spondyloarthropathy that often seems precipitated by an infection,
usually GU or GI. Common manifestations include asymmetric arthritis of variable severity that
tends to affect the lower extremities, sausage-shaped deformities of fingers or toes or both,
constitutional symptoms, enthesitis, tendinitis, and mucocutaneous ulcers, including
hyperkeratotic or crusted vesicular lesions (keratoderma blennorrhagicum). Diagnosis is
clinical. Treatment involves NSAIDs and sometimes sulfasalazine or immunosuppressants.
Spondyloarthropathy associated with urethritis or cervicitis, conjunctivitis, and mucocutaneous lesions
(previously called Reiter's syndrome) is one type of reactive arthritis.
Etiology
Two forms of reactive arthritis are common: sexually transmitted and dysenteric. The sexually transmitted
form occurs primarily in men aged 20 to 40. Genital infections with
Chlamydia trachomatis
are most often
implicated. Men or women can acquire the dysenteric form after enteric infections, primarily
Shigella
,
Salmonella
,
Yersinia
, or
Campylobacter
. Reactive arthritis probably results from joint infection or
postinfectious inflammation. Although there is evidence of microbial antigens in the synovium, organisms
cannot be cultured from joint fluid.
Epidemiology:
The prevalence of the HLA-B27 allele in patients is 63 to 96% vs 6 to 15% in healthy
white controls, thus supporting a genetic predisposition.
Symptoms and Signs
Reactive arthritis can range from transient monarticular arthritis to a severe, multisystem disorder.
Constitutional symptoms may include fever, fatigue, and weight loss. Arthritis may be mild or severe. Joint
involvement is generally asymmetric and oligoarticular or polyarticular, occurring predominantly in the
large joints of the lower extremities and in the toes. Back pain may occur, usually with severe disease.
Enthesopathy (inflammation at tendinous insertion into bone—eg, plantar fasciitis, digital periostitis,
Achilles tendinitis) is common and characteristic. Mucocutaneous lesions—small, transient, relatively
painless, superficial ulcers—commonly occur on the oral mucosa, tongue, and glans penis (balanitis
circinata). Particularly characteristic are vesicles (sometimes identical to pustular psoriasis) of the palms
and soles and around the nails that become hyperkeratotic and form crusts (keratoderma
blennorrhagicum). Rarely, cardiovascular complications (eg, aortitis, aortic insufficiency, cardiac
conduction defects), pleuritis, and CNS or peripheral nervous system symptoms develop.
Urethritis may develop 7 to 14 days after sexual contact (or occasionally after dysentery); low-grade fever,
conjunctivitis, and arthritis develop over the next few weeks. Not all features may occur, so incomplete
forms need to be considered. In men, the urethritis is less painful and productive of purulent discharge
than acute gonococcal urethritis and may be associated with hemorrhagic cystitis or prostatitis. In women,
urethritis and cervicitis may be mild (with dysuria or slight vaginal discharge) or asymptomatic.
Conjunctivitis is the most common eye lesion. It usually causes eye redness and grittiness, but keratitis
and anterior uveitis can develop also, causing eye pain, photophobia, and tearing.
Diagnosis
• Typical arthritis
• Symptoms of GI or GU infection
• One other extra-articular feature
Reactive arthritis should be suspected in patients with acute, asymmetric arthritis affecting
the large joints
of the lower extremities or toes, particularly if there is tendinitis or a history of an antecedent diarrhea or
===PAGE:438===
dysuria. Diagnosis is ultimately clinical and requires the typical peripheral arthritis with symptoms of GU
or GI infection or one of the other extra-articular features. Because these features may manifest at
different times, definitive diagnosis may require several months. Serum and synovial fluid complement
levels are high, but these findings are not usually diagnostic and need not be measured.
Disseminated gonococcal infection can closely simulate reactive arthritis (. Arthrocentesis
may fail to differentiate them, owing to inflammatory characteristics of synovial fluid in both disorders and
the difficulty of culturing gonococci from this fluid. Clinical characteristics may help; disseminated
gonococcal infection tends to involve upper and lower extremities equally, be more migratory, and not
produce back pain, and vesicles tend not to be hyperkeratotic. A positive gonococcal culture from blood
or skin lesions helps differentiate the two disorders, but a positive culture from the urethra or cervix does
not. If differentiation is still difficult, ceftriaxone may be required for simultaneous diagnosis and treatment.
Psoriatic arthritis can simulate reactive arthritis, causing similar skin lesions, uveitis, and asymmetric
arthritis. However, psoriatic arthritis often affects mostly the upper extremities and especially the distal
interphalangeal joints, may be abrupt in onset but may also develop gradually, causes less enthesopathy,
and tends not to cause mouth ulcers or symptoms of GU or GI infection.
Prognosis
Reactive arthritis often resolves in 3 to 4 mo, but up to 50% of patients experience recurrent or prolonged
symptoms over several years. Joint, spinal, or sacroiliac inflammation or deformity may occur with chronic
or recurrent disease. Some patients are disabled.
Treatment
• NSAIDs
• Sometimes sulfasalazine, doxycycline, azathioprine or methotrexate, or a combination
• Supportive measures
NSAIDs (eg, indomethacin 25 to 50 mg po tid) usually help relieve symptoms. If induced by infection with
C. trachomatis
, doxycycline 100 mg po bid for up to 3 mo may accelerate recovery, but this is
controversial. Sulfasalazine as used to treat RA may also be helpful (. If symptoms are severe
despite NSAIDs and sulfasalazine, azathioprine or methotrexate may be considered. Systemic
corticosteroids have no proven value.
Local injection of depot corticosteroids for enthesopathy or resistant oligoarthritis may relieve symptoms.
Physical therapy aimed at maintaining joint mobility is helpful during the recovery phase. Anterior uveitis is
treated as usual, with corticosteroid and mydriatic eye drops to prevent scarring. Conjunctivitis and
mucocutaneous lesions require only symptomatic treatment.
Psoriatic Arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis is a chronic inflammatory arthritis that occurs in people with psoriasis of the
skin or nails. The arthritis is often asymmetric, and some forms involve the distal
interphalangeal joints. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is usually similar to that of RA but can
also involve phototherapy.
Psoriatic arthritis develops in 5 to 40% of patients with psoriasis. Prevalence is increased in patients with
AIDS. Risk of some involvement is increased in patients with HLA-B27 or some other specific alleles and
in family members. Etiology and pathophysiology are unknown.
Symptoms and Signs
Psoriasis of the skin or nails may precede or follow joint involvement. Skin lesions may be hidden in the
scalp, gluteal folds, or umbilicus and go unrecognized by the patient.
===PAGE:439===
The distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints of fingers and toes are especially affected. Asymmetric involvement
of large and small joints, including the sacroiliacs and spine, is common. Joint and skin symptoms may
lessen or worsen simultaneously. Inflammation of the fingers, toes, or both may lead to sausage-shaped
deformities. Rheumatoid nodules are absent. Arthritic remissions tend to be more frequent, rapid, and
complete than in RA, but progression to chronic arthritis and crippling may occur. There may be arthritis
mutilans (destruction of multiple hand joints with telescoping of the digits).
Back pain may be present. It is often accompanied by asymmetric syndesmophytes of the spine.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• RF
Psoriatic arthritis should be suspected in patients with both psoriasis and arthritis. Because psoriasis may
be overlooked or hidden or develop only after arthritis occurs, psoriatic arthritis should be considered in
any patient with seronegative inflammatory arthritis; these patients should be examined for psoriasis and
nail pitting and should be questioned about a family history of psoriasis. Patients suspected of having
psoriatic arthritis should be tested for rheumatoid factor, which can coexist. Psoriatic arthritis is diagnosed
clinically and by excluding other disorders that can cause such similar manifestations. X-ray findings
common in psoriatic arthritis include DIP involvement; resorption of terminal phalanges; arthritis mutilans;
and extensive destruction, proliferative bone reaction, and dislocation of large and small joints.
Treatment
• Arthritis treated generally similarly to RA
• Phototherapy
Treatment is directed at control of skin lesions ( and at joint inflammation. Drug therapy is
similar to that for RA, particularly methotrexate. Hydroxychloroquine is inconsistently of benefit and may
cause exfoliative dermatitis or aggravate underlying psoriasis. Benefit may be gained from NSAIDs,
cyclosporine, and TNF antagonists (see p.
under Drugs for RA); TNF antagonists have been
particularly effective.
Phototherapy using long-wave psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) combined with oral methoxsalen 600
μ
g/kg po 2 h before PUVA twice/wk seems to be highly effective for psoriatic lesions and somewhat
effective for peripheral arthritis, but not for spine involvement.
Other Spondyloarthropathies
Spondyloarthropathy can develop in association with GI conditions (sometimes called enteropathic
arthritis) such as inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal bypass surgery, or Whipple's disease.
Juvenile-onset spondyloarthropathy is an asymmetric, mostly lower extremity spondyloarthropathy that
begins most commonly in boys aged 7 to 16.
Spondyloarthropathy can also develop in people without characteristics of other specific
spondyloarthropathy (undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy). Treatment of the arthritis of these other
spondyloarthropathies is similar to that of treatment of reactive arthritis (.
Osteoarthritis
(Degenerative Joint Disease; Osteoarthrosis; Hypertrophic Osteoarthritis)
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a chronic arthropathy characterized by disruption and potential loss of
===PAGE:440===
joint cartilage along with other joint changes, including bone hypertrophy (osteophyte
formation). Symptoms include gradually developing pain aggravated or triggered by activity,
stiffness lasting < 30 min on awakening and after inactivity, and occasional joint swelling.
Diagnosis is confirmed by x-rays. Treatment includes physical measures (including
rehabilitation), patient education, and drugs.
OA, the most common joint disorder, often becomes symptomatic in the 40s and 50s and is nearly
universal (although not always symptomatic) by age 80. Only half of patients with pathologic changes of
OA have symptoms. Below age 40, most OA is in men and results from trauma. Women predominate from
age 40 to 70, after which men and women are equally affected.
Classification
OA is classified as primary (idiopathic) or secondary to some known cause.
Primary OA may be localized to certain joints (eg, chondromalacia patellae is a mild OA that occurs in
young people). Primary OA is usually subdivided by the site of involvement (eg, hands and feet, knee,
hip). If primary OA involves multiple joints, it is classified as primary generalized OA.
Secondary OA results from conditions that change the microenvironment of the cartilage. These
conditions include significant trauma, congenital joint abnormalities, metabolic defects (eg,
hemochromatosis, Wilson's disease), infections (causing postinfectious arthritis), endocrine and
neuropathic diseases, and disorders that alter the normal structure and function of hyaline cartilage (eg,
RA, gout, chondrocalcinosis).
Pathophysiology
Normal joints have little friction with movement and do not wear out with typical use, overuse, or trauma.
Hyaline cartilage is avascular, aneural, and alymphatic. It is 95% water and extracellular cartilage matrix
and only 5% chondrocytes. Chondrocytes have the longest cell cycle in the body (similar to CNS and
muscle cells). Cartilage health and function depend on compression and release of weight bearing and
use (ie, compression pumps fluid from the cartilage into the joint
space and into capillaries and venules,
whereas release allows the cartilage to reexpand, hyperhydrate, and absorb necessary electrolytes and
nutrients).
OA begins with tissue damage from mechanical injury (eg, torn meniscus), transmission of inflammatory
mediators from the synovium into cartilage, or defects in cartilage metabolism. The tissue damage
stimulates chondrocytes to attempt repair, which increases production of proteoglycans and collagen.
However, efforts at repair also stimulate the enzymes that degrade cartilage, as well as inflammatory
cytokines, which are normally present in small amounts. Inflammatory mediators trigger an inflammatory
cycle that further stimulates the chondrocytes and synovial lining cells, eventually breaking down the
cartilage. Chondrocytes undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis). Once cartilage is destroyed,
exposed bone becomes eburnated and sclerotic.
All articular and some periarticular tissues become involved in OA. Subchondral bone stiffens, then
undergoes infarction, and develops subchondral cysts. Attempts at bony repair cause subchondral
sclerosis and osteophytes at the joint margins. The osteophytes seem to develop in an attempt to
stabilize the joint. The synovium becomes inflamed and thickened and produces synovial fluid with less
viscosity and greater volume. Periarticular tendons and ligaments become stressed, resulting in tendinitis
and contractures. As the joint becomes less mobile, surrounding muscles thin and become less
supportive. Menisci fissure and may fragment.
OA of the spine can, at the disk level, cause marked thickening and proliferation of the posterior
longitudinal ligaments, which are posterior to the vertebral body but anterior to the spinal cord. The result
can be transverse bars that encroach on the anterior spinal cord. Hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the
ligamenta flava, which are posterior to the spinal cord, often compress the posterior canal, causing
lumbar spinal stenosis. In contrast, the anterior and posterior nerve roots, ganglia, and common spinal
nerve are relatively well protected in the intervertebral foramina, where they occupy only 25% of the
===PAGE:441===
available and well-cushioned space.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is most often gradual, usually beginning with one or a few joints. Pain is the earliest symptom,
sometimes described as a deep ache. Pain is usually worsened by weight bearing and relieved by rest
but can eventually become constant. Stiffness follows awakening or inactivity but lasts < 30 min and
lessens with movement. As OA progresses, joint motion becomes restricted, and tenderness and crepitus
or grating sensations develop. Proliferation of cartilage, bone, ligament, tendon, capsules, and synovium,
along with varying amounts of joint effusion, ultimately cause the joint enlargement characteristic of OA.
Flexion contractures may eventually develop. Acute and severe synovitis is uncommon.
Tenderness on palpation and pain on passive motion are relatively late signs. Muscle spasm and
contracture add to the pain. Mechanical block by intra-articular loose bodies or abnormally placed menisci
can occur and cause locking or catching. Deformity and subluxations can also develop.
The joints most often affected in generalized OA include the following:
• Distal interphalangeal (DIP) and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints (causing Heberden's and
Bouchard's nodes)
• Thumb carpometacarpal joint
• Intervertebral disks and zygapophyseal joints in the cervical and lumbar vertebrae
• First metatarsophalangeal joint
• Hip
• Knee
Cervical and lumbar spinal OA
may lead to myelopathy or radiculopathy. However, the clinical signs of
myelopathy are usually mild. Lumbar spinal stenosis may cause lower back or leg pain that is worsened
by walking or back extension. Radiculopathy can be prominent but is less common because the nerve
roots and ganglia are well protected. Insufficiency of the vertebral arteries, infarction of the spinal cord,
and dysphagia due to esophageal impingement by osteophytes occasionally occur. Symptoms and signs
from OA in general may also derive from subchondral bone, ligamentous structures, synovium,
periarticular bursae, capsules, muscles, tendons, disks, and periosteum, all of which are pain sensitive.
Venous pressure may increase within the subchondral bone marrow and cause pain (sometimes called
bone angina).
Hip OA
causes gradual loss of range of motion. Pain may be felt in the inguinal area or greater
trochanter or referred to the knee.
Knee OA
causes cartilage to be lost (medial loss occurs in 70% of cases). The ligaments become lax
and the joint becomes less stable, with local pain arising from the ligaments and tendons.
Erosive OA
causes synovitis and cysts in the hand. It primarily affects the DIP or PIP
joints. The thumb
carpometacarpal joints are involved in 20% of hand OA, but the metacarpophalangeal joints and wrists
are usually spared. At this time, it is uncertain whether erosive interphalangeal OA is a variant of hand OA
or whether it represents a separate entity.
OA is usually sporadically progressive but occasionally, with no predictability, stops or reverses.
Diagnosis
• X-rays
===PAGE:442===
OA should be suspected in patients with gradual onset of symptoms and signs, particularly in older
adults. If OA is suspected, plain x-rays should be taken of the most symptomatic joints. X-rays generally
reveal marginal osteophytes, narrowing of the joint space, increased density of the subchondral bone,
subchondral cyst formation, bony remodeling, and joint effusions. Standing x-rays of knees are more
sensitive in detecting joint space narrowing.
Laboratory studies are normal in OA but may be required to rule out other disorders (eg, RA) or to
diagnose an underlying disorder causing secondary OA. If OA causes joint effusions, synovial fluid
analysis can help differentiate it from inflammatory arthritides; in OA, synovial fluid is usually clear,
viscous, and has ≤ 2000 WBC/
μ
L.
OA involvement outside the usual joints suggests secondary OA; further evaluation may be required to
determine the underlying primary disorder (eg, endocrine, metabolic, neoplastic, biomechanical
disorders).
Treatment
• Rehabilitative and supportive measures
• Adjunctive drug therapy
Treatment goals are relieving pain, maintaining joint flexibility, and optimizing joint and overall function.
Primary treatments include physical measures that involve rehabilitation; support devices; exercise for
strength, flexibility, and endurance; patient education; and modifications in activities of daily living.
Adjunctive therapies include drug treatment and surgery.
Physical measures:
Rehabilitation techniques are best begun before disability develops. Exercises
(range of motion, isometric, isotonic, isokinetic, postural, strengthening— maintain range of
motion and increase the capacity for tendons and muscles to absorb stress during joint motion. Exercise
can sometimes arrest or even reverse hip and knee OA. Stretching exercises should be done daily.
Immobilization for any prolonged period of time can promote contractures and worsen the clinical course.
However, a few minutes of rest (every 4 to 6 h in the daytime) can help if balanced with exercise and use.
Modifying activities of daily living can help. For example, a patient with lumbar spine, hip, or knee OA
should avoid soft deep chairs and recliners in which posture is poor and from which rising is difficult. The
regular use of pillows under the knees while reclining encourages contractures and should also be
avoided. Patients should sit in straight-back chairs without slumping, sleep on a firm bed, perhaps with a
bed board, use a car seat shifted forward and designed for comfort, do postural exercises, wear wellsupported shoes or athletic shoes, and continue employment and physical activity.
In OA of the spine, knee, or thumb carpometacarpal joint, various supports can relieve pain and increase
function, but to preserve flexibility, they should be accompanied by specific exercise programs. In erosive
OA, range-of-motion exercises done in warm water can help prevent contractures.
Drugs:
Drug therapy is an adjunct to the physical program. Acetaminophen in doses of up to 1 g po qid
may relieve pain and is safe. More potent analgesia may be required.
NSAIDs, including cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors or coxibs, may be considered if patients have
refractory pain or signs of inflammation (eg, redness, warmth). NSAIDs may be used simultaneously with
other analgesics (eg, tramadol, opioids) to provide better relief of symptoms.
Muscle relaxants (usually in low doses) occasionally relieve pain that arises from muscles strained by
attempting to support OA joints. In the elderly, however, they may cause more adverse effects than relief.
Oral corticosteroids have no role. However, intra-articular depot corticosteroids help relieve pain and
increase joint flexibility.
Synthetic hyaluronans (similar to hyaluronic acid, a normal component of the joint) can be injected into
===PAGE:443===
the knee, with pain relief for prolonged periods of time (up to a year). However, the effect seems to be
small. The treatment is a series of 3 to 5 weekly injections.
Glucosamine sulfate 1500 mg po once/day has been suggested to relieve pain and slow joint
deterioration; chondroitin sulfate 1200 mg once/day has also been suggested for pain relief. Studies to
date have shown mixed results in terms of pain relief.
Other adjunctive and experimental therapies:
Other adjunctive measures can relieve pain, including
massage, heating pads, weight loss, acupuncture, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, and local
rubs (eg, with capsaicin). Laminectomy, osteotomy, and total joint replacement should be considered if all
nonsurgical approaches fail. (See also the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality's EvidenceBased Practice Program's evidence report.)
Experimental therapies that may preserve cartilage or allow chondrocyte grafting are being studied. It is
not clear whether using a lidocaine 5% patch relieves pain. Flavocoxid, a new drug, can be tried.
Neurogenic Arthropathy
(Neuropathic Arthropathy; Charcot's Joints)
Neurogenic arthropathy is a rapidly destructive arthropathy due to impaired pain perception and
position sense, which can result from various underlying disorders, most commonly diabetes
and stroke. Common manifestations include joint swelling, effusion, deformity, and instability.
Pain may be disproportionately mild due to the underlying neuropathy. Diagnosis requires x-ray
confirmation. Treatment consists of joint immobilization, which slows disease progression, and
sometimes surgery if the disease is advanced.
Pathophysiology
Many conditions predispose to neurogenic arthropathy (see
Table 35-4
). Impaired deep pain sensation or proprioception affects the joint's normal protective reflexes,
often allowing trauma (especially repeated minor episodes) and small periarticular fractures to go
unrecognized. Increased blood flow to bone from reflex vasodilation, resulting in active bone resorption,
contributes to bone and joint damage. Each new injury sustained by the joint causes more distortion as it
heals. Hemorrhagic joint effusions and multiple small fractures can occur, accelerating disease
progression. Ligamentous laxity, muscular hypotonia, and rapid destruction of joint cartilage are common,
predisposing to joint dislocations, which also accelerate disease progression. Advanced neurogenic
arthropathy can cause hypertrophic changes, destructive changes, or both.
[Table 35-4.
Conditions Underlying Neurogenic Arthropathy]
Symptoms and Signs
Arthropathy does not usually develop until years after onset of the neurologic condition but can then
progress rapidly and lead to complete joint disorganization in a few months. Pain is a common early
symptom. However, because the ability to sense pain is commonly impaired, the degree of pain is often
unexpectedly mild for the degree of joint damage. A prominent, often hemorrhagic, effusion and
subluxation and instability of the joint are usually present during early stages. Acute joint dislocation
sometimes occurs also.
During later stages, pain may be more severe if the disease has caused rapid joint destruction (eg,
periarticular fractures or tense hematomas). During advanced stages, the joint is swollen from bony
overgrowth and massive synovial effusion. Deformity results from dislocations and displaced fractures.
Fractures and bony healing may produce many loose pieces of cartilage or bone that can slough into the
joint, causing a coarse, grating, often audible crepitus usually more unpleasant for the observer than for
the patient. The joint may feel like a "bag of bones."
Although many joints can be involved, the knee and the ankle are most often affected.
Distribution
===PAGE:444===
depends largely on the underlying disease. Thus, tabes dorsalis affects the knee and hip, and diabetes
mellitus affects the foot and ankle. Syringomyelia commonly affects the spine and upper limb joints,
especially the elbow and shoulder. Frequently, only one joint is affected and usually no more than two or
three (except for the small joints of the feet), in an asymmetric distribution.
Infectious arthritis may develop with or without systemic symptoms (eg, fever, malaise), particularly with
diabetes. Structures such as blood vessels, nerves, and the spinal cord can become compressed due to
the tissue overgrowth.
Diagnosis
• X-rays
The diagnosis should be considered in a patient with a predisposing neurologic disorder who develops a
destructive but unexpectedly painless arthropathy, usually several years after the onset of the underlying
neurologic condition. If neurogenic arthropathy is suspected, x-rays should be taken. Diagnosis is
established by characteristic x-ray abnormalities in a patient with a predisposing condition and typical
symptoms and signs.
X-ray abnormalities in early neurogenic arthropathy are often similar to those in osteoarthritis (OA). The
cardinal signs are bone fragmentation, bone destruction, new bone growth, and loss of joint space. There
may also be synovial effusion and joint subluxation. Later, the bones are deformed, and new bone forms
adjacent to the cortex, starting within the joint capsule and often extending up the shaft, particularly in
long bones. Rarely, calcification and ossification occur in the soft tissues. Large, bizarrely shaped
osteophytes may be present at the joint margins or within joints. Large curved (parrot's beak) osteophytes
frequently develop in the spine in the absence of clinical spinal disease.
In its early stages, neurogenic arthropathy can simulate OA. However, neurogenic arthropathy progresses
more rapidly than OA and frequently causes proportionately less pain.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Sometimes surgery
Early diagnosis of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic fractures facilitates early treatment;
immobilization (with splints, special boots, or calipers) protects the joint from further injury, possibly
stopping disease evolution. Prevention of neurogenic arthropathy may even be possible in a patient at
risk.
Treatment of the underlying neurologic condition may slow progression of the arthropathy and, if joint
destruction is still in the early stages, partially reverse the process. For a grossly disorganized joint,
arthrodesis using internal fixation, compression, and an adequate bone graft may be successful. For
grossly disorganized hip and knee joints, if neurogenic arthropathy is not expected to be progressive,
good results can be obtained with total hip and knee replacements. However, loosening and dislocation
of the prosthesis are major hazards.
===PAGE:445===
Chapter 36. Crystal-Induced Arthritides
Introduction
Arthritis can result from intra-articular deposition of crystals: monosodium urate, Ca pyrophosphate
dihydrate, basic Ca phosphate (apatite), and, rarely, others such as Ca oxalate crystals. Diagnosis
requires synovial fluid analysis (. Polarized light microscopy is used to specifically identify
most crystals; basic Ca phosphate crystals are of ultramicroscopic size and require other methods.
Crystals may be engulfed in WBCs or may be extracellular. The presence of crystals does not exclude the
possibility of simultaneous infectious or other inflammatory forms of arthritis.
Gout
Gout is precipitation of monosodium urate crystals into tissue, usually in and around joints,
most often causing recurrent acute or chronic arthritis. Acute arthritis is initially monarticular
and often involves the 1st metatarsophalangeal joint. Symptoms include acute pain,
tenderness, warmth, redness, and swelling. Diagnosis requires identification of crystals in
synovial fluid. Treatment of acute attacks is with anti-inflammatory drugs. The frequency of
attacks can be reduced by regular use of NSAIDs, colchicine, or both and by treating
hyperuricemia with allopurinol or uricosuric drugs.
Gout is more common among men than women. Usually, gout develops during middle age in men and
after menopause in women. Gout is rare in younger people but is often more severe in people who
develop the disorder before age 30. Gout often runs in families.
Pathophysiology
The greater the degree and duration of hyperuricemia, the greater is the likelihood of gout and the more
severe are the symptoms. Urate levels can be elevated because of
• Decreased excretion
• Increased production
• Increased purine intake
Why only some people with elevated serum uric acid (urate) levels develop gout is not known.
Decreased renal excretion
is by far the most common cause of hyperuricemia. It may be hereditary and
also occurs in patients receiving diuretics and in those with diseases that decrease GFR. Ethanol
increases purine catabolism in the liver and increases the formation of lactic acid, which blocks urate
secretion by the renal tubules. Lead poisoning and cyclosporine, usually given to transplant patients,
irreversibly damage renal tubules, leading to urate retention.
Increased production
of urate may be caused by increased nucleoprotein turnover in hematologic
conditions (eg, lymphoma, leukemia, hemolytic anemia) and in conditions with increased rates of cellular
proliferation and cell death (eg, psoriasis, cytotoxic cancer therapy, radiation therapy). Increased urate
production may also occur as a primary hereditary abnormality and in obesity, because urate production
correlates with body surface area. In most cases, the cause is unknown, but a few cases are attributable
to enzyme abnormalities; deficiency of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (complete
deficiency is Lesch-Nyhan syndrome) is a possible cause, as is overactivity of
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase.
Increased intake
of purine-rich foods (eg, liver, kidney, anchovies, asparagus, consomme, herring, meat
gravies and broths, mushrooms, mussels, sardines, sweetbreads) can contribute to hyperuricemia.
However, a strict low-purine diet lowers serum urate by only about 1 mg/dL.
Urate precipitates as needle-shaped monosodium urate (MSU) crystals, which are deposited
===PAGE:446===
extracellularly in avascular tissues (eg, cartilage) or in relatively avascular tissues (eg, tendons, tendon
sheaths, ligaments, walls of bursae) and skin around cooler distal joints and tissues (eg, ears). In severe,
longstanding hyperuricemia, MSU crystals may be deposited in larger central joints and in the
parenchyma of organs such as the kidney. At the acid pH of urine, urate precipitates readily as small
platelike or irregular crystals that may aggregate to form gravel or stones, which may cause obstruction.
Tophi are MSU crystal aggregates that most often develop in joint and cutaneous tissue.
Acute gouty arthritis may be triggered by trauma, medical stress (eg, pneumonia or other infection), and
especially vascular occlusions (eg, stroke or MI), or by surgery, use of thiazide diuretics or drugs with
uricosuric activity (eg, allopurinol), or indulgence in purine-rich food or alcohol. Attacks are often
precipitated by a sudden increase or, more commonly, a sudden decrease in serum urate levels. Why
acute attacks follow some of these precipitating conditions is unknown. Tophi in and around joints can
limit motion and cause deformities, called chronic tophaceous gouty arthritis.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute gouty arthritis usually begins with sudden onset of pain (often nocturnal). The metatarsophalangeal
joint of a great toe is most often involved (podagra), but the instep, ankle, knee, wrist, and elbow are also
common sites. Rarely, the hip, shoulder, sacroiliac, sternoclavicular, or cervical spine joints are involved.
The pain becomes progressively more severe, usually over a few hours, and is often excruciating.
Swelling, warmth, redness, and exquisite tenderness may suggest infection. The overlying skin may
become tense, warm, shiny, and red or purplish. Fever, tachycardia, chills, and malaise sometimes occur.
Coexisting hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and obesity are common.
Course:
The first few attacks usually affect only a single joint and last only a few days. Later attacks may
affect several joints simultaneously or sequentially and persist up to 3 wk if untreated. Subsequent
attacks develop after progressively shorter symptom-free intervals. Eventually, several attacks may occur
each year.
Tophi:
Tophi develop most often in patients with chronic gout, but they can occur in patients who have
never had acute gouty arthritis. They are usually firm yellow or white papules or nodules, single or
multiple. They can develop in
various locations, commonly the fingers, hands, feet, and around the
olecranon or Achilles tendon. Tophi can also develop in the kidneys and other organs and under the skin
on the ears. Patients with osteoarthritic Heberden's nodes may develop tophi in the nodes. This
development occurs most often in elderly women taking diuretics. Normally painless, tophi, especially in
the olecranon bursae, can become acutely inflamed and painful. Tophi may even erupt through the skin,
discharging chalky masses of urate crystals. Tophi may eventually cause deformities.
Chronic gout:
Chronic gouty arthritis can cause pain, deformity, and limited joint motion. Inflammation
can be flaring in some joints while subsiding in others. About 20% of patients with gout develop
urolithiasis with uric acid stones or Ca oxalate stones. Complications include obstruction and infection,
with secondary tubulointerstitial disease. Untreated progressive renal dysfunction, most often related to
coexisting hypertension or, less often, some other cause of nephropathy, further impairs excretion of
urate, accelerating crystal deposition in tissues.
Cardiovascular disease and the metabolic syndrome are common among patients with gout.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Synovial fluid analysis
Gout should be suspected in patients with acute monarticular or oligoarthritis, particularly older adults or
those with other risk factors. Podagra and recurrent instep inflammation are particularly suggestive.
Similar symptoms can result from
• Ca pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystal deposition disease ( (however, CPPD generally
===PAGE:447===
attacks larger joints and its clinical course is usually milder)
• Acute rheumatic fever with joint involvement and juvenile RA (however, these disorders occur mostly in
young people, who rarely get gout)
• RA (however, in RA, all affected joints flare and subside together, whereas in gout, inflammation is
usually flaring in some joints while subsiding in others)
• Acute fracture in patients unable to provide a history of injury
• Infectious arthritis (see pp.
and
; differentiation may require synovial fluid analysis)
• Palindromic rheumatism
Palindromic rheumatism is characterized by acute, recurrent attacks of inflammation in or near one or
occasionally several joints with spontaneous resolution; pain and erythema can be as severe as in gout.
Attacks subside spontaneously and completely in 1 to 3 days. Such attacks may herald the onset of RA,
and rheumatoid factor tests can help in differentiation; they are positive in about 50% of patients (these
tests are positive in 10% of gouty patients also).
Synovial fluid analysis:
If acute gouty arthritis is suspected, arthrocentesis and synovial fluid analysis
should be done at the initial presentation. A typical recurrence in a patient with known gout does not
mandate arthrocentesis, but it should be done if there is any question of the diagnosis or if the patient's
risk factors or any clinical characteristics suggest infectious arthritis. Synovial fluid analysis can confirm
the diagnosis by identifying needle-shaped, strongly negatively birefringent urate crystals that are free in
the fluid or engulfed by phagocytes. Synovial fluid during attacks has inflammatory characteristics (see
Table 36-1
), usually 2,000 to 100,000 WBCs/
μ
L, with > 80% polymorphonuclear WBCs. These findings
overlap considerably with infectious arthritis, which must be excluded by Gram stain and culture.
Serum urate level:
An elevated serum urate level supports the diagnosis of gout but is neither specific
nor sensitive; at least 30% of patients have a normal serum urate level during an acute attack. However,
the serum urate level reflects the size of the extracellular miscible urate pool. The level should be
measured on 2 or 3 occasions in patients with newly proven gout to establish a baseline; if elevated (> 7
mg/dL [> 0.41 mmol/L]), 24-h urinary urate excretion can also be measured. Normal 24-h excretion in
people eating a regular diet is about 600 to 900 mg. Quantification of urinary uric acid can indicate
whether hyperuricemia results from impaired excretion or increased production and help guide any serum
urate-lowering therapy. Patients with elevated urine excretion of urate are at increased risk of urolithiasis.
X-rays:
X-rays of the affected joint may be taken to look for bony tophi but are probably unnecessary if
the diagnosis has been established by synovial fluid analysis. In CPPD, radiopaque deposits are present
in fibrocartilage, hyaline articular cartilage (particularly the knee), or both.
Diagnosis of chronic gouty arthritis:
Chronic gouty arthritis should be suspected in patients with
persistent joint disease or subcutaneous
[Table 36-1.
Microscopic Examination of Crystals in Joints]
or bony tophi. Plain x-rays of the 1st metatarsophalangeal joint or other affected joint may be useful.
These x-rays may show punched-out lesions of subchondral bone with overhanging bony margins, most
commonly in the 1st metatarsophalangeal joint; lesions must be ≥ 5 mm in diameter to be visible on x-ray.
Bone lesions are not specific or diagnostic but nearly always precede the appearance of subcutaneous
tophi.
Prognosis
With early diagnosis, therapy enables most patients to live a normal life. For many patients with advanced
disease, aggressive lowering of the serum urate level can resolve tophi and improve joint function. Gout
===PAGE:448===
is generally more severe in patients whose initial symptoms appear before age 30. The metabolic
syndrome and cardiovascular disease probably increase mortality in patients with gout.
Some patients do not improve sufficiently with treatment. The usual reasons include nonadherence,
alcoholism, and undertreatment by physicians.
Treatment
• Termination of an acute attack with NSAIDs or corticosteroids
• Prevention of recurrent acute attacks with daily colchicine or an NSAID
• Prevention of further deposition of MSU crystals and resolution of existing tophi by lowering the serum
urate level
• Treatment of coexisting hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and obesity
Treatment of acute attacks: NSAIDs
are effective in treating acute attacks and are generally well
tolerated. However, they can still cause adverse effects, including GI upset, hyperkalemia, increases in
creatinine, and fluid retention. Elderly and dehydrated patients are at particular risk, especially if there is
a history of renal disease. Virtually any NSAID used in anti-inflammatory (high) doses is effective and is
likely to exert an analgesic effect in a few hours (see
Table 35-2
. Treatment should be continued for several days after the pain and signs of
inflammation have resolved to prevent relapse.
Oral colchicine
, a traditional therapy, often produces a dramatic response if begun soon after the onset
of symptoms. Joint pain generally begins to subside after 12 to 24 h of treatment and ceases within 3 to 7
days. One regimen is colchicine 0.6 mg po q 1 h until symptoms abate to a maximum total dose of 4 to 5
mg or until diarrhea or vomiting occurs. However, diarrhea, sometimes severe, develops in up to 80% of
patients given this regimen of oral colchicine for an acute attack. If treatment is started very early,
regimens such as 0.6 to 1.2 mg bid to tid for 1 to 2 days are better tolerated and may be effective. If
colchicine is tolerated, 0.6 to 1.2 mg once/day can be continued as the attack subsides.
IV colchicine
is much less likely to cause GI symptoms and provides an alternative, particularly for
postoperative patients. Colchicine 1 mg is diluted with 0.9% saline to 20 mL and injected slowly (over 2 to
5 min); a second 1-mg dose can be given in 12 h if needed; no more than 2 mg is given in 24 h (and no
more than 4 mg over 7 days).
IV colchicine should not be given to patients with renal or liver disease
or those receiving prophylactic
oral colchicine, because severe bone marrow suppression, shock, and
death may occur.
IV colchicine is also locally irritating, particularly if extravasated. Although effective and
perhaps the option of choice in certain specific situations, IV colchicine should only be used with careful
adherence to prescribing indications and contraindications.
Corticosteroids
are sometimes used to treat acute attacks; however, this use is controversial because
inflammation may continue while symptoms are masked. Aspiration of affected joints, followed by
instillation of corticosteroid ester crystal suspension, is very effective, particularly for monarticular
symptoms; prednisolone tebutate 4 to 40 mg or prednisolone acetate 5 to 25 mg can be used, with dose
depending on the size of the affected joint. Oral prednisone (about 40 mg once/day), IM or IV
corticosteroids, or single-dose ACTH 80 U IM is also very effective, particularly if multiple joints are
involved. As with NSAID therapy, corticosteroids should be continued until after the attack fully resolves to
prevent relapse.
In addition to NSAIDs or corticosteroids, supplementary analgesics, rest, ice application, and splinting of
the inflamed joint may be helpful. Because lowering the serum urate level during an attack prolongs the
attack or predisposes to recurrence, drugs that lower the serum urate level should not be initiated until
acute symptoms have been completely controlled.
Prevention of recurrent attacks:
The frequency of acute attacks is reduced by taking one to two 0.6mg tablets of colchicine daily (depending on tolerance and severity). An extra two or three 0.6-mg tablets
===PAGE:449===
of colchicine taken at the first suggestion of an attack may abort flares. A (reversible) neuropathy or
myopathy can develop during chronic colchicine ingestion. This condition may occur in patients with renal
insufficiency, in patients also receiving a statin or macrolide, or in patients with none of these risk factors.
Attack frequency can also be decreased with daily low-dose NSAIDs.
Lowering the serum urate level:
Colchicine, NSAIDs, and corticosteroids do not retard the progressive
joint damage caused by tophi. Such damage can be prevented and, if present, reversed with uratelowering drugs. Tophaceous deposits are resorbed by lowering serum urate. Lowering serum urate may
also decrease the frequency of acute arthritic attacks. This decrease is accomplished by
• Blocking urate production with allopurinol
• Increasing urate excretion with a uricosuric drug
• Using both types of drugs together in severe tophaceous gout
Uricase can also be given but is not yet routinely used. Uricase is an enzyme that converts urate to
allantoin, which is more soluble. IV uricase transiently lowers serum urate by a large amount.
Hypouricemic therapy is indicated for patients with
• Tophaceous deposits
• Frequent or disabling attacks of gouty arthritis (eg, more than 2 attacks/yr or very severe attacks)
despite prophylactic colchicine, an NSAID, or both
• Gout with persistent serum urate ≥ 9 mg/dL
• Urolithiasis
• Multiple comorbidities (eg, peptic ulcer disease, chronic kidney disease) that are relative
contraindications to the drugs used to treat acute attacks (NSAIDs or corticosteroids)
Hyperuricemia is not usually treated in the absence of gout.
If the goal of hypouricemic therapy is to dissolve tophi, the serum urate level should be lowered to 4.5
mg/dL (0.26 mmol/L), the saturation level at the normal temperature (31° C) of the bunion joint, or even
lower. If tophi do not need to be dissolved, a level of 5 to 6 mg/dL (0.30 to 0.36 mmol/L), which is below
the level of saturation (> 7.0 mg/dL [> 0.41 mmol/L] at normal core body temperature and pH), is
acceptable. These target levels should be maintained indefinitely. Low levels are often difficult to
maintain.
Drugs are effective in lowering serum urate; dietary restriction of purines is less effective, but high intake
of high-purine food and alcohol (beer in particular) should be avoided. Carbohydrate restriction and
weight loss can lower serum urate in patients with insulin resistance because high insulin levels suppress
urate excretion. Because acute attacks tend to develop during the first months of hypouricemic therapy,
such therapy should be started in conjunction with once or twice daily colchicine or NSAIDs and during a
symptom-free period. Resolution of tophi may take many months even with maintenance of serum urate
at low levels. Serum urate should be measured periodically, usually monthly while determining required
drug dosage and then yearly to confirm the effectiveness of therapy.
Allopurinol
, which inhibits urate synthesis, is the most commonly prescribed hypouricemic therapy. It is
especially helpful in treating patients who repeatedly pass uric acid or Ca oxalate stones or who have
severe renal dysfunction. Uric acid stones or gravel
may dissolve during allopurinol treatment. Treatment
begins with 100 mg po once/day and can be increased up to 800 mg po once/day, or even higher, to
achieve target urate levels; however, the dose must be decreased in patients with renal insufficiency. The
most common daily dose is 300 mg. Adverse effects include mild GI distress and skin rash, which can be
a harbinger of Stevens-Johnson syndrome, life-threatening hepatitis, vasculitis, or leukopenia. Adverse
===PAGE:450===
effects are more common among patients with renal dysfunction.
Uricosuric therapy
is preferred to allopurinol as initial therapy for patients ≤ 60 yr with normal renal
function, no history of urolithiasis, and decreased renal urate excretion. Probenecid or sulfinpyrazone can
be used. Probenecid treatment begins with 250 mg po bid, with doses increased as needed, to a
maximum of 1 g po tid. Sulfinpyrazone treatment begins with 50 to 100 mg po bid, with doses increased
as needed, to a maximum of 100 mg po qid. Sulfinpyrazone is more potent than probenecid but is more
toxic. Salicylates at low doses antagonize both drugs and can increase urate levels. Low doses may
worsen hyperuricemia, but a therapeutic trial of a cardioprotective dose while monitoring urate levels may
be indicated for patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease. Acetaminophen provides comparable
analgesia without interfering with drug efficacy.
Other treatments:
Fluid intake ≥ 3 L/day is desirable for all patients, especially those who chronically
pass urate gravel or stones. Alkalinization of urine (with K citrate 20 to 40 mEq po bid or acetazolamide
500 mg po at bedtime) is also occasionally effective for patients with persistent uric acid urolithiasis
despite hypouricemic therapy and adequate hydration. However, excessive urine alkalinization may cause
deposition of Ca oxalate crystals. Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy may be needed to disintegrate
renal stones. Large tophi in areas with healthy skin may be removed surgically; all others should slowly
resolve under adequate hypouricemic therapy. Losartan, which has uricosuric effects, can be considered
as an alternative to thiazide diuretics.
Asymptomatic Hyperuricemia
Asymptomatic hyperuricemia is elevation of serum urate > 7 mg/dL (> 0.42 mmol/L) in the absence of
clinical gout. Generally, treatment is not required. However, patients with overexcretion of urate who are
at risk of urolithiasis may receive allopurinol.
Calcium Pyrophosphate Dihydrate Crystal Deposition Disease
(Pseudogout)
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystal deposition disease involves intra-articular
and/or extra-articular deposition of CPPD crystals. Manifestations are protean and may be
minimal or include intermittent attacks of acute arthritis and a degenerative arthropathy that is
often severe. Diagnosis requires identification of CPPD crystals in synovial fluid. Treatment is
with intra-articular corticosteroids or oral NSAIDs or colchicine.
CPPD crystal deposition (chondrocalcinosis), whether symptomatic and asymptomatic, becomes more
common with age.
The incidence of radiologic (usually asymptomatic) chondrocalcinosis in patients aged 70 is about 3%,
reaching nearly 50% in patients aged 90. Asymptomatic chondrocalcinosis is common in the knee, hip,
anulus fibrosus, and symphysis pubis. Men and women are affected equally.
Etiology
The cause is unknown. Frequent association with other conditions, such as trauma (including surgery),
amyloidosis, myxedema, hypomagnesemia, hyperparathyroidism, gout, hemochromatosis, and old age,
suggests that CPPD crystal deposits are secondary to degenerative or metabolic changes in the affected
tissues. Some cases are familial, usually transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern, with complete
penetration by age 40.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute, subacute, or chronic arthritis can occur, usually in the knee or other large peripheral joints, which
can mimic many other forms of arthritis. Attacks are sometimes similar to gout but are usually less severe.
There may be no symptoms between attacks or continuous low-grade symptoms in multiple joints, similar
to RA or osteoarthritis. These patterns tend to persist for life.
===PAGE:451===
Diagnosis
• Synovial fluid analysis
• Identification of crystals microscopically
CPPD crystal deposition disease should be suspected in older patients with arthritis, particularly
inflammatory arthritis. Diagnosis is established by identifying rhomboid or rod-shaped, weakly positively
birefringent crystals on polarized light microscopy of synovial fluid (see
Table 36-1
). Coincident infectious
arthritis must be ruled out by Gram stain and culture. X-rays are indicated if synovial fluid cannot be
obtained for analysis; findings of multiple linear or punctate calcification in articular cartilage, especially
fibrocartilages, support the diagnosis but do not exclude gout or infection.
Prognosis
The prognosis for individual attacks is usually excellent. However, chronic arthritis can occur, and severe
destructive arthropathy resembling neuropathic (Charcot's) joints occasionally occurs.
Treatment
• Intra-articular corticosteroids
• NSAIDs
• Colchicine maintenance
Symptoms of acute synovial effusion abate with synovial fluid drainage and instillation of a
microcrystalline corticosteroid ester suspension into the joint space (eg, 40 mg prednisolone acetate or
prednisolone tertiary butylacetate into a knee). Indomethacin, naproxen, or another NSAID given at antiinflammatory doses (see
Table 35-2
 often stops acute attacks promptly. Colchicine 0.6 mg po
once/day or bid may decrease the number of acute attacks.
Basic Calcium Phosphate and Calcium Oxalate Crystal Deposition Diseases
Basic Ca phosphate (apatite) and Ca oxalate crystal disorders tend to cause clinical manifestations
similar to other crystal-induced arthritides.
Basic Ca phosphate crystal deposition disease:
Most pathologic calcifications throughout the body
contain mixtures of carbonate-substituted hydroxyapatite and octacalcium phosphate. Because these
ultramicroscopic crystals are nonacidic Ca phosphates, the term basic Ca phosphate (BCP) is much more
precise than apatite. These ultramicroscopic crystals occur in snowball-like clumps in rheumatic
conditions (eg, calcific tendinitis, calcific periarthritis, some cases of progressive systemic sclerosis and
dermatomyositis). They also occur in joint fluids of patients with all degenerative arthropathies sufficiently
advanced to cause joint space narrowing on x-ray.
BCP crystals can destroy joints and can cause severe intra-articular or periarticular inflammation.
Milwaukee shoulder syndrome is one example, a profoundly destructive arthropathy affecting
predominantly elderly women that usually develops in the shoulders and (often) knees.
Acute podagra due to periarticular BCP deposition can mimic gout; it occurs as a discrete syndrome in
young women (less often in young men) and is treated the same as acute gout.
Besides synovial fluid analysis, x-rays should be taken of symptomatic joints. On x-ray, BCP crystals may
be visible as periarticular cloudlike opacities. Definitive assay for BCP crystals in synovial fluid is not
readily available. Clumped crystals can be identified only with transmission electron microscopy. The
clumps are not birefringent under polarized light.
===PAGE:452===
Treatment with oral or IV colchicine, an NSAID, or, if a large joint is involved, intra-articular corticosteroid
ester crystal suspension is helpful. Treatment is the same as that for acute gout (.
Ca oxalate crystal deposition disease:
Ca oxalate crystal deposition is rare. It occurs most often in
azotemic patients receiving hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, particularly those treated with ascorbic
acid (vitamin C), which is metabolized to oxalate. Crystals may deposit in blood vessel walls and skin, as
well as joints. The crystals appear as birefringent bipyramidal structures (see
Table 36-1
). Synovial fluid
may have > 2000 WBC/
μ
L. On x-ray, Ca oxalate crystals are indistinguishable from BCP periarticular
calcifications or Ca pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystal deposits in cartilage. Treatment is the same
as that for CPPD crystals (see above).
===PAGE:453===
Chapter 37. Osteoporosis
Introduction
Osteoporosis is a progressive metabolic bone disease that decreases bone density (bone mass
per unit volume), with deterioration of bone structure. Skeletal weakness leads to fractures with
minor or inapparent trauma, particularly in the thoracic and lumbar spine, wrist, and hip. Acute
or chronic back pain is common. Diagnosis is by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry. Prevention
and treatment involve Ca and vitamin D supplements, exercises to maximize bone and muscle
strength and minimize the risk of falls, and drug therapy to preserve bone mass or stimulate
new bone formation.
Pathophysiology
Normally, bone formation and resorption are closely coupled. Osteoblasts (cells that make the organic
matrix of bone and then mineralize bone) and osteoclasts (cells that resorb bone) are regulated by
parathyroid hormone (PTH), calcitonin, estrogen, vitamin D, various cytokines, and other local factors
such as prostaglandins.
Peak bone mass in men and women occurs by the mid 20s. Blacks reach higher bone mass than whites
and Asians, whereas Hispanics have intermediate values. Men have higher bone mass than women.
Bone mass plateaus for about 10 yr, during which time bone formation approximately equals bone
resorption. After this, bone loss occurs at a rate of about 0.3 to 0.5%/yr. Beginning with menopause, bone
loss accelerates in women to about 3 to 5%/yr for about 5 to 7 yr.
Osteoporotic bone loss affects cortical and trabecular (cancellous) bone. Cortical thickness and the
number and size of trabeculae decrease, resulting in increased porosity. Trabeculae may be disrupted or
entirely absent.
Classification
Osteoporosis can develop as a primary disorder or secondarily due to some other factor.
Primary osteoporosis:
More than 95% of osteoporosis in women and probably about 80% in men is
primary. Most cases occur in postmenopausal women and older men. The terms postmenopausal,
involutional, senile, and age-related osteoporosis have been used to describe primary osteoporosis in
elderly patients. Estrogen deficiency is an important factor in men as well as women. Other contributing
factors may include decreased Ca intake, low vitamin D levels, and secondary hyperparathyroidism.
The major mechanism is increased bone resorption, which results in decreased bone mass and
microarchitectural deterioration, but other mechanisms also contribute not only in primary osteoporosis
but also in the various secondary forms of osteoporosis. The mechanisms of bone loss may involve the
following:
• Local changes in the production of bone-resorbing cytokines, such as increases in cytokines that
stimulate bone resorption
• Impaired formation response during bone remodeling (probably caused by age-related decline in the
number and activity of osteoblasts)
• Other factors such as a decline in local and systemic growth factors
Trabecular bone loss occurs more rapidly than cortical bone loss because trabecular bone is more porous
and bone turnover is high. However, loss of both types contributes to skeletal fragility.
The most common sites for fragility fractures are the distal radius (dorsally displaced fractures), spine
(vertebral compression fractures), femoral neck, and greater trochanter. Other sites include the proximal
humerus and pelvis. Fragility fractures rarely occur in children or young adults with normal gonadal
===PAGE:454===
function and no detectable secondary cause. This condition is called idiopathic osteoporosis.
Secondary osteoporosis:
Secondary osteoporosis accounts for < 5% of osteoporosis cases in women
but probably more in men. The causes (see
Table 37-1
) may also aggravate bone loss and increase fracture risk in patients with primary
osteoporosis.
Risk Factors
Because stress, including weight bearing, is necessary for bone growth, immobilization or extended
sedentary periods result in bone loss. Being thin predisposes to decreased bone mass. Insufficient
dietary intake of Ca, P, and vitamin D predisposes to bone loss, as does endogenous acidosis (eg, highprotein diets). Cigarette smoking and excessive caffeine or alcohol use also adversely affect bone mass.
Whites and Asians are at higher risk. A family history of osteoporosis also increases risk. Other risk
factors (eg, decreasing
[Table 37-1.
Causes of Secondary Osteoporosis]
amounts of sex hormones) predispose to specific types of osteoporosis. Patients who have had one
fragility fracture are at increased risk of having other clinical (symptomatic) fractures as well as clinically
asymptomatic vertebral compression fractures.
Symptoms and Signs
Most of the chronic pain typical of osteoporosis results from fractures, which may develop after minimal,
inapparent, or no trauma. Patients may be asymptomatic for years, until fractures begin to occur.
Eventually, patients often develop pain in the bones or muscles, particularly of the back. Vertebral
compression fractures are common, usually in weight-bearing vertebrae (T6 and below). The pain begins
acutely, usually does not radiate, is aggravated by weight bearing, may cause local tenderness, and
generally begins to subside in 1 wk. However, residual pain may last for months or be constant.
Multiple thoracic compression fractures eventually cause dorsal kyphosis, with exaggerated cervical
lordosis (dowager's hump). Abnormal stress on the spinal muscles and ligaments may cause chronic, dull,
aching pain, particularly in the lower back. Fractures can develop at other sites, commonly the hip or
wrist, usually from falls.
Diagnosis
• Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)
Osteoporosis should be suspected in patients who sustain fractures after only mild or trivial trauma; older
adults, particularly those with risk factors and unexplained back pain; patients with decreased bone
density that is incidentally noted on imaging studies; and patients at risk of secondary osteoporosis. If
imaging studies have been done or are necessary to evaluate symptoms (eg, back pain), osteoporosis
may be obvious. However, imaging studies are often equivocal, and the diagnosis should be established
by bone density measurement.
Plain x-rays:
Bones show decreased radiodensity and loss of trabecular structure, but not until about
30% of bone has been lost. A loss of horizontally oriented trabeculae increases the prominence of the
cortical end plates and of vertically oriented, weight-bearing trabeculae. Loss of height and increased
biconcavity characterize vertebral compression fractures. Thoracic vertebral fractures may cause anterior
wedging. In long bones, although the cortices may be thin, the periosteal surface remains smooth.
Vertebral fractures at T4 or above suggest cancer rather than osteoporosis.
Corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis is likely to cause rib fractures and exuberant callus formation at sites
of healing fractures. Osteomalacia may cause abnormalities on imaging tests similar to those of
osteoporosis (see
Sidebar 37-1
). Hyperparathyroidism can be differentiated when it causes subperiosteal
resorption or cystic bone lesions, but these are uncommon.
===PAGE:455===
Bone density measurement:
DEXA is used to measure bone density. DEXA is diagnostic for
osteoporosis, predicts the risk of fracture, and can be used to follow treatment response. Bone density of
the lumbar spine, hip, distal radius or ulna, or the entire body can be measured. (Quantitative CT
scanning can produce similar measurements in the spine or hip.) Usually, the lumbar spine, total proximal
femur, or femoral neck is measured. DEXA results are reported as T scores. A T score corresponds to the
number of standard deviations by which bone density differs from a healthy, young person of the same
sex and race. A DEXA result of > 1 is defined as osteopenia and suggests an increased risk of
osteoporosis; > 2.5 is diagnostic for osteoporosis.
If DEXA scanning of the central skeleton is unavailable, portable, less expensive systems such as
peripheral DEXA or quantitative ultrasonography of the heel can be used. However, monitoring the
response to treatment
with serial measurements of bone density should be done only with central DEXA
scanning.
Sidebar 37-1 Osteopenia: Differentiating Osteoporosis and Osteomalacia
Osteopenia is decreased bone mass. Two metabolic bone diseases decrease bone mass: osteoporosis
and osteomalacia. In osteoporosis, bone mass decreases, but the ratio of bone mineral to bone matrix is
normal. In osteomalacia, the ratio of bone mineral to bone matrix is low.
Osteoporosis results from a combination of low peak bone mass, increased bone resorption, and
impaired bone formation. Osteomalacia is due to impaired mineralization, usually because of severe
vitamin D deficiency or abnormal vitamin D metabolism (. Osteoporosis is much more common
than osteomalacia in the US. The 2 disorders may coexist, and their clinical expression is similar;
moreover, mild to moderate vitamin D deficiency can occur in osteoporosis.
Current central DEXA systems can also assess vertebral deformities in the lower thoracic and lumbar
spine, a procedure termed vertebral fracture analysis (VFA). Vertebral deformities, even those clinically
silent, may indicate increased risk of future fractures. VFA is more likely to be useful in patients with loss
of ≥ 3 cm in height.
Other testing:
Once osteoporosis is diagnosed, patients should be checked for causes of secondary
osteoporosis. Serum Ca should be measured to rule out asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism. PTH levels
may be increased in patients with decreased Ca absorption or hypercalciuria. Other tests such as thyroidstimulating hormone or free thyroxine to check for hyperthyroidism, vitamin D levels, measurements of
urinary free cortisol, and blood counts and other tests to rule out cancer, especially myeloma (eg, serum
protein electrophoresis), should be considered depending on the clinical findings. Serum alkaline
phosphatase is usually normal but may be elevated by recent fracture.
Patients with weight loss should be screened for GI disorders as well as cancer. Bone biopsy is reserved
for unusual cases (eg, young patients with pathologic fractures and no apparent cause). Levels of serum
or urine N-telopeptide crosslinks (NTX) or free deoxypyridinoline (DPYR) may reflect increased
breakdown of collagen. These tests are not sufficiently accurate for routine clinical use but may be used
to assess the effectiveness of therapy.
Screening
DEXA screening is recommended for all women > 65. Bone density should also be measured in women
between 50 and 65 who have risk factors, including a family history of osteoporosis, a history of fragility
fractures, and low body weight. Screening is also recommended for both men and women who have had
fragility fractures, even at younger ages.
Treatment
• Risk factor modification
===PAGE:456===
• Ca and vitamin D supplements
• Bisphosphonates or sometimes other antiresorptive drugs
The goals of treatment are to preserve bone mass, prevent fractures, decrease pain, and maintain
function.
Preserving bone mass:
The rate of bone loss can be slowed with drugs and, when possible,
modification of risk factors. Ca and vitamin D intake and physical activity must be adequate for drug
treatment to be effective.
Risk factor modification can include maintaining adequate body weight, increasing weight-bearing
exercise, minimizing caffeine and alcohol intake, and stopping smoking. The optimal amount of weightbearing exercise is not established, but an average of 30 min/day is recommended. A physical therapist
can develop a safe exercise program.
All men and women should consume at least 1000 mg of elemental Ca daily. An intake of 1200 to 1500
mg/day is recommended for postmenopausal women and older men and for periods of increased
requirements, such as pubertal growth, pregnancy, and lactation. Diet alone is rarely adequate; Ca
supplements are needed, most commonly as Ca carbonate or Ca citrate. Supplements differ in their
elemental Ca concentration. Ca citrate is better absorbed in patients with achlorhydria, but both are well
absorbed when taken with meals. Ca should be taken in divided doses of 500 to 600 mg bid or tid.
Vitamin D in doses of 800 U once/day is generally recommended, but up to 2000 U/day is safe and may
be helpful in osteoporotic patients. Patients with vitamin D deficiency may need even higher doses.
Supplemental vitamin D is usually given as cholecalciferol, the natural form of vitamin D, although
ergocalciferol, the synthetic plant derived form, is probably also acceptable.
Bisphosphonates are first-line drug therapy. By inhibiting bone resorption, bisphosphonates preserve
bone mass and can decrease vertebral and hip fractures by 50%. To treat osteoporosis, bisphosphonates
can be given orally. Alendronate can be given at doses of 10 mg po once/day or 70 mg po once/wk,
ibandronate 2.5 mg po once/day or 150 mg once/mo, or risedronate at 5 mg po once/day or 35 mg
once/wk. All increase bone mineral density and decrease risk of at least vertebral fractures. Oral
bisphosphonates must be taken on an empty stomach with a full glass of water, and the patient must
remain upright for ≥ 30 min. They can cause esophageal irritation. Esophageal disorders that delay transit
time and symptoms of upper GI disorders are relative contraindications to oral bisphosphonates. Weekly
or monthly therapy is generally preferred for its greater convenience and probably fewer adverse effects.
Parenteral zolendronate is an alternative to oral bisphosphonates. Doses of 5 mg IV once/year increase
bone mass and decrease risk of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures. Pamidronate can also be given IV
but has not yet been shown to prevent fractures.
Osteonecrosis of the jaw has been associated with use of bisphosphonates; however, this condition is
rare in patients taking oral bisphosphonates. Risk factors include IV bisphosphonate use and cancer.
Bisphosphonates may also be associated with atrial fibrillation, but the mechanism is not clear and there
has been no association with increased cardiovascular mortality.
Salmon calcitonin is less effective than bisphosphonates for treating osteoporosis. The subcutaneous
dose is 100 IU/day or every other day; the nasal spray dose is 200 U/day in alternating nostrils (1 spray).
Salmon calcitonin may provide short-term analgesia after an acute fracture.
Estrogen can preserve bone density and prevent fractures. Most effective if started within 4 to 6 yr of
menopause, estrogen may slow bone loss and possibly reduce fractures even when started much later. It
is usually given as conjugated estrogen 0.625 to 1.25 mg po once/day. However, 0.3 mg po once/day may
be as effective. Use of estrogen increases the risk of thromboembolism and endometrial cancer and may
increase the risk of breast cancer. The risk of endometrial cancer can be reduced in women with an intact
uterus by taking a progestin with estrogen (. However, taking a combination of a progestin
===PAGE:457===
and estrogen increases the risk of breast cancer, coronary artery disease, stroke, and biliary disease.
Raloxifene is a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) that may be appropriate for treatment of
osteoporosis in women who cannot take bisphosphonates. It reduces vertebral fractures by about 50%
but has not been shown to reduce nonvertebral fractures. Raloxifene does not stimulate the uterus and
antagonizes estrogen effects in the breast, probably reducing the risk of breast cancer.
PTH, which stimulates new bone formation, is generally reserved for patients who have the following
characteristics:
• Cannot tolerate antiresorptive drugs or have contraindications to their use
• Fail to respond to antiresorptive drugs, as well as Ca, vitamin D, and exercise, developing new fractures
and loss of bone mineral density
• Possibly have severe osteoporosis (eg, T score < 3.5)
When given daily by injection for an average of 20 mo, synthetic PTH (PTH 1-34; teriparatide) increases
bone mass and reduces risk of fractures.
Preventing fractures:
Many elderly patients are at risk of falls because of poor coordination, poor
vision, muscle weakness, confusion, and use of drugs that cause postural hypotension or alter the
sensorium. Educating patients about the risks of falls and fractures and developing individualized
programs to increase physical stability and attenuate risk can help. Strengthening exercises may increase
stability. Hip pads can reduce the incidence of hip fracture despite continued falls.
Treating pain and maintaining function:
Acute back pain from a vertebral compression fracture should
be treated with orthopedic support, analgesics, and (when muscle spasm is prominent) heat and massage
(. Chronic backache may be relieved by an orthopedic garment and exercises to strengthen
paravertebral muscles. Avoiding heavy lifting can help. Bed rest should be minimized, and consistent,
carefully designed weight-bearing exercise should be encouraged.
In some cases, vertebroplasty, sometimes preceded by kyphoplasty, can relieve severe
pain. In
vertebroplasty, methyl methacrylate is injected into the vertebral body. In kyphoplasty, the vertebral body
is expanded with a balloon. These procedures may reduce deformity in the injected vertebrae but do not
reduce and may even increase the risk of fractures in adjacent vertebrae. Other risks may include rib
fractures, cement leakage, and pulmonary edema or MI.
Prevention
The goals of prevention are to preserve bone mass and prevent fractures. Preventive measures are
indicated in postmenopausal women and older men, patients taking long-term systemic corticosteroids,
and patients at high risk (eg, osteopenia with multiple risk factors or secondary causes).
Preventive measures are similar to treatment measures, including those aimed at preserving bone mass.
Bisphosphonates and other drugs can be given as for treatment of osteoporosis, but alendronate is given
at a reduced dose (5 mg po once/day or 35 mg once/wk). Measures to prevent fractures are also
indicated.
===PAGE:458===
Chapter 38. Paget's Disease of Bone
Introduction
(Osteitis Deformans)
Paget's disease of bone is a chronic disorder of the adult skeleton in which bone turnover is
accelerated in localized areas. Normal matrix is replaced with softened and enlarged bone. The
disease may be asymptomatic or cause gradual onset of bone pain or deformity. Diagnosis is by
x-ray. Treatment includes symptomatic measures and often drugs, usually bisphosphonates.
About 1% of adults in the US > 40 have Paget's disease, with a 3:2 male predominance. Prevalence
increases with aging. However, overall prevalence seems to be decreasing. The disease is most common
in Europe (except Scandinavia), Australia, and New Zealand. It is particularly common in England.
Etiology
Several genetic abnormalities, many affecting osteoclast generation and activity, have been identified.
Mutations of the
Sequestrum 1
gene from chromosome 6 are commonly related to Paget's disease.
Appearance of involved bone on electron microscopy suggests a viral infection, but a viral cause has not
been established.
Pathophysiology
Any bone can be involved. The bones most commonly affected are, in decreasing order, the pelvis, femur,
skull, tibia, vertebrae, clavicle, and humerus.
Bone turnover is accelerated at involved sites. Pagetic lesions are metabolically active and highly
vascular. Excessively active osteoclasts are often large and contain many nuclei. Osteoblastic repair is
also hyperactive, causing coarsely woven, thickened lamellae and trabeculae. This abnormal structure
weakens the bone, despite bone enlargement and heavy calcification.
Complications:
Overgrown bone may compress nerves and other structures passing through small
foramina. Spinal stenosis or spinal cord compression may develop. Osteoarthritis may develop in joints
adjacent to involved bone.
In about 10 to 15% of patients, increased bone formation and Ca requirement leads to secondary
hyperparathyroidism; if this need is not matched by an increase in Ca intake, hypocalcemia may occur.
Hypercalcemia ( occasionally develops in patients who are immobile. It also occurs in patients
with Paget's disease who develop secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Large or numerous lesions may lead to high-output heart failure.
Symptoms and Signs
There are usually no symptoms for a prolonged period. If symptoms occur, they develop insidiously, with
pain, stiffness, fatigue, and bone deformity. Bone pain is aching, deep, and occasionally severe,
sometimes worse at night. Pain also may arise from compression neuropathy or osteoarthritis. If the skull
is involved, there may be headaches and hearing impairment.
Signs may include skull enlargement bitemporally and frontally (frontal bossing); dilated scalp veins;
nerve deafness in one or both ears; angioid streaks in the fundus of the eye; a short kyphotic trunk with
simian
appearance; hobbling gait; and anterolateral angulation (bowing) of the thigh or leg, often with
warmth and tenderness. Deformities may develop from bowing of the long bones or osteoarthritis.
Pathologic fractures may be the presenting manifestation. Sarcomatous degeneration develops in < 1%
and is often suggested by increasingly severe pain.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:459===
Diagnosis
• Plain x-rays
• Serum alkaline phosphatase, Ca, and PO
• Bone scan after the diagnosis is established
Paget's disease should be suspected in patients with the following:
• Unexplained bone pain or deformity
• Suggestive findings on x-ray
• Unexplained elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase on laboratory tests done for other reasons,
particularly if
γ
-glutamyl-transpeptidase (GGT) is normal
• Hypercalcemia that develops during bed rest, particularly among elderly patients
• Bone sarcoma in elderly patients
If Paget's disease is suspected, plain x-rays and serum alkaline phosphatase, Ca, and PO
levels should
be obtained. Confirmation on x-ray is required to establish the diagnosis. Characteristic x-ray findings
include the following:
• Increased bone sclerosis
• Abnormal architecture with coarse cortical trabeculation or cortical thickening
• Bowing
• Bone enlargement
There may be stress microfractures of the tibia or femur.
Characteristic laboratory findings include elevated serum alkaline phosphatase (increased anabolic
activity of bone) but usually normal GGT and serum PO
levels. Serum Ca is usually normal but can
increase because of immobilization or hyperparathyroidism or decrease (often transiently) because of
increased bone synthesis. If alkaline phosphatase is not elevated or it is unclear whether the increased
serum alkaline phosphatase is of bony origin (ie, if GGT is increased in proportion to alkaline
phosphatase), a bone-specific fraction can be measured.
Occasionally, increased catabolic activity of bone, as demonstrated by elevated urine markers of bone
collagen turnover (eg, pyridinoline crosslinks), supplements the findings.
Radionuclide bone scan using technetium-labeled phosphonates should be done at baseline to determine
the extent of bone involvement.
Treatment
• Supportive care for symptoms and complications
• Bisphosphonates
Localized, asymptomatic disease requires no treatment. Symptomatic treatment includes
[Table 38-1.
Drug Therapy for Paget's Disease]
===PAGE:460===
analgesics or NSAIDs for pain. Orthotics help correct abnormal gait caused by bowed lower extremities.
Some patients require orthopedic surgery (eg, hip or knee replacement, decompression of the spinal
cord). Weight bearing should be encouraged, and bed rest should be avoided.
Drug therapy:
Drug therapy suppresses osteoclast activity. It is indicated for the following:
• To prevent or reduce bleeding during orthopedic surgery
• To prevent or retard progression of complications (eg, hearing loss, deformity, osteoarthritis, paraparesis
or paraplegia related to vertebral Paget's disease, or other neurologic deficits, particularly in a poor
surgical candidate)
• To treat pain clearly related to the pagetic process and not to another source (eg, osteoarthritis)
• When serum alkaline phosphatase (of bony origin) is > 2 times the normal level, even in the absence of
symptoms
Although disease progression can be retarded, existing deficits (eg, deformity, osteoarthritis, hearing loss,
neural impingement) are not reversed.
Several bisphosphonates are available and are the drugs of choice (see
Table 38-1
. Synthetic
salmon calcitonin is an alternative to bisphosphonates for patients intolerant of or resistant to them. The
newer bisphosphonates (amino-containing bisphosphonates, eg, zolendronate) seem to provide more
prolonged response.
===PAGE:461===
Chapter 39. Osteonecrosis
Introduction
(Avascular Necrosis; Aseptic Necrosis; Ischemic Necrosis of Bone)
Osteonecrosis (ON) is a focal infarct of bone that may be caused by specific etiologic factors or
may be idiopathic. It can cause pain, limitation of motion, joint collapse, and osteoarthritis.
Diagnosis is by x-rays and MRI. In early stages, surgical procedures may slow or prevent
progression. In later stages, joint replacement may be required for relief of pain and
maintenance of function.
In the US, ON affects about 20,000 new patients annually. The hip (femoral head) is most commonly
affected, followed by the knee and shoulder (humeral head). The wrist and ankle are less often involved.
It is unusual for ON to involve the shoulder or other less commonly affected sites without the hip also
being involved.
Etiology
The most common cause of ON is trauma. Nontraumatic ON affects men more often than women, is
bilateral in > 60% of cases, and occurs primarily in patients between ages 30 and 50.
Traumatic ON:
The most common cause of traumatic ON is a displaced subcapital fracture of the hip
(; ON is uncommon after intertrochanteric fractures. The incidence of ON after hip dislocation
is high without prompt reduction; the sooner reduction occurs, the lower the incidence. Fracture or
dislocation may cause ON by grossly disrupting or compressing nearby blood vessels.
Spontaneous ON of the knee (SPONK) is localized ON of the femoral condyle or tibial plateau in elderly
women (occasionally men). SPONK is thought to be caused by an insufficiency fracture (a type of fragility
fracture caused by normal wear and tear on osteoporotic bone that occurs without direct trauma).
Nontraumatic ON:
Factors causing or contributing to nontraumatic ON are listed in
Table 39-1
. The most common factors are the following:
• Chronic corticosteroid use
• Excessive alcohol consumption
The risk of ON is increased when the dose of prednisone or an equivalent corticosteroid is > 25 mg/day
for several weeks or months, resulting in a cumulative dose usually > 3000 mg. The risk of ON also is
increased when > 3 drinks/day (> 500 mL ethanol/wk) are consumed for several years. Some genetic
factors increase susceptibility to ON. Subtle clotting abnormalities due to deficiencies in protein C, protein
S, or antithrombin III or to anticardiolipin antibodies (see
Chapter 110
) can be detected in a high percentage of
patients with ON. Some disorders that are themselves associated with ON are treated with corticosteroids
(eg, SLE), so it is not clear whether risk is increased because of corticosteroid use or the disorder. About
20% of cases are idiopathic.
[Table 39-1.
Nontraumatic Risk Factors for Osteonecrosis]
ON of the jaw has recently been reported in several patients who have received high-dose IV
bisphosphonate therapy (see
Sidebar 39-1
). Nontraumatic ON of the hip is bilateral in 60% of patients.
Pathophysiology
ON involves the death of osteocytes and bone marrow. Mechanisms of nontraumatic ON may include
embolization by blood clots or lipid droplets, intravascular thrombosis, and extravascular compression.
After the vascular insult, the repair processes attempt to remove necrotic bone and marrow and replace
them with viable tissue. If the infarct is small, particularly if it is not subject to major weight bearing, this
===PAGE:462===
process may succeed. However, in about 80% of patients, the process is not successful and the infarct
gradually collapses. The overlying articular surface becomes flattened and irregular, causing increased
pain and eventually leading to osteoarthritis.
Symptoms and Signs
General symptoms:
Affected areas may remain asymptomatic for weeks to months after the vascular
insult. Usually pain then develops gradually, although it may be acute. With progressive collapse of the
joint, pain increases and is exacerbated by motion and weight bearing and is relieved by rest.
Joint-specific symptoms:
ON of the hip causes groin pain that may radiate down the thigh or into the
buttock. Motion becomes limited, and a limp usually develops. SPONK usually causes sudden knee pain
without preceding trauma. This pain is most often on the medial side of the femoral condyle or tibial
plateau and manifests with tenderness, joint effusion, painful motion, and a limp. ON of the humeral head
often causes less pain and disability than hip and knee involvement. With advanced disease, patients
have pain and decreased motion, although passive range of motion is less affected than active range of
motion.
Sidebar 39-1 Osteonecrosis of the Jaw
Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) has no unanimously accepted definition but is generally held to be an
oral lesion involving bare mandibular or maxillary bone, which usually manifests with pain and purulent
discharge, although it may be asymptomatic. ONJ may occur spontaneously or after dental extraction or
trauma, radiation therapy to the head and neck (osteoradionecrosis), or high-dose IV bisphosphonate
therapy (eg, for cancer treatment). It is not clear whether routine use of oral bisphosphonates for
treatment or prevention of osteoporosis increases risk of ONJ. Currently, otherwise appropriate
bisphosphonate use should not be discouraged. However, it seems reasonable to do any necessary oral
surgery before beginning bisphosphonate therapy and to encourage good oral hygiene while patients are
taking bisphosphonates.
Once established, ONJ is challenging to treat and should be managed by an oral surgeon with
experience treating ONJ. Treatment typically involves limited debridement, antibiotics, and oral rinses.
Surgical resection of the affected area may worsen the condition and should not be the initial treatment.
Diagnosis
• X-rays
• MRI
ON should be suspected in patients with the following:
• Fractures associated with an increased incidence of ON, particularly if pain persists or worsens
• Persistent spontaneous hip, knee, or shoulder pain, particularly if risk factors for ON are present
Plain x-rays should be done initially. They may show no abnormalities for months. The earliest findings
are localized areas of sclerosis and lucency. Later, a subchondral crescent sign may appear. Then, gross
collapse and flattening of the articular surface is seen, followed by advanced degenerative changes.
When x-rays are normal or nondiagnostic, an MRI, which is much more sensitive and more specific,
should be done. Both hips should be imaged. Bone scans are less sensitive and less specific than MRI.
CT is rarely needed, although it may occasionally be of value to detect joint collapse, which does not
appear on plain x-rays.
Laboratory studies are usually normal and of little value in detecting ON. However, they might help detect
===PAGE:463===
an underlying disorder (eg, coagulation defects, hemoglobinopathies, lipid abnormalities).
Treatment
• Symptomatic measures (eg, rest, physical therapy, NSAIDs)
• Surgical decompression or other procedures to stimulate healing
• Hip replacement
Nonsurgical treatments:
Small, asymptomatic lesions may heal spontaneously and may not need
treatment.
Larger lesions, both symptomatic and asymptomatic, have a poor prognosis if untreated, especially when
in the femoral head. Therefore, early treatment to slow or prevent progression and save the joint is
desirable. No completely effective treatment is yet available. Nonsurgical treatments include drugs (eg,
bisphosphonates) and physical modalities (eg, electromagnetic fields and acoustic waves). Drug therapy
and physical modalities have shown promise in limited studies but are not currently in general use.
Surgical treatments:
Surgical treatments are most effective when done before joint collapse. They have
been used most often in treating ON of the hip when the prognosis without treatment is worse than that
for other regions. Core decompression is the procedure most frequently done; one or more cores of bone
are removed from the necrotic region or multiple small tracks or perforations are made in an attempt to
decrease intraosseous pressure and stimulate repair. Core decompression is technically simple, and the
complication rate is very low if the procedure is done correctly. Protected weight bearing is needed for
about 6 wk. Most reports indicate satisfactory or good results in 65% of patients, including those whose
hips have some degree of collapse, and in 80% of patients whose hips have small, early lesions. Other
established procedures include various proximal femoral osteotomies and bone grafting, both
vascularized and nonvascularized. These procedures are technically demanding, require protected
weight bearing for up to 6 mo, and have not been done often in the US. Reports vary as to their
indications and effectiveness. They should be done primarily at selected centers that have the surgical
experience and facilities to achieve optimal results. An approach currently being evaluated is injection of
autologous marrow into the necrotic lesion.
If extensive collapse of the femoral head and degenerative changes in the acetabulum cause sufficient
pain and disability, an arthroplasty usually is the only way to effectively relieve pain and increase range of
motion. The conventional approach is total hip replacement. Good to excellent results are achieved in
95% of total hip and total knee replacements, complication rates are low, and patients resume most
activities of daily living within 3 mo. Most prosthetic hips and knees last > 15 to 20 yr.
Two alternatives under investigation include surface replacement arthroplasty (SRA) and hemi-SRA. SRA,
which can be done instead of total hip replacement, involves the insertion of 2 metal caps, one into the
acetabulum and one onto the femoral head, producing a metal-on-metal articulation. Hemi-SRA involves
placement of a metal cap onto only the femoral head. It is done only if disease is limited to the femoral
head and is considered a temporizing procedure.
ON of the knee and shoulder can be managed nonsurgically more often than ON of the hip. Limited
experience with core decompression has been promising. In advanced stages, partial or total joint
replacement may be indicated.
Prevention
Risk of ON caused by corticosteroids can be minimized by using them only when essential and by giving
them in as low a dose as needed and for as short a duration as possible. To prevent ON caused by
decompression sickness, people should follow accepted rules for decompression when diving and when
working in pressurized environments. Excessive alcohol use and smoking should be discouraged. Various
drugs (eg, anticoagulants, vasodilators, lipid-lowering drugs) are being evaluated for prevention of ON in
patients at high risk.
===PAGE:464===

===PAGE:465===
Chapter 40. Infections of Joints and Bones
Acute Infectious Arthritis
Acute infectious arthritis is a joint infection that evolves over hours or days. The infection
resides in synovial or periarticular tissues and is usually bacterial—in younger adults,
frequently
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
. However, nongonococcal bacterial infections can also occur
and can rapidly destroy joint structures. Symptoms include rapid onset of pain, effusion, and
restriction of both active and passive range of motion, usually within a single joint. Diagnosis
requires synovial fluid analysis and culture. Treatment is IV antibiotics and drainage of pus from
joints.
Acute infectious arthritis may occur in children. About 50% of children with joint infection are < 3 yr.
However, routine childhood vaccination for
Haemophilus influenzae
and
Streptococcus pneumoniae
is
decreasing the incidence in this age group.
Risk factors are listed in
Table 40-1
. Risk is substantially increased in patients with RA and other disorders causing chronic joint
damage, a past history of joint infection, IV drug abuse, or a prosthetic joint (. RA patients are
at particular risk of bacterial arthritis (prevalence 0.3 to 3.0%; annual incidence 0.5%). Most children who
develop infectious arthritis do not have identified risk factors.
Etiology
Infectious organisms reach joints by direct penetration (eg, trauma, surgery, arthrocentesis, bites),
extension from an adjacent infection (eg, osteomyelitis, a soft-tissue abscess, an infected wound), or
hematogenous spread from a remote site of infection.
[Table 40-1.
Risk Factors for Infectious Arthritis]
Common organisms are listed in
Table 40-2
. In adults, most cases result from bacteria and are classified as gonococcal or nongonococcal.
In adults overall,
Staphylococcus aureus
tends to be the most frequent cause of infectious arthritis.
Methicillin resistance has become more common among community isolates of
S. aureus
. In young adults
and adolescents,
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
is the most common cause and results when
N. gonorrhoeae
[Table 40-2.
Organisms that Commonly Cause Acute Infectious Arthritis]
spreads from infected mucosal surfaces (cervix, urethra, rectum, pharynx) via the bloodstream. Affected
patients often have simultaneous genital infections with
Chlamydia trachomatis
(.
Streptococcus
species are also frequent causes, particularly in patients with polyarticular infections.
Pathophysiology
Infecting organisms multiply in the synovial fluid and synovial lining. Some bacteria (eg,
S. aureus
)
produce virulence factors (adhesins), which allow bacteria to penetrate, remain within, and infect joint
tissues. Other bacterial products (eg, endotoxin from gram-negative organisms, cell wall fragments,
exotoxins from gram-positive organisms, immune complexes formed by bacterial antigens and host
antibodies) augment the inflammatory reaction.
PMNs migrate into the joint and phagocytose the infecting organisms. Phagocytosis of bacteria also
results in PMN autolysis with release of lysosomal enzymes into the joint, which damage synovia,
ligaments, and cartilage. Therefore, PMNs are both the major host defense system and the cause of joint
damage. Articular cartilage can be destroyed within hours or days. Inflammatory synovitis may
occasionally persist even after the infection has been eradicated by antibiotics. Particularly in gonococcal
cases, persistent antigen debris from bacteria or infection may alter cartilage, causing it to become
antigenic, and—together with the adjuvant effects of bacterial components—immune-mediated, "sterile"
===PAGE:466===
chronic inflammatory synovitis results.
Symptoms and Signs
Over a few hours to a few days, patients develop moderate to severe joint pain, warmth, tenderness,
effusion, restricted active and passive motion, and sometimes redness. Systemic symptoms may be
minimal or absent. Infants and children may present with limited spontaneous movement of a limb
(pseudoparalysis), irritability, feeding disturbances, and a high, low-grade, or no fever.
Gonococcal arthritis:
Gonococcal arthritis can cause a distinctive dermatitis-polyarthritistenosynovitis
syndrome. Classic manifestations are fever (for 5 to 7 days); shaking chills; multiple skin lesions
(petechiae, papules, pustules, hemorrhagic vesicles or bullae, necrotic lesions) on mucosal surfaces and
on the skin of the trunk, hands, or lower extremities; and migratory arthralgias, arthritis, and tenosynovitis,
which evolves into persistent inflammatory arthritis in one or more joints, most often the small joints of the
hands, wrists, elbows, knees, and ankles, and rarely the axial skeletal joints. Symptoms of the original
mucosal infection (eg, urethritis, cervicitis) may not be present.
Nongonococcal bacterial arthritis:
Nongonococcal bacterial arthritis causes progressive moderate to
severe joint pain that is markedly worsened by movement or palpation. Most infected joints are swollen,
red, and warm. Fever is absent or low grade in up to 50% of patients; 20% of patients report a shaking
chill. Virulent organisms (eg,
S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
) generally cause a more fulminant
arthritis, whereas less virulent organisms (eg, coagulase-negative staphylococci,
Propionibacterium
acnes
) cause a less fulminant arthritis. In 80% of adults, nongonococcal bacterial arthritis is monarticular
and usually occurs in a peripheral joint: knee, hip, shoulder, wrist, ankle, or elbow. In children, ≥ 90% is
monarticular: knee (39%), hip (26%), and ankle (13%). Polyarticular
involvement is somewhat more
common among patients who are immunosuppressed or have an underlying chronic arthritis (eg, RA,
osteoarthritis). In IV drug users and patients with indwelling vascular catheters, axial joints (eg,
sternoclavicular, costochondral, hip, shoulder, vertebral, symphysis pubis, sacroiliac) are often involved.
Infectious arthritis secondary to bite wounds:
Infection due to human, dog, or cat bites usually
develops within 48 h. Rat bites cause systemic symptoms such as fever, rash, and joint pain or true
arthritis with regional adenopathy within about 2 to 10 days.
Viral infectious arthritis:
Viral infectious arthritis sometimes causes symptoms similar to acute
nongonococcal bacterial arthritis and is more likely to be polyarticular than bacterial arthritis.
Borrelia burgdorferi
arthritis:
Patients with
B. burgdorferi
arthritis may have other symptoms of Lyme
disease ( or present only with acute monarthritis or oligoarthritis.
Diagnosis
• Arthrocentesis with synovial fluid examination and culture
• Blood culture
• Sometimes imaging studies
• Often CBC and ESR (or C-reactive protein)
Infectious arthritis is suspected in patients with acute monarticular arthritis and in patients with other
combinations of symptoms characteristic of particular infectious arthritis syndromes (eg, migratory
polyarthritis, tenosynovitis and skin lesions typical of disseminated gonococcal infection; erythema
migrans or other symptoms and signs of Lyme disease—. Even mild monarticular joint
symptoms should arouse suspicion in patients with risk factors (eg, RA), a prosthetic joint, or an extraarticular infection capable of spreading to a joint (eg, genital gonococcal infection, bacteremia, any
anaerobic infection).
General arthritis: Synovial fluid examination
is the cornerstone of diagnosis. Fluid is examined
===PAGE:467===
grossly and sent for cell count and differential, Gram stain, aerobic and anaerobic culture, and crystals.
Foul-smelling synovial fluid suggests anaerobic infection. Fluid from an acutely infected joint usually
reveals a WBC count > 20,000/
μ
L (often > 100,000/
μ
L) consisting of > 95% PMNs. WBC counts tend to
be higher in nongonococcal bacterial than in gonococcal infectious arthritis. WBC counts may also be
lower in early or partially treated infections. Gram stain reveals organisms in only 50 to 75% of joints with
acute bacterial arthritis, most often with staphylococci. If positive, Gram stain is usually relatively specific,
but cultures are definitive. The presence of crystals does not exclude infectious arthritis. Sometimes
synovial fluid analysis cannot differentiate between infectious and other inflammatory synovial fluid. If
differentiation is impossible by clinical means or synovial fluid examination, infectious arthritis is assumed,
pending culture results.
Blood tests
, such as blood cultures, CBC, and ESR (or C-reactive protein), are usually obtained.
However, normal results do not exclude infection. Likewise, WBC count, ESR, or C-reactive protein may
be increased in noninfectious as well as infectious joint inflammation.
Plain x-rays
of the involved joint are not diagnostic of acute infection but can exclude other conditions
under consideration (eg, fractures). Abnormalities in early acute bacterial arthritis are limited to soft-tissue
swelling and signs of synovial effusions. After 10 to 14 days of untreated bacterial infection, destructive
changes of joint space narrowing (reflecting cartilage destruction) and erosions or foci of subchondral
osteomyelitis may appear. Gas visible within the joints suggests infection with
Escherichia coli
or
anaerobes.
MRI
is considered if the joint is not easily accessible for examination and aspiration (eg, an axial joint).
MRI or ultrasonography can identify sites of effusion or abscess that can be aspirated or drained for both
diagnosis and therapy. MRI can provide early suggestion of associated osteomyelitis. Bone scans using
technetium-99m can be falsely negative in infectious arthritis. Also, because they show increased uptake
with increased blood flow in inflamed synovial membranes and in metabolically active bone, they can be
falsely positive in noninfectious inflammatory arthritis. Nuclear imaging and MRI do not distinguish
infection from crystal-induced arthritis.
Gonococcal arthritis:
If gonococcal arthritis is suspected, blood and synovial fluid samples should be
immediately
plated on nonselective chocolate agar, and specimens from the urethra, endocervix, rectum,
and pharynx should be plated on selective Thayer-Martin medium. Genital chlamydial cultures are also
done. Blood cultures are positive in 60 to 75% of cases during the first week and may be the only method
by which to identify the organism; cultures from joints with early tenosynovitis or arthritis are often
negative. Synovial fluid cultures from joints with frank purulent arthritis are usually positive, and
fluid from
skin lesions may be positive. If disseminated gonococcal infection is suspected based on clinical criteria,
it is assumed to be present even if all gonococcal cultures are negative. Clinical response to antibiotics
(anticipated within 5 to 7 days) can help confirm the diagnosis.
Prognosis
Acute nongonococcal bacterial arthritis can destroy articular cartilage, permanently damaging the joint
within hours or days. Gonococcal arthritis does not usually damage joints permanently. Factors that
increase susceptibility to infectious arthritis may also increase disease severity. In patients with RA,
functional outcome is particularly poor, and the mortality rate is increased.
Treatment
• IV antibiotics
• Drainage of pus from infected joints (for acute nongonococcal bacterial arthritis or any septic arthritis
with persistent effusion
Antibiotic therapy:
Initial antibiotic selection is directed at the most likely pathogens. The regimen is
adjusted based on the results of culture and susceptibility testing.
Gonococcal arthritis is treated with ceftriaxone 1 g IV once/day until at least 24 h after symptoms and
===PAGE:468===
signs resolve, followed by cefixime 400 mg po bid for 7 days. Joint drainage and debridement may be
unnecessary. Coexisting genital infection with
C. trachomatis
is also treated, often with doxycycline 100
mg po bid for 7 days, and sexual contacts of the patient are treated as necessary (.
If nongonococcal gram-positive infection is suspected by Gram stain in an adult, the empiric choice is one
of the following: a semisynthetic penicillin (eg, nafcillin 2 g IV q 4 h), a cephalosporin (eg, cefazolin 2 g IV
q 8 h), or vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h (if methicillin resistance is common among local community isolates of
S. aureus
). If gram-negative infection is suspected, empiric treatment includes a parenteral 3rdgeneration cephalosporin with antipseudomonal activity (eg, ceftazidime 2 g IV q 8 h) and, if infection is
severe, an aminoglycoside.
Parenteral antibiotics are continued until clinical improvement is clear (usually 2 to 4 wk), and oral
antibiotics should be given at high doses for another 2 to 6 wk according to the clinical response.
Infections caused by streptococci and
Haemophilus
are usually eradicated after 2 wk of oral antibiotics
after IV treatment. Staphylococcal infections require at least 3 wk and often 6 wk or longer, especially in
patients with prior arthritis.
Other therapies:
In addition to antibiotics, acute nongonococcal bacterial arthritis requires large-bore
needle aspiration of intra-articular pus at least once/day, or tidal irrigation lavage, arthroscopic lavage, or
arthrotomy for debridement. Infected RA joints should generally undergo even earlier and more
aggressive surgical debridement and drainage. For gonococcal arthritis with persistent effusion, pus is
aspirated and drainage may need to be repeated as necessary. Acute bacterial arthritis requires joint
splinting for the first few days to reduce pain, followed by passive and active range-of-motion exercises to
limit contractures, with muscle strengthening as soon as tolerated. NSAIDs can help decrease pain and
inflammation.
Viral arthritis and arthritis secondary to bite wounds:
Viral arthritis is treated supportively. Bite
wounds are treated with antibiotics and surgical drainage as necessary (.
Chronic Infectious Arthritis
Chronic infectious arthritis develops over weeks and is usually caused by mycobacteria, fungi,
or bacteria with low pathogenicity.
Chronic infectious arthritis accounts for 5% of infectious arthritis. It can develop in healthy people, but
patients at increased risk include those with
• RA
• HIV infection
• Immunosuppression (eg, hematologic or other cancers, immunosuppressive drug use)
• Prosthetic joints (
Examples of possible causes are
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, M. marinum, M. kansasii, Candida
sp,
Coccidioides immitis, Histoplasma capsulatum, Cryptococcus neoformans, Blastomyces dermatitidis,
Sporothrix schenckii, Aspergillus fumigatus, Actinomyces israelii
, and
Brucella
sp. The arthritis of Lyme
disease is usually acute but may be chronic and recurrent. Unusual opportunistic organisms are possible
in patients with hematologic cancers or HIV infection or who are taking immunosuppressive drugs. In
chronic infectious arthritis, the synovial membrane can proliferate and can erode articular cartilage and
subchondral bone.
Onset is often indolent, with gradual swelling, mild warmth, minimal or no redness of the joint area, and
aching pain that may be mild. Usually a single joint is involved. A prolonged duration and lack of response
to conventional antibiotics suggest a mycobacterial or fungal cause.
Patients should have fungal and mycobacterial cultures taken of synovial fluid or synovial tissue, as well
===PAGE:469===
as routine studies. Plain x-ray findings may differ from those of acute infectious arthritis in that joint space
is preserved longer, and marginal erosions and bony sclerosis may occur. Mycobacterial and fungal joint
infections require prolonged treatment. Mycobacterial infections are often treated with multiple antibiotics,
guided by sensitivity testing results.
Prosthetic Joint Infectious Arthritis
Prosthetic joints are at risk of acute and chronic infection, which can cause sepsis, morbidity, or
mortality.
Etiology
Infections are more common in prosthetic joints. They are frequently caused by perioperative inoculations
of bacteria into the joint or by postoperative bacteremia resulting from skin infection, pneumonia, dental
procedures, invasive instrumentation, UTI, or possibly falls. They develop within 1 yr of surgery in two
thirds of cases. During the first few months after surgery, the causes are
Staphylococcus aureus
in 50%
of cases, mixed flora in 35%, gram-negative organisms in 10%, and anaerobes in 5%.
Symptoms and Signs
There is a history of a fall within 2 wk of symptom onset in about 25% of patients and of prior surgical
revisions in about 20%. Some patients have had a postoperative wound infection that appeared to
resolve, satisfactory postoperative recovery for many months, and then development of persistent joint
pain at rest and during weight bearing. Symptoms and signs may include pain, swelling, and limited
motion; temperature may be normal.
Diagnosis
• Clinical, microbiologic, pathologic, and radiographic criteria
The diagnosis often uses a combination of clinical, microbiologic, pathologic, and radiographic criteria.
Communication between a sinus tract and the prosthesis may also be considered diagnostic of infection.
Synovial fluid should be sampled for cell count and culture. X-rays may show loosening of the prosthesis
or periosteal reaction but are not diagnostic. Technetium-99m bone scanning and indium-labeled WBC
scanning are more sensitive than plain x-rays but may lack specificity in the immediate postoperative
period. Ultimately, periprosthetic tissue collected at the time of surgery may be sent for culture and
histologic analysis.
Treatment
• Arthrotomy with debridement
• Long-term systemic antibiotic therapy
Treatment must be prolonged and usually involves arthrotomy for prosthesis removal with meticulous
debridement of all cement, abscesses, and devitalized tissues. Debridement is followed by immediate
prosthesis revision or placement of an antibiotic-impregnated spacer and then delayed (2 to 4 mo)
implantation of a new prosthesis using antibiotic-impregnated cement. Long-term systemic antibiotic
therapy is used in either case; empiric therapy is initiated after intraoperative culture is done and usually
combines coverage for methicillin-resistant gram-positive organisms (eg, vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h) and
aerobic gram-negative organisms (eg, piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375 g IV q 6 h or ceftazidime 2 g IV q 8 h)
and is revised based on results of culture and sensitivity testing. Infection develops in 38% of new
implants, whether replaced immediately or after delay.
If patients cannot tolerate surgery, long-term antibiotic therapy alone can be tried. Excision arthroplasty
with or without fusion usually is reserved for patients with uncontrolled infection and insufficient bone
stock.
===PAGE:470===
Prevention
In the absence of other indications (eg, valvular heart disease), patients with prosthetic joints do not need
prophylactic antibiotics before procedures such as dental work and urologic instrumentation. Detailed
recommendations are available at www.aaos.org
.
Osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis is inflammation and destruction of bone caused by bacteria, mycobacteria, or
fungi. Common symptoms are localized bone pain and tenderness with constitutional
symptoms (in acute osteomyelitis) or without constitutional symptoms (in chronic
osteomyelitis). Diagnosis is by imaging studies and cultures. Treatment is with antibiotics and
sometimes surgery.
Etiology
Osteomyelitis is caused by
• Contiguous spread (from infected tissue or an infected prosthetic joint)
• Bloodborne organisms (hematogenous osteomyelitis)
• Open wounds (from contaminated open fractures or bone surgery)
Trauma, ischemia, and foreign bodies predispose to osteomyelitis. Osteomyelitis may form under deep
decubitus ulcers.
About 80% of osteomyelitis results from contiguous spread or from open wounds; it is often polymicrobial.
Staphylococcus aureus
(including both methicillin-sensitive and methicillin-resistant strains) is present in
≥ 50%; other common bacteria include streptococci, gram-negative enteric organisms, and anaerobic
bacteria. Osteomyelitis that results from contiguous spread is common in the feet (in patients with
diabetes or peripheral vascular disease), at sites where bone was penetrated during trauma or surgery, at
sites damaged by radiation therapy, and in bones contiguous to decubitus ulcers, such as the hips and
sacrum. A sinus, gum, or tooth infection may spread to the skull.
Hematogenously spread osteomyelitis usually results from a single organism. In children, gram-positive
bacteria are most common, usually affecting the metaphyses of the tibia, femur, or humerus.
Hematogenously spread osteomyelitis in adults usually affects the vertebrae. Risk factors in adults are
older age, debilitation, hemodialysis, sickle cell disease, and IV drug use. Common infecting organisms
include
S. aureus
(methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
[MRSA] is common) and enteric gram-negative bacteria
(in adults who are older, debilitated, or receiving hemodialysis);
S. aureus
,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
,
and
Serratia
sp (in IV drug users); and
Salmonella
sp (in patients with sickle cell disease). Fungi and
mycobacteria can cause hematogenous osteomyelitis, usually in immunocompromised patients or in
areas of endemic infection with histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, or coccidioidomycosis. The vertebrae are
often involved.
Pathophysiology
Osteomyelitis tends to occlude local blood vessels, which causes bone necrosis and local spread of
infection. Infection may expand through the bone cortex and spread under the periosteum, with formation
of subcutaneous abscesses that may drain spontaneously through the skin. In vertebral osteomyelitis,
paravertebral or epidural abscess can develop.
If treatment of acute osteomyelitis is only partially successful, low-grade chronic osteomyelitis develops.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with acute osteomyelitis of peripheral bones usually experience weight loss, fatigue, fever, and
===PAGE:471===
localized warmth, swelling, erythema, and tenderness.
Vertebral osteomyelitis causes localized back pain and tenderness with paravertebral muscle spasm that
is unresponsive to conservative treatment. Patients are usually afebrile.
Chronic osteomyelitis causes intermittent (months to many years) bone pain, tenderness, and draining
sinuses.
Diagnosis
• ESR or C-reactive protein
• X-rays, MRI, or radioisotopic bone scanning
• Culture of bone, abscess, or both
Acute osteomyelitis is suspected in patients with localized peripheral bone pain, fever, and malaise or with
localized refractory vertebral pain, particularly in patients with recent risk factors for bacteremia. Chronic
osteomyelitis is suspected in patients with persistent localized bone pain, particularly if they have risk
factors.
If osteomyelitis is suspected, CBC and ESR or C-reactive protein, as well as plain x-rays of the affected
bone, are obtained. The WBC count may not be elevated, but the ESR and C-reactive protein usually
are. X-rays become abnormal after 2 to 4 wk, showing periosteal elevation, bone destruction, soft-tissue
swelling, and, in the vertebrae, loss of vertebral body height or narrowing of the adjacent infected
intervertebral disk space and destruction of the end plates above and below the disk.
If x-rays are equivocal or symptoms are acute, CT and MRI are the current imaging techniques of choice
to define abnormalities and reveal abscesses (eg, paravertebral or epidural abscesses). Alternatively, a
radioisotope bone scan with technetium-99m can be done. The bone scan shows abnormalities earlier
than plain x-rays but does not distinguish among infection, fractures, and tumors. A white blood cell scan
using indium-111-labeled cells may help to better identify areas of infection seen on bone scan.
Bacteriologic diagnosis is necessary for optimal therapy of
osteomyelitis; bone biopsy with a needle or
surgical excision and aspiration or debridement of abscesses provides tissue for culture and antibiotic
sensitivity testing. Culture of sinus drainage does not necessarily reveal the bone pathogen. Biopsy and
culture should precede antibiotic therapy unless the patient is in shock or has neurologic dysfunction.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
• Surgery for abscess, constitutional symptoms, potential spinal instability, or much necrotic bone
Antibiotics effective against both gram-positive and gram-negative organisms are given until culture
results and sensitivities are available. Initial antibiotic treatment for acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
should include a penicillinase-resistant semisynthetic penicillin (eg, nafcillin or oxacillin 2 g IV q 4 h) or
vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h (when MRSA is prevalent in a community) and a 3rd- or 4th-generation
cephalosporin (such as ceftazidime 2 g IV q 8 h or cefepime 2 g IV q 12 h). Empiric treatment of chronic
osteomyelitis arising from a contiguous soft-tissue focus, particularly in patients with diabetes, must be
effective against anaerobic organisms in addition to gram-positive and gram-negative aerobes.
Ampicillin/sulbactam 3 g IV q 6 h or piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375 g IV q 6 h is commonly used;
vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h is added when infection is severe or MRSA is prevalent. Antibiotics must be
given parenterally for 4 to 8 wk and tailored to results of appropriate cultures. If any constitutional findings
(eg, fever, malaise, weight loss) persist or if large areas of bone are destroyed, necrotic tissue is debrided
surgically. Surgery may also be needed to drain coexisting paravertebral or epidural abscesses or to
stabilize the spine to prevent injury. Skin or pedicle grafts may be needed to close large surgical defects.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be continued for > 3 wk after surgery. In chronic osteomyelitis, longterm antibiotic therapy may be needed.
===PAGE:472===

===PAGE:473===
Chapter 41. Bursa, Muscle, and Tendon Disorders
Introduction
Often, muscles, bursae, and tendons are injured during sports activities. Injury, overuse, infection, and
occasionally disease can temporarily or permanently damage these structures. Damage can cause pain,
limit control of movement, and reduce range of motion.
Bursitis
Bursitis is acute or chronic inflammation of a bursa. The cause is usually unknown, but trauma,
repetitive or acute, may contribute, as may infection and crystal-induced disease. Symptoms
include pain (particularly with motion or pressure), swelling, and tenderness. Diagnosis is
usually clinical; however, ultrasonography may be needed to evaluate deep bursae. Diagnosis
of infection and crystal-induced disease requires analysis of bursal fluid. Treatment includes
splinting, NSAIDs, sometimes corticosteroid injections, and treatment of the cause.
Bursae are fluid-filled sac-like cavities or potential cavities that are located where friction occurs (eg,
where tendons or muscles pass over bony prominences). Bursae minimize friction between moving parts
and facilitate movement. Some communicate with joints.
Bursitis may occur in the shoulder (subacromial or subdeltoid bursitis), particularly in patients with rotator
cuff tendinitis, which is usually the primary lesion in the shoulder. Other commonly affected bursae
include olecranon (miners' or barfly's elbow), prepatellar (housemaid's knee), suprapatellar,
retrocalcaneal, iliopectineal (iliopsoas), ischial (tailor's or weaver's bottom), greater trochanteric, pes
anserine, and first metatarsal head (bunion) bursae. Occasionally, bursitis causes inflammation in a
communicating joint.
Etiology
Bursitis may be caused by the following:
• Injury
• Chronic overuse
• Inflammatory arthritis (eg, gout, RA)
• Acute or chronic infection (eg, pyogenic organisms, particularly
Staphylococcus aureus
)
Idiopathic and traumatic causes are by far the most common. Acute bursitis may follow unusual exercise
or strain and usually causes bursal effusion. Infection most often affects olecranon and prepatellar
bursae.
Chronic bursitis may develop after previous attacks of bursitis or repeated trauma. The bursal wall is
thickened, with proliferation of its synovial lining; bursal adhesions, villus formation, tags, and chalky
deposits may develop.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute bursitis causes pain, particularly when the bursa is compressed or stretched during motion.
Swelling, sometimes with other signs of inflammation, is common if the bursa is superficial (eg,
prepatellar, olecranon). Swelling may be more prominent than pain in olecranon bursitis. Crystal- or
bacterial-induced bursitis is usually accompanied by erythema, pitting edema, pain, and warmth in the
area over the bursa.
Chronic bursitis may last for several months and may recur frequently. Bouts may last a few days to
several weeks. If inflammation persists near a joint, the joint's range of motion may be limited. Limited
===PAGE:474===
several weeks. If inflammation persists near a joint, the joint's range of motion may be limited. Limited
motion may lead to muscle atrophy.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Ultrasonography or MRI for deep bursitis
• Aspiration for suspected infection or crystal-induced bursitis
Superficial bursitis should be suspected in patients with swelling or signs of inflammation over bursae.
Deep bursitis is suspected in patients with unexplained pain worsened by motion in a location compatible
with bursitis. Usually, bursitis can be diagnosed clinically. Ultrasonography or MRI can help confirm the
diagnosis when deep bursae are not readily accessible for inspection, palpation, or aspiration. These
tests are done to confirm or exclude a suspected diagnosis. These imaging techniques increase the
accuracy of identifying the involved structures.
If bursal swelling is particularly painful, red, or warm or if the olecranon or prepatellar bursa is affected,
infection and crystal-induced disease should be excluded by bursal aspiration. After a local anesthetic is
injected, fluid is withdrawn from the bursa using sterile techniques; analysis includes cell count, Gram
stain and culture, and microscopic search for crystals. Gram stain, although helpful, may not be specific,
and WBC counts in infected bursae are usually lower than those in septic joints. Urate crystals are easily
seen with polarized light, but the apatite crystals typical of calcific tendinitis appear only as shiny chunks
that are not birefringent. X-rays should be taken if bursitis is persistent or if calcification is suspected.
Acute bursitis should be distinguished from hemorrhage into a bursa, which can cause similar
manifestations because blood is inflammatory. Fluid in traumatic bursitis is serosanguineous. Cellulitis can
cause signs of inflammation but does not normally cause bursal effusion; cellulitis overlying the bursa is a
relative contraindication to bursal puncture through the cellulitis, but if septic bursitis is strongly
suspected, aspiration must occasionally be done.
Treatment
• Rest
• High-dose NSAIDs
• Treatment of crystal-induced disease or infection
Crystal-induced disease ( or infection should be treated if present. For infection, choice of
antibiotic is determined by results of Gram stain and culture. Empiric antibiotics effective against
S.
aureus
should be given. Infectious bursitis requires drainage or excision in addition to antibiotics.
Acute nonseptic bursitis is treated with temporary rest or immobilization and high-dose NSAIDs and
sometimes with other analgesics. Voluntary movement should be increased as pain subsides. Pendulum
exercises are helpful for the shoulder joint.
If oral drugs and rest are inadequate, aspiration and intrabursal injection of depot corticosteroids 0.5 to 1
mL (eg, triamcinolone acetonide 40 mg/mL) are the treatment of choice. About 1 mL of local anesthetic
(eg, 2% lidocaine) can be injected before the corticosteroid injection. The same needle is used; it is kept
in place and the syringes are changed. Dose and volume of the corticosteroid may vary according to the
size of the bursa. Infrequently, a flare-up occurs within several hours of injection of a depot corticosteroid;
the flare-up is probably a form of crystal-induced synovitis. It usually lasts ≤ 24 h and responds to cold
compresses plus analgesics. Oral corticosteroids (eg, prednisone) can be used if a local injection is not
feasible.
Chronic bursitis is treated the same as acute bursitis, except that splinting and rest are less likely to help
and range-of-motion exercises are especially important. Rarely, the bursa needs to be excised.
===PAGE:475===
Tendinitis and Tenosynovitis
Tendinitis is inflammation of a tendon, often developing after degeneration (tendinopathy);
tenosynovitis is tendinitis with inflammation of the tendon sheath lining. Symptoms usually
include pain with motion and tenderness with palpation. Chronic deterioration or inflammation
can cause scars that restrict motion. Diagnosis is clinical, sometimes supplemented with
imaging. Treatment includes rest, NSAIDs, and sometimes corticosteroid injections.
Tendinopathy usually results from repeated small tears or degenerative changes (sometimes with Ca
deposit) that occur over years in the tendon.
Tendinitis and tenosynovitis most commonly affect tendons associated with the shoulder (rotator cuff), the
tendon of the long head of the biceps muscle (bicipital tendon), flexor carpi radialis or ulnaris, flexor
digitorum (for infectious flexor tenosynovitis, , popliteus tendon, Achilles tendon (,
and the abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis, which share a common fibrous sheath (the
resulting disorder is de Quervain's syndrome—.
Etiology
The cause of tendinitis is often unknown. It usually occurs in people who are middle-aged or older as the
vascularity of tendons decreases; repetitive microtrauma may contribute. Repeated or extreme trauma
(short of rupture), strain, and excessive or unaccustomed exercise probably also contribute. Some
quinolone antibiotics may increase the risk of tendinopathy and tendon rupture.
Risk of tendinitis may be increased by certain systemic disorders—most commonly RA, systemic
sclerosis, gout, reactive arthritis, and diabetes or, very rarely, amyloidosis or markedly elevated blood
cholesterol levels. In younger adults, particularly women, disseminated gonococcal infection may cause
acute migratory tenosynovitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Affected tendons are usually painful when moved. Occasionally, tendon sheaths become swollen and fluid
accumulates, usually when patients have infection, RA, or gout. Swelling may be visible or only palpable.
Along the tendon, palpation elicits localized tenderness of varying severity.
In systemic sclerosis, the tendon sheath may remain dry, but movement of the tendon in its sheath causes
friction, which can be felt, or heard with a stethoscope.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes imaging
Usually, the diagnosis can be based on symptoms and physical examination, including palpation or
specific maneuvers to assess pain. MRI or ultrasonography may be done to confirm the diagnosis or rule
out other disorders. MRI can detect tendon tears and inflammation (as can ultrasonography).
•
Rotator cuff tendinitis:
This disorder is the most common cause of shoulder pain. Active abduction in
an arc of 40 to 120° and internal rotation cause pain (. Passive abduction causes less
pain. Ca deposits in the tendon just below the acromion are sometimes visible on x-ray.
Ultrasonography or MRI may help with further evaluation and with treatment decisions.
•
Bicipital tendinitis:
Pain in the biceps tendon is aggravated by shoulder flexion or resisted supination
of the forearm. Examiners can elicit tenderness proximally over the bicipital groove of the humerus by
rolling (flipping) the bicipital tendon under their thumb.
===PAGE:476===
•
Volar flexor tenosynovitis
(digital tendinitis): This common musculoskeletal disorder is often
overlooked (. Pain occurs in the palm on the volar aspect of the thumb or other digits and
may radiate distally. Palpation of the tendon and sheath elicits tenderness; swelling and sometimes a
nodule are present. In later stages, the digit may lock when it is flexed, then extend suddenly with a
snap (trigger finger).
•
Gluteus medius tendinitis:
Patients with trochanteric bursitis almost always have gluteus medius
tendinitis. In patients with trochanteric bursitis, palpation over the lateral prominence of the greater
trochanter elicits tenderness. Patients often have a history of chronic pressure on the joint, trauma, a
change in gait (eg, due to osteoarthritis, stroke, or leg-length discrepancy), or inflammation at this site
(eg, in RA).
Treatment
• Rest or immobilization, heat or cold, followed by exercise
• High-dose NSAIDs
• Sometimes corticosteroid injection
Symptoms are relieved by rest or immobilization (splint or sling) of the tendon, application of heat (usually
for chronic inflammation) or cold (usually for acute inflammation), and high-dose NSAIDs (see
Table 35-2
 for 7 to 10 days. Indomethacin or colchicine may be helpful if gout is the cause (see
p.
). After inflammation is controlled, exercises that gradually increase range of motion should be done
several times a day, especially for the shoulder, which can develop contractures rapidly.
Injecting a sustained-release corticosteroid (eg, betamethasone 6 mg/mL, triamcinolone 40 mg/mL,
methylprednisolone 20 to 40 mg/mL) in the tendon sheath may help; injection is usually indicated if pain is
severe or if the problem has been chronic. Injection volume may range from 0.3 mL to 1 mL, depending
on the site. An injection through the same needle of an equal or double volume of local anesthetic (eg, 1
to 2% lidocaine) confirms the diagnosis if pain is relieved immediately. Clinicians should be careful not to
inject the tendon (which can be recognized by marked resistance to injection); doing so may weaken it,
increasing risk of rupture. Patients are advised to rest the injected joint to reduce the slight risk of rupture.
Infrequently, symptoms can worsen for up to 24 h after the injection.
Repeat injections and symptomatic treatment may be required. Rarely, for persistent cases, particularly
rotator cuff tendinitis, surgical exploration with removal of Ca deposits or tendon repair, followed by
graded physical therapy, is needed. Occasionally, patients require surgery to release scars that limit
function or tenosynovectomy to relieve chronic inflammation.
Fibromyalgia
(Myofascial Pain Syndrome; Fibrositis; Fibromyositis)
Fibromyalgia is a common nonarticular disorder of unknown cause characterized by
generalized aching (sometimes severe); widespread tenderness of muscles, areas around
tendon insertions, and adjacent soft tissues; muscle stiffness; fatigue; and poor sleep.
Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment includes exercise, local heat, stress management, drugs to
improve sleep, and analgesics.
In fibromyalgia, any fibromuscular tissues may be involved, especially those of the occiput, neck,
shoulders, thorax, low back, and thighs. There is no specific histologic abnormality. Symptoms and signs
are generalized, in contrast to localized soft-tissue pain and tenderness (myofascial pain syndrome—see
also p.
), which is often related to overuse or microtrauma.
Fibromyalgia is common; it is about 7 times more common among women, usually young or middle-aged
women, but can occur in men, children, and adolescents. Because of the sex difference, it is sometimes
overlooked in men. It sometimes occurs in patients with systemic rheumatic disorders.
===PAGE:477===
The cause is unknown, but disruption of stage 4 sleep may contribute, as can emotional stress. Patients
may tend to be perfectionists. Fibromyalgia may be precipitated by a viral or other systemic infection (eg,
Lyme disease) or a traumatic event.
Symptoms and Signs
Stiffness and pain frequently begin gradually and diffusely and have an achy quality. Symptoms can be
exacerbated by environmental or emotional stress, poor sleep, trauma, or exposure to dampness or cold
or by a physician who implies that the disorder is "all in the head."
Patients tend to be stressed, tense, anxious, fatigued, ambitious, and sometimes depressed. Many
patients also have irritable bowel syndrome symptoms or migraine or tension headaches. Pain may
worsen with fatigue, muscle strain, or overuse. Specific, discrete areas of muscle (tender points) may be
tender when palpated.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
Fibromyalgia is suspected in patients with the following:
• Generalized pain and tenderness, especially if disproportionate to physical findings
• Negative laboratory results despite widespread symptoms
• Fatigue as the predominant symptom
Tests should include ESR or C-reactive protein, CK, and probably tests for hypothyroidism and hepatitis
C (which can cause fatigue and generalized myalgias). The diagnosis is based on clinical criteria,
including tenderness at some of the 18 specified tender points (see
Fig. 41-1
). Most experts no longer require a specific number of tender points to make the diagnosis, as
originally proposed (≥ 11 of 18). Patients with only some of the specified features may still have
fibromyalgia.
[Fig. 41-1.
Diagnosing fibromyalgia.]
To avoid potential pitfalls, clinicians should consider the following:
• Fibromyalgia is often overlooked in men, children, and adolescents.
• Chronic fatigue syndrome ( can cause similar generalized myalgias and fatigue and typically
produces normal laboratory test results.
• Polymyalgia rheumatica ( can cause generalized myalgias, particularly in older adults; it can
be distinguished because it tends to affect proximal muscles selectively and ESR is high.
• In patients with systemic rheumatic disorders, diagnosing fibromyalgia may be difficult. For example,
fibromyalgia may be misinterpreted as an exacerbation of RA or SLE.
Prognosis
Fibromyalgia tends to be chronic but may remit spontaneously if stress decreases. It can also recur at
frequent intervals. Functional prognosis is usually favorable for patients being treated with a
comprehensive, supportive program, although symptoms tend to persist to some degree.
Treatment
===PAGE:478===
• Stretching and aerobic exercise, local heat, and massage
• Stress management
• Tricyclic antidepressants or cyclobenzaprine to improve sleep
• Analgesics
Stretching exercises, aerobic exercises, sufficient sound sleep, local applications of heat, and gentle
massage may provide relief. Overall stress management (eg, deep breathing exercises, meditation,
psychologic support, counseling if necessary) is important.
Exercises to gently stretch the affected muscles should be done daily; stretches should be held for about
30 sec and repeated about 5 times. Aerobic exercise (eg, fast walking, swimming, exercise bicycle) can
lessen symptoms.
Improving sleep is critical. Low-dose oral tricyclic antidepressants at bedtime (eg, amitriptyline 10 to 50
mg, trazodone 50 to 150 mg, doxepin 10 to 25 mg) or the pharmacologically similar cyclobenzaprine 10 to
40 mg may promote deeper sleep and decrease muscle pain. The lowest effective dose should be used.
Drowsiness, dry mouth, and other adverse effects may make some or all of these drugs intolerable,
particularly for the elderly.
Nonopioid analgesics (eg, tramadol, propoxyphene, acetaminophen, NSAIDs) may help some patients but
on average are not effective. Opioids should be avoided. Pregabalin, used as an adjunct to exercise,
measures to improve sleep, and stress management, may help reduce pain.
Rarely, injections of 0.5% bupivacaine or 1% lidocaine 1 to 5 mL are used to treat incapacitating areas of
focal tenderness, but such injections should not be relied on as primary treatment.
Drugs taken by the patient should be reviewed to identify those that may aggravate sleep problems. Such
drugs should be stopped, and future use should be avoided. Anxiety or depression, if present, may
require treatment.
Muscle Cramps
A muscle cramp is a sudden, brief, painful contraction of a muscle or group of muscles.
Cramps (charley horses) can occur in healthy people (usually middle-aged and elderly people),
sometimes during rest, but particularly during or after exercise. Leg cramps can occur during sleep,
causing pain and plantar flexion of the foot and toes.
Tight calf muscles (eg, from lack of stretching, inactivity, or sometimes chronic lower leg edema) are a
common cause of leg cramps. Cramps may also be caused by electrolyte abnormalities (eg,
hypokalemia). Exertional muscle pain from ischemia due to peripheral arterial disease (claudication) may
cause similar calf pain, but this pain is due to inadequate blood flow to muscles and not to a muscle
contraction as with a cramp.
Treatment
• Stretching
If a cramp occurs, stretching the affected muscle often relieves the cramp. For example, for a calf cramp,
the person could use a hand to pull the foot and toes upward (dorsiflexion) or do the runner's stretch.
Prevention
Measures to prevent cramps include the following:
===PAGE:479===
• Not exercising immediately after eating
• Gently stretching the muscles before exercising or going to bed
• Drinking plenty of fluids (particularly beverages that contain potassium) after exercise
• Not consuming stimulants (eg, caffeine, nicotine, ephedrine, pseudoephedrine)
The runner's stretch is most useful. A person stands with one leg forward and bent at the knee and the
other leg behind and the knee straight—a lunge position. The hands can be placed on the wall for
balance. Both heels remain on the floor. The knee of the front leg is bent further until a stretch is felt
along the back of the other leg. The greater the distance between the two feet and the more the front
knee is bent, the greater the stretch. The stretch is held for 30 sec and repeated 5 times. The set of
stretches is repeated on the other side.
Most of the drugs prescribed to prevent cramps (eg, quinine, magnesium, benzodiazepines) have no
demonstrated efficacy and are not recommended. Mexiletine sometimes helps, but whether using it is
worth the risk of adverse effects is unclear. These adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, heartburn,
dizziness, and tremor. Ca supplements are safe and have few adverse effects but have not proved
effective.
===PAGE:480===
Chapter 42. Neck and Back Pain
Introduction
Neck pain and back pain are among the most common reasons for physician visits. This discussion
covers neck pain involving the posterior neck (not pain limited to the anterior neck) and does not cover
most major traumatic injuries (eg, fractures, dislocations, subluxations).
Pathophysiology
Depending on the cause, neck or back pain may be accompanied by neurologic symptoms.
If a nerve root is affected, pain may radiate distally along the distribution of that root (called radicular pain
or, in the low back, sciatica). Strength, sensation, and reflexes of the area innervated by that root may be
impaired.
If the spinal cord is affected, strength, sensation, and reflexes may be impaired at the affected spinal cord
level and all levels below (called segmental neurologic deficits).
If the cauda equina is affected, segmental deficits develop in the lumbosacral region, typically with loss of
bowel and bladder function, loss of perianal sensation, erectile dysfunction, urinary retention, and loss of
rectal tone and sphincter (eg, bulbocavernosus, anal wink) reflexes.
Any painful disorder of the spine may also cause reflex tightening (spasm) of paraspinal muscles, which
can be excruciating.
Etiology
Most neck and back pain is caused by disorders of the spine. Fibromyalgia is also a common cause.
Occasionally, pain is referred from extraspinal disorders (particularly vascular, GI, or GU disorders). Some
uncommon causes—spinal and extraspinal—are serious.
Most spinal disorders are mechanical. Only a few involve infection, inflammation, or cancer (considered
nonmechanical).
Common causes:
Most mechanical spine disorders that cause neck or back pain involve a nonspecific
mechanical derangement:
• Muscle strain, ligament sprain, spasm, or a combination
Only about 15% involve specific structural lesions that clearly cause the symptoms, primarily the
following:
• Disk herniation
• Compression fracture
• Lumbar spinal stenosis
• Osteoarthritis
• Spondylolisthesis
In the other mechanical disorders, there are no specific lesions, or the findings (eg, disk bulging or
degeneration, osteophytes, spondylolysis, congenital facet abnormalities) are common among people
without neck or back pain, and thus are questionable as the etiology of pain. However, etiology of back
pain, particularly if mechanical, is often multifactorial, with an underlying disorder exacerbated by fatigue,
physical deconditioning, and sometimes psychosocial stress or psychiatric abnormality. Thus, identifying
===PAGE:481===
a single cause is often difficult or impossible.
Serious uncommon causes:
Serious causes may require timely treatment to prevent disability or death.
Serious
extraspinal
disorders include the following:
• Abdominal aortic aneurysm
• Aortic dissection
• Carotid or vertebral artery dissection
• Acute meningitis
• Angina or MI
• Certain GI disorders (eg, cholecystitis, diverticulitis, diverticular abscess, pancreatitis, penetrating peptic
ulcer, retrocecal appendicitis)
• Certain pelvic disorders (eg, ectopic pregnancy, ovarian cancer, salpingitis)
• Certain pulmonary disorders (eg, pleuritis, pneumonia)
• Certain urinary tract disorders (eg, prostatitis, pyelonephritis)
Serious
spinal
disorders include the following:
• Infections (eg, diskitis, epidural abscess, osteomyelitis)
• Primary tumors (of spinal cord or vertebrae)
• Metastatic vertebral tumors (most often from breasts, lungs, or prostate)
Mechanical spine disorders can be serious if they compress the spinal nerve roots or, particularly, the
spinal cord. Spinal cord compression may result from disorders such as tumors and spinal epidural
abscess or hematoma.
Other uncommon causes:
Neck or back pain can result from many other disorders, such as Paget's
disease of bone, torticollis, thoracic outlet syndrome, temporomandibular joint syndrome, herpes zoster,
and
spondyloarthropathies (ankylosing spondylitis most often, but also enteropathic arthritis, psoriatic
arthritis, reactive arthritis, and undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy).
Evaluation
General:
Because the cause is often multifactorial, a definitive diagnosis cannot be established in many
patients. However, clinicians should determine the following if possible:
• Whether pain has a spinal or extraspinal cause
• Whether the cause is a serious disorder
History: History of present illness
should include quality, onset, duration, severity, location, radiation,
and time course of pain, as well as modifying factors such as rest, activity, changes in position, weight
bearing, and time of day (eg, at night, when awakening). Accompanying symptoms to note include
stiffness, numbness, paresthesias, weakness, urinary retention, and incontinence.
Review of systems
should note symptoms suggesting a cause, including fever and chills (infection);
weight loss and poor appetite (infection or cancer); fatigue, depressive symptoms, and headaches
===PAGE:482===
(multifactorial mechanical back pain); worsening of neck pain during swallowing (esophageal disorders);
anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and change in bowel function or stool (GI disorders); urinary symptoms and
flank pain (urinary tract disorders); cough, dyspnea, and worsening during inspiration (pulmonary
disorders); vaginal bleeding or discharge and pain related to menstrual cycle phase (pelvic disorders).
Past medical history
includes known neck or back disorders (including osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, disk
disorders, recent or remote injury) and surgery, risk factors for back disorders (eg, cancer, osteoporosis),
risk factors for aneurysm (eg, smoking, hypertension), and risk factors for infection (eg,
immunosuppression; IV drug use; recent surgery, penetrating trauma, or bacterial infection).
Physical examination:
Temperature and general appearance are noted. When possible, patients
should be unobtrusively observed as they move into the examination room, undress, and climb onto the
table. If symptoms are exacerbated by psychologic issues, true functional level can be assessed more
accurately when patients are not aware they are being evaluated.
The examination focuses on the spine and the neurologic examination. If no mechanical spinal source of
pain is obvious, patients are checked for sources of referred pain.
In the spinal examination, the back and neck are inspected for any visible deformity, area of erythema, or
vesicular rash. The spine and paravertebral muscles are palpated for tenderness and muscle spasm.
Gross range of motion is tested.
In the neurologic examination, strength and deep tendon reflexes are tested. In patients with neurologic
symptoms, sensation and sacral nerve function (eg, rectal tone, anal wink reflex, bulbocavernosus reflex)
are tested. These tests are among the most reliable physical tests for confirming normal spinal cord
function. Corticospinal tract dysfunction is indicated by the extensor plantar response and Hoffman's sign.
To test for Hoffman's sign, clinicians tap the nail or flick the volar surface of the 3rd finger; if the distal
phalanx of the thumb flexes, the test is positive, usually indicating corticospinal tract dysfunction caused
by stenosis of the cervical cord. Sensory findings are subjective and may be unreliable.
The straight leg raise test helps confirm sciatica. The patient is supine with both knees extended and the
ankles dorsiflexed. The clinician raises the affected leg, keeping the knee extended. If sciatica is present,
10 to 60° of elevation typically causes symptoms. For the crossed straight leg raise test, the unaffected
leg is raised; the test is positive if sciatica occurs in the affected leg. A positive straight leg test is
sensitive but not specific for herniated disk; the crossed straight leg raise test is less sensitive but 90%
specific. The seated straight leg raise test is done while patients are seated with the hip joint flexed at
90°; the lower leg is slowly raised until the knee is fully extended. If sciatica is present, the pain occurs as
the leg is extended.
In the general examination, the lungs are auscultated. The abdomen is checked for tenderness, masses,
and, particularly in patients > 55, a pulsatile mass (which suggests abdominal aortic aneurysm). With a
fist, clinicians percuss the costovertebral angle for tenderness, suggesting pyelonephritis.
Rectal examination, including stool testing for occult blood and, in men, prostate examination, is done. In
women with symptoms suggesting a pelvic disorder or with unexplained fever, pelvic examination is done.
Lower-extremity pulses are checked.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Abdominal aorta that is > 5 cm (particularly if tender) or lower-extremity pulse deficits
• Acute, tearing mid-back pain
• Cancer, diagnosed or suspected
• Duration of pain > 6 wk
===PAGE:483===
• Neurologic deficit
•
Fever
• GI findings such as localized abdominal tenderness, peritonitis, melena, or hematochezia
• Infection risk factors (eg, immunosuppression; IV drug use; recent surgery, penetrating trauma, or
bacterial infection)
• Meningismus
• Severe nocturnal or disabling pain
• Unexplained pain after age 55
• Unexplained weight loss
Interpretation of findings:
Although serious extraspinal disorders (eg, cancers, aortic aneurysms,
epidural abscesses, osteomyelitis) are uncommon causes of back pain, they are not rare, particularly in
high-risk groups.
A spinal cause is more likely (but not definitive) than referred pain from an extraspinal cause when
• Pain is worsened by movement or weight bearing and is relieved by rest or recumbency
• Vertebral or paravertebral tenderness is present
Red flag findings should heighten suspicion of a serious cause (see
Table 42-1
).
Other findings are also helpful. Erythema and tenderness over the spine suggests infection, particularly in
patients with risk factors. Worsening of pain with flexion is consistent with intervertebral disk disease;
worsening with extension suggests spinal stenosis, arthritis affecting the facet joints, or retroperitoneal
inflammation or infiltration (eg, pancreatic or kidney inflammation or tumor). Tenderness over certain
specific trigger points suggests fibromyalgia. Deformities of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and distal
interphalangeal (DIP) finger joints and stiffness that lessens within 30 min after awakening suggest
osteoarthritis. Neck pain that is unrelated to swallowing and is exertional may indicate angina.
Testing:
Usually, if duration of pain is short (< 4 to 6 wk), no testing is required unless red flag findings
are present, patients have had a serious injury (eg, vehicular crash, fall from a height, penetrating
trauma), or evaluation suggests a specific nonmechanical cause (eg, pyelonephritis).
Plain x-rays can identify most osteoporotic fractures and osteoarthritis. However, they do not identify
abnormalities in soft tissue (the most common cause of back and neck pain) or nerve tissue (as occurs in
many serious disorders). Thus, x-rays are usually unnecessary and do not change management.
Sometimes
[Table 42-1.
Interpretation of Red Flag Findings in Patients with Back Pain]
x-rays are done to identify obvious bone abnormalities (eg, those due to infection or tumors) and to avoid
MRI and CT, which are harder to obtain but which are much more accurate and usually necessary.
Testing is guided by findings and suspected cause:
• Neurologic deficits, particularly those consistent with spinal cord compression: MRI or CT myelography,
done as soon as possible
• Possible infection: WBC count, ESR, imaging (usually MRI or CT), and culture of infected tissue
===PAGE:484===
• Possible cancer: CT or MRI and possibly biopsy
• Possible aneurysm: CT, angiography, or sometimes ultrasonography
• Possible aortic dissection: Angiography, CT, or MRI
• Symptoms that are disabling or that persist > 6 wk: Imaging (usually MRI or CT) and, if infection is
suspected, WBC count and ESR
• Other extraspinal disorders: Testing as appropriate (eg, chest x-ray for pulmonary disorders, urinalysis
for urinary tract disorders)
Treatment
Underlying disorders are treated.
Acute musculoskeletal pain (with or without radiculopathy) is treated with
• Analgesics
• Heat and cold
• Early mobilization followed by stabilization exercises
Acetaminophen or NSAIDs are the initial choice of analgesics, but opioids may be necessary for severe
pain. Adequate analgesia is important immediately after acute injury to help limit the cycle of pain and
spasm.
Acute muscle spasms may also be relieved by cold or heat. Cold is usually preferred to heat during the
first 2 days after an injury. Ice and cold packs should not be applied directly to the skin. They should be
enclosed (eg, in plastic) and placed over a towel or cloth. The ice is removed after 20 min, then later
reapplied for 20 min over a period of 60 to 90 min. This process can be repeated several times during the
first 24 h. Heat, using a heating pad, can be applied for the same periods of time. Because the skin on
the back may be insensitive to heat, heating pads must be used cautiously to prevent burns. Patients are
advised not to use a heating pad at bedtime to avoid prolonged exposure due to falling asleep with the
pad still on their back. Diathermy may help reduce muscle spasm and pain after the acute stage.
Oral muscle relaxants (eg, cyclobenzaprine, methocarbamol, metaxalone) are controversial. Benefits of
these drugs should be weighed against their CNS and other adverse effects, particularly in elderly
patients, who may have more severe adverse effects.
Although a brief initial period (eg, 1 to 2 days) of decreased activity is sometimes needed for comfort,
prolonged bed rest, spinal traction, and corsets are not beneficial. Patients with severe torticollis may
benefit from a cervical collar and contour pillow until pain is relieved and they can participate in a
stabilization program.
Spinal manipulation may help relieve pain caused by muscle spasm or an acute neck or back injury;
however, some forms of manipulation may have risks for patients with disk disorders or osteoporosis.
When acute pain decreases enough that motion is possible, a lumbar stabilization program is begun. This
program includes exercises that strengthen abdominal and low back muscles plus instruction in work
posture; the aim is to strengthen the supporting structures of the back and reduce the likelihood of the
condition becoming chronic or recurrent.
Clinicians should reassure patients with acute nonspecific musculoskeletal back pain that the prognosis is
good and that activity and exercise are safe even when they cause some discomfort. Clinicians should be
thorough, kind, firm, and nonjudgmental. If depression or secondary gain persists for several months,
===PAGE:485===
psychologic evaluation should be considered.
Geriatrics Essentials
Low back pain affects 50% of adults > 60.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (and CT or ultrasonography to detect it) should be considered in elderly
patients with atraumatic low back pain, even if no physical findings suggest this diagnosis.
Imaging of the spine may be appropriate for elderly patients (eg, to rule out cancer) even when the cause
appears to be uncomplicated musculoskeletal back pain.
Oral muscle relaxants (eg, cyclobenzaprine, methocarbamol, metaxalone) are controversial;
anticholinergic, CNS, and other adverse effects may outweigh potential benefits in elderly patients.
Key Points
• Most neck and back pain is caused by mechanical spinal disorders, usually nonspecific, self-limited
musculoskeletal derangements.
•
Most mechanical disorders are treated with analgesics, early mobilization, and exercises; prolonged bed
rest and immobilization are avoided.
• Back pain is often multifactorial, making diagnosis difficult.
• Serious spinal or extraspinal disorders are unusual causes.
• Red flag findings often indicate a serious disorder and the need for testing.
• Patients with segmental neurologic deficits suggesting spinal cord compression require MRI or CT
myelography as soon as possible.
• Normal spinal cord function during physical examination is best confirmed by tests of sacral nerve
function (eg, rectal tone, anal wink reflex, bulbocavernosus reflex).
• Pain not worsened by movement is often extraspinal, particularly if no vertebral or paravertebral
tenderness is detected.
• Abdominal aortic aneurysm should be considered in any elderly patient with low back pain, even if no
physical findings suggest this diagnosis.
Spasmodic Torticollis
Spasmodic torticollis is characterized by involuntary tonic contractions or intermittent spasms
of neck muscles. The cause is unknown. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment can include physical
therapy, drugs, and selective denervation of neck muscles with surgery or locally injected
botulinum toxin.
In torticollis, contraction of the neck muscles causes the neck to turn from its usual position. It is the most
common dystonia (.
Spasmodic (or adult-onset) torticollis is usually idiopathic. About 5% of patients with spasmodic torticollis
have a family history. One third of these patients have other dystonias (eg, eyelids, face, jaw, hand).
Torticollis can also be congenital or secondary to other conditions such as lesions of the brain stem and
basal ganglia.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:486===
Symptoms may begin at any age but usually begin between age 20 and 60, with a peak between age 30
and 50.
Symptoms usually begin gradually but may begin suddenly. Painful tonic contractions or intermittent
spasms of the sternocleidomastoid, trapezius, and other neck muscles occur, usually unilaterally, and
result in abnormal head position. Sternocleidomastoid muscle contraction causes the head to rotate to the
opposite side and the neck to flex laterally to the same side. Rotation may involve any plane but almost
always has a horizontal component. Besides rotational tilting (torticollis), the head can tilt laterally
(laterocollis), forward (anterocollis), or backward (retrocollis). During sleep, muscle spasms disappear.
Spasmodic torticollis ranges from mild to severe. Usually, it progresses slowly for 1 to 5 yr, then plateaus.
About 10 to 20% of patients recover spontaneously within 5 yr of onset (usually in milder cases with
younger age onset). However, it may persist for life and can result in restricted movement and postural
deformity.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
The diagnosis is based on characteristic symptoms and signs and exclusion of alternative diagnoses,
such as the following:
• Tardive dyskinesia can cause torticollis but can usually be distinguished by a history of chronic
antipsychotic use and involuntary movements in muscles outside of the neck.
• Basal ganglia disease and occasionally CNS infections can cause movement disorders but usually also
involve other muscles. Also, CNS infections are usually acute and cause other symptoms.
• Neck infections or tumors are usually differentiated by features of the primary process.
• Antipsychotics and other drugs can cause acute torticollis, but the symptoms usually develop in hours
and resolve within days.
Treatment
• Physical measures
• Sometimes botulinum toxin or oral drugs
Spasms can sometimes be temporarily inhibited by physical therapy and massage, including sensory
biofeedback techniques (slight tactile pressure to the jaw on the same side as head rotation) and any
light touch.
Injections of botulinum toxin type A into the dystonic muscles can reduce painful spasms for 1 to 3 mo in
about 70% of patients, restoring a more neutral position of the head. However, this treatment can lose
effectiveness with repeated injections because antibodies develop against the toxin. Drugs can usually
relieve pain, but they suppress dystonic movements in only about 25 to 33% of patients. Anticholinergics
such as trihexyphenidyl 10 to 25 mg po once/day or bid may help, but adverse
effects may limit their use;
benzodiazepines (particularly clonazepam 0.5 mg po bid) and baclofen and carbamazepine may help. All
drugs should be started in low doses. Doses should be increased until symptoms are controlled or
intolerable adverse effects (particularly likely in the elderly) develop.
Surgery is controversial. The most successful surgical approach selectively severs nerves to affected
neck muscles, permanently weakening or paralyzing them. Results are favorable when the procedure is
done at centers with extensive experience.
Rarely, an emotional problem contributes to spasmodic torticollis; psychiatric treatment is indicated.
===PAGE:487===
Psychiatric prognosis is best if symptom onset coincided with exogenous stress.
Sciatica
Sciatica is pain along the sciatic nerve. It usually results from compression of nerve roots in the
lower back. Common causes include intervertebral disk herniation, osteophytes, and narrowing
of the spinal canal (spinal stenosis). Symptoms include pain radiating from the buttocks down
the leg. Diagnosis sometimes involves MRI or CT. Electromyography and nerve conduction
studies can identify the affected level. Treatment includes symptomatic measures and
sometimes surgery, particularly if there is a neurologic deficit.
Etiology
Sciatica is typically caused by nerve root compression, usually due to intervertebral disk herniation (see
p.
), bony irregularities (eg, osteoarthritic osteophytes, spondylolisthesis), or, much less often,
intraspinal tumor or abscess. Compression may occur within the spinal canal or intervertebral foramen.
The nerves can also be compressed outside the vertebral column, in the pelvis or buttocks. L5-S1, L4-L5,
and L3-L4 nerve roots are most often affected (see
Table 186-1
.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain radiates along the course of the sciatic nerve, most often down the buttocks and posterior aspect of
the leg to below the knee. The pain is typically burning, lancinating, or stabbing. It may occur with or
without low back pain. The Valsalva maneuver or coughing may worsen pain due to disk herniation.
Patients may complain of numbness and sometimes weakness in the affected leg.
Nerve root compression can cause sensory, motor, or, the most objective finding, reflex deficits . L5-S1 disk herniation may affect the ankle jerk reflex; L3-L4 herniation may affect the knee jerk.
Straight leg raising may cause pain that radiates down the leg when the leg is raised above 60° and
sometimes less. This finding is sensitive for sciatica; pain radiating down the affected leg when the
contralateral leg is lifted (crossed straight leg raising) is more specific for sciatica.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes MRI, electrodiagnostic studies, or both
Sciatica is suspected based on the characteristic pain. If it is suspected, strength, reflexes, and sensation
should be tested. If there are neurologic deficits or if symptoms persist for > 6 wk, imaging and
electrodiagnostic studies should be done. Structural abnormalities causing sciatica (including spinal
stenosis) are most accurately diagnosed by MRI or CT. Electrodiagnostic studies can confirm the
presence and degree of nerve root compression and can exclude conditions that may mimic sciatica,
such as polyneuropathy. These studies may help determine whether the lesion involves single or multiple
nerve levels and whether the clinical findings correlate with MRI abnormalities (especially valuable before
surgery). However, abnormalities may not be evident on electrodiagnostic studies for up to a few weeks
after symptoms begin.
Treatment
• Bed rest (brief), analgesics, and sometimes drugs that relieve neuropathic pain
• Surgery for severe cases
Acute pain relief can come from 24 to 48 h of bed rest in a recumbent position with the head of the bed
elevated about 30° (semi-Fowler's position). Measures used to treat low back pain, including nonopioid
analgesics (eg, NSAIDs, acetaminophen), can be tried for up to 6 wk. Drugs that decrease neuropathic
===PAGE:488===
pain (, such as gabapentin or other anticonvulsants or low-dose tricyclic antidepressants (no
tricyclic is superior to another), may relieve symptoms. Gabapentin 100 to 300 mg po at bedtime is used
initially, but doses typically have to be much higher, up to 3600 mg/day. As with all sedating drugs, care
should be taken in the elderly, patients at risk of falls, and those with arrhythmias.
Muscle spasm may be relieved with therapeutic heat or cold (, and physical therapy may be useful. Whether corticosteroids should be used to treat acute
radicular pain is controversial. Given epidurally, corticosteroids may accelerate pain relief, but they
probably should not be used unless pain is severe or persistent.
Surgery is indicated only for unequivocal disk herniation plus one of the following:
• Muscular weakness
• Progressive neurologic deficit
• Intolerable, intractable pain that interferes with job or personal functions in an emotionally stable patient
and that has not lessened after 6 wk of conservative treatment
Some of these patients benefit from epidural corticosteroids instead of surgery.
Classic diskectomy with limited laminotomy for intervertebral disk herniation is the standard procedure. If
herniation is localized, microdiskectomy may be done; with it, the skin incision and laminotomy can be
smaller. Chemonucleolysis, using intradiskal injection of chymopapain, is no longer used.
Predictors of poor surgical outcome include
• Prominent psychiatric factors
• Persistence of symptoms for > 6 mo
• Heavy manual labor
• Prominence of back pain (nonradicular)
• Secondary gain (ie, litigation and compensability)
Lumbar Spinal Stenosis
Lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) is narrowing of the lumbar spinal canal, which puts pressure on
the sciatic nerve roots (or sometimes the cord) before their exit from the foramina. It causes
positional back pain, symptoms of nerve root compression, and lower-extremity pain during
walking or weight bearing.
Spinal stenosis can be congenital or acquired. It may involve the cervical or lumbar spine. Acquired LSS
is a common cause of sciatica in middle-aged or elderly patients. The most common causes of LSS are
osteoarthritis, degenerative disk disorders, and spondylolisthesis with compression of the cauda equina.
Other causes include Paget's disease of bone, RA, and ankylosing spondylitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain occurs in the buttocks, thighs, or calves during walking, running, climbing stairs, or even standing.
The pain is not relieved by standing still but by flexing the back or by sitting (although paresthesias may
continue). Walking up hills is less painful than walking down because the back is slightly flexed. Patients
may have pain, paresthesias, weakness, and diminished reflexes in the affected nerve root distribution.
Rarely, spinal cord compression may cause cauda equina syndrome (.
===PAGE:489===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes MRI, electrodiagnostic studies, or both
Spinal stenosis is suspected based on characteristic symptoms. Diagnostic tests are the same as for
sciatica (. Calf symptoms may simulate those of intermittent claudication. Claudication can be
differentiated by relief with rest (not position change), skin atrophy, and abnormalities in pulses, capillary
refill, and vascular tests.
Treatment
• Bed rest (brief), analgesics, and sometimes drugs that relieve neuropathic pain
• Surgery for severe cases
Conservative treatments and indications for surgery are similar to those for sciatica. For advanced spinal
stenosis, surgery involves decompression of nerve root entrapment by vertebral canal and foraminal
encroachments, which sometimes requires laminectomy at 2 or 3 levels plus foraminotomies.
Spinal stability must be preserved. Spinal fusion is indicated if there is instability or severe, well-localized
arthritic changes in 1 or 2 vertebral interspaces.
Nontraumatic Subluxation
Spinal dislocation and subluxation (partial dislocation) are usually due to trauma. For example,
atlantoaxial subluxation and spondylolisthesis can result from obvious major trauma, such as a highspeed deceleration injury. However, these disorders can occur with minimal, unrecognized, or no trauma.
Rarely, cervical disk disorders can cause nontraumatic spinal subluxation.
Atlantoaxial Subluxation
(C1-C2 Subluxation)
Atlantoaxial subluxation is misalignment of the 1st and 2nd cervical vertebrae, which may occur
only with neck flexion.
Atlantoaxial subluxation can result from major trauma or can occur without trauma in patients with RA,
juvenile RA, or ankylosing spondylitis.
Atlantoaxial subluxation is usually asymptomatic but may cause vague neck pain, occipital headache, or
occasionally intermittent (and potentially fatal) cervical spinal cord compression.
Diagnosis
• Plain x-rays
• MRI if cord compression suspected
It is usually diagnosed with plain cervical x-rays; however, flexion views may be required to show
intermittent subluxation. Views during flexion, done by the patient, show dynamic instability of the entire
cervical spine. If x-rays are normal and subluxation is still suspected, MRI, which is more sensitive, should
be done. MRI also provides the most sensitive evaluation of spinal cord compression and is done
immediately if cord compression is suspected.
Treatment
===PAGE:490===
Indications for treatment include pain, neurologic deficits, and potential spinal instability. Treatment
includes symptomatic measures and cervical immobilization, usually beginning with a rigid cervical collar.
Surgery may be needed to stabilize the spine.
Spondylolisthesis
Spondylolisthesis is subluxation of lumbar vertebrae, usually occurring during adolescence. It
usually results from a congenital defect in the pars interarticularis (spondylolysis).
Spondylolisthesis is usually fixed. It usually involves the L3-L4, L4-L5, or L5-S1 vertebrae.
Spondylolisthesis often occurs in adolescents or young adults who are athletes and who have had only
minimal trauma; the cause is a lumbar vertebra weakened by a congenital defect in the pars
interarticularis. This defect is easily fractured; separation of the fracture fragments causes the
subluxation. Spondylolisthesis can also occur with minimal trauma in patients who are > 60 and have
osteoarthritis. If mild to moderate (subluxation of ≤ 50%), spondylolisthesis, particularly in the young, may
cause little or no pain. Spondylolisthesis can predispose to later development of spinal stenosis. If due to
major trauma, spondylolisthesis can cause spinal cord compression or other neurologic deficits (; these deficits rarely occur.
Spondylolisthesis is staged according to the degree of subluxation of adjacent vertebral bodies:
• Stage I: 0 to 25%
• Stage II: 25 to 50%
• Stage III: 50 to 75%
• Stage IV: 75 to 100%
Spondylolisthesis is evident on plain lumbar x-rays. The lateral view is usually used for staging.
Treatment is usually symptomatic.
===PAGE:491===
Chapter 43. Hand Disorders
Introduction
Common hand disorders include a variety of deformities, ganglia, infections, Kienbock's disease, nerve
compression syndromes, noninfectious tenosynovitis, and osteoarthritis. Complex regional pain syndrome
(reflex sympathetic dystrophy) is discussed on p.
, and hand injuries are discussed in
Chapter 323
.
Evaluation
History and physical examination findings are often diagnostic in hand disorders.
History:
The history should include information about the trauma or other events that may be associated
with symptoms. The presence and duration of deformity and difficulty with motion are noted. The
presence, duration, severity, and factors that exacerbate or relieve pain are elicited. Associated
symptoms, such as fever, swelling, rashes, Raynaud's syndrome (, paresthesias, and
weakness, are also recorded.
Physical examination:
Examination should include inspection for redness, swelling, or deformity and
palpation for tenderness. Active
range of motion should be tested for any possible tendon injury. Passive
range of motion can assess whether specific motions aggravate pain. Sensation is tested most accurately
by 2-point discrimination, using 2 ends of a paper clip. Motor function testing involves muscles innervated
by the radial, median, and ulnar nerves. Vascular examination should include evaluation of capillary refill,
radial and ulnar pulses, and Allen's test (. Stress testing is helpful when specific ligament
injuries are suspected (eg, ulnar collateral ligament in gamekeeper's thumb—. Provocative
testing can aid in the diagnosis of tenosynovitis and nerve compression syndromes.
Laboratory testing:
Laboratory testing has a limited role. Plain x-rays and MRI are helpful for injuries,
arthritis, and Kienbock's disease or to rule out hidden foreign bodies that could be sources of infections.
Nerve conduction testing can help diagnose nerve compression syndromes. Bone scans may assist in
diagnosing occult fractures and reflex sympathetic dystrophy.
Deformities
Deformities can result from generalized disorders (eg, arthritis) or dislocations, fractures, and other
localized disorders. Most nontraumatic localized disorders can be diagnosed by physical examination.
Once a hand deformity becomes firmly established, it cannot be significantly altered by splinting, exercise,
or other nonsurgical treatment.
Mallet Finger
Mallet finger is a flexion deformity of the distal interphalangeal joint preventing extension (see
Fig. 43-1
).
This deformity results from an extensor tendon rupture or an avulsion fracture of the distal phalanx. The
deformity may not be obvious immediately after injury, but on examination, patients cannot fully extend the
distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint. Closed injuries may be treated with splinting that holds the DIP joint in
extension and leaves the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint free. Avulsion fractures are usually united
after 6 wk, but pure tendon injuries require an additional 2 to 4 wk of nighttime splinting. Surgery may be
required if there is a fracture that involves a large proportion of the articular surface or if the joint is
subluxated.
Swan-Neck Deformity
A swan-neck deformity consists of hyperextension of the PIP joint, flexion of the DIP joint, and
sometimes flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joint (see
Fig. 43-2
).
===PAGE:492===
Although characteristic in RA, swan-neck deformity has several causes, including untreated mallet finger,
laxity of the ligaments of the volar aspect of the PIP joint, spasticity of intrinsic hand muscles, rupture of
the flexor tendon of the PIP joint, and malunion of a fracture of the middle or proximal phalanx. The
inability to correct or compensate for hyperextension of the PIP joint makes finger closure impossible and
can cause severe disability. Treatment is aimed at correcting the underlying disorder when possible (eg,
correcting the mallet finger or any bony malalignment, releasing spastic intrinsic muscles). Mild
deformities in patients with RA may be treated with a functional ring splint.
True swan-neck deformity does not affect the thumb, which has only one interphalangeal
[Fig. 43-1.
Mallet finger.]
[Fig. 43-2.
Boutonniere and swan-neck deformities.]
joint. However, severe hyperextension of the interphalangeal joint of the thumb with flexion of the
metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint can occur; this is called a duck bill, Z (zigzag) type, or 90°-angle
deformity. With simultaneous thumb instability, pinch is greatly impaired. This deformity can usually be
corrected by interphalangeal arthrodesis along with tendon reconstruction at the MCP joint.
Boutonniere Deformity
(Buttonhole Deformity)
A boutonniere deformity consists of flexion of the PIP joint accompanied by hyperextension of
the DIP joint (see
Fig. 43-2
).
This deformity can result from tendon laceration, dislocation, fracture, osteoarthritis, or RA. Classically,
the deformity is caused by disruption of the central slip attachment of the extensor tendon to the base of
the middle phalanx, allowing the proximal phalanx to protrude ("buttonhole") between the lateral bands of
the extensor tendon. Initial treatment consists of splinting, but it must occur before scarring and fixed
deformities develop. Surgical reconstruction often cannot restore normal motion but may decrease the
deformity and improve hand function.
Dupuytren's Contracture
(Palmar Fibromatosis)
Dupuytren's contracture is progressive contracture of the palmar fascial bands, causing flexion
deformities of the fingers.
Dupuytren's contracture is one of the more common hand deformities; the incidence is higher among men
and increases after age 45. This autosomal dominant condition with variable penetrance may occur more
commonly among patients with diabetes, alcoholism, or epilepsy. However, the specific factor that causes
the palmar fascia to thicken and contract is unknown.
Symptoms and Signs
The earliest manifestation is usually a tender nodule in the palm, most often near the middle or ring finger;
it gradually becomes painless. Next, a superficial cord forms and contracts the MCP joints and
interphalangeal joints of the fingers. The hand eventually becomes arched. The disease is occasionally
associated with fibrous thickening of the dorsum of the PIP joints (Garrod's pads), Peyronie's disease
(penile fibromatosis) in about 7 to 10% of patients, and rarely nodules on the plantar surface of the feet
(plantar fibromatosis). Other types of flexion deformities of the fingers can also occur in diabetes,
systemic sclerosis, and chronic reflex sympathetic dystrophy, which need to be differentiated.
Treatment
• Corticosteroid injection (before contractures develop)
===PAGE:493===
• Surgery for disabling contractures
Injection of a corticosteroid suspension into the nodule can relieve local tenderness if begun before
contractures develop. If the hand cannot be placed flat on a table or, especially, when significant
contracture develops at the
PIP joints, surgery is usually indicated. Excision of the diseased fascia must
be meticulous because it surrounds neurovascular bundles and tendons. Incomplete excision or new
disease results in recurrent contracture, especially in patients who are young at disease onset or who
have a family history, Garrod's pads, Peyronie's disease, or plantar foot involvement. Injectable
collagenase may reverse some contractures, although this treatment is not yet in widespread clinical use.
Ganglia
(Ganglion Cysts)
Ganglia are cystic swellings occurring usually on the hands, especially on the dorsal aspect of
the wrists. Aspiration or excision is indicated for symptomatic ganglia.
Ganglia constitute about 60% of chronic soft-tissue swellings affecting the hand and wrist. They usually
develop spontaneously in adults aged 20 to 50, with a female:male preponderance of 3:1.
Etiology
The cause of most ganglia is unknown. The cystic structures are near or attached (often by a pedicle) to
tendon sheaths and joint capsules. The wall of the ganglion is smooth, fibrous, and of variable thickness.
The cyst is filled with clear gelatinous, sticky, or mucoid fluid of high viscosity. The fluid in the cyst is
sometimes almost pure hyaluronic acid.
Most ganglia are isolated abnormalities. The dorsal wrist ganglion arises from the scapholunate joint and
constitutes about 65% of ganglia of the wrist and hand. The volar wrist ganglion arises over the distal
aspect of the radius and constitutes about 20 to 25% of ganglia. Flexor tendon sheath ganglia and
mucous cysts (arising from dorsal distal interphalangeal joint) make up the remaining 10 to 15%. Ganglia
may spontaneously regress.
Diagnosis
• Examination
Ganglia are evident on examination. Another type of ganglion on the dorsal wrist occurs in patients with
RA; it is easily differentiated by its soft irregular appearance and association with proliferative rheumatoid
extensor tenosynovitis.
Treatment
• Aspiration or excision if troublesome
Most ganglia do not require treatment. However, if the patient is disturbed by its appearance or if the
ganglion is painful or tender, a single aspiration with a large-bore needle is effective in about 50% of
patients. Attempting to rupture the ganglion by hitting it with a hard object risks local injury without likely
benefit. Nonsurgical treatment fails in about 40 to 70% of patients, necessitating surgical excision.
Recurrence rates after surgical removal are about 5 to 15%.
Infections
Common bacterial hand infections include paronychia (, infected bite wounds, felon, palm
abscess, and infectious flexor tenosynovitis. Herpetic whitlow is a viral hand infection. Infections often
begin with constant, intense, throbbing pain and are usually diagnosed by physical examination. X-rays
are taken in some infections (eg, bite wounds, infectious flexor tenosynovitis) to detect occult foreign
===PAGE:494===
bodies but may not detect small or radiolucent objects.
Treatment
• Surgical measures and antibiotics
The increased incidence of community-acquired and nosocomial methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus
aureus
(MRSA) should be taken into consideration. Uncomplicated MRSA infections are best treated with
incision and drainage. If there is a high incidence of MRSA and the infection is severe, hospitalization and
vancomycin or daptomycin (for IV therapy) are recommended, as is consultation with an infectious
disease specialist. For outpatients, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, doxycycline, or linezolid
(for oral therapy) can be given. Once culture and sensitivity results rule out MRSA, nafcillin, cloxacillin,
dicloxacillin, or a 1st- or 2nd-generation cephalosporin can be given.
Infected Bite Wounds
A small puncture wound, particularly from a human or cat bite, may involve significant injury to the tendon,
joint capsule, or articular cartilage. The most common cause of human bites is a tooth-induced injury to
the metacar-pophalangeal
[Fig. 43-3.
Splint in the functional position (20° wrist extension, 60° metacarpophalangeal joint flexion,
slight interphalangeal joint flexion).]
joint as a result of a punch to the mouth (clenched fist injury). The oral flora of humans includes
Eikenella
corrodens
, staphylococci, streptococci, and anaerobes. Patients with clenched fist injuries tend to wait
hours or days after the wound occurs before seeking medical attention, which increases the severity of
the infection. Animal bites usually contain multiple potential pathogens, including
Pasteurella multocida
(particularly in cat bites), staphylococci, streptococci, and anaerobes. Serious complications include
infectious arthritis and osteomyelitis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• X-rays
Erythema and pain localized to the bite suggest infection. Tenderness along the course of a tendon
suggests spread to the tendon sheath. Pain worsening significantly with motion suggests infection of a
joint or tendon sheath.
The diagnosis is clinical, but if the skin is broken, x-rays should be taken to detect fracture or teeth or
other foreign bodies that could be a nidus of continuing infection.
Treatment
• Debridement
• Antibiotics
Treatment includes surgical debridement, with the wound left open, and antibiotics. For outpatient
treatment, empiric antibiotics usually include monotherapy with amoxicillin/clavulanate 500 mg po tid or
combined therapy with a penicillin 500 mg po qid (for
E. corrodens
,
P. multocida
, streptococci, and
anaerobes) plus a cephalosporin (eg, cephalexin 500 mg po qid) or semisynthetic penicillin (eg,
dicloxacillin 500 mg po qid) for staphylococci. In areas where MRSA is prevalent,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, doxycycline, or linezolid should be used instead of a
cephalosporin. If the patient is allergic to penicillin, clindamycin 300 mg po q 6 h can be used. The hand
should be splinted in the functional position and elevated (see
Fig. 43-3
).
===PAGE:495===
Noninfected bites may require surgical debridement and prophylaxis with 50% of the dose of antibiotic
used to treat infected wounds.
Felon
A felon is an infection of the pulp space of the fingertip, usually with staphylococci and
streptococci.
The most common site is the distal pulp, which may be involved centrally, laterally, or apically. The septa
between pulp spaces ordinarily limit the spread of infection, resulting in an abscess, which creates
pressure and necrosis of adjacent tissues. The underlying bone, joint, or flexor tendons may become
infected. There is intense throbbing pain and a swollen, warm, extremely tender pulp. Treatment involves
prompt incision and drainage (using a mid-lateral incision that adequately divides the fibrous septa) and
oral antibiotic therapy. Empiric treatment with a cephalosporin is adequate. In areas where MRSA is
prevalent, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, doxycycline, or linezolid should be used instead of
a cephalosporin.
Palm Abscess
A palm abscess is a purulent infection of deep spaces in the palm, typically with staphylococci
or streptococci.
Palm abscesses can include collar-button abscesses, thenar space abscesses, and midpalmar space
abscesses. An abscess can occur in any of the deep palmar compartments and spread
between the
metacarpals, from the midpalmar space to the dorsum, manifesting as an infection on the dorsum of the
hand. Intense throbbing pain occurs with swelling and severe tenderness on palpation. X-rays should be
taken to detect occult foreign bodies. Incision and drainage in the operating room (with cultures), with
care to avoid the many important anatomic structures, and antibiotics (eg, a cephalosporin) are required.
In areas where MRSA is prevalent, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, doxycycline, or linezolid
should be used instead of a cephalosporin.
Infectious Flexor Tenosynovitis
Infectious flexor tenosynovitis is an acute infection within the flexor tendon sheath.
The usual cause is a penetration and bacterial inoculation of the sheath.
Diagnosis
• Kanavel's signs
• X-rays
Infectious flexor tenosynovitis causes Kanavel's signs:
• Flexed resting position of the digit
• Fusiform swelling
• Tenderness along the flexor tendon sheath
• Pain with passive extension of the digit
X-rays should be taken to detect occult foreign bodies. Acute calcific tendinitis and RA can restrict motion
and cause pain in the tendon sheath but can usually be differentiated from infectious flexor tenosynovitis
by a more gradual onset and the absence of some of Kanavel's signs. Disseminated gonococcal infection
can cause tenosynovitis but often involves multiple joints (particularly those of the wrists, fingers, ankles,
===PAGE:496===
and toes), and patients often have recent fever, rash, polyarthralgias, and often risk factors for an STD.
Infection of the tendon sheath may involve atypical mycobacteria, but these infections are usually indolent
and chronic.
Treatment
• Surgical drainage and antibiotics
Treatment is surgical drainage (eg, irrigation of the tendon sheath by inserting a cannula into one end
and allowing the irrigating fluid to pass along the tendon sheath to the other end). Antibiotic therapy
(beginning empirically with a cephalosporin) and cultures are also required. In areas where MRSA is
prevalent, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, doxycycline, or linezolid should be used instead of
a cephalosporin.
Herpetic Whitlow
Herpetic whitlow is a cutaneous infection of the distal aspect of the finger caused by herpes
simplex virus.
Herpetic whitlow may cause intense pain. The digital pulp is not very tense. Vesicles develop on the volar
or dorsal distal phalanx but often not until 2 to 3 days after pain begins. The intense pain can simulate a
felon, but herpetic whitlow can usually be differentiated by the absence of tenseness in the pulp or the
presence of vesicles. The condition is self-limited but may recur. Incision and drainage are
contraindicated. Topical acyclovir 5% can shorten the duration of a first episode. Oral acyclovir (800 mg
po bid) may prevent recurrences if given immediately after onset of recurrent symptoms. Open or draining
vesicles should be covered to prevent transmission.
Kienbock's Disease
Kienbock's disease is avascular necrosis of the lunate bone.
Kienbock's disease occurs most commonly in the dominant hand of men aged 20 to 45, usually in workers
doing heavy manual labor. Overall, Kienbock's disease is relatively rare. Its cause is unknown. The lunate
can eventually collapse and cause fixed rotation of the scaphoid and subsequent degeneration of the
carpal joints.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms generally start with insidious onset of wrist pain, localized to the region of the lunate carpal
bone; patients have no recollection of trauma. Kienbock's disease is bilateral in 10% of cases. There is
localized tenderness in the lunate bone.
Diagnosis
• Imaging
MRI and CT are the most sensitive; plain x-rays show abnormalities later, usually beginning with a
sclerotic lunate, then later cystic changes, fragmentation, and collapse.
Treatment
• Surgical procedures
Treatment is aimed at relieving pressure on the lunate by surgically shortening the radius or lengthening
the ulna. Alternative treatments attempt to revascularize the lunate (eg, implanting a blood vessel or bone
graft on a vascular pedicle). Salvage procedures (eg, proximal row carpectomy or intercarpal fusions)
may help preserve some wrist function if the carpal joints have degenerated. Total wrist arthrodesis can
be done as a last resort to relieve pain. Nonsurgical treatments are not effective.
===PAGE:497===
Nerve Compression Syndromes
Common nerve compression syndromes include carpal tunnel syndrome, cubital tunnel syndrome, and
radial tunnel syndrome. Compression of nerves often causes paresthesias; these paresthesias can often
be reproduced by tapping the compressed nerve, usually with the examiner's fingertip (Tinel's sign).
Suspected nerve compression can be confirmed by testing nerve conduction velocity and distal latencies,
which accurately measure motor and sensory nerve conduction. Initial treatment is usually conservative,
but surgical decompression may be necessary if conservative measures fail or if there are significant
motor or sensory deficits.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Carpal tunnel syndrome is compression of the median nerve as it passes through the carpal
tunnel in the wrist. Symptoms include pain and paresthesias in the median nerve distribution.
Diagnosis is suggested by symptoms and signs and is confirmed by nerve conduction velocity
testing. Treatments include ergonomic improvements, analgesia, splinting, and sometimes
corticosteroid injection or surgery.
Carpal tunnel syndrome is very common and most often occurs in women aged 30 to 50. Risk factors
include RA or other wrist arthritis (sometimes the presenting manifestation), diabetes mellitus,
hypothyroidism, acromegaly, amyloidosis, hemodialysis, and pregnancy-induced edema in the carpal
tunnel. Activities or jobs that require repetitive flexion and extension of the wrist may contribute, but rarely.
Most cases are idiopathic.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include pain of the hand and wrist associated with tingling and numbness, classically
distributed along the median nerve (the palmar side of the thumb, the index and middle fingers, and the
radial half of the ring finger) but possibly involving the entire hand. Typically, the patient wakes at night
with burning or aching pain and with numbness and tingling and shakes the hand to obtain relief and
restore sensation. Thenar atrophy and weakness of thumb opposition and abduction may develop late.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Nerve conduction testing
The diagnosis is strongly suggested by Tinel's sign, in which median nerve paresthesias are reproduced
by tapping at the volar surface of the wrist over the site of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel.
Reproduction of tingling with wrist flexion (Phalen's sign) is also suggestive. However, clinical
differentiation from other types of peripheral neuropathy may sometimes be difficult. If symptoms are
severe or the diagnosis is uncertain, nerve conduction testing should be done on the affected arm for
diagnosis and to exclude a more proximal neuropathy.
Treatment
• Splinting
• Sometimes corticosteroid/anesthetic injection
• Sometimes surgical decompression
Changing the position of computer keyboards and making other ergonomic corrections may occasionally
provide relief. Otherwise, treatment includes wearing a lightweight neutral wrist splint (see
Fig. 43-4
), especially at night, and taking mild analgesics (eg, acetaminophen, NSAIDs). If these
measures do not control symptoms, a mixture of a corticosteroid and an anesthetic (eg, 1.5 mL of a 4-
===PAGE:498===
mg/mL dexamethasone solution mixed with 1.5 mL of 1% lidocaine) should be injected into the carpal
tunnel at a site just ulnar to the palmaris longus tendon and proximal to the distal crease at the wrist. If
bothersome symptoms persist or recur or if hand weakness and thenar wasting develop, the carpal tunnel
can be surgically decompressed by using an open or endoscopic technique.
[Fig. 43-4.
Neutral wrist splint.]
Cubital Tunnel Syndrome
(Ulnar Neuropathy)
Cubital tunnel syndrome is compression or traction of the ulnar nerve at the elbow.
The ulnar nerve is commonly irritated at the elbow or, rarely, the wrist. Cubital tunnel syndrome is most
often caused by leaning on the elbow or by prolonged and excessive elbow flexion. It is less common
than carpal tunnel syndrome. Baseball pitching (particularly sliders), which can injure the medial elbow
ligaments, confers risk.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include numbness and paresthesia along the ulnar nerve distribution (in the ring and little
fingers and the ulnar aspect of the hand) and elbow pain. In advanced stages, weakness of the intrinsic
muscles of the hand and the flexors of the ring and little fingers may develop. Weakness interferes with
pinch between the thumb and index finger and with hand grip.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes nerve conduction studies
Diagnosis is often possible clinically. However, if clinical diagnosis is equivocal and when surgery is being
considered, nerve conduction studies are done. Cubital tunnel syndrome is differentiated from ulnar nerve
entrapment at the wrist (in Guyon's canal) by the presence of sensory deficits (on sensory testing or with
Tinel's sign) over the ulnar dorsal hand and by the presence of ulnar nerve deficits proximal to the wrist
on muscle testing or nerve conduction velocity testing.
Treatment
Treatment involves splinting at night, with the elbow extended at 45°, and use of an elbow pad during the
day. Surgical decompression can help if conservative treatment fails.
Radial Tunnel Syndrome
(Posterior Interosseous Nerve Syndrome)
Radial tunnel syndrome is compression of the radial nerve in the proximal forearm.
Compression at the elbow can result from trauma, ganglia, lipomas, bone tumors, or radiocapitellar
(elbow) synovitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include lancinating pain in the dorsum of the forearm and lateral elbow. Pain is precipitated by
attempted extension of the wrist and fingers and forearm supination. Sensory loss is rare because the
radial nerve is principally a motor nerve at this level. This disorder is sometimes confused with backhand
tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis). When weakness of the extensor muscles is the primary finding, the
condition is referred to as posterior interosseus nerve palsy.
===PAGE:499===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Lateral epicondylitis can cause similar tenderness around the lateral epicondyle but does not cause
Tinel's sign or tenderness along the course of the radial nerve.
Treatment
• Splinting
Splinting allows avoidance of the forceful or repeated motion of supination or wrist dorsiflexion, reducing
pressure on the nerve. If wristdrop or weakened digital extension develops, or conservative treatment
fails to provide relief after 3 mo, surgical decompression may be needed.
Noninfectious Tenosynovitis
(See also p.
.)
Although the digital flexor tendons and extensor pollicis brevis are commonly affected, tenosynovitis may
involve any of the tendons in or around the hand.
Digital Flexor Tendinitis and Tenosynovitis
(Trigger Finger)
Digital flexor tendinitis and tenosynovitis are inflammation, sometimes with subsequent
fibrosis, of tendons and tendon sheaths of the digits.
These conditions are idiopathic but are common among patients with RA or diabetes mellitus. Repetitive
use of the hands (as may occur when using heavy gardening shears) may contribute. In diabetes, they
often coexist with carpal tunnel syndrome and occasionally with fibrosis of the palmar fascia. Pathologic
changes begin with a thickening or nodule within the tendon; when located at the site of the tight first
annular pulley, the thickening or nodule blocks smooth extension or flexion of the finger. The finger may
lock in flexion, or "trigger," suddenly extending with a snap.
Treatment
• Conservative measures
• Sometimes corticosteroid injection
Treatment of acute inflammation and pain includes splinting, moist heat, and anti-inflammatory doses of
NSAIDs (. If these measures fail, injection of a corticosteroid suspension into the flexor tendon
sheath, along with splinting, may provide safe, rapid relief of pain and triggering. Operative release can
be done if corticosteroid therapy fails.
De Quervain's Syndrome
(Washerwoman's Sprain)
De Quervain's syndrome is stenosing tenosynovitis of the short extensor (extensor pollicis
brevis) and long abductor tendon (abductor pollicis longus) of the thumb within the first
extensor compartment.
De Quervain's syndrome usually occurs after repetitive use (especially wringing) of the wrist, although it
occasionally occurs in association with RA. The major symptom is aching pain at the wrist and thumb,
===PAGE:500===
aggravated by motion. Tenderness can be elicited just proximal to the radial styloid process over the site
of the involved tendon sheaths. Diagnosis is highly suggested by the Finkelstein test. The patient
adducts the involved thumb into the palm and wraps the fingers over the thumb. The test is positive if
gentle passive ulnar deviation of the wrist provokes severe pain at the affected tendon sheaths.
Treatment
• Corticosteroid injection
• Thumb spica splint
Rest, warm soaks, and NSAIDs may help in very mild cases. Local corticosteroid injections and a thumb
spica splint help 70 to 80% of cases. Tendon rupture is a rare complication of injection and can be
prevented by confining infiltration to the tendon sheath and avoiding injection of the corticosteroid into the
tendon. Intratendinous location of the needle is likely if injection is met with moderate or severe
resistance. Surgical release of the first extensor compartment is very effective when conservative therapy
fails.
Osteoarthritis of the Hand
Hand involvement is extremely common in osteoarthritis.
Osteoarthritis affecting the hand may be asymptomatic enlargement of nodules at the proximal
interphalangeal joint (Bouchard's nodules) or distal interphalangeal joint (Heberden's nodes) or
angulation at these joints. Pain and stiffness of these joints and the base of the thumb are also common.
The wrist usually is spared, and there is usually minimal or no metacarpophalangeal joint involvement
unless the patient also has a metabolic disorder (eg, hemochromatosis). Differentiation of hand changes
in osteoarthritis from those in RA is discussed in
Table 32-7

Treatment
• Conservative measures
• Occasionally corticosteroid injection or surgery
Treatment is symptomatic with analgesics, appropriate rest, splinting, and occasionally corticosteroid
injection as needed. Surgical procedures can help relieve pain and correct deformity for severe changes
at the base of the thumb and, less commonly, for advanced degeneration of the interphalangeal joints.
===PAGE:501===
Chapter 44. Foot and Ankle Disorders
Introduction
Most foot problems result from anatomic disorders or abnormal function of articular or extra-articular
structures (see
Fig. 44-1
). Less commonly, foot problems reflect a systemic disorder (see
Table 44-1
).
In people with diabetes and people with peripheral vascular disease, careful examination of the feet, with
evaluation of vascular sufficiency and neurologic integrity, should be done at least twice/yr. People with
these diseases should examine their own feet at least once/day.
The feet are also common sites for corns and calluses ( and infections by fungus (see
Tinea
Pedis
, bacteria (, and viruses (see
Warts
.
Table 44-2
lists foot and ankle disorders according to anatomic site.
Table 44-3
lists common causes of heel pain according to location.
Tibialis Posterior Tendinosis
Tibialis posterior tendinosis, degeneration of the tibialis posterior tendon, is the most common
cause of pain behind the medial malleolus.
The posterior tibial tendon lies immediately behind the medial malleolus. Degeneration results from longstanding biomechanical problems, such as excessive pronation often in obese people. The tendon can
also be involved by primary inflammatory disorders, such as RA or gout.
Symptoms and Signs
Early on, patients experience occasional pain behind the medial malleolus. Over time, the pain becomes
severe, with painful swelling behind the medial malleolus. Normal standing, walking, and standing on the
toes become difficult.
[Fig. 44-1.
Bones of the foot.]
[Table 44-1.
Foot Manifestations of Systemic Disorders]
Diagnosis
• MRI
Clinical findings suggest the diagnosis. Palpation of the tendon in an inverted-plantar flexed position
usually elicits pain. Standing on the toes is usually painful and may not be possible if the tendon is
ruptured. Pain and swelling behind the medial malleolus, especially with tibialis posterior tendon pain on
[Table 44-2.
Common Foot and Ankle Disorders by Anatomic Site]
palpation, are highly suggestive. MRI or ultrasonography can confirm injury to the tendon and its extent.
Treatment
• Orthotics and braces or surgery
Complete rupture requires surgery if normal function is the goal. Surgery is especially important in young
active patients with acute tears. Conservative therapy consists of mechanically off-loading the tendon by
using orthotics and ankle braces. Corticosteroid injections exacerbate the degenerative process (see
Sidebar 44-1
). If the tendon is inflamed, rest and aggressive anti-inflammatory therapy are warranted.
===PAGE:502===
Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome
(Posterior Tibial Nerve Neuralgia)
Tarsal tunnel syndrome is pain along the course of the posterior tibial nerve, usually resulting
from nerve compression within the tarsal tunnel.
At the level of the ankle, the posterior tibial nerve passes through a fibro-osseous canal and divides into
the medial and lateral plantar nerves. Tarsal tunnel syndrome refers to compression of the nerve within
this canal, but the term has been loosely applied to neuralgia of the posterior tibial nerve resulting from
any cause. Synovitis of the flexor tendons of the ankle caused by abnormal foot function, inflammatory
arthritis (eg, RA), fracture, and ankle venous stasis edema are contributing factors. Patients with
hypothyroidism may develop tarsal tunnel-like symptoms as a result of perineural mucin deposition.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain (occasionally burning and tingling) is usually retromalleolar and sometimes in the plantar medial heel
and may extend along the plantar surface as far as the toes. Although the pain is worse during standing
and walking, pain at rest may occur as the disorder progresses.
Diagnosis
• Examination and electrodiagnostic testing
Tapping or palpating the posterior tibial nerve below the medial malleolus at a site of compression or
injury often causes distal tingling (Tinel's sign). While false-negative results on electrodiagnostic tests are
somewhat common, a positive history combined with supportive physical findings and positive
electrodiagnostic results makes the diagnosis of tarsal tunnel syndrome highly likely. The cause of any
swelling near the nerve should be determined.
Treatment
• Foot inversion, injection, surgery, or a combination
Strapping the foot in a neutral or slightly inverted position or wearing an orthotic that keeps the foot
inverted reduces nerve tension. Local infiltration of a mixture of an insoluble corticosteroid and an
anesthetic may be effective if the cause is inflammation or fibrosis. Surgical decompression may be
necessary to relieve suspected fibro-osseus compression with recalcitrant symptoms.
[Table 44-3.
Disorders Associated with Heel Pain According to Location]
Metatarsalgia
Metatarsalgia is a general term for pain in the area of the metatarsophalangeal joints (ball of the
foot). Most common causes include Freiberg's disease, interdigital nerve pain (Morton's
neuroma), metatarsophalangeal joint pain, and sesamoiditis.
Freiberg's Disease
Freiberg's disease is avascular necrosis of the metatarsal head.
Freiberg's disease is caused by microtrauma at the metaphysis and growth plate. Avascular necrosis
flattens the metatarsal head. The 2nd metatarsal head is most often affected. Freiberg's disease occurs
more frequently among pubertal females and among people who have a short 1st metatarsal bone, which
increases stress on the 2nd metatarsal head and joint.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:503===
The pain is most pronounced in the forefoot at the metatarsal head with weight bearing, particularly when
pushing off or when wearing high-heeled footwear. The metatarsophalangeal joint may also be swollen
and have limited and painful passive range of motion.
Diagnosis
• X-rays
The diagnosis is confirmed with x-rays. Typically, the head of the 2nd metatarsal is widened and
flattened, and the metatarsal joint is sclerotic and irregular.
Sidebar 44-1 Considerations for Using Corticosteroid Injections
Corticosteroid injections should be used judiciously to avoid adverse effects. Injectable corticosteroids
should be reserved for inflammation, which is not present in most foot disorders. Because the tarsus,
ankle, retrocalcaneal space, and dorsum of the toes have little connective tissue between the skin and
underlying bone, injection of insoluble corticosteroids into these structures may cause depigmentation,
atrophy, or ulceration, especially in elderly patients with peripheral arterial disease.
Insoluble corticosteroids can be given deeply rather than superficially with greater safety (eg, in the heel
pad, tarsal canal, or metatarsal interspaces). The foot should be immobilized for a few days after tendon
sheaths are injected. Unusual resistance to injection suggests injection into a tendon. Repeated injection
into a tendon should be avoided because the tendon may weaken (partially tear), predisposing to
subsequent rupture.
Treatment
• Immobilization and weight unloading if acute, then modification of footwear
Corticosteroid injections and immobilization may help to alleviate acutely painful flare-ups. Long-term
management may require orthoses with metatarsal bars and low-heeled footwear to reduce stress on the
2nd metatarsal head and joint. Corticosteroid injections can be tried, and, rarely, surgical excision of the
metatarsal head may be necessary to relieve recalcitrant pain.
Interdigital Nerve Pain
(Morton's Neuroma/Neuralgia)
Interdigital nerve irritation (neuralgia) or persistent benign enlargement of the perineurium
(neuroma) can cause pain, which may be nonspecific, burning, or lancinating, or a foreign body
sensation. Diagnosis is usually clinical. Treatment may involve correction of footwear, local
injection, or sometimes surgical excision.
The interdigital nerves of the foot travel beneath and between the metatarsals, extending distally to
innervate the toes. Neuralgia of the interdigital nerve along its distal innervation near the ball of the foot
develops primarily as a result of improper or constrictive footwear or, less commonly, nerve traction
resulting from abnormal foot structure. As a result of chronic repetitive trauma, a benign thickening of the
nerve develops (Morton's neuroma).
Symptoms and Signs
Interdigital neuralgia is characterized by pain around the metatarsal heads or the toes. Early interdigital
neuralgia often causes an occasional mild ache or discomfort in the ball of the foot, usually when wearing
a specific shoe, such as those that are too narrow at the front. Neuralgia is usually unilateral. As the
condition progresses, the nerve thickens. The pain becomes worse, often with a burning or lancinating
===PAGE:504===
quality or paresthesias. In time, patients are unable to wear most shoes. While walking, patients often
falsely sense a pebble in their shoes, which they take off for relief. Neuroma most frequently affects the
3rd interspace. Only slightly less common is involvement of the 2nd interspace. Sometimes both
interspaces or feet are involved simultaneously.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
The symptoms are often specific, and the diagnosis is confirmed by tenderness on plantar palpation of
the interdigital space and reproduction of the radiating burning pain by squeezing the space. Although
MRI does not usually confirm neuroma, it may be useful to rule out other interspace lesions or arthritis
causing similar symptoms.
Treatment
• Modification of footwear and injection
Neuralgia of recent onset usually resolves quickly with properly fitting shoes and insoles or with local
anesthetic injection. In contrast, neuromas may require one or more perineural infiltrations of long-acting
corticosteroids with a local anesthetic. Injection is at a 45° angle to the foot, into the interspace at the
level of the dorsal aspect of the metatarsophalangeal joints. An appropriate orthotic often relieves
symptoms. If conservative therapy is ineffective, excision often brings complete relief. However, another
neuroma occasionally develops at the site of nerve excision (amputation or stump neuroma).
Metatarsophalangeal Joint Pain
Metatarsophalangeal joint pain usually results from tissue changes due to aberrant foot
biomechanics. Symptoms and signs include pain with walking and tenderness. Diagnosis is
clinical; however, infection or systemic rheumatic diseases (eg, RA) may need to be excluded
by testing. Treatment includes orthotics, sometimes local injection, and occasionally surgery.
Metatarsophalangeal joint pain most commonly results from misalignment of the joint surfaces with altered
foot biomechanics, causing joint subluxations, capsular impingement, and joint cartilage destruction
(osteoarthrosis). Misaligned joints may cause synovial impingement, with minimal if any heat and swelling
(osteoarthritic synovitis).
Metatarsophalangeal joint subluxations also occur as a result of inflammatory arthropathy, particularly RA.
Inflammatory synovitis and interosseous muscle atrophy in RA lead to subluxations of the lesser
metatarsophalangeal joints as well, resulting in hammer toe deformities. Consequently, the metatarsal fat
pad, which usually cushions the stress between the metatarsals and interdigital nerves during walking,
moves distally under the toes; interdigital neuralgia or Morton's neuroma may result. To compensate for
the loss of cushioning, adventitial calluses and bursae may develop.
Metatarsophalangeal joint pain may also result from functional hallux limitus, which limits passive and
active joint motion and usually occurs at the 1st metatarsophalangeal joint. Patients usually have foot
pronation disorders that result in elevation of the 1st ray with lowering of the medial longitudinal arch
during weight bearing. As a result of the 1st ray elevation, the proximal phalanx of the great toe cannot
freely extend on the 1st metatarsal head; the result is jamming at the dorsal joint leading to osteoarthritic
changes and loss of joint motion. Over time, pain may develop, and the joint may become less mobile with
an arthrosis (hallux rigidus), which can be debilitating.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include pain on walking. Dorsal and plantar joint tenderness is usually present on palpation
and during passive range of motion. Mild swelling with minimal heat occurs in osteoarthritic synovitis.
Significant warmth, swelling, or redness suggests inflammatory arthropathies or infection.
===PAGE:505===
Diagnosis
• Mainly clinical evaluation
• Exclusion of infection or arthropathy if signs of inflammation
Metatarsophalangeal joint pain can usually be differentiated from neuralgia or neuroma of the interdigital
nerves by the absence of burning, numbness, and tingling and interspace pain, although these symptoms
may develop from joint inflammation; if so, palpation can help with differentiation.
Monarticular heat, redness, and swelling indicate infection until proven otherwise, although gout is more
likely. When warmth, redness, and swelling involve multiple joints, evaluation for a systemic cause of joint
inflammation (eg, gout, RA, viral-associated arthritis, enteropathic arthritis) with a rheumatic disease
assessment (eg, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, ESR) is indicated.
Treatment
• Orthoses
Foot orthoses may help to redistribute and relieve pressure from the noninflamed joints. With excess
subtalar eversion or when the feet are highly arched, an orthotic that corrects these abnormal motions
should be prescribed. For functional hallux limitus, orthosis modifications may further help to plantarflex
the 1st ray to improve metatarsophalangeal joint motion and reduce pain. For more severe limitation of
1st metatarsophalangeal motion or pain, the use of rigid orthoses, carbon fiber plates, or external shoe
bars or rocker soles may be necessary to reduce motion at the joint. Surgery may be needed if
conservative therapies are ineffective. If inflammation (synovitis) is present, injection of a local
corticosteroid/anesthetic mixture may be useful.
Sesamoiditis
Sesamoiditis is pain at the sesamoid bones beneath the head of the 1st metatarsal, with or
without inflammation or fracture. Diagnosis is usually clinical. Treatment is usually modification
of footwear.
The 2 semilunar-shaped sesamoid bones aid the foot in locomotion. The medial bone is the tibial
sesamoid, and the lateral bone is the fibular sesamoid. Direct trauma or positional change of the
sesamoids due to alterations in foot structure (eg, lateral displacement of a sesamoid due to lateral
deviation of the great toe) can make the sesamoids painful. Sesamoiditis is particularly common among
dancers, joggers, and those who have high-arched feet or wear high heels. Many people with
sesamoiditis have bunions.
Symptoms and Signs
The pain of sesamoiditis is beneath the head of the 1st metatarsal; the pain is usually made worse by
walking and may be worse when wearing certain shoes. Occasionally, inflammation occurs, causing mild
warmth and swelling or occasionally redness that may extend medially and appear to involve the 1st
metatarsophalangeal joint. Sesamoid fracture can also cause pain, moderate swelling, and possibly
inflammation.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Imaging if fracture, infection, or gout is suspected
With the foot and 1st (big) toe dorsiflexed, the examiner inspects the metatarsal head and palpates each
sesamoid. Tenderness is localized to a sesamoid, usually the tibial sesamoid. Hyperkeratotic tissue may
indicate that a wart or corn is causing pain. If inflammation causes swelling around the 1st
===PAGE:506===
metatarsophalangeal joint, arthrocentesis is usually indicated to exclude gout and infectious arthritis. If
fracture, osteoarthritis, or displacement is suspected, x-rays are taken. Sesamoids separated by cartilage
or fibrous tissue (bipartite
sesamoids) may appear fractured on x-rays. If plain x-rays are equivocal, MRI
may be ordered.
Treatment
• New shoes, orthotics, or both
Simply not wearing the shoes that cause pain may be sufficient. If symptoms persist, shoes with a thick
sole and orthotics are prescribed and help by reducing sesamoid pressure. If fracture without
displacement is present, conservative therapy may be sufficient and may also involve immobilization of
the joint with the use of a flat, rigid, surgical shoe. NSAIDs and injections of a corticosteroid/local
anesthetic solution can be helpful. Although surgery may help in recalcitrant cases, it is controversial
because of the potential for disturbing biomechanics and locomotion of the foot. If inflammation is
present, treatment includes conservative measures plus local infiltration of a corticosteroid/anesthetic
solution to help reduce symptoms.
Plantar Fasciosis
(Plantar Fasciitis)
Plantar fasciosis is pain at the site of the attachment of the plantar fascia and the calcaneus,
with or without accompanying pain along the medial band of the plantar fascia. Diagnosis is
mainly clinical. Treatment involves calf muscle and plantar soft-tissue foot-stretching exercises,
night splints, and orthotics.
Syndromes of pain in the plantar fascia have been called plantar fasciitis; however, because there is
usually no inflammation, plantar fasciosis is more correct. Other terms used include calcaneal
enthesopathy pain or calcaneal spur syndrome; however, there may be no bone spurs on the calcaneus.
Plantar fasciosis may involve acute or chronic stretching, tearing, and degeneration of the fascia at its
attachment site.
Etiology
Recognized causes include shortening or contracture of the calf muscles and plantar fascia. Risk factors
for such shortening include a sedentary lifestyle, occupations requiring sitting, very high or low arches in
the feet, and wearing high-heel shoes. The disorder is also common among runners and dancers and
may occur in people whose occupations involve standing or walking on hard surfaces for prolonged
periods. Disorders that may be associated with plantar fasciosis are obesity, RA, reactive arthritis, and
psoriatic arthritis. Multiple injections of corticosteroids may contribute by causing degenerative changes
of the fascia and possible loss of the cushioning subcalcaneal fat pad.
Symptoms and Signs
Plantar fasciosis is characterized by pain at the bottom of the heel on weight bearing, particularly when
first arising in the morning; pain usually improves within 5 to 10 min, only to return later in the day. It is
often worse when pushing off of the heel (the propulsive phase of gait). Acute severe heel pain,
especially with mild local puffiness, may indicate an acute tear. Some patients describe burning or sticking
pain along the plantar medial border of the foot when walking.
Diagnosis
• Pain reproduced by calcaneal pressure during dorsiflexion
Other disorders causing heel pain can mimic plantar fasciosis:
• Throbbing heel pain, particularly when the shoes are removed or when mild heat and puffiness are
===PAGE:507===
present, is more suggestive of calcaneal bursitis (.
• Acute severe retrocalcaneal pain, with redness and heat, may indicate gout.
• Pain that radiates from the low back to the heel may be an S1 radiculopathy due to an L5 disk
herniation.
Plantar fasciosis is confirmed if firm thumb pressure applied to the calcaneus when the foot is dorsiflexed
elicits pain. Fascial pain along the plantar medial border of the fascia may also be present. If findings are
equivocal, demonstration of a heel spur on x-ray may support the diagnosis; however, absence does not
rule out the diagnosis, and visible spurs are not generally the cause of symptoms. Also, infrequently,
calcaneal spurs appear ill defined on x-ray, exhibiting fluffy new bone formation, suggesting
spondyloarthropathy (eg, ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis). If an acute fascial tear is suspected,
MRI is done.
Treatment
• Splinting, stretching, and cushioning or orthotics
To alleviate the stress and pain on the fascia, the person can take shorter steps and avoid walking
barefoot. Activities that involve foot impact, such as jogging, should be avoided. The most effective
treatments include the use
of in-shoe heel and arch cushioning with calf-stretching exercises and night
splinting devices that stretch the calf and plantar fascia while the patient sleeps. Prefabricated or custommade foot orthotics may also alleviate fascial tension and symptoms. Other treatments may include
activity modifications, NSAIDs, weight loss in obese patients, cold and ice massage therapy, and
occasional corticosteroid injections. However, because corticosteroid injections can predispose to plantar
fasciosis, many clinicians limit these injections. For recalcitrant cases, physical medicine, oral
corticosteroids, and cast immobilization should be used before surgical intervention is considered.
Inferior Calcaneal Bursitis
Bursitis can develop at the inferior calcaneus, near the insertion of the plantar fascia. Symptoms and
signs include throbbing heel pain, particularly when the shoes are removed; mild warmth; and swelling.
The pain is most pronounced when the heel first contacts the ground during walking or running activity.
Treatment is injection of a local anesthetic/corticosteroid mixture and soft-soled shoes with added
protective heel cushion padding.
Achilles Tendon Enthesopathy
Achilles tendon enthesopathy is pain at the insertion of the Achilles tendon at the
posterosuperior aspect of the calcaneus.
The cause is chronic traction of the Achilles tendon on the calcaneus. Contracted or shortened calf
muscles (resulting from a sedentary lifestyle and obesity) and athletic overuse are factors. Enthesopathy
may be caused by a spondyloarthropathy.
Pain at the posterior heel below the top of the shoe counter during ambulation is characteristic. Pain on
palpation of the tendon at its insertion is diagnostic. Manual dorsiflexion of the ankle during palpation
usually exacerbates the pain. Recurrent and especially multifocal enthesitis should prompt evaluation
(history and examination) for a spondyloarthropathy.
Treatment
• Stretching, splinting, and heel lifts
Physical therapy aimed at calf muscle stretching should be done 10 min three times/day. The patient can
exert pressure posteriorly to stretch the calf muscle while facing a wall at arms' length, with knees
extended and foot dorsiflexed. To minimize stress to the Achilles tendon with weight bearing, the patient
===PAGE:508===
should move the foot and ankle actively through their range of motion for about 1 min when rising after
extended periods of rest. Night splints may also be prescribed to provide passive stretch during sleep and
help prevent contractures. Heel lifts should be used temporarily to decrease tendon stress during weight
bearing and relieve pain. Heel lifts should be used bilaterally to prevent gait disturbance even if pain is
only in one heel.
Anterior Achilles Tendon Bursitis
(Albert's Disease; Retromalleolar Bursitis)
Anterior Achilles tendon bursitis is inflammation of the retromalleolar (retrocalcaneal) bursa,
located anterior (deep) to the attachment of the Achilles tendon to the calcaneus.
Bursitis is due to trauma (eg, from rigid or poorly fitting shoes) or inflammatory arthritis (eg, RA, gout). On
occasion, small calcaneal erosions may develop from severe inflammation.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs caused by trauma or gout develop rapidly; those caused by another systemic
disorder develop gradually. Pain, swelling, and warmth around the heel are common, as are difficulty
walking and wearing shoes. The bursa is tender. Initially, the swelling is localized anterior to the Achilles
tendon but in time extends medially and laterally.
Using the thumb and index finger, side-to-side compression anterior to the Achilles tendon causes pain.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation and x-rays
Fracture of the posterolateral talar tubercle also causes tenderness anterior to the insertion of the
Achilles tendon. Bursitis is often differentiated from the fracture by the localization of warmth and swelling
contiguous to the tendon and pain localized primarily in the soft tissue. Also, x-rays are taken to rule out
fracture as well as erosive calcaneal changes characteristic of chronic RA or other rheumatic disorders.
Treatment
• Intrabursal injection of a soluble corticosteroid/anesthetic solution
A corticosteroid/anesthetic injection, NSAIDs, and warm or cold compresses may be effective. Care must
be taken to inject only the bursal sac and not the tendon proper because tendon injection may lead to
tendon weakening or tearing, predisposing to subsequent rupture.
Posterior Achilles Tendon Bursitis
Posterior Achilles tendon bursitis is inflammation of a bursa that forms in response to shoe
pressure and is located at the top edge of the posterior shoe counter between the skin and
Achilles tendon.
This disorder occurs mainly in young women. Wearing high-heeled shoes is a risk factor. Many patients
have a bony prominence (Haglund's deformity) on the calcaneus.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs develop at the top edge of the posterior shoe counter. Early symptoms may be
limited to redness, pain, and warmth. Later, superficial skin erosion may occur. After months or longer, a
fluctuant, tender, cystic nodule 1- to 3-cm in diameter develops. It is red or flesh-colored. In chronic cases,
the bursa becomes fibrotic.
===PAGE:509===
Diagnosis
• Symptoms and a small, tender, flesh-colored or red nodule
The presence of the small, tender, flesh-colored or red nodule in a patient with compatible symptoms is
diagnostic. Rarely, an Achilles tendon xanthoma develops at the top edge of the posterior shoe counter
but tends to be pink and asymptomatic. Achilles tendon enthesopathy causes pain mainly at the tendon's
insertion but may also cause pain at the top edge of the posterior shoe counter. Enthesopathy is
differentiated by the absence of a soft-tissue lesion.
Treatment
• Modification of footwear
Properly fitting shoes with low heels are essential. A foam rubber or felt heel pad may be needed to lift the
heel high enough so that the bursa does not hit the shoe counter. Padding around the bursa or the
wearing of a backless shoe until inflammation subsides is indicated. Foot orthotics may enhance rear foot
stability and help reduce irritating motion on the posterior calcaneus while walking. Warm or cool
compresses, NSAIDs, and intrabursal injection of a local anesthetic/corticosteroid solution offer temporary
relief; the Achilles tendon itself must not be injected. Surgical removal of a portion of the underlying bone
may rarely be necessary to reduce soft-tissue impingement.
Epiphysitis of the Calcaneus
(Sever's Disease)
Epiphysitis of the calcaneus is painful disruption between the calcaneal apophysis and the body
of the heel that occurs before calcaneal ossification is complete.
The calcaneus develops from two centers of ossification: one begins at birth, the other usually after age
8. Ossification is usually complete by age 15. The cartilaginous disruption in calcaneal epiphysitis may
result from an excessive pull on the apophysis by contracted or shortened calf muscles. Bone growth
spurts without adaptive calf muscle lengthening may play a role.
Pain develops in a patient (usually aged 9 to 14) with a history of athletic activity; it affects the sides or
margins of the heel and is aggravated by standing on tip toes or running. Warmth and swelling are
occasionally present.
The diagnosis is clinical. X-rays are not helpful.
Treatment
• Heel pads and splinting or casting
Heel pads relieve symptoms by reducing the pull of the Achilles tendon on the heel. Night splints may be
used to passively stretch the calf muscles, helping maintain flexibility. In more severe or recalcitrant
cases, cast immobilization may be used to relieve pain and stretch the calf muscles. Reassurance is
important because symptoms may last several months.
Medial Plantar Nerve Entrapment
Medial plantar nerve entrapment is symptomatic compression of the medial branch of the
posterior tibial nerve at the medial heel.
Symptoms include almost constant pain, with and without weight bearing. Simple standing is often
difficult. Burning, numbness, and paresthesias are usually absent.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:510===
• Clinical evaluation
Medial plantar nerve entrapment may be confused with plantar fasciosis and heel spur pain as well as
tarsal tunnel syndrome. In medial plantar nerve entrapment, the following are present:
• Tenderness is at the medial heel.
• Other signs of tarsal tunnel syndrome are absent.
• Symptoms can be reproduced by palpation over the proximal aspect of the abductor hal-lucis, the origin
of the plantar fascia, or both at the medial tubercle of the calcaneus.
Treatment
• Orthoses, immobilization, and physical therapy
Immobilization and foot orthoses to prevent irritating motion and pressure may be helpful, as may physical
therapy and cryotherapy. If these treatments are ineffective, injection with a sclerosing agent that contains
alcohol or careful surgical decompression of the nerve may help relieve pain.
Plantar Fibromatosis
Plantar fibromatosis is a benign proliferative neoplasia of the plantar fascia.
In plantar fibromatosis, nodules are displayed most easily when the foot is dorsiflexed against the leg.
Most patients also have palmar nodules, usually located at the 4th metacarpophalangeal joint. Reported
associations with diabetes, epilepsy, and alcoholism may be anecdotal. Treatment is usually not indicated
unless the nodules become large enough to cause pressure-related pain with weight bearing. If so,
orthoses can help redistribute pressure away from the fibrotic nodular lesions. Surgery usually results in
recurrence and may also result in unintentional instability of the foot when fascial removal is excessive.
Hammer Toe Deformity
Hammer toe is a C-shaped deformity caused by dorsal subluxation at the metatarsophalangeal
joint.
[Fig. 44-2.
Hammer toe.]
The usual cause is misalignment of the joint surfaces due to a genetic predisposition toward aberrant foot
biomechanics and tendon contractures. RA and neurologic disorders such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease are other causes. The 2nd toe is the most common digit to develop a hammer toe deformity (see
Fig. 44-2
). Second toe hammer toes commonly result from an elongated 2nd metatarsal and from
pressure due to an excessively abducted great toe (hallux valgus deformity) causing a bunion (see
below). Painful corns ( often develop in hammer toe deformity, particularly of the 5th toe.
Reactive adventitial bursas often develop beneath corns, which may become inflamed.
Symptoms include pain while wearing shoes, especially shoes with low and narrow toe boxes, and
sometimes metatarsalgia. Diagnosis is clinical. Joints are examined for coexistent arthritis (eg, RA).
Treatment
• Wide toe box, toe pads, orthotics, or a combination
Shoes should have a wide toe box. Toe pads sold in pharmacies also help by shielding the affected toes
from the overlying shoe. If these measures are ineffective, surgical correction of the deformity often
relieves symptoms. If there is accompanying metatarsalgia, OTC or prescription orthotic devices with
===PAGE:511===
metatarsal pads and cushioning may help alleviate the pain.
Bunion
Bunion is a prominence of the medial portion of the head of the 1st metatarsal bone. The cause
is often variations in position of the 1st
metatarsal bone or great toe, such as lateral angulation
of the great toe (hallux valgus). Secondary osteoarthritis and spur formation are common.
Symptoms may include pain and redness, bursitis medial to the joint, and mild synovitis.
Diagnosis is usually clinical. Treatment is usually a shoe with a wide toe box, protective pads,
and orthotics. For bursitis or synovitis, corticosteroid injection may be helpful.
Contributing factors may include excessive turning in (pronation) of the ankles, wearing tight and pointedtoe shoes, and occasionally trauma. Joint misalignment causes osteoarthritis with cartilage erosion and
exostosis formation, resulting in joint motion being limited (hallux limitus) or eliminated (hallux rigidus). In
late stages, synovitis occurs, causing joint swelling. In reaction to pressure from tight shoes, an
adventitious bursa can develop medial to the joint prominence, which can become painful, swollen, and
inflamed (see
Fig. 44-3
).
Symptoms and Signs
The initial symptom may be pain at the joint prominence when wearing certain shoes. The joint capsule
may be tender at any stage. Later symptoms may include a painful, warm, red, cystic, movable, fluctuant
swelling located medially (adventitial bursitis) and swellings and mild inflammation affecting the entire joint
(osteoarthritic synovitis), which is more circumferential. With hallux limitus or rigidus, there is restriction of
passive joint motion, tenderness of the lateral aspect of the joint, and increased dorsiflexion of the distal
phalanx.
[Fig. 44-3.
Bunion.]
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Clinical findings are usually specific. Acute circumferential intense pain, warmth, swelling, and redness
suggest gouty arthritis or infectious arthritis, mandating examination of synovial fluid. If multiple joints are
affected, gout or another systemic rheumatic disease should be considered. If clinical diagnosis of
osteoarthritic synovitis is equivocal, x-rays are taken. Suggestive findings include joint space narrowing
and bony spurs extending from the metatarsal head or sometimes from the base of the proximal phalanx.
Periarticular erosions (Martel's sign) seen on imaging studies suggest gout.
Treatment
• Wide toe box, bunion pads, orthotics, or a combination
• Treatment of complications
Mild discomfort may lessen by wearing a shoe with a wide toe box. If not, bunion pads purchased in most
pharmacies can shield the painful area. Orthotics can also be prescribed to redistribute and relieve
pressure from the affected articulation. If conservative therapy fails or if the patient is unwilling to wear
large, wide shoes and orthotics because they are unattractive, surgery aimed at correcting abnormal bony
alignments and restoring joint mobility should be strongly considered. For bursitis, bursal aspiration and
injection of a corticosteroid are indicated. For osteoarthritic synovitis, oral NSAIDs or an intra-articular
injection of a corticosteroid/anesthetic solution reduces symptoms. For hallux limitus or hallux rigidus,
treatment aims to preserve joint mobility by using passive stretching exercises, which occasionally require
injection of a local anesthetic to relieve muscle spasm. Sometimes surgical release of contractures is
necessary.
===PAGE:512===
Chapter 45. Tumors of Bones and Joints
Introduction
Bone tumors may be primary or metastatic and benign or malignant.
In children, most bone tumors are primary and benign; some are malignant primary tumors (eg,
osteosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma). Very few are metastatic tumors (eg, neuroblastoma, Wilms' tumor).
Bone also can be affected by childhood leukemia and lymphomas.
In adults, especially those over age 40, metastatic tumors are about 100 times more common than primary
malignant tumors. Excluding marrow cell tumors (eg, multiple myeloma), there are only about 2500 cases
of primary malignant bone tumors in the US each year among children and adults.
Synovial tumors are extremely rare in both children and adults. Pigmented villonodular synovitis is a
benign but at times destructive tumor of synovial cells. Synovial sarcoma (often with both spindle cell and
glandular-like components) is a malignant soft-tissue tumor not of synovial origin, which seldom occurs
inside of a joint.
Symptoms and Signs
Bone tumors typically cause unexplained, progressive pain and swelling. Pain can occur without weight
bearing or bone stress and can occur at rest and at night.
Diagnosis
• Plain x-rays
• MRI usually and sometimes CT
• Bone scan if multicentric or metastatic tumors are suspected
• Biopsy unless imaging studies clearly show benign characteristics
The most common reason that diagnosis of bone tumors is delayed is that physicians fail to suspect the
tumor and order appropriate imaging studies. Persistent or progressive unexplained pain of the trunk or
extremities, particularly if associated with a mass, is suggestive. Plain x-rays are the first test. Tumors
should also be suspected if a radiographic study shows an unexplained abnormality consistent with a
tumor. Lesions suggestive of tumors usually require further assessment, often with additional imaging
studies and a biopsy.
Characteristic findings:
Some tumors (eg, Paget's disease, nonossifying fibroma, fibrous dysplasia,
enchondromas) may have characteristic radiographic findings and can be diagnosed without biopsy.
Radiographic findings that suggest cancer include the following:
• A lytic, destructive, or permeative appearance
• Irregular tumor borders
• Areas, especially multiple areas, of bone destruction (moth-eaten appearance)
• Cortical destruction
• Soft-tissue extension
• Pathologic fracture
===PAGE:513===
A lytic appearance is characterized by clear areas of bone destruction that are sharply demarcated. A
permeative appearance is characterized by a faint, gradual loss of bone or an infiltrating pattern without
clear borders. Certain tumors have a characteristic appearance (eg, Ewing's sarcoma typically shows
permeative-type bone destruction, including a large soft-tissue mass with periosteal onion-skin reactive
bone often before there is an extensive, lytic, destructive appearance; giant cell tumor has a cystic
appearance without a sclerotic interface between the tumor and normal bone). The tumor's location may
narrow diagnostic possibilities (eg, Ewing's sarcoma commonly appears in the shaft of a long bone;
osteosarcoma usually appears in the metaphyseal-diaphyseal region toward the end of a long bone; giant
cell tumor usually occurs in the epiphysis).
Some benign conditions, however, can mimic a malignant tumor:
• Heterotopic ossification (myositis ossificans) and exuberant callus formation after fracture can cause
mineralization around bony cortices and in adjacent soft tissues, mimicking malignant tumors.
• Langerhans' cell histiocytosis (histiocytosis X, Letterer-Siwe disease, Hand-Schuller-Christian disease,
eosinophilic granuloma) can cause solitary or multiple bone lesions that are usually distinguishable on
x-ray. In solitary lesions, there may be periosteal new bone formation, suggesting a malignant bone
tumor.
• Osteopoikilosis (spotted bones) is an asymptomatic condition of no clinical consequence but can
simulate osteoblastic bone metastases of breast cancer. It is characterized by multiple small, round, or
oval foci of bony sclerosis, usually in the tarsal, carpal, or pelvic bones or the metaphyseal-epiphyseal
regions of tubular bones.
Other testing:
CT and MRI may help define the location and extent of a bone tumor and sometimes
suggest a specific diagnosis. MRI is usually done if cancer is suspected. If tumors are suspected of being
metastatic or involving multiple foci (multicentric), then radioisotopic technetium bone scanning should be
done to search for all tumors.
Biopsy is usually essential for diagnosis of malignant tumors, unless the imaging studies have a
classically benign appearance. The pathologist should be given pertinent details of the clinical history
and should review imaging studies. Histopathologic diagnosis may be difficult and requires sufficient
viable tissue from a representative portion of the tumor (usually the soft portion). The best results are
obtained in centers with extensive experience in bone biopsies. Immediate, accurate, definitive diagnosis
is possible in > 90% of cases. If a malignant diagnosis is suspected on frozen section histology, often the
surgeon will wait upon permanent histology before treating definitively. Mistakes occur more frequently in
hospitals that infrequently encounter patients with malignant primary tumors.
Benign Bone Tumors
Osteochondroma:
Osteochondromas (osteocartilaginous exostoses), the most common benign bone
tumors, may arise from any bone but tend to occur near the ends of long bones. These tumors manifest
most often in people aged 10 to 20 and may be single or multiple. Multiple osteochondromas tend to run
in families. Secondary malignant chondrosarcoma develops in about 10% of patients with multiple
osteochondromas and in well < 1% of those with single osteochondromas. Osteochondromas rarely
cause the bone to fracture.
On imaging studies, the lesion appears as a bony prominence with a cartilage cap (< 2 cm) off the
surface of the bone with no underlying cortex under the prominence.
Excision is needed if the tumor is compressing a large nerve; causes pain (especially when impinging on
muscle and creating an inflammatory bursa); disturbs growth; or on imaging study has a destructive
appearance, soft-tissue mass, or thickened cartilaginous cap (> 2 cm) suggesting transformation into
malignant chondrosarcoma.
Enchondroma:
Enchondromas may occur at any age but tend to be recognized in patients aged 10 to
40. They are usually located within the medullary bone metaphyseal-diaphyseal region. These tumors are
===PAGE:514===
usually asymptomatic but may enlarge and become painful. They are often found when x-rays are taken
for another reason.
On x-ray, the tumor may appear as a lobulated calcified area within bone; some lesions are less calcified,
with areas of stippled calcification either on plain films or CT. If adjacent to the cortex, enchondromas
show minor endosteal scalloping. Almost all enchondromas have increased uptake on a bone scan and
thus create concern of cancer. X-ray findings, including MRI and CT, may be diagnostic; if they are not,
and especially if the tumor (not the associated joint) is painful, the diagnosis should be confirmed by
biopsy. To help differentiate bone pain from joint pain, the joint can be injected, usually with a long-lasting
anesthetic (eg, bupivacaine); if pain persists, it may be caused by the bone lesion.
An asymptomatic enchondroma does not need biopsy, excision, or other treatment (usually curettage);
however, follow-up imaging studies are indicated to rule out disease progression. These are done at 6 mo
and again at 1 yr or whenever symptoms develop.
Chondroblastoma:
Chondroblastoma is rare and occurs most commonly among people aged 10 to 20.
Arising in the epiphysis, this tumor may continue to grow and destroy bone and the joint. It appears on
imaging studies as a sclerotic marginated cyst containing spots of punctate calcification. MRI can help
diagnostically by showing characteristic changes well away from the lesion.
The tumor must be surgically removed by curettage, and the cavity must be bone grafted. Local
recurrence rate is about 10 to 20%, and recurrent lesions often resolve with repeat bone curettage and
bone grafting.
Chondromyxofibroma:
Chondromyxofibroma is very rare and usually occurs before age 30. The
appearance on imaging studies (usually eccentric, sharply circumscribed, lytic, and located near the end
of long bones) suggests the diagnosis. Treatment after biopsy is surgical excision or curettage.
Osteoid osteoma:
Osteoid osteoma, which tends to affect young people (commonly aged 10 to 35), can
occur in any bone but is most common among long bones. It can cause pain (usually worse at night) that
is typically relieved by mild analgesics, particularly aspirin or other NSAIDs. In growing children, the
inflammatory response and associated hyperemia, if close to the open growth plate, may cause
overgrowth and limb length discrepancy. Physical examination may reveal atrophy of regional muscles
because the pain causes muscle disuse.
Characteristic appearance on imaging studies is a small radiolucent zone surrounded by a larger sclerotic
zone. If a tumor is suspected, a technetium-99m bone scan should be done; an osteoid osteoma appears
as an area of increased uptake. CT with fine image sequences is also done and is most helpful in
distinguishing the lesion.
Removal of the small radiolucent zone with percutaneous radiofrequency ablation provides permanent
relief. Most osteoid osteomas are treated by an interventional musculoskeletal radiologist using
percutaneous techniques and anesthesia. Less often, osteoid osteomas are surgically curetted or
excised.
Benign giant cell tumor:
These tumors, which most commonly affect people in their 20s and 30s, occur
in the epiphyses and may eventually erode the rest of the bone and extend into the soft tissues. They
may cause pain. Giant cell tumors are notorious for their tendency to recur. Rarely, a giant cell tumor may
metastasize to the lung, even though it remains histologically benign.
Benign giant cell tumors appear as expansile lytic lesions on imaging. On imaging studies, there is a
margin without a sclerotic rim where the tumor ends and normal trabecular bone begins.
Most benign giant cell tumors are treated by curettage and packing with methyl methacrylate or by bone
graft. To reduce recurrence rate, surgeons often prefer using an adjuvant such as thermal heat (provided
by the hardening of methyl methacrylate) or chemically by phenol or freezing with liquid nitrogen. If a
tumor is very large and destructive to the joint, complete excision with joint reconstruction may be
necessary.
===PAGE:515===
Primary Malignant Bone Tumors
(See also
Chapter 117
.)
Multiple myeloma:
Multiple myeloma is the most common primary malignant bone tumor but is often
considered a marrow cell tumor within the bone rather than a bone tumor. It is of hematopoietic derivation
(see also p.
) and occurs mostly in older adults. The neoplastic process is usually multicentric and
often involves the bone marrow so diffusely that bone marrow aspiration is diagnostic. Imaging studies
usually show sharply circumscribed lytic lesions or diffuse demineralization. Rarely, the lesion can appear
as sclerotic or as diffuse osteopenia, especially in a vertebral body. An isolated single myeloma lesion
without systemic marrow involvement is called a plasmacytoma.
Osteosarcoma:
Osteosarcoma (osteogenic sarcoma) is the 2nd most common primary bone tumor and
is highly malignant. It is most common among people aged 10 to 25, although it can occur at any age.
Osteosarcoma produces malignant osteoid (immature bone) from tumor bone cells. Osteosarcoma usually
develops around the knee (distal femur more often than proximal tibia) or in other long bones, particularly
the metaphyseal-diaphyseal area, and may metastasize, usually to lung or other bone. Pain and swelling
are the usual symptoms.
Findings on imaging studies vary and may include sclerotic or lytic features. Diagnosis requires biopsy.
Patients need a chest x-ray and CT to detect lung metastases and a bone scan to detect bone
metastases.
Treatment is a combination of chemotherapy and surgery. Use of adjuvant chemotherapy increases
survival from < 20% to > 65% at 5 yr. Chemotherapy usually begins before any surgery. Decreased tumor
size on x-ray, decreased pain level, and decreased serum alkaline phosphatase indicate some response,
but the desired response is for > 95% tumor necrosis on mapping of the resected specimen. After several
courses of chemotherapy (over several months), limb-sparing surgery and limb reconstruction can
proceed. In limb-sparing surgery, the tumor is resected en bloc, including all surrounding reactive tissue
and a rim of surrounding normal tissue; to avoid microscopic spillage of tumor cells, the tumor is not
violated. More than 80% of patients can be treated with limb-sparing surgery without decreasing longterm survival rate. Continuation of chemotherapy after surgery is usually necessary. If there is nearly
complete tumor necrosis (about 99%) from preoperative chemotherapy, 5-yr survival rate is > 90%.
Fibrosarcoma:
Fibrosarcomas have similar characteristics to osteosarcomas but produce fibrous tumor
cells (rather than bone tumor cells), affect the same age group, and pose similar problems.
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma:
This tumor is clinically similar to osteosarcoma and fibrosarcoma,
although malignant fibrous histiocytomas have been classified as different from the osteosarcoma group
because of a different histology (no tumor bone production). Malignant fibrous histiocytomas tend to
occur in children and teenagers but can also occur in older adults as secondary lesions in bone infarcts
and radiation fields. Treatment is similar to that of osteosarcoma.
Chondrosarcoma:
Chondrosarcomas are malignant tumors of cartilage. They differ from osteosarcomas
clinically, therapeutically, and prognostically. Of chondrosarcomas, 90% are primary tumors.
Chondrosarcomas arise in other pre-existing conditions, particularly multiple osteochondromas and
multiple enchondromatosis (eg, in Ollier's disease and Maffucci's syndrome). Chondrosarcomas tend to
occur in older adults. They often develop in flat bones (eg, pelvis, scapula) but can develop in any portion
of any bone and can implant in surrounding soft tissues.
X-rays often reveal punctate calcifications. Primary chondrosarcomas often also exhibit cortical bone
destruction and loss of normal bone trabeculae. Secondary chondrosarcoma may be suggested by the
appearance of punctate calcifications or an increase in size of an osteochondroma. Technetium-99m
bone scintigraphy is a helpful screening study; all cartilaginous lesions show increased uptake on the
scan, although chondrosarcomas exhibit particularly high uptake. Biopsy is required for diagnosis and can
also determine the tumor's grade (probability of metastasizing).
===PAGE:516===
Low-grade chondrosarcomas (grade 1/2 or grade 1) are often treated intralesionally (wide curettage) with
addition of an adjuvant (often freezing liquid nitrogen; argon beam; heat of methyl methacrylate;
radiofrequency; or phenol). Other tumors are treated with total surgical resection. When surgical resection
with maintenance of function is impossible, amputation may be necessary. Because of the potential to
implant the tumor, meticulous care must be taken to avoid spillage of tumor cells into the soft tissues
during biopsy or surgery. Recurrence is inevitable if tumor cells spill. If no spillage occurs, the cure rate
depends on the tumor grade. Low-grade tumors are nearly all cured with adequate treatment. Because
these tumors have limited vascularity, chemotherapy and radiation therapy have little efficacy.
Ewing's sarcoma of bone:
Ewing's sarcoma is a round-cell bone tumor with a peak incidence between
10 and 25 yr. Most develop in the extremities, but any bone may be involved. Ewing's sarcoma tends to
be extensive, sometimes involving the entire bone shaft, most often the diaphyseal region. About 15 to
20% occur around the metaphyseal region. Pain and swelling are the most common symptoms.
Lytic destruction, particularly a permeative infiltrating pattern without clear borders, is the most common
finding on imaging, but multiple layers of subperiosteal reactive new bone formation may give an onionskin appearance. X-rays do not usually reveal the full extent of bone involvement, and a large soft-tissue
mass usually surrounds the affected bone. MRI better defines disease extent, which can help guide
treatment. Many other benign and malignant tumors can appear very similar, so diagnosis is made by
biopsy. At times this tumor may be confused with an infection. Accurate histologic diagnosis can be
accomplished with molecular markers, including evaluation for a typical clonal chromosomal abnormality.
Treatment includes various combinations of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Currently, >
60% of patients with primary localized Ewing's sarcoma may be cured by this multimodal approach. Cure
is sometimes possible even with metastatic disease. Chemotherapy in conjunction with surgical en bloc
resection, if applicable, often yields better long-term results.
Lymphoma of bone:
Lymphoma of bone (previously known as reticulum cell sarcoma) affects adults,
usually in their 40s and 50s. It may arise in any bone. The tumor consists of small round cells, often with
a mixture of reticulum cells, lymphoblasts, and lymphocytes. It can develop as an isolated primary bone
tumor, in association with similar tumors in other tissues, or as a metastasis from known soft-tissue
lymphomatous disease. Pain and swelling are the usual symptoms. Pathologic fracture is common.
Imaging studies reveal bone destruction, which may be in a mottled or patchy or even infiltrating,
permeative pattern, often with a clinical and radiographic large soft-tissue mass. In advanced disease, the
entire outline of the affected bone may be lost.
In isolated primary bone lymphoma, the 5-yr survival rate is ≥ 50%. Combination radiation therapy and
chemotherapy is as curative as amputation or other extensive ablative surgery. Stabilization of long bones
is often necessary to prevent pathologic fracture. Amputation is indicated only rarely, when function is lost
because of pathologic fracture or extensive soft-tissue involvement that cannot be managed otherwise.
Malignant giant cell tumor:
Malignant giant cell tumor, which is rare, is usually located at the extreme
end of a long bone. X-ray reveals classic features of malignant destruction (predominantly lytic
destruction, cortical destruction, soft-tissue extension, and pathologic fracture). A malignant giant cell
tumor that develops in a previously benign giant cell tumor is characteristically radioresistant. Treatment
is similar to that of osteosarcoma, but the cure rate is low.
Chordoma:
Chordoma, which is rare, develops from the remnants of the primitive notochord.
It tends to
occur at the ends of the spinal column, usually in the middle of the sacrum or near the base of the skull. A
chordoma in the sacrococcygeal region causes nearly constant pain. A chordoma in the base of the skull
can cause deficits in a cranial nerve, most commonly in nerves to the eye.
Symptoms may exist for months to several years before diagnosis. A chordoma appears on imaging
studies as an expansile, destructive bone lesion that may be associated with a soft-tissue mass.
Metastasis is unusual, but local recurrence is not. Chordomas in the sacrococcygeal region may be cured
by radical en bloc excision. Chordomas in the base of the skull are usually inaccessible to surgery but
may respond to radiation therapy.
===PAGE:517===
Metastatic Bone Tumors
Any cancer may metastasize to bone, but metastases from carcinomas are the most common, particularly
those arising in the following areas:
• Breast
• Lung
• Prostate
• Kidney
• Thyroid
• Colon
Prostate cancer in men and breast cancer in women are the most common types of cancers. Lung cancer
is the most common cause of cancer death in both sexes. Breast cancer is the most common cancer to
metastasize to bone. Any bone may be involved with metastases. Metastatic disease does not commonly
spread to bone below the mid forearm or mid calf, but when it occurs in those sites, it results most often
from lung or sometimes kidney cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
Metastases manifest as bone pain, although they may remain asymptomatic for some time. Bone
metastases may cause symptoms before the primary tumor is suspected or may appear in patients with a
known diagnosis of cancer.
Diagnosis
• X-ray
• Radionuclide scanning to identify all metastases
• Clinical evaluation and testing to diagnose the primary tumor (if unknown)
• Often biopsy if the primary tumor is unknown after assessment
Metastatic bone tumors are considered in all patients with unexplained bone pain, but particularly in
patients who have
• Known cancer
• Pain at more than one site
• Findings on imaging studies that suggest metastases
Prostate cancer is most often blastic, lung cancer is most often lytic, and breast cancer may be blastic or
lytic.
CT and MRI are highly sensitive for specific metastases. However, if metastases are suspected, a
radionuclide whole-body scan, which is not quite as sensitive, is usually done. Bone scan is more
sensitive for early and asymptomatic metastases than plain x-rays and can be used to scan the entire
body. Lesions on the scan are usually presumed to be metastases if the patient has a known primary
cancer. Metastases should be suspected in patients who have multiple lesions on bone scan. Although
metastases are suspected in patients with known cancer and a single bone lesion, the lesion may not be
===PAGE:518===
a metastasis; thus, a needle biopsy of the lesion is often done to confirm the diagnosis of a metastasis.
PET for almost whole-body scanning is now often used for some tumors.
If bone metastases are suspected because multiple lytic lesions are found, assessment for the primary
tumor can begin with clinical evaluation for primary cancers (particularly focused on the breast, prostate,
and thyroid), chest x-ray, mammography, and measurement of prostate-specific antigen level. Initial CT of
the chest, abdomen, and pelvis may also reveal the primary tumor. However, bone biopsy, especially fineneedle or core biopsy, is necessary if metastatic tumor is suspected and the primary tumor has not been
otherwise diagnosed. Biopsy with use of immunohistologic stains may give clues to the primary tumor
type.
Treatment
• Usually radiation therapy
• Surgery to stabilize bone at risk of pathologic fracture
• Kyphoplasty or vertebraplasty for certain painful vertebral fractures
Treatment depends on the type of tissue involved (which organ tissue type). Radiation therapy, combined
with selected chemotherapeutic or hormonal drugs, is the most common treatment modality. Early use of
radiation (30 Gy) and bisphosphonates (eg, zoledronate, pamidronate) slows bone destruction. Some
tumors are more likely to heal after radiation
therapy; for example, blastic lesions of prostate and breast
cancer are more likely to heal than lytic destructive lesions of lung cancer and renal cell carcinoma.
If bone destruction is extensive, resulting in imminent or actual pathologic fracture, surgical fixation or
resection and reconstruction may be required to provide stabilization and help minimize morbidity. When
the primary cancer has been removed and only a single bone metastasis remains (especially if the
metastatic lesion appears ≥ 1 yr after the primary tumor), en bloc excision sometimes combined with
radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or both rarely may be curative. Insertion of methyl methacrylate into the
spine (kyphoplasty or vertebraplasty) relieves pain and expands and stabilizes compression fractures that
do not have epidural soft-tissue extension.
Other Bone Lesions
Many nonneoplastic conditions of bone may clinically or radiologically mimic solitary bone tumors.
Unicameral bone cyst:
Simple unicameral bone cysts occur in the long bones starting distal to the
epiphyseal plate in children. The cyst causes the cortex to thin and predisposes the area to a buckle-like
pathologic fracture, which is usually how the cyst is recognized. Cysts < 5 cm may heal and may
disappear as the fracture heals. Cysts > 5 cm, particularly in children, may require excision or curettage
and bone grafting; however, many respond to injections of corticosteroids, demineralized bone matrix, or
synthetic bone substitutes. The response may be variable and may require multiple injections.
Regardless of treatment, cysts persist in about 10 to 15% of patients.
Fibrous dysplasia:
Fibrous dysplasia involves abnormal bone development during childhood. It may
affect one or several bones. Cutaneous pigmentation and endocrine abnormalities may be present
(Albright's syndrome). The abnormal bone lesions of fibrous dysplasia commonly stop developing at
puberty. They rarely undergo malignant degeneration. On x-ray, the lesions can appear cystic and may be
extensive and deforming. Calcitonin may help relieve pain. Progressive deformities, fractures that do not
heal with immobilization, or intractable pain may be effectively treated with orthopedic surgery.
Aneurysmal bone cyst:
An aneurysmal bone cyst is an idiopathic expansile lesion that usually develops
before age 25 yr. This cystic lesion usually occurs in the metaphyseal region of the long bones, but
almost any bone may be affected. It tends to grow slowly. A periosteal new bone shell forms around the
expansile lesion and is often wider than the original bone. Pain and swelling are common. The lesion may
be present for a few weeks to a year before diagnosis. The appearance on x-ray is often characteristic:
The rarefied area is usually well circumscribed and eccentric; the periosteum bulges, extending into the
===PAGE:519===
soft tissues, and may be surrounded by new bone formation.
Surgical removal of the entire lesion is the most successful treatment; regression after incomplete
removal sometimes occurs. Radiation should be avoided when possible because sarcomas occasionally
develop. However, radiation may be the treatment of choice in completely surgically inaccessible
vertebral lesions that are compressing the spinal cord.
Joint Tumors
Tumors rarely affect joints, unless by direct extension of an adjacent bone or soft-tissue tumor. However,
2 conditions—synovial chondromatosis and pigmented villonodular synovitis—occur in the lining
(synovium) of joints. These conditions are benign but locally aggressive. Both usually affect one joint,
most often the knee and second most often the hip, and can cause pain and effusion. Both are treated by
synovectomy and removal of any intra-articular bodies.
Synovial chondromatosis:
Synovial chondromatosis (previously called synovial osteochondromatosis)
is considered metaplastic. It is characterized by numerous calcified cartilaginous bodies in the synovium,
which often become loose. Each body may be no larger than a grain of rice, in a swollen, painful joint.
Malignant change is very rare. Recurrence is common.
Pigmented villonodular synovitis:
Pigmented villonodular synovitis is considered neoplastic. The
synovium becomes thickened and contains hemosiderin, which gives the tissue its blood-stained
appearance and characteristic appearance on MRI. This tissue tends to invade adjacent bone, causing
cystic destruction and damage to the cartilage. Pigmented villonodular synovitis is usually monarticular
but may be polyarticular. Late management, especially after recurrence, may require total joint
replacement. On rare occasions after several synovectomies, radiation therapy can be used.
===PAGE:520===
5 - Ear, Nose, Throat, and Dental Disorders
Chapter 46. Approach to the Patient With Ear Problems
Introduction
Earache, hearing loss, otorrhea, tinnitus, and vertigo are the principal symptoms of ear problems. Hearing
loss is discussed in
Chapter 47
.
In addition to the ears, nose, nasopharynx, and paranasal sinuses, the teeth, tongue, tonsils,
hypopharynx, larynx, salivary glands, and temporomandibular joint are examined; pain and discomfort
may be referred from them to the ears. It is important to examine cranial nerve function (see pp.
and
) and to perform tests of hearing ( and of the vestibular apparatus. The patient is also
examined for nystagmus (a rhythmic movement of the eyes—see
Sidebar 46-1
).
Testing
Patients with abnormal hearing on history or physical examination or with tinnitus or vertigo undergo an
audiogram (. Patients with nystagmus or altered vestibular function may benefit from
computerized electronystagmography (ENG), which quantifies spontaneous, gaze, or positional
nystagmus that might not be visually detectable. Computerized ENG caloric testing quantifies the strength
of response of the vestibular system to cool and warm irrigations in each ear, enabling the physician to
discriminate unilateral weakness. Different components of the vestibular system can be tested by varying
head and body position or by presenting visual stimuli.
Sidebar 46-1 Nystagmus
Nystagmus is a rhythmic movement of the eyes that can have various causes. Vestibular disorders can
result in nystagmus because the vestibular system and the oculomotor nuclei are interconnected. The
presence of vestibular nystagmus helps identify vestibular disorders and sometimes distinguishes central
from peripheral vertigo. Vestibular nystagmus has a slow component caused by the vestibular input and a
quick, corrective component that causes movement in the opposite direction. The direction of the
nystagmus is defined by the direction of the quick component because it is easier to see. Nystagmus may
be rotary, vertical, or horizontal and may occur spontaneously, with gaze, or with head motion.
Initial inspection for nystagmus is done with the patient lying supine with unfocused gaze (+30 diopter or
Frenzel lenses can be used to prevent gaze fixation). The patient is then slowly rotated to a left and then
to a right lateral position. The direction and duration of nystagmus are noted. If nystagmus is not
detected, the Dix-Hallpike (or Barany) maneuver is done. In this maneuver, the patient sits erect on a
stretcher so that when lying back, the head extends beyond the end. With support, the patient is rapidly
lowered to horizontal, and the head is extended back 45° below horizontal and rotated 45° to the left.
Direction and duration of nystagmus and development of vertigo are noted. The patient is returned to an
upright position, and the maneuver is repeated with rotation to the right. Any position or maneuver that
causes nystagmus should be repeated to see whether it fatigues.
Nystagmus secondary to peripheral nervous system disorders has a latency period of 3 to 10 sec and
fatigues rapidly, whereas nystagmus secondary to CNS has no latency period and does not fatigue.
During induced nystagmus, the patient is instructed to focus on an object. Nystagmus caused by
peripheral disorders is inhibited by visual fixation. Because Frenzel lenses prevent visual fixation, they
must be removed to assess visual fixation.
Caloric stimulation of the ear canal induces nystagmus in a person with an intact vestibular system.
Failure to induce nystagmus or > 20% difference in duration between sides suggests a lesion on the side
of the decreased response. Quantification of caloric response is best done with formal (computerized)
electronystagmography.
Ability of the vestibular system to respond to peripheral stimulation can be assessed at the bedside. Care
===PAGE:521===
should be taken not to irrigate an ear with a known tympanic membrane perforation or chronic infection.
With the patient supine and the head elevated 30
, each ear is irrigated sequentially with 3 mL of ice
water. Alternatively, 240 mL of warm water (40 to 44°C) may be used, taking care not to burn the patient
with overly hot water. Cold water causes nystagmus to the opposite side; warm water causes nystagmus
to the same side. A mnemonic device is COWS (
C
old to the
O
pposite and
W
arm to the
S
ame).
Primary imaging tests include CT of the temporal bone with or without radiopaque dye and gadoliniumenhanced MRI of the brain, with attention paid to the internal auditory canals to rule out an acoustic
neuroma. These tests may be indicated in cases of trauma to the ear, head, or both; chronic infection;
hearing loss; vertigo; facial paralysis; and otalgia of obscure origin.
Earache
(Otalgia)
Earache may occur in isolation or along with discharge or, rarely, hearing loss.
Pathophysiology
Pain may come from a process within the ear itself or may be referred to the ear from a nearby
nonotologic disorder.
Pain from the ear itself
may result from a pressure gradient between the middle ear and outside air,
from local inflammation, or both. A middle ear pressure gradient usually involves eustachian tube
obstruction, which inhibits equilibration between middle ear pressure and atmospheric pressure and also
allows fluid to accumulate in the middle ear. Otitis media causes painful inflammation of the tympanic
membrane (TM) as well as pain from increased middle ear pressure (causing bulging of the TM).
Referred pain
can result from disorders in areas innervated by cranial nerves responsible for sensation
in the external and middle ear (5th, 9th, and 10th). Specific areas include the nose, paranasal sinuses,
nasopharynx, teeth, gingiva, temporomandibular joint (TMJ), mandible, parotid glands, tongue, palatine
tonsils, pharynx, larynx, trachea, and esophagus. Disorders in these areas sometimes also obstruct the
eustachian tube, causing pain from a middle ear pressure gradient.
Etiology
Earache results from otologic causes (involving the middle ear or external ear) or from nonotologic causes
referred to the ear from nearby disease processes (see
Table 46-1
).
With
acute pain
, the most common causes are
• Middle ear infection
• External ear infection
With
chronic pain
(> 2 to 3 wk), the most common causes are
• TMJ dysfunction
• Chronic eustachian tube dysfunction
• Chronic otitis externa
Also with chronic pain, a tumor must be considered, particularly in elderly patients and if the pain is
associated with ear drainage. People with diabetes or in other immunocompromised states may develop a
particularly severe form of external otitis termed malignant or necrotizing external otitis. In this situation, if
===PAGE:522===
abnormal soft tissue is found on examination of the ear canal, the tissue must be biopsied to rule out
cancer.
TMJ dysfunction is a common cause of earache in patients with a normal ear examination.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should assess the location, duration, and severity of pain and
whether it is constant or intermittent. If intermittent, it is important to determine whether it is random or
occurs mainly with swallowing or jaw movement. Important associated symptoms include ear drainage,
hearing loss, and sore throat. The patient should be asked about any attempts at cleaning the ear canal
(eg, with cotton swab) or other recent instrumentation, foreign bodies, recent air travel or scuba diving,
and swimming or other recurrent water exposure to ears.
Review of systems
should ask about symptoms of chronic illness, such as weight loss and fevers.
Past medical history
should ask about known diabetes or other immunocompromised state, previous
ear disorders (particularly infections), and amount and duration of tobacco and alcohol use.
Physical examination:
Vital signs should be checked for fever.
Examination focuses on the ears, nose, and throat.
The pinna and area over the mastoid process should be inspected for redness and swelling. The ear
canal should be examined for redness, discharge, cerumen or foreign body, and any other lesions. The
TM should be examined for redness, perforation, and signs of middle ear fluid collection (eg, bulging,
distortion, change in normal light reflex). A brief bedside test of hearing ( should be conducted.
The throat should be examined for erythema, tonsillar exudate, peritonsillar swelling, and any mucosal
lesions suggesting cancer.
TMJ function should be assessed by palpation of the joints on opening and closing of the mouth, and
notation should be made of trismus or evidence of bruxism.
The neck should be palpated for lymphadenopathy. In-office fiberoptic examination of the pharynx and
larynx should be considered, particularly if no cause for the pain is identified on routine examination and if
nonotologic symptoms such as hoarseness, difficulty swallowing, or nasal obstruction are reported.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Diabetes or immunocompromised state
• Redness and fluctuance over mastoid and protrusion of auricle
• Severe swelling at external auditory canal meatus
• Chronic pain, especially if associated with other head/neck symptoms
Interpretation of findings:
An important differentiator is whether the ear examination
[Table 46-1.
Some Causes of Earache]
is normal; middle and external ear disorders cause abnormal physical findings, which, when combined
with history, usually suggest an etiology (see
Table 46-1
). For example, those with chronic eustachian
tube dysfunction have abnormalities of the TM, typically a retraction pocket.
Those with a normal ear examination may have a visible oropharyngeal cause, such as tonsillitis or
peritonsillar abscess. Ear pain due to neuralgia has a classic manifestation as brief (usually seconds,
===PAGE:523===
always < 2 min) episodes of extremely severe, sharp pain. Chronic ear pain without abnormality on ear
examination might be due to a TMJ disorder, but patients should have a thorough head and neck
examination (including fiberoptic examination) to rule out cancer.
Testing:
Most cases are clear after history and physical examination. Depending on clinical findings,
nonotologic causes may require testing (see
Table 46-1
). Those with a normal ear examination,
particularly with chronic or recurrent pain, may warrant evaluation with an MRI to rule out cancer.
Treatment
Underlying disorders are treated.
Pain is treated with oral analgesics; usually an NSAID or acetaminophen is adequate, but sometimes a
brief course of an oral opioid is necessary, particularly for cases of severe otitis externa. In cases of
severe otitis externa, effective treatment requires suction of debris from the ear canal and insertion of a
wick to allow for delivery of antibiotic ear drops to the infected tissue. Topical analgesics (eg, antipyrinebenzocaine combinations) are generally not very effective but can be used on a limited basis.
Patients should be instructed to avoid digging in their ears with any objects (no matter how soft the
objects are or how careful the patient claims to be). Also, patients should not irrigate their ears unless
instructed by a physician to do so, and then only gently. An oral irrigator should never be used to irrigate
the ear.
Key Points
• Most cases are due to infection of the middle or external ear.
• History and physical examination are usually adequate for diagnosis.
• Nonotologic causes should be considered when ear examination is normal.
Otorrhea
Ear discharge (otorrhea) is drainage exiting the ear. It may be serous, serosanguineous, or purulent.
Associated symptoms may include ear pain, fever, pruritus, vertigo, tinnitus, and hearing loss.
Etiology
Causes may originate from the ear canal, the middle ear, or the cranial vault. Certain causes tend to
manifest acutely because of the severity of their symptoms or associated conditions. Others usually have
a more indolent, chronic course but sometimes manifest acutely (see
Table 46-2
).
Overall, the most common causes are
• Acute otitis media with perforation
• Chronic otitis media (with a perforation of the eardrum, cholesteatoma, or both)
• Otitis externa
The most serious causes are necrotizing external otitis and cancer of the ear.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover duration of symptoms and whether symptoms have
been recurrent. Important associated symptoms include pain, itching, decreased hearing, vertigo, and
tinnitus. Patients are questioned about activities that can affect the canal or tympanic membrane (TM
===PAGE:524===
—eg, swimming; insertion of objects, including cotton swabs; use of ear drops). Head trauma sufficient to
cause a CSF leak is readily apparent.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of cranial nerve deficit and systemic symptoms suggesting
Wegener's granulomatosis (eg, nasal discharge, cough, joint pains).
Past medical history
should note any previous known ear disorders, ear surgery (particularly
tympanostomy tube placement), and diabetes or immunodeficiency.
Physical examination:
Examination begins with a review of vital signs for fever.
Ear and surrounding tissues (particularly the area over the mastoid) are inspected for erythema and
edema. The pinna is pulled and the tragus is pushed gently to see whether pain is worsened. The ear
canal is inspected with an otoscope; the character of discharge and presence of canal lesions,
granulation tissue, or foreign body are noted. Edema and discharge may block visualization of all but the
distal canal (irrigation should not be used in case there is a TM perforation), but when
[Table 46-2.
Some Causes of Ear Discharge]
possible, the TM is inspected for inflammation, perforation, distortion, and signs of cholesteatoma (eg,
canal debris, polypoid mass from TM).
When the ear canal is severely swollen at the meatus (eg, as with severe otitis externa) or there is
copious drainage, careful suctioning can permit an adequate examination and also allow treatment (eg,
application of drops, with or without a wick).
The cranial nerves are tested. The nasal mucosa is examined for raised, granular lesions, and the skin is
inspected for vasculitic lesions, both of which may suggest Wegener's granulomatosis.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Recent major head trauma
• Any cranial nerve dysfunction (including sensorineural hearing loss)
• Fever
• Erythema of ear or periauricular tissue
• Diabetes or immunodeficiency
Interpretation of findings:
Otoscopic examination can usually diagnose perforated TM, external otitis
media, foreign body, or other uncomplicated sources of otorrhea. Some findings are highly suggestive
(see
Table 46-2
). Other findings are less specific but indicate a more serious problem that involves more
than a localized external ear or middle ear disorder:
• Vertigo and tinnitus (disorder of the inner ear)
• Cranial nerve deficits (disorder involving the skull base)
• Erythema and tenderness of ear, surrounding tissues, or both (significant infection)
Testing:
Many cases are clear after clinical evaluation.
If CSF leakage is in question, discharge can be tested for glucose or
β
-transferrin; these substances are
present in CSF but not in other types of discharge.
Patients without an obvious etiology on examination require audiogram and CT of the temporal bone or
===PAGE:525===
gadolinium-enhanced MRI. Biopsy should be considered when auditory canal granulation tissue is
present.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause. Most physicians do not treat a suspected CSF leak with antibiotics
without a definitive diagnosis because drugs might mask the onset of meningitis.
Key Points
• Acute discharge in a patient without chronic ear problems or immunodeficiency is likely the result of otitis
externa or perforated otitis media.
• Severe otitis externa may require specialty referral for more extensive cleaning and possible wick
placement.
• Those with recurrent ear symptoms (diagnosed or undiagnosed), cranial nerve findings, or systemic
symptoms should have specialty referral.
Tinnitus
Tinnitus is a noise in the ears. It is experienced by 10 to 15% of the population.
Subjective tinnitus
is perception of sound in the absence of an acoustic stimulus and is
heard only by
the patient. Most tinnitus is subjective.
Objective tinnitus
is uncommon and results from noise generated by structures near the ear. Sometimes
the tinnitus is loud enough to be heard by the examiner.
Characteristics:
Tinnitus may be described as buzzing, ringing, roaring, whistling, or hissing and is
sometimes variable and complex. Objective tinnitus typically is pulsatile (synchronous with the heartbeat)
or intermittent. Tinnitus is most noticeable in quiet environments and in the absence of distracting stimuli
and, thus, frequently seems worse at bedtime.
Tinnitus may be intermittent or continuous. Continuous tinnitus is at best annoying and is often quite
distressing. Some patients adapt to its presence better than others; depression occasionally results.
Stress generally exacerbates tinnitus.
Pathophysiology
Subjective tinnitus
is thought to be caused by abnormal neuronal activity in the auditory cortex. This
activity results when input from the auditory pathway (cochlea, auditory nerve, brain stem nuclei, auditory
cortex) is disrupted or altered in some manner. This disruption may cause loss of suppression of intrinsic
cortical activity and perhaps creation of new neural connections. Some believe the phenomenon is similar
to the development of phantom limb pain after amputation. Conductive hearing loss (eg, caused by
cerumen impaction, otitis media, or eustachian tube dysfunction) may also be associated with subjective
tinnitus, by altering sound input to the central auditory system.
Objective tinnitus
represents actual noise generated by physiologic phenomena occurring near the
middle ear. Usually the noise comes from blood vessels, either normal vessels in conditions of increased
or turbulent flow (eg, caused by atherosclerosis) or abnormal vessels (eg, in tumors or vascular
malformations). Sometimes muscle spasms or myoclonus of palatal muscles or muscles in the middle ear
(stapedius, tensor tympani) cause clicking sounds.
Etiology
Causes may be considered by whether they cause subjective or objective tinnitus (see
Table 46-3
).
===PAGE:526===
Subjective tinnitus:
Subjective tinnitus may occur with almost any disorder affecting the auditory
pathways.
The most common disorders are those that involve sensorineural hearing loss, particularly
• Acoustic trauma (noise-induced sensorineural hearing loss)
• Aging (presbycusis)
• Ototoxic drugs
• Meniere's disease
Infections and CNS lesions (eg, caused by tumor, stroke, multiple sclerosis) that affect auditory pathways
also may be responsible.
Disorders causing conductive hearing loss also may cause tinnitus. These include obstruction of the ear
canal by cerumen, a foreign body, or external otitis. Otitis media, barotrauma, eustachian tube
dysfunction, and otosclerosis may also be associated with tinnitus.
Temporomandibular joint dysfunction may be associated with tinnitus in some patients.
Objective tinnitus:
Objective tinnitus usually involves noise from vascular flow, which causes an audible
pulsating sound synchronous with the pulse. Causes include
• Turbulent flow through the carotid artery or jugular vein
• Highly vascular middle ear tumors
• Dural arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)
Muscle spasms or myoclonus of palatal muscles or those of the middle ear (stapedius, tensor tympani)
may cause perceptible noise, typically a rhythmic clicking. Such spasms may be idiopathic or caused by
tumors, head trauma, and infectious or demyelinating diseases (eg, multiple sclerosis). Palatal myoclonus
causes visible movement of the palate, tympanic membrane, or both that coincides with tinnitus.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should note duration of tinnitus, whether it is in one or both ears,
and whether it is a constant tone or intermittent. If intermittent, the clinician should determine whether it is
regular and whether it is about the rate of the pulse or sporadic. Any exacerbating or relieving factors (eg,
swallowing, head position) should be noted. Important associated symptoms include hearing loss, vertigo,
ear pain, and ear discharge.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including diplopia and difficulty
swallowing or speaking (lesions of the brain stem) and focal weakness and sensory changes (peripheral
nervous system disorders). The impact of the tinnitus on the patient also should be assessed. Whether
the tinnitus is sufficiently distressing to cause significant anxiety, depression, or sleeplessness should be
noted.
Past medical history
should ask about risk factors for tinnitus, including exposure to loud noise, sudden
pressure change (from diving or air travel), history of ear or CNS infections or trauma, radiation therapy to
the head, and recent major weight loss (risk of eustachian dysfunction). Drug use should be ascertained,
particularly any salicylates, aminoglycosides, or loop diuretics.
Physical examination:
Physical examination focuses on the ear and the nervous system.
===PAGE:527===
The ear canal should be inspected for discharge, foreign body, and cerumen. The tympanic membrane
should be inspected for signs of acute infection (eg, redness, bulging), chronic infection (eg, perforation,
cholesteatoma), and tumor (red or bluish mass). A bedside hearing test should be done.
Cranial nerves, particularly vestibular function (, are tested along with peripheral strength,
sensation, and reflexes. A stethoscope is used to listen for vascular noise over the course of the carotid
arteries and jugular veins and over and adjacent to the ear.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Bruit, particularly over the ear or skull
• Accompanying neurologic symptoms or signs (other than hearing loss)
• Unilateral tinnitus
Interpretation of findings:
In some cases, tinnitus may indicate retrocochlear pathology, such as an
acoustic neuroma (benign but invasive tumor originating from the vestibular portion of the 8th cranial
nerve in the internal auditory canal).
It is important to note whether the tinnitus is unilateral because acoustic neuromas may manifest only with
unilateral tinnitus. This diagnosis is more likely if there is also unilateral sensorineural hearing loss or
asymmetric hearing loss with worse hearing in the ear with tinnitus.
It also is important to distinguish the uncommon cases of objective tinnitus from the more common cases
of subjective tinnitus. Tinnitus that is pulsatile or intermittent is almost always objective (although not
always detectable by the examiner), as is that associated with a bruit. Pulsatile tinnitus is nearly always
benign. Continuous tinnitus is usually subjective (except perhaps for that caused by a venous hum, which
may be identified by presence of a bruit and often by a change in tinnitus with head rotation or jugular
vein compression).
Specific causes can often be suspected by findings on examination (see
Table 46-3
). In particular,
exposure to loud noise, barotrauma, or certain drugs before onset suggests those factors as the cause.
Testing:
All patients with significant tinnitus should be referred for comprehensive audiologic evaluation
to determine the presence, degree, and type of hearing loss.
In patients with unilateral tinnitus and hearing loss, acoustic neuroma should be ruled out by gadoliniumenhanced MRI. In those with unilateral tinnitus and normal hearing and physical examination, MRI is not
necessary unless tinnitus persists > 6 mo.
Other testing depends on patient presentation (see
Table 46-3
).
Those with visible evidence of a vascular tumor in the middle ear require CT, gadolinium-enhanced MRI,
and referral to a subspecialist if the diagnosis is confirmed.
Those with pulsatile, objective tinnitus and no ear abnormalities on examination or audiology require
further investigation of the vascular system (carotid, vertebral, and intracranial vessels). The usual test
sequence is to begin with magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). However, because MRA is not very
sensitive for dural AVMs, many clinicians then consider doing an arteriogram. However, because dural
AVMs are rare, the significant risks of arteriography must be weighed against the potential benefit of
diagnosis and treatment (with embolization) of this vascular anomaly.
Treatment
Treatment of the underlying disorder may lessen tinnitus. Correcting hearing loss (eg, with a hearing aid)
relieves tinnitus in about 50% of patients.
===PAGE:528===
Because stress and other mental factors (eg, depression) can exacerbate symptoms, efforts to recognize
and treat these factors may help. Many patients are reassured by learning that their tinnitus does not
represent a serious medical problem. Tinnitus also can be worsened by caffeine and other stimulants, so
patients should try eliminating use of these substances.
Although no specific medical or surgical therapy is available, many patients find that background sound
masks the tinnitus and may help them fall asleep. Some patients benefit from a tinnitus masker, a device
worn like a hearing aid that provides a low-level sound that can cover up the tinnitus. Tinnitus retraining
therapy, offered by programs that specialize in tinnitus treatment, are helpful for many patients. Electrical
stimulation of the inner ear, as with a cochlear implant, occasionally
[Table 46-3.
Some Causes of Tinnitus]
reduces the tinnitus but is appropriate only for patients who are profoundly deaf.
Geriatrics Essentials
One out of 4 people > 65 yr have significant hearing impairment. Because tinnitus is common in people
with sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus is a common complaint among the elderly.
Key Points
• Subjective tinnitus is caused by an abnormality somewhere in the auditory pathway.
• Objective tinnitus is caused by an actual noise produced in a vascular structure near the ear.
• Loud noise, aging, Meniere's disease, and drugs are the most common causes of subjective tinnitus.
• Unilateral tinnitus with hearing loss or dizziness/dysequilibrium warrants gadolinium-enhanced MRI to
rule out acoustic neuroma.
• Any tinnitus accompanied by a neurologic deficit is of concern.
Dizziness and Vertigo
Dizziness
is an imprecise term patients often use to describe various related sensations, including
• Faintness (a feeling of impending syncope)
• Light-headedness
• Feeling of imbalance or unsteadiness
• A vague spaced-out or swimmy-headed feeling
Vertigo
is a false sensation of movement of the self or the environment. Usually the perceived movement
is rotary—a spinning or wheeling sensation—but some patients simply feel pulled to one side. Vertigo is
not a diagnosis—it is a description of a sensation.
Both sensations may be accompanied by nausea and vomiting or difficulty with balance, gait, or both.
Perhaps because these sensations are hard to describe in words, patients often use "dizziness," "vertigo,"
and other terms interchangeably and inconsistently. Different patients with the same underlying disorder
may describe their symptoms very differently. A patient may even give different descriptions of the same
"dizzy" event during a given visit depending on how the question is asked. Because of this discrepancy,
even though vertigo seems to be a clearly delineated subset of dizziness, many clinicians prefer to
consider the two symptoms together.
===PAGE:529===
However they are described, dizziness and vertigo may be disturbing and even incapacitating, particularly
when accompanied by nausea and vomiting. Symptoms cause particular problems for people doing an
exacting or dangerous task, such as driving, flying, or operating heavy machinery.
Dizziness accounts for about 5 to 6% of physician visits. It may occur at any age but becomes more
common with increasing age; it affects about 40% of people over 40 yr at some time. Dizziness may be
temporary or chronic. Chronic dizziness, defined as lasting > 1 mo, is more common among elderly
people.
Pathophysiology
The
vestibular system
is the main neurologic system involved in balance. This system includes
•
The vestibular apparatus of the inner ear
• The 8th (vestibulocochlear) cranial nerve, which conducts signals from the vestibular apparatus to the
central components of the system
• The vestibular nuclei in the brain stem and cerebellum
Disorders of the inner ear and 8th cranial nerve are considered peripheral disorders. Those of the
vestibular nuclei and their pathways in the brain stem and cerebellum are considered central disorders.
The sense of balance also incorporates visual input from the eyes and proprioceptive input from the
peripheral nerves (via the spinal cord). The cerebral cortex receives output from the lower centers and
integrates the information to produce the perception of motion.
Vestibular apparatus:
Perception of stability, motion, and orientation to gravity originates in the
vestibular apparatus, which consists of
• The 3 semicircular canals
• The 2 otolith organs—the saccule and utricle
Rotary motion causes flow of endolymph in the semicircular canal oriented in the plane of motion.
Depending on the direction of flow, endolymph movement either stimulates or inhibits neuronal output
from hair cells lining the canal. Similar hair cells in the saccule and utricle are embedded in a matrix of Ca
carbonate crystals (otoliths). Deflection of the otoliths by gravity stimulates or inhibits neuronal output
from the attached hair cells.
Etiology
There are numerous structural (trauma, tumors, degenerative), vascular, infectious, toxic (including drugrelated), and idiopathic causes (see
Table 46-4
), but only about 5% of cases are caused by a serious disorder.
[Table 46-4.
Some Causes of Dizziness and Vertigo]
The
most common causes of dizziness with vertigo
involve some component of the peripheral
vestibular system:
• Benign positional vertigo
• Meniere's disease
• Vestibular neuronitis
• Labyrinthitis
===PAGE:530===
Less often, the cause is a central vestibular disorder (most commonly migraine), a disorder with a more
global effect on cerebral function, a psychiatric disorder, or a disorder affecting visual or proprioceptive
input. Sometimes, no cause can be found.
The
most common causes of dizziness without vertigo
are less clear cut, but they are usually not
otologic and probably are
• Drug effects
• Multifactorial or idiopathic
Nonneurologic disorders with a more global effect on cerebral function sometimes manifest as dizziness
and rarely as vertigo. These disorders typically involve inadequate substrate (eg, O
, glucose) delivery
caused by hypotension, hypoxemia, anemia, or hypoglycemia; when severe, some of these disorders may
manifest as syncope. Additionally, certain hormonal changes (eg, as with thyroid disease, menstruation,
pregnancy) can cause dizziness. Numerous CNS-active drugs can cause dizziness independent of any
toxic effect on the vestibular system.
Occasionally, dizziness and vertigo may be psychogenic. Patients with panic disorder, hyperventilation
syndrome, anxiety, or depression may present with complaints of dizziness.
In elderly patients, dizziness is often multifactorial secondary to drug adverse effects and age-diminished
visual, vestibular, and proprioceptive abilities. Two of the most common specific causes are disorders of
the inner ear: benign paroxysmal positional vertigo and Meniere's disease.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover the sensations felt; an open-ended question is best
(eg, "Different people use the word 'dizziness' differently. Can you please describe as thoroughly as you
can what you feel?"). Brief, specific questioning as to whether the feeling is faintness, light-headedness,
loss of balance, or vertiginous may bring some clarity, but persistent efforts to categorize a patient's
sensations are unnecessary. Other elements are more valuable and clear-cut:
• Severity of initial episode
• Severity and characteristics of subsequent episodes
• Symptoms continuous or episodic
• If episodic, frequency and duration
• Triggers and relievers (ie, triggered by head/body position change)
• Associated aural symptoms (eg, hearing loss, ear fullness, tinnitus)
• Severity and related disability
Is the patient having a single, sudden, acute event, or has dizziness been chronic and recurrent? Was the
first episode the most severe (vestibular crisis)? How long do episodes last, and what seems to trigger
and worsen them? The patient should be asked specifically about movement of the head, arising, being
in anxious or stressful situations, and menses. Important associated symptoms include headache, hearing
loss, tinnitus, nausea and vomiting, impaired vision, focal weakness, and difficulty walking. The severity
of impact on the patient's life should be estimated: Has the patient fallen? Is the patient reluctant to drive
or leave the house? Has the patient missed work days?
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including URI symptoms (inner ear
disorders); chest pain, palpitations, or both (heart disease); dyspnea (lung disease); dark stools (anemia
===PAGE:531===
caused by GI blood loss); and weight change or heat or cold intolerance (thyroid disease).
Past medical history
should note presence of recent head trauma (usually obvious), migraine, diabetes,
heart or lung disease, and drug and alcohol abuse. In addition to identifying all current drugs, drug history
should assess recent changes in drugs, doses, or both.
Physical examination:
Examination begins with a review of vital signs, including presence of fever,
rapid or irregular pulse, and supine and standing BP, noting any drop in BP on standing up (orthostatic
hypotension) and whether standing provokes symptoms. If standing does provoke symptoms, postural
symptoms should be distinguished from those triggered by head movement by returning the patient
supine until symptoms dissipate and then rotating the head.
The ENT and neurologic examinations are fundamental. Specifically, with the patient supine, the eyes are
checked for presence, direction, and duration of spontaneous nystagmus (for full description of
examination for nystagmus, see
Sidebar 46-1
). Direction and duration of nystagmus and development of
vertigo are noted.
A gross bedside hearing test is done, the ear canal is inspected for discharge and foreign body, and the
tympanic membrane is checked for signs of infection or perforation.
Cerebellar function is tested by assessing gait and doing a finger-nose test and Romberg's test. The
remainder of the neurologic examination is done, including testing the rest of the cranial nerves.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Head or neck pain
• Ataxia
• Loss of consciousness
• Focal neurologic deficit
Interpretation of findings:
Traditionally, differential diagnosis has been based on the exact nature of the
chief complaint (ie, distinguishing dizziness from light-headedness from vertigo). However, the
inconsistency of patients' descriptions and the poor specificity of symptoms make this unreliable. A better
approach places more weight on the onset and timing of symptoms, the triggers, and associated
symptoms and findings, particularly otologic and neurologic ones.
Some constellations of findings are highly suggestive (see
Table 46-4
), particularly those that help
differentiate peripheral from central vestibular disorders.
• Peripheral: Ear symptoms (eg, tinnitus, fullness, hearing loss) usually indicate a peripheral disorder.
They are typically associated with vertigo and not generalized dizziness (unless caused by
uncompensated peripheral vestibular weakness). Symptoms are usually paroxysmal, severe, and
episodic; continuous dizziness is rarely due to peripheral vertigo. Loss of consciousness is not
associated with dizziness due to peripheral vestibular pathology.
• Central: Ear symptoms are rarely present, but gait/balance disturbance is common. Nystagmus is not
inhibited by visual fixation.
Testing:
Patients with a sudden, ongoing attack should have pulse oximetry and finger-stick glucose test.
Women should have a pregnancy test. Most clinicians also do an ECG. Other tests are done based on
findings (see
Table 46-4
), but generally gadolinium-enhanced MRI is indicated for patients with acute
symptoms who have headache, neurologic abnormalities, or any other findings suggestive of a CNS
etiology.
Patients with chronic symptoms should have gadolinium-enhanced MRI to look for evidence of stroke,
===PAGE:532===
multiple sclerosis, or other CNS lesions.
Patients for whom results of bedside tests of hearing and vestibular function are abnormal or equivocal
should undergo formal testing with audiometry and electronystagmography.
Laboratory tests are rarely helpful, except for patients with chronic vertigo and bilateral hearing loss, for
whom syphilis serology is indicated.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause, including stopping, reducing, or switching any causative drugs.
If a vestibular disorder is present and thought to be secondary to active Meniere's disease or vestibular
neuronitis or labyrinthitis, the most effective vestibular nerve suppressants are diazepam (2 to 5 mg po q
6 to 8 h, with higher doses given under supervision for severe vertigo) or oral
antihistamine/anticholinergic drugs (eg, meclizine 25 to 50 mg tid). All of these drugs can cause
drowsiness, thereby limiting their use for certain patients. Nausea can be treated with prochlorperazine 10
mg IM qid or 25 mg rectally bid. Vertigo associated with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is treated
with the Epley maneuver (otolith repositioning) done by an experienced practitioner (see
Fig. 48-1
. Meniere's disease is best managed by an otolaryngologist with training in
management of this chronic disorder, but initial management consists of a low-salt diet and a K-sparing
diuretic.
Patients with persistent or recurrent vertigo secondary to unilateral vestibular weakness (such as
secondary to vestibular neuronitis) usually benefit from vestibular rehabilitation therapy done by an
experienced physical therapist. Most patients compensate well, although some, especially the elderly,
have more difficulty. Physical therapy can also provide important safety information for elderly or
particularly disabled patients.
Geriatrics Essentials
As people age, organs involved in balance function less well. For example, seeing in dim light becomes
more difficult, inner ear structures deteriorate, proprioception becomes less sensitive, and mechanisms
that control BP become less responsive (eg, to postural changes, postprandial demands). Older people
also are more likely to have cardiac or cerebrovascular disorders that can contribute to dizziness. They
also are more likely to be taking drugs that can cause dizziness, including those for hypertension, angina,
heart failure, seizures, and anxiety, as well as certain antibiotics, antihistamines,
and sleep aids. Thus,
dizziness in elderly patients usually has more than one cause.
Although unpleasant at any age, the consequences of dizziness and vertigo are a particular problem for
elderly patients. Those with frailty are at significant risk of falling with consequent fractures; their fear of
moving and falling often significantly decreases their ability to do daily activities.
In addition to treatment of specific causes, elderly patients with dizziness or vertigo may benefit from
physical therapy and exercises to strengthen muscles and help maintain independent ambulation as long
as possible.
Key Points
• Vague or inconsistently described symptoms may still be associated with a serious condition.
• Cerebrovascular disease and drug effects should be sought, particularly in elderly patients.
• Peripheral vestibular system disorders should be differentiated from central vestibular system disorders.
• Immediate neuroimaging should be done when symptoms are accompanied by headache, focal
neurologic abnormalities, or both.
===PAGE:533===
Chapter 47. Hearing Loss
Introduction
Nearly 10% of people in the US have some degree of hearing loss. About 1/800 to 1/1000 neonates are
born with severe to profound hearing loss. Two to 3 times as many are born with lesser hearing loss.
During childhood, another 2 to 3/1000 children acquire moderate to severe hearing loss. Adolescents are
at risk from excessive exposure to noise, head trauma, or both. Older adults typically experience a
progressive decrease in hearing (presbycusis—, which is probably related to aging and noise
exposure.
Hearing deficits in early childhood can result in lifelong impairments in receptive and expressive language
skills. The severity of the handicap is determined by the age at which the hearing loss occurred; the
nature of the loss (its duration, the frequencies affected, and the degree); and the susceptibilities of the
individual child (eg, coexisting visual impairment, intellectual disability, primary language deficits,
inadequate linguistic environment). Children who have other sensory, linguistic, or cognitive deficiencies
are affected most severely.
Pathophysiology
Hearing loss can be classified as conductive, sensorineural, or both (mixed loss).
Conductive hearing loss
occurs secondary to lesions in the external auditory canal, tympanic
membrane (TM), or middle ear. These lesions prevent sound from being effectively conducted to the inner
ear.
Sensorineural hearing loss
is caused by lesions of either the inner ear (sensory) or the auditory (8th)
nerve (neural—see
Table 47-1
). This distinction is important because sensory
[Table 47-1.
Differences Between Sensory and Neural Hearing Losses]
hearing loss is sometimes reversible and is seldom life threatening. A neural hearing loss is rarely
recoverable and may be due to a potentially life-threatening brain tumor—commonly a cerebellopontine
angle tumor.
Mixed loss
may be caused by severe head injury with or without fracture of the skull or temporal bone,
by chronic infection, or by one of many genetic disorders. It may also occur when a transient conductive
hearing loss, commonly due to otitis media, is superimposed on a sensorineural hearing loss.
Etiology
Hearing loss can be congenital (see
Table 47-2
) or acquired (see
Table 47-3
), progressive or sudden (see also p.
), temporary or permanent, unilateral or bilateral, and
mild or profound. Drug-induced ototoxicity is discussed elsewhere (.
The
most common causes
overall are the following:
• Cerumen accumulation
• Noise
• Aging
• Infections (particularly among children and young adults)
Cerumen
(earwax) accumulation is the most common cause of treatable hearing loss, especially in the
===PAGE:534===
elderly. Foreign bodies obstructing the canal are sometimes a problem in children, both because of their
presence and because of any damage inadvertently caused during their removal.
Noise
can cause sudden or gradual sensorineural hearing loss. In acoustic trauma, hearing loss results
from exposure to a single, extreme noise (eg, a nearby gunshot or explosion); some patients have tinnitus
as well. The loss is usually temporary (unless there is also blast damage, which may destroy the TM,
ossicles, or both). In noise-induced hearing loss, the loss develops over time because of chronic
exposure to noise > 85 decibels (dB—see
Sidebar 47-1
. Although people vary somewhat in
susceptibility to noise-induced hearing loss, nearly everyone loses some hearing if they are exposed to
sufficiently intense noise for an adequate time. Repeated exposure to loud noise ultimately results in loss
of hair cells in the organ of Corti. Hearing loss typically occurs first at 4 kHz and gradually spreads to the
lower and higher frequencies as exposure continues. In contrast to most other causes of sensorineural
hearing losses, noise-induced hearing loss may be less severe at 8 kHz than at 4 kHz.
[Table 47-2.
Congenital Causes of Hearing Loss*]
Acute otitis media
(AOM— is a common cause of transient mild to moderate hearing loss
(mainly in children). However, without treatment, AOM sequelae and chronic otitis media (and the rarer
purulent labyrinthitis) can cause permanent loss, particularly if a cholesteatoma forms.
Secretory otitis media
(SOM— occurs in several ways. Almost all episodes of AOM are
followed by a period of 2 to 4 wk of SOM. SOM can also be caused by eustachian
tube dysfunction (eg,
resulting from cleft palate, benign or malignant tumors of the nasopharynx, or rapid changes in external
air pressure as occur during descent from high altitudes or rapid ascent while scuba diving).
Autoimmune disorders
can cause sensorineural hearing loss at all ages and can cause other
symptoms and signs as well.
Evaluation
Evaluation consists of detecting and quantifying hearing loss and determining etiology (particularly
reversible causes).
Screening:
Most adults and older children notice a sudden hearing loss, and caregivers may suspect
that a neonate has a severe hearing loss within the first week of life when the neonate does not respond
to voices or other sounds. However, progressive losses and nearly all losses in infants and young
children must be detected by screening. Screening should begin at birth ( so that linguistic
input can allow optimal language development. Suspected hearing loss at any time should prompt referral
to a specialist. If screening is not done, severe bilateral losses may not be recognized until age 2 yr, and
mild to moderate or severe unilateral losses are often not recognized until children reach school age.
History: History of present illness
should note how long hearing loss has been perceived, how it
began (eg, gradual, acute), whether it is unilateral or bilateral, and whether sound is distorted (eg, music
is off—dull or lifeless) or there is difficulty with speech discrimination. The patient should be asked
whether the loss followed any acute event (eg, head injury, barotrauma [particularly a diving injury],
starting of a drug). Important accompanying symptoms include other otologic symptoms (eg, ear pain,
tinnitus, ear discharge), vestibular symptoms (eg, disorientation in the dark, vertigo), and other neurologic
symptoms (eg, headache, weakness or asymmetry of the face, an abnormal sense of taste, fullness of
the ear). In children, important associated symptoms include presence of delays in speech or language
development and delayed motor development.
Review of systems
should seek to determine the impact of hearing difficulty on the patient's life.
Past medical history
should note previous possibly causative disorders, including CNS infection,
repeated ear infections, chronic exposure to loud noise, head trauma, rheumatic disorders (eg, RA,
lupus), and a family history of hearing loss. Drug history should specifically query current or previous use
of ototoxic drugs (see
Table 47-3
).
===PAGE:535===
Physical examination:
The focus is examination of the ears and hearing and the neurologic
examination. The external ear is inspected for obstruction, infection, congenital malformations, and other
lesions. The TM is examined for perforation, drainage, otitis media, and cholesteatoma. During the
neurologic examination, particular attention needs to be paid to the 2nd through 7th cranial nerves as well
as to vestibular and cerebellar function because abnormalities in these areas often occur with tumors of
the brain stem and cerebellopontine angle. Weber's test and the Rinne test require a tuning fork to
differentiate conductive from sensorineural hearing loss.
In
Weber's test
, the stem of a vibrating 512-Hz or 1024-Hz tuning fork is placed on the midline of the
head, and the patient indicates in which ear the tone is louder. In unilateral conductive hearing loss, the
tone is louder in the ear with hearing loss. In unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, the tone is louder in
the normal ear because the tuning fork stimulates both inner ears equally and the patient perceives the
stimulus with the unaffected ear.
In the
Rinne test
, hearing by bone and by air conduction is compared. Bone conduction bypasses the
external and middle ear and tests the integrity of the inner ear, 8th cranial nerve, and central auditory
pathways. The stem of a vibrating tuning fork is held against the mastoid (for bone conduction); as soon
as the sound is no longer perceived, the fork is removed from the mastoid, and the still-vibrating tines are
held close to the pinna (for air conduction). Normally, the fork can once more be heard, indicating that air
conduction is better than bone conduction. With conductive hearing loss, the relationship is reversed;
bone conduction is louder than air conduction. With sensorineural hearing loss, both air and bone
conduction are reduced, but air conduction remains louder.
Red flags:
Findings of particular concern are
• Unilateral sensorineural hearing loss
• Abnormalities of cranial nerves (other than hearing loss)
Interpretation of findings:
Many causes of hearing loss (eg, cerumen, injury, significant noise exposure,
infectious sequelae, drugs) are readily apparent based on results of the examination (see
Table 47-3
).
Associated findings are helpful in diagnosing the remaining small number of patients in
[Table 47-3.
Some Causes of Acquired Hearing Loss]
whom no clear cause can be found. Those who have focal neurologic abnormalities are of particular
concern. The 5th or 7th cranial nerve or both are often affected by tumors that involve the 8th nerve, so
loss of facial sensation and weak jaw clench (5th) and hemifacial weakness and taste abnormalities (7th)
point to a lesion in that area. Signs of autoimmune disorders, maxillofacial malformations, and renal
dysfunction may suggest these disorders as a cause.
Any child with delays in speech or language development or difficulty in school should be evaluated for
hearing loss. Intellectual disability, aphasia, and autism must also be considered. Delayed motor
development may signal vestibular deficit, which is often associated with a sensorineural hearing loss.
Testing:
Testing includes
• Audiologic tests
• Sometimes MRI or CT
Audiologic tests
are required for all people who have hearing loss; these tests usually include
• Measurement of pure-tone thresholds with air and bone conduction
• Speech reception threshold
===PAGE:536===
• Speech discrimination
• Tympanometry
• Acoustic reflex testing
Information gained from these tests helps determine whether more definitive differentiation of sensory
from neural hearing loss is needed.
Pure-tone audiometry quantifies hearing loss. An audiometer delivers sounds of specific frequencies
(pure tones) at different intensities to determine the patient's hearing threshold (how loud a sound must
be to be perceived) for each frequency. Hearing in each ear is tested from 125 or 250 to 8000 Hz by air
conduction (using earphones) and up to 4 kHz by bone conduction (using an oscillator in contact with the
mastoid process or forehead). Test results are plotted on graphs called audiograms (see
Fig. 47-1
), which show the difference between the patient's hearing threshold and normal hearing at each
frequency. The difference is measured in dB (see
Sidebar 47-1
). The normal threshold is considered 0 dB
hearing level (Hl); hearing loss is considered present if the patient's threshold is > 25 dB Hl. When
hearing loss is such as to require loud test tones, intense tones presented to one ear may be heard in the
other ear. In such cases, a masking sound, usually narrow band noise, is presented to the ear not being
tested to isolate it.
Speech audiometry includes the speech reception threshold (SRT) and the word recognition score. The
SRT is a measure of the intensity at which speech is recognized. To
determine the SRT, the examiner
presents the patient with a list of words at specific sound intensities. These words usually have 2 equally
accented syllables (spondees), such as railroad, staircase, and baseball. The examiner notes the
intensity at which the patient repeats 50% of the words correctly. The SRT approximates the average
hearing level at speech frequencies (eg, 500 Hz, 1000 Hz, 2000 Hz).
Sidebar 47-1 Sound Levels
Sound intensity and pressure (the physical correlates of loudness) are measured in decibels (dB). A dB is
a unitless figure that compares 2 values and is defined as the logarithm of the ratio of a measured value
to a reference value, multiplied by a constant:
dB = k log (V
measured
/V
ref
)
By convention, the reference value for sound pressure level (SPL) is taken as the quietest 1000-Hz
sound detectable by young, healthy human ears.
*
The sound may be measured in terms of pressure
(N/m
) or intensity (watts/m
).
Because sound intensity equals the square of sound pressure, the constant (k) for SPL is 20; for sound
intensity, 10. Thus, each 20-dB increase represents a 10-fold increase in SPL but a 100-fold increase in
sound intensity.
The dB values in the table below give only a rough idea of the risk of hearing loss. Some of them are dB
SPL values (referenced to N/m
), whereas others represent peak dB or dB on the A-scale (a scale that
emphasizes the frequencies that are most hazardous to human hearing).
Db
Example
Faintest sound heard by human ear
Whisper, quiet library
Normal conversation, sewing machine, typewriter
Lawnmower, shop tools, truck traffic (8 h/day is the maximum exposure without protection
)
Chain saw, pneumatic drill, snowmobile (2 h/day is the maximum exposure without protection)
===PAGE:537===
Sandblasting, loud rock concert, automobile horn (15 min/day is the maximum exposure without
protection)
Gun muzzle blast, jet engine (noise causes pain and even brief exposure injures unprotected ears;
injury may occur even with hearing protectors)
Rocket launching pad
*In audiometric testing, because human ears respond differently at different frequencies, the reference
value changes for each frequency tested. Threshold values reported on audiograms take this into
account; the normal threshold is always 0 dB, regardless of the actual SPL.
Mandatory federal standard, but protection is recommended for more than brief exposure to sound levels
> 85 db.
The word recognition score tests the ability to discriminate among the various speech sounds or
phonemes. It is determined by presenting 50 phonetically balanced one-syllable words at an intensity of
35 to 40 dB above the patient's SRT. The word list contains phonemes in the same relative frequency
found in conversational English. The score is the percentage of words correctly repeated by the patient
and reflects the ability to understand speech
[Fig. 47-1.
Audiogram of right ear in a patient with normal hearing.]
under optimal listening conditions. A normal score ranges from 90 to 100%. The word recognition score is
normal with conductive hearing loss, albeit at a higher intensity level, but can be reduced at all intensity
levels with sensorineural hearing loss. Discrimination is even poorer in neural than in sensory hearing
loss.
Tympanometry measures the impedance of the middle ear to acoustic energy and does not require
patient participation. It is commonly used to screen children for middle ear effusions. A probe containing a
sound source, microphone, and air pressure regulator is placed snugly with an airtight seal into the ear
canal. The probe microphone records the reflected sound from the TM while pressure in the canal is
varied. Normally, maximal compliance of the middle ear occurs when the pressure in the ear canal equals
atmospheric pressure. Abnormal compliance patterns suggest specific anatomic disruptions. In eustachian
tube obstruction and middle ear effusion, maximal compliance occurs with a negative pressure in the ear
canal. When the ossicular chain is disrupted, as in necrosis or dislocation of the long process of the
incus, the middle ear is excessively compliant. When the ossicular chain is fixed, as in stapedial ankylosis
in otosclerosis, compliance may be normal or reduced.
The acoustic reflex is contraction of the stapedius muscle in response to loud sounds,
which changes the
compliance of the TM, protecting the middle ear from acoustic trauma. The reflex is tested by presenting
a tone and measuring what intensity provokes a change in middle ear impedance as noted by movement
of the TM. An absent reflex could indicate middle ear disease or a tumor of the auditory nerve.
Advanced testing
is sometimes needed. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the head to detect lesions of the
cerebellopontine angle may be needed in patients with an abnormal neurologic examination or those
whose audiologic testing shows poor word recognition, asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss, or a
combination when the etiology is not clear.
CT is done if bony tumors or bony erosion is suspected. Magnetic resonance angiography is done if
vascular abnormalities such as glomus tumors are suspected.
The auditory brain stem response uses surface electrodes to monitor brain wave response to acoustic
stimulation in people who cannot otherwise respond.
Electrocochleography measures the activity of the cochlea and the auditory nerve with an electrode
placed on or through the eardrum. It can be used to assess and monitor patients with dizziness, can be
used in patients who are awake, and is useful in intraoperative monitoring.
===PAGE:538===
Otoacoustic emissions testing measures sounds produced by outer hair cells of the cochlea in response
to a sound stimulus usually placed in the ear canal. It is used to screen neonates and infants for hearing
loss and to monitor the hearing of patients who are using ototoxic drugs (eg, gentamicin, cisplatin).
Certain patients, such as children with a reading or other learning problem and elderly people who seem
to hear but do not comprehend, should undergo a central auditory evaluation. It measures discrimination
of degraded or distorted speech, discrimination in the presence of a competing message in the opposite
ear, the ability to fuse incomplete or partial messages delivered to each ear into a meaningful message,
and the capacity to localize sound in space when acoustic stimuli are delivered simultaneously to both
ears.
Treatment
The causes of a hearing loss should be determined and treated. Ototoxic drugs should be stopped or the
dose should be lowered unless the severity of the disease being treated (usually cancer or a severe
infection) requires that the risk of additional ototoxic hearing loss be accepted. Attention to peak and
trough drug levels may help minimize risk.
Fluid from middle ear effusion can be drained by myringotomy and prevented with the insertion of a
tympanostomy tube. Benign growths (eg, enlarged adenoids, nasal polyps) and malignant tumors (eg,
nasopharyngeal cancers, sinus cancers) blocking the eustachian tube or ear canal can be removed.
Hearing loss caused by autoimmune disorders may respond to corticosteroids.
Damage to the TM or ossicles or otosclerosis may require reconstructive surgery. Brain tumors causing
hearing loss may in some cases be removed and hearing preserved.
Many causes of hearing loss have no cure, and treatment involves compensating for the hearing loss with
hearing aids and, for severe to profound loss, a cochlear implant. In addition, various coping mechanisms
may help.
Hearing aids:
Amplification of sound with a hearing aid helps many people. Although hearing aids do not
restore hearing to normal, they can significantly improve communication. Physicians should encourage
hearing aid use and help patients overcome a sense of social stigma that continues to obstruct use of
these devices, perhaps by making the analogy that a hearing aid is to hearing as eye glasses are to
seeing.
All hearing aids have a microphone, amplifier, speaker, earpiece, and volume control, although they differ
in the location of these components. An audiologist should be involved in selection and fitting of a hearing
aid.
The best models are adjusted to a person's particular pattern of hearing loss. People with mainly highfrequency hearing loss do not benefit from simple amplification, which merely makes the garbled speech
they hear sound louder. They usually need a hearing aid that selectively amplifies the high frequencies.
Some hearing aids contain vents in the ear mold, which facilitate the passage of high-frequency sound
waves. Some use digital sound processing with multiple frequency channels so that amplification more
precisely matches hearing loss as measured on the audiogram.
Telephone use can be difficult for people with hearing aids. Typical hearing aids cause squealing when
the ear is placed next to the phone handle. Some hearing aids have a phone coil with a switch that turns
the microphone off and links the phone coil electromagnetically to the speaker magnet in the phone.
For moderate to severe hearing loss, a postauricular (ear-level) aid, which fits behind the pinna and is
coupled to the ear mold with
flexible tubing, is appropriate. An in-the-ear aid is contained entirely within
the ear mold and fits less conspicuously into the concha and ear canal; it is appropriate for mild to
moderate hearing loss. Some people with mild hearing loss limited to high frequencies are most
comfortably fitted with postauricular aids and completely open ear canals. Canal aids are contained
entirely within the ear canal and are cosmetically acceptable to many people who would otherwise refuse
===PAGE:539===
to use a hearing aid, but they are difficult for some people (especially the elderly) to manipulate. The
CROS aid (contralateral routing of signals) is occasionally used for severe unilateral hearing loss; a
hearing-aid microphone is placed in the nonfunctioning ear, and sound is routed to the functioning ear
through a wire or radio transmitter. This device enables the wearer to hear sounds from the
nonfunctioning side, allowing for some limited capacity to localize sound. If the better ear also has some
hearing loss, the sound from both sides can be amplified with the binaural CROS (BiCROS) aid. The
body aid type is appropriate for profound hearing loss. It is worn in a shirt pocket or a body harness and
connected by a wire to the earpiece (the receiver), which is coupled to the ear canal by a plastic insert
(ear mold).
A bone conduction aid may be used when an ear mold or tube cannot be used, as in atresia of the ear
canal or persistent otorrhea. An oscillator is held against the head, usually over the mastoid, with a spring
band, and sound is conducted through the skull to the cochlea. Bone conduction hearing aids require
more power, introduce more distortion, and are less comfortable to wear than air conduction hearing aids.
Some bone conduction aids (bone-anchored hearing aids or BAHAs) are surgically implanted in the
mastoid process, avoiding the discomfort and prominence of the spring band.
Cochlear implants:
Profoundly deaf patients, including those with some hearing but who even with a
hearing aid cannot understand speech without the assistance of vision (lip-reading or speech-reading),
may benefit from a cochlear implant. This device provides electrical signals directly into the auditory nerve
via multiple electrodes implanted in the cochlea. An external microphone and processor convert sound
waves to electrical impulses, which are transmitted through the skin electromagnetically from an external
induction coil to an internal coil implanted in the skull above and behind the ear. The internal coil
connects to electrodes inserted in the scala tympani.
Cochlear implants help with speech-reading by providing information about the intonation of words and
the rhythm of speech. Many if not most adults with cochlear implants can discriminate words without
visual clues, allowing them to talk on the telephone. Cochlear implants enable deaf people to hear and
distinguish environmental sounds and warning signals. They also help deaf people modulate their voice
and make their speech more intelligible.
Brain stem implants:
Patients who have had both acoustic nerves destroyed (eg, by bilateral temporal
bone fractures or neurofibromatosis) can have some hearing restored by means of brain stem implants
that have electrodes connected to sound-detecting and sound-processing devices similar to those used
for cochlear implants.
Coping mechanisms:
Alerting systems that use light let people know when the doorbell is ringing, a
smoke detector is sounding, or a baby is crying. Special sound systems transmitting infrared or FM radio
signals help people hear in theaters, churches, or other places where competing noise exists. Many
television programs carry closed captioning. Telephone communication devices are also available.
Lip-reading or speech-reading is particularly important for people who can hear but have trouble
discriminating sounds. Most people get useful speech information from lip-reading even without formal
training. Even people with normal hearing can better understand speech in a noisy place if they can see
the speaker. To use this information the listener must be able to see the speaker's mouth. Health care
personnel should be sensitive to this issue and always position themselves appropriately when speaking
to the hearing-impaired. Observing the position of a speaker's lips allows recognition of the consonant
being spoken, thereby improving speech comprehension in patients with high-frequency hearing loss. Lipreading may be learned in aural rehabilitation sessions in which a group of age-matched peers meets
regularly for instruction and supervised practice in optimizing communication.
People can gain control over their listening environment by modifying or avoiding difficult situations. For
example, people can visit a restaurant during off-peak hours, when it is quieter. They can ask for a booth,
which blocks out some extraneous sounds. In direct conversations, people may ask the speaker to face
them. At the beginning of a telephone conversation, they can identify themselves as being hearingimpaired. At a conference, the
speaker can be asked to use an assistive listening system, which makes
use of either inductive loop, infrared, or FM technology that sends sound through the microphone to a
patient's hearing aid.
===PAGE:540===
People with profound hearing loss often communicate by using sign language. American Sign Language
(ASL) is the most common version in the US. Other forms include Signed English, Signing Exact English,
and Cued Speech.
Treatment in Children
In addition to treatment of any cause and the provision of hearing aids, children with hearing loss require
support of language development with appropriate therapy. Because children must hear language to learn
it spontaneously, most deaf children develop language only with special training, ideally beginning as
soon as the hearing loss is identified (an exception would be a deaf child growing up with deaf parents
who are fluent sign language users). Deaf infants must be provided with a form of language input. For
example, a visually based sign language can provide a foundation for later development of oral language
if a cochlear implant is not available.
If infants as young as 1 mo have profound bilateral hearing loss and cannot benefit from hearing aids,
they can be a candidate for a cochlear implant. Although cochlear implants allow auditory communication
in many children with either congenital or acquired deafness, they are, in the main, more effective in
children who already have developed language. Children who have postmeningitic deafness develop an
ossified inner ear; they should receive cochlear implants early to maximize effectiveness. Children whose
acoustic nerves have been destroyed by tumors may be helped by implantation of brain stem auditorystimulating electrodes. Children with cochlear implants may have a slightly greater risk of meningitis than
children without cochlear implants or adults with cochlear implants.
Children with unilateral deafness should be allowed to use a special system in the classroom, such as an
FM auditory trainer. With these systems, the teacher speaks into a microphone that sends signals to a
hearing aid in the child's nonaffected ear, improving the child's greatly impaired ability to hear speech
against a noisy background.
Geriatrics Essentials
Elderly people typically experience a progressive decrease in hearing (presbycusis). The prevalence of
hearing impairment is 30% in people > 65 and is 40 to 50% in those > 75. Nonetheless, hearing loss in
the elderly should be evaluated and not ascribed to aging; elderly patients may have a tumor, a
neurologic or autoimmune disorder, or an easily correctible conductive hearing loss. Also, hearing loss in
the elderly facilitates dementia (which can be mitigated by properly correcting hearing loss).
Presbycusis:
Presbycusis is sensorineural hearing loss that probably results from a combination of agerelated deterioration and cell death in various components of the hearing system and the effects of
chronic noise exposure.
Hearing loss usually affects the highest frequencies (18 to 20 kHz) early on and gradually affects the
lower frequencies; it usually becomes clinically significant when it affects the critical 2- to 4-kHz range at
about age 55 to 65 (sometimes sooner). The loss of high-frequency hearing significantly affects speech
comprehension. Although the loudness of speech seems normal, certain consonant sounds (eg, C, D, K,
P, S, T) become hard to hear. Consonant sounds are the most important sounds for speech recognition.
For example, when "shoe," "blue," "true," "too," or "new" is spoken, many people with presbycusis can
hear the "oo" sound, but most have difficulty recognizing which word has been spoken because they
cannot distinguish the consonants. This inability to distinguish consonants causes affected people to
often think the speaker is mumbling. A speaker attempting to speak louder usually accentuates vowel
sounds (which are low frequency), doing little to improve speech recognition. Speech comprehension is
particularly difficult when background noise is present.
Screening:
A screening tool is often helpful for elderly people because many do not complain of hearing
loss. One tool is the Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly-Screening Version, which asks
• Does a hearing problem cause you to feel embarrassed when you meet people?
===PAGE:541===
• Does a hearing problem cause you to feel frustrated when talking to a family member?
• Do you have difficulty hearing when someone whispers?
• Do you feel handicapped by a hearing problem?
• Does a hearing problem cause you difficulty when visiting friends, relatives, or neighbors?
• Does a hearing problem cause you to attend religious services less often than you would like?
•
Does a hearing problem cause you to have arguments with family members?
• Does a hearing problem cause you difficulty when listening to the television or radio?
• Do you feel that any difficulty with your hearing hampers your personal or social life?
• Does a hearing problem cause you difficulty when in a restaurant with relatives or friends?
Scoring is "no" = 0 points, "sometimes" = 2 points, and "yes" = 4 points. Scores > 10 suggest significant
hearing impairment and necessitate follow-up.
Prevention
Prevention of hearing loss consists mainly of limiting duration and intensity of noise exposure. People
required to expose themselves to loud noise must wear ear protectors (eg, plastic plugs in the ear canals
or glycerin-filled muffs over the ears). The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) of the
US Department of Labor and similar agencies in many other countries have standards regarding the
length of time that a person can be exposed to a noise. The louder the noise, the shorter the permissible
time of exposure.
Key Points
• Cerumen, genetic disorders, infections, aging, and noise exposure are the most common causes.
• All patients with hearing loss should have audiologic testing.
• Cranial nerve deficits and other neurologic deficits should raise concern and warrant imaging tests.
Sudden Deafness
Sudden deafness is severe sensorineural hearing loss that develops within a few hours or is noticed on
awakening. It affects about 1/5000 people each year. Initial hearing loss is typically unilateral (unless
drug-induced) and may range in severity from mild to profound. Many also have tinnitus, and some have
dizziness, vertigo, or both.
Sudden deafness has some causes that differ from chronic hearing loss and must be addressed urgently.
Etiology
The following are common characteristics of sudden deafness:
• Most cases (see
Table 47-4
) are idiopathic.
• Some occur in the course of an obvious explanatory event.
A few represent the initial manifestation of an occult but identifiable disorder.
===PAGE:542===
Idiopathic:
There are numerous theories for which some evidence (although conflicting and incomplete)
exists. The most promising possibilities include viral infections (particularly involving herpes simplex),
autoimmune attacks, and acute microvascular occlusion.
Obvious event:
Some causes of sudden deafness are readily apparent.
Blunt head trauma
with temporal bone fracture or severe concussion involving the cochlea can cause
sudden hearing loss.
Large ambient pressure changes
(eg, caused by diving) or strenuous activities (eg, weightlifting) can
induce a perilymphatic fistula between the middle and inner ear, causing sudden, severe symptoms.
Perilymphatic fistula can also be congenital; it can spontaneously cause a sudden loss or loss may occur
after trauma or pressure changes.
[Table 47-4.
Some Causes of Sudden Deafness]
Ototoxic drugs
can result in hearing loss occurring sometimes within a day, especially with an overdose
(systemically or when applied to a large wound area, such as a burn). There is a rare genetic
mitochondrial-transmitted disorder that increases the susceptibility to aminoglycoside ototoxicity.
A number of
infections
cause sudden deafness during or immediately after acute illness. Common
causes include bacterial meningitis, Lyme disease, and many viral infections that affect the cochlea (and
sometimes the vestibular apparatus). The most common viral causes in the developed world are mumps
and herpes. Measles is a very rare cause because most of the population is immunized.
Occult disorders:
Sudden deafness rarely can be an isolated first manifestation of some disorders that
usually have other initial symptoms. Sudden deafness rarely may be the first manifestation of an acoustic
neuroma, multiple sclerosis, Meniere's disease, or a small cerebellar stroke. Syphilis reactivation in HIVinfected patients rarely can cause sudden deafness.
Cogan's syndrome is a rare autoimmune reaction directed against an unknown common autoantigen in
the cornea and inner ear; > 50% of patients present with vestibuloauditory symptoms. About 10 to 30% of
patients also have a severe systemic vasculitis, which may include life-threatening aortitis.
Some vasculitic disorders can cause hearing loss, some of which is acute. Hematologic disorders, such
as Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, sickle cell disease, and some forms of leukemia, rarely can cause
sudden deafness.
Evaluation
Evaluation consists of detecting and quantifying hearing loss and determining etiology (particularly
reversible causes).
History: History of present illness
should verify that loss is sudden and not chronic. The history
should also note whether loss is unilateral or bilateral and whether there is a current acute event (eg,
head injury, barotrauma [particularly a diving injury], infectious illness). Important accompanying
symptoms include other otologic symptoms (eg, tinnitus, ear discharge), vestibular symptoms (eg,
disorientation in the dark, vertigo), and other neurologic symptoms (eg, headache, weakness or
asymmetry of the face, abnormal sense of taste).
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including transient, migratory neurologic
deficits (multiple sclerosis) and eye irritation and redness (Cogan's syndrome).
Past medical history
should ask about known HIV or syphilis infection and risk factors for them (eg,
multiple sex partners, unprotected intercourse). Family history should note close relatives with hearing
loss (suggesting a congenital fistula). Drug history should specifically query current or previous use of
ototoxic drugs (see
Table 47-4
) and whether the patient has known renal insufficiency or renal failure.
===PAGE:543===
Physical examination:
The examination focuses on the ears and hearing and on the neurologic
examination.
The tympanic membrane is inspected for perforation, drainage, or other lesions. During the neurologic
examination, attention should be paid to the cranial nerves (particularly the 5th, 7th, and 8th) and to
vestibular and cerebellar function because abnormalities in these areas often occur with tumors of the
brain stem and cerebellopontine angle.
Weber's test and the Rinne test require a tuning fork to differentiate conductive from sensorineural
hearing loss (.
Additionally, the eyes are examined for redness and photophobia (possible Cogan's syndrome), and the
skin is examined for rash (eg, viral infection, syphilis).
Red flags:
Findings of particular concern are
• Abnormalities of cranial nerves (other than hearing loss)
Interpretation of findings:
Traumatic, ototoxic, and some infectious causes are usually apparent
clinically. A patient with perilymphatic fistula may hear an explosive sound in the affected ear when the
fistula occurs and may also have sudden vertigo, nystagmus, and tinnitus.
Focal neurologic abnormalities are of particular concern. The 5th cranial nerve, 7th cranial nerve, or both
are often affected by tumors that involve the 8th cranial nerve, so loss of facial sensation and weak jaw
clench (5th) and hemifacial weakness and taste abnormalities (7th) point to a lesion in that area.
Unilateral hearing loss accompanied by tinnitus and vertigo also suggests Meniere's disease. Systemic
symptoms suggesting inflammation (eg, fevers, rash, joint pains, mucosal lesions) should raise suspicion
of an occult infection or autoimmune disorder.
Testing:
Typically, patients should have an audiogram, and unless the diagnosis is clearly an acute
infection or drug toxicity, most clinicians do gadolinium-enhanced MRI to diagnose
inapparent causes.
Patients with an acute traumatic cause also should have MRI. If a perilymphatic fistula is suspected
clinically, it may be confirmed by tympanometry and electronystagmography (ENG); CT is usually done to
show the bony characteristics of the inner ear.
Patients who have risk factors for or symptoms that suggest causes should have appropriate tests (eg,
serologic tests for possible HIV infection or syphilis, CBC and coagulation profile for hematologic
disorders, ESR and antinuclear antibodies for vasculitis).
Treatment
Treatment focuses on the causative disorder when known. Fistulas are explored and repaired surgically.
In viral and idiopathic cases, hearing returns to normal in about 50% of patients and is partially recovered
in others.
In patients who recover their hearing, improvement usually occurs within 10 to 14 days.
For patients with idiopathic loss, many clinicians empirically give a short course of glucocorticoids and
antiviral drugs effective against herpes simplex (eg, valacyclovir, famciclovir). Glucocorticoids can be
given orally or by transtympanic injection; it is unclear which route is more effective.
Key Points
• Most cases are idiopathic.
• A few cases have an obvious cause (eg, major trauma, acute infection, drugs).
===PAGE:544===
• A very few cases represent unusual manifestations of treatable disorders.
===PAGE:545===
Chapter 48. Inner Ear Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Hearing Loss
)
The inner ear is in the petrous area of the temporal bone. Within the bone is the osseous labyrinth, which
encases the membranous labyrinth. The osseous labyrinth includes the vestibular system (made up of
the semicircular canals and the vestibule) and the cochlea. The vestibular system is responsible for
balance and posture; the cochlea, for hearing.
Acoustic Neuroma
(Acoustic Neurinoma; 8th Nerve Tumor; Vestibular Schwannoma)
An acoustic neuroma is a Schwann cell-derived tumor of the 8th cranial nerve. Symptoms
include unilateral hearing loss. Diagnosis is based on audiology and confirmed by MRI.
Treatment is surgical removal, stereotactic radiation therapy, or both.
Acoustic neuromas almost always arise from the vestibular division of the 8th cranial nerve and account
for about 7% of all intracranial tumors. As the tumor expands, it projects from the internal auditory meatus
into the cerebellopontine angle and compresses the cerebellum and brain stem. The 5th cranial nerve
and later the 7th cranial nerve are affected.
Bilateral acoustic neuromas are common in neurofibromatosis type 2.
Symptoms and Signs
Slowly progressive unilateral sensorineural hearing loss is the hallmark symptom. However, the onset of
hearing loss may be abrupt, and the degree of impairment may fluctuate. Other early symptoms include
unilateral tinnitus, dizziness and dysequilibrium, headache, sensation of pressure or fullness in the ear,
otalgia, trigeminal neuralgia, and numbness or weakness of the facial nerve.
Diagnosis
• Audiogram
• If positive, gadolinium-enhanced MRI
An audiogram is the first test done (. It usually reveals an asymmetric sensorineural hearing
loss and a greater impairment of speech discrimination than would be expected for the degree of hearing
loss. Acoustic reflex decay, the absence of waveforms, and increased latency of the 5th waveform in
auditory brain stem response testing are further evidence of a neural lesion. Although not usually required
in the routine evaluation of a patient with asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss, caloric testing shows
marked vestibular hypoactivity (canal paresis). Such findings indicate the
need for imaging tests,
preferably gadolinium-enhanced MRI.
Treatment
• Surgical removal
• Sometimes stereotactic radiation therapy
Small tumors may be removed with microsurgery that preserves the facial nerve. A middle cranial fossa or
retrosigmoid approach may preserve remaining hearing; a translabyrinthine route may be used if no
useful hearing remains. Large tumors are removed with the translabyrinthine approach regardless of the
remaining hearing. Stereotactic radiation therapy as the sole treatment modality is used predominantly in
the management of small tumors in older patients; its long-term efficacy and adverse effects are under
===PAGE:546===
study.
Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo
(Benign Postural or Positional Vertigo)
In benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV), short (< 60 sec) episodes of vertigo occur with
certain head positions. Nausea and nystagmus develop. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment
involves canalith repositioning maneuvers. Drugs and surgery are rarely, if ever, indicated.
BPPV is the most common cause of relapsing otogenic vertigo. It affects people increasingly as they age
and can severely affect balance in the elderly, leading to potentially injurious falls.
Etiology
The condition is thought to be caused by displacement of otoconial crystals (Ca carbonate crystals
normally embedded in the saccule and utricle). This displaced material stimulates hair cells in the
posterior semicircular canal, creating the illusion of motion. Etiologic factors include spontaneous
degeneration of the utricular otolithic membranes, labyrinthine concussion, otitis media, ear surgery,
recent viral infection (eg, viral neuronitis), head trauma, prolonged anesthesia or bed rest, previous
vestibular disorders (eg, Meniere's disease), and occlusion of the anterior vestibular artery.
Symptoms and Signs
Vertigo is triggered when the patient's head moves (eg, when rolling over in bed or bending over to pick
up something). Acute vertigo lasts only a few seconds to minutes; episodes tend to peak in the morning
and abate throughout the day. Nausea and vomiting may occur, but hearing loss and tinnitus do not.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Gadolinium-enhanced MRI if findings suggest CNS lesion
Diagnosis is based on characteristic symptoms, on nystagmus as determined by the Dix-Hallpike
maneuver (a provocative test for positional nystagmus—see
Sidebar 46-1
, and on absence of
other abnormalities on neurologic examination. Such patients require no further testing. Patients with
nystagmus suggesting a CNS lesion undergo gadolinium-enhanced MRI. Unlike the positional nystagmus
of BPPV, the positional nystagmus of CNS lesions lacks latency, fatigability, and severe subjective
sensation and may continue for as long as the position is maintained. Nystagmus caused by a CNS lesion
may be vertical or change direction and, if rotary, is likely to be in the unexpected direction.
Treatment
• Provocative maneuvers to fatigue symptoms
• Canalith repositioning maneuvers
• Drug treatment typically not recommended
BPPV usually subsides spontaneously in several weeks or months but may continue for months or years.
Because the condition can be long-lasting, drug treatment (like that used in Meniere's disease— is not recommended. Often, the adverse effects of drugs worsen dysequilibrium.
Because BPPV is fatigable, one therapy is to have the patient perform provocative maneuvers early in the
day in a safe environment. Symptoms are then minimal for the rest of the day.
Canalith repositioning maneuvers (Epley maneuver—see
===PAGE:547===
Fig. 48-1
—and Semont maneuver) involve moving the head through a series of specific positions
intended to return the errant canalith to the utricle. After performing these maneuvers, the patient should
remain erect or semi-erect for 1 to 2 days. Both maneuvers can be repeated as necessary.
[Fig. 48-1.
The Epley maneuver.]
For the Semont maneuver, the patient is seated upright in the middle of a stretcher. The patient's head is
rotated toward the unaffected ear; this rotation is maintained throughout the maneuver. Next, the torso is
lowered laterally onto the stretcher so that the patient is lying on the side of the affected ear with the nose
pointed up. After 3 min in this position, the patient is quickly moved through the upright position without
straightening the head and is lowered laterally to the other side now with the nose pointed down. After 3
min in this position, the patient is slowly returned to the upright position, and the head is rotated back to
normal.
Drug-Induced Ototoxicity
A wide variety of drugs can be ototoxic (see
Table 48-1
).
Factors affecting ototoxicity include dose, duration of therapy, concurrent renal failure,
[Table 48-1.
Some Drugs that Cause Ototoxicity]
infusion rate, lifetime dose, co-administration with other drugs having ototoxic potential, and genetic
susceptibility. Ototoxic drugs should not be used for otic topical application when the tympanic membrane
is perforated because the drugs might diffuse into the inner ear.
Streptomycin tends to cause more damage to the vestibular portion than to the auditory portion of the
inner ear. Although vertigo and difficulty maintaining balance tend to be temporary, severe loss of
vestibular sensitivity may persist, sometimes permanently. Loss of vestibular sensitivity causes difficulty
walking, especially in the dark, and oscillopsia (a sensation of bouncing of the environment with each
step). About 4 to 15% of patients who receive 1 g/day for > 1 wk develop measurable hearing loss, which
usually occurs after a short latent period (7 to 10 days) and slowly worsens if treatment is continued.
Complete, permanent deafness may follow.
Neomycin has the greatest cochleotoxic effect of all antibiotics. When large doses are given orally or by
colonic irrigation for intestinal sterilization, enough may be absorbed to affect hearing, particularly if
mucosal lesions are present. Neomycin should not be used for wound irrigation or for intrapleural or
intraperitoneal irrigation, because massive amounts of the drug may be retained and absorbed, causing
deafness. Kanamycin and amikacin are close to neomycin in cochleotoxic potential and are both capable
of causing profound, permanent hearing loss while sparing balance. Viomycin has both cochlear and
vestibular toxicity. Gentamicin and tobramycin have vestibular and cochlear toxicity, causing impairment in
balance and hearing.
Vancomycin can cause hearing loss, especially in the presence of renal insufficiency.
Chemotherapeutic (antineoplastic) drugs, particularly those containing platinum (cisplatin and
carboplatin), can cause tinnitus and hearing loss. Hearing loss can be profound and permanent, occurring
immediately after the first dose, or can be delayed until several months after completion of treatment.
Sensorineural hearing loss strikes bilaterally, progresses decrementally, and is permanent.
Ethacrynic acid and furosemide given IV have caused profound, permanent hearing loss in patients with
renal failure who had been receiving aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Salicylates in high doses (> 12 325-mg tablets of aspirin per day) cause temporary hearing loss and
tinnitus. Quinine and its synthetic substitutes can also cause temporary hearing loss.
Prevention
===PAGE:548===
Ototoxic antibiotics should be avoided during pregnancy. The elderly and people with preexisting hearing
loss should not be treated with ototoxic drugs if other effective drugs are available. The lowest effective
dosage of ototoxic drugs should be used and levels should be closely monitored. If possible before
treatment with an ototoxic drug, hearing should be measured and then monitored during treatment;
symptoms are not reliable warning signs.
Herpes Zoster Oticus
(Geniculate Herpes; Ramsay Hunt Syndrome; Viral Neuronitis)
Herpes zoster oticus is infection of the 8th cranial nerve ganglia and the geniculate ganglion of
the facial nerve by the herpes zoster virus.
Risk factors for herpes infection include immunodeficiency secondary to cancer, chemotherapy, radiation
therapy, and HIV infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include severe ear pain, transient or permanent facial paralysis (resembling Bell's palsy),
vertigo lasting days to weeks, and hearing loss (which may be permanent or which may resolve partially
or completely). Vesicles occur on the pinna and in the external auditory canal along the distribution of the
sensory branch of the facial nerve. Symptoms of meningoencephalitis (eg, headache, confusion, stiff
neck) are uncommon. Sometimes other cranial nerves are involved.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis usually is clinical. If there is any question about viral etiology, vesicular scrapings may be
collected for direct immunofluorescence or for viral cultures, and MRI is done.
Treatment
• Perhaps corticosteroids, antivirals, and surgical decompression
Although there is no reliable evidence that corticosteroids, antiviral drugs, or surgical decompression
makes a difference, they are the only possibly useful treatments. Corticosteroids are started with
prednisone 60 mg po once/day for 4 days, followed by gradual tapering of the dose over the next 2 wk.
Acyclovir 800 mg po q 4 h 5 times/day or valacyclovir 1 g po bid for 10 days may shorten the clinical
course. Vertigo is effectively suppressed with diazepam 2 to 5 mg po q 4 to 6 h. Pain may require oral
opioids. Postherpetic neuralgia may be treated with amitriptyline. Surgical decompression of the fallopian
canal may be indicated if the facial palsy is complete (no visible facial movement). Before surgery,
however, electroneurography is done and should show a > 90% decrement.
Meniere's Disease
(Endolymphatic Hydrops)
Meniere's disease is an inner ear disorder that causes vertigo, fluctuating sensorineural hearing
loss, and tinnitus. There is no diagnostic test. Vertigo and nausea are treated with
anticholinergics or benzodiazepines. Diuretics and a low-salt diet may decrease frequency and
severity of episodes. For severe cases, the vestibular system can be ablated with topical
gentamicin or surgery.
In Meniere's disease, pressure and volume changes of the labyrinthine endolymph affect inner ear
function. The etiology of endolymphatic fluid buildup is unknown. Risk factors include a family history of
Meniere's disease, preexisting autoimmune disorders, allergies, trauma to the head or ear, and, rarely,
syphilis (even several decades previously). Peak incidence is between ages 20 and 50.
===PAGE:549===
Symptoms and Signs
Patients have sudden attacks of vertigo lasting up to 24 h, usually with nausea and vomiting.
Accompanying symptoms include diaphoresis, diarrhea, and gait unsteadiness. Tinnitus may be constant
or intermittent, buzzing or roaring; it is not related to position or motion. Hearing impairment, typically
affecting low frequencies, may follow. Before an episode, most patients sense fullness or pressure in the
affected ear. In 50% of patients, only one ear is affected.
During the early stages, symptoms remit between episodes; symptom-free interludes may last > 1 yr. As
the disease progresses, however, hearing impairment persists and gradually worsens, and tinnitus may
be constant.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Audiogram and gadolinium-enhanced MRI to rule out other causes
The diagnosis, made clinically, is primarily one of exclusion. Similar symptoms can result from viral
labyrinthitis or neuritis, a cerebellopontine angle tumor (eg, acoustic neuroma), or a brain stem stroke.
Patients with suggestive symptoms should have an audiogram and an MRI (with gadolinium
enhancement) of the CNS with attention to the internal auditory canals to exclude other causes.
Audiogram typically shows a low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss in the affected ear.
On examination during an acute attack, the patient has nystagmus and falls to the affected side. Between
attacks, the Fukada stepping test (marching in place with eyes closed) can be used; a patient with
Meniere's disease often turns away from the affected ear, consistent with a unilateral labyrinthine lesion.
Additionally, the Rinne test and Weber's test may indicate sensorineural hearing loss (.
Treatment
• Symptom relief with antiemetics, antihistamines, or benzodiazepines
• Diuretics and low-salt diet
• Rarely vestibular ablation by drugs or surgery
Meniere's disease tends to be self-limited. Treatment of an acute attack is aimed at symptom relief.
Anticholinergics (eg, prochlorperazine or promethazine 25 mg rectally or 10 mg po q 6 to 8 h) can
minimize vagal-mediated GI symptoms. Antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine, meclizine, or cyclizine 50
mg po q 6 h) or benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam 5 mg po q 6 to 8 h) are used to sedate the vestibular
system. Some physicians also use a corticosteroid burst (eg, prednisone 60 mg once/day for 1 wk,
tapered over another wk) for an acute episode.
A low-salt (< 1.5 g/day) diet, avoidance of alcohol and caffeine, and a diuretic (eg,
hydrochlorothiazide 25
mg po once/day) may help prevent vertigo and are useful for many patients.
Intratympanic gentamicin (chemical labyrinthectomy) may be used when medical management is
unsuccessful. Typical dose is 1 mL (at a 30 mg/mL concentration, made by diluting the commercial 40
mg/mL preparation with bicarbonate) injected through the tympanic membrane. Follow-up with serial
audiometry is recommended to distinguish hearing loss from cochleotoxicity. The injection can be
repeated in 4 wk if vertigo persists without hearing loss.
Surgery is reserved for patients with frequent, severely debilitating episodes who are unresponsive to
other modalities. Endolymphatic sac decompression relieves vertigo in some patients and poses minimal
risk of hearing loss. Vestibular neurectomy (an intracranial procedure) relieves vertigo in about 95% of
patients and usually preserves hearing. A surgical labyrinthectomy is done only if preexisting hearing loss
is profound.
===PAGE:550===
Unfortunately, there is no known way to prevent the natural progression of hearing loss. Most patients
sustain moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss in the affected ear within 10 to 15 yr.
Purulent Labyrinthitis
Purulent (suppurative) labyrinthitis is bacterial infection of the inner ear, often causing deafness
and loss of vestibular function.
Purulent labyrinthitis usually occurs when bacteria spread to the inner ear during the course of severe
acute otitis media, purulent meningitis, or an enlarging cholesteatoma.
Symptoms include severe vertigo and nystagmus, nausea and vomiting, tinnitus, and varying degrees of
hearing loss. Pain and fever are common.
Purulent labyrinthitis is suspected if vertigo, nystagmus, sensorineural hearing loss, or a combination
occurs during an episode of acute otitis media. CT of the temporal bone is done to identify erosion of the
otic capsule bone or other complications of acute otitis media, such as coalescent mastoiditis. MRI may
be indicated if symptoms of meningitis or brain abscess, such as altered mental status, meningismus, or
high fever, are present; in such cases, a lumbar puncture and blood cultures also are done.
Treatment is with IV antibiotics appropriate for meningitis (eg, ceftriaxone 50 to 100 mg/kg IV once/day to
maximum 2 g) adjusted according to results of culture and sensitivity testing. A myringotomy (and
sometimes tympanostomy tube placement) is done to drain the middle ear. Mastoidectomy may be
required.
Vestibular Neuronitis
Vestibular neuronitis causes a self-limited episode of vertigo, presumably due to inflammation
of the vestibular division of the 8th cranial nerve; some vestibular dysfunction may persist.
Although etiology is unclear, a viral cause is suspected.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include a single attack of severe vertigo, with nausea and vomiting and persistent nystagmus
toward the affected side, which lasts 7 to 10 days. The nystagmus is unidirectional, horizontal, and
spontaneous, with fast-beat oscillations in the direction of the unaffected ear. The absence of
concomitant tinnitus or hearing loss is a hallmark of vestibular neuronitis. The condition slowly subsides
after this initial episode. Some patients have residual dysequilibrium, especially with rapid head
movements, probably due to permanent vestibular injury.
Diagnosis
• Audiology, electronystagmography, and MRI
Patients undergo an audiologic assessment, electronystagmography with caloric testing, and gadoliniumenhanced MRI of the head, with attention to the internal auditory canals to exclude other diagnoses, such
as cerebellopontine angle tumor, brain stem hemorrhage, or infarction. MRI may show enhancement of
the vestibular nerves, consistent with inflammatory neuritis.
Treatment
• Symptom relief with antiemetics, antihistamines, or benzodiazepines
Symptoms are addressed as in Meniere's disease (, ie, with anticholinergics, antiemetics (eg,
prochlorperazine or promethazine 25 mg rectally or 10 mg po q 6 to 8 h), antihistamines or
benzodiazepines, and a corticosteroid burst with rapid taper. If vomiting is prolonged, IV fluids and
===PAGE:551===
electrolytes may be required. Vestibular rehabilitation (usually given by a physical therapist) helps
compensate for any residual vestibular deficit.
===PAGE:552===
Chapter 49. Middle Ear and Tympanic Membrane Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Otic Tumors

Middle ear disorders may be secondary to infection, eustachian tube obstruction, or trauma. Information
about objects placed in the ear and symptoms such as rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, sore throat, URI,
allergies, headache, systemic symptoms, and fever aid diagnosis. The appearance of the external
auditory canal and tympanic membrane (see
Fig. 49-1
) often yields a diagnosis. The nose, nasopharynx, and oropharynx are examined for signs of
infection and allergy and for evidence of tumors. Middle ear function is evaluated with use of pneumatic
otoscopy, Weber's tuning fork test and the Rinne tuning fork test, tympanometry, and audiologic tests (see
p.
).
Mastoiditis
Mastoiditis is a bacterial infection of the mastoid air cells, which typically occurs after acute
otitis media. Symptoms include redness, tenderness, swelling, and fluctuation over the mastoid
process, with displacement of the pinna. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with antibiotics, such
as ceftriaxone, and mastoidectomy if drug therapy is not effective.
In acute purulent otitis media, inflammation often extends into the mastoid antrum and air cells, resulting in
fluid accumulation. In a few patients, bacterial infection develops in the collected fluid, typically with the
same organism causing the otitis media; pneumococcus is most common. Mastoid infection can cause
osteitis of the septae, leading to coalescence of the air cells. The infection may decompress through a
perforation in the tympanic membrane or extend through the lateral mastoid cortex, forming a
postauricular subperiosteal abscess. Rarely, it extends centrally, causing a temporal lobe abscess or a
septic thrombosis of the lateral sinus. Occasionally, the infection may erode through the tip of the mastoid
and drain into the neck (called a Bezold abscess).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms begin days to weeks after onset of acute otitis media and include fever and persistent,
throbbing otalgia. Nearly all patients have signs of otitis media ( and purulent otorrhea.
Redness, swelling,
[Fig. 49-1.
Tympanic membrane of right ear (A); tympanic cavity with tympanic membrane removed (B).]
tenderness, and fluctuation may develop over the mastoid process; the pinna is typically displaced
laterally and inferiorly.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Rarely CT
Diagnosis is clinical. CT is rarely necessary but can confirm the diagnosis and show the extent of the
infection. Any middle ear drainage is sent for culture and sensitivity. Tympanocentesis for culture
purposes can be done if no spontaneous drainage occurs. CBC and ESR may be abnormal but are
neither sensitive nor specific and add little to the diagnosis.
Treatment
• IV ceftriaxone
IV antibiotic treatment is initiated immediately with a drug that provides CNS penetration, such as
===PAGE:553===
ceftriaxone 1 to 2 g (children, 50 to 75 mg/kg) once/day continued for ≥ 2 wk. Oral treatment with a
quinolone may be acceptable. Subsequent antibiotic choice is guided by culture and sensitivity test
results.
A subperiosteal abscess usually requires a simple mastoidectomy, in which the abscess is drained, the
infected mastoid cells are removed, and drainage is established from the antrum of the mastoid to the
middle ear cavity.
Myringitis
(Bullous Myringitis)
Myringitis is a form of acute otitis media in which vesicles develop on the tympanic membrane.
Myringitis can develop with viral, bacterial (particularly
Streptococcus pneumoniae
), or mycoplasmal otitis
media. Pain occurs suddenly and persists for 24 to 48 h. Hearing loss and fever suggest a bacterial
origin. Diagnosis is based on otoscopic visualization of vesicles on the tympanic membrane.
Because differentiation among a viral, bacterial, and mycoplasmal cause is difficult, antibiotics effective
against organisms causing otitis media are prescribed (see
Table 49-1
). Severe, continued pain may be relieved by rupturing the vesicles with a myringotomy knife or
by oral analgesics (eg, oxycodone with acetaminophen). Topical analgesics (eg, benzocaine, antipyrine)
may also be beneficial.
Acute Otitis Media
Acute otitis media (AOM) is a bacterial or viral infection of the middle ear, usually accompanying
a URI. Symptoms include otalgia, often with systemic symptoms (eg, fever, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea), especially in the very young. Diagnosis is based on otoscopy. Treatment is with
analgesics and sometimes antibiotics.
Although AOM can occur at any age, it is most common between ages 3 mo and 3 yr. At this age, the
eustachian tube is structurally and functionally immature; the angle of the eustachian tube is more
horizontal; and the angle of the tensor veli palatini muscle and the cartilaginous eustachian tube renders
the opening mechanism less efficient.
The etiology may be viral or bacterial. Viral infections are often complicated by secondary bacterial
infection. In neonates, gram-negative enteric bacilli, particularly
Escherichia coli
, and
Staphylococcus
aureus
cause AOM. In older infants and children < 14 yr, the most common organisms are
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
,
Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis
, and nontypeable
Haemophilus influenzae
; less
common causes are group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci and
S. aureus
. In patients > 14 yr,
S. pneumoniae
,
group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci, and
S. aureus
are most common, followed by
H. influenzae
.
In rare cases, bacterial middle ear infection spreads locally, resulting in acute mastoiditis, petrositis, or
labyrinthitis. Intracranial spread is extremely rare and usually causes meningitis, but brain abscess,
subdural empyema, epidural abscess, lateral sinus thrombosis, or otitic hydrocephalus may occur. Even
with antibiotic treatment, intracranial complications are slow to resolve, especially in immunocompromised
patients.
Symptoms and Signs
The usual initial symptom is earache, often with hearing loss. Infants may simply be cranky or have
difficulty sleeping. Fever, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea often occur in young children. Otoscopic
examination can show a bulging, erythematous tympanic membrane (TM) with indistinct landmarks and
displacement of the light reflex. Air insufflation (pneumatic otoscopy) shows poor mobility of the TM.
Spontaneous perforation of the TM causes serosanguineous or purulent otorrhea.
Severe headache, confusion, or focal neurologic signs may occur with intracranial spread of infection.
===PAGE:554===
Facial paralysis or vertigo suggests local extension to the fallopian canal or labyrinth.
[Table 49-1.
Antibiotics for Otitis Media]
Diagnosis
Diagnosis usually is clinical. Except for fluid obtained during myringotomy, cultures are not generally
done.
Treatment
• Analgesics
• Sometimes antibiotics
• Rarely myringotomy
Although 80% of cases resolve spontaneously, in the US, antibiotics are often given (see
Table 49-1
).
Antibiotics relieve symptoms quicker (although results after 1 to 2 wk are similar) and may reduce the
chance of residual hearing loss and labyrinthine or intracranial sequelae. However, with the recent
emergence of resistant organisms, pediatric organizations have strongly recommended initial antibiotics
only for those at highest risk (eg, those who are younger or more severely ill—see
Table 49-2
) or for those with recurrent AOM (eg, ≥ 4 episodes in 6 mo). Others, provided there is good
follow-up, can safely
[Table 49-2.
Guidelines for Using Antibiotics in Acute Otitis Media]
be observed for up to 72 h and given antibiotics only if no improvement is seen; if follow-up by phone is
planned, a prescription can be given at the initial visit to save time and expense.
All patients receive analgesics (eg, acetaminophen, ibuprofen). In adults, topical intranasal
vasoconstrictors, such as phenylephrine 0.25% 3 drops q 3 h, improve eustachian tube function. To avoid
rebound congestion, these preparations should not be used > 4 days. Systemic decongestants (eg,
pseudoephedrine 30 to 60 mg po q 6 h prn) may be helpful. Antihistamines (eg, chlorpheniramine 4 mg po
q 4 to 6 h for 7 to 10 days) may improve eustachian tube function in people with allergies but should be
reserved for the truly allergic. For children, neither vasoconstrictors nor antihistamines are of benefit.
Myringotomy may be done for a bulging TM, particularly if severe or persistent pain, fever, vomiting, or
diarrhea is present. The patient's hearing, tympanometry, and TM appearance and movement are
monitored until normal.
Prevention
Routine childhood vaccination against pneumococci (with pneumococcal conjugate vaccine),
H.
influenzae
type B, and influenza decreases the incidence of AOM. Infants should not sleep with a bottle,
and elimination of household smoking may decrease incidence.
Secretory Otitis Media
(Serous Otitis Media)
Secretory otitis media is an effusion in the middle ear resulting from incomplete resolution of
acute otitis media or obstruction of the eustachian tube without infection. Symptoms include
hearing loss and a sense of fullness or pressure in the ear. Diagnosis is based on appearance of
the tympanic membrane and sometimes on tympanometry. Most cases resolve in 2 to 3 wk. If
there is no improvement in 1 to 3 mo, some form of myringotomy is indicated, usually with
insertion of a tympanostomy tube. Antibiotics and decongestants are not effective.
===PAGE:555===
Normally, the middle ear is ventilated 3 to 4 times/min as the eustachian tube opens during swallowing,
and O
is absorbed by blood in the vessels of the middle ear mucous membrane. If patency of the
eustachian tube is impaired, a relative negative pressure develops within the middle ear, which can lead
to fluid accumulation. This fluid may cause hearing loss.
Secretory otitis media is a common sequela to acute otitis media in children (often identified on routine
ear recheck) and may persist for weeks to months. In other cases, eustachian tube obstruction may be
secondary to inflammatory processes in the nasopharynx, allergies, hypertrophic adenoids or other
obstructive lymphoid aggregations on the torus of the eustachian tube and in Rosenmuller's fossa, or
benign or malignant tumors. The effusion may be sterile or (more commonly) contain pathogenic bacteria
sometimes as a biofilm, although inflammation is not observed.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients may report no symptoms, but some (or their family members) note hearing loss. Patients may
experience a feeling of fullness, pressure, or popping in the ear with swallowing. Otalgia is rare.
Various possible changes to the tympanic membrane (TM) include an amber or gray color, displacement
of the light reflex, mild to severe retraction, and accentuated landmarks. On air insufflation, the TM may
be immobile. An air-fluid level or bubbles of air may be visible through the TM.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical. Tympanometry may be done to confirm middle ear effusion. Adults and adolescents
must undergo nasopharyngeal examination to exclude malignant or benign tumors.
Treatment
• Observation
• If unresolved, myringotomy with tympanostomy tube insertion
• If recurrent in childhood, sometimes adenoidectomy
For most patients, watchful waiting is all that is required. Antibiotics and decongestants are not helpful.
For patients in whom allergies are clearly involved, antihistamines and topical corticosteroids may be
helpful.
If no improvement occurs in 1 to 3 mo, myringotomy may be done for aspiration of fluid and insertion of a
tympanostomy tube, which allows ventilation of the middle ear and temporarily ameliorates eustachian
tube obstruction, regardless of cause. Tympanostomy tubes may be inserted for persistent conductive
hearing loss or to help prevent recurrence of acute otitis media.
Occasionally, the middle ear is temporarily ventilated with the Valsalva maneuver or politzerization. To do
the Valsalva maneuver, patients keep their mouth closed and try to forcibly blow air out through their
pinched nostrils (ie, popping the ear). To do politzerization, the physician blows air with a special syringe
(middle ear inflator) into one of the patient's nostrils and blocks the other while the patient swallows. This
forces the air into the eustachian tube and middle ear. Neither procedure should be done if the patient
has a cold and rhinorrhea.
Persistent, recurrent secretory otitis media may require correction of underlying nasopharyngeal
conditions. Children may benefit from adenoidectomy, including the removal of the central adenoid mass
as well as lymphoid aggregations on the torus of the eustachian tube and in Rosenmuller's fossa.
Antibiotics should be given for bacterial rhinitis, sinusitis, and nasopharyngitis. Demonstrated allergens
should be eliminated from the patient's environment and immunotherapy should be considered.
Chronic Otitis Media
===PAGE:556===
Chronic otitis media is a persistent, chronically draining (> 6 wk), suppurative perforation of the
tympanic membrane. Symptoms include painless otorrhea with conductive hearing loss.
Complications include development of aural polyps, cholesteatoma, and other infections.
Treatment requires complete cleaning of the ear canal several times daily, careful removal of
granulation tissue, and application of topical corticosteroids and antibiotics. Systemic antibiotics
and surgery are reserved for severe cases.
Chronic otitis media can result from acute otitis media, eustachian tube obstruction, mechanical trauma,
thermal or chemical burns, blast injuries, or iatrogenic causes (eg, after tympanostomy tube placement).
Further, patients with craniofacial abnormalities (eg, Down syndrome, cri du chat syndrome, cleft lip
and/or cleft palate, velocardiofacial syndrome [Shprintzen's syndrome]) have an increased risk.
Chronic otitis media may become exacerbated after a URI or when water enters the middle ear through a
tympanic membrane (TM) perforation during bathing or swimming. Infections often are caused by gramnegative bacilli or
Staphylococcus aureus
, resulting in painless, purulent, sometimes foul-smelling
otorrhea. Persistent chronic otitis media may result in destructive changes in the middle ear (such as
necrosis of the long process of the incus) or aural polyps (granulation tissue prolapsing into the ear canal
through the TM perforation). Aural polyps are a serious sign, almost invariably suggesting cholesteatoma.
A cholesteatoma is an epithelial cell growth that forms in the middle ear, mastoid, or epitympanum after
chronic otitis media (see
Plate 1
). Lytic enzymes, such as collagenases, produced by the cholesteatoma can destroy adjacent
bone and soft tissue. The cholesteatoma is also a nidus for infection; purulent labyrinthitis, facial
paralysis, or intracranial abscess may develop.
Symptoms and Signs
Chronic otitis media usually manifests with conductive hearing loss and otorrhea. Pain is uncommon
unless an associated osteitis of the temporal bone occurs. The TM is perforated and draining, and the
auditory canal is macerated and littered with granulation tissue.
A patient with cholesteatoma has white debris in the middle ear, a draining polypoid mass protruding
through the TM perforation, and an ear canal that appears clogged with mucopurulent granulation tissue.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually clinical. Drainage is cultured. When cholesteatoma or other complications are
suspected (as in a febrile patient
or one with vertigo or otalgia), CT or MRI is done. These tests may
reveal intratemporal or intracranial processes (eg, labyrinthitis, ossicular or temporal erosion, abscesses).
Treatment
• Irrigation and topical antibiotic drops
• Removal of granulation tissue
The ear canal is irrigated with a bulb syringe 3 times/day with a slightly warmed solution of half vinegar
and half sterile water. After the ear drains, 10 drops topical ofloxacin solution are instilled in the affected
ear 2 times/day for 14 days.
When granulation tissue is present, it is removed with microinstruments or cauterization with silver nitrate
sticks. Ciprofloxacin 0.3% and dexamethasone 0.1% is then instilled into the ear canal for 7 to 10 days.
Severe exacerbations require systemic antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin 250 to 500 mg po q 8 h for 10
days or a 3rd-generation cephalosporin, subsequently modified by culture results and response to
therapy.
Tympanoplasty is indicated for patients with marginal or attic perforations and chronic central TM
===PAGE:557===
perforations. A disrupted ossicular chain may be repaired during tympanoplasty as well.
Cholesteatomas must be removed surgically. Because recurrence is common, reconstruction of the
middle ear is usually deferred until a 2nd-look operation is done 6 to 8 mo later.
Otic Barotrauma
(Barotitis Media or Aerotitis Media)
Otic barotrauma is ear pain or damage to the tympanic membrane caused by rapid changes in
pressure.
To maintain equal pressure on both sides of the tympanic membrane (TM), gas must move freely
between the nasopharynx and middle ear. When a URI, allergy, or other mechanism interferes with
eustachian tube functioning during changes in environmental pressure, the pressure in the middle ear
either falls below ambient pressure, causing retraction of the TM, or rises above it, causing bulging. With
negative middle ear pressure, a transudate of fluid may form in the middle ear. As the pressure differential
increases, ecchymosis and subepithelial hematoma may develop in the mucous membrane of the middle
ear and the TM. A very large pressure differential may cause bleeding into the middle ear, TM rupture,
and the development of a perilymph fistula through the oval or round window.
Symptoms are severe pain, conductive hearing loss, and, if there is a perilymph fistula, sensory neural
loss. Symptoms usually worsen during rapid increase in external air pressures, such as a rapid ascent
(eg, during scuba diving) or descent (eg, during air travel). Sensorineural hearing loss or vertigo during
descent suggests the development of a perilymph fistula; the same symptoms during ascent from a deepsea dive can additionally suggest an air bubble formation in the inner ear.
Treatment
• Methods to equalize pressure (eg, yawning, swallowing, chewing gum)
Routine self-treatment of pain associated with changing pressure in an aircraft includes chewing gum,
attempting to yawn and swallow, blowing against closed nostrils, and using decongestant nasal sprays.
If hearing loss is sensorineural and vertigo is present, a perilymph fistula is suspected and middle ear
exploration to close a fistula is considered. If pain is severe and hearing loss is conductive, myringotomy
is helpful.
Prevention
A person with nasal congestion due to URI or allergies should avoid flying and diving. When these
activities are unavoidable, a topical nasal vasoconstrictor (eg, phenylephrine 0.25 to 1.0%) is applied 30
to 60 min before descent or ascent.
Otosclerosis
Otosclerosis is a disease of the bone of the otic capsule that causes an abnormal accumulation
of new bone within the oval window.
In otosclerosis, the new bone traps and restricts the movement of the stapes, causing conductive hearing
loss (. Otosclerosis also may cause a sensorineural hearing loss, particularly when the foci of
otosclerotic bone are adjacent to the scala media. Half of all cases are inherited. The measles virus plays
an inciting role in patients with a genetic predisposition for otosclerosis.
Although about 10% of white adults have some otosclerosis (compared with 1% of blacks), only about
10% of affected people develop conductive hearing loss. Hearing loss caused by otosclerosis may
manifest as early as age 7 or 8, but most cases do not become
evident until the late teen or early adult
years, when slowly progressive, asymmetric hearing loss is diagnosed. Fixation of the stapes may
===PAGE:558===
progress rapidly during pregnancy.
A hearing aid may restore hearing. Alternatively, microsurgery to remove some or all of the stapes and to
replace it with a prosthesis may be beneficial.
Traumatic Perforation of the Tympanic Membrane
Traumatic perforation of the tympanic membrane (TM) can cause pain, bleeding, hearing loss,
tinnitus, and vertigo. Diagnosis is based on otoscopy. Treatment often is unnecessary.
Antibiotics may be needed for infection. Surgery may be needed for perforations persisting > 2
mo, disruption of the ossicular chain, or injuries affecting the inner ear.
Traumatic causes of TM perforation include
• Insertion of objects into the ear canal purposely (eg, cotton swabs) or accidentally
• Concussion caused by an explosion or open-handed slap across the ear
• Head trauma (with or without basilar fracture)
• Sudden negative pressure (eg, strong suction applied to the ear canal)
• Barotrauma (eg, during air travel or scuba diving)
• Iatrogenic perforation during irrigation or foreign body removal
Penetrating injuries of the TM may result in dislocations of the ossicular chain, fracture of the stapedial
footplate, displacement of fragments of the ossicles, bleeding, a perilymph fistula from the oval or round
window resulting in leakage of perilymph into the middle ear space, or facial nerve injury.
Symptoms and Signs
Traumatic perforation of the TM causes sudden severe pain sometimes followed by bleeding from the
ear, hearing loss, and tinnitus. Hearing loss is more severe if the ossicular chain is disrupted or the inner
ear is injured. Vertigo suggests injury to the inner ear. Purulent otorrhea may begin in 24 to 48 h,
particularly if water enters the middle ear.
Diagnosis
• Otoscopy
• Audiometry
Perforation is generally evident on otoscopy. Any blood obscuring the ear canal is carefully suctioned.
Irrigation and pneumatic otoscopy are avoided. Extremely small perforations may require otomicroscopy
or middle ear impedance studies for definitive diagnosis. If possible, audiometric studies are done before
and after treatment to avoid confusion between trauma-induced and treatment-induced hearing loss.
Patients with marked hearing loss or severe vertigo are evaluated by an otolaryngologist as soon as
possible. Exploratory tympanotomy may be needed to assess and repair damage. Patients with a large
TM defect should also be evaluated, because the displaced flaps may need to be repositioned.
Treatment
• Ear kept dry
• Oral or topical antibiotics if dirty injury
===PAGE:559===
Often, no specific treatment is needed. The ear should be kept dry; routine antibiotic eardrops are
unnecessary. However, prophylaxis with oral broad-spectrum antibiotics or antibiotic eardrops is
necessary if contaminants may have entered through the perforation as occurs in dirty injuries.
If the ear becomes infected, amoxicillin 500 mg po q 8 h is given for 7 days.
Although most perforations close spontaneously, surgery is indicated for a perforation persisting > 2 mo.
Persistent conductive hearing loss suggests disruption of the ossicular chain, necessitating surgical
exploration and repair.
===PAGE:560===
Chapter 50. External Ear Disorders
Introduction
The external ear (pinna and external auditory canal) can be affected by congenital, dermatologic,
infectious, neoplastic, obstructive, and traumatic disorders. Congenital defects are discussed elsewhere. Ear trauma is discussed elsewhere.
Dermatitis
Dermatitis is inflammation of the ear canal involving itching and skin changes that are caused
by exposure to allergens (contact dermatitis) or are spontaneous occurrences (aural
eczematoid dermatitis).
Common contact allergens include nickel-containing earrings and numerous beauty products (eg,
hairsprays, lotions, hair dye). Aural eczematoid dermatitis is more common among people with a
predisposition toward atopy and with other similar dermatitides (eg, seborrhea, psoriasis).
Both contact dermatitis and aural eczematoid dermatitis cause itching, redness, discharge, desquamation,
hyperpigmentation, and, sometimes, fissuring. A secondary infection can occur.
Contact dermatitis requires avoidance or withdrawal of allergic triggers. Trial and error may be needed to
identify the offending agent. Topical corticosteroids (eg, 1% hydrocortisone cream) can decrease
inflammation and itching.
Aural eczematoid dermatitis can be treated with dilute aluminum acetate solution (Burow's solution), which
can be applied as often as required for comfort. Itching and inflammation can be reduced with topical
corticosteroids. If diffuse external otitis ensues, antibiotic therapy may be required (.
External Otitis
External otitis is infection of the ear canal, typically by bacteria. Symptoms include itching, pain,
and discharge. Diagnosis is based on inspection. Treatment is with topical drugs, including
antibiotics, corticosteroids, and acetic acid or a combination.
External otitis may manifest as a localized furuncle or as a diffuse infection of the entire canal
(generalized or diffuse external otitis). This condition is often called swimmer's ear because it sometimes
afflicts people who swim. Malignant external otitis ( is a severe
Pseudomonas
infection of the
temporal bone and is especially dangerous in diabetics.
Etiology
Diffuse external otitis is usually caused by bacteria, such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
,
Proteus vulgaris
,
Staphylococcus aureus
, or
Escherichia coli
. Fungal external otitis (otomycosis), typically caused by
Aspergillus niger
or
Candida albicans
, is less common. Furuncles usually are due to
S. aureus
.
Predisposing conditions include allergies, psoriasis, eczema, seborrheic dermatitis, decreased canal
acidity (possibly due to the repeated presence of water), irritants (eg, hair spray, hair dye), and
inadvertent injury to the canal caused by excessive cleaning with cotton swabs or other objects. Attempts
to clean the ear canal may push debris and cerumen deeper into the canal; these accumulated
substances tend to trap water, resulting in skin maceration that sets the stage for bacterial infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients have itching and pain. Sometimes, a foul-smelling discharge and hearing loss occur if the canal
becomes swollen or filled with purulent debris. Exquisite tenderness accompanies traction of the pinna or
pressure over the tragus. Otoscopic examination is painful and difficult to conduct. It shows the ear canal
===PAGE:561===
to be red, swollen, and littered with moist, purulent debris. Otomycosis caused by
A. niger
usually
manifests with grayish black or yellow dots (fungal conidiophores) surrounded by a cottonlike material
(fungal hyphae). Infection caused by
C. albicans
does not show any visible fungi but usually contains a
thickened, creamy white exudate.
Furuncles cause severe pain and may drain sanguineous, purulent material. They appear as a focal,
erythematous swelling.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on inspection. When discharge is copious, external otitis can be difficult to
differentiate from perforated otitis media; pain with pulling on the pinna may indicate an external otitis.
Fungal infection is diagnosed by appearance or culture.
Treatment
• Topical acetic acid and corticosteroids
• Sometimes topical antibiotics
In diffuse external otitis, topical antibiotics and corticosteroids are effective. First, the infected debris
should be gently and thoroughly removed from the canal with suction or dry cotton wipes. Mild external
otitis can be treated by altering the ear canal's pH with 2% acetic acid and by relieving inflammation with
topical hydrocortisone; these are given as 5 drops tid for 7 days. Moderate external otitis requires the
addition of an antibacterial solution or suspension, such as neomycin, polymyxin, ciprofloxacin, or
ofloxacin. When inflammation of the ear canal is relatively severe, an ear wick should be placed into the
ear canal and wetted with the necessary drugs 4 times/day. The wick is left in place for 24 to 72 h, after
which time the swelling may have receded enough to allow the instillation of drops directly into the canal.
Severe external otitis or the presence of cellulitis extending beyond the ear canal may require systemic
antibiotics, such as cephalexin 500 mg po tid for 10 days or ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid for 10 days. An
analgesic, such as an NSAID or even an oral opioid, may be necessary for the first 24 to 48 h. Fungal
external otitis requires thorough cleaning of the ear canal and application of an antimycotic solution (eg,
gentian violet, cresylate acetate, nystatin, clotrimazole). Repeated cleanings and treatments may be
needed.
A furuncle, if obviously pointing, should be incised and drained. Incision is of little value, however, if the
patient is seen at an early stage. Topical antibiotics are ineffective; oral antistaphylococcal antibiotics
should be given. Analgesics, such as oxycodone with acetaminophen, may be necessary for pain relief.
Dry heat can also lessen pain and hasten resolution.
Prevention
External otitis often can be prevented by irrigating the ears with a 1:1 mixture of rubbing alcohol and
vinegar immediately after swimming. The alcohol helps remove water, and the vinegar alters the pH of the
canal.
Malignant External Otitis
Malignant external otitis is typically a
Pseudomonas
osteomyelitis of the temporal bone.
Soft tissue, cartilage, and bone are all affected. The osteomyelitis spreads along the base of the skull and
may cross the midline.
Malignant external otitis occurs mainly in elderly patients with diabetes or in immunocompromised patients
and is often initiated by
Pseudomonas
external otitis. It is characterized by persistent and severe earache,
===PAGE:562===
foul-smelling purulent otorrhea, and granulation tissue in the ear canal (usually at the junction of the bony
and cartilaginous portions of the canal). Varying degrees of conductive hearing loss may occur. In severe
cases, facial nerve paralysis may ensue.
Diagnosis is based on a CT scan of the temporal bone, which may show increased radiodensity in the
air-cell system and middle ear radiolucency (demineralization) in some areas. Cultures are done, and the
ear canal is biopsied to differentiate the granulation tissue of this disorder from a malignant tumor.
Treatment is with a 6-wk IV course of a fluoroquinolone or an aminoglycoside-semisynthetic penicillin
combination. Extensive bone disease may require more prolonged antibiotic therapy. Careful control of
diabetes is essential. Surgery usually is not necessary.
Obstructions
The ear canal may be obstructed by cerumen (earwax), insertion of a foreign object, or an
insect. Itching, pain, and temporary conductive hearing loss may result. Most causes of
obstruction are readily apparent during otoscopic examination. Treatment is manual removal.
Cerumen:
Cerumen may get pushed further into the ear canal and accumulate during ill-advised
attempts to clean the ear canal with cotton swabs, resulting in obstruction. Cerumen solvents (hydrogen
peroxide, carbamide peroxide, glycerin, triethanolamine) may be used to soften very hard wax before
irrigation or direct removal. However, the prolonged use of these agents may lead to canal skin irritation
or allergic reactions. Although cerumen may be removed by irrigation, rolling the cerumen out of the ear
canal with a blunt curet or loop or removing it with a suction tip (eg, Baron, size 7 French) is quicker,
neater, safer, and more comfortable for the patient. Irrigation is contraindicated if the patient has a history
of otorrhea or perforation of the tympanic membrane; water entering the middle ear through a perforation
may exacerbate chronic otitis media.
Foreign bodies:
Foreign bodies are common, particularly among children, who often insert objects,
particularly beads, erasers, and beans, into the ear canal. Foreign bodies may remain unnoticed until they
provoke an inflammatory response, causing pain, itching, infection, and foul-smelling, purulent drainage. A
foreign body in the ear canal is best removed by reaching behind it and rolling it out with a blunt hook.
Forceps tend to push smooth objects deeper into the canal. Unfortunately, a foreign body lying medial to
the isthmus (the bony cartilaginous junction of the external auditory canal) is difficult to remove without
injuring the tympanic membrane and ossicular chain. Metal and glass beads can sometimes be removed
by irrigation, but hygroscopic foreign bodies (eg, beans or other vegetable matter) swell when water is
added, complicating removal. A general anesthetic may be needed when a child cannot remain still or
when removal is difficult, threatening injury to the tympanic membrane or ossicles. Further, if manipulating
a presumed foreign object results in bleeding, immediate otolaryngologic consultation should be sought.
Bleeding may indicate a mucosal polyp originating in the middle ear, which may be attached to the
ossicles or facial nerve.
Insects in the canal are most annoying while alive. Filling the canal with viscous lidocaine kills the insect,
which provides immediate relief and allows the immobilized insect to be removed with forceps.
Perichondritis
Perichondritis is infection of the perichondrium of the pinna in which pus accumulates between
the cartilage and the perichondrium.
Causes of perichondritis include trauma, insect bites, body piercings, and incision of superficial infections
of the pinna. Because the cartilage's blood supply is provided by the perichondrium, separation of the
perichondrium from both sides of the cartilage may lead to avascular necrosis and a deformed pinna.
Septic necrosis may also ensue, often with infection by gram-negative bacilli. Symptoms include redness,
pain, and swelling. The course of perichondritis tends to be indolent, long-term, and destructive.
The affected area is incised, and a drain is left in place for 24 to 72 h. Systemic antibiotics are initiated
with an aminoglycoside and semisynthetic penicillin. Subsequent antibiotic choice is guided by culture
===PAGE:563===
and sensitivity tests. Warm compresses may help.The Merck Manual of Diagnosis & Therapy, 19th Edition Chapter 50. External Ear Disorders
===PAGE:564===
Chapter 51. Approach to the Patient With Nasal and Pharyngeal Symptoms
Introduction
The nose and pharynx (consisting of the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx) may be affected by
inflammation, infection, trauma, tumors, and several miscellaneous conditions.
Anatomy
Throat:
The uvula hangs in the midline at the far end of the soft palate. It varies greatly in length. A long
uvula and loose or excess velopharyngeal tissue may cause snoring and occasionally contribute to
obstructive sleep apnea.
Tonsils and adenoids are patches of lymphoid tissue surrounding the posterior pharynx in an area termed
Waldeyer's ring. Their role is to combat infection.
The larynx is discussed in
Chapter 54
.
Nose:
The nasal cavity is covered with a highly vascular mucosa that warms and humidifies incoming air.
Each lateral wall of the cavity has 3 turbinates, which are bony shelves that increase the surface area,
thereby allowing more effective heat and moisture exchange. Nasal mucus traps incoming particulate
matter. The space between the middle and inferior turbinate is the middle meatus, into which the maxillary
and most of the ethmoid sinuses drain. Polyps may develop between the turbinates, often in association
with asthma, allergy, aspirin use, and cystic fibrosis.
Sinuses:
The paranasal sinuses are mucus-lined bony cavities that connect to the nasopharynx. The 4
types are maxillary, frontal, ethmoid, and sphenoid sinuses. They are located in the facial and cranial
bones (see
Fig. 51-1
). The physiologic role of the sinuses is unclear.
[Fig. 51-1.
Paranasal sinuses.]
Evaluation
Examination of the nose and pharynx is part of every general physical examination.
History:
General information includes use of alcohol or tobacco (both major risk factors for head and
neck cancer) and systemic symptoms, such as fever and weight loss. Oropharyngeal symptoms include
pain, ulcers, and difficulty swallowing or speaking. Nasal and sinus symptoms include presence and
duration of congestion, discharge, or bleeding.
Physical examination:
Most physicians use a head-mounted light. However, because the light cannot
be precisely aligned on the axis of vision, it is difficult to avoid shadowing in narrow areas (eg, nasal
cavity). Better illumination results with a head-mounted convex mirror; the physician looks through a hole
in the center of the mirror, so the illumination is always on-axis. The head mirror reflects light from a
source (any incandescent light) placed behind the patient and slightly to one side and requires practice to
use effectively.
The nose is examined using a nasal speculum, which is held so that the 2 blades open in an
anteroposterior (or slightly oblique) direction and do not press against the septum. The physician notes
crusting, discharge, septal deviation, or perforation; whether mucosa is erythematous, boggy, or swollen;
and presence of polyps. The skin over the frontal and maxillary sinuses is examined for erythema and
tenderness, suggesting sinus inflammation.
If necessary, the nasopharynx and hypopharynx can be examined with mirrors, which should be warmed
before use to avoid fogging. A small mirror is used for the nasopharynx. It is held just below the uvula,
angling upward; the tongue is pushed down with a tongue blade. A larger mirror is used for the
hypopharynx and larynx. The tongue is retracted by grasping it with a gauze pad, and the mirror is placed
===PAGE:565===
against the soft palate, angling downward. If patients do not tolerate mirror examination, a flexible
fiberoptic nasopharyngoscope is helpful. A topical anesthetic (eg, lidocaine 4%) is sprayed in the nose
and throat, and the nose is also sprayed with a decongestant (eg, phenylephrine 0.5%). After several
minutes, the scope is gently passed through the nares, and the nasal cavity, hypopharynx, and larynx are
inspected.
Neck examination consists of inspection and palpation for masses. If masses are found, the physician
notes whether they are tender; fluctuant, firm, or stony hard; and movable or fixed. Masses caused by
infection are tender and mobile; cancers tend to be nontender, hard, and fixed. Particular attention is paid
to the cervical lymph nodes and thyroid and parotid glands.
Epistaxis
Epistaxis is nose bleeding. Bleeding can range from a trickle to a strong flow, and the
consequences can range from a minor annoyance to life-threatening hemorrhage. Swallowed
blood is a gastric irritant, so patients also may describe vomiting blood.
Pathophysiology
Most nasal bleeding is anterior, originating from a plexus of vessels in the anteroinferior septum
(Kiesselbach's area).
Less common but more serious are posterior nosebleeds, which originate in the posterior septum
overlying the vomer bone, or laterally on the inferior or middle turbinate. Posterior nosebleeds tend to
occur in patients who have preexisting atherosclerotic vessels or bleeding disorders and have undergone
nasal or sinus surgery.
Etiology
The most common causes of epistaxis are
• Local trauma (eg, nose blowing and picking)
• Drying of the nasal mucosa
There are a number of less common causes (see
Table 51-1
). Hypertension may contribute to the persistence of a nosebleed that has already begun but is
unlikely to be the sole etiology.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should try to determine which side began bleeding first; although
major epistaxis quickly involves both nares, most patients can localize the initial flow to one side, which
focuses the physical examination. Also, the duration of bleeding should be established, as well as any
triggers (eg, sneezing, nose blowing, picking) and attempts by the patient to stop the bleeding. Important
associated symptoms prior to onset include symptoms of a URI, sensation of nasal obstruction, and nasal
or facial pain. The time and number of previous nose-bleeding episodes and their resolution should be
identified.
[Table 51-1.
Some Causes of Epistaxis]
Review of systems
should ask about symptoms of excessive bleeding, including easy bruising; bloody
or tarry stools; hemoptysis; blood in urine; and excess bleeding with toothbrushing, phlebotomy, or minor
trauma.
Past medical history
should note presence of known bleeding disorders (including a family history) and
conditions associated with defects in platelets or coagulation, particularly cancer, cirrhosis, HIV, and
pregnancy. Drug history should specifically query about use of drugs that may promote bleeding,
===PAGE:566===
including aspirin and other NSAIDs, other antiplatelet drugs (eg, clopidogrel), heparin, and warfarin.
Physical examination:
Vital signs should be reviewed for indications of intravascular volume depletion
(tachycardia, hypotension) and marked hypertension. With active bleeding, treatment takes place
simultaneously with evaluation.
During active bleeding, inspection is difficult, so attempts are first made to stop the bleeding as described
below. The nose is then examined using a nasal speculum and a bright head lamp or head mirror, which
leaves one hand free to manipulate suction or an instrument.
Anterior bleeding sites are usually apparent on direct examination. If no site is apparent and there have
been only 1 or 2 minor nosebleeds, further examination is not needed. If bleeding is severe or recurrent
and no site is seen, fiberoptic endoscopy may be necessary.
The general examination should look for signs of bleeding disorders, including petechiae, purpura, and
perioral and oral mucosal telangiectasias as well as any intranasal masses.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Signs of hypovolemia or hemorrhagic shock
• Anticoagulant drug use
• Cutaneous signs of a bleeding disorder
• Bleeding not stopped by direct pressure or vasoconstrictor-soaked pledgets
• Multiple recurrences, particularly with no clear cause
Interpretation of findings:
Many cases have a clear-cut trigger (particularly nose blowing or picking) as
suggested by findings (see
Table 51-1
).
Testing:
Routine laboratory testing is not required. Patients with symptoms or signs of a bleeding
disorder and those with severe or recurrent epistaxis should have CBC, PT, and PTT.
CT may be done if a foreign body, a tumor, or sinusitis is suspected.
Treatment
Presumptive treatment for actively bleeding patients is that for anterior bleeding. The need for blood
replacement is determined by the Hb level, symptoms of anemia, and vital signs. Any identified bleeding
disorders are treated.
Anterior epistaxis:
Bleeding can usually be controlled by pinching the nasal alae together for 10 min
while the patient sits upright (if possible). If this maneuver fails, a cotton pledget impregnated with a
vasoconstrictor (eg, phenylephrine 0.25%) and a topical anesthetic (eg, lidocaine 2%) is inserted and the
nose pinched for another 10 min. The bleeding point may then be cauterized with electrocautery or silver
nitrate on an applicator stick. Cauterizing 4 quadrants immediately adjacent to the bleeding vessel is most
effective. Care must be taken to avoid burning the mucous membrane too deeply; therefore, silver nitrate
is the preferred method. Alternatively, a nasal tampon of expandable foam may be inserted. Coating the
tampon with a topical ointment, such as bacitracin or mupirocin, may help. If these methods are
ineffective, various commercial nasal balloons can be used to compress bleeding sites. Alternatively, an
anterior nasal pack consisting of 1/2-in petrolatum gauze may be inserted; up to 72 in of gauze may be
required. This procedure is painful, and analgesics usually are needed; it should be used only when other
methods fail or are not available.
Posterior epistaxis:
Posterior bleeding may be difficult to control. Commercial nasal balloons are quick
and convenient; a gauze posterior pack is effective but more difficult to position. Both are very
===PAGE:567===
uncomfortable; IV sedation and analgesia may be needed, and hospitalization is required.
Commercial balloons are inserted according to the instructions accompanying the product.
The posterior gauze pack consists of 4-in gauze squares folded, rolled, tied into a tight bundle with 2
strands of heavy silk suture, and coated with antibiotic ointment. The ends of one suture are tied to a
catheter that has been introduced through the nasal cavity on the side of the bleeding and brought out
through the mouth. As the catheter is withdrawn from the nose, the postnasal pack is pulled into place
above the soft palate in the nasopharynx. The 2nd suture hangs down the back of the throat and is
trimmed below the level of the soft palate so that it can be used to remove the pack. The nasal cavity
anterior to this pack is firmly packed with 1/2-in petrolatum gauze, and the
1st suture is tied over a roll of
gauze at the anterior nares to secure the postnasal pack. The packing remains in place for 4 to 5 days.
An antibiotic (eg, amoxicillin/clavulanate 875 mg po bid for 7 to 10 days) is given to prevent sinusitis and
otitis media. Posterior nasal packing lowers the arterial PO
, and supplementary O
is given while the
packing is in place.
Rarely, the internal maxillary artery and its branches must be ligated to control the bleeding. The arteries
may be ligated with clips using endoscopic or microscopic guidance and a surgical approach through the
maxillary sinus. Alternatively, angiographic embolization may be done by a skilled radiologist.
Bleeding disorders:
In Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome, a split-thickness skin graft (septal dermatoplasty)
reduces the number of nosebleeds and allows the anemia to be corrected. Laser (Nd:YAG)
photocoagulation can be done in the operating room. Selective embolization also is very effective,
particularly in patients who cannot tolerate general anesthesia or for whom surgical intervention has not
been successful. New endoscopic sinus devices have made transnasal surgery more effective.
Blood may be swallowed in large amounts and, in patients with liver disease, should be eliminated
promptly with enemas and cathartics to prevent hepatic encephalopathy. The GI tract should be sterilized
with nonabsorbable antibiotics (eg, neomycin 1 g po qid) to prevent the breakdown of blood and the
absorption of ammonia.
Key Points
• Most nosebleeds are anterior and stop with direct pressure.
• Screening (by history and physical examination) for bleeding disorders is important.
• Patients should always be asked about aspirin or ibuprofen use.
Nasal Congestion and Rhinorrhea
Nasal congestion and rhinorrhea (runny nose) are extremely common problems that commonly occur
together but occasionally occur alone.
Etiology
The most common causes (see
Table 51-2
) are the following:
• Viral infections
• Allergic reactions
Dry air may provoke congestion. Acute sinusitis is slightly less common, and a nasal foreign body is
unusual (and occurs predominantly in children).
Patients who use topical decongestants for > 1 day often experience significant rebound congestion
when the effects of the drug wear off, causing them to continue using the decongestant in a vicious circle
===PAGE:568===
of persistent, worsening congestion. This situation (rhinitis medicamentosa) may persist for some time
and may be misinterpreted as a continuation of the original problem rather than a consequence of
treatment.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should determine the nature of the discharge (eg, watery, mucoid,
purulent, bloody) and whether discharge is chronic or recurrent. If recurrent, any relation to patient
location, season, or exposure to potential triggering allergens (numerous) should be determined.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including fever and facial pain
(sinusitis); watery, itchy eyes (allergies); and sore throat, malaise, fever, and cough (viral URI).
Past medical history
should seek known allergies and existence of diabetes or immunocompromise.
Drug history should ask specifically about topical decongestant use.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for fever.
Examination focuses on the nose and area over the sinuses. The face is inspected for focal erythema
over the frontal and maxillary sinuses; these areas are also palpated for tenderness. Nasal mucosa is
inspected for color (eg, red or pale), swelling, color and nature of discharge, and (particularly in children)
presence of any foreign body.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Unilateral discharge, particularly if purulent or bloody
• Facial pain, tenderness, or both
Interpretation of findings:
Symptoms and examination are often enough to suggest a diagnosis (see
Table 51-2
).
In children, unilateral foul-smelling discharge suggests a nasal foreign body. If no foreign body is seen,
sinusitis is suspected when purulent rhinorrhea persists for > 10 days along with fatigue and cough.
Testing:
Testing is generally not indicated for acute nasal symptoms unless invasive sinusitis is
suspected in a diabetic or immunocompromised patient; these patients usually should undergo CT.
[Table 51-2.
Some Causes of Nasal Congestion and Rhinorrhea]
Treatment
Specific conditions are treated. Symptomatic relief of congestion can be achieved with topical or oral
decongestants. Topical decongestants include oxymetazoline, 2 sprays each nostril once/day or bid for 3
days. Oral decongestants include pseudoephedrine 60 mg bid. Prolonged use should be avoided.
Viral rhinorrhea can be treated with oral antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine 25 to 50 mg po bid), which
are recommended because of their anticholinergic properties unrelated to their H
-blocking properties.
Allergic congestion and rhinorrhea can be treated with antihistamines; in such cases, nonanticholinergic
antihistamines (eg, fexofenadine 60 mg po bid) as needed provoke fewer adverse effects. Nasal
corticosteroids (eg, mometasone 2 sprays each nostril daily) also help allergic conditions.
Antihistamines and decongestants are not recommended for children < 6 yr.
Geriatrics Essentials
Antihistamines and can have sedating and anticholinergic effects and should be given in decreased
===PAGE:569===
dosage in the elderly. Similarly, sympathomimetics should be used with the lowest dosage that is clinically
effective.
Key Points
• Most nasal congestion and rhinorrhea are caused by URI or allergies.
• A foreign body should be considered in children.
• Rebound from topical decongestant overuse should also be considered.
Neck Mass
Patients or their family members may notice a mass on the neck, or one may be discovered during routine
examination. A neck mass may be painless or painful depending on the cause. When a neck mass is
painless, much time may pass before patients seek medical care.
Etiology
There are many causes of neck mass, including infectious, cancerous, and congenital causes (see
Table 51-3
).
The most common causes in younger patients include the following:
• Reactive adenitis
• Primary bacterial lymph node infection
• Systemic infections
[Table 51-3.
Some Causes of Neck Mass]
Reactive adenitis occurs in response to viral or bacterial infection somewhere in the oropharynx. Some
systemic infections (eg, mononucleosis, HIV, TB) cause cervical lymph node enlargement—usually
generalized rather than isolated.
Congenital disorders may cause a neck mass, typically longstanding. The most common are thyroglossal
duct cysts, branchial cleft cysts, and dermoid or sebaceous cysts.
Cancerous masses are more common among older patients but may occur in younger ones. These
masses may represent a local primary tumor or lymph node involvement from a local, regional, or distant
primary cancer. About 60% of supraclavicular triangle masses are metastases from distant primary sites.
Elsewhere in the neck, 80% of cancerous cervical adenopathy originates in the upper respiratory or
alimentary tract. Likely sites of origin are the posterior-lateral border of the tongue and the floor of the
mouth followed by the nasopharynx, palatine tonsil, laryngeal surface of the epiglottis, and hypopharynx,
including the pyriform sinuses.
The thyroid gland may enlarge in various disorders, including simple nontoxic goiter, subacute thyroiditis,
and, less often, thyroid cancer.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should note how long the mass has been present and whether it is
painful. Important associated acute symptoms include sore throat, URI symptoms, and toothache.
Review of systems
should ask about difficulty swallowing or speaking and symptoms of chronic
disease (eg, fever, weight loss, malaise). Regional and distant cancers causing metastases to the neck
occasionally cause symptoms in their system of origin (eg, cough in lung cancer, swallowing difficulty in
===PAGE:570===
esophageal cancer). Because numerous cancers can metastasize to the neck, a complete review of
systems is important to help identify a source.
Past medical history
should inquire about known HIV or TB and risk factors for them. Risk factors for
cancer are assessed, including consumption of alcohol or use of tobacco (particularly snuff or chewing
tobacco), ill-fitting dental appliances, and chronic oral candidiasis. Poor oral hygiene also may be a risk.
Physical examination:
The neck mass is palpated to determine consistency (ie, whether soft and
fluctuant, rubbery, or hard) and presence and degree of tenderness. Whether the mass is freely mobile or
appears fixed to the skin or underlying tissue also needs to be determined.
The scalp, ears, nasal cavities, oral cavity, nasopharynx, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx are closely
inspected for signs of infection and any other visible lesions. Teeth are percussed to detect the exquisite
tenderness of root infection. The base of the tongue, floor of the mouth, and the thyroid and salivary
glands are palpated for masses.
The breasts and prostate gland are palpated for masses, and the spleen is palpated for enlargement.
Stool is checked for occult blood, suggestive of a GI cancer.
Other lymph nodes are palpated (eg, axillary, inguinal).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Hard, fixed mass
• Older patient
• Presence of oropharyngeal lesions (other than simple pharyngitis or dental infection)
• A history of persistent hoarseness or dysphagia
Interpretation of findings:
Important differentiating factors for a neck mass (see also
Table 51-3
)
include acuity, pain and tenderness, and consistency and mobility.
A new mass (ie, developing over only a few days), particularly after symptoms of a URI or pharyngitis,
suggests benign reactive lymphadenopathy. An acute tender mass suggests lymphadenitis or an infected
dermoid cyst.
A chronic mass in younger patients suggests a cyst. A non-midline mass in older patients, particularly
those with risk factors, should be considered cancer until proven otherwise; a midline mass is likely of
thyroid origin (benign or malignant).
Pain, tenderness, or both in the mass suggest inflammation (particularly infectious), whereas a painless
mass suggests a cyst or tumor. A hard, fixed, nontender mass suggests cancer, whereas rubbery
consistency and mobility suggest otherwise.
Generalized adenopathy and splenomegaly suggest infectious mononucleosis or a lymphoreticular
cancer. Generalized adenopathy alone may suggest HIV infection, particularly in those with risk factors.
Red and white mucosal patches (erythroplakia and leukoplakia) in the oropharynx may be malignant
lesions responsible for the neck mass.
Difficulty swallowing may be noted with thyroid enlargement or cancer originating in various sites in the
neck. Difficulty speaking
suggests a cancer involving the larynx or recurrent laryngeal nerve.
Testing:
If the nature of the mass is readily apparent (eg, lymphadenopathy caused by recent
pharyngitis) or is in a healthy young patient with a recent, tender swelling and no other findings, then no
immediate testing is required. However, the patient is reexamined regularly; if the mass fails to resolve,
===PAGE:571===
further evaluation is needed.
Most other patients should have a CBC and chest x-ray. Those with findings suggesting specific causes
should also have testing for those disorders (see
Table 51-3
).
If examination reveals an oral or nasopharyngeal lesion that fails to begin resolving within 2 wk, testing
may include CT or MRI and fine-needle biopsy of that lesion.
In young patients with no risk factors for head and neck cancer and no other apparent lesions, the neck
mass may be biopsied.
Older patients, particularly those with risk factors for cancer, should first undergo further testing to identify
the primary site; biopsy of the neck mass may simply reveal undifferentiated squamous cell carcinoma
without illuminating the source. Such patients should have direct laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, and
esophagoscopy with biopsy of all suspicious areas. CT of the head, neck, and chest and possibly a
thyroid scan are done. If a primary tumor is not found, fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the neck mass
should be done, which is preferable to an incisional biopsy because it does not leave a transected mass
in the neck. If the neck mass is cancerous and a primary tumor has not been identified, random biopsy of
the nasopharynx, palatine tonsils, and base of the tongue should be considered.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause.
Key Points
• An acute neck mass in younger patients is usually benign.
• Neck mass in an elderly patient raises concern of cancer.
• Thorough oropharyngeal examination is important.
Pharyngitis
Pharyngitis (sore throat) is pain in the posterior pharynx that occurs with or without swallowing.
Pain can be severe; many patients refuse oral intake.
Etiology
Sore throat results from infection; the most common cause is
• Tonsillopharyngitis
Rarely, an abscess or epiglottitis is involved; although uncommon, these are of particular concern
because they may compromise the airway.
Tonsillopharyngitis:
Tonsillopharyngitis is predominantly a viral infection; a lesser number of cases are
caused by bacteria.
The respiratory viruses (rhinovirus, adenovirus, influenza, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus) are the
most common viral causes, but occasionally Epstein-Barr virus (the cause of mononucleosis), herpes
simplex, cytomegalovirus, or primary HIV infection is involved.
The main bacterial cause is group A
β
-hemolytic streptococcus (GABHS), which, although estimates vary,
causes perhaps 10% of cases in adults and slightly more in children. GABHS is a concern because of the
possibility of the poststreptococcal sequelae of rheumatic fever, glomerulonephritis, and abscess.
Uncommon bacterial causes include gonorrhea, diphtheria, mycoplasma, and chlamydia.
===PAGE:572===
Abscess:
An abscess in the pharyngeal area (peritonsillar, parapharyngeal, and, in children,
retropharyngeal) is uncommon but causes significant throat pain. The usual causative organism is
GABHS.
Epiglottitis:
Epiglottitis, perhaps better termed supraglottitis, used to occur primarily in children and
usually was caused by
Haemophilus influenzae
type B (HiB). Now, because of widespread childhood
vaccination against HiB, supraglottitis/epiglottitis has been almost eradicated in children (more cases
occur in adults). Causal organisms in children and adults include
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
Staphylococcus aureus
, nontypeable
H. influenzae
,
Haemophilus parainfluenzae
,
β
-hemolytic
streptococci,
Branhamella catarrhalis
, and
Klebsiella pneumoniae
. HiB is still a cause in adults and
unvaccinated children.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should note the duration and severity of sore throat.
Review of systems
should seek important associated symptoms, such as runny nose, cough, and
difficulty swallowing, speaking, or breathing. The presence and duration of any preceding weakness and
malaise (suggesting mononucleosis) are noted.
Past medical history
should seek history of previous documented mononucleosis (recurrence is highly
unlikely). Social history should inquire about close contact with people with documented GABHS
infection, risk factors for gonorrhea transmission (eg, recent oral-genital sexual contact), and risk factors
for HIV acquisition (eg, unprotected intercourse, multiple sex partners, IV drug abuse).
Physical examination:
General examination should note fever and signs of respiratory distress, such as
tachypnea, dyspnea, stridor, and, in children, the tripod position (sitting upright, leaning forward with neck
hyperextended and jaw thrust forward).
Pharyngeal examination should not be done in children if supraglottitis/epiglottitis is suspected, because it
may trigger complete airway obstruction. Adults with no respiratory distress may be examined but with
care. Erythema, exudates, and any signs of swelling around the tonsils or retropharyngeal area should be
noted. Whether the uvula is in the midline or appears pushed to one side should also be noted.
The neck is examined for presence of enlarged, tender lymph nodes. The abdomen is palpated for
presence of splenomegaly.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Stridor or other sign of respiratory distress
• Drooling
• Muffled, "hot potato" voice
• Visible bulge in pharynx
Interpretation of findings:
Supraglottitis/epiglottitis and pharyngeal abscess pose a threat to the airway
and must be differentiated from simple tonsillopharyngitis, which is uncomfortable but not acutely
dangerous. Clinical findings help make this distinction.
With supraglottitis/epiglottitis, there is abrupt onset of severe throat pain and dysphagia, usually with no
preceding URI symptoms. Children often have drooling and signs of toxicity. Sometimes (more often in
children), there are respiratory manifestations, with tachypnea, dyspnea, stridor, and sitting in the tripod
position. If examined, the pharynx almost always appears unremarkable.
Pharyngeal abscess and tonsillopharyngitis both may cause pharyngeal erythema, exudate, or both.
However, some findings are more likely in one condition or another:
===PAGE:573===
• Pharyngeal abscess: Muffled, "hot potato" voice (speaking as if a hot object is being held in the mouth);
visible focal swelling in the posterior pharyngeal area (often with deviation of the uvula)
• Tonsillopharyngitis: Accompanied by URI symptoms (eg, runny nose, cough)
Although tonsillopharyngitis is easily recognized clinically, its cause is not. Manifestations of viral and
GABHS infection overlap significantly, although URI symptoms are more common with a viral cause. In
adults, clinical criteria that increase suspicion of GABHS as a cause include
• Tonsillar exudate
• Tender lymphadenopathy
• Fever (including history)
• Absence of cough
Those with ≤ 1 criterion reasonably may be presumed to have viral illness. If ≥ 2 criteria are present, the
likelihood of GABHS is high enough to warrant testing but probably not high enough to warrant
antibiotics, but this decision needs to be patient-specific (ie, threshold for testing and treatment may be
lower in those at risk because of diabetes or immunocompromise). In children, testing usually is done.
Regarding rarer causes of tonsillopharyngitis, infectious mononucleosis should be considered when there
is posterior cervical or generalized adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and fatigue and malaise for > 1 wk.
Those with no URI symptoms but recent oral-genital contact may have pharyngeal gonorrhea. A dirtygray, thick, tough membrane on the posterior pharynx that bleeds if peeled away indicates diphtheria (rare
in the US). HIV infection should be considered in patients with risk factors.
Testing:
If supraglottitis/epiglottitis is considered possible after evaluation, testing is required. Patients
who do not appear seriously ill and have no respiratory symptoms may have plain lateral neck x-rays to
look for an edematous epiglottis. However, a child who appears seriously ill or has stridor or any other
respiratory symptoms should not be transported to the x-ray suite. Such patients (and those with positive
or equivocal x-ray findings) usually should have flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy. (CAUTION:
Examination
of the pharynx and larynx may precipitate complete respiratory obstruction in children, and the pharynx
and larynx should not be directly examined except in the operating room, where the most advanced
airway intervention is available
.)
Many abscesses are managed clinically, but if location and extent are unclear, immediate CT of the neck
should be done.
In tonsillopharyngitis, throat culture is the only reliable way to differentiate viral infection
from GABHS. To
balance timeliness of diagnosis, cost, and accuracy, one strategy in children is to do a rapid strep screen
in the office, treat if positive, and send a formal culture if negative. In adults, because other bacterial
pathogens may be involved, throat culture for all bacterial pathogens is appropriate for those meeting
clinical criteria described previously.
Testing for mononucleosis, gonorrhea, or HIV is done only when clinically suspected.
Treatment
Specific conditions are treated. Those with severe symptoms of tonsillopharyngitis may be started on a
broad-spectrum antibiotic (eg, amoxicillin/clavulanate) pending culture results.
Symptomatic treatments such as warm saltwater gargles and topical anesthetics (eg, benzocaine,
lidocaine, dyclonine) may help temporarily relieve pain in tonsillopharyngitis. Patients in severe pain (even
from tonsillopharyngitis) may require short-term use of opioids.
===PAGE:574===
Key Points
• Most sore throats are caused by viral tonsillopharyngitis.
• It is difficult to clinically distinguish viral from bacterial causes of tonsillopharyngitis.
• Abscess and epiglottitis are rare but serious causes.
• Severe sore throat in a patient with a normal-appearing pharynx should raise suspicion of epiglottitis.
Smell and Taste Abnormalities
Because distinct flavors depend on aromas to stimulate the olfactory chemoreceptors, smell and taste are
physiologically interdependent. Dysfunction of one often disturbs the other. Disorders of smell and taste
are rarely incapacitating or life threatening, so they often do not receive close medical attention, although
their effect on quality of life can be severe.
Taste:
Although abnormal taste sensations may be due to mental disorders, local causes should always
be sought. Glossopharyngeal and facial nerve integrity can be determined by testing taste on both sides
of the dorsum of the tongue with sugar, salt, vinegar (acid), and quinine (bitter).
Drying of the oral mucosa caused by heavy smoking, Sjogren's syndrome, radiation therapy of the head
and neck, or desquamation of the tongue can impair taste, and various drugs (eg, those with
anticholinergic properties and vincristine) alter taste. In all instances, the gustatory receptors are diffusely
involved. When limited to one side of the tongue (eg, in Bell's palsy), ageusia (loss of the sense of taste)
is rarely noticed.
Smell:
The inability to detect certain odors, such as gas or smoke, may be dangerous, and several
systemic and intracranial disorders should be excluded before dismissing symptoms as harmless.
Whether brain stem disease (involvement of the nucleus solitarius) can cause disorders of smell and
taste is uncertain, because other neurologic manifestations usually take precedence.
Anosmia (loss of the sense of smell) is probably the most common abnormality. Hyperosmia (increased
sensitivity to odors) usually reflects a neurotic or histrionic personality but can occur intermittently with
seizure disorders. Dysosmia (disagreeable or distorted sense of smell) may occur with infection of the
nasal sinuses, partial damage to the olfactory bulbs, or mental depression. Some cases, accompanied by
a disagreeable taste, result from poor dental hygiene. Uncinate epilepsy can produce brief, vivid,
unpleasant olfactory hallucinations. Hyposmia (diminished sense of smell) and hypogeusia (diminished
sense of taste) can follow acute influenza, usually temporarily.
Rarely, idiopathic dysgeusia (distorted sense of taste), hypogeusia, and dysosmia respond to zinc
supplementation.
Anosmia
Anosmia is complete loss of smell. Hyposmia is partial loss of smell. Most patients with anosmia have
normal perception of salty, sweet, sour, and bitter substances but lack flavor discrimination, which largely
depends on olfaction. Therefore, they often complain of losing the sense of taste (ageusia) and of not
enjoying food. If unilateral, anosmia is often unrecognized.
Etiology
Anosmia occurs when intranasal swelling or other obstruction prevents odors from gaining access to the
olfactory area; when the olfactory neuroepithelium is destroyed; or when the olfactory nerve fila, bulbs,
tracts, or central connections are destroyed (see
Table 51-4
).
Major causes include
===PAGE:575===
• Head trauma (young adults)
• Viral infections and Alzheimer's disease (older adults)
[Table 51-4.
Some Causes of Anosmia]
Prior URI, especially influenza infection, is implicated in 14 to 26% of all presenting cases of hyposmia or
anosmia.
Drugs can contribute to anosmia in susceptible patients. Other causes include prior head and neck
radiation, recent nasal or sinus surgery, nasal and brain tumors, and toxins. The role of tobacco is
uncertain.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should assess the time course of symptoms and their relation to
any URI or head injury. Important associated symptoms are nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, or both. The
nature of rhinorrhea should be assessed (eg, watery, mucoid, purulent, bloody).
Review of systems
should assess neurologic symptoms, particularly those involving mental status (eg,
difficulty with recent memory) and cranial nerves (eg, diplopia, difficulty speaking or swallowing, tinnitus,
vertigo).
Past medical history
should include history of sinus disorders, cranial trauma or surgery, allergies,
drugs used, and exposure to chemicals or fumes.
Physical examination:
The nasal passages should be inspected for swelling, inflammation, discharge,
and polyps. Having the patient breathe through each nostril sequentially (while the other is manually
occluded) may help identify obstruction.
A complete neurologic examination, particularly of mental status and cranial nerves, is done.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Previous head injury
• Neurologic symptoms or signs
• Sudden onset
Interpretation of findings:
Sudden onset after significant head trauma or toxin exposure strongly
implicates that event as the cause.
A history of chronic rhinosinusitis is suggestive, particularly when significant congestion, polyps, or both
are visible on examination. However, because these findings are common in the population, the physician
should be wary of missing another disorder. Progressive confusion and recent memory loss in an elderly
patient suggest Alzheimer's disease as a cause. Waxing and waning neurologic symptoms affecting
multiple areas suggest a neurodegenerative disease such as multiple sclerosis. Slowly progressive
anosmia in an elderly patient with no other symptoms or findings suggests normal aging as the cause.
Testing:
An in-office test of olfaction can help confirm olfactory dysfunction. Commonly, one nostril is
pressed shut, and a pungent odor such as from a vial containing coffee, cinnamon, or tobacco is placed
under the open nostril; if the patient can identify the substance, olfaction is presumed intact. The test is
repeated on the other nostril to determine whether the response is bilateral. Unfortunately, the test is
crude and unreliable.
If anosmia is present and no cause is readily apparent on clinical evaluation (see
Table 51-4
), patients
===PAGE:576===
should have CT of the head (including sinuses) with contrast to rule out a tumor or unsuspected fracture
of the floor of the anterior cranial fossa. MRI is also used to evaluate intracranial disease and may be
needed as well, particularly in those patients with no nasal or sinus pathology on CT.
A psychophysical assessment of odor and taste identification and threshold detection is done as well.
This assessment commonly involves use of one or several commercially available testing kits. One kit
uses a scratch-and-sniff battery of odors, whereas another kit involves sequential dilutions of an odorous
chemical.
Treatment
Specific causes are treated, although smell does not always recover even after successful treatment of
sinusitis.
There are no treatments for anosmia. Patients who retain some sense of smell may find adding
concentrated flavoring agents to food improves their enjoyment of eating. Smoke alarms, important in all
homes, are even more essential for patients with anosmia. Patients should be cautioned about
consumption of stored food and use of natural gas for cooking or heating, because they have difficulty
detecting food spoilage or gas leaks.
Geriatrics Essentials
There is a significant loss of olfactory receptor neurons with normal aging, leading to a marked diminution
of the sense of smell. Changes are usually noticeable by age 60 and can be marked after age 70.
Key Points
• Anosmia may be part of normal aging.
• Common causes include URI, sinusitis, and head trauma.
• Cranial imaging is typically required unless the cause is obvious.
===PAGE:577===
Chapter 52. Oral and Pharyngeal Disorders
Introduction
Oral and pharyngeal disorders include adenoid disorders, epiglottitis, parapharyngeal abscess,
peritonsillar abscess and cellulitis, retropharyngeal abscess, salivary stones, sialadenitis, submandibular
space infection, tonsillopharyngitis, Tornwaldt's cyst, and velopharyngeal insufficiency. Oral, pharyngeal,
and salivary gland tumors are discussed in
Chapter 55
.
Sialadenitis
Sialadenitis is bacterial infection of a salivary gland, usually due to an obstructing stone or
gland hyposecretion. Symptoms are swelling, pain, redness, and tenderness. Diagnosis is
clinical. CT, ultrasound, and MRI may help identify the cause. Treatment is with antibiotics.
Etiology
Sialadenitis usually occurs after hyposecretion or duct obstruction but may develop without an obvious
cause. The major salivary glands are the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands. Sialadenitis is
most common in the parotid gland and typically occurs in patients in their 50s and 60s, in chronically ill
patients with xerostomia, in those with Sjogren's syndrome, and in those who have had radiation therapy
to the oral cavity. Teenagers and young adults with anorexia are also prone to this disorder. The most
common causative organism is
Staphylococcus aureus
; others include streptococci, coliforms, and
various anaerobic bacteria.
Symptoms and Signs
Fever, chills, and unilateral pain and swelling develop. The gland is firm and diffusely tender, with
erythema and edema of the overlying skin. Pus can often be expressed from the duct by compressing the
affected gland and should be cultured. Focal enlargement may indicate an abscess.
Diagnosis
CT, ultrasound, and MRI can confirm sialadenitis or abscess that is not obvious clinically, although MRI
may miss an obstructing stone.
Treatment
• Antistaphylococcal antibiotics
• Local measures (eg, sialagogues, warm compresses)
Initial treatment is with antibiotics active against
S. aureus
(eg, dicloxacillin, 250 mg po qid, a 1stgeneration cephalosporin, or clindamycin), modified according to culture results. With the increasing
prevalence of methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
, especially among the elderly living in extended-care nursing
facilities, vancomycin is often required. Hydration, sialagogues (eg, lemon juice, hard candy, or some
other substance that triggers saliva flow), warm compresses, gland massage, and good oral hygiene are
also important. Abscesses require drainage. Occasionally, a superficial parotidectomy or submandibular
gland excision is indicated for patients with chronic or relapsing sialadenitis.
Other Salivary Gland Infections
Mumps often cause parotid swelling (see
Table 155-1
. Patients with HIV infection often have parotid enlargement secondary to one or
more lymphoepithelial cysts. Cat-scratch disease caused by
Bartonella
infection often invades periparotid
lymph nodes and may infect the parotid glands by contiguous spread. Although cat-scratch disease is
self-limited, antibiotic therapy is often provided, and incision and drainage are necessary if an abscess
===PAGE:578===
develops.
Atypical mycobacterial infections in the tonsils or teeth may spread contiguously to the major salivary
glands. The PPD may be negative, and the diagnosis may require biopsy and tissue culture for acid-fast
bacteria. Treatment recommendations are controversial. Options include surgical debridement with
curettage, complete excision of the infected tissue, and use of anti-TB drug therapy (rarely necessary).
Salivary Stones
(Sialolithiasis)
Stones composed of Ca salts often obstruct salivary glands, causing pain, swelling, and
sometimes infection. Diagnosis is made clinically or with CT, ultrasonography, or sialography.
Treatment involves stone expression with saliva stimulants, manual manipulation, a probe, or
surgery.
The major salivary glands are the paired parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands. Stones in the
salivary glands are most common among adults. Eighty percent of stones originate in the submandibular
glands and obstruct Wharton's duct. Most of the rest originate in the parotid glands and block Stensen's
duct. Only about 1% originate in the sublingual glands. Multiple stones occur in about 25% of patients.
Etiology
Most salivary stones are composed of Ca phosphate with small amounts of Mg and carbonate. Patients
with gout may have uric acid stones. Stone formation requires a nidus on which salts can precipitate
during salivary stasis. Stasis occurs in patients who are debilitated, dehydrated, have reduced food
intake, or take anticholinergics. Persisting or recurrent stones predispose to infection of the involved
gland (sialadenitis—.
Symptoms and Signs
Obstructing stones cause glandular swelling and pain, particularly after eating, which stimulates saliva
flow. Symptoms may subside after a few hours. Relief may coincide with a gush of saliva. Some stones
cause intermittent or no symptoms. If a stone is lodged distally, it may be visible or palpable at the duct's
outlet.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes imaging (eg, CT, ultrasonography, sialography)
If a stone is not apparent on examination, the patient can be given a sialagogue (eg, lemon juice, hard
candy, or some other substance that triggers saliva flow). Reproduction of symptoms is almost always
diagnostic of a stone. CT, ultrasonography, and sialography are highly sensitive and are used if clinical
diagnosis is equivocal. Contrast sialography may be done through a catheter inserted into the duct and
can differentiate between stone, stenosis, and tumor. This technique is occasionally therapeutic. Because
90% of submandibular calculi are radiopaque and 90% of parotid calculi are radiolucent, plain x-rays are
not always accurate. MRI is not indicated.
Treatment
• Local measures (eg, sialagogues, massage)
• Sometimes manual expression or surgical removal
Analgesics, hydration, and massage can relieve symptoms. Antistaphylococcal antibiotics can be used to
prevent acute sialadenitis if started early. Stones may pass spontaneously or when salivary flow is
===PAGE:579===
stimulated by sialagogues; patients are encouraged to suck a lemon wedge or sour candy every 2 to 3 h.
Stones right at the duct orifice can sometimes be expressed manually by squeezing with the fingertips.
Dilation of the duct with a small probe may facilitate expulsion. Surgical removal of stones succeeds if
other methods fail. Stones at or near the orifice of the duct may be removed transorally, whereas those in
the hilum of the gland often require complete excision of the salivary gland.
Submandibular Space Infection
(Ludwig's Angina)
Submandibular space infection is acute cellulitis of the soft tissues below the mouth.
Symptoms include pain, dysphagia, and potentially fatal airway obstruction. Diagnosis usually is
clinical. Treatment includes airway management, surgical drainage, and IV antibiotics.
Submandibular space infection is a rapidly spreading, bilateral, indurated cellulitis occurring in the
suprahyoid soft tissues, the floor of the mouth, and both sublingual and submaxillary spaces without
abscess formation. Although not a true abscess, it resembles one clinically and is treated similarly.
The condition usually develops from an odontogenic infection, especially of the 2nd and 3rd mandibular
molars, or as an extension of peritonsillar cellulitis. Contributing factors may include poor dental hygiene,
tooth extractions, and trauma (eg, fractures of the mandible, lacerations of the floor of the mouth).
Symptoms and Signs
Early manifestations are pain in any involved teeth, with severe, tender, localized submental and
sublingual induration. Board-like firmness of the floor of the mouth and brawny induration of the
suprahyoid soft tissues may develop rapidly. Drooling, trismus, dysphagia, stridor caused by laryngeal
edema, and elevation of the posterior tongue against the palate may be present. Fever, chills, and
tachycardia are usually present as well. The condition can cause airway obstruction within hours and
does so more often than do other neck infections.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis usually is obvious. If not, CT is done.
Treatment
• Maintenance of airway patency
• Surgical incision and drainage
• Antibiotics active against oral flora
Maintaining airway patency is of the highest priority. Because swelling makes oral endotracheal intubation
difficult, fiberoptic nasotracheal intubation done with topical anesthesia in the operating room or ICU with
the patient awake is preferable. Some patients require a tracheotomy. Patients without immediate need
for intubation require intense observation and may benefit temporarily from a nasal trumpet.
Incision and drainage with placement of drains deep into the mylohyoid muscles relieve the pressure.
Antibiotics should be chosen to cover both oral anaerobes and aerobes (eg, clindamycin,
ampicillin/sulbactam, high-dose penicillin).
Adenoid Disorders
Hypertrophy or inflammation of the adenoids is common among children. Symptoms include
nasal obstruction, sleep disturbances, and middle ear effusions with hearing loss. Diagnosis is
enhanced by flexible fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy. Treatment often includes intranasal
corticosteroids, antibiotics, and, for significant nasal obstruction or persistent recurrent acute
===PAGE:580===
otitis media or middle ear effusion, adenoidectomy.
The adenoids are a rectangular mass of lymphatic tissue in the posterior nasopharynx. They are largest
in children 2 to 6 yr. Enlargement may be physiologic or secondary to viral or bacterial infection, allergy,
irritants, and, possibly, gastroesophageal reflux. Other risk factors include ongoing exposure to bacterial
or viral infection (eg, to multiple children at a child care center). Severe hypertrophy can obstruct the
eustachian tubes (causing otitis media), posterior choanae (causing sinusitis), or both.
Symptoms and Signs
Although patients with adenoid hypertrophy may not complain of symptoms, they usually have chronic
mouth breathing, snoring, sleep disturbance, halitosis, recurrent acute otitis media, conductive hearing
loss (secondary to recurrent otitis media or persistent middle ear effusions), and a hyponasal voice
quality. Chronic adenoiditis can also cause chronic or recurrent nasopharyngitis, rhinosinusitis, epistaxis,
halitosis, and cough.
Diagnosis
• Flexible nasopharyngoscopy
Adenoid hypertrophy is suspected in children and adolescents with characteristic symptoms, persistent
middle ear effusions, or recurrent acute otitis media or rhinosinusitis. Similar symptoms and signs in a
male adolescent may result from an angiofibroma. The gold standard for office assessment of the
nasopharynx is flexible nasopharyngoscopy. X-ray imaging and sleep tape recording, although also often
used, are not as accurate. A sleep study may help define the severity of any sleep disturbance due to
chronic obstruction.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Sometimes adenoidectomy
Underlying allergy is treated with intranasal corticosteroids, and underlying bacterial infection is treated
with antibiotics. In children with persistent middle ear effusions or frequent otitis media, adenoidectomy
often limits recurrence. Children > 4 yr who require tympanostomy tubes often undergo adenoidectomy
when tubes are placed. Surgery is also recommended for younger children with recurrent epistaxis or
significant nasal obstruction (eg, sleep disturbance, voice change). Although it requires general
anesthesia, adenoidectomy usually can be done on an outpatient basis with recovery in 48 to 72 h.
Retropharyngeal Abscess
Retropharyngeal abscesses, most common among young children, can cause sore throat, fever,
neck stiffness, and stridor. Diagnosis requires lateral neck x-ray or CT. Treatment is with
endotracheal intubation, drainage, and antibiotics.
Retropharyngeal abscesses develop in the retropharyngeal lymph nodes at the back of the pharynx,
adjacent to the vertebrae. They can be seeded by infection of the pharynx, sinuses, adenoids, or nose.
They occur mainly in children 1 to 8 yr, as the retropharyngeal lymph nodes begin to recede by 4 to 5 yr.
However, adults may develop infection after foreign body ingestion or after instrumentation. Common
organisms include aerobic
(
Streptococcus
and
Staphylococcus
sp) and anaerobic (
Bacteroides
and
Fusobacterium
) bacteria and, increasingly in adults and children, HIV and TB.
The most serious consequences include airway obstruction, septic shock, rupture of the abscess into the
airway resulting in aspiration pneumonia or asphyxia, mediastinitis, carotid rupture, and suppurative
thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular veins (Lemierre syndrome).
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:581===
Symptoms and signs are usually preceded in children by an acute URI and in adults by foreign body
ingestion or instrumentation. Children may have odynophagia, dysphagia, fever, cervical
lymphadenopathy, nuchal rigidity, stridor, dyspnea, snoring or noisy breathing, and torticollis. Adults may
have severe neck pain but less often have stridor. The posterior pharyngeal wall may bulge to one side.
Diagnosis
• CT
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with severe, unexplained sore throat and neck stiffness; stridor; or
noisy breathing. Lateral soft-tissue x-rays of the neck, taken in the maximum possible hyperextension and
during inspiration, may show focal widening of the prevertebral soft tissues, reversal of normal cervical
lordosis, air in the prevertebral soft tissues, or erosion of the adjacent vertebral body. CT can help
diagnose questionable cases, help differentiate cellulitis from an abscess, and assess extent of the
abscess.
Treatment
• Antibiotics (eg, ceftriaxone, clindamycin)
• Usually surgical drainage
Antibiotics, such as a broad-spectrum cephalosporin (eg, ceftriaxone 50 to 75 mg/kg IV once/day) or
clindamycin, may occasionally be sufficient for children with small abscesses. However, most patients
also require drainage through an incision in the posterior pharyngeal wall. Endotracheal intubation is
done preoperatively and maintained for 24 to 48 h.
Tornwaldt's Cyst
(Pharyngeal Bursa)
Tornwaldt's cyst is a rare cyst in the midline of the nasopharynx that may become infected.
Tornwaldt's cyst is a remnant of the embryonal notochord superficial to the superior constrictor muscle of
the pharynx and is covered by the mucous membrane of the nasopharynx. It may become infected,
causing persistent purulent drainage with a foul taste and odor, eustachian tube obstruction, and sore
throat.
Purulent exudate may be seen at the opening of the cyst. Diagnosis is based on nasopharyngoscopy
supplemented by CT or MRI when the diagnosis is in doubt. Treatment consists of marsupialization or
excision.
Velopharyngeal Insufficiency
Velopharyngeal insufficiency is incomplete closure of a sphincter between the oropharynx and
nasopharynx, often resulting from anatomic abnormalities of the palate and causing hypernasal
speech. Treatment is with speech therapy and surgery.
Velopharyngeal insufficiency is incomplete closure of the velopharyngeal sphincter between the
oropharynx and the nasopharynx. Closure, normally achieved by the sphincteric action of the soft palate
and the superior constrictor muscle, is impaired in patients with cleft palate, repaired cleft palate,
congenitally short palate, submucous cleft palate, palatal paralysis, and, sometimes, enlarged tonsils. The
condition may also result when adenoidectomy or uvulopalatopharyngoplasty is done in a patient with a
congenital underdevelopment (submucous cleft) or paralysis of the palate.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:582===
Speech in a patient with velopharyngeal insufficiency is characterized by hypernasal resonant voice,
nasal emission of air, nasal turbulence, and inability to produce sounds requiring oral pressure (plosives).
Severe velopharyngeal insufficiency results in regurgitation of solid foods and fluids through the nose.
Inspection of the palate during phonation may reveal palatal paralysis.
Diagnosis
• Direct inspection with a fiberoptic nasoendoscope
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with the typical speech abnormalities. Palpation of the midline of
the soft palate may reveal an
occult submucous cleft. Direct inspection with a fiberoptic nasoendoscope is
the primary diagnostic technique. Multiview videofluoroscopy during connected speech and swallowing
(modified barium swallow), done in conjunction with a speech pathologist, can also be used.
Treatment
• Surgical repair and speech therapy
Treatment consists of speech therapy and surgical correction by a palatal elongation pushback
procedure, posterior pharyngeal wall implant, pharyngeal flap, or pharyngoplasty, depending on the
mobility of the lateral pharyngeal walls, the degree of velar elevation, and the size of the defect.
Tonsillopharyngitis
(See also p.
.)
Tonsillopharyngitis is acute infection of the pharynx, palatine tonsils, or both. Symptoms may
include sore throat, dysphagia, cervical lymphadenopathy, and fever. Diagnosis is clinical,
supplemented by culture or rapid antigen test. Treatment depends on symptoms and, in the
case of group A

β
-hemolytic streptococcus, involves antibiotics.
The tonsils participate in systemic immune surveillance. In addition, local tonsillar defenses include a
lining of antigen-processing squamous epithelium that involves B- and T-cell responses.
Tonsillopharyngitis of all varieties constitutes about 15% of all office visits to primary care physicians.
Etiology
Tonsillopharyngitis is usually viral, most often caused by the common cold viruses (adenovirus, rhinovirus,
influenza, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus), but occasionally by Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex
virus, cytomegalovirus, or HIV.
In about 30% of patients, the cause is bacterial. Group A
β
-hemolytic streptococcus (GABHS) is most
common (, but
Staphylococcus aureus
,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
Mycoplasma
pneumoniae
, and
Chlamydia pneumoniae
are sometimes involved. Rare causes include pertussis,
Fusobacterium
, diphtheria, syphilis, and gonorrhea.
GABHS occurs most commonly between ages 5 and 15 and is uncommon before age 3.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain with swallowing is the hallmark and is often referred to the ears. Very young children who are not
able to complain of sore throat often refuse to eat. High fever, malaise, headache, and GI upset are
common, as are halitosis and a muffled voice. A scarlatiniform or nonspecific rash may also be present.
The tonsils are swollen and red and often have purulent exudates. Tender cervical lymphadenopathy may
be present. Fever, adenopathy, palatal petechiae, and exudates are somewhat more common with
GABHS than with viral tonsillopharyngitis, but there is much overlap. GABHS usually resolves within 7
===PAGE:583===
days. Untreated GABHS may lead to local suppurative complications (eg, peritonsillar abscess or
cellulitis) and sometimes to rheumatic fever or glomerulonephritis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• GABHS ruled out by rapid antigen test, culture, or both
Pharyngitis itself is easily recognized clinically. However, its cause is not. Rhinorrhea and cough usually
indicate a viral cause. Infectious mononucleosis is suggested by posterior cervical or generalized
adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, fatigue, and malaise for > 1 wk; a full neck with petechiae of the soft
palate; and thick tonsillar exudates. A dirty gray, thick, tough membrane that bleeds if peeled away
indicates diphtheria (rare in the US).
Because GABHS requires antibiotics, it must be diagnosed early. Criteria for testing are controversial.
Many authorities recommend testing with a rapid antigen test or culture for all children. Rapid antigen
tests are specific but not sensitive and may need to be followed by a culture, which is about 90% specific
and 90% sensitive. In adults, many authorities recommend using the following 4 criteria:
• History of fever
• Tonsillar exudates
• Absence of cough
• Tender anterior cervical lymphadenopathy
Patients who meet 1 or no criteria are unlikely to have GABHS and should not be tested. Patients who
meet 2 criteria can be tested. Patients who meet 3 or 4 criteria can be tested or treated empirically for
GABHS.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment
• Antibiotics for GABHS
• Tonsillectomy considered for recurrent GABHS
Supportive treatments include analgesia, hydration, and rest. Penicillin V is usually considered the drug of
choice for GABHS tonsillopharyngitis; dose is 250 mg po bid for 10 days for patients < 27 kg and 500 mg
for those > 27 kg (see also p.
). Amoxicillin is effective and more palatable if a liquid preparation is
required. If adherence is a concern, a single dose of benzathine penicillin 1.2 million units IM (600,000
units for children ≤ 27 kg) is effective. Other oral drugs include macrolides for patients allergic to
penicillin, a 1st-generation cephalosporin, and clindamycin.
Treatment may be started immediately or delayed until culture results are known. If treatment is started
presumptively, it should be stopped if cultures are negative. Follow-up throat cultures are not done
routinely. They are useful in patients with multiple GABHS recurrences or if pharyngitis spreads to close
contacts at home or school.
Tonsillectomy:
Tonsillectomy should be considered if GABHS tonsillitis recurs repeatedly (> 6
episodes/yr, > 4 episodes/yr for 2 yr, > 3 episodes/yr for 3 yr) or if acute infection is severe and persistent
despite antibiotics. Other criteria for tonsillectomy include obstructive sleep disorder, recurrent
peritonsillar abscess, and suspicion of cancer.
Numerous effective surgical techniques are used to perform tonsillectomy, including electrocautery,
===PAGE:584===
microdebrider, radiofrequency coblation, and sharp dissection. Significant intraoperative or postoperative
bleeding occurs in < 2% of patients, usually within 24 h of surgery or after 7 days, when the eschar
detaches. Patients with bleeding should go to the hospital. If bleeding continues on arrival, patients
generally are examined in the operating room, and hemostasis is obtained. Any clot present in the tonsillar
fossa is removed, and patients are observed for 24 h. Postoperative IV rehydration is necessary in ≤ 3%
of patients, possibly in fewer patients with use of optimal preoperative hydration, perioperative antibiotics,
analgesics, and corticosteroids. Postoperative airway obstruction occurs most frequently in children < 2 yr
who have preexisting severe obstructive sleep disorders and in patients who are morbidly obese or have
neurologic disorders, craniofacial anomalies, or significant preoperative obstructive sleep apnea.
Complications are generally more common and serious among adults.
Peritonsillar Abscess and Cellulitis
Peritonsillar abscess and cellulitis are acute pharyngeal infections most common among
adolescents and young adults. Symptoms are severe sore throat, trismus, "hot potato" voice,
and uvular deviation. Diagnosis requires needle aspiration. Treatment includes broad-spectrum
antibiotics, drainage of any pus, hydration, analgesics, and, occasionally, acute tonsillectomy.
Etiology
Abscess (quinsy) and cellulitis probably represent a spectrum of the same process in which bacterial
infection of the tonsils and pharynx spreads to the soft tissues. Infection is virtually always unilateral and
is located between the tonsil and the superior pharyngeal constrictor muscle. It usually involves multiple
bacteria.
Streptococcus
and
Staphylococcus
are the most frequent aerobic pathogens, whereas
Bacteroides
sp is the predominant anaerobic pathogen.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include gradual onset of severe unilateral sore throat, dysphagia, fever, otalgia, and
asymmetric cervical adenopathy. Trismus, "hot potato" voice (speaking as if a hot object was in the
mouth), a toxic appearance (see
Epiglottitis
, drooling, severe halitosis, tonsillar erythema, and
exudates are common. Abscess and cellulitis both have swelling above the affected tonsil, but with
abscess there is more of a discrete bulge, with deviation of the soft palate and uvula and pronounced
trismus.
Diagnosis
• Needle aspiration
• Sometimes CT
Peritonsillar cellulitis is recognized in patients with severe sore throat who have trismus, "hot potato"
voice, and uvular deviation. All such patients require needle aspiration of the tonsillar mass and cultures.
Aspiration of pus differentiates abscess from cellulitis. CT or ultrasound of the neck can help confirm the
diagnosis when the physical examination is difficult or the diagnosis is in doubt, particularly when the
condition must be differentiated from a parapharyngeal infection or other deep neck infection.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
• Drainage of abscess
Cellulitis subsides, usually within 48 h, with hydration and high-dose penicillin (eg, 2 million units IV q 4 h
or 1 g po qid); alternative drugs
include a 1st-generation cephalosporin or clindamycin. Culture-directed
antibiotics are then prescribed for 10 days. Abscesses are incised and drained in the emergency
department using thorough local anesthesia and sometimes procedural sedation; many clinicians believe
needle aspiration alone provides adequate drainage. Although most patients can be treated as
===PAGE:585===
outpatients, some need brief hospitalization for parenteral antibiotics, IV hydration, and airway monitoring.
Rarely, an immediate tonsillectomy is done, particularly in a young or uncooperative patient who has other
indications for elective tonsillectomy (eg, history of frequently recurrent tonsillitis or obstructive sleep
apnea). Otherwise, elective tonsillectomy is done 4 to 6 wk out to prevent abscess recurrence.
Parapharyngeal Abscess
A parapharyngeal abscess is a deep neck abscess treated with antibiotics and surgical
drainage.
The parapharyngeal (pharyngomaxillary) space is lateral to the superior pharyngeal constrictor and
medial to the masseter muscle. This space connects to every other major fascial neck space and is
divided into anterior and posterior compartments by the styloid process. The posterior compartment
contains the carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and numerous nerves. Infections in the parapharyngeal
space usually originate in the tonsils or pharynx, although local spread from odontogenic sources and
lymph nodes may occur.
Abscess swelling can compromise the airway. Posterior space abscess can erode into the carotid artery
or cause septic thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein (Lemierre syndrome).
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients have fever, sore throat, odynophagia, and swelling in the neck down to the hyoid bone.
Anterior space abscesses cause trismus and induration along the angle of the mandible, with medial
bulging of the tonsil and lateral pharyngeal wall. Posterior space abscesses cause swelling that is more
prominent in the posterior pharyngeal wall. Trismus is minimal. Posterior abscesses may involve
structures within the carotid sheath, possibly causing rigors, high fever, bacteremia, neurologic deficits,
and massive hemorrhage caused by carotid artery rupture.
Diagnosis
• CT
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with poorly defined deep neck infection or other typical symptoms and
is confirmed by using contrast-enhanced CT.
Treatment
• Broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg, ceftriaxone, clindamycin)
• Surgical drainage
Treatment may require airway control. Parenteral broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg, ceftriaxone,
clindamycin) and surgical drainage are generally needed. Posterior abscesses are drained externally
through the submaxillary fossa. Anterior abscesses can often be drained through an intra-oral incision.
Several days of parenteral culture-determined antibiotics are required after drainage, followed by 10 to 14
days of oral antibiotics. Occasionally, small abscesses can be treated with IV antibiotics alone.
Epiglottitis
(Supraglottitis)
Epiglottitis is a rapidly progressive bacterial infection of the epiglottis and surrounding tissues
that may lead to sudden respiratory obstruction and death. Symptoms include severe sore
throat, dysphagia, high fever, drooling, and inspiratory stridor. Diagnosis requires direct
visualization of the supraglottic structures, which is not to be done until full respiratory support
is available. Treatment includes airway protection and antibiotics.
===PAGE:586===
Epiglottitis used to be primarily a disease of children and usually was caused by
Haemophilus influenzae
type B. Now, because of widespread vaccination, it has been almost eradicated in children (more cases
occur in adults). Causal organisms in children and adults include
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
Staphylococcus aureus
, nontypeable
H. influenzae
,
Haemophilus parainfluenzae
,
β
-hemolytic
streptococci,
Branhamella catarrhalis
, and
Klebsiella pneumoniae
.
H. influenzae
type B is still a cause in
adults and unvaccinated children.
Bacteria that have colonized the nasopharynx spread locally to cause supraglottic cellulitis with marked
inflammation of the epiglottis, vallecula, aryepiglottic folds, arytenoids, and laryngeal ventricles. With
H.
influenzae
type B, infection may spread hematogenously.
The inflamed supraglottic structures mechanically obstruct the airway, increasing the work of breathing,
ultimately causing respiratory failure. Clearance of inflammatory secretions is also impaired.
Symptoms and Signs
In children, sore throat, odynophagia, and dysphagia develop abruptly. Fatal asphyxia may occur within a
few hours of onset. Drooling is very common. Additionally, the child has signs of toxicity (poor or absent
eye contact, failure to recognize parents, cyanosis, irritability, inability to be consoled or distracted) and is
febrile and anxious. Dyspnea, tachypnea, and inspiratory stridor may be present, often causing the child
to sit upright, lean forward, and hyperextend the neck with the jaw thrust forward and mouth open in an
effort to enhance air exchange (tripod position). Relinquishing this position may herald respiratory failure.
Suprasternal, supraclavicular, and subcostal inspiratory retractions may be present.
In adults, symptoms are similar to those of children, including sore throat, fever, dysphagia, and drooling,
but peak symptoms usually take > 24 h to develop. Because of the larger diameter of the adult airway,
obstruction is less common and less fulminant. Often, there is no visible oropharyngeal inflammation.
However, severe throat pain with a normal-appearing pharynx raises suspicion of epiglottitis.
Diagnosis
• Direct inspection (typically in operating room)
• X-ray in milder cases with low suspicion
Epiglottitis is suspected in patients with severe sore throat and no pharyngitis and also in patients with
sore throat and inspiratory stridor. Stridor in children may also result from croup (viral laryngotracheal
bronchitis—see
Table 52-1
and p.
), bacterial tracheitis, and airway foreign body. The tripod position may also occur
with peritonsillar or retropharyngeal abscess.
The patient is hospitalized if epiglottitis is suspected. Diagnosis requires direct examination, usually with
flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy. (CAUTION:
Examination of the pharynx and larynx may precipitate
complete respiratory obstruction in children, and the pharynx and larynx should not be directly
examined except in the operating room, where the most advanced airway intervention is available.
)
Although plain x-rays may be helpful, a child with stridor should not be transported to the x-ray suite.
Direct laryngoscopy that reveals a beefy-red, stiff, edematous epiglottis is diagnostic. Cultures from the
supraglottic tissues and blood can then be taken to search for the causative organism.
[Table 52-1.
Differentiating Epiglottitis from Croup]
Adults may, in some cases, safely undergo flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy.
Treatment
• Adequate airway ensured
• Antibiotics (eg, ceftriaxone)
===PAGE:587===
In children, the airway must be secured immediately, preferably by nasotracheal intubation. Securing the
airway can be quite difficult and should, if possible, be done by experienced personnel in the operating
room. An endotracheal tube is usually required until the patient has been stabilized for 24 to 48 h (usual
total intubation time is < 60 h). Alternatively, a tracheotomy is done. If respiratory arrest occurs before an
airway is established, bag-mask ventilation may be a life-saving temporary measure. For emergency care
of children with epiglottitis, each institution should have a protocol that involves critical care,
otolaryngology, anesthesia, and pediatrics.
Adults whose airway is severely obstructed can be endotracheally intubated during flexible fiberoptic
laryngoscopy. Other adults may not require immediate intubation but should be observed for airway
compromise in an ICU with an intubation set and cricothyrotomy tray at the bedside.
A
β
-lactamase-resistant antibiotic, such as ceftriaxone 50 to 75 mg/kg IV once/day (maximum 2 g), should
be used empirically, pending culture and sensitivity test results.
Epiglottitis caused by
H. influenzae
type B can be effectively prevented with the
H. influenzae
type B
(Hib) conjugate vaccine.
===PAGE:588===
Chapter 53. Nose and Paranasal Sinus Disorders
Introduction
(See
Chapter 51
for a detailed description of the anatomy of the nose and sinuses.)
Bacterial Infections
Nasal vestibulitis
is bacterial infection of the nasal vestibule, typically with
Staphylococcus aureus
. It
may result from nose picking or excessive nose blowing and causes annoying crusts and bleeding when
the crusts slough off. Bacitracin or mupirocin ointment applied topically bid for 14 days is effective.
Furuncles
of the nasal vestibule are usually staphylococcal; they may develop into spreading cellulitis of
the tip of the nose. Systemic antistaphylococcal antibiotics (eg, cephalexin 500 mg po qid) are given and
warm compresses and topical mupirocin are applied. Furuncles are incised and drained to prevent local
thrombophlebitis and subsequent cavernous sinus thrombosis.
Foreign Bodies
Nasal foreign bodies are found occasionally in young children, the intellectually impaired, and psychiatric
patients. Common objects pushed into the nose include beads, beans, seeds, nuts, insects, and button
batteries (which may cause chemical burns). When mineral salts are deposited on a long-retained foreign
body, the object is called a rhinolith.
A nasal foreign body is suspected in any patient with a unilateral, foul-smelling, bloody, purulent
rhinorrhea. Diagnosis is often made through another party's observation of the item being pushed into the
nose or through visualization with a nasal speculum.
Nasal foreign bodies can sometimes be removed in the office with a nasal speculum and Hartmann's
nasal forceps. Pretreatment with topical phenylephrine may aid visualization and removal. To avoid
pushing a slippery, round object deeper, it is better to reach behind the object with the bent tip of a blunt
probe and pull it forward. Sometimes, general anesthesia is necessary if a rhinolith has formed or if the
foreign body may be displaced dorsally and then aspirated, resulting in airway obstruction.
Nasal Polyps
Nasal polyps are fleshy outgrowths of the nasal mucosa that form at the site of dependent
edema in the lamina propria of the mucous membrane, usually around the ostia of the maxillary
sinuses (see
Plate 2
).
Allergic rhinitis, acute and chronic infections, and cystic fibrosis all predispose to the formation of nasal
polyps. Bleeding polyps occur in rhinosporidiosis. Unilateral polyps occasionally occur in association with
or represent benign or malignant tumors of the nose or paranasal sinuses. They can also occur in
response to a foreign body. Nasal polyps are strongly associated with aspirin allergy, sinus infections, and
asthma.
Symptoms include obstruction and postnasal drainage, congestion, sneezing, rhinorrhea, anosmia,
hyposmia, facial pain, and ocular itching.
Diagnosis generally is based on physical examination. A developing polyp is teardrop-shaped; when
mature, it resembles a peeled seedless grape.
Treatment
• Topical corticosteroid spray
• Sometimes surgical removal
===PAGE:589===
• Sometimes surgical removal
Corticosteroids (eg, mometasone [30
μ
g/spray], beclomethasone [42
μ
g/spray], flunisolide [25
μ
g/spray]
aerosols), given as 1 or 2 sprays bid in each nasal cavity, may shrink or eliminate polyps, as may a 1-wk
tapered course of oral corticosteroids. Surgical removal is still required in many cases. Polyps that
obstruct the airway or promote sinusitis are removed, as are unilateral polyps that may be obscuring
benign or malignant tumors. However, polyps tend to recur unless the underlying allergy or infection is
controlled. After removal of nasal polyps, topical beclomethasone or flunisolide therapy tends to retard
recurrence. In severe recurrent cases, maxillary sinusotomy or ethmoidectomy may be indicated. These
procedures are usually done endoscopically.
Rhinitis
(See also
Allergic Rhinitis
)
Rhinitis is inflammation of the nasal mucous membrane, with resultant nasal congestion,
rhinorrhea, and variable associated symptoms depending on etiology (eg, itching, sneezing,
purulence, anosmia, ozena). The cause is usually viral, although irritants can cause it. Diagnosis
is usually clinical. Treatment includes humidification of room air, sympathomimetic amines, and
antihistamines. Bacterial superinfection requires appropriate antibiotic treatment.
There are several forms of rhinitis.
Acute rhinitis:
This form of rhinitis, manifesting with edema and vasodilation of the nasal mucous
membrane, rhinorrhea, and obstruction, is usually the result of a common cold (; other
causes include streptococcal, pneumococcal, and staphylococcal infections.
Chronic rhinitis:
This form of rhinitis is generally a prolongation of subacute inflammatory or infectious
viral rhinitis but may also occur in syphilis, TB, rhinoscleroma, rhinosporidiosis, leishmaniasis,
blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and leprosy—all of which are characterized by granuloma formation and
destruction of soft tissue, cartilage, and bone. Nasal obstruction, purulent rhinorrhea, and frequent
bleeding result. Rhinoscleroma causes progressive nasal obstruction from indurated inflammatory tissue
in the lamina propria. Rhinosporidiosis is characterized by bleeding polyps. Both low humidity and
airborne irritants can result in chronic rhinitis.
Atrophic rhinitis:
This form of rhinitis results in atrophy and sclerosis of mucous membrane; the mucous
membrane changes from ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium to stratified squamous epithelium,
and the lamina propria is reduced in amount and vascularity. Atrophic rhinitis is associated with advanced
age, Wegener's granulomatosis, and iatrogenically induced excessive nasal tissue extirpation. Although
the exact etiology is unknown, bacterial infection frequently plays a role. Nasal mucosal atrophy often
occurs in the elderly.
Vasomotor rhinitis:
This form of rhinitis is a chronic condition in which intermittent vascular
engorgement of the nasal mucous membrane leads to watery rhinorrhea and sneezing. Etiology is
uncertain, and no allergy can be identified. A dry atmosphere seems to aggravate the condition.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute rhinitis results in cough, low-grade fever, nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, and sneezing. Symptoms
and signs of chronic rhinitis are similar but may include purulent rhinorrhea and bleeding.
Atrophic rhinitis results in abnormal patency of the nasal cavities, crust formation, anosmia, and epistaxis
that may be recurrent and severe.
Vasomotor rhinitis results in sneezing and watery rhinorrhea. The turgescent mucous membrane varies
from bright red to purple. The condition is marked by periods of remission and exacerbation. Vasomotor
rhinitis is differentiated from specific viral and bacterial infections of the nose by the lack of purulent
exudate and crusting. It is differentiated from allergic rhinitis by the absence of an identifiable allergen.
===PAGE:590===
Diagnosis
The different forms of rhinitis are diagnosed clinically. Testing is unnecessary.
Treatment
• For viral rhinitis, decongestants, antihistamines, or both
• For atrophic rhinitis, topical treatment
• For vasomotor rhinitis, humidification and sometimes topical corticosteroids and oral pseudoephedrine
Viral rhinitis may be treated symptomatically with decongestants (either topical vasoconstriction with a
sympathomimetic amine, such as
oxymetazoline q 8 to 12 h or phenylephrine 0.25% q 3 to 4 h for not
more than 7 days, or systemic sympathomimetic amines, such as pseudoephedrine 30 mg po q 4 to 6 h).
Antihistamines (see
Table 127-2
 may be helpful. Those with anticholinergic properties dry mucous membranes and
therefore may increase irritation. Decongestants also may relieve symptoms of acute bacterial rhinitis and
chronic rhinitis, whereas an underlying bacterial infection requires culture or biopsy, pathogen
identification, antibiotic sensitivities, and appropriate antimicrobial treatment.
Treatment of atrophic rhinitis is directed at reducing the crusting and eliminating the odor with topical
antibiotics (eg, bacitracin), topical or systemic estrogens, and vitamins A and D. Occluding or reducing the
patency of the nasal cavities surgically decreases the crusting caused by the drying effect of air flowing
over the atrophic mucous membrane.
Treatment of vasomotor rhinitis is by trial and error and is not always satisfactory. Patients benefit from
humidified air, which may be provided by a humidified central heating system or a vaporizer in the
workroom or bedroom. Systemic sympathomimetic amines (eg, for adults, pseudoephedrine 30 mg po q 4
to 6 h prn) relieve symptoms but are not recommended for long-term use. Topical vasoconstrictors are
avoided because they cause the vasculature of the nasal mucous membrane to lose its sensitivity to
other vasoconstrictive stimuli—eg, the humidity and temperature of inspired air. Topical corticosteroids
(eg, mometasone 2 sprays bid) can be of some benefit.
Septal Deviation and Perforation
Deviations of the nasal septum
due to developmental abnormalities or trauma are common but often
are asymptomatic and require no treatment. Symptomatic septal deviation causes nasal obstruction and
predisposes the patient to sinusitis (particularly if the deviation obstructs the ostium of a paranasal sinus)
and to epistaxis due to drying air currents. Other symptoms may include facial pain, headaches, and noisy
night breathing. Septal deviation is usually evident on examination, although a flashlight and examination
of the anterior nasal passage may not be sufficient. Treatment consists of septoplasty (septal
reconstruction).
Septal ulcers and perforations
may result from nasal surgery; repeated trauma, such as chronic nose
picking; cosmetic piercing; toxic exposures (eg, acids, chromium, phosphorus, copper vapor); chronic
cocaine use; chronic nasal spray use (including corticosteroids and OTC phenylephrine or oxymetazoline
sprays); transnasal O
use; or diseases such as TB, syphilis, leprosy, SLE, and Wegener's
granulomatosis. Crusting around the margins and repeated epistaxis, which can be severe, may result.
Small perforations may whistle. Anterior rhinoscopy or fiberoptic endoscopy can be used to view septal
perforations. Topical bacitracin or mupirocin ointment reduces crusting, as may saline nasal spray.
Symptomatic septal perforations are occasionally repaired with buccal or septal mucous membrane flaps;
closing the perforation with a silicone septal button is a reliable option.
Sinusitis
Sinusitis is inflammation of the paranasal sinuses due to viral, bacterial, or fungal infections or
allergic reactions. Symptoms include nasal obstruction and congestion, purulent rhinorrhea,
===PAGE:591===
cough, facial pain, malaise, and sometimes fever. Treatment is with antibiotics, such as
amoxicillin, penicillin, erythromycin, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, given for 12 to 14 days
for acute sinusitis and for up to 6 wk for chronic sinusitis. Decongestants and application of heat
and humidity may help relieve symptoms and improve sinus drainage. Recurrent sinusitis may
require surgery to improve sinus drainage.
Sinusitis may be classified as acute (completely resolved in < 30 days); subacute (completely resolved in
30 to 90 days); recurrent (multiple discrete acute episodes, each completely resolved in < 30 days but
recurring in cycles, with at least 10 days between complete resolution of symptoms and initiation of a new
episode); and chronic (lasting > 90 days).
Etiology
Acute sinusitis
is usually precipitated by viral URI, followed by secondary bacterial colonization with
streptococci, pneumococci,
Haemophilus influenzae
,
Moraxella catarrhalis
, or staphylococci. In a URI,
the swollen nasal mucous membrane obstructs the ostium of a paranasal sinus, and the O
in the sinus is
absorbed into the blood vessels of the mucous membrane. The resulting relative negative
pressure in the
sinus (vacuum sinusitis) is painful. If the vacuum is maintained, a transudate from the mucous membrane
develops and fills the sinus; the transudate serves as a medium for bacteria that enter the sinus through
the ostium or through a spreading cellulitis or thrombophlebitis in the lamina propria of the mucous
membrane. An outpouring of serum and leukocytes to combat the infection results, and painful positive
pressure develops in the obstructed sinus. The mucous membrane becomes hyperemic and edematous.
Chronic sinusitis
may be exacerbated by gram-negative bacilli or anaerobic micro-organisms. In a few
cases, chronic maxillary sinusitis is secondary to dental infection or exposure to environmental pollution.
Fungal infections (
Aspergillus
,
Sporothrix
,
Pseudallescheria
) tend to strike the immunocompromised
patient, whereas hospital-acquired infections complicate cystic fibrosis, nasogastric and nasotracheal
intubation, and debilitated patients. Typical organisms include
Staphylococcus aureus
,
Klebsiella
pneumoniae
,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
,
Proteus mirabilis
, and
Enterobacter
.
Allergic fungal sinusitis
is characterized by diffuse nasal congestion, markedly viscid nasal secretions,
and, often, nasal polyps. It is an allergic response to the presence of topical fungi, often
Aspergillus
, and
is not caused by an invasive infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute and chronic sinusitis cause similar symptoms and signs, including purulent rhinorrhea, pressure
and pain in the face, nasal congestion and obstruction, hyposmia, halitosis, and productive cough
(especially at night). Often the pain is more severe in acute sinusitis. The area over the affected sinus
may be tender, swollen, and erythematous. Maxillary sinusitis causes pain in the maxillary area,
toothache, and frontal headache. Frontal sinusitis causes pain in the frontal area and frontal headache.
Ethmoid sinusitis causes pain behind and between the eyes, frontal headache often described as
splitting, periorbital cellulitis, and tearing. Pain caused by sphenoid sinusitis is less well localized and is
referred to the frontal or occipital area. Malaise may be present. Fever and chills suggest an extension of
the infection beyond the sinuses.
The nasal mucous membrane is red and turgescent; yellow or green purulent rhinorrhea may be present.
Seropurulent or mucopurulent exudate may be seen in the middle meatus with maxillary, anterior ethmoid,
or frontal sinusitis and in the area medial to the middle turbinate with posterior ethmoid or sphenoid
sinusitis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes CT
Sinus infections are usually diagnosed clinically. Absence or dullness of light on transillumination may
===PAGE:592===
suggest fluid-filled maxillary or frontal sinuses. In acute and chronic sinusitis, the swollen mucous
membranes and retained exudate cause the affected sinus to appear opaque on 4-view x-rays. Plain xrays are not as valuable as CT, which provides better definition of the extent and degree of sinusitis. Xrays of the apices of the teeth may be required in chronic maxillary sinusitis to exclude a periapical
abscess. When questions persist (eg, regarding intracranial extension, treatment failure, or hospitalacquired causes of sinusitis), culture and sensitivity tests can be done on sinus secretions obtained
through endoscopy or sinus puncture and aspiration.
Sinusitis in children is suspected when purulent rhinorrhea persists for > 10 days along with fatigue and
cough. Fever is uncommon. Local facial pain or discomfort may be present. Nasal examination discloses
purulent drainage; CT is confirmatory. CT is of limited cuts in the coronal projection to limit radiation
exposure.
Treatment
• Local measures to enhance drainage (eg, steam, topical vasoconstrictors)
• Antibiotics (eg, amoxicillin, erythromycin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole)
In acute sinusitis, improved drainage and control of infection are the aims of therapy. Steam inhalation;
hot, wet towels over the affected sinuses; and hot beverages alleviate nasal vasoconstriction and
promote drainage. Topical vasoconstrictors, such as phenylephrine 0.25% spray q 3 h, are effective but
should be used for a maximum of 5 days or for a repeating cycle of 3 days on and 3 days off until the
sinusitis is resolved. Systemic vasoconstrictors, such as pseudoephedrine 30 mg po (for adults) q 4 to 6
h, are less effective.
In acute and chronic sinusitis, antibiotics are given for at least 10 days and often for 14 days. In acute
sinusitis, amoxicillin 500 mg po q 8 h with or without clavulanate is primary therapy. Erythromycin 250 mg
po q 6 h or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 80/400 mg
q 6 h can be given to patients allergic to penicillin.
Second-line therapy includes cefuroxime 500 mg q 12 h or moxifloxacin 400 mg once/day. For children,
similar antibiotics are used, adjusted for the child's weight. Fluoroquinolones, however, are not used in
children because of concerns of premature epiphyseal growth plate closure.
In exacerbations of chronic sinusitis in children or adults, a broad-spectrum antibiotic, such as
amoxicillin/clavulanate 875 mg po q 12 h (12.5 to 25 mg/kg q 12 h in children), cefuroxime, or, in adults,
moxifloxacin, is used. In chronic sinusitis, prolonged antibiotic therapy for 4 to 6 wk often brings complete
resolution. The sensitivities of pathogens isolated from the sinus exudate and the patient's response
guide subsequent therapy.
Sinusitis unresponsive to antibiotic therapy may require surgery (maxillary sinusotomy, ethmoidectomy, or
sphenoid sinusotomy) to improve ventilation and drainage and to remove inspissated mucopurulent
material, epithelial debris, and hypertrophic mucous membrane. These procedures usually are done
intranasally with the aid of an endoscope. Chronic frontal sinusitis may be managed either with
osteoplastic obliteration of the frontal sinuses or endoscopically in selected patients. The use of
intraoperative computer-aided surgery to localize disease and prevent injury to surrounding contiguous
structures (such as the eye and brain) has become common.
Sinusitis in Immunocompromised Patients
Aggressive and even fatal fungal or bacterial sinusitis can occur in patients who are immunocompromised
because of poorly controlled diabetes, neutropenia, or HIV infection.
Mucormycosis:
Mucormycosis (phycomycosis)—a mycosis due to fungi of the order Mucorales,
including species of
Mucor
,
Absidia
, and
Rhizopus
—may develop in patients with poorly controlled
diabetes. It is characterized by black, devitalized tissue in the nasal cavity and neurologic signs
secondary to retrograde thromboarteritis in the carotid arterial system. Diagnosis is based on
histopathologic demonstration of mycelia in the avascularized tissue. Treatment requires control of the
underlying condition (such as reversal of ketoacidosis in diabetes) and IV amphotericin B therapy. Prompt
===PAGE:593===
biopsy of intranasal tissue for histology and culture is warranted.
Aspergillosis and candidiasis:

Aspergillus
and
Candida
spp may infect the paranasal sinuses of
patients who are immunocompromised secondary to therapy with cytotoxic drugs or to
immunosuppressive diseases, such as leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and AIDS. These
infections can appear as polypoid tissue in the nose as well as thickened mucosa; tissue is required for
diagnosis. Aggressive paranasal sinus surgery and IV amphotericin B therapy are used to control these
often-fatal infections.
===PAGE:594===
Chapter 54. Laryngeal Disorders
Introduction
The larynx contains the vocal cords and serves as the opening to the tracheobronchial tree. Laryngeal
disorders include various benign and malignant tumors, contact ulcers, granulomas, laryngitis,
laryngoceles, spasmodic dysphonia, vocal cord paralysis, and vocal cord polyps and nodules. For acute
laryngotracheobronchitis, see
Croup

Laryngeal cancer is discussed elsewhere.
Most laryngeal disorders cause dysphonia, which is impairment of the voice (see
Sidebar 54-1
). A
persistent change in the voice (eg, > 3 wk) requires visualization of the vocal cords, including their
mobility. Although the voice changes with advancing age, becoming breathy and aperiodic, acute or
prominent changes in the elderly should not be presumed to result from aging, and evaluation is required.
The voice should be assessed and recorded, particularly if surgical procedures are planned. Examination
of the larynx includes external inspection and palpation of the neck and internal visualization of the
epiglottis, false cords, true cords, arytenoids, pyriform sinuses, and subglottic region below the cords.
Internal visualization is accomplished by either indirect mirror examination (see
Fig. 54-1
) or direct flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy in an outpatient setting with a topical anesthetic. Rigid
laryngoscopy with the patient under general anesthesia allows for biopsy when necessary or assessment
of passive mobility of the vocal cords when immobilized by either paralysis or fixation.
Sidebar 54-1 The Professional Voice
People who use their voice professionally for public speaking and singing often experience voice
disorders manifesting as hoarseness or breathiness, lowered vocal pitch, vocal fatigue, nonproductive
cough, persistent throat clearing, and/or throat ache. These symptoms often have benign causes, such
as vocal nodules, vocal fold edema, polyps, or granulomas. Such disorders are usually caused by vocal
fold hyperfunction (excessive laryngeal muscular tension when speaking) and possibly laryngopharyngeal
reflux.
Treatment in most cases includes the following:
• Voice evaluation by a speech pathologist or experienced physician, including, when available, use of a
computer-assisted program to assess pitch and intensity and to determine parameters of vocal
acoustics
• Behavioral treatment (decreasing musculoskeletal laryngeal tension when speaking) using the same
computer program for visual and auditory biofeedback
• A vocal hygiene program to eliminate vocally abusive behaviors, such as excessive loudness, long
duration, vocal tension, and habitual throat clearing
• An antireflux regimen, when appropriate
• Adequate hydration to promote an adequate glottal mucosal wave
• Diet modification before vocal performances, which may include avoidance of dairy products, caffeine,
and ambient tobacco smoke and other inhaled irritants
Benign Tumors
Benign laryngeal tumors include juvenile papillomas hemangiomas, fibromas, chondromas, myxomas, and
neurofibromas. They may appear in any part of the larynx. Symptoms include hoarseness, breathy voice,
===PAGE:595===
dyspnea, aspiration, dysphagia, pain, otalgia (pain referred to the ear), and hemoptysis. Diagnosis is
based on direct or indirect visualization of the larynx, supplemented by CT. Removal restores the voice,
the functional integrity of the laryngeal sphincter, and the airway. Smaller lesions may be excised
endoscopically by using a CO
laser and general anesthesia. Larger lesions extending beyond the
laryngeal framework often require pharyngotomy or laryngofissure.
Cancerous tumors are discussed in
Chapter 55
.
Contact Ulcers
Contact ulcers are unilateral or bilateral erosions of the mucous membrane over the vocal
process of the arytenoid cartilage.
Contact ulcers are usually caused by voice abuse in the form of repeated sharp glottal attacks (abrupt
loudness at the onset of phonation), often experienced by singers. They may also occur after
endotracheal intubation if an oversized tube erodes the mucosa overlying the cartilaginous vocal
processes. Gastroesophageal reflux may also cause or aggravate contact ulcers. Symptoms include
varying degrees of hoarseness and mild pain with phonation and swallowing. Biopsy to exclude
carcinoma or TB is important. Prolonged ulceration leads to nonspecific granulomas that also cause
varying degrees of hoarseness.
Treatment consists of ≥ 6 wk of voice rest. Patients must recognize the limitations of their voice and learn
to adjust their postrecovery vocal activities to avoid recurrence. Granulomas tend to recur after surgical
removal. Risk of recurrence is reduced through vigorous treatment of gastroesophageal reflux (. Suppression of bacterial flora by antibiotics during postoperative healing is also recommended.
Laryngitis
Laryngitis is inflammation of the larynx, usually the result of a virus or overuse. The result is
acute change in the voice, with decreased volume and hoarseness. Diagnosis is based on
clinical findings. Laryngoscopy is required for symptoms persisting > 3 wk. Viral laryngitis is
self-limited. Other infectious or irritating causes may require specific treatment.
The most common cause of acute laryngitis is a viral URI. Coughing-induced laryngitis may also occur in
bronchitis, pneumonia, influenza, pertussis, measles, and diphtheria.
[Fig. 54-1.
Laryngeal disorders.]
Excessive use of the voice (especially with loud speaking or singing), allergic reactions,
gastroesophageal reflux, bulimia, or inhalation of irritating substances (eg, cigarette smoke or certain
aerosolized drugs) can cause acute or chronic laryngitis. Bacterial laryngitis is extremely rare. Smoking
can cause Reinke's edema, which is a watery swelling of both vocal cords.
Symptoms and Signs
An unnatural change of voice is usually the most prominent symptom. Volume is typically greatly
decreased; some patients have aphonia. Hoarseness, a sensation of tickling, rawness, and a constant
urge to clear the throat may occur. Symptoms vary with the severity of the inflammation. Fever, malaise,
dysphagia, and throat pain may occur in more severe infections. Laryngeal edema, although rare, may
cause dyspnea.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes direct or indirect laryngoscopy
Diagnosis is based on symptoms. Indirect or direct flexible laryngoscopy is recommended for symptoms
===PAGE:596===
persisting > 3 wk; findings in laryngitis include mild to marked erythema of the mucous membrane, which
may also be edematous. With reflux, there is swelling of the inner lining of the larynx and redness of the
vocal cords that extends above and below the edges of the back part of the cords. If a pseudomembrane
is present, diphtheria is suspected.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment (eg, cough suppressants, voice rest, steam inhalations)
No specific treatment is available for viral laryngitis. Cough suppressants, voice rest, and steam
inhalations relieve symptoms and promote resolution of acute laryngitis. Smoking cessation and treatment
of acute or chronic bronchitis may relieve laryngitis. Depending on the presumed cause, specific
treatments to control gastroesophageal reflux, bulimia, or drug-induced laryngitis may be beneficial.
Laryngoceles
Laryngoceles are evaginations of the mucous membrane of the laryngeal ventricle.
Internal laryngoceles displace and enlarge the false vocal cords, resulting in hoarseness and airway
obstruction. External laryngoceles extend through the thyrohyoid membrane, causing a mass in the neck.
Laryngoceles tend to occur in musicians who play wind instruments. Laryngoceles are filled with air and
can be expanded by the Valsalva maneuver. They appear on CT as smooth, ovoid, low-density masses.
Laryngoceles may become infected (laryngopyocele) or filled with mucoid fluid. Treatment is excision.
Spasmodic Dysphonia
Spasmodic dysphonia (vocal cord spasms) is intermittent spasm of laryngeal muscles that
causes an abnormal voice.
Cause is unknown. Patients often describe the onset of symptoms following a URI, a period of excessive
voice use, or occupational or emotional stress. As a localized form of movement disorder, spasmodic
dysphonia has an onset between ages 30 and 50 yr, and about 60% of patients are women.
In the adductor type of spasmodic dysphonia, patients attempt to speak through the spasmodic closure
with a voice that sounds squeezed, effortful, or strained. These spasmodic episodes usually occur when
vowel sounds are being formed, particularly at the beginning of words. The less common abductor form
results in sudden interruptions of sound caused by momentary abduction of the vocal cords accompanied
by audible escape of air during connected speech.
Surgery has been more successful than other approaches for adductor spasmodic dysphonia. The use of
botulinum toxin injection has restored a normal voice in 70% of patients for up to 3 mo. Because the effect
is temporary, injections may be repeated. There is no known temporary alleviation of the abductor form of
this disorder.
Vocal Cord Paralysis
Vocal cord paralysis has numerous causes and can affect speaking, breathing, and swallowing.
The left vocal cord is affected twice as often as the right, and females are affected more often
than males (3:2). Diagnosis is based on direct visualization. An extensive assessment may be
necessary to determine the cause. Several direct surgical approaches are available if treating
the cause is not curative.
Vocal cord paralysis may result from lesions at the nucleus ambiguus, its supranuclear tracts, the main
trunk of the vagus, or the recurrent laryngeal nerves.
Paralysis is usually unilateral. About one third of unilateral vocal cord paralyses are neoplastic in origin,
one third are traumatic, and one third are idiopathic. Intracranial tumors, vascular accidents, and
demyelinating diseases cause nucleus ambiguus paralysis. Tumors at the base of the skull and trauma to
===PAGE:597===
the neck cause vagus paralysis. Recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis is caused by neck or thoracic
lesions (eg, aortic aneurysm; mitral stenosis; mediastinal tuberculous adenitis; tumors of the thyroid
gland, esophagus, lung, or mediastinal structures), trauma, thyroidectomy, neurotoxins (eg, lead, arsenic,
mercury), neurotoxic infections (eg, diphtheria), cervical spine injury or surgery, Lyme disease, and viral
illness. Viral neuronitis probably accounts for most idiopathic cases.
Bilateral vocal cord paralysis is a life-threatening disorder caused by thyroid and cervical surgery, tracheal
intubation, trauma, and neurodegenerative and neuromuscular diseases.
Symptoms and Signs
Vocal cord paralysis results in loss of vocal cord abduction and adduction. Paralysis may affect
phonation, respiration, and deglutition, and food and fluids may be aspirated into the trachea. The
paralyzed cord generally lies 2 to 3 mm lateral to the midline. In recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis, the
cord may move with phonation but not with inspiration. In unilateral paralysis, the voice may be hoarse
and breathy, but the airway is usually not obstructed because the normal cord abducts sufficiently. In
bilateral paralysis, both cords generally lie within 2 to 3 mm of the midline, and the voice is of good quality
but of limited intensity. The airway, however, is inadequate, resulting in stridor and dyspnea with moderate
exertion as each cord is drawn to the midline glottis by an inspiratory Bernoulli effect. Aspiration is also a
danger.
Diagnosis
• Laryngoscopy
• Various tests for possible causes
Diagnosis is based on laryngoscopy. The cause must always be sought. Evaluation is guided by
abnormalities identified on history and physical examination. During the history, the physician asks about
all possible causes of peripheral neuropathy, including chronic heavy metal exposure (arsenic, lead,
mercury), drug effects from phenytoin and vincristine, and history of connective tissue disorders, Lyme
disease, sarcoidosis, diabetes, and alcoholism. Further evaluation may include enhanced CT or MRI of
the head, neck, and chest; thyroid scan; barium swallow or bronchoscopy; and esophagoscopy.
Cricoarytenoid arthritis, which may cause fixation of the cricoarytenoid joint, must be differentiated from a
neuromuscular etiology. Fixation is best documented by absence of passive mobility during rigid
laryngoscopy under general anesthesia. Cricoarytenoid arthritis may complicate such conditions as RA,
external blunt trauma, and prolonged endotracheal intubation.
Treatment
• For unilateral paralysis, surgical procedures to move cords closer together
• For bilateral paralysis, surgical procedures and measures to maintain airway
In unilateral paralysis, treatment is directed at improving voice quality through augmentation,
medialization, or reinnervation.
Augmentation involves injecting a paste of plasticized particles, collagen, micronized dermis, or
autologous fat into the paralyzed cord, bringing the cords closer together to improve the voice and
prevent aspiration.
Medialization is shifting the vocal cord toward the midline by inserting an adjustable spacer laterally to the
affected cord. This can be done with a local anesthetic, allowing the position of the spacer to be "tuned"
to the patient's voice. Unlike augmentation with plasticized particles, which permanently fixes the cord, the
spacer is both adjustable and removable.
Reinnervation has only rarely been successful.
===PAGE:598===
In bilateral paralysis, an adequate airway must be reestablished. Tracheotomy may be needed
permanently or temporarily during a URI. An arytenoidectomy with lateralization of the true vocal cord
opens the glottis and improves the airway but may adversely affect voice quality. Posterior laser
cordectomy opens the posterior glottis and may be preferred to endoscopic or open arytenoidectomy.
Successful laser establishment of a posterior glottic airway usually obviates the need for long-term
tracheotomy while preserving a serviceable voice quality.
Vocal Cord Polyps and Nodules
Acute trauma or chronic irritation causes changes in the vocal cords that can lead to polyps or
nodules. Both cause hoarseness and a breathy voice. Persistence of these symptoms for > 3
wk dictates visualization of the vocal cords. Diagnosis is based on laryngoscopy and on biopsy
to rule out cancer. Surgical removal restores the voice, and removal of the irritating source
prevents recurrence.
Etiology
Polyps and nodules result from injury to the lamina propria of the true vocal cords. Polyps may occur at
the mid third of the membranous cords and are more often unilateral. They frequently result from an
initiating acute phonatory injury. Nodules usually occur bilaterally at the junction of the anterior and middle
third of the cords. Their main cause is chronic voice abuse—yelling, shouting, singing loudly, or using an
unnaturally low frequency. Polyps may have several other causes, including gastric reflux, untreated
hypothyroid states, chronic laryngeal allergic reactions, or chronic inhalation of irritants, such as industrial
fumes or cigarette smoke. Polyps tend to be larger and more protuberant than nodules and often have a
dominant surface blood vessel.
Symptoms and Signs
Both result in slowly developing hoarseness and a breathy voice.
Diagnosis
• Laryngoscopy
• Sometimes biopsy
Diagnosis is based on direct or indirect visualization of the larynx with a mirror or laryngoscope. Biopsy of
discrete lesions to exclude carcinoma is done by microlaryngoscopy.
Treatment
• Avoidance of cause
• For polyps, usually surgical removal
Correction of the underlying voice abuse cures most nodules and prevents recurrence. Removal of the
offending irritants allows healing, and voice therapy with a speech therapist
reduces the trauma to the
vocal cords caused by improper singing or protracted loud speaking. Nodules usually regress with voice
therapy alone.
Most polyps must be surgically removed to restore a normal voice. Cold-knife microsurgical excision
during direct microlaryngoscopy is preferable to laser excision, which is more likely to cause collateral
thermal injury if improperly applied.
In microlaryngoscopy, an operating microscope is used to examine, biopsy, and operate on the larynx.
Images can be recorded on video as well. The patient is anesthetized, and the airway is secured by highpressure jet ventilation through the laryngoscope, endotracheal intubation, or, for an inadequate upper
airway, tracheotomy. Because the microscope allows observation with magnification, tissue can be
===PAGE:599===
removed precisely and accurately, minimizing damage (possibly permanent) to the vocal mechanism.
Laser surgery can be done through the optical system of the microscope to allow for precise cuts.
Microlaryngoscopy is preferred for almost all laryngeal biopsies, for procedures involving benign tumors,
and for many forms of phonosurgery.
===PAGE:600===
Chapter 55. Tumors of the Head and Neck
Introduction
The most common noncutaneous tumor of the head and neck is squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx,
followed by squamous cell carcinomas of the tongue, palatine tonsil, and floor of the mouth. Less
common are tumors of the salivary glands, jaw, nose and paranasal sinuses, and ear. Tumors of the
thyroid gland, eye, and skin are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Excluding the skin and thyroid gland, > 90% of head and neck cancers are squamous cell (epidermoid)
carcinomas, and 5% are melanomas, lymphomas, and sarcomas. Patients with sarcomas or carcinomas
of the salivary glands or paranasal sinuses are often younger than patients with squamous cell
carcinoma, who are more commonly in their mid-50s and older.
Etiology
The vast majority of patients, 85% or more, with cancer of the head and neck have a history of alcohol
use, smoking, or both. Other suspected causes include use of snuff or chewing tobacco, sunlight
exposure, previous x-rays of the head and neck, certain viral infections, ill-fitting dental appliances,
chronic candidiasis, and poor oral hygiene. In India, oral cancer is extremely common, probably because
of chewing betel quid (a mixture of substances, also called paan). Long-term exposure to sunlight and the
use of tobacco products are the primary causes of squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip.
Patients who in the past were treated with radiation for acne, excess facial hair, enlarged thymus, or
hypertrophic tonsils and adenoids are predisposed to thyroid and salivary gland cancers and benign
salivary tumors.
Epstein-Barr virus plays a role in the pathogenesis of nasopharyngeal cancer, and serum measures of
certain Epstein-Barr virus proteins may be biomarkers of recurrence. Human papillomavirus seems to be
associated with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, particularly oropharyngeal cancer. The
mechanism for viral-mediated tumor genesis may be distinct from tobacco-related pathways and seem to
have a different, better, prognosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Most head and neck cancers first manifest as an asymptomatic neck mass, painful mucosal ulceration, or
visible mucosal lesion (eg, leukoplakia, erythroplakia). Subsequent symptoms depend on location and
extent of the tumor and include pain, paresthesia, nerve palsies, trismus, and halitosis. Otalgia is an often
overlooked symptom usually representing referred pain from the primary tumor. Weight loss caused by
perturbed eating and odynophagia is also common.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Biopsy
• Imaging tests and endoscopy to evaluate extent of disease
Routine physical examination (including a thorough oral examination) is the best way to detect cancers
early before they become symptomatic. Commercially available brush biopsy kits help screen for oral
cancers. Any head and neck symptom (eg, sore throat, hoarseness,
otalgia) lasting > 2 to 3 wk should
prompt referral to a head and neck specialist.
Definitive diagnosis usually requires a biopsy. Additional important information is obtained from a
combination of imaging tests (eg, CT, MRI, PET/CT), endoscopy, and fine-needle aspiration of any neck
mass.
===PAGE:601===
Staging
Head and neck cancers may remain localized for months to years. Local tissue invasion eventually is
followed by metastasis to regional lymph nodes, related in large part to tumor size and extent, and
reduces overall survival by nearly half. Distant metastases tend to occur late, usually in patients with
advanced tumor and nodal stages. Metastases occur more commonly among immunocompromised
patients. Common sites of distant metastases are the lungs, liver, bone, and brain.
Head and neck cancers are staged (see
Table 55-1
) according to size and site of the primary tumor (T), number and size of metastases to the
cervical lymph nodes (N), and evidence of distant metastases (M). Staging usually requires imaging with
CT, MRI, or both, and often PET.
Prognosis
Prognosis is favorable if diagnosis is early and treatment is timely and appropriate. In general, the more
poorly differentiated the cancer, the greater the chance of regional and distant metastases. The presence
of regional nodal spread reduces overall survival by nearly half. Distant metastasis greatly reduces
survival, having only rare cures. Local invasion, a criterion for advanced T stage, with invasion of muscle,
bone, or cartilage, also significantly decreases cure rate. Perineural spread, as evidenced by pain,
paralysis, or numbness, indicates a highly aggressive tumor, is associated with nodal metastasis, and has
a less favorable prognosis than a similar lesion without perineural invasion.
With appropriate treatment, 5-yr survival can be as high as 90% for stage I, 75 to 80% for stage II, 45 to
75% for stage III, and up to 40% for stage IV. The survival rates vary greatly depending on the primary
site. Stage I laryngeal cancers have an excellent survival rate when compared to other sites.
Treatment
• Surgery, radiation therapy, or both
• Sometimes chemotherapy
Many stage I tumors, regardless of location, respond similarly to surgery and to radiation therapy, allowing
other factors (eg, patient preference) to determine choice of therapy. Thus, the treating physician should
carefully review risks and benefits with the patient. However, at certain locations, there is clear superiority
of one modality over another. For
[Table 55-1.
Staging of Head and Neck Cancer]
example, surgery is the better treatment for early-stage disease involving the oral cavity. In select head
and neck cancers, endoscopic surgery has cure rates similar to those of open surgery or radiation, and
morbidity is significantly less. However, many physicians still recommend radiation for early-stage
laryngeal cancer.
If radiation therapy is chosen for primary therapy, it is delivered to the primary site and sometimes
bilaterally to the cervical lymph nodes. The treatment of lymphatics, whether by radiation or surgery, is
determined by the primary site, histologic criteria, and risk of nodal disease.
Advanced-stage disease (stages III and IV) often requires multimodality treatment, incorporating some
combination of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery. Bone or cartilage invasion requires surgical
resection of the primary site and usually regional lymph nodes because of the high risk of nodal spread. If
the primary site is treated surgically, then postoperative radiation to the cervical lymph nodes is delivered
if there are high-risk features, such as multiple lymph nodes with cancer or extracapsular extension.
Postoperative radiation usually is preferred over preoperative radiation, because radiated tissues heal
poorly. Recent studies have shown that adding chemotherapy to adjuvant radiation therapy to the neck
improves regional control of the cancer and improves survival. There are significant risks to this
approach, so the decision to add chemotherapy should be carefully considered.
===PAGE:602===
Advanced squamous cell carcinoma without bony invasion often is treated with concomitant
chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Although advocated as organ-sparing, combining chemotherapy with
radiation therapy doubles the rate of acute toxicities, particularly severe dysphagia. Radiation may be
used alone for debilitated patients with advanced disease who cannot tolerate the sequelae of
chemotherapy and are too high a risk for general anesthesia.
Primary chemotherapy is reserved for chemosensitive tumors, such as Burkitt's lymphoma, or for patients
who have widespread metastases (eg, hepatic or pulmonary involvement). Several drugs—cisplatin,
fluorouracil, bleomycin, and methotrexate—provide palliation for pain and shrink the tumor in patients who
cannot be treated with other methods. Response may be good initially but is not durable, and the cancer
will return.
Tumor recurrence:
Managing recurrent tumors after therapy is complex and has potential complications.
A palpable mass or ulcerated lesion with edema or pain at the primary site after therapy strongly suggests
a persistent tumor. Such patients require CT (with thin cuts) or MRI. For local recurrence after surgical
treatment, all scar planes and reconstructive flaps are excised along with residual cancer. Radiation
therapy, chemotherapy, or both may be done but have limited effectiveness. Patients with recurrence after
radiation therapy should not receive additional radiation and are best treated with surgery.
Symptom control:
Pain is a common symptom in patients with head and neck cancer and must be
adequately addressed. Palliative surgery or radiation may temporarily alleviate pain, and in 30 to 50% of
patients, chemotherapy can produce improvement that lasts a mean of 3 mo. A stepwise approach to pain
management, as recommended by the WHO, is critical to controlling pain. Severe pain is best managed in
association with a pain and palliative care specialist.
Pain, difficulty eating, choking on secretions, and other problems make adequate symptomatic treatment
essential. Patient directives regarding such care should be clarified early (.
Adverse effects of treatment:
All cancer treatments have potential complications and expected
sequelae. Because many treatments have similar cure rates, the choice of modality is based largely on
real, or perceived, differences in sequelae.
Although it is commonly thought that surgery requires rehabilitation for swallowing and speaking, many
procedures do not require such rehabilitation. Increasingly complex reconstructive procedures and
techniques, including prostheses, grafts, regional pedicle flaps, and complex free flaps, can restore
function and appearance often to near normal.
Toxic effects of chemotherapy include malaise, severe nausea and vomiting, mucositis, transient hair
loss, gastroenteritis, hematopoietic and immune suppression, and infection.
Therapeutic radiation for head and neck cancers has several adverse effects. The function of any
salivary gland within the beam is permanently destroyed by a dose of about 40 Gy, resulting in
xerostomia, which markedly increases the risk of dental caries. Newer radiation techniques, such as
intensity-modulated radiation therapy, can minimize or eliminate toxic doses to the parotid glands in
certain patients. Radioprotectant drugs (eg, amifostine) also can help protect salivary function. In addition,
the blood supply of bone, particularly in the mandible, is compromised by doses of > 60 Gy, and
osteoradionecrosis may occur
(see also p.
). In this condition, tooth extraction sites break down,
sloughing bone and soft tissue. Therefore, any needed dental treatment, including scaling, fillings, and
extractions, should be done before radiation therapy. Any teeth in poor condition that cannot be
rehabilitated should be extracted. Radiation therapy may also cause oral mucositis and dermatitis in the
overlying skin, which may result in dermal fibrosis. Loss of taste (ageusia) and impaired smell (dysosmia)
often occur but are usually transient.
Prevention
Removing risk factors is critical, and all patients should cease tobacco use and limit alcohol consumption.
Removing risk factors also helps prevent disease recurrence in those treated for cancer. A new primary
===PAGE:603===
cancer develops in about 5% of patients/yr (to a maximum risk of about 20%); risk is lower in those who
stop.
Cancer of the lower lip may be prevented by sunscreen use and tobacco cessation. Because 60% of
head and neck cancers are well advanced (stage III or IV) at the time of diagnosis, the most promising
strategy for reducing morbidity and mortality is diligent routine examination of the oral cavity.
Jaw Tumors
Numerous tumor types, both benign and malignant, originate in the jaw. Symptoms are
swelling, pain, tenderness, and unexplained tooth mobility; some tumors are discovered on
routine dental x-rays, whereas others are found on routine examinations of the oral cavity and
teeth. Treatment depends on location and tumor type. Benign tumors may be observed and
may not need surgical excision, although most tumors require resection with possible
reconstruction.
If not initially detected on x-ray, jaw tumors are diagnosed clinically because their growth causes swelling
of the face, palate, or alveolar ridge (the part of the jaw supporting the teeth). They can also cause bone
tenderness and severe pain.
Bony outgrowths (torus palatinus, torus mandibularis) may develop on the palate or mandible. These are
common growths and may prompt concerns about cancer, although they are benign and of concern only
if they interfere with dental care or function of the submandibular gland. When on the palate, they are in
the midline and have intact, smooth mucosa. Multiple osteomas seen on dental x-ray may suggest
Gardner's syndrome.
The most common tumor of the mandible and maxilla is squamous cell carcinoma invading the bone
through dental sockets. These can involve any portion of the intraoral mandible or maxilla.
Ameloblastoma, the most common epithelial odontogenic tumor, usually arises in the posterior mandible. It
is slowly invasive and rarely metastatic. On x-ray, it typically appears as multiloculated or soap-bubble
radiolucency. Treatment is wide surgical excision and reconstruction if appropriate.
Odontoma, the most common odontogenic tumor, affects the dental follicle or the dental tissues and
usually appears in the mandibles of young people. Odontomas include fibrous odontomas and
cementomas. A clinically absent molar tooth suggests a composite odontoma. Typically, no treatment is
indicated. These tumors may be excised when the diagnosis is in doubt.
Osteosarcoma, giant cell tumor, Ewing's tumor, multiple myeloma, and metastatic tumors may affect the
jaw. Treatment is the same as for those tumors in other bony sites.
Laryngeal Cancer
Ninety percent of laryngeal cancer is squamous cell carcinoma. Smoking, alcohol abuse, lower
socioeconomic status, and being male and > 60 yr increase risk. Early diagnosis is common
with vocal cord tumors because vocal, swallowing, or respiratory symptoms develop early.
However, supraglottic tumors (above the vocal cords) and subglottic tumors (below the vocal
cords) are often very large and at an advanced stage when diagnosed because they are
asymptomatic until obstructive symptoms develop. Diagnosis is based on laryngoscopy and
biopsy. Treatment of early-stage tumors is with surgery or radiation. Advanced-stage tumors are
most often treated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Surgery is reserved for salvage
treatment or lesions with significant extralaryngeal extension or cartilage destruction.
Reestablishment of speaking ability is needed if a total laryngectomy is done.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common cancer of the larynx. In the US, it is 4 times more common
among men and is more common among those of lower socioeconomic status. Over 95% of patients are
smokers; 15 pack-years of smoking increase the risk 30-fold.
The incidence of larynx cancer is
decreasing, particularly among men, most likely due to changes in smoking habits.
===PAGE:604===
Sixty percent of patients present with localized disease alone; 25% present with local disease and
regional nodal metastatic disease; and 15% present with advanced disease, distant metastases, or both.
Distant metastases occur most frequently in the lungs and liver.
Common sites of origin are the true vocal cords (glottis) and the supraglottic larynx. The least common
site is the subglottic larynx, where only 1% of primary laryngeal cancers originate. Verrucous carcinoma, a
rare variant of squamous cell carcinoma, usually arises in the glottic area and has a better survival rate
than standard squamous cell carcinoma.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs differ based on the involved portion of the larynx. Hoarseness is common early in
glottic cancers but is a late symptom for supraglottic and subglottic cancers. Supraglottic cancer is often
asymptomatic until it manifests as a mass lesion (eg, with airway obstruction, dysphagia, otalgia, or a "hot
potato" voice) or with weight loss. Such patients should be referred for indirect laryngoscopy without
delay.
Diagnosis
• Laryngoscopy
• Operative endoscopy and biopsy
• Imaging tests for staging
All patients who have hoarseness for > 2 to 3 wk should have their larynx examined by a head and neck
specialist. Any lesions discovered require further evaluation, usually with operative endoscopy and
biopsy, with concomitant evaluation of the upper airway and GI tract for coexisting cancers. The incidence
of a synchronous second primary tumor may be as high as 10%.
Patients with confirmed carcinoma typically have neck CT with contrast and a chest x-ray or chest CT.
Most clinicians also do PET of the neck and chest at the time of diagnosis.
Treatment
• Early-stage: Surgery or radiation therapy
• Advanced: Radiation therapy and sometimes chemotherapy
For early-stage glottic carcinoma, laser excision, radiation therapy, or occasionally open laryngeal surgery
results in a 5-yr survival rate of 85 to 95%. Endoscopic laser resection and radiation therapy usually
preserve a normal voice and post-treatment function and have similar cure rates.
For advanced glottic carcinoma, defined by a lack of vocal cord mobility, thyroid cartilage invasion, or
extension into the tongue, most patients are treated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Surgery
(followed by radiation therapy) is reserved for salvage situations; most such cases require total
laryngectomy, although endoscopic or open partial laryngectomy may sometimes be used. Extensive local
invasion, however, usually requires an initial total laryngectomy rather than nonsurgical therapy.
Early supraglottic carcinoma can be effectively treated with radiation therapy or partial laryngectomy.
Laser resection has shown considerable success on early-stage supraglottic squamous cell carcinomas
and minimizes functional changes after surgery. If the carcinoma is more advanced but does not affect the
true vocal cords, a supraglottic partial laryngectomy can be done to preserve the voice and glottic
sphincter. If the true vocal cords also are affected, a supracricoid laryngectomy or a total laryngectomy is
required if surgery is chosen. As with glottic carcinoma, most advanced-stage supraglottic cancers initially
are treated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy.
===PAGE:605===
Treatment of hypopharyngeal carcinomas is similar to that of laryngeal cancer. Early-stage lesions
usually are treated with radiation alone, although endoscopic resection is an option. However, the
majority of patients with hypopharyngeal cancer have advanced-stage disease, because of the silent
nature of the disease and frequent regional lymphatic spread; such patients are treated with
chemotherapy and radiation therapy primarily, with surgical salvage.
Rehabilitation:
Rehabilitation may be required after either surgical or nonsurgical treatment. Significant
swallowing problems are common after chemotherapy and radiation therapy and may require esophageal
dilation, swallowing therapy, or, in severe cases, surgical replacement of the pharynx or gastrostomy tube
feedings. Swallowing also is affected by surgery and may require swallowing therapy or dilation as well.
Speech, on the other hand, is more significantly affected by surgery. After total laryngectomy, the patient
requires creation of a new voice by way of
• Esophageal speech
• A tracheoesophageal puncture
• An electrolarynx
In all 3 techniques, sound is articulated into speech by the pharynx, palate, tongue, teeth, and lips.
Esophageal speech involves taking air into the esophagus during inspiration and gradually eructating the
air through the pharyngoesophageal junction to produce a sound.
A tracheoesophageal puncture involves placement of a one-way valve between the trachea and
esophagus to facilitate phonation. This valve forces air into the esophagus during expiration to produce a
sound. Patients receive physical rehabilitation, speech therapy, and appropriate training in the
maintenance and use of this valve and must be cautioned against the possible aspiration of food, fluids,
and secretions.
An electrolarynx is a battery-powered sound source that is held against the neck to produce sound.
Although it carries a great deal of social stigma for many patients, it has the advantage of being functional
immediately with little or no training.
Nasopharyngeal Cancer
Nasopharyngeal cancers are rare in the US but common in the South China Sea region.
Symptoms develop late, including unilateral bloody nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, facial
swelling, and numbness. Diagnosis is based on inspection and biopsy, with CT, MRI, or PET to
evaluate extent. Treatment is with radiation, chemotherapy, and, rarely, surgery.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common malignant tumor of the nasopharynx. It can occur in any
age group and is rare in North America. It is one of the most common cancers among people of Chinese,
especially southern Chinese, and Southeast Asian ancestry, including Chinese immigrants to North
America. Over several generations, the prevalence among Chinese-Americans gradually decreases to
that among non-Chinese Americans, suggesting an environmental component to etiology. Dietary
exposure to nitrites and salted fish also is thought to increase risk. Epstein-Barr virus is a significant risk
factor, and there is hereditary predisposition. Other nasopharyngeal cancers include adenoid cystic and
mucoepidermoid carcinomas, malignant mixed tumors, adenocarcinomas, lymphomas, fibrosarcomas,
osteosarcomas, chondrosarcomas, and melanomas.
Symptoms and Signs
The first symptom is often nasal or eustachian tube obstruction causing hearing loss due to a middle ear
effusion. Other symptoms include purulent bloody rhinorrhea, frank epistaxis, cranial nerve palsies, and
cervical lymphadenopathy. Cranial nerve palsies most often involve the 6th, 4th, and 3rd cranial nerves
due to their location in the cavernous sinus, in close proximity to the foramen lacerum, which is the most
===PAGE:606===
common route of intracranial spread for these tumors. Because lymphatics of the nasopharynx
communicate across the midline, bilateral metastases are common.
Diagnosis
• Nasopharyngeal endoscopy and biopsy
• Imaging tests for staging
Patients suspected of having nasopharyngeal cancer must undergo examination with a nasopharyngeal
mirror or endoscope, and lesions are biopsied. Open cervical node biopsy should not be done as the
initial procedure (see
Neck Mass
, although a needle biopsy is acceptable and often
recommended. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI (with fat suppression) of the head with attention to the
nasopharynx and skull base is done; the skull base is involved in about 25% of patients. CT also is
required to accurately assess skull base bony changes, which are less visible on MRI. A PET scan also
commonly is done to assess the extent of disease as well as the cervical lymphatics.
Treatment
• Chemotherapy plus radiation therapy
Because of the location and extent of involvement, nasopharyngeal cancers often are not amenable to
surgical resection. They are typically treated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy, which are often
followed by adjuvant chemotherapy.
Recurrent tumors can be treated with another course of radiation, commonly with brachytherapy;
radionecrosis of the skull base is a risk. An alternative to radiation is skull base resection.
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Oral squamous cell carcinoma affects about 30,000 Americans each year. Over 95% smoke,
drink alcohol, or both. Early, curable lesions are rarely symptomatic; thus, preventing fatal
disease requires early detection by screening. Treatment is with surgery, radiation, or both. The
overall 5-yr survival rate (all sites and stages combined) is > 50%.
In the US, 3% of cancers in men and 2% in women are oral squamous cell carcinomas, most of which
occur after age 50. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common oral or pharyngeal cancer (and the
most common at head and neck sites in general).
The chief risk factors for oral squamous cell carcinoma are smoking (especially > 2 packs/day) and
alcohol use. Risk increases dramatically when alcohol use exceeds 6 oz of distilled liquor, 6 oz of wine, or
12 oz of beer/day. The combination of heavy smoking and alcohol abuse is estimated to raise the risk
100-fold in women and 38-fold in men. Squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue may also result from any
chronic irritation, such as dental caries, overuse of mouthwash, chewing tobacco, or the use of betel
quid. Oral human papillomavirus (HPV), typically acquired via oral-genital contact, may have a role in
etiology.
About 40% of intraoral squamous cell carcinomas begin on the floor of the mouth or on the lateral and
ventral surfaces of the tongue. About 38% of all oral squamous cell carcinomas occur on the lower lip;
these are usually solar-related cancers on the external surface. About 11% begin in the palate and
tonsillar area. Squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil (an oropharyngeal cancer), 2nd in frequency only to
carcinoma of the larynx among cancers of the upper respiratory tract, occurs predominantly in males.
Symptoms and Signs
Oral lesions are asymptomatic initially, highlighting the need for oral screening. Most dental professionals
carefully examine the oral cavity and oropharynx during routine care and may do a brush biopsy of
abnormal areas. The lesions may appear as areas of erythroplakia or leukoplakia and may be exophytic
===PAGE:607===
or ulcerated. Cancers are often indurated and firm with a rolled border. Tonsillar carcinoma usually
manifests as an asymmetric swelling and sore throat, with pain often radiating to the ipsilateral ear. A
metastatic mass in the neck may be the first symptom, particularly in tonsillar cancer.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
• Endoscopy to detect second primary cancer
• Chest x-ray and CT of head and neck
Biopsy of suspect areas is done. Direct laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, and esophagoscopy are done to
exclude a simultaneous second primary cancer. Head and neck CT usually is done. Chest x-ray is done;
chest CT is done if an advanced stage is suspected or confirmed.
Prognosis
If carcinoma of the tongue is localized (no lymph node involvement), 5-yr survival is > 50%. For localized
carcinoma of the floor of the mouth, 5-yr survival is 65%. Lymph node metastasis decreases survival rate
by about 50%. Metastases reach the regional lymph nodes first and later the lungs.
For lower lip lesions, 5-yr survival is 90%, and metastases are rare. Carcinoma of the upper lip tends to
be more aggressive and metastatic. For carcinoma of the palate and tonsillar area, 5-yr survival is 68% if
patients are treated before lymph node involvement but only 17% after involvement. The prognosis for
tonsillar carcinoma is often better stage for stage than that for oral cancers. Oropharyngeal cancer
associated with HPV infection may have a better prognosis.
Treatment
• Surgery or radiation therapy
Surgery and radiation therapy are the treatments of choice. Regional or distant disease necessitates a
more radical treatment approach.
For tongue lesions, surgery is usually the initial treatment, particularly for early-stage disease. Selective
neck dissection is indicated if the risk of nodal disease exceeds 15 to 20%. Routine surgical
reconstruction is the key to reducing postoperative oral disabilities; procedures range from local tissue
flaps to free tissue transfers. Speech and swallowing therapy may be required after significant resections.
Radiation therapy is an alternative treatment. Chemotherapy is not used routinely but is recommended on
an individual basis; rare distant metastases are present in sites where chemotherapy may be of some
palliative value (eg, lung, bone, heart, pericardium).
Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the lip is surgical excision with reconstruction to maximize
postoperative function. When large areas of the lip exhibit premalignant change, the lip can be surgically
shaved, or a laser can remove all affected mucosa. Thereafter, appropriate sunscreen application is
recommended.
Treatment of tonsillar carcinoma usually consists of concomitant chemotherapy and radiation therapy.
Another option includes radical resection of the tonsillar fossa, sometimes with partial mandibulectomy
and neck dissection.
Otic Tumors
A number of malignant and benign otic tumors occur, usually manifesting with hearing loss.
They may also manifest with dizziness, vertigo, or imbalance. These tumors are rare and can be
difficult to diagnose.
===PAGE:608===
Malignant otic tumors:
Basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas may arise in the ear canal. Persistent
inflammation caused by chronic otitis media may predispose to the development of squamous cell
carcinoma. Extensive resection is indicated, followed by radiation therapy. En bloc resection of the ear
canal with sparing of the facial nerve is done when lesions are limited to the canal and have not invaded
the middle ear. Deeper invasion requires a more significant temporal bone resection.
Rarely, squamous cell carcinoma originates in the middle ear. The persistent otorrhea of chronic otitis
media may be a predisposing factor. Resection of the temporal bone and postoperative radiation therapy
are necessary.
Nonchromaffin paragangliomas (chemodectomas) arise in the temporal bone from glomus bodies in the
jugular bulb (glomus jugulare tumors) or the medial wall of the middle ear (glomus tympanicum tumors).
They appear as a pulsatile red mass in the middle ear. The first symptom often is tinnitus that is
synchronous with the pulse. Hearing loss develops, followed by vertigo. Cranial nerve palsies of the 9th,
10th, or 11th nerve may accompany glomus jugulare tumors that extend through the jugular foramen.
Excision is the treatment of choice, and radiation is used for nonsurgical candidates.
Benign otic tumors:
Sebaceous cysts, osteomas, and keloids may arise in and occlude the ear canal,
causing retention of cerumen and conductive hearing loss. Excision is the treatment of choice for all
benign otic tumors.
Ceruminomas occur in the outer third of the ear canal. These tumors appear benign histologically and do
not metastasize regionally or distantly but they are locally invasive and potentially destructive and should
be excised widely.
Salivary Gland Tumors
Most salivary gland tumors are benign and occur in the parotid glands. A painless salivary mass
is the most common sign and is evaluated by fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Imaging with CT
and MRI can be helpful. For malignant tumors, treatment is with excision and radiation. Longterm results are related to the grade of the cancer.
About 85% of salivary gland tumors occur in the parotid glands, followed by the submandibular and minor
salivary glands, and about 1% occur in the sublingual glands. About 75 to 80% are benign, slow-growing,
movable, painless, usually solitary nodules beneath normal skin or mucosa. Occasionally, when cystic,
they are soft but most often they are firm.
Benign tumors:
The most common type is a pleomorphic adenoma (mixed tumor). Malignant
transformation is possible, resulting in carcinoma ex mixed tumor, but this usually occurs only after the
benign tumor has been present for 15 to 20 yr. If malignant transformation occurs, the cure rates are very
low, despite adequate surgery and adjuvant therapy.
Other benign tumors include monomorphic adenoma, oncocytoma, and papillary cystadenoma
lymphomatosum (previously known as cylindroma). These tumors rarely recur and rarely become
malignant.
Malignant salivary gland tumors:
Malignant tumors are less common and are characterized by rapid
growth or a sudden growth spurt. They are firm, nodular, and can be fixed to adjacent tissue, often with a
poorly defined periphery. Pain and neural involvement are common. Eventually, the overlying skin or
mucosa may become ulcerated or the adjacent tissues may become invaded. Surgery, followed by
radiation therapy, is the treatment of choice for resectable disease. Currently, there is no effective
chemotherapy for salivary cancer.
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is the most common salivary gland cancer, typically occurring in people in
their 20s to 50s. It can manifest in any salivary gland, often in a minor salivary gland of the palate, or it
can occur deep within the bone, such as in the wall of a dentigerous cyst. Intermediate and high-grade
mucoepidermoid carcinomas may metastasize to the regional lymphatics, which must be addressed with
surgical dissection or postoperative radiation therapy.
===PAGE:609===
Adenoid cystic carcinoma is the most common malignant tumor of minor salivary glands (and of the
trachea). It is a slowly growing malignant transformation of a much more common benign cylindroma. Its
peak incidence is between ages 40 and 60, and symptoms include severe pain and, often, facial nerve
paralysis. It has a propensity for perineural invasion and spread, with disease potentially extending many
centimeters from the main tumor mass. Lymphatic spread is not a common feature of this tumor, so
elective nodal treatment is less common. Although the 5- and 10-yr survival rates are quite good, the
15and 20-yr rates are quite poor, with most patients developing distant metastases. Pulmonary metastases
are common, although patients can live quite long with them.
Acinic cell carcinoma, a common parotid tumor, occurs in people in their 40s and 50s. This carcinoma has
a more indolent course, as well as an incidence of multifocality.
Carcinoma ex mixed tumor is adenocarcinoma arising in a preexisting benign carcinoma ex mixed tumor.
Only the carcinomatous element metastasizes.
Symptoms and Signs
Most benign and malignant tumors manifest as a painless mass. However, malignant tumors may invade
nerves, causing localized or regional pain, numbness, paresthesia, causalgia, or a loss of motor function.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
• CT and MRI for extent of disease
CT and MRI locate the tumor and describe its extent. Biopsy confirms the cell type. A search for spread to
regional nodes or distant metastases in the lung, liver, bone, or brain may be indicated before treatment is
selected.
Treatment
• Surgery, sometimes plus radiation therapy
Treatment of benign tumors is surgery. The recurrence rate is high when excision is incomplete.
Treatment of mucoepidermoid carcinoma consists of wide excision and postoperative radiation. The 5-yr
survival rate is 95% with the low-grade type, primarily affecting mucus cells, and 50% with the high-grade
type, primarily affecting epidermoid cells. Treatment of adenoid cystic carcinoma is wide surgical excision,
but local recurrence is common. Lung metastases and death are likely, although many years, to a decade
or more, after the initial diagnosis and treatment. The prognosis for acinic cell carcinoma is favorable after
wide excision. All surgeries are designed to spare the facial nerve, which is sacrificed only in cases of
direct tumor involvement with the nerve.
===PAGE:610===
Chapter 56. Approach to Dental and Oral Symptoms
Introduction
A physician should always examine the mouth and be able to recognize major oral disorders, particularly
possible cancers. However, consultation with a dentist is needed to evaluate nonmalignant changes as
well as patients with tooth problems. Likewise, patients with xerostomia or unexplained swelling or pain in
the mouth, face, or neck require a dental consultation. Children with abnormal facies (who also may have
dental malformations requiring correction) should be evaluated by a dentist. In FUO or a systemic
infection of unknown cause, a dental disorder should be considered. A dental consultation is necessary
before head and neck radiation therapy and is advisable before chemotherapy.
Clues suggesting systemic disease may be found in the mouth and adjacent structures (see
Table 56-1
). A dentist should consult a physician when a systemic disorder is suspected, when the patient
is taking certain drugs (eg, warfarin, bisphosphonates), and when a patient's ability to withstand general
anesthesia or extensive oral surgery must be evaluated. Patients with certain heart valve abnormalities
may require antibiotic prophylaxis to help prevent bacterial endocarditis before undergoing certain dental
procedures (see
Tables 215-3
and
215-4
on pp.
and
).
Common dental disorders are discussed in
Chapter 57
. Dental emergencies, including toothache, are
discussed in
Chapter 58
.
Anatomy and Development
Teeth:
The teeth are categorized as incisors, canines, premolars, and molars and conventionally are
numbered beginning with the maxillary right 3rd molar (see
Fig. 56-1
).
Each tooth has a crown and a root. The canines have the largest and strongest roots. An inner pulp
contains blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves, surrounded by the hard but porous dentin, a very hard
enamel coating that covers the crown. The bonelike cementum is over the root, which, when healthy, is
covered by gingiva (see
Fig. 56-2
). Twenty deciduous
[Table 56-1.
Oral Findings in Systemic Disorders]
teeth normally begin appearing at close to age 6 mo and should all be in place by age 30 mo (see
Table 271-1
. These teeth are followed by 32 permanent teeth that begin to appear by about
age 6. The period from age 6 to 11 is called the mixed dentition stage, in which both deciduous and
permanent teeth are present. Timing of tooth eruption is one indicator of skeletal age and may identify
growth retardation or establish age for forensic purposes.
Supporting tissues:
The gingiva surrounds the teeth at the base of their crown. The alveolar ridges are
trabecular bone containing sockets for the teeth. The periodontium consists of the tissues that support
the teeth—the gingiva, epithelial attachment, connective tissue attachment, periodontal ligament, and
alveolar bone. The mandible and maxilla support the alveolar ridges and house the teeth. Saliva from the
salivary glands bathes and protects the teeth. The tongue directs food between the grinding surfaces and
helps clean the teeth. The maxilla receives innervation from the maxillary nerve, the 2nd division of the
trigeminal nerve (the 5th cranial nerve). The mandibular nerve, which is the 3rd and most inferior division
of the trigeminal nerve, innervates the mandible.
In the elderly, or in some periodontal diseases, gingival recession exposes the dental root adjacent to the
crown, making root caries common. If tooth destruction results and the tooth must be removed, the
mechanical stimulation necessary for maintaining bone integrity ceases. Consequently, atrophy of the
alveolar ridge (senile atrophy) begins when teeth are absent.
===PAGE:611===
Mouth:
Normally, keratinized epithelium occurs on the facial aspect of the lips, dorsum of the tongue,
hard palate, and gingiva around the teeth. When healthy, the gingiva extends
[Fig. 56-1.
Identifying the teeth.]
5 to 7 mm from the tooth. Nonkeratinized mucosa occurs over alveolar bone further from the teeth, inside
the lips and cheeks, on the sides and undersurface of the tongue, on the soft palate, and covering the
floor of the mouth. The skin and mucosa of the lips are demarcated by the vermilion border.
The buccal mucosa, including the vestibule and nonkeratinized alveolar mucosa, is usually smooth, moist,
and more red than pink (as compared to healthy gingiva). Innocuous entities in this region include linea
alba (a thin white line, typically bilateral, on the level of the occlusal plane, where the cheek is bitten),
Fordyce's granules (aberrant sebaceous glands appearing as < 1 mm light yellow spots that also may
occur on the lips), and white sponge nevus (bilateral thick white folds over most of the buccal mucosa).
Recognizing these avoids needless biopsy and apprehension. The orifices of the parotid (Stensen's)
ducts are opposite the maxillary 1st molar on the inside of each cheek and should not be mistaken for an
abnormality.
The dorsal surface of the tongue is covered with numerous whitish elevations called the filiform papillae.
Interspersed among them are isolated reddish prominences called the fungiform papillae, occurring mostly
on the anterior part of the tongue. The circumvallate papillae, numbering 8 to 12, are considerably larger
and lie posteriorly in a V pattern. The circumvallate papillae do not project from the tongue but instead are
surrounded by a trench. The foliate papillae appear as a series of parallel, slitlike folds on the lateral
borders of the tongue, near the anterior pillars of the fauces. They vary in length and can easily be
confused with malignant lesions, as may the foramen cecum, median rhomboid glossitis, and, rarely, a
lingual thyroid nodule. Lingual tonsils are components of Waldeyer's ring, are at the back of the tongue,
and should not be mistaken for lesions. If an apparent abnormality is bilateral, it is almost always a normal
variant.
Innervation is supplied by the lingual nerves (branches of the 5th cranial nerves), for general sensory
innervation, and the chorda tympani fibers (of the 7th cranial nerve), which innervate the taste buds of the
anterior two thirds of the tongue. Behind the circumvallate papillae, the glossopharyngeal nerves (9th
cranial nerves) provide the sensations of touch and taste. The tongue has taste receptors for sweet,
salty, sour, bitter, and umami (a savory
[Fig. 56-2.
Section of a canine tooth.]
taste triggered by natural glutamic acid and glutamates such as the flavoring agent monosodium
glutamate). Although previously thought to be isolated to particular portions of the tongue, these receptors
are now known to be distributed over the surface of the tongue. The hypoglossal nerves (12th cranial
nerves) control movement of the tongue.
The major salivary glands are the paired parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands. Most oral
mucosal surfaces contain many minor mucus-secreting salivary glands. Anteriorly and near the midline on
each side of the floor of the mouth are the openings of Wharton's ducts, which drain the ipsilateral
submandibular and sublingual glands. The parotid glands drain into the cheeks via Stensen's ducts.
Evaluation
The first routine dental examination should take place by age 1 yr or when the first tooth erupts.
Subsequent evaluations should take place at 6-mo intervals or whenever symptoms develop. Examination
of the mouth is part of every general physical examination. Oral findings in many systemic diseases are
unique, sometimes pathognomonic, and may be the first sign of disease. Oral cancer may be detected at
an early stage.
History:
Important dental symptoms include bleeding, pain, malocclusion, new growths, numbness or
paresthesias, and chewing problems (which may lead to weight loss—see
Table 56-2
). General information includes use of alcohol or tobacco (both major risk factors for head and
===PAGE:612===
neck cancer) and systemic symptoms, such as fever and weight loss.
Physical examination:
A thorough inspection requires good illumination, a tongue blade, gloves, and a
gauze pad. Complete or partial dentures are removed so that underlying soft tissues can be seen.
Most physicians use a head-mounted light. However, because the light cannot be precisely aligned on the
axis of vision, it is difficult to avoid shadowing in narrow areas. Better illumination results with a headmounted convex mirror; the physician looks through a hole in the center of the mirror, so the illumination is
always on-axis. The head mirror reflects light from a source (any incandescent light) placed behind the
patient and slightly to one side and requires practice to use effectively.
The examiner initially looks at the face for asymmetry, masses, and skin lesions. Slight facial asymmetry is
universal, but more marked asymmetry may indicate an underlying disorder, either congenital or acquired
(see
Table 56-3
).
Teeth are inspected for shape, alignment, defects, mobility, color, and presence of adherent plaque,
materia alba (dead bacteria, food debris, desquamated epithelial cells), and calculus (tartar).
Teeth are gently tapped with a tongue depressor or mirror handle to assess tenderness (percussion
sensitivity). Tenderness to percussion suggests deep caries that has caused a necrotic pulp with
periapical abscess or severe periodontal disease. Percussion sensitivity or pain on biting also can
indicate an incomplete (green stick) fracture of a tooth. Percussion tenderness in multiple adjacent
maxillary teeth may result from maxillary sinusitis. Tenderness to palpation around the apices of the teeth
also may indicate an abscess.
Loose teeth usually indicate severe periodontal disease but can be caused by bruxism (clenching or
grinding of teeth— or trauma that damages periodontal tissues. Rarely, teeth become loose
when alveolar bone is eroded by an underlying mass (eg, ameloblastoma, eosinophilic granuloma). A
tumor or systemic cause of alveolar bone loss (eg, diabetes mellitus, hyperparathyroidism, osteoporosis,
Cushing's syndrome) is suspected when teeth are loose and heavy plaque and calculus are absent.
Calculus is mineralized bacterial plaque—a concretion of bacteria, food residue, saliva,
[Table 56-2.
Some Oral Symptoms and Possible Causes]
and mucus with Ca and phosphate salts. After a tooth is cleaned, a mucopolysaccharide coating (pellicle)
is deposited almost immediately. After about 24 h, bacterial colonization turns the pellicle into plaque. After
about 72 h, the plaque starts calcifying, becoming calculus. When present, calculus is deposited most
heavily on the lingual (inner, or tongue) surfaces of the mandibular anterior teeth near the submandibular
and sublingual duct orifices (Wharton's ducts) and on the buccal (cheek) surfaces of the maxillary molars
near the parotid duct orifices (Stensen's ducts).
Caries (tooth decay— first appears as defects in the tooth enamel. Caries then appears as
white spots, later becoming brown.
Attrition (wearing of biting surfaces) can result from chewing abrasive foods or tobacco or from the wear
that accompanies aging, but it usually indicates bruxism. Another common cause is abrasion of a
porcelain crown occluding against opposing enamel, because porcelain is considerably harder than
enamel. Attrition makes chewing less effective and causes noncarious teeth to become
[Table 56-3.
Some Disorders of the Oral Region by Predominant Site of Involvement]
painful when the eroding enamel exposes the underlying dentin. Dentin is sensitive to touch and to
temperature changes. A dentist can desensitize such teeth or restore the dental anatomy by placing
crowns or onlays over badly worn teeth. In minor cases of root sensitivity, the exposed root may be
desensitized by fluoride application or dentin-bonding agents.
===PAGE:613===
Deformed teeth may indicate a developmental or endocrine disorder. In Down syndrome, teeth are small.
In congenital syphilis, the incisors may be small at the incisal third, causing a pegged or screwdriver
shape with a notch in the center of the incisal edge (Hutchinson's incisors), and the 1st molar is small,
with a small occlusal surface and roughened, lobulated, often hypoplastic enamel (mulberry molar). In
ectodermal dysplasia, teeth are absent or conical, so that dentures are needed from childhood.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta, an autosomal dominant disorder, causes abnormal dentin that is dull bluish
brown and opalescent and does not cushion the overlying enamel adequately. Such teeth cannot
withstand occlusal stresses and rapidly become worn. People with pituitary dwarfism or with congenital
hypoparathyroidism have small dental roots; people with gigantism have large ones. Acromegaly causes
excess cementum in the roots as well as enlargement of the jaws, so teeth may become widely spaced.
Acromegaly also can cause an open bite to develop in adulthood. Congenitally narrow lateral incisors
occur in the absence of systemic disease. The most commonly congenitally absent teeth are the 3rd
molars, followed in frequency by the maxillary lateral incisors and 2nd mandibular premolars.
Defects in tooth color must be differentiated from the darkening or yellowing that is caused by food
pigments, aging, and, most prominently, smoking. A tooth may appear gray because of pulpal necrosis,
usually due to extensive caries penetrating the pulp or because of hemosiderin deposited in the dentin
after trauma, with or without pulpal necrosis. Children's teeth darken appreciably and permanently after
even short-term use of tetracyclines by the mother during the 2nd half of pregnancy or by the child during
odontogenesis (tooth development), specifically calcification of the crowns, which lasts until age 9.
Tetracyclines rarely cause permanent discoloration of fully formed teeth in adults. However, minocycline
darkens bone, which can be seen in the mouth when the overlying gingiva and mucosa are thin. Affected
teeth fluoresce with distinctive colors under ultraviolet light corresponding to the specific tetracycline
taken. In congenital porphyria, both the deciduous and permanent teeth may have red or brownish
discoloration but always fluoresce red from the pigment deposited in the dentin. Congenital
hyperbilirubinemia causes a yellowish tooth discoloration. Teeth can be whitened (see
Table 56-4
).
Defects in tooth enamel may be caused by rickets, which results in a rough, irregular band in the enamel.
Any prolonged febrile illness during odontogenesis can cause a permanent narrow zone of chalky, pitted
enamel or simply white discoloration visible after the tooth erupts. Thus, the age at which the disease
occurred and its duration can be estimated from the location and height of the band. Amelogenesis
imperfecta, an autosomal dominant disease, causes severe enamel hypoplasia. Chronic vomiting and
esophageal reflux can decalcify the dental crowns, primarily the lingual surfaces of the maxillary anterior
teeth. Chronic snorting of cocaine can result in widespread decalcification of teeth, because the drug
dissociates in saliva into a base and HCl. Chronic use of methamphetamines markedly increases dental
caries ("meth mouth").
Swimmers who spend a lot of time in over-chlorinated pools may lose enamel from the outer facial/buccal
side of the teeth, especially the maxillary incisors, canines, and 1st premolars. If Na carbonate has been
added to the pool water to correct pH, then brown calculus develops but can be removed by a dental
cleaning.
Fluorosis is mottled enamel that may develop in children who drink water containing > 1 ppm of fluoride
during tooth development. Fluorosis depends on the amount of fluoride ingested. Enamel changes range
from irregular whitish opaque areas to severe brown discoloration of the entire crown with a roughened
surface. Such teeth are highly resistant to dental caries.
The lips are palpated. With the patient's mouth open, the buccal mucosa and vestibules are examined
with a tongue blade; then the hard and soft palates, uvula, and oropharynx are viewed. The patient is
asked to extend the tongue as far as possible, exposing the dorsum, and to move the extended tongue as
far as possible to each side, so that its posterolateral surfaces can be seen. If a patient does not extend
the tongue far enough to expose the circumvallate papillae, the examiner grasps the tip of the tongue with
a gauze pad and extends it. Then the tongue is raised to view the ventral surface and the floor of the
mouth. The teeth and gingiva are viewed. An abnormal distribution of keratinized or nonkeratinized oral
mucosa demands attention. Keratinized tissue that occurs in normally nonkeratinized areas appears
white. This abnormal condition, called leukoplakia, requires a biopsy because it may be cancerous or
precancerous. More ominous, however, are thinned areas of mucosa. These
===PAGE:614===
[Table 56-4.
Tooth Whitening Procedures]
red areas, called erythroplakia, if present for at least 2 wk, especially on the ventral tongue and floor of
the mouth, suggest dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, or cancer.
With gloved hands, the examiner palpates the vestibules and the floor of the mouth, including the
sublingual and submandibular glands. To make palpation more comfortable, the examiner asks the patient
to relax the mouth, keeping it open just wide enough to allow access.
The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is assessed by looking for jaw deviation on opening and by palpating
the head of the condyle anterior to the external auditory meatus. Examiners then place their little fingers
into the external ear canals with the pads of the fingertips lightly pushing anteriorly while patients open
widely and close 3 times. Patients also should be able to comfortably open wide enough to fit 3 of their
fingers vertically between the incisors (typically 4 to 5 cm). Trismus, the inability to open the mouth, may
indicate temporomandibular disease (the most common cause), pericoronitis, scleroderma, arthritis,
ankylosis of the TMJ, dislocation of the temporomandibular disk, tetanus, or peritonsillar abscess.
Unusually wide opening suggests subluxation or type III Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Testing:
For a new patient or for someone who requires extensive care, the dentist takes a full mouth xray series. This series consists of 14 to 16 periapical films to show the roots and bone plus 4 bite-wing
films to detect early caries between posterior teeth. Modern techniques reduce radiation exposure to a
near-negligible level. Patients at high risk of caries (ie, those who have had caries detected during the
clinical examination, have many restorations, or have recurrent caries on teeth previously restored)
should undergo bite-wing x-rays every 12 mo. Otherwise, bite-wings are indicated every 2 to 3 yr. A
panoramic x-ray can yield useful information about tooth development, cysts or tumors of the jaws,
supernumerary or congenitally absent teeth, 3rd molar impaction, Eagle's syndrome (less frequently), and
carotid plaques.
Geriatrics Essentials
With aging, resting salivary secretion diminishes and can be further diminished by drugs, although mealstimulated salivary flow is usually adequate. The flattened cusps of worn teeth and weakness of the
masticatory muscles may make chewing tiresome, impairing food intake. Loss of bone mass in the jaws
(particularly the alveolar portion), dryness of
the mouth, thinning of the oral mucosa, and impaired
coordination of lip, cheek, and tongue movements may make denture retention difficult. The taste buds
become less sensitive, so the elderly may add abundant seasonings, particularly salt (which is harmful for
some), or they may desire very hot foods for more taste, sometimes burning the often atrophic oral
mucosa. Gingival recession and xerostomia contribute to development of root caries. Despite these
changes, improved dental hygiene has greatly decreased the prevalence of tooth loss, and most older
people can expect to retain their teeth.
Poor oral health contributes to poor nutritional intake, which impairs general health. Dental disease
(particularly periodontitis) is associated with a 2-fold increased risk of coronary artery disease.
Edentulous patients cannot have periodontitis (because they do not have a periodontium), although
periodontitis may have resulted in their tooth loss. Aspiration pneumonia in patients with periodontitis can
involve anaerobic organisms and has a high mortality rate. Severe bacteremias secondary to acute or
chronic dental infection may contribute to brain abscesses, cavernous sinus thrombosis, endocarditis,
prosthetic joint infections, and unexplained fevers.
Dental Care of Patients With Systemic Disorders
Certain medical conditions (and their treatment) predispose patients to dental problems or affect dental
care.
Hematologic disorders:
People who have disorders that interfere with coagulation (eg, hemophilia,
acute leukemia, thrombocytopenia) require medical consultation before undergoing dental procedures
that might cause bleeding (eg, extraction, mandibular block). Hemophiliacs should have clotting factors
===PAGE:615===
given before, during, and after an extraction. Such oral surgery should be done in the hospital in
consultation with a hematologist. All patients with bleeding disorders should maintain a lifelong routine of
regular dental visits, which includes cleanings, fillings, topical fluoride, and preventative sealants, to avoid
the need for extractions.
Cardiovascular disorders:
After an MI, dental procedures should be avoided for 6 mo, if possible, to
allow damaged myocardium to become less electrically labile. Patients with pulmonary or cardiac disease
who require inhalation anesthesia for dental procedures should be hospitalized.
Endocarditis prophylaxis
is required before dental procedures only in patients with
• Prosthetic cardiac valves
• Previous history of bacterial endocarditis
• Cyanotic congenital defects of the heart or great vessels (if unrepaired, if completely repaired during
first 6 mo after surgery, or if repaired but with residual defects)
• Cardiac transplantation recipients with a valvulopathy
The heart is better protected against low-grade bacteremias, which occur in chronic dental conditions,
when dental treatment is received (with prophylaxis) than when it is not received. Patients who are to
undergo cardiac valve surgery or repair of congenital heart defects should have any necessary dental
treatment completed before surgery.
Although probably of marginal benefit, antibiotic prophylaxis is sometimes recommended for patients with
hemodialysis shunts and within 2 yr of receipt of a major prosthetic joint (hip, knee, shoulder, elbow). The
organisms causing infections at these sites are almost invariably of dermal rather than oral origin.
Epinephrine and levonordefrin are added to local anesthetics to increase the duration of anesthesia. In
some cardiovascular patients, excess amounts of these drugs cause arrhythmias, myocardial ischemia, or
hypertension. Plain anesthetic can be used for procedures requiring < 45 min, but in longer procedures or
where hemostasis is needed, up to 0.04 mg epinephrine (2 dental cartridges with 1:100,000 epinephrine)
is considered safe. Generally, no healthy patient should receive > 0.2 mg epinephrine at any one
appointment. Absolute contraindications to epinephrine (any dose) are uncontrolled hyperthyroidism;
pheochromocytoma; BP > 200 mm Hg systolic or > 115 mm Hg diastolic; uncontrolled arrhythmias despite
drug therapy; and unstable angina, MI, or stroke within 6 mo.
Some electrical dental equipment, such as an electrosurgical cautery, a pulp tester, or an ultrasonic
scaler, can interfere with early-generation pacemakers.
Cancer:
Extracting a tooth adjacent to a carcinoma of the gingiva, palate, or antrum facilitates invasion of
the alveolus (tooth socket) by the tumor. Therefore, a tooth should be extracted only during the course of
definitive treatment. In patients with leukemia or agranulocytosis, infection may follow an extraction
despite the use of antibiotics.
Immunosuppression:
People with impaired immunity are prone to severe mucosal and periodontal
infections by fungi, herpes and other viruses, and, less commonly, bacteria. The infections may cause
hemorrhage, delayed healing, or sepsis. Dysplastic or neoplastic oral lesions may develop after a few
years of immunosuppression. People with AIDS may develop Kaposi's sarcoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma,
hairy leukoplakia, candidiasis, aphthous ulcers, or a rapidly progressive form of periodontal disease.
Endocrine disorders:
Dental treatment may be complicated by some endocrine disorders. For example,
people with hyperthyroidism may develop tachycardia and excessive anxiety as well as thyroid storm if
given epinephrine. Insulin requirements may be reduced on elimination of oral infection in diabetics;
insulin dose may require reduction when food intake is limited because of pain after oral surgery. In
people with diabetes, hyperglycemia with resultant polyuria may lead to dehydration, resulting in
decreased salivary flow (xerostomia), which, along with elevated salivary glucose levels, contributes to
===PAGE:616===
caries.
Patients receiving corticosteroids and those with adrenocortical insufficiency may require supplemental
corticosteroids during major dental procedures. Patients with Cushing's syndrome or who are taking
corticosteroids may have alveolar bone loss, delayed wound healing, and increased capillary fragility.
Neurologic disorders:
Patients with seizures who require dental appliances should have nonremovable
appliances that cannot be swallowed or aspirated. Patients unable to brush or floss effectively may use
chlorhexidine 12% rinses in the morning and at bedtime.
Obstructive sleep apnea:
Patients with obstructive sleep apnea who are unable to tolerate treatment
with a positive airway pressure (CPAP, biPAP) mask are sometimes treated with an intraoral device that
expands the oropharynx. This treatment is not as effective as CPAP, but more patients tolerate using it.
Drugs:
Certain drugs, such as corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, and antineoplastics, compromise
healing and host defenses. When possible, dental procedures should not be done while these drugs are
being given.
Some antineoplastics (eg, doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, bleomycin, dactinomycin, cytosine, arabinoside,
methotrexate) cause stomatitis, which is worse in patients with preexisting periodontal disease. Before
such drugs are prescribed, oral prophylaxis should be completed, and patients should be instructed in
proper toothbrushing and flossing.
Drugs that interfere with clotting may need to be reduced or stopped before oral surgery. Patients taking
aspirin, NSAIDs, or clopidogrel should stop doing so 4 days before undergoing dental surgery and can
resume taking these drugs after bleeding stops. Warfarin should be stopped 2 to 3 days before oral
surgery. PT is obtained; INR of 1.5 is considered safe for surgery. For people receiving hemodialysis,
dental procedures should be done the day after dialysis, when heparinization has subsided.
Phenytoin and Ca channel blockers, particularly nifedipine, contribute to gingival hyperplasia; however,
this hyperplasia is minimized with excellent oral hygiene and frequent oral prophylaxes (cleanings).
Bisphosphonates, primarily when given parenterally for treatment of bone cancer, and to a much lesser
degree when used orally to prevent osteoporosis, can result in osteonecrosis after an extraction (see
Sidebar 39-1
.
Radiation therapy:
(CAUTION:
Extraction of teeth from irradiated tissues [particularly if the total dose
was
>
65 Gy, especially in the mandible] is commonly followed by osteoradionecrosis of the jaw. This
is a catastrophic complication in which extraction sites break down, frequently sloughing bone and soft
tissue.
) Thus, if possible, patients should have any necessary dental treatment completed before
undergoing radiation therapy of the head and neck region, with time allowed for healing. Teeth that may
not survive should be extracted. Necessary sealants and topical fluoride should be applied. After
radiation, extraction should be avoided, if possible, by using dental restorations and root canal treatment
instead.
Head and neck radiation often damages salivary glands, causing xerostomia, which promotes caries.
Patients must therefore practice lifelong good oral hygiene. A fluoride gel and fluoride mouth rinse should
be used daily. Rinsing with 0.12% chlorhexidine for 30 to 60 sec, if tolerated, can be done in the morning
and at bedtime. Viscous lidocaine may enable a patient with sensitive oral tissues to brush and floss the
teeth and eat. A dentist must be seen at 3-, 4-, or 6-mo intervals, depending on findings at the last
examination. Irradiated tissue under dentures is likely to break down, so dentures should be checked and
adjusted whenever discomfort is noted. Early caries may also be reversed by Ca phosphopeptides and
amorphous Ca phosphate, which can be applied by a dentist or prescribed to a patient for at-home use.
Patients who undergo radiation therapy may develop oral mucosal inflammation and diminished taste as
well as trismus due to fibrosis of
the masticatory muscles. Trismus may be minimized by such exercises
as opening and closing the mouth widely 20 times 3 or 4 times/day. Extractions of teeth in irradiated bone
===PAGE:617===
should be avoided (because of possible osteoradionecrosis). Sometimes root canal therapy is done, and
the tooth is ground down to the gum line. If extraction is required after radiation, 10 to 20 treatments in a
hyperbaric O
chamber may forestall or prevent osteoradionecrosis.
Bruxism
Bruxism is clenching or grinding of teeth. Bruxism can abrade and eventually wear down dental crowns
and loosen teeth. In many people, headaches, jaw pain, or both actually are the result of bruxism. The
most severe and extensive grinding and clenching occurs during sleep, so the person may be oblivious to
it, but family members might notice.
Treatment requires that the patient consciously try to reduce bruxism while awake. Plastic oral appliances
(night guards) that prevent occlusal contact by fitting between the teeth can be used while sleeping.
When symptoms are severe, a guard can be used also during the day. Usually, such devices are made by
dentists. However, if the only problem is tooth wear, OTC heat-moldable devices, fitted at home, are
available. Mild anxiolytics, particularly benzodiazepines, may help until a night guard is available but
should not be used for extended periods.
Halitosis
(Fetor Oris; Oral Malodor)
Halitosis is a frequent or persistent unpleasant odor to the breath.
Pathophysiology
Halitosis most often results from fermentation of food particles by anaerobic gram-negative bacteria in the
mouth, producing volatile sulfur compounds such as hydrogen sulfide and methyl mercaptan. Causative
bacteria may be present in areas of gingival or periodontal disease, particularly when ulceration or
necrosis is present. The causative organisms reside deep in periodontal pockets around teeth. In patients
with healthy periodontal tissue, these bacteria may deposit on the dorsal posterior tongue.
Factors contributing to the overgrowth of causative bacteria include decreased salivary flow (eg, due to
parotid disease, Sjogren's syndrome, use of anticholinergics—, salivary stagnation, and
increased salivary pH.
Certain foods or spices, after digestion, release the odor of that substance to the lungs; the exhaled odor
may be unpleasant to others. For example, the odor of garlic is noted on the breath by others 2 or 3 h
after consumption, long after it is gone from the mouth.
Etiology
About 85% of cases result from oral conditions. A variety of systemic and extraoral conditions account for
the remainder (see
Table 56-5
).
The
most common causes
overall are the following:
• Gingival or periodontal disease
• Smoking
• Ingested foods that have a volatile component
GI disorders rarely cause halitosis because the esophagus is normally collapsed. It is a fallacy that breath
odor reflects the state of digestion and bowel function.
Other breath odors:
Several systemic diseases produce volatile substances detectable on the breath,
===PAGE:618===
although not the particularly foul, pungent odors typically considered halitosis. Diabetic ketoacidosis
produces a sweet or fruity odor of acetone; liver failure produces a mousy or sometimes faintly sulfurous
odor; and renal failure produces an odor of urine or ammonia.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should ascertain duration and severity of halitosis (including
whether other people have noticed or complained), adequacy of patient's oral hygiene, and the
relationship of halitosis to ingestion of causative foods (see
Table 56-5
).
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including nasal discharge and face
or head pain (sinusitis, nasal foreign body); productive cough and fevers (pulmonary infection); and
regurgitation of undigested food when lying down or bending over (Zenker's diverticulum). Predisposing
factors such as dry mouth, dry eyes, or both (Sjogren's syndrome) should be noted.
Past medical history
should ask about duration and amount of use of alcohol and tobacco. Drug history
should specifically ask about use of those that can cause dry mouth.
[Table 56-5.
Some Causes of Halitosis]
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed, particularly for presence of fever.
The nose is examined for discharge and foreign body.
The mouth is examined for signs of gum disease, dental infection, and cancer. Signs of apparent dryness
are noted (eg, whether the mucosa is dry, sticky, or moist; whether saliva is foamy, stringy, or normal in
appearance).
The pharynx is examined for signs of infection and cancer.
Sniff test:
A sniff test of exhaled air is conducted. In general, oral causes result in a putrefying, pungent
smell, whereas systemic conditions result in a more subtle, abnormal odor. Ideally, for 48 h before the
examination, the patient avoids eating garlic or onions, and for 2 h before, the patient abstains from
eating,
chewing, drinking, gargling, rinsing, or smoking. During the test, the patient exhales 10 cm away
from the examiner's nose, first through the mouth and then with the mouth closed. A worse odor through
the mouth suggests an oral etiology. A worse odor through the nose suggests a nasal or sinus etiology.
Similar odor through both nose and mouth suggests a systemic or pulmonary cause. If site of origin is
unclear, the posterior tongue is scraped with a plastic spoon. After 5 sec, the spoon is sniffed 5 cm from
the examiner's nose.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Fever
• Purulent nasal discharge or sputum
• Visible or palpable oral lesions
Interpretation of findings:
Because oral causes are by far the most common, any visible oral disease
may be presumed to be the cause in patients with no extraoral symptoms or signs. When other disorders
are involved, clinical findings often suggest a diagnosis (see
Table 56-5
).
In patients whose symptoms seem to be related to intake of certain substances and who have no other
findings, a trial of avoidance may clarify the diagnosis.
Testing:
Extensive diagnostic evaluation should not be undertaken unless the history and physical
examination suggest an underlying disease (see
Table 56-5
). Portable sulfur monitors, gas
chromatography, and chemical tests of tongue scrapings are available but best left to research protocols
===PAGE:619===
or the occasional dental office that focuses on halitosis.
Treatment
Underlying diseases are treated.
If the cause is oral, the patient should see a dentist for professional cleaning and treatment of gingival
disease and caries. Home treatment involves enhanced oral hygiene, including thorough flossing,
toothbrushing, and brushing of the tongue with the toothbrush or a scraper. Mouthwashes are of limited
benefit except to mask odor for about 20 min. Psychogenic halitosis may require psychiatric consultation.
Geriatrics Essentials
Elderly patients are more likely to take drugs that cause dry mouth, which leads to difficulties with oral
hygiene and hence to halitosis, but are otherwise not more likely to have halitosis. Also, oral cancers are
more common with aging and are more of a concern among elderly than younger patients.
Key Points
• Most halitosis comes from fermentation of food particles by anaerobic gram-negative bacteria in the
mouth.
• Extraoral disorders may cause halitosis but are often accompanied by suggestive findings.
• It is a fallacy that breath odor reflects the state of digestion and bowel function.
• Mouthwashes provide only brief benefit.
Malocclusion
Malocclusion is abnormal contact between the maxillary and mandibular teeth.
Normally, each dental arch consists of teeth in side-by-side contact, forming a smooth curve, with the
maxillary anterior teeth overlying the upper third of the mandibular anterior teeth. The buccal (outer)
cusps of the maxillary posterior teeth are external to the corresponding cusps of the mandibular posterior
teeth. On each side of the mouth, the anterior buccal cusp of the maxillary 1st permanent molar fits into
the anterior buccal groove of the mandibular 1st molar. Because the outer parts of all maxillary teeth are
normally external to the mandibular teeth, the lips and cheeks are displaced from between the teeth so
that they are not bitten. The lingual (inner) surfaces of the lower teeth form a smaller arc than those of the
upper teeth, confining the tongue and minimizing the likelihood of its being bitten. All the maxillary teeth
should contact the corresponding mandibular teeth, so that the masticatory forces (which may be > 150 lb
in the molar region and 250 lb when clenching during sleep) are widely distributed. If these forces are
applied to only a few teeth, those teeth will eventually loosen.
Etiology
Malocclusion often results from jaw and tooth size discrepancies (ie, the jaw is too small or the teeth are
too large for the jaw to accommodate them in proper alignment) but may be caused by a number of
congenital deformities and disorders or by tooth loss. When permanent teeth are lost, adjacent teeth shift
and opposing teeth extrude, causing malocclusion unless a bridge, implant, or partial denture is worn to
prevent these movements. When children lose deciduous teeth prematurely, the teeth more posterior in
the arch or the permanent 1st molars often drift forward, leaving insufficient space for other permanent
teeth to erupt. Malocclusion after
facial trauma may indicate tooth displacement or jaw fracture. In
ectodermal dysplasia, malocclusion results from having too few teeth.
Evaluation
Occlusion is checked on both sides of the mouth by retracting each cheek with a tongue depressor while
===PAGE:620===
telling the patient to close on the back teeth. Malocclusion sometimes is identified as early as the first
dental visit. Early identification may make later treatment easier and more effective.
Treatment
Malocclusions are corrected primarily for aesthetic and psychologic reasons. However, in some cases,
treatment may increase resistance to caries (in specific teeth), to anterior tooth fracture, and, possibly, to
periodontal disease or stripping of the gingiva on the palate. Treatment may improve speech and
mastication as well. Occlusion can be improved by aligning teeth properly, by selectively grinding teeth
and restorations that contact prematurely, and by inserting crowns or onlays to build up tooth surfaces
that are below the plane of occlusion.
Orthodontic appliances (braces) apply a continuous mild force to teeth to gradually remodel the
surrounding alveolar bone. Extraction of one or more permanent teeth (usually a 1st premolar) may be
needed to allow other teeth to be repositioned or to erupt into a stable alignment. After the teeth are
properly aligned, the patient wears a plastic-and-wire retainer 24 h/day initially, then only at night for 2 to
3 yr.
When orthodontic treatment alone is insufficient, surgical correction of jaw abnormalities contributing to
malocclusion (orthognathic surgery) may be indicated.
Stomatitis
Oral inflammation and ulcers, known as stomatitis, may be mild and localized or severe and widespread.
They are invariably painful. Stomatitis may involve swelling and redness of the oral mucosa or discrete,
painful ulcers (single or multiple). Less commonly, whitish lesions form, and, rarely, the mouth appears
normal (burning mouth syndrome) despite significant symptoms. Symptoms hinder eating, sometimes
leading to dehydration and malnutrition. Secondary infection occasionally occurs. Some conditions are
recurrent.
Etiology
Stomatitis may be caused by local infection, systemic disease, a physical or chemical irritant, or an
allergic reaction (see
Table 56-6
); many cases are idiopathic. Because the normal flow of saliva protects the mucosa against
many insults, xerostomia predisposes the mouth to stomatitis of any cause.
The
most common specific causes
overall include
• Recurrent aphthous stomatitis (RAS)—also called recurrent aphthous ulcers (RAU)
• Viral infections, particularly herpes simplex and herpes zoster
• Other infectious agents (
Candida albicans
and bacteria)
• Trauma
• Tobacco
• Chemotherapy and radiation therapy
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should ascertain the duration of symptoms and whether the patient
ever had them previously. Presence and severity of pain should be noted. The relation of symptoms to
food, drugs, and other substances (particularly occupational exposure to chemicals, metals, fumes, or
dust) is sought.
===PAGE:621===
Review of systems
seeks symptoms of possible causes, including chronic diarrhea and weakness
(inflammatory bowel disease, celiac sprue); genital lesions (Behcet's syndrome, syphilis); eye irritation
(Behcet's syndrome); and weight loss, malaise, and fever (nonspecific chronic illness).
Past medical history
should ascertain known conditions that cause oral lesions, including herpes
simplex, Behcet's syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, and risk factors for oral lesions, including
immunocompromised state (eg, cancer, diabetes, organ transplant, use of immunosuppressants, HIV
infection). Whether chemotherapy or radiation therapy has ever been used to manage cancer needs to be
determined. Drug history should note all recent drugs used. History of tobacco use should be noted.
Social history should include sexual contact, particularly oral sex, unprotected sex, and sex with multiple
partners.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for fever. The patient's general appearance is noted for
lethargy, discomfort, or other signs of significant systemic illness.
The mouth is inspected for the location and nature of any lesions.
The skin and other mucosal surfaces (including the genitals) are inspected for any lesions,
[Table 56-6.
Some Causes of Stomatitis]
rash, petechiae, or desquamation. Any bullous lesions are rubbed for Nikolsky's sign (peeling of
epithelium with lateral pressure).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Fever
• Cutaneous bullae
• Ocular inflammation
• Immunocompromise
Interpretation of findings:
Occasionally, causes are obvious in the history (eg, cytotoxic chemotherapy;
significant occupational exposure to chemicals, fumes, or dust). Recurrent episodes of oral lesions occur
with RAS, herpes simplex, and Behcet's syndrome. History of diabetes, HIV infection or other
immunocompromise, or recent antibiotic use should increase suspicion of
Candida
infection. Recent drug
use (particularly sulfa drugs, other antibiotics, and antiepileptics) should increase suspicion of StevensJohnson syndrome (SJS).
Some causes typically have
extraoral, noncutaneous findings
, some of which suggest a cause.
Recurrent GI symptoms suggest inflammatory bowel disease or celiac sprue. Ocular symptoms can occur
with Behcet's syndrome and SJS. Genital lesions may occur with Behcet's syndrome and primary syphilis.
Some causes usually also have
extraoral, cutaneous findings
.
Cutaneous bullae suggest SJS, pemphigus vulgaris, or bullous pemphigoid. Prodrome of malaise, fever,
conjunctivitis, and generalized macular target lesions suggests SJS. Pemphigus vulgaris starts with oral
lesions, then progresses to flaccid cutaneous bullae. Bullous pemphigoid has tense bullae on normalappearing skin. Nikolsky's sign is usually positive in SJS and pemphigus vulgaris.
Cutaneous vesicles are typical with chickenpox or herpes zoster. Unilateral lesions in a band after a
dermatome suggest herpes zoster. Diffuse, scattered vesicular and pustular lesions in different stages
suggest chickenpox.
Kawasaki disease usually has a macular rash, desquamation of hands and feet, and conjunctivitis; it
occurs in children, usually those < 5 yr. Oral findings include erythema of the lips and oral mucosa.
===PAGE:622===
Other cutaneous lesions may implicate erythema multiforme, hand-foot-and-mouth disease (from
coxsackievirus), or secondary syphilis.
Some causes have
isolated oral findings
, including RAS, most viral infections, acute necrotizing
ulcerative gingivitis, primary syphilis, gonorrhea, and
Candida
.
Location of oral lesions may help identify the cause. Interdental ulcers occur with primary herpes simplex
or acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis. Lesions on keratinized surfaces suggest herpes simplex, RAS, or
physical injury. Physical injury typically has an irregular appearance and occurs near projections of teeth,
dental appliances, or where biting can injure the mucosa. An aspirin burn next to a tooth and pizza burn
on the palate are common.
Primary herpes simplex infection causes multiple vesicular lesions on the intraoral mucosa on both
keratinized and nonkeratinized surfaces and always includes the gingiva. These lesions rapidly ulcerate.
Clinical manifestation occurs most often in children. Subsequent reactivations (secondary herpes simplex,
cold sore) usually appear starting in puberty on the lip at the vermilion border and, rarely, on the hard
palate.
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis causes severe inflammation and punched-out ulcers on the dental
papillae and marginal gingivae. A severe variant called noma (gangrenous stomatitis) can cause fullthickness tissue destruction (sometimes involving the lips or cheek), typically in a debilitated patient. It
begins as a gingival, buccal, or palatal (midline lethal granuloma) ulcer that becomes necrotic and
spreads rapidly. Tissue sloughing may occur.
Isolated oral gonorrhea very rarely causes burning ulcers and erythema of the gingiva and tongue, as
well as the more common pharyngitis. Primary syphilis chancres may appear in the mouth. Tertiary
syphilis may cause oral gummas or a generalized glossitis and mucosal atrophy. The site of a gumma is
the only time that squamous cell carcinoma develops on the dorsum of the tongue. A common sign of HIV
becoming AIDS is hairy leukoplakia (vertical white lines on the lateral border of the tongue).
C. albicans
and related species, which are normal oral flora, can overgrow in people who have taken
antibiotics or corticosteroids or who are immunocompromised, such as patients with AIDS.
C. albicans
can cause whitish, cheesy plaques that leave erosions when wiped off. Sometimes only flat,
erythematous areas appear (erosive form of
Candida
).
Testing:
Patients with acute stomatitis and no symptoms, signs, or risk factors for systemic illness
probably require no testing.
If stomatitis is recurrent, viral and bacterial cultures, CBC, serum iron, ferritin, vitamin B
, folate, zinc,
and endomysial antibody (for sprue) are done. Biopsy at the periphery of
normal and abnormal tissue can
be done for persistent lesions that do not have an obvious etiology.
Systematically eliminating foods from the diet can be useful, as can changing brands of toothpaste,
chewing gum, or mouthwash.
Treatment
Specific disorders are treated, and any causative substances or drugs are avoided.
Meticulous oral hygiene (using a soft toothbrush) may help prevent secondary infection. A soft diet that
does not include acidic or salty foods is followed.
Topical measures:
Numerous topical treatments, alone or in combination, are used to ease symptoms.
These treatments include
• Anesthetics
===PAGE:623===
• Protective coatings
• Corticosteroids
• Antibiotics
• Physical measures (eg, cautery)
For topical anesthesia of discomfort that may interfere with eating and drinking, the following may be
effective:
• Lidocaine rinse
• Sucralfate plus aluminum-magnesium antacid rinse
A 2-min rinse is done with 15 mL (1 tbsp) 2% viscous lidocaine q 3 h prn; patient expectorates when done
(no rinsing with water and no swallowing unless the pharynx is involved). A soothing coating may be
prepared with sucralfate (1-g pill dissolved in 15 mL water) plus 30 mL of aluminum-magnesium liquid
antacid; the patient should rinse with or without swallowing. Many institutions and pharmacies have their
own variation of this formulation (magic mouthwash), which sometimes also contains an antihistamine.
If the physician is certain the inflammation is not caused by an infectious organism, the patient can
• Rinse and expectorate after meals with dexamethasone elixir 0.5 mg/5 mL (1 tsp)
• Apply a paste of 0.1% triamcinolone in an oral emollient
• Wipe amlexanox over the ulcerated area with the tip of a finger
Chemical or physical cautery can ease pain of localized lesions. Silver nitrate sticks are not as effective
as low-power (2- to 3-watt), defocused, pulsed-mode CO
laser treatments, after which pain relief is
immediate and lesions tend not to recur locally.
Key Points
• Isolated stomatitis in patients with no other symptoms and signs or risk factors for systemic illness is
usually caused by a viral infection or RAS.
• Extraoral symptoms, skin rash, or both suggest more immediate need for diagnosis.
Recurrent Aphthous Stomatitis
Recurrent aphthous stomatitis is a common condition in which round or ovoid painful ulcers
recur on the oral mucosa. Etiology is unclear. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is symptomatic
and usually includes topical corticosteroids.
Recurrent aphthous stomatitis (RAS) affects 20 to 30% of adults and a greater percentage of children at
some time in their life.
Etiology
Etiology is unclear, but RAS tends to run in families. The damage is predominately cell-mediated.
Cytokines, such as IL-2, IL-10, and, particularly, tumor necrosis factorα
, play a role.
Predisposing factors
include
• Oral trauma
===PAGE:624===
• Stress
• Foods, particularly chocolate, coffee, peanuts, eggs, cereals, almonds, strawberries, cheese, and
tomatoes
Allergy does not seem to be involved.
Factors that may, for unknown reasons, be
protective
include oral contraceptives, pregnancy, and
tobacco, including smokeless tobacco and nicotine-containing tablets.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs usually begin in childhood (80% of patients are < 30 yr) and decrease in frequency
and severity with aging. Symptoms may involve as few as one ulcer 2 to 4 times/yr or almost continuous
disease, with new ulcers forming as old ones heal. A prodrome of pain or burning for 1 to 2 days
precedes ulcers, but there are no antecedent vesicles or bullae. Severe pain, disproportionate to the size
of the lesion, can last from 4 to 7 days.
Ulcers are well-demarcated, shallow, ovoid, or round and have a necrotic center with a yellow-gray
pseudomembrane, a red halo, and slightly raised red margins.
Minor aphthae
(Mikulicz's disease) account for 85% of cases. They occur on the floor of
the mouth,
lateral and ventral tongue, buccal mucosa, and pharynx; are < 8 mm (typically 2 to 3 mm); and heal in 10
days without scarring.
Major aphthae
(Sutton's disease, periadenitis mucosa necrotica recurrens) constitute 10% of cases.
Appearing after puberty, the prodrome is more intense and the ulcers are deeper, larger (> 1 cm), and
longer lasting (weeks to months) than minor aphthae. They appear in the lips, soft palate, and throat.
Fever, dysphagia, malaise, and scarring may occur.
Herpetiform ulcers
(morphologically resembling but unrelated to herpesvirus) account for 5% of cases.
They begin as multiple (up to 100) 1- to 3-mm crops of small, painful clusters of ulcers on an
erythematous base. They coalesce to form larger ulcers that last 2 wk. They tend to occur in women and
at a later age of onset than do other forms of RAS.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Evaluation proceeds as described previously under stomatitis (. Diagnosis is based on
appearance and on exclusion, because there are no definitive histologic features or laboratory tests.
Primary oral herpes simplex may mimic RAS but usually occurs in younger children, always involves the
gingiva and may affect any keratinized mucosa (hard palate, attached gingiva, dorsum of tongue), and is
associated with systemic symptoms. Viral culture can be done to identify herpes simplex. Recurrent
herpetic lesions are usually unilateral.
Similar recurrent episodes can occur with Behcet's syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, sprue, HIV
infection, and nutritional deficiencies; these conditions generally have systemic symptoms and signs.
Isolated recurrent oral ulcers can occur with herpes infection, HIV, and, rarely, nutritional deficiency. Viral
testing and serum hematologic tests can identify these conditions.
Drug reactions may mimic RAS but are usually temporally related to ingestion. However, reactions to
foods or dental products may be difficult to identify; sequential elimination may be necessary.
Treatment
• Topical chlorhexidine and corticosteroids
===PAGE:625===
General treatments for stomatitis ( may help patients with RAS. Chlorhexidine gluconate
mouthwashes and topical corticosteroids, the mainstays of therapy, should be used during the prodrome,
if possible. The corticosteroid can be dexamethasone 0.5 mg/5 mL tid used as a rinse and then
expectorated or clobetasol ointment 0.05% or fluocinonide ointment 0.05% in carboxymethylcellulose
mucosal protective paste (1:1) applied tid. Patients using these corticosteroids should be monitored for
candidiasis. If topical corticosteroids are ineffective, prednisone (eg, 40 mg po once/day) may be needed
for ≤ 5 days. Continuous or particularly severe RAS is best treated by a specialist in oral medicine.
Treatment may require prolonged use of systemic corticosteroids, azathioprine or other
immunosuppressants, pentoxifylline, or thalidomide. Intralesional injections can be done with
betamethasone, dexamethasone, or triamcinolone. Supplemental B
, B
, B
, B
, folate, or iron lessens
RAS in some patients.
Xerostomia
Xerostomia is dry mouth caused by reduced or absent flow of saliva. This condition can result in
discomfort, interfere with speech and swallowing, make wearing dentures difficult, cause halitosis, and
impair oral hygiene by causing a decrease in oral pH and an increase in bacterial growth. Longstanding
xerostomia can result in severe tooth decay and oral candidiasis. Xerostomia is a common complaint
among older adults, affecting about 20% of the elderly.
Pathophysiology
Stimulation of the oral mucosa signals the salivatory nuclei in the medulla, triggering an efferent
response. The efferent nerve impulses release acetylcholine at salivary gland nerve terminals, activating
muscarinic receptors (M
), which increase saliva production and flow. Medullary signals responsible for
salivation may also be modulated by cortical inputs from other stimuli (eg, taste, smell, anxiety).
Etiology
Xerostomia is usually caused by the following:
• Drugs
• Radiation to the head and neck (for cancer treatment)
Systemic disorders are less commonly the cause, but xerostomia is common in Sjogren's syndrome and
may occur in HIV/AIDS, uncontrolled diabetes, and certain other disorders.
Drugs:
Drugs are the most common cause (see
Table 56-7
); about 400 prescription drugs
[Table 56-7.
Some Causes of Xerostomia]
and many OTC drugs cause decreased salivation. The most common include the following:
• Anticholinergics
• Antiparkinsonians
• Antineoplastics (chemotherapy)
Chemotherapy drugs cause severe dryness and stomatitis while they are being taken; these problems
usually end after therapy is stopped.
Other common drug classes that cause xerostomia include antihypertensives, anxiolytics, and
antidepressants (less severe with SSRIs than with tricyclics).
===PAGE:626===
The rise of illicit methamphetamine use has resulted in an increasing incidence of meth mouth, which is
severe tooth decay caused by methamphetamine-induced xerostomia. The damage is exacerbated by the
bruxing and clenching caused by the drug. This combination causes very rapid destruction of teeth.
Tobacco use usually causes a decrease of saliva.
Radiation:
Incidental radiation to the salivary glands during radiation therapy for head and neck cancer
often causes severe xerostomia (5200 cGy causes severe, permanent dryness, but even low doses can
cause temporary drying).
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should include acuity of onset, temporal patterns (eg, constant vs
intermittent, presence only on awakening), provoking factors, including situational or psychogenic factors
(eg, whether xerostomia occurs only during periods of psychologic stress or certain activities),
assessment of fluid status (eg, fluid intake habits, recurrent vomiting or diarrhea), and sleeping habits.
Use of recreational drugs should be specifically elicited.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including dry eyes, dry skin, rashes,
and joint pain (Sjogren's syndrome).
Past medical history
should inquire about conditions associated with xerostomia, including Sjogren's
syndrome, history of radiation treatment, head and neck trauma, and a diagnosis of or risk factors for HIV
infection. Drug profiles should be reviewed for potential offending drugs (see
Table 56-7
).
Physical examination:
Physical examination is focused on the oral cavity, specifically any apparent
dryness (eg, whether the mucosa is dry, sticky, or moist; whether saliva is foamy, stringy, or normal in
appearance), the presence of any lesions caused by
Candida albicans
, and the condition of the teeth.
The presence and severity of xerostomia can be assessed at the bedside in several ways. For example, a
tongue blade can be held against the buccal mucosa for 10 sec. If the tongue blade falls off immediately
when released, salivary flow is normal. The more difficulty encountered removing the tongue blade, the
more severe the xerostomia. In women, the lipstick sign, where lipstick adheres to the front teeth, may be
a useful indicator of xerostomia.
If there appears to be dryness, the submandibular, sublingual, and parotid glands should be palpated
while observing the ductal openings for saliva flow. The openings are at the base of the tongue anteriorly
for the submandibular glands and on the middle of the inside
of the cheek for the parotid glands. Drying
the duct openings with a gauze square before palpation aids observation. If a graduated container is
available, the patient can expectorate once to empty the mouth and then expectorate all saliva into the
container. Normal production is 0.3 to 0.4 mL/min. Significant xerostomia is 0.1 mL/min.
Dental caries may be sought at the margins of restorations or in unusual places (eg, at the neck or tip of
the tooth).
The most common manifestation of
C. albicans
infection is areas of erythema and atrophy (eg, on the
dorsum of the tongue). Less common is the better-known white, cheesy curd that bleeds when wiped off.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Extensive tooth decay
• Concomitant dry eyes, dry skin, rash, or joint pain
• Risk factors for HIV
Interpretation of findings:
Xerostomia is diagnosed by symptoms, appearance, and absence of salivary
flow when massaging the salivary glands.
===PAGE:627===
No further assessment is required when xerostomia occurs after initiation of a new drug and stops after
cessation of that drug or when symptoms appear within several weeks of irradiation of the head and
neck. Xerostomia that occurs with abrupt onset after head and neck trauma is caused by nerve damage.
Concomitant presence of dry eyes, dry skin, rash, or joint pain, particularly in a female patient, suggests a
diagnosis of Sjogren's syndrome. Severe tooth decay, out of proportion to expected findings, may be
indicative of illicit drug use, particularly methamphetamines. Xerostomia that occurs only during nighttime
or that is noted only on awakening may be indicative of excessive mouth breathing in a dry environment.
Testing:
For those in whom the presence of xerostomia is unclear, sialometry can be conducted by
placing collection devices over the major duct orifices and then stimulating salivary production with citric
acid or by chewing paraffin. Normal parotid flow is 0.4 to 1.5 mL/min/gland. Flow monitoring can also help
determine response to therapy.
The cause of xerostomia is often apparent, but if the etiology is unclear and systemic disease is
considered possible, further assessment should be pursued with biopsy of a minor salivary gland (for
detection of Sjogren's syndrome, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, TB, or cancer) and HIV testing.
Treatment
When possible, the cause of xerostomia should be addressed and treated.
For patients with drug-related xerostomia whose therapy cannot be changed to another drug, drug
schedules should be modified to achieve maximum drug effect during the day, because nighttime
xerostomia is more likely to cause caries. For all drugs, easy-to-take formulations, such as liquids, should
be considered, and sublingual dosage forms should be avoided. The mouth and throat should be
lubricated with water before swallowing capsules and tablets or before using sublingual nitroglycerin.
Patients should avoid decongestants and antihistamines.
Patients using continuous positive airway pressure for obstructive sleep apnea may benefit from
humidifying the source air (room humidifier for those using oral appliance therapy).
Symptom control:
Symptomatic treatment consists of measures that do the following:
• Increase existing saliva
• Replace lost secretions
• Control caries
Drugs that augment saliva production include cevimeline and pilocarpine, both cholinergic agonists.
Cevimeline (30 mg po tid) has less M
(cardiac) receptor activity than pilocarpine and a longer half-life.
The main adverse effect is nausea. Pilocarpine (5 mg po tid) may be given after ophthalmologic and
cardiorespiratory contraindications are excluded; adverse effects include sweating, flushing, and polyuria.
Sipping sugarless fluids frequently, chewing xylitol-containing gum, and using an OTC saliva substitute
containing carboxymethylcellulose or hydroxyethylcellulose may help. Petroleum jelly can be applied to
the lips and under dentures to relieve drying, cracking, soreness, and mucosal trauma. A cold-air
humidifier may aid mouth breathers who typically have their worst symptoms at night.
Meticulous oral hygiene is essential. Patients should brush and floss regularly and use fluoride rinses or
gels daily; using newer toothpastes with added Ca and phosphorous also may help avoid rampant caries.
An increased frequency of preventive dental visits with plaque removal is advised. The most effective way
to prevent caries is to sleep with individually fitted carriers containing 1.1% Na fluoride or 0.4% stannous
fluoride. If 2 carriers cannot be worn at once, then each arch should be covered every other night. In
addition, a dentist can apply a 5% Na fluoride varnish 2 to 4 times/yr.
Patients should avoid sugary or acidic foods and beverages and any irritating foods that are dry, spicy,
===PAGE:628===
astringent, or excessively hot or cold.
Geriatrics Essentials
Although dry mouth becomes more common among the elderly, this is probably due to the many drugs
typically used by the elderly rather than aging itself.
Key Points
• Drugs are the most common cause, but systemic diseases (most commonly Sjogren's syndrome or HIV)
and radiation therapy also can cause xerostomia.
• Symptomatic treatment includes increasing existing saliva flow with stimulants or drugs, and artificial
saliva replacement. Xylitol-containing gum and candy may be useful.
• Patients with xerostomia are at high risk of tooth decay; meticulous oral hygiene and professionally
applied fluorides are essential.
===PAGE:629===
Chapter 57. Common Dental Disorders
Introduction
Common dental disorders include caries, gingivitis, periodontitis, and pulpitis. Dental emergencies, such
as toothache, fractured or avulsed teeth, and postextraction complications, are discussed in
Chapter 58
.
Caries
Caries is tooth decay, commonly called cavities. The symptoms—tender, painful teeth—appear
late. Diagnosis is based on inspection, probing of the enamel surface with a fine metal
instrument, and dental x-rays. Treatment involves removing affected tooth structure and
restoring it with various materials. Fluoride, diligent dental hygiene, sealants, and proper diet
can prevent virtually all caries.
Etiology
Caries is caused by acids produced by bacteria in dental plaque. Plaque is, at first, a soft, thin film of
bacteria, mucin, dead epithelial cells, and food debris that develops on the tooth surface within about 24 h
after the tooth is cleaned.
Mutans streptococci
is a group of related bacteria that grow in plaque and can
cause caries. Some strains are more cariogenic than others. Eventually (commonly, after 72 h), soft
plaque mineralizes, mainly with Ca, phosphate, and other minerals, becoming calculus (hard plaque or
tartar), which cannot easily be removed with a toothbrush.
Risk factors:
There are several risk factors for caries:
• Dental defects
• High-acid or low-fluoride environment
• Reduced salivary flow
Many teeth have open enamel pits, fissures, and grooves, which may extend from the surface to the
dentin. These defects may be wide enough to harbor bacteria but too narrow to clean effectively. They
predispose teeth to caries. Large amounts of sugar in the diet provide nutrients for plaque-forming
bacteria.
A tooth surface is more susceptible to caries when it is poorly calcified, has low fluoride exposure, or is in
an acidic environment. Typically, decalcification begins when the pH at the tooth falls below 5.5 (eg, when
lactic acid-producing bacteria colonize the area or when people drink cola beverages, which contain
phosphoric acid).
Rampant caries in deciduous teeth suggests prolonged contact with infant formula, milk, or juice, typically
when an infant goes to bed with a bottle (baby or nursing bottle caries). Thus, bedtime bottles should
contain only water.
The elderly often take drugs that reduce salivary flow, predisposing to caries. The elderly also have a
higher incidence of root caries because of gingival recession, exposure of root surfaces, and declining
manual dexterity.
Complications:
Untreated caries leads to tooth destruction, infections, and the need for extractions and
replacement prostheses. Premature loss of deciduous teeth may shift the adjacent teeth, hindering
eruption of their permanent successors.
Symptoms and Signs
Caries initially involves only the enamel and causes no symptoms. A cavity that invades the dentin causes
pain, first when hot, cold, or
sweet foods or beverages contact the involved tooth, and later with chewing
===PAGE:630===
pain, first when hot, cold, or
sweet foods or beverages contact the involved tooth, and later with chewing
or percussion. Pain can be intense and persistent when the pulp is severely involved (see
Pulpitis
.
Diagnosis
• Direct inspection
• Sometimes use of x-rays or special testing instruments
Routine, frequent (q 6 to 12 mo) clinical evaluation identifies early caries at a time when minimal
intervention prevents its progression. A thin probe, sometimes special dyes, and transillumination by
fiberoptic lights are used, frequently supplemented by new devices that detect caries by changes in
electrical conductivity or laser reflectivity. However, x-rays are still important for detecting caries,
determining the depth of involvement, and identifying caries under existing restorations.
Treatment
• Restorative therapy
• Sometimes a root canal and crown
Incipient caries (which is confined to the enamel) should be remineralized through improved home care
(brushing and flossing), cleanings, prescriptions for high-fluoride toothpastes, and multiple fluoride
applications at the dental office.
The primary treatment of caries that has entered dentin is removal by drilling, followed by filling of the
resultant defect. For very deep cavities, a temporary filling may be left in place 6 to 10 wk in the hope that
a tooth will deposit reparative dentin, preventing exposure of the pulp, which necessitates root canal
treatment.
Fillings for occlusal surfaces of posterior teeth, which bear the brunt of mastication, must be composed of
strong materials. The most common material has been silver amalgam, which combines silver, mercury,
copper, tin, and, occasionally, zinc, palladium, or indium. Amalgam is inexpensive and lasts an average of
14 yr. However, if oral hygiene is good and if amalgam was placed using a rubber dam for isolation from
saliva, many amalgam fillings last > 40 yr. Although concern has been raised about mercury poisoning,
the number of amalgam fillings a person has bears no relationship to blood mercury levels. Replacing
amalgam is not recommended because it is expensive, damages tooth structure, and actually increases
patient exposure to mercury.
Composite resins, which have a more acceptable appearance, have long been used in anterior teeth,
where aesthetics are primary and the forces of chewing are minimal. Some patients request them in
posterior teeth as well, and they are becoming common there. However, composite resins under high
occlusal stress generally last less than half as long as amalgam and tend to develop recurrent decay
because the composite resin shrinks when it hardens and expands and contracts with heat and cold more
than the tooth or other filling materials. The current generation of composites also closely resemble
enamel but do not appear to have the same incidence of recurrent caries as earlier materials and may
also last longer. However, although long-term results with these newer amalgam substitutes appear good,
data equivalent in numbers and duration to those with amalgam are not yet available.
If decay leaves too little dentin to hold a restoration, a dentist replaces the missing dentin with cement,
amalgam, composite, or other materials. Sometimes a post must be inserted into one or more roots to
support a gold, silver, or composite core, which replaces the coronal dentin. This procedure necessitates
a root canal filling, in which an opening is made in the tooth and the pulp is removed. The root canal
system is thoroughly debrided, shaped, and then filled with gutta-percha. The outer tooth surfaces (what
would have been the enamel) are then reduced so that an artificial crown, usually made of gold,
porcelain, or both, can be placed. Crowns for anterior teeth consist of, or are covered with, porcelain.
Prevention
===PAGE:631===
• Regular brushing and flossing
• Fluoride in water, toothpaste, or both
• Regular professional cleanings
• Rarely chlorhexidine rinses and topical fluoride applications
For most people, caries is preventable. Cavities first form on permanent teeth in the early teens to late
20s. Caries-prone people typically have low exposure to fluoride and a relatively cariogenic microflora
acquired from their mothers and through social contact. Maintaining good oral hygiene and minimizing
sugar intake are especially important.
Removal of plaque at least q 24 h, usually by brushing and flossing, helps prevent dental caries. The
gingival third of the tooth is the most important area to clean but is the area most often neglected. Electric
and electronic toothbrushes are excellent, but a manual soft
toothbrush, used for an average of 3 to 4
min, suffices. Using excess toothpaste, particularly an abrasive type, may erode the teeth. Dental floss is
placed between each of the teeth, curved against the side of each tooth, and moved up and down 3
times, going just beneath the gingival margin. Flosses that are very thin (dental tape) or coated with wax
or polytetraethylene can be used for exceptionally tight contacts between teeth or rough filling margins.
Teeth with fluoride incorporated into their enamel are more resistant to acidic decalcification and more
readily recalcify when pH increases. If drinking water is not adequately fluoridated, fluoride supplements
are recommended for children from shortly after birth through age 8 yr and for pregnant women beginning
at 3 mo gestation (when teeth are forming in the fetus). The dose must be selected according to the
amount of fluoride present in the drinking water and the age of the child. The total dose should not be so
high as to cause dental fluorosis (. Fluoridated toothpaste should also be used by people of all
ages.
Fluoridation offers less protection against caries in pits and fissures than against those on smooth
surfaces. Pits and fissures require use of sealants (plastic materials that adhere tightly to the surface of
the enamel) to prevent nutrients from reaching bacteria, reducing their growth and acid production.
If these measures do not decrease cavity formation, more intensive therapy is aimed at changing the
flora. After cavities are treated, pits and fissures, which can harbor
M. streptococci
, are sealed. This
treatment is followed by 60-sec mouth rinses using 0.12% chlorhexidine bid for 2 wk, which may reduce
the cariogenic bacteria in plaque and allow repopulation with less cariogenic strains of
M. streptococci
.
To encourage this repopulation, xylitol in the form of hard candy or chewing gum is used for 5 min tid.
Additionally, topical fluoride may be applied by a dentist or used at night in a custom-made fluoride carrier.
For pregnant women with a history of severe caries, the above regimen may be used before the child's
teeth erupt. If this is not feasible, the mother can use xylitol, as mentioned above, from the time of the
baby's birth to the age at which the mother no longer samples the child's food (the hypothesized mode of
transfer).
For prevention of caries in deciduous teeth (once they have erupted) in infants, bedtime bottles should
contain only water.
Gingivitis
Gingivitis is inflammation of the gingivae, causing bleeding with swelling, redness, exudate, a
change of normal contours, and, occasionally, discomfort. Diagnosis is based on inspection.
Treatment involves professional teeth cleaning and intensified home dental hygiene. Advanced
cases may require antibiotics or surgery.
Normally, the gingivae are firm, tightly adapted to the teeth, and contoured to a point. Keratinized gingiva
near the crowns is pink stippled tissue. This tissue should fill the entire space between the crowns. The
===PAGE:632===
gingiva farther from the crowns, called alveolar mucosa, is nonkeratinized, highly vascular, red, movable,
and continuous with the buccal mucosa. A tongue depressor should express no blood or pus from normal
gingiva.
Inflammation, or gingivitis, the most common gingival problem, may evolve into periodontitis (.
Etiology
The most common cause of gingivitis is poor oral hygiene.
Poor oral hygiene allows plaque to accumulate between the gingiva and the teeth; gingivitis does not
occur in edentulous areas. Irritation due to plaque deepens the normal crevice between the tooth and
gingiva, creating gingival pockets. These pockets contain bacteria that may cause both gingivitis and root
caries. Other local factors, such as malocclusion, dental calculus, food impaction, faulty dental
restorations, and xerostomia, play a secondary role.
Systemic causes:
Gingivitis also commonly occurs at puberty, during menstruation and pregnancy, and
at menopause, presumably because of hormonal changes. Similarly, oral contraceptives may exacerbate
inflammation.
Gingivitis may be an early sign of a systemic disorder, particularly those that affect the response to
infection (eg, diabetes, AIDS, vitamin deficiency, leukopenia), particularly if it occurs in patients with
minimal dental plaque. Some patients with Crohn's disease have a cobblestone area of granulomatous
gingival hypertrophy when intestinal flare-ups occur. Exposure to heavy metals (eg, lead, bismuth) may
cause gingivitis and a dark line at the gingival margin. Severe deficiency of niacin or vitamin C can cause
gingivitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Simple gingivitis first causes a deepening of the sulcus (gingival crevice) between the tooth
and the
gingiva, followed by a band of red, inflamed gingiva along one or more teeth, with swelling of the
interdental papillae and easy bleeding. Pain is usually absent. It may resolve, remain superficial for years,
or occasionally progress to periodontitis.
Pericoronitis is acute, painful inflammation of the gingival flap over a partly erupted tooth, usually around
mandibular 3rd molars (wisdom teeth). Infection is common, and an abscess may develop. Pericoronitis
often recurs as food gets trapped beneath the flap. The gingival flap disappears when the tooth is fully
erupted.
Desquamative gingivitis may occur during menopause. It is characterized by deep red, painful gingival
tissue that bleeds easily. Vesicles may precede desquamation. The gingivae are soft because the
keratinized cells that resist abrasion by food particles are absent. A similar gingival lesion may be
associated with pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, benign mucous membrane pemphigoid, or
atrophic lichen planus.
During pregnancy, swelling, especially of the interdental papillae, is likely to occur. Pedunculated gingival
growths often arise in the interdental papillae during the 1st trimester, may persist throughout pregnancy,
and may or may not subside after delivery. Pregnancy tumors are soft reddish masses that are,
histologically, pyogenic granulomas. They develop rapidly and then remain static. An underlying irritant is
common, such as calculus or a restoration with a rough margin.
Uncontrolled diabetes can exaggerate the effects of gingival irritants, making secondary infections and
acute gingival abscesses common.
In leukemia, the gingivae may become engorged with a leukemic infiltrate, exhibiting clinical symptoms of
edema, pain, and easily induced bleeding.
In scurvy (vitamin C deficiency), the gingivae are inflamed, hyperplastic, and engorged, bleeding easily.
===PAGE:633===
Petechiae and ecchymoses may appear throughout the mouth.
In pellagra (niacin deficiency), the gingivae are inflamed, bleed easily, and are susceptible to secondary
infection. Additionally, the lips are reddened and cracked, the mouth feels scalded, the tongue is smooth
and bright red, and the tongue and mucosa may have ulcerations.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Finding erythematous, friable tissue at the gum lines confirms the diagnosis. To detect early gingival
disease, some dentists frequently measure the depth of the pocket around each tooth. Depths < 3 mm
are normal; deeper pockets are at high risk of gingivitis and periodontitis.
Treatment
• Regular oral hygiene and professional cleaning
Simple gingivitis is controlled by proper oral hygiene with or without an antibacterial mouth rinse.
Thorough scaling (professional cleaning with hand or ultrasonic instruments) should be done. If
appropriate, poorly contoured restorations are reshaped or replaced and local irritants are removed.
Excess gingiva, if present, can be excised. Drugs causing gingival hyperplasia should be stopped if
possible; if not, improved home care and more frequent professional cleanings (at least every 3 mo)
usually reduce the hyperplasia. Pregnancy tumors are excised.
Treatment of pericoronitis consists of
• Removal of debris from under the gingival flap
• Irrigation with saline, 1.5% hydrogen peroxide, or 0.12% chlorhexidine
• Particularly when episodes recur, extraction
If severe infection develops, antibiotics may be given for a day before extraction and continued during
healing. A common regimen is amoxicillin 500 mg po q 6 h for 10 days (or until 3 days after all
inflammation has subsided). Abscesses associated with pericoronitis require localized incision and
drainage, a periodontal flap and root debridement, or extraction.
In gingivitis caused by systemic disorders, treatment is directed at the cause. In desquamative gingivitis
during menopause, sequential administration of estrogens and progestins may be beneficial, but adverse
effects of this therapy ( limit recommendations for its use. Otherwise, dentists may prescribe
a corticosteroid rinse or a corticosteroid paste that is applied directly to the gums. Gingivitis caused by
pemphigus vulgaris ( and similar mucocutaneous conditions may require systemic
corticosteroid therapy.
Prevention
Daily removal of plaque with dental floss and a toothbrush and routine cleaning by a dentist or hygienist
at 6-mo to 1-yr intervals can help minimize gingivitis. Patients with systemic disorders predisposing to
gingivitis require more frequent professional cleanings (from q 2 wk to 4 times/yr).
Acute Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis
(Fusospirochetosis; Trench Mouth; Vincent's Infection or Angina)
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis is a painful infection of the gums. Symptoms are acute
pain, bleeding, and foul breath. Diagnosis is based on clinical findings. Treatment is gentle
debridement, improved oral hygiene, mouth rinses, supportive care, and, if debridement must
===PAGE:634===
be delayed, antibiotics.
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis occurs most frequently in smokers and debilitated patients who are
under stress. Other risk factors are poor oral hygiene, nutritional deficiencies, and sleep deprivation.
Symptoms and Signs
The usually abrupt onset may be accompanied by malaise or fever. The chief manifestations are acutely
painful, bleeding gingivae; excessive salivation; and overwhelmingly foul breath (fetor oris). Ulcerations,
which are pathognomonic, are present on the dental papillae and marginal gingiva; these have a
characteristically punched-out appearance and are covered by a gray pseudomembrane. Similar lesions
on the buccal mucosa and tonsils are rare. Swallowing and talking may be painful. Regional
lymphadenopathy often is present.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Rarely, tonsillar or pharyngeal tissues are affected, and diphtheria or infection due to agranulocytosis
must be ruled out by throat culture and CBC.
Treatment
• Debridement
• Rinses (eg, hydrogen peroxide, chlorhexidine)
• Improved oral hygiene
• Sometimes oral antibiotics
Treatment consists of gentle debridement with a hand scaler or ultrasonic device. Debridement is done
over several days. The patient uses a soft toothbrush to wipe the teeth. Rinses at hourly intervals with
warm normal saline or twice/day with 1.5% hydrogen peroxide or 0.12% chlorhexidine may help during
the first few days after initial debridement. Essential supportive measures include improved oral hygiene
(done gently at first), adequate nutrition, high fluid intake, rest, analgesics as needed, and avoiding
irritation (eg, caused by smoking or hot or spicy foods). Marked improvement usually occurs within 24 to
48 h, after which debridement can be completed. If debridement is delayed (eg, if a dentist or the
instruments necessary for debridement are unavailable), oral antibiotics (eg, amoxicillin 500 mg,
erythromycin 250 mg, or tetracycline 250 mg q 6 h) provide rapid relief and can be continued until 72 h
after symptoms resolve. If the gingival contour inverts (ie, if the tips of papillae are lost) during the acute
phase, surgery is eventually required to prevent subsequent periodontitis.
Other Gingival Disorders
Hyperplasia of gingival tissues may occur without inflammation in response to various drugs, particularly
phenytoin, cyclosporine, and nifedipine or, less commonly, other Ca channel blockers. Hyperplasia is
characterized by diffuse, relatively avascular smooth or nodular enlargement of the gingiva, which may
almost cover some teeth. The hypertrophied tissue is often excised. If possible, substitutions are made for
the offending drugs. Scrupulous oral hygiene may minimize recurrence.
Carcinoma can also originate in the gingiva and spread to regional lymph nodes.
Periodontitis
Periodontitis is an infection of the periodontium—causing inflammation of the periodontal
ligament, gingiva, cementum, and alveolar bone. It usually manifests as a worsening of
gingivitis. Symptoms are rare except with HIV or when abscesses develop, in which case pain
===PAGE:635===
and swelling are common. Diagnosis is based on inspection, periodontal probing, and x-rays.
Treatment involves dental cleaning that extends under the gums and a vigorous home hygiene
program. Advanced cases may require antibiotics and surgery.
Etiology
Periodontitis usually develops when gingivitis, usually with abundant plaque and calculus beneath the
gingival margin, has not been adequately treated. In periodontitis, the deep pockets can harbor anaerobic
organisms
that do more damage than those usually present in simple gingivitis. The gingiva progressively
loses its attachment to the teeth, periodontal pockets deepen, and bone loss begins. With progressive
bone loss, teeth may loosen, and gingiva recedes. Tooth migration is common in later stages.
Systemic causes:
Systemic diseases that predispose patients to periodontitis include diabetes
(especially type 1); acquired, familial, and cyclic neutropenia; leukemia; Down syndrome; leukocyte
adhesion deficiency syndromes; Papillon-Lefevre syndrome; Crohn's disease; histiocytosis syndromes;
agranulocytosis; lazy leukocyte syndrome; hypogammaglobulinemia; Chediak-Higashi syndrome;
glycogen storage disease; infantile genetic agranulocytosis; Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (types IV and VIII);
vitamin C deficiency (scurvy); and hypophosphatasia. Faulty occlusion, causing an excessive functional
load on teeth, may contribute to progression of a particular type of periodontitis characterized by angular
bony defects.
Pathophysiology
Periodontitis is usually chronic and characterized by periods of exacerbation and remission. Chronic
periodontitis (formerly adult periodontitis) occurs in localized and generalized forms, and people with
significant disease tend to be > 35 yr. About 85% of the population is affected to a mild degree, but the
most advanced cases are seen in less than 5% of the population.
Aggressive periodontitis:
Several more rapidly progressive subtypes of chronic periodontitis exist,
collectively known as aggressive periodontitis. Aggressive periodontitis may develop as early as
childhood, sometimes before age 3 yr. Patients may have severe bone loss, even tooth loss, by age 20.
Neutrophil function may be defective in aggressive periodontitis; its clinical significance is unknown.
In one type of aggressive periodontitis that occurs in healthy adolescents (formerly called localized
juvenile periodontitis), patients often have significant colonization of
Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans
. Typically, the signs of inflammation are minor. The disease is detected by
periodontal probing or x-rays, which show localized, deep (vertical) bone loss, commonly limited to the 1st
molars and incisors. Bone loss progresses faster than in adult periodontitis, often at a rate of 3 to 4
μ
m/day.
An uncommon type of aggressive periodontitis (formerly called prepubertal periodontitis) affects
deciduous teeth, usually shortly after eruption. Generalized acute proliferative gingivitis and rapid alveolar
bone destruction are its hallmarks. Patients also have frequent bouts of otitis media and are usually
diagnosed by age 4 yr. In some patients, the disease resolves before the permanent teeth erupt.
Treatment regimens are under study.
Prototypical aggressive periodontitis (formerly called rapidly progressive periodontitis) occurs in patients
aged 20 to 35 yr. It is often associated with
A. actinomycetemcomitans
,
Porphyromonas gingivalis
,
Eikenella corrodens
, and many gram-negative bacilli, but cause and effect are not clear. Some cases
result from undiagnosed localized juvenile periodontitis or prepubertal periodontitis, but others appear
independently.
HIV-associated periodontitis is a particularly virulent, rapidly progressing disease. Clinically, it resembles
acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis ( combined with rapidly progressive periodontitis.
Patients may lose 9 to 12 mm of attachment in as little as 6 mo.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:636===
Pain is usually absent unless an acute infection forms in one or more periodontal pockets or if HIVassociated periodontitis is present. Impaction of food in the pockets can cause pain at meals. Abundant
plaque along with redness, swelling, and exudate are characteristic. Gums may be tender and bleed
easily, and breath may be foul.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes dental x-rays
Inspection of the teeth and gingiva combined with probing of the pockets and measurement of their depth
are usually sufficient for diagnosis. Pockets deeper than 4 mm indicate periodontitis. Dental x-rays reveal
alveolar bone loss adjacent to the periodontal pockets.
Treatment
• Scaling and root planing
• Sometimes oral antibiotics, antibiotic packs, or both
• Surgery or extraction
For all forms of periodontitis, the first phase of treatment consists of thorough scaling and root planing (ie,
removal of diseased or toxin-affected cementum and dentin followed by smoothing of the root) to remove
plaque and
calculus deposits. Thorough home oral hygiene is necessary. The patient is reevaluated after
3 wk. If pockets are no deeper than 4 mm at this point, the only treatment needed is regular cleanings.
If deeper pockets persist, systemic antibiotics can be used. A common regimen is amoxicillin 500 mg po
qid for 10 days. In addition, a gel containing doxycycline or microspheres of minocycline can be placed
into isolated recalcitrant pockets. These are resorbed in 2 wk.
Another approach is to surgically eliminate the pocket and recontour the bone so that the patient can
clean the depth of the sulcus (pocket reduction/elimination surgery). In selected situations, regenerative
surgery and bone grafting are done to encourage alveolar bone growth. Splinting of loose teeth and
selective reshaping of tooth surfaces to eliminate traumatic occlusion may be necessary. Extractions are
often necessary in advanced disease. Contributing systemic factors should be controlled before initiating
periodontal therapy.
Ninety percent of patients with HIV-associated periodontitis respond to irrigation of the sulcus with
povidone-iodine (which the dentist applies with a syringe), regular use of chlorhexidine mouth rinses, and
systemic antibiotics, usually metronidazole 250 mg po tid for 14 days.
Localized juvenile periodontitis requires periodontal surgery plus oral antibiotics (eg, amoxicillin 500 mg
qid or metronidazole 250 mg tid for 14 days).
Pulpitis
Pulpitis is inflammation of the dental pulp resulting from untreated caries, trauma, or multiple
restorations. Its principal symptom is pain. Diagnosis is based on clinical findings and is
confirmed by x-ray. Treatment involves removing decay, restoring the damaged tooth, and
sometimes doing root canal therapy or extracting the tooth.
Pulpitis can occur when
• Caries progresses deeply into the dentin
• A tooth requires multiple invasive procedures
===PAGE:637===
• Trauma disrupts the lymphatic and blood supply to the pulp
Pulpitis begins as a reversible condition in which the tooth can be saved by a simple filling. It becomes
irreversible as swelling inside the rigid encasement of the dentin compromises circulation, making the
pulp necrotic, which predisposes to infection.
Complications:
Infectious sequelae of pulpitis include apical periodontitis, periapical abscess, cellulitis,
and osteomyelitis of the jaw. Spread from maxillary teeth may cause purulent sinusitis, meningitis, brain
abscess, orbital cellulitis, and cavernous sinus thrombosis. Spread from mandibular teeth may cause
Ludwig's angina, parapharyngeal abscess, mediastinitis, pericarditis, empyema, and jugular
thrombophlebitis.
Symptoms and Signs
In reversible pulpitis, pain occurs when a stimulus (usually cold or sweet) is applied to the tooth. When
the stimulus is removed, the pain ceases within 1 to 2 sec.
In irreversible pulpitis, pain occurs spontaneously or lingers minutes after the stimulus is removed. A
patient may have difficulty locating the tooth from which the pain originates, even confusing the maxillary
and mandibular arches (but not the left and right sides of the mouth). The pain may then cease for
several days because of pulpal necrosis. As infection develops and extends through the apical foramen,
the tooth becomes exquisitely sensitive to pressure and percussion. A periapical (dentoalveolar) abscess
elevates the tooth from its socket and feels "high" when the patient bites down.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes dental x-rays
Diagnosis is based on the history and physical examination, which makes use of provoking stimuli
(application of heat, cold, percussion). X-rays help determine whether inflammation has extended beyond
the tooth apex and help exclude other conditions.
Treatment
• Drilling and filling for reversible pulpitis
• Root canal and crown or extraction for irreversible pulpitis
• Antibiotics (eg, amoxicillin) for infection
In reversible pulpitis, pulp vitality can be maintained if the tooth is treated, usually by caries removal, and
then restored.
Irreversible pulpitis and its sequelae require endodontic (root canal) therapy or tooth extraction. In
endodontic therapy, an opening is made in the tooth and the pulp is removed. The root canal system is
thoroughly debrided, shaped, and then filled with gutta-percha. After root canal therapy, adequate healing
is
manifested clinically by resolution of symptoms and radiographically by bone filling in the radiolucent
area at the root apex over a period of months. If patients have systemic signs of infection (eg, fever), an
oral antibiotic is prescribed (amoxicillin 500 mg q 8 h; for patients allergic to penicillin, clindamycin 150 mg
or 300 mg q 6 h). If symptoms persist or worsen, root canal therapy is usually repeated in case a root
canal was missed, but alternative diagnoses (eg, temporomandibular disorder, occult tooth fracture,
neurologic disorder) should be considered.
Very rarely, subcutaneous or mediastinal emphysema develops after compressed air or a high-speed air
turbine dental drill has been used during root canal therapy or extraction. These devices can force air into
===PAGE:638===
the tissues around the tooth socket that dissects along fascial planes. Acute onset of jaw and cervical
swelling with characteristic crepitus of the swollen skin on palpation is diagnostic. Treatment usually is
not required, although prophylactic antibiotics are sometimes given.
Dental Appliances
Teeth may be lost to dental caries, periodontal disease, or trauma or may be removed when treatment
fails. Missing teeth may cause cosmetic, phonation, and occlusal problems and may allow movement of
remaining teeth.
Types:
Dental appliances include fixed bridges, removable partial or complete dentures, and osseointegrated implants.
A
bridge
(fixed partial denture) is composed of false teeth cast or soldered to each other and, at each
end, to a crown that is cemented to natural (abutment) teeth, which bear all stress of biting. A bridge is
not removed. A bridge is smaller than a removable partial denture, but one or multiple bridges can be
made to replace many of the teeth in a dental arch.
A
removable partial denture
, typically an appliance with clasps that snap over abutment teeth, may be
removed for cleaning and during sleep. Part of the occlusal stress may be borne by the soft tissues under
the denture, often on both sides of the jaw. This appliance commonly is used when many teeth have to be
replaced and bridges or implants are not feasible or affordable.
Complete dentures
are removable appliances used when no teeth remain. They help a patient chew
and improve speech and appearance but do not provide the efficiency or sensation of natural dentition.
When teeth are absent, the mandible slowly resorbs, resulting in ill-fitting dentures that require revision
(called reline or rebase) or replacement. Alternatives are oral surgical procedures to enlarge the alveolar
ridge or dental implants to replace missing teeth.
An
implant
is typically a titanium cylinder or screw that replaces a tooth root. One or more implants are
placed into the alveolar bone, where they ankylose. After 4 to 6 mo, artificial teeth are attached to the
implants. Implants are not readily removable, although the prostheses they support can be. The potential
for infection at these sites warrants scrupulous attention to oral hygiene.
Dental appliances and surgery:
Generally, all removable dental appliances are removed before general
anesthesia, throat surgery, or convulsive therapy to prevent their breakage or aspiration. They are stored
in water to prevent changes in shape. However, some anesthesiologists believe that leaving appliances in
place aids the passage of an airway tube, keeps the face in a more normal shape so that the anesthetic
mask fits better, prevents natural teeth from injuring the opposing gingiva of a completely edentulous jaw,
and does not interfere with laryngoscopy.
Denture problems:
Occasionally, the mucosa beneath a denture becomes inflamed (denture sore
mouth, inflammatory papillary hyperplasia). Contributing factors to this usually painless condition include
candidal infections, poor denture fit, poor hygiene, excessive movement of the denture, and, most
frequently, wearing a denture 24 h/day. The mucosa appears red and velvety. Candidal overgrowth may
be indicated by adherent cottonlike patches or, more commonly, erosive lesions on the mucosa. The
presence of
Candida
can be confirmed by the microscopic appearance of typical branching hyphae.
Without
Candida,
inflammatory papillary hyperplasia is unlikely.
A new well-made denture almost always improves the situation. Other treatments consist of improving
oral and denture hygiene, refitting the existing denture, removing the denture for extended periods, and
using anti-fungal therapy (nystatin rinses for the mouth and overnight nystatin soaks for the denture).
Soaking the denture in a commercial cleanser is sometimes helpful. Other options are applying nystatin
suspension to the tissue surface of the denture and clotrimazole troches 10 mg 5 times/day. Ketoconazole
200 mg po once/day may be required. If inflammation persists, biopsy is indicated, and systemic
conditions should be ruled out.
===PAGE:639===
Chapter 58. Dental Emergencies
Introduction
Emergency dental treatment by a physician is sometimes required when a dentist is unavailable.
Oral analgesics effective for most dental problems include acetaminophen 650 to 1000 mg q 6 h and
NSAIDs such as ibuprofen 400 to 800 mg q 6 h. For severe pain, these drugs may be combined with
opioids such as codeine 60 mg; hydrocodone 5 mg, 7.5 mg, or 10 mg; or oxycodone 5 mg.
Antibiotics for dental infections include penicillin VK 500 mg po q 6 h and clindamycin 300 mg po q 8 h.
Prophylactic antibiotics:
Current American Heart Association guidelines (2007) recommend far fewer
people use prophylactic antibiotics for prevention of infective endocarditis (IE—.
Coverage for dental procedures is recommended only for patients with prosthetic cardiac valves, previous
IE, specific congenital heart diseases, and for cardiac transplant recipients with heart valve problems
(valvulopathy). Dental procedures requiring prophylaxis are those that require manipulation or perforation
of gingival or oral mucosa or that involve the root end area of the teeth (ie, those most likely to cause
bacteremia). The preferred drug is amoxicillin 2 g po 30 to 60 min before the procedure. For those who
cannot tolerate penicillins, alternatives include clindamycin 600 mg or cephalexin 2 g.
Fractured and Avulsed Teeth
Tooth fracture:
Fractures are divided by depth into those that
• Affect only the enamel
• Expose the dentin
• Expose the pulp
If the fracture involves only the enamel, patients notice rough or sharp edges but are asymptomatic.
Dental treatment to smooth the edges and improve appearance is elective.
If dentin is exposed but not the dental pulp, patients usually exhibit sensitivity to cold air and water.
Treatment is a mild analgesic and referral to a dentist. Dental treatment consists of restoration of the
tooth by a composite (white filling) or, if the fracture is extensive, a dental crown, to cover the exposed
dentin.
If the pulp is exposed (indicated by bleeding from the tooth) or if the tooth is mobile, dental referral is
urgent. Dental treatment usually involves a root canal.
Root fractures and alveolar fractures are not visible, but the tooth (or several teeth) may be mobile.
Dental referral is also urgent for stabilization by bonding an orthodontic arch wire or polyethylene line
onto several adjacent teeth.
Tooth avulsion:
Avulsed primary teeth are not replaced because they typically become necrotic, then
infected. They may also become ankylosed and do not exfoliate, thereby interfering with the eruption of
the permanent tooth.
If a secondary tooth is avulsed, the patient should replace it in its socket immediately and seek dental
care to stabilize it. If this cannot be done, the tooth should be kept immersed in milk or wrapped in a
moistened paper towel and brought to a dentist for replacement and stabilization. The tooth should not be
scrubbed, because scrubbing may remove viable periodontal ligament fibers, which aid in reattachment. A
patient with an avulsed tooth should take an antibiotic for several days. If the avulsed tooth cannot be
found, it may have been aspirated, embedded in soft tissue, or swallowed. A chest x-ray may be needed
to rule out aspiration, but a swallowed tooth is harmless.
===PAGE:640===
A partially avulsed tooth that is repositioned and stabilized quickly usually is permanently retained. A
completely avulsed tooth may be permanently retained if replaced in the socket with minimal handling
within 30 min to 1 h. Both partial and complete avulsions usually ultimately require root canal therapy
because the pulp tissue becomes necrotic. When replacement of the tooth is delayed, the long-term
retention rate drops, and root resorption eventually occurs. Nevertheless, a patient may be able to use
the tooth for several years.
Mandibular Dislocation
Spontaneous mandibular dislocation usually occurs in people with a history of such dislocations. Although
a dislocated mandible is occasionally caused by trauma, the initiating episode is typically a wide opening
followed by biting pressure (eg, biting into a large
[Fig. 58-1.
Mandibular reduction.]
sandwich with hard bread), a wide yawn, or a dental procedure. People prone to dislocation may have
naturally loose temporomandibular joint (TMJ) ligaments.
Patients present with a wide-open mouth that they are unable to close. Pain is secondary to patients'
attempts to close the mouth. If the mandibular midline deviates to one side, the dislocation is unilateral.
Although rarely used, a local anesthetic (eg, 2% lidocaine 2 to 5 mL) injected into the ipsilateral joint and
into the adjacent area of insertion of the lateral pterygoid muscle may allow the mandible to reduce
spontaneously.
Manual reduction may be necessary (see
Fig. 58-1
). Premedication may be used (eg, diazepam 5 to 10
mg IV at 5 mg/min or midazolam 3 to 5 mg IV at 2 mg/min and an opioid such as meperidine 25 mg IV or
fentanyl 0.5 to 1
μ
g/kg IV) but is usually unnecessary, especially if time will be lost preparing the IV. The
longer the mandible is dislocated, the more difficult it is to reduce and the greater the likelihood that
dislocation will recur.
Barton's bandage may be needed for 2 or 3 days. Most importantly, the patient must avoid opening the
mouth wide for at least 6 wk. When anticipating a yawn, the patient should place a fist under the chin to
prevent wide opening. Food must be cut into small pieces. If the patient suffers from chronic dislocations
and more conservative treatment modalities have been exhausted, an oral and maxillofacial surgeon may
be consulted. As last-resort treatments, the ligaments around the TMJ can be surgically tightened
(shortened) in an attempt to stabilize the joint or the articular eminence can be reduced (eminectomy).
Postextraction Problems
Pain and swelling:
Swelling is normal after oral surgery and is proportional to the degree of
manipulation and trauma. If swelling does not begin to subside by the 3rd postoperative day, infection is
likely and an antibiotic may be given (eg, penicillin VK 500 mg po q 6 h until 72 h after symptoms
subside).
Postoperative pain varies from moderate to severe and is treated with analgesics (.
Alveolitis and osteomyelitis:
Postextraction alveolitis (dry socket) is pain emanating from bare bone if
the socket's clot lyses. Although assumed to be due to bacterial action, it is much more common among
smokers and oral contraceptive users. It is peculiar to the removal of mandibular molars, usually wisdom
teeth. Typically, the pain begins on the 2nd or 3rd postoperative day, is referred to the ear, and lasts from
a few days to many weeks. Alveolitis is best treated with topical analgesics: a 1- to 2-in iodoform gauze
strip saturated in eugenol or coated with an anesthetic ointment, such as lidocaine 2.5% or tetracaine
0.5%, is placed in the socket. The gauze is changed every 1 to 3 days until symptoms do not return after
the gauze is left out for a few hours. This procedure eliminates the need for systemic analgesics.
Osteomyelitis, which in rare cases is confused with alveolitis, is differentiated by fever, local tenderness,
===PAGE:641===
and swelling. If symptoms last a month, a sequestrum, which is diagnostic of osteomyelitis, should be
sought by x-ray. Osteomyelitis requires long-term treatment with antibiotics effective against
both grampositive and gram-negative organisms and referral for definitive care.
Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ):
ONJ (see also
Sidebar 39-1
 is an oral lesion involving
persistent exposure of mandibular or maxillary bone, which usually manifests with pain, loosening of
teeth, and purulent discharge. ONJ may occur after dental extraction but also may develop after trauma or
radiation therapy to the head and neck. Recently, an association has been discovered between IV
bisphosphonate (BP) use and ONJ. However, oral BP therapy seems to pose very low risk of ONJ.
Stopping oral BP therapy is unlikely to reduce this already low rate of ONJ, and maintaining good oral
hygiene is a more effective preventative measure than stopping oral BP before dental procedures.
Management of ONJ is challenging and typically involves limited debridement, antibiotics, and oral rinses.
Bleeding:
Postextraction bleeding usually occurs in the small vessels. Any clots extending out of the
socket are removed with gauze, and a 4-in gauze pad (folded) or a tea bag is placed over the socket.
Then the patient is instructed to apply continuous pressure by biting for 1 h. The procedure may have to
be repeated 2 or 3 times. Patients are told to wait at least 1 h before checking the site so as not to disrupt
clot formation. They also are informed that a few drops of blood diluted in a mouth full of saliva appear to
be more blood than is actually present. If bleeding continues, the site may be anesthetized by nerve block
or local infiltration with 2% lidocaine containing 1:100,000 epinephrine. The socket is then curetted to
remove the existing clot and to freshen the bone and is irrigated with normal saline. Then the area is
sutured under gentle tension. Local hemostatic agents, such as oxidized cellulose, topical thrombin on a
gelatin sponge, or microfibrillar collagen, may be placed in the socket before suturing.
If possible, patients taking low-dose anticoagulants (eg, aspirin, clopedigrol, warfarin) should stop therapy
3 to 4 days before surgery. Therapy can be reinstated that evening. If these measures fail, a systemic
cause (eg, bleeding diathesis) is sought.
Toothache and Infection
Pain in and around the teeth is a common problem, particularly among those with poor oral hygiene. Pain
may be constant, felt after stimulation (eg, heat, cold, sweet food or drink, chewing, brushing), or both.
Etiology
The most common causes of toothache (see
Table 58-1
) are
• Dental caries
• Pulpitis
• Trauma
• Erupting wisdom tooth (causing pericoronitis)
Toothache is usually caused by dental caries and its consequences.
Caries causes pain when the lesion extends through the enamel into dentin. Pain usually occurs after
stimulation from cold, heat, sweet food or drink, or brushing; these stimuli cause fluid to move along
dentinal tubules to the pulp. As long as the discomfort does not persist after the stimulus is removed, the
pulp is likely healthy enough to be maintained. This is referred to as normal dentinal sensitivity, reversible
pulpalgia, or reversible pulpitis.
Pulpitis is inflammation of the pulp, typically due to advancing caries, cumulative minor pulp damage from
previous large restorations, a defective restoration, or trauma. It may be reversible or irreversible.
Pressure necrosis frequently results from pulpitis, because the pulp is encased in a rigid compartment.
Pain may be spontaneous or in response to stimulation. In both cases, pain lingers for a minute or longer.
===PAGE:642===
Once the pulp becomes necrotic, pain ends briefly (hours to weeks). Subsequently, periapical
inflammation (apical periodontitis) or an abscess develops. The tooth is exquisitely sensitive to
percussion (tapped with a metal dental probe or tongue blade) and chewing.
Periapical abscess may follow untreated caries or pulpitis. The abscess may point intraorally and
eventually drain or may become a cellulitis.
Tooth trauma can damage the pulp. The damage may manifest soon after the injury or up to decades
later.
Pericoronitis is inflammation and infection of the tissue between the tooth and its overlying flap of gingiva
(operculum). It usually occurs in an erupting wisdom tooth (almost always a lower one).
Complications:
Rarely, sinusitis results from untreated maxillary dental infection. More commonly, pain
from a sinus infection is perceived as originating in the (unaffected) teeth, mistakenly creating the
impression of a dental origin.
Rarely, cavernous sinus thrombosis ( or Ludwig's angina (submandibular space infection—see
p.
) develops; these conditions are life threatening and require immediate intervention.
[Table 58-1.
Some Causes of Toothache]
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should identify the location and duration of the pain and whether it
is constant or present only after stimulation. Specific triggering factors to review include heat, cold, sweet
food or drink, chewing, and brushing. Any preceding trauma or dental work should be noted.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of complications, including face pain, swelling, or both
(dental abscess, sinusitis); pain below the tongue and difficulty swallowing (submandibular space
infection); pain with bending forward (sinusitis); and retro-orbital headache, fever, and vision symptoms
(cavernous sinus thrombosis).
Past medical history
should note previous dental problems and treatment.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for fever.
The examination focuses on the face and mouth. The face is inspected for swelling and is palpated for
induration and tenderness.
The oral examination includes inspection for gum inflammation and caries and any localized swelling at
the base of a tooth that may represent a pointing apical abscess. If no tooth is clearly involved, teeth in
the area of pain are percussed for tenderness with a tongue depressor. Also, an ice cube can be applied
briefly to each tooth, removing it immediately once pain is felt. In healthy teeth, the pain stops almost
immediately. Pain lingering more than a few seconds indicates pulp damage (eg, irreversible pulpitis,
necrosis). The floor of the mouth is palpated for induration and tenderness, suggesting a deep space
infection.
Neurologic examination, concentrating on the cranial nerves, should be done in those with fever,
headache, or facial swelling.
Red flags:
Findings of particular concern are
• Headache
• Fever
• Swelling or tenderness of floor of the mouth
===PAGE:643===
• Cranial nerve abnormalities
Interpretation of findings:
Red flag finding of headache suggests sinusitis, particularly if multiple upper
molar and premolar (back) teeth are painful. However, presence of vision symptoms or abnormalities of
the pupils or of ocular motility suggests cavernous sinus thrombosis.
Fever is unusual with routine dental infection unless there is significant local extension. Bilateral
tenderness of the floor of the mouth suggests Ludwig's angina.
[Table 58-2.
Characteristics of Pain in Toothache]
Difficulty opening the mouth (trismus) can occur with any lower molar infection but is common only with
pericoronitis.
Isolated dental condition:
Patients without red flag findings or facial swelling likely have an isolated
dental condition, which, although uncomfortable, is not serious. Clinical findings, particularly the nature of
the pain, help suggest a cause (see
Tables 58-1
and
58-2
). Because of its innervation, the pulp can
perceive stimuli (eg, heat, cold, sweets) only as pain. An important distinction is whether there is
continuous pain or pain only on stimulation and, if pain is only on stimulation, whether the pain lingers
after the stimulus is removed.
Swelling at the base of a tooth, on the cheek, or both indicates infection, either cellulitis or abscess. A
tender, fluctuant area at the base of a tooth suggests a pointing abscess.
Testing:
Dental x-rays are the mainstay of testing but can be deferred to a dentist.
The rare cases in which cavernous sinus thrombosis or Ludwig's angina are suspected require imaging
studies, typically CT or MRI.
Treatment
Analgesics
( are given pending dental evaluation and definitive treatment. A patient who is
seen frequently for emergencies but who never receives definitive dental treatment despite availability
may be seeking opioids.
Antibiotics
directed at oral flora are given for most disorders beyond irreversible pulpitis (eg, necrotic
pulp, apical periodontitis, abscess, cellulitis). The patient with pericoronitis
also should receive an
antibiotic. However, antibiotics can be deferred if the patient can be seen the same day by a dentist, who
may be able to treat the infection by removing the source (eg, by extraction, pulpectomy, or curettage).
When antibiotics are used, penicillin is preferred, with clindamycin the alternative.
An
abscess
associated with well-developed (soft) fluctuance is typically drained through an incision with
a #15 scalpel blade at the most dependent point of the swelling. A rubber drain, held by a suture, is often
placed.
Pericoronitis
or erupting 3rd molars are treated with chlorhexidine 0.12% rinses or hypertonic saltwater
soaks (1 tbsp salt mixed in a glass of hot water—no hotter than the coffee or tea a patient normally
drinks). The salt water is held in the mouth on the affected side until it cools and then is expectorated and
immediately replaced with another mouthful. Three or 4 glasses of salt water a day usually control
inflammation and pain pending dental evaluation.
Teething pain
in young children may be treated with weight-based doses of acetaminophen or ibuprofen.
Topical treatments can include chewing hard crackers (eg, biscotti), applying 7.5% or 10% benzocaine
gel qid (provided there is no family history of methemoglobinemia), and chewing on anything cold (eg,
gel-containing teething rings).
===PAGE:644===
The rare patient with cavernous sinus thrombosis or Ludwig's angina requires immediate hospitalization,
removal of the infected tooth, and culture-guided parenteral antibiotics.
Geriatrics Essentials
The elderly are more prone to caries of the root surfaces, usually because of gingival recession.
Periodontitis often begins in young adulthood; if untreated, tooth pain and loss are common in old age.
Key Points
• Most toothache involves dental caries or its complications (eg, pulpitis, abscess).
• Symptomatic treatment and dental referral are usually adequate.
• Antibiotics are given if signs of a necrotic pulp or more severe conditions are present.
• Very rare but serious complications include extension of dental infection to the floor of the mouth or to
the cavernous sinus.
• Dental infections rarely cause sinusitis, but sinus infection may cause pain perceived as originating in
the teeth.
===PAGE:645===
Chapter 59. Temporomandibular Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Mandibular Dislocation
on p.
,
Temporal Bone Fractures
on p.
, and
Jaw Tumors
)
The term temporomandibular disorders is an umbrella term for conditions causing dysfunction of the jaw
joint or pain in the jaw and face, often in or around the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), including
masticatory and other muscles of the head and neck, the fascia, or both. A person is considered to have a
temporomandibular disorder only if pain or limitation of motion is severe enough to require professional
care.
Temporomandibular disorders typically are multifactorial, but most are related to problems with muscles or
joints. Internal derangements of the TMJ cause disturbed movement of the mandibular condyle in the
glenoid fossa or against the cartilaginous articular disk (see
Fig. 59-1
). This disk, shaped like a donut with a closed hole or like a mature red blood cell, serves as a
cushion between joint surfaces. Causes for this disturbed movement include clenching and grinding of
the teeth, trauma, arthritis, and malocclusion and missing teeth. Even the trauma of persistent gum
chewing can be enough to damage the joint.
Diagnosis
Disorders of the TMJ must be distinguished from the many conditions that mimic them (see
Table 59-1
). Pain exacerbated by finger pressure on the joint when the mouth is opened implicates the
TMJ.
Patients are asked to describe the pain and designate painful areas. The cervical and occipital muscles
and each of the major muscle groups involved in mastication are palpated for general tenderness and
trigger points (spots
[Fig. 59-1.
The temporomandibular joint.]
that radiate pain to another area). Patients are observed opening the mouth as wide as is comfortable.
When patients open and close their mouth with the junction of the maxillary and mandibular central
incisors (normally in the midline) lined up against a vertical straight edge, the mandibular midline typically
deviates toward the painful side. Palpation and auscultation of the joint during opening and closing may
reveal tenderness, catching, clicking, or popping. Condylar motion can best be palpated by placing the
5th fingers into the external ear canals and exerting very gentle forward pressure as patients move the
jaw. The average-sized patient can open the mouth at least 40 to 45 mm (measured between upper and
lower central incisors). To account for differences in patient size, a patient should be able to fit 3 fingers
(index, middle, ring) in the mouth on top of each other.
Ankylosis of the Temporomandibular Joint
Ankylosis of the TMJ is immobility or fusion of the joint.
Ankylosis of the TMJ most often results from trauma or infection, but it may be congenital or a result of
RA. Chronic, painless limitation of motion occurs. When ankylosis leads to arrest of condylar growth,
facial asymmetry is common (see
Condylar Hyperplasia
. Intra-articular (true) ankylosis must be
distinguished from extra-articular (false) ankylosis, which may be caused by enlargement of the coronoid
process, depressed fracture of the zygomatic arch, or scarring resulting from surgery, irradiation, or
infection. In most cases of true ankylosis, x-rays of the joint show loss of normal bony architecture.
Treatment may include a condylectomy if the ankylosis is intra-articular or an ostectomy of part of the
ramus if the coronoid process and zygomatic arch are also affected. Jaw-opening exercises must be done
for months to years to maintain the surgical correction, but forced opening of the jaws without surgery is
generally ineffective because of bony fusion.
===PAGE:646===
Arthritis of the Temporomandibular Joint
Infectious arthritis, traumatic arthritis, osteoarthritis, RA, and secondary degenerative arthritis
can affect the TMJ.
Infectious arthritis:
Infection of the TMJ may result from direct extension of adjacent infection or
hematogenous spread of blood-borne organisms (see also
Acute Infectious Arthritis
. The area
is inflamed, and jaw movement is limited. Local signs of infection associated with evidence of a systemic
disease or with an adjacent infection suggest the diagnosis. X-ray results are negative in the early stages
but may show bone destruction later. If suppurative arthritis is suspected, the joint is aspirated to confirm
the diagnosis and to identify the causative organism. Diagnosis must be made rapidly to prevent
permanent joint damage.
[Table 59-1.
Some Conditions that Mimic Temporomandibular Disorders]
Treatment includes antibiotics, proper hydration, pain control, and motion restriction. Parenteral penicillin
G is the drug of choice until a specific bacteriologic diagnosis can be made on the basis of culture and
sensitivity testing. Suppurative infections are aspirated or incised. Once the infection is controlled, jawopening exercises help prevent scarring and limitation of motion.
Traumatic arthritis:
Rarely, acute injury (eg, due to difficult tooth extraction or endotracheal intubation)
may lead to arthritis of the TMJ. Pain, tenderness, and limitation of motion occur. Diagnosis is based
primarily on history. X-ray results are negative except when intra-articular edema or hemorrhage widens
the joint space. Treatment includes NSAIDs, application of heat, a soft diet, and restriction of jaw
movement.
Osteoarthritis:
The TMJ may be affected, usually in people > 50 yr. Occasionally, patients complain of
stiffness, grating, or mild pain. Crepitus results from a hole worn through the disk, causing bone to grate
on bone. Joint involvement is generally bilateral. X-rays or CT may show flattening and lipping of the
condyle, suggestive of dysfunctional change. Treatment is symptomatic.
Rheumatoid arthritis:
The TMJ is affected in > 17% of adults and children with RA, but it is usually
among the last joints involved. Pain, swelling, and limited movement are the most common findings. In
children, destruction of the condyle results in mandibular growth disturbance and facial deformity.
Ankylosis may follow. X-rays of the TMJ are usually negative in early stages but later show bone
destruction, which may result in an anterior open-bite deformity. The diagnosis is suggested by TMJ
inflammation associated with polyarthritis and is confirmed by other findings typical of the disease.
Treatment is similar to that of RA in other joints. In the acute stage, NSAIDs may be given, and jaw
function should be restricted. A night guard or splint is often helpful. When symptoms subside, mild jaw
exercises help prevent excessive loss of motion. Surgery is necessary if ankylosis develops but should
not be done until the condition is quiescent.
Secondary degenerative arthritis:
This type of arthritis usually develops in people aged 20 to 40 after
trauma or in people with persistent myofascial pain syndrome (. It is characterized by limited
opening of the mouth, unilateral pain during jaw movement, joint tenderness, and crepitus. When it is
associated with the myofascial pain syndrome, symptoms wax and wane. Diagnosis is based on x-rays,
which generally show condylar flattening, lipping, spurring, or erosion. Unilateral joint involvement helps
distinguish secondary degenerative arthritis from osteoarthritis.
Treatment is conservative, as it is for myofascial pain syndrome, although arthroplasty or high
condylectomy may be necessary. An occlusal splint (mouth guard) usually relieves symptoms. The splint
is worn constantly, except during meals, oral hygiene, and appliance
cleaning. When symptoms resolve,
the length of time that the splint is worn each day is gradually reduced. Intra-articular injection of
corticosteroids may relieve symptoms but may harm the joint if repeated often.
Condylar Hyperplasia
===PAGE:647===
Condylar hyperplasia is a disorder of unknown etiology characterized by persistent or
accelerated growth of the condyle when growth should be slowing or ended. Growth eventually
stops without treatment.
Slowly progressive unilateral enlargement of the head and neck of the condyle causes crossbite
malocclusion, facial asymmetry, and shifting of the midpoint of the chin to the unaffected side. The patient
may appear prognathic. The lower border of the mandible is often convex on the affected side.
Chondroma and osteochondroma may cause similar symptoms and signs, but they grow more rapidly and
may cause even greater asymmetric condylar enlargement.
Diagnosis
• Plain x-rays
• Usually CT
On x-ray, the temporomandibular joint may appear normal, or the condyle may be proportionally enlarged
and the mandibular neck elongated. CT is usually done to determine whether bone growth is generalized,
which confirms the diagnosis, or localized to part of the condylar head. If growth is localized, a biopsy
may be necessary to distinguish between tumor and hyperplasia.
Treatment
• During active growth, usually condylectomy
• After growth cessation, orthodontics or surgical mandibular repositioning
Treatment usually includes condylectomy during the period of active growth. If growth has stopped,
orthodontics and surgical mandibular repositioning are indicated. If the height of the mandibular body is
greatly increased, facial symmetry can be further improved by reducing the inferior border.
Condylar Hypoplasia
Condylar hypoplasia is facial deformity caused by a short mandibular ramus.
This condition usually results from trauma, infection, or irradiation occurring during the growth period but
may be idiopathic. The deformity involves fullness of the face, deviation of the chin to the affected side,
an elongated mandible, and flatness of the face on the unaffected side. (The side to which the ramus is
short causes muscles to appear fuller; the muscles on the unaffected side are stretched so that side
appears flatter.) Mandibular deviation causes malocclusion.
Diagnosis is based on a history of progressive facial asymmetry during the growth period, x-ray evidence
of condylar deformity and antegonial notching (a depression in the inferior border of the mandible just
anterior to the angle of the mandible), and, frequently, a causative history.
Treatment consists of surgical shortening of the unaffected side of the mandible or lengthening of the
affected side. Presurgical orthodontic therapy helps optimize results.
Internal Joint Derangement
The most common form of internal joint derangement is anterior misalignment or displacement
of the articular disk above the condyle. Symptoms are localized joint pain and popping on jaw
movement. Diagnosis is based on history and physical examination. Treatment is with
analgesics, jaw rest, muscle relaxation, physical therapy, and bite splinting. If these methods
fail, surgery may be necessary. Early treatment greatly improves results.
The superior head of the lateral pterygoid muscle may pull the articular disk out of place when abnormal
===PAGE:648===
jaw mechanics place unusual stress on the joint. Abnormal jaw mechanics can be due to congenital or
acquired asymmetries or to the sequelae of trauma or arthritis. If the disk remains anterior, the
derangement is said to be without reduction. Restricted jaw opening (locked jaw) and pain in the ear and
around the temporomandibular joint result. If at some point in the joint's excursion the disk returns to the
head of the condyle, it is said to be with reduction. Derangement with reduction occurs in about one third
of the population at some point. All types of derangement can cause capsulitis (or synovitis), which is
inflammation of the tissues surrounding the joint (eg, tendons, ligaments, connective tissue, synovium).
Capsulitis can also occur spontaneously or result from arthritis, trauma, or infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Derangement with reduction often causes a clicking or popping sound when the mouth is opened. Pain
may be present, particularly when chewing hard foods. Patients are often embarrassed because they
think others can hear noise when they chew. Indeed, although the sound seems louder to the patient,
others can sometimes hear it.
Derangement without reduction usually causes no sound, but maximum opening between the tips of the
upper and lower incisors is reduced from the normal 40 to 45 mm to ≤ 30 mm. Pain and a change in the
patients' perception of their bite generally result.
Capsulitis results in localized joint pain, tenderness, and, sometimes, restricted opening.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis of derangement with reduction requires observation of the jaw when the mouth is opened.
When the jaw is opened > 10 mm (measured between upper and lower incisors), a click or pop is heard
or a catch is felt as the disk pops back over the head of the condyle. The condyle remains on the disk
during further opening. Usually, another click is heard during closing when the condyle slips over the
posterior rim of the disk and the disk slips forward (reciprocal clicking).
Diagnosis of derangement without reduction requires that the patient open as wide as possible. The
opening is measured, and gentle pressure is then exerted to open the mouth a little wider. Normally, the
jaw opens about 45 to 50 mm; if the disk is deranged, it will open about 20 mm. Closing or protruding the
jaw against resistance worsens the pain.
MRI is usually done to confirm presence of derangement or to determine why a patient is not responding
to treatment.
Capsulitis is often diagnosed based on a history of injury or infection along with exquisite tenderness over
the joint and by exclusion when pain remains after treatment for myofascial pain syndrome, disk
derangement, arthritis, and structural asymmetries. However, capsulitis may be present with any of these
conditions.
Treatment
• Analgesics as needed
• Sometimes repositioning splint or surgery
• Sometimes corticosteroid injection for capsulitis
Derangement with reduction does not require treatment if the patient can open reasonably wide (about 40
mm or the width of the index, middle, and ring fingers) without discomfort. If pain occurs, mild analgesics,
such as NSAIDs (ibuprofen 400 mg po q 6 h), can be used. If onset is < 6 mo, an anterior repositioning
splint may be used to position the mandible forward and on the disk. The splint is a horseshoe-shaped
appliance of hard, transparent acrylic (plastic) made to fit snugly over the teeth of one arch. Its chewing
===PAGE:649===
surface is designed to hold the mandible forward when the patient closes on the splint. In this position,
the disk is always on the head of the condyle. The splint is gradually adjusted to allow the mandible to
move posteriorly. If the disk stays with the condyle as the superior head of the external pterygoid
stretches, the disk is said to be captured. The longer the disk is displaced, the more deformed it becomes
and the less likely repositioning will succeed. Surgical plication of the disk may be done, with variable
success.
Derangement without reduction may not require treatment other than analgesics. Splints may help if the
articular disk has not been significantly deformed, but long-term use may result in irreversible changes in
oral architecture. In some cases, the patient is instructed to slowly stretch the disk out of position, which
allows the jaw to open normally. Various arthroscopic and open surgical procedures are available when
conservative treatment fails.
Capsulitis is initially treated with NSAIDs, jaw rest, and muscle relaxation. If these treatments are
unsuccessful, corticosteroids may be injected into the joint, or arthroscopic joint lavage and debridement
are used.
Myofascial Pain Syndrome
Myofascial pain syndrome can occur in patients with a normal temporomandibular joint. It is
caused by tension, fatigue, or spasm in the masticatory muscles (medial or internal and lateral
or external pterygoids, temporalis, and masseter). Symptoms include bruxism, pain and
tenderness in and around the masticatory apparatus or referred to other locations in the head
and neck, and, often, abnormalities of jaw mobility. Diagnosis is based on history and physical
examination. Conservative treatment, including analgesics, muscle relaxation, habit
modification, and bite splinting, usually is effective.
This syndrome is the most common disorder affecting the temporomandibular region. It is
more common
among women and has a bimodal age distribution in the early 20s and around menopause. The muscle
spasm causing the disorder usually is the result of nocturnal bruxism (clenching or grinding of the teeth).
Whether bruxism is caused by irregular tooth contacts, emotional stress, or sleep disorders is
controversial. Bruxism usually has a multifactorial etiology. Myofascial pain syndrome is not limited to the
muscles of mastication. It can occur anywhere in the body, most commonly involving muscles in the neck
and back.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include pain and tenderness of the masticatory muscles and often pain and limitation of jaw
excursion. Nocturnal bruxism may lead to headache that is more severe on awakening and that gradually
subsides during the day. Such pain should be distinguished from temporal arteritis. Daytime symptoms,
including headache, may worsen if bruxism continues throughout the day.
The jaw deviates when the mouth opens but usually not as suddenly or always at the same point of
opening as it does with internal joint derangement (. Exerting gentle pressure, the examiner
can open the patient's mouth another 1 to 3 mm beyond unaided maximum opening.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
A simple test may aid the diagnosis: Tongue blades of 2 or 3 thicknesses are placed between the rear
molars on each side, and the patient is asked to bite down gently. The distraction produced in the joint
space may ease the symptoms. X-rays usually do not help except to rule out arthritis. If temporal arteritis
is suspected, ESR is measured.
Treatment
• Mild analgesics
===PAGE:650===
• Splint or mouth guard
• An anxiolytic at bedtime considered
• Physical therapy modalities considered
A plastic splint or mouth guard from the dentist can keep teeth from contacting each other and prevent the
damages of bruxism. Comfortable, heat-moldable splints are available from many sporting goods stores or
drugstores. Low doses of a benzodiazepine at bedtime are often effective for acute exacerbations and
temporary relief of symptoms. Mild analgesics, such as NSAIDs or acetaminophen, are indicated.
Cyclobenzaprine may help muscle relaxation in some people. Because the condition is chronic, opioids
should not be used, except perhaps briefly for acute exacerbations. The patient must learn to stop
clenching the jaw and grinding the teeth. Hard-to-chew foods and chewing gum should be avoided.
Physical therapy, biofeedback to encourage relaxation, and counseling help some patients. Physical
modalities include transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation and "spray and stretch," in which the jaw is
stretched open after the skin over the painful area has been chilled with ice or sprayed with a skin
refrigerant, such as ethyl chloride. Botulinum toxin has recently been used successfully to relieve muscle
spasm in myofascial pain syndrome. Most patients, even if untreated, stop having significant symptoms
within 2 to 3 yr.
===PAGE:651===
6 - Eye Disorders
Chapter 60. Approach to the Ophthalmologic Patient
Introduction
The eye can be examined with routine equipment, including a standard ophthalmoscope; thorough
examination requires special equipment and evaluation by an ophthalmologist. (See
Fig. 60-1
for a cross-section of the eye.)
History
History includes location, speed of onset, and duration of current symptoms and history of previous
ocular symptoms; the presence and nature of pain, discharge, or redness; and changes in visual acuity.
Worrisome symptoms besides vision loss and eye pain include flashing lights, showers of floaters (both of
which may be symptoms of retinal detachment), diplopia, and loss of peripheral vision.
Physical Examination
Visual acuity:
The first step is to record visual acuity. Many patients do not give a full effort. Providing
adequate time and coaxing patients tend to yield more accurate results. Visual acuity is measured with
and without the patient's own glasses. If patients do not have their glasses, a pinhole refractor is used. If
a commercial pinhole refractor is unavailable, one can be made at the bedside by poking holes through a
piece of cardboard using an 18-gauge needle and varying the diameter of each hole slightly. Patients
choose the hole that corrects vision the most. If acuity corrects with pinhole refraction, the problem is a
refractive error. Pinhole refraction is a rapid, efficient way to diagnose refractive errors, which are the
most common cause of blurred vision. However, with pinhole refraction, best correction is usually to only
about 20/30, not 20/20.
[Fig. 60-1.
Cross-section of the eye.]
Visual acuity in each eye is tested as the opposite eye is covered with a solid object (not the patient's
fingers, which may separate during testing). Patients look at an eye chart 20 ft (6 m) away. If this test
cannot be done, acuity can be measured using a chart held about 36 cm (14 in) from the eye. Normal and
abnormal vision is quantified by Snellen notation. A Snellen notation of 20/40 (6/12) indicates that the
smallest letter that can be read by someone with normal vision at 40 ft (12 m) has to be brought to 20 ft (6
m) before it is recognized by the patient. Vision is recorded as the smallest letter patients read correctly,
even if patients feel that the letter is blurry or they have to guess. If the patient cannot read the top line of
the Snellen chart at 20 ft (6 m), acuity is tested at 10 ft (3 m). If nothing can be read from a chart even at
the closest distance, the examiner holds up different numbers of fingers to see whether the patient can
accurately count them. If not, the examiner tests whether the patient can perceive hand motion. If not, a
light is shined into the eye to see whether light is perceived.
Near vision is checked by asking patients to read a standard near card or newsprint at 14 in (35 cm);
patients > 40 yr who require corrective lenses (reading glasses) should wear them during near vision
testing.
Refractive error can be estimated roughly with a handheld ophthalmoscope by noting the lens necessary
for the examiner to focus on the retina; this procedure requires examiners to use their own corrective
lenses and is never a substitute for a comprehensive assessment of refraction. More commonly, refractive
error is measured with a standard phoropter or an automated refractor (a device that measures changes
in light projected and reflected by the patient's eye). These devices also measure astigmatism (.
Eyelid and conjunctival examination:
Eyelid margins and periocular cutaneous tissues are examined
under a focal light and magnification (eg, provided by loupe, slit lamp, or ophthalmoscope focused at the
examiner's working distance). In cases of suspected dacryocystitis or canaliculitis, the lacrimal sacs are
palpated and an attempt is made to express any contents through the canaliculi and puncta. After eyelid
===PAGE:652===
eversion, the palpebral and bulbar conjunctivae and the fornices can be inspected for foreign bodies,
signs of inflammation (eg, follicular hypertrophy, exudate, hyperemia, edema), or other abnormalities.
Corneal examination:
Indistinct or blurred edges of the corneal light reflex (reflection of light from the
cornea when illuminated) suggest the corneal surface is not intact or is roughened, as occurs with a
corneal abrasion or keratitis. Fluorescein staining reveals abrasions and ulcers. Before staining, a drop of
topical anesthetic (eg, proparacaine 0.5%, tetracaine 0.5%) may be added to facilitate examination if the
patient is in pain or if it is necessary to touch the cornea or conjunctiva (eg, to remove a foreign body or
measure intraocular pressure). A sterile, individually packaged fluorescein strip is moistened with 1 drop
of sterile saline or topical anesthetic and, with the patient's eye turned upward, is touched momentarily to
the inside of the lower eyelid. The patient blinks several times to spread the dye into the tear film, and
then the eye is examined under magnification and cobalt blue illumination. Areas where corneal or
conjunctival epithelium is absent (abraded or ulcerated) fluoresce green.
Pupil examination:
The size and shape of the pupils are noted, and pupillary reaction to light is tested
in each eye, one at a time, while the patient looks in the distance. Then the swinging flashlight test is
done with a penlight to compare direct and consensual pupillary response. There are 3 steps:
1.
One pupil is maximally constricted by being exposed to light from the penlight for 1 to 3 sec.
2.
The penlight is rapidly moved to the other eye for 1 to 3 sec.
3.
The light is moved back to the first eye.
Normally, a pupil constricts similarly when light is shone on it (direct response) and when light is shone on
the other eye (consensual response). However, if one eye has less light perception than the other, as
caused by dysfunction of the afferent limb (from the optic nerve to the optic chiasm) or extensive retinal
disease, then the
consensual
response in the affected eye is stronger than the
direct
response. Thus, on
step 3 of the swinging light test, when the light is shined back on the affected eye, it paradoxically
appears to dilate. This finding indicates a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD, or Marcus Gunn pupil).
Extraocular muscles:
The examiner guides the patient to look in 8 directions (up, up and right, right,
down and right, down, down and left, left, left and up) with a moving finger, penlight, or transillumination
light, observing for gaze deviation, limitation of movement, disconjugate gaze, or a combination consistent
with cranial nerve palsy, orbital disease, or other abnormalities that restrict movement.
Ophthalmoscopy:
Ophthalmoscopy can be done directly by using a handheld ophthalmoscope or
indirectly by using a head-mounted
ophthalmoscope with a handheld lens. With handheld
ophthalmoscopy, the examiner dials the ophthalmoscope to zero diopters, then increases or decreases
the setting until the fundus comes into focus. The view of the retina is limited with a handheld
ophthalmoscope, whereas indirect ophthalmoscopy gives a 3-dimensional view and is better for
visualizing the peripheral retina, where retinal detachment most commonly occurs. The view of the fundus
can be improved by dilating the pupils. Before dilation, the anterior chamber depth is estimated because
mydriasis can precipitate an attack of acute angle-closure glaucoma if the anterior chamber is shallow.
Depth can be estimated with a slit lamp (see below) or less accurately with a penlight held at the temporal
limbus parallel to the plane of the iris and pointed toward the nose. If the medial iris is in shadow, the
chamber is shallow and dilation should be avoided. Other contraindications to dilation include head
trauma, suspicion of a ruptured globe, a narrow angle, and angle-closure glaucoma.
Pupils can be dilated using 1 drop of tropicamide 1%, phenylephrine 2.5%, or both (repeated in 5 to 10
min if necessary); for longer action, a larger dilated pupil, or both, cyclopentolate 1% can be substituted
for tropicamide.
Ophthalmoscopy can detect lens or vitreous opacities, assess the optic cup-to-disk ratio, and identify
retinal and vascular changes. The optic cup is the central depression, and the optic disk is the entire area
of the optic nerve head. The normal ratio of the cup-to-nerve diameters is 0 to 0.4. A ratio of ≥ 0.5 may
signify loss of ganglion cells and may be a sign of glaucoma. Retinal changes include hemorrhage,
manifested as small or large areas of blood, and drusen (small subretinal yellow-white spots that may
===PAGE:653===
signify dry age-related macular degeneration). Vascular changes include arteriovenous nicking, a sign of
chronic hypertension in which retinal veins are compressed by arteries where the two cross; copper
wiring, a sign of arteriosclerosis in which thickened arteriolar walls increase the thickness of the light
reflex; silver wiring, a sign of hypertension in which thin, fibrotic arteriolar walls decrease the thickness of
the light reflex; and loss of venous pulsations, a sign of increased intracranial pressure in patients known
to have had pulsations.
Slit-lamp examination:
A slit lamp focuses the height and width of a beam of light for a precise
stereoscopic view of the eyelids, conjunctiva, cornea, anterior chamber, iris, lens, and anterior vitreous. It
is especially useful for the following:
• Identifying corneal foreign bodies and abrasions
• Measuring depth of the anterior chamber
• Detecting cells (RBCs or WBCs) and flare (evidence of protein) in the anterior chamber
• Identifying ciliary flush (dilation of blood vessels localized to the limbal region overlying the ciliary body),
which occurs with uveitis
• Identifying scleral edema, which is seen as a bowing forward of the slit beam when it is focused beneath
the conjunctiva and which is usually a sign of scleritis
Tonometry ( and gonioscopy, which quantifies the iridocorneal angle and requires the use of a
special lens, may be done.
Visual field testing:
Visual fields may be impaired by lesions anywhere in the neural visual pathways
from the optic nerves to the occipital lobes (see
Table 60-1
and
Fig. 69-1
. Glaucoma causes loss of peripheral vision. Fields can be assessed grossly by direct
confrontation testing or by more precise, detailed testing.
In
direct confrontation
, patients maintain a fixed gaze at the examiner's eye or nose. The examiner
brings a small target (eg, a match or a finger) from the patients' visual periphery into each of the 4 visual
quadrants and asks patients to indicate when they first see the object. Wiggling the small target helps
patients separate and define it. Another method of direct confrontation visual field testing is to hold a
number of fingers in each quadrant and ask patients how many they see. For both methods, each eye is
tested separately. Abnormalities in target detection should prompt detailed testing with more precise
instruments.
More detailed methods include use of a tangent screen, Goldmann perimeter, or computerized automated
perimetry (in which the visual field is mapped out in detail based on patient response to a series of
flashing lights in different locations controlled by a standardized computer program). The Amsler grid is
used to test central vision. Distortion of the grid (metamorphopsia) or a missing area (central scotoma)
may indicate disease of the macula (eg, choroidal neovascularization), as occurs in age-related macular
degeneration.
Color vision testing:
Twelve to 24 Ishihara color plates, which have colored numbers or symbols hidden
in a field of colored dots, are commonly used to test color vision. Colorblind patients or patients with
acquired color deficiency (eg, in optic nerve diseases) cannot see some or all of the hidden numbers.
Most
[Table 60-1.
Types of Field Defects]
congenital color blindness is red-green; most acquired (eg, caused by glaucoma or optic nerve disease)
is blue-yellow.
Testing
===PAGE:654===
Tonometry:
Tonometry measures intraocular pressure by determining the amount of force needed to
indent the cornea. Handheld pen-type tonometers are used for screening. This test requires topical
anesthesia (eg, proparacaine 0.5%). Office-based screening with noncontact air-puff tonometry also can
be used; it requires less training because it makes no direct corneal contact. Goldmann
applanation
tonometry is the most accurate method but requires more training and typically is used only by
ophthalmologists. Measurement of intraocular pressure alone is not adequate screening for glaucoma;
the optic nerve also should be examined.
Fluorescein angiography:
After IV injection of fluorescein solution, the retinal, choroidal, optic disk, or
iris vasculature is photographed in rapid sequence. Fluorescein angiography is used to investigate
underperfusion and neovascularization in conditions such as diabetes, age-related macular degeneration,
retinal vascular occlusion, and ocular histoplasmosis. It is also useful in preoperative assessment for
retinal laser procedures.
Electroretinography:
Electrodes are placed on each cornea and on the surrounding skin, and electrical
activity in the retina is recorded. This technique evaluates retinal function in patients with retinal
degeneration. It does not evaluate vision.
Ultrasonography:
B-mode ultrasonography provides 2-dimensional structural information even in the
presence of opacities of the cornea and lens. Examples of ophthalmologic applications include
assessment of retinal tumors, detachments, and vitreous hemorrhages; location of foreign bodies;
detection of posterior scleral edema characteristic of posterior scleritis; and distinction of choroidal
melanoma from metastatic carcinoma and subretinal hemorrhage.
A-mode ultrasonography is 1-dimensional ultrasonography used to determine the axial length of the eye,
a measurement needed to calculate the power of an intraocular lens for implantation as a part of cataract
surgery.
Ultrasonic pachymetry is use of ultrasonography to measure the thickness of the cornea before refractive
surgery (eg, LASIK) and in patients with corneal dystrophies.
CT and MRI:
These imaging techniques most often are used for evaluation of ocular trauma, particularly
if an intraocular foreign body is suspected, and in the evaluation of orbital tumors, optic neuritis, and optic
nerve tumors. MRI should not be done when there is suspicion of a metallic intraocular foreign body.
Electronystagmography:
See p.
.
Acute Vision Loss
Loss of vision is usually considered acute if it develops within a few minutes to a couple of days. It may
affect one or both eyes and all or part of a visual field. Patients with small visual field defects (eg, caused
by a small retinal detachment) may describe their symptoms as blurred vision.
Pathophysiology
Acute loss of vision has 3 general causes:
• Opacification of normally transparent structures through which light rays pass to reach the retina (eg,
cornea, vitreous)
• Retinal abnormalities
• Abnormalities affecting the optic nerve or visual pathways
Etiology
The most common causes of acute loss of vision are
===PAGE:655===
• Vascular occlusions of the retina (central retinal artery occlusion, central retinal vein occlusion)
• Ischemic optic neuropathy (often in patients with temporal arteritis)
• Vitreous hemorrhage (caused by diabetic retinopathy or trauma)
• Trauma
In addition, sudden recognition of loss of vision (pseudo-sudden loss of vision) may manifest initially as
sudden onset. For example, a patient with long-standing reduced vision in one eye (possibly caused by a
dense cataract) suddenly is aware of the reduced vision in the affected eye when covering the unaffected
eye.
Presence or absence of pain helps categorize loss of vision (see
Table 60-2
).
Most disorders that cause total loss of vision when they affect the entire eye may affect only part of the
eye and cause only a visual field defect (eg, branch occlusion of the retinal artery or retinal vein, focal
retinal detachment).
Less common causes of acute loss of vision include
• Anterior uveitis (a common disorder, but one that usually causes eye pain severe enough to trigger
evaluation before vision is lost)
• Highly aggressive retinitis
• Certain drugs (eg, methanol, salicylates, ergot alkaloids, quinine)
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should describe loss of vision in terms of onset, duration,
progression, and location (whether it is monocular or binocular and whether it involves the entire visual
field or a specific part and which part). Important associated visual symptoms include floaters, flashing
lights, halos around lights, distorted color vision,
[Table 60-2.
Some Disorders that Cause Acute Vision Loss]
and jagged or mosaic patterns (scintillating scotomata). The patient should be asked about eye pain and
whether it is constant or occurs only with eye movement.
Review of systems
should seek extraocular symptoms of possible causes, including jaw or tongue
claudication, temporal headache, proximal muscle pain, and stiffness (giant cell arteritis); and headaches
(ocular migraine).
Past medical history
should seek known risk factors for eye disorders (eg, contact lens use, severe
myopia, recent eye surgery or injury), risk factors for vascular disease (eg, diabetes, hypertension), and
hematologic disorders (eg, sickle cell anemia or disorders such as Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia or
multiple myeloma that could cause a hyperviscosity syndrome).
Family history should note any family history of migraine headaches.
Physical examination:
Vital signs, including temperature, are measured.
If the diagnosis of a transient ischemic attack is under consideration, a complete neurologic examination
is done. The facial skin is inspected for vesicles or ulcers in the V
distribution (ophthalmic division of the
trigeminal nerve), and the temples are palpated for pulses, tenderness, or nodularity over the course of
===PAGE:656===
the temporal artery. However, most of the examination focuses on the eye.
Eye examination includes the following:
• Visual acuity is measured.
• Peripheral visual fields are assessed by confrontation.
• Central visual fields are assessed by Amsler grid.
• Direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes are examined using the swinging flashlight test.
• Ocular motility is assessed.
• Color vision is tested with color plates.
• The eyelids, sclera, and conjunctiva are examined using a slit lamp if possible.
• The cornea is examined with fluorescein staining.
• The anterior chamber is examined for cells and flare in patients who have eye pain or conjunctival
injection.
• The lens is checked for cataracts using a direct ophthalmoscope, slit lamp, or both.
• Intraocular pressure is measured.
• Ophthalmoscopy is done, preferably after dilating the pupil with a drop of a sympathomimetic (eg, 2.5%
phenylephrine), cycloplegic (eg, 1% cyclopentolate or 1% tropicamide), or both; dilation is nearly full
after about 20 min. The entire fundus, including the retina, macula, fovea, vessels, and optic disk and
its margins, is examined.
• If pupillary light responses are normal and functional loss of vision is suspected (rarely),
[Fig. 60-2.
Evaluation of acute vision loss.]
optokinetic nystagmus is checked. If an optokinetic drum is unavailable, a mirror can be held near the
patient's eye and slowly moved. If the patient can see, the eyes usually track movement of the mirror.
Red flags:
Acute loss of vision is itself a red flag; most causes are serious.
Interpretation of findings:
Diagnosis can be begun systematically.
Fig. 60-2
describes a simplified,
general approach. Specific patterns of visual field deficit help suggest a cause (see
Table 60-1
). Other
clinical findings also help suggest a cause (see
Table 60-2
):
• Difficulty seeing the red reflex during ophthalmoscopy suggests opacification of transparent structures
(eg, caused by corneal ulcer, vitreous hemorrhage, or severe endophthalmitis).
• Retinal abnormalities that are severe enough to cause acute loss of vision are detectable
during
ophthalmoscopy, particularly if the pupils are dilated. Retinal detachment may show retinal folds; retinal
vein occlusion may show marked retinal hemorrhages; and retinal artery occlusion may show a pale
retina with cherry-red fovea.
• An afferent pupillary defect (absence of a direct pupillary light response but a normal consensual
response) with an otherwise normal examination (except sometimes an abnormal optic disk) suggests
an abnormality of the optic nerve or retina (ie, anterior to the chiasm).
===PAGE:657===
In addition, the following facts may help:
• Monocular symptoms suggest a lesion anterior to the optic chiasm.
• Bilateral, symmetric visual field defects suggest a lesion posterior to the chiasm.
• Constant eye pain suggests a corneal lesion (ulcer or abrasion), anterior chamber inflammation, or
increased intraocular pressure, whereas eye pain with movement suggests optic neuritis.
• Temporal headaches suggest giant cell arteritis or migraine.
Testing:
ESR is done for all patients with symptoms (eg, temporal headaches, jaw claudication, proximal
myalgias, stiffness) or signs (eg, temporal artery tenderness or induration, pale retina, papilledema)
suggesting optic nerve or retinal ischemia to exclude giant cell arteritis.
Other testing is listed in
Table 60-2
. The following are of particular importance:
• Ultrasonography is done to view the retina if the retina is not clearly visible with pupillary dilation and
indirect ophthalmoscopy done by an ophthalmologist.
• Gadolinium-enhanced MRI is done for patients who have eye pain with movement or afferent pupillary
defect, particularly with optic nerve swelling on ophthalmoscopy, to diagnose multiple sclerosis.
Treatment
Causative disorders are treated. Treatment should usually commence immediately if the cause is
treatable. In many cases (eg, vascular disorders), treatment is unlikely to salvage the affected eye but can
decrease the risk of the same process occurring in the contralateral eye.
Key Points
• Diagnosis and treatment should occur as rapidly as possible.
• Acute monocular loss of vision with an afferent pupillary defect indicates a lesion of the eye or of the
optic nerve anterior to the optic chiasm.
• Optic nerve lesion, particularly ischemia, is considered in patients with acute monocular loss of vision or
afferent pupillary defect and in those with or without optic nerve abnormalities on ophthalmoscopy but
no other abnormalities on eye examination.
• Corneal ulcer, acute angle-closure glaucoma, endophthalmitis, or severe anterior uveitis is considered in
patients with acute monocular loss of vision, afferent pupillary defect, eye pain, and conjunctival
injection.
Anisocoria
(Unequal Pupils)
Anisocoria is unequal pupil sizes. Anisocoria itself does not cause symptoms.
Etiology
The most common cause of anisocoria is
• Physiologic (present in about 20% of people)
See
Table 60-3
for other causes of anisocoria.
===PAGE:658===
Many disorders are accompanied by anisocoria due to iris or neurologic dysfunction but usually manifest
with other, more bothersome symptoms (eg, uveitis, optic neuritis, stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage,
acute angle-closure glaucoma).
Evaluation
The goal of evaluation is to elucidate the physiologic mechanism of anisocoria. By identifying certain
mechanisms (eg, Horner's syndrome, 3rd cranial nerve palsy), clinicians can diagnose the occasional
serious occult disorder (eg, tumor, aneurysm) manifesting with anisocoria.
History: History of present illness
includes the presence, nature, and duration of symptoms. Any
history of head or ocular trauma is noted.
Review of systems
seeks symptoms that may suggest a cause, such as birth defects or chromosomal
abnormalities (congenital defects); droopy eyelid, cough, chest pain, or dyspnea (Horner's syndrome);
genital lesions, adenopathy, rashes, or fever (syphilis); and headaches or other neurologic symptoms
(Horner's syndrome or 3rd cranial nerve palsy).
Past medical history
includes known ocular disorders and surgeries and exposure to drugs.
[Table 60-3.
Some Common Causes of Anisocoria]
Physical examination:
Pupillary size and light responses should be examined in lighted and dark
rooms. Accommodation and extraocular movements should be tested. Ocular structures are inspected by
using a slit lamp or other magnification to identify structural abnormalities and ptosis. Other ocular
symptoms are evaluated by eye examination as clinically indicated. An old photograph of the patient or
the patient's driver's license should be examined (under magnification if possible) to see whether
anisocoria was present previously.
Testing:
Testing is usually unnecessary but is indicated for clinically suspected disorders. Patients with
Horner's syndrome or 3rd cranial nerve palsy usually require brain MRI or CT.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Ptosis
• Anhidrosis
• Pupils that respond more to accommodation than light
• Impaired extraocular movements
Interpretation of findings:
If the difference in size is greater in the dark, the smaller pupil is abnormal.
Common causes include Horner's syndrome and physiologic anisocoria. An ophthalmologist can
differentiate them because the small pupil in Horner's syndrome does not dilate after instillation of an
ocular dilating drop (eg, 10% cocaine).
If the difference in pupillary sizes is greater in light, the larger pupil is abnormal. If extraocular movements
are impaired, particularly with ptosis, 3rd cranial nerve palsy is likely. If extraocular movements are intact,
an ophthalmologist can further differentiate among causes by instilling a drop of a pupillary constrictor
(eg, 0.1% pilocarpine). If the large pupil constricts, the cause is probably Adie's tonic pupil; if the large
pupil does not constrict, the cause is probably drugs or structural (eg, traumatic, surgical) damage to the
iris.
Treatment
Treatment of anisocoria is unnecessary.
===PAGE:659===
Key Points
• Physiologic anisocoria is very common and causes < 1 mm of difference between the pupils in size.
• Examining the pupils in light and dark and inspecting an old photograph or the
driver's license of the
patient provide a great deal of diagnostic information.
• Serious disorders should be considered in patients with Horner's syndrome or 3rd cranial nerve palsy.
Blurred Vision
Blurred vision is the most common visual symptom. It usually refers to decreased visual acuity of gradual
onset. For sudden, complete loss of vision in one or both eyes (blindness), see p.
. Patients with small
visual field defects (eg, caused by a small retinal detachment) may describe their symptoms as blurring.
Etiology
The most common causes of blurred vision (see
Table 60-4
) include
• Refractive errors (the most common cause overall)
• Age-related macular degeneration
• Cataracts
• Diabetic retinopathy
• Glaucoma
Blurred vision has 4 general mechanisms:
• Opacification of normally transparent ocular structures (cornea, lens, vitreous) through which light rays
must pass to reach the retina
• Disorders affecting the retina
• Disorders affecting the optic nerve or its connections
• Refractive errors
Certain disorders can have more than one mechanism. For example, refraction can be impaired by early
cataracts or the reversible lens swelling caused by poorly controlled diabetes.
Patients with certain disorders that cause blurred vision (eg, acute corneal lesions [such as abrasions],
ulcers, herpes simplex keratitis, herpes zoster ophthalmicus, acute angle-closure glaucoma) are more
likely to present with other symptoms such as eye pain and red eye.
Rare disorders that can cause blurred vision include hereditary optic neuropathies (eg, dominant optic
atrophy, Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy) and corneal scarring due to vitamin A deficiency or
amiodarone toxicity.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should ascertain the onset, duration, and progression of symptoms,
as well as whether they are bilateral or unilateral. The symptom should be defined as precisely as
possible by asking an open-ended question or request (eg, "Please describe what you mean by blurred
===PAGE:660===
vision"). For example, loss of detail is not the same as loss of contrast. Also, visual field defects may not
be recognized as such by patients, who may instead describe symptoms such as missing steps or the
inability to see words when reading. Important associated symptoms include eye redness, photophobia,
floaters, sensation of lightning-like flashes of light (photopsias), and pain at rest or with eye movement.
The effects of darkness (night vision), bright lights (ie, causing blur, star bursts, halos, photophobia),
distance from an object, and corrective lenses and whether central or peripheral vision seems to be more
affected should be ascertained.
Review of systems
includes questions about symptoms of possible causes, such as increased thirst
and polyuria (diabetes).
Past medical history
should note previous eye injury or other diagnosed eye disorders and ask about
disorders known to be risk factors for eye disorders (eg, hypertension, diabetes, HIV/AIDS, SLE, sickle
cell anemia, disorders that could cause hyperviscosity syndrome such as multiple myeloma or
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia). Drug history should include questions about use of drugs that could
affect vision (eg, amiodarone, corticosteroids) and treatments for disorders affecting vision (eg, diabetic
retinopathy).
Physical examination:
Nonvisual symptoms are evaluated as needed; however, examination of the
eyes may be all that is necessary.
Testing
visual acuity
is key. Many patients do not give a full effort. Providing adequate time and coaxing
patients tend to yield more accurate results.
Acuity ideally is measured while the patient stands 6 m (about 20 ft) from a Snellen chart posted on a
wall. If this test cannot be done, acuity can be measured using a chart held about 36 cm (14 in) from the
eye. Measurement of near vision should be done with reading correction in place for patients > age 40.
Each eye is measured separately while the other eye is covered with a solid object (not the patient's
fingers, which may separate during testing). If the patient cannot read the top line of the Snellen chart at
6 m, acuity is tested at 3 m. If nothing can be read from a chart even at the closest distance, the examiner
holds up different numbers of fingers to see whether the patient can accurately count them. If not, the
examiner tests whether the patient can perceive hand motion. If not, a light is shined into the eye to see
whether light is perceived.
Visual acuity is measured with and without the patients' own glasses. If acuity is corrected
[Table 60-4.
Some Causes of Blurred Vision]
with glasses, the problem is a refractive error. If patients do not have their glasses, a pinhole refractor is
used. If a commercial pinhole refractor is unavailable, one can be made at the bedside by poking holes
through a piece of cardboard using an 18-gauge needle and varying the diameter of each hole slightly.
Patients choose the hole that corrects vision the most. If acuity corrects with pinhole refraction, the
problem is a refractive error. Pinhole refraction is a rapid, efficient way to diagnose refractive errors,
which are the most common cause of blurred vision. However, with pinhole refraction, best correction is
usually to only about 20/30, not 20/20.
Eye examination
is also important. Direct and consensual pupillary light responses are examined using
the swinging flashlight test. Visual fields are checked using confrontation and an Amsler grid.
The cornea is examined for opacification, ideally using a slit lamp. The anterior chamber is examined for
cells and flare using a slit lamp if possible, although results of this examination are unlikely to explain
visual blurring in patients without eye pain or redness.
The lens is examined for opacities using an ophthalmoscope, slit lamp, or both.
Ophthalmoscopy is done using a direct ophthalmoscope. More detail is visible if the eyes are dilated for
ophthalmoscopy with a drop of a sympathomimetic (eg, 2.5% phenylephrine), cycloplegic (eg, 1%
tropicamide or 1% cyclopentolate), or both; dilation is nearly full after about 20 min. As much of the fundus
===PAGE:661===
as is visible, including the retina, macula, fovea, vessels, and optic disk and its margins, is examined. To
see the entire fundus (ie, to see a peripheral retinal detachment), the examiner, usually an
ophthalmologist, must use an indirect ophthalmoscope.
Intraocular pressure is measured.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Sudden change in vision
• Eye pain (with or without eye movement)
• Visual field defect (by history or examination)
• Visible abnormality of the retina or optic disk
• HIV/AIDS or other immunosuppressive disorder
• A systemic disorder that could cause retinopathy (eg, sickle cell anemia, possible hyperviscosity
syndrome, diabetes, hypertension)
Interpretation of findings:
Symptoms and signs help suggest a cause (see
Table 60-4
).
If visual acuity is corrected with glasses or a pinhole refractor, simple refractive error is the cause of
blurring. Loss of contrast or glare may still be caused by cataract, which should be considered.
However, red flag findings suggest a more serious ophthalmologic disorder (see
Table 60-5
) and need for a complete examination, including slit-lamp examination, tonometry,
ophthalmoscopic examination with pupillary dilation, and, depending on findings, possibly immediate or
urgent ophthalmologic referral.
Specific retinal findings help suggest a cause (see
Table 60-6
).
[Table 60-5.
Interpretation of Some Red Flag Findings]
[Table 60-6.
Interpretation of Retinal Findings]
Testing:
If acuity corrects appropriately with refraction, patients are referred to an optometrist or
ophthalmologist for routine formal refraction. If visual acuity is not corrected with refraction but there are
no red flag findings, patients are referred to an ophthalmologist for routine evaluation. With certain red
flag findings, patients are referred for immediate or urgent ophthalmologic evaluation.
Patients with symptoms or signs of systemic disorders should have appropriate testing:
• Diabetes: Fingerstick or random glucose measurement
• Poorly controlled hypertension and acute hypertensive retinopathy (hemorrhages, exudates, or
papilledema): Urinalysis, renal function testing, BP monitoring, and possibly ECG
• HIV/AIDS and retinal abnormalities: HIV serology and CD4+ count
• SLE and retinal abnormality: Antinuclear antibodies, ESR, and CBC
• Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, multiple myeloma, or sickle cell anemia: CBC with differential count
and other testing (eg, serum protein electrophoresis) as clinically indicated
Treatment
===PAGE:662===
Underlying disorders are treated. Corrective lenses may be used to improve visual acuity, even when the
disorder causing blurring is not purely a refractive error (eg, early cataract).
Geriatrics Essentials
Although some decrease in visual acuity normally occurs with aging, acuity normally is correctable to
20/20 with refraction, even in very elderly patients.
Key Points
• If visual acuity is corrected with pinhole refraction, refractive error is the problem.
• Because glaucoma is common, intraocular pressure should be measured.
• If pinhole refraction does not correct acuity and there is no obvious cataract or corneal abnormality,
ophthalmoscopy should be done after pupillary dilation.
• Many abnormalities on ophthalmoscopy, particularly if symptoms are recently worsening, require urgent
or immediate ophthalmologic referral.
Diplopia
(Double Vision)
Diplopia is the perception of 2 images of a single object. Diplopia may be monocular or binocular.
Monocular diplopia is present when only one eye is open. Binocular diplopia disappears when either eye
is closed.
Etiology
Monocular diplopia
can occur when something distorts light transmission through the eye to the retina.
There may be > 2 images. One of the images is of normal quality (eg, brightness, contrast, clarity); the
rest are of inferior quality. The most common causes of monocular diplopia are
•
Cataract
• Corneal shape problems, such as keratoconus or surface irregularity
• Uncorrected refractive error, usually astigmatism
Other causes include corneal scarring and dislocated lens. Complaints also may represent malingering.
Binocular diplopia
suggests disconjugate alignment of the eyes. There are only 2 images, and they are
of equal quality. There are many possible causes of binocular diplopia (see
Table 60-7
). The most common are
• Cranial nerve (3rd, 4th, or 6th) palsy
• Myasthenia gravis
• Orbital infiltration (eg, thyroid infiltrative ophthalmopathy, orbital pseudotumor)
Most commonly, the eyes are misaligned because of a disorder affecting the cranial nerves innervating
the extraocular muscles (3rd, 4th, or 6th cranial nerves). These palsies may be isolated and idiopathic or
the result of various disorders involving the cranial nerve nuclei or the infranuclear nerve or nerves. Other
causes involve mechanical interference with ocular motion or a generalized disorder of neuromuscular
transmission.
===PAGE:663===
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should determine whether diplopia involves one or both eyes,
whether diplopia is intermittent or constant, and whether the images are separated vertically, horizontally,
or both. Any associated pain is noted, as well as whether it occurs with or without eye movement.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of other cranial nerve dysfunction, such as vision
abnormalities (2nd cranial nerve); numbness of forehead and cheek (5th cranial nerve); facial weakness
(7th cranial nerve); dizziness, hearing loss, or gait difficulties (8th cranial nerve); and swallowing or
speech difficulties (9th and 12th cranial nerves). Other neurologic symptoms, such as weakness and
sensory abnormalities, should be sought noting whether these are intermittent or constant. Nonneurologic
symptoms of potential causes are ascertained; they include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea (botulism);
palpitations, heat sensitivity, and weight loss (Graves' disease); and difficulty with bladder control (multiple
sclerosis).
Past medical history
should seek presence of known hypertension, diabetes, or both; atherosclerosis,
particularly including cerebrovascular disease; and alcohol abuse.
Physical examination:
Examination begins with a review of vital signs for fever and general
appearance for signs of toxicity (eg, prostration, confusion).
Eye examination begins with measuring visual acuity (with correction) in each eye and both together,
which also helps determine whether diplopia is monocular or binocular. Eye examination should note
presence of bulging of one or both eyes, eyelid droop, pupillary abnormalities, and disconjugate eye
movement and nystagmus during ocular motility testing. Ophthalmoscopy should be done, particularly
noting any abnormalities of the lens (eg, cataract, displacement) and retina (eg, detachment).
Ocular motility is tested by having the patient hold the head steady and track the examiner's finger, which
is moved to extreme gaze to the right, left, upward, downward, diagonally to either side, and finally inward
toward the patient's nose (convergence). However, mild paresis of ocular motility sufficient to cause
diplopia may escape detection by such examination.
If diplopia occurs in one direction of gaze, the eye that produces each image can be determined by
repeating the examination with a red glass placed over one of the patient's eyes. The image that is more
peripheral originates in the paretic eye; ie, if the more peripheral image is red, the red glass is covering
the paretic eye. If a red glass is not available, the paretic eye can sometimes be identified by having the
patient close each eye. The paretic eye is the eye that when closed eliminates the more peripheral image.
The other cranial nerves are tested, and the remainder of the neurologic examination, including strength,
sensation, reflexes, cerebellar function, and observation of gait, is completed.
Relevant nonneurophthalmologic components of the examination include palpation of the neck for goiter
and inspection of the shins for pretibial myxedema (Graves' disease).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• More than one cranial nerve deficit
• Pupillary involvement of any degree
• Any neurologic symptoms or signs besides diplopia
• Pain
• Proptosis
Interpretation of findings:
Findings sometimes suggest which nerve is involved.
===PAGE:664===
• Nerve III: Eyelid droop, eye deviated laterally and down, sometimes pupillary dilation
[Table 60-7.
Some Causes of Binocular Diplopia]
• Nerve IV: Vertical diplopia worse on downward gaze (patient tilts head to improve vision)
• Nerve VI: Eye deviated medially, diplopia worse on lateral gaze (patient turns head to improve vision)
Other findings help suggest a cause (see
Table 60-7
).
Intermittent diplopia suggests a waxing and waning neurologic disorder, such as myasthenia gravis or
multiple sclerosis, or unmasking of a latent phoria (eye deviation). Patients with latent phoria do not have
any other neurologic manifestations.
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO) results from a brain stem lesion in the medial longitudinal fasciculus
(MLF). INO manifests on horizontal gaze testing with diplopia, weak adduction on the affected side
(usually cannot adduct eye past midline), and nystagmus of the contralateral eye. However, the affected
eye adducts normally on convergence testing (which does not require an intact MLF).
Pain suggests a compressive lesion or inflammatory disorder.
Testing:
Patients with monocular diplopia are referred to an ophthalmologist to evaluate for ocular
pathology; no other tests are required beforehand.
For binocular diplopia, patients with a unilateral, single cranial nerve palsy, a normal pupillary light
response, and no other symptoms or signs can usually be observed without testing for a few weeks.
Many cases resolve spontaneously. Ophthalmologic evaluation may be done to monitor the patient and
help further delineate the deficit.
Most other patients require neuroimaging with MRI to detect orbital, cranial, or CNS abnormalities. CT
may be substituted if there is concern about a metallic intraocular foreign body or if MRI is otherwise
contraindicated or unavailable. Imaging should be done immediately if findings suggest infection,
aneurysm, or acute (< 3 h) stroke.
Patients with manifestations of Graves' disease should have thyroid tests (serum thyroxine [T] and
thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] levels). Testing for myasthenia gravis and multiple sclerosis should be
strongly considered for those with intermittent diplopia.
Treatment
Treatment is management of the underlying disorder.
Key Points
• Isolated, pupil-sparing nerve palsy in patients with no other symptoms may resolve spontaneously.
• Imaging is required for those with red flag findings.
• Focal weakness (in any muscle) may indicate a disorder of neuromuscular transmission.
Eyelid Swelling
Eyelid swelling can be unilateral or bilateral. It may be asymptomatic or accompanied by itching or pain.
Etiology
Eyelid swelling has many causes (see
===PAGE:665===
Table 60-8
). It usually results from an eyelid disorder but may result from disorders in and around the orbit
or from systemic disorders that cause generalized edema.
The most common causes are allergic, including
• Local allergy (contact sensitivity)
• Systemic allergy (eg, angioedema, systemic allergy accompanying allergic rhinitis)
Focal swelling of one eyelid is most often caused by a chalazion.
The most immediately dangerous causes are orbital cellulitis and cavernous sinus thrombosis (rare).
[Table 60-8.
Some Causes of Eyelid Swelling]
In addition to the disorders listed in
Table 60-8
, eyelid swelling may result from the following:
• Disorders that may involve the eyelid but do not cause swelling unless very advanced (eg, eyelid
tumors, including squamous cell carcinomas and melanoma)
• Disorders (eg, dacryocystitis, canaliculitis) that cause swelling that begins and is usually most severe in
structures near, but not part of, the eyelids
• Disorders in which swelling occurs but is not the presenting symptom (eg, basilar skull fracture, burns,
trauma, postsurgery)
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should ascertain how long swelling has been present, whether it is
unilateral or bilateral, and whether it has been preceded by any trauma (including insect bites). Important
accompanying symptoms to identify include itching, pain, headache, change in vision, fever, and eye
discharge.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including runny nose, itching, rash, and
wheezing (systemic allergic reaction); headache, nasal congestion, and purulent nasal discharge
(sinusitis); toothache (dental infection); dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (heart
failure); cold intolerance and changes in skin texture (hypothyroidism); and heat intolerance, anxiety, and
weight loss (hyperthyroidism).
Past medical history
should include recent eye injury or surgery; known heart, liver, renal, or thyroid
disease; and allergies and exposure to possible allergens. Drug history should specifically include use of
ACE inhibitors.
Physical examination:
Vital signs should be assessed for fever and tachycardia.
Eye inspection should assess the location and color of swelling (erythematous or pale), including whether
it is present on one eyelid, both eyelids, or both eyes and whether it is tender, warm, or both. The
examiner should observe whether the finding represents edema of the eyelids, protrusion of the globe
(proptosis), or both. Eye examination should particularly note visual acuity and range of extraocular
motion (full or limited). This examination can be difficult when swelling is marked but is important because
deficits suggest an orbital or retro-orbital disorder rather than an eyelid disorder; an assistant may be
required to hold the
eyelids open. Conjunctivae are examined for injection and discharge. Any eyelid or
eye lesions are evaluated using a slit lamp.
General examination should assess signs of toxicity, suggesting a serious infection, and signs of a
causative disorder. Facial skin is inspected for dryness and scales (which may suggest hypothyroidism)
and greasy scales or other signs of seborrheic dermatitis. Extremities and the presacral area are
examined for edema, which suggests a systemic cause. If a systemic cause is suspected, see p.
for
===PAGE:666===
further discussion of the evaluation.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Fever
• Loss of visual acuity
• Impaired extraocular movements
• Proptosis
Interpretation of findings:
Some findings help distinguish among categories of disorders. The first
important distinction is between inflammation or infection and allergy or fluid overload. Pain, redness,
warmth, and tenderness suggest inflammation or infection. Painless, pale swelling suggests angioedema.
Itching suggests allergic reaction, and absence of itching suggests cardiac or renal dysfunction.
Swelling localized to one eyelid in the absence of other signs is rarely caused by a dangerous disorder.
Massive swelling of the eyelids of one or both eyes should raise suspicion of a serious problem. Signs of
inflammation, proptosis, loss of vision, and impaired extraocular movements suggest an orbital disorder
(eg, orbital cellulitis, cavernous sinus thrombosis) that may be pushing the globe forward or affecting the
nerves or muscles. Other suggestive and specific findings are listed in
Table 60-8
.
Testing:
In most cases, diagnosis can be established clinically and no testing is necessary. If orbital
cellulitis or cavernous sinus thrombosis is suspected, diagnosis and treatment should proceed as rapidly
as possible. Immediate imaging with CT or MRI should be done. If cardiac, liver, renal, or thyroid
dysfunction is suspected, organ function is evaluated with laboratory tests and imaging as appropriate for
that system.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder. There is no specific treatment for the swelling.
Key Points
• Proptosis with impaired vision or extraocular movements suggests orbital cellulitis or cavernous sinus
thrombosis, and diagnosis and treatment should proceed as rapidly as possible.
• Eyelid disorders should be differentiated from orbital and systemic causes of swelling.
Eye Pain
Eye pain may be described as sharp, aching, or throbbing and should be distinguished from superficial
irritation or a foreign body sensation. In some disorders, pain is worsened by bright light. Eye pain may be
caused by a serious disorder and requires prompt evaluation. Many causes of eye pain also cause a red
eye.
Pathophysiology
The cornea is richly innervated and highly sensitive to pain. Many disorders that affect the cornea or
anterior chamber (eg, uveitis) also cause pain via ciliary muscle spasm; when such spasm is present,
bright light causes muscle contraction, worsening pain.
Etiology
Disorders that cause eye pain can be divided into those that affect primarily the cornea, other ocular
disorders, and disorders that cause pain referred to the eye (see
Table 60-9
).
===PAGE:667===
The most common causes overall are
• Corneal abrasion
• Foreign bodies
However, most corneal disorders can cause eye pain.
A feeling of scratchiness or of a foreign body may be caused by either a conjunctival or a corneal
disorder.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should address the onset, quality, and severity of pain and any
history of prior episodes (eg, daily episodes in clusters). Important associated symptoms include true
photophobia (shining a light into the unaffected eye causes pain in the affected eye when the affected
eye is shut), decreased visual acuity, foreign body sensation and pain when blinking, and pain when
moving the eye.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting a cause, including presence of an aura
(migraine); fever and chills (infection);
and pain when moving the head, purulent rhinorrhea, productive or
nocturnal cough, and halitosis (sinusitis).
Past medical history
should include known disorders that are risk factors for eye pain, including
autoimmune disorders, multiple sclerosis, migraine, and sinus infections. Additional risk factors to assess
include use (and overuse) of contact lenses (contact lens keratitis), exposure to excessive sunlight or to
welding (UV keratitis), hammering or drilling metal (foreign body), and recent eye injury or surgery
(endophthalmitis).
Physical examination:
Vital signs are checked for the presence of fever. The nose is inspected for
purulent rhinorrhea, and the face is palpated for tenderness. If the eye is red, the preauricular region is
checked for adenopathy. Hygiene during examination must be scrupulous when examining patients who
have chemosis, preauricular adenopathy, punctate corneal staining, or a combination; these findings
suggest epidemic keratoconjunctivitis, which is highly contagious.
Eye examination should be as complete as possible for patients with eye pain. Best corrected visual
acuity is checked. Visual fields are typically tested by confrontation in patients with eye pain, but this test
can be insensitive (particularly for small defects) and unreliable because of poor patient cooperation. A
light is moved from one eye to the other to check for pupillary size and direct and consensual pupillary
light responses. In patients who have unilateral eye pain, a light is shined in the unaffected eye while the
affected eye is shut; pain in the affected eye represents true photophobia. Extraocular movements are
checked. The orbital and periorbital structures are inspected. Conjunctival injection that seems most
intense and confluent around the cornea and limbus is called ciliary flush.
Slit-lamp examination is done if possible. The cornea is stained with fluorescein and examined under
magnification with cobalt blue light. If a slit lamp is unavailable, the cornea can be examined after
fluorescein staining with a Wood's light using magnification. Ophthalmoscopy is done, and ocular
pressures are measured (tonometry). In patients with a foreign body sensation or unexplained corneal
abrasions, the eyelids are everted and examined for foreign bodies.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Vomiting, halos around lights, or corneal edema
• Signs of systemic infection (eg, fever, chills)
• Decreased visual acuity
===PAGE:668===
• Proptosis
• Impaired extraocular motility
Interpretation of findings:
Suggestive findings are listed in
Table 60-9
. Some findings suggest
categories of disorders.
Scratchiness or a foreign body sensation is most often caused by disorders of the eyelids, conjunctivae,
or superficial cornea. Photosensitivity is possible.
Surface pain with photophobia is often accompanied by a foreign body sensation and pain when blinking;
it suggests a corneal lesion, most often a foreign body or abrasion.
Deeper pain—often described as aching or throbbing—usually indicates a serious disorder such as
glaucoma, uveitis, scleritis, endophthalmitis, orbital cellulitis, or orbital pseudotumor. Within this group,
eyelid swelling, proptosis, or both and impaired extraocular movements or visual acuity suggest orbital
pseudotumor, orbital cellulitis, or possibly severe endophthalmitis. Fever, chills, and tenderness suggest
infection (eg, orbital cellulitis, sinusitis).
A red eye suggests that the disorder causing pain is ocular rather than referred.
If pain develops in the affected eye in response to shining light in the unaffected eye when the affected
eye is shut (true photophobia), the cause is most often a corneal lesion or uveitis.
If topical anesthetic drops (eg, proparacaine) abolish pain in a red eye, the cause is probably a corneal
disorder.
Some findings are more suggestive of particular disorders. Pain and photophobia days after blunt eye
trauma suggest uveitis. Hammering or drilling metal is a risk factor for occult metal intraocular foreign
body. Pain with movement of extraocular muscles and loss of pupillary light response that is
disproportionate to loss of visual acuity suggest optic neuritis.
Testing:
Testing is not usually necessary, with some exceptions (see
Table 60-9
). Gonioscopy is done if
glaucoma is suspected based on increased intraocular pressure. Imaging, usually with CT or MRI, is done
if orbital pseudotumor or orbital cellulitis is suspected or if sinusitis is suspected but the diagnosis is not
clinically clear. MRI is often done when optic neuritis is suspected, looking for demyelinating lesions in the
brain suggesting multiple sclerosis.
Intraocular fluids (vitreous and aqueous humor) may be cultured for suspected endophthalmitis. Viral
cultures can be used to confirm herpes zoster ophthalmicus or herpes
[Table 60-9.
Some Causes of Eye Pain]
simplex keratitis if the diagnosis is not clear clinically.
Treatment
The cause of pain is treated. Pain itself is also treated. Systemic analgesics are used as needed. Pain
caused by uveitis and many corneal lesions is also relieved with cycloplegic eye drops (eg, homatropine
5% qid).
Key Points
• Most diagnoses can be made by clinical evaluation.
• Infection precautions should be maintained when examining patients with bilateral red eyes.
===PAGE:669===
• Important danger signs are vomiting, halos around lights, fever, decreased visual acuity, proptosis, and
impaired extraocular motility.
• Pain in the affected eye in response to shining light in the unaffected eye when the affected eye is shut
(true photophobia) suggests a corneal lesion or uveitis.
• If a topical anesthetic (eg, proparacaine) relieves pain, the cause of pain is a corneal lesion.
•
Hammering or drilling on metal is a risk factor for occult intraocular foreign body.
Proptosis
(Exophthalmos)
Proptosis is protrusion of the eyeball. Exophthalmos means the same thing, and this term is usually used
when describing proptosis due to Grave's disease. Disorders that may cause changes in the appearance
of the face and eyes that resemble proptosis but are not include hyperthyroidism without infiltrative eye
disease, Cushing's disease, and severe obesity.
Etiology
The
most common cause
is Graves' disease (see
Table 60-10
), which causes edema and lymphoid infiltration of the orbital tissues.
Evaluation
Rate of onset may provide a clue to diagnosis. Sudden unilateral onset suggests intraorbital hemorrhage
(which can occur after surgery, retrobulbar injection, or trauma) or inflammation of the orbit or paranasal
sinuses. A 2- to 3-wk onset suggests chronic inflammation or orbital inflammatory pseudotumor (nonneoplastic cellular infiltration and proliferation); slower onset suggests an orbital tumor.
Ocular examination findings typical of hyperthyroidism but unrelated to infiltrative eye disease include
eyelid retraction, eyelid lag, temporal flare of the upper eyelid, and staring. Other signs include eyelid
erythema and conjunctival hyperemia. Prolonged exposure of larger-than-usual areas of the eyeball to air
causes corneal drying and can lead to infection and ulceration.
Testing:
Proptosis can be confirmed with exophthalmometry, which measures the distance between the
lateral angle of the bony orbit and the cornea; normal values are < 20 mm in whites and < 22 mm in
blacks. CT or MRI is often useful to confirm the diagnosis and to identify structural causes of unilateral
proptosis. Thyroid function testing is indicated when Graves' disease is suspected.
[Table 60-10.
Some Causes of Proptosis]
Treatment
Lubrication to protect the cornea is required in severe cases. When lubrication is not sufficient, surgery to
provide better coverage of the eye surface or to reduce proptosis may be required. Systemic
corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 1 mg/kg po once/day for 1 wk, tapered over ≥ 1 mo) are often helpful in
controlling edema and orbital congestion due to thyroid eye disease or inflammatory orbital pseudotumor.
Other interventions vary by etiology. Graves' exophthalmos is not affected by treatment of the thyroid
condition but may lessen over time. Tumors must be surgically removed. Selective embolization or, rarely,
trapping procedures may be effective in cases of arteriovenous fistulas involving the cavernous sinus.
Floaters
Floaters are opacities that move across the visual field and do not correspond to external visual objects.
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:670===
With aging, the vitreous humor can contract and separate from the retina. The age at which this change
occurs varies but most often is between 50 and 75 yr. During this separation, the vitreous can
intermittently tug on the retina. The mechanical traction stimulates the retina, which sends a signal that is
perceived by the brain and interpreted as light. Complete separation of the vitreous leads to an increase
in floaters, which may last for years.
However, traction on the retina may create a hole (retinal tear), and if fluid leaks behind the tear, the
retina may detach. Retinal detachment may also be caused by other factors (eg, trauma, primary retinal
disorders). Lightning-like flashes, common in retinal detachment, are called
photopsias
. Photopsias can
also occur when rubbing the eyes or when looking around after awakening.
Etiology
The most common cause of vitreous floaters is
• Contraction of the vitreous humor that occurs for unknown reasons (idiopathic)
Less common causes are listed in
Table 60-11
.
Rare causes of floaters include intraocular tumors (eg, lymphoma). Intraocular foreign bodies can cause
floaters but usually manifest with other symptoms, such as loss of vision, eye pain, or redness.
Evaluation
The most important goal is to identify serious vitreous and retinal disorders. If these disorders cannot be
ruled out, patients should be examined by an ophthalmologist using an indirect ophthalmoscope after
pupillary dilation. Recognizing ocular migraine is also helpful.
History: History of present illness
should ascertain onset and duration of symptoms and the shape
and volume of floaters, as well as whether they are unilateral or bilateral and whether they have been
preceded by trauma. The patient should try to distinguish floaters from lightning-like flashes of light (as in
photopsias) or jagged lines across the visual field (as in migraine). Important associated symptoms
include loss of vision (and its distribution in the visual field) and eye pain.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, such as headaches (ocular migraine)
and eye redness (vitreous inflammation).
Past medical history
should note diabetes (including diabetic retinopathy), migraine headaches, eye
surgery, severe myopia, and any disorders that could affect the immune system (eg, AIDS).
Physical examination:
Eye examination should be reasonably complete. Best corrected visual acuity is
measured. The eyes are inspected for redness. Visual fields are assessed in all patients. However,
recognition of visual field defects by bedside examination is very insensitive, so inability to show such a
defect is not evidence that the patient has full visual fields. Extraocular movements and pupillary light
responses are assessed. If patients have a red eye or eye pain, the corneas are examined under
magnification after fluorescein staining, and slit-lamp examination is done if possible. Ocular pressure is
measured (tonometry).
Ophthalmoscopy is the most important part of the examination. It is done using a direct ophthalmoscope
and after dilating the pupils. To dilate the pupils, the physician first makes sure to record pupillary size
and light responses, then instills drops, usually 1 drop each of a short-acting
α
-adrenergic agonist (eg,
2.5% phenylephrine) and a cycloplegic (eg, 1% tropicamide or 1% cyclopentolate). The pupils are fully
dilated about 20 min after these drops are instilled.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
===PAGE:671===
[Table 60-11.
Some Causes of Floaters]
•
Sudden increase in floaters
• Lightning-like flashes (photopsias)
• Loss of vision, diffuse or focal (visual field defect)
• Recent eye surgery or eye trauma
• Eye pain
• Loss of red reflex
• Abnormal retinal findings
Interpretation of findings:
Retinal detachment is suggested by sudden increases in floaters,
photopsias, or any of its other, more specific characteristics (eg, visual field defects, retinal
abnormalities). Bilateral synchronous symptoms suggest ocular migraine, although patients often have
difficulty deciphering the laterality of their symptoms (eg, they often interpret scintillating scotoma of the
left field of both eyes as left-eyed). Loss of red reflex suggests opacification of the vitreous (eg, vitreous
hemorrhage or inflammation), but it also can be caused by advanced cataracts. Loss of vision suggests a
serious disorder causing dysfunction of the vitreous or retina.
Testing:
Patients who require evaluation by an ophthalmologist may need testing. However, tests can be
selected by or in conjunction with the ophthalmologist. For example, patients suspected of having
chorioretinitis may require microbiologic testing.
Treatment
Idiopathic vitreous floaters require no treatment. Other disorders causing symptoms are treated.
Key Points
• Floaters by themselves rarely indicate a serious disorder.
• Patients with any abnormal findings on examination require ophthalmologic referral.
• If floaters are accompanied by any other symptoms (eg, persistent flashing lights, visual deficit,
sensation of a moving curtain of vision loss), patients require ophthalmologic referral, regardless of
examination findings.
Red Eye
(Pink Eye)
Red eye refers to a red appearance of the opened eye, reflecting dilation of the superficial ocular
vessels.
Pathophysiology
Dilation of superficial ocular vessels can result from
• Infection
• Allergy
• Inflammation (noninfectious)
===PAGE:672===
• Elevated intraocular pressure
Several ocular components may be involved, most commonly the conjunctiva, but also the uveal tract,
episclera, and sclera.
Etiology
The most common causes of red eye include
• Infectious conjunctivitis
• Allergic conjunctivitis
Corneal abrasions and foreign bodies are common causes (see
Table 60-12
). Although the eye is red, patients usually present with a complaint of injury, eye pain, or
both. However, in young children and infants, this information may be unavailable.
Evaluation
Most disorders can be diagnosed by a general health care practitioner.
History: History of present illness
should note the onset and duration of redness and presence of any
change in vision, itching, scratchy sensation, pain, or discharge. Nature and severity of pain, including
whether pain is worsened by light (photophobia), are noted. The clinician should determine whether
discharge is watery or purulent. Other questions assess history of injury, including exposure to irritants
and use of contact lenses (eg, possible overuse, such as wearing them while sleeping). Prior episodes of
eye pain or redness and their time patterns are elicited.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including headache, nausea,
vomiting, and halos around lights (acute angle-closure glaucoma); runny nose and sneezing (allergies,
URI); and cough, sore throat, and malaise (URI).
Past medical history
includes questions about known allergies and autoimmune disorders. Drug history
should specifically ask about recent use of topical ophthalmic drugs (including OTC drugs), which might
be sensitizing.
Physical examination:
General examination should include head and neck examination for signs of
associated disorders (eg, URI, allergic rhinitis, zoster rash).
Eye examination involves a formal measure of visual acuity and usually requires a penlight, fluorescein
stain, and slit lamp.
Best corrected visual acuity is measured. Pupillary size and reactivity to light are assessed. True
photophobia (sometimes called
[Table 60-12.
Some Causes of Red Eye]
consensual photophobia) is present if shining light into an unaffected eye causes pain in the affected eye
when the affected eye is shut. Extraocular movements are assessed, and the eye and periorbital tissues
are inspected for lesions and swelling. The tarsal surface is inspected for follicles. The corneas are
stained with fluorescein and examined with magnification. If a corneal abrasion is found, the eyelid is
everted and examined for hidden foreign bodies. Inspection of the ocular structures and cornea is best
done using a slit lamp. A slit lamp is also used to examine the anterior chamber for cells, flare, and pus
(hypopyon). Ocular pressure is measured using tonometry, although it may be permissible to omit this test
if there are no symptoms or signs suggesting a disorder other than conjunctivitis.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
===PAGE:673===
• Sudden, severe pain and vomiting
• Zoster skin rash
• Decreased visual acuity
• Corneal crater
• Branching, dendritic corneal lesion
• Ocular pressure > 40 mm Hg
• Failure to blanch with phenylephrine eye drop
Interpretation of findings: Conjunctival disorders
and
episcleritis
are differentiated from other
causes of red eye by the absence of pain, photophobia, and corneal staining. Among these disorders,
episcleritis is differentiated by its focality, and subconjunctival hemorrhage is usually differentiated by the
absence of lacrimation, itching, and photosensitivity. Clinical criteria do not accurately differentiate viral
from bacterial conjunctivitis.
Corneal disorders
are differentiated from other causes of red eye (and usually from each other) by
fluorescein staining. These disorders also tend to be characterized by pain and photophobia. If instillation
of an ocular anesthetic drop (eg, proparacaine 0.5%), which is done before tonometry and ideally before
fluorescein instillation, completely
relieves pain, the cause is probably limited to the cornea. If pain is
present and is not relieved by an ocular anesthetic, the cause may be anterior uveitis, glaucoma, or
scleritis. Because patients may have anterior uveitis secondary to corneal lesions, persistence of pain
after instillation of the anesthetic does not exclude a corneal lesion.
Anterior uveitis, glaucoma, acute angle-closure glaucoma
, and
scleritis
can usually be
differentiated from other causes of red eye by the presence of pain and the absence of corneal staining.
Anterior uveitis is likely in patients with pain, true photophobia, absence of corneal fluorescein staining,
and normal intraocular pressure; it is definitively diagnosed based on the presence of cells and flare in
the anterior chamber. However, these findings may be difficult for general health care practitioners to
discern. Acute angle-closure glaucoma can usually be recognized by the sudden onset of its severe and
characteristic symptoms, but tonometry is definitive.
Instillation of phenylephrine 2.5% causes blanching in a red eye unless the cause is scleritis.
Phenylephrine is instilled to dilate the pupil in patients needing a thorough retinal examination. However, it
should not be used in patients who have the following:
• Suspected acute angle-closure glaucoma
• A history of angle-closure glaucoma
• A narrow anterior chamber
Testing:
Testing is usually unnecessary. Viral cultures may help if herpes simplex or herpes zoster is
suspected and the diagnosis is not clear clinically. Corneal ulcers are cultured by an ophthalmologist.
Gonioscopy is done in patients with glaucoma. Testing for autoimmune disorders may be worthwhile in
patients with uveitis and no obvious cause (eg, trauma). Patients with scleritis undergo further testing as
directed by an ophthalmologist.
Treatment
The cause is treated. Red eye itself does not require treatment. Topical vasoconstrictors are not
recommended.
===PAGE:674===
Key Points
• Most cases are caused by conjunctivitis.
• Pain and true photophobia suggest other, more serious diagnoses.
• In patients with pain, slit-lamp examination with fluorescein staining and tonometry are key.
• Persistence of pain despite an ocular anesthetic in a patient with a normal fluorescein examination
suggests anterior uveitis, scleritis, or acute angle-closure glaucoma. These diagnoses should not be
missed.
Tearing
(Epiphora)
Excess tearing may cause a sensation of watery eyes or result in tears falling down the cheek (epiphora).
Pathophysiology
Tears are produced in the lacrimal gland and drain through the upper and lower puncta into the canaliculi
and then into the lacrimal sac and nasolacrimal duct (see
Fig. 60-3
). Obstruction of tear drainage can lead to stasis and infection. Recurrent infection of the
lacrimal sac (dacryocystitis) can sometimes spread, potentially leading to orbital cellulitis.
Etiology
Overall, the most common causes of tearing are
• URI
• Allergic rhinitis
Tearing can be caused by increased tear production or decreased nasolacrimal drainage.
Increased tear production:
The most common causes are
• URI
• Allergic rhinitis
• Allergic conjunctivitis
• Dry eyes (reflex tearing produced in response to dryness of the ocular surface)
• Trichiasis
Any disorder causing conjunctival or corneal irritation can increase tear production (see
Table 60-13
). However, most patients with corneal disorders that cause excess tearing (eg, corneal
abrasion, corneal ulcer, corneal foreign body, keratitis) or with primary angle-closure glaucoma or anterior
uveitis present with eye symptoms other than tearing (eg, eye pain, redness). Most people who have
been crying do not present for evaluation of tearing.
Decreased nasolacrimal drainage:
The most common causes are
• Idiopathic age-related nasolacrimal duct stenosis
• Dacryocystitis
===PAGE:675===
• Ectropion
[Fig. 60-3.
Anatomy of the lacrimal system.]
Nasolacrimal drainage system obstruction may be caused by strictures, tumors, or foreign bodies (eg,
stones, often associated with subclinical infection by
Actinomyces
). Obstruction can also be a congenital
malformation. Many disorders and drugs can cause stricture or obstruction of nasolacrimal drainage.
Other causes of nasolacrimal drainage stricture or obstruction include
• Burns
• Chemotherapy drugs
• Eye drops (particularly echothiophate iodide, epinephrine, and pilocarpine)
• Infection, including canaliculitis (eg, caused by
Staphylococcus aureus
,
Actinomyces
,
Streptococcus
,
Pseudomonas
, herpes zoster virus, herpes simplex conjunctivitis, infectious mononucleosis, human
papillomavirus,
Ascaris
, leprosy, TB)
• Inflammatory disorders (sarcoidosis, Wegener's granulomatosis)
• Injuries (eg, nasoethmoid fractures; nasal, orbital, or endoscopic sinus surgery)
• Obstruction of nasal outlet despite an intact nasolacrimal system (eg, URI, allergic rhinitis, sinusitis)
• Radiation therapy
• Stevens-Johnson syndrome
• Tumors (eg, primary lacrimal sac tumors, benign papillomas, squamous and basal cell carcinoma,
transitional cell carcinoma, fibrous histiocytomas, midline granuloma, lymphoma)
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
addresses the duration, onset, and severity of symptoms, including
whether tears drip down the cheek (true epiphora). The effects of weather, environmental humidity, and
cigarette smoke are ascertained.
Review of symptoms
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including itching, rhinorrhea, or
sneezing, particularly when occurring perennially or after exposure to specific potential allergens (allergic
reaction); eye irritation or pain (blepharitis, corneal abrasion, irritant chemicals); and pain near the medial
canthus (dacryocystitis). Other symptoms are of lower yield but should be sought; they include positional
headache, purulent rhinorrhea, nocturnal cough, and fever (sinusitis, Wegener's granulomatosis); rash
(Stevens-Johnson syndrome); cough, dyspnea, and chest pain (sarcoidosis); and epistaxis, hemoptysis,
polyarthralgias, and myalgias (Wegener's granulomatosis).
Past medical history
asks about known disorders that can cause tearing, including Wegener's
granulomatosis, sarcoidosis, and
[Table 60-13.
Some Causes of Tearing]
cancer treated with chemotherapy drugs; disorders that cause dry eyes (eg, RA, sarcoidosis, Sjogren's
syndrome); and drugs, such as echothiophate, epinephrine, and pilocarpine. Previous ocular and nasal
history, including infections, injuries, surgical procedures, and radiation exposure, is ascertained.
Physical examination:
Examination focuses on the eye and surrounding structures.
===PAGE:676===
The face is inspected; asymmetry suggests congenital or acquired obstruction of nasolacrimal duct
drainage. When available, a slit lamp should be used to examine the eyes. The conjunctivae and corneas
are inspected for lesions, including punctate spots, and redness. The cornea is stained with fluorescein
and examined. The lids are everted to detect hidden foreign bodies. The eyelids, including the lacrimal
puncta, are closely inspected for foreign bodies, blepharitis, hordeola, ectropion, entropion, and trichiasis.
The lacrimal sac (near the medial canthus) is palpated for warmth, tenderness, and swelling. Any
swellings are palpated for consistency and to see whether pus is expressed.
The nose is examined for congestion, purulence, and bleeding.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Repeated, unexplained episodes of tearing
• Hard mass in or near the nasolacrimal drainage structures
Interpretation of findings:
Findings that suggest obstruction of nasolacrimal drainage include
• Tears running down the cheek (true epiphora)
• Absence of signs of a specific cause
A cause is often evident from the clinical evaluation (see
Table 60-14
).
[Table 60-14.
Findings that Suggest the Cause of Nasolacrimal Obstruction]
Testing:
Testing is often unnecessary because the cause is usually evident from the examination.
Schirmer's test with a large amount of wetting (eg, > 25 mm) suggests an evaporative dry eye as the
etiology of tearing. Schirmer's test with very little wetting (< 5.5 mm) suggests an aqueous teardeficient
dry eye. Usually, Schirmer's test is done by an ophthalmologist to ensure it is done and interpreted
correctly.
Probing and saline irrigation of the lacrimal drainage system can help detect anatomic obstruction of
drainage, as well as stenosis due to complete obstruction of the nasolacrimal drainage system. Irrigation
is done with and without fluorescein dye. Reflux through the opposite punctum or canaliculus signals fixed
obstruction; reflux and nasal drainage signify stenosis. This test is considered adjunctive and is done by
ophthalmologists.
Imaging tests and procedures (dacryocystography, CT, nasal endoscopy) are sometimes useful to
delineate abnormal anatomy when surgery is being considered or occasionally to detect an abscess.
Treatment
Underlying disorders (eg, allergies, foreign bodies, conjunctivitis) are treated.
The use of artificial tears lessens tearing when dry eyes or corneal epithelial defects are the cause.
Congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction often resolves spontaneously. In patients < 1 yr, manual
compression of the lacrimal sac 4 or 5 times/day may relieve the distal obstruction. After 1 yr, the
nasolacrimal duct may need probing with the patient under general anesthesia. If obstruction is recurrent,
a temporary drainage tube may be inserted.
In acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction, irrigation of the nasolacrimal duct may be therapeutic when
underlying disorders do not respond to treatment. As a last resort, a passage between the lacrimal sac
and the nasal cavity can be created surgically (dacryocystorhinostomy).
===PAGE:677===
In cases of punctal or canalicular stenosis, dilation is usually curative. If canalicular stenosis is severe
and bothersome, a surgical procedure that places a glass tube leading from the caruncle into the nasal
cavity can be considered.
Geriatrics Essentials
Idiopathic age-related nasolacrimal duct stenosis is the most common cause of unexplained epiphora in
elderly patients; however, tumors should also be considered.
Key Points
• If tears do not run down the cheek, dry eyes is often the cause.
• If tears run down the cheek, obstruction of nasolacrimal drainage is likely.
•
Testing is often unnecessary but is needed in cases of recurrent infectious dacryocystitis, which can
progress to more serious conditions such as orbital cellulitis.
Other Eye Symptoms
Dry eyes are discussed under Keratoconjunctivitis sicca ( The disorder is most often idiopathic
or associated with older age but can also be caused by connective tissue diseases (eg, Sjogren's
syndrome, RA, SLE).
Eye discharge:
Discharge is often accompanied by a red eye ( and commonly is caused by
allergic or infectious conjunctivitis, blepharitis, and, in infants, ophthalmia neonatorum (neonatal
conjunctivitis). Infectious discharge may be purulent in bacterial infection, such as staphylococcal
conjunctivitis or gonorrhea. Less common causes include dacryocystitis and canaliculitis.
Diagnosis is usually made clinically. Allergic conjunctivitis can often be distinguished from infectious by
predominance of itching, clear discharge, and presence of other allergic symptoms (eg, runny nose,
sneezing). Clinical differentiation between viral and bacterial conjunctivitis is difficult. Cultures are not
usually done, but are indicated for patients with the following:
• Clinically suspected gonococcal or chlamydial conjunctivitis
• Severe symptoms
• Immunocompromise
• A vulnerable eye (eg, after a corneal transplant, in exophthalmos due to Graves' disease)
• Ineffective initial therapy
Halos:
Halos around light may result from cataracts; conditions that result in corneal edema, such as
acute angle-closure glaucoma or disorders that cause bullous keratopathy; corneal haziness; mucus on
the cornea; or drugs, such as digoxin or chloroquine.
Blue hues:
Certain conditions may cause a blue tint to the visual field (cyanopsia). Cyanopsia may occur
for a few days after cataract removal or as an adverse effect of sildenafil and possibly other
phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) inhibitors.
Scotomata:
Scotomata are visual field deficits and are divided into
• Negative scotomata (blind spots)
• Positive scotomata (light spots or scintillating flashes)
===PAGE:678===
Negative scotomata may not be noticed by patients unless they involve central vision and interfere
significantly with visual acuity; the complaint is most often decreased visual acuity (. Negative
scotomata have multiple causes that can sometimes be distinguished by the specific type of field deficit
(see
Table 60-1
) as identified by use of a tangent screen, Goldmann perimeter, or computerized
automated perimetry (in which the visual field is mapped out in detail based on patient response to a
series of flashing lights in different locations controlled by a standardized computer program).
Positive scotomata represent a response to abnormal stimulation of some portion of the visual system, as
occurs in migraines.
===PAGE:679===
Chapter 61. Refractive Error
Introduction
In the emmetropic (normally refracted) eye, entering light rays are focused on the retina by the cornea
and the lens, creating a sharp image that is transmitted to the brain. The lens is elastic, more so in
younger people. During accommodation, the ciliary muscles adjust lens shape to properly focus images.
Refractive errors are failure of the eye to focus images sharply on the retina, causing blurred vision (see
Fig. 61-1
).
In
myopia
(nearsightedness), the point of focus is in front of the retina because the cornea is too steeply
curved, the axial length of the eye is too long, or both. Distant objects are blurred, but near objects can be
seen clearly. To correct myopia, a concave (minus) lens is used. Myopic refractive errors in children
frequently increase until the child stops growing.
In
hyperopia
(farsightedness), the point of focus is behind the retina because the cornea is too flatly
curved, the axial length is too short, or both. In adults, both near and distant objects are blurred. Children
and young adults with mild hyperopia may be able to see clearly because of their ability to accommodate.
To correct hyperopia, a convex (plus) lens is used.
[Fig. 61-1.
Errors of refraction.]
In
astigmatism,
nonspherical (variable) curvature of the cornea or lens causes light rays of different
orientations (eg, vertical, oblique, horizontal) to focus at different points. To correct astigmatism, a
cylindric lens (a segment cut from a cylinder) is used. Cylindric lenses have no refractive power along one
axis and are concave or convex along the other axis.
Presbyopia
is loss of the lens' ability to change shape to focus on near objects due to aging. Typically,
presbyopia becomes noticeable by the time a person reaches the early or mid 40s. A convex (plus) lens is
used for correction when viewing near objects. These lenses may be supplied as separate glasses or
built into a lens as bifocals or variable focus lenses.
Anisometropia
is a significant difference between the refractive errors of the 2 eyes (usually > 3
diopters). When corrected with eyeglasses, a difference in image size (aniseikonia) is produced; it can
lead to difficulties with fusion of the 2 differently sized images and even to suppression of one of the
images.
Symptoms and Signs
The primary symptom of refractive errors is blurred vision for distant objects, near objects, or both.
Sometimes the excessive ciliary muscle tone can cause headaches. Occasionally, excessive staring can
lead to ocular surface desiccation, causing eye irritation, itching, visual fatigue, foreign body sensation,
and redness. Frowning when reading and excessive blinking or rubbing of the eyes are symptoms in
children.
Diagnosis
Refraction should be checked every 1 or 2 yr. Screening children helps detect refractive errors before
they interfere with learning. A comprehensive eye examination ( should accompany refraction
testing, whether done by an ophthalmologist or an optometrist.
Contact Lenses
Contact lenses often provide better visual acuity and peripheral vision than do eyeglasses and can be
prescribed to correct myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism, anisometropia, aniseikonia, aphakia (absence of
the lens) after cataract removal, and keratoconus (a conical-shaped cornea). Either soft or rigid lenses
are used to correct myopia and hyperopia. Toric soft contact lenses (which have different curvatures
molded onto the front lens surface) or rigid lenses are used to correct significant astigmatism; they are
===PAGE:680===
satisfactory in many cases but require expert fitting.
Presbyopia can also be corrected with contact lenses. In one approach, termed monovision, the
nondominant eye is corrected for reading and the dominant eye is corrected for distant vision. Rigid and
soft bifocal and multifocal contact lenses can also be successful, but the fitting procedure is timeconsuming because precise alignment is essential.
Neither rigid nor soft contact lenses offer the eyes the protection against blunt or sharp injury that
eyeglasses do.
Care and Complications
Instructions for hygiene and handling lenses must be strictly observed. Poor contact lens hygiene may
lead to persistent inflammation or infection of the cornea.
Contact lenses occasionally cause painless superficial corneal changes. Contact lenses can be painful
when
• The corneal epithelium is abraded (; the cornea becomes red and inflamed and stains with
fluorescein.
• The lenses fit poorly (eg, too tight, too loose, poorly centered).
• There is too little moisture to keep the lens floating above the cornea.
• The lenses are worn in a nonideal environment (eg, O
-poor, smoky, windy).
• A lens is improperly inserted or removed.
• A small foreign particle (eg, soot, dust) becomes trapped between the lens and the cornea.
• The lenses are worn for a long time (overwear syndrome).
In overwear syndrome, spontaneous healing may occur in a day or so if lenses are not worn. In some
cases, active treatment is required—eg, topical antibiotic eyedrops or ointments and dilation of the pupil
with a mydriatic to ease photophobia. (Mydriatics work by paralyzing the muscles of the iris and ciliary
body [movement of the inflamed muscles causes pain].) Recovery is usually rapid, complete, and without
vision impairment. An ophthalmologist should be consulted before lenses are worn again.
Risk factors for contact lens-related corneal infection (keratitis) include the following:
• Poor lens hygiene
• Overnight or extended wear
• Use of tap water in the cleaning regimen
• Eyes with a compromised ocular surface (eg, dryness, poor corneal sensation)
Infections require rapid management by an ophthalmologist.
Corneal ulcer:
A corneal ulcer, which is a potentially vision-threatening infection of the cornea, is
suspected when a contact lens wearer experiences intense eye pain (both foreign body sensation and
ache), redness, photophobia, and tearing (see also p.
).
Diagnosis is by slit-lamp examination and fluorescein staining. A corneal infiltrate (collection of WBCs in
the corneal stroma) is present. At times, the corneal infiltrate is large and dense enough to be seen with
handheld magnification or even with the naked eye as a white spot on the cornea. Microbiologic analysis
===PAGE:681===
of cultures and smears of the corneal infiltrate, contact lens, and contact lens case is indicated.
Treatment includes cessation of contact lens wear and antibiotic drops. Initial therapy includes broadspectrum antibiotic coverage using a fluoroquinolone antibiotic drop q 15 to 60 min around the clock for
24 to 72 h, then at gradually longer intervals. Drops of an additional antibiotic, such as cefazolin,
vancomycin, or concentrated tobramycin, are used if the ulcer is large, deep, or close to the visual axis.
The antibiotic may be changed later based on culture results. Neglected cases may respond poorly or not
at all to treatment, and severe vision loss may result.
Rigid Corneal Contact Lenses
Older polymethyl methacrylate rigid contact lenses have been replaced by gas-permeable contact lenses
(GPCLs) made of fluorocarbon and polymethyl methacrylate admixtures. GPCLs are 6.5 to 10 mm in
diameter and cover part of the cornea, floating on the tear layer overlying it.
Rigid contact lenses can improve vision for people with myopia, hyperopia, and astigmatism. If the
corneal surface is irregular, rigid lenses often provide a smooth refracting surface and thus improve visual
acuity noticeably more than soft contact lenses or eyeglasses.
For complete wearing comfort, rigid contact lenses require an adaptation period, sometimes as long as 1
wk. During this time, the wearer gradually increases the number of hours the lenses are worn each day.
Importantly, no pain should occur at any time. Pain is a sign of an ill-fitting contact lens or corneal
irritation. Wearers usually experience temporary (< 2 h) blurred vision (spectacle blur) when wearing
eyeglasses after removing rigid contact lenses.
Soft Hydrophilic Contact Lenses
Soft contact lenses are made of poly-2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate and other flexible plastics and are 30 to
79% water. They are 13 to 15 mm in diameter and cover the entire cornea. Soft contact lenses can
improve vision for people with myopia and hyperopia. Because soft contact lenses mold to the existing
corneal curvature, anything greater than minimal astigmatism cannot be treated unless a special toric
lens, which has different curvatures molded onto the front lens surface, is used. Weighting the lower
aspect of the lens maintains its orientation.
Soft contact lenses are also prescribed for treatment of recurrent corneal erosions and other corneal
disorders (called bandage or therapeutic contact lenses). Prophylactic antibiotic eyedrops (eg,
fluoroquinolone qid) may be advisable with a bandage lens. Extended wearing of contact lenses,
especially in aphakia after cataract surgery, is practical, but an ophthalmologist should examine the
patient at least 4 times/yr. The patient should clean the lenses once/wk.
Because of their larger size, soft contact lenses are easier to handle, are not as likely as rigid lenses to
eject spontaneously, and are less likely to allow foreign bodies to lodge beneath them. Immediate wearing
comfort allows for a brief adaptation period.
Soft contact lenses have a higher incidence of corneal infections, which increases for every night a
person wears them during sleep. When dry, soft contact lenses are brittle and break easily. They absorb a
certain amount of moisture (based on the water content) from the tear film to retain adequate shape and
pliability. Therefore, patients with dry eye are usually more comfortable wearing lenses that have a low
water content.
Refractive Surgery
Corneal refractive surgery alters the curvature of the cornea to focus light more precisely on the retina.
The goal of refractive surgery is to decrease dependence on eyeglasses or contact lenses. Most people
who undergo refractive surgery achieve this goal; about 95% do not need corrective lenses for distance
vision. Ideal candidates for refractive surgery are people with healthy eyes who are not satisfied wearing
eyeglasses or contact lenses. Preoperative examination excludes people with active ocular diseases,
including severe dry eye. Candidates should not have a history of autoimmune or connective tissue
===PAGE:682===
disease because of potential problems with wound healing. Latent herpes simplex virus may be
reactivated after surgery; patients should be advised accordingly. Refraction should be stable for at least
1 yr, and candidates should be > 18 yr. Another contraindication is use of isotretinoin or amiodarone.
Adverse effects of refractive surgery include temporary foreign body sensation, glare, halos, and dryness;
occasionally, these symptoms persist. Potential complications include overcorrection and undercorrection,
infection, and irregular astigmatism. In excimer laser procedures performed on the superficial corneal
stroma, haze formation is possible. If infection, irregular astigmatism, or haze formation causes permanent
changes in the central cornea, best-corrected acuity could be lost. The overall complication rate is low;
chance of vision loss is < 1% if the patient is considered a good candidate for refractive surgery
preoperatively.
Laser In Situ Keratomileusis
In laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK), a flap of corneal tissue is created with a laser or mechanical
microkeratome and turned back, the underlying stromal bed is sculpted (photo-ablated) with the excimer
laser, and the flap is replaced without suturing. Because surface epithelium is not disrupted centrally,
vision returns rapidly. Most people notice a significant improvement the next day. LASIK can be used to
treat myopia, astigmatism, and hyperopia.
Advantages of LASIK over photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) include the desirable lack of healing
response (the central corneal epithelium is not removed, thereby decreasing the risk of central haze
formation that occurs during healing), the shorter visual rehabilitation period, and minimal postoperative
pain. Disadvantages include possible intraoperative and postoperative flap-related complications, such as
irregular flap formation, flap dislocation, and the need for adequate corneal thickness to prevent long-term
corneal ectasia. Ectasia occurs when the cornea has become so thin that intraocular pressure causes
instability and bulging of the thinned and weakened corneal stroma. Blurring, increasing myopia, and
irregular astigmatism can result.
Photorefractive Keratectomy
In PRK, the excimer laser is used to sculpt (photoablate) the anterior curvature of the corneal stromal bed
to treat myopia, hyperopia, and astigmatism. The corneal epithelium is removed before photoablation and
generally takes 3 to 4 days to regenerate; during this time a bandage contact lens is worn. Unlike LASIK,
no corneal flap is created.
PRK may be more suitable for patients with thin corneas or anterior basement membrane dystrophy.
Advantages of PRK include an overall thicker residual stromal bed (thereby reducing risk of ectasia) and
lack of flap-related complications. Disadvantages include potential for corneal haze formation if a large
amount of corneal tissue is ablated and the need for postoperative corticosteroid drops for 3 to 4 mo.
More than 95% of patients see 20/40 or better without eyeglasses after surgery.
Intracorneal Ring Segments
Intracorneal ring segments (INTACS) are thin arc-shaped segments of biocompatible plastic that are
inserted in pairs through a small radial corneal incision into the peripheral corneal stroma at two-thirds
depth. After INTACS are inserted, the central corneal curvature is flattened, reducing myopia. INTACS are
used for mild myopia (< 3 diopters) and minimal astigmatism (< 1 diopter). INTACS maintain a central,
clear, optical zone because the 2 segments are placed in the corneal periphery. INTACS can be replaced
or removed if desired.
Risks include induced astigmatism, undercorrection and overcorrection, infection, glare, halo, and
incorrect depth placement. Vision results are very good; in US clinical studies, 97% of patients saw 20/40
or better and 74% of patients saw 20/20 or better.
Conductive Keratoplasty
===PAGE:683===
Conductive keratoplasty (CK) is a thermal technique that can treat spherical hyperopia (ie, hyperopia
without associated astigmatism) and presbyopia. CK uses radiofrequency energy applied with a fine
probe in a ring pattern to the peripheral cornea to contract the periphery and steepen the center, thereby
increasing the refractive power of the cornea. For presbyopic patients who wear only reading glasses, CK
is typically done in the nondominant eye (monovision) to induce myopia in that eye and enable the patient
to regain reading vision. As the presbyopia progresses, additional rings of treatment are added. Risks of
CK include induced astigmatism and regression of effect.
Phakic Intraocular Lenses
Phakic intraocular lenses (IOLs) are lens implants that are used to treat severe myopia in patients who
are not suitable candidates for laser vision correction. Unlike in cataract surgery, the patient's natural lens
is not removed. The phakic IOL is inserted directly anterior or posterior to the iris through an incision in
the eye. This procedure is intraocular surgery and must be done in an operating room.
Risks include cataract formation, glaucoma, infection, and loss of corneal endothelial cells.
Because phakic IOLs do not correct astigmatism, patients can undergo subsequent laser vision correction
to refine refractive results in a technique known as bioptics. Because the bulk of the myopia is corrected
with the phakic IOL, less corneal tissue is removed with LASIK, and the risk of ectasia is thus low.
Clear Lensectomy
Clear lensectomy can be considered in patients with high hyperopia who are already presbyopic. This
procedure is identical to cataract surgery except the patient's lens is clear and not cataractous. A
multifocal intraocular lens, which allows the patient to focus over a wide range of distances without
external lens correction, can be inserted.
The main risks of clear lensectomy are infection and rupture of the posterior capsule of the lens, which
would necessitate further surgery. Clear lensectomy should be done with great caution in young myopic
patients because they have an increased risk of retinal detachment.
Radial and Astigmatic Keratotomy
Radial and astigmatic keratotomy procedures change the shape of the cornea by making deep corneal
incisions using a diamond blade.
Radial keratotomy has been replaced by laser vision correction and is rarely used because it offers no
clear advantages over laser vision correction, has a greater need for subsequent retreatment, leads to
visual and refractive results that change through the day, and tends to cause hyperopia in the long term.
Astigmatic keratotomy is used to treat astigmatism at the time of cataract surgery or after corneal
transplantation.
===PAGE:684===
Chapter 62. Eyelid and Lacrimal Disorders
Introduction
Common eyelid and lacrimal disorders include blepharitis, blepharospasm, canaliculitis, chalazion and
hordeolum, dacryocystitis, dacryostenosis, entropion and ectropion, trichiasis, and tumors.
Blepharitis
Blepharitis is inflammation of the eyelid margins that may be acute or chronic. Symptoms and
signs include itching and burning of the eyelid margins with redness and edema. Diagnosis is
by history and examination. Acute ulcerative blepharitis is usually treated with topical
antibiotics or systemic antivirals. Acute nonulcerative blepharitis is occasionally treated with
topical corticosteroids. Chronic disease is treated with tear supplements, warm compresses,
and occasionally oral antibiotics (eg, a tetracycline) for meibomian gland dysfunction or with
eyelid hygiene and tear supplements for seborrheic blepharitis.
Etiology
Blepharitis may be acute (ulcerative or nonulcerative) or chronic (meibomian gland dysfunction,
seborrheic blepharitis).
Acute:
Acute ulcerative blepharitis is usually caused by bacterial infection (usually staphylococcal) of the
eyelid margin at the origins of the eyelashes; the lash follicles and meibomian glands are also involved. It
may also be due to a virus (eg, herpes simplex, varicella zoster).
Acute nonulcerative blepharitis is usually caused by an allergic reaction involving the same area (eg,
atopic blepharodermatitis and seasonal allergic blepharoconjunctivitis, which cause intense itching,
rubbing, and a rash; contact sensitivity [dermatoblepharo-conjunctivitis]).
Chronic:
Chronic blepharitis is noninfectious inflammation of unknown cause. Meibomian glands in the
eyelid produce lipids (meibum) that reduce tear evaporation by forming a lipid layer on top of the aqueous
tear layer. In meibomian gland dysfunction, the lipid composition is abnormal, and gland ducts and orifices
become inspissated with hard, waxy plugs. Many patients have rosacea ( and recurrent
hordeola or chalazia.
Many patients with seborrheic blepharitis have seborrheic dermatitis of the face and scalp ( or
acne rosacea. Secondary bacterial colonization often occurs on the scales that develop on the eyelid
margin. Meibomian glands can become obstructed.
Most patients with meibomian gland dysfunction or seborrheic blepharitis have increased tear evaporation
and secondary keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms common to all forms of blepharitis include itching and burning of the eyelid margins and
conjunctival irritation with lacrimation, photosensitivity, and foreign body sensation.
Acute:
In acute ulcerative blepharitis, small pustules may develop in eyelash follicles and eventually
break down to form shallow marginal ulcers. Tenacious adherent crusts leave a bleeding surface when
removed. During sleep, eyelids can become glued together by dried secretions. Recurrent ulcerative
blepharitis can cause eyelid scars and loss of eyelashes.
In acute nonulcerative blepharitis, eyelid margins become edematous and erythematous; eyelashes may
become crusted with dried serous fluid.
Chronic:
In meibomian gland dysfunction, examination reveals dilated, inspissated gland orifices that,
when pressed, exude a waxy, thick, yellowish secretion with pressure. In seborrheic blepharitis, greasy,
===PAGE:685===
easily removable scales develop on eyelid margins. Most patients with seborrheic blepharitis and
meibomian gland dysfunction have symptoms of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, such as foreign body
sensation, grittiness, eye strain and fatigue, and blurring with prolonged visual effort.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually by slit-lamp examination. Chronic blepharitis that does not respond to treatment may
require biopsy to exclude eyelid tumors that can simulate the condition.
Prognosis
Acute blepharitis most often responds to treatment but may recur, develop into chronic blepharitis, or
both. Chronic blepharitis is indolent, recurrent, and resistant to treatment. Exacerbations are
inconvenient, uncomfortable, and cosmetically unappealing but do not usually result in corneal scarring or
vision loss.
Treatment
Acute:
Acute ulcerative blepharitis is treated with an antibiotic ointment (eg, bacitracin/polymyxin B,
erythromycin, or gentamicin 0.3% qid for 7 to 10 days). Acute viral ulcerative blepharitis is treated with
systemic antivirals (eg, for herpes simplex, acyclovir 400 mg po tid for 7 days; for varicella zoster,
famciclovir 500 mg po tid or valacyclovir 1 g po tid for 7 days).
Treatment of acute nonulcerative blepharitis begins with avoiding the offending action (eg, rubbing) or
substance (eg, new eye drops). Warm compresses over the closed eyelid may relieve symptoms and
speed resolution. If swelling persists > 24 h, topical corticosteroids (eg, fluorometholone ophthalmic
ointment 0.1% tid for 7 days) can be used.
Chronic:
The initial treatment for both meibomian gland dysfunction and seborrheic blepharitis is directed
toward the secondary keratoconjunctivitis sicca (. Tear supplements, bland ointments at night,
and, if necessary, punctal plugs (inserts that obstruct the puncta and thus decrease tear drainage) are
effective in most patients.
If needed, additional treatment for meibomian gland dysfunction includes warm compresses to melt the
waxy plugs and occasionally eyelid massage to extrude trapped secretions and coat the ocular surface. A
tetracycline (eg, doxycycline 100 mg po bid tapered over 3 to 4 mo) may also be effective because it
changes the composition of meibomian gland secretions.
If needed, additional treatment for seborrheic blepharitis includes gentle cleansing of the eyelid margin 2
times a day with a cotton swab dipped in a dilute solution of baby shampoo (2 to 3 drops in 1/2 cup of
warm water). A topical antibiotic ointment (bacitracin/polymyxin B or sulfacetamide 10% bid for up to 3 mo)
may be added to reduce bacterial counts on the eyelid margin when cases are unresponsive to weeks of
eyelid hygiene.
Blepharospasm
Blepharospasm is spasm of muscles around the eye causing involuntary blinking and eye
closing.
The cause of blepharospasm is most often unknown. It affects women more than men and tends to occur
in families. Blepharospasm may be secondary to eye disorders, including those that cause ocular irritation
(eg, trichiasis, corneal foreign body, keratoconjunctivitis sicca) and systemic neurologic diseases that
cause spasm (eg, Parkinson's disease).
Symptoms are involuntary blinking and closing of the eyes; in severe cases, people cannot open their
eyes. Spasms may be made worse by fatigue, bright light, and anxiety.
Treatment involves injecting botulinum toxin type A into the eyelid muscles; treatment must be repeated in
===PAGE:686===
most instances. Anxiolytics may help. Surgery to cut the periorbital muscles is also effective but, because
of potential complications, is considered only if botulinum toxin is ineffective. Sunglasses help decrease
the light sensitivity that may cause or accompany blepharospasm.
Canaliculitis
Canaliculitis is inflammation of the canaliculus (see
Fig. 60-3
.
The most common cause is infection with
Actinomyces israelii
, a gram-positive bacillus with fine
branching filaments, but other bacteria, fungi (eg,
Candida albicans
), and viruses (eg, herpes simplex)
may be causative. Symptoms and signs are tearing, discharge, red eye (especially nasally), and mild
tenderness over the involved side.
Diagnosis is suspected based on symptoms and signs, expression of turbid secretions with pressure over
the lacrimal sac, and a gritty sensation caused by necrotic material that can be felt during probing of the
lacrimal system. Canaliculitis can be differentiated from dacryocystitis. In canaliculitis, the punctum and
canaliculus are red and swollen; in dacryocystitis, the punctum and canaliculus are normal, but a red,
swollen, tender mass is located in or near the lacrimal sac.
Treatment is warm compresses, irrigation of the canaliculus with antibiotic solution (by an
ophthalmologist), and removal of any concretions, which usually requires surgery. Antibiotic selection is
usually empiric with a 1st-generation cephalosporin or penicillinase-resistant synthetic penicillin but may
be guided by irrigation samples.
Chalazion and Hordeolum
Chalazia and hordeola are sudden-onset localized swellings of the eyelid. A chalazion is caused
by noninfectious meibomian gland occlusion, whereas a hordeolum is caused by infection. Both
conditions initially cause eyelid hyperemia and edema, swelling, and pain. With time, a
chalazion becomes a small nontender nodule in the eyelid center, whereas a
hordeolum
remains painful and localizes to an eyelid margin. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with hot
compresses. Both conditions improve spontaneously, but incision or, for chalazia, intralesional
corticosteroids may be used to hasten resolution.
Chalazion:
A chalazion is noninfectious obstruction of a meibomian gland causing extravasation of
irritating lipid material in the eyelid soft tissues with focal secondary granulomatous inflammation (see
Plate 7
). Disorders that cause abnormally thick meibomian gland secretions (eg, meibomian gland
dysfunction, acne rosacea) increase the risk of meibomian gland obstruction.
Hordeolum:
A hordeolum (stye) is an acute, localized, pyogenic (usually staphylococcal) infection or
abscess of the eyelid that may be external or internal (see
Plate 16
). Most hordeola are external and result from obstruction and infection of an eyelash follicle and
adjacent glands of Zeis or Moll's glands. Follicle obstruction may be associated with blepharitis. An
internal hordeolum, which is very rare, results from infection of a meibomian gland. Sometimes cellulitis
accompanies hordeola.
Symptoms and Signs
Chalazia and hordeola each cause eyelid redness, swelling, and pain.
Chalazion:
After 1 or 2 days, a chalazion localizes to the body of the eyelid. Typically, a small nontender
nodule or lump develops. A chalazion usually drains through the inner surface of the eyelid or is absorbed
spontaneously over 2 to 8 wk; rarely, it persists longer. Vision may be slightly blurred.
Hordeolum:
After 1 to 2 days, an external hordeolum localizes to the eyelid margin. There may be
tearing, photophobia, and a foreign body sensation. Typically, a small yellowish pustule develops at the
base of an eyelash, surrounded by hyperemia, induration, and diffuse edema. Within 2 to 4 days, the
===PAGE:687===
lesion ruptures and discharges pus, thereby relieving pain and resolving the lesion.
Symptoms of an internal hordeolum are the same as those of a chalazion, with pain, redness, and edema
localized to the posterior tarsal conjunctival surface. Inflammation may be severe, sometimes with fever or
chills. Inspection of the tarsal conjunctivae shows a small elevation or yellow area at the site of the
affected gland. Later, an abscess forms. Spontaneous rupture is rare; however, when it does occur, it
usually occurs on the conjunctival side of the eyelid and sometimes erupts through the skin side.
Recurrence is common.
Diagnosis
• Clinical assessment
Diagnosis of chalazion and both kinds of hordeola is clinical; however, during the first 2 days, they may
be clinically indistinguishable. Because internal hordeola are so rare, they are not usually suspected
unless inflammation is severe or fever or chills are present. If the chalazion or hordeolum lies near the
inner canthus of the lower eyelid, it must be differentiated from dacryocystitis (see below), which can
usually be excluded by noting the location of maximum induration and tenderness (eg, eyelid for a
chalazion, under the medial canthus near the side of the nose for dacryocystitis). Chronic chalazia that do
not respond to treatment require biopsy to exclude tumor of the eyelid.
Treatment
• Hot compresses
• Sometimes drainage or drug therapy
Hot compresses for 5 to 10 min 2 or 3 times a day can be used to hasten resolution of chalazia and
external hordeola.
Chalazion:
Incision and curettage or intrachalazion corticosteroid therapy (0.05 to 0.2 mL triamcinolone
25 mg/mL) may be indicated if chalazia are large, unsightly, and persist for more than several weeks
despite conservative therapy.
Hordeolum:
An external hordeolum that does not respond to hot compresses can be incised with a
sharp, fine-tipped blade. Systemic antibiotics (eg, dicloxacillin or erythromycin 250 mg po qid) are
indicated when cellulitis accompanies a hordeolum.
Treatment of internal hordeola is oral antibiotics and incision and drainage if needed. Topical antibiotics
are usually ineffective.
Dacryocystitis
Dacryocystitis is infection of the lacrimal sac, usually with staphyloccocal or streptococcal
species and usually as a consequence of nasolacrimal duct obstruction.
In acute dacryocystitis, the patient presents with pain, redness, and edema around the lacrimal sac.
Diagnosis is suspected based on symptoms and signs and when pressure over the lacrimal sac causes
reflux of mucoid material through the puncta. Initial treatment is with warm compresses and oral antibiotics
for mild cases or IV antibiotics for more severe cases.
The antibiotic is usually a 1st-generation
cephalosporin or penicillinase-resistant synthetic penicillin. If the infection does not respond as expected,
consideration should be given to methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA), and antibiotics
changed accordingly. The abscess can be drained and the antibiotics can be changed based on culture
results if the initial antibiotic proves ineffective.
Patients with chronic dacryocystitis usually present with a mass under the medial canthal tendon and
chronic conjunctivitis. Definitive treatment for resolved acute dacryocystitis or chronic conjunctivitis is
usually surgery that creates a passage between the lacrimal sac and the nasal cavity
===PAGE:688===
(dacryocystorhinostomy).
Dacryostenosis
Dacryostenosis is obstruction or stenosis of the nasolacrimal duct, causing excess tearing.
Nasolacrimal obstruction may be congenital or acquired. One cause of congenital obstruction is
inadequate development of any part of the nasolacrimal ducts. Typically, a membrane at the distal end of
the nasolacrimal duct persists. There is tearing and purulent discharge; the condition may manifest as
chronic conjunctivitis, usually beginning after the age of 2 wk (most often at age 3 to 12 wk).
Causes of acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction are listed in
Table 62-1
. The cause is most often age-related stenosis of the nasolacrimal duct. Other causes include
past nasal or facial bone fractures and sinus surgery, which disrupt the nasolacrimal duct; inflammatory
diseases (eg, sarcoidosis, Wegener's granulomatosis); and dacryocystitis.
Causes of punctal or canalicular stenosis include chronic conjunctivitis (especially herpetic), certain types
of chemotherapy, adverse reactions to eye drops (especially topical echothiophate iodide), and radiation.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually based on clinical criteria. Sometimes ophthalmologists probe and irrigate the lacrimal
drainage system with saline, with or without fluorescein dye. Reflux indicates stenosis.
Treatment
Congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction often resolves spontaneously by about age 6 to 9 mo; before 1
yr, manual compression of the lacrimal sac 4 or 5 times/day may relieve the obstruction. After 1 yr, the
nasolacrimal duct may need probing, usually under general anesthesia; if obstruction is recurrent, a
temporary silastic tube may be inserted.
[Table 62-1.
Causes of Acquired Nasolacrimal Duct Obstruction]
In acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction, the underlying disorder is treated when possible. If treatment is
not possible or is ineffective, a passage between the lacrimal sac and the nasal cavity can be created
surgically (dacryocystorhinostomy).
In cases of punctal or canalicular stenosis, dilation is usually curative. If canalicular stenosis is severe
and bothersome, a surgical procedure that places a glass tube (Jones tube) leading from the caruncle
into the nasal cavity can be considered.
Entropion and Ectropion
Entropion is inversion of an eyelid. Ectropion is eversion of the lower eyelid.
Entropion:
Entropion (inversion of an eyelid) is caused by age-related tissue relaxation, postinfectious or
posttraumatic changes, or blepharospasm. Eyelashes rub against the eyeball and may lead to corneal
ulceration and scarring. Symptoms can include foreign body sensation, tearing, and red eye. Diagnosis is
clinical. Definitive treatment is surgery.
Ectropion:
Ectropion (eversion of the lower eyelid—see
Plate 12
) is caused by age-related tissue relaxation, cranial nerve VII palsy, and posttraumatic or
postsurgical changes. Symptoms are tearing (due to poor drainage of tears through the nasolacrimal
system, which may no longer contact the eyeball) and symptoms of dry eyes (, possibly due to
inadequate blinking. Diagnosis is clinical. Symptomatic treatment can include tear supplements and, at
night, ocular lubricants; definitive treatment is surgery.
Trichiasis
===PAGE:689===
Trichiasis is an anatomic misalignment of eyelashes, which rub against the eyeball, in a patient
with no entropion.
Trichiasis is most often idiopathic, but known causes include blepharitis, posttraumatic and postsurgical
changes, conjunctival scarring (eg, secondary to cicatricial pemphigoid, atopic keratoconjunctivitis,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, or chemical injury), epiblepharon (an extra lower eyelid skinfold that directs
lashes into a vertical position), and distichiasis (a congenital extra row of eyelashes). Corneal ulceration
and scarring can occur in chronic cases. Symptoms are foreign body sensation, tearing, and red eye.
Diagnosis is usually clinical. Trichiasis differs from entropion in that the eyelid position is normal.
Evaluation includes fluorescein staining to exclude corneal abrasion or ulceration. Treatment is eyelash
removal with forceps. If eyelashes grow back, electrolysis or cryosurgery is more effective at permanently
preventing recurrence.
Tumors
The skin of the eyelids is a common site for growth of benign and malignant tumors.
Xanthelasma:
Xanthelasma is a common, benign deposit of yellow-white flat plaques of lipid material
that occur subcutaneously on the upper and lower eyelids. Although some people with xanthelasmas
have dyslipidemias, most do not. Diagnosis is by appearance. No treatment is necessary, although
xanthelasmas can be removed for cosmetic reasons, and underlying dyslipidemias should be treated.
Basal cell carcinoma:
This skin cancer frequently occurs at the eyelid margins, at the inner canthus,
and on the upper cheek (see also p.
). Metastasis is rare. Biopsy establishes the diagnosis.
Treatment is surgical excision using conventional techniques or by Mohs' surgery.
Other malignant tumors:
These types of tumors are less common; they include squamous cell
carcinoma, meibomian gland carcinoma, and melanomas. Eyelid tumors may simulate chronic blepharitis
or chronic chalazion. Therefore, chronic blepharitis, chronic chalazion, or similar lesions should be
biopsied if unresponsive to initial treatment.
===PAGE:690===
Chapter 63. Conjunctival and Scleral Disorders
Introduction
The conjunctiva lines the back of the eyelids (palpebral or tarsal conjunctiva), crosses the space between
the lid and the globe (forniceal conjunctiva), then folds back on itself as it spreads over the sclera to the
cornea (bulbar conjunctiva). The conjunctiva helps maintain the tear film and protect the eye from foreign
objects and infection.
The sclera is the thick white sphere of dense connective tissue that encloses the eye and maintains its
shape. Anteriorly, the sclera fuses with the cornea, and posteriorly it blends with the meninges where the
optic nerve penetrates the globe.
The episclera is a thin vascular membrane between the conjunctiva and the sclera.
The most common disorders are inflammatory (eg, conjunctivitis, episcleritis, scleritis). Conjunctivitis can
be acute or chronic and is infectious, allergic, or irritant in origin. Scleritis usually results from immunemediated disease and episcleritis often does as well. Episcleritis usually does not threaten vision, but
scleritis can destroy vision and the eye. Major symptoms of conjunctivitides (eg, conjunctival hyperemia)
are similar. Early, accurate diagnosis is important.
Select eye findings in conjunctival disorders:
Edema of the bulbar conjunctiva results in a
translucent, bluish, thickened conjunctiva. Gross edema with ballooning of the conjunctiva, often leading
to prolapse of conjunctiva, is known as chemosis.
Edema of the tarsal conjunctiva (typical of allergic conjunctivitis) results in fine, minute projections
(papillae), giving the conjunctiva a velvety appearance.
Hyperplasia of lymphoid follicles in the conjunctiva can occur in viral or chlamydial conjunctivitis. It
appears as small bumps with pale centers, resembling cobblestones. It occurs most commonly in the
inferior tarsal conjunctiva.
Cicatricial Pemphigoid
(Benign Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid; Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid; Ocular Cicatricial Pemphigoid)
Cicatricial pemphigoid is a chronic, bilateral, progressive scarring and shrinkage of the
conjunctiva with opacification of the cornea. Early
symptoms are hyperemia, discomfort,
itching, and discharge; progression leads to eyelid and corneal damage and sometimes
blindness. Diagnosis may be confirmed by biopsy, but biopsy is often not necessary. Treatment
may require systemic immunosuppression.
Cicatricial pemphigoid is an autoimmune disease in which binding of anticonjunctival basement
membrane antibodies results in conjunctival inflammation. It is unrelated to bullous pemphigoid.
Symptoms and Signs
Usually beginning as a chronic conjunctivitis, the condition progresses to symblepharon (adhesion
between the tarsal and bulbar conjunctiva); trichiasis (in-turning eyelashes); keratoconjunctivitis sicca;
corneal neovascularization, opacification, and keratinization; and conjunctival shrinkage and
keratinization. Chronic corneal epithelial defects can lead to secondary bacterial ulceration, scarring, and
blindness. Oral mucous membrane involvement with ulceration and scarring is common, but skin
involvement, characterized by scarring bullae and erythematous plaques, is uncommon.
Diagnosis
• Unexplained symblepharon or biopsy findings
===PAGE:691===
Diagnosis is suspected clinically in patients with conjunctival scarring plus corneal changes,
symblepharon, or both. The differential diagnosis of progressive conjunctival scarring includes
postradiation and atopic disease. Therefore, the clinical diagnosis of cicatricial pemphigoid is made when
there is progression of symblepharon without a history of local radiation or severe perennial allergic
conjunctivitis. Diagnosis can be confirmed by conjunctival biopsy showing antibody deposition on the
basement membrane.
Treatment
• Epilation of in-turning lashes
• Sometimes systemic immunosuppression
Tear substitutes and epilation, cryoepilation, or electroepilation of the in-turning eyelashes may increase
patient comfort and reduce the risk of ocular infection and secondary scarring. For progressive scarring
or corneal opacification or for nonhealing corneal epithelial defects, systemic immunosuppression with
dapsone or cyclophosphamide is indicated.
Conjunctivitis
Conjunctival inflammation typically results from infection, allergy, or irritation. Symptoms are
conjunctival hyperemia and ocular discharge and, depending on the etiology, discomfort and
itching. Diagnosis is clinical; sometimes cultures are indicated. Treatment depends on etiology
and may include topical antibiotics, antihistamines, mast cell stabilizers, and corticosteroids.
Infectious conjunctivitis is most commonly viral or bacterial and is contagious. Rarely, mixed or
unidentifiable pathogens are present. Numerous allergens can cause allergic conjunctivitis (.
Nonallergic conjunctival irritation can result from foreign bodies; wind, dust, smoke, fumes, chemical
vapors, and other types of air pollution; and intense ultraviolet light of electric arcs, sunlamps, and
reflection from snow.
Conjunctivitis is typically acute, but both infectious and allergic conditions can be chronic. Conditions that
cause chronic conjunctivitis include ectropion, entropion, blepharitis, and chronic dacryocystitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Any source of inflammation causes lacrimation or discharge and diffuse conjunctival vascular dilation.
Discharge may cause the eyes to crust overnight. Thick discharge may blur vision, but once discharge is
cleared, visual acuity should be unaffected.
Itching and watery discharge predominate in allergic conjunctivitis. Chemosis and papillary hyperplasia
also suggest allergic conjunctivitis. Irritation or foreign body sensation, photophobia, and discharge
suggest infectious conjunctivitis; purulent discharge suggests a bacterial cause. Severe eye pain
suggests scleritis (.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes culture
Usually, diagnosis is made by history and examination (see also
Table 63-1
), usually
including slit-lamp examination with fluorescein staining of the cornea and, if
glaucoma is suspected, measurement of intraocular pressure.
Other disorders can cause a red eye (. Deep pain in the affected eye when a light is shone in
the unaffected eye (true photophobia) does not occur in uncomplicated conjunctivitis and suggests a
disorder of the cornea or anterior uveal tract. Circumcorneal conjunctival hyperemia (sometimes
===PAGE:692===
described as ciliary flush) is caused by dilated, fine, straight, deep vessels that radiate out 1 to 3 mm from
the limbus, without significant hyperemia of the bulbar and tarsal conjunctivae. Ciliary flush occurs with
uveitis, acute glaucoma, and some types of keratitis.
The cause of conjunctivitis is suggested by clinical findings. However, cultures are indicated for patients
with severe symptoms, immunocompromise, a vulnerable eye (eg, after a corneal transplant, in
exophthalmos due to Graves' disease), or ineffective initial therapy.
Clinical differentiation between viral and bacterial infectious conjunctivitis is not highly accurate. However,
temporarily missing some cases of mild bacterial conjunctivitis is not likely to be harmful because the
infection often resolves spontaneously and antibiotics can be prescribed if symptoms persist.
Treatment
• Prevention of spread
• Treatment of symptoms
Most infectious conjunctivitis is highly contagious and spreads by droplet, fomites, and hand-to-eye
inoculation. To avoid transmitting infection, physicians must wash their hands thoroughly and disinfect
equipment after examining patients. Patients should wash their hands thoroughly after touching their eyes
or nasal secretions, avoid touching the noninfected eye after touching the infected eye, avoid sharing
towels or pillows, and avoid swimming in pools. Eyes should be kept free of discharge and should not be
patched. Small children with conjunctivitis should be kept home from school to avoid spread. Cool washcloths applied to the eyes may help relieve local burning and itching. Antimicrobials are used for certain
infections.
Viral Conjunctivitis
Viral conjunctivitis is a highly contagious acute conjunctival infection usually caused by
adenovirus. Symptoms include irritation, photophobia, and watery discharge. Diagnosis is
clinical. Infection is self-limited, but severe cases sometimes require topical corticosteroids.
Etiology
Conjunctivitis may accompany the common cold and other systemic viral infections (especially measles,
but also chickenpox, rubella, and mumps). Isolated viral conjunctivitis usually results from adenoviruses
and sometimes enteroviruses.
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis usually results from adenovirus serotypes Ad 5, 8, 11, 13, 19, and 37.
Pharyngoconjunctival fever usually results from serotypes Ad 3, 4, and 7. Outbreaks of acute
hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, a rare conjunctivitis associated with infection by enterovirus type 70, have
occurred in Africa and Asia.
Symptoms and Signs
After an incubation period of about 5 to 12 days, conjunctival hyperemia, watery discharge, and ocular
irritation usually begin in one eye and spread rapidly to the other. Follicles may be present on the
palpebral conjunctiva. A preauricular lymph node is often enlarged and painful. Many patients have had
contact with someone with conjunctivitis, a recent URI, or both.
[Table 63-1.
Differentiating Features in Acute Conjunctivitis]
In severe adenoviral conjunctivitis, patients may have photophobia and foreign body sensation. Chemosis
may be present. Pseudomembranes of fibrin and inflammatory cells on the tarsal conjunctiva, focal
corneal inflammation, or both may blur vision. Even after conjunctivitis has resolved, residual corneal
subepithelial opacities (multiple, coin-shaped, 0.5 to 1.0 mm in diameter) may be visible with a slit lamp for
up to 2 yr. Corneal opacities occasionally result in decreased vision and significant glare.
===PAGE:693===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis of conjunctivitis and differentiation between bacterial, viral, and noninfectious conjunctivitis are
usually clinical; special tissue cultures are necessary for growth of the virus but are rarely indicated.
Features that may help differentiate between viral and bacterial conjunctivitis can include purulence of
eye discharge, presence of preauricular lymphadenopathy, and, in epidemic keratoconjunctivitis,
chemosis. Patients with photophobia are stained with fluorescein and examined with a slit lamp. Epidemic
keratoconjunctivitis may cause punctate corneal staining. Secondary bacterial infection of viral
conjunctivitis is rare. However, if any signs suggest bacterial conjunctivitis (eg, purulent discharge),
smears from the eye may be examined microscopically and cultured for bacteria.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
Viral conjunctivitis is highly contagious, and transmission precautions must be followed (as described
previously). Children should generally be kept out of school until resolution.
Viral conjunctivitis is self-limiting, lasting 1 wk in mild cases to up to 3 wk in severe cases. It requires only
warm or cool compresses for symptomatic relief. However, patients who have severe photophobia or
whose vision is affected may benefit from topical corticosteroids (eg, 1% prednisolone acetate q 6 to 8 h).
Corticosteroids, if prescribed, are usually prescribed by an ophthalmologist. Herpes simplex keratitis (see
p.
) must be ruled out first (by fluorescein staining and slit-lamp examination) because corticosteroids
can exacerbate it.
Acute Bacterial Conjunctivitis
Acute conjunctivitis can be caused by numerous bacteria. Symptoms are hyperemia,
lacrimation, irritation, and discharge. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with topical antibiotics,
augmented by systemic antibiotics in more serious cases.
Most bacterial conjunctivitis is acute; chronic bacterial conjunctivitis may be caused by
Chlamydia
and
rarely
Moraxella
. Chlamydial conjunctivitis includes trachoma and adult or neonatal inclusion
conjunctivitis.
Etiology
Bacterial conjunctivitis is usually caused by
Staphylococcus aureus
,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
Haemophilus
sp, or, less commonly,
Chlamydia trachomatis
(.
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
causes
gonococcal conjunctivitis, which usually results from sexual contact with a person who has a genital
infection.
Ophthalmia neonatorum (see also p.
) is conjunctivitis that occurs in 20 to 40% of neonates
delivered through an infected birth canal. It can be caused by maternal gonococcal or chlamydial
infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are typically unilateral but frequently spread to the opposite eye within a few days. Discharge
is typically purulent.
The bulbar and tarsal conjunctivae are intensely hyperemic and edematous. Petechial subconjunctival
hemorrhages, chemosis, photophobia, and an enlarged preauricular lymph node are typically absent.
Eyelid edema is often moderate.
===PAGE:694===
With adult gonococcal conjunctivitis, symptoms develop 12 to 48 h after exposure. Severe eyelid edema,
chemosis, and a profuse purulent exudate are typical. Rare complications include corneal ulceration,
abscess, perforation, panophthalmitis, and blindness.
Ophthalmia neonatorum caused by gonococcal infection appears 2 to 5 days after delivery. With
ophthalmia neonatorum caused by a chlamydial infection, symptoms appear within 5 to 14 days.
Symptoms of both are bilateral, intense papillary conjunctivitis with lid edema, chemosis, and
mucopurulent discharge.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis of conjunctivitis and differentiation between bacterial, viral, and noninfectious conjunctivitis are
usually clinical. Smears and bacterial cultures should be done in patients with severe symptoms,
immunocompromise, ineffective initial
therapy, or a vulnerable eye (eg, after a corneal transplant, in
exophthalmos due to Graves' disease). Smears and conjunctival scrapings should be examined
microscopically and stained with Gram stain to identify bacteria and stained with Giemsa stain to identify
the characteristic epithelial cell basophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies of chlamydial conjunctivitis.
Treatment
• Antibiotics (topical for all causes except gonococcal)
Bacterial conjunctivitis is very contagious, and standard infection control measures ( should be
followed.
If neither gonococcal nor chlamydial infection is suspected, most clinicians treat presumptively with
moxifloxacin 0.5% drops tid for 7 to 10 days or another fluoroquinolone or trimethoprim/polymyxin B qid. A
poor clinical response after 2 or 3 days indicates that the cause is resistant bacteria, a virus, or an allergy.
Culture and sensitivity studies determine subsequent treatment.
Adult gonococcal conjunctivitis requires a single dose of ceftriaxone 1 g IM. Fluoroquinolones are no
longer recommended because resistance is now widespread. Bacitracin 500 U/g or gentamicin 0.3%
ophthalmic ointment instilled into the affected eye q 2 h may be used in addition to systemic treatment.
Sex partners should also be treated. Because chlamydial genital infection is often present in patients with
gonorrhea, patients should also receive a single dose of azithromycin 1 g or doxycycline 100 mg po bid
for 7 days.
Ophthalmia neonatorum is prevented by the routine use of silver nitrate eye drops or erythromycin
ointment at birth. Infections that develop despite this treatment require systemic treatment. For
gonococcal infection, ceftriaxone 25 to 50 mg/kg IV or IM is given once/day for 7 days. Chlamydial
infection is treated with erythromycin 12.5 mg/kg po or IV qid for 14 days. The parents should also be
treated.
Adult Inclusion Conjunctivitis
(Adult Chlamydial Conjunctivitis; Swimming Pool Conjunctivitis)
Adult inclusion conjunctivitis is caused by sexually transmitted
Chlamydia trachomatis
.
Symptoms include chronic unilateral hyperemia and mucopurulent discharge. Diagnosis is
clinical. Treatment is with systemic antibiotics.
Adult inclusion conjunctivitis is caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis
serotypes D through K. In most
instances, adult inclusion conjunctivitis results from sexual contact with a person who has a genital
infection. Usually, patients have acquired a new sex partner in the preceding 2 mo. Rarely, adult inclusion
conjunctivitis is acquired from contaminated, incompletely chlorinated swimming pool water.
===PAGE:695===
Symptoms and Signs
Adult inclusion conjunctivitis has an incubation period of 2 to 19 days. Most patients have a unilateral
mucopurulent discharge. The tarsal conjunctiva is often more hyperemic than the bulbar conjunctiva.
Characteristically, there is a marked tarsal follicular response. Occasionally, superior corneal opacities
and vascularization occur. Preauricular lymph nodes may be swollen on the side of the involved eye.
Often, symptoms have been present for many weeks or months and have not responded to topical
antibiotics.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Laboratory testing
Chronicity, mucopurulent discharge, marked tarsal follicular response, and failure of topical antibiotics
differentiate adult inclusion conjunctivitis from other bacterial conjunctivitides. Smears, bacterial cultures,
and chlamydial studies should be done. Immunofluorescent staining techniques, PCR, and special
cultures are used to detect
C. trachomatis
. Smears and conjunctival scrapings should be examined
microscopically and stained with Gram stain to identify bacteria and stained with Giemsa stain to identify
the characteristic epithelial cell basophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies of chlamydial conjunctivitis.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
Azithromycin 1 g po once only or either doxycycline 100 mg po bid or erythromycin 500 mg po qid for 1 wk
cures the conjunctivitis and concomitant genital infection. Sex partners also require treatment.
Trachoma
(Egyptian Ophthalmia; Granular Conjunctivitis)
Trachoma is a chronic conjunctivitis caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis
and is characterized by
progressive exacerbations and remissions.
It is the leading cause of preventable blindness
worldwide. Initial symptoms are conjunctival hyperemia, eyelid edema, photophobia, and
lacrimation. Later, corneal neovascularization and scarring of the conjunctiva, cornea, and
eyelids occur. Diagnosis is usually clinical. Treatment is with topical or systemic antibiotics.
Trachoma is endemic in poverty-stricken parts of North Africa, the Middle East, the Indian subcontinent,
Australia, and Southeast Asia. The causative organism is
Chlamydia trachomatis
(serotypes A, B, Ba,
and C). In the US, trachoma is rare, occurring occasionally among Native Americans and immigrants. The
disease occurs mainly in children, particularly those between the ages of 3 and 6. Older children and
adults are much less susceptible because of increased immunity and better personal hygiene. Trachoma
is highly contagious in its early stages and is transmitted by eye-to-eye contact, hand-to-eye contact, eyeseeking flies, or the sharing of contaminated articles (eg, towels, handkerchiefs, eye makeup).
Symptoms and Signs
Trachoma usually affects both eyes. After an incubation period of about 7 days, conjunctival hyperemia,
eyelid edema, photophobia, and lacrimation gradually appear, usually bilaterally. Small follicles develop in
the upper tarsal conjunctiva 7 to 10 days later and gradually increase in size and number for 3 or 4 wk
(see
Plate 20
). Inflammatory papillae appear on the upper tarsal conjunctiva, and corneal neovascularization
begins during this stage, with invasion of the upper half of the cornea by loops of vessels from the limbus
(called pannus). The stage of follicular/papillary hypertrophy and corneal neovascularization may last
from several months to > 1 yr, depending on response to therapy. The entire cornea may ultimately be
involved, reducing vision.
===PAGE:696===
Without treatment, a cicatricial (scarring) stage follows. The follicles and papillae gradually shrink and are
replaced by scar tissue that often causes entropion and lacrimal duct obstruction. Entropion leads to
further corneal scarring and neovascularization. Secondary bacterial infection is common, contributing to
scarring and disease progression. The corneal epithelium becomes dull and thickened, and lacrimation is
decreased. Small corneal ulcers may appear at the site of peripheral corneal infiltrates, stimulating further
neovascularization.
With treatment and healing, the conjunctiva becomes smooth and grayish white. Rarely, corneal
neovascularization regresses completely without treatment, and corneal transparency is restored.
Impaired vision or blindness occurs in about 5% of people with trachoma.
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings (eg, tarsal lymphoid follicles, linear conjunctival scars, corneal pannus)
Diagnosis is usually clinical because testing is rarely available in endemic areas. Lymphoid follicles on the
tarsal plate or along the corneal limbus, linear conjunctival scarring, and corneal pannus are considered
diagnostic in the appropriate clinical setting. If diagnosis is uncertain,
C. trachomatis
can be isolated in
culture or identified by PCR and immunofluorescence techniques. In the early stage, minute basophilic
cytoplasmic inclusion bodies within conjunctival epithelial cells in Giemsa-stained conjunctival scrapings
differentiate trachoma from nonchlamydial conjunctivitis. Inclusion bodies are also found in adult inclusion
conjunctivitis (, but the setting and developing clinical picture distinguish it from trachoma.
Palpebral vernal conjunctivitis appears similar to trachoma in its follicular hypertrophic stage, but
symptoms are different, milky flat-topped papillae are present, and eosinophils (not basophilic inclusion
bodies) are found in the scrapings.
Treatment
• Oral azithromycin
For individual or sporadic cases, azithromycin 20 mg/kg (maximum 1 g) po as a single dose is 78%
effective. Alternatives are doxycycline 100 mg bid or tetracycline 250 mg qid for 4 wk. In hyperendemic
areas, tetracycline or erythromycin ophthalmic ointment applied bid for 5 consecutive days each month for
6 mo has been effective as treatment and prophylaxis. Endemic trachoma has been dramatically reduced
by using community-wide oral azithromycin in a single dose or in repeated doses. Reinfection due to reexposure is common among endemic areas. Better personal hygiene and environmental measures (eg,
access to potable water) can reduce reinfection.
Eyelid deformities (eg, entropion) should be treated surgically.
Allergic Conjunctivitis
(Atopic Conjunctivitis; Atopic Keratoconjunctivitis; Hay Fever Conjunctivitis; Perennial Allergic
Conjunctivitis; Seasonal Allergic Conjunctivitis; Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis)
Allergic conjunctivitis is an acute, intermittent, or chronic conjunctival inflammation usually
caused by airborne allergens. Symptoms include itching, lacrimation, discharge, and
conjunctival hyperemia. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with topical antihistamines and mast
cell stabilizers.
Etiology
Allergic conjunctivitis is due to a type I hypersensitivity reaction to a specific antigen.
Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis
(hay fever conjunctivitis) is caused by airborne pollen of trees,
grasses, or weeds. It tends to peak during the spring, late summer, or early fall and disappear during the
winter months—corresponding to the life cycle of the causative plant.
===PAGE:697===
Perennial allergic conjunctivitis
(atopic conjunctivitis, atopic keratoconjunctivitis) is caused by dust
mites, animal dander, and other nonseasonal allergens. These allergens, particularly those in the home,
tend to cause symptoms year-round.
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis
is a more severe type of conjunctivitis most likely allergic in origin. It is most
common among males aged 5 to 20 who also have eczema, asthma, or seasonal allergies. Vernal
conjunctivitis typically reappears each spring and subsides in the fall and winter. Many children outgrow
the condition by early adulthood.
Symptoms and Signs
General:
Patients report bilateral mild to intense ocular itching, conjunctival hyperemia, photosensitivity
(photophobia in severe cases), eyelid edema, and watery or stringy discharge. Concomitant rhinitis is
common. Many patients have other atopic diseases, such as eczema, allergic rhinitis, or asthma.
Findings characteristically include conjunctival edema and hyperemia and a discharge. The bulbar
conjunctiva may appear translucent, bluish, and thickened. Chemosis and a characteristic boggy
blepharedema of the lower eyelid are common. Chronic itching can lead to chronic eyelid rubbing,
periocular hyperpigmentation, and dermatitis.
Seasonal and perennial conjunctivitis:
Fine papillae on the upper tarsal conjunctiva give it a velvety
appearance. In more severe forms, larger tarsal conjunctival papillae, conjunctival scarring, corneal
neovascularization, and corneal scarring with variable loss of visual acuity can occur.
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis:
Usually, the palpebral conjunctiva of the upper eyelid is involved, but the
bulbar conjunctiva is sometimes affected. In the palpebral form, square, hard, flattened, closely packed,
pale pink to grayish cobblestone papillae are present, chiefly in the upper tarsal conjunctiva (see
Plate 8
). The uninvolved tarsal conjunctiva is milky white. In the bulbar (limbal) form, the circumcorneal
conjunctiva becomes hypertrophied and grayish. Discharge may be tenacious and mucoid, containing
numerous eosinophils.
Occasionally, a small, circumscribed loss of corneal epithelium occurs, causing pain and increased
photophobia. Other corneal changes (eg, central plaques) and white limbal deposits of eosinophils
(Trantas' dots) may be seen.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is usually clinical. Eosinophils are present in conjunctival scrapings, which may be taken
from the lower or upper tarsal conjunctiva; however, such testing is rarely indicated.
Treatment
• Symptomatic measures
• Topical antihistamines, vasoconstrictors, NSAIDs, mast cell stabilizers, or a combination
• Topical corticosteroids or cyclosporine for recalcitrant cases
Avoidance of known allergens and use of tear supplements can reduce symptoms; antigen
desensitization is occasionally helpful. Topical OTC antihistamine/vasoconstrictors (eg,
naphazoline/pheniramine) are useful for mild cases. If these drugs are insufficient, topical prescription
antihistamines (eg, olopatadine, ketotifen), NSAIDs (eg, ketorolac), or mast cell stabilizers (eg, pemirolast,
nedocromil, azelastine) can be used separately or in combination. Topical corticosteroids (eg, loteprednol,
fluorometholone 0.1%, prednisolone acetate 0.12% to 1% drops tid) can be useful in recalcitrant cases.
Because topical corticosteroids can exacerbate ocular herpes simplex virus infections, possibly leading to
corneal ulceration and perforation and, with long-term use, to glaucoma and possibly cataracts, their use
should be initiated and monitored by an ophthalmologist. Topical cyclosporine may be indicated when
===PAGE:698===
corticosteroids are needed but cannot be used.
Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis is less likely to require multiple drugs or intermittent topical corticosteroids.
Other Conjunctival Disorders
Pinguecula and pterygium:
These lesions are benign growths of the conjunctiva that can
result from
chronic actinic irritation. Both typically appear adjacent to the cornea at the 3-o'clock position, the 9o'clock position, or both (see
Fig. 63-1
).
A
pinguecula
is a raised yellowish white mass on the bulbar conjunctiva, adjacent to the cornea. It does
not tend to grow onto the cornea. However, it may cause irritation or cosmetic blemish and, although
rarely necessary, can easily be removed.
A
pterygium
is a fleshy triangular growth of bulbar conjunctiva that may spread across and distort the
cornea, induce astigmatism, and change the refractive power of the eye. Symptoms may include
decreased vision and foreign body sensation. It is more common in hot, dry climates. Removal is often
indicated for cosmesis, to reduce irritation, and to improve or preserve vision.
Subconjunctival hemorrhages:
These extravasations of blood beneath the conjunctiva usually result
from minor trauma, straining, sneezing, or coughing; rarely, they occur spontaneously. The extent and
location of hyperemia can help determine etiology. Diffuse hyperemia of the bulbar and tarsal
conjunctivae is typical of conjunctivitis. Subconjunctival hemorrhages alarm the patient but are of no
pathologic significance except when associated with blood dyscrasia, which is rare, or other facial or
ocular injuries. They are absorbed spontaneously, usually within 2 wk. Topical corticosteroids, antibiotics,
vasoconstrictors, and compresses do not speed reabsorption; reassurance is adequate therapy.
Episcleritis
Episcleritis is self-limiting, recurring, idiopathic inflammation of the episcleral tissue that does
not threaten vision. Symptoms are a localized area of hyperemia of the globe, irritation, and
lacrimation. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is symptomatic.
Episcleritis occurs in young adults, more commonly among women. It is usually idiopathic; it can be
associated with connective tissue diseases and rarely with serious systemic diseases.
Mild irritation occurs. Additionally, a bright red patch is present just under the bulbar conjunctiva (simple
episcleritis). A hyperemic, edematous, raised nodule (nodular episcleritis) may also be present. The
palpebral conjunctiva is normal.
Episcleritis is distinguished from conjunctivitis because hyperemia is localized to a limited area of the
globe and lacrimation is much less. It is distinguished from scleritis by lack of photophobia and lack of
severe pain.
The condition is self-limited, and a diagnostic assessment for systemic disorders is not routinely
warranted. A topical corticosteroid (eg, prednisolone acetate, 1% drops qid for 5 days, gradually reduced
over 3 wk) or an oral NSAID usually shortens the attack; corticosteroids are usually prescribed by an
ophthalmologist. Topical vasoconstrictors (eg, tetrahydrozoline) to improve appearance are optional.
[Fig. 63-1.
Pinguecula and pterygium.]
Scleritis
Scleritis is a severe, destructive, vision-threatening inflammation involving the deep episclera
and sclera. Symptoms are moderate to marked pain, hyperemia of the globe, lacrimation, and
photophobia. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with systemic corticosteroids and possibly
immunosuppressants.
===PAGE:699===
Scleritis is most common among women aged 30 to 50 yr, and many have connective tissue diseases,
such as RA, SLE, polyarteritis nodosa, Wegener's granulomatosis, or relapsing polychondritis. A few
cases are infectious in origin. About half of the cases of scleritis have no known cause. Scleritis most
commonly involves the anterior segment and occurs in 3 types—diffuse, nodular, and necrotizing
(scleromalacia perforans).
Symptoms and Signs
Pain (often characterized as a deep, boring ache) is severe enough to interfere with sleep and appetite.
Photophobia and lacrimation may occur. Hyperemic patches develop deep beneath the bulbar conjunctiva
and are more violaceous than those of episcleritis or conjunctivitis. The palpebral conjunctiva is normal.
The involved area may be focal (usually one quadrant of the globe) or involve the entire globe and may
contain a hyperemic, edematous, raised nodule (nodular scleritis) or an avascular area (necrotizing
scleritis). Posterior scleritis is less common and is less likely to cause red eye but more likely to cause
blurred or decreased vision.
In severe cases of necrotizing scleritis, perforation of the globe and loss of the eye may result.
Connective tissue disease occurs in 20% of patients with diffuse or nodular scleritis and in 50% of
patients with necrotizing scleritis. Necrotizing scleritis in patients with connective tissue disease signals
underlying systemic vasculitis.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made clinically and by slit-lamp examination. Smears or rarely biopsies are necessary to
confirm infectious scleritis. CT or ultrasonography may be needed for posterior scleritis.
Prognosis
Of patients with scleritis, 14% lose significant visual acuity within 1 yr, and 30% lose significant visual
acuity within 3 yr. Patients with necrotizing scleritis and underlying systemic vasculitis have a mortality
rate of up to 50% in 10 yr (mostly due to MI).
Treatment
• Systemic corticosteroids
Occasionally, NSAIDs are sufficient for mild cases. However, usually a systemic corticosteroid (eg,
prednisone 1 mg/kg po once/day) is the initial therapy. If patients are unresponsive to or intolerant of
systemic corticosteroids or have necrotizing scleritis and connective tissue disease, systemic
immunosuppression with cyclophosphamide or azathioprine is indicated, but only in consultation with a
rheumatologist. Scleral grafts may be indicated for threatened perforation.
===PAGE:700===
Chapter 64. Corneal Disorders
Introduction
The cornea is subject to infection, noninfectious inflammation, ulceration, mechanical damage, and
environmental injury. Infection (keratitis), frequently with secondary conjunctivitis, can be due to viruses,
bacteria,
Acanthamoeba
, or fungi. Ulceration usually represents progression of keratitis. Symptoms that
suggest corneal involvement rather than simple conjunctivitis include pain, particularly with exposure to
light, and slight impairment of vision. Evaluation of the cornea requires slit-lamp examination and
sometimes microbial studies.
Bullous Keratopathy
Bullous keratopathy is the presence of corneal epithelial bullae, resulting from corneal
endothelial disease.
Bullous keratopathy is caused by edema of the cornea, resulting from failure of the corneal endothelium
to maintain the normally dehydrated state of the cornea. Most frequently, it is due to Fuchs' corneal
endothelial
dystrophy or corneal endothelial trauma. Fuchs' dystrophy causes bilateral, progressive
corneal endothelial cell loss, sometimes leading to symptomatic bullous keratopathy by age 50 to 60.
Corneal endothelial trauma can occur during intraocular surgery (eg, cataract removal) or after placement
of a poorly designed or malpositioned intraocular lens implant, leading to bullous keratopathy. Bullous
keratopathy after cataract removal is called pseudophakic (if an intraocular lens implant is present) or
aphakic (if no intraocular lens implant is present) bullous keratopathy.
Subepithelial fluid-filled bullae form on the corneal surface as the corneal stroma swells, leading to eye
discomfort, decreased visual acuity, loss of contrast, glare, and photophobia. Sometimes bullae rupture,
causing pain and foreign body sensation. Bacteria can invade a ruptured bulla, leading to a corneal ulcer.
The bullae and swelling of the corneal stroma can be seen on slit-lamp examination.
Treatment requires an ophthalmologist and includes topical dehydrating agents (eg, hypertonic saline),
intraocular pressure-lowering agents, soft contact lenses for some mild to moderate cases, and treatment
of any secondary microbial infection. Corneal transplantation is usually curative.
Corneal Ulcer
A corneal ulcer is a corneal epithelial defect with underlying inflammation (which soon results in
necrosis of corneal tissue) due to invasion by bacteria, fungi, viruses, or
Acanthamoeba
. It can
be initiated by mechanical trauma or nutritional deficiencies. Symptoms are progressive
redness, foreign body sensation, ache, photophobia, and lacrimation. Diagnosis is by slit-lamp
examination, fluorescein staining, and microbial studies. Treatment with topical antimicrobials
and often dilating drops is urgent and requires an ophthalmologist.
Etiology
Corneal ulcers have many causes (see
Table 64-1
). Bacterial ulcers (most commonly due to contact lens wear) may complicate herpes simplex
keratitis and be particularly refractory to treatment. Ulcers caused by
Acanthamoeba
(also most
commonly due to contact lens wear) and fungi (most commonly due to trauma with vegetable material) are
indolent but progressive; those caused by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(seen almost exclusively in contact
lens wearers) develop rapidly, causing deep and extensive corneal necrosis. Wearing contact lenses
while sleeping or wearing inadequately disinfected contact lenses can cause corneal ulcers (.
Pathophysiology
Ulcers are characterized by corneal epithelial defects with underlying inflammation, and soon necrosis of
===PAGE:701===
the corneal stroma develops. Corneal ulcers tend to heal with scar tissue, resulting in opacification of the
cornea and decreased visual acuity. Uveitis, corneal perforation with iris prolapse, pus in the anterior
chamber (hypopyon), panophthalmitis, and destruction of the eye may occur with or without treatment.
More severe symptoms and complications tend to occur with deeper ulcers.
Symptoms and Signs
Conjunctival redness, eye ache, foreign body sensation, photophobia, and lacrimation may be minimal
initially.
A corneal ulcer begins as a corneal epithelial defect that stains with fluorescein and an underlying dull,
grayish, circumscribed superficial opacity. Subsequently, the ulcer suppurates and necroses to form an
excavated ulcer. Considerable circumcorneal conjunctival hyperemia is usual (see
Plate 9
). In long-standing
[Table 64-1.
Causes of Corneal Ulcers]
cases, blood vessels may grow in from the limbus (corneal neovascularization). The ulcer may spread to
involve the width of the cornea, may penetrate deeply, or both. Hypopyon (layered WBCs in the anterior
chamber) may occur.
Corneal ulcers due to
Acanthamoeba
are often intensely painful and may show transient corneal
epithelial defects, multiple corneal stromal infiltrates, and, later, a large ringshaped infiltrate. Fungal
ulcers, which are more chronic than bacterial ulcers, are densely infiltrated and show occasional discrete
islands of infiltrate (satellite lesions) at the periphery.
Diagnosis
• Slit-lamp examination
Diagnosis is made by slit-lamp examination; a corneal infiltrate with an epithelial defect that stains with
fluorescein is diagnostic. All but small ulcers should be cultured by scraping with a sterile platinum spatula
(typically by an ophthalmologist). Microscopic examination of scrapings can identify
Acanthamoeba
.
Treatment
• Empiric topical broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy
• More specific antimicrobial therapy directed at the cause
Treatment for corneal ulcers, regardless of cause, begins with moxifloxacin 0.5% or gatifloxacin 0.3% for
small ulcers and fortified (higher than stock concentration) antibiotic drops, such as tobramycin 15 mg/mL
and cefazolin 50 mg/mL, for more significant ulcers, particularly those that are near the center of the
cornea. Frequent dosing (eg, q 15 min for 4 doses, followed by q 1 h around the clock) is necessary
initially. Patching is contraindicated because it creates a stagnant, warm environment that favors bacterial
growth and prevents the administration of topical drugs.
Herpes simplex (see below) is treated with trifluridine 1% drops q 2 h while the patient is awake or
acyclovir 400 mg po 5 times/day for about 14 days.
Fungal infections are treated with one of many topical antifungal drops (eg, natamycin 5%, amphotericin
B 0.15%), initially q 1 h during the day and q 2 h overnight. Deep infections may require addition of oral
ketoconazole, fluconazole, or itraconazole.
If
Acanthamoeba
is identified, traditional therapy is propamidine and neomycin supplemented with
miconazole, clotrimazole, or oral ketoconazole. Additional treatments include polyhexamethylene
biguanide 0.02% or chlorhexidine 0.02% q 1 to 2 h until clinical improvement is evident, then gradually
reduced to 4 times/day and continued for a number of months until all inflammation has resolved.
===PAGE:702===
Polyhexamethylene biguanide and chlorhexidine are not commercially available as ocular agents but can
be prepared by a compounding pharmacy. Topical propamidine 0.1% q 1 to 2 h is often added for 3 days.
For all ulcers, treatment may also include a cycloplegic, such as atropine 1% or scopolamine 0.25% 1
drop tid, to decrease the ache of a corneal ulcer and to reduce the formation of posterior synechiae. In
severe cases, debridement of the infected epithelium or even penetrating keratoplasty may be required.
Patients who are poorly compliant or who have large, central, or refractory ulcers may need to be
hospitalized.
Herpes Simplex Keratitis
(Herpes Simplex Keratoconjunctivitis)
Herpes simplex keratitis is corneal infection with herpes simplex virus (see also p.
). It may
involve the iris. Symptoms and signs include foreign body sensation, lacrimation, photophobia,
and conjunctival hyperemia. Recurrences are common and may lead to corneal hypoesthesia,
ulceration, and permanent scarring. Diagnosis is based on the characteristic dendritic corneal
ulcer and sometimes viral culture. Treatment is with topical and occasionally systemic antiviral
drugs.
Herpes simplex usually affects the corneal surface but sometimes involves the deeper layers of the
cornea (corneal stroma). Stromal involvement is probably an immunologic response to the virus.
As with all herpes simplex virus infections, there is a primary infection, followed by a latent phase, in
which the virus goes into the nerve roots. Latent virus may reactivate, causing recurrent symptoms.
Symptoms and Signs
Primary infection:
The initial (primary) infection is usually nonspecific self-limiting conjunctivitis, often in
early childhood and sometimes without corneal involvement. If the cornea is involved, early symptoms
include foreign body sensation, lacrimation, photophobia, and conjunctival hyperemia. Sometimes
vesicular blepharitis (blisters on the eyelid) follows, symptoms worsen, vision blurs, and blisters break
down and ulcerate, then resolve without scarring in about a week.
Recurrent infection:
Recurrences usually take the form of epithelial keratitis (also called dendritic
keratitis) with tearing, foreign body sensation, and a characteristic branching (dendritic or serpentine)
lesion of the corneal epithelium with knoblike terminals that stain with fluorescein (see
Plate 14
). Multiple recurrences may result in corneal hypoesthesia or anesthesia, ulceration, and
permanent scarring.
Stromal involvement:
Most patients with disciform keratitis, which involves the corneal stroma, have a
history of epithelial keratitis. Disciform keratitis is a deeper, disk-shaped, localized area of corneal edema
and haze accompanied by anterior uveitis. This form may cause pain and vision loss.
Stromal keratitis can cause necrosis of the stroma and severe ache, photophobia, foreign body
sensation, and decreased vision.
Diagnosis
Slit-lamp examination is mandatory. Finding a dendrite is enough to confirm the diagnosis in most cases.
When the appearance is not conclusive, viral culture of the lesion can confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment
• Topical trifluridine
• Sometimes oral or IV acyclovir
===PAGE:703===
• For stromal involvement or uveitis, topical corticosteroids in addition to antiviral drugs
Most patients are managed by an ophthalmologist. If stromal or uveal involvement occurs, treatment is
more involved and referral to an ophthalmologist is mandatory.
Topical therapy (eg, trifluridine 1% drops 9 times/day) is usually effective. Occasionally, acyclovir 400 mg
po 5 times/day is indicated. Immunocompromised patients may require IV antivirals (eg, acyclovir 5 mg/kg
IV q 8 h for 7 days). If the epithelium surrounding the dendrite is loose and edematous, debridement by
gentle swabbing with a cotton-tipped applicator before beginning drug therapy may speed healing.
Topical corticosteroids are contraindicated in epithelial keratitis
but may be effective when used with an
antiviral drug to manage later-stage stromal involvement (disciform or stromal keratitis) or uveitis. In such
cases, patients may be given prednisolone acetate 1% instilled q 2 h initially, lengthening the interval to q
4 to 8 h as symptoms improve. Topical drugs to relieve photophobia include atropine 1% or scopolamine
0.25% tid.
Herpes Zoster Ophthalmicus
(Herpes Zoster Virus Ophthalmicus; Ophthalmic Herpes Zoster; Varicella-Zoster Virus Ophthalmicus)
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus is reactivation of a varicella-zoster virus infection (shingles) (see
also p.
) involving the eye. Symptoms and signs, which may be intense, include
dermatomal forehead rash and painful inflammation of all the tissues of the anterior and, rarely,
posterior structures of the eye. Diagnosis is based on the characteristic appearance of the
anterior structures of the eye plus zoster dermatitis of the first branch of the trigeminal nerve.
Treatment is with oral antiviral drugs, mydriatics, and topical corticosteroids.
Herpes zoster of the forehead involves the globe in three fourths of cases when the nasociliary nerve is
affected (as indicated by a lesion on the tip of the nose) and in one third of cases not involving the tip of
the nose. Overall, the globe is involved in half of patients.
Symptoms and Signs
A prodrome of tingling of the forehead may occur. During acute disease, in addition to the forehead rash,
symptoms and signs may include severe pain; marked eyelid edema; conjunctival, episcleral, and
circumcorneal conjunctival hyperemia; corneal edema; and photophobia (see
Plate 15
).
Complications:
Keratitis accompanied by uveitis may be severe and followed by scarring. Late sequelae
—glaucoma, cataract, chronic or recurrent uveitis, corneal scarring, corneal neovascularization, and
hypesthesia—are common and may threaten vision. Postherpetic neuralgia may develop late.
Diagnosis
• Zoster rash on the forehead or eyelid plus eye findings
Diagnosis is based on a typical acute herpes zoster rash on the forehead, eyelid, or both or on a
characteristic history plus signs of previous zoster rash. Vesicular or bullous lesions in this distribution
that do not yet involve the eye suggest significant risk and should prompt an ophthalmologic consultation
to determine whether the eye is involved. Culture and immunologic or PCR studies of skin at initial
evaluation or serial serologic tests are done only when lesions are atypical and the diagnosis uncertain.
Treatment
• Oral antivirals (eg, acyclovir, famciclovir, valacyclovir)
• Sometimes topical corticosteroids
===PAGE:704===
Early treatment with acyclovir 800 mg po 5 times/day or famciclovir 500 mg or valacyclovir 1 g po tid for 7
days reduces ocular complications. Patients with keratitis or uveitis require topical corticosteroids (eg,
prednisolone acetate 1% instilled qid initially, lengthening the interval as symptoms lessen). The pupil
should be dilated with atropine 1% or scopolamine 0.25% 1 drop tid. Intraocular pressure must be
monitored and treated if it rises significantly above normal values.
Use of a brief course of high-dose oral corticosteroids to prevent postherpetic neuralgia in patients > 60
yr who are in good general health remains controversial.
Interstitial Keratitis
(Parenchymatous Keratitis)
Interstitial keratitis is chronic, nonulcerative inflammation of the middle layers of the cornea (ie,
mid-stroma) that is sometimes associated with uveitis. The cause is usually infectious.
Symptoms are photophobia, pain, lacrimation, and vision blurring. Diagnosis is by slit-lamp
examination and serologic tests to determine the cause. Treatment is directed at the cause and
may require topical corticosteroids.
Interstitial keratitis, a manifestation of certain corneal infections, is rare in the US. Most cases occur in
children or adolescents as a late complication of congenital syphilis (. Ultimately, both eyes
may be involved. A similar but less dramatic bilateral keratitis occurs in Cogan's syndrome, Lyme disease,
and Epstein-Barr virus infection. Rarely, acquired syphilis, herpes simplex, herpes zoster, or TB may
cause a unilateral form in adults.
Symptoms and Signs
Photophobia, pain, lacrimation, and vision blurring are common. The lesion begins as patches of
inflammation in the middle corneal layers (ie, mid-stroma) that cause opacification. Typically with syphilis
and occasionally with other causes, the entire cornea develops a ground-glass appearance, obscuring
the iris. New blood vessels grow in from the limbus (neovascularization) and produce orange-red areas
(salmon patches). Anterior uveitis and choroiditis are common in syphilitic interstitial keratitis. Inflammation
and neovascularization usually begin to subside after 1 to 2 mo. Some corneal opacity usually remains,
causing mild to moderate vision impairment.
Diagnosis
• Corneal opacification and other typical findings on slit-lamp examination
• Serologic testing to determine etiology
The specific etiology must be determined. The stigmas of congenital syphilis, vestibuloauditory
symptoms, history of an expanding rash, and tick exposure support a specific etiology. However, all
patients should have serologic testing, including all of the following:
• Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test or the microhemagglutination assay for
Treponema
pallidum
• Lyme titer
• Epstein-Barr virus panel
Patients with negative serologic test results may have Cogan's syndrome, an idiopathic syndrome
consisting of interstitial keratitis and vestibular and auditory deficits. To prevent permanent
vestibuloauditory damage, symptoms of hearing loss, tinnitus, or vertigo require referral to an
otolaryngologist.
Treatment
===PAGE:705===
• Sometimes topical corticosteroids
Keratitis may resolve with treatment of the underlying condition. Additional topical treatment with a
corticosteroid, such as prednisolone 1% qid, is often advisable. An ophthalmologist should be consulted.
Cogan's Syndrome
Cogan's syndrome is a rare autoimmune disease involving the eye and the inner ear.
Cogan's syndrome affects young adults, with 80% of patients between 14 and 47 yr. The disease
appears to result from an autoimmune reaction directed against an unknown common autoantigen in the
cornea and inner ear. About 10 to 30% of patients also have severe systemic vasculitis, which may
include life-threatening aortitis.
Symptoms and Signs
The presenting symptoms involve the ocular system in 38% of patients, the vestibuloauditory system in
46%, and both in 15%.
By 5 mo, 75% of patients have both ocular and vestibuloauditory symptoms.
Nonspecific systemic complaints include fever, headache, joint pain, and myalgia.
Ocular:
Ocular involvement includes any combination of the following:
• Bilateral interstitial keratitis or other corneal stromal keratitis
• Episcleritis or scleritis
• Uveitis
• Papillitis
• Other orbital inflammation (eg, vitritis, choroiditis)
Ocular symptoms include irritation, pain, photophobia, and decreased vision. Ocular examination shows a
patchy corneal stromal infiltrate typical of interstitial keratitis (, ocular redness, optic nerve
edema, proptosis, or a combination of these symptoms.
Vestibuloauditory:
Vestibuloauditory symptoms include sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus, and vertigo.
Vascular:
A diastolic heart murmur may be present when aortitis is significant. Claudication may be
present if limb vessels are affected.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on clinical findings and exclusion of other causes (eg, syphilis, Lyme disease,
Epstein-Barr virus infection) by appropriate serologic tests. Evaluation by an ophthalmologist and
otolaryngologist is important.
Treatment
• Initially topical and sometimes systemic corticosteroids
Untreated disease may lead to corneal scarring and visual loss and, in 60 to 80% of patients, permanent
hearing loss. Keratitis, episcleritis, and anterior uveitis can usually be treated with topical prednisolone
acetate 1% q 1 h to qid. To treat deeper ocular inflammation and especially to treat vestibuloauditory
symptoms before they become permanent, prednisone 1 mg/kg po once/day is begun as soon as possible
and continued for 2 to 6 mo. Some clinicians add cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, or cyclosporine for
recalcitrant cases.
===PAGE:706===
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
(Dry Eyes; Keratitis Sicca)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca is chronic, bilateral desiccation of the conjunctiva and cornea due to
an inadequate tear film. Symptoms include itching, burning, irritation, and photophobia.
Diagnosis is clinical; the Schirmer test may be helpful. Treatment is with topical tear
supplements and sometimes blockage of the nasolacrimal openings.
Etiology
There are 2 main types:
• Aqueous tear-deficient keratoconjunctivitis sicca is caused by inadequate tear volume.
• Evaporative keratoconjunctivitis sicca (more common) is caused by accelerated tear evaporation due to
poor tear quality.
Aqueous tear-deficient keratoconjunctivitis sicca is most commonly an isolated idiopathic condition in
postmenopausal women. It is also commonly part of Sjogren's syndrome (, RA, or SLE. Less
commonly, it is secondary to other conditions that scar the lacrimal ducts (eg, cicatricial pemphigoid,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, trachoma). It may result from a damaged or malfunctioning lacrimal gland
due to graft-vs-host disease, HIV (diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis syndrome), local radiation therapy, or
familial dysautonomia.
Evaporative keratoconjunctivitis sicca is caused by loss of the tear film due to abnormally rapid
evaporation caused by an inadequate oil layer on the surface of the aqueous layer of tears. Symptoms
may result from abnormal oil quality (ie, meibomian gland dysfunction) or a degraded normal oil layer (ie,
seborrheic blepharitis). Patients frequently have acne rosacea.
Drying can also result from exposure due to inadequate eye closure at night (nocturnal lagophthalmos) or,
rarely, from inadequate tear volume due to an insufficient blink rate.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients report itching; burning; a gritty, pulling, or foreign body sensation; or photophobia. A sharp
stabbing pain, eye strain or fatigue, and blurred vision may also occur. Some patients note a flood of
tears after severe irritation. Typically, symptoms fluctuate in intensity and may be intermittent. Certain
factors can worsen symptoms:
• Prolonged visual efforts (eg, reading, working on the computer, driving, watching television)
• Local environments that are dry, windy, dusty, or smoky
• Certain systemic drugs, including isotretinoin, sedatives, diuretics, antihypertensives, oral
contraceptives, and all anticholinergics (including antihistamines and many GI drugs)
Symptoms lessen on cool, rainy, or foggy days or in other high-humidity environments, such as in the
shower. Recurrent and prolonged blurring and frequent intense irritation can impair daily function.
However, permanent impairment of vision is rare.
With both forms, the conjunctiva is hyperemic, and there is often scattered, fine, punctate loss of corneal
epithelium (superficial punctate keratitis), conjunctival epithelium, or both. When the condition is severe,
the involved areas, mainly between the eyelids (the intrapalpebral or exposure zone), stain with
fluorescein. Patients often blink at an accelerated rate because of irritation.
With the aqueous tear-deficient form, the conjunctiva can appear dry and lusterless with redundant folds.
===PAGE:707===
With the evaporative form, abundant tears may be present as well as foam at the eyelid margin. Very
rarely, severe, advanced, chronic drying leads to significant vision loss due to keratinization of the ocular
surface or loss of corneal epithelium, leading to sequelae such as scarring, neovascularization, infections,
ulceration, and perforation.
Diagnosis
• Schirmer test and tear breakup tests
Diagnosis is based on characteristic symptoms and clinical appearance. The Schirmer test and tear
breakup test may differentiate type.
The Schirmer test determines whether tear production is normal. After blotting the closed eye to remove
excess tears, a strip of filter paper is placed, without topical anesthesia, at the junction of the middle and
lateral third of the lower eyelid. If < 5.5 mm of wetting occurs after 5 min on 2 successive occasions, the
patient has aqueous tear-deficient keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
With evaporative keratoconjunctivitis sicca, the Schirmer test is usually normal. The tear film can be made
visible under cobalt blue light at the slit lamp by instillation of a small volume of highly concentrated
fluorescein (made by wetting a fluorescein strip with saline and shaking the strip to remove any excess
moisture). Blinking several times reapplies a complete tear film. The patient then stares, and the length of
time until the first dry spot develops is determined (tear breakup test, or TBUT). An accelerated rate of
intact tear film breakup (< 10 sec) is characteristic of evaporative keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
If aqueous tear-deficient keratoconjunctivitis sicca is diagnosed, Sjogren's syndrome ( should
be suspected, especially if xerostomia is also present. Serologic tests and labial salivary gland biopsy are
used for diagnosis. Patients with primary or secondary Sjogren's syndrome are at increased risk of
several serious diseases (eg, primary biliary cirrhosis, non-Hodgkin lymphoma). Therefore, proper
evaluation and monitoring are essential.
Treatment
• Artificial tears
• Sometimes occlusion of nasolacrimal punctum or tarsorrhaphy
Frequent use of artificial tears can be effective for both forms. More viscous artificial tears coat the ocular
surface longer, and artificial tears that contain polar lipids such as glycerin reduce evaporation; both types
are particularly useful in evaporative keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Artificial tear ointments applied before
sleep are particularly useful when patients have nocturnal lagophthalmos or irritation on waking. Most
cases are treated adequately throughout the patient's life with such supplementation. Staying hydrated,
using humidifiers, and avoiding dry, drafty environments can often help. Not smoking and avoiding
secondary smoke are important. In recalcitrant cases, occlusion of the nasolacrimal punctum may be
indicated. In severe cases, a partial tarsorrhaphy can reduce tear loss through evaporation. Topical
cyclosporine and
ω
-3 fatty acid dietary supplements may be a useful adjunct in some patients.
Patients with evaporative keratoconjunctivitis sicca often benefit from treatment of concomitant blepharitis
and associated rosacea with measures such as warm compresses, eyelid margin scrubs, and intermittent
topical eyelid antibiotic ointments (eg, bacitracin at bedtime), systemic doxycycline 50 to 100 mg po once
or twice/day (contraindicated in pregnant or nursing patients), or both.
Cyclosporine drops that decrease the inflammation associated with dryness of the eye are available.
They lead to meaningful improvement but only in a fraction of patients. These drops sting and take
months before an effect is noticed.
Keratoconus
Keratoconus is a bulging distortion of the cornea, leading to loss of visual acuity.
===PAGE:708===
Keratoconus is a slowly progressive thinning and bulging of the cornea, usually bilateral, beginning
between ages 10 and 25. Its cause is unknown.
The distorted cone shape of the cornea causes major changes in the refractive characteristics of the
cornea (irregular astigmatism) that cannot be fully corrected with glasses. Progressing keratoconus
necessitates frequent change of eyeglasses. Contact lenses may provide better vision correction and
should be tried when eyeglasses are not satisfactory. Corneal transplant surgery may be necessary if
visual acuity with contact lenses is inadequate, contact lenses are not tolerated, or a visually significant
corneal scar (caused by tearing of stromal fibers) is present.
Newer treatments seem promising. Implantation of corneal ring segments appears to have the potential to
save selected patients from transplantation. Corneal cross-linking, an ultraviolet light treatment that
strengthens the cornea, has had positive results in European studies and may become more common.
Keratomalacia
(Xerotic Keratitis; Xerophthalmia)
Keratomalacia is degeneration of the cornea caused by nutritional deficiency.
Keratomalacia is caused by vitamin A deficiency typically in patients with protein-calorie undernutrition. It
is characterized by a hazy, dry cornea. Corneal ulceration with secondary infection is common. The
lacrimal glands and conjunctiva are also affected. Lack of tears causes extreme dryness of the eyes, and
foamy spots appear on the temporal and often nasal bulbar conjunctiva (Bitot's spots). Night blindness
may occur. For further details, including specific therapy, see Vitamin A Deficiency 
Peripheral Ulcerative Keratitis
(Marginal Keratolysis; Peripheral Rheumatoid Ulceration)
Peripheral ulcerative keratitis is inflammation and ulceration of the cornea that often occurs
with chronic connective tissue diseases. Irritation and decreased vision result.
Peripheral ulcerative keratitis is a serious corneal ulceration; it often occurs with autoimmune diseases
that are active, long-standing, or both, such as RA, Wegener's granulomatosis, and relapsing
polychondritis.
Patients often have decreased visual acuity, photophobia, and foreign body sensation. A crescentic area
of opacification in the periphery of the cornea, due to infiltration by WBCs and ulceration, stains with
fluorescein. Infectious causes, such as bacteria, fungi, and herpes simplex virus, must be ruled out by
culturing the ulcer and eyelid margins.
Among patients with rheumatic disease and peripheral ulcerative keratitis, the 10-yr mortality rate is about
40% (usually due to MI) without treatment and about 8% with systemic cytotoxic therapy.
Any patient with peripheral ulcerative keratitis should be promptly referred to an ophthalmologist.
Systemic cyclophosphamide or other immunosuppressants treat the keratitis, life-threatening vasculitis,
and underlying autoimmune disease. Treatment also includes local approaches to control inflammation
(eg, tissue adhesive and bandage contact lenses) and repair damage (eg, patch grafts). Other possibly
helpful drugs include collagenase inhibitors, such as systemic tetracycline or topical 20%
N
-
acetylcysteine.
Phlyctenular Keratoconjunctivitis
(Phlyctenular Conjunctivitis; Phlyctenulosis)
Phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis, a hypersensitivity reaction of the cornea and conjunctiva to
===PAGE:709===
bacterial antigens, is characterized by discrete nodular areas of corneal or conjunctival
inflammation.
Phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis results from a hypersensitivity reaction to bacterial antigens, primarily
staphylococcal, but TB,
Chlamydia
, and other agents have been implicated. It is more common in
children. Many patients also have blepharitis.
Patients have multiple lesions, consisting of small yellow-gray nodules (phlyctenules) that appear at the
limbus, on the cornea, or on the bulbar conjunctiva and persist from several days to 2 wk. On the
conjunctiva, these nodules ulcerate but heal without a scar. When the cornea is affected, severe
lacrimation, photophobia, blurred vision, aching, and foreign body sensation may be prominent. Frequent
recurrence, especially with secondary infection, may lead to corneal opacity and neovascularization with
loss of visual acuity.
Diagnosis is by characteristic clinical appearance. Testing for TB may be indicated (eg, for patients at
risk).
Treatment for nontuberculous cases is with a topical corticosteroid-antibiotic combination. If patients have
seborrheic blepharitis, eyelid scrubs may help prevent recurrence.
Superficial Punctate Keratitis
Superficial punctate keratitis is corneal inflammation of diverse causes characterized by
scattered, fine, punctate corneal epithelial loss or damage. Symptoms are redness, lacrimation,
photophobia, and slightly decreased vision. Diagnosis is by slit-lamp examination. Treatment
depends on the cause.
Superficial punctate keratitis is a nonspecific finding. Causes may include any of the following:
• Viral conjunctivitis (most commonly adenovirus)
• Blepharitis
• Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
• Trachoma
• Chemical burns
• Ultraviolet (UV) light exposure (eg, welding arcs, sunlamps, snow glare)
• Contact lens overwear
• Systemic drugs (eg, adenine arabinoside)
• Topical drug or preservative toxicity.
Symptoms include photophobia, foreign body sensation, lacrimation, redness, and slightly decreased
vision. Slit-lamp or ophthalmoscope examination of the cornea reveals a characteristic hazy appearance
with multiple punctate speckles that stain with fluorescein. With viral conjunctivitis, preauricular
adenopathy is common and chemosis may occur.
Keratitis that accompanies adenovirus conjunctivitis resolves spontaneously in about 3 wk. Blepharitis
(, keratoconjunctivitis sicca (, and trachoma ( require specific therapy.
When caused by overwearing contact lenses, keratitis is treated with discontinuation of the contact lens
and an antibiotic ointment (eg, ciprofloxacin 0.3% qid), but the eye is not patched because serious
infection may result. Contact lens wearers with superficial punctate keratitis should be examined the next
day. Suspected causative topical drugs (active ingredient or preservative) should be stopped.
===PAGE:710===
Ultraviolet keratitis:
UVB light (wavelength < 300 nm) can burn the cornea, causing keratitis or
keratoconjunctivitis. Arc welding is a common cause; even a brief, unprotected glance at a welding arc
may result in a burn. Other causes include high-voltage electric sparks, artificial sun lamps, and sunlight
reflected off snow at high altitudes. UV radiation increases 4 to 6% for every 1000-ft (305-m) increase in
altitude above sea level, and snow reflects 85% of UVB.
Symptoms are usually not apparent for 8 to 12 h after exposure and last 24 to 48 h. Patients have
lacrimation, pain, redness, swollen eyelids, photophobia, headache, foreign body sensation, and
decreased vision. Permanent vision loss is rare.
Diagnosis is by history, presence of superficial punctate keratitis, and absence of a foreign body or
infection.
Treatment consists of an antibiotic ointment (eg, bacitracin or gentamicin 0.3% ointment q 8 h) and
occasionally a short-acting cycloplegic drug (eg, cyclopentolate 1% drop q 4 h). Severe pain may require
systemic analgesics. The corneal surface regenerates spontaneously in 24 to 48 h. The eye must be
rechecked in 24 h. Dark glasses or welder's helmets that block UV light are preventive.
Corneal Transplantation
(Corneal Graft; Penetrating Keratoplasty)
Indications:
Corneal transplantations are done for several reasons:
• To reconstruct the cornea (eg, replacing a perforated cornea)
• To relieve intractable pain (eg, severe foreign body sensation due to recurrent ruptured bullae in bullous
keratopathy)
• To treat a disorder unresponsive to medical management (eg, severe, uncontrolled fungal corneal ulcer)
• To improve the optical qualities of the cornea and thus improve vision (eg, replacing a cornea that is
scarred after a corneal ulcer, is clouded because of edema as occurs in Fuchs' dystrophy or after
cataract surgery, is opaque because of deposits of nontransparent abnormal corneal stromal proteins
as occurs in hereditary corneal stromal dystrophy, or has irregular astigmatism as occurs with
keratoconus)
The most common indications are the following:
• Bullous keratopathy (pseudophakic or aphakic, Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy)
• Keratoconus
• Repeat graft
•
Keratitis or postkeratitis (caused by viral, bacterial, fungal, or
Acanthamoeba
infection or perforation)
• Corneal stromal dystrophies
Procedure:
Tissue matching is not routinely done. Cadaveric donor tissue cannot be used from anyone
suspected of having a communicable disease.
Corneal transplantation can be done using general anesthesia or local anesthesia plus IV sedation.
Topical antibiotics are used for several weeks postoperatively and topical corticosteroids for several
months. To protect the eye from inadvertent trauma after transplantation, the patient wears shields,
glasses, or sunglasses. If transplantation involves the full thickness of the cornea (as in penetrating
===PAGE:711===
keratoplasty, or PKP), achievement of full visual potential may take up to 18 mo because of changing
refraction with wound healing and after suture removal. If only the endothelium is replaced (as in
Descemet's stripping endothelial keratoplasty), achievement of full visual potential usually occurs by 6
mo. In many patients, earlier and better vision is attained by wearing a rigid contact lens over the corneal
transplant.
Complications:
Complications include the following:
• Graft rejection
• Infection (intraocular and corneal)
• Wound leak
• Glaucoma
• Graft failure
• High refractive error (especially astigmatism, myopia, or both)
• Recurrence of disease (with herpes simplex or hereditary corneal stromal dystrophy)
Graft rejection rates are usually < 10% but may be up to 68% in higher-risk patients. Rejection symptoms
include decreased vision, photosensitivity, ocular ache, and ocular redness. Graft rejection is treated with
topical corticosteroids (eg, prednisolone 1% hourly), sometimes with a supplemental periocular injection
(eg, triamcinolone acetonide 40 mg). If graft rejection is severe or if graft function is marginal, additional
corticosteroids are given orally (eg, prednisone 1 mg/kg once/day) and occasionally IV (eg,
methylprednisolone 3 to 5 mg/kg once). Typically, the rejection episode reverses, and graft function
returns fully. The graft may fail if the rejection episode is unusually severe or long-standing or if multiple
episodes of graft rejection occur. Regraft is possible, but the long-term prognosis is worse than for the
original graft.
Prognosis
The chance of long-term transplant success is
• > 90% for keratoconus, corneal scars, early bullous keratopathy, or hereditary corneal stromal
dystrophies
• 80 to 90% for more advanced bullous keratopathy or inactive viral keratitis
• 50% for active corneal infection
• 0 to 50% for chemical or radiation injury
The generally high rate of success of corneal transplantation is attributable to many factors, including the
avascularity of the cornea and the fact that the anterior chamber has venous drainage but no lymphatic
drainage. These conditions promote low-zone tolerance (an immunologic tolerance that results from
constant exposure to low doses of an antigen) and a process termed anterior chamber-associated
immune deviation, in which there is active suppression of intraocular lymphocytes and delayed-type
hypersensitivity to transplanted intraocular antigens. Another important factor is the effectiveness of the
corticosteroids used topically, locally, and systemically to treat graft rejection.
Corneal Limbal Stem Cell Transplantation
Corneal limbal stem cell transplantation surgically replaces critical stem cells at the limbus (the area
where the conjunctiva meets the cornea). Host stem cells normally reside in this area. Transplantation is
done when the host stem cells have been too severely damaged to recover from disease or injury.
===PAGE:712===
Conditions such as severe chemical burns, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and severe contact lens
overwear may cause persistent nonhealing corneal epithelial defects. These defects result from failure of
corneal epithelial stem cells to produce sufficient epithelial cells to repopulate the cornea. If untreated,
persistent nonhealing corneal epithelial defects are vulnerable to infection, which can lead to scarring,
perforation, or both. Under these circumstances, a corneal transplant, which replaces only the central
cornea and not the limbus, is insufficient; stem cells are needed to produce new cells that repopulate the
cornea, restoring the regenerative capacity of the ocular surface.
Corneal limbal stem cells can be transplanted from the patient's healthy eye or from a cadaveric donor
eye. The patient's damaged
corneal epithelial stem cells are removed by a partial-thickness dissection of
the limbus (ie, all the epithelium and the superficial stroma of the limbus). Donor limbal tissue, which is
prepared by a similar dissection, is sutured into the prepared bed.
===PAGE:713===
Chapter 65. Glaucoma
Introduction
Glaucomas are a group of eye disorders characterized by progressive optic nerve damage at least partly
due to increased intraocular pressure (IOP). Glaucoma is the 3rd most common cause of blindness
worldwide and the 2nd most common cause of blindness in the US, where it is the leading cause of
blindness for blacks and Hispanics. About 3 million Americans and 14 million people worldwide have
glaucoma, but only half are aware of it. Glaucoma can occur at any age but is 6 times more common
among people > 60 yr.
Glaucomas are categorized as open-angle or closed-angle (angle-closure)—see
Tables 65-1
,
65-2
, and
65-3
. The "angle" refers to the angle formed by the junction of the iris and cornea at the periphery of the
anterior chamber (see
Fig. 65-1
). The angle is where > 98% of the aqueous humor exits the eye via either the trabecular
meshwork and Schlemm's canal (the major pathway, particularly in the elderly) or the ciliary body face and
choroidal vasculature. These outflow pathways are not simply a mechanical filter and drain but instead
involve active physiologic processes.
Glaucomas are further subdivided into primary (cause of outflow resistance or angle closure is unknown)
and secondary (outflow resistance results from another disorder), accounting for > 20 adult types.
Pathophysiology
Axons of retinal ganglion cells travel through the optic nerve carrying images from the eye to the brain.
Damage to these axons causes ganglion cell death with resultant optic nerve atrophy and patchy vision
loss. Elevated IOP (in unaffected eyes, the average range is 11 to 21 mm Hg) plays a role in axonal
damage, either by direct nerve compression or diminution of blood flow. However, the relationship
between pressure and nerve damage is variable. Of people with IOP > 21 mm Hg (ie, ocular
hypertension), only about 1 to 2%/yr (about 10% over 5 yr) develop glaucoma. Additionally, about one
third of patients with glaucoma do not have IOPs > 21 mm Hg (known as lowtension glaucoma or normaltension glaucoma).
IOP is determined by the balance of aqueous secretion and drainage. Elevated IOP is caused by inhibited
or obstructed outflow, not oversecretion. In open-angle glaucoma, IOP is elevated because outflow is
inadequate despite an angle that appears unobstructed. In angle-closure glaucoma, IOP is elevated when
a physical distortion of the peripheral iris mechanically blocks outflow.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary with the type of glaucoma, but the defining characteristic is optic nerve damage
as evidenced by an abnormal optic disk (see p.
and
Plate 13
) and certain types of visual field deficits (.
IOP may be elevated or within the average range. (For techniques of measurement, 
Diagnosis
• Characteristic visual field defects
• Exclusion of other causes
• IOP usually > 21 mm Hg (but not required for the diagnosis)
Glaucoma should be suspected in a patient with any of the following:
===PAGE:714===
• Typical visual field defects
• Abnormal optic nerve on ophthalmoscopy
• Elevated IOP
Such patients (and those with any risk factors) should be referred to an ophthalmologist for a
comprehensive examination that includes a thorough history, family history, examination of the optic disks
(preferably using a binocular examination technique), formal visual field examination, IOP measurement,
and gonioscopy (visualization of the anterior chamber angle with a special mirrored contact lens prism).
Glaucoma is diagnosed when characteristic findings of optic nerve damage are present and other causes
(eg, multiple sclerosis)
[Table 65-1.
Open-Angle Glaucoma: Classification Based on Mechanisms of Outflow Obstruction*]
have been excluded. Elevated IOP makes the diagnosis more likely but is not essential.
Screening:
Screening can be done by primary physicians by checking visual fields with frequencydoubling technology (FDT) perimetry and ophthalmoscopic evaluation of the optic nerve. FDT perimetry
involves use of a desktop device that can screen for visual field abnormalities suggestive of glaucoma in
2 to 3 min per eye. Although IOP should be measured, screening based only on IOP has low sensitivity,
low specificity, and low positive
[Table 65-2.
Angle-Closure Glaucoma: Classification Based on Mechanisms of Outflow Obstruction*]
predictive value. Patients > 40 yr and those who have risk factors for open-angle or angle-closure
glaucoma should receive a comprehensive eye examination every 1 to 2 yr.
Treatment
• Decreasing IOP by using drugs or laser or incisional surgery
[Table 65-3.
Developmental Abnormalities of the Anterior Chamber Angle Causing Glaucoma:
Classification Based on Mechanisms of Outflow Obstruction*]
Patients with characteristic optic nerve and corresponding visual field changes are treated regardless of
IOP. Lowering the IOP is the only clinically proven treatment. For chronic adult and juvenile glaucomas,
the initial target IOP is at least 20% below pretreatment readings.
Three methods are available: drugs, laser surgery, and incisional surgery. The type of glaucoma
determines the appropriate method. Drugs and most laser surgeries (trabeculoplasty) modify the existing
aqueous secretion and drainage system. Most incisional surgeries (eg, guarded filtration procedures
[trabeculectomy], glaucoma drainage implant devices [tube shunts]) create a new drainage system.
Prophylactic IOP lowering in patients with ocular hypertension delays the onset of glaucoma. However,
because the rate of conversion from ocular hypertension to glaucoma in untreated people is low, the
decision to treat prophylactically should be individualized based on the presence of risk factors,
magnitude of IOP elevation, and patient factors (ie, preference for drugs vs surgery, drug adverse
effects). Generally, treatment is recommended for patients with IOP > 30 mm Hg even if the visual field is
full and the optic nerve disk appears healthy because the likelihood of damage is significant at that IOP
level.
[Fig. 65-1.
Aqueous humor production and flow.]
Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma
Primary open-angle glaucoma is a syndrome of optic nerve damage associated with an open
===PAGE:715===
anterior chamber angle and an elevated or sometimes average intraocular pressure (IOP).
Symptoms occur late and involve visual field loss. Diagnosis is by ophthalmoscopy,
gonioscopy, visual field examination, and measurement of IOP. Treatment includes topical drugs
(eg, prostaglandin analogs,
β
-blockers) and often requires laser or incisional surgery to increase
aqueous drainage.
Etiology
Although open-angle glaucomas can have numerous causes (see
Table 65-1
), 60 to 70% of cases have
no identifiable cause and are termed primary open-angle glaucoma. Both eyes usually are affected, but
typically not equally.
Risk factors include older age, positive family history, black race, thinner central corneal thickness,
systemic hypertension, diabetes, and myopia. In blacks, glaucoma is more severe
and develops at an
earlier age, and blindness is 6 to 8 times more likely.
Pathophysiology
IOP can be elevated or within the average range.
Elevated-pressure glaucoma:
Two thirds of patients with glaucoma have elevated (> 21 mm Hg) IOP.
Aqueous humor drainage is inadequate, whereas production by the ciliary body is normal. Identifiable
mechanisms (ie, secondary open-angle glaucomas) are not present. These mechanisms include
developmental anomalies, scarring caused by trauma or infection, and plugging of channels by detached
iris pigment (ie, pigment dispersion syndrome) or abnormal protein deposits (eg, pseudoexfoliation
syndrome).
Normal- or low-pressure glaucoma:
In at least one third of patients with glaucoma, IOP is within the
average range, but optic nerve damage and visual field loss typical of glaucoma are present. These
patients have a higher incidence of vasospastic diseases (eg, migraines, Raynaud's syndrome) than the
general population, suggesting that a vascular disorder compromising blood flow to the optic nerve may
play a role.
Symptoms and Signs
Early symptoms are uncommon. Usually, the patient becomes aware of visual field loss only when optic
nerve atrophy is marked; the typically asymmetric deficits contribute to delay in recognition. However,
some patients have complaints, such as missing stairs if their inferior visual field has been lost, noticing
portions of words missing when reading, or having difficulty with driving.
Examination findings include an unobstructed open angle on gonioscopy and characteristic optic nerve
appearance and visual field defects. IOP may be normal or high but is almost always higher in the eye
with more optic nerve damage.
Optic nerve appearance:
The optic nerve head (ie, disk) is normally a slightly vertically elongated circle
with a centrally located depression called the cup. The neurosensory rim is the tissue between the margin
of the cup and the edge of the disk and is composed of the ganglion cell axons from the retina.
Characteristic optic nerve changes include
• Increased cup:disk ratio
• Thinning of the neurosensory rim
• Pitting or notching of the rim
• Nerve fiber layer hemorrhage that crosses the disk margin (ie, Drance hemorrhage or splinter
hemorrhages)
===PAGE:716===
• Vertical elongation of the cup
• Quick angulations in the course of the exiting blood vessels
Thinning of the neurosensory rim over time alone can be diagnostic of glaucoma regardless of the IOP or
visual field. However, most initial diagnoses of glaucoma involve some visual field change.
Visual field defects:
Visual field changes caused by lesions of the optic nerve include
• Nasal step defects (which do not cross the horizontal meridian—an imaginary horizontal line between
the upper and lower parts of the visual field)
• Arcuate (arc-shaped) scotomata extending nasally from the blind spot
• Temporal wedge defects
• Paracentral scotomata
In contrast, deficits of the more proximal visual pathways (ie, from the lateral geniculate nucleus to the
occipital lobe) involve quadrants or hemispheres of the visual field; thus, deficits do not cross the vertical
meridian.
Diagnosis
• Visual field testing
• Ophthalmoscopy
• Measurement of IOP
• Exclusion of other optic neuropathies
Diagnosis is suggested by the examination, but similar findings can result from other optic neuropathies
(eg, caused by ischemia, cytomegalovirus infection, or vitamin B
deficiency).
Before a diagnosis of normal-pressure glaucoma can be established, the following factors may need to be
ruled out: inaccurate IOP readings, large diurnal fluctuations (causing intermittent normal readings), optic
nerve damage caused by previously resolved glaucoma (eg, a previously elevated IOP due to
corticosteroid use or uveitis), intermittent angle-closure glaucoma, and other ocular or neurologic
disorders that cause similar visual field defects.
Optic disk photography or a detailed optic disk drawing is helpful for future comparison. The frequency of
follow-up examinations varies from weeks to years, depending on the patient's reliability, severity of the
glaucoma, and response to treatment.
Treatment
• Decreasing IOP 20 to 40%
• Initially, drugs (eg, prostaglandin analogs,
β
-blockers such as timolol)
• Sometimes surgery, such as laser trabeculoplasty or guarded filtration procedure
Vision lost by glaucoma cannot be recovered. The goal is to prevent further optic nerve and visual field
damage by lowering IOP. The target level is 20 to 40% below pretreatment readings. In general, the
greater the damage caused by glaucoma, the lower the IOP must be to prevent further damage. If
damage progresses, the IOP goal is lowered further and additional therapy is initiated.
===PAGE:717===
Initial treatment is usually drug therapy, proceeding to laser therapy and then incisional surgery if the
target IOP is not met. Surgery may be the initial treatment if IOP is extremely high.
Drug therapy:
Multiple drugs are available (see
Table 65-4
). Topical agents are preferred. The most popular are prostaglandin analogs, followed by
β
-
blockers (particularly timolol). Other drugs include
α
-selective adrenergic agonists, cholinergic agonists,
and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. Oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are effective, but adverse effects
limit their use.
Patients taking topical glaucoma drugs should be taught passive lid closure with punctal occlusion to help
reduce systemic absorption and associated adverse effects, although the effectiveness of these
maneuvers is controversial. Patients who have difficulty instilling drops directly onto the conjunctiva may
place the drop on the nose just medial to the medial canthus, then roll the head slightly toward the eye so
that the liquid flows into the eye.
Typically, to gauge effectiveness, clinicians start drugs in only one eye (one-eye trial); once improvement
in the treated eye has been confirmed at a subsequent visit (typically 1 to 4 wk later), both eyes are
treated.
Surgery:
Surgery for primary open-angle and normal-pressure glaucoma includes laser trabeculoplasty,
a guarded filtration procedure, and possibly tube shunts or ciliodestructive procedures.
Argon laser trabeculoplasty
(ALT) may be the initial treatment for patients who do not respond to or
who cannot tolerate drug therapy. Laser energy is applied to either 180° or 360° of the trabecular
meshwork to improve the drainage of aqueous humor. Within 2 to 5 yr, about 50% of patients require
additional drug therapy or surgery because of insufficient IOP control.
Selective laser trabeculoplasty
(SLT) uses a pulsed double-frequency neodymium:yttrium-aluminumgarnet laser. SLT and ALT are equally effective initially, but SLT may have greater effectiveness in
subsequent treatments.
A
guarded filtration procedure
is the most commonly used filtration procedure. A hole is made in the
limbal sclera (trabeculectomy), which is covered by a partial-thickness scleral flap that controls egress of
aqueous from the eye to the subconjunctival space, forming a filtration bleb. Adverse effects of glaucoma
filtration surgery include acceleration of cataract growth, pressures that are too low, and transient
swelling during the perioperative period. Patients with trabeculectomies are at increased risk of bacterial
endophthalmitis and should be instructed to report any symptoms or signs of bleb infection (blebitis) or
endophthalmitis immediately.
Viscocanalostomy, canaloplasty, and Trabectome® surgery are newer filtration procedures that do not
involve creating a fistula between the anterior chamber and subconjunctival space. Viscocanalostomy and
canaloplasty involve dilating Schlemm's canal. Trabectome® surgery uses a proprietary device to remove
a portion of the inner aspect of one of the drains of the eye (trabecular meshwork). More long-term
studies with these procedures are needed and are on-going. Currently, these new procedures do not
appear as effective as trabeculectomy but seem to offer greater safety.
Angle-Closure Glaucoma
Angle-closure glaucoma is glaucoma associated with a physically obstructed anterior chamber
angle, which may be chronic or, rarely, acute. Symptoms of acute angle closure are severe
ocular pain and redness, decreased vision, colored halos around lights, headache, nausea, and
vomiting. Intraocular pressure (IOP) is elevated. Immediate treatment of the acute condition
with multiple topical and systemic drugs is required to prevent permanent vision loss, followed
by the definitive treatment, iridotomy.
Angle-closure glaucoma accounts for about 10% of all glaucomas in the US.
===PAGE:718===
Etiology
Angle-closure glaucoma is caused by factors that either pull or push the iris up into the angle (ie, junction
of the iris and cornea at the periphery of the anterior chamber), physically blocking drainage of aqueous
and raising IOP (see
Table 65-2
). Elevated IOP damages the optic nerve.
Pathophysiology
Angle closure may be primary (cause is unknown) or secondary to another condition (see
Table 65-2
) and
can be acute, subacute (intermittent), or chronic.
[Table 65-4.
Drugs Used to Treat Glaucoma]
Primary angle-closure glaucoma:
Narrow angles are not present in young people. As people age, the
lens of the eye continues to grow. In some but not all people, this growth pushes the iris forward,
narrowing the angle. Risk factors for developing narrow angles include Asian ethnicity, hyperopia, family
history, and advanced age.
In people with narrow angles, the distance between the pupillary iris and the lens is also very narrow.
When the iris dilates, forces pull it centripetally and posteriorly causing iris-lens contact, which prevents
aqueous from passing between the lens and iris into the anterior chamber (this mechanism is termed
pupillary block). Pressure from the continued secretion
of aqueous into the posterior chamber by the
ciliary body pushes the peripheral iris anteriorly (causing a forward-bowing iris called iris bombe), closing
the angle. This closure blocks aqueous outflow, resulting in rapid (within hours) and severe (> 40 mm Hg)
elevation of IOP. Because of the rapid onset, this condition is called primary acute angle-closure
glaucoma and is an ophthalmic emergency requiring immediate treatment.
Intermittent angle-closure glaucoma occurs if the episode of pupillary block resolves spontaneously after
several hours, usually after sleeping supine.
Chronic angle-closure glaucoma occurs if the angle narrows slowly, allowing scarring between the
peripheral iris and trabecular meshwork; IOP elevation is slow.
Pupillary dilation (mydriasis) can push the iris into the angle and precipitate acute angle-closure glaucoma
in any person with narrow angles. This development is of particular concern when applying topical agents
to dilate the eye for examination (eg, cyclopentolate, phenylephrine) or for treatment (eg, homatropine) or
when giving systemic drugs that have the potential to dilate the pupils (eg, scopolamine,
α
-adrenergic
agonists commonly used to treat urinary incontinence, drugs with anticholinergic effects).
Secondary angle-closure glaucomas:
The mechanical obstruction of the angle is due to a coexisting
condition, such as proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), ischemic central vein occlusion, uveitis, or
epithelial down-growth. Contraction of a neovascular membrane (eg, in PDR) or inflammatory scarring
associated with uveitis can pull the iris into the angle.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute angle-closure glaucoma:
Patients have severe ocular pain and redness, decreased vision,
colored halos around lights, headache, nausea, and vomiting. The systemic complaints may be so severe
that patients are misdiagnosed as having a neurologic or GI problem. Examination typically reveals
conjunctival hyperemia, a hazy cornea, a fixed mid-dilated pupil, and anterior chamber inflammation.
Vision is decreased. IOP is usually 40 to 80 mm Hg. The optic nerve is difficult to visualize because of
corneal edema, and visual field testing is not done because of discomfort.
Chronic angle-closure glaucoma:
This type of glaucoma manifests similarly to open-angle glaucoma
(. Some patients have ocular redness, discomfort, blurred vision, or headache that lessens
with sleep (perhaps because of sleep-induced miosis and posterior displacement of the lens by gravity).
On gonioscopy, the angle is narrow, and peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) may be seen. IOP may be
normal but is usually higher in the affected eye.
===PAGE:719===
Diagnosis
•
Acute:
Measurement of IOP and clinical findings
•
Chronic:
Gonioscopy showing peripheral anterior synechiae and characteristic optic nerve and visual
field abnormalities
Diagnosis of acute angle-closure glaucoma is clinical and by measurement of IOP. Gonioscopy may be
difficult to perform in the involved eye because of a clouded cornea with friable corneal epithelium.
However, examination of the other eye reveals a narrow or occludable angle. If the other eye has a wide
angle, a diagnosis other than primary angle-closure glaucoma should be considered.
Diagnosis of chronic angle-closure glaucoma is based on the presence of PAS on gonioscopy and
characteristic optic nerve and visual field changes (.
Treatment
•
Acute:
Timolol, pilocarpine, and apraclonidine drops and a systemic osmotic drug followed promptly by
laser peripheral iridotomy
•
Chronic:
Similar to primary open-angle glaucoma except that laser peripheral iridotomy may be done if
the clinician feels that the procedure may slow the mechanical closing of the angle
Acute angle-closure glaucoma:
Treatment must be initiated immediately because vision can be lost
quickly and permanently. The patient should receive several drugs at once. A suggested regimen is
timolol 0.5% one drop q 30 min for 2 doses; pilocarpine 2 to 4% one drop q 15 min for the first 1 to 2 h;
apraclonidine 0.5 to 1% one drop q 30 min for 2 doses; acetazolamide 500 mg po initially followed by 250
mg q 6 h; and an osmotic agent, such as oral glycerol 1 mL/kg diluted with an equal amount of cold water,
mannitol 1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg IV, or isosorbide 100 g po (220 mL of a 45% solution [NOTE: This form of
isosorbide is not isosorbide dinitrate.]). Response is evaluated by measuring IOP. Miotics are generally
not effective when IOP is > 40 or 50 mm Hg because of an anoxic pupillary sphincter.
Definitive treatment is with laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI), which opens another pathway for fluid to pass
from the posterior to the anterior chamber, breaking the pupillary
block. It is done as soon as the cornea is
clear and inflammation has subsided. In some cases the cornea clears within hours of lowering the IOP;
in other cases, it can take 1 to 2 days. Because the chance of having an acute attack in the other eye is
80%, LPI is done on both eyes.
The risk of complications with LPI is extremely low compared with its benefits. Glare, which can be
bothersome, may occur if the iridotomy is not placed superiorly enough for the upper lid to cover it.
Chronic angle-closure glaucoma:
Patients with chronic, subacute, or intermittent angle-closure
glaucoma should also have LPI. Additionally, patients with a narrow angle, even in the absence of
symptoms, should undergo prompt LPI to prevent angle-closure glaucoma.
The drug and surgical treatments are the same as with open-angle glaucoma. Laser trabeculoplasty is
relatively contraindicated if the angle is so narrow that additional PAS may form after the laser procedure.
===PAGE:720===
Chapter 66. Cataract
(For developmental or congenital cataracts, see p.
.)
A cataract is a congenital or degenerative opacity of the lens. The main symptom is gradual,
painless vision blurring. Diagnosis is by ophthalmoscopy and slit-lamp examination. Treatment
is surgical removal and placement of an intraocular lens.
Lens opacity can develop in several locations:
• Central lens nucleus (nuclear cataract)
• Beneath the posterior lens capsule (posterior subcapsular cataract)
Etiology
Cataracts occur with aging. Other risk factors may include the following:
• Trauma (sometimes causing cataracts years later)
• Smoking
• Alcohol use
• Exposure to x-rays
• Heat from infrared exposure
• Systemic disease (eg, diabetes)
• Uveitis
• Systemic drugs (eg, corticosteroids)
• Undernutrition
• Dark eyes
• Possibly chronic ultraviolet exposure
Many people have no risk factors other than age. Some cataracts are congenital, associated with
numerous syndromes and diseases.
Symptoms and Signs
Cataracts generally develop slowly over years. Early symptoms may be loss of contrast, glare (halos and
starbursts around lights), needing more light to see well, and problems distinguishing dark blue from
black. Painless blurring eventually occurs. The degree of blurring depends on the location and extent of
the opacity. Double vision occurs rarely.
With a nuclear cataract (see
Plate 4
), distance vision worsens. Near vision may improve in the early stages because of changes in the
refractive index of the lens; presbyopic patients may be temporarily able to read without glasses (second
sight).
A posterior subcapsular cataract disproportionately affects vision because the opacity is located at the
crossing point of incoming light rays. Such cataracts reduce visual acuity more when the pupil constricts
(eg, in bright light, during reading). They are also the type most likely to cause loss of contrast as well as
===PAGE:721===
glare, especially from bright lights or from car headlights while driving at night.
Rarely, the cataract swells, occluding the trabecular drainage meshwork and causing secondary closedangle glaucoma and pain.
Diagnosis
• Ophthalmoscopy followed by slit-lamp examination
Diagnosis is best made with the pupil dilated. Well-developed cataracts appear as gray, white, or yellowbrown opacities in the lens. Examination of the red reflex through the dilated pupil with the
ophthalmoscope held about 30 cm away usually discloses subtle opacities. Small cataracts stand out as
dark defects in the red reflex. A large cataract may obliterate the red reflex. Slit-lamp examination provides
more details about the character, location, and extent of the opacity.
Treatment
• Surgical removal of the cataract
• Placement of an intraocular lens
Frequent refractions and corrective lens prescription changes may help maintain useful vision during
cataract development. Occasionally, long-term pupillary dilation (with phenylephrine 2.5% q 4 to 8 h) is
helpful for small centrally located cataracts. Indirect lighting while reading minimizes pupillary constriction
and may optimize vision for close tasks. Polarized lenses reduce glare.
Usual indications for surgery include the following:
• Best vision obtained with glasses is worse than 20/40 (< 6/12), or vision is significantly decreased under
glare conditions (eg, oblique lighting while trying to read a chart) in a patient with bothersome halos or
starbursts.
• Patients sense that vision is limiting (eg, by preventing activities of daily living such as driving, reading,
hobbies, and occupational activities).
• Vision could potentially be meaningfully improved if the cataract is removed (ie, a significant portion of
the vision loss must be caused by the cataract).
Far less common indications include cataracts that cause glaucoma or that obscure the fundus in patients
who need periodic fundus examinations for management of diseases such as diabetic retinopathy and
glaucoma. There is no advantage to removing a cataract early.
Cataract extraction is usually done using a topical or local anesthetic and IV sedation. There are 3
extraction techniques. In
intracapsular cataract extraction
, the cataract and lens capsule are removed
in one piece; this technique is rarely used. In
extracapsular cataract extraction
, the hard central
nucleus is removed in one piece and then the soft cortex is removed in multiple small pieces. In
phacoemulsification
, the hard central nucleus is dissolved by ultrasound and then the soft cortex is
removed in multiple small pieces. Phacoemulsification requires the smallest incision, thus enabling the
fastest healing, and is usually the preferred procedure. In extracapsular extraction and
phacoemulsification, the lens capsule is not removed.
A plastic or silicone lens is almost always implanted intraocularly to replace the optical focusing power
lost by removal of the crystalline lens. The lens implant is usually placed on or within the lens capsule
(posterior chamber lens). The lens can also be placed in front of the iris (anterior chamber lens) or
attached to the iris and within the pupil (iris plane lens). Iris plane lenses are rarely used in the US
because many designs led to a high frequency of postoperative complications. Multifocal intraocular
lenses are newer and have different focusing zones that may reduce dependence on glasses after
surgery. Patients occasionally experience glare or halos with these lenses, especially under low-light
===PAGE:722===
conditions.
In most cases, a tapering schedule of topical antibiotics (eg, moxifloxacin 0.5% 1 drop qid) and topical
corticosteroids (eg, prednisolone acetate 1% 1 drop qid) is used for up to 4 wk postsurgery. Patients often
wear an eye shield while sleeping and should avoid the Valsalva maneuver, heavy lifting, excessive
forward bending, and eye rubbing for several weeks.
Major complications of cataract surgery are rare. Complications include the following:
• Intraoperative: Bleeding beneath the retina, causing the intraocular contents to extrude through the
incision (choroidal hemorrhage), vitreous prolapsing out of the incision (vitreous loss), fragments of the
cataract dislocating into the vitreous, incisional burn, and detachment of corneal endothelium and its
basement membrane (Descemet's membrane)
• Within the first week: Endophthalmitis (infection within the eye) and glaucoma
• Within the first month: Cystoid macular edema
• Months later: Bullous keratopathy (ie, swelling of the cornea due to damage to the corneal pump cells
during cataract surgery), retinal detachment, and posterior capsular opacification (common, but
treatable with laser)
After surgery, vision returns to 20/40 (6/12) or better in 95% of eyes if there are no preexisting disorders
such as amblyopia, retinopathy, macular degeneration, and glaucoma. If an intraocular lens is not
implanted, contact lenses or thick glasses are needed to correct the resulting hyperopia.
Prevention
Many ophthalmologists recommend ultraviolet-coated eyeglasses or sunglasses as a preventive
measure. Reducing risk factors such as alcohol, tobacco, and corticosteroids and controlling blood
glucose in diabetes delay onset. A diet high in vitamin C, vitamin A, and carotenoids (contained in
vegetables such as spinach and kale) may protect against cataracts.
===PAGE:723===
Chapter 67. Uveitis
Introduction
Uveitis is inflammation of the uveal tract—the iris, ciliary body, and choroid. Most cases are
idiopathic, but identifiable causes include various infections and systemic diseases, many of
which are autoimmune. Symptoms include decreased vision, ocular ache, redness,
photophobia, and floaters. Although intraocular inflammation is identified clinically, identifying
the cause of the inflammation typically requires testing. Treatment depends on cause but
typically includes topical, locally injected, or systemic corticosteroids with a topical cycloplegicmydriatic drug. Noncorticosteroid immunosuppressive drugs may be used in severe and
refractory cases. Infectious causes require antimicrobial therapy.
Inflammation of the uvea (uveitis) may occur with or without vitreitis, retinitis, papillitis, or optic neuritis.
Uveitis is classified anatomically as anterior, intermediate, or posterior uveitis or panuveitis.
Anterior uveitis
is localized primarily to the anterior segment of the eye and includes iritis (inflammation
in the anterior chamber alone) and iridocyclitis (inflammation in the anterior chamber and anterior
vitreous).
Intermediate uveitis
(peripheral uveitis or chronic cyclitis) occurs in the vitreous.
Posterior uveitis
refers to any form of retinitis, choroiditis, or inflammation of the optic disk.
Panuveitis
(also called diffuse uveitis) implies inflammation in both the anterior and posterior chambers.
Etiology
Most cases are idiopathic and presumed to be autoimmune in origin. Identifiable causes include
• Trauma
• Ocular and systemic infections
• Systemic autoimmune disorders
The most common cause of anterior uveitis is trauma (traumatic iridocyclitis). Other causes are
spondyloarthropathies (20 to 25%), juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and herpesvirus (herpes simplex and
varicella-zoster) infection. Half of all cases of anterior uveitis are idiopathic.
Most intermediate uveitis is idiopathic. Uncommon identifiable causes include multiple sclerosis,
sarcoidosis, TB, syphilis, and, in endemic regions, Lyme disease.
Most posterior uveitis (retinitis) is idiopathic. The most commonly recognized cause of posterior uveitis in
immunocompetent patients is toxoplasmosis; the most commonly recognized cause in patients with
HIV/AIDS is cytomegalovirus (CMV).
The most commonly identified cause of panuveitis is sarcoidosis, but most cases remain idiopathic
despite appropriate testing.
Infrequently, systemic drugs cause uveitis (usually anterior). Examples are sulfonamides, pamidronate (an
inhibitor of bone resorption), rifabutin, and cidofovir.
Systemic diseases causing uveitis and their treatment are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs may be subtle and vary depending on the site and severity of inflammation.
===PAGE:724===
Anterior uveitis
tends to be the most symptomatic, usually manifesting with pain (ocular ache), redness,
photophobia, and, to a variable degree, decreased vision. Signs include hyperemia of the conjunctiva
adjacent to the cornea (ciliary flush or limbal injection). Slit-lamp findings include cells and flare (a haze)
in the anterior chamber (aqueous humor), keratic precipitates (WBC clumps on the inner corneal surface),
and posterior synechiae. With severe anterior uveitis, WBCs may layer in the anterior chamber
(hypopyon).
Intermediate uveitis
is typically painless and manifests with floaters and decreased vision. The primary
sign is cells in the vitreous humor. Aggregates and condensations of inflammatory cells often occur over
the pars plana (near the junction of the iris and sclera), forming snowballs. Vision may be decreased
because of floaters or cystoid macular edema, which results from fluid leakage from blood vessels in the
macula. Confluent and condensed vitreous cells and snowballs over the pars plana may cause a classic
snowbank appearance, which can be associated with neovascularization of the retinal periphery.
Posterior uveitis
may give rise to diverse symptoms but most commonly causes floaters and decreased
vision as occurs in intermediate uveitis. Signs include cells in the vitreous humor; white or yellow-white
lesions in the retina (retinitis), underlying choroid (choroiditis), or both; exudative retinal detachments;
retinal vasculitis; and optic disk edema.
Panuveitis
may cause any combination of the previously mentioned symptoms and signs.
Consequences:
Consequences of uveitis include profound and irreversible vision loss, especially when
uveitis is unrecognized, inadequately treated, or both. The most frequent complications include cataract;
glaucoma; retinal detachment; neovascularization of the retina, optic nerve, or iris; and cystoid macular
edema (the most common cause of decreased vision in patients with uveitis).
Diagnosis
• Slit-lamp examination
• Ophthalmoscopy after pupil dilation
Uveitis should be suspected in any patient who has ocular ache, redness, photophobia, floaters, or
decreased vision. Patients with anterior uveitis have ocular ache in the affected eye if light is shined in
the unaffected eye (true photophobia), which is uncommon in conjunctivitis. Diagnosis of anterior uveitis
is by recognizing cells and flare in the anterior chamber. Cells and flare are seen with a slit lamp and are
most evident when using a narrow, intensely bright light focused on the anterior chamber in a dark room.
Findings of intermediate and posterior uveitis are most easily seen after dilating the pupil (.
Indirect ophthalmoscopy (usually done by an ophthalmologist) is more sensitive than direct
ophthalmoscopy. (NOTE: If uveitis is suspected, patients should be referred immediately for complete
ophthalmologic evaluation.)
Many conditions that cause intraocular inflammation can mimic uveitis and should be considered in the
appropriate clinical settings. Such conditions include intraocular cancers in the very young (typically
retinoblastoma and leukemia) and in the elderly (intraocular lymphoma). Less commonly, retinitis
pigmentosa ( can manifest with mild inflammation, which may be confused with uveitis.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids (usually topical)
• Cycloplegic-mydriatic drugs
Treatment of active inflammation usually involves corticosteroids given topically or by periocular or
intraocular injection along with a cycloplegic-mydriatic drug (eg, homatropine 2% or 5% drops bid to qid
depending on severity). Antimicrobial drugs are used to treat infectious uveitis. Particularly severe or
chronic cases may require systemic corticosteroids, systemic noncorticosteroid immunosuppressive
===PAGE:725===
drugs, laser phototherapy, cryotherapy applied transsclerally to the retinal periphery, or surgical removal
of the vitreous (vitrectomy).
Uveitis Caused by Connective Tissue Disease
A number of connective tissue diseases cause inflammation of the uveal tract.
Spondyloarthropathies:
The seronegative spondyloarthropathies ( are a common cause of
anterior uveitis. RA, in contrast, is not associated with uveitis. Ocular inflammation is most common with
ankylosing spondylitis but also occurs with reactive arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis
and Crohn's disease), and psoriatic arthritis. Uveitis is classically unilateral, but recurrences are common
and active inflammation may alternate between eyes. Men are affected more commonly than women.
Most patients, regardless of sex, are HLA-B27 positive.
Treatment requires a topical corticosteroid and a cycloplegic-mydriatic drug. Occasionally, periocular
corticosteroids are required.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA, also known as juvenile RA):
JIA characteristically causes chronic
bilateral iridocyclitis in children, particularly those with the pauciarticular variety (. Unlike most
forms of anterior uveitis, however, JIA tends not to cause pain, photophobia, and conjunctival injection but
only blurring and meiosis and is, therefore, often referred to as white iritis. JIA-associated uveitis is more
common among girls.
Recurrent bouts of inflammation are best treated with a topical corticosteroid and a cycloplegic-mydriatic
drug. Long-term control often requires use of a noncorticosteroid immunosuppressive drug (eg,
methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil).
Sarcoidosis:
Sarcoidosis (see also p.
) accounts for 10 to 20% of cases of uveitis, and about 25%
of patients with sarcoidosis develop uveitis. Sarcoid uveitis is more common among blacks and the
elderly.
Virtually any symptoms and signs of anterior, intermediate, posterior, or panuveitis can occur. Suggestive
findings include conjunctival granulomas, large keratic precipitates on the corneal endothelium (so-called
granulomatous or mutton fat precipitates), iris granulomas, and retinal vasculitis. Biopsy of suggestive
lesions, which provides the most secure diagnosis, is usually done on the conjunctiva; it is rarely done on
intraocular tissues because of the risk associated with the procedure.
Treatment usually involves topical, periocular, intraocular, or systemic corticosteroids, or a combination,
along with a topical cycloplegic-mydriatic drug. Patients with moderate to severe inflammation may require
a noncorticosteroid immunosuppressive drug (eg, methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine).
Behcet's syndrome:
This condition is rare in North America but is a fairly common cause of uveitis in
the Middle East and Far East (see also p.
).
Typical findings include severe anterior uveitis with hypopyon, retinal vasculitis, and optic disk
inflammation. The clinical course is usually severe with multiple recurrences.
Diagnosis requires the presence of associated systemic manifestations, such as oral aphthous or genital
ulcers; dermatitis, including erythema nodosum; thrombophlebitis; or epididymitis. Oral aphthae may be
biopsied to show an occlusive vasculitis. There are no laboratory tests for Behcet's syndrome.
Treatment with local and systemic corticosteroids and a cycloplegic-mydriatic drug may alleviate acute
exacerbations, but most patients eventually require systemic corticosteroids and a noncorticosteroid
immunosuppressive drug (eg, cyclosporine, chlorambucil) to control the inflammation and avoid the
serious complications of long-term corticosteroid treatment. Biologic agents such as interferons and tumor
necrosis factor inhibitors have been effective in selected patients unresponsive to other therapies.
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome:
VKH syndrome is an uncommon systemic disorder
===PAGE:726===
characterized by uveitis accompanied by cutaneous and neurologic abnormalities. VKH syndrome is
particularly common among people of Asian, Asian Indian, and American Indian descent. Women in their
20s and 30s are affected more often than men. The etiology is unknown, although an autoimmune
reaction directed against melanin-containing cells in the uveal tract, skin, inner ear, and meninges is
strongly suspected.
Neurologic symptoms tend to occur early and include tinnitus, dysacusis (auditory agnosia), vertigo,
headache, and meningismus. Cutaneous findings frequently occur later and include patchy vitiligo
(especially common on the eyelids, low back, and buttocks), poliosis (a localized patch of white hair), and
alopecia, often involving the head and neck. Common findings include serous retinal detachment, optic
disk edema, and choroiditis. Long-term complications include cataracts, glaucoma, subretinal fibrosis, and
choroidal neovascularization.
Early treatment includes local and systemic corticosteroids and a cycloplegic-mydriatic drug. Many
patients also require a noncorticosteroid immunosuppressive drug (eg, methotrexate, azathioprine,
mycophenolate mofetil).
Endophthalmitis
Endophthalmitis is an acute panuveitis resulting most often from bacterial infection.
Most cases of endophthalmitis are caused by gram-positive bacteria, such as
Staphylococcus
epidermidis
or
S. aureus
. Gram-negative organisms can also cause endophthalmitis, tend to be more
virulent, and predict a poorer prognosis. Fungal and protozoan causes of endophthalmitis are rare. Most
cases occur after penetrating ocular trauma or intraocular surgery (exogenous). Less commonly, infection
reaches the eye via the bloodstream after systemic surgery or dental procedures or when IV lines or IV
drugs are used (endogenous).
Endophthalmitis is a medical emergency because vision prognosis is directly related to the time from
onset to treatment. Rarely, untreated intraocular infections extend beyond the confines of the eye to
involve the orbit and CNS.
Exogenous endophthalmitis typically causes severe ocular ache and decreased vision. Signs include
intense conjunctival hyperemia and intraocular inflammation within the anterior chamber and vitreous,
occasionally with eyelid edema.
Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion in at-risk patients, especially those with recent eye surgery
or trauma. Gram stain and culture of aspirates from the anterior chamber and vitreous are standard.
Patients with suspected endogenous endophthalmitis should also have blood and urine cultures.
Initial treatment includes broad-spectrum intravitreal antibiotics, most commonly vancomycin and
ceftazidime. Patients with endogenous endophthalmitis should receive both intravitreal and IV antibiotics.
Therapy is modified based on culture and sensitivity results.
Vision prognosis is often poor, even with early and appropriate treatment. Patients with count-fingers or
worse vision at presentation should be considered for vitrectomy and use of intraocular corticosteroids.
Corticosteroids are, however, contraindicated in fungal endophthalmitis.
Infectious Uveitis
A number of infectious diseases cause uveitis (see
Table 67-1
). The most common are
[Table 67-1.
Infectious Causes of Uveitis]
herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, and CMV infection and toxoplasmosis. Different organisms
affect different parts of the uveal tract.
===PAGE:727===
Herpesvirus:
Herpes simplex virus (see also p.
) causes anterior uveitis. Varicellazoster virus does
so less commonly, although the prevalence of zoster-associated anterior uveitis increases with age.
Symptoms include ocular ache, photophobia, and decreased vision. Signs include redness; conjunctival
injection and anterior chamber inflammation (cells and flare), often accompanied by corneal inflammation
(keratitis); decreased corneal sensation; and patchy or sectorial iris atrophy. Intraocular pressure may be
elevated as well; elevation can be detected by using applination tonometry with a Schiotz tonometer, a
Goldmann tonometer, or a pneumotonometer.
Treatment should generally be initiated by an ophthalmologist and should include a topical corticosteroid
and a cycloplegic-mydriatic drug. Acyclovir (400 mg po 5 times/day for herpes simplex virus and 800 mg
po 5 times/day for herpes zoster virus) may also be given. Drops to lower intraocular pressure may be
required in patients with ocular hypertension.
Much less commonly, varicella-zoster and herpes simplex viruses cause a rapidly progressing form of
retinitis called acute retinal necrosis (ARN), which typically manifests as confluent retinitis, occlusive
retinal vasculitis, and moderate to severe vitreous inflammation. One third of ARN cases become bilateral,
and in three fourths of eyes, retinal detachment occurs. ARN may also occur in patients with HIV/AIDS,
but severely immunocompromised patients can have less prominent vitreous inflammation. Vitreous
biopsy for culture and PCR analysis may be useful in diagnosing ARN. Treatment options include IV
acyclovir, IV ganciclovir or foscarnet, intravitreal ganciclovir or foscarnet, and oral valacyclovir or
valganciclovir.
Toxoplasmosis:
Toxoplasmosis (see also p.
) is the most common cause of retinitis in
immunocompetent patients. Most cases are transmitted congenitally, although acquired cases occur.
Symptoms of floaters and decreased vision may be due to cells in the vitreous humor or to retinal lesions
or scars. Concurrent anterior segment involvement can occur and may cause ocular ache, redness, and
photophobia. Laboratory testing should include serum antiToxoplasma
antibody titers.
Treatment is recommended for patients with posterior lesions that threaten vital visual structures, such as
the optic disk or macula, and for immunocompromised patients. Multidrug therapy is commonly
prescribed; it includes pyrimethamine, sulfonamides, clindamycin, and, in select cases, systemic
corticosteroids. Corticosteroids should not, however, be used without concurrent antimicrobial coverage.
Long-acting periocular and intraocular corticosteroids (eg, triamcinolone acetonide) should be avoided.
Patients with small peripheral lesions that do not directly threaten vital visual structures may be observed
without treatment and should begin to show slow improvement in 1 to 2 mo.
Cytomegalovirus:
CMV (see also p.
) is the most common cause of retinitis in
immunocompromised patients, affecting ≤ 5% of patients with HIV/AIDS receiving highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Most affected patients have a CD4+ count < 100 cells/
μ
L. CMV retinitis
may also occur in neonates and in pharmacologically immunosuppressed patients but is uncommon.
The diagnosis is largely clinical based on direct or indirect ophthalmoscopic examination; serologic tests
are of limited use. Treatment in patients with HIV/AIDS is with systemic or local (implant) ganciclovir,
systemic foscarnet, or valganciclovir. Therapy is typically continued indefinitely, unless immune
reconstitution is achieved with combination antiretroviral therapy (typically a CD4+ count > 100 cells/
μ
L
for at least 3 mo).
Sympathetic Ophthalmia
Sympathetic ophthalmia is inflammation of the uveal tract after trauma or surgery to the other
eye.
Sympathetic ophthalmia is a rare granulomatous uveitis that occurs after penetrating trauma or surgery to
the other eye. Sympathetic ophthalmia has been estimated to occur in up to 0.5% of nonsurgical and in <
0.1% of surgical penetrating eye wounds. The underlying mechanism is thought to be an autoimmune
reaction directed against melanin-containing cells in the uvea. Uveitis appears within 2 to 12 wk after
injury in about 80% of cases. Isolated cases of sympathetic ophthalmia have occurred as early as 1 wk or
as late as 30 yr after the initial injury or surgery.
===PAGE:728===
Symptoms typically include floaters and decreased vision. Choroiditis, often with overlying exudative
retinal detachment, is common.
Treatment typically requires oral corticosteroids plus a long-term noncorticosteroid immunosuppressive
drug. Prophylactic enucleation of a severely injured eye should be considered within 2 wk of vision loss
to minimize the risk of sympathetic ophthalmia developing in the other eye, but only when the injured eye
has no vision potential.
===PAGE:729===
Chapter 68. Retinal Disorders
Introduction
(For Retinopathy of Prematurity, see p.
.)
The retina is the light-sensing layer of tissue at the back of the eye; it contains the rods, cones, and
nerve endings that transform light into neural impulses. Retinal disorders may be inherited or caused by
vascular disease, inflammation, infection, cancer, or trauma. Visual rehabilitation is indicated for all
patients who have severe vision loss.
Age-Related Macular Degeneration
(Senile Macular Degeneration)
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most common cause of irreversible central
vision loss in elderly patients. Funduscopic findings are diagnostic; fluorescein angiography
and optical coherence tomography assist in directing treatment. Treatment is with dietary
supplements, intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor, laser
photocoagulation, photodynamic therapy, and low-vision devices.
AMD is a leading cause of permanent, irreversible vision loss in the elderly. It is more common among
whites.
Etiology
Risk factors include the following:
• Genetic variants (eg, abnormal complement factor H)
• Smoking
• Cardiovascular disease
• Hypertension
• A diet low in
ω
-3 fatty acids and dark green leafy vegetables
• Age
Pathophysiology
Two different forms occur:
• Dry (atrophic), in about 90% of cases
• Wet (exudative or neovascular), in about 10% of cases
Ninety percent of the blindness caused by AMD occurs in patients who have the wet form.
Dry AMD
causes retinal pigmentation changes, yellow spots (drusen—see
Plate 3
), and areas of chorioretinal atrophy (referred to as geographic atrophy). There is no elevated
macular scar, edema, hemorrhage, or exudation.
Wet AMD
begins as dry AMD. Choroidal neovascularization (abnormal new vessel formation) occurs
under the retina. Localized macular edema or hemorrhage may elevate an area of the macula or cause a
localized retinal pigment epithelial detachment. Eventually, neovascularization causes an elevated scar
under the macula.
===PAGE:730===
Symptoms and Signs
Dry AMD:
The loss of central vision is slow, painless, and usually mild. Central blind spots (scotomas)
usually occur late and can sometimes become severe. Symptoms are usually bilateral.
Funduscopic changes include the following:
• Pigment changes
• Drusen
• Areas of chorioretinal atrophy
Wet AMD:
Rapid vision loss is more typical of wet AMD. The first symptom is usually visual distortion,
such as a central blind spot (scotoma) or curving of straight lines (metamorphopsia). Peripheral vision
and color vision are generally unaffected; however, the patient may become legally blind (< 20/200 vision)
in the affected eye or eyes, particularly if AMD is not treated. Wet macular degeneration usually affects
one eye at a time; thus, symptoms of wet AMD are often unilateral.
Funduscopic changes include the following:
• Subretinal hemorrhage in or around the macula
• Localized retinal elevation
• Retinal edema
• Gray discoloration of the subretinal space
• Exudates in or around the macula
• Detachment of retinal pigment epithelium
Diagnosis
• Funduscopic examination
• Fluorescein angiography
• Optical coherence tomography
Both forms of AMD are diagnosed by funduscopic examination. Visual changes can often be detected
with an Amsler grid (. Fluorescein angiography is done when findings suggest wet AMD.
Angiography demonstrates and characterizes subretinal choroidal neovascular membranes and can
delineate areas of geographic atrophy. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) aids in identifying
intraretinal and subretinal fluid and can help assess response to treatment.
Treatment
• Dietary supplements for dry or unilateral wet AMD
• Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor drugs or laser treatments for wet AMD
• Supportive measures
Dry AMD:
There is no way to reverse damage caused by dry AMD, but patients with extensive drusen,
pigment changes, or geographic atrophy benefit from daily supplements of the following:
===PAGE:731===
• Zinc oxide 80 mg
• Copper 2 mg
• Vitamin C 500 mg
• Vitamin E 400 IU
•
β
-Carotene 15 mg (or vitamin A 28,000 IU)
Vitamin A is sometimes substituted for
β
-carotene. In smokers,
β
-carotene and vitamin A can increase the
risk of lung cancer. For this reason, they are contraindicated in patients who have smoked in the previous
7 yr. Reducing cardiovascular risk factors, including eating foods high in
ω
-3 fatty acids and dark green
leafy vegetables may help.
Wet AMD:
Patients with wet AMD in one eye may benefit from daily supplements that are recommended
for dry AMD. The choice of other treatment depends on the size, location, and type of neovascularization.
Intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) drugs (usually ranibizumab or
bevacizumab or, occasionally, pegaptanib) can substantially reduce the risk of vision loss and can help
restore reading vision in up to one third of patients. Thermal laser photocoagulation of neovascularization
outside the fovea may prevent severe vision loss. Photodynamic therapy, a type of laser treatment, helps
under specific circumstances. Corticosteroids (eg, triamcinolone) are sometimes injected intraocularly
along with an anti-VEGF drug. Other treatments, including transpupillary thermotherapy, subretinal
surgery, and macular translocation surgery, are seldom used.
Supportive measures:
For patients who have lost central vision, low-vision devices such as magnifiers,
high-power reading glasses, computer monitors, and telescopic lenses, are available. Also, certain types
of software can display computer data in large print or read information aloud in a synthetic voice. Lowvision counseling is advised.
Central Retinal Artery Occlusion
(Retinal Artery Occlusion)
Central retinal artery occlusion is blockage of the central retinal artery, usually due to an
embolism. Its symptom is sudden, painless, unilateral blindness. Diagnosis is by history and
characteristic retinal findings on funduscopy. Decreasing intraocular pressure can be attempted
within the first 24 h of occlusion. If patients present within the first few hours of occlusion,
some centers catheterize the carotid artery and selectively inject thrombolytic drugs.
Etiology
Retinal artery occlusion may be due to embolism or thrombosis.
Emboli may come from any of the following:
• Atherosclerotic plaques
• Endocarditis
•
Fat
• Atrial myxoma
Giant cell arteritis ( is another important cause of arterial occlusion.
Occlusion can affect a branch of the retinal artery as well as the central retinal artery.
===PAGE:732===
Neovascularization (abnormal new vessel formation) of the retina or iris (rubeosis iridis) with secondary
(neovascular) glaucoma can occur weeks to months after occlusion. Vitreous hemorrhage may result from
retinal neovascularization.
Symptoms and Signs
Retinal artery occlusion causes sudden, painless blindness or visual field defect, usually unilaterally.
The pupil may respond poorly to direct light but constricts briskly when the other eye is illuminated
(relative afferent pupillary defect). In acute cases, funduscopy discloses a pale, opaque fundus with a red
fovea (cherry-red spot—see
Plate 5
). Typically, the arteries are attenuated and may even appear bloodless. An embolic obstruction is
sometimes visible. If a major branch is occluded rather than the entire artery, fundus abnormalities and
vision loss are limited to that sector of the retina.
Patients who have giant cell arteritis often have headache, a tender and palpable temporal artery, jaw
claudication, fatigue, or a combination.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes fluorescein angiography
The diagnosis is suspected when a patient has acute, painless vision loss. Funduscopy is usually
confirmatory. Fluorescein angiography is often done and shows obstruction clearly.
Once the diagnosis is made, carotid Doppler ultrasonography and echocardiography should be done to
locate any embolic source so that further embolization can be prevented.
If giant cell arteritis is suspected, ESR, C-reactive protein, and platelet count are done.
Prognosis
Patients with a branch artery occlusion often maintain good to fair vision, but vision loss is often profound
with central artery occlusion, even with treatment. Once retinal infarction occurs (possibly in < 2 h, almost
always by 24 h), vision loss is permanent.
Treatment
• Sometimes reduction of intraocular pressure
Immediate treatment is indicated if occlusion occurred within 24 h of presentation. Reduction of
intraocular pressure by ocular hypotensive drugs (eg, topical timolol 0.5%, acetazolamide 500 mg IV or
po), intermittent digital massage over the closed eyelid, or anterior chamber paracentesis may dislodge
an embolus and allow it to enter a smaller branch of the artery, thus reducing the area of retinal ischemia.
Some centers have tried infusing thrombolytics into the carotid artery to dissolve the obstructing clot.
Nonetheless, treatments for retinal artery occlusions rarely improve visual acuity. Surgical or lasermediated embolectomy is available but not commonly done.
Patients with occlusion secondary to temporal arteritis should receive high-dose systemic corticosteroids.
Central Retinal Vein Occlusion
(Retinal Vein Occlusion)
Central retinal vein occlusion is a blockage of the central retinal vein by a thrombus. It causes
===PAGE:733===
painless vision loss, usually suddenly. Diagnosis is by funduscopy. Most treatments are
ineffective.
Etiology
Major risk factors include
• Hypertension
• Age
Other risk factors include
• Glaucoma
• Diabetes
• Increased blood viscosity
Occlusion may also be idiopathic. The condition is uncommon among young people. Occlusion may affect
a branch of the retinal vein or the central retinal vein.
Neovascularization of the retina or iris (rubeosis iridis) with secondary (neovascular) glaucoma can occur
weeks to months after occlusion. Vitreous hemorrhage may result from retinal neovascularization.
Symptoms and Signs
Painless visual loss is usually sudden, but it can also occur gradually over a period of days to weeks.
Funduscopy reveals hemorrhages throughout the retina, engorgement and tortuousness of the retinal
veins, and, usually, significant retinal edema (see
Plate 6
). These
changes are limited to one quadrant if obstruction involves only a branch of the central
retinal vein.
Diagnosis
• Funduscopy
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with painless visual loss, particularly those at risk. Funduscopy
confirms the diagnosis. Patients with a central retinal vein occlusion are evaluated for hypertension and
glaucoma and tested for diabetes. Young patients are tested for increased blood viscosity (with a CBC
and other coagulable factors as deemed necessary).
Prognosis
Most patients have some visual deficit. In mild cases, there can be spontaneous improvement to nearnormal vision over a variable period of time. Visual acuity at presentation is a good indicator of final
vision. If visual acuity is at least 20/40, visual acuity will likely remain good, occasionally near normal. If
visual acuity is worse than 20/200, it will remain at that level or worsen in 80% of patients.
Treatment
• Panretinal photocoagulation if neovascularization develops
There is no generally accepted medical therapy for occlusion itself. However, if neovascularization
develops, panretinal photocoagulation should be initiated because it may decrease vitreous hemorrhages
and prevent neovascular glaucoma.
Clinical trials are investigating intravitreal injection of corticosteroids and anti-vascular endothelial growth
===PAGE:734===
factor drugs.
Diabetic Retinopathy
Diabetic retinopathy includes microaneurysms, intraretinal hemorrhage, exudates, macular
edema, macular ischemia, neovascularization, vitreous hemorrhage, and traction retinal
detachment. Symptoms may not develop until late in the disease. Diagnosis is by funduscopy;
further details are elucidated by fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography.
Treatment includes control of diabetes and BP and ocular laser photocoagulation, intravitreal
injection of drugs, vitrectomy, or a combination.
Pathophysiology
Diabetic retinopathy is a major cause of blindness. The degree of retinopathy is highly correlated with
• Duration of diabetes
• Blood glucose levels
• BP levels
Pregnancy can impair blood glucose control and thus worsen retinopathy.
Nonproliferative retinopathy:
(also called background retinopathy) develops first and causes increased
capillary permeability, microaneurysms, hemorrhages, exudates, macular ischemia, and macular edema
(thickening of the retina caused by fluid leakage from capillaries).
Proliferative retinopathy:
develops after nonproliferative retinopathy and is more severe; it may lead to
vitreous hemorrhage and traction retinal detachment. Proliferative retinopathy is characterized by
abnormal new vessel formation (neovascularization), which occurs on the inner (vitreous) surface of the
retina and may extend into the vitreous cavity and cause vitreous hemorrhage. The neovascularization is
often accompanied by preretinal fibrous tissue, which, along with the vitreous humor, can contract,
resulting in traction retinal detachment. Neovascularization may also occur in the anterior segment of the
eye on the iris; neovascular membrane growth in the angle of the eye at the peripheral margin of the iris
can result, leading to neovascular glaucoma. Vision loss with proliferative retinopathy may be severe.
Clinically significant macular edema can occur with nonproliferative or proliferative retinopathy and is the
most common cause of vision loss due to diabetic retinopathy.
Symptoms and Signs
Nonproliferative retinopathy:
Vision symptoms accompany macular edema or macular ischemia.
However, patients may be unaware of vision loss. The first signs of nonproliferative retinopathy are
• Capillary microaneurysms
• Dot and blot retinal hemorrhages
• Hard exudates
• Cotton-wool spots (soft exudates)
Hard exudates are discrete, yellow, and generally deeper than retinal vessels and suggest retinal edema.
Cotton-wool spots are areas of microinfarction that lead to retinal opacification; they are fuzzy-edged and
white and obscure underlying vessels (see
Plate 10
).
Signs in later stages are
===PAGE:735===
• Macular edema (seen on slit-lamp biomicroscopy as elevation and blurring of retinal layers)
•
Venous dilation and intraretinal microvascular abnormalities
Proliferative retinopathy:
Symptoms may include blurred vision, black spots or flashing lights in the
field of vision, and sudden, severe painless vision loss. Some of these symptoms may be caused by
vitreous hemorrhage or traction retinal detachment.
Proliferative retinopathy, unlike nonproliferative retinopathy, causes fine preretinal capillaries (newly
developed capillaries) to appear on the optic nerve or retinal surface (see
Plates 11
and
). Macular edema or retinal hemorrhage may be visible on funduscopy.
Diagnosis
• Funduscopy
• Fluorescein angiography
• Sometimes optical coherence tomography
Diagnosis is by funduscopy. Fluorescein angiography is used to determine the extent of damage, to
develop a treatment plan, and to monitor the results of treatment. Optical coherence tomography is also
useful to assess severity of macular edema and treatment response.
Screening:
Because early detection is important, all patients with diabetes should have an annual
dilated ophthalmologic examination. Pregnant patients with diabetes should be examined every trimester.
Vision symptoms are indications for ophthalmologic referral.
Treatment
• Control of blood glucose and BP
• For macular edema, focal laser and possibly vitrectomy or intravitreal drugs
• For high-risk or complicated proliferative retinopathy, panretinal laser photocoagulation and sometimes
vitrectomy
Control of blood glucose and BP are critical; intensive control of blood glucose slows progression of
retinopathy. Clinically significant diabetic macular edema is treated with focal laser. Intravitreal injection of
triamcinolone, as well as anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) drugs, may help in more severe
cases. Vitrectomy can help in recalcitrant diabetic macular edema. In select cases of severe
nonproliferative retinopathy, panretinal laser photocoagulation may be used; however, most patients can
be followed closely until proliferative retinopathy develops.
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy with high-risk characteristics of vitreous hemorrhage, extensive
preretinal neovascularization, or anterior segment neovascularization/neovascular glaucoma, should be
treated with panretinal laser photocoagulation. This treatment reduces the risk of severe vision loss
significantly.
Vitrectomy can help preserve and often restore lost vision in patients with any of the following:
• Vitreous hemorrhage that persists for 3 mo
• Extensive preretinal membrane formation
• Traction retinal detachment
===PAGE:736===
Prevention
Control of blood glucose and BP is critical; intensive control of blood glucose delays onset of retinopathy.
Hypertensive Retinopathy
Hypertensive retinopathy is retinal vascular damage caused by hypertension. Symptoms
develop late. Funduscopic examination shows arteriolar constriction, arteriovenous nicking,
vascular wall changes, flame-shaped hemorrhages, cotton-wool spots, yellow hard exudates,
and papilledema. Treatment is directed at controlling BP and, when vision loss occurs, treating
the retina.
Pathophysiology
Acute BP elevation typically causes reversible vasoconstriction in retinal blood vessels, and hypertensive
crisis may cause papilledema. More prolonged or severe hypertension leads to exudative vascular
changes, a consequence of endothelial damage and necrosis. Other changes (eg, arteriole wall
thickening) typically require years of elevated BP to develop. Smoking compounds the adverse effects of
hypertension on the retina.
Hypertension is a major risk factor for other retinal disorders (eg, retinal artery or vein occlusion, diabetic
retinopathy). Also, hypertension combined with diabetes greatly increases risk of vision loss. Patients with
hypertensive retinopathy are at high risk of hypertensive damage to other end organs.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually do not develop until late in the disease.
In the early stages, funduscopy identifies arteriolar constriction, with a decrease in the ratio of the width
of the retinal arterioles to the retinal venules.
Chronic, poorly controlled hypertension causes the following:
•
Permanent arterial narrowing
• Arteriovenous crossing abnormalities (arteriovenous nicking)
• Arteriosclerosis with moderate vascular wall changes (copper wiring) to more severe vascular wall
hyperplasia and thickening (silver wiring)
Sometimes total vascular occlusion occurs. Arteriovenous nicking is a major predisposing factor to the
development of a branch retinal vein occlusion.
If acute disease is severe, the following can develop:
• Superficial flame-shaped hemorrhages
• Small white superficial foci of retinal ischemia (cotton-wool spots—see
Plate 18
)
• Yellow hard exudates
• Optic disk edema (papilledema)
Yellow hard exudates represent intraretinal lipid deposition from leaking retinal vessels. These exudates
can form a star-shaped lesion in the macula, particularly when hypertension is severe (see
Plate 17
). In severe hypertension, the optic disk becomes congested and edematous (papilledema
===PAGE:737===
indicating hypertensive crisis).
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by history (duration and severity of hypertension) and funduscopy.
Treatment
Hypertensive retinopathy is managed primarily by controlling hypertension. Other vision-threatening
conditions should also be aggressively controlled. If vision loss occurs, treatment of the retinal edema
with laser or with intravitreal injection of corticosteroids or anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
drugs may be useful.
Retinal Detachment
Retinal detachment is separation of the neural retina from the underlying retinal pigment
epithelium. The most common cause is a retinal tear. Symptoms are decreased peripheral or
central vision, often described as a curtain or dark cloud coming across the field of vision.
Associated symptoms can include painless vision disturbances, including flashing lights and
excessive floaters. Traction and serous retinal detachments cause either central or peripheral
vision loss. Diagnosis is by funduscopy; ultrasonography may help determine the presence and
type of retinal detachment if it cannot be seen with funduscopy. Immediate treatment is
imperative if rhegmatogenous retinal detachment is acute and threatens central vision.
Treatment of rhegmatogenous detachment may include sealing retinal holes (by laser,
diathermy, or cryotherapy), supporting the holes with scleral buckling, pneumatic retinopexy,
and vitrectomy.
Etiology
There are 3 types of detachment: rhegmatogenous, which involves a retinal tear, and traction and serous
(exudative) detachment, which do not involve a tear (nonrhegmatogenous).
Rhegmatogenous detachment
is the most common. Risk factors include the following:
• Myopia
• Previous cataract surgery
• Ocular trauma
Traction retinal detachment
can be caused by vitreoretinal traction due to preretinal fibrous membranes
as may occur in proliferative diabetic or sickle cell retinopathy.
Serous detachment
results from transudation of fluid into the subretinal space. Causes include severe
uveitis, especially in Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, choroidal hemangiomas, and primary or metastatic
choroidal cancers (.
Symptoms and Signs
Retinal detachment is painless. Early symptoms of rhegmatogenous detachment may include dark or
irregular vitreous floaters (particularly in large numbers), flashes of light (photopsias), and blurred vision.
As detachment progresses, the patient notices a curtain, veil, or grayness in the field of vision. If the
macula is involved, central vision becomes poor. Patients may have simultaneous vitreous hemorrhage.
Traction and exudative (serous) retinal detachments can cause blurriness of vision, but they may not
cause any symptoms in the early stages.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:738===
• Indirect funduscopy with pupillary dilation
Retinal detachment should be suspected in patients, particularly those at risk, who have any of the
following:
• Sudden increase or change in floaters
• Photopsias
• Curtain or veil across the visual field
• Any sudden, unexplained loss of vision
• Vitreous hemorrhage that obscures the retina
Funduscopy shows the retinal detachment and can differentiate the subtypes of retinal detachment in
nearly all cases. Direct funduscopy using a handheld ophthalmoscope can
miss some retinal
detachments, which may be peripheral. Peripheral fundus examination, using either indirect
ophthalmoscopy with scleral depression or using a 3-mirror lens, should be done.
If vitreous hemorrhage (which may be due to a retinal tear), cataract, corneal opacification, or traumatic
injury obscures the retina, retinal detachment should be suspected and B-scan ultrasonography should
be done.
Treatment
• Sealing retinal holes
• Scleral buckling
• Pneumatic retinopexy
• Vitrectomy
Although often localized, retinal detachments due to retinal tears can expand to involve the entire retina if
they are not treated promptly.
Any patient with a suspected or established retinal detachment should be
examined urgently by an ophthalmologist
.
Rhegmatogenous detachment
is treated with one or more methods, depending on the cause and
location of the lesion. One method involves sealing the retinal holes by laser, diathermy, or cryotherapy.
The eye may be treated by scleral buckling (which indents the sclera, pushing the retina inward and
thereby relieving vitreous traction on the retina); during this procedure, fluid may be drained from the
subretinal space. Pneumatic retinopexy (intravitreal injection of gas) and vitrectomy are other treatments.
Retinal tears without detachment can be sealed by laser photocoagulation or transconjunctival cryopexy.
Nearly all rhegmatogenous detachments can be reattached surgically.
Nonrhegmatogenous detachments
due to vitreoretinal traction may be treated by surgical vitrectomy;
transudative detachments due to uveitis may respond to systemic corticosteroids, systemic corticosteroidsparing drugs (eg, methotrexate, azathioprine, anti-tumor necrosis factor drugs), or a slow-release
corticosteroid implant, which is surgically implanted into the eye. Primary and metastatic choroidal
cancers also require treatment. Choroidal hemangiomas may respond to localized photocoagulation.
Retinitis Pigmentosa
Retinitis pigmentosa is a slowly progressive, bilateral degeneration of the retina and retinal
pigment epithelium caused by various genetic mutations. Symptoms include night blindness
and loss of peripheral vision. Diagnosis is by funduscopy, which demonstrates pigmentation in
a bone-spicule configuration in the equatorial retina, narrowing of the retinal arterioles, a waxy
===PAGE:739===
pallor of the optic disk, posterior subcapsular cataracts, and cells in the vitreous.
Electroretinography helps confirm the diagnosis.
Abnormal gene coding for retinal proteins appears to be the cause of retinitis pigmentosa; several genes
have been identified. Transmission may be autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, or, infrequently, Xlinked. It may occur as part of a syndrome (eg, Bassen-Kornzweig, Laurence-Moon). Some of these
syndromes include congenital hearing loss as well.
Symptoms and Signs
Retinal rods are affected, causing defective night vision that becomes symptomatic at varying ages,
sometimes in early childhood. Night vision may eventually be lost. A peripheral ring scotoma (detectable
by visual field testing) widens gradually, so that central vision may also be affected in advanced cases.
The most conspicuous funduscopic finding is hyperpigmentation in a bone-spicule configuration in the
midperipheral retina. Other findings include the following:
• Narrowing of the retinal arterioles
• Cystoid macular edema
• Waxy yellow appearance of the disk
• Posterior subcapsular cataracts
• Cells in the vitreous (less commonly)
• Myopia
Diagnosis
• Funduscopy
• Electroretinography
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with poor night vision or a family history. Diagnosis is by
funduscopy, usually supplemented with electroretinography. Other retinopathies that can simulate retinitis
pigmentosa should be excluded; they include retinopathies associated with syphilis, rubella,
phenothiazine or chloroquine toxicity, and nonocular cancer. Family members should be examined and
tested as necessary or desired to establish the hereditary pattern. Patients with a hereditary syndrome
may wish to seek genetic counseling before having children.
Treatment
• Vitamin A
There is no way to reverse damage caused by retinitis pigmentosa, but vitamin A palmitate 20,000 units
po once/day may help slow disease progression in some patients. Patients taking vitamin A palmitate
should have regular liver function tests. Vision decreases as the macula becomes increasingly involved
and can evolve to legal blindness.
Epiretinal Membrane
(Macular Pucker; Cellophane Maculopathy; Premacular Fibrosis)
Epiretinal membrane is formation of a thin membrane over the retina, which interferes with
vision.
===PAGE:740===
Epiretinal membrane typically occurs after age 50 and is most common among people > 75. An epiretinal
membrane is a thin fibrotic membrane that forms over the retina and contracts, wrinkling the retina
underneath.
Risk factors for epiretinal membrane are the following:
• Diabetic retinopathy
• Uveitis
• Retinal detachment
• Ocular injury
Most cases are idiopathic.
Symptoms may include blurred vision or distorted vision (eg, straight lines may appear wavy). Many
patients say that it seems like they are looking through plastic wrap or cellophane. Diagnosis is by
funduscopy. Fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography may also be helpful.
Most people need no treatment. If problems with vision are significant, the membrane can be removed
surgically (membrane peel).
Cancers Affecting the Retina
Cancers affecting the retina usually begin in the choroid. Because the retina depends on the choroid for
its support and half of its blood supply, damage to the choroid by a cancer is likely to affect vision.
Choroidal melanoma:
Choroidal melanoma originates in the choroidal melanocytes. Choroidal
melanoma is the most common cancer originating in the eye, with an incidence of about 1 in 2500 whites.
It is less common among darker-skinned people. It occurs most frequently at age 55 to 60. It may spread
locally or metastasize and be fatal.
Symptoms tend to develop late and include loss of vision and symptoms of retinal detachment (.
Diagnosis is by funduscopy, supplemented, when indicated, by other tests, such as ultrasonography, CT,
fluorescein angiography, and serial photographs.
Small cancers are treated with laser, radiation, or radioactive implants, which may preserve vision and
save the eye. Rarely, local resection is used. Large cancers require enucleation.
Choroidal metastases:
Choroidal metastases are common because the choroid is highly vascular. The
most common primary cancers are those of the breast in women and of the lung and prostate in men.
Symptoms tend to develop late and include loss of vision and symptoms of retinal detachment.
Diagnosis is often incidental during routine ophthalmoscopy. Ultrasonography is usually done, and the
diagnosis is confirmed using fine-needle biopsy.
Treatment is usually with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or both.
===PAGE:741===
Chapter 69. Optic Nerve Disorders
Introduction
The optic pathway includes the retina, optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic radiations, and occipital cortex (see
Fig. 69-1
). Damage along the optic pathway causes a variety of visual field changes (see
Table 60-1
.
Hereditary Optic Neuropathies
Hereditary optic neuropathies are genetic defects that cause vision loss, occasionally with
cardiac or neurologic abnormalities. There is no effective treatment.
Hereditary optic neuropathies typically manifest in childhood or adolescence with
[Fig. 69-1.
Higher visual pathways—lesion sites and corresponding visual field defects.]
bilateral, symmetric central vision loss. Optic nerve damage is usually permanent and in some cases
progressive. By the time optic atrophy is detected, substantial optic nerve injury has already occurred.
Dominant optic atrophy:
This disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. It is believed to be
the most common of the hereditary optic neuropathies, with prevalence in the range of 1:10,000 to
1:50,000. It is thought to be optic abiotrophy, premature degeneration of the optic nerve leading to
progressive vision loss. Onset is in the 1st decade of life.
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy:
This disorder involves a mitochondrial DNA abnormality that
affects cellular respiration. Although mitochondrial DNA throughout the body is affected, vision loss is the
primary manifestation. Most cases (80 to 90%) occur in males. The disease is inherited with a maternal
inheritance pattern, meaning that all offspring of a woman with the abnormality inherit the abnormality, but
only females can pass on the abnormality because the zygote receives mitochondria only from the
mother.
Symptoms and Signs
Dominant optic atrophy:
Most patients have no associated neurologic abnormalities, although
nystagmus and hearing loss have been reported. The only symptom is slowly progressive bilateral vision
loss, usually mild until late in life. The entire optic disk or, at times, only the temporal part is pale without
visible vessels. A blue-yellow color vision deficit is characteristic.
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy:
Vision loss typically begins between 15 and 35 yr (range, 1 to 80
yr). Painless central vision loss
in one eye is usually followed weeks to months later by loss in the other
eye. Simultaneous vision loss has been reported. Most patients lose vision to worse than 20/200 acuity.
Ophthalmoscopic examination may show telangiectatic microangiopathy, swelling of the nerve fiber layer
around the optic disk, and an absence of leakage on fluorescein angiography. Eventually, optic atrophy
supervenes.
Some patients with Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy have cardiac conduction defects. Other patients
have minor neurologic abnormalities, such as a postural tremor, loss of ankle reflexes, dystonia,
spasticity, or a multiple sclerosis-like illness.
Diagnosis
Molecular genetic testing is available to confirm the diagnosis of dominant optic atrophy.
Diagnosis of Leber's hereditary optic atrophy is mainly clinical. ECG should be done to diagnose occult
cardiac conduction defects.
Treatment
===PAGE:742===
• Symptomatic treatment
There is no effective treatment for the hereditary optic neuropathies. Low-vision aids (eg, magnifiers,
large-print devices, talking watches) may be helpful. Genetic counseling is suggested.
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy:
Corticosteroids, vitamin supplements, and antioxidants have
been tried without success. A small study found benefits from quinone analogs (ubiquinone and
idebenone) during the early phase. Suggestions to avoid agents that might stress mitochondrial energy
production (eg, alcohol) have no proven benefit but are theoretically reasonable. Patients should avoid
tobacco products and excessive alcohol intake. Cardiac and neurologic abnormalities should be referred
to a specialist.
Ischemic Optic Neuropathy
Ischemic optic neuropathy is infarction of the optic disk. The only constant symptom is painless
vision loss. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is ineffective.
Two varieties of optic nerve infarction exist: nonarteritic and arteritic. The nonarteritic variant occurs more
frequently, typically affecting people about 50 yr and older. Vision loss tends not to be as severe as in the
arteritic variant, which typically affects an older group, typically about 70 yr and older.
Most ischemic optic neuropathy is unilateral. Bilateral, sequential cases occur in about 20%, but bilateral
simultaneous involvement is uncommon. Atherosclerotic narrowing of the posterior ciliary arteries may
predispose to nonarteritic optic nerve infarction, particularly after a hypotensive episode. Any of the
inflammatory arteritides, especially giant cell arteritis (, can precipitate the arteritic form.
Acute ischemia causes nerve edema, which further worsens ischemia. A small optic cup to optic disk ratio
is a risk factor for nonarteritic ischemic optic neuropathy but not for the arteritic variety. Usually, no
medical condition is apparent to cause the nonarteritic variety, although diabetes and hypertension are
present in some patients and are thought to be risk factors. Vision loss on awakening leads investigators
to suspect nocturnal hypotension as a potential cause of the nonarteritic variety.
Symptoms and Signs
Vision loss with both varieties is typically rapid (over minutes, hours, or days) and painless. Some patients
notice the loss on awakening. Symptoms such as general malaise, muscle aches and pains, headaches
over the temple, pain when combing hair, jaw claudication, and tenderness over the temporal artery may
be present with temporal arteritis; however, such symptoms may not occur until after vision is lost. Visual
acuity is reduced, and an afferent pupillary defect is present. The optic disk is swollen with surrounding
hemorrhages. Visual field examination often shows a defect in the inferior and central visual fields.
Diagnosis
• ESR
• CT or MRI if vision loss is progressive
Diagnosis is based mainly on a clinical evaluation, but ancillary testing may be needed. Most important is
to exclude the arteritic variety because the other eye is at risk if treatment is not started quickly. ESR is
usually dramatically elevated in the arteritic variety and is normal in the nonarteritic variety. C-reactive
protein is also a useful monitoring test. If temporal arteritis is suspected, temporal artery biopsy should be
done. For isolated cases of progressive vision loss, CT or MRI should be done to rule out compressive
lesions.
Prognosis
There is no effective treatment, and most lost vision is not recovered; however, in the
nonarteritic variety,
===PAGE:743===
up to 40% of patients spontaneously recover some useful vision.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids for the arteritic variety
The arteritic variety is treated with oral corticosteroids (prednisone 80 mg po once/day and tapered based
on ESR) to protect the other eye. Treatment should not be delayed while awaiting biopsy results.
Treatment of the nonarteritic variety with aspirin or corticosteroids has not been helpful. Risk factors are
controlled. Low-vision aids (eg, magnifiers, large-print devices, talking watches) may be helpful in both
types.
Optic Neuritis
Optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve. Symptoms are usually unilateral, with eye pain
and partial or complete vision loss. Diagnosis is primarily clinical. Treatment is directed at the
underlying condition; most cases resolve spontaneously.
Etiology
Optic neuritis is most common among adults 20 to 40 yr. Most cases result from demyelinating disease,
particularly multiple sclerosis (, in which case there may be recurrences. Optic neuritis is
often the presenting manifestation of multiple sclerosis. Other causes include the following:
• Infectious diseases (eg, viral encephalitis [particularly in children], sinusitis, meningitis, TB, syphilis, HIV)
• Tumor metastasis to the optic nerve
• Chemicals and drugs (eg, lead, methanol, quinine, arsenic, antibiotics)
Rare causes include diabetes, pernicious anemia, Graves' disease, bee stings, and trauma. Often, the
cause remains obscure despite thorough evaluation.
Symptoms and Signs
The main symptom is vision loss, frequently maximal within 1 or 2 days and varying from a small central or
paracentral scotoma to complete blindness. Most patients have mild eye pain, which often feels worse
with eye movement.
If the optic disk is swollen, the condition is called papillitis. Otherwise, it is called retrobulbar neuritis. The
most characteristic findings include reduced visual acuity, a visual field deficit, and disturbed color vision
(often out of proportion to loss of visual acuity). An afferent pupillary defect is usually detectable if the
contralateral eye is unaffected or involved to a lesser degree. Testing of color vision is a useful adjunct. In
about two thirds of patients, inflammation is entirely retrobulbar, causing no visible changes in the optic
fundus. In the rest, disk hyperemia, edema in or around the disk, vessel engorgement, or a combination is
present. A few exudates and hemorrhages may be present near or on the optic disk.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• MRI
Optic neuritis is suspected in patients with characteristic pain and vision loss. Neuroimaging, preferably
with gadolinium-enhanced MRI, is usually done and may show an enlarged, enhancing optic nerve. MRI
may also help diagnose multiple sclerosis. Fluid attenuating inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI sequences
may show typical demyelinating lesions in a periventricular location if optic neuritis is related to
demyelination.
===PAGE:744===
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the underlying condition. Most episodes resolve spontaneously, with return of
vision in 2 to 3 mo. Most patients with a typical history of optic neuritis and no underlying systemic
disease, such as a connective tissue disease, recover vision, but > 25% have a recurrence in the same
eye or in the other eye. MRI is used to determine future risk of demyelinating disease.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids are an option, especially if multiple sclerosis is suspected. Treatment with
methylprednisolone (500 mg to 1000 mg IV once/day) for 3 days followed by prednisone (1 mg/kg po
once/day) for 11 days may speed recovery, but ultimate vision results are no different from those with
observation alone. IV corticosteroids have been reported to delay onset of multiple sclerosis for at least 2
yr. Treatment with oral prednisone alone does not improve vision outcome and may increase the rate of
recurrent episodes. Low-vision aids (eg, magnifiers, large-print devices, talking watches) may be helpful.
Papilledema
Papilledema is swelling of the optic disk due to increased intracranial pressure. All other causes
of optic disk swelling, such as that
caused by malignant hypertension or thrombosis of the
central retinal vein, do not involve increased intracranial pressure and therefore are not causes
of papilledema. There are no early symptoms, although vision may be disturbed for a few
seconds. Papilledema requires an immediate search for the cause. Diagnosis is by
ophthalmoscopy with further tests, usually brain imaging, to determine cause. Treatment is
directed at the underlying condition.
Papilledema is a sign of elevated intracranial pressure and is almost always bilateral. Causes include the
following:
• Brain tumor or abscess
• Cerebral trauma or hemorrhage
• Meningitis
• Arachnoidal adhesions
• Cavernous or dural sinus thrombosis
• Encephalitis
• Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri), a condition with elevated CSF pressure and
no mass lesion
Symptoms and Signs
Vision is usually not affected initially, but seconds-long graying out of vision, flickering, or blurred or
double vision may occur. Patients may have symptoms of increased intracranial pressure, such as
headache or nausea and vomiting.
Ophthalmoscopic examination reveals engorged and tortuous retinal veins, a hyperemic and swollen optic
disk (optic nerve head), and retinal hemorrhages around the disk but not into the retinal periphery (see
Plate 19
). Isolated disk edema (eg, caused by optic neuritis or ischemic optic neuropathy) without
elevated CSF pressure is not considered papilledema.
===PAGE:745===
In the early stages, visual acuity and pupillary response to light are usually normal and become abnormal
only after the condition is well advanced. Visual field testing may detect an enlarged blind spot. Later,
nerve fiber bundle defects may be apparent.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Immediate neuroimaging
The degree of disk swelling can be quantified by comparing the plus lens numbers needed to focus an
ophthalmoscope on the most elevated portion of the disk and on the unaffected portion of the retina.
Differentiating papilledema from other causes of a swollen optic disk, such as optic neuritis, ischemic
optic neuropathy, hypotony, central retinal vein occlusion, uveitis, or pseudo swollen disks (eg, optic nerve
drusen), requires a thorough ophthalmologic evaluation. If papilledema is suspected clinically, MRI with
gadolinium contrast or CT with contrast is done immediately to exclude causes such as an intracranial
mass. Lumbar puncture and measurement of CSF pressure should be done if a mass lesion has been
ruled out. Lumbar puncture in patients with intracranial mass lesions can result in brain stem herniation.
B-scan ultrasonography is the best diagnostic tool for the pseudo disk edema of optic nerve drusen.
Treatment
• Treatment of underlying disorder
Urgent treatment of the underlying disorder is indicated to decrease intracranial pressure. If intracranial
pressure is not reduced, secondary optic nerve atrophy and vision loss eventually occur, along with other
serious neurologic sequelae.
Toxic Amblyopia
(Nutritional Amblyopia)
Toxic amblyopia is reduction in visual acuity believed to be the result of a toxic reaction in the
orbital portion (papillomacular bundle) of the optic nerve. It can be caused by various toxic and
nutritional factors and probably unknown factors. The main symptom is painless vision loss.
Diagnosis is by history and visual field examination. Treatment is avoiding suspected toxic
agents and improving nutrition.
Etiology
Toxic amblyopia is usually bilateral and symmetric. In alcoholics, undernutrition may be the cause. True
tobacco-induced amblyopia is rare. Lead, methanol, chloramphenicol, digoxin, ethambutol, and many
other chemicals can damage the optic nerve. Deficiencies of protein and antioxidants are likely risk
factors. Toxic amblyopia may occur with other nutritional disorders, such as Strachan's syndrome
(polyneuropathy and orogenital dermatitis).
Symptoms and Signs
Vision blurring and dimness typically develop over days to weeks. An initially small central or pericentral
scotoma slowly enlarges, typically involving both the fixation and the blind spot (centrocecal scotoma),
and progressively interferes with vision. Total blindness
may occur in methanol ingestion, but other
nutritional causes typically do not cause profound vision loss. Retinal abnormalities do not usually occur,
but temporal disk pallor may develop late.
Diagnosis
• Mainly clinical evaluation
===PAGE:746===
A history of undernutrition or toxic or chemical exposure combined with typical bilateral scotomata on
visual field testing justifies treatment. Laboratory testing for lead, methanol, and other suspected toxins is
done.
Prognosis
Vision may improve if the cause is treated or removed quickly. Once the optic nerve has atrophied, vision
usually does not recover.
Treatment
The cause is treated. Exposure to toxic substances should stop immediately. Chelation therapy is
indicated in lead poisoning. Dialysis, fomepizole, ethanol, or a combination is used for methanol
poisoning. Treatment with oral or parenteral B vitamins before vision loss becomes severe may reverse
the condition when undernutrition is the presumed cause.
Low-vision aids (eg, magnifiers, large-print devices, talking watches) may be helpful.
The role of antioxidants has not been fully characterized. Their use could be justified on a theoretic basis;
however, there is no proof of efficacy, and the at-risk population that should receive such supplements
has not been defined.
===PAGE:747===
Chapter 70. Orbital Diseases
Introduction
Orbital diseases may be vascular, thyroid-related (Graves' disease), infectious, inflammatory, or
neoplastic. Cavernous sinus thrombosis causes many of the same symptoms and signs as orbital
diseases. Infiltrative ophthalmopathy due to Graves' disease, the most frequent cause of orbital disease,
is discussed elsewhere. Orbital fractures are discussed elsewhere. (See
Fig. 60-1
on p.
for anatomy of the orbit.)
Cavernous Sinus Thrombosis
Cavernous sinus thrombosis (CST) is a very rare, typically septic thrombosis of the cavernous
sinus, usually caused by bacterial sinusitis. Symptoms and signs include pain, proptosis,
ophthalmoplegia, vision loss, papilledema, and fever. Diagnosis is confirmed by CT or MRI.
Treatment is with IV antibiotics. Complications are common, and prognosis is poor.
Etiology
The cavernous sinuses are trabeculated sinuses located at the base of the skull that drain venous blood
from facial veins. CST is an extremely rare complication of common facial infections, most notably nasal
furuncles (50%), sphenoidal or ethmoidal sinusitis (30%), and dental infections (10%). Most common
pathogens are
Staphylococcus aureus
(70%), followed by
Streptococcus
sp; anaerobes are more
common when the underlying condition is dental or sinus infection.
Thrombosis of the lateral sinus (related to mastoiditis) and thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus
(related to bacterial meningitis) occur but are rarer than CST.
Pathophysiology
The 3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerves and the ophthalmic and maxillary branches of the 5th cranial nerve
are adjacent to the cavernous sinus and are commonly affected. Complications include
meningoencephalitis, brain abscess, stroke, blindness, and pituitary insufficiency.
Symptoms and Signs
Initial symptoms are progressively severe headache or facial pain, usually unilateral and localized to retroorbital and frontal regions. High fever is common. Later, ophthalmoplegia (initially the 6th cranial nerve,
lateral gaze), proptosis, and lid edema develop and often become bilateral. Facial sensation may be
diminished or absent. Decreased level of consciousness, confusion, seizures, and focal neurologic
deficits are signs of CNS spread. Patients may also have anisocoria or mydriasis (3rd cranial nerve
dysfunction), papilledema, and vision loss.
Diagnosis
• MRI or CT
CST is often misdiagnosed because it is rare. It should be considered in patients who have signs
consistent with orbital cellulitis. Features that distinguish CST from orbital cellulitis include cranial nerve
dysfunction, bilateral eye involvement, and mental status changes.
Diagnosis is based on neuroimaging. MRI is the better study, but CT is also helpful. Useful adjunct testing
may include blood cultures and lumbar puncture. Lumbar puncture may show inflammatory cells (PMNs,
lymphocytes, monocytes); other possible abnormalities include low glucose, high protein, and positive
CSF cultures. Cultures of any suspected source infections are also done.
Prognosis
===PAGE:748===
Mortality is 30% in all patients and 50% in those with underlying sphenoid sinusitis. An additional 30%
develop serious sequelae (eg, ophthalmoplegia, blindness, disability due to stroke, pituitary insufficiency),
which may be permanent.
Treatment
• IV high-dose antibiotics
• Sometimes corticosteroids
Initial antibiotics can include nafcillin or oxacillin 1 to 2 g q 4 to 6 h combined with a 3rd-generation
cephalosporin (eg, ceftriaxone 1 g q 12 h). In areas where methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
is prevalent,
vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h should be substituted for nafcillin or oxacillin. A drug for anaerobes (eg,
metronidazole 500 mg q 8 h) should be added if an underlying sinusitis or dental infection is present.
In cases with underlying sphenoid sinusitis, surgical sinus drainage is indicated, especially if there is no
clinical response to antibiotics within 24 h.
Secondary treatment may include corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone 10 mg po q 6 h) for cranial nerve
dysfunction; anticoagulation is controversial because most patients respond to antibiotics, and adverse
effects may exceed benefits.
Inflammatory Orbital Disease
Orbital inflammation (inflammatory orbital pseudotumor) can affect any or all structures within the orbit.
The inflammatory response can be nonspecific, granulomatous, or vasculitic. The inflammation can be
part of an underlying medical disorder or can exist in isolation. Patients of all ages can be affected. The
process can be acute or chronic and can recur.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs typically include a sudden onset of pain along with swelling and erythema of the
eyelids. Proptosis, diplopia, and vision loss are also possible.
Diagnosis
• CT or MRI
Similar findings occur with orbital infection, but there is no history of trauma or adjacent focus of infection
(eg, sinusitis). Neuroimaging with CT or MRI is required. For chronic or recurrent disease, biopsy may be
used to find evidence of an underlying medical condition.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the type of inflammatory response and may include oral corticosteroids, radiation
therapy, and one of several immunomodulating drugs. In difficult cases, some initial success has occurred
with monoclonal antibodies against tumor necrosis factor
α
or with another monoclonal antibody that
causes lymphocyte depletion.
Preseptal and Orbital Cellulitis
Preseptal cellulitis (periorbital cellulitis) is infection of the eyelid and surrounding skin anterior
to the orbital septum. Orbital cellulitis (postseptal cellulitis) is infection of the orbital tissues
posterior to the orbital septum. Either can be caused by an external focus of infection (eg, a
wound), infection that extends from the nasal sinuses or teeth, or metastatic spread from
infection elsewhere. Symptoms include eyelid pain, discoloration, and swelling; orbital cellulitis
also causes fever, malaise, proptosis, impaired ocular movement, and impaired vision.
Diagnosis is based on history, examination, and CT or MRI. Treatment is with antibiotics and
===PAGE:749===
sometimes surgical drainage.
Preseptal cellulitis and orbital cellulitis are 2 distinct diseases that share a few clinical symptoms and
signs. Preseptal cellulitis usually begins superficial to the orbital septum. Orbital cellulitis usually begins
deep to the orbital septum. Both are more common among
children; preseptal cellulitis is far more
common than orbital cellulitis.
Etiology
Preseptal cellulitis is caused by contiguous spread of infection from local facial or eyelid injuries, insect or
animal bites, conjunctivitis, chalazion, or sinusitis.
Orbital cellulitis is most often caused by extension of infection from adjacent sinuses, especially the
ethmoid sinus (75 to 90%); it is less commonly caused by direct infection accompanying local trauma (eg,
insect or animal bite, penetrating eyelid injuries) or contiguous spread of infection from the face or teeth
or by hematogenous spread.
Pathogens vary by etiology and patient age.
Streptococcus pneumoniae
is the most frequent pathogen
associated with sinus infection, whereas
Staphylococcus aureus
and
Streptococcus pyogenes
predominate when infection arises from local trauma.
Haemophilus influenzae
type b, once a common
cause, is now less common because of widespread vaccination. Fungi are uncommon pathogens,
causing orbital cellulitis in diabetic or immunosuppressed patients. Infection in children < 9 yr is typically
with a single aerobic organism; patients > 15 yr typically have polymicrobial mixed aerobic and anaerobic
(
Bacteroides
,
Peptostreptococcus
) infections.
Pathophysiology
Because orbital cellulitis originates from large adjacent foci of fulminant infection (eg, sinusitis) separated
by only a thin bone barrier, orbital infection can be extensive and severe. Subperiosteal fluid collections,
some quite large, can accumulate; they are called subperiosteal abscesses, but many are sterile initially.
Complications include vision loss (3 to 11%) due to ischemic retinopathy and optic neuropathy caused by
increased intraorbital pressure; restricted ocular movements (ophthalmoplegia) caused by soft-tissue
inflammation; and intracranial sequelae from central spread of infection, including cavernous sinus
thrombosis, meningitis, and cerebral abscess.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of preseptal cellulitis include tenderness, swelling, warmth, and redness or
discoloration (violaceous in the case of
H. influenzae
) of the eyelid. Patients may be unable to open their
eyes because of swelling, but visual acuity is not affected.
Symptoms and signs of orbital cellulitis include swelling and redness of the eyelid and surrounding soft
tissues, conjunctival hyperemia and chemosis, decreased ocular motility, pain with eye movements,
decreased visual acuity, and proptosis caused by orbital swelling. Signs of the primary infection are also
often present (eg, nasal discharge and bleeding with sinusitis, periodontal pain and swelling with
abscess). Fever, malaise, and headache should raise suspicion of associated meningitis. Some or all of
these findings may be absent early in the course of the infection.
Subperiosteal abscesses, if large enough, can contribute to symptoms of orbital cellulitis such as swelling
and redness of the eyelid, decreased ocular motility, proptosis, and decreased visual acuity.
Diagnosis
• Mainly clinical evaluation
• CT or MRI if orbital cellulitis is possible
===PAGE:750===
Diagnosis is suspected clinically. Other disorders to consider include trauma, insect or animal bites
without cellulitis, retained foreign bodies, allergic reactions, tumors, and inflammatory orbital
pseudotumor.
Eyelid swelling may require the use of lid retractors for evaluation of the globe, and initial signs of
complicated infection may be subtle. An ophthalmologist should be consulted when orbital cellulitis is
suspected.
Preseptal cellulitis and orbital cellulitis are often distinguishable clinically. Preseptal cellulitis is likely if eye
findings are normal except for eyelid swelling. The presence of a local nidus of infection on the skin
makes preseptal cellulitis even more likely.
If findings are equivocal, if the examination is difficult (as in young children), or if nasal discharge is
present (suggesting sinusitis), CT or MRI should be done to confirm orbital cellulitis, to exclude tumor and
pseudotumor, and to diagnose sinusitis if present. MRI is better than CT if cavernous sinus thrombosis is
being considered.
The direction of proptosis may be a clue to the site of infection; eg, extension from the frontal sinus
pushes the globe down and out, and extension from the ethmoid sinus pushes the globe laterally and out.
Blood cultures are often done (ideally before beginning antibiotics) in patients with orbital cellulitis but are
positive in less than one third. Lumbar puncture is done if meningitis is suspected. Cultures of the
paranasal sinus fluid are done if sinusitis is the suspected source. Other laboratory tests are not
particularly helpful.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
Preseptal cellulitis:
Initial therapy should be directed against sinusitis pathogens (
S. pneumoniae
,
nontypable
H. influenzae
,
S. aureus
,
Moraxella catarrhalis
); however, in areas where methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
is prevalent, clinicians should add appropriate antibiotics (eg, clindamycin,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, or doxycycline for oral treatment and vancomycin for inpatient treatment).
In patients with dirty wounds, gram-negative infection must be considered.
Outpatient treatment is an option if orbital cellulitis has been definitively excluded; children should have
no signs of systemic infection and should be in the care of responsible parents or guardians. Patients
should be closely followed by an ophthalmologist. Outpatient treatment options include
amoxicillin/clavulanate 30 mg/kg po q 8 h (for children < 12 yr) or 500 mg po tid or 875 mg po bid (for
adults) for 10 days.
For inpatients, ampicillin/sulbactam 50 mg/kg IV q 6 h (for children) or 1.5 to 3 g (for adults) IV q 6 h
(maximum 8 g ampicillin/day) for 7 days is an option.
Orbital cellulitis:
Patients with orbital cellulitis should be hospitalized and treated with meningitis-dose
antibiotics. A 2nd- or 3rd-generation cephalosporin, such as cefotaxime 50 mg/kg IV q 6 h (for children <
12 yr) or 1 to 2 g IV q 6 h (for adults) for 14 days, is an option when sinusitis is present; imipenem,
ceftriaxone, and piperacillin/tazobactam are other options. If cellulitis is related to trauma or foreign body,
treatment should cover gram-positive (vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h) and gram-negative (eg, ertapenem 100
mg IV once/day) pathogens and be taken for 7 to 10 days or until clinical improvement.
Surgery to decompress the orbit, drain an abscess, open infected sinuses, or a combination is indicated
in any of the following circumstances:
• Vision is compromised.
• Suppuration or foreign body is suspected.
===PAGE:751===
• Imaging shows orbital or large subperiosteal abscess.
• The infection does not resolve with antibiotics.
Tumors of the Orbit
Orbital tumors can be benign or malignant and arise primarily within the orbit or secondarily
from an adjacent source, such as the eyelid, paranasal sinus, or intracranial compartment.
Causes differ by age group. The more common benign pediatric tumors include dermoid tumors and
vascular lesions such as capillary hemangioma and lymphangioma. In adults, cavernous hemangiomas
predominate.
Some orbital tumors usually cause proptosis and displacement of the globe in a direction opposite the
tumor. Pain, diplopia, and vision loss may also be present. Diagnosis, in most cases, is based on the
history, examination, and neuroimaging (CT, MRI, or both).
Treatment
Treatment varies by tumor type. Treatment of dermoid tumors is excision. Capillary hemangiomas tend to
spontaneously involute and therefore do not need any treatment; however, especially when located on
the upper eyelid, they may affect vision and require treatment with interlesional injection of corticosteroids
or surgical debulking.
Children:
The common pediatric malignant tumors include rhabdomyosarcoma and metastatic lesions
related to leukemia or neuroblastoma. If rhabdomyosarcoma is resectable, surgery is done, followed by
chemotherapy and orbital radiation therapy. Leukemic disease is usually managed by orbital radiation
therapy, chemotherapy, or both.
Adults:
The most common benign tumors are meningiomas, mucoceles, and cavernous hemangiomas.
When symptomatic, sphenoid wing meningiomas are treated with debulking via craniotomy, sometimes
followed by a course of radiation therapy. Because meningioma cells infiltrate bone of the skull base,
complete resection usually is not possible. Mucoceles are treated by draining them into the nose because
they most commonly arise from the ethmoid or frontal sinus. Cavernous hemangiomas are excised.
Common malignant tumors include lymphoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and metastatic disease.
Lymphomas involving the orbit are typically B-cell and characteristically low grade. Lymphomas can be
bilateral and simultaneous and can be part of a systemic process or exist in the orbit in isolation.
Radiation therapy effectively treats orbital lymphomas with few adverse effects, although the addition of
monoclonal antibodies against a surface receptor (CD20) on the lymphocyte is also effective. Most
squamous cell carcinomas arise from the adjacent paranasal sinuses. Surgery, radiation therapy, or both
form the backbone of therapy. Metastatic disease is usually treated with radiation therapy. Metastatic
disease involving the orbit is usually an unfavorable prognostic sign; carcinoid tumors are a notable
exception.
===PAGE:752===
7 - Dermatologic Disorders
Chapter 71. Approach to the Dermatologic Patient
Introduction
History and physical examination are adequate for diagnosing many skin lesions. Some require biopsy or
other testing.
Important information to obtain from history includes
• Personal or family history of atopy (suggesting atopic dermatitis)
• Occupational exposures (contact dermatitis)
• Long-term exposure to sunlight or other forms of radiation (benign and malignant skin tumors)
• Systemic disease (diabetes and
Candida
or tinea, hepatitis C and cryoglobulinemia)
• Sexual history (syphilis and gonorrhea)
• Use of drugs (Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis)
• Travel history (Lyme disease, skin infections)
A negative history is as important as a positive history. The history of the particular skin lesions is also
important, including time and site of initial appearance, spread, change in appearance, and triggering
factors.
Visual inspection is the central evaluation tool; many skin disorders are diagnosed by the characteristic
appearance or morphology of the lesions.
Description of Skin Lesions
An extensive language has been developed to standardize the description of skin lesions, including
• Primary morphology (lesion type)
• Secondary morphology (configuration)
• Texture
• Distribution
• Color
Rash is a general term for a temporary skin eruption.
Primary Morphology
Macules
are flat, nonpalpable lesions usually < 10 mm in diameter. Macules represent a change in color
and are not raised or depressed compared to the skin surface. A patch is a large macule. Examples
include freckles, flat moles, tattoos, port-wine stains, and the rashes of rickettsial infections, rubella,
measles, and some allergic drug eruptions.
Papules
are elevated lesions usually < 10 mm in diameter that can be felt or palpated. Examples include
nevi, warts, lichen planus, insect bites, seborrheic and actinic keratoses, some lesions of acne, and skin
cancers. The term maculopapular is often loosely and improperly used to describe many red skin
rashes;
===PAGE:753===
cancers. The term maculopapular is often loosely and improperly used to describe many red skin
rashes;
because this term is nonspecific and easily misused, it should be avoided.
Plaques
are palpable lesions > 10 mm in diameter that are elevated or depressed compared to the skin
surface. Plaques may be flat topped or rounded. Lesions of psoriasis and granuloma annulare commonly
form plaques.
Nodules
are firm papules or lesions that extend into the dermis or subcutaneous tissue. Examples
include cysts, lipomas, and fibromas.
Vesicles
are small, clear, fluid-filled blisters < 10 mm in diameter. Vesicles are characteristic of herpes
infections, acute allergic contact dermatitis, and some autoimmune blistering disorders (eg, dermatitis
herpetiformis).
Bullae
are clear fluid-filled blisters > 10 mm in diameter. These may be caused by burns, bites, irritant or
allergic contact dermatitis, and drug reactions. Classic autoimmune bullous diseases include pemphigus
vulgaris and bullous pemphigoid. Bullae also may occur in inherited disorders of skin fragility.
Pustules
are vesicles that contain pus. Pustules are common in bacterial infections and folliculitis and
may arise in some inflammatory disorders including pustular psoriasis.
Urticaria
(wheals or hives—see
Plate 53
) is characterized by elevated lesions caused by localized edema. Wheals are a common
manifestation of hypersensitivity to drugs, stings or bites, autoimmunity, and, less commonly, physical
stimuli including temperature, pressure, and sunlight. The typical wheal lasts < 24 h.
Scales
are heaped-up accumulations of horny epithelium that occur in disorders such as psoriasis,
seborrheic dermatitis, and fungal infections. Pityriasis rosea and chronic dermatitis of any type may be
scaly.
Crusts (scabs)
consist of dried serum, blood, or pus. Crusting can occur in inflammatory or infectious
skin diseases (eg, impetigo).
Erosions
are open areas of skin that result from loss of part or all of the epidermis. Erosions can be
traumatic or can occur with various inflammatory or infectious skin diseases. An excoriation is a linear
erosion caused by scratching, rubbing, or picking.
Ulcers
result from loss of the epidermis and at least part of the dermis. Causes include venous stasis
dermatitis, physical trauma with or without vascular compromise (eg, from decubitus ulcers, peripheral
arterial disease), infections, and vasculitis.
Petechiae
are nonblanchable punctate foci of hemorrhage. Causes include platelet abnormalities (eg,
thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunction), vasculitis, and infections (eg, meningococcemia, Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, other rickettsioses).
Purpura
is a larger area of hemorrhage that may be palpable. Palpable purpura is considered the
hallmark of leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Purpura may indicate a coagulopathy. Large areas of purpura may
be called ecchymoses or, colloquially, bruises.
Atrophy
is thinning of the skin, which may appear dry and wrinkled, resembling cigarette paper. Atrophy
may be caused by chronic sun exposure, aging, and some inflammatory and neoplastic skin diseases,
including cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and lupus erythematosus. Atrophy also may result from long-term
use of potent topical corticosteroids.
Scars
are areas of fibrosis that replace normal skin after injury. Some scars become hypertrophic or
thickened and raised. Keloids are hypertrophic scars that extend beyond the original wound margin.
Telangiectases
are foci of small, permanently dilated blood vessels that are most often idiopathic but
may occur in rosacea, systemic diseases (especially systemic sclerosis), or inherited diseases (eg,
===PAGE:754===
ataxia-telangiectasia, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia) or after long-term therapy with topical
fluorinated corticosteroids.
Secondary Morphology (Configuration)
Configuration is the shape of single lesions and the arrangement of clusters of lesions.
Linear lesions
take on the shape of a straight line and are suggestive of some forms of contact
dermatitis, linear epidermal nevi, and lichen striatus.
Annular lesions
are rings with central clearing. Examples include granuloma annulare, some drug
eruptions, some dermatophyte infections (eg, ringworm), and secondary syphilis.
Nummular lesions
are circular or coin-shaped; an example is nummular eczema.
Target (bull's-eye or iris) lesions
appear as rings with central duskiness and are classic for erythema
multiforme.
Serpiginous lesions
have linear, branched, and curving elements. Examples include some fungal and
parasitic infections (eg, cutaneous larva migrans).
Reticulated lesions
have a lacy or networked pattern. Examples include cutis marmorata and livedo
reticularis.
Herpetiform
describes grouped papules or vesicles arranged like those of a herpes simplex infection.
Zosteriform
describes lesions clustered in a dermatomal distribution similar to herpes zoster.
Texture
Some skin lesions have visible or palpable texture that suggests a diagnosis.
Verrucous lesions
have an irregular, pebbly, or rough surface. Examples include warts and seborrheic
keratoses.
Lichenification
is thickening of the skin with accentuation of normal skin markings; it results from
repeated rubbing.
Induration
, or deep thickening of the skin, can result from edema, inflammation, or infiltration, including
by cancer. Indurated skin has a hard, resistant feeling. Induration is characteristic of panniculitis, some
skin infections, and cutaneous metastatic cancers.
Umbilicated lesions
have a central indentation and are usually viral. Examples include molluscum
contagiosum and herpes simplex.
Xanthomas
, which are yellowish, waxy lesions, may occur in lipid disorders.
Location and Distribution
It is important to note whether
• Lesions are single or multiple
• Particular body parts are affected (eg, palms or soles, scalp, mucosal membranes)
• Distribution is random or patterned, symmetric or asymmetric
• Lesions are on sun-exposed or protected skin
===PAGE:755===
Although few patterns are pathognomonic, some are consistent with certain diseases.
Psoriasis
frequently affects the scalp, extensor surfaces of the elbows and knees, umbilicus, and the
gluteal cleft.
Lichen planus
frequently arises on the wrists, forearms, genitals, and lower legs.
Vitiligo
may be patchy and isolated or may group around the distal extremities and face.
Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus
has characteristic lesions on sun-exposed skin of the face,
especially the forehead, nose, and the conchal bowl of the ear.
Hidradenitis suppurativa
involves skin containing a high density of apocrine glands, including the
axillae, groin, and under the breasts.
Color
Red skin
(erythema) can result from many different inflammatory or infectious diseases. Cutaneous
tumors are often pink or red. Superficial vascular lesions such as port-wine stains may appear red.
Orange skin
is most often seen in hypercarotenemia, a usually benign condition of carotene deposition
after excess dietary ingestion of
β
-carotene.
Yellow skin
is typical of jaundice, xanthelasmas and xanthomas, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum.
Green fingernails
suggest
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection.
Violet skin
may result from cutaneous hemorrhage or vasculitis. Vascular lesions or tumors, such as
Kaposi's sarcoma and hemangiomas, can appear purple. A lilac color of the eyelids or heliotrope eruption
is characteristic of dermatomyositis.
Shades of blue, silver, and gray
can result from deposition of drugs or metals in the skin, including
minocycline, amiodarone, and silver (argyria). Ischemic skin appears purple to gray in color. Deep dermal
nevi appear blue.
Black skin
lesions may be melanocytic, including nevi and melanoma. Black eschars are collections of
dead skin that can arise from vascular infarction, which may be caused by infection (eg, anthrax,
angioinvasive fungi including
Rhizopus
, meningococcemia), calciphylaxis, arterial insufficiency, or
vasculitis.
Other Clinical Signs
Dermatographism
is the appearance of an urticarial wheal after focal pressure (eg, stroking or
scratching the skin) in the distribution of the pressure. Up to 5% of normal patients may exhibit this sign,
which is a form of physical urticaria.
Darier's sign
refers to rapid swelling of a lesion when stroked. It occurs in patients with urticaria
pigmentosa or mastocytosis.
Nikolsky's sign
is epidermal shearing that occurs with gentle lateral pressure on seemingly uninvolved
skin in patients with toxic epidermal necrolysis and some autoimmune bullous diseases.
Auspitz sign
is the appearance of pinpoint bleeding after scale is removed from plaques in psoriasis.
Koebner phenomenon
describes the development of lesions within areas of trauma (eg, caused by
scratching, rubbing, injury). Psoriasis frequently exhibits this phenomenon, as may lichen planus.
===PAGE:756===
Diagnostic Tests
Diagnostic tests are indicated when the cause of a skin lesion or disease is not obvious from history and
physical examination alone (for patch testing, .
Biopsy:
A skin biopsy can be done by a primary care physician. One procedure is a punch
biopsy, in
which a tubular punch (diameter usually 4 mm) is inserted into deep dermal or subcutaneous tissue to
obtain a specimen, which is snipped off at its base. More superficial lesions may be biopsied by shaving
with a scalpel or razor blade. Bleeding is controlled by aluminum chloride solution or electrodesiccation;
large incisions are closed by sutures. Larger or deeper biopsies can be done by excising a wedge of skin
with a scalpel. All pigmented lesions should be excised deeply for histologic evaluation of depth;
superficial biopsies are often inadequate. Diagnosis and cure are achieved simultaneously for most small
tumors by complete excision that includes a small border of normal skin.
Scrapings:
Skin scrapings help diagnose fungal infections and scabies. For fungal infection, scales are
taken from the border of the lesion and placed onto a microscope slide. Then a drop of 10 to 20%
potassium hydroxide (KOH) is added. Hyphae, budding yeast, or both confirm the diagnosis of tinea or
candidiasis. For scabies, scrapings are taken from suspected burrows and placed directly under a
coverslip with mineral oil; findings of mites, feces, or eggs confirm the diagnosis.
Wood's light:
Wood's light (black light) can help distinguish hypopigmentation from depigmentation
(depigmentation of vitiligo fluoresces ivory-white and hypopigmented lesions do not). Erythrasma
fluoresces bright orangered. Tinea capitis caused by
Microsporum canis
and
Microsporum audouinii
fluoresces a light, bright green. (NOTE: Most tinea capitis in the US is caused by
Trichophyton
species,
which do not fluoresce.) The earliest clue to cutaneous
Pseudomonas
infection (eg, in burns) may be
green fluorescence.
Tzanck testing:
Tzanck testing can be used to diagnose viral disease, such as herpes simplex and
herpes zoster, and is done when active intact vesicles are present. Tzanck testing cannot distinguish
between herpes simplex and herpes zoster infections. An intact blister is the preferred lesion for
examination. The blister roof is removed with a sharp blade, and the base of the unroofed vesicle is
scraped with a #15 scalpel blade. The scrapings are transferred to a slide and stained with Wright's stain
or Giemsa stain. Multinucleated giant cells are a sign of herpes infection.
Diascopy:
Diascopy is used to determine whether a lesion is vascular (inflammatory) or nonvascular
(nevus) or hemorrhagic (petechia or purpura). A microscope slide is pressed against a lesion to see
whether it blanches. Hemorrhagic lesions and nonvascular lesions do not blanch; inflammatory lesions
do. Diascopy is sometimes used to identify sarcoid skin lesions, which, when tested, turn an apple jelly
color.
Itching
(Pruritus)
Itching is a symptom that can cause significant discomfort and is one of the most common reasons for
consultation with a dermatologist. Itching leads to scratching, which can cause inflammation, skin
degradation, and possible secondary infection. The skin can become lichenified, scaly, and excoriated.
Pathophysiology
Itch can be prompted by diverse stimuli, including light touch, vibration, and wool fibers. There are a
number of chemical mediators as well as different mechanisms by which the sensation of itch occurs.
Mediators:
Histamine is one of the most significant mediators. It is synthesized and stored in mast cells
in the skin and is released in response to various stimuli. Other mediators (eg, neuropeptides) can either
cause the release of histamine or act as pruritogens themselves, thus explaining why antihistamines
ameliorate some cases of itching and not others. Opioids have a central pruritic action as well as
===PAGE:757===
stimulating the peripherally mediated histamine itch.
Mechanisms:
There are 4 mechanisms of itch:
• Dermatologic—typically caused by inflammatory or pathologic processes (eg, urticaria, eczema)
• Systemic—related to diseases of organs other than skin (eg, cholestasis)
• Neuropathic—related to disorders of the CNS or peripheral nervous system (eg, multiple sclerosis)
• Psychogenic—related to psychiatric conditions
Intense itching stimulates vigorous scratching, which in turn can cause secondary skin conditions (eg,
inflammation, excoriation, infection), which can lead to more itching. However, scratch can temporarily
reduce the sensation of itch by activating inhibitory neuronal circuits.
Etiology
Itching can be a symptom of a primary skin disease or, less commonly, a systemic disease (see
Table 71-1
).
[Table 71-1.
Some Causes of Itching]
Skin disorders:
Many skin disorders cause itching. The most common include
• Dry skin
• Atopic dermatitis (eczema)
• Contact dermatitis
• Fungal skin infections
Systemic disorders:
In systemic disorders, itching may occur with or without skin lesions. However,
when itching is prominent without any identifiable skin lesions, systemic disorders and drugs should be
considered more strongly. Systemic disorders are less
often a cause of itching than skin disorders, but
some of the more common causes include
• Allergic reaction (eg, to foods, drugs, bites and stings)
• Cholestasis
• Chronic renal failure
Less common systemic causes of itching include hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, diabetes, iron
deficiency, dermatitis herpetiformis, and polycythemia vera.
Drugs:
Drugs can cause itching as an allergic reaction or by directly triggering histamine release (most
commonly morphine, some IV contrast agents).
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should determine onset of itching, initial location, course, duration,
patterns of itching (eg, nocturnal or diurnal, intermittent or persistent, seasonal variation), and whether
any rash is present. A careful drug history should be obtained; both oral (eg, opioids, cocaine, aspirin,
prescription and OTC) and topical (eg, hydrocortisone, benadryl, moisturizers) drugs are included. History
also should include any factors that make the itching better or worse.
===PAGE:758===
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including steatorrhea and right upper
quadrant pain (cholestasis); constitutional symptoms of fever, weight loss, and night sweats (cancer);
intermittent weakness, numbness, tingling, and visual disturbances or loss (multiple sclerosis); irritability,
sweating, weight loss, and palpitations (hyperthyroidism) or depression, dry skin, and weight gain
(hypothyroidism); urinary frequency, excessive thirst, and weight loss (diabetes); and headache, pica, hair
thinning, and exercise intolerance (iron deficiency anemia).
Past medical history
should identify known causative disorders (eg, renal disease, cholestatic disorder,
cancer being treated with chemotherapy) and the patient's emotional state. Social history should focus on
family members with similar itching and skin symptoms (eg, scabies, pediculosis); relationship of itching to
occupation or exposures to plants, animals, or chemicals; and history of recent travel.
Physical examination:
Physical examination begins with a review of clinical appearance for signs of
jaundice, weight loss or gain, and fatigue. Close examination of the skin should be done, taking note of
presence, morphology, extent, and distribution of lesions. Cutaneous examination also should make note
of signs of secondary infection (eg, erythema, swelling, warmth, yellow or honey-colored crusting).
The examination should make note of significant adenopathy suggestive of cancer. Abdominal
examination should focus on organomegaly, masses, and tenderness (cholestatic disorder or cancer).
Neurologic examination focuses on weakness, spasticity, or numbness (multiple sclerosis).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Constitutional symptoms of weight loss, fatigue, and night sweats
• Extremity weakness, numbness, or tingling
• Abdominal pain and jaundice
• Urinary frequency, excessive thirst, and weight loss
Interpretation of findings:
Generalized itching that begins shortly after use of a drug is likely caused by
that drug. Localized itching (often with rash) that occurs in the area of contact with a substance is likely
caused by that substance. However, many systemic allergies can be difficult to identify because patients
typically have consumed multiple different foods and have been in contact with many substances before
developing itching. Similarly, identifying a drug cause in a patient taking several drugs may be difficult.
Sometimes the patient has been taking the offending drug for months or even years before developing a
reaction.
If an etiology is not immediately obvious, the appearance and location of skin lesions can suggest a
diagnosis (see
Table 71-1
).
In the minority of patients in whom no skin lesions are evident, a systemic disorder should be considered.
Some disorders that cause itching are readily apparent on evaluation (eg, chronic renal failure,
cholestatic jaundice). Other systemic disorders that cause itching are suggested by findings (see
Table
71-1
). Rarely, itching is the first manifestation of significant systemic disorders (eg, polycythemia vera,
certain cancers, hyperthyroidism).
Testing:
Many dermatologic disorders are diagnosed clinically. However, when itching is accompanied by
discrete skin lesions of uncertain etiology, biopsy can be appropriate. When an allergic reaction is
suspected but the substance is unknown, skin testing (either prick or patch testing depending on
suspected etiology) is often done. When a systemic disorder is suspected, testing is directed by the
suspected cause and usually involves CBC; liver, renal, and thyroid function measurements; and
appropriate evaluation for underlying cancer.
Treatment
Any underlying disorder is treated. Supportive treatment involves the following (see also
===PAGE:759===
Table 71-2
):
• Local skin care
• Topical treatment
• Systemic treatment
Skin care:
Itching due to any cause benefits from use of cool or lukewarm (but not hot) water when
bathing, mild or moisturizing soap, limited bathing duration and frequency, frequent lubrication,
humidification of dry air, and avoidance of irritating or tight clothing. Avoidance of contact irritants (eg,
wool clothing) also may be helpful.
Topical drugs:
Topical drugs may help localized itching. Options include lotions or creams that contain
camphor and/or menthol, pramoxine, or corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are effective in relieving itch
caused by inflammation but should be avoided for conditions that have no evidence of inflammation.
Topical diphenhydramine and doxepin should be avoided because they may sensitize the skin.
Systemic drugs:
Systemic drugs are indicated for generalized itching or local itching resistant to topical
agents. Antihistamines, most notably hydroxyzine, are effective, especially for nocturnal itch, and are most
commonly used. Sedating antihistamines must be used cautiously in elderly patients during the day
because they can lead to falls; newer nonsedating antihistamines such as loratadine, fexofenadine, and
cetirizine can be useful for daytime itching. Other drugs include doxepin (typically taken at night due to
high level of sedation), cholestyramine (for renal failure, cholestasis, polycythemia vera), opioid
antagonists such as naltrexone (for biliary pruritus), and possibly gabapentin (for uremic pruritus).
Physical agents that may be effective for itching include ultraviolet phototherapy.
Geriatrics Essentials
Xerotic eczema is very common among elderly patients. It is especially likely if itching is primarily on the
lower extremities.
Severe, diffuse itching in the elderly should raise concern for cancer, especially if another etiology is not
immediately apparent.
When treating the elderly, sedation can be a significant problem with antihistamines. Use of nonsedating
antihistamines during the day and sedating antihistamines at night, liberal use of topical ointments and
corticosteroids (when appropriate), and consideration of ultraviolet phototherapy can help avoid the
complications of sedation.
Key Points
• Itching is usually a symptom of a skin disorder or systemic allergic reaction but can result from a
systemic disorder.
• If skin lesions are not evident, systemic causes should be investigated.
• Skin care (eg, limiting bathing, avoiding irritants, moisturizing regularly, humidifying environment) should
be observed.
• Symptoms can be relieved by topical or systemic drugs.
Urticaria
(Hives; Wheals)
Urticaria is migratory, well-circumscribed, erythematous, pruritic plaques on the skin (see
Plate 53
).
===PAGE:760===
Urticaria also may be accompanied by angioedema, which results from mast cell and basophil activation
in the deeper dermis and subcutaneous tissues and manifests as edema of the face and lips, extremities,
or genitals. Angioedema can be life-threatening if airway obstruction occurs because of laryngeal edema
or tongue swelling.
Pathophysiology
Urticaria results from the release of histamine, bradykinin, kallikrein, and other vasoactive substances
from mast cells and basophils in the superficial dermis, resulting in intradermal edema caused by capillary
and venous vasodilation and occasionally caused by leukocyte infiltration.
The process can be immune mediated or nonimmune mediated.
Immune-mediated mast cell activation
includes
• Type I hypersensitivity reactions, in which allergen-bound IgE antibodies bind to high-affinity cell surface
receptors on mast cells and basophils
• Autoimmune disorders, in which antibodies to an IgE receptor functionally cross-link IgE receptors and
cause mast cell degranulation
Nonimmune-mediated mast cell activation
includes
• Direct nonallergic activation of mast cells by certain drugs
• Drug-induced cyclooxygenase inhibition that activates mast cells by poorly understood mechanisms
[Table 71-2.
Some Therapeutic Approaches to Itching]
•
Activation by physical or emotional stimuli; mechanism is poorly understood but possibly involves the
release of neuropeptides that interact with mast cells
Etiology
Urticaria is classified as acute (< 6 wk) or chronic (> 6 wk); acute cases (70%) are more common than
chronic (30%).
Acute urticaria
(see
Table 71-3
) most often results from
• Type I hypersensitivity reactions
A presumptive trigger (eg, drug, food ingestion, insect sting, infection) occasionally can be identified.
Chronic urticaria
most often results from
• Idiopathic causes
• Autoimmune disorders
Chronic urticaria often lasts months to years, eventually resolving without a cause being found.
Evaluation
Because there are no definitive diagnostic tests for urticaria, evaluation largely relies on history and
physical examination.
===PAGE:761===
History: History of present illness
should include a detailed account of the individual episodes of
urticaria, including distribution, size, and appearance of lesions; frequency of occurrence; duration of
individual lesions; and any prior episodes. Activities and exposures during, immediately before, and within
the past 24 h of the appearance of urticaria should be noted. Clinicians specifically should ask about
recent exercise; exposure to potential allergens (see
Table 71-3
), insects, or animals; new laundry
detergent or soaps; new foods; recent infections; or recent stressful life events. The patient should be
asked about the duration between any suspected trigger and the appearance of urticaria and which
particular triggers are suspected. Important associated symptoms include pruritus, rhinorrhea, swelling of
the face and tongue, and dyspnea.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including fever, fatigue, abdominal
pain, and diarrhea (infection); heat or cold intolerance, tremor, or weight change (autoimmune thyroiditis);
joint pain (cryoglobulinemia, SLE); malar rash (SLE); dry eyes and dry mouth (Sjogren's syndrome);
cutaneous ulcers and hyperpigmented lesions after resolution of urticaria (urticarial vasculitis); small
pigmented papules (mastocytosis); lymphadenopathy (viral illness, cancer, serum sickness); acute or
chronic diarrhea (viral or parasitic enterocolitis); and fevers, night sweats, or weight loss (cancer).
Past medical history
should include a detailed allergy history, including known atopic conditions (eg,
allergies, asthma, eczema) and known possible causes (eg, autoimmune disorders, cancer). All drug use
should be reviewed, including OTC drugs and herbal products, specifically any agents particularly
associated with urticaria (see
Table 71-3
). Family history should elicit any history of rheumatoid disease,
autoimmune disorders, or cancer. Social history should cover any recent travel and any risk factors for
transmission of infectious disease (eg, hepatitis, HIV).
Physical examination:
Vital signs should note the presence of bradycardia or tachycardia and
tachypnea. General examination should immediately seek any signs of respiratory distress and also note
cachexia, jaundice, or agitation.
Examination of the head should note any swelling of the face, lips, or tongue; scleral icterus; malar rash;
tender and enlarged thyroid; lymphadenopathy; or dry eyes and dry mouth. The oropharynx should be
inspected and the sinuses should be palpated and transilluminated for signs of occult infection (eg, sinus
infection, tooth abscess).
Abdominal examination should note any masses, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or tenderness. Neurologic
examination should note any tremor or hyperreflexia or hyporeflexia. Musculoskeletal examination should
note the presence of any inflamed or deformed joints.
Skin examination should note the presence and distribution of urticarial lesions as well as any cutaneous
ulceration, hyperpigmentation, small papules, or jaundice. Urticarial lesions usually appear as welldemarcated transient swellings involving the dermis. These swellings are typically red and vary in size
from pinprick to covering wide areas. Some lesions can be very large. In other cases, smaller urticarial
lesions may become confluent. However, skin lesions also may be absent at the time of the visit.
Maneuvers to evoke physical urticaria can be done during the examination, including exposure to
vibration (tuning fork), warmth (tuning fork held under warm water), cold (stethoscope or chilled tuning
fork), water, or pressure (lightly scratching an unaffected area with a fingernail).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Angioedema (swelling of the face, lips, or tongue)
[Table 71-3.
Some Causes of Urticaria]
•
Stridor, wheezing, or other respiratory distress
• Hyperpigmented lesions, ulcers, or urticaria that persist > 48 h
• Signs of systemic illness (eg, fever, lymphadenopathy, jaundice, cachexia)
===PAGE:762===
Interpretation of findings: Acute urticaria
is nearly always due to some defined exposure to a drug or
physical stimulus or an acute infectious illness. However, the trigger is not always clear from the history,
particularly because allergy may develop without warning to a previously tolerated substance.
Most
chronic urticaria
is idiopathic. The next most common cause is an autoimmune disorder. The
causative autoimmune disorder is sometimes clinically apparent. Urticarial vasculitis sometimes is
associated with connective tissue disorders (particularly SLE or Sjogren's syndrome). In urticarial
vasculitis, urticaria is accompanied by findings of cutaneous vasculitis; it should be considered when the
urticaria are painful rather than pruritic, last > 48 h, do not blanch, or are accompanied by vesicles or
purpura.
Testing:
Usually, no testing is needed for an isolated episode of urticaria unless symptoms and signs
suggest a specific disorder (eg, infection).
Unusual, recurrent, or persistent cases warrant further evaluation. Referral for allergy skin testing should
be done, and routine laboratory tests should consist of CBC, blood chemistries, liver function tests, and
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Further testing should be guided by symptoms and signs (eg, of
autoimmune disorders) and any abnormalities on the screening tests (eg, hepatitis serologies and
ultrasonography for abnormal liver function tests; ova and parasites for eosinophilia; cryoglobulin titer for
elevated liver function tests or elevated creatinine; thyroid autoantibodies for abnormal TSH).
Skin biopsy should be done if there is any uncertainty as to the diagnosis or if wheals persist > 48 h (to
rule out urticarial vasculitis).
Clinicians should not recommend the patient do an empiric challenge (eg, "Try such and such again and
see whether you get a reaction") because subsequent reactions may be more severe.
Treatment
Any identified causes are treated or remedied. Implicated drugs or foods should be stopped.
Nonspecific symptomatic treatment (eg, taking cool baths, avoiding hot water and scratching, and wearing
loose clothing) may be helpful.
Drugs:
Antihistamines remain the mainstay of treatment. They must be taken on a regular basis, rather
than as needed. Newer oral antihistamines often are preferred because of once-daily dosing and
because some are less sedating. Appropriate choices include
• Cetirizine 10 mg once/day
• Fexofenadine 180 mg once/day
• Desloratadine 5 mg once/day
• Levocetirizine 5 mg once/day
Older oral antihistamines (eg, hydroxyzine 10 to 25 mg q 4 to 6 h; diphenhydramine 25 to 50 mg q 6 h)
are sedating but inexpensive and also quite effective.
Systemic corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 30 to 40 mg po once/day) are given for severe symptoms but
should not be used long term. Topical corticosteroids or antihistamines are not beneficial.
Angioedema:
Patients who have angioedema involving the oropharynx or any involvement of the airway
should receive epinephrine 0.3 mL of 1:1000 solution sc and be admitted to the hospital. On discharge,
patients should be supplied with and trained in the use of an auto-injectable epinephrine pen.
Geriatrics Essentials
===PAGE:763===
The older oral antihistamines (eg, hydroxyzine, diphenhydramine) are sedating and can cause confusion,
urinary retention, and delirium. They should be used cautiously to treat urticaria in elderly patients.
Key Points
• Urticaria can be caused by allergic or nonallergic mechanisms.
• Most acute cases are caused by an allergic reaction to a specific substance.
• Most chronic cases are idiopathic or result from autoimmune disease.
• Treatment is based on severity; nonsedating antihistamines and avoidance of triggers are first-line
options.
• Topical corticosteroids and antihistamines are not beneficial.
• Concomitant systemic symptoms require a thorough evaluation for the etiology.
Skin Manifestations of Internal Disease
The skin frequently serves as a marker for underlying internal disease. The type of lesion typically relates
to a specific disease or type of disease.
Internal cancer:
Of patients with dermatomyositis, about 50% have associated breast, lung, ovarian,
and GI cancers.
Acute onset of multiple seborrheic keratoses (Leser-Trelat sign) may indicate underlying internal cancer,
particularly adenocarcinoma. However, because of the high prevalence of seborrheic keratoses in
healthy adults, this sign may be overdiagnosed.
Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis is associated with hematologic cancer.
Acanthosis nigricans (see
Plate 24
) that is associated with cancer can be of rapid onset and particularly widespread. Pruritus
without a clearly associated dermatitis may indicate occult cancer, often lymphoma.
Paraneoplastic pemphigus is a relatively rare autoimmune blistering disease that has been associated
with various cancers, including leukemias.
The carcinoid syndrome (flushing and erythema of the neck) is associated with carcinoid tumor.
Erythema gyratum repens is a rare eruption consisting of concentric erythematous lesions, resembling
wood grain, which has been associated with various cancers.
Endocrinopathies:
Many skin findings are associated with endocrinopathies but are not specific.
Patients with diabetes mellitus may have acanthosis nigricans, necrobiosis lipoidica, perforating
disorders, and scleredema adultorum.
Thyroid disease, both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism, can affect hair, nails, and skin.
Cushing's disease causes striae distensae, moon facies, and skin fragility.
Addison's disease is characterized by hyperpigmentation that is accentuated in skin creases and areas of
trauma.
GI disorders:
Skin conditions commonly associated with GI disorders include
===PAGE:764===
• Pyoderma gangrenosum: Inflammatory bowel disease
• Lichen planus and porphyria cutanea tarda: Hepatitis C infection
• Diffuse hyperpigmentation, or bronze diabetes: Hemochromatosis
• Erythema nodosum: Inflammatory bowel disease, sarcoidosis, and various infections
• Eruptive xanthomas: Elevated serum triglycerides
===PAGE:765===
Chapter 72. Principles of Topical Dermatologic Therapy
Introduction
Topical dermatologic treatments include
• Cleansing agents
• Absorbents
• Anti-infective agents
• Anti-inflammatory agents
• Astringents (drying agents that precipitate protein and shrink and contract the skin)
• Emollients (skin hydrators and softeners)
• Keratolytics (agents that soften, loosen, and facilitate exfoliation of the squamous cells of the epidermis)
Vehicles
Topical therapies can be delivered in various vehicles, which include
• Powders
• Liquids
• Combinations of liquid and oil
The vehicle influences a therapy's effectiveness and may itself cause adverse effects (eg, contact or
irritant dermatitis). Generally, aqueous preparations are drying (because the liquid evaporates) and are
used in acute inflammatory conditions. Oil-based preparations are moisturizing and are preferred for
chronic inflammation.
Powders:
Inert powders may be mixed with active agents (eg, antifungals) to deliver therapy. They are
prescribed for lesions in moist or intertriginous areas.
Liquids:
Liquid vehicles include
• Baths and soaks
• Solutions
• Lotions
• Gels
Baths and soaks are used when therapy must be applied to large areas, such as with extensive contact
dermatitis or atopic dermatitis.
Solutions are ingredients dissolved in a solvent, usually ethyl alcohol, propylene glycol, polyethylene
glycol, or water. Solutions are convenient to apply (especially to the scalp
for disorders such as psoriasis
or seborrhea) but tend to be drying. Two common solutions are Burow's solution and Domeboro's
solution.
Lotions are water-based emulsions. They are easily applied to hairy skin. Lotions cool and dry acute
inflammatory and exudative lesions, such as contact dermatitis, tinea pedis, and tinea cruris.
===PAGE:766===
Gels are ingredients suspended in a solvent thickened with polymers. Gels are often more effective for
controlled release of topical agents. They are often used in acne, rosacea, and psoriasis of the scalp.
Combination vehicles:
Combinations include
• Creams
• Ointments
Combination vehicles usually contain oil and water but may also contain propylene or polyethylene glycol.
Creams are semi-solid emulsions of oil and water. They are used for moisturizing and cooling and when
exudation is present. They vanish when rubbed into skin.
Ointments are oil based (eg, petrolatum) with little if any water. Ointments are optimal lubricants and
increase drug penetration because of their occlusive nature; a given concentration of drug is generally
more potent in an ointment. They are preferred for lichenified lesions and lesions with thick crusts or
heaped-up scales, including psoriasis and lichen simplex chronicus. Ointments are less irritating than
creams for erosions or ulcers.
Dressings
Dressings protect open lesions, facilitate healing, increase drug absorption, and protect the patient's
clothing.
Nonocclusive dressings:
The most common are gauze dressings. They maximally allow air to reach
the wound, which is often preferred in healing, and allow the lesion to dry. Nonocclusive dressings wetted
with solution, usually saline, are used to help cleanse and debride thickened or crusted lesions. The
dressings are applied wet and removed after the solution has evaporated (wet-to-dry dressings);
materials from the skin then adhere to the dressing.
Occlusive dressings:
Occlusive dressings increase the absorption and effectiveness of topical therapy.
Most common are transparent films such as polyethylene (plastic household wrap) or flexible, transparent,
semi-permeable dressings. Hydrocolloid dressings can be applied with a gauze cover in patients with
cutaneous ulceration. Zinc oxide gelatin (Unna's paste boot) is an effective occlusive dressing for patients
with stasis dermatitis and ulcers. Plastic tape impregnated with flurandrenolide, a corticosteroid, can be
used for isolated or recalcitrant lesions.
Occlusive dressings applied over topical corticosteroids to increase absorption are sometimes used to
treat psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, skin lesions of lupus erythematosus, and chronic hand dermatitis,
among other conditions. Systemic absorption of topical corticosteroids may occur and cause
• Development of miliaria
• Skin atrophy
• Striae
• Bacterial or fungal infections
• Adrenal suppression
• Acneiform eruptions
Other occlusive dressings are used to protect and help heal open wounds, such as burns (.
Categories and Indications
===PAGE:767===
Major categories of topical agents include
• Cleansing
• Moisturizing
• Drying
• Anti-inflammatory
• Antimicrobial
• Keratolytic
• Astringent
• Antipruritic
Cleansing agents:
The principal cleansing agents are soaps, detergents, and solvents. Soap is the
most popular cleanser, but synthetic detergents are also used. Baby shampoos are usually well tolerated
around the eyes and for cleansing wounds and abrasions; they are useful for removing crusts and scales
in psoriasis, eczema, and other forms of dermatitis. However, acutely irritated, weeping, or oozing lesions
are most comfortably cleansed with water or isotonic saline.
Water is the principal solvent for cleansing. Organic solvents (eg, acetone, petroleum products, propylene
glycol) are very drying, can be irritating, and cause irritant or, less commonly, allergic contact dermatitis.
Removal of hardened tar and dried paint from the skin may require a petrolatum-based ointment or
commercial waterless cleanser.
Moisturizing agents:
Moisturizers (emollients) restore water and oils to the skin and help to maintain
skin hydration. They typically contain glycerin, mineral oil, or petrolatum and are available as lotions,
creams, ointments, and bath oils. Stronger moisturizers contain urea
2%, lactic acid 5 to 12%, and
glycolic acid 10% (higher concentrations are used as keratinolytics, eg, for ichthyosis). They are most
effective when applied to already moistened skin (ie, after a bath or shower).
Drying agents:
Excessive moisture in intertriginous areas (eg, between the toes; in the intergluteal cleft,
axillae, groin, and inframammary areas) can cause irritation and maceration. Powders dry macerated skin
and reduce friction by absorbing moisture. However, some powders tend to clump and can be irritating if
they become moist. Cornstarch and talc are most often used. Although talc is more effective, talc may
cause granulomas if inhaled and is no longer used in baby powders. Cornstarch may promote fungal
growth. Aluminum chloride solutions are another type of drying agent (often useful in hyperhidrosis).
Anti-inflammatory agents:
Topical anti-inflammatory agents are either corticosteroids or
noncorticosteroids.
Corticosteroids
are the mainstay of treatment for most noninfectious inflammatory dermatoses. Lotions
are useful on intertriginous areas and the face. Gels are useful on the scalp and in management of
contact dermatitis. Creams are useful on the face and in intertriginous areas and for management of
inflammatory dermatoses. Ointments are useful for dry scaly areas and when increased potency is
required. Corticosteroid-impregnated tape is useful to protect an area from excoriation. It also increases
corticosteroid absorption and therefore potency.
Topical corticosteroids range in potency from mild (class VII) to superpotent (class I—see
Table 72-1
). Intrinsic differences in potency are attributable to fluorination or chlorination (halogenation) of
the compound.
Topical corticosteroids are generally applied 2 to 3 times daily, but high-potency formulations may require
===PAGE:768===
application only once/day or even less frequently. Most dermatoses are treated with mid-potency to highpotency formulations; mild formulations are better for mild inflammation and for use on the face or
intertriginous areas, where systemic absorption is more likely. All agents can cause skin atrophy, striae,
and acneiform eruptions when used for > 1 mo. This effect is particularly problematic on the thinner skin
of the face or genitals. Corticosteroids also promote fungal growth. Contact dermatitis in reaction to
preservatives and additives is also common with prolonged use. Contact dermatitis to the corticosteroid
itself may also occur. Perioral dermatitis occurs with mid-potency or high-potency formulations used on
the face but is uncommon with mild formulations. High-potency formulations may cause adrenal
suppression when used in children, over extensive skin surfaces, or for long periods. Relative
contraindications include conditions in which infection plays an underlying role and acneiform disorders.
Noncorticosteroid anti-inflammatory agents
include tar preparations. Tar comes in the form of crude
coal tar and is indicated for psoriasis. Adverse effects include irritation, folliculitis, staining of clothes and
furniture, and photosensitization. Contraindications include infected skin. Several herbal products are
commonly used in commercial products, although their effectiveness has not been well established.
Among the most popular are chamomile and calendula.
Antimicrobials:
Topical antimicrobials include
• Antibiotics
• Antifungals
• Insecticides
• Nonspecific antiseptic agents
Antibiotics
have few indications. Topical clindamycin and erythromycin are used as primary or adjunctive
treatment for acne vulgaris in patients who do not warrant or tolerate oral antibiotics. Mupirocin has
excellent gram-positive (
Staphylococcus aureus
, streptococci) coverage and can be used to treat
impetigo when deep tissues are not affected. OTC antibiotics such as bacitracin and polymyxin are often
used in postoperative care of a skin biopsy site and to prevent infection in scrapes, minor burns, and
excoriations. Topical neomycin causes contact dermatitis more frequently than other antibiotics. The use
of topical antibiotics and washing with antiseptic soaps in healing wounds may, however, actually slow
healing.
Antifungals
are used to treat candidiasis, a wide variety of dermatophytoses, and other fungal infections
(see
Table 82-1
.
Insecticides
(eg, permethrin, malathion) are used treat lice infestation and scabies (see
Table 83-1
.
Nonspecific antiseptic agents
include iodine solutions (eg, povidone iodine, clioquinol), gentian violet,
silver preparations (eg, silver nitrate, silver sulfadiazine), and zinc pyrithione. Iodine is indicated for
presurgical skin preparation. Gentian violet is used when an inexpensive chemically and physically stable
antiseptic/antimicrobial is needed. Silver preparations are effective in treating burns and ulcers and have
strong antimicrobial
[Table 72-1.
Relative Potency of Selected Topical Corticosteroids]
properties; several wound dressings are impregnated with silver. Zinc pyrithione is an antifungal and a
common ingredient in shampoos used to treat dandruff due to psoriasis or seborrheic dermatitis. Healing
wounds should generally not be treated with topical antiseptics other than silver because they are
irritating and tend to kill fragile granulation tissue.
Keratolytics:
Keratolytics soften and facilitate exfoliation of epidermal cells. Examples include 3 to 6%
salicylic acid and urea. Salicylic acid is used to treat psoriasis, seborrhea, acne, and warts. Adverse
===PAGE:769===
effects are burning and systemic toxicity if large areas are covered. It should rarely be used in children
and infants. Urea is used to treat plantar keratodermas and ichthyosis. Adverse effects are irritation and
intractable burning. It should not be applied to large areas.
Astringents:
Astringents are drying agents that precipitate protein and shrink and contract the skin. The
most commonly used astringents are aluminum acetate (Burow's solution) and aluminum sulfate plus Ca
acetate (Domeboro's solution). Usually applied with dressings or as soaks, astringents are used to treat
infectious eczema, exudative skin lesions, and pressure ulcers. Witch hazel is a popular OTC astringent.
Antipruritics:
Doxepin is a topical antihistamine that is effective in treating itching of atopic dermatitis,
lichen simplex chronic dermatitis, and nummular dermatitis. Topical benzocaine and diphenhydramine
(present in certain OTC lotions) are sensitizing and not recommended. Other antipruritics include
camphor 0.5 to 3%, menthol 0.1 to 0.2%, pramoxine hydrochloride, and eutectic mixture of local
anesthetics (EMLA), which contain equal parts lidocaine and prilocaine in an oil-in-water vehicle. Topical
antipruritics are preferred over systemic drugs (eg, oral antihistamines) when smaller surface areas of
skin are affected and pruritus is not intractable. Calamine lotion is soothing but not specifically antipruritic.
===PAGE:770===
Chapter 73. Acne and Related Disorders
Introduction
Acne vulgaris is a common skin problem, affecting most adolescents and many adults. Perioral dermatitis
and rosacea can produce similar lesions.
Acne Vulgaris
Acne vulgaris (acne) is the formation of comedones, papules, pustules, nodules, and/or cysts as
a result of obstruction and inflammation of pilosebaceous units (hair follicles and their
accompanying sebaceous gland). It most often affects adolescents. Diagnosis is by
examination. Treatment is a variety of topical and systemic agents intended to reduce sebum
production, infection, and inflammation and to normalize keratinization.
Pathophysiology
Acne occurs when pilosebaceous units become obstructed with plugs of sebum and desquamated
keratinocytes, then colonized and sometimes infected with the normal skin anaerobe
Propionibacterium
acnes
. Manifestations differ depending on whether
P. acnes
stimulates inflammation in the follicle; acne
can be noninflammatory or inflammatory.
Comedones, uninfected sebaceous plugs impacted within follicles, are the signature of noninflammatory
acne. Comedones are termed open or closed depending on whether the follicle is dilated or closed at the
skin surface. Inflammatory acne comprises papules, pustules, nodules, and cysts.
Papules appear when lipases from
P. acnes
metabolize triglycerides into free fatty acids (FFA), which
irritate the follicular wall. Pustules occur when active
P. acnes
infection causes inflammation within the
follicle. Nodules and cysts occur when rupture of follicles due to inflammation, physical manipulation, or
harsh scrubbing releases FFAs, bacteria, and keratin into tissues, triggering soft-tissue inflammation.
Etiology
The most common trigger is puberty, when surges in androgen stimulate sebum production and
hyperproliferation of keratinocytes. Other triggers include hormonal changes that occur with pregnancy or
throughout the menstrual cycle; occlusive cosmetics, cleansing agents, and clothing; and humidity and
sweating. Associations between acne exacerbation and diet (eg, chocolate), inadequate face washing,
masturbation, and sex are unfounded. Some studies question an association with milk products. Acne
may improve in summer months because of sunlight's anti-inflammatory effects.
Proposed associations
between acne and hyperinsulinism require further investigation.
Symptoms and Signs
Cystic acne can be painful; other types cause no physical symptoms but can be a source of significant
emotional distress. Lesion types frequently coexist at different stages.
Comedones appear as whiteheads or blackheads. Whiteheads (closed comedones) are flesh-colored or
whitish palpable lesions 1 to 3 mm in diameter; blackheads (open comedones) are similar in appearance
but with a dark center.
Papules and pustules are red lesions 2 to 5 mm in diameter. In both, the follicular epithelium becomes
damaged with accumulation of neutrophils and then lymphocytes. When the epithelium ruptures, the
comedo contents elicit an intense inflammatory reaction in the dermis. Relatively deep inflammation
produces papules. Pustules are more superficial.
Nodules are larger, deeper, and more solid than papules. Such lesions resemble inflamed epidermoid
cysts, although they lack true cystic structure.
===PAGE:771===
Cysts are suppurative nodules. Rarely cysts become infected and form abscesses. Long-term cystic acne
can cause scarring that manifests as tiny, deep pits (icepick scars), larger pits, shallow depressions, or
areas of hypertrophic scar.
Acne conglobata is the most severe form of acne vulgaris, affecting men more than women. Patients have
abscesses, draining sinuses, fistulated comedones, and keloidal and atrophic scars. The back and chest
are severely involved. The arms, abdomen, buttocks, and even the scalp may be affected.
Acne fulminans is acute, febrile, ulcerative acne, characterized by the sudden appearance of confluent
abscesses leading to hemorrhagic necrosis. Leukocytosis and joint pain and swelling may also be
present.
Pyoderma faciale (also called rosacea fulminans) occurs suddenly on the midface of young women. It
may be analogous to acne fulminans. The eruption consists of erythematous plaques and pustules,
involving the chin, cheeks, and forehead.
Diagnosis
• Assessment for contributing factors (eg, hormonal, mechanical, or drug-related)
• Determination of severity (mild, moderate, severe)
• Assessment of psychosocial impact
Diagnosis is by examination. Differential diagnosis includes rosacea (in which no comedones are seen),
corticosteroid-induced acne (which lacks comedones and in which pustules are usually in the same stage
of development), perioral dermatitis (usually with a more perioral and periorbital distribution), and
acneiform drug eruptions. Acne severity is graded mild, moderate, or severe based on the number and
type of lesions; a standardized system is outlined in
Table 73-1
.
Prognosis
Acne of any severity usually remits spontaneously by the early to mid-20s, but a substantial minority of
patients, usually women, may have acne into their 40s; options for treatment may be limited because of
child-bearing. Many adults occasionally develop mild, isolated acne lesions. Noninflammatory and mild
inflammatory acne usually heals without scars. Moderate to severe inflammatory acne heals but often
leaves scarring. Scarring is not only physical; acne may be a huge emotional stressor for adolescents
who may withdraw, using the acne as an excuse to avoid difficult personal adjustments. Supportive
counseling for patients and parents may be indicated in severe cases.
Treatment
• Comedones: Topical tretinoin
• Mild inflammatory acne: Topical antibiotics, benzoyl peroxide, or both
• Moderate acne: Oral antibiotics
• Severe acne: Oral isotretinoin
• Cystic acne: Intralesional triamcinolone
Treatments are directed at reducing sebum production, comedone formation, inflammation, and infection
(see
Fig. 73-1
). Selection of
===PAGE:772===
[Table 73-1.
Classification of Acne Severity]
[Fig. 73-1.
How various drugs work in treating acne.]
treatment is generally based on severity; options are summarized in
Table 73-2
. Affected areas should be cleansed daily, but extra washing, use of antibacterial soaps, and
scrubbing confer no added benefit. Changes in diet are also unnecessary and ineffective, although
moderation of milk intake might be considered for treatment-resistant adolescent acne. Peeling agents
such as sulfur, salicylic acid, and resorcinol are minor therapeutic adjuncts.
Treatment should involve educating the patient and tailoring the plan to one that is realistic for the patient.
Treatment failure can frequently be attributed to lack of adherence to the plan and also to lack of followup. Consultation with a specialist may be necessary.
Mild acne:
Single-agent therapy is generally sufficient for comedonal acne; papulopustular acne
generally requires dual therapy (eg, the combination of tretinoin with benzoyl peroxide or topical
antibiotics). Treatment should be continued for 6 wk or until lesions respond. Maintenance treatment may
be necessary to maintain control.
A mainstay of treatment for comedones is daily topical tretinoin as tolerated. Daily adapalene gel,
tazarotene cream or gel, azelaic acid cream, and glycolic or salicylic acid in propylene glycol are
alternatives for patients who cannot tolerate topical tretinoin. Adverse effects include erythema, burning,
stinging, and peeling. Adapalene and tazarotene are retinoids; like tretinoin, they tend to be somewhat
irritating and photosensitizing. Azelaic acid has comedolytic and antibacterial properties by an unrelated
mechanism and may be synergistic with retinoids.
Mild inflammatory acne should be treated with topical benzoyl peroxide, topical antibiotics (eg,
erythromycin, clindamycin), glyolic acid, or a combination. Combination preparations of these agents may
help limit development of resistance. None have significant adverse effects other than drying and irritation
(and rare allergic reactions to benzoyl peroxide). Topical retinoids are often used concomitantly.
Physical extraction of comedones using a comedo extractor is an option for patients unresponsive to
topical treatment. Comedo extraction may be done by a physician, nurse, or physician assistant. One end
of the comedo extractor is like a blade or bayonet that punctures the closed comedo. The other end
exerts pressure to extract the comedo.
Oral antibiotics (eg, tetracycline, minocycline, doxycycline, erythromycin) can be used when wide
distribution of lesions makes topical therapy impractical.
Moderate acne:
Moderate acne responds best to oral systemic therapy with antibiotics. Antibiotics
effective for acne include tetracycline, minocycline, erythromycin, and doxycycline. Full benefit takes ≥ 12
wk. Topical therapy as for mild acne is usually used concomitantly with oral antibiotics.
Tetracycline is usually a good first choice: 250 or 500 mg bid (between meals and at bedtime) for 4 wk or
until lesions respond, after which it may be reduced to the lowest effective dose. Rarely, dosage must be
increased to
[Table 73-2.
Drugs Used to Treat Acne]
500 mg qid. After control is achieved, it is reasonable to attempt to taper and discontinue the oral
antibiotic and continue topical therapy for control. Because relapse often follows short-term treatment,
therapy may need to be continued for months to years, although for maintenance tetracycline 250 or 500
mg once/day is often sufficient. Minocycline 50 or 100 mg bid causes fewer GI adverse effects, is easier
to take, and is less likely to cause photosensitization, but it is the most costly option. Erythromycin and
doxycycline are considered 2nd-line drugs because both can cause GI adverse effects, and doxycycline
is a frequent photosensitizer. Subantimicrobial doses of doxycycline have also been proven effective for
acne and rosacea.
===PAGE:773===
Long-term use of antibiotics may cause a gram-negative pustular folliculitis around the nose and in the
center of the face. This uncommon superinfection may be difficult to clear and is best treated with oral
isotretinoin after discontinuing the oral antibiotic. Ampicillin is an alternative treatment for gram-negative
folliculitis. In women, prolonged antibiotic use can cause candidal vaginitis; if local and systemic therapy
does not eradicate this problem, antibiotic therapy for acne must be stopped.
Severe acne:
Oral isotretinoin is the best treatment for patients with moderate acne in whom antibiotics
are unsuccessful and for those with severe inflammatory acne. Dosage of isotretinoin is usually 1 mg/kg
once/day for 16 to 20 wk, but the dosage may be increased to 2 mg/kg once/day. If adverse effects make
this dosage intolerable, it may be reduced to 0.5 mg/kg once/day. After therapy, acne may continue to
improve. Most patients do not require a 2nd course of treatment; when needed, it should be resumed only
after the drug has been stopped for 4 mo. Retreatment is required more often if the initial dosage is low
(0.5 mg/kg). With this dosage (which is very popular in Europe), fewer adverse effects occur, but
prolonged therapy is usually required.
Isotretinoin is nearly always effective, but use is limited by adverse effects, including dryness of
conjunctivae and mucosae of the genitals, chapped lips, arthralgias, depression, elevated lipid levels, and
the risk of birth defects if treatment occurs during pregnancy. Hydration with water followed by petrolatum
application usually alleviates mucosal and cutaneous dryness. Arthralgias (mostly of large joints or the
lower back) occur in about 15% of patients. Increased risk for depression
and suicide is much publicized
but probably rare. CBC; liver function; and fasting glucose, triglyceride, and cholesterol levels should be
determined before treatment. Each should be reassessed at 4 wk and, unless abnormalities are noted,
need not be repeated until the end of treatment. Triglycerides rarely increase to a level at which the drug
should be stopped. Liver function is seldom affected. Because isotretinoin is teratogenic, women of
childbearing age are urged to use 2 methods of contraception for 1 mo before treatment, during
treatment, and for at least 1 mo after stopping treatment. Pregnancy tests should be done before
beginning therapy and monthly until 1 mo after therapy stops.
Intralesional injection of 0.1 mL triamcinolone acetonide suspension 2.5 mg/mL (the 10 mg/mL
suspension must be diluted) is indicated for patients with firm (cystic) acne who seek quick clinical
improvement and to reduce scarring. Local atrophy may occur but is usually transient. For isolated, very
boggy lesions, incision and drainage are often beneficial but may result in residual scarring.
Other forms of acne:
Pyoderma faciale is treated with oral corticosteroids and isotretinoin. Acne
fulminans is treated with oral corticosteroids and systemic antibiotics. Acne conglobata is treated with oral
isotretinoin if systemic antibiotics fail. For acne with endocrine abnormalities, antiandrogens are indicated.
Spironolactone, which has some antiandrogen effects, is sometimes prescribed to treat acne at a dose of
50 to 100 mg po once/day. Cyproterone acetate is used in Europe. When other measures fail, an
estrogen-progesterone-containing contraceptive may be tried; therapy ≥ 6 mo is needed to evaluate
effect.
Scarring:
Small scars can be treated with chemical peels, laser resurfacing, or dermabrasion. Deeper,
discrete scars can be excised. Wide, shallow depressions can be treated with subcision or collagen
injection. Collagen implants are temporary and must be repeated every few years.
Perioral Dermatitis
Perioral dermatitis is an erythematous, papulopustular facial eruption that resembles acne
and/or rosacea but typically starts around the mouth.
A variety of causes have been proposed, including exposure to topical corticosteroids and/or fluoride in
water and toothpaste, but the etiology is unknown. Despite its name, perioral dermatitis is not a true
dermatitis. It primarily affects women of childbearing age and children. The eruption classically starts at
the nasolabial folds and spreads periorally sparing a zone around the vermilion border of the lips. But the
eruption can also spread periorbitally and to the forehead.
Diagnosis is by appearance; perioral dermatitis is distinguished from acne by the absence of comedones
and from rosacea by the latter's lack of lesions around the mouth and eyes. Seborrheic dermatitis and
===PAGE:774===
contact dermatitis must be excluded. Biopsy, which is generally not clinically necessary, shows spongiosis
and a lymphohistiocytic infiltrate affecting vellus hair follicles. In the lupoid variant, granulomas may be
present.
Treatment is to stop fluorinated dental products and topical corticosteroids (if being used) and then either
use topical antibiotics (eg, erythromycin 2% or metronidazole 0.75% gel or cream bid), or oral tetracycline
250 to 500 mg po bid (between meals) for 4 wk, tapered to the lowest effective dose. Alternative oral
antibiotics include doxycycline 50 to 100 mg bid and minocycline 50 to 100 mg bid. In contrast to acne,
antibiotics can usually be stopped. Reasons for efficacy of antibiotics are unclear given the absence of
evidence of infection. Isotretinoin has been successfully used to treat granulomatous perioral dermatitis.
Rosacea
Rosacea (acne rosacea) is a chronic inflammatory disorder characterized by facial flushing,
telangiectasias, erythema, papules, pustules, and in severe cases, rhinophyma (see
Plate 43
). Diagnosis is based on the characteristic appearance and history. Treatment depends
on severity and includes topical metronidazole, topical and oral antibiotics, rarely isotretinoin,
and, for severe rhinophyma, surgery.
Rosacea most commonly affects patients aged 30 to 50 with fair complexions, most notably those of Irish
and Northern European descent, but it affects and is probably under-recognized in darker-skinned
patients.
Etiology
The etiology is unknown, although associations with abnormal vasomotor control, impaired facial venous
drainage, an increase in follicle mites (
Demodex folliculorum
), and
Helicobacter pylori
infection have
been
proposed. People with rosacea may have elevated levels of small antimicrobial peptides that are
part of the body's natural defense system. People with rosacea may also have higher than normal levels
of cathelicidin as well as another group of enzymes called stratum corneum tryptic enzymes.
Symptoms and Signs
Rosacea is limited to the face and scalp and manifests in 4 phases:
• Prerosacea phase
• Vascular phase
• Inflammatory phase
• Late stage
In the prerosacea phase, patients describe embarrassing flushing and blushing, often accompanied by
uncomfortable stinging. Common reported triggers for these flares include sun exposure, emotional
stress, cold or hot weather, alcohol, spicy foods, exercise, wind, cosmetics, and hot baths or hot drinks.
These symptoms persist throughout other phases of the disorder.
In the vascular phase, patients develop facial erythema and edema with multiple telangiectases, possibly
as a result of persistent vasomotor instability.
An inflammatory phase often follows, in which sterile papules and pustules (leading to the designation of
rosacea as adult acne) develop.
Some patients go on to develop late-stage rosacea, characterized by coarse tissue hyperplasia of the
cheeks and nose (rhinophyma) caused by tissue inflammation, collagen deposition, and sebaceous gland
hyperplasia.
===PAGE:775===
The phases of rosacea are usually sequential. Some patients go directly into the inflammatory stage,
bypassing the earlier stages. Treatment may cause rosacea to return to an earlier stage. Progression to
the late stage is not inevitable.
Ocular rosacea often accompanies facial rosacea and manifests as some combination of
blepharoconjunctivitis, iritis, scleritis, and keratitis, causing itching, foreign body sensation, erythema, and
edema of the eye.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on the characteristic appearance; there are no specific diagnostic tests. The age of
onset and absence of comedones help distinguish rosacea from acne. Differential diagnosis includes
acne vulgaris, SLE, sarcoidosis, photodermatitis, drug eruptions (particularly from iodides and bromides),
granulomas of the skin, and perioral dermatitis.
Treatment
• Avoidance of triggers
• Consideration of topical or oral antibiotics
• Consideration of isotretinoin if antibiotics are unsuccessful
• Consideration of dermabrasion and tissue excision for rhinophyma
Primary initial treatment of rosacea involves avoidance of triggers (including use of sunscreen).
Antibiotics may be used for inflammatory disease. The objective of treatment is control of symptoms, not
cure.
Metronidazole cream 1%, lotion (0.75%), or gel (0.75%) and azelaic acid 20% cream, applied bid, are
equally effective; 2.5% benzoyl peroxide, applied once/day or bid, can be added for improved control.
Less effective alternatives include sodium sulfacetamide 10%/sulfur 5% lotion; clindamycin 1% solution,
gel, or lotion; and erythromycin 2% solution, all applied bid. Many patients require indefinite treatment for
chronic control.
Oral antibiotics are indicated for patients with multiple papules or pustules and for those with ocular
rosacea; options include tetracycline 250 to 500 mg bid, doxycycline 50 to 100 mg bid, minocycline 50 to
100 mg bid, and erythromycin 250 to 500 mg bid. Dose should be reduced to the lowest one that controls
symptoms once a beneficial response is achieved. Recalcitrant cases may respond to oral isotretinoin.
Subantimicrobial doses of doxycycline are also effective for acne and rosacea.
Techniques for treatment of rhinophyma include dermabrasion and tissue excision; cosmetic results are
good.
===PAGE:776===
Chapter 74. Bullous Diseases
Introduction
Bullae are elevated, fluid-filled blisters ≥ 5 mm in diameter. Bullous diseases include bullous pemphigoid,
dermatitis herpetiformis, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, herpes gestationis (pemphigoid gestationis—see
p.
), linear IgA disease, pemphigus vulgaris, and pemphigus foliaceus. Staphylococcal scalded skin
syndrome ( and toxic epidermal necrolysis ( also cause bullae.
Bullous Pemphigoid
Bullous pemphigoid is an autoimmune skin disorder causing chronic, pruritic bullous eruptions
in elderly patients. Diagnosis is by skin biopsy. Corticosteroids are used initially. Most patients
require long-term maintenance therapy, for which a variety of drugs can be used.
In bullous pemphigoid, antibodies are directed against the basement membrane zone of the epidermis,
causing separation between the epidermis and dermis. Bullous pemphigoid must be distinguished from
pemphigus vulgaris (, a much more serious disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Characteristic tense bullae develop on normal-appearing or erythematous skin, most often in flexural
areas. Nikolsky's sign, in which lateral pressure on skin adjacent to a blister causes epidermal
detachment, is negative. Bullous pemphigoid can manifest initially as hives with annular, dusky-red,
edematous lesions, with or without peripheral vesicles. Itching is common, usually without other
symptoms. Oral lesions occur in about one third of patients but heal rapidly.
Diagnosis
• Skin biopsy and antibody titers
Patients should have a skin biopsy and serum antibody titers for hemidesmosomal BP antigens BP230
(BPAg1) and BP180 (BPAg2).
Bullous pemphigoid must be differentiated from pemphigus vulgaris (see
Table 74-1
), linear IgA disease, erythema multiforme, drug-induced eruptions, benign mucous membrane
pemphigoid, paraneoplastic pemphigoid, dermatitis herpetiformis, and epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.
Prognosis
Prognosis is good, and the disorder usually subsides within months to years; however, the disorder is
potentially fatal, especially in the elderly and debilitated patients, with death being caused by infection
and sepsis or the effects of the drugs.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids, topical or oral
• Anti-inflammatory drugs
Mild bullous pemphigoid sometimes resolves without treatment, but resolution usually
[Table 74-1.
Distinguishing Pemphigoid from Pemphigus Vulgaris]
takes months or years. Patients with more severe disease receive prednisone 60 to 80 mg po once/day,
which can be tapered to a maintenance level of ≤ 10 to 20 mg/day after several weeks. Most patients
achieve remission after 2 to 10 mo. Occasional new lesions in elderly patients do not require increasing
the prednisone dosage.
===PAGE:777===
The disorder occasionally responds to a combination of tetracycline or minocycline and nicotinamide.
Other treatment options include dapsone, sulfapyridine, erythromycin, and tetracycline used alone for
their anti-inflammatory rather than their antibiotic properties. IV immune globulin has been used
occasionally. For patients with generalized and recalcitrant disease, immunosuppressants such as
azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, rituximab, and cyclosporine may be used. However, use of
immunosuppressants for bullous pemphigoid is controversial.
Dermatitis Herpetiformis
Dermatitis herpetiformis is a cutaneous manifestation associated with gluten sensitivity. It
produces a chronic eruption characterized by clusters of intensely pruritic vesicles, papules,
and urticaria-like lesions. The cause is autoimmune. Diagnosis is by skin biopsy with direct
immunofluorescence testing. Treatment is usually with dapsone or sulfapyridine and a glutenfree diet.
This disease usually manifests in patients 30 to 40 yr old (but may occur from age 2 to 90 yr) and is rare
in blacks and Asians.
More than 90% of affected patients have a gluten-sensitive enteropathy, which is often asymptomatic.
Dermatitis herpetiformis develops in 15 to 25% of patients with celiac sprue. Patients have a slightly
higher incidence of other autoimmune disorders, including type 1 diabetes mellitus, sarcoidosis, SLE, and
thyroid abnormalities. The incidence of enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma is also increased.
The term herpetiformis refers to the clustered appearance of the lesions rather than a relationship to
herpesvirus.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually gradual. Vesicles, papules, and urticaria-like lesions are usually distributed symmetrically
on extensor aspects (elbows, knees, sacrum, buttocks, occiput). Vesicles and papules occur in about one
third of patients. Itching and burning are severe, and scratching often obscures the primary lesions with
eczematization of nearby skin, leading to an erroneous diagnosis of eczema. NSAIDs and iodides may
worsen the rash.
Diagnosis
• Skin biopsy
Diagnosis is based on skin biopsy and direct immunofluorescence testing of a lesion and adjacent
normal-appearing skin. Granular IgA deposition in the dermal papillary tips is invariably present and
important for diagnosis. Patients should be evaluated for celiac sprue (.
Treatment
• Gluten-free diet
• Dapsone
Strict adherence to a gluten-free diet for a prolonged time (eg, 6 to 12 mo) controls the disease in some
patients, obviating or reducing the need for drug therapy. When drugs are needed, dapsone generally
results in remarkable improvement. Initial dosages of dapsone are 25 to 50 mg po once/day in adults and
0.5 mg/kg in children. Usually, this dose dramatically relieves symptoms, including itching, within 1 to 3
days; if it does, the dose is continued. If no improvement occurs, the dose can be increased every week,
up to 300 mg/day. Most patients can be maintained on 50 to 150 mg/day, and some require as little as 25
mg/wk. After initial therapy and stabilization of the disease, the majority of patients can be maintained on
a strict gluten-free diet. Although less effective, sulfapyridine may be used as an alternative for patients
who cannot tolerate dapsone. Initial oral dosage is 500 mg bid, increasing by 1 g/day q 1 to 2 wk until
===PAGE:778===
disease is controlled. Maintenance dosage varies from 500 mg twice/wk to 1000 mg once/day. Colchicine
is another treatment option. Treatment continues until lesions resolve.
In patients with G6PD deficiency, dapsone may cause severe hemolysis. Patients receiving dapsone or
sulfapyridine should have a baseline CBC; CBC is then done weekly for 4 wk, then every 2 to 3 wk for 8
wk, and every 12 to 16 wk thereafter. Hemolytic anemia and methemoglobinemia are the most frequently
encountered adverse effects. CNS or liver toxicity is rare. If dapsone therapy causes
considerable
hemolysis, significant cardiopulmonary problems, or peripheral neuropathy, sulfapyridine may be used.
Sulfapyridine usually does not induce significant hemolysis.
Epidermolysis Bullosa Acquisita
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita is a chronic autoimmune mucocutaneous disease causing
blistering and skin fragility.
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita usually appears in adults. Bullous lesions may develop on normalappearing skin spontaneously or may be caused by minor trauma. The trauma-prone areas of the skin,
such as the extensor surfaces of elbows, knees, ankles, and buttocks, are most commonly affected. Pain
and scarring are common. Because the hands and feet are often involved, disability can be significant.
Occasionally, mucosa of eyes, mouth, or genitals is involved. Laryngeal and esophageal involvement also
occurs. Diagnosis is by skin biopsy. Lesions respond poorly to corticosteroids. Mild disease may be
treated with colchicine, but more severe disease may require cyclosporine or immune globulin.
Linear Immunoglobulin A Disease
Linear immunoglobulin A (IgA) disease is an uncommon bullous disease distinguished from
bullous pemphigoid and dermatitis herpetiformis by the linear deposits of IgA in the basement
membrane zone.
Linear IgA disease occurs in adults and children. The childhood form is most frequently termed chronic
bullous disease of childhood.
In linear IgA disease, vesicular or bullous skin lesions occur frequently in a clustered (herpetiform)
arrangement. There is a predilection for flexural areas (eg, inguinal crease). As in dermatitis herpetiformis,
severe burning and pruritus of cutaneous lesions are prominent features. It was previously considered a
form of dermatitis herpetiformis but has no concomitant gluten-sensitive enteropathy and
immunopathology. Also, genetic studies indicate that linear IgA disease is a separate disorder. Druginduced linear IgA disease, most commonly associated with vancomycin, has been reported.
Diagnosis is by skin biopsy. Dapsone is the treatment of choice. Doses should be similar to those used
for dermatitis herpetiformis (, and CBC monitoring should follow the same parameters. Other
treatment options include glucocorticoids (systemic, topical, and intralesional), cyclophosphamide,
azathioprine, colchicine, tetracycline and nicotinamide, and cyclosporine.
Pemphigus Vulgaris
Pemphigus vulgaris is an uncommon, potentially fatal, autoimmune disorder characterized by
intraepidermal blisters and extensive erosions on apparently healthy skin and mucous
membranes. Diagnosis is by skin biopsy with direct immunofluorescence testing. Treatment is
with corticosteroids and sometimes immunosuppressants.
Pemphigus vulgaris usually occurs in middle-aged or elderly patients and is rare in children. One variant,
paraneoplastic pemphigus, occurs in older patients with cancer (primarily lymphoreticular); outcome is
poor.
The disorder is characterized by the presence of autoantibodies directed against intercellular adhesion
molecules desmoglein-1 and desmoglein-3 in the epidermis. They are Ca-dependent cadherins, involved
in adhesion and cell signaling between epidermal cells. Acantholysis results from either direct inhibition of
===PAGE:779===
function of the desmogleins by autoantibody binding or from autoantibody-induced cell signaling that
results in down-regulation of cell-cell adhesion and formation of blisters. These autoantibodies are
present in both serum and skin during active disease. Any area of stratified squamous epithelium may be
affected, including mucosal surfaces.
Symptoms and Signs
The primary lesions are flaccid bullae of various sizes (see
Plate 41
), but often skin or mucosa just shears off, leaving painful erosions. Lesions typically occur first in
the mouth, where they rupture and remain as chronic, often painful, erosions for variable periods before
the skin is affected; dysphagia and poor oral intake are common. Lesions also may occur in the
upper
esophagus. Cutaneous bullae typically arise from normal-appearing skin, rupture, and leave a raw area
and crusting. Itching is usually absent. Open skin lesions often become infected. If large portions of the
body are affected, fluid and electrolyte loss may be significant.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Biopsy with direct immunofluorescence testing
• Sometimes titers of antibodies against desmoglein-3 or desmoglein-1
Pemphigus vulgaris should be suspected in patients with any bullous disorder or chronic mucosal
ulceration. It must be differentiated from other chronic oral ulcers and from other bullous dermatoses (eg,
pemphigus foliaceus, bullous pemphigoid, mucous membrane pemphigoid, drug eruptions, toxic epidermal
necrolysis, erythema multiforme, dermatitis herpetiformis, bullous contact dermatitis). Two physical signs
in pemphigus vulgaris are helpful:
• Lateral pressure on skin adjacent to a blister causes epidermal detachment (Nikolsky's sign).
• Pressure on a blister can cause the blister to extend to adjacent skin (Asboe-Hansen sign).
Biopsy of the edge of a fresh lesion and of a nearby area of normal skin is required; light microscopy and
direct immunofluorescence testing are usually diagnostic. Serum antibodies (eg, to desmoglein-3) can be
used for diagnosis and for differentiating from pemphigus foliaceus; serial titers can help follow disease
activity.
Prognosis
Before systemic corticosteroids were used, pemphigus vulgaris was usually fatal; most patients died
within 5 yr of disease onset. Even with treatment, pemphigus vulgaris is a serious disorder with an
inconsistent and unpredictable response to treatment, a prolonged course, and virtually inevitable
adverse drug effects.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids, oral or IV
• Sometimes immunosuppressants
• Sometimes plasmapheresis and IV immune globulin (IVIG)
Referral to a dermatologist with expertise in treating this disorder is recommended. Hospitalization is
required initially for all but the most minor cases. Cleansing and dressing of open skin lesions is similar to
that done for partial-thickness burns (eg, reverse isolation, hydrocolloid or silver sulfadiazine dressings
—.
===PAGE:780===
Drug treatment aims to decrease the production of autoantibodies and stop the eruption of new lesions.
The mainstay is systemic corticosteroids. Some patients with few lesions may respond to oral prednisone
20 to 30 mg once/day, but most require 1.0 mg/kg once/day as an initial dose. Some clinicians begin with
even higher doses, which may slightly hasten initial response but does not appear to improve outcome. If
new lesions continue to appear after 5 to 7 days, IV pulse therapy with methylprednisolone 1 g once/day
can be tried.
Immunosuppressants such as methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, gold, mycophenolate
mofetil, cyclosporine, or rituximab can reduce the need for corticosteroids and thus minimize the
undesirable effects of long-term corticosteroid use. Plasmapheresis and high-dose IVIG to reduce
antibody titers have also been effective.
Once no new lesions have appeared for 7 to 10 days, corticosteroid dose should be tapered monthly by
about 10 mg/day (tapering continues more slowly once 20 mg/day is reached). A relapse requires a return
to the starting dose. If the patient has been stable after a year, a trial without treatment can be attempted
but must be closely monitored.
Pemphigus Foliaceus
Pemphigus foliaceus is a generally benign blistering disorder. It is characterized by splitting
high in the epidermis, causing erosions to form on the skin.
Pemphigus foliaceus usually occurs in middle-aged patients. Foci of high incidence occur in South
America, especially Brazil.
The primary lesion is a flaccid bulla. However, because splitting occurs high in the epidermis, bullae are
rarely seen; the blisters are so fragile that they rupture. Clinically, scaly, crusted cutaneous erosions, often
on an erythematous base, can be seen. Mucosal surfaces are not usually involved. In one variant,
pemphigus erythematosus, lesions occur on
light-exposed skin and are often similar to those of
cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
Diagnosis is by biopsy of a lesion and neighboring normal skin and by serum antibody titers against the
cell adhesion molecule desmoglein 1 (160 kd). Because the disorder is much more benign than
pemphigus vulgaris, treatment is generally less aggressive. Superpotent topical corticosteroids may be
sufficient in some patients. Others require oral prednisone and additional immunosuppressants. A
combination of tetracycline 500 mg qid and nicotinamide 1.5 g/day has been effective in some patients.
Plasmapheresis is an option for severe disease.
===PAGE:781===
Chapter 75. Cornification Disorders
Introduction
Cornification disorders include calluses, corns, ichthyosis, and keratosis pilaris.
Calluses and Corns
(Tylomas; Helomas; Clavi)
Calluses and corns are circumscribed areas of hyperkeratosis at a site of intermittent pressure
or friction. Calluses are more superficial, cover broader areas of skin, and usually
asymptomatic. Corns are deeper, more focal, and frequently painful. Diagnosis is by
appearance. Treatment is with manual abrasion with or without keratolytics. Prevention
involves altering biomechanics, such as changing footwear. Rarely, surgery is required.
Calluses and corns are caused by intermittent pressure or friction, usually over a bony prominence (eg,
heel, metatarsal heads).
Corns
consist of a sharply circumscribed keratinous plug, pea-sized or slightly larger, which extends
through most of the underlying dermis. An underlying adventitial bursitis may develop. Hard corns occur
over prominent bony protuberances, especially on the toes and plantar surface. Soft corns occur between
the toes. Most corns result from poorly fitting footwear, but small seed-sized corns on non-weight-bearing
aspects of the soles and palms may represent inherited keratosis punctata.
Calluses
lack a central plug and have a more even appearance. They usually occur on the hands or feet
but may occur elsewhere, especially in a person whose occupation entails repeated trauma to a particular
area (eg, the mandible and clavicle of a violinist).
Symptoms and Signs
Calluses are usually asymptomatic but, if friction is extreme, may become irritated, causing mild burning
discomfort. At times, the discomfort may mimic that of interdigital neuralgia.
Corns may be painful or tender when pressure is applied. A bursa or fluid-filled pocket sometimes forms
beneath a corn.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
A corn may be differentiated from a plantar wart or callus by paring away the horny skin. After paring, a
callus shows smooth translucent skin, whereas a wart ( appears sharply circumscribed,
sometimes with soft macerated tissue or with central black dots (bleeding points) representing
thrombosed capillaries. A corn, when pared, shows a sharply outlined yellowish to tan translucent core
that interrupts the normal architecture of the papillary dermis. Interdigital neuralgia can be ruled out by the
absence of interspace pain on palpation.
Treatment
• Manual removal
• Keratolytics
• Cushioning
• Altering foot biomechanics
===PAGE:782===
A nail file, emery board, or pumice stone used immediately after bathing is often a practical way to
manually remove hyperkeratotic tissue. Keratolytics (eg, 17% salicylic acid in collodion, 40% salicylic acid
plasters, 40% urea) can also be used, taking care to avoid applying the agents to normal skin. Normal
skin may be protected by covering it with petrolatum before application of the keratolytic.
Cushioning and altering foot biomechanics can help prevent corns and help treat existing corns. Although
difficult to eliminate, pressure on the affected surface should be reduced and redistributed. For foot
lesions, soft, well-fitting shoes are important; they should have a roomy toe box so that toes can move
freely in the shoe. Stylish shoes often prevent this freedom of motion. Shoes that increase discomfort of a
lesion should be eliminated from the wardrobe. Pads or rings of suitable shapes and sizes, moleskin or
foam-rubber protective bandages, arch inserts (orthotics), or metatarsal plates or bars may help
redistribute the pressure. For corns and calluses on the ball of the foot, an orthotic should not be full
length but should extend only to the ball or part of the shoe immediately behind the corn or callus.
Surgical off-loading or removal of the offending bone is rarely necessary.
Patients who have a tendency to develop calluses and corns may need the regular services of a
podiatrist. Patients with impaired peripheral circulation, especially if associated with diabetes, require
expert care.
Ichthyosis
Ichthyosis is scaling and flaking of skin ranging from mild but annoying dryness (xeroderma) to
severe disfiguring disease (inherited ichthyosis). Ichthyosis can also be a sign of systemic
disease. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment involves emollients and sometimes oral retinoids.
Xeroderma:
Xeroderma (xerosis), or dry skin, is neither inherited nor associated with systemic
abnormalities. Dry skin results from loss of the water content of the skin, resulting in fine white scales.
Risk factors for xerosis include the following:
• Residence in a dry, cold climate
• Older age
• Atopic dermatitis
• Frequent bathing, particularly if using harsh soaps
Inherited ichthyoses:
Inherited ichthyoses, which are characterized by excessive accumulation of scale
on the skin surface, are classified according to clinical and genetic criteria (see
Table 75-1
). Some occur in isolation without
[Table 75-1.
Clinical and Genetic Features of Some Inherited Ichthyoses]
associated abnormalities (eg, ichthyosis vulgaris, X-linked ichthyosis, lamellar ichthyosis, epidermolytic
hyperkeratosis [bullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma]). Other ichthyoses are part of a syndrome
that involves multiple organs. For instance, Refsum's disease ( and Sjogren-Larsson
syndrome (hereditary intellectual disability and spastic paralysis caused by a defect in fatty aldehyde
dehydrogenase) are autosomal recessive conditions with skin and extracutaneous organ involvement. A
dermatologist should assist in diagnosis and management, and a medical geneticist should be consulted
for genetic counseling.
Acquired ichthyosis:
Ichthyosis may be an early manifestation of some systemic disorders (eg, leprosy,
hypothyroidism, lymphoma, AIDS). Some drugs cause ichthyosis (eg, nicotinic acid, triparanol,
butyrophenones). The dry scaling may be fine and localized to the trunk and legs, or it may be thick and
widespread. Biopsy of ichthyotic skin is usually not diagnostic of the systemic disorder; however, there
are exceptions, most notably sarcoidosis, in which a thick scaling may appear on the legs, and biopsy
usually shows the typical granulomas.
===PAGE:783===
Treatment
• Minimization of exacerbating factors
• Moisturization and keratolytics
• Sometimes infection prophylaxis
When ichthyosis is caused by a systemic disorder, abatement is greatest if the primary disorder can be
corrected. Otherwise, treatment is symptomatic, including using emollients and keratolytics and avoiding
drying.
Moisturization and keratolytics:
In any ichthyosis, there is impaired epidermal barrier function, and
moisturizers should be applied immediately after bathing. Substances that are applied to the skin may
have increased absorption. For example, hexachlorophene products should not be used because of
increased absorption and toxicity.
An emollient, preferably plain petrolatum, mineral oil, or lotions containing urea or
α
-hydroxy acids (eg,
lactic, glycolic, and pyruvic acids), should be applied twice daily, especially after bathing while the skin is
still wet. Blotting with a towel removes excess applied material.
Ichthyosis typically responds well to propylene glycol. To remove scale (eg, if ichthyosis is severe),
patients can apply a preparation containing 40 to 60% propylene glycol in water under occlusion (eg, a
thin plastic film or bag), every night after hydrating the skin (eg, by bathing or showering); in children, the
preparation should be applied twice daily without occlusion. Occlusion should be maintained overnight.
After scaling has decreased, less frequent application is required. Other useful keratolytics include
ceramide-based creams, 6% salicylic acid gel, hydrophilic petrolatum and water (in equal parts), and the
α
-hydroxy acids in various bases. Topical calcipotriol cream has been used with success; however, this
vitamin D derivative can result in hypercalcemia when used over broad areas, especially in small children.
Retinoids
are effective in treating ichthyosis. Oral synthetic retinoids are effective for most ichthyoses.
Acitretin ( is effective in treating most forms of inherited ichthyosis. In lamellar ichthyosis, 0.1%
tretinoin cream or oral isotretinoin may be effective. The lowest effective dose should be used. Long-term
(1 yr) treatment with oral isotretinoin has resulted in bony exostoses in some patients, and other long-term
adverse effects may arise. (CAUTION:
Oral retinoids are contraindicated in pregnancy because of their
teratogenicity, and acitretin should be avoided in women of childbearing potential because of its
teratogenicity and long half-life.)
Infection prophylaxis:
Patients with epidermolytic hyperkeratosis may need long-term treatment with
cloxacillin 250 mg po tid or qid or erythromycin 250 mg po tid or qid, as long as thick intertriginous scaling
is present, to prevent bacterial superinfection from causing painful, foul-smelling pustules. Regularly using
soaps containing chlorhexidine may also reduce the bacteria, but these soaps tend to dry the skin.
Keratosis Pilaris
Keratosis pilaris is a disorder of keratinization in which horny plugs fill the openings of hair
follicles.
Keratosis pilaris is common. The cause is unknown, but there is often an autosomal dominant inheritance.
Multiple small, pointed, keratotic follicular papules appear mainly on the lateral aspects of the upper arms,
thighs, and buttocks. Facial lesions may also occur, particularly in children. Lesions are most prominent in
cold weather and sometimes abate in the summer. Skin may appear red. The problem is mainly cosmetic,
but the disorder may cause itching or, rarely, follicular pustules.
Treatment is usually unnecessary and often unsatisfactory. Hydrophilic petrolatum
and water (in equal
parts), cold cream, or petrolatum with 3% salicylic acid may help flatten the lesions. Buffered lactic acid
(ammonium lactate) lotions or creams, urea creams, 6% salicylic acid gel, or 0.1% tretinoin cream may
also be effective. Acid creams should be avoided in young children because of burning and stinging.
===PAGE:784===
Pulse-dye laser has been used successfully to treat facial redness.The Merck Manual of Diagnosis & Therapy, 19th Edition Chapter 75. Cornification Disorders
===PAGE:785===
Chapter 76. Dermatitis
Introduction
Dermatitis is superficial inflammation of the skin characterized by redness, edema, oozing, crusting,
scaling, and sometimes vesicles. Pruritus is common. Eczema is a term often used interchangeably with
dermatitis.
Atopic Dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is an immune-mediated inflammation of the skin arising from an
interaction between genetic and environmental factors. Recent research suggests that a
heritable epidermal barrier defect is a primary cause, and defects in the
filaggrin
gene have
been specifically implicated. Pruritus is the primary symptom; skin lesions range from mild
erythema to severe lichenification. Diagnosis is by history and examination. Treatment is
moisturizers, avoidance of allergic and irritant triggers, and often topical corticosteroids. Atopic
dermatitis frequently resolves completely by age 30.
Etiology
AD primarily affects children in urban areas or developed countries; at least 5% of children in the US are
affected. Like asthma, it may be linked to proallergic/proinflammatory T-cell immune responses. Such
responses are becoming more common in developed countries because trends toward smaller families,
cleaner indoor environments, and early use of vaccinations and antibiotics deprive children of the early
exposure to infections and allergens that otherwise suppress proallergic T cells and thereby induce
tolerance to various antigens.
Pathophysiology
AD can be divided into 2 forms:
• Extrinsic: IgE-mediated (70 to 80% of cases)
• Intrinsic: Non-IgE-mediated (20 to 30% of cases)
Extrinsic AD:
This form occurs when environmental exposures trigger immunologic, usually allergic (ie,
IgE-mediated), reactions in genetically susceptible people. Common environmental triggers include
• Foods (eg, milk, eggs, soy, wheat, peanuts, fish)
• Airborne allergens (eg, dust mites, molds, dander)
•
Staphylococcus aureus
colonization on skin due to deficiencies in endogenous antimicrobial peptides
• Topical products (eg, cosmetics)
AD is common within families, suggesting a genetic component. Many patients with AD have a mutation in
the gene encoding for the filaggrin protein, which is a component of the cornified cell envelope produced
by differentiating keratinocytes. Also, research has shown that skin affected by AD is deficient in
ceramides, which increases transepidermal water loss.
Intrinsic AD:
This form is not mediated by IgE. Intrinsic AD is nonfamilial and idiopathic, and its
pathophysiology is generally not well understood.
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations of intrinsic and extrinsic AD are similar. AD usually appears in infancy, typically by 3 mo. In
the acute phase, lasting 1 to 2 mo (see
===PAGE:786===
the acute phase, lasting 1 to 2 mo (see
Plate 27
), red, weeping, crusted lesions appear on the face and spread to the neck, scalp, extremities,
and abdomen. In the chronic phase (see
Plate 28
), scratching and rubbing create skin lesions (typically erythematous macules and papules that
lichenify with continued scratching). Lesions typically appear in antecubital and popliteal fossae and on
the eyelids, neck, and wrists and may occasionally become generalized. Lesions slowly resolve to dry
scaly macules (xerosis) that can fissure and facilitate exposure to irritants and allergens. In older children
and adults, intense pruritus is the key feature. Patients have a reduced threshold for perceiving itch, and
itch
worsens with allergen exposures, dry air, sweating, local irritation, wool garments, and emotional
stress.
Complications:
Secondary bacterial infections, especially staphylococcal and streptococcal, and
regional lymphadenitis are common.
Eczema herpeticum (Kaposi's varicelliform eruption) is a diffuse herpes simplex infection occurring in
patients with AD. It manifests as grouped vesicles in areas of active or recent dermatitis, although normal
skin can be involved. High fever and adenopathy may develop after several days. Occasionally, this
infection can become systemic, which may be fatal. Sometimes the eye is involved, causing a painful
corneal lesion.
Fungal and nonherpetic viral skin infections (eg, common warts, molluscum contagiosum) can also occur.
Patients with long-standing AD may develop cataracts in their 20s or 30s.
Frequent use of topical products exposes the patient to many potential allergens, and contact dermatitis
may aggravate and complicate AD, as may the generally dry skin that is common among these patients.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes testing for allergic triggers with skin prick testing or radioallergosorbent testing levels
Diagnosis is clinical (see
Table 76-1
). AD is often hard to differentiate from other dermatoses (eg, seborrheic dermatitis, contact
dermatitis, nummular dermatitis, psoriasis), although a family history of atopy and the distribution of
lesions are helpful. For example, psoriasis is usually extensor rather than flexurally distributed, may
involve the fingernails, and has a shinier (micaceous) scale. Seborrheic dermatitis affects the face (eg,
nasolabial folds, eyebrows, glabellar region, scalp) most commonly. Nummular dermatitis is not flexural,
and lichenification is rare. Because patients can still develop other skin disorders, not all subsequent skin
problems should be attributed to AD.
There is no definitive laboratory test for AD. However, allergic precipitants of AD can be identified with
skin testing, measurement of allergen-specific IgE levels, or both.
Prognosis
AD in children often abates by age 5 yr, although exacerbations are common throughout adolescence and
into adulthood. Girls and patients with severe disease, early age of onset, family history, and associated
rhinitis or asthma are more likely to have prolonged disease. Even in these patients, AD frequently
resolves completely by age 30. AD may have long-term psychologic sequelae as children confront many
challenges of living with a visible, sometimes disabling, skin disease during formative years.
[Table 76-1.
Clinical Findings in Atopic Dermatitis*]
Treatment
• Supportive care (eg, moisturizers, symptomatic treatment for pruritus)
===PAGE:787===
• Avoidance of precipitating factors
• Topical corticosteroids
• Sometimes immune modulators (most often topical but sometimes oral)
• Sometimes ultraviolet (UV) therapy
Treatment can usually be given at home, but patients who have exfoliative dermatitis (,
cellulitis, or eczema herpeticum may need to be hospitalized.
Supportive care:
Skin care involves moisturizing. Bathing and hand washing should be infrequent, and
lukewarm (not hot) water should be used; soap use should be minimized on dermatitic areas because it
may be drying and irritating. Colloidal oatmeal baths can be helpful. When toweling dry, the skin should
be blotted or patted dry rather than rubbed.
Body oils or emollients such as white petrolatum, vegetable oil, or hydrophilic petrolatum (unless the
patient is allergic to lanolin) applied immediately after bathing may help retain skin moisture and reduce
itching. Continuously wet dressings (not wet-to-dry) are an alternative for severe lesions. Coal tar cream
or oil can be an effective topical anti-pruritic but also can be inconvenient because it stains clothing.
Antihistamines can help relieve pruritus. Options include hydroxyzine 25 mg po tid or qid (for children, 0.5
mg/kg q 6 h or 2 mg/kg in a single bedtime dose) and diphenhydramine 25 to 50 mg po at bedtime. Lowsedating H
receptor blockers, such as loratadine 10 mg po once/day, fexofenadine 60 mg po bid or 180
mg po once/day, and cetirizine 5 to 10 mg po once/day, may be useful, although their efficacy has not
been defined. Doxepin (a tricyclic antidepressant also with H
and H
receptor blocking activity) 25 to 50
mg po at bedtime may also help, but its use is not recommended for children < 12 yr. Fingernails should
be cut short to minimize excoriations and secondary infections.
Avoidance of precipitating factors:
Household antigens can be controlled by using synthetic fiber
pillows and impermeable mattress covers; washing bedding in hot water; removing upholstered furniture,
soft toys, carpets, and pets (to reduce dust mites and animal dander); using air circulators equipped with
high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters in bedrooms and other frequently occupied living areas; and
using dehumidifiers in basements and other poorly aerated damp rooms (to reduce molds). Reduction of
emotional stress is useful but often difficult. Antistaphylococcal antibiotics, both topical (eg, mupirocin,
fusidic acid) and oral (eg, dicloxacillin, cephalexin, erythromycin [all 250 mg qid]), can control
S. aureus
nasal colonization and are indicated in patients with severe disease unresponsive to specific therapies
and positive nasal cultures. Extensive dietary changes intended to eliminate exposure to allergenic foods
are unnecessary and probably ineffective; food hypersensitivities rarely persist beyond childhood.
Corticosteroids:
Corticosteroids are the mainstay of therapy. Creams or ointments applied twice daily
are effective for most patients with mild or moderate disease. Emollients are applied between
corticosteroid applications and can be mixed with them to decrease the corticosteroid amount required to
cover an area. Systemic corticosteroids (prednisone 60 mg or, for children 1 mg/kg, po once/day for short
courses of 7 to 14 days) are indicated for extensive or refractory disease but should be avoided
whenever possible, because disease often recurs and topical therapy is safer. Prolonged, widespread
use of high-potency corticosteroid creams or ointments should be avoided in infants because adrenal
suppression may ensue.
Other therapies:
Tacrolimus and pimecrolimus are T-cell inhibitors effective for AD. They should be used
when patients do not respond to corticosteroids and tar or when corticosteroid adverse effects such as
skin atrophy, striae formation, or adrenal suppression is a concern. Tacrolimus or pimecrolimus cream is
applied twice daily. Burning or stinging after application is usually transient and abates after a few days.
Flushing is less common.
Repair of the stratum corneum and barrier function may help alleviate AD. Research has shown that skin
affected by AD is particularly deficient in ceramides and that a deficiency in ceramides increases
transepidermal water loss. Several ceramide-containing emollient products are considered helpful for AD
===PAGE:788===
control.
Phototherapy is helpful for extensive AD. Natural sun exposure ameliorates disease in many patients,
including children. Alternatively, therapy with ultraviolet A (UVA) or B (UVB) may be used. Narrowband
UVB therapy is proving more effective than traditional broadband UVB therapy and is also effective in
children. Psoralen plus UVA (PUVA— therapy is reserved for extensive, refractory AD. Adverse
effects include sun damage (eg, PUVA lentigines, nonmelanoma skin cancer). Because of these adverse
effects, PUVA is rarely indicated for children or young adults.
Systemic immune modulators effective in at least some patients include cyclosporine, interferon gamma,
mycophenolate, methotrexate, and azathioprine. All downregulate or inhibit T-cell function and have antiinflammatory properties. These agents are indicated for widespread, recalcitrant, or disabling AD that fails
to abate with topical therapy and phototherapy.
Eczema herpeticum is treated with acyclovir. Infants receive 10 to 20 mg/kg IV q 8 h; older children and
adults with mild illness may receive 200 mg po 5 times/day. Involvement of the eye is considered an
ophthalmic emergency, and if eye involvement is suspected, an ophthalmology consult should be
obtained.
Contact Dermatitis
Contact dermatitis (CD) is acute inflammation of the skin caused by irritants or allergens. The
primary symptom is pruritus. Skin changes range from erythema to blistering and ulceration,
often on or near the hands but occurring on any exposed skin surface. Diagnosis is by exposure
history, examination, and sometimes skin patch testing. Treatment entails antipruritics, topical
corticosteroids, and avoidance of causes.
Pathophysiology
CD is caused by irritants or allergens.
Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD):
ICD accounts for 80% of all cases of CD. It is a nonspecific
inflammatory reaction to substances contacting the skin; the immune system is not activated. Numerous
substances are involved, including
• Chemicals (eg, acids, alkalis, solvents, metal salts)
• Soaps (eg, abrasives, detergents)
• Plants (eg, poinsettias, peppers)
• Body fluids (eg, urine, saliva)
Properties of the irritant (eg, extreme pH, solubility in the lipid film on skin), environment (eg, low humidity,
high temperature, high friction), and patient (eg, very young or old) influence the likelihood of developing
ICD. ICD is more common among patients with atopic disorders, in whom ICD also may initiate
immunologic sensitization and hence allergic CD.
Phototoxic dermatitis
( is a variant in which topical (eg, perfumes, coal tar) or ingested (eg,
psoralens) agents generate damaging free radicals and inflammatory mediators only after absorption of
ultraviolet light.
Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD):
ACD is a type IV cell-mediated hypersensitivity reaction that has 2
phases:
• Sensitization to an antigen
• Allergic response after reexposure
===PAGE:789===
In the sensitization phase, allergens are captured by Langerhans' cells (dendritic epidermal cells), which
migrate to regional lymph nodes where they process and present the antigen to T cells. The process may
be brief (6 to 10 days for strong sensitizers such as poison ivy) or prolonged (years for weak sensitizers
such as sunscreens, fragrances, and glucocorticoids). Sensitized T cells then migrate back to the
epidermis and activate on any reexposure to the allergen, releasing cytokines, recruiting inflammatory
cells, and leading to the characteristic symptoms and signs of ACD.
In
autoeczematization
, epidermal T cells activated by an allergen migrate locally or through the
circulation to cause dermatitis at sites remote from the initial trigger. However, contact with fluid from
vesicles or blisters cannot trigger a reaction elsewhere on the patient or on another person.
Multiple allergens cause ACD (see
Table 76-2
), and cross-sensitization among agents is common (eg, between benzocaine and
paraphenylenediamine). Cross-sensitization means that exposure to one substance can result in an
allergic response after exposure to a different but related substance.
ACD variants include photoallergic CD and systemically induced ACD. In photoallergic CD (, a
substance becomes sensitizing only after it undergoes structural change triggered by ultraviolet light.
Typical causes include aftershave lotions, sunscreens, and topical sulfonamides. Reactions may extend
to non-sun-exposed skin. In systemically induced ACD, ingestion of an allergen after topical sensitization
causes diffuse dermatitis (eg, oral diphenhydramine after sensitization with topical diphenhydramine).
Symptoms and Signs
ICD:
ICD is more painful than pruritic. Signs range from mild erythema to hemorrhage, crusting, erosion,
pustules, bullae, and edema.
ACD:
In ACD, the primary symptom is intense pruritus; pain is usually the result of excoriation or infection.
Skin changes range from transient erythema through vesiculation to severe swelling with bullae,
ulceration, or both. Changes often occur in a pattern, distribution, or combination that suggests a specific
exposure, such as linear streaking on an arm or leg (eg, from brushing against poison ivy) or
circumferential erythema (under a wristwatch or waistband). Any surface may be involved, but hands are
the most common surface due to handling and touching potential allergens. With airborne exposure (eg,
[Table 76-2.
Causes of Allergic Contact Dermatitis]
perfume aerosols), areas not covered by clothing are predominantly affected. The dermatitis is typically
limited to the site of contact but may later spread due to scratching and autoeczematization. In
systemically induced ACD, skin changes may be distributed over the entire body.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes patch testing
CD can often be diagnosed by skin changes and exposure history. The patient's occupation, hobbies,
household duties, vacations, clothing, topical drug use, cosmetics, and spouse's activities must be
considered. The "use" test, in which a suspected agent is applied far from the original area of dermatitis,
usually on the flexor forearm, is useful when perfumes, shampoos, or other home agents are suspected.
Patch testing is indicated when ACD is suspected and does not respond to treatment. In patch testing,
standard contact allergens are applied to the upper back using adhesive-mounted patches containing
minute amounts of allergen or plastic (Finn) chambers containing allergen held in place with porous tape.
Thin-layer rapid use epicutaneous (TRUE) patch testing involves 2 adhesive strips that can be applied
and interpreted by any provider. Skin under the patches is evaluated 48 and 96 h after application. Falsepositive results occur when concentrations provoke an irritant rather than an allergic reaction, when
===PAGE:790===
reaction to one antigen triggers a nonspecific reaction to others, or with cross-reacting antigens. Falsenegative results occur when patch allergens do not include the offending antigen. Definitive diagnosis
requires a history of exposure to the test agent in the original area of dermatitis.
Prognosis
Resolution may take up to 3 wk. Reactivity is usually lifelong. Patients with photoallergic CD can have
flares for years when exposed to sun (persistent light reaction).
Treatment
• Avoidance of offending agents
• Supportive care (eg, cool compresses, dressings, antihistamines)
• Corticosteroids (most often topical but sometimes oral)
CD is prevented by avoiding the trigger; patients with photosensitive CD should avoid exposure to sun.
Topical treatment includes cool compresses (saline or Burow's solution) and corticosteroids; patients with
mild to moderate ACD are given mid-potency topical corticosteroids (eg, triamcinolone 0.1% ointment or
betamethasone valerate cream 0.1%). Oral corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 60 mg once/day for 7 to 14
days) can be used for severe blistering or extensive disease. Systemic antihistamines (eg, hydroxyzine,
diphenhydramine) help pruritus; antihistamines with low anticholinergic potency, such as low-sedating H
blockers, are not as effective. Wet-to-dry dressings can soothe oozing blisters, dry the skin, and promote
healing.
Exfoliative Dermatitis
(Erythroderma)
Exfoliative dermatitis is widespread erythema and scaling of the skin caused by preexisting
skin disorders, drugs, cancer, or unknown causes. Symptoms and signs are pruritus, diffuse
erythema, and epidermal sloughing. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment involves corticosteroids
and correction of the cause.
Exfoliative dermatitis is a manifestation of rapid epidermal cell turnover. Its cause is unknown, but it most
often occurs in the context of preexisting skin disorders (eg, atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis,
seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, pityriasis rubra pilaris), use of drugs (eg, penicillin, sulfonamides,
isoniazid, phenytoin, barbiturates), and cancer (eg, mycosis fungoides, leukemia, and, rarely, adenocarcinomas). Up to 25% of patients have no identifiable underlying disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include pruritus, malaise, and chills. Diffuse erythema initially occurs in patches but spreads
and involves all or nearly all of the body. Extensive epidermal sloughing leads to abnormal
thermoregulation, nutritional deficiencies because of extensive protein losses, increased metabolic rate
with a hypercatabolic state, and hypovolemia due to transdermal fluid losses.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is by history and examination. Preexisting skin disease may underlie the extensive erythema
and suggest a cause. Biopsy is often nonspecific but is indicated when mycosis fungoides is suspected.
Blood tests may reveal hypoproteinemia, hypocalcemia, and iron deficiency, each a consequence of
extensive protein, electrolyte, and RBC loss; however, these findings are not diagnostic.
===PAGE:791===
Treatment
• Supportive care (eg, rehydration)
• Topical care (eg, emollients, colloidal oatmeal baths)
• Systemic corticosteroids for severe disease
The disease may be life threatening; hospitalization is often necessary. Any known cause is treated.
Supportive care consists of correction of dehydration, correction of electrolyte abnormalities and
nutritional deficiencies, and comprehensive wound care and dressings to prevent bacterial superinfection.
Because drug eruptions and contact dermatitis cannot be ruled out by history alone, all drugs should be
stopped if possible or changed. Skin care is with emollients and colloidal oatmeal baths. Weak topical
corticosteroids (eg, 1 to 2.5% hydrocortisone ointment) may be used. Corticosteroids (prednisone 40 to
60 mg po once/day for 10 days, then tapered) are used for severe disease.
Prognosis depends on the cause. Cases related to drug reactions have the shortest duration, lasting 2 to
6 wk after the drug is withdrawn.
Hand and Foot Dermatitis
Hand and foot dermatitis is not a single disorder. Rather, it is a categorization of dermatitis that
affects the hands and feet selectively due to one of several causes.
Patients often present with isolated dermatitis of the hands or feet. Causes include
• Contact dermatitis
• Fungal infection
• Psoriasis
• Scabies
Other causes include systemic viral infection in children (hand-foot-and-mouth disease— or
certain chemotherapies (hand-foot syndrome). Some cases are idiopathic.
Diagnosis can sometimes be inferred from location and appearance of the skin lesions (see
Table 76-3
).
Treatment of all forms of hand and foot dermatitis should be directed at the cause when possible. Topical
corticosteroids or antifungals may be tried empirically. Patients should also avoid prolonged contact with
water that would otherwise remove protective oils and lead to paradoxical drying of the skin.
Dyshidrotic dermatitis:
Pruritic vesicles or bullae on the palms, sides of the fingers, or soles are
characteristic of this disorder. Scaling, redness, and oozing often follow vesiculation. Pompholyx is a
severe form with bullae. The cause is unknown, but fungal infection, contact dermatitis, and id reactions
to tinea pedis can cause a similar clinical appearance and should be ruled out. Treatment includes topical
corticosteroids, tacrolimus or pimecrolimus, oral antibiotics, and ultraviolet light.
Keratolysis exfoliativa:
Painless patchy peeling of the palms, soles, or both is characteristic of this
disorder. The cause is unknown; treatment is unnecessary because the condition is self-resolving.
Hyperkeratotic eczema:
Thick yellow-brown plaques on the palms and sometimes soles are
characteristic of this disorder. The cause is unknown. Treatment is with topical corticosteroids and
keratolytics, oral psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA), and retinoids.
Id reaction:
The appearance of vesicles usually on the sides of the fingers in response to active
===PAGE:792===
dermatitis elsewhere is characteristic of this disorder. The cause may be an allergic reaction.
Housewives' eczema:
This irritant contact dermatitis affects people whose hands are frequently
immersed in water. It is worsened by washing dishes, clothes, and babies because repeated exposure to
even mild detergents and water or prolonged sweating under rubber gloves may irritate dermatitic skin or
cause an irritant contact dermatitis.
Hand-foot syndrome:
This disorder (also called acral erythema or palmar-plantar eryth-rodysesthesia)
represents cutaneous toxicity caused by certain systemic chemotherapies (eg, capecitabine, cytarabine,
fluorouracil, idarubicin, doxorubicin, taxanes, methotrexate, cisplatin, tegafur). Manifestations include
pain, swelling, numbness, tingling, redness, and sometimes flaking or blistering of the palms or soles.
Treatment is with oral or topical corticosteroids, topical dimethylsulfoxide, oral vitamin B
(pyridoxine),
OTC analgesics (eg, acetaminophen, ibuprofen), and supportive measures (eg, cool compresses,
minimizing manual tasks).
Lichen Simplex Chronicus
(Neurodermatitis)
Lichen simplex chronicus is eczema caused by repeated scratching; by several mechanisms,
chronic scratching causes further itching, creating a vicious circle. Diagnosis is by examination.
[Table 76-3.
Differential Diagnosis of Hand Dermatitis]
Treatment is through education and behavioral techniques to prevent scratching and
corticosteroids and antihistamines.
Etiology
Lichen simplex chronicus is thickening of the skin with variable scaling that arises secondary to repetitive
scratching or rubbing. Lichen simplex chronicus is not a primary process. Perceived pruritus in a specific
area of skin (with or without underlying pathology) provokes rubbing and mechanical trauma, resulting in
secondary lichenification and further pruritus. Lichen simplex chronicus frequently occurs in people with
anxiety disorders and nonspecific emotional stress as well as in patients with any type of underlying
chronic dermatitis.
Pathophysiology
The underlying pathophysiology is unknown but may involve alterations in the way the nervous system
perceives and processes itchy sensations. Skin that tends toward eczematous conditions (eg, atopic
dermatitis) is more prone to lichenification.
Symptoms and Signs
Lichen simplex chronicus is characterized by pruritic, dry, scaling, hyperpigmented, lichenified plaques in
irregular, oval, or angular shapes. It involves easily reached sites, most commonly the legs, arms, neck,
and upper trunk.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is by examination. A fully developed plaque has an outer zone of discrete, brownish papules
and a central zone of confluent papules covered with scales. Look-alike conditions include tinea corporis,
lichen planus, and psoriasis; lichen simplex chronicus can be distinguished from these by potassium
hydroxide wet mount and biopsy.
Treatment
===PAGE:793===
• Education and behavioral techniques
• Corticosteroids (most often topical but sometimes intralesional)
• Antihistamines
Primary treatment is patient education about the effects of scratching and rubbing. Secondary treatment
is topical corticosteroids (eg, triamcinolone acetonide, fluocinonide); surgical tape impregnated with
flurandrenolide (applied in the morning and replaced in the evening) may be preferred because occlusion
prevents scratching. Small areas may be locally infiltrated (intralesional injections) with a long-acting
corticosteroid such as triamcinolone acetonide 2.5 mg/mL (diluted with saline), 0.3 mL/cm
of lesion;
treatment can be repeated every 3 to 4 wk. Oral H
-blocking antihistamines may be useful. Emollients
may also be helpful.
Nummular Dermatitis
Nummular (discoid) dermatitis is inflammation of the skin characterized by coin-shaped or discshaped lesions. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment may include antibiotics, corticosteroids, and
ultraviolet light therapy.
Nummular dermatitis is most common among middle-aged patients and is often associated with dry skin,
especially during the winter. The cause is unknown.
Symptoms and Signs
Discoid lesions often start as patches of confluent vesicles and papules that later ooze serum and form
crusts. Lesions are eruptive, widespread, and pruritic. They are often more prominent on the extensor
aspects of the extremities and on the buttocks but also appear on the trunk. Exacerbations and
remissions may occur, and when they do, new lesions tend to reappear at the sites of healed lesions.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical based on the characteristic appearance and distribution of the skin lesions.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Antibiotics
• Corticosteroids (most often topical, but sometimes intralesional or oral)
• Ultraviolet light therapy
No treatment is uniformly effective. Oral antibiotics (eg, dicloxacillin or cephalexin 250 mg qid) may be
given, along with use of tap water compresses, especially when weeping and pus are present. Less
inflamed lesions may respond to tetracycline 250 mg po qid, which has a beneficial (although not
necessarily antibacterial) effect. Corticosteroid cream or ointment should be rubbed in 3 times daily. An
occlusive dressing with a corticosteroid cream under polyethylene film or with flurandrenolideimpregnated
tape can be applied at bedtime. Intralesional corticosteroid injections may be beneficial for
the few lesions that do not respond to therapy. In more widespread, resistant, and recurrent cases,
ultraviolet B radiation alone or oral psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) radiation may be helpful.
Occasionally, oral corticosteroids are required, but long-term use should be avoided; a reasonable
starting dose is prednisone 40 mg every other day.
Seborrheic Dermatitis
===PAGE:794===
Seborrheic dermatitis (SD) is inflammation of skin that has a high density of sebaceous glands
(eg, face, scalp, upper trunk). The cause is unknown, but
Pityrosporum ovale
, a normal skin
organism, plays some role. SD occurs with increased frequency in patients with HIV and in
those with certain neurologic disorders. SD causes occasional pruritus, dandruff, and yellow,
greasy scaling along the hairline and on the face. Diagnosis is made by examination. Treatment
is tar or other medicated shampoo and topical corticosteroids and antifungals.
Despite the name, the composition and flow of sebum are usually normal. The pathogenesis of SD is
unclear, but its activity has been linked to the number of
Pityrosporum
yeasts present on the skin. The
incidence and severity of disease seem to be affected by genetic factors, emotional or physical stress,
and climate (usually worse in cold weather). SD may precede or be associated with psoriasis (called
seborrhiasis). SD may be more common and more severe among patients with neurologic disorders
(especially Parkinson's disease) or HIV/AIDS. Very rarely, the dermatitis becomes generalized.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms develop gradually, and the dermatitis is usually apparent only as dry or greasy diffuse scaling
of the scalp (dandruff) with variable pruritus. In severe disease, yellow-red scaling papules appear along
the hairline, behind the ears, in the external auditory canals, on the eyebrows, in the axillae, on the bridge
of the nose, in the nasolabial folds, and over the sternum. Marginal blepharitis with dry yellow crusts and
conjunctival irritation may develop. SD does not cause hair loss.
Neonates may develop SD with a thick, yellow, crusted scalp lesion (cradle cap); fissuring and yellow
scaling behind the ears; red facial papules; and stubborn diaper rash. Older children may develop thick,
tenacious, scaly plaques on the scalp that may measure 1 to 2 cm in diameter.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is made by physical examination. SD may occasionally be difficult to distinguish from other
disorders, including psoriasis, atopic dermatitis or contact dermatitis, tinea, and rosacea.
Treatment
• Topical therapy
Adults:
In adults, zinc pyrithione, selenium sulfide, sulfur and salicylic acid, or tar shampoo should be
used daily or every other day until dandruff is controlled and twice/wk thereafter. A corticosteroid lotion
(eg, 0.01% fluocinolone acetonide solution, 0.025% triamcinolone acetonide lotion) can be rubbed into
the scalp or other hairy areas twice daily until scaling and redness are controlled. For SD of the
postauricular areas, nasolabial folds, eyelid margins, and bridge of the nose, 1% hydrocortisone cream is
rubbed in 2 or 3 times daily, decreasing to once/day when SD is controlled; hydrocortisone cream is the
safest corticosteroid for the face because fluorinated corticosteroids may cause adverse effects (eg,
telangiectasia, atrophy, perioral dermatitis). In some patients, 2% ketoconazole cream or other topical
imidazoles applied twice daily for 1 to 2 wk induce a remission that lasts for months. For eyelid margin
seborrhea, a dilution of 1 part baby shampoo to 9 parts water is applied with a cotton swab.
Infants and children:
In infants, a baby shampoo is used daily, and 1% hydrocortisone cream is rubbed
in twice daily. For thick lesions on the scalp of a young child, 2% salicylic acid in olive oil or a
corticosteroid gel is applied at bedtime to affected areas and rubbed in with a toothbrush. The scalp is
shampooed daily until the thick scale is gone.
Stasis Dermatitis
Stasis dermatitis is inflammation of the skin of the lower legs caused by chronic venous
insufficiency. Symptoms are itching, scaling, hyperpigmentation, and sometimes ulceration.
===PAGE:795===
Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is directed at the chronic venous insufficiency and preventing
occurrence or progression of associated ulcers.
Stasis dermatitis occurs in patients with chronic venous insufficiency ( because pooled
venous blood in the legs compromises the endothelial integrity in the microvasculature, resulting in fibrin
leakage, local inflammation, and local cell necrosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Initially, hyperpigmentation and red-brown discoloration from RBC extravasation appear. Later,
eczematous changes develop and manifest as erythema, scaling, weeping, and crusting (see
Plate 46
), all of which can be made worse by bacterial superinfection or by contact dermatitis caused by
the many topical treatments often applied. When chronic venous insufficiency and stasis dermatitis are
both inadequately treated, stasis dermatitis progresses to frank skin ulceration (see
Plate 47
), chronic edema, thickened fibrotic skin, or lipodermatosclerosis (a painful induration resulting
from panniculitis, which, if severe, gives the lower leg an inverted bowling pin shape with enlargement of
the calf and narrowing at the ankle).
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical based on the characteristic appearance of the skin lesions and other signs of chronic
venous insufficiency.
Treatment
• Elevation, compression, and dressings
• Sometimes topical or oral antibiotics
Chronic venous insufficiency must be adequately treated with leg elevation and compression stockings
(. For acute stasis dermatitis (characterized by crusts, exudation, and superficial ulceration),
continuous and then intermittent tap water compresses should be applied. For a weeping lesion, a
hydrocolloid dressing may be best. For less acute dermatitis, a corticosteroid cream or ointment should be
applied 3 times/day or incorporated into zinc oxide paste.
Ulcers are best treated with compresses and bland dressings (eg, zinc oxide paste); other dressings (eg,
hydrocolloids) are also effective (see also p.
). Ulcers in ambulatory patients may be healed with Unna's paste boot (zinc gelatin), the less messy
zinc gelatin bandage, or a colloid dressing (all are available commercially). Colloid-type dressings used
under elastic support are more effective than Unna's paste boot. It may be necessary to change the
dressing every 2 or 3 days, but as edema recedes and the ulcer heals, once or twice/wk is sufficient. After
the ulcer heals, an elastic support should be applied before the patient rises in the morning. Regardless
of the dressing used, reduction of edema (usually with compression) is paramount for healing.
Oral antibiotics (eg, cephalosporins, dicloxacillin) are used to treat superimposed cellulitis. Topical
antibiotics (eg, mupirocin, silver sulfadiazine) are useful for treating erosions and ulcers. When edema
and inflammation subside, split-thickness skin grafts may be needed for large ulcers.
Complex or multiple topical drugs or OTC remedies should not be used. The skin in stasis dermatitis is
more vulnerable to direct irritants and to potentially sensitizing topical agents (eg, antibiotics; anesthetics;
vehicles of topical drugs, especially lanolin or wool alcohols).
===PAGE:796===
Chapter 77. Reactions to Sunlight
Introduction
The skin may respond to excessive sunlight in several ways: various chronic changes (eg,
dermatoheliosis, actinic keratoses), photosensitivity, or sunburn.
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation:
Although the sun emits a wide range of UV electromagnetic radiation (ie,
UVA, 320 to 400 nm; UVB, 280 to 320 nm; UVC, 100 to 280 nm), only UVA and UVB reach the earth's
surface. The character and amount of such radiation vary greatly with the seasons and with changing
atmospheric conditions. Exposure of skin to sunlight depends on multiple lifestyle factors, (eg, clothing,
occupation), geographic factors (eg, altitude, latitude), and time of year (UV intensity is higher in
summer).
Sunburn-producing rays (primarily wavelengths < 320 nm) are filtered out by glass and to a great extent
by smoke and smog. Sunburn-producing rays may pass through light clouds, fog, or 30 cm of clear water,
causing severe burns in unsuspecting people. Snow, sand, and water enhance exposure by reflecting the
rays. Stratospheric ozone, which filters out shorter wavelengths of UV, is depleted by man-made
chlorofluorocarbons (eg, in refrigerants
and aerosols). A decreased ozone layer increases inadvertent
exposure to UVA and UVB.
Sun-tanning lamps use artificial light that is more UVA than UVB. This UVA use is often advertised as a
"safer" way to tan; however, many of the same long-term deleterious effects may occur as with UVB
exposure, including photoaging and skin cancer. Quite simply, there is no "safe tan."
Pathophysiology
After exposure to sunlight, the epidermis thickens, and melanocytes produce the pigment melanin at an
increased rate, causing tanning. Tanning provides some natural protection against future exposure.
Exposure leads to both inactivation and loss of epidermal Langerhans' cells, which are immunologically
important.
People differ greatly in their sensitivity and response to sunlight based on the amount of melanin in their
skin. Skin is classified into 6 types (I to VI) in decreasing order of susceptibility to sun injury. Classification
is based on skin color, UV sensitivity, and response to sun exposure. Skin type I is white to lightly
pigmented, very sensitive to UV light, has no immediate pigment darkening, always burns easily, and
never tans. Skin type VI is dark brown or black, least sensitive to UV light, has significant immediate
pigment darkening, and tans profusely (deep black). Dark-skinned people are not immune to the effects
of the sun and can become sunburned with strong or prolonged exposure. Long-term effects of UV
exposure in dark-skinned people are the same as those in light-skinned people but are often delayed and
less severe. People with blonde or red hair are especially susceptible to the acute and chronic effects of
UV radiation. Uneven melanocyte activation occurs in many fair-haired people and results in freckling.
There is no skin pigmentation in people with albinism ( because of a defect in melanin
metabolism. Patchy areas of depigmentation are present in patients with vitiligo ( because of
immunologic destruction of melanocytes.
Prevention
Avoidance:
Simple precautions help prevent sunburn and the chronic effects of sunlight. These
precautions are recommended for people of all skin types, particularly those who are fair skinned and
burn easily. Exposure to bright midday sun should not be > 30 min, even for people with dark skin. In
temperate zones, exposure is less hazardous before 10 AM and after 3 PM because more sunburnproducing wavelengths are filtered out. Fog and clouds do not reduce risk, and risk is increased at high
altitude.
Clothing:
Skin should be covered. Fabrics with a tight weave block the sun better than do those with a
loose weave. Special clothing that provides high sun protection is commercially available. Broad-brimmed
hats protect the face, ears, and neck. Regular use of UV-protective, wrap-around sunglasses helps shield
===PAGE:797===
the eyes.
Sunscreens:
Although sunscreens help protect the skin from sunburn and chronic sun damage, they do
not always prevent damage. Older sunscreens tended to filter only UVB light, but many newer
sunscreens are now "full spectrum" and effectively filter UVA light as well. In the US, the FDA rates
sunscreens by sun protection factor (SPF): the higher the number, the greater the protection. Agents with
SPF ≥ 15 are recommended. The SPF, however, only quantifies the protection against UVB exposure;
there is no scale for UVA protection.
Sunscreens are available in a wide variety of formulations, including creams, gels, foams, sprays, and
sticks. Self-tanning products do not provide significant protection from UV exposure.
Most sunscreens contain several agents that function as chemical screens, absorbing light or providing a
physical screen that reflects or scatters light. Common chemical sunscreen agents mostly absorb UVB
rays and include the aminobenzoates, which include
p
-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), salicylates,
cinnamates, benzophenones (eg, avobenzone), and the anthrilates (an aminobenzoate derivative). Of
these, the benzophenones are particularly effective at screening UVA rays.
Other sunscreens, called sunblocks, contain zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, which physically block both
UVB and UVA rays. Micronized formulations of these products have significantly improved their cosmetic
acceptability.
Sunscreen failure is common and usually results from insufficient application of the product, application
too late (sunscreens should optimally be applied 30 min before exposure), or failure to reapply after
swimming or exercise.
Allergic or photoallergic reactions to sunscreens must be distinguished from other photosensitive skin
eruptions. Patch or photopatch testing with sunscreen components may be necessary to make the
diagnosis. This testing is usually done by dermatologists with a particular expertise in allergic contact
dermatitis.
Chronic Effects of Sunlight
Aging:
Chronic exposure to sunlight ages the skin (dermatoheliosis, extrinsic aging), producing both fine
and coarse wrinkles, rough leathery texture, mottled pigmentation, and telangiectasia. The atrophic
effects in some people may resemble those seen after x-ray therapy (chronic radiation dermatitis).
Actinic keratoses:
Actinic keratoses are precancerous changes in skin cells (keratinocytes) that are a
frequent, disturbing consequence of many years of sun exposure. People with blonde or red hair, blue
eyes, and skin type I or II are particularly susceptible.
The keratoses are usually pink or red, poorly marginated, and scaly on palpation, although some are light
gray or pigmented, giving them a brown appearance. They should be differentiated from seborrheic
keratoses (, which increase in number and size with aging. Seborrheic keratoses tend to
appear waxy and stuck-on but can often take on an appearance similar to actinic keratoses. Close
inspection usually reveals distinguishing characteristics of the lesion. Unlike actinic keratoses, seborrheic
keratoses also occur on non-sun-exposed areas of the body and are not premalignant.
Skin cancers
(
:
The incidence of squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma in fair,
light-skinned people is directly proportional to the total annual sunlight in the area. Such lesions are
especially common among people who were extensively exposed to sunlight as children and adolescents
and among those who are chronically exposed to the sun as part of their profession or recreational
activities (eg, athletes, farmers, ranchers, sailors, frequent sunbathers). Sun exposure also substantially
increases the risk of malignant melanomas.
Treatment
Various combination therapies, including chemical peels, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), topical
α
-hydroxy acids,
===PAGE:798===
imiquimod, photodynamic therapy, and tretinoin, have been used to reduce carcinogenic changes and
improve the cosmetic appearance of chronically sun-damaged skin. These therapies are often effective in
ameliorating superficial skin changes (eg, coarse and fine wrinkles, irregular pigmentation, sallowness,
roughness, minor laxity) but have a much less pronounced effect on deeper changes (eg,
telangiectasias). Lasers are capable of treating both superficial and deep changes in the dermis and are
used to treat cosmetic and precancerous skin changes. Many chemicals are used in OTC cosmetic
products without significant evidence that they improve chronic changes of the skin caused by sunlight.
Actinic keratoses:
There are several options, depending on the number and location of lesions.
• Liquid nitrogen
• Topical 5-FU
• Topical imiquimod
If only a few actinic keratoses are present, cryotherapy (freezing with liquid nitrogen) is the most rapid
and satisfactory treatment.
If there are too many lesions to freeze, topical 5-FU applied to the affected area nightly or twice daily for 2
to 6 wk often clears the majority of lesions. Several strengths and formulations of 5-FU are commercially
available. Many patients tolerate 0.5% 5-FU cream applied once/day for 4 wk on the face better than
stronger concentrations. Actinic keratoses on the arms may require stronger concentrations, such as 5%
cream. Topical 5-FU produces a brisk reaction, with redness, scaling, and burning, often affecting areas
with no visible actinic keratoses. If the reaction is too brisk, application may be suspended for 1 to 3 days.
Topical 5-FU has few significant adverse effects except for this unsightly and uncomfortable reaction,
which can be masked by cosmetics and, when necessary, suppressed with topical corticosteroids. 5-FU
should not be used to treat basal cell carcinomas, except those shown by biopsy to be of the superficial
type.
A relatively new drug, imiquimod, is often used for treatment of actinic keratoses and superficial basal cell
carcinomas. It stimulates the immune system to recognize and destroy cancerous skin lesions. For
treatment of skin cancers, see
Chapter 90
.
Photosensitivity
Photosensitivity is a poorly understood cutaneous reaction to sunlight probably involving the
immune system. It may be idiopathic or occur after exposure to certain drugs or chemicals, and
it is sometimes a feature of systemic disorders (eg, SLE, porphyria, pellagra, xeroderma
pigmentosum). Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment varies by type.
In addition to the acute and chronic effects of sunlight, a variety of unusual reactions may
occur soon
after only a brief sun exposure. Unless the cause is obvious, patients with pronounced photosensitivity
should be evaluated for systemic or cutaneous disorders associated with light sensitivity such as SLE
( and porphyria (. Treatment for chemical photosensitivity is topical corticosteroids
and avoidance of the causative substance.
Solar urticaria:
In certain patients, urticaria develops at a site of sun exposure within a few minutes.
Rarely, if large areas are involved, syncope, dizziness, wheezing, and other systemic symptoms may
develop. Etiology is unclear but may involve endogenous skin constituents functioning as photoallergens,
leading to mast cell degranulation as in other types of urticaria. Solar urticaria can be distinguished from
other types of urticaria in that wheals in solar urticaria occur only on exposed skin after ultraviolet (UV)
light exposure. Solar urticaria can be classified based on the component of the UV spectrum (UVA, UVB,
and visible light) that produces them. Treatment can be difficult and may include H
blockers, antimalarial
drugs, topical corticosteroids, sunscreens, and psoralen UV light (PUVA). The wheals of solar urticaria
usually last just minutes to hours, but the disorder is chronic and can wax and wane over years.
Chemical photosensitivity:
Over 100 substances, ingested or applied topically, are known to
===PAGE:799===
predispose to cutaneous reactions following sun exposure. A limited number are responsible for most
reactions (see
Table 77-1
). Reactions are divided into phototoxicity and photoallergy.
In
phototoxicity
, light-absorbing compounds directly generate free radicals and inflammatory mediators,
causing tissue damage manifesting as pain and erythema (like sunburn). This reaction does not require
prior sun exposure and can appear in any person, although reaction is highly variable. Typical causes of
phototoxic reactions include topical (eg, perfumes, coal tar) or ingested (eg, tetracyclines, psoralencontaining plants) agents. Phototoxic reactions do not generalize to non-sun-exposed skin.
Photoallergy
is a type IV (cell-mediated) immune response; light absorption causes structural changes in
the drug or substance, allowing it to bind to tissue protein and function as a hapten. Prior exposure is
required. Typical causes of photoallergic reactions include aftershave lotions, sunscreens, and
sulfonamides. Reaction may extend to non-sun-exposed skin. Symptoms include erythema, pruritus, and
sometimes vesicles.
[Table 77-1.
Some Substances that Sensitize the Skin to Sunlight]
Polymorphous light eruption:
These eruptions are unusual reactions to light that do not seem to be
associated with systemic disease or drugs. Eruptions appear on sun-exposed areas, usually 30 min to
several hours after exposure. Lesions are pruritic, erythematous, and often papular but may be
papulovesicular or plaquelike. They are most common among women and people from northern climates
when first exposed to spring or summer sun than among those exposed to sun year-round. Lesions
subside within several days to 1 wk or so. Actinic prurigo is a similar (perhaps related) phenomenon with
more nodular-appearing lesions that may persist year-round, worsening with sun exposure.
Diagnosis is made by history, skin findings, and exclusion of other sun-sensitivity disorders. Diagnosis
sometimes requires reproduction of the lesions with artificial or natural
sunlight when the patient is not
using any potentially sensitizing drugs.
Often, lesions are self-limited and spontaneously improve as summer progresses. Treatment is by
moderating sun exposure and applying topical corticosteroids. More severely affected patients may
benefit from desensitization by graduated exposure to UV light with PUVA ( or narrow band
UVB (312 nm) phototherapy. Patients with disabling disease may require a course of oral
immunosuppressive therapy such as prednisone, azathioprine, cyclosporine, or hydroxychloroquine.
Sunburn
Sunburn is characterized by erythema and sometimes pain and blisters caused by exposure to
solar ultraviolet radiation. Treatment is similar to that for thermal burns, including cool
compresses, NSAIDs, and, for severe cases, sterile dressings and topical antimicrobials.
Prevention by sun avoidance and use of sunscreens is crucial.
Sunburn results from overexposure of the skin to ultraviolet (UV) radiation; wavelengths in the UVB
spectrum (280 to 320 nm) cause the most pronounced effects.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs appear in 1 to 24 h and, except in severe reactions, peak within 72 h. Skin changes
range from mild erythema, with subsequent superficial scaling, to pain, swelling, skin tenderness, and
blisters. Constitutional symptoms (eg, fever, chills, weakness, shock), similar to a thermal burn, may
develop if a large portion of the body surface is affected; these symptoms may be caused by the release
of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1.
Secondary infection, blotchy pigmentation, and miliaria-like eruptions are the most common late
complications. Exfoliated skin may be extremely vulnerable to sunlight for several weeks.
Treatment
===PAGE:800===
• Supportive measures
Further exposure should be avoided until sunburn has completely subsided. Cold tap water compresses
and oral NSAIDs help relieve symptoms, as may topical aloe vera. Topical corticosteroids are no more
effective than cool compresses. Blistered areas should be managed similarly to other partial-thickness
burns (, with sterile dressings and topical bacitracin or silver sulfadiazine. Ointments or
lotions containing local anesthetics (eg, benzocaine) should be avoided because of the risk of allergic
contact dermatitis.
Early treatment of extensive, severe sunburn with a systemic corticosteroid (eg, prednisone 20 to 30 mg
po bid for 4 days for adults or teenagers) may decrease the discomfort, but this use is controversial.
Prevention
Simple precautions (eg, avoiding the sun especially during midday, wearing tightly woven clothing, using
sunscreens) usually prevent most cases of sunburn (.
===PAGE:801===
Chapter 78. Psoriasis and Scaling Diseases
Introduction
Psoriasis, parapsoriasis, pityriasis rosea, pityriasis rubra pilaris, pityriasis lichenoides, lichen planus, and
lichen sclerosus are dissimilar disorders grouped together because their primary lesions have similar
characteristics: sharply marginated, scaling papules or plaques without wetness, crusts, fissures, and
excoriations. Lesion appearance and distribution distinguish these diseases from each other.
Psoriasis
Psoriasis is an inflammatory disease that manifests most commonly as well-circumscribed,
erythematous papules and plaques covered with silvery scales. Cause is unclear but seems to
involve the immune system. Common triggers include trauma, infection, and certain drugs.
Symptoms are usually minimal with occasional mild itching, but cosmetic implications may be
major. Some people develop severe disease with painful arthritis. Diagnosis is based on
appearance and distribution of lesions. Treatment is with emollients, vitamin D analogs,
retinoids, tar, anthralin, corticosteroids, phototherapy, and, when severe, methotrexate,
retinoids, immunomodulatory agents (biologics), or immunosuppressants.
Psoriasis is hyperproliferation of epidermal keratinocytes combined with inflammation of the epidermis
and dermis. It affects about 1
to 5% of the population worldwide; light-skinned people are at greater risk.
Peak onset is roughly bimodal, most often at ages 16 to 22 and at ages 57 to 60, but the disorder can
occur at any age.
Etiology
The cause is unclear but involves immune stimulation of epidermal keratinocytes; T cells seem to play a
central role. Family history is common, and certain genes and HLA antigens (Cw6, B13, B17) are
associated with psoriasis. An environmental trigger is thought to evoke an inflammatory response and
subsequent hyperproliferation of keratinocytes.
Well-identified triggers include
• Injury (Koebner phenomenon)
• Sunburn
• HIV
•
β
-Hemolytic streptococcal infection
• Drugs (especially
β
-blockers, chloroquine, lithium, ACE inhibitors, indomethacin, terbinafine, and
interferon alfa)
• Emotional stress
• Alcohol consumption
Symptoms and Signs
Lesions are either asymptomatic or pruritic and are most often localized on the scalp, extensor surfaces of
the elbows and knees, sacrum, buttocks, and penis. The nails, eyebrows, axillae, umbilicus, and perianal
region may also be affected. The disease can be widespread, involving confluent areas of skin extending
between these regions. Lesions differ in appearance depending on type.
Among the various subtypes (see
Table 78-1
), plaque psoriasis (psoriasis vulgaris or chronic plaque psoriasis) is the most common pattern;
===PAGE:802===
lesions are discrete, erythematous papules or plaques covered with thick, silvery, shiny scales. Lesions
appear gradually and remit and recur either spontaneously or with appearance and resolution of triggers.
Arthritis develops in 5 to 30% of patients and can be disabling (; joint destruction may
ultimately occur.
Psoriasis is rarely life-threatening but can affect a patient's self-image. Besides image, the sheer amount
of time required to treat extensive skin or scalp lesions and to maintain clothing and bedding may
adversely affect quality of life.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Rarely biopsy
Diagnosis is most often by clinical appearance and distribution of lesions. Differential diagnosis includes
seborrheic dermatitis, dermatophytoses, cutaneous lupus erythematosus, eczema, lichen planus,
pityriasis rosea, squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease, especially when on the trunk), lichen
simplex chronicus, and secondary syphilis. Biopsy is rarely necessary and may not be diagnostic.
Disease is graded as mild, moderate, or severe based on the body surface area affected and how the
lesions affect patients' quality of life. There are many more complex scoring systems for disease severity
(eg, the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index), but these systems are useful mainly in research protocols.
Treatment
• Topical treatments
• Systemic treatments
• Ultraviolet (UV) light therapy
Treatment options are extensive and include emollients, salicylic acid, coal tar, anthralin, corticosteroids,
vitamin D
analogs, methotrexate, topical and oral retinoids, topical and oral calcineurin inhibitors,
immunosuppressants, immunomodulatory agents (biologics), and ultraviolet light therapy.
Topical treatments: Emollients
include emollient creams, ointments, petrolatum, paraffin, and even
hydrogenated vegetable (cooking) oils. They reduce scaling and are most effective when applied twice
daily and immediately after bathing. Lesions may appear redder as scaling decreases or becomes more
transparent. Emollients are safe and should probably always be used for mild to moderate plaque
psoriasis.
Salicylic acid
is a keratinolytic that softens scales, facilitates their removal, and increases absorption of
other topical agents. It is especially useful as a component of scalp treatments; scalp scale can be quite
thick.
Coal tar
ointments, solutions, or shampoos are anti-inflammatory and decrease keratinocyte
hyperproliferation via an unknown mechanism. They are typically applied at night and washed off in the
morning. They can be used in combination with topical corticosteroids or with exposure to natural or
artificial broad-band UVB light (280 to 320 nm) in slowly increasing increments (Goeckerman regimen).
Anthralin
is a topical antiproliferative, anti-inflammatory agent. Its mechanism is unknown. Effective dose
is 0.1% cream or ointment increased to 1% as tolerated. Anthralin may be irritating and should be used
with caution in intertriginous areas; it also stains. Irritation and staining can be avoided
[Table 78-1.
Subtypes of Psoriasis]
===PAGE:803===
by washing off the anthralin 20 to 30 min after application. Using a liposome-encapsulated preparation
may also avoid some disadvantages of anthralin.
Corticosteroids
are usually used topically but may be injected into small or recalcitrant lesions.
(CAUTION:
Systemic corticosteroids may precipitate exacerbations or development of pustular
psoriasis and should not be used to treat psoriasis
.) Topical corticosteroids are used twice daily,
sometimes with anthralin or coal tar applied at bedtime. Corticosteroids are most effective when used
overnight under occlusive polyethylene coverings or incorporated into tape; a corticosteroid cream is
applied without occlusion during the day. Corticosteroid
potency ( is selected according to the
extent of involvement. As lesions abate, the corticosteroid should be applied less frequently or at a lower
potency to minimize local atrophy, striae formation, and telangiectases. Ideally, after about 3 wk, an
emollient should be substituted for the corticosteroid for 1 to 2 wk (as a rest period); this substitution limits
corticosteroid dosage and prevents tachyphylaxis. Topical corticosteroid use can be expensive because
large quantities (about 1 oz or 30 g) are needed for each application when a large body surface area is
affected. Topical corticosteroids applied for long duration to large areas of the body may cause systemic
effects and exacerbate psoriasis. For small, thick, localized, or recalcitrant lesions, high-potency
corticosteroids are used with an occlusive dressing or flurandrenolide tape; these dressings are left on
overnight and changed in the morning. Relapse after topical corticosteroids are stopped is often faster
than with other agents.
Vitamin D
analogs
(eg, calcipotriol, calcitriol) are topical vitamin D analogs that induce normal
keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation; they can be used alone or in combination with topical
corticosteroids. Some clinicians have patients apply calcipotriol on weekdays and corticosteroids on
weekends.
Calcineurin inhibitors
(eg, tacrolimus, pimecrolimus) are available in topical form and are generally welltolerated. They are not as effective as corticosteroids but may avoid the complications of corticosteroids
when treating facial and intertriginous psoriasis. They may be associated with an increased risk of
lymphoma and skin cancer.
Tazarotene
is a topical retinoid. It is less effective than corticosteroids as monotherapy but is a useful
adjunct.
Systemic treatments: Methotrexate
taken orally is the most effective treatment for severe disabling
psoriasis, especially severe psoriatic arthritis or widespread erythrodermic or pustular psoriasis
unresponsive to topical agents or psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) light therapy. Methotrexate seems to
interfere with the rapid proliferation of epidermal cells. Hematologic, renal, and hepatic function should be
monitored. Dosage regimens vary, so only physicians experienced in its use for psoriasis should
undertake methotrexate therapy.
Systemic retinoids
(eg, acitretin, isotretinoin) may be effective for severe and recalcitrant cases of
psoriasis vulgaris, pustular psoriasis (in which isotretinoin may be preferred), and hyperkeratotic
palmoplantar psoriasis. Because of the teratogenic potential and long-term retention of acitretin in the
body, women who use it must not be pregnant and should be warned against becoming pregnant for at
least 2 yr after treatment ends. Pregnancy restrictions also apply to isotretinoin, but the agent is not
retained in the body beyond 1 mo. Long-term treatment may cause diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
(DISH—.
Immunosuppressants
can be used for severe psoriasis. Cyclosporine is a commonly used
immunosuppressant. It should be limited to courses of several months (rarely, up to 1 yr) and alternated
with other therapies. Its effect on the kidneys and potential long-term effects on the immune system
preclude more liberal use. Other immunosuppressants (eg, hydroxyurea, 6-thioguanine, mycophenolate
mofetil) have narrow safety margins and are reserved for severe, recalcitrant psoriasis.
Immunomodulatory agents
(biologics— include tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-
α
inhibitors (etanercept, adalimumab, infliximab) and the T-cell
modulator alefacept. TNFα
inhibitors lead to clearing of psoriasis, but their safety profile is still under
study. Efalizumab is no longer available in the US due to increased risk of progressive multifocal
===PAGE:804===
leukoencephalopathy.
Phototherapy: UV light therapy
is typically used in patients with extensive psoriasis. The mechanism
of action is unknown, although UVB light reduces DNA synthesis and can induce mild systemic
immunosuppression. In PUVA, oral methoxypsoralen, a photosensitizer, is followed by exposure to longwave UVA light (330 to 360 nm). PUVA has an antiproliferative effect and also helps to normalize
keratinocyte differentiation. Doses of light are started low and increased as tolerated. Severe burns can
result if the dose of drug or UVA is too high. Although the treatment is less messy than topical treatment
and may produce remissions lasting several months, repeated treatments may increase the incidence of
UV-induced skin cancer and melanoma. Less UV light is required when used with oral retinoids (the socalled re-PUVA regimen). Narrow-band UVB light (311 to 312 nm) used without psoralens is similar in
effectiveness to PUVA. Excimer laser therapy is a type of phototherapy using extremely pure
wavelengths.
Choice of therapy:
Choice of specific agents and combinations requires close cooperation with the
patient, always keeping in mind the untoward effects of the treatments. There is no single ideal
combination or sequence of
agents, but treatment should be kept as simple as possible. Monotherapy is
preferred, but combination therapy is the norm. Rotational therapy refers to the substitution of one
therapy for another after 1 to 2 yr to reduce the adverse effects caused by chronic use and to circumvent
disease resistance. Sequential therapy refers to initial use of potent agents (eg, cyclosporine) to quickly
gain control followed by use of agents with a better safety profile.
Mild plaque psoriasis
can be treated with emollients, keratolytics, tar, topical corticosteroids, vitamin D
analogs, or anthralin alone or in combination. Exposure to sunlight is beneficial, but sunburn can induce
exacerbations.
Moderate to severe plaque psoriasis
should be treated with topical agents and either phototherapy or
systemic agents. Immunosuppressants are used for quick, short-term control (eg, in allowing a break from
other modalities) and for the most severe disease. Immunomodulatory agents (biologics) are used for
moderate to severe disease unresponsive to other agents.
Scalp plaques
are notoriously difficult to treat because they resist systemic therapy, and because hair
blocks application of topical agents and scale removal and shields skin from UV light. A suspension of
10% salicylic acid in mineral oil may be rubbed into the scalp at bedtime manually or with a toothbrush,
covered with a shower cap (to enhance penetration and avoid messiness), and washed out the next
morning with a tar (or other) shampoo. More cosmetically acceptable corticosteroid solutions can be
applied to the scalp during the day. These treatments are continued until the desired clinical response is
achieved. Resistant skin or scalp patches may respond to local superficial intralesional injection of
triamcinolone acetonide suspension diluted with saline to 2.5 or 5 mg/mL, depending on the size and
severity of the lesion. Injections may cause local atrophy, which is usually reversible.
Special treatment needs for subtypes are described in
Table 78-1
.
For psoriatic arthritis, treatment with systemic therapy is important to prevent joint destruction;
methotrexate or a TNFα
inhibitor may be effective.
Parapsoriasis
Parapsoriasis describes a poorly understood and poorly distinguished group of diseases that share
clinical features. There are 2 general forms: a small-plaque type, which is usually benign, and a largeplaque type, which is a precursor of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). It is extremely rare for smallplaque parapsoriasis to transform into CTCL.
The plaques are usually asymptomatic; their typical appearance is thin, scaling, dull pink patches and
plaques with a slightly atrophic or wrinkled appearance. Small-plaque parapsoriasis is defined by lesions
< 5 cm in diameter, whereas large-plaque parapsoriasis has lesions > 6 cm in diameter. Sometimes
digitate plaques develop along the dermatomes, especially on the flanks and abdomen, in small-plaque
parapsoriasis.
===PAGE:805===
Treatment of small-plaque parapsoriasis is unnecessary but can include emollients, topical tar
preparations or corticosteroids, phototherapy, or a combination. Treatment of large-plaque parapsoriasis
is phototherapy or topical corticosteroids.
Course for both types is unpredictable; periodic clinical follow-up and biopsies give the best indication of
risk of developing CTCL.
Pityriasis Rosea
Pityriasis rosea (PR) is an inflammatory disease characterized by diffuse, scaling papules or
plaques. Treatment is usually unnecessary.
PR most commonly occurs between ages 10 and 35. It affects women more often and peaks in incidence
in cooler months in temperate climates. The cause may be viral infection (some research has implicated
human herpesviruses 6 and 7). Drugs may cause a PR-like reaction.
Symptoms and Signs
The condition classically begins with a single, primary, 2- to 10-cm herald patch that appears on the trunk
or proximal limbs (see
Plate 42
). A general centripetal eruption of 0.5- to 2-cm rose- or fawn-colored oval papules and plaques
follows within 7 to 14 days. The lesions have a scaly, slightly raised border (collarette) and resemble
ringworm (tinea corporis). Most patients itch, occasionally severely. Papules may dominate with little or no
scaling in blacks, children, and pregnant women. The rose or fawn color is not as evident in blacks;
blacks also more commonly have inverse PR (lesions in the axillae or groin that spread centrifugally).
Classically, lesions orient along skin lines, giving PR a Christmas tree-like distribution when multiple
lesions appear on the back. A prodrome of malaise and headache precedes the lesions in a minority of
patients.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on clinical appearance and distribution. Differential diagnosis includes tinea corporis,
tinea versicolor, drug eruptions, psoriasis, parapsoriasis, pityriasis lichenoides chronica, lichen planus,
and secondary syphilis. Serologic testing for syphilis is indicated when the palms or soles are affected,
when a herald patch is not seen, or when lesions occur in an unusual sequence or distribution.
Treatment
• Antipruritic therapy
No specific treatment is necessary because the eruption usually remits within 5 wk and recurrence is rare.
Artificial or natural sunlight may hasten resolution. Antipruritic therapy such as topical corticosteroids, oral
antihistamines, or topical measures may be used as needed.
Pityriasis Rubra Pilaris
Pityriasis rubra pilaris is a rare chronic disorder that causes hyperkeratotic yellowing of the
palms and soles and red follicular papules that merge to form red-orange scaling plaques and
confluent areas of erythema with islands of normal skin between lesions.
The cause of pityriasis rubra pilaris is unknown.
The 2 most common forms of the disorder are
• Juvenile classic (characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance and childhood onset)
===PAGE:806===
• Adult classic (characterized by no apparent inheritance and adult onset)
Atypical forms exist in both age groups. Sunlight can trigger a flare.
Diagnosis is by clinical appearance and may be supported by biopsy. Differential diagnosis includes
seborrheic dermatitis (in children) and psoriasis when disease occurs on the scalp, elbows, and knees.
Treatment is exceedingly difficult and empiric. The disorder may be ameliorated but almost never cured;
classic forms of the disorder resolve slowly over 3 yr, whereas non-classic forms persist. Scaling may be
reduced with emollients or 12% lactic acid under occlusive dressing, followed by topical corticosteroids.
Oral vitamin A may be effective. Oral retinoids or methotrexate is an option when a patient is resistant to
topical treatment.
Pityriasis Lichenoides
Pityriasis lichenoides is a clonal T-cell disorder that may develop in response to foreign
antigens (eg, infections or drugs) and may be associated with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Pityriasis lichenoides has acute and chronic forms existing in a clinical continuum. The acute form
typically appears in children and young adults, with crops of asymptomatic chickenpox-like lesions that
typically resolve within weeks to months. Antibiotics (eg, tetracycline, erythromycin) or phototherapy may
help.
The chronic form initially manifests as flatter, reddish brown, scaling papules that may take months or
longer to resolve. No treatment has proved effective.
Lichen Planus
Lichen planus (LP) is a recurrent, pruritic, inflammatory eruption characterized by small,
discrete, polygonal, flat-topped, violaceous papules that may coalesce into rough scaly patches,
often accompanied by oral lesions. Diagnosis is usually clinical and supported by skin biopsy.
Treatment generally requires topical or intralesional corticosteroids. Severe cases may require
phototherapy or systemic immunosuppressants.
Etiology
LP is thought to be caused by a T cell-mediated autoimmune reaction against basal epithelial
keratinocytes in people with genetic predisposition. Drugs (especially
β
-blockers, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors,
sulfonylureas, gold, antimalarial drugs, penicillamine, and thiazides) can cause LP; drug-induced LP
(sometimes called lichenoid drug eruption) may be indistinguishable from nondrug-induced LP or may
have a pattern that is more eczematous. Associations with hepatitis C-induced liver insufficiency, primary
biliary cirrhosis, and other forms of hepatitis have been reported.
Symptoms and Signs
Typical lesions are pruritic, purple, polygonal, flat-topped papules and plaques (see
Plate 39
). Lesions initially are 2 to 4 mm in diameter, with angular borders, a violaceous color, and a
distinct sheen in cross-lighting. They are usually symmetrically distributed, most commonly on the flexor
surfaces of the wrists, legs, trunk, glans penis, and oral and
vaginal mucosae but can be widespread.
The face is rarely involved. Onset may be abrupt or gradual. Children are affected infrequently. During the
acute phase, new papules may appear at sites of minor skin injury (Koebner phenomenon), such as a
superficial scratch. Lesions may coalesce or change over time, becoming hyperpigmented, atrophic,
hyperkeratotic (hypertrophic LP), or vesiculobullous. Although pruritic, lesions are rarely excoriated or
crusted. If the scalp is affected, patchy scarring alopecia (lichen planopilaris) may occur.
The oral mucosa is involved in about 50% of cases; oral lesions may occur without cutaneous lesions
and usually persist for life. Reticulated, lacy, bluish-white, linear lesions (Wickham's striae) are a hallmark
===PAGE:807===
of oral LP, especially on the buccal mucosae. Tongue margins and gingival mucosae in edentulous areas
may also be affected. An erosive form of LP may occur in which the patient develops shallow, often
painful, recurrent oral ulcers, which, if long-standing, rarely become cancerous. Chronic exacerbations
and remissions are common. Vulvar and vaginal mucosae are often involved. Up to 50% of women with
oral mucosal findings have undiagnosed vulvar LP. In men, genital involvement is common, especially of
the glans penis.
Nails are involved in up to 10% of cases. Findings vary in intensity with nail bed discoloration, longitudinal
ridging and lateral thinning, and complete loss of the nail matrix and nail, with scarring of the proximal nail
fold onto the nail bed (pterygium formation).
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Biopsy
Although diagnosis is suggested by appearance of the lesions, similar lesions may result from any of the
papulosquamous disorders, lupus erythematosus, and secondary syphilis, among others. Oral or vaginal
LP may resemble leukoplakia, and the oral lesions must also be distinguished from candidiasis,
carcinoma, aphthous ulcers, pemphigus, cicatricial pemphigoid, and chronic erythema multiforme.
Typically, biopsy is done.
If LP is diagnosed, some clinicians do laboratory testing for liver dysfunction, including hepatitis B and C
infections.
Prognosis
Many cases resolve without intervention, presumably because the inciting agent is no longer present.
Recurrence after years may be due to reexposure to the trigger or some change in the triggering
mechanism. Sometimes treatment of a previously occult infection, such as a dental abscess, results in
resolution.
Vulvovaginal LP may be chronic and refractory to therapy, causing decreased quality of life.
Treatment
• Topical treatments
• Systemic treatments
• Sometimes light therapy
Asymptomatic LP does not require treatment. Drugs suspected of triggering LP should be stopped.
Few controlled studies have evaluated treatments. Options differ by location and extent of disease. Most
cases of LP on the trunk or extremities can be treated with local drugs. Topical corticosteroids are firstline treatment for most cases of localized disease. High-potency ointments or creams (eg, clobetasol,
fluocinonide) may be used on the thicker lesions on the extremities; lower-potency drugs (eg,
triamcinolone, desonide) may be used on the face, groin, and axillae. As always, courses should be
limited to reduce risk of corticosteroid atrophy. Potency may be enhanced with use of polyethylene
wrapping or flurandrenolide tape. Intralesional corticosteroids (triamcinolone acetonide solution diluted
with saline to 5 to 10 mg/mL) can be used every 4 wk for hyperkeratotic plaques and those resistant to
other therapies.
Topical therapy is impractical for generalized LP; oral drugs or phototherapy is used. Oral corticosteroids
(eg, prednisone 20 mg once/day for 2 to 6 wk followed by a taper) may be used for severe cases. The
disease may rebound when therapy ceases; however, long-term systemic corticosteroids should not be
===PAGE:808===
used.
Oral retinoids (eg, acitretin 30 mg once/day for 8 wk) are indicated for otherwise recalcitrant cases.
Griseofulvin 250 mg po bid given for 3 to 6 mo may be effective. Cyclosporine (1.25 to 2.5 mg/kg bid) can
be used when corticosteroids or retinoids fail. Light therapy using psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) or
narrow-band UVB is an alternative to oral therapies, especially if they have failed or are contraindicated
for medical reasons.
Treatment of oral LP differs slightly. Viscous lidocaine may help relieve symptoms of erosive ulcers.
Tacrolimus 0.1% ointment applied twice daily may induce lasting remission, although it has not been fully
evaluated. Other treatment options include topical (in an adhesive base), intralesional, and systemic
corticosteroids.
Erosive oral LP may respond to oral dapsone or cyclosporine. Cyclosporine rinses also
may be helpful.
Dapsone, hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine, systemic cyclosporine, and topical tretinoin may also be
useful. As with any disease with so many therapies, individual drugs have not been uniformly successful.
Lichen Sclerosus
Lichen sclerosus is an inflammatory dermatosis of unknown cause, possibly autoimmune, that
usually affects the anogenital area.
The earliest signs are skin fragility, bruising, and sometimes blistering. Lesions typically cause mild to
severe itching. When lichen sclerosus manifests in children, the appearance may be confused with sexual
abuse. With time, the involved tissue becomes atrophic, thinned, hypopigmented (there may be flecks of
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation), fissured, and scaly. Hyperkeratotic and fibrotic forms exist. Severe
and longstanding cases cause scarring and distortion of normal anogenital architecture. In women, this
distortion can even lead to total absorption of the labia minora and fusion over the clitoris. In men,
phimosis or fusion of the foreskin to the coronal sulcus can occur.
Diagnosis can usually be based on appearance, especially in advanced cases; however, biopsy should
be done on any anogenital dermatosis that does not resolve with mild conventional therapy (eg, topical
hydrocortisone, antifungal drug). It is especially important to biopsy any area that becomes thickened or
ulcerated, because lichen sclerosus is a precursor of squamous cell carcinoma.
Treatment
• Topical corticosteroids
Treatment consists of potent topical corticosteroids (drugs that otherwise should be used with extreme
caution in this area). The disease is generally intractable, so long-term follow-up, especially to monitor for
squamous cell carcinoma and sexual function and for psychologic support, is indicated.
===PAGE:809===
Chapter 79. Hypersensitivity and Inflammatory Disorders
Introduction
The immune system plays a significant role in a large number of skin disorders, including dermatitis,
sunlight reactions, and bullous diseases. Although all of these disorders involve some level of
inflammation, certain skin disorders are primarily characterized by their inflammatory component or as a
hypersensitivity reaction, be it to a drug, infection, or cancer.
Acute Febrile Neutrophilic Dermatosis
(Sweet's Syndrome)
Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis is characterized by tender, indurated, dark-red papules
and plaques with prominent edema in the upper dermis and dense infiltrate of neutrophils.
Cause is not known. It frequently occurs with underlying cancer, especially hematologic
cancers.
Etiology
Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis may occur with various disorders, including
• Acute respiratory illness
• GI infection
• Cancer
• Drug exposure
• Inflammatory or autoimmune disorders
• Pregnancy
About 25% of patients have an underlying cancer, 75% of which are hematologic cancers, especially
myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukemia. When not due to cancer, acute febrile
neutrophilic dermatosis affects mostly women ages 30 to 50, with a female: male ratio of 3:1. In contrast,
men who develop the condition tend to be older (60 to 90).
The cause is unknown; however, type 1 helper T-cell cytokines, including IL-2 and interferonγ
, are
predominant and may play a role in lesion formation.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients are febrile, with an elevated neutrophil count, and have tender, dark-red plaques or
papules,
most often on the face, neck, and upper extremities, especially the dorsum of hands. Oral lesions can
also occur. Rarely, bullous and pustular lesions are present. The lesions often develop in crops. Each
crop is preceded by fever and persists for days to weeks.
Extracutaneous manifestations can involve the eyes (eg, conjunctivitis, episcleritis, iridocyclitis), joints
(eg, arthralgia, myalgia, arthritis), and internal organs (eg, neutrophilic alveolitis; sterile osteomyelitis;
psychiatric or neurologic changes; transient kidney, liver, and pancreatic insufficiency).
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Skin biopsy
===PAGE:810===
Diagnosis is suggested by the appearance of the lesions and is supported by the presence of associated
conditions. Differential diagnosis includes erythema multiforme, erythema elevation diutinum, acute
cutaneous lupus erythematosus, pyoderma gangrenosum, and erythema nodosum. If diagnosis is
unclear, skin biopsy should be done. The histopathologic pattern is that of edema in the upper dermis
with a dense infiltrate of neutrophils in the dermis. Vasculitis may be present but is secondary.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
Treatment involves systemic corticosteroids, chiefly prednisone 0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg po once/day tapered
over 3 wk. Antipyretics are also recommended. In difficult cases, dapsone 100 to 200 mg po once/day,
indomethacin 150 mg po once/day for 1 wk and 100 mg po once/day for 2 additional wk, or K iodide 900
mg po once/day or 300 mg po tid can be given.
Drug Eruptions and Reactions
Drugs can cause multiple skin eruptions and reactions. The most serious of these are discussed
elsewhere in THE MANUAL and include Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis,
hypersensitivity syndrome, serum sickness, exfoliative dermatitis, angioedema and anaphylaxis, and druginduced vasculitis. Drugs can also be implicated in hair loss, lichen planus, erythema nodosum,
pigmentation changes, SLE, photosensitivity reactions, pemphigus, and pemphigoid. Other drug reactions
are classified by lesion type (see
Table 79-1
).
[Table 79-1.
Types of Drug Reactions and Typical Causative Agents]
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary based on the cause and the specific reaction (see
Table 79-1
).
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation and drug exposure history
• Sometimes skin biopsy
A detailed history is often required for diagnosis, including recent use of OTC drugs. Because the
reaction may not occur until several days or even weeks after first exposure to the drug, it is important to
consider all new drugs and not only the one that has been most recently started. No laboratory tests
reliably aid diagnosis, although biopsy of affected skin is often suggestive. Sensitivity can be definitively
established only by rechallenge with the drug, which may be hazardous and unethical in patients who
have had severe reactions.
Treatment
• Discontinuation of offending drug
• Sometimes antihistamines and corticosteroids
Most drug reactions resolve when drugs are stopped and require no further therapy. Whenever possible,
chemically unrelated compounds should be substituted for suspect drugs. If no substitute drug is
available and if the reaction is a mild one, it might be necessary to continue the treatment under careful
watch despite the reaction. Pruritus can be controlled with antihistamines and topical corticosteroids. For
IgE-mediated reactions (eg, urticaria), desensitization ( can be considered when there is
critical need for a drug.
===PAGE:811===
When progression from urticaria to anaphylaxis is a concern, treatment is with aqueous epinephrine
(1:1000) 0.2 mL sc or IM and with the slower-acting but more persistent soluble hydrocortisone 100 mg IV,
which may be followed by an oral corticosteroid for a short period (see also p.
).
Erythema Multiforme
Erythema multiforme (EM) is an inflammatory reaction, characterized by target or iris skin
lesions. Oral mucosa may be involved. Diagnosis is clinical. Lesions spontaneously resolve but
frequently recur. Erythema multiforme can occur as reaction to a drug or an infectious agent
such as herpes simplex virus or mycoplasma. Suppressive antiviral therapy may be indicated
for patients with frequent or symptomatic recurrence due to herpes simplex virus.
For years, EM was thought to represent the milder end of a spectrum of drug hypersensitivity disorders
that included Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis. Recent evidence suggests that
EM is different from these other disorders.
Etiology
The majority of cases are caused by herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection (HSV-1 more so than HSV-2),
although it is unclear whether EM lesions represent a specific or nonspecific reaction to the virus. Current
thinking holds that EM is caused by a T-cell-mediated cytolytic reaction to HSV DNA fragments present in
keratinocytes. A genetic disposition is presumed given that EM is such a rare clinical manifestation of
HSV infection, and several HLA subtypes have been linked with the predisposition to develop lesions.
Less commonly, cases are caused by drugs, vaccines, other viral diseases (especially hepatitis C), or
possibly SLE. EM that occurs in patients with SLE is sometimes referred to as Rowell's syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
EM manifests as the sudden onset of asymptomatic, erythematous macules, papules, wheals, vesicles,
bullae, or a combination on the distal extremities (including palms and soles) and face. The classic lesion
is annular, with a violaceous center and pink halo separated by a pale ring (target or iris lesion).
Distribution is symmetric and centripetal; spread to the trunk is common. Some patients have itching. Oral
lesions include target lesions on the lips and vesicles and erosions on the palate and gingivae.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is by clinical appearance; biopsy is rarely necessary. Differential diagnosis includes essential
urticaria, vasculitis, bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus, linear IgA dermatosis, acute febrile neutrophilic
dermatosis, and dermatitis herpetiformis; oral lesions must be distinguished from aphthous stomatitis,
pemphigus, herpetic stomatitis, and hand-foot-and-mouth disease. Patients with widely disseminated
purpuric macules and blisters and prominent involvement of the trunk and face are likely to have StevensJohnson syndrome rather than EM.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Sometimes prophylactic antivirals
EM spontaneously resolves, so treatment is usually unnecessary. Topical corticosteroids and anesthetics
may ameliorate symptoms and reassure patients. Recurrences are common, and empiric oral
maintenance therapy with acyclovir 400 mg po q 12 h, famciclovir 250 mg po q 12 h, or valacyclovir 1000
mg po q 24 h can be attempted if symptoms recur more than 5 times/yr and HSV association is suspected
or if recurrent EM is consistently preceded by herpes flares.
Panniculitis
===PAGE:812===
Panniculitis describes inflammation of the subcutaneous fat that can result from multiple
causes. Diagnosis is by clinical evaluation and biopsy. Treatment depends on the cause.
Etiology
There are multiple causes of panniculitis, including
• Infections (the most common)
• Physical factors (eg, cold, trauma)
• Proliferative disorders
• Connective tissue disorders (eg, SLE, systemic sclerosis)
Idiopathic panniculitis is sometimes referred to as Weber-Christian disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Panniculitis is characterized by tender and erythematous subcutaneous nodules located over the
extremities and sometimes over the posterior thorax, abdominal area, breasts, face, or buttocks. Rarely,
nodules can involve the mesentery, lungs, scrotum, and cranium. Signs of systemic inflammation can
accompany panniculitis. In Weber-Christian disease, systemic involvement can result in fever as well as
signs of organ dysfunction, including hepatic, pancreatic, and bone marrow insufficiency, which is
potentially fatal.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Excisional biopsy
Diagnosis is by usually by clinical appearance and can be confirmed by excisional biopsy.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Anti-inflammatory drugs
• Immunosuppressants
There is no specific definitive treatment for panniculitis. A variety of strategies have been used with
modest results, including NSAIDs, antimalarials, dapsone, and thalidomide. Corticosteroids (1 to 2 mg/kg
po or IV once/day) and other immunosuppressive or chemotherapeutic drugs have been used to treat
patients with progressive symptoms or signs of systemic involvement. Surgical abdominal panniculectomy
has been used with varying levels of success in morbidly obese patients but should be reserved for
patients with serious disease that does not respond to other measures.
Erythema Nodosum
Erythema nodosum (EN) is a specific form of panniculitis ( characterized by tender,
red or violet, palpable, subcutaneous nodules on the shins and occasionally other locations. It
often occurs with an underlying systemic disease, notably streptococcal infections, sarcoidosis,
inflammatory bowel disease, and TB. Diagnosis is by clinical evaluation and biopsy. Treatment
depends on the cause.
===PAGE:813===
Etiology
EN primarily affects people in their 20s and 30s but can occur at any age; women are more often
affected. Etiology is unknown, but an immunologic reaction is suspected because EN is frequently
accompanied by other disorders; the most common are
• Streptococcal infection (especially in children)
• Sarcoidosis
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• TB
Other possible triggers include
• Other bacterial infections (eg,
Yersinia
,
Salmonella
, mycoplasma, chlamydia, leprosy, lymphogranuloma
venereum)
• Fungal infections (eg, coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis)
• Rickettsial infections
• Viral infections (eg, Epstein-Barr, hepatitis B)
• Use of drugs (eg, sulfonamides, iodides, bromides, oral contraceptives)
• Hematologic and solid cancers
• Pregnancy
Up to one third of cases of EN are idiopathic.
Symptoms and Signs
EN is a subset of panniculitis that manifests as erythematous, tender plaques or nodules, primarily in the
pretibial region (see
Plate 34
), accompanied by fever, malaise, and arthralgia.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Excisional biopsy
Diagnosis is usually by clinical appearance and can be confirmed by excisional biopsy of a nodule when
necessary. A diagnosis of EN should prompt evaluation for causes. Evaluation might include biopsy, skin
testing (PPD or anergy panel), antinuclear antibodies, CBC, chest x-ray, and antistreptolysin O titer or
pharyngeal culture. ESR is often high.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Anti-inflammatory drugs
• Corticosteroids
===PAGE:814===
EN almost always resolves spontaneously. Treatment includes bed rest, elevation, cool compresses, and
NSAIDs. K iodide 300 to 500 mg po tid can be given to decrease inflammation. Systemic corticosteroids
are effective but are an intervention of last resort as they can worsen an occult infection. If an underlying
disorder is identified, it should be treated.
Granuloma Annulare
Granuloma annulare is a benign, chronic, idiopathic condition characterized by papules or
nodules that spread peripherally to form a ring around normal or slightly depressed skin.
Etiology
Etiology is unclear but proposed mechanisms include cell-mediated immunity (type IV), immune complex
vasculitis, and an abnormality of tissue monocytes. Granuloma annulare is not associated with systemic
disorders, except that the incidence of abnormal glucose metabolism is increased among adults with
many lesions. In some cases, exposure to sunlight, insect bites, TB skin testing, BCG vaccination,
trauma,
Borrelia
infection, and viral infections have induced disease flares. The condition is twice as
prevalent among women.
Symptoms and Signs
Lesions are erythematous, yellowish tan, bluish, or the color of the surrounding skin; one or more lesions
may occur, most often on dorsal feet, legs, hands, or fingers. They are usually asymptomatic but may
occasionally be tender. The lesions often expand or join to form rings. The center of each ring may be a
slightly depressed, pale or light brown. In some cases, lesions may become generalized and widespread.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually clinical but can be confirmed by skin biopsy.
Treatment
• Sometimes corticosteroids, anti-inflammatory drugs, or psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy
Usually no treatment is necessary; spontaneous resolution is common. For patients with more widespread
or bothersome lesions, quicker resolution may be promoted by the use of high-strength topical
corticosteroids under occlusive dressings every night, flurandrenolide-impregnated tape, and intralesional
corticosteroids. PUVA therapy is also effective and practical for patients with widespread disease. Recent
reports have suggested that tumor necrosis factorα
inhibitors (eg, infliximab, adalimumab), 595-nm
pulsed dye laser, and fractional photothermolysis are useful in managing disseminated and recalcitrant
lesions.
Pyoderma Gangrenosum
Pyoderma gangrenosum is a chronic progressive skin necrosis of unknown etiology often
associated with systemic illness.
Etiology
Etiology is unknown, but pyoderma gangrenosum can be associated with vasculitis, gammopathies, RA,
leukemia, lymphoma, hepatitis C virus infection, SLE, sarcoidosis, polyarthritis, and especially
inflammatory bowel disease and is thought to be caused by an abnormal immune response.
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiology is poorly understood but may involve problems with neutrophil chemotaxis. Ulcerations
of pyoderma gangrenosum may occur after trauma or injury to the skin in 30% of patients; this process is
termed pathergy.
===PAGE:815===
Symptoms and Signs
Pyoderma gangrenosum begins as an inflamed erythematous papule, pustule, or nodule. The lesion,
which may resemble a furuncle or an arthropod bite at this stage, then ulcerates and expands rapidly,
developing a swollen necrotic base and a raised dusky to violaceous border. An undermined border is
common, if not pathognomonic. Systemic symptoms such as fever, malaise, and arthralgias are common.
The ulcers coalesce to form larger ulcers, often with cribriform or sieve-like scarring.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical. Biopsies of lesions are not often diagnostic but may be supportive; 40% of biopsies
from a leading edge show vasculitis with neutrophils and fibrin in superficial vessels.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes other anti-inflammatory drugs or immunosuppressants
• Avoidance of surgical debridement
Prednisone 60 to 80 mg po once/day is still the mainstay of treatment, although cyclosporine 3 mg/kg po
once/day is also quite effective. Dapsone, clofazimine, thalidomide, tumor necrosis factorα
inhibitors (eg,
infliximab), and mycophenolate mofetil have also been used successfully. Surgical treatments are avoided
because of the risk of wound extension.
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are severe cutaneous
hypersensitivity reactions. Drugs, especially sulfa drugs, antiepileptics, and antibiotics, are the
most common causes. Macules rapidly spread and coalesce, leading to epidermal blistering,
necrosis, and sloughing. Diagnosis is usually obvious by appearance of initial lesions and
clinical syndrome. Treatment is supportive care; corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, and other
drugs may be tried. Prognosis depends on how early the disorders are diagnosed and treated.
Mortality can be as high as 7.5% in children and 20 to 25% in adults.
SJS and TEN are clinically similar except for their distribution. By one commonly accepted definition,
changes affect < 10% of
body surface area in SJS and > 30% of body surface area in TEN; involvement
of 15 to 30% of body surface area is considered SJS-TEN overlap.
The disorders affect between 1 and 5 people/million. Incidence, severity, or both of these disorders may
be higher in bone-marrow transplant recipients, in
Pneumocystis jirovecii
-infected HIV patients, in
patients with SLE, and in patients with other chronic rheumatologic diseases.
Etiology
Drugs precipitate over 50% of SJS cases and up to 95% of TEN cases. The most common drug causes
include
• Sulfa drugs (eg, cotrimoxazole, sulfasalazine)
• Other antibiotics (eg, aminopenicillins, fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins)
• Antiepileptics (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, valproate, lamotrigine)
• Miscellaneous individual drugs (eg, piroxicam, allopurinol, chlormezanone)
===PAGE:816===
Cases that are not caused by drugs are attributed to
• Infection (mostly with
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
)
• Vaccination
• Graft-vs-host disease
Rarely, a cause cannot be identified.
Pathophysiology
Exact mechanism is unknown; however, one theory holds that altered drug metabolism in some patients
causes formation of reactive metabolites that bind to and alter cell proteins, triggering a T-cell-mediated
cytotoxic reaction to drug antigens in keratinocytes.
Another possible mechanism involves interactions between Fas (a cell-surface receptor that induces
apoptosis) and its ligand, particularly a soluble form of Fas ligand released from mononuclear cells.
Recent findings suggest that granulysin released from cytotoxic T cells and natural killer cells might play a
role in keratinocyte death.
Symptoms and Signs
Within 1 to 3 wk after the start of the offending drug, patients develop a prodrome of malaise, fever,
headache, cough, and conjunctivitis. Macules, often in a target configuration, then appear suddenly,
usually on the face, neck, and upper trunk. These macules simultaneously appear elsewhere on the body,
coalesce into large flaccid bullae, and slough over a period of 1 to 3 days. Nails and eyebrows may be
lost along with epithelium.
In severe cases of TEN, large sheets of epithelium slide off the entire body at pressure points (Nikolsky's
sign), exposing weepy, painful, and erythematous skin. Painful oral crusts and erosions,
keratoconjunctivitis, and genital problems (eg, phimosis, vaginal synechiae) accompany skin sloughing in
up to 90% of cases. Bronchial epithelium may also slough, causing cough, dyspnea, pneumonia,
pulmonary edema, and hypoxemia. Glomerulonephritis and hepatitis may develop.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Often skin biopsy
Diagnosis is often obvious from appearance of lesions and rapid progression of symptoms. Histologic
examination of sloughed skin shows necrotic epithelium, a distinguishing feature.
Differential diagnosis in SJS and early TEN includes erythema multiforme, viral exanthems, and drug
rash; and, in later stages of TEN, paraneoplastic pemphigus, toxic shock syndrome, exfoliative
erythroderma, and thermal burn. In children, TEN is less common and must be distinguished from
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.
Prognosis
Severe TEN is similar to extensive burns; patients are acutely ill, may be unable to eat or open their eyes,
and suffer massive fluid and electrolyte losses. They are at high risk of infection, multiorgan failure, and
death. With early therapy, survival rates approach 90%. The severity-of-illness score for TEN (see
Table 79-2
) systematically scores 7 independent risk factors within the first 24 h of presentation to the
hospital to determine the mortality rate for a particular patient.
Treatment
===PAGE:817===
• Supportive care
• Possibly immune modulator treatment
• Possibly plasmapheresis
Treatment is most successful when SJS or TEN is recognized early and treated in an inpatient
dermatologic or ICU setting; treatment in a burn unit may be needed for severe disease. Ophthalmology
consultation is mandatory for patients with ocular involvement. Drugs should be stopped immediately.
Patients
[Table 79-2.
Severity-of-Illness Score for Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (Scorten)]
are isolated to minimize exposure to infection and are given fluids, electrolytes, blood products, and
nutritional supplements as needed. Skin care includes prompt treatment of secondary bacterial infections.
Prophylactic antibiotics are controversial.
Drug treatment of STS and TEN is controversial. High-dose systemic corticosteroids (eg,
methylprednisolone 80 to 200 mg IV or prednisone 80 mg po once/day for 7 to 10 days or until
progression stops) or cyclophosphamide (300 mg IV q 24 h for 7 days or until significant improvement)
can be given to inhibit T-cell-mediated cytolysis. Cyclosporine (3 to 5 mg/kg po once/day) inhibits CD8
cells and has been shown to decrease the duration of active disease by 2 to 3 days in some instances.
However, corticosteroids are controversial and are thought by some to increase mortality. Plasmapheresis
can remove reactive drug metabolites or antibodies. Early high-dose IV immune globulin (IVIG) 2.7 g/kg
over 3 days blocks antibodies and Fas ligand. Despite some remarkable results using high-dose IVIG for
TEN, clinical trials involving small cohorts have reported conflicting results.
===PAGE:818===
Chapter 80. Sweating Disorders
Introduction
There are two types of sweat glands: apocrine and eccrine.
Apocrine glands are clustered in the axillae, areolae, genitals, and anus; modified apocrine glands are
found in the external auditory meatus. Apocrine glands become active at puberty; their excretions are oily
and viscid and are presumed to play a role in sexual olfactory messages. The most common disorders of
apocrine glands are bromhidrosis and hidradenitis suppurativa (.
Eccrine glands are sympathetically innervated, distributed over the entire body, and active from birth.
Their secretions are watery and serve to cool the body in hot environments or during activity. Disorders of
eccrine glands include hyperhidrosis, hypohidrosis, and miliaria.
Bromhidrosis
Bromhidrosis is excessive or abnormal body odor caused by decomposition by bacteria and
yeasts of apocrine secretions and cellular debris.
Apocrine secretions are lipid-rich, sterile, and odorless but become odoriferous when decomposed.
Eccrine bromhidrosis is not as fragrant because eccrine sweat is nearly 100% water. The cause of
apocrine bromhidrosis is poor hygiene of skin and clothing.
In some people, a few days of washing with an antiseptic soap, which may be combined with use of
antibacterial creams containing clindamycin or erythromycin, may be necessary. Shaving the hair in the
armpits may also help control odor.
Hyperhidrosis
Hyperhidrosis is excessive sweating, which can be focal or diffuse and has multiple causes.
Sweating of the axillae, palms, and soles is most often due to stress; diffuse sweating is usually
idiopathic but should raise suspicions for cancer, infection, and endocrine disease. Diagnosis is
obvious, but tests for underlying causes may be indicated. Treatment is topical aluminum
chloride, tap water iontophoresis, botulinum toxin, and, in extreme cases, surgery.
Etiology
Hyperhidrosis can be focal or generalized.
Focal sweating:
Emotional causes are common, causing sweating on the palms, soles, axillae, and
forehead at times of anxiety, excitement, anger, or fear. It may be due to a generalized stress-increased
sympathetic outflow. Although such sweating is a normal response, patients with hyperhidrosis sweat
excessively and under conditions that do not cause sweating in most people.
Gustatory sweating occurs around the lips and mouth when ingesting foods and beverages that are spicy
or hot in temperature. There is no known cause in most cases, but gustatory sweating can be increased
in diabetic neuropathy, facial herpes zoster, cervical sympathetic ganglion invasion, CNS injury or
disease, or parotid gland injury. In the case of parotid gland injury, surgery, infection, or trauma may
disrupt parotid gland innervation and lead to regrowth of parotid parasympathetic fibers into sympathetic
fibers innervating local sweat glands in skin where the injury took place, usually over the parotid gland.
This condition is called Frey's syndrome.
Other causes of focal sweating include pretibial myxedema (shins), hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
(palms), and blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome and glomus tumor (over lesions). Compensatory sweating
is intense sweating after sympathectomy.
Generalized sweating:
Generalized sweating involves most of the body. Although most cases are
===PAGE:819===
idiopathic, numerous conditions can be involved (see
Table 80-1
).
Symptoms and Signs
Sweating is often present during examination and sometimes is extreme. Clothing can be soaked, and
palms or soles may become macerated and fissured. Hyperhidrosis can cause emotional distress to
patients and may lead to social withdrawal. Palmar or plantar skin may appear pale.
Diagnosis
• History and examination
• Iodine and starch test
• Tests to identify a cause
Hyperhidrosis is diagnosed by history and examination but can be confirmed with the iodine and starch
test (apply iodine solution to the affected area, let dry, dust on corn starch: areas of sweating appear
dark). Testing is necessary only to confirm foci of sweating (as in Frey's syndrome or to locate the
[Table 80-1.
Some Causes of Generalized Sweating]
area needing surgical or botulinum toxin treatment) or in a semiquantitative way when following the
course of treatment.
Tests to identify a cause of hyperhidrosis are guided by a review of symptoms and might include CBC to
detect leukemia, serum glucose to detect diabetes, and thyroid-stimulating hormone to screen for thyroid
dysfunction.
Treatment
• Aluminum chloride hexahydrate solution
• Tap water iontophoresis
• Botulinum toxin type A
• Surgery
Initial treatment of focal and generalized sweating is similar.
Aluminum chloride hexahydrate 6 to 20% solution in absolute ethyl alcohol is indicated for topical
treatment of axillary, palmar, and plantar sweating; these preparations require a prescription. The solution
blocks sweat ducts and is most effective when applied nightly and covered tightly with a thin
polyvinylidene or polyethylene film; it should be washed off in the morning. Sometimes an anticholinergic
drug is taken before applying to prevent sweat from washing the aluminum chloride away. Initially, several
applications weekly are needed to achieve control, then a maintenance schedule of once or twice weekly
is followed. If treatment under occlusion is irritating, it should be tried without occlusion. This solution
should not be applied to inflamed, broken, wet, or recently shaved skin. High-concentration, water-based
aluminum chloride solutions may provide adequate relief in milder cases. Topical alternatives to aluminum
chloride, including glutaraldehyde, formaldehyde, and tannic acid, are effective but can cause contact
dermatitis and skin discoloration. A solution of methenamine also may help.
Tap water iontophoresis, in which salt ions are introduced into the skin using electric current, is an option
for patients unresponsive to topical treatments. The affected areas (typically palms or soles) are placed in
2 tap water basins each containing an electrode across which a 15- to 25-mA current is applied for 10 to
20 min. This routine is done daily for 1 wk and then repeated weekly or bimonthly. Treatments may be
===PAGE:820===
made more effective with topical or oral anticholinergic drugs. Although the treatments are usually
effective, the technique is time-consuming and somewhat cumbersome, and some patients tire of the
routine.
Botulinum toxin type A is a neurotoxin that decreases the release of acetylcholine from sympathetic
nerves serving eccrine glands. Injected directly into the axillae, palms, or forehead, botulinum toxin
inhibits sweating for about 5 mo depending on dose. Complications include local muscle weakness and
headache. Injections are effective but painful and expensive.
Surgery is indicated if more conservative treatments fail. Patients with axillary sweating can be treated
with surgical excision of axillary sweat glands either through open dissection or by liposuction (the latter
seems to have lower morbidity). Patients with palmar sweating can be treated with endoscopic
transthoracic sympathectomy. The potential morbidity of surgery must be considered, especially in
sympathectomy. Potential complications include phantom sweating, compensatory sweating, gustatory
sweating, neuralgia, and Horner's syndrome.
Hypohidrosis
Hypohidrosis is inadequate sweating.
Hypohidrosis due to skin abnormalities is rarely clinically significant. It is most commonly focal and caused
by local skin injury (eg, from trauma, radiation, infection [eg, leprosy], or inflammation) or by atrophy of
glands from connective tissue disease (eg, systemic sclerosis, SLE, Sjogren's syndrome). Hypohidrosis
may be caused by drugs, especially those with anticholinergic properties. It is also caused by diabetic
neuropathy and a variety of congenital syndromes. Heatstroke causes inadequate sweating but is a CNS
rather than a skin disorder (. A rare presentation is fever of unknown origin.
Diagnosis is by clinical observation of decreased sweating or by heat intolerance. Treatment is by cooling
measures (eg, air-conditioning, wet garments).
Miliaria
In miliaria, sweat flow is obstructed and trapped within the skin, causing papular lesions.
Miliaria most often occurs in warm humid weather but may occur in cool weather in an overdressed
patient. Lesions vary depending on the depth of tissue at which the sweat duct is obstructed.
•
Miliaria crystallina
is ductal obstruction in the uppermost epidermis, with retention of sweat
subcorneally. It causes clear droplike vesicles that rupture with light pressure.
•
Miliaria rubra
(prickly heat) is ductal obstruction in the mid-epidermis with retention of sweat in the
epidermis and dermis. It causes irritated, pruritic papules (prickling).
•
Miliaria pustulosa
is similar to miliaria rubra but manifests as pustules rather than papules.
•
Miliaria profunda
is ductal obstruction at the entrance of the duct into the dermal papillae at the dermoepidermal junction, with retention of sweat in the dermis. It causes papules that are larger and more
deeply seated than those of miliaria pustulosa. Papules are frequently painful.
Diagnosis is by clinical appearance in the context of hot environment.
Treatment is cooling and drying of the involved areas and avoidance of conditions that may induce
sweating; an air-conditioned environment is ideal. Once the rash develops, corticosteroid creams or
lotions are used, sometimes with a bit of menthol added.
===PAGE:821===
Chapter 81. Bacterial Skin Infections
Introduction
Bacterial skin infections may be uncomplicated or complicated. Uncomplicated infections usually respond
promptly to systemic antibiotics and local wound care. A skin infection is considered complicated when it
meets 2 of the following 5 criteria:
• Involves a preexisting wound or ulceration of the skin
• Involves the deeper soft tissues
• Requires surgical intervention
• Is caused or exacerbated by underlying comorbid disease states (eg diabetes, systemic
immunosuppression)
• Is unresponsive to conventional antibiotic therapy or is recurrent
All uncomplicated skin infections have the potential to become complicated. Complicated skin and softtissue infections may require multidrug therapy and the assistance of other consultants (eg, surgeons,
infectious disease specialists), particularly in light of resistance in many strains of bacteria and the rapid
loss of efficacy among more potent antibiotics. Recurrent skin infections should raise suspicion of
colonization (eg, staphylococcal nasal carriage), resistant strains of bacteria (eg, methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
[MRSA]), cancer, poorly controlled diabetes, or other reasons for
immunocompromise (eg, HIV, hepatitis, advanced age, congenital susceptibility). Bacteria are involved in
the pathophysiology of acne, but acne is not primarily considered a bacterial skin infection.
Cellulitis
Cellulitis is acute bacterial infection of the skin and subcutaneous tissue most often caused by
streptococci or staphylococci. Symptoms and signs are pain, rapidly spreading erythema, and
edema; fever may occur, and regional lymph nodes may enlarge. Diagnosis is by appearance;
cultures are sometimes helpful but awaiting culture results should not delay empiric therapy.
Treatment is with antibiotics. Prognosis is excellent with timely treatment.
Etiology
•
Streptococcus pyogenes
•
Staphylococcus aureus
Cellulitis is most often caused by group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci (eg,
Streptococcus pyogenes
) or
Staphylococcus aureus
. Streptococci cause diffuse, rapidly spreading infection because enzymes
produced by the organism (streptokinase, DNase, hyaluronidase) break down cellular components that
would otherwise contain and localize the inflammation. Staphylococcal cellulitis is typically more localized
and usually occurs in open wounds or cutaneous abscesses.
Recently, methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
(MRSA) has become more common in the community
(community-associated MRSA [CA-MRSA]). Historically, MRSA was typically confined to patients who
were exposed to the organism in a hospital or nursing facility. MRSA infection should now be considered
in patients with community-acquired cellulitis, particularly in those with cellulitis that is recurrent or
unresponsive to monotherapy.
Less common causes are group B streptococci (eg,
Streptococcus agalactiae
) in older patients with
diabetes; gram-negative bacilli (eg,
Haemophilus influenzae
) in children; and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
in patients with diabetes or neutropenia, hot tub or spa users, and hospitalized patients. Animal bites may
===PAGE:822===
result in cellulitis;
Pasteurella multocida
is the cause in cat bites, and
Capnocytophaga
sp is
responsible
in dog bites. Immersion injuries in fresh water may result in cellulitis caused by
Aeromonas hydrophila
; in
warm salt water, by
Vibrio vulnificus
.
Risk factors include skin abnormalities (eg, trauma, ulceration, fungal infection, other skin barrier
compromise due to preexisting skin disease), which are common in patients with chronic venous
insufficiency or lymphedema. Scars from saphenous vein removal for cardiac or vascular surgery are
common sites for recurrent cellulitis, especially if tinea pedis is present. Frequently, no predisposing
condition or site of entry is evident.
Symptoms and Signs
Infection is most common in the lower extremities. Cellulitis is typically unilateral; stasis dermatitis closely
mimics cellulitis but is usually bilateral. The major findings are local erythema and tenderness, frequently
with lymphangitis and regional lymphadenopathy. The skin is hot, red, and edematous (see
Plate 31
), often with surface appearance resembling the skin of an orange (peau d'orange). The borders
are usually indistinct, except in erysipelas (a type of cellulitis with sharply demarcated margins—. Petechiae are common; large areas of ecchymosis are rare. Vesicles and bullae may develop and
rupture, occasionally with necrosis of the involved skin. Cellulitis may mimic deep venous thrombosis but
can often be differentiated by one or more features (see
Table 81-1
). Fever, chills, tachycardia, headache, hypotension, and delirium may precede cutaneous
findings by several hours, but many patients do not appear ill. Leukocytosis is common.
[Table 81-1.
Differentiating Cellulitis and Deep Venous Thrombosis]
Diagnosis
• Examination
• Blood and sometimes tissue cultures for immunocompromised patients
Diagnosis is by examination. Skin and (when present) wound cultures are generally not indicated
because they rarely identify the infecting organism. Blood cultures are useful in immunocompromised
patients to detect or rule out bacteremia. Culture of involved tissue may be required in
immunocompromised patients if they are not responding to empiric therapy or if blood cultures do not
isolate an organism.
Prognosis
Most cellulitis resolves quickly with antibiotic therapy. Local abscesses occasionally form, requiring
incision and drainage. Serious but rare complications include severe necrotizing subcutaneous infection
( and bacteremia with metastatic foci of infection.
Recurrences in the same area are common, sometimes causing serious damage to the lymphatics,
chronic lymphatic obstruction, and lymphedema.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
Treatment is with antibiotics. For most patients, empiric treatment effective against both group A
streptococci and
S. aureus
is used. Oral therapy is usually adequate with dicloxacillin 250 mg or
cephalexin 500 mg qid for mild infections. Levofloxacin 500 mg po once/day or moxifloxacin 400 mg
once/day works well for patients who are unlikely to adhere to multiple daily dosing schedules. For more
serious infections, oxacillin or nafcillin 1 g IV q 6 h is given. Use of initial empiric therapy against MRSA is
not typically advised unless there is compelling clinical evidence (eg, contact with a documented case or
outbreak; culture-documented prevalence of > 10% or 15% in a practice area). For penicillin-allergic
patients or those with suspected or confirmed MRSA infection, vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h is the drug of
===PAGE:823===
choice (see also p.
). Linezolid is another option for the treatment of MRSA at a dose of 600 mg IV or
po q 12 h for 10 to 14 days. Teicoplanin has a mechanism of action similar to vancomycin. It is commonly
used outside the US to treat MRSA; the usual dose is 6 mg/kg IV q 12 h for 2 doses, followed by 6 mg/kg
(or 3 mg/kg) IV or IM once/day. Immobilization and elevation of the affected area help reduce edema; cool,
wet dressings relieve local discomfort.
Cellulitis in a patient with neutropenia requires empiric antipseudomonal antibiotics (eg, tobramycin 1.5
mg/kg IV q 8 h and piperacillin 3 g IV q 4 h) until blood culture results are available. Penicillin is the drug
of choice for cellulitis caused by
P. multocida
; an aminoglycoside (eg, gentamicin) is effective against
A.
hydrophila
, and tetracycline is preferred for
V. vulnificus
infections.
Recurrent leg cellulitis is prevented by treating concomitant tinea pedis, which often eliminates the source
of bacteria residing in the inflamed, macerated tissue. If such therapy is unsuccessful or not indicated,
recurrent cellulitis can sometimes be prevented by benzathine penicillin 1.2 million units IM monthly or
penicillin V or erythromycin 250 mg po qid for 1 wk/mo. If these regimens prove unsuccessful, tissue
culture may be required.
Erysipelas
Erysipelas is a type of superficial cellulitis ( with dermal lymphatic involvement.
Erysipelas should not be confused with erysipeloid, a skin infection caused by
Erysipelothrix
(. Erysipelas is characterized clinically by shiny, raised, indurated, and tender plaque-like lesions
with distinct margins (see
Plate 33
). There is also a bullous form of erysipelas. Erysipelas is most often caused by group A (or rarely
group C or G)
β
-hemolytic streptococci and occurs most frequently on the legs and face. However, other
causes have been reported, including
Staphylococcus aureus
(including methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
[MRSA]),
Klebsiella pneumoniae
,
Haemophilus influenzae
,
Escherichia coli
,
S. warneri
,
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
,
S. pyogenes
, and
Moraxella
sp. Erysipelas of the face must be differentiated from herpes
zoster, angioedema, and contact dermatitis. It is commonly accompanied by high fever, chills, and
malaise; MRSA is more common in facial erysipelas than in lower-extremity erysipelas. Erysipelas may be
recurrent and may result in chronic lymphedema.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by characteristic appearance; blood culture is done in toxic-appearing patients. Diffuse
inflammatory carcinoma of the breast may also be mistaken for erysipelas.
Treatment
• Usually penicillin for lower-extremity erysipelas
• Initially vancomycin for facial erysipelas
Treatment of choice for lower-extremity erysipelas is penicillin V 500 mg po qid for ≥ 2 wk. In severe
cases, penicillin G 1.2 million units IV q 6 h is indicated, which can be replaced by oral therapy after 36 to
48 h. Dicloxacillin 500 mg po qid for 10 days can be used for infections with staphylococci. Erythromycin
500 mg po qid for 10 days may be used in penicillin-allergic patients; however, there is growing macrolide
resistance in streptococci. In infections resistant to these antibiotics, cloxacillin or nafcillin can be used. In
Europe, pristinamycin and roxithromycin have been shown to be good choices for erysipelas. If facial
erysipelas is present or if MRSA is otherwise suspected, empiric therapy should be initiated with
vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h (which is active against MRSA). Cold packs and analgesics may relieve local
discomfort. Fungal foot infections may be an entry site for infection and may require antifungal treatment
to prevent recurrence.
Cutaneous Abscess
A cutaneous abscess is a localized collection of pus in the skin and may occur on any skin
===PAGE:824===
surface. Symptoms and signs are pain and a tender, firm or fluctuant swelling. Diagnosis is
usually obvious by examination. Treatment is incision and drainage.
Bacteria causing cutaneous abscesses are typically indigenous to the skin of the involved area. For
abscesses on the trunk, extremities, axillae, or head and neck, the most common organisms are
Staphylococcus aureus
and streptococci. In recent years, methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
(MRSA) has
become a more common cause.
Abscesses in the perineal (ie, inguinal, vaginal, buttock, perirectal) region contain organisms found in the
stool, commonly anaerobes or a combination of aerobes and anaerobes. Carbuncles and furuncles are
follicle-based cutaneous abscesses with characteristic features (.
Cutaneous abscesses tend to form in patients with bacterial overgrowth, antecedent trauma (particularly
when a foreign body is present), or immunologic or circulatory compromise.
Symptoms and Signs
Cutaneous abscesses are painful, tender, indurated, and sometimes erythematous. They vary in size,
typically 1 to 3 cm in length, but sometimes much larger. Initially the swelling is firm; later, as the abscess
"points," the overlying skin becomes thin and feels fluctuant.
The abscess may then spontaneously drain.
Local cellulitis, lymphangitis, regional lymphadenopathy, fever, and leukocytosis are variable
accompanying features.
Diagnosis
• Examination
• Gram stain and culture to identify MRSA
Diagnosis is usually obvious by examination. Gram stain and culture are recommended, primarily to
identify MRSA.
Conditions resembling simple cutaneous abscesses include hidradenitis suppurativa ( and
ruptured epidermal cysts. Epidermal cysts (often incorrectly referred to as sebaceous cysts) rarely
become infected; however, rupture releases keratin into the dermis, causing an exuberant inflammatory
reaction sometimes clinically resembling infection. Culture of these ruptured cysts seldom reveals any
bacteria. Perineal abscesses may represent cutaneous emergence of a deeper perirectal abscess or
drainage from Crohn's disease via a fistulous tract. These other conditions are usually recognizable by
history and rectal examination.
Treatment
• Incision and drainage
• Sometimes antibiotics
Some small abscesses resolve without treatment, coming to a point and draining. Warm compresses help
accelerate the process. Incision and drainage are indicated when significant pain, tenderness, and
swelling are present; it is unnecessary to await fluctuance. Under sterile conditions, local anesthesia is
administered as either a lidocaine injection or a freezing spray.
Patients with large, extremely painful abscesses may benefit from IV sedation and analgesia during
drainage. A single puncture with the tip of a scalpel is often sufficient to open the abscess. After the pus
drains, the cavity should be bluntly probed with a gloved finger or curette to clear loculations, and then
irrigated with 0.9% saline solution. Some clinicians pack the cavity loosely with a gauze wick that is
removed 24 to 48 h later. Local heat and elevation may hasten resolution of inflammation.
Antibiotics are unnecessary unless the patient has signs of systemic infection, cellulitis, multiple
===PAGE:825===
abscesses, immunocompromise, or a facial abscess in the area drained by the cavernous sinus. In these
cases, empiric therapy should be started with a drug active against MRSA (eg,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin; for severe infection, vancomycin) pending results of bacterial
culture.
Folliculitis
Folliculitis is a bacterial infection of hair follicles.
Folliculitis is usually caused by
Staphylococcus aureus
but occasionally
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(hot
tub folliculitis) or other organisms. Hot tub folliculitis occurs because of inadequate treatment of water
with chlorine or bromine.
Symptoms of folliculitis are mild pain, pruritus, or irritation. Signs of folliculitis are a superficial pustule or
inflammatory nodule surrounding a hair follicle. Infected hairs easily fall out or are removed, but new
papules tend to develop. Growth of stiff hairs into the skin may cause chronic low-grade irritation or
inflammation that may mimic infectious folliculitis (pseudofolliculitis barbae—.
Treatment
Because most folliculitis is caused by
S. aureus
, clindamycin 1% lotion or gel may be applied topically bid
for 7 to 10 days. Alternatively, benzoyl peroxide 5% wash may be used when showering for 5 to 7 days.
Extensive cutaneous involvement may warrant systemic therapy (eg, cephalexin 250 to 500 mg po tid to
qid for 10 days). If these measures do not result in a cure, or folliculitis recurs, pustules are Gram stained
and cultured to rule out gram-negative or methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
(MRSA) etiology, and nares are
cultured to rule out nasal staphylococcal carriage. Potassium hydroxide wet mount should be done on a
plucked hair to rule out fungal folliculitis.
Treatment for MRSA usually requires 2 oral antibiotics, and the choice of therapeutic drugs should be
based on culture and sensitivity reports.
Hot tub folliculitis usually resolves without treatment. However, adequate chlorination of the hot tub is
necessary to prevent recurrences and to protect others from infection.
Furuncles and Carbuncles
Furuncles are skin abscesses caused by staphylococcal infection, which involve a hair follicle
and surrounding tissue. Carbuncles are clusters of furuncles connected subcutaneously,
causing deeper suppuration and scarring. They are smaller and more superficial than
subcutaneous abscesses (. Diagnosis is by appearance. Treatment is warm
compresses and often oral antistaphylococcal antibiotics.
Both furuncles and carbuncles may affect healthy young people but are more common in the obese, the
immunocompromised (including those with neutrophil defects), the elderly, and possibly those with
diabetes. Clustered cases may occur among those living in crowded quarters with relatively poor hygiene
or among contacts of patients infected with virulent strains. Predisposing factors include bacterial
colonization of skin or nares, hot and humid climates, and occlusion or abnormal follicular anatomy (eg,
comedones in acne). Methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) is a common cause.
Furuncles are common on the neck, breasts, face, and buttocks. They are uncomfortable and may be
painful when closely attached to underlying structures (eg, on the nose, ear, or fingers). Appearance is a
nodule or pustule that discharges necrotic tissue and sanguineous pus. Carbuncles may be accompanied
by fever and prostration.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by examination. Material for culture should be obtained.
===PAGE:826===
Treatment
• Drainage
• Often antibiotics effective against MRSA
Abscesses are incised and drained. Intermittent hot compresses are used to facilitate drainage.
Antibiotics, when used, should be effective against MRSA, pending culture and sensitivity test results. In
afebrile patients, treatment of a single lesion < 5 mm requires no antibiotics. If a single lesion is ≥ 5 mm,
an oral antibiotic is given for 5 to 10 days; choices include trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX)
160/800 mg to 320/1600 mg bid, clindamycin 300 to 600 mg q 6 to 8 h, and doxycycline or minocycline
100 mg q 12 h. Patients with fever, multiple abscesses, or carbuncles are given 10 days of TMP/SMX
160/800 mg to 320/1600 mg bid plus rifampin 300 mg bid. Systemic antibiotics are also needed for
• Lesions < 5 mm that do not resolve with drainage
• Evidence of expanding cellulitis
• Immunocompromised patients
• Patients at risk of endocarditis
Furuncles frequently recur and can be prevented by applying liquid soap containing either chlorhexidine
gluconate with isopropyl alcohol or 2 to 3% chloroxylenol and by giving maintenance antibiotics over 1 to
2 mo. Patients with recurrent furunculosis should be treated for predisposing factors such as obesity,
diabetes, occupational or industrial exposure to inciting factors, and nasal carriage of
S. aureus
or MRSA
colonization.
Erythrasma
Erythrasma is an intertriginous infection with
Corynebacterium minutissimum
that is most
common among patients with diabetes and among people living in the tropics.
Erythrasma resembles tinea or intertrigo. It is most common in the foot, where it manifests as superficial
scaling, fissuring, and maceration most commonly confined to the 3rd and 4th web spaces. Erythrasma is
also common in the groin, where it manifests as irregular but sharply marginated pink or brown patches
with fine scaling. Erythrasma may also involve the axillae, submammary or abdominal folds, and
perineum, particularly in obese middle-aged women and in patients with diabetes.
Erythrasma fluoresces a characteristic coral-red color under Wood's light. Absence of hyphae in skin
scrapings also distinguishes erythrasma from tinea.
Treatment is erythromycin or tetracycline 250 mg po qid for 14 days. Topical erythromycin or clindamycin
is also effective. Recurrence is common.
Hidradenitis Suppurativa
Hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic, scarring inflammation of apocrine glands of the axillae,
groin, and around the nipples and anus.
Blockage of apocrine ducts has been suggested as the cause, leading to subsequent inflammation,
bacterial overgrowth, and scarring.
Staphylococcus aureus
is almost always implicated in acute cases,
but gram-negative organisms such as
Proteus
may predominate in chronic cases.
Swollen, tender masses resembling cutaneous abscesses develop. Pain, fluctuance, discharge, and
sinus tract formation are characteristic in chronic cases. In chronic axillary cases, coalescence of inflamed
nodules causes palpable cordlike fibrotic bands. The condition may become disabling because of pain
and foul odor.
===PAGE:827===
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by examination. Bacterial cultures may be helpful if there appears to be a concomitant
cellulitis or loculated abscess.
Treatment
Treatment of acute cases consists of high-dose oral tetracycline (500 mg bid), doxycycline (100 to 200
mg once/day), minocycline (100 mg once/day), or erythromycin (250 to 500 mg qid) until the lesions
resolve. Topical clindamycin applied bid may be equally effective. Incision and drainage are necessary for
an abscess or fluctuance of the affected area but alone do not resolve the problem (unlike in cutaneous
abscesses). Isotretinoin 1 mg/kg po bid has also been effective in some patients, but recurrences are
common. Intralesional corticosteroid injections (eg, triamcinolone 1 to 10% suspension intradermally) may
help with inflammation and pain. Surgical excision and repair or grafting of the affected areas is often
necessary if the disease persists. Ablative laser therapy (CO
or erbium:YAG) is an alternate surgical
treatment. Several studies report success in treating hidradenitis suppurativa with etanercept or
infliximab, injectable tumor necrosis factorα
inhibitors. Although not the gold standard, this option may be
useful when all other treatment modalities have failed.
Impetigo and Ecthyma
Impetigo is a superficial skin infection with crusting or bullae caused by streptococci,
staphylococci, or both. Ecthyma is an ulcerative form of impetigo.
No predisposing lesion is identified in most patients, but impetigo may follow any type of break in the skin.
General risk factors seem to be moist environment, poor hygiene, and chronic nasal carriage of
staphylococci. Impetigo may be bullous or nonbullous.
Staphylococcus aureus
is the predominant cause
of nonbullous impetigo and the cause of all bullous impetigo. Bullae are caused by exfoliative toxin
produced by staphylococci. Methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
(MRSA) has been isolated in about 20% of
recent cases of impetigo.
Symptoms and Signs
Nonbullous impetigo typically manifests as clusters of vesicles or pustules that rupture and develop a
honey-colored crust (exudate from the lesion base) over the lesions (see
Plate 35
). Bullous impetigo is similar except that vesicles typically enlarge rapidly to form bullae. The
bullae burst and expose larger bases, which become covered with honey-colored varnish or crust.
Ecthyma is characterized by small, purulent, shallow, punched-out ulcers with thick, brown-black crusts
and surrounding erythema.
Impetigo and ecthyma cause mild pain or discomfort. Pruritus is common; scratching may spread
infection, inoculating adjacent and nonadjacent skin.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is by characteristic appearance. Cultures of lesions are indicated only when the patient does
not respond to empiric therapy. Patients with recurrent impetigo should have nasal culture. Persistent
infections should be cultured to identify MRSA.
Treatment
• Topical mupirocin or retapamulin
• Sometimes oral antibiotics
===PAGE:828===
The affected area should be washed gently with soap and water several times a day to remove any
crusts. Treatment for localized disease is topical mupirocin antibiotic ointment tid for 7 days or retapamulin
ointment bid for 5 days. Oral antibiotics (eg, dicloxacillin or cephalexin 250 to 500 mg qid, 12.5 mg/kg qid
for children, for 10 days) may be needed in patients with extensive or resistant lesions. Use of initial
empiric therapy against MRSA is not typically advised unless there is compelling clinical evidence (eg,
contact with a documented case or outbreak; high culture-documented prevalence in a practice area).
Treatment of MRSA should be directed by culture and sensitivity test results; typically, clindamycin,
rifampin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole are effective against most strains of community-associated
MRSA.
Other therapy includes restoring a normal cutaneous barrier in patients with underlying atopic dermatitis
or extensive xerosis using topical emollients and corticosteroids if warranted. Chronic staphylococcal
nasal carriers are given topical antibiotics (mupirocin) for 1 wk each of 3 consecutive months.
Prompt recovery usually follows timely treatment. Delay can cause cellulitis, lymphangitis, furunculosis,
and hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation with or without scarring. Children aged 2 to 4 yr are at risk of
acute glomerulonephritis if nephritogenic strains of group A streptococci are involved; nephritis seems to
be more common in the southern US than in other regions.
Lymphadenitis
(See also
Lymphangitis
, below.)
Lymphadenitis is an acute infection of one or more lymph nodes.
Lymphadenitis is a feature of many bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoal infections. Focal lymphadenitis is
prominent in streptococcal infection, TB or nontuberculous mycobacterial infection, tularemia, plague, catscratch disease, primary syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, chancroid, and genital herpes simplex.
Multifocal lymphadenitis is common in infectious mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus infection,
toxoplasmosis, brucellosis, secondary syphilis, and disseminated histoplasmosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Lymphadenitis typically causes pain, tenderness, and lymph node enlargement. Pain and tenderness
typically distinguish lymphadenitis from lymphadenopathy. With some infections, the overlying skin is
inflamed, occasionally with cellulitis. Abscesses may form, and penetration to the skin produces draining
sinuses. Fever is common.
Diagnosis
The underlying disorder is usually suggested by history and examination. If not, aspiration and culture or
excisional biopsy is indicated.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
Treatment is directed at the cause and is usually empiric. Options include IV antibiotics, antifungals, and
antiparasitics depending upon etiology or clinical suspicion. Many patients with lymphadenitis may
respond to outpatient therapy with oral antibiotics. However, many also go on to form abscesses, which
require surgical drainage; an extensive procedure is done with accompanying IV antibiotics. In children, IV
antibiotics are commonly needed. Hot, wet compresses may relieve some pain. Lymphadenitis usually
resolves with timely treatment, although residual, persistent, nontender lymphadenopathy is common.
Lymphangitis
(See also
Lymphadenitis
, above.)
===PAGE:829===
Lymphangitis is acute bacterial infection (usually streptococcal) of peripheral lymphatic
channels.
Bacteria enter the lymphatic channels from an abrasion, wound, or coexisting infection (usually cellulitis).
Patients with underlying lymphedema are at particular risk. Red, irregular, warm, tender streaks develop
on an extremity and extend proximally from a peripheral lesion toward regional lymph nodes, which are
typically enlarged and tender. Systemic manifestations (eg, fever, shaking chills, tachycardia, headache)
may occur and may be more severe than cutaneous findings suggest. Leukocytosis is common.
Bacteremia may occur. Rarely, cellulitis with suppuration, necrosis, and ulceration develops along the
involved lymph channels as a consequence of primary lymphangitis.
Diagnosis is clinical. Isolation of the responsible organism is usually unnecessary. Most cases respond
rapidly to antistreptococcal antibiotics (see
Cellulitis
.
Necrotizing Subcutaneous Infection
(Necrotizing Fasciitis)
Necrotizing subcutaneous infection (NSI) is typically caused by a mixture of aerobic and
anaerobic organisms that cause necrosis of subcutaneous tissue, usually including the fascia.
This infection most commonly affects the extremities and perineum. Affected tissues become
red, hot, and swollen, resembling severe cellulitis (. Without timely treatment, the
area becomes gangrenous. Patients are acutely ill. Diagnosis is by history and examination and
is supported by evidence of overwhelming infection. Treatment involves antibiotics and
surgical debridement. Prognosis is poor without early, aggressive treatment.
Etiology
NSI typically results from infection with group A streptococci (eg,
Streptococcus pyogenes
) or a mixture of
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria (eg,
Bacteroides
sp). These organisms typically extend to subcutaneous
tissue from a contiguous ulcer, an infection, or after trauma. Streptococci can arrive from a remote site of
infection via the bloodstream. Perineal involvement (also called Fournier's gangrene) is usually a
complication of recent surgery, perirectal abscess, periurethral gland infection, or retroperitoneal infection
from perforated abdominal viscera. Patients with diabetes are at particular risk of NSI.
Pathophysiology
NSI causes tissue ischemia by widespread occlusion of small subcutaneous vessels. Vessel occlusion
results in skin infarction and necrosis, which facilitates the growth of obligate anaerobes (eg,
Bacteroides
) while promoting anaerobic metabolism by facultative organisms (eg,
Escherichia coli
),
resulting in gangrene. Anaerobic metabolism produces hydrogen and nitrogen, relatively insoluble gases
that may accumulate in subcutaneous tissues.
Symptoms and Signs
The primary symptom is intense pain. However, in areas denervated by peripheral neuropathy, pain may
be minimal or absent. Affected tissue is red, hot, and swollen and rapidly becomes discolored. Bullae,
crepitus (from soft-tissue gas), and gangrene may develop. Subcutaneous tissues (including adjacent
fascia) necrose, with widespread undermining of surrounding tissue. Muscles are spared initially. Patients
are acutely ill, with high fever, tachycardia, altered mental status ranging from confusion to obtundation,
and hypotension. Patients may be bacteremic or septic and may require aggressive hemodynamic
support.
Diagnosis
• Clinical examination
• Blood and wound cultures
===PAGE:830===
Diagnosis, made by history and examination, is supported by leukocytosis, soft-tissue gas on x-ray,
positive blood cultures, and deteriorating metabolic and hemodynamic status.
NSI must be differentiated from clostridial soft-tissue infections, in which cellulitis, myositis, and
myonecrosis often occur (. Such infections are anaerobic. Anaerobic cellulitis produces lots
of gas but little pain, edema, or change in skin; it very seldom travels into the muscle. Anaerobic
myonecrosis has pronounced skin changes, pain, and edema and usually penetrates into muscle.
Prognosis
Mortality rate is about 30%. Old age, underlying medical problems, delayed diagnosis and therapy, and
insufficient surgical debridement worsen prognosis.
Treatment
• Surgical debridement
• Antibiotics
• Amputation if necessary
Treatment of early NSI is primarily surgical. IV antibiotics are adjuncts, usually including 2 or more drugs,
but regimens vary depending on results of Gram stain and culture (eg, penicillin G 4 million units q 4 h
combined with clindamycin 600 to 900 mg q 8 h or ceftriaxone 2 g q 12 h). Evidence of bullae,
ecchymosis, fluctuance, crepitus, and systemic spread of infection requires immediate surgical
exploration and debridement. The initial incision should be extended until an instrument or finger can no
longer separate the skin and subcutaneous tissue from the deep fascia. The most common error is
insufficient surgical intervention; repeat operation every 1 to 2 days, with further incision and debridement
as needed, should be carried out routinely. Amputation of an extremity may be necessary.
IV fluids may be needed in large volumes before and after surgery. Antibiotic choices should be reviewed
based on Gram stain and culture of tissues obtained during surgery. Hyperbaric O
therapy as adjuvant
therapy may also be of benefit; however, the evidence is inconclusive.
Staphylococcal Scalded Skin Syndrome
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) is an acute epidermolysis caused by a
staphylococcal toxin. Infants and children are most susceptible. Symptoms are widespread
bullae with epidermal sloughing. Diagnosis is by examination and sometimes biopsy. Treatment
is antistaphylococcal antibiotics and local care. Prognosis is excellent with timely treatment.
SSSS almost always affects children < 6 yr (especially infants); it rarely occurs in older patients unless
they have renal failure or are immunocompromised. Epidemics may occur in nurseries, presumably
transmitted by the hands of personnel who are in contact with an infected infant or who are nasal carriers
of
Staphylococcus aureus
. Sporadic cases also occur.
SSSS is caused by group II coagulase-positive staphylococci, usually phage type 71, which elaborate
exfoliatin (also called epidermolysin), a toxin that splits the upper part of the epidermis just beneath the
granular cell layer (see also p.
). The primary infection often begins during the first few days of life in
the umbilical stump or diaper area; in older children, the face is the typical site. Toxin produced in these
areas enters the circulation and affects the entire skin.
[Table 81-2.
Differentiating Staphylococcal Scalded Skin Syndrome (SSSS) and Toxic Epidermal
Necrolysis (TEN)]
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:831===
The initial lesion is usually superficial and crusted. Within 24 h, the surrounding skin becomes painful and
scarlet, changes that quickly spread to other areas. The skin may be exquisitely tender and have a
wrinkled tissue paper-like consistency. Large, flaccid blisters arise on the erythematous skin and quickly
break to produce erosions. Intact blisters extend laterally with gentle pressure (Nikolsky's sign). The
epidermis may peel easily, often in large sheets (see
Plate 45
). Widespread desquamation occurs within 36 to 72 h, and patients become very ill with systemic
manifestations (eg, malaise, chills, fever). Desquamated areas appear scalded. Loss of the protective
skin barrier can lead to sepsis and to fluid and electrolyte imbalance.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
• Cultures may be useful in adults
Diagnosis is suspected clinically, but confirmation usually requires biopsy (frozen section may give earlier
results). Specimens show noninflammatory superficial splitting of the epidermis. In children, skin cultures
are seldom positive; in adults, they are frequently positive. Cultures should be taken from the nose,
conjunctiva, throat, and nasopharynx.
Differential diagnosis:
Differential diagnosis includes drug hypersensitivity, viral exanthemas, scarlet
fever, thermal burns, genetic bullous diseases (eg, some types of epidermolysis bullosa), acquired
bullous diseases (eg, pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid), and toxic epidermal necrolysis (see p.
and
Table 81-2
). Stevens-Johnson syndrome is characterized by mucosal involvement, which is
absent in SSSS.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
• Corticosteroids not recommended
• Gel dressings for weeping lesions
With prompt diagnosis and therapy, death rarely occurs; the stratum corneum is quickly replaced, and
healing usually occurs within 5 to 7 days after start of treatment.
Penicillinase-resistant antistaphylococcal antibiotics given IV must be started immediately. Nafcillin 12.5 to
25 mg/kg IV q 6 h for neonates > 2 kg and 25 to 50 mg/kg for older children is given until improvement is
noted, followed by oral cloxacillin 12.5 mg/kg q 6 h (for infants and children weighing ≤ 20 kg) and 250 to
500 mg q 6 h (for older children). Corticosteroids are contraindicated. Topical therapy and patient
handling must be minimized.
If disease is widespread and lesions are weeping, the skin should be treated as for burns (. Hydrolyzed polymer gel dressings may be very useful, and the number of dressing changes should
be minimized.
Steps to detect carriers and prevent or treat nursery epidemics are discussed elsewhere (.
===PAGE:832===
Chapter 82. Fungal Skin Infections
Introduction
Fungal skin infections are caused by yeasts (
Candida
sp) or dermatophytes (
Epidermophyton
,
Microsporum
, and
Trichophyton
spp).
Candidiasis
Candidiasis (moniliasis) is skin infection with
Candida
sp, most commonly
Candida albicans
.
Infections can occur anywhere and are most common in skinfolds and web spaces and on the
genitals, cuticles, and oral mucosa. Symptoms and signs vary by site. Diagnosis is by clinical
appearance and potassium hydroxide wet mount of skin scrapings. Treatment is with drying
agents and antifungals.
Most candidal infections are of the skin and mucous membranes, but invasive candidiasis is common in
immunosuppressed patients and can be life threatening. Systemic candidiasis is discussed in
Chapter 142
.
Etiology
Candida
is a group of about 150 yeast species.
C. albicans
is responsible for about 70 to 80% of all
candidal infections. Other significant species include
C. glabrata
,
C. tropicalis
,
C. krusei
, and
C.
dubliniensis
.
Candida
is a ubiquitous yeast that resides harmlessly on skin and mucous membranes until dampness,
heat, and impaired local and systemic defenses provide a fertile environment for it to grow. Risk factors
for candidiasis include
• Hot weather
• Restrictive clothing
• Poor hygiene
• Infrequent diaper or undergarment changes in children and elderly patients
• Altered flora from antibiotic therapy
• Inflammatory diseases (eg, psoriasis) that occur in skinfolds
• Immunosuppression resulting from corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs, pregnancy, diabetes,
other endocrinopathies (eg, Cushing's disease, hypoadrenalism, hypothyroidism), blood dyscrasias, or
T-cell defects
Candidiasis occurs most commonly in intertriginous areas such as the axillae, groin, and gluteal folds (eg,
diaper rash—see
Plate 30
), in digital web spaces, in the glans penis, and beneath the breasts. Vulvovaginal candidiasis is
common in women (. Candidal nail infections and paronychia may develop after improperly
done manicures and in kitchen workers and others whose hands are continually exposed to water (. In obese people, candidal infections may occur beneath the pannus (abdominal fold).
Oropharyngeal candidiasis (see
Plate 32
) is a common sign of local or systemic immunosuppression.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis typically affects the nails, skin, and oropharynx. Patients have
cutaneous anergy to
Candida
, absent proliferative responses to
Candida
antigen (but normal proliferative
responses to mitogens), and an intact antibody response to
Candida
and other antigens. Chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis may occur as an autosomal recessive illness associated with
===PAGE:833===
hypoparathyroidism and Addison's disease (
Candida
-endocrinopathy syndrome).
Symptoms and Signs
Intertriginous infections manifest as pruritic, well-demarcated, erythematous patches of varying size and
shape; erythema may be difficult to detect in darker-skinned patients. Primary patches may have adjacent
satellite papules and pustules. Perianal candidiasis produces white maceration and pruritus ani.
Vulvovaginal candidiasis causes pruritus and discharge (.
Candidal infection is a frequent cause of chronic paronychia, which manifests as painful red periungual
swelling. Subungual infections are characterized by distal separation of one or several fingernails
(onycholysis), with white or yellow discoloration of the subungual area (.
Oropharyngeal candidiasis causes white plaques on oral mucous membranes that may bleed when
scraped.
Perleche is candidiasis at the corners of the mouth, which causes cracks and tiny fissures. It may stem
from chronic lip licking, thumb sucking, ill-fitting dentures, or other conditions that make the corners of the
mouth moist enough that yeast can grow.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis is characterized by red, pustular, crusted, and thickened plaques
resembling psoriasis, especially on the nose and forehead, and is invariably associated with chronic oral
candidiasis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical appearance
• Potassium hydroxide wet mounts
Diagnosis is based on clinical appearance and identification of yeast and pseudohyphae in potassium
hydroxide wet mounts of scrapings from a lesion. Positive culture is usually meaningless because
Candida
is omnipresent.
Treatment
• Sometimes drying agents
• Topical or oral antifungals
Intertriginous infection
is treated with drying agents as needed (eg, Burow's solution for oozing lesions,
gentian violet for toe web spaces) and topical antifungals (see
Table 82-1
). Powdered formulations are ideal for dry lesions (eg, miconazole powder bid for 2 to 3 wk).
Fluconazole 150 mg po once/wk for 2 to 4 wk is indicated for extensive intertriginous candidiasis; topical
antifungal agents may be used at the same time.
Candidal diaper rash
is treated with more frequent change of diapers, avoidance of disposable diapers
with plastic coverings, and an imidazole cream bid. Oral nystatin is an option for infants with coexisting
oropharyngeal candidiasis; 1 mL of suspension (100,000 units/mL) is placed in each buccal pouch qid.
Candidal paronychia
is treated by protecting the area from wetness and giving topical or oral
antifungals. These infections are often resistant to treatment.
Oral candidiasis
is treated with fluconazole 200 mg po on the first day, then 100 mg po once/day for 2 to
3 wk thereafter.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
requires long-term oral antifungal treatment with ketoconazole
400 mg once/day or itraconazole 200 mg once/day.
===PAGE:834===
[Table 82-1.
Options for Treatment of Superficial Fungal Infections*]
Dermatophytoses
Dermatophytoses are fungal infections of keratin in the skin and nails (nail infection is called
tinea unguium—. Symptoms and signs vary by site of infection. Diagnosis is by
clinical appearance and by examination of skin scrapings on potassium hydroxide wet mount.
Treatment varies by site but always involves topical or oral antifungal drugs.
Dermatophytes are molds that require keratin for nutrition and must live on stratum corneum, hair, or nails
to survive. Human infections are caused by
Epidermophyton
,
Microsporum
, and
Trichophyton
spp. These
infections differ from candidiasis in that they are rarely if ever invasive. Transmission is person-to-person,
animal-to-person, and rarely, soil-to-person. The organism may persist indefinitely. Most people do not
develop clinical infection; those who do may have impaired T-cell responses from an alteration in local
defenses (eg, from trauma with vascular compromise) or from primary (hereditary) or secondary (eg,
diabetes, HIV) immunosuppression.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary by site (skin, hair, nails). Organism virulence and host susceptibility
and
hypersensitivity determine severity. Most often, there is little or no inflammation; asymptomatic or mildly
itching lesions with a scaling, slightly raised border remit and recur intermittently. Occasionally,
inflammation is more severe and manifests as sudden vesicular or bullous disease (usually of the foot) or
as an inflamed boggy lesion of the scalp (kerion).
Diagnosis
• Clinical appearance
• Potassium hydroxide wet mount
Diagnosis is based on clinical appearance and site of infection and confirmed by skin scrapings and
demonstration of hyphae on potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet mount. Identification of specific organisms
by culture is unnecessary except for scalp infection (where an animal source may be identified and
treated) and nail infection (which may be caused by a nondermatophyte). Culture may also be useful
when overlying inflammation and bacterial infection are severe and/or accompanied by alopecia.
Differential diagnosis includes
• Folliculitis decalvans
• Bacterial pyodermas
• Entities that cause scarring alopecia, such as discoid lupus, lichen planopilaris, and pseudopelade
Treatment
• Topical or oral antifungals
• Sometimes corticosteroids
Topical antifungals are generally adequate (see
Table 82-1
). In general, OTC terbinafine is best;
econazole or ciclopirox may be better if candidal infection cannot be excluded. Oral antifungals are used
for most nail and scalp infections, resistant skin infections, and patients unwilling or unable to adhere to
prolonged topical regimens; doses and duration differ by site of infection.
Corticosteroid creams can be used to help relieve itching and pain for the first few days. Low-dose
===PAGE:835===
hydrocortisone can be applied separately, or more potent corticosteroids may be added to the antifungal
cream. Oral corticosteroids are occasionally used for treatment of severe inflammatory lesions.
Tinea Barbae
(Barber's Itch)
Tinea barbae is a dermatophyte infection of the beard area most often caused by
Trichophyton
mentagrophytes
or
T. verrucosum
.
Tinea barbae manifests as superficial annular lesions, but deeper infection similar to folliculitis may occur.
It may also occur as an inflammatory kerion that can result in scarring hair loss. Diagnosis is by KOH wet
mount, culture, or biopsy.
Treatment is micronized griseofulvin 500 mg to 1 g po once/day until 2 to 3 wk after clinical clearance.
Terbinafine 250 mg po once/day and itraconazole 200 mg po once/day have also been used. If the
lesions are severely inflamed, a short course of prednisone should be added (to lessen symptoms and
perhaps reduce the chance of scarring), starting with 40 mg po once/day (for adults) and tapering the
dose over 2 wk.
Tinea Capitis
(Scalp Ringworm)
Tinea capitis is a dermatophyte infection of the scalp.
Tinea capitis mainly affects children, is contagious, and can be epidemic.
T. tonsurans
is the most
common cause in the US, followed by
Microsporum canis
and
M. audouinii
; other
Trichophyton
sp (eg,
T.
schoenleinii
,
T. violaceum
) are common elsewhere.
Tinea capitis causes the gradual appearance of round patches of dry scale, alopecia, or both.
T.
tonsurans
infection causes "black dot ringworm," in which hair shafts break at the scalp surface;
M.
audouinii
infection causes "gray patch ringworm," in which hair shafts break above the surface, leaving
short stubs. Tinea capitis less commonly manifests as diffuse scaling, like dandruff, or in a diffuse
pustular pattern.
Kerion:
Dermatophyte infection occasionally leads to formation of a kerion, which is a large, boggy,
inflammatory scalp mass (see
Plate 48
) caused by a severe inflammatory reaction to the dermatophyte. A kerion may have pustules and
crusting and can be mistaken for an abscess. A kerion may result in scarring hair loss.
Diagnosis
• Clinical appearance
• KOH wet mount
• Sometimes Wood's light examination
Tinea capitis is diagnosed by clinical appearance and by KOH wet mount of plucked hairs or of hairs and
scale obtained by scraping or brushing. Spore size and appearance inside (endothrix) or outside
(ectothrix) the hair shaft distinguish organisms and can help
guide treatment. Blue-green fluorescence
during Wood's light examination is diagnostic for infection with
M. canis
and
M. audouinii
and can
distinguish tinea from erythrasma.
Differential diagnosis of tinea capitis includes
• Seborrheic dermatitis
===PAGE:836===
• Psoriasis
Treatment
• Oral antifungals
• Selenium sulfide shampoo
• Sometimes prednisone
Children are treated with micronized griseofulvin suspension 10 to 20 mg/kg po once/day (doses vary by
several parameters, but maximum dose is generally 1 g/day) or, if > 2 yr, with ultramicronized griseofulvin
5 to 10 mg/kg (maximum 750 mg/day) po once/day or in 2 divided doses with meals or milk for 4 to 6 wk
or until all signs of infection are gone. Terbinafine also may be used; children < 20 kg are given 62.5 mg
once/day; those 20 to 40 kg, 125 mg once/day, and those > 40 kg, 250 mg once/day. An imidazole or
ciclopirox cream should be applied to the scalp to prevent spread, especially to other children, until tinea
capitis is cured; selenium sulfide 2.5% shampoo should also be used at least twice/wk. Children may
attend school during treatment.
Adults are treated with terbinafine 250 mg po once/day for 2 to 4 wk, which is more effective for endothrix
infections, or itraconazole 200 mg once/day for 2 to 4 wk or 200 mg bid given for 1 wk, followed by 3 wk
without the drug (pulsed) for 2 to 3 mo.
For severely inflamed lesions and for kerion, a short course of prednisone should be added (to lessen
symptoms and perhaps reduce the chance of scarring), starting with 40 mg po once/day (1 mg/kg for
children) and tapering the dose over 2 wk.
Tinea Corporis
(Body Ringworm)
Tinea corporis is a dermatophyte infection of the face, trunk, and extremities.
Common causes are
T. mentagrophytes
,
T. rubrum
, and
M. canis
.
Tinea corporis causes pink-to-red annular patches and plaques with raised scaly borders that expand
peripherally and tend to clear centrally (see
Plate 49
). A variant form appears as nummular scaling patches studded with small papules or pustules.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Differential diagnosis includes
• Pityriasis rosea
• Drug eruptions
• Nummular dermatitis
• Erythema multiforme
• Tinea versicolor
• Erythrasma
===PAGE:837===
• Psoriasis
• Secondary syphilis
Treatment
• Topical or oral antifungals
Treatment of mild-to-moderate lesions is an imidazole, ciclopirox, naftifine, or terbinafine in cream, lotion,
or gel. The drug should be rubbed in bid continuing at least 7 to 10 days after lesions disappear, typically
at about 2 to 3 wk.
Extensive and resistant lesions occur in patients infected with
T. rubrum
and in people with debilitating
systemic diseases. For such cases, the most effective therapy is oral itraconazole 200 mg once/day or
terbinafine 250 mg once/day for 2 to 3 wk.
Tinea Cruris
(Jock Itch)
Tinea cruris is a dermatophyte infection of the groin.
Common organisms include
T. rubrum
or
T. mentagrophytes
. The primary risk factors are associated with
a moist environment (ie, warm weather, wet and restrictive clothing, obesity causing constant apposition
of skin folds). Men are affected more than women because of apposition of the scrotum and thigh.
Typically, a pruritic, ringed lesion extends from the crural fold over the adjacent upper inner thigh (see
Plate 50
). Infection may be bilateral. Lesions may be complicated by maceration, miliaria, secondary
bacterial or candidal infection, and reactions to treatment. In addition, scratch dermatitis and
lichenification can occur. Recurrence is common because fungi may repeatedly infect susceptible people.
Flare-ups occur more often during summer.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Differential diagnosis includes
• Contact dermatitis
• Psoriasis
• Erythrasma
• Candidiasis
Scrotal involvement is usually absent or slight; by contrast, the scrotum is often inflamed in candidal
intertrigo or lichen simplex chronicus.
Treatment
• Topical antifungal cream or lotion
Antifungal choices include terbinafine, miconazole, clotrimazole, ketoconazole, econazole, naftifine, and
ciclopirox applied bid for 10 to 14 days. Itraconazole 200 mg po once/day or terbinafine 250 mg po
once/day for 3 to 6 wk may be needed in patients who have refractory, inflammatory, or widespread
infections.
===PAGE:838===
Tinea Pedis
(Athlete's Foot)
Tinea pedis is a dermatophyte infection of the feet.
Tinea pedis is the most common dermatophytosis because moisture from foot sweating facilitates fungal
growth. Tinea pedis may occur as any of 4 clinical forms or in combination:
• Chronic hyperkeratotic
• Chronic intertriginous
• Acute ulcerative
• Vesiculobullous
Chronic hyperkeratotic
tinea pedis due to
T. rubrum
causes a distinctive pattern of lesion, manifesting
as scaling and thickening of the soles, which often extends beyond the plantar surface in a moccasin
distribution. Differential diagnosis is sterile maceration (due to hyperhidrosis and occlusive footgear),
contact dermatitis (due to type IV delayed hypersensitivity to various materials in shoes, particularly
adhesive cement, thiuram compounds in footwear that contains rubber, and chromate tanning agents
used in leather footwear), irritant dermatitis, and psoriasis.
Chronic intertriginous
tinea pedis is characterized by scaling, erythema, and erosion of the interdigital
and subdigital skin of the feet, most commonly affecting the lateral 3 toes.
Acute ulcerative
tinea pedis (most often caused by
T. mentagrophytes
var.
interdigitale
) typically begins
in the 3rd and 4th interdigital spaces and extends to the lateral dorsum and/or the plantar surface of the
arch. These toe web lesions are usually macerated and have scaling borders (see
Plate 51
). Secondary bacterial infection, cellulitis, and lymphangitis are common complications.
Vesiculobullous
tinea pedis, in which vesicles develop on the soles and coalesce into bullae, is the less
common result of a flare of interdigital tinea pedis; risk factors are occlusive shoes and environmental
heat and humidity.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually obvious based on clinical examination and review of risk factors.
Treatment
• Moisture reduction and drying agents
• Topical and oral antifungals
The safest treatment is topical antifungals, but recurrence is common and treatment must often be
prolonged. Alternatives that provide a more durable response include itraconazole 200 mg po once/day
for 1 mo (or pulse therapy with 200 mg bid 1 wk/mo for 1 to 2 mo) and terbinafine 250 mg po once/day for
2 to 6 wk. Concomitant topical antifungal use may reduce recurrences.
Moisture reduction on the feet and in footwear is necessary for preventing recurrence. Permeable or
open-toe footwear and sock changes are important especially during warm weather. Interdigital spaces
should be manually dried after bathing. Drying agents are also recommended; options include antifungal
powders (eg, miconazole), gentian violet, Burow's solution (5% aluminum sub-acetate) soaks bid, and 20
to 25% aluminum chloride hexahydrate powder once/day.
Dermatophytid Reaction
===PAGE:839===
Dermatophytid is an inflammatory reaction to dermatophytosis at a cutaneous site distant from
the primary infection.
Dermatophytid (identity or id) reactions are protean; they are not related to localized growth of the fungus
but rather are an inflammatory reaction elsewhere on the body. Lesions are typically pruritic but may
manifest as
• Vesicular eruptions on the hands and feet
• Follicular papules
• Erysipelas-like plaques
• Erythema nodosum
• Erythema annulare centrifugum
• Urticaria
Distribution may be extensive.
Diagnosis is by KOH wet mounts that are negative at the site of the id reaction and positive at the distant
site of dermatophyte infection.
Treatment of the primary infection cures dermatophytid; pending cure, topical corticosteroids and/or
antipruritics (eg, hydroxyzine 25 mg qid) can be used to relieve symptoms.
Intertrigo
Intertrigo is skinfold changes caused by moisture and infection.
Intertrigo develops when friction and trapped moisture in intertriginous areas cause skin maceration with
formation of patches or plaques; bacterial, yeast, and dermatophyte infection is common. Typical
locations are the inframammary, infrapannicular, interdigital, axillary, infragluteal, and genitocrural folds.
Diagnosis is based on clinical appearance; potassium hydroxide wet mounts and cultures can guide
treatment.
If no bacteria or yeast are detected, drying agents (powders such as talc rather than cornstarch, which
can support fungal growth, Burow's solution) to decrease moisture should be therapeutic. If bacteria or
yeasts are present, topical antibacterial lotions or antifungal creams are given in addition to drying
agents.
Tinea Versicolor
(Pityriasis Versicolor)
Tinea versicolor is skin infection with
Malassezia furfur
that manifests as multiple asymptomatic
scaly patches varying in color from white to brown. Diagnosis is based on clinical appearance
and skin scrapings. Treatment is topical antifungals.
Malassezia furfur
is a dimorphic fungus that is normally a harmless component of normal skin flora but
that in some people causes tinea versicolor. The high prevalence of tinea versi-color in young adults
suggests a link to increased sebaceous secretions; other risk factors include heat and humidity and
immunosuppression due to corticosteroids, pregnancy, undernutrition, diabetes, and other disorders.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:840===
Tinea versicolor usually is asymptomatic. Classically, it causes the appearance of multiple tan, brown,
salmon, or white scaling lesions (see
Plate 52
) on the trunk, neck, abdomen, and occasionally face. The lesions coalesce. In whites, the
condition is often diagnosed in summer months because the lesions, which do not tan, become more
obvious against tanned skin.
Diagnosis
• Clinical appearance
• Potassium hydroxide wet mount
• Sometimes Wood's light examination
Diagnosis is based on clinical appearance and by identification of hyphae and budding cells ("spaghetti
and meatballs") on potassium hydroxide wet mount. Wood's light examination reveals golden-white
fluorescence.
Treatment
• Topical antifungals
• Sometimes oral antifungals
Treatment is any topical antifungal drug. Examples include selenium sulfide shampoo 2.5% (in 10-min
applications daily for 1 wk or 24-h applications weekly for 1 mo); topical azoles (eg, ketoconazole 2%
daily for 2 wk); and bathing with zinc pyrithione soap 2% or sulfur-salicylic shampoo 2% for 1 to 2 wk.
Oral treatment is indicated for patients with extensive disease and those with frequent recurrences. Two
convenient regimens are a single 400-mg dose of fluconazole and ketoconazole 200 mg once/day for 1 to
5 days.
Hypopigmentation from tinea versicolor is reversible in months to years after the yeast has cleared.
Recurrence is almost universal after treatment because the causative organism is a normal skin
inhabitant. Fastidious hygiene, regular use of zinc pyrithione soap, or once-monthly use of topical
antifungal therapy lowers the likelihood of recurrence.
===PAGE:841===
Chapter 83. Parasitic Skin Infections
Introduction
Parasitic skin infections can cause severe itching and be distressing. Most skin parasites are insects or
worms that burrow into the skin for part or all of their life cycle. Also, some systemic parasitic infections
have cutaneous manifestations; these include certain nematodes (ancylostomiasis, dracunculosis,
strongyloidiasis, toxocariasis— and flukes (schistosomiasis—. Very rarely,
patients have delusional parasitosis.
Cutaneous Larva Migrans
(Creeping Eruption)
Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is the skin manifestation of hookworm infestation.
CLM is caused by
Ancylostoma
sp, most commonly dog or cat hookworm
Ancylostoma braziliense
.
Hookworm ova in dog or cat feces develop into infective larvae when left in warm moist ground or sand;
transmission occurs when skin directly contacts contaminated soil or sand and larvae penetrate
unprotected skin, usually of the feet, legs, buttocks, or back. CLM occurs worldwide but most commonly
in tropical environments.
CLM causes intense pruritus; signs are erythema and papules at the site of entry, with a winding,
threadlike subcutaneous trail of reddish-brown inflammation. Diagnosis is by history and clinical
appearance.
Topical thiabendazole 15% liquid or cream (compounded) bid to tid for 5 days is extremely effective. Oral
thiabendazole is not well tolerated and not usually used. Albendazole (400 mg po once/day for 7 days)
and ivermectin can cure the infestation and are well tolerated.
CLM may be complicated by a self-limiting pulmonary reaction called Loffler's syndrome (patchy
pulmonary infiltrates and peripheral blood eosinophilia).
Cutaneous Myiasis
Cutaneous myiasis is skin infestation by the larvae of certain fly species.
Myiasis involves the larvae of two-winged (dipterous) flies. Three types of cutaneous infestation exist,
depending on the species involved:
• Furuncular
• Wound
• Migratory
Other organs sometimes are involved (eg, nasopharynx, GI tract, GU tract). Infestation usually occurs in
tropical countries, so most cases in the US occur in people who have recently arrived from endemic
areas.
Furuncular myiasis:
Many of the common sources are known as bot flies.
Dermatobia hominis
, native
to South and Central America, is the most common cause in travelers returning to the US. Other species
include
Cordylobia anthropophaga
(in sub-Saharan Africa), and various
Cuterebra
sp (in tropical Africa).
Many of the flies do not lay their eggs on humans but on other insects (eg, mosquitoes) or objects (eg,
drying laundry) that may contact skin. Eggs on the skin hatch into larvae, which burrow into the skin and
develop through successive stages (instars) into mature larvae; mature larvae may be 1 to 2 cm long,
depending on the species. If the infestation is untreated, larvae eventually emerge from the skin and drop
===PAGE:842===
to the ground to continue their life cycle.
Typical symptoms include itching, a sensation of movement, and sometimes lancinating pain. The initial
lesion may resemble an arthropod bite or bacterial furuncle but may be distinguished by the presence of a
central punctum with serosanguineous drainage; sometimes a small portion of the end of the larva is
visible.
Because larvae require atmospheric O
, occlusion of the skin opening may cause them to depart or at
least come closer to the surface, facilitating manual removal. The numerous occlusal methods include use
of petrolatum, nail polish, bacon, or a paste of tobacco. However, larvae that die during occlusion are
difficult to remove and often trigger an intense inflammatory reaction. Other options for removal include
manual expression (ie, squeezing) and extraction through a small incision. Ivermectin, oral (200
μ
g/kg,
one dose) or topical, may kill the larvae or induce migration.
Wound myiasis:
Open wounds, typically in the homeless, alcoholics, and other people in poor social
circumstances, may be infested by fly larvae, most often from green or black blowflies. Unlike larvae of
common houseflies, most agents of wound myiasis invade healthy as well as necrotic tissue. Treatment is
usually with irrigation and manual debridement.
Migratory myiasis:
The most common agents are
Gasterophilus intestinalis
and
Hypoderma
sp. These
flies typically infest horses and cattle; people acquire them via contact with infested animals or, less often,
via direct egg-laying on their skin. Larvae of these agents burrow under the skin, causing pruritic,
advancing lesions, which may be mistaken for cutaneous larva migrans; however, fly larvae are much
larger than nematodes, and the lesions created by fly larvae last longer. Treatment is similar to that of
furuncular myiasis.
Delusional Parasitosis
In delusional parasitosis, patients mistakenly believe that they are infested with parasites.
Patients have an unshakable belief that they are infested with insects, worms, mites, lice, or other
organisms. They often provide vivid descriptions of how the organisms enter their skin and move around
their bodies, and bring samples of hair, skin, and debris such as dried scabs, dust, and lint on slides or in
containers (the matchbox sign) to prove that the infestation is real. The condition is considered a
hypochondriacal psychosis, but the cause is unknown.
Diagnosis is suspected by history. Work-up requires ruling out true infestations and other physiologic
disease by physical examination and judicious testing, such as skin scrapings and CBC.
Treatment is with antipsychotic drugs (. Typically, the patient seeks confirmation that the drug
treats the infestation itself, and any suggestion that the treatment is for something else is met with
resistance and/or rejection. Thus, effective treatment often requires diplomacy and a delicate balance
between offering proper treatment and respecting the patient's right to know.
Lice
(Pediculosis)
Lice can infect the scalp, body, pubis, and eyelashes. Head lice are transmitted by close
contact; body lice, in cramped, crowded conditions; and pubic lice, by sexual contact.
Symptoms, signs, diagnosis, and treatment differ by location of infestation.
Lice are wingless, blood-sucking insects that infest the head (
Pediculus humanus
var.
capitis
), body (
P.
humanus
var.
corporis
), or pubis (
Phthirus pubis
). The 3 kinds of lice differ substantially in morphology
and clinical features. Head lice and pubic lice live directly on the host; body lice live in garments. All types
occur worldwide.
Head lice:
Head lice are most common in girls aged 5 to 11 but can affect almost anyone; infestations
===PAGE:843===
are rare in blacks. Head lice are easily transmitted from person to person with close contact (as occurs
within households and classrooms) and may be ejected from hair by static electricity or wind; transmission
by these routes (or by sharing of combs, brushes, and hats) is likely but unproven. There is no
association between head lice and poor hygiene or low socioeconomic status.
Infestation typically involves the hair and scalp, but the eyebrows, eyelashes, and beard may be involved
as well. Active infection usually involves ≤ 20 lice and causes severe pruritus. Examination is most often
normal but may reveal scalp excoriations and posterior cervical adenopathy.
Diagnosis depends on demonstration of living lice. Lice are detected by a thorough combing-through of
wet hair from the scalp with a fine-tooth detection comb; lice are usually found at the back of the head or
behind the ears. Nits are ovoid, grayish white eggs fixed to the base of hair shafts (see
Plate 38
). Each adult female louse lays 3 to 5 eggs/day, so nits typically vastly outnumber lice and are not
a measure of severity of infestation.
Treatment is outlined in
Table 83-1
. Drug resistance is common and should be managed with use of oral ivermectin and by
attempting to rotate pediculicides. Termination of live (viable) nits is important in preventing reinfestation;
live nits fluoresce on illumination with a Wood's lamp. Most pediculicides also kill nits. Dead nits remain
after successful treatment and do not signify active infection; they do not have to be removed. Nits grow
away from the scalp with time; the absence of nits less than one fourth of an inch from the scalp rules out
current active infection. Hot air has been shown to kill > 88% of eggs but has been variably effective in
killing hatched lice. Thirty minutes of hot air, slightly cooler than a blow drier, may be an effective
adjunctive measure to treat head lice.
Controversy surrounds the need to clean the personal items of people with lice or nits and the need to
exclude children with head lice or nits from school; there are no conclusive data supporting either
approach.
Body lice:
Body lice primarily live on bedding and clothing, not people, and are most frequently found in
cramped, crowded conditions (eg, military barracks) and in people of low socioeconomic status.
Transmission is by sharing of contaminated clothing and bedding. Body lice are important vectors of
epidemic typhus, trench fever, and relapsing fever.
Body lice cause pruritus; signs are small red puncta caused by bites, usually associated with linear
scratch marks, urticaria, or superficial bacterial infection. These findings are especially common on the
shoulders, buttocks, and abdomen. Nits may be present on body hairs.
Diagnosis is by demonstration of lice and nits in clothing, especially at the seams.
Primary treatment is thorough cleaning or replacement of clothing and bedding, which is often difficult
because affected people often have few resources and little control over their environment.
[Table 83-1.
Treatment Options for Scabies and Lice]
Pubic lice:
Pubic lice ("crabs") are sexually transmitted in adolescents and adults and may be transmitted
to children by close parental contact. They may also be transmitted by fomites (towels, bedding, clothing).
They most commonly infest pubic and perianal hairs but may spread to thighs, trunk, and facial hair
(beard, mustache, and, in children, eyelashes).
Pubic lice cause pruritus. Physical signs are few, but some patients have excoriations and regional
lymphadenopathy and/or lymphadenitis. Pale, bluish gray skin macules (maculae caeruleae) on the trunk,
buttocks, and thighs are caused by anticoagulant activity of louse saliva while feeding; they are unusual
but characteristic of infestation. Eyelash infestation manifests as eye itching, burning, and irritation.
Diagnosis is by demonstration of nits and/or living lice by close inspection (Wood's light) or microscopic
analysis. A supporting sign of infestation is scattering of dark brown specks (louse excreta) on skin or
undergarments.
===PAGE:844===
Treatment is outlined in
Table 83-1
. Treatment of eyelid and eyelash infestation is often difficult and
involves use of petrolatum, physostigmine ointment, oral ivermectin, or physical removal of lice with
forceps. Sex partners should also be treated.
Scabies
Scabies is an infestation of the skin with the mite
Sarcoptes scabiei
. Scabies causes intensely
pruritic lesions with erythematous papules and burrows in web spaces, wrists, waistline, and
genitals. Diagnosis is based on examination and scrapings. Treatment is with topical scabicides
or, rarely, oral ivermectin.
Etiology
Scabies is caused by the mite
Sarcoptes scabiei
var.
hominis
, an obligate human parasite that lives in
burrowed tunnels in the stratum corneum. Scabies is easily transmitted from person to person through
physical contact; animal and fomite transmission probably also occurs. The primary risk factor is crowded
conditions (as in schools, shelters, barracks, and some households); there is no clear association with
poor hygiene. For unknown reasons, crusted scabies is more common in immunosuppressed patients
(eg, those with HIV infection, hematologic cancer, chronic corticosteroid or other immunosuppressant
use), patients with severe physical disabilities or intellectual disability, and Australian Aborigines.
Infestations occur worldwide. Patients in warm climates develop small
erythematous papules with few
burrows. Severity is related to the patient's immune status, not geography.
Symptoms and Signs
The primary symptom is intense pruritus, classically worse at night, although that timing is not specific to
scabies.
Classic scabies:
Erythematous papules initially appear in finger web spaces, flexor surfaces of the wrist
and elbow, axillary folds, along the belt line, or on the lower buttocks. Papules can spread to any area of
the body, including the breasts and penis. The face remains uninvolved in adults. Burrows are
pathognomonic for disease, manifesting as fine, wavy, and slightly scaly lines several mm to 1 cm long. A
tiny dark papule—the mite—is often visible at one end.
Signs of classic scabies may be atypical. In blacks and other people with dark skin, scabies can manifest
as granulomatous nodules. In infants, the palms, soles, face, and scalp may be involved, especially in the
posterior auricular folds. In elderly patients, scabies can cause intense pruritus with subtle skin findings,
making it a challenge to diagnose. In immunocompromised patients, there may be widespread nonpruritic
scaling (particularly on the palms and soles in adults and on the scalp in children).
Other forms:
Crusted (Norwegian) scabies is due to an impaired host immune response, allowing mites
to proliferate and number in the millions. Nodular scabies is more common in infants and young children
and may be due to hypersensitivity to retained organisms. Bullous scabies occurs more commonly in
children. When it occurs in the elderly, it can mimic bullous pemphigoid, resulting in a delay in diagnosis.
Scalp scabies occurs in infants and immunocompromised people and can mimic dermatitis, particularly
atopic or seborrheic dermatitis. Scabies incognito is a widespread atypical form resulting from application
of topical corticosteroids.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Burrow scrapings
Diagnosis is suspected by physical findings, especially burrows, and confirmed by mites, ova, or fecal
pellets on microscopic examination of burrow scrapings. Scrapings should be obtained by placing
glycerol, mineral oil, or immersion oil over a burrow or papule (to prevent dispersion of mites and material
===PAGE:845===
during scraping), which is then unroofed with the edge of a scalpel. The material is then placed on a slide
and covered with a coverslip; potassium hydroxide should be avoided because it dissolves fecal pellets.
Treatment
• Topical permethrin or lindane
• Sometimes oral ivermectin
Primary treatment is topical or oral scabicides (see
Table 83-1
). Permethrin is the 1st-line topical drug.
Older children and adults should apply permethrin or lindane to the entire body from the neck down and
wash it off after 8 to 14 h. Treatments should be repeated in 7 days.
For infants and young children, permethrin should be applied to the head and neck, avoiding periorbital
and perioral regions. Special attention should be given to intertriginous areas, fingernails, toenails, and
the umbilicus. Mittens on infants can keep permethrin out of the mouth. Lindane is not recommended in
children < 2 yr and in patients with a seizure disorder because of potential neurotoxicity.
Precipitated sulfur 6 to 10% in petrolatum, applied for 24 h for 3 consecutive days, is safe and effective.
Ivermectin is indicated for patients who do not respond to topical treatment, are unable to adhere to
topical regimens, or are immunocompromised with Norwegian scabies. Ivermectin has been used with
success in epidemics involving close contacts, such as nursing homes.
Close contacts should also be treated, and personal items (eg, towels, clothing, bedding) should be
washed or isolated for at least 3 days.
Pruritus can be treated with corticosteroid ointments and/or oral antihistamines (eg, hydroxyzine 25 mg po
qid). Secondary infection should be considered in patients with weeping, yellow-crusted lesions and
treated with the appropriate systemic or topical antistaphylococcal or antistreptococcal antibiotic.
Symptoms and lesions take up to 3 wk to resolve despite killing of the mites, making failed treatment due
to resistance, poor penetration, incompletely applied therapy, reinfection, or nodular scabies difficult to
recognize. Skin scrapings can be done periodically to check for persistent scabies.
===PAGE:846===
Chapter 84. Viral Skin Diseases
Introduction
Many systemic viral infections cause skin lesions. Molluscum contagiosum and warts are the 2 most
common primary viral skin diseases without systemic manifestations. Herpes simplex virus infection is
discussed elsewhere.
Molluscum Contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum is clusters of smooth, waxy, or pearly umbilicated papules 1 to 5 mm in
diameter caused by molluscum contagiosum virus, a poxvirus.
Molluscum contagiosum virus commonly causes a localized chronic infection. Transmission is by direct
contact; spread occurs by autoinoculation and via fomites (eg, towels, bath sponges).
Symptoms and Signs
Molluscum contagiosum can appear anywhere on the skin except the palms and soles. Lesions consist of
clusters of flesh-colored papules, which occur most commonly on the face, trunk, and extremities in
children and on the pubis, penis, or vulva in adults. Lesions may grow to 10 to 15 mm in diameter,
especially among patients with HIV infection and other immunocompromised patients. Lesions are usually
not pruritic or painful and may be discovered only coincidentally during a physical examination. However,
the lesions can become inflamed and itchy as the body fights off the virus.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on clinical appearance; hematoxylin and eosin staining of expressed fluid
demonstrates inclusion bodies but is necessary only when diagnosis is uncertain. Differential diagnosis
includes folliculitis, milia, and warts (for lesions < 2 mm) and juvenile xanthogranuloma and Spitz nevus
(for lesions > 2 mm).
Treatment
• Curettage, cryosurgery, laser therapy, or electrocautery
• Topical irritants (eg, trichloroacetic acid, cantharidin, tretinoin, tazarotene), imiquimod, or both
• Sometimes combination therapies
Most lesions spontaneously regress in 1 to 2 yr, but they can remain for 2 to 3 yr. Treatment is indicated
for cosmetic reasons or for prevention of sexual spread. Options include curettage, cryosurgery, laser
therapy, electrocautery, trichloroacetic acid (25 to 40% solution), cantharidin, tretinoin, tazarotene and
imiquimod 5% cream. Especially in children, treatments that cause minimal pain (eg, tretinoin, imiquimod,
tazarotene, cantharidin) are used first. Curettage or liquid nitrogen can be used after application of a
topical anesthetic such as EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) or 4% lidocaine cream. EMLA
cream must be applied judiciously because it can cause systemic toxicity, especially in children. In adults,
curettage is very effective but painful. Dermatologists often use combination therapy such as liquid
nitrogen or cantharidin in the office and imiquimod cream at home. This form of therapy is typically
successful, but resolution often takes 1 to 2 mo in some patients.
Nondermatologists should feel comfortable using imiquimod cream. The cream is applied at night, 1 drop
to each molluscum lesion and rubbed in well, until the cream turns clear. The area is washed with soap
and water. The cream can be applied 3 to 7 times/wk. Molluscum lesions within the orbital rim should not
be treated, and those in the genital region can easily become irritated. Lesions should be treated until
they develop a scant amount of redness; treatment is then withheld to avoid weeping and crusting.
===PAGE:847===
Cantharidin is safe and effective but can cause blistering. Cantharidin is applied in 1 small drop directly to
the molluscum lesion. Areas that patients (especially children) may rub are covered with a bandage
because contact with the fingers should be avoided. Cantharidin should not be applied to the face or near
the eyes because blistering is unpredictable. If cantharidin comes into contact with the cornea, it can scar
the cornea. Cantharidin should be washed off with soap and water in 6 h. Parents should be warned
about blistering if their children are prescribed this drug.
Warts
(Verrucae Vulgaris)
Warts are common, benign epidermal lesions caused by human papillomavirus infection.
They
can appear anywhere on the body in a variety of morphologies. Diagnosis is by examination.
Warts are usually self limited but may be treated by excision, cautery, cryotherapy, liquid
nitrogen, and topical or injected agents.
Warts are almost universal in the population; they affect all ages but are most common among children
and are uncommon among the elderly.
Etiology
Warts are caused by human papillomavirus (HPV) infection; there are over 100 HPV subtypes. Trauma
and maceration facilitate initial epidermal inoculation. Spread may then occur by autoinoculation. Local
and systemic immune factors appear to influence spread; immunosuppressed patients (especially those
with HIV infection or a renal transplant) are at particular risk of developing generalized lesions that are
difficult to treat. Humoral immunity provides resistance to HPV infection; cellular immunity helps
established infection to regress.
Symptoms and Signs
Warts are named by their clinical appearance and location; different forms are linked to different HPV
types (for unusual manifestations, see
Table 84-1
).
Common warts:
Common warts (verrucae vulgaris) are caused by HPV 1, 2, 4, 27, and 29. They are
usually asymptomatic but sometimes cause mild pain, especially when they are located on a weightbearing surface (eg, bottom of the feet). They are sharply demarcated, rough, round or irregular, firm, and
light gray, yellow, brown, or gray-black nodules 2 to 10 mm in diameter. They appear most often on sites
subject to trauma (eg, fingers, elbows, knees, face) but may spread elsewhere. Variants of unusual shape
(eg, pedunculated or resembling a cauliflower) appear most frequently on the head and neck, especially
the scalp and beard area.
Filiform warts:
These warts are long, narrow, frondlike growths, usually located on the eyelids, face,
neck, or lips. They are usually asymptomatic. This morphologically distinct variant of the common wart is
benign and easy to treat.
Flat warts:
Flat warts, caused by HPV 3, 10, 28, and 49, are smooth, flat-topped, yellow-brown papules,
most often located on the face and along scratch marks; they are more common among children and
young adults and develop by autoinoculation. They generally cause no symptoms but can be difficult to
treat.
Palmar and plantar warts:
These warts, caused by HPV 1, occur on the palms and soles; they are
flattened by pressure and surrounded by cornified epithelium (see
Plate 55
). They are
[Table 84-1.
Wart Variants]
===PAGE:848===
often tender and can make walking and standing uncomfortable. They can be distinguished from corns
and calluses by their tendency to pinpoint bleeding when the surface is pared away. Classically, warts
hurt with side-to-side pressure, and calluses hurt with direct pressure; in reality, this is not a reliable sign.
Mosaic warts:
Mosaic warts are plaques formed by the coalescence of myriad smaller, closely set
plantar warts. As with other plantar warts, they are often tender.
Periungual warts:
These warts appear as thickened, fissured cauliflower-like skin around the nail plate.
Patients frequently lose the cuticle and are susceptible to paronychia. Periungual warts are more common
among patients who bite their nails.
Genital warts:
Genital warts ( manifest as discrete flat to broad-based smooth to velvety
papules on the perineal, perirectal, labial, and penile areas. Infection with high-risk HPV types (most
notably types 16 and 18) is the main cause of cervical cancer. These warts are usually asymptomatic.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Rarely biopsy
Diagnosis is based on clinical appearance; biopsy is rarely needed. A cardinal sign of warts is the
absence of skin lines crossing their surface and the presence of pinpoint black dots (thrombosed
capillaries) or bleeding when warts are shaved. Differential diagnosis includes corns (clavi), lichen
planus, seborrheic keratosis, skin tags, and squamous cell carcinomas. DNA typing is available in some
medical centers but is generally not needed.
Prognosis
Many warts regress spontaneously; others persist for years and recur at the same or different sites, even
with treatment. Factors influencing recurrence appear to be related to the patient's overall immune status
as well as local factors. Patients who subject themselves to local trauma (eg, athletes, mechanics,
butchers) may have recalcitrant and recurrent HPV infection. Genital HPV infection has malignant
potential, but malignant transformation is rare in HPV-induced skin warts, except among
immunosuppressed patients.
Treatment
• Topical irritants (eg, salicylic acid, cantharidin, podophyllum resin)
• Destructive methods (eg, cryosurgery, electrocautery, curettage, excision, laser)
Treatment is aimed at eliciting an immune response to HPV. In most instances, this response is achieved
by applying an irritant (eg, salicylic acid [SCA], trichloroacetic acid, 5-fluorouracil, podophyllum resin,
tretinoin, cantharidin).
These compounds can be used in combination or with a destructive method (eg, cryosurgery,
electrocautery, curettage, excision, laser). Direct antiviral effects can be achieved with bleomycin and
interferon alfa-2b, but these treatments are reserved for the most recalcitrant warts. Topical imiquimod 5%
cream induces skin cells to locally produce antiviral cytokines. Topical cidofovir, HPV vaccines, and
contact immunotherapy (eg, squaric acid dibutyl ester and
Candida
allergen) have been used to treat
warts. Oral treatments include cimetidine, isotretinoin, and oral zinc. In most instances, modalities should
be combined to increase the likelihood of success.
Common warts:
In immunocompetent patients, common warts usually spontaneously regress within 2 to
4 yr, but some linger for many years. Numerous treatments are available. Destructive methods include
• Electrocautery
===PAGE:849===
• Cryosurgery with liquid nitrogen
• SCA preparations
Which method is used depends on the location and severity of involvement. For example, 17% liquid SCA
can be used on the fingers, and 40% plaster SCA can be used on the soles.
The most common topical agent to be used is SCA. SCA is available in a liquid, plaster, or impregnated
within tape. Patients apply SCA to their warts at night and leave on for 8 to 48 h depending on the site.
Cantharidin can be used alone or in combination (1%) with SCA (30%) and podophyllum (5%) in a
collodion base. Cantharidin alone is removed with soap and water after 6 h; cantharidin with SCA or
podophyllum is removed in 2 h. The longer these agents are left in contact with the skin, the more brisk
the blistering response.
Cryosurgery is painful but extremely effective. Electrodesiccation with curettage, laser surgery, or both is
effective and indicated for isolated lesions but may cause scarring. Recurrent or new warts occur in about
35% of patients within 1 yr, so methods that scar should be avoided as much as possible.
Filiform warts:
Treatment is removal with scalpel, scissors, curettage, or liquid nitrogen. Liquid nitrogen
should be applied so that up to 2 mm of skin surrounding the wart turns white. Damage to the skin occurs
when the
skin thaws, which usually takes 10 to 20 sec. Blisters can occur 24 to 48 h after treatment with
liquid nitrogen. Care must be taken when treating cosmetically sensitive sites, such as the face and neck,
because hypopigmentation frequently occurs after treatment with liquid nitrogen. Patients with darkly
pigmented skin can develop permanent depigmentation.
Flat warts:
Treatment is daily tretinoin (retinoic acid 0.05% cream). If peeling is not sufficient for wart
removal, another irritant (eg, 5% benzoyl peroxide) or 5% SCA cream can be applied sequentially with
tretinoin. Imiquimod 5% cream can be used alone or in combination with topical drugs or destructive
measures. Topical 5-fluorouracil (1% or 5% cream) can also be used. Spontaneous resolution may follow
unprovoked inflammation of the lesions; however, flat warts are frequently recalcitrant to treatment.
Plantar warts:
Treatment is vigorous maceration with 40% SCA plaster kept in place for several days.
The wart is debrided while damp and soft, then destroyed by freezing or using caustics (eg, 30 to 70%
trichloroacetic acid). Other destructive treatments (eg, CO
laser, pulsed-dye laser, various acids) are
often effective. Duct tape is effective when applied for 6-day intervals, followed by debridement of
macerated tissue.
Periungual warts:
Combination therapy with liquid nitrogen and imiquimod 5% cream, tretinoin, or SCA
is effective.
Recalcitrant warts:
Several methods whose long-term value and risks are not fully known are available
for recalcitrant warts. Intralesional injection of small amounts of a 0.1% solution of bleomycin in saline
often cures stubborn plantar and periungual warts. However, Raynaud's syndrome or vascular damage
may develop in injected digits, especially when the drug is injected at the base of the digit, so caution is
warranted. Interferon, especially interferon alfa, administered intralesionally (3 times/wk for 3 to 5 wk) or
IM, has also cleared recalcitrant skin and genital warts. Extensive warts sometimes improve or clear with
oral isotretinoin or acitretin. Cimetidine at doses up to 800 mg po tid has been used with success but is
more effective when combined with another therapy.
Zoonotic Diseases
Two viral skin diseases are rarely transmitted from animals to humans.
Contagious ecthyma:
Contagious ecthyma (contagious pustular dermatitis) is caused by orf virus, a
poxvirus that infects ruminants (most often sheep and goats). Farmers, veterinarians, zoo caretakers, and
others with direct animal contact are at risk. The cutaneous findings pass through 6 stages that together
===PAGE:850===
last about 1 wk:
• Stage 1 (papular): A single red edematous papule on a finger (most commonly right index finder)
• Stage 2 (target): A larger nodule with a red center surrounded by a white ring with a red periphery
• Stage 3 (acute): A rapidly growing infected-looking tumor
• Stage 4 (regenerative): A nodule with black dots covered with a thin transparent crust
• Stage 5 (papillomatous): A nodule with a surface studded with small projections
• Stage 6 (regressive): A flattened nodule with a thick crust
Patients can develop regional adenopathy, lymphangitis, and fever.
Diagnosis is by history of contact; differential diagnosis is extensive depending upon the stage of the
lesion. Acute lesions must be differentiated from milker's nodules,
Mycobacterium marinum
infection, and
other bacterial infections; regressed lesions must be differentiated from cutaneous tumors, such as
Bowen's disease or squamous cell carcinoma. Lesions spontaneously heal; no treatment is necessary.
Milker's nodules:
These nodules are caused by paravaccinia virus, a parapoxvirus that causes udder
lesions in cows. Infection requires direct contact and produces macules that progress to papules,
vesicles, and nodules. This infection has 6 stages, which are similar to those of contagious ecthyma.
Fever and lymphadenopathy are uncommon. Diagnosis is by history of contact and cutaneous findings.
Differential diagnosis varies depending upon morphology but includes primary inoculation TB,
sporotrichosis, anthrax, and tularemia. Lesions heal spontaneously; no treatment is necessary.
===PAGE:851===
Chapter 85. Pigmentation Disorders
Introduction
Pigmentation disorders involve hypopigmentation, depigmentation, or hyperpigmentation. Areas may be
focal or diffuse.
Focal hypopigmentation
is most commonly a consequence of
• Injury
• Inflammatory dermatoses (eg, atopic dermatitis, psoriasis)
• Burns
• Chemical exposure
Focal hypopigmentation or depigmentation is also a feature of vitiligo (which may involve large areas of
skin), leprosy, nutritional deficiencies (kwashiorkor), and genetic conditions (tuberous sclerosis,
piebaldism, Waardenburg's syndrome).
Diffuse hypopigmentation
is most often caused by
•
Albinism
•
Vitiligo
Focal hyperpigmentation
typically occurs after inflammation of various causes, but it also may occur in
patients with a systemic disorder or cancer.
Albinism
Albinism (officially called oculocutaneous albinism) is an inherited defect in melanin formation
that causes diffuse hypopigmentation of the skin, hair, and eyes; deficiency of melanin (and
hence pigmentary dilution) may be total or partial, but all areas of the skin are involved. Ocular
involvement causes strabismus, nystagmus, and decreased vision. Diagnosis is usually
obvious from the skin, but ocular evaluation is necessary. No treatment for the skin involvement
is available other than protection from sunlight.
Pathophysiology
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a group of rare inherited disorders in which a normal number of
melanocytes are present but melanin production is absent or greatly decreased. Cutaneous and ocular
pathologies (ocular albinism) are both present. Ocular albinism involves abnormal optic tract CNS
development manifested by foveal hypoplasia with decreased photoreceptors and misrouting of optic
chiasmal fibers. Ocular albinism may occur without cutaneous abnormalities.
Most cases are autosomal recessive; autosomal dominant inheritance is rare. There are 4 main genetic
forms:
• Type I is caused by absent (OCA1A; 40% of all OCA) or reduced (OCA1B) tyrosinase activity;
tyrosinase catalyzes several steps in melanin synthesis.
• Type II (50% of all OCA) is caused by mutations in the P (pink-eyed) gene. The function of the P protein
is not yet known. Tyrosinase activity is present.
• Type III occurs only in people with dark skin (skin types III to V). It is caused by mutations in a tyrosinaserelated protein 1 gene whose product is important in eumelanin synthesis.
===PAGE:852===
• Type IV is an extremely rare form in which the genetic defect is in a gene that codes a membrane
transporter protein. Type IV is the most common form of OCA in Japan.
In a group of inherited diseases, a clinical phenotype of OCA occurs in conjunction with bleeding
disorders. In the Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, OCA-like findings occur with platelet abnormalities and a
ceroid-lipofuscin lysosomal storage disease. This syndrome is rare except in people with family origin in
Puerto Rico, where its incidence is 1 in 1800. In the Chediak-Higashi syndrome, OCA-like findings occur
(hair is silvery gray), and a decrease in platelet-dense granules results in a bleeding diathesis. Patients
have severe immunodeficiency due to abnormal lymphocyte lytic granules. Progressive neurologic
degeneration occurs.
Symptoms and Signs
The different genetic forms have a variety of phenotypes.
Type I (OCA1A) is classic tyrosinase-negative albinism; skin and hair are milky white, and eyes are bluegray. Pigmentary dilution in OCA1B ranges from obvious to subtle.
Type II has phenotypes with pigmentary dilution that ranges from minimal to moderate. Pigmented nevi
and lentigines may develop if skin is exposed to the sun; some lentigines become large and dark. Eye
color varies greatly.
In type III, skin is brown, hair is rufous (reddish), and eye color can be blue or brown.
In type IV, the phenotype is similar to that for type II.
Patients with ocular involvement may have decreased retinal pigmentation (see
Plate 25
), leading to photophobia. In addition, nystagmus, strabismus, reduced visual acuity, and loss of
binocular vision likely result from defective routing of the optic fibers.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis of all types of OCA is based on examination of the skin. Early ocular examination may detect
iris translucency, reduced retinal pigmentation, foveal hypoplasia, reduced visual acuity, and ocular
movement disorders (strabismus and nystagmus).
Treatment
• Sun protection
• Sometimes surgical intervention for ocular movement disorders
There is no treatment for albinism. Patients are at high risk of sunburn and skin cancers (especially
squamous cell carcinoma) and should avoid direct sunlight, use sunglasses with UV filtration, wear
protective clothing, and use sunscreen with an SPF of ≥ 30 that protects against UVA and UVB
wavelengths (. Some surgical interventions may lessen ocular movement disorders.
Vitiligo
Vitiligo is a loss of skin melanocytes that causes areas of skin depigmentation of varying sizes.
Cause is unknown, but the condition may be autoimmune; up to one third of patients have
evidence of other autoimmune disease. Diagnosis is often obvious on examination. First-line
treatment is topical corticosteroids. Calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus and pimecrolimus) and
psoralens plus ultraviolet A are commonly used. For severe widespread pigment loss,
depigmentation (bleaching) of residual patches of normal skin may be done with hydroquinone.
===PAGE:853===
Vitiligo affects 0.5 to 2% of the population.
Etiology
Etiology is unclear, but melanocytes are lacking in affected areas. It is both familial (autosomal dominant,
with incomplete penetrance and variable expression) and acquired. Proposed mechanisms include
autoimmune destruction of melanocytes, reduced survival of melanocytes, and primary melanocyte
defects. Occasionally, vitiligo occurs after a direct physical injury to the skin (eg, as a response to
sunburn). This form of vitiligo is called the Koebner phenomenon. Patients may associate the onset of
vitiligo with emotional stress.
Some patients have antibodies to melanin. Up to 30% have other autoimmune antibodies (to
thyroglobulin, adrenal cells, and parietal cells) or clinical autoimmune endocrinopathies (Addison's
disease, diabetes mellitus, pernicious anemia, and thyroid dysfunction), leading to speculation that vitiligo
is an autoimmune disease. However, the relationship is unclear and may be coincidental. The strongest
association is with hyperthyroidism (Graves' disease) and hypothyroidism (Hashimoto's thyroiditis).
Symptoms and Signs
Vitiligo is characterized by depigmented areas (see
Plate 54
), usually sharply demarcated and often symmetric. Depigmentation may be localized, involving 1
or 2 spots or entire body segments (segmental vitiligo); rarely, it may be generalized, involving most of the
skin surface (universal vitiligo). However, vitiligo most commonly involves the face (especially around the
orifices), digits, dorsal hands, flexor wrists, elbows, knees, shins, dorsal ankles, armpits, inguinal area,
anogenital area, umbilicus, and nipples. Cosmetic disfigurement can be especially devastating in darkskinned patients. Hair in vitiliginous areas is usually white.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Depigmented skin is typically obvious on examination. Skin lesions are accentuated under Wood's light.
Differential diagnosis includes postinflammatory hypopigmentation, morphea, leprosy, chemical
leukoderma, and leukoderma due to melanoma. Additional testing for autoimmune endocrine disease is
probably unnecessary unless symptoms or signs suggest a particular disorder.
Treatment
• Protection of affected areas from sunlight
• Topical corticosteroids
• Topical calcineurin inhibitors when face or groin involved
• Sometimes psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy
Treatment is supportive and cosmetic. Physicians must be aware of individual and
ethnic sensibilities
regarding uniform skin coloring; the disease can be psychologically devastating. All depigmented areas
are prone to severe sunburn and must be protected with clothing or sunscreen.
Small, scattered lesions may be camouflaged with makeup. First-line therapy for more extensive
involvement is potent topical corticosteroids, which may cause hypopigmentation or atrophy in normal
surrounding skin. Calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus and pimecrolimus) may be particularly useful for
treating areas of the skin (such as the face and groin) where adverse effects of topical corticosteroid
therapy most commonly occur. Oral and topical PUVA is often successful, although hundreds of treatment
sessions may be necessary. Narrowband UVB is as effective as topical PUVA and has few adverse
effects. Lasers may be useful, particularly for localized disease that does not respond to initial topical
===PAGE:854===
therapy.
Surgery is reasonable only for patients with stable, limited disease when medical therapy has failed.
Therapies include autologous micrografting, suction blister grafting, and tattooing; tattooing is especially
useful for difficult-to-repigment areas such as the nipples, lips, and fingertips.
Depigmentation of unaffected skin to achieve homogeneous skin tone is possible with 20% monobenzyl
ether of hydroquinone applied twice daily and is indicated only when most of the skin is involved and the
patient is prepared for permanent pigment loss. This treatment can be extremely irritating, so a smaller
test area should be treated before widespread use. Treatment for ≥ 1 yr may be required.
Hyperpigmentation
Hyperpigmentation has multiple causes and may be focal or diffuse. Most cases are due to an increase in
melanin production and deposition.
Focal hyperpigmentation is most often postinflammatory in nature, occurring after injury (eg, cuts and
burns) or other causes of inflammation (eg, acne, lupus). Focal linear hyperpigmentation is commonly due
to phytophotodermatitis, which results from ultraviolet light combined with furocoumarins in limes, celery,
and other plants.
Hyperpigmentation also has systemic and neoplastic causes.
Melasma (chloasma):
Melasma consists of dark brown, sharply marginated, roughly symmetric patches
of hyperpigmentation on the face (usually on the forehead, temples, and cheeks). It occurs primarily in
pregnant women (melasma gravidarum, or the mask of pregnancy) and in women taking oral
contraceptives. Ten percent of cases occur in nonpregnant women and dark-skinned men. Melasma is
more prevalent and lasts longer in people with dark skin.
Because all cases are associated with sun exposure, the mechanism probably involves overproduction of
melanin by hyperfunctional melanocytes. Other than sun exposure, aggravating factors include
• Autoimmune thyroid disorders
• Photosensitizing drugs
In women, melasma fades slowly and incompletely after childbirth or cessation of hormone use. In men,
melasma rarely fades.
Treatment depends on whether the pigmentation is epidermal or dermal; epidermal pigmentation becomes
accentuated with Wood's light or can be diagnosed with biopsy. Only epidermal pigmentation responds to
treatment. First-line therapy includes a combination of hydroquinone 2 to 4%, tretinoin 0.05 to 1%, and a
class V to VII topical corticosteroid. Hydroquinone 3 to 4% applied twice daily is often effective, but long
courses are usually required; 2% hydroquinone is useful as maintenance. Hydroquinone should be tested
behind one ear or on a small patch on the forearm for 1 wk before use on the face because it may cause
irritation. Bleaching agents, such as 0.1% tretinoin and azelaic acid 15 to 20% cream, can be used in
place of or with hydroquinone. Chemical peeling with glycolic acid or 30 to 50% trichloroacetic acid is an
option for patients with severe melasma unresponsive to topical bleaching agents.
Lentigines:
Lentigines (singular: lentigo) are flat, tan to brown oval spots. They are commonly due to
chronic sun exposure (solar lentigines; sometimes called liver spots) and occur most frequently on the
face and back of the hands. They typically first appear during middle age and increase in number with
age. Although progression from lentigines to melanoma has not been established, lentigines are an
independent risk factor for melanoma. They are treated with cryotherapy or laser; hydroquinone is not
effective.
Nonsolar lentigines are sometimes associated with systemic disorders, such as Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
(in which profuse lentigines of the lips occur), multiple lentigines syndrome (Leopard syndrome), or
===PAGE:855===
xeroderma pigmentosum.
[Table 85-1.
Hyperpigmentation Effects of Some Drugs and Chemicals]
Diffuse hyperpigmentation due to systemic disorders:
Common systemic causes include Addison's
disease (, hemochromatosis (, and primary biliary cirrhosis (. Skin
findings are nondiagnostic as to cause.
Drug-induced hyperpigmentation:
Changes are usually diffuse but sometimes have drug-specific
distribution patterns or hues (see
Table 85-1
). Mechanisms include
• Increased melanin in the epidermis (tends to be more brown)
• Melanin in the epidermis and high dermis (mostly brown with hints of gray or blue)
• Increased melanin in the dermis (tends to be more grayish or blue)
• Dermal deposition of the drug or metabolite (usually slate or bluish gray)
Focal hyperpigmentation frequently follows drug-induced lichen planus (also known as lichenoid drug
reactions).
In fixed drug eruptions, red plaques or blisters form at the same site each time a drug is taken; residual
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation usually persists. Typical lesions occur on the face (especially the
lips), hands, feet, and genitals. Typical inciting drugs include sulfonamides, tetracycline, NSAIDs
(especially phenazone derivatives), barbiturates, and carbamazepine.
===PAGE:856===
Chapter 86. Hair Disorders
Introduction
Hair growth in both men and women is regulated by androgens. Testosterone stimulates hair growth in
the pubic area and underarms. Dihydrotestosterone stimulates beard hair growth and scalp hair loss.
Hair disorders include alopecia, hypertrichosis, hirsutism, and pseudofolliculitis barbae. Although most
hair disorders are not serious, they are often perceived as major cosmetic issues that demand treatment.
Dandruff is not a hair disorder but rather a skin disorder (seborrheic dermatitis) of the scalp (.
Alopecia
(Baldness)
Alopecia is defined as loss of hair. Hair loss is often a cause of great concern to the patient for cosmetic
and psychologic reasons, but it can also be an important sign of systemic disease.
Pathophysiology
Growth cycle:
Hair grows in cycles. Each cycle consists of a long growing phase (anagen), a brief
transitional apoptotic phase (catagen), and a short resting phase (telogen). At the end of the resting
phase, the hair falls out (exogen) and a new hair starts growing in the follicle, beginning the cycle again.
Normally, about 100 scalp hairs reach the end of resting phase each day and fall out. When significantly
more than 100 hairs/day go into resting phase, clinical hair loss (telogen effluvium) may occur. A
disruption of the growing phase causing abnormal loss of anagen hairs is an anagen effluvium.
Classification:
Alopecia can be classified as focal or diffuse and by the presence or absence of scarring.
Scarring alopecia is the result of active destruction of the hair follicle. The follicle is irreparably damaged
and replaced by fibrotic tissue. Several hair disorders show a biphasic pattern in which nonscarring
alopecia occurs early in the course of the disease, and then permanent hair loss occurs as the disease
progresses. Scarring alopecias can be subdivided further into primary forms, where the target of
inflammation is the follicle itself, and secondary forms, where the follicle is destroyed as a result of
nonspecific inflammation (see
Table 86-1
).
Nonscarring alopecia results from processes that reduce or slow hair growth without irreparably
damaging the hair follicle. Disorders that primarily affect the hair shaft also are considered nonscarring
alopecia.
Etiology
The alopecias comprise a large group of disorders with multiple and varying etiologies (see
Table 86-1
).
The
most common cause
of alopecia is
• Androgenetic alopecia (male-pattern or female-pattern hair loss)
Androgenetic alopecia is an androgen-dependent hereditary disorder in which dihydrotestosterone plays
a major role.
Other common causes
of hair loss are
• Drugs (including chemotherapeutic agents)
• Infection
===PAGE:857===
• Systemic illnesses (particularly those that cause high fever, systemic lupus, endocrine disorders, and
nutritional deficiencies)
Less common causes
are primary hair shaft abnormalities, autoimmune disease, heavy metal
poisoning, and rare dermatologic conditions.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover the onset and duration of hair loss, whether hair
shedding is increased, and whether hair loss is generalized or localized. Associated symptoms such as
pruritus and scaling should be noted. Patients should be asked about typical hair care practices, including
use of braids, rollers, and hair dryers, and whether they routinely pull or twist their hair.
Review of systems
should include recent exposures to noxious stimuli (eg, drugs, toxins, radiation) and
stressors (eg, surgery, chronic illness, fever, psychologic stressors). Symptoms of possible causes should
be sought, including fatigue and cold intolerance (hypothyroidism) and, in women, hirsutism, deepening of
the voice, and increased libido (virilizing syndrome). Other features, including dramatic weight loss,
dietary practices (including vegetarianism), and obsessive-compulsive behavior, should be noted. In
women, a hormonal/gynecologic/obstetric history should be obtained.
Past medical history
should note known possible causes of hair loss, including endocrine and skin
disorders. Current and recent
[Table 86-1.
Classification and Causes of Alopecia]
drug use should be reviewed for offending agents (see
Table 86-1
). A family history of hair loss should be
recorded.
Physical examination:
Examination of the scalp should note the distribution of hair loss, the presence
and characteristics of any skin lesions, and whether there is scarring. Part widths should be measured.
Abnormalities of the hair shafts should be noted.
A full skin examination should be done to evaluate hair loss elsewhere on the body (eg, eyebrows,
eyelashes, arms, legs), rashes that may be associated with certain types of alopecia (eg, lichen planus,
atopy, psoriasis, discoid lupus lesions, hidradenitis, signs of secondary syphilis or of other bacterial or
fungal infections), and signs of virilization in women (eg, hirsutism, acne, deepening voice, clitoromegaly).
Signs of potential underlying systemic disorders should be sought, and a thyroid examination should be
done.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Virilization in women
• Signs of systemic illness or constellations of nonspecific findings possibly indicating poisoning
Interpretation of findings:
Hair loss that begins at the temples or vertex and spreads to diffuse thinning
or nearly complete hair loss is typical of male-pattern hair loss. Hair thinning in the frontal, parietal, and
crown regions is typical of female-pattern hair loss (see
Fig. 86-1
).
Hair loss that occurs 2 to 4 wk after chemotherapy or radiation therapy (anagen effluvium) can typically
be ascribed to those causes. Hair loss that occurs 3 to 4 mo after a major stressor (pregnancy, febrile
illness, surgery, medication change, or severe psychologic stressor) suggests a diagnosis of telogen
effluvium.
Other findings help suggest alternative diagnoses (see
Table 86-2
).
===PAGE:858===
Other than hair loss, scalp symptoms (eg, itching, burning, tingling) are often absent and, when present,
are not specific to any cause.
Signs of hair loss in patterns other than those described above are nondiagnostic and may require
microscopic hair examination or scalp biopsy for definitive diagnosis.
Testing:
Evaluation for causative disorders (eg, endocrinologic, autoimmune, toxic) should be done
based on clinical suspicion.
Male-pattern or female-pattern hair loss generally requires no testing. When it occurs in young men with
no family history, the physician should question the patient about use of anabolic steroids and other
drugs. In addition to questions regarding drug and illicit drug use, women with significant hair loss and
evidence of virilization should have testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) levels
measured (.
The
pull test
helps evaluate diffuse scalp hair loss. Gentle traction is exerted on a bunch of hairs (40 to
60) on at least 3 different areas of the scalp, and the number of extracted hairs is counted and examined
microscopically. Normally, < 3 telogen-phase hairs should come out with each pull. If at least 3 hairs are
obtained with each pull or if > 10 hairs total are obtained, the pull test is positive and suggestive of
telogen effluvium.
The
pluck test
pulls individual hairs out abruptly ("by the roots"). The roots of the plucked hairs are
examined microscopically to determine the phase of growth and thus help diagnose a defect of telogen or
anagen or an occult systemic disease. Anagen hairs have sheaths attached to their roots; telogen hairs
have tiny bulbs without sheaths at their roots. Normally, 85 to 90% of hairs are in the
[Fig. 86-1.
Male-pattern and female-pattern hair loss.]
anagen phase; about 10 to 15% are in telogen phase; and < 1% are in catagen phase. Telogen effluvium
shows an increased percentage of telogen-phase hairs on microscopic examination, whereas anagen
effluvium shows a decrease in telogen-phase hairs and an increased number of broken hairs. Primary
hair shaft abnormalities are usually obvious on microscopic examination of the hair shaft.
Scalp biopsy
is indicated when alopecia persists and diagnosis is in doubt. Biopsy may differentiate
scarring from nonscarring forms. Specimens should be taken from areas of active inflammation, ideally at
the border of a bald patch. Fungal and bacterial cultures may be useful; immunofluorescence studies may
help identify lupus erythematosus, lichen planopilaris, and systemic sclerosis.
Daily hair counts
can be done by the patient to quantify hair loss when the pull test is negative. Hairs
lost in the first morning combing or during washing are collected in clear plastic bags daily for 14 days.
The number of hairs in each bag is then recorded. Scalp hair counts of > 100/day are abnormal except
after shampooing, when hair counts of up to 250 may be normal. Hairs may be brought in by the patient
for microscopic examination.
Treatment
Androgenetic alopecia: Minoxidil
(2% for women, 2% or 5% for men) prolongs the anagen growth
phase and gradually enlarges miniaturized follicles (vellus hairs) into mature terminal hairs. Topical
minoxidil 1 mL bid applied to the scalp is most effective for vertex alopecia in male-pattern or femalepattern hair loss. However, usually only 30 to 40% of patients experience significant hair growth, and
minoxidil is generally not effective or indicated for other causes of hair loss except possibly alopecia
areata. Hair regrowth can take 8 to 12 mo. Treatment is continued indefinitely because, once treatment is
stopped, hair loss resumes. The most frequent adverse effects are mild scalp irritation, allergic contact
dermatitis, and increased facial hair.
Finasteride
inhibits the 5
α
-reductase enzyme, blocking conversion of testosterone to
dihydrotestosterone, and is useful for male-pattern hair loss. Finasteride 1 mg po once/day can stop hair
===PAGE:859===
loss and can stimulate hair
[Table 86-2.
Interpreting Findings in Alopecia]
growth. Efficacy is usually evident within 6 to 8 mo of treatment. Adverse effects include decreased libido,
erectile and ejaculatory dysfunction, hypersensitivity reactions, gynecomastia, and myopathy. There may
be a decrease in prostate-specific antigen levels in older men, which should be taken into account when
that test is used for cancer screening. Common practice is to continue treatment for as long as positive
results persist. Once treatment is stopped, hair loss returns to previous levels. Finasteride is not indicated
for women and is contraindicated in pregnant women because it has teratogenic effects in animals.
Hormonal modulators
such as oral contraceptives or spironolactone may be useful for female-pattern
hair loss associated with hyperandrogenemia.
Surgical options
include follicle transplant, scalp flaps, and alopecia reduction. Few procedures have
been subjected to scientific scrutiny, but patients who are self-conscious about their hair loss may
consider them.
Hair loss due to other causes:
Underlying disorders are treated.
Multiple treatment options for alopecia areata exist and include topical, intralesional, or, in severe cases,
systemic corticosteroids, topical minoxidil, topical anthralin, topical immunotherapy (diphencyprone or
squaric acid dibutylester), or psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA).
Treatment for traction alopecia is elimination of physical traction or stress to the scalp.
Treatment for tinea capitis is topical or oral antifungals (.
Trichotillomania is difficult to treat, but behavior modification, clomipramine, or an SSRI (eg, fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram) may be of benefit.
Scarring alopecia as seen in central centrifugal scarring alopecia, dissecting cellulitis of the scalp, and
acne keloidalis nuchae is best treated by a long-acting oral tetracycline in combination with a potent
topical corticosteroid.
Lichen planopilaris and chronic cutaneous lupus lesions may be treated with oral antimalarials,
corticosteroids, retinoids, or immunosuppressants.
Hair loss due to chemotherapy is temporary and is best treated with a wig; when hair regrows, it may be
different in color and texture from the original hair. Hair loss due to telogen effluvium or anagen effluvium
is usually temporary as well and abates after the precipitating agent is eliminated.
Key Points
• Androgenetic alopecia (male-pattern and female-pattern hair loss) is the most common type of hair loss.
• Concomitant virilization in women or scarring hair loss should prompt a thorough evaluation for the
underlying disorder.
• Microscopic hair examination or scalp biopsy may be required for definitive diagnosis.
Alopecia Areata
Alopecia areata is sudden patchy hair loss in people with no obvious skin or systemic disorder.
The scalp and beard are most frequently affected, but any hairy area may be involved. Hair loss may
affect most or all of the body (alopecia universalis). Alopecia areata is thought to be an autoimmune
disorder affecting genetically susceptible people exposed to unclear environmental triggers, such as
===PAGE:860===
infection or emotional stress. It occasionally coexists with autoimmune vitiligo or thyroiditis.
Diagnosis
• Examination
Diagnosis is by inspection. Alopecia areata typically manifests as discrete circular patches of hair loss
characterized by short broken hairs at the margins, which resemble exclamation points. Nails are
sometimes pitted or display trachyonychia, a roughness of the nail also seen in lichen planus. Differential
diagnosis includes tinea capitis, trichotillomania, discoid lupus, and secondary syphilis. Measures of
thyroid-stimulating hormone, vitamin B
, and autoantibodies are indicated only when coexisting disease
is suspected.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes topical anthralin, minoxidil or both
Treatment is with corticosteroids. Triamcinolone acetonide suspension (in doses not to exceed 0.1 mL per
injection site, eg, 10 mg/mL concentration to deliver 1 mg) can be injected intradermally if the lesions are
small. Potent topical corticosteroids (such as betamethasone 0.05% bid) can be used; however, they
often do not penetrate to the depth of the hair bulb where the inflammatory process is located. Oral
corticosteroids are effective, but hair loss recurs after cessation of therapy and adverse effects limit use.
Topical anthralin (0.5 to 1% for 10 to 20 min daily, then washed off, frequency titrated as tolerated up to
30 min bid) and/or minoxidil may be used. Induction of allergic contact dermatitis using diphencyprone or
squaric acid dibutylester leads to hair growth due to unknown mechanisms, but this treatment is best
reserved for patients with diffuse involvement who have not responded to other therapies.
Alopecia areata may spontaneously regress, become chronic, or spread diffusely. Risk factors for
chronicity include extensive involvement, onset before adolescence, atopy, and involvement of the
peripheral scalp (ophiasis).
Hirsutism
Hirsutism
is the excessive growth of thick or dark hair in women in locations that are more typical of
male hair patterns (eg, mustache, beard, central chest, shoulders, lower abdomen, back, inner thigh). The
amount of hair growth that is considered excessive may differ depending on ethnic background and
cultural interpretation. Men vary significantly in amount of body hair, some being quite hairy, but rarely
present for medical evaluation.
Hypertrichosis
is a separate condition. It is simply an increase in the amount of hair growth anywhere on
the body. Hypertrichosis may be generalized or localized.
Pathophysiology
Hair growth depends on the balance between androgens (eg, testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate [DHEAS], dihydrotestosterone [DHT]) and estrogens. Androgens promote thick, dark hair growth,
whereas estrogens slow hair growth or modulate it toward finer, lighter hairs.
When caused by increased androgen activity, hirsutism is often accompanied by virilization, which may
manifest as loss of menses, increased muscle mass, voice deepening, and clitoral hypertrophy.
Etiology
There are a number of causes of hirsutism (see
Table 86-3
). Overall, the most common causes are the following:
===PAGE:861===
• Polycystic ovary syndrome
• Familial hirsutism
Androgen excess:
Hirsutism typically results from abnormally high androgen activity as a result of
increased central production of androgens (eg, from ovarian or adrenal disorders) or increased peripheral
conversion of testosterone to DHT by 5
α
-reductase. Free androgen levels also can increase as a result
of decreased production of sex hormone-binding globulin, which can occur in a variety of conditions,
including hyperinsulinemia and liver disease. However, the severity of hirsutism does not correlate with
the level of circulating
[Table 86-3.
Some Causes of Hirsutism]
androgens because of individual differences in androgen sensitivity of the hair follicle.
No androgen excess:
Hirsutism not associated with androgen excess may be physiologic (eg,
postmenopausal, during pregnancy), the result of systemic nonandrogenic endocrine conditions, or a
familial phenomenon, especially in people of Mediterranean or Middle Eastern ancestry.
Hypertrichosis
involves nonandrogenic hair growth and is usually caused by a drug, systemic illness
(see
Table 86-4
), or paraneoplastic syndrome. It also occurs as part of a rare familial disorder.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover the extent and acuity of hair growth as well as the age
of onset.
Review of systems
should seek signs of virilization (eg, deepening of the voice, increased libido) and
review menstrual and fertility history. Symptoms of causative disorders should be sought, including cold
intolerance, fatigue, and weight gain (hypothyroidism); polyuria (diabetes); bingeing and purging (eating
disorders); and weight loss and fevers (cancer).
Past medical history
should specifically seek known causative disorders such as endocrine disorders,
adrenal or ovarian pathology, and cancer.
Family history
should inquire about excess hair growth in family members. Drug history should review
all prescribed drugs and specifically query for the surreptitious use of anabolic steroids.
Physical examination:
The presence of excess coarse and dark hair growth should be assessed at
multiple sites, including the face, chest, lower abdomen, back, buttocks, and inner thigh. Signs of
virilization should be sought, including clitoromegaly, acne, male-pattern hair loss, breast atrophy, and
increased muscle mass.
General physical examination should note signs of potentially causative disorders.
The eyes should be examined for extraocular movements, and the visual fields should be assessed.
The breasts should be examined for galactorrhea.
The abdomen (including pelvic examination) should be examined for masses.
The skin should be examined for velvety, black pigmentation on the axillae and neck and under the
breasts (acanthosis nigricans); acne; and striae.
The general habitus should be examined for fat distribution (particularly a round face and accumulation of
fat at the base of the neck posteriorly).
[Table 86-4.
Causes of Hypertrichosis]
===PAGE:862===
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Virilization
• Abrupt appearance of hirsutism
• Pelvic or abdominal mass
Interpretation of findings:
Excess hair growth beginning after use of an anabolic steroid or other
causative drug (see
Tables 86-3
and
86-4
) in an otherwise healthy female is likely due to that drug.
Symptoms and signs sometimes point to a diagnosis (see
Table 86-5
).
Testing:
Diagnostic testing in men with no other signs of illness is unnecessary.
Women should have laboratory measurement of serum hormone levels, including the following:
• Free and total testosterone
• DHEAS
• Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)
• Androstenedione
• Thyroid-stimulating hormone
• Prolactin
High levels of testosterone accompanied by a normal level of DHEAS indicate that the ovaries, and not
the adrenal glands, are producing the excess androgen. High levels of testosterone accompanied by
moderate elevations in DHEAS suggest an adrenal origin for the hirsutism.
Often, in women with polycystic ovary syndrome, LH levels are elevated and FSH levels are depressed,
which results in elevated LH/FSH ratios (> 3 is common).
Imaging:
Pelvic ultrasonography, CT, or both should be done to rule out pelvic or adrenal cancer,
particularly when a pelvic mass is appreciated, when the total testosterone level is > 200 ng/dL (> 100
ng/dL in postmenopausal women), or when the DHEAS level is > 7000 ng/dL (> 4000 ng/dL in
postmenopausal women). However, the majority of patients with elevated DHEAS have adrenal
hyperplasia rather than adrenal carcinoma.
Patients with signs of Cushing's syndrome or an adrenal mass on imaging studies should have 24-h urine
cortisol levels measured.
Treatment
The underlying disorder should be treated, including stopping or changing causative drugs. Treatment for
hirsutism itself is unnecessary if the patient does not find the excess hair cosmetically objectionable.
Nonandrogen-dependent excess hair growth, such as hypertrichosis, is treated primarily with physical
hair removal methods. Patients with androgen-dependent hirsutism require a combination of hair removal
and medical antiandrogen therapy.
Hair removal:
There are several techniques. Depilatory techniques remove hair from the surface of the
skin and include shaving and OTC depilatory creams, such as those containing barium sulfate and Ca
thioglycolate.
===PAGE:863===
Epilation involves removing intact hairs and the roots and can be achieved via mechanical means (eg,
tweezing, plucking, waxing) or home epilating devices. Permanent epilation techniques, including
electrolysis, thermolysis, and laser epilation, can result in more long-term hair removal but often require
multiple treatments.
As an alternative to hair removal, hair bleaching is inexpensive and works well when hirsutism is not
excessive. Bleaches lighten the color of the hair, rendering it less noticeable. There are several types of
commercial
[Table 86-5.
Some Symptoms and Signs for Diagnosis of Hirsutism]
hair-bleaching products, most of which use hydrogen peroxide as the active ingredient.
Topical eflornithine, applied twice daily, decreases hair growth and, with long-term use, may decrease the
need to manually remove hair.
Hormonal treatment:
Hirsutism resulting from androgen excess usually requires long-term therapy
because the source of excess androgen rarely can be eliminated permanently. Hormonal treatments
include
• Oral contraceptives
• Antiandrogenic drugs
• Sometimes other drugs
Oral contraceptives in standard doses often are the initial treatment for hirsutism caused by ovarian
hyperandrogenism. Oral contraceptives reduce ovarian androgen secretion and increase sex hormonebinding globulin, thereby decreasing free testosterone levels.
Antiandrogenic therapy is also used and can include finasteride (5 mg po once/day), spironolactone (25
to 100 mg po bid), or flutamide (125 mg po once/day or bid). These drugs are contraindicated during
pregnancy as they may cause feminization of a male fetus.
Insulin sensitizers such as metformin decrease insulin resistance, causing a decline in testosterone
levels. However, they are less effective than other antiandrogenic drugs. Corticosteroids are used for
adrenal suppression. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists (eg, leuprolide acetate, nafarelin,
triptorelin) can be used for severe forms of ovarian hyperandrogenism under the direction of a
gynecologist or endocrinologist.
Key Points
• Hirsutism may be familial, and the degree of hair growth may vary with ethnicity.
• Polycystic ovary syndrome is the most frequent cause of hirsutism.
• Virilization suggests an androgenic disorder that requires further evaluation.
• Abrupt onset of hirsutism may indicate cancer.
Pseudofolliculitis Barbae
Pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB) is irritation of the skin due to beard hairs that penetrate the skin
before leaving the hair follicle or that leave the follicle and curve back into the skin, causing a
foreign-body reaction.
PFB predominantly affects black men. It is most noticeable around the beard and neck. It causes small
===PAGE:864===
papules and pustules that can be confused with bacterial folliculitis.
Diagnosis is by physical examination.
Treatment
Acute PFB can be treated with warm compresses and manual removal of ingrown hairs with a needle or
tweezers. Topical hydrocortisone 1% or topical antibiotics can be used for mild inflammation. Oral
tetracycline (250 to 500 mg qid) or oral erythromycin (250 to 500 mg qid, 333 mg tid, 500 mg bid) can be
used for moderate to severe inflammation.
Tretinoin (retinoic acid) liquid or cream or benzoyl peroxide
cream may also be effective in mild or moderate cases but may irritate the skin. Topical eflornithine
hydrochloride cream may help by slowing hair growth. Hairs should be allowed to grow out; grown hairs
can then be cut to about 0.5 cm length. Depilatories are an alternative but may irritate the skin. Hair
follicles can be permanently removed by electrolysis or laser treatment.
===PAGE:865===
Chapter 87. Nail Disorders
Introduction
A variety of disorders can affect nails, including deformities, infections of the nail, paronychia, and
ingrown toenails. Nail changes may occur in many systemic conditions and genetic syndromes.
Nails may also undergo changes due to local infection or trauma. For example, trauma to the finger may
cause changes in the nail. The nail may develop a white coloration that starts at the nail bed and grows
up with the nail. Sometimes, if a nail becomes separated from the nail bed, a new nail grows below the
existing nail and replaces it when fully grown in.
Most nail infections are fungal (onychomycosis—, but bacterial and viral infections can occur
(eg, green-nail syndrome [Pseudomonas], herpetic whitlow [herpes simplex virus-1]). Paronychia is not
actually an infection of the nail but rather of periungual tissues.
Common warts (verrucae vulgaris) result from papillomavirus infection and frequently infect the proximal
nail fold and sometimes the subungual area. Onychophagia (nail-biting) can help to spread this infection.
Warts involving these areas are especially difficult to treat. Freezing with liquid nitrogen may be effective.
Toenails require special attention in the elderly and in people with diabetes or peripheral vascular
disease; a podiatrist can help avoid local breakdown and secondary infections.
Deformities
About 50% of nail deformities result from fungal infection. The remainder result from various causes,
including trauma, psoriasis, lichen planus, and occasionally cancer. Diagnosis may be obvious on
examination, but sometimes fungal scrapings and culture may be done. Deformities may resolve with
treatment of the cause, but if not, manicurists may be able to hide nail deformities with appropriate
trimming and polishes. Dystrophies are often considered together with deformities, but the two are slightly
different; deformities are generally considered to be gross changes in nail shape, whereas dystrophies
are changes in nail texture or composition (eg, onychomycosis).
Congenital deformities:
In some congenital ectodermal dysplasias, patients have no nails (anonychia).
In pachyonychia congenita, the nail beds are thickened, discolored, and hypercurved with a pincer nail
deformity. Nail-patella syndrome ( causes triangular lunulae and partially absent thumb nails.
Patients with Darier's disease can have nails with red and white streaks and a distal V-shaped nick.
Deformities associated with systemic problems:
In Plummer-Vinson syndrome, 50% of patients have
koilonychia (concave, spoon-shaped nails). Yellow nail syndrome (characterized by hard, hypercurved,
transversely thickened, yellow nails with loss of the cuticle) occurs in patients with lymphedema of limbs,
pleural effusion, and ascites. Half-and-half nails occur with renal failure; the proximal half of the nail is
white, and the distal half is pink or pigmented. White nails occur with cirrhosis, although the distal third
may remain pinker.
Deformities associated with dermatologic conditions:
In psoriasis, nails may have a number of
changes, including irregular pits, oil spots (localized areas of tan-brown discoloration), onycholysis, and
thickening and crumbling of the nail plate. Lichen planus of the nail matrix causes scarring with early
longitudinal ridging and splitting of the nail and later leads to pterygium formation. Pterygium of the nail is
characterized by scarring from the proximal nail outward in a V formation, which leads ultimately to loss of
the nail. Alopecia areata can be accompanied by regular pits that form a pattern.
Discoloration:
Cancer chemotherapy drugs (especially the taxanes) can cause melanonychia (nail plate
pigmentation), which can be diffuse or may occur in transverse bands. Some drugs cause characteristic
changes in nail coloration. For example, quinacrine can
cause nails to appear greenish yellow or white
under ultraviolet light. Cyclophosphamide can cause the onychodermal bands (seal formed at the junction
of the nail plate and distal nail bed at the free edge of the nail plate) to become slate-gray or bluish. With
arsenic intoxication, the nails may turn diffusely brown. Tetracyclines, ketoconazole, phenothiazines,
===PAGE:866===
arsenic intoxication, the nails may turn diffusely brown. Tetracyclines, ketoconazole, phenothiazines,
sulfonamides, and phenindione can all cause brownish or blue discoloration. Gold therapy can turn nails
light or dark brown. Tobacco use can result in yellow or brownish discoloration. In argyria, the nails may
be diffusely blue-gray.
White transverse lines of the nails (Mees' lines) may occur with chemotherapy, acute arsenic intoxication,
malignant tumors, MI, thallium and antimony intoxication, fluorosis, and even during etretinate therapy.
They also develop with trauma to the finger, although traumatic white lines usually do not span the entire
nail. The fungus
Trichophyton mentagrophytes
causes a chalky white discoloration of the nail plate.
Green-nail syndrome is caused by infection with
Pseudomonas
. It is generally a harmless infection,
usually of 1 or 2 nails, and is noteworthy for its striking blue-green color. It often occurs in patients with
onycholysis or chronic paronychia whose nails have been immersed in fresh water for a long period.
Treatment is most effective with soaks of 1% acetic acid solution or alcohol diluted 1:4 with water.
Patients should soak their affected nails twice a day for 10 min and should avoid trauma and excess
moisture. Frequent clipping of the nail increases the response to treatment.
Melanonychia striata:
Melanonychia striata are hyperpigmented bands that are longitudinal and extend
from the proximal nail fold and cuticle to the free distal end of the nail plate. In dark-skinned people, these
bands may be a normal physiologic variant requiring no treatment. Other causes include trauma;
pregnancy; Addison's disease; post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation; and the use of certain drugs,
including doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, zidovudine (AZT), and psoralens. Melanonychia striata can also
occur in benign melanocytic nevi and malignant melanoma. Hutchinson's sign of the nail (melanin
extending through the lunula, cuticle, and proximal nail fold) may signal a melanoma in the nail matrix.
Rapid biopsy and treatment are essential.
Onychogryphosis:
Onychogryphosis is a nail dystrophy in which the nail, most often on the big toe,
becomes thickened and curved. It may be caused by ill-fitting shoes. It is common among the elderly.
Treatment consists of trimming the deformed nails.
Onycholysis:
Onycholysis is separation of the nail plate from the nail bed or complete nail plate loss. It
can occur as a drug reaction in patients treated with tetracyclines (photo-onycholysis), doxorubicin, 5fluorouracil, cardiovascular drugs (particularly practolol and captopril), cloxacillin and cephaloridine
(rarely), trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, diflunisal, etretinate, indomethacin, isoniazid, and isotretinoin.
Partial onycholysis may also result from infection with
Candida albicans
as a component of
onychomycosis or from trauma. Partial onycholysis may occur in patients with psoriasis or thyrotoxicosis.
Onychotillomania:
In this disorder, patients pick at and self-mutilate their nails, which can lead to
parallel transverse grooves and ridges (washboard deformity or habit-tic nails). It most commonly
manifests in patients who habitually push back the cuticle on one finger, causing dystrophy of the nail
plate as it grows. Subungual hemorrhages can also develop in onychotillomania.
Pincer nail deformity:
Pincer nail deformity is a transverse over-curvature of the nail plate. It can occur
in patients with psoriasis, SLE, Kawasaki disease, cancer, end-stage renal disease, and some genetic
syndromes. Patients often have pain at the borders of the nail where the nail plate curves into the tips of
the fingers.
Subungual hematoma and nail bed trauma:
Subungual hematoma occurs when blood becomes
trapped between the nail plate and nail bed, usually as a result of trauma. Subungual hematoma causes
significant pain and eventual separation of and temporary loss of the nail plate. When the cause is a
crush injury, underlying fracture and nail bed damage are common. Nail bed damage may result in
permanent nail deformity.
If the injury is acute, nail trephination (eg, creating a hole in the nail plate using a cautery device, 18gauge needle, or red-hot paperclip) can help relieve pain by draining accumulated blood. It is not clear
whether removing the nail and repairing any nail bed damage reduces risk of permanent nail deformity.
Trachyonychia:
Trachyonychia (rough, opaque nails) may occur with alopecia areata, lichen planus,
atopic dermatitis, and psoriasis. It is most common among children.
===PAGE:867===
Tumors:
Benign and malignant tumors can affect the nail unit, causing deformity. These tumors include
benign myxoid cysts, pyogenic granulomas, glomus tumors, Bowen's disease, squamous cell carcinoma,
and malignant melanoma. When cancer is suspected, expeditious biopsy followed by referral to a surgeon
is strongly advised.
Onychomycosis
Onychomycosis is fungal infection of the nail plate, nail bed, or both. The nails typically are
deformed and discolored white or yellow. Diagnosis is by appearance, wet mount, culture, PCR,
or a combination. Treatment, when indicated, is with selective use of oral terbinafine or
itraconazole.
About 10% (range 2 to 14%) of the population has onychomycosis. Risk factors include
• Tinea pedis
• Preexisting nail dystrophy (eg, in patients with psoriasis)
• Older age
• Male sex
• Exposure to someone with tinea pedis or onychomycosis (eg, a family member or through public
bathing)
• Peripheral vascular disease or diabetes
• Immunocompromise
Toenails are 10 times more commonly infected than fingernails. About 60 to 80% of cases are caused by
dermatophytes (eg,
Trichophyton rubrum
); dermatophyte infection of the nails is called tinea unguium.
Many of the remaining cases are caused by nondermatophyte molds (eg,
Aspergillus
,
Scopulariopsis
,
Fusarium
). Immunocompromised patients and those with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis may have
candidal onychomycosis (which is more common on the fingers). Subclinical onychomycosis can also
occur in patients with recurrent tinea pedis. Onychomycosis may predispose patients to lower extremity
cellulitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Nails have asymptomatic patches of white or yellow discoloration and deformity. There are 3
characteristic manifestations:
• Distal subungual, in which the nails thicken and yellow, keratin and debris accumulate distally and
underneath, and the nail separates from the nail bed (onycholysis)
• Proximal subungual, a form that starts proximally and is a marker of immunosuppression
• White superficial, in which a chalky white scale slowly spreads beneath the nail surface
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Potassium hydroxide wet mount examination
• Culture
===PAGE:868===
Onychomycosis is suspected by appearance; predictive clinical features include involvement of the 3rd or
5th toenail, involvement of the 1st and 5th toenails on the same foot, and unilateral nail deformity.
Subclinical onychomycosis should be considered in patients with recurrent tinea pedis. Differentiation
from psoriasis or lichen planus is important, because the therapies differ, so diagnosis is typically
confirmed by microscopic examination and culture of scrapings. Scrapings are taken from the most
proximal position that can be accessed on the affected nail and are examined for hyphae on potassium
hydroxide wet mount and cultured. Obtaining an adequate sample of nail can be difficult because the
distal subungual debris, which is easy to sample, often does not contain living fungus. Therefore,
removing the distal portion of the nail with clippers before sampling or using a small curette to reach more
proximally beneath the nail increases the yield. PCR can also be done on nail clippings if cultures are
negative and the cost of finding a definitive diagnosis is warranted.
Treatment
• Sometimes oral terbinafine or itraconazole
Onychomycosis is not always treated because many cases are asymptomatic or mild and unlikely to
cause complications, and the oral drugs that are the most effective treatments can potentially cause
hepatotoxicity and serious drug interactions. Some proposed indications for treatment include the
following:
• Previous ipsilateral cellulitis
• Diabetes or other risk factors for cellulitis
• Presence of bothersome symptoms
• Psychosocial impact
• Desire for cosmetic improvement (controversial)
Treatment is oral terbinafine or itraconazole. Terbinafine 250 mg once/day for 12 wk (6 wk for fingernail)
or itraconazole 200 mg bid 1 wk/mo for 3 mo is used and achieves a cure rate of 60 to 75%, but the
recurrence rate is estimated to be as high as 10 to 50%. It is not necessary to treat until all abnormal nail
is gone because these drugs remain bound to the nail plate and continue to be effective after oral
administration has ceased. The affected nail will not revert to normal; however, newly growing nail will
appear normal. Topical antifungal nail lacquer containing ciclopirox 8% or amorolfine 5% (not available in
the US) is rarely effective as primary treatment but can improve cure rate when used as an
adjunct with
oral drugs, particularly in resistant infections.
To limit relapse, the patient should trim nails short, dry feet after bathing, wear absorbent socks, and use
antifungal foot powder. Old shoes may harbor a high density of spores and, if possible, should not be
worn.
Paronychia
Paronychia is infection of the periungual tissues. Acute paronychia causes redness, warmth,
and pain along the nail margin. Diagnosis is by inspection. Treatment is with antistaphylococcal
antibiotics and drainage of any pus.
Paronychia is usually acute, but chronic cases occur. In acute paronychia, the causative organisms are
usually
Staphylococcus aureus
or streptococci and, less commonly,
Pseudomonas
or
Proteus
spp.
Organisms enter through a break in the epidermis resulting from a hangnail, trauma to a nail fold, loss of
the cuticle, or chronic irritation (eg, resulting from water and detergents). Biting or sucking the fingers can
also predispose people to developing the infection. In toes, infection often begins at an ingrown toenail
(.
In patients with diabetes and those with peripheral vascular disease, toe paronychia can threaten the
===PAGE:869===
limb.
Symptoms and Signs
Paronychia develops along the nail margin (lateral and proximal nail folds), manifesting over hours to
days with pain, warmth, redness, and swelling. Pus usually develops along the nail margin and
sometimes beneath the nail. Infection can spread to the fingertip pulp, causing a felon. Rarely, infection
penetrates deep into the finger, sometimes causing infectious flexor tenosynovitis.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by inspection. Several skin conditions can cause changes that mimic paronychia and should
be considered, particularly when treatment is not effective initially. These conditions include squamous
cell carcinoma, proximal onychomycosis, pyogenic granuloma, pyoderma gangrenosum, and herpetic
whitlow.
Treatment
• Antistaphylococcal antibiotics
• Drainage of pus
Early treatment is warm compresses or soaks and an antistaphylococcal antibiotic (eg, dicloxacillin or
cephalexin 250 mg po qid, clindamycin 300 mg po qid). In areas where methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
is
common, antibiotics that are effective against this organism (eg, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole) should be
chosen based on results of local sensitivity testing. In patients with diabetes and others with peripheral
vascular disease, toe paronychia should be monitored for signs of cellulitis or more severe infection (eg,
extension of edema or erythema, lymphadenopathy, fever).
Fluctuant swelling or visible pus should be drained with a Freer elevator, small hemostat, or #11 scalpel
blade inserted between the nail and nail fold. Skin incision is unnecessary. A thin gauze wick should be
inserted for 24 to 48 h to allow drainage.
Chronic Paronychia
Chronic paronychia is recurrent or persistent nail fold inflammation, typically of the fingers.
Chronic paronychia occurs almost always in people whose hands are chronically wet (eg, dishwashers,
bartenders, housekeepers), particularly if they are diabetic or immunocompromised.
Candida
is often
present, but its role in etiology is unclear; fungal eradication does not always resolve the condition. The
condition may be an irritant dermatitis with secondary fungal colonization.
The nail fold is painful and red as in acute paronychia, but there is almost never pus accumulation.
Eventually, there is loss of the cuticle and separation of the nail fold from the nail plate. This forms a
space that allows entry of irritants and microorganisms. The nail becomes distorted.
Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment
• Keeping hands dry
• Topical corticosteroid or tacrolimus
Primary treatment is to keep the hands dry and to assist the cuticle in reforming to close the space
between the nail fold and nail plate. Gloves or barrier creams are used if water contact is necessary.
Topical drugs that may help include corticosteroids and, for their corticosteroid-sparing effects,
immunosuppressants (eg, tacrolimus). Antifungal treatments are helpful only in reducing colonizing fungal
===PAGE:870===
organisms. Thymol 3% in ethanol applied several times a day to the space left by loss of cuticle aids in
keeping this space dry and free of microorganisms. If there is no response to therapy, squamous cell
carcinoma should be considered and a biopsy should be done.
Ingrown Toenail
(Onychocryptosis)
An ingrown toenail is incurvation or impingement of a nail border into its adjacent nail fold,
causing pain.
Causes include tight shoes, abnormal gait (eg, toe-walking), bulbous toe shape, excessive trimming of the
nail plate, or congenital variations in nail contour (congenital pincer nail deformity). Sometimes an
underlying osteochondroma is responsible, especially in the young. In the elderly, peripheral edema is a
risk factor. Eventually, infection can occur along the nail margin (paronychia—.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain occurs at the corner of the nail fold or, less commonly, along its entire lateral margin. Initially only
mild discomfort may be present, especially when wearing certain shoes. In chronic cases, granulation
tissue becomes visible, more often in the young.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Redness, swelling, and pain suggest paronychia. In young patients (eg, < 20 yr) with ingrown toenails, xrays should be considered to exclude underlying osteochondroma. In the elderly, apparent granulation
tissue around the toe suggests the possibility of amelanotic melanoma, which is often overlooked; biopsy
is necessary.
Treatment
• Usually nail excision and destruction of adjacent nail matrix
In mild cases, inserting cotton between the ingrown nail plate and painful fold (using a thin toothpick) may
provide immediate relief and, if continued, correct the problem. If the shoes are too tight, a larger toe box
is indicated. In most cases, however, particularly with paronychia, excision of the ingrown toenail after
injecting a local anesthetic is the only effective treatment. If ingrown toenails recur, permanent destruction
of the nearby lateral nail matrix by applying phenol or trichloroacetic acetic acid or by surgical excision is
indicated. Phenol should not be used if there is arterial insufficiency.
===PAGE:871===
Chapter 88. Pressure Ulcers
Introduction
(Pressure Sores; Bedsores; Decubitus Ulcers; Decubiti)
Pressure ulcers (PUs) are areas of necrosis and ulceration where tissues are compressed
between bony prominences and hard surfaces; they result from pressure alone or pressure in
combination with friction, shearing forces, or both. Risk factors include old age, impaired
circulation, immobilization, undernutrition, and incontinence. Severity ranges from
nonblanchable skin erythema to full-thickness skin loss with extensive soft-tissue necrosis.
Diagnosis is clinical. Prognosis is excellent for early-stage ulcers; neglected and late-stage
ulcers pose risk of serious infection and nutritional stress and are difficult to heal. Treatment
includes pressure reduction, avoidance of friction and shearing forces, local care, and
sometimes skin grafts or myocutaneous flaps.
Etiology
An estimated 1.3 to 3 million patients in the US have PUs; incidence is highest in older patients,
especially those who are hospitalized or in long-term care facilities. Aging increases risk, in part because
of reduced subcutaneous fat and decreased capillary blood flow. Immobility and comorbidities increase
risk further.
Patients who are cognitively impaired, immobile, or both are at increased risk. Immobility—because of
decreased spontaneous movement (eg, due to stroke, sedation, or severe illness) or inability to change
position frequently because of weakness—is the most important factor. Other risk factors include urinary
and fecal incontinence; poor nutritional status, including dehydration; diabetes; and cardiovascular
disease. Clinical assessment is sufficient to identify patients at risk; several scales (eg, Norton, Braden
—see
Fig. 88-1
) are useful for predicting risk. The National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel has also issued
guidelines for the prediction and prevention of PUs.
Pathophysiology
PUs develop when soft tissues are compressed between bony prominences and contact surfaces
[Fig. 88-1.
Braden scale for predicting risk for pressure ulcers.]
[Table 88-1.
Pressure Ulcer Staging]
or when friction (eg, rubbing against clothing or bedding) or shearing forces (which develop when skin
clings to surfaces) cause erosion, tissue ischemia, and infarction. PUs most frequently develop over the
sacrum, ischial tuberosities, trochanters, malleoli, and heels, but they can develop elsewhere, including
behind the ears when nasal cannulae are used for prolonged periods. Also, poorly fitting prosthetic
devices can cause PUs to develop over bony prominences. Increased force and duration of pressure
directly influence risk and severity, but PUs can develop in as little as 3 to 4 h in some settings (eg,
trauma patients who are immobilized on rigid spine-immobilization boards). Ulcers worsen when skin is
overly moist and macerated (eg, from perspiration or incontinence).
Other causes of skin ulcers:
Chronic arterial and venous insufficiency can result in skin ulcers,
particularly on the lower extremities. Although the underlying mechanism is vascular, the same forces that
cause PUs can worsen these ulcers, and principles of treatment are similar.
Symptoms and Signs
Several staging systems exist; the most common classifies ulcers according to the depth of soft-tissue
damage (see
Table 88-1
). PUs do not always present as Stage I and then progress to higher stages.
===PAGE:872===
Sometimes the first sign of a PU is a deep, necrotic stage III or IV ulcer. In a rapidly developing PU,
subcutaneous tissue can become necrotic before the epidermis erodes. A small ulcer might, like an
iceberg, be quite large under the surface.
Stage I
PUs manifest as nonblanchable erythema, usually over a bony prominence. Color changes may
not be as visible in darkly pigmented skin. The lesion may also be warmer, cooler, firmer, softer, or more
tender than adjacent or contralateral tissue. This stage is a misnomer in the sense that an actual ulcer (a
defect of skin into the dermis) is not yet present. However, ulceration will occur if the course is not
arrested and reversed.
Stage II
PUs involve loss of epidermis with or without erosion (defect of epidermis) or true ulceration
(partial-thickness loss of dermis); subcutaneous tissue is not exposed. The ulcers are shallow with a
reddish base. Intact or partially ruptured blisters due to pressure are also stage II PUs. (NOTE: Nonpressure-related causes of erosion, ulceration, or blistering—eg, skin tears, tape burns, perineal
dermatitis, maceration, excoriation—are excluded from stage II description.)
Stages III and IV
PUs have deeper involvement of underlying tissue with more extensive destruction.
Ulcers covered with debris or eschar are by definition unstageable. However, stable, nonfluctuant heel
lesions with dry eschar should not be debrided for the sake of staging. Bruising of an apparent stage II
ulcer should raise the suspicion of a deeper-stage PU. PUs at any stage may be painful or pruritic but
may not be noticed by patients with blunted awareness or sensation. Tenderness, erythema of
surrounding skin, exudate, or foul odor suggests
infection. Fever should raise suspicion of bacteremia or
underlying osteomyelitis.
Complications
Nonhealing ulcers may be due to inadequate treatment but should raise suspicion of osteomyelitis or,
rarely, squamous cell carcinoma within the ulcer (Marjolin's ulcer). Other complications of nonhealing PUs
include sinus tracts, which can be superficial or connect the ulcer to deep adjacent structures (eg, to the
bowel in sacral ulcers), and tissue calcification. In addition, PUs are a reservoir for hospital-acquired
antibiotic-resistant organisms, which can slow healing and cause bacteremia and sepsis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation with continuous assessment
• Sometimes bone scan or MRI
Diagnosis is usually apparent clinically, but depth and extent can be difficult to determine. PUs are always
colonized by bacteria, so wound surface cultures are uninterpretable. Underlying osteomyelitis is
diagnosed with radionuclide bone scanning or gadolinium-enhanced MRI, but both techniques have poor
sensitivity and specificity. Diagnosis may require bone biopsy and culture.
Continuous assessment is mandatory for effective management. Serial photographs can also document
healing.
Prognosis
Prognosis for early-stage PUs is excellent with timely, appropriate treatment, but healing typically requires
weeks. PUs often develop in patients with suboptimal care. If care cannot be improved, long-term
outcome is poor, even if short-term wound healing is accomplished.
Treatment
• Pressure reduction
• Direct ulcer care
===PAGE:873===
• Management of pain, infection, and undernutrition
• Sometimes adjunctive therapy or surgery
Treatment requires multiple simultaneous elements.
Reducing pressure:
Reducing tissue pressure is accomplished through careful positioning of the
patient, protective devices, and variation of support surfaces.
Frequent repositioning
(and selection of the proper position) is most important. A written schedule
should be used to direct and document repositioning. Bedbound patients should be turned a minimum of
every 2 h, should be placed at a 30° angle to the mattress when on their side (ie, lateral decubitus) to
avoid direct trochanteric pressure, and should be elevated as minimally as possible to avoid the shear
forces on tissues that result from sliding down the bed. For repositioning patients, lifting devices (eg, a
Stryker frame) or bed linen should be used instead of dragging the patient (which causes friction and
shear forces). Patients placed in chairs should be repositioned every hour, and they should be
encouraged to change position on their own every 15 min.
Protective padding
includes pillows or foam wedges placed between knees, ankles, and heels when
patients are on their side and pillows, foam, or heel protectors when patients are supine. Windows should
be cut out of plaster casts at pressure sites in patients immobilized by fractures. Soft seat cushions
should be provided for patients able to sit in a chair. Donut-shaped devices and sheepskins should be
avoided as a treatment for PUs.
Support surfaces
under bedbound patients can be changed to reduce pressure. A change from
standard mattresses is indicated when patients are unable to reposition themselves and periodic
repositioning care is unavailable.
Support surfaces are static or dynamic.
Static surfaces, which do not require electricity, include air, foam, gel, and water overlays and mattresses.
Old-fashioned "egg crate" mattresses offer no advantage. In general, static surfaces increase surface
support areas and decrease pressure and shear forces; they are indicated for high-risk patients without
PUs and for patients with stage I PUs.
Dynamic surfaces require electricity. Alternating-air mattresses have air cells that are alternately inflated
and deflated by a pump, thus shifting supportive pressure from site to site. Low-air-loss mattresses are
giant air-permeable pillows that are continuously inflated with air; the air flow has a drying effect on
tissues. These specialized mattresses are indicated for patients with stage I ulcers who develop
hyperemia on static surfaces and for patients with stage III or IV ulcers. Air-fluidized (high-air-loss)
mattresses contain silicone-coated beads that liquefy when air is pumped through the bed. Advantages
include reduction of moisture on surfaces and cooling. They are indicated for patients with nonhealing
stage III and IV ulcers or numerous truncal ulcers (see
Table 88-2
). Although specialized mattresses are designed to shift
[Table 88-2.
Options for Support Surfaces]
pressure and reduce forces that lead to PUs, they are best thought of as an adjunct to comprehensive
care.
Ulcer care:
Appropriate ulcer care involves cleaning, debridement, and dressings.
Cleaning
should be done initially and with each dressing change; ordinary soap and water (not hot) is
usually best. Cleaning often involves irrigation with saline solution at pressures sufficient to remove
bacteria without traumatizing tissue; commercial syringes, squeeze bottles, or electrically pressurized
systems can be used. Alternatively, a 35-mL syringe and an 18-gauge IV catheter can be used. Irrigation
should continue until no further debris can be loosened. Antiseptics (eg, iodine, hydrogen peroxide) and
===PAGE:874===
antiseptic washes interfere with tissue healing and should be avoided. Rubbing of skin should be
minimized, and moisturizer should be applied gently after each cleansing.
Debridement
is necessary to remove dead tissue. Methods include
• Autolytic debridement: Synthetic occlusive dressings are used to facilitate digestion of dead tissues by
enzymes normally present in wound fluids. Autolytic debridement may be used for small wounds with
simple accumulation of tissue proteins and wounds that need to be sealed off anyway (eg, for
protection from feces or urine). DuoDERM or Contreet (which is impregnated with silver and thus offers
antimicrobial effects) are commonly applied. Infected wounds, however, should not be occluded.
• Mechanical debridement: Hydrotherapy (whirlpool baths), ultrasound, medical maggots, wound
irrigation, or dextranomers (small carbohydrate-based beads that help absorb exudate and liquid debris)
should be used to remove thick exudate or loose necrotic tissue. A scalpel or scissors can be used to
remove eschar (except in heel ulcers, in which dry eschar in the absence of edema, erythema,
fluctuance, or drainage can be safely left alone) or extensive areas of dead tissue. Modest amounts of
eschar or tissue can be debrided at the patient's bedside, but extensive or deep areas should be
debrided in the operating room. Urgent debridement is indicated in advancing cellulitis or sepsis.
Debridement with wet-to-dry dressings should be done only for wounds with very loose exudate and
only with great care because it is often painful and it may remove healthy tissue or overdry the wound.
• Enzymatic debridement (using collagenase, papain, fibrinolysin, or streptokinase/streptodornase): This
method can be used for patients whose caretakers are not trained to do mechanical debridement or for
patients unable to tolerate surgery. It is most effective after careful and judicious cross-hatching of the
wound with a scalpel to improve penetration. Collagenase is especially effective as collagen comprises
75% of the dry weight of skin.
Dressings
should be used for stage I ulcers that are subject to friction or incontinence and for all other
ulcers (see
Table 88-3
). Objectives are to keep the ulcer bed moist to retain tissue growth factors while allowing
some evaporation and inflow of O
, to keep surrounding skin
[Table 88-3.
Options for Pressure Ulcer Dressings]
dry, to facilitate autolytic debridement, and to establish a barrier to infection. Transparent films (eg,
OpSite, Tegaderm, Bioclusive) are sufficient for ulcers with limited exudate; they should not be used over
cavities and must be changed every 3 to 7 days. Some experts recommend a small amount of triple
antibiotic ointment under the dressing. Hydrogels (Clear-Site, Vigilon, FlexiGel), which are cross-linked
polymer dressings that come in sheets or gels, are indicated for very shallow wounds, such as reepithelializing wounds with minimal exudate.
Hydrocolloids (eg, RepliCare, DuoDERM, Restore, Tegasorb), which combine gelatin, pectin, and
carboxymethylcellulose in the form of wafers, powders, and pastes, are indicated for light-to-moderate
exudate; some have adhesive backings and others are typically covered with transparent films to ensure
adherence to the ulcer and must be changed every 3 days. Alginates (polysaccharide seaweed
derivatives containing alginic acid), which come as pads, ropes, and ribbons (AlgiSite, Sorbsan,
Curasorb), are indicated for absorbing extensive exudate and for controlling bleeding after surgical
debridement. Foam dressings (Allevyn, LYOfoam, Hydrasorb, Mepilex, Curafoam, Contreet) are useful as
they can handle various levels of exudate and provide a moist environment for wound healing.
Waterproof versions protect the skin from incontinence. Dressings with adhesive backings stay in place
longer and need less frequent changing.
Pain management:
Primary treatment of pain is treatment of the PU itself, but NSAIDs or
acetaminophen is used for mild-to-moderate pain. Opioids should be avoided if possible because
sedation promotes immobility. Opioids may be necessary during dressing changes and debridement. In
cognitively impaired patients, changes in vital signs can be used as an indication of pain.
Infection management:
PUs should be continually reassessed for bacterial infection using clinical signs
===PAGE:875===
of erythema, warmth, increased drainage, fever, and elevated WBC count. Options for topical treatment
include silver sulfadiazine, triple antibiotic, and metronidazole (the latter for anaerobic bacteria, which are
often foul smelling). Systemic antibiotics should be administered for cellulitis, bacteremia, or osteomyelitis;
usage should be guided by tissue culture or clinical suspicion and not by surface culture.
Nutrition:
Undernutrition is common among patients with PUs and is a risk factor for nonhealing. Markers
of undernutrition include albumin < 3.5 mg/dL or weight < 80% of ideal. Protein intake of 1.25 to 1.5
g/kg/day, sometimes requiring oral or parenteral supplementation (, is desirable for optimal
healing. Zinc supplementation supports wound healing, and replacement at a dose of 50 mg tid may be
useful. Supplemental vitamin C 1 g/day may be provided. Providing a drink of water to patients at each
repositioning may be useful to aid hydration.
Adjuncts:
Multiple adjunctive treatments have been tried or are under investigation. Negative pressure
therapy (for clean wounds) and the use of various topical recombinant growth factors (eg, nerve growth
factor, platelet-derived growth factor-BB) and skin equivalents are showing promise in wound
management; however, they do not ameliorate mechanical forces and tissue ischemia. Electrical
stimulation, heat therapy, massage therapy, and hyperbaric O
therapy have not proven effective.
Surgery:
Surgical debridement is necessary for any ulcer with devitalized tissue, except for stable, dry,
nonfluctuant heel ulcers. Large defects, especially with exposure of musculoskeletal structures, require
surgical closure. Skin grafts are useful for large, shallow defects. However, because grafts do not add to
blood supply, measures must be taken to prevent pressure from developing to the point of ischemia and
further breakdown. Myocutaneous flaps, because of their pressure-sharing bulk and rich vasculature, are
the closures of choice over large bony prominences (eg, sacrum, ischia, trochanters).
Ischemic and venous ulcers:
Wound care treatments also are useful for ischemic ulcers, but the
underlying pathophysiology must be addressed (eg, better control of the inflammatory process in a
rheumatoid ulcer or surgical stenting or bypass surgery to improve circulation in atherosclerosis).
Pentoxifylline has been tried with minimal success. Some evidence supports the use of dalteparin for
diabetic foot ulcers (5000 units sc once/day until healed); however, this finding has not been
corroborated. Ischemic ulcers can become infected, often with anaerobic organisms, and the infection
may spread, causing septicemia or osteomyelitis.
Venous ulcers are typically sterile at first but tend to lead to cellulitis. The same local care as for PUs can
be used. In addition, treatment includes measures to reduce venous hypertension, such as using
compression stockings or Unna boot bandages (applied at a pressure of 35 to 40 mm Hg) and elevating
the leg above the heart. Pentoxifylline 800 mg po tid for up to 24 wk may be useful.
Prevention
Prevention requires
• Identification of high-risk patients
• Repositioning
• Conscientious skin care and hygiene
• Avoidance of oversedation
The mainstay of prevention is frequent repositioning. Pressure should not continue over any bony surface
for > 2 h. Patients who cannot move themselves must be repositioned using pillows. Even when on lowpressure mattresses, patients must be turned. Pressure points should be checked for erythema or trauma
at least once/day under adequate lighting. Patients and family members must be taught a routine of daily
visual inspection and palpation of sites for potential ulcer formation.
Daily attention to hygiene and dryness is necessary to prevent maceration and secondary infection.
Although sheepskin should not be used to redistribute pressure after ulceration has occurred, lying on a
===PAGE:876===
sheepskin as a preventive measure helps keep the skin in good condition. Protective padding, pillows, or
a sheepskin can be used to separate body surfaces. Bedding and clothing should be changed frequently;
sheets should be soft, clean, and free from wrinkles and particulate matter. In hot weather, the skin should
be sponge-bathed and thoroughly dried afterward. In incontinent patients, ulcers should be protected from
contamination; synthetic dressings can help. Skin breakdown can be prevented with careful cleansing
and drying (patting and not rubbing the skin) and using anticandidal creams and moisture barrier creams
or skin protective wipes (eg, Skin-Prep). Use of adhesive tape should be minimized because it can irritate
and even tear fragile skin.
Areas subject to friction may be powdered with plain talc. Use of cornstarch is discouraged because it
may allow microbial growth.
Oversedation should be avoided, and activity should be encouraged. Adequate nutrition is important.
===PAGE:877===
Chapter 89. Benign Tumors
Introduction
(See also
Warts
on p.
and
Genital Warts

Most skin tumors are benign. However, because skin cancers must be treated early, proper diagnosis of
unusual skin growths should always be made definitively and without undue delay.
Dermatofibroma
(Fibrous Histiocytoma)
Dermatofibroma is a firm, red-to-brown, small papule or nodule composed of fibroblastic tissue.
It usually occurs on the thighs or legs.
Dermatofibromas are common, more so in women, and typically appear when people are in their 20s.
Their cause is unknown. Lesions are usually 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter and feel like a lentil embedded in the
skin. Most are asymptomatic, but some itch or ulcerate following minor trauma. Diagnosis is clinical;
lesions typically dimple when grasped between the fingers. They may regress spontaneously, but they
can be excised if troublesome.
Epidermal Cysts
(Keratinous Cyst; Epidermal Inclusion Cyst; Sebaceous Cyst; Milia; Pilar Cyst [Wen]; Steatocystoma)
Epidermal cysts are slow-growing benign cysts containing material that is keratinous
(keratinous or epidermal inclusion cyst, sebaceous cyst, milia), follicular (pilar cyst, or wen), or
sebaceous (steatocystoma). They frequently occur on the scalp, ears, face, back, or scrotum.
On palpation, the cystic mass is firm, globular, movable, and nontender; cysts range from about 1 to 5 cm
in diameter. This kind of cyst seldom causes discomfort unless it has ruptured internally, causing a rapidly
enlarging, painful foreign body reaction and abscess. Keratinous cysts, the most common, often are
surmounted with a punctum or pore; their contents are cheesy and often fetid (due to secondary bacterial
colonization). Milia are minute superficial keratinous cysts noted on the face.
Treatment
Cysts may be left or removed. A small incision may be made to evacuate the contents, then the cyst wall
itself should be removed with a curet or hemostat; otherwise, the lesion will recur. Surgical excision with
complete removal of the cyst wall is also effective. Internally ruptured cysts should be incised and
drained; a gauze drain is inserted and removed after 2 to 3 days. Antibiotics are not needed unless
cellulitis is present. Milia may be evacuated with a #11 blade.
Keloids
Keloids are smooth overgrowths of fibroblastic tissue that arise in an area of injury (eg,
lacerations, surgical scars, truncal acne) or, occasionally, spontaneously.
Keloids are more frequent in blacks. They tend to appear on the upper trunk, especially the upper back
and mid chest, and on deltoid areas. Unlike hyperplastic scars, keloidal scar tissue always extends
beyond the area of original injury.
Keloids are shiny, firm, smooth, usually ovoid but sometimes contracted or webbed, and slightly pink or
hyperpigmented (see
Plate 37
). Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment
===PAGE:878===
Treatment is often ineffective. Monthly corticosteroid injections (eg, triamcinolone acetonide 5 to 40
mg/mL) into the lesion sometimes flatten the keloid. Surgical or laser excision may debulk lesions, but
they usually recur larger than before. Excision is more successful if preceded and followed by a series of
intralesional corticosteroid injections. Gel sheeting (applying a soft, semiocclusive dressing made of
cross-linked polymethylsiloxane polymer, or silicone) or pressure garments are other adjuncts to prevent
recurrence.
Keratoacanthoma
Keratoacanthoma is a round, firm, usually flesh-colored nodule with sharply sloping borders and
a characteristic central crater containing keratinous material; it usually resolves spontaneously.
Etiology is unknown. Most consider these lesions to be well-differentiated squamous cell carcinomas with
a tendency to involute.
Development is rapid. Usually the lesion reaches its full size, typically 1 to 3 cm but
may be > 5 cm, within
1 or 2 mo. Common sites are sun-exposed areas, the face, the forearm, and the dorsum of the hand.
Spontaneous involution may start within a few months. However, because this lesion cannot be relied
upon to involute, biopsy or excision is recommended. Spontaneous involution may leave substantial
scarring; surgery or intralesional injections with methotrexate or 5-fluorouracil usually yield better
cosmetic results, and excision allows histologic confirmation of the diagnosis.
Lipomas
Lipomas are soft, movable, subcutaneous nodules of adipocytes (fat cells); overlying skin is
normal.
A patient may have one or many lipomas. They occur more often in women than men, rarely grow to be >
7 to 8 cm in diameter, and appear most commonly on the trunk, nape, and forearms. They are rarely
symptomatic, but they may be painful, especially in patients with familial variants presenting with multiple
lesions.
Diagnosis
• Usually clinical
A lipoma is usually easily movable within the subcutis. Lipomas are generally soft, but some become
firmer. Some superficial dimpling may occur, but frank inflammation is not normal.
A rapidly growing lesion should be biopsied, although lipomas rarely become malignant.
Treatment
Treatment is not usually required, but bothersome lipomas may be removed by excision or liposuction.
Moles
(Pigmented, Melanocytic, or Nevus Cell Nevi)
Moles are pigmented macules, papules, or nodules composed of clusters of melanocytes or
nevus cells. Their main significance (other than cosmetic) is their potential for being or
becoming malignant. Lesions with characteristics of concern (changing or highly irregular
borders, color changes, pain, bleeding, ulceration, or itching) are biopsied.
Almost everyone has a few moles, which usually appear in childhood or adolescence. There are different
types of moles (see
Table 89-1
). During adolescence and pregnancy, more moles often appear, and existing ones may
===PAGE:879===
enlarge or darken. Moles typically become more raised and less pigmented over the decades.
An individual mole is unlikely to become malignant (lifetime risk is about 1 in 3,000 to 10,000), but the
single best predictor for risk of development of melanoma is the total number of moles. The presence of >
20 moles indicates a higher than average risk for melanoma; patients should be taught to self-monitor for
warning signs and have skin surveillance as part of their primary care.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
Because moles are extremely common and melanomas are uncommon, prophylactic removal is not
justifiable. However, a mole should be biopsied and examined histologically if it has certain characteristics
of concern:
• Changing or highly irregular borders
• Color changes
• Pain
• Bleeding
• Ulceration
• Itching
The biopsy specimen must be deep enough for accurate microscopic diagnosis and should contain the
entire lesion if possible, especially if the concern for cancer is strong. However, wide primary excision
should not be the initial procedure, even for highly abnormal-appearing lesions, because many such
lesions are not melanomas. Incisional biopsy does not increase the likelihood of metastasis if the lesion is
malignant, and it avoids extensive surgery for a benign lesion.
Treatment
• Sometimes excision
Moles can be removed by shaving or excision for cosmetic purposes, and all moles removed should be
examined histologically. If hair growth is a concern for the patient, a hairy mole should be adequately
excised rather than removed by shaving. Otherwise, hair regrowth will occur.
Atypical Moles
(Dysplastic Nevi)
Atypical moles (AM) are melanocytic nevi with irregular and ill-defined borders, variegated
[Table 89-1.
Classification of Moles]
colors usually of brown and tan tones, and macular or papular components. Management is by
monitoring and biopsy of highly atypical or changed lesions. Patients should reduce sun
exposure and conduct regular self-examinations for new moles or changes in existing ones.
AM are nevi with a slightly different clinical and histologic appearance (disordered architecture and atypia
of melanocytes). Patients with AM are at increased risk of melanoma; risk increases as the number of AM
and as sun exposure increase. Some patients have only one or a few AM; others have many.
The propensity to develop AM may be inherited (autosomal dominant) or sporadic without apparent
===PAGE:880===
familial association. Familial atypical mole-melanoma syndrome refers to the presence of multiple AM and
melanoma in ≥ 2 1st-degree relatives. These patients are at markedly increased risk (25 times) for
melanoma.
Symptoms and Signs
AM are often larger than other nevi (> 6 mm diameter) and primarily round (unlike many melanomas) but
with indistinct borders and mild asymmetry. In contrast, melanomas have greater irregularity of color, not
just tan and brown, but dark brown, black, red, and blue or whitish areas of depigmentation.
Diagnosis
• Regular physical examinations
• Biopsy
Although clinical findings suggest the diagnosis of AM (see
Table 89-2
), biopsy of the worst-appearing lesions should be done to establish the diagnosis and to
determine the degree of atypia.
One or more atypical-appearing lesions should be biopsied. Patients with multiple AM and a personal or
family history of melanoma should be examined regularly (eg, yearly for family history, more often for
personal history, of melanoma).
Treatment
Atypical moles can be removed by excision or shaving.
Prevention
Patients with AM should avoid excessive sun exposure and use sunscreens. Also, they
[Table 89-2.
Characteristics of Atypical vs Typical Moles]
should be taught self-examination to detect changes in existing moles and to recognize features of
melanomas. Some experts recommend yearly photographs of the skin surface. Regular follow-up
examinations may be combined with baseline and follow-up color photographs of most of the patient's
body; this method is most useful in patients with many AM.
If patients have a family history of melanoma (whether developing from AM or de novo) or other skin
cancers, 1st-degree relatives should be examined. Patients who are from melanoma-prone families (ie, ≥
2 1st-degree relatives with cutaneous melanomas) have a high lifetime risk of developing melanomas.
The entire skin (including the scalp) of members of an at-risk family should be examined.
Seborrheic Keratoses
Seborrheic keratoses are pigmented superficial epithelial lesions that are usually warty but may
occur as smooth papules.
The cause is unknown. The lesions commonly occur in middle or old age and most often appear on the
trunk or temples; in blacks and Asians, especially women, lesions that are 1 to 3 mm often occur on the
cheekbones; this condition is termed dermatosis papulosa nigra.
Seborrheic keratoses vary in size and grow slowly. They may be round or oval and flesh-colored, brown,
or black. They usually appear stuck on and may have a verrucous, velvety, waxy, scaling, or crusted
surface (see
Plate 44
).
===PAGE:881===
Diagnosis is clinical.
They are not premalignant and need no treatment unless they are irritated, itchy, or cosmetically
bothersome. Lesions may be removed with little or no scarring by cryotherapy (which can cause
hypopigmentation) or by electro-desiccation and curettage after local injection of lidocaine.
Skin Tags
Skin tags (acrochordons, soft fibromas) are common soft, small, flesh-colored or
hyperpigmented, pedunculated lesions; there are usually multiple lesions, typically on the
neck, axilla, and groin.
Skin tags are usually asymptomatic but may be irritating. Irritating or unsightly skin tags can be removed
by freezing with liquid nitrogen, light electrodesiccation, or excision with a scalpel or scissors. The
standard of care is to submit all skin tags individually for histologic examination, especially if there is any
question of the diagnosis. However, for a patient with dozens of identical lesions, an individual lesion is
unlikely to be anything other than a skin tag.
Vascular Lesions
Vascular lesions include acquired lesions (eg, pyogenic granuloma) and those that are present at birth or
arise shortly after birth (vascular birthmarks). Vascular birthmarks include vascular tumors (eg, infantile
hemangioma) and vascular malformations. Vascular malformations are congenital, life-long, localized
defects in vascular morphogenesis and include capillary (eg, nevus flammeus), venous, arteriovenous
(eg, cirsoid aneurysm), and lymphatic malformations. Vascular birthmarks usually involve only the skin
and subcutaneous tissues and rarely affect the CNS.
Infantile Hemangioma
Infantile hemangiomas (IH) are raised, red or purplish, hyperplastic vascular lesions appearing
in the first year of life. Most spontaneously involute; those obstructing vision, the airway, or
other structures require treatment, usually with oral corticosteroids. Surgery is rarely
recommended.
IH is the most common tumor of infancy, affecting 10 to 12% of infants by age 1 yr. IH is present at birth in
10 to 20% of those affected and almost always within the first several weeks of life; occasionally, deeper
lesions may not be apparent until a few months after birth. Size and vascularity increase rapidly, usually
peaking at about age 1 yr.
IH can be classified by general appearance (superficial, deep, or cavernous) or by other descriptive terms
(eg, strawberry hemangioma). However, because all of these lesions share a common pathophysiology
and natural history, the inclusive term infantile hemangioma is preferred.
Symptoms and Signs
Superficial lesions have a bright red appearance; deeper lesions have a bluish color. Lesions can bleed
or ulcerate from minor trauma; ulcers may be painful. IH in certain locations can interfere with function.
Lesions on the face or oropharynx may interfere with vision or obstruct the airway; those near the urethral
meatus or anus may interfere with elimination. A periocular hemangioma in an infant is an emergency
because even a few days of disrupted vision can result in permanent visual defects. Lumbosacral
hemangiomas may be a sign of neurologic or GU anomalies.
Lesions slowly involute starting at 12 to 18 mo, decreasing in size and vascularity. Generally, IH involute
by 10%/year of age (eg, 50% by age 5, 60% by age 6), with maximal involution by age 10. Involuted
lesions commonly have a yellowish or telangiectatic color and a wrinkled or lax fibrofatty texture. Residual
changes are almost always proportional to the lesion's maximal size and vascularity.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:882===
Diagnosis is clinical; the extent can be evaluated by MRI if lesions appear to encroach on vital structures.
Treatment
• Sometimes laser therapy
• Sometimes intralesional or systemic corticosteroid therapy
• General wound care for ulcerated lesions
Treatment is controversial. Many physicians treat lesions early to prevent subsequent enlargement or to
make them less noticeable; others do not treat unless a lesion causes (or risks) functional problems by its
location. When treatment is elected, laser therapy or intralesional or systemic corticosteroids are chosen
based on the location, extent, and rate of growth of the lesion. For systemic corticosteroid therapy,
prednisone 1 to 3 mg/kg po bid or tid is given for ≥ 2 wk. If resolution starts, the prednisone should be
decreased slowly; if not, the drug should be stopped.
Topical treatments and wound care are useful for ulcerated lesions and help prevent scarring, bleeding,
and pain. Compresses, topical mupirocin or metronidazole, barrier dressings (polyurethane film dressing
or petrolatum-impregnated gauze), or barrier creams may be used.
Unless complications are life threatening or vital organs are compromised, surgical excision or other
destructive procedures should be avoided because they frequently cause more scarring than occurs with
spontaneous involution. To help parents accept nonintervention, the physician can review the natural
history (photographic examples are helpful), provide serial photography of the lesion to document
involution, and listen sympathetically to parents' concerns.
Nevus Flammeus and Port-Wine Stain
Nevus flammeus and port-wine stains are capillary vascular malformations that are present at
birth and appear as flat, pink, red, or purplish lesions.
Nevi flammei
are flat pink marks that are very common on the nape, glabella, and eyelids. Lesions
around the eyes disappear in a few months. Nape lesions may disappear in early childhood, only to recur
in middle age.
Port-wine stains
are flat, reddish to purple lesions appearing anywhere on the body. Lesions become
darker and more palpable with time (often becoming quite hyperplastic by late middle age), but the lateral
extent increases only in proportion to the growth of the patient. Port-wine stains of the trigeminal area
may be a component of the Sturge-Weber syndrome (in which a similar vascular lesion appears on the
underlying meninges and cerebral cortex and is associated with epilepsy).
Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment with vascular lasers produces excellent results in many cases, especially if the lesion is treated
as early in life as possible.
The lesion can also be hidden with an opaque cosmetic cream prepared to
match the patient's skin color.
Nevus Araneus
(Spider Nevus; Spider Angioma; Vascular Spider)
Nevus araneus is a bright red, faintly pulsatile vascular lesion consisting of a central arteriole
with slender projections resembling spider legs (see
Plate 26
).
These lesions are acquired. One lesion or small numbers of lesions unrelated to internal disease may
===PAGE:883===
occur in children or adults. Patients with cirrhosis develop many spider angiomas that may become quite
prominent. Many women develop lesions during pregnancy or while taking oral contraceptives.
The lesions are asymptomatic and usually resolve spontaneously about 6 to 9 mo postpartum or after oral
contraceptives are stopped. Lesions are not uncommon on the faces of children. Compression of the
central vessel temporarily obliterates the lesion.
Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment is not usually required. If resolution is not spontaneous or treatment is desired for cosmetic
purposes, the central arteriole can be destroyed with fine-needle electrodesiccation; vascular laser
treatment may also be done.
Pyogenic Granuloma
Pyogenic granuloma is a fleshy, moist or crusty, usually scarlet vascular nodule composed of
proliferating capillaries in an edematous stroma.
The lesion, composed of vascular tissue, is neither of bacterial origin nor a true granuloma. It develops
rapidly, often at the site of recent injury (although injury may not be recalled), typically grows no larger
than 2 cm in diameter, and probably represents a vascular and fibrous response to injury. There is no sex
or age predilection. The overlying epidermis is thin, and the lesion tends to be friable, bleeds easily, and
does not blanch on pressure. The base may be pedunculated and surrounded by a collarette of
epidermis.
During pregnancy, pyogenic granulomas may become large and exuberant (eg, gingival pregnancy
tumors, or telangiectatic epulis).
Diagnosis involves biopsy and histologic examination. Histologic analysis is required for all removed
tissue because these lesions occasionally resemble and must be differentiated from melanomas or other
malignant tumors.
Treatment consists of removal by excision or curettage and electrodesiccation, but the lesions may recur.
Lymphatic Malformations
(Lymphangioma; Lymphangioma Circumscriptum; Cystic Hygroma; Cavernous Lymphangioma)
Lymphatic vascular malformations are elevated lesions composed of dilated lymphatic vessels.
Most lymphatic malformations are present at birth or develop within the first 2 yr. Lesions are usually
yellowish tan but occasionally reddish or purple if small blood vessels are intermingled. Puncture of the
lesion yields a colorless or blood-tinged fluid.
Diagnosis is made clinically and by MRI.
Treatment is usually not needed. If the lesion is excised, recurrence is common, even when removal of
dermal and subcutaneous tissues is extensive.
===PAGE:884===
Chapter 90. Cancers of the Skin
Introduction
Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer and usually develops in sun-exposed areas of skin. The
incidence is highest among outdoor workers, sportsmen, and sunbathers and is inversely related to the
amount of melanin skin pigmentation; fair-skinned people are most susceptible. Skin cancers may also
develop years after therapeutic x-rays or exposure to carcinogens (eg, arsenic ingestion).
Over one million new cases of skin cancer are diagnosed in the US yearly. About 80% are basal cell
carcinoma, 16% are squamous cell carcinoma, and 4% are melanoma. Paget's disease of the nipple or
extramammary Paget's (usually near the anus), Kaposi's sarcoma, tumors of adnexa, and cutaneous Tcell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides— make up the remaining, less common, forms of skin
cancer.
Initially, skin cancers are often asymptomatic. The most frequent presentation is a papule or blind pimple
that does not go away. Any lesion that appears to be enlarging should be biopsied—whether tenderness,
mild inflammation, crusting, or occasional bleeding is present or not. If treated early, most skin cancers
are curable.
Screening:
Routine screening for skin cancer is by patient self-examination, physician examination, or
both.
Prevention:
Because many skin cancers seem to be related to ultraviolet (UV) exposure, a number of
measures are recommended to limit exposure.
• Sun avoidance: Seeking shade, minimizing outdoor activities between 10 AM and 4 PM (when sun's
rays are strongest), and avoiding sunbathing and the use of tanning beds
• Use of protective clothing: Long-sleeved shirt, pants, and broad-brimmed hat
• Use of sunscreen: At least sun protection factor (SPF) 30 with UVA protection, used as directed; should
not be used to prolong sun exposure
Current evidence is inadequate to determine whether these measures reduce incidence or mortality of
melanoma; in nonmelanoma skin cancers (basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma), sun protection does
decrease the incidence of new cancers.
Basal Cell Carcinoma
(Rodent Ulcer)
Basal cell carcinoma is a superficial, slowly growing papule or nodule (see
Plate 29
) that derives from certain epidermal cells. Basal cell carcinomas arise from
keratinocytes near the basal layer and can be referred to as basaloid keratinocytes. Metastasis
is rare, but local growth can be highly destructive. Diagnosis is by biopsy. Treatment depends
on the tumor's characteristics and may involve curettage and electrodesiccation, surgical
excision, cryosurgery, topical chemotherapy, or, occasionally, radiation therapy.
Basal cell carcinoma is the most common type of skin cancer, with > 800,000 new cases yearly in the US.
It is more common in fair-skinned people with a history of sun exposure and is very rare in blacks.
Symptoms and Signs
The clinical manifestations and biologic behavior of basal cell carcinomas are highly variable. They may
appear as
• Small, shiny, firm, almost translucent nodules
===PAGE:885===
• Ulcerated, crusted papules or nodules
• Flat, scarlike, indurated plaques
• Red, marginated, thin papules or plaques that are difficult to differentiate from psoriasis or localized
dermatitis
Most commonly, the carcinoma begins as a shiny papule, enlarges slowly, and, after a few months or
years, shows a shiny, pearly border with prominent engorged vessels (telangiectases) on the surface and
a central dell or ulcer. Recurrent crusting or bleeding is not unusual. Commonly, the carcinomas may
alternately crust and heal, which may unjustifiably decrease patients' and physicians' concern about the
importance of the lesion.
Basal cell carcinomas rarely metastasize but may invade healthy tissues. Rarely, patients die because the
carcinoma invades or impinges on underlying vital structures or orifices (eyes, ears, mouth, bone, dura
mater).
Diagnosis
• Biopsy and histologic examination
Treatment
Treatment should be done by a specialist. The clinical appearance, size, site, and histologic subtype
determine choice of treatment—curettage and electrodesiccation, surgical excision, cryosurgery, topical
chemotherapy (imiquimod, 5-fluorouracil, and photodynamic therapy), or, occasionally, radiation therapy.
Recurrent or incompletely treated cancers, large cancers, cancers at recurrence-prone sites, and
morphea-like cancers with vague borders are often treated with Mohs microscopically controlled surgery,
in which tissue borders are progressively excised until specimens are tumor-free (as determined by
microscopic examination during surgery). Almost 25% of patients with a history of basal cell carcinoma
develop a new basal cell cancer within 5 yr of the original carcinoma. Consequently, patients with a
history of basal cell carcinoma should be seen annually for a skin examination.
Bowen's Disease
(Intraepidermal Squamous Cell Carcinoma)
Bowen's disease is a superficial squamous cell carcinoma in situ.
Bowen's disease is most common in sun-exposed areas but may arise at any location.
Lesions can be
solitary or multiple. They are red-brown and scaly or crusted, with little induration; they frequently
resemble a localized thin plaque of psoriasis, dermatitis, or a dermatophyte infection. Diagnosis is by
biopsy.
Treatment depends on the tumor's characteristics and may involve topical chemotherapy, curettage and
electrodesiccation, surgical excision, or cryosurgery.
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma is a malignant tumor of epidermal keratinocytes that invades the
dermis; this cancer usually occurs in sun-exposed areas. Local destruction may be extensive,
and metastases occur in advanced stages. Diagnosis is by biopsy. Treatment depends on the
tumor's characteristics and may involve curettage and electrodesiccation, surgical excision,
cryosurgery, or, occasionally, radiation therapy.
Squamous cell carcinoma, the 2nd most common type of skin cancer, may develop in normal tissue, in a
preexisting actinic keratosis (, in a patch of leukoplakia, or in a burn scar. The incidence in the
===PAGE:886===
US is 200,000 to 300,000 cases annually, with 2000 deaths.
The clinical appearance is highly variable, but any nonhealing lesion on sun-exposed surfaces should be
suspect. The tumor may begin as a red papule or plaque with a scaly or crusted surface and may become
nodular, sometimes with a warty surface. In some cases, the bulk of the lesion may lie below the level of
the surrounding skin. Eventually the tumor ulcerates and invades the underlying tissue.
Diagnosis
Biopsy is essential. Differential diagnosis includes many types of benign and malignant lesions, such as
basal cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma, actinic keratosis, verruca vulgaris, and seborrheic keratosis.
Prognosis
In general, the prognosis for small lesions removed early and adequately is excellent. Regional and
distant metastases of squamous cell carcinomas on sun-exposed skin are uncommon but do occur,
particularly with poorly differentiated tumors. However, about one third of lingual or mucosal cancers have
metastasized before diagnosis (.
Late-stage disease, which may require extensive surgery, is far more likely to metastasize. It spreads
initially regionally to surrounding skin and lymph nodes and eventually to nearby organs. Cancers that
occur near the ears, the vermilion, and in scars are more likely to metastasize. The overall 5-yr survival
rate for metastatic disease is 34% despite therapy.
Treatment
Treatment is similar to that for basal cell carcinoma and includes curettage and electrodesiccation,
surgical excision, cryosurgery, topical chemotherapy (imiquimod, 5-fluorouracil), and photodynamic
therapy, or, occasionally, radiation therapy (. Treatment and follow-up must be monitored
closely because of the greater risk of metastasis. Squamous cell carcinoma on the lip or other
mucocutaneous junction should be excised; at times, cure is difficult. Recurrences and large tumors
should be treated aggressively with Mohs microscopically controlled surgery, or by a team approach with
surgery and radiation therapy.
Metastatic disease is responsive to radiation therapy if metastases can be identified and are isolated.
Widespread metastases do not respond well to chemotherapeutic regimens.
Melanoma
(Malignant Melanoma)
Malignant melanoma arises from melanocytes in a pigmented area (eg, skin, mucous
membranes, eyes, or CNS). Metastasis is correlated with depth of dermal invasion. With spread,
prognosis is poor. Diagnosis is by biopsy. Wide surgical excision is the rule for operable tumors.
Metastatic disease requires chemotherapy but is difficult to cure.
About 60,000 new cases of melanoma occur yearly in the US, causing about 8400 deaths. Incidence has
remained steady over the last 8 yr (it had previously been increasing at a faster rate than any other
malignant tumor).
Melanomas occur mainly on the skin but also on the mucosa of the oral and genital regions and
conjunctiva. Melanomas vary in size, shape, and color (usually pigmented) and in their propensity to
invade and metastasize. Metastasis occurs via lymphatics and blood vessels. Local metastasis results in
the formation of nearby satellite papules or nodules that may or may not be pigmented. Direct metastasis
to skin or internal organs may occur, and occasionally, metastatic nodules or enlarged lymph nodes are
discovered before the primary lesion is identified.
Etiology
===PAGE:887===
Risk factors include
• Sun exposure
• Family and personal history
• Fair skin
• Increased numbers of melanocytic nevi
• Immunosuppression
• Occurrence of lentigo maligna
• Large congenital melanocytic nevus
• Dysplastic nevus syndrome
Patients with a personal history of melanoma have an increased risk of additional melanomas. People
who have one or more 1st-degree relatives with a history of melanoma have an increased risk (up to 6 or
8 times) over those without a family history. Melanoma is rare in blacks.
About 40 to 50% of melanomas develop from pigmented moles (see also p.
); almost all the rest arise
from melanocytes in normal skin. Atypical moles (dysplastic nevi) may be precursors to melanoma (. The very rare melanomas of childhood almost always arise from large pigmented moles (giant
congenital nevi) present at birth. Although melanomas occur during pregnancy, pregnancy does not
increase the likelihood that a mole will become a melanoma; moles frequently change in size and darken
uniformly during pregnancy. However, the following signs of malignant transformation should be carefully
sought:
• Change in size
• Irregular change in color, especially spread of red, white, and blue pigmentation to surrounding normal
skin
• Change in surface characteristics, consistency, or shape
• Signs of inflammation in surrounding skin, with possible bleeding, ulceration, itching, or tenderness
Classification
There are 4 main types of melanoma.
Lentigo maligna melanoma:
This type accounts for 5 to 15% of melanomas. It tends to arise in older
patients. It arises from lentigo maligna (Hutchinson's freckle or malignant melanoma in situ). It appears on
the face or other sun-exposed areas as an asymptomatic, flat, tan or brown, irregularly shaped macule or
patch with darker brown or black spots scattered irregularly on its surface. In lentigo maligna, both normal
and malignant melanocytes are confined to the epidermis. When malignant melanocytes invade the
dermis, the lesion is called lentigo maligna melanoma, and the cancer may metastasize.
Superficial spreading melanoma:
This type accounts for two thirds of melanomas. Typically
asymptomatic, it occurs most commonly on women's legs and men's torsos. The lesion is usually a plaque
with irregular, raised, indurated, tan or brown areas, which often have red, white, black, and blue spots or
small, sometimes protuberant blue-black nodules (see
Plate 40
). Small notchlike indentations of the margins may be noted, along with enlargement or color
change. Histologically, atypical melanocytes characteristically invade the dermis and epidermis.
===PAGE:888===
Nodular melanoma:
This type accounts for 10 to 15% of melanomas. It may occur anywhere on the
body as a dark, protuberant papule or a plaque that varies from pearl to gray to black. Occasionally, a
lesion contains little if any pigment or may look like a vascular tumor. Unless it ulcerates, nodular
melanoma is asymptomatic, but patients usually seek advice because the lesion enlarges rapidly.
Acral-lentiginous melanoma:
This type accounts for only 5 to 10% of melanomas, but it is the most
common form of melanoma in blacks. It arises on palmar, plantar, and subungual skin and has a
characteristic histologic picture similar to that of lentigo maligna melanoma.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
The differential diagnosis includes basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas, seborrheic keratoses,
atypical moles, blue nevi, dermatofibromas, moles, hematomas (especially on the hands or feet), venous
lakes, pyogenic granulomas, and warts with focal thromboses. If doubt exists, biopsy should include the
full depth of the dermis and extend slightly beyond the edges of the lesion. Biopsy should be excisional
for small lesions and incisional for larger lesions. By doing step sections, the pathologist can determine
the maximal thickness of the melanoma. Definitive radical surgery should not precede histologic
diagnosis.
Pigmented lesions with the following features should be excised or biopsied:
• Recent enlargement
• Darkening
• Bleeding
• Ulceration
However, these features usually indicate that the melanoma has already invaded the skin deeply. Earlier
diagnosis is possible if biopsy specimens can be obtained from lesions having variegated colors (eg,
brown or black
with shades of red, white, or blue), irregular elevations that are visible or palpable, and
borders with angular indentations or notches. Polarized light and immersion contact dermoscopy, which is
used to examine pigmented lesions, may be useful for distinguishing melanomas from benign lesions.
Staging:
The staging of melanoma is based on clinical and pathologic criteria and closely corresponds to
the traditional tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification system. The staging system classifies
melanomas based on local, regional, or distant disease.
• Stage I and II: Localized primary melanoma
• Stage III: Metastasis to regional lymph nodes
• Stage IV: Distant metastatic disease
Stage strongly correlates with survival. A minimally invasive microstaging technique, the so-called sentinel
lymph node biopsy (SLNB), is a major advance in the ability to stage cancers more accurately.
Recommended staging studies depend on the Breslow depth (how deeply tumor cells have invaded) and
histologic characteristics of the melanoma. Staging studies may include SLNB, laboratory tests (CBC,
LDH, liver function tests), chest x-ray, CT, and PET and are done by a coordinated team that includes
dermatologists, oncologists, general surgeons, plastic surgeons, and dermatopathologists.
Prognosis
Melanoma may spread rapidly, causing death within months of its recognition, yet the 5-yr cure rate of
early, very superficial lesions is nearly 100%. Thus, cure depends on early diagnosis and early treatment.
===PAGE:889===
For tumors of cutaneous origin (not CNS and subungual melanomas) that have not metastasized, the
survival rate varies depending on the thickness of the tumor at the time of diagnosis (see
Table 90-1
). Mucosal melanomas (especially anorectal melanomas), which are more common in
nonwhites, have a poor prognosis, although they often seem quite limited when discovered. Once
melanoma has metastasized to the lymph nodes, 5-yr survival ranges from 25 to 70% depending on the
degree of ulceration and number of nodes involved. Once melanoma has metastasized to distant sites, 5yr survival is about 10%.
Degree of lymphocytic infiltration, which represents reaction by the patient's immunologic defense system,
may correlate with the level of invasion and prognosis. Chances of cure are maximal when lymphocytic
infiltration is limited to the most superficial lesions and decrease with deeper levels of tumor cell invasion,
ulceration, and vascular or lymphatic invasion.
[Table 90-1.
5-yr Survival* for Malignant Melanoma Relative to Thickness and Ulceration]
Treatment
• Surgical excision
• Possibly adjuvant radiation therapy
• Possibly adjuvant interferon alfa
• Sometimes excision, imiquimod, and cryotherapy
Treatment is primarily by surgical excision. Although the width of margins is debated, most experts agree
that a 1-cm lateral tumor-free margin is adequate for lesions < 1 mm thick. Thicker lesions may deserve
larger margins, more radical surgery, and SLNB.
Lentigo maligna melanoma and lentigo maligna are usually treated with wide local excision and, if
necessary, skin grafting. Intensive radiation therapy is much less effective. Treatment of lentigo maligna
includes early excision (before the lesion is very large), imiquimod, and controlled cryotherapy. Most other
treatment methods usually do not penetrate deeply enough into involved follicles, which must be
removed.
Spreading or nodular melanomas are usually treated with wide local excision extending down to the
fascia. Lymph node dissection may be recommended when nodes are involved. (See also the American
Academy of Dermatology Association's Guidelines of Care for Primary Cutaneous Melanoma.)
Metastatic disease:
Metastatic disease is generally inoperable, but in certain cases, localized and
regional metastases can be excised. Chemotherapy with dacarbazine or temozolamide (oral dacarbazine
analog) and aldesleukin can be used for the treatment of metastatic melanoma. Adjuvant therapy with
recombinant biologic response modifiers (particularly interferon alfa) to suppress clinically inapparent
micrometastases may also be used for inoperable metastatic melanoma. Brain metastases may be treated
with palliative radiation, but the response is poor.
The following are under study:
• Infusion of lymphokine-activated killer cells or antibodies (for advanced-stage disease)
• Vaccine therapy
Kaposi's Sarcoma
(Multiple Idiopathic Hemorrhagic Sarcoma)
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is a multicentric vascular tumor caused by herpesvirus type 8. It can
occur in classic, AIDS-associated, endemic, and iatrogenic forms. Diagnosis is by biopsy.
===PAGE:890===
Treatment for indolent superficial lesions involves cryotherapy, electrocoagulation, excision, or
electron beam radiation therapy. Radiation therapy is used for more extensive disease. In the
AIDS-associated form, antiretrovirals provide the most improvement.
KS originates from endothelial cells in response to infection by human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8).
Immunosuppression (particularly by AIDS and drugs for organ transplant recipients) markedly increases
the likelihood of KS in HHV-8-infected patients. The tumor cells have a spindle shape, resembling smooth
muscle cells, fibroblasts, and myofibroblasts.
Classification
Classic KS:
This form occurs most often in older (> 60 yr) men of Italian, Jewish, or Eastern European
ancestry. The course is indolent, and the disease is usually confined to a small number of lesions on the
skin of the lower extremities (see
Plate 36
); visceral involvement occurs in < 10%. This form is usually not fatal.
AIDS-associated (epidemic) KS:
This form is the most common AIDS-associated cancer and is more
aggressive than classic KS. Multiple cutaneous lesions are typically present, often involving the face and
trunk. Mucosal, lymph node, and GI involvement is common. Sometimes KS is the first manifestation of
AIDS.
Endemic KS:
This form occurs in Africa independent of HIV infection. There are 2 main types:
• Prepubertal lymphadenopathic form: It predominantly affects children; primary tumors involve lymph
nodes, with or without skin lesions. The course is usually fulminant and fatal.
• Adult form: This form resembles classic KS.
Iatrogenic (immunosuppressive) KS:
This form typically develops several years after organ
transplantation. The course is more or less fulminant, depending on the degree of immunosuppression.
Symptoms and Signs
Cutaneous lesions are asymptomatic purple, pink, or red macules that may coalesce into blue-violet to
black plaques and nodules. Some edema may be present. Occasionally, nodules fungate or penetrate
soft tissue and invade bone. Mucosal lesions appear as bluish to violaceous macules, plaques, and
tumors. GI lesions can bleed, sometimes extensively, but usually are asymptomatic.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
Diagnosis is confirmed by punch biopsy. Patients with AIDS or immunosuppression require evaluation for
visceral spread by CT of the chest and abdomen. If CT is negative but pulmonary or GI symptoms are
present, bronchoscopy or GI endoscopy should be considered.
Treatment
• Surgical excision, cryotherapy, or electrocoagulation for superficial lesions
• Local radiation therapy for multiple lesions or lymph node disease
• Antiretroviral therapy or sometimes IV interferon alfa for AIDS-associated KS
• Reduction of immunosuppressants for iatrogenic KS
Indolent lesions often require no treatment. One or a few superficial lesions can be removed by excision,
cryotherapy, or electrocoagulation. Intralesional vinblastine or interferon alfa is also useful. Multiple
===PAGE:891===
lesions and lymph
node disease are treated locally with 10 to 20 Gy of radiation therapy.
AIDS-associated KS responds markedly to highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), probably because
CD4+ count improves and HIV viral load decreases; however, there is some evidence that protease
inhibitors in this regimen may block angiogenesis. AIDS patients with indolent disease and CD4+ counts >
150/
μ
L and HIV RNA < 500 copies/mL can be treated with IV interferon alfa. Patients with more extensive
or visceral disease can be given liposomal doxorubicin 20 mg/m
IV q 2 to 3 wk. If this regimen fails,
patients may receive paclitaxel. Other agents being investigated as adjuncts include IL-12,
desferrioxamine, and oral retinoids. Treatment of KS does not prolong life in most AIDS patients because
infections dominate the clinical course.
Iatrogenic KS responds best to stopping immunosuppressants. In organ transplant patients, reduction of
immunosuppressant dosage often results in reduction of KS lesions. If dosage reduction is not possible,
conventional local and systemic therapies used in other forms of KS should be instituted. Sirolimus may
also improve iatrogenic KS.
Treatment of endemic KS is challenging and typically palliative.
Paget's Disease of the Nipple
Paget's disease is a rare type of carcinoma that appears as a unilateral eczematous to
psoriasiform plaque surrounding the nipple. It involves extension to the epidermis of an
underlying ductal adenocarcinoma of the breast.
Paget's disease of the nipple should not be confused with the metabolic bone disease that is also called
Paget's disease. In Paget's disease of the nipple, metastatic disease is often present at the time of the
diagnosis.
Paget's disease of the nipple also occurs at other sites, most often in the groin or perianal area
(extramammary Paget's disease). The bladder, anus, and rectum are the most common sites.
Extramammary Paget's disease is a rare intraepithelial adenocarcinoma of apocrine gland-bearing sites.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
The redness, oozing, and crusting closely resemble dermatitis; but physicians should suspect carcinoma
because the lesion is sharply marginated, unilateral, and unresponsive to topical therapy. Biopsy shows
typical histologic changes. Because this tumor is associated with underlying cancer, systemic evaluation
is required.
Treatment
Treatment involves surgical removal of discovered tumors, including possible mastectomy for disease
involving the nipple. Treatment may also involve ablation of overlying cutaneous involvement, either
surgically or by CO
laser ablation.
===PAGE:892===
8 - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Chapter 91. Principles of Endocrinology
Introduction
The endocrine system coordinates functioning between different organs through hormones, which are
released into the bloodstream from specific types of cells within endocrine (ductless) glands. Once in
circulation, hormones affect function of the target tissue. Some hormones exert an effect on cells of the
organ from which they were released (paracrine effect), some even on the same cell type (autocrine
effect). Hormones can be peptides of various sizes, steroids (derived from cholesterol), or amino acid
derivatives.
Hormones bind selectively to receptors located inside or on the surface of target cells. Receptors inside
cells interact with hormones that regulate gene function (eg, corticosteroids, vitamin D, thyroid hormone).
Receptors on the cell surface bind with hormones that regulate enzyme activity or affect ion channels (eg,
growth hormone, thyrotropin-releasing hormone).
Hypothalamic-Pituitary Relationships
Peripheral endocrine organ functions are controlled to varying degrees by pituitary hormones (see also
Chapter 92
). Some functions (eg, secretion of insulin by the pancreas, primarily controlled by the blood
glucose level) are controlled to a minimal extent, whereas many (eg, secretion of thyroid or gonadal
hormones) are controlled to a great extent. Secretion of pituitary hormones is controlled by the
hypothalamus.
The interaction between the hypothalamus and pituitary (hypothalamic-pituitary axis) is a feedback control
system. The hypothalamus receives input from virtually all other areas of the CNS and uses it to provide
input to the pituitary. In response, the pituitary releases various hormones that stimulate certain endocrine
glands throughout the body. Changes in circulating levels of hormones produced by these endocrine
glands are detected by the hypothalamus, which then increases or decreases its stimulation of the
pituitary to maintain homeostasis.
The hypothalamus modulates the activities of the anterior and posterior lobes of the pituitary in different
ways. Neurohormones synthesized in the hypothalamus reach the anterior pituitary (adenohypophysis)
through a specialized portal vascular system and regulate synthesis and release of the 6 major peptide
hormones of the anterior pituitary. These anterior pituitary hormones regulate peripheral endocrine glands
(the thyroid, adrenals, and gonads) as well as growth and lactation. No direct neural connection exists
between the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary. In contrast, the posterior pituitary (neurohypophysis)
comprises axons originating from neuronal cell bodies located in the hypothalamus. These axons serve
as storage sites for 2 peptide hormones synthesized in the hypothalamus; these hormones act in the
periphery to regulate water balance, milk ejection, and uterine contraction.
Virtually all hormones produced by the hypothalamus and the pituitary are released in a
pulsatile fashion;
periods of such release are interspersed with periods of inactivity. Some hormones (eg,
adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH], growth hormone, prolactin) have definite circadian rhythms; others
(eg, luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone during the menstrual cycle) have month-long
rhythms with superimposed circadian rhythms.
Hypothalamic Controls
Thus far, 7 physiologically important hypothalamic neurohormones have been identified (see
Table 91-1
). Except for the biogenic amine dopamine, all are small peptides. Several are produced in the
periphery as well as in the hypothalamus and function in local paracrine systems, especially in the GI
tract. Vasoactive intestinal peptide, which also stimulates the release of prolactin, is one. Neurohormones
may control the release of multiple pituitary hormones. Regulation of most anterior pituitary hormones
depends on stimulatory signals from the hypothalamus; the exception is prolactin, which is regulated by
inhibitory stimuli. If the pituitary stalk (which connects the pituitary to the hypothalamus) is severed,
===PAGE:893===
prolactin release increases, whereas release of all other anterior pituitary hormones decreases.
Many hypothalamic abnormalities (including tumors and encephalitis and other inflammatory lesions) can
alter the release of hypothalamic neurohormones. Because neurohormones are synthesized in different
centers within the hypothalamus, some disorders affect only one neuropeptide, whereas others affect
several. The result can be undersecretion or oversecretion of neurohormones. Clinical syndromes that
result from the ensuing pituitary hormone dysfunction (eg, diabetes insipidus, acromegaly,
hypopituitarism) are discussed in
Chapter 92
.
Anterior Pituitary Function
The cells of the anterior lobe (which constitutes 80% of the pituitary by weight) synthesize and release
several hormones necessary for normal growth and development and also stimulate the activity of several
target glands.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH):
ACTH is also known as corticotropin. Corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH) is the primary stimulator of ACTH release, but antidiuretic hormone plays a role during
stress. ACTH induces the adrenal cortex to release cortisol and several weak androgens, such as
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). Circulating cortisol and other corticosteroids (including exogenous
corticosteroids) inhibit the release of CRH and ACTH. The CRH-ACTH-cortisol axis is a central
component of the response to stress. Without ACTH, the adrenal cortex atrophies and cortisol release
virtually ceases.
[Table 91-1.
Hypothalamic Neurohormones]
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH):
TSH regulates the structure and function of the thyroid gland and
stimulates synthesis and release of thyroid hormones. TSH synthesis and release are stimulated by the
hypothalamic hormone thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and suppressed (by negative feedback) by
circulating thyroid hormones.
Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH):
LH and FSH control the
production of the sex hormones. Synthesis and release of LH and FSH are stimulated by gonadotropinreleasing hormone (GnRH) and suppressed by estrogen and testosterone.
In women, LH and FSH
stimulate ovarian follicular development and ovulation (. In men, FSH acts on Sertoli cells
and is essential for spermatogenesis; LH acts on Leydig cells of the testes to stimulate testosterone
biosynthesis (.
Growth hormone (GH):
GH stimulates somatic growth and regulates metabolism. Growth hormonereleasing hormone (GHRH) is the major stimulator and somatostatin is the major inhibitor of the synthesis
and release of GH. GH controls synthesis of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1, also called somatomedinC), which largely controls growth. Although IGF-1 is produced by many tissues, the liver is the major
source. A variant of IGF-1 occurs in muscle, where it plays a role in enhancing muscle strength. It is less
under control of GH than is the liver variant.
The metabolic effects of GH are biphasic. GH initially exerts insulin-like effects, increasing glucose
uptake in muscle and fat, stimulating amino acid uptake and protein synthesis in liver and muscle, and
inhibiting lipolysis in adipose tissue. Several hours later, more profound anti-insulin-like metabolic effects
occur. They include inhibition of glucose uptake and use, causing blood glucose and lipolysis to increase,
which increases plasma free fatty acids. GH levels increase during fasting, maintaining blood glucose
levels and mobilizing fat as an alternative metabolic fuel. Production of GH decreases with aging. Ghrelin,
a hormone produced in the fundus of the stomach, promotes GH release from the pituitary, increases food
intake, and improves memory.
Prolactin:
Prolactin is produced in cells called lactotrophs that constitute about 30% of the cells of the
anterior pituitary. The pituitary doubles in size during pregnancy, largely because of hyperplasia and
hypertrophy of lactotrophs. In humans, the major function of prolactin is stimulating milk production. Also,
prolactin release occurs during sexual activity and stress. Prolactin may be a sensitive indicator of
pituitary dysfunction; prolactin is the hormone most frequently produced in excess by pituitary tumors, and
===PAGE:894===
it may be one of the hormones to become deficient from infiltrative disease or tumor compression of the
pituitary.
Other hormones:
Several other hormones are produced by the anterior pituitary. These include proopiomelanocortin (POMC, which gives rise to ACTH),
α
- and
β
-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH),
β
-
lipotropin (
β
-LPH), the enkephalins, and the endorphins. POMC and MSH can cause hyperpigmentation
of the skin and are only significant clinically in disorders in which ACTH levels are markedly elevated (eg,
Addison's disease, Nelson syndrome). The function of
β
-LPH is unknown. Enkephalins and endorphins
are endogenous opioids that bind to and activate opioid receptors throughout the CNS.
Posterior Pituitary Function
The posterior pituitary releases antidiuretic hormone (also called vasopressin or arginine vasopressin)
and oxytocin. Both hormones are released in response to neural impulses and have half-lives of about 10
min.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH):
ADH acts primarily to promote water conservation by the kidney by
increasing the permeability of the distal tubular epithelium to water. At high concentrations, ADH also
causes vasoconstriction. Like aldosterone, ADH plays an important role in maintaining fluid homeostasis
and vascular and cellular hydration. The main stimulus for ADH release is increased osmotic pressure of
water in the body, which is sensed by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus. The other major stimulus is
volume depletion, which is sensed by baroreceptors in the left atrium, pulmonary veins, carotid sinus, and
aortic arch, and then transmitted to the CNS through the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves. Other
stimulants for ADH release include pain, stress, emesis, hypoxia, exercise, hypoglycemia, cholinergic
agonists,
β
-blockers, angiotensin, and prostaglandins. Inhibitors of ADH release include alcohol,
α
-
blockers, and glucocorticoids.
A lack of ADH causes central diabetes insipidus (; an inability of the kidneys to respond
normally to ADH causes nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (. Removal of the pituitary gland
usually does not result in permanent diabetes insipidus because some of the remaining hypothalamic
neurons produce small amounts of ADH. Copeptin is coproduced with ADH in the posterior pituitary.
Measuring it may be useful in distinguishing the cause of hyponatremia.
Oxytocin:
Oxytocin has 2 major targets: the myoepithelial cells of the breast, which surround the alveoli
of the mammary gland, and the smooth muscle cells of the uterus. Suckling stimulates the production of
oxytocin, which causes the myoepithelial cells to contract. This contraction causes milk to move from the
alveoli to large sinuses for ejection (ie, the milk letdown reflex of nursing mothers). Oxytocin stimulates
contraction of uterine smooth muscle cells, and uterine sensitivity to oxytocin increases throughout
pregnancy.
However, plasma levels do not increase sharply during parturition, and the role of oxytocin in
the initiation of labor is unclear. There is no recognized stimulus for oxytocin release in men, although
men have extremely low levels.
Endocrine Disorders
Endocrine disorders can result from dysfunction originating in the peripheral endocrine gland itself
(primary disorders) or from understimulation or overstimulation by the pituitary (secondary disorders). The
disorders can result in hormone overproduction (hyperfunction) or underproduction (hypofunction).
Rarely, endocrine disorders (usually hypofunction) occur because of abnormal tissue responses to
hormones. Clinical manifestations of hypofunction disorders are often insidious and nonspecific.
Hyperfunction:
Hyperfunction of endocrine glands may result from overstimulation by the pituitary but is
most commonly due to hyperplasia or neoplasia of the gland itself. In some cases, cancers from other
tissues can produce hormones (ectopic hormone production). Hormone excess also can result from
exogenous hormone administration. In some cases, patients take hormones without telling the physician
(factitious disease). Tissue hypersensitivity to hormones can occur. Antibodies can stimulate peripheral
endocrine glands, as occurs in hyperthyroidism of Graves' disease. Destruction of a peripheral endocrine
gland can rapidly release stored hormone (eg, thyroid hormones in thyroiditis). Enzyme defects in the
synthesis of a peripheral endocrine hormone can result in overproduction of hormones proximal to the
===PAGE:895===
block. Finally, overproduction of a hormone can occur as an appropriate response to a disease state.
Hypofunction:
Hypofunction of an endocrine gland can result from understimulation by the pituitary.
Hypofunction originating within the peripheral gland itself can result from congenital or acquired disorders
(including autoimmune disorders, tumors, infections, vascular disorders, and toxins). Genetic disorders
causing hypofunction can result from deletion of a gene or by production of an abnormal hormone. A
decrease in hormone production by the peripheral endocrine gland with a resulting increase in production
of pituitary regulating hormone can lead to peripheral endocrine gland hyperplasia. For example, if
synthesis of thyroid hormone is defective, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is produced in excessive
amounts, causing goiter.
Several hormones require conversion to an active form after secretion from the peripheral endocrine
gland. Certain disorders can block this step (eg, renal disease can inhibit production of the active form of
vitamin D). Antibodies to the circulating hormone or its receptor can block the ability of the hormone to
bind to its receptor. Disease or drugs can cause increased rate of clearance of hormones. Circulating
substances may also block the function of hormones. Abnormalities of the receptor or elsewhere in the
peripheral endocrine tissue can also cause hypofunction.
Laboratory Testing
Because symptoms of endocrine disorders can begin insidiously and may be nonspecific, clinical
recognition is often delayed for months or years. For this reason, biochemical diagnosis is usually
essential; it typically requires measuring levels of the peripheral endocrine hormone, the pituitary
hormone, or both in the blood.
Free or bioavailable hormone (ie, hormone not bound to a specific binding hormone) is generally believed
to be the active form. Free or bioavailable hormones are measured using equilibrium dialysis,
ultrafiltration, or a solvent-extraction method to separate the free and albumin-bound hormone from the
binding globulin. These methods can be expensive and time-consuming. Analog and competitive free
hormone assays, although often used commercially, are not always accurate and should not be used.
Free hormone levels can also be estimated indirectly by assessing levels of the binding protein and using
them to adjust levels of the total serum hormone. However, indirect methods are inaccurate if the binding
capacity of the hormone-binding protein has been altered (eg, by a disorder).
Because most hormones have circadian rhythms, measurements need to be made at a prescribed time of
day. Hormones that vary over short periods (eg, luteinizing hormone) necessitate obtaining 3 or 4 values
over 1 or 2 h or using a pooled blood sample. Hormones with week-to-week variation (eg, testosterone)
necessitate obtaining separate values a week apart.
In some cases, indirect estimates are used. For example, because growth hormone (GH) has a short
serum half-life and is difficult to detect in serum, serum insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), which is
produced in response to GH, is often measured as an index of GH activity. Sometimes, urine (eg, free
cortisol when testing for Cushing's disease) or salivary hormone
levels may be used. Whether
measurement of circulating hormone metabolites indicates the amount of bioavailable hormone is under
investigation.
In many cases, a dynamic test is necessary. Thus, in the case of hypofunctioning organs, a stimulating
test can be used. In hyperfunction, a suppressive test can be used.
Treatment
Hypofunction disorders are usually treated by replacement of the peripheral endocrine hormone
regardless of whether the defect is primary or secondary (an exception is GH replacement for pituitary
dwarfism). If resistance to the hormone exists, drugs that reduce resistance can be used (eg, metformin or
thiazolidinediones for type 2 diabetes mellitus). Occasionally, a hormone-stimulating drug is used.
Radiation therapy, surgery, and drugs that suppress hormone production are used to treat hyperfunction
===PAGE:896===
disorders. In some cases, a receptor antagonist is used.
Aging and Endocrinology
Hormones undergo many changes as a person ages. Most hormone levels decrease. Some remain
normal, including TSH, ACTH (basal), thyroxine, cortisol (basal), 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, insulin
(sometimes increases), and estradiol (in men). Hormones that increase, including ACTH (increased
response to corticotropin-releasing hormone), follicle-stimulating hormone, sex-hormone binding globulin,
and activin (in men), gonadotropins (in women), epinephrine (in the oldest old), parathyroid hormone,
norepinephrine, cholecystokinin, vasoactive intestinal peptide and ADH (also loss of circadian rhythm),
and atrial natriuretic factor, are associated with either receptor defects or postreceptor defects, resulting
in hypofunction. Many age-related changes are similar to those in patients with hormone deficiency,
leading to the hypothesis of a hormonal fountain of youth (ie, speculation that some changes associated
with aging can be reversed by the replacement of one or more deficient hormones). Some evidence
suggests that replacing certain hormones in the elderly can improve functional outcomes (eg, muscle
strength, bone mineral density), but little evidence exists regarding effects on mortality. In some cases,
replacing hormones may be harmful, as in estrogen replacement in most older women.
A competing theory is that the age-related decline in hormone levels represents a protective slowing
down of cellular metabolism. This concept is based on the rate of living theory of aging (ie, the faster the
metabolic rate of an organism, the quicker it dies). This concept is seemingly supported by studies on the
effects of dietary restriction. Restriction decreases levels of hormones that stimulate metabolism, thereby
slowing metabolic rate; this prolongs life in rodents.
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate levels decline dramatically with age. Despite optimism for
the role of DHEA supplementation in older people, most controlled trials failed to show any major
benefits.
Pregnenolone is the precursor of all known steroid hormones. As with DHEA, its levels decline with age.
Studies in the 1940s showed its safety and benefits in people with arthritis, but additional studies failed to
show any beneficial effects on memory and muscle strength.
Levels of GH and its peripheral endocrine hormone (IGF-1) decline with age. GH replacement in older
people sometimes increases muscle mass but does not increase muscle strength (although it may in
malnourished people). Adverse effects (eg, carpal tunnel syndrome, arthralgias, water retention) are very
common. GH may have a role in the short-term treatment of some undernourished older patients, but in
critically ill undernourished patients GH increases mortality. Secretagogues that stimulate GH production
in a more physiologic pattern may improve benefit and decrease risk.
Levels of melatonin, a hormone produced by the pineal gland, also decline with aging. This decline may
play an important role in the loss of circadian rhythms with aging. Estrogen replacement in older women is
discussed in
Chapter 247
. Testosterone replacement in older men is discussed in
Chapter 229
.
===PAGE:897===
Chapter 92. Pituitary Disorders
Introduction
The pituitary gland controls the functions of peripheral endocrine glands. Pituitary structure and function
and relationships between the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland are discussed in
Chapter 91
.
Pituitary Lesions
Patients with hypothalamic-pituitary lesions generally present with some combination of symptoms and
signs of a mass lesion (eg, headaches, visual field defects—particularly bitemporal hemianopia or the
hemifield slide phenomenon [images drifting apart]—altered appetite, thirst); imaging evidence of a mass
lesion as an incidental finding; or hypersecretion or hyposecretion of one or more pituitary hormones.
The most common cause of hypopituitary or hyperpituitary secretion is a pituitary or hypothalamic tumor.
A pituitary tumor tends to produce an enlarged sella (sella turcica). Alternatively, an enlarged sella may
represent empty sella syndrome.
Empty sella syndrome:
In this disorder, the sella appears empty because it is filled with CSF, which
flattens the pituitary gland against the wall of the sella. The syndrome may be congenital, primary, or
secondary to injury (eg, ischemia after childbirth, surgery, head trauma, or radiation therapy). The typical
patient is female (> 80%), obese (about 75%), and hypertensive (30%) and may have idiopathic
intracranial hypertension (10%) or spinal fluid rhinorrhea (10%). Pituitary function in patients with empty
sella syndrome is frequently normal. However, hypopituitarism may occur, as may headaches and visual
field defects. Occasionally, patients have small coexisting pituitary tumors that secrete growth hormone
(GH), prolactin, or ACTH. Diagnosis can be confirmed by CT or MRI. No specific therapy is needed for an
empty sella alone.
Anterior lobe lesions:
Hypersecretion of anterior lobe hormones (hyperpituitarism) is almost always
selective. The anterior pituitary hormones most commonly secreted in excess are GH (as in acromegaly,
gigantism), prolactin (as in galactorrhea), and ACTH (as in the pituitary type of Cushing's syndrome).
Hyposecretion of anterior lobe hormones (hypopituitarism) may be generalized, usually due to a pituitary
tumor, or is idiopathic, or may involve the selective loss of one or a few pituitary hormones.
Posterior lobe lesions:
The 2 posterior lobe hormones are oxytocin and ADH. In women, oxytocin
causes myoepithelial cells of the breast and myometrial cells of the uterus to contract. Oxytocin is present
in men but has no proven function. Deficiency of ADH results in central diabetes insipidus (.
Excess ADH secretion results in the syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (see
Sidebar 97-1
.
Generalized Hypopituitarism
Generalized hypopituitarism refers to endocrine deficiency syndromes due to partial or
complete loss of anterior lobe pituitary function. Various clinical features occur depending on
the specific hormones that are deficient. Diagnosis involves imaging tests and measurement of
pituitary hormone levels basally and after various provocative stimuli. Treatment depends on
cause but generally includes removal of any tumor and administration of replacement
hormones
.
The many causes of hypopituitarism are listed in
Table 92-1
.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs relate to the underlying disorder and to the specific pituitary hormones that are
deficient or absent. Onset is usually insidious and may not be recognized by the patient; occasionally,
onset is sudden or dramatic.
===PAGE:898===
Most commonly, growth hormone (GH) is lost first, then gonadotropins, and finally thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) and ACTH. ADH deficiency is rare in primary pituitary disease but is common with stalk
and hypothalamic lesions. Function of all target glands decreases when all hormones are deficient
(panhypopituitarism).
Lack of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) in children leads to delayed
puberty (see
Hypopituitarism in Children Resulting in Short Stature
. Premenopausal women
develop amenorrhea, reduced libido, regression of secondary sexual characteristics, and infertility. Men
develop erectile dysfunction, testicular
[Table 92-1.
Causes of Hypopituitarism]
atrophy, reduced libido, regression of secondary sexual characteristics, and decreased spermatogenesis
with consequent infertility.
GH deficiency may contribute to decreased energy but is usually asymptomatic and clinically
undetectable in adults (see p.
for effects in children). Suggestions that GH deficiency accelerates
atherosclerosis are unproved. TSH deficiency leads to hypothyroidism, with such symptoms as facial
puffiness, hoarse voice, bradycardia, and cold intolerance. ACTH deficiency results in hypoadrenalism
with attendant fatigue, hypotension, and intolerance to stress and infection. ACTH deficiency does not
result in the hyperpigmentation characteristic of primary adrenal failure.
Hypothalamic lesions, which can result in hypopituitarism, can also disturb the centers that control
appetite, causing a syndrome resembling anorexia nervosa, or sometimes hyperphagia with massive
obesity.
Sheehan's syndrome,
which affects postpartum women, is pituitary necrosis due to hypovolemia and
shock occurring in the immediate peripartum period. Lactation does not start after childbirth, and the
patient may complain of fatigue and loss of pubic and axillary hair.
Pituitary apoplexy
is a symptom complex caused by hemorrhagic infarction of either a normal pituitary
gland or, more commonly, a pituitary tumor. Acute symptoms include severe headache, stiff neck, fever,
visual field defects, and oculomotor palsies. The resulting edema may compress the hypothalamus,
resulting in somnolence or coma. Varying degrees of hypopituitarism may develop suddenly, and the
patient may present with vascular collapse because of deficient ACTH and cortisol. The CSF often
contains blood, and MRI documents hemorrhage.
Diagnosis
• MRI or CT
• Free thyroxine (T
), TSH, and prolactin levels
• Cortisol levels plus provocative testing of pituitary-adrenal axis
• Sometimes other provocative testing
Clinical features are often nonspecific, and the diagnosis must be established with certainty before
committing the patient to a lifetime of hormone replacement therapy. Pituitary dysfunction must be
distinguished from anorexia nervosa, chronic liver disease, myotonia dystrophica, polyglandular
autoimmune disease (see
Table 92-2
), and disorders of the other endocrine glands. The clinical picture may be
[Table 92-2.
Differentiation of Generalized Hypopituitarism from Other Selected Disorders]
particularly confusing when the function of more than one gland decreases at the same time. Evidence of
structural pituitary abnormalities and of hormonal deficiencies should be sought with imaging and
laboratory tests.
===PAGE:899===
Imaging tests:
Patients should undergo high-resolution CT or MRI, with contrast media as required (to
rule out structural abnormalities, such as pituitary adenomas). PET is a research tool used in a few
specialized centers and therefore is rarely done. When no modern neuroradiologic facilities are available,
a simple cone-down lateral x-ray of the sella turcica can identify pituitary macroadenomas with a diameter
> 10 mm. Cerebral angiography is indicated only when other imaging tests suggest perisellar vascular
anomalies or aneurysms.
Laboratory testing:
Initial evaluation should include testing for TSH and ACTH deficiencies, because
both conditions are potentially life threatening. Testing for deficiencies of other hormones is also
discussed elsewhere (.
Free T
and TSH levels should be determined. Levels of both are usually low in generalized
hypopituitarism; a pattern of normal TSH level with low free T
may also occur. In contrast, elevated TSH
levels with low free T
indicate a primary abnormality of the thyroid gland.
Synthetic thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 200 to 500
μ
g IV given over 15 to 30 sec, may help
identify patients with hypothalamic as opposed to pituitary dysfunction, although this test is not often
done. Serum TSH levels are generally measured at 0, 20, and 60 min after injection. If pituitary function is
intact, TSH should rise by > 5 mU/L, peaking by 30 min after injection. A delayed rise in serum TSH levels
may occur in patients with hypothalamic disease. However, some patients with primary pituitary disease
also show a delayed rise.
Serum cortisol levels alone are not reliable indicators of ACTH-adrenal axis function. One of several
provocative tests should be done. The
short ACTH stimulation test
is a safer and less labor-intensive
test for cortisol deficiency than the insulin tolerance test. In the short ACTH stimulation test, synthetic
ACTH 250
μ
g IV or IM (standard test) or 1
μ
g IV (low-dose test) is given, and the blood cortisol response
is measured 30 and 60 min later. Cortisol should rise significantly; a peak of < 20
μ
g/dL is abnormal.
However, the short ACTH stimulation test is abnormal in secondary cortisol deficiency only when done at
least 2 to 4 wk after onset of the deficiency; before this time, the adrenal glands have not atrophied and
remain responsive to exogenous ACTH.
The
insulin tolerance test
is considered the most accurate way of evaluating ACTH (as well as GH and
prolactin) reserve, but because of its demands, it is probably best reserved for patients who fail the short
synacthen test (if confirmation is needed) or when a test must be done within 2 to 4 wk of a possible
pituitary injury. Regular insulin at a dosage of 0.1 units/kg body weight IV is given over 15 to 30 sec, and
venous blood samples are obtained to determine GH, cortisol, and glucose levels at baseline (before
insulin administration) and 20, 30, 45, 60, and 90 min later. If glucose drops to < 40 mg/dL (< 2.22
mmol/L) or symptoms of hypoglycemia develop, cortisol should increase by > 7
μ
g/dL or to > 20
μ
g/dL.
(CAUTION:
This test is hazardous in patients with severe documented panhypopituitarism or diabetes
mellitus and in the elderly and is contraindicated in patients with coronary artery disease or epilepsy. A
health care practitioner should be present during the test.
) Usually, only transient perspiration,
tachycardia, and nervousness occur. If the patient complains of palpitations, loses consciousness, or has
a seizure, the test should be stopped promptly by giving 50 mL of 50% glucose solution IV.
Neither the short ACTH stimulation test nor the insulin tolerance test alone will differentiate between
primary (Addison's disease) and secondary (hypopituitary) adrenal insufficiency. Tests to make this
distinction and to evaluate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis are described under Addison's disease
(. An alternative provocative test that is done much less often is the corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH) test. CRH 1
μ
g/kg IV is given by rapid injection. Serum ACTH and cortisol levels are
measured 15 min before, then at baseline, and 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after the injection. Adverse
effects include temporary flushing, a metallic taste in the mouth, and slight and transient hypotension.
Prolactin levels are routinely measured. These levels are often elevated up to 5 times normal values
when a large pituitary tumor is present, even if it does not produce prolactin. The tumor compresses the
pituitary stalk, preventing dopamine, which inhibits pituitary prolactin production and release, from
reaching the pituitary. Patients with such hyperprolactinemia often have hypogonadotropism and
===PAGE:900===
secondary hypogonadism.
Measurement of basal levels of LH and FSH is most helpful in evaluating hypopituitarism in
postmenopausal women not taking exogenous estrogens in whom circulating gonadotropin
concentrations are normally high (> 30 mIU/mL). Although gonadotropin levels tend to be low in other
patients with panhypopituitarism, overlap exists with the normal range. Levels of both hormones should
increase in response to synthetic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) at a dose of 100
μ
g IV, with
LH peaking about 30 min and FSH peaking 40 min after GnRH administration. However, normal,
diminished, or absent responses to GnRH may occur in hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction. Normal
increases in LH and FSH in response to GnRH vary. Administration of exogenous GnRH is not helpful in
distinguishing primary hypothalamic disorders from primary pituitary disorders.
Screening for GH deficiency in adults is not recommended unless GH treatment is contemplated (eg, for
unexplained reduced energy and quality of life in patients with hypopituitarism in which other hormones
have been fully replaced). GH deficiency is suspected if ≥ 2 other pituitary hormones are deficient.
Because GH levels vary by time of day and other factors and are difficult to interpret, levels of insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1), which reflect GH, are used; low levels suggest GH deficiency, but normal levels
do not rule it out. A provocative test of GH release ( may be necessary.
Although the usefulness of provocative testing of pituitary function using releasing hormones remains to
be established, if such testing is elected, it is most efficient to evaluate multiple hormones simultaneously.
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (1
μ
g/kg), CRH (1
μ
g/kg), TRH (200
μ
g), and GnRH (100
μ
g) are
given together IV over 15 to 30 sec. Glucose, cortisol, GH, TSH, prolactin, LH, FSH, and ACTH are
measured at frequent intervals for the ensuing 180 min. The normal responses are the same as those
delineated earlier for individual testing.
Treatment
• Hormone replacement
• Treatment of cause (eg, tumor)
Treatment is replacement of the hormones of the hypofunctioning target glands, as discussed in the
pertinent chapters in this section and elsewhere in THE MANUAL. Adults ≤ 50 yr deficient in GH are now
sometimes treated with GH doses of 0.002 to 0.012 mg/kg sc once/day. Benefits of treatment include
improved energy and quality of life, increased body muscle mass, and decreased body fat mass.
Suggestions that GH replacement can prevent an acceleration of atherosclerosis induced by GH
deficiency are unproved.
When hypopituitarism is due to a pituitary tumor, specific treatment must be directed at the tumor as well
as replacing hormones. The appropriate management of such tumors is controversial. If the tumor is small
and does not secrete prolactin, most endocrinologists favor transsphenoidal removal. Most
endocrinologists consider dopamine agonists, such as bromocriptine or the longer-acting cabergoline, the
initial treatment of prolactinomas, regardless of size, if there is amenorrhea in a woman or erectile
dysfunction in a man (see
Galactorrhea
. Patients with macroadenomas > 2 cm with extremely
high circulating levels of prolactin may require surgery or irradiation in addition to
dopamine agonist
treatment. Supervoltage irradiation of the pituitary may be added or used alone. With larger tumors and
suprasellar extension, resection of the entire tumor, either transsphenoidally or transfrontally, may not be
possible, and adjunctive supervoltage irradiation may be warranted.
In pituitary apoplexy, immediate surgery is warranted if visual field disturbances or oculomotor palsies
develop suddenly or if somnolence progresses to coma because of hypothalamic compression. Although
management with high-dose corticosteroids and general support may suffice in a few cases,
transsphenoidal decompression of the tumor should generally be undertaken promptly.
Surgery and irradiation may be followed by the loss of other pituitary hormone functions. Irradiated
patients may lose endocrine function slowly over years. Therefore, posttreatment hormonal status should
be evaluated frequently, preferably at 3 and 6 mo and yearly thereafter. Such evaluation should include at
===PAGE:901===
least assessment of thyroid and adrenal function. Patients may also develop visual difficulties related to
fibrosis of the optic chiasm. Sellar imaging and visual field assessment should be done at least every 2 yr
initially for about 10 yr, particularly if residual tumor tissue is present.
Selective Pituitary Hormone Deficiencies
Selective deficiencies of pituitary hormones may represent an early stage in the development of more
generalized hypopituitarism. Patients must be observed for signs of other pituitary hormone deficiencies,
and sellar imaging should be done at intervals to check for signs of a pituitary tumor.
Isolated growth hormone (GH)
deficiency is responsible for many cases of pituitary dwarfism (. Although one autosomal dominant form of complete GH deficiency is associated with a deletion of
the GH structural gene, such gene defects probably account for a minority of cases. Treatment of GH
deficiency in adults < 50 yr is discussed elsewhere.
Isolated gonadotropin deficiency
occurs in both sexes and must be distinguished from primary
hypogonadism; men have low serum testosterone levels and infertility, and women have amenorrhea, low
serum estrogen levels, and infertility. A eunuchoid habitus is generally present. However, patients with
primary hypogonadism ( have elevated levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and folliclestimulating hormone (FSH), whereas those with gonadotropin deficiency, either secondary (pituitary) or
tertiary (hypothalamic), have low-normal, low, or unmeasurable levels of LH and FSH. Although most
cases of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism involve deficiencies of both LH and FSH, in rare cases the
secretion of only one is impaired. Isolated gonadotropin deficiency must also be distinguished from
hypogonadotropic amenorrhea secondary to exercise, diet, or mental stress (. Although the
history may be helpful, differential diagnosis may be impossible.
In
Kallmann syndrome,
the specific lack of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is associated with
midline facial defects, including anosmia and cleft lip or palate, and with color blindness. Embryologic
studies have shown that GnRH neurons originally develop in the epithelium of the olfactory placode and
migrate into the septal-preoptic region of the hypothalamus early in development. In at least some cases,
gene defects, localized to the X chromosome in the X-linked form of the disorder and termed the
KALIG-1
(Kallmann syndrome interval gene 1) gene, have been found in the adhesion proteins facilitating this
neuronal migration. Administration of GnRH may be indicated (.
Isolated ACTH deficiency
is rare. Weakness, hypoglycemia, weight loss, and decreased axillary and
pubic hair suggest the diagnosis. Blood and urinary steroid levels are low and rise to normal after ACTH
replacement. Clinical and laboratory evidence of other hormonal deficiencies is absent. Treatment is with
cortisol replacement, as for Addison's disease (.
Isolated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) deficiency
is likely when clinical features of
hypothyroidism exist, serum TSH levels are not elevated, and no other pituitary hormone deficiencies
exist. Serum TSH levels, as measured by immunoassay, are not always lower than normal, suggesting
that the TSH secreted is biologically inactive. Administration of recombinant human TSH increases
thyroid hormone levels (see also
Hypothyroidism
.
Isolated prolactin deficiency
has been noted rarely in women who fail to lactate after delivery. Basal
prolactin levels are low and do not increase in response to provocative stimuli, such as thyroid-releasing
hormone. Administration of prolactin is not indicated.
Hypopituitarism in Children Resulting in Short Stature
(Pituitary Dwarfism)
Hypopituitarism in children typically results in abnormally slow growth and short stature with
normal proportions. It is usually due to a pituitary tumor but may be idiopathic. Diagnosis
involves measurement of growth hormone (GH) levels at baseline and in response to
pharmacologic stimuli. Treatment usually involves removal of the causative tumor and GH
replacement
.
===PAGE:902===
Hypopituitarism in children may be generalized, involving deficiency of several pituitary hormones, but it is
usually first expressed clinically as short stature resulting from deficiency of GH. Isolated deficiency of GH
may also occur.
Hypopituitarism in children is usually due to a pituitary tumor (most commonly a craniopharyngioma) or is
idiopathic. The combination of lytic lesions of the bone or skull and diabetes insipidus suggests
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis (. Hypothalamic or pituitary hormone deficiency as well as
isolated GH deficiency may occur in patients with midline defects, such as cleft palate or septo-optic
dysplasia, which involves absence of the septum pellucidum, optic nerve atrophy, and hypopituitarism.
GH deficiency, either alone or in patients with other abnormalities, is hereditary in about 5% of cases.
Therapeutic radiation of the CNS for various cancers causes slowing of linear growth, which can often be
linked to resulting GH deficiency. Radiation of the spine, either prophylactic or therapeutic, may further
impair the growth potential of the vertebrae and further jeopardize height gain.
Symptoms and Signs
In a child with hypopituitarism, height is below the 3rd percentile, and growth velocity is < 6 cm/yr before
age 4 yr, < 5 cm/yr from age 4 to 8 yr, and < 4 cm/yr before puberty. Skeletal maturation, assessed by
bone age determination, is > 2 yr behind chronologic age.
Although of small stature, a child with hypopituitarism retains normal proportionality between upper and
lower body segments. The child fails to begin pubertal development. However, a child with isolated GH
deficiency secondary to hypopituitarism may undergo delayed pubertal development.
Growth data for height and weight should be plotted on a growth chart (auxologic assessment) for all
children. When growth is abnormal, bone age should be determined from an x-ray of the left hand (by
convention). In GH deficiency, skeletal maturation is usually delayed to the same extent as height.
Evaluating the pituitary gland and sella turcica with CT or MRI is indicated to rule out calcifications and
tumors; the sella turcica is abnormally small in 10 to 20% of patients.
Diagnosis
• Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) levels and sometimes IGF binding protein type 3 (IGFBP-3) levels
• Usually confirmation by provocative testing
In mid to late childhood, IGF-1 levels, which reflect GH activity, are measured because GH levels are
highly variable and difficult to interpret. Normal IGF-1 levels help exclude GH deficiency. However, IGF-1
levels are low in conditions other than GH deficiency, such as psychosocial deprivation, undernutrition,
and hypothyroidism. Because IGF-1 levels are normally low in infancy and early childhood, they do not
allow reliable discrimination between normal and subnormal in these age groups. In these children, levels
of IGFBP-3 (the major carrier of IGF peptides) are measured. IGFBP-3 is less affected by undernutrition
than is IGF-1.
In children with low levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3, GH deficiency is usually confirmed by measuring GH
levels. Because basal GH levels are typically low or undetectable (except after the onset of sleep),
assessment of GH levels requires provocative testing. However, provocative testing is nonphysiologic,
subject to laboratory error, and poorly reproducible, and interpretation of data relies on arbitrary
definitions of "normal" that vary by age and sex.
The insulin tolerance test may be the most effective provocative test for stimulating GH release. Less
dangerous, but also less reliable, are tests using arginine infusion (500 mg/kg IV given over 30 min),
levodopa (10 mg/kg to children; 500 mg po to adults), sleep, or 20 min of vigorous exercise. Generally,
any GH level > 10 ng/mL or any response of > 5 ng/mL after a stimulus is sufficient to rule out GH
deficiency. Increases in GH of < 5 ng/mL or to levels < 10 ng/mL are difficult to interpret. What constitutes
a normal response, however, is arbitrary, and all provocative tests of GH
secretion occasionally produce
===PAGE:903===
misleading results. Because no single test is 100% effective in eliciting GH release, a 2nd provocative
test should be done if the first is abnormal. GH levels generally peak 30 to 90 min after administration of
insulin or the onset of arginine infusion, 30 to 120 min after levodopa, 60 to 120 min after the onset of
sleep, and after 20 min of vigorous exercise. Because GH responses are generally abnormal in patients
with diminished thyroid or adrenal function, testing should be conducted in these patients only after
adequate hormone replacement therapy.
The value of exogenous growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) alone in evaluating GH secretion is
not established. In normal people, a dose of 1
μ
g/kg GHRH IV administered over 15 to 30 sec results in
maximal but variable release of GH, typically reaching a peak about 60 min after GHRH injection. The
variability in pituitary responsiveness to GHRH is consistent with the hypothesis that intermittent secretion
of somatostatin, which opposes GHRH, is responsible for modulating pituitary GH output. Presumably,
absent or diminished increases in GH in response to GHRH identify patients with GH deficiency, but
whether the pattern of response distinguishes primary hypothalamic disease from pituitary disease is
unclear. In children with GH deficiency presumably secondary to GHRH deficiency, highly variable GH
responses to GHRH occur. The combination of arginine and GHRH improves the sensitivity for
diagnosing GH deficiency.
Provocative testing may not detect subtle defects in the regulation of GH release. For example, in
children with short stature secondary to GH secretory dysfunction, results of provocative testing for GH
release are usually normal. However, serial measurements of GH levels over 12 to 24 h indicate
abnormally low 12- or 24-h integrated GH secretion.
If diminished GH release is confirmed, secretion of other pituitary hormones and (if abnormal) hormones
of their target peripheral endocrine glands also must be evaluated.
Treatment
• Recombinant GH supplements
Recombinant GH is indicated for all children with short stature who have documented GH deficiency.
Dosing is usually from 0.03 to 0.05 mg/kg sc once/day. With therapy, height velocity often increases to 10
to 12 cm/yr in the first year and, although it increases more slowly thereafter, remains above pretreatment
rates. Therapy is continued until an acceptable height is reached or growth rate falls below 2.5 cm/yr.
Adverse effects of GH therapy are few but include idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor
cerebri), slipped capital femoral epiphysis, and transient mild peripheral edema. Before the advent of
recombinant GH, GH extracted from pituitary glands was used. This preparation rarely led to CreutzfeldtJakob disease 20 to 40 yr after treatment (. Pituitary-extracted GH was last used in the
1980s.
It is controversial whether short children with clinical features of GH deficiency but with normal GH
secretion and normal IGF-1 levels should be treated with GH. Many experts recommend a trial of GH
therapy for 6 to 12 mo, continuing GH only if there is a doubling of or an increase of 3 cm/yr over the
pretreatment height velocity. Others object to this approach because it is expensive, is experimental, may
lead to adverse effects, labels otherwise healthy children as abnormal, and raises ethical and
psychosocial concerns that feed into the bias of "heightism."
Cortisol and thyroid hormone should be replaced throughout childhood, adolescence, and adulthood in
patients with short stature due to pituitary dwarfism when circulating levels of these hormones are low
(see pp.
and
). When puberty fails to occur normally, treatment with gonadal sex steroids is
indicated (.
GH therapy in children with short stature due to therapeutic radiation of the pituitary gland for cancer
carries a theoretic risk of causing cancer recurrence. However, studies have not shown a greater-thanexpected incidence of new cancers or a greater recurrence rate. GH replacement can probably be safely
instituted at least 1 yr after the successful completion of anticancer therapy.
===PAGE:904===
Gigantism and Acromegaly
Gigantism and acromegaly are syndromes of excessive secretion of growth hormone
(hypersomatotropism) that are nearly always due to a pituitary adenoma. Before closure of the
epiphyses, the result is gigantism. Later, the result is acromegaly, which causes distinctive
facial and other features. Diagnosis is clinical and by skull and hand x-rays and measurement of
growth hormone levels. Treatment involves removal or destruction of the responsible
adenoma.
Many growth hormone (GH)-secreting adenomas contain a mutant form of the G
s
protein, which is a
stimulatory regulator of adenylate cyclase. Cells with the mutant form of G
s
protein secrete GH even in
the absence of growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH). A few cases of ectopic GHRH-producing
tumors, especially of the pancreas and lung, also have been described.
Symptoms and Signs
Pituitary gigantism:
This rare condition occurs if GH hypersecretion begins in childhood, before closure
of the epiphyses. Skeletal growth velocity and ultimate stature are increased, but little bony deformity
occurs. However, soft-tissue swelling occurs, and the peripheral nerves are enlarged. Delayed puberty or
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is also frequently present, resulting in a eunuchoid habitus.
Acromegaly:
In acromegaly, GH hypersecretion usually starts between the 20s and 40s. When GH
hypersecretion begins after epiphyseal closure, the earliest clinical manifestations are coarsening of the
facial features (see
Plate 21
) and soft-tissue swelling of the hands and feet. Appearance changes, and larger rings, gloves,
and shoes are needed. Photographs of the patient are important in delineating the course of the disease.
In adults with acromegaly, coarse body hair increases and the skin thickens and frequently darkens. The
size and function of sebaceous and sweat glands increase, such that patients frequently complain of
excessive perspiration and offensive body odor. Overgrowth of the mandible leads to protrusion of the
jaw (prognathism) and malocclusion of teeth. Cartilaginous proliferation of the larynx leads to a deep,
husky voice. The tongue is frequently enlarged and furrowed. In longstanding acromegaly, costal cartilage
growth leads to a barrel chest. Articular cartilaginous proliferation occurs early in response to GH excess,
with the articular cartilage possibly undergoing necrosis and erosion. Joint symptoms are common, and
crippling degenerative arthritis may occur.
Peripheral neuropathies occur commonly because of compression of nerves by adjacent fibrous tissue
and endoneural fibrous proliferation. Headaches are common because of the pituitary tumor. Bitemporal
hemianopia may develop if suprasellar extension compresses the optic chiasm. The heart, liver, kidneys,
spleen, thyroid, parathyroid glands, and pancreas are larger than normal. Cardiac disease occurs in
perhaps one third of patients, with a doubling in the risk of death from cardiac disease. Hypertension
occurs in up to one third of patients. The risk of cancer, particularly of the GI tract, increases 2-fold to 3fold. GH increases tubular reabsorption of phosphate and leads to mild hyperphosphatemia. Impaired
glucose tolerance occurs in nearly one half the patients with acromegaly and in gigantism, but clinically
significant diabetes mellitus occurs in only about 10% of patients.
Galactorrhea occurs in some women with acromegaly, usually in association with hyperprolactinemia (see
p.
). However, galactorrhea may occur with GH excess alone, because GH itself stimulates lactation.
Decreased gonadotropin secretion often occurs with GH-secreting tumors. About one third of men with
acromegaly develop erectile dysfunction, and nearly all women develop menstrual irregularities or
amenorrhea.
Diagnosis
• CT or MRI
• Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) levels
===PAGE:905===
• Usually GH levels
Diagnosis can be made from the characteristic clinical findings. CT, MRI, or skull x-rays disclose cortical
thickening, enlargement of the frontal sinuses, and enlargement and erosion of the sella turcica. X-rays of
the hands show tufting of the terminal phalanges and soft-tissue thickening. Generally, glucose tolerance
is abnormal and serum phosphate levels are mildly elevated.
Serum IGF-1 should be measured in patients with suspected acromegaly; IGF-1 levels are typically
substantially elevated (3-fold to 10-fold), and because IGF-1 levels do not fluctuate like GH levels do,
they are the simplest way to assess GH hypersecretion. IGF-1 levels also can be used to monitor
response to therapy.
Plasma GH levels measured by radioimmunoassay are typically elevated. Blood should be taken before
the patient eats breakfast (basal state); in normal people, basal GH levels are < 5 ng/mL. Transient
elevations of GH are normal and must be distinguished from pathologic hypersecretion. The degree of
GH suppression after a glucose load remains the standard and thus should be measured in patients with
elevated plasma GH; however, the results are assay-dependent, and the cutoff for normal suppression is
controversial. Secretion in normal people is suppressed to < 2 ng/mL (a cutoff of < 1 ng/mL is often used)
within 90 min of administration of glucose 75 g po. Most patients with acromegaly have substantially
higher values. Basal plasma GH levels
are also important in monitoring response to therapy.
CT or MRI of the head should be done to look for a tumor. If a tumor is not visible, excessive secretion of
pituitary GH may be due to a non-CNS tumor producing excessive amounts of ectopic GHRH.
Demonstration of elevated levels of plasma GHRH can confirm the diagnosis. Lungs and pancreas may
be first evaluated in searching for the sites of ectopic production.
Treatment
• Surgery or radiation therapy
Ablative therapy with surgery or radiation is generally indicated. Transsphenoidal resection is preferred,
but choices vary at different institutions. Stereotactic supervoltage radiation, delivering about 5000 cGy to
the pituitary, is used, but GH levels may not fall to normal for several years. Treatment with accelerated
protons (heavy particle radiation) permits delivery of larger doses of radiation (equivalent to 10,000 cGy)
to the pituitary; such therapy poses higher risk of cranial nerve and hypothalamic damage and is available
only in a few centers. Development of hypopituitarism several years after irradiation is common. Because
radiation damage is cumulative, proton beam therapy should not be used after conventional
γ
-irradiation.
A combined approach with both surgery and radiation therapy is indicated for patients with progressive
extrasellar involvement by a pituitary tumor and for patients whose entire tumor cannot be resected, which
is often the case.
Surgical removal of the tumor is likely to have been curative if GH levels after the glucose tolerance test
and IGF-1 levels reach normal values. If one or both values are abnormal, further therapy is usually
needed. If GH excess is poorly controlled, hypertension, heart failure, and a doubling in the death rate
occur. If GH levels are < 5 ng/mL, however, mortality does not increase.
In general, drug therapy is indicated if surgery and radiation therapy are contraindicated, if they have not
been curative, or if radiation therapy is being given time to work. In such instances, a somatostatin
analog, octreotide, is given at 0.05 to 0.15 mg sc q 8 to 12 h; it suppresses GH secretion effectively in
patients refractory to bromocriptine, surgery, or irradiation. Longer-acting somatostatin analogs, such as
mannitol-modified release octreotide (octreotide LAR) given 10 to 30 mg IM q 4 to 6 wk and lanreotide
given 30 mg IM q 10 to 14 days, are more convenient. Bromocriptine mesylate (1.25 to 5 mg po bid) may
effectively lower GH levels in a small percentage of patients but is less effective than somatostatin
analogs.
Pegvisomant, a GH receptor blocker, has been shown to reduce the effects of GH and lower IGF-1 levels
in people with acromegaly, without apparent increase in pituitary tumor size. This drug may find a place in
treating patients who are partially or totally unresponsive to somatostatin analogs.
===PAGE:906===
Galactorrhea
Galactorrhea is lactation in men or in women who are not breastfeeding. It is generally due to a
prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma. Diagnosis is by measurement of prolactin levels and
imaging tests. Treatment involves tumor inhibition with dopamine agonist drugs and sometimes
removal or destruction of the adenoma
.
Etiology
Galactorrhea is generally due to a prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma (prolactinoma). Most tumors in
women are microadenomas (< 10 mm in diameter), but a small percentage are macroadenomas (> 10
mm) when diagnosed. The frequency of microadenomas is much lower in men, perhaps because of later
recognition.
Hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea also may be caused by ingestion of certain drugs, including
phenothiazines, other antipsychotics, certain antihypertensives (especially
α
-methyldopa), and opioids.
Primary hypothyroidism can cause hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea, because increased levels of
thyroid-releasing hormone increase secretion of prolactin as well as thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). It
is unclear why hyperprolactinemia is associated with hypogonadotropism and hypogonadism. Causes of
hyperprolactinemia are listed in
Table 92-3
.
Symptoms and Signs
Abnormal lactation is not defined quantitatively; it is milk release that is inappropriate, persistent, or
worrisome to the patient. Spontaneous lactation is more unusual than milk released in response to
manual expression. The milk is white. Women with galactorrhea commonly also have amenorrhea or
oligomenorrhea. Women with galactorrhea and amenorrhea may also have symptoms and signs of
estrogen deficiency, including dyspareunia, due to inhibition of pulsatile luteinizing hormone and folliclestimulating hormone release
[Table 92-3.
Causes of Hyperprolactinemia]
by high prolactin levels. However, estrogen production may be normal, and signs of androgen excess
have been observed in some women with hyperprolactinemia. Hyperprolactinemia may occur with other
menstrual cycle disturbances besides amenorrhea, including infrequent ovulation and corpus luteum
dysfunction.
Men with prolactin-secreting pituitary tumors typically have headaches or visual difficulties. About two
thirds of affected men have loss of libido and erectile dysfunction.
Diagnosis
• Prolactin levels
• Thyroxine (T
) and TSH levels
• CT or MRI
Diagnosis of galactorrhea due to a prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma is based on elevated prolactin
levels. In general, prolactin levels correlate with the size of a pituitary tumor and can be used to follow
patients over time. Serum gonadotropin and estradiol levels are either low or in the normal range in
women with hyperprolactinemia. Primary hypothyroidism is easily ruled out by absence of elevated TSH.
High-resolution CT or MRI is the method of choice in identifying microadenomas. Visual field examination
is indicated in all patients with macroadenomas and in any patient who elects drug therapy or surveillance
only.
===PAGE:907===
Treatment
• Depends on cause, symptoms, and other factors
The treatment of microprolactinomas is controversial. Asymptomatic patients who have prolactin levels <
100 ng/mL and normal CT or MRI results or who have only microadenomas can probably be observed;
serum prolactin often normalizes within years. Patients with hyperprolactinemia should be monitored with
quarterly measurement of prolactin levels and undergo sellar CT or MRI annually for at least an additional
2 yr. The frequency of sellar imaging can then be reduced if prolactin levels do not increase. Indications
for treatment in women include the desire for pregnancy, amenorrhea or significant oligomenorrhea
(because of the risk of osteoporosis), hirsutism, low libido, and troublesome galactorrhea. Indications in
men include hypogonadism (because of the risk of osteoporosis), erectile dysfunction, low libido, and
troublesome infertility.
The initial treatment is usually a dopamine agonist such as bromocriptine (1.25 to 5 mg po bid) or the
longer-acting cabergoline (0.25 to 1.0 mg po once/wk or twice/wk). Cabergoline is the treatment of choice
because it seems to be more easily tolerated and more potent than bromocriptine. Women trying to
become pregnant should switch to bromocriptine at least 1 mo before planned conception and stop
bromocriptine use at the time of a positive pregnancy test; long-term safety data are better established for
bromocriptine than for cabergoline. Exogenous estrogen can be given to women with a microadenoma
who are clinically hypoestrogenic or have low estradiol levels. Exogenous estrogen is unlikely to cause
tumor expansion.
Patients with macroadenomas generally should be treated with dopamine agonists or surgically but only
after thorough testing of pituitary function and evaluation for radiation therapy. Dopamine agonists are
usually the initial treatment of choice and usually shrink the tumor. If prolactin levels fall and symptoms
and signs of compression by the tumor abate, no other therapy may be necessary. Surgery or radiation
therapy may be easier to do or yield better results after tumor shrinkage induced by a dopamine agonist.
Although dopamine agonist treatment usually needs to be continued long-term, prolactin-secreting tumors
sometimes remit, either spontaneously or perhaps aided by the drug therapy. Sometimes, therefore,
dopamine agonists can be stopped without a recurrence of the tumor or a rise in prolactin levels;
remission is more likely with microadenomas than macroadenomas. Remission is also more likely after
pregnancy.
High doses of dopamine agonists, particularly cabergoline and pergolide, are thought to have caused
valvular heart disease in some patients with Parkinson's disease. It is not clear whether the lower doses
of dopamine agonists used for hyperprolactinemia similarly increase the risk of valvular heart disease, but
the possibility should be discussed with patients, and echocardiographic surveillance should be
considered. The risk may be less with bromocriptine or a nonergot-derived dopamine agonist (eg,
quinagolide).
Radiation therapy should be used only in patients with progressive disease who do not respond to other
forms of therapy. With irradiation, hypopituitarism often develops several years after therapy. Monitoring
endocrine function and sellar imaging are indicated yearly for life.
Central Diabetes Insipidus
(Vasopressin-Sensitive Diabetes Insipidus)
(See also
Sidebar 97-1
on p.
and
Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
)
Diabetes insipidus (DI) results from a deficiency of ADH due to a hypothalamic-pituitary disorder
(central DI [CDI]) or from resistance of the kidney to ADH (nephrogenic DI [NDI]). Polyuria and
polydipsia develop. Diagnosis is by water deprivation test showing failure to maximally
concentrate urine; ADH levels and response to exogenous ADH help distinguish CDI from NDI.
Treatment is with intranasal desmopressin or lypressin. Nonhormonal treatment includes use of
diuretics (mainly thiazides) and ADH-releasing drugs, such as chlorpropamide
.
===PAGE:908===
Pathophysiology
Polyuria may result from CDI, a deficiency of ADH, NDI, or compulsive or habitual water drinking
(psychogenic polydipsia). The posterior lobe of the pituitary is the major site of ADH storage and release,
but ADH is synthesized within the hypothalamus. Newly synthesized hormone can still be released into
the circulation as long as the hypothalamic nuclei and part of the neurohypophyseal tract are intact. Only
about 10% of neurosecretory neurons must remain intact to avoid CDI. The pathology of CDI thus always
involves the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus or a major portion of the pituitary
stalk.
CDI may be complete (absence of ADH) or partial (insufficient amounts of ADH). CDI may be primary, in
which there is a marked decrease in the hypothalamic nuclei of the neurohypophyseal system.
Etiology
Primary CDI:
Genetic abnormalities of the ADH gene on chromosome 20 are responsible for autosomal
dominant forms of primary CDI, but many cases are idiopathic.
Secondary CDI:
CDI may also be secondary (acquired), caused by various lesions, including
hypophysectomy, cranial injuries (particularly basal skull fractures), suprasellar and intrasellar tumors
(primary or metastatic), Langerhans' cell histiocytosis (Hand-Schuller-Christian disease), granulomas
(sarcoidosis or TB), vascular lesions (aneurysm and thrombosis), and infections (encephalitis or
meningitis).
Symptoms and Signs
Onset may be insidious or abrupt, occurring at any age. The only symptoms in primary CDI are polydipsia
and polyuria. In secondary CDI, symptoms and signs of the associated lesions are also present.
Enormous quantities of fluid may be ingested, and large volumes (3 to 30 L/day) of very dilute urine (sp gr
usually < 1.005 and osmolality < 200 mOsm/L) are excreted. Nocturia almost always occurs. Dehydration
and hypovolemia may develop rapidly if urinary losses are not continuously replaced.
Diagnosis
• Water deprivation test
• Sometimes ADH levels
CDI must be differentiated from other causes of polyuria (see
Table 92-4
), particularly psychogenic polydipsia and NDI. All tests for CDI (and for NDI) are based on the
principle that increasing the plasma osmolality in normal people will lead to decreased excretion of urine
with increased osmolality.
The water deprivation test is the simplest and most reliable method for diagnosing CDI but
should be
done only while the patient is under constant supervision. Serious dehydration may result.
Additionally,
if psychogenic
[Table 92-4.
Common Causes of Polyuria]
polydipsia is suspected, the patient must be observed to prevent surreptitious drinking. The test is started
in the morning by weighing the patient, obtaining venous blood to determine electrolyte concentrations
and osmolality, and measuring urinary osmolality. Voided urine is collected hourly, and its sp gr or,
preferably, osmolality is measured. Dehydration is continued until orthostatic hypotension and postural
tachycardia appear, ≥ 5% of the initial body weight has been lost, or the urinary concentration does not
increase > 0.001 sp gr or > 30 mOsm/L in sequentially voided specimens. Serum electrolytes and
osmolality are again determined, and 5 units of aqueous vasopressin are injected sc. Urine for sp gr or
osmolality measurement is collected one final time 60 min postinjection, and the test is terminated.
===PAGE:909===
A normal response produces maximum urine osmolality after dehydration (often > 1.020 sp gr or > 700
mOsm/L), exceeding the plasma osmolality; osmolality does not increase more than an additional 5% after
injection of vasopressin. Patients with CDI are generally unable to concentrate urine to greater than the
plasma osmolality but are able to increase their urine osmolality by > 50% after vasopressin
administration. Patients with partial CDI are often able to concentrate urine to above the plasma
osmolality but show a rise in urine osmolality of > 9% after vasopressin administration. Patients with NDI
are unable to concentrate urine to greater than the plasma osmolality and show no additional response to
vasopressin administration.
Measurement of circulating ADH is the most direct method of diagnosing CDI; levels at the end of the
water deprivation test (before the vasopressin injection) are low in CDI and appropriately elevated in NDI.
However, ADH levels are difficult to measure, and the test is not routinely available. In addition, water
deprivation is so accurate that direct measurement of ADH is unnecessary. Plasma ADH levels are
diagnostic after either dehydration or infusion of hypertonic saline.
Psychogenic polydipsia:
Psychogenic polydipsia may present a difficult problem in differential
diagnosis. Patients may ingest and excrete up to 6 L of fluid/day and are often emotionally disturbed.
Unlike patients with CDI and NDI, they usually do not have nocturia, nor does their thirst wake them at
night. Continued ingestion of large volumes of water in this situation can lead to life-threatening
hyponatremia (.
Patients with acute psychogenic water drinking are able to concentrate their urine during water
deprivation. However, because chronic water intake diminishes medullary tonicity in the kidney, patients
with longstanding polydipsia are not able to concentrate their urine to maximal levels during water
deprivation, a response similar to that of patients with partial CDI. However, unlike CDI, patients with
psychogenic polydipsia show no response to exogenous ADH after water deprivation. This response
resembles NDI, except that basal ADH levels are low compared with the elevated levels present in NDI.
After prolonged restriction of fluid intake to ≤ 2 L/day, normal concentrating ability returns within several
weeks.
Treatment
• Desmopressin
CDI can be treated with hormone replacement and treatment of any correctable cause. In the absence of
appropriate management, permanent renal damage can result.
Desmopressin, a synthetic analog of ADH with minimal vasoconstrictive properties, has prolonged
antidiuretic activity lasting for 12 to 24 h in most patients and may be administered intranasally, sc, IV, or
orally. Desmopressin is the preparation of choice for both adults and children and is available as an
intranasal solution in 2 forms. A dropper bottle with a calibrated nasal catheter has the advantage of
delivering incremental doses from 5 to 20
μ
g but is awkward to use. A spray bottle that delivers 10
μ
g of
desmopressin in 0.1 mL of fluid is easier to use but delivers a fixed quantity. For each patient, the duration
of action of a given dose must be established, because variation among individuals is great. The duration
of action can be established by following timed urine volumes and osmolality. The nightly dose is the
lowest dose required to prevent nocturia. The morning and evening doses should be adjusted separately.
The usual dosage range in adults is 10 to 40
μ
g, with most adults requiring 10
μ
g bid. For children age 3
mo to 12 yr, the usual dosage range is 2.5 to 10
μ
g bid. Overdosage can lead to fluid retention and
decreased plasma osmolality, possibly resulting in seizures in small children. In such instances,
furosemide can be given to induce diuresis. Headache may be a troublesome adverse effect but generally
disappears if the dosage is reduced. Infrequently, desmopressin causes a slight increase in BP.
Absorption from the nasal mucosa may be erratic, especially when URI or allergic rhinitis occurs. When
intranasal delivery of desmopressin is inappropriate, it may be administered sc using about one tenth the
intranasal dose. Desmopressin may
be used IV if a rapid effect is necessary (eg, for hypovolemia). With
oral desmopressin, dose equivalence with the intranasal formulation is unpredictable, so individual dose
titration is needed. The initial dose is 0.1 mg po tid, and the maintenance dose is usually 0.1 to 0.2 mg tid.
===PAGE:910===
Lypressin (lysine-8-vasopressin), a synthetic agent, is given by nasal spray at doses of 2 to 4 units (7.5 to
μ
g) q 3 to 8 h but, because of its short duration of action, has been largely replaced by desmopressin.
Aqueous vasopressin 5 to 10 units sc or IM can be given to provide an antidiuretic response that usually
lasts ≤ 6 h. Thus, this drug has little use in long-term treatment but can be used in the initial therapy of
unconscious patients and in patients with CDI who are undergoing surgery. Synthetic vasopressin can
also be administered bid to qid as a nasal spray, with the dosage and interval tailored to each patient.
Vasopressin tannate in oil 0.3 to 1 mL (1.5 to 5 units) IM may control symptoms for up to 96 h.
At least 3 groups of nonhormonal drugs are useful in reducing polyuria: various diuretics, primarily
thiazides; ADH-releasing drugs, such as chlorpropamide, carbamazepine, and clofibrate; and
prostaglandin inhibitors, which are modestly effective. These drugs have been particularly useful in partial
CDI and do not cause the adverse effects of exogenous ADH.
The thiazides paradoxically reduce urine volume in partial and complete CDI (and NDI), primarily as a
consequence of reducing ECF volume and increasing proximal tubular resorption. Urine volumes may fall
by 25 to 50% with 15 to 25 mg/kg of chlorothiazide. Restricting salt intake may also help because it
reduces urine output by reducing solute load.
Chlorpropamide, carbamazepine, and clofibrate can reduce or eliminate the need for vasopressin in some
patients with partial CDI. None are effective in NDI. Chlorpropamide (3 to 5 mg/kg po once/day or bid)
causes some release of ADH and also potentiates the action of ADH on the kidney. Clofibrate (500 to
1000 mg po bid) or carbamazepine (100 to 400 mg po bid) is recommended for adults only. These drugs
may be used synergistically with a diuretic. However, significant hypoglycemia may result from
chlorpropamide.
Prostaglandin inhibitors (such as indomethacin 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg po tid, although most NSAIDs are
effective) may reduce urine volume, but generally by no more than 10 to 25%, perhaps by decreasing
renal blood flow and GFR. Together with indomethacin, restriction of Na intake and a thiazide diuretic
help further reduce urine volume in NDI.
===PAGE:911===
Chapter 93. Thyroid Disorders
Introduction
The thyroid gland, located in the anterior neck just below the cricoid cartilage, consists of 2 lobes
connected by an isthmus. Follicular cells in the gland produce the 2 main thyroid hormones,
tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine, T
) and triiodothyronine (T
). These hormones act on cells in virtually
every body tissue by combining with nuclear receptors and altering expression of a wide range of gene
products. Thyroid hormone is required for normal brain and somatic tissue development in the fetus and
neonate, and, in people of all ages, regulates protein, carbohydrate, and fat metabolism.
T
is the most active form; T
has only minimal hormonal activity. However, T
is much longer lasting and
can be converted to T
(in most tissues) and thus serves as a reservoir for T
. A 3rd form of thyroid
hormone, reverse T
(rT
), has no metabolic activity; levels of rT
increase in certain diseases.
Additionally, parafollicular cells (C cells) secrete the hormone calcitonin, which is released in response to
hypercalcemia and lowers serum Ca levels (.
Synthesis and Release of Thyroid Hormones
Synthesis of thyroid hormones requires iodine (see
Fig. 93-1
). Iodine, ingested in food and water as iodide, is actively concentrated by the thyroid and
converted to organic iodine (organification) within follicular cells by thyroid peroxidase. The follicular cells
surround a space filled with colloid, which consists of thyroglobulin, a glycoprotein containing tyrosine
within its matrix. Tyrosine in contact with the membrane of the follicular cells is iodinated at 1
(monoiodotyrosine) or 2 (diiodotyrosine) sites and then coupled to produce the 2 forms of thyroid
hormone (diiodotyrosine + diiodotyrosine
T
; diiodotyrosine + monoiodotyrosine
T
).
[Fig. 93-1.
Synthesis of thyroid hormones.]
T
and T
remain incorporated in thyroglobulin within the follicle until the follicular cells take up
thyroglobulin as colloid droplets. Once inside the thyroid follicular cells, T
and T
are cleaved from
thyroglobulin. Free T
and T
are then released into the bloodstream, where they are bound to serum
proteins for transport, the major one being thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), which has high affinity but
low capacity for T
and T
. TBG normally carries about 75% of bound thyroid hormones. The other
binding proteins are thyroxine-binding prealbumin (transthyretin), which has high affinity but low capacity
for T
, and albumin, which has low affinity but high capacity for T
and T
. About 0.3% of total serum T
and 0.03% of total serum T
are free and in equilibrium with bound hormones. Only free T
and free T
are available to act on the peripheral tissues.
All reactions necessary for the formation and release of T
and T
are controlled by thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), which is secreted by pituitary thyrotropic cells. TSH secretion is controlled by a negative
feedback mechanism in the pituitary: Increased levels of free T
and T
inhibit TSH synthesis and
secretion, whereas decreased levels increase TSH secretion. TSH secretion is also influenced by
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), which is synthesized in the hypothalamus. The precise
mechanisms regulating TRH synthesis and release are unclear, although negative feedback from thyroid
hormones inhibits TRH synthesis.
Most circulating T
is produced outside the thyroid by monodeiodination of T
. Only one fifth of
circulating T
is secreted directly by the thyroid.
Laboratory Testing of Thyroid Function
TSH measurement is the best means of determining thyroid dysfunction (see
Table 93-1
). Normal results essentially rule out hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, except in rare patients
===PAGE:912===
with pituitary resistance to thyroid hormone or with central hypothyroidism due to disease in the
hypothalamus, pituitary gland, or both. Serum TSH can be falsely low in very sick people. The serum
TSH level also defines the syndromes of subclinical hyperthyroidism (low serum TSH) and subclinical
hypothyroidism (elevated serum TSH), both
[Table 93-1.
Results of Thyroid Function Tests in Various Clinical Situations]
of which are characterized by normal serum T
, free T
, serum T
, and free T
levels.
Total serum T
is a measure of bound and free hormone. Changes in levels of thyroid hormone-binding
serum proteins produce corresponding changes in total T
, even though levels of physiologically active
free T
are unchanged. Thus, a patient may be physiologically normal but have an abnormal total serum
T
level. Free T
in the serum can be measured directly, avoiding the pitfalls of interpreting total T
levels.
Free T
index is a calculated value that corrects total T
for the effects of varying amounts of thyroid
hormone-binding serum proteins and thus gives an estimate of free T
when total T
is measured. The
thyroid hormone-binding ratio or T
resin uptake is used to estimate protein binding. Free T
index is
readily available and compares well with direct measurement of free T
.
Total serum T
and free T
can also be measured. Because T
is tightly bound to TBG (although 10
times less so than T
), total serum T
levels are influenced by alterations in serum TBG level and by
drugs that affect binding to TBG. Free T
levels in the serum are measured by the same direct and
indirect methods (free T
index) described for T
and are used mainly for evaluating thyrotoxicosis.
TBG can be measured; it is increased in pregnancy, by estrogen therapy or oral contraceptive use, and in
the acute phase of infectious hepatitis. TBG may also be increased by an X-linked abnormality. It is most
commonly decreased by illnesses that reduce hepatic protein synthesis, use of anabolic steroids, and
excessive corticosteroid use. Large doses of certain drugs, such as phenytoin and aspirin and their
derivatives, displace T
from its binding sites on TBG, which spuriously lowers total serum T
levels.
Autoantibodies to thyroid peroxidase are present in almost all patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (some
of whom also have autoantibodies to thyroglobulin) and in most patients with Graves' disease. These
autoantibodies are markers of autoimmune disease but probably do not cause disease. However, an
autoantibody directed against the TSH receptor on the thyroid follicular cell is responsible for the
hyperthyroidism in Graves' disease.
Antibodies against T
and T
may be found in patients with
autoimmune thyroid disease and may affect T
and T
measurements but are rarely clinically significant.
The thyroid is the only source of thyroglobulin, which is readily detectable in the serum of healthy people
and is usually elevated in patients with nontoxic or toxic goiter. The principal use of serum thyroglobulin
measurement is in evaluating patients after near-total or total thyroidectomy (with or without
I ablation)
for differentiated thyroid cancer. Normal or elevated serum thyroglobulin values indicate the presence of
residual normal or cancerous thyroid tissue in patients receiving TSH-suppressive doses of L-thyroxine or
after withdrawal of L-thyroxine. However, thyroglobulin antibodies can interfere with thyroglobulin
measurement.
Radioactive iodine uptake can be measured. A trace amount of radioiodine is given orally or IV; a scanner
then detects the amount of radioiodine taken up by the thyroid. The preferred radioiodine isotope is
I,
which exposes the patient to minimal radiation (much less than
I). Thyroid
I uptake varies widely
with iodine ingestion and is low in patients exposed to excess iodine.
The test is valuable in the differential diagnosis of hyperthyroidism (high uptake in Graves' disease, low
uptake in thyroiditis—. It may also help in the calculation of the dose of
I needed for
treatment of hyperthyroidism.
===PAGE:913===
Imaging by a scintillation camera can be done after radioisotope administration (radioiodine or technetium
99m pertechnetate) to produce a graphic representation of isotope uptake. Focal areas of increased (hot)
or decreased (cold) uptake help distinguish areas of possible cancer (thyroid cancers exist in < 1% of hot
nodules compared with 10 to 20% of cold nodules).
Screening:
Screening every 5 yr by measuring serum TSH is recommended for all men ≥ 65 and for all
women ≥ 35. For those with risk factors for thyroid disease, the serum TSH should be checked more
often. Screening for hypothyroidism is as cost effective as screening for hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia, and breast cancer. This single test is highly sensitive and specific in diagnosing or
excluding two prevalent and serious disorders (hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism), both of which can
be treated effectively. Because of the high incidence of hypothyroidism in older people, screening on an
annual basis is reasonable for those > age 70.
Approach to the Patient With a Thyroid Nodule
Thyroid nodules are common, increasingly so with increasing age. The reported incidence varies with the
method of assessment. In middle-aged and elderly patients, palpation reveals nodules in about 5%.
Results of ultrasonography and autopsy studies suggest that nodules are present in about 50% of adults.
Many nodules are found incidentally on thyroid imaging studies done for other disorders.
Etiology
Most nodules are benign. Benign causes include hyperplastic colloid goiter, thyroid cysts, thyroiditis, and
thyroid adenomas. Malignant causes include thyroid cancers (.
Evaluation
History:
Pain suggests thyroiditis or hemorrhage into a cyst. An asymptomatic nodule may be malignant
but is usually benign. Symptoms of hyperthyroidism suggest a hyperfunctioning adenoma or thyroiditis,
whereas symptoms of hypothyroidism suggest Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Risk factors for thyroid cancer
include
• History of thyroid irradiation, especially in infancy or childhood
• Age < 20 yr
• Male sex
• Family history of thyroid cancer or multiple endocrine neoplasia
• A solitary nodule
• Dysphagia
• Dysphonia
• Increasing size (particularly rapid growth or growth while receiving thyroid suppression treatment)
Physical examination:
Signs that suggest thyroid cancer include stony hard consistency or fixation to
surrounding structures, cervical lymphadenopathy, and hoarseness due to recurrent laryngeal nerve
paralysis.
Testing:
Initial evaluation of a thyroid nodule consists of measurement of levels of
• Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
• Free thyroxine (T
)
===PAGE:914===
• Antithyroid peroxidase antibodies
If TSH is suppressed, radioiodine scanning is done. Nodules with increased radionuclide uptake (hot) are
seldom malignant. If thyroid function tests do not indicate hyperthyroidism
or Hashimoto's thyroiditis, or if
nodules are indeterminate or cold, fine-needle aspiration biopsy is done to distinguish benign from
malignant nodules. Early use of fine-needle aspiration biopsy is a more economic approach than routine
use of radioiodine scans. Ultrasonography is useful in determining the size of the nodule but is rarely
diagnostic of cancer, although cancer is suggested by ultrasonographic or x-ray evidence of fine,
stippled, psammomatous calcification (papillary carcinoma) or dense, homogeneous calcification
(medullary carcinoma). Fine-needle aspiration biopsy is not routinely indicated for nodules < 1 cm on
ultrasonography.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder. Thyroxine suppression of TSH to shrink smaller benign
nodules is effective in no more than half the cases.
Euthyroid Sick Syndrome
Euthyroid sick syndrome is low serum levels of thyroid hormones in clinically euthyroid
patients with nonthyroidal systemic illness. Diagnosis is based on excluding hypothyroidism.
Treatment is of the underlying illness; thyroid hormone replacement is not indicated
.
Patients with various acute or chronic nonthyroid disorders may have abnormal thyroid function tests.
Such disorders include acute and chronic illness, particularly fasting, starvation, protein-energy
undernutrition, major trauma, MI, chronic renal failure, diabetic ketoacidosis, anorexia nervosa, cirrhosis,
thermal injury, and sepsis.
Decreased triiodothyronine (T
) levels are most common. Patients with more severe or prolonged illness
also have decreased thyroxine (T
) levels. Serum reverse T
(rT
) is increased. Patients are clinically
euthyroid and do not have elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels.
Pathogenesis is unknown but may include decreased peripheral conversion of T
to T
, decreased
clearance of rT
generated from T
, and decreased binding of thyroid hormones to thyroxine-binding
globulin (TBG). Proinflammatory cytokines (eg, tumor necrosis factorα
, IL-1) may be responsible for
some changes.
Interpretation of abnormal thyroid function test results in ill patients is complicated by the effects of
various drugs, including the iodine-rich contrast agents and amiodarone, which impairs the peripheral
conversion of T
to T
, and by drugs such as dopamine and corticosteroids, which decrease pituitary
secretion of TSH, resulting in low serum TSH levels and subsequent decreased T
secretion.
Diagnosis
• TSH
• Serum cortisol
• Clinical judgment
The diagnostic dilemma is whether the patient has hypothyroidism or euthyroid sick syndrome. The best
test is measurement of TSH, which in euthyroid sick syndrome is low, normal, or slightly elevated but not
as high as it would be in hypothyroidism. Serum rT
is elevated, although this measurement is rarely
done. Serum cortisol is often elevated in euthyroid sick syndrome and low or low-normal in
hypothyroidism due to pituitary-hypothalamic disease. Because tests are nonspecific, clinical judgment is
required to interpret abnormal thyroid function tests in the acutely or chronically ill patient. Unless thyroid
===PAGE:915===
dysfunction is highly suspected, thyroid function tests should not be ordered for patients in the ICU.
Treatment
Treatment with thyroid hormone replacement is not appropriate. When the underlying disorder is treated,
results of thyroid tests normalize.
Hashimoto's Thyroiditis
(Autoimmune Thyroiditis; Chronic Lymphocytic Thyroiditis; Hashimoto's Struma)
Hashimoto's thyroiditis is chronic autoimmune inflammation of the thyroid with lymphocytic
infiltration. Findings include painless thyroid enlargement and symptoms of hypothyroidism.
Diagnosis involves demonstration of high titers of thyroid peroxidase antibodies. Lifelong Lthyroxine replacement is typically required
.
Hashimoto's thyroiditis is believed to be the most common cause of primary hypothyroidism in North
America. It is twice as prevalent among women. Incidence increases with age and in patients with
chromosomal disorders, including Down, Turner's, and Klinefelter's syndromes. A family history of thyroid
disorders is common.
Hashimoto's thyroiditis, like Graves' disease, is sometimes associated with other autoimmune disorders,
including Addison's disease (adrenal insufficiency), type 1 diabetes mellitus, hypoparathyroidism, vitiligo,
premature graying of hair, pernicious anemia, connective tissue diseases (eg, RA, SLE, Sjogren's
syndrome), and Schmidt's syndrome (Addison's disease, diabetes, and hypothyroidism secondary to
Hashimoto's thyroiditis). There may be an increased incidence of thyroid tumors, rarely thyroid lymphoma.
Pathologically, there is extensive infiltration of lymphocytes with lymphoid follicles and scarring.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients complain of painless enlargement of the thyroid or fullness in the throat. Examination reveals a
nontender goiter that is smooth or nodular, firm, and more rubbery than the normal thyroid. Many patients
present with symptoms of hypothyroidism, but some present with hyperthyroidism.
Diagnosis
• Thyroxine (T
)
• Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
• Thyroid autoantibodies
Testing consists of measuring T
, TSH, and thyroid autoantibodies; early in the disease T
and TSH
levels are normal and there are high levels of thyroid peroxidase antibodies and less commonly of
antithyroglobulin antibodies. Thyroid radioactive iodine uptake may be increased, perhaps because of
defective iodide organification together with a gland that continues to trap iodine. Patients later develop
hypothyroidism with decreased T
, decreased thyroid radioactive iodine uptake, and increased TSH.
Testing for other autoimmune disorders is warranted only when clinical manifestations are present.
Treatment
Occasionally, the hypothyroidism is transient, but most patients require lifelong thyroid hormone
replacement, typically L-thyroxine 75 to 150
μ
g po once/day.
Hyperthyroidism
(Thyrotoxicosis)
===PAGE:916===
Hyperthyroidism is characterized by hypermetabolism and elevated serum levels of free
thyroid hormones. Symptoms are many but include tachycardia, fatigue, weight loss,
nervousness, and tremor. Diagnosis is clinical and with thyroid function tests. Treatment
depends on cause
.
Hyperthyroidism can be classified on the basis of thyroid radioactive iodine uptake and the presence or
absence of circulating thyroid stimulators (see
Table 93-1
).
Etiology
Hyperthyroidism may result from increased synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones (thyroxine [T]
and triiodothyronine [T]) from the thyroid, caused by thyroid stimulators in the blood or by autonomous
thyroid hyperfunction. It can also result from excessive release of thyroid hormone from the thyroid
without increased synthesis. Such release is commonly caused by the destructive changes of various
types of thyroiditis. Various clinical syndromes also cause hyperthyroidism.
Graves' disease (toxic diffuse goiter),
the most common cause of hyperthyroidism, is characterized by
hyperthyroidism and one or more of the following:
• Goiter
• Exophthalmos
• Infiltrative dermopathy
Graves' disease is caused by an autoantibody against the thyroid receptor for thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH); unlike most autoantibodies, which are inhibitory, this autoantibody is stimulatory, thus
causing continuous synthesis and secretion of excess T
and T
. Graves' disease (like Hashimoto's
thyroiditis) sometimes occurs with other autoimmune disorders, including type 1 diabetes mellitus, vitiligo,
premature graying of hair, pernicious anemia, connective tissue diseases, and polyglandular deficiency
syndrome. The pathogenesis of infiltrative ophthalmopathy (responsible for the exophthalmos in Graves'
disease) is poorly understood but may result from immunoglobulins directed to specific receptors in the
orbital fibroblasts and fat that result in release of proinflammatory cytokines, inflammation, and
accumulation of glycosaminoglycans. Ophthalmopathy may also occur before the onset of
hyperthyroidism or as late as 20 yr afterward and frequently worsens or abates independently of the
clinical course of hyperthyroidism. Typical ophthalmopathy in the presence of normal thyroid function is
called euthyroid Graves' disease.
Inappropriate TSH secretion
is a rare cause. Patients with hyperthyroidism have essentially
undetectable TSH except for those with a TSH-secreting anterior pituitary
adenoma or pituitary resistance
to thyroid hormone. TSH levels are high, and the TSH produced in both disorders is biologically more
active than normal TSH. An increase in the
α
-subunit of TSH in the blood (helpful in differential diagnosis)
occurs in patients with a TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma.
Molar pregnancy, choriocarcinoma, and hyperemesis gravidarum
produce high levels of serum
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), a weak thyroid stimulator. Levels of hCG are highest during the 1st
trimester of pregnancy and result in the decrease in serum TSH and mild increase in serum free T
sometimes observed at that time. The increased thyroid stimulation may be caused by increased levels of
partially desialated hCG, an hCG variant that seems to be a more potent thyroid stimulator than more
sialated hCG. Hyperthyroidism in molar pregnancy, choriocarcinoma, and hyperemesis gravidarum is
transient; normal thyroid function resumes when the molar pregnancy is evacuated, the choriocarcinoma
is appropriately treated, or the hyperemesis gravidarum abates.
Nonautoimmune autosomal dominant hyperthyroidism
manifests during infancy. It results from
mutations in the TSH receptor gene that produce continuous thyroid stimulation.
===PAGE:917===
Toxic solitary or multinodular goiter (Plummer's disease)
sometimes results from TSH receptor
gene mutations producing continuous thyroid stimulation. Patients with toxic nodular goiter have none of
the autoimmune manifestations or circulating antibodies observed in patients with Graves' disease. Also,
in contrast to Graves' disease, toxic solitary and multinodular goiters usually do not remit.
Inflammatory thyroid disease (thyroiditis)
includes subacute granulomatous thyroiditis, Hashimoto's
thyroiditis, and silent lymphocytic thyroiditis, a variant of Hashimoto's thyroiditis (.
Hyperthyroidism results from destructive changes in the gland and release of stored hormone, not from
increased synthesis. Hypothyroidism may follow.
Drug-induced hyperthyroidism
can result from amiodarone and interferon alfa, which may induce
thyroiditis with hyperthyroidism and other thyroid disorders. Although more commonly causing
hypothyroidism, lithium can rarely cause hyperthyroidism. Patients receiving these drugs should be
closely monitored.
Thyrotoxicosis factitia
is hyperthyroidism resulting from conscious or accidental overingestion of thyroid
hormone.
Excess iodine ingestion
causes hyperthyroidism with a low thyroid radioactive iodine uptake. It most
often occurs in patients with underlying nontoxic nodular goiter (especially elderly patients) who are given
drugs that contain iodine (eg, amiodarone, iodine-containing expectorants) or who undergo radiologic
studies using iodine-rich contrast agents. The etiology may be that the excess iodine provides substrate
for functionally autonomous (ie, not under TSH regulation) areas of the thyroid to produce hormone.
Hyperthyroidism usually persists as long as excess iodine remains in the circulation.
Metastatic thyroid cancer
is a possible cause. Overproduction of thyroid hormone occurs rarely from
functioning metastatic follicular carcinoma, especially in pulmonary metastases.
Struma ovarii
develops when ovarian teratomas contain enough thyroid tissue to cause true
hyperthyroidism. Radioactive iodine uptake occurs in the pelvis, and uptake by the thyroid is usually
suppressed.
Pathophysiology
In hyperthyroidism, serum T
usually increases more than does T
, probably because of increased
secretion of T
as well as conversion of T
to T
in peripheral tissues. In some patients, only T
is
elevated (T
toxicosis). T
toxicosis may occur in any of the usual disorders that cause hyperthyroidism,
including Graves' disease, multinodular goiter, and the autonomously functioning solitary thyroid nodule. If
T
toxicosis is untreated, the patient usually also develops laboratory abnormalities typical of
hyperthyroidism (ie, elevated T
and
I uptake). The various forms of thyroiditis commonly have a
hyperthyroid phase followed by a hypothyroid phase.
Symptoms and Signs
Most symptoms and signs are the same regardless of the cause. Exceptions include infiltrative
ophthalmopathy and dermopathy, which occur only in Graves' disease.
The clinical presentation may be dramatic or subtle. A goiter or nodule may be present. Many common
symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism are similar to those of adrenergic excess, such as nervousness,
palpitations, hyperactivity, increased sweating, heat hypersensitivity, fatigue, increased appetite, weight
loss, insomnia, weakness, and frequent bowel movements (occasionally diarrhea). Hypomenorrhea may
be present. Signs may include warm, moist skin; tremor; tachycardia; widened pulse pressure; atrial
fibrillation; and palpitations.
Elderly patients, particularly those with toxic nodular goiter, may present atypically (apathetic or masked
hyperthyroidism) with symptoms more akin to depression or dementia. Most do not have exophthalmos or
tremor. Atrial fibrillation, syncope, altered sensorium, heart failure, and weakness are more likely.
===PAGE:918===
Symptoms and signs may involve only a single organ system.
Eye signs include stare, eyelid lag, eyelid retraction, and mild conjunctival injection and are largely due to
excessive adrenergic stimulation. They usually remit with successful treatment. Infiltrative
ophthalmopathy, a more serious development, is specific to Graves' disease and can occur years before
or after hyperthyroidism. It is characterized by orbital pain, lacrimation, irritation, photophobia, increased
retro-orbital tissue, exophthalmos, and lymphocytic infiltration of the extraocular muscles, causing ocular
muscle weakness that frequently leads to double vision.
Infiltrative dermopathy, also called pretibial myxedema (a confusing term, because myxedema suggests
hypothyroidism), is characterized by nonpitting infiltration by proteinaceous ground substance, usually in
the pretibial area. It rarely occurs in the absence of Graves' ophthalmopathy. The lesion is often pruritic
and erythematous in its early stages and subsequently becomes brawny. Infiltrative dermopathy may
appear years before or after hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid storm:
Thyroid storm is an acute form of hyperthyroidism that results from untreated or
inadequately treated severe hyperthyroidism. It is rare, occurring in patients with Graves' disease or toxic
multinodular goiter (a solitary toxic nodule is less common and generally less severe). It may be
precipitated by infection, trauma, surgery, embolism, diabetic ketoacidosis, or preeclampsia. Thyroid
storm causes abrupt florid symptoms of hyperthyroidism with one or more of the following: fever, marked
weakness and muscle wasting, extreme restlessness with wide emotional swings, confusion, psychosis,
coma, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and hepatomegaly with mild jaundice. The patient may present with
cardiovascular collapse and shock.
Thyroid storm is a life-threatening emergency requiring prompt
treatment.
Diagnosis
• TSH
• Free T
• Sometimes radioactive iodine uptake
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and thyroid function tests. Serum TSH measurement
is the best test, because TSH is suppressed in hyperthyroid patients except in the rare instance when the
etiology is a TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma or pituitary resistance to thyroid hormone. Screening
selected populations for TSH level is warranted (. Free T
is increased in hyperthyroidism.
However, T
can be falsely normal in true hyperthyroidism in patients with a severe systemic illness
(similar to the falsely low levels that occur in euthyroid sick syndrome) and in T
toxicosis. If free T
level
is normal and TSH is low in a patient with subtle symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism, then serum T
should be measured to detect T
toxicosis; an elevated level confirms that diagnosis.
The cause can often be diagnosed clinically (eg, exposure to a drug, the presence of signs specific to
Graves' disease). If not, thyroid radioactive iodine uptake may be obtained by using
I. When
hyperthyroidism is due to hormone overproduction, thyroid radioactive iodine uptake is usually elevated.
TSH receptor antibodies can be measured to detect Graves' disease, but measurement is rarely
necessary except during the 3rd trimester of pregnancy to assess the risk of neonatal Graves' disease;
TSH receptor antibodies readily cross the placenta to stimulate the fetal thyroid. Most patients with
Graves' disease have circulating antithyroid peroxidase antibodies, and fewer have antithyroglobulin
antibodies.
Inappropriate TSH secretion is uncommon. The diagnosis is confirmed when hyperthyroidism occurs with
elevated circulating free T
and T
concentrations and normal or elevated serum TSH.
If thyrotoxicosis factitia is suspected, serum thyroglobulin can be measured; it is usually low or low-normal
===PAGE:919===
—unlike in all other causes of hyperthyroidism.
In hyperthyroidism caused by excess iodine ingestion, low radioactive iodine uptake is typical because
thyroid radioactive iodine uptake is inversely proportional to iodine intake.
Treatment
Treatment depends on cause but may include
• Propylthiouracil or methimazole
•
β
-Blockers
• Iodine
• Radioactive iodine
• Surgery
Iodine:
Iodine in pharmacologic doses inhibits the release of T
and T
within hours and inhibits the
organification of iodine, a transitory effect lasting from a few days to a week, after
which inhibition usually
ceases. Iodine is used for emergency management of thyroid storm, for hyperthyroid patients undergoing
emergency nonthyroid surgery, and (because it also decreases the vascularity of the thyroid) for
preoperative preparation of hyperthyroid patients undergoing subtotal thyroidectomy. Iodine generally is
not used for routine treatment of hyperthyroidism. The usual dosage is 2 to 3 drops (100 to 150 mg) of a
saturated K iodide solution po tid or qid or 0.5 to 1 g Na iodide in 1 L 0.9% saline solution given IV slowly
q 12 h.
Complications of iodine therapy include inflammation of the salivary glands, conjunctivitis, and rash.
Propylthiouracil and methimazole:
These antithyroid drugs block thyroid peroxidase, decreasing the
organification of iodide, and impair the coupling reaction. Propylthiouracil in high doses also inhibits the
peripheral conversion of T
to T
. About 20 to 50% of patients with Graves' disease remain in remission
after a 1- to 2-yr course of either drug. The return to normal or a marked decrease in gland size, the
restoration of a normal serum TSH level, and less severe hyperthyroidism before therapy are good
prognostic signs of long-term remission. The concomitant use of antithyroid drug therapy and L-thyroxine
does not improve the remission rate in patients with Graves' disease. Because toxic nodular goiter rarely
goes into remission, antithyroid drug therapy is given only in preparation for surgical treatment or
I
therapy.
The usual starting dosage of propylthiouracil is 100 to 150 mg po q 8 h and of methimazole 5 to 20 mg po
tid. When T
and T
levels normalize, the dosage is decreased to the lowest effective amount, usually
propylthiouracil 50 mg tid or methimazole 5 to 15 mg once/day. Usually, control is achieved in 2 to 3 mo.
More rapid control can be achieved by increasing the dosage of propylthiouracil to 150 to 200 mg q 8 h.
Such dosages or higher ones (up to 400 mg q 8 h) are generally reserved for severely ill patients,
including those with thyroid storm. Maintenance doses can be continued for one or many years
depending on the clinical circumstances. Carbimazole, which is used widely in Europe, is rapidly
converted to methimazole. The usual starting dose is similar to that of methimazole; maintenance dosage
is 5 to 20 mg po once/day, 2.5 to 10 mg bid, or 1.7 to 6.7 mg tid.
Adverse effects include rash, allergic reactions, abnormal liver function, and, in about 0.1% of patients,
reversible agranulocytosis. Patients allergic to one drug can be switched to the other, but cross-sensitivity
may occur. If agranulocytosis occurs, the patient cannot be switched to the other drug; other therapy (eg,
radioiodine, surgery) should be used.
Each drug has advantages and disadvantages. Methimazole need only be given once/day, which
improves adherence. Furthermore, when methimazole is used in dosages of < 40 mg/day, agranulocytosis
===PAGE:920===
is less common; with propylthiouracil, agranulocytosis may occur at any dosage. Propylthiouracil may be
preferred if antithyroid drugs must be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding because it is less likely to
cross the placenta or enter breast milk. Methimazole has been used successfully in pregnant and nursing
women without fetal or infant complications, but rarely methimazole has been associated with scalp and
GI defects in the neonate. Propylthiouracil is also preferred for the treatment of thyroid storm, because
the dosages used (800 to 1200 mg/day) partially block the peripheral conversion of T
to T
.
The combination of high-dose propylthiouracil and dexamethasone, also a potent inhibitor of T
to T
conversion, can relieve symptoms of hyperthyroidism and restore the serum T
level to normal within a
week.
β
-Blockers:
Symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism due to adrenergic stimulation may respond to
β
-
blockers; propranolol has had the greatest use, but atenolol or metoprolol may be preferable.
Other manifestations typically do not respond.
• Manifestations typically responding to
β
-blockers: Tachycardia, tremor, mental symptoms, eyelid lag;
occasionally heat intolerance and sweating, diarrhea, proximal myopathy
• Manifestations typically not responding to
β
-blockers: O
consumption, exophthalmos, goiter, bruit,
circulating thyroxine levels, weight loss
Propranolol is indicated in thyroid storm (see
Table 93-2
). It rapidly decreases heart rate, usually within 2 to 3 h when given orally and within minutes
when given IV. Esmolol may be used in the ICU because it requires careful titration and monitoring.
Propranolol is also indicated for tachycardia with hyperthyroidism, especially in elderly patients, because
antithyroid drugs usually take several weeks to become fully effective. Ca channel blockers may control
tachyarrhythmias in patients in whom
β
-blockers are contraindicated.
Radioactive sodium iodine (
I, radioiodine):
In the US,
I is the most common treatment for
hyperthyroidism. Radioiodine is often recommended as the treatment of choice for
[Table 93-2.
Treatment of Thyroid Storm]
Graves' disease and toxic nodular goiter in all patients, including children. Dosage of
I is difficult to
adjust because the response of the gland cannot be predicted; some physicians give a standard dose of
8 to 10 mCi. Others adjust the dose based on estimated thyroid size and the 24-h uptake to provide a
dose of 80 to 120
μ
Ci/g thyroid tissue.
When sufficient
I is given to cause euthyroidism, about 25% of patients become hypothyroid 1 yr later,
and the incidence continues to increase yearly. Thus, most patients eventually become hypothyroid.
However, if smaller doses are used, incidence of recurrence is higher. Larger doses, such as 10 to 15
mCi, often cause hypothyroidism within 6 mo.
Radioactive iodine is not used during pregnancy. There is no proof that radioiodine increases the
incidence of tumors, leukemia, thyroid cancer, or birth defects in children born to women who become
pregnant later in life.
Surgery:
Surgery is indicated for patients with Graves' disease whose hyperthyroidism has recurred after
courses of antithyroid drugs and who refuse
I therapy, patients who cannot tolerate antithyroid drugs,
patients with very large goiters, and in some younger patients with toxic adenoma and multinodular goiter.
Surgery may be done in elderly patients with giant nodular goiters.
Surgery usually restores normal function. Postoperative recurrences vary between 2 and 16%; risk of
hypothyroidism is directly related to the extent of surgery and occurs in about one half of patients. Vocal
cord paralysis and hypoparathyroidism are uncommon complications. Saturated solution of K iodide 3
===PAGE:921===
drops (about 100 to 150 mg) po tid should be given for 10 days before surgery to reduce the vascularity
of the gland. Propylthiouracil or methimazole must also be given, because the patient should be euthyroid
before iodide is given. Dexamethasone can be added to rapidly restore euthyroidism. Surgical procedures
are more difficult in patients who previously underwent thyroidectomy or radioiodine therapy.
Treatment of thyroid storm:
A treatment regimen for thyroid storm is shown in
Table 93-2
.
Treatment of infiltrative dermopathy and ophthalmopathy:
In infiltrative dermopathy (in Graves'
disease), topical corticosteroids sometimes relieve the pruritus. Dermopathy usually remits spontaneously
after months or years. Ophthalmopathy should be treated jointly by the endocrinologist and
ophthalmologist and may require corticosteroids, orbital radiation, and surgery.
Subclinical Hyperthyroidism
Subclinical hyperthyroidism is low serum TSH in patients with normal serum free T
and T
and
absent or minimal symptoms of hyperthyroidism
.
Subclinical hyperthyroidism is far less common than subclinical hypothyroidism (. Patients with
serum TSH < 0.1 mU/L have an increased incidence of atrial fibrillation (particularly elderly patients),
reduced bone mineral density, increased fractures, and increased mortality. Patients with serum TSH that
is only slightly below normal are less likely to have these features. Many patients with subclinical
hyperthyroidism are taking L-thyroxine; in these patients, reduction of the dose is the most appropriate
management unless therapy is aimed at maintaining a suppressed
TSH in patients with thyroid cancer or
nodules. The other causes of subclinical hyperthyroidism are the same as those for clinically apparent
hyperthyroidism.
Therapy is indicated for patients with endogenous subclinical hyperthyroidism (serum TSH < 0.1 mU/L),
especially those with atrial fibrillation or reduced bone mineral density. The usual treatment is
I. In
patients with milder symptoms (eg, nervousness), a trial of antithyroid drug therapy is worthwhile.
Hypothyroidism
(Myxedema)
Hypothyroidism is thyroid hormone deficiency. It is diagnosed by clinical features such as a
typical facies, hoarse slow speech, and dry skin and by low levels of thyroid hormones.
Management includes treatment of the cause and administration of thyroxine
.
Hypothyroidism occurs at any age but is particularly common among the elderly. It occurs in close to 10%
of women and 6% of men > 65. Although typically easy to diagnose in younger adults, it may be subtle
and manifest atypically in the elderly.
Primary hypothyroidism:
Primary hypothyroidism is due to disease in the thyroid; thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) is increased. The most common cause is probably autoimmune. It usually results from
Hashimoto's thyroiditis and is often associated with a firm goiter or, later in the disease process, with a
shrunken fibrotic thyroid with little or no function. The 2nd most common cause is post-therapeutic
hypothyroidism, especially after radioactive iodine therapy or surgery for hyperthyroidism or goiter.
Hypothyroidism during overtreatment with propylthiouracil, methimazole, and iodide abates after therapy
is stopped.
Most patients with non-Hashimoto's goiters are euthyroid or have hyperthyroidism, but goitrous
hypothyroidism may occur in endemic goiter. Iodine deficiency decreases thyroid hormonogenesis. In
response, TSH is released, which causes the thyroid to enlarge and trap iodine avidly; thus, goiter
results. If iodine deficiency is severe, the patient becomes hypothyroid, a rare occurrence in the US since
the advent of iodized salt.
Iodine deficiency can cause endemic cretinism in children; endemic cretinism is the most common cause
===PAGE:922===
of congenital hypothyroidism in severely iodine-deficient regions and a major cause of mental deficiency
worldwide.
Rare inherited enzymatic defects can alter the synthesis of thyroid hormone and cause goitrous
hypothyroidism (.
Hypothyroidism may occur in patients taking lithium, perhaps because lithium inhibits hormone release by
the thyroid. Hypothyroidism may also occur in patients taking amiodarone or other iodine-containing
drugs, and in patients taking interferon alfa. Hypothyroidism can result from radiation therapy for cancer
of the larynx or Hodgkin lymphoma (Hodgkin's disease). The incidence of permanent hypothyroidism after
radiation therapy is high, and thyroid function (through measurement of serum TSH) should be evaluated
at 6- to 12-mo intervals.
Secondary hypothyroidism:
Secondary hypothyroidism occurs when the hypothalamus produces
insufficient thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) or the pituitary produces insufficient TSH. Sometimes,
deficient TSH secretion due to deficient TRH secretion is termed tertiary hypothyroidism.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of primary hypothyroidism are often subtle and insidious. Symptoms may include
cold intolerance, constipation, forgetfulness, and personality changes. Modest weight gain is largely the
result of fluid retention and decreased metabolism. Paresthesias of the hands and feet are common, often
due to carpal-tarsal tunnel syndrome caused by deposition of proteinaceous ground substance in the
ligaments around the wrist and ankle. Women with hypothyroidism may develop menorrhagia or
secondary amenorrhea.
The facial expression is dull; the voice is hoarse and speech is slow; facial puffiness and periorbital
swelling occur due to infiltration with the mucopolysaccharides hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulfate;
eyelids droop because of decreased adrenergic drive; hair is sparse, coarse, and dry; and the skin is
coarse, dry, scaly, and thick. The relaxation phase of deep tendon reflexes is slowed. Hypothermia is
common. Dementia or frank psychosis (myxedema madness) may occur.
Carotenemia is common, particularly notable on the palms and soles, caused by deposition of carotene in
the lipid-rich epidermal layers. Deposition of proteinaceous ground substance in the tongue may cause
macroglossia. A decrease in both thyroid hormone and adrenergic stimulation causes bradycardia. The
heart may be enlarged, partly because of dilation but chiefly because of pericardial effusion. Pleural or
abdominal effusions also may be noted. The pericardial and pleural effusions
develop slowly and only
rarely cause respiratory or hemodynamic distress.
Elderly patients have significantly fewer symptoms than do younger adults, and complaints are often
subtle and vague. Many elderly patients with hypothyroidism present with nonspecific geriatric syndromes
—confusion, anorexia, weight loss, falling, incontinence, and decreased mobility. Musculoskeletal
symptoms (especially arthralgias) occur often, but arthritis is rare. Muscular aches and weakness, often
mimicking polymyalgia rheumatica or polymyositis, and an elevated CK level may occur. In the elderly,
hypothyroidism may mimic dementia or parkinsonism.
Although secondary hypothyroidism is uncommon, its causes often affect other endocrine organs
controlled by the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. In a woman with hypothyroidism, indications of secondary
hypothyroidism are a history of amenorrhea rather than menorrhagia and some suggestive differences on
physical examination. Secondary hypothyroidism is characterized by skin and hair that are dry but not
very coarse, skin depigmentation, only minimal macroglossia, atrophic breasts, and low BP. Also, the
heart is small, and serous pericardial effusions do not occur. Hypoglycemia is common because of
concomitant adrenal insufficiency or growth hormone deficiency.
Myxedema coma:
Myxedema coma is a life-threatening complication of hypothyroidism, usually
occurring in patients with a long history of hypothyroidism. Its characteristics include coma with extreme
hypothermia (temperature 24° to 32.2° C), areflexia, seizures, and respiratory depression with CO
retention. Severe hypothermia may be missed unless low-reading thermometers are used. Rapid
===PAGE:923===
diagnosis based on clinical judgment, history, and physical examination is imperative, because death is
likely without rapid treatment. Precipitating factors include illness, infection, trauma, drugs that suppress
the CNS, and exposure to cold.
Diagnosis
• TSH
• Free thyroxine (T
)
Serum TSH is the most sensitive test, and screening of selected populations is warranted (. In
primary hypothyroidism, there is no feedback inhibition of the intact pituitary, and serum TSH is always
elevated, whereas serum free T
is low. In secondary hypothyroidism, free T
and serum TSH are low
(sometimes TSH is normal but with decreased bioactivity).
Many patients with primary hypothyroidism have normal circulating levels of triiodothyronine (T
),
probably caused by sustained TSH stimulation of the failing thyroid, resulting in preferential synthesis and
secretion of biologically active T
. Therefore, serum T
is not sensitive for hypothyroidism.
Anemia is often present, usually normocytic-normochromic and of unknown etiology, but it may be
hypochromic because of menorrhagia and sometimes macrocytic because of associated pernicious
anemia or decreased absorption of folate. Anemia is rarely severe (Hb > 9 g/dL). As the hypometabolic
state is corrected, anemia subsides, sometimes requiring 6 to 9 mo.
Serum cholesterol is usually high in primary hypothyroidism but less so in secondary hypothyroidism.
In addition to primary and secondary hypothyroidism, other conditions may cause decreased levels of
total T
, such as serum thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) deficiency, some drugs (, and
euthyroid sick syndrome (.
Treatment
• L-Thyroxine, adjusted until TSH levels are in midnormal range
Various thyroid hormone preparations are available for replacement therapy, including synthetic
preparations of T
(L-thyroxine), T
(liothyronine), combinations of the 2 synthetic hormones, and
desiccated animal thyroid extract. L-Thyroxine is preferred; the usual maintenance dose is 75 to 150
μ
g
po once/day, depending on age, body mass index, and absorption (for pediatric doses, .
Therapy is begun with low doses, especially in the elderly, usually 25
μ
g once/day. The dose is adjusted
every 6 wk until maintenance dose is achieved. The maintenance dose may need to be decreased in
elderly patients and increased in pregnant women. Dose may also need to be increased if drugs that
decrease T
absorption or increase its biliary excretion are administered concomitantly. The dose used
should be the lowest that restores serum TSH levels to the midnormal range (though this criterion cannot
be used in patients with secondary hypothyroidism).
Liothyronine should not be used alone for long-term replacement because of its short half-life and the
large peaks in serum T
levels it produces. The administration of standard replacement amounts (25 to
37.5
μ
g bid) results in rapidly increasing serum T
to between 300 and 1000 ng/dL (4.62 to 15.4 nmol/L)
within
4 h due to its almost complete absorption; these levels return to normal by 24 h. Additionally,
patients receiving liothyronine are chemically hyperthyroid for at least several hours a day, potentially
increasing cardiac risks.
Similar patterns of serum T
occur when mixtures of T
and T
are taken po, although peak T
is lower
because less T
is given. Replacement regimens with synthetic T
preparations reflect a different pattern
in serum T
response. Increases in serum T
occur gradually, and normal levels are maintained when
adequate doses of T
are given. Desiccated animal thyroid preparations contain variable amounts of T
===PAGE:924===
and T
and should not be prescribed unless the patient is already taking the preparation and has normal
serum TSH.
In patients with secondary hypothyroidism, L-thyroxine should not be given until there is evidence of
adequate cortisol secretion (or cortisol therapy is given), because L-thyroxine could precipitate adrenal
crisis.
Myxedema coma:
Myxedema coma is treated as follows:
• T
given IV
• Corticosteroids
• Supportive care as needed
• Conversion to oral T
when patient is stable
Patients require a large initial dose of T
(300 to 500
μ
g IV) or T
(25 to 50
μ
g IV). The IV maintenance
dose of T
is 75 to 100
μ
g once/day and of T
, 10 to 20
μ
g bid until T
can be given orally.
Corticosteroids are also given, because the possibility of central hypothyroidism usually cannot be initially
ruled out. The patient should not be rewarmed rapidly, which may precipitate hypotension or arrhythmias.
Hypoxemia is common, so PaO
should be monitored. If ventilation is compromised, immediate
mechanical ventilatory assistance is required. The precipitating factor should be rapidly and appropriately
treated and fluid replacement given carefully, because hypothyroid patients do not excrete water
appropriately. Finally, all drugs should be given cautiously because they are metabolized more slowly than
in healthy people.
Subclinical Hypothyroidism
Subclinical hypothyroidism is elevated serum TSH in patients with absent or minimal symptoms
of hypothyroidism and normal serum levels of free T
.
Subclinical thyroid dysfunction is relatively common; it occurs in more than 15% of elderly women and
10% of elderly men, particularly in those with underlying Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
In patients with serum TSH > 10 mU/L, there is a high likelihood of progression to overt hypothyroidism
with low serum levels of free T
in the next 10 yr. These patients are also more likely to have
hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis. They should be treated with L-thyroxine, even if they are
asymptomatic. For patients with TSH levels between 4.5 and 10 mU/L, a trial of L-thyroxine is reasonable
if symptoms of early hypothyroidism (eg, fatigue, depression) are present. L-Thyroxine therapy is also
indicated in pregnant women and in women who plan to become pregnant to avoid deleterious effects of
hypothyroidism on the pregnancy and fetal development. Patients should have annual measurement of
serum TSH and free T
to assess progress of the condition if untreated or to adjust the L-thyroxine
dosage.
Silent Lymphocytic Thyroiditis
Silent lymphocytic thyroiditis is a self-limited, subacute disorder occurring most commonly in
women during the postpartum period. Symptoms are initially of hyperthyroidism, then
hypothyroidism, and then generally recovery to the euthyroid state. Treatment of the
hyperthyroid phase is with a
β
-blocker. If hypothyroidism is permanent, lifelong thyroxine
supplementation is needed
.
The term "silent" refers to the absence of thyroid tenderness in contrast with subacute thyroiditis, which
usually causes thyroid tenderness. Silent lymphocytic thyroiditis causes most cases of postpartum thyroid
dysfunction. It occurs in about 5 to 10% of postpartum women.
===PAGE:925===
Thyroid biopsy reveals lymphocytic infiltration as in Hashimoto's thyroiditis but without lymphoid follicles
and scarring. Thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies and, less commonly, antithyroglobulin antibodies are
almost always positive during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Thus, this disorder would seem to
be a variant of Hashimoto's thyroiditis (.
Symptoms and Signs
The condition begins in the postpartum period, usually within 12 to 16 wk. Silent lymphocytic thyroiditis is
characterized by a variable degree of painless thyroid enlargement with a hyperthyroid phase of several
weeks, often followed by transient hypothyroidism due to depleted thyroid hormone stores but usually
eventual recovery to the euthyroid state (as noted for painful subacute thyroiditis). The hyperthyroid
phase is self-limited and may be brief or overlooked. Many women with this disorder are diagnosed when
they become hypothyroid, which occasionally is permanent.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Serum thyroxine (T
), triiodothyronine (T
), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels
Silent lymphocytic thyroiditis is frequently undiagnosed. Suspicion of the diagnosis generally depends on
clinical findings, typically once hypothyroidism has occurred. Eye signs and pretibial myxedema do not
occur.
Thyroid function test results vary depending on the phase of illness. Initially, serum T
and T
are
elevated and TSH is suppressed. In the hypothyroid phase, these findings are reversed. WBC count and
ESR are normal. Needle biopsy provides definitive diagnosis but is usually unnecessary.
Treatment
• Usually a
β
-blocker
• Sometimes thyroid hormone replacement
Because silent lymphocytic thyroiditis lasts only a few months, treatment is conservative, usually requiring
only a
β
-blocker (eg, propranolol) during the hyperthyroid phase (. Antithyroid drugs, surgery,
and radioiodine therapy are contraindicated. Thyroid hormone replacement may be required during the
hypothyroid phase. Most patients recover normal thyroid function, although some remain permanently
hypothyroid. Therefore, thyroid function should be reevaluated after 9 to 12 mo of thyroxine therapy;
replacement is stopped for 5 wk, and TSH is remeasured. This disorder usually recurs after subsequent
pregnancies.
Subacute Thyroiditis
(de Quervain's Thyroiditis; Giant Cell Thyroiditis; Granulomatous Thyroiditis)
Subacute thyroiditis is an acute inflammatory disease of the thyroid probably caused by a virus.
Symptoms include fever and thyroid tenderness. Initial hyperthyroidism is common,
sometimes followed by a transient period of hypothyroidism. Diagnosis is clinical and with
thyroid function tests. Treatment is with high doses of NSAIDs or with corticosteroids. The
disease usually resolves spontaneously within months
.
History of an antecedent viral URI is common. Histologic studies show less lymphocytic infiltration of the
thyroid than in Hashimoto's thyroiditis or silent thyroiditis, but there is characteristic giant cell infiltration,
PMNs, and follicular disruption.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:926===
There is pain in the anterior neck and fever of 37.8° to 38.3° C. Neck pain characteristically shifts from
side to side and may settle in one area, frequently radiating to the jaw and ears. It is often confused with
dental pain, pharyngitis, or otitis and is aggravated by swallowing or turning of the head. Symptoms of
hyperthyroidism are common early in the disease because of hormone release from the disrupted
follicles. There is more lassitude and prostration than in other thyroid disorders. On physical examination,
the thyroid is asymmetrically enlarged, firm, and tender.
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings
• Free thyroxine (T
) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels
• ESR
• Radioactive iodine uptake
Diagnosis is primarily clinical, based on finding an enlarged, tender thyroid in patients with the
appropriate clinical history. Thyroid testing with TSH and at least a free T
measurement is usually also
done. Radioactive iodine uptake should be measured to confirm the diagnosis. When the diagnosis is
uncertain, finer needle aspiration biopsy is useful. Thyroid ultrasonography with color Doppler shows
reduced blood flow in contrast with the increased flow of Graves' disease. Laboratory findings early in the
disease include an increase in free T
and triiodothyronine (T
), a marked decrease in TSH and thyroid
radioactive iodine uptake (often 0), and a high ESR. After several weeks, the thyroid is depleted of T
and T
stores, and transient hypothyroidism develops accompanied by a decrease in free T
and T
, a
rise in TSH, and recovery of thyroid radioactive iodine uptake. Weakly positive thyroid antibodies may be
present. Measurement of free T
, T
, and TSH at 2- to 4-wk intervals identifies the stages of the
disease.
Prognosis
Subacute thyroiditis is self-limited, generally subsiding in a few months; occasionally, it
recurs and may
result in permanent hypothyroidism when follicular destruction is extensive.
Treatment
• NSAIDs
• Sometimes corticosteroids, a
β
-blocker, or both
Discomfort is treated with high doses of aspirin or NSAIDs. In severe and protracted cases,
corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 30 to 40 mg po once/day, gradually decreasing the dose over 3 to 4 wk)
eradicate all symptoms within 48 h.
Bothersome hyperthyroid symptoms may be treated with a short course of a
β
-blocker. If hypothyroidism
is pronounced or persists, thyroid hormone replacement therapy may be required, rarely permanently.
Simple Nontoxic Goiter
(Euthyroid Goiter)
Simple nontoxic goiter, which may be diffuse or nodular, is noncancerous hypertrophy of the
thyroid without hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, or inflammation. Except in severe iodine
deficiency, thyroid function is normal and patients are asymptomatic except for an obviously
enlarged, nontender thyroid. Diagnosis is clinical and with determination of normal thyroid
function. Treatment is directed at the underlying cause, but partial surgical removal may be
===PAGE:927===
required for very large goiters
.
Simple nontoxic goiter, the most common type of thyroid enlargement, is frequently noted at puberty,
during pregnancy, and at menopause. The cause at these times is usually unclear. Known causes include
intrinsic thyroid hormone production defects and, in iodine-deficient countries, ingestion of foods that
contain substances that inhibit thyroid hormone synthesis (goitrogens, eg, cassava, broccoli, cauliflower,
cabbage). Other causes include the use of drugs that can decrease the synthesis of thyroid hormone (eg,
amiodarone or other iodine-containing compounds, lithium).
Iodine deficiency is rare in North America but remains the most common cause of goiter worldwide
(termed endemic goiter). Compensatory small elevations in thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) occur,
preventing hypothyroidism, but the TSH stimulation results in goiter formation. Recurrent cycles of
stimulation and involution may result in nontoxic nodular goiters. However, the true etiology of most
nontoxic goiters in iodine-sufficient areas is unknown.
Symptoms and Signs
The patient may have a history of low iodine intake or overingestion of food goitrogens, but these
phenomena are rare in North America. In the early stages, the goiter is typically soft, symmetric, and
smooth. Later, multiple nodules and cysts may develop.
Diagnosis
• Thyroidal radioactive iodine uptake
• Thyroid scan
• Thyroxine (T
), triiodothyronine (T
), and TSH levels
In the early stages, thyroidal radioactive iodine uptake may be normal or high with normal thyroid scans.
Thyroid function tests are usually normal. Thyroid antibodies are measured to rule out Hashimoto's
thyroiditis.
In endemic goiter, serum TSH may be slightly elevated, and serum T
may be low-normal or slightly low,
but serum T
is usually normal or slightly elevated.
Treatment
• Depends on cause
In iodine-deficient areas, iodine supplementation of salt; oral or IM administration of iodized oil yearly; and
iodination of water, crops, or animal fodder eliminates iodine-deficiency goiter. Goitrogens being ingested
should be stopped.
In other instances, suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis with thyroid hormone blocks TSH
production (and hence stimulation of the thyroid). Full TSH-suppressive doses of L-thyroxine (100 to 150
μ
g/day po depending on the serum TSH) are useful in younger patients. L-Thyroxine is contraindicated in
older patients with nontoxic nodular goiter, because these goiters rarely shrink and may harbor areas of
autonomy so that L-thyroxine therapy can result in hyperthyroidism. Large goiters occasionally require
surgery or
I to shrink the gland enough to prevent interference with respiration or swallowing or to
correct cosmetic problems.
Thyroid Cancers
The 4 general types of thyroid cancer are papillary, follicular, medullary, and anaplastic. Papillary
and follicular carcinoma together are called differentiated thyroid cancer because of their
histologic resemblance to normal thyroid tissue and because differentiated function (eg,
===PAGE:928===
thyroglobulin secretion) is preserved. Most thyroid
cancers manifest as asymptomatic nodules.
Rarely, lymph node, lung, or bone metastases cause the presenting symptoms of small thyroid
cancers. Diagnosis is often by fine-needle aspiration biopsy but may involve other tests. Except
for anaplastic and metastatic medullary carcinoma, most thyroid cancers are not highly
malignant and are seldom fatal. Treatment is surgical removal, usually followed by ablation of
residual tissue with radioactive iodine
.
Papillary Carcinoma
Papillary carcinoma accounts for 70 to 80% of all thyroid cancers. The female:male ratio is 3:1. It may be
familial in up to 5% of patients. Most patients present between ages 30 and 60. The tumor is often more
aggressive in elderly patients. Many papillary carcinomas contain follicular elements.
The tumor spreads via lymphatics to regional lymph nodes in one third of patients and may metastasize to
the lungs. Patients < 45 yr with small tumors confined to the thyroid have an excellent prognosis.
Treatment
• Surgical resection
• Sometimes radioactive iodine
Treatment for encapsulated tumors < 1.5 cm localized to one lobe is usually near-total thyroidectomy,
although some experts recommend only lobectomy and isthmectomy; surgery is almost always curative.
Thyroid hormone in thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-suppressive doses is given to minimize chances
of regrowth and cause regression of any microscopic remnants of papillary carcinoma.
Tumors > 4 cm or that are diffusely spreading require total or near-total thyroidectomy with postoperative
radioiodine ablation of residual thyroid tissue with appropriately large doses of
I administered when
the patient is hypothyroid or after recombinant TSH injections. Treatment may be repeated every 6 to 12
mo to ablate any remaining thyroid tissue. TSH-suppressive doses of L-thyroxine are given after
treatment, and serum thyroglobulin levels help detect recurrent or persistent disease. About 20 to 30% of
patients, mainly older patients, have recurrent or persistent disease.
Follicular Carcinoma
Follicular carcinoma, including the Hurthle cell variant, accounts for about 15% of thyroid cancers. It is
more common among older patients and in regions of iodine deficiency. It is more malignant than papillary
carcinoma, spreading hematogenously with distant metastases.
Treatment requires near-total thyroidectomy with postoperative radioiodine ablation of residual thyroid
tissue as in treatment for papillary carcinoma. Metastases are more responsive to radioiodine therapy
than are those of papillary carcinoma. TSH-suppressive doses of L-thyroxine are given after treatment.
Serum thyroglobulin should be monitored to detect recurrent or persistent disease.
Medullary Carcinoma
Medullary (solid) carcinoma constitutes about 3% of thyroid cancers and is composed of parafollicular
cells (C cells) that produce calcitonin. It may be sporadic (usually unilateral); however, it is often familial,
caused by a mutation of the
ret
proto-oncogene. The familial form may occur in isolation or as a
component of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes types 2A and 2B (see pp.
and
).
Although calcitonin can lower serum Ca and phosphate, serum Ca is normal because the high level of
calcitonin ultimately down-regulates its receptors. Characteristic amyloid deposits that stain with Congo
red are also present.
Metastases spread via the lymphatic system to cervical and mediastinal nodes and sometimes to liver,
lungs, and bone.
===PAGE:929===
Symptoms and Signs
Patients typically present with an asymptomatic thyroid nodule, although many cases are now diagnosed
during routine screening of affected kindreds with MEN-2A or MEN-2B before a palpable tumor develops.
Medullary carcinoma may have a dramatic biochemical presentation when associated with ectopic
production of other hormones or peptides (eg, ACTH, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, prostaglandins,
kallikreins, serotonin).
Diagnosis
• Serum calcitonin levels
The best test is measurement of serum calcitonin, which is greatly elevated. A challenge with Ca (15
mg/kg IV over 4 h) provokes excessive secretion of calcitonin. X-rays may show a dense, homogenous,
conglomerate calcification.
All patients with medullary carcinoma should have genetic testing; relatives of those with mutations
should have genetic testing and measurement of basal and stimulated calcitonin levels.
Treatment
• Surgical resection
Total thyroidectomy is indicated even if bilateral involvement is not obvious. Lymph nodes are also
dissected. If hyperparathyroidism is present, removal of hyperplastic or adenomatous parathyroids is
required. Pheochromocytoma, if present, is usually bilateral. Pheochromocytomas should be identified
and removed before thyroidectomy because of the danger of provoking hypertensive crisis during the
operation. Long-term survival is common in patients with medullary carcinoma and MEN-IIA; more than
two thirds of affected patients are alive at 10 yr. Medullary carcinoma of the sporadic type has a worse
prognosis.
Relatives with an elevated calcitonin level without a palpable thyroid abnormality should undergo
thyroidectomy, because there is a greater chance of cure at this stage. Some experts recommend surgery
in relatives who have normal basal and stimulated serum calcitonin levels but who have the
ret
protooncogene mutation.
Anaplastic Carcinoma
Anaplastic carcinoma is an undifferentiated cancer that accounts for about 2% of thyroid cancers. It
occurs mostly in elderly patients and slightly more often in women. The tumor is characterized by rapid,
painful enlargement. Rapid enlargement of the thyroid may also suggest thyroid lymphoma, particularly if
found in association with Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
No effective therapy exists, and the disease is generally fatal. About 80% of patients die within 1 yr of
diagnosis. In a few patients with smaller tumors, thyroidectomy followed by external radiation has been
curative. Chemotherapy is mainly experimental.
Radiation-Induced Thyroid Cancer
Thyroid tumors develop in people exposed to large amounts of environmental thyroid radiation, as occurs
from atomic bomb blasts, nuclear reactor accidents, or incidental thyroid irradiation due to radiation
therapy. Tumors may be detected 10 yr after exposure, but risk remains increased for 30 to 40 yr. Such
tumors are usually benign; however, about 10% are papillary thyroid carcinoma. The tumors are
frequently multicentric or diffuse.
Patients who had thyroid irradiation should undergo yearly thyroid palpation, ultrasonography, and
measurement of thyroid autoantibodies (to exclude Hashimoto's thyroiditis). A thyroid scan does not
===PAGE:930===
always reflect areas of involvement.
If ultrasonography reveals a nodule, fine-needle aspiration biopsy should be done. In the absence of
suspicious or malignant lesions, many physicians recommend lifelong TSH-lowering doses of thyroid
hormone to suppress thyroid function and thyrotropin secretion and possibly decrease the chance of
developing a thyroid tumor.
Surgery is required if fine-needle aspiration biopsy suggests cancer. Near-total or total thyroidectomy is
the treatment of choice, to be followed by radioiodine ablation of any residual thyroid tissue if a cancer is
found (depending on the size, histology, and invasiveness).
===PAGE:931===
Chapter 94. Adrenal Disorders
Introduction
The adrenal glands, located on the cephalad portion of each kidney, consist of a cortex and medulla,
each with separate endocrine functions.
Cortex:
The adrenal cortex produces glucocorticoids (primarily cortisol), mineralocorticoids (primarily
aldosterone), and androgens (primarily dehydroepiandrosterone and androstenedione). Physiology of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical system is further discussed in
Chapter 91
.
Glucocorticoids promote and inhibit gene transcription in many cells and organ systems. Prominent
effects include anti-inflammatory actions and increased hepatic gluconeogenesis.
Mineralocorticoids regulate electrolyte transport across epithelial surfaces, particularly renal conservation
of Na in exchange for K.
Adrenal androgens' chief physiologic activity occurs after conversion to testosterone and
dihydrotestosterone.
Medulla:
The adrenal medulla is composed of chromaffin cells, which synthesize and secrete
catecholamines (mainly epinephrine and lesser amounts of norepinephrine). Chromaffin cells also
produce bioactive amines and peptides (eg, histamine, serotonin, chromogranins, neuropeptide
hormones). Epinephrine and norepinephrine, the major effector amines of the
sympathetic nervous
system, are responsible for the "flight or fight" response (ie, chronotropic and inotropic effects on the
heart; bronchodilation; peripheral and splanchnic vasoconstriction with skeletal muscular vasodilation;
metabolic effects including glycogenolysis, lipolysis, and renin release).
Clinical syndromes:
Most deficiency syndromes affect output of all adrenocortical hormones.
Hypofunction may be primary (malfunction of the adrenal gland itself, as in Addison's disease) or
secondary (due to lack of adrenal stimulation by the pituitary or hypothalamus, although some experts
refer to hypothalamic malfunction as tertiary).
Hyperfunction causes distinct clinical syndromes. Hypersecretion of androgens results in adrenal virilism;
of glucocorticoids, Cushing's syndrome; and of aldosterone, hyperaldosteronism (aldosteronism). These
syndromes frequently have overlapping features. Hyperfunction may be compensatory, as in congenital
adrenal hyperplasia (, or due to acquired hyperplasia, adenomas, or adenocarcinomas.
Excess quantities of epinephrine and norepinephrine are produced in pheochromocytoma.
Addison's Disease
(Primary or Chronic Adrenocortical Insufficiency)
Addison's disease is an insidious, usually progressive hypofunctioning of the adrenal cortex. It
causes various symptoms, including hypotension and hyperpigmentation, and can lead to
adrenal crisis with cardiovascular collapse. Diagnosis is clinical and by finding elevated plasma
ACTH with low plasma cortisol. Treatment depends on the cause but generally includes
hydrocortisone and sometimes other hormones
.
Addison's disease develops in about 4/100,000 annually. It occurs in all age groups, about equally in each
sex, and tends to become clinically apparent during metabolic stress or trauma. Onset of severe
symptoms (adrenal crisis) may be precipitated by acute infection (a common cause, especially with
septicemia). Other causes include trauma, surgery, and Na loss from excessive sweating. With treatment,
Addison's disease should not typically reduce life expectancy.
Etiology
About 70% of cases in the US are due to idiopathic atrophy of the adrenal cortex, probably caused by
===PAGE:932===
autoimmune processes. The remainder result from destruction of the adrenal gland by granuloma (eg,
TB), tumor, amyloidosis, hemorrhage, or inflammatory necrosis. Hypoadrenocorticism can also result from
administration of drugs that block corticosteroid synthesis (eg, ketoconazole, the anesthetic etomidate).
Addison's disease may coexist with diabetes mellitus or hypothyroidism in polyglandular deficiency
syndrome (. In children, the most common cause of primary adrenal insufficiency is congenital
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH—see also
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
.
Pathophysiology
Both mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids are deficient.
Mineralocorticoid deficiency:
Because mineralocorticoids stimulate Na reabsorption and K excretion,
deficiency results in increased excretion of Na and decreased excretion of K, chiefly in urine but also in
sweat, saliva, and the GI tract. A low serum concentration of Na and a high concentration of K result.
Inability to concentrate the urine, combined with changes in electrolyte balance, cause severe
dehydration, plasma hypertonicity, acidosis, decreased circulatory volume, hypotension, and, eventually,
circulatory collapse. However, when adrenal insufficiency is caused by inadequate ACTH production
(secondary adrenal insufficiency—, electrolyte levels are often normal or only mildly deranged.
Glucocorticoid deficiency:
Glucocorticoid deficiency contributes to hypotension and causes severe
insulin sensitivity and disturbances in carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism. In the absence of
cortisol, insufficient carbohydrate is formed from protein; hypoglycemia and diminished liver glycogen
result. Weakness follows, due in part to deficient neuromuscular function. Resistance to infection, trauma,
and other stress is diminished. Myocardial weakness and dehydration reduce cardiac output, and
circulatory failure can occur. Decreased blood cortisol results in increased pituitary ACTH production and
increased blood
β
-lipotropin, which has melanocyte-stimulating activity and, together with ACTH, causes
the hyperpigmentation of skin and mucous membranes characteristic of Addison's disease. Thus, adrenal
insufficiency secondary to pituitary failure ( does not cause hyperpigmentation.
Symptoms and Signs
Weakness, fatigue, and orthostatic hypotension are early symptoms and signs.
Hyperpigmentation is
characterized by diffuse tanning of exposed and, to a lesser extent, unexposed portions of the body,
especially on pressure points (bony prominences), skin folds, scars, and extensor surfaces. Black
freckles are common on the forehead, face, neck, and shoulders. Areas of vitiligo develop, as do bluish
black discolorations of the areolae and mucous membranes of the lips, mouth, rectum, and vagina.
Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea often occur. Decreased tolerance to cold, with hypometabolism,
may be noted. Dizziness and syncope may occur. The gradual onset and nonspecific nature of early
symptoms often lead to an incorrect initial diagnosis of neurosis. Weight loss, dehydration, and
hypotension are characteristic of the later stages of Addison's disease.
Adrenal crisis:
Adrenal crisis is characterized by profound asthenia; severe pain in the abdomen, lower
back, or legs; peripheral vascular collapse; and, finally, renal shutdown with azotemia. Body temperature
may be low, although severe fever often occurs, particularly when crisis is precipitated by acute infection.
A significant number of patients with partial loss of adrenal function (limited adrenocortical reserve)
appear well but experience adrenal crisis when under physiologic stress (eg, surgery, infection, burns,
critical illness). Shock and fever may be the only signs.
Diagnosis
• Electrolytes
• Serum cortisol
• Serum ACTH
• Sometimes ACTH stimulation testing
===PAGE:933===
Clinical symptoms and signs suggest adrenal insufficiency. Sometimes the diagnosis is considered only
on discovery of characteristic abnormalities of serum electrolytes, including low Na (< 135 mEq/L), high K
(> 5 mEq/L), low HCO
(15 to 20 mEq/L), and high BUN (see
Table 94-1
).
Differential diagnosis:
Hyperpigmentation can result from bronchogenic carcinoma, ingestion of heavy
metals (eg, iron, silver), chronic skin conditions, or hemochromatosis. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is
characterized by pigmentation of the buccal and rectal mucosa. Frequently, hyperpigmentation occurs
with vitiligo, which may indicate Addison's disease, although other diseases can cause this association.
Weakness resulting from Addison's disease subsides with rest, unlike neuropsychiatric weakness, which
is often worse in the morning than after activity. Most myopathies that cause weakness can be
differentiated by their distribution, lack of abnormal pigmentation, and characteristic laboratory findings.
[Table 94-1.
Test Results that Suggest Addison's Disease]
Patients with adrenal insufficiency develop hypoglycemia after fasting because of decreased
gluconeogenesis. In contrast, patients with hypoglycemia due to oversecretion of insulin can have attacks
at any time, usually have increased appetite with weight gain, and have normal adrenal function. Low
serum Na due to Addison's disease must be differentiated from that of edematous patients with cardiac or
liver disease (particularly those taking diuretics), the dilutional hyponatremia of the syndrome of
inappropriate ADH secretion, and salt-losing nephritis. These patients are not likely to have
hyperpigmentation, hyperkalemia, and increased BUN.
Testing:
Laboratory tests, beginning with serum cortisol and ACTH levels, confirm adrenal insufficiency.
Elevated ACTH (≥ 50 pg/mL) with low cortisol (< 5
μ
g/dL [< 138 nmol/L]) is diagnostic, particularly in
patients who are severely stressed or in shock. Low ACTH (< 5 pg/mL) and cortisol suggest secondary
adrenal insufficiency (; it is important
to note that ACTH levels within the normal range are
inappropriate for very low cortisol levels.
If ACTH and cortisol levels are borderline and adrenal insufficiency is clinically suspected—particularly in
a patient who is about to undergo major surgery—provocative testing must be done. If time is too short
(eg, emergency surgery), the patient is given hydrocortisone empirically (eg, 100 mg IV or IM), and
provocative testing is done subsequently.
Addison's disease is diagnosed by showing failure of exogenous ACTH to increase serum cortisol.
Secondary adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed by a prolonged ACTH stimulation test, insulin tolerance
test, or glucagon test.
ACTH stimulation testing is done by injecting cosyntropin (synthetic ACTH) 250
μ
g IV or IM. Some
authorities believe that in patients with suspected secondary adrenal insufficiency, a low-dose ACTH
stimulation test using 1
μ
g IV instead of the standard 250
μ
g should be done, because such patients may
react normally to the higher dose. Patients taking glucocorticoid supplements or spironolactone should
not take them on the day of the test. Normal preinjection serum cortisol ranges from 5 to 25
μ
g/dL (138 to
690 nmol/L) and doubles in 30 to 90 min, reaching at least 20
μ
g/dL (552 nmol/L). Patients with Addison's
disease have low or low-normal values that do not rise above 20
μ
g/dL at 30 min. A normal response to
cosyntropin may occur in secondary adrenal insufficiency. However, because pituitary failure may cause
adrenal atrophy (and hence failure to respond to ACTH), the patient may need to be primed with longacting ACTH 1 mg IM once/day for 3 days before the cosyntropin test if pituitary disease is suspected.
A prolonged ACTH stimulation test (sampling for 24 h) may be used to diagnose secondary (or tertiary
—hypothalamic) adrenal insufficiency. Cosyntropin 1 mg IM is given and cortisol measured at intervals for
24 h. Results for the first hour are similar for both the short (sampling stopped after 1 h) and prolonged
tests, but in Addison's disease there is no further rise beyond 60 min. In secondary and tertiary adrenal
insufficiency, cortisol levels continue to rise for ≥ 24 h. Only in cases of prolonged adrenal atrophy is
adrenal priming (with long-acting ACTH) necessary. The simple short test is usually done initially, because
a normal response obviates the need for further investigation.
===PAGE:934===
If adrenal crisis is suspected, confirmation of Addison's disease by ACTH stimulation testing is deferred
until the patient has recovered. If ACTH stimulation testing is done, elevated ACTH levels together with
low cortisol levels confirm the diagnosis.
In Western societies, the cause is usually assumed to be autoimmune, unless there is evidence
otherwise. Adrenal autoantibodies can be assessed. A chest x-ray should be done for TB; if doubt exists,
CT of the adrenals is helpful. In patients with autoimmune disease, the adrenals are atrophied, whereas
in patients with TB or other granulomas, the adrenals are enlarged (initially) with frequent calcification.
Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia suggests an enzyme defect.
Treatment
• Hydrocortisone or prednisone
• Fludrocortisone
• Dose increase during intercurrent illness
Normally, cortisol is secreted maximally in the early morning and minimally at night. Thus, hydrocortisone
(identical to cortisol) is given in 2 or 3 divided doses with a typical total daily dose of 15 to 30 mg. One
regimen gives half the total in the morning, and the remaining half split between lunchtime and early
evening (eg, 10 mg, 5 mg, 5 mg). Others give two thirds in the morning and one third in the evening.
Doses immediately before retiring should generally be avoided because they may cause insomnia.
Alternatively, prednisone 5 mg po in the morning and 2.5 mg po in the evening may be used. Additionally,
fludrocortisone 0.1 to 0.2 mg po once/day is recommended to replace aldosterone. The easiest way to
adjust the dosage is to ensure that the renin level is within the normal range. Normal hydration and
absence of orthostatic hypotension are evidence of adequate replacement therapy. In some patients,
fludrocortisone causes hypertension, which is treated by reducing the dosage or starting a nondiuretic
antihypertensive. Some clinicians tend to give too little fludrocortisone in an effort to avoid use of
antihypertensives.
Intercurrent illnesses (eg, infections) are potentially serious and should be vigorously treated; the patient's
hydrocortisone dose should be doubled during the illness. If nausea and vomiting preclude oral therapy,
parenteral therapy is necessary. Patients should be instructed when to take supplemental prednisone and
taught to self-administer parenteral hydrocortisone for urgent situations. A preloaded syringe with 100 mg
hydrocortisone should be available to the patient. A bracelet or wallet card giving the diagnosis and
corticosteroid
dose may help in case of adrenal crisis that renders the patient unable to communicate.
When salt loss is severe, as in very hot climates, the dose of fludrocortisone may need to be increased.
In coexisting diabetes mellitus and Addison's disease, the hydrocortisone dose usually should not be > 30
mg/day; otherwise, insulin requirements are increased.
Adrenal crisis:
Therapy should be instituted immediately upon suspicion. (CAUTION:
In adrenal crisis, a
delay in instituting corticosteroid therapy, particularly if there is hypoglycemia and hypotension, may be
fatal.
) If the patient is acutely ill, confirmation by an ACTH stimulation test should be postponed until the
patient has recovered.
Hydrocortisone 100 mg is injected IV over 30 sec and repeated q 6 to 8 h for the first 24 h. Immediate
intravascular volume expansion is done by giving 1 L of a 5% dextrose in 0.9% saline solution over 1 to 2
h. Additional 0.9% saline is given IV until hypotension, dehydration, and hyponatremia have been
corrected. Serum K may fall during rehydration, requiring replacement. Mineralocorticoids are not
required when high-dose hydrocortisone is given. When illness is less acute, hydrocortisone 50 or 100
mg can be given IM q 6 h. Restoration of BP and general improvement should occur within 1 h after the
initial dose of hydrocortisone. Inotropic agents may be needed until the effects of hydrocortisone are
achieved.
A total dose of 150 mg hydrocortisone is usually given over the 2nd 24-h period if the patient has
improved markedly, and 75 mg is given on the 3rd day. Maintenance oral doses of hydrocortisone (15 to
===PAGE:935===
30 mg) and fludrocortisone (0.1 mg) are given daily thereafter, as described above. Recovery depends on
treatment of the underlying cause (eg, infection, trauma, metabolic stress) and adequate hydrocortisone
therapy.
For patients with some residual adrenal function who develop adrenal crisis when under stress,
hydrocortisone treatment is the same, but fluid requirements may be much lower.
Treatment of complications:
Fever > 40.6° C occasionally accompanies the rehydration process.
Except in the presence of falling BP, antipyretics (eg, aspirin 650 mg) may be given po with caution.
Complications of corticosteroid therapy may include psychotic reactions. If psychotic reactions occur after
the first 12 h of therapy, the hydrocortisone dose should be reduced to the lowest level consistent with
maintaining BP and good cardiovascular function. Antipsychotics may be temporarily required, but use
should not be prolonged.
Secondary Adrenal Insufficiency
Secondary adrenal insufficiency is adrenal hypofunction due to a lack of ACTH. Symptoms are
the same as for Addison's disease, but there is usually less hypovolemia (. Diagnosis
is clinical and by laboratory findings, including low plasma ACTH with low plasma cortisol.
Treatment depends on the cause but generally includes hydrocortisone
.
Secondary adrenal insufficiency may occur in panhypopituitarism, in isolated failure of ACTH production,
in patients receiving corticosteroids, or after corticosteroids are stopped. Inadequate ACTH can also
result from failure of the hypothalamus to stimulate pituitary ACTH production, which is sometimes called
tertiary adrenal insufficiency.
Panhypopituitarism ( may occur secondary to pituitary tumors; craniopharyngioma in younger
people; and various tumors, granulomas, and, rarely, infection or trauma that destroys pituitary tissue.
Patients receiving corticosteroids for > 4 wk may have insufficient ACTH secretion during metabolic stress
to stimulate the adrenals to produce adequate quantities of corticosteroids, or they may have atrophic
adrenals that are unresponsive to ACTH. These problems may persist for up to 1 yr after corticosteroid
treatment is stopped.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are similar to those of Addison's disease (. Differentiating clinical or
general laboratory features include the absence of hyperpigmentation and relatively normal electrolyte
and BUN levels; hyponatremia, if it occurs, is usually dilutional.
Patients with panhypopituitarism have depressed thyroid and gonadal function and hypoglycemia, and
coma may supervene when symptomatic secondary adrenal insufficiency occurs. Adrenal crisis is
especially likely if a patient is treated for a single endocrine gland problem, particularly with thyroxine,
without hydrocortisone replacement.
Diagnosis
• Serum cortisol
• Serum ACTH
• ACTH stimulation testing
• CNS imaging
Tests to differentiate primary and secondary adrenal insufficiency are discussed under Addison's disease
(. Patients with
confirmed secondary adrenal insufficiency should have CT or MRI of the brain
to rule out pituitary tumor or atrophy. Adequacy of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis during tapering
or after stopping long-term corticosteroid treatment can be determined by injecting cosyntropin 250
μ
g IV
===PAGE:936===
or IM. After 30 min, serum cortisol should be > 20
μ
g/dL (> 552 nmol/L). An insulin stress test to induce
hypoglycemia and a rise in cortisol is the gold standard for testing integrity of the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal axis.
The corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) test can be used to distinguish between hypothalamic and
pituitary causes but is rarely used in clinical practice. After administration of CRH 100
μ
g (or 1
μ
g/kg) IV,
the normal response is a rise of serum ACTH of 30 to 40 pg/mL; patients with pituitary failure do not
respond, whereas those with hypothalamic disease usually do.
Treatment
• Hydrocortisone or prednisone
• Fludrocortisone not indicated
• Dose increase during intercurrent illness
Glucocorticoid replacement is similar to that described for Addison's disease. Each case varies regarding
the type and degree of specific hormone deficiencies. Fludrocortisone is not required because the intact
adrenals produce aldosterone. During acute febrile illness or after trauma, patients receiving
corticosteroids for nonendocrine disorders may require supplemental doses to augment their endogenous
hydrocortisone production. In panhypopituitarism, other pituitary deficiencies should be treated
appropriately (.
Adrenal Virilism
(Adrenogenital Syndrome)
Adrenal virilism is a syndrome in which excessive adrenal androgens cause virilization.
Diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by elevated androgen levels with and without
dexamethasone suppression; determining the cause may involve adrenal imaging. Treatment
depends on the cause
.
Adrenal virilism is caused by an androgen-secreting adrenal tumor or by adrenal hyperplasia. Malignant
adrenal tumors may secrete excess androgens, cortisol, or mineralocorticoids (or all three), resulting in
Cushing's syndrome ( with suppression of ACTH secretion and atrophy of the contralateral
adrenal as well as hypertension. Adrenal hyperplasia is usually congenital; delayed virilizing adrenal
hyperplasia is a variant of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (. Both are caused by a defect in
hydroxylation of cortisol precursors; cortisol precursors accumulate and are shunted into the production
of androgens. The defect is only partial in delayed virilizing adrenal hyperplasia, so clinical disease may
not develop until adulthood.
Symptoms and Signs
Effects depend on the patient's sex and age at onset and are more noticeable in women than in men.
Symptoms and signs include hirsutism (sometimes the only sign in mild cases), baldness, acne, and
deepening of the voice. Libido may increase. In prepubertal children, growth may accelerate. If untreated,
premature epiphyseal closure and short stature occur. Affected prepubertal males may experience
premature sexual maturation. Females may have amenorrhea, atrophy of the uterus, clitoral hypertrophy,
decreased breast size, and increased muscularity. In adult men, the excess adrenal androgens may
suppress gonadal function and cause infertility. Ectopic adrenal tissue in the testes may enlarge and
simulate tumors.
Diagnosis
• Testosterone
• Other adrenal androgens (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate [DHEAS], androstenedione)
===PAGE:937===
• Dexamethasone suppression test
• Adrenal imaging
• 17-hydroxyprogesterone
Adrenal virilism is suspected clinically, although mild hirsutism and virilization with hypomenorrhea and
elevated plasma testosterone may also occur in polycystic ovary (Stein-Leventhal) syndrome (. Adrenal virilism is confirmed by showing elevated levels of adrenal androgens. In adrenal
hyperplasia, urinary dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate (DHEAS) are elevated, pregnanetriol
excretion is often increased, and urinary free cortisol is normal or diminished. Plasma DHEA, DHEAS, 17hydroxyprogesterone, testosterone, and androstenedione may be elevated. A level of > 30 nmol/L of 17hydroxyprogesterone 30 min after administration of cosyntropin 0.25 mg IM strongly suggests the most
common form of adrenal hyperplasia.
Virilizing tumors are excluded if dexamethasone 0.5 mg po q 6 h for 48 h suppresses production of excess
androgens. If excessive
androgen excretion is not suppressed, CT or MRI of the adrenals and
ultrasonography of the ovaries are done to search for a tumor.
Treatment
• Oral corticosteroids for hyperplasia
• Removal of tumors
Recommended treatment for adrenal hyperplasia is dexamethasone 0.5 to 1 mg po at bedtime, but even
these small doses may cause signs of Cushing's syndrome. Cortisol 25 mg po once/day or prednisone 5
to 10 mg po once/day can be used instead. Although most symptoms and signs of virilism disappear,
hirsutism and baldness disappear slowly, the voice may remain deep, and fertility may be impaired.
Tumors require adrenalectomy. For patients with cortisol-secreting tumors, hydrocortisone should be
given preoperatively and postoperatively because their nontumerous adrenal cortex will be atrophic and
suppressed.
Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's syndrome is a constellation of clinical abnormalities caused by chronic high blood
levels of cortisol or related corticosteroids. Cushing's disease is Cushing's syndrome that
results from excess pituitary production of ACTH, usually secondary to a pituitary adenoma.
Typical symptoms include moon facies and truncal obesity with thin arms and legs. Diagnosis is
by history of receiving corticosteroids or by finding elevated serum cortisol. Treatment
depends on the cause
.
Etiology
Hyperfunction of the adrenal cortex can be ACTH dependent or ACTH independent. ACTH-dependent
hyperfunction may result from
• Hypersecretion of ACTH by the pituitary gland
• Secretion of ACTH by a nonpituitary tumor, such as small cell carcinoma of the lung or a carcinoid tumor
(ectopic ACTH syndrome)
• Administration of exogenous ACTH
ACTH-independent hyperfunction usually results from therapeutic administration of corticosteroids or from
adrenal adenomas or carcinomas. Rare causes include primary pigmented nodular adrenal dysplasia
===PAGE:938===
(usually in adolescents) and macronodular dysplasia (in older patients).
Whereas the term Cushing's syndrome denotes the clinical picture resulting from cortisol excess from any
cause, Cushing's disease refers to hyperfunction of the adrenal cortex from pituitary ACTH excess.
Patients with Cushing's disease usually have a small adenoma of the pituitary gland.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical manifestations include moon facies with a plethoric appearance (see
Plate 22
), truncal obesity with prominent supraclavicular and dorsal cervical fat pads (buffalo hump), and,
usually, very slender distal extremities and fingers. Muscle wasting and weakness are present. The skin is
thin and atrophic, with poor wound healing and easy bruising. Purple striae may appear on the abdomen.
Hypertension, renal calculi, osteoporosis, glucose intolerance, reduced resistance to infection, and
mental disturbances are common. Cessation of linear growth is characteristic in children. Females usually
have menstrual irregularities. In females with adrenal tumors, increased production of androgens may
lead to hypertrichosis, temporal balding, and other signs of virilism.
Diagnosis
• Dexamethasone suppression test
• Urinary free cortisol (UFC) level
• ACTH levels; if detectable, provocative testing
Diagnosis is usually suspected based on the characteristic symptoms and signs. Confirmation (and
identification of the cause) generally requires hormonal and imaging tests.
In some centers, testing begins with measurement of UFC, the best assay for urinary excretion (normal,
20 to 100
μ
g/24 h [55.2 to 276 nmol/24 h]). UFC is elevated > 120
μ
g/24 h (> 331 nmol/24 h) in almost all
patients with Cushing's syndrome. However, many patients with UFC elevations between 100 and 150
μ
g/24 h (276 and 414 nmol/24 h) have obesity, depression, or polycystic ovaries but not Cushing's
syndrome. A patient with suspected Cushing's syndrome with grossly elevated UFC (> 4 times the upper
limit of normal) almost certainly has Cushing's syndrome. Two to 3 normal collections virtually exclude the
diagnosis. Slightly elevated levels generally necessitate further investigation.
An alternative approach to investigation uses the dexamethasone suppression test, in which 1, 1.5, or 2
mg of dexamethasone is given po at 11 to 12 PM and serum cortisol is measured at 8 to 9 AM the next
morning. In most
normal patients, this drug suppresses morning serum cortisol to ≤ 1.8
μ
g/mL (≤ 50
nmol/L), whereas patients with Cushing's syndrome virtually always have a higher level. A more specific
but equally sensitive test is to give dexamethasone 0.5 mg po q 6 h for 2 days (low dose). In general, a
clear failure to suppress levels in response to low-dose dexamethasone establishes the diagnosis.
If results of these tests are indeterminate, the patient is hospitalized for measurement of serum cortisol at
midnight, which is more likely to be conclusive. Cortisol normally ranges from 5 to 25
μ
g/dL (138 to 690
nmol/L) in the early morning (6 to 8 AM) and declines gradually to < 1.8
μ
g/dL (< 50 nmol/L) at midnight.
Patients with Cushing's syndrome occasionally have a normal morning cortisol level but lack normal
diurnal decline in cortisol production, such that the midnight serum cortisol levels are above normal and
the total 24-h cortisol production is elevated. Alternatively, salivary cortisol samples may be collected and
stored in the refrigerator at home. Serum cortisol may be spuriously elevated in patients with congenital
increases of corticosteroid-binding globulin or in those receiving estrogen therapy, but diurnal variation is
normal in these patients.
ACTH levels are measured to determine the cause of Cushing's syndrome. Undetectable levels, both
basally and particularly in response to corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), suggest a primary adrenal
cause. High levels suggest a pituitary cause. If ACTH is detectable (ACTH-dependent Cushing's
syndrome), provocative tests help differentiate Cushing's disease from ectopic ACTH syndrome, which is
rarer. In response to high-dose dexamethasone (2 mg po q 6 h for 48 h), the 9 AM serum cortisol falls by
===PAGE:939===
> 50% in most patients with Cushing's disease but infrequently in those with ectopic ACTH syndrome.
Conversely, ACTH rises by > 50% and cortisol rises by > 20% in response to human or ovine-sequence
CRH (100
μ
g IV or 1
μ
g/kg IV) in most patients with Cushing's disease but very rarely in those with ectopic
ACTH syndrome (see
Table 94-2
). An alternative approach to localization, which is more accurate but more invasive, is to
catheterize both petrosal veins (which drain the pituitary) and measure ACTH from these veins 5 min after
a bolus of CRH 100
μ
g or 1
μ
g/kg. A central-to-peripheral ACTH ratio > 3 virtually excludes ectopic ACTH
syndrome, whereas a ratio < 3 suggests a need to seek such a source.
Pituitary imaging is done if ACTH levels and provocative tests suggest a pituitary cause; gadoliniumenhanced MRI is most accurate, but some microadenomas are visible on CT. If testing suggests a
nonpituitary cause, imaging includes high-resolution CT of the chest, pancreas, and adrenals;
scintiscanning with radiolabeled octreotide; and PET scanning.
In children with Cushing's disease, pituitary tumors are very small and usually cannot be detected with
MRI. Petrosal sinus sampling is particularly useful in this situation. MRI is preferred to CT in pregnant
women to avoid fetal exposure to radiation.
Treatment
• Metyrapone or ketoconazole
• Surgery or radiation to remove tumors
[Table 94-2.
Diagnostic Tests in Cushing's Syndrome]
Initially, the patient's general condition should be supported by high protein intake and appropriate
administration of K. If clinical manifestations are severe, it may be reasonable to block corticosteroid
secretion with metyrapone 250 mg to 1 g po tid or ketoconazole 400 mg po once/day, increasing to a
maximum of 400 mg tid. Ketoconazole is more readily available but slower in onset and sometimes
hepatotoxic.
Pituitary tumors that produce excessive ACTH are removed surgically or extirpated with radiation. If no
tumor is shown on imaging but a pituitary source is likely, total hypophysectomy may be attempted,
particularly in older patients. Younger patients usually receive supervoltage irradiation of the pituitary,
delivering 45 Gy. Improvement usually occurs in < 1 yr. However, in children, irradiation may reduce
secretion of growth hormone and occasionally cause precocious puberty. In special centers, heavy
particle beam irradiation, providing about 100 Gy, is often successful, as is a single focused beam of
radiation therapy given as a single dose—radiosurgery. Response to irradiation occasionally requires
several years, but response is more rapid in children.
Bilateral adrenalectomy is reserved for patients with pituitary hyperadrenocorticism who do not respond to
both pituitary exploration (with possible adenomectomy) and irradiation. Adrenalectomy requires life-long
corticosteroid replacement.
Nelson syndrome occurs when the pituitary gland continues to expand after adrenalectomy, causing a
marked increase in the secretion of ACTH and its precursors, resulting in severe hyperpigmentation. It
occurs in ≤ 50% of patients who undergo adrenalectomy. The risk is probably reduced if the patient
undergoes pituitary radiation. Although irradiation may arrest continued pituitary growth, many patients
also require hypophysectomy. The indications for hypophysectomy are the same as for any pituitary
tumor: an increase in size such that the tumor encroaches on surrounding structures, causing visual field
defects, pressure on the hypothalamus, or other complications. Routine irradiation is often done after
hypophysectomy if it was not done previously, especially when a tumor is clearly present. Radiosurgery,
or focused radiation therapy, can be given in a single fraction when standard external beam radiation
therapy has already been done, as long as the lesion is at a reasonable distance from the optic nerve and
chiasm.
Adrenocortical tumors are removed surgically. Patients must receive cortisol during the surgical and
===PAGE:940===
postoperative periods because their nontumorous adrenal cortex will be atrophic and suppressed. Benign
adenomas can be removed laparoscopically. With multinodular adrenal hyperplasia, bilateral
adrenalectomy may be necessary. Even after a presumed total adrenalectomy, functional regrowth occurs
in a few patients.
Ectopic ACTH syndrome is treated by removing the nonpituitary tumor that is producing the ACTH.
However, in some cases, the tumor is disseminated and cannot be excised. Adrenal inhibitors, such as
metyrapone 500 mg po tid (and up to a total of 6 g/day) or mitotane 0.5 g po once/day, increasing to a
maximum of 3 to 4 g/day, usually control severe metabolic disturbances (eg, hypokalemia). When
mitotane is used, large doses of hydrocortisone or dexamethasone may be needed. Measures of cortisol
production may be unreliable, and severe hypercholesterolemia may develop. Ketoconazole 400 to 1200
mg po once/day also blocks corticosteroid synthesis, although it may cause liver toxicity and can cause
addisonian symptoms. Alternatively, the corticosteroid receptors can be blocked with mifepristone (RU
486). Mifepristone increases serum cortisol but blocks effects of the corticosteroid. Sometimes ACTHsecreting tumors respond to long-acting somatostatin analogs, although administration for > 2 yr requires
close follow-up, because mild gastritis, gallstones, cholangitis, and malabsorption may develop.
Primary Aldosteronism
(Conn's Syndrome)
Primary aldosteronism is aldosteronism caused by autonomous production of aldosterone by
the adrenal cortex (due to hyperplasia, adenoma, or carcinoma). Symptoms and signs include
episodic weakness, elevated BP, and hypokalemia. Diagnosis includes measurement of plasma
aldosterone levels and plasma renin activity. Treatment depends on cause. A tumor is removed
if possible; in hyperplasia, spironolactone or related drugs may normalize BP and eliminate
other clinical features
.
Aldosterone is the most potent mineralocorticoid produced by the adrenals. It causes Na retention and K
loss. In the kidney, aldosterone causes transfer of Na from the lumen of the distal tubule into the tubular
cells in exchange for K and hydrogen. The same effect occurs in salivary glands, sweat glands, cells of
the intestinal mucosa, and in exchanges between ICFs and ECFs.
Aldosterone secretion is regulated by the renin-angiotensin system and, to a lesser extent, by ACTH.
Renin, a proteolytic enzyme, is stored in the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys. Reduction in blood
volume and flow in the afferent renal arterioles induces secretion of renin. Renin transforms
angiotensinogen from the liver to angiotensin I, which is transformed by ACE to angiotensin II. Angiotensin
II causes secretion of aldosterone and, to a much lesser extent, secretion of cortisol and
deoxycorticosterone; it also has pressor activity. Na and water retention resulting from increased
aldosterone secretion increases the blood volume and reduces renin secretion.
Primary aldosteronism is caused by an adenoma, usually unilateral, of the glomerulosa cells of the
adrenal cortex or, more rarely, by adrenal carcinoma or hyperplasia. Adenomas are extremely rare in
children, but the syndrome sometimes occurs in childhood adrenal carcinoma or hyperplasia. In adrenal
hyperplasia, which is more common among older men, both adrenals are overactive, and no adenoma is
present. The clinical picture can also occur with congenital adrenal hyperplasia from deficiency of 11
β
-
hydroxylase and the dominantly inherited dexamethasone-suppressible hyperaldosteronism. Hyperplasia
as a cause of hyperaldosteronism may be more common than previously recognized but remains an
infrequent cause in the presence of hypokalemia.
Symptoms and Signs
Hypernatremia, hypervolemia, and a hypokalemic alkalosis may occur, causing episodic weakness,
paresthesias, transient paralysis, and tetany. Diastolic hypertension and hypokalemic nephropathy with
polyuria and polydipsia are common. In many cases, the only manifestation is mild to moderate
hypertension. Edema is uncommon.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:941===
• Electrolytes
• Plasma aldosterone
• Plasma renin activity (PRA)
• Adrenal imaging
• Bilateral adrenal vein catheterization (for cortisol and aldosterone levels)
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with hypertension and hypokalemia. Initial laboratory testing consists
of plasma aldosterone levels and PRA. Ideally, tests are done after the patient has not taken any drugs
that affect the renin-angiotensin system (eg, thiazide diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin antagonists,
β
-
blockers) for 4 to 6 wk. PRA is usually measured in the morning with the patient recumbent. Patients with
primary aldosteronism typically have plasma aldosterone > 15 ng/dL (> 0.42 nmol/L) and low levels of
PRA, with a ratio of plasma aldosterone (in ng/dL) to PRA (in ng/mL/h) > 20.
Low levels of both PRA and aldosterone suggest nonaldosterone mineralocorticoid excess (eg, due to
licorice ingestion, Cushing's syndrome, or Liddle syndrome). High levels of both PRA and aldosterone
suggest secondary hyperaldosteronism (. The principal differences between primary and
secondary aldosteronism are shown in
Table 94-3
. In children, Bartter syndrome
[Table 94-3.
Differential Diagnosis of Aldosteronism]
( is distinguished from primary hyperaldosteronism by the absence of hypertension and
marked elevation of renin.
Patients with findings suggesting primary hyperaldosteronism should undergo CT or MRI to determine
whether the cause is a tumor or hyperplasia. Aldosterone levels measured on awakening and 2 to 4 h
later while standing also may help make this distinction; in adenoma, levels decline and in hyperplasia,
levels increase. In most cases, bilateral catheterization of the adrenal veins to measure cortisol and
aldosterone should be used to confirm whether the aldosterone excess is unilateral (tumor) or bilateral
(hyperplasia).
Treatment
• Surgical removal of tumors
• Spironolactone or eplerenone for hyperplasia
Tumors should be removed laparoscopically. After removal of an adenoma, BP decreases in all patients;
complete remission occurs in 50 to 70%.
With adrenal hyperplasia, 70% remain hypertensive after bilateral adrenalectomy; thus, surgery is not
recommended. Hyperaldosteronism in these patients can usually be controlled by spironolactone, starting
with 300 mg po once/day and decreasing over 1 mo to a maintenance dose, usually around 100 mg
once/day; or by amiloride 5 to 10 mg po once/day or another K-sparing diuretic. The newer more specific
drug eplerenone may be used because, unlike spironolactone, it does not block the androgen receptor.
About half of patients with hyperplasia need additional antihypertensive treatment (.
Secondary Aldosteronism
Secondary aldosteronism is increased adrenal production of aldosterone in response to
nonpituitary, extra-adrenal stimuli, including renal artery stenosis and hypovolemia. Symptoms
are those of primary aldosteronism. Treatment involves correcting the cause
.
===PAGE:942===
Secondary aldosteronism is caused by reduced renal blood flow, which stimulates the renin-angiotensin
mechanism with resultant hypersecretion of aldosterone. Causes of reduced renal blood flow include
obstructive renal artery disease (eg, atheroma, stenosis), renal vasoconstriction (as occurs in accelerated
hypertension), and edematous disorders (eg, heart failure, cirrhosis with ascites, nephrotic syndrome).
Secretion may be normal in heart failure, but hepatic blood flow and aldosterone metabolism are reduced,
so circulating levels of the hormone are high.
Pheochromocytoma
A pheochromocytoma is a catecholamine-secreting tumor of chromaffin cells typically located
in the adrenals. It causes persistent or paroxysmal hypertension. Diagnosis is by measuring
catecholamine products in blood or urine. Imaging tests, especially CT or MRI, help localize
tumors. Treatment involves removal of the tumor when possible. Drug therapy for control of BP
includes
α
-blockade, usually combined with
β
-blockade
.
The catecholamines secreted include norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, and dopa in varying
proportions. About 90% of pheochromocytomas are in the adrenal medulla, but they may also be located
in other tissues derived from neural crest cells. Possible sites include the following:
• Paraganglia of the sympathetic chain
• Retroperitoneally along the course of the aorta
• Carotid body
• Organ of Zuckerkandl (at the aortic bifurcation)
• GU system
• Brain
• Pericardial sac
• Dermoid cysts
Pheochromocytomas in the adrenal medulla occur equally in both sexes, are bilateral in 10% of cases
(20% in children), and are malignant in < 10%. Of extra-adrenal tumors, 30% are malignant. Although
pheochromocytomas occur at any age, peak incidence is between the 20s and 40s. About 25% are now
thought to be due to germline mutations.
Pheochromocytomas vary in size but average 5 to 6 cm in diameter. They weigh 50 to 200 g, but tumors
weighing several kilograms have been reported. Rarely, they are large enough to be palpated or cause
symptoms due to pressure or obstruction. Regardless of the histologic appearance, the tumor is
considered benign if it has not invaded the capsule and no metastases are found, although exceptions
occur.
Pheochromocytomas may be part of the syndrome of familial multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN), types
2A and 2B, in which other endocrine tumors (parathyroid or medullary carcinoma of the thyroid) coexist or
develop subsequently (. Pheochromocytoma develops in 1% of patients with
neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen's disease) and may occur with hemangiomas and renal cell
carcinoma, as in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Familial pheochromocytomas and carotid body tumors may
be due to mutations of the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase.
Symptoms and Signs
Hypertension, which is paroxysmal in 45% of patients, is prominent. About 1/1000 hypertensive patients
has a pheochromocytoma. Common symptoms and signs are tachycardia, diaphoresis, postural
hypotension, tachypnea, cold and clammy skin, severe headache, angina, palpitations, nausea, vomiting,
===PAGE:943===
epigastric pain, visual disturbances, dyspnea, paresthesias, constipation, and a sense of impending
doom. Paroxysmal attacks may be provoked by palpation of the tumor, postural changes, abdominal
compression or massage, induction of anesthesia, emotional trauma, unopposed
β
-blockade (which
paradoxically increases BP by blocking
β
-mediated vasodilation), or micturition (if the tumor is in the
bladder). In elderly patients, severe weight loss with persistent hypertension is suggestive of
pheochromocytoma.
Physical examination, except for the presence of hypertension, is usually normal unless done during a
paroxysmal attack. Retinopathy and cardiomegaly are often less severe than might be expected for the
degree of hypertension, but a specific catecholamine cardiomyopathy can occur.
Diagnosis
• Plasma free metanephrines or urinary metanephrines
• Chest and abdomen imaging (CT or MRI) if catecholamine screen positive
• Possibly nuclear imaging with
I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG)
Pheochromocytoma is suspected in patients with typical symptoms or particularly sudden, severe, or
intermittent unexplained hypertension. Diagnosis involves demonstrating high levels of catecholamine
products in the serum or urine.
Blood tests:
Plasma free metanephrine is up to 99% sensitive. This test has superior sensitivity to
measurement of circulating epinephrine and norepinephrine because plasma metanephrines are elevated
continuously, unlike epinephrine and norepinephrine, which are secreted intermittently; however, grossly
elevated plasma norepinephrine renders the diagnosis highly probable.
Urine tests:
Urinary metanephrine is less specific than plasma free metanephrine, but sensitivity is about
95%. Two or 3 normal results while the patient is hypertensive render the diagnosis extremely unlikely.
Measurement of urinary norepinephrine and epinephrine is nearly as accurate. The principal urinary
metabolic products of epinephrine and norepinephrine are the metanephrines vanillylmandelic acid (VMA)
and homovanillic acid (HVA). Healthy people excrete only very small amounts of these substances.
Normal values for 24 h are as follows: free epinephrine and norepinephrine < 100
μ
g (< 582 nmol), total
metanephrine < 1.3 mg (< 7.1
μ
mol), VMA < 10 mg (< 50
μ
mol), HVA < 15 mg (< 82.4
μ
mol). In
pheochromocytoma, increased urinary excretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine and their metabolic
products is intermittent. Elevated excretion of these compounds may also occur in other disorders (eg,
neuroblastoma, coma, dehydration, sleep apnea) or extreme stress; in patients being treated with
rauwolfia alkaloids, methyldopa, or catecholamines; or after ingestion of foods containing large quantities
of vanilla (especially if renal insufficiency is present).
Other tests:
Blood volume is constricted and may falsely elevate Hb and Hct levels. Hyperglycemia,
glycosuria, or overt diabetes mellitus may be present, with elevated fasting levels of plasma free fatty acid
and glycerol. Plasma insulin level is inappropriately low for the plasma glucose. After removal of the
pheochromocytoma, hypoglycemia may occur, especially in patients treated with oral antihyperglycemics.
Provocative tests
with histamine or tyramine
are hazardous and should not be used.
Glucagon 0.5 to 1
mg injected rapidly IV provokes a rise in BP of > 35/25 mm Hg within 2 min in normotensive patients with
pheochromocytoma but is now generally unnecessary.
Phentolamine mesylate must be available to
terminate any hypertensive crisis.
Screening tests
are preferred to provocative tests. The general approach is to measure plasma
metanephrines, 24-h urinary catecholamines, or their metabolites as a screening test and to avoid
provocative tests. In patients with elevated plasma catecholamines, a suppression test using oral
clonidine or IV pentolinium can be used but is rarely necessary.
Imaging tests to localize tumors
are usually done in patients with abnormal screening results. Tests
should include CT and MRI of the chest and abdomen with and without contrast.
With isotonic contrast
===PAGE:944===
should include CT and MRI of the chest and abdomen with and without contrast.
With isotonic contrast
media, no adrenoceptor blockade is necessary. PET has also been used successfully. Repeated
sampling of plasma catecholamine concentrations during catheterization of the vena cava with sampling
at different locations, including the adrenal veins, can help localize the tumor: there will be a step up in
norepinephrine level in a vein draining the tumor. Adrenal vein norepinephrine:epinephrine ratios may
help in the hunt for a small adrenal source. Radiopharmaceuticals with nuclear imaging techniques can
also help localize pheochromocytomas.
I-MIBG is the most used compound outside the US; 0.5 mCi is
injected IV, and the patient is scanned on days 1, 2, and 3. Normal adrenal tissue rarely picks up this
isotope, but 85% of pheochromocytomas do. The imaging is usually positive only when the lesion is large
enough to be obvious on CT or MRI, but it can help confirm that a mass is likely to be the source of the
catecholamines.
I-MIBG is a less sensitive alternative.
Signs of an associated genetic disorder
(eg, cafe-au-lait patches in neurofibromatosis) should be
sought. Patients should be screened for MEN with a serum Ca (and possibly calcitonin) and any other
tests as directed by clinical findings.
Treatment
• Hypertension control with combination of
α
-blockers and
β
-blockers
• Surgical removal of tumor
Surgical removal is the treatment of choice. The operation is usually delayed until hypertension is
controlled by a combination of
α
-blockers and
β
-blockers (usually phenoxybenzamine 20 to 40 mg po tid
and propranolol 20 to 40 mg po tid).
β
-Blockers should not be used until adequate
α
-blockade has been
achieved. Some
α
-blockers, such as doxazosin, may be equally effective but better tolerated.
The most effective and safest preoperative
α
-blockade is phenoxybenzamine 0.5 mg/kg IV in 0.9% saline
over 2 h on each of the 3 days before the operation. Na nitroprusside can be infused for hypertensive
crises preoperatively or intraoperatively. When bilateral tumors are documented or suspected (as in a
patient with MEN), sufficient hydrocortisone (100 mg IV bid) given before and during surgery avoids acute
glucocorticoid insufficiency due to bilateral adrenalectomy.
Most pheochromocytomas can be removed laparoscopically. BP must be continuously monitored via an
intra-arterial catheter, and volume status is closely monitored. Anesthesia should be induced with a
nonarrhythmogenic drug (eg, a thiobarbiturate) and continued with enflurane. During surgery, paroxysms
of hypertension should be controlled with injections of phentolamine 1 to 5 mg IV or nitroprusside infusion
(2 to 4
μ
g/kg/min), and tachyarrhythmias should be controlled with propranolol 0.5 to 2 mg IV. If a muscle
relaxant is needed, drugs that do not release histamine are preferred.
Atropine should not be used
preoperatively.
Preoperative blood transfusion (1 to 2 units) may be given before the tumor is removed in
anticipation of blood loss. If BP has been well controlled before surgery, a diet high in salt is
recommended to increase blood volume. An infusion of norepinephrine 4 to 12 mg/L in a dextrosecontaining solution should be started if hypotension develops. Some patients whose hypotension
responds poorly to levarterenol may benefit from hydrocortisone 100 mg IV, but adequate fluid
replacement is usually all that is required.
Malignant metastatic pheochromocytoma
should be treated with
α
- and
β
-blockers. The tumor may
be indolent and survival long-lasting. However, even with rapid tumor growth, BP can be controlled.
IMIBG prolongs life when used to treat residual disease. Radiation therapy may reduce bone pain;
chemotherapy is rarely effective but can be attempted if all else fails.
Nonfunctional Adrenal Masses
Nonfunctional adrenal masses are spaceoccupying lesions of the adrenal glands that have no
hormonal activity. Symptoms, signs, and treatment depend on the nature and size of the mass
.
The most common nonfunctioning adrenal mass in adults is an adenoma (50%), followed by carcinomas
and metastatic tumors. Cysts and lipomas make up most of the remainder. However, the precise
===PAGE:945===
proportions depend on the clinical presentation. Masses discovered on incidental screening are usually
adenomas. Less commonly, in neonates, spontaneous adrenal hemorrhage may cause large adrenal
masses, simulating neuroblastoma or Wilms' tumor. In adults, bilateral massive adrenal hemorrhage may
result from thromboembolic disease or coagulopathy. Benign cysts are observed in elderly patients and
may be due to cystic degeneration, vascular accidents, lymphomas, bacterial infections, fungal infections
(eg, histoplasmosis), or parasitic infestations (eg, due to
Echinococcus
). Hematogenous spread of TB
organisms may cause adrenal masses. A nonfunctional adrenal carcinoma produces a diffuse and
infiltrating retroperitoneal process. Hemorrhage can occur, causing adrenal hematomas.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients are asymptomatic. With any adrenal mass, adrenal insufficiency is rare unless both glands
are involved.
The major signs of bilateral massive adrenal hemorrhage are abdominal pain, falling Hct, signs of acute
adrenal failure, and suprarenal masses on CT or MRI. TB of the adrenals may cause calcification and
Addison's disease. Nonfunctional adrenal carcinoma usually manifests as metastatic disease and may
therefore not be amenable to surgery, though mitotane may afford chemotherapeutic control when used
with supportive exogenous corticosteroids.
Diagnosis
• Adrenal hormone measurements
• Fine-needle biopsy
Nonfunctional adrenal masses are usually found incidentally during tests such as CT or MRI conducted
for other reasons. Nonfunctionality is established clinically and confirmed by adrenal hormonal
measurements (. If metastatic disease is possible, fine-needle biopsy can be diagnostic but is
contraindicated if adrenal carcinoma is strongly suspected.
Treatment
• Excision
• Periodic monitoring
If the tumor is solid, of adrenal origin, and > 4 cm, it should be excised, because biopsy cannot always
distinguish benign from malignant tumors.
Tumors 2 to 4 cm in diameter are a particularly difficult clinical problem. If scanning does not suggest
cancer and hormonal function does not seem altered (eg, normal electrolytes and catecholamines, no
evidence of Cushing's syndrome), it is reasonable to reevaluate periodically, usually for up to 4 yr. If no
progression is seen by then, further follow-up is unnecessary. However, many of these tumors secrete
cortisol in quantities too small to cause symptoms, and whether they would eventually cause symptoms
and morbidity if untreated is unclear. Most clinicians merely observe patients with these tumors.
Adrenal adenomas < 2 cm require no special treatment but should be observed for growth or
development of secretory function (such as by looking for clinical signs and periodically measuring
electrolytes).
===PAGE:946===
Chapter 95. Polyglandular Deficiency Syndromes
Introduction
(Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes; Polyendocrine Deficiency Syndromes)
Polyglandular deficiency syndromes (PDS) are characterized by sequential or simultaneous
deficiencies in the function of several endocrine glands that have a common cause. Etiology is
most often autoimmune. Symptoms depend on the combination of deficiencies, which fall
within 1 of 3 types. Diagnosis requires measurement of hormone levels and autoantibodies
against affected endocrine glands. Treatment includes replacement of missing or deficient
hormones and sometimes immunosuppressants
.
Etiology
Although individual endocrine glands can be damaged by numerous causes, including infection,
infarction, and tumors, these syndromes usually result from an autoimmune reaction, probably triggered
by a virus or other environmental antigen.
Genetic factors increase susceptibility to these syndromes, as shown by the increased presence of
certain HLA subtypes in affected people and the recognition of several inheritance patterns (see
Table 95-1
).
Pathophysiology
The underlying autoimmune reaction involves autoantibodies against endocrine tissues, cell-mediated
autoimmunity, or both and leads to inflammation, lymphocytic infiltration, and partial or complete gland
destruction. More
[Table 95-1.
Characteristics of Types I, II, and III Polyglandular Deficiency Syndromes]
than one endocrine gland is involved, although clinical manifestations are not always simultaneous. The
autoimmune reaction and associated immune system dysfunction can also damage nonendocrine tissues.
Classification
Three patterns of autoimmune failure have been described (see
Table 95-1
), which likely reflect different
autoimmune abnormalities.
Type I:
Type I usually begins in childhood. The 3 primary components are
• Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
• Hypoparathyroidism
• Adrenal insufficiency (Addison's disease)
Candidiasis is usually the initial clinical manifestation, most often occurring in patients < 5 yr.
Hypoparathyroidism occurs next, usually in patients < 10 yr. Lastly, adrenal insufficiency occurs in
patients < 15 yr. Accompanying endocrine and nonendocrine disorders (see
Table 95-1
) continue to
appear at least until patients are about age 40.
Type II (Schmidt's syndrome):
Type II usually occurs in adults; peak incidence is age 30. It occurs 3
times more often in women. It typically manifests with
• Adrenal insufficiency
• Hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism
===PAGE:947===
• Type 1 diabetes (autoimmune etiology)
More rare features may also be present (see
Table 95-1
).
Type III:
Type III is characterized by
• Glandular failure occurring in adults, particularly middle-aged women
• Hypothyroidism
• At least one of a variety of other disorders (see
Table 95-1
)
Type III does not involve the adrenal cortex.
Symptoms and Signs
The clinical appearance of patients with PDS is the sum of the individual endocrine deficiencies and
associated nonendocrine disorders; their symptoms and signs are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
The deficiencies do not always appear at the same time and may require a period of years to manifest; in
such cases they do not follow a particular sequence.
Diagnosis
• Measurement of hormone levels
• Sometimes autoantibody titers
Diagnosis is suggested clinically and confirmed by detecting deficient hormone levels. Other causes of
multiple endocrine deficiencies include hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction and coincidental endocrine
dysfunction due to separate causes (eg, tuberculous hypoadrenalism and nonautoimmune
hypothyroidism in the same patient). Detecting autoantibodies to each affected glandular tissue can help
differentiate PDS from the other causes, and elevated levels of pituitary tropic hormones (eg, thyroidstimulating hormone) suggest the hypothalamic-pituitary axis is intact (although some patients with type II
PDS have hypothalamic-pituitary insufficiency).
Because decades may pass before the appearance of all manifestations, lifelong follow-up is prudent;
unrecognized hypoparathyroidism or adrenal insufficiency can be life threatening.
Relatives should be made aware of the diagnosis and screened when appropriate; measurement of
glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies may be useful in determining risk.
Treatment
• Hormone replacement
Treatment of the various individual glandular deficiencies is discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL; the
treatment of multiple deficiencies can be more complex than treatment of an isolated endocrine
deficiency.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis usually requires lifelong antifungal therapy (eg, oral fluconazole or
ketoconazole—. If given early (within the first few weeks to months) in the course of
endocrine failure, immunosuppressive doses of cyclosporine may benefit some patients.
IPEX Syndrome
IPEX (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked) is a recessive
syndrome involving aggressive autoimmunity
.
===PAGE:948===
This rare disorder results from mutation of the transcriptional activator,
FoxP3
, which causes regulatory
T-cell dysfunction and a subsequent autoimmune disorder.
IPEX syndrome manifests as severe enlargement of the secondary lymphoid organs, type 1 diabetes
mellitus, eczema, food allergies, and infections. Secondary enteropathy leads to persistent diarrhea.
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical features and confirmed by genetic analysis.
Untreated, IPEX syndrome is usually fatal in the first year of life. Immunosuppressants and bone marrow
transplantation can prolong life but are rarely curative.
POEMS Syndrome
(Crow-Fukase Syndrome)
POEMS (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, skin
changes) is a nonautoimmune polyglandular deficiency syndrome
.
POEMS syndrome is probably caused by circulating immunoglobulins caused by a plasma cell dyscrasia
(see also p.
). Circulating cytokines (IL-1β
, IL-6), vascular endothelial growth factor, and tumor
necrosis factorα
are also increased.
Patients may have the following:
• Hepatomegaly
• Lymphadenopathy
• Hypogonadism
• Diabetes mellitus type 2
• Primary hypothyroidism
• Hyperparathyroidism
• Adrenal insufficiency
• Excess production of monoclonal IgA and IgG due to plasmacytomas and skin abnormalities (eg,
hyperpigmentation, dermal thickening, hirsutism, angiomas, hypertrichosis)
Other symptoms and signs may include edema, ascites, pleural effusion, papilledema, and fever.
Like other syndromes of undefined pathophysiology, POEMS syndrome is diagnosed based on the
constellation of symptoms and signs. Criteria include the presence of polyneuropathy and monoclonal
paraproteinemia plus any 2 of the other manifestations of the disorder.
Treatment consists of chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by autologous hematopoietic or stem
cell transplantation. Five-year survival is about 60%.
===PAGE:949===
Chapter 96. Porphyrias
Introduction
Porphyrias result from genetic deficiencies of enzymes of the heme biosynthetic pathway.
These deficiencies allow heme precursors to accumulate, causing toxicity. Porphyrias are
defined by the specific enzyme deficiency. Two major clinical manifestations occur:
neurovisceral abnormalities (the acute porphyrias) and cutaneous photosensitivity (the
cutaneous porphyrias)
.
Heme, an iron-containing pigment, is synthesized mostly in the bone marrow (by erythroblasts and
reticulocytes) and is incorporated into hemoglobin. Heme is also synthesized in the liver and incorporated
into certain enzymes (eg, cytochromes). Heme synthesis requires 8 enzymes (see
Table 96-1
). These enzymes produce and transform molecular species called porphyrins (and their
precursors), which are toxic if they accumulate.
Etiology
Most porphyrias are autosomal dominant. Homozygous or double heterozygous states may be
incompatible with life, generally causing fetal death; the exceptions are
δ
-aminolevulinic acid (ALA)
dehydratase (ALAD)-deficiency porphyria and uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase deficiency, in which only
homozygous or double heterozygous conditions (ie, 2 separate heterozygous mutations in the same gene
in the same patient) cause disease. Disease penetrance in heterozygotes varies. In terms of genetic
prevalence, the 2 most common porphyrias are acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) and porphyria cutanea
tarda (PCT). The prevalence of each is about 1/10,000.
Pathophysiology
Porphyrias result from a deficiency of any of the last 7 enzymes of the heme biosynthetic pathway
(deficiency of the first enzyme in the pathway, ALA synthase, causes sideroblastic anemia). Single genes
encode each enzyme; any of numerous possible mutations can incapacitate the enzyme encoded by that
gene. When an enzyme of heme synthesis is deficient or defective, its substrate and any other heme
precursors normally modified by that enzyme may accumulate in bone marrow, liver, skin, or other tissues
and have toxic effects. These precursors may appear in excess in the blood and be excreted in urine,
bile, or stool.
[Table 96-1.
Substrates and Enzymes of the Heme Biosynthetic Pathway and the Diseases Associated
with their Deficiency]
Although porphyrias are most precisely defined according to the deficient enzyme, classification by major
clinical features (phenotype) is often useful. Thus, porphyrias are usually divided into 2 classes:
• Acute
• Cutaneous
Acute porphyrias manifest as intermittent attacks of abdominal, mental, and neurologic symptoms. They
are typically triggered by drugs and other exogenous factors. Cutaneous porphyrias tend to cause
continuous or undulating symptoms involving cutaneous photosensitivity. Some acute porphyrias also
have cutaneous manifestations. Because of variable penetrance in heterozygous porphyrias, clinically
expressed disease is less common than genetic prevalence (see
Table 96-2
).
Urine discoloration (red or reddish brown) may occur in the symptomatic phase of all porphyrias except
erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) and ALAD-deficiency porphyria. Discoloration results from oxidized
porphyrins, the porphyrin
[Table 96-2.
Major Features of the Two Most Common Porphyrias]
===PAGE:950===
precursor porphobilinogen (PBG), or both. Sometimes the color develops after the urine has stood in light
for about 30 min, allowing time for oxidation. In the acute porphyrias, except in ALAD-deficiency porphyria,
about 1 in 3 heterozygotes (more frequently in females than males) also have increased urinary excretion
of PBG (and urine discoloration) in the latent phase.
Diagnosis
Patients with symptoms suggesting porphyria are screened by blood or urine tests for porphyrins or the
porphyrin precursors PBG and ALA (see
Table 96-3
). Abnormal results on screening are confirmed by further testing.
Asymptomatic patients, including suspected carriers and people who are between attacks, are evaluated
similarly. However, the tests are less sensitive in these circumstances; measurement of RBC or WBC
enzyme activity is considerably more sensitive. Genetic analysis is highly accurate and preferentially used
within families when the mutation is known. Prenatal testing (involving amniocentesis or chorionic villus
sampling) is possible but rarely indicated.
Acute Porphyrias
Acute porphyrias cause intermittent attacks of abdominal pain and neurologic symptoms.
Attacks are precipitated by certain drugs and other factors. Patients with variegate porphyria
and hereditary coproporphyria may develop
[Table 96-3.
Screening for Porphyrias]
bullous eruptions due to sunlight exposure. Diagnosis is based on elevated levels of
δ
-
aminolevulinic acid and porphyrin precursor porphobilinogen in the urine during attacks.
Attacks are treated with glucose or, if more severe, IV heme. Symptomatic treatment, including
analgesia, is given as necessary
.
Acute porphyrias include, in order of prevalence, acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), variegate porphyria
(VP), hereditary coproporphyria (HCP), and the exceedingly rare
δ
-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase
(ALAD)-deficiency porphyria.
Among heterozygotes, acute porphyrias are rarely expressed clinically before puberty and, after puberty,
in only about 20 to 30%. Among homozygotes and double heterozygotes, onset generally is in childhood,
and symptoms are often severe.
Precipitating Factors
Many precipitating factors exist, typically accelerating heme biosynthesis above the catalytic capacity of
the defective enzyme. Accumulation of porphyrin precursor porphobilinogen (PBG) and
δ
-aminolevulinic
acid (ALA), or in the case of ALAD-deficiency porphyria, ALA alone, results.
Hormonal factors are important. Women are more prone to attacks than men, particularly during periods
of hormonal change (eg, just before menstruation, during use of oral contraceptives, during the early
weeks of gestation, just after delivery). Nevertheless, pregnancy is not contraindicated.
Other factors include drugs (including barbiturates, other antiepileptic drugs, and sulfonamide antibiotics
—see
Table 96-4
) and reproductive hormones (progesterone and related steroids), particularly those that induce
hepatic ALA synthase and cytochrome P-450 enzymes. Attacks usually occur within 24 h after exposure to
a precipitating drug. Low-calorie and low-carbohydrate diets, alcohol ingestion, and exposure to organic
solvents can also precipitate symptoms. Infection or other illness, surgery, and mental problems are
sometimes implicated. Attacks usually result from several, sometimes unidentifiable, factors.
Sunlight precipitates cutaneous symptoms in VP and HCP.
===PAGE:951===
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs involve the nervous system, abdomen, or both (neurovisceral). Attacks develop over
hours or days and can last
[Table 96-4.
Drugs and Porphyria*]
up to several weeks. Most gene carriers experience no, or only a few, attacks in their lifetime. Others
experience recurrent symptoms. In women, attacks often coincide with phases of the menstrual cycle.
The acute porphyric attack:
Constipation, fatigue, irritability, and insomnia typically precede an acute
attack. The most common symptoms with an attack are abdominal pain and vomiting. The pain may be
excruciating and is disproportionate to abdominal tenderness. Abdominal manifestations may result from
effects on visceral nerves or from local vasoconstrictive ischemia. Because there is no inflammation, the
abdomen is not tender and there are no peritoneal signs. Temperature and WBC count are normal or
slightly increased. Bowel distention may develop as a result of paralytic ileus. The urine is red or reddish
brown and positive for PBG during an attack.
All components of the peripheral and central nervous systems may be involved. Motor neuropathy is
common with severe and prolonged attacks. Muscle weakness usually begins in the extremities but can
involve any motor neuron or cranial nerve and proceed to tetraplegia. Bulbar involvement can cause
ventilatory failure.
CNS involvement may cause seizures or mental disturbances (eg, apathy, depression, agitation, frank
psychosis, hallucinations). Seizures, psychotic behavior, and hallucinations may be due to hyponatremia
or hypomagnesemia, which can also contribute to cardiac arrhythmias.
Excess catecholamines generally cause restlessness and tachycardia. Rarely, catecholamine-induced
arrhythmias cause sudden death. Labile hypertension with transiently high BP may cause vascular
changes progressing to irreversible hypertension if untreated. Renal failure in acute porphyria is
multifactorial; acute hypertension (possibly leading to chronic hypertension) is likely a main precipitating
factor.
Subacute or subchronic symptoms:
Some patients have prolonged symptoms of lesser intensity (eg,
obstipation, fatigue, headache, back or thigh pain, paresthesia, tachycardia, dyspnea, insomnia, mental
disturbance, seizures).
Skin symptoms in VP and HCP:
Fragile skin and bullous eruptions may develop on sun-exposed
areas, even in the absence of neurovisceral symptoms. Often patients are not aware of the connection to
sun exposure. Cutaneous manifestations are identical to those of porphyria cutanea tarda.
Late manifestations:
Motor involvement during acute attacks may cause persistent weakness between
attacks. Hepatocellular cancer, hypertension, and renal impairment become more common after middle
age in AIP and possibly also in VP and HCP, especially in patients with previous porphyric attacks.
Diagnosis
• Urine screen for PBG
• If urine results are positive, quantitative ALA and PBG determination
• Genetic analysis if type must be identified
Acute attack:
Misdiagnosis is common because the acute attack is confused with other causes of acute
abdomen (sometimes leading to unnecessary surgery) or with a primary neurologic or mental disorder.
However, in patients previously diagnosed as gene carriers or who have a positive family history,
porphyria should be suspected. Still, even in known gene carriers, other causes must be considered.
===PAGE:952===
Red or reddish brown urine, not present before onset of symptoms, is a cardinal sign and is present
during full-blown attacks. A urine specimen should be examined in patients with abdominal pain of
unknown cause, especially if severe constipation, vomiting, tachycardia, muscle weakness, bulbar
involvement, or mental symptoms occur.
If porphyria is suspected, the urine is analyzed for PBG using a rapid qualitative or semiquantitative
determination. A positive result or high clinical suspicion necessitates quantitative ALA and PBG
measurements preferentially obtained from the same specimen. PBG and ALA levels > 5 times normal
indicate an acute porphyric attack unless patients are gene carriers in whom porphyrin precursor
excretion occurs at similar levels even during the latent phase of the disorder.
If urinary PBG and ALA levels are normal, an alternative diagnosis must be considered. Elevated ALA with
normal or slightly increased PBG suggests lead poisoning or ALAD-deficiency porphyria. Analysis of a 24h urine specimen is not useful. Instead, a random urine specimen is used, and PBG and ALA levels are
corrected for dilution by relating to the creatinine level of the sample. Electrolytes and Mg should be
measured. Hyponatremia may be present because of excessive vomiting or diarrhea after hypotonic fluid
replacement or because of the syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH).
Determination of type:
Because treatment does not depend on the type of acute porphyria,
identification of the specific type is valuable mainly for finding gene carriers among relatives. When the
type and mutation are already known from previous testing of relatives, the diagnosis is clear but may be
confirmed by gene analysis. Enzymatic diagnosis is not necessary. If there is no family history to guide the
diagnosis, the different forms of acute porphyria are distinguished by characteristic patterns of porphyrin
(and precursor) accumulation and excretion in plasma, urine, and stool. When urine analysis reveals
increased levels of ALA and PBG, fecal porphyrins may be measured. Fecal porphyrins are usually
normal or minimally increased in AIP but elevated in HCP and VP. Often, these markers are not present in
the quiescent phase of the disorder. In HCP and VP, plasma porphyrins with characteristic fluorescence
are sought. RBC PBG deaminase levels that are about 50% of normal suggest AIP. Diminished WBC
protoporphyrinogen oxidase levels suggest VP, and diminished coproporphyrinogen oxidase levels
suggest HCP.
Family studies:
Children of a gene carrier have a 50% risk of inheriting the disorder. Because diagnosis
followed by counseling reduces the risk of morbidity, children in affected families should be tested before
the onset of puberty. Genetic testing is used if the mutation has been identified in the index case. If not,
pertinent RBC or WBC enzyme levels are measured. Gene analysis can be used for in utero diagnosis
(using amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling) but is seldom indicated because of the favorable
outlook for most gene carriers.
Prognosis
Advances in medical care and self-care have improved the prognosis for symptomatic patients. Still, some
patients develop recurrent crises or progressive disease with permanent paralysis or renal failure. Also,
frequent need for potent analgesics may give rise to drug addiction.
Treatment
• Triggers eliminated if possible
• Dextrose (oral or IV)
• IV heme
Treatment of the acute attack is identical for all the acute porphyrias. Possible triggers (eg, drugs) are
identified and eliminated. Unless the attack is mild, patients are hospitalized in a darkened, quiet, private
room. Heart rate, BP, and fluid and electrolyte balance are
monitored. Neurologic status, bladder function,
muscle and tendon function, respiratory function, and pulse oximetry are continuously monitored.
Symptoms (eg, pain, vomiting) are treated with nonporphyrinogenic drugs as needed (see
Table 96-4
).
===PAGE:953===
Dextrose 300 to 500 g daily inhibits ALA synthase and relieves symptoms. It can be given by mouth if
patients are not vomiting; otherwise, it is given IV. To avoid overhydration with consequent hyponatremia,
1 L of a 50% dextrose solution can be given by central venous catheter over 24 h.
IV heme is more effective than dextrose and should be given immediately in severe attacks, electrolyte
imbalance, or muscle weakness. Heme usually resolves symptoms in 3 to 4 days. If heme therapy is
delayed, nerve damage is more severe and recovery is slower and possibly incomplete. Heme is
available in the US as lyophilized hematin to be reconstituted in a glass vial with sterile water. The dose is
3 mg/kg IV once/day for 4 days. In this form, heme degradation products form rapidly and may cause
phlebitis at the infusion site; they also have a transient anticoagulant effect. Adverse effects can be
reduced by reconstitution with, eg, 20% human albumin. Heme arginate is a more stable, generally
toxicity-free alternative.
In patients with severe recurrent attacks, who are at risk of renal damage or permanent neurologic
damage, liver transplantation is an option. Renal transplantation, with or without simultaneous liver
exchange, should be considered in patients with active disease and terminal renal failure, because there
is considerable risk that nerve damage will progress at the start of dialysis.
Prevention
Carriers of acute porphyria should avoid the following:
• Potentially harmful drugs (see
Table 96-4
)
• Alcohol
• Emotional stress
• Exposure to organic solvents (eg, in painting or dry cleaning)
• Crash diets
• Periods of starvation
Diets for obesity should provide gradual weight loss and be adopted only during periods of remission.
Carriers of VP or HCP should minimize sun exposure; sunscreens that block only ultraviolet B light are
ineffective, but opaque titanium dioxide preparations are beneficial. Support associations for porphyria
patients can provide written information and direct counseling.
Patients should be identified prominently in the medical record as carriers and should carry a card
verifying the carrier state and precautions to be observed.
A high-carbohydrate diet may decrease the risk of acute attacks. A high-carbohydrate diet or a lump of
sugar every hour may help relieve symptoms of an acute attack. Prolonged use should be avoided in
order to decrease risk of obesity and dental caries.
Patients who experience recurrent and predictable attacks (typically women with attacks related to the
menstrual cycle) may benefit from prophylactic heme therapy given shortly before the expected onset.
There is no standardized regimen; a specialist should be consulted. Frequent premenstrual attacks in
some women are aborted by administration of a gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog plus low-dose
estrogen. Oral contraceptives are sometimes used successfully, but the progestin component is likely to
exacerbate the porphyria.
To prevent renal damage, chronic hypertension is treated (using safe drugs). Patients with evidence of
impaired renal function are referred to a nephrologist.
The incidence of hepatocellular cancer is high among carriers of acute porphyria, especially in patients
===PAGE:954===
with active disease. Patients who are > 50 should undergo yearly or twice yearly surveillance, including
liver screening with contrast-enhanced ultrasonography. Early intervention can be curative and increases
life expectancy.
Cutaneous Porphyrias
Cutaneous porphyrias tend to manifest as undulating or unremitting disease with a relatively
steady production of phototoxic porphyrins in the liver or bone marrow. These porphyrins
accumulate in the skin and, on sunlight exposure (visible light, including near-ultraviolet [UV]),
generate cytotoxic radicals that cause cutaneous manifestations
.
Cutaneous porphyrias include porphyria cutanea tarda, erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP), and the
extremely rare hepatoerythropoietic porphyria and congenital erythropoietic porphyria (see
Table 96-5
). The acute porphyrias variegate porphyria and hereditary coproporphyria also have
cutaneous manifestations.
In all cutaneous porphyrias except EPP, cutaneous photosensitivity manifests as fragile skin and bullous
eruptions. Skin changes generally occur on sun-exposed areas (eg, face, neck, dorsal sides of fingers
and hands) or traumatized skin. The cutaneous reaction is
[Table 96-5.
Some Less Common Porphyrias]
insidious, and often patients are unaware of the connection to sun exposure. In contrast, the
photosensitivity in EPP occurs within minutes or hours after sun exposure, manifesting as a burning pain
that persists for hours, often without any objective signs on the skin.
Porphyria Cutanea Tarda
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is a comparatively common porphyria affecting mainly the skin.
Liver disease is common. Symptoms include fragile skin and blisters affecting sun-exposed
areas.
Iron plays a key role in pathogenesis. Several environmental factors lower the threshold
for the phototoxic skin reaction, including alcohol ingestion, estrogens, hepatitis C infection,
and possibly HIV infection. Drugs, with the exceptions of iron and estrogens, are not triggers.
Diagnosis is by porphyrin analysis of urine and stool. Differentiation from the acute cutaneous
porphyrias hereditary coproporphyria and variegate porphyria is important. Treatment includes
iron depletion by phlebotomy and forced porphyrin excretion by treatment with chloroquine.
Prevention is by avoidance of sunlight, alcohol, estrogens, and iron-containing drugs
.
Pathophysiology
PCT results from hepatic deficiency of uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UPGD—see
Table 96-1
). In
about 80% of patients, the responsible mutation is sporadic; the remaining 20% are hereditary.
Porphyrins accumulate in the liver and are transported to the skin, where they cause photosensitivity. The
50% decrease in UPGD activity in heterozygous patients is insufficient to cause clinical PCT. Other
factors must further impair enzyme activity. Iron plays a central role, probably by generating oxygen
radicals that inhibit UPGD by oxidizing its substrate; thus, hemochromatosis is a significant risk factor.
Alcohol, estrogens, and chronic viral infection probably contribute in different ways by increasing iron
activity in hepatic tissue. The drugs that commonly trigger acute porphyria (see
Table 96-4
) do not trigger
PCT.
Liver disease is common in PCT and may be due partly to porphyrin accumulation, chronic hepatitis C
infection, concomitant hemosiderosis, or excess alcohol ingestion. Cirrhosis occurs in ≤ 35% of patients,
and hepatocellular carcinoma occurs in 7 to 24% (more common among middle-aged men).
The 2 major forms of the disease, types 1 and 2, have the same precipitants, symptoms, and treatment.
Overall prevalence may be on the order of 1/10,000.
===PAGE:955===
In type 1 PCT (sporadic), decarboxylase deficiency is restricted to the liver and no genetic background is
recognized. It usually manifests in middle age or later.
In type 2 PCT (familial), decarboxylase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with
limited penetrance. Prevalence is lower than in sporadic PCT. Deficiency occurs in all cells, including
RBCs. It may develop earlier than type 1, occasionally in childhood.
Secondary PCT-like conditions (pseudoporphyria) may occur with certain photosensitizing drugs (eg,
furosemide, tetracyclines, sulfonamides, some NSAIDs). Because porphyrins are poorly dialyzed, some
patients receiving long-term hemodialysis develop a skin condition that resembles PCT; this condition is
termed pseudoporphyria of end-stage renal disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients present with fragile skin, mainly on sun-exposed areas. Phototoxicity is delayed: patients do not
always connect sun exposure with symptoms.
Spontaneously or after minor trauma, tense bullae develop. Accompanying erosions and ulcers may
develop secondary infection; they heal slowly, leaving atrophic scars. Sun exposure occasionally leads to
erythema, edema, or itching. Hyperemic conjunctivitis may develop, but other mucosal sites are not
affected. Areas of hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation may develop, as may facial hypertrichosis and
pseudosclerodermoid changes.
Diagnosis
• Levels of plasma porphyrins, urinary uroporphyrin and heptacarboxyl porphyrin, and fecal
isocoproporphyrin
In otherwise healthy patients, fragile skin and blister formation suggest PCT. Differentiation from acute
porphyrias with cutaneous symptoms (variegate porphyria [VP] and hereditary coproporphyria [HCP]) is
important because in patients with VP and HCP, the erroneous prescription of porphyrogenic drugs may
trigger the severe neurovisceral symptoms of the acute porphyrias. Previous unexplained neurologic
symptoms or abdominal pain may suggest an acute porphyria. A history of exposure to chemicals that can
cause pseudoporphyria should be sought.
Although all porphyrias that cause skin lesions are accompanied by elevated plasma porphyrins, elevated
urinary uroporphyrin and heptacarboxyl porphyrin and fecal isocoproporphyrin indicate PCT. Urine levels
of porphyrin precursor porphobilinogen (PBG) and, usually,
δ
-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) are normal in
PCT. RBC activity of UPGD is normal in type 1 PCT but decreased in type 2.
Because concurrent hepatitis C infection is common and may be asymptomatic, serum markers for
hepatitis C ( should be investigated.
Treatment
Two different therapeutic strategies are available:
• Reduction of body iron stores
• Increase in porphyrin excretion
These strategies can be combined for more rapid remission. The treatment is monitored by
determinations of urinary porphyrin excretion every other or every 3rd month until full remission.
Iron removal by phlebotomy is usually effective. A pint of blood is removed every 2nd or every 3rd week;
shorter intervals unnecessarily risk causing anemia. When serum ferritin falls slightly below normal,
phlebotomy is stopped. Usually, only 5 to 6 sessions are needed. Urine and plasma porphyrins fall
===PAGE:956===
gradually with treatment, lagging behind but paralleling the fall in ferritin. The skin eventually becomes
normal. After remission, further phlebotomy is needed only if there is a recurrence.
Low-dose chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine (100 to 125 mg po twice/wk) removes excess porphyrins
from the liver by increasing the excretion rate. Higher doses can cause transient liver damage and
worsening of porphyria. When remission is achieved, the regimen is stopped.
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are not effective in advanced renal disease, and phlebotomy is
usually contraindicated because of underlying anemia. However, recombinant erythropoietin mobilizes
excess iron and resolves the anemia enough to permit phlebotomy. In end-stage renal disease,
deferoxamine is an adjunct to phlebotomy for reduction of hepatic iron, the complexed iron being removed
during dialysis. Dialyzers with ultrapermeable membranes and extra high blood flow rates are needed.
Patients with overt PCT and hepatitis C infection are preferentially treated with pegylated interferon alfa2a and ribavirin. Previous iron depletion augments the response to antiviral therapy.
Children with symptomatic PCT are treated with small-volume phlebotomies or oral chloroquine; dosage
is determined by body weight.
Skin symptoms occurring during pregnancy are treated with phlebotomy. In refractory cases, low-dose
chloroquine can be added; no teratogenic effects have been recognized. Depending on degree of
hemodilution and iron depletion, the skin symptoms usually abate as pregnancy advances.
Postmenopausal estrogen supplementation is interrupted during treatment for PCT. Stopping estrogens
often induces remission. After remission, estrogens can be reintroduced, preferentially in transdermal
administration to reduce hepatic porphyrogenic exposure.
Prevention
Patients should avoid sun exposure; hats and clothing protect best, as do zinc or titanium oxide
sunscreens. Typical sunscreens that block UV light are ineffective, but UVA-absorbing sunscreens, such
as those containing dibenzylmethanes, may help somewhat. Alcohol ingestion should be avoided
permanently, but estrogen supplementation can usually be resumed safely after a disease remission.
Erythropoietic Protoporphyria
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) typically manifests in infancy with burning skin pain after
even short exposure to sunlight. Gallstones are common later in life, and acute liver failure
occurs in about 10%. Diagnosis is based on symptoms and increased levels of protoporphyrin
in RBCs and plasma. Treatment is with
β
-carotene or dihydroxyacetone and avoidance of
sunlight. In patients with liver failure, combined liver and bone marrow transplantation may be
life saving as well as curative
.
Etiology
EPP results from deficiency of the enzyme ferrochelatase in erythroid tissue. Clinical prevalence is
about1/75,000. Phototoxic protoporphyrins accumulate in bone marrow and RBCs, enter the plasma, and
are deposited in the skin or excreted by the liver into bile and stool. Heavy biliary protoporphyrin excretion
can cause gallstones. These cytotoxic molecules sometimes damage the hepatobiliary tract, resulting in
hepatic protoporphyrin accumulation that leads to acute liver failure; liver failure may become clinically
acute within days.
Inheritance pattern is basically autosomal dominant but complex. Clinical manifestations occur only in
people who have both the defective EPP gene and an unusual low-output (but otherwise normal) allele
from the healthy parent.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:957===
Severity varies greatly, even among patients within a single family. Usually, an infant or young child with
EPP cries for hours after even short exposure to sun. However, because cutaneous signs are usually
absent and young children cannot describe their symptoms, EPP often goes undiagnosed.
If unrecognized, EPP causes psychosocial problems because children inexplicably refuse to go outdoors.
The pain may be so distressing that it causes nervousness, tenseness, aggressiveness, or even feelings
of detachment from the surroundings or suicidal thoughts.
During childhood, crusting may develop around the lips and on the back of the hands after prolonged sun
exposure. Blistering and scarring do not occur. If skin protection is chronically neglected, rough,
thickened, and leathery skin may
develop, especially over the knuckles. Linear perioral furrows (carp
mouth) may develop.
Biliary excretion of large amounts of protoporphyrin can cause cholestasis that progresses to nodular
cirrhosis and acute liver failure in ≤ 10% of patients; symptoms include jaundice, malaise, upper
abdominal pain, and tender hepatic enlargement.
Diagnosis
• RBC and plasma protoporphyrin measurement
EPP should be suspected in children and adults with painful cutaneous photosensitivity who experience
no blisters or scarring. Family history is usually negative. The diagnosis is confirmed by finding increased
RBC and plasma protoporphyrin levels. A genetic marker for susceptibility to cholestatic complications
has been identified.
Screening of potential carriers among relatives is by showing increased RBC protoporphyrin contents and
decreased ferrochelatase activity (assayed in lymphocytes) or by genetic testing if the mutation has been
identified in the index case. Susceptibility for cutaneous disease in carriers is indicated by finding the lowoutput ferrochelatase allele.
Treatment
• Avoidance of triggers (eg, sun exposure, alcohol, fasting)
• Symptomatic treatment
• Sometimes oral
β
-carotene
Acute skin symptoms are alleviated by cold baths or wet towels, analgesics, and antihistamines. Regular
physician-patient consultations that provide information, discussion, and opportunities for genetic
counseling together with physical checkups are important.
Patients should avoid sun exposure; opaque titanium dioxide or zinc oxide sunscreens are beneficial, and
UVA-absorbing sunscreens, such as those containing dibenzylmethanes, may help somewhat. Protection
against the operating light is strictly required in liver transplantation to avoid serious phototoxic injury to
inner organs. Covering of light sources with filters that block wavelengths < 470 nm is required.
Endoscopy, laparoscopy, and nontransplant abdominal surgery are not connected with risk of phototoxic
damage.
[Table 96-6.
Doses of
β
-Carotene in Erythropoietic Protoporphyria]
Patients should avoid alcohol and fasting, both of which increase the rate of RBC production and thus the
protoporphyrin load. Drugs that trigger acute porphyrias (see
Table 96-4
) need not be avoided.
Systemic
β
-carotene causes slight yellow protective skin coloration and neutralizes the toxic radicals in
the skin that cause symptoms. Dose depends on patient age (see
Table 96-6
).
===PAGE:958===
Another antioxidant, cysteine, may also lessen photosensitivity. The brown protective skin color obtained
with topically applied dihydroxyacetone is generally cosmetically preferable to the yellowish tint caused by
β
-carotene.
If the above-mentioned measures are ineffective (eg, patients have increasing photosensitivity, rising
porphyrin levels, or progressive jaundice), RBC hypertransfusion (ie, to abovenormal Hb levels) can
reduce the production rate of porphyrin-loaded RBCs. Administration of bile acids facilitates biliary
excretion of protoporphyrin. Oral cholestyramine or charcoal interrupts the enterohepatic circulation. Liver
failure may require immediate liver transplantation. Bone marrow exchange corrects the basic metabolic
defect.
Patients with EPP should undergo annual surveillance for risks of cholestasis. Tests include RBC
porphyrin levels, porphyrin excretion patterns, and liver function. Abnormal findings should be evaluated
by a porphyria specialist and a hepatologist. If the liver appears involved, biopsy is done to identify
progressive disease. Patients should be vaccinated against hepatitis A and B and advised to avoid
alcohol.
===PAGE:959===
Chapter 97. Fluid and Electrolyte Metabolism
Introduction
Body fluid volume and electrolyte concentration are normally maintained within very narrow limits despite
wide variations in dietary intake, metabolic activity, and environmental stresses. Homeostasis of body
fluids is preserved primarily by the kidneys.
Water and Sodium Balance
Water and Na balance are closely interdependent. Total body water (TBW) is about 60% of body weight
(ranging from about 50% in obese people to 70% in lean people). Almost two thirds of TBW is in the
intracellular compartment (intracellular fluid, or ICF); the other one third is extracellular (extracellular fluid,
or ECF). Normally, about 25% of the ECF is in the intravascular compartment; the other 75% is interstitial
fluid (see
Fig. 97-1
).
The major intracellular cation is K, with an average concentration of 140 mEq/L. The extracellular K
concentration is 3.5 to 5 mEq/L. The major extracellular cation is Na, with an average concentration of
140 mEq/L and an intracellular Na concentration of 12 mEq/L.
Osmotic forces:
The concentration of combined solutes in water is osmolarity (amount of solute per L of
solution), which, in body fluids, is similar to osmolality (amount of solute per kg of solution). Plasma
osmolality can be measured in the laboratory or estimated according to the formula
Plasma osmolality (mOsm/kg) =
where serum Na is expressed in mEq/L and glucose and BUN are expressed in mg/dL. Osmolality of
body fluids is normally between 275 and 290 mOsm/kg. Na is the major determinant of serum osmolality.
Apparent changes in osmolality may result from errors in the measurement of Na with electrodes that are
not ion selective (see under Diagnosis . An osmolar gap is present when measured osmolality
exceeds estimated osmolality by ≥ 10 mOsm/kg. It is caused by unmeasured osmotically active
substances present in the plasma. The most common are alcohols (ethanol, methanol, isopropanol,
ethylene glycol), mannitol, and glycine.
Water crosses cell membranes freely from areas of low solute concentration to areas of high solute
concentration. Thus, osmolality tends to equalize across the various body fluid compartments, resulting
primarily from movement of water, not solutes. Solutes such as urea that freely diffuse across cell
membranes have little or no effect on water shifts (little or no osmotic activity), whereas solutes that are
restricted primarily to one fluid compartment, such as Na and K, have the greatest osmotic activity.
Tonicity, or effective osmolality, reflects osmotic activity and determines the force drawing water across
fluid compartments (the osmotic force). Osmotic force can be opposed by other forces. For example,
plasma proteins have a small osmotic effect that tends to draw water into the plasma; this osmotic effect
is normally counteracted by vascular hydrostatic forces that drive water out of the plasma.
Water intake and excretion:
The average daily fluid intake is about 2.5 L. The amount needed to
replace losses from the urine and other sources is about 1 to 1.5 L/day in healthy adults. However, on a
short-term basis, an average
[Fig. 97-1.
Fluid compartments in an average 70-kg man.]
young adult with normal kidney function may ingest as little as 200 mL of water each day to excrete the
nitrogenous and other wastes generated by cellular metabolism. More is needed in people with any loss
of renal concentrating capacity. Renal concentrating capacity is lost in
===PAGE:960===
• The elderly
• People with diabetes insipidus, certain renal disorders, hypercalcemia, severe salt restriction, chronic
overhydration, or hyperkalemia
• People who ingest ethanol, phenytoin, lithium, demeclocycline, or amphotericin B
• People with osmotic diuresis (eg, due to high-protein diets or hyperglycemia)
Other obligatory water losses are mostly insensible losses from the lungs and skin, averaging about 0.4
to 0.5 mL/kg/h or about 650 to 850 mL/day in a 70-kg adult. With fever, another 50 to 75 mL/day may be
lost for each degree C of temperature elevation above normal. GI losses are usually negligible, except
when marked vomiting, diarrhea, or both occur. Sweat losses can be significant during environmental
heat exposure or excessive exercise.
Water intake is regulated by thirst. Thirst is triggered by receptors in the anterolateral hypothalamus that
respond to increased serum osmolality (as little as 2%) or decreased body fluid volume. Rarely
hypothalamic dysfunction decreases the capacity for thirst.
Water excretion by the kidneys is regulated primarily by ADH (vasopressin). ADH is released by the
posterior pituitary and results in increased water reabsorption in the distal nephron. ADH release is
stimulated by any of the following:
• Increased serum osmolality
• Decreased blood volume
• Decreased BP
• Stress
ADH release may be impaired by certain substances (eg, ethanol, phenytoin) and central diabetes
insipidus (.
Water intake decreases serum osmolality. Low serum osmolality inhibits ADH secretion, allowing the
kidneys to produce dilute urine. The diluting capacity of healthy kidneys in young adults is such that
maximum daily fluid intake can be as much as 25 L; greater amounts quickly lower serum osmolality.
Disorders of Fluid Volume
Because Na is the major osmotically active ion in the ECF, total body Na content determines ECF volume.
Deficiency or excess of total body Na content causes ECF volume depletion or overload. Plasma Na
concentration does not necessarily reflect total body Na.
Dietary intake and renal excretion regulate total body Na content. When total Na content and ECF volume
are low, the kidneys increase Na conservation. When total Na content and ECF volume are high, Na
excretion (natriuresis) increases so that volume decreases.
Renal Na excretion can be adjusted widely to match Na intake. Renal Na excretion requires delivery of
Na to the kidneys and so depends on renal blood flow and GFR. Thus, inadequate Na excretion may be
secondary to decreased renal blood flow, as in chronic kidney disease or heart failure.
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis:
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis is the main regulatory
mechanism of renal Na excretion. In volume-depleted states, GFR and Na delivery to the distal nephrons
decreases, causing release of renin. Renin cleaves angiotensinogen (renin substrate) to form angiotensin
I. ACE then cleaves angiotensin I to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II does the following:
• Increases Na retention by decreasing the filtered load of Na and enhancing proximal tubular Na
===PAGE:961===
reabsorption.
• Increases BP (has pressor activity)
• Increases thirst
• Directly impairs water excretion
• Stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone, which increases Na reabsorption via multiple renal
mechanisms
Angiotensin I can also be transformed to angiotensin III, which stimulates aldosterone release as much as
angiotensin II but has much less pressor activity. Aldosterone release is also stimulated by hyperkalemia.
Other natriuretic factors:
Several other natriuretic factors have been identified, including atrial
natriuretic peptide (ANP), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), and a C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP).
ANP
is secreted by cardiac atrial tissue. Concentration increases in response to ECF volume overload
(eg, heart failure, chronic kidney disease, cirrhosis with ascites) and primary aldosteronism and in some
patients with primary hypertension. Decreases have occurred in the subset of patients with nephrotic
syndrome who have presumed ECF volume contraction. High concentrations increase Na excretion and
increase GFR even when BP is low.
BNP
is synthesized mainly in the atria and left ventricle and has similar triggers and effects to ANP. BNP
assays are readily available. High BNP concentration is used to diagnose volume overload.
CNP
, in contrast to ANP and BNP, is primarily vasodilatory.
Na depletion and excess:
Na depletion requires inadequate Na intake plus abnormal losses from the
skin, GI tract, or kidneys (defective renal Na conservation). Defective renal Na conservation may be
caused by primary renal disease, adrenal insufficiency, or diuretic therapy.
Na overload requires higher Na intake than excretion; however, because normal kidneys can excrete
large amounts of Na, Na overload generally reflects defective regulation of renal blood flow and Na
excretion (eg, as occurs in heart failure, cirrhosis, or chronic kidney disease).
Volume Depletion
Volume depletion, or ECF volume contraction, occurs as a result of loss of total body Na.
Causes include vomiting, excessive sweating, diarrhea, burns, diuretic use, and kidney failure.
Clinical features include diminished skin turgor, dry mucous membranes, tachycardia, and
orthostatic hypotension. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment involves administration of Na and
water
.
Because water crosses plasma membranes in the body through passive osmosis, loss of the major
extracellular cation (Na) quickly results in water loss from the ECF space as well. In this way, Na loss
always causes water loss. However, depending on many factors, serum Na concentration can be high,
low, or normal in volume-depleted patients (despite the decreased total body Na content). ECF volume is
related to effective circulating volume. A decrease in ECF (hypovolemia) generally causes a decrease in
effective circulating volume, which in turn causes decreased organ perfusion and leads to clinical
sequelae. Common causes of volume depletion are listed in
Table 97-1
.
Symptoms and Signs
In mild volume depletion (< 5% of ECF), the only sign may be diminished skin turgor (best assessed at
the upper torso). Skin turgor may be low in elderly patients regardless of volume status. Patients may
complain of thirst. Dry mucous membranes do not always correlate with volume depletion, especially in
===PAGE:962===
the elderly and in mouth-breathers. Oliguria is typical.
When ECF volume has diminished by 5 to 10%, orthostatic tachycardia, hypotension, or both are usually,
but not always, present. Also, orthostatic changes can occur in patients without ECF volume depletion,
particularly patients deconditioned or bedridden. Skin turgor may decrease further.
[Table 97-1.
Common Causes of Volume Depletion]
When fluid loss exceeds 10% of ECF volume, signs of shock can occur (eg, tachypnea, tachycardia,
hypotension, confusion, poor capillary refill).
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings
• Sometimes serum electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine
• Rarely serum osmolality and urine chemistries
Volume depletion is suspected in patients at risk, most often in patients with a history of inadequate fluid
intake (especially in comatose or disoriented patients), increased fluid losses, diuretic therapy, and renal
or adrenal disorders.
Diagnosis is usually clinical. When the cause is obvious and easily correctable (eg, acute gastroenteritis
in otherwise healthy patients), laboratory testing is unnecessary; otherwise, serum electrolytes, BUN, and
creatinine are measured. Serum osmolality and urine Na, creatinine, and osmolality are measured when
there is suspicion of clinically meaningful electrolyte abnormality that is not clear from serum tests and for
patients with cardiac or renal disease. When metabolic alkalosis is present, urine Cl is also measured.
Central venous pressure and pulmonary artery occlusion pressure are decreased in volume depletion, but
measurement is rarely required. Measurement, which requires an invasive procedure, is occasionally
necessary for patients for whom even small amounts of added volume may be detrimental, such as those
with unstable heart failure or advanced chronic kidney disease.
The following concepts are helpful when interpreting urine electrolyte and osmolality values:
• During volume depletion, normally functioning kidneys conserve Na. Thus, the urine Na concentration is
usually < 15 mEq/L; the fractional excretion of Na (urine Na/serum Na divided by urine creatinine/serum
creatinine) is usually < 1%; also, urine osmolality is often > 450 mOsm/kg.
• When metabolic alkalosis is combined with volume depletion, urine Na concentration may be high
because large amounts of HCO
are spilled in the urine, obligating the excretion of Na to maintain
electrical neutrality. In this instance, a urine Cl concentration of < 10 mEq/L more reliably indicates
volume depletion.
• Misleadingly high urinary Na (generally > 20 mEq/L) or low urine osmolality can also occur due to renal
Na losses resulting from renal disease, diuretics, or adrenal insufficiency.
Volume depletion frequently increases the BUN and serum creatinine concentrations with the ratio of
BUN to creatinine often > 20:1. Values such as Hct often increase in volume depletion but are difficult to
interpret unless baseline values are known.
Treatment
• Replacement of Na and water
The cause of volume depletion is corrected and fluids are given to replace existing volume deficits as well
as any ongoing fluid losses and to provide daily fluid requirements. Mild-to-moderate volume deficits may
===PAGE:963===
be replaced by increased oral intake of Na and water when patients are conscious and not vomiting.
When volume deficits are severe or when oral fluid replacement is impractical, IV 0.9% saline is given.
Typical IV regimens are discussed on p.
; oral regimens are discussed elsewhere.
Volume Overload
Volume overload generally refers to expansion of the ECF volume. ECF volume expansion
typically occurs in heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, and cirrhosis. Renal Na retention leads to
increased total body Na content. This increase results in varying degrees of volume overload.
In heart failure, the increased ECF volume results in decreased effective circulating volume,
which in turn causes decreased organ perfusion leading to clinical sequelae. Serum Na
concentration can be high, low, or normal in volume-overloaded patients (despite the increased
total body Na content)
.
An increase in total body Na is the key pathophysiologic event. It increases osmolality, which triggers
compensatory mechanisms that cause water retention. When sufficient fluid accumulates in the ECF
(usually > 2.5 L), edema ( develops.
Among the most common causes of ECF volume overload are the following:
• Heart failure
• Cirrhosis
• Renal failure
• Nephrotic syndrome
• Premenstrual edema
• Pregnancy
Clinical features include weight gain and edema. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment aims to correct the
cause.
Hyponatremia
Hyponatremia is decrease in serum Na concentration < 136 mEq/L caused by an excess of
water relative to solute. Common causes include diuretic use, diarrhea, heart failure, and renal
disease. Clinical manifestations are primarily neurologic (due to an osmotic shift of water into
brain cells causing edema), especially in acute hyponatremia, and include headache, confusion,
and stupor; seizures and coma may occur.
Diagnosis is by measuring serum Na. Serum and
urine electrolytes and osmolality help determine the cause. Treatment involves restricting
water intake and promoting its loss, replacing any Na deficit, and treating the cause.
Etiology
Hyponatremia reflects an excess of total body water (TBW) relative to total body Na content. Because
total body Na content is reflected by ECF volume status, hyponatremia must be considered along with
status of the ECF volume: hypovolemia, euvolemia, and hypervolemia (see
Table 97-2
). Note that the ECF volume is not the same as effective plasma volume. For example,
decreased effective plasma volume may occur with decreased ECF volume, but it may also occur with an
increased ECF volume (eg, in heart failure, hypoalbuminemia, or capillary leak syndrome).
Hypovolemic hyponatremia:
Deficiencies in both TBW and total body Na exist, although proportionally
more Na than water has been lost; the Na deficit causes hypovolemia. In hypovolemic hyponatremia, both
serum osmolality and blood volume decrease. ADH secretion increases despite a decrease in osmolality
===PAGE:964===
to maintain blood volume. The resulting water retention increases plasma dilution and hyponatremia.
[Table 97-2.
Principal Causes of Hyponatremia]
Extrarenal fluid losses
, such as those that occur with the losses of Na-containing fluids as in protracted
vomiting, severe diarrhea, or sequestration of fluids in a 3rd space (see
Table 97-3
), can cause hyponatremia typically when losses are replaced by ingesting plain water or
liquids low in Na (see
Table 97-4
) or by hypotonic IV fluid. Significant ECF fluid losses also cause release of ADH, causing
water retention by the kidneys, which can maintain or worsen hyponatremia. In extrarenal causes of
hypovolemia, because the normal renal response to volume loss is Na conservation, urine Na
concentration is typically < 10 mEq/L.
Renal fluid losses
resulting in hypovolemic hyponatremia may occur with mineralocorticoid deficiency,
diuretic therapy, osmotic diuresis, or salt-losing nephropathy. Salt-losing nephropathy encompasses a
loosely defined group of intrinsic renal disorders with primarily renal tubular dysfunction. This group
includes interstitial nephritis, medullary cystic disease, partial urinary tract obstruction, and, occasionally,
polycystic kidney disease. Renal causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia can usually be differentiated from
extrarenal causes by the history. Patients with ongoing renal fluid losses can also be distinguished from
patients with extrarenal fluid losses because the urine Na concentration is inappropriately high (> 20
mEq/L). Urine Na concentration may not help in differentiation when metabolic alkalosis (as occurs with
protracted vomiting) is present and large amounts of HCO
are spilled in the urine, obligating the
excretion of Na to maintain electrical neutrality. In metabolic alkalosis, urine Cl concentration frequently
differentiates renal from extrarenal sources of volume depletion (.
[Table 97-3.
Composition of Body Fluids]
[Table 97-4.
Approximate Na Content of Common Beverages]
Diuretics
may also cause hypovolemic hyponatremia. Thiazide diuretics, in particular, decrease the
kidneys' diluting capacity and increase Na excretion. Once volume depletion occurs, the nonosmotic
release of ADH causes water retention and worsens hyponatremia. Concomitant hypokalemia shifts Na
intracellularly and enhances ADH release, thereby worsening hyponatremia. This effect of thiazides may
last for up to 2 wk after cessation of therapy; however, hyponatremia usually responds to replacement of
K and volume deficits along with judicious monitoring of water intake until the drug effect dissipates.
Elderly patients may have increased Na diuresis and are especially susceptible to thiazide-induced
hyponatremia, particularly when they have a preexisting defect in renal capacity to excrete free water.
Rarely, such patients develop severe, life-threatening hyponatremia within a few weeks after the initiation
of a thiazide diuretic. Loop diuretics much less commonly cause hyponatremia.
Euvolemic hyponatremia:
In euvolemic (dilutional) hyponatremia, total body Na and thus ECF volume
are normal or near-normal; however, TBW is increased.
Primary polydipsia can cause hyponatremia only when water intake overwhelms the kidneys' ability to
excrete water. Because normal kidneys can excrete up to 25 L urine/day, hyponatremia due solely to
polydipsia results only from the ingestion of large amounts of water or from defects in renal capacity to
excrete free water. Patients affected include those with psychosis or more modest degrees of polydipsia
plus renal insufficiency.
Euvolemic hyponatremia may also result from excessive water intake in the presence
of Addison's
disease, hypothyroidism, or nonosmotic ADH release (eg, due to stress; postoperative states; use of
drugs such as chlorpropamide, tolbutamide, opioids, barbiturates, vincristine, clofibrate, or
carbamazepine). Postoperative hyponatremia most commonly occurs because of a combination of
nonosmotic ADH release and excessive administration of hypotonic fluids after surgery. Certain drugs (eg,
cyclophosphamide, NSAIDs, chlorpropamide) potentiate the renal effect of endogenous ADH, whereas
others (eg, oxytocin) have a direct ADH-like effect on the kidneys. A deficiency in water excretion is
common in all these conditions. Diuretics can cause or contribute to euvolemic hyponatremia if another
factor causes water retention or excessive water intake. The syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
===PAGE:965===
(SIADH—see
Sidebar 97-1
) is another cause of euvolemic hyponatremia.
Hypervolemic hyponatremia:
Hypervolemic hyponatremia is characterized by an increase in both total
body Na (and thus ECF volume) and TBW with a relatively greater increase in TBW. Various edematous
disorders, including heart failure and cirrhosis, cause hypervolemic hyponatremia. Rarely, hyponatremia
occurs in nephrotic syndrome, although pseudohyponatremia may be due to interference with Na
measurement by elevated lipids. In each of these disorders, a decrease in effective circulating volume
results in the release of ADH and angiotensin II. The following factors contribute to hyponatremia:
• The antidiuretic effect of ADH on the kidneys
• Direct impairment of renal water excretion by angiotensin II
• Decreased GFR
• Stimulation of thirst by angiotensin II
Urine Na excretion is usually < 10 mEq/L, and urine osmolality is high relative to serum osmolality.
Hyponatremia in AIDS:
Hyponatremia has been reported in > 50% of hospitalized patients with AIDS.
Among the many potential contributing factors are
• Administration of hypotonic fluids
• Impaired renal function
• Nonosmotic ADH release due to intravascular volume depletion
• Administration of drugs that impair renal water excretion
In addition, adrenal insufficiency has become increasingly common among AIDS patients as the result of
cytomegalovirus adrenalitis, mycobacterial infection, or interference with adrenal glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid synthesis by ketoconazole. SIADH may be present because of coexistent pulmonary or
CNS infections.
Sidebar 97-1 Syndrome of Inappropriate ADH Secretion
The syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH) is attributed to excessive ADH release. It is
defined as less-than-maximally-dilute urine in the presence of plasma hypo-osmolality (hyponatremia)
without volume depletion or overload, emotional stress, pain, diuretics, or other drugs that stimulate ADH
secretion in patients with normal cardiac, hepatic, renal, adrenal, and thyroid function. SIADH is
associated with myriad disorders (see
Table 97-5
).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms mainly involve CNS dysfunction. However, when hyponatremia is accompanied by
disturbances in total body Na content, signs of ECF volume depletion or overload also occur (.
In general, older chronically ill patients with hyponatremia develop more symptoms than younger
otherwise healthy patients. Symptoms are also more severe with faster-onset hyponatremia. Symptoms
generally occur when the effective plasma osmolality falls to < 240 mOsm/kg. Symptoms can be subtle
and consist mainly of changes in mental status, including altered personality, lethargy, and confusion. As
the serum Na falls to < 115 mEq/L, stupor, neuromuscular hyperexcitability, hyperreflexia, seizures, coma,
and death can result.
Severe cerebral edema may occur in premenopausal women with acute hyponatremia, perhaps because
===PAGE:966===
estrogen and progesterone inhibit brain Na
+
, K
+
-ATPase and decrease solute extrusion from brain cells.
Sequelae include hypothalamic and posterior pituitary infarction and occasionally brain stem herniation.
Diagnosis
• Serum and urine electrolytes and osmolality
• Clinical assessment of volume status
Hyponatremia is occasionally suspected in patients who have neurologic abnormalities and are at risk.
However, because findings are nonspecific, hyponatremia is often recognized only after serum electrolyte
measurement.
[Table 97-5.
Disorders Associated with Syndrome of Inappropriate ADH Secretion]
Serum Na may be low when severe hyperglycemia increases osmolality and water moves out of cells into
the ECF. Serum Na concentration falls about 1.6 mEq/L for every 100-mg/dL (5.55-mmol/L) rise in the
serum glucose concentration above normal. This condition is often called translocational hyponatremia
because it is caused by translocation of Na across cell membranes. Pseudohyponatremia with normal
serum osmolality may occur in hyperlipidemia or extreme hyperproteinemia, because the lipid or protein
occupies space in the volume of serum taken for analysis; the concentration of Na in serum itself is not
affected. Newer methods of measuring serum electrolytes with ion-selective electrodes circumvent this
problem.
Identification of the cause:
Identifying the cause can be complex. The history sometimes suggests a
cause (eg, significant fluid loss due to vomiting or diarrhea, renal disease, compulsive fluid ingestion,
intake of drugs that stimulate ADH release or enhance ADH action).
The volume status, particularly the presence of obvious volume depletion or overload, suggests certain
causes (see
Table 97-1
). Overtly hypovolemic patients usually have an obvious source of fluid loss
(typically treated with hypotonic fluid replacement). Overtly hypervolemic patients usually have a readily
recognizable condition, such as heart failure or hepatic or renal disease. Euvolemic patients and patients
with equivocal volume status require more laboratory testing to identify a cause.
Laboratory tests should include serum and urine osmolality and electrolytes. Euvolemic patients should
also have thyroid and adrenal function tested. Hypo-osmolality in euvolemic patients should cause
excretion of a large volume of dilute urine (eg, osmolality < 100 mOsm/kg and sp gr < 1.003). Serum Na
concentration and serum osmolality that are low and urine osmolality that is inappropriately high (120 to
150 mmol/L) with respect to the low serum osmolality suggest volume overload, volume contraction, or
SIADH. Volume overload and volume contraction are differentiated clinically (see pp.
and
). When
neither volume overload nor volume contraction appears likely, SIADH is considered. Patients with SIADH
are usually euvolemic or slightly hypervolemic. BUN and creatinine values are normal, and serum uric
acid is generally low. Urine Na concentration is usually > 30 mmol/L, and fractional excretion of Na is >
1% (for calculation, .
In patients with hypovolemia and normal renal function, Na reabsorption results in a urine Na of < 20
mmol/L. Urine Na > 20 mmol/L in hypovolemic patients suggests mineralocorticoid deficiency or saltlosing nephropathy. Hyperkalemia suggests adrenal insufficiency.
Treatment
• When hypovolemic, 0.9% saline
• When hypervolemic, fluid restriction and sometimes a diuretic
• When euvolemic, treatment of cause
===PAGE:967===
• Rarely cautious correction with hypertonic (3%) saline
Rapid correction of hyponatremia, even mild hyponatremia, risks neurologic complications (.
Except possibly in the first few hours of treatment of severe hyponatremia, Na should be corrected no
faster than 0.5 mEq/L/h. Even with severe hyponatremia, increase in serum Na concentration should not
exceed 10 mEq/L over the first 24 h. Any identified cause of hyponatremia is treated concurrently.
Mild hyponatremia:
Mild, asymptomatic hyponatremia (ie, serum Na > 120 mEq/L) requires restraint
because small adjustments are
generally sufficient. In diuretic-induced hyponatremia, elimination of the
diuretic may be enough; some patients need some Na or K replacement. Similarly, when mild
hyponatremia results from inappropriate hypotonic parenteral fluid administration in patients with impaired
water excretion, merely altering fluid therapy may suffice.
With
hypovolemia
and normal adrenal function, administration of 0.9% saline usually corrects both
hyponatremia and hypovolemia. When the serum Na is < 120 mEq/L, hyponatremia may not completely
correct upon restoration of intravascular volume; restriction of free water ingestion to ≤ 500 to 1000
mL/24 h may be needed.
In
hypervolemic patients
, in whom hyponatremia is due to renal Na retention (eg, heart failure,
cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome) and dilution, water restriction combined with treatment of the underlying
disorder is required. In patients with heart failure, an ACE inhibitor, in conjunction with a loop diuretic, can
correct refractory hyponatremia. In other patients in whom simple fluid restriction is ineffective, a loop
diuretic in escalating doses can be used, sometimes in conjunction with IV 0.9% normal saline. K and
other electrolytes lost in the urine must be replaced. When hyponatremia is more severe and
unresponsive to diuretics, intermittent or continuous hemofiltration may be needed to control ECF volume
while hyponatremia is corrected with IV 0.9% normal saline.
In
euvolemia,
treatment is directed at the cause (eg, hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, diuretic use).
When SIADH is present, severe water restriction (eg, 250 to 500 mL/24 h) is generally required.
Additionally, a loop diuretic may be combined with IV 0.9% saline as in hypervolemic hyponatremia.
Lasting correction depends on successful treatment of the underlying disorder. When the underlying
disorder is not correctable, as in metastatic cancer, and patients find severe water restriction
unacceptable, demeclocycline (300 to 600 mg q 12 h) may be helpful by inducing a concentrating defect
in the kidneys. However, demeclocycline may cause acute renal failure. Renal failure is usually reversible
when the drug is stopped. IV conivaptan, an ADH receptor antagonist, causes effective water diuresis
without significant loss of electrolytes in the urine and can be used in hospitalized patients for treatment
of resistant hyponatremia.
Severe hyponatremia:
Severe hyponatremia (serum Na < 109 mEq/L; effective osmolality < 238
mOsm/kg) in asymptomatic patients can be treated safely with stringent restriction of water intake.
Treatment is more controversial when neurologic symptoms (eg, confusion, lethargy, seizures, coma) are
present. The debate primarily concerns the pace and degree of hyponatremia correction. Many experts
recommend that serum Na be raised no faster than 1 mEq/L/h, but replacement rates of up to 2 mEq/L/h
for the first 2 to 3 h have been suggested for patients with seizures. Regardless, the rise should be ≤ 10
mEq/L over the first 24 h. More vigorous correction risks precipitation of osmotic demyelination syndrome.
Hypertonic (3%) saline (containing 513 mEq Na/L) may be used, but only with frequent (q 2 to 4 h)
electrolyte determinations. For patients with seizures or coma, ≤ 100 mL/h may be administered over 4 to
6 h in amounts sufficient to raise the serum Na 4 to 6 mEq/L. This amount (in mEq) may be calculated
using the Na deficit formula as
(Desired change in Na) × TBW
where TBW is 0.6 × body weight in kg in men and 0.5 × body weight in kg in women.
For example, the amount of Na needed to raise the Na from 106 to 112 in a 70-kg man can be calculated
as follows:
(112 mEq/L - 106 mEq/L) × (0.6 L/kg × 70 kg) = 252 mEq
===PAGE:968===
Because there is 513 mEq Na/L in hypertonic saline, roughly 0.5 L of hypertonic saline is needed to raise
the Na from 106 to 112 mEq/L.
Adjustments may be needed based on serum Na concentrations, which are monitored closely for the first
few hours of treatment. Patients with seizures, coma, or altered mental status need supportive treatment,
which may involve endotracheal intubation, mechanical ventilation, and benzodiazepines (eg, lorazepam 1
to 2 mg IV q 5 to 10 min prn) for seizures.
Osmotic demyelination syndrome:
Osmotic demyelination syndrome (previously called central pontine
myelinolysis) may follow too-rapid correction of hyponatremia. Demyelination may affect the pons and
other areas of the brain. Lesions are more common among patients with alcoholism, undernutrition, or
other chronic debilitating illness. Flaccid paralysis, dysarthria, and dysphagia can evolve over a few days
or weeks. The lesion may extend dorsally to involve sensory tracts and leave patients with a locked-in
syndrome (an awake and sentient state in which patients, because of generalized motor paralysis, cannot
communicate, except possibly by coded eye movements). Damage often is permanent. When Na is
replaced too rapidly (eg, > 14 mEq/L/8 h) and neurologic symptoms
start to develop, it is critical to
prevent further serum Na increases by stopping hypertonic fluids. In such cases, inducing hyponatremia
with hypotonic fluid may mitigate the development of permanent neurologic damage.
Hypernatremia
(For hypernatremia in neonates, see p.
.)
Hypernatremia is serum Na concentration > 145 mEq/L. It implies a deficit of total body water
relative to total body Na, caused by water intake being less than water losses. A major symptom
is thirst; other clinical manifestations are primarily neurologic (due to an osmotic shift of water
out of brain cells), including confusion, neuromuscular excitability, seizures, and coma.
Diagnosis requires measurement of serum Na and sometimes other tests. Treatment is usually
controlled water replacement. When the response is poor, testing (eg, monitored water
deprivation or administration of vasopressin) is directed at detecting causes other than
decreased water intake.
Etiology
Hypernatremia reflects a deficit of total body water (TBW) relative to total body Na content. Because total
body Na content is reflected by ECF volume status, hypernatremia must be considered along with status
of the ECF volume: hypovolemia, euvolemia, and hypervolemia. Note that the ECF volume is not the
same as effective plasma volume. For example, decreased effective plasma volume may occur with
decreased ECF volume, but it may also occur with an increased ECF volume (eg, in heart failure,
hypoalbuminemia, or capillary leak syndrome).
Hypernatremia usually implies either an impaired thirst mechanism or limited access to water. The
severity of the underlying disorder that results in an inability to drink in response to thirst and the effects
of brain hyperosmolality are thought to be responsible for a high mortality rate in hospitalized adults with
hypernatremia. There are several common causes of hypernatremia (see
Table 97-6
).
Hypovolemic hypernatremia:
Hypernatremia associated with hypovolemia occurs with Na loss
accompanied by a relatively greater loss of water from the body. Common extrarenal causes include most
of those that cause hyponatremia and volume depletion (. Either hypernatremia or
hyponatremia can occur with severe volume loss, depending on the relative amounts of Na and water lost
and the amount of water ingested before presentation.
Renal causes of hypernatremia and volume depletion include therapy with diuretics. Loop diuretics inhibit
Na reabsorption in the concentrating portion of the nephrons and can increase water clearance. Osmotic
diuresis can also impair renal concentrating capacity because of a hypertonic substance present in the
tubular lumen of the distal nephron. Glycerol, mannitol, and occasionally urea can cause osmotic diuresis
===PAGE:969===
resulting in hypernatremia. The most common cause of hypernatremia due to osmotic diuresis is
hyperglycemia in patients with diabetes. Because glucose does not penetrate cells in the absence of
insulin, hyperglycemia further dehydrates the ICF compartment. The degree of hyperosmolality in
hyperglycemia may be obscured by the lowering of serum Na resulting from movement of water out of
cells into the ECF (translational hyponatremia—see
Hyponatremia
. Patients with renal disease
can also be predisposed to hypernatremia when their kidneys are unable to maximally concentrate urine.
Euvolemic hypernatremia:
Hypernatremia with euvolemia is a decrease in TBW with nearnormal total
body Na (pure water deficit). Extrarenal causes of water loss, such as excessive sweating, result in some
Na loss, but because sweat is hypotonic, hypernatremia can result before significant hypovolemia. A
deficit of almost purely water also occurs in central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
Essential hypernatremia (primary hypodipsia) occasionally occurs in children with brain damage and in
chronically ill elderly adults. It is characterized by an impaired thirst mechanism (eg, caused by lesions of
the brain's thirst center). Altered osmotic trigger for ADH release is another possible cause of euvolemic
hypernatremia; some lesions cause both an impaired thirst mechanism and an altered osmotic trigger.
The nonosmotic release of ADH seems intact, and these patients are generally euvolemic.
Hypervolemic hypernatremia:
Hypernatremia in rare cases is associated with volume overload. In this
case, hypernatremia results from a grossly elevated Na intake associated with limited access to water.
One example is the excessive administration of hypertonic NaHCO
during treatment of lactic acidosis.
Hypernatremia can also be caused by the administration of hypertonic saline or incorrectly formulated
hyperalimentation.
Hypernatremia in the elderly:
Hypernatremia is common among the elderly, particularly postoperative
patients and those receiving tube feedings or parenteral nutrition. Other contributing factors may include
the following:
[Table 97-6.
Principal Causes of Hypernatremia]
• Dependence on others to obtain water
• Impaired thirst mechanism
• Impaired renal concentrating capacity (due to diuretics, impaired ADH release, or nephron loss
accompanying aging or other renal disease)
• Impaired angiotensin II production (which may contribute directly to the impaired thirst mechanism)
Symptoms and Signs
The major symptom of hypernatremia is thirst. The absence of thirst in conscious patients with
hypernatremia suggests an impaired thirst mechanism. Patients with difficulty communicating may be
unable to express thirst or obtain access to water.
The major signs of hypernatremia result from CNS dysfunction due to brain cell shrinkage. Confusion,
neuromuscular excitability, hyperreflexia, seizures, or coma may result; cerebrovascular damage with
subcortical or subarachnoid hemorrhage and venous thromboses are common among patients who died
from severe hypernatremia.
In chronic hypernatremia, osmotically active substances occur in CNS cells (idiogenic osmoles) and
increase intracellular osmolality. Therefore, the degree of brain cell dehydration and resultant CNS
symptoms are less severe in chronic than in acute hypernatremia.
When hypernatremia occurs with abnormal total body Na, the typical symptoms of volume depletion or
overload are present (see
Volume Depletion
on p.
and
Volume Overload
. A large volume of
hypotonic urine is characteristically excreted in patients with renal concentrating defects. When losses
are extrarenal, the route of water loss is often evident (eg, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sweating), and
===PAGE:970===
the urinary Na concentration is low.
Diagnosis
• Serum Na
The diagnosis is clinical and by measuring serum Na. In patients who do not respond to simple
rehydration or in whom hypernatremia recurs despite adequate access to water, further diagnostic testing
is warranted. Determination of the underlying disorder requires assessment of urine volume and
osmolality, particularly after water deprivation.
In patients with increased urine output, a water deprivation test ( is occasionally used to
differentiate among several polyuric states, such as central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
Treatment
• Replacement of intravascular volume and of free water
Replacement of intravascular volume and of free water is the main goal of treatment. Oral hydration is
effective in conscious patients without significant GI dysfunction. In severe hypernatremia or in patients
unable to drink because of continued vomiting or mental status changes, IV hydration is preferred.
Hypernatremia that lasts < 24 h should be corrected within 24 h. However, hypernatremia that is chronic
or of unknown duration should be corrected over 48 h, and the serum osmolality should be lowered at a
rate of no faster than 2 mOsm/L/h to avoid cerebral edema caused by excess brain solute. The amount of
water (in liters) necessary to replace existing deficits may be estimated by the following formula:
Free water deficit = TBW × [serum Na/140) - 1]
where TBW is in liters and is estimated by multiplying weight in kilograms by 0.6; serum Na is in mEq/L.
This formula assumes constant total body Na content. In patients with hypernatremia and depletion of
total body Na content (ie, who have volume depletion), the free water deficit is greater than that estimated
by the formula.
In patients with hypernatremia and ECF volume overload (excess total body Na content), the free water
deficit can be replaced with 5% D/W, which can be supplemented with a loop diuretic. However, too-rapid
infusion of 5% D/W may cause glycosuria, thereby increasing salt-free water excretion and hypertonicity,
especially in patients with diabetes mellitus. Other electrolytes, including serum K, should be monitored
and should be replaced as needed.
In patients with hypernatremia and euvolemia, free water can be replaced using either 5% D/W or 0.45%
saline.
Treatment of patients with central diabetes insipidus is discussed elsewhere. Acquired nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus is discussed elsewhere.
In patients with hypernatremia and hypovolemia, particularly in patients with diabetes with nonketotic
hyperglycemic coma, 0.45% saline can be given as an alternative to a combination of 0.9% normal saline
and 5% D/W to replenish Na and free water. Alternatively, ECF volume and free water can be replaced
separately, using the formula given previously to estimate the free water deficit. When severe acidosis
(pH < 7.10) is present, NaHCO
solution can be added to 5% D/W or 0.45% saline, as long as the final
solution remains hypotonic.
Disorders of Potassium Concentration
K is the most abundant intracellular cation, but only about 2% of total body K is extracellular. Because
most intracellular K is contained within muscle cells, total body K is roughly proportional to lean body
mass. An average 70-kg adult has about 3500 mEq of K.
K is a major determinant of intracellular osmolality. The ratio between ICF and ECF K concentrations
===PAGE:971===
K is a major determinant of intracellular osmolality. The ratio between ICF and ECF K concentrations
strongly influences cell membrane polarization, which in turn influences important cell processes, such as
the conduction of nerve impulses and muscle (including myocardial) cell contraction. Thus, relatively
small alterations in serum K concentration can have significant clinical manifestations.
In the absence of factors that shift K in or out of cells (, the serum K concentration correlates
closely with total body K content. Once intracellular and extracellular concentrations are stable, a
decrease in serum K concentration of about 1 mEq/L indicates a total K deficit of about 200 to 400 mEq.
Patients with K < 3 mEq/L typically have a significant K deficit.
K shifts:
Factors that shift K in or out of cells include the following:
• Insulin concentrations
•
β
-Adrenergic activity
• Acid-base status
Insulin moves K into cells; high concentrations of insulin thus lower serum K concentration. Low insulin
concentrations, as in diabetic ketoacidosis, cause K to move out of cells, thus raising serum K, sometimes
even in the presence of total body K deficiency.
β
-Adrenergic agonists, especially selective
β
-agonists, move K into cells, whereas
β
-blockade and
α
-
agonists promote movement of K out of cells.
Acute metabolic acidosis causes K to move out of cells, whereas acute metabolic alkalosis causes K to
move into cells. However, changes in serum HCO
concentration may be more important than changes in
pH; acidosis caused by accumulation of mineral acids (nonanion gap, hyperchloremic acidosis) is more
likely to elevate serum K. In contrast, metabolic acidosis due to accumulation of organic acids (increased
anion gap acidosis) is not associated with hyperkalemia. Thus, the hyperkalemia common in diabetic
ketoacidosis results more from insulin deficiency than from acidosis. Acute respiratory acidosis and
alkalosis affect serum K concentration less than metabolic acidosis and alkalosis. Nonetheless, serum K
concentration should always be interpreted in the context of the serum pH (and HCO
concentration).
K metabolism:
Dietary K intake normally varies between 40 and 150 mEq/day. In the steady state, fecal
losses are usually close to 10% of intake. Urinary excretion contributes to K balance.
When K intake is > 150 mEq/day, about 50% of the excess K appears in the urine over the next several
hours. Most of the remainder is transferred into the intracellular compartment, thus minimizing the rise in
serum K. When elevated K intake continues, aldosterone secretion is stimulated and thus renal K
excretion rises. In addition, K absorption from stool appears to be under some regulation and may fall by
50% in chronic K excess.
When K intake falls, intracellular K again serves to buffer wide swings in serum K concentration. Renal K
conservation develops relatively slowly in response to decreases in dietary K and is far less efficient than
the kidneys' ability to conserve Na. Thus, K depletion is a frequent clinical problem. Urinary K excretion of
10 mEq/day represents near-maximal renal K conservation and implies significant K depletion.
Acute acidosis impairs K excretion, whereas chronic acidosis and acute alkalosis can promote K
excretion. Increased delivery of Na to the distal nephrons, as occurs with high Na intake or loop diuretic
therapy, promotes K excretion.
False K concentrations:
Pseudohypokalemia, or falsely low serum K, occasionally occurs in patients
with chronic myelocytic leukemia with a WBC count > 10
/
μ
L when the specimen remains at room
temperature before being processed because of uptake of serum K by abnormal leukocytes in the
sample. It is prevented by prompt separation of plasma or serum in blood samples.
Pseudohyperkalemia, or falsely elevated serum K, is more common, typically occurring due to hemolysis
===PAGE:972===
and release of intracellular K. To prevent false results, phlebotomy personnel should not rapidly aspirate
blood through a narrow-gauge needle or excessively agitate blood samples. Pseudohyperkalemia can
also result from platelet count > 400,000/
μ
L due to release of K from platelets during clotting. In cases of
pseudohyperkalemia, the plasma K (unclotted blood), as opposed to serum K, is normal.
Hypokalemia
Hypokalemia is serum K concentration < 3.5 mEq/L caused by a deficit in total body K stores or
abnormal movement of K into cells. The most common causes are excess losses from the
kidneys or GI tract. Clinical features include muscle weakness and polyuria; cardiac
hyperexcitability may occur with severe hypokalemia. Diagnosis is by serum measurement.
Treatment is giving K and managing the cause
.
Etiology
Hypokalemia can be caused by decreased intake of K but is usually caused by excessive losses of K in
the urine or from the GI tract.
GI tract losses:
Abnormal GI K losses occur in all of the following:
• Chronic diarrhea, including chronic laxative abuse and bowel diversion
• Clay (bentonite) ingestion, which binds K and greatly decreases absorption
• Vomiting
• Protracted gastric suction (which removes volume and HCl, causing the kidneys to excrete HCO
and,
to electrically balance lost HCO
, K)
• Rarely, villous adenoma of the colon, which causes massive K secretion
GI K losses may be compounded by concomitant renal K losses due to metabolic alkalosis and
stimulation of aldosterone due to volume depletion.
Intracellular shift:
The transcellular shift of K into cells may also cause hypokalemia. This shift can
occur in any of the following:
• Glycogenesis during TPN or enteral hyperalimentation (stimulating insulin release)
• After administration of insulin
• Stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system, particularly with
β
-agonists (eg, albuterol, terbutaline),
which may increase cellular K uptake
•
Thyrotoxicosis (occasionally) due to excessive
β
-sympathetic stimulation (hypokalemic thyrotoxic
periodic paralysis)
• Familial periodic paralysis (, a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by transient
episodes of profound hypokalemia thought to be due to sudden abnormal shifts of K into cells.
Episodes frequently involve varying degrees of paralysis. They are typically precipitated by a large
carbohydrate meal or strenuous exercise.
Renal losses:
Various disorders can increase renal K excretion. Excess mineralocorticoid effect can
directly increase K secretion by the distal nephrons and occurs in any of the following:
• Adrenal steroid excess that is due to Cushing's syndrome, primary hyperaldosteronism, rare reninsecreting tumors, glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (a rare inherited disorder involving abnormal
===PAGE:973===
aldosterone metabolism), and congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
• Ingestion of substances such as glycyrrhizin (present in natural licorice and used in the manufacture of
chewing tobacco), which inhibits the enzyme 11
β
-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11
β
-HSDH),
preventing the conversion of cortisol, which has some mineralocorticoid activity, to cortisone, which
does not, resulting in high circulating concentrations of cortisol and renal K wasting.
• Bartter and Gitelman's syndromes, uncommon genetic disorders characterized by renal K and Na
wasting, excessive production of renin and aldosterone, and normotension. Bartter syndrome (see also
p.
) is caused by mutations in a loop diuretic-sensitive ion transport mechanism in the loop of
Henle. Gitelman's syndrome is caused by loss of function mutations in a thiazide-sensitive ion transport
mechanism in the distal nephron.
Liddle syndrome (see also p.
) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by severe
hypertension and hypokalemia. Liddle syndrome is caused by unrestrained Na reabsorption in the distal
nephron due to one of several mutations found in genes encoding for epithelial Na channel subunits.
Inappropriately high reabsorption of Na results in both hypertension and renal K wasting.
Renal K wasting can also be caused by numerous congenital and acquired renal tubular diseases, such
as the renal tubular acidoses and Fanconi syndrome, an unusual syndrome resulting in renal wasting of
K, glucose, phosphate, uric acid, and amino acids.
Hypomagnesemia is a common correlate of hypokalemia. Much of this is attributable to common
underlying causes (ie, diuretics, diarrhea), but hypomagnesemia itself may also result in increased renal
K losses.
Drugs:
Diuretics are by far the most commonly used drugs that cause hypokalemia. K-wasting diuretics
that block Na reabsorption proximal to the distal nephron include
• Thiazides
• Loop diuretics
• Osmotic diuretics
By inducing diarrhea, laxatives, especially when abused, can cause hypokalemia. Surreptitious diuretic or
laxative abuse or both is a frequent cause of persistent hypokalemia, particularly among patients
preoccupied with weight loss and among health care practitioners with access to prescription drugs.
Other drugs that can cause hypokalemia include
• Amphotericin B
• Antipseudomonal penicillins (eg, carbenicillin)
• Penicillin in high doses
• Theophylline intoxication (both acute and chronic)
Symptoms and Signs
Mild hypokalemia (serum K 3 to 3.5 mEq/L) rarely causes symptoms. Serum K < 3 mEq/L generally
causes muscle weakness and may lead to paralysis and respiratory failure. Other muscular dysfunction
includes cramping, fasciculations, paralytic ileus, hypoventilation, hypotension, tetany, and
rhabdomyolysis. Persistent hypokalemia can impair renal concentrating ability, causing polyuria with
secondary polydipsia.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:974===
• Serum K measurement
• ECG
• When the mechanism not evident clinically, 24-h urinary K excretion and serum Mg concentration
Hypokalemia (serum K < 3.5 mEq/L) may be found on routine serum electrolyte measurement. It should
be suspected in patients with typical changes on an ECG or who have muscular symptoms and risk
factors and confirmed by blood testing.
ECG:
ECG should be done on patients with hypokalemia. Cardiac effects of hypokalemia are usually
minimal until serum K concentrations are < 3 mEq/L. Hypokalemia causes sagging of the ST segment,
depression of the T wave, and elevation of the U wave. With
marked hypokalemia, the T wave becomes
progressively smaller and the U wave becomes increasingly larger. Sometimes, a flat or positive T wave
merges with a positive U wave, which may be confused with QT prolongation (see
Fig. 97-2
). Hypokalemia may cause premature ventricular and atrial contractions, ventricular and atrial
tachyarrhythmias, and 2nd- or 3rd-degree atrioventricular block. Such arrhythmias become more severe
with increasingly severe hypokalemia; eventually, ventricular fibrillation may occur. Patients with
significant preexisting heart disease and patients receiving digoxin are at risk of cardiac conduction
abnormalities even from mild hypokalemia.
Diagnosis of cause:
The cause is usually apparent by history (particularly the drug history); when it is
not, further investigation is warranted. After acidosis and other causes of intracellular K shift (increased
β
-
adrenergic effect, hyperinsulinemia) have been eliminated, 24-h urinary K and serum Mg concentrations
are measured. In hypokalemia, K secretion is normally < 15 mEq/L. Extrarenal (GI) K loss or decreased K
ingestion is suspected in chronic unexplained hypokalemia when renal K secretion is < 15 mEq/L.
Secretion of > 15 mEq/L suggests a renal cause for K loss. Unexplained hypokalemia with increased
renal K secretion and hypertension suggests an aldosterone-secreting tumor or Liddle syndrome.
Unexplained hypokalemia with increased renal K loss and normal BP suggests Bartter or Gitelman's
syndrome, but hypomagnesemia, surreptitious vomiting, and diuretic abuse are more common and should
also be considered.
Treatment
• Oral K supplements
• IV K supplements for severe hyperkalemia or ongoing K losses
Many oral K supplements are available. Because high single doses can cause GI irritation and occasional
bleeding, deficits are usually replaced in divided doses. Liquid KCl given orally elevates concentrations
within 1 to 2 h but has a bitter taste and is tolerated particularly poorly in doses > 25 to 50 mEq. Waximpregnated KCl preparations are safe and better tolerated. GI bleeding may be even less common with
microencapsulated KCl preparations. Several of these preparations contain 8 or 10 mEq/capsule.
Because a decrease in serum K of 1 mEq/L correlates with about a 200- to 400-mEq deficit in total body
K stores, total deficit can be estimated and replaced over a number of days at 20 to 80 mEq/day.
When hypokalemia is severe (eg, with ECG changes or severe symptoms), is unresponsive
[Fig. 97-2.
ECG patterns in hypokalemia and hyperkalemia.]
to oral therapy, or occurs in hospitalized patients who are taking digitalis or who have significant heart
disease or ongoing losses, K must be replaced IV. Because K solutions can irritate peripheral veins, the
concentration should not exceed 40 mEq/L. The rate of correction of hypokalemia is limited because of
the lag in K movement into cells.
Routine infusion rates should not exceed 10 mEq/h.
In hypokalemicinduced arrhythmia, IV KCl must be given more rapidly, usually through a central vein or using multiple
peripheral veins simultaneously. Infusion of 40 mEq KCl/h can be undertaken but only with continuous
cardiac monitoring and hourly serum K determinations. Glucose solutions are avoided because elevation
===PAGE:975===
in the serum insulin concentrations could result in transient worsening of hypokalemia.
Even when K deficits are severe, it is rarely necessary to give > 100 to 120 mEq of K in a 24-h period
unless K loss continues. In K deficit with high serum K concentration, as in diabetic ketoacidosis, IV K is
deferred until the serum K starts to fall. When hypokalemia occurs with hypomagnesemia, both the K and
Mg deficiencies must be corrected to stop ongoing renal K wasting (see
Hypomagnesemia
.
Prevention
Routine K replacement is not necessary in most patients receiving diuretics. However, serum K should be
monitored during diuretic use when risk of hyperkalemia or of its complications is high. Risk is high in
• Patients with decreased left ventricular function
• Patients taking digoxin
• Patients with diabetes (in whom insulin concentrations can fluctuate)
• Patients with asthma who are taking
β
-agonists
Triamterene 100 mg po once/day or spironolactone 25 mg po qid does not increase K excretion and may
be useful in patients who become hypokalemic but must use diuretics. When hypokalemia develops, K
supplementation, usually with oral KCl, is indicated.
Hyperkalemia
Hyperkalemia is serum K concentration > 5.5 mEq/L resulting from excess total body K stores
or abnormal movement of K out of cells. There are usually several simultaneous contributing
factors, including increased K intake, drugs that impair renal K excretion, and acute or chronic
kidney disease. It can also occur in metabolic acidosis as in diabetic ketoacidosis. Clinical
manifestations are generally neuromuscular, resulting in muscle weakness and cardiac toxicity
that, when severe, can degenerate to ventricular fibrillation or asystole. Diagnosis is by
measuring serum K. Treatment may involve decreasing K intake, adjusting drugs, giving a
cation exchange resin and, in emergencies, Ca gluconate, insulin, and dialysis
.
Etiology
The most common cause of increased serum K concentration is probably pseudohyperkalemia caused by
hemolysis of RBCs in the blood sample. Normal kidneys eventually excrete K loads, so sustained,
nonartifactual hyperkalemia usually implies diminished renal K excretion. However, other factors usually
contribute. They can include increased K intake, increased K release from cells, or both (see
Table 97-7
). When sufficient KCl is ingested or given parenterally, severe hyperkalemia may result even
with normal renal function but is usually temporary.
Hyperkalemia due to total body K excess is particularly common in oliguric states (especially acute renal
failure) and with rhabdomyolysis, burns, bleeding into soft tissue or the GI tract, and adrenal insufficiency.
In chronic renal failure, hyperkalemia is uncommon until the GFR falls to < 10 to 15 mL/min unless dietary
or IV K intake is excessive.
Symptoms and Signs
Although flaccid paralysis occasionally occurs, hyperkalemia is usually asymptomatic until cardiac toxicity
develops.
In the rare disorder hyperkalemic familial periodic paralysis, weakness frequently develops during attacks
and can progress to frank paralysis.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:976===
• Serum K measurement
• ECG
• Review of drug use
• Assessment of renal function
Hyperkalemia (serum K > 5.5 mEq/L) may be found on routine serum electrolyte measurement. It should
be suspected in patients with typical changes on an ECG or patients at high risk, such as those with renal
failure, advanced heart failure treated with ACE inhibitors and K-sparing diuretics, or urinary obstruction.
ECG:
ECG should be done on patients with hyperkalemia. ECG changes (see
Fig. 97-2
) are frequently
visible when serum K is > 5.5 mEq/L. Slowing of conduction characterized by an increased PR interval
and shortening of the QT interval as well as tall, symmetric, peaked T
[Table 97-7.
Factors Contributing to Hyperkalemia]
waves are visible initially. K > 6.5 mEq/L causes further slowing of conduction with widening of the QRS
interval, disappearance of the P wave, and nodal and escape ventricular arrhythmias. Finally, the QRS
complex degenerates into a sine wave pattern, and ventricular fibrillation or asystole ensues.
Diagnosis of the cause:
Pseudohyperkalemia should be considered in patients without risk factors or
ECG abnormalities. Hemolysis may be reported by the laboratory. When pseudohyperkalemia is
suspected, K concentration should be repeated, taking measures to avoid hemolysis of the sample.
Diagnosis of the cause of hyperkalemia requires a detailed history, including a review of drugs, a physical
examination with emphasis on volume status, and measurement of electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine. In
cases in which renal failure is present, additional tests, including renal ultrasonography to exclude
obstruction, are needed (.
Treatment
• Treatment of the cause
• For mild hyperkalemia, Na polystyrene sulfonate
For moderate or severe hyperkalemia, IV insulin and glucose, an IV Ca solution, possibly an inhaled
β
-
agonist, and usually hemodialysis
Mild hyperkalemia:
Patients with serum K < 6 mEq/L and no ECG abnormalities may respond to
diminished K intake or stopping K-elevating drugs. The addition of a loop diuretic enhances renal K
excretion as long as volume depletion is not present.
Na polystyrene sulfonate in sorbitol can be given (15 to 30 g in 30 to 70 mL of 70% sorbitol po q 4 to 6 h).
It acts as a cation exchange resin and removes K through the GI mucosa. Sorbitol is administered with the
resin to ensure passage through the GI tract. Patients unable to take drugs orally because of nausea or
other reasons may be given similar doses by enema. Enemas are not as effective at lowering K in
patients with ileus. Enemas should not be used if acute abdomen is suspected. About 1 mEq of K is
removed per gram of resin given. Resin therapy is slow and often fails to lower serum K significantly in
hypercatabolic states. Because Na is exchanged for K when Na polystyrene sulfonate is used, Na
overload may occur, particularly in oliguric patients with preexisting volume overload.
Moderate to severe hyperkalemia:
Serum K between 6 and 6.5 mEq/L needs prompt attention, but the
actual treatment depends on
the clinical situation. If no ECG changes are present and renal function is
intact, maneuvers described previously are usually effective. Follow-up serum K levels are needed to
ensure that the hyperkalemia has been successfully treated. If serum K is > 6.5 mEq/L, more aggressive
===PAGE:977===
therapy is required. Administration of regular insulin 5 to 10 units IV is followed immediately by or
administered simultaneously with rapid infusion of 50 mL 50% glucose. Infusion of 10% D/W should
follow at 50 mL/h to prevent hypoglycemia. The effect on serum K peaks in 1 h and lasts for several
hours.
If ECG changes include the loss of P-wave or widening of the QRS complex, treatment with IV Ca as well
as insulin and glucose is indicated; 10 to 20 mL 10% Ca gluconate (or 5 to 10 mL 22% Ca gluceptate) is
given IV over 5 to 10 min. Ca antagonizes the effect of hyperkalemia on cardiac muscle. Ca should be
given with caution to patients taking digoxin because of the risk of precipitating hypokalemia-related
arrhythmias. If the ECG shows a sine wave pattern or asystole, Ca gluconate may be given more rapidly
(5 to 10 mL IV over 2 min). CaCl can also be used but can be irritating to peripheral veins and cause
tissue necrosis if extravasated. CaCl should be given only through a correctly positioned central venous
catheter. The benefits of Ca occur within minutes but last only 20 to 30 min. Ca infusion is a temporizing
measure while awaiting the effects of other treatments or initiation of hemodialysis and may need to be
repeated.
A high-dose
β
-agonist, such as albuterol 10 to 20 mg inhaled over 10 min (5 mg/mL concentration), can
lower serum K by 0.5 to 1.5 mEq/L and may be a helpful adjunct. The peak effect occurs in 90 min.
However,
β
-agonists are contraindicated in patients with unstable angina and acute MI.
Administration of IV NaHCO
is controversial. It may lower serum K over several hours. Reduction may
result from alkalinization or the hypertonicity due to the concentrated Na in the preparation. The
hypertonic Na that it contains may be harmful for dialysis patients who also may have volume overload.
When given, the usual dose is 45 mEq (1 ampule of 7.5% NaHCO
) infused over 5 min and repeated in
30 min. HCO
therapy has little effect when used by itself in patients with severe renal insufficiency
unless acidemia is also present.
In addition to strategies for lowering K by shifting it into cells, maneuvers to remove K from the body
should also be done early in the treatment of severe or symptomatic hyperkalemia. K can be removed via
the GI tract by administration of Na polystyrene sulfonate ( or by hemodialysis. Hemodialysis
should be instituted promptly after emergency measures in patients with renal failure or when emergency
treatment is ineffective. Dialysis should be considered early in patients with end-stage renal disease and
hyperkalemia because they are at increased risk of progression to more severe hyperkalemia and serious
cardiac arrhythmias. Peritoneal dialysis is relatively inefficient at removing K.
Disorders of Calcium Concentration
Ca is required for the proper functioning of muscle contraction, nerve conduction, hormone release, and
blood coagulation. In addition, proper Ca concentration is required for various other metabolic processes.
Maintenance of body Ca stores depends on
• Dietary Ca intake
• Absorption of Ca from the GI tract
• Renal Ca excretion
In a balanced diet, roughly 1000 mg of Ca is ingested each day and about another 200 mg/day is
secreted into the GI tract in the bile and other GI secretions. Depending on the concentration of
circulating vitamin D, particularly 1,25(OH)
D (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, calcitriol, or active vitamin D,
which is converted in the kidney from 25(OH)D, the inactive form), roughly 200 to 400 mg of Ca is
absorbed from the intestine each day. The remaining 800 to 1000 mg appears in the stool. Ca balance is
maintained through renal Ca excretion averaging 200 mg/day.
Both extracellular and intracellular Ca concentrations are tightly regulated by bidirectional Ca transport
across the plasma membrane of cells and intracellular organelles, such as the endoplasmic reticulum, the
===PAGE:978===
sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells, and the mitochondria. Cytosolic ionized Ca is maintained within
the micromolar range (< 1/1000 of the serum concentration). Ionized Ca acts as an intracellular 2nd
messenger; it is involved in skeletal muscle contraction, excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac and
smooth muscle, and activation of protein kinases and enzyme phosphorylation. Ca is also involved in the
action of other intracellular messengers, such as cAMP and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, and thus
mediates the cellular response to
numerous hormones, including epinephrine, glucagon, ADH
(vasopressin), secretin, and cholecystokinin. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) increases urinary cAMP.
Despite its important intracellular roles, about 99% of body Ca is in bone, mainly as hydroxyapatite
crystals. About 1% of bone Ca is freely exchangeable with the ECF and, therefore, is available for
buffering changes in Ca balance.
Normal total serum Ca concentration ranges from 8.8 to 10.4 mg/dL (2.20 to 2.60 mmol/L). About 40% of
the total blood Ca is bound to plasma proteins, primarily albumin. The remaining 60% includes ionized Ca
plus Ca complexed with phosphate (PO
) and citrate. Total Ca (ie, protein-bound, complexed, and ionized
Ca) is usually what is determined by clinical laboratory measurement. Ideally, ionized or free Ca should be
determined because it is the physiologically active form of Ca in plasma; this determination, because of
its technical difficulty, is usually restricted to patients in whom significant alteration of protein binding of
serum Ca is suspected. Ionized Ca is generally assumed to be about 50% of the total serum Ca.
Regulation of Calcium Metabolism
The metabolism of Ca and of PO
( is intimately related. The regulation of both Ca and PO
balance is greatly influenced by concentrations of circulating PTH, vitamin D, and, to a lesser extent,
calcitonin. Ca and inorganic PO
concentrations are also linked by their ability to chemically react to form
CaPO
. The product of concentrations of Ca and PO
(in mEq/L) is estimated to be 60 normally; when
the product exceeds 70, precipitation of CaPO
crystals in soft tissue is much more likely. Calcification of
vascular tissue accelerates arteriosclerotic vascular disease and may occur when the Ca × PO
product
is even lower (> 55), especially in patients with chronic kidney disease.
PTH is secreted by the parathyroid glands. It has several actions, but perhaps the most important is to
defend against hypocalcemia. Parathyroid cells sense decreases in serum Ca and, in response, release
preformed PTH into the circulation. PTH increases serum Ca within minutes by increasing renal and
intestinal absorption of Ca and by rapidly mobilizing Ca and PO
from bone (bone resorption). Renal Ca
excretion generally parallels Na excretion and is influenced by many of the same factors that govern Na
transport in the proximal tubule. However, PTH enhances distal tubular Ca reabsorption independently of
Na. PTH also decreases renal PO
reabsorption and thus increases renal PO
losses. Renal PO
loss
prevents the solubility product of Ca and PO
from being exceeded in plasma as Ca concentrations rise
in response to PTH. PTH also increases serum Ca by stimulating conversion of vitamin D ( to
its most active form, calcitriol. This form of vitamin D increases the percentage of dietary Ca absorbed by
the intestine. Despite increased Ca absorption, long-term increases in PTH secretion generally result in
further bone resorption by inhibiting osteoblastic function and promoting osteoclastic activity. PTH and
vitamin D both function as important regulators of bone growth and bone remodeling (.
Radioimmunoassays for the intact PTH molecule are still the recommended way to test for PTH. Secondgeneration assays for intact PTH are available. These tests measure bioavailable PTH or complete PTH.
They give values equal to 50 to 60% of those obtained with the older assay. Usefulness of the newer
assays is under investigation. Sometimes total or nephrogenous cAMP excretion is measured in diagnosis
of pseudohypoparathyroidism.
Calcitonin is secreted by the thyroid parafollicular cells (C cells). Calcitonin tends to lower serum Ca
concentration by enhancing cellular uptake, renal excretion, and bone formation. The effects of calcitonin
on bone metabolism are much weaker than those of either PTH or vitamin D.
Hypocalcemia
===PAGE:979===
(Hypocalcemia in neonates is discussed elsewhere.)
Hypocalcemia is total serum Ca concentration < 8.8 mg/dL (< 2.20 mmol/L) in the presence of
normal plasma protein concentrations or a serum ionized Ca concentration < 4.7 mg/dL (< 1.17
mmol/L). Causes include hypoparathyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, and renal disease.
Manifestations include paresthesias, tetany, and, when severe, seizures, encephalopathy, and
heart failure. Diagnosis involves measurement of serum Ca with adjustment for serum albumin
concentration. Treatment is administration of Ca, sometimes with vitamin D
.
Etiology
Hypocalcemia has a number of causes, including
•
Hypoparathyroidism
• Pseudohypoparathyroidism
• Vitamin D deficiency and dependency
• Renal disease
Hypoparathyroidism:
Hypoparathyroidism is characterized by hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia
and often causes chronic tetany. Hypoparathyroidism results from deficient parathyroid hormone (PTH),
which can occur in autoimmune disorders or after the accidental removal of or damage to several
parathyroid glands during thyroidectomy. Transient hypoparathyroidism is common after subtotal
thyroidectomy, but permanent hypoparathyroidism occurs after < 3% of such thyroidectomies done by
experienced surgeons. Manifestations of hypocalcemia usually begin about 24 to 48 h postoperatively but
may occur after months or years. PTH deficiency is more common after radical thyroidectomy for cancer
or as the result of surgery on the parathyroid glands (subtotal or total parathyroidectomy). Risk factors for
severe hypocalcemia after subtotal parathyroidectomy include
• Severe preoperative hypercalcemia
• Removal of a large adenoma
• Elevated alkaline phosphatase
• Chronic kidney disease
Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism is an uncommon sporadic or inherited condition in which the parathyroid
glands are absent or atrophied. It manifests in childhood. The parathyroid glands are occasionally absent
and thymic aplasia and abnormalities of the arteries arising from the brachial arches (DiGeorge
syndrome) are present. Other inherited forms include Addison's disease, autoimmune hypoparathyroidism
associated with mucocutaneous candidiasis, and X-linked recessive idiopathic hypoparathyroidism.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism:
Pseudohypoparathyroidism is an uncommon group of disorders
characterized not by hormone deficiency but by target organ resistance to PTH. Complex genetic
transmission of these disorders occurs.
Patients with type Ia pseudohypoparathyroidism (Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy) have a mutation in
the stimulatory Gsα
1 protein of the adenylyl cyclase complex (
GNAS1
). The result is failure of normal
renal phosphaturic response or increase in urinary cAMP to PTH. Patients are usually hypocalcemic as a
result of hyperphosphatemia. Secondary hyperparathyroidism and hyperparathyroid bone disease can
occur. Associated abnormalities include short stature, round facies, intellectual disability with calcification
of the basal ganglia, shortened metacarpal and metatarsal bones, mild hypothyroidism, and other subtle
endocrine abnormalities. Because only the maternal allele for
GNAS1
is expressed in the kidneys,
patients whose abnormal gene is paternal, although they have many of the somatic features of the
disease, do not have hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, or secondary hyperparathyroidism; this
===PAGE:980===
condition is sometimes described as pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism.
Less is known about type Ib pseudohypoparathyroidism. Affected patients have hypocalcemia,
hyperphosphatemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism but do not have the other associated
abnormalities.
Type II pseudohypoparathyroidism is even less common than type I. In affected patients, exogenous PTH
raises the urinary cAMP normally but does not raise serum Ca or urinary phosphate (PO
). An
intracellular resistance to cAMP has been proposed.
Vitamin D deficiency and dependency:
Vitamin D deficiency and dependency are discussed in full
elsewhere (. Vitamin D is ingested in foods naturally high in vitamin D or fortified with it. It is also
formed in the skin in response to sunlight. Vitamin D deficiency may result from inadequate dietary intake
or decreased absorption due to hepatobiliary disease or intestinal malabsorption. It can also result from
alterations in vitamin D metabolism as occur with certain drugs (eg, phenytoin, phenobarbital, rifampin) or
decreased formation in the skin due to lack of exposure to sunlight. Aging also decreases skin synthetic
capacity. Decreased skin synthesis is an important cause of acquired vitamin D deficiency among people
who spend a great deal of time indoors, who live in high northern or southern latitudes, and who wear
clothing that covers them completely. Accordingly, subclinical vitamin D deficiency is fairly common,
especially during winter months in temperate climates among the elderly. The institutionalized elderly are
at particular risk because of decreased skin synthetic capacity, undernutrition, and lack of sun exposure.
In fact, most people with deficiency have both decreased skin synthesis and dietary deficiency (see also
p.
).
Type I vitamin D-dependent rickets (pseudovitamin D-deficiency rickets) is an autosomal recessive
disorder involving a mutation in the gene encoding the 1α
-hydroxylase enzyme. Normally expressed in
the kidney, 1α
-hydroxylase is needed to convert inactive vitamin D to the active form calcitriol.
In type II vitamin D-dependent rickets, target organs cannot respond to calcitriol. Vitamin
D deficiency,
hypocalcemia, and severe hypophosphatemia occur. Muscle weakness, pain, and typical bone
deformities can occur.
Renal disease:
Renal tubular disease, including acquired proximal renal tubular acidosis due to
nephrotoxins (eg, heavy metals) and distal renal tubular acidosis, can cause severe hypocalcemia due to
abnormal renal loss of Ca and decreased renal conversion to 1,25(OH)
D. Cadmium, in particular,
causes hypocalcemia by injuring proximal tubular cells and interfering with vitamin D conversion.
Renal failure can result in hypocalcemia due to diminished formation of 1,25(OH)
D from direct renal cell
damage as well as suppression of 1α
-hydroxylase by hyperphosphatemia.
Other causes:
Other causes of hypocalcemia include
• Mg depletion (can cause relative PTH deficiency and end-organ resistance to PTH action, usually when
serum Mg concentrations are < 1.0 mg/dL [< 0.5 mmol/L]; Mg repletion increases PTH concentrations
and improves renal Ca conservation)
• Acute pancreatitis (when lipolytic products released from the inflamed pancreas chelate Ca)
• Hypoproteinemia (reduces the protein-bound fraction of serum Ca; hypocalcemia due to diminished
protein binding is asymptomatic—because ionized Ca is unchanged, this entity has been termed
factitious hypocalcemia)
• Hungry bone syndrome (persistent hypocalcemia and hypophosphatemia occurring after surgical or
medical correction of moderate to severe hyperparathyroidism in patients in whom serum Ca levels had
been supported by high bone turnover induced by greatly elevated PTH—hungry bone syndrome has
been described after parathyroidectomy, after renal transplantation, and rarely in patients with endstage renal disease treated with calcimimetics)
===PAGE:981===
• Septic shock (due to suppression of PTH release and decreased conversion of 25(OH)D to
1,25(OH)
D)
• Hyperphosphatemia (causes hypocalcemia by poorly understood mechanisms; patients with renal failure
and subsequent PO
retention are particularly prone)
• Drugs including anticonvulsants (eg, phenytoin, phenobarbital) and rifampin, which alter vitamin D
metabolism, and drugs generally used to treat hypercalcemia (
• Transfusion of > 10 units of citrate-anticoagulated blood and use of radiocontrast agents containing the
divalent ion-chelating agent ethylenediaminetetraacetate (can decrease the concentration of
bioavailable ionized Ca while total serum Ca concentrations remain unchanged)
• Infusion of gadolinium (may spuriously lower Ca concentration)
Although excessive secretion of calcitonin might be expected to cause hypocalcemia, low serum Ca
concentrations rarely occur in patients with large amounts of circulating calcitonin due to medullary
carcinoma of the thyroid.
Symptoms and Signs
Hypocalcemia is frequently asymptomatic. The presence of hypoparathyroidism is often suggested by the
clinical manifestations of the underlying disorder (eg, short stature, round facies, intellectual disability,
basal ganglia calcification in type Ia pseudohypoparathyroidism).
Major clinical manifestations of hypocalcemia are due to disturbances in cellular membrane potential,
resulting in neuromuscular irritability.
Neurologic manifestations:
Muscle cramps involving the back and legs are common. Insidious
hypocalcemia may cause mild, diffuse encephalopathy and should be suspected in patients with
unexplained dementia, depression, or psychosis. Papilledema occasionally occurs. Severe hypocalcemia
with serum Ca < 7 mg/dL (< 1.75 mmol/L) may cause hyperreflexia, tetany, laryngospasm, or generalized
seizures.
Tetany characteristically results from severe hypocalcemia but can result from reduction in the ionized
fraction of serum Ca without marked hypocalcemia, as occurs in severe alkalosis. Tetany is characterized
by the following:
• Sensory symptoms consisting of paresthesias of the lips, tongue, fingers, and feet
• Carpopedal spasm, which may be prolonged and painful
• Generalized muscle aching
• Spasm of facial musculature
Tetany may be overt with spontaneous symptoms or latent and requiring provocative tests to elicit. Latent
tetany generally occurs at less severely decreased serum Ca concentrations: 7 to 8 mg/dL (1.75 to 2.20
mmol/L).
Chvostek's and Trousseau's signs are easily elicited at the bedside to identify latent tetany. Chvostek's
sign is an involuntary twitching of the facial muscles elicited by a light tapping of the facial nerve just
anterior to the exterior auditory meatus. It is present in ≤ 10% of healthy people and in most people with
acute hypocalcemia but is often absent in chronic hypocalcemia. Trousseau's sign is the precipitation of
carpopedal spasm by reduction of the blood supply to the hand with
a tourniquet or BP cuff inflated to 20
mm Hg above systolic BP applied to the forearm for 3 min. Trousseau's sign also occurs in alkalosis,
hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia, and hyperkalemia and in about 6% of people with no identifiable
===PAGE:982===
electrolyte disturbance.
Other manifestations:
Many other abnormalities may occur with chronic hypocalcemia, such as dry and
scaly skin, brittle nails, and coarse hair.
Candida
infections occasionally occur in hypocalcemia but most
commonly occur in patients with idiopathic hypoparathyroidism. Cataracts occasionally occur with longstanding hypocalcemia and are not reversible by correction of serum Ca.
Diagnosis
• Estimation or measurement of ionized Ca
• Sometimes further testing with Mg, PTH, PO
, alkaline phosphatase, and vitamin D concentrations in
blood and cAMP and PO
concentrations in urine
Hypocalcemia may be suspected in patients with characteristic neurologic manifestations or cardiac
arrhythmias but is often found incidentally. Hypocalcemia is diagnosed by a total serum Ca concentration
< 8.8 mg/dL (< 2.20 mmol/L). However, because low plasma protein can lower total, but not ionized,
serum Ca, ionized Ca should be estimated based on albumin concentration (see
Sidebar 97-2
). Suspicion
of low ionized Ca mandates its direct measurement, despite normal total serum Ca. Hypocalcemic
patients should undergo measurement of renal function (eg, BUN, creatinine), serum PO
, Mg, and
alkaline phosphatase.
When no etiology (eg, alkalosis, renal failure, drugs, or massive blood transfusion) is obvious, further
testing is needed (see
Table 97-8
). Additional testing begins with serum concentrations of Mg, PO
, PTH, alkaline phosphatase,
and occasionally vitamin D levels (25(OH)D, and 1,25(OH)
D). Urinary PO
and cAMP concentrations
are measured when pseudohypoparathyroidism is suspected.
PTH concentration should be measured as an assay of the intact molecule. Because hypocalcemia is the
major stimulus for PTH secretion, PTH should be elevated in hypocalcemia. Thus,
• Low or even low-normal PTH concentrations are inappropriate and suggest hypoparathyroidism.
• An undetectable PTH concentration suggests idiopathic hypoparathyroidism.
• A high PTH concentration suggests pseudohypoparathyroidism or an abnormality of vitamin D
metabolism.
Sidebar 97-2 Estimation of Ionized Calcium Concentration
Ionized Ca concentration can be estimated from routine laboratory tests, usually with reasonable
accuracy. In hypoalbuminemia, measured serum Ca is often low, mainly reflecting a low concentration of
protein-bound Ca, while ionized Ca can be normal. Measured total serum Ca decreases or increases by
about 0.8 mg/dL (0.20 mmol/L) for every 1-g/dL decrease or increase in albumin. Thus, an albumin
concentration of 2.0 g/dL (normal, 4.0 g/dL) should itself reduce measured serum Ca by 1.6 mg/dL.
Similarly, increases in serum proteins, as occur in multiple myeloma, can raise total serum Ca. Acidosis
increases ionized Ca by decreasing protein binding, whereas alkalosis decreases ionized Ca.
Hypoparathyroidism is further characterized by high serum PO
and normal alkaline phosphatase.
In type I pseudohypoparathyroidism, despite the presence of a high concentration of circulating PTH,
urinary cAMP and urinary PO
are absent. Provocative testing by injection of parathyroid extract or
recombinant human PTH fails to raise serum or urinary cAMP. Patients with type Ia
pseudohypoparathyroidism frequently also have skeletal abnormalities, including short stature and
shortened 1st, 4th, and 5th metacarpals. Patients with type Ib disease have renal manifestations without
===PAGE:983===
skeletal abnormalities.
In vitamin D deficiency, osteomalacia or rickets may be present, usually with typical skeletal abnormalities
on x-ray. Diagnosis of vitamin D deficiency and dependency and measurement of vitamin D
concentrations are discussed elsewhere.
Severe hypocalcemia can affect the ECG. It typically shows prolongation of the QTc and ST intervals.
Changes in repolarization, such as T-wave peaking or inversion, also occur. ECG may show arrhythmia
or heart block occasionally in patients with severe hypocalcemia. However, evaluation of hypocalcemia
does not mandate ECG testing.
Treatment
• IV Ca gluconate for tetany
• Oral Ca for postoperative hypoparathyroidism
• Oral Ca and vitamin D for chronic hypocalcemia
[Table 97-8.
Typical Laboratory Test Results in Some Disorders Causing Hypocalcemia]
For tetany, Ca gluconate 10 mL of 10% solution IV over 10 min is given. Response can be dramatic but
may last for only a few hours. Repeated boluses or a continuous infusion with 20 to 30 mL of 10% Ca
gluconate in 1 L of 5% D/W over the next 12 to 24 h may be needed. Infusions of Ca are hazardous in
patients receiving digoxin and should be given slowly and with continuous ECG monitoring. When tetany
is associated with hypomagnesemia, it may respond transiently to Ca or K administration but is
permanently relieved only by repletion of Mg, typically given as a 10% Mg sulfate (MgSO
) solution (1
g/10 mL) IV, followed by oral Mg salts (eg, Mg gluconate 500 to 1000 mg po tid).
In transient hypoparathyroidism after thyroidectomy or partial parathyroidectomy, supplemental oral Ca
may be sufficient; 1 to 2 g of elemental Ca/day may be given as Ca gluconate (90 mg elemental Ca/1 g)
or Ca carbonate (400 mg elemental Ca/1 g). However, hypocalcemia may be particularly severe and
prolonged after subtotal parathyroidectomy, particularly in patients with chronic kidney disease or in
patients from whom a large tumor was removed. Prolonged parenteral administration of Ca may be
necessary postoperatively; supplementation with as much as 1 g/day of elemental Ca (eg, 111 mL of Ca
gluconate, which contains 90 mg elemental Ca/10 mL) may be required for 5 to 10 days before oral Ca
and vitamin D are sufficient. Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase in such patients may be a sign of rapid
uptake of Ca into bone. The need for large amounts of parenteral Ca usually does not fall until the
alkaline phosphatase concentration begins to decrease.
In chronic hypocalcemia, oral Ca and occasionally vitamin D supplements are usually sufficient: 1 to 2 g
of elemental Ca/day may be given as Ca gluconate or Ca carbonate. In patients without renal failure,
vitamin D is given as a standard oral supplement (eg, cholecalciferol 800 IU once/day). Vitamin D therapy
is not effective unless adequate dietary or supplemental Ca and PO
( are supplied.
For patients with renal failure, calcitriol or another 1,25(OH)
D analog is used because these drugs
require no renal metabolic alteration. Patients with hypoparathyroidism have difficulty converting
cholecalciferol to its active form and also usually require calcitriol, usually 0.5 to 2
μ
g po once/day.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism can occasionally be managed with oral Ca supplementation alone. When
used, calcitriol requires 1 to 3
μ
g/day.
Vitamin D analogs include dihydrotachysterol (usually given orally at 0.8 to 2.4 once/day for a few days,
followed by 0.2 to 1.0 mg once/day) and calcidiol (eg, 4000 to 6000 IU po once/wk). Use of vitamin D
analogs, particularly the longer-acting calcidiol, can be complicated by vitamin D toxicity, with severe
symptomatic hypercalcemia. Serum Ca concentration should be monitored weekly at first and then at 1- to
3-mo intervals after Ca concentrations have stabilized. The maintenance dose of calcitriol or its analog,
dihydrotachysterol, usually decreases with time.
===PAGE:984===
Hypercalcemia
Hypercalcemia is total serum Ca concentration > 10.4 mg/dL (> 2.60 mmol/L) or ionized serum
Ca > 5.2 mg/dL (> 1.30 mmol/L). Principal causes include hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D
toxicity, and cancer. Clinical features include polyuria, constipation, muscle weakness,
confusion, and coma. Diagnosis is by serum ionized Ca and parathyroid hormone
concentrations. Treatment to increase Ca excretion and reduce bone resorption of Ca involves
saline, Na diuresis, and drugs such as pamidronate
.
Etiology
Hypercalcemia usually results from excessive bone resorption. There are many causes of hypercalcemia
(see
Table 97-9
), but the most common are hyperparathyroidism and cancer.
Pathophysiology
Primary hyperparathyroidism
is a generalized disorder resulting from excessive secretion of
parathyroid hormone (PTH) by one or more parathyroid glands. It probably is the most common cause of
hypercalcemia, particularly among patients who are not hospitalized. Incidence increases with age and is
higher in postmenopausal women. It also occurs in high frequency ≥ 3 decades after neck irradiation.
Familial and sporadic forms exist. Familial forms due to parathyroid adenoma occur in patients with other
endocrine tumors (. Primary hyperparathyroidism causes hypophosphatemia and excessive
bone resorption. Although asymptomatic hypercalcemia is the most frequent presentation, nephrolithiasis
is also common, particularly when hypercalciuria occurs due to long-standing hypercalcemia. Histologic
examination shows a parathyroid adenoma in about 85% of patients with primary hyperparathyroidism,
although it is sometimes difficult to distinguish an adenoma from a normal gland. About 15% of cases are
due to hyperplasia of ≥ 2 glands. Parathyroid cancer occurs in < 1% of cases.
The syndrome of
familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH)
is transmitted as an autosomal dominant
trait. Most cases involve an inactivating mutation of the Ca-sensing receptor gene, resulting in higher
concentrations of serum Ca being needed to inhibit PTH secretion. Subsequent PTH secretion induces
renal phosphate (PO
) excretion. Persistent hypercalcemia (usually asymptomatic), often from an early
age; normal to slightly elevated concentrations of PTH; hypocalciuria; and hypermagnesemia occur.
Renal function is normal, and nephrolithiasis is unusual. However, severe pancreatitis occasionally
occurs. This syndrome, which is associated with parathyroid hyperplasia, is not relieved by subtotal
parathyroidectomy.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
occurs most commonly in advanced chronic kidney
[Table 97-9.
Principal Causes of Hypercalcemia]
disease when decreased formation of active vitamin D in the kidneys and other factors lead to
hypocalcemia and chronic stimulation of PTH secretion. Hyperphosphatemia that develops in response to
chronic kidney disease also contributes. Once established, hypercalcemia or normocalcemia may occur.
The sensitivity of the parathyroid to Ca may be diminished because of pronounced glandular hyperplasia
and elevation of the Ca set point (ie, the amount of Ca necessary to reduce secretion of PTH).
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism
results in autonomous hypersecretion of PTH regardless of serum Ca
concentration. Tertiary hyperparathyroidism generally occurs in patients with long-standing secondary
hyperparathyroidism, as in patients with end-stage renal disease of several years' duration.
Cancer
is a common cause of hypercalcemia, usually in hospitalized patients. Although there are several
mechanisms, elevated serum Ca ultimately occurs as a result of bone resorption. Humoral hypercalcemia
of cancer (ie, hypercalcemia with no or minimal bone metastases) occurs most commonly with squamous
cell carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, breast cancer, prostate cancer, and ovarian cancer. Many cases of
humoral hypercalcemia of cancer were formerly attributed to ectopic production of PTH. However, some
===PAGE:985===
of these tumors secrete a PTH-related peptide that binds to PTH receptors in both bone and kidney and
mimics many of the effects of the hormone, including osteoclastic bone resorption. Hematologic cancers,
most often multiple myeloma, but also certain lymphomas and lymphosarcomas, cause hypercalcemia by
elaborating a group of cytokines that stimulate osteoclasts to resorb bone, resulting in osteolytic lesions,
diffuse osteopenia, or both. Hypercalcemia may result from local elaboration of osteoclast-activating
cytokines or prostaglandins, direct bone resorption by the metastatic tumor cells, or both.
Vitamin D toxicity
can be caused by high concentrations of endogenous 1,25(OH)
D. Although serum
concentrations are low in most patients with solid tumors, patients with lymphoma and T-cell leukemia
sometimes have elevated concentrations due to dysregulation of the 1α
-hydroxylase enzyme present in
tumor cells. Exogenous vitamin D in pharmacologic doses causes excessive bone resorption as well as
increased intestinal Ca absorption, resulting in hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria (.
Granulomatous disorders
, such as sarcoidosis, TB, leprosy, berylliosis, histoplasmosis, and
coccidioidomycosis, lead to hypercalcemia
and hypercalciuria. In sarcoidosis, hypercalcemia and
hypercalciuria seem to be due to unregulated conversion of 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)
D, presumably due to
expression of the 1α
-hydroxylase enzyme in mononuclear cells within sarcoid granulomas. Similarly,
elevated serum concentrations of 1,25(OH)
D have been reported in hypercalcemic patients with TB and
silicosis. Other mechanisms must account for hypercalcemia in some instances, because depressed
1,25(OH)
D concentrations occur in some patients with hypercalcemia and leprosy.
Immobilization
, particularly complete prolonged bed rest in patients at risk (see
Table 97-9
), can result
in hypercalcemia due to accelerated bone resorption. Hypercalcemia develops within days to weeks of
onset of bed rest. Reversal of hypercalcemia occurs promptly on resumption of weight bearing. Young
adults with several bone fractures and people with Paget's disease of bone are particularly prone to
hypercalcemia when at bed rest.
Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia
(Williams syndrome—see
Table 299-2
 is an extremely rare sporadic disorder with dysmorphic facial features,
cardiovascular abnormalities, renovascular hypertension, and hypercalcemia. PTH and vitamin D
metabolism are normal, but the response of calcitonin to Ca infusion may be abnormal.
In
milk-alkali syndrome
, excessive amounts of Ca and absorbable alkali are ingested, usually during
self-treatment with Ca carbonate antacids for dyspepsia or to prevent osteoporosis, resulting in
hypercalcemia, metabolic alkalosis, and renal insufficiency. The availability of effective drugs for peptic
ulcer disease and osteoporosis has greatly reduced the incidence of this syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
In mild hypercalcemia, many patients are asymptomatic. Clinical manifestations of hypercalcemia include
constipation, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, and ileus. Impairment of the renal
concentrating mechanism leads to polyuria, nocturia, and polydipsia. Elevation of serum Ca > 12 mg/dL
(> 3.00 mmol/L) can cause emotional lability, confusion, delirium, psychosis, stupor, and coma.
Hypercalcemia may cause neuromuscular symptoms, including skeletal muscle weakness. Hypercalciuria
with nephrolithiasis is common. Less often, prolonged or severe hypercalcemia causes reversible acute
renal failure or irreversible renal damage due to nephrocalcinosis (precipitation of Ca salts within the
kidney parenchyma). Peptic ulcers and pancreatitis may occur in patients with hyperparathyroidism for
reasons that are not related to hypercalcemia.
Severe hypercalcemia causes a shortened QT
c
interval on ECG, and arrhythmias may occur, particularly
in patients taking digoxin. Hypercalcemia > 18 mg/dL (> 4.50 mmol/L) may cause shock, renal failure, and
death.
Diagnosis
• Total serum Ca concentration
===PAGE:986===
• Chest x-ray; measurement of electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, ionized Ca, PO
, and alkaline phosphatase;
and serum protein immunoelectrophoresis to determine the cause
• Sometimes PTH and urinary excretion of Ca with or without PO
Hypercalcemia is diagnosed by a serum Ca concentration > 10.4 mg/dL (> 2.60 mmol/L) or ionized serum
Ca > 5.2 mg/dL (> 1.30 mmol/L). The condition is frequently discovered during routine laboratory
screening. Serum Ca can be artifactually elevated (see
Table 97-10
). Hypercalcemia can also be masked by low serum protein. When protein and albumin are
abnormal and when ionized hypercalcemia is suspected because of clinical findings (eg, because of
symptoms of hypercalcemia), ionized serum Ca should be measured.
Initial evaluation:
Initial evaluation should include a review of the history, particularly of past serum Ca
concentration; physical examination; a chest x-ray; and laboratory studies, including electrolytes, BUN,
creatinine, ionized Ca, PO
, alkaline phosphatase, and serum protein immunoelectrophoresis. The cause
is apparent from clinical data and results of these tests in ≥ 95% of patients. Patients without an obvious
cause of hypercalcemia after this evaluation should undergo measurement of intact PTH and 24-h urinary
Ca. When hyperparathyroidism is suspected, PO
renal excretion is often measured.
Asymptomatic hypercalcemia that has been present for years or is present in several family members
raises the possibility of FHH. Primary hyperparathyroidism generally manifests late in life but can be
present for several years before symptoms occur. When no cause is obvious, concentrations of serum Ca
< 11 mg/dL (< 2.75 mmol/L) suggest hyperparathyroidism or other nonmalignant causes, whereas
concentration > 13 mg/dL (> 3.25 mmol/L) suggest cancer.
Measurement of intact PTH levels help differentiate PTH-mediated hypercalcemia (eg, caused by
hyperparathyroidism or FHH), in which PTH levels are high or high-normal,
[Table 97-10.
Laboratory and Clinical Findings in Some Disorders Causing Hypercalcemia]
from most other (PTH-independent) causes. In PTH-independent causes, levels are usually < 20 pg/mL.
The chest x-ray is particularly helpful, revealing most granulomatous disorders, such as TB, sarcoidosis,
and silicosis, as well as primary lung cancer and lytic and Paget's lesions in bones of the shoulder, ribs,
and thoracic spine.
Chest and bone (eg, skull, extremity) x-rays can also show the bony effects of secondary
hyperparathyroidism, most commonly in long-term dialysis patients. In osteitis fibrosa cystica (often due to
primary hyperparathyroidism), increased osteoclastic activity from over-stimulation by PTH causes
rarefaction of bone with fibrous degeneration and cyst and fibrous nodule formation. Because
characteristic bone lesions occur only with relatively advanced disease, bone x-rays are recommended
only for symptomatic patients. X-rays typically show bone cysts, a heterogeneous appearance of the
skull, and subperiosteal resorption of bone in the phalanges and distal clavicles.
Hyperparathyroidism:
In hyperparathyroidism, the serum Ca is rarely > 12 mg/dL (> 3.00 mmol/L), but
the ionized serum Ca is almost always elevated. Low serum PO
concentration suggests
hyperparathyroidism, especially when coupled with elevated PO
renal excretion. When
hyperparathyroidism results in increased bone turnover, serum alkaline phosphatase is frequently
increased. Increased intact PTH, particularly inappropriate elevation (ie, a high concentration in the
absence of hypocalcemia) or an inappropriate high-normal concentration (ie, despite hypercalcemia), is
diagnostic. Urinary Ca excretion is usually normal or high in hyperparathyroidism. Primary
hyperparathyroidism is suggested by an absence of a family history of endocrine neoplasia, childhood
neck irradiation, or other obvious cause. Chronic kidney disease suggests the presence of secondary
hyperparathyroidism, but primary hyperparathyroidism can also be present. In patients with chronic kidney
disease, high serum Ca and normal serum PO
suggest primary hyperparathyroidism, whereas elevated
PO
suggests secondary hyperparathyroidism.
===PAGE:987===
The need for localization of parathyroid tissue before surgery on the parathyroid(s) is controversial. Highresolution CT with or without CT-guided biopsy and immunoassay of thyroid venous drainage, MRI, highresolution ultrasonography, digital subtraction angiography, and thallium-201-technetium-99 scanning all
have been used and are highly accurate, but they have not improved the usually high cure rate of
parathyroidectomy done by experienced surgeons. Technetium-99 sestamibi, a newer radionuclide agent
for parathyroid imaging, is more sensitive and specific than older agents and may be useful for identifying
solitary adenomas.
For residual or recurrent hyperparathyroidism after initial parathyroid surgery, imaging is necessary and
may reveal abnormally functioning parathyroid glands in unusual locations throughout the neck and
mediastinum. Technetium-99 sestamibi is probably the most sensitive imaging test. Use of several
imaging studies (MRI, CT, or high-resolution ultrasonography in addition to technetium-99 sestamibi)
before repeat parathyroidectomy is sometimes necessary.
Cancer:
A serum Ca > 13 mg/dL (> 3.00 mmol/L) suggests some cause of hypercalcemia other than
hyperparathyroidism. Urinary Ca excretion is usually normal or high in cancer. In humoral hypercalcemia
of cancer, PTH is often decreased or undetectable; PO
is often decreased; and metabolic alkalosis,
hypochloremia, and hypoalbuminemia are often present. Suppressed PTH differentiates humoral
hypercalcemia of cancer from primary hyperparathyroidism. Humoral hypercalcemia of cancer can also
be diagnosed by detection of PTH-related peptide in serum.
Multiple myeloma is suggested by simultaneous anemia, azotemia, and hypercalcemia or by the presence
of a monoclonal gammopathy. Myeloma is confirmed by bone marrow examination.
FHH:
FHH should be considered in patients with hypercalcemia and elevated or high-normal intact PTH
levels. FHH is distinguished from primary hyperparathyroidism by the early age of onset, frequent
occurrence of hypermagnesemia, and presence of hypercalcemia without hypercalciuria in other family
members. The fractional excretion of Ca (ratio of Ca clearance to creatinine clearance) is low (< 1%) in
FHH; it is almost always elevated (1 to 4%) in primary hyperparathyroidism. Intact PTH can be elevated
or normal, perhaps reflecting altered feedback regulation of the parathyroid glands.
Milk-alkali syndrome:
In addition to a history of increased intake of Ca antacids, milk-alkali syndrome is
recognized by the combination of hypercalcemia, metabolic alkalosis, and, occasionally, azotemia with
hypocalciuria. The diagnosis can be confirmed when the serum Ca concentration rapidly returns to
normal when Ca and alkali ingestion stops, although renal insufficiency can persist when
nephrocalcinosis is present. Circulating PTH usually is suppressed.
Other causes:
In hypercalcemia due to sarcoidosis, other granulomatous disorders, and some
lymphomas, serum concentration of 1,25(OH)
D may be elevated. Vitamin D toxicity is also characterized
by elevated 1,25(OH)
D concentration. In other endocrine causes of hypercalcemia, such as
thyrotoxicosis and Addison's disease, typical laboratory findings of the underlying disorder help establish
the diagnosis. When Paget's disease is suspected, plain x-rays ( are done first and may show
characteristic abnormalities.
Treatment
• Oral PO
for serum Ca < 11.5 mg/dL with mild symptoms and no kidney disease
• IV saline and furosemide for more rapid correction for serum Ca < 18 mg/dL
• Bisphosphonates or other Ca-lowering drugs for serum Ca < 18 mg/dL and > 11.5 mg/dL or moderate
symptoms
• Hemodialysis for serum Ca > 18 mg/dL
• Surgical removal for moderate, progressive primary hyperparathyroidism and sometimes for mild disease
===PAGE:988===
• PO
restriction and binders and sometimes calcitriol for secondary hyperparathyroidism
There are 4 main strategies for lowering serum Ca: • Decrease intestinal Ca absorption
• Increase urinary Ca excretion
• Decrease bone resorption
• Remove excess Ca through dialysis
The treatment used depends on both the degree and the cause of hypercalcemia.
Mild hypercalcemia:
In mild hypercalcemia (serum Ca < 11.5 mg/dL [< 2.88 mmol/L]), in which
symptoms are mild, treatment is deferred pending definitive diagnosis. After diagnosis, the underlying
disorder is treated. When symptoms are significant, treatment aimed at lowering serum Ca is necessary.
Oral PO
can be used. When taken with meals, it binds some Ca, preventing its absorption. A starting
dose is 250 mg of elemental PO
(as Na or K salt) qid. The dose can be increased to 500 mg qid prn
unless diarrhea develops. Another treatment is increasing urinary Ca excretion by giving isotonic saline
plus a loop diuretic. Initially, 1 to 2 L of saline is given over 2 to 4 h unless significant heart failure is
present, because nearly all patients with significant hypercalcemia are hypovolemic. Furosemide 20 to 40
mg IV q 2 to 4 h is given as needed to maintain a urine output of roughly 250 mL/h (monitored hourly).
Care must be taken to avoid volume depletion. K and Mg are monitored as often as every 4 h during
treatment and replaced IV as needed to avoid hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia. Serum Ca begins to
decrease in 2 to 4 h and falls to nearnormal within 24 h.
Moderate hypercalcemia:
Moderate hypercalcemia (serum Ca > 11.5 mg/dL [< 2.88 mmol/L] and < 18
mg/dL [< 4.51 mmol/L]) can be treated with isotonic saline and a loop diuretic as is done for mild
hypercalcemia or, depending on its cause, agents that decrease bone resorption (usually
bisphosphonates, calcitonin, or infrequently plicamycin or gallium nitrate), corticosteroids, or chloroquine.
Bisphosphonates
inhibit osteoclasts. They are usually the drugs of choice for cancer-associated
hypercalcemia. Pamidronate can be given for cancer-associated hypercalcemia as a one-time dose of 30
to 90 mg IV, repeated only after 7 days. It lowers serum Ca for ≤ 2 wk. Zoledronate can also be given in
doses of 4 to 8 mg IV and lowers serum Ca very effectively for an average of > 40 days. Ibandronate 4 to
6 mg IV can be given for cancer-associated hypercalcemia; it is effective for about 14 days. Etidronate 7.5
mg/kg IV once/day for 3 to 5 days is used to treat Paget's disease and cancer-associated hypercalcemia.
Maintenance dosage is 20 mg/kg po once/day, but the dose must be reduced when GFR is low.
Repetitive use of IV bisphosphonates to treat hypercalcemia associated with metastatic bone disease or
myeloma has been associated with osteonecrosis of the jaw. Some reports suggest this finding may be
more common with zoledronate. Renal toxicity has been reported in patients receiving zoledronate. Oral
bisphosphonates (eg, alendronate or risedronate) can be given to maintain Ca in the normal range but
are not generally used for treating hypercalcemia acutely.
Calcitonin
(thyrocalcitonin) is a rapidly acting peptide hormone normally secreted in response to
hypercalcemia by the C cells of the thyroid. Calcitonin seems to lower serum Ca by inhibiting osteoclastic
activity. A dosage of 4 to 8 IU/kg sc q 12 h of salmon calcitonin is safe. Its usefulness in the treatment of
cancer-associated hypercalcemia is limited by its short duration of action with the development of
tachyphylaxis (often after about 48 h) and by the lack of response in ≥ 40% of patients. However, the
combination of salmon calcitonin and prednisone may control serum Ca for several months in some
patients with cancer. If calcitonin stops working, it can be stopped for 2 days (while prednisone is
continued) and then resumed.
Corticosteroids
(eg, prednisone 20 to 40 mg po once/day) can help control hypercalcemia as adjunctive
therapy by decreasing calcitriol production and thus intestinal Ca absorption in most patients with vitamin
D toxicity, idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy, and sarcoidosis. Some patients with myeloma, lymphoma,
leukemia, or metastatic cancer require 40 to 60 mg of prednisone once/day. However, > 50% of such
patients fail to respond to corticosteroids, and response, when it occurs, takes several days; thus, other
===PAGE:989===
treatment usually is necessary.
Chloroquine PO
500 mg po once/day inhibits 1,25(OH)
D synthesis and reduces serum Ca
concentration in patients with sarcoidosis. Routine ophthalmologic surveillance (eg, retinal examinations
every 6 to 12 mo) is mandatory to detect dose-related retinal damage.
Plicamycin
μ
g/kg IV once/day in 50 mL of 5% D/W over 4 to 6 h is effective in patients with
hypercalcemia due to cancer but is rarely used because other treatments are safer.
Gallium nitrate
is also effective in hypercalcemia due to cancer but is used infrequently because of renal
toxicity and limited clinical experience.
Severe hypercalcemia:
In severe hypercalcemia (serum Ca > 18 mg/dL [> 4.50 mmol/L] or with severe
symptoms), hemodialysis with low-Ca dialysate may be needed in addition to other treatments. Although
there is no completely satisfactory way to correct severe hypercalcemia in patients with renal failure,
hemodialysis is probably the safest and most reliable short-term treatment.
IV PO
(disodium PO
or monopotassium PO
) should be used only when hypercalcemia is life
threatening and unresponsive to other methods and when short-term hemodialysis is not possible. No
more than 1 g should be given IV in 24 h; usually 1 or 2 doses over 2 days lower serum Ca for 10 to 15
days. Soft-tissue calcification and acute renal failure may result. (NOTE: IV infusion of Na sulfate is even
more hazardous and less effective than PO
infusion and should not be used.)
Hyperparathyroidism:
Treatment for hyperparathyroidism depends on severity.
Patients with
asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism
with no indications for surgery may be
treated conservatively with methods to ensure that serum Ca concentrations remain low. Patients should
remain active (ie, avoid immobilization that could exacerbate hypercalcemia), follow a low-Ca diet, drink
plenty of fluids to minimize the chance of nephrolithiasis, and avoid drugs that can raise serum Ca, such
as thiazide diuretics. Serum Ca and renal function are monitored every 6 mo. Bone density is monitored
every 12 mo. However, subclinical bone disease, hypertension, and longevity are concerns. Osteoporosis
is treated with bisphosphonates.
Surgery
is indicated for patients with symptomatic or progressive hypoparathyroidism. The indications for
surgery in patients with asymptomatic, primary hyperparathyroidism are controversial. Surgical
parathyroidectomy increases bone density and may have modest effects on some quality of life
symptoms, but most patients do not have progressive deterioration in biochemical abnormalities or bone
density. Still, concerns about hypertension and longevity remain. Many experts recommend surgery in the
following circumstances:
• Serum Ca 1 mg/dL (0.25 mmol/L) greater than the upper limits of normal Calciuria > 400 mg/day (> 10
mmol/day)
• Creatinine clearance 30% less than that of age-matched controls
Peak bone density at the hip, lumbar spine, or radius 2.5 standard deviations below controls (T score = -
2.5)
Age < 50 yr
• The possibility of poor adherence with follow-up
Surgery consists of removal of adenomatous glands. PTH concentration can be measured before and
after removal of the presumed abnormal gland using rapid assays. A fall of 50% or more 10 min after
removal of the adenoma indicates successful treatment. In patients with disease of > 1 gland, several
glands are removed, and often a small portion of a normalappearing parathyroid gland is reimplanted in
the belly of the sternocleidomastoid muscle or subcutaneously in the forearm to prevent
===PAGE:990===
hypoparathyroidism. Parathyroid tissue is also occasionally preserved using cryopreservation to allow for
later autologous transplantation in case persistent hypoparathyroidism develops.
When hyperparathyroidism is mild, the serum Ca concentration drops to just below normal within 24 to 48
h after surgery; serum Ca must be monitored. In patients with severe osteitis fibrosa cystica, prolonged,
symptomatic hypocalcemia may occur postoperatively unless 10 to 20 g elemental Ca is given in the days
before surgery. Even with preoperative Ca administration, large doses of Ca and vitamin D may be
required ( while bone Ca is repleted.
Hyperparathyroidism in renal failure
is usually secondary. Measures used for treatment can also be
used for prevention. One aim is to prevent hyperphosphatemia. Treatment combines dietary PO
restriction and PO
-binding agents, such as Ca carbonate or sevelamer. Despite the use of PO
binders,
dietary restriction of PO
is needed. Aluminum-containing compounds have been used to limit PO
concentration, but they should be avoided, especially in patients receiving long-term dialysis, to prevent
aluminum accumulation in bone resulting in severe osteomalacia. Vitamin D administration is potentially
hazardous in renal failure because it can increase PO
absorption and contribute to hypercalcemia;
administration requires frequent monitoring of Ca and PO
. Treatment should be limited to patients with
any of the following:
• Symptomatic osteomalacia (unrelated to aluminum)
• Secondary hyperparathyroidism
• Postparathyroidectomy hypocalcemia
Although oral calcitriol is often given along with oral Ca to suppress secondary hyperparathyroidism, the
results are variable in patients with end-stage renal disease. The parenteral form of calcitriol, or vitamin D
analogs such as paricalcitol, may better prevent secondary hyperparathyroidism in such patients,
because the higher attained serum concentration of 1,25(OH)
D directly suppresses PTH release.
Simple osteomalacia may respond to 0.25 to 0.5
μ
g once/day of oral calcitriol, whereas correction of
postparathyroidectomy hypocalcemia may require prolonged administration
of as much as 2
μ
g of
calcitriol once/day and ≥ 2 g of elemental Ca/day. The calcimimetic, cinacalcet, modulates the set point of
the Ca-sensing receptor on parathyroid cells and decreases PTH concentration in dialysis patients
without increasing serum Ca. In patients with osteomalacia caused by having taken large amounts of
aluminum-containing PO
binders, removal of aluminum with deferoxamine is necessary before calcitrol
administration reduces bone lesions.
FHH:
Although FHH results from histologically abnormal parathyroid tissue, the response to subtotal
parathyroidectomy is unsatisfactory. Because overt clinical manifestations are rare, drug therapy is not
routinely indicated.
Disorders of Phosphate Concentration
Phosphorus is one of the most abundant elements in the human body. Most phosphorus in the body is
complexed with O
as phosphate (PO
). About 85% of the about 500 to 700 g of PO
in the body is
contained in bone, where it is an important constituent of crystalline hydroxyapatite. In soft tissues, PO
is
mainly found in the intracellular compartment as an integral component of several organic compounds,
including nucleic acids and cell membrane phospholipids. PO
is also involved in aerobic and anaerobic
energy metabolism. RBC 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) plays a crucial role in O
delivery to tissue.
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and ATP contain PO
and use chemical bonds between PO
groups to
store energy. Inorganic PO
is a major intracellular anion but is also present in plasma. The normal serum
inorganic PO
concentration in adults ranges from 2.5 to 4.5 mg/dL (0.81 to 1.45 mmol/L). PO
concentration is 50% higher in infants and 30% higher in children, possibly because of the important roles
these PO
-dependent processes play in growth.
===PAGE:991===
The typical American diet contains about 800 to 1500 mg of PO
. The amount in the stool varies
depending on the amount of PO
binding compounds (mainly Ca) in the diet. Also, like Ca, GI PO
absorption is enhanced by vitamin D. Renal PO
excretion roughly equals GI absorption to maintain PO
balance. PO
depletion can occur in various disorders and normally results in conservation of PO
by the
kidneys. Bone PO
serves as a reservoir, which can buffer changes in plasma and intracellular PO
.
Hypophosphatemia
Hypophosphatemia is serum phosphate (PO
) concentration < 2.5 mg/dL (0.81 mmol/L). Causes
include alcoholism, burns, starvation, and diuretic use. Clinical features include muscle
weakness, respiratory failure, and heart failure; seizures and coma can occur. Diagnosis is by
serum PO
concentration. Treatment consists of PO
supplementation
.
Etiology
Hypophosphatemia occurs in 2% of hospitalized patients but is more prevalent in certain populations (eg,
it occurs in up to 10% of hospitalized patients with alcoholism).
Hypophosphatemia has numerous causes, but clinically significant acute hypophosphatemia occurs in
relatively few clinical settings, including the following:
• The recovery phase of diabetic ketoacidosis
• Acute alcoholism
• Severe burns
• When receiving TPN
• Refeeding after prolonged undernutrition
• Severe respiratory alkalosis
Acute severe hypophosphatemia with serum PO
< 1 mg/dL (< 0.32 mmol/L) is most often caused by
transcellular shifts of PO
, often superimposed on chronic PO
depletion.
Chronic hypophosphatemia usually is the result of decreased renal PO
reabsorption. Causes include
the following:
• Hyperparathyroidism
• Other hormonal disturbances, such as Cushing's syndrome and hypothyroidism
• Electrolyte disorders, such as hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia
• Theophylline intoxication
• Long-term diuretic use
Severe chronic hypophosphatemia usually results from a prolonged negative PO
balance. Causes
include
• Chronic starvation or malabsorption, especially when combined with vomiting or copious diarrhea
• Long-term ingestion of large amounts of PO
-binding aluminum, usually in the form of antacids
===PAGE:992===
Ingestion of aluminum is particularly prone to cause PO
depletion when combined with decreased
dietary intake and dialysis losses of PO
in patients with end-stage renal disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Although hypophosphatemia usually is asymptomatic, anorexia, muscle weakness, and
osteomalacia can
occur in severe chronic depletion. Serious neuromuscular disturbances may occur, including progressive
encephalopathy, seizures, coma, and death. The muscle weakness of profound hypophosphatemia may
be accompanied by rhabdomyolysis, especially in acute alcoholism. Hematologic disturbances of
profound hypophosphatemia include hemolytic anemia, decreased release of O
from Hb, and impaired
leukocyte and platelet function.
Diagnosis
• Serum PO
levels
Hypophosphatemia is diagnosed by a serum PO
concentration < 2.5 mg/dL (< 0.81 mmol/L). Most
causes of hypophosphatemia (eg, diabetic ketoacidosis, burns, refeeding) are readily apparent. Testing
to diagnose the cause is done when clinically indicated (eg, suggestive liver function test results or signs
of cirrhosis in patients with suspected alcoholism).
Treatment
• Oral PO
replacement
• IV PO
when serum PO
is < 0.5 mEq/L or symptoms are severe
Oral treatment:
Treatment of the underlying disorder and oral PO
replacement are usually adequate in
asymptomatic patients, even when the serum concentration is very low. PO
can be given in doses up to
about 1 g po tid in tablets containing Na or K PO
. Oral Na or K PO
may be poorly tolerated because of
diarrhea. Ingestion of 1 L of low-fat or skim milk provides 1 g of PO
and may be more acceptable.
Removal of the cause of hypophosphatemia may include stopping PO
-binding antacids or diuretics or
correcting hypomagnesemia.
Parenteral treatment:
Parenteral PO
is usually given IV. It should be administered in any of the
following circumstances:
• When serum PO
is < 0.5 mEq/L (< 0.16 mmol/L)
• Rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis, or CNS symptoms are present
• Oral replacement is not feasible due to underlying disorder
IV administration of KPO
(as buffered mix of K
HPO
and KH
PO
) is relatively safe when renal
function is well preserved. NaPO
(rather than KPO
) preparations generally should be used in patients
with impaired renal function. The usual parenteral dose of KPO
is 2.5 mg (0.08 mmol)/kg IV over 6 h.
Patients with alcoholism may require ≥ 1 g/day during TPN; supplemental PO
is stopped when oral
intake is resumed. Serum Ca and PO
concentrations should be monitored during therapy, particularly
when PO
is given IV or to patients with impaired renal function. In most cases, no more than 7 mg/kg
(about 500 mg for a 70-kg adult) of PO
should be given over 6 h. Close monitoring is done and more
rapid rates of PO
administration should be avoided to prevent hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and
metastatic calcification due to excessive Ca × PO
product.
Hyperphosphatemia
===PAGE:993===
Hyperphosphatemia is serum phosphate (PO
) concentration > 4.5 mg/dL (> 1.46 mmol/L).
Causes include chronic renal failure, hypoparathyroidism, and metabolic or respiratory acidosis.
Clinical features may be due to accompanying hypocalcemia and include tetany. Diagnosis is by
serum PO
. Treatment includes restriction of PO
intake and administration of PO
-binding
antacids, such as Ca carbonate
.
The usual cause of hyperphosphatemia is a decrease in renal excretion of PO
. Advanced renal
insufficiency (GFR < 30 mL/min) reduces excretion sufficiently to increase serum PO
. Defects in renal
excretion of PO
in the absence of renal failure also occur in pseudohypoparathyroidism and
hypoparathyroidism. Hyperphosphatemia can also occur with excessive oral PO
administration and
occasionally with overzealous use of enemas containing PO
.
Hyperphosphatemia occasionally results from a transcellular shift of PO
into the extracellular space that
is so large that the renal excretory capacity is overwhelmed. This transcellular shift occurs most
frequently in diabetic ketoacidosis (despite total body PO
depletion), crush injuries, and nontraumatic
rhabdomyolysis as well as in overwhelming systemic infections and tumor lysis syndrome.
Major causes of hyperphosphatemia include
• GFR < 30 mL/min
• Hypoparathyroidism
• Pseudohypoparathyroidism
• Excessive oral PO
administration
• Overzealous use of enemas containing PO
• Shifts of PO
into the extracellular space (eg, in diabetic ketoacidosis, rhabdomyolysis, overwhelming
systemic infections, and tumor lysis syndrome)
Hyperphosphatemia plays a critical role in the development of secondary hyperparathyroidism and renal
osteodystrophy in patients
with advanced chronic kidney disease as well as in patients on dialysis. Lastly,
hyperphosphatemia can be spurious in cases of hyperproteinemia (multiple myeloma or Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia), hyperlipidemia, hemolysis, or hyperbilirubinemia.
Hyperphosphatemia can lead to hypocalcemia by causing Ca and PO
precipitation into soft tissues,
especially when the serum Ca × PO
product is chronically > 55 in patients with chronic kidney disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with hyperphosphatemia are asymptomatic, although symptoms of hypocalcemia, including
tetany, can occur when concomitant hypocalcemia is present. Soft-tissue calcifications are common
among patients with chronic kidney disease.
Diagnosis
• PO
concentration > 4.5 mg/dL (> 1.46 mmol/L)
Hyperphosphatemia is diagnosed by PO
concentration. When the etiology is not obvious (eg,
rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis syndrome, renal failure, overingestion of PO
,-containing laxatives),
additional evaluation is warranted to exclude hypoparathyroidism or pseudohypoparathyroidism, which is
end-organ resistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH—. False elevation of serum PO
also
===PAGE:994===
should be excluded by measuring serum protein, lipid, and bilirubin concentrations.
Treatment
• PO
restriction
• PO
binders
The mainstay of treatment in patients with renal failure is reduction of PO
intake, which is usually
accomplished with avoidance of foods containing high amounts of PO
and with use of PO
-binding
drugs taken with meals. Because of the possibility of aluminum-related osteomalacia, Ca carbonate and
Ca acetate replace aluminum-containing antacids in patients with end-stage renal disease. Because of
the possibility of excessive Ca × PO
product causing vascular calcification in dialysis patients taking Cacontaining binders, a PO
-binding resin without Ca, sevelamer, is widely used in dialysis patients in
doses of 800 to 2400 mg tid with meals. Lanthanum carbonate, another PO
binder that lacks Ca, can
also be used in dialysis patients. It is given in doses of 500 to 1000 mg tid with meals.
Disorders of Magnesium Concentration
Mg is the 4th most plentiful cation in the body. A 70-kg adult has about 2000 mEq of Mg. About 50% is
sequestered in bone and is not readily exchangeable with Mg in other compartments. The ECF contains
only about 1% of total body Mg. The remainder resides in the intracellular compartment. Normal serum
Mg concentration ranges from 1.4 to 2.1 mEq/L (0.70 to 1.05 mmol/L).
The maintenance of serum Mg concentration is largely a function of dietary intake and effective renal and
intestinal conservation. Within 7 days of initiation of a Mg-deficient diet, renal and stool Mg excretion
each fall to about 1 mEq/day (0.5 mmol/day).
About 70% of serum Mg is ultrafiltered (filtered through minute pores) by the kidney; the remainder is
bound to protein. Protein binding of Mg is pH dependent. Serum Mg concentration is not closely related
to either total body Mg or intracellular Mg content. However, severe serum hypomagnesemia may reflect
diminished total body Mg.
Many enzymes are activated by or are dependent on Mg. Mg is required by all enzymatic processes
involving ATP and by many of the enzymes involved in nucleic acid metabolism. Mg is required for
thiamine pyrophosphate cofactor activity and seems to stabilize the structure of macromolecules such as
DNA and RNA. Mg is also related to Ca and K metabolism in an intimate but poorly understood way.
Hypomagnesemia
Hypomagnesemia is serum Mg concentration < 1.4 mEq/L (< 0.70 mmol/L). Causes include
inadequate Mg intake and absorption or increased excretion due to hypercalcemia or drugs
such as furosemide. Clinical features are often due to accompanying hypokalemia and
hypocalcemia and include lethargy, tremor, tetany, seizures, and arrhythmias. Treatment is with
Mg replacement
.
Serum Mg concentration, even when free Mg ion is measured, may be normal even with decreased
intracellular or bone Mg stores. Mg depletion usually results from inadequate intake plus impairment of
renal
conservation or GI absorption. There are numerous causes of clinically significant Mg deficiency
(see
Table 97-11
).
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical manifestations are anorexia, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, weakness, personality change, tetany
(eg, positive Trousseau's or Chvostek's sign or spontaneous carpopedal spasm, hyperreflexia), and
tremor and muscle fasciculations. The neurologic signs, particularly tetany, correlate with development of
===PAGE:995===
concomitant hypocalcemia, hypokalemia, or both. Myopathic potentials are found on electromyography
but are also compatible with hypocalcemia or hypokalemia. Severe hypomagnesemia may cause
generalized tonicclonic seizures, especially in children.
Diagnosis
• Considered in patients with risk factors and with unexplained hypocalcemia or hypokalemia
• Serum Mg concentration < 1.4 mEq/L (< 0.70 mmol/L)
Hypomagnesemia is diagnosed by a serum Mg concentration. Severe hypomagnesemia usually results in
concentrations of < 1.0 mEq/L (< 0.50 mmol/L). Associated hypocalcemia and hypocalciuria are common.
Hypokalemia with increased urinary K excretion and metabolic alkalosis may be present. Mg deficiency
should be suspected even when serum Mg concentration is normal in patients with unexplained
hypocalcemia or refractory hypokalemia. Mg deficiency should also be suspected in patients with
unexplained neurologic symptoms and alcoholism, with chronic diarrhea, or after cyclosporine,
cisplatinum-based chemotherapy or prolonged therapy with amphotericin B or aminoglycosides.
[Table 97-11.
Causes of Hypomagnesemia]
Treatment
• Oral Mg salts
• IV or IM Mg sulfate for severe hypomagnesemia or inability to tolerate or adhere to oral therapy
Treatment with Mg salts is indicated when Mg deficiency is symptomatic or persistently < 1 mEq/L (< 0.50
mmol/L). Patients with alcoholism are treated empirically. In such cases, deficits approaching 12 to 24
mg/kg are possible. About twice the amount of the estimated deficit should be given in patients with intact
renal function, because about 50% of the administered Mg is excreted in urine. Oral Mg salts (eg, Mg
gluconate 500 to 1000 mg po tid) are given for 3 to 4 days. Oral treatment is limited by the onset of
diarrhea. Parenteral administration is reserved for patients with severe, symptomatic hypomagnesemia
who cannot tolerate oral drugs. Sometimes a single injection is given in patients with alcoholism who are
unlikely to adhere to ongoing oral therapy. When Mg must be replaced parenterally, a 10% Mg sulfate
(MgSO
) solution (1 g/10 mL) is available for IV use and a 50% solution (1 g/2 mL) is available for IM use.
The serum Mg concentration should be monitored frequently during Mg therapy, particularly when Mg is
given to patients with renal insufficiency or in repeated parenteral doses. In these patients, treatment is
continued until a normal serum Mg concentration is achieved.
In severe, symptomatic hypomagnesemia (eg, Mg < 1 mEq/L [< 0.5 mmol/L] with seizures or other severe
symptoms), 2 to 4 g of MgSO
IV is given over 5 to 10 min. When seizures persist, the dose may be
repeated up to a total of 10 g over the next 6 h. In patients in whom seizures stop, 10 g in 1 L of 5% D/W
can be infused over 24 h, followed by up to 2.5 g q 12 h to replace the deficit in total Mg stores and
prevent further drops in serum Mg.
When serum Mg is ≤ 1 mEq/L (< 0.5 mmol/L) but symptoms are less
severe, MgSO
may be given IV in 5% D/W at a rate of 1 g/h as slow infusion for up to 10 h. In less
severe cases of hypomagnesemia, gradual repletion may be achieved by administration of smaller
parenteral doses over 3 to 5 days until the serum Mg concentration is normal.
Hypermagnesemia
Hypermagnesemia is a serum Mg concentration > 2.1 mEq/L (> 1.05 mmol/L). The major cause is
renal failure. Symptoms include hypotension, respiratory depression, and cardiac arrest.
Diagnosis is by serum Mg concentration. Treatment includes IV administration of Ca gluconate
and possibly furosemide; hemodialysis can be helpful in severe cases
.
Symptomatic hypermagnesemia is fairly uncommon. It occurs most commonly in patients with renal failure
after ingestion of Mg-containing drugs, such as antacids or purgatives.
===PAGE:996===
Symptoms and signs include hyporeflexia, hypotension, respiratory depression, and cardiac arrest.
Diagnosis
Serum Mg concentrations > 2.1 mEq/L (> 1.05 mmol/L)
At serum Mg concentrations of 5 to 10 mEq/L (2.5 to 5 mmol/L), the ECG shows prolongation of the PR
interval, widening of the QRS complex, and increased T-wave amplitude. Deep tendon reflexes disappear
as the serum Mg concentration approaches 10 mEq/L (5.0 mmol/L); hypotension, respiratory depression,
and narcosis develop with increasing hypermagnesemia. Cardiac arrest may occur when blood Mg
concentration is > 12 to 15 mEq/L (6.0 to 7.5 mmol/L).
Treatment
• Ca gluconate
• Diuresis or dialysis
Treatment of severe Mg toxicity consists of circulatory and respiratory support with administration of 10%
Ca gluconate 10 to 20 mL IV. Ca gluconate may reverse many of the Mg-induced changes, including
respiratory depression. Administration of IV furosemide can increase Mg excretion when renal function is
adequate; volume status should be maintained. Hemodialysis may be valuable in severe
hypermagnesemia, because a relatively large fraction (about 70%) of blood Mg is not protein bound and
thus removable with hemodialysis. When hemodynamic compromise occurs and hemodialysis is
impractical, peritoneal dialysis is an option.
===PAGE:997===
Chapter 98. Acid-Base Regulation and Disorders
Introduction
Metabolic processes continually produce acid and, to a lesser degree, base. Hydrogen ion (H
+
) is
especially reactive; it can attach to negatively charged proteins and, in high concentrations, alter their
overall charge, configuration, and function. To maintain cellular function, the body has elaborate
mechanisms that maintain blood H
+
concentration within a narrow range—typically 37 to 43 nmol/L (pH
7.43 to 7.37, where pH = -log [H
+]) and ideally 40 nmol/L (pH = 7.40). Disturbances of these mechanisms
can have serious clinical consequences.
Acid-base equilibrium is closely tied to fluid and electrolyte balance, and disturbances in one of these
systems often affect another. Fluid and electrolytes are discussed in
Chapter 97
.
Acid-Base Physiology
Most acid comes from carbohydrate and fat metabolism, which generates 15,000 to 20,000 mmol of CO
daily. CO
is not an acid itself but combines with water (H
O) in the blood to create carbonic acid
(H
CO
), which in the presence of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase dissociates into H
+
and HCO
-
. The
H
+
binds with Hb in RBCs and is released with oxygenation in the alveoli, at which time the reaction is
reversed, creating H
O and CO
, which is exhaled in each breath.
Lesser amounts of organic acid derive from the following:
• Incomplete metabolism of glucose and fatty acids into lactic acid and ketoacids
• Metabolism of sulfur-containing amino acids (cysteine, methionine) into sulfuric acid
•
Metabolism of cationic amino acids (arginine, lysine)
• Hydrolysis of dietary phosphate
This "fixed" or "metabolic" acid load cannot be exhaled and therefore must be neutralized or excreted.
Most base comes from metabolism of anionic amino acids (glutamate and aspartate) and from oxidation
and consumption of organic anions such as lactate and citrate, which produce HCO
-
.
Acid-Base Balance
Acid-base balance is maintained by chemical buffering and by pulmonary and renal elimination.
Chemical buffering:
Chemical buffers are solutions that resist changes in pH. Intracellular and
extracellular buffers provide an immediate response to acid-base disturbances. Bone also plays an
important buffering role. A buffer is made up of a weak acid and its conjugate base. The conjugate base
can accept H
+
and the weak acid can relinquish it thereby minimizing changes in free H
+
concentration.
The most important extracellular buffer is the HCO
-
/CO
system, described by the equation:
H
+
+ HCO
-

⇔
H
CO

⇔
CO
+ H
O
An increase in H
+
drives the equation to the right and generates CO
. This important buffer system is
highly regulated; CO
concentrations can be finely controlled by alveolar ventilation, and H
+
and HCO
-
===PAGE:998===
concentrations can be finely regulated by renal excretion.
The relationship between HCO
-
and CO
in the system can be described by the Kassirer-Bleich
equation, derived from the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation:
H
+
= 24 × PCO
/HCO
-
This equation illustrates that acid-base balance depends on the ratio of PCO
and HCO
-
, not on the
absolute value of either one alone. With this formula, any 2 values (usually H
+
and PCO
) can be used to
calculate the other (usually HCO
-
).
Other important physiologic buffers include intracellular organic and inorganic phosphates and proteins,
including Hb in RBCs. Less important are extracellular phosphate and plasma proteins. Bone becomes an
important buffer after consumption of extracellular HCO
-
. Bone initially releases sodium carbonate
(NaHCO
) and potassium carbonate (KHCO
) in exchange for H
+
. With prolonged acid loads, bone
releases calcium carbonate (CaCO
) and calcium phosphate (CaPO
). Long-standing acidemia therefore
contributes to bone demineralization and osteoporosis.
Pulmonary regulation:
CO
concentration is finely regulated by changes in tidal volume and respiratory
rate (minute ventilation). A decrease in pH is sensed by arterial chemoreceptors and leads to increases in
tidal volume or respiratory rate; CO
is exhaled and blood pH increases. In contrast to chemical buffering,
which is immediate, pulmonary regulation occurs over minutes to hours. It is about 50 to 75% effective; it
does not completely normalize pH.
Renal regulation:
The kidneys control pH by adjusting the amount of HCO
-
that is reabsorbed and the
amount of H
+
that is excreted; increase in HCO
-
is equivalent to removing free H
+
. Changes in renal
acid-base handling occur hours to days after changes in acid-base status.
HCO
-
reabsorption occurs mostly in the proximal tubule and, to a lesser degree, in the collecting tubule.
H
O within the tubular cell dissociates into H
+
and hydroxide (OH
-
); in the presence of carbonic
anhydrase, the OH
-
combines with CO
to form HCO
-
, which is transported back into the peritubular
capillary, while the H
+
is secreted into the tubular lumen and joins with freely filtered HCO
-
to form CO
and H
O, which are also reabsorbed. Thus, reabsorbed HCO
-
ions are newly generated and not the
same as those that were filtered. Decreases in effective circulating volume (such as occur with diuretic
therapy) increase HCO
-
reabsorption, while increases in parathyroid hormone in response to an acid
load decrease HCO
-
reabsorption. Also, increased PCO
leads to increased HCO
-
reabsorption, while
Cl
-
depletion (typically from volume depletion) leads to increased Na
+
reabsorption and HCO
-
generation by the proximal tubule.
Acid is actively excreted into the proximal and distal tubules where it combines with urinary buffers
—primarily freely filtered HPO
-2
, creatinine, uric acid, and ammonia—to be transported outside the body.
The ammonia buffering system is especially important because other buffers are filtered in fixed
concentrations and can be depleted by high acid loads; by contrast, tubular cells actively regulate
ammonia production in response to changes in acid load. Arterial pH is the main determinant of acid
secretion, but excretion is also influenced by K
+
, Cl
-
, and aldosterone levels. Intracellular K
+
concentration and H
+
secretion are reciprocally related; K
+
depletion causes increased H
+
secretion and
hence metabolic alkalosis.
===PAGE:999===
Acid-Base Disorders
Acid-base disorders are changes in arterial PCO
, serum HCO
-
, and serum pH.
• Acidemia is serum pH < 7.35.
• Alkalemia is serum pH > 7.45.
• Acidosis refers to physiologic processes that cause acid accumulation or alkali loss.
• Alkalosis refers to physiologic processes that cause alkali accumulation or acid loss.
Actual changes in pH depend on the degree of physiologic compensation and whether multiple processes
are present.
Classification
Primary acid-base disturbances are defined as metabolic or respiratory based on clinical context and
whether the primary change in pH is due to an alteration in serum HCO
-
or in PCO
.
Metabolic acidosis
is serum HCO
-
< 24 mEq/L. Causes are
• Increased acid production
• Acid ingestion
• Decreased renal acid excretion
• GI or renal HCO
-
loss
Metabolic alkalosis
is serum HCO
-
> 24 mEq/L. Causes are
• Acid loss
• HCO
-
retention
Respiratory acidosis
is PCO
> 40 mm Hg (hypercapnia). Cause is
• Decrease in minute ventilation (hypoventilation)
Respiratory alkalosis
is PCO
< 40 mm Hg (hypocapnia). Cause is
• Increase in minute ventilation (hyperventilation)
Whenever an acid-base disorder is present, compensatory mechanisms begin to correct the pH (see
Table 98-1
). Compensation cannot return pH completely to normal and never overshoots.
[Table 98-1.
Primary Changes and Compensations in Simple Acid-Base Disorders]
[Table 98-2.
Clinical Consequences of Acid-Base Disorders]
A simple acid-base disorder is a single acid-base disturbance with its accompanying compensatory
response.
===PAGE:1000===
Mixed acid-base disorders comprise 2 or more primary disturbances.
Symptoms and Signs
Compensated or mild acid-base disorders cause few symptoms or signs. Severe, uncompensated
disorders have multiple cardiovascular, respiratory, neurologic, and metabolic consequences (see
Table
98-2
and
Fig. 189-4
.
Diagnosis
• ABG
• Serum electrolytes
• Anion gap calculated
• If metabolic acidosis is present, delta gap calculated and Winter's formula applied
• Search for compensatory changes
Evaluation is with ABG and serum electrolytes. The ABG directly measures arterial pH and PCO
. HCO
-
levels on ABG are calculated using the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation; levels on serum chemistry
panels are directly measured and are more accurate. Acid-base balance is generally most accurately
assessed with measurement of pH and pCO
on arterial blood. In cases of circulatory failure or during
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, measurements on venous blood may more accurately reflect conditions at
the tissue level and may be a more useful guide to bicarbonate administration and adequacy of
ventilation.
The pH establishes the primary process (acidosis or alkalosis), although it moves toward the normal
range with compensation. Changes in PCO
reflect the respiratory component, and changes in HCO
-
reflect the metabolic component. However, several calculations may be required to determine whether
changes in PCO
and HCO
-
are primary or compensatory and whether a mixed disorder is present; in
mixed
disorders, values may be deceptively normal. Interpretation must also consider clinical conditions
(eg, chronic lung disease, renal failure, drug overdose).
Sidebar 98-1 The Anion Gap
The anion gap is defined as plasma Na concentration minus the sum of Cl
-
and HCO
-
concentrations;
Na
+
- (Cl
-
+ HCO
-
). The term "gap" is misleading, because the law of electroneutrality requires the
same number of positive and negative charges in an open system; the gap appears on laboratory testing
because certain cations (+) and anions (-) are not measured on routine laboratory chemistry panels. Thus
Na
+
+ unmeasured cations (UC) = Cl
-
+ HCO
-
+ unmeasured anions (UA)
and
the anion gap, Na
+
- (Cl
-
+ HCO
-
) = UA - UC
The predominant unmeasured anions are PO
3-
, sulfate (SO
-
), various negatively charged proteins,
and some organic acids, accounting for 20 to 24 mEq/L. The predominant unmeasured extracellular
cations are K
+
, Ca
++
, and Mg
++
and account for about 11 mEq/L. Thus the typical anion gap is 23 - 11 =
12 mEq/L. The anion gap can be affected by increases or decreases in the UC or UA.
===PAGE:1001===
Increased anion gap
is most commonly caused by metabolic acidosis in which negatively charged acids
—mostly ketones, lactate, sulfates, or metabolites of methanol, ethylene glycol, and salicylate—consume
(are buffered by) HCO
-
. Other causes of increased anion gap include hyperalbuminemia and uremia
(increased anions) and hypocalcemia or hypomagnesemia (decreased cations).
Decreased anion gap
is unrelated to metabolic acidosis but is caused by hypoalbuminemia (decreased
anions); hypercalcemia, hypermagnesemia, lithium intoxication, and hypergammaglobulinemia (increased
cations); or hyperviscosity or halide (bromide or iodide) intoxication. The effect of low albumin can be
accounted for by adjusting the normal range for the anion gap 2.5 mEq/L upward for every 1-g/dL fall in
albumin.
Negative anion gap
occurs rarely as a laboratory artifact in severe cases of hypernatremia,
hyperlipidemia, and bromide intoxication.
The delta gap:
The difference between the patient's anion gap and the normal anion gap is termed the
delta gap. This amount is considered an HCO
-
equivalent, because for every unit rise in the anion gap,
the HCO
-
should lower by 1 (by buffering). Thus, if the delta gap is added to the measured HCO
-
, the
result should be in the normal range for HCO
-
; elevation indicates the additional presence of a metabolic
alkalosis.
Example:
A vomiting, ill-appearing alcoholic patient has laboratory results showing
Na, 137; K, 3.8; Cl, 90; HCO
-
, 22; pH, 7.40; PCO
, 41; PO
, 85
At first glance, results appear unremarkable. However, calculations show elevation of the anion gap:
137 - (90 + 22) = 25 (normal, 10)
indicating a metabolic acidosis. Respiratory compensation is evaluated by Winter's formula:
Predicted PCO
=
1.5 (22) + 8 ± 2

=
41 ± 2
Predicted = measured, so respiratory compensation is appropriate.
Because there is metabolic acidosis, the delta gap is calculated, and the result is added to measured
HCO
-
:
25 - 10 = 15
15 + 22 = 37
The resulting corrected HCO
-
is above the normal range for HCO
-
, indicating a primary metabolic
alkalosis is also present. Thus, the patient has a mixed acid-base disorder. Using clinical information, one
could theorize a metabolic acidosis arising from alcoholic ketoacidosis combined with a metabolic
alkalosis from recurrent vomiting with loss of Cl
-
and volume.
The anion gap (see
Sidebar 98-1
) should always be calculated; elevation almost always indicates a
metabolic acidosis. A normal anion gap with a low HCO
-
(eg, < 24 mEq/L) and high serum Cl
-
indicates
a non-anion gap (hyperchloremic) metabolic acidosis. If metabolic acidosis is present, a delta gap is
calculated (see
Sidebar 98-1
) to identify concomitant metabolic alkalosis, and Winter's formula is applied
===PAGE:1002===
to see whether respiratory compensation is
appropriate or reflects a 2nd acid-base disorder (predicted
PCO
= 1.5 [HCO
-] + 8 ± 2; if PCO
is higher, there is also a primary respiratory acidosis—if lower,
respiratory alkalosis).
Respiratory acidosis is suggested by PCO
> 40 mm Hg; HCO
-
should compensate acutely by
increasing 3 to 4 mEq/L for each 10-mm Hg rise in PCO
sustained for 4 to 12 h (there may be no
increase or only 1 to 2 mEq/L, which slowly increases to 3 to 4 mEq/L over days). Greater increase in
HCO
-
implies a primary metabolic alkalosis; lesser increase suggests no time for compensation or
coexisting primary metabolic acidosis.
Metabolic alkalosis is suggested by HCO
-
> 28 mEq/L. The PCO
should compensate by increasing
about 0.6 to 0.75 mm Hg for each 1 mEq/L increase in HCO
-
(up to about 55 mm Hg). Greater increase
implies concomitant respiratory acidosis; lesser increase, respiratory alkalosis.
Respiratory alkalosis is suggested by PCO
< 38 mm Hg. The HCO
-
should compensate over 4 to 12 h
by decreasing 5 mEq/L for every 10-mm Hg decrease in PCO
. Lesser decrease means there has been
no time for compensation or existence of a primary metabolic alkalosis. Greater decrease implies a
primary metabolic acidosis.
Nomograms (acid-base maps) are an alternative way to diagnose mixed disorders, allowing for
simultaneous plotting of pH, HCO
-
, and PCO
.
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic acidosis is primary reduction in HCO
-
, typically with compensatory reduction in
PCO
; pH may be markedly low or slightly subnormal. Metabolic acidoses are categorized as
high or normal anion gap based on the presence or absence of unmeasured anions in serum.
Causes include accumulation of ketones and lactic acid, renal failure, and drug or toxin
ingestion (high anion gap) and GI or renal HCO
-
loss (normal anion gap). Symptoms and signs
in severe cases include nausea and vomiting, lethargy, and hyperpnea. Diagnosis is clinical and
with ABG and serum electrolyte measurement. The cause is treated; IV NaHCO
may be
indicated when pH is very low.
Etiology
Metabolic acidosis is acid accumulation due to increased acid production or acid ingestion; decreased
acid excretion; or GI or renal HCO
-
loss. Acidemia (arterial pH < 7.35) results when acid load
overwhelms respiratory compensation. Causes are classified by their effect on the anion gap (see
Sidebar 98-1
and
Table 98-3
).
High anion gap acidosis:
The most common causes of a high anion gap metabolic acidosis are
• Ketoacidosis,
• Lactic acidosis
• Renal failure
• Toxic ingestions
Ketoacidosis is a common complication of type 1 diabetes mellitus, but it also occurs with chronic
===PAGE:1003===
alcoholism, undernutrition, and, to a lesser degree, fasting. In these conditions, the body converts from
glucose to free fatty acid (FFA) metabolism; FFAs are converted by the liver into ketoacids, acetoacetic
acid, and
β
-hydroxybutyrate (all unmeasured anions). Ketoacidosis is also a rare manifestation of
congenital isovaleric and methylmalonic acidemia.
Lactic acidosis ( is the most common cause of metabolic acidosis in hospitalized patients.
Lactate accumulation results from a combination of excess formation and decreased utilization of lactate.
Excess lactate production occurs during states of anaerobic metabolism. The most serious form occurs
during the various types of shock. Decreased utilization generally occurs with hepatocellular dysfunction
from decreased liver perfusion or as a part of generalized shock.
Renal failure causes anion gap acidosis by decreased acid excretion and decreased HCO
-
reabsorption. Accumulation of sulfates, phosphates, urate, and hippurate accounts for the high anion gap.
Toxins may have acidic metabolites or trigger lactic acidosis. Rhabdomyolysis is a rare cause of metabolic
acidosis thought to be due to release of protons and anions directly from muscle.
Normal anion gap acidosis:
The most common causes of normal anion gap acidosis are
• GI or renal HCO
-
loss
• Impaired renal acid excretion
Normal anion gap metabolic acidosis is also called hyperchloremic acidosis because the kidneys resorb
Cl
-
with Na instead of reabsorbing HCO
-
.
Many GI secretions are rich in HCO
-
(eg, biliary, pancreatic, and intestinal fluids); loss due to diarrhea,
tube drainage, or fistulas can cause acidosis. In ureterosigmoidostomy (insertion of ureters into the
sigmoid colon after obstruction or cystectomy), the colon secretes and loses HCO
-
in exchange for
urinary Cl
-
[Table 98-3.
Causes of Metabolic Acidosis]
and absorbs urinary ammonium, which dissociates into ammonia (NH
+
) and hydrogen ion (H
+
). Ionexchange resin uncommonly causes HCO
-
loss by binding HCO
-
.
The renal tubular acidoses ( either impair H
+
secretion (types 1 and 4) or HCO
-
absorption
(type 2). Impaired acid excretion and a normal anion gap also occur in early renal failure, tubulointerstitial
renal disease, and when carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (eg, acetazolamide) are taken.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs (see
Table 98-2
) are primarily those of the cause. Mild acidemia is itself
asymptomatic. More severe acidemia (pH < 7.10) may cause nausea, vomiting, and malaise. Symptoms
may appear at higher pH if acidosis develops rapidly. The most characteristic sign is hyperpnea (long,
deep breaths at a normal rate), reflecting a compensatory increase in alveolar ventilation.
Severe, acute acidemia predisposes to cardiac dysfunction with hypotension and shock, ventricular
arrhythmias, and coma. Chronic acidemia causes bone demineralization disorders (eg, rickets,
osteomalacia, osteopenia).
Diagnosis
• ABG and serum electrolytes
===PAGE:1004===
• Anion gap and delta gap calculated
• Winter's formula for calculating compensatory changes
• Testing for cause
Recognition of metabolic acidosis and appropriate respiratory compensation are discussed elsewhere.
Determining the cause of metabolic acidosis begins with the anion gap.
The cause of an elevated anion gap may be clinically obvious (eg, hypovolemic shock, missed
hemodialysis), but if not, blood testing should include glucose, BUN, creatinine, lactate, and tests for
possible toxins. Salicylate levels can be measured in most laboratories, but methanol and ethylene glycol
frequently cannot; their presence may be suggested by presence of an osmolar gap. Calculated serum
osmolarity (2 [Na] + [glucose]/18 + BUN/2.8 + blood alcohol/5) is subtracted from measured osmolarity. A
difference > 10 implies the presence of an osmotically active substance, which in the case of a high anion
gap acidosis is methanol or ethylene glycol. Although ingestion of ethanol may cause an osmolar gap and
a mild acidosis, it should never be considered the cause of a significant metabolic acidosis.
If the anion gap is normal and no cause is obvious (eg, marked diarrhea), urinary electrolytes are
measured and the urinary anion gap is calculated as [Na] + [K] - [Cl]. A normal urinary anion gap
(including in patients with GI losses) is 30 to 50 mEq/L; an elevation suggests renal HCO
-
loss (for
evaluation of renal tubular acidosis, . In addition, when metabolic acidosis is present, a delta
gap is calculated (see
Sidebar 98-1
) to identify concomitant metabolic alkalosis, and Winter's formula (see
p.
) is applied to see whether respiratory compensation is appropriate or reflects a 2nd acid-base
disorder.
Treatment
• Cause treated
• NaHCO
rarely indicated
Treatment is directed at the underlying cause. Hemodialysis is required for renal failure and sometimes
for ethylene glycol, methanol, and salicylate poisoning.
Treatment of acidemia with NaHCO
is clearly indicated only in certain circumstances and is probably
deleterious in others. When metabolic acidosis results from loss of HCO
-
or accumulation of inorganic
acids (ie, normal anion gap acidosis), HCO
-
therapy is generally safe and appropriate. However, when
acidosis results from organic acid accumulation (ie, high anion gap acidosis), HCO
-
therapy is
controversial; it does not clearly decrease mortality in these conditions, and there are several possible
risks. With treatment of the underlying condition, lactate and ketoacids are metabolized back to HCO
-
;
exogenous HCO
-
loading may therefore cause an "overshoot" metabolic alkalosis. In any condition,
HCO
-
may also cause Na and volume overload, hypokalemia, and, by inhibiting respiratory drive,
hypercapnia. Furthermore, because HCO
-
does not diffuse across cell membranes, intracellular acidosis
is not corrected and may paradoxically worsen because some of the added HCO
-
is converted to CO
,
which does cross into the cell and is hydrolyzed to H
+
and HCO
-
.
Despite these and other controversies, most experts still recommend HCO
-
IV for severe metabolic
acidosis (pH < 7.00), with a target pH of 7.20.
Treatment requires 2 calculations. The first is the level to which HCO
-
must be raised, calculated by the
===PAGE:1005===
Kassirer-Bleich equation, using a value for [H
+] of 63 nmol/L at a pH of 7.2:
63 = 24 × PCO
/HCO
-
or
desired HCO
-
= 0.38 × PCO
The amount of HCO
-
needed to achieve that level is
NaHCO
required (mEq) = (desired [HCO
-] - observed [HCO
-]) × 0.4 × body weight (kg)
This amount of NaHCO
is given over several hours. Serum pH and HCO
-
levels can be checked 30
min to 1 h after administration, which allows for equilibration with extravascular HCO
-
.
Alternatives to NaHCO
include
• Tromethamine, an amino alcohol that buffers both metabolic (H
+
) and respiratory (carbonic acid
[H
CO]) acid
• Carbicarb, an equimolar mixture of NaHCO
and carbonate (the latter consumes CO
and generates
HCO
-
)
• Dichloroacetate, which enhances oxidation of lactate
These alternatives are all of unproven benefit and cause complications of their own.
K
+
depletion, common in metabolic acidosis, should be identified through frequent serum K
+
monitoring
and treated as needed with oral or parenteral KCl.
Lactic Acidosis
Lactic acidosis results from overproduction of lactate, decreased metabolism of lactate, or both
.
Lactate is a normal byproduct of glucose and amino acid metabolism. The most serious form of lactic
acidosis, type A, occurs when lactic acid is overproduced in ischemic tissue to generate ATP during O
deficit. Overproduction typically occurs during tissue hypoperfusion in hypovolemic, cardiac, or septic
shock and is worsened by decreased lactate metabolism in the poorly perfused liver. It may also occur
with primary hypoxia due to lung disease and with various hemoglobinopathies.
Type B lactic acidosis occurs in states of normal global tissue perfusion (and hence ATP production) and
is less ominous. Lactate production may be increased from local relative hypoxia as with vigorous muscle
use (eg, exertion, seizures, hypothermic shivering) and with cancer and ingestion of certain drugs or
toxins (see
Table 98-3
). Drugs include the nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors and the biguanides
phenformin and, less so, metformin; although phenformin has been removed from the market in most of
the world, it is still available from China (including as a component of some Chinese proprietary
medicines). Metabolism may be decreased due to hepatic insufficiency or thiamin deficiency.
D-Lactic acidosis is an unusual form of lactic acidosis in which D-lactic acid, the product of bacterial
carbohydrate metabolism in the colon of patients with jejunoileal bypass or intestinal resection, is
systemically absorbed. It persists in circulation because human lactate dehydrogenase can metabolize
only L-lactate.
===PAGE:1006===
Findings in and treatment of types A and B lactic acidosis are as for other metabolic acidoses. In D-lactic
acidosis, the anion gap is lower than expected for the decrease in HCO
-
, and there may be a urinary
osmolar gap (difference between calculated and measured urine osmolarity). Treatment is IV fluids,
restriction of carbohydrates, and sometimes antibiotics (eg, metronidazole).
Metabolic Alkalosis
Metabolic alkalosis is primary increase in HCO
-
with or without compensatory increase in
PCO
; pH may be high or nearly normal. Common causes include prolonged vomiting,
hypovolemia, diuretic use, and hypokalemia. Renal impairment of HCO
-
excretion must be
present to sustain alkalosis. Symptoms and signs in severe cases include headache, lethargy,
and tetany. Diagnosis is clinical and with ABG and serum electrolyte measurement. The
underlying cause is treated; oral or IV acetazolamide or HCl is sometimes indicated
.
Etiology
Metabolic alkalosis is HCO
-
accumulation due to acid loss, alkali administration, intracellular shift of
hydrogen ion (H
+
—as occurs in hypokalemia), or HCO
-
retention. Regardless of initial cause,
persistence of metabolic alkalosis indicates that the kidneys have increased their HCO
-
reabsorption,
because HCO
-
is normally freely filtered by the kidneys and hence excreted. Volume depletion and
hypokalemia are the most common stimuli for increased HCO
-
reabsorption, but any condition that
elevates aldosterone or mineralocorticoids (which enhance Na reabsorption and K and H
+
excretion) can
elevate HCO
-
. Thus, hypokalemia is both a cause and a frequent consequence of metabolic alkalosis.
Causes are listed; the most common are volume depletion (particularly when involving loss of gastric acid
and Cl from recurrent vomiting or nasogastric suction) and diuretic use (see
Table 98-4
).
Metabolic alkalosis involving loss or excess secretion of Cl is termed Cl-responsive, because it typically
corrects with IV administration of NaCl-containing fluid. Cl-unresponsive metabolic alkalosis does not, and
it typically involves severe Mg or K deficiency or mineralocorticoid excess. The 2 forms can coexist, eg, in
patients with volume overload made hypokalemic from high-dose diuretics.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of mild alkalemia are usually related to the underlying disorder. More severe
alkalemia increases protein binding of ionized Ca
++
, leading to hypocalcemia and subsequent headache,
lethargy, and neuromuscular excitability, sometimes with delirium, tetany, and seizures. Alkalemia also
lowers threshold for anginal symptoms and arrhythmias. Concomitant hypokalemia may cause weakness.
Diagnosis
• ABG and sercum electrolytes
• Diagnosis of cause usually clinical
• Sometimes measurement of urinary Cl
-
and K
+
Recognition of metabolic alkalosis and appropriate respiratory compensation is discussed on p.
and
requires ABG and measurement of serum electrolytes (including Ca and Mg).
Common causes can often be determined by history and physical examination. If history is unrevealing
and renal function is normal, urinary Cl
-
and K
+
concentrations are measured (values are not diagnostic
===PAGE:1007===
in renal insufficiency). Urinary Cl < 20 mEq/L indicates significant renal Cl
-
reabsorption and hence a Clresponsive cause (see
Table 98-4
). Urinary Cl > 20 mEq/L suggests a Cl-unresponsive form.
Urinary K and presence or absence of hypertension help differentiate Cl-unresponsive alkaloses. Urinary
K < 30 mEq/day signifies hypokalemia or laxative misuse. Urinary K > 30 mEq/day without hypertension
suggests diuretic abuse or Bartter or Gitelman's syndrome. Urinary K > 30 mEq/day with hypertension
requires evaluation for hyperaldosteronism, mineralocorticoid excess, and
[Table 98-4.
Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis]
renovascular disease. Tests typically include plasma renin activity and aldosterone and cortisol levels
(see pp.
and
).
Treatment
• Cause treated
• IV 0.9% saline solution for Cl-responsive metabolic alkalosis
Underlying conditions are treated, with particular attention paid to correction of hypovolemia and
hypokalemia.
Patients with Cl-responsive metabolic alkalosis are given 0.9% saline solution IV; infusion rate is typically
50 to 100 mL/h greater than urinary and other sensible and insensible fluid losses until urinary Cl rises to
> 25 mEq/L and urinary pH normalizes after an initial rise from bicarbonaturia. Patients with Clunresponsive metabolic alkalosis rarely benefit from rehydration alone.
Patients with severe metabolic alkalosis (eg, pH > 7.6) sometimes require more urgent correction of
serum pH. Hemofiltration or hemodialysis is an option, particularly if volume overload and renal
dysfunction are present. Acetazolamide 250 to 375 mg po or IV once/day or bid increases HCO
-
excretion but may also accelerate urinary losses of K
+
and phosphate (PO
-
); volume-overloaded
patients with diuretic-induced metabolic alkalosis and those with posthypercapnic metabolic alkalosis may
especially benefit.
Hydrochloric acid in a 0.1 to 0.2 normal solution IV is safe and effective but must be given through a
central catheter because it is hyperosmotic and scleroses peripheral veins. Dosage is 0.1 to 0.2
mmol/kg/h. Frequent monitoring of ABG and electrolytes is needed.
Respiratory Acidosis
Respiratory acidosis is primary increase in PCO
with or without compensatory increase in
HCO
-
; pH is usually low but may be near normal. Cause is a decrease in respiratory rate,
volume (hypoventilation), or both due to CNS, pulmonary, or iatrogenic conditions. Respiratory
acidosis can be acute or chronic; the chronic form is asymptomatic, but the acute, or
worsening, form causes headache, confusion, and drowsiness. Signs include tremor, myoclonic
jerks, and asterixis. Diagnosis is clinical and with ABG and serum electrolyte measurements.
The cause is treated; O
and mechanical ventilation are often required
.
Respiratory acidosis is CO
accumulation (hypercapnia) due to a decrease in respiratory rate, respiratory
volume (hypoventilation), or both. Causes of hypoventilation (discussed under Ventilatory Failure  include
• Conditions that impair CNS respiratory drive
• Conditions that impair neuromuscular transmission and other conditions that cause muscular weakness
===PAGE:1008===
• Obstructive, restrictive, and parenchymal pulmonary disorders
Hypoxia typically accompanies hypoventilation.
Respiratory acidosis may be acute or chronic. Distinction is based on the degree of metabolic
compensation; CO
is initially buffered inefficiently, but over 3 to 5 days the kidneys increase HCO
-
reabsorption significantly.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs depend on the rate and degree of PCO
increase. CO
rapidly diffuses across the
blood-brain barrier. Symptoms and signs are a result of high CNS CO
concentrations (low CNS pH) and
any accompanying hypoxemia.
Acute (or acutely worsening chronic) respiratory acidosis causes headache, confusion, anxiety,
drowsiness, and stupor (CO
narcosis). Slowly developing, stable respiratory acidosis (as in COPD) may
be well tolerated, but patients may have memory loss, sleep disturbances, excessive daytime sleepiness,
and personality changes. Signs include gait disturbance, tremor, blunted deep tendon reflexes, myoclonic
jerks, asterixis, and papilledema.
Diagnosis
• ABG and serum electrolytes
• Diagnosis of cause usually clinical
Recognition of respiratory acidosis and appropriate renal compensation ( requires ABG and
measurement of serum electrolytes. Causes are usually obvious from history and examination.
Calculation of the alveolar-arterial (A-a) O
gradient (inspired PO
- [arterial PO
+ 5/4 arterial PCO])
can help distinguish pulmonary from extrapulmonary disease; a normal gradient essentially excludes
pulmonary disorders.
Treatment
• Adequate ventilation
• NaHCO
almost always contraindicated
Treatment is provision of adequate ventilation by either endotracheal intubation or noninvasive positive
pressure ventilation (for specific indications and procedures, see
Chapter 225
).
Adequate ventilation is all that
is needed to correct respiratory acidosis, although chronic hypercapnia generally must be corrected
slowly (eg, over several hours or more), because too-rapid PCO
lowering can cause a posthypercapnic
"overshoot" alkalosis when the underlying compensatory hyperbicarbonatemia becomes unmasked; the
abrupt rise in CNS pH that results can lead to seizures and death. Any K
+
and Cl
-
deficits are corrected.
NaHCO
is almost always contraindicated, because HCO
-
can be converted to PCO
in serum but
crosses the blood-brain barrier slowly, thus increasing serum pH without affecting CNS pH. One
exception may be in cases of severe bronchospasm, in which HCO
-
may improve responsiveness of
bronchial smooth muscle to
β
-agonists.
Respiratory Alkalosis
(See also
Hyperventilation Syndrome
)
Respiratory alkalosis is a primary decrease in Pco
with or without compensatory decrease in
===PAGE:1009===
HCO
-
; pH may be high or near normal. Cause is an increase in respiratory rate or volume
(hyperventilation) or both. Respiratory alkalosis can be acute or chronic. The chronic form is
asymptomatic, but the acute form causes light-headedness, confusion, paresthesias, cramps,
and syncope. Signs include hyperpnea or tachypnea and carpopedal spasms. Diagnosis is
clinical and with ABG and serum electrolyte measurements. Treatment is directed at the cause
.
Etiology
Respiratory alkalosis is a primary decrease in PCO
(hypocapnia) due to an increase in respiratory rate
or volume (hyperventilation) or both. Ventilation increase occurs most often as a physiologic response to
hypoxia, metabolic acidosis, and increased metabolic demands (eg, fever) and, as such, is present in
many serious conditions. In addition, pain and anxiety and some CNS disorders can increase respirations
without a physiologic need.
Pathophysiology
Respiratory alkalosis can be acute or chronic. Distinction is based on the degree of metabolic
compensation. Excess HCO
-
is buffered by extracellular hydrogen ion (H
+
) within minutes, but more
significant compensation occurs over 2 to 3 days as the kidneys decrease H
+
excretion.
Pseudorespiratory alkalosis:
Pseudorespiratory alkalosis is low arterial PCO
and high pH in
mechanically ventilated patients with severe metabolic acidosis due to poor systemic perfusion (eg,
cardiogenic shock, during CPR). Pseudorespiratory alkalosis occurs when mechanical ventilation (often
hyperventilation) eliminates larger-than-normal amounts of alveolar CO
. Exhalation of large amounts of
CO
causes respiratory alkalosis in arterial blood (hence on ABG measurements), but poor systemic
perfusion and cellular ischemia cause cellular acidosis, leading to acidosis of venous blood. Diagnosis is
by demonstration of marked arteriovenous differences in PCO
and pH and by elevated lactate levels;
treatment is improvement of systemic hemodynamics.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs depend on the rate and degree of fall in PCO
. Acute respiratory alkalosis causes
light-headedness, confusion, peripheral and circumoral paresthesias, cramps, and syncope. Mechanism
is thought to be change in cerebral blood flow and pH. Tachypnea or hyperpnea is often the only sign;
carpopedal spasm may occur in severe cases. Chronic respiratory alkalosis is usually asymptomatic and
has no distinctive signs.
Diagnosis
• ABG and serum electrolytes
• If hypoxia present, cause vigorously pursued
Recognition of respiratory alkalosis and appropriate renal compensation (discussed  requires
ABG and serum electrolyte measurements. Minor hypophosphatemia and hypokalemia due to intracellular
shifts and decreased ionized Ca
++
due to an increase in protein binding may be present.
Presence of hypoxia or an increased alveolar-arterial (A-a) O
gradient (inspired PO
- [arterial PO
+
5/4 arterial PCO]) requires search for a cause. Other causes are often apparent on history and
examination. However, because pulmonary embolism often manifests without hypoxia (,
embolism must be strongly considered in a hyperventilating patient before ascribing the cause to anxiety.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying cause. Respiratory alkalosis is not life threatening, so no
===PAGE:1010===
interventions to lower pH are necessary. Increasing inspired CO
through rebreathing (such as from a
paper bag) is common practice but may be dangerous in at least some patients with CNS disorders in
whom CSF pH may already be below normal.
===PAGE:1011===
Chapter 99. Diabetes Mellitus and Disorders of Carbohydrate Metabolism
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus and its complications (diabetic ketoacidosis, nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome) are the
most common disorders of carbohydrate metabolism, but alcoholic ketoacidosis and hypoglycemia are
also important.
Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is impaired insulin secretion and variable degrees of peripheral insulin
resistance leading to hyperglycemia. Early symptoms are related to hyperglycemia and include
polydipsia, polyphagia, and polyuria. Later complications include vascular disease, peripheral
neuropathy, and predisposition to infection. Diagnosis is by measuring plasma glucose.
Treatment is diet, exercise, and drugs that reduce glucose levels, including insulin and oral
antihyperglycemic drugs. Prognosis varies with degree of glucose control
.
There are 2 main categories of DM—type 1 and type 2, which can be distinguished by a combination of
features (see
Table 99-1
). Terms that describe the age of onset (juvenile or adult) or type of treatment (insulin- or noninsulin-dependent) are no longer accurate because of overlap in age groups and treatments between
disease types.
Impaired glucose regulation (impaired glucose tolerance, or impaired fasting glucose—see
Table 99-2
) is an intermediate, possibly transitional, state between normal glucose metabolism and DM
that becomes common with age. It is a significant risk factor for DM and may be present for many years
before onset of DM. It is associated with an increased
[Table 99-1.
General Characteristics of Types 1 and 2 Diabetes Mellitus]
[Table 99-2.
Diagnostic Criteria for Diabetes Mellitus and Impaired Glucose Regulation]
risk of cardiovascular disease, but typical diabetic microvascular complications generally do not develop.
Etiology
Type 1:
In Type 1 DM (previously called juvenile-onset or insulin-dependent), insulin production is absent
because of autoimmune pancreatic
β
-cell destruction possibly triggered by an environmental exposure in
genetically susceptible people. Destruction progresses subclinically over months or years until
β
-cell
mass decreases to the point that insulin concentrations are no longer adequate to control plasma glucose
levels. Type 1 DM generally develops in childhood or adolescence and until recently was the most
common form diagnosed before age 30; however, it can also develop in adults (latent autoimmune
diabetes of adulthood, which often initially seems to be type 2 DM). Some cases of type 1 DM,
particularly in nonwhite populations, do not seem to be autoimmune in nature and are considered
idiopathic. Type 1 accounts for < 10% of all cases of DM.
The pathogenesis of the autoimmune
β
-cell destruction involves incompletely understood interactions
between susceptibility genes, autoantigens, and environmental factors. Susceptibility genes include those
within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)—especially HLA-DR3, DQB1*0201 and HLA-DR4,
DQB1*0302, which are present in > 90% of patients with type 1 DM—and those outside the MHC, which
seem to regulate insulin production and processing and confer risk of DM in concert with MHC genes.
Susceptibility genes are more common among some populations than among others and explain the
higher prevalence of type 1 DM among some ethnic groups (Scandinavians, Sardinians).
Autoantigens include glutamic acid decarboxylase, insulin, insulinoma-associated protein, and other
proteins in
β
cells. It is thought that these proteins are exposed or released during normal
β
-cell turnover
or
β
-cell injury (eg, due to infection), activating a cell-mediated immune response resulting in
β
-cell
destruction (insulitis). Glucagon-secreting
α
cells remain unharmed. Antibodies to autoantigens, which
===PAGE:1012===
can be detected in serum, seem to be a response to (not a cause of)
β
-cell destruction.
Several viruses (including coxsackievirus, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and
retroviruses) have been linked to the onset of type 1 DM. Viruses may directly infect and destroy
β
cells,
or they may cause
β
-cell destruction indirectly by exposing autoantigens, activating autoreactive
lymphocytes, mimicking molecular sequences of autoantigens that stimulate an immune response
(molecular mimicry), or other mechanisms.
Diet may also be a factor. Exposure of infants to dairy products (especially cow's milk and the milk protein
β
casein), high nitrates in drinking water, and low vitamin D consumption have been linked to increased
risk of type 1 DM. Early (< 4 mo) or late (> 7 mo) exposure to gluten and cereals increases islet cell
autoantibody production. Mechanisms for these associations are unclear.
Type 2:
In type 2 DM (previously called adult-onset or non-insulin-dependent), insulin secretion is
inadequate. Often insulin levels are very high, especially early in the disease, but peripheral insulin
resistance and increased hepatic production of glucose make insulin levels inadequate to normalize
plasma glucose levels. Insulin production then falls, further exacerbating hyperglycemia. The disease
generally develops in adults and becomes more common with age. Plasma glucose levels reach higher
levels after eating in older than in younger adults, especially after high carbohydrate loads, and take
longer to return to normal, in part because of increased accumulation of visceral and abdominal fat and
decreased muscle mass.
Type 2 DM is becoming increasingly common among children as childhood obesity has
become epidemic:
40 to 50% of new-onset DM in children is now type 2. Over 90% of adults with DM have type 2 disease.
There are clear genetic determinants, as evidenced by the high prevalence of the disease within ethnic
groups (especially American Indians, Hispanics, and Asians) and in relatives of people with the disease.
Although several genetic polymorphisms have been identified, no gene responsible for the most common
forms of type 2 DM has been identified.
Pathogenesis is complex and incompletely understood. Hyperglycemia develops when insulin secretion
can no longer compensate for insulin resistance. Although insulin resistance is characteristic in people
with type 2 DM and those at risk for it, evidence also exists for
β
-cell dysfunction and impaired insulin
secretion, including impaired first-phase insulin secretion in response to IV glucose infusion, a loss of
normally pulsatile insulin secretion, an increase in proinsulin secretion signaling impaired insulin
processing, and an accumulation of islet amyloid polypeptide (a protein normally secreted with insulin).
Hyperglycemia itself may impair insulin secretion, because high glucose levels desensitize
β
cells, cause
β
-cell dysfunction (glucose toxicity), or both. These changes typically take years to develop in the
presence of insulin resistance.
Obesity and weight gain are important determinants of insulin resistance in type 2 DM. They have some
genetic determinants but also reflect diet, exercise, and lifestyle. Adipose tissue increases plasma levels
of free fatty acids that may impair insulin-stimulated glucose transport and muscle glycogen synthase
activity. Adipose tissue also seems to function as an endocrine organ, releasing multiple factors
(adipocytokines) that favorably (adiponectin) and adversely (tumor necrosis factorα
, IL-6, leptin, resistin)
influence glucose metabolism. Intrauterine growth restriction and low birth weight have also been
associated with insulin resistance in later life and may reflect prenatal environmental influences on
glucose metabolism.
Miscellaneous types:
Miscellaneous causes of DM that account for a small proportion of cases include
genetic defects affecting
β
-cell function, insulin action, and mitochondrial DNA (eg, maturity-onset
diabetes of youth); pancreatic diseases (eg, cystic fibrosis, pancreatitis, hemochromatosis);
endocrinopathies (eg, Cushing's syndrome, acromegaly); toxins (eg, the rodenticide pyriminyl [Vacor]);
and drug-induced diabetes, most notably from glucocorticoids,
β
-blockers, protease inhibitors, and
therapeutic doses of niacin. Pregnancy causes some insulin resistance in all women, but only a few
develop gestational DM (.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1013===
The most common symptoms of DM are those of hyperglycemia: an osmotic diuresis caused by
glycosuria leading to urinary frequency, polyuria, and polydipsia that may progress to orthostatic
hypotension and dehydration. Severe dehydration causes weakness, fatigue, and mental status changes.
Symptoms may come and go as plasma glucose levels fluctuate. Polyphagia may accompany symptoms
of hyperglycemia but is not typically a primary patient concern. Hyperglycemia can also cause weight
loss, nausea and vomiting, and blurred vision, and it may predispose to bacterial or fungal infections.
Patients with type 1 DM typically present with symptomatic hyperglycemia and sometimes with diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA—. Some patients experience a long but transient phase of near-normal
glucose levels after acute onset of the disease (honeymoon phase) due to partial recovery of insulin
secretion.
Patients with type 2 DM may present with symptomatic hyperglycemia but are often asymptomatic, and
their condition is detected only on routine testing. In some patients, initial symptoms are those of diabetic
complications, suggesting that the disease has been present for some time. In some patients,
hyperosmotic coma occurs initially, especially during a period of stress or when glucose metabolism is
further impaired by drugs, such as corticosteroids.
Complications
Years of poorly controlled hyperglycemia lead to multiple, primarily vascular complications that affect
small (microvascular) vessels, large (macrovascular) vessels, or both. The mechanisms by which
vascular disease develops include glycosylation of serum and tissue proteins with formation of advanced
glycation end products; superoxide production; activation of protein kinase C, a signaling molecule that
increases vascular permeability and causes endothelial dysfunction; accelerated hexosamine biosynthetic
and polyol pathways leading to sorbitol accumulation within tissues; hypertension and dyslipidemias that
commonly accompany DM; arterial microthromboses; and proinflammatory and prothrombotic effects of
hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia that
impair vascular autoregulation. Immune dysfunction is another
major complication and develops from the direct effects of hyperglycemia on cellular immunity.
Microvascular disease underlies the 3 most common and devastating manifestations of DM:
• Retinopathy
• Nephropathy
• Neuropathy
Microvascular disease may also impair skin healing, so that even minor breaks in skin integrity can
develop into deeper ulcers and easily become infected, particularly in the lower extremities. Intensive
control of plasma glucose can prevent many of these complications but may not reverse them once
established.
Diabetic retinopathy:
Diabetic retinopathy is the most common cause of adult blindness in the US (see
also p.
). It is characterized initially by retinal capillary microaneurysms and later by macular edema
and neovascularization (see
Plate 23
). There are no early symptoms or signs, but focal blurring, vitreous or retinal detachment, and
partial or total vision loss eventually develop; rate of progression is highly variable. Diagnosis is by retinal
examination. Treatment is argon laser photocoagulation or vitrectomy. Strict glycemic control and early
detection and treatment are critical to preventing vision loss.
Diabetic nephropathy:
Diabetic nephropathy (see also p.
) is a leading cause of chronic renal
failure in the US. It is characterized by thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, mesangial
expansion, and glomerular sclerosis. These changes cause glomerular hypertension and progressive
decline in GFR. Systemic hypertension may accelerate progression. The disease is usually asymptomatic
until nephrotic syndrome or renal failure develops.
Diagnosis is by detection of urinary albumin. A urine dipstick positive for protein signifies albumin
===PAGE:1014===
excretion > 300 mg/day and advanced diabetic nephropathy (or an improperly collected or stored
specimen). If the dipstick is negative for protein, the albumin:creatinine ratio on a spot urine specimen or
urinary albumin in a 24-h collection should be measured. A ratio > 30 mg/g or an albumin concentration
30 to 300 mg/24 h signifies microalbuminuria and early diabetic nephropathy.
Treatment is rigorous glycemic control combined with BP control. An ACE inhibitor, an angiotensin II
receptor blocker, or both should be used to treat hypertension at the earliest sign of microalbuminuria or
even before, because these drugs lower intraglomerular BP and thus have renoprotective effects.
Diabetic neuropathy:
Diabetic neuropathy is the result of nerve ischemia due to microvascular disease,
direct effects of hyperglycemia on neurons, and intracellular metabolic changes that impair nerve
function. There are multiple types, including
• Symmetric polyneuropathy (with small-and large-fiber variants)
• Autonomic neuropathy
• Radiculopathy
• Cranial neuropathy
• Mononeuropathy
Symmetric polyneuropathy is most common and affects the distal feet and hands (stocking-glove
distribution); it manifests as paresthesias, dysesthesias, or a painless loss of sense of touch, vibration,
proprioception, or temperature. In the lower extremities, these symptoms can lead to blunted perception of
foot trauma due to ill-fitting shoes and abnormal weight bearing, which can in turn lead to foot ulceration
and infection or to fractures, subluxation, and dislocation or destruction of normal foot architecture
(Charcot's joint).
Small-fiber neuropathy is characterized by pain, numbness, and loss of temperature sensation with
preserved vibration and position sense. Patients are prone to foot ulceration and neuropathic joint
degeneration and have a high incidence of autonomic neuropathy.
Predominant large-fiber neuropathy is characterized by muscle weakness, loss of vibration and position
sense, and lack of deep tendon reflexes. Atrophy of intrinsic muscles of the feet and foot drop are
common.
Autonomic neuropathy can cause orthostatic hypotension, exercise intolerance, resting tachycardia,
dysphagia, nausea and vomiting (due to gastroparesis), constipation and diarrhea (including dumping
syndrome), fecal incontinence, urinary retention and incontinence, erectile dysfunction and retrograde
ejaculation, and decreased vaginal lubrication.
Radiculopathies most often affect the proximal L2 through L4 nerve roots, causing pain, weakness, and
atrophy of the lower extremities (diabetic amyotrophy), or the proximal T
through T
nerve roots,
causing abdominal pain (thoracic polyradiculopathy).
Cranial neuropathies cause diplopia, ptosis, and anisocoria when they affect the 3rd cranial nerve or
motor palsies when they affect the 4th or 6th cranial nerve.
Mononeuropathies cause finger weakness and numbness (median nerve) or foot drop (peroneal nerve).
Patients with DM are also prone to nerve compression disorders, such as carpal tunnel syndrome.
Mononeuropathies can occur in several places simultaneously (mononeuritis multiplex). All tend to affect
older patients predominantly and usually abate spontaneously over months; however, nerve compression
disorders do not.
Diagnosis of symmetric polyneuropathy is by detection of sensory deficits and diminished ankle reflexes.
Loss of ability to detect the light touch of a nylon monofilament identifies patients at highest risk of foot
===PAGE:1015===
ulceration (see
Fig. 99-1
). Electromyography and nerve conduction studies may be needed for all forms of neuropathy
and are sometimes used to exclude other causes of neuropathic symptoms, such as nondiabetic
radiculopathy and carpal tunnel syndrome. Strict glycemic control may lessen neuropathy. Treatments for
relief of symptoms include topical capsaicin cream, tricyclic antidepressants (eg, imipramine), SNRIs (eg,
duloxetine), anticonvulsants (eg, gabapentin, carbamazepine), and mexiletine. Patients with sensory loss
should examine their feet daily to detect minor foot trauma and prevent it from progressing to limbthreatening infection.
Macrovascular disease:
Large-vessel atherosclerosis is a result of the hyperinsulinemia, dyslipidemias,
and hyperglycemia characteristic of DM. Manifestations are
• Angina pectoris and MI
• Transient ischemic attacks and strokes
• Peripheral arterial disease
[Fig. 99-1.
Diabetic foot screening.]
Diagnosis is by history and examination; the role of screening tests is evolving. Treatment is rigorous
control of atherosclerotic risk factors, including normalization of plasma glucose, lipids, and BP, combined
with smoking cessation and daily intake of aspirin and ACE inhibitors. In contrast with microvascular
disease, intensive control of plasma glucose alone is not an effective preventive measure.
Cardiomyopathy:
Diabetic cardiomyopathy is thought to result from many factors, including epicardial
atherosclerosis, hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy, microvascular disease, endothelial and
autonomic dysfunction, obesity, and metabolic disturbances. Patients develop heart failure due to
impairment in left ventricular systolic and diastolic function and are more likely to develop heart failure
after MI.
Infection:
Patients with poorly controlled DM are prone to bacterial and fungal infections because of
adverse effects of hyperglycemia on granulocyte and T-cell function. Most common are mucocutaneous
fungal infections (eg, oral and vaginal candidiasis) and bacterial foot infections (including osteomyelitis),
which are typically exacerbated by lower extremity vascular insufficiency and diabetic neuropathy.
Other complications:
Diabetic foot complications (skin changes, ulceration, infection, gangrene) are
common and are attributable to vascular disease, neuropathy, and relative immunosuppression.
Patients with DM have an increased risk of developing some rheumatologic diseases, including muscle
infarction, carpal tunnel syndrome, Dupuytren's contracture, adhesive capsulitis, and sclerodactyly. They
may also develop ophthalmologic disease unrelated to diabetic retinopathy (eg, cataracts, glaucoma,
corneal abrasions, optic neuropathy); hepatobiliary diseases (eg, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
[steatosis and steatohepatitis], cirrhosis, gallstones); and dermatologic disease (eg, tinea infections,
lower-extremity ulcers, diabetic dermopathy, necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum, diabetic systemic
sclerosis, vitiligo, granuloma annulare, acanthosis nigricans [a sign of insulin resistance]). Depression
and dementia are also common.
Diagnosis
• Fasting plasma glucose levels
• Sometimes oral glucose tolerance testing
DM is indicated by typical symptoms and signs and confirmed by measurement of plasma glucose.
Measurement after an 8- to 12-h fast (fasting plasma glucose [FPG]) or 2 h after ingestion of a
concentrated glucose solution (oral glucose tolerance testing [OGTT]) is best (see
Table 99-2
). OGTT is
more sensitive for diagnosing DM and impaired glucose tolerance but is less convenient and reproducible
===PAGE:1016===
than FPG. It is therefore rarely used routinely, except for diagnosing gestational DM ( and for
research purposes.
In practice, DM or impaired fasting glucose regulation is often diagnosed using random measures of
plasma glucose or of glycosylated Hg (HbA
1c
). A random glucose value > 200 mg/dL (> 11.1 mmol/L)
may be diagnostic, but values can be affected by recent meals and must be confirmed by repeat
testing; testing twice may not be necessary in the presence of diabetic symptoms. HbA
1c
measurements reflect glucose levels over the preceding 2 to 3 mo. HbA
1c
measurements are now
included in the diagnostic criteria for DM: • HbA
1c
≥ 6.5% = DM
• HbA
1c
5.7 to 6.4% = prediabetes or at risk of DM
However, values may be falsely high or low (see Monitoring , and tests must be done in a
certified clinical laboratory. HbA
1c
is also used for monitoring DM control.
Urine glucose measurement, once commonly used, is no longer used for diagnosis or monitoring because
it is neither sensitive nor specific.
Screening for disease:
Screening for DM should be conducted for people at risk of the disease.
Patients with DM are screened for complications.
People at high risk of type 1 DM (eg, siblings and children of people with type 1 DM) can be tested for the
presence of islet cell or antiglutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies, which precede onset of clinical
disease. However, there are no proven preventive strategies for people at high risk, so such screening is
usually reserved for research settings.
Risk factors for type 2 DM include age > 45; obesity; sedentary lifestyle; family history of DM; history of
impaired glucose regulation; gestational DM or delivery of a baby > 4.1 kg; history of hypertension or
dyslipidemia; polycystic ovary syndrome; and black, Hispanic, or American Indian ethnicity.
Risk of insulin resistance among overweight people (body mass index ≥ 25 kg/m
) is increased with
serum triglycerides ≥ 130 mg/dL (≥ 1.47 mmol/L); triglyceride/high-density lipoprotein (HDL) ratio ≥ 3.0 (≥
1.8); and insulin ≥ 108 pmol/L. People with these characteristics are at particularly high risk and should
be screened for DM with an FPG level at least once every 3 yr as long as plasma glucose measurements
are normal and at least annually if results reveal impaired fasting glucose levels (see
Table 99-2
).
Screening for complications:
All patients with type 1 DM should begin screening for diabetic
complications 5 yr after diagnosis. For patients with type 2 DM, screening begins at diagnosis. Typical
screening for complications includes
• Foot examination
• Funduscopic examination
• Urine testing for proteinuria and microalbuminuria
• Measurement of serum creatinine and lipid profile
Patients should have their feet examined at least annually for impaired sense of pressure, vibration, pain,
or temperature, which is characteristic of peripheral neuropathy. Pressure sense is best tested with a
monofilament esthesiometer (see
Fig. 99-1
). The entire foot, and especially skin beneath the metatarsal
heads, should be examined for skin cracking and signs of ischemia, such as ulcerations, gangrene,
fungal nail infections, deceased pulses, and hair loss.
Funduscopic examination should be done by an ophthalmologist; the screening interval is controversial
but ranges from annually for patients with established retinopathy to every 3 yr for those without
retinopathy on at least one examination.
===PAGE:1017===
Spot or 24-h urine testing is indicated annually to detect proteinuria or microalbuminuria, and serum
creatinine should be measured to assess renal function.
Many physicians consider baseline electrocardiography important given the risk of heart disease. Lipid
profile should be checked at least annually and more often when abnormalities are present. BP should be
measured at every examination.
Treatment
• Diet and exercise
• For type 1 DM, insulin
• For type 2 DM, oral antihyperglycemics, insulin, or both
• Often ACE inhibitors, statins, and aspirin to prevent complications
Goals and methods:
Treatment involves control of hyperglycemia to relieve symptoms
and prevent
complications while minimizing hypoglycemic episodes.
Goals for glycemic control are
• Blood glucose between 80 and 120 mg/dL (4.4 and 6.7 mmol/L) during the day
• Blood glucose between 100 and 140 mg/dL (5.6 and 7.8 mmol/L) at bedtime
• HbA
1c
levels < 7%
Glucose levels are typically determined by home monitoring (see Monitoring: . These goals may
be adjusted for patients in whom strict glucose control may be inadvisable, such as the frail elderly;
patients with a short life expectancy; patients who experience repeated bouts of hypoglycemia, especially
with hypoglycemic unawareness; and patients who cannot communicate the presence of hypoglycemia
symptoms (eg, young children).
Key elements for all patients are patient education, dietary and exercise counseling, and monitoring of
glucose control.
All patients with type 1 DM require insulin.
Patients with type 2 DM and mildly elevated plasma glucose should be prescribed a trial of diet and
exercise, followed by a single oral antihyperglycemic drug if lifestyle changes are insufficient, additional
oral drugs as needed (combination therapy), and insulin when ≥ 2 drugs are ineffective for meeting
recommended goals.
Patients with type 2 DM and more significant glucose elevations at diagnosis are typically prescribed
lifestyle changes and oral antihyperglycemic drugs simultaneously.
Insulin is indicated as initial therapy for women with type 2 DM who are pregnant and for patients who
present with acute metabolic decompensation, such as nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome (NKHS) or
DKA. Patients with severe hyperglycemia (plasma glucose > 400 mg/dL) may respond better to oral
therapy after glucose levels are normalized with a brief period of insulin treatment.
Patients with impaired glucose regulation should receive counseling addressing their risk of developing
DM and the importance of lifestyle changes for preventing DM. They should be monitored closely for
development of DM symptoms or elevated plasma glucose. Ideal follow-up intervals have not been
determined, but annual or biannual checks are probably appropriate.
===PAGE:1018===
Patient education:
Education about causes of DM, diet, exercise, drugs, self-monitoring with fingerstick
testing, and the symptoms and signs of hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and diabetic complications is
crucial to optimizing care. Most patients with type 1 DM can also be taught how to adjust their insulin
doses. Education should be reinforced at every physician visit and hospitalization. Formal diabetes
education programs, generally conducted by diabetes nurses and nutrition specialists, are often very
effective.
Diet:
Adjusting diet to individual circumstances can help patients control fluctuations in their glucose level
and, for patients with type 2 DM, lose weight.
In general, all patients with DM need to be educated about a diet that is low in saturated fat and
cholesterol and contains moderate amounts of carbohydrate, preferably from whole grain sources with
higher fiber content. Although dietary protein and fat contribute to caloric intake (and thus, weight gain or
loss), only carbohydrates have a direct effect on blood glucose levels. A low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet
improves glucose control for some patients, but its long-term safety is uncertain.
Patients with type 1 DM should use carbohydrate counting or the carbohydrate exchange system to
match insulin dose to carbohydrate intake and facilitate physiologic insulin replacement. "Counting" the
amount of carbohydrate in the meal is used to calculate the preprandial insulin dose. In general, patients
require 1 unit of rapid-acting insulin for each 15 g of carbohydrate in a meal. This approach requires
detailed patient education and is most successful when guided by a dietitian experienced in working with
diabetic patients. Some experts advise use of the glycemic index to delineate between rapid and slowly
metabolized carbohydrates, although others believe the index adds little.
Patients with type 2 DM should restrict calories, eat regularly, increase fiber intake, and limit intake of
refined carbohydrates and saturated fats. Some experts also recommend dietary protein restriction to ≤
0.8 g/kg/day to prevent progression of early nephropathy (. Nutrition consultation should
complement physician counseling; the patient and the person who prepares the patient's meals should
both be present.
Exercise:
Physical activity should increase incrementally to whatever level a patient can tolerate. Some
experts believe that aerobic exercise is better than isometric exercise for weight loss and protection from
vascular disease, but resistance training also can improve glucose control, and all forms of exercise are
beneficial.
Patients who experience hypoglycemic symptoms during exercise should be advised to test their blood
glucose and ingest carbohydrates or lower their insulin dose as needed
to get their glucose slightly above
normal just before exercise. Hypoglycemia during vigorous exercise may require carbohydrate ingestion
during the workout period, typically 5 to 15 g of sucrose or another simple sugar.
Patients with known or suspected cardiovascular disease may benefit from exercise stress testing before
beginning an exercise program, while activity goals may need to be modified for patients with diabetic
complications such as neuropathy and retinopathy.
Monitoring:
DM control can be monitored by measuring blood levels of
• Glucose
• HbA
1c
• Fructosamine
Self-monitoring of whole blood glucose using fingertip blood, test strips, and a glucose meter is most
important. It should be used to help patients adjust dietary intake and insulin and to help physicians
recommend adjustments in the timing and doses of drugs.
Many different monitoring devices are available. Nearly all require test strips and a means for pricking the
skin and obtaining a sample. Most come with control solutions, which should be used periodically to verify
===PAGE:1019===
proper meter calibration. Choice among devices is usually based on patient preferences for features such
as time to results (usually 5 to 30 sec), size of display panel (large screens may benefit patients with poor
eyesight), and need for calibration. Meters that allow for testing at sites less painful than fingertips (palm,
forearm, upper arm, abdomen, thigh) are also available.
Continuous glucose monitoring systems using a subcutaneous catheter can provide real-time results,
including an alarm to warn of hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, or rapidly changing glucose levels. Such
devices are expensive and do not eliminate the need for fingerstick glucose testing, but they may be
useful for selected patients.
Patients with poor glucose control and those given a new drug or a new dose of a currently used drug
may be asked to self-monitor 1 (usually morning fasting) to ≥ 5 times/day, depending on the patient's
needs and abilities and the complexity of the treatment regimen. Most patients with type 1 DM benefit
from testing at least 4 times/day.
HbA
1c
levels
reflect glucose control over the preceding 2 to 3 mo and hence assess control between
physician visits. HbA
1c
should be assessed quarterly in patients with type 1 DM and at least annually in
patients with type 2 DM whose plasma glucose seems stable (more frequently when control is uncertain).
Home testing kits are useful for patients who are able to follow the testing instructions rigorously.
Control suggested by HbA
1C
values sometimes seems to differ from that suggested by daily glucose
readings because of falsely elevated or normal values. False elevations may occur with renal
insufficiency (urea interferes with the assay), low RBC turnover (as occurs with iron, folate, or vitamin
B
deficiency anemia), high-dose aspirin, and high blood alcohol concentrations. Falsely normal values
occur with increased RBC turnover, as occurs with hemolytic anemias and hemoglobinopathies (eg, HbS,
HbC) or during treatment of deficiency anemias.
Fructosamine,
which is mostly glycosylated albumin but also comprises other glycosylated proteins,
reflects glucose control in the previous 1 to 2 wk. Fructosamine monitoring may be used during intensive
treatment of DM and for patients with Hb variants or high RBC turnover (which cause false HbA
1c
results), but it is mainly used in research settings.
Urine glucose monitoring
provides a crude indication of hyperglycemia and can be recommended only
when blood glucose monitoring is impossible. By contrast, self-measurement of urine ketones is
recommended for patients with type 1 DM if they experience symptoms, signs, or triggers of ketoacidosis,
such as nausea or vomiting, abdominal pain, fever, cold or flu-like symptoms, or unusual sustained
hyperglycemia (> 250 to 300 mg/dL) during glucose self-monitoring.
Insulin:
Insulin is required for all patients with type 1 DM if they become ketoacidotic without it; it is also
helpful for management of many patients with type 2 DM. Insulin replacement should ideally mimic
β
-cell
function using 2 insulin types to provide basal and prandial requirements (physiologic replacement); this
approach requires close attention to diet and exercise as well as to insulin timing and dose. Most insulin
preparations are now recombinant human, practically eliminating the once-common allergic reactions to
the drug when it was extracted from animal sources. Except for use of regular insulin IV in hospitalized
patients, insulin is administered subcutaneously. A number of analogs, created by modifications of the
human insulin molecule that alter subcutaneous absorption rates, are available.
Insulin types are commonly categorized by their time to onset and duration of action (see
Table 99-3
). However, these parameters vary within and among patients depending on many factors (eg,
site and technique of injection,
[Table 99-3.
Onset, Peak, and Duration of Action of Human Insulin Preparations*]
amount of subcutaneous fat, blood flow at the injection site).
Rapid-acting insulins, including lispro and aspart, are rapidly absorbed because reversal of an amino acid
pair prevents the insulin molecule from associating into dimers and polymers. They begin to reduce
===PAGE:1020===
plasma glucose often within 15 min but have short duration of action (< 4 h). These insulins are best used
at mealtime to control postprandial spikes in plasma glucose.
Regular insulin is slightly slower in onset (30 to 60 min) than lispro and aspart but lasts longer (6 to 8 h). It
is the only form for IV use.
Neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH, or insulin isophane) is intermediate-acting; onset of action is about 2
h after injection, peak effect is 4 to 12 h after injection, and duration of action is 18 to 26 h. Unlike NPH,
insulin glargine has no discernible peak of action and provides a steady basal effect over 24 h.
Combinations of NPH and regular insulin and of insulin lispro and lispro protamine (a form of lispro
modified to act like NPH) are commercially available in premixed preparations (see
Table 99-3
).
Different insulin types can be drawn into the same syringe for injection but should not be premixed in
bottles except by a manufacturer. On occasion, mixing insulins may affect rates of insulin absorption,
producing variability of effect and making glycemic control less predictable, especially if mixed > 1 h
before use. Insulin glargine should never be mixed with any other insulin.
Many prefilled insulin pen devices are available as an alternative to the conventional vial and syringe
method. Insulin pens may be more convenient for use away from home and may be preferable for patients
with limited vision or manual dexterity. Spring-loaded self-injection devices (for use with a syringe) may be
useful for the occasional patient who is fearful of injection, and syringe magnifiers are available for
patients with low vision.
Lispro, aspart, or regular insulin can also be given continuously using an insulin pump. Continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion pumps can eliminate the need for multiple daily injections, provide maximal
flexibility in the timing of meals, and substantially reduce variability in glucose levels. Disadvantages
include cost, mechanical failures leading to interruptions in insulin supply, and the inconvenience of
wearing an external device. Frequent and meticulous self-monitoring and close attention to pump function
are necessary for safe and effective use of the insulin pump.
Oligomeric or liposomal oral forms and transmucosal (eg, intranasal, oral spray) or transdermal delivery
systems show promise but require further study.
Complications of insulin treatment:
Hypoglycemia is the most common complication of insulin
treatment, occurring more often as patients try to achieve strict glucose control and approach nearnormoglycemia. Symptoms of mild or moderate hypoglycemia include headache, diaphoresis,
palpitations, light-headedness, blurred vision, agitation, and confusion. Symptoms of more severe
hypoglycemia include seizures and loss of consciousness. In older patients, hypoglycemia may cause
strokelike symptoms of aphasia or hemiparesis and is more likely to precipitate stroke, MI, and sudden
death. Patients with type 1 DM with long duration of disease may be unaware of hypoglycemic episodes
because they no longer experience autonomic symptoms (hypoglycemia unawareness).
Patients should be taught to recognize symptoms of hypoglycemia, which usually respond rapidly to the
ingestion of sugar, including candy, juice, and glucose tablets. Typically, 15 g of glucose or sucrose
should be ingested. Patients should check their glucose levels 15 min after glucose or sucrose ingestion
and ingest an additional 15 g if their glucose level is not > 80 mg/dL. For patients who are unconscious or
unable to swallow, hypoglycemia can be treated immediately with glucagon 1 mg sc or IM or a 50%
dextrose solution 50 mL IV (25 g) followed, if necessary, by IV infusion of a 5% or 10% dextrose solution
to maintain adequate plasma glucose levels.
Hyperglycemia may follow hypoglycemia either because too much sugar was ingested or because
hypoglycemia caused a surge in counter-regulatory hormones (glucagon, epinephrine, cortisol, growth
hormone). Too high a bedtime insulin dose can drive glucose down and stimulate a counter-regulatory
response, leading to morning hyperglycemia (Somogyi phenomenon). A more common cause of
unexplained morning hyperglycemia, however, is a rise in early morning growth hormone (dawn
phenomenon). In this case, the evening insulin dose should be increased, changed to a longer-acting
preparation, or injected later.
===PAGE:1021===
Hypokalemia may be caused by intracellular shifts of K due to insulin-induced stimulation of the Na-K
pump, but it is uncommon. Hypokalemia more commonly occurs in acute care settings where IV insulin is
used.
Local allergic reactions at the site of insulin injections are rare, especially with the use of human insulins,
but they may still occur in patients with latex allergy because of the natural rubber latex contained in vial
stoppers. They can cause immediate pain or burning followed by erythema, pruritus, and induration the
latter sometimes persist for days. Most reactions spontaneously disappear after weeks of continued
injection and require no specific treatment, although antihistamines may provide symptomatic relief.
Generalized allergic reaction is extremely rare with human insulins but can occur when insulin is restarted
after a lapse in treatment. Symptoms develop 30 min to 2 h after injection and include urticaria,
angioedema, pruritus, bronchospasm, and anaphylaxis. Treatment with antihistamines often suffices, but
epinephrine and IV glucocorticoids may be needed. If insulin treatment is needed after a generalized
allergic reaction, skin testing with a panel of purified insulin preparations and desensitization should be
done.
Local fat atrophy or hypertrophy at injection sites is relatively rare and is thought to result from an immune
reaction to a component of the insulin preparation. Either may resolve by rotation of injection sites.
Insulin resistance occurs mostly in patients with type 2 DM. The causes are usually obesity and genetic
factors. Circulating anti-insulin antibodies are a rare cause. This type of insulin resistance can sometimes
be treated by changing insulin preparations (eg, from animal to human insulin) and by administering
corticosteroids if necessary.
Insulin regimens for type 1 DM:
Regimens range from twice/day split-mixed (eg, split doses of rapidand intermediate-acting insulins) to more physiologic basal-bolus regimens using multiple daily injections
(eg, single fixed [basal] dose of long-acting and variable prandial [bolus] doses of rapid-acting insulin) or
an insulin pump. Intensive treatment, defined as glucose monitoring ≥ 4 times/day and ≥ 3 injections/day
or continuous insulin infusion, is more effective than conventional treatment (1 to 2 insulin injections daily
with or without monitoring) for preventing diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy. However,
intensive therapy may result in more frequent episodes of hypoglycemia and weight gain and is generally
effective only in patients who are able and willing to take an active role in their self-care.
In general, most patients with type 1 DM can start with a total dose of 0.2 to 0.8 units of insulin/kg/day.
Obese patients may require higher doses. Physiologic replacement involves giving 40 to 60% of the daily
insulin dose as an intermediate- or long-acting preparation to cover basal needs, with the remainder given
as a rapid- or short-acting preparation to cover postprandial increases. This approach is most effective
when the dose of rapid- or short-acting insulin is determined by a sliding
scale that takes into account
preprandial blood glucose and anticipated meal content. Dose can be adjusted 1 to 2 units for each 50
mg/dL (2.7 mmol/L) above or below target glucose level. This physiologic regimen allows greater freedom
of lifestyle because patients can skip or time-shift meals and maintain normoglycemia. However, no
specific insulin regimen has proved more effective than others, and these recommendations are for
initiation of therapy; thereafter, choice of regimens generally rests on physiologic response and patient
and physician preferences.
Insulin regimens for type 2 DM:
Regimens for type 2 DM also vary. In many patients, glucose levels
are adequately controlled with lifestyle changes or oral drugs, but insulin should be added when glucose
remains inadequately controlled by ≥ 2 oral drugs. Although uncommon, adult-onset type 1 DM may be
the cause. Insulin should replace oral drugs in women who become pregnant. The rationale for
combination therapy is strongest for use of insulin with oral biguanides and insulin sensitizers. Regimens
vary from a single daily injection of long- or intermediate-acting insulin (usually at bedtime) to the multipleinjection regimen used by patients with type 1 DM. In general, the simplest effective regimen is preferred.
Because of insulin resistance, some patients with type 2 DM require very large doses (> 2 units/kg/day).
A common complication is weight gain, which is mostly attributable to reduction in loss of glucose in urine
and improved metabolic efficiency.
Oral antihyperglycemic drugs:
Oral anti-hyperglycemic drugs (see
===PAGE:1022===
Tables 99-4
and
99-5
) are the primary treatment for type 2 DM, although insulin is often added when ≥ 2 oral drugs fail to
provide adequate glycemic control. Oral antihyperglycemic drugs may
• Enhance pancreatic insulin secretion (secretagogues)
• Sensitize peripheral tissues to insulin (sensitizers)
• Impair GI absorption of glucose
Drugs with different mechanisms of action may be synergistic.
Sulfonylureas
(SUs) are insulin secretagogues. They lower plasma glucose by stimulating pancreatic
β
-
cell insulin secretion and may secondarily improve peripheral and hepatic insulin sensitivity by reducing
glucose toxicity. First-generation drugs (see
Table 99-4
) are more likely to cause adverse effects and are
used infrequently. All SUs promote hyperinsulinemia and weight gain of 2 to 5 kg, which over time may
potentiate insulin resistance and limit their usefulness. All also can cause hypoglycemia. Risk factors
include age > 65, use of long-acting drugs (especially chlorpropamide, glyburide, or glipizide), erratic
eating and exercise, and renal or hepatic insufficiency. Hypoglycemia caused by long-acting drugs may
last for days after treatment cessation, occasionally causes permanent neurologic disability, and can be
fatal. For these reasons, some physicians hospitalize hypoglycemic patients, especially older ones.
Chlorpropamide also causes the syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion. Most patients taking SUs
alone eventually require additional drugs to achieve normoglycemia, suggesting that SUs may exhaust
β
-
cell function. However, worsening of insulin secretion and insulin resistance is probably more a feature of
DM itself than of drugs used to treat it.
Short-acting insulin secretagogues
(repaglinide, nateglinide) stimulate insulin secretion in a manner
similar to SUs. They are faster acting, however, and may stimulate insulin secretion more during meals
than at other times. Thus, they may be especially effective for reducing postprandial hyperglycemia and
seem to have lower risk of hypoglycemia. There may be some weight gain, although apparently less than
with SUs. Repaglinide seems to be as effective as SUs or metformin in lowering glucose levels.
Nateglinide may be somewhat less effective and therefore more appropriate for patients with mild
hyperglycemia. Patients who have not responded to other oral drug classes (eg, SUs, metformin) are not
likely to respond to these drugs.
Biguanides
lower plasma glucose by decreasing hepatic glucose production (gluconeogenesis and
glycogenolysis). They are considered peripheral insulin sensitizers, but their stimulation of peripheral
glucose uptake may simply be a result of reductions in glucose from their hepatic effects. Biguanides also
lower lipid levels and may also decrease GI nutrient absorption, increase
β
-cell sensitivity to circulating
glucose, and decrease levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, thereby exerting an antithrombotic
effect. Metformin is the only biguanide commercially available in the US. It is at least as effective as SUs
in reducing plasma glucose, rarely causes hypoglycemia, and can be safely used with other drugs and
insulin. In addition, metformin does not cause weight gain and may even promote weight loss by
suppressing appetite. However, the drug commonly causes GI adverse effects (eg, dyspepsia, diarrhea),
which for most people recede with time. Less commonly, metformin causes vitamin B
malabsorption,
but clinically
[Table 99-4.
Characteristics of Oral Antihyperglycemics]
significant anemia is rare. Contribution of metformin to life-threatening lactic acidosis is controversial, but
the drug is thought to be contraindicated in patients at risk of acidemia (including those with renal
insufficiency [creatinine ≥ 1.4 mg/dL], heart failure, hypoxia or severe respiratory disease, alcoholism,
other forms of metabolic acidosis, or dehydration). The drug should be withheld during surgery,
administration of IV contrast, and any serious illness. Many people receiving metformin monotherapy
eventually require an additional drug.
Thiazolidinediones
(TZDs) decrease peripheral insulin resistance (insulin sensitizers), but their specific
mechanisms of action are not well understood. The drugs bind a nuclear receptor primarily present in fat
===PAGE:1023===
cells (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptorγ
[PPARγ]) that is involved in the transcription of genes
that regulate glucose and lipid metabolism. TZDs also increase HDL levels, lower triglycerides, and may
have anti-inflammatory and anti-atherosclerotic effects. TZDs are as effective as SUs and metformin in
reducing HbA
1c
. Because the drug class is relatively new, data on long-term safety and effectiveness are
not available. Though one TZD (troglitazone) caused acute liver failure, currently available drugs have
not proven hepatotoxic. Nevertheless, periodic monitoring of liver function is recommended. TZDs may
cause peripheral edema, especially in patients taking insulin, and may worsen heart failure in susceptible
patients. Weight gain, due to fluid retention and increased adipose tissue mass, is common and may be
substantial (> 10 kg) in some patients. Rasiglitazone may increase risk of heart failure, angina, MI, stroke,
and fracture.
α
-Glucosidase inhibitors
(AGIs) competitively inhibit intestinal enzymes that hydrolyze dietary
carbohydrates; carbohydrates are digested and absorbed more slowly, thereby lowering postprandial
plasma glucose. AGIs are less effective than other oral drugs in reducing plasma glucose, and patients
often stop the drugs because they may cause dyspepsia, flatulence, and diarrhea. But the drugs are
otherwise safe and can be used in combination with all other oral drugs and with insulin.
Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors
(eg, sitagliptin, saxagliptin) block glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)
breakdown by inhibiting the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4). Vildagliptin, a similar drug, is being
developed.
Injectable antihyperglycemic drugs:
Injectable antihyperglycemic drugs other than insulin are the
GLP-1 agonists and the amylin analog, pramlintide (see
Table 99-4
). These drugs are used in
combination with other antihyperglycemics.
GLP-1 agonists
(eg, exenatide [an incretin hormone], liraglutide) enhance glucose-dependent insulin
secretion and slow gastric emptying. Exenatide may also reduce appetite and promote weight loss and
stimulate
β
-cell proliferation. It is given by injection 5 or 10
μ
g bid before meals and may be used in
combination with oral antihyperglycemics. Other GLP-1 agonists, including a long-acting form of
exenatide, are being developed,.
The
amylin analog
pramlintide mimics amylin, a pancreatic
β
-cell hormone that helps regulate
postprandial glucose levels. Pramlintide suppresses postprandial glucagon secretion, slows gastric
emptying, and promotes satiety. It is given by injection and is used in combination with mealtime insulin.
Patients with type 1 DM are given 30 to 60
μ
g sc before meals, and those with type 2 DM are given 120
μ
g.
Other antihyperglycemic treatments:
Transplantation of pancreatic or islet cells is an alternative
means of insulin delivery; both techniques effectively transplant insulin-producing
[Table 99-5.
Combination Oral Antihyperglycemics]
β
-cells into insulin-deficient (type 1) patients. Indications, tissue sources, procedures, and limitations of
both procedures are discussed elsewhere (.
Other oral antihyperglycemic drugs are under investigation. These drugs include PPARα
and PPARγ
agonists (ragaglitazar, tesaglitazar); non-TZD insulin sensitizers, including recombinant human insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1); and phosphodiesterase inhibitors, which augment pancreatic insulin secretion.
Adjunctive treatments:
Measures to prevent or treat complications of DM are critical. ACE inhibitors,
angiotensin II receptor blockers, or both are indicated for patients with evidence of early nephropathy
(microalbuminuria or proteinuria), even in the absence of hypertension, and are a good choice for treating
hypertension in patients who have DM and who have not yet shown renal impairment.
ACE inhibitors also help prevent cardiovascular events in patients with DM. Aspirin 81 to 325 mg
once/day provides cardiovascular protection and should be used by most adults with DM in the absence
of a specific contraindication. Patients with type 2 DM tend to have high levels of triglycerides and small,
dense low-density lipoproteins (LDL) and low levels of HDL; they should receive aggressive treatment
===PAGE:1024===
with the same treatment goals as those of patients with known coronary artery disease (LDL < 100 mg/dL
[< 2.6 mmol/L], HDL > 40 mg/dL [> 1.1 mmol/L], and triglycerides < 150 mg/dL [< 1.7 mmol/L]—see
Table 100-4
.
Orlistat, an intestinal lipase inhibitor, reduces dietary fat absorption; it reduces serum lipids and helps
promote weight loss. Sibutramine, a centrally acting anorectic drug, is for short-term use to promote
weight loss. Both of these drugs may be useful in selected patients as part of a comprehensive weight
loss program. Surgical treatment for obesity, such as gastric banding or bypass, also leads to weight loss
and improved glucose control in patients who have DM and are unable to lose weight through other
means.
Regular professional podiatric care, including trimming of toenails and calluses, is important for patients
with sensory loss or circulatory impairment. Such patients should be advised to inspect their feet daily for
cracks, fissures, calluses, corns, and ulcers. Feet should be washed daily in lukewarm water, using mild
soap, and dried gently and thoroughly. A lubricant (eg, lanolin) should be applied to dry, scaly skin.
Nonmedicated foot powders should be applied to moist feet. Toenails should be cut, preferably by a
podiatrist, straight across and not too close to the skin. Adhesive plasters and tape, harsh chemicals, corn
cures, water bottles, and electric pads should not be used on skin. Patients should change stockings
daily and not wear constricting clothing (eg, garters, socks or stockings with tight elastic tops). Shoes
should fit well, be wide-toed without open heels or toes, and be changed frequently. Special shoes should
be prescribed to reduce trauma if the foot is deformed (eg, previous toe amputation, hammer toe, bunion).
Walking barefoot should be avoided. Patients with neuropathic foot ulcers should avoid weight bearing
until ulcers heal. If they cannot, they should wear appropriate orthotic protection. Because most patients
with these ulcers have little or no macrovascular occlusive
disease, debridement and antibiotics
frequently result in good healing and may prevent major surgery (. After the ulcer has healed,
appropriate inserts or special shoes should be prescribed. In refractory cases, especially if osteomyelitis
is present, surgical removal of the metatarsal head (the source of pressure) or amputation of the involved
toe or transmetatarsal amputation may be required. A neuropathic joint can often be satisfactorily
managed with orthopedic devices (eg, short leg braces, molded shoes, sponge-rubber arch supports,
crutches, prostheses).
All patients with DM should be vaccinated against
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(once) and influenza virus
(annually).
Special Populations and Settings
The term brittle diabetes has been used to refer to patients who have dramatic, recurrent swings in
glucose levels, often for no apparent reason. However, this concept has no biologic basis and should not
be used. Labile plasma glucose levels are more likely to occur in patients with type 1 DM because
endogenous insulin production is completely absent and, in some patients, counterregulatory response to
hypoglycemia is impaired. Other causes include occult infection, gastroparesis (which leads to erratic
absorption of dietary carbohydrates), and endocrinopathies (eg, Addison's disease).
Patients with chronic difficulty maintaining acceptable glucose levels should be evaluated for situational
factors that affect glucose control. Such factors include inadequate patient education or understanding
that leads to errors in insulin administration, inappropriate food choices, and psychosocial stress that
expresses itself in erratic patterns of drug use and food intake.
The initial approach is to thoroughly review self-care techniques, including insulin preparation and
injection and glucose testing. Increased frequency of self-testing may reveal previously unrecognized
patterns and provides the patient with helpful feedback. A thorough dietary history, including timing of
meals, should be taken to identify potential contributions to poor control. Underlying disorders should be
ruled out by physical examination and appropriate laboratory tests. For some insulin-treated patients,
changing to a more intensive regimen that allows for frequent dose adjustments (based on glucose
testing) is helpful. In some cases, the frequency of hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic episodes diminishes
over time even without specific treatment, suggesting life circumstances may contribute to causation.
Children:
Children with type 1 DM require physiologic insulin replacement as do adults, and similar
===PAGE:1025===
treatment regimens, including insulin pumps, are used. However, the risk of hypoglycemia, because of
unpredictable meal and activity patterns and limited ability to report hypoglycemic symptoms, may require
modification of treatment goals. Most young children can be taught to actively participate in their own
care, including glucose testing and insulin injections. School personnel and other caregivers must be
informed about the disease and instructed about the detection and treatment of hypoglycemic episodes.
Screening for microvascular complications can generally be deferred until after puberty.
Children with type 2 DM require the same attention to diet and weight control and recognition and
management of dyslipidemia and hypertension as do adults. Most children with type 2 DM have severe
obesity, so lifestyle modification is the cornerstone of therapy. Children with mild hyperglycemia generally
begin treatment with metformin unless they have ketosis, renal insufficiency, or another contraindication to
metformin use. Dosage is 500 to 1000 mg bid. If response is insufficient, an insulin secretagogue (such
as a SU or repaglinide) or insulin may be added. TZDs are generally avoided because long-term safety is
unknown.
Adolescents:
Glucose control typically deteriorates as children with DM enter adolescence. Multiple
factors contribute, including pubertal and insulin-induced weight gain; hormonal changes that decrease
insulin sensitivity; psychosocial factors that lead to insulin nonadherence (eg, mood and anxiety
disorders); family conflict, rebellion, and peer pressure; eating disorders that lead to insulin omission as a
means of controlling weight; and experimentation with cigarettes, alcohol, and substance use. For these
reasons, some adolescents experience recurrent episodes of hyperglycemia and DKA requiring
emergency department visits and hospitalization.
Treatment often involves intensive medical supervision combined with psychosocial interventions (eg,
mentoring or support groups), individual or family therapy, and psychopharmacology when indicated.
Patient education is important so that adolescents can safely enjoy the freedoms of early adulthood.
Rather than judging personal choices and behaviors, providers must continually reinforce the need for
careful glycemic control, especially frequent blood sugar monitoring and use of frequent, low-dose, fastacting insulins as needed.
Hospitalization:
Diabetes can be a primary reason for hospitalization or can accompany other illnesses
that require inpatient care. All diabetic patients with DKA, NKHS, or prolonged or severe hypoglycemia
should be hospitalized. Others with SU-induced hypoglycemia, poorly controlled hyperglycemia, or acute
worsening of diabetic complications may benefit from brief hospitalization, as do children and adolescents
with new-onset disease. Control may worsen on discharge when insulin regimens developed in controlled
inpatient settings prove inadequate to the uncontrolled conditions outside the hospital.
When other illnesses mandate hospitalization, many patients do well without any change in drugs.
However, glucose control may prove difficult, and it is often neglected when other diseases are more
acute. Restricted physical activity and acute illness worsen hyperglycemia in some patients, whereas
dietary restrictions and symptoms that accompany illness (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia)
precipitate hypoglycemia in others—especially when antihyperglycemic drug doses remain unchanged. In
addition, it may be difficult to control glucose adequately in hospitalized patients because usual routines
(eg, timing of meals, drugs, and procedures) are inflexibly timed relative to diabetes treatment regimens.
Inpatients who are able to eat may continue usual outpatient regimens; others may be appropriately
treated with basal insulin without or with supplemental short-acting insulin. Slidingscale insulin should not
be the only intervention to correct hyperglycemia; it is reactive rather than proactive, and no data suggest
it leads to outcomes equivalent to or better than other approaches. Longer-acting insulins should be
adjusted to prevent hyperglycemia rather than just using short-acting insulins to correct it.
Inpatient hyperglycemia worsens short-term prognosis for many acute conditions, most notably stroke and
acute MI, and often prolongs hospital stay. Critical illness causes insulin resistance and hyperglycemia
even in patients without known DM. Insulin infusion to maintain plasma glucose between 100 and 150
mg/dL (4.4 and 6.1 mmol/L) prevents adverse outcomes such as organ failure, may enhance recovery
from stroke, and leads to improved survival in patients requiring prolonged (> 5 days) critical care.
Severely ill patients, especially those receiving glucocorticoids or pressors, may need very high doses of
insulin (> 5 to 10 units/h) because of insulin resistance. Insulin infusion should also be considered for
patients receiving TPN and for patients with type 1 DM who cannot ingest anything orally.
===PAGE:1026===
Surgery:
The physiologic stress of surgery can increase plasma glucose in patients with DM and induce
DKA in those with type 1 DM. For type 1 patients, one half to two thirds of the usual morning dose of
intermediate-acting insulin or 70 to 80% of the dose of long-acting insulin (glargine or detemir) can be
given the morning before surgery with an IV infusion of a 5% dextrose solution at a rate of 100 to 150
mL/h. During and after surgery, plasma glucose (and ketones if hyperglycemia suggests the need) should
be measured at least every 2 h. Glucose infusion is continued (monitoring is done at 2- to 4-h intervals),
and regular or short-acting insulin is given sc q 4 to 6 h as needed to maintain the plasma glucose level
between 100 and 200 mg/dL (5.55 and 11.01 mmol/L) until the patient can be switched to oral feedings
and resume the usual insulin regimen. Additional doses of intermediate- or long-acting insulin should be
given if there is a substantial delay (> 24 h) in resuming the usual regimen. This approach may also be
used for insulin-treated patients with type 2 DM, but frequent measurement of ketones may be omitted.
Some physicians prefer to withhold sc insulin on the day of surgery and to give insulin by IV infusion. One
approach is to add 6 to 10 units of regular insulin to 1 L of 5% dextrose in 0.9% saline solution or water
infused initially at 100 to 150 mL/h on the morning of surgery based on the plasma glucose level.
Alternatively, separate insulin (1 to 2 units/h) and dextrose (75 to 125 mL/h of 5% dextrose) infusions may
be used and allow for easier titration. Insulin adsorption onto IV tubing can lead to inconsistent effects,
which can be minimized by preflushing the IV tubing with insulin solution. Insulin infusion is continued
through recovery, with insulin adjusted based on the plasma glucose levels obtained in the recovery room
and at 1- to 2-h intervals thereafter.
Most patients with type 2 DM who are treated with oral antihyperglycemic drugs maintain acceptable
glucose levels when fasting and may not require insulin in the perioperative period. Most oral drugs,
including SUs and metformin, should be withheld on the day of surgery, and plasma glucose levels should
be measured preoperatively and postoperatively and every 6 h while patients receive IV fluids. Oral drugs
may be resumed when patients are able to eat, but metformin should be withheld until normal renal
function is confirmed 48 h after surgery.
Prevention
Type 1:
No treatments definitely prevent the onset or progression of type 1 DM. Azathioprine,
corticosteroids, and cyclosporine induce remission of early type 1 DM in some patients, presumably
through suppression of autoimmune
β
-cell destruction. However, toxicity and the need for lifelong
treatment limit their use. In a few patients, short-term treatment with anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies
reduces insulin requirements for at least the first year of recent-onset disease by suppressing
autoimmune T-cell response.
Type 2:
Type 2 DM usually can be prevented with lifestyle modification. Weight loss of as little as 7% of
baseline body weight, combined with moderate-intensity physical activity (eg, walking 30 min/day), may
reduce the incidence of DM in high-risk people by > 50%. Metformin and acarbose have also been shown
to reduce the risk of DM in patients with impaired glucose regulation. TZDs may also be protective,
perhaps by inducing PPARγ
activity but require further study before they can be recommended for
routine preventive use.
Complications:
Risk of DM complications can be decreased by strict control of plasma glucose, defined
as HbA
1c
< 7%, and by control of hypertension and lipid levels (see pp.
and
). Specific
measures for prevention of progression of complications once detected are described under
Complications ( and Treatment (.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is an acute metabolic complication of diabetes characterized by
hyperglycemia, hyperketonemia, and metabolic acidosis. DKA occurs mostly in type 1 diabetes
mellitus (DM). It causes nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain and can progress to cerebral
edema, coma, and death. DKA is diagnosed by detection of hyperketonemia and anion gap
metabolic acidosis in the presence of hyperglycemia. Treatment involves volume expansion,
insulin replacement, and prevention of hypokalemia
.
===PAGE:1027===
DKA is most common among patients with type 1 DM and develops when insulin levels are insufficient to
meet the body's basic metabolic requirements. DKA is the first manifestation of type 1 DM in a minority of
patients. Insulin deficiency can be absolute (eg, during lapses in the administration of exogenous insulin)
or relative (eg, when usual insulin doses do not meet metabolic needs during physiologic stress).
Common physiologic stresses that can trigger DKA include acute infection (particularly pneumonia and
UTI), MI, stroke, pancreatitis, and trauma. Drugs implicated in causing DKA include corticosteroids,
thiazide diuretics, and sympathomimetics. DKA is less common in type 2 DM, but it may occur in situations
of unusual physiologic stress.
Pathophysiology
Insulin deficiency causes the body to metabolize triglycerides and muscle instead of glucose for energy.
Serum levels of glycerol and free fatty acids (FFAs) rise because of unrestrained lipolysis, as does
alanine because of muscle catabolism. Glycerol and alanine provide substrate for hepatic
gluconeogenesis, which is stimulated by the excess of glucagon that accompanies insulin deficiency.
Glucagon also stimulates mitochondrial conversion of FFAs into ketones. Insulin normally blocks
ketogenesis by inhibiting the transport of FFA derivatives into the mitochondrial matrix, but ketogenesis
proceeds in the absence of insulin. The major ketoacids produced, acetoacetic acid and
β
-hydroxybutyric
acid, are strong organic acids that create metabolic acidosis. Acetone derived from the metabolism of
acetoacetic acid accumulates in serum and is slowly disposed of by respiration.
Hyperglycemia due to insulin deficiency causes an osmotic diuresis that leads to marked urinary losses of
water and electrolytes. Urinary excretion of ketones obligates additional losses of Na and K. Serum Na
may fall from natriuresis or rise due to excretion of large volumes of free water. K is also lost in large
quantities, sometimes > 300 mEq/24 h. Despite a significant total body deficit of K, initial serum K is
typically normal or elevated because of the extracellular migration of K in response to acidosis. K levels
generally fall further during treatment as insulin therapy drives K into cells. If serum K is not monitored
and replaced as needed, life-threatening hypokalemia may develop.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of DKA include those of hyperglycemia ( with the addition of nausea,
vomiting, and—particularly in children—abdominal pain. Lethargy and somnolence are symptoms of more
severe decompensation. Patients may be hypotensive and tachycardic from dehydration and acidosis;
they may breathe rapidly and deeply to compensate for acidemia (Kussmaul's
respirations). They may
also have fruity breath due to exhaled acetone. Fever is not a sign of DKA itself and, if present, signifies
underlying infection. In the absence of timely treatment, DKA progresses to coma and death.
Acute cerebral edema, a complication in about 1% of DKA patients, occurs primarily in children and less
often in adolescents and young adults. Headache and fluctuating level of consciousness herald this
complication in some patients, but respiratory arrest is the initial manifestation in others. The cause is not
well understood but may be related to too-rapid reductions in serum osmolality or to brain ischemia. It is
most likely to occur in children < 5 yr when DKA is the initial manifestation of DM. Children with the
highest BUN and lowest PaCO
at presentation seem to be at greatest risk. Delays in correction of
hyponatremia and the use of HCO
during DKA treatment are additional risk factors.
Diagnosis
• Arterial pH
• Serum ketones
• Calculation of anion gap
In patients suspected of having DKA, serum electrolytes, BUN and creatinine, glucose, ketones, and
osmolarity should be measured. Urine should be tested for ketones. Patients who appear significantly ill
and those with positive ketones should have ABG measurement. DKA is diagnosed by an arterial pH <
===PAGE:1028===
7.30 with an anion gap > 12 (see
Sidebar 98-1
 and serum ketones in the presence of
hyperglycemia. A presumptive diagnosis can be made when urine glucose and ketones are strongly
positive. Urine test strips and some assays for serum ketones may underestimate the degree of ketosis
because they detect acetoacetic and not
β
-hydroxybutyric acid, which is usually the predominant
ketoacid.
Symptoms and signs of a triggering illness should be pursued with appropriate studies (eg, cultures,
imaging studies). Adults should have an ECG to screen for acute MI and to help determine the
significance of abnormalities in serum K.
Other laboratory abnormalities include hyponatremia, elevated serum creatinine, and elevated serum
osmolarity. Hyperglycemia may cause dilutional hyponatremia, so measured serum Na is corrected by
adding 1.6 mEq/L for each 100 mg/dL elevation of serum glucose over 100 mg/dL. To illustrate, for a
patient with serum Na of 124 mEq/L and glucose of 600 mg/dL, add 1.6 ([600-100]/100) = 8 mEq/L to 124
for a corrected serum Na of 132 mEq/L. As acidosis is corrected, serum K drops. An initial K level < 4.5
mEq/L indicates marked K depletion and requires immediate K supplementation. Serum amylase and
lipase are often elevated, even in the absence of pancreatitis (which may be present in alcoholic DKA
patients and in those with coexisting hypertriglyceridemia).
Prognosis
Mortality rates for DKA are between 1 and 10%. Shock or coma on admission indicates a worse
prognosis. Main causes of death are circulatory collapse, hypokalemia, and infection. Among children
with cerebral edema, 57% recover completely, 21% survive with neurologic sequelae, and 21% die.
Treatment
• IV 0.9% saline
• Correction of any hypokalemia
• IV insulin (as long as serum K is ≥ 3.3 mEq/L)
• Rarely IV NaHCO
(if pH < 7 after 1 h of treatment)
The most urgent goals are rapid intravascular volume repletion, correction of hyperglycemia and acidosis,
and prevention of hypokalemia. Identification of precipitating factors is also important. Treatment should
occur in intensive care settings because clinical and laboratory assessments are initially needed every
hour or every other hour with appropriate adjustments in treatment.
Intravascular volume should be restored rapidly to raise BP and ensure glomerular perfusion; once
intravascular volume is restored, remaining total body water deficits are corrected more slowly, typically
over about 24 h. Initial volume repletion in adults is typically achieved with rapid IV infusion of 1 to 3 L of
0.9% saline solution, followed by saline infusions at 1 L/h or faster as needed to raise BP, correct
hyperglycemia, and keep urine flow adequate. Adults with DKA typically need a minimum of 3 L of saline
over the first 5 h. When BP is stable and urine flow adequate, normal saline is replaced by 0.45% saline.
When plasma glucose falls to < 250 mg/dL, IV fluid should be changed to 5% dextrose in 0.45% saline.
For children, fluid deficits are estimated at 60 to 100 mL/kg body weight. Maintenance fluids (for ongoing
losses) must also be provided (. Initial fluid therapy should be 0.9% saline (20 mL/kg) over 1
to 2 h, followed by 0.45% saline once BP is stable and urine output adequate. The remaining fluid deficit
should be replaced over 36 h,
typically requiring a rate (including maintenance fluids) of about 2 to 4
mL/kg/h, depending on the degree of dehydration.
Hyperglycemia is corrected by giving regular insulin 0.15 unit/kg IV bolus initially, followed by continuous
IV infusion of 0.1 unit/kg/h in 0.9% saline solution.
Insulin should be withheld until serum K is
≥
3.3
mEq/L
(. Insulin adsorption onto IV tubing can lead to inconsistent effects, which can be
minimized by preflushing the IV tubing with insulin solution. If plasma glucose does not fall by 50 to 75
===PAGE:1029===
mg/dL in the first hour, insulin doses should be doubled. Children should be given a continuous IV insulin
infusion of 0.1 unit/kg/h or higher with or without a bolus.
Ketones should begin to clear within hours if insulin is given in sufficient doses. However, clearance of
ketones may seem to lag because of conversion of
β
-hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate (which is the
"ketone" measured in most hospital laboratories) as acidosis resolves. Serum pH and HCO
levels should
also quickly improve, but restoration of a normal serum HCO
level may take 24 h. Rapid correction of pH
by HCO
administration may be considered if pH remains < 7 after about an hour of initial fluid
resuscitation, but HCO
is associated with development of acute cerebral edema (primarily in children)
and should not be used routinely. If used, only modest pH elevation should be attempted (target pH of
about 7.1), with doses of 50 to 100 mEq over 30 to 60 min, followed by repeat measurement of arterial pH
and serum K.
When plasma glucose becomes 250 to 300 mg/dL (13.88 to 16.65 mmol/L) in adults, 5% dextrose should
be added to IV fluids to reduce the risk of hypoglycemia. Insulin dosage can then be reduced (minimum 1
to 2 units/h), but the continuous IV infusion of regular insulin should be maintained until the anion gap has
narrowed and blood and urine are consistently negative for ketones. Insulin replacement may then be
switched to regular insulin 5 to 10 units sc q 4 to 6 h. When the patient is stable and able to eat, a typical
split-mixed or basal-bolus insulin regimen is begun. IV insulin should be continued for 1 to 4 h after the
initial dose of sc insulin is given. Children should continue to receive 0.05 unit/kg/h insulin infusion until sc
insulin is initiated and pH is > 7.3.
Hypokalemia prevention requires replacement of 20 to 30 mEq K in each liter of IV fluid to keep serum K
between 4 and 5 mEq/L. If serum K is < 3.3 mEq/L, insulin should be withheld and K given at 40 mEq/h
until serum K is ≥ 3.3 mEq/L; if serum K is > 5 mEq/L, K supplementation can be withheld. Initially normal
or elevated serum K measurements may reflect shifts from intracellular stores in response to acidemia
and belie the true K deficits that almost all DKA patients have. Insulin replacement rapidly shifts K into
cells, so levels should be checked hourly or every other hour in the initial stages of treatment.
Hypophosphatemia often develops during treatment of DKA, but phosphate repletion is of unclear benefit
in most cases. If indicated (eg, if rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis, or neurologic deterioration occurs), K
phosphate 1 to 2 mmol/kg of phosphate, can be infused over 6 to 12 h. If K phosphate is given, the serum
Ca level usually decreases and should be monitored.
Treatment of suspected cerebral edema is hyperventilation, corticosteroids, and mannitol, but these
measures are often ineffective after the onset of respiratory arrest.
Nonketotic Hyperosmolar Syndrome
(Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State)
Nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome (NKHS) is a metabolic complication of diabetes mellitus
(DM) characterized by hyperglycemia, extreme dehydration, hyperosmolar plasma, and altered
consciousness. It most often occurs in type 2 DM, often in the setting of physiologic stress.
NKHS is diagnosed by severe hyperglycemia and serum hyperosmolarity and absence of
significant ketosis. Treatment is IV saline solution and insulin. Complications include coma,
seizures, and death
.
NKHS is a complication of type 2 DM and has a mortality rate of up to 40%. It usually develops after a
period of symptomatic hyperglycemia in which fluid intake is inadequate to prevent extreme dehydration
due to hyperglycemia-induced osmotic diuresis. The precipitating factor may be a coexisting acute
infection, drugs that impair glucose tolerance (glucocorticoids) or increase fluid loss (diuretics), medical
nonadherence, or other medical conditions. Serum ketones are not present because the amounts of
insulin present in most patients with type 2 DM are adequate to suppress ketogenesis. Because
symptoms of acidosis are not present, most patients endure a significantly longer period of osmotic
dehydration before presentation, and thus plasma glucose (> 600 mg/dL [> 33 mmol/L]) and
osmolarity (>
320 mOsm/L) are typically much higher than in diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
===PAGE:1030===
Symptoms and Signs
The primary symptom of NKHS is altered consciousness varying from confusion or disorientation to
coma, usually as a result of extreme dehydration with or without prerenal azotemia, hyperglycemia, and
hyperosmolarity. In contrast to DKA, focal or generalized seizures and transient hemiplegia may occur.
Diagnosis
• Blood glucose level
• Serum osmolarity
Generally, NKHS is initially suspected when a markedly elevated glucose level is found in a fingerstick
specimen obtained in the course of a workup of altered mental status. If measurements have not already
been obtained, measurement of serum electrolytes, BUN and creatinine, glucose, ketones, and
osmolarity should be done. Urine should be tested for ketones. Serum K levels are usually normal, but Na
may be low or high depending on volume deficits. BUN and serum creatinine levels are markedly
increased. Arterial pH is usually > 7.3, but occasionally mild metabolic acidosis develops due to lactate
accumulation.
The average fluid deficit is 10 L, and acute circulatory collapse is a common cause of death. Widespread
thrombosis is a frequent finding on autopsy, and in some cases bleeding may occur as a consequence of
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Other complications include aspiration pneumonia, acute renal
failure, and acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Treatment
• IV 0.9% saline
• Correction of any hypokalemia
• IV insulin (as long as serum K is ≥ 3.3 mEq/L)
Treatment is 0.9% saline solution 1 L IV over 30 min, then at 1 L/h to raise BP and improve circulation and
urine output. It can be replaced by 0.45% saline when BP becomes normal and plasma glucose reaches
300 mg/dL. The rate of infusion of IV fluids should be adjusted depending on BP, cardiac status, and the
balance between fluid input and output.
Insulin is given at 0.15 unit/kg IV bolus followed by a 0.1 unit/kg/h infusion after the first liter of saline has
been infused. Hydration alone can sometimes precipitously decrease plasma glucose, so insulin dose
may need to be reduced. A too-quick reduction in osmolality can lead to cerebral edema. Occasional
patients with insulin-resistant type 2 DM with NKHS require larger insulin doses. Once plasma glucose
reaches 200 to 250 mg/dL, insulin infusion should be reduced to basal levels (1 to 2 units/h) until
rehydration is complete and the patient is able to eat. Addition of 5% dextrose infusion may occasionally
be needed to avoid hypoglycemia. After recovery from the acute episode, patients are usually switched to
adjusted doses of sc insulin. Most patients can resume using oral antihyperglycemic drugs once their
condition is stable.
K replacement is similar to DKA: 40 mEq/h for serum K < 3.3 mEq/L; 20 to 30 mEq/h for serum K between
3.3 and 4.9 mEq/L; and none for serum K ≥ 5 mEq/L.
Alcoholic Ketoacidosis
Alcoholic ketoacidosis is a metabolic complication of alcohol use and starvation characterized
by hyperketonemia and anion gap metabolic acidosis without significant hyperglycemia.
Alcoholic ketoacidosis causes nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Diagnosis is by history
and findings of ketoacidosis without hyperglycemia. Treatment is IV saline solution and
dextrose infusion
.
===PAGE:1031===
Alcoholic ketoacidosis is attributed to the combined effects of alcohol and starvation on glucose
metabolism.
Pathophysiology
Alcohol diminishes hepatic gluconeogenesis and leads to decreased insulin secretion, increased lipolysis,
impaired fatty acid oxidation, and subsequent ketogenesis. Counter-regulatory hormones are increased
and may further inhibit insulin secretion. Plasma glucose levels are usually low or normal, but mild
hyperglycemia sometimes occurs.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, an alcohol binge leads to vomiting and the cessation of alcohol or food intake for ≥ 24 h. During
this period of starvation, vomiting continues and abdominal pain develops, leading the patient to seek
medical attention. Pancreatitis may occur.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Calculation of anion gap
• Exclusion of other disorders
Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion; similar symptoms in an alcoholic patient may result from
acute pancreatitis, methanol
or ethylene glycol poisoning, or diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). In patients
suspected of having alcoholic ketoacidosis serum electrolytes (including Mg), BUN and creatinine,
glucose, ketones, amylase, lipase, and osmolarity should be measured. Urine should be tested for
ketones. Patients who appear significantly ill and those with positive ketones should probably have ABG
and serum lactate measurement. The absence of hyperglycemia makes DKA improbable. Those with mild
hyperglycemia may have underlying diabetes mellitus, which may be recognized by elevated levels of
glycosylated Hb (HbA
1c
). Typical laboratory findings include a high anion gap metabolic acidosis,
ketonemia, and low levels of K, Mg, and P. Detection of acidosis may be complicated by concurrent
metabolic alkalosis due to vomiting, resulting in a relatively normal pH; the main clue is the elevated anion
gap. If history does not rule out toxic alcohol ingestion as a cause of the elevated anion gap, serum
methanol and ethylene glycol levels should be obtained. Ca oxalate crystals in the urine also suggests
ethylene glycol poisoning. Lactic acid levels are often elevated because of hypoperfusion and the altered
balance of reduction and oxidation reactions in the liver.
Treatment
• IV thiamin and other vitamins plus Mg
• IV 5% dextrose in 0.9% saline
Treatment begins with an IV infusion of 5% dextrose in 0.9% saline solution, preceded by thiamin 100 mg
IV to prevent development of Wernicke's encephalopathy or Korsakoff's psychosis. Initial IV fluids should
contain added water-soluble vitamins and Mg, with K replacement as required. Ketoacidosis and GI
symptoms usually respond rapidly. Use of insulin is appropriate only if there is any question of atypical
DKA or if hyperglycemia > 300 mg/dL develops.
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia unrelated to exogenous insulin therapy is an uncommon clinical syndrome
characterized by low plasma glucose level, symptomatic sympathetic nervous system
stimulation, and CNS dysfunction. Many drugs and disorders cause it. Diagnosis requires blood
tests done at the time of symptoms or during a 72-h fast. Treatment is provision of glucose
===PAGE:1032===
combined with treatment of the underlying disorder
.
Most commonly, symptomatic hypoglycemia is a complication of drug treatment of diabetes mellitus (DM).
Oral antihyperglycemics or insulin may be involved.
Symptomatic hypoglycemia unrelated to treatment of DM is relatively rare, in part because the body has
extensive counter-regulatory mechanisms to compensate for low blood glucose levels. Glucagon and
epinephrine levels surge in response to acute hypoglycemia and seem to be the first line of defense.
Cortisol and growth hormone levels also increase acutely and are important in the recovery from
prolonged hypoglycemia. The threshold for release of these hormones is usually above that for
hypoglycemic symptoms.
Etiology
Causes of physiologic hypoglycemia can be classified as
• Reactive (postprandial) or fasting
• Insulin-mediated or non-insulin-mediated
• Drug-induced or nondrug-induced
Insulin-mediated causes include exogenous administration of insulin or an insulin secretagogue and
insulin-secreting tumors (insulinomas). A helpful practical classification is based on clinical status:
whether hypoglycemia occurs in patients who appear healthy or ill. Within these categories, causes of
hypoglycemia can be divided into drug-induced and other causes. Pseudohypoglycemia occurs when
processing of blood specimens in untreated test tubes is delayed and cells, such as RBCs and
leukocytes (especially if increased, as in leukemia or polycythemia), consume glucose. Factitious
hypoglycemia is true hypoglycemia induced by nontherapeutic administration of sulfonylureas or insulin.
Symptoms and Signs
The surge in autonomic activity in response to low plasma glucose causes sweating, nausea, warmth,
anxiety, tremulousness, palpitations, and possibly hunger and paresthesias. Insufficient glucose supply to
the brain causes headache, blurred or double vision, confusion, difficulty speaking, seizures, and coma.
In controlled settings, autonomic symptoms begin at or beneath a plasma glucose level of about 60 mg/dL
(3.33 mmol/L), whereas CNS symptoms occur at or below a glucose level of about 50 mg/dL (2.78
mmol/L). However, symptoms suggestive of hypoglycemia are far more common than the condition itself.
Most people with glucose levels at these thresholds have no symptoms, and most people
with symptoms
suggestive of hypoglycemia have normal glucose concentrations.
Diagnosis
• Blood glucose level correlated with clinical findings
• Response to dextrose (or other sugar) administration
• Sometimes 72-h fast
• Sometimes insulin, C-peptide, and proinsulin levels
In principle, diagnosis requires verification that a low plasma glucose level (< 50 mg/dL [< 2.78 mmol/L])
exists at the time hypoglycemic symptoms occur and that the symptoms are responsive to dextrose
administration. If a practitioner is present when symptoms occur, blood should be sent for glucose testing.
If glucose is normal, hypoglycemia is ruled out and no further testing is needed. If glucose is abnormally
low, serum insulin, C-peptide, and proinsulin measured from the same tube can distinguish insulinmediated from non-insulin-mediated and factitious from physiologic hypoglycemia and can obviate the
need for further testing. Insulin growth factor 2 (IGF-2) levels may help identify non-islet cell (IGF-2
===PAGE:1033===
secreting) tumors, which are an unusual cause of hypoglycemia.
In practice, however, it is unusual that practitioners are present when patients experience symptoms
suggestive of hypoglycemia. Home glucose meters are unreliable for quantifying hypoglycemia, and there
are no clear glycosylated Hb (HbA
1c
) thresholds that distinguish long-term hypoglycemia from
normoglycemia. So the need for more extensive diagnostic testing is based on the probability that an
underlying disorder that could cause hypoglycemia exists given a patient's clinical appearance and
coexisting illnesses.
A 72-h fast done in a controlled setting is the standard for diagnosis. Patients drink only noncaloric,
noncaffeinated beverages, and plasma glucose is measured at baseline, whenever symptoms occur, and
q 4 to 6 h or q 1 to 2 h if glucose falls below 60 mg/dL (3.3 mmol/L). Serum insulin, C-peptide, and
proinsulin should be measured at times of hypoglycemia to distinguish endogenous from exogenous
(factitious) hypoglycemia. The fast is terminated at 72 h if the patient has experienced no symptoms and
glucose remains normal, sooner if glucose decreases to ≤ 45 mg/dL (≤ 2.5 mmol/L) in the presence of
hypoglycemic symptoms. End-of-fast measurements include
β
-hydroxybutyrate (which should be low in
insulinoma), serum sulfonylurea to detect drug-induced hypoglycemia, and plasma glucose after IV
glucagon injection to detect an increase characteristic of insulinoma. Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive
values for detecting hypoglycemia by this protocol have not been reported. There is no definitive lower
limit of glucose that unequivocally defines pathologic hypoglycemia during a 72-h fast. Normal women
tend to have lower fasting glucose levels than men and may have glucose levels as low as 30 mg/dL
without symptoms. If symptomatic hypoglycemia has not occurred by 72 h, the patient should exercise
vigorously for about 30 min. If hypoglycemia still does not occur, insulinoma is essentially excluded and
further testing is generally not indicated.
Treatment
• Oral sugar or IV dextrose
• Sometimes parenteral glucagon
Immediate treatment of hypoglycemia involves provision of glucose. Patients able to eat or drink can drink
juices, sucrose water, or glucose solutions; eat candy or other foods; or chew on glucose tablets when
symptoms occur. Infants and younger children may be given 10% dextrose solution 2 to 5 mL/kg IV bolus.
Adults and older children unable to eat or drink can be given glucagon 0.5 (< 20 kg) or 1 mg (≥ 20 kg) sc
or IM or 50% dextrose 50 to 100 mL IV bolus, with or without a continuous infusion of 5 to 10% dextrose
solution sufficient to resolve symptoms. The efficacy of glucagon depends on the size of hepatic glycogen
stores; glucagon has little effect on plasma glucose in patients who have been fasting or who are
hypoglycemic for long periods.
Underlying disorders causing hypoglycemia must also be treated. Islet cell and non-islet cell tumors must
first be localized, then removed by enucleation or partial pancreatectomy; about 6% recur within 10 yr.
Diazoxide and octreotide can be used to control symptoms while the patient is awaiting surgery or when a
patient refuses or is not a candidate for a procedure. Islet cell hypertrophy is most often a diagnosis of
exclusion after an islet cell tumor is sought but not identified. Drugs that cause hypoglycemia, including
alcohol, must be stopped. Treatment of hereditary and endocrine disorders; hepatic, renal, and heart
failure; and sepsis and shock are described elsewhere.
===PAGE:1034===
Chapter 100. Lipid Disorders
Introduction
Lipids are fats that are either absorbed from food or synthesized by the liver. Triglycerides (TGs) and
cholesterol contribute most to disease, although all lipids are physiologically important. The primary
function of TGs is to store energy in adipocytes and muscle cells; cholesterol is a ubiquitous constituent
of cell membranes, steroids, bile acids, and signaling molecules. All lipids are hydrophobic and mostly
insoluble in blood, so they require transport within hydrophilic, spherical structures called lipoproteins,
which possess surface proteins (apoproteins, or apolipoproteins) that are cofactors and ligands for lipidprocessing enzymes (see
Table 100-1
). Lipoproteins are classified by size and density (defined as the ratio of lipid to protein) and
are important because high levels of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) and low levels of high-density
lipoproteins (HDL) are major risk factors for atherosclerotic heart disease (.
Physiology
Pathway defects in lipoprotein synthesis, processing, and clearance can lead to accumulation of
atherogenic lipids in plasma and endothelium.
Exogenous (dietary) lipid metabolism:
Over 95% of dietary lipids are TGs; the rest are phospholipids,
free fatty acids (FFAs), cholesterol (present in foods as esterified cholesterol), and fat-soluble vitamins.
Dietary TGs are digested in the stomach and duodenum into monoglycerides (MGs) and FFAs by gastric
lipase, emulsification from vigorous stomach peristalsis, and pancreatic lipase. Dietary cholesterol esters
are de-esterified into free cholesterol by these same mechanisms. MGs, FFAs, and free cholesterol are
then solubilized in the intestine by bile acid micelles, which shuttle them to intestinal villi for absorption.
Once absorbed into the enterocyte, they are reassembled into TGs and packaged with cholesterol into
chylomicrons, the largest lipoproteins.
[Table 100-1.
Major Apoproteins and Enzymes Important to Lipid Metabolism]
Chylomicrons
transport dietary TGs and cholesterol from within enterocytes through lymphatics into the
circulation. In the capillaries of adipose and muscle tissue, apoprotein C-II (apo C-II) on the chylomicron
activates endothelial lipoprotein lipase (LPL) to convert 90% of chylomicron TG to fatty acids and
glycerol, which are taken up by adipocytes and muscle cells for energy use or storage. Cholesterol-rich
chylomicron remnants then circulate back to the liver, where they are cleared in a process mediated by
apoprotein E (apo E).
Endogenous lipid metabolism:
Lipoproteins synthesized by the liver transport endogenous TGs and
cholesterol. Lipoproteins circulate through the blood continuously until the TGs they contain are taken up
by peripheral tissues or the lipoproteins themselves are cleared by the liver. Factors that stimulate hepatic
lipoprotein synthesis generally lead to elevated plasma cholesterol and TG levels.
Very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL)
contain apoprotein B-100 (apo B), are synthesized in the liver,
and transport TGs and cholesterol to peripheral tissues. VLDL is the way the liver exports excess TGs
derived from plasma FFA and chylomicron remnants; VLDL synthesis increases with increases in
intrahepatic FFA, such as occur with high-fat diets and when excess adipose tissue releases FFAs
directly into the circulation (eg, in obesity, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus). Apo C-II on the VLDL surface
activates endothelial LPL to break down TGs into FFAs and glycerol, which are taken up by cells.
Intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL)
are the product of LPL processing of VLDL and chylomicrons.
IDL are cholesterol-rich VLDL and chylomicron remnants that are either cleared by the liver or
metabolized by hepatic lipase into LDL, which retains apo B.
Low-density lipoproteins (LDL),
the products of VLDL and IDL metabolism, are the most cholesterolrich of all lipoproteins. About 40 to 60% of all LDL are cleared by the liver in a process mediated by apo B
and hepatic LDL receptors. The rest are taken up by either hepatic LDL or nonhepatic non-LDL
(scavenger) receptors. Hepatic LDL receptors are down-regulated by delivery of cholesterol to the liver
===PAGE:1035===
by chylomicrons and by increased dietary saturated fat; they can be up-regulated by decreased dietary
fat and cholesterol. Nonhepatic scavenger receptors, most notably on macrophages, take up excess
oxidized circulating LDL not processed by hepatic receptors. Monocytes rich in oxidized LDL migrate into
the subendothelial space and become macrophages; these macrophages then take up more oxidized LDL
and form foam cells within atherosclerotic plaques (. There are 2 forms of LDL: large,
buoyant and small, dense LDL. Small, dense LDL is especially rich in cholesterol esters, associated with
metabolic disturbances such as hypertriglyceridemia and insulin resistance, and especially atherogenic.
The increased atherogenicity of small, dense LDL derives from less efficient hepatic LDL receptor
binding, leading to prolonged circulation and exposure to endothelium and increased oxidation.
High-density lipoproteins (HDL)
are initially cholesterol-free lipoproteins that are synthesized in both
enterocytes and the liver. HDL metabolism is complex, but HDL's overall role is to obtain cholesterol from
peripheral tissues and other lipoproteins and transport it to where it is needed most—other cells, other
lipoproteins (using cholesteryl ester transfer protein [CETP]), and the liver (for clearance). Its overall
effect is anti-atherogenic. Efflux of free cholesterol from cells is mediated by ATP-binding cassette
transporter A1 (ABCA1), which combines with apoprotein A-I (apo A-I) to produce nascent HDL. Free
cholesterol in nascent HDL is then esterified by the enzyme lecithin-cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT),
producing mature HDL. Blood HDL levels may not completely represent reverse cholesterol transport.
Lipoprotein (a) [Lp (a)]
is LDL that contains apoprotein(a), characterized by 5 cysteine-rich regions
called kringles. One of these regions is homologous with plasminogen and is thought to competitively
inhibit fibrinolysis and thus predispose to thrombus. The Lp(a) may also directly promote atherosclerosis.
The metabolic pathways of Lp(a) production and clearance are not well characterized, but levels increase
in patients with diabetic nephropathy.
Dyslipidemia
(Hyperlipidemia)
Dyslipidemia is
elevation
of plasma cholesterol, triglycerides (TGs), or both, or a low highdensity lipoprotein level that contributes to the development of atherosclerosis. Causes may be
primary (genetic) or secondary. Diagnosis is by measuring plasma levels of total cholesterol,
TGs, and individual lipoproteins. Treatment is dietary changes, exercise, and lipid-lowering
drugs.
There is no natural cutoff between normal and abnormal lipid levels because lipid measurements are
continuous. A linear relation probably exists between lipid levels and cardiovascular risk, so many people
with "normal"
cholesterol levels benefit from achieving still lower levels. Consequently, there are no
numeric definitions of dyslipidemia; the term is applied to lipid levels for which treatment has proved
beneficial. Proof of benefit is strongest for lowering elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels. In the
overall population, evidence is less strong for a benefit from lowering elevated TG and increasing low
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels, in part because elevated TG and low HDL levels are more
predictive of cardiovascular risk in women than in men.
HDL levels do not always predict cardiovascular risk. For example, high HDL levels caused by some
genetic disorders may not protect against cardiovascular disorders, and low HDL levels caused by some
genetic disorders may not increase the risk of cardiovascular disorders. Although HDL levels predict
cardiovascular risk in the overall population, the increased risk may be caused by other factors, such as
accompanying lipid and metabolic abnormalities, rather than the HDL level itself.
Classification
Dyslipidemias were traditionally classified by patterns of elevation in lipids and lipoproteins (Fredrickson
phenotype—see
Table 100-2
). A more practical system categorizes dyslipidemias as primary or secondary and
characterizes them by increases in cholesterol only (pure or isolated hypercholesterolemia), increases in
TGs only (pure or isolated hypertriglyceridemia), or increases in both cholesterol and TGs (mixed or
combined hyperlipidemias). This system does not take into account specific lipoprotein abnormalities (eg,
===PAGE:1036===
low HDL or high LDL) that may contribute to disease despite normal cholesterol and TG levels.
Etiology
Primary (genetic) causes and secondary (lifestyle and other) causes contribute to dyslipidemias in varying
degrees. For example, in familial combined hyperlipidemia, expression may occur only in the presence of
significant secondary causes.
Primary causes:
Primary causes are single or multiple gene mutations that result in either
overproduction or defective clearance of TG and LDL cholesterol, or in underproduction or excessive
clearance of HDL (see
Table 100-3
). Primary disorders, the most common cause of dyslipidemia in children, do not cause a large
percentage of cases in adults. The names of many reflect an old nomenclature in which lipoproteins were
detected and distinguished by how they separated into
α
(HDL) and
β
(LDL) bands on electrophoretic
gels.
[Table 100-2.
Lipoprotein Patterns (Fredrickson Phenotypes)]
Secondary causes:
Secondary causes contribute to most cases of dyslipidemia in adults. The most
important secondary cause in developed countries is a sedentary lifestyle with excessive dietary intake of
saturated fat, cholesterol, and trans fats. Trans fats are polyunsaturated or monounsaturated fatty acids
to which hydrogen atoms have been added; they are commonly used in many processed foods and are
as atherogenic as saturated fat. Other common secondary causes include diabetes mellitus, alcohol
overuse, chronic kidney disease, hypothyroidism, primary biliary cirrhosis and other cholestatic liver
diseases, and drugs, such as thiazides,
β
-blockers, retinoids, highly active antiretroviral agents, estrogen
and progestins, and glucocorticoids.
Diabetes
is an especially significant secondary cause because patients tend to have an atherogenic
combination of high TGs; high small, dense LDL fractions; and low HDL (diabetic dyslipidemia,
hypertriglyceridemic hyperapo B). Patients with type 2 diabetes are especially at risk. The combination
may be a consequence of obesity, poor control of diabetes, or both, which may increase circulating free
fatty acids (FFAs), leading to increased hepatic very-low-density lipoprotien (VLDL) production. TG-rich
VLDL then transfers TG and cholesterol to LDL and HDL, promoting formation of TG-rich, small, dense
LDL and clearance of TG-rich HDL. Diabetic dyslipidemia is often exacerbated by the increased caloric
intake and physical inactivity that characterize the lifestyles of some patients with type 2 diabetes.
Women with diabetes may be at special risk of cardiac disease from this form.
[Table 100-3.
Genetic (Primary) Dyslipidemias]
Symptoms and Signs
Dyslipidemia itself usually causes no symptoms but can lead to symptomatic vascular disease, including
coronary artery disease (CAD) and peripheral arterial disease. High levels of TGs (> 1000 mg/dL [> 11.3
mmol/L]) can cause acute pancreatitis. High levels of LDL can cause eyelid xanthelasmas; arcus
corneae; and tendinous xanthomas at the Achilles, elbow, and knee tendons and over
metacarpophalangeal joints. Patients with the homozygous form of familial hypercholesterolemia may
have the above findings plus planar or cutaneous xanthomas. Patients with severe elevations of TGs can
have eruptive xanthomas over the trunk, back, elbows, buttocks, knees, hands, and feet. Patients with the
rare dysbetalipoproteinemia can have palmar and tuberous xanthomas.
Severe hypertriglyceridemia (> 2000 mg/dL [> 22.6 mmol/L]) can give retinal arteries and veins a creamy
white appearance (lipemia retinalis). Extremely high lipid levels also give a lactescent (milky) appearance
to blood plasma. Symptoms can include paresthesias, dypsnea, and confusion.
Diagnosis
• Serum lipid profile (measured total cholesterol, TG, and HDL cholesterol and calculated LDL cholesterol
and VLDL)
===PAGE:1037===
Dyslipidemia is suspected in patients with characteristic physical findings or complications of dyslipidemia
(eg, atherosclerotic disease). Primary lipid disorders are suspected when patients have physical signs of
dyslipidemia, onset of premature atherosclerotic disease (at < 60 yr), a family history of atherosclerotic
disease, or serum cholesterol > 240 mg/dL (> 6.2 mmol/L). Dyslipidemia is diagnosed by measuring
serum lipids. Routine measurements (lipid profile) include total cholesterol (TC), TGs, HDL cholesterol,
and LDL cholesterol.
Lipid profile measurement:
TC, TGs, and HDL cholesterol are measured directly; TC and TG values
reflect cholesterol and TGs in all circulating lipoproteins, including chylomicrons, VLDL, intermediatedensity lipoprotein (IDL), LDL, and HDL. TC values vary by 10% and TGs by up to 25% day-to-day even
in the absence of a disorder. TC and HDL cholesterol can be measured in the non-fasting state, but most
patients should have all lipids measured while fasting for maximum accuracy and consistency.
Testing should be postponed until after resolution of acute illness, because TGs increase and cholesterol
levels decrease in inflammatory states. Lipid profiles can vary for about 30 days after an acute MI;
however, results obtained within 24 h after MI are usually reliable enough to guide initial lipid-lowering
therapy.
LDL cholesterol values are most often calculated as the amount of cholesterol not contained in HDL and
VLDL. VLDL is estimated by TG ÷ 5 because the cholesterol concentration
in VLDL particles is usually
one fifth of the total lipid in the particle. Thus, LDL cholesterol = TC - [HDL cholesterol + (TGs ÷ 5)]
(Friedewald formula). This calculation is valid only when TGs are < 400 mg/dL and patients are fasting,
because eating increases TGs. The calculated LDL cholesterol value incorporates measures of all nonHDL, nonchylomicron cholesterol, including that in IDL and lipoprotein (a) [Lp(a)]. LDL can also be
measured directly using plasma ultracentrifugation, which separates chylomicrons and VLDL fractions
from HDL and LDL, and by an immunoassay method. Direct measurement may be useful in some patients
with elevated TGs, but these direct measurements are not routinely necessary. The role of apoprotein B
testing is under study because values reflect all non-HDL cholesterol (in VLDL, VLDL remnants, IDL, and
LDL) and may be more predictive of CAD risk than LDL alone.
Other tests:
Patients with premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, cardiovascular disease with
normal or near-normal lipid levels, or high LDL levels refractory to drug therapy should probably have
Lp(a) levels measured. Lp(a) levels may also be directly measured in patients with borderline high LDL
cholesterol levels to determine whether drug therapy is warranted. C-reactive protein and homocysteine
measurement may be considered in the same populations.
Secondary causes:
Tests for secondary causes of dyslipidemia—including measurements of fasting
glucose, liver enzymes, creatinine, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and urinary protein—should be
done in most patients with newly diagnosed dyslipidemia and when a component of the lipid profile has
inexplicably changed for the worse.
Screening:
A fasting lipid profile (TC, TGs, HDL cholesterol, and calculated LDL cholesterol) should be
obtained in all adults ≥ 20 yr and should be repeated every 5 yr. Lipid measurement should be
accompanied by assessment of other cardiovascular risk factors, defined as
• Diabetes mellitus
• Cigarette use
• Hypertension
• Family history of CAD in a male 1st-degree relative before age 55 or a female 1st-degree relative before
age 65
A definite age after which patients no longer require screening has not been established, but evidence
supports screening of patients into their 80s, especially in the presence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease.
===PAGE:1038===
Indications for screening patients < 20 yr are atherosclerotic risk factors, such as diabetes, hypertension,
cigarette smoking, and obesity; premature CAD in a parent, grandparent, or sibling; or a cholesterol level
> 240 mg/dL (> 6.2 mmol/L) or known dyslipidemia in a parent. If information on relatives is unavailable,
as in the case of adopted children, screening is at the discretion of the health care practitioner.
Patients with an extensive family history of heart disease should also be screened by measuring Lp(a)
levels.
Treatment
• Risk assessment by explicit criteria
• Lifestyle changes (eg, exercise, dietary modification)
• For high LDL cholesterol, statins, sometimes bile acid sequestrants, ezetimibe, and other measures
• For high TG or low HDL cholesterol, niacin, fibrates, and sometimes other measures
General principles:
Treatment is indicated for all patients with cardiovascular disease (secondary
prevention) and for some without (primary prevention). The National Institutes of Health's National
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Adult Treatment Panel III (ATPIII) guidelines are the most common
reference for deciding which adults should be treated (see
Tables 100-4
and
100-5
). The guidelines focus primarily on reducing elevated LDL cholesterol levels and secondarily on
treating high TGs, low HDL, and metabolic syndrome (. An alternate treatment guide (the
Sheffield table) uses TC:HDL ratios combined with presence of CAD risk factors to predict cardiovascular
risk, but this approach probably leads to undertreatment.
Treatment of children is controversial; dietary changes may be difficult to implement, and no data suggest
that lowering lipid levels in childhood effectively prevents heart disease in adulthood. Moreover, the safety
and effectiveness of long-term lipid-lowering treatment are questionable. Nevertheless, the American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends treatment for some children who have elevated LDL
cholesterol levels.
Treatment options depend on the specific lipid abnormality, although different lipid abnormalities often
coexist. In some patients, a single abnormality may require several therapies; in others, a single treatment
may be adequate for several abnormalities. Treatment should always include treatment of hypertension
and diabetes, smoking cessation, and in patients
[Table 100-4.
National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III Approach to
Dyslipidemias]
with a 10-yr risk of MI or death from CAD of ≥ 10% (as determined from the Framingham tables—see
Tables 100-6
and
100-7
), low-dose daily aspirin. In general, treatment options for men and women are the same.
Elevated LDL cholesterol:
In
adults
, ATPIII guidelines recommend treatment for those with any of the
following:
• Elevated LDL cholesterol levels and a history of CAD
• Conditions that confer a risk of future cardiac events similar to that of CAD itself (CAD equivalents,
defined as diabetes mellitus, abdominal aortic aneurysm, peripheral arterial disease, and symptomatic
carotid artery disease)
• ≥ 2 CAD risk factors
===PAGE:1039===
ATPIII guidelines recommend that these patients have LDL cholesterol levels lowered to < 100 mg/dL, but
accumulating evidence
[Table 100-5.
Ncep Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines for Treatment of Hyperlipidemia]
suggests that this target may be too high and a target LDL cholesterol < 70 mg/dL is an option for
patients at very high risk (eg, patients with known CAD and diabetes, other poorly controlled risk factors,
metabolic syndrome, or acute coronary syndrome). When drugs are used, a dose providing at least a 30
to 40% decrease in LDL cholesterol is desirable (see
Table 100-8
).
For
children
, the AAP recommends dietary treatment for children with LDL cholesterol > 110 mg/dL. Drug
therapy is recommended for children > 8 yr and with either of the following:
• Poor response to dietary therapy, LDL cholesterol ≥ 190 mg/dL, and no family history of premature
cardiovascular disease
• LDL cholesterol ≥ 160 mg/dL and a family history of premature cardiovascular disease or ≥ 2 risk factors
for premature cardiovascular disease
Childhood risk factors besides family history and diabetes include cigarette smoking, hypertension, low
HDL cholesterol (< 35 mg/dL), obesity, and physical inactivity.
Treatment options to lower LDL cholesterol in all age groups include lifestyle changes (diet and exercise),
drugs, dietary supplements, procedural interventions, and experimental therapies. Many of these options
are also effective for treating other lipid abnormalities. Exercise lowers LDL cholesterol in some people; it
is also essential to maintain ideal body weight. Dietary changes and exercise should be the initial
approach whenever feasible.
Lifestyle changes
can involve diet and exercise. Dietary changes include decreasing intake of saturated
fats and cholesterol; increasing the proportion of dietary fiber, and complex carbohydrates; and
maintaining ideal body weight. Referral to a dietitian is often useful, especially for older people. The
length
[Table 100-6.
Framingham Risk Tables for Men]
of time for which lifestyle changes should be attempted before beginning lipid-lowering drugs is
controversial. In patients at average or low cardiovascular risk, 3 to 6 mo is reasonable. Generally, 2 to 3
visits with a patient over 2 to 3 mo are sufficient to assess motivation and adherence.
Drugs are the next step when lifestyle changes are not effective. However, for patients with extremely
elevated LDL cholesterol (> 200 mg/dL [> 5.2 mmol/L]) and those at high cardiovascular risk, drug
therapy should accompany diet and exercise from the start.
Statins
are the drugs and possibly treatment of choice for LDL cholesterol reduction; they demonstrably
reduce cardiovascular mortality. Statins inhibit hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA reductase, a key enzyme in
cholesterol synthesis, leading to up-regulation of LDL receptors and increased LDL clearance. They
reduce LDL cholesterol by up to 60% and produce small increases in HDL and modest decreases in TGs.
Statins also seem to decrease intraarterial inflammation, systemic inflammation, or both by stimulating
production of endothelial nitric oxide and may have other beneficial effects. Adverse effects are
uncommon but include liver enzyme elevations and myositis or rhabdomyolysis. Muscle toxicity without
enzyme elevation has also been reported. Adverse effects are more common among older patients,
patients with several disorders, and patients taking several drugs. In some patients, changing from one
statin to another or lowering the dose relieves the problem. Muscle toxicity seems to be most common
when some of the statins are used with drugs that inhibit cytochrome P3A4 (eg, macrolide antibiotics,
azole antifungals, cyclosporine) and with fibrates, especially gemfibrozil. Properties of statins differ
[Table 100-7.
Framingham Risk Tables for Women]
===PAGE:1040===
slightly by drug, and the choice of drug should be based on patient characteristics, LDL cholesterol level,
and provider discretion (see
Table 100-8
).
Bile acid sequestrants
block intestinal bile acid reabsorption, forcing up-regulation of hepatic LDL
receptors to recruit circulating cholesterol for bile synthesis. They are proved to reduce cardiovascular
mortality. Bile acid sequestrants are usually used with statins or with nicotinic acid ( to
augment LDL cholesterol reduction and are the drugs of choice for children and women who are or are
planning to become pregnant. Bile acid sequestrants are safe, but their use is limited by adverse effects
of bloating, nausea, cramping, and constipation. They may also increase TGs, so their use is
contraindicated in patients with hypertriglyceridemia. Cholestyramine and colestipol, but not colesevelam,
interfere with absorption of other drugs—notably thiazides,
β
-blockers, warfarin, digoxin, and thyroxine
—an effect that can be decreased by administration 4 h before or 1 h after other drugs.
Cholesterol absorption inhibitors
, such as ezetimibe, inhibit intestinal absorption of cholesterol and
phytosterol. Ezetimibe usually lowers LDL cholesterol by 15 to 20% and causes small increases in HDL
and a mild decrease in TGs. Ezetimibe can be used as monotherapy in patients intolerant to statins or
added to statins for patients on maximum doses with persistent LDL cholesterol elevation. Adverse effects
are infrequent.
Dietary supplements
that lower LDL cholesterol levels include fiber supplements and commercially
available margarines and other products containing plant sterols (sitosterol and campesterol) or stanols.
The latter reduce LDL cholesterol by up to 10% without affecting HDL or TGs by competitively displacing
cholesterol from intestinal micelles.
[Table 100-8.
Lipid-Lowering Drugs]
Procedural approaches
are reserved for patients with severe hyperlipidemia (LDL cholesterol > 300
mg/dL) that is refractory to conventional therapy, such as occurs with familial hypercholesterolemia.
Options include LDL apheresis (in which LDL is removed by extracorporeal plasma exchange), ileal
bypass (to block reabsorption of bile acids), liver transplantation (which transplants LDL receptors), and
portocaval shunting (which decreases LDL production by unknown mechanisms). LDL apheresis is the
procedure of choice in most instances when maximally tolerated therapy fails to lower LDL adequately.
Apheresis is also the usual therapy in patients with the homozygous form of familial hypercholesterolemia
who have limited or no response to drug therapy.
Future therapies
to reduce LDL include peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists that have
thiazolidinedione-like and fibrate-like properties, LDL-receptor activators, LPL activators, and recombinant
apo E. Cholesterol vaccination (to induce anti-LDL antibodies and hasten LDL clearance from serum) and
gene transfer are conceptually appealing therapies that are under study but years away from being
available for use.
Elevated TGs:
Though it is unclear whether elevated TGs independently contribute to cardiovascular
disease, they are associated with multiple metabolic abnormalities that contribute to CAD (eg, diabetes,
metabolic syndrome). Consensus is emerging that lowering elevated TGs is beneficial (see
Table 100-4
).
No target goals exist, but levels < 150 mg/dL (< 1.7 mmol/L) are generally considered desirable. No
guidelines specifically address treatment of elevated TGs in children.
The
overall treatment strategy
is to first implement lifestyle changes, including exercise, weight loss,
and avoidance of concentrated dietary sugar and alcohol. Intake of 2 to 4 servings/wk of marine fish high
in
ω
-3 fatty acids may be effective, but the amount of
ω
-3 fatty acids is often lower than needed;
supplements may be helpful. In patients with diabetes, glucose levels should be tightly controlled. If these
measures are ineffective, lipid-lowering drugs should be considered. Patients with very high TGs should
begin drug therapy at diagnosis to more quickly reduce the risk of acute pancreatitis.
Fibrates
reduce TGs by about 50%. They seem to stimulate endothelial LPL, leading to increased fatty
acid oxidation in the liver and muscle and decreased hepatic VLDL synthesis. They also increase HDL by
up to 20%. Fibrates can cause GI adverse effects, including dyspepsia, abdominal pain, and elevated
===PAGE:1041===
liver enzymes. They uncommonly cause cholelithiasis. Fibrates may potentiate muscle toxicity when used
with statins and potentiate the effects of warfarin.
Nicotinic acid
may also be useful (see below).
Statins
can be used in patients with TGs < 500 mg/dL if LDL cholesterol elevations are also present;
statins may reduce both LDL cholesterol and TGs through reduction of VLDL. If only TGs are elevated,
fibrates are the drug of choice.
Omega-3 fatty acids
in high doses (1 to 6 g/day of eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA] and docosahexaenoic
acid [DHA]) can be effective in reducing TGs. The
ω
-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA are the active ingredients
in marine fish oil or
ω
-3 capsules. Adverse effects include eructation and diarrhea. These may be
decreased by giving the fish oil capsules with meals in divided doses (eg, bid or tid). Omega-3 fatty acids
can be a useful adjunct to other therapies.
Low HDL:
Treatment to increase HDL cholesterol levels may decrease risk of death, but data are limited.
ATPIII guidelines define low HDL cholesterol as < 40 mg/dL [< 1.04 mmol/L]; the guidelines do not specify
an HDL cholesterol target level and recommend interventions to raise HDL cholesterol only after LDL
cholesterol targets have been reached. Treatments for LDL cholesterol and TG reduction often increase
HDL cholesterol, and the 3 objectives can sometimes be achieved simultaneously. No guidelines
specifically address treatment of low HDL cholesterol in children.
Treatment includes
lifestyle changes
such as an increase in exercise and weight loss. Alcohol raises
HDL cholesterol but is not routinely recommended as a therapy because of its many other adverse
effects. Drugs are useful when lifestyle changes alone are insufficient.
Nicotinic acid (niacin)
is the most effective drug for increasing HDL. Its mechanism of action is
unknown, but it seems to both increase HDL production and inhibit HDL clearance; it may also mobilize
cholesterol from macrophages. Niacin also decreases TGs and, in doses of 1500 to 2000 mg/day,
reduces LDL cholesterol. Niacin causes flushing, pruritus, and nausea; premedication with low-dose
aspirin may prevent these adverse effects. Extended-release preparations cause flushing less often.
However, most OTC slow-release preparations are not recommended; an exception is polygel controlledrelease niacin. Niacin can cause liver enzyme elevations and occasionally liver failure, insulin resistance,
and hyperuricemia and gout. It may also increase homocysteine levels. In patients with average LDL
cholesterol and below-average HDL cholesterol levels, niacin combined with statin treatment may be
effective in preventing cardiovascular disorders.
Fibrates
increase HDL. Infusion of recombinant HDL (eg, apoprotein A-1 Milano, an HDL variant in which
a cysteine is substituted for an arginine at position 173 allowing for dimer formation) seems promising as
a treatment for atherosclerosis but requires further study.
Elevated Lp(a):
The upper limit of normal for Lp(a) is about 30 mg/dL (0.8 mmol/L), but values in African
Americans run higher. Few data exist to guide the treatment of elevated Lp(a) or to establish treatment
efficacy. Niacin is the only drug that directly decreases Lp(a); it can lower Lp(a) by ≤ 20% at higher doses.
The usual approach in patients with elevated Lp(a) is to lower LDL cholesterol aggressively.
Secondary causes:
Treatment of diabetic dyslipidemia should always involve lifestyle changes, with
statins to reduce LDL cholesterol, fibrates to decrease TGs, or both drugs. Metformin lowers TGs, which
may be a reason to choose it over other oral antihyperglycemic drugs when treating diabetes. Some
thiazolidinediones (TZDs) increase both HDL cholesterol and LDL cholesterol (probably the less
atherogenic large, buoyant type of LDL). Some TZDs also decrease TGs. These antihyperglycemic drugs
should not be chosen over lipid-lowering drugs to treat lipid abnormalities in diabetic patients but may be
useful adjuncts. Patients with very high TG levels and less than optimally controlled diabetes may have
better response to insulin than to oral antihyperglycemic drugs.
Treatment of dyslipidemia in patients with hypothyroidism, renal disease, liver disease, or a combination
of these disorders involves treating the underlying disorders primarily and lipid abnormalities secondarily.
Abnormal lipid levels in patients with low-normal thyroid function (high-normal TSH levels) improve with
===PAGE:1042===
hormone replacement. Reducing the dosage of or stopping drugs that cause lipid abnormalities should be
considered.
Monitoring treatment:
Lipid levels should be monitored periodically after starting treatment. No data
support specific monitoring intervals, but measuring lipid levels 2 to 3 mo after starting or changing
therapies and once or twice yearly after lipid levels are stabilized is common practice.
Despite the low incidence of liver and muscle toxicity with statin use (0.5 to 2% of all users), current
recommendations are for baseline measurements of liver and muscle enzyme levels at the beginning of
treatment. Many practitioners obtain at least one additional set of liver enzyme measurements 4 to 12 wk
after beginning treatment and annually thereafter. Statin therapy can be continued unless liver
enzymes
increase to > 3 times the upper limit of normal. Muscle enzyme levels need not be checked regularly
unless patients develop myalgias or other muscle symptoms. If statin-induced muscle damage is
suspected, statin use is stopped and CK may be measured. When muscle symptoms subside, a lower
dose or a different statin can be tried.
Elevated High-Density Lipoprotein Levels
Elevated high-density lipoprotein (HDL) level is HDL cholesterol > 80 mg/dL (> 2.1 mmol/L).
Elevated HDL cholesterol levels usually correlate with decreased cardiovascular risk; however, high HDL
cholesterol levels caused by some genetic disorders may not protect against cardiovascular disease,
probably because of accompanying lipid and metabolic abnormalities.
Primary causes are single or multiple genetic mutations that result in overproduction or decreased
clearance of HDL. Secondary causes of high HDL cholesterol include all of the following:
• Chronic alcoholism without cirrhosis
• Primary biliary cirrhosis
• Hyperthyroidism
• Drugs (eg, corticosteroids, insulin, phenytoin)
The unexpected finding of high HDL cholesterol in patients not taking lipid-lowering drugs should prompt
a diagnostic evaluation for a secondary cause with measurements of AST, ALT, and thyroid-stimulating
hormone; a negative evaluation suggests a possible primary cause.
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) deficiency
is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused
by a
CETP
gene mutation. CETP facilitates transfer of cholesterol esters from HDL to other lipoproteins,
and CETP deficiency affects low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and slows HDL clearance. Affected
patients display no symptoms or signs but have HDL cholesterol > 150 mg/dL. Protection from
cardiovascular disorders has not been proved. No treatment is necessary.
Familial hyperalphalipoproteinemia
is an autosomal dominant condition caused by various
unidentified and known genetic mutations, including those that cause apoprotein A-I overproduction and
apoprotein C-III variants. The disorder is usually diagnosed incidentally when plasma HDL cholesterol
levels are > 80 mg/dL. Affected patients have no other symptoms or signs. No treatment is necessary.
Hypolipidemia
Hypolipidemia is a decrease in plasma lipoprotein caused by primary (genetic) or secondary
factors. It is usually asymptomatic and diagnosed incidentally on routine lipid screening.
Treatment of secondary hypolipidemia involves treating underlying disorders. Treatment of
primary hypolipidemia is often unnecessary, but patients with some genetic disorders require
high-dose vitamin E and dietary supplementation of fats and other fat-soluble vitamins.
===PAGE:1043===
Etiology
Hypolipidemia is defined as a total cholesterol (TC) < 120 mg/dL (< 3.1 mmol/L) or low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) cholesterol < 50 mg/dL (< 0.13 mmol/L). Secondary causes are far more common than primary
causes and include all of the following:
• Hyperthyroidism
• Chronic infections and other inflammatory states
• Hematologic and other cancers
• Undernutrition (including that accompanying chronic alcohol use)
• Malabsorption
The unexpected finding of low cholesterol or low LDL cholesterol in a patient not taking a lipid-lowering
drug should prompt a diagnostic evaluation, including measurements of AST, ALT, and thyroid-stimulating
hormone; a negative evaluation suggests a possible primary cause.
There are 3 primary disorders in which single or multiple genetic mutations result in underproduction or
increased clearance of LDL.
Abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome):
This autosomal recessive condition is caused
by mutations in the gene for microsomal triglyceride (TG) transfer protein, a protein critical to chylomicron
and very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) formation. Dietary fat cannot be absorbed, and lipoproteins in
both metabolic pathways are virtually absent from serum; TC is typically < 45 mg/dL (< 1.16 mmol/L), TGs
are < 20 mg/dL (< 0.23 mmol/L), and LDL is undetectable. The condition is often first noticed in infants
with fat malabsorption, steatorrhea, and failure to thrive. Intellectual disability may result. Because vitamin
E is distributed to peripheral tissues via VLDL and LDL, most affected people eventually develop severe
vitamin E deficiency. Symptoms and signs include visual changes from slow retinal degeneration, sensory
neuropathy, posterior column signs, and cerebellar signs of dysmetria, ataxia, and
spasticity, which can
eventually lead to death. RBC acanthocytosis is a distinguishing feature on blood smear. Diagnosis is
made by the absence of apoprotein B (apo B) in plasma; intestinal biopsies show lack of microsomal
transfer protein. Treatment is with high doses (100 to 300 mg/kg once/day) of vitamin E with
supplementation of dietary fat and other fat-soluble vitamins. The prognosis is poor.
Hypobetalipoproteinemia:
Hypobetalipoproteinemia is an autosomal dominant or codominant condition
caused by mutations in the gene coding for apo B. Heterozygous patients have truncated apo B, leading
to rapid LDL clearance. Heterozygous patients manifest no symptoms or signs except for TC < 120 mg/dL
and LDL cholesterol < 80 mg/dL. TGs are normal. Homozygous patients have either shorter truncations,
leading to lower lipid levels (TC < 80 mg/dL, LDL cholesterol < 20 mg/dL), or absent apo B synthesis,
leading to symptoms and signs of abetalipoproteinemia. Diagnosis is by finding low levels of LDL
cholesterol and apo B; hypobetalipoproteinemia and abetalipoproteinemia are distinguished from one
another by family history. People who are heterozygous and people who are homozygous with low but
detectable LDL cholesterol require no treatment. Treatment of people who are homozygous with no LDL
is the same as for abetalipoproteinemia.
Chylomicron retention disease:
Chylomicron retention disease is a very rare autosomal recessive
condition caused by an unknown mutation leading to deficient apo B secretion from enterocytes.
Chylomicron synthesis is absent, but VLDL synthesis remains intact. Affected infants have fat
malabsorption, steatorrhea, and failure to thrive and may develop neurologic disorders similar to those in
abetalipoproteinemia. Diagnosis is by intestinal biopsy of patients with low cholesterol levels and
absence of postprandial chylomicrons. Treatment is supplementation of fat and fatsoluble vitamins.
===PAGE:1044===
Chapter 101. Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is any of a group of disparate conditions characterized by extracellular deposition
of various insoluble proteins. These proteins may accumulate locally, causing relatively few
symptoms, or widely, involving multiple organs and causing severe multiorgan failure.
Amyloidosis can be primary or be secondary to various infectious, inflammatory, or malignant
conditions. Rarely, it results from any of several inherited metabolic defects. Diagnosis is by
biopsy of affected tissue. Treatment varies with the type of amyloidosis.
Amyloid deposits may be formed from at least 18 different proteins, including immunoglobulin fragments.
Amyloid deposits are metabolically inert but interfere physically with organ structure and function. All stain
positive with Congo red dye, stain pink with hematoxylin and eosin, and have apple-green birefringence
under polarized light after Congo red staining. Amyloid deposits have a fibrillar, usually rigid, and
nonbranching ultrastructure. They form a
β
-pleated sheet that can be seen by x-ray diffraction. In addition
to the fibrillar amyloid protein, the deposits also contain serum amyloid P component and
glycosaminoglycans. On gross inspection, affected organs appear waxy and translucent.
Etiology
There are 3 major systemic forms of amyloidosis: primary, secondary, and familial. Also, there are 2 major
localized forms, A
β
(associated with Alzheimer's disease) and AIAPP (which occurs in the pancreas of
patients with type 2 diabetes), as well as several miscellaneous forms (eg, A
β
-microglobulin associated
with chronic hemodialysis).
Primary amyloidosis (AL):
AL is a monoclonal plasma cell disorder in which the abnormal protein is an
immunoglobulin, usually a light chain fragment (Bence Jones protein) but occasionally a heavy chain
fragment (AH amyloidosis). These chains either have an aberrant structure or are processed abnormally
so that some form insoluble deposits. Common sites for deposition include the skin, nerves, heart, GI tract
(including tongue), kidneys, liver, spleen, and blood vessels. A mild plasmacytosis occurs in the bone
marrow, which is suggestive of multiple myeloma, but most patients do not have true multiple myeloma
(with lytic bone lesions, renal tubular casts, and anemia). However, about 10 to 20% of patients with
multiple myeloma also develop amyloidosis.
Secondary amyloidosis (AA):
This form can occur secondary to several infectious, inflammatory, and
malignant (eg, renal cell carcinomas and others) conditions and is caused by the degradation of the
acute-phase reactant serum amyloid A (SAA). Common causative infections include TB, bronchiectasis,
osteomyelitis, and leprosy. Inflammatory conditions include RA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (formerly
juvenile RA), Crohn's disease, and familial Mediterranean fever. Inflammatory cytokines (eg, IL-1, tumor
necrosis factor, IL-6) that are produced in these disorders cause increased hepatic production of the
precursor protein SAA, which circulates in the serum.
AA amyloidosis shows a predilection for the spleen, liver, kidneys, adrenals, and lymph nodes. The liver,
spleen, and kidneys are often enlarged, firm, and rubbery. Involvement of the heart and peripheral or
autonomic nerves is rare. However, no organ system is spared, and vascular involvement may be
widespread.
Familial amyloidosis:
The familial form results from accumulation of a mutated version of a plasma
protein (most commonly transthyretin [TTR], hence ATTR). Nearly all of the abnormal protein is produced
by the liver. Over 80 mutations of the gene for TTR have been identified, all inherited in an autosomal
dominant pattern.
Age at onset of symptoms is highly variable, ranging from the teens to the 70s. ATTR amyloidosis causes
peripheral sensory and motor neuropathy, often with an autonomic neuropathy. Carpal tunnel syndrome is
common. Later in the illness, cardiovascular and renal involvement occurs. Vitreous abnormalities may
also develop.
Other very rare hereditary amyloidoses result from mutations of other physiologic proteins, including
===PAGE:1045===
apolipoprotein A-1, lysozyme, fibrinogen, gelsolin, and cystatin C. These amyloidoses have various
systemic and localized effects.
A
β
-microglobulin (dialysis-related) amyloidosis:
This form occurs in patients with chronic renal
failure who have been on hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis for long periods, usually > 8 yr. The amyloid
deposits consist of
β
-microglobulin, a component of the class I major histocompatibility complex, which is
normally cleared by the kidneys but cannot be removed by dialysis membranes. Deposits preferentially
occur in and around bones and joints and in the carpal tunnel and have been found in the GI tract and in
other organs.
A
β
-protein amyloidosis:
This form occurs in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Although the exact role
of amyloid deposits is unclear, the neuritic plaques characteristic of Alzheimer's disease contain amyloid
deposits consisting of a
β
-protein fragment of
β
-amyloid precursor protein (a transmembrane
glycoprotein). The
β
-protein fragment is sometimes complexed with apolipoprotein E. Within the plaques,
nonfibrillar forms of the
β
protein are intermixed with fibrillar amyloid forms.
β
-Protein amyloid deposition may also occur around cerebral blood vessels, which is thought to be a
cause of nonhypertensive cerebral hemorrhage (cerebral amyloid angiopathy). The angiopathy may
occur sporadically or as a hereditary syndrome (Dutch hereditary cerebral hemorrhage).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are nonspecific and relate to the organ or system affected. Symptoms in AA
amyloidosis are often obscured by the underlying disease.
When the kidneys are affected, nephrotic syndrome is the most striking early manifestation. Initially, only
slight proteinuria may occur; later, the distinctive symptom complex develops with anasarca,
hypoproteinemia, and massive proteinuria.
Hepatic involvement causes painless hepatomegaly, which may be massive (liver weight > 7 kg). Except
for occasional elevation of alkaline phosphatase, liver function tests remain normal. Jaundice is rare.
Occasionally, portal hypertension develops, with resulting esophageal varices and ascites.
Cardiac involvement causes a restrictive cardiomyopathy, eventually leading to heart failure.
Cardiomegaly and various degrees of heart block or arrhythmia may occur.
Peripheral neuropathy, with paresthesias of the fingers and toes, is a common presenting manifestation in
AL and ATTR amyloidoses. Autonomic neuropathy may cause orthostatic hypotension, erectile
dysfunction, sweating abnormalities, and GI motility disturbances.
Rheumatologic symptoms in patients with A
β
-microglobulin amyloidosis include carpal tunnel syndrome
and chronic pain in the shoulder, wrist, and fingers. Pathologic fractures, particularly of the humerus and
femur, may occur.
GI amyloid may cause motility abnormalities of the esophagus and small and large intestines. Gastric
atony, malabsorption, bleeding, or pseudo-obstruction may also occur. Macroglossia is common in AL
amyloidoses.
A firm, symmetric, nontender goiter resembling that found in Hashimoto's thyroiditis may
result from
amyloidosis of the thyroid gland. Lung involvement (mostly in AL amyloidosis) can be characterized by
focal pulmonary nodules, tracheobronchial lesions, or diffuse alveolar deposits. In several hereditary
amyloidoses, amyloid vitreous opacities and bilateral scalloped pupillary margins develop.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
===PAGE:1046===
Amyloidosis is suspected clinically but can be diagnosed only by biopsy. Subcutaneous abdominal fat pad
aspiration and biopsy of rectal mucosa are the best approaches. Other useful biopsy sites are the
gingiva, skin, nerves, kidneys, and liver. Tissue sections are stained with Congo red dye and examined
with a polarizing microscope for characteristic birefringence. Isotopically labeled serum AP (in which AP
represents the pentagonal component of amyloid) can be used in a scintigraphic test to confirm the
diagnosis.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the type of amyloidosis and the organ system involved. AL amyloidosis with
multiple myeloma has the poorest prognosis: death within 1 yr is common. Untreated ATTR amyloidoses
are fatal within 10 to 15 yr. Prognosis in other familial amyloidoses varies. In general, renal or cardiac
involvement in patients with any type of amyloidosis is of particular concern.
Prognosis in AA amyloidosis depends on successful treatment of the underlying disorder, although rare
patients undergo spontaneous regression of the amyloid deposits without such treatment.
Treatment
• Symptom relief
• Sometimes kidney transplantation
• Sometimes chemotherapy for AL amyloidosis
Management is generally symptomatic, although treatment of the underlying disorder can sometimes
arrest amyloidosis. In patients with renal amyloid, kidney transplantation provides long-term survival
comparable to that in other renal diseases, although mortality is higher in the early years. Amyloid
ultimately recurs in a donor kidney, but several recipients have done very well and have survived up to 10
yr. Heart transplantation has been successful in carefully selected patients with AL amyloidosis and
severe cardiac involvement.
Patients with AL amyloidosis are often treated with chemotherapy. A common protocol uses melphalan
0.075 mg/kg po bid and prednisone 0.2 mg/kg po qid. Melphalan with autologous stem cell transplantation
achieves good short-term success and apparent cures in some cases.
In patients with ATTR amyloidosis, liver transplantation—which removes the site of synthesis of the
mutant protein—is very effective.
For AA amyloidosis with familial Mediterranean fever, colchicine 0.6 mg po once/day or bid is effective.
Underlying infections in patients with AA amyloidosis of infectious origin must be treated aggressively.
Treatment of amyloid resulting from cancer (eg, renal cell carcinoma) is directed at the cancer.
===PAGE:1047===
Chapter 102. Carcinoid Tumors
Introduction
Carcinoid tumors develop from neuroendocrine cells in the GI tract (90%—, pancreas, and
pulmonary bronchi (. More than 95% of all GI carcinoids originate in only 3 sites: the
appendix, ileum, and rectum. Although carcinoids are often benign or only locally invasive, those affecting
the ileum and bronchus are frequently malignant.
Carcinoids can be endocrinologically inert or produce various hormones. The most common
endocrinologic syndrome is carcinoid syndrome; however, most patients with carcinoids do not develop
carcinoid syndrome. The likelihood that a tumor will be endocrinologically active varies with its site of
origin, being highest for tumors originating in the ileum and proximal colon (40 to 50%). The likelihood is
lower with bronchial carcinoids, lower still with appendiceal carcinoids, and essentially zero with rectal
carcinoids.
Endocrinologically inert carcinoids are suspected because of their symptoms and signs (eg, pain, luminal
bleeding, GI obstruction). They can be detected by angiography, CT, or MRI. Small-bowel carcinoids may
exhibit filling defects or other abnormalities on barium x-rays. Definitive diagnosis is made histologically
after biopsy or resection.
Endocrinologically active carcinoids are diagnosed and treated as described below.
Carcinoid Syndrome
Carcinoid syndrome develops in some people with carcinoid tumors and is characterized by
cutaneous flushing, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. Right-sided valvular heart disease may
develop after several years. The syndrome results from vasoactive substances (including
serotonin, bradykinin, histamine, prostaglandins, polypeptide hormones) secreted by the tumor,
which is typically a metastatic intestinal carcinoid. Diagnosis is clinical and by demonstrating
increased urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. Tumor localization may require a radionuclide
scan or laparotomy. Treatment of symptoms is with somatostatin or octreotide, but surgical
removal is done where possible; chemotherapy may be used for malignant tumors.
Etiology
Endocrinologically active tumors of the diffuse peripheral endocrine or paracrine system produce various
amines and polypeptides with corresponding symptoms and signs, including carcinoid syndrome.
Carcinoid syndrome is usually due to endocrinologically active malignant tumors that develop from
neuroendocrine cells (mostly in the ileum) and produce serotonin. It can, however, occur from tumors
elsewhere in the GI tract (particularly the appendix and rectum), pancreas, bronchi, or, rarely, the gonads.
Rarely, certain highly malignant tumors (eg, oat cell carcinoma of the lung, pancreatic islet cell carcinoma,
medullary thyroid carcinoma) are responsible.
An intestinal carcinoid does not usually cause the syndrome unless hepatic metastases have occurred,
because metabolic products released by the tumor are rapidly destroyed by blood and liver enzymes in
the portal circulation (eg, serotonin by hepatic monoamine oxidase). Hepatic metastases, however,
release metabolic products via the hepatic veins directly into the systemic circulation. Metabolic products
released by primary pulmonary and ovarian carcinoids bypass the portal route and may similarly induce
symptoms. Rare intestinal carcinoids with only intra-abdominal spread can drain directly into the systemic
circulation or the lymphatics and cause symptoms.
Pathophysiology
Serotonin acts on smooth muscle to cause diarrhea, colic, and malabsorption. Histamine and bradykinin,
through their vasodilator effects, cause flushing. The role of prostaglandins and various polypeptide
hormones, which may be produced by paracrine cells, awaits further investigation; elevated human
chorionic gonadotropin and pancreatic polypeptide levels are occasionally present with carcinoids.
===PAGE:1048===
Many patients develop right-sided endocardial fibrosis, leading to pulmonary stenosis and tricuspid
regurgitation. Left heart lesions, which have been reported with bronchial carcinoids, are rare because
serotonin is destroyed during passage through the lungs.
Symptoms and Signs
The most common (and often earliest) sign is an uncomfortable flushing, typically of the head and neck,
often precipitated by emotional stress or the ingestion of food, hot beverages, or alcohol. Striking skin
color changes may occur, ranging from pallor or erythema to a violaceous hue. Abdominal cramps with
recurrent diarrhea occur and are often the patient's major complaint. Malabsorption syndrome may occur.
Patients with valvular lesions may have a heart murmur. A few patients have asthmatic wheezing, and
some have decreased libido and erectile dysfunction; pellagra develops rarely.
Diagnosis
• Urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA)
Serotonin-secreting carcinoids are suspected based on their symptoms and signs. Diagnosis is confirmed
by demonstrating increased urinary excretion of the serotonin metabolite 5-HIAA. To avoid false-positive
results, clinicians do the test after the patient has abstained from serotonin-containing foods (eg,
bananas, tomatoes, plums, avocados, pineapples, eggplant, walnuts) for 3 days. Certain drugs, including
guaifenesin, methocarbamol, and phenothiazines, also interfere with the test and should be stopped
temporarily before testing. On the 3rd day, a 24-h urine sample is collected for assay. Normal excretion of
5-HIAA is < 10 mg/day (< 52
μ
mol/day); in patients with carcinoid syndrome, excretion is usually > 50
mg/day (> 260
μ
mol/day).
Provocative tests with Ca gluconate, catecholamines, pentagastrin, or alcohol have been used to induce
flushing. These tests may be helpful when the diagnosis is in doubt, but they must be done with care.
Localization of the tumor involves the same techniques used to localize a nonfunctioning carcinoid ( but may require extensive evaluation, sometimes including laparotomy. A scan with radionuclidelabeled somatostatin receptor ligand indium-111 pentetreotide or with
iodine-123
metaiodobenzylguanidine may show metastases.
Other conditions that manifest with flushing and that could, therefore, be confused with carcinoid
syndrome should be excluded. In patients in whom 5-HIAA excretion is not increased, disorders that
involve systemic activation of mastocytes (eg, systemic mastocytosis with increased urinary levels of
histamine metabolites and increased serum tryptase level) and idiopathic anaphylaxis may be
responsible. Additional causes of flushing include menopause, ethanol ingestion, drugs such as niacin,
and certain tumors (eg, vipomas, renal cell carcinoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma).
Prognosis
Despite metastatic disease, these tumors are slow growing, and survival of 10 to 15 yr is not unusual.
Treatment
• Surgical resection
• Octreotide for symptoms
Resection of primary lung carcinoids is often curative. For patients with hepatic metastases, surgery is
only diagnostic or palliative, and radiation therapy is unsuccessful, in part because of the poor tolerance
of normal hepatic tissue to radiation. No effective chemotherapeutic regimen has been established, but
streptozocin with 5-fluorouracil is most widely used, sometimes with doxorubicin.
Certain symptoms, including flushing, have been relieved by somatostatin (which inhibits release of most
hormones) without lowering urinary 5-HIAA or gastrin. Numerous studies have suggested good results
===PAGE:1049===
with octreotide, a long-acting analog of somatostatin. Octreotide is the drug of choice for controlling
diarrhea and flushing. Case reports indicate that tamoxifen has been effective infrequently; leukocyte
interferon (IFNα
) has temporarily relieved symptoms.
Flushing also can be treated with phenothiazines (eg, prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg or chlorpromazine 25
to 50 mg po q 6 h). Histamine
blockers may also be used. Phentolamine (an
α
-blocker) 5 to 15 mg IV has
prevented experimentally induced flushes. Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 5 mg po q 6 h) may be useful
for severe flushing caused by bronchial carcinoids.
Diarrhea may be controlled by codeine phosphate 15 mg po q 4 to 6 h, tincture of opium 0.6 mL po q 6 h,
loperamide 4 mg po as a loading dose and 2 mg after each loose bowel to a maximum of 16 mg/day,
diphenoxylate 5 mg po qid, or peripheral serotonin antagonists such as cyproheptadine 4 to 8 mg po q 6 h
or methysergide 1 to 2 mg po qid.
Niacin and adequate protein intake are needed to prevent pellagra, because dietary tryptophan is
diverted to serotonin by the tumor. Enzyme inhibitors that prevent the conversion of 5-hydroxytryptophan
to serotonin include methyldopa 250 to 500 mg po q 6 h and phenoxybenzamine 10 mg/day.
===PAGE:1050===
Chapter 103. Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Syndromes
Introduction
(Familial Endocrine Adenomatosis; Multiple Endocrine Adenomatosis)
The multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes comprise 3 genetically distinct familial diseases
involving adenomatous hyperplasia and malignant tumors in several endocrine glands. Clinical features
depend on the glandular elements involved.
Each syndrome is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with a high degree of penetrance, variable
expressivity, and production of seemingly unrelated effects by a single mutant gene. The specific mutation
is not always known.
Symptoms and signs develop at any age. Proper management includes early identification of affected
individuals within a kindred and surgical removal of the tumors when possible. Although these syndromes
are generally considered clinically distinct, significant overlap exists (see
Table 103-1
).
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type 1
(Multiple Endocrine Adenomatosis, Type I; Wermer's Syndrome)
Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN 1) is a hereditary syndrome characterized by tumors
[Table 103-1.
Conditions Associated with Men Syndromes]
of the parathyroid glands, pancreatic islet cells, and pituitary gland. Clinical features most
commonly include hyperparathyroidism and asymptomatic hypercalcemia. Genetic screening
is used to detect carriers. Diagnosis is by hormonal and imaging tests. Tumors are surgically
removed when possible.
MEN 1 is probably caused by an inactivating mutation of the tumor suppressor gene that encodes the
transcription factor menin; many mutations of this gene may be responsible.
About 40% of MEN 1 cases involve tumors of all 3 affected glands—the parathyroids, pancreas, and
pituitary. Almost any combination of the tumors and symptom complexes outlined below is possible. A
patient with a MEN 1 gene mutation and one of the MEN 1 tumors is at risk of developing any of the other
tumors later on. Age at onset ranges from 4 to 81 yr, but peak incidence occurs in the 20s in women and
30s in men. Women are affected twice as often as men.
Symptoms and Signs
The clinical features depend on the glandular elements affected (see
Table 103-1
).
Parathyroid:
Hyperparathyroidism is present in ≥ 90% of patients. Asymptomatic hypercalcemia is the
most common manifestation: about 25% of patients have evidence of nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis.
In contrast to sporadic cases of hyperparathyroidism, diffuse hyperplasia or multiple adenomas are more
common than solitary adenomas.
Pancreas:
Pancreatic islet cell tumors occur in 60 to 70% of patients. Tumors are usually multicentric.
Multiple adenomas or diffuse islet cell hyperplasia commonly occurs; such tumors may arise from the
small bowel rather than the pancreas. About 30% of tumors are malignant and have local or distant
metastases. Malignant islet cell tumors due to MEN 1 syndrome often have a more benign course than do
sporadically occurring malignant islet cell tumors.
About 40% of islet cell tumors originate from a
β
cell, secrete insulin (insulinoma), and can cause fasting
hypoglycemia.
β
-Cell tumors are more common among patients < 40. About 60% of islet cell tumors
===PAGE:1051===
originate from nonβ
-cell elements and tend to occur in patients > 40. Nonβ
-cell tumors are somewhat
more likely to be malignant.
Most islet cell tumors secrete pancreatic polypeptide, the clinical significance of which is unknown.
Gastrin is secreted by many nonβ
-cell tumors (increased gastrin secretion in MEN 1 also often originates
from the duodenum). Increased gastrin secretion increases gastric acid, which may inactivate pancreatic
lipase, leading to diarrhea and steatorrhea. Increased gastrin secretion also leads to peptic ulcers in >
50% of MEN 1 patients. Usually the ulcers are multiple or atypical in location, and often bleed, perforate,
or become obstructed. Peptic ulcer disease may be intractable and complicated (Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome—. Among patients presenting with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 20 to 60% have
MEN 1.
A severe secretory diarrhea can develop and cause fluid and electrolyte depletion with nonβ
-cell tumors.
This complex, referred to as the watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and achlorhydria syndrome (WDHA;
pancreatic cholera—, has been ascribed to vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, although other
intestinal hormones or secretagogues (including prostaglandins) may contribute. Hypersecretion of
glucagon, somatostatin, chromogranin, or calcitonin, ectopic secretion
of ACTH (causing Cushing's
syndrome), and hypersecretion of growth hormone-releasing hormone (causing acromegaly) sometimes
occur in nonβ
-cell tumors. All of these are rare in MEN 1.
Nonfunctioning pancreatic tumors also occur in patients with MEN 1 and may be the most common type
of pancreatoduodenal tumor in MEN 1. The size of the nonfunctioning tumor correlates with risk of
metastasis and death.
Pituitary:
Pituitary tumors occur in 15 to 42% of MEN 1 patients. From 25 to 90% are prolactinomas.
About 25% of pituitary tumors secrete growth hormone or growth hormone and prolactin. Excess prolactin
may cause galactorrhea (, and excess growth hormone causes acromegaly clinically
indistinguishable from sporadically occurring acromegaly. About 3% of tumors secrete ACTH, causing
Cushing's disease. Most of the remainder are nonfunctional. Local tumor expansion may cause visual
disturbance, headache, and hypopituitarism. Pituitary tumors in MEN 1 patients appear to be larger and
behave more aggressively than sporadic pituitary tumors.
Other manifestations:
Adenomas and adenomatous hyperplasia of the thyroid and adrenal glands
occurs occasionally in MEN 1 patients. Hormone secretion is rarely altered as a result, and the
significance of these abnormalities is uncertain. Carcinoid tumors, particularly those derived from the
embryologic foregut, occur in isolated cases. Multiple subcutaneous and visceral lipomas, angiofibromas,
and collagenomas may also occur.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation for other tumors of the triad
• Serum Ca, parathyroid hormone (PTH), gastrin, and prolactin levels
• Tumor localization with MRI, CT, or scintigraphy
• Genetic testing
Patients with tumors of the parathyroids, pancreas, or pituitary, particularly those with a family history of
endocrinopathy, should undergo clinical screening for other tumors of MEN 1. Such screening includes
the following:
• Asking about symptoms of peptic ulcer disease, diarrhea, nephrolithiasis, hypoglycemia, and
hypopituitarism
• Examining for visual field defects, galactorrhea in women, and features of acromegaly and
subcutaneous lipomas
===PAGE:1052===
• Measuring levels of serum Ca, intact PTH, gastrin, and prolactin
Additional laboratory or radiologic tests should be done if these screening tests suggest an endocrine
abnormality related to MEN 1. An insulin-secreting
β
-cell tumor of the pancreas is diagnosed by detecting
fasting hypoglycemia with an elevated plasma insulin level.
A gastrin-secreting nonβ
-cell tumor of the pancreas or duodenum is diagnosed by elevated basal plasma
gastrin levels, an exaggerated gastrin response to infused Ca, and a paradoxical rise in gastrin level after
infusion of secretin. An elevated basal level of pancreatic polypeptide or gastrin or an exaggerated
response of these hormones to a standard meal may be the earliest sign of pancreatic involvement. CT
or MRI can help localize tumors. Because these tumors are often small and difficult to localize, other
imaging tests (eg, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, endoscopic ultrasonography, intraoperative
ultrasonography) may be necessary.
Acromegaly is diagnosed by elevated growth hormone levels that are not suppressed by glucose
administration and by elevated levels of serum insulin-like growth factor 1.
In patients with 2 or more endocrine abnormalities related to MEN 1 who are not from a known MEN 1
kindred (index case), direct DNA sequencing of the MEN 1 gene identifies a specific mutation in 80 to
90%. If an index case is identified, 1st-degree relatives should consider genetic screening. Early
presymptomatic screening of family members of MEN 1 patients has not been shown to reduce morbidity
or mortality; annual clinical and biochemical screening may thus be preferable in this group.
Treatment
• Surgical excision when possible
• Drug management of hormone excess
Treatment of parathyroid and pituitary lesions is primarily surgical, although prolactinoma is usually
managed with dopamine agonists. Islet cell tumors are more difficult to manage because the lesions are
often small and difficult to find and multiple lesions are common. If a single tumor cannot be found, total
pancreatectomy may be required for adequate control of hyperinsulinism. Diazoxide may be a useful
adjunct in treating hypoglycemia. Streptozocin and other cytotoxic drugs may ameliorate symptoms by
reducing tumor burden.
The treatment of gastrin-secreting nonβ
-cell tumors is complex. Localization and removal
of the tumor
should be attempted. If localization is impossible, a proton pump inhibitor frequently produces
symptomatic relief from peptic ulcer disease. With the availability of these drugs, gastrectomy is rarely
required.
Octreotide, a somatostatin analog, can block hormone secretion from nongastrin-secreting pancreatic
tumors and is well tolerated, particularly if given as a long-acting preparation administered every 4 wk.
Palliative treatments for metastatic pancreatic tumors include hepatic artery embolization and interferon
alfa (in combination with octreotide).
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type 2A
(MEN 2; Multiple Endocrine Adenomatosis, Type 2; Sipple's Syndrome)
Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2A (MEN 2A) is a hereditary syndrome characterized by
medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, pheochromocytoma, hyperparathyroidism, and
occasionally cutaneous lichen amyloidosis. Clinical features depend on the glandular elements
affected. Familial medullary thyroid carcinoma is a distinct variant of MEN 2A. Diagnosis
involves genetic testing. Hormonal and imaging tests help locate the tumors, which are
removed surgically when possible.
Mutations in the
RET
proto-oncogene on chromosome 10 have been identified in MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and
===PAGE:1053===
familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). The RET protein is a receptor tyrosine kinase; MEN 2A and
FMTC mutations result in activation of certain intracellular pathways.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical features depend on the type of tumor present (
Table 103-1
).
Thyroid:
Almost all patients have medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC—. The tumor usually
develops during childhood and begins with thyroid parafollicular C-cell hyperplasia. Tumors are frequently
multicentric.
Adrenal:
Pheochromocytoma usually originates in the adrenal glands. Pheochromocytoma occurs in 40
to 50% of patients within a MEN 2A kindred, and in some kindreds pheochromocytoma accounts for 30%
of deaths. In contrast to sporadic pheochromocytoma (, the familial variety within MEN 2A
begins with adrenal medullary hyperplasia and is multicentric and bilateral in > 50% of cases. Extraadrenal pheochromocytomas are rare. Pheochromocytomas are almost always benign, but some tend to
recur locally.
Pheochromocytomas that occur with MEN 2A (and 2B) usually produce epinephrine disproportionately to
norepinephrine, in contrast to sporadic cases.
Hypertensive crisis secondary to pheochromocytoma is a common manifestation. Hypertension in MEN
2A patients with pheochromocytoma is more often paroxysmal than sustained, in contrast to the usual
sporadic case. Patients with pheochromocytomas may have paroxysmal palpitations, anxiety, headaches,
or sweating; many are asymptomatic.
Parathyroid:
Ten to 20% of patients have evidence of hyperparathyroidism (which may be longstanding), with hypercalcemia, nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, or renal failure. Hyperparathyroidism
frequently involves multiple glands as either diffuse hyperplasia or multiple adenomas, and mild
abnormalities in parathyroid function may also be present in MEN 2A.
Other manifestations:
Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis, a pruritic, scaly, papular skin lesion, located in the
interscapular region or on extensor surfaces, occurs in some MEN 2A kindreds. Increased incidence of
Hirschsprung's disease has been reported in children in at least one MEN 2A kindred.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion
• Genetic testing
• Serum Ca, parathyroid hormone, and plasma free metanephrine or urinary catecholamine levels in
affected patients
• Pheochromocytoma localization with MRI or CT
Many cases are identified during screening of family members of known cases. MEN 2A should also be
suspected in patients with bilateral pheochromocytoma or at least 2 of its characteristic endocrine
manifestations. The diagnosis can be confirmed with genetic testing. Although only 25% of MTC cases
are familial, genetic testing of people with apparent sporadic MTC should be considered if patients are <
35 yr, tumors are bilateral or multicentric, or a family history is suspected.
Because pheochromocytoma may be asymptomatic, its exclusion may be difficult (. The most
sensitive tests are plasma free metanephrines and fractionated urinary catecholamines (particularly
epinephrine). CT or MRI is useful in localizing the pheochromocytoma or establishing the presence of
bilateral lesions.
Hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed by hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia, and increased parathyroid
===PAGE:1054===
hormone level.
Screening:
Genetic screening of family members of MEN 2A patients is now the diagnostic test of
choice; the availability of such testing has made biochemical screening for early MTC largely obsolete.
Among affected family members, annual screening for hyperparathyroidism and pheochromocytoma
should begin in early childhood and continue indefinitely. Screening for hyperparathyroidism is with
measurement of serum Ca. Screening for pheochromocytoma includes questions about symptoms,
measurement of BP, and laboratory testing.
Treatment
• Surgical excision of identified tumors
• Prophylactic thyroidectomy
In patients presenting with pheochromocytoma and either MTC or hyperparathyroidism, the
pheochromocytoma should be removed first; even if asymptomatic, it greatly increases risk of other
surgeries. Once MTC has metastasized, chemotherapy and radiation therapy are largely ineffective in
lengthening survival but may slow disease progression. Radioimmunotherapy has improved survival in
initial studies.
Once genetic testing identifies a child as having a
RET
mutation, prophylactic thyroidectomy is
recommended, generally when the child is between 4 and 6 yr; this potentially fatal condition can be
cured or prevented by early thyroidectomy.
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type 2B
(MEN 3; Mucosal Neuroma Syndrome; Multiple Endocrine Adenomatosis, Type 2B)
Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2B (MEN 2B) is an autosomal dominant syndrome
characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, multiple mucosal
neuromas and intestinal ganglioneuromas, and often a marfanoid habitus. Symptoms depend on
the glandular elements present. Diagnosis and treatment are the same as for MEN 2A.
Ninety-five percent of MEN 2B cases result from a single amino acid substitution in the RET protein.
More than 50% are de novo mutations and thus seem to be sporadic rather than familial.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs reflect the glandular abnormalities present (see
Table 103-1
). About 50% of patients
have the complete syndrome with mucosal neuromas, pheochromocytomas, and medullary thyroid
carcinoma (MTC). Fewer than 10% have neuromas and pheochromocytomas alone, whereas the
remaining patients have neuromas and medullary carcinoma of the thyroid without pheochromocytoma.
Often, mucosal neuromas are the earliest sign, and they occur in most or all patients. Neuromas appear
as small glistening bumps on the lips, tongue, and buccal mucosa. The eyelids, conjunctivae, and
corneas also commonly develop neuromas. Thickened eyelids and diffusely hypertrophied lips are
characteristic. GI abnormalities related to altered motility (constipation, diarrhea, and, occasionally,
megacolon) are common and thought to result from diffuse intestinal ganglioneuromatosis. Patients may
have a marfanoid habitus. Skeletal abnormalities of the spine (lordosis, kyphosis, scoliosis), pes cavus,
and talipes equinovarus are common.
MTC and pheochromocytoma resemble the corresponding disorders in MEN 2A syndrome; both tend to
be bilateral and multicentric. MTC, however, tends to be particularly aggressive in MEN 2B and may be
present in very young children.
Although the neuromas, facial characteristics, and GI disorders are present at an early age, the syndrome
may not be recognized until MTC or pheochromocytoma manifests in later life.
===PAGE:1055===
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion
• Genetic testing
• Plasma free metanephrine or urinary catecholamine levels
• Pheochromocytoma localization with MRI or CT
MEN 2B is suspected in patients with a family history of MEN 2B, pheochromocytoma, multiple mucosal
neuromas, or MTC. Genetic testing is highly accurate and is done in 1st-degree relatives and any
symptomatic family members of MEN 2B patients.
Pheochromocytoma may be suspected clinically and is confirmed by measuring plasma free
metanephrines or urinary catecholamines (. Laboratory testing for MTC may be done (. MRI or
CT is used to search for pheochromocytomas and MTC.
Treatment
• Surgical excision of identified tumors
• Prophylactic thyroidectomy
Affected patients should have total thyroidectomy as soon as the diagnosis is established.
Pheochromocytoma, if present, should be removed before thyroidectomy is done. Gene carriers should
undergo prophylactic thyroidectomy in infancy or early childhood.
===PAGE:1056===
9 - Hematology and Oncology
Chapter 104. Approach to the Patient With Anemia
Introduction
Red blood cell (RBC) production (erythropoiesis) takes place in the bone marrow under the control of the
hormone erythropoietin (EPO). Juxtaglomerular cells in the kidney produce EPO in response to
decreased O
delivery (as in anemia and hypoxia) and increased levels of androgens. In addition to EPO,
RBC production requires adequate supplies of substrates, mainly iron, vitamin B
, and folate. Vitamin
B
and folate are discussed in
Chapter 4
; iron is discussed on pp.
and
.
RBCs become senescent after about 120 days. They then lose their cell membranes and are largely
cleared from the circulation by the phagocytic cells of the spleen, liver, and bone marrow. Hb is broken
down in these cells and in hepatocytes primarily by the heme oxygenase system with conservation (and
subsequent reutilization) of iron, degradation of heme to bilirubin through a series of enzymatic steps, and
reutilization of protein. Maintenance of a steady number of RBCs requires daily renewal of 1/120 of the
cells; immature RBCs (reticulocytes) are continually released and constitute 0.5 to 1.5% of the peripheral
RBC population.
Low levels of androgens leading to decreased EPO levels in women and girls and in elderly patients can
predispose to anemia, as does the decline in the capacity of bone marrow to produce RBCs. With aging,
Hb and Hct decrease slightly, but not below normal values. In women, other factors that frequently
contribute to lower levels of RBCs include cumulative menstrual blood loss and increased demand for
iron due to multiple pregnancies.
Etiology of Anemia
Anemia is a decrease in the number of RBCs, Hct, or Hb content.
The RBC mass represents the balance between production and destruction or loss of RBCs. Thus,
anemia can result from one or more of 3 basic mechanisms (see
Table 104-1
):
[Table 104-1.
Classification of Anemia by Cause]
•
Blood loss
• Deficient erythropoiesis
• Excessive hemolysis (RBC destruction)
Blood loss
can be acute or chronic. Anemia does not develop until several hours after acute blood loss,
when interstitial fluid diffuses into the intravascular space and dilutes the remaining RBC mass. During
the first few hours, however, levels of polymorphonuclear granulocytes, platelets, and, in severe
hemorrhage, immature WBCs and normoblasts may rise. Chronic blood loss results in anemia if loss is
more rapid than can be replaced or, more commonly, if accelerated erythropoiesis depletes body iron
stores (.
Deficient erythropoiesis
( has myriad causes. Complete cessation of erythropoiesis results
in a decline in RBCs of about 7 to 10%/wk (1%/day). Impaired erythropoiesis, even if not sufficient to
decrease the numbers of RBCs, often causes abnormal RBC size and shape.
Excessive hemolysis
( can be caused by intrinsic abnormalities of RBCs or by extrinsic
factors, such as the presence of antibodies on their surface, that lead to their early destruction. An
enlarged spleen sequesters and destroys RBCs more rapidly than normal. Some causes of hemolysis
deform as well as destroy RBCs. Excessive hemolysis does not normally decrease reticulocyte production
===PAGE:1057===
unless iron or other essential nutrients are depleted.
Evaluation of Anemia
Anemia is not a diagnosis; it is a manifestation of an underlying disorder. Thus, even mild, asymptomatic
anemia should be investigated so that the primary problem can be diagnosed and treated.
Acute or chronic blood loss is the first consideration. The diagnosis usually is based on history,
examination, and a stool test for occult blood. Further testing for occult bleeding is sometimes necessary.
If blood loss is not detected, laboratory testing is usually done to determine whether anemia is due to
deficient RBC production or excessive hemolysis.
History
The history should address risk factors for particular anemias, symptoms of anemia itself, and symptoms
that reflect the underlying disorder.
Anemia has many risk factors. For example, a vegan diet predisposes to vitamin B
deficiency anemia,
whereas alcoholism increases the risk of folate deficiency anemia. A number of hemoglobinopathies are
inherited, and certain drugs predispose to hemolysis. Cancer, rheumatic disorders, and chronic
inflammatory disorders can suppress bone marrow activity or enlarge the spleen.
The symptoms of anemia are neither sensitive nor specific and do not help differentiate between types of
anemias. Symptoms reflect compensatory responses to tissue hypoxia and usually develop when Hb falls
to < 7 g/dL. However, they may develop at higher Hb levels in patients with limited cardiopulmonary
reserve or in whom the anemia developed very rapidly. Symptoms such as weakness, seeing spots,
fatigue, drowsiness, angina, syncope, and dyspnea on exertion can indicate anemia. Vertigo, headache,
pulsatile tinnitus, amenorrhea, loss of libido, and GI complaints may also occur. Heart failure or shock can
develop in patients with severe tissue hypoxia or hypovolemia.
Certain symptoms may suggest the cause of the anemia. For example, melena, epistaxis, hematochezia,
hematemesis, or menorrhagia indicates bleeding. Jaundice and dark urine, in the absence of liver
disease, suggest hemolysis. Weight loss may suggest cancer. Diffuse severe bone or chest pain may
suggest sickle cell disease, and stocking-glove paresthesias may suggest vitamin B
or folate
deficiency.
Physical Examination
Complete physical examination is necessary. Signs of anemia itself are neither sensitive nor specific;
however, pallor is common with severe anemia.
Signs of underlying disorders are often more diagnostically accurate than are signs of anemia. Hemepositive stool identifies GI bleeding. Hemorrhagic shock (eg, hypotension, tachycardia, pallor, tachypnea,
diaphoresis, confusion— may result from acute bleeding. Jaundice may suggest hemolysis.
Splenomegaly may occur with hemolysis, hemoglobinopathy, connective tissue disease,
myeloproliferative disorder, infection, or cancer. Peripheral neuropathy suggests vitamin B
deficiency.
Abdominal distention in a patient with blunt trauma suggests acute hemorrhage. Petechiae develop in
thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction. Fever and heart murmurs suggest infectious endocarditis, a
possible cause of hemolysis. Rarely, high-output heart failure develops as a compensatory response to
anemia-induced tissue hypoxia.
Testing
• CBC with WBC and platelets
• RBC indices and morphology
===PAGE:1058===
• Reticulocyte count
• Peripheral smear
• Sometimes bone marrow aspiration and biopsy
Laboratory evaluation begins with a CBC, including WBC and platelet counts, RBC indices and
morphology (MCV, MCH, MCHC, RBC volume distribution width [RDW]), and examination of the
peripheral smear. Reticulocyte count demonstrates how well the bone marrow compensates for the
anemia. Subsequent tests are selected on the basis of these results and on the clinical presentation.
Recognition of general diagnostic patterns can expedite the diagnosis (see
Table 104-2
).
The automated CBC
directly measures Hb, RBC count, and MCV (a measure of RBC size). Hct (a
measure of the percentage of blood made up of RBCs), MCH (a measure of the Hb content in individual
RBCs), and MCHC (a measure of the Hb level in individual RBCs) are calculated values. The diagnostic
criterion for anemia in men is Hb < 14 g/dL, Hct < 42%, or RBC < 4.5 million/L; for women, Hb < 12 g/dL,
Hct < 37%, or RBC < 4 million/L. For infants, normal values vary with age, necessitating use of agerelated tables. RBC populations are termed microcytic (small cells) if MCV is < 80 fL, and macrocytic
(large cells) if MCV is > 100 fL. However, because reticulocytes are also larger than mature red cells,
large numbers of reticulocytes can elevate the MCV and not represent an alteration of RBC production.
Automated techniques can also determine the degree of variation in RBC size, expressed as the RDW. A
high RDW may be the only indication of simultaneous microcytic and macrocytic disorders (or
simultaneous microcytosis and reticulocytosis); such a pattern may result in a normal MCV, which
measures only the mean value. The term hypochromia refers to RBC populations in which MCH is < 27
pg/RBC or MCHC is < 30%. RBC populations with normal MCH and MCHC values are normochromic.
The RBC indices
can help indicate the mechanism of anemia and narrow the number of possible
causes. Microcytic indices occur with altered heme or globin synthesis. The most common causes are
iron deficiency, thalassemia, and related Hb-synthesis defects. In some patients with anemia of chronic
disease, the MCV is microcytic or borderline microcytic. Macrocytic indices occur with impaired DNA
synthesis (eg, due to vitamin B
or folate deficiencies or chemotherapeutic drugs such as hydroxyurea
and antifolate agents) and in alcoholism because of abnormalities of the cell membrane. Acute bleeding
may briefly produce macrocytic indices because of the release of large young reticulocytes. Normocytic
indices occur in anemias resulting from deficient EPO or inadequate response to it (hypoproliferative
anemias). Hemorrhage, before iron deficiency develops, usually results in normocytic and normochromic
anemia unless the number of large reticulocytes is excessive.
The peripheral smear
is highly sensitive for excessive RBC production and hemolysis. It is more
accurate than automated technologies for recognition of altered RBC structure, thrombocytopenia,
nucleated RBCs, or immature granulocytes and can detect other abnormalities (eg, malaria and other
parasites, intracellular RBC or granulocyte inclusions) that can occur despite normal automated blood cell
counts. RBC injury may be identified by finding RBC fragments, portions of disrupted cells (schistocytes),
or evidence of significant membrane alterations from oval-shaped cells (ovalocytes) or spherocytic cells.
Target cells (thin RBCs with a central dot of Hb) are RBCs with insufficient Hb or excess cell membrane
(eg, due to hemoglobinopathies or liver disorders). The peripheral smear can also reveal variation in RBC
shape (poikilocytosis) and size (anisocytosis).
The reticulocyte count
is expressed as the percentage of reticulocytes (normal range, 0.5 to 1.5%) or
as the absolute reticulocyte count (normal range, 50,000 to 150,000/
μ
L). Higher values indicate excessive
production, or reticulocytosis; in the presence of anemia, reticulocytosis suggests excessive RBC
destruction. Low numbers in the presence of anemia indicate decreased RBC production. The
reticulocyte response can usually be estimated based on the number of blue-stained cells found when the
peripheral smear is stained with a supravital stain; this estimates makes a reticulocyte count, which
requires flow cytometry or a large amount of time, unnecessary.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy
provide direct observation and assessment of RBC precursors.
===PAGE:1059===
The presence of abnormal maturation (dyspoiesis) of blood cells and the amount, distribution, and
cellular pattern of iron content can be assessed. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are done to
diagnose the following conditions:
• Unexplained anemias
• Other cytopenias
• Unexplained leukocytosis
[Table 104-2.
Characteristics of Common Anemias]
• Thrombocytosis
• Suspected leukemia, multiple myeloma, or myelophthisis
Cytogenetic and molecular analyses can be done on aspirate material in hematopoietic or other tumors or
in suspected congenital lesions of RBC precursors (eg, Fanconi's anemia). Flow cytometry can be done
in suspected lymphoproliferative or myeloproliferative states to define the immunophenotype. Bone
marrow aspiration and biopsy are not technically difficult and do not pose significant risk of morbidity.
These procedures are safe and helpful when hematologic disease is suspected. Both usually can be
done as a single procedure. Because biopsy requires adequate bone depth, the sample is usually taken
from the posterior (or, less commonly, anterior) iliac crest. If only aspiration is necessary, the sternum may
be used.
Serum bilirubin and LDH can sometimes help differentiate between hemolysis and blood loss; both are
elevated in hemolysis and normal in blood loss. Other tests are discussed under specific anemias and
bleeding disorders (.
Treatment of Anemia
When possible, the cause of the anemia is treated. When the Hb falls dangerously low (eg, < 7 g/dL for
patients without cardiopulmonary insufficiency or higher for patients with it), RBC transfusion temporarily
increases O
-carrying capacity. RBC transfusion should be reserved for patients
• With or at high risk of cardiopulmonary symptoms
• With active, uncontrollable blood loss
• With some form of hypoxic or ischemic end-organ failure (eg, neurologic ischemic symptoms, angina,
tachycardia in patients with underlying heart failure or severe COPD)
Transfusion procedures and blood components are discussed in
Chapter 121
.
===PAGE:1060===
Chapter 105. Anemias Caused by Deficient Erythropoiesis
Introduction
Anemia (a decrease in the number of RBCs, Hb content, or Hct) can result from decreased RBC
production (erythropoiesis), increased RBC destruction, or blood loss. Anemias due to decreased
erythropoiesis are recognized by reticulocytopenia, which is usually evident on the peripheral smear (see
p.
). The RBC indices, mainly the MCV, narrow the differential diagnosis of deficient erythropoiesis
and determine what further testing is necessary.
Microcytic anemias
result from deficient or defective heme or globin synthesis. Microcytic anemias
include iron deficiency anemias, iron-transport deficiency anemias, iron-utilization anemias (including
some sideroblastic anemias and lead poisoning), and thalassemias (which also cause hemolysis—. Patients with microcytic anemias typically require testing of iron stores (see below).
Normocytic anemias
result from primary bone marrow failure. They are usually characterized by a
normal RBC distribution width (RDW) and normochromic indices. The mechanisms involved are
hypoproliferation (deficiency of or inadequate response to erythropoietin [EPO]), hypoplasia (in aplastic
anemia), myelophthisis, and myelodysplasia.
Macrocytic anemias
result most often from impaired DNA synthesis, as occurs with deficiencies of
vitamin B
or folate.
Some anemias have variable findings on the peripheral smear. Anemia of chronic disease may be
microcytic or normocytic. Anemias due to myelodysplastic syndromes may be microcytic, normocytic, or
macrocytic. Treatment of deficient RBC production depends on the cause; however, stimulation of
erythropoiesis with human recombinant EPO often is helpful in the anemia due to renal failure. Because
erythropoiesis increases the iron requirement, supplemental iron is helpful when administering any
treatment that aims to increase erythropoiesis.
Iron Deficiency Anemia
(Anemia of Chronic Blood Loss; Chlorosis)
Iron deficiency is the most common cause of anemia and usually results from blood loss.
Symptoms are usually nonspecific. RBCs tend to be microcytic and hypochromic, and iron
stores are low as shown by low serum ferritin and low serum iron levels with high serum total
iron binding capacity. If the diagnosis is made, occult blood loss is suspected. Treatment
involves iron replacement and treatment of the cause of blood loss.
Pathophysiology
Iron is distributed in active metabolic and storage pools. Total body iron is about 3.5 g in healthy men and
2.5 g in women; the difference relates to women's smaller body size, lower androgen levels, and dearth of
stored iron because of iron loss due to menses and pregnancy. The distribution of body iron in an
average man is Hb, 2100 mg; ferritin, 700 mg (in cells and plasma); hemosiderin, 300 mg (in cells);
myoglobin, 200 mg; tissue (heme and nonheme) enzymes, 150 mg; and transport-iron compartment, 3
mg.
Iron absorption:
Iron is absorbed in the duodenum and upper jejunum. Absorption of iron is determined
by the type of iron molecule and by what other substances are ingested. Iron absorption is best when
food contains heme iron (meat). Dietary nonheme iron must be reduced to the ferrous state and released
from food binders by gastric secretions. Nonheme iron absorption is reduced by other food items (eg,
vegetable fiber phytates and polyphenols; tea tannates, including phosphoproteins; bran) and certain
antibiotics (eg, tetracycline). Ascorbic acid is the only common food element known to increase nonheme
iron absorption.
===PAGE:1061===
The average American diet, which contains 6 mg of elemental iron/kcal of food, is adequate for iron
homeostasis. Of about 15 mg/day of dietary iron, adults absorb only 1 mg, which is the approximate
amount lost daily by cell desquamation from the skin and intestines. In iron depletion, absorption
increases, although the exact signaling mechanism is not known; however, absorption rarely increases to
> 6 mg/day unless supplemental iron is added. Children have a greater need for iron and appear to
absorb more to meet this need.
Iron transport and usage:
Iron from intestinal mucosal cells is transferred to transferrin, an irontransport protein synthesized in the liver; transferrin can transport iron from cells (intestinal,
macrophages) to specific receptors on erythroblasts, placental cells, and liver cells. For heme synthesis,
transferrin transports iron to the erythroblast mitochondria, which insert the iron into protoporphyrin for it
to become heme. Transferrin (plasma half-life, 8 days) is extruded for reutilization. Synthesis of transferrin
increases with iron deficiency but decreases with any type of chronic disease.
Iron storage and recycling:
Iron not used for erythropoiesis is transferred by transferrin, an irontransporting protein, to the storage pool; iron is stored in 2 forms, ferritin and hemosiderin. The most
important is ferritin (a heterogeneous group of proteins surrounding an iron core), which is a soluble and
active storage fraction located in the liver (in hepatocytes), bone marrow, and spleen (in macrophages); in
RBCs; and in serum. Iron stored in ferritin is readily available for any body requirement. Circulating
(serum) ferritin level parallels the size of the body stores (1 ng/mL = 8 mg of iron in the storage pool). The
2nd storage pool of iron is in hemosiderin, which is relatively insoluble and is stored primarily in the liver
(in Kupffer cells) and in bone marrow (in macrophages).
Because iron absorption is so limited, the body recycles and conserves iron. Transferrin grasps and
recycles available iron from aging RBCs undergoing phagocytosis by mononuclear phagocytes. This
mechanism provides about 97% of the daily iron needed (about 25 mg of iron). With aging, iron stores
tend to increase because iron elimination is slow.
Iron deficiency:
Deficiency develops in stages. In the first stage, iron requirement exceeds intake,
causing progressive depletion of bone marrow iron stores. As stores decrease, absorption of dietary iron
increases in compensation. During later stages, deficiency impairs RBC synthesis, ultimately causing
anemia.
Severe and prolonged iron deficiency also may cause dysfunction of iron-containing cellular enzymes.
Etiology
Because iron is poorly absorbed, dietary iron barely meets the daily requirement for most people. Even
so, people who eat a typical Western diet are unlikely to become iron deficient solely as a result of dietary
deficiency. However, even modest losses, increased requirements, or decreased intake readily causes
iron deficiency.
Blood loss
is almost always the cause. In men, the most frequent cause is chronic occult bleeding,
usually from the GI tract. In premenopausal women, cumulative menstrual blood loss (mean, 0.5 mg
iron/day) is a common cause. Another possible cause of blood loss in men and women is chronic
intravascular hemolysis ( when the amount of iron released during hemolysis exceeds the
haptoglobin-binding capacity. Vitamin C deficiency can contribute to iron deficiency anemia by causing
capillary fragility, hemolysis, and bleeding.
Increased iron requirement
may contribute to iron deficiency. From birth to age 2 and during
adolescence, when rapid growth requires a large iron intake, dietary iron often is inadequate. During
pregnancy, the fetal iron requirement increases the maternal iron requirement (mean, 0.5 to 0.8 mg/day
—see
Anemia in Pregnancy
 despite the absence of menses. Lactation also increases the iron
requirement (mean, 0.4 mg/day).
Decreased iron absorption
can result from gastrectomy and upper small-bowel
malabsorption
syndromes. Rarely, absorption is decreased by dietary deprivation from undernutrition.
===PAGE:1062===
Symptoms and Signs
Most symptoms of iron deficiency are due to anemia. Such symptoms include fatigue, loss of stamina,
shortness of breath, weakness, dizziness, and pallor. Fatigue also may result from dysfunction of ironcontaining cellular enzymes.
In addition to the usual manifestations of anemia, some uncommon symptoms occur in severe iron
deficiency. Patients may have pica, an abnormal craving to eat substances (eg, ice, dirt, paint). Other
symptoms of severe deficiency include glossitis, cheilosis, concave nails (koilonychia), and, rarely,
dysphagia caused by a postcricoid esophageal web (Plummer-Vinson syndrome).
Diagnosis
• CBC, serum iron, iron-binding capacity, and serum ferritin
• Rarely bone marrow examination
Iron deficiency anemia is suspected in patients with chronic blood loss or microcytic anemia, particularly if
pica is present. In such patients, CBC, serum iron and iron-binding capacity, and serum ferritin are
obtained.
Iron and iron-binding capacity (or transferrin) are usually both measured because their relationship is
important. Various tests exist; the range of normal values relates to the test used. In general, normal
serum iron is 75 to 150
μ
g/dL (13 to 27
μ
mol/L) for men and 60 to 140
μ
g/dL (11 to 25
μ
mol/L) for women;
total iron-binding capacity is 250 to 450
μ
g/dL (45 to 81
μ
mol/L). Serum iron level is low in iron deficiency
and in many chronic diseases and is elevated in hemolytic disorders and in iron-overload syndromes (see
p.
). Patients taking oral iron may have normal serum iron despite a deficiency; in such
circumstances, a valid test requires cessation of iron therapy for 24 to 48 h. The iron-binding capacity
increases in iron deficiency. Serum transferrin receptor levels reflect the amount of RBC precursors
available for active proliferation; levels are sensitive and specific. The range of normal is 3.0 to 8.5
μ
g/mL. Levels increase in early iron deficiency and with increased erythropoiesis.
Serum ferritin levels closely correlate with total body iron stores. The range of normal in most laboratories
is 30 to 300 ng/mL, and the mean is 88 ng/mL in men and 49 ng/mL in women. Low levels (< 12 ng/mL)
are specific for iron deficiency. However, ferritin is an acute-phase reactant, and levels increase in
inflammatory and neoplastic disorders, so ferritin may also be elevated in cases of liver injury (eg,
hepatitis) and in some tumors (especially acute leukemia, Hodgkin lymphoma, and GI tract tumors).
The most sensitive and specific criterion for iron-deficient erythropoiesis is absent bone marrow stores of
iron, although a bone marrow examination is rarely needed.
Stages of iron deficiency:
Laboratory test results help stage iron deficiency anemia.
Stage 1 is characterized by decreased bone marrow iron stores; Hb and serum iron remain normal, but
serum ferritin level falls to < 20 ng/mL. The compensatory increase in iron absorption causes an increase
in iron-binding capacity (transferrin level).
During stage 2, erythropoiesis is impaired. Although the transferrin level is increased, the serum iron level
decreases; transferrin saturation decreases. Erythropoiesis is impaired when serum iron falls to < 50
μ
g/dL (< 9
μ
mol/L) and transferrin saturation to < 16%. The serum ferritin receptor level rises (> 8.5
mg/L).
During stage 3, anemia with normal-appearing RBCs and indices develops.
During stage 4, microcytosis and then hypochromia develop.
During stage 5, iron deficiency affects tissues, resulting in symptoms and signs.
===PAGE:1063===
Diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia prompts consideration of its cause, usually bleeding. Patients with
obvious blood loss (eg, women with menorrhagia) may require no further testing. Men and
postmenopausal women without obvious blood loss should undergo evaluation of the GI tract, because
anemia may be the only indication of an occult GI cancer. Rarely, chronic epistaxis or GU bleeding is
underestimated by the patient and requires evaluation in patients with normal GI study results.
Other microcytic anemias:
Iron deficiency anemia must be differentiated from other microcytic anemias
(see
Table 105-1
). If tests exclude iron deficiency in patients with microcytic anemia, then anemia of chronic
disease, structural Hb abnormalities (eg, hemoglobinopathies), and congenital RBC membrane
abnormalities are considered. Clinical features, Hb studies (eg, Hb electrophoresis and Hb A
), and
genetic testing (eg, for
α
-thalassemia) may help distinguish these entities.
[Table 105-1.
Differential Diagnosis of Microcytic Anemia Due to Decreased RBC Production]
Treatment
• Oral supplemental iron
• Rarely parenteral iron
Iron therapy without pursuit of the cause is poor practice; the bleeding site should be sought even in
cases of mild anemia.
Iron can be provided by various iron salts (eg, ferrous sulfate, gluconate, fumarate) or saccharated iron
po 30 min before meals (food or antacids may reduce absorption). A typical initial dose is 60 mg of
elemental iron (eg, as 325 mg of ferrous sulfate) given once/day or bid. Larger doses are largely
unabsorbed but increase adverse effects especially. Ascorbic acid either as a pill (500 mg) or as orange
juice when taken with iron enhances iron absorption without increasing gastric distress. Parenteral iron
causes the same therapeutic response as oral iron but can cause adverse effects, such as anaphylactoid
reactions, serum sickness, thrombophlebitis, and pain. It is reserved for patients who do not tolerate or
who will not take oral iron or for patients who steadily lose large amounts of blood because of capillary or
vascular disorders (eg, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia). The dose of parenteral iron is determined
by a hematologist. Oral or parenteral iron therapy should continue for ≥ 6 mo after correction of Hb levels
to replenish tissue stores.
The response to treatment is assessed by serial Hb measurements until normal RBC values are
achieved. Hb rises little for 2 wk but then rises 0.7 to 1 g/wk until near normal, at which time rate of
increase tapers. Anemia should be corrected within 2 mo. A subnormal response suggests continued
hemorrhage, underlying infection or cancer, insufficient iron intake, or, very rarely, malabsorption of oral
iron.
Sideroblastic Anemias
Sideroblastic anemias are iron-utilization anemias that are usually part of a myelodysplastic
syndrome, causing a normocytic-normochromic anemia with high RBC distribution width or a
microcytic-hypochromic anemia, particularly with increased serum iron and ferritin and
transferrin saturation.
Sideroblastic anemias are among the anemias characterized by inadequate marrow utilization of iron for
Hb synthesis despite the presence of adequate or increased amounts of iron (iron-utilization anemias).
Other iron-utilization anemias include some hemoglobinopathies, primarily thalassemias (.
Sideroblastic anemias are characterized by the presence of polychromatophilic, stippled, targeted RBCs
(siderocytes). Sideroblastic anemias are generally part of a myelodysplastic syndrome but may be
hereditary or may occur secondary to drugs (eg, chloramphenicol, cycloserine, isoniazid, pyrazinamide) or
toxins (including ethanol and lead). Pyridoxine deficiency can lead to sideroblastic anemia. Deficient
reticulocyte production, intramedullary death of RBCs, and bone marrow erythroid hyperplasia (and
dysplasia) occur. Although hypochromic RBCs are produced, other RBCs may be large, producing
===PAGE:1064===
normochromic indices; if so, variation in RBC size (dimorphism) usually produces a high RBC distribution
width (RDW).
Sideroblastic anemia is suspected in patients with microcytic anemia or a high RDW anemia, particularly
with increased serum iron, serum ferritin, and transferrin saturation (see
Iron Deficiency Anemia
. The peripheral smear shows RBC dimorphism. RBCs may appear stippled. Bone marrow
examination is necessary and reveals erythroid hyperplasia. Iron staining reveals the pathognomonic ironengorged paranuclear mitochondria in developing RBCs (ringed sideroblasts). Other features of
myelodysplasia, such as chromosomal abnormalities, are frequently evident. Serum lead is measured if
sideroblastic anemia has an unknown cause.
Elimination of a toxin or drug (especially alcohol) can lead to recovery. Rarely, congenital cases respond
to pyridoxine 50 mg po tid, but incompletely. Pyridoxine deficiency is corrected by vitamin B
supplementation.
Anemia of Chronic Disease
(Iron-Reutilization Anemia)
Anemia of chronic disease is a multifactorial anemia often coexistent with iron deficiency.
Diagnosis generally requires the presence of chronic infection, inflammation, or cancer;
microcytic or marginal normocytic anemia; and values for serum transferrin receptor and serum
ferritin that are between those typical for iron deficiency and sideroblastic anemia. Treatment is
to reverse the underlying disorder or, if the disorder is irreversible, to give erythropoietin.
Worldwide, anemia of chronic disease is the 2nd most common anemia. Early on, the RBCs are
normocytic; with time they become microcytic. The major issue is that the marrow erythroid mass fails to
expand appropriately in response to anemia.
Etiology
This type of anemia was thought to occur as part of a chronic disorder, most often infection, inflammatory
disease (especially RA), or cancer; however, the same process appears to begin acutely during virtually
any infection or inflammation. Three pathophysiologic mechanisms have been identified:
• Slightly shortened RBC survival occurs via unknown mechanisms in patients with cancer or chronic
granulomatous infections.
• Erythropoiesis is impaired because of decreases in both erythropoietin (EPO) production and marrow
responsiveness to EPO.
• Intracellular iron metabolism is impaired.
Reticuloendothelial cells retain iron from senescent RBCs, making iron unavailable for Hb synthesis.
There is thus a failure to compensate for the anemia with increased RBC production. Macrophagederived cytokines (eg, IL-1
β
, tumor necrosis factorα
, interferonβ
) in patients with infections, inflammatory
states, and cancer cause or contribute to the decrease in EPO production and the impaired iron
metabolism.
Diagnosis
• Symptoms and signs of underlying disorder
• CBC and serum iron, ferritin, transferrin, and transferrin receptor
Clinical findings are usually those of the underlying disorder (infection, inflammation, or cancer). Anemia
of chronic disease is suspected in patients with microcytic or marginal normocytic anemia with chronic
infection, inflammation, or cancer. If anemia of chronic disease is suspected, serum iron, transferrin,
===PAGE:1065===
transferrin receptor, and serum ferritin are measured. Hb usually is > 8 g/dL unless an additional
mechanism contributes to anemia (see also
Table 105-1
). If iron deficiency is present in addition to
anemia of chronic disease,
serum ferritin generally remains < 100 ng/mL, and, if there is infection,
inflammation, or cancer, a ferritin level of slightly < 100 ng/mL suggests that iron deficiency is
superimposed on anemia of chronic disease. However, because serum ferritin may be falsely elevated as
an acute-phase reactant, the serum transferrin receptor measurement may better differentiate iron
deficiency from anemia of chronic disease when serum ferritin is > 100 ng/mL.
Treatment
• Treatment of underlying disorder
• Recombinant EPO and iron supplements
Treating the underlying disorder is most important. Because the anemia is generally mild, transfusions
usually are not required, and recombinant EPO may be offered. Because both reduced production of and
marrow resistance to EPO occur, the EPO dose may need to be 150 to 300 units/kg sc 3 times/wk. A
good response is likely if after 2 wk of therapy Hb has increased > 0.5 g/dL and serum ferritin is < 400
ng/mL. Iron supplements ( are required to ensure an adequate response to EPO. However,
careful monitoring of Hb response is needed because adverse effects (eg, venous thromboembolism, MI,
death) may occur when Hb rises to > 12 g/dL.
Hypoproliferative Anemias
Hypoproliferative anemias result from deficient erythropoietin (EPO) or a diminished response
to it; they tend to be normocytic and normochromic. Renal, metabolic, and endocrine disorders
are common causes. Treatment includes measures to correct the underlying disorder and
sometimes EPO.
Hypoproliferation is a common mechanism in anemias of renal disease, hypometabolic or endocrine
deficiency states (eg, hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism), and protein deprivation. The mechanism appears
to be a relative or absolute decreased production of EPO. In hypometabolic states, the bone marrow may
also fail to respond to EPO.
Anemia of renal disease:
The deficiency in renal production of EPO and the severity of anemia
correlate with the extent of renal dysfunction; anemia occurs when creatinine clearance is < 45 mL/min.
Renal glomerular lesions (eg, from amyloidosis, diabetic nephropathy) generally result in the most severe
anemia for their degree of excretory failure.
The term anemia of renal disease refers only to that caused by decreased EPO, but other mechanisms
may increase its severity. In uremia, mild hemolysis is common; its basis is uncertain. Less common is
RBC fragmentation (traumatic hemolytic anemia), which occurs when the renovascular endothelium is
injured (eg, in malignant hypertension, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, polyarteritis nodosa, or
acute cortical necrosis). Traumatic hemolysis in children can be an acute, sometimes fatal illness called
hemolytic-uremic syndrome (.
Diagnosis is based on demonstration of renal insufficiency and normocytic anemia, peripheral
reticulocytopenia, and a paucity of erythroid hyperplasia for the degree of anemia. RBC fragmentation on
the peripheral smear, particularly if there is thrombocytopenia, suggests simultaneous traumatic
hemolysis.
Therapy is directed at improving renal function and increasing RBC production. If renal function returns to
normal, anemia is slowly corrected. In patients receiving long-term dialysis, EPO, beginning with 50 to
100 units/kg IV or sc 3 times/wk with iron supplements, is the treatment of choice. In almost all cases,
maximum increases in RBCs are reached by 8 to 12 wk. Reduced doses of EPO (about one half the
induction dose) can then be given 1 to 3 times/wk. Transfusions are rarely necessary. Careful monitoring
of the response is needed to avoid adverse effects when Hb increases to > 12 g/dL.
===PAGE:1066===
Other hypoproliferative anemias:
Clinical and laboratory findings of other hypoproliferative
normochromic-normocytic anemias are milder but otherwise mimic those of the anemia of renal disease.
The mechanism of the anemia of protein depletion may be general hypometabolism. Hypometabolism
may diminish the marrow response to EPO. Protein's role in hematopoiesis is unclear.
Aplastic Anemia
(Hypoplastic Anemia)
Aplastic anemia is a normocytic-normochromic anemia that results from a loss of blood cell
precursors, causing hypoplasia of bone marrow, RBCs, WBCs, and platelets. Symptoms result
from severe anemia, thrombocytopenia (petechiae, bleeding), or leukopenia (infections).
Diagnosis requires demonstration of peripheral pancytopenia and the absence of cell
precursors in bone marrow. Treatment is equine antithymocyte globulin and cyclosporine.
Erythropoietin, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and bone marrow
transplantation may also be useful.
The term aplastic anemia commonly implies a panhypoplasia of the marrow with associated leukopenia
and thrombocytopenia. In contrast, pure RBC aplasia is restricted to the erythroid cell line. Although both
disorders are uncommon, aplastic anemia is more common.
Etiology
True aplastic anemia (most common in adolescents and young adults) is idiopathic in about one half of
cases. Recognized causes are chemicals (eg, benzene, inorganic arsenic), radiation, and drugs (eg,
antineoplastic drugs, antibiotics, NSAIDs, anticonvulsants, acetazolamide, gold salts, penicillamine,
quinacrine). The mechanism is unknown, but selective (perhaps genetic) hypersensitivity appears to be
the basis.
Fanconi's anemia
is a very rare, familial form of aplastic anemia with bone abnormalities, microcephaly,
hypogonadism, and brown pigmentation of skin. It occurs in children with abnormal chromosomes.
Fanconi's anemia is often inapparent until some illness (especially an acute infection or inflammatory
disorder) supervenes, causing peripheral cytopenias. With clearing of the supervening illness, peripheral
values return to normal despite reduced marrow mass.
Pure RBC aplasia
may be acute and reversible. Acute erythroblastopenia is a brief disappearance of
RBC precursors from the bone marrow during various acute viral illnesses (particularly human parvovirus
infection), especially in children. The anemia lasts longer than the acute infection. Chronic pure RBC
aplasia has been associated with hemolytic disorders, thymomas, and autoimmune mechanisms and, less
often, with drugs (eg, tranquilizers, anticonvulsants), toxins (organic phosphates), riboflavin deficiency,
and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. A rare congenital form, Diamond-Blackfan anemia, usually occurs
during infancy but has also been reported in adulthood. Diamond-Blackfan anemia is associated with
bony abnormalities of the thumbs or digits and short stature.
Symptoms and Signs
Although onset of aplastic anemia usually is insidious, often occurring over weeks or months after
exposure to a toxin, occasionally it is acute. Signs vary with the severity of the pancytopenia. Symptoms
and signs of anemia (eg, pallor) usually are severe.
Severe thrombocytopenia may cause petechiae, ecchymosis, and bleeding from the gums, into the
conjunctivae, or other tissues. Agranulocytosis commonly causes life-threatening infections.
Splenomegaly is absent unless induced by transfusion hemosiderosis. Symptoms of pure RBC aplasia
are generally milder and relate to the degree of the anemia or to the underlying disorder.
Diagnosis
• CBC
===PAGE:1067===
• Bone marrow examination
Aplastic anemia is suspected in patients, particularly young patients, with pancytopenia (eg, WBC <
1500/
μ
L, platelets < 50,000/
μ
L). Pure RBC aplasia (including Diamond-Blackfan anemia) is suspected in
patients with bony abnormalities and normocytic anemia but normal WBC and platelet counts. If either
diagnosis is suspected, bone marrow examination is done.
In aplastic anemia, RBCs are normochromicnormocytic (sometimes marginally macrocytic). The WBC
count reduction occurs chiefly in the granulocytes. Platelets are often far below 50,000/
μ
L. Reticulocytes
are decreased or absent. Serum iron is elevated. The bone marrow is acellular. In pure RBC aplasia,
normocytic anemia, reticulocytopenia, and elevated serum iron are present, but WBC and platelet counts
are normal. Bone marrow cellularity and maturation may be normal except for absence of erythroid
precursors.
Treatment
• Equine antithymocyte globulin, corticosteroids, and cyclosporine
• Sometimes hematopoietic cell transplantation
• Sometimes cytokines
• Sometimes surgery in thymoma-associated RBC aplasia
In aplastic anemia, treatment of choice is equine antithymocyte globulin (ATG) 10 to 20 mg/kg diluted in
500 mL saline and infused IV over 4 to 6 h once/day for 10 consecutive days. Shorter regimens are also
used. About 60% of patients respond to ATG. Allergic reactions and serum sickness may occur; some
experts advocate skin testing (to identify allergy to horse serum) and concomitant corticosteroids
(prednisone 40 mg/m
po once/day beginning on day 7 for 10 days or until symptoms subside).
Cyclosporine (5 to 10 mg/kg po once/day) is as effective as ATG and produces responses in about 50%
of patients who do not respond to ATG, suggesting that its mechanism of action is different. Combined
ATG and cyclosporine is also effective. If aplastic anemia is very severe or fails to respond to ATG and
cyclosporine, bone marrow transplantation or treatment with cytokines (erythropoietin,
granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor, or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor) may be effective.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation may help younger patients (particularly patients < 30) but
requires an identical twin or an HLA-compatible sibling. At diagnosis, siblings are evaluated for HLA
compatibility. Because transfusions pose a risk to subsequent transplantation, blood products are used
only when essential.
Pure RBC aplasia has been successfully managed with immunosuppressants (prednisone, cyclosporine,
or cyclophosphamide), especially when an autoimmune mechanism is suspected. Because patients with
thymoma-associated pure RBC aplasia improve after thymectomy, CT is used to seek the presence of
such a lesion, and surgery is considered.
Myelophthisic Anemia
Myelophthisic anemia is a normocytic-normochromic anemia that occurs when normal marrow
space is infiltrated and replaced by nonhematopoietic or abnormal cells. Causes include
tumors, granulomatous disorders, and lipid storage diseases. Marrow fibrosis often occurs.
Splenomegaly may develop. Characteristic changes in peripheral blood include anisocytosis,
poikilocytosis, and excessive numbers of RBC and WBC precursors. Diagnosis usually requires
bone marrow biopsy. Treatment is supportive and includes measures directed at the underlying
disorder.
Descriptive terms used in this anemia can be confusing. Myelofibrosis, which is replacement of marrow
by fibrous tissue bands, may be idiopathic (primary) or secondary. True myelofibrosis is a stem cell defect
===PAGE:1068===
in which the fibrosis is secondary to other hematopoietic intramedullary events. Myelosclerosis is new
bone formation that sometimes accompanies myelofibrosis. Myeloid metaplasia refers to extramedullary
hematopoiesis in the liver, spleen, or lymph nodes that may accompany myelophthisis due to any cause.
An old term, agnogenic myeloid metaplasia, indicates primary myelofibrosis with or without myeloid
metaplasia.
Etiology
The most common cause is replacement of bone marrow by metastatic cancer (most often, breast or
prostate; less often, kidney, lung, adrenal, or thyroid); extramedullary hematopoiesis tends to be modest.
Other causes include myeloproliferative disorders (especially late-stage or spent polycythemia vera),
granulomatous diseases, and (lipid) storage diseases. Myelofibrosis can occur in all of these.
Factors that may contribute to decreased RBC production include a decreased amount of functioning
hematopoietic tissue, disordered metabolism related to the underlying disorder, and, in some cases,
erythrophagocytosis. Extramedullary hematopoiesis or disruption of the marrow sinusoids causes release
of immature cells. Abnormally shaped RBCs often result in increased RBC destruction.
Symptoms and Signs
Myeloid metaplasia may result in splenomegaly, particularly in patients with storage diseases. In severe
cases, symptoms of anemia and of the underlying disorder may be present. Massive splenomegaly can
cause abdominal pressure, early satiety, and left upper quadrant abdominal pain; hepatomegaly may be
present. Hepatosplenomegaly is rare with myelofibrosis from malignant tumors.
Diagnosis
• CBC, RBC indices, reticulocyte count, and peripheral smear
• Bone marrow examination
Myelophthisic anemia is suspected in patients with normocytic anemia, particularly when splenomegaly or
a potential underlying disorder is present. If it is suspected, a peripheral smear should be obtained,
because a leukoerythroblastic pattern (immature myeloid cells and nucleated RBCs, such as normoblasts
in the smear) suggests myelophthisic anemia. Anemia, usually moderately severe, is characteristically
normocytic but may be slightly macrocytic. RBC morphology may show extreme variation (anisocytosis
and poikilocytosis) in size and shape. The WBC count may vary. The platelet count is often low, and
platelets are often large and bizarre in shape. Reticulocytosis often occurs; it may be caused by
premature release of reticulocytes from the marrow or extramedullary sites and thus does not always
indicate increased blood regeneration.
Although examination of peripheral blood can be suggestive, diagnosis usually requires bone marrow
examination. Indications include a leukoerythroblastic pattern and unexplained splenomegaly. The marrow
may be difficult to aspirate; marrow trephine biopsy is usually required. Findings vary according to the
underlying disorder. Erythropoiesis is normal or increased in some cases. However, the
life span of RBCs
is often reduced. Hematopoiesis may be present in the spleen and liver.
X-rays, if obtained incidentally, may disclose bony lesions (myelosclerosis) characteristic of long-standing
myelofibrosis or other osseous changes (ie, osteoblastic or lytic lesions of a tumor), suggesting the cause
of anemia.
Treatment
• Treatment of underlying disorder
• Transfusions and corticosteroids
• Hydroxyurea
===PAGE:1069===
• Possibly thalidomide
The underlying disorder is treated. In idiopathic cases, management is supportive. Erythropoietin (20,000
to 40,000 units sc once/wk or twice/wk) and corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 10 to 30 mg po once/day)
have been used, but only modest responses have been observed. Hydroxyurea (500 mg po once/day or
once every other day) decreases spleen size and normalizes RBC values in many patients, but the
response requires 6 to 12 mo of treatment. Thalidomide (50 to 100 mg po once/day in the evening) may
provide modest responses, but it increases the risk of thrombosis and causes fatigue, which can be
severe.
Megaloblastic Macrocytic Anemias
Megaloblastic anemias result most often from deficiencies of vitamin B
and folate. Ineffective
hematopoiesis affects all cell lines but particularly RBCs. Diagnosis is usually based on a CBC
and peripheral smear, which may show a macrocytic anemia with anisocytosis and
poikilocytosis, large oval RBCs (macro-ovalocytes), hypersegmented neutrophils, and
reticulocytopenia. Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder.
Macrocytes are enlarged RBCs (ie, MCV > 100 fL/cell). Macrocytic RBCs occur in a variety of clinical
circumstances, many unrelated to the megaloblastosis and the resultant anemia. Macrocytosis may be
due to megaloblasts or other enlarged RBCs (see
Sidebar 105-1
). Megaloblasts are large nucleated RBC
precursors with noncondensed chromatin. Megaloblastosis precedes macrocytic anemia.
Etiology
The most common cause of megaloblastic states is deficiency or defective utilization of vitamin B
(see
p.
) or folate (. Other causes include drugs (generally antineoplastics or
immunosuppressants) that interfere with DNA synthesis and rare metabolic disorders (eg, hereditary
orotic aciduria); some cases are of unknown etiology.
Pathophysiology
Megaloblastic states result from defective DNA synthesis. RNA synthesis continues, resulting in a large
cell with a large nucleus. All cell lines have dyspoiesis, in which cytoplasmic maturity is greater than
nuclear maturity; this dyspoiesis produces megaloblasts in the marrow before they appear in the
peripheral blood. Dyspoiesis results in intramedullary cell death, making erythropoiesis ineffective and
causing indirect hyperbilirubinemia and hyperuricemia. Because dyspoiesis affects all cell lines,
reticulocytopenia and, during later stages, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia develop. Large, oval RBCs
(macro-ovalocytes) enter the circulation. Hypersegmentation of polymorphonuclear neutrophils is
common; the mechanism of their production is unknown.
Symptoms and Signs
Anemia develops insidiously and may not cause symptoms until it is severe. Deficiencies of vitamin B
may cause neurologic manifestations, including peripheral neuropathy, dementia, and subacute combined
degeneration. Folate deficiency may also cause diarrhea and glossitis. Many patients with folate
deficiency appear wasted, particularly with temporal wasting.
Diagnosis
• CBC, RBC indices, reticulocyte count, and peripheral smear
• Sometimes bone marrow examination
Megaloblastic anemia is suspected in anemic patients with macrocytic indices. Diagnosis is usually based
on peripheral smear. When fully developed, the anemia is macrocytic, with MCV > 100 fL/cell. The smear
===PAGE:1070===
shows macro-ovalocytosis, anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. The RBC distribution width (RDW) is high.
Howell-Jolly bodies (residual fragments of the nucleus) are common. Reticulocytopenia is present.
Hypersegmentation of the granulocytes develops early; neutropenia develops later. Thrombocytopenia is
often present in severe cases, and platelets may be bizarre in size and shape. If the diagnosis is
questionable, a bone marrow examination may be needed.
Treatment
Before treatment, the cause must be identified. Deficiency of vitamin B
or folate is suspected if
megaloblastic anemia is recognized;
these disorders are indistinguishable on the basis of peripheral
blood and bone marrow findings, so vitamin B
and folate levels are required (see pp.
and
).
Sidebar 105-1 Nonmegaloblastic Macrocytosis
Most macrocytic (ie, MCV > 100 fL/cell) anemias are megaloblastic. Nonmegaloblastic macrocytosis
occurs in various clinical states, not all of which are understood. Anemia commonly occurs in patients with
macrocytosis but usually results from mechanisms independent of macrocytosis.
Macrocytosis due to excess RBC membrane occurs in patients with chronic liver disease when
cholesterol esterification is defective. Macrocytosis with an MCV of about 100 to 105 fL/cell can occur
with chronic alcohol use in the absence of folate deficiency. Mild macrocytosis can occur in aplastic
anemia, especially as recovery occurs. Macrocytosis is also common in myelodysplasia. Because RBC
membrane molding occurs in the spleen after cell release from the marrow, RBCs may be slightly
macrocytic after splenectomy, although these changes are not associated with anemia.
Nonmegaloblastic macrocytosis is suspected in patients with macrocytic anemias when testing excludes
vitamin B
and folate deficiencies. The macro-ovalocytes on peripheral smear and the increased RBC
distribution width that are typical of classic megaloblastic anemia may be absent. If nonmegaloblastic
macrocytosis is unexplained clinically (eg, by the presence of aplastic anemia, chronic liver disease, or
alcohol use) or if myelodysplasia is suspected, bone marrow examination and cytogenetic analysis are
done to exclude myelodysplasia. In nonmegaloblastic macrocytosis, the marrow is not megaloblastic, but
in myelodysplasia and advanced liver disease there are megaloblastoid RBC precursors with dense
nuclear chromatin that differ from the usual fine fibrillar pattern in megaloblastic anemias.
Treatment depends on the cause. For treatment of folate and vitamin B
deficiencies, see pp.
and
. Drugs causing megaloblastic states may need to be eliminated or given in reduced doses.
Myelodysplasia and Iron-Transport Deficiency Anemia
In myelodysplastic syndrome (, anemia is commonly prominent. The anemia can be
microcytic or normochromic-normocytic, usually with a dimorphic (large and small) population of
circulating cells. Bone marrow examination shows decreased erythroid activity, megaloblastoid and
dysplastic changes, and, sometimes, increased numbers of ringed sideroblasts. Treatment is the same as
for sideroblastic anemias (.
Iron-transport deficiency anemia (atransferrinemia) is exceedingly rare. It occurs when iron cannot move
from storage sites (eg, mucosal cells, liver) to the erythropoietic precursors. The presumed mechanism is
absence of transferrin or presence of a defective transferrin molecule. In addition to anemia,
hemosiderosis of lymphoid tissue, especially along the GI tract, is prominent.
===PAGE:1071===
Chapter 106. Anemias Caused by Hemolysis
Introduction
At the end of their normal life span (about 120 days), RBCs are removed from the circulation. Hemolysis
involves premature destruction and hence a shortened RBC life span (< 120 days). Anemia results when
bone marrow production can no longer compensate for the shortened RBC survival; this condition is
termed hemolytic anemia. If the marrow can compensate, the condition is termed compensated hemolytic
anemia.
Etiology
Hemolysis can result from disorders extrinsic to the RBC or from intrinsic RBC abnormalities (see
Table 106-1
).
Disorders extrinsic to the RBC:
Most extrinsic disorders are acquired; the RBCs are normal and
transfused cells as well as autologous cells are destroyed. Disorders extrinsic to the RBC include
reticuloendothelial hyperactivity (hypersplenism—, immunologic abnormalities (eg,
autoimmune hemolytic anemia, isoimmune hemolytic anemia), mechanical injury (traumatic hemolytic
anemia), and certain infections. Infectious organisms may cause hemolytic anemia through the direct
action of toxins (eg, from
Clostridium perfringens
,
α
- or
β
-hemolytic streptococci, meningococci) or by
invasion and destruction of RBC by the organism (eg,
Plasmodium
sp,
Bartonella
sp).
Intrinsic RBC abnormalities:
Defects intrinsic to the RBC that can cause hemolysis involve one or more
components or functions of the RBC: the membrane, cell metabolism, and the Hb. Abnormalities include
hereditary and acquired cell membrane disorders (eg, spherocytosis), disorders of RBC metabolism (eg,
G6PD deficiency), and hemoglobinopathies (eg, sickle cell diseases, thalassemias). Quantitative and
functional abnormalities of certain RBC membrane proteins (
α
- and
β
-spectrin, protein 4.1, F-actin,
ankyrin) cause hemolytic anemias.
Pathophysiology
Hemolysis may be acute, chronic, or episodic. Chronic hemolysis may be complicated by aplastic crisis
(temporary failure of erythropoiesis), usually caused by an infection, often parvovirus. Hemolysis can be
extravascular, intravascular, or both.
[Table 106-1.
Hemolytic Anemias]
Normal RBC processing:
Senescent RBCs lose membrane and are cleared from the circulation largely
by the phagocytic cells of the spleen, liver, bone marrow, and reticuloendothelial system. Hb is broken
down in these cells primarily by the heme oxygenase system. The iron is conserved and reutilized, and
heme is degraded to bilirubin, which is conjugated in the liver to bilirubin glucuronide and excreted in the
bile.
Extravascular hemolysis:
Most pathologic hemolysis is extravascular and occurs when damaged or
abnormal RBCs are cleared from the circulation by cells of the spleen, liver, and bone marrow similar to
the process by which senescent RBCs are removed. The spleen usually contributes to hemolysis by
destroying mildly abnormal RBCs or cells coated with warm antibodies. An enlarged spleen may
sequester even normal RBCs. Severely abnormal RBCs or RBCs coated with cold antibodies or
complement (C3) are destroyed within the circulation and in the liver, which (because of its large blood
flow) can remove damaged cells efficiently.
Intravascular hemolysis:
Intravascular hemolysis is an important reason for premature RBC destruction
and usually occurs when the cell membrane has been severely damaged by any of a number of different
mechanisms, including autoimmune phenomena, direct trauma (eg, march hemoglobinuria), shear stress
(eg, defective mechanical heart valves), and toxins (eg, clostridial toxins, venomous snake bite).
===PAGE:1072===
Intravascular hemolysis results in hemoglobinemia when the amount of Hb released into plasma exceeds
the Hb-binding capacity of the plasma-binding protein haptoglobin, a globulin normally present in
concentrations of about 1.0 g/L in plasma. With hemoglobinemia, unbound Hb dimers are filtered into the
urine and reabsorbed by renal tubular cells; hemoglobinuria results when reabsorptive capacity is
exceeded. Iron is embedded in hemosiderin within the tubular cells; some of the iron is assimilated for
reutilization and some reaches the urine when the tubular cells slough.
Consequences of hemolysis:
Unconjugated (indirect) hyperbilirubinemia and jaundice occur when the
conversion of Hb to bilirubin exceeds the liver's capacity to conjugate and excrete bilirubin (.
Bilirubin catabolism causes increased stercobilin in the stool and urobilinogen in the urine and sometimes
cholelithiasis.
The bone marrow responds to the excess loss of RBCs by accelerating production and release of RBCs,
resulting in a reticulocytosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Systemic manifestations resemble those of other anemias and include pallor, fatigue, dizziness, and
possible hypotension. Hemolytic crisis (acute, severe hemolysis) is uncommon; it may be accompanied by
chills, fever, pain in the back and abdomen, prostration, and shock. Severe hemolysis can cause jaundice
and splenomegaly. Hemoglobinuria causes red or reddish-brown urine.
Diagnosis
• Peripheral smear, reticulocyte count, serum bilirubin, LDH, and ALT
• Sometimes, measurement of urinary hemosiderin and serum haptoglobin
• Rarely, measurement of RBC survival using a radioactive label
Hemolysis is suspected in patients with anemia and reticulocytosis, particularly if splenomegaly or
another possible cause is recognized. If hemolysis is suspected, peripheral smear is examined and serum
bilirubin, LDH, and ALT are measured. If results of these tests are inconclusive, urinary hemosiderin and
serum haptoglobin are measured.
Abnormalities of RBC morphology are seldom diagnostic but often suggest the presence and cause of
hemolysis (see
Table 106-2
).
[Table 106-2.
RBC Morphologic Changes in Hemolytic Anemias]
Other suggestive findings include increased levels of serum LDH and indirect bilirubin with a normal ALT,
and the presence of urinary urobilinogen. Intravascular hemolysis is suggested by RBC fragments
(schistocytes) on the peripheral smear and by decreased serum haptoglobin levels; however, haptoglobin
levels can decrease because of hepatocellular dysfunction and can increase because of systemic
inflammation. Intravascular hemolysis is also suggested by urinary hemosiderin. Urinary Hb, like
hematuria and myoglobinuria, produces a positive benzidine reaction on dipstick testing; it can be
differentiated from hematuria by the absence of RBCs on microscopic urine examination. Free Hb may
make plasma reddish brown, noticeable often in centrifuged blood; myoglobin does not.
Although hemolysis can usually be identified by these simple criteria, the definitive diagnosis is
demonstration of decreased RBC survival, preferably with a radioactive label, such as radiochromium
(
Cr). The measured survival of radiolabeled RBCs can establish hemolysis and also identify the sites
of sequestration by using body surface counting. This procedure is rarely required, however.
Once hemolysis has been identified, the specific disorder is sought. One approach to narrowing the
differential diagnosis in hemolytic anemias is to consider risk factors (eg, geographic location, genetics,
underlying disorder), examine the patient for splenomegaly, and do a direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test
===PAGE:1073===
and peripheral smear; most hemolytic anemias produce abnormalities in one of these variables that can
direct further testing. Other laboratory tests that can help discern the causes of hemolysis include the
following:
• Quantitative Hb electrophoresis
• RBC enzyme assays
• Flow cytometry
• Cold agglutinins
• Osmotic fragility
Although some tests can help differentiate intravascular from extravascular hemolysis, making the
distinction is sometimes difficult. During increased RBC destruction, both types are commonly involved,
although to differing degrees.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the specific mechanism of hemolysis.
Hemoglobinuria and hemosiderinuria may necessitate iron-replacement therapy. Corticosteroids are
helpful in the initial treatment of warm antibody autoimmune hemolysis. Long-term transfusion therapy
may cause excessive iron accumulation, necessitating chelation therapy. Splenectomy is beneficial in
some situations, particularly when splenic sequestration is the major cause of RBC destruction. If
possible, splenectomy is delayed until 2 wk after vaccination with pneumococcal,
Haemophilus
influenzae
, and meningococcal vaccines. In cold agglutinin disease, the patient is kept warm. Folate
replacement is needed for patients with ongoing long-term hemolysis.
Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia is caused by autoantibodies that react with RBCs at
temperatures ≥ 37° C (warm antibody hemolytic anemia) or < 37° C (cold agglutinin disease).
Hemolysis is usually extravascular. The direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test establishes the
diagnosis and may suggest the cause. Treatment depends on the cause and may include
corticosteroids, splenectomy, IV immune globulin, immunosuppressants, avoidance of blood
transfusions, and withdrawal of drugs.
Etiology
Warm antibody hemolytic anemia:
Warm antibody hemolytic anemia is the most common form of
autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA); it is more common among women. Autoantibodies in warm antibody
hemolytic anemia generally react at temperatures ≥ 37° C. They may occur spontaneously or in
association with certain disorders (SLE, lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia). Some drugs (eg,
α
-
methyldopa, levodopa—see
Table 106-3
) stimulate production of autoantibodies against Rh antigens (
α
-methyldopa-type of AIHA).
Other drugs stimulate production of autoantibodies against the antibiotic-RBC-membrane complex as part
of a transient hapten mechanism; the hapten may be stable (eg, high-dose penicillin, cephalosporins) or
unstable (eg, quinidine, sulfonamides).
In warm antibody hemolytic anemia, hemolysis occurs primarily in the spleen. It is often severe and can be
fatal. Most of the autoantibodies in warm antibody hemolytic anemia are IgG. Most are panagglutinins and
have limited specificity.
Cold agglutinin disease:
Cold agglutinin disease (cold antibody disease) is caused by autoantibodies
that react at temperatures < 37° C. It sometimes occurs with infections
===PAGE:1074===
[Table 106-3.
Drugs that Cause Warm Antibody Hemolytic Anemia]
(especially mycoplasmal pneumonias or infectious mononucleosis) and lymphoproliferative states; about
one half of cases are idiopathic, which is the common form in older adults. Infections tend to cause acute
disease, whereas idiopathic disease tends to be chronic. The hemolysis occurs largely in the
extravascular mononuclear phagocyte system of the liver. The anemia is usually mild (Hb > 7.5 g/dL).
Autoantibodies in cold agglutinin disease are usually IgM. The higher the temperature (ie, the closer to
normal body temperature) at which these antibodies react with the RBC, the greater the hemolysis.
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria:
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH; Donath-Landsteiner
syndrome) is a rare type of cold agglutinin disease. Hemolysis results from exposure to cold, which may
even be localized (eg, from drinking cold water, from washing hands in cold water). An IgG autohemolysin
binds to RBCs at low temperatures and causes intravascular hemolysis after warming. It occurs most
often after a nonspecific viral illness or in otherwise healthy patients, although it occurs in some patients
with congenital or acquired syphilis. The severity and rapidity of development of the anemia varies and
may be fulminant.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of warm antibody hemolytic anemia tend to be due to the anemia. If the disorder is severe,
fever, chest pain, syncope, or heart failure may occur. Mild splenomegaly is typical.
Cold agglutinin disease manifests as an acute or chronic hemolytic anemia. Other cryopathic symptoms
or signs may be present (eg, acrocyanoses, Raynaud's syndrome, cold-associated occlusive changes).
Symptoms of PCH may include severe pain in the back and legs, headache, vomiting, diarrhea, and
passage of dark brown urine; hepatosplenomegaly may be present.
Diagnosis
• Assays for hemolytic anemia (eg, peripheral smear, reticulocyte count; sometimes urinary hemosiderin,
serum haptoglobin)
• Direct antiglobulin test
AIHA is suspected in patients with hemolytic anemia, particularly if symptoms are severe or other
suggestive symptoms are present. Routine laboratory tests generally suggest extravascular hemolysis
(eg, hemosiderinuria is absent; haptoglobin levels are near normal) unless anemia is sudden and severe
or PCH is the cause. Spherocytosis and a high MCHC are typical.
AIHA is diagnosed by detection of autoantibodies with the direct antiglobulin (direct Coombs') test.
Antiglobulin serum is added to washed RBCs from the patient; agglutination indicates the presence of
immunoglobulin or complement (C) bound to the RBCs. Generally IgG is present in warm antibody
hemolytic anemia, and C3 (C3b and C3d) in cold antibody disease. The test is ≤ 98% sensitive for AIHA;
false-negative results can occur if antibody density is very low or if the autoantibodies are IgA or IgM. In
general, the intensity of the direct antiglobulin test correlates with the number of molecules of IgG or C3
bound to the RBC and, roughly, with the rate of hemolysis. A complementary test consists of mixing the
patient's plasma with normal RBCs to determine whether such antibodies are free in
the plasma (the
indirect antiglobulin [indirect Coombs'] test). A positive indirect antiglobulin test and a negative direct test
generally indicate an alloantibody caused by pregnancy, prior transfusions, or lectin cross-reactivity rather
than immune hemolysis. Even identification of a warm antibody does not define hemolysis, because
1/10,000 healthy blood donors has a positive test result.
Once AIHA has been identified by the Coombs' test, testing should differentiate between warm antibody
hemolytic anemia and cold agglutinin disease as well as the mechanism responsible for warm antibody
hemolytic anemia. This determination can often be made by observing the pattern of the direct
antiglobulin reaction. Three patterns are possible:
• The reaction is positive with anti-IgG and negative with anti-C3. This pattern is common in idiopathic
===PAGE:1075===
AIHA and in the drug-associated or
α
-methyldopa-type of AIHA, usually warm antibody hemolytic
anemia.
• The reaction is positive with anti-IgG and anti-C3. This pattern is common in patients with SLE and
idiopathic AIHA, usually warm antibody hemolytic anemia, and is rare in drug-associated cases.
• The reaction is positive with anti-C3 but negative with anti-IgG. This pattern occurs in cold agglutinin
disease. It is uncommon in idiopathic AIHA, warm antibody hemolytic anemia, when the IgG antibody is
of low affinity, in some drug-associated cases, and in PCH.
Other studies can suggest the cause of AIHA but are not definitive. In cold agglutinin disease, RBCs
clump on the peripheral smear, and automated cell counts often reveal an increased MCV and spuriously
low Hb due to such clumping; hand warming of the tube and recounting result in values significantly
closer to normal. Warm antibody hemolytic anemia can often be differentiated from cold agglutinin disease
by the temperature at which the direct antiglobulin test is positive; a test that is positive at temperatures ≥
37° C indicates warm antibody hemolytic anemia, whereas a test that is positive at lower temperatures
indicates cold agglutinin disease.
If PCH is suspected, the Donath-Landsteiner test, which is specific for PCH, should be done. Testing for
syphilis is recommended.
Treatment
• For drug-induced warm antibody hemolytic anemia, drug withdrawal, sometimes IV immune globulin
• For idiopathic warm antibody hemolytic anemia, corticosteroids
• For cold agglutinin disease, avoidance of cold
Treatment depends on the specific mechanism of the hemolysis.
Warm antibody hemolytic anemias:
In drug-induced warm antibody hemolytic anemias, drug
withdrawal decreases the rate of hemolysis. With
α
-methyldopa-type AIHA, hemolysis usually ceases
within 3 wk; however, a positive Coombs' test may persist for > 1 yr. With hapten-mediated AIHA,
hemolysis ceases when the drug is cleared from the plasma. Corticosteroids have only little effect in druginduced hemolysis; infusions of immune globulin may be more effective.
Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 1 mg/kg po once/day or higher doses) are the treatment of choice in
idiopathic warm antibody AIHA. In very severe hemolysis, an initial loading dose of 100 to 200 mg is
recommended. Most patients have an excellent response, which in about one third is sustained after 12 to
20 wk of therapy. When stable RBC values are achieved, corticosteroids are tapered slowly. In patients
who relapse after corticosteroid cessation or who are not helped by corticosteroids, splenectomy is done.
About one third to one half of patients have a sustained response after splenectomy. In cases of fulminant
hemolysis, plasma exchange has been used. For less severe but uncontrolled hemolysis, immune
globulin infusions have provided temporary control. Long-term management with immunosuppressants
(including cyclosporine) has been effective in patients in whom corticosteroids and splenectomy have
been ineffective.
The presence of panagglutinating antibodies in warm antibody hemolytic anemia makes cross-matching
of donor blood difficult. In addition, transfusions often superimpose an alloantibody on the autoantibody,
accelerating hemolysis. Thus, transfusions should be avoided whenever possible. When necessary, they
should be given only in small aliquots (100 to 200 mL over 1 to 2 h, with monitoring for hemolysis).
Cold agglutinin disease:
Treatment is largely supportive in acute cases, because the anemia may be
self-limited. In chronic cases, treatment of the underlying disorder often controls the anemia. However, in
idiopathic chronic cases, mild anemia (Hb, 9 to 10 g/dL) may persist for life. Avoidance of cold exposure is
often helpful. Splenectomy is of no value. Immunosuppressants have only modest effectiveness.
Transfusions should be given sparingly, with the blood warmed through an on-line warmer. Because the
===PAGE:1076===
autologous RBCs have
already survived the autoantibodies, autologous cell survival is better than that of
transfused cells, limiting the efficacy of transfusion.
In PCH, therapy consists of strict avoidance of exposure to cold. Splenectomy is of no value.
Immunosuppressants have been effective but should be restricted to patients with progressive or
idiopathic cases. Treatment of concomitant syphilis may cure PCH.
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare disorder characterized by intravascular
hemolysis and hemoglobinuria, the latter accentuated during sleep. Leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia, and episodic crises are common. Diagnosis requires flow cytometry.
Treatment is supportive.
PNH is most common among men in their 20s, but it occurs in both sexes and at any age.
Etiology
PNH is an acquired genetic mutation resulting in a membrane defect in stem cells and their progeny,
including RBCs, WBCs, and platelets. It results in unusual sensitivity to normal (C3) in the plasma,
leading to ongoing intravascular hemolysis of RBCs and diminished marrow production of WBCs and
platelets. The defect is a missing glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor for membrane proteins caused by
an abnormality of the
PIG-A
gene, which is located on the X chromosome.
Pathophysiology
Protracted urinary Hb loss may result in iron deficiency. Patients are strongly predisposed to both venous
and arterial thrombi, including the Budd-Chiari syndrome. Thrombi are commonly fatal. Some patients
with PNH develop aplastic anemia, and some with aplastic anemia develop PNH.
Crises may be precipitated by infection, iron use, vaccination, or menstruation. Abdominal and lumbar
pain and symptoms of severe anemia may occur; gross hemoglobinuria and splenomegaly are common.
Diagnosis
• Flow cytometry
• Possibly acid hemolysis test (Ham's test)
PNH is suspected in patients who have typical symptoms of anemia or unexplained normocytic anemia
with intravascular hemolysis, particularly if leukopenia or thrombocytopenia is present. Historically, if PNH
was suspected, the sugar-water test was usually the first test done; it relies on enhanced hemolysis of
C3-dependent systems in isotonic solutions of low ionic strength, is simple to do, and is sensitive.
However, the test is nonspecific; positive results require confirmation by further testing. The most
sensitive and specific test is determination of the absence of specific RBC or WBC membrane proteins
(CD59 and CD55) by flow cytometry. An alternative is the acid hemolysis test (Ham's test). Hemolysis
usually occurs if blood is acidified with HCl, incubated for 1 h, and centrifuged. Bone marrow examination
is not necessary but, if done to exclude other disorders, usually shows marrow hypoplasia. Gross
hemoglobinuria is common during crises, and the urine may contain hemosiderin.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
• Possibly monoclonal antibody
Treatment is largely symptomatic. However, a new monoclonal antibody that is a terminal complement
inhibitor, eculizumab, has reduced transfusion requirements, thromboembolism, and symptoms.
===PAGE:1077===
Supportive measures include corticosteroids, androgen hormones, iron and folate supplementation, and
sometimes transfusions and stem cell transplantation. Empiric use of corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 20
to 40 mg po once/day) controls symptoms and stabilizes RBC values in > 50% of patients. Androgenic
hormones and recombinant erythropoietin to stimulate hematopoiesis have been used in some patients.
Generally, transfusions are reserved for crises. Transfusions containing plasma (and C3) should be
avoided. Washing RBCs with saline before transfusion is no longer necessary. Heparin followed by
warfarin may be required for thromboses but should be used cautiously. Oral iron and folate supplements
may be necessary. Most cases can be managed by these supportive measures for years to decades.
Allogenic stem cell transplantation has been successful in a small number of cases.
Traumatic Hemolytic Anemia
(Microangiopathic Hemolytic Anemia)
Traumatic hemolytic anemia is intravascular hemolysis caused by excessive shear or
turbulence in the circulation.
Trauma may originate outside the vessel, as in skeletal impact, eg, repetitive foot striking (march
hemoglobinuria) or from karate or bongo playing; within the heart across a pressure gradient, as in calcific
aortic stenosis or with faulty aortic valve prostheses; in arterioles, as in severe (especially malignant)
hypertension, some malignant tumors, or polyarteritis nodosa; or in end arterioles, often across fibrin
deposits, as in thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and disseminated intravascular coagulation. The
trauma causes odd-shaped RBC fragments (eg, triangles, helmet shapes) called schistocytes in the
peripheral blood; their appearance on the peripheral smear is diagnostic. The small schistocytes cause
low MCV and high RBC distribution width (the latter reflecting the anisocytosis).
Treatment addresses the underlying process. Iron deficiency anemia occasionally is superimposed on the
hemolysis as a result of chronic hemosiderinuria and, when present, responds to iron-replacement
therapy.
Hereditary Spherocytosis and Hereditary Elliptocytosis
Hereditary spherocytosis and hereditary elliptocytosis are congenital RBC membrane
disorders. Symptoms, generally milder in hereditary elliptocytosis, include variable degrees of
anemia, jaundice, and splenomegaly. Diagnosis requires demonstration of increased RBC
osmotic fragility and a negative direct antiglobulin test. Rarely, patients < 45 yr with
symptomatic disease require splenectomy.
Hereditary spherocytosis (chronic familial icterus; congenital hemolytic jaundice; familial spherocytosis;
spherocytic anemia) is an autosomal dominant disease with variable gene penetrance. It is characterized
by hemolysis of spheroidal RBCs and anemia.
Hereditary elliptocytosis (ovalocytosis) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder in which RBCs are oval or
elliptical. Hemolysis is usually absent or slight, with little or no anemia; splenomegaly is often present.
Pathophysiology
Alterations in membrane proteins cause the RBC abnormalities in both disorders. In hereditary
spherocytosis, the cell membrane surface area is decreased disproportionately to the intracellular
content. The decreased surface area of the cell impairs the flexibility needed for the cell to traverse the
spleen's microcirculation, causing intrasplenic hemolysis. In hereditary elliptocytosis, genetic mutations
result in weakness of the cytoskeleton of the cell, leading to deformation of the cell. The abnormally
shaped RBCs are taken up and destroyed by the spleen.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of hereditary spherocytosis are usually mild, and the anemia may be so well
compensated that it is not recognized until an intercurrent viral illness transiently decreases RBC
===PAGE:1078===
production, simulating an aplastic crisis. However, these episodes are self-limited, resolving with
resolution of the infection. Moderate jaundice and symptoms of anemia are present in severe cases.
Splenomegaly is almost invariable but only rarely causes abdominal discomfort. Hepatomegaly may be
present. Cholelithiasis (pigment stones) is common and may be the presenting symptom. Congenital
skeletal abnormalities (eg, tower-shaped skull, polydactylism) occasionally occur. Although usually one or
more family members have had symptoms, several generations may be skipped because of variations in
the degree of gene penetrance.
Clinical features of hereditary elliptocytosis are similar to those of hereditary spherocytosis but tend to be
milder.
Diagnosis
• RBC fragility assay, RBC autohemolysis assay, and direct antiglobulin test
These disorders are suspected in patients with unexplained hemolysis, particularly if splenomegaly, a
family history of similar manifestations, or suggestive RBC indices are present. Because RBCs are
spheroidal and the MCV is normal, the mean corpuscular diameter is below normal, and RBCs resemble
microspherocytes. MCHC is increased. Reticulocytosis of 15 to 30% and leukocytosis are common.
If these disorders are suspected, the RBC osmotic fragility test (which mixes RBCs with varying
concentrations of saline), the RBC autohemolysis test (which measures the amount of spontaneous
hemolysis occurring after 48 h of sterile incubation), and, to rule out spherocytosis due to autoimmune
hemolytic anemia, the direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test are done. RBC fragility is characteristically
increased, but in mild cases, it may be normal
unless sterile defibrinated blood is first incubated at 37° C
for 24 h. RBC autohemolysis is increased and can be corrected by the addition of glucose. The direct
antiglobulin test results are negative.
Treatment
• Sometimes splenectomy
Splenectomy, after appropriate vaccination, is the only specific treatment for either disorder but is rarely
needed. It is indicated in patients < 45 yr with Hb persistently < 10 g/dL, jaundice or biliary colic, or
persistent aplastic crisis. If the gallbladder has stones or other evidence of cholestasis, it should be
removed during splenectomy. Although spherocytosis persists after splenectomy, the cells survive longer
in the circulation. Usually, symptoms resolve and anemia and reticulocytosis decrease. However, RBC
fragility remains high.
Stomatocytosis and Anemia Caused by Hypophosphatemia
Stomatocytosis (presence of cup- or bowl-shaped RBCs) and hypophosphatemia are RBC
membrane abnormalities causing hemolytic anemia.
Stomatocytosis:
Stomatocytosis is a rare condition of RBCs in which a mouth-like or slitlike pattern
replaces the normal central zone of pallor. These cells are associated with congenital and acquired
hemolytic anemia. The symptoms result from the anemia.
The rare congenital stomatocytosis, which shows autosomal dominant inheritance, causes a severe
hemolytic anemia presenting very early in life. The RBC membrane is hyperpermeable to monovalent
cations (Na and K); movement of divalent cations and anions is normal. About 20 to 30% of circulating
RBCs are stomatocytic; RBC fragility is increased, as is autohemolysis with inconstant correction with
glucose. Splenectomy ameliorates anemia in some cases.
Acquired stomatocytosis with hemolytic anemia occurs primarily with recent excessive alcohol ingestion.
Stomatocytes in the peripheral blood and hemolysis disappear within 2 wk of alcohol withdrawal.
Anemia caused by hypophosphatemia:
RBC pliability varies according to intracellular ATP levels.
===PAGE:1079===
Because the serum phosphate concentration affects RBC ATP levels, serum phosphate level < 0.5 mg/dL
(< 0.16 mmol/L) depletes RBC ATP; the complex metabolic sequelae of hypophosphatemia also include
2,3-diphosphoglyceric acid depletion, a shift to the left in the O
dissociation curve, decreased glucose
utilization, and increased lactate production. The resultant rigid, nonyielding RBCs are susceptible to
injury in the capillary circulatory bed, leading to hemolysis and small, sphere-shaped RBCs
(microspherocytosis).
Severe hypophosphatemia may occur in alcohol withdrawal, diabetes mellitus, refeeding after starvation,
the recovery (diuretic) phase after severe burns, hyperalimentation, severe respiratory alkalosis, and in
uremic patients receiving dialysis who are taking antacids. Phosphate supplements prevent or reverse the
anemia and are considered for patients at risk of or who have hypophosphatemia.
Embden-Meyerhof Pathway Defects
Embden-Meyerhof pathway defects are autosomal recessive RBC metabolic disorders that
cause hemolytic anemia.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency is one such enzyme defect. In all of these pathway defects, hemolytic anemia
occurs only in homozygotes, and the exact mechanism of hemolysis is unknown. Spherocytes are absent,
but small numbers of irregularly shaped spheres may be present. In general, assays of ATP and
diphosphoglycerate help identify any metabolic defect and localize the defective sites for further analysis.
There is no specific therapy for these hemolytic anemias, although most patients require no treatment
other than supplemental folate 1 mg po once/day during acute hemolysis. Hemolysis and anemia persist
after splenectomy, although some improvement may occur, particularly in patients with pyruvate kinase
deficiency.
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is an X-linked enzymatic defect
common in blacks that can result in hemolysis after acute illnesses or intake of oxidant drugs
(including salicylates and sulfonamides). Diagnosis is based on assay for G6PD, although tests
are often falsely negative during acute hemolysis. Treatment is supportive.
The only important defect in the hexose monophosphate shunt pathway is caused by G6PD deficiency.
Over 100 mutant forms of the enzyme have been identified. Clinically, the most common form is the drugsensitive variety. This X-linked disorder is fully expressed in males and homozygous females and is
variably expressed in heterozygous females. This defect occurs in about 10% of black males and in <
10% of black females in the US and in lower frequencies among people with ancestors from the
Mediterranean basin (eg, Italians, Greeks, Arabs, Sephardic Jews).
Pathophysiology
G6PD deficiency reduces energy available to maintain the integrity of the red cell membrane, which
shortens RBC survival.
Hemolysis selectively affects older RBCs among affected blacks and among most affected whites.
Hemolysis occurs commonly after fever, acute viral and bacterial infections, and diabetic acidosis. Less
commonly, hemolysis occurs after exposure to drugs or to other substances that produce peroxide and
cause oxidation of Hb and RBC membranes. These drugs and substances include primaquine,
salicylates, sulfonamides, nitrofurans, phenacetin, naphthalene, some vitamin K derivatives, dapsone,
phenazopyridine, nalidixic acid, methylene blue, and, in some whites, fava beans. Whether continued use
of the offending drug leads to a compensated hemolytic state or lethal hemolysis depends on the degree
of G6PD deficiency and the oxidant potential of the drug. Chronic congenital hemolysis (without drug use)
occurs in some whites. Because older cells are selectively destroyed in blacks, hemolysis is usually selflimited, affecting < 25% of RBC mass; in whites, the deficiency is more severe, and profound hemolysis
may lead to hemoglobinuria and acute renal failure.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1080===
• G6PD assay
The diagnosis is considered in patients with acute hemolysis, particularly black males. G6PD assay is
done. Anemia, jaundice, and reticulocytosis develop during hemolysis. Heinz bodies, possibly particles of
dead cytoplasm or denatured Hb, may be visible early during the hemolytic episode but do not persist in
patients with an intact spleen because they are removed by it. A specific diagnostic clue is the presence
in the peripheral blood of RBCs that appear to have had one or more bites (1μ
m wide) taken from the
cell periphery (bite cells), possibly as a result of Heinz body removal by the spleen. Many screening tests
are available. However, during and immediately after a hemolytic episode, tests may yield false-negative
results because of destruction of the older, more deficient RBCs and the presence of reticulocytes rich in
G6PD. Specific enzyme assays are the best diagnostic tests.
Treatment
During acute hemolysis, treatment is supportive; transfusions are rarely needed. Patients are advised to
avoid drugs or substances that initiate hemolysis.
Sickle Cell Disease
(Hb S Disease)
Sickle cell disease (a hemoglobinopathy—see
Sidebar 106-1
) causes a chronic hemolytic
anemia occurring almost exclusively in blacks, caused by homozygous inheritance of Hb S.
Sickle-shaped RBCs clog capillaries, causing organ ischemia. Acute exacerbations (crises) may
develop frequently. Infection, bone marrow aplasia, or lung involvement (acute chest
syndrome) can develop acutely and be fatal. Normocytic hemolytic anemia is characteristic.
Diagnosis requires Hb electrophoresis. Crises are treated with analgesics and other supportive
measures. Transfusions are occasionally required. Vaccines against bacterial infections,
prophylactic antibiotics, and aggressive treatment of infections prolong survival. Hydroxyurea
may decrease the frequency of crises.
Homozygotes (about 0.3% of blacks in the US) have sickle cell anemia; heterozygotes (8 to 13% of
blacks) are typically not anemic.
Pathophysiology
In Hb S, valine is substituted for glutamic acid in the 6th amino acid of the
β
chain. Oxygenated Hb S is
much less soluble than oxygenated Hb A; it forms a semisolid gel that causes RBCs to deform in a sickle
shape at sites of low PO
. Distorted, inflexible RBCs adhere to vascular endothelium and plug small
arterioles and capillaries, which leads to infarction. Venous plugging predisposes to thromboses. Because
sickled RBCs are fragile, the mechanical trauma of circulation causes hemolysis. Chronic compensatory
marrow hyperactivity deforms the bones.
Acute exacerbations:
Acute exacerbations (crises) occur intermittently, often for no known reason. In
some cases, fever, viral infection, or local trauma appears to precipitate a crisis.
Sidebar 106-1 Hemoglobinopathies
Hb molecules consist of polypeptide chains whose chemical structure is genetically controlled. The
normal adult Hb molecule (Hb A) consists of 2 pairs of chains designated
α
and
β
. Normal blood also
contains a ≤ 2.5% concentration of Hb A
(composed of
α
and
δ
chains). Fetal Hb (Hb F, which has
γ
chains in the place of
β
chains) gradually decreases, particularly in the first months of life, until it makes
up < 2% of total Hb in adults (see
Hemoglobinopathies
. Hb F concentration increases in
certain disorders of Hb synthesis and in aplastic and myeloproliferative states.
Some hemoglobinopathies result in anemias that are severe in patients who are homozygous but mild in
===PAGE:1081===
patients who are heterozygous. Some patients are heterozygous for 2 such abnormalities and have
anemia with characteristics of both traits.
Different Hbs, as distinguished by electrophoretic mobility, are alphabetically designated in order of
discovery (eg, A, B, C), although the first abnormal Hb, sickle cell Hb, was designated Hb S. Structurally
different Hbs with the same electrophoretic mobility are named for the city or location in which they were
discovered (eg, Hb S Memphis, Hb C Harlem). Standard description of a patient's Hb composition places
the Hb of greatest concentration first (eg, AS in sickle cell trait).
In the US, important anemias are caused by defective synthesis of Hb S or Hb C and the thalassemias,
and immigration of Southeast Asians has made Hb E disease common.
Painful crisis is the most common type; it is caused by ischemia and infarction, typically of the bones, but
also of the spleen, lung, or kidney.
Aplastic crisis occurs when marrow erythropoiesis slows during acute infection (especially viral), during
which an acute erythroblastopenia may occur.
Acute chest syndrome results from pulmonary microvascular occlusion and is a common cause of death,
with mortality rates of up to 10%. It occurs in all age groups but is most common in childhood. Repeated
episodes predispose to chronic pulmonary hypertension.
In children, acute sequestration of sickled cells in the spleen may occur, exacerbating anemia.
Priapism, a serious complication that can cause erectile dysfunction, is most common in young men.
Complications:
Long-term consequences include impaired growth and development. Increased
susceptibility to infection, particularly pneumococcal and
Salmonella
infections (including
Salmonella
osteomyelitis), also results. These infections are especially common in early childhood and can be rapidly
fatal.
Other consequences include ischemic stroke, CNS vasculitis, avascular necrosis of the hips, renal
concentrating defects, renal failure, heart failure, and pulmonary fibrosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Most symptoms occur only in patients who are homozygous and result from anemia and vaso-occlusive
events resulting in tissue ischemia and infarction. Anemia is usually severe but varies highly among
patients; mild jaundice and pallor are common.
Patients may be poorly developed and often have a relatively short trunk with long extremities and a
tower-shaped skull. Hepatosplenomegaly is common in children, but because of repeated infarctions and
subsequent fibrosis (autosplenectomy), the spleen in adults is commonly very small. Cardiomegaly and
systolic ejection (flow) murmurs are common. Cholelithiasis and chronic punched-out ulcers around the
ankles are common.
Painful crisis causes severe pain in long bones (eg, pretibial pain), the hands and feet (eg, hand-foot
syndrome), and joints. Joint pain may result from hemarthrosis or avascular necrosis of the femoral head.
Severe abdominal pain may develop with or without vomiting and, when due to sickling itself, is usually
accompanied by back and joint pain.
Acute chest syndrome is characterized by sudden onset of fever, chest pain, and pulmonary infiltrates.
The infiltrates begin in the lower lobes, are bilateral in one third of cases, and may be accompanied by
pleural effusion. It may follow bacterial pneumonia. Hypoxemia may develop rapidly, causing dyspnea.
Heterozygotes:
Patients who are heterozygous (Hb AS) do not experience hemolysis, painful crises, or
thrombotic complications except possibly during hypoxic conditions (eg, at high altitudes, during sudden
===PAGE:1082===
decompression in airplanes). However, rhabdomyolysis and sudden death may occur during
sustained,
exhausting exercise. Impaired ability to concentrate urine (hyposthenuria) is common. Unilateral
hematuria (by unknown mechanisms and usually from the left kidney) can occur but is self-limited. Typical
renal papillary necrosis can occur but is less common than among homozygous patients.
Diagnosis
• DNA testing (prenatal diagnosis)
• Peripheral smear
• Solubility testing
• Hb electrophoresis (or thin-layer isoelectric focusing)
The type of testing done depends on the age of the patient. DNA testing can be used for prenatal
diagnosis or to confirm a diagnosis of the sickle cell genotype. Screening of neonates is available in most
US states and involves Hb electrophoresis. Screening and diagnosis in children and adults involve
examination of the peripheral smear, Hb solubility testing, and Hb electrophoresis.
Prenatal screening:
The sensitivity of prenatal diagnosis has been greatly improved with the availability
of the PCR technique. It is recommended for families at risk for sickle cell (eg, couples with medical or
family histories of anemia or of suggestive ethnic background). DNA samples can be obtained by
chorionic villus sampling at 8 to 10 wk gestation. Amniotic fluid can also be tested at 14 to 16 wk.
Diagnosis is important for genetic counseling.
Newborn screening:
Universal testing is currently recommended and is frequently one of a battery of
newborn screening tests. To distinguish between Hbs F, S, A, and C, the recommended tests are Hb
electrophoresis using cellulose acetate or acid citrate agar, thin-layer isoelectric focusing, or Hb
fractionation by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Repeat testing at age 3 to 6 mo may be
necessary for confirmation. Solubility testing for Hb S is unreliable during the first few months of life.
Screening and diagnosis of children and adults:
Patients with a family history of sickle cell disease or
trait should be screened with peripheral smear, Hb solubility testing, and Hb electrophoresis.
Patients with symptoms or signs suggesting the disorder or its complications (eg, poor growth, acute and
unexplained bone pain, aseptic necrosis of the femoral head, unexplained hematuria), and black patients
with normocytic anemia (particularly if hemolysis is present) require laboratory tests for hemolytic anemia
(, Hb electrophoresis, and examination of RBCs for sickling. If sickle cell disease is present,
RBC count is usually between 2 and 3 million/
μ
L with Hb reduced proportionately; cells are normocytic
(microcytosis suggests a concomitant
α
-thalassemia). Nucleated RBCs frequently appear in the
peripheral blood, and reticulocytosis ≥ 10% is common. Dry-stained smears may show sickled RBCs
(crescent-shaped, often with elongated or pointed ends).
The homozygous state is differentiated from other sickle hemoglobinopathies by electrophoresis showing
only Hb S with a variable amount of Hb F. The heterozygote is differentiated by the presence of more Hb
A than Hb S on electrophoresis. Hb S must be distinguished from other Hb with a similar electrophoretic
pattern by showing the pathognomonic RBC morphology.
Bone marrow examination is not used for diagnosis. If it is done to differentiate other anemias, it shows
hyperplasia, with normoblasts predominating; bone marrow may become aplastic during sickling or
severe infections. ESR, if done to exclude other disorders (eg, juvenile RA causing hand and foot pain), is
low. Incidental findings on skeletal x-rays may include widening of the diploic spaces of the skull and a
sun-ray appearance of the diploic trabeculations. The long bones often show cortical thinning, irregular
densities, and new bone formation within the medullary canal. Unexplained hematuria, even among
patients not suspected of having sickle cell disease, should prompt consideration of sickle cell trait.
Evaluation of exacerbations:
If patients with known sickle cell disease have acute exacerbations,
===PAGE:1083===
including pain, fever, or other symptoms of infection, aplastic crisis is considered and CBC and
reticulocyte count are done. Reticulocyte count < 1% suggests aplastic crisis, particularly when Hb
decreases below the patient's usual level. In a painful crisis without aplasia, WBC count rises, often with
a shift to the left, particularly during bacterial infection. Platelet count usually increases. If measured,
serum bilirubin is usually elevated (eg, 2 to 4 mg/dL [34 to 68
μ
mol/L]), and urine may contain
urobilinogen.
In patients with chest pain or difficulty breathing, acute chest syndrome and pulmonary embolism are
considered; chest x-ray and pulse oximetry are necessary. Hypoxemia or pulmonary parenchymal
infiltrates on chest x-ray suggest acute chest syndrome or pneumonia. Hypoxemia without pulmonary
infiltrates suggests pulmonary embolism.
In patients with fever, infection and acute chest syndrome are considered; cultures, chest x-ray, and other
appropriate diagnostic tests are done.
Prognosis
The life span of homozygous patients has steadily increased to > 50 yr. Common causes of death are
acute chest syndrome, intercurrent infections, pulmonary emboli, infarction of a vital organ, and renal
failure.
Treatment
• Broad-spectrum antibiotics (for infection)
• Analgesics and IV hydration (for vasoocclusive pain crisis)
• Sometimes transfusions
• Immunizations, folate supplementation, and hydroxyurea (for health maintenance)
Treatment includes regular health maintenance measures as well as specific treatment of the
complications as they arise. Complications are treated supportively. No effective in vivo anti-sickling drug
is available. Splenectomy is valueless. Stem cell transplantation has been curative in a small number of
patients but has a 5 to 10% mortality rate and so is not commonly done. Gene therapy offers hope for a
cure, but it is still under study.
Indications for hospitalization include suspected serious (including systemic) infection, aplastic crisis,
acute chest syndrome, and, often, intractable pain or the need for transfusion. Fever alone may not be a
reason to hospitalize. However, patients who appear acutely ill and have a temperature > 38°C should be
admitted so that cultures can be obtained from multiple areas and IV antibiotics can be given.
Antibiotics:
Patients with suspected serious bacterial infections or acute chest syndrome require broadspectrum antibiotics immediately.
Analgesics:
Painful crises are managed with liberal administration of analgesics, usually opioids. IV
morphine (continuous or bolus) is effective and safe; meperidine is avoided. Although dehydration
contributes to sickling and may precipitate crises, it is unclear whether vigorous hydration is helpful during
crises. Nevertheless, maintaining normal intravascular volume has been a mainstay of therapy. During
crises, pain and fever may persist for as long as 5 days.
Transfusion:
Transfusion is given in many situations in which its efficacy has not been demonstrated.
However, routine transfusion therapy is indicated for prevention of recurrent cerebral thrombosis,
especially in children. Transfusion is usually done when Hb is < 5 g/dL. Specific indications include acute
splenic sequestration, aplastic crises, cardiopulmonary symptoms or signs (eg, high-output heart failure,
hypoxemia with PO
< 65 mm Hg), preoperative use, priapism, and life-threatening events that would
benefit from improved O
delivery (eg, sepsis, severe infection, acute chest syndrome, stroke, acute
organ ischemia). Transfusion is not helpful during an uncomplicated painful crisis; however, it may break
===PAGE:1084===
a cycle of closely spaced painful crises. Transfusion may be needed in pregnancy.
Partial exchange transfusion is usually preferred to simple transfusion if routine or multiple transfusions
are necessary. It can be done with modern apheresis machines. If the initial Hb is low (< 7 g/dL), this
process cannot be initiated before first transfusing red cells. Partial exchange transfusion minimizes iron
accumulation and hyperviscosity.
Health maintenance:
For long-term management the following interventions have reduced mortality,
particularly during childhood:
• Pneumococcal,
Haemophilus influenzae
, and meningococcal vaccines
• Early identification and treatment of serious bacterial infections
• Prophylactic antibiotics, including continuous prophylaxis with oral penicillin from age 4 mo to 6 yr
• Use of hydroxyurea and folate supplementation
Supplemental folate, 1 mg po once/day, is usually prescribed.
Hydroxyurea, by increasing Hb F and thereby reducing sickling, decreases painful crises (by 50%) and
decreases acute chest syndrome and transfusion requirements. The dose of hydroxyurea is variable and
is adjusted to increase Hb F. Hydroxyurea may be more effective when combined with erythropoietin (eg,
40,000 to 60,000 units/wk). However, hydroxyurea is a leukemogen and causes neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia. It is also a teratogen and should not be given to females of child-bearing age.
Erythropoietin use in patients with anemia unrelated to chemotherapy has been associated with
increased frequency of venous thromboembolic events and cardiopulmonary complications (eg, MI); it is
generally not helpful in patients with sickle cell disease.
Hemoglobin C Disease
Hemoglobin C disease is a hemoglobinopathy (see
Sidebar 106-1
) that causes symptoms
similar to those of sickle cell disease, but milder.
Of blacks in the US, 2 to 3% have the trait, which is asymptomatic. Symptoms in homozygotes are usually
similar to those of sickle cell
disease, but milder. However, the abdominal crises of sickle cell disease do
not occur, and the spleen is usually enlarged. Splenic sequestration is possible.
Hemoglobin C disease is suspected in all patients with a family history and in black patients with clinical
features suggesting sickle cell disease, particularly in adults with splenomegaly. The anemia is usually
mild but can be moderately severe. The smear is normocytic, with 30 to 100% target cells, spherocytes,
and, rarely, crystal-containing RBCs. Nucleated RBCs may be present. The RBCs do not sickle. On
electrophoresis, the Hb is type C. In heterozygotes, the only laboratory abnormality is centrally targeted
RBCs.
No specific treatment is recommended. Anemia usually is not severe enough to require blood transfusion.
Hemoglobin S-C Disease
Hemoglobin S-C disease is a hemoglobinopathy (see
Sidebar 106-1
) that causes symptoms
similar to those of sickle cell disease, but milder.
Because 10% of blacks carry the Hb S trait, the heterozygous S-C combination is more common than
homozygous Hb C disease. The anemia in Hb S-C disease is milder than the anemia in sickle cell
disease; some patients even have normal Hb levels. Most symptoms are those of sickle cell disease, but
symptoms are usually less frequent and less severe. However, gross hematuria, retinal hemorrhages, and
aseptic necrosis of the femoral head are common. Hb S-C disease is suspected in patients whose clinical
===PAGE:1085===
features suggest sickle cell disease or whose RBCs demonstrate sickling. Stained blood smears show
target cells and a rare sickle cell. Sickling is identified in a sickling preparation, and Hb electrophoresis
establishes the diagnosis. Treatment can be similar to that of sickle cell disease but is determined by
severity of symptoms.
Hemoglobin E Disease
Homozygous Hb E disease (a hemoglobinopathy—see
Sidebar 106-1
) causes a mild hemolytic
anemia, usually without splenomegaly.
Hb E is the 3rd most prevalent Hb worldwide (after Hb A and Hb S), primarily in black and Southeast
Asian (> 15% incidence of homozygous disease) populations, although rarely in Chinese populations.
Heterozygotes (Hb AE) are asymptomatic. Patients heterozygous for Hb E and
β
-thalassemia have a
hemolytic disease more severe than S-thalassemia or homozygous Hb E disease and usually have
splenomegaly.
In heterozygotes (Hb AE), routine laboratory test results of peripheral blood are normal. In homozygotes, a
mild microcytic anemia with prominent target cells exists. Diagnosis of Hb E disorders is by Hb
electrophoresis. Treatment in homozygous patients with severe disease usually involves chronic
transfusions.
Thalassemias
(Mediterranean Anemia; Thalassemia Major and Minor)
Thalassemias are a group of inherited microcytic, hemolytic anemias characterized by
defective Hb synthesis. They are particularly common in people of Mediterranean, African, and
Southeast Asian ancestry. Symptoms and signs result from anemia, hemolysis, splenomegaly,
bone marrow hyperplasia, and, if there have been multiple transfusions, iron overload.
Diagnosis is based on genetic tests and quantitative Hb analysis. Treatment for severe forms
may include transfusion, splenectomy, chelation, and stem cell transplantation.
Pathophysiology
Thalassemia (a hemoglobinopathy—see
Sidebar 106-1
) is among the most common inherited disorders
of Hb production. It results from unbalanced Hb synthesis caused by decreased production of at least
one globin polypeptide chain (
β
,
α
,
γ
,
δ
).
β
-Thalassemia results from decreased production of
β
-polypeptide chains. Inheritance is autosomal:
Heterozygotes are carriers and have asymptomatic mild to moderate microcytic anemia (thalassemia
minor); homozygotes (
β
-thalassemia major, or Cooley's anemia) develop severe anemia and bone marrow
hyperactivity.
β
-
δ
-Thalassemia is a less common form of
β
-thalassemia in which
δ
-chain as well as
β
-
chain production is impaired and which also has heterozygous and homozygous states.
α
-Thalassemia, which results from decreased production of
α
-polypeptide chains, has a more complex
inheritance pattern, because genetic control of
α
-chain synthesis involves 2 pairs of genes (4 genes).
Heterozygotes for a single gene defect (
α
-thalassemia-2 [silent]) are usually clinically normal.
Heterozygotes with defects in 2 of the 4 genes (
α
-thalassemia-1 [trait]) tend to develop mild to moderate
microcytic anemia but no symptoms. Defects in 3 of the 4 genes more severely impairs
α
-chain
production, resulting in the formation of tetramers of excess
β
chains (Hb H) or, in infancy,
γ
chains (Bart's
Hb). Defects in all 4 genes are a lethal condition in utero, because Hb that lacks
α
chains does not
transport O
. In blacks, the gene frequency for
α
-thalassemia is about 25%; only 10% have defects in
more than 2 genes.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical features of thalassemias are similar but vary in severity.
β
-Thalassemia major manifests by age 1
to 2 yr with symptoms of severe anemia and transfusional and absorptive iron overload. Patients are
===PAGE:1086===
jaundiced, and leg ulcers and cholelithiasis occur (as in sickle cell anemia). Splenomegaly, often massive,
is common. Splenic sequestration may develop, accelerating destruction of transfused normal RBCs.
Bone marrow hyperactivity causes thickening of the cranial bones and malar eminences. Long bone
involvement predisposes to pathologic fractures and impairs growth, possibly delaying or preventing
puberty. Iron deposits in heart muscle may cause heart failure. Hepatic siderosis is typical, leading to
functional impairment and cirrhosis. Patients with Hb H disease often have symptomatic hemolytic anemia
and splenomegaly.
Diagnosis
• Evaluation for hemolytic anemia if suspected
• Peripheral smear
• Electrophoresis
• DNA testing (prenatal diagnosis)
Thalassemias are suspected in patients with a family history, suggestive symptoms or signs, or microcytic
hemolytic anemia. If thalassemias are suspected, laboratory tests for microcytic and hemolytic anemias
and quantitative Hb studies are done. Serum bilirubin, iron, and ferritin levels are increased.
In
β
-thalassemia major, anemia is severe, often with Hb ≤ 6 g/dL. RBC count is elevated relative to Hb
because the cells are very microcytic. The blood smear is virtually diagnostic, with many nucleated
erythroblasts; target cells; small, pale RBCs; and punctate and diffuse basophilia.
In quantitative Hb studies, elevation of Hb A
is diagnostic for
β
-thalassemia minor. In
β
-thalassemia
major, Hb F is usually increased, sometimes to as much as 90%, and Hb A
is usually elevated to > 3%.
The percentages of Hb F and Hb A
are generally normal in
α
-thalassemias, and the diagnosis of single
or double gene defect thalassemias may be carried out with newer genetic tests and often is one of
exclusion of other causes of microcytic anemia. Hb H disease can be diagnosed by demonstrating the
fast-migrating Hb H or Bart's fractions on Hb electrophoresis. The specific molecular defect can be
characterized but does not alter the clinical approach. Recombinant DNA approaches of gene mapping
(particularly the PCR) have become standard for prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling.
If bone marrow examination is done for anemia (eg, to exclude other causes), it shows marked erythroid
hyperplasia. X-rays done for other reasons in patients with
β
-thalassemia major show changes due to
chronic bone marrow hyperactivity. The skull may show cortical thinning, widened diploic space, a sunray appearance of the trabeculae, and a granular or ground-glass appearance. The long bones may
show cortical thinning, marrow space widening, and areas of osteoporosis. The vertebral bodies may
have a granular or ground-glass appearance. The phalanges may appear rectangular or biconvex.
Prognosis
Life expectancy is normal for people with
β
-thalassemia minor or
α
-thalassemia minor. The outlook for
people with Hb H disease varies. Life expectancy is decreased in people with
β
-thalassemia major; only
some live to puberty or beyond.
Treatment
• Sometimes splenectomy
• Sometimes RBC transfusion and chelation therapy
• Rarely allogeneic stem cell transplantation
People with
α
- and
β
-thalassemia minor require no treatment. Splenectomy may be helpful if Hb H
===PAGE:1087===
disease causes severe anemia or splenomegaly.
Children with
β
-thalassemia major should receive as few transfusions as possible to avoid iron overload.
However, suppression of abnormal hematopoiesis by periodic RBC transfusion may be valuable in
severely affected patients. To prevent or delay iron overload, excess (transfusional) iron must be removed
(eg, via chronic iron-chelation therapy). Splenectomy may help decrease transfusion requirements for
patients with splenomegaly. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation has been successful, but the requirement
for a histocompatible match, mortality and morbidity of the procedure, and lifelong requirement for
immunosuppression have limited its usefulness.
Hemoglobin Sβ
-Thalassemia Disease
Hemoglobin Sβ
-thalassemia disease is a hemoglobinopathy (see
Sidebar 106-1
) that causes
symptoms similar to those of sickle cell disease, but milder.
Because of the increased frequency of both Hb S and
β
-thalassemia genes in similar population groups,
inheritance of both defects is relatively common. Clinically, the disorder causes symptoms of moderate
anemia and signs of sickle cell anemia, which are usually less frequent and less severe than those of
sickle cell disease. Mild to moderate microcytic anemia is usually present along with some sickled RBCs
on stained blood smears. Diagnosis requires quantitative Hb studies. The Hb A
is > 3%. Hb S
predominates on electrophoresis, and Hb A is decreased or absent. Hb F increase is variable. Treatment,
if necessary, is the same as for sickle cell disease.
===PAGE:1088===
Chapter 107. Neutropenia and Lymphocytopenia
Introduction
Leukopenia is a reduction in the circulating WBC count to < 4000/
μ
L. It is usually characterized by a
reduced number of circulating neutrophils, although a reduced number of lymphocytes, monocytes,
eosinophils, or basophils may also contribute. Thus, immune function is generally greatly decreased.
Neutropenia is a reduction in blood neutrophil count to < 1500/
μ
L in whites and < 1200/
μ
L in blacks. It is
more serious when accompanied by monocytopenia and lymphocytopenia. Lymphocytopenia, in which
the total number of lymphocytes is < 1000/
μ
L in adults, is not always reflected in the total WBC count,
because lymphocytes account for only 20 to 40% of the count.
Neutropenia
(Agranulocytosis; Granulocytopenia)
Neutropenia is a reduction in the blood neutrophil count. If it is severe, the risk and severity of
bacterial and fungal infections increase. Focal symptoms of infection may be muted, but fever
is present during most serious infections. Diagnosis is by WBC count, but evaluation requires
identification of the cause. If fever is present, infection is presumed, and immediate, empiric
broad-spectrum antibiotics are necessary. Treatment with granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor or granulocyte colony-stimulating factor is sometimes helpful.
Neutrophils (granulocytes) are the body's main defense against bacterial and fungal infections. When
neutropenia is present, the inflammatory response to such infections is ineffective. Normal lower limit of
the neutrophil count (total WBC × % neutrophils and bands) is 1500/
μ
L in whites and is somewhat lower
in blacks (about 1200/
μ
L).
Severity of neutropenia relates to the relative risk of infection:
• Mild (1000 to 1500/
μ
L)
• Moderate (500 to 1000/
μ
L)
• Severe (< 500/
μ
L)
When neutrophil counts fall to < 500/
μ
L, endogenous microbial flora (eg, in the mouth or gut) can cause
infections. If the count falls to < 200/
μ
L, inflammatory response may be nonexistent. Acute, severe
neutropenia, particularly if another factor (eg, cancer) also impairs the immune system, predisposing to
rapidly fatal infections. The integrity of the skin and mucous membranes, the vascular supply to tissue,
and the nutritional status of the patient also influence the risk of infections.
The most frequently occurring pyogenic infections in patients with profound neutropenia are
• Cellulitis
• Liver abscesses
• Furunculosis
• Pneumonia
• Septicemia
Vascular catheters and other puncture sites confer extra risk of skin infections; the most common bacterial
causes are coagulase-negative staphylococci and
Staphylococcus aureus
. Stomatitis, gingivitis,
perirectal inflammation, colitis, sinusitis, paronychia, and otitis media often occur. Patients with prolonged
===PAGE:1089===
perirectal inflammation, colitis, sinusitis, paronychia, and otitis media often occur. Patients with prolonged
neutropenia after bone marrow transplantation or chemotherapy and patients receiving high
doses of
corticosteroids are predisposed to fungal infections.
Etiology
Acute neutropenia (occurring over hours to a few days) can develop from rapid neutrophil use or
destruction or from impaired production. Chronic neutropenia (lasting months to years) usually arises from
reduced production or excessive splenic sequestration.
Neutropenia also may be classified as due to an intrinsic defect in marrow myeloid cells or as secondary
(due to factors extrinsic to marrow myeloid cells—see
Table 107-1
).
Neutropenia caused by intrinsic defects in myeloid cells or their precursors:
This type of
neutropenia is uncommon, but when present, the most common causes include
• Chronic idiopathic neutropenia
• Congenital neutropenia
Cyclic neutropenia is a rare congenital granulocytopoietic disorder, usually transmitted in an autosomal
dominant fashion. It is characterized by regular, periodic oscillations in the number of peripheral
neutrophils. The mean oscillatory period is 21 ± 3 days.
Severe congenital neutropenia (Kostmann's syndrome) is a rare disorder that occurs sporadically in the
US and is characterized by an arrest in myeloid maturation at the promyelocyte stage of the bone marrow,
resulting in an absolute neutrophil count of < 200/
μ
L.
Chronic idiopathic neutropenia is a group of uncommon, poorly understood disorders involving stem cells
committed to the myeloid series; RBC and platelet precursors are unaffected. The spleen is not enlarged.
Chronic benign neutropenia is a type of chronic idiopathic neutropenia in which the rest of the immune
system appears to remain intact; even with neutrophil counts < 200/
μ
L, serious infections usually do not
occur, probably because neutrophils are sometimes produced in adequate quantities in response to
infection.
Neutropenia can also result from bone marrow failure due to rare syndromes (eg, cartilage-hair
hypoplasia, Chediak-Higashi syndrome, dyskeratosis congenita, glycogen storage disease type IB,
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome). Neutropenia is also a prominent feature of myelodysplasia (, where it may be accompanied by megaloblastoid features in the bone marrow, and of aplastic
anemia ( and can occur in dysgammaglobulinemia and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinemia.
Secondary neutropenia:
Secondary neutropenia can result from use of certain drugs, bone marrow
infiltration or replacement, certain infections, or immune reactions. The most common causes include
• Drugs
• Infections
• Marrow infiltrative processes
[Table 107-1.
Classification of Neutropenias]
Drug-induced neutropenia is one of the most common causes of neutropenia. Drugs can decrease
neutrophil production through toxic, idiosyncratic, or hypersensitivity mechanisms or increase peripheral
neutrophil destruction through immune mechanisms. Only the toxic mechanism (eg, with phenothiazines)
produces dose-related neutropenia. Idiosyncratic reactions are unpredictable and occur with a wide
variety of drugs, including alternative medicine preparations or extracts, and toxins. Hypersensitivity
reactions are rare
and occasionally involve anticonvulsants (eg, phenytoin, phenobarbital). These
===PAGE:1090===
reactions may last for only a few days or for months or years. Often, hepatitis, nephritis, pneumonitis, or
aplastic anemia accompanies hypersensitivity-induced neutropenia. Immune-mediated drug-induced
neutropenia, thought to arise from drugs that act as haptens to stimulate antibody formation, usually
persists for about 1 wk after the drug is stopped. It may result from aminopyrine, propylthiouracil,
penicillin, or other antibiotics. Severe dose-related neutropenia occurs predictably after cytotoxic cancer
drugs or radiation therapy suppresses bone marrow production.
Neutropenia due to ineffective bone marrow production can occur in megaloblastic anemias caused by
vitamin B
or folate deficiency. Usually, macrocytic anemia and sometimes mild thrombocytopenia
develop simultaneously.
Bone marrow infiltration by leukemia, myeloma, lymphoma, or metastatic solid tumors (eg, breast,
prostate) can impair neutrophil production. Tumor-induced myelofibrosis may further exacerbate
neutropenia. Myelofibrosis can also occur from granulomatous infections, Gaucher's disease, and
radiation therapy. Hypersplenism of any cause can lead to moderate neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and
anemia.
Infections can cause neutropenia by impairing neutrophil production or by inducing immune destruction or
rapid use of neutrophils. Sepsis is a particularly serious cause. Neutropenia that occurs with common
childhood viral diseases develops during the first 1 to 2 days of illness and may persist for 3 to 8 days.
Transient neutropenia may also result from virus- or endotoxemia-induced redistribution of neutrophils
from the circulating to the marginal pool. Alcohol may contribute to neutropenia by inhibiting the
neutrophilic response of the marrow during some infections (eg, pneumococcal pneumonia).
Chronic secondary neutropenia often accompanies HIV infection because of impaired production of
neutrophils and accelerated destruction of neutrophils by antibodies. Autoimmune neutropenias may be
acute, chronic, or episodic. They may involve antibodies directed against circulating neutrophils or
neutrophil precursor cells. Most patients with autoimmune neutropenia have an underlying autoimmune
disorder or lymphoproliferative disorder (eg, SLE, Felty's syndrome).
Symptoms and Signs
Neutropenia is asymptomatic until infection develops. Fever is often the only indication of infection. Focal
symptoms may develop but are often subtle. Patients with drug-induced neutropenia due to
hypersensitivity may have a fever, rash, and lymphadenopathy from the hypersensitivity.
Some patients with chronic benign neutropenia and neutrophil counts < 200/
μ
L do not experience many
serious infections. Patients with cyclic neutropenia or severe congenital neutropenia tend to have
episodes of oral ulcers, stomatitis, or pharyngitis and lymph node enlargement during severe chronic
neutropenia. Pneumonias and septicemia often occur.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion (repeated or unusual infections)
• Confirmatory CBC with differential
• Evaluation for infection with cultures and imaging
• Identification of mechanism and cause of neutropenia
Neutropenia is suspected in patients with frequent, severe, or unusual infections or in patients at risk (eg,
those receiving cytotoxic drugs or radiation therapy). Confirmation is by CBC with differential.
Evaluation for infection:
The first priority is to determine whether an infection is present. Because
infection may be subtle, physical examination systematically assesses the most common primary sites of
infection: mucosal surfaces, such as the alimentary tract (gums, pharynx, anus); lungs; abdomen; urinary
tract; skin and fingernails; venipuncture sites; and vascular catheters.
===PAGE:1091===
If neutropenia is acute, laboratory evaluation must proceed rapidly.
Cultures are the mainstay of evaluation. At least 2 sets of bacterial and fungal blood cultures are obtained
from all febrile patients; if an indwelling IV catheter is present, cultures are obtained from the lumen and
from a separate peripheral vein. Persistent or chronic drainage material is also cultured for fungi and
atypical mycobacteria. Skin lesions are aspirated or biopsied for cytology and culture. Samples for
urinalysis and urine cultures are obtained from all patients. If diarrhea is present, stool is evaluated for
enteric bacterial pathogens and
Clostridium difficile
toxins.
Imaging studies are helpful. Chest x-rays are done on all patients. CT scan of the para-nasal sinuses may
be helpful if symptoms or signs of sinusitis (eg, positional headache, upper tooth or maxillary pain, facial
swelling, nasal discharge) are present. CT scan of the abdomen is usually done if symptoms (eg,
pain) or
history (eg, recent surgery) suggests an intra-abdominal infection.
Identification of cause:
Next, mechanism and cause of neutropenia are determined. The history
addresses all drugs, other preparations, and possible toxin exposure or ingestion. Physical examination
addresses the presence of splenomegaly and signs of other underlying disorder (eg, arthritis,
lymphadenopathy).
The most important test is bone marrow examination, which determines whether neutropenia is due to
decreased marrow production or is secondary to increased destruction or use of the cells (determined by
normal or increased production of the cells). Bone marrow may also indicate the specific cause of the
neutropenia (eg, aplastic anemia, myelofibrosis, leukemia). Additional marrow studies (eg, cytogenetic
analysis; special stains and flow cytometry for detecting leukemia, other malignant disorders, and
infections) are obtained.
Further testing for the cause of neutropenia may be necessary, depending on the diagnoses suspected.
In patients at risk of deficiency, levels of folate and vitamin B
are determined. Testing for the presence
of antineutrophil antibodies is done if immune neutropenia is suspected. Differentiation between
neutropenia caused by certain antibiotics and infection can sometimes be difficult. The WBC count just
before the start of antibiotic treatment usually reflects the change in blood count due to the infection.
Patients who have had chronic neutropenia since infancy and a history of recurrent fevers and chronic
gingivitis have WBC counts with differential done 3 times/wk for 6 wk, so that periodicity suggestive of
cyclic neutropenia can be evaluated. Platelet and reticulocyte counts are done simultaneously.
Eosinophils, reticulocytes, and platelets frequently cycle synchronously with the neutrophils, whereas
monocytes and lymphocytes may cycle out of phase.
Treatment
• Treatment of associated conditions (eg, infections, stomatitis)
• Sometimes antibiotic prophylaxis
• Myeloid growth factors
• Discontinuation of suspected etiologic agent (eg, drug)
• Sometimes corticosteroids
• Rarely splenectomy
Acute neutropenia:
Suspected infections are always treated immediately. If fever or hypotension is
present, serious infection is assumed, and empiric, high-dose, broad-spectrum antibiotics are given IV.
Regimen selection is based on the most likely infecting organisms, the antimicrobial susceptibility of
pathogens at that particular institution, and the regimen's potential toxicity. Because of the risk of creating
resistant organisms, vancomycin is used only if gram-positive organisms resistant to other drugs are
===PAGE:1092===
suspected.
Indwelling vascular catheters can usually remain in place even if bacteremia is suspected or documented,
but removal is considered if infections involve
S. aureus
or
Bacillus
,
Corynebacterium,
or
Candida
sp or
if blood cultures are persistently positive despite appropriate antibiotics. Infections caused by coagulasenegative staphylococci generally resolve with antimicrobial therapy alone. Indwelling Foley catheters can
also predispose to infections in these patients, and change or removal of the catheter should be
considered for persistent urinary infections.
If cultures are positive, antibiotic therapy is adjusted to the results of sensitivity tests. If a patient
defervesces within 72 h, antibiotics are continued for at least 7 days and until the patient has no
symptoms or signs of infection. When neutropenia is transient (such as that following myelosuppressive
chemotherapy), antibiotic therapy is usually continued until the neutrophil count is > 500/
μ
L; however,
stopping antimicrobials can be considered in selected patients with persistent neutropenia, especially
those in whom symptoms and signs of inflammation have resolved, if cultures remain negative.
Fever that persists > 72 h despite antibiotic therapy suggests a nonbacterial cause, infection with a
resistant species, a superinfection with a 2nd bacterial species, inadequate serum or tissue levels of the
antibiotics, or localized infection, such as an abscess. Neutropenic patients with persistent fever are
reassessed every 2 to 4 days with physical examination, cultures, and chest x-ray. If the patient is well
except for the presence of fever, the initial antibiotic regimen can be continued. If the patient is
deteriorating, alteration of the antimicrobial regimen is considered.
Fungal infections are the most likely cause of persistent fevers and deterioration. Antifungal therapy (eg,
with azole, echinocandin, or polyene drug) is added empirically if unexplained fever persists after 4 days
of broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. If fever persists after 3 wk of empiric therapy (including 2 wk of
antifungal therapy) and the neutropenia has resolved, then stopping all antimicrobials is considered and
the cause of fever reevaluated.
Antibiotic prophylaxis
in afebrile neutropenic patients remains controversial.
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) prevents
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia in neutropenic
and nonneutropenic patients with associated impaired cell-mediated immunity. Also, TMP/SMX may
prevent bacterial infections in patients expected to be profoundly neutropenic for > 1 wk. The
disadvantages of TMP/SMX prophylaxis include adverse effects, potential myelosuppression, and
development of resistant bacteria and oral candidiasis. Antifungal prophylaxis is not routinely
recommended for neutropenic patients, but patients at high risk of developing fungal infections (eg, after
bone marrow transplantation and after receiving high doses of corticosteroids) may benefit.
Myeloid growth factors
(granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF] and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor [G-CSF]) are now widely used to increase the neutrophil count and to prevent
infections in patients with severe neutropenia (eg, after bone marrow transplantation and intensive cancer
chemotherapy). They are expensive. However, if the risk of febrile neutropenia is ≥ 30% (as assessed by
neutrophil count < 500
μ
L, presence of infection during a previous cycle of chemotherapy, associated
comorbid disease, or age > 75), growth factors are indicated. In general, most clinical benefit occurs
when the growth factor is administered beginning about 24 h after completion of chemotherapy. Patients
with neutropenia caused by an idiosyncratic drug reaction may also benefit from myeloid growth factors,
particularly if a delayed recovery is anticipated. The dose for G-CSF is 5
μ
g/kg sc once/day; for GM-CSF,
μ
g/m
sc once/day.
Glucocorticoids, anabolic steroids, and vitamins do not stimulate neutrophil production but can affect
distribution and destruction. If acute neutropenia is suspected to be drug or toxin induced, all potentially
etiologic agents are stopped. If neutropenia develops during treatment with a drug known to induce low
counts (eg, chloramphenicol), then switching to an alternative antibiotic may be helpful.
Saline or hydrogen peroxide gargles every few hours, anesthetic lozenges (benzocaine 15 mg q 3 or 4 h),
or chlorhexidine mouth rinses (1% solution) bid or tid may relieve the discomfort of stomatitis with
oropharyngeal ulcerations. Oral or esophageal candidiasis is treated with nystatin (400,000 to 600,000
units oral rinse qid; swallowed if esophagitis is present) or with systemic antifungal drugs (eg,
===PAGE:1093===
fluconazole). A semisolid or liquid diet may be necessary during acute stomatitis or esophagitis to
minimize discomfort.
Chronic neutropenia:
Neutrophil production in congenital, cyclic, and idiopathic neutropenia can be
increased with administration of G-CSF 1 to 10
μ
g/kg sc once/day. Effectiveness can be maintained with
daily or intermittent G-CSF for months or years. Long-term G-CSF has also been used in other patients
with chronic neutropenia, including those with myelodysplasia, HIV, and autoimmune disorders. In
general, neutrophil counts increase, although clinical benefits are less clear, especially for patients who
do not have severe neutropenia. For patients with autoimmune disorders or who have had an organ
transplant, cyclosporine can also be beneficial.
In some patients with accelerated neutrophil destruction caused by autoimmune disorders, corticosteroids
(generally, prednisone 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg po once/day) increase blood neutrophils. This increase often can
be maintained with alternate-day G-CSF therapy.
Splenectomy increases the neutrophil count in some patients with splenomegaly and splenic
sequestration of neutrophils (eg, Felty's syndrome, hairy cell leukemia). However, splenectomy should be
reserved for patients with severe neutropenia (ie, < 500/
μ
L) and serious problems with infections in whom
other treatments have failed. Patients should be vaccinated against infections caused by
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
,
Neisseria meningitidis
, and
Haemophilus influenzae
before and after splenectomy
because splenectomy predisposes patients to infection by encapsulated organisms.
Lymphocytopenia
Lymphocytopenia is a total lymphocyte count of < 1000/
μ
L in adults or < 3000/
μ
L in children < 2
yr. Sequelae include opportunistic infections and an increased risk of malignant and
autoimmune disorders. If the CBC reveals lymphocytopenia, testing for immunodeficiency and
analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations should follow. Treatment is directed at the underlying
disorder.
The normal lymphocyte count in adults is 1000 to 4800/
μ
L; in children < 2 yr, 3000 to 9500/
μ
L. At age 6
yr, the lower limit of normal is 1500/
μ
L. Both B and T cells are present in the peripheral blood; about 75%
of the lymphocytes are T cells and 25% B cells. Because lymphocytes account for only 20 to 40% of the
total WBC count, lymphocytopenia may go
unnoticed when WBC count is checked without a differential.
Almost 65% of blood T cells are CD4+ (helper) T cells. Most patients with lymphocytopenia have a
reduced absolute number of T cells, particularly in the number of CD4+ T cells. The average number of
CD4+ T cells in adult blood is 1100/
μ
L (range, 300 to 1300/
μ
L), and the average number of cells of the
other major T-cell subgroup, CD8+ (suppressor) T cells, is 600/
μ
L (range, 100 to 900/
μ
L).
Etiology
Lymphocytopenia can be acquired or inherited.
Acquired lymphocytopenia
can occur with a number of other disorders (see
Table 107-2
). The most common causes include
• Protein-energy undernutrition
• AIDS
Protein-energy undernutrition is the most common cause worldwide. AIDS is the most common infectious
disease causing lymphocytopenia, which arises from destruction of CD4+ T cells infected with HIV.
Lymphocytopenia may also reflect impaired lymphocyte production arising from destruction of thymic or
lymphoid architecture. In acute viremia due to HIV or other viruses, lymphocytes may undergo accelerated
destruction from active infections with the virus, may be trapped in the spleen or lymph nodes, or may
migrate to the respiratory tract.
===PAGE:1094===
Inherited lymphocytopenia
(see
Table 107-2
) most commonly results from
• Severe combined immunodeficiency disorder
• Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
It may occur with inherited immunodeficiency disorders (see
Chapter 126
) and disorders that involve impaired
lymphocyte production. Other inherited disorders, such as Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, adenosine
deaminase deficiency, and purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency, may involve accelerated T-cell
destruction. In many disorders, antibody production is also deficient.
Iatrogenic lymphocytopenia is caused by cytotoxic chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or the administration
of antilymphocyte globulin (or other lymphocyte antibodies). Long-term treatment for psoriasis using
psoralen and ultraviolet irradiation may destroy T cells. Glucocorticoids can induce lymphocyte
destruction.
Lymphocytopenia may occur with autoimmune diseases such as SLE, RA, myasthenia gravis, and
protein-losing enteropathy.
Symptoms and Signs
Lymphocytopenia per se generally causes no symptoms. However, findings of an associated disorder
may include absent or diminished
[Table 107-2.
Causes of Lymphocytopenia]
tonsils or lymph nodes, indicative of cellular immunodeficiency; skin abnormalities, such as alopecia,
eczema, pyoderma, or telangiectasia; evidence of hematologic disease, such as pallor, petechiae,
jaundice, or mouth ulcers; and generalized lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly, which may suggest HIV
infection.
Lymphocytopenic patients experience recurrent infections or develop infections with unusual organisms.
Pneumocystis jirovecii
, cytomegalovirus, rubeola, and varicella pneumonias often are fatal.
Lymphocytopenia is also a risk factor for cancer and for autoimmune disorders.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion (repeated or unusual infections)
• CBC with differential
• Measurement of lymphocyte subpopulations and immunoglobulin levels
Lymphocytopenia is suspected in patients with recurrent viral, fungal, or parasitic infections but is usually
detected incidentally on a CBC.
P. jirovecii
, cytomegalovirus, rubeola, or varicella pneumonias with
lymphocytopenia suggest immunodeficiency. Lymphocyte subpopulations are measured in
lymphocytopenic patients. Measurements of immunoglobulin levels should also be done to evaluate
antibody production. Patients with a history of recurrent infections undergo complete laboratory
evaluation for immunodeficiency (, even if initial screening tests are normal.
Treatment
• Treatment of underlying disorder
• Sometimes IV immune globulin
• Possibly stem cell transplantation
===PAGE:1095===
Lymphocytopenia usually remits with removal of the underlying factor or successful treatment of the
underlying disorder in the acquired lymphocytopenias. Intravenous immune globulin is indicated if patients
have chronic IgG deficiency, lymphocytopenia, and recurrent infections. Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation can be considered for all patients with congenital immunodeficiencies and may be curative
(.
===PAGE:1096===
Chapter 108. Thrombocytopenia and Platelet Dysfunction
Introduction
Platelets are cell fragments that function in the clotting system. Thrombopoietin, primarily produced in the
liver in response to decreased numbers of bone marrow megakaryocytes and circulating platelets,
stimulates the bone marrow to synthesize platelets from megakaryocytes. Platelets circulate for 7 to 10
days. About one third are always transiently sequestered in the spleen. The platelet count is normally
140,000 to 440,000/
μ
L. However, the count can vary slightly according to menstrual cycle phase,
decrease during near-term pregnancy (gestational thrombocytopenia), and increase in response to
inflammatory cytokines (secondary, or reactive, thrombocytosis). Platelets are eventually destroyed,
primarily by the spleen.
Platelet disorders
include
• An abnormal increase in platelets (thrombocythemia, a myeloproliferative disorder—
• A decrease in platelets (thrombocytopenia)
• Platelet dysfunction
Any of these conditions, even those in which platelets are increased, may cause defective formation of
hemostatic plugs and bleeding.
The risk of bleeding is inversely proportional to the platelet count. When the platelet count is < 50,000/
μ
L,
minor bleeding occurs easily and the risk of major bleeding increases. Counts between 20,000 and
50,000/
μ
L predispose to bleeding with trauma, even minor trauma; with counts < 20,000/
μ
L, spontaneous
bleeding may occur; with counts < 5000/
μ
L, severe spontaneous bleeding is more likely. However,
patients with counts < 10,000/
μ
L may be asymptomatic for years.
Etiology
Thrombocytopenia:
Causes of thrombocytopenia can be classified by mechanism (see
Table 108-1
) and include failed platelet production, increased splenic sequestration of platelets with
normal platelet survival, increased platelet destruction or consumption (both immunologic and
nonimmunologic causes), dilution of platelets, and a combination of these mechanisms.
[Table 108-1.
Classification of Thrombocytopenia]
Increased splenic sequestration is suggested by splenomegaly.
A large number of drugs may cause thrombocytopenia (, typically by triggering immunologic
destruction.
Overall, the most common specific causes of thrombocytopenia include
• Gestational thrombocytopenia
• Drug-induced thrombocytopenia due to immune-mediated platelet destruction (commonly quinine,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole)
• Drug-induced thrombocytopenia due to dose-dependent bone marrow suppression (by
chemotherapeutic agents)
• Thrombocytopenia accompanying systemic infection
• Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
===PAGE:1097===
Platelet dysfunction:
Platelet dysfunction may stem from an intrinsic platelet defect or from an extrinsic
factor that alters the function of normal platelets. Dysfunction may be hereditary or acquired. Hereditary
disorders of platelet function consist of von Willebrand's disease, the most common hereditary
hemorrhagic disease, and hereditary intrinsic platelet disorders (, which are much less
common. Acquired disorders of platelet function ( are commonly due to diseases as well as to
aspirin and other drugs.
Symptoms and Signs
Platelet disorders result in a typical pattern of bleeding:
• Multiple petechiae in the skin (typically most evident on the lower legs)
• Scattered small ecchymoses at sites of minor trauma
• Mucosal bleeding (epistaxis, bleeding in the GI and GU tracts, vaginal bleeding)
• Excessive bleeding after surgery
Heavy GI bleeding and bleeding into the CNS may be life threatening. However, bleeding
into tissues (eg,
deep visceral hematomas or hemarthroses) does not occur with thrombocytopenia, which causes
immediate, superficial bleeding; tissue bleeding (often delayed for up to a day after trauma) suggests a
coagulation disorder (eg, hemophilia).
Diagnosis
• Clinical presentation of petechiae and mucosal bleeding
• CBC with platelets, coagulation studies, peripheral blood smear
• Sometimes bone marrow aspiration
• Sometimes von Willebrand's antigen and factor activity studies
Platelet disorders are suspected in patients with petechiae and mucosal bleeding. A CBC with platelet
count, coagulation studies, and a peripheral blood smear are obtained. Excessive platelets and
thrombocytopenia are diagnosed from the platelet count; coagulation studies are normal unless there is a
simultaneous coagulopathy. In patients with a normal CBC, platelet count, and INR and normal or only
slightly prolonged PTT, platelet dysfunction is suspected.
Thrombocytopenia:
In patients with thrombocytopenia, the peripheral smear may suggest the cause
(see
Table 108-2
). If the smear shows abnormalities other than thrombocytopenia, such as nucleated RBCs or
abnormal or immature WBCs, bone marrow aspiration is indicated. Bone marrow aspiration reveals the
number and appearance of megakaryocytes and is the definitive test for many disorders causing marrow
failure. However, normal number and appearance of megakaryocytes does not always indicate normal
platelet production. For example, in patients with immune thrombocytopenic purpura, platelet production is
frequently decreased, or not appropriately increased, despite the normal appearance of megakaryocytes.
If the bone marrow is normal but the spleen is enlarged, increased splenic sequestration is the likely
cause of thrombocytopenia; if the bone marrow is normal and the spleen is not enlarged, excess platelet
destruction is the likely cause. Measurement of antiplatelet antibodies is not clinically useful. HIV testing
is done in patients at risk of HIV infection.
Suspected platelet dysfunction:
In patients with platelet dysfunction, a drug cause is suspected if
symptoms began only after patients started taking a potentially causative drug. A hereditary cause is
suspected if there is a lifelong history of easy bruising and bleeding after tooth extractions or surgery. In
the case of a suspected hereditary cause, von Willebrand's antigen and factor activity studies are
obtained. Platelet dysfunction caused by systemic disorders is typically mild and of minor clinical
===PAGE:1098===
importance. In these patients, the causative systemic disorder is the clinical concern, and hematologic
tests are unnecessary.
[Table 108-2.
Peripheral Blood Findings in Thrombocytopenic Disorders]
Treatment
• Avoidance of drugs that impair platelet function
• Rarely platelet transfusions
In patients with thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction, drugs that further impair
platelet function,
particularly aspirin and other NSAIDs, should not be given. Patients who are already taking such drugs
should consider alternative drugs, such as acetaminophen, or simply stop using them.
Patients may require platelet transfusion, but transfusions are given only in limited situations (. Prophylactic transfusions are used sparingly because they may lose their effectiveness with
repeated use due to the development of platelet alloantibodies. In platelet dysfunction or
thrombocytopenia caused by decreased production, transfusions are reserved for patients with active
bleeding or severe thrombocytopenia (eg, platelet count < 10,000/
μ
L). In thrombocytopenia caused by
platelet destruction, transfusions are reserved for life-threatening or CNS bleeding.
Acquired Platelet Dysfunction
Acquired platelet dysfunction, which is common, may result from aspirin, other NSAIDs, or
systemic disorders.
Acquired abnormalities of platelet function are very common. Causes include
• Drugs
• Systemic disorders
• Cardiopulmonary bypass
Acquired platelet dysfunction is suspected and diagnosed when an isolated prolongation of bleeding time
is observed and other possible diagnoses have been eliminated. Platelet aggregation studies are
unnecessary.
Drugs:
Aspirin and other NSAIDs, which are very commonly used drugs, may induce platelet dysfunction.
Sometimes this effect is incidental (eg, when the drugs are used to relieve pain and inflammation) and
sometimes therapeutic (eg, when aspirin is used for prevention of stroke or coronary thrombosis). Other
therapeutic antiplatelet drugs include clopidogrel, ticlopidine, and the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors.
Aspirin and NSAIDs prevent cyclooxygenase-mediated production of thromboxane A
. This effect can last
5 to 7 days. Aspirin modestly prolongs bleeding time in healthy people but may markedly prolong bleeding
time in patients with underlying platelet dysfunction or a severe coagulation disturbance (eg, patients
receiving heparin, patients with severe hemophilia).
Systemic disorders:
Many disorders (eg, myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic disorders, uremia,
macroglobulinemia and multiple myeloma, cirrhosis, SLE) can impair platelet function.
Uremia may prolong bleeding via unknown mechanisms. If bleeding is observed clinically, bleeding time
may be corrected transiently with vigorous dialysis, cryoprecipitate administration, or desmopressin
infusion. If indicated for treatment of anemia, RBC count can be increased by transfusion or by giving
erythropoietin; this process also shortens the bleeding time.
Cardiopulmonary bypass:
Platelets may become dysfunctional, prolonging the bleeding time as blood
===PAGE:1099===
circulates through a pump oxygenator during cardiopulmonary bypass. The mechanism appears to be
activation of fibrinolysis on the platelet surface with resultant loss of the glycoprotein Ib-IX binding site for
von Willebrand's factor. Regardless of platelet count, patients who bleed excessively after
cardiopulmonary bypass and who have a long bleeding time are transfused with platelets. Giving
aprotinin (a protease inhibitor that neutralizes plasmin activity) during bypass may preserve platelet
function, prevent prolongation of bleeding time, and reduce the need for transfusion.
Hereditary Intrinsic Platelet Disorders
Hereditary intrinsic platelet disorders are rare and produce lifelong bleeding tendencies.
Diagnosis is confirmed by platelet aggregation tests. Platelet transfusion is necessary to control
serious bleeding.
Normal hemostasis requires platelet adhesion and activation.
Adhesion
(ie, of platelets to exposed vascular subendothelium) requires von Willebrand's factor (VWF)
and the platelet glycoprotein Ib-IX complex.
Activation
promotes platelet aggregation and fibrinogen binding and requires the platelet glycoprotein
IIb-IIIa complex. Activation involves release of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) from platelet storage
granules and conversion of arachidonic acid to thromboxane A
via a cyclooxygenase-mediated reaction.
Hereditary intrinsic platelet disorders can involve defects in any of these substrates and steps. These
disorders are suspected in patients with lifelong bleeding disorders who have normal platelet counts and
coagulation study results. Diagnosis usually is based on platelet aggregation tests; however, platelet
aggregation tests are not quantitative, and interpretation of results is often inconclusive (see
Table 108-3
).
Disorders of adhesion:
Bernard-Soulier syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. It impairs
platelet adhesion via a defect in the glycoprotein Ib-IX complex. Bleeding may be severe. Platelets are
unusually large. They do not aggregate with ristocetin but aggregate normally with ADP, collagen, and
epinephrine.
Large platelets associated with functional abnormalities also occur in the May-Hegglin anomaly, a
thrombocytopenic disorder with abnormal WBCs, and in the Chediak-Higashi syndrome (.
Platelet transfusion is necessary to control serious bleeding.
Disorders of activation:
Disorders of amplification of platelet activation are the most common hereditary
intrinsic platelet disorders and produce mild bleeding. They may result from decreased ADP in the platelet
granules (storage pool deficiency), from an inability to generate thromboxane A
from arachidonic acid, or
from an inability of platelets to aggregate in response to thromboxane A
. Platelet aggregation tests
reveal impaired aggregation after exposure to collagen, epinephrine, and low levels of ADP and normal
aggregation after exposure to high levels of ADP. The same pattern can result from use of NSAIDs or
aspirin, the effect of which can persist for several days. Therefore, platelet aggregation tests should not
be done in patients who have recently taken these drugs.
Thrombasthenia (Glanzmann disease) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder causing a defect in the
platelet glycoprotein IIb-IIIa complex; platelets cannot aggregate. Patients may experience severe mucosal
bleeding (eg, nosebleeds that stop only after nasal packing and transfusions of platelet concentrates).
The diagnosis is suggested by a finding of single platelets without aggregates on a peripheral blood
smear obtained from a finger stick. It is confirmed by the finding that platelets fail to aggregate with
epinephrine, collagen, or even high levels of ADP but do aggregate transiently with ristocetin. Platelet
transfusion is necessary to control serious bleeding.
Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura
===PAGE:1100===
(Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic Purpura)
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a bleeding disorder caused by thrombocytopenia
not associated with a systemic disease. Typically, it is chronic in adults but is usually acute and
self-limited in children. Spleen size is normal. Diagnosis requires that other disorders be
excluded through selective tests. Treatment includes corticosteroids, splenectomy, and
immunosuppressants and thrombopoietic-mimetic drugs. For life-threatening bleeding, platelet
transfusions, IV corticosteroids, and IV immune globulin are required.
ITP usually results from development of an autoantibody directed against a structural platelet antigen. In
childhood ITP, the autoantibody may be triggered by binding of viral antigen to megakaryocytes.
Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms and signs are petechiae, purpura, and mucosal bleeding. Gross GI bleeding and
hematuria are uncommon. The
[Table 108-3.
Results of Aggregation Tests in Hereditary Disorders of Platelet Function]
spleen is of normal size unless it is enlarged by a coexisting childhood viral infection.
Diagnosis
• CBC with platelets, peripheral blood smear
• Sometimes bone marrow aspiration
• Exclusion of other thrombocytopenic disorders
ITP is suspected in patients with isolated thrombocytopenia (ie, otherwise normal CBC and peripheral
blood smear). Because manifestations of ITP are nonspecific, other causes of isolated thrombocytopenia
(eg, drugs, alcohol, lymphoproliferative disorders, systemic illness) need to be excluded by clinical
evaluation and appropriate testing. Typically, patients have coagulation studies, liver function tests
(including testing for hepatitis C), and, because HIV-associated thrombocytopenia may be otherwise
indistinguishable from ITP, HIV testing. Testing for antiplatelet antibodies does not aid diagnosis or
treatment.
Bone marrow examination is not required to make the diagnosis but is done if blood counts or blood
smear reveals abnormalities in addition to thrombocytopenia, when clinical features are not typical, and in
patients > 60 yr (because myelodysplasia is more common in older patients). In patients with ITP, bone
marrow examination reveals normal or possibly increased numbers of megakaryocytes in an otherwise
normal bone marrow sample.
Prognosis
Children typically recover spontaneously, even from severe thrombocytopenia, in several weeks to
months.
In adults, spontaneous remission is rare. However, some have mild and stable disease (ie, platelet counts
> 30,000/
μ
L); such cases may be more common than previously thought, many being discovered by the
automated platelet counting now routinely done with CBC. Others have significant, symptomatic
thrombocytopenia, although life-threatening bleeding and death are rare.
Treatment
• Oral corticosteroids
• Splenectomy
===PAGE:1101===
• Rituximab
• Sometimes thrombopoietic-mimetic drugs
• Sometimes other immunosuppressants
• For severe bleeding, IV immune globulin, IV corticosteroids, or platelet transfusions
Adults usually are given an oral corticosteroid (eg, prednisone 1 mg/kg once/day) initially. In patients who
respond, the platelet count rises to normal within 2 to 6 wk. The corticosteroid dosage is then tapered. An
alternative corticosteroid regimen is dexamethasone 40 mg po once/day for 4 days. However, most
patients do not respond adequately or relapse as the corticosteroid is tapered. Splenectomy can achieve
a complete remission in about two thirds of these patients but is usually reserved for those with severe
thrombocytopenia, bleeding, or both; it may not be appropriate for those with mild disease. Rituximab (375
mg/m
IV once/wk for 4 wk) may be used in patients who do not respond to splenectomy or in patients
who are not candidates for splenectomy.
Because other treatments may not be effective for patients with ITP refractory to corticosteroids and
splenectomy and because ITP often has a benign natural history, additional treatments may not be
indicated unless the platelet count is < 10,000 to 20,000/
μ
L and active bleeding is present. In these
patients, thrombopoietin-mimetic drugs, such as romiplostim 1 to 5
μ
g/kg sc once/wk and eltrombopag 50
to 75 mg po once/day, may be used.
About 75 to 80% of patients respond to thrombopoietin-mimetic drugs even after failure of multiple
previous treatments. However, these drugs are used for maintenance therapy rather than induction of
remission and need to be administered continuously to maintain the platelet count > 50,000/
μ
L. More
intensive immunosuppression may be required with drugs such as cyclophosphamide and azathioprine in
patients unresponsive to other drugs who have severe, symptomatic thrombocytopenia.
Treatment of children is usually supportive, because most children spontaneously recover. Even after
months or years of thrombocytopenia, most children have spontaneous remissions. If mucosal bleeding
occurs, corticosteroids or IV immune globulin is given. Initial use of corticosteroids and IV immune globulin
is controversial, because they increase platelet count but may not improve clinical outcome. Splenectomy
is rarely done in children. However, if thrombocytopenia is severe and symptomatic for > 6 mo, then
splenectomy is effective.
In children or adults with ITP and life-threatening bleeding, rapid phagocytic blockade is attempted by
giving IV immune globulin 1 g/kg once/day for 1 to 2 days. This treatment usually causes the platelet
count to rise within 2 to 4 days, but the count remains high only for 2 to 4 wk. High-dose
methylprednisolone (1 g IV once/day for 3 days) is less
expensive than IV immune globulin and is easier
to administer but may not be as effective. Patients with ITP and life-threatening bleeding are also given
platelet transfusions. Platelet transfusions are not used prophylactically.
Oral corticosteroids or IV immune globulin may also be given when a transient increase of the platelet
count is required for tooth extractions, childbirth, surgery, or other invasive procedures.
Thrombocytopenia Due to Splenic Sequestration
Increased splenic platelet sequestration can occur in various disorders that cause splenomegaly.
Sequestration is expected in patients with congestive splenomegaly caused by advanced cirrhosis. The
platelet count usually is > 30,000/
μ
L unless the disorder causing the splenomegaly also impairs platelet
production (eg, in myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia). Platelets are released from the spleen by
epinephrine and therefore may be available at a time of stress. Therefore, thrombocytopenia caused only
by splenic sequestration does not cause bleeding. Splenectomy corrects the thrombocytopenia but is not
indicated unless severe thrombocytopenia from simultaneous marrow failure is present.
Thrombocytopenia: Other Causes
===PAGE:1102===
Platelet destruction can develop because of immunologic causes (HIV infection, drugs,
connective tissue or lymphoproliferative disorders, blood transfusions) or nonimmunologic
causes (sepsis, acute respiratory distress syndrome). Manifestations are petechiae, purpura,
and mucosal bleeding. Laboratory findings depend on the cause. The history may be the only
suggestion of the diagnosis. Treatment is correction of the underlying disorder.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome:
Patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome may develop
nonimmunologic thrombocytopenia, possibly secondary to deposition of platelets in the pulmonary
capillary bed.
Blood transfusions:
Posttransfusion purpura causes immunologic platelet destruction indistinguishable
from immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), except for a history of a blood transfusion within the
preceding 7 to 10 days. The patient, usually a woman, lacks a platelet antigen (PLA-1) present in most
people. Transfusion with PLA-1-positive platelets stimulates formation of anti-PLA-1 antibodies, which (by
an unknown mechanism) can react with the patient's PLA-1-negative platelets. Severe thrombocytopenia
results, taking 2 to 6 wk to subside.
Connective tissue and lymphoproliferative disorders:
Connective tissue (eg, SLE) or
lymphoproliferative disorders can cause immunologic thrombocytopenia. Corticosteroids and splenectomy
are often effective.
Drug-induced immunologic destruction:
Commonly used drugs that occasionally induce
thrombocytopenia include
• Quinine
• Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
• Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (abciximab, eptifibatide, tirofiban)
• Hydrochlorothiazide
• Carbamazepine
• Acetaminophen
• Chlorpropamide
• Ranitidine
• Rifampin
• Vancomycin
Drug-induced thrombocytopenia occurs typically by causing an immune reaction in which drug bound to
the platelet creates a new and "foreign" antigen. This disorder is indistinguishable from ITP except for the
history of drug ingestion. When the drug is stopped, the platelet count typically begins to increase within
1 to 2 days and recovers to normal within 7 days.
Up to 5% of patients receiving unfractionated heparin develop thrombocytopenia, which may occur even
with very-low-dose heparin (eg, used in flushes to keep IV or arterial lines open). The mechanism is
usually immunologic. Bleeding can occur, but more commonly platelets clump excessively, causing vessel
obstruction, leading to paradoxical arterial and venous thromboses, which may be life threatening (eg,
thromboembolic occlusion of limb arteries, stroke, acute MI). Heparin should be stopped in any patient
who becomes thrombocytopenic or whose platelet count decreases by more than 50%. Because 5 days
of heparin is sufficient to treat venous thrombosis and because most patients begin oral anticoagulants
simultaneously with heparin, stopping heparin is usually safe. Low mol wt heparin (LMWH) may be less
===PAGE:1103===
immunogenic than unfractionated heparin. However, LMWH is not useful if heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia has already developed, because most antibodies cross-react with LMWH.
Infections: HIV infection
may cause immunologic thrombocytopenia indistinguishable from ITP except
for the association with HIV. The platelet count may increase with glucocorticoids, which are often
withheld unless the platelet count falls to < 20,000/
μ
L, because these drugs may further depress immune
function. The platelet count also usually increases after treatment with antiviral drugs.
Other infections
such as systemic viral infections (eg, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus), rickettsial
infections (eg, Rocky Mountain spotted fever), and bacterial sepsis are typically associated with
thrombocytopenia.
Pregnancy:
Mild thrombocytopenia, typically asymptomatic, occurs late in gestation in about 5% of
normal pregnancies (gestational thrombocytopenia); it is usually mild (platelet counts < 70,000/
μ
L are
rare), requires no treatment, and resolves after delivery. However, severe thrombocytopenia may develop
in pregnant women with preeclampsia and the HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver function tests,
and low platelets—; such women typically require immediate delivery, and platelet
transfusion is considered if platelet count is < 20,000/
μ
L (or < 50,000/L if delivery is to be cesarean).
Sepsis:
Sepsis often causes nonimmunologic thrombocytopenia that parallels the severity of the
infection. The thrombocytopenia has multiple causes: disseminated intravascular coagulation, formation
of immune complexes that can associate with platelets, activation of complement, and deposition of
platelets on damaged endothelial surfaces.
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura and Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) are acute,
fulminant disorders characterized by thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia. Other manifestations may include alterations in level of consciousness and renal
failure. Diagnosis requires demonstrating characteristic laboratory test abnormalities, including
Coombs'-negative hemolytic anemia. Treatment is plasma exchange and corticosteroids in
adults and supportive care (sometimes including hemodialysis) in children.
Pathophysiology
TTP and HUS involve nonimmunologic platelet destruction. Loose strands of von Willebrand's factor
(VWF) or fibrin are deposited in multiple small vessels and damage passing platelets and RBCs, causing
significant thrombocytopenia and anemia. Platelets are also destroyed within multiple small thrombi.
Multiple organs develop bland platelet-VWF thrombi (without the vessel wall granulocytic infiltration
characteristic of vasculitis) localized primarily to arteriocapillary junctions, described as thrombotic
microangiopathy. The brain, heart, and kidneys are particularly likely to be affected.
TTP and HUS differ mainly in the relative degree of renal failure. Typically, disorders in adults are
described as TTP and are less likely to involve renal failure. HUS is used to describe the disorder in
children, which typically involves renal failure.
Etiology
Children:
Most cases follow acute hemorrhagic colitis resulting from
Shiga
toxin-producing bacteria (eg,
Escherichia coli
O157:H7, some strains of
Shigella dysenteriae
).
Adults:
Many cases are idiopathic. Known causes and associations include
• Drugs: Quinine (most common), immunosuppressants, and cancer chemotherapy drugs (eg,
cyclosporine, mitomycin C)
• Pregnancy (often indistinguishable from severe preeclampsia or eclampsia)
===PAGE:1104===
• Rarely, hemorrhagic colitis due to
Escherichia coli
O157:H7
A predisposing factor in many patients is congenital or acquired deficiency of the plasma enzyme
ADAMTS13, which cleaves VWF and thus eliminates abnormally large VWF multimers that can cause
platelet thrombi.
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations of ischemia develop with varying severity in multiple organs. These manifestations include
weakness, confusion and coma, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and arrhythmias caused by
myocardial damage. Children usually have a prodrome of vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea
(frequently bloody). Fever may occur, but high fever with chills does not occur in TTP or HUS and
suggests sepsis. The clinical syndromes of TTP and HUS are indistinguishable, except that neurologic
symptoms are less common with HUS.
Diagnosis
• CBC with platelets, peripheral blood smear, Coombs' test
• Exclusion of other thrombocytopenic disorders
TTP-HUS is suspected in patients with suggestive symptoms, thrombocytopenia, and anemia. If the
disorder is suspected, urinalysis, peripheral blood smear, reticulocyte count, serum LDH, renal function
tests, serum bilirubin (direct and indirect), and Coombs' test are done. The diagnosis is suggested by:
• Thrombocytopenia and anemia
• Fragmented RBCs on the blood smear (helmet cells, triangular RBCs, distorted-appearing RBCs; these
changes describe microangiopathic hemolysis)
• Evidence of hemolysis (falling Hb level, polychromasia, elevated reticulocyte count, elevated serum
LDH)
• Negative direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test
Otherwise unexplained thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia are sufficient evidence
for a presumptive diagnosis.
Causes:
Although causes (eg, quinine sensitivity) or associations (eg, pregnancy) are clear in some
patients, in most patients TTP-HUS appears suddenly and spontaneously without apparent cause. TTPHUS is often indistinguishable, even with renal biopsy, from syndromes that cause identical thrombotic
microangiopathies (eg, preeclampsia, systemic sclerosis, accelerated hypertension, acute renal allograft
rejection).
Testing for ADAMTS13 activity is appropriate in patients with suspected TTP-HUS, except in children who
have typical diarrhea-associated HUS. Although the results of ADAMTS13 testing do not affect initial
treatment, results are important prognostically.
Stool testing (specific culture for
E. coli
O157:H7 or
Shiga
toxin assay) is done in children with diarrhea
and also adults who had a prodrome of bloody diarrhea; however, the organism and toxin may have
cleared by the time of presentation.
Treatment
• Plasma exchange and corticosteroids in adults
Typical diarrhea-associated HUS in children caused by enterohemorrhagic infection usually
spontaneously remits and is treated with supportive care and not plasma exchange; over half of patients
===PAGE:1105===
require renal dialysis. In other cases, untreated TTP-HUS is almost always fatal. With plasma exchange,
however, > 85% of patients recover completely.
Plasma exchange is continued daily until evidence of disease activity has subsided, as indicated by a
normal platelet count, which may be several days to many weeks. Adults with TTP are also given
corticosteroids. In patients with recurrence when plasma exchange is stopped or in patients with relapses,
more intensive immunosuppression with rituximab may be effective. Most patients experience only a
single episode of TTP-HUS. However, relapses occur in about 40% of patients who have a severe
deficiency of ADAMTS13 activity caused by an autoantibody inhibitor. Patients must be evaluated quickly
if symptoms suggestive of a relapse develop.
Von Willebrand's Disease
Von Willebrand's disease (VWD) is a hereditary deficiency of von Willebrand's factor (VWF),
which causes platelet dysfunction. Bleeding tendency is usually mild. Screening tests show a
normal platelet count and, possibly, a slightly prolonged PTT. Diagnosis is based on low levels
of VWF antigen and abnormal ristocetin cofactor activity. Treatment involves control of bleeding
with replacement therapy (cryoprecipitate or pasteurized intermediate-purity factor VIII
concentrate) or desmopressin.
VWF is synthesized and secreted by vascular endothelium to form part of the perivascular matrix. VWF
promotes the platelet adhesion phase of hemostasis by binding with a receptor on the platelet surface
membrane (glycoprotein Ib/IX), which connects the platelets to the vessel wall. VWF is also required to
maintain normal plasma factor VIII levels. Levels of VWF can temporarily increase in response to stress,
exercise, pregnancy, inflammation, or infection.
VWD is classified into 3 types:
• Type 1: a quantitative deficiency of VWF, which is the most common form and is an autosomal dominant
disorder
• Type 2: a qualitative impairment in synthesis of VWF that can result from various genetic abnormalities
and is an autosomal dominant disorder
• Type 3: a rare autosomal recessive disorder in which homozygotes have no detectable VWF
Although VWD, like hemophilia A, is a hereditary disorder that may, when severe, cause factor VIII
deficiency, the deficiency is usually only moderate.
Symptoms and Signs
Bleeding manifestations are mild to moderate and include easy bruising, mucosal bleeding, bleeding from
small skin cuts that may stop and start over hours, sometimes increased menstrual bleeding, and
abnormal bleeding after surgical procedures (eg, tooth extraction, tonsillectomy). Platelets function well
enough that petechiae and purpura do not occur.
Diagnosis
• Total plasma VWF antigen, VWF function, and plasma factor VIII level
VWD is suspected in patients with bleeding disorders, particularly those with a family history of the
disorder. Screening coagulation tests reveal a normal platelet count, normal INR, and sometimes a slightly
prolonged PTT. Bleeding time may be prolonged, but this test has poor reproducibility and is of limited
value. Diagnosis requires measuring total plasma VWF antigen, VWF function as determined by the ability
of plasma to support agglutination of normal platelets by ristocetin (ristocetin cofactor activity), and
plasma factor VIII level. Stimuli that temporarily increase VWF levels can cause false-negative results in
mild VWD; tests may need to be repeated.
===PAGE:1106===
In the common (type 1) form of VWD, results are concordant; ie, VWF antigen, VWF function, and plasma
factor VIII level are equally depressed. The degree of depression varies from about 15 to 60% of normal
and determines the severity of a patient's abnormal bleeding. Levels of VWF antigen can also be as low
as 40% of normal in healthy people with type O blood.
Type 2 variants are suspected if tests are discordant, ie, VWF antigen is higher than expected for the
degree of abnormality in ristocetin cofactor activity. (VWF antigen is higher than expected because the
VWF defect in type 2 is qualitative, not quantitative.) Diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating a reduced
concentration of large VWF multimers on agarose gel electrophoresis. Four different type 2 variants are
recognized, distinguished by different functional abnormalities of the VWF molecule.
Patients with type 3 VWD have no detectable VWF and a marked deficiency of factor VIII.
Treatment
• VWF replacement when necessary
Patients are treated only if they are actively bleeding or are undergoing an invasive procedure (eg,
surgery, dental extraction). Treatment involves replacement of VWF by infusion of pasteurized
intermediate-purity factor VIII concentrates, which contain components of VWF. These concentrates are
virally inactivated and therefore do not transmit HIV infection or hepatitis. Because they do not cause
transfusion-transmitted infections, these concentrates are preferred to the previously used
cryoprecipitate. High-purity factor VIII concentrates are prepared by immunoaffinity chromatography and
contain no VWF.
Desmopressin is an analog of antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) that stimulates release of VWF into the
plasma and may increase levels of factor VIII. Desmopressin can be helpful for type 1 VWD but is usually
of no value in other types and may even be harmful in some. To ensure adequate response to the drug,
physicians give patients a test dose and measure the response of VWF antigen. Desmopressin 0.3
μ
g/kg
given in 50 mL of 0.9% saline solution IV over 15 to 30 min may enable patients to undergo minor
procedures (eg, tooth extraction, minor surgery) without needing replacement therapy. If a replacement
product is needed, desmopressin may reduce the required dose. One dose of desmopressin is effective
for about 8 to 10 h. About 48 h must elapse for new stores of VWF to accumulate, permitting a 2nd
injection of desmopressin to be as effective as the initial dose.
===PAGE:1107===
Chapter 109. Hemostasis
Introduction
Hemostasis, the arrest of bleeding from an injured blood vessel, requires the combined activity of
vascular, platelet, and plasma factors. Regulatory mechanisms counterbalance the tendency of clots to
form. Hemostatic abnormalities can lead to excessive bleeding or thrombosis.
Vascular Factors
Vascular factors reduce blood loss from trauma through local vasoconstriction (an immediate reaction to
injury) and compression of injured vessels by extravasation of blood into surrounding tissues. Vessel wall
injury triggers the attachment and activation of platelets and production of fibrin; platelets and fibrin
combine to form a clot.
Platelet Factors
Various mechanisms, including endothelial cell nitric oxide and prostacyclin, promote blood fluidity by
preventing platelet stasis and dilating intact blood vessels. These mediators are no longer produced
when the vascular endothelium is disrupted. Under these conditions, platelets adhere to the damaged
intima and form aggregates. Initial platelet adhesion is to von Willebrand's factor (VWF), previously
secreted by endothelial cells into the subendothelium. VWF binds to receptors on the platelet surface
membrane (glycoprotein Ib/IX). Platelets anchored to the vessel wall undergo activation. During activation,
platelets release mediators from storage granules, including adenosine diphosphate (ADP). Other
biochemical changes resulting from activation include hydrolysis of membrane phospholipids, inhibition of
adenylate cyclase, mobilization of intracellular Ca, and phosphorylation of intracellular proteins.
Arachidonic acid is converted to thromboxane A
; this reaction requires cyclooxygenase and is inhibited
irreversibly by aspirin and reversibly by many NSAIDs. ADP, thromboxane A
, and other mediators induce
activation and aggregation of additional platelets on the injured endothelium. Another receptor is
assembled on the platelet surface membrane from glycoproteins IIb and IIIa. Fibrinogen binds to the
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa complexes of adjacent platelets, connecting them into aggregates.
Platelets provide surfaces for the assembly and activation of coagulation complexes and the generation
of thrombin. Thrombin converts fibrinogen to fibrin. Fibrin strands bind aggregated platelets to help
secure the platelet-fibrin hemostatic plug.
Plasma Factors
Plasma coagulation factors interact to produce thrombin, which converts fibrinogen to fibrin. Radiating
from and anchoring the hemostatic plug, fibrin strengthens the clot.
In the intrinsic pathway, factor XII, high mol wt kininogen, prekallikrein, and activated factor XI (factor XIa)
interact to produce factor IXa from factor IX. Factor IXa then combines with factor VIIIa and procoagulant
phospholipid (present on the surface of activated platelets and tissue cells) to form a complex that
activates factor X. In the extrinsic pathway, factor VIIa and tissue factor directly activate factor X (the factor
VIIa/tissue factor complex also activates factor IX—see
Fig. 109-1
and
Table 109-1
).
[Fig. 109-1.
Pathways in blood coagulation.]
[Table 109-1.
Components of Blood Coagulation Reactions]
Activation of the intrinsic or extrinsic pathway activates the common pathway, resulting in formation of the
fibrin clot. Three steps are involved in common pathway activation:
1. A prothrombin activator is produced on the surface of activated platelets and tissue cells. The activator
===PAGE:1108===
is a complex of an enzyme, factor Xa, and 2 cofactors, factor Va and procoagulant phospholipid.
2. The prothrombin activator cleaves prothrombin into thrombin and another fragment.
3. Thrombin induces the generation of fibrin polymers from fibrinogen. Thrombin also activates factor XIII,
an enzyme that catalyzes formation of stronger bonds between adjacent fibrin monomers, as well as
factor VIII and factor XI.
Ca
2+
ions are needed in most thrombin-generating reactions (Ca
2+
-chelating agents [eg, citrate,
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid] are used in vitro as anticoagulants). Vitamin K-dependent clotting factors
(factors II, VII, IX, and X) cannot bind normally to phospholipid surfaces through Ca
2+
bridges and
function in blood coagulation when synthesized in the absence of vitamin K.
Although the coagulation pathways are helpful in understanding mechanisms and laboratory evaluation of
coagulation disorders, in vivo coagulation is predominantly via the extrinsic pathway. People with
hereditary
deficiencies of factor XII, high mol wt kininogen, or prekallikrein have no bleeding abnormality.
People with hereditary factor XI deficiency have a mild to moderate bleeding disorder. In vivo, factor XI (an
intrinsic pathway factor) is activated when a small amount of thrombin is generated. Factor IX can be
activated both by factor XIa and factor VIIa/tissue factor complexes.
In vivo, initiation of the extrinsic pathway occurs when injury to blood vessels brings blood into contact
with the tissue factor on membranes of cells within and around the vessel walls. This contact with tissue
factor generates factor VIIa/tissue factor complexes that activate factor X and factor IX. Factor IXa,
combined with its cofactor, factor VIIIa, on phospholipid membrane surfaces generates additional factor
Xa. Factor X activation by both factor VIIa/tissue factor and factor IXa/VIIIa complexes is required for
normal hemostasis. This requirement for factors VIII and IX explains why hemophilia type A (deficiency of
factor VIII) or type B (deficiency of factor IX) results in bleeding, despite an intact extrinsic coagulation
pathway initiated by factor VIIa/tissue factor complexes.
Regulatory Mechanisms
Several inhibitory mechanisms prevent activated coagulation reactions from amplifying uncontrollably,
causing extensive local thrombosis or disseminated intravascular coagulation. These mechanisms include
inactivation of procoagulant enzymes, fibrinolysis, and hepatic clearance of activated clotting factors.
Inactivation of coagulation factors:
Plasma protease inhibitors (antithrombin, tissue factor pathway
inhibitor,
α
-macroglobulin, heparin cofactor II) inactivate coagulation enzymes. Antithrombin inhibits
thrombin, factor Xa, factor XIa, and factor IXa. Heparin enhances antithrombin activity.
Two vitamin K-dependent proteins, protein C and protein S, form a complex that inactivates factors VIIIa
and Va by proteolysis. Thrombin, when bound to a receptor on endothelial cells (thrombomodulin),
activates protein C. Activated protein C, in combination with protein S and phospholipid cofactors,
proteolyzes and inactivates factors VIIIa and Va.
Fibrinolysis:
Fibrin deposition and lysis must be balanced to maintain and remold the hemostatic seal
during repair of an injured vessel wall. The fibrinolytic system dissolves fibrin by means of plasmin, a
proteolytic enzyme. Fibrinolysis is activated by plasminogen activators released from vascular endothelial
cells. Plasminogen activators and plasminogen (from plasma) bind to fibrin, and plasminogen activators
cleave plasminogen into plasmin (see
Fig. 109-2
). Plasmin then proteolyzes fibrin into soluble fibrin degradation products that are swept away in
the circulation.
There are several plasminogen activators:
•
Tissue plasminogen activator
(tPA), from endothelial cells, is a poor activator when
[Fig. 109-2.
Fibrinolytic pathway.]
===PAGE:1109===
free in solution but an efficient activator when bound to fibrin in proximity to plasminogen.
•
Urokinase
exists in single-chain and double-chain forms with different functional properties. Singlechain urokinase cannot activate free plasminogen but, like tPA, can readily activate plasminogen bound
to fibrin. A trace concentration of plasmin cleaves single-chain to double-chain urokinase, which
activates plasminogen in solution as well as plasminogen bound to fibrin. Epithelial cells that line
excretory passages (eg, renal tubules, mammary ducts) secrete urokinase, which is the physiologic
activator of fibrinolysis in these channels.
•
Streptokinase
, a bacterial product not normally found in the body, is another potent plasminogen
activator.
Streptokinase, urokinase, and recombinant tPA (alteplase) have all been used therapeutically to induce
fibrinolysis in patients with acute thrombotic disorders.
Regulation of fibrinolysis:
Fibrinolysis is regulated by plasminogen activator inhibitors (PAIs) and
plasmin inhibitors that slow fibrinolysis. PAI-1, the most important PAI, inactivates tPA and urokinase and is
released from vascular endothelial cells and activated platelets. The primary plasmin inhibitor is
α
-
antiplasmin, which quickly inactivates free plasmin escaping from clots. Some
α
-antiplasmin is also
cross-linked to fibrin by the action of factor XIIIa during clotting. This cross-linking may prevent excessive
plasmin activity within clots. tPA and urokinase are rapidly cleared by the liver, which is another
mechanism of preventing excessive fibrinolysis.
Excessive Bleeding
Unusual or excessive bleeding may be indicated by several different signs and symptoms. Patients may
present with unexplained nosebleeds (epistaxis), excessive or prolonged menstrual blood flow
(menorrhagia), or prolonged bleeding after minor cuts, tooth brushing or flossing, or trauma. Other
patients may have unexplained skin lesions, including petechiae (small intradermal or mucosal
hemorrhages), purpura (areas of mucosal or skin hemorrhage larger than petechiae), ecchymoses
(bruises), or telangiectasias (dilated small vessels visible on skin or mucosa). Some critically ill patients
may suddenly bleed from vascular punctures or skin lesions and have severe hemorrhage from these
sites or from the GI or GU tract. In some patients, a laboratory test abnormality suggesting the
susceptibility to excessive bleeding is found incidentally.
Etiology
Excessive bleeding can result from several mechanisms (see
Table 109-2
), including the following:
• Platelet disorders
• Coagulation disorders
• Defects in blood vessels
Platelet disorders may involve an abnormal number of platelets (typically too few platelets, although an
extremely elevated platelet count may be associated either with thrombosis or with excessive bleeding),
defective platelet function, or both. Coagulation disorders may be acquired or hereditary.
Overall, the most common causes of excessive bleeding include
• Severe thrombocytopenia
• Excessive anticoagulation with warfarin or heparin
• Liver disease (inadequate production of coagulation factors)
===PAGE:1110===
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should determine the bleeding sites, the amount and duration of
bleeding, and the relationship of bleeding to any possible precipitating factors.
Review of systems
should specifically query about bleeding from sites other than those volunteered
(eg, patients complaining of easy bruising should be questioned about frequent nosebleeds, gum
bleeding while tooth brushing, melena, hemoptysis, blood in stool or urine). Patients should be asked
about symptoms of possible causes, including abdominal pain and diarrhea (GI illness); joint pain
(connective tissue disorders); and amenorrhea and morning sickness (pregnancy).
Past medical history
should seek known systemic conditions associated with defects in platelets or
coagulation, particularly
• Severe infection, cancer, cirrhosis, HIV infection, pregnancy, SLE, or uremia
• Prior excessive or unusual bleeding or transfusions
• Family history of excessive bleeding
Drug history should be reviewed, particularly use of heparin, warfarin, aspirin, and NSAIDs.
Physical examination:
Vital signs and general appearance can indicate hypovolemia
[Table 109-2.
Some Causes of Excessive Bleeding]
(tachycardia, hypotension, pallor, diaphoresis) or infection (fever, tachycardia, hypotension with sepsis).
The skin and mucous membranes (nose, mouth, vagina) are examined for petechiae, purpura, and
telangiectasias. GI bleeding can often be identified by digital rectal examination. Signs of bleeding in
deeper tissues may include tenderness during movement and local swelling, muscle hematomas, and, for
intracranial bleeding, confusion, stiff neck, focal neurologic abnormalities, or a combination of these
findings.
Characteristic findings of alcohol abuse or liver disease are ascites, splenomegaly (secondary to portal
hypertension), and jaundice.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Signs of hypovolemia or hemorrhagic shock
• Pregnancy or recent delivery
• Signs of infection or sepsis
Interpretation of findings:
Bleeding in a patient taking warfarin, especially if there has been a recent
increase in dose, is likely due to the drug. Telangiectasias on the face, lips, oral or nasal mucosa, and tips
of the fingers and toes in a patient with a positive family history of excessive bleeding is likely hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia.
Bleeding from superficial sites, including skin and mucous membranes, suggests a quantitative or
qualitative defect in platelets or a defect in blood vessels (eg, amyloidosis).
Bleeding into deep tissues (eg, hemarthroses, muscle hematomas, retroperitoneal hemorrhage) suggests
a defect in coagulation (coagulopathy).
A family history of excessive bleeding suggests an inherited coagulopathy (eg, hemophilia), a qualitative
===PAGE:1111===
platelet disorder, a type of von Willebrand's disease (VWD), or hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.
Absence of a known family history does not, however, exclude an inherited disorder of hemostasis.
Bleeding in a patient who is pregnant or has recently delivered, who is in shock, or who has a serious
infection suggests disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Bloody diarrhea and thrombocytopenia in a child with fever and GI symptoms suggest the hemolyticuremic syndrome (HUS), which is often associated with infection by
Escherichia coli
O157:H7.
In a child, a palpable, purpuric rash on the extensor surfaces of the extremities suggests HenochSchonlein purpura, particularly if accompanied by fever, polyarthralgia, or GI symptoms.
Patients with known alcohol abuse or liver disease may have coagulopathy, splenomegaly, or
thrombocytopenia.
In patients with a history of IV drug abuse, HIV infection should be considered.
Testing:
Most patients require laboratory evaluation (see
Table 109-3
). The initial tests are
• CBC with platelet count
• Peripheral blood smear
• PT and PTT
Screening tests evaluate the components of hemostasis, including the number of circulating platelets and
the plasma coagulation pathways. The most common screening tests for bleeding disorders are the
platelet count, PT, and PTT. If results are abnormal, a specific test can usually pinpoint the defect.
Determination of the level of fibrin degradation products measures in vivo activation of fibrinolysis.
[Table 109-3.
Laboratory Tests of Hemostasis by Phase]
Prothrombin time (PT)
screens for abnormalities in the extrinsic and common pathways of coagulation
(plasma factors VII, X, V, prothrombin, and fibrinogen). The PT is reported as the international normalized
ratio (INR), which reflects the ratio of the patient's PT to the laboratory's control value; the INR controls
for differences in reagents among different laboratories. Because commercial reagents and
instrumentation vary widely, each laboratory determines its own normal range for PT and PTT; a typical
normal range for the PT is between 10 and 13 sec. An INR > 1.5 or a PT ≥ 3 sec longer than a
laboratory's normal control value is usually abnormal and requires further evaluation. The INR is valuable
in screening for abnormal coagulation in various acquired conditions (eg, vitamin K deficiency, liver
disease, DIC). It is also used to monitor therapy with the oral vitamin K antagonist, warfarin.
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
screens plasma for abnormalities in factors of the intrinsic and
common pathways (prekallikrein; high mol wt kininogen; factors XII, XI, IX, VIII, X, and V; prothrombin;
fibrinogen). The PTT tests for deficiencies of all clotting factors except factor VII (measured by the PT)
and factor XIII. A typical normal range is 28 to 34 sec. A normal result indicates that at least 30% of all
coagulation factors in the pathway are
present in the plasma. Heparin prolongs the PTT, and the PTT is
often used to monitor heparin therapy. Inhibitors that prolong the PTT include an autoantibody against
factor VIII (see pp.
and
) and antibodies against protein-phospholipid complexes (lupus
anticoagulant—see pp.
and
).
Prolongation of PT or PTT
may reflect
• Factor deficiency
• Presence of an inhibitor of a component of the coagulation pathway
===PAGE:1112===
The PT and PTT do not become prolonged until one or more of the clotting factors tested are about 70%
deficient. For determining if prolongation reflects a deficiency of one or more clotting factor or the
presence of an inhibitor, the test is repeated after mixing the patient's plasma with normal plasma in a 1:1
ratio. Because this mixture provides about 50% of normal levels of all coagulation factors, failure of the
mixture to correct almost completely the prolongation suggests the presence of an inhibitor in patient
plasma.
The previously used bleeding time test is of doubtful reliability.
Normal results
on initial tests exclude many bleeding disorders. The main exceptions are VWD and
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. VWD is a common entity in which the associated deficiency of
factor VIII is frequently insufficient to prolong the PTT. Patients who have normal initial test results, along
with symptoms or signs of bleeding and a positive family history, should be tested for VWD by measuring
plasma von Willebrand's factor (VWF) antigen, ristocetin cofactor activity (an indirect test for large VWF
multimers), and factor VIII levels.
If
thrombocytopenia
is present, the peripheral blood smear often suggests the cause (see
Table 108-2
). If the smear is normal, patients should be tested for HIV. If the result of the HIV test is
negative and the patient is not pregnant and has not taken a drug known to cause platelet destruction,
then idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura is likely. If there are signs of hemolysis (fragmented RBCs on
smear, decreasing Hb level), thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) or HUS is suspected, although
sometimes other hemolytic disorders can cause these findings. HUS occurs in children with hemorrhagic
colitis. The Coombs' test is negative in TTP and HUS. If the CBC and peripheral blood smear
demonstrate other cytopenias or abnormal WBCs, a hematologic abnormality affecting multiple cell types
is suspected, and a bone marrow aspiration or biopsy is necessary for diagnosis.
Prolonged PTT with normal platelets and PT
suggests hemophilia A or B. Factor VIII and IX assays are
indicated. Inhibitors that prolong the PTT include an autoantibody against factor VIII and antibodies
against protein-phospholipid complexes (lupus anticoagulant). Such inhibitors are suspected when a
prolonged PTT does not correct upon 1:1 mixing with normal plasma.
Prolonged PT with normal platelets and PTT
suggests factor VII deficiency. Congenital factor VII
deficiency is rare; however, the short half-life of factor VII in plasma causes factor VII to decrease to low
levels more rapidly than other vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors (eg, in patients given warfarin
anticoagulation or in patients with incipient liver disease).
Prolonged PT and PTT with thrombocytopenia
suggest DIC, especially in association with obstetric
complications, sepsis, cancer, or shock. Confirmation is by finding elevated levels of D-dimers (or fibrin
degradation products) and decreasing plasma fibrinogen levels on serial testing. Prolonged PT or PTT
with normal platelet count occurs with liver disease or vitamin K deficiency or during anticoagulation with
warfarin or unfractionated heparin. Liver disease is suspected based on history and is confirmed by
finding elevation of serum aminotransferases and bilirubin; hepatitis testing is recommended.
Imaging tests
are often required to detect occult bleeding in patients with bleeding disorders. For
example, head CT should be done in patients with severe headaches, head injuries, or impairment of
consciousness; and abdominal CT in patients with abdominal pain or other findings compatible with
intraperitoneal or retroperitoneal hemorrhage.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder and at any hypovolemia. For immediate treatment of
bleeding due to a coagulopathy that has not yet been diagnosed, fresh frozen plasma, which contains all
coagulation factors, should be infused pending definitive evaluation.
Key Points
• DIC should be suspected in patients with sepsis, shock, or complications of pregnancy or delivery.
===PAGE:1113===
• Drug causes are common, particularly mild platelet dysfunction caused by aspirin or NSAIDs.
• Easy bruising with no other clinical manifestations and normal laboratory test results is probably benign.
===PAGE:1114===
Chapter 110. Thrombotic Disorders
Introduction
In healthy people, homeostatic balance exists between procoagulant (clotting) forces and anticoagulant
and fibrinolytic forces (see
Chapter 109
). Numerous genetic, acquired, and environmental factors can tip the
balance in favor of coagulation, leading to the pathologic formation of thrombi in veins (eg, deep venous
thrombosis [DVT]), arteries (eg, MI, ischemic stroke), or cardiac chambers. Thrombi can obstruct blood
flow at the site of formation or detach and embolize to block a distant blood vessel (eg, pulmonary
embolism, embolic stroke).
Etiology
Genetic defects
that increase the propensity for venous thromboembolism include
• Factor V Leiden mutation, which causes resistance to activated protein C (APC)
• Prothrombin 20210 gene mutation
• Deficiency of protein C, protein S, protein Z, or antithrombin
Acquired defects
also predispose to venous and arterial thrombosis (see
Table 110-1
).
Other disorders and environmental factors can increase the risk of thrombosis, especially if a genetic
abnormality is also present.
Diagnosis
Diagnoses are summarized elsewhere in THE MANUAL specific to the location of the thrombus.
Predisposing factors:
Predisposing factors should always be considered. In some cases, the condition
is clinically obvious (eg, recent surgery or trauma, prolonged immobilization, cancer, generalized
atherosclerosis). If no predisposing factor is readily apparent, further evaluation should be conducted in
patients with
• Family history of venous thrombosis
• More than one episode of venous thrombosis
• Venous or arterial thrombosis before age 50
• Unusual sites of venous thrombosis (eg, cavernous sinus, mesenteric veins)
As many as half of all patients with spontaneous DVT have a genetic predisposition.
[Table 110-1.
Acquired Causes of Thromboembolism]
Testing for predisposing congenital factors includes measurements of the quantity of activity of natural
anticoagulant molecules in plasma and tests for specific gene defects. Testing begins with a group of
screening tests, followed (if necessary) by specific assays.
Treatment
Treatment is summarized elsewhere in THE MANUAL specific to the location of the thrombus.
Factor V Resistance to Activated Protein C
===PAGE:1115===
APC (in complex with protein S) degrades factors Va and VIIIa, thus inhibiting coagulation. Any of several
mutations to factor V make it resistant to inactivation by APC, increasing the tendency for thrombosis.
Factor V Leiden is the most common of these mutations. Homozygous mutations increase the risk of
thrombosis more than do heterozygous mutations.
Factor V Leiden as a single gene defect in European populations is present in about 5%, but it rarely
occurs in native Asian or African populations. It is present in 20 to 60% of patients with spontaneous
venous thrombosis.
Diagnosis is based on a functional plasma coagulation assay (the failure of patient plasma PTT to
become prolonged in the presence of snake venom-activated patient protein C) and on molecular
analysis of the factor V gene.
Treatment, if necessary, involves anticoagulation with heparin followed by warfarin.
Protein C Deficiency
Protein C is a vitamin K-dependent protein, as are coagulation factors VII, IX, and X, prothrombin, and
proteins S and Z. Because APC degrades factors Va and VIIIa, APC is a natural plasma anticoagulant.
Decreased protein C from genetic or acquired causes promotes venous thrombosis. Heterozygous
deficiency of plasma protein C has a prevalence of 0.2 to 0.5%; about 75% of people with this defect
experience a venous thromboembolism (50% by age 50). Homozygous or doubly heterozygous deficiency
causes neonatal purpura fulminans, ie, severe neonatal disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Acquired decreases occur in patients with liver disease or DIC, during cancer chemotherapy (including Lasparaginase administration), and during warfarin therapy.
Diagnosis is based on antigenic and functional plasma assays.
Patients with symptomatic thrombosis require anticoagulation with heparin or low mol wt heparin, followed
by warfarin; use of the vitamin K antagonist, warfarin, as initial therapy occasionally causes thrombotic
skin infarction by lowering vitamin K-dependent protein C levels before a therapeutic decrease has
occurred in most vitamin K-dependent clotting factors. Neonatal purpura fulminans is fatal without
replacement of protein C (using normal plasma or purified concentrate) and anticoagulation with heparin.
Protein S Deficiency
Protein S, a vitamin K-dependent protein, is a cofactor for APC-mediated cleavage of factors Va and VIIIa.
Heterozygous deficiency of plasma protein S predisposes to venous thrombosis and is similar to protein C
deficiency in genetic transmission, prevalence, laboratory testing, treatment, and precautions.
Homozygous deficiency of protein S can cause neonatal purpura fulminans that is clinically
indistinguishable from that caused by homozygous deficiency of protein C. Acquired deficiencies of
protein S (and protein C) occur during DIC and warfarin therapy and after L-asparaginase administration.
Diagnosis is based on antigenic assays of total or free plasma protein S. (Free protein S is the form
unbound to C4 binding protein.)
Protein Z Deficiency
Protein Z, another vitamin K-dependent protein, functions as a cofactor to down-regulate coagulation by
forming a complex with the plasma protein, Z-dependent protease inhibitor (ZPI). The complex inactivates
factors Xa, XI, and IX on phospholipids surfaces. The consequence of either protein Z or ZPI deficiency in
the pathophysiology of thrombosis and fetal loss is unresolved; however, either defect may make
thrombosis more likely if an affected patient also has another congenital coagulation abnormality (eg,
factor V Leiden). Quantification of protein Z and ZPI is done in research laboratories by plasma
electrophoresis and immunoblotting. It is not yet known whether anticoagulant therapy or prophylaxis is
indicated in protein Z or ZPI deficiency.
Antithrombin Deficiency
===PAGE:1116===
Antithrombin is a protein that inhibits thrombin and factors Xa, IXa, and XIa. Heterozygous deficiency of
plasma antithrombin has a prevalence of about 0.2 to 0.4%; about half of those
affected develop venous
thromboses. Homozygous deficiencies are probably lethal to the fetus in utero. Acquired deficiencies
occur in patients with DIC, liver disease, or nephrotic syndrome and during heparin or L-asparaginase
therapy.
Laboratory testing involves quantification of plasma inhibition of thrombin in the presence of heparin.
Oral warfarin is used for prophylaxis against venous thromboembolism.
Prothrombin 20210 Gene Mutation
A mutation of the prothrombin 20210 gene results in increased plasma prothrombin levels and increases
the risk of venous thromboembolism. Treatment, if necessary, involves anticoagulation with heparin
followed by warfarin.
Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome
(Anti-Cardiolipin Antibodies; Lupus Anticoagulant)
The antiphospholipid antibody syndrome consists of thrombosis and (in pregnancy) fetal demise
associated with various autoimmune antibodies directed against one or more phospholipid-binding
proteins (eg,
β
-glycoprotein I, prothrombin, annexin). These proteins normally bind to phospholipid
membrane constituents and protect them from excessive coagulation activation. The autoantibodies
displace the protective proteins and, thus, produce procoagulant endothelial cell surfaces and cause
arterial or venous thromboses. In vitro clotting tests may paradoxically be prolonged because the
antiprotein/phospholipid antibodies interfere with coagulation factor assembly and activation on the
phospholipid components added to plasma to initiate the tests. The lupus anticoagulant is an
antiphospholipid autoantibody that binds to protein-phospholipid complexes. It was initially recognized in
patients with SLE, but these patients now account for a minority of patients with the autoantibody.
The lupus anticoagulant is suspected if the PTT is prolonged and does not correct immediately upon 1:1
mixing with normal plasma but does return to normal upon the addition of an excessive quantity of
phospholipids (done by the hematology laboratory). Antiphospholipid antibodies in patient plasma are
measured by immunoassays of IgG and IgM antibodies that bind to phospholipidβ
-glycoprotein I
complexes on microtiter plates.
Heparin, warfarin, and aspirin have been used for prophylaxis and treatment.
Hyperhomocysteinemia
Hyperhomocysteinemia may predispose to arterial thrombosis and venous thromboembolism, possibly
because of injury to vascular endothelial cells. Plasma homocysteine levels are elevated ≥ 10-fold in
homozygous cystathionine
β
-synthase deficiency. Milder elevations occur in heterozygous deficiency and
in other abnormalities of folate metabolism, including methyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase deficiency.
However, by far the most common causes of hyperhomocysteinemia are acquired deficiencies of folate,
vitamin B
, or vitamin B
.
The diagnosis is established by measuring plasma homocysteine levels.
Plasma homocysteine levels may be normalized by dietary supplementation with folic acid, vitamin B
, or
vitamin B
(pyridoxine) alone or in combination; however, it is not clear that this therapy reduces the risk
of arterial or venous thrombosis.
===PAGE:1117===
Chapter 111. Coagulation Disorders
Introduction
Abnormal bleeding can result from disorders of the coagulation system (, of platelets, or of
blood vessels. Disorders of coagulation can be acquired or hereditary. The major causes of acquired
coagulation disorders are vitamin K deficiency (, liver disease, disseminated intravascular
coagulation, and development of circulating anticoagulants. Severe liver disease (eg, cirrhosis, fulminant
hepatitis, acute fatty liver of pregnancy) may disturb hemostasis by impairing clotting factor synthesis.
Because all coagulation factors are made in the liver, both the PT and PTT are elevated in severe liver
disorders. (PT results are typically reported as INR.) Occasionally, decompensated liver disease also
causes excessive
fibrinolysis and bleeding due to decreased hepatic synthesis of
α
-antiplasmin.
The most common hereditary disorder of hemostasis is von Willebrand's disease (. The most
common hereditary coagulation disorders are the hemophilias.
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
(Consumption Coagulopathy; Defibrination Syndrome)
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) involves abnormal, excessive generation of
thrombin and fibrin in the circulating blood. During the process, increased platelet aggregation
and coagulation factor consumption occur. DIC that evolves slowly (over weeks or months)
causes primarily venous thrombotic and embolic manifestations; DIC that evolves rapidly (over
hours or days) causes primarily bleeding. Severe, rapidly evolving DIC is diagnosed by
demonstrating thrombocytopenia, an elevated PTT and PT, increased levels of plasma D-dimer
(or serum fibrin degradation products), and a decreasing plasma fibrinogen level. Treatment
includes correction of the cause and replacement of platelets, coagulation factors (in fresh
frozen plasma), and fibrinogen (in cryoprecipitate) to control severe bleeding. Heparin is used
as therapy (or prophylaxis) in patients with slowly evolving DIC who have (or are at risk of)
venous thromboembolism.
Etiology
DIC usually results from exposure of tissue factor to blood, initiating the coagulation cascade (see
Fig. 109-2
). DIC occurs in the following clinical circumstances:
• Complications of obstetrics (eg, abruptio placentae, saline-induced therapeutic abortion, retained dead
fetus or products of conception, amniotic fluid embolism): Placental tissue with tissue factor activity
enters or is exposed to the maternal circulation.
• Infection, particularly with gram-negative organisms: Gram-negative endotoxin causes generation or
exposure of tissue factor activity in phagocytic, endothelial, and tissue cells.
• Cancer, particularly mucin-secreting adenocarcinomas of the pancreas and prostate and acute
promyelocytic leukemia: Tumor cells express or release tissue factor.
• Shock due to any condition that causes ischemic tissue injury and release of tissue factor
Less common causes of DIC include severe tissue damage from head trauma, burns, frostbite, or gunshot
wounds; complications of prostate surgery that allow prostatic material with tissue factor activity (along
with plasminogen activators) to enter the circulation; venomous snake bites in which enzymes enter the
circulation, activate one or several coagulation factors, and either generate thrombin or directly convert
fibrinogen to fibrin; profound intravascular hemolysis; and aortic aneurysms or cavernous hemangiomas
(Kasabach-Merritt syndrome) associated with vessel wall damage and areas of blood stasis.
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:1118===
Slowly evolving DIC
primarily causes venous thromboembolic manifestations (eg, deep venous
thrombosis, pulmonary embolism), although occasionally cardiac valve vegetations occur; abnormal
bleeding is uncommon.
Severe, rapidly evolving DIC
, in contrast, causes thrombocytopenia and depletion of plasma clotting
factors and fibrinogen, which cause bleeding. Bleeding into organs, along with microvascular thromboses,
may cause dysfunction and failure in multiple organs. Delayed dissolution of fibrin polymers by fibrinolysis
may result in the mechanical disruption of RBCs, producing schistocytes and mild intravascular hemolysis
(.
Symptoms and Signs
In slowly evolving DIC, symptoms of venous thrombosis ( and pulmonary embolism ( may be present.
In severe, rapidly evolving DIC, skin puncture sites (eg, IV or arterial punctures) bleed persistently,
ecchymoses form at sites of parenteral injections, and serious GI bleeding may occur.
Diagnosis
• Platelet count, PT, PTT, plasma fibrinogen, plasma D-dimer
DIC is suspected in patients with unexplained bleeding or venous thromboembolism, especially if a
predisposing condition exists. If DIC is suspected, platelet count, PT, PTT, plasma fibrinogen level, and
plasma D-dimer level (an indication of in vivo fibrin deposition and degradation) are obtained.
Slowly evolving DIC produces mild thrombocytopenia, a normal to minimally prolonged PT (results are
typically reported as
INR) and PTT, a normal or moderately reduced fibrinogen level, and an increased
plasma D-dimer level. Because various disorders stimulate increased synthesis of fibrinogen as an acutephase reactant, a declining fibrinogen level on 2 consecutive measurements can help make the diagnosis
of DIC. Initial PTT values in slowly evolving DIC may actually be shorter than normal, probably because
of the presence of activated coagulation factors in the plasma.
Severe, rapidly evolving DIC results in more severe thrombocytopenia, more prolonged PT and PTT, a
rapidly declining plasma fibrinogen level, and a high plasma D-dimer level.
A factor VIII level can sometimes be helpful if severe, acute DIC must be differentiated from massive
hepatic necrosis, which can cause similar abnormalities in coagulation studies. The factor VIII level is
elevated in hepatic necrosis, because factor VIII is made in hepatocytes and released as they are
destroyed; factor VIII is reduced in DIC because of the thrombin-induced generation of activated protein
C, which proteolyses factor VIII.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Possibly replacement therapy (eg, platelets, cryoprecipitate, fresh frozen plasma, natural anticoagulants)
• Sometimes heparin
Immediate correction of the cause is the priority (eg, broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment of suspected
gram-negative sepsis, evacuation of the uterus in abruptio placentae). If treatment is effective, DIC should
subside quickly. If bleeding is severe, adjunctive replacement therapy is indicated, consisting of platelet
concentrates to correct thrombocytopenia; cryoprecipitate to replace fibrinogen and factor VIII; and fresh
frozen plasma to increase levels of other clotting factors and natural anticoagulants (antithrombin,
proteins C, S, and Z). The effectiveness of infusion of concentrates of antithrombin or activated protein C
in severe, rapidly evolving DIC is unresolved.
===PAGE:1119===
Heparin is useful in the treatment of slowly evolving DIC with venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism.
Heparin usually is not indicated in rapidly evolving DIC with bleeding or bleeding risk, except in women
with a retained dead fetus and evolving DIC with a progressive decrease in platelets, fibrinogen, and
coagulation factors. In these patients, heparin is administered for several days to control DIC, increase
fibrinogen and platelet levels, and decrease excessive coagulation factor consumption. Heparin is then
stopped and the uterus evacuated.
Hemophilia
Hemophilias are common hereditary bleeding disorders caused by deficiencies of either
clotting factor VIII or IX. The extent of factor deficiency determines the probability and severity
of bleeding. Bleeding into deep tissues or joints usually develops within hours of trauma. The
diagnosis is suspected in a patient with an elevated PTT and normal PT and platelet count; it is
confirmed by specific factor assays. Treatment includes replacement of the deficient factor if
acute bleeding is suspected, confirmed, or likely to develop (eg, before surgery).
Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency), which affects about 80% of patients with hemophilia, and hemophilia
B (factor IX deficiency) have identical clinical manifestations, screening test abnormalities, and X-linked
genetic transmission. Specific factor assays are required to distinguish the two.
Etiology
Hemophilia is an inherited disorder that results from mutations, deletions, or inversions affecting a factor
VIII or factor IX gene. Because these genes are located on the X chromosome, hemophilia affects males
almost exclusively. Daughters of men with hemophilia are obligate carriers, but sons are normal. Each son
of a carrier has a 50% chance of having hemophilia, and each daughter has a 50% chance of being a
carrier.
Pathophysiology
Normal hemostasis requires > 30% of normal factor VIII and IX levels. Most patients with hemophilia have
levels < 5%. Carriers usually have levels of about 50%; rarely, random inactivation of their normal X
chromosome in early embryonic life results in a carrier having factor VIII or IX levels of < 30%.
Most patients with hemophilia who were treated with plasma concentrates in the early 1980s were
infected with HIV due to contaminated factor concentrates. Occasional patients developed immune
thrombocytopenia secondary to HIV infection, which exacerbated bleeding.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with hemophilia bleed into tissues (eg, hemarthroses, muscle hematomas,
retroperitoneal
hemorrhage). The bleeding may be immediate or occur slowly, depending on the extent of trauma and
plasma level of factor VIII or IX. Pain often occurs as bleeding commences, sometimes before other signs
of bleeding develop. Chronic or recurrent hemarthroses can lead to synovitis and arthropathy. Even a
trivial blow to the head can cause intracranial bleeding. Bleeding into the base of the tongue can cause
life-threatening airway compression.
Severe hemophilia (factor VIII or IX level < 1% of normal) causes severe bleeding throughout life, usually
beginning soon after birth (eg, scalp hematoma after delivery or excessive bleeding after circumcision).
Moderate hemophilia (factor levels 1 to 5% of normal) usually causes bleeding after minimal trauma. In
mild hemophilia (factor levels 5 to 25% of normal), excessive bleeding may occur after surgery or dental
extraction.
Diagnosis
• Platelet count, PT, PTT, factor VIII and IX assays
===PAGE:1120===
• Sometimes von Willebrand's factor activity and antigen and multimer composition
Hemophilia is suspected in patients with recurrent bleeding, unexplained hemarthroses, or a prolongation
of the PTT. If hemophilia is suspected, PTT, PT, platelet count, and factor VIII and IX assays are obtained.
In hemophilia, the PTT is prolonged, but the PT and platelet count are normal. Factor VIII and IX assays
determine the type and severity of the hemophilia. Because factor VIII levels may also be reduced in von
Willebrand's disease (VWD), von Willebrand's factor (VWF) activity, antigen, and multimer composition are
measured in patients with newly diagnosed hemophilia A, particularly if the disorder is mild and a family
history indicates that both male and female family members are affected. Determining if a female is a true
carrier of hemophilia A is sometimes possible by measuring the factor VIII level. Similarly, measuring the
factor IX level often identifies a carrier of hemophilia B. PCR analysis of DNA that comprises the factor VIII
gene, available at specialized centers, can be used for diagnosis of the hemophilia A carrier state and for
prenatal diagnosis of hemophilia A by chorionic villus sampling at 12 wk or amniocentesis at 16 wk.
These procedures carry a 0.5 to 1% risk of miscarriage.
After repeated exposure to factor VIII replacement, about 15 to 35% of patients with hemophilia A develop
factor VIII isoantibodies (alloantibodies) that inhibit the coagulant activity of any additional factor VIII
infused. Patients should be screened for isoantibodies (eg, by measuring the degree of PTT shortening
immediately after mixing the patient's plasma with an equal volume of normal plasma, and then by
repeating the measurement after incubation for 1 h), especially before an elective procedure that requires
replacement therapy. If isoantibodies are present, their titers can be measured by determining the extent
of factor VIII inhibition by serial dilutions of patient plasma.
Treatment
• Replacement of deficient factor
• Sometimes antifibrinolytics
If symptoms suggest bleeding, treatment should begin immediately, even before diagnostic tests are
completed. For example, treatment for headache that might indicate intracranial hemorrhage should begin
before a CT scan is completed.
Replacement of the deficient factor is the primary treatment. In hemophilia A, the factor VIII level should be
raised transiently to
• About 30% of normal to prevent bleeding after dental extraction or to abort an incipient joint hemorrhage
• 50% of normal if severe joint or IM bleeding is already evident
• 100% of normal before major surgery or if bleeding is intracranial, intracardiac, or otherwise life
threatening
Repeated infusions at 50% of the initial calculated dose should then be given every 8 to 12 h to keep
trough levels above 50% for 7 to 10 days after major surgery or life-threatening hemorrhage. Each unit/kg
of factor VIII increases the factor VIII level by about 2%. Thus, to increase the level from 0% to 50%, about
25 units/kg are required.
Factor VIII can be given as purified factor VIII concentrate, which is derived from multiple donors. It
undergoes viral inactivation, but inactivation may not eliminate parvovirus or hepatitis A. Recombinant
factor VIII is free of viruses and is usually preferred unless patients are already seropositive for HIV or for
hepatitis B or C virus.
In hemophilia B, factor IX can be given as a purified or recombinant viral-inactivated product every 24 h.
The target levels of factor correction are the same as in hemophilia A. However, to achieve these levels,
the dose must be higher than in hemophilia A because factor IX is smaller than factor VIII and, in
contrast
to VIII, has an extensive extravascular distribution.
===PAGE:1121===
Fresh frozen plasma contains factors VIII and IX. However, unless plasma exchange is done, sufficient
whole plasma usually cannot be given to patients with severe hemophilia to raise factor VIII or IX to levels
that prevent or control bleeding. Fresh frozen plasma should, therefore, be used only if rapid replacement
therapy is necessary and factor concentrate is unavailable or the patient has a coagulopathy that is not
yet defined precisely.
In patients with hemophilia who develop a factor VIII inhibitor, treatment is best accomplished using
recombinant factor VIIa in repeated high doses (eg, 90 g/kg).
Adjunctive therapies may include desmopressin or an antifibrinolytic drug. As described for VWD (, desmopressin may temporarily raise factor VIII levels. The patient's response should be tested
before desmopressin is used therapeutically. Its use after minor trauma or before elective dental surgery
may obviate replacement therapy. Desmopressin should be used only for patients with mild hemophilia A
(basal factor VIII levels ≥ 5%) who have demonstrated responsiveness.
An antifibrinolytic agent (
ε
-aminocaproic acid 2.5 to 4 g po qid for 1 wk or tranexamic acid 1.0 to 1.5 g po
tid or qid for 1 wk) should be given to prevent late bleeding after dental extraction or other oropharyngeal
mucosal trauma (eg, tongue laceration).
Prevention
Patients should avoid aspirin and NSAIDs (both inhibit platelet function). Regular dental care is essential
so that tooth extractions and other dental surgery can be avoided. Drugs should be given orally or IV; IM
injections can cause hematomas. Patients with hemophilia should be vaccinated against hepatitis B.
Coagulation Disorders Caused by Circulating Anticoagulants
Circulating anticoagulants are usually autoantibodies that neutralize specific clotting factors in vivo (eg,
an autoantibody against factor VIII or factor V) or inhibit protein-bound phospholipid in vitro. Occasionally,
the latter type of autoantibody causes bleeding in vivo by binding prothrombin.
Circulating anticoagulants should be suspected in patients with excessive bleeding combined with either
a prolonged PTT or PT that does not correct when the test is repeated with a 1:1 mixture of normal
plasma and the patient's plasma.
Antiphospholipid antibodies ( typically cause thrombosis. However, in a subset of patients, the
antibodies bind to prothrombin-phospholipid complexes and induce hypoprothrombinemia and bleeding.
Factor VIII Anticoagulants
Isoantibodies to factor VIII develop in about 15 to 35% of patients with severe hemophilia A as a
complication of repeated exposure to normal factor VIII molecules during replacement therapy (. Factor VIII autoantibodies also arise occasionally in patients without hemophilia, eg, in postpartum
women as a manifestation of an underlying systemic autoimmune disorder or of transiently disordered
immune regulation, or in elderly patients without overt evidence of other underlying disorders. Patients
with a factor VIII anticoagulant can develop life-threatening hemorrhage.
Plasma containing a factor VIII antibody has a prolonged PTT that does not correct when normal plasma
or another source of factor VIII is added in a 1:1 mixture to the patient's plasma. Testing is done
immediately after mixture and again after incubation.
Therapy with cyclophosphamide and corticosteroids may suppress autoantibody production in patients
without hemophilia. In postpartum women, the autoantibodies may disappear spontaneously.
Management of acute hemorrhage in patients with hemophilia who have factor VIII isoantibodies or
autoantibodies is by recombinant factor VIIa (see above).
Uncommon Hereditary Coagulation Disorders
===PAGE:1122===
Most hereditary coagulation disorders other than hemophilia are rare autosomal recessive conditions that
cause disease only in homozygous people (see
Table 111-1
). Factor XI deficiency is uncommon in the general population but common in descendants of
European Jews (gene frequency about 5 to 9%). Bleeding typically occurs after significant injuries,
including trauma or surgery, in people who are homozygotes or compound heterozygotes.
Severe deficiency of
α
-antiplasmin (1 to 3% of normal), the major physiologic inhibitor of plasmin, can
also cause bleeding. Diagnosis
[Table 111-1.
Screening Laboratory Test Results in Inherited Defects in Blood Coagulation]
is based on a specific
α
-antiplasmin assay.
ε
-Aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid is used to control or
prevent acute bleeding. Heterozygous people with
α
-antiplasmin levels of 40 to 60% of normal can
occasionally experience excessive surgical bleeding if secondary fibrinolysis is extensive (eg, in patients
who have had open prostatectomy).
===PAGE:1123===
Chapter 112. Bleeding Due to Abnormal Blood Vessels
Introduction
Bleeding may result from abnormalities in platelets, coagulation factors, or blood vessels. Vascular
bleeding disorders result from defects in blood vessels, typically causing petechiae, purpura, and bruising
but seldom leading to serious blood loss. Bleeding may result from deficiencies of vascular and
perivascular collagen in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and in other rare hereditary connective tissue disorders
(eg, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, osteogenesis imperfecta, Marfan syndrome—. Hemorrhage
may be a prominent feature of scurvy ( or of Henoch-Schonlein purpura, a hypersensitivity
vasculitis common during childhood (. In vascular bleeding disorders, tests of hemostasis are
usually normal. Diagnosis is clinical.
Autoerythrocyte Sensitization
(Gardner-Diamond Syndrome)
Autoerythrocyte sensitization is a rare disorder affecting women. It is characterized by local
pain and burning preceding painful ecchymoses that occur primarily on the extremities.
Autoerythrocyte sensitization typically occurs in white women who are experiencing emotional stress or
who have concomitant psychologic illness. Episodes of ecchymosis are painful and can occur
spontaneously or after trauma or surgery. Bruising can occur on different sites of the body from where the
trauma occurs. Tests of the coagulation system are normal.
In women with autoerythrocyte sensitization, intradermal injection of 0.1 mL of autologous RBCs or RBC
stroma may result in pain, swelling, and induration at the injection site. This result suggests that escape
of RBCs into the
tissues is involved in the pathogenesis of the lesion. However, most patients also have
associated severe psychoneurotic symptoms. In addition, psychogenic factors, such as self-induced
purpura, seem related to the pathogenesis of the syndrome in some patients.
Diagnosis is based on examination of the site of intradermal injection of autologous RBCs and of a
separate control injection site (without RBCs) 24 to 48 h after injection. Excoriation, which can complicate
the test's interpretation, is prevented by making both sites difficult for the patient to reach. Treatment is
psychiatric intervention and therapy.
Dysproteinemias Causing Vascular Purpura
Conditions that cause an abnormal protein content in the blood, typically in the form of
immunoglobulins, can affect vascular fragility and lead to purpura.
Amyloidosis
( causes amyloid deposition within vessels in the skin and subcutaneous
tissues, which may increase vascular fragility, producing purpura. In some patients, coagulation factor X is
adsorbed by amyloid and becomes deficient, but this deficiency is usually not the cause of bleeding.
Periorbital purpura or a purpuric rash that develops in a nonthrombocytopenic patient after gentle stroking
of the skin suggests amyloidosis.
Cryoglobulinemia
produces immunoglobulins that precipitate when plasma is cooled (ie, cryoglobulins)
while flowing through the skin and subcutaneous tissues of the extremities. Monoclonal immunoglobulins
formed in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia or in multiple myeloma ( occasionally behave as
cryoglobulins, as may mixed IgMI-gG immune complexes formed in some chronic infectious diseases,
most commonly hepatitis C. Cryoglobulinemia can lead to small-vessel vasculitis, which can cause
purpura. Cryoglobulins can be detected by laboratory testing.
Hypergammaglobulinemic purpura
is a vasculitic purpura that primarily affects women. Recurrent
crops of small, palpable purpuric lesions develop on the lower legs. These lesions leave small residual
brown spots. Many patients have manifestations of an underlying immunologic disorder (eg, Sjogren's
syndrome, SLE). The diagnostic finding is a polyclonal increase in IgG (broad-based or diffuse
===PAGE:1124===
hypergammaglobulinemia on serum protein electrophoresis).
Hyperviscosity syndrome
( resulting from a markedly elevated plasma IgM concentration
may also result in purpura and other forms of abnormal bleeding (eg, profuse epistaxis) in patients with
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia.
Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia
(Rendu-Osler-Weber Syndrome)
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is a hereditary disorder of vascular malformation
transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait affecting men and women.
Symptoms and Signs
The most characteristic lesions are small red-to-violet telangiectatic lesions on the face, lips, oral and
nasal mucosa, and tips of the fingers and toes (see
Plate 56
). Similar lesions may be present throughout the mucosa of the GI tract, resulting in recurrent GI
bleeding. Patients may experience recurrent, profuse nosebleeds. Some patients have pulmonary
arteriovenous fistulas. These fistulas may cause significant right-to-left shunts, which can result in
dyspnea, fatigue, cyanosis, or polycythemia. However, the first sign of their presence may be a brain
abscess, transient ischemic attack, or stroke as a result of infected or noninfected emboli. Cerebral or
spinal arteriovenous malformations occur in some families and may cause subarachnoid hemorrhage,
seizures, or paraplegia.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes endoscopy or angiography
Diagnosis is based on the finding of characteristic arteriovenous malformations on the face, mouth, nose,
and digits. Endoscopy or angiography is sometimes needed, however. Laboratory findings are usually
normal except for iron deficiency anemia in most patients.
Screening:
If a family history of pulmonary or cerebral arteriovenous malformations exists, screening at
puberty and at the end of adolescence with pulmonary CT or cerebral MRI is recommended.
Treatment
• Sometimes laser ablation, surgical resection, or embolotherapy
•
Supplemental iron therapy
• Possibly blood transfusions
Treatment for most patients is supportive, but accessible telangiectases (eg, in the nose or GI tract via
endoscopy) may be treated with laser ablation. Arteriovenous fistulas may be treated by surgical resection
or embolotherapy. Repeated blood transfusions may be needed; therefore, immunization with hepatitis B
vaccine is important. Most patients require continuous iron therapy to replace iron lost in repeated
mucosal bleeding; some patients require parenteral iron (see
Iron Deficiency Anemia
.
Treatment with drugs that inhibit fibrinolysis, such as aminocaproic acid, may be beneficial.
Purpura Simplex
(Easy Bruising)
Purpura simplex is increased bruising that results from vascular fragility.
===PAGE:1125===
Purpura simplex is extremely common. The cause and mechanism are unknown; it may represent a
heterogeneous group of disorders or merely a variation of normal.
The disorder usually affects women. Bruises develop on the thighs, buttocks, and upper arms in people
without known trauma. The history usually reveals no other abnormal bleeding, but easy bruising may be
present in family members. Serious bleeding does not occur. The platelet count and tests of platelet
function, blood coagulation, and fibrinolysis are normal.
No drug prevents the bruising; patients are often advised to avoid aspirin and aspirin-containing drugs,
but there is no evidence that bruising is related to or worsened by their use. Patients should be reassured
that the condition is not serious.
Senile Purpura
Senile purpura causes ecchymoses and results from increased vessel fragility due to
connective tissue damage to the dermis caused by chronic sun exposure and aging.
Senile purpura typically affects elderly patients as their dermal tissues atrophy and blood vessels become
more fragile. Patients develop persistent dark purple ecchymoses, which are characteristically confined to
the extensor surfaces of the hands and forearms. New lesions appear without known trauma and then
resolve over several days, leaving a brownish discoloration caused by deposits of hemosiderin; this
discoloration may clear over weeks to months or may be permanent. The skin and subcutaneous tissue
of the involved area often appear thinned and atrophic. No treatment hastens lesion resolution or is
needed. Although cosmetically displeasing, the disorder has no health consequences.
===PAGE:1126===
Chapter 113. Spleen Disorders
Introduction
By structure and function the spleen is like 2 organs. The white pulp, consisting of periarterial lymphatic
sheaths and germinal centers, acts as an immune organ. The red pulp, consisting of macrophages and
granulocytes lining vascular spaces (the cords and sinusoids), acts as a phagocytic organ.
The white pulp is a site of production and maturation of B and T cells. B cells in the spleen generate
protective humoral antibodies; in certain autoimmune disorders (eg, immune thrombocytopenic purpura
[ITP], Coombs'-positive immune hemolytic anemias), inappropriate autoantibodies to circulating blood
elements also may be synthesized.
The red pulp removes antibody-coated bacteria, senescent or defective RBCs, and antibody-coated
blood cells (as may occur in immune cytopenias such as ITP, Coombs'-positive hemolytic anemias, and
some neutropenias). The red pulp also serves as a reservoir for blood elements, especially WBCs and
platelets. During its culling and pitting of RBCs, the spleen removes inclusion bodies, such as Heinz
bodies (precipitates of insoluble globin), Howell-Jolly bodies (nuclear fragments), and whole nuclei; thus,
after splenectomy or in the functionally hyposplenic state, RBCs with these inclusions appear in the
peripheral circulation. Hematopoiesis normally occurs in the red pulp only during fetal life. Beyond fetal
life, hematopoiesis may occur if injury to bone marrow (eg, by fibrosis or tumors) allows hematopoietic
stem cells to circulate and repopulate the adult
spleen (see
Primary Myelofibrosis
on p.
and
Myelodysplastic Syndrome
.
Splenomegaly
Splenomegaly is almost always secondary to other disorders. Its causes are myriad, as are the many
possible ways of classifying them (see
Table 113-1
). In temperate climates, the most common causes are
• Myeloproliferative disorders
• Lymphoproliferative disorders
• Storage diseases (eg, Gaucher's disease)
• Connective tissue disorders
In the tropics, the most common causes are
• Infectious diseases (eg, malaria, kala-azar)
If splenomegaly is massive (spleen palpable 8 cm below the costal margin), the cause is usually chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, chronic myelocytic leukemia, polycythemia vera,
myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia, or hairy cell leukemia.
Splenomegaly can lead to cytopenia (see
Hypersplenism
.
Evaluation
History:
At presentation, most of the symptoms result from the underlying disorder. However,
splenomegaly itself may cause early satiety by encroachment of the enlarged spleen on the stomach.
Fullness and left upper quadrant abdominal pain are also possible. Severe pain suggests splenic
infarction. Recurrent infections, symptoms of anemia, or bleeding manifestations suggest cytopenia and
possible hypersplenism.
Physical examination:
The sensitivity for detection of ultrasound-documented splenic enlargement is
60 to 70% for palpation and 60 to 80% for percussion. Up to 3% of normal,
===PAGE:1127===
[Table 113-1.
Common Causes of Splenomegaly*]
thin, people have a palpable spleen. Also, a palpable left upper quadrant mass may indicate a problem
other than an enlarged spleen.
Other helpful signs include a splenic friction rub that suggests splenic infarction and epigastric and
splenic bruits that suggest congestive splenomegaly. Generalized adenopathy may suggest a
myeloproliferative, lymphoproliferative, infectious, or autoimmune disorder.
Testing:
If confirmation of splenomegaly is necessary because the examination is equivocal,
ultrasonography is the test of choice because of its accuracy and low cost. CT and MRI may provide
more detail of the organ's consistency. MRI is especially useful in detecting portal or splenic vein
thromboses. Nuclear scanning is accurate and can identify accessory splenic tissue but is expensive and
cumbersome to do.
Specific causes suggested clinically should be confirmed by appropriate testing (see elsewhere in THE
MANUAL). If no cause is suggested, the highest priority is exclusion of occult infection, because early
treatment affects the outcome of infection more than it does most other causes of splenomegaly. Testing
should be thorough in areas of high geographic prevalence of infection or if the patient appears to be ill.
CBC, blood cultures, and bone marrow examination and culture should be considered. If the patient is not
ill, has no symptoms besides those due to splenomegaly, and has no risk factors for infection, the extent
of testing is controversial but probably includes CBC, peripheral blood smear, liver function tests, and
abdominal CT. Flow cytometry of peripheral blood is indicated if lymphoma is suspected.
Specific peripheral blood findings may suggest underlying disorders (eg, lymphocytosis in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia; leukocytosis and immature forms in other leukemias). Excessive basophils,
eosinophils, or nucleated or teardrop RBCs suggest myeloproliferative disorders. Cytopenias suggest
hypersplenism. Spherocytosis suggests hypersplenism or hereditary spherocytosis. Liver function test
results are diffusely abnormal in congestive splenomegaly with cirrhosis; an isolated elevation of serum
alkaline phosphatase suggests hepatic infiltration, as in myeloproliferative and lymphoproliferative
disorders and miliary TB.
Some other tests may be useful, even in asymptomatic patients. Serum protein electrophoresis identifying
a monoclonal gammopathy or decreased immunoglobulins suggest lymphoproliferative disorders or
amyloidosis; diffuse hypergammaglobulinemia suggests chronic infection (eg, malaria, kala-azar,
brucellosis, TB) or cirrhosis with congestive splenomegaly, sarcoidosis, or connective tissue disorders.
Elevation of serum uric acid suggests a myeloproliferative or lymphoproliferative disorder. Elevation of
WBC alkaline phosphatase suggests a myeloproliferative disorder, whereas decreased levels suggest
chronic myelocytic leukemia.
If testing reveals no abnormalities other than splenomegaly, the patient should be reevaluated at intervals
of 6 to 12 mo or when new symptoms develop.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder. The enlarged spleen itself needs no treatment unless
severe hypersplenism is present. Patients with palpable or very large spleens probably should avoid
contact sports to decrease the risk of splenic rupture.
Hypersplenism
Hypersplenism is cytopenia caused by splenomegaly.
Hypersplenism is a secondary process that can arise from splenomegaly of almost any cause (see
Table
113-1
). Splenomegaly increases the spleen's mechanical filtering and destruction of RBCs and often of
WBCs and platelets. Compensatory bone marrow hyperplasia occurs in those cell lines that are reduced
in the circulation.
===PAGE:1128===
Symptoms and Signs
Splenomegaly is the hallmark; spleen size correlates with the degree of anemia. The spleen can be
expected to extend about 2 cm beneath the costal margin for each 1-g decrease in Hb. Other clinical
findings usually result from the underlying disorder.
Diagnosis
Hypersplenism is suspected in patients with splenomegaly and anemia or cytopenias. Evaluation is
similar to that of splenomegaly (.
Unless other mechanisms coexist to compound their severity, anemia and other cytopenias are modest
and asymptomatic (eg, platelet counts, 50,000 to 100,000/
μ
L; WBC counts, 2500 to 4000/
μ
L with normal
WBC differential count). RBC morphology is generally normal except for occasional spherocytosis.
Reticulocytosis is usual.
Treatment
• Possibly splenic ablation (splenectomy or radiation therapy)
• Vaccination for splenectomized patients
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder. However, if hypersplenism is the only
serious
manifestation of the disorder (eg, Gaucher's disease), splenic ablation by splenectomy or radiation
therapy may be indicated (see
Table 113-2
). Because the intact spleen protects against serious infections with encapsulated bacteria,
splenectomy should be avoided whenever possible, and patients undergoing splenectomy require
vaccination against infections caused by
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
Neisseria meningitidis
, and
Haemophilus influenzae
. After splenectomy, patients are particularly susceptible to severe sepsis.
Patients who develop fever should receive empiric antibiotics.
Splenic Injury
Splenic injury usually results from blunt abdominal trauma.
Significant impact (eg, motor vehicle crash) can damage the spleen, as can penetrating trauma (eg, knife
wound, gunshot wound). Splenic enlargement as a result of fulminant Epstein-Barr viral disease
(infectious mononucleosis or posttransplant Epstein-Barr virus-mediated pseudolymphoma) predisposes
to injury with minimal trauma or even spontaneously. Splenic injuries range from subcapsular hematomas
and small capsular lacerations to deep parenchymal lacerations, crush injury, and avulsion from the
pedicle.
[Table 113-2.
Indications for Splenectomy or Radiation Therapy in Hypersplenism]
The main immediate consequence is hemorrhage into the peritoneal cavity. The amount of hemorrhage
may be small or large, depending on the nature and degree of injury. Many small lacerations, particularly
in children, cease bleeding spontaneously. Larger injuries hemorrhage extensively, often causing
hemorrhagic shock. A splenic hematoma sometimes ruptures, usually in the first few days, although
rupture can occur from hours to even months after injury.
Symptoms and Signs
The manifestations of major hemorrhage, including hemorrhagic shock, abdominal pain, and distention,
are usually clinically obvious. Lesser hemorrhage causes left upper quadrant abdominal pain, which
sometimes radiates to the shoulder. Patients with unexplained left upper quadrant pain, particularly if
there is evidence of hypovolemia or shock, should be asked about recent trauma.
===PAGE:1129===
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is confirmed with CT in stable patients and with bedside (point of care) ultrasonography or
exploratory laparotomy in unstable patients.
Treatment
Treatment has traditionally been splenectomy. However, splenectomy should be avoided if possible,
particularly in children, to avoid the resulting permanent susceptibility to bacterial infections. Most small,
and some moderatesized lacerations in stable patients (particularly children) are managed with hospital
observation and sometimes transfusion rather than surgery. When surgery is needed, the spleen can be
surgically repaired in a few cases, but splenectomy is still the main surgical treatment.
===PAGE:1130===
Chapter 114. Eosinophilic Disorders
Introduction
Eosinophils are granulocytes derived from the same progenitor cells as monocytesmacrophages,
neutrophils, and basophils. The precise functions of eosinophils are unknown. Although they are
phagocytic, eosinophils are less efficient than neutrophils in killing intracellular bacteria. And although
eosinophilia commonly accompanies helminthic infections and eosinophils are toxic to helminths in vitro,
there is no direct evidence that they kill parasites in vivo. Eosinophils may modulate immediate
hypersensitivity reactions by degrading or inactivating mediators released by mast cells, such as
histamine, leukotrienes (which may cause vasoconstriction and bronchoconstriction), lysophospholipids,
and heparin. Prolonged eosinophilia may result in tissue damage by mechanisms that are not fully
understood.
Eosinophil granules contain major basic protein and eosinophil cationic protein that are toxic to several
parasites and to mammalian cells. These proteins bind heparin and neutralize its anticoagulant activity.
Eosinophil-derived neurotoxin can severely damage myelinated neurons. Eosinophil peroxidase, which
differs significantly from peroxidase of other granulocytes, generates oxidizing radicals in the presence of
hydrogen peroxide and a halide. Charcot-Leyden crystals are primarily composed of phospholipase B and
are located in sputum, tissues, and stool in disorders in which there is eosinophilia (eg, asthma,
eosinophilic pneumonia).
The normal peripheral blood eosinophil count is < 350/
μ
L, with diurnal levels that vary inversely with
plasma cortisol levels; the peak occurs at night and the trough in the morning. The eosinophil count can
decrease with stress, with use of
β
-blockers or corticosteroids, and sometimes with bacterial or viral
infections. The count can increase with allergic disorders, with certain infections (typically parasitic), and
from numerous other causes (see below). The circulating half-life of eosinophils is 6 to 12 h, with most
eosinophils residing in tissues (eg, the upper respiratory and GI tracts, skin, uterus).
Eosinophil production appears to be regulated by T cells through the secretion of the hematopoietic
growth factors granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin-3 (IL-3), and
interleukin-5 (IL-5). Although GM-CSF and IL-3 also increase the production of other myeloid cells, IL-5
increases eosinophil production exclusively.
Eosinophilia
Eosinophilia is defined as a peripheral blood eosinophil count > 450/
μ
L. Causes and associated
disorders are myriad but often represent an allergic reaction or parasitic infection. Diagnosis
involves selective testing directed at clinically suspected causes. Treatment is directed at the
cause.
Eosinophilia has features of an immune response: an agent such as
Trichinella spiralis
invokes a primary
response with relatively low levels of eosinophils, whereas repeated exposures result in an augmented or
secondary eosinophilic response. Several compounds released by mast cells and basophils induce IgEmediated eosinophil production. Such substances include eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis,
leukotriene B4, complement complex (C5-C6-C7), and histamine (over a narrow range of concentration).
Eosinophilia itself does not cause symptoms. However, occasionally patients with very severe
eosinophilia (eg, eosinophil counts of > 100,000/
μ
L), usually with eosinophilic leukemia, develop
complications of hyperleukocytosis (.
Etiology
Eosinophilia may be primary (ie, clonal proliferation of eosinophils associated with hematologic disorders
such as leukemias and myeloproliferative disorders), secondary to (or associated with) numerous
nonhematologic disorders (see
Table 114-1
), or idiopathic (if other causes cannot be identified).
===PAGE:1131===
The
most common cause
in the US is
• Allergic or atopic disorders (typically respiratory or dermatologic)
Other common causes include
• Infections (typically parasitic)
• Certain tumors (hematologic or solid, benign or malignant)
Almost any parasitic invasion of tissues can elicit eosinophilia, but protozoa and noninvasive metazoa
usually do not.
Of the tumors, Hodgkin lymphoma may elicit marked eosinophilia, whereas eosinophilia is less common in
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, chronic myelocytic leukemia, and
[Table 114-1.
Important Disorders and Treatments Associated with Eosinophilia]
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Ovarian cancer is the most commonly associated solid tumor.
The pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia syndrome comprises a spectrum of clinical manifestations
characterized by peripheral eosinophilia and eosinophilic pulmonary infiltrates ( but is usually
of unknown cause.
Patients with eosinophilic drug reactions may be asymptomatic or have various syndromes, including
interstitial nephritis, serum sickness, cholestatic jaundice, hypersensitivity vasculitis, and immunoblastic
lymphadenopathy. Several hundred patients were reported to have developed an eosinophilia-myalgia
syndrome after taking L-tryptophan for sedation or psychotropic support. This syndrome was probably
caused by a contaminant rather than by L-tryptophan. The symptoms (severe muscle pain, tenosynovitis,
muscle edema, rash) lasted weeks to months, and several deaths occurred.
Evaluation
The number of possible causes and associated disorders is very large. Common causes (eg, allergic,
infectious, neoplastic disorders) should be considered first, but even they are often difficult to identify; a
thorough history and physical examination are always required.
History:
The questions most likely to be helpful pertain to the following:
• Travel (suggesting possible parasite exposure)
• Allergies
• Drug use
• Use of herbal products and dietary supplements, including L-tryptophan
• Systemic symptoms (eg, fever, weight loss, myalgias, arthralgias, rashes, lymphadenopathy)
Systemic symptoms suggest that a minor allergic or drug cause is less likely, and a detailed evaluation for
an infectious, neoplastic, connective tissue, or other systemic disorder should be done. Other important
parts of the history include family history of blood dyscrasias (eg, plasma cell disorders) and a complete
review of systems, including symptoms of allergic, pulmonary, cardiac, GI, and neurologic dysfunction.
Physical examination:
General physical examination is done, including the heart, skin, and neurologic
and pulmonary systems. Certain physical findings may suggest causes or associated disorders. Examples
include rash (allergic, dermatologic, or vasculitic disorders), abnormal lung findings (asthma, lung
infections, or syndromes of pulmonary infiltration
with eosinophilia), and generalized lymphadenopathy or
===PAGE:1132===
splenomegaly (myeloproliferative disorders or cancer).
Testing:
Eosinophilia is typically recognized when CBC is done for other reasons. Additional testing often
includes the following:
• Stool ova and parasite testing
• Other tests to detect organ damage or for specific causes based on clinical findings
When the CBC indicates eosinophilia, an absolute eosinophil count is rarely needed.
In general, if a drug or allergic cause is not clinically suspected, 3 stool specimens should be examined
for ova and parasites; however, negative findings do not rule out a parasitic cause (eg, trichinosis
requires a muscle biopsy; visceral larva migrans and filarial infections require other tissue biopsies;
duodenal aspirates may be needed to exclude specific parasites, eg,
Strongyloides
sp—.
Other specific diagnostic tests are determined by the clinical findings (particularly travel history) and may
include chest x-ray, urinalysis, liver and kidney function tests, and serologic tests for parasitic and
connective tissue diseases. If patients have generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, or systemic
symptoms, blood tests are done; an elevated serum vitamin B
level, low WBC alkaline phosphatase
level, or abnormalities on the peripheral blood smear suggest an underlying myeloproliferative disorder, in
which case a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with cytogenetic studies may be helpful. Also, if routine
evaluation does not reveal a cause, tests are done to detect organ damage. Testing can include some of
the tests previously mentioned as well as LDH and liver function tests (suggesting liver damage or
possibly a myeloproliferative disorder), echocardiogram, and pulmonary function tests.
Treatment
• Sometimes corticosteroids
Corticosteroid treatment of hypereosinophilic syndrome is discussed elsewhere.
Drugs known to be associated with eosinophilia are stopped. Other identified causes are treated.
If no cause is detected, the patient is followed for complications. A brief trial with low-dose corticosteroids
may lower the eosinophil count if eosinophilia is secondary (eg, to allergy, connective tissue disorders, or
parasitic infection) rather than primary. Such a trial is indicated if eosinophilia is persistent and
progressive in the absence of a treatable cause.
Hypereosinophilic Syndrome
(Idiopathic Hypereosinophilic Syndrome)
Hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) is a condition characterized by peripheral blood eosinophilia
with manifestations of organ system involvement or dysfunction directly related to eosinophilia
in the absence of parasitic, allergic, or other causes of eosinophilia. Symptoms are myriad,
depending on which organs are dysfunctional. Diagnosis involves excluding other causes of
eosinophilia and bone marrow and genetic tests. Treatment usually begins with prednisone and,
in one common subtype, includes imatinib.
HES is traditionally defined by peripheral blood eosinophilia > 1500/
μ
L persisting ≥6 mo. HES was
previously considered to be idiopathic but is now known to result from various disorders, some of which
have known causes. One limitation of the traditional definition is that it does not include those patients
with some of the same abnormalities (eg, genetic defects) that are known causes of HES and who do not
fulfill the traditional HES diagnostic criteria for degree or duration of eosinophilia. Another limitation is that
some patients with eosinophilia and organ damage that characterize HES require treatment earlier than
the 6 mo necessary to confirm the traditional diagnostic criteria.
===PAGE:1133===
HES is rare, has an unknown prevalence, and most often affects people age 20 through 50. Only some
patients with prolonged eosinophilia develop organ dysfunction that characterizes hypereosinophilic
syndrome. Although any organ may be involved, the heart, lungs, spleen, skin, and nervous system are
typically affected. Cardiac involvement often causes morbidity and mortality.
Subtypes:
There are two broad subtypes (see
Table 114-2
):
• Myeloproliferative variant
• Lymphoproliferative variant
The
myeloproliferative variant
is often associated with a small interstitial deletion in chromosome 4
and the
FIPILI/PDGFRA
-associated fusion gene (reflecting tyrosine kinase activity that can transform
hematopoietic cells). Patients often have
• Splenomegaly
• Thrombocytopenia
• Anemia
• Elevated serum vitamin B
levels
• Hypogranular or vacuolated eosinophils
• Myelofibrosis
[Table 114-2.
Subtypes of Hypereosinophilic Syndrome]
Patients with this subtype often develop endomyocardial fibrosis and may rarely develop acute myeloid or
lymphoblastic leukemia. Patients with the
FIPILI/PDGFRA
-associated fusion gene are more often males
and may be responsive to imatinib.
The
lymphoproliferative variant
is associated with a clonal population of T cells with aberrant
phenotype. Patients more often have
• Angioedema, skin abnormalities, or both
• Hypergammaglobulinemia (especially IgE)
• Circulating immune complexes (sometimes with serum sickness)
They also more often respond favorably to corticosteroids and occasionally develop T-cell lymphoma.
Other HES variants
include chronic eosinophilic leukemia, Gleich's syndrome (cyclical eosinophilia and
angioedema), familial hypereosinophilic syndrome mapped to 5q 31-33, and other organ-specific
syndromes. Hyperleukocytosis may occur in patients with eosinophilic leukemia and very high eosinophil
counts (eg, > 100,000 cells/
μ
L). Eosinophils can form aggregates that occlude small blood vessels,
causing tissue ischemia and microinfarctions. Common manifestations include brain or lung hypoxia (eg,
encephalopathy, dyspnea or respiratory failure).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are diverse and depend on which organs are dysfunctional (see
Table 114-3
).
Occasionally, patients with very severe eosinophilia (eg, eosinophil counts of > 100,000/
μ
L) develop
===PAGE:1134===
complications of hyperleukocytosis, such as manifestations of brain or lung hypoxia (eg, encephalopathy,
dyspnea or respiratory failure).
Diagnosis
• Exclusion of secondary eosinophilia
• Tests to identify organ damage
• Bone marrow examination with cytogenetics
Evaluation for HES should be considered in patients who have peripheral blood eosinophilia > 1500/
μ
L
present on more than one occasion that is unexplained, particularly when there are manifestations of
organ damage. Testing to exclude disorders causing eosinophilia should be done (. Further
evaluation should include blood chemistries (including liver enzymes, creatine kinase, renal function, and
troponin), ECG; echocardiography; pulmonary function tests; and CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and reverse transcriptase-PCR or
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is done to identify the
FIPILI/PDGFRA
-associated fusion gene
and other possible causes of eosinophilia (eg,
BCR-ABL
abnormalities characteristic of chronic
myelogenous leukemia).
Prognosis
Death usually results from organ, particularly heart, dysfunction. Cardiac involvement
[Table 114-3.
Abnormalities in Patients with Hypereosinophilic Syndrome]
is not predicted by the degree or duration of eosinophilia. Prognosis varies depending on response to
therapy. Response to imatinib improves the prognosis among patients with the
FIPILI/PDGFRA
-
associated fusion gene. Current therapy has improved prognosis.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids for hypereosinophilia and often for ongoing treatment of organ damage
• Imatinib for patients with the
FIPILI/PDGFRA
-associated fusion gene
• Supportive therapy
Treatments include immediate therapy, definitive therapies (treatments directed at the disorder itself), and
supportive therapies.
Immediate therapy:
For patients with very severe eosinophilia, complications of hyperleukocytosis, or
both (usually patients with eosinophilic leukemia), high-dose IV corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 1 mg/kg or
equivalent) should be initiated as soon as possible. If the eosinophil count is much lower (eg, by ≥ 50%)
after 24 h, corticosteroid dose can be repeated daily; if not, an alternative treatment (eg, vincristine,
imatinib, leukapheresis) is begun.
Definitive therapy:
Patients with the
FIPILI/PDGFRA
-associated fusion gene are usually treated with
imatinib and, particularly if heart damage is suspected, corticosteroids. If imatinib is ineffective or poorly
tolerated, another tyrosine kinase inhibitor (eg, dasatinib, nilotinib, sorafenib) can be used, or allogenic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can be tried.
Patients without the
FIPILI/PDGFRA
-associated fusion gene, even if asymptomatic, are often given one
dose of prednisone 60 mg (or 1 mg/kg) po to determine corticosteroid responsiveness (ie, a decrease in
the eosinophil count). In patients with symptoms or organ damage, prednisone is continued at the same
dose for 2 wk, then tapered. Patients without symptoms and organ damage are
monitored for at least 6
mo for these complications. If corticosteroids cannot be easily tapered, a corticosteroid-sparing drug (eg,
===PAGE:1135===
hydroxyurea, interferon alfa) can be used.
Supportive therapy:
Supportive drug therapy and surgery may be required for cardiac manifestations
(eg, infiltrative cardiomyopathy, valvular lesions, heart failure). Thrombotic complications may require the
use of antiplatelet drugs (eg, aspirin, clopidogrel, ticlopidine); anticoagulation is indicated if a left
ventricular mural thrombus is present or if transient ischemic attacks persist despite use of aspirin.
===PAGE:1136===
Chapter 115. Histiocytic Syndromes
Introduction
The histiocytic syndromes are clinically heterogeneous disorders that result from an abnormal
proliferation of histiocytes—either monocyte-macrophages (antigen-processing cells) or dendritic cells
(antigen-presenting cells). Classifying these disorders is difficult (see
Table 115-1
) and has changed over time as an understanding of the biology of these cells has evolved.
Langerhans' Cell Histiocytosis
(See also p.
.)
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a proliferation of dendritic mononuclear cells with
infiltration into organs locally or diffusely. Most cases occur in children. Manifestations may
include lung infiltrates; bone lesions; rashes; and hepatic, hematopoietic, and endocrine
dysfunction. Diagnosis is based on biopsy. Factors predicting a poor prognosis include age < 2
yr and dissemination, particularly involving the hematopoietic
[Table 115-1.
Some Histiocytic Syndromes]
system, liver, lungs, or a combination. Treatments include supportive measures and
chemotherapy or local treatment with surgery or radiation therapy as indicated by the extent of
disease.
LCH is a dendritic cell disorder. It can cause distinct clinical syndromes that have been historically
described as eosinophilic granuloma, Hand-Schuller-Christian disease, and Letterer-Siwe disease.
Because these syndromes may be varied manifestations of the same underlying disorder and because
most patients with LCH have manifestations of more than one of these syndromes, the designations of
the separate syndromes are now mostly of historical significance. Estimates of the prevalence of LCH
vary widely (eg, from about 1:50,000 to 1:200,000).
In LCH, abnormally proliferating dendritic cells infiltrate one or more organs. Bone, skin, teeth, gingival
tissue, ears, endocrine organs, lungs, liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow may be involved.
Organs may be affected by infiltration, causing dysfunction, or by compression from adjacent enlarged
structures. In about half of patients, more than one organ is involved.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary considerably depending on which organs are infiltrated. The syndromes are
described by their historical designations, but few patients present with classic manifestations.
Eosinophilic granuloma:
Solitary or multifocal eosinophilic granuloma (60 to 80% of LCH cases) occurs
predominantly in older children and young adults, usually by age 30; incidence peaks between ages 5
and 10 yr. Lesions most frequently involve bone, often with pain, the inability to bear weight, or both and
with overlying tender (sometimes warm) swelling.
Hand-Schuller-Christian disease:
This syndrome (15 to 40% of LCH cases) occurs in children aged 2
to 5 yr and in some older children and adults. This systemic disorder classically involves the flat bones of
the skull, ribs, pelvis, scapula, or a combination. Long bones and lumbosacral vertebrae are less
frequently involved; the wrists, hands, knees, feet, and cervical vertebrae are rarely involved. In classic
cases, patients have exophthalmos caused by orbital tumor mass. Rarely, vision loss or strabismus is
caused by optic nerve or orbital muscle involvement. Tooth loss caused by apical and gingival infiltration
is common in older patients.
Chronic otitis media and otitis externa due to involvement of the mastoid and petrous portions of the
temporal bone with partial obstruction of the auditory canal are fairly common. Diabetes insipidus, the last
component of the classic triad that includes flat bone involvement and exophthalmos, affects 5 to 50% of
===PAGE:1137===
patients, with higher percentages in children who have systemic disease and involvement of the orbit and
skull. Up to 40% of children with systemic disease have short stature. Hyperprolactinemia and
hypogonadism can result from hypothalamic infiltration.
Letterer-Siwe disease:
This syndrome (10% of LCH cases), a systemic disorder, is the most severe
form of LCH. Typically, a child < 2 yr presents with a scaly seborrheic, eczematoid, sometimes purpuric
rash involving the scalp, ear canals, abdomen, and inter-triginous areas of the neck and face. Denuded
skin may facilitate microbial invasion, leading to sepsis. Frequently, there is ear drainage,
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and, in severe cases, hepatic dysfunction with hypoproteinemia
and diminished synthesis of clotting factors. Anorexia, irritability, failure to thrive, and pulmonary
manifestations (eg, cough, tachypnea, pneumothorax) may also occur. Significant anemia and sometimes
neutropenia occur; thrombocytopenia is of grave prognostic significance. Parents frequently report
precocious eruption of teeth, when in fact the gums are receding to expose immature dentition. Patients
may appear abused or neglected.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
LCH is suspected in patients (particularly young patients) with unexplained pulmonary infiltrates, bone
lesions, or ocular or craniofacial abnormalities; and in children < 2 yr with typical rashes or severe,
unexplained multiorgan disease.
X-rays are often done because of presenting symptoms. Bone lesions are usually sharply marginated,
and round or oval, with a beveled edge giving the appearance of depth. However, some lesions are
radiographically indistinguishable from Ewing's sarcoma, osteogenic sarcoma, other benign and
malignant conditions, or osteomyelitis.
Diagnosis is based on biopsy. Langerhans' cells are usually prominent, except in older lesions. These
cells are identified by a pathologist experienced in the diagnosis of LCH according to their
immunohistochemical characteristics, which include cell surface CD 1a and S-100.
Once diagnosis is
established, the extent of disease must be determined by appropriate imaging and laboratory studies.
Prognosis
Prognosis is good for patients with both of the following:
• Disease restricted to skin, lymph nodes, or bone
• Age > 2 yr
With treatment, almost all such patients survive.
Morbidity and mortality are increased in patients with multiorgan involvement, particularly those with
• Age < 2 yr
• Involvement of the hematopoietic system, liver, lungs, or spleen
With treatment, the overall survival rate for patients with multiorgan disease is about 80%. Death is more
likely among at-risk patients who do not respond to initial therapy. Disease recurrence is common. A
chronic remitting and exacerbating course may occur, particularly among adults.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Sometimes hormone replacement therapy for hypopituitarism
===PAGE:1138===
• Chemotherapy for multiorgan involvement
• Sometimes surgery or radiation therapy (usually for single bone involvement)
Because these syndromes are rare and complex, patients are usually referred to institutions experienced
in the treatment of LCH. General supportive care is essential and may include scrupulous hygiene to limit
ear, cutaneous, and dental lesions. Debridement or resection of severely affected gingival tissue limits
oral involvement. Seborrhea-like dermatitis of the scalp may diminish with use of a selenium-based
shampoo twice/wk. If shampooing is ineffective, topical corticosteroids are used in small amounts and
briefly in small areas.
Patients with systemic disease are monitored for potential chronic disabilities, such as cosmetic or
functional orthopedic and cutaneous disorders and neurotoxicity as well as for psychologic problems that
may require psychosocial support.
Many patients require hormone replacement for diabetes insipidus or other manifestations of
hypopituitarism.
Chemotherapy is indicated for patients with multiorgan involvement. Protocols sponsored by the
Histiocyte Society are used; treatment protocols vary according to the risk category. Almost all patients
with a good response to therapy can stop treatment. Protocols for poor responders are under study.
Local surgery or radiation therapy is used for disease involving a single bone and, rarely, when multiple
lesions or multiple bones are involved. Easily accessible lesions in noncritical locations undergo surgical
curettage. Surgery should be avoided when it may result in significant cosmetic deformities, orthopedic
deformities, or loss of function. Radiation therapy involving megavoltage equipment may be given to
patients at risk of skeletal deformity, visual loss secondary to exophthalmos, pathologic fractures,
vertebral collapse, and spinal cord injury or to patients with severe pain. Doses of radiation are
considerably less than those used to treat cancer. Surgery and radiation therapy should be done by
specialists experienced in treating LCH.
Patients with multiorgan disease that progresses despite standard therapy usually respond to more
aggressive chemotherapy. Patients who do not respond to salvage chemotherapy may undergo bone
marrow transplantation, experimental chemotherapy, or immunosuppressive or other immunomodulatory
therapy.
Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is an uncommon disorder causing immune
dysfunction in infants and young children. Many patients have an underlying immune disorder,
although in some patients the underlying disorder is not known. Manifestations may include
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, fever, and neurologic abnormalities. Diagnosis is by
specific clinical and testing (genetic) criteria. Treatment is usually with chemotherapy and, in
refractory cases or in cases with a genetic cause, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
HLH is characterized by
• High levels of cytokines (eg, IL-1, IL-2; TNFα
; interferon [INF]-
γ
; soluble IL-6, IL-10, IL-12; granulocytemacrophage colony stimulating factor [GM-CSF])
•
Uncontrolled proliferation and activation of cytotoxic T cells, natural killer cells, and macrophages in
multiple tissues
Certain aspects of immune function, such as natural killer cell and cytotoxic T-cell activity, are abnormal.
HLH is uncommon. It affects mostly infants < 18 mo. HLH can be
===PAGE:1139===
• Familial (primary)
• Acquired (secondary)
In both forms, genetic abnormalities, clinical manifestations, and outcomes tend to be similar. Acquired
HLH can be associated with other immune disorders (eg, leukemias, lymphomas, SLE, RA, polyarteritis
nodosa, sarcoidosis, progressive systemic sclerosis, Sjogren's syndrome, Kawasaki disease) and can
occur in kidney or liver transplant recipients. Acquired HLH may be secondary to other disorders or to
immunosuppressive regimens used to treat them or possibly to infections.
Symptoms and Signs
Common early manifestations include fever, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, rash, lymphadenopathy, and
neurologic abnormalities (eg, seizures, retinal hemorrhages, ataxia, altered consciousness or coma).
Bone lesions may occur, and clinical manifestations may mimic child abuse.
Diagnosis
• Specific clinical and testing criteria
HLH is suspected in children with unexplained recurrent infections and typical laboratory abnormalities
(cytopenias, coagulopathy, abnormal liver function test results, high serum ferritin levels) or with typical
symptoms and signs.
Diagnosis requires the presence of > 5 of the following criteria:
• Fever (peak temperature of > 38.5°C for > 7 days)
• Splenomegaly (spleen palpable > 3 cm below costal margin)
• Cytopenia involving > 2 cell lines (Hb < 9 g/dL, absolute neutrophil count < 100/
μ
L, platelets <
100,000/
μ
L)
• Hypertriglyceridemia (fasting triglycerides > 2.0 mmol/L or > 3 standard deviations [SD] more than
normal value for age) or hypofibrinogenemia (fibrinogen < 1.5 g/L or > 3 SD less than normal value for
age)
• Hemophagocytosis (in biopsy samples of bone marrow, spleen, or lymph nodes)
• Low or absent natural killer cell activity
• Serum ferritin > 500
μ
g/L plus elevated soluble IL-2 (CD25) levels (> 2400 U/mL or very high for age)
Because some of these tests may not be widely available and HLH is uncommon, patients are usually
referred to specialized centers for evaluation.
Treatment
• Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and chemotherapy
Treatment should be started if the disorder is suspected, even if not all diagnostic criteria are fulfilled.
Patients are usually treated by a pediatric hematologist and in a referral center experienced in treating
patients with HLH. Depending on the presence of factors such as a family history of HLH, coexisting
infections, and demonstrated immune system defects, treatment can involve combinations of
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, dexamethasone, cyclosporine, etoposide, and methotrexate.
Rosai-Dorfman Disease
===PAGE:1140===
(Sinus Histiocytosis With Massive Lymphadenopathy)
Rosai-Dorfman disease is a rare disorder characterized by accumulation of histiocytes and
massive lymphadenopathy, particularly in the neck and head.
Rosai-Dorfman disease is most common among patients < 20 yr, particularly blacks. Cause is unknown.
The most common presenting symptoms are fever and massive, painless cervical adenopathy. Other
nodal sites, including the mediastinum, retroperitoneum, axillae, and inguinal region, may be involved, as
may the nasal cavity, salivary gland tissue, other regions of the head and neck, and CNS. Other
manifestations may include lytic bone lesions, pulmonary nodules, and rash. The bone marrow and
spleen are typically spared.
Laboratory testing usually shows leukocytosis, polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, hypochromic or
normocytic anemia, and elevated ESR.
The disorder commonly resolves without treatment. Treatment is uncertain; chemotherapy has been tried.
===PAGE:1141===
Chapter 116. Myeloproliferative Disorders
Introduction
The myeloproliferative disorders are characterized by abnormal proliferation of one or more hematopoietic
cell lines or connective tissue elements. They include
• Essential thrombocythemia
• Primary myelofibrosis
• Polycythemia vera
• Chronic myelocytic leukemia (
Essential thrombocythemia, primary myelofibrosis, and polycythemia vera are Philadelphia chromosomenegative myeloproliferative disorders. Myeloproliferative disorders, particularly chronic myelocytic
leukemia, sometimes lead to acute leukemia; some hematologists also classify hypereosinophilic
syndrome and mastocytosis as myeloproliferative disorders. However, most experts argue that these
disorders are sufficiently different and omit them.
Each disorder is identified according to its predominant feature or site of proliferation (see
Table 116-1
). Despite overlap, each disorder has a somewhat typical constellation of clinical features,
laboratory findings, and course. Although proliferation of one cell line may dominate the clinical picture,
each disorder is typically caused by clonal proliferation of a pluripotent stem cell, causing varying degrees
of abnormal proliferation of RBC, WBC, and platelet precursors in the bone marrow. This abnormal clone
does not, however, produce bone marrow fibroblasts, which can proliferate in polyclonal reactive fashion.
An abnormality of a tyrosine kinase called JAK2, involved in the bone marrow response to erythropoietin,
contributes to the cause of polycythemia vera and causes a high proportion of cases of essential
thrombocythemia and myelofibrosis.
[Table 116-1.
Classification of Myeloproliferative Disorders]
Essential Thrombocythemia
(Essential Thrombocytosis; Primary Thrombocythemia)
Essential thrombocythemia (ET) is characterized by an increased platelet count,
megakaryocytic hyperplasia, and a hemorrhagic or thrombotic tendency. Symptoms and signs
may include weakness, headaches, paresthesias, bleeding, splenomegaly, and erythromelalgia
with digital ischemia. Diagnosis is based on a platelet count > 450,000/
μ
L, normal RBC mass or
normal Hct in the presence of adequate iron stores, absence of myelofibrosis, the Philadelphia
chromosome (or
BCR-ABL
rearrangement), and any other disorder that could cause
thrombocytosis. Treatment is controversial but may include aspirin. Patients > 60 yr and those
with previous thromboses and transient ischemic attacks require cytotoxic drugs to decrease
risk of thromboses. Data suggest that risk of thrombosis does not correlate with platelet count,
although anecdotal experience suggests otherwise.
Pathophysiology
ET is a typically clonal abnormality of a multipotent hematopoietic stem cell. However, some women who
fulfill diagnostic criteria for ET have polyclonal hematopoiesis. ET usually occurs with bimodal peaks of
between ages 50 and 70 yr and a separate peak among young females.
Platelet production is increased. Platelet survival is usually normal, although it may decrease due to
splenic sequestration and in patients with erythromelalgia with digital ischemia.
===PAGE:1142===
In elderly patients with atherosclerosis, increased platelets may lead to serious bleeding or, more
commonly, thrombosis. Thrombosis is the major cause of morbidity and mortality. Recent studies indicate
that an elevated leukocyte count is a major independent risk factor for thromboses. Although anecdotally
(and intuitively), elevated platelet count may increase the risk of thrombosis, one study found an inverse
relationship between absolute platelet count and thrombotic risk. Bleeding is more likely with extreme
thrombocytosis (ie, > 1.5 million platelets/
μ
L) due to an acquired von Willebrand's factor deficiency.
Symptoms and Signs
Common symptoms are
• Weakness
• Hemorrhage
• Gout
• Ocular migraines
• Paresthesias of the hands and feet
Thrombosis may cause symptoms in the affected site (eg, neurologic deficits with stroke or transient
ischemic attack, leg pain, swelling or both with lower extremity thrombosis, chest pain and dyspnea with
pulmonary embolism). Bleeding is usually mild and manifests as epistaxis, easy bruisability, or GI
bleeding. Digital ischemia may occur, and splenomegaly (usually not extending > 3 cm below the left
costal margin) occurs in < 50% of patients. Hepatomegaly may rarely occur. In pregnant patients,
thrombosis may cause recurrent spontaneous abortions.
Diagnosis
• CBC and peripheral blood smear
• Cytogenetic studies
• Possibly bone marrow examination
ET should be considered in patients in whom common reactive causes ( are excluded. If ET is
suspected, CBC, peripheral blood smear, and cytogenetic studies, including Philadelphia chromosome or
BCR-ABL
assay, should be done. Some authorities recommend bone marrow examination, but although
classic ET morphologic abnormalities have been described, the diagnostic value of bone marrow
examination is not established. The platelet count can be > 1,000,000/
μ
L but may be as low as
450,000/
μ
L. Platelet count may decrease spontaneously during pregnancy. The peripheral smear may
show platelet aggregates, giant platelets, and megakaryocyte fragments. The bone marrow shows
megakaryocytic hyperplasia, with an abundance of platelets being released. Bone marrow iron is present.
To distinguish from other myeloproliferative disorders that produce thrombocytosis, the diagnosis of ET
requires a normal Hct, MCV, and iron studies; absence of the Philadelphia chromosome and
BCR-ABL
translocation; and absence of teardrop-shaped RBCs; there may be significant increase in bone marrow
fibrosis (present in idiopathic myelofibrosis). The
JAK2V617F
mutation occurs in about 50% of patients,
and a small minority of ET patients has acquired somatic thrombopoietin receptor gene mutations (
c-mpl
).
Prognosis
Life expectancy is near normal. Although symptoms are common, the course of the disease is often
benign. Serious arterial and venous thrombotic complications are rare but can be life-threatening.
Leukemic transformation occurs in < 2% of patients but may increase after exposure to cytotoxic therapy,
especially alkylating agents.
Treatment
===PAGE:1143===
• Aspirin
• Platelet-lowering drugs (eg, hydroxyurea, anagrelide)
• Rarely plateletpheresis
For mild vasomotor symptoms (eg, headache, mild digital ischemia, erythromelalgia) and to decrease the
risk of thrombosis in low-risk patients, aspirin 81 mg po once/day may be sufficient. Also, most pregnant
patients are given aspirin. Use in low-risk patients is acceptable but not data-proven.
Because prognosis is often good, potentially toxic drugs that lower the platelet count should be used
sparingly. Generally agreed indications for such therapy are
• Previous thromboses or transient ischemic attack
• Age > 60 yr
Other indications are controversial. Patients with significant bleeding and extreme thrombocytosis (highrisk patients) may need therapy to lower the platelet count. It is unclear whether asymptomatic patients <
60 yr need platelet-lowering drugs. Myelosuppressive drugs to lower platelet count include anagrelide,
interferon alfa-2b, and hydroxyurea (sometimes with low-dose aspirin). Hydroxyurea is generally
considered the drug of choice, although some clinicians prefer anagrelide. Because anagrelide and
hydroxyurea cross the placenta, they are not used during pregnancy; interferon alfa-2b can be used in
pregnant women when necessary.
Dosage and monitoring are described in the treatment of polycythemia vera (. The
conventional aim of therapy is a platelet count < 450,000/
μ
L without significant clinical toxicity or
suppression of other bone marrow elements; however, this goal needs to be reevaluated in view of
recent data suggesting an inverse relationship between platelet count and thrombotic risk.
Plateletpheresis
has been used in rare patients with serious hemorrhage and recurrent
thrombosis or
before emergency surgery to immediately reduce the platelet count; this procedure, however, is rarely
necessary. Due to the long half-life of platelets (7 days), hydroxyurea and anagrelide do not provide an
immediate effect.
Thrombocytosis
(Secondary Thrombocythemia)
Thrombocytosis can develop secondary to
• Chronic inflammatory disorders, eg, RA, inflammatory bowel disease, TB, sarcoidosis, Wegener's
granulomatosis
• Acute infection
• Hemorrhage
• Iron deficiency
• Hemolysis
• Cancer (particularly Hodgkin lymphoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma)
• Splenectomy
• Myeloproliferative and hematologic disorders (eg, polycythemia vera, chronic myelocytic leukemia,
===PAGE:1144===
sideroblastic anemia, myelodysplasia [5q- syndrome], idiopathic myelodysplasia)
There are also congenital familial thrombocytoses such as those due to thrombopoietin and
thrombopoietin receptor gene mutations.
Platelet function is usually normal. Unlike ET, thrombocytosis does not increase the risk of thrombotic or
hemorrhagic complications unless patients have severe arterial disease or prolonged immobility. With
secondary thrombocytosis, the platelet count is usually < 1,000,000/
μ
L, and the cause may be obvious
from the history and physical examination (perhaps with confirmatory testing). CBC and peripheral blood
smear should help suggest iron deficiency or hemolysis. If a cause is not obvious, evaluation for a
myeloproliferative disorder should be considered.
Treatment of the underlying disorder usually returns the platelet count to normal.
Primary Myelofibrosis
(Agnogenic Myeloid Metaplasia; Myelofibrosis with Myeloid Metaplasia)
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a chronic, usually idiopathic disorder characterized by bone
marrow fibrosis, splenomegaly, and anemia with immature and teardrop-shaped RBCs.
Diagnosis requires bone marrow examination and exclusion of other conditions that can cause
myelofibrosis (secondary myelofibrosis). Treatment is usually supportive.
Pathophysiology
Myelofibrosis is excessive bone marrow fibrosis and loss of hematopoietic cells, with subsequent marked
increase in extramedullary hematopoiesis (primarily in the liver and spleen, which enlarge significantly).
Myelofibrosis may be primary or secondary to a number of hematologic, malignant, and nonmalignant
conditions (see
Table 116-2
).
PMF is more common than secondary myelofibrosis and results from neoplastic transformation of a
multipotent bone marrow stem cell. These PMF progeny cells stimulate bone marrow fibroblasts (which
are not part of the neoplastic transformation) to secrete excessive collagen. The peak incidence of PMF
is between 50 and 70 yr.
In PMF, large numbers of nucleated RBCs (normoblasts) and granulocytes are released into the
circulation (leukoerythroblastosis). Serum LDH level is often elevated. Bone marrow failure eventually
occurs, with consequent anemia and thrombocytopenia. Rapidly
[Table 116-2.
Conditions Associated with Myelofibrosis]
progressive, chemotherapy-incurable acute leukemia develops in about 10% of patients.
Malignant or acute myelofibrosis, an unusual variant, has a more rapidly progressive downhill course; this
variant may actually be a true megakaryocytic leukemia.
Symptoms and Signs
In many patients, myelofibrosis is asymptomatic. Other patients have symptoms of anemia, splenomegaly,
or, in later stages, general malaise, weight loss, fever, or splenic infarction. Hepatomegaly occurs in a
significant proportion of patients. Lymphadenopathy is rare.
Diagnosis
• CBC and peripheral blood smear
• Bone marrow examination
===PAGE:1145===
PMF should be suspected in patients with splenomegaly, splenic infarction, anemia, or unexplained
elevations in LDH. If the disorder is suspected, CBC should be done and peripheral blood morphology
and bone marrow should be examined, including cytogenetic testing. If myelofibrosis is detected on bone
marrow examination (eg, by increased fibroblasts and collagen as detected by reticulin staining,
osteosclerosis), other disorders associated with myelofibrosis (see
Table 116-2
) should be excluded by
appropriate clinical and laboratory evaluation.
Anemia is typically present and usually increases over time. Blood cell morphology is variable. RBCs are
poikilocytic. Reticulocytosis and polychromatophilia may be present; teardrop-shaped RBCs
(dacryocytes) are characteristic morphologic features. Nucleated RBCs and neutrophil precursors are
typically present in peripheral blood. WBC counts are usually increased but are highly variable; a low
WBC count tends to indicate a poor prognosis. Neutrophils are usually immature, and myeloblasts may be
present, even in the absence of acute leukemia. Platelet counts initially may be high, normal, or
decreased; however, thrombocytopenia tends to supervene as the disorder progresses.
If diagnosis is difficult, CD34+ cell count on peripheral blood can be done. Levels are much higher in
patients with PMF.
Bone marrow aspiration is usually dry. Because demonstration of bone marrow fibrosis is required and
fibrosis may not be uniformly distributed, biopsy should be repeated at a different site if the first biopsy is
nondiagnostic.
Prognosis
The median survival is 5 yr from onset, but variation is wide; some patients have a rapidly progressing
disorder with short survival and some have a delay in initial diagnosis. Unfavorable prognostic markers
include Hb < 10 g/dL, history of transfusions, leukocytosis and leukopenia, and platelet count <
100,000/
μ
L. Patients in the least favorable risk group usually survive < 1 yr. No treatment reverses or
controls the underlying process except for allogeneic stem cell transplant.
Treatment
• Symptomatic therapy
• Sometimes allogeneic stem cell transplantation
Treatment is directed at symptoms and complications. Androgens, splenectomy, chemotherapy, and
splenic embolization and radiation therapy have been used for palliation. For patients with low
erythropoietin levels relative to the degree of anemia, erythropoietin may increase Hct sufficiently;
otherwise, RBC transfusion may be necessary. For younger patients with advanced disease, allogeneic
stem cell transplantation should be considered. Nonmyeloablative allogeneic stem cell transplantation has
been successfully used even in older patients; however, it is usually limited to patients < 65 yr.
Inhibitors of the JAK pathway appear to have a significant effect on splenomegaly and abnormal
peripheral hematologic abnormalities. These drugs are in early trials.
Polycythemia Vera
(Primary Polycythemia)
Polycythemia vera (PV) is an idiopathic chronic myeloproliferative disorder characterized by an
increase in RBC mass, which often manifests as an increased Hct. There is an increased risk of
thrombosis and, rarely, acute leukemia and myelofibrotic transformation. Hepatosplenomegaly
may also occur. Diagnosis is made by CBC, testing for
JAK2
mutations, and clinical criteria.
Treatment involves low-dose aspirin for all patients and myelosuppressive drugs for high-risk
patients; phlebotomy, once standard, is now controversial.
===PAGE:1146===
PV is the most common of the myeloproliferative disorders; incidence in the US is estimated to be
1.9/100,000, with incidence increasing with age. PV may be slightly more
common in men. The mean age
at diagnosis is around 60 yr. PV is very rare in children.
Pathophysiology
PV involves increased production of all cell lines, including RBCs, WBCs, and platelets. Thus, PV is
sometimes called a panmyelosis because of elevations of all 3 peripheral blood components. Increased
production confined to the RBC line is termed erythrocytosis; erythrocytosis may occur with PV but is
more commonly due to other causes (secondary erythrocytosis—. In PV, RBC production
proceeds independently of erythropoietin levels.
Extramedullary hematopoiesis may occur in the spleen, liver, and other sites that have the potential for
blood cell formation. Peripheral blood cell turnover increases. Eventually, progression to a spent-phase
may occur, with a phenotype indistinguishable from primary myelofibrosis. Transformation to acute
leukemia is rare, although the risk is increased with exposure to alkylating agents and radioactive
phosphorus, which should only be used rarely, if ever.
Complications:
In PV, blood volume expands and hyperviscosity develops. Patients are prone to
develop thrombosis. Thrombosis can occur in most blood vessels, resulting in stroke, transient ischemic
attacks, deep venous thrombosis, MI, retinal artery or vein occlusion, splenic infarction (often with a
friction rub), or Budd-Chiari syndrome (. Previously, most experts believed hyperviscosity was
the predisposing factor for thrombosis. Newer studies suggest that risk of thrombosis may be primarily
related to the degree of leukocytosis. However, this hypothesis has yet to be confirmed in dedicated,
prospective trials.
Platelets may function abnormally, predisposing to increased bleeding. Increased cell turnover may cause
hyperuricemia, increasing the risk of gout and urate kidney stones.
Genetic basis:
Clonal hematopoiesis is a hallmark of PV, suggesting that a mutation of hematopoietic
stem cells is the cause of proliferation. The
JAK2 V617F
mutation (or one of several other rarer
JAK2
mutations) is present in virtually all patients with PV. However, one or more other disease-initiating
mutations almost certainly exist. These mutations lead to sustained activation of the JAK2 protein, which
causes excess cell production, independent of erythropoietin levels.
Symptoms and Signs
PV itself is often asymptomatic. Occasionally, increased red cell volume and viscosity produce weakness,
headache, light-headedness, visual disturbances, fatigue, and dyspnea. Pruritus often occurs, particularly
after a hot bath. The face may be red and the retinal veins engorged. The palms and feet may be red,
warm, and painful, sometimes with digital ischemia (erythromelalgia). Hepatomegaly is common, and >
75% of patients have splenomegaly (which may be massive).
Thrombosis may cause symptoms in the affected site (eg, neurologic deficits with stroke or transient
ischemic attack, leg pain, swelling or both with lower extremity thrombosis, unilateral vision loss with
retinal vascular occlusion).
Bleeding (typically GI) occurs in about 10% of patients.
Hypermetabolism can cause low-grade fevers and weight loss and suggests progression to spent-phase
polycythemia, which is clinically indistinguishable from primary myelofibrosis.
Diagnosis
• CBC
• Testing for
JAK2
mutations
===PAGE:1147===
• Sometimes bone marrow examination and serum erythropoietin level
• Use of WHO criteria
PV is often first suspected because of an abnormal CBC (eg, Hb > 18.5 g/dL in men or > 16.5 g/dL in
women), but it must be considered in patients with suggestive symptoms, particularly Budd-Chiari
syndrome (however, some patients develop Budd-Chiari syndrome before the Hct increases). Neutrophils
and platelets are often, but not invariably, increased; in patients with only elevated Hb, PV may be
present, but secondary erythrocytosis, a more common cause of elevated Hb, must first be considered
(. PV should also be considered in the rare patient with a normal Hb level but microcytosis
and evidence of iron deficiency; this combination of findings can occur with iron-limited hematopoiesis,
which is a hallmark of some cases of PV.
New WHO criteria for diagnosis have been established (see
Table 116-3
). Thus, patients suspected of having PV typically should have testing for
JAK2
mutations;
bone marrow examination is not always necessary.
When done, bone marrow typically shows panmyelosis, large and clumped megakaryocytes, and
sometimes reticulin fibers. However, no bone marrow findings absolutely differentiate between PV and
other disorders of excessive erythrocytosis, such as congenital familial polycythemia.
[Table 116-3.
WHO Criteria for Diagnosis of Polycythemia Vera*]
Patients with PV typically have low or low-normal serum erythropoietin levels. Elevated levels suggest
secondary erythrocytosis.
Sometimes in vitro testing for endogenous erythroid colony formation is done (erythroid progenitors from
peripheral blood or bone marrow from patients with PV, unlike those from healthy people, can form
erythroid cells in culture without the addition of erythropoietin).
RBC mass determination with chromium-labeled RBCs can help differentiate between true and relative
polycythemia and can also help to differentiate between PV and other myeloproliferative disorders.
However, this test is technically difficult and is usually not done due to its limited availability and the fact it
has been standardized only at sea level.
Nonspecific laboratory abnormalities that may occur in PV include elevated vitamin B
and B
-binding
capacity, hyperuricemia and hyperuricosuria (present in ≥ 30% of patients), increased expression of
PRVgene in leukocytes, and decreased expression of C-mpl (the receptor for thrombopoietin) in
megakaryocytes and platelets. These tests are not needed for diagnosis.
Prognosis
Generally, PV is associated with a shortened life span. Median survival for all patients is around 8 to 15
yr, although many patients live much longer. Thrombosis is the most common cause of death, followed by
complications of myelofibrosis and development of leukemia.
Treatment
• Aspirin therapy
• Possibly phlebotomy
• Possibly myelosuppressive therapy
Because PV is the only form of erythrocytosis for which myelosuppressive therapy may be indicated,
accurate diagnosis is critical. Therapy must be individualized according to age, sex, medical status,
clinical manifestations, and hematologic findings. Patients are classified as high-risk or low-risk. High-risk
patients are > 60 yr and have a history of thrombosis or transient ischemic attacks or both.
===PAGE:1148===
Aspirin:
Aspirin (81 to 100 mg po once/day) reduces the incidence of thrombotic complications. Thus,
patients undergoing phlebotomy alone or phlebotomy and myelosuppression should be given aspirin
unless contraindicated. Higher doses of aspirin are associated with an unacceptably increased risk of
bleeding.
Phlebotomy:
Phlebotomy has been the mainstay of therapy for high- and low-risk patients because
experts believed it decreased the risk of thrombosis. However, use of phlebotomy
is now controversial
because recent studies suggest that the Hct level may not correlate with risk of thrombosis, and some
clinicians no longer adhere to the strict phlebotomy guidelines. However, this issue requires further study,
and phlebotomy may still be considered for any patient. In a minority of patients with symptomatic rubor
and hyperviscosity symptoms, phlebotomy can be therapeutic. Common thresholds for phlebotomy are
Hct > 45% in men and > 42% in women. Initially, 300 to 500 mL of blood are removed every other day.
Less blood is removed (ie, 200 to 300 mL twice/wk) from elderly patients and from patients with cardiac or
cerebrovascular disorders. Once the Hct is below the threshold value, it is checked monthly and
maintained at this level by additional phlebotomies as needed. If necessary, intravascular volume can be
maintained with crystalloid or colloid solutions.
Myelosuppressive therapy:
Myelosuppressive therapy is indicated for high-risk patients.
Radioactive phosphorus
(
P) has long been used as a treatment for PV. It has a success rate of 80 to
90%. Remission may last 6 mo to several years. Radioactive phosphorus is well tolerated and requires
fewer follow-up visits once the disorder is controlled. However, radioactive phosphorus is associated with
an increased incidence of acute leukemic transformation, and the leukemia that develops after this
therapy is often resistant to induction chemotherapy and is never curable. Thus, use of radioactive
phosphorus requires careful patient selection (eg, used only for patients who are expected to die of other
disorders within 5 yr). It should be used rarely; many clinicians do not use it at all.
Hydroxyurea,
which inhibits the enzyme ribonucleoside diphosphate reductase, is also used to achieve
myelosuppression. It has not been clearly shown to be leukemogenic; however, the possibility of leukemic
conversion, although small, does exist. Hydroxyurea is started at a dose of 500 to 1000 mg po once/day.
Patients are monitored with a weekly CBC. When a steady state is achieved, the interval between CBCs
is lengthened to 2 wk and then to 4 wk. If the WBC count falls to < 4000/
μ
L or the platelet count to <
100,000/
μ
L, hydroxyurea is withheld and reinstituted at 50% of the dose when those values normalize. It
is reasonable to titrate the hydroxyurea dose to achieve a near-normal Hct, although there is no evidence
that titration is beneficial. It is likely that normalization of the WBC count is more important, but this theory
has not been demonstrated prospectively. There is no evidence that normalization of the platelet count is
necessary, and some clinicians do not increase the hydroxyurea dose as long as the platelet count is <
1.5 million/
μ
L. Acute toxicity is infrequent; occasionally patients develop a rash, GI symptoms, fever, nail
changes, and skin ulcers, which may require stopping hydroxyurea.
Interferon alfa-2b
has been used if hydroxyurea does not control blood counts or is not tolerated.
However, pegylated interferon alfa-2b is usually well tolerated. This drug affects the disease at the
molecular level with relatively low toxicity.
Alkylating agents are leukemogenic and should be avoided.
Several inhibitors of the JAK2 pathway are currently in clinical trials, primarily in patients with advanced
myelofibrosis.
Treatment of complications:
Hyperuricemia should be treated with allopurinol 300 mg po once/day if it
causes symptoms or if patients are receiving simultaneous myelosuppressive therapy. Pruritus may be
managed with antihistamines but is often difficult to control; myelosuppression often is most effective.
Cholestyramine 4 g po tid, cyproheptadine 4 mg po tid to qid, cimetidine 300 mg po qid, or paroxetine 20
to 40 mg po once/day may be successful. After bathing, the skin should be dried gently. Aspirin relieves
symptoms of erythromelalgia; higher doses may be required but clearly increase the risk of hemorrhage.
Secondary Erythrocytosis
===PAGE:1149===
(Secondary Polycythemia)
Secondary erythrocytosis is erythrocytosis that develops secondary to circulating
erythropoiesis-stimulating substances.
In secondary erythrocytosis, only the RBC line is increased.
Common causes
of secondary erythrocytosis include
• Smoking
• Chronic arterial hypoxemia
• Tumors (tumor-associated erythrocytosis)
Less common
causes include certain congenital disorders such as
• High O
-affinity hemoglobinopathies
• Erythropoietin receptor mutations
• Chuvash polycythemia (in which a mutation in the
VHL
gene affects the hypoxia-sensing pathway)
• Proline hydroxylase 2 and hypoxia-inducible factor 2
(HIF-2)

α
mutations
Spurious erythrocytosis may occur with hemoconcentration (eg, from burns, diarrhea, diuretics).
In patients who smoke, reversible erythrocytosis results mainly from tissue hypoxia due to elevation of
blood carboxyhemoglobin concentration; levels often normalize with smoking cessation.
Patients with chronic hypoxemia (arterial Hb O
concentration < 92%), typically due to lung disease,
right-to-left intracardiac shunts, renal transplantation, prolonged exposure to high altitudes (,
or hypoventilation syndromes, often develop erythrocytosis. The primary treatment is to alleviate the
underlying condition, but O
therapy may help, and some degree of phlebotomy may decrease viscosity
and alleviate symptoms. Because in some cases the elevated Hct is physiologic, phlebotomy may cause
harm because it decreases tissue oxygenation.
Tumor-associated erythrocytosis can occur when renal tumors, cysts, hepatomas, cerebellar
hemangioblastomas, or uterine leiomyomas secrete erythropoietin. Removal of the lesion may be
curative.
High O
-affinity hemoglobinopathies are very rare. This diagnosis is suggested by a family history of
erythrocytosis; it is established by measuring the P
(the partial pressure of O
at which Hb becomes
50% saturated) and, if possible, determining the complete oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. Standard
Hb electrophoresis may be normal and cannot reliably exclude this cause of erythrocytosis.
Evaluation:
Tests done when erythrocytosis is present include
• Arterial O
saturation
• Serum erythropoietin levels
• P
A low or low-normal serum erythropoietin level suggests PV. Patients with hypoxia-induced erythrocytosis
have an elevated level or inappropriately normal level for their elevated Hct. Patients with tumor-
===PAGE:1150===
associated erythrocytosis typically have elevated erythropoietin levels. Patients with elevated
erythropoietin levels or microscopic hematuria should undergo abdominal imaging, CNS imaging, or both
to seek a renal lesion or other tumor source of erythropoietin.
P
measures the affinity of Hb for O
; a normal result excludes a high-affinity Hb (a familial abnormality)
as the cause of erythrocytosis.
===PAGE:1151===
Chapter 117. Leukemias
Introduction
The leukemias are cancers of the WBCs involving bone marrow, circulating WBCs, and organs such as
the spleen and lymph nodes.
Etiology
Risk of developing most leukemias increases with
• History of exposure to ionizing radiation (eg, post-atom bomb in Nagasaki and Hiroshima) or to
chemicals (eg, benzene)
• Prior treatment with certain antineoplastic drugs, particularly procarbazine, nitrosureas
(cyclophosphamide, melphalan), and epipodophyllotoxins (etoposide, teniposide)
• Infection with a virus (eg, human T-lymphotrophic virus 1 and 2, Epstein-Barr virus)
• Chromosomal translocations
• Preexisting conditions, including immunodeficiency disorders, chronic myeloproliferative disorders, and
chromosomal disorders (eg, Fanconi's anemia, Bloom syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, Down
syndrome, infantile X-linked agammaglobulinemia)
Pathophysiology
Malignant transformation usually occurs at the pluripotent stem cell level, although it sometimes involves
a committed stem cell with more limited capacity for differentiation. Abnormal proliferation, clonal
expansion, and diminished apoptosis (programmed cell death) lead to replacement of normal blood
elements with malignant cells.
Manifestations of leukemia are due to suppression of normal blood cell formation and organ infiltration by
leukemic cells. Inhibitory factors produced by leukemic cells and replacement of marrow space may
suppress normal hematopoiesis, with ensuing anemia, thrombocytopenia, and granulocytopenia. Organ
infiltration results in enlargement of the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes, with occasional kidney and
gonadal involvement. Meningeal infiltration results in clinical features associated with increasing
intracranial pressure (eg, cranial nerve palsies).
Classification
Leukemias were originally termed acute or chronic based on life expectancy but now are classified
according to cellular maturity.
Acute leukemias
consist of predominantly immature, poorly differentiated cells (usually blast forms).
Acute leukemias are divided into lymphocytic (ALL) and myelocytic (AML) types, which may be further
subdivided by the French-American-British (FAB) classification (see
Table 117-1
).
Chronic leukemias
have more mature cells than do acute leukemias. Chronic leukemias are described
as lymphocytic (CLL) or myelocytic (CML—see
Table 117-2
).
Myelodysplastic syndromes
involve progressive bone marrow failure but with an insufficient proportion
of blast cells (< 30%) for making a definite diagnosis of AML; 40 to 60% of cases evolve into AML.
A
leukemoid reaction
is marked granulocytic leukocytosis (ie, WBC > 30,000/
μ
L) produced by normal
bone marrow in response to systemic infection or cancer. Although not a neoplastic disorder, a leukemoid
===PAGE:1152===
reaction with a very high WBC count may require testing to distinguish it from CML (.
Acute Leukemia
Acute leukemia occurs when a hematopoietic stem cell undergoes malignant transformation into a
primitive, undifferentiated cell with abnormal longevity. These lymphocytes (acute lymphocytic leukemia
[ALL]) or myeloid cells (acute myelocytic leukemia [AML]) proliferate abnormally, replacing normal marrow
tissue and hematopoietic cells and inducing anemia, thrombocytopenia, and granulocytopenia. Because
they are blood-borne, they can infiltrate various organs and sites, including the liver, spleen, lymph nodes,
CNS, kidneys, and gonads.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms have usually been present for only days to weeks before diagnosis. Disrupted hematopoiesis
leads to the most common presenting symptoms (anemia, infection, easy bruising and bleeding). Other
presenting symptoms and signs are usually nonspecific (eg, pallor, fatigue, fever, malaise, weight loss,
tachycardia, chest pain) and are attributable to anemia and a hypermetabolic state. The cause of fever
often is not found, although granulocytopenia may lead to a rapidly progressing and potentially lifethreatening bacterial infection. Bleeding is usually manifested by petechiae, easy bruising, epistaxis,
bleeding gums, or menstrual irregularity. Hematuria and GI bleeding are uncommon. Bone marrow and
periosteal infiltration may cause bone and joint pain, especially in children with ALL. Initial CNS
involvement or leukemic meningitis (manifesting as headaches, vomiting, irritability, cranial nerve palsies,
seizures, and papilledema) is uncommon. Extramedullary infiltration by leukemic cells may cause
[Table 117-1.
French-American-British (FAB) Classification of Acute Leukemias]
[Table 117-2.
Findings at Diagnosis in the Most Common Leukemias]
lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and leukemia cutis (a raised, nonpruritic rash).
Diagnosis
• CBC and peripheral blood smear
• Bone marrow examination
• Histochemical studies, cytogenetics, immunophenotyping, and molecular biology studies
• Imaging
CBC and peripheral smear are the first tests done; pancytopenia and peripheral blasts suggest acute
leukemia. Blast cells in the peripheral smear may approach 90%, unless the WBC count is markedly
decreased. Although the diagnosis can usually be made from the peripheral smear, bone marrow
examination (aspiration or needle biopsy) should always be done. Blast cells in the bone marrow are
between 20 and 95%. Aplastic anemia, viral infections such as infectious mononucleosis, and vitamin B
and folate deficiency should be considered in the differential diagnosis of severe pancytopenia.
Leukemoid reactions to infectious disease (such as TB) can manifest as high blast counts.
Histochemical studies, cytogenetics, immunophenotyping, and molecular biology studies help distinguish
the blasts of ALL from those of AML or other disease processes. Specific B-cell, T-cell, and myeloidantigen monoclonal antibodies, together with flow cytometry, are very helpful in classifying ALL vs AML,
which is critical for treatment.
Other laboratory findings may include hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia or hypokalemia,
elevated serum hepatic transaminases or LDH, hypoglycemia, and hypoxia. Lumbar puncture and head
CT scan are done in patients with CNS symptoms, B-cell ALL, high WBC count, or high LDH. Chest x-ray
is done; if a mediastinal mass is present, CT may be done. CT, MRI, or abdominal ultrasonography may
help assess splenomegaly or leukemia infiltration of other organs.
===PAGE:1153===
Prognosis
Cure is a realistic goal for both ALL and AML, especially in younger patients. Prognosis is worse in infants
and the elderly and in those with hepatic or renal dysfunction, CNS involvement, myelodysplasia, or a
high WBC count (> 25,000/
μ
L). Survival in untreated
acute leukemia generally is 3 to 6 mo. Prognosis
varies according to karyotype.
Treatment
• Chemotherapy
• Supportive care
The goal of treatment is complete remission, including resolution of abnormal clinical features, restoration
of normal blood counts and normal hematopoiesis with < 5% blast cells, and elimination of the leukemic
clone. Although basic principles in treating ALL and AML are similar, the drug regimens differ. The
complex nature of patients' clinical situations and the available treatment protocols necessitate an
experienced team. Whenever possible, patients should be treated at specialized medical centers,
particularly during critical phases (eg, remission induction).
Supportive care:
Supportive care is similar in the acute leukemias and may include
• Transfusions
• Antibiotics or antifungal drugs
• Hydration and urine alkalinization
• Psychologic support
Transfusions
of platelets, RBCs, and granulocytes are administered as needed to patients with bleeding,
anemia, and neutropenia, respectively. Prophylactic platelet transfusion is done when platelets fall to <
10,000/
μ
L; a higher threshold (20,000/
μ
L) is used for patients with the triad of fever, disseminated
intravascular coagulation, and mucositis secondary to chemotherapy. Anemia (Hb < 8 g/dL) is treated with
packed RBC transfusions. Granulocyte transfusions may help neutropenic patients with gram-negative or
other serious sepsis but have no proven benefit as prophylaxis.
Antimicrobials
are often needed because infections are serious in neutropenic, immunosuppressed
patients and can progress quickly without the usual clinical evidence. After appropriate studies and
cultures have been done, both febrile and afebrile patients with neutrophil counts < 500/
μ
L should begin
broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotic treatment that is effective against gram-positive and gram-negative
organisms (eg, ceftazidime, imipenem, cilastatin). Fungal infections, especially pneumonias, are becoming
more common and are difficult to diagnose; empiric antifungal drugs should be given if antibacterial
therapy is not effective within 72 h. In patients with refractory pneumonitis,
Pneumocystis jirovecii
infection or a viral infection should be suspected and confirmed by bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar
lavage and treated appropriately. Empiric therapy with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX),
amphotericin B, and acyclovir or other analogs, often with granulocyte transfusions, is often necessary. In
patients with drug-induced immunosuppression at risk of opportunistic infections, TMP/SMX is given to
prevent
P. jirovecii
pneumonia.
Hydration
(twice the daily maintenance volume), urine alkalinization (pH 7 to 8), and electrolyte
monitoring can prevent the hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hyperkalemia (tumor lysis syndrome
— caused by the rapid lysis of leukemic cells during initial therapy (particularly in ALL).
Hyperuricemia can be minimized by giving allopurinol (a xanthine oxidase inhibitor) or rasburicase (a
recombinant urate-oxidase enzyme) before starting chemotherapy to reduce the conversion of xanthine to
uric acid.
===PAGE:1154===
Psychologic support
may help patients and their families weather the shock of illness and the rigors of
treatment for a potentially life-threatening condition.
Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia
(Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia)
ALL is the most common pediatric cancer; it also strikes adults of all ages. Malignant
transformation and uncontrolled proliferation of an abnormally differentiated, long-lived
hematopoietic progenitor cell results in a high circulating number of blasts, replacement of
normal marrow by malignant cells, and the potential for leukemic infiltration of the CNS and
abdominal organs. Symptoms include fatigue, pallor, infection, and easy bruising and bleeding.
Examination of peripheral smear and bone marrow is usually diagnostic. Treatment typically
includes combination chemotherapy to achieve remission, intrathecal chemotherapy for CNS
prophylaxis and/or cerebral irradiation for intracerebral leukemic infiltration, consolidation
chemotherapy with or without stem cell transplantation, and maintenance chemotherapy for 1
to 3 yr to avoid relapse.
Two thirds of all ALL cases occur in children, with a peak incidence at age 2 to 5 yr; ALL is the most
common cancer in children and the 2nd most common cause of death in children < 15 yr. A 2nd rise in
incidence occurs after age 45.
Prognosis
Prognostic factors help determine treatment protocol and intensity.
Favorable prognostic factors
are
• Age 3 to 7 yr
• WBC count < 25,000/
μ
L
• French-American-British (FAB) L1 morphology
• Leukemic cell karyotype with > 50 chromosomes and t(12;21)
• No CNS disease at diagnosis
Unfavorable factors
are
• A leukemic cell karyotype with chromosomes that are normal in number but abnormal in morphology
(pseudodiploid)
• Presence of the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome t(9;22)
• Increased age in adults
• B-cell immunophenotype with surface or cytoplasmic immunoglobulin
Regardless of prognostic factors, the likelihood of initial remission is ≥ 95% in children and 70 to 90% in
adults. About 75% of children and 30 to 40% of adults have continuous disease-free survival for 5 yr and
appear cured. Imatinib improves outcome in patients with Ph chromosome-positive ALL. Most
investigatory protocols select patients with poor prognostic factors for more intense therapy, because the
increased risk of and toxicity from treatment are outweighed by the greater risk of treatment failure
leading to death.
Treatment
===PAGE:1155===
• Chemotherapy
• Sometimes stem cell transplantation or radiation therapy
The 4 general phases of chemotherapy for ALL include
• Remission induction
• CNS prophylaxis
• Postremission consolidation or intensification
• Maintenance
Induction therapy:
The goal is to induce remission. Several regimens emphasize early introduction of
an intensive multidrug regimen. Remission can be induced with daily oral prednisone and weekly IV
vincristine with the addition of an anthracycline or asparaginase. Other drugs and combinations that may
be introduced early in treatment are cytarabine and etoposide as well as cyclophosphamide. In some
regimens, intermediate-dose or high-dose IV methotrexate is given with leucovorin rescue. The
combinations and their dosages are modified according to the presence of risk factors. Imatinib can be
added to the drug regimen in patients with Ph chromosome-positive ALL.
CNS prophylaxis:
An important site of leukemic infiltration is the meninges; prophylaxis and treatment
may include high-dose intrathecal methotrexate, cytosine arabinoside, and corticosteroids. Cranial nerve
or whole-brain irradiation may be necessary and is often used for patients at high risk of CNS disease
(eg, high WBC count, high serum LDH, B-cell phenotype) but has been used less often in recent years.
Consolidation therapy:
The goal of consolidation is to prevent leukemic regrowth. Consolidation
therapy usually lasts a few months and combines drugs that have different mechanisms of action than
drugs used in induction regimens. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is recommended as consolidation
of Ph chromosome-positive ALL or in 2nd or later relapses or remissions.
Maintenance therapy:
Most regimens include maintenance therapy with methotrexate and
mercaptopurine. Therapy duration is usually 2 1/2 to 3 yr but may be shorter with regimens that are more
intensive in earlier phases and for B-cell (L3) cases. For patients in continuous complete remission for 2
1/2 yr, the risk of relapse after therapy cessation is about 20%, usually within 1 yr. Thus, when therapy
can be stopped, most patients are cured.
Relapse:
Leukemic cells may reappear in the bone marrow, the CNS, or the testes. Bone marrow
relapse is particularly ominous. Although a new round of chemotherapy may induce a 2nd remission in 80
to 90% of children (30 to 40% of adults), subsequent remissions tend to be brief. Only a few patients with
late bone marrow relapses achieve long disease-free 2nd remissions or cure.
If an HLA-matched sibling is available, stem cell transplantation offers the greatest hope of long-term
remission or cure (. Cells from other relatives or matched, unrelated donors are sometimes
used. Transplantation is rarely used for patients > 65 yr because it is much less likely to be successful
and because adverse effects are much more likely to be fatal.
When relapse involves the CNS, treatment includes intrathecal methotrexate (with or without cytarabine
or corticosteroids) twice weekly until all signs disappear. Most regimens include systemic reinduction
chemotherapy because of the likelihood of systemic spread of blast cells. The role of continued
intrathecal drug use or CNS irradiation is unclear.
Testicular relapse may be evidenced clinically by painless firm swelling of the testis or may be identified
on biopsy. If unilateral testicular involvement is clinically evident, the apparently uninvolved testis should
undergo biopsy. Treatment is by irradiation of the involved testis and administration of systemic
reinduction therapy as for isolated CNS relapse.
===PAGE:1156===
Acute Myelocytic Leukemia
(Acute Myelogenous Leukemia; Acute Myeloid Leukemia)
In AML, malignant transformation and uncontrolled proliferation of an abnormally differentiated,
long-lived myeloid progenitor cell results in high circulating numbers of immature blood forms
and replacement of normal marrow by malignant cells. Symptoms include fatigue, pallor, easy
bruising and bleeding, fever, and infection; symptoms of leukemic infiltration are present in
only about 5% of patients (often as skin manifestations). Examination of peripheral smear and
bone marrow is diagnostic. Treatment includes induction chemotherapy to achieve remission
and postremission chemotherapy (with or without stem cell transplantation) to avoid relapse.
The incidence of AML increases with age; it is the more common acute leukemia in adults, with a median
age of onset of 50 yr. AML may occur as a secondary cancer after chemotherapy or irradiation for a
different type of cancer.
AML has a number of subtypes that are distinguished from each other by morphology, immunophenotype,
and cytochemistry. Five classes are described, based on predominant cell type, including myeloid,
myeloid-monocytic, monocytic, erythroid, and megakaryocytic.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) is a particularly important subtype, representing 10 to 15% of all
cases of AML, striking a younger age group (median age 31 yr) and particular ethnicity (Hispanics), in
which the patient commonly presents with a coagulation disorder.
Prognosis
Remission induction rates range from 50 to 85%. Long-term disease-free survival reportedly occurs in 20
to 40% of patients and increases to 40 to 50% in younger patients treated with stem cell transplantation.
Prognostic factors help determine treatment protocol and intensity; patients with strongly negative
prognostic features are usually given more intense forms of therapy, because the potential benefits are
thought to justify the increased treatment toxicity. The most important prognostic factor is the leukemia cell
karyotype. The specific chromosomal rearrangements of the different forms of AML can affect the
outcome. Three levels of outcome have been identified: favorable, intermediate, and poor. Patients who
have the cytogenetics t(8;21), t(15;17), and inv(16) typically have a favorable response to therapy,
remission duration, and survival. Patients with a normal karyotype have an intermediate prognosis, and
patients with a poor prognosis are those with a deletion of chromosome 5 or 7, trisomy 8, or a karyotype
with > 3 abnormalities. Other negative factors include increasing age, a preceding myelodysplastic phase,
secondary leukemia, high WBC count, and absence of Auer rods. The FAB or WHO classification alone
does not predict response.
Treatment
• Chemotherapy (induction and consolidation)
• Sometimes stem cell transplantation
Induction therapy:
Initial therapy attempts to induce remission and differs most from ALL in that AML
responds to fewer drugs. The basic induction regimen includes cytarabine by continuous IV infusion or
high doses for 5 to 7 days; daunorubicin or idarubicin is given IV for 3 days during this time. Some
regimens include 6-thioguanine, etoposide, vincristine, and prednisone, but their contribution is unclear.
Treatment usually results in significant myelosuppression, with infection or bleeding; there is significant
latency before marrow recovery. During this time, meticulous preventive and supportive care is vital (see
p.
).
In APL and some other cases of AML, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may be present on
diagnosis and may worsen as leukemic cell lysis releases procoagulant. In APL with the translocation
t(15;17), alltrans
-retinoic acid corrects the DIC in 2 to 5 days; combined with daunorubicin or idarubicin,
===PAGE:1157===
this regimen can induce remission in 80 to 90% of patients and bring about long-term survival in 65 to
70%. Arsenic trioxide is also very active in APL.
Consolidation therapy:
After remission, many regimens involve a phase of intensification with the same
drugs used for induction or with other drugs. High-dose cytarabine regimens may lengthen remission
duration, particularly when given as consolidation in patients < 60 yr. CNS prophylaxis usually is not
given, because with better systemic disease
control, CNS leukemia is a less frequent complication. In
AML patients who have had consolidation, maintenance therapy has no demonstrated role.
Relapse:
Patients who have not responded to treatment and younger patients who are in remission but
who are at high risk of relapse (generally identified by certain chromosomal abnormalities) may be given
high-dose chemotherapy and stem cell transplantation. Extramedullary sites are infrequently involved in
isolated relapse. When relapse occurs, additional chemotherapy for patients unable to undergo stem cell
transplantation is less effective and often poorly tolerated. Another course of chemotherapy is most
effective in younger patients and in patients whose initial remission lasted > 1 yr. Gemtuzumab
ozogamicin, a recombinant monoclonal antibody combined with a cytotoxic drug, is effective in some
patients after relapse has occurred, but long-term benefits have not been determined.
Chronic Leukemia
Chronic leukemia usually manifests as abnormal leukocytosis with or without cytopenia in an otherwise
asymptomatic person. Findings and management differ significantly between chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) and chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML).
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
(Chronic Lymphatic Leukemia)
The most common type of leukemia in the Western world, CLL involves mature-appearing
defective neoplastic lymphocytes (almost always B cells) with an abnormally long life span. The
peripheral blood, bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes undergo leukemic infiltration.
Symptoms may be absent or may include lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and
nonspecific symptoms attributable to anemia (fatigue, malaise). Diagnosis is by examination of
peripheral smear and bone marrow aspirate. Treatment, delayed until symptoms develop, is
aimed at lengthening life and decreasing symptoms and may involve chlorambucil or
fludarabine, prednisone, and cyclophosphamide or doxorubicin or both. Monoclonal antibodies,
such as alemtuzumab and rituximab, are increasingly being used. Palliative radiation therapy is
reserved for patients whose lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly interferes with other organs.
Incidence of CLL increases with age; 75% of cases are diagnosed in patients > 60 yr. CLL is twice as
common in men. Although the cause is unknown, some cases appear to have a hereditary component.
CLL is rare in Japan and China and does not seem to increase among Japanese expatriates in the US,
suggesting a genetic factor. CLL is more common among Jews of Eastern European descent.
Pathophysiology
In about 98% of cases, CD5+ B cells undergo malignant transformation, with lymphocytes initially
accumulating in the bone marrow and then spreading to lymph nodes and other lymphoid tissues,
eventually inducing splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. As CLL progresses, abnormal hematopoiesis
results in anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and decreased immunoglobulin production. Many
patients develop hypogammaglobulinemia and impaired antibody response, perhaps related to increased
T-suppressor cell activity. Patients have increased susceptibility to autoimmune disease characterized by
immunohemolytic anemias (usually Coombs' test-positive) or thrombocytopenia and a modest increase in
risk of developing other cancers.
In 2 to 3% of cases, the clonal expansion is T cell in type, and even this group has a subtype (eg, large
granular lymphocytes with cytopenias).
===PAGE:1158===
In addition, other chronic leukemic patterns have been categorized under CLL:
• Prolymphocytic leukemia
• Leukemic phase of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (ie, Sezary syndrome)
• Hairy cell leukemia
• Lymphoma leukemia (ie, leukemic changes that occur in advanced stages of malignant lymphoma)
Differentiation of these subtypes from typical CLL is usually straightforward.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually insidious; CLL is often diagnosed incidentally during routine blood tests or through
evaluation of asymptomatic lymphadenopathy. Symptomatic patients usually have nonspecific complaints
of fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, dyspnea on exertion, or a sense of abdominal fullness (secondary to an
enlarged spleen). Initial findings include generalized lymphadenopathy and minimal-to-moderate
hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. With progressive disease, there may be pallor due to anemia. Skin
infiltration, either maculopapular
or diffuse, may be a feature of T-cell CLL. Hypogammaglobulinemia and
granulocytopenia in late CLL may predispose to bacterial, viral, and fungal infection, especially
pneumonia. Herpes zoster is common and usually dermatomic.
Diagnosis
• CBC and peripheral smear
• Bone marrow examination
• Immunophenotyping
CLL is confirmed by examining the peripheral smear and bone marrow; the hallmark is sustained,
absolute peripheral lymphocytosis (> 5000/
μ
L) and increased lymphocytes (> 30%) in the bone marrow.
Differential diagnosis is simplified by immunophenotyping. Other findings at diagnosis may include
hypogammaglobulinemia (< 15% of cases) and, rarely, elevated LDH. Only 10% of patients present with
moderate anemia (sometimes immunohemolytic), thrombocytopenia, or both. A monoclonal serum
immunoglobulin spike of the same type may be found on the leukemic cell surface in 2 to 4% of cases.
Clinical staging is useful for prognosis and treatment. Two common approaches are Rai and Binet
staging, primarily based on hematologic changes and extent of disease (see
Table 117-3
).
Prognosis
The median survival of patients with B-cell CLL or its complications is about 7 to 10 yr. Patients in Rai
stage 0 to II at diagnosis may survive for 5 to 20 yr without treatment. Patients in Rai stage III or IV are
more likely to die within 3 to 4 yr of diagnosis. Progression to bone marrow failure is usually associated
with short survival. Patients with CLL are more likely to develop a secondary cancer, especially skin
cancer.
Treatment
• Symptom amelioration
• Supportive care
Although CLL is progressive, some patients may be asymptomatic for years; therapy is not indicated until
progression or symptoms occur. Cure usually is not possible, so treatment attempts to ameliorate
===PAGE:1159===
symptoms and prolong life. Supportive care includes transfusion of packed RBCs or erythropoietin
injections for anemia; platelet transfusions for bleeding associated with thrombocytopenia; and
antimicrobials for bacterial, fungal, or viral infections. Because neutropenia and agammaglobulinemia limit
bacterial killing, antibiotic therapy should be bactericidal. Therapeutic infusions of
γ
-globulin should be
considered in patients with hypogammaglobulinemia and repeated or refractory infections or, for
prophylaxis, when ≥ 2 severe infections occur within 6 mo.
[Table 117-3.
Clinical Staging of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia]
Specific therapy includes
• Chemotherapy
• Corticosteroids
• Monoclonal antibody therapy
• Radiation therapy
These modalities may alleviate symptoms but have not been proven to prolong survival.
Overtreatment is
more dangerous than under-treatment
.
Chemotherapy:
Chemotherapy may be instituted in response to the advent of symptomatic disease,
including constitutional symptoms (fever, night sweats, extreme fatigue, weight loss); significant
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy; lymphocytosis > 100,000/
μ
L; and infections
accompanied by anemia, neutropenia, or thrombocytopenia. Alkylating drugs, especially chlorambucil,
alone or with corticosteroids, have long been the usual therapy for B-cell CLL. However, fludarabine is
more effective. Combination chemotherapy with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab more often
induces complete remissions. It also lengthens remission duration and prolongs survival. Interferon alfa,
deoxycoformycin, and 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine are highly effective for hairy cell leukemia. Patients with
prolymphocytic leukemia and lymphoma leukemia usually require multidrug chemotherapy and often
respond only partially.
Corticosteroids:
Immunohemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia are indications for corticosteroids.
Prednisone 1 mg/kg po once/day may occasionally result in striking, rapid improvement in patients with
advanced CLL, although response is often brief. The metabolic complications and increasing rate and
severity of infections warrant caution in its prolonged use. Prednisone used with fludarabine increases
the risk of
Pneumocystis jirovecii
and
Listeria
infections.
Monoclonal antibody therapy:
Rituximab is the first monoclonal antibody used in the successful
treatment of lymphoid cancers. The partial response rate with conventional doses in CLL is 10 to 15%. In
previously untreated patients, the response rate is 75%, with 20% of patients achieving complete
remission. Alemtuzumab has a 33% response rate in previously treated patients refractory to fludarabine
and a 75 to 80% response rate in previously untreated patients. More problems with immunosuppression
occur with alemtuzumab than with rituximab. Rituximab has been combined with fludarabine and with
fludarabine and cyclophosphamide; these combinations have markedly improved the complete remission
rate in both previously treated and untreated patients. Alemtuzumab is now being combined with rituximab
and with chemotherapy to treat minimal residual disease and has effectively cleared bone marrow
infiltration. Reactivation of cytomegalovirus and other opportunistic infections has occurred with
alemtuzumab.
Radiation therapy:
Local irradiation may be given to areas of lymphadenopathy or liver and spleen
involvement for transient symptomatic palliation. Total body irradiation in small doses is occasionally
successful.
Chronic Myelocytic Leukemia
(Chronic Granulocytic Leukemia; Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia; Chronic Myeloid Leukemia)
===PAGE:1160===
CML occurs when a pluripotent stem cell undergoes malignant transformation and clonal
myeloproliferation, leading to a striking overproduction of immature granulocytes. Initially
asymptomatic, CML progression is insidious, with a nonspecific "benign" stage (malaise,
anorexia, weight loss) eventually giving way to accelerated or blast phases with more ominous
signs, such as splenomegaly, pallor, easy bruising and bleeding, fever, lymphadenopathy, and
skin changes. Peripheral smear, bone marrow aspirate, and demonstration of Philadelphia
chromosome are diagnostic. Treatment is with imatinib, which significantly improves response
and probably prolongs survival. The curative potential of imatinib is undefined.
Myelosuppressive drugs (eg, hydroxyurea), stem cell transplantation, and interferon alfa are
also used.
CML accounts for about 15% of all adult leukemias. CML can strike at any age, although it is uncommon
before age 10, and the median age at diagnosis is 45 to 55. CML may occur in either sex.
Pathophysiology
Most cases of CML appear to be induced by a translocation known as the Philadelphia (Ph)
chromosome, which is demonstrable in 95% of patients. It is a reciprocal translocation t(9;22) in which a
piece of chromosome 9 containing the oncogene
c-abl
is translocated to chromosome 22 and fused to
the gene
BCR
. The fusion gene
BCR-ABL
is important in the pathogenesis and expression of CML and
results in the production of a specific tyrosine kinase. CML ensues when an abnormal pluripotent
hematopoietic progenitor cell initiates excessive production of granulocytes, primarily in the bone marrow
but also in extramedullary sites (eg, spleen, liver). Although granulocyte production predominates, the
neoplastic clone includes RBC, megakaryocyte, monocyte, and even some T and B cells. Normal stem
cells are retained and can emerge after drug suppression of the CML clone.
CML has 3 phases:
•
Chronic phase:
An initial indolent period that may last months to years
•
Accelerated myeloproliferative phase:
Treatment failure, worsening anemia, and progressive
thrombocytopenia
•
Terminal phase:
Blast crisis; blast cell tumors possibly developing in extramedullary sites (eg, bone,
CNS, lymph nodes, skin)
The terminal phase leads to fulminant complications resembling those of acute leukemia, including sepsis
and bleeding. Some patients progress directly from the chronic to the blast phase.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients are often asymptomatic early on, with insidious onset of nonspecific symptoms (eg, fatigue,
weakness, anorexia, weight loss, fever, night sweats, a sense of abdominal fullness), which may prompt
evaluation. Initially, pallor, bleeding, easy bruising, and lymphadenopathy are unusual, but moderate or
occasionally extreme splenomegaly is common (60 to 70% of cases). With disease progression,
splenomegaly may increase, and pallor and bleeding occur. Fever, marked lymphadenopathy, and
maculopapular skin involvement are ominous developments.
Diagnosis
• CBC and peripheral smear
• Bone marrow examination
• Cytogenetic studies (Ph chromosome)
CML is most frequently diagnosed by a CBC obtained incidentally or during evaluation of splenomegaly.
===PAGE:1161===
Granulocyte count is elevated, usually < 50,000/
μ
L in asymptomatic patients and 200,000/
μ
L to
1,000,000/
μ
L in symptomatic patients, and platelet count is normal or moderately increased. Hb level is
usually > 10 g/dL.
Peripheral smear may help differentiate CML from leukocytosis of other etiology. In CML, peripheral
smear shows predominantly immature granulocytes and absolute eosinophilia and basophilia, although in
patients with WBC counts < 50,000/
μ
L, immature granulocytes may be uncommon. Leukocytosis in
patients with myelofibrosis is usually associated with nucleated RBCs, teardrop-shaped RBCs, anemia,
and thrombocytopenia. Myeloid leukemoid reactions resulting from cancer or infection are not often
associated with absolute eosinophilia and basophilia.
The leukocyte alkaline phosphatase score is usually low in CML and increased in leukemoid reactions.
Bone marrow examination should be done to evaluate the karyotype as well as cellularity (usually
increased) and extent of myelofibrosis.
Diagnosis is confirmed by presence of the Ph chromosome on cytogenetic or molecular studies, although
it is absent in 5% of patients.
During the accelerated phase of disease, anemia and thrombocytopenia usually develop. Basophils may
increase, and granulocyte maturation may be defective. The proportion of immature cells and the
leukocyte alkaline phosphatase score may increase. In the bone marrow, myelofibrosis may develop and
sideroblasts may be seen on microscopy. Evolution of the neoplastic clone may be associated with
development of new abnormal karyotypes, often an extra chromosome 8 or isochromosome 17.
Further evolution may lead to a blast crisis with myeloblasts (60% of patients), lymphoblasts (30%), and
megakaryocytoblasts (10%). In 80% of these patients, additional chromosomal abnormalities occur
frequently.
Prognosis
With imatinib, survival is > 90% at 5 yr after diagnosis. Before imatinib was used, with treatment 5 to 10%
of patients died within 2 yr of diagnosis; 10 to 15% died each year thereafter. Median survival was 4 to 7
yr. Most (90%) deaths follow a blast crisis or an accelerated phase of the disease. Median survival after
blast crisis is about 3 to 6 mo but can be up to 12 mo with remission.
Ph chromosome-negative CML and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia have a worse prognosis than Ph
chromosome-positive CML. Their clinical behaviors resemble a myelodysplastic syndrome (.
Treatment
• A tyrosine kinase inhibitor, sometimes with chemotherapy
• Sometimes stem cell transplantation
Except when stem cell transplantation is successful, treatment is not curative; however, survival can be
prolonged by treatment with imatinib.
Imatinib and several newer drugs inhibit the specific tyrosine kinase that results from the
BCR-ABL
gene
product. It is dramatically effective in achieving complete clinical and cytogenetic remissions of Ph
chromosome-positive CML and is clearly superior to other regimens (eg, interferon with or without
cytosine
arabinoside). Imatinib also is superior to other treatments in the accelerated and blast phases. In
blast crisis, combinations of chemotherapy with imatinib have a higher response rate than does therapy
with either approach alone. Treatment tolerance is excellent. The high level of durable complete
remissions associated with imatinib therapy has led to the prospect of cure of the disease.
Older chemotherapy regimens are reserved for
BCR-ABL
-negative patients, patients who relapse after
receiving imatinib, and patients in blast crisis. The main agents are busulfan, hydroxyurea, and interferon.
Hydroxyurea is easiest to manage and has the fewest adverse effects. The starting dosage is generally
===PAGE:1162===
500 to 1000 mg po bid. Blood counts should be done every 1 to 2 wk and the dosage adjusted
accordingly. Busulfan often causes unexpected general myelosuppression, and interferon causes a flulike syndrome that often is unacceptable to patients. The main benefit of these therapies is reduction in
distressing splenomegaly and adenopathy and control of the tumor burden to reduce the incidence of
tumor lysis and gout. None of these therapies prolongs median survival > 1 yr compared with untreated
patients; thus, reduction in symptoms is the major goal, and therapy is not continued when patients have
significant toxic symptoms.
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation can be useful for patients refractory to frontline therapy.
Although splenic radiation is rarely used, it may be helpful in refractory cases of CML or in patients with
terminal disease and marked splenomegaly. Total dosage usually ranges from 6 to 10 Gy delivered in
fractions of 0.25 to 2 Gy/day. Treatment should begin with very low doses and careful evaluation of the
WBC count. Response is usually disappointing.
Splenectomy may alleviate abdominal discomfort, lessen thrombocytopenia, and relieve transfusion
requirements when splenomegaly cannot be controlled with chemotherapy or irradiation. Splenectomy
does not play a significant role during the chronic phase of CML.
Myelodysplastic Syndrome
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) involves a group of disorders typified by peripheral
cytopenia, dysplastic hematopoietic progenitors, a hypercellular bone marrow, and a high risk
of conversion to acute myelocytic leukemia (AML). Symptoms are referable to the specific cell
line most affected and may include fatigue, weakness, pallor (secondary to anemia), increased
infections and fever (secondary to neutropenia), and increased bleeding and bruising
(secondary to thrombocytopenia). Diagnosis is by blood count, peripheral smear, and bone
marrow aspiration. Treatment with 5-azacytidine may help; if AML supervenes, it is treated per
the usual protocols.
Pathophysiology
MDS is a group of disorders, often termed preleukemia, refractory anemias, Philadelphia chromosomenegative chronic myelocytic leukemia, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, or agnogenic myeloid
metaplasia, resulting from a somatic mutation of hematopoietic precursors. Etiology is often unknown, but
risk is increased with exposure to benzene, radiation, and chemotherapeutic agents (particularly long or
intense regimens and those involving alkylating agents and epipodophyllotoxins).
MDS is characterized by clonal proliferation of hematopoietic cells, including erythroid, myeloid, and
megakaryocytic forms. The bone marrow is normal or hypercellular, and ineffective hematopoiesis can
cause anemia (most common), neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, or a combination. The disordered cell
production is also associated with morphologic cellular abnormalities in bone marrow and blood.
Extramedullary hematopoiesis may occur, leading to hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Myelofibrosis is
occasionally present at diagnosis or may develop during the course of MDS. Classification is by blood
and bone marrow findings (see
Table 117-4
). The MDS clone is unstable and tends to progress to AML.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms tend to reflect the most affected cell line and may include pallor, weakness, and fatigue
(anemia); fever and infections (neutropenia); and increased bruising, petechiae, epistaxis, and mucosal
bleeding (thrombocytopenia). Splenomegaly and hepatomegaly are common. Symptoms may also be
referable to other underlying disorders; eg, in elderly patients with preexisting cardiovascular disorders,
anemia from MDS may exacerbate anginal pain.
Diagnosis
• CBC
===PAGE:1163===
• Peripheral smear
• Bone marrow examination
MDS is suspected in patients (especially the elderly) with refractory anemia, leukopenia, or
thrombocytopenia. Cytopenias secondary to congenital disorders, vitamin deficiencies, or drug adverse
effects must be ruled out. Diagnosis
[Table 117-4.
Myelodysplastic Syndrome Bone Marrow Findings and Survival]
is by examining peripheral blood and bone marrow and identifying morphologic abnormalities in 10 to
20% of cells of a particular lineage.
Anemia is the most common feature, associated usually with macrocytosis and anisocytosis. With
automatic cell counters, these changes are indicated by an increased MCV and RBC distribution width.
Some degree of thrombocytopenia is usual; on peripheral smear, platelets vary in size, and some appear
hypogranular. The WBC count may be normal, increased, or decreased. Neutrophil cytoplasmic
granularity is abnormal, with anisocytosis and variable numbers of granules. Eosinophils also may have
abnormal granularity. Pseudo Pelger-Huet cells (hyposegmented neutrophils) may be seen. Monocytosis
is characteristic of the chronic myelomonocytic leukemia subgroup, and immature myeloid cells may occur
in the less well differentiated subgroups. The cytogenetic pattern is usually abnormal, with one or more
clonal cytogenetic abnormalities often involving chromosomes 5 or 7.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends greatly on classification and on any associated disorder. Patients with refractory
anemia or refractory anemia with sideroblasts are less likely to progress to the more aggressive forms
and may die of unrelated causes.
Treatment
• Symptom amelioration
• Supportive care
• Possibly stem cell transplantation
Azacitidine relieves symptoms, decreases the rate of transformation to leukemia and the need for
transfusions, and probably improves survival. Other therapy is supportive, including RBC transfusions as
indicated, platelet transfusions for bleeding, and antibiotic therapy for bacterial infection.
Deoxyazacitidine, a hypomethylating agent, is sometimes effective, even in patients who do not respond
to azacitidine. In some patients, erythropoietin to support RBC needs, granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor to manage severe symptomatic granulocytopenia, and, when available, thrombopoietin for severe
thrombocytopenia can serve as important hematopoietic support but have not increased survival.
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is useful, and nonablative allogeneic bone marrow transplantations
are now being studied for patients > 50 yr. Response of MDS to chemotherapy used for AML is similar to
that of AML, after age and karyotype are considered.
===PAGE:1164===
Chapter 118. Lymphomas
Introduction
Lymphomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors arising in the reticuloendothelial and lymphatic
systems. The major types are Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL—see
Table 118-1
).
Lymphomas were once thought to be absolutely distinct from leukemias. However, better understanding
of cell markers and tools with which to evaluate those markers now show that the differentiation between
these 2 cancers is often vague. The notion that lymphoma is relatively restricted to the lymphatic system
and leukemias to the bone marrow, at least in early stages, is also not always true.
Hodgkin Lymphoma
(Hodgkin's Disease)
Hodgkin lymphoma is a localized or disseminated malignant proliferation of cells of the
lymphoreticular system, primarily involving lymph node tissue, spleen, liver, and bone marrow.
Symptoms include painless lymphadenopathy, sometimes with fever, night sweats,
unintentional weight loss, pruritus, splenomegaly, and hepatomegaly. Diagnosis is based on
lymph node biopsy. Treatment is curative in about 75% of cases and consists of chemotherapy
with or without radiation therapy.
In the US, about 8000 new cases of Hodgkin lymphoma are diagnosed annually. The male:female ratio is
1.4:1. Hodgkin lymphoma is rare before age 10 and is most common between ages 15 and 40; a 2nd
peak occurs in people > 50 to 60.
Pathophysiology
Hodgkin lymphoma results from the clonal transformation of cells of B-cell origin, giving rise to
pathognomic binucleated Reed-Sternberg cells. The cause is unknown, but genetic susceptibility and
environmental associations (eg, occupation, such as woodworking; history of treatment with phenytoin,
radiation therapy, or chemotherapy; infection with Epstein-Barr virus,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
,
herpesvirus type 6, HIV) play a role. Risk is slightly increased in people with certain types of
immunosuppression (eg, posttransplant patients taking immunosuppressants); in people with congenital
immunodeficiency states (eg, ataxia-telangiectasia, Klinefelter's syndrome, Chediak-Higashi syndrome,
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome); and in people with certain autoimmune disorders (RA, celiac sprue, Sjogren's
syndrome, SLE).
[Table 118-1.
Comparison of Hodgkin Lymphoma and Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma]
Most patients also develop a slowly progressive defect in cell-mediated immunity (T-cell function) that, in
advanced disease, contributes to common bacterial and unusual fungal, viral, and protozoal infections.
Humoral immunity (antibody production) is depressed in advanced disease. Death often results from
sepsis.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with painless cervical adenopathy. Although the mechanism is unclear, pain may
occur in diseased areas immediately after drinking alcoholic beverages, thereby providing an early
indication of the diagnosis.
Other manifestations develop as the disease spreads through the reticuloendothelial system, generally to
contiguous sites. Intense pruritus
may occur early. Constitutional symptoms include fever, night sweats,
and unintentional weight loss (> 10% of body weight in previous 6 mo), which may signify involvement of
internal lymph nodes (mediastinal or retroperitoneal), viscera (liver), or bone marrow. Splenomegaly is
often present; hepatomegaly may be present. Pel-Ebstein fever (a few days of high fever regularly
===PAGE:1165===
often present; hepatomegaly may be present. Pel-Ebstein fever (a few days of high fever regularly
alternating with a few days to several weeks of normal or below-normal temperature) occasionally occurs.
Cachexia is common as disease advances.
Bone involvement is often asymptomatic but may produce vertebral osteoblastic lesions (ivory vertebrae)
and, rarely, pain with osteolytic lesions and compression fracture. Intracranial, gastric, and cutaneous
lesions are rare and when present suggest HIV-associated Hodgkin lymphoma.
Local compression by tumor masses often causes symptoms, including
• Jaundice secondary to intrahepatic or extrahepatic bile duct obstruction
• Leg edema secondary to lymphatic obstruction in the pelvis or groin
• Severe dyspnea and wheezing secondary to tracheobronchial compression
• Lung cavitation or abscess secondary to infiltration of lung parenchyma, which may simulate lobar
consolidation or bronchopneumonia
Epidural invasion that compresses the spinal cord may result in paraplegia. Horner's syndrome and
laryngeal paralysis may result when enlarged lymph nodes compress the cervical sympathetic and
recurrent laryngeal nerves. Neuralgic pain follows nerve root compression.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• CT of chest, abdomen, and pelvis
• CBC, ESR, alkaline phosphatase, LDH, liver function tests, albumin, Ca, BUN, and creatinine
• Lymph node biopsy
• Bone marrow biopsy
• Possibly PET for staging, bone scanning if bone pain is present, or MRI if neurologic symptoms are
present
Hodgkin lymphoma is usually suspected in patients with painless lymphadenopathy or mediastinal
adenopathy detected on routine chest x-ray. Similar lymphadenopathy can result from infectious
mononucleosis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus infection, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, or leukemia. Similar
chest x-ray findings can result from lung cancer, sarcoidosis, or TB (for evaluation of a mediastinal mass,
.
A chest x-ray is obtained if not already done. X-ray is usually followed by lymph node biopsy if findings
are confirmed on CT or PET scan of the chest. If only mediastinal nodes are enlarged, mediastinoscopy
or Chamberlain procedure (a limited left anterior thoracostomy allowing biopsy of mediastinal lymph
nodes inaccessible by cervical mediastinoscopy) may be indicated. CT-guided biopsy may also be
considered, but results of fine-needle aspiration are often inaccurate, so lymph node biopsy is preferred.
CBC, ESR, alkaline phosphatase, and renal and liver function tests are generally done. Other tests are
done depending on findings (eg, MRI for symptoms of cord compression, bone scan for evaluation of
bone pain).
Biopsy reveals Reed-Sternberg cells (large binucleated cells) in a characteristically heterogeneous
cellular infiltrate consisting of histiocytes, lymphocytes, monocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils. Classic
Hodgkin lymphoma has 4 histopathologic subtypes (see
Table 118-2
); there is also a lymphocyte-predominant type. Certain antigens on Reed-Sternberg cells may
help differentiate Hodgkin lymphoma from non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and classic Hodgkin lymphoma from
===PAGE:1166===
the lymphocyte-predominant type.
Other test results may be abnormal but are nondiagnostic. CBC may show slight polymorphonuclear
leukocytosis. Lymphocytopenia may occur early and become pronounced with advanced disease.
Eosinophilia is present in about 20% of patients, and thrombocytosis may be present. Anemia, often
microcytic, usually develops with advanced disease. In advanced anemia, defective iron reutilization is
characterized by low serum iron, low iron-binding capacity, and increased bone marrow iron.
Pancytopenia is occasionally caused by bone marrow invasion, usually by the lymphocyte-depleted type.
Hypersplenism ( may appear in patients with marked splenomegaly. Elevated serum alkaline
phosphatase levels may be present, but elevations do not always indicate bone marrow or liver
involvement. Increases in leukocyte alkaline phosphatase, serum haptoglobin, ESR, and other acutephase reactants usually reflect active disease.
Staging:
After diagnosis, stage is determined to guide therapy. The commonly used Ann Arbor staging
system (see
Table 118-3
) incorporates symptoms; physical examination findings; results of imaging tests, including
chest x-ray, CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; and unilateral bone marrow biopsy. Laparotomy is not
required for staging. Other
[Table 118-2.
Histopathologic Subtypes of Hodgkin Lymphoma (WHO Classification)]
staging tests may include PET scan and cardiac and pulmonary function tests in anticipation of therapy.
The Cotswold modifications of the Ann Arbor staging system incorporate the prognostic implications of
tumor bulkiness and numerous disease sites.
Designation of the letter A to any stage means that no systemic symptoms are being experienced.
Designation of the letter B means that at least one systemic symptom is experienced. The presence of
symptoms correlates with response to treatment.
Prognosis
In classic Hodgkin lymphoma, disease-free survival 5 yr after therapy is considered a cure. Relapse is
very rare after 5 yr. Chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy achieves cure in 70 to 80% of
patients. Increased potential for relapse depends on many factors, including male sex, age > 45 yr,
involvement of multiple extranodal sites, and presence of constitutional symptoms at diagnosis. Patients
who do not achieve complete remission or who relapse within 12 mo have a poor prognosis.
Treatment
• Chemotherapy
• Radiation therapy
• Surgery
• Sometimes hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
The choice of treatment modality is complex and depends on the precise stage of disease. Before
treatment, men should be offered sperm banking, and women should discuss fertility options with their
oncologists.
Stage IA, IIA, IB, or IIB disease is generally treated with an abbreviated chemotherapy regimen of
doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD) plus radiation therapy or with
longer-course chemotherapy alone. Such treatment cures about 80% of patients. In patients with bulky
mediastinal disease, chemotherapy may be of longer duration or of a different type, and radiation therapy
is used routinely.
Stage IIIA disease is usually treated with ABVD combination chemotherapy. Involved field irradiation is
===PAGE:1167===
also sometimes added. Cure rates of 75 to 80% have been achieved.
[Table 118-3.
Cotswold Modification of Ann Arbor Staging of Hodgkin Lymphoma and Non-Hodgkin
Lymphoma]
Stage IIIB disease requires ABVD combination chemotherapy typically alone but sometimes with involved
field irradiation. Survival rates range from 70 to 80%.
For stage IVA and IVB disease, ABVD combination chemotherapy is the standard regimen, producing
complete remission in 70 to 80% of patients; > 50% remain disease-free at 5 yr. Other effective drugs
include nitrosoureas, ifosfamide, cisplatin or carboplatin, and etoposide. A promising new drug
combination, Stanford V, is a 12-wk regimen that incorporates involved field irradiation for consolidation.
Autologous transplantation using peripheral stem cell products should be considered for all
physiologically eligible patients with relapsed or refractory Hodgkin lymphoma who respond to salvage
chemotherapy.
Complications of treatment:
Chemotherapy with mechlorethamine, vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine,
and prednisone (MOPP) and MOPP-like regimens increases the risk of leukemia, which generally
develops after > 3 yr. Both chemotherapy and radiation therapy increase the risk of malignant solid
tumors (eg, breast, GI, lung, soft tissue). Mediastinal radiation increases the risk of coronary
atherosclerosis. Breast cancer risk is increased in women beginning about 7 yr after they have received
radiation treatment to adjacent nodal regions.
Posttreatment surveillance:
Routine testing is done to identify recurrence. For a schedule of
posttreatment surveillance, see
Table 118-4
.
[Table 118-4.
Hodgkin Lymphoma Posttreatment Surveillance]
Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) are a heterogeneous group of disorders involving malignant
monoclonal proliferation of lymphoid cells in lymphoreticular sites, including lymph nodes,
bone marrow, the spleen, the liver, and the GI tract. Presenting symptoms usually include
peripheral lymphadenopathy. However, some patients present without lymphadenopathy but
with abnormal lymphocytes in circulation. Compared with Hodgkin lymphoma, there is a greater
likelihood of disseminated disease at the time of diagnosis. Diagnosis is usually based on
lymph node or bone marrow biopsy or both. Treatment involves radiation therapy,
chemotherapy, or both. Stem cell transplantation is usually reserved for salvage therapy after
incomplete remission or relapse.
NHL is more common than Hodgkin lymphoma. It is the 6th most common cancer in the US; about 65,000
new cases are diagnosed annually in all age groups. However, NHL is not one disease but rather a
category of lymphocyte cancers. Incidence increases with age (median age, 50 yr).
Etiology
The cause of NHL is unknown, although, as with the leukemias, substantial evidence suggests a viral
cause (eg, human T-cell leukemia-lymphoma virus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis C virus, HIV). Risk factors
for NHL include immunodeficiency (secondary to posttransplant immunosuppression, AIDS, primary
immune disorders, sicca syndrome, RA),
Helicobacter pylori
infection, certain chemical exposures, and
previous treatment for Hodgkin lymphoma. NHL is the 2nd most common cancer in HIV-infected patients
(, and some AIDS patients present with lymphoma.
C-myc
gene rearrangements are
characteristic of some AIDS-associated lymphomas.
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:1168===
Most (80 to 85%) NHLs arise from B cells; the remainder arise from T cells or natural killer cells. Either
precursor or mature cells may be involved. Overlap exists between leukemia and NHL because both
involve proliferation of lymphocytes or their precursors. A leukemia-like picture with peripheral
lymphocytosis and bone marrow involvement may be present in up to 50% of children and in about 20%
of adults with some types of NHL. Differentiation can be difficult, but generally patients with more
extensive nodal involvement (especially mediastinal), fewer circulating abnormal cells, and fewer blast
forms in the marrow (< 25%) are considered to have lymphoma. A prominent leukemic phase is less
common in aggressive lymphomas, except Burkitt's and lymphoblastic lymphomas.
Hypogammaglobulinemia caused by a progressive decrease in immunoglobulin production occurs in 15%
of patients and may predispose to serious bacterial infection.
Classification
Pathologic classification of NHLs continues to evolve, reflecting new insights into the cells of origin and
the biologic bases of these heterogeneous diseases. The WHO classification (see
Table 118-5
) is valuable because it incorporates immunophenotype, genotype, and cytogenetics,
[Table 118-5.
Subtypes of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (WHO Classification)]
but numerous other systems exist (eg, Lyon classification). Among the most important new lymphomas
recognized by the WHO system are mucosa-associated lymphoid tumors (MALT—; mantle cell
lymphoma (previously diffuse small cleaved cell lymphoma); and anaplastic large cell lymphoma, a
heterogeneous disorder with 75% of cases of T-cell origin, 15% of B-cell origin, and 10% unclassified.
However, despite the plethora of entities, treatment is often similar except in certain T-cell lymphomas.
Lymphomas are commonly also categorized as indolent or aggressive. Indolent lymphomas are slowly
progressive and responsive to therapy but are not curable with standard approaches. Aggressive
lymphomas are rapidly progressive but responsive to therapy and often curable.
In children, NHL is almost always aggressive. Follicular and other indolent lymphomas are very rare. The
treatment of these aggressive lymphomas (Burkitt's, diffuse large B cell, and lymphoblastic lymphoma)
presents special concerns, including GI tract involvement (particularly in the terminal ileum); meningeal
spread (requiring CSF prophylaxis or treatment); and other sanctuary sites of involvement (eg, testes,
brain). In addition, with these potentially curable lymphomas, treatment adverse effects as well as
outcome must be considered, including late risks of secondary cancer, cardiorespiratory sequelae, fertility
preservation, and developmental consequences. Current research is focused on these areas as well as
on the molecular events and predictors of lymphoma in children.
Symptoms and Signs
Many patients present with asymptomatic peripheral lymphadenopathy. Enlarged lymph nodes are
rubbery and discrete and later become matted. Disease is localized in some patients, but most patients
have several areas of involvement. Mediastinal and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy may cause
pressure symptoms on various organs. Extranodal sites may dominate clinically (eg, gastric involvement
can simulate GI carcinoma; intestinal lymphoma may cause a malabsorption syndrome; HIV patients who
develop NHL often present with CNS involvement).
The skin and bones are initially involved in 15% of patients with aggressive lymphoma and in 7% of those
with indolent lymphoma. Occasionally, patients with extensive abdominal or thoracic disease develop
chylous ascites or pleural effusion because of lymphatic obstruction. Weight loss, fever, night sweats, and
asthenia indicate disseminated disease. Patients may have hepatomegaly and splenomegaly as well.
Two problems are common in NHL but rare in Hodgkin lymphoma: Congestion and edema of the face and
neck from pressure on the superior vena cava (superior vena cava or superior mediastinal syndrome)
may occur. Also, ureters may be compressed by retroperitoneal or pelvic lymph nodes or both; this
compression may interfere with urinary flow and cause secondary renal failure.
===PAGE:1169===
Anemia is initially present in about 33% of patients and eventually develops in most. It may be caused by
bleeding from GI lymphoma, with or without low platelet levels; hemolysis from hypersplenism or Coombs'-
positive hemolytic anemia; bone marrow infiltration from lymphoma; or marrow suppression from
chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
The acute illness of adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma (associated with human T-lymphotrophic virus 1
[HTLV-1]) has a fulminating clinical course with skin infiltrates, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly,
and leukemia. The leukemic cells are malignant T cells, many with convoluted nuclei. Hypercalcemia
often develops, related to humoral factors rather than to direct bone invasion.
Patients with anaplastic large cell lymphoma have rapidly progressive skin lesions, adenopathy, and
visceral lesions. This disease may be mistaken for Hodgkin lymphoma or metastatic undifferentiated
carcinoma.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• CT of chest, abdomen, and pelvis (possibly integrated PET-CT)
• CBC, ESR, alkaline phosphatase, LDH, liver function tests, albumin, Ca, BUN, creatinine, electrolytes,
and uric acid
• HIV, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus testing
• Lymph node and bone marrow biopsy
• MRI of spine if neurologic symptoms are present
As with Hodgkin lymphoma, NHL is usually suspected in patients with painless lymphadenopathy or when
mediastinal adenopathy is detected on routine chest x-ray. Painless lymphadenopathy can also result
from infectious mononucleosis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus infection, primary HIV infection, or
leukemia. Similar chest x-ray findings can result from lung carcinoma, sarcoidosis, or TB. Less commonly,
patients present after a finding of peripheral lymphocytosis on CBC done for nonspecific symptoms. In
such cases, the differential diagnosis includes leukemia, Epstein-Barr virus infection, and Duncan's
syndrome (X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome).
Chest x-ray is obtained if not done previously, and a lymph node biopsy is done if lymphadenopathy is
confirmed on CT or PET scan. If only mediastinal nodes are enlarged, patients require CT-guided needle
biopsy or mediastinoscopy. Usually, tests should include CBC, alkaline phosphatase, renal and liver
function tests, LDH, and uric acid. Other tests are done depending on findings (eg, MRI for symptoms of
spinal cord compression or CNS abnormalities).
Histologic criteria on biopsy include destruction of normal lymph node architecture and invasion of the
capsule and adjacent fat by characteristic neoplastic cells. Immunophenotyping studies to determine the
cell of origin are of great value in identifying specific subtypes and helping define prognosis and
management; these studies also can be done on peripheral cells. Demonstration of the leukocyte
common antigen CD45 by immunoperoxidase rules out metastatic cancer, which is often in the differential
diagnosis of "undifferentiated" cancers. The test for leukocyte common antigen, most surface marker
studies, and gene rearrangement (to document B-cell or T-cell clonality) can be done on fixed tissues.
Cytogenetics and flow cytometry require fresh tissue.
Staging:
Although localized NHL does occur, the disease is typically disseminated when first recognized.
Staging procedures include CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; PET; and bone marrow biopsy. The
final staging of NHL (see
Table 118-3
) is similar to that of Hodgkin lymphoma and is based on clinical and
pathologic findings.
Prognosis
===PAGE:1170===
Patients with T-cell lymphomas generally have a worse prognosis than do those with B-cell types,
although newer intensive treatment regimens may lessen this difference. Prognosis for each NHL variant
is related to differences in tumor cell biology.
Survival also varies with other factors. The International Prognostic Index (IPI) is frequently used in
aggressive lymphomas. It considers 5 risk factors:
• Age > 60
• Poor performance status (can be measured using the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group tool)
• Elevated LDH
• > 1 extranodal site
• Stage III or IV disease
Outcome is worse with an increasing number of risk factors. Survival, as determined by IPI factor, has
improved with the addition of rituximab to the standard chemotherapeutic regimen. Patients in the highest
risk groups (patients with 4 or 5 risk factors) now have a 50% 5-yr survival. Low-risk patients without any
of the risk factors have a very high cure rate. A modified IPI (follicular lymphoma IPI [FLIPI]) is being used
in follicular lymphomas and in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (revised IPI [R-IPI]).
Treatment
• Chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or both
• Sometimes anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody
• Sometimes hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
Treatment varies considerably with cell type, which are too numerous to permit detailed discussion.
Generalizations can be made regarding localized vs advanced disease and aggressive vs indolent forms.
Burkitt's lymphoma (see below) and mycosis fungoides ( are discussed separately.
Localized disease (stages I and II):
Patients with indolent lymphomas rarely present with localized
disease, but when they do, regional radiation therapy may offer long-term control. However, relapses may
occur > 10 yr after radiation therapy.
About one half of patients with aggressive lymphomas present with localized disease, for which
combination chemotherapy, with or without regional radiation, is usually curative. Patients with
lymphoblastic lymphomas or Burkitt's lymphoma, even if apparently localized, must receive intensive
combination chemotherapy with meningeal prophylaxis. Treatment may require maintenance
chemotherapy (lymphoblastic), but cure is expected.
Advanced disease (stages III and IV):
For indolent lymphomas, treatment varies considerably. A watchand-wait approach, treatment with a single alkylating drug, or 2- or 3-drug regimens may be used. Criteria
considered in selecting management options include age, general health, distribution of disease, tumor
bulk, histology, and anticipated benefits of therapy. The B-cell specific anti-CD20 antibody rituximab and
other biologic response modifiers appear to be of benefit; one of these drugs can be combined with
chemotherapy or administered as single therapy. Radiolabeled-antibody therapy is also valuable.
In patients with the aggressive B-cell lymphomas (eg, diffuse large B cell), the standard drug combination
is rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin (doxorubicin), vincristine, prednisone (RCHOP). Complete disease regression is expected in ≥ 70% of patients, depending on the IPI category.
More than 70% of complete responders are cured, and relapses > 2 yr after treatment ceases are rare.
===PAGE:1171===
As cure rates have improved with the use of R-CHOP, autologous transplantation is reserved for patients
with relapsed or refractory aggressive B-cell lymphomas, some younger patients with mantle cell
lymphoma, and some patients with aggressive T-cell lymphomas.
Lymphoma relapse:
The first relapse after initial chemotherapy is almost always treated with
autologous stem cell transplantation. Patients usually should be ≤ 70 yr or in equivalent health and have
responsive disease, good performance status, a source of uncontaminated stem cells, and an adequate
number of CD34+ stem cells (harvested from peripheral blood or bone marrow). Consolidation
myeloablative therapy may include chemotherapy with or without irradiation. Posttreatment
immunotherapy (eg, rituximab, vaccination, IL-2) is being studied.
An allogeneic transplant is the donation of stem cells from a compatible donor (brother, sister, or matched
unrelated donor). The stem cells have a 2-fold effect: reconstituting normal blood counts and providing a
possible graft-vs-tumor effect.
In aggressive lymphoma, a cure may be expected in 30 to 50% of eligible patients undergoing
myeloablative therapy.
In indolent lymphomas, cure with autologous transplantation remains uncertain, although remission may
be superior to that with secondary palliative therapy alone. Reduced intensity allotransplantation appears
to offer a potentially curative option in some patients with indolent lymphoma.
The mortality rate of patients undergoing myeloablative transplantation has decreased dramatically to 2 to
5% for most autologous procedures and to < 15% for most allogeneic procedures.
Complications of treatment:
A late sequela of standard and high-dose chemotherapy is the occurrence
of 2nd tumors, especially myelodysplasias and acute myelogenous leukemia. Chemotherapy combined
with radiation therapy increases this risk, although its incidence is still only about 3%.
Burkitt's Lymphoma
Burkitt's lymphoma is a B-cell lymphoma occurring primarily in children. Endemic (African),
sporadic (non-African), and immunodeficiency-related forms exist.
Burkitt's lymphoma is endemic in central Africa and constitutes 30% of childhood lymphomas in the US.
The form endemic to Africa often manifests as enlargement of the jaw or facial bones. In non-African
Burkitt's lymphoma, abdominal disease predominates, often arising in the region of the ileocecal valve or
the mesentery. The kidneys, ovaries, or breasts may be involved as well, and in adults, disease may be
bulky and generalized, often with massive involvement of liver, spleen, and bone marrow. CNS
involvement is often present at diagnosis or with relapsing lymphoma.
Burkitt's lymphoma is the most rapidly growing human tumor, and pathology reveals a high mitotic rate, a
monoclonal proliferation
of B cells, and a "starry-sky" pattern of benign macrophages that have engulfed
apoptotic malignant lymphocytes. There is a distinctive genetic translocation involving the Cmyc
gene on
chromosome 8 and the immunoglobulin heavy chain of chromosome 14. The disease is closely
associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection in endemic lymphoma; however, it is uncertain whether
Epstein-Barr virus plays an etiologic role. Burkitt's lymphoma occurs frequently in patients with AIDS and
may be an AIDS-defining disease.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on biopsy of lymph node or tissue from another suspected disease site. Staging
includes CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, bone marrow biopsy, CSF cytology, and PET scan.
Treatment
• Intensive chemotherapy
===PAGE:1172===
Treatment must be initiated rapidly and staging studies must be expedited because of rapid tumor growth.
An intensive alternating regimen-cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, methotrexate, ifosfamide,
etoposide, and cytarabine (CODOX-M/IVAC)-results in a cure rate of > 90% for children and adults.
Meningeal prophylaxis is essential. With treatment, tumor lysis syndrome ( is common, and
patients must receive IV hydration, allopurinol or rasburicase, alkalinization, and close attention to
electrolytes (particularly K and Ca).
If the patient presents with bowel obstruction secondary to tumor and the tumor is completely resected at
initial diagnostic-therapeutic laparotomy, then aggressive therapy is still indicated. Salvage therapy for
treatment failures is generally unsuccessful, underscoring the importance of very aggressive initial
therapy.
Mycosis Fungoides
Mycosis fungoides is an uncommon chronic T-cell lymphoma primarily affecting the skin and
occasionally the internal organs.
Mycosis fungoides is rare compared with Hodgkin lymphoma and NHL. Unlike most other lymphomas, it is
insidious in onset, sometimes appearing as a chronic, pruritic rash that is difficult to diagnose. It begins
focally but may spread to involve most of the skin. Lesions are plaquelike but may become nodular or
ulcerated. Eventually, systemic involvement of lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and lungs occurs, resulting in
the advent of symptoms, which include fever, night sweats, and unintentional weight loss.
Diagnosis
• Skin biopsy
• For staging, bone marrow biopsy and CT of chest, abdomen, and pelvis
Diagnosis is based on skin biopsy, but histology may be equivocal early in the course because of
insufficient quantities of lymphoma cells. The malignant cells are mature T cells (T4+, T11+, T12+).
Characteristic Pautrier's microabscesses are present in the epidermis. In some cases, a leukemic phase
called Sezary syndrome is characterized by the appearance of malignant T cells with serpentine nuclei in
the peripheral blood.
Once mycosis fungoides has been confirmed, the stage (see
Table 118-3
) is determined by CT scan of
the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and by bone marrow biopsy for blood or lymph node involvement. PET
scan may also be used for suspected visceral involvement.
Prognosis
Most patients are > 50 yr at diagnosis; average life expectancy is 7 to 10 yr after diagnosis, even without
treatment. However, survival rates vary markedly depending on stage at diagnosis. Patients who receive
treatment for stage IA disease have a life expectancy analogous to that of similar people without mycosis
fungoides. Patients who receive treatment for stage IIB disease survive for about 3 yr. Patients treated for
stage III disease survive an average of 4 to 6 yr. Patients treated for stage IVA or IVB disease (extracutaneous disease) survive < 1.5 yr.
Treatment
• Radiation therapy, topical chemotherapy, phototherapy, or topical corticosteroids
• Sometimes systemic chemotherapy
Electron beam radiation therapy, in which most of the energy is absorbed in the first 5 to 10 mm of tissue,
and topical nitrogen mustard have proved highly effective. Plaques may also be treated with sunlight and
topical corticosteroids. Systemic treatment with alkylating drugs and folic acid antagonists produces
transient tumor regression, but systemic treatment is primarily used when other therapies have failed,
===PAGE:1173===
after relapse, or in patients with documented extranodal or extracutaneous disease. Extracorporeal
phototherapy with a chemosensitive drug has shown modest success. The adenosine deaminase
inhibitors fludarabine and 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine show promise.
===PAGE:1174===
Chapter 119. Plasma Cell Disorders
Introduction
(Dysproteinemias; Monoclonal Gammopathies; Paraproteinemias; Plasma Cell Dyscrasias)
Plasma cell disorders are a diverse group of disorders of unknown etiology characterized by the
disproportionate proliferation of one clone of B cells and the presence of a structurally and
electrophoretically homogeneous (monoclonal) immunoglobulin or polypeptide subunit in serum, urine, or
both.
Patiology
(For structural features and classification of the immunoglobulins, see p.
.)
After developing in the bone marrow, undifferentiated B cells enter peripheral lymphoid tissues, such as
lymph nodes, spleen, and Peyer's patches. Here, they begin to differentiate into cells, each of which can
respond to a limited number of antigens. After encountering the appropriate antigen, some B cells
undergo clonal proliferation into plasma cells. Each clonal plasma cell line is committed to synthesizing
one specific immunoglobulin antibody that consists of 2 identical heavy chains (gamma [γ], mu [μ], alpha
[α], delta [δ], or epsilon [ε]) and 2 identical light chains (kappa [κ] or lambda [λ]). A slight excess of light
chains is normally produced, and urinary excretion of small amounts of free polyclonal light chains (≤ 40
mg/24 h) is normal.
Plasma cell disorders are of unknown etiology and are characterized by the disproportionate proliferation
of one clone. The result is a corresponding increase in the serum level of its product, the monoclonal
immunoglobulin protein (M-protein).
M-proteins may consist of both heavy and light chains or of only one type of chain. Some show antibody
activity, which may cause autoimmune damage of organs, particularly the kidneys. When M-proteins are
produced, production of other immunoglobulins is commonly reduced, and immunity may become
impaired. M-protein may coat platelets, inactivate clotting factors, increase blood viscosity, and cause
bleeding by other mechanisms. M-proteins may also produce secondary amyloidosis. The clonal cells can
infiltrate bone matrix or marrow, with resultant osteoporosis, hypercalcemia, anemia, or pancytopenia.
Plasma cell disorders can vary from asymptomatic, stable conditions (in which only the protein is present)
to progressive cancers (eg, multiple myeloma—for classification, see
Table 119-1
). Rarely, transient plasma cell disorders occur in patients with drug hypersensitivity
(sulfonamide, phenytoin, and penicillin), with presumed viral infections, and after heart or transplant
surgery.
Plasma cell disorders may be suspected because of clinical manifestations, findings during evaluation of
anemia, or an incidental finding of elevated serum protein or proteinuria that leads to further evaluation
with serum or urine protein electrophoresis. Electrophoresis detects M-protein, which is further evaluated
with immunofixation electrophoresis for identification of heavy and light chain classes.
Heavy Chain Diseases
Heavy chain diseases are neoplastic plasma cell disorders characterized by overproduction of
monoclonal immunoglobulin heavy chains. Symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment vary according
to the specific disorder.
Heavy chain diseases are plasma cell disorders that are generally malignant. In most plasma cell
disorders, M-proteins are structurally similar to normal antibody molecules. In contrast, in heavy chain
diseases, incomplete monoclonal immunoglobulins (true paraproteins) are produced. They consist of only
heavy chain components (either
α
,
γ
,
μ
, or
δ
) without light chains (
ε
heavy chain disease has not been
described). Most heavy chain proteins are fragments of their normal counterparts with internal deletions
of variable length; these deletions appear to result from structural mutations. The clinical picture is more
===PAGE:1175===
like lymphoma than multiple myeloma. Heavy chain diseases are considered in patients with clinical
manifestations suggesting lymphoproliferative disorders.
IgA Heavy Chain Disease
(
α
-Chain Disease)
IgA heavy chain disease is the most common heavy chain disease and is similar to
Mediterranean lymphoma (immunoproliferative small intestinal disease).
IgA heavy chain disease usually appears between ages 10 and 30 and is geographically
[Table 119-1.
Classification of Plasma Cell Disorders]
concentrated in the Middle East. The cause may be an aberrant immune response to a parasite or other
microorganism. Villous atrophy and plasma cell infiltration of the jejunal mucosa are usually present and,
sometimes, infiltration of the mesenteric lymph nodes. The peripheral lymph nodes, bone marrow, liver,
and spleen usually are not involved. A respiratory tract form of the disease has been reported rarely.
Osteolytic lesions do not occur.
Almost all patients present with diffuse abdominal lymphoma and malabsorption. Serum protein
electrophoresis is normal in half of cases; often, there is an increased
α
and
β
fraction or a decreased
γ
fraction. Diagnosis requires the detection of a monoclonal
α
chain on immunofixation electrophoresis.
This chain is sometimes found in concentrated urine. If it cannot be found in serum or urine, biopsy is
required. The abnormal protein can sometimes be detected in intestinal secretions. The intestinal cellular
infiltrate may be pleomorphic and not overtly malignant. Bence Jones proteinuria is absent.
The course is highly variable: Some patients die in 1 to 2 yr, whereas others have remissions that last
many years, particularly after treatment with corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs, and broad-spectrum
antibiotics.
IgG Heavy Chain Disease
(
γ
-Chain Disease)
IgG heavy chain disease is generally similar to an aggressive malignant lymphoma but is
occasionally asymptomatic and benign.
IgG heavy chain disease occurs primarily in elderly men but can occur in children. Associated chronic
disorders include RA,
Sjogren's syndrome, SLE, TB, myasthenia gravis, hypereosinophilic syndrome,
autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and thyroiditis. Reductions in normal immunoglobulin levels occur. Lytic
bone lesions are uncommon. Amyloidosis sometimes develops.
Common manifestations include lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly, fever, and recurring
infections. Palatal edema occurs in about one fourth of patients.
The CBC may show anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, eosinophilia, and circulating atypical
lymphocytes or plasma cells. Diagnosis requires demonstration by immunofixation of free monoclonal
heavy chain fragments of IgG in serum and urine. Of affected patients, one half have monoclonal serum
components > 1 g/dL (often broad and heterogeneous), and one half have proteinuria > 1 g/24 h.
Although heavy chain proteins may involve any IgG subclass, the G3 subclass is especially common.
Bone marrow or lymph node biopsy, done if other tests are not diagnostic, reveals variable
histopathology.
The median survival with aggressive disease is about 1 yr. Death usually results from bacterial infection
or progressive malignancy. Alkylating drugs, vincristine, or corticosteroids, and radiation therapy may yield
transient remissions.
===PAGE:1176===
IgM Heavy Chain Disease
(
μ
-Chain Disease)
IgM heavy chain disease, which is rare, produces a clinical picture similar to chronic
lymphocytic leukemia or other lymphoproliferative disorders.
IgM heavy chain disease most often affects adults > 50 yr. Visceral organ involvement (spleen, liver,
abdominal lymph nodes) is common, but extensive peripheral lymphadenopathy is not. Pathologic
fractures and amyloidosis may occur. Serum protein electrophoresis usually is normal or shows
hypogammaglobulinemia. Bence Jones proteinuria (type
κ
) is present in 10 to 15% of patients.
Diagnosis usually requires bone marrow examination; vacuolated plasma cells are present in two thirds of
patients and, when present, are virtually pathognomonic. Death can occur in a few months or in many
years. The usual cause of death is uncontrollable proliferation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells.
Treatment depends on the patient's condition but may consist of alkylating agents plus corticosteroids or
may be similar to treatment of the lymphoproliferative disorder that it most closely resembles.
Macroglobulinemia
(Primary Macroglobulinemia; Waldenstrom's Macroglobulinemia)
Macroglobulinemia is a malignant plasma cell disorder in which B cells produce excessive
amounts of IgM M-proteins. Manifestations may include hyperviscosity, bleeding, recurring
infections, and generalized adenopathy. Diagnosis requires bone marrow examination and
demonstration of M-protein. Treatment includes plasmapheresis as needed for hyperviscosity,
and systemic therapy with alkylating drugs, corticosteroids, nucleoside analogs, or monoclonal
antibodies.
Macroglobulinemia, an uncommon B-cell cancer, is clinically more similar to a lymphomatous disease than
to myeloma and other plasma cell disorders. Cause is unknown. Men are affected more often than
women; median age is 65.
After myeloma, macroglobulinemia is the 2nd most common malignant disorder associated with a
monoclonal gammopathy. Excessive amounts of IgM M-proteins can also accumulate in other disorders,
causing manifestations similar to macroglobulinemia. Small monoclonal IgM components are present in
the sera of about 5% of patients with B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma; this circumstance is termed
macroglobulinemic lymphoma. Additionally, IgM M-proteins are occasionally present in patients with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia or other lymphoproliferative disorders.
Clinical manifestations of macroglobulinemia may be due to the large amount of high mol wt monoclonal
IgM proteins circulating in plasma, but most patients do not develop problems related to high IgM levels.
Some of these proteins are antibodies directed toward autologous IgG (rheumatoid factors) or I antigens
(cold agglutinins). About 10% are cryoglobulins. Secondary amyloidosis occurs in 5% of patients.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients are asymptomatic, but many present with manifestations of hyperviscosity syndrome:
fatigue, weakness, skin and mucosal bleeding, visual disturbances, headache, symptoms of peripheral
neuropathy, and other changing neurologic manifestations. An increased plasma volume can precipitate
heart failure. Cold sensitivity, Raynaud's syndrome, or recurring bacterial infections may occur.
Examination may disclose lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and purpura. Marked
engorgement
and localized narrowing of retinal veins, which resemble sausage links, suggests hyperviscosity
syndrome. Retinal hemorrhages, exudates, microaneurysms, and papilledema occur in late stages.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1177===
• CBC with platelets, RBC indices, and peripheral blood smear
• Serum protein electrophoresis followed by serum and urine immunofixation
• Serum viscosity assay
• Bone marrow examination
• Sometimes lymph node biopsy
Macroglobulinemia is suspected in patients with symptoms of hyperviscosity or other typical symptoms,
particularly if anemia is present. However, it is often diagnosed incidentally when protein electrophoresis
reveals an M-protein that proves to be IgM by immunofixation. Laboratory evaluation includes tests used
to evaluate plasma cell disorders (see
Multiple Myeloma
 as well as measurement of
cryoglobulins, rheumatoid factor, and cold agglutinins; coagulation studies; and direct Coombs' test.
Moderate normocytic, normochromic anemia, marked rouleau formation, and a very high ESR are typical.
Leukopenia, relative lymphocytosis, and thrombocytopenia occasionally occur. Cryoglobulins, rheumatoid
factor, or cold agglutinins may be present. If cold agglutinins are present, the direct Coombs' test usually
is positive. Various coagulation and platelet function abnormalities may occur. Results of routine blood
studies may be spurious if cryoglobulinemia or marked hyperviscosity is present. Normal immunoglobulins
are decreased in one half of patients.
Immunofixation electrophoresis of concentrated urine frequently shows a monoclonal light chain (usually
κ
), but gross Bence Jones proteinuria is unusual. Bone marrow studies show a variable increase in
plasma cells, lymphocytes, plasmacytoid lymphocytes, and mast cells. Periodic acid-Schiff-positive
material may be present in lymphoid cells. Lymph node biopsy, done if bone marrow examination is
normal, is frequently interpreted as diffuse well-differentiated or plasmacytic lymphocytic lymphoma.
Serum viscosity is measured to confirm suspected hyperviscosity and when present is usually > 4.0
(normal, 1.4 to 1.8).
Treatment
• Plasmapheresis (when hyperviscosity is present)
• Alkylating drugs, nucleoside analogs, monoclonal antibodies (rituximab), or a combination
• Possibly bortezomib, thalidomide, or lenalidomide
The course is variable, with a median survival of 7 to 10 yr. Age > 60 yr, anemia, and cryoglobulinemia
predict shorter survival.
Often, patients require no treatment for many years. If hyperviscosity is present, initial treatment is
plasmapheresis, which rapidly reverses bleeding as well as neurologic abnormalities. Plasmapheresis
often needs to be repeated.
Long-term treatment with oral alkylating drugs may be indicated for palliation, but bone marrow toxicity
can occur. Nucleoside analogs (fludarabine and 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine) produce responses in large
numbers of newly diagnosed patients. Rituximab can reduce tumor burden without suppressing normal
hematopoiesis. However, during the first several months, IgM levels may increase, requiring
plasmapheresis. The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib and the immunomodulating agents thalidomide and
lenalidomide are also effective in this cancer.
Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is the production of M-protein
by noncancerous plasma cells in the absence of other manifestations typical of multiple
===PAGE:1178===
myeloma.
The incidence of MGUS increases with age, from 1% of people aged 25 yr to > 5% of people > 70 yr.
MGUS may occur in association with other disorders (see
Table 119-1
), in which case M-proteins may be
antibodies produced in large amounts in response to protracted antigenic stimuli.
MGUS usually is asymptomatic, but peripheral neuropathy can occur. Although most cases are initially
benign, up to 25% (1%/yr) progress to myeloma or a related B-cell disorder, such as macroglobulinemia,
amyloidosis, or lymphoma.
Diagnosis is usually suspected when M-protein is incidentally detected in blood or urine during a routine
examination. On laboratory evaluation, M-protein is present in low levels in serum (< 3 g/dL) or urine (<
300 mg/24 h). MGUS is differentiated from other plasma cell disorders because M-protein levels remain
relatively stable over time and lytic bone lesions, anemia, and renal dysfunction are
absent. However,
patients show enhanced bone loss and a higher rate of fractures. Thus, baseline evaluation with a
skeletal survey and bone densitometry should be done. Bone marrow shows only mild plasmacytosis (<
10% of nucleated cells).
No antineoplastic treatment is recommended. However, recent studies suggest that MGUS patients with
associated bone loss (osteopenia or osteoporosis) may benefit from treatment with bisphosphonates.
Patients should be evaluated for progression of disease every 6 to 12 mo with clinical examination and
serum and urine protein electrophoresis.
Multiple Myeloma
(Myelomatosis; Plasma Cell Myeloma)
Multiple myeloma is a cancer of plasma cells that produce monoclonal immunoglobulin and
invade and destroy adjacent bone tissue. Common manifestations include bone pain, renal
insufficiency, hypercalcemia, anemia, and recurrent infections. Diagnosis requires
demonstration of M-protein (sometimes present in urine and not serum) and either lytic bone
lesions, light-chain proteinuria, or excessive plasma cells in bone marrow. A bone marrow
biopsy is usually needed. Specific treatment includes conventional chemotherapy with the
addition of bortezomib, lenalidomide, thalidomide, corticosteroids, and high-dose melphalan
followed by autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation.
The incidence of multiple myeloma is 2 to 4/100,000. Male:female ratio is 1.6:1, and the median age is
about 65 yr. Prevalence in blacks is twice that in whites. Etiology is unknown, although chromosomal and
genetic factors, radiation, and chemicals have been suggested.
Pathophysiology
The M-protein produced by the malignant plasma cells is IgG in about 55% of myeloma patients and IgA
in about 20%; of patients producing either IgG or IgA, 40% also have Bence Jones proteinuria, which is
free monoclonal
κ
or
λ
light chains in the urine. In 15 to 20% of patients, plasma cells secrete only Bence
Jones protein. IgD myeloma accounts for about 1% of cases.
Diffuse osteoporosis or discrete osteolytic lesions develop, usually in the pelvis, spine, ribs, and skull.
Lesions are caused by bone replacement by expanding plasmacytomas or by cytokines that are secreted
by malignant plasma cells that activate osteoclasts and suppress osteoblasts. The osteolytic lesions are
usually multiple; occasionally, they are solitary intramedullary masses. Enhanced bone loss may also lead
to hypercalcemia. Extraosseous solitary plasmacytomas are unusual but may occur in any tissue,
especially in the upper respiratory tract.
Renal failure (myeloma kidney) occurs in many patients at diagnosis or during the course of the disorder
due to many causes, most commonly from deposition of light chains in the distal tubules and
hypercalcemia. Patients also often develop anemia usually from kidney disease or suppression of
erythropoiesis by cancer cells.
===PAGE:1179===
Susceptibility to bacterial infection may occur in some patients. Viral infections, especially herpes
infections, are increasingly occurring as a result of newer treatment modalities. Secondary amyloidosis
( occurs in 10% of myeloma patients, most often in patients with Bence Jones proteinuria of
λ
-
type.
Variant expressions of multiple myeloma occur (see
Table 119-2
).
[Table 119-2.
Variant Expressions of Multiple Myeloma]
Symptoms and Signs
Persistent bone pain (especially in the back or thorax), renal failure, and recurring bacterial infections are
the most common problems on presentation, but many patients are identified when routine laboratory
tests show an elevated total protein level in the blood or show proteinuria. Pathologic fractures are
common, and vertebral collapse may lead to spinal cord compression and paraplegia. Symptoms of
anemia predominate or may be the sole reason for evaluation in some patients, and a few patients have
manifestations of hyperviscosity syndrome (. Peripheral neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome,
abnormal bleeding, and symptoms of hypercalcemia (eg, polydipsia) are common. Patients may also
present with renal failure. Lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are unusual.
Diagnosis
• CBC with platelets, peripheral blood smear, ESR, and chemistry panel (BUN, creatinine, Ca, uric acid,
LDH)
• Serum and urine protein electrophoresis followed by immunofixation
• X-rays (skeletal survey)
• Bone marrow examination
Multiple myeloma is suspected in patients > 40 yr with persistent unexplained bone pain, particularly at
night or at rest, other typical symptoms, or unexplained laboratory abnormalities, such as elevated blood
protein or urinary protein, hypercalcemia, renal insufficiency, or anemia. Laboratory evaluation includes
routine blood tests, protein electrophoresis, x-rays, and bone marrow examination.
Routine blood tests include CBC, ESR, and chemistry panel. Anemia is present in 80% of patients,
usually normocytic-normochromic anemia with formation of rouleau, which are clusters of 3 to 12 RBCs
that occur in stacks. WBC and platelet counts are usually normal. ESR usually is > 100 mm/h; BUN,
serum creatinine, LDH, and serum uric acid are frequently elevated. Anion gap is sometimes low.
Hypercalcemia is present at diagnosis in about 10% of patients.
Protein electrophoresis is done on a serum sample and on a urine sample concentrated from a 24-h
collection to quantify the amount of urinary M-protein. Serum electrophoresis identifies M-protein in about
80 to 90% of patients. The remaining 10 to 20% are usually patients with only free monoclonal light
chains (Bence Jones protein) or IgD. They almost always have M-protein detected by urine protein
electrophoresis. Immunofixation electrophoresis can identify the immunoglobulin class of the M-protein
and can often detect light-chain protein if serum immuno-electrophoresis is falsely negative;
immunofixation electrophoresis is done even when the serum test is negative if multiple myeloma is
strongly suspected. Light-chain analysis with delineation of
κ
and
λ
ratios helps confirm the diagnosis.
Light-chain analysis can also be used to monitor efficacy of therapy and provide prognostic data. Serum
level of
β
-microglobulin is measured if diagnosis is confirmed or very likely; it frequently is elevated, and
albumin may be decreased. A new international staging system uses the levels of serum albumin and
β
-
microglobulin to indicate severity of disease and subsequent prognosis.
X-rays include a skeletal survey. Punched-out lytic lesions or diffuse osteoporosis is present in 80% of
===PAGE:1180===
cases. Radionuclide bone scans usually are not helpful. MRI can provide more detail and is obtained if
specific sites of pain or neurologic symptoms are present.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are done and reveal sheets or clusters of plasma cells; myeloma is
diagnosed when > 10% of the cells are of this type. However, bone marrow involvement is patchy;
therefore, some samples from patients with myeloma may show < 10% plasma cells. Still, the number of
plasma cells in bone marrow is rarely normal. Plasma cell morphology does not correlate with the class of
immunoglobulin synthesized. Chromosomal studies on bone marrow may reveal specific karyotypic
abnormalities in plasma cells associated with differences in survival.
In patients without serum M protein, myeloma is indicated by Bence Jones proteinuria > 300 mg/24 h,
osteolytic lesions (without evidence of metastatic cancer or granulomatous disease), and sheets or
clusters of plasma cells in the bone marrow.
Prognosis
The disease is progressive and incurable, but median survival has recently improved to > 5 yr as a result
of advances in treatment. Unfavorable prognostic signs at diagnosis are lower serum albumin and higher
β
-microglobulin levels. Patients presenting with renal failure also do poorly unless kidney function
improves with therapy.
Because multiple myeloma is ultimately fatal, patients are likely to benefit from discussions of end-of-life
care that involve their doctors and appropriate family and friends.
Points for discussion may include
advance directives, the use of feeding tubes, and pain relief.
Treatment
• Chemotherapy for symptomatic patients
• Thalidomide, bortezomib, or lenalidomide with corticosteroids and/or chemotherapy
• Possibly maintenance therapy
• Possibly stem cell transplantation
• Possibly radiation therapy
• Treatment of complications (anemia, hypercalcemia, renal insufficiency, infections, skeletal lesions)
Treatment of myeloma has improved in the past decade, and long-term survival is a reasonable
therapeutic target. Therapy involves direct treatment of malignant cells in symptomatic patients and the
treatment of the complications. Asymptomatic patients probably do not benefit from treatment, which is
usually withheld until symptoms or complications develop. However, patients with evidence of lytic lesions
or bone loss (osteopenia or osteoporosis) should be treated with monthly infusions of zoledronic acid or
pamidronate to reduce the risk of skeletal complications.
Treatment of malignant cells:
Until recently, conventional chemotherapy consisted only of oral
melphalan and prednisone given in cycles of 4 to 6 wk with monthly evaluation of response. Recent
studies show superior outcome with the addition of either bortezomib or thalidomide. Other
chemotherapeutic drugs, including other alkylating drugs (eg, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and its
newer analog liposomal pegylated doxorubicin) also are more effective when combined with thalidomide
or bortezomib. Many other patients are effectively treated with bortezomib, thalidomide, or lenalidomide
plus glucocorticoids and/or chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy response is indicated by decreases in serum or urine M-protein, increases in RBCs, and
improvement in renal function among patients presenting with kidney failure.
Autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation may be considered for patients who have adequate
===PAGE:1181===
cardiac, hepatic, pulmonary, and renal function, particularly those whose disease is stable or responsive
after several cycles of initial therapy. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation after nonmyeloablative
chemotherapy (eg, low-dose cyclophosphamide and fludarabine) or low-dose radiation therapy can
produce myeloma-free survival of 5 to 10 yr in some patients. However, allogeneic stem cell
transplantation remains experimental because of the high morbidity and mortality from graft vs. host
disease.
In relapsed or refractory myeloma, combinations of bortezomib, thalidomide, or its newer analog
lenalidomide with chemotherapy or corticosteroids may be used. These drugs are usually combined with
other effective drugs that the patient has not yet been treated with, although patients with prolonged
remissions may respond to retreatment with the same regimen that led to the remission.
Maintenance therapy has been tried with nonchemotherapeutic drugs, including interferon alfa, which
prolongs remission but does not improve survival and is associated with significant adverse effects.
Following a response to corticosteroid-based regimens, corticosteroids alone are effective as a
maintenance treatment. Thalidomide may also be effective as a maintenance treatment, and studies are
evaluating maintenance therapy with bortezomib and lenalidomide among patients who have responded
to these drugs alone or in combination therapeutic regimens.
Treatment of complications:
In addition to direct treatment of malignant cells, therapy must also be
directed at complications, which include anemia, hypercalcemia, renal insufficiency, infections, and
skeletal lesions.
Anemia
can be treated with recombinant erythropoietin (40,000 units sc once/wk) in patients whose
anemia is inadequately relieved by chemotherapy. If anemia causes cardiovascular or significant systemic
symptoms, packed RBCs are transfused. Plasmapheresis is indicated if hyperviscosity develops (.
Hypercalcemia
is treated with saluresis, IV bisphosphonates, and sometimes with prednisone. Most
patients do not require allopurinol. However, allopurinol is indicated for patients with high levels of serum
uric acid or high tumor burden and a high risk of tumor lysis syndrome with treatment.
Renal compromise
can be ameliorated with adequate hydration. Even patients with prolonged, massive
Bence Jones proteinuria (≥ 10 to 30 g/day) may have intact renal function if they maintain urine output >
2000 mL/day. Dehydration combined with high-osmolar IV contrast may precipitate acute oliguric renal
failure in patients with Bence Jones proteinuria.
Infection
is more likely during chemotherapy-induced neutropenia. In addition, infections with the herpes
zoster virus are occurring more frequently in patients treated with newer antimyeloma drugs. Documented
bacterial infections should be treated with antibiotics; however, prophylactic use of antibiotics is not
routinely recommended. Prophylactic use
of antiviral drugs may be indicated for patients receiving
specific drugs. Prophylactic IV immune globulin may reduce the risk of infection but is generally reserved
for patients with recurring infections. Pneumococcal and influenza vaccines are indicated to prevent
infection.
Skeletal lesions
require multiple supportive measures. Maintenance of ambulation and supplemental Ca
and vitamin D help preserve bone density. Analgesics and palliative doses of radiation therapy (18 to 24
Gy) can relieve bone pain. However, radiation therapy may impair the patient's ability to receive cytotoxic
doses of systemic chemotherapy. Most patients, especially those with lytic lesions and generalized
osteoporosis or osteopenia, should receive a monthly IV bisphosphonate (either pamidronate or
zoledronic acid). Bisphosphonates reduce skeletal complications and lessen bone pain and may have an
antitumor effect.
===PAGE:1182===
Chapter 120. Iron Overload
Introduction
(Hemosiderosis; Hemochromatosis)
(For iron poisoning, see p.
.)
Iron (Fe) in excess of bodily needs is deposited in tissues:
• Hemosiderosis is focal deposition of iron that does not cause tissue damage.
• Hemochromatosis (iron overload) is a typically systemic process in which iron deposition can cause
tissue damage.
Iron overload may result from primary hemochromatosis (a genetic disorder of iron metabolism), from
excess oral intake or absorption of iron, or from repeated blood transfusions. Morbidity is mainly due to
iron accumulation in the endocrine organs (especially the pancreas, gonads, and pituitary), liver, and
heart.
Hemosiderosis
Hemosiderosis is focal deposition of iron that does not cause tissue damage.
Focal hemosiderosis can result from hemorrhage within an organ. Iron liberated from extravasated RBCs
is deposited within that organ, and significant hemosiderin deposits may eventually develop. Occasionally,
iron loss from tissue hemorrhage causes iron deficiency anemia, because iron in tissues cannot be
reused.
Usually the lungs are affected, and the cause usually is recurrent pulmonary hemorrhage, either
idiopathic (eg, Goodpasture's syndrome) or due to chronic pulmonary hypertension (eg, from primary
pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary fibrosis, severe mitral stenosis).
Another common site of accumulation is the kidneys, where hemosiderosis can result from extensive
intravascular hemolysis (. Free Hb is filtered at the glomerulus, resulting in iron deposition in
the kidneys. The renal parenchyma is not damaged, but severe hemosiderinuria may result in iron
deficiency.
Primary Hemochromatosis
(Hereditary Hemochromatosis)
Primary hemochromatosis is a genetic disorder characterized by excessive iron accumulation
that results in tissue damage. Manifestations can include constitutional symptoms, liver
disorders, cardiomyopathy, diabetes, erectile dysfunction, and arthropathy. Diagnosis is by
serum ferritin level and gene assay. Treatment is usually with serial phlebotomies.
Etiology
Until recently, the cause in virtually all patients with primary hemochromatosis was thought to be a
mutation of the
HFE
gene. Recently, other causes have been identified; different mutations causing
primary hemochromatosis occur in ferroportin disease, juvenile hemochromatosis, neonatal
hemochromatosis (neonatal iron storage disease), hypotransferrinemia, and aceruloplasminemia.
Although these types vary markedly in age of onset, clinical consequences of iron overload are the same
in all.
More than 80% of
HFE
-related hemochromatosis is caused by the homozygous
C282Y
or
C282Y/H63D
===PAGE:1183===
compound heterozygote mutation. The disorder is autosomal recessive, with a homozygous frequency of
1:200 and a heterozygous frequency of 1:8 in people of northern European ancestry. It is uncommon
among blacks and rare among people of Asian ancestry. Of patients with clinical hemochromatosis,
83%
are homozygous. However, for unknown reasons, phenotypic (clinical) disease is much less common than
predicted by the frequency of the gene (ie, many homozygous people do not manifest the disorder).
Pathophysiology
Normal total body iron content is about 2.5 g in women and 3.5 g in men. Because symptoms may be
delayed until iron accumulation is excessive, hemochromatosis may not be recognized until total body iron
content is > 10 g, or often several times greater. In women, clinical manifestations are uncommon before
menopause because iron loss due to menses (and sometimes pregnancy and childbirth) tends to offset
iron accumulation.
The mechanism for iron overload is increased iron absorption from the GI tract, leading to chronic
deposition of iron in the tissues. Hepcidin, a liver-derived peptide, is the critical control mechanism for iron
absorption. Hepcidin, along with the normal
HFE
gene, prevents excessive iron absorption and storage in
normal people.
In general, tissue injury appears to result from reactive free hydroxyl radicals generated when iron
deposition in tissues catalyzes their formation. Other mechanisms may affect particular organs (eg, skin
hyperpigmentation can result from increased melanin as well as iron accumulation).
Symptoms and Signs
The clinical consequences of iron overload are the same regardless of the etiology and pathophysiology
of the overload.
Historically, experts believed that symptoms did not develop until significant organ damage had occurred.
However, organ damage is slow and subtle, and fatigue and nonspecific constitutional symptoms often
occur early.
Other symptoms relate to the organs with the largest iron deposits (see
Table 120-1
). In men, the initial symptoms may be hypogonadism and erectile dysfunction caused by
gonadal iron deposition. Glucose intolerance or diabetes mellitus is another common initial presentation.
Some patients present with hypothyroidism.
Liver disease is the most common complication and may progress to cirrhosis; 20 to 30% of patients with
cirrhosis develop hepatocellular carcinoma. Liver disease is the most common cause of death.
Cardiomyopathy with heart failure is the 2nd most common fatal complication. Hyperpigmentation (bronze
diabetes) is common, as is symptomatic arthropathy.
[Table 120-1.
Common Manifestations of Primary Hemochromatosis]
Diagnosis
• Serum ferritin level
• Genetic testing
Symptoms and signs may be nonspecific, subtle, and of gradual onset, so that index of suspicion should
be high. Primary hemochromatosis should be suspected when typical manifestations, particularly
combinations of such manifestations, remain unexplained after routine evaluation. Although any family
history is a more specific clue, it is not usually present.
Serum ferritin measurement is the simplest and most direct initial test. Elevated levels (> 200 ng/mL in
women or > 300 ng/mL in men) are usually present in primary hemochromatosis but can result from other
abnormalities, such as inflammatory liver disorders (eg, chronic viral hepatitis, nonalcoholic
===PAGE:1184===
steatohepatitis, alcoholic liver disease), cancer, certain systemic inflammatory disorders (eg, RA,
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis), or obesity. Further testing is done if ferritin level is abnormal;
testing includes serum iron (usually > 300 mg/dL) and iron binding capacity (transferrin saturation; levels
usually > 50%). Gene assay is diagnostic of primary hemochromatosis caused by
HFE
gene mutations.
Other types of primary hemochromatosis (eg, ferroportin disease, juvenile hemochromatosis, neonatal
hemochromatosis, transferrin deficiency, ceruloplasmin deficiency) are suspected in very rare instances in
which ferritin and iron blood tests indicate iron overload and genetic testing is negative for the
HFE
gene
mutation, particularly in younger patients. Confirmation of these diagnoses is evolving.
Because the presence of cirrhosis affects prognosis, a liver biopsy is commonly done and tissue iron
content is measured (when
available). High-intensity MRI is a noninvasive alternative for estimating
hepatic iron content that is becoming increasingly accurate.
Screening is required for first-degree relatives of people with primary hemochromatosis by measuring
serum ferritin levels and testing for the
282Y/H63D
gene.
Treatment
• Phlebotomy
Treatment is indicated for patients with clinical manifestations, elevated serum ferritin levels (particularly
levels > 1000 ng/mL), or elevated transferrin saturation. Asymptomatic patients need only periodic (eg,
yearly) clinical evaluation and measurement of serum iron, ferritin, and transferrin saturation.
Phlebotomy is the simplest and most effective method to remove excess iron. It delays progression of
fibrosis to cirrhosis, sometimes even reversing cirrhotic changes, and prolongs survival, but it does not
prevent hepatocellular carcinoma. About 500 mL of blood (about 250 mg of iron) is removed weekly until
serum iron levels are normal and transferrin saturation is < 50%. Weekly phlebotomy may be needed for
many months (eg, if 250 mg Fe are removed per week, 40 wk will be required to remove 10 g Fe). When
iron levels are normal, phlebotomies can be intermittent to maintain transferrin saturation at < 30%.
Diabetes, cardiomyopathy, erectile dysfunction, and other secondary manifestations are treated as
indicated.
Patients should follow a balanced diet; it is not necessary to restrict consumption of iron-containing foods
(eg, red meat, liver). Alcohol should be consumed only in moderation because it can increase iron
absorption and, in high amounts, increases the risk of cirrhosis.
Ferroportin Disease
Ferroportin disease occurs largely in people of southern European ancestry. It results from an autosomal
dominant mutation in the
SLC 40 A1
gene. It manifests in the first decade of life as increased serum
ferritin levels with low or normal transferrin saturation; progressive saturation of transferrin occurs when
patients are in their 20s and 30s. Clinical manifestations are milder than in
HFE
disease, with modest liver
disease and mild anemia. Tolerance to vigorous phlebotomy is poor; serial monitoring of Hb level and
transferrin saturation is required.
Juvenile Hemochromatosis
Juvenile hemochromatosis is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the
HJV
gene
that affect the transcription protein hemojuvelin. It often manifests in adolescents. Symptoms and signs
include progressive hepatomegaly and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Ferritin levels are > 1000
ng/mL, and transferrin saturation is > 90%.
Transferrin and Ceruloplasmin Deficiency
(Hypotransferrinemia/Atransferrinemia; Aceruloplasminemia)
===PAGE:1185===
In transferrin deficiency, absorbed iron that enters the portal system not bound to transferrin is deposited
in the liver. Subsequent iron transfer to sites of RBC production is reduced because of transferrin
deficiency.
In ceruloplasmin deficiency, lack of ferroxidase causes defective conversion of Fe
2+
to Fe
3+
; such
conversion is necessary for binding to transferrin. Defective transferrin binding impairs the movement of
iron from intracellular stores to plasma transport, resulting in accumulation of iron in tissues.
Diagnosis is based on measurement of serum transferrin (ie, iron-binding capacity) and ceruloplasmin
levels (see
Inherited Copper Toxicity
. Treatment is experimental; eg, iron chelators may be
better tolerated than phlebotomy because patients typically have anemia.
Transferrin Receptor 2 Mutation
Mutations in transferrin receptor 2, a protein that appears to control saturation of transferrin, can cause a
rare autosomal recessive form of hemochromatosis. Symptoms and signs are similar to
HFE
hemochromatosis.
Secondary Iron Overload
(Secondary Hemochromatosis)
Secondary iron overload results from excess absorption of iron, repeated blood transfusions, or
excess oral intake, typically in patients with disorders of erythropoiesis. Diagnosis is with
serum iron studies. Treatment is usually by iron chelation.
Etiology
Secondary iron overload typically occurs in patients who have
•
Hemoglobinopathies (eg, sickle cell disease, thalassemia, sideroblastic anemias)
• Congenital hemolytic anemias
• Myelodysplasia
Iron overload results from the following mechanisms:
• Increased iron absorption (which occurs, for unknown reasons, with ineffective erythropoiesis)
• Exogenous iron given to treat the anemia
• Repeated blood transfusions (each unit of blood provides about 250 mg of iron; tissue deposition
becomes significant when more than about 40 units of blood are transfused)
Patients with hemoglobinopathies and congenital hemolytic anemias now typically live into adulthood, so
complications of iron overload are now common. In such patients, iron overload involving the heart, the
liver, and endocrine organs has become a common cause of death, but survival can be prolonged by iron
removal.
Diagnosis
Patients with ineffective erythropoiesis should be evaluated for secondary iron overload, which is
diagnosed by measuring serum ferritin, serum iron, and transferrin saturation.
Treatment
• Usually iron chelation with deferasirox or deferoxamine
===PAGE:1186===
Some patients can be treated with phlebotomy and given erythropoietin to maintain erythropoiesis.
However, because it worsens anemia, phlebotomy is not recommended for many patients (eg, those with
Hb level < 10 g/dL, those who are transfusion dependent, and those who develop symptoms of anemia
after phlebotomy). Treatment in these patients is iron chelation. The goal of treatment is a transferrin
saturation of < 50%.
Deferoxamine
is the drug traditionally used for iron chelation therapy. It is given by a slow subcutaneous
infusion overnight through a portable pump for 5 to 7 nights/wk or via 24-h IV infusion. Dose is 1 to 2 g in
adults and 20 to 40 mg/kg in children. However, this therapy is complex to administer and requires an
unusual time commitment from patients, resulting in a high rate of nonadherence. Important adverse
effects include hypotension, GI disturbances, and anaphylaxis (acutely) and vision and hearing loss (with
chronic use).
Deferasirox
, an oral chelating agent, is an effective and increasingly used alternative to deferoxamine.
Deferasirox reduces iron levels and prevents or delays onset of complications of iron overload. Initial
dose is 20 mg/kg po once/day. Patients are monitored monthly with dose increases of up to 30 mg/kg
once/day. Treatment can be interrupted when serum ferritin is < 500 ng/mL. Adverse effects (which occur
in about 10% of patients) can include nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and rash. Liver and kidney
function may become abnormal; liver and kidney function tests should be done periodically (eg, monthly,
sometimes more frequently for high-risk patients).
===PAGE:1187===
Chapter 121. Transfusion Medicine
Introduction
More than 29 million units of blood components are transfused yearly in the US, from about 8 million
volunteer donors. Although transfusion is probably safer than ever, risk (and the public's perception of
risk) mandates informed consent whenever practical.
Blood Collection
In the US, the collection, storage, and transport of blood and its components are standardized and
regulated by the FDA, the AABB, and sometimes state or local health authorities. Donor screening
includes an extensive questionnaire and health interview; measurement of temperature, heart rate, and
BP; and Hb determination. Some potential donors are deferred either temporarily or permanently (see
Table 121-1
). Criteria for deferral protect prospective donors from possible ill effects of donation and
recipients from disease. Donations are limited to once every 56 days. With rare exceptions, blood donors
are unpaid.
In standard blood donation, about 450 mL of whole blood is collected in a plastic bag containing an
anticoagulant preservative. Whole blood or packed RBCs preserved with citrate-phosphate-dextroseadenine may be stored for 35 days. Packed RBCs may be stored for 42 days if an adenine-dextrosesaline solution is added.
[Table 121-1.
Some Reasons for Blood Donation Deferral or Denial]
Autologous donation, which is use of the patient's own blood, is the preferred method of transfusion when
conditions permit. In the 2 to 3 wk preceding elective surgery, up to 3 or 4 units of whole blood or packed
RBCs are collected, and the patient is given iron supplements. Special blood salvage procedures are also
available for collecting and autotransfusing blood shed after trauma and during surgery.
Pretransfusion Testing
Donor blood testing includes ABO and Rh
(D) antigen typing, antibody screening, and testing for
infectious disease markers (see
Table 121-2
).
Compatibility testing tests the recipient's RBCs for antigens A, B, and Rh
(D); screens the recipient's
plasma for antibodies against other RBC antigens; and includes a cross-match to ensure that the
recipient's plasma is compatible with antigens on donor RBCs. Compatibility testing is done before a
transfusion; however, in an emergency, testing is done after releasing blood from the blood bank. It can
also help in diagnosing transfusion reactions.
ABO typing of donor and recipient blood is done to prevent transfusion of incompatible RBCs (see
Fig. 121-1
). As a rule, blood for transfusion should be of the same ABO type as that of the recipient. In
urgent situations or when the correct ABO type is in doubt or unknown, type O Rh-negative packed RBCs
(not whole blood—see p.
for Acute Hemolytic Transfusion Reaction), which contains neither A nor B
antigens, may be used for patients of any ABO type.
Rh typing determines whether the Rh factor Rh
(D) is present on (Rh-positive) or absent from (Rhnegative) the RBCs. Rh-negative patients should always receive Rh-negative blood except in lifethreatening emergencies when Rh-negative blood is unavailable. Rh-positive patients may receive Rhpositive or Rh-negative blood. Occasionally, RBCs from some Rh-positive people react weakly on
standard Rh typing (weak D, or D
u
, positive), but these people are still considered Rh-positive.
Antibody screening for unexpected anti-RBC antibodies is routinely done on blood from prospective
recipients and prenatally on maternal specimens. Unexpected anti-RBC antibodies are specific for RBC
blood group antigens other than A and B [eg, Rh
(D), Kell (K), Duffy (Fy)]. Early detection is important,
===PAGE:1188===
blood group antigens other than A and B [eg, Rh
(D), Kell (K), Duffy (Fy)]. Early detection is important,
because such antibodies can cause serious
[Table 121-2.
Infectious Disease Transmission Testing]
[Fig. 121-1.
Compatible RBC types.]
hemolytic transfusion reactions or hemolytic disease of the newborn (, and they may greatly
complicate compatibility testing and delay procurement of compatible blood.
Indirect antiglobulin testing (the indirect Coombs' test) is used to screen for unexpected anti-RBC
antibodies. This test may be positive in the presence of an unexpected blood group antibody or when free
(non-RBC-attached) antibody is present in autoimmune hemolytic anemias (. Reagent RBCs
are mixed with the patient's serum, incubated, washed, tested with antihuman globulin, and observed for
agglutination. Once an antibody is detected, its specificity is determined. Knowing the specificity of the
antibody is helpful for assessing its clinical significance, selecting compatible blood, and managing
hemolytic disease of the newborn.
Direct antiglobulin testing (the direct Coombs' test) detects antibodies that have coated the patient's
RBCs in vivo. It is used when immune-mediated hemolysis is suspected. Patients' RBCs are directly
tested with antihuman globulin and observed for agglutination. A positive result, if correlated with clinical
findings, suggests autoimmune hemolytic anemia, drug-induced hemolysis, a transfusion reaction, or
hemolytic disease of the newborn.
Antibody titration is done when a clinically significant, unexpected anti-RBC antibody is identified in the
serum of a pregnant woman or in a patient with cold autoimmune hemolytic anemia (. The
maternal antibody titer correlates fairly well with the severity of hemolytic disease in the incompatible
fetus and is often used to guide treatment in hemolytic disease of the newborn along with
ultrasonography and amniotic fluid study.
The addition of a cross-match to ABO/Rh typing and antibody screening increases detection of
incompatibility by only 0.01%. If the recipient has a clinically significant anti-RBC antibody, donor blood is
restricted to RBC units negative for the corresponding antigen; further testing for compatibility is done by
combining recipient serum, donor RBCs, and antihuman globulin. In recipients without clinically significant
anti-RBC antibodies, an immediate spin cross-match, which omits the antiglobulin phase, confirms ABO
compatibility.
Emergency transfusion is done when not enough time (generally < 60 min) is available for thorough
compatibility testing because the patient is in hemorrhagic shock. When time permits (about 10 min is
needed), ABO/Rh type-specific blood may be given. In more urgent circumstances, type O RBCs are
transfused if the ABO type is uncertain, and Rh-negative blood is given if the Rh type is uncertain.
"Type and screen" may be requested in circumstances not likely to require transfusion, as in elective
surgery. The patient's blood is typed for ABO/Rh antigens and screened for antibodies. If antibodies are
absent and the patient needs blood, ABO/Rh type specific or compatible RBCs may be released without
the antiglobulin phase of the cross-match. If an unexpected antibody is present, full testing is required.
Blood Products
Whole blood can provide improved O
-carrying capacity, volume expansion, and replacement of clotting
factors and was previously recommended for rapid massive blood loss. However, because component
therapy is equally effective and is a more efficient use of donated blood, whole blood is not generally
available in the US.
RBCs:
Packed RBCs are ordinarily the component of choice with which to increase Hb. Indications
depend on the patient. O
-carrying capacity may be adequate with Hb levels as low as 7 g/L in healthy
patients, but transfusion may be indicated with higher Hb levels in patients with decreased
cardiopulmonary reserve or ongoing bleeding. One unit of RBCs increases an average adult's Hb by
===PAGE:1189===
about 1 g/dL, and the Hct by about 3% above the pretransfusion Hct value. When only volume expansion
is required, other fluids can be
used concurrently or separately. In patients with multiple blood group
antibodies or with antibodies to high-frequency RBC antigens, rare frozen RBCs are used.
Washed RBCs are free of almost all traces of plasma, most WBCs, and platelets. They are generally
given to patients who have severe reactions to plasma (eg, severe allergies, paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria, or IgA immunization). In IgA-immunized patients, blood collected from IgA-deficient donors
may be preferable for transfusion.
WBC-depleted RBCs are prepared with special filters that remove ≥ 99.99% of WBCs. They are indicated
for patients who have experienced nonhemolytic febrile transfusion reactions, for exchange transfusions,
for patients who require cytomegalovirus-negative blood that is unavailable, and possibly for the
prevention of platelet alloimmunization.
Fresh frozen plasma:
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is an unconcentrated source of all clotting factors
without platelets. Indications include correction of bleeding secondary to factor deficiencies for which
specific factor replacements are unavailable, multifactor deficiency states (eg, massive transfusion,
disseminated intravascular coagulation [DIC], liver failure), and urgent warfarin reversal, although
prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) should be the first choice if available. FFP can supplement
RBCs when whole blood is unavailable for exchange transfusion. FFP should not be used simply for
volume expansion.
Cryoprecipitate:
Cryoprecipitate is a concentrate prepared from FFP. Each concentrate usually contains
about 80 units each of factor VIII and von Willebrand's factor and about 250 mg of fibrinogen. It also
contains fibronectin and factor XIII. Although originally used for hemophilia and von Willebrand's disease,
cryoprecipitate is currently used as a source of fibrinogen in acute DIC with bleeding, treatment of uremic
bleeding, cardiothoracic surgery (fibrin glue), obstetric emergencies such as abruptio placentae and
HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count) syndrome, and rare factor XIII
deficiency. In general, it should not be used for other indications.
WBCs:
Granulocytes may be transfused when sepsis occurs in a patient with profound persistent
neutropenia (WBCs < 500/
μ
L) who is unresponsive to antibiotics. Granulocytes must be given within 24 h
of harvest; however, testing for HIV, hepatitis, human T-cell lymphotropic virus, and syphilis may not be
completed before infusion. Because of improved antibiotic therapy and drugs that stimulate granulocyte
production during chemotherapy, granulocytes are seldom used.
Immune globulins:
Rh immune globulin (RhIg), given IM or IV, prevents development of maternal Rh
antibodies that can result from fetomaternal hemorrhage. The standard dose of intramuscular RhIg (300
μ
g) must be given to an Rh-negative mother immediately after abortion or delivery (live or stillborn) unless
the infant is Rh
(D) and D
u
negative or the mother's serum already contains anti-Rh
(D). If fetomaternal
hemorrhage is > 30 mL, a larger dose is needed. If hemorrhage of this amount is suspected, testing of
the volume of fetomaternal hemorrhage begins with the screening rosette test, which, if positive, is
followed by a quantitative test (eg, Kleihauer-Betke). RhIg is given IV only when IM administration is
contraindicated (eg, in patients with coagulopathy).
Other immune globulins are available for postexposure prophylaxis for patients exposed to a number of
infectious diseases, including cytomegalovirus, hepatitis A and B, measles, rabies, respiratory syncytial
virus, rubella, tetanus, smallpox, and varicella (for usage, see under specific disease).
Platelets:
Platelet concentrates are used to prevent bleeding in asymptomatic severe thrombocytopenia
(platelet count < 10,000/
μ
L), for bleeding patients with less severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count <
50,000/
μ
L), for bleeding patients with platelet dysfunction due to antiplatelet drugs but with normal
platelet count, for patients receiving massive transfusion that causes dilutional thrombocytopenia, and
sometimes before invasive surgery, particularly with extracorporeal circulation for > 2 h (which often
makes platelets dysfunctional). One platelet concentrate unit increases the platelet count by about
10,000/
μ
L, and adequate hemostasis is achieved with a platelet count of about 10,000/
μ
L in a patient
without complicating conditions and about 50,000/
μ
L for those undergoing surgery. Therefore, 4 to 6 units
===PAGE:1190===
of random donor platelet concentrates are commonly used in adults.
Platelet concentrates are increasingly being prepared by automated devices that harvest the platelets (or
other cells) and return unneeded components (eg, RBCs, plasma) to the donor. This procedure, called
cytapheresis, provides enough platelets from a single donation (equivalent to 6 random platelet units) for
transfusion to an adult, which, because it minimizes infectious and immunogenic risks, is preferred to
multiple donor transfusions in certain conditions.
Certain patients may not respond to platelet transfusions, possibly because of splenic sequestration or
platelet consumption due to HLA or platelet-specific antigen alloimmunization.
These patients may
respond to multiple random donor platelets (because of greater likelihood that some units are HLA
compatible), platelets from family members, or ABO-or HLA-matched platelets. Alloimmunization may be
mitigated by transfusing WBC-depleted RBCs and WBC-depleted platelet concentrates.
Other products:
Irradiated blood products are used to prevent graft-vs-host disease in patients at risk
(. Blood substitutes are being developed that use inert chemicals or Hb solutions to carry and
deliver O
to tissues. Perfluorocarbons are chemically and biologically inactive and are capable of
dissolving O
and CO
under pressure. Because perfluorocarbons are not water miscible, they are
prepared as emulsions. They are undergoing phase II and III clinical trials. Hb-based O
carrier solutions
are undergoing phase III clinical trials in the US. Hb, human or bovine, is chemically modified, producing a
solution capable of O
transport. These solutions can be stored at room temperature for up to 2 yr,
making them attractive for transport to the site of trauma or to the battlefield. However, both
perfluorocarbons and Hb-based O
carriers are cleared from plasma within 24 h.
Hematopoietic progenitor cells (stem cells) from autologous or allogenic donors can be transfused as a
way of reconstituting hematopoietic function (particularly immune function) in patients undergoing
myeloablative or myelotoxic therapy (.
Technique of Transfusion
CAUTION:
Before transfusion is started, the patient's wristband, blood unit label, and compatibility test
report must be checked at the bedside to ensure that the blood component is the one intended for the
recipient.
Use of an 18-gauge (or larger) needle prevents mechanical damage to and hemolysis of RBCs. A
standard filter should always be used for infusion of any blood component. Only 0.9% saline IV should be
allowed into the blood bag or in the same tubing with blood. Hypotonic solutions lyse RBCs, and the Ca in
Ringer's lactate can cause clotting.
Transfusion of 1 unit of blood or blood component should be completed by 4 h; longer duration increases
the risk of bacterial growth. If transfusion must be given slowly because of heart failure or hypervolemia,
units may be divided into smaller aliquots in the blood bank. For children, 1 unit of blood can be provided
in small sterile aliquots used over several days, thereby minimizing exposure to multiple donors.
Close observation is important, particularly during the first 15 min, and includes recording temperature,
BP, pulse, and respiratory rate. Periodic observation continues throughout and after the transfusion,
during which fluid status is assessed. The patient is kept covered and warm to prevent chills, which may
be interpreted as a transfusion reaction. Elective transfusions at night are discouraged.
Complications of Transfusion
The most common complications of transfusion are febrile nonhemolytic and chill-rigor reactions. The
most serious complications are transfusion-related acute lung injury and acute hemolytic reaction due to
ABO incompatible transfusion, which have very high mortality rates.
Early recognition of symptoms suggestive of a transfusion reaction and prompt reporting to the blood
bank are essential. The most common symptoms are chills, rigors, fever, dyspnea, light-headedness,
===PAGE:1191===
urticaria, itching, and flank pain. If any of these symptoms (other than localized urticaria and itching)
occur, the transfusion should be stopped immediately and the IV line kept open with normal saline. The
remainder of the blood product and clotted and anticoagulated samples of the patient's blood should be
sent to the blood bank for investigation. NOTE:
The unit in question should not be restarted, and
transfusion of any previously issued unit should not be initiated.
Further transfusion should be delayed
until the cause of the reaction is known, unless the need is urgent, in which case type O Rh-negative
RBCs should be used.
Hemolysis of donor or recipient RBCs (usually the former) during or after transfusion can result from
ABO/Rh incompatibility, plasma antibodies, or hemolyzed or fragile RBCs (eg, by overwarming stored
blood or contact with hypotonic IV solutions). Hemolysis is most common and most severe when
incompatible donor RBCs are hemolyzed by antibody in the recipient's plasma. Hemolytic reactions may
be acute (within 24 h) or delayed (from 1 to 14 days).
Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction (AHTR):
About 20 people die yearly in the US from AHTR.
AHTR usually results from recipient plasma antibodies to donor RBC antigens. ABO incompatibility is the
most common
cause of AHTR. Antibodies against blood group antigens other than ABO can also cause
AHTR. Mislabeling the recipient's pretransfusion sample at collection or failing to match the intended
recipient with the blood product immediately before transfusion is the usual cause, not laboratory error.
Hemolysis is intravascular, causing hemoglobinuria with varying degrees of acute renal failure and
possibly disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). The severity of AHTR depends on the degree of
incompatibility, the amount of blood given, the rate of administration, and the integrity of the kidneys, liver,
and heart. An acute phase usually develops within 1 h of initiation of transfusion, but it may occur later
during the transfusion or immediately afterward. Onset is usually abrupt. The patient may complain of
discomfort and anxiety. Dyspnea, fever, chills, facial flushing, and severe pain may occur, especially in the
lumbar area. Shock may develop, causing a rapid, feeble pulse; cold, clammy skin; low BP; and nausea
and vomiting. Jaundice may follow acute hemolysis.
If AHTR occurs while the patient is under general anesthesia, the only symptom may be hypotension,
uncontrollable bleeding from incision sites and mucous membranes caused by an associated DIC, or dark
urine that reflects hemoglobinuria.
If AHTR is suspected, one of the first steps is to recheck the sample and patient identifications. Diagnosis
is confirmed by measuring urinary Hb, serum LDH, bilirubin, and haptoglobin. Intravascular hemolysis
produces free Hb in the plasma and urine; haptoglobin levels are very low. Hyperbilirubinemia may follow.
After the acute phase, the degree of acute renal failure determines the prognosis. Diuresis and a
decreasing BUN usually portend recovery. Permanent renal insufficiency is unusual. Prolonged oliguria
and shock are poor prognostic signs.
If AHTR is suspected, the transfusion should be stopped and supportive treatment begun. The goal of
initial therapy is to achieve and maintain adequate BP and renal blood flow with IV 0.9% saline and
furosemide. IV saline is given to maintain urine output of 100 mL/h for 24 h. The initial furosemide dose is
40 to 80 mg (1 to 2 mg/kg in children), with later doses adjusted to maintain urinary flow > 100 mL/h
during the first day.
Antihypertensive drugs must be administered with caution. Pressor drugs that decrease renal blood flow
(eg, epinephrine, norepinephrine, high-dose dopamine) are contraindicated. If a pressor drug is
necessary, dopamine 2 to 5
μ
g/kg/min is usually administered.
A nephrologist should be consulted as early as possible, particularly if no diuretic response occurs within
about 2 to 3 h after initiating therapy, which may indicate acute tubular necrosis. Further fluid and diuretic
therapy may be contraindicated, and early dialysis may be helpful.
Delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction:
Occasionally, a patient who has been sensitized to an RBC
antigen has very low antibody levels and negative pretransfusion tests. After transfusion with RBCs
bearing this antigen, a primary or anamnestic response may result (usually in 1 to 4 wk) and cause a
===PAGE:1192===
delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction. Delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction usually does not manifest
as dramatically as AHTR. Patients may be asymptomatic or have a slight fever. Rarely, severe symptoms
occur. Usually, only destruction of the transfused RBCs (with the antigen) occurs, resulting in a falling Hct
and a slight rise in LDH and bilirubin. Because delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction is usually mild and
self-limited, it is often unidentified, and the clinical clue may be an unexplained drop in Hb to the
pretransfusion level occurring 1 to 2 wk posttransfusion. Severe reactions are treated similarly to acute
reactions.
Febrile nonhemolytic transfusion reaction:
Febrile reaction may occur without hemolysis. Antibodies
directed against WBC HLA from otherwise compatible donor blood are one possible cause. This cause is
most common in multitransfused or multiparous patients. Cytokines released from WBCs during storage,
particularly in platelet concentrates, are another possible cause.
Clinically, febrile reactions consist of a temperature increase of ≥ 1° C, chills, and sometimes headache
and back pain. Simultaneous symptoms of allergic reaction are common. Because fever and chills also
herald a severe hemolytic transfusion reaction, all febrile reactions must be investigated as for AHTR, as
with any transfusion reaction.
Most febrile reactions are treated successfully with acetaminophen and, if necessary, diphenhydramine
(. Patients should also be treated (eg, with acetaminophen) before future transfusions. If a
recipient has experienced more than one febrile reaction, special leukoreduction filters are used during
future transfusions; most hospitals use prestorage, leukoreduced blood components.
Allergic reactions:
Allergic reactions to an unknown component in donor blood are common, usually due
to allergens in donor plasma or, less often, to antibodies from an allergic donor. These reactions are
usually mild, with urticaria, edema, occasional dizziness, and
headache during or immediately after the
transfusion. Simultaneous fever is common. Less frequently, dyspnea, wheezing, and incontinence may
occur, indicating a generalized spasm of smooth muscle. Rarely, anaphylaxis occurs, particularly in IgAdeficient recipients.
In a patient with a history of allergies or an allergic transfusion reaction, an antihistamine may be given
prophylactically just before or at the beginning of the transfusion (eg, diphenhydramine 50 mg po or IV).
NOTE:
Drugs must never be mixed with the blood.
If an allergic reaction occurs, the transfusion is
stopped. An antihistamine (eg, diphenhydramine 50 mg IV) usually controls mild urticaria and itching, and
transfusion may be resumed. However, a moderate allergic reaction (generalized urticaria or mild
bronchospasm) requires hydrocortisone (100 to 200 mg IV), and a severe anaphylactic reaction requires
additional treatment with epinephrine 0.5 mL of 1:1000 solution sc and 0.9% saline IV ( along
with investigation by the blood bank. Further transfusion should not occur until the investigation is
completed. Patients with severe IgA deficiency require transfusion of washed RBCs, washed platelets,
and plasma from an IgA-deficient donor.
Volume overload:
The high osmotic load of blood products draws volume into the intravascular space
over the course of hours, which can cause volume overload in susceptible patients (eg, those with
cardiac or renal insufficiency). RBCs should be infused slowly. The patient should be observed and, if
signs of heart failure (eg, dyspnea, crackles) occur, the transfusion should be stopped and treatment for
heart failure begun.
Typical treatment is with a diuretic such as furosemide 20 to 40 mg IV. Occasionally, patients requiring a
higher volume of plasma infusion to reverse a warfarin overdose may be given a low dose of furosemide
simultaneously; however, prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) should be the first choice for such
patients. Patients at high risk of volume overload (eg, those with heart failure or severe renal
insufficiency) are treated prophylactically with a diuretic (eg, furosemide 20 to 40 mg IV).
Acute lung injury:
Transfusion-related acute lung injury is an infrequent complication caused by antiHLA and/or antigranulocyte antibodies in donor plasma that agglutinate and degranulate recipient
granulocytes within the lung. Acute respiratory symptoms develop, and chest x-ray has a characteristic
pattern of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. This complication is the 2nd most common cause of
transfusion-related death. Incidence is one in 5,000 to one in 10,000, but many cases are mild. Mild to
===PAGE:1193===
moderate transfusion-related acute lung injury probably is commonly missed. General supportive therapy
typically leads to recovery without long-lasting sequelae. Diuretics should be avoided. Cases should be
reported.
Altered oxygen affinity:
Blood stored for > 7 days has decreased RBC 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (DPG),
and the 2,3-DPG is absent after > 10 days. This absence results in an increased affinity for O
and
slower O
release to the tissues. There is little evidence that 2,3-DPG deficiency is clinically significant
except in exchange transfusions in infants, in sickle cell patients with acute chest syndrome and stroke,
and in some patients with severe heart failure. After transfusion of RBCs, 2,3-DPG regenerates within 12
to 24 h.
Graft-vs-host disease (GVHD):
Transfusion-associated GVHD ( is usually caused by
transfusion of products containing immunocompetent lymphocytes to an immunocompromised host. The
donor lymphocytes attack host tissues. GVHD can occur occasionally in immunocompetent patients if
they receive blood from a donor (usually a close relative) who is homozygous for an HLA haplotype for
which they are heterozygous. Symptoms and signs include fever, rash (centrifugally spreading rash
becoming erythroderma with bullae), vomiting, watery and bloody diarrhea, lymphadenopathy, and
pancytopenia due to bone marrow aplasia. Jaundice and elevated liver enzymes are also common. GVHD
occurs 4 to 30 days after transfusion and is diagnosed based on clinical suspicion and skin and bone
marrow biopsies. GVHD has > 90% mortality because no specific treatment is available.
Prevention of GVHD is with irradiation (to damage DNA of the donor lymphocytes) of all transfused blood
products. It is done if the recipient is immunocompromised (eg, patients with congenital immune
deficiency syndromes, hematologic cancers, or hematopoietic stem cell transplants; neonates), if donor
blood is obtained from a 1st-degree relative, or when HLA-matched components, excluding stem cells, are
transfused. Treatment with corticosteroids and other immunosuppressants, including those used for solid
organ transplantation, is not an indication for blood irradiation.
Complications of massive transfusion:
Massive transfusion is transfusion of a volume of blood
greater than or equal to one blood volume in 24 h (eg, 10 units in a 70-kg adult). When a patient receives
stored blood in such large volume, the patient's own blood may
be, in effect, "washed out." In
circumstances uncomplicated by prolonged hypotension or DIC, dilutional thrombocytopenia is the most
likely complication. Platelets in stored whole blood are not functional. Clotting factors (except factor VIII)
usually remain sufficient. Microvascular bleeding (abnormal oozing and continued bleeding from raw and
cut surfaces) may result. Five to 8 units (1 unit/10 kg) of platelet concentrates are usually enough to
correct such bleeding in an adult. Fresh frozen plasma and cryoprecipitate may be needed.
Hypothermia due to rapid transfusion of large amounts of cold blood can cause arrhythmias or cardiac
arrest. Hypothermia is avoided by using an IV set with a heat-exchange device that gently warms blood.
Other means of warming blood (eg, microwave ovens) are contraindicated because of potential RBC
damage and hemolysis.
Citrate and K toxicities generally are not of concern even in massive transfusion; however, toxicities of
both may be amplified in the presence of hypothermia. Patients with liver failure may have difficulty
metabolizing citrate. Hypocalcemia can result but rarely necessitates treatment (which is 10 mL of a 10%
solution of Ca gluconate IV diluted in 100 mL D
W, given over 10 min). Patients with renal failure may
have elevated K if transfused with blood stored for > 1 wk (K accumulation is usually insignificant in blood
stored for < 1 wk). Mechanical hemolysis during transfusion may increase K. Hypokalemia may occur
about 24 h after transfusion of older RBCs (> 3 wk), which take up K.
Infectious complications:
Bacterial contamination of packed RBCs occurs rarely, possibly due to
inadequate aseptic technique during collection or to transient asymptomatic donor bacteremia.
Refrigeration of RBCs usually limits bacterial growth except for cryophilic organisms such as
Yersinia
sp,
which may produce dangerous levels of endotoxin. All RBC units are inspected before issue for bacterial
growth, which is indicated by a color change. Because platelet concentrates are stored at room
temperature, they have greater potential for bacterial growth and endotoxin production if contaminated.
To minimize growth, storage is limited to 5 days. The risk of bacterial contamination of platelets is 1:2500.
===PAGE:1194===
Therefore, platelets are routinely tested for bacteria.
Rarely, syphilis is transmitted in fresh blood or platelets. Storing blood for ≥ 96 h at 4 to 10° C kills the
spirochete. Although federal regulations require a serologic test for syphilis on donor blood, infective
donors are seronegative early in the disease. Recipients of infected units may develop the characteristic
secondary rash.
Hepatitis may occur after transfusion of any blood product. The risk has been reduced by viral
inactivation through heat treatment of serum albumin and plasma proteins and by the use of recombinant
factor concentrates. Tests for hepatitis are required for all donor blood (see
Table 121-2
). The estimated
risk of hepatitis B is 1:200,000; of hepatitis C, 1:2.6 million. Because its transient viremic phase and
concomitant clinical illness likely preclude blood donation, hepatitis A (infectious hepatitis) is not a
significant cause of transfusion-associated hepatitis.
HIV infection in the US is almost entirely HIV-1, although HIV-2 is also of concern. Testing for antibodies to
both strains is required. Nucleic acid testing for HIV-1 antigen and HIV-1 p24 antigen testing are also
required. Additionally, blood donors are asked about behaviors that may put them at high risk of HIV
infection. HIV-0 has not been identified among blood donors. The estimated risk of HIV transmission due
to transfusion is 1:2.6 million.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) can be transmitted by WBCs in transfused blood. It is not transmitted through
fresh frozen plasma. Because CMV does not cause disease in immunocompetent recipients, routine
antibody testing of donor blood is not required. However, CMV may cause serious or fatal disease in
immunocompromised patients, who should probably receive CMV-negative blood products that have been
provided by CMV antibody-negative donors or by blood depleted of WBCs by filtration.
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus 1 (HTLV-1), which can cause adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia, HTLV-1associated myelopathy, and tropical spastic paraparesis, causes posttransfusion seroconversion in some
recipients. All donor blood is tested for HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 antibodies. The estimated risk of falsenegative results on testing of donor blood is 1:641,000.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease has never been reported to be transmitted by transfusion, but current practice
precludes donation from a person who has received human-derived growth hormone or a dura mater
transplant or who has a family member with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. New variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease (mad cow disease) has not been transmitted by blood transfusion. However, donors who have
spent significant time in the United Kingdom and some other parts of Europe may be permanently
deferred from donation (see
Table 121-1
).
Malaria is transmitted easily through infected RBCs. Many donors are unaware that they have malaria,
which may be latent and transmissible for 10 to 15 yr. Storage does not render blood safe. Prospective
donors must be asked about malaria or whether they have been in a region where it is prevalent. Donors
who have had a diagnosis of malaria or who are immigrants, refugees, or citizens from countries in which
malaria is considered endemic are deferred for 3 yr; travelers to endemic countries are deferred for 1 yr.
Babesiosis has rarely been transmitted by transfusion.
Therapeutic Apheresis
Therapeutic apheresis includes plasma exchange and cytapheresis, which are generally tolerated by
healthy donors. However, many minor and a few major risks exist. Insertion of the large IV catheters
necessary for apheresis can cause complications (eg, bleeding, infection, pneumothorax). Citrate
anticoagulant may decrease serum ionized Ca. Replacement of plasma with a noncolloidal solution (eg,
saline) shifts fluid from the intravascular space. Colloidal replacement solutions do not replace IgG and
coagulation factors.
Most complications can be managed with close attention to the patient and manipulation of the
procedure, but some severe reactions and a few deaths have occurred.
===PAGE:1195===
Plasma exchange:
Therapeutic plasma exchange removes plasma components from blood. A blood cell
separator extracts the patient's plasma and returns RBCs and platelets in plasma or a plasma-replacing
fluid; for this purpose, 5% albumin is preferred to fresh frozen plasma (except for patients with thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura) because it causes fewer reactions and transmits no infections. Therapeutic
plasma exchange resembles dialysis but, in addition, can remove protein-bound toxic substances. A onevolume exchange removes about 66% of such components.
To be of benefit, plasma exchange should be used for diseases in which the plasma contains a known
pathogenic substance, and plasma exchange should remove this substance more rapidly than the body
produces it. For example, in rapidly progressive autoimmune disorders, plasma exchange may be used to
remove existing harmful plasma components (eg, cryoglobulins, antiglomerular basement membrane
antibodies) while immunosuppressive or cytotoxic drugs suppress their future production.
There are numerous indications (see
Table 121-3
). The frequency of plasma exchange, the volume to be removed, the replacement fluid, and
other variables are individualized.
[Table 121-3.
Indications for Plasma Exchange According to the American Society for Apheresis]
Low density lipoprotein cholesterol can be removed by plasma exchange with a recently implemented
filtration method. Complications of plasma exchange are similar to those of therapeutic cytapheresis.
Cytapheresis:
Therapeutic cytapheresis removes cellular components from blood, returning plasma. It is
most often used to remove defective RBCs and substitute normal ones in patients with sickle cell anemia
who have the following conditions: acute chest syndrome, stroke, pregnancy, or frequent, severe sickle
cell crises. Cytapheresis achieves Hb S levels of < 30% without the risk of increased viscosity that can
occur because of increased Hct with simple transfusion.
Therapeutic cytapheresis may also be used to reduce severe thrombocytosis or leukocytosis
(cytoreduction) in acute or chronic leukemia when there is risk of hemorrhage, thrombosis, or pulmonary
or cerebral complications of extreme leukocytosis (leukostasis). Cytapheresis is effective in
thrombocytosis because platelets are not replaced as rapidly as WBCs. One or 2 procedures may reduce
platelet counts to safe levels. Therapeutic WBC removal (leukapheresis) can remove kilograms of buffy
coat in a few procedures, and it often relieves leukostasis and splenomegaly. However, the reduction in
WBC count itself may be mild and only temporary.
Other uses of cytapheresis include collection of peripheral blood stem cells for autologous or allogeneic
bone marrow reconstitution (an alternative to bone marrow transplantation) and collection of lymphocytes
for use in immune modulation cancer therapy (adoptive immunotherapy).
===PAGE:1196===
Chapter 122. Overview of Cancer
Introduction
Cancer is an unregulated proliferation of cells due to loss of normal controls, resulting in unregulated
growth, lack of differentiation, local tissue invasion, and, often, metastasis. Cancer can develop in any
tissue or organ at any age. There is often evidence of an immune response to tumors, but the role of the
immune system in preventing and treating cancer is still uncertain.
Many cancers are curable if detected at an early stage, and long-term remission is often possible in later
stages. However, cure is not always possible and is not attempted in some advanced cases in which
palliative care provides better quality of life than aggressive treatment, particularly in the elderly or in
patients with underlying comorbid disorders.
Cellular and Molecular Basis of Cancer
Cellular Kinetics
Generation time is the time required for a quiescent cell to complete a cycle in cell division (see
Fig. 122-1
) and give rise to 2 daughter cells. Malignant cells usually have a shorter generation time than
nonmalignant cells from the same tissue, and there usually are a smaller percentage of cells in G
(resting phase). Initial exponential tumor growth is followed by a plateau phase when cell death nearly
equals the rate of formation of daughter cells. The slowing in growth rate is likely related to exhaustion of
the supply of nutrients and O
for the rapidly expanding
[Fig. 122-1.
The cell cycle.]
tumor. Small tumors have a greater percentage of actively dividing cells than do large tumors.
Cellular kinetics of particular tumors is an important consideration in the design of antineoplastic drug
regimens and may influence the dosing schedules and timing intervals of treatment. Many antineoplastic
drugs are effective only if cells are actively dividing, and some drugs work only during a specific phase of
the cell cycle and thus require prolonged administration to catch dividing cells during the phase of
maximal sensitivity.
Tumor Growth and Metastasis
As a tumor grows, nutrients are provided by direct diffusion from the circulation. Local growth is facilitated
by enzymes (eg, proteases) that destroy adjacent tissues. As tumor volume increases, tumor
angiogenesis factors are produced to promote formation of the vascular supply required for further tumor
growth.
Almost from inception, a tumor may shed cells into the circulation. From animal models, it is estimated that
a 1-cm tumor sheds > 1 million cells/24 h into the venous circulation. Although most circulating tumor cells
die as a result of intravascular trauma, an occasional cell may adhere to the vascular endothelium and
penetrate into surrounding tissues, generating independent tumors (metastases) at distant sites.
Metastatic tumors grow in much the same manner as primary tumors and may subsequently give rise to
other metastases.
Experiments suggest that through random mutation, a subset of cells in the primary tumor may acquire
the ability to invade and migrate to distant sites, resulting in metastasis.
Molecular Abnormalities
Genetic mutations are responsible for the generation of cancer cells. These mutations alter the quantity
or function of protein products that regulate cell growth and division and DNA repair. Two major
categories of mutated genes are oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.
===PAGE:1197===
Oncogenes:
These are abnormal forms of normal genes (proto-oncogenes) that regulate various
aspects of cell growth. Mutation of these genes may result in direct and continuous stimulation of the
pathways (eg, intracellular signal transduction pathways, transcription factors, secreted growth factors)
that control cellular growth and division, DNA repair, angiogenesis, and other physiologic processes.
There are > 100 known oncogenes that may contribute to human neoplastic transformation. For example,
the ras gene encodes the Ras protein, which regulates cell division. Mutations may result in the
inappropriate activation of the Ras protein, leading to uncontrolled cell growth and division. In fact, the
Ras protein is abnormal in about 25% of human cancers. Other oncogenes have been implicated in
specific cancers. These include
•
Her2/neu
(breast cancer)
•
BCR-ABL
(chronic myelocytic leukemia, B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia)
• Cmyc
(Burkett's lymphoma)
• Nmyc
(small cell lung cancer, neuroblastoma)
Specific oncogenes may have important implications for diagnosis, therapy, and prognosis (see individual
discussions under the specific cancer type).
Oncogenes typically result from acquired somatic cell mutations secondary to point mutations (eg, from
chemical carcinogens), gene amplification (eg, an increase in the number of copies of a normal gene), or
translocations. Occasionally, mutation of genes results in inheritance of a cancer predisposition, as in the
inheritance of
BRCA1
or
BRCA2
in families with a high incidence of breast or ovarian cancer.
Tumor suppressor genes:
Genes such as the
p53
gene play a role in normal cell division and DNA
repair and are critical for detecting inappropriate growth signals in cells. If these genes, as a result of
inherited or acquired mutations, become unable to function, genetic mutations in other genes can proceed
unchecked, leading to neoplastic transformation.
As with most genes, 2 alleles are present that encode for each tumor suppressor gene. A defective copy
of one gene may be inherited, leaving only one functional allele for the individual tumor suppressor gene.
If a mutation is acquired in the other allele, the normal protective mechanisms of the tumor suppressor
gene are lost, and dysfunction of other protein products or DNA damage may escape unregulated,
leading to cancer. For example, the retinoblastoma (
RB
) gene encodes for the protein Rb, which
regulates the cell cycle by stopping DNA replication. Mutations in the
RB
gene family occur in many
human cancers, allowing affected cells to divide continuously.
Another important regulatory protein, p53, prevents replication of damaged DNA in normal cells and
promotes cell death (apoptosis) in cells with abnormal DNA. Inactive or altered p53 allows cells with
abnormal DNA to survive and divide. Mutations are passed to daughter cells, conferring a high probability
of neoplastic
transformation. The
p53
gene is defective in many human cancers. As with oncogenes,
mutation of tumor suppressor genes such as
p53
or
RB
in germ cell lines may result in vertical
transmission and a higher incidence of cancer in offspring.
Chromosomal abnormalities:
Gross chromosomal abnormalities ( can occur through
deletion, translocation, or duplication. If these alterations activate or inactivate genes that result in a
proliferative advantage over normal cells, then a tumor may develop. Chromosomal abnormalities occur in
certain human cancers (see
Table 122-1
). In some congenital diseases (Bloom syndrome, Fanconi's anemia, Down syndrome), DNA
repair processes are defective and chromosomes break easily, putting children at high risk of developing
acute leukemia and lymphomas.
Other influences:
Most cancers likely involve several of the mechanisms described above that lead to
neoplastic conversion. For example, the development of tumor in familial polyposis takes place through a
===PAGE:1198===
neoplastic conversion. For example, the development of tumor in familial polyposis takes place through a
sequence of genetic events: epithelium hyperproliferation (loss of a suppressor gene on chromosome 5),
early adenoma (change in DNA methylation), intermediate adenoma (overactivity of the
ras
oncogene),
late adenoma (loss of a suppressor gene on chromosome 18), and finally, cancer (loss of a gene on
chromosome 17). Further genetic changes may be required for metastasis.
Telomeres
are nucleoprotein complexes that cap the ends of chromosomes and maintain their integrity.
In normal tissue, telomere shortening (which occurs with aging) results in a finite limit in cell division. The
enzyme telomerase provides for telomere synthesis and maintenance; thus telomerase may potentially
allow for cellular immortality. Activation of telomerase in tumors allows continuous proliferation of tumors.
Environmental Factors
Infections:
Viruses contribute to the pathogenesis of human cancers (see
Table 122-2
). Pathogenesis may occur through the integration of viral genetic elements into the host
DNA. These new genes are expressed by the host; they may affect cell growth or division or disrupt
normal host genes required for control of cell growth and division. Alternatively, viral infection may result
in immune dysfunction, leading to decreased immune surveillance for early tumors.
Bacteria may also cause cancer.
Helicobacter pylori
infection increases the risk of
[Table 122-1.
Human Cancers Associated with Chromosomal Abnormalities]
[Table 122-2.
Cancer-Associated Viruses]
several kinds of cancer (gastric adenocarcinoma, gastric lymphoma, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
[MALT] lymphoma).
Parasites of some types can lead to cancer.
Schistosoma haematobium
causes chronic inflammation and
fibrosis of the bladder, which may lead to cancer.
Opisthorchis sinensis
has been linked to carcinoma of
the pancreas and bile ducts.
Radiation:
Ultraviolet radiation may induce skin cancer (eg, basal and squamous cell carcinoma,
melanoma) by damaging DNA. This DNA damage consists of formation of thymidine dimers, which may
escape repair because of inherent defects in DNA repair (eg, xeroderma pigmentosum) or through rare,
random events.
Ionizing radiation is also carcinogenic. For example, survivors of the atomic bomb explosions in Hiroshima
and Nagasaki have a higher-than-expected incidence of leukemia and other cancers. Similarly, the
previous use of x-rays to treat nonmalignant disease (acne, thymic or adenoid enlargement, and
ankylosing spondylitis) resulted in higher rates of acute and chronic leukemias, Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin
lymphomas, multiple myeloma, aplastic anemia terminating in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia,
myelofibrosis, melanoma, and thyroid cancer. Use of x-rays in diagnostic imaging studies is thought to
increase risk of cancer (. Industrial exposure (eg, to uranium by mine workers) is linked to development of lung cancer after
a 15- to 20-yr latency. Long-term exposure to occupational irradiation or to internally deposited thorium
dioxide predisposes people to angiosarcomas and acute nonlymphocytic leukemia.
Exposure to the radioactive gas radon, which is released from soil, increases the risk of lung cancer.
Normally, radon disperses rapidly into the atmosphere and causes no harm. However, when a building is
placed on soil with high radon content, radon can accumulate within the building, sometimes producing
sufficiently high levels in the air to cause harm. In exposed people who also smoke, the risk of lung
cancer is further increased.
Drugs and chemicals:
Estrogens in oral contraceptives may slightly increase the risk of breast cancer,
but this risk decreases over time. Estrogen and progestin used for hormone replacement therapy also
increase the risk of breast cancer. Diethylstilbestrol (DES) increases the risk of breast cancer in women
who took the drug and increases the risk of vaginal carcinoma in daughters of these women who were
exposed before birth. Long-term use of anabolic steroids may increase the risk of liver cancer. Treatment
===PAGE:1199===
of cancer with chemotherapy drugs and with radiation therapy increases the risk of developing a second
cancer.
Chemical carcinogens can induce gene mutations and result in uncontrolled growth and tumor formation
(see
Table 122-3
). Other substances, called co-carcinogens, have little or no inherent carcinogenic potency
but enhance the carcinogenic effect of another agent when exposed simultaneously.
Dietary substances:
Certain substances consumed in the diet can increase the risk of cancer. For
instance, a diet high in fat has been linked to an increased risk of colon, breast, and possibly prostate
cancer. People who drink large amounts of alcohol are at much higher risk of developing esophageal
cancer. A diet high in smoked and pickled foods or in barbecued meats increases the risk of developing
stomach cancer. People who are overweight or obese have a higher risk of cancer of the breast,
endometrium, colon, kidneys, and esophagus.
Physical factors:
Chronic skin irritation leads to chronic dermatitis and, in rare cases, to squamous cell
carcinoma. This occurrence is presumably due to random mutations that occur more frequently because
of the increased cell turnover.
Immunologic Disorders
Immune system dysfunction as a result of inherited genetic mutation, acquired disorders, aging, or
immunosuppressants interferes with
[Table 122-3.
Common Chemical Carcinogens]
normal immune surveillance of early tumors and results in higher rates of cancer. Known cancerassociated immune disorders include
• Ataxia-telangiectasia (acute lymphocytic leukemia [ALL], brain tumors, gastric cancer)
• Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (lymphoma, ALL)
• X-linked agammaglobulinemia (lymphoma, ALL)
• Immune deficiency secondary to immunosuppressants or HIV infection (large cell lymphoma, Kaposi's
sarcoma)
• Rheumatologic conditions, such as SLE, RA, and Sjogren's syndrome (B-type lymphoma)
• General immune disorders (lymphoreticular neoplasia)
Cancer Diagnosis
A diagnosis of cancer may be suspected based on history and physical examination but requires
confirmation by tumor biopsy and histopathologic examination.
A complete history and physical examination may reveal unexpected clues to early cancer.
History
Physicians must be aware of predisposing factors and must specifically ask about familial cancer,
environmental exposure (including smoking history), and prior or present illnesses (eg, autoimmune
disorders, previous immunosuppressive therapy, hepatitis B or hepatitis C, HIV infection, abnormal
Papanicolaou test, human papillomavirus infection). Symptoms suggesting occult cancer can include
• Fatigue
===PAGE:1200===
• Weight loss
• Fevers
• Night sweats
• Cough
• Hemoptysis
• Hematemesis
• Hematochezia
• Change in bowel habits
• Persistent pain
Physical examination
Particular attention should be paid to skin, lymph nodes, lungs, breasts, abdomen, and testes. Prostate,
rectal, and vaginal examinations are also important. Findings help direct further testing, including x-rays
and biopsies.
Testing
Tests include imaging tests, serum tumor markers, and biopsy.
Imaging tests
often include plain x-rays, ultrasonography, CT, and MRI. These tests assist in identifying
abnormalities, determining qualities of a mass (solid or cystic), providing dimensions, and establishing
relationship to surrounding structures, which may be important if surgery or biopsy is being considered.
Serum tumor markers
may offer corroborating evidence in patients with findings suggestive of a
specific cancer (. With some exceptions (eg, prostate-specific antigen [PSA]), these markers
do not have enough sensitivity and specificity to be used for screening. They are the most useful in
detecting early relapse and monitoring response to therapy. Useful examples include
•
α
-Fetoprotein (hepatocellular carcinoma, testicular carcinoma)
• Carcinoembryonic antigen (colon cancer)
•
β
-human chorionic gonadotropin (choriocarcinoma, testicular carcinoma)
• Serum immunoglobulins (multiple myeloma)
• DNA probes (eg,
bcr
probe to identify a chromosome 22 alteration in chronic myelogenous leukemia)
• CA 125 (ovarian cancer)
• CA 27-29 (breast cancer)
• PSA (prostate cancer)
Biopsy
to confirm the diagnosis and tissue of origin is almost always required when cancer is suspected
or detected. The choice of biopsy site is usually determined by ease of access and degree of
invasiveness. If lymphadenopathy is present, fine-needle or core biopsy may yield the tumor type; if
nondiagnostic, open biopsy is done. Other biopsy routes include bronchoscopy for easily accessible
mediastinal or central pulmonary tumors, percutaneous liver biopsy if liver lesions are present, and CT- or
===PAGE:1201===
ultrasound-guided biopsy. If these procedures are not suitable, open biopsy may be necessary.
Grading
is a histologic measure of tumor aggressiveness and provides important prognostic information.
It is determined by examining the biopsy specimen. Grade is based on the morphologic appearance of
tumor cells, including the appearance of the nuclei, cytoplasm, and nucleoli; frequency of mitoses; and
amount of necrosis. For many cancers, grading scales have been developed.
Molecular tests
such as chromosomal analogs, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), PCR, and cell
surface antigens (eg, in lymphomas, leukemias) delineate the origin of metastatic cancers originating from
an unknown primary cancer or assist in recognizing chemotherapy resistance (eg, in acute myelogenous
leukemia).
Staging
Once a histologic diagnosis is made, staging (ie, determination of the extent of disease) helps determine
treatment decisions and prognosis. Clinical staging uses data from the history, physical examination,
imaging tests, laboratory tests, and biopsy of bone marrow, lymph nodes, or other sites of suspected
disease. For staging of specific neoplasms, see details in the organ-relevant chapter.
Imaging tests:
Imaging tests, especially CT and MRI, can detect metastases to brain, lungs, or
abdominal viscera, including the adrenal glands, retroperitoneal lymph nodes, liver, and spleen. MRI (with
gadolinium contrast) is the procedure of choice for recognition and evaluation of brain tumors, both
primary and metastatic. PET scanning is increasingly being used to determine the metabolic activity of a
suspect lymph node or mass. Integrated PET-CT can be valuable, especially in lung, head and neck, and
breast cancer and in lymphoma.
Ultrasonography can be used to study orbital, thyroid, cardiac, pericardial, hepatic, pancreatic, renal, and
retroperitoneal areas. It may guide percutaneous biopsies and differentiate renal cell carcinoma from a
benign renal cyst.
Nuclear scans can identify several types of metastases. Bone scans identify abnormal bone growth (ie,
osteoblastic activity) before it is visible on plain x-ray. Thus, this technique is useless in neoplasms that
are purely lytic (eg, multiple myeloma); routine bone x-rays are the study of choice in such diseases.
Laboratory tests:
Serum chemistries and enzymes may help staging. Elevated liver enzyme (alkaline
phosphatase, LDH, ALT) levels suggest the presence of liver metastases. Elevated alkaline phosphatase
and serum Ca may be the first evidence of bone metastases. Elevated BUN or creatinine levels may
indicate an obstructive uropathy secondary to a pelvic mass, intrarenal obstruction from tubular
precipitation of myeloma protein, or uric acid nephropathy from lymphoma or other cancers. Elevated uric
acid levels often occur in myeloproliferative and lymphoproliferative disorders.
Invasive tests:
Mediastinoscopy ( is especially valuable in the staging of non-small cell lung
cancer. When mediastinal lymph node involvement is found, patients do not usually benefit from
thoracotomy and
lung resection but may benefit from chemoradiation and subsequent tumor resection.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are especially useful in detecting metastases from malignant
lymphoma and small cell lung cancer, and their role in breast and prostate cancer staging is expanding.
Bone marrow biopsy is positive at diagnosis in 50 to 70% of patients with malignant lymphoma (low and
intermediate grade) and in 15 to 18% of patients with small cell lung cancer. Bone marrow biopsy should
be done in patients with hematologic abnormalities (ie, anemia, thrombocytopenia, pancytopenia) that
cannot be explained by other mechanisms.
Biopsy of regional lymph nodes is part of the evaluation of most tumors, such as breast, lung, or colon
cancers.
Cancer Screening
Cancer can sometimes be detected in asymptomatic patients via regular physical examinations and
===PAGE:1202===
screening tests.
Physical examinations for cancers of the thyroid, oral cavity, skin, lymph nodes, testes, prostate, and
ovaries should also be done during routine medical care.
Screening tests are done in asymptomatic patients at risk. The rationale is that early diagnosis may
decrease cancer mortality by detecting cancer at an early and curable stage. Early detection may allow
for less radical therapy and reduce costs. Risks, however, include false-positive results, which
necessitate confirmatory tests (eg, biopsy, endoscopy) that can lead to anxiety, significant morbidity, and
significant costs; and false-negative results, which may give a mistaken sense of security, causing
patients to ignore subsequent symptoms.
Screening for cancer should be done in the following circumstances:
• When distinct high-risk groups can be identified (eg, people with certain infections, exposures, or
behaviors)
• When the disorder has an asymptomatic period during which treatment would alter outcome
• When the morbidity of the disorder is significant
• When an intervention is available that is acceptable and effective at changing the natural history of the
disorder
The screening tests themselves should satisfy the following criteria:
• Cost and convenience are reasonable.
• Results are reliable and reproducible.
• Sensitivity and specificity are adequate.
• The positive predictive value (probability that a person with a positive test result has or will develop a
disorder or condition— is high in the population screened, and few false-negative results
occur.
• The test or procedure is acceptable to patients.
Recommended screening schedules are constantly evolving based on ongoing studies (see
Table 122-4
).
Clinical Sequelae of Cancer
Cancer may lead to pain, weight loss, neuropathy, nausea, fatigue, seizures, or obstruction of visceral
organs. Death typically occurs as a result of failure of one or more organ systems.
Pain
in patients with metastatic cancer frequently results from bone metastases, nerve or plexus
involvement, or pressure exerted by a tumor mass or effusion. Aggressive pain management is essential
in the treatment of cancer and for maintenance of quality of life (.
Cardiac tamponade
can result from malignant pericardial effusion and often occurs precipitously. The
most common causes are breast cancer, lung cancer, and lymphoma. The preceding effusion may cause
ill-defined chest pain or pressure that is worse when patients are supine and better when they are sitting
up (. Patients with tamponade may experience signs and symptoms of decreased cardiac
output (eg, dizziness or syncope). On physical examination, heart signs may be muffled and a friction rub
and pulsus paradoxus may be present. X-ray may show a globular cardiac silhouette. Pericardiocentesis
should be done for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, and a pleuropericardial window or
pericardiectomy should be considered.
===PAGE:1203===
Pleural effusions
should be drained if symptomatic and monitored for reaccumulation. If the effusion
reaccumulates rapidly, thoracostomy tube drainage ( and sclerosing agents or repeated
catheter drainage should be considered. Palliative surgical pleurectomy can be used for refractory
effusions in advanced malignant disease.
Spinal cord compression
( can result from cancer spread to the vertebrae and requires
immediate surgery or radiation therapy. Symptoms may include back pain, lower extremity paresthesias,
and bowel and bladder
[Table 122-4.
Screening Procedures in Average-Risk Asymptomatic People as Recommended by the
American Cancer Society*]
dysfunction. Diagnosis is confirmed by CT or MRI.
Clots in the veins
of the lower extremities often cause complications in cancer patients. Tumors produce
procoagulants, such as tissue factors, leading to excess clot formation, particularly in after surgery.
Anticoagulants may be necessary to prevent pulmonary emboli.
Metabolic and immune consequences
of cancer can include hypercalcemia, hyperuricemia, increased
ACTH production, antibodies that produce neurologic dysfunction, hemolytic anemia, and many other
complications.
Metastatic Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Origin
A patient is considered to have carcinoma of unknown primary origin when a tumor is detected at one or
more metastatic sites and routine evaluation fails to identify a primary tumor. Metastatic carcinoma of
unknown primary origin constitutes up to 7% of all cancers and poses a therapeutic dilemma, because
cancer treatment is typically directed at the specific primary tissue type.
The most common causative primary tumors are those of the testes, lungs, colon and rectum, and
pancreas. Examination of these areas should be thorough.
Types of testing used to help specify the primary site include
• Laboratory testing
• Imaging tests
• Immunocytochemical and immunoperoxidase staining
• Tissue analysis
Laboratory tests should include a CBC, urinalysis, stool examination for occult blood, and
serum
chemistries (including prostate-specific antigen assays in males).
Imaging should be limited to a chest x-ray, abdominal CT, and mammography. An upper GI series and
barium enema should be done if blood is present in the stool.
Increasing numbers of immunocytochemical stains can be used to test available cancerous tissue to help
determine the primary tissue site. In addition, immunoperoxidase staining for immunoglobulin, gene
rearrangement studies, and electron microscopy help diagnose large cell lymphoma, whereas
immunoperoxidase staining for
α
-fetoprotein or
β
-human chorionic gonadotropin may suggest germ cell
tumors. Tissue analysis for estrogen and progesterone receptors helps identify breast cancer, and
immunoperoxidase staining for prostate-specific antigen helps identify prostate cancer.
Even if a precise histologic diagnosis cannot be made, one constellation of findings may suggest an
origin. Poorly differentiated carcinomas near or at midline regions of the mediastinum or retroperitoneum
===PAGE:1204===
in young or middle-aged males should be considered germ cell neoplasms—even in the absence of a
testicular mass. Patients with this type of carcinoma should be treated with a cisplatin-based regimen,
because nearly 50% of such patients experience long disease-free intervals. For most other unknown
primary cancers, the responses to this regimen and to other multidrug chemotherapy regimens are
modest and of brief duration (eg, median survival < 1 yr).
Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Paraneoplastic syndromes are symptoms that occur at sites distant from a tumor or its
metastasis.
Although the pathogenesis remains unclear, these symptoms may be secondary to substances secreted
by the tumor or may be a result of antibodies directed against tumors that cross-react with other tissue.
Symptoms may occur in any organ or physiologic system. Up to 20% of cancer patients experience
paraneoplastic syndromes, but often these syndromes are unrecognized.
The most common cancers associated with paraneoplastic syndromes include
• Lung carcinoma (most common)
• Renal carcinoma
• Hepatocellular carcinoma
• Leukemias
• Lymphomas
• Breast tumors
• Ovarian tumors
• Neural cancers
• Gastric cancers
• Pancreatic cancers
Successful treatment is best obtained by controlling the underlying cancer, but some symptoms can be
palliated with specific drugs (eg, cyproheptadine for carcinoid syndrome, bisphosphonates and
corticosteroids for hypercalcemia).
General paraneoplastic symptoms:
Patients with cancer often experience fever, night sweats,
anorexia, and cachexia. These symptoms may arise from release of cytokines involved in the
inflammatory or immune response or from mediators involved in tumor cell death, such as tumor necrosis
factorα
. Alterations in liver function and steroidogenesis may also contribute.
Cutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes:
Patients may experience many skin symptoms.
Itching
is the most common cutaneous symptom experienced by patients with cancer (eg, leukemia,
lymphomas) and may result from hypereosinophilia.
Flushing
may also occur and is likely related to tumor-generated circulating vasoactive substances (eg,
prostaglandins).
Pigmented skin lesions,
or keratoses, may appear, including acanthosis nigricans (GI cancer),
generalized dermic melanosis (lymphoma, melanoma, hepatocellular carcinoma), Bowen's disease (lung,
GI, GU cancer), and large multiple seborrheic keratoses, ie, Leser-Trelat signs (lymphoma, GI cancer).
===PAGE:1205===
Secretion of melanin precursors from tumors may promote formation of these lesions.
Ichthyosis,
or desquamation of the extensor surface of the extremities, may also occur.
Hypertrichosis
may manifest as sudden appearance of coarse hair on the face and ears that resolves
after resection or treatment of the tumor. Alternatively, alopecia may occur with certain tumor types. The
mechanism by which alopecia occurs is not clear.
Necrotizing migrating erythema
may occur with glucagonomas.
Subcutaneous adipose nodular necrosis
may result from release of proteolytic enzymes from various
pancreatic tumors.
Herpes zoster
may result from reactivation of latent virus in patients with immune system depression or
dysfunction.
Endocrine paraneoplastic syndromes:
The endocrine system is often affected by paraneoplastic
syndromes.
Cushing's syndrome
(cortisol excess, leading to hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, hypertension, central
obesity, moon facies) may result from ectopic production of ACTH or ACTH-like molecules, most often
with small cell cancer of the lung.
Abnormalities in water and electrolyte balance,
including hyponatremia, may result from production
of ADH and parathyroid hormone-like hormones from small cell and non-small cell lung cancer.
Hypoglycemia
may result from production of insulin-like growth factors or insulin production by
pancreatic islet cell tumors or hemangiopericytomas.
Hypertension
may result from abnormal epinephrine and norepinephrine secretion
(pheochromocytomas) or from cortisol excess (ACTH-secreting tumors).
Other ectopically produced hormones
include parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHRP—from
squamous cell lung cancer, head and neck cancer, bladder cancer), calcitonin (from breast cancer, small
cell lung cancer, and medullary thyroid carcinoma), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (from gestational
choriocarcinoma). PTHRP causes hypercalcemia and its associated symptoms (polyuria, dehydration,
constipation, muscle weakness); calcitonin causes a fall in the serum Ca level, with contractions and
cardiac arrhythmias.
GI paraneoplastic syndromes:
Watery diarrhea with subsequent dehydration and electrolyte
imbalances may result from tumor-related secretion of prostaglandins or vasoactive intestinal peptide.
Implicated tumors include pancreatic islet cell tumors and others. Protein-losing enteropathies may result
from tumor mass inflammation, particularly with lymphomas.
Hematologic paraneoplastic syndromes:
Patients with cancer may develop pure RBC aplasia,
anemia of chronic disease, leukocytosis (leukemoid reaction), thrombocytosis, eosinophilia, basophilia,
and disseminated intravascular coagulation. In addition, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and a
Coombs'-positive hemolytic anemia can complicate the course of lymphoid cancers and Hodgkin
lymphoma. Erythrocytosis may occur in various cancers, especially renal cancers and hepatomas, due to
ectopic production of erythropoietin or erythropoietin-like substances, and monoclonal gammopathies
may sometimes be present.
Demonstrated mechanisms of hematologic abnormalities include tumor-generated substances that mimic
or block normal endocrine signals for hematologic line development and generation of antibodies that
cross-react with receptors or cell lines.
Neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes:
Several types of peripheral neuropathy are among the
neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes. Cerebellar syndromes and other central neurologic paraneoplastic
===PAGE:1206===
syndromes also occur.
Peripheral neuropathy
is the most common neurologic paraneoplastic syndrome. It is usually a distal
sensorimotor polyneuropathy that causes mild motor weakness, sensory loss, and absent distal reflexes.
The syndrome is indistinguishable from that accompanying many chronic illnesses.
Subacute sensory neuropathy
is a more specific but rare peripheral neuropathy. Dorsal root ganglia
degeneration and progressive sensory loss with ataxia but little motor weakness develop; the disorder
may be disabling. Anti-Hu, an autoantibody, is found in the serum of some patients with lung cancer.
There is no treatment.
Guillain-Barre syndrome,
another peripheral neuropathy, is more common in patients with Hodgkin
lymphoma than in the general population.
Eaton-Lambert syndrome
is an immune-mediated, myasthenia-like syndrome with weakness usually
affecting the limbs and sparing ocular and bulbar muscles. It is pre-synaptic, resulting from impaired
release of acetylcholine from nerve terminals. An IgG antibody is involved. The syndrome can precede,
occur with, or develop after the diagnosis of cancer. It occurs most commonly in men with intrathoracic
tumors (70% have small or oat cell lung carcinoma). Symptoms and signs include fatigability, weakness,
pain in proximal limb muscles, peripheral paresthesias, dry mouth, erectile dysfunction, and ptosis. Deep
tendon reflexes are reduced or lost. The diagnosis is confirmed by finding an incremental response to
repetitive nerve stimulation: Amplitude of the compound muscle action potential increases > 200% at
rates > 10 Hz. Treatment is first directed at the underlying cancer and sometimes induces remission.
Guanidine (initially 125 mg po qid, gradually increased to a maximum of 35 mg/kg), which facilitates
acetylcholine release, often lessens symptoms but may depress bone marrow and liver function.
Corticosteroids and plasmapheresis benefit some patients.
Subacute cerebellar degeneration
causes progressive bilateral leg and arm ataxia, dysarthria, and
sometimes vertigo and diplopia. Neurologic signs may include dementia with or without brain stem signs,
ophthalmoplegia, nystagmus, and extensor plantar signs, with prominent dysarthria and arm involvement.
Cerebellar degeneration usually progresses over weeks to months, often causing profound disability.
Cerebellar degeneration may precede the discovery of the cancer by weeks to years. Anti-Yo, a
circulating autoantibody, is found in the serum or CSF of some patients, especially women with breast or
ovarian cancer. MRI or CT may show cerebellar atrophy, especially late in the disease. Characteristic
pathologic changes include widespread loss of Purkinje cells and lymphocytic cuffing of deep blood
vessels. CSF occasionally has mild lymphocytic pleocytosis. Treatment is nonspecific, but some
improvement may follow successful cancer therapy.
Opsoclonus
(spontaneous chaotic eye movements) is a rare cerebellar syndrome that may accompany
childhood neuroblastoma. It is associated with cerebellar ataxia and myoclonus of the trunk and
extremities. Anti-Ri, a circulating autoantibody, may be present. The syndrome often responds to
corticosteroids and treatment of the cancer.
Subacute motor neuronopathy
is a rare disorder causing painless lower motor neuron weakness of
upper and lower extremities, usually in patients with Hodgkin lymphoma or other lymphomas. Anterior
horn cells degenerate. Spontaneous improvement usually occurs.
Subacute necrotizing myelopathy
is a rare syndrome in which rapid ascending sensory and motor loss
occurs in gray and white matter of the spinal cord, leading to paraplegia. MRI helps rule out epidural
compression from metastatic tumor—a much more common cause of rapidly progressive spinal cord
dysfunction in patients with cancer. MRI may show necrosis in the spinal cord.
Encephalitis
may occur as a paraneoplastic syndrome, taking several different forms, depending on the
area of the brain involved. Global encephalitis has been proposed to explain the encephalopathy that
occurs most commonly in small cell lung cancer. Limbic encephalitis is characterized by anxiety and
depression, leading to memory loss, agitation, confusion, hallucinations, and behavioral abnormalities.
Anti-Hu antibodies, directed against RNA binding proteins, may be present in the serum and spinal fluid.
MRI may disclose areas of increased contrast uptake and edema.
===PAGE:1207===
Renal paraneoplastic syndrome:
Membranous glomerulonephritis may occur in patients with colon
cancer, ovarian cancer, and lymphoma as a result of circulating immune complexes.
Rheumatologic paraneoplastic syndromes:
Rheumatologic disorders mediated by autoimmune
reactions can also be a manifestation of paraneoplastic syndromes.
Arthropathies
(rheumatic polyarthritis, polymyalgia) or systemic sclerosis may develop in patients with
hematologic cancers or with cancers of the colon, pancreas, or prostate. Systemic sclerosis or SLE may
also develop in patients with lung and gynecologic cancers.
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
is prominent with certain lung cancers and manifests as painful
swelling of the joints (knees, ankles, wrists, elbows, metacarpophalangeal joints) with effusion and
sometimes fingertip clubbing.
Secondary amyloidosis
may occur with myeloma, lymphomas, or renal cell carcinomas.
Dermatomyositis
and, to a lesser degree,
polymyositis
( are thought to be more common
in patients with cancer, especially in those > 50 yr. Typically, proximal muscle weakness is progressive
with pathologically demonstrable muscle inflammation and necrosis. A dusky, erythematous butterfly rash
with a heliotrope hue may develop on the cheeks with periorbital edema. Corticosteroids may be helpful.
===PAGE:1208===
Chapter 123. Tumor Immunology
Introduction
Tumor recognition is a complex, challenging problem for the immune system, which must distinguish
proper cellular growth and organization from neoplastic transformation. This process involves recognition
of tumor antigens by effector cells and induction of immunity. The development of tumors despite the
presence of antigens, the significance of immune recognition in the pathogenesis of tumors, and the
potential for therapeutic augmentation of immune responses remain the subject of intense investigation.
Tumor Antigens
Many tumor cells produce antigens, which may be released in the bloodstream or remain on the cell
surface. Antigens have been identified in most of the human cancers, including Burkitt's lymphoma,
neuroblastoma, malignant melanoma, osteosarcoma, renal cell carcinoma, breast carcinoma, prostate
cancer, lung carcinomas, and colon cancer. A key role of the immune system is detection of these
antigens to permit subsequent targeting for eradication. However, despite their foreign structure, the
immune response to tumor antigens varies and is often insufficient to prevent tumor growth.
Tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) are relatively restricted to tumor cells, whereas tumor-specific antigens
(TSAs) are unique to tumor cells. TSAs and TAAs typically are portions of intracellular molecules
expressed on the cell surface as part of the major histocompatibility complex.
Suggested mechanisms of origin for tumor antigens include
• Introduction of new genetic information from a virus (eg, human papillomavirus E6 and E7 proteins in
cervical cancer)
• Alteration of oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes by carcinogens, which either generate a novel
protein sequence directly or induce accumulation of proteins that are normally not expressed or are
expressed at very low levels (eg,
ras, p53
)
• Abnormally high levels of proteins that normally are present at substantially lower levels (eg, prostatespecific antigens, melanoma-associated antigens) or that are expressed only during embryonic
development (carcinoembryonic antigens)
• Uncovering of antigens normally buried in the cell membrane because of defective membrane
homeostasis in tumor cells
• Release of antigens normally sequestered within the cell or its organelles when tumor cells die
Host Response to Tumors
The immune response to foreign antigens consists of humoral (eg, antibodies) and cellular mechanisms.
Most humoral responses cannot prevent tumor growth. However, effector cells, such as T cells,
macrophages, and natural killer cells, have relatively effective tumoricidal abilities. Effector cell activity is
induced by cells that present tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) or tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) on their
surface (these cells are called antigen-presenting cells) and is supported by cytokines (eg, interleukins,
interferons—. Despite the activity of effector cells, host immunoreactivity may fail to control
tumor occurrence and growth.
Cellular Immunity
The T cell
is the primary cell responsible for direct recognition and killing of tumor cells. T cells carry out
immunologic surveillance, then proliferate and destroy newly transformed tumor cells after recognizing
TAAs. The T-cell response to tumors is modulated by other cells of the immune system; some cells
require the presence of humoral antibodies directed against the tumor cells (antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity) to initiate the interactions that lead to the death of tumor cells. In contrast, suppressor T cells
===PAGE:1209===
cytotoxicity) to initiate the interactions that lead to the death of tumor cells. In contrast, suppressor T cells
inhibit the immune response against tumors.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs) recognize antigens on target cells and lyse these cells. These
antigens may be cell surface proteins or may be intracellular proteins (eg, TAAs) that are expressed on
the surface in combination with class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Tumor-specific
CTLs have been found with neuroblastomas; malignant melanomas; sarcomas; and carcinomas of the
colon, breast, cervix, endometrium, ovary, testis, nasopharynx, and kidney.
Natural killer (NK) cells
are another population of effector cells with tumoricidal activity. In contrast to
CTLs, NK cells lack the receptor for antigen detection but can still recognize normal cells infected with
viruses or tumor cells. Their tumoricidal activity is termed natural
because it is not induced by a specific
antigen. The mechanism by which NK cells discriminate between normal and abnormal cells is under
study. Evidence suggests that class I MHC molecules on the surface of normal cells inhibit NK cells and
prevent lysis. Thus, the decreased level of class I molecule expression characteristic of many tumor cells
may allow activation of NK cells and subsequent tumor lysis.
Macrophages
can kill specific tumor cells when activated by a combination of factors, including
lymphokines (soluble factors produced by T cells) and interferon. They are less effective than T-cellmediated cytotoxic mechanisms. Under certain circumstances, macrophages may present TAAs to T cells
and stimulate tumor-specific immune response.
Dendritic cells
are dedicated antigen-presenting cells present in barrier tissues (eg, skin, lymph nodes).
They play a central role in initiation of tumor-specific immune response. These cells take up tumorassociated proteins, process them, and present TAAs to T cells to stimulate the CTL response against
tumor. The presence of dendritic cells in tumor tissues correlates with improved prognosis.
Lymphokines
produced by immune cells stimulate growth or induce activities of other immune cells.
Such lymphokines include IL-2, also known as T-cell growth factor, and the interferons. IL-12 is produced
by dendritic cells and specifically induces CTLs, thereby enhancing antitumor immune responses.
Regulatory T cells
are normally present in the body and help prevent autoimmune reactions. They are
produced during the active phase of immune responses to pathogens and limit the strong immune
response that could damage the host. Accumulation of these cells in cancers inhibits antitumor immune
responses.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells
consist of immature myeloid cells and their precursors. These cells
accumulate in large numbers in cancers and potently suppress immune responses.
Humoral Immunity
In contrast to T-cell cytotoxic immunity, humoral antibodies do not appear to confer significant protection
against tumor growth. Most antibodies cannot recognize TAAs. Regardless, humoral antibodies that react
with tumor cells in vitro have been detected in the sera of patients with various tumors, including Burkitt's
lymphoma; malignant melanoma; osteosarcoma; neuroblastoma; and carcinomas of the lung, breast, and
GI tract.
Cytotoxic antibodies are directed against surface antigens of tumor cells. These antibodies can exert antitumor effects through complement fixation or by serving as a flag for destruction of tumor cells by T cells
(antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity). Another population of humoral antibodies, called
enhancing antibodies (blocking antibodies), may actually favor rather than inhibit tumor growth. The
mechanisms and relative importance of such immunologic enhancement are not well understood.
Failure of Host Defenses
Although many tumors are eliminated by the immune system (and thus are never detected), others
continue to grow despite the presence of TAAs. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain this
deficient host response to the TAA, including the following:
===PAGE:1210===
• Specific immunologic tolerance to TAAs in a process that involves antigen-presenting cells and
suppressor T cells, possibly secondary to prenatal exposure to the antigen
• Suppression of immune response by chemical, physical, or viral agents (eg, helper T-cell destruction by
HIV)
• Suppression of the immune response by cytotoxic drugs or radiation
• Suppression of the immune response by the tumor itself through various complex and largely
uncharacterized mechanisms that cause various problems including decreased T, B, and antigenpresenting cell function, decreased IL-2 production, and increased circulating soluble IL-2 receptors
(which bind and hence inactivate IL-2)
Tumor Immunodiagnosis
Tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) can help diagnose various tumors and sometimes determine the
response to therapy or recurrence. An ideal tumor marker would be released only from tumor tissue, be
specific for a given tumor type, be detectable at low levels of tumor cell burden, have a direct relationship
to the tumor cell burden, and be present in all patients with the tumor. However, although most tumors
release detectable antigenic macromolecules into the circulation, no tumor marker has all the requisite
characteristics to provide enough specificity or sensitivity to be used in early diagnosis or mass cancer
screening programs.
Carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) is a protein-polysaccharide complex present in colon carcinomas and
in normal fetal intestine, pancreas, and liver. Blood levels are elevated
in patients with colon carcinoma,
but the specificity is relatively low because positive results also occur in heavy cigarette smokers and in
patients with cirrhosis, ulcerative colitis, and other cancers (eg, breast, pancreas, bladder, ovary, cervix).
Monitoring CEA levels may be useful for detecting cancer recurrence after tumor excision if the patient
initially had an elevated CEA and for refining estimates of prognosis by stage.
α
-Fetoprotein,
a normal product of fetal liver cells, is also present in the sera of patients with primary
hepatoma, nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, and, frequently, ovarian or testicular embryonal
carcinoma. Levels are sometimes useful for estimating prognosis or, less often, for diagnosis.
β
Subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin
(
β
-hCG), measured by immunoassay, is the major clinical
marker in women with gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN)—a disease spectrum that includes
hydatidiform mole, nonmetastatic GTN, and metastatic GTN (see also p.
)—and in about two thirds
of men with testicular embryonal carcinoma or choriocarcinoma. The
β
subunit is measured because it is
specific for hCG. This marker is present in low levels in healthy people. Levels are elevated during
pregnancy.
Prostate-specific antigen
(PSA), a glycoprotein located in ductal epithelial cells of the prostate gland,
can be detected in low concentrations in the sera of healthy men. Using an appropriate upper limit of
normal, assays with monoclonal antibodies detect elevated serum levels of PSA in about 90% of patients
with advanced prostate cancer, even in the absence of defined metastatic disease. It is more sensitive
than prostatic acid phosphatase. However, because PSA is elevated in other conditions (eg, benign
prostatic hypertrophy, prostatitis, recent GU tract instrumentation), it is less specific. PSA can be used to
monitor recurrence after prostatic carcinoma has been diagnosed and treated.
CA 125
is clinically useful for screening, diagnosing, and monitoring therapy for ovarian cancer, although
any peritoneal inflammatory process and some other cancers can increase levels.
β
-Microglobulin
is often elevated in multiple myeloma and in some lymphomas. Its primary use is in
prognosis.
CA 19-9
was originally developed to detect colorectal cancer but proved more sensitive for pancreatic
cancer. It is primarily used to judge the response to treatment in patients with advanced pancreatic
cancers. CA 19-9 can also be elevated in other GI cancers, particularly cancer of the bile ducts, and
===PAGE:1211===
some benign bile duct and cholestatic disorders.
CA 15-3
and
CA 27-29
are elevated in most patients with metastatic breast cancer. Levels may also be
elevated in other conditions. These markers are primarily used to monitor the response to therapy.
Chromogranin A
is used as a marker for carcinoid and other neuroendocrine tumors. Sensitivity and
specificity for neuroendocrine tumors can exceed 75%, and diagnostic accuracy is higher with diffuse
than with localized tumors. Levels can be elevated in other cancers, such as lung and prostate, and some
benign disorders (eg, primary hypertension, chronic kidney disease, chronic atrophic gastritis).
Thyroglobulin
is produced by the thyroid and may be elevated with various thyroid disorders. It is
primarily used after complete thyroidectomy to detect recurrent thyroid cancer and to monitor the
response to treatment in metastatic thyroid cancer.
TA-90
is a highly immunogenic subunit of a urinary tumor-associated antigen that is present in 70% of
melanomas, soft-tissue sarcomas, and carcinomas of the breast, colon, and lung. Some studies have
shown that TA-90 levels can accurately predict survival and the presence of subclinical disease after
surgery for melanoma.
Immunotherapy
A number of immunologic interventions, both passive and active, can be directed against tumor cells.
Passive Cellular Immunotherapy
In passive cellular immunotherapy, specific effector cells are directly infused and are not induced or
expanded within the patient.
Lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells
are produced from the patient's endogenous T cells, which
are extracted and grown in a cell culture system by exposing them to the lymphokine IL-2. The
proliferated LAK cells are then returned to the patient's bloodstream. Animal studies have shown that LAK
cells are more effective against cancer cells than are the original endogenous T cells, presumably
because of their greater number. Clinical trials of LAK cells in humans are ongoing.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
may have greater tumoricidal activity than LAK cells. These cells
are grown in culture in a manner similar to LAK cells. However, the progenitor cells consist of T cells that
are isolated from resected tumor tissue. This process
theoretically provides a line of T cells that has
greater tumor specificity than those obtained from the bloodstream. Recent clinical studies have shown
highly promising results.
Concomitant use of interferon enhances the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
antigens and tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) on tumor cells, thereby augmenting the killing of tumor
cells by the infused effector cells.
However, remissions using unmodified TILs have been infrequent. A new approach using T cells
genetically modified to express receptors that recognize TAAs with high specificity to tumor cells is under
study and may provide significant clinical benefit.
Passive Humoral Immunotherapy
Administration of exogenous antibodies constitutes passive humoral immunotherapy. Antilymphocyte
serum has been used in the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and in T-cell and B-cell
lymphomas, resulting in temporary decreases in lymphocyte counts or lymph node size.
Monoclonal antitumor antibodies may also be conjugated with toxins (eg, ricin, diphtheria) or with
radioisotopes so that the antibodies deliver these toxic agents specifically to the tumor cells. Another
technique involves bispecific antibodies, or linkage of one antibody that reacts with the tumor cell to a
second antibody that reacts with a cytotoxic effector cell. This technique brings the effector cell in close
===PAGE:1212===
opposition to the tumor cell, resulting in increased tumoricidal activity. However, these techniques are in
early stages of testing; thus, potential clinical benefits are uncertain.
Active Specific Immunotherapy
Inducing cellular immunity (involving cytotoxic T cells) in a host that failed to spontaneously develop an
effective response generally involves methods to enhance presentation of tumor antigens to host effector
cells. Cellular immunity can be induced to specific, very well-defined antigens. Several techniques can be
used to stimulate a host response; these techniques may involve giving peptides, DNA, or tumor cells
(from the host or another patient). Peptides and DNA are often given using antigen-presenting cells
(dendritic cells). These dendritic cells can also be genetically modified to secrete additional immuneresponse stimulants (eg, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF]).
Peptide-based vaccines
use peptides from defined TAAs. An increasing number of TAAs have been
identified as the target of T cells in cancer patients and are being tested in clinical trials. Recent data
indicate that responses are most potent if TAAs are delivered using dendritic cells. These cells are
obtained from the patient, loaded with the desired TAA, and then reintroduced intradermally; they
stimulate endogenous T cells to respond to the TAA. The peptides also can be delivered by coadministration with immunogenic adjuvants.
DNA vaccines
use recombinant DNA that encodes a specific (defined) antigenic protein. The DNA is
incorporated into viruses that are injected directly into patients or, more often, introduced into dendritic
cells obtained from the patients, which are then injected back into them. The DNA expresses the target
antigen which triggers or enhances patients' immune response.
Autochthonous tumor cells
(cells taken from the host) have been reintroduced to the host after use of
ex vivo techniques (eg, irradiation, neuraminidase treatment, hapten conjugation, hybridization with other
cell lines) to reduce their malignant potential and increase their antigenic activity. Sometimes the tumor
cells are genetically modified to produce immunostimulatory molecules (including cytokines such as GMCSF or IL-2, costimulatory molecules such as B7-1, and allogeneic class I MHC molecules); this
modification helps attract effector molecules and enhances systemic tumor targeting. Clinical trials with
GM-CSF-modified tumor cells have produced encouraging preliminary results.
Allogeneic tumor cells
(cells taken from other patients) have been used in patients with acute
lymphocytic leukemia and acute myeloblastic leukemia. Remission is induced by intensive chemotherapy
and radiation therapy. Then, irradiated allogeneic tumor cells that have been modified either genetically or
chemically to increase their immunogenic potential are injected into the patient. Sometimes patients are
also given bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine or other adjuvants ( to enhance the
immune response against the tumor. Prolonged remissions or improved reinduction rates have been
reported in some series but not in most.
A novel approach to cancer treatment combining immunotherapy and conventional chemotherapy has
shown some success (vs historic controls) in nonrandomized phase I and phase II clinical trials involving
various cancers, types of vaccines, and chemotherapy.
Nonspecific Immunotherapy
Interferons
(IFNα
, -
β
, -
γ
) are glycoproteins that have antitumor and antiviral activity.
Depending on dose,
interferons may either enhance or decrease cellular and humoral immune functions. Interferons also
inhibit division and certain synthetic processes in a variety of cells. Clinical trials have indicated that
interferons have antitumor activity in various cancers, including hairy cell leukemia, chronic myelocytic
leukemia, AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and ovarian
carcinoma. However, interferons may have significant adverse effects, such as fever, malaise,
leukopenia, alopecia, and myalgias.
Certain
bacterial adjuvants
(BCG and derivatives, killed suspensions of
Corynebacterium parvum
) have
tumoricidal properties. They have been used with or without added tumor antigen to treat a variety of
cancers, usually along with intensive chemotherapy or radiation therapy. For example, direct injection of
===PAGE:1213===
BCG into cancerous tissues has resulted in regression of melanoma and prolongation of disease-free
intervals in superficial bladder carcinomas and may help prolong drug-induced remission in acute
myeloblastic leukemia, ovarian carcinoma, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
===PAGE:1214===
Chapter 124. Principles of Cancer Therapy
Introduction
Curing cancer requires eliminating all cancer cells. The major modalities of therapy are
• Surgery and radiation therapy (for local and local-regional disease)
• Chemotherapy (for systemic disease) Other important methods include
• Hormonal therapy (for selected cancers, eg, prostate, breast, endometrium)
• Immunotherapy (monoclonal antibodies, interferons, and other biologic response modifiers and tumor
vaccines—
• Differentiating agents such as retinoids
• Targeted agents that exploit the growing knowledge of cellular and molecular biology
Overall treatment should be coordinated among a radiation oncologist, surgeon, and medical oncologist,
where appropriate. Choice of modalities constantly evolves, and numerous controlled research trials
continue. When available and appropriate, clinical trial participation should be considered and discussed
with patients.
Various terms are used to describe the response to treatment (see
Table 124-1
). The disease-free interval often serves as an indicator of cure and varies with cancer type.
For example, lung, colon, bladder, and testicular cancers are usually cured if a 5-yr disease-free interval
occurs. However, breast cancer may recur even after 5 yr; thus a 10-yr disease-free interval is more
indicative of cure.
Treatment decisions should weigh the likelihood of adverse effects against the likelihood of benefit; these
decisions require frank communication and possibly the involvement of a multidisciplinary cancer team.
Patient preferences for how to live out the end of life should be established early in the course of cancer
[Table 124-1.
Defining Response to Cancer Treatment]
treatment despite the difficulties of discussing death at such a sensitive time (.
Modalities of Cancer Therapy
Treatment of cancer can involve any of several modalities:
• Surgery
• Radiation therapy
• Chemotherapy
Often, modalities are combined to create a program that is appropriate for the patient and is based on
patient and tumor characteristics as well as patient preferences.
Survival rates with the different modalities, alone and in combination, are listed for selected cancers (see
Table 124-2
).
Surgery
Surgery is the oldest form of effective cancer therapy. It may be used alone or in combination with other
modalities.
===PAGE:1215===
Factors that increase operative risk in cancer patients include
• Age
• Comorbid conditions
• Debilitation due to cancer
• Paraneoplastic syndromes (less common—
Cancer patients often have poor nutrition due to anorexia and the catabolic influences of tumor growth,
and these factors may inhibit or slow recovery from surgery. Patients may be neutropenic or
thrombocytopenic or may have clotting disorders; these conditions increase the risk of sepsis and
hemorrhage. Therefore, preoperative assessment is paramount (.
[Table 124-2.
5-yr Disease-Free Survival Rates by Cancer Therapy]
Primary tumor resection:
If a primary tumor has not metastasized, surgery may be curative.
Establishing a complete margin of normal tissue around the primary tumor is critical for the success of
primary tumor resection. Intraoperative examination of frozen tissue sections by a pathologist may be
needed, with immediate resection of additional tissue if margins are positive for tumor cells. However,
frozen tissue examination is inferior to examination of processed and stained tissue. Later review of
margin tissue may prove the need for wider resection.
Surgical resection for primary tumor with local spread may also require removal of involved regional
lymph nodes, resection of an involved adjacent organ, or en bloc resection. Survival rates with surgery
alone are listed for selected cancers (see
Table 124-2
).
When the primary tumor has spread into adjacent normal tissues extensively, surgery may be delayed so
that other modalities (eg, chemotherapy, radiation therapy) can be used to reduce the size of the required
resection.
Resection of metastases:
With regional lymph node metastases, nonsurgical modalities may be the
best initial treatments, as in locally advanced lung cancer or head and neck cancer. Single metastases,
especially those in the lung, can sometimes be resected with a reasonable rate of cure.
Patients with a limited number of metastases, particularly to the liver, brain, or lungs, may benefit from
surgical resection of both the primary and metastatic tumor. For example, in colon cancer with liver
metastases, resection produces 5-yr survival rates of 30 to 40% if < 4 hepatic lesions exist and if
adequate tumor margins can be obtained.
Cytoreduction:
Cytoreduction (surgical resection to reduce tumor burden) is often an option when
removal of all tumor tissue is impossible, as in most cases of ovarian cancer. Cytoreduction may increase
the sensitivity of the remaining tissue to other treatment modalities through mechanisms that are not
entirely clear. Cytoreduction has yielded favorable results in pediatric solid tumors and in ovarian cancer.
Palliative surgery:
Surgery to relieve symptoms and preserve quality of life may be a reasonable
alternative when cure is unlikely or when an attempt at cure produces adverse effects that are
unacceptable to the patient. Tumor resection may be indicated to control pain, to reduce the risk of
hemorrhage, or to relieve obstruction of a vital organ (eg, intestine, urinary tract). Nutritional
supplementation with a feeding gastrostomy or jejunostomy tube may be necessary if proximal obstruction
exists.
Reconstructive surgery:
Reconstructive surgery may improve a patient's comfort or quality of life after
tumor resection (eg, breast reconstruction after mastectomy).
Radiation Therapy
===PAGE:1216===
Radiation therapy can cure many cancers (see
Table 124-2
), particularly those that are localized or that
can be completely encompassed within the radiation field. Radiation therapy with surgery (for head and
neck, laryngeal, or uterine cancer) or with chemotherapy and surgery (for sarcomas or breast,
esophageal, lung, or rectal cancers) improves cure rates and allows for more limited surgery as compared
with traditional surgical resection.
Radiation therapy can provide significant palliation when cure is not possible:
• For brain tumors: Prolongs patient functioning
• For cancers that compress the spinal cord: Prevents progression of neurologic deficits
• For superior vena cava syndromes: Relieves venous obstruction
• For painful bone lesions: Usually relieves symptoms
Radiation cannot destroy malignant cells without destroying some normal cells as well. Therefore, the risk
to normal tissue must be weighed against the potential gain in treating the malignant cells. The final
outcome of a dose of radiation depends on numerous factors, including
• Nature of the delivered radiation (mode, timing, volume, dose)
• Properties of the tumor (cell cycle phase, oxygenation, molecular properties, overall sensitivity to
radiation)
In general, cancer cells are selectively damaged because of their high metabolic rate. Normal tissue
repairs itself more effectively, resulting in greater net destruction of tumor.
Important considerations in the use of radiation therapy include the following:
• Treatment timing (critical)
• Dose fractionation (critical)
• Normal tissue in or adjacent to the proposed radiation field
• Target volume
• Configuration of radiation beams
• Dose distribution
• Modality and energy most suited to the patient's situation
Treatment is tailored to take advantage of the cellular kinetics of tumor growth, with the aim
of maximizing
damage to the tumor while minimizing damage to normal tissues.
Radiation therapy sessions begin with the precise positioning of the patient. Foam casts or plastic masks
are often constructed to ensure exact repositioning for serial treatments. Laser-guided sensors are used.
Typical courses consist of large daily doses given over 3 wk for palliative treatment or smaller doses
given once/day 5 days/wk for 6 to 8 wk for curative treatment.
Types of radiation therapy:
There are several different types of radiation therapy.
External beam radiation therapy
can be done with photons (gamma radiation), electrons, or protons.
Gamma radiation using a linear accelerator is the most common type of radiation therapy. The radiation
dose to adjacent normal tissue can be limited by conformal technology, which reduces scatter at the field
===PAGE:1217===
margins. Electron beam radiation therapy produces little tissue penetration and is best for skin or
superficial cancers. Different energies of electrons are used based on the desired depth of penetration
and type of tumor. Proton therapy, although limited in availability, can provide sharp margins and is
particularly useful for tumors of the eye, the base of the brain, and the spine.
Stereotactic radiation therapy
is radio-surgery with precise stereotactic localization of a tumor to
deliver a single high dose or multiple, fractionated doses to a small intracranial or other target.
Advantages include complete tumor ablation where conventional surgery would not be possible and
minimal adverse effects. Disadvantages include limitations involving the size of the area that can be
treated and the potential danger to adjacent tissues because of the high dose of radiation. In addition, it
cannot be used in all areas of the body. Patients must be immobilized and the area kept completely still.
Brachytherapy
involves placement of radioactive seeds into the tumor bed itself (eg, in the prostate or
cervix). Typically, placement is guided by CT or ultrasonography. Brachytherapy achieves higher effective
radiation doses over a longer period than could be accomplished by use of fractionated, external
irradiation.
Systemic radioactive isotopes
can direct radiation to cancer in organs that have specific receptors for
uptake of the isotope (ie, radioactive iodine for thyroid cancer) or when the radionuclide is attached to a
monoclonal antibody (eg, tositumomab plus iodine-131 tositumomab for non-Hodgkin lymphoma).
Isotopes can also accomplish palliation of generalized bony metastases (ie, radiostrontium for prostate
cancer).
Other agents or strategies, particularly chemotherapy, can sensitize tumor tissue to the delivered radiation
and increase efficacy.
Adverse effects:
Radiation can damage any intervening normal tissue.
Acute adverse effects
depend on the area receiving radiation and may include
• Lethargy
• Fatigue
• Mucositis
• Dermatologic manifestations (erythema, pruritus, desquamation)
• Esophagitis
• Pneumonitis
• Hepatitis
• GI symptoms (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, tenesmus)
• GU symptoms (frequency, urgency, dysuria)
• Cytopenias
Early detection and management of these adverse effects is important not only for the patient's comfort
and quality of life but also to ensure continuous treatment; prolonged interruption can allow for tumor
regrowth.
Late complications
can include cataracts, keratitis, and retinal damage if the eye is in the treatment
field; hypopituitarism; xerostomia; hypothyroidism; pneumonitis; pericarditis; esophageal stricture;
hepatitis; ulcers; gastritis; nephritis; sterility; and muscular contractures. Radiation that reaches normal
tissue can lead to poor healing of the tissues if further procedures or surgery is necessary. For example,
===PAGE:1218===
radiation to the head and neck impairs recovery from dental procedures (eg, restoration, extraction) and
thus should be administered only after all necessary dental work has been done.
Radiation therapy can increase the risk of developing other cancers, particularly leukemias and cancers
of the thyroid or breast. Peak incidence occurs 5 to 10 yr after exposure and depends on the patient's
age at the time of treatment. For example, chest irradiation for Hodgkin lymphoma in adolescent girls
leads to a higher risk of breast cancer than does the same treatment for postadolescent women.
Chemotherapy
The ideal chemotherapeutic drug would target and destroy only cancer cells. Only a few such drugs exist.
Common chemotherapeutic drugs and their adverse effects are described (see
Table 124-3
).
The most common routes of administration are IV and oral. Frequent dosing for extended
[Table 124-3.
Commonly Used Antineoplastic Drugs]
periods may necessitate subcutaneously implanted venous access devices (central or peripheral),
multilumen external catheters, or peripherally inserted central catheters.
Drug resistance can occur to chemotherapy. Identified mechanisms include overexpression of target
genes, mutation of target genes, drug inactivation by tumor cells, defective apoptosis in tumor cells, and
loss of receptors for hormonal agents. One of the best characterized mechanisms is overexpression of
the
MDR-1
gene, a cell membrane transporter that causes efflux of certain drugs (eg, vinca alkaloids,
taxanes, anthracyclines). Attempts to alter
MDR-1
function and thus prevent drug resistance have been
unsuccessful.
Cytotoxic drugs:
Traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy, which damages cell DNA, kills many normal cells
in addition to cancer cells. Antimetabolites, such as 5-fluorouracil and methotrexate, are cell cycle-specific
and have no linear dose-response relationship. In contrast, other chemotherapeutic drugs (eg, DNA
cross-linkers, also known as alkylating agents) have a linear dose-response relationship, producing more
tumor killing as well as more toxicity at higher doses. At their highest doses, DNA cross-linkers may
produce bone marrow aplasia, necessitating bone marrow transplantation to restore bone marrow
function.
Single-drug chemotherapy may cure selected cancers (eg, choriocarcinoma, hairy cell leukemia). More
commonly, multidrug regimens incorporating drugs with different mechanisms of action and different
toxicities are used to increase the tumor cell kill, reduce dose-related toxicity, and decrease the probability
of drug resistance. These regimens can provide significant cure rates (eg, in acute leukemia, testicular
cancer, Hodgkin lymphoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and, less commonly, solid tumors such as small cell
lung cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer). Multidrug regimens typically are given as repetitive cycles of a
fixed combination of drugs. The interval between cycles should be the shortest one that allows for
recovery of normal tissue. Continuous infusion may increase cell kill with some cell cycle-specific drugs
(eg, 5-fluorouracil).
For each patient, the probability of significant toxicities should be weighed against the likelihood of
benefit. End-organ function should be assessed before chemotherapeutic drugs with organ-specific
toxicities are used (eg, echocardiography before doxorubicin use). Dose modification or exclusion of
certain drugs may be necessary in patients with chronic lung disease (eg, bleomycin), renal failure (eg,
methotrexate), or hepatic dysfunction (eg, taxanes).
Despite these precautions, adverse effects commonly result from cytotoxic chemotherapy. The normal
tissues most commonly affected are those with the highest intrinsic turnover rate: bone marrow, hair
follicles, and the GI epithelium.
Imaging (eg, CT, MRI, PET) is frequently done after 2 to 3 cycles of therapy to evaluate response to
treatment. Therapy continues if there is a clear response. If the tumor progresses despite therapy, the
===PAGE:1219===
regimen is often amended or stopped. If the disease remains stable with treatment and the patient can
tolerate therapy, then a decision to continue is reasonable with the understanding that the disease will
eventually progress.
Hormonal therapy:
Hormonal therapy uses hormone agonists or antagonists to influence the course of
cancer. It may be used alone or in combination with other treatment modalities.
Hormonal therapy is particularly useful in prostate cancer, which grows in response to androgens. Other
cancers with hormone receptors on their cells (eg, breast, endometrium) can often be palliated by
hormone antagonist therapy or hormone ablation.
Use of prednisone, a glucocorticosteroid, is also considered hormonal therapy. It is frequently used to
treat tumors derived from the immune system (lymphomas, lymphocytic leukemias, multiple myeloma).
Biologic response modifiers:
Interferons are proteins synthesized by cells of the immune system as a
physiologic immune protective response to foreign antigens (viruses, bacteria, other foreign cells). In
pharmacologic amounts, they can palliate some cancers, including hairy cell leukemia, chronic myelocytic
leukemia, locally advanced melanoma, metastatic renal cell cancer, and Kaposi's sarcoma. Significant
toxic effects of interferon include fatigue, depression, nausea, leukopenia, chills and fever, and myalgias.
Interleukins, primarily the lymphokine IL-2 produced by activated T cells, can be used in metastatic
melanomas and can provide modest palliation in renal cell cancer.
Differentiating drugs:
These drugs induce differentiation in cancer cells. Alltrans
-retinoic acid has been
highly effective in treating acute promyelocytic leukemia. Other drugs in this class include arsenic
compounds and the hypomethylating agents azacytidine and deoxyazacytidine. When used alone, these
drugs have only transient effects, but their role in prevention and in combination with cytotoxic drugs is
promising.
Antiangiogenesis drugs:
Solid tumors produce growth factors that form new blood vessels necessary
to support ongoing tumor growth. Several drugs that inhibit this process are available. Thalidomide is
antiangiogenic, among its many effects. Bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody to vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), is effective against renal cancers and colon cancer. VEGF receptor inhibitors are
also affective in renal cancer, hepatocellular cancers, and GI stromal tumors.
Signal transduction inhibitors:
Many epithelial tumors possess mutations that activate signaling
pathways that cause their continuous proliferation and failure to differentiate. These mutated pathways
include growth factor receptors and the downstream proteins that transmit messages to the cell nucleus
from growth factor receptors on the cell surface. Three such drugs, imatinib (an inhibitor of the BCR-ABL
tyrosine kinase in chronic myelocytic leukemia) and erlotinib and gefitinib (inhibitors of the epidermal
growth factor receptor), are now in routine clinical use. Other inhibitors of these signaling pathways are
under study.
Monoclonal antibodies:
Monoclonal antibodies directed against unique tumor antigens have some
efficacy against neoplastic tissue (see also p.
). Trastuzumab, an antibody directed against a protein
called Her-2 or Erb-B2, plus chemotherapy has shown benefit in metastatic breast cancer. Antibodies
against CD antigens expressed on neoplastic cells, such as CD20 and CD33, are used to treat patients
with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (rituximab, anti-CD20 antibody) and acute myelocytic leukemia
(gemtuzumab, an antibody linked to a potent toxin).
The effectiveness of monoclonal antibodies may be increased by linking them to radioactive nuclide. One
such drug, ibritumomab, is used to treat non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Multimodality and Adjuvant Chemotherapy
In some tumors with a high likelihood of relapse despite optimal initial surgery or radiation therapy,
relapse may be prevented by addition of adjuvant chemotherapy. Increasingly, combined-modality therapy
(eg, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, surgery) is used. It may permit organ-sparing procedures and
===PAGE:1220===
preserve organ function.
Adjuvant therapy:
Adjuvant therapy is systemic chemotherapy or radiation therapy given to eradicate
residual occult tumor after initial surgery. Patients who have a high risk of recurrence may benefit from its
use. General criteria are based on degree of local extension
of the primary tumor, presence of positive
lymph nodes, and certain morphologic or biologic characteristics of individual cancer cells. Adjuvant
therapy has increased disease-free survival and cure rate in breast and in colorectal cancer.
Neoadjuvant therapy:
Neoadjuvant therapy is chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or both given
before
surgical resection. This treatment may enhance resectability and preserve local organ function. For
example, when this therapy is used in head and neck, esophageal, or rectal cancer, a smaller subsequent
resection may be possible. Another advantage of neoadjuvant therapy is in assessing response to
treatment; if the primary tumor does not respond, micrometastases are unlikely to be eradicated, and an
alternate regimen should be considered. Neoadjuvant therapy may obscure the true pathologic stage of
the cancer by altering tumor size and margins and converting histologically positive nodes to negative,
complicating clinical staging. The use of neoadjuvant therapy has improved survival in inflammatory and
locally advanced breast, stage IIIA lung, nasopharyngeal, and bladder cancers.
Bone Marrow Transplantation
Bone marrow or stem cell transplantation is an important component of the treatment of otherwise
refractory lymphomas, leukemias, and multiple myeloma (for an in-depth discussion of this topic, .
Gene Therapy
Genetic modulation is under intense investigation. Strategies include the use of antisense therapy,
systemic viral vector transfection, DNA injection into tumors, genetic modulation of resected tumor cells to
increase their immunogenicity, and alteration of immune cells to enhance their antitumor response.
Management of Adverse Effects
Patients being treated for cancer frequently experience adverse effects. Managing these effects improves
quality of life.
Nausea and Vomiting
Nausea and vomiting are commonly experienced by cancer patients and may result from the cancer itself
(eg, paraneoplastic syndromes) or from its treatment (eg, chemotherapy, radiation therapy to the brain or
abdomen). However, refractory nausea and vomiting should prompt further investigation, including basic
laboratory testing (electrolytes, liver function tests, lipase) and x-rays to investigate possible bowel
obstruction or intracranial metastases.
Serotonin-receptor antagonists
are the most effective drugs but are also the most expensive. Virtually
no toxicity occurs with granisetron and ondansetron aside from headache and orthostatic hypotension. A
0.15-mg/kg dose of ondansetron or a 10μ
g/kg dose of granisetron is given IV 30 min before
chemotherapy. Doses of ondansetron can be repeated 4 and 8 h after the first dose. The efficacy against
highly emetogenic drugs, such as the platinum complexes, can be improved with co-administration of
dexamethasone (8 mg IV given 30 min before chemotherapy with repeat doses of 4 mg IV q 8 h).
A substance P/neurokinin-1 antagonist
, aprepitant, can limit nausea and vomiting resulting from highly
emetogenic chemotherapy. Dosage is 125 mg po 1 h before chemotherapy on day 1, then 80 mg po 1 h
before chemotherapy on days 2 and 3.
Other traditional antiemetics, including phenothiazines (eg, prochlorperazine 10 mg IV q 8 h, promethazine
12.5 to 25 mg po or IV q 8 h) and metoclopramide (10 mg po or IV given 30 min before chemotherapy with
repeated doses q 6 to 8 h), are alternatives restricted to patients with mild to moderate nausea and
vomiting.
===PAGE:1221===
Dronabinol (
Δ
-9-tetrahydrocannabinol [THC])
is an alternative treatment for nausea and vomiting
caused by chemotherapy. THC is the principal psychoactive component of marijuana. Its mechanism of
antiemetic action is unknown, but cannabinoids bind to opioid receptors in the forebrain and may
indirectly inhibit the vomiting center. Dronabinol is administered in doses of 5 mg/m
po 1 to 3 h before
chemotherapy, with repeated doses q 2 to 4 h after the start of chemotherapy (maximum of 4 to 6
doses/day). However, it has variable oral bioavailability, is not effective for inhibiting the nausea and
vomiting of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens, and has significant adverse effects (eg, drowsiness,
orthostatic hypotension, dry mouth, mood changes, visual and time sense alterations). Smoking marijuana
may be more effective. Marijuana for this purpose can be obtained legally in some states. It is used less
commonly because of barriers to availability and because many patients cannot tolerate smoking.
Benzodiazepines
, such as lorazepam (1 to 2 mg po or IV given 10 to 20 min before chemotherapy with
repeated doses q 4 to 6 h prn), are sometimes helpful for refractory or anticipatory nausea and vomiting.
Cytopenias
Anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia may develop during chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
Anemia:
Clinical symptoms and decreased efficacy of radiation therapy usually occur at Hct levels of <
30% or Hb levels < 10 g/dL, sooner in patients with coronary artery disease or peripheral vascular
disease. Recombinant erythropoietin therapy may be started when Hb falls to < 10 mg/dL, depending on
symptoms. In general, 150 to 300 units/kg sc 3 times/wk (a convenient adult dose is 10,000 units) is
effective and reduces the need for transfusions. Longer-acting formulations of erythropoietin require less
frequent dosing (darbepoetin alfa 2.25 to 4.5
μ
g/kg sc q 1 to 2 wk). Unnecessary use of erythropoietin
should be avoided. Packed RBC transfusions may be needed to relieve acute cardiorespiratory
symptoms.
Thrombocytopenia:
A platelet count < 10,000/mL, especially with bleeding, requires transfusion of
platelet concentrates. Small molecules that mimic thrombopoietin are available but are not commonly
used in cancer treatment.
Leukocyte depletion of transfused blood products may prevent alloimmunization to platelets and should
be used in patients who are expected to need platelet transfusions during multiple courses of
chemotherapy or for candidates for bone marrow or stem cell transplantation. Leukocyte depletion also
lowers the probability of cytomegalovirus being transferred to the patient through WBCs. Gamma
irradiation of blood products to inactivate lymphocytes and prevent transfusion-induced graft-vs-host
disease is also indicated in patients undergoing severely immunosuppressive chemotherapy.
Neutropenia:
Neutropenia (see also p.
), usually defined by an absolute neutrophil count < 500/
μ
L,
predisposes to immediate life-threatening infection.
Afebrile patients with neutropenia require close outpatient follow-up for detection of fever and should be
instructed to avoid contact with sick people or areas frequented by large numbers of people (eg,
shopping malls, airports). Although most patients do not require antibiotics, patients with severe
immunosuppression (ie, concomitant T-cell depletion or loss of function)
and
leukopenia are sometimes
given trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (one double-strength tablet/day) as prophylaxis for
Pneumocystis
jiroveci
. In transplant patients or others receiving high-dose chemotherapy, antiviral prophylaxis (acyclovir
800 mg po bid or 400 mg IV q 12 h) should be considered if serologic tests are positive for herpes simplex
virus.
Fever > 38° C in a patient with neutropenia is an emergency. Evaluation should include immediate chest
x-ray and cultures of blood, sputum, urine, stool, and any suspect skin lesions. Examination includes
possible abscess sites (eg, skin, ears), skin and mucosa for presence of herpetic lesions, retina for
vascular lesions suggestive of metastatic infection, and catheter sites. Rectal examination and use of a
rectal thermometer are avoided if possible in neutropenic patients because of the risk of bacteremia.
Febrile neutropenic patients should receive broad-spectrum antibiotics chosen on the basis of the most
===PAGE:1222===
Febrile neutropenic patients should receive broad-spectrum antibiotics chosen on the basis of the most
likely source. Typical regimens include cefepime or ceftazidime 2 g IV q 8 h immediately after samples for
culture are obtained. If diffuse pulmonary infiltrates are present, sputum should be tested for
P. jirovecii
,
and if positive, appropriate therapy should be started. If fever resolves within 72 h after starting empiric
antibiotics, then antibiotics are continued until the absolute neutrophil count is > 500/
μ
L. If fever continues
for 120 h, antifungal drugs should be added to treat possible fungal causes. Re-assessment for occult
infection (often including CT of the chest and abdomen) should be undertaken at this time.
In selected patients with neutropenia related to chemotherapy, especially after high-dose chemotherapy,
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GMCSF) may be started to shorten the leukopenic period. GCSF 5
μ
g/kg sc once/day up to 14 days and
longer-acting forms (eg, pegfilgrastim 6 mg sc single dose once per chemotherapy cycle) may be used to
accelerate WBC recovery. These drugs should not be administered in the first 24 h after chemotherapy,
and for pegfilgrastim, at least 14 days should elapse until the next planned chemotherapy dose. These
drugs are begun at the onset of fever or sepsis or, in afebrile patients, when neutrophil counts fall to <
500/
μ
L.
Many centers use outpatient treatment of selected low-risk patients with fever and neutropenia.
Candidates must not have hypotension, altered mental status, respiratory distress, uncontrolled pain, or
serious comorbid illnesses, such as diabetes, heart disease, or hypercalcemia. The regimen in such
cases requires daily follow-up and often involves visiting nurse services and home antibiotic infusion.
Some regimens involve oral antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin 750 mg po bid plus amoxicillin/clavulanate
875 mg po bid or 500 mg po tid. If no defined institutional program for follow-up
and treatment of
neutropenic fever is available in an outpatient setting, then hospitalization is required.
Gastrointestinal Effects
Oral lesions:
Oral lesions, such as ulcers, infections, and inflammation, are common.
Oral candidiasis can be treated with nystatin oral suspension 5 to 10 mL qid, clotrimazole troches 10 mg
qid, or fluconazole 100 mg po once/day.
Mucositis from radiation therapy can cause pain and preclude sufficient oral intake, leading to
undernutrition and weight loss. Rinses with analgesics and topical anesthetics (2% viscous lidocaine, 5 to
10 mL q 2 h or other commercially available mixtures) before meals, a bland diet without citrus food or
juices, and avoidance of temperature extremes may allow patients to eat and maintain weight. If not, a
feeding tube may be helpful if the small intestine is functional. For severe mucositis and diarrhea or an
abnormally functioning intestine, parenteral alimentation may be needed.
Diarrhea:
Diarrhea from pelvic radiation therapy or from chemotherapy can be alleviated with
antidiarrheal drugs as needed (kaolin/pectin suspension 60 to 120 mL regular strength, or 30 to 60 mL
concentrate, po at first sign of diarrhea and after each loose stool or prn; loperamide 2 to 4 mg po; or
diphenoxylate/atropine 1 to 2 tablets po). Patients who underwent abdominal surgery or received broadspectrum antibiotics within the preceding 3 mo should undergo stool testing for
Clostridium difficile
.
Constipation:
Constipation may result from opioid use. A stimulant laxative such as senna 2 to 6 tablets
po at bedtime or bisacodyl 10 mg po at bedtime should be initiated when repeated opioid use is
anticipated. Established constipation can be treated with various drugs (eg, bisacodyl 5 to 10 mg po q 12
to 24 h, milk of magnesia 15 to 30 mL po at bedtime, lactulose 15 to 30 mL q 12 to 24 h, Mg citrate 250 to
500 mL po once). Enemas and suppositories should be avoided in patients with neutropenia or
thrombocytopenia.
Anorexia:
Appetite may decrease secondary to cancer treatment or to a paraneoplastic syndrome.
Corticosteroids (dexamethasone 4 mg po once/day, prednisone 5 to 10 mg po once/day) and megestrol
acetate 400 to 800 mg once/day are most effective. However, the primary benefits are variably increased
appetite and weight gain, not improved survival or quality of life.
Pain
===PAGE:1223===
Pain should be anticipated and aggressively treated (see also p.
). Use of multiple drug classes may
provide better pain control with fewer or less severe adverse effects than single drug classes. NSAIDs
should be avoided in patients with thrombocytopenia. Opioids are the mainstay of treatment, given
around the clock in generally efficient doses, with supplemental doses given for occasional worse pain. If
the oral route is unavailable, fentanyl is given transdermally. Antiemetics and prophylactic bowel regimens
are often needed with opioids.
Neuropathic pain can be treated with gabapentin; the dose required is high (up to 3.6 g/day) but must be
started low and then increased over a few weeks. Alternatively, a tricyclic antidepressant (eg, nortriptyline
25 to 75 mg po at bedtime) may be tried.
Useful nondrug treatments for pain include focal radiation therapy, nerve blockade, and surgery.
Depression
Depression is often overlooked. It may occur in response to the disease (its symptoms and feared
consequences), adverse effects of the treatments, or both. Patients receiving interferon can develop
depression as an adverse effect. Also, alopecia as an adverse effect of radiation therapy or
chemotherapy can contribute to depression. Frank discussion of a patient's fears can often relieve
anxiety; depression can often be treated effectively (.
Tumor Lysis Syndrome
Tumor lysis syndrome may occur secondary to release of intracellular components into the bloodstream
as a result of tumor cell death after chemotherapy. It occurs mainly in acute leukemias and non-Hodgkin
lymphomas but can also occur in other hematologic cancers and, uncommonly, after treatment of solid
tumors. It should be suspected in patients with a large tumor burden who develop acute renal failure after
initial treatment.
The diagnosis is confirmed by some combination of the following findings:
• Renal failure
• Hypocalcemia (< 8 mg/dL)
• Hyperuricemia (> 15 mg/dL)
• Hyperphosphatemia (> 8 mg/dL)
Allopurinol (200 to 400 mg/m
once/day, maximum 600 mg/day) and normal saline IV to achieve urine
output > 2 L/day should be initiated with close laboratory and cardiac monitoring. Patients who have a
cancer with
rapid cell turnover should receive allopurinol for at least 2 days before and during
chemotherapy; for patients with high cell burden, this regimen can be continued for 10 to 14 days after
therapy. All such patients should receive vigorous IV hydration to establish a diuresis of at least 100 mL/h
prior to treatment. Although some physicians advocate NaHCO
IV to alkalinize the urine and increase
solubilization of uric acid, alkalinization may promote Ca phosphate deposition in patients with
hyperphosphatemia, and a pH of about 7 should be avoided. Alternatively, rasburicase, an enzyme that
oxidizes uric acid to allantoin (a more soluble molecule), may be used to prevent tumor lysis. The dose is
0.15 to 0.2 mg/kg IV over 30 min once/day for 5 to 7 days, typically initiated 4 to 24 h before the first
chemotherapy treatment. Adverse effects may include anaphylaxis, hemolysis, hemoglobinuria, and
methemoglobinemia.
Cachexia
Cachexia is wasting of both adipose and skeletal muscle. It occurs in many conditions and is common
with many cancers when remission or control fails. Some cancers, especially pancreatic and gastric
cancers, cause profound cachexia. Affected patients may lose 10 to 20% of body weight. Men tend to
===PAGE:1224===
experience worse cachexia with cancer than do women. Neither tumor size nor the extent of metastatic
disease predicts the degree of cachexia. Cachexia is associated with reduced response to chemotherapy,
poor functional performance, and increased mortality.
The primary cause of cachexia is not anorexia or decreased caloric intake. Rather, this complex metabolic
condition involves increased tissue catabolism. Protein synthesis is decreased and degradation
increased. Cachexia is mediated by certain cytokines, especially tumor necrosis factorα
, IL-1b, and IL-6,
which are produced by tumor cells and host cells in the tissue mass. The ATP-ubiquitin-protease pathway
plays a role as well.
Cachexia is easy to recognize, primarily by weight loss, which is most apparent with loss of temporalis
muscle mass in the face. The loss of subcutaneous fat increases the risk of pressure ulcers over bony
prominences.
Treatment
Treatment involves treatment of the cancer. If the cancer can be controlled or cured, regardless of
modality, cachexia resolves.
Additional caloric supplementation does not relieve cachexia. Any weight gain is usually minimal and is
likely to consist of adipose tissue rather than muscle. Neither function nor prognosis is improved. Thus, in
most cachectic patients with cancer, high-calorie supplementation is not recommended, and parenteral
nutritional support is not indicated, except in situations where oral intake of adequate nutrition is
impossible.
However, other treatments can mitigate cachexia and improve function. Corticosteroids increase appetite
and may improve a sense of well-being but do little to increase body weight. Likewise, cannabinoids
(marijuana, dronabinol) increase appetite but not weight. Progestogens, such as megestrol acetate, 40
mg po bid or tid, may increase both appetite and body weight. Drugs to alter cytokine production and
effects are being studied.
Incurable Cancer
Even in cases of incurable cancer, palliative or experimental therapy may improve quality and extent of
life. But in many cases, physicians must resist the urge to administer a relatively ineffective chemotherapy
drug. A better choice is to discuss the likely results of such treatments and to set realistic goals with the
patient. A patient's decision to forgo cancer treatment must be respected. Another alternative is the clinical
trial, the risks and benefits of which deserve discussion.
Regardless of prognosis, quality of life in cancer patients may improve with nutritional support, effective
pain management, other symptomatic palliative care, and psychiatric and social support of the patient and
family. Above all, patients must know that the clinical team will remain involved and accessible for
supportive care, regardless of the prognosis. Hospice or other related end-of-life care programs are
important parts of cancer treatment. For more information pertaining to patients with incurable disease,
see
Chapter 353
.
===PAGE:1225===
10 - Immunology; Allergic Disorders
Chapter 125. Biology of the Immune System
Introduction
The immune system distinguishes self from nonself and eliminates potentially harmful nonself molecules
and cells from the body. The immune system also has the capacity to recognize and destroy abnormal
cells that derive from host tissues (. Any molecule capable of being recognized by the
immune system is considered an antigen (Ag).
The skin, cornea, and mucosa of the respiratory, GI, and GU tracts form a physical barrier that is the
body's first line of defense. Some of these barriers also involve immune functions and other active
defenses:
• Outer, keratinized epidermis: Keratinocytes in the skin secrete antimicrobial peptides (defensins), and
sebaceous and sweat glands secrete microbe-inhibiting substances (eg, lactic acid, fatty acids). Also,
many immune cells (eg, mast cells, intraepithelial lymphocytes, Ag-sampling Langerhans' cells) reside in
the skin.
• Mucosa of the respiratory, GI, and GU tracts: The mucus contains antimicrobial substances, such as
lysozyme, lactoferrin, and secretory IgA antibody (SIgA).
Breaching of anatomic barriers can trigger 2 types of immune response: innate and acquired. Many
molecular components (eg, complement, cytokines, acute phase proteins) participate in both innate and
acquired immunity.
Innate immunity:
Innate (natural) immunity does not require prior exposure to an Ag (ie, memory) to be
effective. Thus, it can respond immediately to an invader. However, it recognizes mainly Ag molecules that
are broadly distributed rather than specific to one organism or cell. Components include
• Phagocytic cells
• Ag-presenting cells
• Natural killer (NK) cells
• Polymorphonuclear leukocytes
Phagocytic cells (neutrophils and monocytes in blood, macrophages and dendritic cells in tissues) ingest
and destroy invading Ags. Attack by phagocytic cells can be facilitated when Ags are coated with antibody
(Ab), which is produced as part of acquired immunity. Ag-presenting cells (macrophages, dendritic cells)
present fragments of ingested Ags to T cells (which are part of acquired immunity). Natural killer cells kill
virus-infected cells and some tumor cells. Certain polymorphonuclear leukocytes (eosinophils, basophils,
mast cells) release inflammatory mediators.
Acquired immunity:
Acquired (adaptive) immunity requires prior exposure to an Ag and thus takes time
to develop after the initial encounter with a new invader. Thereafter, response is quick. The system
remembers past exposures and is Ag-specific. Components include
• T cells
• B cells
Acquired immunity derived from certain T-cell responses is called cell-mediated immunity. Immunity
derived from B-cell responses is called humoral immunity because B cells secrete soluble Ag-specific Ab.
B cells and T cells work together to destroy invaders. Some of these cells do not directly destroy invaders
but instead enable other WBCs to recognize and destroy invaders.
===PAGE:1226===
Immune Response
Successful immune defense requires activation, regulation, and resolution of the immune response.
Activation:
The immune system is activated when a foreign Ag is recognized by circulating Abs or cell
surface receptors. These receptors
may be highly specific (Ab expressed on B cells or T-cell receptors) or
broadly specific (eg, pattern-recognition receptors such as Toll-like, mannose, and scavenger receptors
on dendritic and other cells). Broadly specific receptors recognize common microbial pathogen-associated
molecular patterns in ligands, such as gram-negative lipopolysaccharide, gram-positive peptidoglycans,
bacterial flagellin, unmethylated cytosine-guanosine dinucleotides (CpG motifs), and viral doublestranded RNA. Activation may also occur when Ab-Ag and complement-microorganism complexes bind to
surface receptors for the crystallizable fragment (Fc) region of IgG (Fc
γ
R) and for C3b and iC3b.
Once recognized, an Ag, Ag-Ab complex, or complement-microorganism complex is phagocytosed. Most
microorganisms are killed after they are phagocytosed, but others (eg, mycobacteria) inhibit the
phagocyte's ability to kill them once they are engulfed. In such cases, T cell-derived cytokines, particularly
interferonγ
(IFNγ
), stimulate the phagocyte to produce lytic enzymes and other microbicidal macrophage
products, which kill the microorganism.
Unless Ag is rapidly phagocytosed and entirely degraded (an uncommon event), the acquired immune
response is recruited. This response begins in the spleen for circulating Ag, in regional lymph nodes for
tissue Ag, and in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues (eg, tonsils, adenoids, Peyer's patches) for
mucosal Ag. For example, Langerhans' dendritic cells in the skin phagocytose Ag and migrate to local
lymph nodes; there, peptides derived from the Ag are expressed on the cell surface within class II major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, which present the peptide to CD4 helper T (T
H
) cells. When
the T
H
cell engages the MHC-peptide complex and receives various costimulatory signals, it is activated
to express receptors for the cytokine IL-2 and secretes several cytokines. Each subset of T
H
cells
secretes different substances, which effect different immune response (.
Class II MHC molecules present peptides derived from extracellular (exogenous) Ag to CD4 T
H
cells; in
contrast, class I MHC molecules present peptides derived from intracellular (endogenous) Ag (eg, viruses)
to CD8 cytotoxic T cells. The activated cytotoxic T cell then kills the infected cell.
Regulation:
The immune response must be regulated to prevent overwhelming damage to the host (eg,
anaphylaxis, widespread tissue destruction). Regulatory T cells (most of which express Foxp3
transcription factor) help control the immune response via secretion of immunosuppressive cytokines,
such as IL-10 and transforming growth factorβ
(TGFβ
), or via a poorly defined cell contact mechanism.
These regulatory cells help prevent autoimmune responses and probably help resolve ongoing responses
to nonself Ag.
Resolution:
The immune response resolves when Ag is sequestered and eliminated from the body.
Without stimulation by Ag, cytokine secretion ceases, and activated cytotoxic T cells undergo apoptosis.
Apoptosis tags a cell for immediate phagocytosis, which prevents spill-age of the cellular contents and
development of subsequent inflammation. T and B cells that have differentiated into memory cells are
spared this fate.
Geriatrics Essentials
With aging, the immune system becomes less effective in the following ways:
• The immune system becomes less able to distinguish self from nonself, making autoimmune disorders
more common.
• Macrophages destroy bacteria, cancer cells, and other Ag more slowly, possibly contributing to the
increased incidence of cancer among the elderly.
===PAGE:1227===
• T cells respond less quickly to Ag.
• There are fewer lymphocytes that can respond to new Ag.
• The aging body produces less complement in response to bacterial infections.
• Less Ab is produced in response to Ag, and Ab is less able to attach to Ag, possibly contributing to the
increased incidence of pneumonia, influenza, infectious endocarditis, and tetanus and the increased
risk of death due to these disorders among the elderly. These changes may also partly explain why
vaccines are less effective in the elderly.
Components of the Immune System
The immune system consists of cellular and molecular components that work together to destroy antigens
(Ags).
Antigen-Presenting Cells
Although some Ags can stimulate the immune response directly, T cell-dependent acquired immune
responses typically require antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to present Ag-derived peptides within major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Intracellular Ag
(eg, viruses) can be processed and
presented to CD8 cytotoxic T cells by any nucleated cell because all nucleated cells express class I MHC
molecules. However, extracellular Ag must be processed into peptides and complexed with surface class II
MHC molecules on professional APCs to be recognized by CD4 helper T (T
H
) cells. The following cells
constitutively express class II MHC molecules and therefore act as professional APCs:
• B cells
• Monocytes
• Macrophages
• Dendritic cells
Monocytes
in the circulation are precursors to tissue macrophages. Monocytes migrate into tissues,
where over about 8 h, they develop into macrophages under the influence of macrophage colonystimulating factor (M-CSF), secreted by various cell types (eg, endothelial cells, fibroblasts). At infection
sites, activated T cells secrete cytokines (eg, interferonγ
[IFNγ]) that induce production of macrophage
migration inhibitory factor, preventing macrophages from leaving.
Macrophages
are activated by IFNγ
and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF).
Activated macrophages kill intracellular organisms and secrete IL-1 and tumor necrosis factorα
(TNFα
).
These cytokines potentiate the secretion of IFNγ
and GM-CSF and increase the expression of adhesion
molecules on endothelial cells, facilitating leukocyte influx and destruction of pathogens.
Dendritic cells
are present in the skin (as Langerhans' cells), lymph nodes, and tissues throughout the
body. Dendritic cells in the skin act as sentinel APCs, taking up Ag, then travel to local lymph nodes where
they can activate T cells. Follicular dendritic cells are a distinct lineage, do not express class II MHC
molecules, and therefore do not present Ag to T
H
cells. However, they have receptors for the
crystallizable fragment (Fc) region of IgG and for complement, which enable them to bind with immune
complexes and present the complex to B cells in germinal centers of secondary lymphoid organs.
Polymorphonuclear Leukocytes
Polymorphonuclear (PMN) leukocytes, also called granulocytes because their cytoplasm contains
granules, include
• Neutrophils
===PAGE:1228===
• Eosinophils
• Basophils
• Mast cells
All, except for mast cells, occur in the circulation, and all have multilobed nuclei. Mast cells are tissuebased and functionally similar to circulating blood basophils.
Neutrophils
constitute 40 to 70% of total WBCs; they are a first line of defense against infection. Mature
neutrophils have a half-life of about 2 to 3 days. During acute inflammatory responses (eg, to infection),
neutrophils, drawn by chemotactic factors and alerted by the expression of adhesion molecules on blood
vessel endothelium, leave the circulation and enter tissues. Their purpose is to phagocytose and digest
pathogens. Microorganisms are killed when phagocytosis generates lytic enzymes and reactive O
compounds (eg, superoxide, hypochlorous acid) and triggers release of granule contents (eg, defensins,
proteases, bactericidal permeability-increasing protein, lactoferrin, and lysozymes). DNA and histones are
also released, and they, with granule contents such as elastase, generate fibers in the surrounding
tissues; the fibers may facilitate killing by trapping bacteria and focusing enzyme activity.
Eosinophils
constitute up to 5% of WBCs. They target organisms too large to be engulfed; they kill by
secreting toxic substances (eg, reactive O
compounds similar to those produced in neutrophils), major
basic protein (which is toxic to parasites), eosinophil cationic protein, and several enzymes. Eosinophils
are also a major source of inflammatory mediators (eg, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, platelet-activating
factor, many cytokines).
Basophils
constitute < 5% of WBCs and share several characteristics with mast cells, although the 2 cell
types have distinct lineages. Both have high-affinity receptors for IgE called Fc
ε
RI. When these cells
encounter certain Ags, the bivalent IgE molecules bound to the receptors become cross-linked, triggering
cell degranulation with release of preformed inflammatory mediators (eg, histamine, platelet-activating
factor) and generation of newly synthesized mediators (eg, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, thromboxanes).
Mast cells
occur in different tissues of the body. Mucosal mast cell granules contain tryptase and
chondroitin sulfate; connective tissue mast cell granules contain tryptase, chymase, and heparin. By
releasing these mediators, mast cells play a key role in generating protective acute inflammatory
responses; basophils and mast cells are the source of type I hypersensitivity reactions associated with
atopic allergy (. Degranulation can be triggered by cross-linking of IgE receptors or by the
anaphylatoxin complement fragments C3a and C5a.
Cytotoxic Leukocytes
Cytotoxic leukocytes include
• Natural killer cells
• Lymphokine-activated killers
Natural killer (NK) cells:
Typical NK cells constitute 5 to 15% of peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
They have a round nucleus and granular cytoplasm and induce apoptosis in infected or abnormal cells by
a number of pathways. As cells of the innate response, they lack antigen-specific receptors and
immunologic memory. NK cells are best characterized by CD2
+
, CD3
-
, CD4
-
, CD8
+
, CD16
+
(a receptor
for IgG-Fc), and CD56
+
surface markers.
Typical NK cells are thought to be important for tumor surveillance. NK cells express both activating and
inhibitory receptors. The activating receptors on NK cells can recognize numerous ligands on target cells
(eg, MHC class I-related chain A [MICA] and chain B [MICB]); the inhibitory receptors on NK cells
recognize MHC class I molecules. NK cells can kill their target only when there is no strong signal from
===PAGE:1229===
inhibitory receptors. MHC class I molecules (normally expressed on nucleated cells) therefore prevent
destruction of cells; their absence indicates that the cell is infected with certain viruses that inhibit MHC
expression or has lost MHC expression because cancer has changed the cell.
NK cells can also secrete several cytokines (eg, IFNγ
, IL-1, TNFα
); they are a major source of IFNγ
. By
secreting IFNγ
, NK cells can influence the acquired immune system by promoting differentiation of type 1
helper T (T
H
1) cells and inhibiting that of type 2 (T
H
2) cells.
Lymphokine-activated killers (LAK):
Some leukocytes develop into potent lymphokine-activated
killers, capable of killing a wide spectrum of tumor target cells and abnormal lymphocytes (eg, infected
with certain viruses). These cells are a phenomenon rather than a unique subset of cells. LAK precursors
are heterogeneous but can be classified primarily as NK-like (most common) or T-cell-like.
Lymphocytes
The 2 main types of lymphocytes are
• B cells (which mature in bone marrow)
• T cells (which mature in the thymus)
They are morphologically indistinguishable but have different immune functions. They can be
distinguished by Ag-specific surface receptors and molecules called clusters of differentiation (CDs),
whose presence and absence define some subsets. More than 300 CDs have been identified (for further
information on CD Ags, see the Human Cell Differentiation Molecules web site at www.hlda8.org/
). Each
lymphocyte recognizes a specific Ag via surface receptors.
B cells:
About 5 to 15% of lymphocytes in the blood are B cells; they are also present in the spleen,
lymph nodes, and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues. B cells can present Ag to T cells, but their
primary function is to develop into plasma cells, which manufacture and secrete antibodies (Abs—.
After random rearrangement of the genes that encode immunoglobulin (Ig), B cells have the potential to
recognize an almost limitless number of unique Ags. Gene rearrangement occurs in programmed steps in
the bone marrow during B-cell development. The process starts with a committed stem cell, continues
through pro-B and pre-B cell stages, and results in an immature B cell. If an immature B cell interacts with
Ag, it may become inactivated (tolerant) or be eliminated (by apoptosis). Immature B cells that are not
inactivated or eliminated may continue to develop into mature naive B cells, leave the marrow, and enter
peripheral lymphoid organs, where they may encounter Ag. Their response to Ag has 2 stages:
•
Primary immune response:
When mature naive B cells first encounter Ag, they become lymphoblasts,
undergo clonal proliferation, and differentiate into memory cells, which can respond to the same Ag in
the future, or into mature Ab-secreting plasma cells. After first exposure, there is a latent period of days
before Ab is produced. Then, only IgM is produced. After that, with the help of T cells, B cells can
further rearrange their Ig genes and switch to production of IgG, IgA, or IgE. Thus, after first exposure,
the response is slow and provides limited protective immunity.
•
Secondary (anamnestic or booster) immune response:
When memory B and T
H
cells are
reexposed to the Ag, the memory B cells rapidly proliferate, differentiate into mature plasma cells, and
promptly produce large amounts of Ab (chiefly IgG because of a T cell-induced isotype switch). The Ab
is released into the blood and other tissues, where it can react with Ag. Thus, after reexposure, the
immune response is faster and more effective.
T cells:
T cells develop from bone marrow stem cells that travel to the thymus, where they go through
rigorous selection. There are 3 main types of T cell:
•
Helper
===PAGE:1230===
• Regulatory
• Cytotoxic
In selection, T cells that react to self Ag presented by self MHC molecules or to self MHC molecules
(regardless of the Ag presented) are eliminated by apoptosis. Only T cells that can recognize nonself Ag
complexed to self MHC molecules survive; they leave the thymus for peripheral blood and lymphoid
tissues.
Most mature T cells express either CD4 or CD8 and have an Ag-binding, Ig-like surface receptor called
the T-cell receptor (TCR). Genes that encode the TCR, like Ig genes, are rearranged, resulting in defined
specificity and affinity for the Ag peptide displayed in the MHC molecule of an APC. As for B cells, the
number of T-cell specificities is almost limitless.
For T cells to be activated, the TCR must engage with Ag-MHC. Costimulatory accessory molecules must
also interact; otherwise, the T cell becomes anergic or dies by apoptosis. Some accessory molecules (eg,
CTLA-4) inhibit previously activated T cells and thus dampen the immune response.
Helper T (T
H
) cells
are usually CD4 but may be CD8. They differentiate from T
H
0 cells into one of the
following:
• T
H
1 cells: In general, T
H
1 cells promote cell-mediated immunity via cytotoxic T cells and macrophages.
• T
H
2 cells: T
H
2 cells promote Ab production by B cells (humoral immunity).
• T
H
17 cells: T
H
17 cells promote tissue inflammation.
Each cell type secretes several cytokines (see
Table 125-1
). Different patterns of cytokine production identify other T
H
-cell functional phenotypes.
The distinction between the different T
H
cells is clinically relevant. For example, a T
H
1 response
dominates in tuberculoid leprosy, and a T
H
2 response dominates in lepromatous leprosy. A T
H
1 response
is characteristic of certain autoimmune disorders (eg, type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis), and a T
H
response promotes IgE production and development of allergic disorders, as well as helps B cells
produce autoantibodies in some autoimmune disorders (eg, Graves' disease, myasthenia gravis). T
H
cells, via their role in inflammation, may also contribute to autoimmune disorders.
Regulatory T cells
mediate suppression of immune responses. The process involves functional subsets
of CD4 T cells that either secrete cytokines with immunosuppressive properties or suppress the immune
response by poorly defined mechanisms that require cell-to-cell contact. Some regulatory T cells express
the CD8 T-cell phenotype.
[Table 125-1.
Functions of T Cells]
Cytotoxic T (T
C
) cells
are usually CD8 but may be CD4; they are vital for eliminating intracellular
pathogens, especially viruses. T
C
cells play a role in organ transplant rejection.
T
C
-cell development involves 3 phases:
• A precursor cell that, when appropriately stimulated, can differentiate into a T
C
cell
• An effector cell that has differentiated and can kill its appropriate target
• A memory cell that is quiescent (no longer stimulated) but is ready to become an effector when
restimulated by the original Ag-MHC combination
===PAGE:1231===
Fully activated TC cells, like NK cells, can kill an infected target cell by inducing apoptosis.
T
C
cells may be
• Syngeneic: Generated in response to self (autologous) cells modified by viral infection or other foreign
proteins
• Allogeneic: Generated in response to cells that express foreign MHC products (eg, in organ
transplantation when the donor's MHC molecules differ from the recipient's)
Some T
C
cells can directly
recognize foreign MHC (direct pathway); others may recognize fragments of foreign MHC presented by
self MHC molecules of the transplant recipient (indirect pathway).
NK T cells
are a distinct subset of T cells. Activated NK T cells secrete IL-4 and IFNγ
and may help
regulate immune responses.
Antibodies
Abs act as the Ag receptor on the surface of B cells and, in response to Ag, are subsequently secreted by
plasma cells. Abs recognize specific configurations (epitopes, or antigenic determinants) on the surfaces
of Ags (eg, proteins, polysaccharides, nucleic acids). Abs and Ags fit tightly together because their shape
and other surface properties (eg, charge) are complementary. The same Ab molecule can cross-react with
related Ags if their epitopes are similar enough to those of the original Ag.
Structure:
Abs consist of 4 polypeptide chains (2 identical heavy chains and 2 identical light chains)
joined by disulfide bonds to produce a Y configuration (see
Fig. 125-1
). The heavy and light chains are divided into a variable (V) region and a constant (C) region.
V regions
are located at the amino-terminal ends of the Y arms; they are called variable because the
amino acids they contain are different in different Abs. The amino acids present determine the specificity
of the Ig. Hypervariable regions within the V regions contain idiotypic determinants, to which certain
natural (anti-idiotype) Abs can bind; this binding may help regulate B-cell responses. A B cell can switch
the Ig heavy chain isotype it produces, but it retains its heavy chain V region and the entire light-chain,
thereby retaining antigenic specificity.
[Fig. 125-1.
B-cell receptor.]
The
C region
contains a relatively constant sequence of amino acids that is distinctive for each Ig
isotype.
The amino-terminal (variable) end of the Ab binds to Ag to form an Ab-Ag complex. The Ag-binding (Fab)
portion of Ig consists of a light chain and a fragment of a heavy chain and contains the V region of the Ig
molecule (ie, the combining sites). The crystallizable fragment (Fc) contains most of the C region of the
heavy chains; Fc is responsible for complement activation and binds to Fc receptors on cells.
Antibody classes:
Antibodies are divided into 5 classes:
• IgM
• IgG
• IgA
• IgD
• IgE
The classes are defined by their type of heavy chain (
μ
for IgM,
γ
for IgG,
α
for IgA,
ε
for IgE, and
δ
for
IgD); there are also 2 types of light chains (
κ
and
λ
). Each of the 5 Ig classes can bear either
κ
or
λ
light
===PAGE:1232===
chains.
IgM
is the first Ab formed after exposure to new Ag. It has 5 Y-shaped molecules (10 heavy chains and 10
light chains), linked by a single joining (J) chain. IgM circulates primarily in the intravascular space; it
complexes with and agglutinates Ag and can activate complement, thereby facilitating phagocytosis.
Isohemagglutinins and many Abs to gram-negative bacteria are IgM. Monomeric IgM acts as a surface Ag
receptor on B cells.
IgG
is the most prevalent Ig isotype in serum and is present also in intravascular and extravascular
spaces. It coats Ag to activate complement and facilitate phagocytosis by neutrophils and macrophages.
IgG is the primary circulating Ig produced after reexposure to Ag (secondary immune response) and is the
predominant isotype contained in commercial
γ
-globulin products. IgG protects against bacteria, viruses,
and toxins; it is the only Ig isotype that crosses the placenta.
There are 4 subclasses of IgG: IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4. They are numbered in descending order of
serum concentration. IgG subclasses differ functionally mainly in their ability to activate complement; IgG1
and IgG3 are most efficient, IgG2 is less efficient, and
IgG4 is inefficient. IgG1 and IgG3 are efficient
mediators of Ab-dependent cellular cytotoxicity; IgG4 and IgG2 are less so.
IgA
occurs at mucosal surfaces, in serum, and in secretions (saliva; tears; respiratory, GU, and GI tract
secretions; colostrum), where it provides an early antibacterial and antiviral defense. J chain links IgA into
a dimer to form secretory IgA. Secretory IgA is synthesized by plasma cells in the subepithelial regions of
the GI and respiratory tracts.
IgD
is coexpressed with IgM on the surface of naive B cells. Whether these 2 classes function differently
on the surface of the B cell and, if so, how differently are unclear. They may simply be an example of
molecular degeneracy. Serum IgD levels are very low, and the function of circulating IgD is unknown.
IgE
is present in low levels in serum and in respiratory and GI mucous secretions. IgE binds with high
affinity to receptors present in high levels on mast cells and basophils and to a lesser extent on several
other hematopoietic cells, including dendritic cells. If Ag bridges 2 IgE molecules bound to the mast cell or
basophil surface, the cells degranulate, releasing chemical mediators that cause an inflammatory
response. IgE levels are elevated in atopic disorders (eg, allergic or extrinsic asthma, hay fever, atopic
dermatitis) and parasitic infections.
Acute Phase Reactants
Acute phase reactants are plasma proteins whose levels dramatically increase if infection or tissue
damage occurs. Most dramatically increased are C-reactive protein and mannose-binding lectin (which fix
complement and act as opsonins), the transport protein
α
-acid glycoprotein, and serum amyloid P
component. Many acute phase reactants are made in the liver. Collectively, they may help limit tissue
injury, enhance host resistance to infection, and promote tissue repair and resolution of inflammation.
Cytokines
Cytokines are polypeptides secreted by immune and other cells when the cell interacts with a specific Ag,
endotoxin, or other cytokines. Main categories include
• IFNs (IFNα
, IFNβ
, IFNγ
)
• TNFs (TNFα
, lymphotoxinα
, lymphotoxinβ
)
• ILs
• Chemokines
• TGFs
===PAGE:1233===
• Hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors (CSFs)
Although lymphocyte interaction with a specific Ag triggers cytokine secretion, cytokines themselves are
not Ag-specific; thus, they bridge innate and acquired immunity and generally influence the magnitude of
inflammatory or immune responses. They act sequentially, synergistically, or antagonistically. They may
act in an autocrine or paracrine manner.
Cytokines deliver their signals via cell surface receptors. For example, the IL-2 receptor consists of 3
chains:
α
,
β
, and
γ
. The receptor's affinity for IL-2 is high if all 3 chains are expressed, intermediate if only
the
β
and
γ
chains are expressed, or low if only the
α
chain is expressed. Mutations or deletion of the
γ
chain is the basis for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (.
Chemokines induce chemotaxis and migration of leukocytes. There are 4 subsets, defined by the number
of intervening amino acids between the first 2 cysteine residues in the molecule. Chemokine receptors
(CCR5 on memory T cells, monocytes/macrophages, and dendritic cells; CXCR4 on resting T cells) act
as core-ceptors for entry of HIV into cells.
Human Leukocyte Antigen System
The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system, the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) in humans, is
controlled by genes located on chromosome 6. It encodes cell surface molecules specialized to present
antigenic peptides to the T-cell receptor (TCR) on T cells. MHC molecules that present antigen (Ag) are
divided into 2 main classes.
Class I MHC molecules
are present on the surface of all nucleated cells and platelets. These
polypeptides consist of a heavy chain bound to a
β
-microglobulin molecule. The heavy chain consists of
2 peptide-binding domains, an Ig-like domain, and a transmembrane region with a cytoplasmic tail. The
heavy chain of the class I molecule is encoded by genes at HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C loci. Lymphocytes
that express CD8 molecules react with class I MHC molecules. These lymphocytes often have a cytotoxic
function, requiring them to be capable of recognizing any infected cell. All nucleated cells express class I
MHC molecules and can thus act as antigen-presenting cells for CD8 T cells (CD8 binds to the
nonpolymorphic part of the class I heavy chain). Some class I MHC genes encode nonclassical MHC
molecules, such as HLA-G (which may play a role in protecting the fetus from the maternal immune
response) and HLA-E (which presents peptides to certain receptors on natural killer cells).
Class II MHC molecules
are usually present only on professional Ag-presenting cells (B cells,
macrophages, dendritic cells, Langerhans' cells), thymic epithelium, and activated (but not resting) T
cells; most nucleated cells can be induced to express class II MHC molecules by interferon (IFN)-
γ
. Class
II MHC molecules consist of 2 polypeptide (
α
and
β
) chains; each chain has a peptide-binding domain, an
Ig-like domain, and a transmembrane region with a cytoplasmic tail. Both polypeptide chains are encoded
by genes in the HLA-DP, -DQ, or -DR region of chromosome 6. Lymphocytes reactive to class II molecules
express CD4 and are often helper T cells.
The MHC class III region of the genome encodes several molecules important in inflammation; they
include complement components C2, C4, and factor B; tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-
α
; lymphotoxinα
;
lymphotoxinβ
; and 3 heat shock proteins.
Individual alleles of the class I and II loci in the HLA system are given standard designations (eg, HLA-A1,
-B5, -Cw1, -DR1). Alleles defined by DNA sequencing are named to identify the gene and to give each
allele a unique number composed of the HLA locus, an asterisk, 2 numbers representing the serologic
equivalent of the Ag, and 2 numbers representing the specific allele (eg, A*0201, DRB1*0103,
DQA1*0102). Sometimes another number is added to identify a different subtype.
Some disorders are linked to specific HLA alleles (eg, psoriasis to HLA-Cw6, ankylosing spondylitis and
reactive arthritis to HLA-B27, narcolepsy to HLA-DR2 and HLA-DQB1*0602, type 1 diabetes mellitus to
HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DQ8, multiple sclerosis to HLA-DR2, RA to HLA-DRB1).
Complement System
===PAGE:1234===
The complement system is an enzyme cascade that helps defend against infection. Many complement
proteins occur in serum as inactive enzyme precursors (zymogens); others reside on cell surfaces. The
complement system bridges innate and acquired immunity by
• Augmenting antibody (Ab) responses and immunologic memory
• Lysing foreign cells
• Clearing immune complexes and apoptotic cells
Complement components have many biologic functions (eg, stimulation of chemotaxis, triggering of mast
cell degranulation independent of IgE).
Complement activation:
There are 3 pathways of complement activation (see
Fig. 125-2
):
• Classical
• Lectin
• Alternative
Classical pathway components are labeled with a C and a number (eg, C1, C3), based on the order in
which they were identified. Alternative pathway components are often lettered (eg, factor B, factor D) or
named (eg, properdin).
Classical pathway
activation is Ab-dependent, occurring when C1 interacts with Ag-IgM or aggregated
Ag-IgG complexes, or Ab-independent, occurring when polyanions (eg, heparin, protamine, DNA and RNA
from apoptotic cells), gram-negative bacteria, or bound C-reactive protein reacts directly with C1. This
pathway is regulated by C1 inhibitor (C1-INH). Hereditary angioedema is due to a genetic deficiency of
C1-INH.
Lectin pathway
activation is Ab-independent; it occurs when mannose-binding lectin (MBL), a serum
protein, binds to mannose or fructose groups on bacterial cell walls, yeast walls, or viruses. This pathway
otherwise resembles the classical pathway structurally and functionally.
Alternate pathway
activation occurs when components of microbial cell surfaces (eg, yeast walls,
bacterial cell wall lipopolysaccharide [endotoxin]) or Ig (eg, nephritic factor, aggregated IgA) cleave small
amounts of C3. This pathway is regulated by properdin, factor H, and decay-accelerating factor.
The 3 activation pathways converge into a final common pathway when C3 convertase cleaves C3 into
C3a and C3b (see
Fig. 125-2
). C3 cleavage may result in formation of the membrane attack complex
(MAC), the cytotoxic component of the complement system. MAC causes lysis of foreign cells.
Biologic activities:
Complement components have other immune functions that are mediated by
complement receptors (CR) on various cells.
• CR1 (CD35) promotes phagocytosis and helps clear immune complexes.
• CR2 (CD21) regulates Ab production by B cells and is the Epstein-Barr virus receptor.
• CR3 (CD11b/CD18), CR4 (CD11c/CD18), and C1q receptors play a role in phagocytosis.
• C3a, C5a, and C4a (weakly) have anaphylatoxin activity: They cause mast cell degranulation, leading to
increased vascular permeability and smooth muscle contraction.
[Fig. 125-2.
Complement activation pathways.]
===PAGE:1235===
• C3b acts as an opsonin by coating microorganisms and thereby enhancing their phagocytosis.
• C3d enhances Ab production by B cells.
• C5a is a neutrophil chemoattractant; it regulates neutrophil and monocyte activities and may cause
augmented adherence of cells, degranulation and release of intracellular enzymes from granulocytes,
production of toxic oxygen metabolites, and initiation of other cellular metabolic events.
Immunotherapeutics
Immunotherapeutic agents use or modify immune mechanisms. Use of these agents is rapidly evolving;
new classes, new agents, and new uses of current agents are certain to be developed. A number of
different classes of immunotherapeutic agents have been developed (see
Table 125-2
):
• Monoclonal antibodies
• Fusion proteins
•
Soluble cytokine receptors
• Recombinant cytokines
• Small-molecule mimetics
Monoclonal antibodies:
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are manufactured in vitro to recognize specific
targeted Ags; they are used to treat solid and hematopoietic tumors and inflammatory disorders. The
mAbs that are currently in clinical use include
• Murine
• Chimeric
• Humanized
Murine mAbs
are produced by injecting a mouse with an Ag, harvesting its spleen to obtain plasma cells
that are producing Ab specific to that Ag, fusing those cells with immortal mouse myeloma cells, growing
these hybridoma cells (eg, in cell culture), and harvesting
[Table 125-2.
Some Immunotherapeutic Agents in Clinical Use*]
the Ab. Although mouse antibodies are similar to human antibodies, clinical use of murine mAbs is limited
because they induce human anti-mouse Ab production, can cause immune complex serum sickness (a
type III hypersensitivity reaction), and are rapidly cleared. An exception is muromonab-CD3 (OKT3), which
effectively prevents acute rejection of solid organ transplants; it is typically given only once or twice to a
patient receiving other immunosuppressants (.
To minimize the problems due to use of pure mouse Ab, researchers have used recombinant DNA
techniques to create monoclonal Abs that are part human and part mouse. Depending on the proportion
of the Ab molecule that is human, the resultant product is termed chimeric or humanized. In both cases,
the process usually begins as above with production of mouse hybridoma cells that make Ab to the
desired Ag. Then the DNA for some or all of the variable portion of the mouse Ab is merged with DNA for
human immunoglobulin. The resultant DNA is placed in a mammalian cell culture, which then expresses
the resultant gene, producing the desired Ab. If the mouse gene for the whole variable region is spliced
next to the human constant region, the product is termed "chimeric"; if only parts of the mouse gene for
the binding portion of the variable region are used, the product, termed "humanized," is even more
human.
===PAGE:1236===
Chimeric mAbs activate Ag-presenting cells (APCs) and T cells more effectively than murine mAbs but can
still induce production of human anti-chimeric Ab.
Humanized mAbs against various antigens (Ags) have been approved for the treatment of colorectal and
breast cancer, leukemia, allergy, autoimmune disease, transplant rejection, and respiratory syncytial virus
infection.
Fusion proteins:
These hybrid proteins are created by linking together the gene sequences encoding all
or part of 2 different proteins to generate a chimeric polypeptide that incorporates desirable attributes
from the parent molecules (eg, a cell targeting component combined with a cell toxin). The circulating halflife of therapeutic proteins can also often be improved by fusing them to another protein that naturally has
a longer serum half-life (eg, the Fc region of IgG).
Soluble cytokine receptors:
Soluble versions of cytokine receptors are used as therapeutic reagents.
They can block the action of cytokines by binding with them before they attach to their normal cell surface
receptor.
Etanercept, a fusion protein, consists of 2 identical chains from the receptor for CD120b tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-
α
. This agent thus blocks TNFα
and is used to treat RA refractory to other treatments,
ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, and plaque psoriasis.
Soluble IL receptors (eg, those for IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-6) are being developed for treatment of
inflammatory and allergic disorders and cancer.
Recombinant cytokines:
Colony-stimulating factors (CSF), such as erythropoietin, granulocyte CSF (GCSF), and granulocyte-macrophage CSF (GM-CSF), are used in patients undergoing chemotherapy or
transplantation for hematologic disorders and cancers (see
Table 125-2
). Interferonα
(IFNα
) and IFNγ
are used to treat cancer, immunodeficiency disorders, and viral infections; IFNβ
is used to treat relapsing
multiple sclerosis. Many other cytokines are being studied.
Anakinra, used to treat RA, is a recombinant, slightly modified form of the naturally occurring IL-1R
antagonist; this drug attaches to the IL-1 receptor and thus prevents binding of IL-1, but unlike IL-1, it
does not activate the receptor.
Cells expressing cytokine receptors can be targeted by modified versions of the relevant cytokine (eg,
denileukin diftitox, which is a fusion protein containing sequences from IL-2 and from diphtheria toxin).
Denileukin is used in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma to target the toxin to cells expressing the CD25
component of the IL-2 receptor.
Small-molecule mimetics:
Small linear peptides, cyclicized peptides, and small organic molecules have
been developed as agonists or antagonists for various applications. Screening libraries of peptides and
organic compounds can identify potential mimetics (eg, agonists for receptors for erythropoietin,
thrombopoietin, and G-CSF).
===PAGE:1237===
Chapter 126. Immunodeficiency Disorders
Introduction
Immunodeficiency disorders increase susceptibility to infection. They may be secondary or primary;
secondary is more common.
Secondary immunodeficiencies:
Causes include systemic disorders (eg, diabetes, undernutrition, HIV
infection) and immunosuppressive treatments (eg, chemotherapy, radiation therapy—see
Table 126-1
). Secondary immunodeficiency also occurs among critically ill, older, or hospitalized patients.
Prolonged serious illness may impair immune responses; impairment is often reversible if the underlying
illness resolves.
Immunodeficiency can result from loss of serum proteins (particularly IgG and albumin) through the
kidneys in nephrotic syndrome, through skin in severe burns or dermatitis, or through the GI tract in
enteropathy. Enteropathy may also lead to lymphocyte loss, resulting in lymphopenia. These disorders
can mimic Band T-cell defects. Treatment focuses on the underlying disorder; a diet high in medium-chain
triglycerides may decrease loss of Igs and lymphocytes from the GI tract and be remarkably beneficial.
Primary immunodeficiencies:
These disorders are genetically determined; they may occur alone or as
part of a syndrome. More than 200 have been described, and heterogeneity within each disorder may be
considerable. The molecular basis for about 80% is known.
[Table 126-1.
Causes of Secondary Immunodeficiency]
[Table 126-2.
Some Drugs that Cause Immunosuppression]
Primary immunodeficiencies typically manifest during infancy and childhood as abnormally frequent
(recurrent) or unusual infections. About 70% of patients are < 20 yr at onset; because transmission is
often X-linked, 60% are male. Overall incidence of symptomatic disease is about 1/280 people.
Primary immunodeficiencies are classified by the main component of the immune system that is deficient,
absent, or defective (see
Table 126-3
):
• B cells (or Ig)
• T cells
• Natural killer cells (very rare)
• Phagocytic cells
• Complement proteins
As more molecular defects are defined, classifying immunodeficiencies by their molecular defects will be
more appropriate.
B-cell defects
causing Ig and antibody deficiencies account for 50 to 60% of primary
immunodeficiencies. Serum Ig and antibody titers decrease, predisposing to infections with encapsulated
gram-positive bacteria. The most common B-cell disorder is selective IgA deficiency.
T-cell disorders
account for about 5 to 10% of primary immunodeficiencies and predispose to infection
by viruses,
Pneumocystis jirovecii
, fungi, other opportunistic organisms, and many common pathogens.
T-cell disorders also cause Ig deficiencies because the B- and T-cell immune systems are
interdependent. The most common T-cell disorders are DiGeorge syndrome, ZAP-70 deficiency, X-linked
lymphoproliferative syndrome, and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (.
===PAGE:1238===
lymphoproliferative syndrome, and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (.
Combined B- and T-cell defects
account for about 20% of primary immunodeficiencies. The most
important form is severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). In some forms of combined
immunodeficiency (eg, purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency), Ig levels are normal or elevated, but
because of inadequate T-cell function, antibody formation is impaired.
Natural killer cell defects
are very rare and may predispose to viral infections and tumors.
Phagocytic cell defects
account for 10 to 15% of primary immunodeficiencies; the ability of phagocytic
cells (eg, monocytes, macrophages, granulocytes such as neutrophils and eosinophils) to kill pathogens
is impaired. Cutaneous staphylococcal and gram-negative infections are characteristic. The most
common phagocytic cell defects are chronic granulomatous disease, leukocyte adhesion deficiency, and
Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
Complement deficiencies
are rare (≤ 2%); they include isolated deficiencies of complement
components or inhibitors and may be hereditary or acquired. Hereditary deficiencies are autosomal
recessive except for deficiencies of C1 inhibitor, which is autosomal dominant, and properdin, which is Xlinked. The deficiencies result in defective opsonization, phagocytosis, and lysis of pathogens and in
defective clearance of antigen-antibody complexes. Recurrent infection, due to defective opsonization,
and autoimmune disorders (eg, SLE, glomerulonephritis), due to defective clearance of antigen-antibody
complexes (see
Table 126-3
), are the most serious consequences. One of these deficiencies causes
hereditary angioedema.
Primary immunodeficiency syndromes
are genetically determined immunodeficiencies with immune
and nonimmune defects. Nonimmune manifestations are often more easily recognized than those of the
immunodeficiency. Examples are ataxia-telangiectasia, cartilage-hair hypoplasia, DiGeorge syndrome,
hyper-IgE syndrome, and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
Geriatrics Essentials
Some decrease in immunity occurs with aging. For example, in the elderly, the thymus
[Table 126-3.
Primary Immunodeficiency Disorders]
tends to produce fewer naive T cells; thus, fewer T cells are available to respond to new antigens. The
number of T cells does not decrease (because of oligoclonality), but these cells can recognize only a
limited number of antigens.
Signal transduction (transmission of antigen-binding signal across the cell membrane into the cell) is
impaired, making T cells less likely to respond to antigens. Also, helper T cells may be less likely to signal
B cells to produce antibodies.
The number of neutrophils does not decrease, but these cells become less effective in phagocytosis and
microbicidal action.
Undernutrition, common among the elderly, impairs immune responses. Ca, zinc, and vitamin E are
particularly important to immunity. Risk of Ca deficiency is increased in the elderly, partly because with
aging, the intestine becomes less able to absorb Ca. Also, the elderly may not ingest enough Ca in their
diet. Zinc deficiency is very common among the institutionalized elderly and homebound patients.
Approach to the Patient With Suspected Immunodeficiency
Immunodeficiency typically manifests as recurrent infections. However, more likely causes of recurrent
infections in children are repeated exposures to infection at day care or school (infants and children may
normally have up to 10 respiratory infections/yr), and more likely causes in children and adults are
inadequate duration of antibiotic treatment, resistant organisms, and other disorders that predispose to
infection (eg, congenital heart defects, allergic rhinitis, ureteral or urethral stenosis, immotile cilia
syndrome, asthma, cystic fibrosis, severe dermatitis).
===PAGE:1239===
Immunodeficiency should be suspected when recurrent infections are the following:
• Severe
• Complicated
• In multiple locations
• Resistant to treatment
• Caused by unusual organisms
Initially, infections due to immunodeficiency are typically upper and lower respiratory tract infections (eg,
sinusitis, bronchitis, pneumonia) and gastroenteritis, but they may be serious bacterial infections (eg,
meningitis, sepsis).
Immunodeficiency should also be suspected in infants or young children with chronic diarrhea and failure
to thrive, especially when the diarrhea is caused by unusual viruses (eg, adenovirus) or fungi (eg,
Cryptosporidium
sp). Other signs include skin lesions (eg, eczema, warts, abscesses, pyoderma,
alopecia), oral or esophageal thrush, oral ulcers, and periodontitis.
Less common manifestations include severe viral infection with herpes simplex or varicella zoster virus
and CNS problems (eg, chronic encephalitis, delayed development, seizure disorder). Frequent use of
antibiotics may mask many of the common symptoms and signs. Immunodeficiency should be considered
particularly in patients with infections and an autoimmune disorder (eg, hemolytic anemia,
thrombocytopenia).
Evaluation
History and physical examination are helpful but must be supplemented by immune function testing.
Prenatal testing is available for many disorders and is indicated if there is a family history of
immunodeficiency and the mutation has been identified in family members.
History:
Clinicians should determine whether patients have a history of risk factors for infection or of
symptoms and risk factors for secondary immunodeficiency disorders. Family history is very important.
Age when recurrent infections began is important. Onset of infections before age 12 mo suggests
combined B- and T-cell defects or a B-cell defect, which becomes evident when maternal antibodies are
disappearing (at about age 6 mo). In general, the earlier the age at onset in children, the more severe the
immunodeficiency. Often, certain other primary immunodeficiencies (eg, common variable
immunodeficiency [CVID]) do not manifest until adulthood.
Certain infections suggest certain immunodeficiency disorders (see
Table 126-4
); however, no infection is specific to any one disorder, and certain common infections (eg,
respiratory viral or bacterial infections) occur in many.
Physical examination:
Patients with immunodeficiency may or may not appear chronically ill. Macular
rashes, vesicles, pyoderma, eczema, petechiae, alopecia, or telangiectasia may be evident.
Cervical lymph nodes and adenoid and tonsillar tissue are typically very small or absent in X-linked
agammaglobulinemia, X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome, severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), and
other T-cell immunodeficiencies despite a history of recurrent infections. In certain other
immunodeficiencies (eg, chronic granulomatous disease), lymph nodes of the head and neck may be
enlarged and suppurative.
Tympanic membranes may be scarred or perforated. The nostrils may be crusted, indicating purulent
nasal discharge. Chronic cough is common, as are lung crackles, especially in adults with CVID. The liver
===PAGE:1240===
and spleen are often enlarged in patients with CVID or chronic granulomatous disease. Muscle mass and
fat deposits of the buttocks are decreased. In infants, skin around the anus may break down because of
chronic diarrhea. Neurologic examination may detect delayed developmental milestones or ataxia.
Other characteristic findings tentatively suggest a clinical diagnosis (see
Table 126-5
).
Initial testing:
If a specific secondary immunodeficiency disorder is suspected clinically, testing should
focus on that disorder (eg, diabetes, HIV infection, cystic fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia).
Tests are needed to confirm a diagnosis of immunodeficiency (see
Table 126-6
). Initial screening tests should include
• CBC with manual differential
• Quantitative Ig measurements
• Antibody titers
• Skin testing for delayed hypersensitivity
[Table 126-4.
Some Clues in Patient History to Type of Immunodeficiency]
If results are normal, immunodeficiency (especially Ig deficiency) can be excluded. If results are abnormal,
further tests in specialized laboratories are needed to identify specific deficiencies. If chronic infections
are objectively documented, initial and specific tests may be done simultaneously.
CBC
can detect abnormalities in one or more cell types (eg, WBCs, platelets) characteristic of specific
disorders. However, many abnormalities are transient manifestations of infection, drug use, or other
factors; thus, abnormalities should be confirmed and followed.
•
Neutropenia
(absolute neutrophil count < 1200 cells/
μ
L) may be congenital or cyclic or may occur in
aplastic anemia.
•
Lymphopenia
(lymphocytes < 2000/
μ
L at birth, < 4500/
μ
L at age 9 mo, or < 1000/
μ
L in older children
or adults) suggests a T-cell disorder because 70% of circulating lymphocytes are T cells.
•
Leukocytosis
that persists between infections may occur in leukocyte adhesion deficiency.
•
Thrombocytopenia
in male infants suggests Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
•
Anemia
may suggest anemia of chronic disease or autoimmune hemolytic anemia, which may occur in
CVID and other immunodeficiencies.
Peripheral blood smear
should be examined for Howell-Jolly bodies and other unusual RBC forms,
which suggest primary asplenia or impaired splenic function. Granulocytes may have morphologic
abnormalities (eg, giant granules in Chediak-Higashi syndrome).
Quantitative serum Ig levels
are measured. Low serum levels of IgG, IgM, or IgA suggest antibody
deficiency, but results must be compared with those of age-matched controls. An IgG level < 200 mg/dL
usually indicates significant antibody deficiency, although such levels may occur in protein-losing
enteropathies or nephrotic syndrome.
•
IgM antibodies
can be assessed by measuring isohemagglutinin titers (anti-A, anti-B). All patients
except infants < 6 mo and people with blood type AB have natural antibodies at
[Table 126-5.
Characteristic Clinical Findings in Some Primary Immunodeficiency Disorders]
===PAGE:1241===
a titer of ≥ 1:8 (anti-A) or ≥ 1:4 (anti-B). Antibodies to blood groups A and B and to some bacterial
polysaccharides are selectively deficient in certain disorders (eg, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, complete
IgG2 deficiency).
•
IgG antibody
titers can be assessed in immunized patients by measuring antibody titers before and
after administration of vaccine antigens (
Haemophilus influenzae
type B, tetanus, diphtheria,
conjugated or nonconjugated pneumococcal, and meningococcal antigens); a less-than-twofold
increase in titer at 2 to 3 wk suggests antibody deficiency regardless of Ig levels. Natural antibodies
(eg, antistreptolysin O, heterophil antibodies) may also be measured.
[Table 126-6.
Initial and Additional Laboratory Tests for Immunodeficiency]
With
skin testing,
most immunocompetent adults, infants, and children react to 0.1 mL of
Candida
albicans
extract (1:100 for infants and 1:1000 for older children and adults) injected intradermally. Positive
reactivity, defined as erythema and induration > 5 mm at 24, 48, and 72 h, excludes a T-cell disorder.
Lack of response does not confirm immunodeficiency in patients with no previous exposure to
Candida
.
Chest x-ray may be useful in some infants; an absent thymic shadow suggests a T-cell disorder,
especially if the x-ray is obtained before onset of infection or other stresses that may shrink the thymus.
Lateral pharyngeal x-ray may show absence of adenoidal tissue.
Additional testing:
If clinical findings or initial tests suggest a specific disorder of immune cell or
complement function, other tests are indicated.
If patients have recurrent infections and lymphopenia, lymphocyte phenotyping using flow cytometry and
monoclonal antibodies to T, B, and natural killer (NK) cells is indicated to check for lymphocyte deficiency.
If T cells are low or absent, invitro mitogen stimulation studies are done to assess T-cell function. If MHC
antigen deficiency is suspected, serologic (not molecular) HLA typing is indicated.
If phagocytic cell defects are suspected, a flow cytometric respiratory burst assay can detect whether O
radicals are produced during phagocytosis; no production is characteristic of chronic granulomatous
disease.
If the type or pattern of infections suggests complement deficiency, the serum dilution required to lyse
50% of antibody-coated RBCs (CH50) is measured. This test detects complement component
deficiencies in the classical or alternative complement activation pathway but does not indicate which
component is abnormal.
If examination or screening tests detect abnormalities suggesting lymphocyte or phagocytic cell defects,
other tests can more precisely characterize specific disorders (see
Table 126-7
).
Prenatal diagnosis:
An increasing number of primary immunodeficiency disorders can be diagnosed
prenatally using chorionic villus sampling, cultured amniotic cells, or fetal blood sampling, but these tests
are used only when a mutation in family members has already been identified (. X-linked
agammaglobulinemia, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, X-linked lymphoproliferative
syndrome, all forms of SCID, and all forms of chronic granulomatous disease can be detected. Sex
determination by ultrasonography can be used to exclude X-linked disorders.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the primary immunodeficiency disorder. Most patients with an Ig or a complement
deficiency have a good prognosis with a near-normal life expectancy if they are
diagnosed early, are
treated appropriately, and have no coexisting chronic disorders (eg, pulmonary disorders such as
bronchiectasis). Other immunodeficient patients (eg, those with a phagocytic cell defect or combined
immunodeficiencies, such as Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome or ataxia-telangiectasia) have a guarded
prognosis; most require intensive and frequent treatment. Some immunodeficient patients (eg, those with
SCID) die during
===PAGE:1242===
[Table 126-7.
Advanced Laboratory Tests for Immunodeficiency]
infancy unless immunity is provided through transplantation. All forms of SCID could be diagnosed at birth
if a WBC count and manual differential of cord or peripheral blood were routinely done in neonates.
Suspicion for SCID, a true pediatric emergency, must be high because prompt diagnosis is essential for
survival. If done before patients reach age 3 mo, transplantation of bone marrow or stem cells from a
matched or half-matched (haploidentical) relative is lifesaving in 95%.
Treatment
• Vaccines and avoidance of exposure to infection
• Antibiotics and sometimes surgery
• Replacement of missing immune components
Treatment generally involves preventing infection, managing acute infection, and replacing missing
immune components when possible.
Infection prevention:
Infection can be prevented by advising patients to avoid environmental exposures
and giving live-virus vaccines (varicella, rotavirus, measles, mumps, rubella). Patients at risk of serious
infections (eg, those with SCID, chronic granulomatous disease, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, or asplenia)
or a specific infection (eg, with
Pneumocystis jirovecii
in patients with T-cell disorders) can be given
prophylactic antibiotics (eg, 5 mg/kg trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole po bid).
To prevent graft-vs-host disease after transfusions, clinicians should use blood products from
cytomegalovirus-negative donors; the products should be filtered to remove WBCs and irradiated (15 to
30 Gy).
Management of acute infection:
After appropriate cultures are obtained, antibiotics that target likely
causes should be given promptly. Sometimes surgery (eg, to drain abscesses) is needed. Usually, selflimited viral infections cause severe persistent disease in immunocompromised patients. Antivirals (eg,
amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir for influenza; acyclovir for herpes simplex and
varicella-zoster infections; ribavirin for respiratory syncytial virus or parainfluenza 3 infections) may be
lifesaving.
Replacement of missing immune components:
Such replacement helps prevent infection. Therapies
used in more than one primary immunodeficiency disorder include the following:
•
IV immune globulin
(IVIG) is effective replacement therapy in most forms of antibody deficiency. The
usual dose is 400 mg/kg once/mo; treatment is begun at a low infusion rate. Some patients need higher
or more frequent doses. IVIG 800 mg/kg once/mo helps some antibody-deficient patients who do not
respond well to conventional doses, particularly those with a chronic lung disorder. High-dose IVIG aims
to keep IgG trough levels in the normal range (> 500 mg/dL). IVIG may also
be given by slow sc
infusions at weekly intervals.
•
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
using bone marrow, cord blood, or adult peripheral blood
stem cells is effective for lethal T-cell and other immunodeficiencies. Pretransplantation chemotherapy
is unnecessary in patients without T cells (eg, those with SCID). However, patients with intact T-cell
function or partial T-cell deficiencies (eg, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, combined immunodeficiency with
inadequate but not absent T-cell function) require pretransplantation chemotherapy to ensure graft
acceptance. When a matched sibling donor is unavailable, haploidentical bone marrow from a parent
can be used. In such cases, mature T cells that cause graft-vs-host disease must be rigorously
depleted from parental marrow before it is given. Umbilical cord blood from an HLA-matched sibling can
also be used as a source of stem cells. In some cases, bone marrow or umbilical cord blood from a
matched unrelated donor can be used, but after transplantation, immunosuppressants are required to
prevent graft-vs-host disease, and their use delays restoration of immunity.
===PAGE:1243===
Retroviral vector gene therapy has been successful in a few patients with X-linked and ADA-deficient
SCID, but this treatment is not widely used because some patients with X-linked SCID developed
leukemia.
Ataxia-Telangiectasia
Ataxia-telangiectasia results from a T-cell defect and causes progressive cerebellar ataxia,
oculocutaneous telangiectasias, and recurrent sinopulmonary infections.
Inheritance is autosomal-recessive. Ataxia-telangiectasia is caused by mutations in the gene that encodes
ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) protein. ATM protein may be important in mitogenic signal
transduction, meiotic recombination, and cell cycle control.
Age at onset of neurologic symptoms and evidence of immunodeficiency vary. Ataxia usually develops
when children begin to walk. Progression of neurologic symptoms leads to severe disability. Speech
becomes slurred, choreoathetoid movements and nystagmus develop, and muscle weakness usually
progresses to muscle atrophy. Telangiectasias may not appear until age 4 to 6 yr; they are most
prominent on the bulbar conjunctivae, ears, antecubital and popliteal fossae, and sides of the neck.
Recurrent sinopulmonary infections lead to recurrent pneumonia, bronchiectasis, and chronic restrictive
pulmonary disease. Patients often lack IgA and IgE and have a progressive T-cell defect. Certain
endocrine abnormalities (eg, gonadal dysgenesis, testicular atrophy, diabetes mellitus) may occur.
Frequency of cancer (especially leukemia, brain tumors, and gastric cancer) is high, and frequency of
chromosome breaks, consistent with a defect in DNA repair, is increased. Serum
α
-fetoprotein is usually
elevated.
Diagnosis
Clinical findings of cerebellar ataxia (particularly when telangiectasias are present), low levels of IgA, and
high levels of serum
α
-fetoprotein suggest the diagnosis. Diagnosis is confirmed by identifying mutations
on both alleles of the gene for ATM protein.
Treatment
Treatment with antibiotics or IV immune globulin may help, but no treatment is effective for the CNS
abnormalities. Thus, neurologic deterioration progresses, causing death, usually by age 30.
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is characterized by impaired lysis of phagocytized bacteria,
resulting in recurrent bacterial respiratory and other infections and oculocutaneous albinism.
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is rare. Inheritance is autosomal recessive. The syndrome is caused by a
mutation in a gene that regulates intracellular protein trafficking. Giant lysosomal granules develop in
neutrophils and other cells (eg, melanocytes, neural Schwann cells). The abnormal lysosomes cannot
fuse with phagosomes, so ingested bacteria cannot be lysed normally.
Clinical findings include oculocutaneous albinism and susceptibility to recurrent respiratory and other
infections. In about 85% of patients, an accelerated phase occurs, causing fever, jaundice,
hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, pancytopenia, bleeding diathesis, and neurologic changes. Once
the accelerated phase occurs, the syndrome is usually fatal within 30 mo.
A peripheral blood smear is examined for giant granules in neutrophils and other cells; a bone marrow
smear is examined for giant inclusion bodies in leukocyte precursor cells.
Transplantation of unfractionated HLA-identical bone marrow after pretransplantation cytoreductive
chemotherapy may be curative.
===PAGE:1244===
Chronic Granulomatous Disease
Chronic granulomatous disease is characterized by WBCs that cannot produce activated O
compounds and by defects in phagocytic cell microbicidal function. Manifestations include
recurrent infections; multiple granulomatous lesions of the lungs, liver, lymph nodes, and GI
and GU tract; abscesses; lymphadenitis; hypergammaglobulinemia; elevated ESR; and anemia.
Diagnosis is by assessing O
radical production in WBCs via a flow cytometric respiratory burst
assay. Treatment is with antibiotics, antifungal drugs, and interferonγ
; granulocyte transfusions
may be needed.
More than 50% of cases of chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) are inherited as an X-linked recessive
trait and thus occur only in males; in the rest, inheritance is autosomal recessive. In CGD, WBCs do not
produce hydrogen peroxide, superoxide, and other activated O
compounds because nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase activity is deficient. Phagocytic cell microbicidal function is
defective; thus, bacteria and fungi are not killed despite normal phagocytosis.
Symptoms and Signs
CGD usually begins with recurrent abscesses during early childhood, but in a few patients, onset is
delayed until the early teens. Typical pathogens are catalase-producing organisms (eg,
Staphylococcus
aureus
;
Escherichia coli
;
Serratia, Klebsiella
, and
Pseudomonas
sp; fungi).
Aspergillus
infections are
the leading cause of death.
Multiple granulomatous lesions occur in the lungs, liver, lymph nodes, and GI and GU tract (causing
obstruction). Suppurative lymphadenitis, hepatosplenomegaly, pneumonia, and hematologic evidence of
chronic infection are common. Skin, lymph node, lung, liver, and perianal abscesses; stomatitis; and
osteomyelitis also occur. Growth may be delayed.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by a flow cytometric respiratory burst assay to detect O
radical production. The test can
also identify female carriers of the X-linked form. Hypergammaglobulinemia and anemia can occur; ESR
is elevated.
Treatment
• Prophylactic antibiotics, sometimes including antifungals
• Sometimes interferon (IFN)-
γ
• For severe infections, granulocyte transfusions or bone marrow transplantation
Treatment is continuous prophylactic antibiotics, particularly trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 160/800 mg
po bid alone or with cephalexin 500 mg po q 8 h. Oral antifungals are given as primary prophylaxis or are
added if fungal infections occur even once; most useful are itraconazole po q 12 h (100 mg for patients <
13 yr; 200 mg for those ≥ 13 yr or weighing > 50 kg), voriconazole po q 12 h (100 mg for those weighing <
40 kg; 200 mg for those weighing ≥ 40 kg), or posaconazole (400 mg bid). IFNγ
may reduce severity and
frequency of infections. Usual dose is 50
μ
g/m
sc 3 times/wk.
Granulocyte transfusions can be lifesaving when infections are severe. When preceded by
pretransplantation chemotherapy, HLA-identical sibling bone marrow transplantation may be successful.
Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis is persistent or recurrent candidal infection due to T-cell
defects.
===PAGE:1245===
Inheritance is autosomal dominant or recessive. Patients have cutaneous anergy to
Candida
, absent
proliferative responses to
Candida
antigen (but normal proliferative responses to mitogens), and intact
antibody response to
Candida
and other antigens. Candidiasis recurs or persists, usually beginning
during infancy but sometimes during early adulthood. Life span is not affected.
Patients with the recessive form (autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidosis-ectodermal dystrophy)
develop endocrine disorders (eg, hypoparathyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, hypogonadism, thyroid
disease, diabetes), and hepatitis.
Thrush is common, as are infections of the scalp, skin, nails, and GI and vaginal mucosa. Severity varies.
Nails may be thickened, cracked, and discolored, with edema and erythema of the surrounding
periungual tissue, resembling clubbing. Skin lesions are crusted, pustular, erythematous, and
hyperkeratotic. Scalp lesions may result in scarring alopecia. Infants often present with refractory thrush,
candidal diaper dermatitis, or both.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the presence of recurrent candidal skin or mucosal lesions when no other known
causes of candidal infection (eg, diabetes, antibiotic use) are present. Candidal lesions are confirmed by
other tests (eg, potassium hydroxide wet mount of scrapings).
Treatment
• Antifungal drugs
Usually, the infections can be controlled with a topical antifungal. However, long-term treatment with a
systemic antifungal drug (eg, amphotericin B, fluconazole, ketoconazole) may be needed. Topical
antifungals are usually ineffective. Sometimes an immunomodulator (eg, transfer factor) is also used.
Common Variable Immunodeficiency
Common variable immunodeficiency (acquired or adult-onset hypogammaglobulinemia) is
characterized by low immunoglobulin (Ig) levels with phenotypically normal B cells that can
proliferate but do not develop into Ig-producing cells.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) includes several different molecular defects, but in most
patients, the molecular defect is unknown. CVID is clinically similar to X-linked agammaglobulinemia in the
types of infections that develop, but onset tends to be later, even in adulthood. T-cell immunity may be
impaired in some patients. Autoimmune disorders (eg, SLE, Addison's disease, thyroiditis, RA, alopecia
areata, autoimmune thrombocytopenia, autoimmune hemolytic or pernicious anemia) can occur, as can
malabsorption, nodular lymphoid hyperplasia of the GI tract, lymphoid interstitial pneumonia,
splenomegaly, and bronchiectasis. Gastric carcinoma and lymphoma occur in 10% of patients.
Diagnosis
• Measurement of serum Ig and antibody titers
• Flow cytometry
• Serum protein electrophoresis
Diagnosis is suggested by familial clustering of autoimmune disorders and is confirmed by measuring
serum Ig and antibody titers to protein and polysaccharide vaccine antigens. If either measurement is low,
B-cell quantification by flow cytometry is indicated to distinguish CVID from X-linked agammaglobulinemia,
multiple myeloma, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Serum protein electrophoresis is indicated to screen
for monoclonal gammopathies (eg, myeloma), which may be associated with reduced levels of other Ig
isotypes. If patients are treated with IV immune globulin (IVIG) before testing, serologic tests have no
===PAGE:1246===
value because the antibodies are from the IVIG.
Treatment
Treatment consists of IVIG 400 mg/kg once/mo and antibiotics as needed to treat infection. Rituximab or a
corticosteroid may be required to treat autoimmune disorders.
DiGeorge Syndrome
DiGeorge syndrome is thymic and parathyroid hypoplasia or aplasia leading to T-cell
immunodeficiency and hypoparathyroidism.
DiGeorge syndrome results from gene deletions in the DiGeorge chromosomal region at 22q11, mutations
in genes at chromosome 10p13, and mutations in other unknown genes, which cause dysembryogenesis
of structures that develop from pharyngeal pouches during the 8th wk of gestation. Most cases are
sporadic; boys and girls are equally affected. Di-George syndrome may be partial (some T-cell function
exists) or complete (T-cell function is absent).
Infants have low-set ears, midline facial clefts, a small receding mandible, hypertelorism, a shortened
philtrum, and a congenital heart disorder. They also have thymic and parathyroid hypoplasia or aplasia,
causing T-cell deficiency and hypoparathyroidism. Recurrent infections begin soon after birth, but the
degree of immunodeficiency varies considerably, and T-cell function may improve spontaneously.
Hypocalcemic tetany appears within 24 to 48 h of birth.
Prognosis often depends on severity of the heart disorder.
Diagnosis
• Immune function assessment
• Parathyroid function assessment
• Chromosome analysis
Diagnosis is based on clinical findings. An absolute lymphocyte count is done, followed by
B- and T-cell
counts if leukopenia is detected; blood tests to evaluate T-cell and parathyroid function are done. A lateral
chest x-ray may help evaluate thymic shadow. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) testing can detect
the chromosomal deletion in the 22q11 region; standard chromosomal tests to check for other
abnormalities may also be done. Cardiac catheterization may be needed to identify heart defects.
Treatment
In partial DiGeorge syndrome, hypoparathyroidism is treated with Ca and vitamin D supplementation;
long-term survival is not affected. Complete DiGeorge syndrome is fatal without treatment, which is
transplantation of cultured thymus tissue.
Hyper-IgE Syndrome
Hyper-IgE (Buckley) syndrome is combined Band T-cell immunodeficiency characterized by
recurrent staphylococcal abscesses of the skin, lungs, joints, and viscera.
Inheritance is autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance; it is caused by mutations in the
STAT3
(signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) gene.
Hyper-IgE syndrome starts during infancy. It typically causes recurrent staphylococcal abscesses of the
skin, lungs, joints, and viscera with pulmonary pneumatoceles and a pruritic eosinophilic dermatitis.
Patients have coarse facial features, delayed shedding of baby teeth, osteopenia, and recurrent
fractures. All have tissue and blood eosinophilia and very high IgE levels (> 1000 IU/mL [> 2400
μ
g/L]).
===PAGE:1247===
Diagnosis is suspected based on symptoms and confirmed by measurement of serum IgE levels. Genetic
testing can identify the abnormal gene.
Treatment consists of lifelong continuous antistaphylococcal antibiotics (eg, dicloxacillin, cephalexin).
Hyper-IgM Syndrome
Hyper-IgM syndrome is an Ig deficiency characterized by normal or elevated serum IgM levels
and decreased levels or absence of other serum Igs, resulting in susceptibility to bacterial
infections.
Hyper-IgM syndrome may be X-linked or autosomal. Most cases are caused by mutations in a gene that is
located on the X chromosome; this gene encodes a protein (CD154, or CD40 ligand) on the surfaces of
activated helper T cells. In the presence of cytokines, normal CD40 ligand interacts with B cells and thus
signals them to switch from producing IgM to producing IgA, IgG, or IgE.
In X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome, T cells lack functional CD40 ligand and cannot signal B cells to switch.
Thus, B cells produce only IgM; IgM levels may be normal or elevated. Patients with this form may have
severe neutropenia and often present during infancy with
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia. Otherwise,
clinical presentation is similar to that of X-linked agammaglobulinemia and includes recurrent pyogenic
bacterial sinopulmonary infections during the first 2 yr of life. Susceptibility to
Cryptosporidium
infections
may be increased. Lymphoid tissue is very small because germinal centers are missing. Many patients die
before puberty, and those who live longer often develop cirrhosis or B-cell lymphomas.
At least 4 autosomal recessive forms involve a B-cell defect. In 2 of these forms (deficiency of activationinduced cytidine deaminase or uracil DNA glycosylase [UNG]), serum IgM levels are much higher than in
the X-linked form; lymphoid hyperplasia (including lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and tonsillar
hypertrophy) is present, and autoimmune disorders may be present.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical and by detecting normal or elevated serum IgM levels and low levels or absence of
other Igs.
Treatment
Treatment is IV immune globulin 400 mg/kg once/mo. For the X-linked form, granulocyte colonystimulating factor is also given as needed for neutropenia, and because prognosis is poor, bone marrow
transplantation is preferred if an HLA-identical sibling donor is available.
IgA Deficiency
IgA deficiency is an IgA level < 10 mg/dL with normal IgG and IgM levels. It is the most common
primary immunodeficiency. Many patients are asymptomatic, but some develop recurrent
infections and autoimmune disorders. Some patients develop common variable
immunodeficiency, and some remit spontaneously. Diagnosis is by measuring serum Igs.
Treatment is avoidance of blood products that contain IgA; antibiotics are given as needed.
IgA deficiency affects up to 1/333 people. Transmission is autosomal dominant with incomplete
penetrance. IgA deficiency is commonly associated with certain HLA haplotypes, and rare alleles or
deletions of genes in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class III region ( are
common. IgA deficiency also occurs in siblings of children with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID)
and evolves into CVID in some patients. Use of drugs such as phenytoin, sulfasalazine, colloidal gold and
D-penicillamine may lead to IgA deficiency in genetically susceptible patients.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1248===
Many patients are asymptomatic; others have recurrent sinopulmonary infections, diarrhea, allergies, or
autoimmune disorders (eg, celiac or inflammatory bowel disease, SLE, chronic active hepatitis). Anti-IgA
antibodies may develop after exposure to IgA in transfusions; anaphylactic reactions to IV immune
globulin (IVIG) and other blood products that contain IgA may occur.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Measurement of serum Ig levels and antibody titers
Diagnosis is suspected in patients who have recurrent infections (including giardiasis); anaphylactic
transfusion reactions; or a family history of CVID, IgA deficiency, or autoimmune disorders or who are
taking drugs that lead to IgA deficiency. Diagnosis is confirmed by a serum IgA level < 10 mg/dL with
normal IgG and IgM levels and normal antibody titers in response to vaccine antigens.
Prognosis
A few IgA-deficient patients develop CVID over time; others improve spontaneously. Prognosis is worse if
an autoimmune disorder develops.
Treatment
• Avoidance of blood products that contain IgA
• Antibiotics as needed
Treatment is avoidance of blood products that contain IgA because even trace amounts can elicit an antiIgA-mediated anaphylactic reaction. If RBC transfusion is needed, only washed RBCs or frozen blood can
be used.
Antibiotics are given as needed for bacterial infections of the ears, sinuses, lungs, or GI or GU tract.
IVIG is contraindicated because many patients have antibodies to IgA and because IVIG is > 99% IgG,
which patients do not need. Patients are advised to wear an identification bracelet to prevent inadvertent
plasma or IVIG administration, which could lead to anaphylaxis.
Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency results from an adhesion molecule defect that causes
granulocyte and lymphocyte dysfunction and recurrent soft-tissue infections.
Inheritance is autosomal recessive. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency is caused by deficiency of adhesive
glycoproteins on the surfaces of WBCs; these glycoproteins facilitate cellular interactions, cell attachment
to blood vessel walls, cell movement, and interaction with complement fragments. Deficiencies impair the
ability of granulocytes (and lymphocytes) to migrate out of the intravascular compartment, to engage in
cytotoxic reactions, and to phagocytose bacteria. Severity of disease correlates with degree of deficiency.
Severely affected infants have recurrent or progressive necrotic soft-tissue infections with staphylococcal
and gram-negative bacteria, periodontitis, poor wound healing, leukocytosis, and delayed (> 3 wk)
umbilical cord detachment. WBC counts remain high even between infections. Infections become
increasingly difficult to control.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by detecting absence or severe deficiency of adhesive glycoproteins on the surface of
WBCs using monoclonal antibodies (eg, anti-CD11, anti-CD18) and flow cytometry. Leukocytosis on CBC
is common but nonspecific.
===PAGE:1249===
Treatment
Most patients die by age 5 unless treated successfully with bone marrow transplantation, but moderately
affected patients survive into young adulthood.
Treatment is with antibiotics, often given continuously. Granulocyte transfusions can also help. Bone
marrow transplantation is the only effective treatment and can be curative.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Severe combined immunodeficiency is characterized by absent T cells and a low, high, or
normal number of B cells and natural killer cells. Most infants develop opportunistic infections
within the first 3 mo of life. Diagnosis is by detecting lymphopenia, absence or a very low
number of T cells, and impaired lymphocyte proliferative responses to mitogens. Patients must
be kept in a protected environment; definitive treatment is bone marrow stem cell
transplantation.
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is caused by mutations in any one of at least 12 different
genes. All but one type are autosomal recessive defects, so for the infant to be affected with SCID, the
same gene must be mutated on both chromosomes. There are 4 different abnormal lymphocyte
phenotypes. In all forms of SCID, T cells are absent (T-); the number of B cells and natural killer (NK)
cells may be low or none (B-; NK-) or high or normal (B+; NK+), depending on the form of SCID.
However, B cells, even when normal in number, cannot function because T cells are absent.
The most common form is X-linked. It affects the IL-2 receptor
γ
chain (a component of at least 6 cytokine
receptors) and thus causes severe disease; phenotype is T- B+ NK-. The 2nd most common form results
from adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, which leads to apoptosis of precursors for B, T, and NK
cells; phenotype is T- B- NK-. The next most common form results from IL-7 receptor
α
-chain deficiency;
phenotype is T- B+ NK+.
Symptoms and Signs
By age 6 mo, most infants with SCID develop candidiasis, persistent viral infections,
Pneumocystis
jirovecii
pneumonia, and diarrhea, leading to failure to thrive. Some have graft-vs-host disease due to
maternal lymphocytes or blood transfusions. Other infants present at age 6 to 12 mo. Exfoliative
dermatitis may develop as part of Omenn's syndrome, one form of SCID. ADA deficiency may cause bone
abnormalities. The thymus is extremely small, and lymphoid tissue may be decreased or absent.
All forms of SCID are fatal during infancy unless they are diagnosed and treated early.
Diagnosis
• History of persistent infections
• CBC with differential
• Mitogen and vaccine antigen stimulation assays
• Tests to determine type of SCID
SCID is suspected in infants with a history of persistent infections. CBC, including absolute WBC count
and differential, is done; Ig levels are measured. Responses to mitogens and to standard vaccine
antigens are determined to evaluate WBC and antibody function. Chest x-rays to evaluate the thymus are
not necessary for diagnosis.
The disorder is diagnosed in patients with the following:
===PAGE:1250===
• Lymphopenia
• A low number of or no T cells
• Absent lymphocyte proliferative responses to mitogens
Other tests are done to determine the type of SCID. ADA and purine nucleoside phosphorylase levels in
WBCs, RBCs, and fibroblasts are measured. X-inactivation tests may be done to determine whether SCID
is X-linked.
Treatment
• IV immune globulin (IVIG)
• Antibiotics
• Bone marrow stem cell transplantation
• Sometimes ADA injections or gene therapy
Patients must be kept in reverse isolation. Treatment with IVIG and antibiotics, including
P. jirovecii
prophylaxis, is helpful but not curative.
In 90 to 100% of infants with SCID or its variants, bone marrow stem cell transplantation from an HLAidentical, mixed leukocyte culture-matched sibling restores immunity. When an HLA-identical sibling is not
available, haploidentical bone marrow from a parent that is rigorously depleted of T cells can be used. If
SCID is diagnosed by age 3 mo, the survival rate after transplantation with either type of bone marrow is
96%. Pretransplantation chemotherapy is unnecessary because patients do not have T cells and
therefore cannot reject a graft.
Patients with ADA deficiency who do not receive a bone marrow graft may be treated with injections of
polyethylene glycol-modified bovine ADA once or twice/wk. Gene therapy has been successful in X-linked
SCID but has caused T-cell leukemias, precluding its use. Gene therapy has also been successful in
ADA-deficient SCID, and no posttreatment leukemias or lymphomas have been reported.
Transient Hypogammaglobulinemia of Infancy
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy is a temporary decrease in serum IgG and
sometimes IgA and other Ig isotypes to levels below age-appropriate normal values.
In transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy, IgG levels continue to be low after the physiologic fall in
maternal IgG at about age 3 to 6 mo. The condition rarely leads to significant infections and is not thought
to be a true immunodeficiency.
Diagnosis is based on low serum Ig levels and tests showing that antibody production in response to
vaccine antigens (eg, tetanus, diphtheria) is normal. Thus, this condition can be distinguished from
permanent forms of hypogammaglobulinemia, in which specific antibodies to vaccine antigens are not
produced.
IV immunoglobulin is unnecessary. This condition may persist for months to a few years but usually
resolves.
Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome results from a combined B- and T-cell defect and is characterized by
recurrent infection, atopic dermatitis, and thrombocytopenia.
Inheritance is X-linked recessive. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene that
===PAGE:1251===
encodes the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP), a cytoplasmic protein necessary for normal Band T-cell signaling. Because B- and T-cell functions are impaired, infections with pyogenic bacteria and
opportunistic organisms, particularly viruses and
Pneumocystis jirovecii
, develop.
The first manifestations are often hemorrhagic (usually bloody diarrhea), followed by recurrent respiratory
infections, eczema, and thrombocytopenia. Cancers, especially Epstein-Barr virus lymphomas and acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, develop in about 10% of patients > 10 yr.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on tests showing impaired antibody responses to polysaccharide antigens, cutaneous
anergy, partial T-cell immunodeficiency, elevated IgE and IgA levels, low IgM levels, and low or normal
IgG levels. Antibodies to polysaccharide antigens (eg, blood group antigens A and B) may be selectively
deficient. Platelets are small and defective, and splenic destruction of platelets is increased, causing
thrombocytopenia. Mutation analysis may be used.
Treatment
Treatment is splenectomy, continuous antibiotics, IV immunoglobulin, and bone marrow transplantation.
Without transplantation, most patients die by age 15; however, some patients survive into adulthood.
X-linked Agammaglobulinemia
(Bruton's Disease)
X-linked agammaglobulinemia is characterized by low levels or absence of Igs and absent B
cells, leading to recurrent infections with encapsulated bacteria.
X-linked agammaglobulinemia results from mutations in a gene on the X chromosome that encodes
Bruton tyrosine kinase (Btk). Btk is essential for B-cell development and maturation; without it, there are
no B cells and hence no antibodies. As a result, male infants have very small tonsils and do not develop
lymph nodes; they have recurrent pyogenic lung, sinus, and skin infections with encapsulated bacteria
(eg,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
Haemophilus influenzae
). Patients are also susceptible to persistent
CNS infections resulting from live-attenuated oral polio vaccine and from echoviruses and
coxsackieviruses; these infections can also manifest as progressive dermatomyositis with or without
encephalitis.
With early diagnosis and appropriate treatment, prognosis is good unless CNS viral infections develop.
Diagnosis
• Low Ig levels and absent B cells
Diagnosis is by detecting low IgG levels (< 100 mg/dL) and absent B cells (< 1% CD19+ cells via flow
cytometry). Transient neutropenia may also be present. If the mutation has been identified in family
members, mutational analysis of chorionic villus, amniocentesis, or percutaneous umbilical cord blood
samples can provide prenatal diagnosis.
Treatment
Treatment is IV immune globulin 400 mg/kg once/mo. Prompt use of adequate antibiotics
for each
infection is crucial; bronchiectasis requires continuous rotation of antibiotics.
X-linked Lymphoproliferative Syndrome
(Duncan's Syndrome)
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome results from a T-cell and natural killer cell defect and is
===PAGE:1252===
characterized by an abnormal response to Epstein-Barr virus infection, leading to liver failure,
immunodeficiency, lymphoma, fatal lymphoproliferative disease, or bone marrow aplasia.
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome is caused by mutations in a gene on the X chromosome that
encodes a T and natural killer (NK) cell-specific protein called SAP. Without SAP, lymphocytes proliferate
unchecked in response to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, and NK cells do not function.
The syndrome is usually asymptomatic until EBV infection develops. Then, most patients develop
fulminating or fatal infectious mononucleosis with liver failure (caused by cytotoxic T cells that react to
EBV-infected B or other tissue cells); survivors of initial infection develop B-cell lymphomas, aplastic
anemia, hypogammaglobulinemia (resembling that in common variable immunodeficiency), or a
combination.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic findings in patients that survive initial EBV infection include hypogammaglobulinemia,
decreased antibody responses to antigens (particularly to EBV nuclear antigen), impaired T-cell
proliferative responses to mitogens, decreased NK-cell function, and an inverted CD4:CD8 ratio. Genetic
diagnosis by mutation analysis is possible before EBV infection and symptoms develop.
Treatment
About 75% of patients die by age 10, and all die by age 40 unless bone marrow transplantation is done.
Transplantation is curative if done before EBV infection or other disorders become irreversible, resulting
in death.
ZAP-70 Deficiency
ZAP-70 (
ζ
-associated protein 70) deficiency is impaired T-cell activation caused by a signaling
defect.
ZAP-70 is important in T-cell signaling and in T-cell selection in the thymus. ZAP-70 deficiency causes Tcell activation defects.
Patients who have ZAP-70 deficiency present during infancy or early childhood with recurrent infections
similar to those in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID); however, they live longer, and the
deficiency may not be diagnosed until they are several years old. Patients have normal, low, or elevated
serum Ig levels and normal or elevated numbers of circulating CD4 T cells but essentially no CD8 T cells.
Their CD4 T cells do not respond to mitogens or allogeneic cells in vitro and do not produce cytotoxic T
cells. In contrast, natural killer cell activity is normal.
Diagnosis is similar to that for SCID.
The disorder is fatal unless treated by bone marrow transplantation.
===PAGE:1253===
Chapter 127. Allergic and Other Hypersensitivity Disorders
Introduction
Allergic and other hypersensitivity disorders are exaggerated or inappropriate immune reactions.
Classification
The Gell and Coombs classification delineates 4 types of hypersensitivity reaction. Hypersensitivity
disorders often involve more than 1 type.
Type I:
Type I reactions (immediate hypersensitivity) are IgE-mediated. Antigen binds to IgE (which is
bound to tissue mast cells and blood basophils), triggering release of preformed mediators (eg, histamine,
proteases, chemotactic factors) and synthesis of other mediators (eg, prostaglandins, leukotrienes,
platelet-activating factor, cytokines). These mediators cause vasodilation, increased capillary
permeability, mucus hypersecretion, smooth muscle spasm, and tissue infiltration
with eosinophils, type 2
helper T cells (T
H
2), and other inflammatory cells. Type I reactions underlie atopic disorders (eg, allergic
asthma, rhinitis, conjunctivitis) and latex and some food allergies.
Type II:
Type II reactions result when antibody binds to cellular or tissue antigens or to a molecule
coupled to a cell or tissue. The antigen-antibody complex activates cells that participate in antibodydependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (eg, NK cells, eosinophils, macrophages), complement, or both. The
result is cell and tissue damage. Disorders involving type II reactions include hyperacute graft rejection of
an organ transplant, Coombs'-positive hemolytic anemias, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and antiglomerular
basement membrane disease (eg, Goodpasture's syndrome).
Type III:
Type III reactions cause acute inflammation in response to circulating antigen-antibody immune
complexes deposited in vessels or tissue. These complexes can activate the complement system or bind
to and activate certain immune cells, resulting in release of inflammatory mediators. Consequences of
immune complex formation depend in part on the relative proportions of antigen and antibody in the
immune complex. Early, there is excess antigen with small antigen-antibody complexes, which do not
activate complement. Later, when antigen and antibody are more balanced, immune complexes are larger
and tend to be deposited in various tissues (glomeruli, blood vessels), causing systemic reactions. The
isotype of induced antibodies changes, and glycosylation of the complex's components contributes to the
clinical response. Type III disorders include serum sickness, SLE, RA, leukocytoclastic vasculitis,
cryoglobulinemia, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and several types of
glomerulonephritis.
Type IV:
Type IV reactions (delayed hypersensitivity) are T cell-mediated. There are 4 subtypes based
on the T-cell subpopulation involved:
• IVa: Type 1 helper T cells
• IVb: Type 2 helper T cells
• IVc: Cytotoxic T cells
• IVd: IL-8-secreting T cells
These cells, sensitized after contact with a specific antigen, are activated by reexposure to the antigen;
they damage tissue by direct toxic effects or through release of cytokines, which activate eosinophils,
monocytes and macrophages, neutrophils, or killer cells depending on type. Disorders involving type IV
reactions include contact dermatitis (eg, poison ivy), hypersensitivity pneumonitis, allograft rejection, TB,
and many forms of drug hypersensitivity.
Autoimmune disorders:
Immune system reactions directed against intrinsic body components can lead
to autoimmune disease (see
===PAGE:1254===
Table 127-1
).
Angioedema
Angioedema is edema of the deep dermis and subcutaneous tissues. It is caused by exposure
to drug, venom, dietary, or extracted allergens. The main symptom is diffuse, painful swelling
that can be severe. Diagnosis is by examination. Treatment is elimination or avoidance of the
allergen and H
blockers.
Acute angioedema is essentially anaphylaxis of the subcutaneous tissues. It is sometimes accompanied
by urticaria (local wheals and erythema in the skin—; the two have similar causes (eg, drug,
venom, dietary, or extracted allergens). Also, angioedema is pathogenetically related to urticaria, which
occurs at the epidermal-dermal junction.
Chronic (> 6 wk) angioedema is rarely IgE-mediated and is more difficult to explain. Cause is usually
unknown (idiopathic), but chronic ingestion of an unsuspected drug or chemical (eg, penicillin in milk, a
nonprescription drug, preservatives, other food additives) is sometimes the cause. A few cases are
hereditary (.
Symptoms and Signs
Angioedema may be slightly pruritic or nonpruritic. It is characterized by locally diffuse and painful softtissue swelling that may be asymmetric, especially on the eyelids, lips (see
Plate 57
), face, and tongue but also on the back of hands or feet and on the genitals. Edema of the upper
airways may cause respiratory distress, and the stridor may be mistaken for asthma. Complete airway
obstruction may occur.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
The cause is often obvious, and diagnostic tests are seldom required because reactions are self-limited
and nonrecurrent. No test is particularly useful. Erythropoietic protoporphyria may mimic allergic forms of
angioedema and can be distinguished by measuring blood and fecal porphyrins (.
Treatment
• Oral prednisone
• Sometimes sc epinephrine
• Sometimes IV antihistamines
[Table 127-1.
Putative Autommune Disorders]
For acute angioedema, treatment is removing or avoiding the allergen and relieving symptoms (eg, with
H
blockers—see p.
and
Table 127-2
). Prednisone 30 to 40 mg po once/day is indicated for more severe reactions.
Topical corticosteroids are useless. If a cause is not obvious, all nonessential drugs should be stopped.
Pharyngeal or laryngeal angioedema requires epinephrine 0.3 mL of a 1:1000 solution sc. It may be
supplemented with an IV anti-histamine (eg, diphenhydramine 50 to 100 mg). Long-term treatment may
involve H
and H
blockers and occasionally corticosteroids.
[Table 127-2.
Oral H
Blockers]
Hereditary Angioedema
===PAGE:1255===
Hereditary angioedema is caused by deficiency or dysfunction of C1 inhibitor, a protein that
regulates the classical complement activation pathway (.
Hereditary angioedema has 2 types:
• Type 1 (85%): C1 inhibitor is deficient.
• Type 2 (15%): C1 inhibitor malfunctions.
Inheritance is autosomal dominant. C1 inhibitor deficiency may also be acquired: when complement is
consumed in neoplastic disorders (eg, B-cell lymphoma), when C1 inhibitor autoantibody is produced in
monoclonal gammopathy, or, rarely, when the autoantibody is produced in other disorders (eg, SLE,
dermatomyositis). Attacks can be precipitated by mild trauma (eg, dental work, tongue piercing), viral
illness, cold exposure, pregnancy, or ingestion of certain foods or may be aggravated by emotional stress.
Symptoms and signs are similar to those of angioedema except that edema progresses until complement
components have been consumed; the GI tract is often involved, causing nausea, vomiting, colic, and
signs of intestinal obstruction. Other common anatomic locations include the skin and the larynx.
Episodes of swelling are self-limited; however, laryngeal involvement can lead to death.
Diagnosis
• Measurement of complement protein levels
Diagnosis is based on detection of low levels of C2 and C4, normal levels of C1q (a fragment of C1), and
decreased C1 inhibitor function. In type 1, C1 inhibitor protein levels are low; in type 2, levels are normal
or increased. In acquired C1 inhibitor deficiency, C1q levels are low.
Treatment
• Attenuated androgens
• Symptomatic treatments
Attenuated androgens (eg, stanozolol 2 mg po tid, danazol 200 mg po tid) are used to stimulate hepatic
C1 inhibitor synthesis. This treatment may be less effective for the acquired form. Some experts advocate
giving fresh frozen plasma immediately before dental or medical procedures to prevent attacks, but this
approach could theoretically provoke an attack by providing substrate for angioedema.
Purified C1 inhibitor and recombinant C1 inhibitor are being developed for acute treatment.
Corticosteroids and antihistamines are not effective. Epinephrine can be of transient benefit in cases of
airway involvement. Symptomatic relief can be provided by analgesics, antiemetics, and fluid
replacement.
Atopic and Allergic Disorders
Type I hypersensitivity reactions underlie all atopic and many allergic disorders. The terms atopy and
allergy are often used interchangeably but are different:
•
Atopy
is an exaggerated IgE-mediated immune response; all atopic disorders are type I hypersensitivity
disorders.
•
Allergy
is any exaggerated immune response to a foreign antigen regardless of mechanism.
Thus, all atopic disorders are considered allergic, but many allergic disorders (eg, hypersensitivity
pneumonitis) are not atopic. Allergic disorders are the most common disorders among people.
Atopic disorders most commonly affect the nose, eyes, skin, and lungs. These disorders include atopic
===PAGE:1256===
dermatitis, contact dermatitis, urticaria (, angioedema (which may be primary skin disorders or
symptoms of systemic disorders), latex allergy (see
Sidebar 127-1
), allergic lung disorders (eg, asthma,
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis), and allergic reactions to
venomous stings.
Etiology
Complex genetic, environmental, and site-specific factors contribute to development of allergies.
Genetic factors
may be involved, as suggested by familial inheritance of disease, association between
atopy and specific HLA loci, and polymorphisms of several genes, including those for the high-affinity IgE
receptor
β
-chain, IL-4 receptor
α
-chain, IL-4, IL-13, CD14, dipeptidyl-peptidase 10 (DPP10), and a
disintegrin and metalloprotease domain 33 (
ADAM33)
.
Environmental factors
interact with genetic factors to maintain type 2 helper T (T
H
2) cell immune
responses, which activate eosinophils and IgE production and are proallergic. Early childhood exposure
to bacterial and viral infections and endotoxins (eg, lipopolysaccharide) may normally shift native T
H
2-cell
responses to type 1 helper T (T
H
1)-cell responses, which suppress T
H
2 cells and therefore discourage
allergic responses. Regulatory T (CD4+CD25+Foxp3+) cells (which are capable of suppressing T
H
2-cell
responses) and IL-12-secreting dendritic cells (which drive T
H
1-cell responses) are perhaps also
involved. But trends in developed countries
toward smaller families with fewer children, cleaner indoor
environments, and early use of vaccinations and antibiotics may deprive children of exposure to
infectious agents that drive a predominantly T
H
1-cell response; such trends may explain the increased
prevalence of some allergic disorders. Other factors thought to contribute to allergy development include
chronic allergen exposure and sensitization, diet, and environmental pollutants.
Sidebar 127-1 Latex Sensitivity
Latex sensitivity is an exaggerated immune response to water-soluble proteins in latex products (eg,
rubber gloves, dental dams, condoms, tubing for respiratory equipment, catheters, enema tips with
inflatable latex cuffs), causing urticaria, angioedema, and anaphylaxis.
Reactions to latex may be acute (IgE-mediated) or delayed (cell-mediated). Acute reactions cause
urticaria and anaphylaxis; delayed reactions cause dermatitis.
Diagnosis is based on history. Assays for detecting IgE anti-latex antibodies and patch tests for detecting
anti-latex cellular immunity are being developed, but none is well-validated yet.
Treatment is avoidance of latex.
Site-specific factors
include adhesion molecules in bronchial epithelium and in skin and molecules in
the GI tract that direct T
H
2 cells to target tissues.
Allergens:
By definition, an allergen induces IgE-mediated and T
H
2-cell immune responses. Allergic
triggers are almost always low molecular weight proteins; many of them can be constituted as airborne
particles.
Allergens that most commonly cause acute and chronic allergic reactions include
• House dust
• Mite feces
• Animal dander
===PAGE:1257===
• Pollens (tree, grass, weed)
• Molds
Pathophysiology
When allergen binds to IgE-sensitized mast cells and basophils, histamine is released from their
intracellular granules. Mast cells are widely distributed but are most concentrated in skin, lungs, and GI
mucosa; histamine facilitates inflammation and is the primary mediator of clinical atopy. Physical
disruption of tissue and various substances (eg, tissue irritants, opioids, surface-active agents,
complement components C3a and C5a) can trigger histamine release directly, independent of IgE.
Histamine causes the following:
• Local vasodilation (causing erythema)
• Increased capillary permeability and edema (producing a wheal)
• Surrounding arteriolar vasodilation mediated by neuronal reflex mechanisms (causing flare)
• Stimulation of sensory nerves (causing itching)
• Smooth muscle contraction in the airways (bronchoconstriction) and in the GI tract (increasing GI
motility)
• Increased salivary and bronchial gland secretions
When released systemically, histamine is a potent arteriolar dilator and can cause extensive peripheral
pooling of blood and hypotension; cerebral vasodilation may be a factor in vascular headache. Histamine
increases capillary permeability; the resulting loss of plasma and plasma proteins from the vascular space
can worsen circulatory shock. This loss triggers a compensatory catecholamine surge from adrenal
chromaffin cells.
Symptoms and Signs
Common symptoms include rhinorrhea, sneezing, and nasal congestion (upper respiratory tract);
wheezing and dyspnea (lower respiratory tract); and itching (eyes and skin).
Signs may include nasal turbinate edema, sinus pain during palpation, wheezing, conjunctival hyperemia
and edema, and skin lichenification. Stridor, wheezing, and sometimes hypotension are life-threatening
signs of anaphylaxis (. In some children, a narrow and high-arched palate, narrow chin, and
elongated maxilla with overbite (allergic facies) are thought to be associated with chronic allergy.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• CBC and serum IgE levels (nonspecific tests)
• Skin testing and radioallergosorbent testing (specific tests)
• Rarely, provocative testing
A thorough history is generally more reliable than testing or screening. History should include
• Questions about frequency and duration of attacks and changes over time
• Triggering factors if identifiable
===PAGE:1258===
• Relation to seasonal or situational settings (eg, predictably occurring during pollen seasons; after
exposure to animals, hay, or dust; during exercise; or in particular places)
• Family history of similar symptoms or of atopic disorders
• Responses to attempted treatments
Age at onset may be important in asthma because childhood asthma is likely to be atopic and asthma
beginning after age 30 is not.
Nonspecific tests:
Certain tests can suggest but not confirm an allergic origin of symptoms.
CBC should be ordered to detect eosinophilia in all patients except those taking corticosteroids, which
reduce the eosinophil count.
An eosinophil differential of 5 to 15% of total WBCs suggests atopy but is
nonspecific; 16 to 40% may reflect atopy or other conditions (eg, drug hypersensitivity, cancer,
autoimmune disorders, parasitic infection); a differential of 50 to 90% almost never occurs in atopic
disorders and is more characteristic of hypereosinophilic syndrome or visceral larva migrans. Total WBC
is usually normal.
Conjunctival or nasal secretions or sputum can be examined for leukocytes; finding any eosinophils
indicates that T
H
2-mediated allergic inflammation is likely.
Serum IgE levels are elevated in atopic disorders but are of little help in diagnosis because they may also
be elevated in parasitic infections, infectious mononucleosis, autoimmune disorders, drug reactions,
immunodeficiency disorders (
hyper-IgE syndrome
—see p.
—and
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
—, and in some forms of multiple myeloma. IgE levels are probably most helpful for following response
to therapy in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (.
Specific tests:
Skin testing uses standardized concentrations of antigen introduced directly into skin and
is indicated when a detailed history and physical examination do not identify the cause and triggers for
symptoms. Skin testing has higher positive predictive values for diagnosing allergic rhinosinusitis and
conjunctivitis than for diagnosing allergic asthma or food allergy; negative predictive value for food allergy
is high. The most commonly used antigens are pollens (tree, grass, weed), molds, house dust mites,
animal danders and sera, insect venom, foods, and
β
-lactam antibiotics. Choice of antigens to include is
based on patient history and geographic prevalence.
Two skin test techniques can be used
• Percutaneous (prick)
• Intradermal
The prick test can detect most allergies. The intradermal test is more sensitive but less specific; it can be
used to evaluate sensitivity to allergens with negative or equivocal prick test results.
For the
prick test
, a drop of antigen extract is placed on the skin, which is then pricked or punctured
through the extract by tenting up the skin with the tip of a 27-gauge needle held at a 20° angle or with a
commercially available prick device.
For the
intradermal test
, just enough extract to produce a 1- or 2-mm bleb (typically 0.02 mL) is injected
intradermally with a 0.5- or 1-mL syringe and a 27-gauge short-bevel needle.
Prick and intradermal skin testing should include the diluent alone as a negative control and histamine (10
mg/mL for prick tests, 0.01 mL of a 1:1000 solution for intradermal tests) as a positive control. For
patients who have had a recent (< 1 yr) generalized reaction to the test antigen, testing begins with the
standard reagent diluted 100-fold, then 10-fold, and then the standard concentration. A test is considered
positive if a wheal and flare reaction occurs and wheal diameter is 3 to 5 mm greater than that of the
===PAGE:1259===
negative control after 15 to 20 min. False positives occur in dermatographism (a wheal and flare reaction
provoked by stroking or scraping the skin). False negatives occur when allergen extracts have been
stored incorrectly or are outdated. Certain drugs can also interfere with results and should be stopped a
few days to a week before testing. These drugs include OTC and prescription antihistamines, tricyclic
antidepressants, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Patients taking
β
-blockers should not be tested.
Radioallergosorbent testing (RAST)
detects the presence of allergen-specific serum IgE and is
indicated when skin testing is contraindicated because of generalized dermatitis, dermatographism,
history of anaphylaxis to the allergen, or need to continue antihistamines. A known allergen in the form of
an insoluble polymer-allergen conjugate is mixed with the serum to be tested and with
I-labeled antiIgE antibody. Any allergen-specific IgE in the serum binds the conjugate and can be quantified by
measuring the
I-labeled antibody.
Provocative testing
involves direct exposure of the mucosae to allergen and is indicated for patients
who must document their reaction (eg, for occupational or disability claims) and sometimes for diagnosis
of food allergy.
Ophthalmic testing
has no advantage over skin testing and is rarely used.
Nasal and bronchial challenge
are primarily research tools, but bronchial challenge is sometimes used
when the clinical significance of a positive skin test is unclear or when no antigen extracts are available
(eg, for occupation-related asthma).
Treatment
• Removal or avoidance of allergic triggers
• Antihistamines
• Mast cell stabilizers
• Anti-inflammatory corticosteroids and leukotriene inhibitors
• Immunotherapy (desensitization)
Environmental control:
Removal or avoidance of allergic triggers is the primary treatment
for allergy, as
well as the primary preventive strategy (see Prevention .
Antihistamines:
Antihistamines block receptors; they do not affect histamine production or metabolism.
H
blockers are a mainstay of treatment for allergic disorders. H
blockers are used primarily for gastric
acid suppression and have limited usefulness for allergic reactions; they may be indicated for certain
atopic disorders, especially chronic urticaria.
Oral H
blockers relieve symptoms in various atopic and allergic disorders (eg, seasonal hay fever,
allergic rhinitis, conjunctivitis, urticaria, other dermatoses, minor reactions to blood transfusion
incompatibilities and to x-ray radiopaque dyes); they are less effective for allergic bronchoconstriction and
vasodilation. Onset of action is usually 15 to 30 min, with peak effects in 1 h; duration of action is usually
3 to 6 h.
Oral H
blockers are classified as sedating or nonsedating (better thought of as less sedating). Sedating
antihistamines are widely available without prescription. All have significant sedative and anticholinergic
properties; they pose particular problems for the elderly and for patients with glaucoma, benign prostatic
hyperplasia, constipation, or dementia. Nonsedating (nonanticholinergic) antihistamines are preferred
except when sedative effects may be therapeutic (eg, for nighttime relief of allergy, for short-term
treatment of insomnia in adults or nausea in younger patients). Anticholinergic effects may also partially
justify use of sedating antihistamines to relieve rhinorrhea in URIs.
===PAGE:1260===
Antihistamine solutions may be intranasal (azelastine to treat rhinitis) or ocular (azelastine, emedastine,
ketotifen, levocabastine, or olopatadine to treat conjunctivitis). Topical diphenhydramine is available but
should not be used; its efficacy is unproved, drug sensitization (ie, allergy) may occur, and anticholinergic
toxicity can develop in young children who are simultaneously taking oral H
blockers.
Mast cell stabilizers:
These drugs (eg, cromolyn) block the release of mediators from mast cells; they
are used when other drugs (eg, antihistamines, topical corticosteroids) are ineffective or not well
tolerated. Ocular forms (eg, lodoxamide, olopatadine, pemirolast) are also available.
Anti-inflammatory drugs:
Corticosteroids can be given intranasally (see
Table 127-3
) or orally. Oral corticosteroids are indicated for systemic allergic disorders that are severe but
self-limited (eg, seasonal asthma flares, severe widespread contact dermatitis) and for disorders
refractory to other measures. NSAIDs are typically not useful, with the exception of topical ketorolac for
allergic conjunctivitis.
Leukotriene modifiers are indicated for treatment of mild persistent asthma ( and seasonal
allergic rhinitis.
Anti-IgE antibody (omalizumab) is indicated for moderately persistent or severe asthma refractory to
standard treatment (.
Immunotherapy:
Exposure to allergen in gradually increasing doses (hyposensitization or
desensitization) via injection or in high doses sublingually can induce tolerance
[Table 127-3.
Inhaled Nasal Corticosteroids and Mast Cell Stabilizers]
and is indicated when allergen exposure cannot be avoided and drug treatment is inadequate.
Mechanism is unknown but may involve induction of IgG antibodies, which compete with IgE for allergen
or block IgE from binding with mast cell IgE receptors; induction of interferonγ
, IL-12, and cytokines
secreted by TH
cells; or induction of regulatory T cells.
For full effect, injections must be given monthly. Dose typically starts at 0.1 to 1.0 biologically active units
(BAU), depending on initial sensitivity, and is increased weekly or biweekly by ≤ 2 times with each
injection until a maximum tolerated concentration is reached;
patients should be observed for about 30
min postinjection during dose escalation because anaphylaxis may occur after injection
. Maximum
dose should be given q 4 to 6 wk year-round; year-round treatment is better than preseasonal or
coseasonal treatment even for seasonal allergies. Allergens used are those that typically cannot be
avoided: pollens, house dust mites, molds, and venom of stinging insects. Insect venoms are
standardized by weight; a typical starting dose is 0.01
μ
g, and usual maintenance dose is 100 to 200
μ
g.
Animal dander desensitization is ordinarily limited to patients who cannot avoid exposure (eg,
veterinarians, laboratory workers), but there is little evidence that it is useful. Food desensitization is not
indicated. Desensitization for penicillin and certain other antibiotics and for foreign (xenogeneic) serum
can be done (.
Adverse effects are most commonly related to overdose, occasionally via an inadvertent IM or IV injection,
and range from mild cough or sneezing to generalized urticaria, severe asthma, anaphylactic shock, and,
rarely, death. They can be prevented by the following:
• Increasing the dose in small increments
• Repeating or decreasing the dose if local reaction to the previous injection is large (≥ 2.5 cm in
diameter)
• Reducing the dose when a fresh extract is used
Reducing the dose of pollen extract during pollen season is recommended. Epinephrine, O
, and
resuscitation equipment should be immediately available for prompt treatment of anaphylaxis.
===PAGE:1261===
Prevention
Allergic triggers should be removed or avoided. Strategies include the following:
• Using synthetic fiber pillows and impermeable mattress covers
• Frequently washing bed sheets, pillowcases, and blankets in hot water
• Removing upholstered furniture, soft toys, carpets, and pets
• House cleaning and extermination to eliminate cockroach exposure
• Using dehumidifiers in basements and other poorly aerated, damp rooms
• Treating homes with heat-steam
• Using high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) vacuums and filters
• Avoiding food triggers
• Limiting pets to certain rooms
• Frequently cleaning cloth furniture and carpets
Adjunctive nonallergenic triggers (eg, cigarette smoke, strong odors, irritating fumes, air pollution, cold
temperatures, high humidity) should also be avoided or controlled when possible.
Allergic Rhinitis
Allergic rhinitis is seasonal or perennial itching, sneezing, rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, and
sometimes conjunctivitis, caused by exposure to pollens or other allergens. Diagnosis is by
history and skin testing. Treatment is with a combination of antihistamines, decongestants,
nasal corticosteroids, and, for severe, refractory cases, desensitization.
Allergic rhinitis may occur seasonally (hay fever) or throughout the year (perennial rhinitis). At least 25%
of perennial rhinitis is nonallergic.
Seasonal rhinitis is caused by
•
Spring:
Tree pollens (eg, oak, elm, maple, alder, birch, juniper, olive)
•
Summer:
Grass pollens (eg, Bermuda, timothy, sweet vernal, orchard, Johnson) and weed pollens (eg,
Russian thistle, English plantain)
•
Fall:
Other weed pollens (eg, ragweed)
Causes also differ by region, and seasonal rhinitis is occasionally caused by airborne fungal spores.
Perennial rhinitis is caused by year-round exposure to indoor inhaled allergens (eg, dust mites,
cockroaches, animal dander, mold) or by strong reactivity to plant pollens in sequential seasons.
Allergic rhinitis and asthma frequently coexist; whether rhinitis and asthma result from the same allergic
process (one-airway hypothesis) or rhinitis is a discrete asthma trigger is unclear.
Nonallergic forms of perennial rhinitis include infectious, vasomotor, atrophic, hormonal, drug-induced,
and gustatory rhinitis (.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1262===
Patients have itching (in the nose, eyes, or mouth), sneezing, rhinorrhea, and nasal and sinus
obstruction. Sinus obstruction may cause frontal headaches; sinusitis is a frequent complication.
Coughing and wheezing may also occur, especially if asthma is also present.
The most prominent feature of perennial rhinitis is chronic nasal obstruction, which, in children, can lead
to chronic otitis media; symptoms vary in severity throughout the year. Itching is less prominent than in
seasonal rhinitis.
Signs include edematous, bluish-red nasal turbinates, and, in some cases of seasonal rhinitis,
conjunctival injection and eyelid edema.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes skin testing, RAST, or both
Allergic rhinitis can almost always be diagnosed based on history alone. Diagnostic testing is not routinely
needed unless patients do not improve when treated empirically; for such patients, skin tests are done to
identify a reaction to pollens (seasonal) or to dust mite, cockroach, animal dander, mold, or other antigens
(perennial), which can be used to guide additional treatment. Occasionally, skin test results are
ambivalent, or testing cannot be done (eg, because patients are taking drugs that interfere with results);
then, RAST is done. Eosinophilia detected on nasal smear plus negative skin tests suggests aspirin
sensitivity or nonallergic rhinitis with eosinophilia (NARES).
Diagnosis of infectious, vasomotor, atrophic, hormonal, drug-induced, and gustatory rhinitis is usually
based on history or therapeutic trials.
Treatment
• Removal or avoidance of allergens for perennial rhinitis
• Antihistamines, decongestants, nasal corticosteroids, or a combination
• Sometimes immunotherapy for seasonal rhinitis
• Desensitization for severe, refractory rhinitis
Treatment of seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis is generally the same, although attempts at
environmental control (eg, eliminating dust mites and cockroaches) are recommended for perennial
rhinitis.
The most effective first-line drug treatments are
• Oral antihistamines plus oral decongestants
• Nasal corticosteroids with or without oral antihistamines (see
Table 127-3
)
Less effective alternatives include nasal mast cell stabilizers (eg, cromolyn) given bid to qid, the nasal H
blocker azelastine 2 puffs once/day, and nasal ipratropium 0.03% 2 puffs q 4 to 6 h, which relieves
rhinorrhea. Intranasal saline, often forgotten, helps mobilize thick nasal secretions and hydrate nasal
mucous membranes.
Immunotherapy may be more effective for seasonal than for allergic perennial rhinitis; it is indicated when
symptoms are severe, allergen cannot be avoided, and drug treatment is inadequate.
Desensitization may be needed for severe, refractory rhinitis. First attempts at desensitization should
===PAGE:1263===
begin soon after the pollen season ends to prepare for the next season; adverse reactions increase when
desensitization is started during the pollen season because the person's allergic immunity is already
maximally stimulated.
Montelukast relieves allergic rhinitis symptoms, but its role relative to other treatments is uncertain. AntiIgE antibody is under study for treatment of allergic rhinitis but will probably have a limited role because
less expensive, effective alternatives are available.
Treatment of NARES is nasal corticosteroids. Treatment of aspirin sensitivity is aspirin avoidance, with
desensitization and leukotriene blockers as needed. Nasal polyps may respond to nasal corticosteroids.
Food Allergy
Food allergy is an exaggerated immune response to dietary proteins.
Food allergy should be distinguished from nonimmune reactions to food (eg, lactose intolerance, irritable
bowel syndrome, infectious gastroenteritis) and reactions to additives (eg, monosodium glutamate,
metabisulfite, tartrazine) or food contaminants (eg, latex dust in food handled by workers wearing latex
gloves), which cause most food reactions. Prevalence of true food allergy ranges from < 1 to 3% and
varies by geography and method of ascertainment; patients tend to confuse intolerance with allergy.
Etiology
Almost any food or food additive can cause an allergic reaction, but the most common triggers include
•
Infants and young children:
Milk, soy, eggs, peanuts, and wheat
•
Older children and adults:
Nuts and seafood
Cross-reactivity between food and nonfood allergens exists, and sensitization may occur nonenterally. For
example, patients with oral allergies (typically, pruritus, erythema, and edema of the mouth when fruits
and vegetables are eaten) may have been sensitized by pollen exposure; children with peanut allergy
may have been sensitized by topical creams containing peanut oil used to treat rashes. Many patients
who are allergic to latex are also allergic to bananas, kiwis, avocadoes, or a combination.
In general, food allergy is mediated by IgE, T cells, or both. IgE-mediated allergy (eg, urticaria, asthma,
anaphylaxis) is acute in onset, usually develops during infancy, and occurs most often in people with a
strong family history of atopy. T cell-mediated allergy (eg, dietary protein gastroenteropathies, celiac
disease) manifests gradually and is chronic. Allergies mediated by both IgE and T cells (eg, atopic
dermatitis, eosinophilic gastroenteropathy) tend to be delayed in onset or chronic.
Eosinophilic gastroenteropathy:
This unusual disorder causes pain, cramps, and diarrhea with blood
eosinophilia, eosinophilic infiltrates in the gut, protein-losing enteropathy, and a history of atopic
disorders. Eosinophilic esophagitis sometimes accompanies eosinophilic gastroenteropathy. Initially, it
may cause dysphagia and dysmotility or, in children, feeding intolerance and abdominal pain.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary by allergen, mechanism, and patient age. The most common manifestation in
infants is atopic dermatitis alone or with GI symptoms (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea). Children usually
outgrow these manifestations and react increasingly to inhaled allergens, with symptoms of asthma and
rhinitis; this progression is called atopic march. By age 10 yr, patients rarely have respiratory symptoms
after the allergenic food is eaten, even though skin tests remain positive. If atopic dermatitis persists or
appears in older children or adults, its activity seems largely independent of IgE-mediated allergy, even
though atopic patients with extensive dermatitis have much higher serum IgE levels than those who are
free of dermatitis.
When food allergy persists in older children and adults, reactions tend to be more severe (eg, explosive
===PAGE:1264===
urticaria, angioedema, even anaphylaxis). In a few patients, food (especially wheat and celery) triggers
anaphylaxis only if they exercise soon afterward; mechanism is unknown. A few patients have foodinduced or aggravated migraine, confirmed by blinded oral challenge. Occasionally, cheilitis, aphthae,
pylorospasm, spastic constipation, pruritus ani, and perianal eczema are attributed to food allergy.
Diagnosis
• Skin testing or RAST
• Trial elimination diet (alone or after skin testing or RAST)
Severe food allergy is usually obvious in adults. When it is not and when it occurs in children (usually),
diagnosis may be difficult, and the disorder must be differentiated from functional GI problems.
If a food reaction is suspected, the relationship of symptoms to foods is assessed by skin testing or IgEspecific RAST. A positive test does not confirm a clinically relevant allergy, but a negative test excludes it.
If a skin test is positive, the tested food is eliminated from the diet; if symptoms are relieved, the patient is
reexposed to the food (preferably in a double-blind test) to see whether symptoms recur.
Alternatives to skin testing include eliminating foods the patient suspects of causing symptoms and
prescribing a diet that consists of relatively nonallergenic foods and that eliminates common food
allergens (see
Table 127-4
). No foods or fluids may be consumed other than those specified. Pure products must always
be used. Many commercially prepared products and meals contain an undesired food in large amounts
(eg, commercial rye bread contains wheat flour) or in traces as flavoring or thickeners, and determining
whether an undesired food is present may be difficult.
If no improvement occurs after 1 wk, another diet should be tried. If symptoms are relieved, one new food
is added and eaten in large amounts for > 24 h or until symptoms recur. Alternatively, small amounts of
the food to be tested are eaten in the clinician's presence, and the patient's reactions observed.
Aggravation or recrudescence of symptoms after addition of a new food is the best evidence of allergy.
Treatment
• Food elimination diet
• Sometimes oral cromolyn
• Sometimes corticosteroids for eosinophilic enteropathy
[Table 127-4.
Allowable Foods in Elimination Diets*]
Treatment consists of eliminating the food that triggers the allergic reaction. Thus, diagnosis and
treatment overlap. When assessing an elimination diet's effect, clinicians must consider that food
sensitivities may disappear spontaneously.
Oral desensitization (by first eliminating the allergenic food for a time, then giving small amounts and
increasing them daily) is not effective nor is use of sublingual drops of food extracts. Antihistamines are of
little value except in acute general reactions with urticaria and angioedema. Oral cromolyn has been used
with apparent success. Prolonged corticosteroid treatment is helpful for symptomatic eosinophilic
enteropathy.
Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is an acute, life-threatening, IgE-mediated allergic reaction that occurs in
previously sensitized people when they are reexposed to the sensitizing antigen. Symptoms
include stridor, dyspnea, wheezing, and hypotension. Diagnosis is clinical. Bronchospasm and
upper airway edema are treated with inhaled or injected
β
-agonists and sometimes
===PAGE:1265===
endotracheal intubation. Hypotension requires IV fluids and vasopressors.
Etiology
Anaphylaxis is typically triggered by
• Drugs (eg,
β
-lactam antibiotics, insulin, streptokinase, allergen extracts)
• Foods (eg, nuts, eggs, seafood)
• Proteins (eg, tetanus antitoxin, blood transfusions)
• Animal venoms
• Latex
Peanut and latex allergens may be airborne. History of atopy does not increase risk of anaphylaxis but
increases risk of death when anaphylaxis occurs.
Pathophysiology
Interaction of antigen with IgE on basophils and mast cells triggers release of histamine, leukotrienes, and
other mediators that cause diffuse smooth muscle contraction (bronchoconstriction, vomiting, diarrhea)
and vasodilation with plasma leakage.
Anaphylactoid reactions:
These reactions are clinically indistinguishable from anaphylaxis but do not
involve IgE and do not require prior sensitization. They occur via direct stimulation of mast cells or via
immune complexes that activate complement. The most common
triggers are iodinated radiographic
radiopaque dye, aspirin, other NSAIDs, opioids, blood transfusions, Ig, and exercise.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms typically involve the skin, upper or lower airways, cardiovascular system, or GI tract. One or
more areas may be affected, and symptoms do not necessarily progress, although each patient typically
manifests the same reaction to subsequent exposure.
Symptoms range from mild to severe and include flushing, pruritus, sneezing, rhinorrhea, nausea,
abdominal cramps, diarrhea, sense of choking or dyspnea, palpitations, and dizziness.
Signs include hypotension, tachycardia, urticaria, angioedema, wheezing, cyanosis, and syncope. Shock
can develop within minutes, and patients may experience seizures, become unresponsive, and die.
Cardiovascular collapse can occur without respiratory or other symptoms.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical. Risk of rapid progression to shock leaves no time for testing, although mild equivocal
cases can be confirmed by measuring 24-h urinary levels of
Nmethylhistamine or serum levels of
tryptase.
Treatment
• Epinephrine given immediately
• Sometimes intubation
• IV fluids and vasopressors for hypotension
• Antihistamines
===PAGE:1266===
• Inhaled
β
-agonists for bronchoconstriction
Epinephrine is the cornerstone of treatment and should be given immediately. It can be given sc or IM
(usual dose is 0.3 to 0.5 mL of a 1:1000 solution in adults or 0.01 mL/kg in children, repeated every 10 to
30 min); maximal absorption occurs when the drug is given IM in the lateral thigh. Patients with
cardiovascular collapse or severe airway obstruction may be given epinephrine IV in a single dose (3 to 5
mL of a 1:10,000 solution over 5 min) or by continuous drip (1 mg in 250 mL 5% D/W for a concentration
of 4
μ
g/mL, starting at 1
μ
g/min up to 4
μ
g/min [15 to 60 mL/h]). Epinephrine may also be given by
sublingual injection (0.5 mL of 1:1000 solution) or through an endotracheal tube (3 to 5 mL of a 1:10,000
solution diluted to 10 mL with saline). A 2nd injection of epinephrine sc may be needed. Glucagon 1-mg
bolus followed by 1-mg/h infusion should be used in patients taking oral
β
-blockers, which attenuate the
effect of epinephrine.
Patients who have stridor and wheezing unresponsive to epinephrine should be given O
and be
intubated. Early intubation is recommended because waiting for a response to epinephrine may allow
upper airway edema to progress sufficiently to prevent endotracheal intubation and require
cricothyrotomy.
Hypotension can usually be treated with 1 to 2 L (20 to 40 mL/kg in children) of isotonic IV fluids (eg,
0.9% saline). Hypotension refractory to fluids and IV epinephrine may require vasopressors (eg,
dopamine 5
μ
g/kg/min).
Antihistamines—both H
blockers (eg, diphenhydramine 50 to 100 mg IV) and H
blockers (eg, cimetidine
300 mg IV)—should be given q 6 h until symptoms resolve. Inhaled
β
-agonists are useful for managing
bronchoconstriction; albuterol 5 to 10 mg by continuous nebulization can be given.
Corticosteroids have no proven role but may help prevent late-phase reaction in 4 to 8 h;
methylprednisolone 125 mg IV initially is adequate.
Prevention
Primary prevention is avoidance of known triggers. Desensitization is used for allergen triggers that
cannot reliably be avoided (eg, insect stings). Patients with past reactions to radiopaque dye should not
be reexposed; when exposure is absolutely necessary, patients are given 3 doses of prednisone 50 mg
po q 6 h, starting 18 h before the procedure, and diphenhydramine 50 mg po 1 h before the procedure;
however, no evidence supports the efficacy of this approach (see also p.
).
Patients with an anaphylactic reaction to insect stings, foods, or other known substances should wear an
alert bracelet and carry a prefilled epinephrine syringe (containing 0.3 mg for adults and 0.15 mg for
children) for prompt self-treatment after exposure.
Autoimmune Disorders
In autoimmune disorders, the immune system produces antibodies to an endogenous antigen. It may
involve the following hypersensitivity reactions:
•
Type II:
Antibody-coated cells, like any similarly coated foreign particle, activate the complement system
(, resulting in tissue injury.
•
Type III:
The mechanism of injury involves deposition of antibody-antigen complexes.
•
Type IV:
Injury is T-cell-mediated.
For specific autoimmune disorders, see elsewhere in THE MANUAL and also
Table 127-1
.
Etiology
===PAGE:1267===
Several mechanisms may account for the body's attack on itself.
Autoantigens may become immunogenic because they are altered chemically, physically, or biologically.
Certain chemicals can couple with body proteins, making them immunogenic (as in contact dermatitis).
Drugs can produce several autoimmune reactions by binding covalently to serum or tissue proteins (see
below). Photosensitivity exemplifies physically induced autoimmunity: Ultraviolet light alters skin protein,
to which the patient becomes allergic. In animal models, persistent infection with an RNA virus that
combines with host tissues alters autoantigens biologically, resulting in an autoimmune disorder
resembling SLE.
Antibodies produced in response to a foreign antigen may cross-react with normal autoantigens (eg,
cross-reaction between streptococcal M protein and human heart muscle).
Normally, potentially pathologic autoimmune reactions are avoided because of the immunologic tolerance
mechanisms of clonal deletion and clonal anergy. Any autoreactive lymphocytes not controlled by these
mechanisms are usually restrained by Foxp3+ regulatory T cells. A regulatory T-cell defect may
accompany any of these mechanisms for autoimmunity. Anti-idiotype antibodies (antibodies to the
antigen-combining site of other antibodies) may interfere with regulation of antibody activity.
Genetic factors play a role. Relatives of patients with autoimmune disorders often have the same type of
autoantibodies, and incidence of autoimmune disorders is higher in identical than in fraternal twins. Most
autoimmune disorders have a polygenic etiology, and allelic variants within the HLA gene locus nearly
always contribute. Women are affected more often than men. In genetically predisposed people,
environmental factors may provoke disease (eg, certain drugs can trigger hemolytic anemia in patients
with G6PD deficiency).
Drug Hypersensitivity
Drug hypersensitivity is an immune-mediated reaction to a drug. Symptoms range from mild to
severe and include skin rash, anaphylaxis, and serum sickness. Diagnosis is clinical; skin
testing is occasionally useful. Treatment is drug discontinuation, antihistamines (for symptoms),
and sometimes desensitization.
Drug hypersensitivity must be distinguished from toxic and adverse effects that may be expected from the
drug and from problems due to drug interactions (.
Pathophysiology
Some protein and large polypeptide drugs (eg, insulin, therapeutic antibodies) can directly stimulate
antibody production. However, most drugs act as haptens, binding covalently to serum or cell-bound
proteins, including peptides embedded in major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. The binding
makes the protein immunogenic, stimulating antidrug antibody production, T-cell responses against the
drug, or both. Haptens may also bind directly to the MHC II molecule, directly activating T cells. When
metabolized, prohaptens become haptens; eg, penicillin itself is not antigenic, but its main degradation
product, benzylpenicilloic acid, can combine with tissue proteins to form benzylpenicilloyl (BPO), a major
antigenic determinant. Some drugs bind and stimulate T-cell receptors (TCR) directly; the clinical
significance of nonhapten TCR binding is being determined.
How primary sensitization occurs and how the immune system is initially involved is unclear, but once a
drug stimulates an immune response, cross-reactions within and between drug classes can occur. For
example, penicillin-sensitive patients are highly likely to react to semisynthetic penicillins (eg, amoxicillin,
carbenicillin, ticarcillin), and about 10% react to cephalosporins, which have a similar
β
-lactam structure.
However, some apparent cross-reactions (eg, between sulfonamide antibiotics and nonantibiotics) are
due to a predisposition to allergic reactions rather than to specific immune cross-reactivity. Also, not every
apparent reaction is allergic; for example, amoxicillin causes a rash that is not immune-mediated and does
not preclude future use of the drug.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1268===
Symptoms and signs vary by patient and drug, and a single drug may cause different reactions in different
patients. The most serious is anaphylaxis; exanthema (eg, morbilliform eruption), urticaria, and fever are
common. Fixed drug reactions are uncommon.
Some distinct clinical syndromes exist.
•
Serum sickness:
This reaction typically occurs 7 to 10 days after exposure and causes fever,
arthralgias, and rash. Mechanism involves drug-antibody complexes and complement activation. Some
patients have frank arthritis, edema, or GI symptoms.
Symptoms are self-limited, lasting 1 to 2 wk.
β
-
Lactam and sulfonamide antibiotics, iron-dextran, and carbamazepine are most commonly implicated.
•
Hemolytic anemia:
This disorder may develop when an antibody-drug-RBC interaction occurs or when
a drug (eg, methyldopa) alters the RBC membrane, uncovering an antigen that induces autoantibody
production.
•
Pulmonary effects:
Some drugs induce respiratory symptoms, deterioration in pulmonary function, and
other pulmonary changes (.
•
Renal effects:
Tubulointerstitial nephritis is the most common allergic renal reaction (;
methicillin, antimicrobials, and cimetidine are commonly implicated.
•
Other autoimmune phenomena:
Hydralazine and procainamide can cause an SLE-like syndrome.
The syndrome is relatively benign, sparing the kidneys and CNS; the antinuclear antibody test is
positive. Penicillamine can cause SLE and other autoimmune disorders (eg, myasthenia gravis).
Diagnosis
• Patient's report of a reaction soon after taking a drug
• Skin testing
• Sometimes drug provocation testing
• Sometimes direct and indirect antiglobulin assays
Drug hypersensitivity is suggested when a reaction occurs within minutes to hours after drug
administration. However, many patients report a past reaction of uncertain nature. In such cases, if there
is no equivalent substitute (eg, when penicillin is needed to treat syphilis), testing should be considered.
Skin testing:
Tests for immediate-type (IgE-mediated) hypersensitivity help identify reactions to
β
-lactam
antibiotics, foreign (xenogeneic) serum, and some vaccines and polypeptide hormones. However,
typically, only 10 to 20% of patients who report a penicillin allergy have a positive reaction on skin tests.
Also, for most drugs (including cephalosporins), skin tests are unreliable and, because they detect only
IgE-mediated reactions, do not predict the occurrence of morbilliform eruptions, hemolytic anemia, or
nephritis.
Penicillin skin testing is needed if patients with a history of an immediate hypersensitivity reaction must
take a penicillin. BPO-polylysine conjugate and penicillin G are used with histamine and saline as
controls. The prick test ( is used first. If patients have a history of a severe explosive reaction,
reagents should be diluted 100-fold for initial testing. If prick tests are negative, intradermal testing may
follow. If skin tests are positive, treating patients with penicillin may induce an anaphylactic reaction. If
tests are negative, a serious reaction is less likely but not excluded. Although the penicillin skin test has
not induced de novo sensitivity in patients, patients should usually be tested only immediately before
essential penicillin therapy is begun.
For xenogeneic serum skin testing, patients who are not atopic and who have not received xenogeneic
(eg, horse) serum previously should first be given a prick test with a 1:10 dilution; if this test is negative,
===PAGE:1269===
0.02 mL of a 1:1000 dilution is injected intradermally. A wheal > 0.5 cm in diameter develops within 15 min
in sensitive patients. All patients who may have received serum previously—whether or not they reacted
—and those with a suspected allergic history should be tested first with a 1:1000 dilution. A negative
result rules out the possibility of anaphylaxis but does not predict incidence of subsequent serum
sickness.
Other testing:
For drug provocation testing, a drug suspected of causing a hypersensitivity reaction is
given in escalating doses to precipitate the reaction. This test is probably safe and effective if done in a
controlled setting.
Tests for hematologic drug reactions include direct and indirect antiglobulin tests (. Tests for other specific drug hypersensitivity (eg, radioallergosorbent testing [RAST], histamine
release, basophil or mast cell degranulation, lymphocyte transformation) are unreliable or experimental.
Prognosis
Hypersensitivity decreases with time. IgE antibodies are present in 90% of patients 1 yr after an allergic
reaction but in only about 20 to 30% after 10 yr. Patients who have anaphylactic reactions are more likely
to retain antibodies to the causative drug longer. People with drug allergies should be taught about
avoiding the drug and should carry identification or an alert bracelet. Charts should always be
appropriately marked.
Treatment
• Drug discontinuation
• Supportive treatment (eg, antihistamines, corticosteroids, epinephrine)
• Sometimes desensitization
Treatment is stopping the implicated drug; most symptoms and signs clear within a few days after the
drug is stopped.
Symptomatic and supportive treatment for acute reactions may include antihistamines for pruritus,
NSAIDs for arthralgias, corticosteroids for severe reactions (eg, exfoliative dermatitis, bronchospasm),
and epinephrine for anaphylaxis. Conditions such as drug fever, a nonpruritic skin rash, or mild organ
system reactions require no treatment (for treatment of specific clinical reactions, see elsewhere in THE
MANUAL).
Desensitization:
Rapid desensitization may be necessary if sensitivity has been established and if
treatment is essential and no alternative exists. If possible, desensitization should be done in
collaboration with an allergist. The procedure should not be attempted in patients who have had StevensJohnson syndrome. Whenever desensitization is used, O
, epinephrine, and resuscitation equipment
must be available for prompt treatment of anaphylaxis.
Desensitization is based on incremental dosing of the antigen every 30 min, beginning with a minute dose
to induce subclinical anaphylaxis before exposure to therapeutic doses. This procedure depends on
constant presence of drug in the serum and so must not be interrupted; desensitization is immediately
followed by full therapeutic doses. Hypersensitivity typically returns 24 to 48 h after treatment is stopped.
Minor reactions (eg, itching, rash) are common during desensitization.
For penicillin, oral or IV regimens can be used; sc or IM regimens are not recommended. If only the
intradermal skin test is positive, 100 units (or
μ
g)/mL IV in a 50-mL bag (5000 units total) should be given
very slowly at first. If no symptoms appear, flow rate can be increased gradually until the bag is empty,
after 20 to 30 min. The procedure is then repeated with concentrations of 1,000 units/mL and 10,000
units/mL, followed by the full therapeutic dose. If any allergic symptoms develop, flow rate should be
slowed, and patients are given appropriate drug treatment (see above). If the prick test for penicillin was
positive or patients have had a severe anaphylactic reaction, the starting dose should be lower.
===PAGE:1270===
Oral penicillin desensitization begins with 100 units (or
μ
g); doses are doubled every 15 min up to
400,000 units (dose 13). Then, the drug is given parenterally, and if symptoms occur, they are relieved
with appropriate anti-anaphylactic drugs.
For allergies to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and vancomycin, regimens similar to those for penicillin
can be used.
If a skin test to xenogeneic serum is positive, risk of anaphylaxis is high. If serum treatment is essential,
desensitization must precede it. Skin tests, using weak concentrations prepared by serial dilution, are
used to determine the appropriate starting dose for desensitization (ie, the concentration that produces a
negative or only a weak reaction). 0.1 mL of this solution is injected sc or slowly IV; the IV route, although
not standard, gives the clinician control over concentration and rate of delivery. If no reaction occurs in 15
min, the dose is doubled every 15 min until 1 mL of undiluted serum is given. This dose is repeated IM,
and if no reaction occurs in another 15 min, the full dose can be given. If a reaction occurs, treatment may
still be possible; the dose is reduced, an antihistamine is given as for acute urticaria, and the dose is then
increased by smaller increments.
Mastocytosis
Mastocytosis is mast cell infiltration of skin or other tissues and organs. Symptoms result
mainly from mediator release and include pruritus, flushing, and dyspepsia due to gastric
hypersecretion. Diagnosis is by skin or bone marrow biopsy or both. Treatment is with
antihistamines and control of any underlying disorder.
Mastocytosis is a group of disorders characterized by proliferation of mast cells and infiltration of the skin,
other organs, or both. Pathology results mainly from release of mast cell mediators, including histamine,
heparin, leukotrienes, and various inflammatory cytokines. Histamine causes many symptoms, including
gastric symptoms, but other mediators also contribute. Significant organ infiltration may cause organ
dysfunction. Mediator release may be triggered by physical touch, exercise, alcohol, NSAIDs, opioids,
insect stings, or foods.
Etiology in many patients involves an activating mutation (D816V) in the gene coding for the stem cell
factor receptor c-kit, present on mast cells.
Classification
Mastocytosis may be cutaneous or systemic.
Cutaneous mastocytosis:
This type typically occurs in children. Most patients present with urticaria
pigmentosa, a local or diffusely distributed salmon or brown maculopapular skin rash caused by multiple
small mast cell collections. Less common are diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis, which is skin infiltration
without discrete lesions, and mastocytoma, which is a large (1 to 5 cm) solitary collection of mast cells.
Systemic mastocytosis:
This type most commonly occurs in adults and is characterized by multifocal
bone marrow lesions; it often involves other organs, most commonly the skin, lymph nodes, liver, spleen,
or GI tract. Systemic mastocytosis is classified as
• Indolent mastocytosis, with no organ dysfunction and a good prognosis
• Mastocytosis associated with other hematologic disorders (eg, myeloproliferative disorders,
myelodysplasia, lymphoma)
• Aggressive mastocytosis, characterized by impaired organ function
• Mast cell leukemia, with > 20% mast cells in bone marrow, no skin lesions, multiorgan failure, and a poor
prognosis
===PAGE:1271===
Symptoms and Signs
Skin involvement is often pruritic. Stroking or rubbing skin lesions causes urticaria and erythema around
the lesion (Darier's sign); this reaction differs from dermatographism, which involves normal skin.
Systemic symptoms can occur with any form. The most common is flushing; the most dramatic is
anaphylactoid reaction with syncope and shock. Other symptoms include epigastric pain due to peptic
ulcer disease, nausea, vomiting, chronic diarrhea, arthralgias, bone pain, and neuropsychiatric changes
(eg, irritability, depression, mood lability). Hepatic and splenic infiltration may cause portal hypertension
with resultant ascites.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Skin lesion biopsy and sometimes bone marrow biopsy
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical presentation. Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of skin lesions and
sometimes of bone marrow. Multifocal, dense infiltrates of mast cells are present.
Tests may be done to rule out disorders that cause similar symptoms (anaphylaxis, pheochromocytoma,
carcinoid syndrome, and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). Serum gastrin level is useful to rule out ZollingerEllison syndrome in patients with ulcer symptoms; urinary excretion of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) is measured to rule out carcinoid in patients with flushing.
If the diagnosis is uncertain, levels of mast cell mediators and their metabolites (eg, urinary
N
-
methylhistamine and
N
-methylimidazole acetic acid) may be measured in plasma and urine; elevated
levels support the diagnosis of mastocytosis. The level of tryptase (a marker of mast cell degranulation)
is elevated in systemic mastocytosis but is typically normal in cutaneous mastocytosis. A bone scan, GI
workup, and identification of the D816V
c-kit
mutation can also be helpful in cases where the diagnosis
requires confirmation.
Treatment
• For cutaneous mastocytosis, H
blockers and possibly psoralen plus ultraviolet light or topical
corticosteroids
• For systemic mastocytosis, H
and H
blockers and sometimes cromolyn
• For aggressive forms, interferon alfa-2b, corticosteroids, or splenectomy
Cutaneous mastocytosis:
H
blockers are effective for symptoms. Children with cutaneous forms
require no additional treatment because most cases resolve spontaneously. Adults with cutaneous forms
may be treated with psoralen plus ultraviolet light or with topical corticosteroids once/day or bid.
Mastocytoma usually involutes spontaneously and requires no treatment. Cutaneous forms rarely
progress to systemic disease in children but may do so in adults.
Systemic mastocytosis:
All patients should be treated with H
and H
blockers. Aspirin controls
flushing but may enhance leukotriene production, thereby contributing to mast cell-related symptoms; it
should not be given to children because Reye's syndrome is a risk. Cromolyn 200 mg po qid (100 mg qid
for children 2 to 12 yr; not to exceed 40 mg/kg/day) may help by preventing mast cell degranulation. No
treatment can reduce the number of tissue mast cells. Ketotifen 2 to 4 mg po bid is inconsistently
effective.
In patients with an aggressive form, interferon alfa-2b 4 million units sc once/wk to a maximum of 3 million
units/day induces regression of bone lesions. Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 40 to 60 mg po once/day
for 2 to 3 wk) may be required. Splenectomy may improve survival.
===PAGE:1272===
Cytotoxic drugs (eg, daunomycin, etoposide, 6-mercaptopurine) may be indicated for treatment of mast
cell leukemia, but efficacy is unproved. Imatinib (a tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor) may be useful in
some patients but is ineffective in patients with the D816V
c-kit
mutation. Midostaurin (a 2nd-generation
tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor) is under study in such patients.
===PAGE:1273===
Chapter 128. Transplantation
Introduction
Transplants may be the patient's own tissue (autografts; eg, bone, bone marrow, and skin grafts),
genetically identical (syngeneic) donor tissue (isografts), genetically dissimilar donor tissue (allografts, or
homografts), or, rarely, grafts from a different species (xenografts, or heterografts). Transplanted tissue
may be cells (as for hematopoietic stem cell [HSC], lymphocyte, and pancreatic islet cell transplants),
parts or segments of an organ (as for hepatic or pulmonary lobar transplants and skin grafts), or entire
organs (as for heart transplants).
Tissues may be grafted to an anatomically normal site (orthotopic; eg, heart transplants) or abnormal site
(heterotopic; eg, a kidney transplanted into the iliac fossa). Almost always, transplantation is done to
improve patient survival. However, some procedures (eg, hand, larynx, tongue, and facial transplantation)
attempt to improve quality of life but jeopardize quantity of life and thus are controversial.
With rare exceptions, clinical transplantation uses allografts from living related, living unrelated, or
deceased donors. Living donors are often used for kidney and HSC transplants and increasingly for
segmental liver, pancreas, and lung transplants. Use of deceased-donor organs (from heart-beating or
non-heart-beating donors) has helped reduce the disparity between organ demand and supply; however,
demand still far exceeds supply, and the number of patients waiting for organ transplants continues to
grow.
All allograft recipients are at risk of graft rejection; the recipient's immune system recognizes the graft as
foreign and seeks to destroy it. Recipients of grafts containing immune cells are at risk of graft-vs-host
disease. Risk of these complications is minimized by pretransplantation screening and
immunosuppressive therapy during and after transplantation.
Organ distribution:
Allocation depends on disease severity for some organs (liver, heart) and on disease
severity, time on the waiting list, or both for others (kidney, lung, bowel). In the US and Puerto Rico,
organs are allocated first among 12 geographic regions, then among local Organ Procurement
Organizations. If no recipient in the first region is suitable, organs are reallocated to recipients in other
regions.
Pretransplantation Screening
Before the risk and expense of transplantation are undertaken and scarce donor organs are committed,
physicians screen potential recipients for medical and nonmedical factors that may affect the likelihood of
success.
Tissue compatibility:
In pretransplantation screening, recipients and donors are tested for human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) and ABO antigens, and recipients are tested for presensitization to donor
antigens. HLA tissue typing is most important for kidney and the most common types of HSC
transplantation. Heart, liver, pancreas, and lung transplantation typically occurs quickly, often before HLA
tissue typing can be completed, so the role of matching for these organs is less well established.
HLA tissue typing of peripheral blood or lymph node lymphocytes is used to match the most important
known determinants of histocompatibility in the donor and recipient. More than 1250 alleles determine 6
HLA antigens (HLA-A, -B, -C, -DP, -DQ, -DR), so matching is a challenge; eg, in the US, only 2 of 6
antigens on average are matched in kidney donors and recipients. Matching of as many HLA antigens as
possible significantly improves functional survival of grafts from living related kidney and HSC donors;
HLA matching of grafts from unrelated donors also improves survival, although much less so because of
multiple undetected histocompatibility differences. Better immunosuppressive therapy has expanded
eligibility for transplantation; HLA mismatches no longer automatically disqualify patients for
transplantation.
ABO compatibility and HLA compatibility are important for graft survival. ABO mismatches can precipitate
hyperacute rejection of highly vascular grafts (eg, kidney, heart), which have ABO antigens on the
===PAGE:1274===
endothelial surfaces. Presensitization to HLA and ABO antigens results from prior blood transfusions,
transplantations, or pregnancies and can be detected with serology tests or, more commonly, with a
lymphocytotoxic test using the recipient's serum and donor's lymphocytes in the presence of complement.
A positive cross-match indicates that the recipient's serum contains antibodies directed against ABO or
class I HLA antigens in the donor; it is an absolute contraindication to transplantation, except possibly in
infants (up to age 14 mo) who have not yet produced isohemagglutinins. High-dose IV immune globulin
has been used to suppress HLA antibodies and facilitate transplantation, but long-term outcomes are
unknown. A negative cross-match does not guarantee safety; when ABO antigens are compatible but not
identical (eg, donor O and recipient A, B, or
AB), hemolysis is a potential complication due to antibody
production by transplanted (passenger) donor lymphocytes.
Although matching for HLA and ABO antigens generally improves graft survival, nonwhite patients are
disadvantaged because they may have different HLA polymorphisms from white donors, a higher rate of
presensitization to HLA antigens, and a higher incidence of blood types O and B.
Infection:
Donor and recipient exposure to common infectious pathogens and active infections must be
detected before transplantation to minimize risk of transmitting infection from the donor and risk of
worsening or reactivating existing infection in the recipient (due to use of immunosuppressants). This
screening usually includes the history; serologic tests for cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), varicellazoster virus (VZV), hepatitis B and C viruses, HIV, and West
Nile virus (if exposure is suspected); and tuberculin skin testing. Positive findings may require posttransplantation antiviral treatment (eg, for CMV infection or hepatitis B) or contraindicate transplantation
(eg, if HIV with AIDS is detected).
Contraindications to transplantation:
Absolute contraindications to transplantation include active
infection and cancer (except hepatocellular carcinoma confined to the liver and certain neuroendocrine
tumors).
Relative contraindications include age > 65, poor functional or nutritional status (including severe
obesity), HIV infection, and multiorgan insufficiency. Psychologic and social factors also play a role in
success of transplantation. For example, people who abuse drugs or who are psychologically unstable
are less likely to firmly adhere to the necessary lifelong regimen of treatments and follow-up visits.
Eligibility decisions for patients with relative contraindications differ by medical center.
Immunosuppressants are safe and effective for HIV-positive transplant recipients.
Immunosuppression
Immunosuppressants control graft rejection and are primarily responsible for the success of
transplantation. However, they suppress all immune responses and contribute to many posttransplantation complications, including death due to overwhelming infection. Except when HLA-identical
transplants are used, immunosuppressants must usually be continued long after transplantation, but
initially high doses can be reduced a few weeks after the procedure, and low doses can be continued
indefinitely unless rejection occurs.
Corticosteroids:
A high dose is usually given at the time of transplantation, then is reduced gradually to
a maintenance dose, which is given indefinitely. Several months after transplantation, corticosteroids can
be given on alternate days; this regimen helps prevent growth restriction in children. If rejection occurs,
high doses are reinstituted.
Calcineurin inhibitors (CNIs):
These drugs (cyclosporine, tacrolimus) block T-cell transcription
processes required for production of cytokines, thereby selectively inhibiting T-cell proliferation and
activation.
Cyclosporine
is the most commonly used drug in heart and lung transplantation. It can be given alone
but is usually given with other drugs (eg, azathioprine, prednisone), so that lower, less toxic doses can be
used. The initial dose is reduced to a maintenance dose soon after transplantation. The drug is
metabolized by the cytochrome P-450 3A enzyme, and blood levels are affected by many other drugs.
The most serious adverse effect is nephrotoxicity; cyclosporine causes vasoconstriction of afferent
===PAGE:1275===
(preglomerular) arterioles, leading to glomerular apparatus damage, refractory glomerular hypoperfusion,
and, eventually, chronic renal failure. Also, B-cell lymphomas and polyclonal B-cell lymphoproliferation
occur more often in patients receiving high doses of cyclosporine or combinations of cyclosporine and
other immunosuppressants directed at T cells, possibly because of an association with EBV. Other
adverse effects include diabetes, hepatotoxicity, refractory hypertension, increased incidence of other
tumors, and less serious effects (eg, gum hypertrophy, hirsutism). Serum cyclosporine levels do not
correlate with effectiveness or toxicity.
Tacrolimus
is the most commonly used drug in kidney, liver, pancreas, and small-bowel transplantation.
Tacrolimus may be started at the time of transplantation or days after the procedure. Dosing should be
guided by blood levels, which are influenced by the same drug interactions as for cyclosporine.
Tacrolimus may be useful when cyclosporine is ineffective or has intolerable adverse effects. Adverse
effects of tacrolimus are similar to those of cyclosporine except tacrolimus is more prone to induce
diabetes; gum hypertrophy and hirsutism are less common. Lymphoproliferative disorders seem to occur
more often in patients taking tacrolimus, even weeks after transplantation. If they occur, tacrolimus should
be stopped and cyclosporine or another immunosuppressive drug substituted.
Purine metabolism inhibitors:
Examples are azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil.
Azathioprine
, an antimetabolite, is usually started at the time of transplantation. Most patients tolerate it
indefinitely. The most serious adverse effects are bone marrow depression and, rarely, hepatitis.
Azathioprine is often used with low doses of cyclosporine.
Mycophenolate mofetil
(MMF), a prodrug metabolized to mycophenolic acid, reversibly inhibits inosine
monophosphate dehydrogenase, an enzyme in the guanine nucleotide pathway that is rate-limiting in
lymphocyte proliferation. MMF is given with cyclosporine (or tacrolimus) and corticosteroids to patients
with a kidney, heart, or liver transplant. The most common adverse effects are leukopenia, nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea.
Rapamycins:
These drugs (sirolimus, everolimus) block a key regulatory kinase in lymphocytes,
resulting in arrest of the cell cycle and in inhibition of lymphocyte response to cytokine stimulation.
Sirolimus
is typically given with cyclosporine and corticosteroids and may be useful for patients with
renal insufficiency. Adverse effects include hyperlipidemia, impaired wound healing, and bone marrow
depression with leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia.
Everolimus
is typically used to prevent heart transplant rejection; adverse effects are similar to those of
sirolimus.
Immunosuppressive Igs:
Examples are antilymphocyte globulin (ALG) and antithymocyte globulin
(ATG). Both are fractions of animal antisera directed against human cells: lymphocytes (ALG) or thymus
cells (ATG). ALG and ATG suppress cellular immunity while preserving humoral immunity. They are used
with other immunosuppressants to allow those drugs to be used in lower, less toxic doses. Use of ALG or
ATG to control acute episodes of rejection improves graft survival rates; use at the time of transplantation
may decrease rejection incidence and allow CNIs to be started later, thereby reducing toxicity. Use of
highly purified serum fractions has greatly reduced incidence of adverse effects (eg, anaphylaxis, serum
sickness, antigen-antibody-induced glomerulonephritis).
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs):
mAbs directed against T cells provide a higher concentration of anti-Tcell antibodies and fewer irrelevant serum proteins than do ALG and ATG. OKT3 inhibits T-cell receptor
(TCR)-antigen binding, resulting in immunosuppression. OKT3 is used primarily to control episodes of
acute rejection; it may also be used at the time of transplantation to reduce incidence or delay onset of
rejection episodes. However, benefits of prophylactic use must be weighed against adverse effects,
which include severe CMV infection and development of neutralizing antibodies; these effects preclude
using OKT3 for an actual rejection episode. With first use, OKT3 binds to the TCR-CD3 complex,
activating the cell and triggering release of cytokines, which cause a syndrome of fevers, rigors,
myalgias, arthralgias, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Pretreatment with corticosteroids, antipyretics, and
antihistamines can ameliorate these symptoms. The first-dose reaction less commonly includes chest
===PAGE:1276===
pain, dyspnea, and wheezing, possibly due to complement activation. Repeated use is associated with
increased incidence of EBV-induced B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders. Rarely, aseptic meningitis and
hemolytic uremic syndrome occur.
Anti-IL-2 receptor monoclonal antibodies inhibit T-cell proliferation by blocking the effect of IL-2, secreted
by activated T cells. Basiliximab and daclizumab, 2 humanized anti-IL-2 receptor antibodies, are
increasingly being used to treat acute rejection of kidney, liver, and small-bowel transplants; they are also
used as adjunct immunosuppressive therapy at the time of transplantation. The only adverse effect
reported is anaphylaxis. Also, experience with IL-2 receptor antibodies is limited, and an increased risk of
lymphoproliferative disorders cannot be excluded.
Irradiation:
Irradiation of a graft, local recipient tissues, or both can be used to treat kidney transplant
rejection episodes when other treatment (eg, corticosteroids and ATG) is ineffective. Total lymphatic
irradiation is experimental but appears to safely suppress cellular immunity, at first by stimulation of
suppressor T cells and later possibly by clonal deletion of specific antigen-reactive cells.
Future therapies:
Protocols and agents to induce graft antigen-specific tolerance without suppressing
other immune responses are being sought. Two strategies are promising:
• Blockade of T-cell costimulatory pathways using a cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA4)-IgG1 fusion protein
• Induction of chimerism (coexistence of donor and recipient immune cells in which graft tissue is
recognized as self) using nonmyeloablative pretransplantation treatment (eg, with cyclophosphamide,
thymic irradiation, ATG, and cyclosporine) to induce transient T-cell depletion, engraftment of donor
HSCs, and subsequent tolerance of solid organ transplants from the same donor
Post-transplantation Complications
Complications include the following:
• Rejection
• Infection
• Renal insufficiency
• Cancer
Rejection:
Rejection of solid organs may be hyperacute, accelerated, acute, or chronic (late). These
categories overlap somewhat in timing but can be distinguished histopathologically. Symptoms vary by
organ (see
Table 128-1
).
Hyperacute rejection
occurs within 48 h of transplantation and is caused by preexisting complementfixing antibodies to graft antigens (presensitization). It has become rare (1%) as pretransplantation
screening has improved. Hyperacute rejection is characterized by small-vessel thrombosis and graft
infarction. No treatment is effective except graft removal.
Accelerated rejection
occurs 3 to 5 days after transplantation and is caused by preexisting
noncomplement-fixing antibodies to graft antigens. Accelerated rejection is also rare. It is characterized
histopathologically by cellular infiltrate with or without vascular changes. Treatment is with high-dose
pulse corticosteroids or, if vascular changes occur, antilymphocyte preparations. Plasmapheresis, which
may clear circulating antibodies more rapidly, has been used.
Acute rejection
is graft destruction after transplantation and is caused by a T cell-mediated delayed
hypersensitivity reaction to allograft histocompatibility antigens. It accounts for about one half of all
rejection episodes that occur within 10 yr. Acute rejection is characterized by mononuclear cellular
===PAGE:1277===
infiltration, with varying degrees of hemorrhage, edema, and necrosis. Vascular integrity is usually
maintained, although vascular endothelium appears to be a primary target. Acute rejection is often
reversed by intensifying immunosuppressive therapy (eg, with pulse corticosteroids, ALG, or both). After
rejection
[Table 128-1.
Signs of Transplant Rejection by Category]
reversal, severely damaged parts of the graft heal by fibrosis, the remainder of the graft functions
normally, immunosuppressant doses can be reduced to very low levels, and the allograft can survive for
long periods.
Chronic rejection
is graft dysfunction, often without fever, typically occurring months to years after
transplantation but sometimes within weeks. Causes are multiple and include early antibody-mediated
rejection, periprocedural ischemia and reperfusion injury, drug toxicity, infection, and vascular factors (eg,
hypertension, hyperlipidemia). Chronic rejection accounts for most of the other one half of all rejection
episodes. Proliferation of neointima consisting of smooth muscle cells and extracellular matrix
(transplantation atherosclerosis) gradually and eventually occludes vessel lumina, resulting in patchy
ischemia and fibrosis of the graft. Chronic rejection progresses insidiously despite immunosuppressive
therapy; no established treatments exist.
Infection:
Immunosuppressants, secondary immunodeficiencies that accompany organ failure, and
surgery make transplant patients more vulnerable to infections. Rarely, a transplanted organ is the source
of infection (eg, CMV).
The most common sign is fever, often without localizing signs. Fever can also be a symptom of acute
rejection but is usually accompanied by signs of graft dysfunction. If these signs are absent, the approach
is similar to that for other FUO (; timing of symptoms and signs after transplantation helps
narrow the differential diagnosis.
In the first month after transplantation, most infections are caused by the same hospital-acquired bacteria
and fungi that infect other surgical patients (eg,
Pseudomonas
sp causing pneumonia, gram-positive
bacteria causing wound infections). The greatest concern with early infection is that organisms can infect
a graft or its vascular supply at suture sites, causing mycotic aneurysms or dehiscence.
Opportunistic infections occur 1 to 6 mo after transplantation (for treatment, see elsewhere in The
Manual). Infections may be bacterial (eg, listeriosis, nocardiosis), viral (eg, due to CMV, EBV, VZV, or
hepatitis B or C virus), fungal (eg, aspergillosis, cryptococcosis,
Pneumocystis jirovecii
infection), or
parasitic (eg, strongyloidiasis, toxoplasmosis, trypanosomiasis, leishmaniasis).
Risk of infection returns to baseline for about 80% of patients after 6 mo. About 10% develop
complications of early infections, such as viral infection of the graft, metastatic infection (eg, CMV retinitis,
colitis), or virus-induced cancers (eg, hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma, human papillomavirus and
basal cell carcinoma). Others develop chronic rejection, require high doses of immunosuppressants (5 to
10%), and remain at high risk of opportunistic infections indefinitely.
After transplantation, most patients are given antimicrobials to reduce risk of infection. Choice of drug
depends on individual risk and type of transplantation; regimens include trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
80/400 mg po once/day for 4 to 12 mo to prevent
P. jirovecii
infection or to prevent UTIs in kidney
transplant patients. Neutropenic patients are sometimes given quinolone antibiotics (eg, levofloxacin 500
mg po or IV once/day) to prevent infection with gram-negative organisms. Inactivated vaccines can be
safely given post-transplantation; risks due to live-attenuated vaccines must be balanced against their
potential benefits, especially for patients taking low doses of immunosuppressants.
Renal disorders:
GFR decreases 30 to 50% during the first 6 mo after solid organ transplantation in 15
to 20% of patients. They usually also develop hypertension. Incidence is greatest for recipients of smallbowel transplants (21%) and least for recipients of heart-lung transplants (7%). Nephrotoxic and
diabetogenic effects of CNIs are the most important contributor, but periprocedural renal insults,
pretransplantation renal insufficiency, hepatitis C infection, and use of other nephrotoxic drugs also
===PAGE:1278===
contribute. After the initial decrease, GFR typically stabilizes or decreases more slowly; nonetheless,
mortality risk quadruples unless subsequent kidney transplantation is done. Renal insufficiency after
transplantation may be prevented by early weaning from CNIs, but a safe minimum dose has not been
determined.
Cancer:
Long-term immunosuppression increases incidence of virus-induced cancer, especially
squamous and basal cell carcinoma, lymphoproliferative disorders (mainly B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma),
anogenital (including cervical) cancer, and Kaposi's sarcoma. Treatment is similar to that of cancer in
nonimmunosuppressed patients; reduction or interruption of immunosuppression is not usually required
for low-grade tumors but is recommended for more aggressive tumors and lymphomas.
Transfusion of partially HLA-matched cytotoxic T cells is under study as a possible treatment for some
forms of lymphoproliferative disorders.
Other complications:
Immunosuppressants (especially corticosteroids and CNIs) increase
bone
resorption and risk of osteoporosis for patients who are at risk before transplantation (eg, because of
reduced physical activity, tobacco and alcohol use, or a preexisting renal disorder). Although not routine,
use of vitamin D, bisphosphonates, or other antiresorptive drugs after transplantation may play a role in
prevention.
Failure to grow, primarily as a consequence of chronic corticosteroid use, is a concern in children. Growth
failure can be mitigated by tapering corticosteroids to the minimum dose that does not lead to graft
rejection.
Systemic atherosclerosis can result from hyperlipidemia due to use of CNIs and corticosteroids; it typically
occurs in kidney transplant recipients > 15 yr post-transplantation.
Graft vs host disease (GVHD) occurs when donor T cells react against recipient's self-antigens. GVHD
primarily affects hematopoietic stem cell recipients ( but may also affect liver and small-bowel
transplant recipients.
Heart Transplantation
Heart transplantation is an option for patients who have end-stage heart failure, coronary artery disease
(CAD), arrhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or congenital heart disease and who remain at risk of
death and have intolerable symptoms despite optimal use of drugs and medical devices. Transplantation
may also be indicated for patients who cannot be weaned from temporary cardiac-assist devices after MI
or nontransplant cardiac surgery and for patients with cardiac sequelae of a lung disorder requiring lung
transplantation. The only absolute contraindication is pulmonary hypertension; relative contraindications
include organ insufficiency (eg, pulmonary, renal, hepatic) and local or systemic infiltrative disorders (eg,
cardiac sarcoma, amyloidosis).
All donated hearts come from brain-dead donors, who must be < 60 and have normal cardiac and
pulmonary function and no history of CAD or other heart disorders. Donor and recipient must have
compatible ABO blood type and heart size. About 25% of eligible recipients die before a donor organ
becomes available. Left ventricular assist devices and artificial hearts provide interim hemodynamic
support for patients waiting for a transplant. However, if left in place too long, these devices put the
recipient at high risk of sepsis, device failure, and thromboembolism.
Procedure
Donor hearts are preserved by hypothermic storage. They must be transplanted within 4 to 6 h. The
recipient is placed on a bypass pump, and the recipient heart is removed, preserving the posterior right
atrial wall in situ. The donor heart is then transplanted orthotopically with aortic, pulmonary artery, and
pulmonary vein anastomoses; a single anastomosis joins the retained posterior atrial wall to that of the
donor organ.
Immunosuppressive regimens vary but are similar to those for kidney or liver transplantation (eg, anti-IL-2
===PAGE:1279===
receptor monoclonal antibodies, a calcineurin inhibitor, corticosteroids). About 50 to 80% of patients have
at least 1 episode of rejection (average 2 to 3); most patients are asymptomatic, but about 5% develop
left ventricle dysfunction or atrial arrhythmias. Incidence of acute rejection peaks at 1 mo, decreases over
the next 5 mo, and levels off by 1 yr. Risk factors for rejection include younger age, female recipient,
female or black donor, and HLA mismatching. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection may also influence risk.
Because graft damage can be irreversible and catastrophic, surveillance endomyocardial biopsy is
usually done once/yr; degree and distribution of mononuclear cell infiltrate and presence of myocyte
injury in specimens is determined. Differential diagnosis includes perioperative ischemia, CMV infection,
and idiopathic B-cell infiltration (Quilty lesions). Mild rejection (grade 1) without detectable clinical
sequelae requires no treatment; moderate or severe rejection (grades 2 to 4) or mild rejection with clinical
sequelae is treated with corticosteroids and antithymocyte globulin or OKT3 as needed.
The main complication is cardiac allograft vasculopathy, a form of atherosclerosis that diffusely narrows
or obliterates vessel lumina (in 25% of patients). Its cause is probably multifactorial and relates to donor
age, cold and reperfusion ischemia, dyslipidemia, immunosuppressants, chronic rejection, and viral
infection (adenovirus in children, CMV in adults). For early detection, surveillance stress testing or
coronary angiography with or without intravascular ultrasonography is often done at the time of
endomyocardial biopsy. Treatment is aggressive lipid lowering ( and diltiazem; everolimus 1.5
mg po bid may be preventive.
Prognosis
Survival rates at 1 yr are 85%, and annual mortality thereafter is about 4%. Pretransplantation predictors
of 1-yr mortality include need
for preoperative ventilation or left ventricular assist devices, cachexia,
female recipient or donor, and diagnoses other than heart failure or CAD. Post-transplantation predictors
include elevated C-reactive protein and troponin levels.
Cause of death within 1 yr is most often acute rejection and infection; cause after 1 yr is most often
cardiac allograft vasculopathy or a lymphoproliferative disorder. Prognosis of recipients alive at > 1 yr is
excellent; exercise capacity remains below normal but is sufficient for daily activities and may increase
over time with sympathetic reinnervation. More than 95% of patients reach New York Heart Association
class I cardiac status, and > 70% return to full-time employment.
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplantation is a rapidly evolving technique that offers a potential cure
for hematologic cancers (leukemias, lymphomas, myeloma) and other hematologic disorders (eg, primary
immunodeficiency, aplastic anemia, myelodysplasia). HSC transplantation may be autologous or
allogeneic; bone marrow, peripheral blood, or umbilical cord stem cells may be used. Peripheral blood has
largely replaced bone marrow as a source of stem cells, especially in autologous HSC transplantation,
because stem cell harvest is easier and neutrophil and platelet counts recover faster. Umbilical cord HSC
transplantation has been restricted mainly to children because the number of stem cells is low.
There are no contraindications to autologous HSC transplantation. Contraindications to allogeneic HSC
transplantation are relative and include age > 50, previous HSC transplantation, and significant
comorbidities. Allogeneic HSC transplantation is limited mainly by lack of histocompatible donors. An HLAidentical sibling donor is ideal, followed by an HLA-matched sibling donor. Because only one fourth of
patients have such a sibling donor, mismatched related or matched unrelated donors (identified through
international registries) are often used. However, long-term disease-free survival rates may be lower than
those with HLA-identical sibling donors. The technique for umbilical cord HSC transplantation is still being
defined, but HLA-matching is probably unimportant.
Procedure
For bone marrow stem cell harvest, 700 to 1500 mL (maximum 15 mL/kg) of marrow is aspirated from the
donor's posterior iliac crests; local or general anesthesia is used. For peripheral blood harvest, the donor
is treated with recombinant growth factors (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or granulocyte-
===PAGE:1280===
macrophage colony-stimulating factor) to stimulate proliferation and mobilization of stem cells, with
standard phlebotomy 4 to 6 days afterward. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting is used to identify and
separate stem cells from other cells.
Stem cells are then infused over 1 to 2 h through a large-bore central venous catheter. In HSC
transplantation for cancer, the recipient first is given a conditioning regimen (eg, cyclophosphamide 60
mg/kg IV once/day for 2 days with total body irradiation, busulfan 1 mg/kg po qid for 4 days plus
cyclophosphamide without total body irradiation) to induce remission and suppress the immune system so
that the graft can be accepted. Similar regimens are used for allogeneic HSC transplantation, even when
cancer is not the indication, to reduce incidence of rejection and relapse, but not for autologous HSC
transplantation. Nonmyeloablative conditioning regimens may reduce morbidity and mortality risks and
may be useful for elderly patients, patients with comorbidities, and patients susceptible to a graft-vs-tumor
effect (eg, those with multiple myeloma).
After transplantation, recipients are given colony-stimulating factors to shorten duration of posttransplantation leukopenia, prophylactic anti-infective drugs (, and, in allogeneic HSC
transplantation, up to 6 mo of prophylactic immunosuppressants (typically methotrexate and cyclosporine)
to prevent donor T cells from reacting against recipient major histocompatibility complex molecules (graftvs-host disease [GVHD]). Broad-spectrum antibiotics are usually withheld unless fever develops.
Engraftment typically occurs 10 to 20 days after HSC transplantation (earlier with peripheral blood stem
cells) and is defined by an absolute neutrophil count > 500 × 10
/L.
Major
early complications
(< 100 days) include
• Failure to engraft
• Rejection
• Acute GVHD
Failure to engraft and rejection affect < 5% of patients and manifest as persistent pancytopenia or
irreversible decline in blood counts. Treatment is corticosteroids for several weeks.
Acute GVHD occurs in recipients of allogeneic HSC transplants, 40% of HLA-matched sibling graft
recipients, and 80% of unrelated
donor graft recipients. It causes fever, rash, hepatitis with
hyperbilirubinemia, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain (which may progress to ileus), and weight loss.
Risk factors include HLA and sex mismatching; unrelated donor; older age of recipient, donor, or both;
donor presensitization; and inadequate GVHD prophylaxis. Diagnosis is obvious by history and physical
examination; treatment is methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg IV once/day, increased to 10 mg/kg if there is no
response within 5 days.
Major
later complications
include
• Chronic GVHD
• Disease relapse
Chronic GVHD may occur by itself, develop from acute GVHD, or occur after resolution of acute GVHD. It
typically occurs 4 to 7 mo after HSC transplantation (range 2 mo to 2 yr). Chronic GVHD occurs in
recipients of allogeneic HSC transplants, about 35 to 50% of HLA-matched sibling graft recipients, and 60
to 70% of unrelated donor graft recipients. It affects primarily the skin (eg, lichenoid rash, scleroderma)
and mucous membranes (eg, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, periodontitis, orogenital lichenoid reactions), but it
also affects the GI tract and liver. Immunodeficiency is a primary feature; bronchiolitis obliterans similar to
that after lung transplantation can also develop. Ultimately, 20 to 40% die of GVHD; mortality rate is
higher with more severe reactions. Treatment may not be necessary for skin and mucous membrane
disease; treatment of more extensive disease is similar to that of acute GVHD. T-cell depletion of
allogeneic donor grafts using monoclonal antibodies or mechanical separation reduces incidence and
severity of GVHD but also eliminates a graft-vs-tumor effect that may enhance stem cell proliferation and
===PAGE:1281===
engraftment and reduce disease relapse rates. Relapse rates with autologous HSC transplantation are
higher for this reason and because circulating tumor cells may be transplanted. Ex vivo tumor cell purging
before autologous transplantation is under study.
In patients without chronic GVHD, all immunosuppression can be stopped 6 mo after HSC transplantation;
thus, late complications are rare in these patients.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies by indication and procedure. Overall, disease relapse occurs in 40 to 75% of recipients
of autologous HSC transplants and in 10 to 40% of recipients of allogeneic HSC transplants. Success
(cancer-free bone marrow) rates are 30 to 40% for patients with relapsed, chemotherapy-sensitive
lymphoma and 20 to 50% for patients with acute leukemia in remission; compared with chemotherapy
alone, HSC transplantation improves survival of patients with multiple myeloma. Success rates are low for
patients with more advanced disease or with responsive solid cancers (eg, breast cancer, germ cell
tumors). Relapse rates are reduced in patients with GVHD, but overall mortality rates are increased if
GVHD is severe. Intensive preparative regimens, effective GVHD prophylaxis, cyclosporine-based
regimens, and improved supportive care (eg, antibiotics, herpesvirus and cytomegalovirus prophylaxis)
have increased long-term disease-free survival after HSC transplantation.
Kidney Transplantation
Kidney transplantation is the most common type of solid organ transplantation; the primary indication is
end-stage renal failure. Absolute contraindications include comorbidities that could compromise graft
survival (eg, severe heart disorders, cancer), which can be detected via thorough screening. Relative
contraindications include poorly controlled diabetes, which can lead to renal failure. Patients in their 60s
may be transplant candidates if they are otherwise healthy and functionally independent with good social
support, if they have a reasonably long life expectancy, and if transplantation is likely to substantially
improve function and quality of life beyond simply freeing them from dialysis. Patients with type 1 diabetes
may be candidates for simultaneous pancreas-kidney or pancreas-after-kidney transplantation.
More than one half of donated kidneys come from previously healthy, brain-dead people. About one third
of these kidneys are marginal, with physiologic or procedure-related damage, but are used because
demand is so great. The remaining donated kidneys come from living donors; because of limited supply,
allografts from carefully selected living unrelated donors are being increasingly used. Living donors
relinquish reserve renal capacity, may put themselves at risk of procedural and long-term morbidity, and
may have psychologic conflicts about donation; therefore, they are evaluated for normal bilateral renal
function, absence of systemic disease, histocompatibility, emotional stability, and ability to give informed
consent. Hypertension, diabetes, and cancer (except possibly CNS tumors) usually preclude kidney
donation from living donors.
Procedure
The donor kidney is removed during an open or laparoscopic procedure, perfused with cooling solutions
containing relatively large concentrations of poorly permeating substances (eg, mannitol, hetastarch) and
electrolyte concentrations approximating intracellular levels, then stored in an iced solution. Kidneys
preserved this way usually function well if transplanted within 48 h. Although not commonly used,
continuous pulsatile hypothermic perfusion with an oxygenated, plasma-based perfusate can extend ex
vivo viability up to 72 h.
Dialysis may be required before transplantation to ensure a relatively normal metabolic state, but livingdonor allografts appear to survive better in recipients who have not begun long-term dialysis before
transplantation. Nephrectomy is usually not required unless native kidneys are infected. Whether
transfusions are useful for anemic patients anticipating an allograft is unclear; transfusions can sensitize
patients to alloantigens, but allografts may survive better in recipients who receive transfusions but do not
become sensitized, possibly because transfusions induce some form of tolerance.
The transplanted kidney is usually placed in the iliac fossa. Renal vessels are anastomosed to the iliac
===PAGE:1282===
vessels, and the donor ureter is implanted into the bladder or anastomosed to the recipient ureter.
Vesicoureteral reflux occurs in about 30% of recipients but is usually harmless.
Immunosuppressive regimens vary. Commonly, calcineurin inhibitors are begun immediately after
transplantation in doses titrated to minimize toxicity and rejection while maintaining trough blood levels >
200 ng/mL. On the day of transplantation, IV or oral corticosteroids are also given; dose is tapered over
the following 12 wk.
Despite use of immunosuppressants, about 20% of recipients have one or more rejection episodes within
the first year after transplantation. Most episodes are probably insignificant, subclinical, and therefore
never detected; however, they contribute to long-term insufficiency, graft failure, or both. Signs of
rejection vary by type (see
Table 128-1
).
Rejection can be diagnosed by percutaneous needle biopsy if the diagnosis is unclear clinically. Biopsy
may also help distinguish antibody-mediated from T-cell-mediated rejection and identify other common
causes of graft insufficiency or failure (eg, calcineurin inhibitor toxicity, diabetic or hypertensive
nephropathy, polyomavirus type 1 infection). Advanced tests that may improve accuracy of rejection
diagnosis include measurement of urinary mRNA-encoding mediators of rejection and gene expression
profiling of biopsy samples using DNA microarrays.
Chronic allograft nephropathy refers to graft insufficiency or failure ≥ 3 mo after transplantation. Most
cases are attributable to one or more of the above causes. Some experts believe the term should be
reserved to describe graft insufficiency or failure when biopsy shows chronic interstitial fibrosis and
tubular atrophy not attributable to any other cause.
Intensified immunosuppressive therapy (eg, with high-dose pulse corticosteroids or antilymphocyte
globulin) usually reverses accelerated or acute rejection. If immunosuppressants are ineffective, dose is
tapered and hemodialysis is resumed until a subsequent transplant is available. Nephrectomy of the
transplanted kidney is necessary if hematuria, graft tenderness, or fever develops after
immunosuppressants are stopped.
Prognosis
Most rejection episodes and other complications occur within 3 to 4 mo after transplantation; most
patients then return to more normal health and activity but must take maintenance doses of
immunosuppressants indefinitely.
At 1 yr, survival rates with living-donor grafts are 98% for patients and 94% for grafts; rates with
deceased-donor grafts are 94% and 88%, respectively. Subsequent annual graft loss rates are 3 to 5%
with a living-donor graft and 5 to 8% with a deceased-donor graft.
Among patients whose graft survives the first year, one half die of other causes with the graft functioning
normally; one half develop chronic allograft nephropathy with the graft malfunctioning in 1 to 5 yr. Rates
of late failure are higher for blacks than for whites.
Doppler ultrasonographic measurement of peak systolic and minimal end-diastolic flow in renal segmental
arteries ≥ 3 mo after transplantation may help assess prognosis, but the gold standard remains serial
determination of serum creatinine.
Liver Transplantation
Liver transplantation is the 2nd most common type of solid organ transplantation. Indications include
cirrhosis (70% of US transplants, 60 to 70% of which are attributed to hepatitis C); fulminant hepatic
necrosis (about 8%); hepatocellular carcinoma (about 7%); biliary atresia and metabolic disorders,
primarily in
children (about 3% each); and other cholestatic (eg, primary sclerosing cholangitis) and
noncholestatic (eg, autoimmune hepatitis) disorders (about 8%). For patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma, transplantation is indicated for 1 tumor < 5 cm or up to 3 tumors < 3 cm (Milan criteria) and for
some fibrolamellar types. For patients with liver metastases, transplantation is indicated only for
===PAGE:1283===
neuroendocrine tumors without extrahepatic growth after removal of the primary tumor.
Absolute contraindications are elevated intracranial pressure (> 40 mm Hg) or low cerebral perfusion
pressure (< 60 mm Hg) in patients with fulminant hepatic necrosis, severe pulmonary hypertension (mean
pulmonary arterial pressure > 50 mm Hg), sepsis, and advanced or metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma;
all of these conditions lead to poor outcomes during or after transplantation.
Nearly all donated livers come from size-and ABO-matched deceased, heart-beating donors. Annually,
about 500 come from living donors, who can live without their right lobe (in adult-to-adult transplantation)
or the lateral segment of their left lobe (in adult-to-child transplantation). Advantages of living donation for
the recipient include shorter waiting times, shorter cold ischemic times for explanted organs, and the
ability to schedule transplantation to optimize the patient's condition. Disadvantages to the donor include
mortality risk of 1/300 to 400 (compared with 1/3300 in living-donor kidney transplantation) and
complications (especially bile leakage) in up to one fourth, usually when resection is lobar (not
segmental). Living donors are also at risk of psychologic coercion. A few livers come from deceased, nonheart-beating donors.
Donor (deceased or living) risk factors for graft failure in the recipient include age > 50; hepatic steatosis;
elevated liver enzymes, bilirubin, or both; prolonged stay in ICU; hypotension requiring vasopressors; and
hypernatremia. Transplants from female donors to male recipients may also increase risk. But because
imbalance between supply and demand is greatest for liver transplants (and is growing because
prevalence of hepatitis-induced cirrhosis is increasing), livers from donors > 50 and with short cold
ischemia times, those with fatty infiltration, and those with viral hepatitis (for transplantation into recipients
with viral hepatitis-induced cirrhosis) are increasingly being used.
Additional techniques to increase supply include split liver transplantation, in which deceased-donor livers
are divided into right and left lobes or right lobe and left lateral segment (done in or ex situ) and given to 2
recipients, and domino transplantation, rarely indicated, in which a deceased-donor liver is given to a
recipient with an infiltrative disease (eg, amyloidosis), and the explanted diseased liver is given to an
elderly recipient who can benefit from the diseased liver but is not expected to live long enough to
experience adverse effects of transplant dysfunction.
Despite these innovations, many patients die waiting for transplants. Liver-assist devices (extracorporeal
perfusion of cultured hepatocyte suspensions or immortalized hepatoma cell lines) are used in some
centers to keep patients alive until a liver is available or acute dysfunction resolves. For distribution of
available organs, patients on the national waitlist are given a prognostic score derived from creatinine,
bilirubin, and INR measurements (for adults) or from age and serum albumin, bilirubin, INR, and growth
failure measurements (for children). For patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, the score incorporates
tumor size and waiting time (increasing with each). Patients with higher scores are more likely to die and
are given higher priority for organs from ABO- and weight-matched donors.
Procedure
Deceased-donor livers are removed after exploratory laparotomy confirms absence of intra-abdominal
disease that would preclude transplantation. Living donors undergo lobar or segmental resection.
Explanted livers are perfused and stored in a cold preservation solution for up to 24 h before
transplantation; incidence of graft nonfunction and ischemic-type biliary injury increases with prolonged
storage.
Recipient hepatectomy is the most demanding part of the procedure because it is often done in patients
with portal hypertension and coagulation defects. Intraoperative blood loss can total > 100 units in rare
cases, but use of a cell saver machine and autotransfusion devices reduce allogeneic transfusion
requirements to an average of 5 to 10 units. After hepatectomy, the suprahepatic vena cava of the donor
graft is anastomosed to the recipient's vena cava in an end-to-side fashion ("piggy-back" technique).
Donor and recipient portal veins, hepatic arteries, and bile ducts are then anastomosed. With this
technique, a bypass pump is not needed to carry portal venous blood to the systemic venous circuit.
Heterotopic placement of the liver provides an auxiliary liver and obviates several technical difficulties, but
outcomes have been discouraging, and this technique is still experimental.
===PAGE:1284===
Immunosuppressive regimens vary. Commonly, anti-IL-2 receptor monoclonal antibodies are given on the
day of transplantation, with a calcineurin inhibitor (cyclosporine or tacrolimus), mycophenolate mofetil,
and corticosteroids. Except in patients with autoimmune hepatitis, corticosteroids can be tapered within
weeks and often stopped after 3 to 4 mo. Compared with other solid organ transplantation, liver
transplantation requires the lowest doses of immunosuppressants.
Liver allografts are less aggressively rejected than other organ allografts for unknown reasons;
hyperacute rejection occurs less frequently than expected in patients presensitized to HLA or ABO
antigens, and immunosuppressants can often be tapered relatively quickly and eventually stopped. Most
episodes of acute rejection are mild and self-limited, occur in the first 3 to 6 mo, and do not affect graft
survival. Risk factors include younger recipient age, older donor age, greater HLA mismatching, longer
cold ischemia times, and autoimmune disorders; worse nutritional status (eg, in alcoholism) appears
protective.
Symptoms and signs of rejection depend on the type of rejection (see
Table 128-1
). Symptoms of acute
rejection occur in about 50% of patients; symptoms of chronic rejection occur in < 2%.
Differential diagnosis of acute rejection includes viral hepatitis (eg, cytomegalovirus or Epstein-Barr virus
infection; recurrent hepatitis B, C, or both), calcineurin inhibitor toxicity, and cholestasis. Rejection can be
diagnosed by percutaneous needle biopsy if the diagnosis is unclear clinically. Suspected rejection is
treated with IV corticosteroids; antithymocyte globulin and OKT3 are options when corticosteroids are
ineffective (in 10 to 20%). Retransplantation is tried when rejection is refractory to immunosuppressants.
Immunosuppression contributes to recurrence of viral hepatitis in patients who had viral hepatitis-induced
cirrhosis before transplantation. Hepatitis C recurs in nearly all patients; usually, viremia and infection are
clinically silent but may cause active hepatitis and cirrhosis. Risk factors for clinically significant
reinfection may be related to the recipient (older age, HLA type, hepatocellular carcinoma), donor (older
age, fatty infiltration, prolonged ischemic time, living donor), virus (high viral load, genotype 1B, failure to
respond to interferon), or postprocedural events (immunosuppressant doses, acute rejection treated with
corticosteroids or OKT3, cytomegalovirus infection). Standard treatment ( is only marginally
effective. Hepatitis B recurs in all but has been successfully managed with hepatitis B immune globulin
and lamivudine; co-infection with hepatitis D appears protective against recurrence.
Early (within 2 mo) complications of liver transplantation include primary nonfunction in 1 to 5%, biliary
dysfunction (eg, ischemic anastomotic strictures, bile leakage, ductal obstructions, leakage around T-tube
site) in 15 to 20%, portal vein thrombosis in < 5%, hepatic artery thrombosis in 3 to 5% (especially in
small children or patients taking sirolimus), hepatic artery mycotic or pseudoaneurysm, and hepatic artery
rupture. Typical symptoms include fever, hypotension, and elevated liver function enzymes.
The most common late complications are intrahepatic or anastomotic bile duct strictures, which produce
symptoms of cholestasis and cholangitis. Strictures can sometimes be treated endoscopically or through
percutaneous transhepatic cholangiographic dilation, stenting, or both, but they often ultimately require
retransplantation.
Prognosis
At 1 yr, survival rates with living-donor grafts are 90% for patients and 82% for grafts; rates with
deceased-donor grafts are 86% and 82%, respectively. Overall rates for patients and grafts, respectively,
are 79% and 72% at 3 yr and 73% and 65% at 5 yr. Survival is better for chronic than for acute liver
failure. Death after 1 yr is rare and attributable to a recurrent disorder (eg, cancer, hepatitis) rather than to
post-transplantation complications.
Recurrent hepatitis C infection leads to cirrhosis in 15 to 30% of patients by 5 yr. Hepatic disorders with
an autoimmune component (eg, primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, autoimmune
hepatitis) recur in 20 to 30% by 5 yr.
Lung Transplantation
===PAGE:1285===
Lung transplantation is an option for patients who have respiratory insufficiency or failure and who remain
at risk of death despite optimal medical treatment. The most common indications are COPD, idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis,
α
-antitrypsin deficiency, and primary pulmonary hypertension. Less
common indications include interstitial lung disorders (eg, sarcoidosis), bronchiectasis, and congenital
heart disease. Single and double lung procedures are equally appropriate for most lung disorders without
cardiac involvement; the exception is chronic diffuse infection (eg, bronchiectasis), for which double
lung
transplantation is best. Heart-lung transplantation is indicated for Eisenmenger's syndrome and for any
lung disorder with severe ventricular dysfunction likely to be irreversible; cor pulmonale is not an
indication because it often reverses after lung transplantation. Single and double lung procedures are
about equally common and are at least 8 times more common than heart-lung transplantation.
Relative contraindications include age (single lung recipients must be < 65; double lung recipients, < 60;
and heart and lung recipients, < 55), active cigarette smoking, previous thoracic surgery, and, for some
cystic fibrosis patients and at some medical centers, lung infection with resistant strains of
Burkholderia
cepacia
, which greatly increases mortality risk.
Nearly all donated lungs are from brain-dead, heart-beating donors. Rarely, living adult (usually parent-tochild) lobar transplantation is done when deceased-donor organs are unavailable. Donors must be < 65
and never-smokers and have no active lung disorder as evidenced by
• Oxygenation: PaO
/FIO
(fractional inspired O
) > 250 to 300, with PaO
in mm Hg and FIO
in
decimal fraction (eg, 0.5)
• Lung compliance: Peak inspiratory pressure < 30 cm H
O at tidal volume (V
T
) 15 mL/kg and positive
end-expiratory pressure = 5 cm H
O
• Gross appearance: Using bronchoscopy
Donor and recipients must be size-matched anatomically (by chest x-ray), physiologically (by total lung
capacity), or both.
Timing of referral for transplantation should be determined by factors such as
• Degree of obstructive defect: Forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
) < 25 to 30% predicted in
patients with COPD,
α
-antitrypsin deficiency, or cystic fibrosis
• PaO
< 55 mm Hg
• PaCO
> 50 mm Hg
• Right atrial pressure > 10 mm Hg and peak systolic pressure > 50 mm Hg for patients with primary
pulmonary hypertension
• Progression rate of clinical, radiographic, or physiologic disease
Procedure
The donor is anticoagulated, and a cold crystalloid preservation solution containing prostaglandins is
flushed through the pulmonary arteries into the lungs. Donor organs are cooled with iced saline slush in
situ or via cardiopulmonary bypass, then removed. Prophylactic antibiotics are often given.
Single lung transplantation
requires posterolateral thoracotomy. The native lung is removed, and the
bronchus, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary veins of the donor lung are anastomosed to their respective
cuffs. The bronchial anastomosis requires intussusception or wrapping with omentum or pericardium to
facilitate adequate healing. Advantages include a simpler operation, avoidance of cardiopulmonary
===PAGE:1286===
bypass and systemic anticoagulation (usually), more flexibility concerning size matching, and availability
of the contralateral lung from the same donor for another recipient. Disadvantages include the possibility
of ventilation/perfusion mismatch between the native and transplant lungs and the possibility of poor
healing of the single bronchial anastomosis.
Double lung transplantation
requires sternotomy or anterior transverse thoracotomy; the procedure is
similar to 2 sequential single transplants. The primary advantage is definitive removal of all diseased
tissue. The disadvantage is poor healing of the tracheal anastomosis.
Heart-lung transplantation
requires median sternotomy with cardiopulmonary bypass. Aortic, right atrial,
and tracheal anastomoses are required; the trachea is anastomosed immediately above the bifurcation.
The primary advantages are improved graft function and more dependable healing of the tracheal
anastomosis because of coronary-bronchial collaterals within the heart-lung block. Disadvantages include
long operative time with the need for cardiopulmonary bypass, the need for close size matching, and use
of 3 donor organs by one recipient.
Methylprednisolone IV is often given to recipients before reperfusion of the transplanted lung. A common
immunosuppressive regimen combines a calcineurin inhibitor (cyclosporine or tacrolimus), a purine
metabolism inhibitor (azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil), and methylprednisolone. Prophylactic
antithymocyte globulin (ATG) or OKT3 may also be given during the first 2 wk after transplantation.
Corticosteroids may be omitted to facilitate healing of the bronchial anastomosis; higher doses of other
drugs (eg, cyclosporine, azathioprine) are substituted. Immunosuppressants are continued indefinitely.
Rejection develops in most patients despite immunosuppressive therapy. Symptoms and signs are similar
in hyperacute, acute, and chronic forms and include fever, dyspnea, cough, decreased SaO
, interstitial
infiltrate on x-ray, and a decrease in FEV
by > 10 to 15%. Hyperacute rejection must be distinguished
from early graft dysfunction caused by ischemic injury during the transplantation procedure. Diagnosis is
confirmed if bronchoscopic transbronchial biopsy shows perivascular lymphocytic infiltration in small
vessels. IV corticosteroids
are usually effective. Treatment of recurrent or resistant cases varies and
includes higher corticosteroid doses, aerosolized cyclosporine, ATG, and OKT3.
Chronic rejection (after > 1 yr) occurs in up to 50% of patients; it takes the form of obliterative
bronchiolitis or, less commonly, atherosclerosis. Acute rejection may increase risk of chronic rejection.
Patients with obliterative bronchiolitis present with cough, dyspnea, and decreased FEV
with or without
physical and radiographic evidence of an airway process. Differential diagnosis includes pneumonia.
Diagnosis is by bronchoscopy with biopsy. No treatment has proved effective, but options include
corticosteroids, ATG or OKT3, inhaled cyclosporine, and retransplantation.
The most common surgical complication is poor healing of the bronchial or tracheal anastomosis. Up to
20% of single lung recipients develop bronchial stenosis that causes wheezing and airway obstruction; it
can be treated with dilation or stent placement. Other surgical complications include hoarseness and
diaphragmatic paralysis, caused by damage to the recurrent laryngeal or phrenic nerves; GI dysmotility,
caused by damage to the thoracic vagus nerve; and pneumothorax. Supraventricular arrhythmias develop
in some patients, probably because of conduction changes caused by pulmonary vein-atrial suturing.
Prognosis
At 1 yr, survival rates are 84% with living-donor grafts and 83% with deceased-donor grafts. At 5 yr,
survival rates are 34% with living-donor grafts and 46% with deceased-donor grafts. Mortality rate is
higher for patients with primary pulmonary hypertension, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, or sarcoidosis and
lower for those with COPD or
α
-antitrypsin deficiency. Mortality rate is higher for single lung
transplantation than for double. Most common causes of death within 1 mo are primary graft failure,
ischemia and reperfusion injury, and infection (eg, pneumonia) excluding cytomegalovirus; the most
common cause between 1 mo and 1 yr is infection; and after 1 yr, it is obliterative bronchiolitis. Mortality
risk factors include cytomegalovirus mismatching (donor positive, recipient negative), human leukocyte
antigen (HLA-DR) mismatching, diabetes, and prior need for mechanical ventilation or inotropic support.
Uncommonly, the disorder recurs, particularly in some patients with an interstitial lung disorder. Exercise
===PAGE:1287===
capacity is slightly limited because of a hyperventilatory response.
With heart-lung transplantation, overall survival rate at 1 yr is 60% for patients and grafts.
Pancreas Transplantation
Pancreas transplantation is a form of pancreatic
β
-cell replacement that can restore normoglycemia in
diabetic patients. Because the recipient exchanges risks of insulin injection for risks of
immunosuppression, eligibility is limited mostly to patients who have type 1 diabetes with renal failure and
who are thus candidates for kidney transplantation; > 90% of pancreas transplantations include
transplantation of a kidney. At many centers, failure of standard treatment and episodes of hypoglycemic
unawareness are also eligibility criteria. Relative contraindications include age > 55 and significant
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, defined as history of MI, coronary artery bypass graft surgery,
percutaneous coronary intervention, or a positive stress test; these factors dramatically increase
perioperative risk.
Options include simultaneous pancreas-kidney (SPK) transplantation; pancreas-after-kidney (PAK)
transplantation; and pancreas-alone transplantation. The advantages of SPK are one-time exposure to
induction immunosuppression, potential protection of the newly transplanted kidney from adverse effects
of hyperglycemia, and the ability to monitor rejection in the kidney; the kidney is more prone to rejection
than the pancreas, where rejection is difficult to detect. The advantage of PAK is the ability to optimize
HLA matching and timing of kidney transplantation using a living donor. Pancreas-alone transplantation
offers an advantage to patients who do not have end-stage renal disease but have other severe diabetes
complications, including labile glucose control.
Donors are usually recently deceased patients who are aged 10 to 55 and have no history of glucose
intolerance or alcohol abuse. For SPK, the pancreas and kidney come from the same donor, and the
same restrictions for kidney donation apply (. A few (< 1%) segmental transplantations from
living donors have been done, but this procedure has substantial risks for the donor (eg, splenic
infarction, abscess, pancreatitis, pancreatic leak and pseudocyst, secondary diabetes), which limit its
widespread use.
Procedure
The donor is anticoagulated, and a cold preservation solution is flushed into the celiac artery. The
pancreas is cooled in situ with iced saline slush, then removed en bloc with the liver (for transplantation
into a different recipient) and the 2nd portion of the duodenum containing the ampulla of Vater.
The donor pancreas is positioned intraperitoneally and laterally in the lower abdomen. In SPK, the
pancreas is placed into the right lower quadrant of the recipient's abdomen and the kidney into the left
lower quadrant. The native pancreas is left in place. Anastomoses are made between the donor splenic or
superior mesenteric artery and recipient iliac artery and between the donor portal vein and recipient iliac
vein. Thus, endocrine secretions drain systemically, causing hyperinsulinemia; sometimes the pancreatic
venous system is anastomosed to a portal vein tributary to re-create physiologic conditions, although this
procedure is more demanding and its benefits are unclear. The duodenum is sewn to the bladder dome or
to the jejunum for drainage of exocrine secretions.
Immunosuppression regimens vary but typically include immunosuppressive Igs, a calcineurin inhibitor, a
purine synthesis inhibitor, and corticosteroids, which can be slowly tapered over 12 mo. Despite adequate
immunosuppression, rejection develops in 60 to 80% of patients, primarily affecting exocrine, not
endocrine, components. Compared with kidney transplantation alone, SPK has a greater risk of rejection,
and rejection episodes tend to occur later, to recur more often, and to be corticosteroid-resistant.
Symptoms and signs are nonspecific (see
Table 128-1
).
After SPK and PAK, pancreas rejection, indicated by an increase in serum creatinine, almost always
accompanies kidney rejection. After pancreas-alone transplantation, a stable urinary amylase
concentration in patients with urinary drainage excludes rejection; a decrease suggests some form of
graft dysfunction but is not specific to rejection. Early detection is therefore difficult. Diagnosis is
===PAGE:1288===
confirmed by ultrasound-guided percutaneous or cystoscopic transduodenal biopsy. Treatment is with
antithymocyte globulin.
Early complications affect 10 to 15% of patients and include wound infection and dehiscence, gross
hematuria, intra-abdominal urinary leak, reflux pancreatitis, recurrent UTI, small-bowel obstruction,
abdominal abscess, and graft thrombosis. Late complications relate to urinary loss of pancreatic
NaHCO
-
, causing volume depletion and non-anion gap metabolic acidosis. Hyperinsulinemia does not
appear to adversely affect glucose or lipid metabolism.
Prognosis
At 1 yr, 78% of grafts survive, but > 90% of patients survive. Whether survival is higher than that of
patients without transplantation is unclear; however, the primary benefits of the procedure are freedom
from insulin therapy and stabilization or amelioration of many diabetic complications (eg, nephropathy,
neuropathy). Graft survival is 95% for SPK, 74% for PAK, and 76% for pancreas-alone transplantation.
The rate of immunologic graft loss for PAK and pancreas-alone transplants is higher, possibly because
such a transplanted pancreas lacks a reliable monitor of rejection; in contrast, rejection after SPK can be
monitored using established indicators of rejection for the transplanted kidney.
Pancreatic Islet Cell Transplantation
Islet cell transplantation has theoretical advantages over pancreas transplantation; the most important is
that the procedure is less invasive. A secondary advantage is that islet cell transplantation appears to
help maintain normoglycemia in patients who require total pancreatectomy for pain due to chronic
pancreatitis. Nevertheless, the procedure remains experimental, although steady improvement appears to
be occurring.
Its disadvantages are that transplanted glucagon-secreting
α
cells are nonfunctional (possibly
complicating hypoglycemia) and several pancreata are usually required for a single islet cell recipient
(exacerbating disparities between graft supply and demand and limiting use of the procedure).
Indications are the same as those for pancreas transplantation. Simultaneous islet cell-kidney
transplantation may be desirable after the technique is improved.
Procedure
A pancreas is removed from a brain-dead donor; collagenase is infused into the pancreatic duct to
separate islets from pancreatic tissue. A purified islet cell fraction is infused percutaneously into the portal
vein. Islet cells travel into hepatic sinusoids, where they lodge and secrete insulin.
Results are best when 2 cadavers are used, with each supplying 2 or 3 infusions of islet cells, followed by
an immunosuppressive regimen consisting of an anti-IL-2 receptor, monoclonal antibodies (daclizumab),
tacrolimus, and sirolimus. Corticosteroids are not used. Immunosuppression must be continued lifelong or
until islet cell function ceases.
Rejection is poorly defined but can be detected by deterioration in blood glucose control; treatment of
rejection is not established. Procedural complications include percutaneous hepatic puncture with
bleeding, portal vein thrombosis, and portal hypertension.
Successful islet cell transplantation maintains short-term normoglycemia, but long-term outcomes are
unknown; additional injections
of islet preparations may be necessary to obtain longer-lasting insulin
independence.
Small-Bowel Transplantation
Small-bowel transplantation is indicated for patients who have malabsorption because of intestinal
disorders (eg, gastroschisis, Hirschsprung's disease, autoimmune enteritis) or intestinal resection (eg, for
===PAGE:1289===
mesenteric thromboembolism or extensive Crohn's disease) and who are at high risk of death (usually
due to congenital enteropathies such as microvillus inclusion disease) or who develop complications of
TPN (eg, liver failure, recurrent sepsis, total loss of venous access). Patients with locally invasive tumors
that cause obstruction, abscesses, fistulas, ischemia, or hemorrhage (usually desmoid tumors associated
with familial polyposis) are also candidates.
Procedure
Procurement from a brain-dead, beating-heart donor is complex, partly because the small bowel can be
transplanted alone, with a liver, or with a stomach, liver, duodenum, and pancreas. The role of livingrelated donation for small-bowel allografts has yet to be defined. Procedures vary by medical center;
immunosuppressive regimens also vary, but a typical regimen includes antilymphocyte globulin for
induction, followed by high-dose tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil for maintenance.
Weekly endoscopy is indicated to check for rejection. Symptoms and signs of rejection include diarrhea,
fever, and abdominal cramping. Endoscopic findings include mucosal erythema, friability, ulceration, and
exfoliation; changes are distributed unevenly, may be difficult to detect, and can be differentiated from
cytomegalovirus enteritis by viral inclusion bodies. Biopsy findings include blunted villi and inflammatory
infiltrates in the lamina propria. Treatment of acute rejection is high-dose corticosteroids, antithymocyte
globulin, or both.
Prognosis
Surgical complications affect 50% of patients and include anastomotic leaks, biliary leaks and strictures,
hepatic artery thrombosis, and chylous ascites. Nonsurgical complications include graft ischemia and
graft-vs-host disease caused by transplantation of gut-associated lymphoid tissue.
At 3 yr, > 50% of grafts with small-bowel transplantation alone survive, but patient survival is around 65%.
With liver and small-bowel transplantation, survival rate is lower because the procedure is more extensive
and the recipient's condition is more serious.
Tissue Transplantation
Skin allografts:
Skin allografts are used for patients with extensive burns or other conditions causing
massive skin loss. Allografts are used to cover broad denuded areas and thus reduce fluid and protein
losses and discourage invasive infection. The allografts are ultimately rejected, but the resulting denuded
areas develop well-vascularized granulations onto which autografts from the patient's healed sites take
readily. Skin cells may be grown in culture, then returned to a burned patient to help cover extensive
burns; artificial skin, composed of cultured cells on a synthetic underlayer, may also be used. Splitthickness skin grafts are used to accelerate healing of small wounds. A small piece of skin just a few
millimeters thick is harvested, and the donor skin is then laid onto the graft site.
Cartilage transplantation:
Cartilage transplantation is used for children with congenital nasal or ear
defects and adults with severe injuries or joint destruction (eg, severe osteoarthritis). Chondrocytes are
more resistant to rejection, possibly because the sparse population of cells in hyaline cartilage is
protected from cellular attack by the cartilaginous matrix around them.
Bone transplantation:
Bone transplantation is used for reconstruction of large bony defects (eg, after
massive resection of bone cancer). No viable donor bone cells survive in the recipient, but dead matrix
from allografts can stimulate recipient osteoblasts to recolonize the matrix and lay down new bone. This
matrix acts as scaffolding for bridging and stabilizing defects until new bone is formed. Cadaveric
allografts are preserved by freezing to decrease immunogenicity of the bone (which is dead at the time of
implantation) and by glycerolization to maintain chondrocyte viability. No postimplantation
immunosuppressive therapy is used. Although patients develop anti-HLA antibodies, early follow-up
detects no evidence of cartilage degradation.
Corneal transplantation:
Corneal transplantation is discussed elsewhere.
===PAGE:1290===
Adrenal autografting:
Adrenal autografting by stereotactically placing medullary tissue within the CNS
has been reported to alleviate
symptoms in patients with Parkinson's disease. Allografts of adrenal tissue,
especially from fetal donors, have also been proposed. Fetal ventral mesencephalic tissue stereotactically
implanted in the putamen of patients with Parkinson's disease has been reported to reduce rigidity and
bradykinesia. However, with the ethical and political debates about the propriety of using human fetal
tissue, a controlled trial large enough to adequately assess fetal neural transplantation appears unlikely.
Xenografts of endocrinologically active cells from porcine donors are being tested.
Fetal thymus implants:
Fetal thymus implants obtained from stillborn infants may restore immunologic
responsiveness in children with thymic aplasia and resulting abnormal development of the lymphoid
system. Because the recipient is immunologically unresponsive, immunosuppression is not required;
however, severe graft-vs-host disease may occur.
===PAGE:1291===
11 - Infectious Diseases
Chapter 129. Biology of Infectious Disease
Introduction
A healthy person lives in harmony with the microbial flora that helps protect its host from invasion by
pathogens, usually defined as microorganisms that have the capacity to cause disease. The microbial
flora is mostly bacteria and fungi and includes normal resident flora, which is present consistently and
promptly reestablishes itself if disturbed, and transient flora, which may colonize the host for hours to
weeks but does not permanently establish itself. Organisms that are normal flora can occasionally cause
disease, especially when defenses are disrupted.
Tropisms (attractions to certain tissues) determine which body sites microorganisms colonize. Normal
flora is influenced by tropisms and many other factors (eg, diet, hygiene, sanitary conditions, air pollution).
For example, lactobacilli are common in the intestines of people with a high intake of dairy products;
Haemophilus influenzae
colonizes the tracheobronchial tree in patients with COPD.
Host Defense Mechanisms
Host defenses that protect against infection include natural barriers (eg, skin, mucous membranes),
nonspecific immune responses (eg, phagocytic cells [neutrophils, macrophages] and their products), and
specific immune responses (eg, antibodies, lymphocytes).
Natural Barriers
Skin:
The skin usually bars invading microorganisms unless it is physically disrupted (eg, by injury, IV
catheter, or surgical incision). Exceptions include human papillomavirus, which can invade normal skin,
causing warts, and some parasites (eg,
Schistosoma mansoni
,
Strongyloides stercoralis
).
Mucous membranes:
Many mucous membranes are bathed in secretions that have antimicrobial
properties (eg, cervical mucus, prostatic fluid, and tears containing lysozyme, which splits the muramic
acid linkage in bacterial cell walls, especially in gram-positive organisms). Local secretions also contain
immunoglobulins, principally IgG and secretory IgA, which prevent microorganisms from attaching to host
cells.
Respiratory tract:
The respiratory tract has upper airway filters. If invading organisms reach the
tracheobronchial tree, the mucociliary epithelium transports them away from the lung. Coughing also
helps remove organisms. If the organisms reach the alveoli, alveolar macrophages and tissue histiocytes
engulf them. However, these defenses can be overcome by large numbers of organisms or by
compromised effectiveness resulting from air pollutants (eg, cigarette smoke) or interference with
protective mechanisms (eg, endotracheal intubation, tracheostomy).
GI tract:
GI tract barriers include the acid pH of the stomach and the antibacterial activity of pancreatic
enzymes, bile, and intestinal secretions. Peristalsis and the normal loss of epithelial cells remove
microorganisms. If peristalsis is slowed (eg, because of drugs such as belladonna or opium alkaloids),
this removal is delayed and prolongs some infections, such as symptomatic shigellosis. Compromised GI
defense mechanisms may predispose patients to particular infections (eg, achlorhydria predisposes to
salmonellosis). Normal bowel flora can inhibit pathogens; alteration of this flora with antibiotics can allow
overgrowth of inherently pathogenic microorganisms (eg,
Salmonella typhimurium
) or superinfection with
ordinarily commensal organisms (eg,
Candida albicans
).
GU tract:
GU tract barriers include the length of the urethra (20 cm) in men, the acid pH of the vagina in
women, and the hypertonic state of the kidney medulla. The kidneys also produce and excrete large
amounts of Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein, which binds certain bacteria, facilitating their harmless excretion.
Nonspecific Immune Responses
===PAGE:1292===
Cytokines (including IL-1, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor, interferonγ
) are produced principally by
macrophages and activated lymphocytes and mediate an acute-phase response that develops regardless
of the inciting microorganism (see also p.
). The response involves fever and increased production
of neutrophils by the bone marrow. Endothelial cells also produce large amounts of IL-8, which attracts
neutrophils.
The inflammatory response directs immune system components to injury or infection sites and is
manifested by increased blood supply and vascular permeability, which allows chemotactic peptides,
neutrophils, and mononuclear cells to leave the intravascular compartment. Microbial spread is limited by
engulfment of microorganisms by phagocytes (eg, neutrophils, macrophages). Phagocytes are drawn to
microbes via chemotaxis and engulf them, releasing phagocytic lysosomal contents that help destroy
microbes. Oxidative products such as hydrogen peroxide are generated by the phagocytes and kill
ingested microbes. When quantitative or qualitative defects in neutrophils result in infection, the infection
is usually prolonged and recurrent and responds slowly to antimicrobial drugs. Staphylococci, gramnegative organisms, and fungi are the pathogens usually responsible.
Specific Immune Responses
After infection, the host can produce a variety of antibodies, complex glycoproteins known as
immunoglobulins that bind to specific microbial antigenic targets. Antibodies can help eradicate the
infecting organism by attracting the host's WBCs and activating the complement system. The complement
system
( destroys cell walls, usually through the classic pathway. Complement can also be
activated on the surface of some microorganisms via the alternative pathway. Antibodies can also
promote the deposition of substances known as opsonins (eg, the complement protein C3b) on the
surface of microorganisms, which helps promote phagocytosis. Opsonization is important for eradication
of encapsulated organisms such as pneumococci and meningococci.
Factors Facilitating Microbial Invasion
Microbial invasion can be facilitated by virulence factors, microbial adherence, resistance to
antimicrobials, and defects in host defense mechanisms.
Virulence Factors
Virulence factors assist pathogens in invasion and resistance of host defenses; these factors include
• Capsules
• Enzymes
• Toxins
Capsules:
Some organisms (eg, certain strains of pneumococci, meningococci, type B
Haemophilus
influenzae
) have capsules that prevent opsonic antibodies from binding and thus are more virulent than
nonencapsulated strains.
Enzymes:
Bacterial proteins with enzymatic activity (eg, protease, hyaluronidase, neuraminidase,
elastase, collagenase) facilitate local tissue spread. Invasive organisms (eg,
Shigella flexneri
,
Yersinia
enterocolitica
) can penetrate and traverse intact eukaryotic cells, facilitating entry from mucosal surfaces.
Some bacteria (eg,
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
,
H. influenzae
,
Proteus mirabilis
, clostridial species,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
) produce IgA-specific proteases that cleave and inactivate secretory IgA on
mucosal surfaces.
Toxins:
Organisms may release toxins (called exotoxins), which are protein molecules that may cause the
disease (eg, diphtheria, cholera, tetanus, botulism) or increase the severity of the disease. Most toxins
bind to specific target cell receptors. With the exception of preformed toxins responsible for food-borne
===PAGE:1293===
illnesses, toxins are produced by organisms during the course of infection.
Endotoxin is a lipopolysaccharide produced by gram-negative bacteria and is part of the cell wall.
Endotoxin triggers humoral enzymatic mechanisms involving the complement, clotting, fibrinolytic, and
kinin pathways and causes much of the morbidity in gram-negative sepsis.
Other factors:
Many microorganisms have mechanisms that impair antibody production by inducing
suppressor cells, blocking antigen processing, and inhibiting lymphocyte mitogenesis.
Resistance to the lytic effects of serum complement confers virulence. Among species of
N. gonorrhoeae
,
resistance predisposes to disseminated rather than localized infection.
Some organisms resist the oxidative steps in phagocytosis. For example,
Legionella
and
Listeria
either
do not elicit or actively suppress the oxidative step, whereas other organisms produce enzymes (eg,
catalase, glutathione reductase, or superoxide dismutase) that mitigate the oxidative products.
Microbial Adherence
Adherence to surfaces helps microorganisms establish a base from which to penetrate tissues. Among the
factors that determine adherence are adhesins (microbial molecules that mediate attachment to a cell)
and host receptors to which the adhesins bind. Host receptors include cell surface sugar residues and
cell surface proteins (eg, fibronectin) that enhance binding of certain gram-positive organisms (eg,
staphylococci). Other determinants of adherence include fine structures on certain bacterial cells (eg,
streptococci) called fibrillae, by which some bacteria bind to human epithelial cells. Other bacteria, such
as Enterobacteriaceae (eg,
Escherichia coli
), have specific adhesive organelles called fimbriae or pili.
Fimbriae enable the organism to attach to almost all human cells, including neutrophils and epithelial cells
in the GU tract, mouth, and intestine.
Biofilm:
Biofilm is a slime layer that can form around certain bacteria and confer resistance to
phagocytosis and antibiotics. It develops around
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
in the lungs of patients with
cystic fibrosis and around coagulase-negative staphylococci on synthetic medical devices, such as IV
catheters, prosthetic vascular grafts, and suture material. Factors that affect the likelihood of biofilm
developing on such medical devices include the material's roughness, chemical composition, and
hydrophobicity.
Antimicrobial Resistance
Genetic variability among microbes is inevitable. Use of antimicrobial drugs eventually
selects for survival
of strains that are capable of resisting them.
In many cases, resistant bacterial strains have acquired genes that are encoded on plasmids or
transposons and that enable the microorganisms to synthesize enzymes that
• Modify or inactivate the antimicrobial agent
• Change the bacterial cell's ability to accumulate the antimicrobial agent
• Resist inhibition by the antimicrobial agent
Minimizing inappropriate use of antibiotics is important for public health. Resistance among bacteria is
discussed elsewhere.
Defects in Host Defense Mechanisms
Two types of immune deficiency states affect the host's ability to fight infection: Primary immune
deficiency and secondary (acquired) immune deficiency.
Primary immune deficiencies
are genetic in origin; > 100 primary immune deficiency states have been
===PAGE:1294===
described. Most primary immune deficiencies are recognized during infancy; however, up to 40% are
recognized during adolescence or adulthood.
Acquired immune deficiencies
are caused by another disease (eg, cancer, HIV infection, chronic
disease) or by exposure to a chemical or drug that is toxic to the immune system.
Mechanisms:
Defects in immune responses may involve
• Cellular immunity
• Humoral immunity
• Phagocytic system
• Complement system
Cellular deficiencies are typically T-cell or combined immune defects. T cells contribute to the killing of
intracellular organisms; thus, patients with T-cell defects can present with opportunistic infections such as
Pneumocystis jirovecii
or cryptococcal infections. Chronicity of these infections can lead to failure to
thrive, chronic diarrhea, and persistent oral candidiasis.
Humoral deficiencies are typically caused by the failure of B cells to make functioning immunoglobulins.
Patients with this type of defect usually have infections involving encapsulated organisms (eg,
H.
influenzae
, streptococci). Patients can present with poor growth, diarrhea, and recurrent sinopulmonary
infections.
A defect in the phagocytic system affects the immediate immune response to bacterial infection and can
result in development of recurrent abscesses, severe pneumonias, or delayed umbilical cord separation.
Primary complement system defects are particularly rare. Patients with this type of defect may present
with recurrent infections with pyogenic bacteria (eg, encapsulated bacteria,
Neisseria
sp) and have an
increased risk of autoimmune disorders (eg, SLE).
Manifestations of Infection
Manifestations may be local (eg, cellulitis, abscess) or systemic, most often fever (.
Manifestations may develop in multiple organ systems. Severe, generalized infections may have lifethreatening manifestations (eg, sepsis, septic shock—. Most manifestations resolve with
successful treatment of the underlying infection.
Clinical:
Most infections increase the pulse rate and body temperature, but others (eg, typhoid fever,
tularemia, brucellosis, dengue) may not elevate the pulse rate commensurate with the degree of fever.
Hypotension can result from hypovolemia or septic shock. Hyperventilation and respiratory alkalosis are
common.
Alterations in sensorium (encephalopathy) may occur in severe infection regardless of whether CNS
infection is present. Encephalopathy is most common and serious in the elderly and may cause anxiety,
confusion, delirium, stupor, seizures, and coma.
Hematologic:
Infectious diseases commonly increase the numbers of mature and immature circulating
neutrophils. Mechanisms include demargination and release of immature granulocytes from bone marrow,
IL-1- and IL-6-mediated release of neutrophils from bone marrow, and colony-stimulating factors
elaborated by macrophages, lymphocytes, and other tissues. Exaggeration of these phenomena (eg, in
trauma, inflammation, and similar stresses) can result in release of excessive numbers of immature
leukocytes into the circulation (leukemoid reaction), with leukocyte counts up to 25 to 30 × 10
/L.
Conversely, some infections (eg, typhoid fever, brucellosis) commonly cause neutropenia. In
===PAGE:1295===
overwhelming, severe infections, profound neutropenia is often a poor prognostic sign. Characteristic
morphologic changes in the neutrophils of septic patients include Dohle bodies, toxic granulations, and
vacuolization.
Anemia can develop despite adequate tissue iron stores. If anemia is chronic, plasma iron and total ironbinding capacity may be decreased. Serious infection, particularly with gram-negative organisms, may
cause disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC—.
Other organ systems:
Pulmonary compliance may decrease, progressing to acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) and respiratory muscle failure.
Renal manifestations range from minimal proteinuria to acute renal failure, which can result from shock
and acute tubular necrosis, glomerulonephritis, or tubulointerstitial disease.
Hepatic dysfunction, including cholestatic jaundice (often a poor prognostic sign) or hepatocellular
dysfunction, occurs with many infections, even though the infection does not localize to the liver. Upper GI
bleeding due to stress ulceration may occur during sepsis.
Endocrinologic dysfunctions include increased production of thyroid-stimulating hormone, vasopressin,
insulin, and glucagon; breakdown of skeletal muscle proteins and muscle wasting secondary to increased
metabolic demands; and bone demineralization. Hypoglycemia occurs infrequently in sepsis, but adrenal
insufficiency should be considered in patients with hypoglycemia and sepsis. Hyperglycemia may be an
early sign of infection in diabetics.
Fever
Fever is elevated body temperature (> 37.8° C orally or > 38.2° C rectally) or an elevation above a
person's known normal daily value. Elevated body temperature that is not caused by a resetting of the
temperature set point in the hypothalamus is commonly called hyperthermia. Many patients use "fever"
very loosely, often meaning that they feel too warm, too cold, or sweaty, but they have not actually
measured their temperature.
Symptoms are due mainly to the condition causing the fever, although fever itself can cause discomfort.
Pathophysiology
During a 24-h period, temperature varies from lowest levels in the early morning to highest in late
afternoon. Maximum variation is about 0.6° C.
Body temperature is determined by the balance between heat production by tissues, particularly the liver
and muscles, and heat loss from the periphery. Normally, the hypothalamic thermoregulatory center
maintains the internal temperature between 37° and 38° C. Fever results when something raises the
hypothalamic set point, triggering vasoconstriction and shunting of blood from the periphery to decrease
heat loss; sometimes shivering, which increases heat production, is induced. These processes continue
until the temperature of the blood bathing the hypothalamus reaches the new set point. Resetting the
hypothalamic set point downward (eg, with antipyretic drugs) initiates heat loss through sweating and
vasodilation. The capacity to generate a fever is reduced in certain patients (eg, alcoholics, the very old,
the very young).
Pyrogens
are substances that cause fever. Exogenous pyrogens are usually microbes or their products.
The best studied are the lipopolysaccharides of gram-negative bacteria (commonly called endotoxins)
and
Staphylococcus aureus
toxin, which causes toxic shock syndrome. Exogenous pyrogens usually
cause fever by inducing release of endogenous pyrogens (eg, IL-1, tumor necrosis factor [TNF],
interferonγ
, IL-6), which raise the hypothalamic set point. Prostaglandin E
synthesis appears to play a
critical role.
Consequences of fever:
Although many patients worry that fever itself can cause harm, the modest
transient core temperature elevations (ie, 38° to 40°) caused by most acute illnesses are well tolerated by
===PAGE:1296===
healthy adults. However, extreme temperature elevation (typically > 41° C) may be damaging. Such
elevation is more typical of severe environmental hyperthermia but sometimes results from exposure to
illicit drugs (eg, cocaine, phencyclidine), anesthetics, or antipsychotic drugs. At this temperature, protein
denaturation occurs, and inflammatory cytokines that activate the inflammatory cascade are released. As
a result, cellular dysfunction occurs, leading to malfunction and ultimately failure of most organs; the
coagulation cascade is also activated, leading to disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Because fever can increase the BMR by about 10 to 12% for every 1° C increase over 37° C, fever may
physiologically stress adults with preexisting cardiac or pulmonary insufficiency. Fever can also worsen
mental status in patients with dementia.
Fever in healthy children can cause febrile seizures (.
Etiology
Many disorders can cause fever. They are broadly categorized as
• Infectious (most common)
• Neoplastic
• Inflammatory (including rheumatic, nonrheumatic, and drug-related)
The cause of an acute (ie, duration ≤ 4 days) fever in adults is highly likely to be infectious.
When
patients present with fever due to a noninfectious cause, the fever is almost always chronic or recurrent.
Also, an isolated, acute febrile event in patients with a known inflammatory or neoplastic disorder is still
most likely to be infectious. In healthy people, an acute febrile event is unlikely to be the initial
manifestation of a chronic illness.
Infectious causes:
Virtually all infectious illnesses can cause fever. But overall, the most likely causes
are
• Upper and lower respiratory tract infections
• GI infections
• UTIs
• Skin infections
Most acute respiratory tract and GI infections are viral.
Specific patient and external factors also influence which causes are most likely.
Patient factors include health status, age, occupation, and risk factors (eg, hospitalization, recent invasive
procedures, presence of IV or urinary catheters, use of mechanical ventilation).
External factors are those that expose patients to specific diseases—eg, through infected contacts, local
outbreaks, disease vectors (eg, mosquitoes, ticks), a common vehicle (eg, food, water), or geographic
location (eg, residence in or recent travel to an endemic area).
Some causes appear to predominate based on these factors (see
Table 129-1
).
Evaluation
Two general issues are important in the initial evaluation of acute fever:
===PAGE:1297===
• Identifying any localizing symptoms (eg, headache, cough): These symptoms help narrow the range of
possible causes. The localizing symptom may be part of the patient's chief complaint or identified only
by specific questioning.
• Determining whether the patient is seriously or chronically ill (particularly if such illness is unrecognized):
Many causes of fever in healthy people are self-limited, and many of the possible viral infections are
difficult to diagnose specifically. Limiting testing to the seriously or chronically ill can help avoid many
expensive, unnecessary, and often fruitless searches.
History: History of present illness
should cover magnitude and duration of fever and method used to
take the temperature. True rigors (severe, shaking, teeth-chattering chills—not simply feeling cold)
suggest fever due to infection but are not otherwise specific. Pain is an important clue to the possible
source; the patient should be asked about pain in the ears, head, neck, teeth, throat, chest, abdomen,
flank, rectum, muscles, and joints.
Other localizing symptoms include nasal congestion and/or discharge, cough, diarrhea, and urinary
symptoms (frequency, urgency, dysuria). Presence of rash (including nature, location, and time of onset in
relation to other symptoms) and lymphadenopathy may help. Infected contacts and their diagnosis should
be identified.
Review of systems
should identify symptoms of chronic illness, including recurrent fevers, night
sweats, and weight loss.
Past medical history
should particularly cover the following:
• Recent surgery
• Known disorders that predispose to infection (eg, HIV infection, diabetes, cancer, organ transplantation,
sickle cell disease, valvular heart disorders—particularly if an artificial valve is present)
• Other known disorders that predispose to fever (eg, rheumatologic disorders, SLE, gout, sarcoidosis,
hyperthyroidism, cancer)
Questions to ask about recent travel include location, time since return, locale (eg, in back country, only in
cities), vaccinations received before travel, and any use of prophylactic antimalarial drugs (if required).
All patients should be asked about possible exposures (eg, via unsafe food or water, insect bites, animal
contact, or unprotected sex).
Vaccination history, particularly against hepatitis A and B and against organisms that cause meningitis,
influenza, or pneumococcal infection, should be noted.
Drug history should include specific questions about the following:
• Drugs known to cause fever (see
Table 129-1
)
• Drugs that predispose to infection (eg, corticosteroids, anti-TNF drugs, chemotherapeutic and
antirejection drugs, other immunosuppressants)
• Illicit use of injection drugs (predisposing to endocarditis, hepatitis, septic pulmonary emboli, and skin
and soft-tissue infections)
Physical examination:
Physical examination begins with confirmation of fever. Fever is most accurately
diagnosed by measuring rectal temperature. Oral temperatures are normally about 0.6° C lower and may
be falsely even lower for many reasons, such as recent ingestion of a cold drink, mouth breathing,
hyperventilation, and inadequate measurement time (up to several minutes are required with mercury
thermometers). Measurement
===PAGE:1298===
[Table 129-1.
Some Causes of Acute Fever]
of tympanic membrane temperature by infrared sensor is less accurate than rectal temperature.
Other vital signs are reviewed for presence of tachypnea, tachycardia, or hypotension.
For patients with localizing symptoms, examination proceeds as discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
For febrile patients without localizing symptoms, a complete examination is necessary because clues to
the diagnosis may be in any organ system.
The patient's general appearance, including any weakness, lethargy, confusion, cachexia, and distress,
should be noted.
All of the skin should be inspected for rash, particularly petechial or hemorrhagic rash and any lesions or
areas of erythema or blistering suggesting skin or soft-tissue infection. Axillae and epitrochlear and
inguinal areas should be examined for adenopathy. In hospitalized patients, presence of any IVs, NGTs,
urinary catheters, and any other tubes or lines inserted into the body should be noted. If patients have
had recent surgery, surgical sites should be thoroughly inspected.
For the head and neck examination, the following should be done:
• Tympanic membranes: Examined for infection
• Sinuses (frontal and maxillary): Percussed
• Temporal arteries: Palpated for tenderness
• Nose: Inspected for congestion and discharge (clear or purulent)
• Eyes: Inspected for conjunctivitis or icterus
• Fundi: Inspected for Roth's spots (suggesting endocarditis)
• Oropharynx and gingiva: Inspected for inflammation or ulceration (including any lesions of candidiasis,
which suggests immunocompromise)
• Neck: Flexed to detect discomfort, stiffness, or both, indicating meningismus, and palpated for
adenopathy
The lungs are examined for crackles or signs of consolidation, and the heart is auscultated for murmurs
(suggesting possible endocarditis).
The abdomen is palpated for hepatosplenomegaly and tenderness (suggesting infection).
The flanks are percussed for tenderness over the kidneys (suggesting pyelonephritis). A pelvic
examination is done in women to check for cervical motion or adnexal tenderness; a genital examination is
done in men to check for urethral discharge and local tenderness.
The rectum is examined for tenderness and swelling, suggesting perirectal abscess (which may be occult
in immunosuppressed patients).
All major joints are examined for swelling, erythema, and tenderness (suggesting a joint infection or
rheumatologic disorder). The hands and feet are inspected for signs of endocarditis, including splinter
hemorrhages under the nails, painful erythematous subcutaneous nodules on the tips of digits (Osler's
nodes), and nontender hemorrhagic macules on the palms or soles (Janeway lesions).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
===PAGE:1299===
• Altered mental status
• Headache, stiff neck, or both
• Petechial skin rash
• Hypotension
• Significant tachycardia or tachypnea
• Temperature > 40° C or < 35° C
• Recent travel to malaria-endemic area
• Recent use of immunosuppressants
Interpretation of findings:
The degree of elevation in temperature usually does not predict the
likelihood or cause of infection. Fever pattern, once thought to be significant, is not.
Likelihood of serious illness
is considered. If serious illness is suspected, immediate and aggressive
testing and often hospital admission are needed.
Red flag findings strongly suggest a serious disorder. Headache, stiff neck, and petechial or purpuric rash
suggest meningitis. Tachycardia (beyond the modest elevation normally present with fever) and
tachypnea, with or without hypotension or mental status changes, suggest sepsis. Malaria should be
suspected in patients who have recently traveled to an endemic area.
Immunocompromise, whether caused by a known disorder or use of immunosuppressants or suggested
by examination findings (eg, weight loss, oral candidiasis), is also of concern, as are other known chronic
illnesses, injection drug use, and heart murmur.
The elderly, particularly those in nursing homes, are at particular risk (see Geriatrics Essentials .
Localizing findings
identified by history or physical examination are evaluated and interpreted (see
elsewhere in THE MANUAL). Other suggestive findings include generalized adenopathy and rash.
Generalized adenopathy
may occur in older children and younger adults who have acute
mononucleosis; it is usually accompanied by significant pharyngitis, malaise, and hepatosplenomegaly.
Primary HIV infection or secondary syphilis should be suspected in patients with generalized adenopathy,
sometimes accompanied by arthralgias, rash, or both. HIV
infection develops 2 to 6 wk after exposure
(although patients may not always report unprotected sexual contact or other risk factors). Secondary
syphilis is usually preceded by a chancre, with systemic symptoms developing 4 to 10 wk later.
Fever and rash have many infectious and drug causes. Petechial or purpuric rash is of particular concern;
it suggests possible meningococcemia, Rocky Mountain spotted fever (particularly if the palms or soles
are involved), and, less commonly, some viral infections (eg, dengue fever, hemorrhagic fevers). Other
suggestive skin lesions include the classic erythema migrans rash of Lyme disease, target lesions of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and the painful, tender erythema of cellulitis and other bacterial soft-tissue
infections. The possibility of delayed drug hypersensitivity (even after long periods of use) should be kept
in mind.
If no localizing findings are present,
healthy people with acute fever and only nonspecific findings (eg,
malaise, generalized aches) most likely have a self-limited viral illness, unless a history of exposure to
infected contacts (including a new, unprotected sexual contact), to disease vectors, or in an endemic area
(including recent travel) suggests otherwise.
Patients with significant underlying disorders are more likely to have an occult bacterial or parasitic
===PAGE:1300===
infection. Injection drug users and patients with a prosthetic heart valve may have endocarditis.
Immunocompromised patients are predisposed to infection caused by certain microorganisms (see
Table
129-1
).
Drug fever (with or without rash) is a diagnosis of exclusion, often requiring a trial of stopping the drug.
One difficulty is that if antibiotics are the cause, the illness being treated may also cause fever.
Sometimes a clue is that the fever and rash begin after clinical improvement from the initial infection and
without worsening or reappearance of the original symptoms (eg, in a patient being treated for
pneumonia, fever reappears without cough, dyspnea, or hypoxia).
Testing:
Testing depends on whether localized findings are present.
If localizing findings are present,
testing is guided by clinical suspicion and findings (see also
elsewhere in THE MANUAL), as for the following:
• Mononucleosis or HIV infection: Serologic testing
• Rocky Mountain spotted fever: Biopsy of skin lesions to confirm the diagnosis (acute serologic testing is
unhelpful)
• Bacterial or fungal infection: Blood cultures to detect possible bloodstream infections
• Meningitis: Immediate lumbar puncture and IV antibiotics (head CT should be done before lumbar
puncture if patients are at risk of brain herniation; IV antibiotics must be given immediately after blood
cultures are obtained and before head CT is done)
• Specific disorders based on exposure (eg, to contacts, to vectors, or in endemic areas): Testing for
those disorders, particularly a peripheral blood smear for malaria
If no localizing findings are present
in otherwise healthy patients and serious illness is not suspected,
patients can usually be observed at home without testing. In most, symptoms resolve quickly; the few who
develop worrisome or localizing symptoms should be reevaluated and tested based on the new findings.
If serious illness is suspected in patients who have no localizing findings, testing is needed. Patients with
red flag findings suggesting sepsis require cultures (urine and blood), chest x-ray, and evaluation for
metabolic abnormalities with measurement of serum electrolytes, glucose, BUN, creatinine, lactate, and
liver enzymes. CBC is typically done, but sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing serious bacterial
infection are low. However, WBC count is important prognostically for patients who may be
immunosuppressed (ie, a low WBC count may be associated with a poor prognosis).
Patients with certain underlying disorders may need testing even if they have no localizing findings and
do not appear seriously ill. Because of the risk and devastating consequences of endocarditis, febrile
injection drug users are usually admitted to the hospital for serial blood cultures and often
echocardiography. Patients taking immunosuppressants require CBC; if neutropenia is present, testing is
initiated and chest x-ray is done, as are cultures of blood, sputum, urine, stool, and any suspicious skin
lesions. Many with neutropenia are admitted to be given IV antibiotics, but certain patients can be sent
home provided daily follow-up is available.
Febrile elderly patients often require testing (see Geriatrics Essentials .
Treatment
Specific causes are treated with anti-infective therapy; empiric anti-infective therapy is required when
suspicion of serious infection is high.
Whether fever due to infection should be treated is controversial. Experimental evidence,
but not clinical
studies, suggests that fever enhances host defenses.
===PAGE:1301===
Fever should probably be treated in certain patients at particular risk, including adults with cardiac or
pulmonary insufficiency or with dementia. Drugs that inhibit brain cyclooxygenase effectively reduce fever:
• Acetaminophen 650 to 1000 mg po q 6 h
• Ibuprofen 400 to 600 mg po q 6 h
The daily dose of acetaminophen should not exceed 4 g to avoid toxicity; patients should be warned not
to simultaneously take nonprescription cold or flu remedies that contain acetaminophen. Other NSAIDs
(eg, aspirin, naproxen) are also effective antipyretics. Salicylates should not be used to treat fever in
children with viral illnesses because use of salicylates has been associated with Reye's syndrome.
If temperature is ≥ 41° C, other cooling measures (eg, evaporative cooling with tepid water mist, cooling
blankets) should also be started.
Geriatrics Essentials
In the frail elderly, infection is less likely to cause fever, and even when elevated by infection, temperature
may be lower than the standard definition of fever. Similarly, other inflammatory symptoms, such as focal
pain, may be less prominent. Frequently, alteration of mental status or decline in daily functioning may be
the only other initial manifestations of pneumonia or UTI.
In spite of their less severe manifestations of illness, the febrile elderly are significantly more likely to
have a serious bacterial illness than are febrile younger adults. As in younger adults, the cause is
commonly a respiratory infection or UTI, but in the elderly, skin and soft-tissue infections are among the
top causes.
Focal findings are evaluated as for younger patients. But unlike younger patients, elderly patients
probably require urinalysis, urine culture, and chest x-ray. Blood cultures should be done to exclude
septicemia; if septicemia is suspected or vital signs are abnormal, patients should be admitted to the
hospital.
Key Points
• Most fevers in healthy people are due to viral respiratory tract or GI infections.
• Localizing symptoms guide evaluation.
• Underlying chronic disorders, particularly those impairing the immune system, must be considered.
Fever of Unknown Origin
FUO is body temperature ≥ 38.3° C rectally that does not result from transient and self-limited illness,
rapidly fatal illness, or disorders with clear-cut localizing symptoms or signs or with abnormalities on
common tests such as chest x-ray, urinalysis, or blood cultures.
FUO is currently classified into 4 distinct categories:
•
Classic FUO:
Fever for ≥ 3 wk with no identified cause after 3 days of hospital evaluation or ≥ 3
outpatient visits
•
Nosocomial FUO:
Fever in hospitalized patients receiving acute care and with no infection present or
incubating at admission if the diagnosis remains uncertain after ≥ 3 days of appropriate evaluation,
including incubation of microbiologic cultures for ≥ 2 days
•
Neutropenic FUO:
Fever in patients who have < 500 neutrophils/
μ
L or who are expected to have this
level within 2 days if the diagnosis remains uncertain after ≥ 3 days of appropriate evaluation, including
incubation of microbiologic cultures for ≥ 2 days
===PAGE:1302===
•
HIV-associated FUO:
Fever in patients with confirmed HIV infection for > 4 wk as outpatients or > 3
days as inpatients if the diagnosis remains uncertain after ≥ 3 days of appropriate evaluation, including
incubation of microbiologic cultures for ≥ 2 days
Etiology
Causes of FUO are usually divided into 4 categories (see
Table 129-2
):
• Infectious (25 to 50%)
• Connective tissue disorders (10 to 20%)
• Neoplastic (5 to 35%)
• Miscellaneous (15 to 25%)
Infections are the most common cause of FUO. In patients with HIV infection, opportunistic infections (eg,
TB; infection by atypical mycobacteria, disseminated fungi, or cytomegalovirus) should be sought.
Common connective tissue disorders include SLE, RA, giant cell arteritis, vasculitis, and juvenile RA of
adults.
The most common neoplastic causes are lymphoma, leukemia, renal cell carcinoma, hepatocellular
carcinoma, and metastatic carcinomas. However, the incidence of neoplastic causes of FUO has been
decreasing, probably because ultrasonography and CT are widely used during initial evaluation.
[Table 129-2.
Some Causes of FUO]
Important miscellaneous causes include drug reactions, deep venous thrombosis, recurrent pulmonary
emboli, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease, and factitious fever.
No cause of FUO is identified in about 10% of adults.
Evaluation
In puzzling cases, such as FUO, assuming that all information was gathered or was gathered accurately
by previous clinicians is usually a mistake. Clinicians should be aware of what patients previously
reported (to resolve discrepancies) but should not simply copy details of previously recorded history (eg,
family history, social history). Initial errors of omission have been perpetuated through many clinicians
over many days of hospitalization, causing much unnecessary testing. Even when initial evaluation was
thorough, patients often remember new details when questioning is repeated.
Conversely, clinicians should not ignore previous test results and should not repeat tests without
considering how likely results are to be different (eg, because the patient's condition has changed,
because a disorder develops slowly).
History:
History aims to uncover focal symptoms and facts (eg, travel, occupation, family history,
exposure to animal vectors, dietary history) that suggest a cause.
History of present illness
should cover duration and pattern (eg, intermittent, constant) of fever. Fever
patterns usually have little or no significance in the diagnosis of FUO, although a fever that occurs every
other day (tertian) or every 3rd day (quartan) may suggest malaria in patients with risk factors. Focal pain
often indicates the location (although not the cause) of the underlying disorder. Clinicians should ask
generally, then specifically, about discomfort in each body part.
Review of systems
should include nonspecific symptoms, such as weight loss, anorexia, fatigue, night
===PAGE:1303===
sweats, and headaches. Also, symptoms of connective tissue disorders
(eg, myalgias, arthralgias,
rashes) and GI disorders (eg, diarrhea, steatorrhea, abdominal discomfort) should be sought.
Past medical history
should include disorders known to cause fever, such as cancer, TB, connective
tissue disorders, alcoholic cirrhosis, inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatic fever, and hyperthyroidism.
Clinicians should note disorders or factors that predispose to infection, such as immunocompromise (eg,
due to disorders such as HIV infection, cancer, diabetes, or use of immunosuppressants), structural heart
disorders, urinary tract abnormalities, operations, and insertion of devices (eg, IV lines, pacemakers, joint
prostheses).
Drug history should include questions about specific drugs known to cause fever.
Social history should include questions about risk factors for infection such as injection drug use, highrisk sexual practices (eg, unprotected sex, multiple partners), infected contacts (eg, with TB), travel, and
possible exposure to animal or insect vectors. Risk factors for cancer, including smoking, alcohol use, and
occupational exposure to chemicals, should also be identified.
Family history should include questions about inherited causes of fever (eg, familial Mediterranean fever).
Medical records are checked for previous test results, particularly those that effectively rule out certain
disorders.
Physical examination:
The general appearance, particularly for cachexia, jaundice, and pallor, is noted.
The skin is thoroughly inspected for focal erythema (suggesting a site of infection) and rash (eg, malar
rash of SLE); inspection should include the perineum and feet, particularly in diabetics, who are prone to
infections in these areas. Clinicians should also check for cutaneous findings of endocarditis, including
painful erythematous subcutaneous nodules on the tips of digits (Osler's nodes), nontender hemorrhagic
macules on the palms or soles (Janeway lesions), petechiae, and splinter hemorrhages under the nails.
The entire body (particularly over the spine, bones, joints, abdomen, and thyroid) is palpated for areas of
tenderness, swelling, or organomegaly; digital rectal examination and pelvic examination are included.
The teeth are percussed for tenderness (suggesting apical abscess). During palpation, any regional or
systemic adenopathy is noted; eg, regional adenopathy is characteristic of cat-scratch disease in contrast
to the diffuse adenopathy of lymphoma.
The heart is auscultated for murmurs (suggesting bacterial endocarditis) and rubs (suggesting pericarditis
due to a rheumatologic or infectious disorder).
Sometimes key physical abnormalities in patients with FUO are or seem so subtle that repeated physical
examinations may be necessary to suggest causes (eg, by detecting new adenopathy, heart murmurs,
rash, or nodularity and weak pulsations in the temporal artery).
Red flags:
The following are of particular concern:
• Immunocompromise
• Heart murmur
• Presence of inserted devices (eg, IV lines, pacemakers, joint prostheses)
• Recent travel to endemic areas
Interpretation of findings:
After a thorough history and physical examination, the following scenarios
are typical:
• Localizing symptoms or signs that were not present, not detected, or not managed during previous
examinations are discovered. These findings are interpreted and investigated as indicated (see
Table
129-2
).
===PAGE:1304===
• More commonly, evaluation detects only nonspecific findings that occur in many different causes of
FUO, but it identifies risk factors that can help guide testing (eg, travel to an endemic area, exposure to
animal vectors). Sometimes risk factors are less specific but may suggest a class of illness; eg, weight
loss without anorexia is more consistent with infection than cancer, which usually causes anorexia.
Possible causes should be investigated further.
• In the most difficult scenario, patients have only nonspecific findings and no or multiple risk factors,
making a logical, sequential approach to testing essential. Initial testing is used to narrow the diagnostic
possibilities and guide subsequent testing.
Testing:
Previous test results, particularly for cultures, are reviewed. Cultures for some organisms may
require a long time to become positive.
As much as possible, clinical information is used to focus testing (see
Table 129-2
). For example,
housebound elderly patients with headache would not be tested for tick-borne infections or malaria, but
those disorders should be considered in younger travelers who have hiked in an endemic area. Elderly
patients require evaluation for giant cell arteritis; younger patients do not.
In addition to specific testing, the following should usually be done:
• CBC with differential
• ESR
• Liver function tests
•
Serial blood cultures (ideally before antimicrobial therapy)
• HIV antibody test, RNA concentration assays, and PCR assay
• Tuberculin skin test
Even if done earlier, these tests may suggest a helpful trend.
Urinalysis, urine culture, and chest x-ray, usually already done, are repeated only if findings indicate that
they should be.
Any available fluid or material from abnormal areas identified during the evaluation is cultured (eg, for
bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, viruses, or specific fastidious bacteria as indicated). Organism-specific
tests, such as PCR and serologic titers (acute and convalescent), are helpful mainly when guided by
clinical suspicion, not done in a shotgun approach.
Serologic tests, such as antinuclear antibody (ANA) and rheumatoid factor, are done to screen for
rheumatologic disorders.
Imaging tests
are guided by symptoms and signs. Typically, areas of discomfort should be imaged—eg,
in patients with back pain, MRI of the spine (to check for infection or tumor); in patients with abdominal
pain, CT of the abdomen. However, CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis should be considered to check
for adenopathy and occult abscesses even when patients do not have localizing symptoms or signs. If
blood cultures are positive or new heart murmurs or peripheral signs suggest endocarditis,
echocardiography is done.
In general, CT is useful for delineating abnormalities localized to the abdomen or chest. MRI is more
sensitive than CT for detecting most causes of FUO involving the CNS and should be done if a CNS
cause is being considered. Venous duplex imaging may be useful for identifying cases of deep venous
thrombosis. Radionuclide scanning with indium-111-labeled granulocytes may help localize some
infectious or inflammatory processes. This technique has generally fallen out of favor because it is
===PAGE:1305===
thought to contribute very little to diagnosis, but some reports suggest that it provides a higher diagnostic
yield than CT. PET may also be useful in detecting the focus of fever.
Biopsy
may be required if an abnormality is suspected in tissue that can be biopsied (eg, liver, bone
marrow, skin, pleura, lymph nodes, intestine, muscle). Biopsy specimens should be evaluated by
histopathologic examination and cultured for bacteria, fungi, viruses, and mycobacteria or sent for
molecular (PCR) diagnostic testing. Muscle biopsy or skin biopsy of rashes may confirm vasculitis.
Bilateral temporal artery biopsy may confirm giant cell arteritis in elderly patients with unexplained ESR
elevation.
Treatment
Treatment focuses on the causative disorder. Antipyretics should be used judiciously, considering the
duration of fever.
Geriatrics Essentials
Causes of FUO in the elderly are usually similar to those in the general population, but connective tissue
disorders are identified more often. The most common causes are
• Giant cell arteritis
• Leukemias
• Lymphomas
• Abscesses
• TB
Key Points
• Classic FUO is body temperature ≥ 38.3° C rectally for ≥ 3 wk with no identified cause after 3 days of
hospital investigation or ≥ 3 outpatient visits.
• Identified causes can be categorized as infectious, rheumatologic, neoplastic, or miscellaneous.
• Evaluation should be based on synthesis of history and physical examination, with particular
consideration of risk factors and likely causes based on individual circumstances.
Abscesses
Abscesses are collections of pus in confined tissue spaces, usually caused by bacterial
infection. Symptoms include local pain, tenderness, warmth, and swelling (if abscesses are
near the skin layer) or constitutional symptoms (if abscesses are deep). Imaging is often
necessary for diagnosis of deep abscesses. Treatment is surgical drainage and often
antibiotics.
Etiology
Numerous organisms can cause abscesses, but
Staphylococcus aureus
is the most common. Organisms
may enter the tissue by
• Direct implantation (eg, penetrating trauma with a contaminated object)
• Spread from an established, contiguous infection
• Dissemination via lymphatic or hematogenous routes from a distant site
===PAGE:1306===
• Migration from a location where there are resident flora into an adjacent, normally
sterile area because
natural barriers are disrupted (eg, by perforation of an abdominal viscus causing an intra-abdominal
abscess)
Abscesses may begin in an area of cellulitis ( or in compromised tissue where leukocytes
accumulate. Progressive dissection by pus or necrosis of surrounding cells expands the abscess. Highly
vascularized connective tissue may then surround the necrotic tissue, leukocytes, and debris to wall off
the abscess and limit further spread.
Predisposing factors to abscess formation include impaired host defense mechanisms (eg, impaired
leukocyte defenses), the presence of foreign bodies, obstruction to normal drainage (eg, in the urinary,
biliary, or respiratory tracts), tissue ischemia or necrosis, hematoma or excessive fluid accumulation in
tissue, and trauma.
Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms and signs of cutaneous and subcutaneous abscesses are pain, heat, swelling,
tenderness, and redness. If superficial abscesses are ready to spontaneously rupture, the skin over the
center of the abscess may thin, sometimes appearing white or yellow because of the underlying pus
(termed pointing). Fever may occur, especially with surrounding cellulitis. For deep abscesses, local pain
and tenderness and systemic symptoms, especially fever, as well as anorexia, weight loss, and fatigue
are typical. The predominant manifestation of some abscesses is abnormal organ function (eg,
hemiplegia due to a brain abscess).
Complications of abscesses include bacteremic spread, rupture into adjacent tissue, bleeding from
vessels eroded by inflammation, impaired function of a vital organ, and inanition due to anorexia and
increased metabolic needs.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes ultrasonography or CT
Diagnosis of cutaneous and subcutaneous abscesses is by physical examination. Diagnosis of deep
abscesses often requires imaging. Ultrasonography is noninvasive and detects many soft-tissue
abscesses; CT is accurate for most, although MRI is usually more sensitive.
Treatment
• Surgical drainage
• Sometimes antibiotics
Superficial abscesses may resolve with heat and oral antibiotics. However, healing usually requires
drainage.
Minor cutaneous abscesses may require only incision and drainage. All pus, necrotic tissue, and debris
should be removed. Eliminating open (dead) space by packing with gauze or by placing drains may be
necessary to prevent reformation of the abscess. Predisposing conditions, such as obstruction of natural
drainage or the presence of a foreign body, require correction.
Deep abscesses can sometimes be adequately drained by percutaneous needle aspiration (typically
guided by ultrasonography or CT); this method often avoids the need for open surgical drainage.
Spontaneous rupture and drainage may occur, sometimes leading to the formation of chronic draining
sinuses. Without drainage, an abscess occasionally resolves slowly after proteolytic digestion of the pus
===PAGE:1307===
produces a thin, sterile fluid that is resorbed into the bloodstream. Incomplete resorption may leave a
cystic loculation within a fibrous wall that may become calcified.
If the abscess is deep or if there is surrounding cellulitis, systemic antimicrobial drugs are indicated as
adjunctive therapy; they are usually ineffective without drainage. Empiric antimicrobial therapy is based
on location and likely infecting pathogen. Gram stain, culture, and susceptibility results guide further
antimicrobial therapy.
Bacteremia
(See also Neonatal Sepsis on p.
and Occult Bacteremia )
Bacteremia is the presence of bacteria in the bloodstream. It can occur spontaneously, during
certain tissue infections, with use of indwelling GU or IV catheters, or after dental, GI, GU,
wound-care, or other procedures. Bacteremia may cause metastatic infections, including
endocarditis, especially in patients with valvular heart abnormalities. Transient bacteremia is
often asymptomatic but may cause fever. Development of other symptoms usually suggests
more serious infection, such as sepsis or septic shock (.
Bacteremia may be transient and cause no sequelae, or it may have metastatic or systemic
consequences. Systemic consequences include systemic inflammatory response syndrome and septic
shock.
Etiology
Bacteremia has many possible causes, including
• Catheterization of an infected lower urinary tract
• Surgical treatment of an abscess or infected wound
• Colonization of indwelling devices, especially IV and intracardiac catheters, urethral catheters, and
ostomy devices and tubes
Gram-negative bacteremia secondary to infection usually originates in the GU or GI tract or in the skin of
patients with decubitus ulcers. Chronically ill and immunocompromised patients have an increased risk of
gram-negative bacteremia. They may also develop bacteremia with gram-positive cocci, anaerobes, and
fungi. Staphylococcal bacteremia is common among injection drug users and patients with IV catheters.
Bacteroides
bacteremia may develop in patients with infections of the abdomen and the pelvis,
particularly the female genital tract. If an infection in the abdomen causes bacteremia, the organism is
most likely a gram-negative bacillus. If an infection above the diaphragm causes bacteremia, the
organism is most likely gram-positive.
Pathophysiology
Transient or sustained bacteremia can cause metastatic infection of the meninges or serous cavities,
such as the pericardium or larger joints. Metastatic abscesses may occur almost anywhere. Multiple
abscess formation is especially common with staphylococcal bacteremia. Bacteremia may cause
endocarditis (, most commonly with enterococcal, streptococcal, or staphylococcal bacteremia and less commonly
with gram-negative bacteremia or fungemia. Patients with structural heart disease (eg, valvular disease,
certain congenital anomalies), prosthetic heart valves, or other intravascular prostheses are predisposed
to endocarditis. Staphylococci can cause bacterial endocarditis, particularly in injection drug users, and
may involve the tricuspid valve.
Symptoms and Signs
Some patients are asymptomatic or have only mild fever. Development of symptoms such as tachypnea,
===PAGE:1308===
shaking chills, persistent fever, altered sensorium, hypotension, and GI symptoms (abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) suggests sepsis or septic shock. Septic shock develops in 25 to 40% of
patients with significant bacteremia.
Diagnosis
If bacteremia, sepsis, or septic shock is suspected, cultures are obtained of blood and any other
appropriate specimens (.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
In patients with suspected bacteremia, empiric antibiotics are given after appropriate cultures are
obtained. Early treatment of bacteremia with an appropriate antimicrobial regimen appears to improve
survival. Continuing therapy involves adjusting antibiotics according to the results of culture and
susceptibility testing, surgically draining any abscesses, and usually removing any internal devices that
are the suspected source of bacteria.
Biological Warfare and Terrorism
Biological warfare is the use of microbiological agents for hostile purposes. Such use is contrary to
international law and has rarely taken place during formal warfare in modern history, despite the extensive
preparations and stockpiling of biological agents carried out during the 20th century by most major
powers. For a variety of reasons (including uncertain military efficacy and the threat of massive
retaliation), experts consider the use of biological agents in formal warfare unlikely. The area of most
concern is the use of such agents by terrorist groups. Biological agents are thought by some people to be
an ideal weapon for terrorists. These agents may be delivered clandestinely, and they have delayed
effects, allowing the user to remain undetected.
Potential biological agents include anthrax, botulinum toxin, brucellosis, encephalitis, viruses,
hemorrhagic fever viruses (Ebola and Marburg), plague, tularemia, and smallpox. Each of these agents is
potentially fatal and, except for anthrax and botulinum toxin, can be passed from person to person.
Anthrax is of most concern; anthrax spores are relatively easy to prepare and spread through the air,
creating the potential for distribution by airplane. Theoretically, 1 kg of anthrax could kill 10,000 people,
although technical difficulties with preparing the spores in a sufficiently fine powder would probably limit
actual deaths to a fraction of this number. Some other potential agents, including
Yersinia pestis
,
Francisella tularensis
, viral hemorrhagic fever viruses,
smallpox virus, and botulinum toxin, can potentially
be aerosolized as bioweapons.
Despite these theoretical concerns, the only successful terrorist use of anthrax—multiple pieces of
contaminated mail delivered to a variety of locations in the US in 2001—resulted in only a handful of
deaths and serious infections (total of 22 cases). A larger number of people were contaminated with
anthrax spores without developing illness. However, there was extreme public anxiety related to these
incidents, which may have been a major goal of the terror group responsible.
In addition to the actual infections, an even greater number of false threats of anthrax have been
reported. In 1999, the FBI received an average of 1 false report/day of alleged anthrax use. False reports,
both hoaxes and alarmed citizens misperceiving harmless material for anthrax, increased even more after
the 2001 anthrax attack in the US.
The only other successful use of a biological agent by a terror group in the US occurred in 1984. In this
event, 751 people were stricken with diarrhea when a salad bar in Oregon was intentionally contaminated
with
Salmonella
. The bacteria were introduced by a religious cult trying to influence the results of a local
election. No one died, and the election was not affected.
Defense against bioterrorism
involves several factors:
===PAGE:1309===
• Intelligence to disrupt terrorists before they can use the weapons
• Early detection
• Availability of protective antibiotics
• Preparedness of public health infrastructure to coordinate management of an infectious disease
outbreak
• Vaccination of selected populations (eg, the military)
===PAGE:1310===
Chapter 130. Laboratory Diagnosis of Infectious Disease
Introduction
Laboratory tests may identify organisms directly (eg, visually, using a microscope, growing the organism
in culture) or indirectly (eg, identifying antibodies to the organism). General types of tests include
microscopy, culture, immunologic tests (agglutination tests such as latex agglutination, enzyme
immunoassays, Western blot, precipitation tests, and complement fixation tests), and nucleic and nonnucleic acid-based identification methods. Culture is normally the gold standard for identification of
organisms, but results may not be available for days or weeks, and not all pathogens can be cultured,
making alternative tests useful. When a pathogen is cultured and identified, the laboratory can also
assess its susceptibility to antimicrobial drugs.
Some tests (eg, Gram stain, routine aerobic culture) can detect a large variety of pathogens and are
commonly done for many suspected infectious illnesses. However, because some pathogens are missed
on these tests, clinicians must be aware of the limitations of each test for each suspected pathogen. In
such cases, clinicians should request tests specific for the suspected pathogen (eg, special stains or
culture media) or advise the laboratory to select more specific tests.
Microscopy
Microscopy can be done quickly, but accuracy depends on the experience of the microscopist and quality
of equipment. Regulations often limit physicians' use of microscopy for diagnostic purposes outside a
certified laboratory.
Most specimens are treated with stains that color pathogens, causing them to stand out from the
background, although wet mounts of unstained samples can be used to detect fungi, parasites (including
helminth eggs and larvae), vaginal clue cells, motile organisms (eg,
Trichomonas
), and syphilis (via
darkfield microscopy). Visibility of fungi can be increased by applying 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) to
dissolve surrounding tissues and nonfungal organisms.
The clinician orders a stain based on the likely pathogens, but no stain is 100% specific. Most samples
are treated with Gram stain and, if mycobacteria are suspected, with an acidfast stain. However, some
pathogens are not easily visible using these stains; if these pathogens are suspected, different stains or
other identification methods are required. Because microscopic detection usually requires a microbe
concentration of about 1 × 10
/mL, most body fluid specimens (eg, CSF) are concentrated (eg, by
centrifugation) before examination.
Gram stain:
The Gram stain classifies bacteria according to whether they retain crystal violet stain
(gram-positive—blue) or not (gram-negative—red) and highlights cell morphology (eg, bacilli, cocci) and
cell arrangement (eg, clumps, chains, diploids). Such characteristics can direct antibiotic therapy pending
definitive identification. To do a Gram stain, technicians heat-fix specimen material to a slide and stain it
by sequential exposure to Gram's crystal violet, iodine, decolorizer, and counterstain (typically safranin).
Acid-fast and moderate (modified) acid-fast stains:
These stains are used to identify acid-fast
organisms (
Mycobacterium
sp) and moderately acid-fast organisms (primarily
Nocardia
sp). These stains
are also useful for staining
Rhodococcus
and related genera, as well as oocysts of some parasites (eg,
Cryptosporidium
).
Although detection of mycobacteria in sputum requires only about 5,000 to 10,000 organisms/mL,
mycobacteria are often present in lower levels, so sensitivity is limited. Usually, several mL of sputum are
decontaminated with Na hydroxide and concentrated by centrifugation for acid-fast staining. Specificity is
better, although some moderately acid-fast organisms are difficult to distinguish from mycobacteria.
Fluorescent stains:
These stains allow detection at lower concentrations (1 × 10
cells/mL). Examples
are acridine orange (bacteria and fungi), auramine-rhodamine and auramine O (mycobacteria), and
calcofluor white (fungi, especially dermatophytes).
===PAGE:1311===
Coupling a fluorescent dye to an antibody directed at a pathogen (direct or indirect immunofluorescence)
should theoretically increase sensitivity and specificity. However, these tests are difficult to read and
interpret, and few (eg,
Pneumocystis
and
Legionella
direct fluorescent antibody tests) are commercially
available and commonly used.
India ink (colloidal carbon) stain:
This stain is used to detect mainly
Cryptococcus neoformans
and
other encapsulated fungi in a cell suspension (eg, CSF sediment). The background field, rather than the
organism itself, is stained, making any capsule around the organism visible as a halo. In CSF, the test is
not as sensitive as cryptococcal antigen. Specificity is also limited; leukocytes may appear encapsulated.
Wright's stain and Giemsa stain:
These stains are used for detection of parasites in blood,
Histoplasma capsulatum
in phagocytes and tissue cells, intracellular inclusions formed by viruses and
chlamydia, trophozoites of
Pneumocystis jirovecii
, and some intracellular bacteria.
Trichrome stain (Gomori-Wheatley stain) and iron hematoxylin stain:
These stains are used to
detect intestinal protozoa.
The Gomori-Wheatley stain is used to detect microsporidia. It may miss helminth eggs and larvae and
does not reliably identify
Cryptosporidium
. Fungi and human cells take up the stain.
The iron hematoxylin stain differentially stains cells, cell inclusions, and nuclei. Helminth eggs may stain
too dark to permit identification.
Culture
Culture is microbial growth on or in a nutritional solid or liquid medium; increased numbers of organisms
simplify identification. Culture also facilitates testing of antimicrobial susceptibility.
Communication with the laboratory is essential. Although most specimens are placed on general purpose
media (eg, blood or chocolate agar), some pathogens require inclusion of specific nutrients and inhibitors
or other special conditions (see
Table 130-1
); if one of these pathogens is suspected or if the patient has been taking antimicrobials, the
laboratory should be advised. The specimen's source is reported so that the laboratory can differentiate
pathogens from site-specific normal flora.
Specimen collection is important. The wrong type of swab can produce false-negative results. Woodenshafted swabs are toxic to some viruses. Cotton-tipped swabs are toxic for some bacteria and
chlamydiae. Blood cultures require decontamination and disinfection of the skin (eg, povidone iodine
swab, allowed to dry, removed with 70% alcohol). Multiple samples, each from a different site are
generally used; they are taken nearly simultaneously with fever spikes if possible. Normal flora of skin
and mucous membranes that grows in only a single blood sample is usually interpreted as contamination.
If a blood specimen is obtained from a central line, a peripheral blood specimen should also be obtained
to help differentiate systemic bacteremia from catheter infection. Cultures from infected catheters
generally turn positive more quickly and contain more organisms than simultaneously drawn peripheral
blood cultures. Some fungi, particularly molds (eg,
Aspergillus
sp), usually cannot be cultured from blood.
[Table 130-1.
Selective Media for Isolation of Common Bacteria]
The specimen must be transported rapidly, in the correct medium, and in conditions that limit growth of
any potentially contaminating normal flora. For accurate quantification of the pathogen, additional
pathogen growth must be prevented; specimens should be transported to the laboratory immediately or, if
transport is delayed, refrigerated (in most cases).
Certain cultures have special considerations.
Anaerobic bacteria
should not be cultured from sites where they are normal flora because differentiation
of pathogens from normal flora may be impossible. Specimens must be shielded from air, which can be
===PAGE:1312===
difficult. For swab specimens, anaerobic transport media are available. Specimens collected with a
syringe (eg, abscess contents) should be transported in the syringe.
Mycobacteria
are difficult to culture. Specimens containing normal flora (eg, sputum) must first be
decontaminated and concentrated.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and some other mycobacteria grow
slowly. Growth of
M. tuberculosis
is typically faster in liquid than in solid media; routine use of automated
systems with liquid media can result in growth within 2 wk vs ≥ 4 wk on solid media such as LowensteinJensen agar. In addition, few organisms may be present in a specimen. Multiple specimens from the same
site may help maximize yield. Specimens should be allowed to grow for 8 wk before being discarded. If an
atypical mycobacterium is suspected, the laboratory should be notified.
Viruses
are generally cultured from swabs and tissue specimens usually transported in media that
contain antibacterial and antifungal agents. Specimens are inoculated onto tissue cultures that support
the suspected virus and inhibit all other microbes. Viruses that are highly labile (eg, varicella zoster)
should be inoculated onto tissue cultures within 1 h of collection. Standard tissue cultures are most
sensitive. Rapid tissue cultures (shell vials) may provide more rapid results. Some common viruses
cannot be detected using routine culture methods and require alternative methods for diagnosis (eg,
enzyme immunoassay for
Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B and E viruses, HIV, and human T-lymphotropic
virus; serologic tests for hepatitis A and D viruses; nucleic acid-based methods for HIV).
Fungi specimens obtained from nonsterile sites must be inoculated onto media containing antibacterial
agents. Specimens should be allowed to grow for 4 wk before being discarded.
Susceptibility Testing
Susceptibility tests determine a microbe's vulnerability to antimicrobial drugs by exposing a standardized
concentration of organism to specific concentrations of antimicrobial drugs. Susceptibility testing can be
done for bacteria, fungi, and viruses. For some organisms, results obtained with one drug predict results
with similar drugs. Thus, not all potentially useful drugs are tested.
Susceptibility testing occurs in vitro and may not account for many in vivo factors (eg, pharmacodynamics
and pharmacokinetics, site-specific drug concentrations, host immune status, site-specific host defenses)
that influence treatment success. Thus, susceptibility test results do not always predict treatment
outcome.
Susceptibility testing can be done qualitatively, semiquantitatively, or using nucleic acid-based methods.
Testing can also determine the effect of combining different antimicrobials (synergy testing).
Qualitative methods:
Qualitative methods are less precise than semiquantitative. Results are usually
reported as susceptible (S), intermediate (I), or resistant (R). The commonly used disk diffusion method
(also known as the Kirby-Bauer test) is appropriate for rapidly growing organisms. It places antibioticimpregnated disks on agar plates inoculated with the test organism. After incubation (typically 16 to 18 h),
the diameter of the zone of inhibition around each disk is measured. Each organism-antibiotic
combination has different diameters signifying S, I, or R.
Other methods that require less rigid adherence to test parameters can be used to rapidly screen for
resistance of a single organism to a single drug or drug class or to specific antimicrobial combinations
(eg, oxacillin resistance of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
,
β
-lactamase production).
Semiquantitative methods:
Semiquantitative methods determine the minimal concentration of a drug
that inhibits growth of a particular organism in vitro. This minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) is
reported as a numerical value that may then be translated to 1 of 3 groupings: S (sensitive), I
(intermediate), or R (resistant). MIC determination is used primarily for bacteria, including mycobacteria
and anaerobes, and is sometimes used for fungi, especially
Candida
sp, obtained from sterile sites.
Minimal killing (bactericidal) concentration (MBC) can also be determined but is technically difficult, and
standards for interpretation have not been agreed on. The value of MBC testing is that it indicates
whether a drug may be bacteriostatic or bactericidal.
===PAGE:1313===
The antibiotic can be diluted in agar or broth, which is then inoculated with the organism. Broth dilution is
the gold standard but is labor intensive because only one drug concentration can be tested per tube. A
more efficient method uses a strip of polyester film impregnated with antibiotic in a concentration gradient
along its length. The strip is laid on an agar plate containing the inoculum, and the MIC determined by the
location on the strip where inhibition begins; multiple antibiotics can be tested on one plate.
The MIC allows correlation between drug susceptibility of the organism and the achievable tissue
concentration of drug not bound to protein (free drug). If the tissue concentration of free drug is higher
than the MIC, successful treatment is likely. Similarly, reports of S, I, and R are correlated with MIC but
generally are not tissue concentration-specific. That is, they are usually based on achievable serum or
plasma concentration of free drug.
Nucleic acid-based methods:
These tests incorporate nucleic acid techniques similar to those used for
organism identification ( but modified to detect known resistance genes or mutations. An
example is mecA, a gene for oxacillin resistance in
S. aureus
; if this gene is present, the organism is
considered resistant to all
β
-lactam drugs regardless of apparent susceptibility results. However, although
a number of such genes are known, their presence does not uniformly confer in vivo resistance. Also,
because new mutations or other resistance genes may be present, their absence does not guarantee
drug sensitivity. For these reasons and because the tests are limited in number, expensive, and not widely
available, nucleic acid methods have not replaced standard culture and routine susceptibility testing.
Immunologic Tests
Immunologic tests use an antigen to detect antibodies to a pathogen or use an antibody to
detect an
antigen of the pathogen in the patient's specimen. Handling varies, but if testing is to be delayed, the
specimen should typically be refrigerated or frozen to prevent overgrowth of bacterial contaminants.
Agglutination tests:
In agglutination tests (eg, latex agglutination, coaggregation), a particle (latex bead
or bacterium) is coupled to a reagent antigen or antibody. The resulting particle complex is mixed with the
specimen (eg, CSF, serum); if the target antibody or antigen is present in the specimen, it cross-links the
particles, producing measurable agglutination.
If results are positive, the body fluid is serially diluted and tested. Agglutination with more dilute solutions
indicates higher concentrations of the target antigen or antibody. The titer is correctly reported as the
reciprocal of the most dilute solution yielding agglutination; eg, 32 indicates that agglutination occurred in
a solution diluted to 1/32 of the starting concentration.
Usually, agglutination tests are rapid but less sensitive than many other methods. They can also
determine serotypes of some bacteria.
Complement fixation:
This test measures complement-consuming (complement-fixing) antibody in
serum or CSF. The test is used for diagnosis of some viral and fungal infections, particularly
coccidioidomycosis. The specimen is incubated with known quantities of complement and the antigen that
is the target of the antibody being measured. The degree of complement fixation indicates the relative
quantity of the antibody in the specimen. The test can measure IgM and IgG antibody titers or can be
modified to detect certain antigens. It is accurate but has limited applications, is labor intensive, and
requires numerous controls.
Enzyme immunoassays:
These tests use antibodies linked to enzymes to detect antigens and to detect
and quantify antibodies. The enzyme immunoassay (EIA) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) are examples. Because sensitivities of most enzyme immunoassays are high, they are usually
used for screening. Titers can be determined by serially diluting the specimen as for agglutination tests.
Test sensitivities, although usually high, can vary, sometimes according to patient age, microbial serotype,
specimen type, or stage of clinical disease.
Precipitation tests:
These tests measure an antigen or antibody in body fluids by the degree of visible
precipitation of antigen-antibody complexes within a gel (agarose) or in solution. There are many types of
===PAGE:1314===
precipitation tests (eg, Ouchterlony double diffusion, counter immunoelectrophoresis), but their
applications are limited. Usually, a blood specimen is mixed with test antigen to detect patient antibodies,
most often in suspected fungal infection or pyogenic meningitis. Because a positive result requires a large
amount of antibody or antigen, sensitivity is low.
Western blot test:
This test detects antimicrobial antibodies in the patient's sample (eg, serum, other
body fluid) by their reaction with target antigens (eg, viral components) that have been immobilized onto a
membrane by blotting.
The Western blot typically has good sensitivity, although often less than that of screening tests such as
ELISA, but generally is highly specific. Thus, it is usually used to confirm a positive result obtained with a
screening test.
Technical modifications of the Western blot are the line immunoassay (LIA); the recombinant immunoblot
assay (RIBA), which uses synthetic or recombinant-produced antigens; and immunochromatographic
assays, which can rapidly screen specimens for specific microbial antigens or patient antibodies.
Non-Nucleic Acid-Based Identification Methods
Once an organism has been isolated by culture, it must be identified. Non-nucleic acid-based
identification methods use phenotypic (functional or morphologic) characteristics of organisms rather than
genetic identification.
Characteristics of an organism's growth on culture media, such as colony size, color, and shape, provide
clues to species identification and, combined with Gram stain, direct further testing. Numerous
biochemical tests are available; each is restricted to organisms of a certain type (eg, aerobic or anaerobic
bacteria). Some assess an organism's ability to use different substrates for growth. Others assess
presence or activity of key enzymes (eg, coagulase, catalase). Tests are done sequentially, with previous
results determining the next test to be used. The sequences of tests are myriad and differ somewhat
among laboratories.
Non-nucleic acid-based identification tests may involve manual methods, automated systems, or
chromatographic methods. Some commercially available kits contain a battery of individual tests that may
be done simultaneously using a single specimen and may be useful for a wider range of organisms.
Multiple test systems can be highly accurate but may require several days to yield results.
Chromatographic methods:
Microbial components or products are separated and identified using highperformance liquid chromatography (HPLC) or gas chromatography. Usually, identification is by
comparison of an organism's fatty acids to a database. Chromatographic methods can be used to identify
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi. Test accuracy depends on the conditions used
to culture the specimen and the quality of the database, which may be inaccurate or incomplete.
Nucleic Acid-Based Identification Methods
Nucleic acid-based methods detect organism-specific DNA or RNA sequences extracted from the
microorganism. Sequences may or may not be amplified in vitro. Nucleic acid-based methods are
generally specific and highly sensitive and can be used for all categories of microbes. Results can be
provided rapidly. Because each test typically is specific to a single organism, the clinician must know the
diagnostic possibilities and request tests accordingly. For example, if a patient has symptoms suggesting
influenza but the influenza season is over, doing a more general viral diagnostic test (eg, viral culture)
rather than a specific flu test is better because another virus (eg, parainfluenza, adenovirus) may be the
cause.
Nucleic acid-based tests are qualitative, but quantification methods exist for a limited but increasing
number of infections (eg, HIV, cytomegalovirus, human T-cell lymphotropic virus); these methods can be
useful for diagnosis and for monitoring response to treatment.
Techniques that do not involve nucleic acid amplification are used if the organism has been first cultured
===PAGE:1315===
or is present in high concentration in the specimen (eg, in pharyngitis caused by group A
Streptococcus
,
in genital infections caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis
or
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
).
Amplification:
Nucleic acid amplification techniques take tiny amounts of DNA or RNA, replicate them
many times, and thus can detect minute traces of an organism in a specimen, avoiding the need for
culture. These techniques are particularly useful for organisms that are difficult to culture or identify using
other methods (eg, viruses, obligate intracellular pathogens, fungi, mycobacteria, some other bacteria) or
that are present in low numbers.
These tests may involve target amplification (eg, PCR, reverse transcriptase-PCR [RT-PCR], strand
displacement amplification, transcription amplification), signal amplification (eg, branched DNA assays,
hybrid capture), probe amplification (eg, ligase chain reaction, cleavase-invader, cycling probes), or
postamplification analysis (eg, sequencing of the amplified product, microarray analysis, and melting
curve analysis, as is done in real-time PCR).
Appropriate specimen collection and storage before arrival at the molecular diagnostic laboratory are
critical. Because amplification methods are so sensitive, false positives from trace contamination of the
specimen or equipment can easily occur. Despite high sensitivity, false negatives sometimes occur even
when a patient is symptomatic (eg, in West Nile virus infection). False-negative results can be minimized
by
• Avoiding use of swabs with wooden shafts or cotton tips
• Transporting specimens rapidly
• Freezing or refrigerating specimens if transport is likely to take > 2 h
Freezing is the typical storage method for nucleic acid amplification assays. However, specimens should
be refrigerated rather than frozen if labile viruses (eg, varicella-zoster virus, influenza virus, HIV-2) are
suspected or if viral cultures are also to be done (frozen specimens may not be usable for standard
cultures).
===PAGE:1316===
Chapter 131. Immunization
Introduction
Immunity can be achieved actively by using antigens (eg, vaccines, toxoids) or passively by using
antibodies (eg, immune globulins, antitoxins). A toxoid is a bacterial toxin that has been modified to be
nontoxic but that can still stimulate antibody formation. A vaccine is a suspension of whole (live or
inactivated) or fractionated bacteria or viruses rendered nonpathogenic. For vaccines available in the US,
see
Table 131-1
. The most current recommendations
for immunization are available at the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) web site.
Vaccines should be given exactly as recommended on the package insert; however, the interval between
a series of doses may be lengthened without losing efficacy. Injection vaccines are usually given IM into
the mid-lateral thigh (in infants and toddlers) or into the deltoid muscle (in school-aged children and
adults). Parents should keep a written history of each child's vaccinations.
[Table 131-1.
Vaccines Available in the US]
Risks, Restrictions, and High-Risk Groups
Live-microbial vaccines should not be given simultaneously with blood, plasma, or immune globulin, which
can interfere with development of desired antibodies; ideally, such vaccines should be given 2 wk before
or 6 to 12 wk after the immune globulins.
Immunocompromised patients should not receive live-virus vaccines, which could provoke severe or fatal
infections. In patients receiving short-term (ie, < 14 days) immunosuppressive therapy (eg,
corticosteroids, antimetabolites, alkylating compounds, radiation), live-virus vaccines should be withheld
until after treatment. Patients receiving longer-term immunosuppressive therapy may receive inactivated
vaccines such as DTaP; ≥ 3 mo after immunosuppressive therapy is stopped, they should be given an
additional dose of inactivated vaccine and may receive live-virus vaccines.
Asplenic patients are predisposed to overwhelming bacteremic infection, usually due to
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
,
Neisseria meningitidis
, or
Haemophilus influenzae
type b (Hib). They should be given the
following:
• Hib conjugate vaccine (HbCV)
• Meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine
• Annual influenza vaccine
• Pneumococcal conjugate (if age < 5 yr) or polysaccharide (if age > 5 yr) vaccine
Before solid organ transplantation, patients should receive all appropriate vaccines. Patients who have
had hematopoietic cell transplantation should be considered unimmunized and should receive repeat
doses of all appropriate vaccines.
Patients with AIDS should generally receive inactivated vaccines (eg, DTP, polio [IPV], HbCV) according
to routine recommendations but should usually not receive live-virus or bacterial vaccines (eg, measlesmumps-rubella, OPV, BCG). However, they can receive measles-mumps-rubella if immunosuppression is
not
severe because naturally occurring measles can cause severe, often fatal infection in AIDS patients,
and measles-mumps-rubella vaccine rarely causes serious complications.
Risks of vaccines should be discussed with patients. Parents should give written consent for vaccination
of their children. In the US, selected events that occur after routine vaccination must be reported to the
manufacturer, the US Department of Health and Human Services, and the Centers for Disease Control
===PAGE:1317===
and Prevention's Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Forms and instructions can be
obtained by calling 800-822-7967 (Health and Human Services) or from the VAERS web site
(http://vaers.hhs.gov
).
A temperature of > 39° C requires delaying vaccination, but minor infections, such as the common cold
(even with low-grade fever), do not. Some vaccines produced in cell culture systems contain trace
amounts of egg antigens. Although egg allergies are often considered contraindications to these
vaccines, the vaccines do not appear to cause significant adverse reactions in patients who can eat foods
that contain eggs, such as bread or cookies. A history of other allergic reactions may contraindicate use
of certain vaccines (see
Table 131-2
).
Pregnancy is a relative contraindication to vaccination with human papillomavirus (HPV), measlesmumps-rubella, pneumococcal pneumonia, varicella, and other live-virus vaccines.
Concern has been raised about the safety in infants of thimerosal, an Hg-based preservative present in
some vaccines, but there is no evidence of harm. In particular, there is no convincing evidence that
vaccines containing thimerosal are related to the development of autism. Nevertheless, most
manufacturers have developed thimerosal-free vaccines for use in infants. Information about vaccines
that currently contain low levels of Hg or thimerosal is available at the Institute for Vaccine Safety web
site.
Patients with a fluctuating or progressive neurologic disorder, such as Guillain-Barre syndrome, should
not be vaccinated until their condition has been stable for at least 1 yr because cerebral irritation is a risk.
If a neurologic disorder is stable, vaccinations should proceed normally. The risk in patients with multiple
sclerosis is unknown.
Routine Vaccinations
For the schedule of vaccinations for infants and children, see
Table 268-10
on p.
(see also the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's [CDC's] National
Immunization Program 2010 Childhood and Adolescent Immunization Schedule at
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/schedules/
).
For vaccinations to be considered for all adults, see
Table 131-2
(see also the CDC's National
Immunization Program Adult Immunization Recommendations at
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/schedules/adult-schedule
). Uses of nonroutine active vaccines (eg, for
rabies, typhoid, yellow fever, and mycobacterial infections) and some routine vaccinations are discussed
under specific disorders elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Diphtheria-Tetanus-Pertussis
Preparations:
Diphtheria (D) vaccines contain toxoids prepared from
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
.
Tetanus (T) vaccines contain toxoids prepared from
Clostridium tetani
. Acellular (a) pertussis (P)
vaccines contain semipurified or purified components of
Bordetella pertussis
. Whole-cell pertussis
vaccine is no longer available in the US because of concerns about adverse effects, but it is still available
in other parts of the world. There are 2 preparations of the acellular vaccine:
• DTaP for children < 7 yr
• Tdap for adolescents and adults
Tdap contains lower doses of diphtheria and pertussis components (indicated by the lower case d and p).
Administration:
The vaccine is given as 5 primary and 1 booster IM injections during childhood as
follows: the first 3 doses at 2-mo intervals, starting at age 2 mo; the 4th at age 12 to 15 mo; and the last
before school entry at age 4 to 6 yr. A single booster of Tdap is given at age 11 or 12 yr.
===PAGE:1318===
Adverse effects:
Adverse effects are rare and are mostly attributable to the pertussis component. They
include encephalopathy within 7 days; a seizure, with or without fever, within 3 days; persistent, severe,
inconsolable screaming or crying for ≥ 3 h; collapse or shock within 48 h; temperature of ≥ 40.5° C,
unexplained by another cause, within 48 h; and immediate severe or anaphylactic reaction to the vaccine.
These reactions contraindicate further use of pertussis vaccine; combined diphtheria and tetanus vaccine
is available without the pertussis component.
Mild adverse effects include redness, swelling, and soreness at the injection site.
Tetanus-Diphtheria
Although tetanus is rare in the US, it has a high mortality rate. Because one third of cases
[Table 131-2.
Common Vaccinations for Adults]
occur unpredictably (after minor or inapparent injuries), universal tetanus vaccination remains necessary.
Preparations:
The most widely used preparations combine tetanus toxoid with diphtheria toxoid (Td for
adults, DT for children); a preparation with only tetanus toxoid (TT) is also available. Td contains a lower
dose of diphtheria toxoid than DTaP and DT, which are used in children.
Administration:
Td boosters, 0.5 mL IM, are given every 10 yr after the Tdap booster that is given at
age 11 to 12 yr. Boosters are needed to maintain immunity. Because the incidence of pertussis is
increasing, at least one booster before age 65 should be Tdap. Adults who missed the primary series of
vaccinations in childhood should receive it as adults.
Adverse effects:
Adverse effects are very rare. They include anaphylactic reactions, Guillain-Barre
syndrome, and brachial neuritis. Mild effects include redness, swelling, and soreness at the injection site.
Haemophilus influenzae
Type b
Preparations:
These vaccines are prepared from the purified capsule of
Haemophilus influenzae
type b
(Hib). All Hib vaccines use polyribosylribitol phosphate (PRP) as the polysaccharide, but 4 different
protein carriers produce 4 different Hib conjugate vaccines: diphtheria toxoid (PRP-D),
Neisseria
meningitidis
outer membrane protein (PRP-OMP), tetanus toxoid (PRP-T), and diphtheria mutant carrier
protein CRM
(HbOC).
Administration:
A primary series is given in 3 IM doses at age 2, 4, and 6 mo or in 2 IM doses at age 2
and 4 mo, depending on the formulation. In either case, a booster is recommended at age 12 to 15 mo.
Some adults at increased risk (eg, because of AIDS or asplenia) may benefit from this vaccine.
Adverse effects:
Adverse effects are rare. They can include pain, redness, and swelling at the injection
site.
Hepatitis A
Preparations:
Hepatitis A vaccines are prepared from formalin-inactivated, cell culture-derived hepatitis A
virus. There are 2 formulations; either can be used in children or adults.
Administration:
The vaccine is given in 2 IM doses 6 mo apart. It is recommended for children aged 12
to 18 mo and for older children and adults who are at increased of the disease (see
Table 131-2
).
Adverse effects:
No serious adverse effects have been reported. Mild effects include pain and
occasionally induration at the injection site.
Hepatitis B
Preparations:
Hepatitis B vaccine uses recombinant DNA technology. Single-antigen and combination
===PAGE:1319===
formulations are available.
Administration:
The vaccine is given in 2 or 3 IM doses, depending on the formulation. Universal
vaccination is recommended beginning at birth.
Adverse effects:
Serious adverse effects are very rare and include anaphylaxis. Mild effects include
pain at the injection site and occasionally an increase in temperature to > 38°C.
Human Papillomavirus
Preparations:
Recombinant technology is used to prepare the vaccine. The vaccine is made from HPVlike particles (VLP) from serotypes 6, 11, 16, and 18, which cause 70% of cervical cancers and 90% of
genital warts.
Administration:
The vaccine is given in 3 IM doses: initially, then at 1 to 2 and 4 to 6 mo after the initial
dose. It is recommended for females aged 11 to 13 but can be given as early as age 9 or up to age 26 for
catch-up. Vaccination is not recommended after age 26.
Adverse effects:
No serious adverse effects have been reported. Mild effects include redness, swelling,
and tenderness at the injection site.
Influenza
Preparations:
Influenza vaccines may be inactivated trivalent vaccines (TIV) or live-attenuated vaccines
(LAIV). Each type targets 3 virus strains (2 from influenza A and 1 from influenza B). Because antigenic
drift is continual, 1 or 2 strains are changed each year in anticipation of the expected predominant
influenza strains. An inactivated vaccine against avian influenza has been developed but is not
commercially available. It is being nationally stockpiled in case person-to-person transmission of avian
influenza becomes possible.
Administration:
The vaccine is required annually for at-risk patients because of antigenic drift. Because
outbreaks usually begin in early winter or midwinter, the vaccine is given in the fall, usually October and
November in the Northern Hemisphere.
TIV, given as a single IM injection, is recommended for people at high risk of serious sequelae, including
children aged 6 mo to 8 yr and anyone > 50 yr (see
Table 131-2
), as well as anyone who requests
vaccination.
LAIV, given as an intranasal spray, is indicated for healthy people aged 2 to 49 yr; it is contraindicated
during pregnancy.
Adverse effects:
Rarely, TIV has adverse effects, such as Guillain-Barre syndrome, anaphylactic
reactions, soreness at the injection site, and fever. Adverse effects of LAIV are unusual; they include
possible triggering of asthma and transmission of the virus to unimmunized contacts.
Egg protein is used in both vaccine types; thus, the vaccine is contraindicated for people who have
severe anaphylactic reactions to egg protein.
Measles, Mumps, and Rubella
Preparations:
The vaccine contains live-attenuated virus prepared in chicken embryo cell cultures.
Measles vaccine is available as a single-antigen (measles-only) vaccine or combined with rubella (MR),
mumps and rubella (MMR), or mumps, rubella, and varicella (MMRV). There are also single-antigen
vaccines for mumps, rubella, and varicella.
Administration:
Most commonly, the combination vaccine MMR or MMRV is given sc. The vaccine
should be given to all children in their 2nd yr of life, typically at age 12 to 15 mo, with a 2nd dose at age 4
to 6 yr. Adults at risk include those who have never received the vaccine and have never become
===PAGE:1320===
naturally infected. Generally, people born before 1956 are considered immune because infection during
their childhood was ubiquitous. Unless the vaccine is contraindicated, people who were born after 1956
and have not had 2 doses of the vaccine or the infections should receive at least one dose of the
combined vaccine; people who have been or are likely to be exposed (eg, college students, health care
workers, international travelers) should receive a 2nd dose.
Although the components of the vaccine can be given separately, the combined form is preferred because
people who need one vaccine probably need all 3, and revaccination poses no particular risk.
Adverse effects:
A mild, noncommunicable infection occurs in 15% of vaccine recipients. Symptoms
appear 7 to 11 days after immunization and include fever, malaise, and a measles-like exanthem. Mumps
vaccine has adverse effects only rarely; they include encephalitis (only from a Japanese mumps vaccine
strain), seizures, nerve deafness, parotitis, purpura, rash, and pruritus.
Rubella vaccine can cause joint pain, usually in the small peripheral joints 2 to 8 wk after immunization, in
< 1% of infants but in ≤ 26% of women. Rash or lymphadenopathy occasionally occurs. The vaccine is
not recommended for pregnant women because of the theoretic risk to the fetus. However, inadvertent
administration during pregnancy does not necessarily mean a therapeutic abortion is recommended
because the actual fetal risk may be nil.
With all of the vaccine formulations, local adverse effects are unusual and include soreness at the
injection site.
Pneumococcal Disease
Preparations:
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) contains 7 purified capsular polysaccharides of
Streptococcus pneumoniae
; each is coupled to a variant of diphtheria toxin. Pneumococcal
polysaccharide vaccine (PPV23) contains antigens from the 23 most virulent of the 83 subtypes of
S.
pneumococcus
. Unlike the older 23-valent vaccine, PCV7 can stimulate antibody responses in infants. It
also seems to confer greater protection against invasive pneumococcal disorders than PPV23. PPV23
reduces bacteremia by 56 to 81% in adults overall but is less effective in debilitated elderly people. It
reduces pneumonia incidence only minimally.
Administration:
PCV7 is recommended as a 4-dose IM series for infants at age 2, 4, 6, and 12 to 15 mo.
Children at high risk of pneumococcal disease (eg, children with sickle cell disease, asplenia, or a chronic
disorder) should receive a dose of PPV23 at age 24 mo and an additional dose 3 to 5 yr after the first.
PPV23 should be given to any older child or adult at high risk of pneumococcal disease (see
Table 131-
). One immunization is recommended for lifetime protection; however, revaccination after 5 yr should be
considered for patients at particularly high risk.
Adverse effects:
Adverse effects are usually mild and include fever, irritability, drowsiness, anorexia,
vomiting, and local erythema.
Poliomyelitis
Preparations:
Inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) contains a mixture of formalininactivated poliovirus
types 1, 2, and 3. IPV may contain trace amounts of streptomycin, neomycin, and polymyxin B. A
combination vaccine with IPV, DTaP, and hepatitis B is also available. The live-attenuated oral formulation
is no longer available in the US because it causes polio in about 1 of every 2.4 million people who receive
the vaccine.
Administration:
A 4-dose IM series is given at age 2 mo, 4 mo, 6 to 18 mo, and 4 to 6 yr. Typically, a
combination vaccine is used for
the first 3 vaccinations and a single-antigen vaccine for the last dose.
Adverse effects:
No adverse effects have been associated with IPV. Because it may contain trace
amounts of neomycin, streptomycin, and polymyxin B, people who are sensitive to any of these drugs
may have an allergic reaction to the vaccine.
===PAGE:1321===
Varicella
Preparations:
The vaccine contains an attenuated wild strain of varicella and trace amounts of gelatin
and neomycin. It is available as a single-antigen vaccine or as a combination vaccine with MMR.
Administration:
The vaccine is given sc in 2 doses: at age 12 to 15 mo and at age 4 to 6 yr. The 2nd
dose is a new recommendation; thus, a catch-up dose is suggested for children, adolescents, and adults
who have received only one dose. The vaccine should be given to all children and to young adults not
previously infected, especially health care practitioners and close contacts of immunocompromised
patients. If adults have not had varicella, levels of protective antibodies should be measured to determine
the need for vaccination. No immune globulins, particularly varicella-zoster immune globulin, should be
given within 5 mo before or 2 mo after vaccination because immune globulins may prevent development
of protective antibodies.
Adverse effects:
Adverse effects are minimal and include transient pain, tenderness, and redness at the
injection site. Occasionally, within 1 mo of vaccination, a mild maculopapular or varicella-like rash
develops. Patients who develop this rash should avoid contact with immunocompromised people until it
resolves. Spread of the virus from vaccine recipients to susceptible people has been documented in < 1%
of recipients but only from those who developed a rash.
Because Reye's syndrome can develop, recipients < 16 yr should avoid salicylates for 6 wk.
Herpes Zoster
Preparations:
The vaccine contains an attenuated wild strain of varicella, similar to the varicella vaccine
but with a higher amount of the attenuated virus.
Administration:
The vaccine is recommended for adults ≥ 60 yr regardless of prior infection. It is given
sc.
Adverse effects:
No serious adverse effects have been reported. Soreness at the site of the injection
may occur.
Simultaneous Administration of Different Vaccines
Simultaneous administration is safe, effective, and convenient; it is particularly recommended when
children may be unavailable for future vaccination or when adults require multiple simultaneous vaccines
(eg, before international travel). Simultaneous administration may involve combination vaccines (see
Table 131-1
) or use of ≥ 1 single-antigen vaccines. More than one vaccine may be given at the same time
using different injection sites and syringes. If live-virus vaccines (varicella and MMR) are not given at the
same time, they should be given at least 4 wk apart.
Immunizations for Travelers
Immunizations may be required for travel to areas where infectious diseases are endemic. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention can provide information; a telephone service (1-877-394-8747) and
web site (wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/content/vaccinations.aspx
) are available 24 h/day.
Passive Immunization
Passive immunization is provided in the following circumstances:
• When people cannot synthesize antibody
• When people have been exposed to a disease that they are not immune to or that is likely to cause
complications
• When people have a disease and the effects of the toxin must be ameliorated
===PAGE:1322===
For immune globulins and antitoxins available in the US, see
Table 131-3
.
Human immune globulin (IG):
IG is a concentrated antibody-containing solution prepared from plasma
obtained from normal donors. It consists primarily of IgG, although trace amounts of IgA, IgM, and other
serum proteins may be present. IG very rarely contains transmissible viruses (eg, hepatitis B or C, HIV)
and is stable for many months if stored at 4°C. IG is given IM. Because maximal serum antibody levels
may not occur until about 48 h after IM injection, IG must be given as soon after exposure as possible.
Half-life of IG in the circulation is about 3 wk.
IG may be used for prophylaxis in hepatitis A, measles, immunoglobulin deficiency, varicella (in
immunocompromised patients when varicella-zoster IG is unavailable), and rubella exposure during the
1st trimester of pregnancy.
[Table 131-3.
Immune Globulins and Antitoxins* Available in the US]
IG provides only temporary protection; the antibody content against specific agents varies by as much as
10-fold among preparations. Administration is painful, and anaphylaxis can occur.
IV immune globulin (IVIG)
was developed to provide larger and repeated doses of human immune
globulin. IVIG is used to treat or prevent severe bacterial and viral infections, autoimmune disorders, and
immunodeficiency disorders, particularly the following:
• Kawasaki disease
• HIV infection in children
• Chronic B-cell lymphocytic leukemia
• Primary immunodeficiencies
• Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura
• Prevention of graft-vs-host disease
IVIG or a specific monoclonal antibody against RSV is available for prevention of RSV in children who are
< 24 mo and have bronchopulmonary dysplasia or a history of premature birth (< 35 wk gestation).
Adverse effects are uncommon, although fever, chills, headache, faintness, nausea, vomiting,
hypersensitivity, anaphylactic reactions, coughing, and volume overload have occurred.
Subcutaneous immune globulin (SCIG)
is also prepared from pooled human plasma; SCIG is intended
for home use in patients with a primary immunodeficiency.
Injection site reactions are common, but systemic adverse effects (eg, fever, chills) are much less
common than with IVIG.
Hyperimmune globulin:
Hyperimmune globulin is prepared from the plasma of people with high titers of
antibody against a specific organism or antigen. It is derived from people convalescing from natural
infections or donors artificially immunized.
Hyperimmune globulins are available for hepatitis B, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), rabies, tetanus,
cytomegalovirus, vaccinia, and varicella-zoster. Administration is painful, and anaphylaxis may occur.
===PAGE:1323===
Chapter 132. Bacteria and Antibacterial Drugs
Introduction
Bacteria are microorganisms that have circular double-stranded DNA and (except for mycoplasmas) cell
walls. Most bacteria live extracellularly. Some bacteria (eg,
Salmonella typhi; Neisseria gonorrhoeae;
Legionella, Mycobacterium, Chlamydia
, and
Chlamydophila
spp) preferentially reside and replicate
intracellularly. Some bacteria such as chlamydiae and rickettsiae are obligate intracellular pathogens (ie,
able to grow, reproduce, and cause disease only within the cells of the host). Others (eg,
Salmonella
typhi, Brucella
sp,
Francisella tularensis, N. gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis, Legionella
and
Listeria
spp,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
) are facultative intracellular pathogens.
Many bacteria are present in humans as normal flora, often in large numbers and in many areas (eg, in
the GI tract). Only a few bacterial species are human pathogens.
Bacteria are classified by the following criteria (see
Table 132-1
).
Morphology:
Bacteria may be cylindric (bacilli), spherical (cocci), or spiral (spirochetes). A few coccal,
many bacillary, and most spirochetal species are motile.
Staining:
The most common stain for general bacterial identification is Gram stain. Gram-positive
bacteria retain crystal violet dye (appearing dark blue) after iodine fixation and alcohol decolorization;
gram-negative bacteria do not. Gram-negative bacteria have an additional outer membrane containing
lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin), increasing the virulence of these bacteria. (For other factors that enhance
bacterial pathogenicity, see Factors Facilitating Microbial Invasion )
Ziehl-Neelsen stain (acid-fast stain) is used to identify mainly mycobacteria, particularly
M. tuberculosis
. It
also can identify
Nocardia
sp. Carbolfuchsin is applied with heat, followed by decolorization with
hydrochloric acid and ethanol and counterstaining with methylene blue.
Encapsulation:
Some bacteria are enclosed in capsules; for some encapsulated bacteria (eg,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae
), the capsule helps protect them from ingestion by
phagocytes. Encapsulation increases bacterial virulence.
Oxygen requirements:
Aerobic bacteria (obligate aerobes) require O
to produce energy and to grow
in culture. They produce energy using aerobic cellular respiration.
Anaerobic bacteria (obligate anaerobes) do not require O
and do not grow in culture
if air is present.
They produce energy using fermentation or anaerobic respiration. Anaerobic bacteria are common in the
GI tract, vagina, dental crevices, and wounds when blood supply is impaired.
Facultative bacteria can grow with or without O
. They produce energy by fermentation or anaerobic
respiration when O
is absent and by aerobic cellular respiration when O
is present. Microaerophilic
bacteria prefer a reduced O
[Table 132-1.
Classification of Common Pathogenic Bacteria]
tension (eg, 2 to 10%). Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular parasites that acquire energy from the host
cell and do not produce it themselves.
Antibacterial Drugs
Antibacterial drugs are derived from bacteria or molds or are synthesized de novo. Technically, "antibiotic"
refers only to antimicrobials derived from bacteria or molds but is often (including in THE MANUAL) used
synonymously with "antibacterial drug."
===PAGE:1324===
Antibiotics have many mechanisms of action, including inhibiting cell wall synthesis, activating enzymes
that destroy the cell wall, increasing cell membrane permeability, and interfering with protein synthesis
and nucleic acid metabolism.
Antibiotics sometimes interact with other drugs, raising or lowering serum levels of other drugs by
increasing or decreasing their metabolism or by various other mechanisms (see
Table 132-2
). The most clinically important interactions involve drugs with a low therapeutic ratio (ie, toxic
levels are close to therapeutic levels). Also, other drugs can increase or decrease levels of antibiotics.
Many antibiotics are chemically related and are thus grouped into classes. Although drugs within each
class share structural and functional similarities, they often have different pharmacology and spectra of
activity.
Selection and Use of Antibiotics
Antibiotics should be used only if clinical or laboratory evidence suggests bacterial infection. Use for viral
illness or undifferentiated fever is inappropriate, subjects patients to drug complications without any
benefit, and contributes to bacterial resistance. Certain bacterial infections (eg, abscesses, infections with
foreign bodies) require surgical intervention and do not respond to antibiotics alone.
Spectrum of activity:
Cultures and antibiotic sensitivity testing are essential for selecting a drug for
serious infections. However, treatment must often begin before culture results are available, necessitating
selection according to the most likely pathogens (empiric antibiotic selection). Whether chosen according
to culture results or not, drugs with the narrowest spectrum of activity that can control the infection should
be used. For empiric treatment of serious infections that may involve any one of several pathogens (eg,
fever in neutropenic patients) or that may be due to multiple pathogens (eg, polymicrobial anaerobic
infection), a broad spectrum of activity is desirable. The most likely pathogens and their susceptibility to
antibiotics vary according to geographic location (within cities or even within a hospital) and can change
from month to month.
For serious infections, combinations of antibiotics are often necessary because multiple species of
bacteria may be present or because combinations act synergistically against a single species of bacteria.
Synergism is usually defined as a more rapid and complete bactericidal action from a combination of
antibiotics than occurs with either antibiotic alone. A common example is a cell wall-active antibiotic (eg, a
β
-lactam, vancomycin) plus an aminoglycoside.
Effectiveness:
In vivo antibiotic effectiveness involves many factors, including
• Pharmacology (eg, absorption, distribution, concentration in fluids and tissues, protein binding, rate of
metabolism or excretion)
• Pharmacodynamics (ie, the time course of antibacterial effects exerted by drug levels in blood and at the
site of infection)
• Drug interactions or inhibiting substances
• Host defense mechanisms
[Table 132-2.
Common Effects of Antibiotics on Other Drugs]
•
In vitro killing power but usually only if the site of infection (eg, in meningitis or endocarditis) is resistant
to treatment or if systemic host defenses are weak (eg, in neutropenic or other immunocompromised
patients)
Bactericidal drugs kill bacteria in vitro. Bacteriostatic drugs slow or stop in vitro bacterial growth. These
definitions are not absolute; bacteriostatic drugs may kill some bacteria, and bactericidal drugs may not
kill all of the bacteria in vitro. More precise quantitative methods identify the minimum in vitro
===PAGE:1325===
concentration at which an antibiotic can inhibit growth (minimum inhibitory concentration, or MIC) or kill
(minimum bactericidal concentration, or MBC).
The predominant determinant of bacteriologic response to antibiotics is the time that blood levels of the
antibiotic exceed the MIC (time-dependence) or the peak blood level relative to MIC (concentrationdependence).
β
-Lactams and vancomycin exhibit time-dependent bactericidal activity. Increasing their concentration
above the MIC does not increase their bactericidal activity, and their in vivo killing is generally slow. In
addition, because there is no or very brief residual inhibition of bacterial growth after concentrations fall
below the MIC (postantibiotic effect, or PAE),
β
-lactams and vancomycin are most often effective when
serum levels of free drug (drug not bound to serum protein) exceed the MIC for ≥ 50% of the time.
Because ceftriaxone has a long serum half-life, free serum levels exceed the MIC of very susceptible
pathogens for the entire 24-h dosing interval. However, for
β
-lactams that have serum half-lives of ≤ 2 h,
frequent dosing or continuous infusion is required. For vancomycin, trough levels should be maintained at
least at 10 to 15
μ
g/mL.
Aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, and daptomycin exhibit concentration-dependent bactericidal activity.
Increasing their concentrations from levels slightly above the MIC to levels far above the MIC increases
their rate of bactericidal activity and decreases the bacterial load. In addition, if concentrations exceed the
MIC even briefly, aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones have a PAE on residual bacteria; duration of PAE
is also concentration-dependent. If PAEs are long, drug levels can be below the MIC for extended periods
without loss of efficacy, allowing less frequent dosing. Consequently, aminoglycosides and
fluoroquinolones are usually most effective as intermittent boluses that reach peak free serum levels ≥ 10
times the MIC of the bacteria.
Route:
For many antibiotics, oral administration results in therapeutic blood levels nearly as rapidly as IV
administration. However, IV administration is preferred in the following circumstances:
• Oral antibiotics cannot be tolerated (eg, because of vomiting).
• Oral antibiotics cannot be absorbed (eg, because of malabsorption after intestinal surgery).
• Intestinal motility is impaired (eg, because of opioid use).
• No oral formulation is available (eg, for aminoglycosides).
• Patients are critically ill, possibly impairing GI tract perfusion or making even the brief delay with oral
administration detrimental.
Special populations:
Doses and scheduling of antibiotics may need to be adjusted for the following:
• Infants
• The elderly
• Patients with renal failure (see
Table 132-3
)
• Patients with hepatic insufficiency (most commonly for cefoperazone, ceftriaxone, chloramphenicol,
clindamycin, metronidazole, nafcillin, rifabutin, and rifampin)
Pregnancy and breastfeeding affect choice of antibiotic. Penicillins, cephalosporins, and erythromycin are
among the safest antibiotics during pregnancy; tetracyclines are contraindicated. Most antibiotics reach
sufficient concentrations in breast milk to affect a breastfed baby, sometimes contraindicating their use in
women who are breastfeeding.
Duration:
Antibiotics should be continued until objective evidence of systemic infection (eg, fever,
===PAGE:1326===
symptoms, abnormal laboratory findings) is absent for several days. For some infections (eg,
endocarditis, TB, osteomyelitis), antibiotics are continued for weeks or months to prevent relapse.
Complications:
Complications of antibiotic therapy include superinfection by nonsusceptible bacteria or
fungi and cutaneous, renal, hematologic, and GI adverse effects. Adverse effects frequently require
stopping the causative drug and substituting another antibiotic to which the bacteria are susceptible;
sometimes, no alternatives exist.
Antibiotic Resistance
Resistance to an antibiotic may be inherent in a particular bacterial species or may be acquired through
mutations or acquisition of genes for antibiotic resistance that are obtained
[Table 132-3.
Usual Doses of Commonly Prescribed Antibiotics]
[Table 132-4.
Common Mechanisms of Antibiotic Resistance]
from another organism. Different mechanisms for resistance are encoded by these genes (see
Table 132-
). Resistance genes can be transmitted between 2 bacterial cells by the following mechanisms:
• Transformation (uptake of naked DNA from another organism)
• Transduction (infection by a bacteriophage)
• Conjugation (exchange of genetic material in the form of either plasmids, which are pieces of
independently replicating extra-chromosomal DNA, or transposons, which are movable pieces of
chromosomal DNA) Plasmids and transposons, which can rapidly disseminate resistance genes
Antibiotic use preferentially eliminates non-resistant bacteria, increasing the proportion of resistant
bacteria that remain. Antibiotic use has this effect not only on pathogenic bacteria but also on normal
flora; resistant normal flora can become a reservoir for resistance genes that can spread to pathogens.
Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycosides (see
Table 132-5
) have concentration-dependent bactericidal activity. They bind to the 30S ribosome, thereby
inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis.
Pharmacology
Aminoglycosides are poorly absorbed orally but are well absorbed from the peritoneum, pleural cavity,
and joints (and should never be instilled in these body cavities) and from denuded skin. Aminoglycosides
are usually given IV. Aminoglycosides are distributed well into ECF except for vitreous humor, CSF,
respiratory secretions, and bile (particularly in patients with biliary obstruction). Intravitreous injection is
required to treat endophthalmitis. Intraventricular injection is often required to reach intraventricular levels
high enough to treat meningitis.
[Table 132-5.
Aminoglycosides]
Aminoglycosides are excreted by glomerular filtration and have a serum half-life of 2 to 3 h; the half-life
increases exponentially as the GFR falls (eg, in renal insufficiency, in the elderly).
Indications
Aminoglycosides are used for
• Serious gram-negative bacillary infections (especially those due to
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
)
===PAGE:1327===
Aminoglycosides are active against most gram-negative aerobic and facultative anaerobic bacilli but lack
activity against anaerobes and most gram-positive bacteria, except for most staphylococci; however,
some gram-negative bacilli and methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant.
Aminoglycosides that are active against
P. aeruginosa
include tobramycin (particularly), gentamicin, and
amikacin. Streptomycin, neomycin, and kanamycin are not active against
P. aeruginosa
. Gentamicin and
tobramycin have similar antimicrobial spectra against gram-negative bacilli, but tobramycin is more active
against
P. aeruginosa
, and gentamicin is more active against
Serratia marcescens
. Amikacin is frequently
active against gentamicin- and tobramycin-resistant pathogens.
Aminoglycosides are infrequently used alone, typically for plague and tularemia. They are usually used
with a broad-spectrum
β
-lactam for severe infection suspected to be due to a gram-negative bacillary
species. However, because of increasing aminoglycoside resistance, a fluoroquinolone can be
substituted for the aminoglycoside in initial empiric regimens, or if the pathogen is found to be susceptible
to the accompanying antibiotic, the aminoglycoside can be stopped after 2 to 3 days unless an
aminoglycoside-sensitive
P. aeruginosa
is identified.
Gentamicin or, less commonly, streptomycin may be used with other antibiotics to treat endocarditis due to
streptococci or enterococci. Enterococcal resistance to aminoglycosides has become a common problem.
Because treatment of enterococcal endocarditis requires prolonged use of a potentially nephrotoxic and
ototoxic aminoglycoside plus a bacterial cell wall-active drug (eg, penicillin, vancomycin) to achieve
bactericidal synergy, the choice of aminoglycoside must be based on special in vitro susceptibility testing.
Susceptibility only to high levels of aminoglycosides in vitro predicts synergy when low-dose
aminoglycoside therapy is combined with a cell wall-active drug. If the strain is susceptible to high levels
of gentamicin and streptomycin, gentamicin is preferred because serum levels can be readily determined
and toxicity is less. High-level enterococcal resistance to gentamicin in vitro does not rule out
susceptibility of these strains to high levels of streptomycin; in such cases, streptomycin should be used.
Few therapeutic options are available for endocarditis due to enterococci that are resistant to high levels
of gentamicin and streptomycin; no synergistic cell wall-active drug/aminoglycoside combination exists for
endocarditis due to such strains, but long courses of a cell wall-active drug alone or combined with
daptomycin or linezolid have had limited success.
Streptomycin has limited uses because of resistance and toxicity. It is used with other antibiotics to treat
TB.
Because of toxicity, neomycin and kanamycin are limited to topical use in small amounts. Neomycin is
available for eye, ear, oral, and rectal use and as a bladder irrigant. Oral neomycin is used topically
against intestinal flora to prepare the bowel before surgery and to treat hepatic coma.
Contraindications
Aminoglycosides are contraindicated in patients who are allergic to them.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Aminoglycosides are in pregnancy category D (there is evidence of human risk, but clinical benefits may
outweigh risk). Aminoglycosides enter breast milk but are not well absorbed orally. Thus, they are
considered compatible with use during breastfeeding.
Adverse Effects
All aminoglycosides cause
• Renal toxicity (often reversible)
• Vestibular and auditory toxicity (often irreversible)
===PAGE:1328===
• Prolongation of effects of neuromuscular blockers
Symptoms and signs of vestibular damage are vertigo, nausea, vomiting, nystagmus, and ataxia.
Risk factors
for renal, vestibular, and auditory toxicity are
• Frequent or very high doses
• Very high blood levels of the drug
• Long duration of therapy (particularly > 3 days)
• Older age
• A preexisting renal disorder
•
Coadministration of vancomycin, cyclosporine, or amphotericin B
• For renal toxicity, coadministration of contrast agents
• For auditory toxicity, preexisting hearing problems and coadministration of loop diuretics
Patients receiving aminoglycosides for > 2 wk and those at risk of vestibular and auditory toxicity should
be monitored with serial audiography. At the first sign of toxicity, the drug should be stopped (if possible),
or dosing should be adjusted.
Aminoglycosides can prolong the effect of neuromuscular blockers (eg, succinylcholine, curare-like drugs)
and worsen weakness in disorders affecting neuromuscular transmission (eg, myasthenia gravis). These
effects are particularly likely when the drug is given too rapidly or serum levels are excessively high. The
effects sometimes resolve more rapidly if patients are given neostigmine or IV Ca. Other neurologic
effects include paresthesias and peripheral neuropathy.
Hypersensitivity reactions are uncommon. High oral doses of neomycin can cause malabsorption.
Dosing considerations:
Because toxicity depends more on duration of therapeutic levels than on peak
levels and because efficacy is concentration-dependent rather than timedependent, frequent doses are
avoided. Once/day IV dosing is preferred for most indications except enterococcal endocarditis. IV
aminoglycosides are given slowly (30 min for divided daily dosing or 30 to 45 min for once/day dosing).
In patients with normal renal function, once/day dosing of gentamicin or tobramycin is 5 mg/kg (7 mg/kg if
patients are critically ill) q 24 h, and once/day dosing for amikacin is 15 mg/kg q 24 h. If patients respond
to the higher dose of gentamicin clinically and renal
[Table 132-6.
Dosing for Aminoglycosides in Adults]
function continues to be normal, the once/day dose can be reduced to the lower dose after the first few
days of treatment.
In critically ill patients, peak serum levels should be determined after the first dose. In all patients, peak
and trough levels are measured after the 2nd or 3rd dose (when the daily dose is divided) or when
therapy lasts > 3 days, as well as after the dose is changed. Serum creatinine is measured every 2 to 3
days, and if it is stable, serum aminoglycoside levels need not be measured again. Peak concentration is
the level 60 min after an IM injection or 30 min after the end of a 30-min IV infusion. Trough levels are
measured during the 30 min before the next dose.
Peak levels in serum of at least 10 times the MIC are desirable. Dosing is adjusted to ensure a
therapeutic peak serum level (to facilitate concentration-dependent activity) and nontoxic trough levels
===PAGE:1329===
(see
Table 132-6
). In critically ill patients, who are likely to have expanded volumes of distribution and
who are given higher initial doses, target peak serum levels are 16 to 24
μ
g/mL for gentamicin and
tobramycin and 56 to 64
μ
g/mL for amikacin. For gentamicin and tobramycin, trough levels should be < 1
μ
g/mL at 18 to 24 h after the first dose with once/day dosing and between 1 and 2
μ
g/mL with divided
daily dosing.
For patients with renal insufficiency, the loading dose is the same as that for patients with normal renal
function; usually, the dosing interval is increased rather than the dose decreased. Guidelines for
maintenance doses based on serum creatinine or creatinine clearance values are available (see
Table
132-6
), but they are not precise, and measurement of blood levels is preferred.
If patients are taking a high dose of a
β
-lactam (eg, piperacillin, ticarcillin) and an aminoglycoside, the
high serum levels of the
β
-lactam can inactivate the aminoglycoside in vitro in serum specimens obtained
to determine drug levels unless the specimen is assayed immediately or frozen. If patients with renal
failure are concurrently taking an aminoglycoside and a high-dose
β
-lactam, the serum aminoglycoside
level may be lower because interaction in vivo is prolonged.
Spectinomycin
Spectinomycin is a bacteriostatic antibiotic chemically related to the aminoglycosides. Spectinomycin
binds to the 30S subunit of the ribosome, thus inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis. Its activity is
restricted to gonococci. Spectinomycin is excreted by glomerular filtration.
Indications
include
• Gonococcal urethritis
• Cervicitis
• Proctitis
Spectinomycin is not effective for gonococcal pharyngitis. It is reserved for patients who cannot be treated
with ceftriaxone, cefpodoxime, cefixime, or a fluoroquinolone.
Adverse effects, including hypersensitivity reactions and fever, are rare.
β
-Lactams
β
-Lactams are antibiotics that have a
β
-lactam ring nucleus. Subclasses include
• Cephalosporins and cephamycins (cephems)
• Carbacephems (loracarbef)
• Penicillins
• Clavams
• Carbapenems
• Monobactams
All
β
-lactams bind to and inactivate enzymes required for bacterial cell wall synthesis.
Cephalosporins
Cephalosporins are bactericidal (see
Table 132-7
). They inhibit enzymes in the cell wall of susceptible bacteria, disrupting cell synthesis.
===PAGE:1330===
Pharmacology
Cephalosporins penetrate well into most body fluids and the ECF of most tissues, especially when
inflammation (which enhances diffusion) is present. However, the only cephalosporins that reach CSF
levels high enough to treat meningitis are
• Ceftriaxone
• Cefotaxime
• Ceftazidime
• Cefepime
All cephalosporins penetrate poorly into ICF and the vitreous humor.
Most cephalosporins are excreted primarily in urine, so their doses must be adjusted in patients with renal
insufficiency. Cefoperazone and ceftriaxone, which have significant biliary excretion, do not require such
dose adjustment.
Indications
Cephalosporins are bactericidal for most of the following:
• Gram-positive bacteria
• Gram-negative bacteria
Cephalosporins are classified in generations (see
Table 132-7
). The 1st-generation
[Table 132-7.
Cephalosporins*]
drugs are effective mainly against gram-positive organisms. Higher generations generally have expanded
spectra against aerobic gram-negative bacilli. The 5th-generation cephalosporin ceftobiprole, which is not
yet available in the US, is active against methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
. Cephalosporins
have the following limitations:
• Lack of activity against enterococci
• Lack of activity against methicillin-resistant staphylococci (except for ceftobiprole)
• Lack of activity against anaerobic gram-negative bacilli (except for cefotetan and cefoxitin)
First-generation cephalosporins:
These drugs have excellent activity against
• Gram-positive cocci
Oral 1st-generation cephalosporins are commonly used for uncomplicated skin and soft-tissue infections,
which are usually due to staphylococci and streptococci. Parenteral cefazolin is frequently used for
endocarditis due to methicillin-sensitive
S. aureus
and for prophylaxis before cardiothoracic, orthopedic,
abdominal, and pelvic surgery.
Second-generation cephalosporins and cephamycins:
Second-generation cephalosporins are active
against
• Gram-positive cocci
===PAGE:1331===
• Certain gram-negative bacilli
Cephamycins are active against
•
Bacteroides
sp, including
B. fragilis
These drugs may be slightly less active against gram-positive cocci than 1st-generation cephalosporins.
Second-generation cephalosporins and cephamycins are often used for polymicrobial infections that
include gram-negative bacilli and gram-positive cocci. Because cephamycins are active against
Bacteroides
sp, they can be used when anaerobes are suspected (eg, in intra-abdominal sepsis,
decubitus ulcers, and diabetic foot infections). However, in some medical centers, these bacilli are no
longer reliably susceptible to cephamycins.
Third-generation cephalosporins:
These drugs are active against
•
Haemophilus influenzae
and some Entero-bacteriaceae (eg,
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Proteus mirabilis
) that do not produce ampC
β
-lactamase or extended-spectrum
β
-lactamase (ESBL)
Ceftazidime and cefoperazone are also active against
•
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Some 3rd-generation cephalosporins have relatively poor activity against gram-positive cocci. Oral
cefixime and ceftibuten have little activity against
S. aureus
and, if used for skin and soft-tissue infections,
should be restricted to uncomplicated infections due to streptococci. These cephalosporins have many
clinical uses, as does the 4th-generation cephalosporin (see
Table 132-8
).
Fourth-generation cephalosporin:
The 4th-generation cephalosporin cefepime has activity against
• Gram-positive cocci (similar to cefotaxime)
• Gram-negative bacilli (enhanced activity), including
P. aeruginosa
(similar to ceftazidime), ESBLproducing
K. pneumoniae
and
E. coli
, and ampC
β
-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae, such as
Enterobacter
sp
Fifth-generation cephalosporin:
The 5th-generation cephalosporin ceftobiprole is active against
• Methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
[Table 132-8.
Some Clinical Uses of 3rd- and 4th-Generation Cephalosporins]
Contraindications
Cephalosporins are contraindicated in patients who are allergic to them or who have had an anaphylactic
reaction to penicillins.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Cephalosporins are in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is
incomplete, or animal studies show risk but human studies do not).
Cephalosporins enter breast milk and may alter bowel flora of the infant. Thus, use during breastfeeding
is often discouraged.
Adverse Effects
Significant adverse effects include
===PAGE:1332===
Significant adverse effects include
• Hypersensitivity reactions (most common)
•
Clostridium difficile
-induced diarrhea (pseudomembranous colitis)
• Leukopenia
• Thrombocytopenia
• Positive Coombs' test (although hemolytic anemia is very uncommon)
Hypersensitivity reactions are the most common systemic adverse effects; rash is common, but immediate
IgE-mediated urticaria and anaphylaxis are rare.
Cross-sensitivity between cephalosporins and penicillins is uncommon; cephalosporins can be given
cautiously to patients with a history of delayed hypersensitivity to penicillin if necessary. However,
cephalosporins should not be used in patients who have had an anaphylactic reaction to penicillin. Pain
at the IM injection site and thrombophlebitis after IV use may occur.
Cefamandole (no longer available in the US), cefoperazone, and cefotetan may have a
disulfiram-like
effect when ethanol is ingested, causing nausea and vomiting. Cefamandole, cefoperazone, and
cefotetan may elevate the PT/INR and PTT, an effect that is reversible with vitamin K.
Contraindications
Ceftriaxone is contraindicated as follows:
• Ceftriaxone IV must not be coadministered with Ca-containing IV solutions (including continuous Cacontaining infusions such as parenteral nutrition) in neonates ≤ 28 days because precipitation of
ceftriaxone-Ca salt is a risk. Fatal reactions with ceftriaxone-Ca precipitates in the lungs and kidneys of
neonates have been reported. In some cases, different infusion lines were used, and ceftriaxone and
Ca-containing solutions were given at different times. To date, no intravascular or pulmonary
precipitates have been reported in patients other than neonates who are treated with ceftriaxone and
Ca-containing IV solutions. However, because an interaction between ceftriaxone and IV Ca-containing
solutions is theoretically possible in patients other than neonates, ceftriaxone and Ca-containing
solutions should not be mixed or given within 48 h of each other (based on 5 half-lives of ceftriaxone)
—even via different infusion lines at different sites—to any patient regardless of age. No data on
potential interaction between ceftriaxone and oral Ca-containing products or on interaction between IM
ceftriaxone and Ca-containing products (IV or oral) are available.
• Ceftriaxone should not be given to hyperbilirubinemic and preterm neonates because in vitro,
ceftriaxone can displace bilirubin from serum albumin, potentially triggering kernicterus.
Penicillins
Penicillins (see
Table 132-9
) are bactericidal by unknown mechanisms but perhaps by activating autolytic enzymes that
destroy the cell wall in some bacteria. Some bacteria produce
β
-lactamase, which inactivates the drug;
this effect can be blocked by adding a
β
-lactamase inhibitor (clavulanate, sulbactam, or tazobactam).
However, available
β
-lactamase inhibitors do not inhibit ampC
β
-lactamases, commonly produced by
Enterobacter, Serratia, Citrobacter, Providencia
, and
Morganella
spp or by
P. aeruginosa
, and these
drugs may only partially inhibit ESBL produced by some
K. pneumoniae, E. coli
, and other
Enterobacteriaceae.
[Table 132-9.
Penicillins]
Pharmacology
===PAGE:1333===
Food does not interfere with absorption of amoxicillin, but penicillin G should be given 1 h before or 2 h
after a meal. Amoxicillin has generally replaced ampicillin for oral use because amoxicillin is absorbed
better, has fewer GI effects, and can be given less frequently.
Penicillins are distributed rapidly in the ECF of most tissues, particularly when inflammation is present.
All penicillins except nafcillin are excreted in urine and reach high levels in urine. Parenteral penicillin G is
rapidly excreted (serum half-life 0.5 h), except for repository forms (the benzathine or procaine salt of
penicillin G); these forms are intended for deep IM injection only and provide a tissue depot from which
absorption takes place over several hours to several days. Benzathine penicillin reaches its peak level
more slowly and is generally longeracting than procaine penicillin.
Indications
Penicillin G-like drugs (including penicillin V) are primarily used against
•
Gram-positive bacteria
• Some gram-negative cocci (eg, meningococci)
A minority of gram-negative bacilli are also susceptible to large parenteral doses of penicillin G. Most
staphylococci, most
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
, many anaerobic gram-negative bacilli, and about 30% of
H.
influenzae
are resistant. Penicillin G is the drug of choice for syphilis and, with gentamicin, for
endocarditis due to susceptible enterococci.
Benzathine penicillin G is available as pure benzathine penicillin, a mixture of equal amounts of
benzathine and procaine penicillin G, and a mixture of 0.9 million units benzathine and 0.3 million units
procaine penicillin G. Of the 3 products, only pure benzathine penicillin is recommended for treating
syphilis and preventing rheumatic fever. Whether the mixture of equal amounts is effective in treating
syphilis is unknown. Pure benzathine penicillin and the mixture of equal amounts are indicated for treating
URIs and skin and soft-tissue infections caused by susceptible streptococci.
Amoxicillin and ampicillin:
These drugs are more active against
• Enterococci
• Certain gram-negative bacilli, such as nonβ
-lactamase-producing
H. influenzae, E. coli
, and
P.
mirabilis; Salmonella
sp; and
Shigella
sp
The addition of a
β
-lactamase inhibitor allows use against methicillin-sensitive staphylococci,
H.
influenzae, N. gonorrhoeae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Bacteroides
sp,
E. coli
, and
K. pneumoniae
.
Ampicillin is indicated primarily for infections typically caused by susceptible gram-negative bacteria:
• UTIs
• Meningococcal meningitis
• Biliary sepsis
• Respiratory infections
•
Listeria
meningitis
• Enterococcal infections
• Some typhoid fever and typhoid carriers
Penicillinase-resistant penicillins:
These drugs are used primarily for
===PAGE:1334===
• Penicillinase-producing methicillin-sensitive
S. aureus
These drugs are also used to treat some
S. pneumoniae
, group A streptococcal, and methicillin-sensitive
coagulase-negative staphylococcal infections.
Broad-spectrum (antipseudomonal) penicillin:
These drugs have activity against
• Bacteria susceptible to ampicillin
• Some strains of
Enterobacter
and
Serratia
spp
• Many strains of
P. aeruginosa
Ticarcillin is less active against enterococci than piperacillin. The addition of a
β
-lactamase inhibitor
enhances activity against
β
-lactamase-producing methicillin-sensitive
S. aureus, E. coli, K. pneumoniae,
H. influenzae
, and gram-negative anaerobic bacilli, but not against gram-negative bacilli that produce
ampC
β
-lactamase, and may only partially inhibit ESBL produced by some
K. pneumoniae
,
E. coli
, and
other Enterobacteriaceae. Broad-spectrum penicillins exhibit synergy with aminoglycosides and are
usually used with this class to treat
P. aeruginosa
infections.
Contraindications
Penicillins are contraindicated in patients who have had serious allergic reactions to them.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Penicillins are in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is incomplete,
or animal studies show risk but human studies do not).
Penicillins enter breast milk in small amounts. Their use is usually considered compatible with
breastfeeding.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• Hypersensitivity reactions, including rashes (most common)
Other adverse effects occur less commonly.
Hypersensitivity:
Most adverse effects are hypersensitivity reactions:
• Immediate reactions: Anaphylaxis (which can cause death within minutes), urticaria and angioneurotic
edema (in 1 to 5/10,000 injections), and death (in about 0.3/10,000 injections)
• Delayed reactions (in up to 8% of patients): Serum sickness, rashes (eg, macular, papular, morbilliform),
and exfoliative dermatitis (which usually appears after 7 to 10 days of therapy)
Most patients who report an allergic reaction to penicillin do not react to subsequent exposure to
penicillin. Although small, risk of an allergic reaction is about 10 times higher for patients who have had a
previous allergic reaction. Many patients report adverse reactions to penicillin that are not truly allergic
(eg, GI adverse effects, nonspecific symptoms). If
patients have a vague or inconsistent history of
penicillin allergy and taking alternative antibiotics is not effective or convenient, skin testing may be done
(. Desensitization may be attempted in patients with a positive skin test if there is no
alternative to a penicillin-type drug. However, patients with a history of anaphylaxis to penicillin should not
be given any
β
-lactam again (including for skin testing), except in very rare circumstances when no
substitute can be found. In such cases, special precautions and desensitization regimens are required
===PAGE:1335===
(.
Rashes:
Rashes occur more often with ampicillin and amoxicillin than with other penicillins. Patients with
infectious mononucleosis often develop a nonallergic rash, typically maculopapular, usually beginning
between days 4 and 7 of treatment.
Other adverse effects:
Penicillins can also cause
• CNS toxicity (eg, seizures) if doses are high, especially in patients with renal insufficiency
• Nephritis
•
C. difficile
-induced diarrhea (pseudomembranous colitis)
• Coombs'-positive hemolytic anemia
• Leukopenia
• Thrombocytopenia
Leukopenia seems to occur most often with nafcillin. Any penicillin used in very high IV doses can
interfere with platelet function and cause bleeding, but ticarcillin is the most common cause, especially in
patients with renal insufficiency.
Other adverse effects include pain at the IM injection site, thrombophlebitis when the same site is used
repeatedly for IV injection, and, with oral formulations, GI disturbances. Rarely, black tongue, due to
irritation of the glossal surface and keratinization of the superficial layers, occurs, usually when oral
formulations are used. Ticarcillin in high doses may cause Na overload because ticarcillin is a disodium
salt. Ticarcillin can also cause hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis because the large amount of
nonabsorbable anion presented to the distal tubules alters H
+
ion excretion and secondarily results in K
+
loss.
Dosing Considerations
Because penicillins, except nafcillin, reach high levels in urine, doses must be reduced in patients with
severe renal insufficiency. Probenecid inhibits renal tubular secretion of many penicillins, increasing blood
levels. It is sometimes given to maintain high blood levels.
Other
β
-Lactams
Carbapenems
(imipenem, meropenem, doripenem, and ertapenem) are parenteral bactericidal
antibiotics that have an extremely broad spectrum. They are active against
•
H. influenzae
• Anaerobes
• Most Enterobacteriaceae (including those that produce ampC
β
-lactamase and ESBL, although
P.
mirabilis
tends to have higher imipenem MICs)
• Methicillin-sensitive staphylococci and streptococci, including
S. pneumoniae
(except possibly strains
with reduced penicillin sensitivity)
Most
Enterococcus faecalis
and many
P. aeruginosa
strains, including those resistant to broad-spectrum
penicillins and cephalosporins, are susceptible to imipenem, meropenem, and doripenem but are resistant
to ertapenem. Carbapenems are active synergistically with aminoglycosides against
P. aeruginosa. E.
faecium
and methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant.
===PAGE:1336===
Many multidrug-resistant hospital-acquired bacteria are sensitive only to carbapenems. However,
expanded use of carbapenems has resulted in some carbapenem resistance.
Imipenem and meropenem penetrate into CSF when meninges are inflamed. Meropenem is used for
gram-negative bacillary meningitis; imipenem is not used in meningitis because it may cause seizures.
Most seizures occur in patients who have CNS abnormalities or renal insufficiency and who are given
inappropriately high doses.
Aztreonam
is a parenteral bactericidal antibiotic; it is as active as ceftazidime against
• Enterobacteriaceae that do not produce ampC
β
-lactamase or ESBL
•
P. aeruginosa
Aztreonam is not active against anaerobes. Gram-positive bacteria are resistant to aztreonam (in contrast
to cephalosporins). Aztreonam acts synergistically with aminoglycosides. Because the metabolic products
of aztreonam differ from those of other
β
-lactams, cross-hypersensitivity is unlikely. Thus, aztreonam is
used mainly for
• Severe aerobic gram-negative bacillary infections, including meningitis, in patients who have a serious
β
-lactam allergy but who nevertheless require
β
-lactam therapy
Other antibiotics are added to cover any suspected gram-positive cocci and anaerobes. The dose is
reduced in renal failure.
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol is primarily bacteriostatic. It binds to the 50S subunit of the ribosome, thereby inhibiting
bacterial protein synthesis.
Pharmacology
Chloramphenicol is well absorbed orally. Parenteral therapy should be IV.
Chloramphenicol is distributed widely in body fluids, including CSF, and is excreted in urine. Because of
hepatic metabolism, active chloramphenicol does not accumulate when renal insufficiency is present.
Indications
Chloramphenicol has a wide spectrum of activity against
• Gram-positive and gram-negative cocci and bacilli (including anaerobes)
•
Rickettsia, Mycoplasma, Chlamydia
, and
Chlamydophila
spp
Because of bone marrow toxicity, the availability of alternative antibiotics, and the emergence of
resistance, chloramphenicol is no longer a drug of choice for any infection, except for
• Serious infections due to a few multidrug-resistant bacteria that remain susceptible to this antibiotic
However, when chloramphenicol has been used to treat meningitis caused by relatively penicillin-resistant
pneumococci, outcomes have been discouraging, probably because chloramphenicol has poor
bactericidal activity against these strains.
Contraindications
Chloramphenicol is contraindicated if another drug can be used instead.
===PAGE:1337===
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Use of chloramphenicol during pregnancy results in fetal drug levels almost as high as maternal levels.
Gray baby syndrome is a theoretical concern, particularly near term, but there is no clear evidence of fetal
risk.
Chloramphenicol enters breast milk. Safety during breastfeeding has not been determined.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• Bone marrow depression (most serious)
• Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea
• Gray baby syndrome (in neonates)
There are 2 types of bone marrow depression:
• Reversible dose-related interference with iron metabolism: This effect is most likely with high doses or
prolonged treatment or in patients with a severe liver disorder.
• Irreversible idiosyncratic aplastic anemia: This anemia occurs in < 1/25,000 treated patients. It may not
develop until after therapy is stopped. Chloramphenicol should not be used topically because small
amounts may be absorbed and, rarely, cause aplastic anemia.
Hypersensitivity reactions are uncommon. Optic and peripheral neuritis may occur with prolonged use.
The neonatal gray baby syndrome, which involves hypothermia, cyanosis, flaccidity, and circulatory
collapse, is often fatal. The cause is high blood levels, which occur because the immature liver cannot
metabolize and excrete chloramphenicol. To avoid the syndrome, clinicians should not give infants ≤ 1 mo
> 25 mg/kg/day initially, and doses should be adjusted based on blood levels of the drug.
Daptomycin
Daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide antibiotic that has a unique mechanism of action. It binds to the
bacterial cell membranes, causing rapid depolarization of the membrane due to K efflux and associated
disruption of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis; the result is rapid concentration-dependent bacterial
death.
Indications
Daptomycin has activity against the following:
• Gram-positive bacteria (broad-spectrum activity)
• Multidrug-resistant gram-positive bacteria (because cross-resistance with other classes of antibiotics
does not occur)
Daptomycin is used mainly for infections caused by
• Vancomycin- and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
• Vancomycin-resistant enterococci
• Pneumococci with reduced penicillin sensitivity
===PAGE:1338===
However, methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
and vancomycin-resistant enterococci may
become resistant
during daptomycin therapy, resulting in relapsing or persistent infection.
Daptomycin is inferior to ceftriaxone for pneumonia, presumably because daptomycin can bind to
pulmonary surfactant, reducing daptomycin's activity in the alveolar epithelial lining fluid.
Contraindications
Daptomycin is contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to it.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Daptomycin is in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is incomplete).
Whether daptomycin enters breast milk and is safe to use during breastfeeding is unknown.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• Eosinophilic pneumonia
• Myopathy
Chronic use may cause reversible organizing pneumonia with eosinophilic pulmonary infiltrates,
presumably because daptomycin binds to pulmonary surfactant and thus accumulates in the alveolar
spaces.
Skeletal myopathy due to daptomycin is reversible but seldom occurs with once/day dosing.
Dosing Considerations
Daptomycin is given parenterally once/day. Over 90% is bound to serum protein. Dosing is adjusted for
renal failure. Because daptomycin can cause reversible skeletal myopathy, patients should be monitored
for muscle pain or weakness, and serum creatine kinase levels should be checked weekly.
Fluoroquinolones
Fluoroquinolones (see
Table 132-10
) exhibit concentration-dependent bactericidal activity by inhibiting the activity of DNA gyrase
and topoisomerase, enzymes essential for bacterial DNA replication. Fluoroquinolones are divided into 2
groups, based on antimicrobial spectrum and pharmacology:
• Older group: Ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, and ofloxacin
• Newer group: Gemifloxacin, levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin
[Table 132-10.
Fluoroquinolones]
Some newer fluoroquinolones have been withdrawn because of toxicity; they include trovafloxacin
(because of severe hepatic toxicity) and gatifloxacin (because of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia).
Pharmacology
Oral absorption is diminished by coadministration of cations (aluminum, Mg, Ca, zinc, and iron
preparations). After oral and parenteral administration, fluoroquinolones are widely distributed in most
extracellular and intracellular fluids and are concentrated in the prostate, lungs, and bile.
===PAGE:1339===
Most fluoroquinolones are metabolized in the liver and excreted in urine, reaching high levels in urine.
Moxifloxacin is eliminated primarily in bile.
Indications
Fluoroquinolones are active against the following:
•
Neisseria
sp
•
Haemophilus influenzae
•
Moraxella catarrhalis
•
Mycoplasma
sp
•
Chlamydia
sp
•
Chlamydophila
sp
•
Legionella
sp
• Enterobacteriaceae
•
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(particularly ciprofloxacin)
•
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
• Some atypical mycobacteria
• Methicillin-sensitive staphylococci
Nosocomial methicillin-resistant staphylococci are usually resistant. Older fluoroquinolones have poor
activity against streptococci and anaerobes. Newer fluoroquinolones have reliable activity against
streptococci (including
Streptococcus pneumoniae
with reduced penicillin sensitivity) and some
anaerobes. As use has increased, resistance, particularly to older fluoroquinolones, is developing among
Enterobacteriaceae,
P. aeruginosa, S. pneumoniae
, and
Neisseria
sp. Nonetheless, fluoroquinolones
have many clinical uses (see
Table 132-11
).
Fluoroquinolones are no longer recommended for treatment of gonorrhea in the US because of
increasing resistance.
Contraindications
Contraindications include
• Previous allergic reaction to the drugs
• Certain disorders that predispose to arrhythmias (eg, QT-interval prolongation, uncorrected hypokalemia
or hypomagnesemia, significant bradycardia)
• Use of drugs known to prolong the QT interval or to cause bradycardia (eg, metoclopramide, cisapride,
erythromycin, clarithromycin, classes Ia and III antiarrhythmics, tricyclic antidepressants)
Fluoroquinolones have traditionally been considered to be contraindicated in children because they may
cause cartilage lesions if growth plates are open. However, some experts, who challenge this view
===PAGE:1340===
because evidence is weak, have recommended prescribing fluoroquinolones as a 2nd-line antibiotic and
restricting use to a few specific situations, including
P. aeruginosa
infections in patients with cystic
fibrosis, prophylaxis and treatment of bacterial infections in immunocompromised patients, life-threatening
multiresistant bacterial infections in neonates and infants, and
Salmonella
or
Shigella
GI tract infections.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Fluoroquinolones are in pregnancy category C (animal studies show some risk, evidence in human and
animal studies is inadequate, but clinical benefit sometimes exceeds risk).
[Table 132-11.
Some Clinical Uses of Fluoroquinolones]
Fluoroquinolones enter breast milk. Use during breastfeeding is not recommended.
Adverse Effects
Serious adverse effects are uncommon; main concerns include the following:
• Upper GI adverse effects occur in about 5% of patients because of direct GI irritation and CNS effects.
• CNS adverse effects (eg, mild headache, drowsiness, insomnia, dizziness, mood alteration) occur in <
5%. NSAIDs may enhance the CNS stimulatory effects of fluoroquinolones. Seizures are rare, but
fluoroquinolones should not be used in patients with CNS disorders.
• Tendinopathy, including rupture of the Achilles tendon, may occur even after short-term use of
fluoroquinolones.
• QT-interval prolongation can occur, potentially leading to ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac
death.
• Fluoroquinolone use has been strongly associated with
Clostridium difficile
-associated diarrhea
(pseudomembranous colitis), especially that due to the hypervirulent
C. difficile
ribotype 027.
Diarrhea, leukopenia, anemia, and photosensitivity are uncommon. Rash is uncommon unless
gemifloxacin is used for > 1 wk and is more likely to develop in women < 40. Nephrotoxicity is rare.
Dosing Considerations
Dose reduction, except for moxifloxacin, is required for patients with renal insufficiency. Older
fluoroquinolones are normally given twice/day; newer ones and an extended-release form of ciprofloxacin
are given once/day.
Ciprofloxacin raises theophylline levels, sometimes resulting in theophylline-related adverse effects.
Lincosamides, Oxazolidinones, and Streptogramins
Lincosamides (clindamycin), oxazolidinones (linezolid), streptogramins (dalfopristin [streptogramin A] and
quinupristin [streptogramin B]) are grouped together because they have a similar mode of antibacterial
action and similar antibacterial spectra. Macrolides ( and the ketolide telithromycin ( may be included with this group for similar reasons. All inhibit protein synthesis by binding to the
50S ribosomal subunit. Cross-resistance occurs among the following antibiotics because they bind to the
same target:
• Macrolides
• Clindamycin
• Quinupristin
===PAGE:1341===
• Telithromycin (to some extent)
However, cross-resistance does not occur between these antibiotics and dalfopristin and linezolid, which
bind to different targets on the 50S ribosomal subunit.
Lincosamides
Clindamycin is primarily bacteriostatic. It binds to the 50S subunit of the ribosome, thus inhibiting bacterial
protein synthesis.
Pharmacology
Clindamycin is absorbed well orally and can be given parenterally. Clindamycin diffuses well into body
fluids except CSF; it is concentrated in phagocytes. Most of the drug is metabolized; metabolites are
excreted in bile and urine.
Indications
The spectrum of activity for clindamycin is similar to that of the macrolide erythromycin (see
Table 132-13
 except that clindamycin is
• Effective for infections due to anaerobes (particularly
Bacteroides
sp, including
B. fragilis
), communityacquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
, and macrolide-resistant, clindamycin-susceptible
Streptococcus pneumoniae
• Not reliably active against mycoplasmas, chlamydiae,
Chlamydophila
sp, and legionellae
Aerobic gram-negative bacilli and enterococci are resistant.
Clindamycin is usually used for anaerobic infections; however, clindamycin resistance has emerged
among these organisms in some regions. Because these infections often also involve aerobic gramnegative bacilli, additional antibiotics are also used. Clindamycin is part of combination therapy for the
following:
• Infections caused by toxigenic streptococci (because clindamycin decreases the bacteria's toxin
production)
• Cerebral toxoplasmosis
• Babesiosis
• Falciparum malaria
•
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia
Clindamycin can be used for infections (eg, skin and soft-tissue infections) in communities where
community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
(CA-MRSA) is common; whether
clindamycin is useful depends on local resistance patterns.
Clindamycin can be used for infections due to clindamycin- and erythromycin-susceptible strains.
However, some CA-MRSA strains are clindamycin-susceptible and erythromycin-resistant; erythromycin
resistance in these strains may be due to an active efflux mechanism or to erythromycin-inducible
modification of the ribosomal target. If the infecting strain of clindamycin-susceptible CA-MRSA is
resistant to erythromycin because of the efflux mechanism, patients can be expected to respond to
clindamycin. However, if the strain is erythromycin-resistant because of erythromycin-inducible ribosomal
target modification, patients may not respond clinically to clindamycin because certain mutants can
emerge during clindamycin therapy; these mutants are resistant to clindamycin and erythromycin because
===PAGE:1342===
of constitutive modification of the ribosomal target. (Constitutive means that resistance is always present
regardless of whether an inducer, such as erythromycin, is present.)
Erythromycin resistance due to efflux can be differentiated from that due to inducible ribosomal target
modification with a commonly used double disk diffusion assay (D test). A clindamycin disk is placed at a
standard distance from an erythromycin disk on an agar plate streaked with a standard inoculum of the
CA-MRSA strain in question. Zone of growth inhibition (shaped like the letter "D") around the clindamycin
disk, with a flattened zone nearest the erythromycin disk indicates inducible ribosomal resistance.
Patients who have moderate to severe infection with an inducible ribosomal-resistant CA-MRSA strain
and a positive D test should not be treated with clindamycin.
Clindamycin cannot be used for CNS infections (other than cerebral toxoplasmosis) because penetration
into the brain and CSF is poor.
Topical clindamycin is used for acne.
Contraindications
Clindamycin is contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to it or have a history of
regional enteritis, ulcerative colitis, or antibiotic-associated colitis.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Clindamycin is in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk but human evidence is inadequate,
or animal studies show risk and human studies do not).
Clindamycin enters breast milk. Use during breastfeeding is not recommended.
Adverse Effects
The main adverse effect is
•
Clostridium difficile
-associated diarrhea (pseudomembranous colitis)
Clindamycin, penicillins, cephalosporins, and, most recently, fluoroquinolones have been associated with
C. difficile
-associated diarrhea. Clindamycin has been associated with
C. difficile
-associated diarrhea in
up to 10% of patients regardless of route, including topical.
Hypersensitivity reactions may occur. If not swallowed with water, clindamycin may cause esophagitis.
Dosing Considerations
Dose adjustments are not required for renal failure. Clindamycin is given q 6 to 8 h.
Oxazolidinones
Linezolid has activity against the following:
• Streptococci
• Enterococci (
Enterococcus faecalis
and
E. faecium
)
• Staphylococci, including strains resistant to other classes of antibiotics
• Mycobacteria
• Anaerobes, such as
Fusobacterium, Prevotella, Porphyromonas
, and
Bacteroides
spp and
peptostreptococci
===PAGE:1343===
Contraindications
Linezolid is contraindicated in patients with a prior allergic reaction to it.
Linezolid is a reversible, nonselective monamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI). Thus, linezolid, when used with
drugs that have serotonergic activity (eg, SSRIs, MAOIs, tricyclic antidepressants, L-tryptophan,
amphetamines, lithium), has the potential for causing serotonin syndrome, a hyperserotonergic state
characterized by mental status changes, neurologic abnormalities, and autonomic instability.
Linezolid is contraindicated in the following patients unless they are carefully observed for symptoms and
signs of serotonin syndrome:
• Those who have taken MAO inhibitors (eg, phenelzine, isocarboxazid), serotonin reup-take inhibitors,
tricyclic antidepressants, serotonin 1B,1D receptor agonists (triptans), meperidine, or buspirone within 2
wk
• Those with carcinoid syndrome
Linezolid should not be given to the following patients unless they are monitored for potential increases in
BP:
• Those taking any of the following: sympathomimetic drugs (eg, pseudoephedrine), vasopressors (eg,
epinephrine, norepinephrine), dopaminergic drugs (eg, dopamine, dobutamine)
• Those with uncontrolled hypertension
• Those with thyrotoxicosis
• Those with a pheochromocytoma
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Linezolid is in pregnancy category C (animal studies show some risk, evidence in human studies is
inadequate, but clinical benefit sometimes exceeds risk).
Whether linezolid is excreted in breast milk or is safe to use during breastfeeding is unknown.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• Reversible myelosuppression
• Irreversible peripheral neuropathy
• Reversible optic neuropathy
• Serotonin syndrome
Adverse effects are minimal, although reversible myelosuppression, including thrombocytopenia,
leukopenia, and anemia, occurs in about 3% of patients, usually when therapy is used > 2 wk.
Consequently, CBC is monitored weekly, especially when therapy lasts > 2 wk. Peripheral and optic
neuropathy may occur with prolonged use, and patients taking long-term linezolid therapy should be
closely monitored for these disorders.
Streptogramins
===PAGE:1344===
Quinupristin and dalfopristin are semisynthetic derivatives of pristinamycin, a naturally occurring
streptogramin. Quinupristin/dalfopristin (Q/D) is given together in a fixed 30/70 combination; this
combination has synergistic bactericidal activity against the following:
• Streptococci and staphylococci, including strains resistant to other antibiotic classes
• Some gram-negative anaerobic bacilli
•
Clostridium perfringens
•
Peptostreptococcus
sp
• Atypical respiratory pathogens (
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Legionella
pneumophila
)
Q/D inhibits
E. faecium
, including vancomycin-resistant strains.
E. faecalis
is resistant.
Q/D is given via a central IV catheter because phlebitis frequently occurs when Q/D is given via a
peripheral vein. Up to 30% of patients develop significant myalgias.
Dosage reduction is required for severe hepatic insufficiency but not for renal insufficiency.
Q/D may inhibit drugs that are metabolized by the cytochrome P-450 (CYP450) 3A4 isoenzyme system.
Macrolides
Macrolides (see
Table 132-12
) are primarily bacteriostatic; by binding to the 50S subunit of the ribosome, they inhibit
bacterial protein synthesis.
Pharmacology
Dirithromycin is a prodrug that is converted to its active form during intestinal absorption. Except for
telithromycin, macrolides are relatively poorly absorbed orally. Food has the following effects on
absorption:
• For dirithromycin and extended-release clarithromycin, increased absorption
• For immediate-release clarithromycin tablet or suspension, no effect
• For azithromycin capsules and erythromycin (including base and stearate formulations), decreased
absorption
All macrolides diffuse well into body fluids, except CSF, and are concentrated in phagocytes. Excretion is
mainly in bile.
Indications
Macrolides are active against
• Aerobic and anaerobic gram-positive cocci, except for most enterococci, many
Staphylococcus aureus
strains (especially methicillin-resistant strains), and some
Streptococcus pneumoniae
and
S. pyogenes
strains
•
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
•
Chlamydia trachomatis
===PAGE:1345===
•
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
•
Legionella
sp
[Table 132-12.
Macrolides]
•
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
•
Campylobacter
sp
•
Treponema pallidum
•
Propionibacterium acnes
•
Borrelia burgdorferi
Bacteroides fragilis
is resistant. Clarithromycin and azithromycin have enhanced activity against
Haemophilus influenzae
and activity against
Mycobacterium avium
complex.
Macrolides have been considered the drug of choice for group A streptococcal and pneumococcal
infections when penicillin cannot be used. However, pneumococci with reduced penicillin sensitivity are
often resistant to macrolides, and in some communities, up to 20% of
S. pyogenes
are macrolideresistant. Because they are active against atypical respiratory pathogens, they are often used empirically
for lower respiratory tract infections, but another drug is often necessary to cover macrolide-resistant
pneumococci. Macrolides have other clinical uses (see
Table 132-13
). Macrolides are not used to treat
meningitis.
Contraindications
Macrolides are contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to them.
Concomitant administration of macrolides with astemizole, cisapride, pimozide, or terfenadine is
contraindicated. Postmarketing surveillance has reported cardiac arrhythmias (QT prolongation,
ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, torsades de pointes) when clarithromycin or erythromycin
was coadministered with astemizole, cisapride, pimozide, or terfenadine; this effect was most likely due to
inhibition of metabolism of these drugs by erythromycin and clarithromycin. Deaths have been reported.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Erythromycin and azithromycin are in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human
evidence is incomplete, or animal studies show risk but human studies do not). Erythromycin is
considered safer because clinical use has been much more extensive.
Clarithromycin is in category C (animal studies show some risk, evidence in human studies is inadequate,
but clinical benefit sometimes outweighs risk).
Erythromycin is considered compatible with breastfeeding. Safety of other macrolides during
breastfeeding is unknown.
Adverse Effects
Main concerns include
• GI disturbances (mainly with erythromycin)
• QT-interval prolongation by erythromycin
===PAGE:1346===
• Inhibition of hepatic metabolism, leading to numerous drug interactions
Erythromycin commonly causes dose-related GI disturbances, including nausea, vomiting, abdominal
cramps, and diarrhea; disturbances are less common with clarithromycin and azithromycin. Taking the
drug with food may help
[Table 132-13.
Some Clinical Uses of Macrolides]
decrease GI disturbances. Erythromycin may cause dose-related tinnitus, dizziness, and reversible
hearing loss. Cholestatic jaundice occurs most commonly with erythromycin estolate. Jaundice usually
appears after 10 days of use, primarily in adults but can occur earlier if the drug has been given
previously. Erythromycin is not given IM because it causes severe pain; when given IV, it may cause
phlebitis or pain. Hypersensitivity reactions are rare.
Erythromycin causes QT-interval prolongation and predisposes to ventricular tachyarrhythmia, especially
in women, in patients who have QT-interval prolongation or electrolyte abnormalities, and in patients
taking another drug that may prolong the QT interval.
Dosing Considerations
For azithromycin and dirithromycin, no dosage adjustment is required for renal insufficiency.
Erythromycin and, to some extent, clarithromycin interact with numerous drugs because they inhibit
hepatic metabolism via the cytochrome P-450 (CYP450) system. Azithromycin is the least likely to interact
with other drugs. Interactions may occur when erythromycin or clarithromycin are taken with the following:
• Warfarin: Further elevation of the PT/INR
• Lovastatin and simvastatin: Rhabdomyolysis
• Midazolam and triazolam: Somnolence
• Theophylline: Nausea, vomiting, and seizures
• Tacrolimus, cyclosporine, and ergot alkaloids: Elevated serum levels of these drugs
Telithromycin
Telithromycin is a ketolide antibiotic. Ketolides are chemically related to macrolides and inhibit bacterial
ribosomal protein synthesis without inducing resistance to macrolides, clindamycin, or streptogramins.
Telithromycin is rapidly absorbed orally with or without food and is metabolized primarily in the liver.
Indications
Telithromycin is active against erythromycin-susceptible staphylococci and streptococci and multidrugresistant
S. pneumoniae
. Telithromycin is also active against erythromycin-susceptible enterococci,
Bordetella pertussis
,
H. influenzae, Helicobacter pylori, Moraxella catarrhalis, M. pneumoniae, C.
pneumoniae
, and
Legionella, Prevotella
, and
Peptostreptococcus
spp.
Because of safety concerns, telithromycin is recommended only for the treatment of adults ≥ 18 yr with
community acquired mild to moderate pneumonia due to the following:
•
S. pneumoniae
(including multidrug-resistant strains, ie, penicillin-resistant
S. pneumoniae
; isolates
resistant to ≥ 2 of the following: penicillin, 2nd-generation cephalosporins [eg, cefuroxime], macrolides,
tetracyclines, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole)
•
H. influenzae
===PAGE:1347===
•
M. catarrhalis
•
C. pneumoniae
•
M. pneumoniae
Contraindications
Contraindications include
• Previous allergic reaction to telithromycin or any macrolide
• Previous hepatitis or jaundice after taking telithromycin or a macrolide
• Concurrent use of pimozide or cisapride because of cardiac arrhythmias (QT prolongation, ventricular
tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, torsades de pointes)
• Myasthenia gravis because telithromycin may exacerbate symptoms and fatal respiratory failure has
occurred in patients with this disorder
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Telithromycin is in pregnancy category C because animal studies show some risk, evidence in human
studies is inadequate, but clinical benefit sometimes outweighs risk.
Safety of telithromycin during breastfeeding is unknown.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• GI disturbances
• QT-interval prolongation
• Severe hepatitis
Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and dizziness are the most common adverse effects. Prolongation of the QT
interval, hyperbilirubinemia, elevation of liver enzymes, transient loss of consciousness (sometimes
associated with vagal syndrome), and visual disturbances (particularly a slowed ability to accommodate
and to release accommodation) are less common. Severe hepatotoxicity, which may require liver
transplantation and which may be fatal, may occur.
Cross-sensitivity with macrolides can occur.
Dosing Considerations
Telithromycin inhibits cytochrome P-450 (CYP450) 3A4, increasing levels of the following drugs:
•
Digoxin: Digoxin adverse effects or serum levels should be monitored.
• Ergot alkaloids: Concomitant use should be avoided.
• Benzodiazepines: Concomitant use requires caution.
• Metoprolol: Concomitant use in patients with heart failure requires caution.
===PAGE:1348===
• Statins: Concomitant use of simvastatin, lovastatin, or atorvastatin (but not pravastatin or fluvastatin)
should be avoided.
• Cisapride: Concomitant use is contraindicated.
• Pimozide: Concomitant use is contraindicated.
• Sirolimus
• Tacrolimus
CYP3A4 inducers such as rifampin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and phenobarbital decrease levels of
telithromycin; the CYP3A4 inhibitors itraconazole and ketoconazole increase levels of telithromycin.
Telithromycin decreases absorption of sotalol.
Metronidazole
Metronidazole is bactericidal. It enters bacterial cell walls and interrupts DNA.
Pharmacology
Oral metronidazole is absorbed well. It is usually given IV only if patients cannot be treated orally. It is
distributed widely in body fluids and penetrates into CSF, resulting in high concentrations. Metronidazole
is metabolized presumably in the liver and excreted mainly in urine, but elimination is not decreased in
patients with renal insufficiency.
Indications
Metronidazole is active against
• All obligate anaerobic bacteria (it is inactive against facultative anaerobic and aerobic bacteria)
• Certain protozoan parasites (eg,
Trichomonas vaginalis, Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia intestinalis
[lamblia]
)
Metronidazole is used primarily for infections caused by obligate anaerobes, often with other
antimicrobials. Metronidazole is the drug of choice for bacterial vaginosis. The drug has other clinical
uses (see
Table 132-14
).
Contraindications
Metronidazole is contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to it.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Metronidazole is in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is
incomplete, or animal studies show risk but human studies do not). Nonetheless, metronidazole should be
avoided during the 1st trimester because mutagenicity is a concern.
[Table 132-14.
Some Clinical Uses of Metronidazole]
Metronidazole enters breast milk; use during breastfeeding is not recommended.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
===PAGE:1349===
• GI disturbances
• CNS effects and peripheral neuropathy
• Disulfiram-like reaction
Nausea, vomiting, headache, seizures, syncope, other CNS effects, and peripheral neuropathy can
occur; rash, fever, and reversible neutropenia have been reported. Metronidazole can cause a metallic
taste and dark urine. A disulfiram-like reaction may occur if alcohol is ingested within 7 days of use.
Dosing Considerations
Metronidazole doses are not decreased in patients with renal failure but are usually decreased 50% in
patients with significant liver disease.
Metronidazole inhibits metabolism of warfarin and may increase its anticoagulant effect.
Mupirocin
Mupirocin inhibits bacterial RNA and protein synthesis. It is available only as a 2% topical preparation,
which is bactericidal against staphylococci and
β
-hemolytic streptococci. Systemic absorption of topical
mupirocin is negligible.
Mupirocin is used for impetigo and for minor superficial secondarily infected skin lesions. Mupirocin can
also eradicate
Staphylococcus aureus
nasal carriage, although relapse rates may be high. Chronic
therapy leads to mupirocin-resistant staphylococci.
Mupirocin is nontoxic but, when applied to denuded skin or mucous membranes, may cause itching and
burning.
Nitrofurantoin
Nitrofurantoin is bactericidal; the exact mechanism is unknown.
Nitrofurantoin is available only for oral use.
Pharmacology
After a single dose, serum drug levels are very low, but urine drug levels are therapeutic.
Indications
Nitrofurantoin is active against common uropathogens, such as
•
Escherichia coli
•
Staphylococcus saprophyticus
•
Enterococcus faecalis
E. faecium
, including vancomycin-resistant strains, and
Klebsiella
and
Enterobacter
sp are less
susceptible. Most strains of
Proteus
,
Providencia
,
Morganella
,
Serratia
,
Acinetobacter
, and
Pseudomonas
spp are resistant. There is no cross-resistance with other antibiotic classes.
Nitrofurantoin is used only for
• Treatment or prophylaxis of uncomplicated UTI
===PAGE:1350===
In women with recurrent UTIs, it may decrease the number of episodes.
Contraindications
Contraindications to nitrofurantoin use include
• Previous allergic reaction to it
• Renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance < 60 L/min)
• Age < 1 mo
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Nitrofurantoin is in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is
incomplete, or animal studies show risk but human studies do not). Nonetheless, nitrofurantoin is
contraindicated at term and during labor or delivery because it interferes with immature enzyme systems
in RBCs of neonates, damaging the cells and resulting in hemolytic anemia.
Nitrofurantoin enters breast milk and is contraindicated during the first month of breast-feeding.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• GI disturbances
• Pulmonary toxicity
• Peripheral neuropathy
• Hemolytic anemia
• Hepatic toxicity
Common adverse effects are nausea and vomiting, which are less likely with the macrocrystalline form.
Fever, rash, acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis (accompanied by fever and eosinophilia), and chronic
progressive pulmonary interstitial fibrosis may occur. Paresthesias may result and may be followed by a
severe ascending motor and sensory polyneuropathy if the drug is continued, especially in patients with
renal failure. Leukopenia and hepatic toxicity (acute cholestatic or chronic active hepatitis) have been
reported, and hemolytic anemia can occur in patients with G6PD deficiency and in infants < 1 mo.
Chronic pulmonary and hepatic reactions occur when the drug is used for > 6 mo.
Polypeptides
Polypeptide antibiotics disrupt bacterial cell walls (see
Table 132-15
).
Bacitracin is a polypeptide antibiotic that inhibits cell wall synthesis and is active against gram-positive
bacteria.
Colistin (polymyxin E) and polymyxin B are cationic polypeptide antibiotics that disrupt the outer bacterial
cell membrane by binding to the anionic outer membrane, which contains lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin),
and thereby neutralizing the bacteria's toxicity.
Colistin methane sulfonate (colistimethate sodium [CMS]) is a parenteral preparation of a prodrug that is
transformed in blood and urine to colistin. CMS is less toxic than colistin.
===PAGE:1351===
Polypeptides are usually used topically; systemic absorption is negligible.
Indications
Polymyxin B and colistin have rapid concentration-dependent bactericidal activity against
• Most facultative and aerobic gram-negative bacilli, including
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and
Acinetobacter
sp
These drugs are not active against
Proteus, Providencia, Burkholderia
,
and Serratia
spp and some
obligate anaerobes, including
Bacteroides fragilis
and gram-positive bacteria. Development of resistance
is uncommon.
Polypeptides are used for several types of infections (see
Table 132-16
).
Contraindications
All polypeptides are contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to them. CMS and
polymyxin B should not be given simultaneously with drugs that block neuromuscular transmission or are
nephrotoxic (eg, aminoglycosides, curare-like drugs).
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Bacitracin may pose minimal risk during pregnancy and breastfeeding because systemic absorption is
minimal; however, safety has not been established.
Polymyxin B is in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is incomplete,
or animal studies show risk but human studies do not).
[Table 132-15.
Polypeptides]
Colistin is in pregnancy category C (animal studies show some risk, evidence in human studies is
inadequate, but clinical benefit sometimes outweighs risk); this drug crosses the placenta. Whether use
during breastfeeding is safe is unknown.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• Nephrotoxicity
• Central and peripheral neurotoxicity
Polymyxins are nephrotoxic. CMS and polymyxin B may cause circumoral and extremity paresthesias,
vertigo, slurred speech, and muscle weakness and respiratory difficulty due to neuromuscular blockade,
especially in patients with renal insufficiency.
Rifamycins
The rifamycins are bactericidal and inhibit bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, suppressing RNA
synthesis (see
Table 132-17
).
Rifampin and Rifabutin
Rifampin and rifabutin have similar pharmacology, antimicrobial spectra, and adverse effects.
===PAGE:1352===
Pharmacology
Oral absorption is good, producing wide distribution in body tissues and fluids, including CSF. Rifampin is
concentrated in polymorpho-nuclear granulocytes and macrophages, facilitating clearance of bacteria
from abscesses. It is metabolized in the liver and eliminated in bile and, to a much lesser extent, in urine.
Indications
Rifampin
is active against
• Most gram-positive and some gram-negative bacteria
•
Mycobacterium
sp
Resistance develops rapidly, so rifampin is rarely used alone. Rifampin is used with other antibiotics for
• TB (
• Atypical mycobacterial infection (rifampin is active against many nontuberculous mycobacteria, but
rapidly growing mycobacteria, such as
M. fortuitum
or
M. chelonae
, are naturally resistant)
• Leprosy (with dapsone with or without clofazimine)
• Staphylococcal infections, including osteomyelitis, prosthetic valve endocarditis, and
[Table 132-16.
Some Clinical Uses of Polypeptides]
infections involving foreign bodies such as a prosthetic joint (with other antistaphylococcal antibiotics)
•
Legionella
infections (older data suggest better outcomes for rifampin when used with erythromycin; use
of rifampin with azithromycin or a fluoroquinolone offers no advantage)
• Pneumococcal meningitis when organisms are susceptible to rifampin (with vancomycin
[Table 132-17.
Rifamycins]
with or without ceftriaxone or cefotaxime for ceftriaxone- or cefotaxime-resistant organisms [MIC > 4
μ
g/mL]) or when expected clinical or microbiologic response is delayed
Rifampin can be used alone for prophylaxis of close contacts of patients with meningococcal or
Haemophilus influenzae
type b meningitis.
Rifabutin and rifampin are equally efficacious in regimens for TB in HIV-positive and HIV-negative
patients.
Rifabutin
is more active than rifampin against
M. avium
complex and is used preferentially in multidrug
regimens for these infections, but otherwise, rifampin is preferred.
Contraindications
Rifampin and rifabutin are contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to them.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Rifabutin is in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is incomplete, or
animal studies show risk but human studies do not). Safety during breast-feeding is unknown.
===PAGE:1353===
Rifampin is in pregnancy category C (animal studies show some risk [in this case, teratogenicity],
evidence in human studies is inadequate, but clinical benefit sometimes outweighs risk). The drug
crosses the placenta. Still, if risk of maternal TB is moderate or high, treatment is thought to be less
harmful for the fetus than untreated maternal TB and is thus recommended. Because of potential
tumorigenicity shown in animal studies, a decision to stop breastfeeding or to stop the drug should be
made, depending on the importance of the drug to the mother.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• Hepatitis (most serious)
• GI disturbances
• CNS effects
• Myelosuppression
Hepatitis occurs much more often when isoniazid or pyrazinamide is used concurrently with rifampin.
During the first week of therapy, rifampin may cause a transient rise in unconjugated serum bilirubin,
which results from competition between rifampin and bilirubin for excretion and which is not in itself an
indication for interrupting treatment.
CNS effects may include headache, drowsiness, ataxia, and confusion. Rash, fever, leukopenia,
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, interstitial nephritis, acute tubular necrosis, renal insufficiency, and
interstitial nephritis are generally considered to be hypersensitivity reactions and occur when therapy is
intermittent or when treatment is resumed after interruption of a daily dosage regimen; they are reversed
when rifampin is stopped.
Less serious adverse effects are common; they include heartburn, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Rifampin colors urine, saliva, sweat, sputum, and tears red-orange.
Dosing Considerations
If patients have a liver disorder, liver function tests should be done before rifampin therapy is started and
every 2 to 4 wk during therapy, or an alternate drug should be used. Dose adjustments are unnecessary
for renal insufficiency.
Rifampin interacts with many drugs because it is a potent inducer of hepatic cytochrome P-450 (CYP450)
microsomal enzymes. Rifampin accelerates elimination and thereby may decrease the effectiveness of
the following drugs: ACE inhibitors, atovaquone, barbiturates,
β
-blockers, Ca channel blockers,
chloramphenicol, clarithromycin, oral and systemic hormone contraceptives, corticosteroids, cyclosporine,
dapsone, digoxin, doxycycline, fluconazole, haloperidol, itraconazole, ketoconazole, the nonnucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors delavirdine and nevirapine, opioid analgesics, phenytoin, protease
inhibitors, quinidine, sulfonylureas, tacrolimus, theophylline, thyroxine, tocainide, tricyclic antidepressants, voriconazole, warfarin, and zidovudine. To maintain optimum therapeutic effect of these
drugs, clinicians may have to adjust the dosage when rifampin is started or stopped. Conversely, protease
inhibitors, as well as other drugs (eg, azoles, the macrolide clarithromycin, nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors) inhibit CYP450 enzymes and increase levels of rifamycins and thus potentially
increase the frequency of toxic reactions. For example, uveitis occurs more commonly when rifabutin is
used with clarithromycin or azoles.
Rifaximin
Rifaximin is a derivative of rifamycin that is poorly absorbed after oral administration;
97% is recovered
primarily unchanged in feces. Rifaximin can be used for empiric treatment of traveler's diarrhea, which is
caused primarily by enterotoxigenic and enteroaggregative
Escherichia coli
. Rifaximin is not known to be
===PAGE:1354===
effective for diarrhea due to enteric pathogens other than
E. coli
. Because rifaximin is not systemically
absorbed, it should not be used to treat infectious diarrhea caused by invasive enteric bacterial
pathogens (eg, salmonellae,
Campylobacter
sp).
The dose is 200 mg q 8 h for 3 days in adults and children > 12 yr.
Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and flatulence.
Sulfonamides
Sulfonamides (see
Table 132-18
) are synthetic bacteriostatic antibiotics that competitively inhibit conversion of
p
-
aminobenzoic acid to dihydropteroate, which bacteria need for folate synthesis and ultimately purine and
DNA synthesis. Humans do not synthesize folate but acquire it in their diet, so their DNA synthesis is less
affected.
Two sulfonamides, sulfisoxazole and sulfamethizole, are available as single drugs for oral use.
Sulfamethoxazole may be combined with trimethoprim (TMP/SMX—. Sulfadoxine plus
pyrimethamine is available (but not in the US) as an oral, fixed combination for malaria due to
chloroquine-resistant
Plasmodium falciparum
.
Sulfonamides available for topical use include silver sulfadiazine, vaginal cream and suppositories
containing sulfanilamide, and ophthalmic sulfacetamide.
Pharmacology
Most sulfonamides are readily absorbed orally and, when applied to burns, topically. Sulfonamides are
distributed throughout the body. They are metabolized mainly by the liver and excreted by the kidneys.
Sulfonamides compete for bilirubin-binding sites on albumin.
[Table 132-18.
Sulfonamides]
Indications
Sulfonamides are active against
• A broad spectrum of gram-positive and many gram-negative bacteria
•
Plasmodium
and
Toxoplasma
spp
However, resistance is widespread, and resistance to one sulfonamide indicates resistance to all.
Sulfasalazine can be used orally for inflammatory bowel disease. Sulfonamides are most commonly used
with other drugs (eg, for nocardiosis, UTI, and chloroquine-resistant falciparum malaria).
Topical sulfonamides can be used to treat the following:
• Burns: Silver sulfadiazine and mafenide acetate
• Vaginitis: Vaginal cream and suppositories with sulfanilamide
• Superficial ocular infections: Ophthalmic sulfacetamide
Contraindications
Sulfonamides are contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to them or who have
porphyria. Sulfonamides do not eradicate group A streptococci in patients with pharyngitis and should not
be used to treat group A streptococcal pharyngitis.
===PAGE:1355===
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Most sulfonamides are in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is
incomplete, or animal studies show risk but human studies do not). However, use near term and in
breastfeeding mothers is contraindicated, as is use in patients < 2 mo (except as adjunctive therapy with
pyrimethamine to treat congenital toxoplasmosis). If used during pregnancy or in neonates, these drugs
increase blood levels of unconjugated bilirubin and increase risk of kernicterus in the fetus or neonate.
Sulfonamides enter breast milk.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects can result from oral and sometimes topical sulfonamides; effects include
• Hypersensitivity reactions, such as rashes, Stevens-Johnson syndrome (, vasculitis, serum
sickness, drug fever, anaphylaxis, and angioedema
• Crystalluria, oliguria, and anuria
• Hematologic reactions, such as agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and, in patients with G6PD
deficiency, hemolytic anemia
• Kernicterus in neonates
• Photosensitivity
• Neurologic effects, such as insomnia, and headache
Hypothyroidism, hepatitis, and activation of quiescent SLE may occur in patients taking sulfonamides.
These drugs can exacerbate porphyrias.
Incidence of adverse effects is different for the various sulfonamides, but cross-sensitivity is common.
Sulfasalazine can reduce intestinal absorption of folate (folic acid). Thus, use of this drug may trigger
folate deficiency in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, which also reduces absorption, especially if
dietary intake is also inadequate.
Mafenide may cause metabolic acidosis by inhibiting carbonic anhydrase.
Dosing Considerations
To avoid crystalluria, clinicians should hydrate patients well (eg, to produce a urinary output of 1200 to
1500 mL/day). Sulfonamides can be used in patients with renal insufficiency, but peak plasma levels
should be measured and sulfamethoxazole levels should not exceed 120
μ
g/mL. Sulfonamides can
potentiate sulfonylureas (with consequent hypoglycemia), phenytoin (with increased adverse effects), and
coumarin anticoagulants.
Trimethoprim and Sulfamethoxazole
Trimethoprim is available as a single drug or in combination with sulfamethoxazole. The drugs act
synergistically to block sequential steps in bacterial folate metabolism. Trimethoprim prevents reduction of
dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, and sulfamethoxazole inhibits conversion of
p
-aminobenzoic acid to
dihydropteroate. This synergy results in maximal antibacterial activity, which is often bactericidal.
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) is available as a fixed combination consisting of a 1:5 ratio
(80 mg TMP plus 400 mg SMX or a double-strength tablet of 160 mg TMP plus 800 mg SMX).
===PAGE:1356===
Pharmacology
Both drugs are well absorbed orally and are excreted in the urine. They have a serum half-life of about 11
h in plasma and penetrate well into tissues and body fluids, including CSF. TMP is concentrated in
prostatic tissue.
Indications
TMP and TMP/SMX are active against (see
Table 132-19
)
• A broad spectrum of gram-positive bacteria (including some methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
)
• A broad spectrum of gram-negative bacteria
The combination is inactive against anaerobes,
Treponema pallidum, Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
Mycoplasma
sp, and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
. Enterococci, many Enterobacteriaceae, and
Streptococcus pneumoniae
strains are resistant. TMP/SMX is not clinically effective for group A
streptococcal pharyngitis.
[Table 132-19.
Some Indications for TMP/SMX]
TMP alone is especially useful for chronic bacterial prostatitis and for prophylaxis and treatment of UTI in
patients allergic to sulfonamides.
Contraindications
TMP/SMX is contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to either drug. Relative
contraindications include folate deficiency, liver dysfunction, and renal insufficiency.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
TMP/SMX is in pregnancy category C (animal studies show some risk, evidence in human studies is
inadequate, but clinical benefit sometimes outweighs risk). However, use near term is contraindicated; if
used during pregnancy or in neonates, TMP/SMX increases blood levels of unconjugated bilirubin and
increases risk of kernicterus in the fetus or neonate.
Sulfonamides enter breast milk and use during breastfeeding is usually discouraged.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• Those associated with sulfonamide
• Folate deficiency
• Hyperkalemia (TMP can decrease renal tubular K excretion, leading to hyperkalemia)
• Renal insufficiency
Renal failure in patients with underlying renal insufficiency is probably secondary to interstitial nephritis or
tubular necrosis. Also, TMP competitively inhibits renal tubular creatinine secretion and may cause an
artificial increase in serum creatinine, although GFR remains unchanged. Increases in serum creatinine
are more likely in patients with preexisting renal insufficiency and especially in those with diabetes
mellitus.
Most adverse effects are the same as for sulfonamides. TMP has adverse effects identical to those of
===PAGE:1357===
SMX, but they are less common. Nausea, vomiting, and rash occur most often. AIDS patients have a high
incidence of adverse effects, especially fever, rash, and neutropenia.
Folate deficiency (resulting in macrocytic anemia) can also occur. Use of folinic acid can prevent or treat
macrocytic anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia, which sometimes occur with prolonged TMP/SMX
use.
Rarely, severe hepatic necrosis occurs. The drug may also cause a syndrome resembling aseptic
meningitis.
Dosing Considerations
TMP/SMX may increase warfarin activity and levels of phenytoin, methotrexate, and rifampin. SMX can
increase the hypoglycemic effects of sulfonylureas.
Tetracyclines
Tetracyclines (see
Table 132-20
) are bacteriostatic antibiotics that bind to the 30S subunit of the ribosome, thus inhibiting
bacterial protein synthesis.
Pharmacology
About 60 to 80% of tetracycline and ≥ 90% of doxycycline and minocycline are absorbed after oral use.
However, absorption is decreased by metallic cations (eg, aluminum, Ca, Mg, iron); thus, tetracyclines
cannot be taken with preparations containing these substances (eg, antacids, many vitamin and mineral
supplements). Food decreases absorption of tetracycline but not of doxycycline or minocycline.
Tetracyclines penetrate into most body tissues and fluids. All are concentrated in unobstructed bile.
However, CSF levels are not reliably therapeutic. Minocycline is the only tetracycline that reaches high
concentrations in tears and saliva. Tetracycline and minocycline are excreted primarily in urine.
Doxycycline is excreted primarily in the intestinal tract.
Indications
Tetracyclines are effective against infections caused by the following:
• Rickettsiae
• Spirochetes (eg,
Treponema pallidum, Borrelia burgdorferi
)
•
Helicobacter pylori
•
Vibrio
sp
•
Yersinia pestis
•
Francisella tularensis
•
Brucella
sp
•
Bacillus anthracis
•
Plasmodium vivax
•
Plasmodium falciparum
•
Mycoplasma
sp
===PAGE:1358===
•
Mycoplasma
sp
•
Chlamydia
and
Chlamydophila
sp
• Some methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
About 5 to 10% of pneumococcal strains and many group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci, many gram-negative
bacillary uropathogens, and penicillinase-producing gonococci are resistant.
[Table 132-20.
Tetracyclines]
Tetracyclines are interchangeable for most indications, although minocycline has been most studied for
methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
infections. Doxycycline is usually preferred for all of the following because it
is better tolerated and can be given twice/day:
• Infections caused by rickettsiae and
Chlamydia, Chlamydophila, Mycoplasma
, and
Vibrio
spp
• Acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis
• Lyme disease
• Brucellosis
• Anthrax
• Plague
• Tularemia
• Granuloma inguinale
• Syphilis
• Prophylaxis of malaria caused by chloroquine-resistant
P. falciparum
Because of its high concentration in tears and saliva, minocycline is the only tetracycline that can
eradicate meningococci in carriers and is an alternate to rifampin for this indication.
Contraindications
Tetracyclines are contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to them, patients with
renal insufficiency (except for doxycycline, which has no dosage adjustment for renal insufficiency), and
children ≤ 8 yr (except sometimes for inhalational anthrax).
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Tetracyclines are in pregnancy category D (there is evidence of human risk, but clinical benefits may
outweigh risk). Tetracyclines cross the placenta, enter fetal circulation, accumulate in fetal bones, and, if
used during the 2nd or 3rd trimester, may cause permanent discoloration of teeth. Hepatotoxicity may
occur in pregnant women, particularly after IV administration and in those with azotemia or pyelonephritis.
Taking high doses during pregnancy can lead to fatty degeneration of the liver, which may be fatal.
Tetracyclines enter breast milk, but usually in small amounts (particularly tetracycline). Use during
breastfeeding is usually discouraged.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
===PAGE:1359===
• GI disturbances
•
Clostridium difficile
-induced diarrhea (pseudomembranous colitis)
• Candidiasis
• Photosensitivity
• Bone and dental effects in children
• Fatty liver
• Vestibular dysfunction (with minocycline)
All oral tetracyclines cause nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea and can cause
C. difficile
-induced diarrhea
(pseudomembranous colitis) and candidal superinfections. If not swallowed with water, tetracyclines can
cause esophageal erosions. Photosensitivity due to tetracyclines may manifest as an exaggerated
sunburn reaction. Bone and dental effects include staining of teeth, hypoplasia of dental enamel, and
abnormal bone growth in children ≤ 8 yr and in fetuses. In infants, tetracyclines may cause idiopathic
intracranial hypertension and bulging fontanelles.
Excessive blood levels due to use of high doses or renal insufficiency may lead to fatal acute fatty
degeneration of the liver, especially during pregnancy.
Minocycline commonly causes vestibular dysfunction, particularly in women, limiting its use. Use of
minocycline has been associated with development of autoimmune disorders such as SLE and
polyarteritis nodosa, which may be reversible.
Tetracycline can exacerbate azotemia in patients with renal insufficiency. Expired tetracycline pills can
degenerate and, if ingested, cause Fanconi syndrome. Patients should be instructed to discard the drugs
when they expire.
Dosing Considerations
Doxycycline, excreted primarily in the intestinal tract, requires no dose reduction in renal insufficiency.
Tetracyclines may decrease the effectiveness of oral contraceptives and potentiate the effects of oral
anticoagulants.
Tigecycline
Tigecycline, a derivative of the tetracycline minocycline, is the first available glycylcycline. Tigecycline
inhibits protein synthesis by binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit. It is bacteriostatic.
Tigecycline is given IV. Tigecycline has a large volume of distribution (> 12 L/kg), penetrating well into
bone, lung, liver, and kidney tissues. A half-life of 36 h should provide for once/day dosing. Most of the
drug is excreted in bile and feces.
Indications
Tigecycline is effective against many resistant bacteria, including those with resistance to tetracyclines.
Tigecycline is active against
•
Many gram-positive bacteria, including methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus
aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae
with reduced penicillin sensitivity, vancomycin-sensitive
Enterococcus faecalis
, vancomycin-resistant
E. faecium
, and
Listeria
sp
• Many gram-negative bacteria, such as multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii, Stenotrophomonas
===PAGE:1360===
maltophilia, Haemophilus influenzae
, and most Enterobacteriaceae (including some strains that
produce extended-spectrum
β
-lactamases [ESBLs] and other strains that were carbapenem-resistant
based on production of a carbapenemase or metalloβ
-lactamase)
• Many atypical respiratory pathogens (chlamydiae,
Mycoplasma
sp),
Mycobacterium abscessus, M.
fortuitum,
and anaerobes, including
Bacteroides fragilis, Clostridium perfringens
, and
C
.
difficile
It is not effective against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
,
Providencia
sp,
Morganella morganii
, or
Proteus
sp.
Tigecycline is indicated for complicated skin and soft-tissue infections and complicated intra-abdominal
infections, but the drug shows promise for other infections as well. Clinically, tigecycline is used mainly for
the following:
• Complicated intra-abdominal infections, including abscesses, appendicitis, cholecystitis, diverticulitis,
perforations, and peritonitis
• Complicated skin and soft-tissue infections, including abscesses and infected burns or ulcers
• Community-acquired bacterial pneumonia caused by
S. pneumoniae
(penicillin-susceptible isolates),
including cases with concurrent bacteremia,
H. influenzae
(
β
-lactamase negative isolates), and
Legionella pneumophila
• Ventilator-associated hospital-acquired pneumonia due to multidrug resistant pathogens
Contraindications
Tigecycline is contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to it and in children ≤ 8 yr.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Tigecycline is in pregnancy category D (there is evidence of human risk, but clinical benefits may
outweigh risk); it, like tetracyclines, can affect fetal bones and teeth.
Whether tigecycline enters breast milk and is safe to use during breastfeeding is unknown.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include
• Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea
• Photosensitivity
• Hepatotoxicity
Nausea and vomiting are common. Increases in serum amylase, total bilirubin concentration, PT, and
transaminases can occur in patients treated with tigecycline. Isolated cases of significant hepatic
dysfunction and hepatic failure have been reported in patients being treated with tigecycline. Many of
tigecycline's adverse effects are similar to those of tetracyclines (eg, photosensitivity).
Dosing Considerations
Dose is adjusted in patients with hepatic dysfunction but not in those with renal dysfunction. Serum levels
of warfarin may increase, but INR does not appear to increase.
Vancomycin
Vancomycin is a time-dependent bactericidal antibiotic that inhibits cell wall synthesis.
===PAGE:1361===
Pharmacology
Vancomycin is not appreciably absorbed from a normal GI tract after oral administration. Given
parenterally, it penetrates into bile and pleural, pericardial, synovial, and ascitic fluids. However,
penetration into even inflamed CSF is low and erratic. Vancomycin is excreted unchanged by glomerular
filtration.
Indications
Vancomycin is active against
• Most gram-positive cocci and bacilli, including almost all
Staphylococcus aureus
and coagulasenegative staphylococcal strains that are resistant to penicillins and cephalosporins
• Many strains of enterococci (via a bacteriostatic mechanism)
However, many strains of enterococci and some strains of
S. aureus
are resistant.
Vancomycin is the drug of choice for serious infection and endocarditis caused by the following:
• Methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
• Methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci
•
Streptococcus pneumoniae
•
β
-Hemolytic streptococci (when
β
-lactams cannot be used because of drug allergy or resistance)
•
Corynebacterium
group JK
• Viridans streptococci (when
β
-lactams cannot be used because of drug allergy or resistance)
•
Enterococci, (when
β
-lactams cannot be used because of drug allergy or resistance)
However, vancomycin is less effective than antistaphylococcal
β
-lactams for
S. aureus
endocarditis.
Vancomycin is used with other antibiotics when treating methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative
staphylococcal prosthetic valve endocarditis or enterococcal endocarditis. Vancomycin has also been
used as an alternative drug for pneumococcal meningitis caused by strains with reduced penicillin
sensitivity; however, the erratic penetration of vancomycin into CSF (especially during concomitant use of
dexamethasone) and reports of clinical failures make it less than optimal when used alone to treat
pneumococcal meningitis. Before dental procedures likely to result in bacteremia are done, vancomycin is
used to prevent endocarditis in penicillin-allergic high-risk patients who cannot tolerate oral antibiotics.
Oral vancomycin is used to treat
Clostridium difficile
-induced diarrhea (pseudomembranous colitis) only
if patients do not respond to metronidazole.
Contraindications
Vancomycin is contraindicated in patients who have had an allergic reaction to it.
Use During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Vancomycin has not had adverse effects in animals, and evidence in human studies is inadequate. Oral
vancomycin tablets are in pregnancy category B (animal studies show no risk and human evidence is
incomplete, or animal studies show risk but human studies do not). Oral-solution vancomycin and IV
vancomycin are in category C (animal studies show some risk, evidence in human and animal studies is
inadequate, but clinical benefit sometimes exceeds risk).
===PAGE:1362===
Vancomycin enters breast milk, and so its use during breastfeeding is discouraged; however, because
oral absorption is poor from a normal GI tract, adverse effects in infants are usually considered unlikely.
Adverse Effects
The main concern is
• Hypersensitivity
Hypersensitivity reactions (eg, rash, fever, reversible neutropenia and thrombocytopenia) may occur,
especially when therapy lasts for > 2 wk. Nephrotoxicity is rare unless high doses are used or an
aminoglycoside is given concomitantly. Phlebitis occurs uncommonly during IV infusion. Infusion should be
given over at least 60 min to avoid the red-person syndrome, a histamine-mediated reaction that can
cause pruritus and flushing on the face, neck, and shoulders.
Dose-related ototoxicity is unusual with current formulations.
Dosing Considerations
Doses used for meningitis must be higher than usual. Dose reduction is required in renal insufficiency. In
critically ill patients, serum levels should be measured after the 2nd or 3rd dose and kept between 10 and
μ
g/mL (trough levels).
Vancomycin MIC has been increasing in the past decade.
S. aureus
with vancomycin MIC of ≤ 2
μ
g/mL
are considered sensitive; those with vancomycin MIC of 4 to 8
μ
g/mL are considered intermediate, and
those with vancomycin MIC of > 8
μ
g/mL are considered resistant. However, infections due to
S. aureus
with vancomycin MIC of 2 to 8
μ
g/mL may respond suboptimally to standard dosing and require higher
doses with trough levels between 15 to 20
μ
g/mL, but this approach may be complicated by increased
rates of nephrotoxicity.
===PAGE:1363===
Chapter 133. Gram-Positive Cocci
Introduction
Many gram-positive cocci are commensal organisms that cause infection only when they find their way
into normally sterile areas. They are the most common cause of skin infections and a frequent cause of
pneumonia and septicemia. Although they are generally susceptible to a broad range of antibiotics,
certain strains have developed resistance to many available antimicrobial drugs.
Pneumococcal Infections
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(pneumococci) are gram-positive,
α
-hemolytic, aerobic,
encapsulated diplococci. In the US, pneumococcal infection annually causes about 7 million
cases of otitis media, 500,000 cases of pneumonia, 50,000 cases of sepsis, 3,000 cases of
meningitis,
and 40,000 deaths. Diagnosis is by Gram stain and culture. Treatment depends on
the resistance profile and includes a
β
-lactam, a macrolide, a respiratory fluoroquinolone, and
sometimes vancomycin.
Pneumococci are fastidious microorganisms that require catalase to grow on agar plates. In the
laboratory, pneumococci are identified by
α
-hemolysis on blood agar, sensitivity to optochin, and lysis by
bile salts.
Pneumococci commonly colonize the human respiratory tract, particularly in winter and early spring.
Spread is via airborne droplets. True epidemics of pneumococcal infections are rare.
Serotypes:
The pneumococcus capsule consists of a complex polysaccharide that determines serologic
type and contributes to virulence and pathogenicity. Virulence varies somewhat within serologic types
because of differences in DNA composition.
Currently, > 90 different serotypes have been identified, but most serious infections are caused by
serotypes 4, 6, 9, 14, 18, 19, and 23. These serotypes cause about 90% of invasive infections in children
and 60% in adults. However, these patterns are slowly changing, in part because of the widespread use
of polyvalent vaccine. Serotype 19A, a nonvaccine serotype that is highly virulent and multi-drugresistant, has emerged as an important cause of respiratory tract infection and invasive disease.
Risk factors:
Patients most susceptible to serious and invasive pneumococcal infections are those with
chronic illness (eg, chronic cardiorespiratory disease, diabetes, liver disease, alcoholism),
immunosuppression (eg, HIV), functional or anatomic asplenia, or sickle cell disease, as well as residents
of long-term care facilities, smokers, aborigines, Alaskan natives, and certain American Indian
populations. The elderly, even those without other disease, tend to have a poor prognosis with
pneumococcal infections. Damage to the respiratory epithelium by chronic bronchitis or common
respiratory viral infections, notably influenza, may predispose to pneumococcal invasion.
Diseases Caused by Pneumococci
Pneumococcal diseases include
• Otitis media
• Pneumonia
• Sinusitis
• Meningitis
• Endocarditis
• Septic arthritis
===PAGE:1364===
• Peritonitis (rare)
Primary infection usually involves the middle ear or lungs. The diseases listed below are further
discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Pneumococcal bacteremia
can occur in immunocompetent and immunosuppressed patients; patients
who have had splenectomy are at particular risk. Bacteremia may be the primary infection, or it may
accompany the acute phase of any focal pneumococcal infection. When bacteremia is present,
secondary seeding of distant sites may cause infections such as septic arthritis, meningitis, and
endocarditis. Despite treatment, the overall mortality rate for bacteremia is 15 to 20% in children and
adults and 30 to 40% in the elderly; risk of death is highest during the first 72 h.
Pneumonia
( is the most frequent serious infection caused by pneumococci; it may manifest
as lobar pneumonia or, less commonly, as bronchopneumonia. About 4 million cases of communityacquired pneumonia occur each year in the US; when community-acquired pneumonia requires
hospitalization, pneumococci are the most common etiologic agent in patients of all ages. Pleural effusion
occurs in up to 40% of patients, but most effusions resolve during drug treatment; only about 2% of
patients develop empyema, which may become loculated, thick, and fibrinopurulent. Lung abscess
formation is rare.
Acute otitis media
in infants (after the neonatal period) and children is caused by pneumococci in about
30 to 40% of cases (. More than one third of children in most populations develop acute
pneumococcal otitis media during the first 2 yr of life, and pneumococcal otitis commonly recurs.
Relatively few serotypes of
S. pneumoniae
are responsible for most cases. After universal immunization
of infants in the US beginning in 2000, nonvaccine serotypes of
S. pneumoniae
(particularly serotype
19A) have become the most common pneumococcal cause of acute otitis media. Complications include
mild conductive hearing loss, vestibular balance dysfunction, tympanic membrane perforation, mastoiditis,
petrositis, and labyrinthitis. Intracranial complications are rare in developed countries but may include
meningitis, epidural abscess, brain abscess, lateral venous sinus thrombosis, cavernous sinus
thrombosis, subdural empyema, and carotid artery thrombosis.
Paranasal sinusitis
( may be caused by pneumococci and may become chronic and
polymicrobic. Most commonly, the maxillary and ethmoid sinuses are affected. Infection of the sinuses
may extend into the cranium, causing cavernous sinus thrombosis;
brain, epidural, or subdural
abscesses; septic cortical thrombophlebitis; or meningitis.
Acute purulent meningitis
( is frequently caused by pneumococci and may be secondary
to bacteremia from other foci (notably pneumonia); direct extension from infection of the ear, mastoid
process, or paranasal sinuses; or basilar fracture of the skull involving one of these sites or the cribriform
plate. Complications after pneumococcal meningitis include hearing loss (in up to 50% of patients),
seizures, learning disabilities, mental dysfunction, and palsies.
Endocarditis
( may result from pneumococcal bacteremia, even in patients without valvular heart disease, but is
rare. Pneumococcal endocarditis may produce a corrosive valvular lesion, with sudden rupture or
fenestration, leading to rapidly progressive heart failure.
Septic arthritis
, similar to septic arthritis caused by other gram-positive cocci, is usually a complication of
pneumococcal bacteremia from another site (see Acute Infectious Arthritis .
Spontaneous pneumococcal peritonitis
occurs most often in patients with cirrhosis and ascites, with
no features to distinguish it from spontaneous bacterial peritonitis of other causes (.
Diagnosis
• Gram stain and culture
===PAGE:1365===
Pneumococci are readily identified by their typical appearance on Gram stain as lancet-shaped
diplococci. The characteristic capsule can be best detected using the Quellung test. In this test,
application of antiserum followed by staining with India ink causes the capsule to appear like a halo
around the organism. The capsule is also visible in smears stained with methylene blue. Culture confirms
identification; antimicrobial susceptibility testing should be done. Serotyping and genotyping of isolates
can be helpful for epidemiologic reasons (eg, to follow the spread of specific clones and antimicrobial
resistance patterns).
Treatment
• A
β
-lactam or macrolide
If pneumococcal infection is suspected, initial therapy pending susceptibility studies should be determined
by local resistance patterns. Although preferred treatment for pneumococcal infections is a
β
-lactam or
macrolide antibiotic, treatment has become more challenging because resistant strains have emerged.
Strains highly resistant to penicillin, ampicillin, and other
β
-lactams are common worldwide. The most
common predisposing factor to
β
-lactam resistance is use of these drugs within the past several months.
Intermediately resistant organisms may be treated with usual or high doses of penicillin G or another
β
-
lactam.
Seriously ill patients with nonmeningeal infections caused by organisms that are highly resistant to
penicillin can often be treated with ceftriaxone or cefotaxime. Very high doses of parenteral penicillin G
(20 to 40 million units/day IV for adults) also work, unless the minimum inhibitory concentration of the
isolate is very high. Fluoroquinolones (eg, gatifloxacin, gemifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin) are
effective for respiratory infections with highly penicillin-resistant pneumococci in adults.
All penicillin-resistant isolates have been susceptible to vancomycin so far, but parenteral vancomycin
does not always produce concentrations in CSF adequate for treatment of meningitis (especially if
corticosteroids are also being used). Therefore, in patients with meningitis, ceftriaxone or cefotaxime,
rifampin, or both are commonly used with vancomycin.
Prevention
Infection produces type-specific immunity that does not generalize to other serotypes. Otherwise,
prevention involves
• Vaccination
• Prophylactic antibiotics
Vaccines:
Two pneumococcal vaccines are available: a conjugated vaccine against 7 serotypes (PCV7)
and a polyvalent polysaccharide vaccine directed against the 23 serotypes (PPV23) that account for 80 to
95% of serious pneumococcal infections.
Conjugated vaccine
is recommended for all children aged 6 wk through 59 mo. The schedule varies
depending on age and underlying medical conditions (see
Table 268-10
. If vaccination is begun at age ≤ 6 mo, children should receive a 3-dose primary
series at about 2-mo intervals, followed by a 4th dose at age 12 to 15 mo. The customary age for the first
dose is 2 mo. If vaccination is begun at age 7 to 11 mo, a 2-dose primary series and a booster are given.
From age 12 to 23 mo, 2 doses and no booster are given. From age 24 mo to 9 yr, children receive 1
dose.
Polysaccharide vaccine
is ineffective in children < 2 yr but reduces pneumococcal bacteremia by 50%
in adults. There is no documented reduction in pneumonia. Protection generally lasts many years, but
revaccination after ≥ 5 yr may be desirable in highly susceptible
people. The polysaccharide vaccine is
indicated for adults ≥ 65 yr and people 2 to 64 yr with increased susceptibility ( and before
splenectomy. It is not recommended for children < 2 yr or anyone hypersensitive to the vaccine's
===PAGE:1366===
components.
Prophylactic antibiotics:
For functional or anatomic asplenic children < 5 yr, penicillin V 125 mg po bid
is recommended. The duration for chemoprophylaxis is empiric, but some experts continue prophylaxis
throughout childhood and into adulthood for high-risk patients with asplenia. Penicillin 250 mg po bid is
recommended for older children or adolescents for at least 1 yr after splenectomy.
Staphylococcal Infections
Staphylococci are gram-positive, aerobic organisms.
Staphylococcus aureus
is the most
pathogenic; it typically causes skin infections and sometimes pneumonia, endocarditis, and
osteomyelitis. It commonly leads to abscess formation. Some strains elaborate toxins that
cause gastroenteritis, scalded skin syndrome, and toxic shock syndrome. Diagnosis is by Gram
stain and culture. Treatment is usually with penicillinase-resistant b-lactams, but because
antibiotic resistance is common, vancomycin or other newer antibiotics may be required. Some
strains are partially or totally resistant to all but the newest antibiotics, which include linezolid,
quinupristin/dalfopristin, daptomycin, telavancin, dalbavancin, and tigecycline.
The ability to clot blood by producing coagulase determines the virulence of the several species of
staphylococci. Coagulase-positive
Staphylococcus aureus
is among the most ubiquitous and dangerous
human pathogens, for both its virulence and its ability to develop antibiotic resistance. Coagulasenegative species such as
S. epidermidis
are increasingly associated with hospital-acquired infections;
S.
saprophyticus
causes urinary infections.
S. lugdunensis
, a coagulase-negative species, has recently
been found to cause invasive disease with virulence similar to that of
S. aureus
. Unlike most coagulasenegative staphylococcal species,
S. lugdunensis
, often remains sensitive to penicillinase-resistant
β
-
lactam antibiotics.
Pathogenic staphylococci are ubiquitous. They are carried, usually transiently, in the anterior nares of
about 30% of healthy adults and on the skin of about 20%. Rates are higher in hospital patients and
personnel.
Risk factors:
Neonates and breastfeeding mothers are predisposed to staphylococcal infections, as are
patients with influenza, chronic bronchopulmonary disorders (eg, cystic fibrosis, emphysema), leukemia,
tumors, transplants, implanted prostheses or other foreign bodies, burns, chronic skin disorders, surgical
incisions, diabetes mellitus, or indwelling intravascular plastic catheters. Patients receiving adrenal
steroids, irradiation, immunosuppressants, or antitumor chemotherapy are also at increased risk.
Predisposed patients may acquire antibiotic-resistant staphylococci from other patients, health care
personnel, or inanimate objects in health care settings. Transmission via the hands of personnel is the
most common means of spread, but airborne spread can also occur.
Diseases Caused by Staphylococci
Staphylococci cause disease by
• Direct tissue invasion
• Sometimes exotoxin production
S. aureus
bacteremia
, which frequently causes metastatic foci of infection, may occur with any localized
staphylococcal infection but is particularly common with infection related to intravascular catheters or
other foreign bodies. It may also occur without any obvious primary site.
S. epidermidis
and other
coagulase-negative staphylococci increasingly cause hospital-acquired bacteremia associated with
intravascular catheters and other foreign bodies because they can form biofilms on these materials. They
are important causes of morbidity (especially prolongation of hospitalization) and mortality in debilitated
patients. The diseases listed below are further discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Direct invasion:
Most staphylococcal disease results from direct tissue invasion. Examples are
===PAGE:1367===
• Skin infections
• Pneumonia
• Endocarditis
• Osteomyelitis
• Septic arthritis
Skin infections
are the most common form of staphylococcal disease (. Superficial infections
may be diffuse, with vesicular pustules and crusting (impetigo) or sometimes cellulitis or with focal and
nodular abscesses (furuncles and carbuncles). Deeper cutaneous abscesses are common. Severe
necrotizing skin infections may occur. Staphylococci are commonly implicated in wound and burn
infections, postoperative incision
infections, and mastitis or breast abscess in breastfeeding mothers.
Neonatal infections
usually appear within 6 wk after birth and include skin lesions with or without
exfoliation, bacteremia, meningitis, and pneumonia.
Pneumonia
that occurs in a community setting is not common but may develop in patients who have
influenza, who are receiving corticosteroids or immunosuppressants, or who have chronic
bronchopulmonary or other high-risk diseases. However,
S. aureus
is a common cause of hospitalacquired pneumonia. Staphylococcal pneumonia is occasionally characterized by formation of lung
abscesses followed by rapid development of pneumatoceles and empyema. Community-associated
methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
(CA-MRSA) often causes severe necrotizing pneumonia.
Endocarditis
can develop, particularly in IV drug abusers and patients with prosthetic heart valves.
Because intravascular catheter use and implantation of cardiac devices have increased,
S. aureus
has
become a leading cause of bacterial endocarditis.
S. aureus
endocarditis is an acute febrile illness often
accompanied by visceral abscesses, embolic phenomena, pericarditis, subungual petechiae,
subconjunctival hemorrhage, purpuric lesions, heart murmurs, and heart failure secondary to cardiac
valve damage.
Osteomyelitis
occurs more commonly in children, causing chills, fever, and pain over the involved bone.
Redness and swelling subsequently appear. Articular infection may occur; it frequently results in effusion,
suggesting septic arthritis rather than osteomyelitis.
Toxin-mediated disease:
Staphylococci may produce multiple toxins. Some have local effects; others
trigger cytokine release from certain T cells, causing serious systemic effects (eg, skin lesions, shock,
organ failure, death). Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL) is a toxin produced by strains infected with a
certain bacteriophage. PVL is typically present in strains of CA-MRSA and has been thought to mediate
the ability to necrotize; however, this effect has not been verified.
Toxin-mediated staphylococcal diseases include the following:
• Toxic shock syndrome
• Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
• Staphylococcal food poisoning
Toxic shock syndrome
( may result from use of vaginal tampons or occur as a complication
of a seemingly minor postoperative infection. Although most cases have been due to methicillinsusceptible
S. aureus
(MSSA), cases due to MRSA are becoming more frequent.
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
(see p.
and Plate 45), which is caused by several toxins
termed exfoliatins, is an exfoliative dermatitis of childhood characterized by large bullae and peeling of the
upper layer of skin. Eventually, exfoliation occurs.
===PAGE:1368===
Staphylococcal food poisoning
is caused by ingesting a preformed heat-stable staphylococcal
enterotoxin. Food can be contaminated by staphylococcal carriers or people with active skin infections. In
food that is incompletely cooked or left at room temperature, staphylococci reproduce and elaborate
enterotoxin. Many foods can serve as growth media, and despite contamination, they have a normal taste
and odor. Severe nausea and vomiting begin 2 to 8 h after ingestion, typically followed by abdominal
cramps and diarrhea. The attack is brief, often lasting < 12 h.
Diagnosis
• Gram stain and culture
Diagnosis is by Gram stain and culture of infected material. Susceptibility tests should be done because
methicillin-resistant organisms are now common and require alternative therapy.
When staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome is suspected, cultures should be obtained from blood, urine,
the nasopharynx, the umbilicus, abnormal skin, or any suspected focus of infection; the intact bullae are
sterile. Although the diagnosis is usually clinical, a biopsy of the affected skin may help confirm the
diagnosis.
Staphylococcal food poisoning is usually suspected because of case clustering (eg, within a family,
attendees of a social gathering, or customers of a restaurant). Confirmation (typically by the health
department) entails isolating staphylococci from suspect food and sometimes testing for enterotoxins.
X-ray changes of osteomyelitis may not be apparent for 10 to 14 days, and bone rarefaction and
periosteal reaction may not be detected for even longer. Abnormalities in MRI, CT, or radionuclide bone
scans are often apparent earlier. Bone biopsy (open or percutaneous) should be done for pathogen
identification and susceptibility testing.
Screening:
Some institutions that have a high incidence of MRSA nosocomial infections routinely screen
admitted patients for MRSA (active surveillance) by using rapid laboratory techniques to evaluate nasal
swab specimens. Some institutions screen only high-risk patients (eg, those who are admitted to the
ICU,
who have had previous MRSA infection, or who are about to undergo vascular, orthopedic, or cardiac
surgeries). Quick identification of MRSA allows carriers to be placed in contact isolation. This practice
decreases the spread of MRSA and may decrease the incidence of nosocomial infections with MRSA.
Treatment
• Local measures (eg, debridement, removal of catheters)
• Antibiotics selected based on severity of infection and local resistance patterns
Management includes abscess drainage, debridement of necrotic tissue, removal of foreign bodies
(including intravascular catheters), and use of antibiotics. Initial choice and dosage of antibiotics depend
on infection site, illness severity, and probability that resistant strains are involved. Thus, it is essential to
know local resistance patterns for initial therapy (and ultimately, to know actual drug susceptibility).
Treatment of toxin-medicated staphylococcal disease (the most serious of which is toxic shock syndrome)
involves decontamination of the toxin-producing area (exploration of surgical wounds, irrigation,
debridement), intensive support (including vasopressors and respiratory assistance), electrolyte
balancing, and antimicrobials. In vitro evidence supports a preference for protein synthesis inhibitors (eg,
clindamycin 900 mg IV q 8 h) over other classes of antibiotics. IV immune globulin has been beneficial in
severe cases.
Antibiotic resistance:
Many staphylococcal strains produce penicillinase, an enzyme that inactivates
several
β
-lactam antibiotics; these strains are resistant to penicillin G, ampicillin, and antipseudomonal
penicillins. Most community-acquired strains are susceptible to penicillinase-resistant penicillins (eg,
methicillin, oxacillin, nafcillin, cloxacillin, dicloxacillin), cephalosporins, carbapenems (eg, imipenem,
===PAGE:1369===
meropenem, ertapenem, doripenem), macrolides, fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
(TMP/SMX), gentamicin, vancomycin, and teicoplanin.
MRSA
isolates have become common, especially in hospitals. In addition, CA-MRSA has emerged over
the past several years in many geographic regions. CA-MRSA tends to be less resistant to multiple drugs
than hospital-acquired MRSA. These strains, although resistant to most
β
-lactams, are usually
susceptible to TMP/SMX, doxycycline, or minocycline and are often susceptible to clindamycin, but there
is the potential for emergence of clindamycin resistance by strains inducibly resistant to erythromycin
(laboratories may report these strains as D-test positive). Vancomycin is effective against most MRSA,
sometimes with the addition of rifampin and an amino-glycoside for serious infections.
Vancomycin-resistant
S. aureus
(VRSA) and vancomycin-intermediate-susceptible
S. aureus
(VISA)
strains have appeared in the US. These organisms may require linezolid, quinupristin/dalfopristin, or
daptomycin.
Because incidence of MRSA has increased, initial empiric treatment for serious staphylococcal infections
(particularly those that occur in a health care setting) should include a drug with reliable activity against
MRSA. Thus, for proven or suspected bloodstream infections, vancomycin or daptomycin would be
appropriate. For pneumonia, vancomycin or linezolid should be used because daptomycin is not reliably
active in the lungs.
Table 133-1
summarizes treatment options.
Prevention
Aseptic precautions (eg, thoroughly washing hands between patient examinations, sterilizing shared
equipment) help decrease spread in institutions. Strict isolation procedures should be used for patients
harboring resistant microbes until their infections have been cured. An asymptomatic nasal carrier need
not be isolated unless the strain is MRSA or is the suspected source of an outbreak. Cloxacillin,
dicloxacillin, TMP/SMX, ciprofloxacin (each of these drugs is often combined with rifampin), and topical
mupirocin have been useful in treating MRSA in carriers, but the organism recurs in up to 50% and
frequently becomes resistant.
Staphylococcal food poisoning can be prevented by appropriate food preparation. Patients with
staphylococcal skin infections should not handle food, and food should be consumed immediately or
refrigerated and not kept at room temperature.
Streptococcal and Enterococcal Infections
(See also
Pneumococcal Infections
on p.
, Rheumatic Fever on p.
, and Tonsillopharyngitis on
p.
.)
Streptococci are gram-positive aerobic organisms that cause many disorders, including
pharyngitis, pneumonia, wound and skin infections, sepsis, and endocarditis. Symptoms vary
with the organ infected. Sequelae include
[Table 133-1.
Antibiotic Treatment of Staphylococcal Infections in Adults]
rheumatic fever and glomerulonephritis. Clinical diagnoses are confirmed by Gram stain and
culture. Most strains are sensitive to penicillin, with the exception of enterococci, which can be
resistant to multiple drugs. Recently, macrolide-resistant strains have emerged.
Classification:
Three different types of streptococci are initially differentiated by their appearance when
they are grown on sheep blood agar.
β
-Hemolytic streptococci produce zones of clear hemolysis around
each colony,
α
-hemolytic streptococci (including viridans group streptococci) are surrounded by green
discoloration resulting from incomplete hemolysis, and
γ
-hemolytic streptococci are nonhemolytic.
Subsequent classification, based on carbohydrates in the cell wall, divides streptococci into Lancefield
===PAGE:1370===
groups A through H and K through T (see
Table 133-2
). Viridans streptococci form a separate group that is difficult to classify. In the Lancefield
classification, enterococci were initially included among the group D streptococci. More recently,
enterococci have been classified as a separate genus.
Virulence factors:
Many streptococci elaborate virulence factors, including streptolysins, DNAases, and
hyaluronidase, which contribute to tissue destruction and spread of infection. A few strains release
exotoxins that activate certain T cells, triggering release of cytokines, including tumor necrosis factorα
,
interleukins, and other immunomodulators. These cytokines activate the complement, coagulation, and
fibrinolytic systems, leading to shock, organ failure, and death.
Diseases Caused by Streptococci
The most significant streptococcal pathogen is
S. pyogenes
, which is
β
-hemolytic and in Lancefield group
A and is thus denoted as group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci (GABHS). The 2 most common acute diseases
due to GABHS are pharyngitis and skin infections; in addition, delayed, nonsuppurative complications
(rheumatic fever, acute glomerulonephritis) sometimes occur ≥ 2 wk after infection.
Disease caused by other streptococcal species is less prevalent and usually involves soft-tissue infection
or endocarditis (see
Table 133-2
). Some non-GABHS infections occur predominantly in certain
populations (eg, group B streptococci in neonates and postpartum women, enterococci in hospitalized
patients).
Infections can spread through the affected tissues and along lymphatic channels to regional lymph nodes.
They can also cause local suppurative complications, such as peritonsillar abscess, otitis media, sinusitis,
and
[Table 133-2.
Classification of Streptococci]
bacteremia. Suppuration depends on the severity of infection and the susceptibility of tissue.
Streptococcal pharyngitis
is usually caused by GABHS. About 20% of patients present with sore throat,
fever, a beefy red pharynx, and a purulent tonsillar exudate. The remainder have less prominent
symptoms, and the examination resembles that of viral pharyngitis. The cervical and submaxillary nodes
may enlarge and become tender. Streptococcal pharyngitis can lead to peritonsillar abscess (.
Cough, laryngitis, and stuffy nose are not characteristic of streptococcal pharyngeal infection; their
presence suggests another cause (usually viral or allergic). An asymptomatic carrier state may exist in as
many as 20%.
Scarlet fever
is uncommon today. Scarlet fever is caused by group A (and occasionally by group B or C)
streptococcal strains that
produce an erythrogenic toxin, leading to a diffuse pink-red cutaneous flush that
blanches with pressure. The rash is seen best on the abdomen or lateral chest as dark red lines in
skinfolds (Pastia's lines) or as circumoral pallor. A strawberry tongue (inflamed papillae protruding through
a bright red coating) also occurs and must be differentiated from that seen in toxic shock syndrome (see
p.
) and Kawasaki disease (. Characteristic numerous small (1- to 2-mm) papular
elevations, giving a sandpaper quality to the skin, may be present. The upper layer of the previously
reddened skin often desquamates after fever subsides. Other symptoms are similar to those in
streptococcal pharyngitis, and the course and management of scarlet fever are the same as those of
other group A infections.
Skin infections
include impetigo ( and cellulitis (. Cellulitis may spread rapidly
because of the numerous lytic enzymes and toxins produced mainly by group A streptococci. Erysipelas
( is a particular form of streptococcal cellulitis.
Necrotizing fasciitis
due to
S. pyogenes
is a severe dermal (or rarely muscular) infection that spreads
along fascial planes (. Inoculation originates through the skin or bowel, and the defect may be
surgical, trivial, distant from the disease site, or occult, as with colonic diverticula or an appendiceal
abscess. Necrotizing fasciitis is prevalent among IV drug abusers. Formerly known as streptococcal
===PAGE:1371===
gangrene and popularized as the flesh-eating bacteria, the same syndrome may also be polymicrobial,
involving a host of aerobic and anaerobic flora, including
Clostridium perfringens
. When necrotizing
fasciitis occurs in the perineum, it is called Fournier's gangrene (see Plate 61). Comorbid conditions, such
as impaired immunity, diabetes, and alcoholism, are common. Symptoms begin with fever and exquisite
localized pain; pain increases rapidly over time and is often the first (and sometimes only) manifestation.
Diffuse or local erythema may be present. Thrombosis of the microvasculature causes ischemic necrosis,
leading to rapid spread and disproportionally severe toxicity. In 20 to 40% of patients, adjacent muscles
are invaded. Shock and renal dysfunction are common. Mortality is high, even with treatment.
Other serious streptococcal infections include septicemia, puerperal sepsis, endocarditis, and pneumonia.
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
(, similar to that caused by
S. aureus
, may result
from toxin-producing strains of GABHS. Patients are usually otherwise healthy children or adults with skin
and soft-tissue infections.
Delayed complications:
The mechanism by which certain strains of GABHS cause delayed
complications is unclear but may involve cross-reactivity of streptococcal antibodies against host tissue.
Rheumatic fever
(, an inflammatory disorder, occurs in < 3% of patients in the weeks after
untreated GABHS upper respiratory tract infection. It is much less common today than in the preantibiotic
era. Diagnosis is based on a combination of arthritis, carditis, chorea, specific cutaneous manifestations,
and laboratory test results (Jones criteria). One of the most important reasons for treating strep throat is
to prevent rheumatic fever.
Poststreptococcal acute glomerulonephritis
( is an acute nephritic syndrome following
pharyngitis or skin infection due to a certain limited number of nephritogenic strains of GABHS (eg, types
12 and 49). After a throat or skin infection with one of these strains, about 10 to 15% of patients develop
acute glomerulonephritis. It is most common among children, occurring 1 to 3 wk after infection. Nearly all
children, but somewhat fewer adults, recover without permanent renal damage. Antibiotic treatment of
GABHS infection has little effect on development of glomerulonephritis.
PANDAS syndrome
(pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with group A
streptococci) refers to a subset of obsessive disorders or tic disorders in children thought to be
exacerbated by GABHS infection.
Certain forms of
psoriasis
(eg, guttate) may also be related to
β
-hemolytic streptococcal infections.
Diagnosis
• Culture
• Sometimes rapid antigen tests or antibody titers
Streptococci are readily identified by culture on a sheep blood agar plate.
Rapid antigen-detection tests
that can detect GABHS directly from throat swabs are available. Many
tests use enzyme immunoassay, but more recently, tests using optical immunoassay have become
available. These rapid tests have high specificity (> 95%) but vary considerably in sensitivity (55% to 80
to 90% for the newer optical immunoassay test). Negative results should be confirmed by culture
(particularly if use of a macrolide is being considered because of potential resistance).
During convalescence, evidence of infection can be obtained indirectly by demonstrating
antistreptococcal antibodies in serum. Antibodies are most useful in diagnosis of poststreptococcal
diseases, such as rheumatic fever and glomerulonephritis. Confirmation requires that sequential
specimens show a rise in titer because a single value may be high because of a long antecedent
infection. Serum specimens need not be taken more often than every 2 wk and may be taken every 2 mo.
To be considered significant, a rise (or fall) in titer should span at least 2 serial dilutions. The
antistreptolysin O (ASO) titer rises in only 75 to 80% of infections. For completeness in difficult cases, any
===PAGE:1372===
one of the other tests (antihyaluronidase, antideoxyribonuclease B, antinicotinamide adenine
dinucleotidase, antistreptokinase) can also be used. Penicillin given within the first 5 days for
symptomatic streptococcal pharyngitis may delay the appearance and decrease the magnitude of the
ASO response. Patients with streptococcal pyoderma usually do not have a significant ASO response but
may have a response to other antigens (ie, anti-DNAase, antihyaluronidase).
Treatment
• Usually penicillin
Pharyngitis:
Ordinarily, pharyngeal GABHS infections, including scarlet fever, are self-limited. Antibiotics
shorten the course in young children, especially those with scarlet fever, but have only modest effect on
symptoms in adolescents and adults. However, antibiotics help prevent local suppurative complications
(eg, peritonsillar abscess), otitis media, and rheumatic fever.
Penicillin is the drug of choice. No isolate of GABHS has demonstrated penicillin resistance clinically,
probably because it lacks altered penicillin-binding proteins, has an inefficient gene transfer mechanism
for resistance, or both. However, some streptococcal strains appear to have in vitro tolerance to penicillin;
the clinical significance of such strains is unclear.
A single injection of benzathine penicillin G, 600,000 units IM for small children (< 27.3 kg) or 1.2 million
units IM for adolescents and adults usually suffices. Oral penicillin V may be used if the patient can be
trusted to maintain the regimen for the required 10 days; penicillin V 500 mg (250 mg for children < 27 kg)
po bid or tid is given. Oral cephalosporins are also effective. Cefdinir, cefpodoxime, and azithromycin can
be used for a 5-day course of therapy. Delaying treatment 1 to 2 days until laboratory confirmation
increases neither the duration of disease nor the incidence of complications.
When penicillin or a
β
-lactam is contraindicated, erythromycin 250 mg po qid or clindamycin 300 mg po tid
may be given for 10 days, although resistance of GABHS to macrolides has been detected. Some
authorities recommend in vitro confirmation of susceptibility if a macrolide is to be used and there is
macrolide resistance in the community. Clindamycin 5 mg/kg po qid is preferred in children who have
relapses of chronic tonsillitis, possibly because it has good activity against penicillinase-producing
staphylococci or anaerobes coinfecting the tonsillar crypts and inactivating penicillin G and because it
appears to halt exotoxin production more rapidly than other drugs. Amoxicillin/clavulanate is also effective.
TMP/SMX, some of the fluoroquinolones, and tetracyclines are unreliable for treating GABHS.
Sore throat, headache, and fever can be treated with analgesics or antipyretics. Bed rest and isolation
are unnecessary. Close contacts who are symptomatic or have a history of poststreptococcal
complications should be examined for streptococci.
Skin infection:
Cellulitis is often treated without doing a culture because isolating organisms can be
difficult. Thus, regimens effective against both streptococci and staphylococci are used (.
Necrotizing fasciitis should be treated in an ICU. Extensive (sometimes repeated) surgical debridement is
required. A recommended initial antibiotic regimen is a
β
-lactam (often a broad-spectrum drug until
etiology is confirmed by culture) plus clindamycin. Although streptococci remain susceptible to
β
-lactam
antibiotics, animal studies show that penicillin is not always effective against a large bacterial inoculum
because the streptococci are not rapidly growing.
Other streptococcal infections:
Drugs of choice for treating group B, C, and G infections are penicillin,
ampicillin, or vancomycin. Cephalosporins or macrolides are usually effective, but susceptibility tests must
guide therapy, especially in very ill, immunocompromised, or debilitated people and in people with foreign
bodies at the infection site. Surgical wound drainage and debridement as adjuncts to antimicrobial
therapy may be lifesaving.
S. bovis
is relatively susceptible to antibiotics. Although vancomycin-resistant
S. bovis
isolates have been
reported, the organism remains susceptible to penicillin and aminoglycosides.
===PAGE:1373===
Most viridans streptococci are often susceptible to penicillin G and other
β
-lactams. Resistance is
growing, and therapy for such strains should be dictated by results of in vitro susceptibility tests.
Enterococcal Infections
Enterococcus faecalis
and
E. faecium
cause endocarditis, UTI, intra-abdominal infection,
cellulitis, and wound infection as well as concurrent bacteremia.
Enterococci associated with endocarditis are difficult to eradicate unless a combination of a cell wallactive drug (eg, penicillin, ampicillin, vancomycin) plus an aminoglycoside (eg, gentamicin, streptomycin)
is used.
For complicated skin infections due to vancomycin-susceptible enterococci, daptomycin and tigecycline
are effective treatment options. Tigecycline is recommended for complicated intra-abdominal infections.
Resistance:
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) may exist; they may be resistant to other
glycopeptides (eg, teicoplanin), aminoglycosides, and cell wall-active
β
-lactams (eg, penicillin G,
ampicillin). When identified, infected patients are strictly isolated. Recommended treatment includes
streptogramins (quinupristin/dalfopristin for
Enterococcus faecium
only) and oxazolidinones (linezolid).
Daptomycin and tigecycline have in vitro activity against VRE and may be off-label treatment options.
β
-Lactamase-producing enterococci are occasionally encountered. Combination
β
-lactam/
β
-lactamase
inhibitor antibiotics (eg, piperacillin/tazobactam, ampicillin/sulbactam) or vancomycin can be used.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is caused by staphylococcal or streptococcal exotoxins.
Symptoms include high fever, hypotension, diffuse erythematous rash, and multiple organ
dysfunction, which may rapidly progress to severe and intractable shock. Diagnosis is made
clinically and by isolating the organism. Treatment includes antibiotics, intensive support, and
immune globulin.
TSS is caused by exotoxin-producing cocci. Strains of phage-group 1
Staphylococcus aureus
elaborate
the TSS toxin-1 (TSST-1) or related exotoxins; certain strains of
Streptococcus pyogenes
produce at
least 2 exotoxins.
Staphylococcal toxic shock:
Women who have preexisting staphylococcal colonization of the vagina
and who use tampons are at highest risk. Mechanical or chemical factors related to tampon use probably
enhance production of the exotoxin or facilitate its entry into the bloodstream through a mucosal break or
via the uterus. Estimates made from small series suggest about 3 cases/100,000 menstruating women
still occur, and cases are still reported in women who do not use tampons, in women who have had
surgery, and in postpartum women. About 15% of cases occur postpartum or as a complication of
postoperative staphylococcal wound infections, which frequently appear insignificant. Cases have also
been reported in patients with influenza, osteomyelitis, or cellulitis.
Mortality from staphylococcal TSS is < 3%. Recurrences are common among women who continue to use
tampons during the first 4 mo after an episode.
Streptococcal toxic shock:
The syndrome is similar to that caused by
S. aureus
, but mortality is higher
(20 to 60%). In addition, about 50% of patients have
S. pyogenes
bacteremia, and 50% have necrotizing
fasciitis (neither is common with staphylococcal TSS). Patients are usually otherwise healthy children or
adults. Primary infections in skin and soft tissue are more common than in other sites. In contrast to
staphylococcal TSS, streptococcal TSS is more likely to cause acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) and less likely to cause a typical cutaneous reaction.
S. pyogenes
TSS is defined as any group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci (GABHS) infection associated with
shock and organ failure. Risk factors for GABHS TSS include minor trauma, surgical procedures, viral
infections (eg, varicella), and use of NSAIDs.
===PAGE:1374===
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is sudden, with fever (39° to 40.5°C, which remains elevated), hypotension, a diffuse macular
erythroderma, and involvement of at least 2 other organ systems.
Staphylococcal TSS is likely to cause vomiting, diarrhea, myalgia, elevated CK, mucositis, hepatic
damage, thrombocytopenia, and confusion. The staphylococcal TSS rash is more likely to desquamate,
particularly on the palms and soles, between 3 and 7 days after onset.
Streptococcal TSS commonly causes respiratory distress syndrome, coagulopathy, and hepatic damage
and is more likely to cause fever, malaise, and severe pain at the site of a soft-tissue infection.
Renal impairment is frequent and common to both. The syndrome may progress within 48 h to syncope,
shock, and death. Less severe cases of staphylococcal TSS are fairly common.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Cultures
Diagnosis is made clinically and by isolating the organism from blood cultures (for
Streptococcus
) or from
the local site. TSS resembles Kawasaki disease, but Kawasaki disease usually occurs in children < 5 yr
of age and does not cause shock, azotemia, or thrombocytopenia; the skin rash is maculopapular. Other
disorders to be considered are scarlet fever, Reye's syndrome, staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome,
meningococcemia, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, leptospirosis, and viral exanthematous diseases.
These disorders are ruled out by specific clinical differences, cultures, and serologic tests.
Specimens for culture should be taken from any lesions, the nose (for staphylococci), throat (for
streptococci), vagina (for both), and blood. MRI or CT of soft tissue is helpful in localizing sites of
infection. Continuous monitoring of renal, hepatic, bone marrow, and cardiopulmonary function is
necessary.
Treatment
• Local measures (eg, decontamination, debridement)
• Fluid resuscitation and circulatory support
• A
β
-lactam (eg, penicillin) plus clindamycin
Patients suspected of having TSS should be hospitalized immediately and treated intensively. Tampons,
diaphragms, and other foreign bodies should be removed at once. Suspected primary sites should be
decontaminated thoroughly. Decontamination includes reinspection and irrigation of surgical wounds,
even if they appear healthy; repeated debridement of devitalized tissues; and irrigation of potential
naturally colonized sites (sinuses, vagina). Fluids and electrolytes are replaced to prevent or treat
hypovolemia, hypotension, and shock. Because fluid loss into tissues can occur throughout the body
(because of systemic capillary leak syndrome and hypoalbuminemia), shock may be profound and
resistant. Aggressive fluid resuscitation and circulatory support are sometimes required.
Obvious infections should be treated. If
S. pyogenes
is isolated, a
β
-lactam (eg, penicillin) plus
clindamycin (900 mg IV q 8 h) continued for 14 days is the most effective antibiotic treatment. If methicillinresistant
S. aureus
(MRSA— is suspected or confirmed, vancomycin, daptomycin, linezolid,
or tigecycline is indicated. Antibiotics given during the acute illness may eradicate pathogen foci and
prevent recurrences. Passive immunization to TSS toxins with IV immune globulin (400 mg/kg) has been
helpful in severe cases of both types of TSS and lasts for weeks, but the disease may not induce active
immunity, so recurrences are possible.
===PAGE:1375===
If a test for seroconversion of the serum antibody responses to TSST-1 in acute- and convalescentphase paired sera is negative, women who have had staphylococcal TSS should probably refrain from
using tampons and cervical caps, plugs, and diaphragms. Advising all women, regardless of TSST-1
antibody status, to change tampons frequently or use napkins instead and to avoid hyperabsorbent
tampons seems prudent.
===PAGE:1376===
Chapter 134. Gram-Positive Bacilli
Introduction
Gram-positive bacilli cause anthrax, diphtheria, erysipelothricosis, listeriosis, and nocardiosis. Serious
symptoms caused by anthrax and diphtheria are due to powerful toxins produced by the organisms.
Anthrax
Anthrax is caused by
Bacillus anthracis
, toxin-producing, encapsulated, aerobic or facultative
anaerobic organisms. Anthrax, an often fatal disease of animals, is transmitted to humans by
contact with infected animals or their products. In humans, infection typically occurs through
the skin. Inhalation infection is less common; oropharyngeal, meningeal, and GI infections are
rare. For inhalation and GI infections, nonspecific local symptoms are typically followed in
several days by severe systemic illness, shock, and often death. Empiric treatment is with
ciprofloxacin or doxycycline. A vaccine is available.
Etiology
Anthrax is an important domestic animal disease, occurring in goats, cattle, sheep, and horses. Anthrax
also occurs in wildlife, such as hippos, elephants, and Cape buffalo. It is rare in humans and occurs
mainly in countries
that do not prevent industrial or agricultural exposure to infected animals or their
products (eg, hides). The incidence of natural infection has decreased, particularly in the developed
world.
However, the potential use of anthrax as a biological weapon has increased fear of this pathogen. Spores
have been prepared in very finely powdered form (weaponized) to be used as agents of warfare and
bioterrorism (; in anthrax bioattacks of 2001, spores were spread via the United States Postal
Service.
Pathophysiology
Bacillus anthracis
readily form spores when they dry—an environmental condition unfavorable for growth.
Spores resist destruction and can remain viable in soil, wool, and animal hair for decades. Spores
germinate and begin multiplying rapidly when they enter an environment rich in amino acids and glucose
(eg, tissue, blood).
Human infection can be acquired by
• Cutaneous contact (most common)
• Ingestion
• Inhalation
Cutaneous infection
is usually acquired by contact with infected animals or sporecontaminated animal
products. Open wounds or abrasions increase susceptibility, but infection may occur when skin is intact.
Skin infection may be transmitted from person to person by direct contact or fomites.
GI (including oropharyngeal) infection
may occur after ingestion of inadequately cooked meat
containing the vegetative forms of the organism, usually when a break in the pharyngeal or intestinal
mucosa facilitates invasion. Ingested anthrax spores can cause lesions from the oral cavity to the cecum.
Released toxin causes hemorrhagic necrotic ulcers and mesenteric lymphadenitis, which may lead to
intestinal hemorrhage, obstruction, or perforation.
Pulmonary infection
(inhalation anthrax), caused by inhaling spores, is almost always due to
occupational exposure to contaminated animal products (eg, hides) and is often fatal.
===PAGE:1377===
GI and inhalation anthrax are not transmitted from person to person.
After entering the body, spores germinate inside macrophages, which migrate to regional lymph nodes
where the bacteria multiply. In inhalation anthrax, spores are deposited in alveolar spaces, where they are
ingested by macrophages, which migrate to mediastinal lymph nodes, usually causing a hemorrhagic
mediastinitis. Bacteremia may occur in any form of anthrax and occurs in nearly all fatal cases; meningeal
involvement is common.
Virulence factors:
The virulence of
B. anthracis
is due to its antiphagocytic capsule, its toxins (factors),
and its rapid replication capability.
The predominant toxins are edema toxin and lethal toxin. Protective antigen binds to target cells and
facilitates cellular entry of edema toxin and lethal toxin. Edema toxin causes massive local edema. Lethal
toxin triggers a massive release of cytokines from macrophages, which is responsible for the sudden
death common in anthrax infections.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present within 1 to 6 days of exposure, but for inhalation anthrax, the incubation period can
be > 6 wk.
Cutaneous anthrax
begins as a painless, pruritic, red-brown papule 1 to 10 days after exposure to
infective spores. The papule enlarges with a surrounding zone of brawny erythema and marked edema
(see Plate 58). Vesiculation and induration are present. Central ulceration follows, with serosanguineous
exudation and formation of a black eschar (the malignant pustule). Local lymphadenopathy is common,
occasionally with malaise, myalgia, headache, fever, nausea, and vomiting. It may take several weeks for
the wound to heal and the edema to resolve.
GI anthrax
ranges from asymptomatic to fatal. Fever, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and bloody
diarrhea are common. Ascites may be present. Intestinal necrosis and septicemia with potentially lethal
toxicity ensue.
Oropharyngeal anthrax
manifests as edematous lesions with central necrotic ulcers on the tonsils,
posterior pharyngeal wall, or hard palate. Soft-tissue swelling in the neck is marked, and cervical lymph
nodes are enlarged. Symptoms include hoarseness, sore throat, fever, and dysphagia. Airway obstruction
may occur.
Inhalation anthrax
begins insidiously as a flu-like illness. Within a few days, fever worsens, and chest
pain and severe respiratory distress develop, followed by cyanosis, shock, and coma. Severe
hemorrhagic necrotizing lymphadenitis develops and spreads to adjacent mediastinal structures.
Serosanguineous transudation, pulmonary edema, and bloody pleural effusion occur. Typical
bronchopneumonia does not occur. Hemorrhagic meningoencephalitis or GI anthrax may develop.
Diagnosis
• Gram stain and culture
Occupational and exposure history is important. Cultures and Gram stain of samples
from clinically
identified sites, including cutaneous or mucosal lesions, pleural fluid, CSF, ascites, or stool, should be
done. Sputum examination and Gram stain are unlikely to identify inhalation anthrax because airspace
disease is frequently absent. A PCR test and immunohistochemical methods can help. Nasal swab testing
for spores in people potentially exposed to inhalation anthrax is not recommended because the predictive
value is unknown.
Chest x-ray (or CT) should be done if pulmonary symptoms are present. It typically shows widening of the
mediastinum (because of enlarged hemorrhagic lymph nodes) and pleural effusion. Pneumonic infiltrates
are uncommon. Lumbar puncture should be done if patients have meningeal signs or a change in mental
status. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is available, but confirmation requires a 4-fold
===PAGE:1378===
change in antibody titer from acute to convalescent specimens.
Prognosis
Mortality in untreated anthrax varies depending on infection type:
• Inhalation and meningeal anthrax: 100%
• Cutaneous anthrax: 10 to 20%
• GI anthrax: About 50%
• Oropharyngeal anthrax: 12.4 to 50%
Treatment
• Ciprofloxacin or doxycycline
Cutaneous anthrax without significant edema or systemic symptoms is treated with ciprofloxacin 500 mg
(10 to 15 mg/kg for children) po q 12 h or doxycycline 100 mg (2.5 mg/kg for children) po q 12 h for 7 to
10 days. Treatment is extended to 60 days if concomitant inhalation exposure was possible. Children and
pregnant or breastfeeding women, who typically should not be given ciprofloxacin or doxycycline, should
nonetheless be given one of these drugs; however, if prolonged treatment is needed, they may be
switched to amoxicillin 500 mg (15 to 30 mg/kg for children) tid after 14 to 21 days if the organism is
shown to be susceptible to penicillin. Mortality is rare with treatment, but the lesion will progress through
the eschar phase.
Inhalation and other forms of anthrax, including cutaneous anthrax with significant edema or systemic
symptoms, require therapy with 2 or 3 drugs: ciprofloxacin 400 mg (10 to 15 mg/kg for children) IV q 12 h
or doxycycline 100 mg (2.5 mg/kg for children) IV q 12 h, plus penicillin, ampicillin, imipenem/cilastatin,
meropenem, rifampin, vancomycin, clindamycin, or clarithromycin. Corticosteroids may be useful for
meningitis and severe mediastinal edema but have not been evaluated adequately. Ca channel blockers,
ACE inhibitors, and specific hyperimmune globulin for
B. anthracis
may be considered. With early
diagnosis and intensive support, including mechanical ventilation, fluids, and vasopressors, mortality may
be reduced to 50%. If treatment is delayed (usually because the diagnosis is missed), death is likely.
Drug resistance
is a theoretical concern. Although normally sensitive to penicillin,
B. anthracis
manifests
inducible
β
-lactamases, so single-drug therapy with a penicillin or a cephalosporin is not recommended.
Biological warfare researchers may have created strains of anthrax that are resistant to multiple
antibiotics, but these strains have not yet been encountered in a clinical situation.
Prevention
An anthrax vaccine, composed of a cellfree culture filtrate, is available for people at high risk (eg, military
personnel, veterinarians, laboratory technicians, employees of textile mills processing imported goat hair).
A separate veterinary vaccine is also available. Repeated vaccination is required to ensure protection.
Local reactions from vaccine can occur.
Limited data suggest that cutaneous anthrax does not result in acquired immunity, particularly if early
effective antimicrobial therapy was used. Inhalation anthrax may provide some immunity in patients who
survive, but data are very limited.
Postexposure prophylaxis:
Postexposure measures include
• Antibiotics
• Vaccination
===PAGE:1379===
Asymptomatic people (including pregnant women and children) exposed to inhaled anthrax require
prophylaxis with oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg (10 to 15 mg/kg for children) q 12 h or doxycycline 100 mg (2.5
mg/kg for children) q 12 h for 60 days. If the organism has been shown to be susceptible to penicillin,
amoxicillin 500 mg (25 to 30 mg/kg for children) tid is an option when ciprofloxacin and doxycycline are
contraindicated.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that the anthrax vaccine be
administered with antibiotic prophylaxis to patients exposed to anthrax spores. Postexposure antibiotic
treatment is extended to 100 days in patients who are vaccinated.
Diphtheria
Diphtheria is an acute pharyngeal or cutaneous infection by
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
; some
strains produce an exotoxin. Symptoms are either nonspecific skin infections or
pseudomembranous pharyngitis followed by myocardial and neural tissue damage secondary
to the exotoxin. Diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by culture. Treatment is with antitoxin and
penicillin or erythromycin. Childhood vaccination should be routine.
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
usually infect the nasopharynx (respiratory diphtheria) or skin.
Diphtheria toxin:
Diphtheria strains infected by a
β
-phage, which carries a toxin-encoding gene,
produce a potent toxin. This toxin first causes inflammation and necrosis of local tissues and then can
damage the heart, nerves, and sometimes the kidneys. Nontoxigenic strains of
C. diphtheriae
can also
cause nasopharyngeal infection and sometimes systemic disease (eg, endocarditis, septic arthritis).
Epidemiology and transmission:
Humans are the only known reservoir for
C. diphtheriae
. The
organism is spread by
• Respiratory droplets
• Contact with nasopharyngeal secretions
• Contact with infected skin lesions
• Fomites (rare)
A carrier state is common in endemic regions but not in developed countries; most patients who are
adequately treated do not become carriers. Patients with clinical illness or asymptomatic carriers may
transmit the infection.
Poor personal and community hygiene contributes to the spread of cutaneous diphtheria. In the US,
indigent adults living in endemic areas are particularly at risk.
Diphtheria is endemic in many counties in Africa, South America, South and Southeast Asia, the Middle
East, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic (travel information about diphtheria is available at the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] web site). Diphtheria is now rare in developed countries because
childhood immunization is widespread. However, after the breakup of the former Soviet Union,
vaccination rates in its constituent countries fell, followed by a marked rise in diphtheria cases.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms vary depending on where the infection is and on whether the strain produces toxin. Most
respiratory infections are caused by toxigenic strains. Cutaneous infections are caused by toxigenic and
nontoxigenic strains. Toxin is poorly absorbed from the skin; thus, toxin complications are rare in
cutaneous diphtheria.
Pharyngeal infection:
After an incubation period, which averages 5 days, and a prodromal period of
between 12 and 24 h, patients develop mild sore throat, dysphagia, low-grade fever, and tachycardia.
===PAGE:1380===
Nausea, emesis, chills, headache, and fever are more common among children.
If a toxigenic strain is involved, the characteristic membrane appears in the tonsillar area. It may initially
appear as a white, glossy exudate but typically becomes dirty gray, tough, fibrinous, and adherent so that
removal causes bleeding. Local edema may cause a visibly swollen neck (bull neck), hoarseness, stridor,
and dyspnea. The membrane may extend to the larynx, trachea, and bronchi and may partially obstruct
the airway or suddenly detach, causing complete obstruction.
Mild disease with a serosanguineous or purulent discharge and irritation of the external nares and upper
lip occurs in patients who have only nasal diphtheria.
Skin infection:
Skin lesions usually occur on the extremities and are varied in appearance, often
indistinguishable from chronic skin conditions (eg, eczema, psoriasis, impetigo). A few patients have
nonhealing, punched-out ulcers, occasionally with a grayish membrane. Pain, tenderness, erythema, and
exudate are typical. If exotoxin is produced, lesions may be numb. Concomitant nasopharyngeal infection
occurs in 20 to 40% by direct or indirect inoculation with the organism, often from preexisting chronic skin
lesions.
Complications:
The main complications are cardiac and neurologic.
Myocarditis
is usually evident by the 10th to 14th day but can appear any time during the 1st to 6th wk,
even while local respiratory symptoms are subsiding; risk of cardiac toxicity is related to degree of local
infection. Insignificant ECG changes occur in 20 to 30% of patients, but atrioventricular dissociation,
complete heart block, and ventricular arrhythmias may occur and are associated with a high mortality rate.
Heart failure may develop.
Nervous system toxicity
is uncommon (about 5%) and limited to patients with severe respiratory
diphtheria. The toxin causes a demyelinating polyneuropathy that affects cranial and peripheral nerves.
The toxic effects usually begin during the 1st wk of illness with loss of ocular accommodation and bulbar
palsy, causing dysphagia and nasal regurgitation.
Peripheral neuropathy appears during the 3rd to 6th
wk. It is both motor and sensory, although motor symptoms predominate. Resolution occurs over many
weeks.
Diagnosis
• Gram stain and culture
Diphtheria needs to be considered in patients with nonspecific findings of pharyngitis, cervical
adenopathy, and low-grade fever if they also have systemic toxicity plus hoarseness, palatal paralysis, or
stridor. The appearance of the characteristic membrane suggests the diagnosis.
Gram stain of the membrane may reveal gram-positive bacilli with metachromatic (beaded) staining in
typical Chinese-character configuration. Material for culture should be obtained from below the
membrane, or a portion of membrane itself should be submitted. The laboratory should be notified that
C.
diphtheriae
is suspected, so that special culture media (Loeffler's or Tindale's) can be used. In vitro
testing for toxin production (modified Elek test) is done to differentiate toxigenic from nontoxigenic strains.
Cutaneous diphtheria should be considered when a patient develops skin lesions during an outbreak of
respiratory diphtheria. Swab or biopsy specimens should be cultured. Patients with cutaneous diphtheria
may be co-infected with group A streptococci or
Staphylococcus aureus
.
Treatment
• Diphtheria antitoxin
• Penicillin or erythromycin
Symptomatic patients with respiratory diphtheria should be hospitalized in an ICU to monitor for
===PAGE:1381===
respiratory and cardiac complications. Isolation with respiratory-droplet and contact precautions is
required and must continue until 2 cultures, taken 24 and 48 h after antibiotics are stopped, are negative.
Diphtheria antitoxin
must be given without waiting for culture confirmation because the antitoxin
neutralizes only toxin not yet bound to cells. The use of antitoxin for cutaneous disease, without evidence
of respiratory disease, is of questionable value because toxic sequelae have rarely been reported in
cutaneous diphtheria; however, some experts recommend it. In the US, antitoxin must be obtained from
the CDC at 770-488-7100 (see also the CDC's notice regarding availability of diphtheria antitoxin).
CAUTION: Diphtheria antitoxin is derived from horses; therefore, a skin (or conjunctival) test to rule out
sensitivity should always precede administration (. The dose, ranging from 20,000 to 100,000
units IM or IV, is determined by the site and severity of symptoms, duration of the disease, and
complications. If an allergic reaction occurs, 0.3 to 1 mL epinephrine 1:1000 (0.01 mL/kg) should
immediately be injected sc, IM, or slowly IV. In highly sensitive patients, IV administration of antitoxin is
contraindicated.
Antibiotics
are required to eradicate the organism and prevent spread; they are not substitutes for
antitoxin. Adults may be given either procaine penicillin G 600,000 units IM q 12 h or erythromycin 250 to
500 mg IV or po q 6 h for 14 days. Children should be given procaine penicillin G 12,500 to 25,000
units/kg IM q 12 h or erythromycin 10 to 15 mg/kg (maximum, 2 g/day) po or IV q 6 h. Organism
elimination should be documented by 2 consecutive negative throat and/or nasopharyngeal cultures after
completion of antibiotics.
Vaccination
is required after recovery for patients who had diphtheria because infection does not
guarantee immunity.
Recovery from severe diphtheria is slow, and patients must be advised against resuming activities too
soon. Even normal physical exertion may harm patients recovering from myocarditis. Overall mortality is
3%; it is higher in those with delayed presentation or myocarditis and in children < 15 yr.
For cutaneous diphtheria, thorough cleansing of the lesion with soap and water and administration of
systemic antibiotics for 10 days are recommended.
Prevention
Prevention consists of infection control measures plus
• Vaccination (primary and postexposure)
• Antibiotics
Vaccination:
The vaccine for diphtheria contains diphtheria toxoid; it is available only in combination with
other vaccines.
Everyone should be vaccinated at prescribed intervals using diphtheria-tetanus-acellular pertussis
(DTaP) vaccine for children and tetanus-diphtheria (Td) or tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and
acellular pertussis (Tdap) for adolescents and adults (. (See also the CDC's National
Immunization Program 2009 Childhood and Adolescent Immunization Schedule and their Adult
Immunization Recommendations.)
After exposure, diphtheria immunization should be updated in all contacts (including hospital personnel)
who have not completed a primary series or who have gone > 5 yr since
their last booster dose. The
vaccine should also be given if immunization status is unknown. An age-appropriate diphtheria toxoidcontaining vaccine is used.
Postexposure antibiotics:
All close contacts should be examined; surveillance for evidence of disease
is maintained for 7 days. Nasopharyngeal and throat cultures for
C. diphtheriae
should be done
regardless of immunization status.
===PAGE:1382===
Asymptomatic contacts should be treated with erythromycin 250 to 500 mg (10 to 15 mg/kg for children)
po q 6 h for 7 days or, if adherence is uncertain, a single dose of penicillin G benzathine (600,000 units
IM for patients < 30 kg and 1.2 million units IM for those > 30 kg).
If cultures are positive, an additional 10-day course of erythromycin should be given; carriers should not
be given antitoxin. After 3 days of treatment, carriers can safely resume work while continuing to take
antibiotics. Cultures should be repeated; 24 h after the completion of antimicrobial therapy, 2 consecutive
culture sets of the nose and throat should be collected 24 h apart. If results are positive, another course
of antibiotics is given and cultures are done again.
Erysipelothricosis
Erysipelothricosis is infection caused by
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
. The most common
symptom is erysipeloid, an acute but slowly evolving localized cellulitis. Diagnosis is by culture
of a biopsy specimen or occasionally PCR testing. Treatment is with antibiotics.
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
(formerly
E. insidiosa
) are capsulated, nonsporulating, nonmotile,
microaerophilic bacilli with worldwide distribution; they are primarily saprophytes. They may infect a
variety of animals, including insects, shellfish, fish, birds, and mammals (especially swine). In humans,
infection is chiefly occupational and typically follows a penetrating wound in people who handle edible or
nonedible animal matter (eg, infected carcasses, rendered products [grease, fertilizer], bones, shells).
Most commonly, patients handle fish or work in slaughterhouses. Infection can also result from cat or dog
bites. Nondermal infection is rare, usually occurring as arthritis or endocarditis.
Symptoms and Signs
Within 1 wk of injury, a characteristic raised, purplish red, nonvesiculated, indurated, maculopapular rash
appears, accompanied by itching and burning. Local swelling, although sharply demarcated, may inhibit
use of the hand, the usual site of infection. The lesion's border may slowly extend outward, causing
discomfort and disability that may persist for 3 wk. The disease is usually self-limited. Regional
lymphadenopathy occurs in about one third of cases. It rarely becomes generalized cutaneous disease,
which is characterized by purple skin lesions that expand as the lesion's center clears, plus bullous
lesions at the primary or distant sites.
Bacteremia is rare and is more often a primary infection than dissemination from cutaneous lesions. It may
result in septic arthritis or infective endocarditis, even in people without known valvular heart disease.
Endocarditis tends to involve the aortic valve, and the mortality rate and percentage of patients needing
cardiac valve replacement are unusually high.
Diagnosis
• Culture
Culture of a full-thickness biopsy specimen is superior to needle aspiration of the advancing edge of a
lesion because organisms are located only in deeper parts of the skin. Culture of exudate obtained by
abrading a florid papule may be diagnostic. Isolation from synovial fluid or blood is necessary for
diagnosis of erysipelothrical arthritis or endocarditis.
E. rhusiopathiae
may be misidentified as lactobacilli
or enterococci. PCR amplification may aid rapid diagnosis.
Treatment
• Penicillin, ciprofloxacin, or erythromycin
For
localized cutaneous disease
, usual treatment is penicillin V, ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, or
erythromycin (macrolides may not be consistently active) 500 mg po qid for 7 days. Tetracyclines and
cephalosporins are also effective.
E. rhusiopathiae
are resistant to sulfonamides and vancomycin.
Severe diffuse cutaneous or systemic infection
is best treated with IV penicillin G (12 to 20 million
===PAGE:1383===
units/day), ceftriaxone (2 g IV once/day), or a fluoroquinolone (eg, ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV q 12 h).
Endocarditis
is treated with penicillin G 25,000 to 30,000 units/kg IV q 4 h for 4 wk. Cephalosporins and
fluoroquinolones are alternatives.
The same drugs and doses are appropriate for arthritis (given for at least 1 wk after defervescence or
cessation of effusion), but repeated needle aspiration drainage of the infected joint is also necessary.
Listeriosis
(See also Neonatal Listeriosis )
Listeriosis is bacteremia, meningitis, cerebritis, dermatitis, an oculoglandular syndrome,
intrauterine and neonatal infections, or rarely endocarditis caused by
Listeria
sp. Symptoms
vary with the organ system affected and include intrauterine death in perinatal infection.
Diagnosis is by laboratory isolation. Treatment includes penicillin, ampicillin (often with
aminoglycosides), and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.
Listeria
are small, non-acid-fast, noncapsulated, nonsporulating,
β
-hemolytic, aerobic, and facultative
anaerobic gram-positive bacilli that have characteristic tumbling motility. They are present worldwide in
the environment and in the gut of humans, nonhuman mammals, birds, arachnids, and crustaceans.
There are several species of
Listeria
, but
L. monocytogenes
is the only pathogen in humans. Incidence in
the US is ≥ 7 cases/1,000,000 people/yr, peaking in the summer; attack rates are highest in neonates and
in adults ≥ 60 yr.
Because
L. monocytogenes
is ubiquitous in the environment, opportunities for contamination are
numerous during the food production process. Infection usually occurs via ingestion of contaminated dairy
products, raw vegetables, or meats and is favored by the ability of
L. monocytogenes
to survive and grow
at refrigerator temperatures. Infection may also occur by direct contact and during slaughter of infected
animals.
Risk factors:
Glucocorticoid therapy is the most important predisposing factor in nonpregnant adults.
Because
L. monocytogenes
multiplies intracellularly, control of listeriosis requires cell-mediated immunity;
thus, immunocompromised patients are at high risk. Pregnant women are also at increased risk of
developing listerial infection, which can spread antepartum and intrapartum from mother to child and can
cause abortion or early infant death.
Symptoms and Signs
Primary listerial bacteremia is rare and causes high fever without localizing symptoms and signs.
Endocarditis, peritonitis, osteomyelitis, cholecystitis, and pleuropneumonia may occur. Listerial
bacteremia during pregnancy can cause intrauterine infection, chorioamnionitis, premature labor, fetal
death, or neonatal infections.
Meningitis is due to
Listeria
in about 20% of cases in neonates and in patients > 60 yr. Twenty percent of
cases progress to cerebritis, either diffuse encephalitis or, rarely, rhombencephalitis and abscesses;
rhombencephalitis manifests as altered consciousness, cranial nerve palsies, cerebellar signs, and motor
or sensory loss.
Oculoglandular listeriosis can cause ophthalmitis and regional lymph node enlargement. It may follow
conjunctival inoculation and, if untreated, may progress to bacteremia and meningitis.
Diagnosis
• Culture
Listerial infections are diagnosed by culture of blood or CSF. The laboratory must be informed when
L.
monocytogenes
is suspected because the organism is easily confused with diphtheroids. In all listerial
===PAGE:1384===
infections, IgG agglutinin titers peak 2 to 4 wk after onset.
Treatment
• Ampicillin, usually with an aminoglycoside
Listerial meningitis is best treated with ampicillin 2 g IV q 4 h. Most authorities recommend adding an
aminoglycoside based on synergy in vitro. Children receive ampicillin 50 to 100 mg/kg IV q 6 h.
Cephalosporins are not effective.
Endocarditis and primary listerial bacteremia are treated with ampicillin 2 g IV q 4 h plus gentamicin (for
synergy) given for 6 wk (for endocarditis) or 2 wk (for bacteremia) beyond defervescence. Oculoglandular
listeriosis and listerial dermatitis should respond to erythromycin 10 mg/kg po q 6 h, continued until 1 wk
after defervescence. Cephalosporins have no in vitro activity and should not be used.
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 5/25 mg/kg IV q 8 h is an alternative.
Nocardiosis
Nocardiosis is an acute or chronic, often disseminated, suppurative or granulomatous infection
caused by various aerobic soil saprophytes of the genus
Nocardia
. Pneumonia is typical, but
skin and CNS infections are common. Diagnosis is by culture and special stains. Treatment is
usually with sulfonamides.
Nocardia
are obligate aerobic, partially acidfast, beaded, branching, gram-positive bacilli. Several
Nocardia
sp, in the family Actinomycetaceae, cause human disease.
N. asteroides
is the most common human pathogen; it usually causes pulmonary and disseminated
infection.
N. brasiliensis
most commonly causes skin infection, particularly in tropical climates. Infection is via
inhalation or by direct inoculation of the skin.
Other
Nocardia
sp sometimes cause localized or, occasionally, systemic infections.
Nocardiosis occurs worldwide in all age groups, but incidence is higher in older adults, especially men.
Person-to-person spread is rare.
Risk factors:
Lymphoreticular cancers, organ transplantation, high-dose corticosteroid or other
immunosuppressive therapy, and underlying pulmonary disease are predisposing factors, but about one
half of patients have no preexisting disease. Nocardiosis is also an opportunistic infection in patients with
advanced HIV infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Nocardiosis usually begins as a subacute pulmonary infection that resembles actinomycosis, but
Nocardia
are more likely to disseminate locally or hematogenously. Dissemination with abscess formation
may involve any organ but most commonly affects the brain, skin, kidneys, bone, or muscle.
The most common symptoms of pulmonary involvement—cough, fever, chills, chest pain, weakness,
anorexia, and weight loss—are nonspecific and may resemble those of TB or suppurative pneumonia.
Pleural effusion may also occur. Metastatic brain abscesses, occurring in 30 to 50% of cases, usually
cause severe headaches and focal neurologic abnormalities. Infection may be acute, subacute, or
chronic.
Skin or subcutaneous abscesses occur frequently, sometimes as a primary local inoculation. They may
appear as firm cellulitis, a lymphocutaneous syndrome, or an actinomycetoma. The lymphocutaneous
syndrome consists of a primary pyoderma lesion and lymphatic nodules resembling sporotrichosis. An
actinomycetoma begins as a nodule, suppurates, spreads along fascial planes, and drains through
===PAGE:1385===
chronic fistulas.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination or culture
Diagnosis is by identification of
Nocardia
sp in tissue or in culture of samples from localized lesions
identified by physical examination, x-ray, or other imaging studies. Clumps of beaded, branching filaments
of gram-positive bacteria (which may be weakly acid-fast) are often seen.
Nocardia
do not have a
clubbed appearance, as do
Actinomyces israelii
.
Prognosis
Without treatment, pulmonary and disseminated nocardiosis are usually fatal. Among patients who are
treated with appropriate antibiotics, the mortality rate is highest (> 50%) in immunocompromised patients
with disseminated infections and lowest (about 10%) in immunocompetent patients with lesions restricted
to the lungs. Cure rates for patients with skin infection are usually > 95%.
Treatment
• Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or high doses of a sulfonamide alone (sulfamethoxazole or sulfisoxazole)
are used. Because most cases respond slowly, a dose that maintains a sulfonamide blood concentration
of 12 to 15 mg/dL (eg, with sulfadiazine 4 to 6 g/day po) must be continued for several months.
When sulfonamide hypersensitivity or refractory infection is present, amikacin, a tetracycline (particularly
minocycline), imipenem/cilastatin, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, extended-spectrum fluoroquinolones (eg,
moxifloxacin), or cycloserine can be used. In vitro susceptibility data should guide the choice of alternative
drugs.
===PAGE:1386===
Chapter 135. Gram-Negative Bacilli
Introduction
Gram-negative bacilli are responsible for numerous diseases. Some are commensal organisms present
among normal intestinal flora. These commensal organisms plus others from animal or environmental
reservoirs may cause disease. UTIs, diarrhea, peritonitis, and bloodstream infections are commonly
caused by gram-negative bacilli. Plague, cholera, and typhoid fever are rare but serious gram-negative
infections.
Bartonella
Infections
Bartonella
sp are gram-negative bacteria previously classified as Rickettsiae. They cause several
uncommon diseases: cat-scratch disease, an acute febrile anemia, a chronic cutaneous eruption, and
disseminated disease in immunocompromised hosts (see
Table 135-1
).
Cat-Scratch Disease
(Cat-Scratch Fever)
Cat-scratch disease is infection caused by
Bartonella henselae
. Symptoms are a local papule
and regional lymphadenitis. Diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by biopsy. Treatment is with
local heat application and analgesics.
The domestic cat is a major reservoir for
B. henselae
. The prevalence of
B. henselae
antibodies in US
cats is 14 to 50%. About 99% of patients report contact with cats, most of which are healthy. The cat flea
may be an additional vector. Children are most often affected.
Symptoms and Signs
Within 3 to 10 days after a scratch, most patients develop an erythematous, crusted papule (rarely, a
pustule) at the scratch site. Regional lymphadenopathy develops within 2 wk. The nodes are initially firm
and tender, later becoming fluctuant, and may drain with fistula formation. Fever, malaise, headache, and
anorexia may accompany lymphadenopathy.
Unusual manifestations occur in 5 to 14% of patients: Parinaud's oculoglandular syndrome (conjunctivitis
associated with palpable preauricular nodes) in 6%, neurologic manifestations (encephalopathy, seizures,
neuroretinitis, myelitis, paraplegia, cerebral arteritis) in 2%, and hepatosplenic granulomatous disease in
[Table 135-1.
Some
Bartonella
Infections]
< 1%. Severe disseminated illness may occur in patients with AIDS.
Lymphadenopathy subsides spontaneously within 2 to 5 mo. Complete recovery is usual, except in severe
neurologic or hepatosplenic disease, which may be fatal or have residual effects.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is confirmed by positive serum Ab titers or PCR testing of samples from lymph node aspirates.
Immunocompromised patients and patients with systemic symptoms should also have blood cultures.
Lymph node aspirates are rarely culture-positive.
Treatment
• Local heat and analgesics
===PAGE:1387===
• Sometimes antibiotics for immunocompromised patients
Treatment in immunocompetent patients is local heat application and analgesics. If a lymph node is
fluctuant, needle aspiration usually relieves the pain.
Antibiotic treatment is not clearly beneficial and generally should not be given for localized infection.
Ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, or doxycycline may be used for bacteremia in AIDS patients. Prolonged therapy
is usually necessary (eg, weeks to months) for bacteremia to clear. In vitro antibiotic susceptibilities often
do not correlate with clinical results; testing often shows sensitivity to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
(TMP/SMX) and cephalosporins, but these drugs are clinically ineffective.
Oroya Fever and Verruga Peruana
Oroya fever and verruga peruana are infections caused by
Bartonella bacilliformis
. Oroya fever
occurs after initial exposure; verruga peruana occurs after recovery from the primary infection.
Endemic only to the Andes Mountains in Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru, both diseases are passed from
human to human by the
Phlebotomus
sandfly.
Oroya fever:
Symptoms include fever and profound anemia, which may be sudden or indolent in onset.
The anemia is primarily hemolytic, but myelosuppression also occurs. Muscle and joint pain, severe
headache, and often delirium and coma may occur. Superimposed bacteremia caused by
Salmonella
or
other coliform organisms may occur. Mortality rates may exceed 50% in untreated patients.
Diagnosis is confirmed by blood cultures. Because Oroya fever is often complicated by
Salmonella
bacteremia, chloramphenicol 500 to 1000 mg po q 6 h for 7 days is the treatment of choice; some
clinicians add another antibiotic, typically a
β
-lactam, but TMP/SMX, macrolides, and fluoroquinolones
have also been used successfully.
Verruga peruana:
This disorder manifests as multiple skin lesions that strongly resemble bacillary
angiomatosis, usually occurring on the limbs and face. The lesions may persist for months to years and
may be accompanied by pain and fever.
Verruga peruana is diagnosed by its appearance and sometimes by biopsy showing dermal angiogenesis.
Treatment with most antibiotics produces remission, but relapse is common and requires prolonged
therapy. Typical treatment is streptomycin 15 to 20 mg/kg IM once/day for 10 days or rifampin 10 mg/kg
po once/day for 10 to 14 days. Ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid for 7 to 10 days has been used successfully,
as has azithromycin.
Bacillary Angiomatosis
(Epithelioid Angiomatosis)
Bacillary angiomatosis is skin infection caused by
Bartonella henselae
or
B. quintana
.
Bacillary angiomatosis almost always occurs in immunocompromised people and is characterized by
protuberant, reddish, berry-like lesions on the skin, often surrounded by a collar of scale. Lesions bleed
profusely if traumatized. They may resemble Kaposi's sarcoma or pyogenic granulomas. Infection is
spread by lice and ticks and probably by fleas from household cats. Disease may spread throughout the
reticuloendothelial system, particularly in AIDS patients.
Diagnosis relies on histopathology of the skin lesions, cultures, and PCR analysis. The laboratory should
be notified that
Bartonella
is suspected because special stains and prolonged culture growth are
necessary.
Treatment is with erythromycin 500 mg po q 6 h or doxycycline 100 mg po q 12 h, continued for at least 3
mo.
===PAGE:1388===
Trench Fever
(Wolhynia, Shin Bone, or Quintan Fever)
Trench fever is a louse- or tick-borne disease caused by
Bartonella quintana
or
B. henselae
and
observed originally in military populations during World Wars I and II. Symptoms are an acute,
recurring febrile illness, occasionally with a rash. Diagnosis is by blood culture. Treatment is
with a macrolide or doxycycline.
Humans are the only reservoir.
B. quintana
is transmitted to humans when feces from infected lice are
rubbed into abraded skin or the conjunctiva.
B. henselae
is transmitted by tick bites. Trench fever is
endemic in Mexico, Tunisia, Eritrea, Poland, and the former Soviet Union and is reappearing in the
homeless population in the US.
After a 14- to 30-day incubation period, onset is sudden, with fever, weakness, dizziness, headache, and
severe back and leg pains. Fever may reach 40.5° C and persist for 5 to 6 days. In about half the cases,
fever recurs 1 to 8 times at 5- to 6-day intervals. A transient macular or papular rash and, occasionally,
hepatomegaly and splenomegaly occur. Relapses are common and have occurred up to 10 yr after the
initial attack.
Diagnosis
Trench fever should be suspected in people living where louse infestation is heavy. Leptospirosis, typhus,
relapsing fever, and malaria must be considered.
The organism is identified by blood culture, although growth may take 1 to 4 wk. The disease is marked
by persistent bacteremia during the initial attack, during relapses, and throughout the asymptomatic
periods between relapses.
Treatment
Although recovery is usually complete in 1 to 2 mo and mortality is negligible, bacteremia may persist for
months after clinical recovery, and prolonged (> 1 mo) macrolide or doxycycline treatment may be
needed. Body lice must be controlled (. Patients with chronic bacteremia should be monitored
for signs of endocarditis.
Brucellosis
(Undulant, Malta, Mediterranean, or Gibraltar Fever)
Brucellosis is caused by
Brucella
sp. Symptoms begin as an acute febrile illness with few or no
localized signs and progress to a chronic stage with relapses of fever, weakness, sweats, and
vague aches and pains. Diagnosis is by culture, usually from the blood. Optimal treatment
usually requires 2 antibiotics—doxycycline or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole plus
streptomycin or rifampin.
The causative organisms of human brucellosis are
B. abortus
(from cattle),
B. melitensis
(from sheep and
goats), and
B. suis
(from hogs).
B. canis
(from dogs) has caused sporadic infections. The most common
sources of infection are farm animals and raw dairy products. Deer, bison, horses, moose, caribou, hares,
chickens, and desert rats may also be infected; humans can acquire the infection from these animals as
well.
Brucellosis is acquired by direct contact with secretions and excretions of infected animals and by
ingesting undercooked meat, raw milk, or milk products containing viable organisms. Brucellosis is rarely
transmitted from person to person. Most prevalent in rural areas, brucellosis is an occupational disease of
meatpackers, veterinarians, hunters, farmers, and livestock producers. Brucellosis is rare in the US,
Europe, and Canada, but cases occur in the Middle East, Mediterranean regions, Mexico, and Central
America.
===PAGE:1389===
Patients with acute, uncomplicated brucellosis usually recover in 2 to 3 wk, even without treatment. Some
go on to subacute, intermittent, or chronic disease.
Complications:
Complications are rare but include subacute bacterial endocarditis, meningitis,
encephalitis, neuritis, orchitis, cholecystitis, hepatic suppuration, and osteomyelitis (particularly sacroiliac
or vertebral).
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period varies from 5 days to several months and averages 2 wk. Onset may be sudden,
with chills and fever, severe headache, joint and low back pain, malaise, and occasionally diarrhea. Or
onset may be insidious, with mild prodromal malaise, muscular pain, headache, and pain in the back of
the neck, followed by a rise in evening temperature. As the disease progresses, temperature increases to
40 to 41° C, then subsides gradually to normal or near-normal with profuse sweating in the morning.
Typically, intermittent fever persists for 1 to 5 wk, followed by a 2- to 14-day remission when symptoms
are greatly diminished or absent. In some patients, fever may be transient. In others, the febrile phase
recurs once or repeatedly in waves (undulations) and remissions over months or years and may manifest
as FUO.
After the initial febrile phase, anorexia, weight loss, abdominal and joint pain, headache, backache,
weakness, irritability, insomnia, depression, and emotional instability may occur. Constipation is usually
pronounced. Splenomegaly appears, and lymph nodes may be slightly or moderately enlarged. Up to
50% of patients have hepatomegaly.
Diagnosis
• Blood cultures
• Acute and convalescent serologic testing
Blood cultures should be obtained; growth may take > 7 days, so the laboratory should be notified of the
suspicion of brucellosis.
Acute and convalescent sera should be obtained 3 wk apart. A 4-fold increase or an acute titer of 1:160
or higher is considered diagnostic, particularly if a history of exposure and characteristic clinical findings
are present. The WBC count is normal or reduced with relative or absolute lymphocytosis during the
acute phase.
Treatment
• Doxycycline plus streptomycin
Activity should be restricted in acute cases, with bed rest recommended during febrile episodes.
If antibiotics are given, combination therapy is preferred. Doxycycline 100 mg po bid for 3 to 6 wk plus
streptomycin 1 g IM q 12 to 24 h for 14 days lowers the rate of relapses. In children < 8 yr,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) and either IM streptomycin or oral rifampin for 4 to 6 wk have
been used. Severe musculoskeletal pains, especially over the spine, may require analgesia.
Pasteurization of milk helps prevent brucellosis. Cheese that is made from unpasteurized milk and is aged
< 3 mo may be contaminated. People handling animals or carcasses likely to be infected should wear
goggles and rubber gloves and protect skin breaks from exposure. Programs to detect infection in
animals, eliminate infected animals, and vaccinate young seronegative cattle and swine are required in
the US and in several other countries. Immunity after human infection is short-lived, lasting about 2 yr.
Campylobacter
and Related Infections
===PAGE:1390===
Campylobacter
infections commonly cause diarrhea and occasionally bacteremia, with
consequent endocarditis, osteomyelitis, or septic arthritis.
Campylobacter
sp are motile, curved, microaerophilic, gram-negative bacilli that normally inhabit the GI
tract of many domestic animals and fowl. Several species are human pathogens. The major pathogens
are
C. jejuni
and
C. fetus. C. jejuni
causes diarrhea in all age groups, although peak incidence appears
to be from age 1 to 5 yr.
C. jejuni
accounts for more cases of diarrhea in the US than
Salmonella
and
Shigella
combined.
C. fetus
and several others typically cause bacteremia in adults, more often when
underlying predisposing diseases, such as diabetes, cirrhosis, or cancer, are present. In patients with
immunoglobulin deficiencies, these organisms may cause difficult-to-treat, relapsing infections.
C. jejuni
can cause meningitis in infants.
Contact with infected animals and ingestion of contaminated food (especially under-cooked poultry) or
water have been implicated in outbreaks. However, in sporadic cases, the source of the infecting
organism is frequently obscure.
Complications:

C. jejuni
diarrheal illness is associated with subsequent development (up to 30% of
cases) of Guillain-Barre syndrome because of cross-reaction between
C. jejuni
antibodies and surface
components of peripheral nerves.
Postinfectious (reactive) arthritis may occur in HLA-B27-positive patients a few days to several weeks
after an episode of
C. jejuni
diarrhea.
Focal extraintestinal infections (eg, endocarditis, meningitis, septic arthritis) occur rarely.
Symptoms and Signs
The most common manifestation is watery and sometimes bloody diarrhea. Fever (38 to 40° C), which
follows a relapsing or intermittent course, is the only constant feature of systemic
Campylobacter
infection, although abdominal pain and hepatosplenomegaly are frequent.
Patients can also present with subacute bacterial endocarditis, reactive arthritis, meningitis, or an indolent
FUO rather than with diarrheal illness. Joint involvement with reactive arthritis is usually monoarticular,
affecting the knees; symptoms resolve spontaneously over 1 wk to several months.
Diagnosis
• Stool culture
• Sometimes blood cultures
Diagnosis, particularly to differentiate
Campylobacter
infection from ulcerative colitis (,
requires microbiologic evaluation. Stool culture should be obtained plus blood cultures for patients with
signs of focal infection or serious systemic illness. WBCs are present in stained smears of stool.
Treatment
• Sometimes erythromycin
Most enteric infections resolve spontaneously; if they do not, erythromycin 500 mg po q 6 h for 5 days
may be helpful. For patients with extraintestinal infections, antibiotics (eg, imipenem, gentamicin,
ampicillin, erythromycin) should be given for 2 to 4 wk to prevent relapses.
Cholera
Cholera is an acute infection of the small bowel by
Vibrio cholerae
, which secretes a toxin that
causes copious watery diarrhea, leading to dehydration, oliguria, and circulatory collapse.
===PAGE:1391===
causes copious watery diarrhea, leading to dehydration, oliguria, and circulatory collapse.
Infection is typically through contaminated water or seafood. Diagnosis is by culture or
serology. Treatment is vigorous rehydration and electrolyte replacement plus doxycycline.
The causative organism,
V. cholerae
, serogroups 01 and 0139, is a short, curved, motile, aerobic bacillus
that produces enterotoxin, a protein that induces hypersecretion of an isotonic electrolyte solution by the
small-bowel mucosa. Both the El Tor and classic biotypes of
V. cholerae
can cause severe disease.
However, mild or asymptomatic infection is much more common with the El Tor biotype.
Cholera is spread by ingestion of water, seafood, or other foods contaminated by the excrement of people
with symptomatic or asymptomatic infection. Cholera is endemic in portions of Asia, the Middle East,
Africa, South and Central America, and the Gulf Coast of the US. Cases transported into Europe, Japan,
and Australia have caused localized outbreaks. In endemic areas, outbreaks usually occur during warm
months. The incidence is highest in children. In newly affected areas, epidemics may occur during any
season, and all ages are equally susceptible. A milder form of gastroenteritis is caused by noncholera
vibrios (.
Susceptibility to infection varies and is greater for people with blood type O. Because vibrios are sensitive
to gastric acid, hypochlorhydria and achlorhydria are predisposing factors. People living in endemic areas
gradually acquire a natural immunity.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is 1 to 3 days. Cholera can be subclinical, a mild and uncomplicated episode of
diarrhea, or a fulminant, potentially lethal disease. Abrupt, painless, watery diarrhea and vomiting are
usually the initial symptoms. Significant nausea is typically absent. Stool loss in adults may exceed 1 L/h
but is usually much less. The resultant severe water and electrolyte depletion leads to intense thirst,
oliguria, muscle cramps, weakness, and marked loss of tissue turgor, with sunken eyes and wrinkling of
skin on the fingers. Hypovolemia, hemoconcentration, oliguria and anuria, and severe metabolic acidosis
with K+ depletion (but normal serum Na+ concentration) occur. If cholera is untreated, circulatory collapse
with cyanosis and stupor may follow. Prolonged hypovolemia can cause renal tubular necrosis.
Most patients are free of
V. cholerae
within 2 wk after cessation of diarrhea; chronic biliary tract carriers
are rare.
Diagnosis
• Stool culture and serotyping
Diagnosis is confirmed by stool culture and subsequent serotyping. Cholera can be distinguished from
clinically similar disease caused by enterotoxin-producing strains of
Escherichia coli
and occasionally by
Salmonella
and
Shigella
. Serum electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine should be measured.
Treatment
• Fluid replacement
• Doxycycline, furazolidone, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX), depending on results of
susceptibility testing
Replacement of fluid loss is essential. Mild cases can be treated with standard oral replacement formulas
(. Rapid correction of severe hypovolemia is lifesaving. Prevention or correction of metabolic
acidosis and hypokalemia is important. For hypovolemic and severely dehydrated patients, IV
replacement with isotonic fluids should be used (for details on fluid resuscitation, see pp.
and
).
Water should also be given freely by mouth. To replace K+ losses, KCl 10 to 15 mEq/L can be added to
the IV solution, or KHCO
1 mL/kg po of a 100-g/L solution can be given qid. K+ replacement is
especially important for children, who tolerate hypokalemia poorly.
===PAGE:1392===
Once intravascular volume is restored, amounts for replacement of continuing losses should equal
measured stool volume. Adequacy of hydration is confirmed by frequent clinical evaluation (pulse rate and
strength, skin turgor, urine output). Plasma, plasma volume expanders, and vasopressors should
not
be
used in place of water and electrolytes.
Oral glucose-electrolyte solution is effective in replacing stool losses and may be used
after initial IV
rehydration, and it may be the only means of rehydration in epidemic areas where supplies of parenteral
fluids are limited. Patients who have mild or moderate dehydration and who can drink may be rehydrated
exclusively with the oral solution (about 75 mL/kg in 4 h). Those with more severe dehydration need more
and may need to receive the fluid by nasogastric tube. The oral solution recommended by the WHO
contains 20 g glucose, 3.5 g NaCl, 2.9 g trisodium citrate and dihydrate (or 2.5 g NaHCO
), and 1.5 g KCl
per liter of drinking water. This solution should be continued ad libitum after rehydration in amounts at
least equal to continuing stool and vomitus losses. Solid food should be given only after vomiting stops
and appetite returns.
Early treatment with an effective oral antimicrobial eradicates vibrios, reduces stool volume by 50%, and
stops diarrhea within 48 h. The choice of antimicrobial should be based on the susceptibility of
V.
cholerae
isolated from the community.
Drugs effective for susceptible strains include
• Doxycycline: For adults, a single dose of 300 mg po
• Furazolidone: For adults, 100 mg po qid for 72 h; for children, 1.5 mg/kg qid for 72 h
• TMP/SMX: For adults, one double-strength tablet bid; for children, 5 mg/kg (of the TMP component) bid
for 72 h
Prevention
For control of cholera, human excrement must be correctly disposed of, and water supplies purified. In
endemic regions, drinking water should be boiled or chlorinated, and vegetables and fish cooked
thoroughly.
A killed oral whole cell-B subunit vaccine (not available in the US) provides 85% protection against the 01
serogroup for 4 to 6 mo. Protection lasts up to 3 yr in adults but wanes rapidly in children and is greater
for the classic than for the El Tor biotype. There is no cross-protection between 01 and 0139 serogroups.
Vaccines proven effective against both sero-groups are a future goal. The parenteral cholera vaccine is
not recommended because of its low efficacy, short duration (43% for 3 mo), and frequent severe adverse
effects.
Prompt prophylaxis with doxycycline 100 mg po q 12 h in adults (TMP/SMX can be used for prophylaxis in
children < 9 yr) can decrease secondary cases among household contacts of cholera patients, but mass
prophylaxis is inappropriate and some strains are not sensitive.
Noncholera
Vibrio
Infections
Noncholera vibrios include
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, V. mimicus, V. alginolyticus, V. hollisae
, and
V.
vulnificus
; these vibrios are sometimes called nonagglutinable vibrios (ie, they do not agglutinate with
serum from cholera patients). They typically inhabit warm salt water or mixed salt and fresh water (eg, in
estuaries).
V. parahaemolyticus, V. mimicus
, and
V. hollisae
usually cause food-borne outbreaks of diarrhea,
typically involving inadequately cooked seafood (usually shellfish).
V. parahaemolyticus
infections
typically occur in Japan and in coastal areas of the US. The organisms damage intestinal mucosa but do
not produce enterotoxin or invade the bloodstream. Also, wound infection may develop when
===PAGE:1393===
contaminated warm seawater enters a minor wound.
V. alginolyticus
and
V. vulnificus
can cause serious wound infection; neither causes enteritis.
V.
vulnificus
, when ingested by a compromised host (often someone with chronic liver disease or
immunodeficiency), can cross the intestinal mucosa without causing enteritis and cause septicemia with a
high mortality rate; occasionally, otherwise healthy people develop such infections.
Symptoms and Signs
After a 15- to 24-h incubation period, enteric illness begins suddenly with cramping abdominal pain, large
amounts of watery diarrhea (stools may be bloody and contain PMNs), tenesmus, weakness, and
sometimes nausea, vomiting, and low-grade fever. Symptoms subside spontaneously in 24 to 48 h.
Cellulitis can rapidly develop in contaminated wounds in some cases (typically those involving
V.
vulnificus
) and progress to necrotizing fasciitis with typical hemorrhagic, bullous lesions.
V. vulnificus
septicemia causes shock, bullous skin lesions, and often manifestations of disseminated
intravascular coagulation (eg, thrombocytopenia, hemorrhage); mortality rate is high.
Diagnosis
• Cultures
Wound and bloodstream infections are readily diagnosed with routine cultures. When enteric infection is
suspected,
Vibrio
organisms can be cultured from stool on thiosulfate citrate bile salts sucrose medium.
Contaminated seafood also yields positive cultures.
Treatment
• Ciprofloxacin or doxycycline for enteric infection
• Antibiotics and often debridement for wound infection
Noncholera
Vibrio
enteric infections can be treated with a single dose of ciprofloxacin 1 g po or
doxycycline 300 mg po. For diarrhea, close attention to volume repletion and replacement of lost
electrolytes are needed.
For wound infections, antibiotics are used—typically, doxycycline 100 mg po q 12 h, with or without a 3rdgeneration cephalosporin for severe wound infection or septicemia. Patients with necrotizing fasciitis
require surgical debridement.
Escherichia Coli
Infections
Escherichia coli
are the most numerous aerobic commensal inhabitants of the large intestine.
Certain strains cause diarrhea, and all can cause infection when they invade sterile sites (eg,
the urinary tract). Diagnosis is by standard culture techniques. Toxin assays may help identify
the cause of diarrhea. Treatment with antibiotics is guided by susceptibility testing.
Diseases caused by
E. coli
:
Most commonly,
E. coli
cause UTIs, which usually represent ascending
infection (ie, from the perineum via the urethra).
E. coli
normally inhabit the GI tract; however, some strains have acquired genes that enable them to
cause intestinal infection. When ingested, the following strains can cause diarrhea:
• Enterohemorrhagic: These strains (eg, type O157:H7—see below) produce several cytotoxins,
neurotoxins, and enterotoxins, including Shiga toxin, and cause bloody diarrhea; hemolytic-uremic
syndrome develops in 2 to 7% of cases (. Such strains have most often been acquired from
undercooked ground beef but may also be acquired from infected people by the fecaloral route when
===PAGE:1394===
hygiene is inadequate.
• Enterotoxigenic: These strains can cause watery diarrhea, particularly in infants and travelers (.
• Enteroinvasive: These strains can cause inflammatory diarrhea.
• Enteropathogenic: These strains can cause watery diarrhea, particularly in infants.
• Enteroaggregative: Some strains are emerging as potentially important causes of persistent diarrhea in
patients with AIDS and in children in tropical areas.
Other strains are capable of causing extra-intestinal infection if normal intestinal anatomic barriers are
disrupted (eg, by ischemia, inflammatory bowel disease, or trauma), in which case the organism may
spread to adjacent structures or invade the bloodstream. Hepatobiliary, peritoneal, cutaneous, and
pulmonary infections also occur.
E. coli
bacteremia may also occur without an evident portal of entry.
In neonates, particularly preterm infants,
E. coli
bacteremia and meningitis (caused by strains with the K1
capsule, a marker for neuroinvasiveness) are common (see Neonatal Bacterial Meningitis on p.
and
Neonatal Sepsis .
Diagnosis
• Culture
Samples of blood, stool, or other clinical material are sent for culture. If an enterohemorrhagic strain is
suspected, the laboratory must be notified because special culture media are required.
Treatment
• Various antibiotics depending on site of infection and susceptibility testing
Treatment must be started empirically based on the site and severity of infection (eg, mild bladder
infection, urosepsis) and then modified based on antibiotic susceptibility testing. Many strains are
resistant to ampicillin and tetracyclines, so other drugs should be used; they include ticarcillin, piperacillin,
cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX), and fluoroquinolones.
Surgery may be required to drain pus, debride necrotic lesions, or remove foreign bodies.
E. coli
O157:H7 Infection
E. coli
O157:H7 typically causes acute bloody diarrhea, which may lead to hemolytic-uremic
syndrome. Symptoms are abdominal cramps and diarrhea that may be grossly bloody. Fever is
not prominent. Diagnosis is by stool culture and toxin assay. Treatment is supportive; antibiotic
use is controversial.
Epidemiology
Although > 100 serotypes of
E. coli
produce Shiga and Shiga-like toxins,
E. coli
O157:H7
is the most
common in North America. In some parts of the US and Canada,
E. coli
O157:H7 infection may be a more
common cause of bloody diarrhea than shigellosis or salmonellosis.
E. coli
O157:H7 infection can occur
in people of all ages, although severe infection is most common among children and the elderly.
E. coli
O157:H7 has a bovine reservoir, so outbreaks and sporadic cases occur after ingestion of
undercooked beef (especially ground beef) or unpasteurized milk. Food or water contaminated with cow
manure or raw ground beef can also transmit infection. The organism can also be transmitted by the
fecal-oral route, especially among infants in diapers (eg, via inadequately chlorinated children's wading
pools).
===PAGE:1395===
After ingestion,
E. coli
O157:H7 and similar strains of
E. coli
(termed enterohemorrhagic
E. coli
) produce
high levels of various toxins in the large intestine; these toxins are closely related to the potent cytotoxins
produced by
Shigella dysenteriae
type 1. These toxins appear to directly damage mucosal cells and
vascular endothelial cells in the gut wall. If absorbed, they exert toxic effects on other vascular endothelia
(eg, renal).
Symptoms and Signs
E. coli
O157:H7 infection typically begins acutely with severe abdominal cramps and watery diarrhea that
may become grossly bloody within 24 h. Some patients report diarrhea as being "all blood and no stool,"
which has given rise to the term hemorrhagic colitis. Fever, usually absent or low grade, occasionally
reaches 39° C. Diarrhea may last 1 to 8 days in uncomplicated infections.
About 5% of cases (mostly children < 5 yr and adults > 60 yr) are complicated by hemolytic-uremic
syndrome (, which typically develops in the 2nd wk of illness. Death may occur, especially in
the elderly, with or without this complication.
Diagnosis
• Stool cultures
• Sometimes rapid stool assay for Shiga toxin
E. coli
O157:H7 infection should be distinguished from other infectious diarrheas by isolating the
organism from stool cultures. Often, the clinician must specifically ask the laboratory to test for the
organism. Because bloody diarrhea and severe abdominal pain without fever suggest various
noninfectious etiologies,
E. coli
O157:H7 infection should be considered in suspected cases of ischemic
colitis, intussusception, and inflammatory bowel disease. A rapid stool assay for Shiga toxin may help.
Patients at risk of noninfectious diarrheas may need sigmoidoscopy. If done, sigmoidoscopy may reveal
erythema and edema; barium enema typically shows evidence of edema with thumbprinting.
Treatment
• Supportive care
The mainstay of treatment is supportive. Although
E. coli
is sensitive to most commonly used antibiotics,
antibiotics have not been shown to alleviate symptoms, reduce carriage of the organism, or prevent
hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Fluoroquinolones are suspected of increasing release of enterotoxins.
In the week after infection, patients at high risk of developing hemolytic-uremic syndrome (eg, children < 5
yr, the elderly) should be observed for early signs, such as proteinuria, hematuria, red cell casts, and
rising serum creatinine. Edema and hypertension develop later. Patients who develop complications are
likely to require intensive care, including dialysis and other specific therapies, at a tertiary medical center.
Prevention
Correct disposal of the stool of infected people, good hygiene, and careful hand washing with soap limit
spread of infection. Preventive measures that may be effective in the day care setting include grouping
children known to be infected with
E. coli
O157:H7 or requiring 2 negative stool cultures before allowing
infected children to attend. Pasteurization of milk and thorough cooking of beef prevent food-borne
transmission.
Reporting outbreaks of bloody diarrhea to public health authorities is important because intervention can
prevent additional infections.
Haemophilus
Infections
===PAGE:1396===
Haemophilus
sp cause numerous mild and serious infections, including bacteremia, meningitis,
pneumonia, otitis media, cellulitis, and epiglottitis. Diagnosis is by culture and serotyping.
Treatment is with antibiotics.
Many
Haemophilus
sp are normal flora in the upper respiratory tract and rarely cause illness. Pathogenic
strains enter the upper respiratory tract through droplet inhalation or
direct contact. Spread is rapid in
nonimmune populations. Children, particularly males, blacks, and Native Americans, are at highest risk of
serious infection. Overcrowded living conditions and day care center attendance predispose to infection,
as do immunodeficiency states, asplenia, and sickle cell disease.
There are several pathogenic species of
Haemophilus
; the most common is
H. influenzae
, which has 6
distinct encapsulated serotypes (a through f) and numerous nonencapsulated, nontypeable strains.
Before the use of
H. influenzae
type b (Hib) conjugate vaccine, most cases of serious, invasive disease
were caused by type b.
Diseases caused by
Haemophilus
sp: H. influenzae
causes many childhood infections, including
meningitis, bacteremia, septic arthritis, pneumonia, tracheobronchitis, otitis media, conjunctivitis, sinusitis,
and acute epiglottitis. These infections, as well as endocarditis and UTIs, may occur in adults, although
far less commonly. These illnesses are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Nontypeable
H. influenzae
strains cause mainly mucosal infections (eg, otitis media, sinusitis,
conjunctivitis, bronchitis). Occasionally, nonencapsulated strains cause invasive infections in children, but
they may cause up to half of serious
H. influenzae
infections in adults.
H. influenzae
biogroup aegyptius (formerly called
H. aegyptius
) may cause mucopurulent conjunctivitis
and bacteremic Brazilian purpuric fever.
H. ducreyi
causes chancroid (.
H. parainfluenzae
and
H. aphrophilus
are rare causes of bacteremia, endocarditis, and brain abscess.
Diagnosis
• Cultures
• Sometimes serotyping
Diagnosis is by culture of blood and body fluids. Strains involved in invasive illness should be serotyped.
Treatment
• Various antibiotics depending on site and severity of infection
Treatment depends on nature and location of the infection, but doxycycline, fluoroquinolones, 2nd- and
3rd-generation cephalosporins, and carbapenems are used for invasive disease. The Hib vaccine has
markedly reduced the rate of bacteremia. Children with serious illness are hospitalized with contact and
respiratory isolation for 24 h after starting antibiotics.
Antibiotic choices depend strongly on the site of infection and require susceptibility testing; many isolates
in the US produce
β
-lactamase. For invasive illness, including meningitis, cefotaxime or ceftriaxone is
recommended. For less serious infections, oral cephalosporins, macrolides, and amoxicillin/clavulanate
are generally effective. (See individual disease entries for specific recommendations.)
Prevention
Hib conjugate vaccines are available for children ≥ 2 mo of age and have reduced invasive infections (eg,
meningitis, epiglottitis, bacteremia) by 99%. A primary series is given at age 2, 4, and 6 mo or at age 2
and 4 mo, depending on the vaccine product. A booster at age 12 to 15 mo is indicated.
Contacts within the household may have asymptomatic
H. influenzae
carriage. Unimmunized or
incompletely immunized household contacts < 4 yr are at risk of illness and should receive a dose of
===PAGE:1397===
vaccine. In addition, all household members (except pregnant women) should receive prophylaxis with
rifampin 600 mg (20 mg/kg for children) po once/day for 4 days. Nursery or day care contacts should
receive prophylaxis if ≥ 2 cases of invasive disease occurred in 60 days. The benefit of prophylaxis if
only one case occurred has not been established.
HACEK Infections
The HACEK group includes weakly virulent, gram-negative organisms that primarily cause
endocarditis.
The HACEK group of nonmotile, gram-negative bacilli or coccobacilli contains a number of minimally
pathogenic, slow-growing, fastidious genera. Their primary pathology is endocarditis in susceptible
people; about 1% of endocarditis cases are due to this group. The group consists of
•
Haemophilus
sp, which may cause respiratory infections or, less commonly, endocarditis
•
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans
, which usually occurs with
A. israelii
in actinomycosis (see
Actinomycosis

•
Cardiobacterium hominis
•
Eikenella corrodens
, which usually occurs in human bite wounds, endocarditis, brain and visceral
abscesses, osteomyelitis, respiratory infections, uterine infections related to intrauterine devices, and
mixed soft-tissue infections
•
Kingella kingae
Antibiotic sensitivities differ among species, so treatment should be directed by susceptibility testing.
Klebsiella, Enterobacter,
and
Serratia
Infections
Klebsiella, Enterobacter
, and
Serratia
are closely related normal intestinal flora that rarely cause
disease in normal hosts.
Infections with
Klebsiella, Enterobacter
, and
Serratia
are usually hospital-acquired and occur mainly in
patients with diminished resistance. Usually,
Klebsiella, Enterobacter
, and
Serratia
cause a wide variety
of infections, including bacteremia, surgical site infections, intravascular catheter infections, and
respiratory or urinary tract infections that manifest as pneumonia, cystitis, or pyelitis and that may
progress to lung abscess, empyema, and septicemia.
Klebsiella
pneumonia, a rare and severe disease
with dark brown or red currant-jelly sputum, lung abscess formation, and empyema, is most common
among diabetics and alcoholics.
Serratia,
particularly
S. marcescens
, has greater affinity for the urinary
tract.
Enterobacter
can cause otitis media, cellulitis, and neonatal sepsis.
Treatment is with 3rd-generation cephalosporins, cefepime, carbapenems, fluoroquinolones,
piperacillin/tazobactam, or aminoglycosides. However, because some isolates are resistant to multiple
antibiotics, susceptibility testing is essential.
Klebsiella
strains that produce extended-spectrum
β
-
lactamase (ESBL) may develop resistance to cephalosporins during treatment, particularly with
ceftazidime.
Enterobacter
strains may be resistant to most
β
-lactam antibiotics, including 3rd-generation
cephalosporins; the
β
-lactamase enzyme they produce is not inhibited by the usual
β
-lactamase inhibitors
(clavulanate, tazobactam, sulbactam). However, these
Enterobacter
strains may be susceptible to
carbapenems (eg, imipenem, meropenem, ertapenem).
Legionella
Infections
Legionella pneumophila
most often causes pneumonia with extrapulmonary features. Diagnosis
requires specific growth media, serologic testing, or PCR analysis. Treatment is with
doxycycline, macrolides, or fluoroquinolones.
===PAGE:1398===
The first appearance of this organism was in 1976 at a convention of the American Legion—thus, the
name Legionnaires' disease. This disease is the pneumonic form of an infection usually caused by
Legionella pneumophila
serogroups 1 through 6. Nonpneumonic infection is called Pontiac fever.
The organisms are often present in soil and freshwater. A building's water supply is often the source of a
Legionella
outbreak.
Legionella
organisms are embedded in a biofilm that forms on the inside of water
pipes and containers. The infection is usually acquired by inhaling aerosols of contaminated water (eg, as
generated by shower heads, misters, whirlpool baths, or water cooling towers for air-conditioning).
Diseases caused by
Legionella
sp:
The lungs are the most common site of infection; community- and
hospital-acquired pneumonia may occur.
Extrapulmonary foci of infection occur most frequently in hospitalized patients and most commonly involve
the heart. Other sites include the CNS, liver, and intestines. Immunocompromised patients, patients with
diabetes mellitus, cigarette smokers, the elderly, and patients with chronic lung disease are principally
affected.
Symptoms and Signs
Legionnaires' disease is a flu-like syndrome with acute fever, chills, malaise, myalgias, headache, or
confusion. Nausea, loose stools or watery diarrhea, abdominal pain, cough, and arthralgias also
frequently occur. Pneumonic manifestations may include dyspnea, pleuritic pain, and hemoptysis.
Mortality is low in otherwise healthy people but can reach 50% in hospital-acquired outbreaks.
Diagnosis
• Direct fluorescent antibody staining
• Sputum culture
• Rapid urinary antigen test (for serogroup 1 only)
Direct fluorescent antibody staining of sputum or lavage fluid is frequently used. In addition, PCR with
DNA probing is available. A urinary antigen test is 70% sensitive and 100% specific 3 days after symptom
onset but detects only
L. pneumophila
(serogroups 1 through 6) and not nonpneumophila Legionella
.
Paired acute and convalescent antibody assays may yield a delayed diagnosis. A 4-fold increase or an
acute titer of ≥ 1:128 is considered diagnostic.
Diagnosis is by culture of sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; blood cultures are
unreliable. Slow
growth on laboratory media may delay identification for 3 to 5 days.
Chest x-ray should be done; it usually shows patchy and rapidly asymmetrically progressive infiltrates
(even when effective antibiotic therapy is used), with or without small pleural effusions.
Treatment
• Fluoroquinolones
• Doxycycline
A fluoroquinolone given IV or po for 2 to 3 wk is the preferred regimen. Doxycycline is also highly
effective. Azithromycin is effective, but erythromycin may be ineffective. Rifampin may be added for
severe infections.
Melioidosis
===PAGE:1399===
Melioidosis is an infection caused by
Burkholderia
(formerly
Pseudomonas
)
pseudomallei
.
Manifestations include pneumonia, septicemia, and localized infection in various organs.
Diagnosis is by staining or culture. Treatment with antibiotics, such as ceftazidime, is prolonged.
The organism can be isolated from soil and water and is endemic in Southeast Asia; Australia; Central,
West, and East Africa; India; and China. Humans may contract melioidosis by contamination of skin
abrasions or burns, ingestion, or inhalation but not directly from infected animals or other humans. In
endemic areas, melioidosis is likely to occur in patients with AIDS.
Symptoms and Signs
Infection may be asymptomatic or remain latent for years. Mortality is < 10%, except in acute septicemic
melioidosis, which is frequently fatal.
Acute pulmonary infection
is the most common form. It varies from mild to overwhelming necrotizing
pneumonia. Onset may be abrupt or gradual, with headache, anorexia, pleuritic or dull aching chest pain,
and generalized myalgia. Fever is usually > 39° C. Cough, tachypnea, and rales are characteristic.
Sputum may be blood-tinged. Chest x-rays usually show upper lobe consolidation, frequently cavitating
and resembling TB. Nodular lesions, thin-walled cysts, and pleural effusion may also occur. The WBC
count ranges from normal to 20,000/
μ
L.
Disseminated septicemic infection
begins abruptly, with septic shock and multiple organ involvement
manifested by disorientation, extreme dyspnea, severe headache, pharyngitis, upper abdominal colic,
diarrhea, and pustular skin lesions. High fever, hypotension, tachypnea, a bright erythematous flush, and
cyanosis are present. Muscle tenderness may be striking. Signs of arthritis or meningitis sometimes
occur. Pulmonary signs may be absent or may include rales, rhonchi, and pleural rubs.
Nondisseminated septicemic infection
occurs when bacteremia involves only a single organ. It does
not usually lead to shock.
Localized (chronic suppurative) infection
causes secondary abscesses, most often in the skin, lymph
nodes, or bone. Patients may be afebrile. An acute suppurative form is uncommon.
Diagnosis
• Staining and culture
B. pseudomallei
can be identified in exudates by methylene blue or Gram stain and by culture. Chest xrays usually show irregular, nodular (4 to 10 mm) densities. The liver and spleen may be palpable. Liver
function tests, AST, and bilirubin are often abnormal. The WBC count is normal or slightly increased.
Treatment
• Sometimes trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) or ceftazidime
Asymptomatic infection needs no treatment. Mildly ill patients are given TMP/SMX, one double-strength
tablet po bid for a minimum of 30 days. Moderately or seriously ill patients are given ceftazidime 30 mg/kg
IV q 6 h for 2 to 4 wk (imipenem, meropenem, and piperacillin are acceptable substitutes), then oral
TMP/SMX or amoxicillin/clavulanate for 30 to 120 days.
Pertussis
(Whooping Cough)
Pertussis is a highly communicable disease occurring mostly in children and adolescents and
caused by
Bordetella pertussis
. Symptoms are initially those of nonspecific URI followed by
paroxysmal or spasmodic coughing that usually ends in a prolonged, high-pitched, crowing
inspiration (the whoop). Diagnosis is by nasopharyngeal culture, PCR, and serologic assays.
===PAGE:1400===
Treatment is with macrolide antibiotics.
Pertussis is endemic throughout the world. Its incidence in the US cycles every 3 to 4 yr. In a given
unimmunized locality, it becomes epidemic every 2 to 4 yr. It occurs at all ages, but 71% of cases occur in
children < 5 yr, and 38% of cases, including nearly all deaths, occur in infants < 6 mo. Mortality is about 1
to 2% in children < 1 yr and is highest during the first month of life. Most deaths are caused by
bronchopneumonia and cerebral complications. It is also serious in the elderly. One attack does not
confer life-long natural immunity, but secondary attacks are usually mild and often unrecognized.
Transmission via aerosols of
B. pertussis
(a small, nonmotile, gram-negative coccobacillus) from infected
patients, particularly in the catarrhal and early paroxysmal stages, causes disease in 90 to 100% of close
contacts. Transmission by contact with contaminated articles is rare. Patients are usually not infectious
after the 3rd wk of the paroxysmal phase.
Diseases caused by pertussis:
Respiratory complications, including asphyxia in infants, are most
common. Otitis media occurs frequently. Bronchopneumonia (common among the elderly) may be fatal at
any age. Seizures are common among infants but rare in older children. Hemorrhage into the brain, eyes,
skin, and mucous membranes can result from severe paroxysms and consequent anoxia. Cerebral
hemorrhage, cerebral edema, and toxic encephalitis may result in spastic paralysis, intellectual disability
(mental retardation), or other neurologic disorders. Umbilical herniation and rectal prolapse occasionally
occur.
Parapertussis:
This disease, caused by
B. parapertussis
, may be clinically indistinguishable from
pertussis but is usually milder and less often fatal.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period averages 7 to 14 days (maximum 3 wk).
B. pertussis
invades respiratory mucosa,
increasing the secretion of mucus, which is initially thin and later viscid and tenacious. Uncomplicated
disease lasts about 6 to 10 wk and consists of 3 stages:
• Catarrhal
• Paroxysmal
• Convalescent
The catarrhal stage begins insidiously, generally with sneezing, lacrimation, or other signs of coryza;
anorexia; listlessness; and a troublesome, hacking nocturnal cough that gradually becomes diurnal.
Hoarseness may occur. Fever is rare.
After 10 to 14 days, the paroxysmal stage begins with an increase in the severity and frequency of the
cough. Repeated bouts of ≥ 5 rapidly consecutive forceful coughs occur during a single expiration and
are followed by the whoop—a hurried, deep inspiration. Copious viscid mucus may be expelled or bubble
from the nares during or after the paroxysms. Vomiting is characteristic. In infants, choking spells (with or
without cyanosis) may be more common than whoops.
Symptoms diminish as the convalescent stage begins, usually within 4 wk of onset. Average duration of
illness is about 7 wk (range 3 wk to 3 mo). Paroxysmal coughing may recur for months, usually induced in
the still sensitive respiratory tract by irritation from a URI.
Diagnosis
• Nasopharyngeal cultures
The catarrhal stage is often difficult to distinguish from bronchitis or influenza. Adenovirus infections and
TB should also be considered.
===PAGE:1401===
Cultures of nasopharyngeal specimens are positive for
B. pertussis
in 80 to 90% of cases in the catarrhal
and early paroxysmal stages. Because special media and prolonged incubation are required, the
laboratory should be notified that pertussis is suspected. Specific fluorescent antibody testing of
nasopharyngeal smears accurately diagnoses pertussis but is not as sensitive as culture. PCR can also
be used. The WBC count is usually between 15,000 and 20,000/
μ
L but may be normal or as high as
60,000/
μ
L, usually with 60 to 80% small lymphocytes.
Parapertussis is differentiated by culture or the fluorescent antibody technique.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Erythromycin or azithromycin
Hospitalization with respiratory isolation is recommended for seriously ill infants. Isolation is continued
until antibiotics have been given for 5 days.
In infants, suction to remove excess mucus from the throat may be lifesaving. O
and tracheostomy or
nasotracheal intubation is occasionally needed. Expectorants, cough suppressants, and mild sedation are
of little value. Because any disturbance can precipitate serious paroxysmal coughing with anoxia,
seriously ill infants should be kept in a darkened, quiet room and disturbed as little as possible. Patients
treated at home should be
quarantined, particularly from susceptible infants, for at least 4 wk from
disease onset and until symptoms have subsided.
Antibiotics given during the catarrhal stage may ameliorate the disease. After paroxysms are established,
antibiotics usually have no clinical effect but are recommended to limit spread. Preferred drugs are
erythromycin 10 to 12.5 mg/kg po q 6 h (maximum 2 g/day) for 14 days or azithromycin 10 to 12 mg/kg po
once/day for 5 days. Antibiotics should also be used for bacterial complications (eg, bronchopneumonia,
otitis media).
Prevention
Active immunization is part of standard childhood vaccination. Five doses of vaccine are given (usually
combined with diphtheria and tetanus [DTP or DTaP]) at age 2, 4, and 6 mo; boosters are given at 15 to
18 mo and 4 to 6 yr. Significant adverse effects from the pertussis component of the vaccine include
encephalopathy within 7 days; seizure, with or without fever, within 3 days; persistent, severe,
inconsolable screaming or crying for ≥ 3 h; collapse or shock within 48 h; fever ≥ 40.5° C within 48 h; and
immediate severe or anaphylactic reaction. These reactions contraindicate further use of pertussis
vaccine; combined diphtheria and tetanus vaccine is available without the pertussis component. The
acellular vaccine (DTaP) is better tolerated.
Immunity after natural infection lasts about 20 yr. Passive immunization is unreliable and is not
recommended.
Close contacts < 7 yr who have had < 4 doses of vaccine should be vaccinated. Contacts of all ages,
whether vaccinated or not, should receive a 10-day course of erythromycin 500 mg po qid or 10 to 12.5
mg/kg po qid.
Plague and Other
Yersinia
Infections
(Bubonic Plague; Pestis; Black Death)
Plague is caused by
Yersinia pestis
. Symptoms are either severe pneumonia or massive
lymphadenopathy with high fever, often progressing to septicemia. Diagnosis is epidemiologic
and clinical, confirmed by culture and serologic testing. Treatment is with streptomycin or
doxycycline.
===PAGE:1402===
Yersinia
(formerly
Pasteurella
)
pestis
is a short bacillus that often shows bipolar staining (especially with
Giemsa stain) and may resemble a safety pin.
Plague occurs primarily in wild rodents (eg, rats, mice, squirrels, prairie dogs) and is transmitted from
rodent to human by the bite of an infected rat flea vector. Human-to-human transmission occurs by
inhaling droplet nuclei from patients with pulmonary infection (primary pneumonic plague), which is highly
contagious. In endemic areas in the US, several cases may have been caused by household pets,
especially cats. Transmission from cats can be by bite or, if the cat has pneumonic plague, by inhalation
of infected droplets.
Massive human epidemics (eg, the Black Death of the Middle Ages) have occurred. More recently, plague
has occurred sporadically or in limited outbreaks. In the US, > 90% of human plague occurs in the
Southwest, especially New Mexico, Arizona, California, and Colorado.
Yersinia
is considered a possible
agent of bioterrorism.
Symptoms and Signs
In
bubonic plague,
the most common form, the incubation period is usually 2 to 5 days but varies from a
few hours to 12 days. Onset of fever of 39.5 to 41° C is abrupt, often with chills. The pulse may be rapid
and thready; hypotension may occur. Enlarged lymph nodes (buboes) appear with or shortly after the
fever. The femoral or inguinal lymph nodes are most commonly involved, followed by axillary, cervical, or
multiple nodes. Typically, the nodes are extremely tender and firm, surrounded by considerable edema.
They may suppurate in the 2nd wk. The overlying skin is smooth and reddened but often not warm. A
primary cutaneous lesion, varying from a small vesicle with slight local lymphangitis to an eschar,
occasionally appears at the bite. The patient may be restless, delirious, confused, and uncoordinated.
The liver and spleen may be enlarged. Bubonic plague may be complicated by pneumonic plague.
Primary pneumonic plague
has a 2- to 3-day incubation period, followed by abrupt onset of high fever,
chills, tachycardia, chest pain, and headache, often severe. Cough, not prominent initially, develops within
24 h. Sputum is mucoid at first, rapidly develops blood specks, and then becomes uniformly pink or bright
red (resembling raspberry syrup) and foamy. Tachypnea and dyspnea are present, but pleuritic chest pain
is not. Signs of consolidation are rare, and rales may be absent.
Septicemic plague
may occur with the bubonic form or without the bubonic form (called primary
septicemic plague) as an acute, fulminant illness. Abdominal pain, presumably due to mesenteric
lymphadenopathy, occurs in 40% of patients. Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, gangrene of the
extremities
(hence, the name Black Death), and multiorgan failure eventually develop. Pharyngeal plague
and plague meningitis are less common forms.
Pestis minor,
a more benign form of bubonic plague, usually occurs only in endemic areas.
Lymphadenitis, fever, headache, and prostration subside within a week.
The mortality rate for untreated patients with bubonic plague is about 60%; most deaths result from
septicemia in 3 to 5 days. Most untreated patients with pneumonic plague die within 48 h of symptom
onset. Septicemic plague may be fatal before bubonic or pulmonary manifestations predominate.
Diagnosis
• Staining, cultures, and serologic testing
Diagnosis is made by stain and culture of the organism, typically by needle aspiration of a bubo (surgical
drainage may disseminate the organism); blood and sputum cultures should also be obtained. Other tests
include immunofluorescent staining and serology; a titer of > 1:16 or a 4-fold rise between acute and
convalescent titers is positive. PCR testing, if available, is diagnostic. Prior vaccination does not exclude
plague; clinical illness may occur in vaccinated people.
Patients with pulmonary symptoms or signs should have a chest x-ray, which shows a rapidly progressing
pneumonia in pneumonic plague. The WBC count is usually 10,000 to 20,000/
μ
L with numerous immature
===PAGE:1403===
neutrophils.
Treatment
• Streptomycin
• Alternatively, doxycycline, gentamicin, or chloramphenicol
Immediate treatment reduces mortality to < 5%. In septicemic or pneumonic plague, treatment must begin
within 24 h with streptomycin 15 mg/kg (up to 1 g) IM bid for 10 days or until 3 days after temperature has
returned to normal. Doxycycline 100 mg IV or po q 12 h is an alternative. Gentamicin and chloramphenicol
are also effective.
Chloramphenicol is preferred for patients with infection of tissue spaces into which other drugs pass
poorly (eg, plague meningitis, endophthalmitis). Chloramphenicol should be given in a loading dose of 25
mg/kg IV, followed by 12.5 mg/kg IV or po q 6 h.
Routine isolation precautions are adequate for patients with bubonic plague. Those with primary or
secondary pneumonic plague require strict respiratory isolation.
Prevention
All pneumonic plague contacts should be under medical surveillance. Temperature should be taken q 4 h
for 6 days. They and others in close contact with plague patients or with contaminated fluids or tissue
should receive prophylaxis with doxycycline 100 mg po q 12 h (for children < 8 yr,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole [TMP/SMX] 20 mg/kg [of the SMX component] q 12 h). Travelers should
be given prophylaxis with doxycycline 100 mg po q 12 h during exposure periods. Plague vaccine is
available but is recommended mainly for laboratory workers and researchers because immunity requires
about 1 mo to develop.
Rodents should be controlled and repellents used to minimize flea bites.
Other
Yersinia
Infections
Yersinia enterocolitica
and
Y. pseudotuberculosis
are zoonoses acquired by ingestion of contaminated
food or water; they occur worldwide.
Y. enterocolitica
is a common cause of diarrheal disease and mesenteric adenitis that clinically mimics
appendicitis.
Y. pseudotuberculosis
most commonly causes mesenteric adenitis and has been suspected
in cases of interstitial nephritis, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, and a scarlet fever-like illness. Both species
can cause pharyngitis, septicemia, focal infections in multiple organs, postinfectious erythema nodosum,
and reactive arthritis. In patients with chronic liver disease or iron overload, mortality from septicemia may
be as high as 50%, even with treatment.
The organisms can be identified in standard cultures from normally sterile sites. Selective culture methods
are required for nonsterile specimens. Serologic assays are available but difficult and not standardized.
Diagnosis, particularly of reactive arthritis, requires a high index of suspicion and close communication
with the clinical laboratory.
Treatment of diarrhea is supportive because the disease is self-limited. Septic complications require
β
-
lactamase-resistant antibiotics guided by susceptibility testing.
Prevention focuses on food handling and preparation, household pets, and epidemiology of suspected
outbreaks.
Proteeae Infections
The Proteeae are normal fecal flora that often cause infection in patients whose normal flora
===PAGE:1404===
have been disturbed by antibiotic therapy.
The Proteeae constitute at least 3 genera of gram-negative organisms:
•
Proteus: P. mirabilis, P. vulgaris
, and
P. myxofaciens
•
Morganella: M. morganii
•
Providencia: P. rettgeri, P. alcalifaciens
, and
P. stuartii
However,
P. mirabilis
causes most human infections. These organisms are normal fecal flora and are
present in soil and water. They are often present in superficial wounds, draining ears, and sputum,
particularly in patients whose normal flora has been eradicated by antibiotic therapy. They may cause
bacteremia and deep-seated infections, particularly in the ears and mastoid sinuses, peritoneal cavity,
and urinary tract of patients with chronic UTIs or with renal or bladder stones.
P. mirabilis
is often sensitive to ampicillin, carbenicillin, ticarcillin, piperacillin, cephalosporins, and
aminoglycosides and resistant to tetracyclines. Multidrug-resistant
P. mirabilis
is an emerging problem.
Indole-positive species (
P. vulgaris, M. morganii, P. rettgeri
) tend to be more resistant but generally are
sensitive to fluoroquinolones, carbapenems, piperacillin/tazobactam, 3rd-generation cephalosporins, and
cefixime.
Pseudomonas
and Related Infections
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and other members of this group of gram-negative bacilli are
opportunistic pathogens that frequently cause hospital-acquired infections, particularly in
ventilator patients, burn patients, and patients with chronic debility. Many sites can be infected,
and infection is usually severe. Diagnosis is by culture. Antibiotic choice varies with the
pathogen and must be guided by susceptibility testing because resistance is common.
Epidemiology
Pseudomonas
is ubiquitous and favors moist environments. In humans,
P. aeruginosa
is the most
common pathogen, but infection may result from
P. paucimobilis, P. putida, P. fluorescens
, or
P.
acidovorans
. Other important hospital-acquired pathogens formerly classified as
Pseudomonas
include
Burkholderia cepacia
and
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. B. pseudomallei
causes a distinct disease
known as melioidosis that is limited mostly to the Asian tropics (.
P. aeruginosa
is present occasionally in the axilla and anogenital areas of normal skin but rarely in stool
unless antibiotics are being given. In hospitals, the organism is frequently present in sinks, antiseptic
solutions, and urine receptacles. Transmission to patients by health care practitioners may occur,
especially in burn and neonatal ICUs, unless infection control practices are meticulously followed.
Diseases Caused by
Pseudomonas
Most
P. aeruginosa
infections occur in hospitalized patients, particularly those who are debilitated or
immunocompromised.
P. aeruginosa
is a common cause of infections in ICUs. HIV-infected patients,
particularly those in advanced stages, are at risk of community-acquired
P. aeruginosa
infections.
Pseudomonas
infections can develop in many anatomic sites, including skin, subcutaneous tissue, bone,
ears, eyes, urinary tract, and heart valves. The site varies with the portal of entry and the patient's
vulnerability. In hospitalized patients, the first sign may be overwhelming gram-negative sepsis.
Skin and soft-tissue infections:
In burns, the region below the eschar can become heavily infiltrated
with organisms, serving as a focus for subsequent bacteremia—an often lethal complication.
Deep puncture wounds of the foot are often infected by
P. aeruginosa
. Draining sinuses, cellulitis, and
===PAGE:1405===
osteomyelitis may result. Drainage from puncture wounds often has a sweet, fruity smell.
Folliculitis acquired in hot tubs is often caused by
P. aeruginosa
.
External otitis, common in tropical climates, is the most common form of
Pseudomonas
infection involving
the ear. A more severe form, referred to as malignant external otitis (, can develop in diabetic
patients. It is manifested by severe ear pain, often with unilateral cranial nerve palsies, and requires
parenteral therapy.
Ecthyma gangrenosum is a skin lesion that occurs in neutropenic patients and is usually caused by
P.
aeruginosa
. It is characterized by erythematous, centrally ulcerated, purpleblack areas about 1 cm in
diameter occurring most often in the axillary, inguinal, or anogenital areas.
Respiratory tract infections:

P. aeruginosa
is a frequent cause of ventilator-associated pneumonia. In
HIV-infected patients,
Pseudomonas
most commonly causes pneumonia or sinusitis.
Pseudomonas
bronchitis is common late in the course of cystic fibrosis. Isolates from patients with cystic fibrosis have a
characteristic mucoid colonial morphology.
Other infections:

Pseudomonas
is a common cause of nosocomial UTI, especially in patients who have
had urologic manipulation or obstructive uropathy.
Pseudomonas
commonly colonizes the urinary tract in
catheterized patients, especially those who have received broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Ocular involvement generally manifests as corneal ulceration, most often after trauma, but contamination
of contact lenses or lens fluid has been implicated in some cases.
Rarely,
Pseudomonas
causes acute bacterial endocarditis, usually on prosthetic valves in patients who
have had open-heart surgery or on natural valves in IV drug abusers.
Bacteremia:
Many
Pseudomonas
infections can cause bacteremia. In nonintubated patients without a
detectable urinary focus, especially if infection is due to a species other than
P. aeruginosa
, bacteremia
suggests contaminated IV fluids, drugs, or antiseptics used in placing the IV catheter.
Diagnosis
• Culture
Diagnosis depends on culturing the organism from the site of infection: blood, skin lesions, drainage fluid,
urine, CSF, or eye. Localized infection may produce a fruity smell, and pus may be greenish.
Treatment
• Various antibiotics depending on site and severity of infection and susceptibility testing
Localized infection:
Hot-tub folliculitis resolves spontaneously and does not require antibiotic therapy.
External otitis is treated with 1% acetic acid irrigations or topical drugs such as polymyxin B or colistin.
More severe infection is treated with fluoroquinolones.
Focal soft-tissue infection may require early surgical debridement of necrotic tissue and drainage of
abscesses in addition to antibiotics.
Small corneal ulcers are treated with ciprofloxacin 0.3% or levofloxacin 0.5%. Fortified (higher than stock
concentration) antibiotic drops, such as tobramycin 15 mg/mL, are used for more significant ulcers.
Frequent dosing (eg, q 1 h around the clock) is necessary initially. Eye patching is contraindicated
because it produces a dark warm environment that favors bacterial growth and prevents administration of
topical drugs.
===PAGE:1406===
Asymptomatic bacteriuria is not treated with antibiotics, except during pregnancy and before urologic
manipulation. Patients with symptomatic UTIs can often be treated with levofloxacin 500 mg po once/day
or ciprofloxacin 400 mg po bid.
Systemic infection:
Parenteral therapy is required, typically with an aminoglycoside plus an
antipseudomonal
β
-lactam, an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin (eg, cefepime, cefoperazone), or the
carbapenems meropenem or imipenem.
Right-sided endocarditis can be treated with antibiotics, but usually the infected valve must be removed to
cure an infection involving the mitral, aortic, or prosthetic valve.
In neutropenic patients with marginal renal function, nonaminoglycoside combinations, such as double
β
-
lactams or a
β
-lactam plus a fluoroquinolone, are also satisfactory.
P. aeruginosa
resistance may occur among patients treated with ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin,
meropenem, or imipenem.
Salmonella
Infections
The 2200 known serotypes of
Salmonella
may be grouped into
• Those highly adapted to human hosts: This group includes
S. typhi
and
S. paratyphi
types A, B (also
called
S. schottmulleri
), and C (also called
S. hirschfeldii
), which are pathogenic only in humans and
commonly cause enteric (typhoid) fever.
• Those adapted to nonhuman hosts or causing disease almost exclusively in animals. Two strains within
this group,
S. dublin
and
S. choleraesuis
, also cause disease in humans.
• Those unadapted to specific hosts: This group, designated
S. enteritidis
, includes > 2000 serotypes
that cause gastroenteritis and accounts for 85% of all
Salmonella
infections in the US.
Typhoid Fever
Typhoid fever is a systemic disease caused by
Salmonella typhi
. Symptoms are high fever,
prostration, abdominal pain, and a rose-colored rash. Diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by
culture. Treatment is with ceftriaxone or ciprofloxacin.
Epidemiology
About 400 to 500 cases of typhoid fever are reported annually in the US, mainly among US travelers
returning from endemic regions. Typhoid bacilli are shed in stool of asymptomatic carriers or in stool or
urine of people with active disease. Inadequate hygiene after
defecation may spread
S. typhi
to
community food or water supplies. In endemic areas where sanitary measures are generally inadequate,
S. typhi
is transmitted more frequently by water than by food. In developed countries, transmission is
chiefly by food that has been contaminated during preparation by healthy carriers. Flies may spread the
organism from feces to food. Occasional transmission by direct contact (fecal-oral route) may occur in
children during play and in adults during sexual practices. Rarely, hospital personnel who have not taken
adequate enteric precautions have acquired the disease when changing soiled bedclothes.
The organism enters the body via the GI tract and gains access to the bloodstream via the lymphatic
channels. Intestinal ulceration, hemorrhage, and perforation may occur in severe cases.
Carrier state:
About 3% of untreated patients, referred to as chronic enteric carriers, harbor organisms in
their gallbladder and shed them in stool for > 1 yr. Some carriers have no history of clinical illness. Most
of the estimated 2000 carriers in the US are elderly women with chronic biliary disease. Obstructive
uropathy related to schistosomiasis may predispose certain typhoid patients to urinary carriage.
Epidemiologic data indicate that typhoid carriers are more likely than the general population to develop
hepatobiliary cancer.
===PAGE:1407===
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period (usually 8 to 14 days) is inversely related to the number of organisms ingested.
Onset is usually gradual, with fever, headache, arthralgia, pharyngitis, constipation, anorexia, and
abdominal pain and tenderness. Less common symptoms include dysuria, nonproductive cough, and
epistaxis.
Without treatment, the temperature rises in steps over 2 to 3 days, remains elevated (usually 39.4 to
40°C) for another 10 to 14 days, begins to fall gradually at the end of the 3rd wk, and reaches normal
levels during the 4th wk. Prolonged fever is often accompanied by relative bradycardia and prostration.
CNS symptoms such as delirium, stupor, or coma occur in severe cases. In about 10% of patients,
discrete pink, blanching lesions (rose spots) appear in crops on the chest and abdomen during the 2nd
wk and resolve in 2 to 5 days. Splenomegaly, leukopenia, anemia, liver function abnormalities,
proteinuria, and a mild consumption coagulopathy are common. Acute cholecystitis and hepatitis may
occur.
Late in the disease, when intestinal lesions are most prominent, florid diarrhea may occur, and the stool
may contain blood (occult in 20% of patients, gross in 10%). In about 2% of patients, severe bleeding
occurs during the 3rd wk, with a mortality rate of about 25%. An acute abdomen and leukocytosis during
the 3rd wk may suggest intestinal perforation, which usually involves the distal ileum and occurs in 1 to
2% of patients. Pneumonia may develop during the 2nd or 3rd wk and may be due to secondary
pneumococcal infection, although
S. typhi
can also cause pulmonary infiltrates. Bacteremia occasionally
leads to focal infections such as osteomyelitis, endocarditis, meningitis, soft-tissue abscesses,
glomerulitis, or GU tract involvement. Atypical presentations, such as pneumonitis, fever only, or, very
rarely, symptoms consistent with UTI, may delay diagnosis. Convalescence may last several months.
In 8 to 10% of untreated patients, symptoms and signs similar to the initial clinical syndrome recur about 2
wk after defervescence. For unclear reasons, antibiotic therapy during the initial illness increases the
incidence of febrile relapse to 15 to 20%. If antibiotics are restarted at the time of relapse, the fever
abates rapidly, unlike the slow defervescence that occurs during the primary illness. Occasionally, a 2nd
relapse occurs.
Diagnosis
• Cultures
Other infections causing a similar presentation include other
Salmonella
infections, the major
rickettsioses, leptospirosis, disseminated TB, malaria, brucellosis, tularemia, infectious hepatitis,
psittacosis,
Yersinia enterocolitica
infection, and lymphoma. Early in its clinical course, typhoid fever may
resemble malaria.
Cultures of blood, stool, and urine should be obtained. Blood cultures are usually positive only during the
first 2 wk of illness, but stool cultures are usually positive during the 3rd to 5th wk. If these cultures are
negative and typhoid fever is strongly suspected, culture from a bone marrow biopsy specimen may
reveal the organism.
Typhoid bacilli contain antigens (O and H) that stimulate the host to form corresponding antibodies. A 4fold rise in O and H antibody titers in paired specimens obtained 2 wk apart suggests
S. typhi
infection.
However, this test is only moderately (70%) sensitive and lacks specificity; many nontyphoidal
Salmonella
strains cross-react, and liver cirrhosis causes false-positives.
Prognosis
Without antibiotics, the mortality rate is about 12%. With prompt therapy, the mortality rate is 1%. Most
deaths occur in malnourished people, infants, and the elderly. Stupor, coma, or shock reflects severe
disease and a poor prognosis. Complications occur mainly in patients who are untreated or in whom
treatment is delayed.
===PAGE:1408===
Treatment
• Ceftriaxone
• Sometimes a fluoroquinolone
Preferred antibiotics include ceftriaxone 1 g IM or IV q 12 h (25 to 37.5 mg/kg in children) for 14 days and
various fluoroquinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid for 10 to 14 days, levofloxacin 500 mg po or IV
once/day for 14 days, moxifloxacin 400 mg po or IV once/day for 14 days). Chloramphenicol 500 mg po or
IV q 6 h is still widely used, but resistance is increasing. Fluoroquinolones may be used in children.
Alternative therapies, depending on in vitro sensitivity, include amoxicillin 25 mg/kg po qid,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) 320/1600 bid or 10 mg/kg (of the TMP component) bid, and
azithromycin 1 g po on day 1, then 500 mg once/day for 6 days.
Corticosteroids may be added to antibiotics to treat severe toxicity. Defervescence and clinical
improvement usually follow. Prednisone 20 to 40 mg once/day po (or equivalent) for the first 3 days of
treatment usually suffices. Higher doses of corticosteroids (dexamethasone 3 mg/kg IV initially, followed
by 1 mg/kg q 6 h for 48 h total), are used in patients with marked delirium, coma, or shock.
Nutrition should be maintained with frequent feedings. While febrile, patients are usually kept on bed rest.
Salicylates (which may cause hypothermia and hypotension), as well as laxatives and enemas, should be
avoided. Diarrhea may be minimized with a clear liquid diet; parenteral nutrition may be needed
temporarily. Fluid and electrolyte therapy and blood replacement may be needed.
Intestinal perforation and associated peritonitis call for surgical intervention and broader gram-negative
and antiBacteroides fragilis
coverage.
Relapses are treated the same as the initial illness, although duration of antibiotic therapy seldom needs
to be > 5 days.
Patients must be reported to the local health department and prohibited from handling food until proven
free of the organism. Typhoid bacilli may be isolated for as long as 3 to 6 mo after the acute illness in
people who do not become carriers. Thereafter, 3 stool cultures at weekly intervals must be negative to
exclude a carrier state.
Carriers:
Carriers with normal biliary tracts should be given antibiotics. The cure rate is about 60% with
amoxicillin 2 g po tid for 4 wk.
In some carriers with gallbladder disease, eradication has been achieved with TMP/SMX and rifampin. In
other cases, cholecystectomy with 1 to 2 days of preoperative antibiotics and 2 to 3 days of postoperative
antibiotics is effective.
Prevention
Drinking water should be purified, sewage should be disposed of effectively, milk should be pasteurized,
chronic carriers should avoid handling food, and adequate patient isolation precautions should be
implemented. Special attention to enteric precautions is important. Travelers in endemic areas should
avoid ingesting raw leafy vegetables, other foods stored or served at room temperature, and untreated
water. Unless water is known to be safe, it should be boiled or chlorinated before drinking.
A live-attenuated oral typhoid vaccine is available (Ty21a strain) and is about 70% effective. It is given
every other day for a total of 4 doses. Because the vaccine contains living
S. typhi
organisms, it is
contraindicated in patients who are immunosuppressed. In the US, the Ty21a vaccine is not used in
children < 6 yr. An alternative is the single-dose, IM Vi polysaccharide vaccine, which is 64 to 72%
effective and is well tolerated, but it is not used in children < 2 yr.
Nontyphoidal
Salmonella
Infections
===PAGE:1409===
Nontyphoidal salmonellae, mainly
Salmonella enteritidis
, primarily cause gastroenteritis,
bacteremia, and focal infection. Symptoms may be diarrhea, high fever with prostration, or
symptoms of focal infection. Diagnosis is by cultures of blood, stool, or site specimens.
Treatment, when indicated, is with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or ciprofloxacin, with surgery
for abscesses, vascular lesions, and bone and joint infections.
Most nontyphoidal
Salmonella
infections are caused by
S. enteritidis
. These infections are common and
remain a significant public health problem in the US. Many serotypes of
S. enteritidis
have been given
names and are referred to informally as if they were separate species even though they are not. The
most common
Salmonella
serotypes in the US include
S. typhimurium, S. heidelberg,
S. newport, S.
infantis, S. agona, S. montevideo
, and
S. saint-paul.
Human disease occurs by direct and indirect contact with numerous species of infected animals, the
foodstuffs derived from them, and their excreta. Infected meat, poultry, raw milk, eggs, and egg products
are common sources of
Salmonella
. Other reported sources include infected pet turtles and reptiles,
carmine red dye, and contaminated marijuana.
Risk factors:
Subtotal gastrectomy, achlorhydria (or ingestion of antacids), sickle cell anemia,
splenectomy, louse-borne relapsing fever, malaria, bartonellosis, cirrhosis, leukemia, lymphoma, and HIV
infection are all risk factors for
Salmonella
infection.
Diseases caused by nontyphoidal
Salmonella
sp:
Each
Salmonella
serotype can cause any or all of
the clinical syndromes described below, although given serotypes tend to produce specific syndromes.
Enteric fever, for instance, is caused by
S. paratyphi
types A, B, and C.
An asymptomatic carrier state may also occur. However, carriers do not appear to play a major role in
large outbreaks of nontyphoidal gastroenteritis. Persistent shedding of organisms in the stool for ≥ 1 yr
occurs in only 0.2 to 0.6% of patients with nontyphoidal
Salmonella
infections.
Symptoms and Signs
Salmonella
infection may manifest as
• Gastroenteritis
• Enteric fever
• Bacteremia
• Focal disease
Gastroenteritis
usually starts 12 to 48 h after ingestion of organisms, with nausea and cramping
abdominal pain followed by diarrhea, fever, and sometimes vomiting. Usually, the stool is watery but may
be a pastelike semisolid. Rarely, mucus or blood is present. The disease is usually mild, lasting 1 to 4
days. Occasionally, a more severe, protracted illness occurs.
Enteric fever
in a less severe form than typhoid is characterized by fever, prostration, and septicemia.
Bacteremia
is relatively uncommon in patients with gastroenteritis. However,
S. choleraesuis, S.
typhimurium
, and
S. heidelberg
, among others, can cause a sustained and frequently lethal bacteremic
syndrome lasting ≥ 1 wk, with prolonged fever, headache, malaise, and chills but rarely diarrhea. Patients
may have recurrent episodes of bacteremia or other invasive infections (eg, septic arthritis) due to
Salmonella
. Multiple
Salmonella
infections in a patient without other risk factors should prompt HIV
testing.
Focal
Salmonella
infection
can occur with or without sustained bacteremia, causing pain in or referred
===PAGE:1410===
from the involved organ—the GI tract (liver, gallbladder, appendix), endothelial surfaces (eg,
atherosclerotic plaques, ileofemoral or aortic aneurysms, heart valves), pericardium, meninges, lungs,
joints, bones, GU tract, or soft tissues. Preexisting solid tumors are occasionally seeded and develop
abscesses that may, in turn, become a source of
Salmonella
bacteremia.
S. choleraesuis
and
S.
typhimurium
are the most common causes of focal infection.
Diagnosis
• Cultures
Diagnosis is by isolating the organism from stool or another infected site. In bacteremic and focal forms,
blood cultures are positive, but stool cultures are generally negative. In stool specimens stained with
methylene blue, WBCs are often seen, indicating inflammatory colitis.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Ciprofloxacin or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) only for high-risk patients and patients with
systemic or focal infections
Gastroenteritis is treated symptomatically with oral or IV fluids (. Antibiotics do not hasten
resolution, may prolong excretion of the organism, and are unwarranted in uncomplicated cases.
However, in elderly nursing home residents, infants, and patients with HIV infection, increased mortality
dictates treatment with antibiotics. Antibiotic resistance is more common with nontyphoidal
Salmonella
than with
S. typhi
. TMP/SMX 5 mg/kg (of the TMP component) po q 12 h for children and ciprofloxacin
500 mg po q 12 h for adults are acceptable regimens. Nonimmunocompromised patients should be
treated for 3 to 5 days; patients with AIDS may require prolonged suppression to prevent relapses.
Systemic or focal disease should be treated with antibiotic doses as outlined above for typhoid fever.
Sustained bacteremia is generally treated for 4 to 6 wk. Abscesses should be drained surgically. At least 4
wk of antibiotic therapy should follow surgery. Infected aneurysms and heart valves and bone or joint
infections usually require surgical intervention and prolonged courses of antibiotics. The prognosis is
usually good, unless severe underlying disease is present.
Carriers:
Asymptomatic carriage is usually self-limited, and antibiotic treatment is rarely
required. In
unusual cases (eg, in food handlers or health care workers), eradication may be attempted with
ciprofloxacin 500 mg po q 12 h for 1 mo. Follow-up stool cultures should be obtained in the weeks after
drug administration to document elimination of
Salmonella
.
Prevention
Preventing contamination of foodstuffs by infected animals and humans is paramount. Preventive
measures for travelers discussed on p.
also apply to most other enteric infections. Case reporting is
essential.
Shigellosis
(Bacillary Dysentery)
Shigellosis is an acute infection of the intestine caused by
Shigella
sp. Symptoms include fever,
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea that is usually bloody. Diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by
stool culture. Treatment is supportive, mostly with rehydration; antibiotics (eg, ampicillin,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole) are optional.
The genus
Shigella
is distributed worldwide and is the typical cause of inflammatory dysentery,
responsible for 5 to 10% of diarrheal illness in many areas.
Shigella
is divided into 4 major subgroups: A,
B, C, and D, which are subdivided into serologically determined types.
S. flexneri
and
S. sonnei
are more
widespread than
S. boydii
and the particularly virulent
S. dysenteriae. S. sonnei
is the most common
===PAGE:1411===
isolate in the US.
The source of infection is the feces of infected people or convalescent carriers. Direct spread is by the
fecal-oral route. Indirect spread is by contaminated food and fomites. Flies serve as vectors. Epidemics
occur most frequently in overcrowded populations with inadequate sanitation. Shigellosis is particularly
common among younger children living in endemic areas. Adults usually have less severe disease.
Convalescents and subclinical carriers may be significant sources of infection, but true long-term carriers
are rare. Infection imparts little or no immunity.
Shigella
organisms penetrate the mucosa of the colon, causing mucus secretion, hyperemia, leukocytic
infiltration, edema, and often superficial mucosal ulcerations.
Shigella dysenteriae
type 1 (not commonly
present in the US, except in travelers returning from endemic areas) produces Shiga toxin, which causes
marked watery diarrhea and sometimes hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is 1 to 4 days. The most common presentation, watery diarrhea, is
indistinguishable from other bacterial, viral, and protozoan infections that induce secretory activity of
intestinal epithelial cells.
In adults, initial symptoms may be episodes of gripping abdominal pain, urgency to defecate, and
passage of formed feces that temporarily relieves the pain. These episodes recur with increasing severity
and frequency. Diarrhea becomes marked, with soft or liquid stools containing mucus, pus, and often
blood. Rectal prolapse and consequent fecal incontinence may result from severe tenesmus. However,
adults may present without fever, with nonbloody and nonmucoid diarrhea, and with little or no tenesmus.
The disease usually resolves spontaneously in adults—mild cases in 4 to 8 days, severe cases in 3 to 6
wk. Significant dehydration and electrolyte loss with circulatory collapse and death occur mainly in
debilitated adults and children < 2 yr.
Rarely, shigellosis starts suddenly with ricewater or serous (occasionally bloody) stools. The patient may
vomit and rapidly become dehydrated. Infection may manifest as delirium, seizures, and coma but with
little or no diarrhea. Death may occur in 12 to 24 h.
In young children, onset is sudden, with fever, irritability or drowsiness, anorexia, nausea or vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal pain and distention, and tenesmus. Within 3 days, blood, pus, and mucus appear in
the stools. The number of stools may increase to ≥ 20/day, and weight loss and dehydration become
severe. If untreated, children may die in the first 12 days. If children survive, acute symptoms subside by
the 2nd wk.
Complications:
The hemolytic-uremic syndrome may complicate shigellosis due to
S. dysenteriae
type 1
in children. Secondary bacterial infections may occur, especially in debilitated and dehydrated patients.
Severe mucosal ulcerations may cause significant acute blood loss. Patients (particularly those with the
HLA-B27 genotype) may develop reactive arthritis (arthritis, conjunctivitis, urethritis) after shigellosis (and
other enteritides).
Other complications are uncommon but include seizures in children, myocarditis, and, rarely, intestinal
perforation. Infection does not become chronic and is not an etiologic factor in ulcerative colitis.
Diagnosis
• Stool cultures
Diagnosis is facilitated by a high index of suspicion during outbreaks and in endemic areas and by the
presence of fecal leukocytes
on smears stained with methylene blue or Wright's stain. Stool cultures are
diagnostic and should be obtained. In patients with symptoms of dysentery (bloody and mucoid stools),
the differential diagnosis should include invasive
Escherichia coli, Salmonella, Yersinia
, and
Campylobacter
infections; amebiasis; and viral diarrheas.
===PAGE:1412===
The mucosal surface, as seen through a proctoscope, is diffusely erythematous with numerous small
ulcers. Although leukopenia or marked leukocytosis may be present, it averages 13,000/
μ
L.
Hemoconcentration is common, as is diarrhea-induced metabolic acidosis.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• For severely ill or at-risk patients, a fluoroquinolone or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX)
Fluid loss is treated symptomatically with oral or IV fluids (. Antibiotics can reduce the
symptoms and shedding of
Shigella
but are not necessary for healthy adults with mild illness. However,
certain patients, including the following, should usually be treated:
• Children
• The elderly
• Debilitated patients
• Patients with severe disease
For adults, a fluoroquinolone, such as ciprofloxacin 500 mg po q 12 h for 3 to 5 days, or TMP/SMX one
double-strength tablet q 12 h is the treatment of choice. For children, treatment is TMP/SMX 4 mg/kg (of
the TMP component) po q 12 h. Many
Shigella
isolates are likely to be resistant to ampicillin and
tetracycline.
Prevention
Hands should be washed thoroughly before handling food, and soiled garments and bedclothes should
be immersed in covered buckets of soap and water until they can be boiled. Appropriate isolation
techniques (especially stool isolation) should be used with patients and carriers.
A live oral vaccine is being developed, and field trials in endemic areas hold promise. However, immunity
is generally type specific.
Tularemia
(Rabbit or Deer Fly Fever)
Tularemia is a febrile disease caused by
Francisella tularensis
; it may resemble typhoid fever.
Symptoms are a primary local ulcerative lesion, regional lymphadenopathy, profound systemic
symptoms, and, occasionally, atypical pneumonia. Diagnosis is primarily epidemiologic and
clinical and supported by serologic tests. Treatment is with streptomycin, gentamicin,
chloramphenicol, or doxycycline.
There are 7 clinical syndromes associated with tularemia (see
Table 135-2
). The causative organism,
F. tularensis
, is a small, pleomorphic, nonmotile, nonsporulating
aerobic bacillus that enters the body by
• Ingestion of contaminated food or water
• Bite of an infected arthropod vector (ticks, deer flies, fleas)
• Inhalation
• Direct contact with infected tissues or material
===PAGE:1413===
The organism can penetrate apparently unbroken skin but may actually enter through microlesions.
There are 2 types of
F. tularensis
: type A and type B. Type A, a more virulent serotype for humans,
usually occurs in rabbits and rodents in the US and Canada. Type B usually causes a mild
ulceroglandular infection and occurs in water and aquatic animals in Europe and Asia.
Hunters, butchers, farmers, and fur handlers are most commonly infected. In winter months, most cases
result from contact (especially during skinning) with infected wild rabbits. In summer months, infection
usually follows handling of other infected animals or birds or bites of infected ticks or other arthropods.
Rarely, cases result from eating undercooked infected meat, drinking contaminated water, or mowing
fields in endemic areas. In the Western states, ticks, deer flies, horse flies, and direct contact with
infected animals are other sources of infection. Human-to-human transmission has not been reported.
Laboratory workers are at particular risk because infection is readily acquired during normal handling of
infected specimens. Tularemia is considered a possible agent of bioterrorism.
In disseminated cases, characteristic focal necrotic lesions in various stages of evolution are scattered
throughout the body. They are 1 mm to 8 cm and whitish yellow; they are seen externally as the primary
lesions on the fingers, eyes, or mouth and commonly occur in lymph nodes, spleen, liver, kidneys, and
lungs. In pneumonia, necrotic foci occur in the lungs. Although severe systemic toxicity may occur, no
toxins have been demonstrated.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset occurs suddenly, 1 to 10 (usually 2 to 4) days after exposure, with headache, chills,
[Table 135-2.
Types of Tularemia*]
nausea, vomiting, fever of 39.5° to 40° C, and severe prostration. Extreme weakness, recurring chills, and
drenching sweats develop. Clinical manifestations depend to some extent on the type of exposure (see
Table 135-2
).
Within 24 to 48 h, an inflamed papule appears at the site of exposure (finger, arm, eye, roof of the
mouth), except in glandular or typhoidal tularemia. The papule rapidly becomes pustular and ulcerates,
producing a clean ulcer crater with a scanty, thin, colorless exudate. Ulcers are usually single on the
extremities but multiple in the mouth or eyes. Usually, only one eye is affected. Regional lymph nodes
enlarge and may suppurate and drain profusely. A typhoid-like state frequently develops by the 5th day,
and the patient may develop atypical pneumonia, sometimes accompanied by delirium.
Pneumonic tularemia can occur after inhalation or by hematogenous spread from another type of
tularemia; it develops in 10 to 15% of ulceroglandular tularemia cases and in about 50% of typhoidal
tularemia cases. Although signs of consolidation are frequently present, reduced breath sounds and
occasional rales may be the only physical findings in tularemic pneumonia. A dry, nonproductive cough is
associated with a retrosternal burning sensation. A nonspecific roseola-like rash may appear at any stage
of the disease. Splenomegaly and perisplenitis may occur. In untreated cases, temperature remains
elevated for 3 to 4 wk and resolves gradually. Mediastinitis, lung abscess, and meningitis are rare
complications.
Mortality is almost nil in treated cases and about 6% in untreated cases of ulceroglandular tularemia.
Mortality rates are higher for type A infection and for typhoidal, septicemic, and pneumonic tularemia; they
are as high as 33% for untreated cases. Death usually results from overwhelming infection, pneumonia,
meningitis, or peritonitis. Relapses can occur in inadequately treated cases. One attack confers immunity.
Diagnosis
• Cultures
• Acute and convalescent serologic testing
===PAGE:1414===
Diagnosis is suspected based on a history of contact with rabbits or wild rodents or exposure to arthropod
vectors, the sudden onset of symptoms, and the characteristic primary lesion.
Patients should have cultures of blood and relevant clinical material (eg, sputum, lesions); routine
cultures may be negative, and the laboratory should be notified that tularemia is suspected so that
appropriate media can be used (and appropriate safety precautions ensured). Acute and convalescent
antibody titers should be done 2 wk apart. A 4-fold rise or a single titer > 1:128 is diagnostic. The serum
of patients with brucellosis may cross-react to
F. tularensis
antigens but usually in much lower titers.
Fluorescent antibody staining is used by some laboratories. Leukocytosis is common, but the WBC count
may be normal with an increase only in the proportion of PMNs.
Because this organism is highly infectious, samples and culture media suspected of tularemia should be
handled with extreme caution and, if possible, processed by a high-level biosafety containment-equipped
laboratory with a level 3 rating.
Treatment
• Streptomycin (plus chloramphenicol for meningitis)
The preferred drug is streptomycin 7.5 to 10 mg/kg (up to 1 g) IM q 12 h for 7 to 14 days or, if in a
bioterrorism setting, 15 mg/kg IM q 12 h. For children, the streptomycin dose is 10 to 15 mg/kg IM q 12 h.
Chloramphenicol 12.5 to 25 mg/kg IV q 6 h is added if there is evidence of meningitis.
Alternatives to streptomycin include gentamicin 1 to 2 mg/kg IM or IV q 8 h, doxycycline 100 mg po q 12 h,
chloramphenicol 12.5 to 25 mg/kg IV q 6 h (oral form not available in US), and ciprofloxacin 500 mg po q
12 h. However, relapses occasionally occur with these drugs, and they may not prevent node
suppuration.
Continuous wet saline dressings are beneficial for primary skin lesions and may diminish the severity of
lymphangitis and lymphadenitis. Surgical drainage of large abscesses is rarely necessary unless therapy
is delayed. In ocular tularemia, applying warm saline compresses and using dark glasses give some relief.
In severe cases, 2% homatropine 1 to 2 drops q 4 h may relieve symptoms. Intense headache usually
responds to oral opioids (eg, oxycodone or hydrocodone with acetaminophen).
Prevention
When entering endemic areas, people should use tick-proof clothing and repellents. A thorough search
for ticks should be done after leaving tick-infested areas. Ticks should be removed at once (see
Sidebar
139-1
. When handling rabbits and rodents, especially in endemic areas, people should wear
protective clothing, including rubber gloves and face masks, because organisms may be present in the
animal and in tick feces on the animal's fur. Wild birds and game must be thoroughly cooked before
eating. Water that may be contaminated must be disinfected before use.
No vaccine is currently available. Antibiotic prophylaxis with 14 days of oral doxycycline or ciprofloxacin is
recommended after high-risk exposure (eg, a laboratory accident).
===PAGE:1415===
Chapter 136. Spirochetes
Introduction
The family Spirochaetales is distinguished by the helical shape of the bacteria. They are too thin to be
visualized using routine microscopy but can be viewed using darkfield microscopy. There are 3 genera:
Treponema
,
Leptospira
, and
Borrelia
. The spirochetal disease syphilis is discussed elsewhere.
Bejel, Pinta, and Yaws
Bejel, pinta, and yaws (endemic treponematoses) are chronic, tropical, nonvenereal spirochetal
infections spread by body contact. Symptoms of bejel are mucous-membrane and cutaneous
lesions, followed by bone and skin gummas. Yaws causes periostitis and dermal lesions. Pinta
lesions are confined to the dermis. Diagnosis is clinical and epidemiologic. Treatment is with
penicillin.
The causative agents,
Treponema pallidum
subsp
endemicum
(bejel),
T. pallidum
subsp
pertenue
(yaws), and
T. carateum
(pinta), are morphologically and serologically indistinguishable from the agent of
syphilis,
T. pallidum
subsp
pallidum
. As in syphilis, the typical course is an initial mucocutaneous lesion
followed by diffuse secondary lesions, a latent period, and late destructive disease.
Transmission is by close skin contact—sexual or not—primarily between children living in conditions of
poor hygiene. Bejel (endemic syphilis) occurs mainly in arid countries of the eastern Mediterranean and
West Africa (Sahel). Transmission results from mouth-to-mouth contact or sharing eating and drinking
utensils. Yaws (frambesia) occurs in humid
equatorial countries where transmission is favored by scanty
clothing and skin trauma. Pinta occurs among the natives of Mexico, Central America, and South America
and is not very contagious. Transmission probably requires contact with broken skin.
Symptoms and Signs
Bejel
begins in childhood as a mucous patch (usually on the buccal mucosa), which may go unnoticed; it
is followed by papulosquamous and erosive papular lesions of the trunk and extremities that are similar to
yaws. Periostitis of the leg bones is common. Later, gummatous lesions of the nose and soft palate
develop.
Yaws,
after an incubation period of several weeks, begins at the site of inoculation as a red papule that
enlarges, erodes, and ulcerates. The surface resembles a strawberry, and the exudate is rich in
spirochetes. The lesion heals but is followed after months to a year by successive generalized eruptions
that resemble the primary lesion. These lesions often develop in moist areas of the axillae, skinfolds, and
mucosal surfaces; they heal slowly and may recur. Keratotic lesions may develop on the palms and soles,
causing painful ulcerations (crab yaws). Five to 10 yr later, destructive lesions may develop; they include
periostitis (particularly of the tibia), proliferative exostoses of the nasal portion of the maxillary bone
(goundou), juxta-articular nodules, gummatous skin lesions, and, ultimately, mutilating facial ulcers,
particularly around the nose (gangosa).
Pinta
lesions are confined to the dermis. They begin at the inoculation site as a small papule that
enlarges and becomes hyperkeratotic; they develop mainly on the extremities, face, and neck. After 3 to 9
mo, further thickened and flat lesions (pintids) appear all over the body and over bony prominences. Still
later, some lesions become slate blue or depigmented, resembling vitiligo.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on the typical appearance of lesions in people from endemic areas. Serologic tests for
syphilis (the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory [VDRL] and fluorescent treponemal antibody
absorption tests) are positive; thus, differentiation from venereal syphilis is clinical. Early lesions are often
===PAGE:1416===
darkfield-positive for spirochetes and are indistinguishable from
T. pallidum
subsp
pallidum
.
Treatment
• Penicillin
Active disease is treated with 1 dose of penicillin benzathine 1.2 million units IM. Children < 45 kg should
receive 600,000 units IM. Public health control includes active case finding and treatment of family and
close contacts with penicillin benzathine.
Leptospirosis
Leptospirosis is an infection caused by one of several pathogenic serotypes of
Leptospira
.
Symptoms are biphasic. Both phases involve acute febrile episodes; the 2nd phase sometimes
includes hepatic, renal, and meningeal involvement. Diagnosis is by darkfield microscopy,
culture, and serologic testing. Treatment is with doxycycline or penicillin.
Leptospirosis, a zoonosis occurring in many domestic and wild animals, may cause inapparent illness or
serious, even fatal disease. There is a carrier state in which animals shed leptospires in their urine for
years. Human infections are acquired by direct contact with infected urine or tissue or indirectly by
contact with contaminated water or soil. Outbreaks frequently follow exposure to contaminated flood
water. Abraded skin and exposed mucous membranes (conjunctival, nasal, oral) are the usual entry
portals. Leptospirosis can be an occupational disease (eg, of farmers or sewer and abattoir workers), but
in the US, most patients are exposed incidentally during recreational activities (eg, swimming in
contaminated water). Dogs and rats are other common probable sources. The 40 to 100 annual US cases
occur mainly in late summer and early fall. Because distinctive clinical features are lacking, probably
many more cases are not diagnosed and reported.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period ranges from 2 to 20 (usually 7 to 13) days. The disease is characteristically
biphasic. The septicemic phase starts abruptly, with headache, severe muscular aches, chills, fever,
cough, chest pain, and, in some patients, hemoptysis. Conjunctival suffusion usually appears on the 3rd
or 4th day. Splenomegaly and hepatomegaly are uncommon. This phase lasts 4 to 9 days, with recurrent
chills and fever that often spikes to > 39° C. Defervescence follows. The 2nd, or immune, phase occurs
between the 6th and
12th day of illness, correlating with appearance of antibodies in serum. Fever and
earlier symptoms recur, and meningitis may develop. Iridocyclitis, optic neuritis, and peripheral neuropathy
occur infrequently. If acquired during pregnancy, leptospirosis, even during the convalescent period, may
cause abortion.
Weil's syndrome
(icteric leptospirosis) is a severe form with jaundice and usually azotemia, anemia,
diminished consciousness, and continued fever. Onset is similar to that of less severe forms. However,
hemorrhagic manifestations, which are due to capillary injury and include epistaxis, petechiae, purpura,
and ecchymoses, then develop and rarely progress to subarachnoid, adrenal, or GI hemorrhage.
Thrombocytopenia may occur. Signs of hepatocellular and renal dysfunction appear from the 3rd to 6th
day. Renal abnormalities include proteinuria, pyuria, hematuria, and azotemia. Hepatocellular damage is
minimal, and healing is complete.
Mortality is nil in anicteric patients. With jaundice, the mortality rate is 5 to 10%; it is higher in patients >
60 yr.
Diagnosis
• Blood cultures
• Serologic testing
Similar symptoms can result from viral meningoencephalitis, hemolytic fever with renal syndrome due to
===PAGE:1417===
hantaviruses, other spirochetal infections, influenza, and hepatitis. The history of biphasic illness may
help differentiate leptospirosis. Leptospirosis should be considered in any patient with FUO if they might
have been exposed to leptospires.
Patients with suspected leptospirosis should have blood cultures, acute and convalescent (3- to 4-wk)
antibody titers, CBC, serum chemistries, and liver function tests. Meningeal findings mandate lumbar
puncture; the CSF cell count is between 10 and 1000/
μ
L (usually < 500/
μ
L), with predominantly
mononuclear cells. CSF glucose is normal; protein is < 100 mg/dL. CSF bilirubin levels are higher than
serum bilirubin levels.
The peripheral blood WBC count is normal or slightly elevated in most patients but may reach 50,000/
μ
L
in severely ill patients with jaundice. The presence of > 70% neutrophils helps differentiate leptospirosis
from viral illnesses. Serum bilirubin is elevated out of proportion to elevations in serum aminotransferases. In jaundiced patients, bilirubin levels are usually < 20 mg/dL (< 342
μ
mol/L) but may reach
40 mg/dL (684
μ
mol/L) in severe infection.
Treatment
• Penicillin
• Doxycycline
Antibiotic therapy is most effective when begun early in the infection. In severe illness, penicillin G 5 to 6
million units IV q 6 h or ampicillin 500 to 1000 mg IV q 6 h is recommended. In less severe cases,
doxycycline 100 mg po q 12 h, ampicillin 500 to 750 mg po q 6 h, or amoxicillin 500 mg po q 6 h may be
given for 5 to 7 days. In severe cases, supportive care, including fluid and electrolyte therapy, is also
important. Patient isolation is not required, but urine must be handled and disposed of carefully.
Doxycycline 200 mg po given once/wk during a period of known geographic exposure prevents disease.
Lyme Disease
Lyme disease is a tick-transmitted infection caused by
Borrelia burgdorferi
. Early symptoms
include an erythema migrans rash, which may be followed weeks to months later by neurologic,
cardiac, or joint abnormalities. Diagnosis is primarily clinical in early-stage disease, but
serologic testing can help diagnose cardiac, neurologic, and rheumatologic complications that
occur later in the disease. Treatment is with antibiotics such as doxycycline or ceftriaxone.
Epidemiology
Lyme disease was recognized in 1975 because of close clustering of cases in Lyme, Connecticut and is
now the most commonly reported tick-borne illness in the US. It has been reported in 49 states, but >
90% of cases occur from Massachusetts to Maryland and in Wisconsin, Minnesota, California, and
Oregon. Lyme disease also occurs in Europe, across the former Soviet Union, and in China and Japan.
Onset is usually in the summer and early fall. Most patients are children and young adults living in heavily
wooded areas.
Lyme disease is transmitted primarily by 4
Ixodes
sp world wide:
Ixodes scapularis
(the deer tick) in the
northeastern and north central US,
I. pacificus
in the western US,
I. ricinus
in Europe, and
I. persulcatus
in Asia. In the US, the white-footed mouse is the primary animal reservoir for
Borrelia burgdorferi
and the
preferred host for nymphal and larval forms of the deer tick. Deer are hosts for adult ticks but do not carry
Borrelia
. Other mammals
(eg, dogs) can be incidental hosts and can develop Lyme disease. In Europe,
sheep host the organism.
Pathophysiology
B. burgdorferi
enters the skin at the site of the tick bite. After 3 to 32 days, the organisms migrate locally
in the skin around the bite, spread via the lymphatics to cause regional adenopathy or disseminate in
===PAGE:1418===
blood to organs or other skin sites. Initially, an inflammatory reaction (erythema migrans) occurs before
significant antibody response to infection (serologic conversion).
Symptoms and Signs
Lyme disease has 3 stages:
• Early localized
• Early disseminated
• Late
The early and late stages are usually separated by an asymptomatic interval.
Early localized:
Erythema migrans (EM), the hallmark and best clinical indicator of Lyme disease, is the
first sign of the disease. It occurs in at least 75% of patients, beginning as a red macule or papule at the
site of the tick bite, usually on the proximal portion of an extremity or the trunk (especially the thigh,
buttock, or axilla), between 3 and 32 days after a tick bite (see Plate 60). The area expands, often with
clearing between the center and periphery resembling a bull's eye, to a diameter ≤ 50 cm. Darkening
erythema may develop in the center, which may be hot to the touch and indurated. Without therapy, EM
typically fades within 3 to 4 wk.
Soon after onset, nearly one half of untreated patients develop multiple, usually smaller lesions without
indurated centers. Cultures of biopsy samples of these secondary lesions have been positive, indicating
dissemination of infection. EM generally lasts a few weeks (average, 3 to 4 wk). Evanescent lesions may
appear during resolution. Mucosal lesions do not occur.
Early disseminated:
Symptoms of early-disseminated disease begin days or weeks after the
appearance of the primary lesion when the bacteria spread through the body. This musculoskeletal, flulike syndrome, consisting of malaise, fatigue, chills, fever, headache, stiff neck, myalgias, and arthralgias,
may last for weeks. Because symptoms are often nonspecific, the diagnosis is frequently missed if EM is
absent; a high index of suspicion is required. Frank arthritis is rare at this stage. Less common are
backache, nausea and vomiting, sore throat, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly.
Symptoms are characteristically intermittent and changing, but malaise and fatigue may linger for weeks.
Some patients develop symptoms of fibromyalgia. Resolved skin lesions may reappear faintly, sometimes
before recurrent attacks of arthritis, in late-stage disease.
Neurologic abnormalities
develop in about 15% of patients within weeks to months of EM (generally
before arthritis occurs), commonly last for months, and usually resolve completely. Most common are
lymphocytic meningitis (CSF pleocytosis of about 100 cells/
μ
L) or meningoencephalitis, cranial neuritis
(especially Bell's palsy, which may be bilateral), and sensory or motor radiculoneuropathies, alone or in
combination.
Myocardial abnormalities
occur in about 8% of patients within weeks of EM. They include fluctuating
degrees of atrioventricular block (1st-degree, Wenckebach, or 3rd-degree) and, rarely, myopericarditis
with chest pain, reduced ejection fractions, and cardiomegaly.
Late:
In untreated Lyme disease, the late stage begins months to years after initial infection. Arthritis
develops in about 60% of patients within several months, occasionally up to 2 yr, of disease onset (as
defined by EM). Intermittent swelling and pain in a few large joints, especially the knees, typically recur
for several years. Affected knees commonly are much more swollen than painful; they are often hot, but
rarely red. Baker cysts may form and rupture. Malaise, fatigue, and low-grade fever may precede or
accompany arthritis attacks. In about 10% of patients, knee involvement is chronic (unremittent for ≥ 6
mo). Other late findings (occurring years after onset) include an antibiotic-sensitive skin lesion
(acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans) and chronic CNS abnormalities, either polyneuropathy or a subtle
encephalopathy with mood, memory, and sleep disorders.
===PAGE:1419===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation, supported by acute and convalescent serologic testing
Cultures of blood and relevant body fluids (eg, CSF, joint fluid) may be obtained, primarily to diagnose
other pathogens. Acute (IgM) and convalescent (IgG) antibody titers may be helpful; positive enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) titers should be confirmed by Western blot. However, seroconversion may be late (eg, > 4 wk) or occasionally absent (eg, if patients received prior
antibiotic
therapy), and positive IgG titers alone represent previous exposure. PCR testing of CSF or synovial fluid
is often positive when those sites are involved. Consequently, diagnosis depends on both test results and
the presence of typical findings. A classic EM rash strongly suggests Lyme disease, particularly when
supported by other elements (eg, recent tick bite, exposure to endemic area, typical systemic symptoms).
In the absence of rash, diagnosis is more difficult. Early-disseminated disease may mimic idiopathic RA in
children and reactive arthritis and atypical RA in adults. Important negative RA findings in adults include
usually absent morning stiffness, subcutaneous nodules, iridocyclitis, mucosal lesions, rheumatoid factor,
and antinuclear antibodies.
In the US, human granulocytic anaplasmosis and babesiosis are also transmitted by
I. scapularis
and
have a common geographic distribution in the northeastern and upper Midwest. Patients ill with any one
of the diseases transmitted by
I. scapularis
may be concurrently infected with the other diseases it
transmits. A clinician should suspect that patients with Lyme disease also have babesiosis if they have
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia or that they also have human granulocytic anaplasmosis if they
have hepatitis, leukopenia, or thrombocytopenia. Human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis, which is caused by
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
and transmitted by the Lone Star tick,
Amblyomma americanum
, occurs mainly in
the southeastern and south central US and is unlikely to be confused with Lyme disease.
Lyme disease may manifest with a musculoskeletal aseptic meningitis syndrome in summer. Although
ehrlichiosis, a rickettsial infection, is transmitted by the same tick (, clinical coinfection is rare.
The lack of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, elevated aminotransferases, and inclusion bodies in
neutrophils helps distinguish Lyme disease from human granulocytic anaplasmosis. Lack of hemolytic
anemia (unelevated LDH) and thrombocytopenia helps exclude babesiosis. Acute rheumatic fever is
considered in the occasional patient with migratory polyarthralgias and either an increased PR interval or
chorea (as a manifestation of meningoencephalitis). However, patients with Lyme disease rarely have
heart murmurs or evidence of a preceding streptococcal infection.
Late-stage disease lacks axial involvement, which distinguishes it from spondyloarthropathies with
peripheral joint involvement. Lyme disease may cause Bell's palsy and can mimic other causes of
lymphocytic meningitis, or peripheral neuropathies.
In areas where Lyme disease is endemic, many patients report arthralgias, fatigue, difficulty
concentrating, or other nonspecific symptoms. Without a history of EM or other symptoms of earlylocalized or early-disseminated Lyme disease, few of these patients actually have Lyme disease. In such
patients, elevated IgG titers (with normal IgM titers) indicate past exposure, not current or persistent
infection, and may lead to long and unnecessary courses of antibiotic therapy.
Treatment
• Multiple alternatives that vary with stage of disease but typically include amoxicillin, doxycycline, and
ceftriaxone
Most features of Lyme disease respond to antibiotics, but treatment of early disease is most successful.
In late-stage disease, antibiotics eradicate the bacteria, relieving the arthritis in most people. However, a
few genetically predisposed people have persistent arthritis even after the infection has been eliminated
because of continued inflammation.
Table 136-3
shows adult treatment regimens for various presentations of Lyme disease. Treatment in
children is similar except that doxycycline is avoided in children < 8 yr and doses are adjusted based on
===PAGE:1420===
weight (see
Table 132-3
.
For symptomatic relief, NSAIDs may be used. Complete heart block may require a temporary pacemaker.
Tense knee joints due to effusions require aspiration. Some genetically predisposed patients with arthritis
of the knee that persists despite antibiotic therapy may respond to arthroscopic synovectomy.
Prevention
Precautions against tick bite (see
Sidebar 139-1
 should be taken by people in endemic areas.
Deer tick nymphs, which attack humans, are small and difficult to see. Once attached to the skin, they
gorge on blood for days. Transmission of
B. burgdorferi
does not usually occur until the infected tick has
been in place for > 36 h. Thus, searching for ticks after potential exposure and removing them promptly
can help prevent infection.
A single dose of doxycycline 200 mg po has been shown to reduce the likelihood of Lyme disease after a
deer tick bite. Patients with a known tick bite can easily be instructed to monitor the bite site and seek
care if rash or other symptoms occur; the diagnostic dilemma of Lyme is most prominent when there is no
history of tick bite.
[Table 136-3.
Guidelines for Antibiotic Treatment of Lyme Disease in Adults*]
A vaccine, which had adverse effects similar to symptoms of Lyme disease and was only moderately
effective, has been removed from the market.
Rat-Bite Fever
Rat-bite fever is caused by either
Streptobacillus moniliformis
or
Spirillum minus
. Symptoms of
the streptobacillary form include fever, rash, and arthralgias. The spirillary form causes
relapsing fever, rash, and regional lymphadenitis. Diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by culture
and sometimes rising antibody titers. Treatment is with penicillin or doxycycline.
Rat-bite fever is transmitted to humans in up to 10% of rat bites. However, there may be no history of rat
bite. Rat-bite fever is most commonly caused by rat bites but can be caused by the bite of any rodent or
of a carnivore that preys on rodents. Both the streptobacillary and spirillary forms affect mainly urban
dwellers living in crowded conditions and biomedical laboratory personnel. In the US and Europe, rat-bite
fever is usually due to
S. moniliformis
; in Asia, it is usually due to
S. minus
.
Streptobacillary rat-bite fever:
This form is caused by the pleomorphic gram-negative bacillus
S.
moniliformis
, an organism present in the oropharynx of healthy rats. Epidemics have been associated
with ingestion of unpasteurized milk contaminated by
S. moniliformis
(Haverhill fever), but infection is
usually a consequence of a bite by a wild rat or mouse. Other rodents and weasels have also been
implicated.
The primary wound usually heals promptly, but after an incubation period of 1 to 22 (usually < 10) days, a
viral-like syndrome develops abruptly, causing chills, fever, vomiting, headache, and back and joint pains.
Most patients develop a morbilliform, petechial, or vesicular rash on the hands and feet about 3 days
later. Polyarthralgia or arthritis, usually affecting the large joints asymmetrically, develops in many patients
within 1 wk and, if untreated, may persist for several days or months. Bacterial endocarditis and
abscesses in the brain or other tissues are rare but serious. Some patients have infected pericardial
effusion and infected amniotic fluid. Haverhill fever resembles percutaneously acquired rat-bite fever, but
with more prominent pharyngitis and vomiting.
Diagnosis is confirmed by culturing the organism from blood or joint fluid. Measurable agglutinins develop
during the 2nd or 3rd wk and are diagnostically important if the titer increases. PCR or enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests may be helpful. The WBC count ranges between 6,000 and
30,000/
μ
L. The streptobacillary form usually can be differentiated clinically from the spirillary form.
===PAGE:1421===
Treatment involves amoxicillin 1 g po q 8 h, procaine penicillin G 600,000 units IM q 12 h, or penicillin V
500 mg po qid for 7 to 10 days. Erythromycin 500 mg po qid may be used for patients allergic to penicillin.
Doxycycline 100 mg q 12 h for 14 days is an alternative.
Spirillary rat-bite fever (sodoku):

S. minus
infection is acquired through a rat bite or occasionally a
mouse bite. The wound usually heals promptly, but inflammation recurs at the site after 4 to 28 (usually >
10) days, accompanied by a relapsing fever and regional lymphadenitis. A roseolar-urticarial rash
sometimes develops but is less prominent than the streptobacillary rash. Systemic symptoms commonly
accompany fever, but arthritis is rare. In untreated patients, 2- to 4-day cycles of fever usually recur for 4
to 8 wk, but febrile episodes rarely recur for > 1 yr.
Diagnosis is by direct visualization or culture of
Spirillum
from blood smears or tissue from lesions or
lymph nodes, or by Giemsa stain or darkfield examination of blood from inoculated mice. The WBC count
ranges between 5,000 and 30,000/
μ
L. The Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) results are
false-positive in half the patients. The disease may easily be confused with malaria or
Borrelia recurrentis
infection; both are characterized by relapsing fever.
Treatment is the same as for the streptobacillary form.
Relapsing Fever
(Tick, Recurrent, or Famine Fever)
Relapsing fever is a recurring febrile disease caused by several species of
Borrelia
and
transmitted by lice or ticks. Symptoms are recurrent febrile episodes with headache, myalgia,
and vomiting lasting 3 to 5 days, separated by intervals of apparent recovery. Diagnosis is
clinical, confirmed by staining of peripheral blood smears. Treatment is with a tetracycline or
erythromycin.
The insect vector may be soft ticks of the genus
Ornithodoros
or the human body louse, depending on
geographic location. Louseborne relapsing fevers are rare in the US and endemic only in the highlands of
Central and East Africa and the Andes of South America; the tick-borne fevers are endemic in the
Americas, Africa, Asia, and Europe. In the US, the
disease is generally confined to the western states,
where occurrence is highest between May and September.
The louse is infected by feeding on a febrile patient. If the louse is crushed on a new host,
Borrelia
are
released and can enter abraded skin or bites. Intact lice do not transmit disease. Ticks acquire the
spirochetes from rodent reservoirs. Humans are infected when spirochetes in the tick's saliva or excreta
enter the skin rapidly as the tick bites. Congenital borreliosis has also been reported.
The mortality rate is generally < 5% with treatment but may be considerably higher in very young,
pregnant, old, malnourished, or debilitated people or during epidemics of louse-borne fever.
Symptoms and Signs
Because the tick feeds transiently and painlessly at night, most patients do not report a history of tick bite
but may report an overnight exposure to caves or rustic dwellings. When present, louse infestation is
usually obvious.
The incubation period ranges from 3 to 11 days (median, 6 days). Sudden chills mark the onset, followed
by high fever, tachycardia, severe headache, vomiting, muscle and joint pain, and often delirium. An
erythematous macular or purpuric rash may appear early over the trunk and extremities. Conjunctival,
subcutaneous, or submucous hemorrhages may be present. Fever remains high for 3 to 5 days, then
clears abruptly, indicating a turning point in the disease. The duration of illness ranges from 1 to 54 days
(median, 18 days). Later in the several weeks' course of the disease, jaundice, hepatomegaly,
splenomegaly, myocarditis, and heart failure may occur, especially in louse-borne disease. Other
symptoms may include ophthalmitis, iridocyclitis, exacerbation of asthma, and erythema multiforme.
Meningismus is rare. Spontaneous abortion can occur.
===PAGE:1422===
The patient is usually asymptomatic for several days to ≥ 1 wk between the initial episode and the first
relapse. Relapses, related to the cyclic development of the parasites, occur with a sudden return of fever
and often arthralgia and all the former symptoms and signs. Jaundice is more common during relapse.
The illness clears as before, but 2 to 10 similar episodes may follow at intervals of 1 to 2 wk. The
episodes become progressively less severe, and patients eventually recover as they develop immunity.
Diagnosis
• Darkfield microscopy
The diagnosis is suggested by recurrent fever and confirmed by visualization of spirochetes in the blood
during a febrile episode. The spirochetes may be seen on darkfield examination or Wright's- or Giemsastained thick and thin blood smears. (Acridine orange stain for examining blood or tissue is more sensitive
than Wright's or Giemsa stain.) Serologic tests are unreliable. Mild polymorphonuclear leukocytosis may
occur. Serologic tests for syphilis and Lyme disease may be falsely positive.
Differential diagnosis includes Lyme arthritis, malaria, dengue, yellow fever, leptospirosis, typhus,
influenza, and enteric fevers.
Treatment
• Tetracycline, doxycycline, or erythromycin
In relapsing fever transmitted by ticks, tetracycline or erythromycin 500 mg po q 6 h is given for 5 to 10
days. A single 500-mg oral dose of either drug cures louse-transmitted fever. Doxycycline 100 mg po q 12
h for 5 to 10 days is also effective. Children < 8 yr are given erythromycin estolate 10 mg/kg po tid. When
vomiting or severe disease precludes oral administration, doxycycline 1 to 2 mg/kg may be given IV q 12
to 24 h to children > 8 yr. Children < 8 yr are given penicillin G 25,000 units/kg IV q 6 h.
Therapy should be started early during fever. A Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction may occur within 2 h of
starting therapy. Severity of the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction may be lessened by giving acetaminophen
650 mg po 2 h before and 2 h after the first dose of doxycycline or erythromycin.
Dehydration and electrolyte imbalance should be corrected with parenteral fluids. Acetaminophen with
oxycodone or hydrocodone may be used for severe headache. Nausea and vomiting should be treated
with prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg po or IM once/day to qid. If heart failure occurs, specific therapy is
indicated.
===PAGE:1423===
Chapter 137. Neisseriaceae
Introduction
All pathogenic aerobic gram-negative cocci belong to the Neisseriaceae family, which is composed of 5
genera:
•
Acinetobacter
•
Kingella
•
Moraxella
(including 2 subgenera,
Moraxella
and
Branhamella
)
•
Neisseria
•
Oligella
Of these,
Neisseria
includes the most important human pathogens,
N. meningitidis
and
N. gonorrhoeae
.
Numerous saprophytic Neisseriaceae commonly inhabit the oropharynx, vagina, or colon but rarely cause
human disease.
Moraxella catarrhalis
causes otitis media in children and sinusitis. Over half a dozen
other
Moraxella
sp and the related
Kingella kingae
cause infections in the CNS, respiratory tract, urinary
tract, endocardium, bones, and joints.
Humans are the only reservoir of
Neisseria
, and person-to-person spread is the prime mode of
transmission. Both
N. meningitidis
(meningococcus) and
N. gonorrhoeae
can exist in an asymptomatic
carrier state. Carrier states are particularly important with meningococcus because of its association with
epidemics. Gonorrhea is discussed elsewhere.
Acinetobacter
Infections
Acinetobacter
sp can cause suppurative infections in any organ system; these bacteria are
often opportunists in hospitalized patients.
Acinetobacter
is ubiquitous and can survive on dry surfaces for up to a month, increasing the likelihood
of patients being colonized and medical equipment being contaminated. There are many species of
Acinetobacter
; all can cause human disease, but
A. baumannii
(AB) accounts for about 80% of
infections.
Diseases Caused by Acinetobacter
AB infections typically occur in critically ill, hospitalized patients. Crude death rates associated with AB
infection are 19 to 54%.
The most common site for infection is the respiratory system.
Acinetobacter
easily colonize tracheostomy
sites and can cause community-acquired bronchiolitis and tracheobronchitis in healthy children and
tracheobronchitis in immunocompromised adults. Hospital-acquired
Acinetobacter
pneumonias are
frequently multilobar and complicated. Secondary bacteremia and septic shock are associated with a poor
prognosis.
Acinetobacter
sp can also cause suppurative infections (eg, abscesses) in any organ system, including
the lungs, urinary tract, skin, and soft tissues; bacteremia may occur. Rarely, these organisms cause
meningitis (primarily after neurosurgical procedures), cellulitis, or phlebitis in patients with an indwelling
venous catheter, ocular infections, native or prosthetic valve endocarditis, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis,
and pancreatic and liver abscesses.
The significance of isolates from clinical specimens is difficult to determine because they often represent
colonization.
===PAGE:1424===
Risk factors:
Risk factors for infection depend on the type of infection (hospital-acquired, communityacquired, multidrug resistant—see
Table 137-1
).
Drug resistance:
Recently, multidrug resistant (MDR) AB has emerged. Spread in ICUs has been
attributed to colonized health care practitioners, contaminated common equipment, and contaminated
parenteral nutrition solutions.
Treatment
• Typically empiric multidrug therapy for serious infections
In patients with localized cellulitis or phlebitis associated with a foreign body (eg, IV catheter, suture),
removal of the foreign body plus local care is usually sufficient. Tracheobronchitis after endotracheal
intubation may resolve with pulmonary toilet alone. Patients with more extensive infections should be
treated with antibiotics and with debridement if necessary.
AB has long had intrinsic resistance to many antimicrobials. MDR-AB can be resistant to ≥ 3 classes of
antimicrobials; some isolates are resistant to all. Possible options include a carbapenem (eg, meropenem,
imipenem, doripenem), a
β
-lactam/
β
-lactamase inhibitor (eg, ampicillin/sulbactam), colistin, or a
fluoroquinolone plus an aminoglycoside, rifampin, or both. Sulbactam (a
β
-lactamase inhibitor) has
intrinsic bactericidal activity against many MDR-AB strains. Tigecycline, a glycylcycline antibiotic, is also
effective; however, borderline activity and emergence of resistance during therapy has been reported.
Mild to moderate infections may respond to monotherapy. Traumatic wound infections
[Table 137-1.
Risk Factors for
Acinetobacter
Infection]
can be treated with minocycline. Serious infections are treated with combination therapy—typically,
imipenem, or a
β
-lactam/
β
-lactamase inhibitor plus an aminoglycoside.
To prevent spread, health care practitioners should use contact precautions (hand washing, barrier
precautions) and appropriate ventilator care and cleaning for patients colonized or infected with MDR-AB.
Kingella
Infections
Kingella
organisms colonize the human respiratory tract. They cause skeletal infections,
endocarditis, and bacteremia and, rarely, pneumonia, epiglottitis, meningitis, abscesses, and
ocular infections.
Kingella
are short, nonmotile, gram-negative coccobacilli that occur in pairs or short chains. The
organisms are slow-growing and fastidious.
Kingella
are recovered from the human respiratory tract and
are a rare cause of human disease.
Among
Kingella
species,
K. kingae
is the most frequent human pathogen; these organisms frequently
colonize the respiratory mucous membranes. Children aged 6 mo to 4 yr have the highest rates of
colonization and invasive disease from this and other respiratory tract pathogens such as
Moraxella
catarrhalis
and
Streptococcus pneumoniae
. Infection has a seasonal distribution, with more cases in fall
and winter.
Diseases Caused By
Kingella
The most common manifestations of
K. kingae
disease are
• Skeletal infections
• Endocarditis
===PAGE:1425===
• Bacteremia
Rare manifestations include pneumonia, epiglottitis, meningitis, abscesses, and ocular infections.
The most common skeletal infection is septic arthritis, which most frequently affects large, weight-bearing
joints, especially the knee and ankle. Osteomyelitis most frequently involves bones of the lower
extremities. Onset is insidious, and diagnosis is often delayed. Hematogenous invasion of intervertebral
disks can occur, most commonly in the lumbar intervertebral spaces.
Kingella
endocarditis has been reported in all age groups. Endocarditis may involve native or prosthetic
valves.
Kingella
is a component of the so-called HACEK group (
Haemophilus aphrophilus
and
H.
parainfluenzae, Actinobacillus, Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, Kingella
—, which includes
fastidious gram-negative bacteria capable of causing endocarditis.
Diagnosis requires laboratory isolation from suspected fluids or tissues.
Treatment
• A penicillin or cephalosporin
Kingella
organisms are generally susceptible to various penicillins and cephalosporins. However,
antimicrobial susceptibility testing is needed to guide therapy. Other useful drugs include
aminoglycosides, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, tetracyclines, erythromycin, and ciprofloxacin.
Meningococcal Diseases
Meningococci (
Neisseria meningitidis
) cause meningitis and septicemia. Symptoms, usually
severe, include headache, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, lethargy, rash, multiple organ failure,
shock, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Diagnosis is clinical, confirmed by culture.
Treatment is penicillin or a 3rd-generation cephalosporin.
Worldwide, the incidence of endemic meningococcal disease is 0.5 to 5/100,000, with an increased
number of cases during winter and spring in temperate climates. Local outbreaks occur most frequently in
sub-Saharan Africa between Senegal and Ethiopia, an area known as the meningitis belt. In major African
epidemics, attack rates range from 100 to 800/100,000.
In the US, the annual incidence ranges from 0.5 to 1.1/100,000. Most cases are sporadic, typically in
children < 2 yr; < 2% occur in outbreaks. Outbreaks tend to occur in semiclosed communities (eg, military
recruit camps, college dormitories, schools, day-care centers) and often involve patients aged 5 to 19 yr.
Diseases Caused by Meningococci
Over 90% of meningococcal infections involve
• Meningitis
• Septicemia
Infections of lungs, joints, respiratory passageways, GU organs, eyes, endocardium, and pericardium are
less common.
Pathophysiology
Meningococci can colonize the oropharynx and nasopharynx of asymptomatic carriers. A combination of
factors is probably responsible for transition from carrier state to invasive disease. Despite documented
high rates of colonization, transition to invasive disease is rare and occurs primarily in previously
uninfected patients. Transmission usually occurs via direct contact with respiratory secretions from a
===PAGE:1426===
nasopharyngeal carrier. Carrier rates rise dramatically during epidemics.
After invading the body,
N. meningitidis
causes meningitis and severe bacteremia in children and adults,
resulting in profound vascular effects. Infection can rapidly become fulminant and is associated with a
mortality rate of 10 to 15%. Of patients who recover, 10 to 15% have serious sequelae, such as
permanent hearing loss, intellectual disability, or loss of phalanges or limbs.
Risk factors:
Children aged 6 mo to 3 yr are the most frequently infected. Other high-risk groups include
adolescents, military recruits, college freshmen living in dormitories, people with complement deficiencies,
and microbiologists working with
N. meningitidis
isolates. Infection or vaccination confers serogroupspecific immunity.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with meningitis frequently report fever, headache, and stiff neck (see also Acute Bacterial
Meningitis . Other symptoms include nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and lethargy. A
maculopapular or hemorrhagic petechial rash often appears soon after disease onset. Meningeal signs
are often apparent during physical examination. Fulminant meningococcemia syndromes include
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome (septicemia, profound shock, cutaneous purpura, adrenal
hemorrhage), sepsis with multiple organ failure, shock, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. A
rare, chronic meningococcemia causes recurrent mild symptoms.
Diagnosis
• Gram stain and culture
Neisseria
are small, gram-negative cocci readily identified with Gram stain and by other standard
bacteriologic identification methods. Serologic methods, such as latex agglutination and coagglutination
tests, allow rapid presumptive diagnosis of
N. meningitides
in blood, CSF, synovial fluid, and urine.
However, both positive and negative results should be confirmed by culture. PCR for
N. meningitidis
has
been developed but is not commercially available.
Treatment
• Ceftriaxone
• Dexamethasone
While awaiting definitive identification of the causal organism, immunocompetent adults suspected of
having meningococcal infection are given a 3rd-generation cephalosporin (eg, cefotaxime 2 g IV q 6 h,
ceftriaxone 2 g IV q 12 h) plus vancomycin 500 to 750 mg IV q 6 h or 1 g IV q 12 h or q 8 h. In
immunocompromised patients and patients > 50 yr, coverage for
Listeria monocytogenes
should be
considered by adding ampicillin 2 g IV q 4 h.
Once
N. meningitidis
has been definitively identified, the preferred treatment is ceftriaxone 2 g IV q 12 h
or penicillin 4 million units IV q 4 h.
Corticosteroids decrease the incidence of neurologic complications in children and adults. When
corticosteroids are used, they should be given with or before the first dose of antibiotics. Dexamethasone
0.15 mg/kg IV q 6 h in children (10 mg q 6 h in adults) is given for 4 days.
Prevention
Antibiotic prophylaxis:
Close contacts of people with meningococcal disease are at increased risk of
acquiring disease and should receive a prophylactic antibiotic. Options include
• Rifampin 600 mg (for children > 1 mo, 10 mg/kg; for children < 1 mo, 5 mg/kg) po q 12 h for 4 doses
===PAGE:1427===
• Ceftriaxone 250 mg (for children < 15 yr, 125 mg) IM for 1 dose
• In adults, a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin 500 mg or ofloxacin 400 mg) po for 1 dose
Azithromycin is not routinely recommended, but a recent study showed that a single 500-mg dose was
equivalent to rifampin for chemoprophylaxis and so could be an alternative for patients with
contraindications to recommended drugs.
Ciprofloxacin-resistant meningococcal disease has been reported in several countries (Greece, England,
Wales, Australia, Spain, Argentina, France, India). More recently, 2 US states (North Dakota, Minnesota)
reported ciprofloxacin-resistant meningococci and so recommended that ciprofloxacin chemoprophylaxis
not be used as preventive treatment for people who have had close contact with someone diagnosed with
meningococcal disease.
Vaccination:
A meningococcal conjugate vaccine is available in the US. The vaccine includes 4 of the 5
serogroups of meningococcus (all but B). A one-time routine vaccination is recommended for all children
between the age of 11 and 18 yr. Vaccination is also recommended for people who are aged 19 to 55 and
at risk, including military recruits, college freshmen living in a dormitory, travelers to hyperendemic or
epidemic areas, and people with laboratory or industrial exposure to
N. meningitidis
aerosols. Adults and
children aged 2 to 10 yr with terminal complement component deficiencies or functional or actual asplenia
should also be vaccinated.
Moraxella Catarrhalis
Infection
Moraxella catarrhalis
causes ear and upper and lower respiratory infections.
Previously classified as
Micrococcus
, then
Neisseria
, and also known as
Branhamella catarrhalis
, this
organism is a frequent cause of otitis media in children, acute and chronic sinusitis at all ages, and lower
respiratory infection in adults with chronic lung disease. It is the 2nd most common bacterial cause of
COPD exacerbations after nontypeable
Haemophilus influenzae. M. catarrhalis
pneumonia resembles
pneumococcal pneumonia. Although bacteremia is rare, half of patients die within 3 mo because of
intercurrent diseases.
The prevalence of
M. catarrhalis
colonization depends on age. About 1 to 5% of healthy adults have
upper respiratory tract colonization. Nasopharyngeal colonization with
M. catarrhalis
is common
throughout infancy, may be increased during winter months, and is a risk factor for acute otitis media;
early colonization is a risk factor for recurrent otitis media. Substantial regional differences in colonization
rates occur. Living conditions, hygiene, environmental factors (eg, household smoking), genetic
characteristics of the populations, host factors, and other factors may contribute to these differences.
The organism appears to spread contiguously from its colonizing position in the respiratory tract to the
infection site.
There is no pathognomonic feature of
M. catarrhalis
otitis media, acute or chronic sinusitis, or
pneumonia. In lower respiratory disease, patients experience increased cough, purulent sputum
production, and increased dyspnea.
These gram-negative cocci resemble
Neisseria
sp but can be readily distinguished by routine
biochemical tests after culture isolation from infected fluids or tissues.
All strains now produce
β
-lactamase. The organism is generally susceptible to
β
-lactam/
β
-lactamase
inhibitors, sulfamethoxazole, tetracyclines, extended-spectrum oral cephalosporins, aminoglycosides,
macrolides, and fluoroquinolones.
Oligella
Infections
Oligella
sp causes infection primarily of the GU tract.
===PAGE:1428===
The genus
Oligella
contains 2 species,
Oligella urethralis
and
O. ureolytica.
O. urethralis
is a commensal of the GU tract, and most clinical isolates are from the urine, predominantly
from men. Although symptomatic infections are rare, bacteremia, septic arthritis that mimics gonococcal
arthritis, and peritonitis have been reported.
O. ureolytica
also occurs primarily in the urine, usually from patients with long-term urinary catheters or
other urinary drainage systems. These patients have a propensity to develop urinary stones, possibly
because the organism hydrolyzes urea and alkalinizes urine, leading to precipitation of phosphates.
Bacteremia has occurred in a patient with obstructive uropathy.
Diagnosis is by culture.
Because these organisms are rarely isolated, antimicrobial susceptibility data are limited; most are
sensitive to
β
-lactam antibiotics. However, a
β
-lactam-producing strain and strains resistant to
ciprofloxacin have been identified.
===PAGE:1429===
Chapter 138. Chlamydia and Mycoplasmas
Chlamydia
Three species of
Chlamydia
cause human disease, including sexually transmitted diseases and
pneumonias. Most are susceptible to azithromycin, doxycycline, and some fluoroquinolones.
Chlamydiae are nonmotile, obligate intracellular organisms. Although originally considered viruses
because they require a cellular host, they are now known to be bacteria; they contain DNA, RNA, and
ribosomes and make their own proteins and nucleic acids. However, because they synthesize most of
their own metabolic intermediates, they cannot make their own ATP and thus are energy parasites.
Three species cause human disease:
•
Chlamydia trachomatis
•
Chlamydophila
(formerly
Chlamydia
)
pneumoniae
•
Chlamydophila
(formerly
Chlamydia
)
psittaci
C. trachomatis
has 18 immunologically defined serovars. Serovars A, B, Ba, and C cause trachoma and
inclusion conjunctivitis; D through K cause sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) localized to mucosal
surfaces; L1, L2, and L3 cause STDs that lead to invasive lymph node disease (lymphogranuloma
venereum). In the US,
C. trachomatis
is the most common bacterial cause of STDs, including
nongonococcal urethritis ( and epididymitis in men; cervicitis, urethritis, and pelvic
inflammatory disease in women; and proctitis, lymphogranuloma venereum, and reactive arthritis (Reiter's
syndrome) in both sexes. Maternal transmission of
C. trachomatis
causes neonatal conjunctivitis and
pneumonia. The organism is occasionally isolated from the throat in adults but rarely causes symptomatic
pharyngitis.
C. pneumoniae
can cause pneumonia (especially in children and young adults) that may be clinically
indistinguishable from pneumonia caused by
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
. In some patients with
C.
pneumoniae
, pneumonia, hoarseness, and sore throat may precede coughing, which may be persistent
and complicated by bronchospasm. From 6 to 19% of community-acquired pneumonia cases are due to
C. pneumoniae
, but chlamydial pneumonia is uncommon among children < 5 yr. No seasonal variations in
occurrence have been observed. The organism has been found in atheromatous lesions, and infection
may be associated with increased risk of coronary artery disease, although proof of a connection has not
yet been established.
C. psittaci
causes psittacosis. Strains causing human disease are usually transmitted from psittacine
birds (eg, parrots), causing a disseminated disease characterized by pneumonitis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes nucleic acid-based testing
The diagnosis is sometimes made without testing (eg, in men with typical nongonococcal urethritis).
However, because many cases are asymptomatic, especially in women, routine testing for genital
infection has been recommended and is increasingly common. In cases of urethritis, diagnosis is often
made by excluding gonorrhea as a cause or by presuming that both chlamydial infection and gonorrhea
are present.
C. trachomatis
can be isolated by diagnostic cell culture but is best identified in genital samples using
nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) such as PCR because these tests are more sensitive than cell
culture and have less stringent sample handling requirements. NAATs for genital infection can be done
===PAGE:1430===
using noninvasively obtained samples, such as urine or vaginal swabs obtained by the patient or clinician.
An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or a direct immunofluorescent slide test can detect
antigens in genital and ocular infections, but both are less sensitive than culture or NAATs. Serologic tests
are useful in diagnosing pneumonia in infants and lymphogranuloma venereum.
A primary clue to diagnosis of
C. psittaci
infection is close contact with birds, typically parrots or
parakeets.
Screening:
Because chlamydial genital infection is so common and often causes mild or nonspecific
symptoms (particularly in women), routine screening of asymptomatic people at high risk of STDs is
recommended. People who should be screened include
• People with a history of a previous STD
• People with high-risk behaviors
• Sexually active adolescents and young adults < 24 yr
• Pregnant women < 24 yr
Treatment
• Azithromycin or doxycycline
Uncomplicated lower genital tract infection is typically treated with a single dose of azithromycin (1 g po)
or with a 7-day regimen of doxycycline (100 mg po bid) or some fluoroquinolones (eg, levofloxacin 500 mg
po once/day). Treatment of presumed chlamydial infection is routine when gonorrhea is present (see also
p.
). Pelvic inflammatory disease, lymphogranuloma venereum, or epididymitis is usually treated for 2
wk.
Specific infections are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL: Psittacosis and
C. pneumoniae
pneumonia
on p.
, lymphogranuloma venereum and urethritis on p.
, epididymitis on p.
, reactive arthritis on p.
, neonatal conjunctivitis and neonatal pneumonia on pp.
and
,
and trachoma and inclusion conjunctivitis 
Mycoplasmas
Mycoplasmas are ubiquitous bacteria that differ from other prokaryotes in that they lack a cell wall.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
is a common cause of pneumonia, particularly community-acquired. Increasing
evidence suggests that
M. genitalium
and
Ureaplasma urealyticum
cause some cases of nongonococcal
urethritis. They (and
M. hominis
) are often present in patients with other urogenital infections (eg,
vaginitis, cervicitis, pyelonephritis, pelvic inflammatory disease) and some nonurogenital infections, but
whether they cause these infections is not clear.
Mycoplasmas are not visible with light microscopy. Culture is technically difficult and often unavailable,
but laboratory diagnosis is sometimes possible with DNA probes or by detection of antibodies or antigens;
frequently, diagnosis must be clinical.
Macrolides are usually the antimicrobials of choice. Most species are also sensitive to fluoroquinolones
and tetracyclines.
===PAGE:1431===
Chapter 139. Rickettsiae and Related Organisms
Introduction
Rickettsial diseases (rickettsioses) and related diseases (ehrlichiosis, Q fever) are caused by a
group of gram-negative, obligately intracellular coccobacilli. Most have an arthropod vector.
Symptoms usually include sudden-onset fever with severe headache, malaise, prostration, and,
in most cases, a characteristic rash. Diagnosis is clinical, confirmed by immunofluorescence
assay or PCR. Treatment is with tetracyclines or chloramphenicol.
Although rickettsiae require living cells for growth, they are true bacteria because they have metabolic
enzymes and cell walls,
use O
, and are susceptible to antibiotics. Rickettsiae (except
Coxiella burnetii
,
the causative agent of Q fever, which is no longer classified with the Rickettsiae) have an animal
reservoir and usually an arthropod vector that infects humans (see
Table 139-1
).
Rickettsiae multiply at the site of arthropod attachment and often produce a local lesion (eschar). They
penetrate the skin or mucous membranes; some (
Rickettsia rickettsii
) multiply in the endothelial cells of
small blood vessels, causing vasculitis, and others (
Ehrlichia
sp) replicate in WBCs. The endovasculitis
of
R. rickettsii
causes a rash, encephalitic signs, and gangrene of skin and tissues. Patients seriously ill
with a rickettsial disease of the typhus or spotted fever group or with ehrlichiosis may have ecchymotic
skin necrosis, digital gangrene, circulatory collapse, shock, oliguria, anuria, azotemia, anemia,
hyponatremia, hypochloremia, edema, delirium, and coma.
Diagnosis
• Clinical features
• Biopsy of rash
• Serologic testing not useful acutely
• PCR for
Ehrlichia
sp
Differentiating rickettsial from other infections:
Rickettsial and related diseases must be differentiated from other acute infections, primarily
meningococcemia, rubeola, and rubella. A history of louse or flea contact, tick bite, or presence in a
known endemic area is helpful, but such history is often absent. Clinical features may help distinguish
diseases:
• Meningococcemia: The rash may be pink, macular, maculopapular, or petechial in the subacute form
and petechially confluent or ecchymotic in the fulminant form. The rash develops rapidly in acute
meningococcal disease and, when ecchymotic, is usually tender when palpated.
• Rubeola: The rash begins on the face, spreads to the trunk and arms, and soon becomes confluent.
• Rubella: The rash usually remains discrete. Postauricular lymph node enlargement and lack of toxicity
suggest rubella.
Differentiating among rickettsial diseases:
Rickettsial and related diseases must also be
differentiated from each other. Clinical features allow some differentiation, but overlap is considerable:
• Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF): The rash usually appears on about the 4th febrile day as
blanching macules on the extremities and gradually becomes petechial as it spreads to the trunk,
palms, and soles over several days. Some patients with RMSF never develop a rash.
===PAGE:1432===
• Epidemic typhus: The rash usually appears initially in the axillary folds and on the trunk. Later, it spreads
peripherally, rarely involving the palms, soles, and face. Severe physiologic and pathologic
abnormalities similar to those of RMSF occur.
• Murine typhus: The rash is nonpurpuric, nonconfluent, and less extensive, and renal and vascular
complications are uncommon.
• Scrub typhus: Manifestations are similar to those of RMSF and epidemic typhus.
[Table 139-1.
Diseases Caused by
Rickettsia, Ehrlichia
, and
Coxiella
Spp]
However, scrub typhus occurs in different geographic areas, and frequently, an eschar develops with
satellite adenopathy.
• Rickettsialpox: This disease is mild, and the rash, in the form of vesicles with surrounding erythema, is
sparse and may resemble varicella.
• African tick bite fever (due to
R. Africae
): Symptoms are similar to those of other rick-ettsial diseases.
The rash is characterized by multiple black eschars on the distal extremities with regional adenopathy.
Testing:
Knowledge of residence and recent travel often helps in diagnosis because many
rickettsiae are
localized to certain geographic areas. However, testing is usually required.
The most useful tests for
R. rickettsii
are indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) and PCR of a biopsy
specimen of the rash. Culture is difficult and not clinically useful. For
Ehrlichia
sp, PCR of blood is the
best test. Serologic tests are not useful for acute diagnosis because they usually become positive only
during convalescence.
Treatment
• Tetracyclines
Because diagnostic tests can take time and may be insensitive, antibiotics are usually begun
presumptively to prevent significant deterioration, death, and prolonged recovery. Tetracyclines are firstline treatment: doxycycline 200 mg po once followed by 100 mg bid until the patient improves, has been
afebrile for 24 to 48 h, and has received treatment for at least 7 days. IV preparations are used in patients
too ill to take oral drugs. Although tetracyclines can cause tooth staining in children, experts think that a
course of doxycycline is warranted. Chloramphenicol 500 mg po or IV qid for 7 days is 2nd-line treatment.
Both drugs are rickettsiostatic, not rickettsicidal. Ciprofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones are effective
against certain rickettsiae, but extensive clinical experience is lacking.
Because severely ill patients with RMSF or epidemic typhus may have a marked increase in capillary
permeability in later stages, IV fluids should be given cautiously to maintain BP while avoiding worsening
pulmonary and cerebral edema. Heparin is not recommended in patients who develop disseminated
intravascular coagulation.
Eastern Tick-Borne Rickettsioses
Eastern tick-borne rickettsioses (ETBR) are caused by various rickettsiae transmitted by ixodid
ticks. Symptoms are an initial skin lesion, satellite adenopathy, and an erythematous
maculopapular rash.
ETBR include North Asian tick-borne rickettsiosis, Queensland tick typhus, African tick typhus, and
Mediterranean spotted fever (boutonneuse fever). The causative agents belong to the spotted fever
group of rickettsiae.
The epidemiology of these tick-borne rick-ettsioses resembles that of spotted fever in the Western
Hemisphere. Ixodid ticks and wild animals maintain the rickettsiae in nature. If humans intrude
===PAGE:1433===
accidentally into the cycle, they become infected. In certain areas, the cycle of boutonneuse fever
involves domiciliary environments, with the brown dog tick,
Rhipicephalus sanguineus
, as the dominant
vector.
Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms and signs are similar for all ETBR and generally milder than with spotted fever. After an
incubation period of 5 to 7 days, fever, malaise, headache, and conjunctival injection develop. With the
onset of fever, a small buttonlike ulcer 2 to 5 mm in diameter with a black center appears (an eschar or, in
boutonneuse fever, tache noire). Usually, the regional or satellite lymph nodes are enlarged. On about the
4th day of fever, a red maculopapular rash appears on the forearms and extends to most of the body,
including the palms and soles. Fever lasts into the 2nd wk.
Complications and death are rare except among elderly or debilitated patients. However, the disease
should not be ignored; a fulminant form of vasculitis can occur.
Diagnosis
For diagnosis, see p.
.
Treatment
• Doxycycline or ciprofloxacin
Treatment is doxycycline 100 mg po bid for 5 days or ciprofloxacin 500 to 750 mg po bid for 5 days.
Measures can be taken to prevent tick bites (see
Sidebar 139-1
).
Epidemic Typhus
(European, Classic, or Louse-Borne Typhus; Jail Fever)
Epidemic typhus is caused by
Rickettsia prowazekii
. Symptoms are prolonged high fever,
intractable headache, and a maculopapular rash.
Humans are the natural reservoir for
R. prowazekii
, which is prevalent worldwide and transmitted by body
lice when louse feces are scratched or rubbed into bite or other wounds (or sometimes the mucous
membranes of the eyes or mouth). In the US, humans may occasionally contract epidemic typhus after
contact with flying squirrels.
Fatalities are rare in children < 10 yr, but mortality increases with aging and may reach 60% in untreated
patients > 50 yr.
Symptoms and Signs
After an incubation period of 7 to 14 days, fever, headache, and prostration suddenly occur. Temperature
reaches 40° C in several days
and remains high, with slight morning remission, for about 2 wk. Headache
is generalized and intense. Small, pink macules, which appear on the 4th to 6th day, rapidly cover the
body, usually in the axillae and on the upper trunk and not on the palms, soles, and face. Later, the rash
becomes dark and maculopapular. In severe cases, the rash becomes petechial and hemorrhagic.
Splenomegaly sometimes occurs. Hypotension occurs in most seriously ill patients. Vascular collapse,
renal insufficiency, encephalitic signs, ecchymosis with gangrene, and pneumonia are poor prognostic
signs.
Sidebar 139-1 Tick Bite Prevention
Preventing tick access to skin includes
===PAGE:1434===
• Staying on paths and trails
• Tucking trousers into boots or socks
• Wearing long-sleeved shirts
• Applying repellents with diethyltoluamide (DEET) to skin surfaces
DEET should be used cautiously in very young children because toxic reactions have been reported.
Permethrin on clothing effectively kills ticks. Frequent searches for ticks, particularly in hairy areas and on
children, are essential in endemic areas.
Engorged ticks should be removed with care and not crushed between the fingers because crushing the
tick may result in disease transmission. The tick's body should not be grasped or squeezed. Gradual
traction on the head with a small forceps dislodges the tick. The point of attachment should be swabbed
with alcohol. Petroleum jelly, alcohol, lit matches, and other irritants are not effective and should not be
used.
No practical means are available to rid entire areas of ticks, but tick populations may be reduced in
endemic areas by controlling small-animal populations.
Diagnosis
Louse infestation is usually obvious and strongly suggests typhus if history (eg, living in or visiting an
endemic area) suggests possible exposure. For details of diagnosis, see p.
.
Treatment
• Doxycycline
Primary treatment is doxycycline 200 mg po once followed by 100 mg bid until the patient improves, has
been afebrile for 24 to 48 h, and has received treatment for at least 7 days. Chloramphenicol 500 mg po
or IV qid for 7 days is 2nd-line treatment.
Prevention
Immunization and louse control are highly effective for prevention. However, vaccines are not available in
the US. Lice may be eliminated by dusting infested people with malathion or lindane.
===PAGE:1435===
Brill-Zinsser Disease
Brill-Zinsser disease is a recrudescence of epidemic typhus, occurring years after an initial
attack.
Patients with Brill-Zinsser disease acquired epidemic typhus earlier or lived in an endemic area.
Apparently, when host defenses falter, viable organisms retained in the body are activated, causing
recurrent typhus; thus, disease is sporadic, occurring at any season and in the absence of infected lice.
Lice that feed on patients may acquire and transmit the agent.
Symptoms and signs are almost always mild and resemble those of epidemic typhus, with similar
circulatory disturbances and hepatic, renal, and CNS changes. The remittent febrile course lasts about 7
to 10 days. The rash is often evanescent or absent. Mortality is nil.
For diagnosis and treatment, see p.
.
Murine (Endemic) Typhus
(Rat-Flea Typhus; Urban Typhus of Malaya)
Murine typhus is caused by
Rickettsia typhi
, which is transmitted to humans by rat fleas; it is
clinically similar to but milder than epidemic typhus, causing chills, headache, fever, and rash.
Animal reservoirs include wild rats, mice, and other rodents. Rat fleas and probably cat fleas transmit the
agent to humans. Distribution is sporadic but worldwide; the incidence is low but higher in rat-infested
areas.
After an incubation of 6 to 18 days (mean 10 days), a shaking chill accompanies headache and fever.
The fever lasts about 12 days; then temperature gradually returns to normal. The rash and other
manifestations are similar to those of epidemic typhus but are much less severe. The early rash is sparse
and discrete. Mortality is low but is higher in elderly patients.
Diagnosis
Murine typhus is identified by immunofluorescence assay (IFA), immunohistology of a skin biopsy, PCR,
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Treatment
• Doxycycline
Primary treatment is doxycycline 200 mg po once followed by 100 mg bid until the patient improves, has
been afebrile for 24 to 48 h, and has received treatment for at least 7 days. Chloramphenicol 500 mg po
or IV qid for 7 days is 2nd-line treatment. (For details of treatment, see p.
.)
Incidence has been decreased by reducing rat and rat flea populations. No effective vaccine exists.
Rickettsialpox
(Vesicular Rickettsiosis)
Rickettsialpox is caused by
Rickettsia akari
. Symptoms are an initial local lesion and a
generalized papulovesicular rash.
Rickettsialpox occurs in many areas of the US and in Russia, Korea, and Africa. The vector, a small,
colorless mite, is widely distributed. It infects the house mouse and some species of wild mice. Humans
may be infected by chigger (mite larvae) or adult mite bites.
===PAGE:1436===
An eschar appears about 1 wk before onset of fever as a small papule 1 to 1.5 cm in diameter, then
develops into a small ulcer with a dark crust that leaves a scar when it heals. Regional lymphadenopathy
is present. An intermittent fever lasts about 1 wk, with chills, profuse sweating, headache, photophobia,
and muscle pains. Early in the febrile course, a generalized maculopapular rash with intraepidermal
vesicles appears, sparing the palms and soles. The disease is mild; no deaths have been reported.
For details of diagnosis, see p.
.
Treatment is doxycycline 100 mg po bid for 5 days or ciprofloxacin 750 mg po bid for 5 days.
For prophylaxis, mouse harborages must be destroyed, and the vector controlled by residual insecticides.
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
(Spotted Fever; Tick Fever; Tick Typhus)
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is caused by
Rickettsia rickettsii
and transmitted by
ixodid ticks. Symptoms are high fever, severe headache, and rash.
Epidemiology
RMSF is limited to the Western Hemisphere. Initially recognized in the Rocky Mountain states, it occurs in
practically all of the US, especially the Atlantic states, and throughout Central and South America. In
humans, infection occurs mainly from March to September, when adult ticks are active and people are
most likely to be in tick-infested areas. In southern states, sporadic cases occur throughout the year. The
incidence is highest in children < 15 yr and in people who frequent tick-infested areas for work or
recreation.
Hard-shelled ticks (family Ixodidae) harbor
R. rickettsii
, and infected females transmit the agent to their
progeny. These ticks are the natural reservoirs.
Dermacentor andersoni
(wood tick) is the principal vector
in the western US.
D. variabilis
(dog tick) is the vector in the eastern and southern US. RMSF is probably
not transmitted directly from person to person.
Pathophysiology
Small blood vessels are the sites of the characteristic pathologic lesions. Rickettsiae propagate within
damaged endothelial cells, and vessels may become blocked by thrombi, producing vasculitis in the skin,
subcutaneous tissues, CNS, lungs, heart, kidneys, liver, and spleen. Disseminated intravascular
coagulation often occurs in severely ill patients (.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period averages 7 days but varies from 3 to 12 days; the shorter the incubation period,
the more severe the infection. Onset is abrupt, with severe headache, chills, prostration, and muscular
pains. Fever reaches 39.5 to 40° C within several days and remains high (for 15 to 20 days in severe
cases), although morning remissions may occur. Between the 1st and 6th day of fever, most patients
develop a rash on the wrists, ankles, palms, soles, and forearms that rapidly extends to the neck, face,
axillae, buttocks, and trunk. Initially macular and pink, it becomes maculopapular and darker. In about 4
days, the lesions become petechial and may coalesce to form large hemorrhagic areas that later ulcerate.
Neurologic symptoms include headache, restlessness, insomnia, delirium, and coma, all indicative of
encephalitis. Hypotension develops in severe cases. Hepatomegaly may be present, but jaundice is
infrequent. Nausea and vomiting are common. Localized pneumonitis may occur. Untreated patients may
develop pneumonia, tissue necrosis, and circulatory failure, sometimes with brain and heart damage.
Cardiac arrest with sudden death occasionally occurs in fulminant cases.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1437===
• Specifics of diagnosis 
Clinicians should suspect RMSF in any seriously ill patient who lives in or near a wooded area anywhere
in the Western Hemisphere and has unexplained fever, headache, and prostration, with or without a
history of tick contact. A history of tick bite is elicited in about 70% of patients.
Treatment
• Doxycycline
Starting antibiotics early significantly reduces mortality, from about 20 to 5%, and prevents most
complications. If patients who have been in an endemic area have a tick bite but no clinical signs,
antibiotics should not be given immediately.
If fever, headache, and malaise occur with or without a rash, antibiotics should be started promptly.
Primary treatment is doxycycline 200 mg po once followed by 100 mg bid until the patient improves, has
been afebrile for 24 to 48 h, and has received treatment for at least 7 days. Chloramphenicol 500 mg po
or IV qid for 7 days is 2nd-line treatment.
No effective vaccine is available. Measures can be taken to prevent tick bites (see
Sidebar 139-1
).
Scrub Typhus
(Tsutsugamushi Disease; Mite-Borne Typhus; Tropical Typhus)
Scrub typhus is a mite-borne disease caused by
Rickettsia tsutsugamushi
. Symptoms are fever,
a primary lesion, a macular rash, and lymphadenopathy.
R. tsutsugamushi
is transmitted by trombiculid mites, which feed on forest and rural rodents, including
rats, voles, and field mice. Human infection follows a chigger (mite larva) bite.
Symptoms
After an incubation period of 6 to 21 days (mean 10 to 12 days), fever, chills, headache, and generalized
lymphadenopathy start suddenly. At onset of fever, an eschar often develops at the site of the chigger
bite. The typical lesion, common in whites but rare in Asians, begins as a red, indurated lesion about 1 cm
in diameter; it eventually vesiculates, ruptures, and becomes covered with a black scab. Regional lymph
nodes enlarge. Fever rises during the 1st wk, often to 40 to 40.5° C. Headache is severe and common, as
is conjunctival injection. A macular rash develops on the trunk during the 5th to 8th day of fever, often
extending to the arms and legs. It may disappear rapidly or become maculopapular and intensely colored.
Cough is present during the 1st wk of fever, and pneumonitis may develop during the 2nd wk.
In severe cases, pulse rate increases; BP drops; and delirium, stupor, and muscular twitching develop.
Splenomegaly may be present, and interstitial myocarditis is more common than in other rickettsial
diseases. In untreated patients, high fever may persist ≥ 2 wk, then falls gradually over several days. With
therapy, defervescence usually begins within 36 h. Recovery is prompt and uneventful.
Diagnosis
For details of diagnosis, see p.
.
Treatment
• Doxycycline
Primary treatment is doxycycline 200 mg po once followed by 100 mg bid until the patient improves, has
been afebrile for 24 to 48 h, and has received treatment for at least 7 days. Chloramphenicol 500 mg po
===PAGE:1438===
or IV qid for 7 days is 2nd-line treatment.
Clearing brush and spraying infested areas with residual insecticides eliminate or decrease mite
populations. Insect repellents (eg, diethyltoluamide [DEET]) should be used when exposure is likely.
Ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichiosis is caused by rickettsial-like bacteria of the genus
Ehrlichia
transmitted to humans
by ticks. Symptoms resemble those of Rocky Mountain spotted fever except that a rash is
much less common. Onset of illness, with fever, chills, headache, and malaise, is abrupt.
Most cases have been identified in the southeastern and south central US. Three species of
Ehrlichia
are human pathogens in the US:
E. chaffeensis
causes human monocytic ehrlichiosis;
Anaplasma
phagocytophila
(formerly
E. phagocytophila
) and
E. ewingii
cause human granulocytic ehrlichiosis. The
difference in the primary target cell results in only minor differences in clinical manifestations.
These obligate, intracellular bacteria appear as small cytoplasmic inclusions in lymphocytes and
neutrophils. Infections are transmitted to humans via tick bites, sometimes via contact with animals that
carry the brown dog tick or deer tick.
Symptoms and Signs
Although some infections are asymptomatic, most cause an abrupt onset of illness with fever, chills,
headache, and malaise, usually beginning about 12 days after the tick bite. Some patients develop a
maculopapular or petechial rash involving the trunk and extremities, although rash is rare with
E. ewingii
.
Abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhea, disseminated intravascular coagulation, seizures, and coma may
occur.
Diagnosis
• PCR testing of a blood sample
Diagnostic serologic tests are available, but PCR of blood is more sensitive and specific and can result in
an early diagnosis. Cytoplasmic ehrlichial inclusions in monocytes or neutrophils may be detected. Blood
and liver functions tests may detect hematologic and hepatic abnormalities, such as leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia, and elevated aminotransferase levels.
Treatment
• Doxycycline
Treatment is best started before laboratory results return. When treatment is started early, patients
generally respond rapidly and well. A delay in treatment may lead to serious complications, including viral
and fungal super-infections and death in 2 to 5%.
Primary treatment is doxycycline 200 mg po once followed by 100 mg bid until the patient improves, has
been afebrile for 24 to 48 h, and has received treatment for at least 7 days. Chloramphenicol 500 mg po
or IV qid for 7 days is 2nd-line treatment.
Measures can be taken to prevent tick bites (see
Sidebar 139-1
).
Q Fever
Q fever is an acute or chronic disease caused by the rickettsial-like bacillus
Coxiella burnetii
.
Acute disease causes sudden onset of fever, headache, malaise, and interstitial pneumonitis.
Chronic disease manifestations reflect the organ system affected. Diagnosis is confirmed by
several serologic techniques, isolation of the organism, or PCR. Treatment is with doxycycline
or chloramphenicol.
===PAGE:1439===
Coxiella burnetii
is a small, intracellular, pleomorphic bacillus that is no longer classified as
Rickettsia
.
Molecular studies have reclassified it as Proteobacteria in the same group as
Legionella
sp.
Q fever can be acute or chronic. Acute disease causes a febrile illness that often affects the respiratory
system, although sometimes the liver is involved. Chronic Q fever usually manifests as endocarditis or
hepatitis; osteomyelitis may occur.
Worldwide in its distribution, Q fever is maintained as an inapparent infection in domestic or farm animals.
Sheep, cattle, and goats are the principal reservoirs for human infection.
C. burnetii
persists in stool,
urine, milk, and tissues (especially the placenta), so that fomites and infective aerosols form easily.
C.
burnetii
is also maintained in nature through an animal-tick cycle.
Etiology
Cases occur among workers whose occupations bring them in close contact with farm animals or their
products. Transmission is usually by inhalation of infected aerosols, but the disease can also be
contracted by ingesting infective raw milk.
C. burnetii
is very virulent, resists inactivation, and remains
viable in dust and stool for months; even a single organism can cause infection. Very rarely, the disease is
transmitted from person to person.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period averages 18 to 21 days (range 9 to 28 days). Some infections are minimally
symptomatic; however, most patients have influenza-like symptoms. Onset is abrupt, with fever, severe
headache, chills, severe malaise, myalgia, anorexia, and sweats. Fever may rise to 40° C and persist 1 to
> 3 wk. Respiratory symptoms (a dry nonproductive cough, pleuritic chest pain) appear 4 to 5 days after
onset of illness. These symptoms may be particularly severe in elderly or debilitated patients. During
examination, lung crackles are commonly noted, and findings suggesting consolidation may be present.
Unlike rickettsial diseases, acute Q fever does not cause a rash.
Acute hepatic involvement, occurring in some patients, resembles viral hepatitis, with fever, malaise,
hepatomegaly with right upper abdominal pain, and possibly jaundice. Headache and respiratory signs
are frequently absent. Chronic Q fever hepatitis may manifest as FUO. Liver biopsy may show
granulomas, which should be differentiated from other causes of liver granulomas (eg, TB, sarcoidosis,
histoplasmosis, brucellosis, tularemia, syphilis).
Endocarditis resembles viridans group subacute bacterial endocarditis (; the aortic valve is most commonly affected, but vegetations may occur on any valve. Marked finger
clubbing, arterial emboli, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and a purpuric rash may occur.
The mortality rate is only 1% of untreated patients but is higher in those with endocarditis. Some patients
with neurologic involvement have residual impairment.
Diagnosis
• Immunofluorescence assay of infected tissue
Symptoms do not readily suggest the diagnosis. Early on, Q fever resembles many infections (eg,
influenza, other viral infections, salmonellosis, malaria, hepatitis, brucellosis). Later, it resembles many
forms of bacterial, viral, and mycoplasmal pneumonias. Contact with animals or animal products is an
important clue.
Immunofluorescence assay (IFA) of infected tissue is the diagnostic method of choice; alternatively,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) may be done. Acute and convalescent serum specimens
(typically complement fixation) may be used. PCR can identify the organism in biopsy specimens.
C.
burnetii
may be isolated from clinical specimens, but only by special research laboratories; routine blood
and sputum cultures are negative.
===PAGE:1440===
Patients with respiratory symptoms or signs require chest x-ray; findings may include atelectasis, pleuralbased opacities, pleural effusion, and lobar consolidation. The gross appearance of the lungs may
resemble bacterial pneumonia but, histologically, more closely resembles psittacosis and some viral
pneumonias.
In acute Q fever, CBC may be normal, but about 30% of patients have an elevated WBC count. Alkaline
phosphatase, AST, and ALT levels are mildly elevated to 2 to 3 times the normal level in typical cases. If
obtained, liver biopsy specimens often show diffuse granulomatous changes.
Treatment
• Doxycycline
Primary treatment is doxycycline 200 mg po once followed by 100 mg po bid until the patient improves,
has been afebrile for about 5 days, and has received treatment for at least 7 days. Chloramphenicol 500
mg po or IV qid for 7 days is 2nd-line treatment. Fluoroquinolones and macrolides are also effective.
For endocarditis, treatment needs to be prolonged (months to years to lifelong). Clinical signs, ESR,
blood count, and antibody titers should be monitored to determine when to stop treatment. A tetracycline
plus rifampin or ciprofloxacin is usually preferred. Some experts use hydroxychloroquine as an additional
drug. When antibiotic treatment is only partially effective, damaged valves must be replaced surgically,
although some cures have occurred without surgery. Clear-cut regimens for chronic hepatitis have not
been determined.
Prevention
Vaccines are effective and should be used to protect slaughterhouse and dairy workers, rendering-plant
workers, herders, woolsorters, farmers, and other people at risk. These vaccines are not available
commercially but may be obtained from special laboratories (eg, the US Army Medical Research Institute
of Infectious Diseases in Fort Detrick, Maryland).
===PAGE:1441===
Chapter 140. Anaerobic Bacteria
Introduction
Bacteria can be classified by their need and tolerance for O
:
• Facultative bacteria, which grow in the presence or absence of O
• Microaerophilic bacteria, which tolerate low O
concentrations but grow better anaerobically or with >
10% CO
• Obligate anaerobic bacteria, which are intolerant of O
Obligate anaerobes replicate at sites with low oxidation-reduction potential (eg, necrotic, devascularized
tissue). Obligate anaerobes have been categorized based on their O
tolerance: strict anaerobes grow in
≤ 0.4% O
; moderate anaerobes grow in 0.8 to 2.5% O
; and aerotolerant anaerobes grow in ≥ 2.5% O
.
The obligate anaerobes that commonly cause infection can tolerate atmospheric O
for at least 8 h and
frequently for up to 72 h.
Obligate anaerobes are major components of the normal microflora on mucous membranes, especially of
the mouth, lower GI tract, and vagina; these anaerobes cause disease when normal mucosal barriers
break down.
Gram-negative anaerobes
and some of the infections they cause include
•
Bacteroides
(most common): Intra-abdominal infections
•
Fusobacterium:
Abscesses, wound infections, and pulmonary and intracranial infections
•
Porphyromonas:
Aspiration pneumonia and periodontitis
•
Prevotella:
Intra-abdominal and soft-tissue infections
Gram-positive anaerobes
and some of the infections they cause include
•
Actinomyces:
Head, neck, abdominal, and pelvic infections and aspiration pneumonia
•
Clostridium:
Gas gangrene due to
C. perfringens
, food poisoning due to
C. perfringens type A
, botulism
due to
C. botulinum
, tetanus due to
C. tetani
, and
C. difficile
-induced diarrhea (pseudomembranous
colitis)
•
Peptostreptococcus:
Oral, respiratory, and intra-abdominal infections
•
Propionibacterium:
Foreign body infections (eg, in a cerebrospinal fluid shunt, prosthetic joint, or
cardiac device)
Anaerobic infections are typically suppurative, causing abscess formation and tissue necrosis (often the
result of thrombophlebitis, gas formation, or both). Many anaerobes produce tissue-destructive enzymes
as well as some of the most potent paralytic toxins known.
Clues to anaerobic infection include
• Polymicrobial results on Gram stain or culture
• Gas in pus or infected tissues
===PAGE:1442===
• Foul odor of pus or infected tissues
• Necrotic infected tissues
• Site of infection near mucosa where anaerobic microflora normally reside
Testing:
Specimens for anaerobic culture should be obtained by aspiration or biopsy from normally sterile
sites. Delivery to the laboratory should be prompt, and transport devices should provide an O
-free
atmosphere of carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and nitrogen. Swabs are best transported in an anaerobically
sterilized, semisolid medium such as Cary-Blair transport medium.
Clostridia
Clostridia are spore-forming, gram-positive bacilli present widely in dust, soil, and vegetation
and as normal flora in mammalian GI tracts.
Nearly 100
Clostridium
sp have been identified, but only 25 to 30 commonly cause human or animal
disease.
Pathophysiology
The pathogenic species produce tissue-destructive and neural exotoxins that are responsible for disease
manifestations. Clostridia may become pathogenic when tissue O
tension and pH are low. Such an
anaerobic environment may develop in ischemic or devitalized tissue, as occurs in primary arterial
insufficiency or after severe penetrating or crushing injuries. The deeper and more severe the wound, the
more prone the patient is to clostridial infection, especially if there is even minimal contamination by
foreign matter. Clostridial disease can also occur after injection of street drugs. Serious noninfectious
disease can occur after ingestion of home-canned foods in which clostridia have produced toxins.
Diseases Caused by Clostridia
Diseases caused by clostridia include
• Botulism (due to
C. botulinum
)
•
C. difficile
-induced colitis
•
Gastroenteritis
• Soft-tissue infections
• Tetanus (due to
C. tetani
)
• Enteritis necroticans (due to
C. perfringens type C
)
• Neutropenic enterocolitis (due to
C. septicum
)
The most frequent clostridial infection is minor, self-limited gastroenteritis, typically due to
C. perfringens
type A
. Serious clostridial diseases are relatively rare but can be fatal. Abdominal disorders, such as
cholecystitis, peritonitis, ruptured appendix, and bowel perforation can involve
C. perfringens, C.
ramosum
, and many others. Muscle necrosis and soft-tissue infection, which is characterized by crepitant
cellulitis, myositis, and clostridial myonecrosis, can be caused by
C. perfringens
. Tissue necrosis can be
caused by
C. septicum
. Clostridia also appear as components of mixed flora in common mild wound
infections; their role in such infections is unclear.
Hospital-acquired clostridial infection is increasing, particularly in postoperative and immunocompromised
patients. Severe clostridial sepsis may complicate intestinal perforation and obstruction.
===PAGE:1443===
Actinomycosis
Actinomycosis is a chronic localized or hematogenous infection caused by
Actinomyces israelii
.
Symptoms are a local abscess with multiple draining sinuses, a TB-like pneumonitis, and lowgrade septicemia. Diagnosis is by the typical appearance plus laboratory identification.
Treatment is with a long course of antibiotics and surgery.
The causative organisms,
Actinomyces
sp (most commonly
A. israelii
), are often present commensally on
the gums, tonsils, and teeth. However, many, if not most, infections are polymicrobial, with other bacteria
(oral anaerobes, staphylococci, streptococci,
Aggregatibacter
[previously
Actinobacillus]
actinomycetemcomitans
, Enterobacteriaceae) frequently cultured from lesions.
Actinomycosis most often occurs in adult males and takes several forms:
• Cervicofacial (lumpy jaw): The most common portal of entry is decayed teeth.
• Thoracic: Pulmonary disease results from aspiration of oral secretions.
• Abdominal: Disease presumably results from a break in the mucosa of a diverticulum or the appendix or
from trauma.
• Uterine: This localized pelvic form is a complication of certain types of intrauterine device (IUD).
• Generalized: Rarely, the infection spreads from primary sites, presumably by hematogenous seeding.
Symptoms and Signs
The characteristic lesion is an indurated area of multiple, small, communicating abscesses surrounded by
granulation tissue. Lesions tend to form sinus tracts that communicate to the skin and drain a purulent
discharge containing "sulfur" granules (rounded or spherical, usually yellowish, and ≤ 1 mm in diameter).
Infection spreads to contiguous tissues, but only rarely hematogenously.
The
cervicofacial form
usually begins as a small, flat, hard swelling, with or without pain, under the oral
mucosa or the skin of the neck or as a subperiosteal swelling of the jaw. Subsequently, areas of softening
appear and develop into sinuses and fistulas that discharge the characteristic sulfur granules. The cheek,
tongue, pharynx, salivary glands, cranial bones, meninges, or brain may be affected, usually by direct
extension.
In the
abdominal form
, the intestines (usually the cecum and appendix) and the peritoneum are infected.
Pain, fever, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation, and emaciation are characteristic. One or more abdominal
masses develop and cause signs of partial intestinal obstruction. Draining sinuses and intestinal fistulas
may develop and extend to the external abdominal wall.
In the
localized pelvic form
, patients who use an IUD have vaginal discharge and pelvic or lower
abdominal pain.
In the
thoracic form
, lung involvement resembles TB. Extensive invasion may occur before chest pain,
fever, and productive cough appear. Perforation of the chest wall, with chronic draining sinuses, may
result.
In the
generalized form
, infection spreads hematogenously to multiple areas, including the skin,
vertebral bodies, brain, liver, kidneys, ureters, and, in women, pelvic organs. Diverse symptoms (eg, back
pain, headache, abdominal pain) related to these sites may occur.
Diagnosis
• Microscopy
===PAGE:1444===
• Culture
Diagnosis is suspected clinically and by x-ray. It is confirmed by identification of
A. israelii
in sputum, pus,
or a biopsy specimen by microscopy and by culture.
In pus or tissue, the microorganism appears as the distinctive sulfur granules or as tangled masses of
branched and unbranched wavy bacterial filaments, pus cells, and debris, surrounded by an outer zone of
radiating, club-shaped, hyaline, and refractive filaments that take hematoxylin-eosin stain in tissue but are
positive on Gram stain.
Lesions in any location may simulate malignant growths. Lung lesions must be distinguished from those
of TB and cancer. Most abdominal lesions occur in the ileocecal region and are difficult to diagnose,
except during laparotomy or when draining sinuses appear in the abdominal wall. Aspiration liver biopsy
should be avoided because it can cause a persistent sinus.
Prognosis
The disease is slowly progressive. Prognosis relates directly to early diagnosis and is most favorable in
the cervicofacial form and progressively worse in the thoracic, abdominal, and generalized forms,
especially if the CNS is involved.
Treatment
• High-dose penicillin
Most patients respond to antibiotics, although response is usually slow because of extensive tissue
induration and the relatively avascular nature of the lesions. Therefore, treatment must be continued for
at least 8 wk and occasionally for ≥ 1 yr, until symptoms and signs have resolved.
High doses of penicillin G (eg, 3 to 5 million units IV q 6 h) are usually effective. Penicillin V 1 g po qid
may be substituted after about 2 to 6 wk. Tetracycline 500 mg po q 6 h may be given instead of penicillin.
Minocycline, clindamycin, and erythromycin have also been successful. Antibiotic regimens may be
broadened to cover other pathogens cultured from lesions.
Anecdotal reports suggest that hyperbaric O
therapy is helpful.
Extensive and repeated surgical procedures may be required. Sometimes small abscesses can be
aspirated; large ones are drained, and fistulas are excised surgically.
Botulism
Botulism is neuromuscular poisoning due to
Clostridium botulinum
toxin. Botulism may occur
without infection if toxin is ingested. Symptoms are symmetric cranial nerve palsies
accompanied by a symmetric descending weakness and flaccid paralysis without sensory
deficits. Diagnosis is clinical and by laboratory identification of toxin. Treatment is with support
and antitoxin.
C. botulinum
elaborates 7 types of antigenically distinct neurotoxins, which interfere with release of
acetylcholine at peripheral nerve endings. Four of the toxins (types A, B, E, and rarely F) affect humans.
Types A and B are highly poisonous proteins resistant to digestion by GI enzymes. About 50% of foodborne outbreaks in the US are caused by type A toxin, followed by types B and E. Type A toxin occurs
predominantly west of the Mississippi River, type B in the eastern states, and type E in Alaska and the
Great Lakes area (type E is frequently associated with ingestion of fish products). Type A toxin is used
therapeutically to relieve excess muscle activity; botulinum toxin has also been developed as a
bioweapon.
Botulism occurs in 3 forms:
===PAGE:1445===
• Food-borne
• Wound
• Infant
In food-borne botulism, neurotoxin produced in contaminated food is eaten. Neurotoxin is elaborated in
vivo by
C. botulinum
in infected tissue in wound botulism and in the large intestine in infant botulism (see
p.
).
C. botulinum
spores are highly heat-resistant and may survive boiling for several hours at 100° C.
However, exposure to moist heat at 120° C for 30 min kills the spores. Toxins, on the other hand, are
readily destroyed by heat, and cooking food at 80° C for 30 min safeguards against botulism. Toxin
production (especially type E) can occur at temperatures as low as 3° C (ie, inside a refrigerator) and
does not require strict anaerobic conditions.
Sources of infection:
Home-canned foods, particularly low-acid foods, are the most common sources,
but commercially prepared foods have been implicated in about 10% of outbreaks. Vegetables, fish, fruits,
and condiments are the most common vehicles, but beef, milk products, pork, poultry, and other foods
have been involved. Of outbreaks caused by seafood, type E causes about 50%; types A and B cause
the rest. In recent years, foods that are not canned (eg, foil-wrapped baked potatoes, chopped garlic in
oil, patty melt sandwiches) have caused restaurant-associated outbreaks.
C. botulinum
spores are common in the environment, and many cases may be caused by ingestion or
inhalation of dust or by absorption through the eyes or a break in the skin.
Injecting drugs with unsterilized needles can cause wound botulism. Injecting contaminated heroin into a
muscle or under the skin (skin popping) is riskiest.
Symptoms and Signs
Food-borne botulism:
Symptoms begin abruptly, usually 18 to 36 h after toxin ingestion, although the
incubation period may vary from 4 h to 8 days. Nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea
frequently precede neurologic symptoms. Neurologic symptoms are characteristically bilateral and
symmetric, beginning with the cranial nerves and followed by descending weakness or paralysis. There
are no sensory disturbances, and the sensorium usually remains clear.
Common initial symptoms and signs include dry mouth, blurred or double vision, drooping eyelids, slurred
speech, and difficulty swallowing. Pupillary light reflex is diminished or totally lost. Dysphagia can lead to
aspiration pneumonia. Muscles of respiration and of the extremities and trunk progressively weaken in a
descending pattern. Fever is absent, and the pulse remains normal or slow unless intercurrent infection
develops. Constipation is common after neurologic impairment appears. Major complications include
respiratory failure caused by diaphragmatic paralysis and pulmonary infections.
Wound botulism:
Neurologic symptoms appear, as in food-borne botulism, but there are no GI
symptoms or evidence implicating food as a cause. A history of a traumatic injury or a deep puncture
wound in the preceding 2 wk may suggest the diagnosis. A thorough search should be made for breaks in
the skin and for skin abscesses caused by self-injection of illegal drugs.
Diagnosis
• Toxin assays
• Sometimes electromyography
Botulism may be confused with Guillain-Barre syndrome, poliomyelitis, stroke, myasthenia gravis, tick
paralysis, and poisoning caused by curare or belladonna alkaloids. Electromyography shows
===PAGE:1446===
characteristic augmented response to rapid repetitive stimulation in most cases.
In
food-borne botulism
, the pattern of neuromuscular disturbances and ingestion of a likely food source
are important diagnostic clues. The simultaneous presentation of at least 2 patients who ate the same
food simplifies diagnosis, which is confirmed by demonstrating
C. botulinum
toxin in serum or stool or by
isolating the organism from stool. Finding
C. botulinum
toxin in suspect food identifies the source.
In
wound botulism
, finding toxin in serum or isolating
C. botulinum
organisms on anaerobic culture of
the wound confirms the diagnosis.
Toxin assays are done only by certain laboratories, which may be located through local health authorities
or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Equine trivalent antitoxin
Anyone known or thought to have been exposed to contaminated food must be carefully observed.
Administration of activated charcoal may be helpful. Patients with significant symptoms often have
impaired airway reflexes, so if charcoal is used, it should be given via gastric tube, and the airway should
be protected by a cuffed endotracheal tube.
The greatest threat to life is respiratory impairment and its complications. Patients should be hospitalized
and closely monitored with serial measurements of vital capacity. Progressive paralysis prevents patients
from showing signs of respiratory distress as their vital capacity decreases. Respiratory impairment
requires management in an ICU, where intubation and mechanical ventilation are readily available.
Improvements in such supportive care have reduced the mortality rate to < 10%.
Nasogastric intubation is the preferred method of alimentation because it simplifies management of
calories and fluids, stimulates intestinal peristalsis (which eliminates
C. botulinum
from the gut), allows
the use of breast milk in infants, and avoids the potential infectious and vascular complications inherent in
IV alimentation.
Patients with wound botulism require wound debridement and parenteral antibiotics such as penicillin or
metronidazole.
Antitoxin:
Trivalent equine antitoxin (A, B, E) is available from the CDC through state health
departments. Antitoxin does not inactivate toxin that is already bound at the neuromuscular junction;
therefore, preexisting neurologic impairment cannot be reversed rapidly. (Ultimate recovery depends on
regeneration of nerve endings, which may take weeks or months.) However, antitoxin may slow or halt
further progression. In patients with wound botulism, antitoxin can reduce complications and mortality
rate. Antitoxin should be given as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis and not delayed to await
culture results. Antitoxin
is less likely to be of benefit if given > 72 h after symptom onset.
In the US, botulism equine trivalent antitoxin is given as a single 10-mL dose containing 7500 IU of
antitoxin A, 5500 IU of antitoxin B, and 8500 IU of antitoxin E. All patients who require the antitoxin must
be reported to state health authorities or the CDC. Antitoxin is available only through the CDC, the
telephone number is 404-639-2206 weekdays and 404-639-2888 for all other times. Because antitoxin is
derived from horse serum, there is a risk of anaphylaxis or serum sickness. (For precautions, see Drug
Hypersensitivity on p.
; for treatment, see Anaphylaxis )
Prevention
Because even minute amounts of
C. botulinum
toxin can cause serious illness, all materials suspected of
containing toxin require special handling. Toxoids are available for active immunization of people working
===PAGE:1447===
with
C. botulinum
or its toxins. Details regarding specimen collection and handling can be obtained from
state health departments or the CDC.
Correct canning and adequate heating of home-canned food before serving are essential. Canned foods
showing evidence of spoilage and swollen or leaking cans should be discarded.
Infant Botulism
Infant botulism results from ingestion of
C. botulinum
spores, their colonization of the large
intestine, and toxin production in vivo.
Infant botulism occurs most often in infants < 6 mo. The youngest reported patient was 2 wk, and the
oldest was 12 mo. Unlike food-borne botulism, infant botulism is not caused by ingestion of a preformed
toxin. Most cases are idiopathic, although some have been traced to ingestion of honey, which may
contain
C. botulinum
spores; thus, infants < 12 mo should not be fed honey.
Symptoms and Signs
Constipation is present initially in 90% of cases and is followed by neuromuscular paralysis, beginning
with the cranial nerves and proceeding to peripheral and respiratory musculature. Cranial nerve deficits
typically include ptosis, extraocular muscle palsies, weak cry, poor suck, decreased gag reflex, pooling of
oral secretions, poor muscle tone (floppy baby syndrome), and an expressionless face. Severity varies
from mild lethargy and slowed feeding to severe hypotonia and respiratory insufficiency.
Diagnosis
Infant botulism may be confused with sepsis, congenital muscular dystrophy, spinal muscular atrophy,
hypothyroidism, and benign congenital hypotonia. Finding
C. botulinum
toxin or organisms in the stool
establishes the diagnosis.
Treatment
• Human botulism antitoxin
Infants are hospitalized, and supportive care (eg, ventilatory support) is given as needed.
Specific treatment is with human botulism immune globulin. Treatment is started as soon as the diagnosis
is suspected; waiting for confirmatory test results is dangerous. The dose is 50 mg/kg IV once, given
slowly. The horse serum antitoxin used in adults is not recommended for infants.
Antibiotics are not given because they may lyse
C. botulinum
in the gut and increase toxin availability.
Clostridium Difficile
-Induced Diarrhea
(Pseudomembranous Colitis)
Toxins produced by
Clostridium difficile
strains in the GI tract cause pseudomembranous colitis,
typically after antibiotic use. Symptoms are diarrhea, sometimes bloody, rarely progressing to
sepsis and acute abdomen. Diagnosis is by identifying
C. difficile
toxin in stool. Treatment is
with oral metronidazole or vancomycin.
C. difficile
is the most common cause of antibiotic-associated colitis and is typically hospital-acquired.
C.
difficile
-induced diarrhea occurs in up to 8% of hospitalized patients and is responsible for 20 to 30% of
cases of hospital-acquired diarrhea. Extremes of age, severe underlying disease, prolonged hospital stay,
and living in a nursing home are risk factors.
C. difficile
is carried asymptomatically by 15 to 70% of neonates, 3 to 8% of healthy adults, and perhaps
20% of hospitalized adults (more in long-term care facilities) and is common in the environment (eg, soil,
===PAGE:1448===
water, household pets). Disease may result from overgrowth of intrinsic organisms or infection from an
external source. Health care workers are frequently the source of transmission.
Recently, a more virulent strain, BI/NAP1/027, has become prominent in hospital out-breaks.
This strain
produces substantially more toxin, causes more severe illness with greater chance of relapse, is more
transmissible, and responds less well to antibiotic treatment.
Pathophysiology
Antibiotic-induced changes in GI flora are the dominant predisposing factor. Although most antibiotics
have been implicated, cephalosporins (particularly 3rd-generation), penicillins (particularly ampicillin and
amoxicillin), clindamycin, and fluoroquinolones pose the highest risk.
C. difficile
-induced colitis may also
follow use of certain antineoplastic drugs.
The organism secretes both a cytotoxin and an enterotoxin. The main effect is on the colon, which
secretes fluid and develops characteristic pseudomembranes—discrete yellow-white plaques that are
easily dislodged. Plaques may coalesce in severe cases. Toxic megacolon, which rarely develops, is
somewhat more likely after use of antimotility drugs. Limited tissue dissemination occurs very rarely, as do
sepsis and acute abdomen. Reactive arthritis has occurred after
C. difficile
-induced diarrhea.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms typically begin 5 to 10 days after starting antibiotics but may occur on the first day or up to 2
mo later. Diarrhea may be mild and semiformed or frequent and watery. Cramping or pain is common, but
nausea and vomiting are rare. The abdomen may be slightly tender.
Patients with significant colitis or toxic megacolon have more pain and appear very ill, with tachycardia
and abdominal distention and tenderness. Peritoneal signs are present in those with perforation.
Diagnosis
• Stool assay for toxin
• Sometimes sigmoidoscopy
Diagnosis should be suspected in any patient who develops diarrhea within 2 mo of antibiotic use or 72 h
of hospital admission. Diagnosis is confirmed by stool (sample, not swab) assay for
C. difficile
toxin. A
new real-time PCR test for the toxin gene
tcdB
may be superior to current assays. A single sample is
usually adequate, but repeat samples should be submitted when suspicion is high and the first sample is
negative. Fecal leukocytes are often present but not specific.
Sigmoidoscopy, which can confirm the presence of pseudomembranes, should be done if patients have
ileus or if toxin assays are non-diagnostic. Abdominal x-rays, CT, or both are usually done if fulminant
colitis, perforation, or megacolon is suspected.
Treatment
• Oral metronidazole or vancomycin
Metronidazole 250 mg po q 6 h or 500 mg po q 8 h for 10 days is the therapy of choice. If patients do not
respond within 48 h, vancomycin 125 to 500 mg po q 6 h for 10 days may be given. Some patients require
bacitracin 500 mg po q 6 h for 10 days, cholestyramine resin, or
Saccharomyces boulardii
yeast.
Relapses occur in 15 to 20% of patients. Nitazoxanide 500 mg po q 12 h appears to be comparable to
oral vancomycin 125 mg but is not commonly used in the US. A few patients require total colectomy for
cure.
Infection control measures are vital to reduce the spread of
C. difficile
among patients and health care
workers.
===PAGE:1449===
Clostridial Intra-Abdominal Infections
Clostridia, primarily
Clostridium perfringens
, are common in mixed intra-abdominal infections
due to a ruptured viscus or pelvic inflammatory disease.
Clostridium
sp are common residents of the GI tract and are present in many abdominal infections,
generally mixed with other enteric organisms. Clostridia are often the primary agents in emphysematous
cholecystitis, gas gangrene of the uterus (previously common with septic abortion), certain other female
genital tract infections (tubo-ovarian, pelvic, and uterine abscesses), and infection after perforation in
colon carcinoma.
The primary organisms are
C. perfringens
and, in the case of colon carcinoma,
C. septicum
. The
organism produces exotoxins (lecithinases, hemolysins, collagenases, proteases, lipases) that can cause
suppuration. Gas formation is common. Clostridial septicemia may cause hemolytic anemia because
lecithinase disrupts RBC membranes. With severe hemolysis and coexisting toxicity, acute renal failure
can occur.
Symptoms are similar to those of other abdominal infections (eg, pain, fever, abdominal tenderness, a
toxic appearance). In uterine infection, gas sometimes escapes through the cervix. Rarely, acute tubular
necrosis develops.
Diagnosis
• Gram stain and culture
Early diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion. Early and repeated Gram stains and cultures of the
site, pus, lochia, and blood are indicated. Because
C. perfringens
can occasionally be isolated from
healthy vagina and lochia, cultures are not specific. X-rays may show local gas production (eg, in the
biliary tree, gallbladder wall, or uterus).
Treatment
• Surgical debridement
• High-dose penicillin
Treatment is surgical debridement and penicillin G 5 million units IV q 6 h for at least 1 wk. Organ removal
(eg, hysterectomy) may be necessary and can be lifesaving if debridement is insufficient. If acute tubular
necrosis develops, dialysis is needed. The usefulness of hyperbaric O
has not been established.
Clostridial Necrotizing Enteritis
(Enteritis Necroticans; Pigbel)
Clostridial necrotizing enteritis is necrotizing inflammation of the jejunum and ileum caused by
Clostridium perfringens
.
C. perfringens
occasionally causes severe inflammatory disease in the small bowel (primarily, the
jejunum). Inflammation is segmental, involving small or large patches with varying degrees of hemorrhage
and necrosis. Perforation may occur.
Disease is caused by clostridial
β
-toxin, which is very sensitive to proteolytic enzymes and is inactivated
by normal cooking. Disease occurs primarily in populations with multiple risk factors, including protein
deprivation (causing inadequate synthesis of protease enzymes), poor food hygiene, episodic meat
feasting, staple diets containing trypsin inhibitors (eg, sweet potatoes), and
Ascaris
infestation (these
parasites secrete a trypsin inhibitor). These factors are typically present collectively only in the
hinterlands of New Guinea and parts of Africa, Central and South America, and Asia. In New Guinea, the
===PAGE:1450===
disease is known as pigbel and is usually spread through contaminated pork, other meats, and perhaps
peanuts.
Severity varies from mild diarrhea to a fulminant course of severe abdominal pain, vomiting, bloody stool,
and sometimes death within 24 h.
Treatment is with antibiotics (penicillin G, metronidazole). Perhaps 50% of seriously ill patients require
surgery for perforation, persistent intestinal obstruction, or failure to respond to antibiotics. An
experimental toxoid vaccine has been used successfully in endemic areas but is not available
commercially.
Neutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis):
This similar syndrome develops in the cecum of neutropenic
patients (eg, those with leukemia or receiving cancer chemotherapy). It may be associated with sepsis
due to
Clostridium septicum
. Symptoms are fever, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.
Treatment is with antibiotics, but surgery may be necessary.
Neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis:
Neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis (, which occurs in
neonatal ICUs, may be caused by
C. perfringens, C. butyricum
, or
C. difficile
, although the role of these
organisms needs further study.
Clostridium perfringens
Food Poisoning
Clostridium perfringens
food poisoning is acute gastroenteritis caused by ingestion of
contaminated food.
C. perfringens
is widely distributed in feces, soil, air, and water. Contaminated meat has caused many
outbreaks. When meat contaminated with
C. perfringens
is left at room temperature, the organism
multiplies and produces toxin. Outbreaks typically occur in commercial establishments and rarely at home.
Once inside the GI tract,
C. perfringens
produces an enterotoxin that acts on the small bowel. Only
C.
perfringens type A
has been definitively linked to this food poisoning syndrome. The enterotoxin produced
is sensitive to heat (> 75° C).
Mild gastroenteritis is most common, with onset of symptoms 6 to 24 h after ingestion of contaminated
food. The most common symptoms are watery diarrhea and abdominal cramps. Vomiting is unusual.
Symptoms typically resolve within 24 h; severe or fatal cases rarely occur.
Diagnosis is based on epidemiologic evidence and isolation of large numbers of organisms from
contaminated food or from stools of affected people or on direct identification of enterotoxin in stool
samples.
To prevent disease, people should promptly refrigerate leftover cooked meat and reheat it thoroughly
(internal temperature, 75° C) before serving.
Treatment is supportive (; antibiotics are not given.
Clostridial Soft-Tissue Infections
Clostridial soft-tissue infections include cellulitis, myositis, and clostridial myonecrosis. They
usually occur after trauma. Symptoms may include edema, pain, gas with crepitation, foulsmelling exudates, intense coloration of the site, and progression to shock and renal failure.
Diagnosis is by inspection and smell, confirmed by culture. Treatment is with penicillin and
surgical debridement. Hyperbaric O
is sometimes beneficial.
Clostridium perfringens
is the most common species involved. Infection develops hours or days after
injury, usually in an extremity after severe crushing or penetrating trauma devitalizes tissue, creating
anaerobic conditions. The presence of foreign material (even if sterile) markedly increases risk of
===PAGE:1451===
clostridial infection. Infection may also occur in operative wounds, particularly in patients with underlying
occlusive vascular disease. Rarely, spontaneous cases occur, usually involving
C. septicum
originating
from occult colon perforation in patients with colon cancer, diverticulitis, or bowel ischemia. Infection
typically results in gas collection in soft tissues.
In suitable conditions (low oxidation-reduction potential, low pH), as occur in devitalized tissue, infection
progresses rapidly, from initial injury through shock, toxic delirium, and death within as little as 1 day.
Symptoms and Signs
Clostridial cellulitis
occurs as a localized infection in a superficial wound, usually ≥ 3 days after injury.
Infection may spread extensively along fascial planes, often with evident crepitation and abundant gas
bubbling, but toxicity is much less severe than with extensive myonecrosis, and pain is minimal. Bullae are
frequently evident, with foul-smelling, serous, brown exudate. Discoloration and gross edema of the
extremity are rare. Clostridial skin infections associated with primary vascular occlusion of an extremity
rarely progress to severe toxic myonecrosis or extend beyond the line of demarcation.
Clostridial myositis
(suppurative infection of muscle without necrosis) is most common among
parenteral drug users. It resembles staphylococcal pyomyositis and lacks the systemic symptoms of
clostridial myonecrosis. Edema, pain, and frequently gas in the tissues occur. The infection spreads
rapidly and may progress to myonecrosis.
In
clostridial myonecrosis
(gas gangrene), initial severe pain is common, sometimes even before other
findings. The wound site may be pale initially, but it becomes red or bronze, often with blebs or bullae,
and finally turns blackish green. The area is tensely edematous and tender to palpation. Crepitation is
less obvious early than it is in clostridial cellulitis but is ultimately palpable in about 80%. Wounds and
drainage have a particularly foul odor.
With progression, patients appear toxic, with tachycardia, pallor, and hypotension. Shock and renal failure
occur, although patients often remain alert until the terminal stage. Unlike clostridial uterine infection,
overt hemolysis is rare in gas gangrene of the extremities, even in terminally ill patients. Whenever
massive hemolysis occurs, mortality of 70 to 100%, due to acute renal failure and septicemia, can be
expected.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Gram stain and culture
Early suspicion and intervention are essential; clostridial cellulitis responds well to treatment, but
myonecrosis has a mortality rate of ≥ 40% with treatment and 100% without treatment.
Although localized cellulitis, myositis, and spreading myonecrosis may be clinically distinct, differentiation
often requires surgical exploration. In myonecrosis, muscle tissue is visibly necrotic; the affected muscle is
a lusterless pink, then deep red, and finally gray-green or mottled purple and does not contract with
stimulation. X-rays may show local gas production, and CT and MRI delineate the extent of gas and
necrosis.
Wound exudate should be cultured for anaerobic and aerobic organisms. Because of their short
generation time, anaerobic cultures of
Clostridia
may be positive in as little as 6 h. However, other
anaerobic and aerobic bacteria, including members of the Enterobacteriaceae family and
Bacteroides,
Streptococcus
, and
Staphylococcus
spp, alone or mixed, can cause severe clostridia-like cellulitis,
extensive fasciitis, or myonecrosis (see Necrotizing Sub-cutaneous Infection . Also, many
wounds, particularly if open, are contaminated with both pathogenic and nonpathogenic clostridia that are
not responsible for the infection.
The presence of clostridia is significant when
===PAGE:1452===
• Gram stain shows them in large numbers.
• Few PMNs are found in the exudates.
• Free fat globules are demonstrated with Sudan stain.
However, if PMNs are abundant and the smear shows many chains of cocci, an anaerobic streptococcal
or staphylococcal infection should be suspected. Abundant gram-negative bacilli may indicate infection
with one of the Enterobacteriaceae or a
Bacteroides
sp (see also
Mixed Anaerobic Infections
.
Detection of clostridial toxins in the wound or blood is useful only in the rare case of wound botulism (see
p.
).
Treatment
• Drainage and debridement
• Penicillin plus clindamycin
When clinical signs of clostridial infection (eg, gas, myonecrosis) are present, rapid, aggressive
intervention is mandatory. Thorough drainage and debridement are as important as antibiotics; both
should be instituted rapidly. Penicillin G is the drug of choice; 1 to 2 million units IV q 2 to 3 h should be
given immediately for severe cellulitis and myonecrosis. Addition of clindamycin 600 mg IV q 6 h is
beneficial. If gram-negative organisms are seen or suspected, a broad-spectrum antibiotic (eg, ticarcillin
plus clavulanate, ampicillin plus sulbactam, piperacillin plus tazobactam) should be added.
Hyperbaric O
therapy may be helpful in extensive myonecrosis, particularly in the extremities, as a
supplement to antibiotics and surgery. Hyperbaric O
therapy may salvage tissue and lessen mortality
and morbidity if it is started early,
but it should not delay surgical debridement.
Tetanus
(Lockjaw)
Tetanus is acute poisoning from a neurotoxin produced by
Clostridium tetani
. Symptoms are
intermittent tonic spasms of voluntary muscles. Spasm of the masseters accounts for the name
lockjaw. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with immune globulin and intensive support.
Tetanus bacilli form durable spores that occur in soil and animal feces and remain viable for years.
Worldwide, tetanus is estimated to cause over half a million deaths annually, mostly in neonates and
young children, but the disease is so rarely reported that all figures are only rough estimates. In the US,
only 37 cases were reported in 2001. Disease incidence is directly related to the immunization level in a
population, attesting to the effectiveness of preventive efforts. In the US, well over half of elderly patients
have inadequate antibody levels and account for one third to one half of cases. Most of the rest occur in
inadequately immunized patients aged 20 to 59. Patients < 20 account for < 10%. Patients with burns,
surgical wounds, or a history of injection drug abuse are especially prone to developing tetanus.
However, tetanus may follow trivial or even inapparent wounds. Infection may also develop postpartum in
the uterus (maternal tetanus) and in a neonate's umbilicus (tetanus neonatorum).
Pathophysiology
Manifestations of tetanus are caused by an exotoxin (tetanospasmin). The toxin may enter the CNS along
the peripheral motor nerves or may be bloodborne to nervous tissue. Tetanospasmin binds irreversibly to
the ganglioside membranes of nerve synapses, blocking release of inhibitory transmitter from nerve
terminals and thereby causing a generalized tonic spasticity, usually with superimposed intermittent tonic
seizures. Disinhibition of autonomic neurons and loss of control of adrenal catecholamine release cause
autonomic instability and a hypersympathetic state. Once bound, the toxin cannot be neutralized.
===PAGE:1453===
Most often, tetanus is generalized, affecting skeletal muscles throughout the body. However, tetanus is
sometimes localized to muscles near an entry wound.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period ranges from 2 to 50 days (average, 5 to 10 days). Symptoms include
• Jaw stiffness (most frequent)
• Difficulty swallowing
• Restlessness
• Irritability
• Stiff neck, arms, or legs
• Headache
• Sore throat
• Tonic spasms
Later, patients have difficulty opening their jaw (trismus).
Spasms:
Facial muscle spasm produces a characteristic expression with a fixed smile and elevated
eyebrows (risus sardonicus). Rigidity or spasm of abdominal, neck, and back
muscles—even
opisthotonos—may occur. Sphincter spasm causes urinary retention or constipation. Dysphagia may
interfere with nutrition. Characteristic painful, generalized tonic spasms with profuse sweating are
precipitated by minor disturbances such as a draft, noise, or movement. Mental status is usually clear, but
coma may follow repeated spasms. During generalized spasms, patients are unable to speak or cry out
because of chest wall rigidity or glottal spasm. Spasms also interfere with respiration, causing cyanosis or
fatal asphyxia. The immediate cause of death may not be apparent.
Respiratory failure is the most common cause of death. Laryngeal spasm and rigidity and spasms of the
abdominal wall, diaphragm, and chest wall muscles cause asphyxiation. Hypoxemia can also induce
cardiac arrest, and pharyngeal spasm leads to aspiration of oral secretions with subsequent pneumonia,
contributing to a hypoxemic death.
Autonomic instability:
Temperature is only moderately elevated unless a complicating infection, such
as pneumonia, is present. Respiratory and pulse rates are increased. Reflexes are often exaggerated.
Protracted tetanus may manifest as a very labile and overactive sympathetic nervous system, including
periods of hypertension, tachycardia, and myocardial irritability.
Localized tetanus:
In localized tetanus, there is spasticity of muscles near the entry wound but no
trismus; spasticity may persist for weeks.
Cephalic tetanus
is a form of localized tetanus that affects the cranial nerves. It is more common among
children; in them, it may occur with chronic otitis media or may follow a head wound. Incidence is highest
in Africa and India. All cranial nerves can be involved, especially the 7th. Cephalic tetanus may become
generalized.
Tetanus neonatorum:
Tetanus in neonates is usually generalized and frequently fatal. It often begins in
an inadequately cleansed umbilical stump in children born of inadequately immunized mothers. Onset
during the first 2 wk of life is characterized by rigidity, spasms, and poor feeding. Bilateral deafness may
occur in surviving children.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1454===
• Clinical evaluation
A history of a recent wound in a patient with muscle stiffness or spasms is a clue. Tetanus can be
confused with meningoencephalitis of bacterial or viral origin, but the combination of an intact sensorium,
normal CSF, and muscle spasms suggests tetanus. Trismus must be distinguished from peritonsillar or
retropharyngeal abscess or another local cause. Phenothiazines can induce tetanus-like rigidity (eg,
dystonic reaction, neuroleptic malignant syndrome).
C. tetani
can sometimes be cultured from the wound, but culture is not sensitive.
Prognosis
Tetanus has a worldwide mortality rate of 50%, 15 to 60% in untreated adults, and 80 to 90% in neonates
even if treated. Mortality is highest at the extremes of age and in drug abusers. The prognosis is poorer if
the incubation period is short and symptoms progress rapidly or if treatment is delayed. The course tends
to be milder when there is no demonstrable focus of infection.
Treatment
• Supportive care, particularly respiratory support
• Wound debridement
• Tetanus antitoxin
• Benzodiazepines for muscle spasms
• Metronidazole or penicillin
• Sometimes drugs for autonomic dysfunction
Therapy requires maintaining adequate ventilation. Additional interventions include early and adequate
use of human immune globulin to neutralize nonfixed toxin; prevention of further toxin production;
sedation; control of muscle spasm, hypertonicity, fluid balance, and intercurrent infection; and continuous
nursing care.
General principles:
The patient should be kept in a quiet room. Three principles should guide all
therapeutic interventions: prevent further toxin release by debriding the wound and giving an antibiotic
(; neutralize toxin outside the CNS with human tetanus immune globulin and tetanus toxoid,
taking care to inject into different body sites and thus avoid neutralizing the antitoxin; and minimize the
effect of toxin already in the CNS.
Wound care:
Because dirt and dead tissue promote
C. tetani
growth, prompt, thorough debridement,
especially of deep puncture wounds, is essential. Antibiotics are not substitutes for adequate debridement
and immunization.
Antitoxin:
The benefit of human-derived antitoxin depends on how much tetanospasmin is already
bound to the synaptic membranes—only free toxin is neutralized. For adults, human tetanus immune
globulin 3000 units IM is given once; this large volume may be split and given at separate sites. Dose can
range from 1,500 to 10,000 units, depending on wound
severity, although some authorities feel that 500
units are adequate. Antitoxin of animal origin is far less preferable because it does not maintain the
patient's serum antitoxin level well and risk of serum sickness is considerable. If horse serum must be
used, the usual dose is 50,000 units IM or IV (CAUTION: See Drug Hypersensitivity . If
necessary, immune globulin or antitoxin can be injected directly into the wound, but this injection is not as
important as good wound care.
Management of muscle spasm:
Drugs are used to manage spasms.
===PAGE:1455===
Benzodiazepines
are the standard of care to control rigidity and spasms. They block reuptake of an
endogenous inhibiting neuro-transmitter,
γ
-aminobutyric acid (GABA), at the GABA
A
receptor.
Diazepam can help control seizures, counter muscle rigidity, and induce sedation. Dosage varies and
requires meticulous titration and close observation. The most severe cases may require 10 to 20 mg IV q
3 h (not exceeding 5 mg/kg). Less severe cases can be controlled with 5 to 10 mg po q 2 to 4 h. Dosage
varies by age:
• Infants > 30 days: 1 to 2 mg IV given slowly, repeated q 3 to 4 h as necessary
• Young children: 0.1 to 0.8 mg/kg/day up to 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg IV q 4 to 8 h
• Children > 5 yr: 5 to 10 mg IV q 3 to 4 h
• Adults: 5 to 10 mg po q 4 to 6 h or up to 40 mg/h IV drip
Diazepam has been used most extensively, but midazolam (adults, 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg/h IV infusion; children,
0.06 to 0.15 mg/kg/h IV infusion) is water soluble and preferred for prolonged therapy. Midazolam reduces
risk of lactic acidosis due to propylene glycol solvent, which is required for diazepam and lorazepam, and
reduces risk of long-acting metabolites accumulating and causing coma.
Benzodiazepines may not prevent reflex spasms, and effective respiration may require neuromuscular
blockade with vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg IV or other paralytic drugs and mechanical ventilation. Pancuronium
has been used but may worsen autonomic instability. Vecuronium is free of adverse cardiovascular effects
but is short-acting. Longer-acting drugs (eg, pipecuronium, rocuronium) also work, but no randomized
clinical comparative trials have been done.
Intrathecal baclofen
(a GABA
A
agonist) is effective but has no clear advantage over benzodiazepines. It
is given by continuous infusion; effective doses range between 20 and 2000
μ
g/day. A test dose of 50
μ
g
is given first; if response is inadequate, 75
μ
g may be given 24 h later, and 100
μ
g 24 h after that.
Patients who do not respond to 100
μ
g are not candidates for chronic infusion. Coma and respiratory
depression requiring ventilatory support are potential adverse effects.
Dantrolene
(loading dose 1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg IV, followed by infusion of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg q 4 to 6 h for ≤ 25
days) relieves muscle spasticity. Dantrolene given orally can be used in place of infusion therapy for up to
60 days. Hepatotoxicity and expense limit its use.
Management of autonomic dysfunction:
Morphine may be given q 4 to 6 h to control autonomic
dysfunction, especially cardiovascular; total daily dose is 20 to 180 mg.
β
-Blockade with long-acting drugs
such as propranolol is not recommended. Sudden cardiac death is a feature of tetanus, and
β
-blockade
can increase risk; however, esmolol, a short-acting
β
-blocker, has been used successfully. Atropine at
high doses has been used; blockade of the parasympathetic nervous system markedly reduces excessive
sweating and secretions. Lower mortality has been reported in clonidine-treated patients than in those
treated with conventional therapy.
Mg sulfate at doses that maintain serum levels between 4 to 8 mEq/L (eg, 4 g bolus followed by 2 to 3
g/h) has a stabilizing effect, eliminating catecholamine stimulation. Patellar tendon reflex is used to assess
overdosage. Tidal volume may be impaired, so ventilatory support must be available.
Pyridoxine (100 mg once/day) lowers mortality in neonates. Other drugs that may prove useful include Na
valproate (which blocks GABA-aminotransferase, inhibiting GABA catabolism), ACE inhibitors (which
inhibit angiotensin II and reduce norepinephrine release from nerve endings), dexmedetomidine (a potent
α
-2 adrenergic agonist), and adenosine (which reduces presynaptic norepinephrine release and
antagonizes the inotropic effect of catecholamines). Corticosteroids are of unproven benefit; their use is
not recommended.
Antibiotics:
The role of antibiotic therapy is minor compared with wound debridement and general
===PAGE:1456===
support. Typical antibiotics include penicillin G 6 million units IV q 6 h, doxycycline 100 mg po bid, and
metronidazole 500 mg po q 6 to 8 h.
Supportive care:
In moderate or severe cases, patients should be intubated. Mechanical ventilation is
essential when neuromuscular blockade is required to control muscle spasms that impair respirations.
IV hyperalimentation avoids the hazard of aspiration secondary to gastric tube feeding.
Because
constipation is usual, stools should be kept soft. A rectal tube may control distention. Bladder
catheterization is required if urinary retention occurs.
Chest physiotherapy, frequent turning, and forced coughing are essential to prevent pneumonia.
Analgesia with opioids is often needed.
Prevention
A series of 4 primary immunizations against tetanus, followed by boosters every 10 yr, with the adsorbed
(for primary immunization) or fluid (for boosters) toxoid is superior to giving antitoxin at the time of injury.
Tetanus toxoid comes by itself, combined with diphtheria in both adult (Td) and child strengths (DT), and
combined with diphtheria and pertussis (DTP). For routine diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis immunization
and booster recommendations, see
Chapter 131
. Adults need to maintain immunity with regular boosters q 10
yr. Immunization in an unimmunized or inadequately immunized pregnant woman produces both active
and passive immunity in the fetus and should be given at a gestational age of 5 to 6 mo with a booster at
8 mo. Passive immunity develops when maternal toxoid is given before a gestational age of 6 mo.
After injury, tetanus vaccination is given depending on wound type and vaccination history; tetanus
immune globulin may also be indicated (see
Table 140-1
). Patients not previously vaccinated are given a 2nd and 3rd dose of toxoid at monthly
intervals.
Because tetanus infection does not confer immunity, patients who have recovered from clinical tetanus
should be vaccinated.
Mixed Anaerobic Infections
Anaerobes can infect normal hosts and hosts with compromised resistance or damaged
tissues. Symptoms depend on site of infection. Anaerobes are often accompanied by aerobic
organisms. Diagnosis is clinical combined with Gram stain and anaerobic cultures. Treatment is
with antibiotics and surgical drainage and debridement.
Hundreds of species of nonsporulating anaerobes are part of the normal flora of the skin, mouth, GI tract,
and vagina. If this commensal relationship is disrupted (eg, by surgery, other trauma, poor blood supply,
or tissue necrosis), a few of these species can cause infections with high morbidity and mortality. After
becoming established in a primary site, organisms can spread hematogenously to distant sites. Because
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria are frequently present in the same infected site, appropriate procedures
for isolation and culture are necessary to keep from overlooking the anaerobes. Anaerobes can be the
main cause of infection in the pleural spaces and lungs; in intra-abdominal, gynecologic, CNS, upper
respiratory tract, and cutaneous diseases; and in bacteremia.
Etiology
The principal anaerobic gram-positive cocci that cause disease are peptococci and peptostreptococci,
which are part of the normal flora of the mouth, upper respiratory tract, and large intestine. The principal
anaerobic gram-negative bacilli include
Bacteroides
[Table 140-1.
Tetanus Prophylaxis in Routine Wound Management]
fragilis
,
Prevotella melaninogenica
, and
Fusobacterium
sp. The
B. fragilis
group is part of the normal
bowel flora and includes the anaerobic pathogens most frequently isolated from intra-abdominal
===PAGE:1457===
infections. Organisms in the
Prevotella
group and
Fusobacterium
sp are part of the normal oral flora.
Pathophysiology
Anaerobic infections can usually be characterized as follows:
• They tend to occur as localized collections of pus or abscesses.
• The reduced O
tension and low oxidation-reduction potential that prevail in avascular and necrotic
tissues are critical for their survival.
• When bacteremia occurs, it usually does not lead to disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and
purpura.
Some anaerobic bacteria possess distinct virulence factors. The virulence factors of
B. fragilis
probably
account for its frequent isolation from clinical specimens despite its relative rarity in normal flora. This
organism has a polysaccharide capsule that apparently stimulates abscess formation. An experimental
model of intra-abdominal sepsis has shown that
B. fragilis
alone can cause abscesses, whereas other
Bacteroides
sp require the synergistic effect of another organism. Another virulence factor, a potent
endotoxin, is implicated in septic shock associated with severe
Fusobacterium
pharyngitis.
Morbidity and mortality rates for anaerobic and mixed bacterial sepsis are as high as those for sepsis
caused by a single aerobic organism. Anaerobic infections are often complicated by deep-seated tissue
necrosis. The overall mortality rate for severe intra-abdominal sepsis and mixed anaerobic pneumonias
tends to be high.
B. fragilis
bacteremia has a high mortality rate, especially in the elderly and in patients
with cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients usually have fever, rigors, and critical illness; shock may develop. DIC may occur in
Fusobacterium
sepsis.
For specific infections (and symptoms) caused by mixed anaerobic organisms, see elsewhere in THE
MANUAL and
Table 140-2
. Anaerobes are rare in UTI, septic arthritis, and infective endocarditis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion
• Gram stain and culture
[Table 140-2.
Disorders Often Caused by Mixed* Anaerobic Organisms]
Clinical clues to the presence of anaerobic organisms include
• Infection adjacent to mucosal surfaces that bear anaerobic flora
• Ischemia, tumor, penetrating trauma, foreign body, or perforated viscus
• Spreading gangrene involving skin, subcutaneous tissue, fascia, and muscle
• Feculent odor in pus or infected tissues
• Abscess formation
• Gas in tissues
===PAGE:1458===
• Septic thrombophlebitis
• Failure to respond to antibiotics that do not have significant anaerobic activity
Anaerobic infection should be suspected when any wound smells foul or when a Gram stain of pus from
an infected site shows mixed
pleomorphic bacteria. Only specimens from normally sterile sites should be
cultured because commensal contaminants may easily be mistaken for pathogens.
Gram stains and aerobic cultures should be obtained for all specimens. Gram stain, particularly in
Bacteroides
infection, and cultures for all anaerobes may be falsely negative. Antibiotic sensitivity testing
of anaerobes is exacting, and data may not be available for ≥ 1 wk after initial culture. However, if the
species is known, sensitivity patterns can usually be predicted. Therefore, many laboratories do not
routinely test anaerobic organisms for sensitivity.
Treatment
• Drainage and debridement
• Antibiotic choice varying by site of infection
In established infection, pus is drained, and devitalized tissue, foreign bodies, and necrotic tissue are
removed. Organ perforations must be treated by closure or drainage. Whenever possible, blood supply
should be reestablished. Septic thrombophlebitis may require vein ligation as well as antibiotics.
Because anaerobic culture results may not be available for 3 to 5 days, antibiotics are started. Antibiotics
sometimes work even when some of the bacterial species in a mixed infection are resistant to the
antibiotic, especially if surgical debridement and drainage are adequate.
Oropharyngeal anaerobic infections may not respond to penicillin and thus require a drug effective
against penicillin-resistant anaerobes (see below). Oropharyngeal infections and lung abscesses should
be treated with clindamycin or a
β
-lactam/
β
-lactamase combination such as amoxicillin/clavulanate. In
patients allergic to penicillin, clindamycin or metronidazole (plus a drug active against aerobes) is useful.
GI or female pelvic anaerobic infections are likely to contain obligate anaerobic gram-negative bacilli such
as
B. fragilis
plus facultative gram-negative bacilli such as
Escherichia
coli; antibiotic regimens must be
active against both. Resistance of
B. fragilis
and other obligate anaerobic gram-negative bacilli to
penicillins and 3rd- and 4th-generation cephalosporins occurs. However, the following drugs have
excellent in vitro activity against
B. fragilis
and are effective: metronidazole, carbapenems (eg,
imipenem/cilastatin, meropenem, ertapenem),
β
-lactam/
β
-lactamase combinations (eg,
piperacillin/tazobactam, ampicillin/sulbactam, amoxicillin/clavulanate, ticarcillin/clavulanate), tigecycline,
and moxifloxacin. No single regimen appears to be superior. Drugs that are somewhat less predictably
active in vitro against
B. fragilis
but are usually effective include clindamycin, cefoxitin, and cefotetan. All
except clindamycin and metro-nidazole can be used as monotherapy because these drugs also have
good activity against facultative anaerobic gram-negative bacilli.
Metronidazole is active against clindamycin-resistant
B. fragilis
, has unique anaerobic bactericidal
activity, and usually avoids the pseudomembranous colitis sometimes associated with clindamycin.
Concerns about metronidazole's potential mutagenicity have not been of clinical consequence.
Because many regimens are available to treat GI or female pelvic anaerobic infections, use of a
potentially nephrotoxic aminoglycoside (to cover enteric gram-negative bacilli) plus an antibiotic active
against
B. fragilis
is no longer warranted.
Prevention
• Metronidazole plus gentamicin or ciprofloxacin
===PAGE:1459===
Before elective colorectal surgery, patients should have bowel preparation consisting of
• Cathartics
• Enemas
• Antibiotics
Most surgeons give both oral and parenteral antibiotics. For emergency colorectal surgery, parenteral
antibiotics are used alone. Examples of oral regimens are neomycin plus erythromycin or neomycin plus
metronidazole; these drugs are given no more than 18 to 24 h before the procedure. Examples of
parenteral preoperative regimens are cefotetan, cefoxitin, or cefazolin plus metronidazole. Preoperative
parenteral antibiotics control bacteremia, reduce secondary or metastatic suppurative complications, and
prevent local spread of infection around the surgical site.
For patients with confirmed allergy or adverse reaction to
β
-lactams, one of the following regimens is
recommended: clindamycin plus gentamicin, aztreonam, or ciprofloxacin; or metronidazole plus gentamicin
or ciprofloxacin.
===PAGE:1460===
Chapter 141. Mycobacteria
Introduction
Mycobacteria are small, slow-growing, aerobic bacilli distinguished by a complex, lipid-rich cell envelope
responsible for their characterization as acid-fast (ie, resistant to decolorization by acid after staining with
carbolfuchsin) and their imperviousness to Gram stain. The most common mycobacterial infection is
tuberculosis; others include leprosy and various diseases caused by
Mycobacterium avium
complex.
Tuberculosis
(See also
Perinatal Tuberculosis
)
Tuberculosis (TB) is a chronic, progressive infection with a period of latency following initial
infection. It occurs most commonly in the lungs. Pulmonary symptoms include productive
cough, chest pain, and dyspnea. Diagnosis is most often by sputum culture and smear.
Treatment is with multiple antimicrobial drugs.
TB is a leading infectious cause of morbidity and mortality in adults worldwide, killing about 1.5 million
people every year. HIV/AIDS is an increasingly prominent factor predisposing to TB infection and mortality
in parts of the world where both infections are prevalent.
Etiology
TB properly refers only to disease caused by
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
. Similar disease occasionally
results from the closely related mycobacteria,
M. bovis, M. africanum
, and
M. microti
.
TB results almost exclusively from inhalation of airborne particles (droplet nuclei) containing
M.
tuberculosis
. They disperse primarily through coughing, singing, and other forced respiratory maneuvers
by people who have active pulmonary TB and whose sputum contains a significant number of organisms
(typically enough to render the smear positive). People with pulmonary cavitary lesions are especially
infectious. Droplet nuclei containing tubercle bacilli may remain suspended in room air currents for
several hours, increasing the chance of spread. However, once these droplets land on a surface, it is
difficult to resuspend the organisms (eg, by sweeping the floor, shaking out bed linens) as respirable
particles. Although such actions can resuspend dust particles containing tubercle bacilli, these particles
are far too large to reach the alveolar surfaces necessary to initiate infection. Fomites (eg, contaminated
surfaces, food, and personal respirators) do not appear to facilitate spread.
Although there is wide variability, patients with pulmonary TB infect about 7 close contacts, on average,
but most of those infected do not develop active disease. Transmission is enhanced by frequent or
prolonged exposure to a patient who is dispersing large numbers of tubercle bacilli in overcrowded,
enclosed, poorly ventilated spaces; thus, people living in poverty or in institutions are at particular risk.
Health care practitioners who have close contact with active cases have increased risk. However, once
effective treatment begins, cough rapidly decreases, organisms are inactivated, and within weeks, TB is
no longer contagious.
Much less commonly, spread results from aerosolization of organisms after irrigation of infected wounds,
in mycobacteriology laboratories, or in autopsy rooms. TB of the tonsils, lymph nodes, abdominal organs,
bones, and joints was once commonly caused by ingestion of milk or milk products (eg, cheese)
contaminated with
M. bovis
, but this transmission route has been largely eradicated in developed
countries by slaughter of cows that test positive on a tuberculin skin test and by pasteurization of milk.
Tuberculosis due to
M. bovis
still occurs in developing countries and in immigrants from developing
countries where bovine tuberculosis is endemic (eg, some Latin American countries).
Risk factors:
HIV infection is the greatest single medical risk factor because cell-mediated immunity,
which is impaired by HIV, is essential for defense against TB; other immunosuppressive illnesses (eg,
diabetes) or therapies (eg, tumor necrosis factor [TNF] inhibitors, corticosteroids) increase risk but less
===PAGE:1461===
than HIV.
Age has traditionally been considered an independent risk factor because the elderly have more years of
potential exposure and are more likely to have impaired immunity. However, in the US, the difference in
the age-specific case rate is no longer as large, probably because the incidence of infectious cases (and
hence lifetime risk of significant exposure) has declined.
Epidemiology
About one third of the world's population is infected. Of these, perhaps only 15 million have
active
disease at any given time. In 2006, an estimated 9.2 million new TB cases occurred worldwide
(139/100,000). Of these, Africa and Southeast Asia each accounted for about 3 million cases, and the
Western Pacific region for about 2 million. Case rates vary very widely by country, age, race, sex, and
socioeconomic status. India and China reported the largest numbers of new cases, but South Africa has
the largest case rate: 940/100,000.
In the US, the case rate has declined 10-fold since 1953. In 2007, 13,299 cases were reported to the
CDC for a case rate of 4.4/100,000 (ranging from 0.4 in Wyoming to 10.2 in Washington DC). Over half of
these cases occurred in patients born outside the US in high-prevalence areas. The TB rate among
foreign-born people (20.7/100,000) was nearly 10 times the rate among US-born people (2.1/100,000).
Blacks accounted for 45% of cases among the US-born. In the southeastern US and inner cities
throughout the US, poor US-born blacks, the homeless, people in jails and prisons, and other
disenfranchised minorities contribute disproportionately to the case rate. In such high-risk populations,
case rates can approach those in high-burden parts of the world.
A resurgence of TB occurred in parts of the US and other developed countries between 1985 and 1992;
it was associated with several factors, including HIV coinfection, homelessness, a deteriorated public
health infrastructure, and the appearance of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB). Although substantially
controlled in the US by public health and institutional infection control measures, the problem of MDR-TB,
including extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB), appears to be growing around the world, fueled by
poor treatment supervision, weak retreatment regimens, inadequate drug supplies, HIV coinfection,
institutional transmission, and inadequate diagnostic laboratory facilities. Control efforts, including
prolonged (eg, > 18 mo) use of 2nd-line antibiotics, treatment of adverse drug reactions, communitybased supervision, social and emotional support, and improved institutional transmission control are
raising hopes for better global control of MDR-TB. Treatment of XDR-TB has less favorable outcomes,
and the mortality rate is extremely high in patients coinfected with HIV despite concomitant antiretroviral
therapy.
Pathophysiology
Tubercle bacilli initially cause a primary infection, which only rarely causes acute illness. Most (about
95%) primary infections are asymptomatic and followed by a latent (dormant) phase. However, a variable
percentage of latent infections subsequently reactivate with symptoms and signs of disease. Infection is
usually not transmissible in the primary stage and is never contagious in the latent stage.
Primary infection:
Infection requires inhalation of particles small enough to traverse the upper
respiratory defenses and deposit deep in the lung, usually in the subpleural airspaces of the lower lung.
Large droplets tend to lodge in the more proximal airways and typically do not result in infection. Infection
usually begins from a single initial focus.
To initiate infection, tubercle bacilli must be ingested by alveolar macrophages. Tubercle bacilli that are
not killed by the macrophages actually replicate inside them, ultimately killing the host macrophage (with
the help of CD8 lymphocytes); inflammatory cells are attracted to the area, causing a focal pneumonitis
that evolves into the characteristic tubercles seen histologically. In the early weeks of infection, some
infected macrophages migrate to regional lymph nodes (eg, hilar, mediastinal), where they access the
bloodstream. Organisms may then spread hematogenously to any part of the body, particularly the apicalposterior portion of the lungs, epiphyses of the long bones, kidneys, vertebral bodies, and meninges.
===PAGE:1462===
In 95% of cases, after about 3 wk of uninhibited growth, the immune system suppresses bacillary
replication before symptoms or signs develop. Foci of infection in the lung or other sites resolve into
epithelioid cell granulomas, which may have caseous and necrotic centers. Tubercle bacilli can survive in
this material for years; the balance between the host's resistance and microbial virulence determines
whether the infection ultimately resolves without treatment, remains dormant, or becomes active.
Infectious foci may leave fibronodular scars in the apices of one or both lungs (Simon foci), calcified scars
from the primary infection (Ghon foci), or calcified hilar lymph nodes. The tuberculin skin test ( and the newer interferonγ
release assay become positive.
Less often, the primary focus immediately progresses, causing acute illness with pneumonia (sometimes
cavitary), pleural effusion, and marked mediastinal or hilar lymph node enlargement (which, in children,
may compress bronchi). Small pleural effusions are predominantly lymphocytic, typically contain few
organisms, and clear within a few weeks. This sequence may be more common among young children
and recently infected
or reinfected immunosuppressed patients. Extrapulmonary TB at any site can
sometimes manifest without evidence of lung involvement. TB lymphadenopathy is the most common
extrapulmonary presentation; however, meningitis is the most feared because of its high mortality in the
very young and very old.
Active disease:
In about 10% of immunocompetent patients, latent infection develops into active
disease, although the percentage varies significantly by age and other risk factors. In 50 to 80% of those
who develop active disease, TB reactivates within the first 2 yr, but it can occur decades later. Any organ
initially seeded may become a site of reactivation, but reactivation occurs most often in the lung apices,
presumably because of favorable local conditions such as high O
tension. Ghon foci and affected hilar
lymph nodes are much less likely to be sites of reactivation.
Conditions that facilitate activation include impaired immunity (particularly HIV infection), certain
immunosuppressants (eg, corticosteroids, infliximab, other TNF inhibitors), gastrectomy, jejunoileal
bypass surgery, silicosis, renal insufficiency, stress, diabetes, head or neck cancer, significant weight
loss, adolescence, and advanced age (particularly > 70 yr).
TB damages tissues through delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH—, typically producing
granulomatous necrosis with a caseous histologic appearance. Lung lesions are characteristically but not
invariably cavitary, especially in immunosuppressed patients with impaired DTH. Pleural effusion is less
common than in progressive primary TB but may result from direct extension or hematogenous spread.
Rupture of a large tuberculous lesion into the pleural space may cause empyema with or without
bronchopleural fistula and sometimes causes pneumothorax. In the prechemotherapy era, TB empyema
sometimes complicated medically induced pneumothorax therapy and was usually rapidly fatal, as was
sudden massive hemoptysis due to erosion of a pulmonary artery by an enlarging cavity.
The course varies greatly, depending on the virulence of the organism and the state of host defenses.
The course may be rapid among blacks, American Indians, and other populations who have not had as
many centuries of selective pressure to develop innate or natural immunity as descendents of the
European and American TB epidemics have had. The course is often more indolent in the latter
populations.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which appears to be due to hypersensitivity to TB antigens,
develops rarely after diffuse hematogenous spread or rupture of a large cavity with spillage into the lungs.
Symptoms and Signs
In active pulmonary TB, even moderate or severe disease, patients may have no symptoms, except "not
feeling well," anorexia, fatigue, and weight loss, which develop gradually over several weeks, or they may
have more specific symptoms. Cough is most common. At first, it may be minimally productive of yellow or
green sputum, usually on rising, but cough may become more productive as the disease progresses.
Hemoptysis occurs only with cavitary TB (sometimes due to fungal growth in a cavity). Low-grade fever is
common but not invariable. Drenching night sweats are a classic symptom but are neither common in nor
specific for TB. Dyspnea may result from lung parenchymal damage, spontaneous pneumothorax, or
pleural TB with effusion.
===PAGE:1463===
With HIV coinfection, the clinical presentation is often atypical because DTH is impaired; patients are
more likely to have symptoms of extrapulmonary or disseminated disease.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Tuberculin skin test
• Acid-fast stain and culture
• When available, DNA-based testing
Pulmonary TB is often suspected based on chest x-rays taken while evaluating respiratory symptoms
(cough > 3 wk, hemoptysis, chest pain, dyspnea), an unexplained illness, FUO, or a positive tuberculin
skin test (.
Initial tests are chest x-ray, sputum examination, and tuberculin skin testing. If the chest x-ray is highly
characteristic (upper lobe lung cavitation) in patients with TB risk factors, sputum examination is still
required, but skin testing is often not done.
Chest x-ray:
In adults, a multinodular infiltrate above or behind the clavicle (the most characteristic
location, most visible in an apical-lordotic view or with CT) suggests reactivation of TB. Middle and lower
lung infiltrates are nonspecific but should prompt suspicion of primary TB in patients (usually young)
whose symptoms or exposure history suggests recent infection, particularly if there is pleural effusion.
Calcified hilar nodes may be present; they may result from primary TB infection but also may result from
histoplasmosis in areas where histoplasmosis is endemic (eg, the Ohio River Valley).
Sputum examination:
Sputum is tested for the presence of acid-fast bacilli (AFB). Tubercle bacilli are
nominally gram-positive but take up Gram stain inconsistently; samples are best prepared with ZiehlNeelsen or Kinyoun stains for conventional light microscopy or fluorochrome stains for fluorescent
microscopy.
If patients cannot produce sputum spontaneously, aerosolized hypertonic saline can be used to induce it.
If induction is unsuccessful, bronchial washings, which are particularly sensitive, can be obtained by
fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Because induction of sputum and bronchoscopy entail some risk of infection for
medical staff, these procedures should be done as a last resort in selected cases when MDR-TB is not
likely. Appropriate precautions (eg, negative-pressure room, N-95 or other fitted respirators) should be
used.
In addition to acid-fast staining, sputum can be tested using nucleic acid amplification techniques (NAAT)
for TB; this test can shorten the time needed to diagnose TB from 1 to 2 wk to 1 to 2 days. However, in
low-prevalence situations, this test is usually done only on smear-positive specimens. It is approved for
smear-negative specimens and is indicated when suspicion is high and a rapid diagnosis is essential for
medical or public health reasons.
If NAAT and AFB smear results are positive, patients are presumed to have TB and treatment can be
started. If the NAAT result is positive and the AFB smear result is negative, an additional specimen is
tested using NAAT; patients can be presumed to have TB if ≥ 2 specimens are NAAT-positive. If NAAT
and AFB smear results are negative, clinical judgment is used to determine whether to begin anti-TB
treatment while awaiting results of culture.
The finding of acid-fast bacilli in a sputum smear is strong presumptive evidence of TB, but definitive
diagnosis requires a positive sputum culture or NAAT. Culture is also required for isolating bacteria for
drug-susceptibility testing and genotyping.
Drug susceptibility tests (DSTs)
should be done on initial isolates from all patients to identify an
===PAGE:1464===
effective anti-TB regimen. These tests should be repeated if patients continue to produce culture-positive
sputum after 3 mo of treatment or if cultures become positive after a period of negative cultures. Results
of DSTs may take up to 8 wk if conventional bacteriologic methods are used. However, several new
molecular DSTs can detect drug resistance in a sputum sample within hours.
Tests of other specimens:
Transbronchial biopsies can be done on infiltrative lesions, and samples are
submitted for culture, histologic evaluation, and molecular testing. Gastric washings, which are culturepositive in a minority of samples, are no longer commonly used except in small children, who usually
cannot produce a good sputum specimen. Ideally, biopsied samples of other tissue should be cultured
fresh, but NAAT can be used for fixed tissues (eg, for biopsied lymph node if histologic examination
unexpectedly detects granulomatous changes). The latter use of NAAT has not been approved but can
be extremely useful, although positive and negative predictive values have not been established.
Skin testing:
Multiple-puncture devices (tine test) are no longer recommended. The tuberculin skin test
(TST; Mantoux or PPD—purified protein derivative) is usually done, although it is a test of infection, latent
or active, and is not diagnostic of active disease. The standard dose in the US of 5 tuberculin units (TU)
of PPD in 0.1 mL of solution is injected on the volar forearm. It is critical to give the injection intradermally,
not subcutaneously. A well-demarcated bleb or wheal should result immediately. The diameter of
induration (not erythema) transverse to the long axis of the arm is measured 48 to 72 h after injection.
Recommended cutoff points for a positive reaction depend on the clinical setting:
•
5 mm:
Patients at high risk of developing active TB if infected, such as those who have chest x-ray
evidence of past TB, who are immunosuppressed because of HIV infection or drugs (eg, TNFα
inhibitors, corticosteroid use equivalent to prednisone 15 mg/day for > 1 mo), or who are close contacts
of patients with infectious TB
•
10 mm:
Patients with some risk factors, such as injection drug users, recent immigrants from highprevalence areas, residents of high-risk settings (eg, prisons, homeless shelters), patients aged > 70
yr, those with certain disorders (eg, silicosis, renal insufficiency, diabetes, head or neck cancer), and
those who have had gastrectomy or jejunoileal bypass surgery
•
15 mm:
Patients with no risk factors (who typically should not be tested)
Results can be falsely negative, most often in patients who are febrile, elderly, HIV-infected (especially if
CD4+ count is < 200 cells/
μ
L), or very ill, many of whom show no reaction to any skin test (anergy).
Anergy probably occurs because inhibiting antibodies are present or because so many T cells have been
mobilized to the disease site that too few remain to produce a significant skin reaction.
Other tests:
New blood tests based on the release of interferonγ
by lymphocytes exposed in vitro to
TB-specific antigens are now available and are likely to soon replace the TST for routine testing for TB
infection. Although results of interferonγ
release assays (IGRAs) are not always concordant with TST,
these tests appear to be as sensitive as and more specific than TST in contact investigations. Importantly,
they are often negative in patients with remote TB infection. Long-term studies are being done to see
whether TST-positive, IGRA-negative patients (particularly those with immunosuppression) are at low risk
of reactivation.
Prognosis
In immunocompetent patients with drug-susceptible pulmonary TB, even severe disease and large
cavities usually resolve if appropriate therapy is instituted and completed. Still, TB causes or contributes
to death in about 10% of cases, often in patients who are debilitated for other reasons. Disseminated TB
and TB meningitis may be fatal in up to 25% of cases despite optimal treatment.
TB is much more aggressive in immunocompromised patients and, if not appropriately and aggressively
treated, may be fatal in as little as 2 mo from its initial symptom, especially with MDR-TB, in which
mortality can approach 90%. With effective antiretroviral therapy (and appropriate anti-TB treatment), the
prognosis for immunocompromised patients, even with MDR-TB, may approach that of immunocompetent
patients. However, poorer outcomes should be expected for patients with XDR-TB because there are so
===PAGE:1465===
few effective drugs.
Treatment
Most patients with uncomplicated TB and all patients with complicating illnesses (eg, AIDS, hepatitis,
diabetes), adverse drug reactions, or drug resistance should be referred to a TB specialist. However,
most TB can be fully treated at home with instructions on how to avoid spreading disease; these
measures include
• Staying at home
• Avoiding visitors (previously exposed family members may stay)
• Covering coughs with a tissue or hand
Surgical face masks for TB patients are stigmatizing and are generally not recommended for cooperative
patients. For drug-susceptible TB that is being treated effectively, precautions must be continued for at
least 2 wk in or outside the hospital. For patients with MDR-TB and XDR-TB, response to treatment may
be slower, and the consequences of transmission greater; thus, precautions are continued longer, until
there is clear evidence of treatment response.
Hospitalization:
The main indications for hospitalization are
• Serious concomitant illness
• Need for diagnostic procedures
• Social issues (eg, homelessness)
• Need for respiratory isolation, as for people living in congregate settings where previously unexposed
people would be regularly encountered
Initially, all hospitalized patients should be in respiratory isolation, ideally in a negative-pressure room with
6 to 12 air changes/h. Anyone entering the room should wear a respirator (not a surgical mask) that has
been appropriately fitted and that meets National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health certification
(N-95 or greater). Because risk of exposing other hospitalized patients is high, release from respiratory
isolation usually requires 3 negative sputum smears over 2 days, including at least one early-morning
negative specimen.
Public health considerations:
To improve treatment adherence, ensure cure, and limit transmission and
the development of drug-resistant strains, public health programs closely monitor treatment, even if
patients are being treated by a private physician. In most states, TB care (including skin testing, chest xrays, and drugs) is available free through public health clinics to reduce barriers to treatment.
Increasingly, optimal patient case management includes supervision by public health personnel of the
ingestion of every dose of drug, a strategy known as directly observed therapy (DOT). DOT increases
the likelihood that the full treatment course will be completed from 61% to 86% (91% with enhanced DOT,
in which incentives and enablers such as transportation vouchers, child care, outreach workers, and
meals are provided). DOT is particularly important
• For children and adolescents
• For patients with HIV infection, psychiatric illness, or substance abuse
• After treatment failure, relapse, or development of drug resistance
In some programs, selective self-administered treatment (SAT) is an option for patients who are committed
to treatment; ideally, fixed-dose combination drug preparations are used to avoid the possibility of
===PAGE:1466===
monotherapy, which can lead to drug resistance. Mechanical drug
monitors have been advocated to
improve adherence with SAT.
Public health departments usually visit homes to evaluate potential barriers to treatment (eg, extreme
poverty, unstable housing, child care problems, alcoholism, mental illness) and to check for other active
cases and close contacts. Close contacts are people who share the same breathing space for prolonged
periods, typically household residents, but often include people at work, school, and places of recreation.
The precise duration and degree of contact that constitutes risk vary because TB patients vary greatly in
infectiousness. For patients who are highly infectious as evidenced by multiple family members with
disease or positive skin tests, even relatively casual contacts (eg, passengers on the bus they ride)
should be referred for skin testing and evaluation for latent infection (; patients who do not
infect any household contacts are less likely to infect casual contacts.
First-line drugs:
The first-line drugs isoniazid (INH), rifampin (RIF), pyrazinamide (PZA), and ethambutol
(EMB) are used together in initial treatment (for regimens and doses, see p.
and
Table 141-1
).
INH
is given orally once/day, has good tissue penetration (including CSF), and is
[Table 141-1.
Dosing of First-Line Anti-TB Drugs*]
highly bactericidal. It remains the single most useful and least expensive drug for TB treatment. However,
inconsistent drug levels and decades of uncontrolled use (often as monotherapy) in many countries
(especially in East Asia) have greatly increased the percentage of resistant strains. In the US, about 10%
of isolates are INH-resistant. INH is safe during pregnancy.
Adverse reactions include rash, fever, and, rarely, anemia and agranulocytosis. INH causes harmless,
transient aminotransferase elevations in up to 20% of patients and symptomatic (usually reversible)
hepatitis in about 1/1000 (more often in patients > 35 yr, alcoholics, postpartum women, and patients with
chronic liver disease). Monthly liver function testing is not recommended unless patients have risk factors
for liver disease. Patients with unexplained fatigue, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, or jaundice may have
hepatic toxicity; treatment is suspended and liver function tests are obtained. Those with symptoms and
any significant aminotransferase elevation (or asymptomatic elevation > 5 times normal) by definition
have hepatic toxicity, and INH is stopped. After recovery from mild aminotransferase elevations and
symptoms, patients can be safely challenged with a half-dose for 2 to 3 days. If this dose is tolerated
(typically in about half of patients), the full dose may be restarted with close monitoring for symptoms and
liver function deterioration. If patients are receiving INH, RIF, and PZA, all drugs must be stopped, and the
challenge done with each drug separately. INH or PZA, rather than RIF, is the more likely cause of
hepatotoxicity. Peripheral neuropathy can result from INH-induced pyridoxine (vitamin B
) deficiency, most
likely in pregnant or breastfeeding women, undernourished patients, patients with diabetes mellitus or HIV
infection, alcoholics, patients with cancer or uremia, and the elderly. A daily dose of pyridoxine 25 to 50
mg can prevent this complication, although pyridoxine is usually not needed in children and healthy young
adults. INH delays hepatic metabolism of phenytoin, requiring dose reduction. INH can also cause a
violent reaction to disulfiram, a drug occasionally used for alcoholism.
RIF
, given orally, is bactericidal, is well absorbed, penetrates well into cells and CSF, and acts rapidly. It
also eliminates dormant organisms in macrophages or caseous lesions that can cause late relapse. Thus,
RIF should be used throughout the course of therapy. Adverse effects include cholestatic jaundice (rare),
fever, thrombocytopenia, and renal failure. RIF adds only slightly to the hepatotoxicity of INH. RIF has
many significant drug interactions. It accelerates metabolism of anticoagulants, oral contraceptives,
corticosteroids, digitoxin, oral antihyperglycemic drugs, methadone, and many other drugs. The
interactions of rifamycins and many antiretroviral drugs is particularly complex; combined use requires
specialized expertise. RIF is safe during pregnancy.
The following newer rifamycins are available for special situations:
•
Rifabutin
is used for patients taking drugs (particularly antiretroviral drugs) that have unacceptable
interactions with RIF. Its action is similar to RIF, but when used with clarithromycin or fluconazole, it has
===PAGE:1467===
been associated with uveitis.
•
Rifapentine
is used in one dose/wk regimens (see
Table 141-1
) but is not used in children or patients
with HIV (because of unacceptable treatment failure rates) or extrapulmonary TB.
PZA
is an oral bactericidal drug. When used during the intensive initial 2 mo of treatment, it shortens
therapy to 6 mo and prevents development of resistance to RIF.
Its major adverse effects are GI upset and hepatitis. It often causes hyperuricemia, which is generally mild
and only rarely induces gout. It is contraindicated in pregnancy. PZA plus rifampin is no longer
recommended as a 2-mo regimen for latent TB because excessive hepatotoxicity can occur.
EMB
is given orally and is the best tolerated of the first-line drugs. Its main toxicity is optic neuritis, which
is more common at higher doses (eg, 25 mg/kg) and in patients with impaired renal function. Patients
present initially with an inability to distinguish blue from green, followed by impairment of visual acuity.
Because both symptoms are reversible if detected early, patients should have a baseline test of visual
acuity and color vision and should be questioned monthly regarding their vision. Caution is warranted if
communication is limited by language and cultural barriers. For similar reasons, EMB is usually avoided in
young children who cannot read eye charts but can be used if needed because of drug resistance or
drug intolerance. Another drug is substituted for EMB if optic neuritis occurs. EMB can be used safely
during pregnancy. Resistance to EMB is less common than that to the other first-line drugs.
Second-line drugs:
Other antibiotics are active against TB and are used primarily when patients have
MDR-TB or do not tolerate one of the first-line drugs. The 2 most important classes are aminoglycosides
(and the closely
related polypeptide drug, capreomycin) and fluoroquinolones.
Streptomycin
, the most commonly used aminoglycoside, is very effective and bactericidal. Resistance is
still relatively uncommon in the US but is more common globally. CSF penetration is poor, and intrathecal
administration should not be used if other effective drugs are available.
Dose-related adverse effects include renal tubular damage, vestibular damage, and ototoxicity. The dose
is about 15 mg/kg IM (maximum: usually 1 g for adults, reduced to 0.75 g [10 mg/kg] for those ≥ 60 yr). To
limit dose-related adverse effects, clinicians give one dose only 5 days/wk for > 2 mo. Then it may be
given twice/wk for another 2 mo if necessary. In patients with renal insufficiency, dosing frequency should
be reduced (eg, 12 to 15 mg/kg/dose 2 or 3 times/wk). Patients should be monitored with appropriate
testing of balance, hearing, and serum creatinine levels. Adverse effects include rash, fever,
agranulocytosis, and serum sickness. Flushing and tingling around the mouth commonly accompany
injection but subside quickly. Streptomycin is contraindicated during pregnancy because it may damage
the 8th cranial nerve in the fetus.
Kanamycin
and
amikacin
may remain effective even if streptomycin resistance has developed. Their
renal and neural toxicities are similar to those of streptomycin.
Capreomycin
, a related nonaminoglycoside parenteral bactericidal drug, has dosage, effectiveness, and
adverse effects similar to those of aminoglycosides. It is an important drug for MDR-TB because isolates
resistant to streptomycin are often susceptible to capreomycin, and it is somewhat better tolerated than
aminoglycosides when prolonged administration is required.
Some
fluoroquinolones
(levofloxacin, moxifloxacin) are the most active and safest TB drugs after INH
and RIF, but they are not first-line drugs for TB susceptible to INH and RIF. Moxifloxacin appears to be as
active as INH when used with RIF.
Other 2nd-line drugs include ethionamide, cycloserine, and para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS). These drugs
are less effective and more toxic than the first-line drugs but are essential in treatment of MDR-TB.
Drug resistance:
Treatment with any single antibiotic always results in survival of a very few (about 1 in
a million) organisms that have acquired spontaneous resistance mutations. Incomplete or erratic therapy
selects for these resistant organisms, making treatment adherence particularly important in prevention of
===PAGE:1468===
resistance. Multiple drugs are used concurrently for TB so that organisms resistant to one drug are killed
by the others; simultaneous spontaneous mutations to multiple drugs are unlikely. However, once a strain
resistant to a single drug has developed and proliferated, it may acquire resistance to additional drugs
through the same process; thus, MDRTB can occur by stepwise acquired resistance to INH, RIF, and
often other drugs. Some resistant strains appear to be less fit (ie, less transmissible and virulent); others
have acquired compensatory mutations that restore fitness, allowing disease progression and
transmission to occur.
Once a drug-resistant strain develops in a patient, it can spread from person to person (primary drug
resistance). Uninhibited transmission of drug-resistant strains in congregate settings, such as hospitals,
clinics, prisons, shelters, and refugee camps, is a major barrier to global control.
Several new anti-TB drugs that may be active against resistant strains are in preclinical or clinical
development but will not be available for several more years. Furthermore, unless treatment programs are
strengthened (eg, by full supervision of each dose), stepwise resistance to new drugs is likely.
MDR-TB
is TB resistant in vitro to both isoniazid and rifampin, with or without resistance to other drugs.
Numerous outbreaks of MDR-TB have been reported, and the global burden is rising. The Stop TB
Partnership estimates that 780,000 new cases of MDR-TB will occur between 2006 and 2015. In parts of
the world where resistance testing is inadequate or unavailable, many patients who do not respond to
first-line therapy probably have MDR-TB that is undiagnosed. MDR-TB has major negative implications
for TB control; alternative treatments require a longer treatment course with less effective, more toxic, and
more expensive 2nd-line drugs.
XDR-TB
is MDR-TB that is also resistant to fluoroquinolones and injectable drugs (eg, streptomycin,
amikacin, kanamycin, capreomycin). TB strains that are resistant to other drug combinations but that do
not meet the definitions of MDR or XDR are termed polyresistant. Because the fluoroquinolones and
injectables are important for treatment of MDR-TB, XDR-TB has dire therapeutic implications. Although
some patients can be cured, mortality is higher and depends on the number of effective drugs remaining
and the extent of lung destruction. Surgery to remove localized areas of lung destruction plays an
important role in the treatment of advanced cases of MDR-TB or XDR-TB but is not widely available in
high-burden regions.
Treatment regimens:
Treatment of all patients with new, previously untreated TB should consist of a
• 2-mo initial, intensive phase
• 4- or 7-mo continuation phase
Initial intensive-phase therapy
is with 4 antibiotics: INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB (see
Table 141-1
for
dosing). These drugs can be given daily throughout this phase or daily for 2 wk, followed by doses 2 or 3
times/wk for 6 wk. Intermittent administration (usually with higher doses) is usually satisfactory because of
the slow growth of tubercle bacilli and the residual postantibiotic effect on growth (after antibiotic
inhibition, bacterial growth is often delayed well after antibiotics are below the minimal inhibitory
concentration). However, daily therapy is recommended for patients with MDR-TB or HIV coinfection.
Regimens involving less than daily dosing must be carried out as DOT because each dose becomes
more important.
After 2 mo of intensive 4-drug treatment, PZA and usually EMB are stopped, depending on the drug
susceptibility pattern of the original isolate.
Continuation-phase treatment
depends on results of drug susceptibility testing of initial isolates (where
available), the presence or absence of a cavitary lesion on the initial chest x-ray, and results of cultures
taken at 2 mo. If positive, 2-mo cultures indicate the need for a longer course of treatment. If both culture
and smear are negative, regardless of the chest x-ray, or if the culture or smear is positive but x-ray
showed no cavitation, INH and RIF are continued for 4 more mo (6 mo total). If the x-ray showed
cavitation and the culture or smear is positive, INH and RIF are continued for 7 more mo (9 mo total). In
either regimen, EMB is stopped if the initial culture shows no resistance to any drug. Continuation-phase
===PAGE:1469===
drugs can be given daily or, if patients are not HIV-positive, 2 or 3 times/wk. Patients who have negative
culture and smears at 2 mo and no cavitation on chest x-ray and who are HIV-negative may receive
once/wk INH plus rifapentine.
For both initial and continuation phases, the total number of doses (calculated by doses/wk times number
of weeks) should be given; thus if any doses are missed, treatment is extended and not stopped at the
end of the time period.
Management of drug-resistant TB
varies with the pattern of drug resistance. Generally, MDR-TB
requires prolonged (eg, 18 to 24 mo) treatment with the remaining active first-line drugs (including PZA, if
the strain is susceptible) with addition of an injectable, a fluoroquinolone, and other 2nd-line drugs as
needed to build a 4- or 5-drug regimen that the infecting strain is known or likely to be susceptible to (ie,
based on testing, a known source-case, prior treatment, or drug susceptibility patterns in the community).
Managing the adverse effects of these long, complex regimens is challenging. MDR-TB should always be
treated by a TB specialist experienced with these cases. Fully supervised treatment is essential to avoid
additional drug resistance through nonadherance.
Other treatments:
Surgical resection of a persistent TB cavity is occasionally necessary. The main
indication for resection is persistent, culture-positive MDR-TB or XDR-TB in patients with a destroyed
lung region into which antibiotics cannot penetrate. Other indications include uncontrollable hemoptysis
and bronchial stenosis.
Corticosteroids are sometimes used to treat TB when inflammation is a major cause of morbidity and are
indicated for patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome or closed-space infections, such as
meningitis and pericarditis. Dexamethasone 12 mg po or IV q 6 h is given to adults and children > 25 kg;
children < 25 kg are given 8 mg. Treatment is continued for 2 to 3 wk. Corticosteroids that are needed for
other indications pose no danger to patients who have active TB and who are receiving an effective TB
regimen.
Screening
Screening for latent TB infection (LTBI) is done with TST or IGRA. Indications for testing include
• Close contact with a person who has active pulmonary TB
• Chest x-ray evidence of past TB infection
• Risk factors for exposure to TB (eg, people who have immigrated within 5 yr from high-risk areas,
indigent patients, IV drug users, selected US health care practitioners such as respiratory therapists
and practitioners working with high-risk populations)
• Risk factors for development of active TB (eg, HIV infection or other impaired immunity, gastrectomy,
jejunoileal bypass surgery, silicosis, renal insufficiency, diabetes, head or neck cancer, age > 70 yr)
• Therapeutic immunosuppression with corticosteroids, TNF inhibitors, or cancer chemotherapy
In the US, most children and other people without specific TB risk factors should not be tested to avoid
false-positive reactions.
A positive TST or IGRA test result (see p.
for criteria) suggests LTBI. Patients with a positive TST or
IGRA result are evaluated for other risk factors and have a chest x-ray. Those with x-ray abnormalities
suggesting TB require evaluation for active TB as above, including sputum examination and culture.
Updated guidelines for testing and treatment of LTBI are available at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) web site (www.cdc.gov
).
Booster reaction:
Some patients with remote TB exposure, BCG vaccination, or infection with
nontuberculous mycobacteria may have a negative TST or IGRA; however, the TST itself may serve as
an immune booster so that a subsequent test done as little as 1 wk or as much as several years later may
===PAGE:1470===
be positive (booster reaction). Thus, in people who are tested regularly (eg, health care workers), the 2nd
routine test will be positive, giving the false appearance of recent infection (and hence mandating further
testing and treatment). If recurrent testing for LTBI is indicated, a 2nd TST should be done 1 to 4 wk after
the first to identify a booster reaction (because conversion in that brief interval is highly unlikely).
Subsequent TST is done and interpreted normally.
The new IGRAs for LTBI do not involve injection of antigens and thus do not cause boosting. They also
are not influenced by preexisting hypersensitivity from BCG vaccination or infection with environmental
mycobacteria other than
M. kansasii, M. szulgai
, and
M. marinum
.
Treatment of LTBI:
Treatment is indicated principally for
• People whose TST converted from negative to positive within the previous 2 yr
• People with x-ray changes consistent with old TB and no evidence of active TB
Other indications for preventive treatment include
• People who, if infected, are at high risk of developing active TB (eg, HIV-infected people, people with
drug-induced immunosuppression)
• Any child < 5 yr who is a close contact of a person with smear-positive TB, regardless of whether there
was TST conversion
Other people with an incidental positive TST or IGRA but without these risk factors are often treated for
LTBI, but physicians should balance individual risks of drug toxicity against the benefits of treatment.
Treatment generally consists of INH unless resistance is suspected (eg, in exposure to a known INHresistant case). The dose is 300 mg once/day for 6 to 9 mo for most adults and 10 mg/kg for 9 mo for
children. HIV-infected patients and people with abnormal chest x-rays consistent with old TB also require
9 mo of therapy. An alternative for patients resistant to or intolerant of INH is RIF 600 mg once/day for 4
mo.
The main limitations of treatment of LTBI are poor adherence and hepatotoxicity. Used for LTBI, INH
causes clinical hepatitis in 1/1000 cases; hepatitis usually reverses if INH is stopped promptly. Patients
being treated for LTBI should be instructed to stop the drug if they experience any new symptoms,
especially unexplained fatigue, loss of appetite, or nausea. Hepatitis due to RIF is less common than with
INH, but drug interactions are frequent. Monthly visits to monitor symptoms and to encourage treatment
completion are standard good clinical and public health practice.
Prevention
General preventive measures (eg, staying at home, avoiding visitors, covering coughs with a tissue or
hand— are followed.
Vaccination:
The BCG vaccine, made from an attenuated strain of
M. bovis
is given to > 80% of the
world's children, primarily in high-burden countries. Overall average efficacy is probably only 50%.
However, although BCG is not believed to prevent TB infection, it reduces the rate of extrathoracic TB in
children, especially TB meningitis, and therefore is considered worthwhile. BCG has few indications in
the US, except unavoidable exposure of a child to an infectious TB case that cannot be effectively treated
(ie, highly resistant MDR-TB) and possibly previously uninfected health care workers exposed to MDRTB
or XDR-TB on a regular basis.
Although BCG vaccination often converts the TST, the reaction is usually smaller than the response to
natural TB infection, and it usually wanes more quickly. The TST reaction due to BCG is rarely > 15 mm
and rarely > 10 mm 15 yr after BCG administration. CDC recommends that all TST reactions in children
who have had BCG be attributed to TB infection (and treated accordingly) because untreated latent
infection can have serious complications. IGRAs for LTBI are not influenced by BCG vaccination.
===PAGE:1471===
Special Populations
Children:
Primary TB in children can spread to the vertebrae (Pott's disease) or the highly
vascular
epiphyses of long bones. Young children may also rapidly develop serious TB, possibly miliary TB, TB
meningitis, or cavitary disease, even before the TST becomes positive. However, most children have few
symptoms other than a brassy cough, and the primary focus usually resolves spontaneously with or
without treatment. The most common sign is hilar lymphadenopathy, but segmental atelectasis is possible.
Adenopathy may progress, even after chemotherapy is started, and may cause lobar atelectasis, which
usually clears during treatment. Cavitary disease is less common than in adults, and most children harbor
far fewer organisms and are not infectious. Except for dosage adjustments, treatment of children is similar
to that of adults (see
Table 141-1
).
The elderly:
Reactivated disease can involve any organ, but particularly the lungs, brain, kidneys, long
bones, vertebrae, or lymph nodes. Reactivation may cause few symptoms and can be overlooked for
weeks or months, delaying appropriate evaluation. The frequent presence of other disorders in old age
further complicates the diagnosis. At any age, recent transmission may cause apical, middle-lobe, or
lower-lobe pneumonia as well as pleural effusion in previously tuberculin-negative nursing home
residents. The pneumonia may not be recognized as TB and may persist and spread to other people
despite broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment. In the US, miliary TB and TB meningitis, commonly thought
to affect mainly young children, are more common among the elderly.
INH is hepatotoxic in up to 4 to 5% of patients > 65 yr (compared with < 1% of patients < 65 yr). In the
elderly, chemoprophylaxis is indicated only if the TST increases ≥ 15 mm from a previously negative
reaction. TST sensitivity can be poor in the elderly. Close contacts of an active case and others at high
risk and with a negative TST or IGRA should be considered for preventive treatment unless
contraindicated.
HIV-infected patients:
TST sensitivity is generally poor in immunocompromised patients (who may be
anergic). In some studies, IGRAs appear to perform better than the TST in immunocompromised patients,
although this advantage has not yet been established.
In HIV-infected patients with LTBI, active TB develops in about 5 to 10%/yr, whereas in people who are
not immunocompromised, it develops in about the same percentage over a lifetime. In the early 1990s,
half of HIV-infected TB patients who were untreated or infected with an MDR strain died, with median
survival of only 60 days. Now, outcomes are somewhat better in developed countries because of earlier
TB diagnosis and antiretroviral therapy, but TB in HIV patients remains a serious concern. In developing
countries, mortality continues to be high among patients coinfected with HIV and MDR-TB or XDR-TB.
Dissemination of bacilli during primary infection is usually much more extensive in patients with HIV
infection. Consequently, a larger proportion of TB is extrapulmonary. Tuberculomas are more common
and more destructive. HIV reduces both inflammatory reaction and cavitation of pulmonary lesions. As a
result, a chest x-ray may show a nonspecific pneumonia or even be normal, even though AFB are present
in sufficient numbers to appear on a sputum smear. Smear-negative TB is more common when HIV
coinfection is present.
TB may develop early in AIDS and may be its presenting manifestation. Hematogenous dissemination of
TB in patients with HIV infection causes a serious, often baffling illness with symptoms of both infections.
In AIDS patients, a mycobacterial illness that develops while the CD4 count is ≥ 200/
μ
L is almost always
TB. By contrast, depending on the probability of TB exposure, a mycobacterial infection that develops
while the CD4 count is < 50/
μ
L is usually due to
M. avium
complex (, which is not contagious
and is predominantly an infection of the blood and bone marrow, not the lungs.
TB in HIV-infected patients generally responds well to usual regimens when in vitro testing shows
sensitivity. However, for MDRTB strains, outcomes are not as favorable because the drugs are more toxic
and less effective. Therapy for susceptible TB should be continued for 6 to 9 mo after conversion of
sputum cultures to negative but may be shortened to 6 mo if 3 separate pretreatment sputum smears are
negative, suggesting a low burden of organisms. Current recommendations suggest that if the sputum
===PAGE:1472===
culture is positive after 2 mo of therapy, treatment is prolonged to 9 mo. HIV-infected patients whose
tuberculin reactions are ≥ 5 mm (or with a positive IGRA) should receive chemoprophylaxis. Current CDC
TB treatment guidelines should be consulted.
Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis
TB outside the lung usually results from hematogenous dissemination. Sometimes infection directly
extends from an adjacent organ.
Symptoms vary by site but generally include fever, malaise, and weight
loss.
Miliary TB:
Also known as generalized hematogenous TB, miliary TB occurs when a tuberculous lesion
erodes into a blood vessel, disseminating millions of tubercle bacilli into the bloodstream and throughout
the body. The lungs and bone marrow are most often affected, but any site may be involved. Miliary TB is
most common among children < 4 yr, immunocompromised people, and the elderly.
Symptoms include fever, chills, weakness, malaise, and often progressive dyspnea. Intermittent
dissemination of tubercle bacilli may lead to a prolonged FUO. Bone marrow involvement may cause
anemia, thrombocytopenia, or a leukemoid reaction.
Genitourinary TB:
Infection of the kidneys may manifest as pyelonephritis (eg, fever, back pain, pyuria)
without the usual urinary pathogens on routine culture (sterile pyuria). Infection commonly spreads to the
bladder and, in men, to the prostate, seminal vesicles, or epididymis, causing an enlarging scrotal mass.
Infection may spread to the perinephric space and down the psoas muscle, sometimes causing an
abscess on the anterior thigh.
Salpingo-oophoritis can occur after menarche, when the fallopian tubes become vascular. Symptoms
include chronic pelvic pain and sterility or ectopic pregnancy due to tubal scarring.
TB meningitis:
Meningitis often occurs in the absence of infection at other extrapulmonary sites. In the
US, it is most common among the elderly and immunocompromised, but in areas where TB is common
among children, TB meningitis usually occurs between birth and 5 yr. At any age, meningitis is the most
serious form of TB and has high morbidity and mortality. It is the one form of TB believed to be prevented
in childhood by vaccination with BCG.
Symptoms are low-grade fever, unremitting headache, nausea, and drowsiness, which may progress to
stupor and coma. Kernig's and Brudzinski's signs may be positive. Stages are
1. Clear sensorium with abnormal CSF
2. Drowsiness or stupor with focal neurologic signs
3. Coma
Stroke may result from thrombosis of a major cerebral vessel. Focal neurologic symptoms suggest a
tuberculous mass intracranial lesion (tuberculoma).
TB peritonitis:
Peritoneal infection represents seeding from abdominal lymph nodes or from salpingooophoritis. Peritonitis is particularly common among alcoholics with cirrhosis.
Symptoms may be mild, with fatigue, abdominal pain, and tenderness, or severe enough to mimic acute
abdomen.
TB pericarditis:
Pericardial infection may develop from foci in mediastinal lymph nodes or from pleural
TB. In some high-incidence parts of the world, TB pericarditis is a common cause of heart failure.
Patients may have a pericardial friction rub, pleuritic and positional chest pain, or fever. Pericardial
tamponade may occur, causing dyspnea, neck vein distention, paradoxical pulse, muffled heart sounds,
and possibly hypotension.
===PAGE:1473===
TB lymphadenitis:
Usually, the hilar lymph nodes are involved. Other nodes are generally not involved
unless the inoculum is large or poorly contained, allowing organisms to reach the thoracic duct, where
they disseminate into the bloodstream. Most infected nodes heal, but reactivation commonly occurs.
Infection in supraclavicular nodes may inoculate anterior cervical nodes, eventually resulting in scrofula
(TB lymphadenitis in the neck).
Affected nodes are swollen and may be mildly tender or drain. Adjacent nodes sometimes coalesce into
an irregular mass.
TB of bones and joints:
Weight-bearing joints are most commonly involved, but bones of the wrist,
hand, and elbow may also be affected, especially after injury.
Pott's disease is spinal infection, which begins in a vertebral body and often spreads to adjacent
vertebrae, with narrowing of the disk space between them. Untreated, the vertebrae may collapse,
possibly impinging on the spinal cord. Symptoms include progressive or constant pain in involved bones
and chronic or subacute arthritis (usually monoarticular). In Pott's disease, spinal cord compression
produces neurologic deficits, including paraplegia; paravertebral swelling may result from an abscess.
Gastrointestinal TB:
Because the entire GI mucosa resists TB invasion, infection requires prolonged
exposure and enormous inocula. It is very unusual in developed countries where bovine TB is rare.
Ulcers of the mouth and oropharynx may develop from eating
M. bovis
-contaminated dairy products;
primary lesions may also occur in the small bowel. Intestinal invasion generally causes hyperplasia and
an inflammatory bowel syndrome with pain, diarrhea, obstruction, and hematochezia. It may also mimic
appendicitis. Ulceration and fistulas are possible.
TB of the liver:
Liver infection is common in patients with advanced pulmonary TB and
widely
disseminated or miliary TB. However, the liver generally heals without sequelae when the principal
infection is treated. TB in the liver occasionally spreads to the gallbladder, leading to obstructive jaundice.
Other sites:
Rarely, TB may develop on abraded skin in patients with cavitary pulmonary TB. TB may
infect the wall of a blood vessel and has even ruptured the aorta. Adrenal involvement, leading to
Addison's disease, formerly was common but now is rare. Tubercle bacilli may spread to tendon sheaths
(tuberculous tenosynovitis) by direct extension from adjacent lesions in bone or hematogenously from any
infected organ.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Tuberculin skin test
• Acid-fast stain and culture
• When available, DNA-based testing
Testing is similar to that for pulmonary TB (, including chest x-ray, tuberculin skin testing
(TST), and microscopic analysis (with appropriate staining) and cultures of affected body fluids (CSF,
urine, or pleural, pericardial, or joint fluid) and tissue for mycobacteria. However, cultures and smears are
often negative because few organisms may be present; in this case, nucleic acid amplification techniques
(NAAT) may be helpful. If all tests are negative and miliary TB is still a concern, biopsies of the bone
marrow and the liver are done. Blood culture results are positive in about 50% of patients with
disseminated TB; such patients are often immunocompromised by HIV infection or another
immunosuppressive condition. If TB is highly suspected based on other features (eg, granuloma seen on
biopsy, positive TST plus unexplained lymphocytosis in pleural fluid or CSF), treatment should usually
proceed despite inability to demonstrate TB organisms.
===PAGE:1474===
Chest x-ray may show signs of primary or active TB; in miliary TB, it shows thousands of 2- to 3-mm
interstitial nodules evenly distributed through both lungs. TST and IGRA may initially be negative, but a
repeat test in a few weeks is likely to be positive. If it is not, the diagnosis of TB should be questioned or
causes of anergy sought.
Other imaging studies are done based on clinical findings. Abdominal or GU involvement usually requires
CT or ultrasonography; renal lesions are often visible. Bone and joint involvement requires CT or MRI;
MRI is preferable for spinal disease.
Body fluids typically show lymphocytosis. The most suggestive CSF constellation also includes a glucose
level < 50% of that in the serum and an elevated protein level.
Treatment
Drug treatment is the most important modality and follows standard regimens and principles (. Six to 9 mo of therapy is probably adequate for most sites except the meninges, which require
treatment for 9 to 12 mo. Corticosteroids may help in pericarditis and meningitis (for dosing, .
Surgery
is required for the following:
• To drain empyema, cardiac tamponade, and CNS abscess
• To close bronchopleural fistulas
• To resect infected bowel
• To decompress spinal cord encroachment
Surgical debridement is sometimes needed in Pott's disease to correct spinal deformities or to relieve
cord compression if there are neurologic deficits or pain persists; fixation of the vertebral column by bone
graft is required in only the most advanced cases. Surgery is usually not necessary for TB lymphadenitis
except for diagnostic purposes.
Other Mycobacterial Infections Resembling Tuberculosis
Mycobacteria other than the tubercle bacillus sometimes infect humans. These organisms are commonly
present in soil and water and are much less virulent in humans than is
M. tuberculosis
. Infections with
these organisms have been called atypical, environmental, and nontuberculous mycobacterial infections.
Most exposures and infections by these organisms do not cause disease, which usually requires a defect
in local or systemic host defenses; the frail elderly are sometimes infected.
M. avium
complex (MAC)—the
closely related species of
M. avium
and
M. intracellulare
—accounts for most diseases. Other causative
species are
M. kansasii, M. xenopi, M. marinum, M. ulcerans
, and the
M. fortuitum
complex (
M.
fortuitum, M. abscessus
, and
M. chelonae
). Person-to-person transmission has not been documented.
The lungs are the most common site; most lung infections involve MAC but may be due to
M. kansasii, M.
xenopi
, or
M. abscessus
. Occasional cases involve lymph nodes, bones and joints, the skin, and
wounds. However,
incidence of disseminated MAC disease is increasing in HIV-infected patients, and
resistance to anti-TB drugs is the rule (except for
M. kansasii
and
M. xenopi
).
Nontuberculous mycobacterial infections are best managed by a specialist with particular expertise in that
area. The American Thoracic Society publishes updated diagnostic and therapeutic guidelines on the
diagnosis and management of these challenging infections.
Pulmonary disease:
The typical patient is a middle-aged or older white man with previous lung
problems such as chronic bronchitis, emphysema, healed TB, bronchiectasis, or silicosis. MAC also
commonly causes pulmonary disease in middle-aged and elderly women with bronchiectasis, scoliosis,
pectus excavatum, or mitral valve prolapse but without known underlying lung abnormalities. This
syndrome appears to be increasing in frequency for unknown reasons.
===PAGE:1475===
Cough and expectoration are common, often associated with fatigue, weight loss, and low-grade fever.
The course may be slowly progressive or stable for long periods. Respiratory insufficiency and persistent
hemoptysis may develop. Fibronodular infiltrates on chest x-ray resemble those of pulmonary TB, but
cavitation tends to be thin-walled, and pleural effusion is rare. So-called tree-and-bud infiltrates are also
characteristic of MAC disease.
Determination of drug susceptibility may be helpful for certain organism/drug combinations but can be
done only in highly specialized laboratories.
For moderately symptomatic disease due to MAC with positive sputum smears and cultures,
clarithromycin 500 mg po bid or azithromycin 600 mg once/day, rifampin (RIF) 600 mg po once/day, and
ethambutol (EMB) 15 to 25 mg/kg po once/day should be used for 12 to 18 mo or until cultures are
negative for 12 mo. For progressive cases unresponsive to standard drugs, combinations of 4 to 6 drugs
that include clarithromycin 500 mg po bid or azithromycin 600 mg once/day, rifabutin 300 mg po once/day,
ciprofloxacin 250 to 500 mg po or IV bid, clofazimine 100 to 200 mg po once/day, and amikacin 10 to 15
mg/kg IV once/day may be tried. Resection surgery is recommended in exceptional cases involving welllocalized disease in young, otherwise healthy patients.
M. kansasii
and
M. xenopi
infections respond to
isoniazid, rifabutin, and EMB, with or without streptomycin or clarithromycin, given for 18 to 24 mo. All
nontuberculous mycobacteria are resistant to pyrazinamide.
Lymphadenitis:
In children 1 to 5 yr, chronic submaxillary and submandibular cervical lymphadenitis is
commonly due to MAC or
M. scrofulaceum
. It is presumably acquired by oral ingestion of soil organisms.
Diagnosis is usually by excisional biopsy. Usually, excision is adequate treatment and chemotherapy is
not required.
Cutaneous disease:
Swimming pool granuloma is a protracted but self-limited superficial granulomatous
ulcerating disease usually caused by
M. marinum
contracted from swimming in contaminated pools or
from cleaning a home aquarium.
M. ulcerans
and
M. kansasii
are occasionally involved. Lesions, reddish
bumps enlarging and turning purple, most frequently occur on the upper extremities or knees. Healing
may occur spontaneously, but minocycline or doxycycline 100 to 200 mg po once/day, clarithromycin 500
mg po bid, or RIF plus EMB for 3 to 6 mo have been effective against
M. marinum
.
Wounds and foreign body infections:

M. fortuitum
complex has caused serious infections of
penetrating wounds in the eyes and skin (especially feet) and in patients receiving contaminated
materials (eg, porcine heart valves, breast implants, bone wax).
Treatment usually requires extensive debridement and removal of the foreign material. Useful drugs
include imipenem 1 g IV q 6 h, levofloxacin 500 mg IV or po once/day, clarithromycin 500 mg po bid,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 1 double-strength tablet po bid, doxycycline 100 to 200 mg po once/day,
cefoxitin 2 g IV q 6 to 8 h, and amikacin 10 to 15 mg/kg IV once/day, for 3 to 6 mo. Combination therapy is
recommended with at least 2 drugs that have in vitro activity. Infections caused by
M. abscessus
and
M.
chelonae
are resistant to most antibiotics, have proved extremely difficult or impossible to cure and
should be referred to an experienced specialist.
Disseminated disease:
MAC causes disseminated disease commonly in patients with advanced AIDS
and occasionally in those with other immunocompromised states, including organ transplantation and
hairy cell leukemia. In AIDS patients, disseminated MAC usually develops late (unlike TB, which develops
early), occurring simultaneously with other opportunistic infections.
Disseminated MAC disease causes fever, anemia, thrombocytopenia, diarrhea, and abdominal pain
(features similar to Whipple's disease). Diagnosis can be confirmed by cultures of blood or bone marrow
or by biopsy (eg, percutaneous fine-needle biopsy of liver or necrotic lymph nodes). Organisms may be
identified in stool and respiratory specimens,
but organisms from these specimens may represent
colonization rather than true disease.
Combination therapy to clear bacteremia and alleviate symptoms usually requires 2 to 3 drugs; one is
===PAGE:1476===
clarithromycin 500 mg po bid or azithromycin 600 mg po once/day, plus EMB 15 to 25 mg/kg once/day.
Sometimes rifabutin 300 mg once/day is also given. After successful treatment, chronic suppression with
clarithromycin or azithromycin plus EMB is necessary to prevent relapse.
HIV-infected patients with a CD4 count < 100 cells/
μ
L require prophylaxis for disseminated MAC with
azithromycin 1.2 g po once/week or clarithromycin 500 mg po bid.
Leprosy
(Hansen's Disease)
Leprosy is a chronic infection caused by the acid-fast bacillus
Mycobacterium leprae
, which has
a unique tropism for peripheral nerves, skin, and mucous membranes. Symptoms are myriad
and include anesthetic polymorphic skin lesions and peripheral neuropathy. Diagnosis is clinical
and confirmed by biopsy. Treatment is typically with dapsone plus other antimycobacterial
drugs.
Because without treatment, people with leprosy are visibly disfigured and often have significant disability,
they have long been feared and shunned by others. Although leprosy is not highly contagious, rarely
causes death, and can be effectively treated with antibiotics, it still causes anxiety. As a result, people with
leprosy and their family members often have psychologic and social problems.
Epidemiology
During 2007, > 250,000 new cases were reported. About 90% of these cases occurred in the following 8
countries (from the most cases to the least): India, Brazil, Indonesia, Congo, Bangladesh, Nigeria, Nepal,
and Ethiopia. In 2006, 137 new cases were reported in the US. Cases occurred in 30 states, but more
than half occurred in 6 states: California, Florida, Louisiana, Massachusetts, New York, and Texas. Most
cases of leprosy in the US involve people who emigrated from developing countries.
Leprosy can develop at any age but appears most often in people aged 5 to 15 yr or > 30.
Pathophysiology
Humans are the main natural reservoir for
M. leprae
. Armadillos are the only confirmed source other than
humans, although other animal and environmental sources may exist.
How leprosy is spread is unclear. It is thought to be passed from person to person through nasal droplets
and secretions. Casual contact (eg, simply touching someone with the disease) and short-term contact
does not seem to spread the disease. About half of people with leprosy probably contracted it through
close, long-term contact with an infected person. Even after contact with the bacteria, most people do not
contract leprosy; health care workers often work for many years with people who have leprosy without
contracting the disease. Most (95%) immunocompetent people who are infected with
M. leprae
do not
develop leprosy because of effective immunity. People who do develop leprosy probably have a poorly
defined genetic predisposition.
M. leprae
grow slowly (doubling in 2 wk). The usual incubation period ranges from 6 mo to 10 yr. Once
infection develops, hematogenous dissemination can occur.
Classification:
Leprosy can be categorized by type and number of skin areas affected:
•
Paucibacillary:
≤ 5 skin lesions with no bacteria detected on samples from those areas
•
Multibacillary:
≥ 6 skin lesions, bacteria detected on samples from skin lesions, or both
Leprosy can also be classified by cellular response and clinical findings:
• Tuberculoid
===PAGE:1477===
• Lepromatous
• Borderline
People with tuberculoid leprosy typically have a strong cell-mediated response, which limits disease to a
few skin lesions (paucibacillary), and the disease is milder, less common, and less contagious. People
with lepromatous or borderline leprosy typically have poor cell-mediated immunity to
M. leprae
and have
more severe, systemic infection with widespread bacterial infiltration of skin, nerves, and other organs
(eg, nose, testes, kidneys). They have more skin lesions (multibacillary), and the disease is more
contagious.
In both classifications, the type of leprosy dictates long-term prognosis, likely complications, and duration
of antibiotic treatment.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually do not begin until > 1 yr after infection (average 5 to 7 yr). Once symptoms begin, they
progress slowly.
Leprosy affects mainly the skin and peripheral nerves. Nerve involvement causes numbness and
weakness in areas controlled by the affected nerves.
•
Tuberculoid leprosy:
Skin lesions consist of one or a few hypoesthetic, centrally hypopigmented
macules with sharp, raised borders. The rash, as in all forms of leprosy, is nonpruritic. Areas affected by
this rash are numb because of damage to the underlying nerves, which may be palpably enlarged.
•
Lepromatous leprosy:
Much of the skin and many areas of the body, including the kidneys, nose, and
testes, may be affected. Patients have skin macules, papules, nodules, or plaques, often symmetric.
Peripheral neuropathy is more severe than in tuberculoid leprosy, with more areas of numbness; certain
muscle groups may be weak. Patients may develop gynecomastia or lose eyelashes and eyebrows or
digits.
•
Borderline leprosy:
Features of both tuberculoid and lepromatous leprosy are present. Without
treatment, borderline leprosy may become less severe and more like the tuberculoid form, or it may
worsen and become more like the lepromatous form.
Complications:
The most severe complications result from the peripheral neuropathy, which causes
deterioration of the sense of touch and a corresponding inability to feel pain and temperature. Patients
may unknowingly burn, cut, or otherwise harm themselves. Repeated damage may lead to loss of digits.
Muscle weakness can result in deformities (eg, clawing of the 4th and 5th fingers caused by ulnar nerve
involvement, foot drop caused by peroneal nerve involvement).
Papules and nodules can be particularly disfiguring on the face.
Other areas of the body may be affected:
•
Feet:
Plantar ulcers with secondary infection are a major cause of morbidity, making walking painful.
•
Nose:
Damage to the nasal mucosa can result in chronic nasal congestion and nosebleeds and, if
untreated, erosion and collapse of the nasal septum.
•
Eyes:
Iritis may lead to glaucoma, and corneal insensitivity may lead to scarring and blindness.
•
Sexual function:
Men with lepromatous leprosy may have erectile dysfunction and infertility. The
infection can reduce testosterone and sperm production by the testes.
•
Kidneys:
Amyloidosis and consequent renal failure occasionally occur in lepromatous leprosy.
===PAGE:1478===
Leprosy reactions:
During the course of untreated or even treated leprosy, the immune system may
produce inflammatory reactions. There are 2 types.
Type 1 reactions
result from a spontaneous increase in cell-mediated immunity. These reactions can
cause fever and inflammation of the preexisting skin and peripheral nerve lesions, resulting in skin
edema, erythema, and tenderness and worsening nerve function. These reactions, particularly if not
treated early, contribute significantly to nerve damage. Because the immune response is increased, these
reactions are termed reversal reactions, despite the apparent clinical worsening.
Type 2 reactions
(erythema nodosum leprosum, or ENL) are systemic inflammatory reactions that
appear to be a vasculitis or panniculitis and probably involve circulating immune complex deposition or
increased T-helper cell function. They have become less common since clofazimine was added to the
drug regimen. Patients may develop erythematous and painful papules or nodules that may pustulate and
ulcerate and cause fever, neuritis, lymphadenitis, orchitis, arthritis (particularly in large joints, usually
knees), and glomerulonephritis. Hemolysis or bone marrow suppression may cause anemia, and hepatic
inflammation may cause mild abnormalities in liver function tests.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of skin biopsy specimen
Diagnosis is suggested by the clinical picture of skin lesions and peripheral neuropathy and confirmed by
microscopic examination of biopsy specimens; the organism does not grow on artificial culture media.
Biopsy specimens should be taken from the advancing edge of tuberculoid lesions or, in lepromatous
leprosy, from nodules or plaques.
Serum IgM antibodies to
M. leprae
are specific but insensitive (present in only two thirds of patients with
tuberculoid leprosy). Diagnostic usefulness is further limited in endemic areas because such antibodies
may be present in asymptomatic infection.
Treatment
• Long-term, multidrug regimens with dapsone, rifampin, and sometimes clofazimine
• Sometimes lifelong maintenance antibiotics
Antibiotics can stop the progression of leprosy but do not reverse any nerve damage or deformity. Thus,
early detection and treatment are vitally important. Because of antibiotic resistance, multidrug regimens
are used. The drugs chosen depend on the type of leprosy;
multibacillary leprosy requires more intensive
regimens and a longer duration than paucibacillary does. Advice about diagnosis and treatment is
available from the National Hansen's Disease Program in Baton Rouge, LA (1-800-642-2477). Standard
regimens recommended by the WHO differ somewhat from those used in the US.
Multibacillary:
The standard WHO regimen includes dapsone, rifampin, and clofazimine. Patients take
rifampin 600 mg and clofazimine 300 mg po once/mo under a health care practitioner's supervision and
dapsone 100 mg plus clofazimine 50 mg once/day without supervision. This regimen is continued for 12
to 24 mo, depending on disease severity.
In the US, the regimen is rifampin 600 mg po once/day and dapsone 100 mg po once/day for 3 yr.
Dapsone is continued indefinitely for lepromatous leprosy and for 10 yr for borderline leprosy.
Paucibacillary:
In the standard WHO regimen, patients take rifampin 600 mg po once/mo with
supervision and dapsone 100 mg once/day without supervision for 6 mo. People who have only a single
skin lesion are given a single dose of rifampin 600 mg, ofloxacin 400 mg, and minocycline 100 mg.
In the US, the regimen is rifampin 600 mg po once/day and dapsone 100 mg po once/day for 6 mo.
Dapsone is continued for 3 yr for indeterminate and tuberculoid leprosy and for 5 yr for borderline
===PAGE:1479===
tuberculoid.
Drugs for leprosy:
Dapsone is relatively inexpensive and generally safe to use. Adverse effects include
hemolysis and anemia (which are generally mild) and allergic dermatoses (which can be severe); rarely,
dapsone syndrome (exfoliative dermatitis, high fever, mononucleosis-like WBC differential) occurs.
Rifampin, is primarily bactericidal for
M. leprae
and is even more effective than dapsone. However, if
given at the recommended US dosage of 600 mg po once/day, it is too expensive for many developing
countries. Adverse effects include hepatotoxicity, flu-like syndromes, and, rarely, thrombocytopenia and
renal failure.
Clofazimine is extremely safe. The main side effect is temporary skin pigmentation.
Leprosy reactions:
Patients with type 1 reactions (except minor skin inflammation) are given prednisone
40 to 60 mg po once/day initially, followed by low maintenance doses (often as low as 10 to 15 mg
once/day) for a few months. Minor skin inflammation should not be treated.
First and 2nd episodes of ENL may be treated, if mild, with aspirin or, if significant, with 1 wk of
prednisone 40 to 60 mg po once/day plus antimicrobials. For recurrent cases, thalidomide 100 to 300 mg
po once/day is the drug of choice (in the US, available through the National Hansen's Disease Program).
However, because of its teratogenicity, thalidomide should not be given to women who may become
pregnant. Adverse effects are mild constipation, mild leukopenia, and sedation.
Prevention
Because leprosy is not very contagious, risk of spread is low. Only the untreated lepromatous form is
contagious, but even then the infection is not easily spread. Once treatment has begun, leprosy cannot
be spread. Avoiding contact with bodily fluids from and the rash on infected people is the best prevention.
The BCG vaccine, used to prevent TB, provides some protection against leprosy but is not often used.
===PAGE:1480===
Chapter 142. Fungi
Introduction
(See also
Chapter 82
.)
Fungal infections are often classified as opportunistic or primary. Opportunistic infections are those that
develop mainly in immunocompromised hosts; primary infections can develop in immunocompetent hosts.
Fungal infections can be systemic or local. Local fungal infections typically involve the skin (,
mouth (, and vagina ( and may occur in normal or immunocompromised hosts.
Opportunistic fungal infections:
Many fungi are opportunists and are usually not pathogenic except in
an immunocompromised host. Causes of immunocompromise include AIDS, azotemia, diabetes mellitus,
bronchiectasis, emphysema, TB, lymphoma, leukemia, other hematologic cancers, burns, and therapy
with corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, or antimetabolites. Patients who spend more than several
days in an ICU can become compromised because of medical procedures, underlying disorders, and
undernutrition.
Typical opportunistic systemic fungal infections (mycoses) include
• Candidiasis
• Aspergillosis
• Mucormycosis (zygomycosis)
• Fusariosis
Systemic mycoses affecting severely immunocompromised patients often manifest acutely with rapidly
progressive pneumonia, fungemia, or manifestations of extrapulmonary dissemination.
Primary fungal infections:
These infections usually result from inhalation of fungal spores, which can
cause a localized pneumonia as the primary manifestation of infection. In immunocompetent patients,
systemic mycoses typically have a chronic course; disseminated mycoses with pneumonia and septicemia
are rare and, if lung lesions develop, usually progress slowly. Months may elapse before medical
attention is sought or a diagnosis is made. Symptoms are rarely intense in such chronic mycoses, but
fever, chills, night sweats, anorexia, weight loss, malaise, and depression may occur. Various organs may
be infected, causing symptoms and dysfunction.
Primary fungal infections may have a characteristic geographic distribution, which is especially true for
the endemic mycoses caused by certain dimorphic fungi. For example,
•
Coccidioidomycosis:
Confined primarily to the southwestern US and northern Mexico
•
Histoplasmosis:
Occurring primarily in the eastern and Midwestern US
•
Blastomycosis:
Confined to North America and Africa
•
Paracoccidioidomycosis (formerly, South American blastomycosis):
Confined to that continent
However, travelers can manifest disease any time after returning from endemic areas.
When fungi disseminate from a primary focus in the lung, the manifestations may be characteristic, as for
the following:
•
Cryptococcosis:
Usually, chronic meningitis
•
Progressive disseminated histoplasmosis:
Generalized involvement of the reticuloendothelial
===PAGE:1481===
system (liver, spleen, bone marrow)
•
Blastomycosis:
Single or multiple skin lesions or involvement of the prostate
Diagnosis
• Cultures and stains (typically for fungi and mycobacteria)
• Sometimes serologic tests (mainly for
Aspergillus, Candida, Coccidioides
, and
Cryptococcus
)
• Rarely biopsy
If clinicians suspect an acute or a chronic primary fungal infection, they should obtain a detailed travel
and residential history to determine whether patients may have been exposed to certain endemic
mycoses, perhaps years previously.
Pulmonary fungal infections must be distinguished from TB, tumors, and chronic pneumonias caused by
nonfungal organisms. Specimens are obtained for fungal and acid-fast bacilli culture and histopathology.
Sputum samples may be adequate, but occasionally bronchoalveolar lavage, transthoracic needle biopsy,
or even surgery may be required to obtain an acceptable specimen.
Fungi that cause primary systemic infections are readily recognized by their histopathologic appearance.
However, identifying the specific fungus may be difficult and usually requires fungal culture. The clinical
significance of positive sputum cultures may be unclear if they show commensal organisms (eg,
Candida
albicans
) or fungi ubiquitous in the environment (eg,
Aspergillus
sp). Therefore, evidence of tissue
invasion is required for a diagnosis of candidiasis, aspergillosis, or other opportunistic fungal infections
(eg, fusariosis, pseudallescheriasis) because these fungi may not be causing the symptoms.
Serologic tests
may be used to check for many systemic mycoses if culture and histopathology are
unavailable or unrevealing, although few provide definitive diagnoses. Particularly useful tests include the
following:
• Measurement of organism-specific antigens, most notably from
Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma
capsulatum
, and
Aspergillus
sp
• Measurement of histoplasmin in urine to diagnose histoplasmosis
• Complement fixation assays and newer enzyme immunoassays for anticoccidioidal antibodies, which are
satisfactorily specific and do not require proof of rising levels (high titers confirm the diagnosis and
indicate high risk of extrapulmonary dissemination)
• Detection of antibodies in CSF of patients with chronic meningitis to confirm the diagnosis
Most other tests for antifungal antibodies have low sensitivity, specificity, or both and, because
measurement of acute and convalescent titers is required, cannot be used to guide initial therapy.
Antifungal Drugs
Drugs for systemic antifungal treatment include amphotericin B (and its lipid formulations), various azole
derivatives, echinocandins, and flucytosine (see
Table 142-1
).
[Table 142-1.
Some Drugs for Systemic Fungal Infections]
Amphotericin B, an effective but relatively toxic drug, has long been the mainstay of antifungal therapy for
invasive and serious mycoses. However, newer potent and less toxic triazoles and echinocandins are
now often recommended as first-line drugs for many invasive fungal infections. These drugs have
markedly changed the approach to antifungal therapy, sometimes even allowing oral treatment of chronic
===PAGE:1482===
mycoses.
Amphotericin B
Amphotericin B has been the mainstay of antifungal therapy for invasive and serious mycoses, but other
antifungals (eg, voriconazole, posaconazole, the echinocandins) are now considered first-line drugs for
many of these infections.
For
chronic mycoses
, conventional amphotericin B is usually started at ≥ 0.3 mg/kg IV once/day,
increased as tolerated to the desired dose (0.4 to 1.0 mg/kg; generally not > 50 mg/day); many patients
tolerate the target dose on the first day. If patients tolerate the target dose, twice that dose can be given
on a more convenient alternate-day schedule. Extended treatment courses may be even less frequent
(eg, 3 times/wk).
For
acute, life-threatening mycoses
, amphotericin B is started at 0.6 to 1.0 mg/kg IV once/day. For
certain rapidly progressive opportunistic mycoses (eg, invasive aspergillosis), daily doses as high as 1.5
mg/kg have been used, usually divided into 2 or 3 infusions. These doses must be decreased to about
0.5 mg/kg/day as nephrotoxicity develops.
For
chronic meningitis,
intrathecal amphotericin B injections can be used but are now rarely needed
because potent triazoles (eg, voriconazole, posaconazole) are an effective alternative. Administration is
usually via direct intracisternal injection or through a subcutaneous Ommaya-type reservoir connected to
an intraventricular catheter. Headache, nausea, and vomiting may occur, but adding dexamethasone to
each intrathecal injection may lessen these effects. Amphotericin B can also be given as lumbar
intrathecal injections. At the time of injection, ≥ 10 mL of CSF is withdrawn into a syringe containing
amphotericin B diluted in 5% D/W to 0.2 mg/mL. Doses of 0.05 to 0.5 mg are then injected over 2 min or
more. Doses are gradually increased as tolerated, peaking with a regimen of 0.5 mg 3 times/wk.
Formulations:
There are 2 formulations of amphotericin:
• Standard (conventional)
• Lipid-based
The
standard formulation
, colloidal amphotericin B deoxycholate, must always be given in 5% D/W
because salts can precipitate the drug. It is usually given over 2 to 3 h, although more rapid infusions over
20 to 60 min can be used in selected patients. However, more rapid infusions usually have no advantage.
Many patients experience chills, fever, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, headache, and, occasionally,
hypotension during and for several hours after an infusion. Amphotericin B may also cause chemical
thrombophlebitis when given via peripheral veins. Pretreatment with acetaminophen or NSAIDs is often
used; if these drugs are ineffective, hydrocortisone 25 to 50 mg or diphenhydramine 25 mg is sometimes
added to the infusion or given as a separate IV bolus. Often, hydrocortisone can be tapered and omitted
during extended therapy. Severe chills and rigors can be relieved or prevented by meperidine 50 to 75 mg
IV.
Several
lipid vehicles
reduce the toxicity of amphotericin B (particularly nephrotoxicity and infusionrelated symptoms). Three preparations are available:
• Amphotericin B lipid complex
• Liposomal amphotericin B
• Amphotericin B cholesteryl sulfate
The first 2 lipid formulations are preferred over conventional amphotericin B because
they cause fewer
infusion-related symptoms and less nephrotoxicity. Amphotericin B cholesteryl sulfate does not provide
any advantages over conventional amphotericin B.
===PAGE:1483===
Adverse effects:
The main adverse effects are
• Nephrotoxicity (most common)
• Bone marrow suppression
Renal impairment is the major toxic risk of amphotericin B therapy. Serum creatinine and BUN should be
monitored before treatment and at regular intervals during treatment: several times/wk for the first 2 to 3
wk, then 1 to 4 times/mo as clinically indicated. Amphotericin B is unique among nephrotoxic antimicrobial
drugs because it is not eliminated appreciably via the kidneys and does not accumulate as renal failure
worsens. Nevertheless, dosages should be lowered if serum creatinine rises to > 3.0 to 3.5 mg/dL (> 265
to 309
μ
mol/L) or BUN rises to > 50 mg/dL (> 18 mmol urea/L). Acute nephrotoxicity can be reduced by
aggressive IV hydration with saline before amphotericin B infusion; at least 1 L of normal saline should be
given before amphotericin infusion. Mild to moderate renal function abnormalities induced by amphotericin
B usually resolve gradually after therapy is completed. Permanent damage occurs primarily after
prolonged treatment; after > 4 g total dose, about 75% of patients have persistent renal insufficiency.
Amphotericin B also frequently suppresses bone marrow function, manifested primarily by anemia.
Hepatotoxicity or other untoward effects are unusual.
Azole Antifungals
Azoles block the synthesis of ergosterol, an important component of the fungal cell membrane. They can
be given orally to treat chronic mycoses. The first such oral drug, ketoconazole, has largely been
supplanted by more effective, less toxic triazole derivatives, such as fluconazole, itraconazole,
posaconazole, and voriconazole. Drug interactions can occur with all azoles but are less likely with
fluconazole.
Fluconazole:
This water-soluble drug is absorbed almost completely after an oral dose. It is excreted
largely unchanged in urine and has a half-life of > 24 h, allowing single daily doses. It has high
penetration into CSF (≥ 70% of serum levels) and has been especially useful in treating cryptococcal and
coccidioidal meningitis. It is also one of the first-line drugs for treatment of candidemia in non-neutropenic
patients. Doses range from 200 to 400 mg po once/day to as high as 160 mg once/day in some seriously
ill patients and in patients infected with
Candida glabrata
or other
Candida
sp (not
C. albicans
); daily
doses of ≥ 1000 mg have been given and had acceptable toxicity.
Adverse effects
that occur most commonly are GI discomfort and skin rash. More severe toxicity is
unusual, but the following have occurred: hepatic necrosis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, anaphylaxis,
alopecia, and, when taken after the 1st trimester of pregnancy, congenital fetal anomalies.
Drug interactions
occur less often with fluconazole than with other azoles. However, fluconazole
sometimes elevates serum levels of cyclosporine, rifabutin, phenytoin, tacrolimus, warfarin-type oral
anticoagulants, sulfonylurea drugs (eg, tolbutamide), and zidovudine. Rifampin may lower fluconazole
blood levels.
Itraconazole:
This drug has become the standard treatment for lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis as well
as for mild or moderately severe histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and paracoccidioidomycosis. It is also
effective in mild cases of invasive aspergillosis, some cases of coccidioidomycosis, and certain types of
chromoblastomycosis. Itraconazole can clear some types of fungal meningitis, but it is not the drug of
choice. Because of its high lipid solubility and protein binding, itraconazole blood levels tend to be low,
but tissue levels are typically high. Drug levels are negligible in urine and CSF. Use of itraconazole is
likely to decline as use of voriconazole and posaconazole increases.
Adverse effects
with doses of up to 400 mg/day most commonly are GI, but a few men have reported
erectile dysfunction, and higher doses may cause hypokalemia, hypertension, and edema. Other reported
adverse effects include allergic rash, hepatitis, and hallucinations.
Drug and food interactions
can be significant. Acidic drinks (eg, cola, acidic fruit juices) or food
===PAGE:1484===
(especially high-fat foods) improves absorption from the GI tract. However, absorption may be reduced if
itraconazole is taken with prescription or OTC drugs used to lower gastric acidity. Several drugs, including
rifampin, rifabutin, didanosine, phenytoin, and carbamazepine, may decrease serum itraconazole levels.
Itraconazole also inhibits metabolic degradation of other drugs, elevating blood levels with potentially
serious consequences. Serious, even fatal cardiac arrhythmias may occur if itraconazole is used with
cisapride (not available in the US) or some antihistamines (eg, terfenadine, astemizole, perhaps
loratadine). Rhabdomyolysis has been associated with itraconazole-induced elevations
in blood levels of
cyclosporine or statins. Blood levels of digoxin, tacrolimus, oral anticoagulants, or sulfonylureas may
increase when these drugs are used with itraconazole.
Posaconazole:
The triazole posaconazole is an oral suspension; it is not available in tablet or IV
formulations. This drug is highly active against yeasts and molds and effectively treats various
opportunistic mold infections, such as those due to dematiaceous (dark-walled) fungi (eg,
Cladophialophora
sp). Posaconazole is also being evaluated as prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with
various cancers.
Adverse effects
for posaconazole, as for other triazoles, include a prolonged QT interval and interaction
with many drugs, including rifampin, statins, various immunosuppressants, and barbiturates.
Voriconazole:
This broad-spectrum triazole can be used as first-line therapy for serious
Aspergillus
infections; most clinical mycologists consider it the treatment of choice for
Aspergillus
infections in
immunocompetent and immunocompromised hosts. Voriconazole can also be used to treat
Scedosporium
apiospermum
and
Fusarium
infections. Additionally, the drug is effective in candidal esophagitis and other
candidal infections; it has activity against a broader spectrum of
Candida
sp than does fluconazole.
Adverse effects
that must be monitored for include hepatotoxicity, visual disturbances, hallucinations,
and dermatologic reactions. This drug can prolong the QT interval. Also, there are numerous drug-drug
interactions, notably with certain immunosuppressants used after organ transplantation.
Echinocandins
Echinocandins are water-soluble lipopeptides that inhibit glucan synthase. Their mechanism of action is
unique among antifungal drugs; echinocandins target the fungal cell wall, making them attractive because
they lack cross-resistance with other drugs and their target is fungal and has no mammalian counterpart.
Echinocandins available in the US are anidulafungin, caspofungin, and micafungin. There is little
evidence to suggest that one is better than the other, but anidulafungin appears to interact with fewer
drugs than the other two.
These drugs can be used to treat various forms of candidiasis, aspergillosis, and other mycoses.
Flucytosine
Flucytosine, a nucleic acid analog, is water soluble and well absorbed after oral administration.
Preexisting or emerging resistance is common, so it is almost always used with another antifungal, usually
amphotericin B. Flucytosine plus amphotericin B is used primarily to treat cryptococcosis but is also
valuable for some cases of disseminated candidiasis, other yeast infections, and severe invasive
aspergillosis. Flucytosine plus antifungal azoles may be beneficial in treating cryptococcosis and some
other mycoses.
The usual dose (12.5 to 37.5 mg/kg po qid) leads to high drug levels in serum, urine, and CSF. Major
adverse effects are bone marrow suppression (thrombocytopenia and leukopenia), hepatotoxicity, and
enterocolitis; only degree of bone marrow suppression is proportional to serum levels. Because
flucytosine is cleared primarily by the kidneys, blood levels rise if nephrotoxicity develops during
concomitant use with amphotericin B, particularly when amphotericin B is used in doses > 0.4 mg/kg/day.
Flucytosine serum levels should be monitored, and the dosage should be adjusted to keep levels
between 40 and 90
μ
g/mL. CBC and renal and liver function tests should be done twice/wk. If blood
levels are unavailable, therapy is begun at 25 mg/kg qid, and dosage is decreased if renal function
deteriorates.
===PAGE:1485===
Aspergillosis
Aspergillosis is an opportunistic infection caused by inhaling spores of the mold
Aspergillus
;
the spores invade blood vessels, causing hemorrhagic necrosis and infarction. Symptoms may
be those of asthma, pneumonia, sinusitis, or rapidly progressing systemic illness. Diagnosis is
primarily clinical but may be aided by imaging, histopathology, and specimen staining and
culture. Treatment is with voriconazole, amphotericin B (or its lipid formulations), caspofungin,
itraconazole, or flucytosine. Fungus balls may require surgical resection. Recurrence is
common.
Aspergillus
sp are among the most common environmental molds, frequently present in or on the
following:
• Decaying vegetation (eg, compost heaps)
• Insulating materials
• Air conditioning or heating vents
• Operating pavilions and patient rooms
• Hospital implements
• Airborne dust
Pathophysiology
Invasive infections are usually acquired by inhalation of spores or, occasionally, by direct invasion through
damaged skin.
Major risk factors
include
• Neutropenia
• Long-term high-dose corticosteroid therapy
• Organ transplantation (especially bone marrow transplantation)
• Hereditary disorders of neutrophil function (eg, chronic granulomatous disease)
• AIDS
Aspergillus
sp tends to infect open spaces, such as pulmonary cavities caused by previous lung
disorders (eg, bronchiectasis, tumor, TB), the sinuses, or ear canals (otomycosis). Such infections tend to
be locally invasive and destructive, although systemic spread sometimes occurs, particularly in
immunocompromised patients.
A. fumigatus
is the most common cause of invasive pulmonary disease;
A. flavus
most often causes
invasive extrapulmonary disease, probably because these patients are more severely immunosuppressed
than patients infected with
A. fumigatus
.
Focal infections, typically in the lung, sometimes form a fungus ball (aspergilloma), a characteristic growth
of tangled masses of hyphae, with fibrin exudate and few inflammatory cells, typically encapsulated by
fibrous tissue. Occasionally, there is some local invasion of tissue at the periphery of the cavity, but
usually the fungus just resides within the cavity with no appreciable local invasion.
A chronic form of invasive aspergillosis occasionally occurs, particularly in patients with chronic
===PAGE:1486===
granulomatous disease, which is characterized by a hereditary phagocytic cell defect.
Aspergillus
sp can
also cause endophthalmitis after trauma or surgery to the eye (or by hematogenous seeding) and
infections of intravascular and intracardiac prostheses.
Primary superficial aspergillosis is uncommon but may occur in burns; beneath occlusive dressings; after
corneal trauma (keratitis); or in the sinuses, mouth, nose, or ear canal.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
is a hypersensitivity reaction to
A. fumigatus
that results in
lung inflammation unrelated to fungal invasion of tissues (.
Symptoms and Signs
Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis causes cough, often with hemoptysis and shortness of breath. If
untreated, invasive pulmonary aspergillosis usually causes rapidly progressive, ultimately fatal respiratory
failure.
Extrapulmonary invasive aspergillosis begins with skin lesions, sinusitis, or pneumonia and may involve
the liver, kidneys, brain, and other tissues; it is often rapidly fatal.
Aspergillosis in the sinuses can form an aspergilloma or cause allergic fungal sinusitis or a chronic, slowly
invasive granulomatous inflammation with fever, rhinitis, and headache. Patients may have necrosing
cutaneous lesions overlying the nose or sinuses, palatal or gingival ulcerations, signs of cavernous sinus
thrombosis, or pulmonary or disseminated lesions.
Diagnosis
• Usually fungal culture and histopathology of tissue samples
Because
Aspergillus
sp are common in the environment, positive sputum cultures may be due to
environmental contamination or noninvasive colonization in patients with chronic lung disease; positive
cultures are significant mainly when obtained from patients with increased susceptibility due to
immunosuppression or when there is high suspicion due to typical imaging findings. Conversely, sputum
cultures from patients with aspergillomas or invasive pulmonary aspergillosis are often negative because
cavities are often walled off from airways and because invasive disease progresses mainly by vascular
invasion and tissue infarction.
Chest x-rays are taken, and CT of sinuses is done if sinus infection is suspected. A movable fungus ball
within a cavitary lesion is characteristic on both, although most lesions are focal and solid. Sometimes
imaging detects a halo sign (a thin air shadow surrounding a nodule), representing cavitation within a
necrotic lesion. Diffuse, generalized pulmonary infiltrates are seen in some patients.
Culture and histopathology of a tissue sample are usually necessary for confirmation; the sample is
typically taken from the lungs via bronchoscopy and from the sinuses via anterior rhinoscopy. Because
cultures take time and histopathology results may be false-negative, most decisions to treat are based on
strong presumptive clinical evidence. Large vegetations often release sizable emboli that may occlude
blood vessels and provide specimens for diagnosis.
Various serologic assays exist but are of limited value for rapid diagnosis of acute, life-threatening
invasive aspergillosis. Detection of antigens such as galactomannans can be specific but is not
sufficiently sensitive to identify most cases in their early stages. Blood cultures are almost always
negative, even in rare cases of endocarditis.
Treatment
• Voriconazole or amphotericin B
• Sometimes surgery for aspergillomas
===PAGE:1487===
Invasive infections
usually require aggressive treatment with IV amphotericin B or voriconazole
(generally considered the first-choice drug). Oral itraconazole (but not fluconazole) can be effective in
some cases. Caspofungin or other echinocandins may be used as salvage therapy. Combination therapy
with azoles and echinocandins or with amphotericin B and echinocandins has been effective in some
patients.
Usually, complete cure requires reversal of immunosuppression (eg, resolution of neutropenia,
discontinuation of corticosteroids). Recrudescence is common if neutropenia recurs.
Aspergillomas
neither require nor respond to systemic antifungal therapy but may require resection
because of local effects, especially hemoptysis.
Blastomycosis
(Gilchrist's Disease; North American Blastomycosis)
Blastomycosis is a pulmonary disease caused by inhaling spores of the dimorphic fungus
Blastomyces dermatitidis
; occasionally, the fungi spread hematogenously, causing
extrapulmonary disease. Symptoms result from pneumonia or from dissemination to multiple
organs, most commonly the skin. Diagnosis is clinical, by chest x-ray, or both and is confirmed
by laboratory identification of the fungi. Treatment is with itraconazole, fluconazole, or
amphotericin B.
In North America, the endemic area for blastomycosis includes
• Ohio-Mississippi River valleys (extending into the middle Atlantic and Southeastern states)
• Northern Midwest
• Upstate New York
• Southern Canada
Infection also occurs in the Middle East and Africa.
Immunocompetent people can contract this infection. Although blastomycosis may be more common and
more severe in immunocompromised patients, it is a less common opportunistic infection than
histoplasmosis or coccidioidomycosis.
B. dermatitidis
grows as a mold at room temperature in soil enriched with animal excreta and in moist,
decaying, acidic organic material, often near rivers. In the lungs, inhaled spores convert into large (15 to
μ
m) invasive yeasts, which form characteristic broad-based buds.
Once in the lungs, infection may
• Remain localized in the lungs
• Disseminate hematogenously
Hematogenous dissemination can cause focal infection in numerous organs, including the skin, prostate,
epididymides, testes, kidneys, vertebrae, ends of long bones, subcutaneous tissues, brain, oral or nasal
mucosa, thyroid, lymph nodes, and bone marrow.
Symptoms and Signs
Pulmonary:
Pulmonary blastomycosis may be asymptomatic or cause an acute, self-limited disease that
often goes unrecognized. It can also begin insidiously and develop into a chronic, progressive infection.
Symptoms include a productive or dry hacking cough, chest pain, dyspnea, fever, chills, and drenching
===PAGE:1488===
sweats.
Pleural effusion occurs occasionally. Some patients have rapidly progressive infections, and acute
respiratory distress syndrome may develop.
Extrapulmonary:
In extrapulmonary disseminated blastomycosis, symptoms depend on the organ
involved. Skin lesions are by far the most common; they may be single or multiple and may occur with or
without clinically apparent pulmonary involvement. Papules or papulopustules usually appear on exposed
surfaces and spread slowly. Painless miliary abscesses, varying from pinpoint to 1 mm in diameter,
develop on the advancing borders. Irregular, wartlike papillae may form on surfaces. As lesions enlarge,
the centers heal, forming atrophic scars. When fully developed, an individual lesion appears as an
elevated verrucous patch, usually ≥ 2 cm wide with an abruptly sloping, purplish red, abscess-studded
border. Ulceration may occur if bacterial superinfection is present.
If bone lesions develop, overlying areas are sometimes swollen, warm, and tender. Genital lesions cause
painful epididymal swelling, deep perineal discomfort, or prostatic tenderness detected during rectal
examination.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Fungal cultures
A chest x-ray should be taken. Focal or diffuse infiltrates may be present, sometimes as patchy
bronchopneumonia fanning out from
the hilum. These findings must be distinguished from other causes of
pneumonia (eg, other mycoses, TB, tumors). Skin lesions can be mistaken for sporotrichosis, TB, iodism,
or basal cell carcinoma. Genital involvement may mimic TB.
Cultures of infected material are done; they are definitive when positive. The organism's characteristic
appearance, seen during microscopic examination of tissues or sputum, is also frequently diagnostic.
Serologic testing is not sensitive but is useful if positive.
Treatment
• For mild to moderate disease, itraconazole
• For severe, life-threatening infection, amphotericin B
Untreated blastomycosis is usually slowly progressive and is rarely ultimately fatal. Treatment depends on
severity of the infection. For mild to moderate disease, itraconazole 200 to 400 mg po once/day is used.
Fluconazole appears less effective, but 400 to 800 mg po once/day may be tried in itraconazole-intolerant
patients with mild disease. For severe, life-threatening infections, IV amphotericin B is usually effective.
Voriconazole and posaconazole are highly active against
B. dermatitidis
, but their role has not yet been
defined.
Candidiasis (Invasive)
(Candidosis; Moniliasis)
(See also pp.
,
, and
.)
Candidiasis is infection by
Candida
sp (most often
C. albicans
), manifested by mucocutaneous
lesions, fungemia, and sometimes focal infection of multiple sites. Symptoms depend on the
site of infection and include dysphagia, skin and mucosal lesions, blindness, vaginal symptoms
(itching, burning, discharge), fever, shock, oliguria, renal shutdown, and disseminated
intravascular coagulation. Diagnosis is confirmed by histopathology and cultures from normally
===PAGE:1489===
sterile sites. Treatment is with amphotericin B, fluconazole, echinocandins, voriconazole, or
posaconazole.
Candida
sp are commensal organisms that inhabit the GI tract and sometimes the skin (.
Unlike other systemic mycoses, candidiasis results from endogenous organisms. Most infections are
caused by
C. albicans
or
C. tropicalis
; however,
C. glabrata
(formerly
Torulopsis glabrata
) is increasingly
involved in fungemia, UTIs, and, occasionally, pneumonia or other focal disease.
Candida
sp account for about 80% of major systemic fungal infections and are the most common cause
of fungal infections in immunocompromised patients. Candidal infections are one of the most common
hospital-acquired infections.
Candidiasis involving the mouth and esophagus is a defining opportunistic infection in AIDS. Although
mucocutaneous candidiasis is frequently present in HIV-infected patients, hematogenous dissemination is
unusual until immunosuppression becomes profound. Neutropenic patients (eg, those receiving cancer
chemotherapy) are at high risk of developing life-threatening disseminated candidiasis.
Candidemia may occur in nonneutropenic patients during prolonged hospitalization. This bloodstream
infection is often related to one or more of the following:
• Multiple trauma
• Surgical procedures
• Multiple courses of broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy
• IV hyperalimentation
IV lines and the GI tract are the usual portals of entry. Candidemia often prolongs hospitalization and
increases mortality due to concurrent disorders. Prolonged or untreated candidemia may lead to
endocarditis or meningitis as well as to focal involvement of skin, subcutaneous tissues, bones, joints,
liver, spleen, kidneys, eyes, and other tissues. Endocarditis is commonly related to IV drug abuse, valve
replacement, or intravascular trauma induced by indwelling IV catheters.
All forms of disseminated candidiasis should be considered serious, progressive, and potentially fatal.
Symptoms and Signs
Esophagitis is most often manifested by dysphagia. Symptoms of respiratory tract infections (eg, cough)
are nonspecific.
Candidemia usually causes fever, but no symptoms are specific. Some patients develop a syndrome
resembling bacterial sepsis, with a fulminating course that may include shock, oliguria, renal shutdown,
and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Candidal endophthalmitis starts as white retinal lesions that are initially asymptomatic but can progress,
opacifying the vitreous and causing potentially irreversible scarring and blindness. In neutropenic
patients, retinal hemorrhages occasionally also occur, but actual infection of the eye is rare.
Papulonodular skin lesions may also develop, especially in neutropenic patients, in whom they indicate
widespread hematogenous dissemination to other organs. Symptoms of other focal infection depend on
the organ involved.
Diagnosis
• Histopathology and fungal cultures
Because
Candida
spp are commensal, their culture from sputum, the mouth, the vagina, urine, stool, or
===PAGE:1490===
skin does not necessarily signify an invasive, progressive infection. A characteristic clinical lesion must
also be present, histopathologic evidence of tissue invasion (eg, yeasts, pseudohyphae, or hyphae in
tissue specimens) must be documented, and other etiologies must be excluded. Positive cultures of
blood, CSF, pericardium or pericardial fluid or tissue biopsy specimens provide definitive evidence that
systemic therapy is needed.
Serologic assays do not have sufficient specificity or sensitivity to be useful.
Treatment
• Amphotericin B for severe illness, otherwise an echinocandin or azole
Predisposing conditions (eg, neutropenia, immunosuppression, use of broad-spectrum antibacterial
antibiotics, hyperalimentation, presence of indwelling lines) should be reversed or controlled if possible.
IV amphotericin B is recommended for most severely ill patients, especially those who are
immunosuppressed. Echinocandins are an alternative to amphotericin B in adults with or without
neutropenia. Fluconazole 400 to 800 mg po once/day is also considered a first-line drug (unless
C. krusei
or
C. glabrata
is involved) for nonneutropenic patients and may be effective in patients with neutropenia.
Esophageal candidiasis is treated with fluconazole 200 to 400 mg po or IV once/day or itraconazole 200
mg po once/day. If these drugs are ineffective or if infection is severe, voriconazole 4 mg/kg po or IV bid,
posaconazole 400 mg po bid, or one of the echinocandins may be used. These drugs are also effective
for bloodstream and other hematogenously disseminated infections.
Coccidioidomycosis
(San Joaquin Fever; Valley Fever)
Coccidioidomycosis is a pulmonary or hematogenously spread disseminated disease caused
by the fungus
Coccidioides immitis
; it usually occurs as an acute benign asymptomatic or selflimited respiratory infection. The organism occasionally disseminates to cause focal lesions in
other tissues. Symptoms, if present, are those of lower respiratory infection or low-grade
nonspecific disseminated disease. Diagnosis is suspected based on clinical and epidemiologic
characteristics and confirmed by chest x-ray, culture, and serologic testing. Treatment, if
needed, is usually with fluconazole, itraconazole, newer triazoles, or amphotericin B.
In North America, the endemic area for coccidioidomycosis includes
• The southwestern US
• Northern Mexico
The affected areas of the southwestern US include Arizona, the central valley of California, parts of New
Mexico, and Texas west of El Paso. The area extends into northern Mexico, and foci occur in parts of
Central America and Argentina.
Pathophysiology
Infections are acquired by inhaling spore-laden dust. Because of travel and delayed onset of clinical
manifestations, infections can become evident outside endemic areas.
Once inhaled,
C. immitis
spores convert to large tissue-invasive spherules. As spherules enlarge and
then rupture, each releases thousands of small endospores, which may form new spherules. Pulmonary
disease is characterized by an acute, subacute, or chronic granulomatous reaction with varying degrees
of fibrosis. Lesions may cavitate or form nodular-like coin lesions.
Sometimes disease progresses, with widespread lung involvement, dissemination, or both; focal lesions
may form in almost any other tissue, most commonly in skin, subcutaneous tissues, bones (osteomyelitis),
===PAGE:1491===
and meninges (meningitis). Progressive disease is more common among men and is more likely to occur
in the following contexts:
• HIV infection
• Use of immunosuppressants
• Advanced age
• 2nd half of pregnancy or postpartum
• Certain ethnic backgrounds (Filipino, African American, Native American, Hispanic, and Asian, in
decreasing order of relative risk)
Symptoms and Signs
Primary coccidioidomycosis:
Most patients are asymptomatic, but nonspecific respiratory symptoms
resembling those of influenza, acute
bronchitis, or, less often, acute pneumonia or pleural effusion
sometimes occur. Symptoms, in decreasing order of frequency, include fever, cough, chest pain, chills,
sputum production, sore throat, and hemoptysis.
Physical signs may be absent or limited to scattered rales with or without areas of dullness to percussion
over lung fields. Some patients develop hypersensitivity to the localized respiratory infection, manifested
by arthritis, conjunctivitis, erythema nodosum, or erythema multiforme.
Primary pulmonary lesions sometimes leave nodular coin lesions that must be distinguished from tumors,
TB, and other granulomatous infections. Sometimes residual cavitary lesions develop; they may vary in
size over time and often appear thin-walled. A small percentage of these cavities fail to close
spontaneously. Hemoptysis or the threat of rupture into the pleural space occasionally necessitates
surgery.
Progressive coccidioidomycosis:
Nonspecific symptoms develop a few weeks, months, or
occasionally years after primary infection; they include low-grade fever, anorexia, weight loss, and
weakness.
Extensive pulmonary involvement may cause progressive cyanosis, dyspnea, and mucopurulent or bloody
sputum. Symptoms of extrapulmonary lesions depend on the site. Draining sinus tracts sometimes
connect deeper lesions to the skin. Localized extrapulmonary lesions often become chronic and recur
frequently, sometimes long after completion of seemingly successful antifungal therapy.
Untreated disseminated coccidioidomycosis is usually fatal and, if meningitis is present, is uniformly fatal
without prolonged and possibly lifelong treatment. Mortality rates in patients with advanced HIV infection
exceed 70% within 1 mo of diagnosis; whether treatment can alter mortality rates is unclear.
Diagnosis
• Cultures (routine or fungal)
• Microscopic examination of specimens to check for
C. immitis
spherules
• Serologic testing
Eosinophilia may be an important clue in identifying coccidioidomycosis. The diagnosis is suspected
based on history and typical physical findings, when apparent; chest x-ray findings can help confirm the
diagnosis, which can be established by fungal culture or by visualization of
C. immitis
spherules in
sputum, pleural fluid, CSF, exudate from draining lesions, or biopsy specimens. Intact spherules are
usually 20 to 80
μ
m in diameter, thick-walled, and filled with small (2 to 4
μ
m) endospores. Endospores
released into tissues from ruptured spherules may be mistaken for nonbudding yeasts.
===PAGE:1492===
Serologic testing for anticoccidioidal antibodies using an immunodiffusion kit (for IgG and IgM antibodies)
and complement fixation (for IgG antibodies) are the most useful tests. Titers ≥ 1:4 in serum are
consistent with current or recent infection, and higher titers (≥ 1:32) signify an increased likelihood of
extrapulmonary dissemination. However, immunocompromised patients may have low titers. Titers should
decline during successful therapy. The presence of complement-fixing antibodies in CSF is diagnostic of
coccidioidal meningitis and is important because CSF cultures are rarely positive.
Delayed cutaneous hypersensitivity to coccidioidin or spherulin usually develops within 10 to 21 days
after acute infections in immunocompetent patients but is characteristically absent in progressive disease.
Because this test is positive in most people in endemic areas, its primary value is for epidemiologic
studies rather than for diagnosis.
Treatment
• Usually antifungal drugs
Treatment for primary coccidioidomycosis is controversial in low-risk patients. Some experts give
fluconazole because its toxicity is low and there is a small risk of hematogenous seeding, especially to
bone or brain. In addition, symptoms resolve more quickly in treated patients than in those who are not
treated with an antifungal. Others think that fluconazole may blunt the immune response and that risk of
hematogenous seeding in primary infection is too low to warrant use of fluconazole. High complement
fixation titers indicate spread and the need for treatment.
Mild to moderate nonmeningeal extrapulmonary involvement should be treated with fluconazole ≥ 400 mg
po once/day or voriconazole 200 mg po or IV bid. For severe illness, amphotericin B 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg IV
over 2 to 6 h once/day is given for 4 to 12 wk until total dose reaches 1 to 3 g, depending on degree of
infection. Patients can usually be switched to an oral azole once they have been stabilized, usually within
several weeks.
Patients with HIV- or AIDS-associated coccidioidomycosis require maintenance therapy to prevent
relapse; fluconazole 200 mg po once/day or itraconazole 200 mg po bid usually is sufficient, and weekly
IV amphotericin
B may suffice for azole-intolerant patients. Lipid formulations of amphotericin B are
preferred over conventional amphotericin B.
For meningeal coccidioidomycosis, fluconazole is used. The optimal dose is unclear; oral doses of 800 to
1200 mg once/day may be more effective than 400 mg/day. If amphotericin B is used, intrathecal
injections are needed, either intraventricularly via a subcutaneous reservoir or intracisternally. Treatment
for meningeal coccidioidomycosis must be continued for many months, probably lifelong. Surgical removal
of involved bone may be necessary to cure osteomyelitis.
Cryptococcosis
(European Blastomycosis; Torulosis)
Cryptococcosis is a pulmonary or disseminated infection acquired by inhalation of soil
contaminated with the encapsulated yeast
Cryptococcus neoformans
. Symptoms are those of
pneumonia, meningitis, or involvement of skin, bones, or viscera. Diagnosis is clinical and
microscopic, confirmed by culture or fixed-tissue staining. Treatment, when necessary, is with
azoles or amphotericin B, with or without flucytosine.
Distribution is worldwide. Cryptococcosis is a defining opportunistic infection for AIDS, although patients
with Hodgkin lymphoma, other lymphomas, or sarcoidosis and those taking long-term corticosteroid
therapy are also at increased risk.
Pathophysiology
Cryptococcosis is acquired by inhalation and thus typically affects the lungs. Many patients present with
===PAGE:1493===
asymptomatic, self-limited primary lung lesions. In immunocompetent patients, the isolated pulmonary
lesions usually heal spontaneously without disseminating, even without antifungal therapy.
After inhalation,
Cryptococcus
may disseminate, frequently to the brain and meninges, typically
manifesting as microscopic multifocal intracerebral lesions. Meningeal granulomas and larger focal brain
lesions may be evident. Although pulmonary involvement is rarely dangerous, meningitis is life-threatening
and requires aggressive therapy.
Focal sites of dissemination may also occur in skin, the ends of long bones, joints, liver, spleen, kidneys,
prostate, and other tissues. Except for those in the skin, these lesions usually cause few or no symptoms.
Rarely, pyelonephritis occurs with renal papillary necrosis.
Involved tissues typically contain cystic masses of yeasts that appear gelatinous because of accumulated
cryptococcal capsular polysaccharide, but acute inflammatory changes are minimal or absent.
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations depend on the affected area.
CNS:
Because inflammation is not extensive, fever is usually low grade or absent, and meningismus is
uncommon. In patients with AIDS, cryptococcal meningitis may cause minimal or no symptoms, but
headache frequently occurs. Because most symptoms of cryptococcal meningitis result from cerebral
edema, they are usually nonspecific (eg, headache, blurred vision, confusion, depression, agitation, other
behavioral changes). Except for ocular or facial palsies, focal signs are rare until relatively late in the
course. Blindness may develop because of cerebral edema or direct involvement of the optic tracts.
Lungs:
Many patients are asymptomatic. Those with pneumonia usually have cough and other
nonspecific respiratory symptoms. However, AIDS-associated cryptococcal pulmonary infection may
manifest as severe, progressive pneumonia with acute dyspnea and an x-ray pattern suggesting
Pneumocystis
infection.
Skin:
Dermatologic spread can manifest as pustular, papular, nodular, or ulcerated lesions, which
sometimes resemble acne, molluscum contagiosum, or basal cell carcinoma.
Diagnosis
• Culture of CSF, sputum, urine, and blood
• Fixed-tissue specimen staining
Clinical diagnosis is suggested by symptoms of an indolent infection in immunocompetent patients and a
more severe, progressive infection in immunocompromised patients. Chest x-ray, urine collection, and
lumbar puncture are done first.
Culture of
C. neoformans
is definitive. CSF, sputum, and urine yield organisms most often, and blood
cultures may be positive, particularly in patients with AIDS. In disseminated cryptococcosis with
meningitis,
C. neoformans
is frequently cultured from urine (prostatic foci of infection sometimes persist
despite successful clearance of organisms from the CNS). Diagnosis is strongly suggested if experienced
observers identify encapsulated budding yeasts in smears of body fluids, secretions, exudates, or other
specimens. In fixed tissue specimens, encapsulated yeasts may also
be identified and confirmed as
C.
neoformans
by positive mucicarmine or Masson-Fontana staining.
Elevated CSF protein and a mononuclear cell pleocytosis are usual in cryptococcal meningitis, although
neutrophilia occasionally predominates. Glucose is frequently low, and encapsulated yeasts forming
narrow-based buds can be seen on India ink smears in most patients, especially in those who have AIDS
and who typically have a higher fungal burden than those without HIV infection. In some patients with
AIDS, CSF parameters are normal, except for the presence of numerous yeasts on India ink preparation.
The latex test for cryptococcal capsular antigen is positive in CSF or blood specimens or both in > 90% of
===PAGE:1494===
patients with meningitis and is generally specific, although false-positive results may occur, usually with
titers ≤ 1:8, especially if rheumatoid factor is also present.
Treatment
• Usually antifungal drugs
Patients without AIDS:
Patients may need no treatment for localized pulmonary involvement, confirmed
by normal CSF parameters, negative cultures of CSF and urine, and no evidence of cutaneous, bone, or
other extrapulmonary lesions. Some experts give a course of fluconazole to prevent hematogenous
dissemination and to shorten the course of the illness.
In patients without meningitis, localized lesions in skin, bone, or other sites require systemic antifungal
therapy, typically fluconazole 400 mg po once/day for 3 to 6 mo. For more severe disease, amphotericin B
0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg IV once/day with flucytosine 25 mg/kg po q 6 h is given for several weeks.
For meningitis, the standard regimen is amphotericin B 0.7 to 1.0 mg/kg IV once/day plus flucytosine 25
mg/kg po q 6 h for 6 to 10 wk; alternatively, this regimen can be used for 2 wk, followed by fluconazole
400 mg po once/day for 10 wk. After these regimens, patients with AIDS are given fluconazole 200 mg po
once/day until the CD4 count is > 200 for at least 6 mo.
Cryptococcal antigen titers should be monitored at the start and end of therapy. However, if the patient is
not improving with antifungal drugs, titers should be rechecked while the patient continues to receive
therapy; the titers should steadily decline during successful therapy. In general, cultures should become
and remain negative for at least 2 wk before treatment is ended.
Patients with AIDS:
All patients require treatment. In isolated pulmonary or urinary tract disease,
fluconazole 400 mg po once/day is given. For more severe disease, fluconazole 400 mg po once/day plus
flucytosine 25 mg/kg po qid is used for 10 wk. For meningitis, the standard regimen is amphotericin B 0.7
to 1.0 mg/kg IV once/day plus flucytosine 25 mg po q 6 h for the first 2 wk of treatment; the entire
induction phase of therapy lasts 6 to 10 wk. Alternatively, this regimen can be used for 2 wk, followed by
fluconazole 400 mg po once/day for 10 wk total. Once induction therapy is completed, long-term
suppressive (maintenance) therapy is required.
Nearly all AIDS patients need maintenance therapy for life. Fluconazole 200 mg po once/day is preferred,
but itraconazole at the same dose is acceptable; however, itraconazole serum levels should be measured
to make sure that patients are absorbing the drug. Weekly doses of IV amphotericin B also can be used,
but this regimen has mostly been replaced by one of the azoles.
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis is a pulmonary and hematogenous disease caused by
Histoplasma capsulatum
;
it is often chronic and usually follows an asymptomatic primary infection. Symptoms are those
of pneumonia or of nonspecific chronic illness. Diagnosis is by chest x-ray, identification of the
organism in sputum or tissue, or both. Treatment, when necessary, is with amphotericin B or an
azole.
Histoplasmosis occurs worldwide.
In the US, the endemic area for histoplasmosis includes
• The Ohio-Mississippi River valleys extending into parts of northern Maryland, southern Pennsylvania,
central New York, and Texas
Microfoci have been noted in other states, such as Florida.
H. capsulatum
grows as a mold in nature or in culture at room temperature but converts to a small (1 to 5
μ
m in diameter) yeast cell at 37° C and during invasion of host cells. Infection follows inhalation of conidia
===PAGE:1495===
(spores produced by the mycelial form of the fungus) in soil or dust contaminated with bird or bat
droppings. Severe disease is more common after heavy, prolonged exposure and in men, infants, or
people with compromised T-cell-mediated immunity.
Initial infection occurs in the lungs and usually remains there but may spread hematogenously to other
organs if it is not controlled by normal cell-mediated host defenses. Progressive disseminated
histoplasmosis is one of the defining opportunistic infections for AIDS.
Symptoms and Signs
Most histoplasmosis infections are asymptomatic or so mild that patients do not seek medical attention.
The disease has 3 main forms.
Acute primary histoplasmosis
is a syndrome with fever, cough, myalgias, chest pain, and malaise of
varying severity. Acute pneumonia (evident on physical examination and chest x-ray) sometimes develops.
Chronic cavitary histoplasmosis
is characterized by pulmonary lesions that are often apical and
resemble cavitary TB. Manifestations are worsening cough and dyspnea, progressing eventually to
disabling respiratory dysfunction. Dissemination does not occur.
Progressive disseminated histoplasmosis
characteristically includes generalized involvement of the
reticuloendothelial system, with hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, bone marrow involvement, and
sometimes oral or GI ulcerations. The course is usually subacute or chronic, with only nonspecific, often
subtle symptoms (eg, fever, fatigue, weight loss, weakness, malaise); the condition of HIV-positive
patients may inexplicably worsen. The CNS may become involved, causing meningitis or focal brain
lesions. Adrenal infection is rare but may result in Addison's disease. Severe pneumonia is rare, but
patients with AIDS may develop severe acute pneumonia with hypoxia suggesting
Pneumocystis jirovecii
infection, as well as hypotension, mental status changes, coagulopathy, or rhabdomyolysis.
Fibrosing mediastinitis, a chronic but rare form, ultimately causes circulatory compromise.
Patients with histoplasmosis may lose vision, but organisms are not present in ocular lesions, antifungal
chemotherapy is not helpful, and the link to
H. capsulatum
infection is unclear.
Diagnosis
• Histopathology and cultures
• Antigen testing
The index of suspicion must be high because symptoms are nonspecific. Chest x-rays should be done
and may show the following:
•
In acute infection:
Normal or a diffuse nodular or miliary pattern
•
In chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis:
Cavitary lesions in most patients
•
In progressive disease:
Hilar adenopathy with diffuse nodular infiltrates in about 50% of patients
Bronchiolavage or tissue biopsy may be necessary to obtain histology specimens; serologic testing and
culture of urine, blood, and sputum specimens are also done.
Microscopic histopathology can strongly suggest the diagnosis, particularly in patients with AIDS and
extensive infections; in such patients, intracellular yeasts may be seen in Wright's- or Giemsa-stained
peripheral blood or buffy coat specimens. Fungal culture confirms the diagnosis. Lysis-centrifugation or
culture of buffy coat improves the yield from blood specimens.
A test for
H. capsulatum
antigen is sensitive and specific, particularly when simultaneous serum and urine
===PAGE:1496===
specimens are tested; however, cross-reactivity with other fungi (
Coccidioides immitis, Blastomyces
dermatitidis, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, Penicillium marneffei
) has been noted.
Prognosis
The acute primary form is almost always self-limited, although very rarely, death occurs after massive
infection. Chronic cavitary histoplasmosis can cause death due to severe respiratory insufficiency.
Untreated progressive disseminated histoplasmosis has a mortality rate of > 90%.
Treatment
• Sometimes no treatment
• Sometimes azole antifungal drugs
• Amphotericin B for serious illness
Acute primary histoplasmosis requires no antifungal therapy unless there is no spontaneous improvement
after 1 mo; itraconazole 200 mg po once/day for 6 to 12 wk is then used. Fluconazole and other azoles
are also effective. Severe pneumonia requires more aggressive therapy with amphotericin B.
For chronic cavitary histoplasmosis, itraconazole 200 mg po once/day or bid is given for 12 to 24 mo.
Other azoles or amphotericin B is used if patients are seriously ill or do not respond to or tolerate
itraconazole.
For severe disseminated histoplasmosis, amphotericin B 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg IV once/day for 4 to 12 wk is the
treatment of choice. Patients without AIDS can be switched to itraconazole 200 mg po once/day after they
become afebrile and require no ventilatory or
BP support. For mild disseminated disease, itraconazole
200 mg po once/day or bid for 9 mo can be used. In patients with AIDS, itraconazole is given indefinitely
to prevent relapse. Fluconazole may be less effective, but voriconazole and posaconazole are very active
against
H. capsulatum
and may be very effective in the treatment of patients with histoplasmosis. Further
data and experience are required to determine which drug is the best in each clinical situation. Intermittent
doses of IV amphotericin B can be used for chronic suppression in azole-intolerant patients with AIDS.
Mucormycosis
(Zygomycosis)
Mucormycosis refers to infection caused by diverse fungal species, including
Rhizopus,
Rhizomucor, Absidia
, and
Mucor
. Symptoms most frequently result from invasive necrotic
lesions in the nose and palate, causing pain, fever, orbital cellulitis, proptosis, and purulent
nasal discharge. CNS symptoms may follow. Pulmonary symptoms are severe and include
productive cough, high fever, and dyspnea. Diagnosis is primarily clinical, requires a high index
of suspicion, and is confirmed by histopathology and culture. Treatment is with IV amphotericin
B and surgery to remove necrotic tissue.
Infection is most common among immunocompromised people, in patients with poorly controlled diabetes,
and in patients receiving the iron-chelating drug deferoxamine.
The most common form of mucormycosis is
• Rhinocerebral
However, primary cutaneous, pulmonary, or GI lesions sometimes develop, and hematogenous
dissemination to other sites can occur.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1497===
Rhinocerebral infections are usually severe and frequently fatal unless diagnosed early and treated
aggressively. Necrotic lesions appear on the nasal mucosa or sometimes the palate. Vascular invasion by
hyphae leads to progressive tissue necrosis that may involve the nasal septum, palate, and bones
surrounding the orbit or sinuses. Manifestations may include pain, fever, orbital cellulitis, proptosis,
purulent nasal discharge, and mucosal necrosis.
Progressive extension of necrosis to the brain can cause signs of cavernous sinus thrombosis, seizures,
aphasia, or hemiplegia. Pulmonary infections resemble invasive aspergillosis. Pulmonary symptoms (eg,
productive cough, high fever, dyspnea) are severe. Cutaneous
Rhizopus
infections have developed
under occlusive dressings but more often result from trauma when the injured areas are contaminated
with soil.
Diagnosis
• Examination of tissue samples for nonseptate hyphae
Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion and painstaking examination of tissue samples for large
nonseptate hyphae with irregular diameters and right-angle branching patterns; the examination must be
thorough because much of the necrotic debris contains no organisms. For unclear reasons, cultures may
be negative, even when hyphae are clearly visible in tissues. CT and x-rays often underestimate or miss
significant bone destruction.
Treatment
• Control of underlying condition
• Amphotericin B
• Surgical debridement
Effective therapy requires that diabetes be controlled or, if at all possible, immunosuppression be
reversed or deferoxamine be stopped.
IV amphotericin B must be used because azoles are ineffective, although recent evidence suggests that
posaconazole with or without an echinocandin may be effective. Most experts use high doses of lipid
formulations of amphotericin B (up to 10 to 20 mg/kg/day).
Complete surgical debridement of necrotic tissue is critical.
Mycetoma
(Maduromycosis; Madura Foot)
Mycetoma is a chronic, progressive local infection caused by fungi or bacteria and involving the
feet, upper extremities, or back. Symptoms include tumefaction and formation of sinus tracts.
Diagnosis is clinical, confirmed by microscopic examination of exudates and culture. Treatment
includes antimicrobials, surgical debridement, and sometimes amputation.
Bacteria, primarily
Nocardia
sp and other actinomycetes, cause > one half of the cases. The remainder
are caused by about 20 different fungal species. When caused by fungi, the lesions are sometimes called
eumycetoma.
Mycetoma occurs mainly in tropical or subtropical areas, including the southern US, and is acquired when
organisms enter through sites of local trauma on bare skin of the feet or on the extremities or backs of
workers carrying contaminated vegetation or other objects. Men aged 20 to 40 are most often affected,
presumably because of trauma incurred while working outdoors.
Infections spread through contiguous subcutaneous areas, resulting in tumefaction and formation of
===PAGE:1498===
multiple draining sinuses that exude characteristic grains of clumped organisms. Microscopic tissue
reactions may be primarily suppurative or granulomatous depending on the specific causative agent. As
the infection progresses, bacterial superinfections can develop.
Symptoms and Signs
The initial lesion may be a papule, a fixed subcutaneous nodule, a vesicle with an indurated base, or a
subcutaneous abscess that ruptures to form a fistula to the skin surface. Fibrosis is common in and
around early lesions. Tenderness is minimal or absent unless acute suppurative bacterial superinfection
is present.
Infection progresses slowly over months or years, gradually extending to and destroying contiguous
muscles, tendons, fascia, and bones. Neither systemic dissemination nor symptoms and signs suggesting
generalized infection occur. Eventually, muscle wasting, deformity, and tissue destruction prevent use of
affected limbs. In advanced infections, involved extremities appear grotesquely swollen, forming a clubshaped mass of cystic areas. The multiple draining and intercommunicating sinus tracts and fistulas in
these areas discharge thick or serosanguineous exudates containing characteristic grains.
Diagnosis
• Examination and culture of exudates
Causative agents can be identified presumptively by gross and microscopic examination of grains from
exudates, which contain irregularly shaped, variably colored, 0.5- to 2- mm granules. Crushing and
culture of these granules provides definitive identification. Exudate specimens may yield multiple bacteria
and fungi, some of which are potential causes of superinfections.
Treatment
• Antibacterial or antifungal drugs
• Sometimes surgery
Treatment may be required for > 10 yr. Death may result from bacterial superinfection and sepsis if
treatment is neglected.
In infections caused by
Nocardia
(, sulfonamides and certain other antibacterial drugs,
sometimes in combination, are used.
In infections caused by fungi, certain potential causative organisms may be at least partially sensitive to
amphotericin B, itraconazole, or ketoconazole, but many are resistant to all antifungal drugs. Relapses
occur after antifungal therapy in most patients, and many patients do not improve or worsen during
treatment.
Surgical debridement is necessary, and limb amputation may be needed to prevent potentially fatal severe
secondary bacterial infections.
Paracoccidioidomycosis
(South American Blastomycosis)
Paracoccidioidomycosis is progressive mycosis of the lungs, skin, mucous membranes, lymph
nodes, and internal organs caused by
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
. Symptoms are skin ulcers,
adenitis, and pain due to abdominal organ involvement. Diagnosis is clinical and microscopic,
confirmed by culture. Treatment is with azoles (eg, itraconazole), amphotericin B, or
sulfonamides.
Infections occur only in discrete foci in South and Central America, most often in men aged 20 to 50,
===PAGE:1499===
especially coffee growers of Colombia, Venezuela, and Brazil. Although a relatively unusual opportunistic
infection, paracoccidioidomycosis sometimes occurs in immunocompromised patients, including those
with AIDS. Although specific natural sites for
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
remain undefined, it is
presumed to exist in soil as a mold, with infection due to inhalation of conidia (spores produced by the
mycelial form of the fungus). Conidia convert to invasive yeasts in the lungs and are assumed to spread
to other sites via blood and lymphatics.
Symptoms and Signs
Most people who inhale conidia of
P. brasiliensis
do not become ill; illness, if it occurs, usually manifests
as acute pneumonia, which may spontaneously resolve. Clinically apparent infections can become
chronic and progressive but are not usually fatal. There are 3 patterns:
•
Mucocutaneous:
Infections most often involve the face, especially at the nasal and oral
mucocutaneous borders. Yeasts are usually
abundantly present within pinpoint lesions throughout
granular bases of slowly expanding ulcers. Regional lymph nodes enlarge, become necrotic, and
discharge necrotic material through the skin.
•
Lymphatic:
Cervical, supraclavicular, or axillary nodes enlarge but are painless.
•
Visceral:
Typically, focal lesions cause enlargement mainly of the liver, spleen, and abdominal lymph
nodes, sometimes causing abdominal pain.
Infections may be mixed, involving combinations of all 3 patterns.
Diagnosis
Clinical findings suggest the diagnosis. Culture is diagnostic, although observation of large (often > 15
μ
m) yeasts that form characteristic multiple buds (pilot wheel) in specimens provides strong presumptive
evidence.
Treatment
• Antifungal drugs
Azoles are highly effective. Oral itraconazole is generally considered the drug of choice, primarily
because it costs less than other azoles that are available in endemic areas. IV amphotericin B can also
eliminate the infection and is often used in very severe cases. Sulfonamides, which are widely used in
some countries because they are inexpensive, can suppress growth and cause lesions to regress but are
not curative.
Pigmented Fungi
(Chromoblastomycosis; Chromomycosis; Phaeohyphomycosis; Verrucous Dermatitis)
Chromoblastomycosis is a cutaneous infection caused by dematiaceous (pigmented) fungi.
Symptoms are ulcerating nodules on exposed body parts; extracutaneous infections (termed
phaeohyphomycosis) in subcutaneous tissues, sinuses, the brain, and other tissues may occur.
Diagnosis is by appearance, histopathology, and culture. Treatment is with itraconazole, another
azole, or flucytosine and surgical excision.
Chromoblastomycosis is a cutaneous infection affecting normal, immunocompetent people mostly in
tropical or subtropical areas; it is characterized by formation of papillomatous nodules that tend to
ulcerate. Pigmented fungi have been increasingly recognized as opportunists affecting
immunosuppressed patients. These infections are caused by many kinds of dark, melanin-pigmented
dematiaceous fungi including species of
Bipolaris, Cladophialophora, Cladosporium, Drechslera,
Exophiala, Fonsecaea, Phialophora, Xylohypha, Ochronosis, Rhinocladiella, Scolecobasidium
, and
Wangiella
.
===PAGE:1500===
Symptoms and Signs
Most infections begin on the foot or leg, but other exposed body parts may be infected, especially where
the skin is broken. Early small, itchy, enlarging papules may resemble dermatophytosis (ringworm). These
papules extend to form dull red or violaceous, sharply demarcated patches with indurated bases. Several
weeks or months later, new lesions, projecting 1 to 2 mm above the skin, may appear along paths of
lymphatic drainage. Hard, dull red or grayish cauliflower-shaped nodular projections may develop in the
center of patches and gradually extend to cover extremities for up to 4 to 15 yr. Lymphatics may be
obstructed, itching may persist, and secondary bacterial superinfections may develop, causing ulcerations
and occasionally septicemia.
Extracutaneous infections (phaeohyphomycosis) may occur. They include invasive sinusitis, sometimes
with bone necrosis, as well as subcutaneous nodules or abscesses, keratitis, lung masses, osteomyelitis,
mycotic arthritis, intramuscular abscess, endocarditis, brain abscess, and chronic meningitis.
Dematiaceous fungi only rarely cause fatal infections in patients who have normal, intact host defense
mechanisms. Life-threatening illnesses occur more often in immunocompromised patients.
Diagnosis
• Culture
• Sometimes tissue staining
Late chromoblastomycosis lesions have a characteristic appearance, but early lesions may be mistaken
for dermatophytoses. Phaeohyphomycosis must be distinguished from myriad other infectious and
noninfectious conditions by histopathology and culture.
Dematiaceous fungi are frequently discernible in tissue specimens stained with conventional hematoxylin
and eosin; they appear as septate, brownish bodies, reflecting their natural melanin content. FontanaMasson staining for melanin confirms their presence. Culture is needed to identify the causative species.
Treatment
• Itraconazole, sometimes with flucytosine
• Often surgery
Itraconazole is the most effective drug, although not all patients respond. Flucytosine
is sometimes added
to prevent relapse. Fluconazole seldom causes lesions to regress, and amphotericin B is ineffective. The
role of voriconazole and posaconazole has not yet been determined.
Many cases require surgical excision for cure.
Sporotrichosis
Sporotrichosis is a cutaneous infection caused by the saprophytic mold
Sporothrix schenckii
.
Pulmonary and hematogenous involvement is uncommon. Symptoms are cutaneous nodules
that spread via lymphatics and break down into abscesses and ulcers. Diagnosis is by culture.
Treatment is with itraconazole or amphotericin B.
Sporothrix schenckii
resides on rose or barberry bushes, in sphagnum moss, and in other mulches.
Horticulturists, gardeners, farm laborers, and timber workers are most often infected, typically after minor
trauma involving contaminated material. In contrast to the other dimorphic fungi,
S. schenckii
is not
usually inhaled but enters the body through small cuts and abrasions in the skin.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1501===
Lymphocutaneous infections are most common. They characteristically involve one hand and arm,
although they can occur anywhere on the body; primary lesions may occur on exposed surfaces of the
feet or face.
A primary lesion may appear as a small, nontender papule or, occasionally, as a slowly expanding
subcutaneous nodule that eventually becomes necrotic and sometimes ulcerates. Typically, a few days or
weeks later, a chain of draining lymph nodes begins to enlarge slowly but progressively, forming movable
subcutaneous nodules. Without treatment, overlying skin reddens and may later necrose, sometimes
causing an abscess, ulceration, and bacterial superinfection. Systemic symptoms and signs of infection
are notably absent.
Lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis is chronic and indolent; it is potentially fatal only if bacterial
superinfections cause sepsis.
Rarely, in patients without primary lymphocutaneous lesions, hematogenous spread leads to indolent
infections of multiple peripheral joints, sometimes bones, and, less often, genitals, liver, spleen, kidneys,
or meninges. Equally rare is chronic pneumonia caused by inhaling spores and manifested by localized
infiltrates or cavities, most often in patients with preexisting chronic lung disease.
Diagnosis
• Culture
The illness must be differentiated from local infections caused by
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
, atypical
mycobacteria,
Nocardia
, or other organisms. During the early, nondisseminated stage, the primary lesion
is sometimes misdiagnosed as a spider bite. Culture of tissue from the active infection site provides the
definitive diagnosis.
S. schenckii
yeasts can be seen only rarely in fixed-tissue specimens, even with
special staining. Serologic tests are not available.
Treatment
• Itraconazole
Oral itraconazole, given for 3 to 6 mo, is the treatment of choice. Severe infection and infection in patients
with AIDS require IV amphotericin B. AIDS patients may require lifelong maintenance therapy with
itraconazole. Voriconazole and posaconazole may have a role.
Miscellaneous Opportunistic Fungi
Many yeasts and molds can cause opportunistic, even life-threatening infections in immunocompromised
patients. These infections only rarely affect immunocompetent people. Yeasts tend to cause fungemia as
well as focal involvement of skin and other sites.
Trichosporon beigelii
(most now known as
T. asahii
) and
Blastoschizomyces capitatus
particularly affect
neutropenic patients.
Malassezia furfur
fungemia typically affects infants and debilitated adults receiving lipid-containing IV
hyperalimentation infusions.
Penicillium marneffei
was recognized as an opportunistic invader in Southeast Asian patients with AIDS,
and cases have been recognized in the US.
P. marneffei
skin lesions may resemble molluscum
contagiosum.
Especially in neutropenic patients, various environmental molds, including species of
Fusarium
and
Scedosporium
, both of which are becoming more frequent, can cause focal vasculitic lesions mimicking
invasive aspergillosis.
===PAGE:1502===
Specific diagnosis requires culture and species identification and is crucial because not all of these
organisms respond to any single antifungal drug. For example,
Scedosporium
sp are typically resistant to
amphotericin B. Optimal regimens of antifungal therapy for each member of this group of fungal
opportunists must be defined.
===PAGE:1503===
Chapter 143. Approach to Parasitic Infections
Introduction
Parasitic infections are responsible for substantial morbidity and mortality worldwide. They are prevalent
in Central and South America, Africa, and Asia. They are much less common in Australia, Canada,
Europe, Japan, New Zealand, and the US. By far, the greatest impact is on residents of developing
areas, but parasitic infections are encountered in developed countries among immigrants and travelers
returning from endemic regions and, on occasion, even among residents who have not traveled,
particularly those with AIDS or other causes of immunodeficiency.
Many parasitic infections are spread through fecal contamination of food or water. They are most frequent
in impoverished areas where sanitation and hygiene are poor. Some parasites, such as the hookworm,
can enter the skin during contact with infected dirt or, in the case of schistosomes, with freshwater.
Others, such as malaria, are transmitted by arthropod vectors. Rarely, parasites are transmitted via blood
transfusions or shared needles or congenitally from mother to fetus.
Some parasites are endemic in the US and other developed countries. Examples are the pinworm,
Enterobius vermicularis, Trichomonas vaginalis
, toxoplasmosis, and enteric parasites such as
Giardia
intestinalis (lamblia)
and
Cryptosporidium
spp.
Taxonomically, parasites can be divided into 2 major groups:
• Protozoa
• Helminths (worms)
The characteristics of protozoan and helminthic infections vary in important ways.
Protozoa:
Protozoa are single-celled organisms that multiply by simple binary division (see
Chs. 147
and
). Protozoa can multiply in their human hosts, increasing in number to cause overwhelming infection.
With rare exceptions, protozoan infections do not cause eosinophilia.
Helminths:
Helminths are multicellular and have complex organ systems. Helminths can be further
divided into
• Roundworms (nematodes—see
Chapter 144
)
• Flatworms (platyhelminthes), which include tapeworms (cestodes—see
Chapter 146
)
• Flukes (trematodes—see
Chapter 145
)
Some parasites have adapted to living in the lumen of the intestine where conditions are anaerobic;
others reside in blood or tissues in aerobic conditions.
In contrast to protozoa, helminths do not multiply in humans but can elicit eosinophilic responses when
they migrate through tissue. Most helminths have complex life cycles that involve substantial time outside
their human hosts. Exceptions are
Strongyloides stercoralis, Capillaria philippinensis
, and
Hymenolepis
nana
, which can increase in number because of autoinfection. In strongyloidiasis, autoinfection can result
in life-threatening, disseminated hyperinfections in immunosuppressed people, particularly those taking
corticosteroids.
The severity of helminthic infections usually correlates with the worm burden, but there are exceptions as
when a single ascaris causes life-threatening pancreatitis by migrating into the pancreatic duct. The worm
burden depends on the degree of environmental exposure, parasite factors, and the host's genetically
determined immune responses. If a person moves from an endemic area, the number of adult worms
diminishes over time. Although a few parasites (eg,
Clonorchis sinensis
) can survive for decades, many
===PAGE:1504===
species have life spans of only a few years or less. More information about parasitic infections is
available at the CDC's Division of Parasitic Diseases.
Diagnosis
Methods for the diagnosis of specific parasitic infections are discussed in the chapters to follow and are
summarized in
Table 143-1
.
Parasitic infections should be considered in the differential diagnosis of clinical syndromes in residents of
or travelers to areas where sanitation and hygiene are poor or where vector-borne diseases are endemic.
For example, fever in the returning traveler suggests the possibility of malaria. Experience indicates that
immigrants from developing areas to developed countries who return home to visit friends and relatives
are at particular risk. They frequently do not seek or cannot afford pretravel advice on disease prevention
and are more likely to enter high-risk settings than tourists who stay at resort facilities. Although less
frequent, the possibility of an endemic or imported parasitic infection must also be considered in residents
of developed countries who present with suggestive
[Table 143-1.
Collecting and Handling Specimens for Microscopic Diagnosis of Parasitic Infections]
clinical syndromes, even if they have not traveled.
Historical information, physical findings, and laboratory data may also suggest specific parasitic
infections. For example, eosinophilia is common when helminths migrate through tissue and suggests a
parasitic infection in an immigrant or returning traveler.
Physicians with expertise in parasitic infections and tropical medicine are available for consultation at
many major medical centers, travel clinics, and public health facilities.
"Laboratory Identification of Parasites of Public Health Concern" provides detailed descriptions of
diagnostic methods and is available from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) at
www.dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx
.
GI tract parasites:
Various stages of protozoa and helminths that infect the GI tract are typically shed in
the stool. Routine detection requires examination of stool specimens, preferably 3 collected on different
days, because shedding can be sporadic. With some parasites, relatively sensitive and specific assays
are available to detect antigens in stool.
Freshly passed stools uncontaminated with urine, water, dirt, or disinfectants should be sent to the
laboratory within 1 h; unformed or watery stools are most likely to contain motile trophozoites. If not
examined immediately, stools should be refrigerated, but not frozen. Portions of fresh stools should also
be emulsified in fixative to preserve GI protozoa. Concentration techniques can be used to improve
sensitivity. Anal cellophane tape or swabs may collect pinworm or tapeworm eggs. If strongyloidiasis is
suspected, fresh stool should be smeared on an agar plate and incubated to identify the tracks of
migrating larvae. Antibiotics, x-ray contrast material, purgatives, and antacids can hinder detection of ova
and parasites for several weeks. Serologic assays, antigen detection tests (eg, for
Giardia intestinalis
,
Cryptosporidium
sp, or
Entamoeba histolytica
), or PCR testing may aid in diagnosis (see
Table 143-2
). Sensitivity of stool examinations for ova and parasites is low enough that when clinical
suspicion is strong, empirical treatment may be given.
Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy
should be considered when routine stool examinations are negative
and amebiasis is suspected in patients with persistent GI symptoms. Sigmoidoscopic specimens should
be collected with a curet or spoon (cotton swabs are not suitable) and processed immediately for
microscopy. Duodenal aspirates or small-bowel biopsy specimens may be necessary for diagnosis of
such infections as cryptosporidiosis and microsporidiosis.
[Table 143-2.
Serologic and Molecular Tests for Parasitic Infection]
===PAGE:1505===
Serologic testing for parasitic infections:
Some parasites can be detected by serologic tests (see
Table 143-2
).
Treatment
Advice for treating parasitic infections is available from experts at major medical and public health centers
and travel clinics, in textbooks of infectious diseases and tropical medicine, and in summary form from
The Medical Letter on Drugs and Therapeutics
. Drugs for unusual parasitic infections can be obtained
from the manufacturer or from the CDC Drug Service.
Prevention
Despite substantial investment and research, no vaccines are yet available for prevention of human
parasitic infections. Prevention is based on avoidance strategies.
Transmission of most intestinal parasites can be prevented by
• Sanitary disposal of feces
• Adequate cooking of food
• Provision of purified water
For the international traveler, the best advice is "cook it, boil it, peel it, or forget it." When followed, these
measures substantially reduce the risk of intestinal parasitic infections as well as risk of bacterial and viral
gastroenteritis. Meat, particularly pork, and fish, particularly freshwater varieties, should be thoroughly
cooked before ingestion. Other safety measures include removing litter boxes from areas where food is
prepared to prevent toxoplasmosis. People should not swim in freshwater lakes, streams, or rivers in
areas where schistosomiasis is endemic or walk barefoot in areas where hookworms are found.
The risk of malaria and many other vector-borne diseases can be decreased by wearing long-sleeved
shirts and pants and applying diethyltoluamide (DEET)-containing insect repellants to exposed skin and
permethrin to clothing. Window screens, air-conditioning, and mosquito nets impregnated with permethrin
or other insecticides provide further protection. In addition, prophylactic antimalarial drugs should be
taken by those traveling in endemic regions.
Travelers to rural Latin America should not sleep in adobe dwellings where reduviid bugs can transmit
Chagas disease. In Africa, travelers should avoid bright colors and wear long-sleeved shirts and pants to
avoid tsetse flies in regions where African sleeping sickness occurs.
Country-specific recommendations for travel are available from the CDC web site (www.cdc.gov/travel
)
and in
CDC Health Information for International Travel 2010.
===PAGE:1506===
Chapter 144. Nematodes (Roundworms)
Introduction
Nematodes are nonsegmented cylindric worms ranging from 1 mm to 1 m in length. Nematodes have a
body cavity, distinguishing them from tapeworms and flukes. Depending on the species, different stages
in the life cycle are infectious to humans. Hundreds of millions of humans are infected with nematodes;
the most common are
Ascaris
, hookworms, and
Trichuris
.
Angiostrongyliasis
Angiostrongyliasis is infection with larvae of worms of the genus
Angiostrongylus
; intestinal
symptoms or eosinophilic meningitis occurs depending on the infecting species.
Angiostrongylus
are parasites of rats. Excreted larvae are taken up by intermediate hosts (snails and
slugs) and transport hosts (certain crabs and freshwater shrimp). Human infection is acquired by
ingestion of raw or undercooked snails or slugs or transport hosts; it is unclear whether larval
contamination of vegetables (eg, in slime from snails or slugs that crawl on the food) can cause infection.
A. cantonensis
infection occurs predominantly in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Basin, although infection
has been reported elsewhere. The larvae migrate from the GI tract to the meninges, where they cause
eosinophilic meningitis, with fever, headache, and meningismus. Occasionally, ocular invasion occurs.
A. costaricensis
infection occurs in the Americas. Adult worms reside in arterioles of the ileocecal area,
and eggs can be released into the intestinal tissues, resulting in local inflammation with abdominal pain,
vomiting, and fever. Abdominal angiostrongyliasis
mimics appendicitis; a painful right lower quadrant mass
may develop.
Diagnosis is suspected based on a history of ingesting potentially contaminated material. Patients with
meningeal findings require lumbar puncture; CSF shows eosinophilia, but parasites are rarely visible.
Diagnosis of GI infection is difficult because larvae and eggs are not present in stool; however, if surgery
is done (eg, for suspected appendicitis), eggs and larvae can be identified in tissues removed during
surgery.
A. cantonensis
meningitis is treated with analgesics, corticosteroids, and removal of CSF at frequent
intervals to reduce CNS pressure. Most patients have a self-limited course and recover completely.
Treatment of
A. costaricensis
infection is controversial. Anthelmintics do not appear to be effective and
may be harmful because of the inflammatory response provoked by antigen released from dead
parasites.
Anisakiasis
Anisakiasis is infection with larvae of worms of the genus
Anisakis
and related genera such as
Pseudoterranova
. Infection is acquired by eating raw or poorly cooked saltwater fish; larvae
burrow into the mucosa of the GI tract, causing discomfort.
Anisakis
is a parasite that resides in the GI tract of marine mammals. Excreted eggs hatch into freeswimming larvae, which are ingested by fish and squid; human infection is acquired by ingestion of these
intermediate hosts in a raw or undercooked state. Thus, infection is particularly common in locations and
cultures in which raw fish is traditionally consumed. Larvae burrow into the stomach and small bowel.
Symptoms typically include abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting; intestinal infection may create an
inflammatory mass causing symptoms resembling Crohn's disease.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1507===
• Upper endoscopy
Diagnosis is usually made by upper endoscopy; stool examination is unhelpful, but a serologic test is
available in some countries. Infection typically resolves spontaneously after several weeks; rarely, it
persists for months. Endoscopic removal of the larvae is curative.
Treatment
• Albendazole
Treatment with albendazole 400 mg po as a single dose may be effective. Cooking to > 50° C (> 122° F)
or freezing for > 24 h destroys larvae; they may resist pickling, salting, and smoking.
Ascariasis
Ascariasis is infection with
Ascaris lumbricoides
. Light infections may be asymptomatic. Early
symptoms are pulmonary (cough, wheezing); later symptoms are GI, with cramps or abdominal
pain due to obstruction of GI lumina (intestines or biliary or pancreatic ducts) by adult worms.
Chronically infected children may develop undernutrition. Diagnosis is by identifying eggs or
adult worms in stool, adult worms that migrate from the nose or mouth, or larvae in sputum
during the pulmonary migration phase. Treatment is with albendazole, mebendazole, or pyrantel
pamoate.
Pathophysiology
Ingested eggs hatch in the duodenum, and the resulting larvae penetrate the wall of the small bowel and
migrate via the portal circulation through the liver to the heart and lungs. Larvae lodge in the alveolar
capillaries, penetrate alveolar walls, and ascend the bronchial tree into the oropharynx. They are
swallowed and return to the small bowel, where they develop into adult worms, which mate and release
eggs into the stool. The life cycle is completed in about 2 to 3 mo; adult worms live 1 to 2 yr.
A tangled mass of worms resulting from heavy infection can obstruct the bowel, particularly in children.
Aberrantly migrating individual adult worms occasionally obstruct the biliary or pancreatic ducts, causing
cholecystitis or pancreatitis; cholangitis, liver abscess, and peritonitis are less common. Fever due to
other illnesses or certain drugs (eg, albendazole, mebendazole, tetrachloroethylene) may trigger aberrant
migration.
Etiology
Ascariasis occurs worldwide. It is concentrated in tropical and subtropical areas with poor sanitation, but
transmission also occurs in rural areas of the southeastern US. Ascariasis is the most prevalent intestinal
helminth infection in the world. Current estimates suggest that > 1.3 billion people are infected, and about
20,000 infected people (mostly children) die each year of bowel or biliary obstruction.
An estimated 4
million people in the US are infected.
Symptoms and Signs
Larvae migrating through the lungs may cause cough, wheezing, and occasionally hemoptysis or other
respiratory symptoms. Adult worms in small numbers usually do not cause GI symptoms, although
passage of an adult worm by mouth or rectum may bring an otherwise asymptomatic patient to medical
attention. Bowel or biliary obstruction causes cramping abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Jaundice
is uncommon. Even moderate infections can lead to undernutrition in children. The pathophysiology is
unclear and may include competition for nutrients, impairment of absorption, and depression of appetite.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool
===PAGE:1508===
Diagnosis is by microscopic detection of eggs in stools. Occasionally, larvae can be found in sputum
during the pulmonary phase.
Eosinophilia can be marked while larvae migrate though the lungs but usually subsides later when adult
worms reside in the intestine. Chest x-ray during the pulmonary phase may show infiltrates (Loffler's
syndrome).
Treatment
• Albendazole
All infections should be treated. Albendazole 400 mg po once, mebendazole 100 mg po bid for 3 days, or
ivermectin 150 to 200
μ
g/kg once is effective. Albendazole, mebendazole, and ivermectin should not be
used during pregnancy. Nitazoxanide is effective for mild
Ascaris
infections but less so for heavy
infections. Piperazine, once widely used, has been replaced by less toxic alternatives.
Obstructive complications may respond to anthelmintic therapy or require surgical or endoscopic
extraction of adult worms.
Prevention
Prevention requires adequate sanitation. Uncooked or unwashed vegetables should be avoided in areas
where human feces are used as fertilizer.
Dracunculiasis
(Guinea Worm Disease; Fiery Serpent)
Dracunculiasis is infection with
Dracunculus medinensis
. Symptoms are a painful, inflamed skin
lesion, which contains an adult worm, and debilitating arthritis. Diagnosis is by inspection.
Treatment is slow removal of the adult worm.
Twenty years ago, dracunculiasis was endemic in much of tropical Africa, Yemen, India, and Pakistan.
Today, because of international efforts to interrupt transmission, infection occurs mainly within a narrow
belt of African countries and Yemen.
Pathophysiology
Humans become infected by drinking water containing infected microcrustaceans (copepods). The larvae
are released, penetrate the bowel wall, and mature in the abdominal cavity into adult worms in about 1 yr.
After mating, the male dies, and the gravid female migrates through subcutaneous tissues, usually to the
distal lower extremities. The cephalic end of the worm produces an indurated papule that vesiculates and
eventually ulcerates. On contact with water, a loop of the worm's uterus prolapses through the skin and
discharges motile larvae. Worms that do not reach the skin die and disintegrate or become calcified.
Larvae are ingested by copepods.
In most endemic areas, transmission is seasonal and each infectious episode lasts about 1 yr.
Symptoms and Signs
Infection is initially asymptomatic; symptoms usually develop when the worm erupts. Local symptoms
include intense itching and a burning pain at the site of the skin lesion. Urticaria, erythema, dyspnea,
vomiting, and pruritus are thought to reflect allergic reactions to worm antigens. If the worm is broken
during expulsion or extraction, a severe inflammatory reaction ensues with disabling pain. Symptoms
subside and the ulcer heals once the adult worm is expelled. In about 50% of cases, secondary bacterial
infections occur along the track of the emerging worm. Chronic sequelae include fibrous ankylosis of
joints and contraction of tendons.
===PAGE:1509===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is obvious once the white, filamentous adult worm appears at the cutaneous ulcer. Calcified
worms can be localized with x-ray examination; they have been found in Egyptian mummies.
Serodiagnostic tests are not specific.
Treatment
• Manual removal
Treatment consists of slow removal of the adult worm over days to weeks by rolling it on a stick. Surgical
removal under local anesthesia is an option but is seldom available in endemic areas. There are no
effective drugs for this disease; the beneficial effect of metronidazole (250 mg tid for 10 days) has been
ascribed to the drug's anti-inflammatory and antibacterial properties rather than to anthelmintic effects.
Prevention
Filtering drinking water through a piece of cheesecloth, chlorination, or boiling effectively protects against
dracunculiasis.
Filarial Nematode Infections
Threadlike adult filarial worms reside in lymphatic or subcutaneous tissues. Gravid females produce live
offspring (microfilariae) that circulate in blood or migrate through tissues. When ingested by a suitable
bloodsucking insect (mosquitoes or flies), microfilariae develop into infective larvae that are inoculated or
deposited in the skin of the next host during the insect bite. Life cycles of all filarial worms are similar
except for the site of infection. Only a few filarial species infect humans.
Subcutaneous filariasis
is caused by
Loa loa
(the African eye worm) and
Onchocerca volvulus
.
Lymphatic filariasis
is caused by
Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi
, and
B. timori
.
Dirofilariasis
(Dog Heartworm Infection)
Dirofilaria immitis
is the dog heartworm, which is transmitted to humans by infected
mosquitoes.
Symptomatic human infection is very rare, but larvae may become encapsulated in infarcted lung tissue
and produce well-defined pulmonary nodules.
Patients may have chest pain, cough, and occasionally hemoptysis. Many patients remain asymptomatic,
and a pulmonary nodule, which may suggest a tumor, is discovered during routine chest x-ray.
Diagnosis is by histologic examination of a surgical specimen. No treatment is indicated in humans;
infection is self-limited.
Loiasis
Loiasis is infection with
Loa loa
. Symptoms include localized angioedema (Calabar swellings)
and subconjunctival migration of adult worms. Diagnosis is by detecting microfilariae in
peripheral blood or seeing worms migrating across the eye. Treatment is with
diethylcarbamazine.
Loiasis is confined to the rain forest belt of western and central Africa. Humans are the only known
===PAGE:1510===
natural reservoir for this parasite.
Loa loa
microfilariae are transmitted by day-biting tabanid flies (
Chrysops
[deerfly or horsefly]).
Microfilariae mature to adult worms in the subcutaneous tissues of the human host; females are 40 to 70
mm long, and males are 30 to 34 mm long. The adults produce more microfilariae. Adults migrate in
subcutaneous tissues and the eye, and microfilariae circulate in blood. Flies become infected when they
ingest blood from a human host during the day (when microfilaremia levels are the highest).
Occasionally, infection causes cardiomyopathy, nephropathy, or encephalitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Infection produces areas of angioedema (Calabar swellings) that develop anywhere on the body but
predominantly on the extremities; they are presumed to reflect hypersensitivity reactions to allergens
released by migrating adult worms. In native residents, swellings usually last 1 to 3 days but are more
frequent and severe in visitors. Worms may also migrate subconjunctivally across the eyes. This
migration may be unsettling, but residual eye damage is uncommon.
Nephropathy generally manifests as proteinuria with or without mild hematuria and is believed to be due
to immune complex deposition. Encephalopathy is usually mild, with vague CNS symptoms.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of blood samples
Microscopic detection of microfilariae in peripheral blood establishes the diagnosis. Blood samples should
be drawn around noontime, when microfilaremia levels are the highest. Serologic tests for antibodies do
not differentiate
Loa loa
from other filarial nematode infections.
Treatment
• Diethylcarbamazine
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) is the only drug that kills microfilariae and adult worms. Patients with
microfilariae in the blood are given DEC 50 mg po on day 1, 50 mg po tid on day 2, 100 mg tid on day 3,
then 2 mg/kg tid on days 4 through 14. A single dose of 6 mg/kg has been used in mass treatment
programs. Multiple courses may be necessary before resolution is complete.
DEC transiently exacerbates proteinuria and, in heavily infected patients, may trigger encephalopathy,
leading to coma and death. Such patients may benefit from apheresis or initial treatment with
albendazole, and multiple courses of therapy may be necessary. Ivermectin has also been used to reduce
microfilaremia, but albendazole is preferred because its onset of action is slower and risk of precipitating
encephalopathy is lower.
Prevention
DEC 300 mg po once/wk can be used to prevent infection. Using insect repellents (including permethrinimpregnated clothing) and wearing long-sleeved and long-legged clothing may reduce the number of
bites by infected flies. Because the flies are day-biting, mosquito (bed) nets do not help.
Bancroftian and Brugian Lymphatic Filariasis
Lymphatic filariasis is infection with any of 3 species of
Filarioidea
. Acute symptoms include
fever, lymphadenitis, lymphangitis, funiculitis, and epididymitis. Chronic symptoms include
abscesses, hyperkeratosis, polyarthritis, hydroceles, lymphedema, and elephantiasis. Tropical
pulmonary eosinophilia with bronchospasm, fever, and pulmonary infiltrates is another
manifestation of infection. Diagnosis is by detection of microfilariae in blood, ultrasound
visualization of adult worms, or serologic testing. Treatment is with diethylcarbamazine;
===PAGE:1511===
antibiotics are used for complicating bacterial cellulitis.
Etiology
Lymphatic filariasis is caused by
Wuchereria bancrofti
,
Brugia malayi
, and
B. timori
. Transmission is by
mosquitoes. Infective larvae from the mosquito migrate to the lymphatics, where they develop into
threadlike adult worms within 6 to 12 mo. Females are 80 to 100 mm long; males are about 40 mm long.
Gravid adult females produce microfilariae that circulate in blood.
Bancroftian filariasis is present in tropical and subtropical areas of Africa, Asia, the Pacific, and the
Americas, including Haiti. Brugian filariasis is endemic in South and Southeast Asia. Current estimates
suggest that about 120 million people are infected.
Symptoms and Signs
Infection can result in microfilaremia without overt clinical manifestations. Symptoms and signs are caused
primarily by adult worms. Microfilaremia gradually disappears after people leave the endemic area.
Acute inflammatory filariasis
consists of 4- to 7-day episodes (often recurrent) of fever and
inflammation of lymph nodes with lymphangitis (termed acute adenolymphangitis [ADL]) or acute
epididymitis and spermatic cord inflammation. Localized involvement of a limb may cause an abscess that
drains externally and leaves a scar. ADL is often associated with secondary bacterial infections. ADL
episodes usually precede onset of chronic disease by ≥ 2 decades. Acute filariasis is more severe in
previously unexposed immigrants to endemic areas than in native residents.
Chronic filarial disease
develops insidiously after many years. In most patients, asymptomatic lymphatic
dilation occurs, but chronic inflammatory responses to adult worms and secondary bacterial infections
may result in chronic lymphedema of the affected body area or in scrotal hydroceles. Chronic pitting
lymphedema of a lower extremity can progress to elephantiasis. Increased local susceptibility to bacterial
and fungal infections contributes to the development of elephantiasis. Other forms of chronic filarial
disease are caused by disruption of lymphatic vessels or aberrant drainage of lymph fluid, leading to
chyluria and chyloceles.
Extralymphatic signs
include chronic microscopic hematuria and proteinuria and mild polyarthritis, all
presumed to result from immune complex deposition.
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
(TPE) is an uncommon manifestation with recurrent bronchospasm,
transitory lung infiltrates, low-grade fever, and marked eosinophilia. It is most likely due to hypersensitivity
reactions to microfilariae. Chronic TPE can lead to pulmonary fibrosis.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of blood samples
Microscopic detection of microfilariae in blood establishes the diagnosis. Filtered or centrifuged
concentrates of blood are more sensitive than thick blood films. Blood samples
must be obtained when
microfilaremia peaks—at night where
W. bancrofti
is endemic, but during the day in many Pacific islands
where
B. malayi
and
B. timori
occur. Viable adult worms can be visualized in dilated lymphatics by
ultrasonography; their movement has been called the filarial dance.
A rapid-format immunochromatographic antigen test specific for
W. bancrofti
has recently been evaluated
in the field. Antibody detection is of limited value; there is substantial antigenic cross-reactivity between
filariae and other helminths, and a positive serologic test does not distinguish between past and current
infection. PCR-based assays for DNA of
W. bancrofti
and
B. malayi
are available in research settings.
Treatment
• Diethylcarbamazine
===PAGE:1512===
Optimal treatment is uncertain. Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) kills microfilariae and a variable proportion of
adult worms. The DEC dose in patients with heavy microfilaremia is 50 mg po on day 1, 50 mg tid on day
2, 100 mg tid on day 3, then 2 mg/kg tid on days 4 to 14. A single dose of albendazole (400 mg po) with
either ivermectin (200
μ
g/kg po) or DEC (6 mg/kg) rapidly reduces microfilaremia levels, but ivermectin
does not kill adult worms.
Also, doxycycline has been given long-term (eg, 8 wk). Doxycycline kills
Wolbachia
endosymbiont
bacteria within filaria, leading to death of the worms.
Acute attacks of ADL usually resolve spontaneously, although antibiotics may be required to control
secondary bacterial infections. Whether DEC therapy prevents or lessens chronic lymphedema remains
controversial.
Chronic lymphedema
requires meticulous skin care, including use of systemic antibiotics to treat
secondary bacterial infections; these antibiotics may slow or prevent progression to elephantiasis.
Conservative measures such as elastic bandaging of the affected limb reduce swelling. Surgical
decompression using nodal-venous shunts to improve lymphatic drainage offers some long-term benefit in
extreme cases of elephantiasis. Massive hydroceles can also be managed surgically.
TPE
responds to DEC (2 mg/kg tid for 12 to 21 days), but relapses occur in up to 25% of patients and
require additional courses of therapy.
Prevention
Avoiding mosquito bites in endemic areas is the best protection (eg, by using diethyltoluamide [DEET],
permethrin-impregnated clothing, and bed nets). Chemoprophylaxis with DEC or combinations of
antifilarial drugs (ivermectin/albendazole or ivermectin/DEC) can suppress microfilaremia and thereby
reduce transmission of the parasite by mosquitoes in endemic communities. DEC has even been used as
an additive to table salt in some endemic areas.
Onchocerciasis
(River Blindness)
Onchocerciasis is infection with the filarial nematode
Onchocerca volvulus
. Symptoms are
subcutaneous nodules, pruritus, adenopathy, lymphatic obstruction, chronic skin disease, and
eye lesions that may lead to blindness. Diagnosis is by finding microfilariae in skin snips, the
cornea, or the anterior chamber of the eye; identifying adult worms in subcutaneous nodules;
or using PCR or DNA probes. Treatment is with ivermectin.
Pathophysiology
Onchocerciasis is spread by blackflies (
Simulium
sp) that breed in swiftly flowing streams (hence, the
term river blindness). Infective larvae inoculated into the skin during the bite of a blackfly develop into
adult worms in 12 to 18 mo. Adult female worms may live up to 15 yr in subcutaneous nodules. Females
are 33 to 50 cm long; males are 19 to 42 mm long. Mature female worms produce microfilariae that
migrate mainly through the skin and invade the eyes.
Etiology
About 18 million people are infected; about 270,000 are blind and an additional 500,000 are visually
impaired. Onchocerciasis is the 2nd leading cause of blindness worldwide (after trachoma).
Onchocerciasis is most common in tropical and sub-Saharan regions of Africa. Small foci exist in Yemen,
southern Mexico, Guatemala, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, and the Brazilian Amazon. Blindness due to
onchocerciasis is fairly rare in the Americas.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1513===
Onchocerciasis typically affects
• Skin (nodules, dermatitis)
• Eyes
Nodules:
The subcutaneous (or deeper) nodules (onchocercoma) that contain adult worms may be
visible or palpable but are otherwise asymptomatic. They are composed
of inflammatory cells and fibrotic
tissue in various proportions. Old nodules may caseate or calcify.
Dermatitis:
Onchocercal dermatitis is caused by the microfilarial stage of the parasite. Intense pruritus
may be the only symptom in lightly infected people. Skin lesions usually consist of a nondescript
maculopapular rash with secondary excoriations, scaling ulcerations and lichenification, and mild to
moderate lymphadenopathy. Premature wrinkling, skin atrophy, enlargement of inguinal or femoral nodes,
lymphatic obstruction, patchy hypopigmentation, and transitory localized areas of edema and erythema
can occur.
Onchocercal dermatitis is generalized in most patients, but a localized and sharply delineated form of
eczematous dermatitis with hyperkeratosis, scaling, and pigment changes (Sowdah) is common in Yemen
and Saudi Arabia.
Eye disease:
Ocular involvement ranges from mild visual impairment to complete blindness. Lesions of
the anterior portion of the eye include
• Punctate (snowflake) keratitis (an acute inflammatory infiltrate surrounding dying microfilariae that
resolves without causing permanent damage)
• Sclerosing keratitis (an ingrowth of fibrovascular scar tissue that may cause subluxation of the lens and
blindness)
• Anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis (which may deform the pupil)
Chorioretinitis, optic neuritis, and optic atrophy may also occur.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of a skin sample
Demonstration of microfilariae in skin snips is the traditional diagnostic method (see
Table 143-1
. Microfilariae may also be visible in the cornea and anterior chamber of the eye
during slit-lamp examination. PCR-based methods to detect parasite DNA in skin snips may be more
sensitive than standard techniques but are available only in research settings. Antibody detection is of
limited value; there is substantial antigenic cross-reactivity among filaria and other helminths, and a
positive serologic test does not distinguish between past and current infection. Palpable nodules (or deep
nodules detected by ultrasonography or MRI) can be excised and examined for adult worms, but this
procedure is rarely necessary.
Treatment
• Ivermectin
Ivermectin is given as a single oral dose of 150
μ
g/kg, repeated q 6 to 12 mo until patients are
asymptomatic. Ivermectin reduces microfilariae in the skin and eyes and decreases production of
microfilariae for many months. It does not appear to kill adult worms in standard regimens but inhibits
microfilarial release from female worms. Adverse effects are qualitatively similar to those of
diethylcarbamazine (DEC) but are much less common and less severe. DEC is no longer used for
onchocerciasis because it can cause a severe hypersensitivity (Mazzotti) reaction, which can further
===PAGE:1514===
damage skin and eyes and lead to cardiovascular collapse.
Long-term use (eg, 6 wk) of doxycycline, which targets
Wolbachia
endosymbiont bacteria, with or without
a single dose of ivermectin has produced long periods of amicrofilaremia.
Prevention
No drug has been shown to protect against infection with
O. volvulus
. However, annual or semiannual
administration of ivermectin effectively controls disease and may decrease transmission. Surgical removal
of accessible onchocercomas can also reduce skin microfilaria counts, but it has been replaced by
ivermectin therapy.
Simulium
bites can be minimized by avoiding fly-infested areas, by wearing protective clothing, and
possibly by liberally applying insect repellents.
Hookworm Infection
(Ancylostomiasis)
Ancylostomiasis is infection with the hookworm
Ancylostoma duodenale
or
Necator americanus
.
Symptoms include rash at the site of larval entry and sometimes abdominal pain or other GI
symptoms during early infection. Later, iron deficiency may develop because of chronic blood
loss. Hookworms are a major cause of iron deficiency anemia in endemic regions. Diagnosis is
by finding eggs in stool. Treatment is with albendazole, mebendazole, or pyrantel pamoate.
Pathophysiology
Both hookworm species have similar life cycles. Eggs passed in the stool hatch in 1 to
2 days (if they are
deposited in a warm, moist place on loose soil) and release rhabditiform larvae, which molt once to
become slender filariform larvae in 5 to 10 days. The larvae can survive 3 to 4 wk if environmental
conditions are favorable. Filariform larvae penetrate human skin when people walk barefoot on infested
soil. The larvae reach the lungs via blood vessels, penetrate into pulmonary alveoli, ascend the bronchial
tree to the epiglottis, and are swallowed. The larvae develop into adults in the small bowel; there, they
attach to the wall, feeding on blood. Adult worms may live ≥ 2 yr.
Chronic blood loss leads to iron deficiency anemia. Development of anemia depends on worm burden
and the amount of absorbable iron in the diet.
Etiology
The estimated prevalence of hookworm infection is about 1 billion, mostly in developing areas. Both
A.
duodenale
and
N. americanus
occur in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. Only
A. duodenale
occurs in the
Middle East, North Africa, and southern Europe.
N. americanus
predominates in the Americas and
Australia; it was once widely distributed in the southern US and is still endemic on islands of the
Caribbean and in Central and South America.
Other hookworms:

A. braziliense
and
A. caninum
are hookworms that have cats and dogs as the
primary hosts. These hookworms cannot complete their life cycle in humans. If their larvae penetrate
human skin, they typically wander in the skin, causing cutaneous larva migrans (, rather than
migrate to the intestine.
Rarely, a few
A. caninum
larvae migrate to the intestine, where they may cause eosinophilic enterocolitis.
However, they do not cause significant blood loss and anemia, and because they do not mature to full
adulthood, they do not lay eggs (making diagnosis difficult). Such intestinal infection may be
asymptomatic or cause acute abdominal pain and eosinophilia.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1515===
Hookworm infection is often asymptomatic. However, a pruritic papulovesicular rash (ground itch,
cutaneous larva migrans) may develop at the site of larval penetration, usually on the feet. Migration of
large numbers of larvae through the lungs occasionally causes Loffler's syndrome, with cough, wheezing,
and sometimes hemoptysis. During the acute phase, adult worms in the intestine may cause colicky
epigastric pain, anorexia, flatulence, diarrhea, and weight loss. Chronic infection can lead to iron
deficiency anemia, and heavy infection can lead to hypoproteinemia, causing pallor, dyspnea, weakness,
tachycardia, lassitude, and peripheral edema. A low-grade eosinophilia is often present. Chronic blood
loss may lead to severe anemia, heart failure, and anasarca and, in pregnant women, to growth
retardation in the fetus.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool
A. duodenale
and
N. americanus
produce thin-shelled oval eggs that are readily detected in fresh stool. If
the stool is not kept cold and examined within several hours, the eggs may hatch and release larvae that
may be confused with those of
Strongyloides stercoralis
. Nutritional status, anemia, and iron stores
should be evaluated.
Treatment
• Albendazole or mebendazole
Albendazole 400 mg po as a single dose or mebendazole 100 mg po bid for 3 days or 500 mg as a single
dose is given. Pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg po once/day (1 g maximum) for 3 days is also effective. These
drugs should not be used during pregnancy.
General support and correction of iron deficiency anemia are needed if infection is heavy.
Prevention
Preventing unhygienic defecation and avoiding direct skin contact with the soil are effective in preventing
infection but difficult to implement in many endemic areas. Periodic mass treatment of susceptible
populations at 3- to 4-mo intervals has been used in high-risk areas.
Hookworm treatment for cats and dogs is the primary means for preventing cutaneous larva migrans.
Pinworm Infestation
(Enterobiasis; Oxyuriasis)
Enterobiasis is an intestinal infestation by the pinworm
Enterobius vermicularis
, usually in
children. Its major symptom is perianal itching. Diagnosis is by visual inspection for threadlike
worms
in the perianal area or the cellophane tape test for ova. Treatment is with pyrantel
pamoate, mebendazole, or albendazole.
Pinworm infestation is the most common helminthic infection in the US.
Pathophysiology
Infestation usually results from transfer of ova from the perianal area to fomites (clothing, bedding,
furniture, rugs, toys), from which the ova are picked up by the new host, transmitted to the mouth, and
swallowed. Thumb sucking is a risk factor. Reinfestation (autoinfestation) easily occurs through finger
transfer of ova from the perianal area to the mouth. Pinworm infections have also been attributed to
anilingus among adults.
Pinworms reach maturity in the lower GI tract within 2 to 6 wk. The female worm migrates to the perianal
region (usually at night) to deposit ova. The sticky, gelatinous substance in which the ova are deposited
===PAGE:1516===
and the movements of the female worm cause perianal pruritus. The ova can survive on fomites as long
as 3 wk at normal room temperature.
Symptoms and Signs
Most infected people have no symptoms or signs, but some experience perianal pruritus and develop
perianal excoriations from scratching. Rarely, migrating female worms ascend the human female genital
tract, causing vaginitis and, even less commonly, peritoneal lesions.
Many other conditions (eg, abdominal pain, insomnia, seizures) have been attributed to pinworm
infestation, but a causal relationship is unlikely. Pinworms have been found obstructing the appendiceal
lumen in cases of appendicitis, but the presence of the parasites may be coincidental.
Diagnosis
• Examination of the perianal region for worms, ova, or both
Pinworm infestation can be diagnosed by finding the female worm, which is about 10 mm long (males
average 3 mm), in the perianal region 1 or 2 h after a child goes to bed at night or in the morning or by
using a low-power microscope to identify ova on cellophane tape. The ova are obtained in the early
morning before the child arises by patting the perianal skin-folds with a strip of cellophane tape, which is
then placed sticky side down on a glass slide and viewed microscopically. The 50 by 30
μ
m ova are oval
with a thin shell that contains a curled-up larva. A drop of toluene placed between tape and slide
dissolves the adhesive and eliminates air bubbles under the tape, which can hamper identification of the
ova. This procedure should be repeated on 5 successive mornings if necessary. Eggs may also be
encountered, but less frequently, in stool, urine, or vaginal smears.
Treatment
• Mebendazole or albendazole
Because pinworm infestation is seldom harmful, prevalence is high, and reinfestation is common,
treatment is indicated only for symptomatic infections. However, most parents actively seek treatment
when their children have pinworms.
A single dose of mebendazole 100 mg po (regardless of age) or albendazole 400 mg po, repeated in 2
wk, is effective in eradicating pinworms (but not ova) in > 90% of cases. A single dose of pyrantel
pamoate 11 mg/kg po (maximum 1 g) initially and repeated after 2 wk is also effective.
Reinfestation is common because viable ova may be excreted for 1 wk after therapy, and ova deposited in
the environment before therapy can survive 3 wk. Multiple infestations within the household are common,
and treatment of the entire family may be necessary. Clothing, bedding, and other articles should be
washed frequently, and the environment vacuumed.
Carbolated petrolatum or other antipruritic creams or ointments applied to the perianal region may relieve
itching.
Strongyloidiasis
(Threadworm Infection)
Strongyloidiasis is infection with
Strongyloides stercoralis
. Findings include rash and pulmonary
symptoms (including cough and wheezing), eosinophilia, and abdominal pain with diarrhea.
Diagnosis is by finding larvae in stool or small-bowel contents or by detection of antibodies in
blood. Treatment is with ivermectin, thiabendazole, or albendazole.
Strongyloidiasis is endemic throughout the tropics and subtropics, including rural areas of the southern
US, at sites where bare skin is exposed to contaminated soil and conditions are unsanitary.
Strongyloides
===PAGE:1517===
fulleborni
, which
infects chimpanzees and baboons, can cause limited infections in humans.
Pathophysiology
Adult worms live in the mucosa and submucosa of the duodenum and jejunum. Released eggs hatch in
the bowel lumen, liberating rhabditiform larvae. Most of the larvae are excreted in the stool. After a few
days in soil, they develop into infectious filariform larvae. Like hookworms,
Strongyloides
larvae penetrate
human skin, migrate via the bloodstream to the lungs, break through pulmonary capillaries, ascend the
respiratory tract, are swallowed, and reach the intestine, where they mature in about 2 wk. In the soil,
larvae that do not contact humans may develop into free-living adult worms that can reproduce for several
generations before their larvae reenter a human host.
Some rhabditiform larvae convert within the intestine to infectious filariform larvae that immediately
reenter the bowel wall, short-circuiting the life cycle (internal autoinfection). Sometimes filariform larvae
are passed in stool and reenter through the skin of the buttocks and thighs (external autoinfection).
Autoinfection explains why strongyloidiasis can persist for many decades and helps account for the
extremely high worm burdens in the hyperinfection syndrome.
Hyperinfection may result from a newly acquired
Strongyloides
infection or from activation of a previously
asymptomatic one. In either case, it can result in disseminated disease involving organs not usually part
of the parasite's normal life cycle (eg, CNS, skin, liver, heart). Hyperinfection usually occurs in patients
who are taking corticosteroids or who have impaired cell-mediated immunity, particularly those infected
with the human T-lymphotropic virus 1 (HTLV-1). However, hyperinfection and disseminated
strongyloidiasis are less common than might be predicted among patients with HIV/AIDS, even those
living in areas where
Strongyloides
is highly endemic.
Symptoms and Signs
Infection may be asymptomatic.
Larva currens (creeping infection) is a form of cutaneous larva migrans specific to
Strongyloides
infection; it results from autoinfection. The eruption begins in the perianal region and rapidly spreads,
causing intense pruritus, but nonspecific maculopapular or urticarial eruptions may also occur.
Pulmonary symptoms are uncommon, although heavy infections may cause Loffler's syndrome, with
cough, wheezing, and eosinophilia. GI symptoms include anorexia, epigastric pain and tenderness,
diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. In heavy infections, malabsorption and protein-losing enteropathy may
result in weight loss and cachexia.
Hyperinfection syndrome:
GI and pulmonary symptoms are often prominent. Ileus, obstruction,
massive GI bleeding, severe malabsorption, and peritonitis may occur. Pulmonary symptoms include
dyspnea, hemoptysis, and respiratory failure. Infiltrates may be seen on chest x-ray.
Other symptoms depend on the organ involved. CNS involvement includes parasitic meningitis, brain
abscess, and diffuse invasion of the brain. Secondary gram-negative meningitis and bacteremia, which
occurs with high frequency, probably reflect disruption of bowel mucosa, carriage of bacteria on migrating
larvae, or both. Liver infection may result in cholestatic and granulomatous hepatitis. Infection may be
fatal in immunocompromised patients, even with treatment.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool
• Sometimes enzyme immunoassay
Microscopic examination of a single stool sample detects larvae in about 25% of uncomplicated
infections. Repeated examination of concentrated stool or the agar-plate method raises sensitivity to ≥
85%. If the specimen stands at room temperature for several hours, rhabditiform larvae may transform
===PAGE:1518===
into longer filariform larvae, leading to erroneous diagnosis of hyperinfection. Sampling of the proximal
small bowel by aspiration may be positive in low-level infections and should be done endoscopically to
permit biopsy of suspicious duodenal and jejunal lesions. In hyperinfection syndrome, filariform larvae
may be found in stool, duodenal contents, sputum, and bronchial washings and, uncommonly, in CSF,
urine, or pleural or ascitic fluid. Chest x-rays may show diffuse interstitial infiltrates, consolidation, or
abscess.
Several immunodiagnostic tests are available for strongyloidiasis. Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) is
recommended because of its greater sensitivity (> 90%). IgG antibodies can usually be detected even in
immunocompromised patients with disseminated strongyloidiasis. Cross-reactions in patients with
filariasis or other nematode infections may result in false-positive tests. Antibody test results cannot be
used to differentiate current from past infection. A
positive test warrants continuing efforts to establish a
parasitologic diagnosis. Serologic monitoring may be useful in follow-up because antibody levels
decrease within 6 mo of successful chemotherapy.
Eosinophilia is often present but can be suppressed by drugs such as corticosteroids or cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic drugs.
Treatment
• Ivermectin
Ivermectin 200
μ
g/kg po once/day for 2 days is used for uncomplicated infection and is generally well
tolerated. Albendazole 400 mg po bid for 7 days is an alternative. In immunocompromised patients,
prolonged therapy or repeated courses may be needed. Combined therapy with albendazole and
ivermectin has been used for hyperinfections. In severely ill patients who are unable to take oral drugs,
veterinary parenteral or rectal preparations of ivermectin have been used.
Cure should be documented by repeated stool examinations.
Prevention
Prevention of primary infections is the same as for hookworms. To prevent potentially fatal hyperinfection
syndrome, clinicians should do several stool examinations and serologic testing in patients with possible
exposure to
Strongyloides
(even in the distant past), with unexplained eosinophilia, or with symptoms that
suggest strongyloidiasis before corticosteroids or other immunosuppressants are used. If patients are
infected, treatment for strongyloidiasis should be instituted and parasitologic cure should be documented
before immunosuppression. Immunosuppressed people who have recurrent strongyloidiasis require
additional courses of treatment until cured.
Toxocariasis
(Visceral or Ocular Larva Migrans)
Toxocariasis is human infection with nematode ascarid larvae that ordinarily infect animals.
Symptoms are fever, anorexia, hepatosplenomegaly, rash, pneumonitis, asthma, or visual
impairment. Diagnosis is by enzyme immunoassay. Treatment is with albendazole or
mebendazole. Corticosteroids may be added for severe symptoms or eye involvement.
Pathophysiology
The eggs of
Toxocara canis, T. cati
, and other animal ascarid helminths mature in soil and infect dogs,
cats, and other animals. Humans may accidentally ingest eggs in soil contaminated by stool from infected
animals or may ingest infected transfer hosts (eg, rabbits). The eggs hatch in the human intestine. Larvae
penetrate the bowel wall and may migrate through the liver, lungs, CNS, eyes, or other tissues. Tissue
damage is caused by focal eosinophilic granulomatous reactions to the migrating larvae. The larvae
usually do not complete their development in the human body but can remain alive for many months.
===PAGE:1519===
Symptoms and Signs
Visceral larva migrans (VLM):
This syndrome consists of fever, anorexia, hepatosplenomegaly, rash,
pneumonitis, and asthmatic symptoms, depending on the affected organs.
VLM occurs mostly in 2- to 5-yr-old children with a history of geophagia. The syndrome is self-limiting in 6
to 18 mo if egg intake ceases. Deaths due to invasion of the brain or heart occur rarely.
Ocular larva migrans (OLM):
This syndrome, also called ocular toxocariasis, usually has no or very mild
systemic manifestations. OLM lesions consist mostly of granulomatous reactions to a larva in the retina;
the larva may cause visual impairment.
OLM occurs in older children and less commonly in young adults. The lesion may be confused with
retinoblastoma or other intraocular tumors.
Diagnosis
• Enzyme immunoassay plus clinical findings
Diagnosis is based on clinical, epidemiologic, and serologic findings. Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) is
currently recommended. Isoagglutinins are frequently elevated, but this finding is nonspecific.
Hyperglobulinemia, leukocytosis, and marked eosinophilia are common.
Biopsies of the liver or other affected organs may show eosinophilic granulomatous reactions, but larvae
are difficult to find in tissue sections and biopsies are low yield. Stool examinations are worthless. OLM
should be distinguished from retinoblastoma to prevent unnecessary surgical enucleation of the eye.
Treatment
• Mebendazole or albendazole
• Symptomatic treatment
Mebendazole 100 to 200 mg po bid for 5 days or albendazole 400 mg po bid for 5 days is often
used, but
the optimal duration of therapy has not been determined.
Antihistamines may suffice for mild symptoms. Corticosteroids (prednisone 20 to 40 mg po once/day) are
indicated for patients with severe symptoms. Corticosteroids, both local and oral, are also indicated for
acute OLM.
Laser photocoagulation has been used to kill larvae in the retina.
Prevention
Infection with
T. canis
in puppies is common in the US; infection with
T. cati
in cats is less common. Both
animals should be dewormed regularly. Contact with dirt or sand contaminated with animal feces should
be minimized. Sandboxes should be covered.
Baylisascariasis
Baylisascariasis is infection with the raccoon ascarid,
Baylisascaris procyonis
, which may cause
fatal CNS infection in humans.
Infection usually occurs in children who play in dirt or with articles contaminated with raccoon feces. It
occurs in the US, particularly in the Middle Atlantic, Midwest, and Northeast. Although baylisascariasis is
rare in people, it is of concern because a large number of raccoons live near humans and the infection
rate of
B. procyonis
in these animals is high.
===PAGE:1520===
Migration of the larvae through a wide variety of tissues (liver, heart, lungs, brain, eyes) results in VLM
and OLM syndromes, similar to those due to toxocariasis. However, in contrast to
Toxocara
larvae,
Baylisascaris
larvae continue to grow to a large size (up to 24 cm for females and 12 cm for males) within
the CNS and cause eosinophilic meningoencephalitis. Tissue damage and symptoms and signs of
baylisascariasis are often severe because
Baylisascaris
larvae continue to grow, tend to wander widely,
and do not readily die.
Diagnosis is difficult because serologic tests are not widely available. Viewing a larva during ocular
examination is often a clue.
Treatment is similar to that of other causes of VLM and OLM.
Trichinosis
(Trichiniasis)
Trichinosis is infection with
Trichinella spiralis
or related
Trichinella
species. Symptoms include
initial GI irritation followed by periorbital edema, muscle pain, fever, and eosinophilia. Diagnosis
is clinical and with serologic tests. Muscle biopsy may be diagnostic but is seldom necessary.
Treatment is with mebendazole or albendazole plus prednisone if symptoms are severe.
Trichinosis occurs worldwide. In addition to the classic agent
Trichinella spiralis
, trichinosis can be
caused by
T. pseudospiralis, T. nativa, T. nelsoni
, and
T. britovi
in different geographic locations.
Pathophysiology
The life cycle is maintained by animals that are fed (eg, pigs, horses) or eat (eg, bears, foxes, boars)
other animals whose striated muscles contain encysted infective larvae (eg, rodents). Humans become
infected by eating raw, undercooked, or processed meat from infected animals, most commonly pigs, wild
boar, or bear. Larvae excyst in the small bowel, penetrate the mucosa, and become adults in 6 to 8 days.
Females are about 2.2 mm long, and males are about 1.2 mm long. Mature females release living larvae
for 4 to 6 wk and then die or are expelled. Newborn larvae migrate through the bloodstream and body but
ultimately survive only within striated skeletal muscle cells. Larvae fully encyst in 1 to 2 mo and remain
viable for several years as intracellular parasites. Dead larvae eventually are resorbed or calcify. The
cycle continues only if encysted larvae are ingested by another carnivore.
Symptoms and Signs
Many infections are asymptomatic or mild. During the 1st wk, nausea, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea
may occur. One to 2 wk after infection, systemic symptoms and signs begin: facial or periorbital edema,
myalgia, persistent fever, headache, and subconjunctival hemorrhages and petechiae. Eye pain and
photophobia often precede myalgia.
Symptoms due to muscle invasion may mimic polymyositis. The muscles of respiration, speech,
mastication, and swallowing may be painful. Severe dyspnea may occur in heavy infections.
Fever is generally remittent, rising to 39° C or higher, remaining elevated for several days, and then falling
gradually. Eosinophilia usually begins when newborn larvae invade tissues, peaks 2 to 4 wk after
infection, and gradually declines as the larvae encyst.
In heavy infections, the inflammation may cause complications: cardiac (myocarditis, heart failure,
arrhythmia), neurologic (encephalitis, meningitis, visual or auditory disorders,
seizures), or pulmonary
(pneumonitis, pleurisy). Death may result from myocarditis or encephalitis.
Symptoms and signs gradually resolve, and most disappear by about the 3rd mo, when the larvae have
become fully encysted in muscle cells and eliminated from other organs and tissues. Vague muscular
pains and fatigue may persist for months. Recurrent infections with
T. nativa
in northern latitudes can
cause chronic diarrhea.
===PAGE:1521===
Diagnosis
• Enzyme immunoassay
• Rarely biopsy
No specific tests to diagnose the intestinal stage are available. After the 2nd wk of infection, a muscle
biopsy may detect larvae and cysts but is seldom necessary. Diffuse inflammation in muscle tissue
indicates recent infection.
A number of serologic tests have been used, but enzyme immunoassay (EIA) using
T. spiralis
excretorysecretory (ES) antigen seems to be the quickest way to detect the infection and is used in the US.
Antibodies are often not detectable for the first 3 to 5 wk of infection, so tests should be repeated at
weekly intervals if results are initially negative. Because antibodies may persist for years, serologic tests
are of most value if they are initially negative and then positive. Serologic tests and muscle biopsy are
complementary tests: Either one can be negative in a given patient with trichinosis. Skin testing with larval
antigens is unreliable.
Muscle enzymes (creatine kinase and LDH) are elevated in 50% of patients and correlate with abnormal
electromyograms.
Trichinosis must be differentiated from
• Acute rheumatic fever, acute arthritis, angioedema, and myositis
• Febrile illnesses such as TB, typhoid fever, sepsis, and undulant fever
• Pneumonitis
• Neurologic manifestations of meningitis, encephalitis, and poliomyelitis
• Eosinophilia due to Hodgkin lymphoma, eosinophilic leukemia, polyarteritis nodosa, or disease caused
by other migrating nematodes
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment
• Mebendazole or albendazole to eliminate adult worms
Anthelmintics eliminate adult worms from the GI tract but probably have little effect on encysted larvae.
Mebendazole 200 to 400 mg po tid for 3 days, then 400 to 500 mg tid for 10 days or albendazole 400 mg
bid for 8 to 14 days may be used.
Analgesics (eg, NSAIDs, opioids) may help relieve muscle pains. For severe allergic manifestations or
myocardial or CNS involvement, prednisone 20 to 60 mg po once/day is given for 3 or 4 days, then
tapered over 10 to 14 days.
Prevention
Trichinosis is prevented by cooking meat thoroughly until brown (71° C [160° F] throughout). Larvae can
usually be killed by freezing the meat at -17° C (1° F) for 3 wk or -30° C (-22° F) for 6 days, but
T. nativa
is relatively resistant. Smoking, microwave cooking, or salting meat does not reliably kill larvae.
Domestic swine should not be fed uncooked meat products.
Trichuriasis
===PAGE:1522===
(Whipworm Infection; Trichocephaliasis)
Trichuriasis is infection with
Trichuris trichiura
. Symptoms may include abdominal pain,
diarrhea, and, in heavy infections, anemia and undernutrition. Diagnosis is by finding eggs in
stool. Treatment is with mebendazole or albendazole.
Infection is spread via the fecal-oral route. Ingested eggs hatch and enter the crypts of the small bowel as
larvae. After maturing for 1 to 3 mo, the worms migrate to the cecum and ascending colon, where they
attach to the superficial epithelium, mate, and lay eggs.
Adult worms may live 7 to 10 yr.
Trichuriasis is the 3rd most common roundworm infection. An estimated 800 million people are infected
worldwide.
Trichuris trichiura
occurs principally in developing tropical or subtropical areas, but infections
also occur in the southern US. Children are most affected.
Light infections are often asymptomatic. Heavy infections cause abdominal pain, anorexia, and diarrhea
and may result in anemia or retarded growth. Very heavy infections may cause weight loss, anemia, and
rectal prolapse, particularly in children.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool
Diagnosis is made by microscopic examination of stool; the characteristic lemon-shaped eggs with clear
opercula at both ends are readily
apparent. When colonoscopy is done for other indications, wiggling
adult worms may be seen protruding into the bowel lumen. CBC is done to check for anemia.
Treatment
• Mebendazole
Mebendazole 100 mg po bid for 3 days or 500 mg as a single dose is recommended. Alternatively,
albendazole 400 mg po once/day for 3 days or ivermectin 200
μ
g/kg po once/day for 3 days may be used.
These drugs should not be used during pregnancy.
Prevention is possible through good sanitation and personal hygiene.
===PAGE:1523===
Chapter 145. Trematodes (Flukes)
Introduction
Flukes are parasitic flatworms that infect the blood vessels, GI tract, lungs, or liver. They are often
categorized according to the organ system they invade:
•
Schistosoma
sp: Vasculature of the GI or GU system
•
Fasciolopsis buski, Heterophyes heterophyes
, and related organisms: Lumen of the GI tract
•
Clonorchis sinensis, Fasciola hepatica
, and
Opisthorchis
sp: Liver
•
Paragonimus westermani
and related species: Lungs and other organs such as the CNS
Clonorchiasis
(Oriental Liver Fluke Infection)
Clonorchiasis is infection with the liver fluke
Clonorchis sinensis
. Infection is acquired by eating
undercooked freshwater fish. Symptoms include fever, chills, epigastric pain, tender
hepatomegaly, diarrhea, and mild jaundice. Diagnosis is by identifying eggs in the feces or
duodenal contents. Treatment is with praziquantel or albendazole.
Clonorchis
is endemic in the Far East, especially in Korea, Japan, Taiwan, and southern China, and
infection occurs elsewhere among immigrants and people eating fish imported from endemic areas.
Pathophysiology
Adult
C. sinensis
worms live in the bile ducts. Eggs are passed in the stool and ingested by snails.
Cercariae (free-swimming larvae) released from infected snails subsequently infect a variety of freshwater
fish. Humans become infected by eating raw, dried, salted, or pickled fish containing encysted
metacercariae (resting or maturing stage). Metacercariae are released in the duodenum, enter the
common bile duct through the ampulla of Vater, and migrate to smaller intrahepatic ducts (or occasionally
the gallbladder and pancreatic ducts), where they mature into adult worms in about 1 mo. The adults may
live ≥ 20 yr and grow to about 10 to 25 mm by 3 to 5 mm.
Symptoms and Signs
Light infections are usually asymptomatic. Heavier infections can cause fever, chills, epigastric pain,
tender hepatomegaly, mild jaundice, and eosinophilia. Later, diarrhea may occur. Chronic cholangitis in
heavy infections may progress to atrophy of liver parenchyma, portal fibrosis, and cirrhosis. Jaundice may
occur if a mass of flukes obstructs the biliary tree. Other complications include suppurative cholangitis,
chronic pancreatitis, and, late in the course, cholangiocarcinoma.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool
Diagnosis is by finding eggs in the feces or duodenal contents. The eggs are difficult to distinguish from
those of
Metagonimus, Heterophyes
, and
Opisthorchis
. Occasionally, the diagnosis is made by
identifying adult flukes in surgical specimens or by doing percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography.
Other tests are nondiagnostic but may be abnormal; alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, and eosinophil
counts may be elevated. A plain abdominal x-ray occasionally shows intrahepatic calcification. Hepatic
ultrasonography may show ductal irregularities and evidence of scarring.
===PAGE:1524===
Treatment
• Praziquantel or albendazole
Treatment is with praziquantel 25 mg/kg po tid for 2 days or albendazole 10 mg/kg po once/day for 7
days. Biliary obstruction may require surgery. Freshwater fish from endemic waters should be thoroughly
cooked and not eaten raw, pickled, or wine-soaked.
Fascioliasis
Fascioliasis is infection with the liver fluke
Fasciola hepatica
, which is acquired by eating
contaminated watercress or other water plants.
F. hepatica
is the sheep and cattle liver fluke. Incidental human fascioliasis, acquired by eating watercress
contaminated by sheep or cattle dung, occurs in Europe, Africa, China, and South America but is rare in
the US.
In acute infection, immature flukes migrate through the intestinal wall, the peritoneal cavity, the liver
capsule, and the parenchyma of the liver before entering the biliary ducts where they mature to adulthood
in about 3 to 4 mo.
Acute infection causes abdominal pain, hepatomegaly, nausea, vomiting, intermittent fever, urticaria,
eosinophilia, malaise, and weight loss due to liver damage. Chronic infection may be asymptomatic or
lead to intermittent biliary tract obstruction. Ectopic lesions may occur in the intestinal wall, lungs, or other
organs.
CT frequently shows hypodense lesions in the liver. Antibody detection assays are useful in the early
stages of disease. Eggs may be recovered in the stool or, during chronic infection, in duodenal or biliary
materials.
Treatment is with triclabendazole (10 mg/kg po once or twice) where it is available. Alternatively,
nitazoxanide 500 mg bid po for 7 days or bithionol 30 to 50 mg/kg po every other day for 10 to 15 doses
may be used. Treatment failures are common with praziquantel.
Fasciolopsiasis
Fasciolopsiasis is infection with the intestinal fluke
Fasciolopsis buski
, which is acquired by
eating aquatic plants.
F. buski
is present in the intestine of pigs in many parts of Asia. Human infection is acquired by eating
aquatic plants (eg, water chestnuts) that bear infectious metacercariae (encysted stage). Adult worms
attach to and ulcerate the mucosa of the proximal small bowel. They grow to about 20 to 75 mm by 8 to
20 mm. Adults have a life span of about 1 yr.
Most infections are light and asymptomatic, but heavy infections may cause diarrhea, abdominal pain,
and signs of malabsorption.
Diagnosis is made by finding eggs or, less commonly, adult worms in the feces.
Treatment is with praziquantel 25 mg/kg po tid for 1 day.
Heterophyiasis and Related Trematode Infections
Heterophyiasis is infection with the intestinal fluke
Heterophyes heterophyes
, which is acquired
by eating infected raw or undercooked fish from freshwater or brackish water.
Heterophyes heterophyes
and several related trematodes are endemic in the Far East, Middle East, and
Egypt. Infection is acquired by eating infected raw or undercooked fish from freshwater or brackish water
===PAGE:1525===
containing metacercariae (encysted stage). After ingestion, metacercariae excyst and attach to the
mucosa of the small intestine. There, they develop into adults, growing to about 1.0 to 1.7 mm by 0.3 to
0.4 mm. Salmon live part of their lives in freshwater and can be infected with
Nanophyetus salmincola
.
Adult flukes can cause abdominal pain and diarrhea. Diagnosis is by finding eggs in the feces. Treatment
is with praziquantel 25 mg/kg po tid for 1 day.
Opisthorchiasis
Opisthorchiasis is infection with 1 of 2 species of the liver fluke
Opisthorchis
, which is acquired
by eating infected raw or undercooked fish.
Opisthorchiasis occurs in cats and dogs in eastern and central Europe, Siberia, and parts of Asia, such
as Thailand and Cambodia. The life cycle of
Opisthorchis
requires both snails and fish. Human disease
resembles clonorchiasis and is acquired by eating raw or undercooked freshwater fish that contains
infectious metacercariae (encysted stage). After ingestion, metacercariae excyst and ascend through the
ampulla of Vater into the biliary ducts, where they attach to the mucosa
and mature. Adult flukes grow to 5
to 10 mm by 1 to 2 mm (
O. viverrini
) or 7 to 12 mm by 2 to 3 mm (
O. felineus
).
Symptoms include vague GI discomfort or bowel symptoms (diarrhea or constipation). Rarely, infection
causes cholangitis or cholangiocarcinoma.
Diagnosis is by finding eggs in the feces. Praziquantel 25 mg/kg po tid for 2 days is the treatment of
choice.
Paragonimiasis
(Oriental Lung Fluke Infection; Endemic Hemoptysis)
Paragonimiasis is infection with the lung fluke
Paragonimus westermani
and related species.
Humans are infected by eating raw, pickled, or poorly cooked freshwater crustaceans.
Symptoms include chronic cough, chest pain, dyspnea, and hemoptysis. Allergic skin reactions
and CNS abnormalities due to ectopic flukes, including seizures, aphasia, paresis, and visual
disturbances, can also occur. Diagnosis is by identifying eggs in sputum, stool, or pleural or
peritoneal fluid. Serologic tests are also available. Praziquantel is the treatment of choice;
bithionol is an alternative.
Although > 30 species of
Paragonimus
exist and 10 have been reported to infect humans,
P. westermani
is the most frequent cause of disease. The most important endemic areas are in the Far East, principally
Korea, Japan, Taiwan, the highlands of China, and the Philippines. Endemic foci also exist in West Africa
and in parts of South and Central America.
Pathophysiology
Eggs passed in sputum or feces develop for 2 to 3 wk in freshwater before miracidia (first larval stage)
hatch. The miracidia invade snails; there, they develop, multiply, and eventually emerge as cercariae
(free-swimming larvae). Cercariae penetrate freshwater crabs or crayfish and encyst to form
metacercariae. Humans become infected by eating raw, pickled, or poorly cooked crustaceans.
Metacercariae excyst in the human GI tract, penetrate the intestinal wall, move into the peritoneal cavity,
then through the diaphragm into the pleural cavity; they enter lung tissue, encyst, and develop into
hermaphroditic adult worms, which grow to about 7.5 to 12 mm by 4 to 6 mm. Worms may also reach the
brain, liver, lymph nodes, skin, and spinal cord and develop there. However, in these organs, the life cycle
cannot be completed because the eggs have no way to exit the body. Adult flukes may persist for 20 to 25
yr.
Other hosts include pigs, dogs, and a variety of feline species.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1526===
Most damage is to the lungs, but other organs may be involved. About 25 to 45% of all extrapulmonary
infections affect the CNS. Manifestations of pulmonary infection develop slowly and include chronic
cough, chest pain, hemoptysis, and dyspnea; the clinical picture resembles and is often confused with
TB. Cerebral infections manifest as space-occupying lesions, often within a year after the onset of
pulmonary disease. Seizures, aphasia, paresis, and visual disturbances occur. Migratory allergic skin
lesions similar to those of cutaneous larva migrans are common in infections with
P. skrjabini
but also
occur with other species.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of sputum and stool
Diagnosis is by identifying the characteristic large operculated eggs in sputum or stool. Occasionally,
eggs may be found in pleural or peritoneal fluid. Eggs may be difficult to find because they are released
intermittently and in small numbers. Concentration techniques increase sensitivity.
X-rays provide ancillary information but are not diagnostic; chest x-rays and CT may show a diffuse
infiltrate, nodules and annular opacities, cavitations, lung abscesses, pleural effusion, and pneumothorax.
Serologic tests may assist in diagnosis of light or extrapulmonary infections.
Treatment
• Praziquantel
Praziquantel 25 mg/kg po tid for 2 days cures 80 to 100% of pulmonary infections and is the drug of
choice. Bithionol 30 to 50 mg/kg po every other day for 10 to 15 doses is an alternative but has more
adverse effects. Praziquantel is used to treat extrapulmonary infections, but multiple courses may be
required. Surgery may be needed to excise skin lesions or, rarely, brain cysts.
The best prevention is to avoid eating raw or undercooked freshwater crabs and crayfish from endemic
waters.
Schistosomiasis
(Bilharziasis)
Schistosomiasis is infection with blood flukes of the genus
Schistosoma
, which are acquired
transcutaneously by swimming or wading in contaminated freshwater. The organisms infect the
vasculature of the GI or GU system. Acute symptoms are dermatitis, followed several weeks
later by fever, chills, nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, malaise, and myalgia. Chronic
symptoms vary with species but include bloody diarrhea (eg, with
S. mansoni
) or hematuria (eg,
with
S. haematobium
). Diagnosis is by identifying eggs in stool, urine, or biopsy specimens.
Serologic tests may be sensitive and specific but do not provide information about the worm
burden or clinical status. Treatment is with praziquantel.
Etiology
Schistosomiasis is by far the most important trematode infection.
Schistosoma
is the only trematode that
invades through the skin; all other trematodes infect only via ingestion. About 200 million people are
infected worldwide. The risk of infection is spreading as new dams are built in endemic areas.
Five species of schistosomes infect humans; all have similar life cycles involving freshwater snails.
S.
haematobium
causes urinary tract disease; the other
Schistosoma
sp cause intestinal disease.
Geographic distribution differs by species:
•
S. haematobium:
Widely distributed over the African continent with smaller foci in the Middle East and
India
===PAGE:1527===
•
S. mansoni:
Widespread in Africa and the only species in the Western Hemisphere, endemic in Brazil,
Surinam, and Venezuela and on some Caribbean islands
•
S. japonicum:
Only in Asia, mainly in China and the Philippines
•
S. mekongi:
Laos and Cambodia
•
S. intercalatum:
Central Africa
The disease may be imported in travelers and immigrants from endemic areas, but transmission does not
occur within the US and Canada.
Pathophysiology
Adult worms live and copulate within the veins of the mesentery (typically
S. japonicum
and
S. mansoni
)
or bladder (typically
S. haematobium
—see
Fig. 145-1
). Some eggs penetrate the intestinal or bladder mucosa and are passed in stool or urine; other
eggs remain within the host organ or are transported through the portal system to the liver and
occasionally to other sites (eg, lungs, CNS, spinal cord). Excreted eggs hatch in freshwater, releasing
miracidia (first larval stage), which enter snails. After multiplication, thousands of free-swimming cercariae
are released. Cercariae penetrate human skin within a few minutes after exposure and transform into
schistosomula, which travel through the bloodstream to the liver, where they mature into adults. The
adults then migrate to their ultimate home in the intestinal veins or the venous plexus of the GU tract.
Eggs appear in stool or urine 1 to 3 mo after cercarial penetration.
Estimates of the adult worm life span range from 3 to 7 yr. The females range in size from 7 to 20 mm;
males are slightly smaller.
Symptoms and Signs
Schistosome dermatitis:
This pruritic papular rash (see also Dermatitis Caused by Avian and Animal
Schistosomes  develops where the cercariae penetrate the skin in previously sensitized
people.
Acute schistosomiasis:
Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama fever) occurs with onset of egg laying,
typically 2 to 4 wk after heavy exposure. Symptoms include fever, chills, cough, nausea, abdominal pain,
malaise, myalgia, urticarial rashes, and marked eosinophilia, resembling serum sickness. Manifestations
are more common and usually more severe in visitors than in residents of endemic areas and typically
last for several weeks.
Chronic schistosomiasis:
Chronic schistosomiasis results mostly from host responses to eggs retained
in tissues. Early on, intestinal mucosal ulcerations caused by
S. mansoni
or
S. japonicum
may bleed and
result in bloody diarrhea. As lesions progress, focal fibrosis, strictures, fistulas, and papillomatous growths
may develop. With
S. haematobium
, ulcerations in the bladder wall may cause dysuria, hematuria, and
urinary frequency. Over time, chronic cystitis develops. Strictures may lead to hydroureter and
hydronephrosis. Papillomatous masses in the bladder are common, and squamous cell carcinoma may
develop. Blood loss from both GI and GU tracts frequently results in anemia.
Secondary bacterial infection of the GU tract is common, and persistent
Salmonella
septicemia may
occur with
S. mansoni
. Several species, notably
S. haematobium
, can cause genital disease in both men
and women, resulting in numerous symptoms including infertility.
[Fig. 145-1.
Simplified
Schistosoma
life cycle.]
Granulomatous reactions to eggs of
S. mansoni
and
S. japonicum
in the liver usually do not compromise
===PAGE:1528===
liver function but may cause fibrosis and cirrhosis, which can lead to portal hypertension and subsequent
hematemesis due to esophageal varices. Eggs in the lungs may produce granulomas and focal
obliterative arteritis, which may cause pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale. Eggs lodged in the
spinal cord can cause transverse myelitis, and those in the CNS can cause seizures.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool
Stool (
S. japonicum, S. mansoni, S. mekongi, S. intercalatum
) or urine (
S. haematobium
, occasionally
S.
japonicum
) is examined for eggs. Repeated examinations using concentration techniques may be
necessary. Geography is a primary determinant of species, so a history of exposure should be
communicated to the laboratory. If the clinical picture suggests schistosomiasis but no eggs are found
after repeated examination of urine or feces, intestinal or bladder mucosa can be biopsied to check for
eggs.
Depending on the antigens used, serologic tests may be sensitive and specific for infection, but they do
not provide information about worm burden, clinical status, or prognosis.
Treatment
• Praziquantel
Single-day oral treatment with praziquantel (20 mg/kg bid for
S. haematobium, S. mansoni
, and
S.
intercalatum
; 20 mg/kg tid for
S. japonicum
and
S. mekongi
) is recommended. However, treatment does
not affect developing schistosomula and thus may not abort an early infection. Adverse effects are
generally mild and include abdominal pain, diarrhea, headache, and dizziness. Therapeutic failures have
been reported, but it is difficult to determine whether they are due to reinfection or drug-resistant strains.
Oxamniquine (not available in the US) has been effective in treating infection due to
S. mansoni
in some
areas where praziquantel has been less effective. African strains are more resistant to this drug than
South American strains and require higher doses.
Patients should be examined for living eggs 3 and 6 mo after treatment. Retreatment is indicated if egg
excretion has not decreased markedly.
Prevention
Scrupulously avoiding contact with contaminated freshwater prevents infection. The sanitary disposal of
urine and feces reduces the likelihood of infection. Adult residents of endemic areas are more resistant to
reinfection than children, suggesting the possibility of acquired immunity. Vaccine development is under
way.
Dermatitis Caused by Avian and Animal Schistosomes
(Cercarial Dermatitis; Clam Diggers' Itch; Swimmers' Itch)
Cercarial dermatitis, a skin condition, occurs when
Schistosoma
sp that cannot develop in
humans penetrate the skin during contact with contaminated freshwater or brackish water.
Cercariae of
Schistosoma
sp that infect birds and mammals other than humans can penetrate the skin.
Although the organisms do not develop in humans, humans may become sensitized and develop pruritic
maculopapular, then vesicular skin lesions at the site of penetration. Skin lesions may be accompanied by
a systemic febrile response that runs for 5 to 7 days and resolves spontaneously.
Ocean-related schistosome dermatitis (clam diggers' itch) occurs on all Atlantic, Gulf, Pacific, and
Hawaiian coasts. It is very common in muddy flats off Cape Cod. Freshwater schistosome dermatitis
(swimmers' itch) is common in the lakes of northern Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota.
===PAGE:1529===
Diagnosis is based on clinical findings. Most cases do not require medical attention.
Treatment is symptomatic with cool compresses, baking soda, or antipruritic lotions. Topical
corticosteroids can also be used.
===PAGE:1530===
Chapter 146. Cestodes (Tapeworms)
Introduction
All tapeworms (cestodes) cycle through 3 stages—eggs, larvae, and adults. Adults inhabit the intestines
of definitive hosts, mammalian carnivores. Several of the adult tapeworms that infect humans are named
after their intermediate host: the fish tapeworm (
Diphyllobothrium latum
), the beef tapeworm (
Taenia
saginata
), and the pork tapeworm (
Taenia solium
). Eggs laid by adult tapeworms living in the intestines of
definitive hosts are excreted with feces into the environment and ingested by an intermediate host
(typically another species), in which larvae develop, enter the circulation, and encyst in the musculature
or
other organs. When the intermediate host is eaten, cysts develop into adult tapeworms in the intestines
of the definitive host, restarting the cycle. With some cestode species (eg,
T. solium
), the definitive host
can also serve as an intermediate host; tissue cysts develop instead of intestinal worms after eggs are
ingested.
Adult tapeworms are multisegmented flat worms that lack a digestive tract and absorb nutrients directly
from the host's small bowel. In the host's digestive tract, adult tapeworms can become large; the longest
parasite in the world is the 40-m whale tapeworm,
Polygonoporus
sp. Tapeworms have 3 recognizable
portions. The scolex (head) functions as an anchoring organ that attaches to intestinal mucosa. The neck
is an unsegmented region with high regenerative capacity. If treatment does not eliminate the neck and
scolex, the entire worm may regenerate. The rest of the worm consists of numerous proglottids
(segments). Proglottids closest to the neck are undifferentiated. As proglottids move caudally, each
develops hermaphroditic sex organs. Distal proglottids are gravid and contain eggs in a uterus.
In contrast to adult tapeworms, larvae can cause severe and even lethal disease, most importantly in the
brain, but also in the liver, lungs, eyes, muscles, and subcutaneous tissues. In humans,
T. solium
causes
cysticercosis, and
Echinococcus granulosus
and
E. multilocularis
cause hydatid disease.
Sparganum
mansoni
and
T. multiceps
larvae can also infect humans.
Symptoms and Signs
Adult tapeworms are so well adapted to their hosts that they cause minimal symptoms.
Hymenolepis nana
is an exception and can cause abdominal discomfort, diarrhea, and weight loss. However, larvae may
elicit intense immunologic reactions as they travel through tissues (hence inducing immunity) and cause
severe disease when they settle in extraintestinal sites.
Diagnosis
Adult tapeworm infections are diagnosed by identifying eggs or gravid proglottid segments in stool. Larval
disease is best identified by imaging (eg, brain CT or MRI) and, for some species, serologic tests.
Treatment
The anthelmintic drugs, praziquantel and niclosamide, are effective for most intestinal tapeworm
infections. Some extraintestinal infections respond to anthelmintic treatment; others require surgical
intervention.
Prevention
Prevention and control involve the following:
• Thorough cooking (to a temperature > 57° C [> 135° F]) of pork, beef, lamb, game meat, and fish
• Regular worming of dogs and cats
• Prevention of recycling through hosts (eg, dogs eating dead game or livestock)
===PAGE:1531===
• Reduction and avoidance of intermediate hosts such as rodents, fleas, and grain beetles
• Meat inspection
• Sanitary treatment of human waste
Prolonged freezing of meat is effective, pickling is variably effective, and smoking and drying are
ineffective.
Diphyllobothriasis
(Fish Tapeworm Infection)
Diphyllobothriasis is infection with the intestinal tapeworm,
Diphyllobothrium latum
, a parasite
of freshwater fish. Treatment is with praziquantel.
D. latum
is the largest parasite of humans (up to 10 m in length). It and
Sparganum mansoni
are the only
human tapeworms with aquatic life cycles. In freshwater, eggs of
D. latum
from human feces hatch into
free-swimming larvae, which are ingested by microcrustaceans. The microcrustaceans are ingested by
fish, in which the larvae become infective.
Diphyllobothriasis occurs worldwide, especially where cool lakes are contaminated by sewage. Infections
in the US and northern Europe occur in people who eat raw freshwater fish. Infection is less common with
current sewage treatment.
Infection is usually asymptomatic, but mild GI symptoms may be noted. Fish tapeworms take up dietary
vitamin B
, occasionally resulting in vitamin B
deficiency and megaloblastic anemia.
Diagnosis is by identification of characteristic operculated eggs or broad proglottids in stool.
Treatment
• Praziquantel or niclosamide
Treatment is with a single oral dose of praziquantel 5 to 10 mg/kg. Alternatively, a single 2-g dose of
niclosamide is given as 4 tablets
(500 mg each) that are chewed one at a time and swallowed. For
children, the dose is 50 mg/kg once.
Vitamin B
may be needed to correct the anemia. Thorough cooking of freshwater fish or freezing it at -
10° C (14° F) for 48 h prevents infection.
Dipylidium caninum
Infection
Dipylidium caninum
can cause intestinal infection, which is typically asymptomatic.
D. caninum
, the double-pored tapeworm, is present in dogs and cats. Fleas are the intermediate host.
Ingestion of an infected flea, usually by a young child, causes an asymptomatic, self-limited infection, but
proglottids may be seen in stool.
Treatment is with a single oral dose of praziquantel 5 to 10 mg/kg. Alternatively, a single 2-g dose of
niclosamide is given as 4 tablets (500 mg each) that are chewed one at a time and swallowed. For
children, the dose is 50 mg/kg once.
Echinococcosis
(Hydatid Disease)
===PAGE:1532===
Echinococcosis is infection with larvae of
Echinococcus granulosus
or
E. multilocularis
(alveolar
hydatid disease). Symptoms depend on the organ involved—eg, jaundice and abdominal
discomfort with liver cysts or cough, chest pain, and hemoptysis with lung cysts. Cyst rupture
can cause fever, urticaria, and serious anaphylactic reactions. Diagnosis is with imaging,
examination of cyst fluid, or serologic tests. Treatment is with albendazole, surgery, or both or
with cyst aspiration and instillation of a scolicidal agent.
Etiology
Echinococcus granulosus
is common in sheep-raising areas of the Mediterranean, Middle East,
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and South America. It requires canines as definitive hosts and
herbivores (eg, sheep, horses, deer) or humans as intermediate hosts. Foci also exist in regions of
Canada, Alaska, and California.
E. multilocularis
worms are present in foxes, and the hydatid larvae occur in small wild rodents. Infected
dogs and other canines are the main link to occasional human infection.
E. multilocularis
occurs mainly in
Central Europe, Alaska, Canada, and Siberia. Its range of natural infection in the continental US extends
from Wyoming and the Dakotas to the upper Midwest. Rarely,
E. vogelii
or
E. oliganthus
causes
polycystic hydatid disease in humans, primarily in the liver.
Pathophysiology
Ingested eggs from animal feces (which may be present in the fur of dogs or other animals) hatch in the
gut. Larvae penetrate the intestinal wall, migrate via the circulation, and lodge in the liver or lungs or, less
frequently, in the brain, bone, or other organs.
E. granulosus
larvae develop slowly (usually over many years) into large unilocular, fluid-filled lesions
—hydatid cysts. Brood capsules containing numerous small infective protoscolices form within these
cysts. Large cysts may contain > 1 L of highly antigenic hydatid fluid as well as millions of protoscolices.
Daughter cysts sometimes form in or outside primary cysts. If a cyst in the liver leaks or ruptures, infection
can spread to the peritoneum.
E. multilocularis
produces spongy masses that are locally invasive and difficult or impossible to treat
surgically. Cysts occur primarily in the liver but can occur in the lungs, or other tissues.
Symptoms and Signs
Although many infections are acquired during childhood, clinical signs may not appear for years, except
when cysts are in vital organs. Symptoms and signs may resemble those of a space-occupying tumor.
Liver cysts
eventually cause abdominal pain or a palpable mass. Jaundice may occur if the bile duct is
obstructed. Rupture into the bile duct, peritoneal cavity, or lung may cause fever, urticaria, or a serious
anaphylactic reaction.
Pulmonary cysts
can rupture, causing cough, chest pain, and hemoptysis.
Diagnosis
• Imaging
• Serologic testing
• Examination of cyst fluid
Pulmonary cysts are usually discovered on routine chest x-ray as round, often irregular pulmonary
masses.
CT, MRI, and ultrasound findings may be pathognomonic if daughter cysts and hydatid sand
===PAGE:1533===
(protoscolices and debris) are present, but simple hydatid cysts may be difficult to
differentiate from
simple benign cysts, abscesses, or benign or malignant tumors. The presence of hydatid sand in
aspirated cyst fluid is diagnostic.
Serologic tests (enzyme immunoassay, immunofluorescent assay, indirect hemagglutination assay) are
variably sensitive but are useful if positive and should be done. CBC may detect eosinophilia.
Treatment
• Surgical removal or aspiration followed by instillation of a scolicidal agent
• Sometimes albendazole
Surgery, sometimes via laparoscopy, can be curative. Albendazole is often given before surgery to prevent
metastatic infections that can occur if cyst contents spill during the procedure. In some centers,
percutaneous aspiration under CT guidance is done, followed by instillation of a scolicidal agent (eg,
hypertonic saline) and reaspiration (PAIR [percutaneous aspiration-injection-reaspiration]).
For
E. granulosis
, albendazole 400 mg po bid for 1 to 6 mo (7.5 mg/kg bid in children up to a maximum of
400 mg bid) is curative in 30 to 40% of patients and can be used to suppress growth in inoperable cases.
Prognosis for patients with
E. multilocularis
infection is poor unless the entire larval mass can be
removed. Surgery is indicated if it is feasible, which depends on the size, location, and manifestations of
the lesion. Albendazole in the above doses can suppress growth of inoperable lesions. Liver
transplantation has been lifesaving in a few patients.
Hymenolepis nana
Infection
(Dwarf Tapeworm Infection)
Hymenolepis nana
, a tiny intestinal tapeworm, is the most common human cestode; infection is
treated with praziquantel.
Hymenolepis nana
is only 15 to 40 mm long. It requires only one host but can also cycle through two. Its
larvae migrate only within the gut wall, and its life span is relatively short (4 to 6 wk).
H. nana
is more
frequent in populations living in conditions of poverty and poor hygiene, particularly when fleas are
present.
H. nana
has 3 modes of infection:
•
Indirect 2-host cycle:
Rodents are the primary definitive hosts, and grain beetles, fleas, or other
insects feed on contaminated rodent droppings as intermediate hosts; humans can become infected by
ingesting parasitized insects.
•
Human-to-human oral-anal cycle:
Eggs are passed from one human to another or recycle externally
in a single host.
•
Internal autoinfection:
Eggs hatch within the gut and initiate a 2nd generation without ever exiting the
host. Autoinfection can result in massive numbers of worms, which can cause nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, and nonspecific systemic symptoms.
The pronounced cellular and humoral response to the tissue phase of
H. nana
infection probably
provides some protection for adult humans living in endemic areas.
Diagnosis is made by finding eggs in stool samples.
Treatment
===PAGE:1534===
Praziquantel 25 mg/kg po once is the treatment of choice.
Hymenolepis diminuta
Infection
Hymenolepis diminuta
can cause intestinal infection.
Hymenolepis diminuta
, the rat tapeworm, has a life cycle similar to the indirect cycle of
H. nana
, involving
grain insects.
H. diminuta
rarely infects humans but can cause mild diarrhea.
Diagnosis is by finding characteristic eggs in stool.
Infection is effectively treated with praziquantel 25 mg/kg po once.
Coenurosis (
Taenia multiceps
or
T. serialis
Infection)
Taenia multiceps
and
T. serialis
, rare causes of human infection, are acquired by accidental
ingestion of eggs from dog feces.
Canines are the definitive hosts for adult
Taenia multiceps
and
T. serialis
tapeworms; sheep and other
herbivorous animals are
intermediate hosts. Unwitting ingestion of material contaminated by dog feces
causes human disease. The larvae invade and form a cyst (coenurus) in human tissue, usually in the
CNS.
Symptoms require several years to develop and depend on the organ infected. Involvement of the brain
causes increased intracranial pressure, seizures, loss of consciousness, and focal neurologic deficits.
Diagnosis is typically made after surgical removal, which is also the primary treatment. Surgery is typically
done for symptomatic, space-occupying lesions.
Sparganosis
Sparganosis is infection with larvae of the tapeworm
Spirometra mansoni
and related species.
Spirometra mansoni
affects dogs, cats, and other carnivores. Eggs are passed into freshwater where
they are ingested by copepods (eg,
Cyclops
). Frogs, reptiles, and various small mammals ingest them
and serve as intermediate hosts. Humans can become infected by accidental ingestion of copepods from
water contaminated by cat or dog feces, ingestion of inadequately cooked flesh from another intermediate
host, or contact with poultices containing flesh from these sources. In humans, larvae typically migrate to
subcutaneous tissue or muscle and form slowly growing masses. Other sites, including the CNS, may be
involved but are much less common. Symptoms are caused by mass effect.
Diagnosis is typically made after surgical removal, although it may be suggested when imaging detects a
mass. Surgery is also the primary treatment and is typically done for symptomatic, space-occupying
lesions.
Taeniasis saginata
(Beef Tapeworm Infection)
Infection with the beef tapeworm,
Taenia saginata
, may cause mild GI upset or passage of a
motile segment in the stool. It is treated with praziquantel.
Cattle are intermediate hosts for
Taenia saginata
. Humans are infected by eating cysticerci (larval form) in
raw or undercooked beef. The larvae mature in about 2 mo to adult worms that can live for several years;
usually, only 1 or 2 adult worms are present.
Infection occurs worldwide but especially in cattle-raising regions of the tropics and subtropics in Africa,
the Middle East, Eastern Europe, Mexico, and South America. Infection is uncommon in US cattle and is
===PAGE:1535===
monitored by federal inspection.
Patients may be asymptomatic or have mild digestive symptoms. Passage of a motile segment often
brings an otherwise asymptomatic patient to medical attention.
The stool should be examined for proglottids and eggs; eggs may also be present on anal swabs. The
ova of
T. saginata
are indistinguishable from those of
T. solium
(pork tapeworm), as are the clinical
features and management of intestinal infections due to the 2 tapeworms.
Treatment
• Praziquantel or niclosamide
Treatment is with a single oral dose of praziquantel 5 or 10 mg/kg. Alternatively, a single 2-g dose of
niclosamide is given as 4 tablets (500 mg each) that are chewed one at a time and swallowed with a small
amount of water. For children, the dose is 40 to 50 mg/kg once. Both drugs have cure rates of about
90%. Treatment can be considered successful when no proglottids are passed for 4 mo.
Taeniasis Solium and Cysticercosis
(Pork Tapeworm Infection)
Taeniasis solium is infection with adult T
aenia solium
worms that follows ingestion of
contaminated pork, resulting in intestinal infection. Cysticercosis is infection with larvae of
T.
solium
, which develop from ova excreted with human feces. Adult worms may cause mild GI
symptoms or passage of a motile segment in the stool. Cysticercosis is usually asymptomatic
unless larvae invade the CNS, resulting in neurocysticercosis, which can cause seizures and
various other neurologic signs. Neurocysticercosis may be recognized on brain imaging
studies. Less than half of patients with neurocysticercosis have adult
T. solium
in their
intestines and thus eggs or proglottids in their stool. Adult worms can be eradicated with
praziquantel. Treatment of symptomatic neurocysticercosis is with corticosteroids,
anticonvulsants, and, in some
situations, albendazole or praziquantel. Surgery may be required.
Presentation, diagnosis, and management of intestinal infection with the adult
T. solium
tapeworm are
similar to those of beef tapeworm infection. However, humans may also act as intermediate hosts for
T.
solium
larvae if they ingest
T. solium
eggs from human excreta (see
Fig. 146-1
). Another theory is that if an adult tapeworm is present in the intestine, gravid proglottids may
be passed retrograde from the intestine to the stomach, where oncospheres (immature form of the
parasite enclosed in an embryonic envelope) may hatch and migrate to subcutaneous tissue, muscle,
viscera, and the CNS.
Adult tapeworms may reside in the small bowel for years. They may be 2 to 7 m long and produce < 1000
proglottids; each contains about 50,000 eggs.
Cysticercosis is prevalent, and neurocysticercosis is a major cause of seizure disorders in Latin America,
Africa, Southeast Asia, and Eastern Europe. Infection in the US is most common among immigrants from
those areas but has occurred in North Americans who have not traveled abroad but who have apparently
been infected through exposure to immigrants harboring adult
T. solium
.
Symptoms and Signs
Humans infected with adult
T. solium
worms are asymptomatic or have mild GI complaints.
Cysticercosis:
Viable cysticerci (larval form) in most organs cause minimal or no tissue reaction, but
death of the cysts in the CNS can elicit an intense tissue response. Thus, symptoms often do not appear
for years after infection. Infection in the brain (cerebral cysticercosis) may result in severe symptoms,
resulting from mass effect and inflammation induced by degeneration of cysticerci and release of
antigens.
===PAGE:1536===
Patients may present with seizures, signs of increased intracranial pressure, hydrocephalus, focal
neurologic signs, altered mental status, or aseptic meningitis. Cysticerci may also infect the spinal cord,
muscles, subcutaneous tissues, and eyes. Substantial secondary immunity develops after larval infection.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool
• Imaging and serologic testing for patients with CNS symptoms
T. solium
eggs are present in ≤ 50% of stool samples from patients with cysticercosis. Diagnosis is
usually made when CT or MRI is done to evaluate neurologic symptoms. Scans may show solid nodules,
cysts, calcified cysts, ring-enhancing lesions, or hydrocephalus. The CDC's (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention's) immunoblot assay (using a serum specimen) is highly specific and more sensitive than
other enzyme immunoassays (particularly when > 2 CNS lesions are present; sensitivity is lower when
only a single cyst is present). Infection with adult
T. solium
worms can usually be diagnosed using stool
samples.
Treatment
•
For intestinal infection:
Praziquantel
•
For cysticercosis:
Corticosteroids, anticonvulsants, and sometimes surgery
Intestinal infection is treated with praziquantel 5 to 10 mg/kg po as a single dose to eliminate adult worms.
Corticosteroids (prednisone 60 mg po once/day or dexamethasone 6 mg once/day) and anticonvulsants
should be given to patients with symptomatic neurocysticercosis to reduce inflammation and symptoms.
The anthelmintic treatment of choice for cerebral cysticercosis is controversial. Not all patients respond to
treatment, and not all patients must be treated (cysts may already be dead and calcified, or the
inflammatory response to treatment may be worse than the disease). When anthelmintic treatment is
used, albendazole 400 mg po bid for 8 to 30 days is the drug of choice; praziquantel 33.3 mg/kg po tid on
day 1 followed by 16.6 mg/kg po tid for 29 days can also be used. Neither albendazole nor praziquantel
should be used in patients with ocular or spinal cord involvement.
Surgery may be necessary for obstructive hydrocephalus (due to intraventricular cysticerci), infection of
the 4th ventricle, and spinal and ocular cysticercosis.
[Fig. 146-1.

Taenia solium
life cycle.]
===PAGE:1537===
Chapter 147. Intestinal Protozoa
Introduction
The most important intestinal protozoan pathogens are
Entamoeba histolytica, Cryptosporidium
sp,
Giardia intestinalis
(
lamblia
),
Cystoisospora
(
Isospora
)
belli
,
Cyclospora cayetanensis
, and members of
the phylum Microsporidia. Multiple pathogenic parasites and nonpathogenic commensal organisms may
be present in the intestine at the same time. Nonintestinal protozoan infections are covered in other
chapters: For systemic protozoal diseases (malaria, babesiosis, leishmaniasis, toxoplasmosis,
trypanosomiasis), see p.
; for nematode infections, see p.
; for fluke infections, see p.
; and
for tapeworm infections, see p.
.
Intestinal protozoa are spread by the fecal-oral route, so infections are widespread in areas with
inadequate sanitation and water treatment. They are also common in the US in settings where fecal
incontinence and poor hygiene prevail, as occur in mental institutions and day care centers. Occasionally,
large waterborne outbreaks of intestinal protozoan infection have occurred in the US (eg, the massive
waterborne
Cryptosporidium
outbreak in Milwaukee in 1993). Some GI protozoa are spread sexually,
especially with practices involving oral-anal contact, and several protozoan species cause severe
opportunistic infections in patients with AIDS.
Diagnosis
Making a diagnosis based on symptoms and physical findings is difficult; stool testing for parasite
antigens or microscopic examination of stool for cysts or organisms is necessary.
Fecal antigen tests
that are sensitive and specific are available for
•
G. intestinalis
•
Cryptosporidium
sp
•
E. histolytica
Microscopic diagnosis
may require several samples, concentration methods, and special stains; thus,
the laboratory should be notified which pathogen or pathogens are suspected. Some patients require
semi-invasive diagnostic techniques such as endoscopic biopsy (see
Table 143-1
.
Amebiasis
(Entamebiasis)
Amebiasis is infection with
Entamoeba histolytica
. It is commonly asymptomatic, but symptoms
ranging from mild diarrhea to severe dysentery may occur. Extraintestinal infections include
liver abscesses. Diagnosis is by identifying
E. histolytica
in stool specimens or by serologic
tests. Treatment for symptomatic disease is with metronidazole or tinidazole followed by
paromomycin or other drugs active against cysts in the lumen.
Three species of
Entamoeba
are morphologically indistinguishable, but molecular techniques show that
they are different species:
•
E. histolytica
(pathogenic)
•
E. dispar
(harmless colonizer, more common)
•
E. moshkovskii
(harmless colonizer)
===PAGE:1538===
Disease is caused by
E. histolytica
and tends to occur in regions with poor socioeconomic conditions and
poor sanitation. Most infections occur in Central America, western South America, western and southern
Africa, and the Indian subcontinent. In developed countries (eg, US), most cases occur among recent
immigrants and travelers returning from endemic regions.
Worldwide each year, an estimated 40 to 50 million people develop amebic colitis or extraintestinal
disease, and about 40,000 to 70,000 die.
Pathophysiology
Entamoeba
sp exist in 2 forms:
• Trophozoite
• Cyst
The motile trophozoites feed on bacteria and tissue, reproduce, colonize the lumen and the mucosa of the
large intestine, and sometimes invade tissues and organs. Trophozoites predominate in liquid stools but
rapidly die outside the body. Some trophozoites in the colonic lumen become cysts that are excreted with
stool.
Cysts predominate in formed stools and resist destruction in the external environment. They may spread
directly from person to person or indirectly via food or water. Amebiasis can also be sexually transmitted
by oral-anal contact.
E. histolytica
trophozoites can adhere to and kill colonic epithelial cells and PMNs and can cause
dysentery with blood and mucus but with few PMNs in stool. Trophozoites also secrete proteases that
degrade the extracellular matrix and permit invasion into the intestinal wall and beyond. Trophozoites can
spread via the portal circulation and cause necrotic liver abscesses. Infection may spread by direct
extension from the liver to the right lung and pleural space or, rarely, through the bloodstream to the brain
and other organs.
Symptoms and Signs
Most infected people are asymptomatic but chronically pass cysts in stools. Symptoms that occur with
tissue invasion include intermittent diarrhea and constipation, flatulence, and cramping abdominal pain.
Tenderness over the liver or ascending colon may occur, and stools may contain mucus and blood.
Amebic dysentery:
This form, common in the tropics, manifests with episodes of frequent semiliquid
stools that often contain blood, mucus, and live trophozoites. Abdominal findings range from mild
tenderness to frank abdominal pain, with high fevers and toxic systemic symptoms. Abdominal tenderness
frequently accompanies amebic colitis. Between relapses, symptoms diminish to recurrent cramps and
loose or very soft stools, but emaciation and anemia may develop. Symptoms suggesting appendicitis
may occur. Surgery in such cases may result in peritoneal spread of amebas.
Chronic amebic infection:
This infection can mimic inflammatory bowel disease and manifests as
intermittent nondysenteric diarrhea with abdominal pain, mucus, flatulence, and weight loss. Chronic
infection may also manifest as tender, palpable masses or annular lesions (amebomas) in the cecum and
ascending colon.
Extraintestinal amebic disease:
Extraintestinal disease originates from infection in the colon and can
involve any organ, but a liver abscess, usually single and in the right lobe, is the most common. It can
manifest in patients who had no prior symptoms, is more common among men than among women (7:1 to
9:1), and may develop insidiously.
Symptoms include pain or discomfort over the liver, which is occasionally referred to the right shoulder, as
well as intermittent fever, sweats, chills, nausea, vomiting, weakness, and weight loss. Jaundice is
unusual and low grade when present. The abscess may perforate into the subphrenic space, right pleural
===PAGE:1539===
cavity, right lung, or other adjacent organs (eg, pericardium).
Skin lesions are occasionally observed, especially around the perineum and buttocks in chronic infection,
and may also occur in traumatic or operative wounds.
Diagnosis
•
Intestinal infection:
Microscopic examination and, when available, enzyme immunoassay of stool
•
Extraintestinal infection:
Imaging and serologic testing or a therapeutic trial
Nondysenteric amebiasis may be misdiagnosed as irritable bowel syndrome, regional enteritis, or
diverticulitis. A right-sided colonic mass may also be mistaken for cancer, TB, actinomycosis, or
lymphoma.
Amebic dysentery may be confused with shigellosis, salmonellosis, schistosomiasis, or ulcerative colitis.
In amebic dysentery, stools are usually less frequent and watery than those in bacillary dysentery. They
characteristically contain tenacious mucus and flecks of blood. Unlike stools in shigellosis, salmonellosis,
and ulcerative colitis, amebic stools do not contain large numbers of WBCs because trophozoites lyse
them.
Hepatic amebiasis and amebic abscess must be differentiated from other hepatic infections and tumors.
Diagnosis of amebiasis is supported by finding amebic trophozoites, cysts, or both in stool or tissues;
however, pathogenic
E. histolytica
are morphologically indistinguishable from nonpathogenic
E. dispar
and
E. moshkovskii
.
Intestinal infection:
Identification of intestinal amebas may require examination of 3 to 6 stool
specimens and concentration methods (see
Table 143-1
. Antibiotics, antacids, antidiarrheals,
enemas, and intestinal radiocontrast agents can interfere with recovery of the parasite and should not be
given until the stool has been examined.
E. histolytica
also has to be distinguished from nonpathogenic
amebas such as
E coli, E. hartmanni, Endolimax nana
, and
Iodamoeba butschlii
.
In symptomatic patients, proctoscopy often shows characteristic flask-shaped mucosal lesions, which
should be aspirated, and the aspirate should be examined for trophozoites. Biopsy specimens from
rectosigmoid lesions may also show trophozoites.
Extraintestinal infection:
This infection is more difficult to diagnose. Stool examination is usually
negative, and recovery of trophozoites from aspirated pus is uncommon. If a liver abscess is suspected,
ultrasonography, CT, or MRI should be done. They have similar
sensitivity; however, no technique can
differentiate amebic from pyogenic abscess with certainty.
Needle aspiration is reserved for lesions of uncertain etiology, those in which rupture seems imminent,
and those that respond poorly to drug therapy. Abscesses contain thick, semifluid material ranging from
yellow to chocolate-brown. A needle biopsy may show necrotic tissue, but motile amebas are difficult to
find in abscess material, and amebic cysts are not present.
A therapeutic trial of an amebicide is often the most helpful diagnostic tool for an amebic liver abscess.
Serologic tests are positive in about 95% of patients with an amebic liver abscess, in > 70% of those with
active intestinal infection, and in 10% of asymptomatic carriers. Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) is the most
widely used. Antibody titers can confirm
E. histolytica
infection but may persist for months or years,
making it impossible to differentiate acute from past infection in residents from areas with a high
prevalence of infection.
E. histolytica, E. dispar
, and
E. moshkovskii
are morphologically
indistinguishable, so microscopic examination cannot be used to differentiate them. A sensitive and
specific antigen detection assay for the
E. histolytica
adherence lectin has been developed and is
available. PCR-based assays are available in research settings.
===PAGE:1540===
Treatment
• Metronidazole or tinidazole initially
• Iodoquinol, paromomycin, or diloxanide furoate subsequently for cyst eradication
For
mild to moderate GI symptoms
, oral metronidazole 500 to 750 mg tid in adults (12 to 17 mg/kg tid
in children) for 7 to 10 days is recommended. Metronidazole should not be given to pregnant women.
Alcohol must be avoided because of the drug's disulfiram-like effect. Alternatively, tinidazole 2 g po
once/day in adults (50 mg/kg [maximum 2 g] po once/day in children > 3 yr) for 3 days can be used. When
taken with alcohol, tinidazole also has a disulfiram-like effect, and it should not be used during pregnancy;
however, in terms of GI adverse effects, it is generally better tolerated than metronidazole.
For
severe intestinal and extraintestinal amebiasis
, metronidazole 750 mg tid in adults (12 to 17
mg/kg tid in children) for 7 to 10 days is used. Alternatively, tinidazole 2 g po once/day in adults (50 mg/kg
[maximum 2 g] po once/day in children > 3 yr) for 5 days can be used.
A course of metronidazole or tinidazole should be followed by a 2nd oral drug to eradicate residual cysts
in the lumen. Options are
• Iodoquinol 650 mg po tid in adults (10 to 13 mg/kg [maximum of 2 g/day] tid in children) for 20 days
• Paromomycin 8 to 11 mg/kg tid for 7 days
• Diloxanide furoate 500 mg po tid in adults (7 mg/kg po tid in children) for 10 days
Diloxanide furoate is not available commercially in the US.
Therapy should include rehydration with fluid and electrolytes and other supportive measures.
Asymptomatic people who pass
E. histolytica
cysts should be treated with paromomycin, iodoquinol, or
diloxanide furoate (see above for doses). Although metronidazole and tinidazole have some activity
against
E. histolytica
cysts, it is not sufficient for them to be used for cyst eradication.
Treatment is not necessary for
E. dispar
or
E. moshkovskii
infections. However, if fecal antigen testing to
differentiate them from
E. histolytica
is not available, the decision to treat is made clinically (eg, by the
likelihood of exposure to
E. histolytica
).
Prevention
Contamination of food and water with human feces must be prevented—a problem complicated by the
high incidence of asymptomatic carriers. Uncooked foods, including salads and vegetables, and
potentially contaminated water and ice should be avoided in developing areas. Boiling water kills
E.
histolytica
cysts. The effectiveness of chemical disinfection with iodine- or chlorine-containing
compounds depends on the temperature of the water and amount of organic debris in it. Portable filters
provide various degrees of protection.
Work continues on the development of a vaccine, but none is available yet.
Cryptosporidiosis
Cryptosporidiosis is infection with
Cryptosporidium
. The primary symptom is watery diarrhea,
often with other signs of GI distress. Illness is typically self-limited in immunocompetent
patients but can be persistent and severe in patients with AIDS. Diagnosis is by identification of
the organism or antigen in stool. Treatment, when necessary, is with nitazoxanide.
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:1541===
Cryptosporidia are coccidian protozoa that replicate in small-bowel epithelial cells of a vertebrate host.
Infective oocysts are shed into the lumen and passed in stool. Very few oocysts (eg, < 100) are required
to cause disease, thus increasing risk of person-to-person transmission. After ingestion by another
vertebrate, the oocyst releases sporozoites that transform into trophozoites in epithelial cells, replicate,
and then produce oocysts that are released into the lumen of the intestine to complete the cycle. Thinwalled oocysts are involved in autoinfection.
Oocysts are resistant to harsh conditions, including chlorine at levels usually used in public water
treatment systems.
Epidemiology
Cryptosporidium parvum
and
C. hominis
are responsible for most human cases. Infections result from
fecally contaminated food or water, direct person-to-person contact, or zoonotic spread. The disease
occurs worldwide. Cryptosporidiosis is responsible for 0.6 to 7.3% of diarrheal illness in developed
countries and an even higher percentage in areas with poor sanitation. In Milwaukee, Wisconsin, >
400,000 people were affected during a waterborne outbreak in 1993, when the city's water supply was
contaminated by run-off from dairy farms during spring rains and the filtration system was not working
correctly.
Children, travelers to foreign countries, immunocompromised patients, and medical personnel caring for
patients with cryptosporidiosis are at increased risk. Outbreaks have occurred in day care centers.
Severe, chronic diarrhea due to cryptosporidiosis is a problem in patients with AIDS.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is about 1 wk, and clinical illness occurs in > 80% of infected people. Onset is
abrupt, with profuse watery diarrhea, abdominal cramping, and, less commonly, nausea, anorexia, fever,
and malaise. Symptoms usually persist 1 to 2 wk, rarely ≥ 1 mo, and then abate. Fecal excretion of
oocysts may continue for several weeks after symptoms have subsided. Asymptomatic shedding of
oocysts is common among older children in developing countries.
In the immunocompromised host, onset may be more gradual, but diarrhea can be more severe. Unless
the underlying immune defect is corrected, infection can persist, causing profuse intractable diarrhea for
life. Fluid losses of > 5 to 10 L/day have been reported in some AIDS patients. The intestine is the most
common site of infection in immunocompromised hosts; however, other organs (eg, biliary tract, pancreas,
respiratory tract) may be involved.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool (special techniques required)
• Enzyme immunoassay for fecal antigen
Identifying the acid-fast oocysts in stool confirms the diagnosis, but conventional methods of stool
examination are unreliable. Oocyst excretion is intermittent, and multiple stool samples may be needed.
Several concentration techniques increase the yield.
Cryptosporidium
oocysts can be identified by
phase-contrast microscopy or by staining with modified Ziehl-Neelsen or Kinyoun techniques.
Immunofluorescence microscopy with fluorescein-labeled monoclonal antibodies allows for greater
sensitivity and specificity.
Enzyme immunoassay for fecal
Cryptosporidium
antigen is more sensitive than microscopic examination
for oocysts. Intestinal biopsy can demonstrate
Cryptosporidium
within epithelial cells.
Treatment
• Nitazoxanide in patients without AIDS
===PAGE:1542===
• Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in patients with AIDS
In immunocompetent people, cryptosporidiosis is self-limited. Nitazoxanide can be used; the
recommended doses, given for 3 days, are
• Age 1 to 3 yr: 100 mg bid
• Age 4 to 11 yr: 200 mg bid
• Age > 12 yr: 500 mg bid
No drug has proved to be effective against
Cryptosporidium
in patients with advanced AIDS. Symptoms
have abated after effective HAART in some AIDS patients. Supportive measures, oral and parenteral
rehydration, and hyperalimentation are indicated for immunocompromised patients.
Prevention
Stools of patients with cryptosporidiosis are highly infectious; strict stool precautions should be observed.
Special biosafety guidelines have been developed for handling clinical specimens. Boiling water is the
most reliable decontamination method; only filters with pore sizes ≤ 1
μ
m (specified as "absolute 1 micron"
or certified by NSF Standard No. 53) remove
Cryptosporidium
cysts.
Cystoisosporiasis and Cyclosporiasis
Cystoisosporiasis is infection with
Cystoisospora (Isospora) belli
; cyclosporiasis is infection
with
Cyclospora cayetanensis
. Both organisms are coccidian protozoa. Symptoms include
watery diarrhea with GI and systemic symptoms. Diagnosis is by detection of characteristic
oocysts in stool or intestinal biopsy specimens. Treatment is usually with
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.
The life cycles of
Cystoisospora belli
and
Cyclospora cayetanensis
are similar to that of
Cryptosporidium
, except that oocysts must sporulate before becoming infective. Human cystoisosporiasis
and cyclosporiasis are most common in tropical and subtropical climates. Transmission is by the fecal-oral
route via contaminated food or drink. In North America, outbreaks of
C. cayetanensis
have been caused
by ingestion of raspberries imported from Guatemala.
Symptoms and Signs
The primary symptom is sudden, nonbloody, watery diarrhea, with fever, abdominal cramps, nausea,
anorexia, malaise, and weight loss. In immunocompetent patients, the illness usually resolves
spontaneously but can last weeks.
In hosts with depressed cell-mediated immunity as occurs in AIDS, cystoisosporiasis and cyclosporiasis
may cause severe, intractable, voluminous diarrhea resembling cryptosporidiosis. Extraintestinal disease
in patients with AIDS may include cholecystitis and disseminated infection.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of stool
Diagnosis is by detection of oocysts via microscopic examination of the stool. Detection is facilitated by
staining stool samples with modified acid-fast stain. Multiple stool specimens may be needed because
cyst secretion may be intermittent. Diagnosis is sometimes made only when intracellular parasite stages
are detected in biopsies of intestinal tissue. In cystoisosporiasis, cysts autofluoresce when ultraviolet
microscopy is used; the stool may contain Charcot-Leyden crystals (hexagonal, double-pointed, and often
needlelike crystals) derived from eosinophils. Unlike other protozoan infections, cystoisosporiasis may
result in peripheral blood eosinophilia.
===PAGE:1543===
Treatment
• Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
Treatment of choice for both cystoisosporiasis and cyclosporiasis is double-strength
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX): 160 mg TMP and 800 mg SMX po bid for 10 days for
cystoisosporiasis or for 7 to 10 days for cyclosporiasis. Children are given 5 mg/kg TMP (and 25 mg/kg
SMX) po bid for the same number of days.
In patients with AIDS, higher doses and longer duration may be needed, and treatment of acute infection
is usually followed by long-term suppressive therapy.
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid for 7 days has also been used to treat cystoisosporiasis and cyclosporiasis
but appears to be less effective than TMP/SMX.
Prevention is as for cryptosporidiosis.
Giardiasis
Giardiasis is infection with the flagellated protozoan
Giardia intestinalis (lamblia).
Infection can
be asymptomatic or cause symptoms ranging from intermittent flatulence to chronic
malabsorption. Diagnosis is by identifying the organism in fresh stool or duodenal contents or
by assays of
Giardia
antigen in stool. Treatment is with metronidazole, tinidazole, or
nitazoxanide or, during pregnancy, paromomycin.
Giardia
trophozoites firmly attach to the duodenal and proximal jejunal mucosa and multiply by binary
fission. Some organisms transform into environmentally resistant cysts that are spread by the fecal-oral
route. Waterborne transmission is the major source of giardiasis. Transmission can also occur by
ingestion of contaminated food and by direct person-to-person contact, especially in mental institutions
and day care centers or between sex partners.
Giardia
cysts remain viable in surface water and are
resistant to routine levels of chlorination. Wild animals may also serve as reservoirs. Thus, mountain
streams as well as chlorinated but poorly filtered municipal water supply systems have been implicated in
waterborne epidemics.
Symptoms and Signs
Many cases are asymptomatic. However, asymptomatic people can pass infective cysts.
Symptoms of acute giardiasis usually appear 1 to 2 wk after infection. They are usually mild and include
watery malodorous diarrhea, abdominal cramps and distention, flatulence, eructation, intermittent nausea,
epigastric discomfort, and sometimes low-grade malaise and anorexia. Acute giardiasis usually lasts 1 to
3 wk. Malabsorption of fat and sugars can lead
to significant weight loss in severe cases. Neither blood
nor WBCs are present in stool.
A subset of infected patients develop chronic diarrhea with foul stools, abdominal distention, and
malodorous flatus. Substantial weight loss may occur. Chronic giardiasis occasionally causes failure to
thrive in children.
Diagnosis
• Enzyme immunoassay for antigen in stool
• Microscopic examination of stool
Enzyme immunoassay to detect parasite antigen in stool is more sensitive than microscopic examination.
Characteristic trophozoites or cysts in stool are diagnostic, but parasite excretion is intermittent and at low
levels during chronic infections. Thus, microscopic diagnosis may require repeated stool examinations.
Sampling of the upper intestinal contents can also yield trophozoites but is seldom necessary. Specific
===PAGE:1544===
DNA probes are under evaluation.
Treatment
• Tinidazole, metronidazole, or nitazoxanide
For symptomatic infections, metronidazole 250 mg po tid in adults (5 mg/kg po tid in children) for 5 to 7
days can be used. Adverse effects include nausea, headaches, and a disulfiram-like effect if alcohol is
consumed concurrently. Tinidazole 2 g once in adults (50 mg/kg [maximum 2 g] in children) is as effective
as and less toxic than metronidazole. Neither of these drugs should be taken with alcohol.
Nitazoxanide is given orally for 3 days as follows: age 1 to 3 yr, 100 mg bid; age 4 to 11 yr, 200 mg bid;
and age > 12 yr (including adults), 500 mg bid. It is available in liquid form for children.
Furazolidone and quinacrine are effective but are now rarely used because of potential toxicity.
Metronidazole and tinidazole should not be given to pregnant women. Nitazoxanide is in pregnancy
category B. If therapy cannot be delayed because of symptoms, the nonabsorbable aminoglycoside
paromomycin (8 to 11 mg/kg po tid for 5 to 10 days) is an option.
Prevention
Prevention requires appropriate public water treatment, hygienic food preparation, and appropriate fecaloral hygiene. Water can be decontaminated by boiling.
Giardia
cysts resist routine levels of chlorination.
Disinfection with iodine-containing compounds is variably effective and depends on the turbidity and
temperature of the water and duration of treatment. Some handheld filtration devices can remove
Giardia
cysts from contaminated water, but the efficacy of various filter systems has not been fully assessed.
Treatment of asymptomatic cyst passers can theoretically reduce the spread of infection, but whether it is
cost-effective remains unclear.
Microsporidiosis
Microsporidiosis is infection with microsporidia. Symptomatic disease develops predominantly
in patients with AIDS and includes chronic diarrhea, disseminated infection, and corneal
disease. Diagnosis is by demonstrating organisms in biopsy specimens, stool, urine, other
secretions, or corneal scrapings. Treatment is with albendazole or fumagillin (depending on the
infecting species and clinical syndrome), with topical fumagillin added for eye disease.
Microsporidia are obligate intracellular spore-forming protozoan parasites. At least 14 of the > 1200
species are associated with human disease. Spores of the organisms are acquired by ingestion,
inhalation, direct contact with the conjunctiva, animal contact, or person-to-person transmission. Inside
the host, they harpoon a host cell with their polar tubule or filament and inoculate it with an infective
sporoplasm. Intracellularly, the sporoplasm divides and multiplies, producing sporoblasts that mature into
spores; the spores can disseminate throughout the body or pass into the environment via respiratory
aerosols, stool, or urine. An inflammatory response develops when spores are liberated from host cells.
Little is known about routes of transmission to humans or possible animal reservoirs. Microsporidia
probably are a common cause of subclinical or mild self-limited illness in otherwise healthy people, but
only a few cases of human infection were reported in the pre-AIDS era.
Microsporidia have emerged as opportunistic pathogens in patients with AIDS and, to a lesser degree, in
those with other immunocompromising conditions.
Encephalitozoon bieneusi
and
E.
(formerly
Septata
)
intestinalis
can cause chronic diarrhea in patients with AIDS and CD4+ cell counts of < 100/
μ
L.
Microsporidian species can also infect the biliary tract, cornea, muscles, respiratory tract, GU system,
and, occasionally, the CNS.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1545===
Clinical illness caused by microsporidia varies with the parasite species and the immune status of the
host. In patients with AIDS, various species cause chronic diarrhea, malabsorption,
wasting, cholangitis,
punctate keratoconjunctivitis, peritonitis, hepatitis, myositis, or sinusitis. Infections of kidneys, gallbladder,
and sinuses have occurred.
Vittaforma (Nosema) corneum
and several other species can cause ocular
infections ranging from punctuate keratopathy with redness and irritation to severe, vision-threatening
stromal keratitis.
Diagnosis
• Light or electron microscopy with special stains
Infecting organisms can be demonstrated in specimens of affected tissue obtained by biopsy or in stool,
urine, CSF, sputum, or corneal scrapings. Microsporidia are best seen with special staining techniques.
Fluorescence brighteners (fluorochromes) are used to detect spores in tissues and smears. The quick-hot
Gram chromotrope technique is the fastest. Immunoassay and PCR-based tests hold promise for the
future.
Transmission electron microscopy is currently the most sensitive test and is used for speciation.
Treatment
• For immunocompetent patients: Supportive care
• For immunocompromised patients: Albendazole alone or with topical fumagillin for corneal disease
In immunocompetent patients, microsporidia infections are usually self-limited, and therapy is seldom
necessary.
In immunocompromised patients, albendazole (400 mg po bid for 21 days in adults) may be effective in
controlling intestinal infection with
E. intestinalis
. The drug reduces the number of organisms in smallbowel biopsies but does not eliminate infection. Fumagillin 20 mg po tid for 14 days has been used for
E.
bieneusi
, but it has adverse effects (eg, bone marrow suppression).
Ocular lesions (due to
Brachiola algerae, E. hellem
, or
E. cuniculi
) have been treated with albendazole
400 mg bid plus fumagillin eyedrops. These drugs are also used for
V. corneum
, but they frequently fail,
and keratoplasty may be required.
Albendazole 400 mg bid has been used for patients with disseminated disease and skin and deep muscle
infection caused by numerous microsporidian species.
Treatment of AIDS with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is important and can lead to reduction
in symptoms.
===PAGE:1546===
Chapter 148. Extraintestinal Protozoa
Introduction
Protozoa are motile, single-celled organisms that occur worldwide. Many of those that cause
extraintestinal infections are transmitted by arthropod vectors. These infections include African
trypanosomiasis, Chagas disease, leishmaniasis, and malaria. Toxoplasmosis is acquired through
contaminated food. Free-living amebas are acquired through contact with surface water or soil.
African Trypanosomiasis
(African Sleeping Sickness)
African trypanosomiasis is infection with protozoa of the genus
Trypanosoma
, transmitted by
the bite of a tsetse fly. Symptoms include characteristic skin lesions, intermittent fever,
headache, rigors, transient edema, generalized lymphadenopathy, and often fatal
meningoencephalitis. Diagnosis is by identification of the organism in blood, lymph node
aspirate, or CSF or sometimes by serologic tests. Treatment is with suramin, pentamidine,
melarsoprol, or eflornithine, depending on the infecting subspecies, clinical stage, and drug
availability.
African trypanosomiasis is caused by
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
in West and Central Africa and by
T. brucei rhodesiense
in East Africa; both species are endemic in Uganda. The organisms are transmitted
by tsetse flies and occasionally by blood transfusion.
Pathophysiology
Metacyclic trypomastigotes inoculated by flies transform into bloodstream trypomastigotes, which multiply
by binary fission and spread through the lymphatics and bloodstream after inoculation. Bloodstream
trypomastigotes multiply until specific antibodies produced by the host sharply reduce parasite levels.
However, a subset of parasites escape immune destruction by a change in their variant
surface
glycoprotein and start a new multiplication cycle. The cycle of multiplication and lysis repeats. Late in the
course of infection, trypanosomes appear in the interstitial fluid of many organs, including the myocardium
and eventually the CNS. The cycle is continued when a tsetse fly bites an infected human. Humans are
the main reservoir of
T. b. gambiense
, but this species may also reside in animals. Wild game animals are
the main reservoir of
T. b. rhodesiense
.
Symptoms and Signs
The disease has 3 stages:
• Cutaneous
• Hemolymphatic
• CNS
Cutaneous:
A papule may develop at the site of the tsetse fly bite within a few days to 2 wk. It evolves
into a dusky red, painful, indurated nodule (trypanosomal chancre). A chancre is present in about half of
Caucasians with
T. b. rhodesiense
but is less common in Africans with
T. b. rhodesiense
and seldom
occurs with
T. b. gambiense
.
Hemolymphatic:
Over several months in
T. b. gambiense
infection but a period of weeks with
T. b.
rhodesiense
, intermittent fever, headaches, rigors, and transient swellings develop. An evanescent,
circinate erythematous rash may develop. It is most readily visible in light-skinned patients. Generalized
lymphadenopathy often occurs. Winterbottom's sign (enlarged lymph nodes in the posterior cervical
triangle) is characteristic with
T. b. gambiense
sleeping sickness.
===PAGE:1547===
CNS:
In the Gambian form, CNS involvement occurs months to several years after onset of acute
disease. In the Rhodesian form, disease is more fulminant, and CNS invasion often occurs within a few
weeks. CNS involvement causes persistent headache, inability to concentrate, personality changes (eg,
progressive lassitude and indifference), daytime somnolence, hyperphagia, tremor, ataxia, and terminal
coma. Without treatment, death occurs within months of disease onset with
T. b. rhodesiense
and during
the 2nd or 3rd yr with
T. b. gambiense
. Untreated patients die in coma of undernutrition or secondary
infections.
Diagnosis
• Light microscopy of blood (thin or thick smears) or other fluid sample
Diagnosis is made by identifying trypanosomes in fluid from a chancre, lymph node aspirate, blood, bone
marrow aspirate, or, during the late stage of infection, CSF. Preferred sources are blood smears for
T. b.
rhodesiense
and fluid aspirated from an enlarged lymph node for
T. b. gambiense
. Wet preparations
should be examined for motile trypanosomes, and smears should be fixed, stained with Giemsa (or
Field's) stain, and examined. Concentration techniques (eg, centrifugation of blood or CSF) enhance
sensitivity.
Antibody detection assays are not very useful clinically because seroconversion occurs after the onset of
symptoms. However, a card agglutination test for
T. b. gambiense
is useful in mass screening programs
to identify candidates for microscopic examination.
When the CNS is involved, lumbar puncture is done. CSF pressure is increased, and CSF has elevated
levels of lymphocytes (≥ 5 cells/
μ
L), total protein, and IgM. In addition to trypanosomes, characteristic
Mott cells (plasma cells with cytoplasmic vacuoles that contain immunoglobulin [Russell bodies]) may be
present.
Other, nonspecific laboratory findings include anemia, monocytosis, and markedly elevated serum levels
of polyclonal IgM.
Treatment
• Without CNS involvement, pentamidine or eflornithine for
T. b. gambiense
; suramin for
T. b. rhodesiense
• With CNS involvement, eflornithine or melarsoprol for
T. b. gambiense
; melarsoprol for
T. b. rhodesiense
Without CNS involvement:
Suramin and pentamidine are effective against bloodstream stages of both
T. brucei
subspecies but do not cross the blood-brain barrier and are not useful for CNS infection.
Pentamidine is preferred for
T. b. gambiense
, and suramin is preferred for the hemolymphatic stage of
T.
b. rhodesiense
. The dosage of pentamidine is 4 mg/kg IM or IV once/day for 7 days. An initial test dose of
suramin 100 mg IV (to exclude hypersensitivity) is followed by 20 mg/kg (up to 1 g) IV on days 1, 3, 7, 14,
and 21.
Eflornithine (availability limited) is effective against all stages of
T. b. gambiense
(but not
T. b.
rhodesiense
) trypanosomiasis. Dosage is 100 mg/kg IV qid for 14 days. When available, it is the drug of
choice for
T. b. gambiense
.
With CNS involvement:
Melarsoprol, an organic arsenical, is used in most African countries for CNS
disease. For
T. b. gambiense
, dosage is 2.2 mg/kg IV once/day for 10 days. Where available, eflornithine
can be used in the regimen above for
T. b. gambiense
CNS disease.
For
T. b. rhodesiense
, dosage is 2
to 3.6 mg/kg IV once/day for 3 days; after 7 days, 3.6 mg/kg once/day is given for 3 days, followed 7 days
later by another 3-day course at this dose. Alternative regimens have been proposed for debilitated
patients with severe CNS involvement.
Serious adverse effects include reactive encephalopathy and exfoliative dermatitis in addition to the usual
===PAGE:1548===
GI and renal toxicity of arsenicals.
Corticosteroids have been used to decrease the risk of reactive encephalopathy.
Prevention
Prevention includes avoiding endemic areas and protecting against tsetse flies. Visitors to game parks
should wear substantial wrist- and ankle-length clothing (tsetse flies bite through thin clothes) and use
insect repellents with DEET (diethyltoluamide) appropriately.
Pentamidine can help prevent
T. b. gambiense
infection, but it may damage pancreatic
β
-cells, resulting
in insulin release and hypoglycemia followed later by diabetes; thus, it is seldom used for prophylaxis.
Babesiosis
Babesiosis is infection with
Babesia
sp. Infections can be asymptomatic or cause a malaria-like
illness with fever and hemolytic anemia. Disease is most severe in asplenic patients, the
elderly, and patients with AIDS. Diagnosis is by identification of
Babesia
in a peripheral blood
smear, serologic test, or PCR. Treatment, when needed, is with azithromycin plus atovaquone
or with quinine plus clindamycin.
Etiology
In the US,
Babesia microti
is the most common cause of babesiosis. Rodents are the principal natural
reservoir, and deer ticks of the family Ixodidae are the usual vectors. Larval ticks become infected while
feeding on an infected rodent, then transform into nymphs that transmit the parasite to another animal or
to a human. Adult ticks ordinarily feed on deer but may also transmit the parasite to humans.
Babesia
enter RBCs, mature, and then divide asexually. Infected erythrocytes eventually rupture and release
organisms that invade other RBCs; thus,
Babesia
can also be transmitted by blood transfusion.
Endemic areas in the US include the islands and the mainland bordering Nantucket Sound in
Massachusetts, eastern Long Island and Shelter Island in New York, coastal Connecticut, and New
Jersey, as well as foci in Wisconsin and the upper Midwest.
Babesia duncani
has been isolated from
patients in Washington and California. A currently unnamed strain designated MO-1 has been reported in
patients in Missouri. Other
Babesia
sp transmitted by different ticks infect humans in areas of Europe. In
Europe,
B. divergens
is the principle cause of babesiosis in patients who have had a splenectomy.
Ixodes
ticks infected with
Babesia
are sometimes coinfected with
Borrelia burgdorferi
(which causes
Lyme disease),
Anaplasma phagocytophilum
(which causes human granulocytic anaplasmosis), or both.
Symptoms and Signs
Asymptomatic infection may persist for months to years and remain subclinical throughout its course in
otherwise healthy people, especially those < 40 yr.
When symptomatic, the illness usually starts after a 1- to 2-wk incubation period with malaise, fatigue,
chills, fever, headache, myalgia, and arthralgia, which may last for weeks. Hepatosplenomegaly with
jaundice, mild to moderately severe hemolytic anemia, mild neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia may
occur.
Infection is sometimes fatal, particularly in the elderly, asplenic patients, and patients with AIDS. In such
patients, babesiosis may resemble falciparum malaria, with high fever, hemolytic anemia, hemoglobinuria,
jaundice, and renal failure. Splenectomy may cause previously acquired asymptomatic parasitemia to
become symptomatic.
Diagnosis
• Light microscopy of blood smears
===PAGE:1549===
Most patients do not remember a tick bite, but they may report a history of travel to an endemic region.
Diagnosis is usually made by finding
Babesia
in blood smears, but differentiation from
Plasmodium
species can be difficult. Tetrad forms (the so-called Maltese cross formation), although not common, are
unique to
Babesia
and helpful diagnostically. Serologic and PCR tests are available. Antibody detection
by indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) testing using
B. microti
antigens can be helpful in patients with lowlevel parasitemia but may be falsely negative in those infected with other
Babesia
sp. PCR-based assays
are available in research settings.
Treatment
• Atovaquone plus azithromycin
Asymptomatic patients require no treatment, but therapy is indicated for patients with
persistent high
fever, rapidly increasing parasitemia, and falling Hct. The combination of atovaquone 750 mg po q 12 h
and azithromycin 600 mg po once/day for 7 to 10 days is as effective as traditional therapy with quinine
plus clindamycin and has fewer adverse effects. Pediatric dosage is atovaquone 20 mg/kg bid plus
azithromycin 12 mg/kg once/day for 7 to 10 days.
Alternatively, quinine 650 mg po tid for 7 days plus clindamycin 600 mg po tid or 1.2 g IV bid for 7 to 10
days can be used. Pediatric dosage is quinine 10 mg/kg po tid plus clindamycin 7 to 14 mg/kg po tid.
Exchange transfusion has been used in hypotensive patients with high parasitemia.
Standard tick precautions (see
Sidebar 139-1
 should be taken by all people in endemic
areas. Asplenic patients and patients with AIDS should be particularly cautious.
Chagas Disease
(American Trypanosomiasis)
Chagas disease is infection with
Trypanosoma cruzi
, transmitted by Triatominae bug bites.
Symptoms begin with a skin lesion or unilateral periorbital edema, then progress to fever,
malaise, generalized lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly; years later, some patients
develop chronic cardiomyopathy, megaesophagus, or mega-colon. Diagnosis is by detecting
trypanosomes in peripheral blood or aspirates from infected organs. Antibody tests are
sensitive and can be helpful. Treatment is with nifurtimox or benznidazole.
T. cruzi
is transmitted by Triatominae (reduviid, kissing, or assassin) bugs.
Pathophysiology
While biting, infected bugs deposit feces containing metacyclic trypomastigotes on the skin. These
infective forms enter through the bite wound or penetrate the conjunctivae or mucous membranes. The
parasites invade macrophages at the site of entry and transform into amastigotes that multiply by binary
fission; the amastigotes develop into trypomastigotes, enter the bloodstream and tissue spaces, and
infect other cells. Cells of the reticuloendothelial system, myocardium, muscles, and nervous system are
most commonly involved.
Infection can also be transmitted by blood transfusion, organ transplantation, or ingestion of uncooked
food or drink (eg, drinks made from sugar cane juice) contaminated by infected reduviid bugs or their
feces. Transplacental transmission is also possible.
Etiology
Infected Triatominae bugs are present in North, Central, and South America. More than 20 million people
in the Americas are infected with
T. cruzi
, but the prevalence has been decreasing because of control
===PAGE:1550===
measures. In some rural parts of South America, Chagas disease has been a leading cause of death.
Nonhuman reservoirs include dogs, cats, opossums, rats, and many other animals.
Vector-borne disease is rare in the US, but some Latin American immigrants living in the US are
chronically infected. These people are potential sources of transmission by blood transfusion or organ
donation.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute infection is followed by a latent (indeterminate) period, which may remain asymptomatic or progress
to chronic disease. Immunosuppression may reactivate latent infection, with high parasitemia and a 2nd
acute stage, skin lesions, or brain abscesses. Congenital transmission occurs in 1 to 5% of pregnancies
and results in abortion, stillbirth, or chronic neonatal disease with high mortality.
Acute:
Acute infection in endemic areas usually occurs in childhood and can be asymptomatic. When
present, symptoms start 1 to 2 wk after exposure. An indurated, erythematous skin lesion (a chagoma)
appears at the site of parasite entry. When the inoculation site is the conjunctiva, unilateral periocular and
palpebral edema with conjunctivitis and preauricular lymphadenopathy are collectively called Romana's
sign.
Acute Chagas disease is fatal in a small percentage of patients; death results from acute myocarditis with
heart failure or meningoencephalitis. In the remainder, symptoms subside without treatment.
Primary acute Chagas disease in immunocompromised patients, such as those with AIDS, may be severe
and atypical, with skin lesions and, rarely, brain abscesses.
Chronic:
Chronic disease develops in 20 to 40% after a latent phase that may last years or decades.
The main effects are
• Cardiac
• GI
Chronic cardiomyopathy leads to flaccid enlargement of all chambers, apical aneurysms, and localized
degenerative lesions in
the conduction system. Patients may present with heart failure, syncope, sudden
death due to heart block or ventricular arrhythmia, or thromboembolism. ECG may show right bundle
branch or complete heart block.
GI disease causes symptoms resembling achalasia or Hirschsprung's disease. Chagas megaesophagus
manifests as dysphagia and may lead to pulmonary infections caused by aspiration or to severe
undernutrition. Mega-colon may result in long periods of obstipation and intestinal volvulus.
Diagnosis
• Light microscopy of blood smears (thin or thick) or another fluid sample
The number of trypanosomes in peripheral blood is large during the acute phase and readily detected by
examining thin or thick smears. In contrast, few parasites are present in blood during latent infection or
chronic disease. Definitive diagnosis may be made by examining aspirates from organs such as lymph
nodes.
Serologic tests including indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) and enzyme immunoassays (EIA) are sensitive
but may yield false-positive results in patients with leishmaniasis or other diseases. Other diagnostic
approaches include xenodiagnosis (examination of the intestinal contents of laboratory-raised bugs after
they take a blood meal from a patient suspected of having Chagas disease) and detection of PCRamplified parasite DNA in blood or tissue fluids.
Treatment
===PAGE:1551===
• Nifurtimox or benznidazole
• Supportive care
Treatment in the acute stage rapidly reduces parasitemia, shortens the clinical illness, and reduces risk of
mortality due to chronic infection.
For indeterminate infections, treatment of children and young adults has been recommended but is not
always curative. Treatment of older adults with indeterminate disease is controversial.
Once the signs of chronic Chagas disease appear, antiparasitic drugs are not helpful.
Supportive measures include treatment for heart failure, pacemakers for heart block, antiarrhythmic
drugs, cardiac transplantation, esophageal dilation, botulinum toxin injection into the lower esophageal
sphincter, and GI tract surgery.
The only effective drugs are
•
Nifurtimox:
For adults, 2 to 2.5 mg/kg po qid for 3 to 4 mo
For children aged 11 to 16 yr, 3 to 3.75 mg/kg qid for 3 mo
For children aged 1 to 10 yr, 4 to 5 mg/kg qid for 3 mo
•
Benznidazole:
For adults and children > 12 yr, 2.5 to 3.5 mg/kg po bid for 1 to 3 mo
For children ≤ 12 yr, 5 mg/kg bid for 1 to 3 mo
Both drugs have substantial toxicity. The long treatment courses are often associated with GI adverse
effects, peripheral neuropathy, poor tolerance, and low compliance.
Prevention
Plastering walls and replacing thatched roofs or repeated spraying of houses with residual insecticides
(those that have prolonged duration of action) can control Triatominae bugs. Infection in travelers is rare
and can be avoided by not sleeping in adobe dwellings or by using bed nets if sleeping in such dwellings
is unavoidable.
Blood and organ donors are screened in many endemic areas and, since 2006, in the US to prevent
transfusion and organ transplant-related Chagas disease.
Free-Living Amebas
Free-living amebas are protozoa that live independently in soil or water and do not require a human or
animal host. They rarely cause disease, in contrast to the parasitic ameba
Entamoeba histolytica
, which
is a common cause of intestinal infection (. Pathogenic free-living amebas are of the genera
Naegleria, Acanthamoeba
, and
Balamuthia
.
Three major syndromes occur:
• Primary amebic meningoencephalitis
• Granulomatous amebic encephalitis
• Amebic keratitis
Acanthamoeba
can also cause skin lesions.
===PAGE:1552===
Primary Amebic Meningoencephalitis
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis is a generally fatal, acute CNS infection caused by
Naegleria fowleri
.
Naegleria fowleri
inhabit bodies of warm fresh water worldwide. Swimming in contaminated water
exposes nasal mucosa to the organism, which can enter the CNS via olfactory neuroepithelium and the
cribriform plate. Most patients are healthy children or young adults.
Symptoms begin within 1 to 2 wk of exposure, sometimes with alteration of smell and taste. Fulminant
meningoencephalitis ensues, with headache, meningismus, and mental status change, progressing to
death within 10 days, usually due to cerebral herniation. Only a few patients survive.
Diagnosis is suspected based on history of swimming in fresh water, but confirmation is difficult because
CT and routine CSF tests, although necessary to exclude other causes, are nonspecific. Wet mount of
CSF should be done; it may demonstrate motile amebic trophozoites (which are destroyed by Gram stain
techniques).
Optimal treatment is unclear. A reasonable regimen would include amphotericin B (given intravenously,
intrathecally, or both) plus azithromycin or clarithromycin, azole antimicrobials (eg, ketoconazole,
fluconazole, miconazole), and perhaps rifampin.
Granulomatous Amebic Encephalitis
Granulomatous amebic encephalitis is a generally fatal subacute CNS infection caused by
Acanthamoeba
sp in immunocompromised or debilitated hosts or by
Balamuthia mandrillaris
.
Acanthamoeba
sp and
Balamuthia mandrillaris
are present worldwide in water, soil, and dust. Human
exposure is common, but infection is rare.
Acanthamoeba
infection of the CNS occurs almost entirely in
immunocompromised or otherwise debilitated patients, but
B. mandrillaris
may also infect healthy hosts.
The entry portal is thought to be the skin or lower respiratory tract, with subsequent hematogenous
dissemination to the CNS.
Onset is insidious, often with focal neurologic manifestations. Mental status change, seizures, and
headache are common.
B. mandrillaris
may also cause skin lesions. Survival is highly unlikely (and only
in immunocompetent patients); death occurs between 7 and 120 days after onset (average, 39 days).
Diagnosis is often postmortem. CT and routine CSF tests are obtained but are nonspecific. CT may show
multiple nonenhancing lucent areas; in CSF, WBC count (predominantly lymphocytes) is elevated, but
trophozoites are rarely seen. Visible skin lesions often contain amebas and should be biopsied; if
detected, amebas may be cultured and tested for drug sensitivity. Brain biopsy is often positive.
Some patients with
Acanthamoeba
granulomatous encephalitis have responded to drug combinations,
which may include pentamidine; sulfadiazine or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole; flucytosine; fluconazole,
ketoconazole, itraconazole, or voriconazole; amphotericin B; and other drugs. Skin infections caused by
Acanthamoeba
sp are usually treated with the same drugs and surgical debridement.
B. mandrillaris
has been treated with a combination of pentamidine, flucytosine, fluconazole, and
sulfadiazine plus either azithromycin or clarithromycin combined with surgical resection.
Amebic Keratitis
Amebic keratitis is corneal infection with
Acanthamoeba
sp, typically occurring in contact lens
wearers.
Acanthamoeba
sp can cause chronic and progressively destructive keratitis in normal hosts. The main
risk factor (85% of cases) is contact lens use, particularly if lenses are worn while swimming or if unsterile
===PAGE:1553===
lens cleaning solution is used. Some infections follow corneal abrasion.
Lesions are typically very painful and produce a foreign body sensation. Initially, lesions have a
dendriform appearance resembling herpes simplex keratitis. Later, there are patchy stromal infiltrates and
sometimes a characteristic ring-shaped lesion. Anterior uveitis is usually also present. Vision is
diminished.
Diagnosis is confirmed by examination of Giemsa- or trichrome-stained corneal scrapings and by culture
on special media. Viral culture is done if herpes is considered.
Treatment
• Corneal debridement
• Topical propamidine plus a biguanide
• Perhaps systemic fluconazole or itraconazole
Early, superficial infection responds better to treatment. The encysted stage of the life cycle appears to
cause most problems.
Epithelial lesions are debrided, and intensive drug therapy is applied. Topical propamidine isethionate
0.1% plus either polyhexamethylene biguanide or biguanide chlorhexidine drops is frequently the initial
choice; for the first 3 days, drugs are given every 1 to 2 h. Other topical drugs that can be used include
aminoglycosides, hexamidine diisethionate, miconazole, and neosporin.
Systemic treatment with fluconazole or itraconazole has also been used, particularly in patients with
anterior uveitis or involvement of the sclera. Early recognition and treatment have eliminated the need for
therapeutic
keratoplasty in most instances, but it remains an option when pharmacologic therapy fails.
Intensive treatment is required for the first month; it is tapered per clinical response but often continued
for 6 to 12 mo. Recurrence is common if treatment is stopped prematurely.
Prevention
Contact lens solution should be kept clean. Nonsterile homemade contact lens solutions should not be
used. Wearing contact lenses while swimming or showering should be avoided.
Leishmaniasis
Leishmaniasis is caused by species of
Leishmania
. Manifestations include cutaneous, visceral,
and mucocutaneous syndromes. Cutaneous leishmaniasis causes painless chronic skin lesions
ranging from nodules to large ulcers that can persist for months to years but eventually heal.
Visceral leishmaniasis causes irregular fever, hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, and
polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia with high mortality in untreated patients. Mucosal disease
affects nasopharyngeal tissues and can cause gross mutilation of the nose and palate.
Diagnosis is by demonstrating parasites in smears or cultures. Treatment is with liposomal
amphotericin B, amphotericin B deoxycholate, pentavalent antimony compounds (sodium
stibogluconate, meglumine antimonate), or miltefosine, depending on the causative species
and clinical syndrome.
Etiology
Leishmaniasis is present in scattered areas worldwide. Human infection is caused by about 20
Leishmania
sp that are morphologically indistinguishable but can be differentiated by laboratory analysis.
Leishmania
promastigotes are transmitted by sand flies (
Phlebotomus
sp,
Lutzomyia
sp) to vertebrate
hosts. Vector sand flies are infected by biting infected humans or animals. Animal reservoirs vary with the
Leishmania
sp and location and include canines, rodents, and other animals. In the Indian subcontinent,
===PAGE:1554===
humans are the reservoir for
L. donovani
. Rarely, infection is spread by blood transfusion, shared
needles, congenitally, or sexually.
Pathophysiology
After infection, promastigotes from the vector are phagocytized by host macrophages; inside these cells,
they transform into amastigotes.
The parasites may remain localized in the skin or spread to internal organs or the mucosa of the
nasopharynx, resulting in 3 major clinical forms of leishmaniasis:
• Cutaneous
• Visceral
• Mucosal
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
is also known as oriental or tropical sore, Delhi or Aleppo boil, uta or chiclero
ulcer, or forest yaws. The causative agents are
L. major
and
L. tropica
in southern Europe, Asia, and
Africa;
L. mexicana
and related species in Mexico and Central and South America; and
L. braziliensis
and
related species in Central and South America. Cases have occurred among US military personnel serving
in Iraq and Afghanistan and among travelers to endemic areas in Central and South America, Israel, and
elsewhere. Uncommonly,
L. braziliensis
spreads widely in the skin causing disseminated cutaneous
leishmaniasis.
Visceral leishmaniasis
(kala-azar, Dumdum fever) is typically caused by
L. donovani
or
L.
infantum/chagasi
and occurs in India, Africa (particularly the Sudan), Central Asia, the Mediterranean
basin, South and Central America, and infrequently China. Most cases occur in northeastern India.
Parasites disseminate from the site of the sand fly bite in the skin to regional lymph nodes, the spleen, the
liver, and bone marrow and cause symptoms. Subclinical infections are common; only a minority of
infected patients develop progressive visceral disease. Symptomatic infection with
L. infantum/chagasi
is
more common among children than adults. Visceral leishmaniasis is an opportunistic infection in patients
with AIDS or other immunocompromising conditions.
Mucosal leishmaniasis
(espundia) is caused mainly by
L. braziliensis
, but it occasionally occurs with
other
Leishmania
sp in the Americas. The parasites spread from the initial skin lesion through lymphatics
and blood to nasopharyngeal tissues. Symptoms and signs of mucosal disease develop months to years
later.
Symptoms and Signs
In
cutaneous leishmaniasis,
a welldemarcated skin lesion develops at the site of a sand fly bite, usually
within several weeks to months. Multiple lesions may occur after multiple infective bites or with metastatic
spread. The initial lesion is often a papule that slowly enlarges, ulcerates centrally, and develops a raised,
erythematous border where
intracellular parasites are concentrated. Ulcers are painless and cause no
systemic symptoms unless secondarily infected. Lesions typically heal spontaneously after several
months but may persist for years. They leave a depressed, burn-like scar. The course depends on the
infecting
Leishmania
sp and the host's immune status. Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis results in
widespread nodular skin lesions resembling those of lepromatous leprosy. It results from cell-mediated
anergy to the organism.
In
visceral leishmaniasis,
the clinical manifestations usually develop gradually over weeks to months
after inoculation of the parasite. Irregular fever, hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, and polyclonal
hypergammaglobulinemia with a reversed albumin:globulin ratio occur. In some patients, there are twicedaily temperature spikes. Emaciation and death occur within months to years in patients with progressive
infections. Those with asymptomatic, self-resolving infections and survivors (after successful treatment)
are resistant to further attacks unless cell-mediated immunity is impaired (eg, by AIDS). Relapse may
occur years after initial infection. After treatment for visceral leishmaniasis, patients in the Sudan and India
===PAGE:1555===
occur years after initial infection. After treatment for visceral leishmaniasis, patients in the Sudan and India
may develop post kalaazar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL) with flat or nodular cutaneous lesions that
contain many parasites. These lesions develop at the end of or within 6 mo of therapy in patients in the
Sudan and 1 to 2 yr later in India. The lesions persist for a few months to a year in most patients in the
Sudan but can last for years in India. PKDL lesions are thought to contribute to the spread of infection.
Mucosal leishmaniasis
starts with a primary cutaneous ulcer. This skin lesion heals spontaneously, but
months to years later, mucosal lesions develop, sometimes resulting in gross mutilations of the nose,
palate, and face.
Diagnosis
• Light microscopy of tissue samples, touch preparations, or aspirates
• For visceral leishmaniasis, antibody titers
• For cutaneous leishmaniasis, sometimes skin testing (not available in the US)
• Culture (special media required)
A definite diagnosis is made by demonstrating organisms in Giemsa-stained smears or cultures of
aspirates from the spleen, bone marrow, liver, or lymph nodes in visceral leishmaniasis or biopsy,
aspirates, or touch preparations from the border of a cutaneous lesion. Parasites are usually difficult to
isolate from mucosal lesions. Organisms causing simple cutaneous leishmaniasis can be differentiated
from those capable of causing mucocutaneous leishmaniasis with specific DNA probes or monoclonal
antibodies or by analysis of isoenzyme patterns of cultured parasites.
Serologic tests can help diagnose visceral leishmaniasis; high titers of antibodies to a recombinant
leishmanial antigen (rk39) are present in most immunocompetent patients with visceral leishmaniasis.
Antibodies may be absent in subclinical cases and in patients with cutaneous leishmaniasis or AIDS.
The leishmanin skin test is available outside the US. It is positive in patients with cutaneous and mucosal
leishmaniasis but negative in those with active visceral leishmaniasis.
Treatment
• Liposomal amphotericin B
• Pentavalent antimony compounds
• Alternative drugs (eg, amphotericin B deoxycholate, miltefosine, paromomycin)
Supportive measures (eg, adequate nutrition, transfusions, antibiotics for secondary bacterial infection)
may be needed for patients with visceral leishmaniasis. Reconstructive surgery may be required if
mucocutaneous leishmaniasis grossly distorts the nose or palate, but surgery should be delayed for 6 to
12 mo after therapy to avoid losing grafts because of relapses. This form frequently relapses, as does the
visceral form in patients with AIDS. Treatment with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) may
reduce risk of relapse.
Drugs are given; selection depends on the form of disease, infecting species, resistance pattern, and
geographic location.
Cutaneous leishmaniasis:
Parenteral pentavalent antimonials are often used for
Leishmania
sp
acquired in regions where resistance is low if the lesion is potentially disfiguring or if the infecting species
has the potential to disseminate and cause mucosal leishmaniasis. Drugs include sodium stibogluconate
and meglumine antimonite. Doses of both are based on their pentavalent antimony content—20 mg/kg IV
(slow infusion required) or IM once/day for 20 days. Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, malaise;
elevated amylase, liver enzymes, or both; and cardiotoxicity (arrhythmias, myocardial depression, heart
failure, ECG changes, cardiac arrest). The incidence of side effects increases with age. The drug is
===PAGE:1556===
stopped if patients develop cardiotoxicity.
Alternatively, miltefosine may be effective at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg (maximum, 150 mg/day) po once/day for
28 days. Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, transient aminotransferase
elevations, and dizziness.
Fluconazole or itraconazole is effective in some cases. Topical paromomycin 2 times a day for 10 to 20
days has been used for
L. major
infections.
Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis is relatively resistant to treatment.
Visceral leishmaniasis:
Liposomal amphotericin B is the drug of choice in the US and wherever the
drug is available; other lipid-associated amphotericin preparations have been used successfully.
Immunocompetent patients are given liposomal amphotericin B 3 mg/kg IV once/day for 5 days and then
once/day on days 14 and 21. Higher doses and longer regimens are used in patients with AIDS.
Pentavalent antimony compounds are used to treat visceral leishmaniasis in Latin America. Dosing is as
for cutaneous disease (, except the drug is given for 28 days.
Drug resistance is an increasing problem with antimonials, particularly in India in patients with visceral
leishmaniasis. In such cases, miltefosine 2.5 mg/kg po once/day (maximum 150 mg/day) for 28 days has
been effective, but miltefosine resistance has also been reported. Alternatively, amphotericin B
deoxycholate 1 mg/kg IV once/day for 15 to 20 days or every other day for up to 8 wk or paromomycin 15
mg/kg IM once/day for 21 days may be used for antimony-sensitive or -resistant strains.
Mucosal leishmaniasis:
Pentavalent antimonials (as for visceral leishmaniasis), amphotericin B 0.5 to
1.0 mg/kg once/day or every other day for 8 wk, or miltefosine (as described for visceral leishmaniasis)
may be used.
Prevention
For prevention, treatment of cases in a geographic area where humans are a reservoir, reduction of the
vector population by spraying residual insecticide (one that has prolonged duration of action) in sites of
domestic transmission, and elimination of nonhuman reservoirs may help. People in endemic areas
should use insect repellents containing DEET (diethyltoluamide). Insect screens, bed nets, and clothing
are more effective if treated with permethrin or pyrethrum because the small sand flies can penetrate
mechanical barriers. Vaccines are not currently available.
Malaria
Malaria is infection with
Plasmodium
sp. Symptoms are fever (which may be periodic), chills,
sweating, hemolytic anemia, and splenomegaly. Diagnosis is by seeing
Plasmodium
in a
peripheral blood smear. Treatment and prophylaxis depend on the species and drug sensitivity
and include chloroquine, quinine, the fixed combination of atovaquone and proguanil,
mefloquine, doxycycline, and artemisinin derivatives. Patients infected with
P. vivax
and
P. ovale
also receive primaquine to prevent relapse.
Malaria is endemic in Africa, much of South and Southeast Asia, North and South Korea, Mexico, Central
America, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, northern South America (including northern parts of Argentina),
the Middle East (including Turkey, Syria, Iran, and Iraq), and Central Asia. There are 300 to 500 million
infected people worldwide, with 1 to 2 million deaths yearly, most in children < 5 yr in Africa. Malaria once
was endemic in the US but has been virtually eliminated. About 1500 cases/yr occur in the US. Nearly all
are acquired abroad, but a small number result from blood transfusions or rare autochthonous
transmission by local mosquitoes that feed on infected immigrants.
Pathophysiology
The
Plasmodium
species that are spread among humans are
•
P. falciparum
===PAGE:1557===
•
P. vivax
•
P. ovale
•
P. malariae
Also, simian malaria has been reported in humans;
P. knowlesi
is implicated most often. Whether
P.
knowlesi
is transmitted from human to human via the mosquito, without the natural intermediate monkey
host, has not been determined.
The basic elements of the life cycle are the same for all
Plasmodium
sp. Transmission begins when a
female
Anopheles
mosquito feeds on a person with malaria and ingests blood containing gametocytes.
During the following 1 to 2 wk, gametocytes inside the mosquito reproduce sexually and produce infective
sporozoites. When the mosquito feeds on another human, sporozoites are inoculated and quickly reach
the liver and infect hepatocytes. The parasites mature into tissue schizonts within hepatocytes. Each
schizont produces 10,000 to 30,000 merozoites, which are released into the bloodstream 1 to 3 wk later
when the hepatocyte ruptures. Each merozoite can invade an RBC and there transform into a trophozoite.
Trophozoites grow and develop into erythrocyte schizonts; schizonts produce further merozoites, which
48 to 72 h
later rupture the RBC and are released in plasma. These merozoites then rapidly invade new
RBCs, repeating the cycle. Some trophozoites develop into gametocytes, which are ingested by an
Anopheles
mosquito. They undergo sexual union in the gut of the mosquito, develop into oocysts, and
release infective sporozoites, which migrate to the salivary glands.
With
P. vivax
and
P. ovale
(but not
P. falciparum
or
P. malariae
), tissue schizonts may persist as
hypnozoites in the liver for up to 3 yr. These dormant forms serve as time-release capsules, which cause
relapses and complicate chemotherapy because they are not killed by most antimalarial drugs, which
typically act on bloodstream parasites.
The pre-erythrocytic (hepatic) stage of the malarial life cycle is bypassed when infection is transmitted by
blood transfusions, by sharing of contaminated needles, or congenitally. Therefore, these modes of
transmission do not cause latent disease or delayed recurrences.
Rupture of RBCs during release of merozoites is responsible for the clinical symptoms. If severe,
hemolysis causes anemia and jaundice, which are worsened by phagocytosis of infected RBCs in the
spleen. Anemia may be severe in
P. falciparum
or chronic
P. vivax
infection but tends to be mild in
P.
malariae
infection.
Falciparum malaria:
Unlike other forms of malaria,
P. falciparum
causes microvascular obstruction
because infected RBCs adhere to vascular endothelial cells. Ischemia develops with resultant tissue
hypoxia, particularly in the brain, kidneys, lungs, and GI tract. Hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis are other
potential complications.
Resistance to infection:
Most West Africans have complete resistance to
P. vivax
because their RBCs
lack the Duffy blood group, which is required for the attachment of
P. vivax
to RBCs; many African
Americans also have such resistance. The development of
Plasmodium
in RBCs is retarded in patients
with hemoglobin S, hemoglobin C, thalassemia, G6PD deficiency, or elliptocytosis.
Previous infections provide partial immunity. Once residents of hyperendemic areas leave, acquired
immunity wanes over time (months to years), and symptomatic malaria may develop if they return home
and become reinfected.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is usually 12 to 17 days for
P. vivax
, 9 to 14 days for
P. falciparum
, 16 to 18 days
or longer for
P. ovale
, and about 1 mo (18 to 40 days) or longer (years) for
P. malariae
. However, some
strains of
P. vivax
in temperate climates may not cause clinical illness for months to > 1 yr after infection.
===PAGE:1558===
Manifestations common to all forms of malaria include
• Fever and rigor—the malarial paroxysm
• Anemia
• Jaundice
• Splenomegaly
• Hepatomegaly
The malarial paroxysm coincides with release of merozoites from ruptured RBCs. The classic paroxysm
starts with malaise, abrupt chills and fever rising to 39 to 41° C, rapid and thready pulse, polyuria,
headache, myalgia, and nausea. After 2 to 6 h, fever falls, and profuse sweating occurs for 2 to 3 h,
followed by extreme fatigue. Fever is often hectic at the start of infection. In established infections,
malarial paroxysms typically occur about every 2 to 3 days depending on the species; intervals are not
rigid.
Splenomegaly usually becomes palpable by the end of the first week of clinical disease but may not occur
with
P. falciparum
. The enlarged spleen is soft and prone to traumatic rupture. Splenomegaly may
decrease with recurrent attacks of malaria as functional immunity develops. After many bouts, the spleen
may become fibrotic and firm or, in some patients, becomes massively enlarged (tropical splenomegaly).
Hepatomegaly usually accompanies splenomegaly.
P. falciparum
causes the most severe disease because of its microvascular effects. It is the only species
likely to cause fatal disease if untreated; nonimmune patients may die within days of their initial
symptoms. Patients with cerebral malaria may develop symptoms ranging from irritability to seizures and
coma. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), diarrhea, icterus, epigastric tenderness, retinal
hemorrhages, algid malaria (a shocklike syndrome), and severe thrombocytopenia may also occur. Renal
insufficiency may result from volume depletion, vascular obstruction by parasitized erythrocytes, or
immune complex deposition. Hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria resulting from intravascular hemolysis
may progress to blackwater fever (so named based on the dark color of the urine), either spontaneously
or after treatment with quinine. Hypoglycemia is common and may be aggravated by quinine treatment
and associated hyperinsulinemia. Placental involvement may lead to spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, or
sometimes congenital infection.
P. vivax, P. ovale
,
and
P. malariae
typically do not compromise vital organs. Mortality is
rare and is mostly
due to splenic rupture or uncontrolled hyperparasitemia in asplenic patients. The clinical course with
P.
ovale
is similar to that of
P. vivax
. In established infections, temperature spikes occur at 48-h intervals.
P.
malariae
infections may cause no acute symptoms, but low-level parasitemia may persist for decades and
lead to immune complex-mediated nephritis or nephrosis or tropical splenomegaly; when symptomatic,
fever tends to occur at 72-h intervals.
In patients who have been taking chemoprophylaxis (, malaria may be atypical. The
incubation period may extend weeks after the drug is stopped. Those infected may develop headache,
backache, and irregular fever. Parasites may initially be difficult to find in blood samples.
Diagnosis
• Light microscopy of blood (thin and thick smears)
• Sometimes rapid blood assays that detect
Plasmodium
antigens or enzymes
Fever and chills (particularly recurrent attacks) in a traveler returning from an endemic region should
prompt immediate assessment for malaria. Most cases occur within the first 6 mo, but onset may take up
to 2 yr or, rarely, longer.
===PAGE:1559===
Malaria is typically diagnosed by finding parasites on microscopic examination of thick or thin blood
smears. The infecting species (which determines therapy and prognosis) is identified by characteristic
features on smears (see
Table 148-1
). Blood smears should be repeated at 4- to 6-h intervals if the initial smear is negative.
Thin blood smears stained with Wright-Giemsa stain allow assessment of parasite morphology within
RBCs and determination of percentage parasitemia. Thick smears are more sensitive but more difficult to
prepare and interpret as the RBCs are lysed before staining.
Commercial rapid assays have been developed to diagnose malaria based on the presence of certain
plasmodium antigens or enzymatic activities. Assays may involve detection of a histidine-rich protein 2
(HRP-2) associated with malaria parasites (especially
P. falciparum
and
P. vivax
) and detection of
plasmodium-associated lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH). However, the rapid tests are no more sensitive
for detecting low levels of parasitemia than evaluation of a blood smear by an experienced microscopist
and do not detect dual infections.
PCR and species-specific DNA probes may be used but are not widely available. Serologic tests may
reflect prior exposure and are not useful in the diagnosis of acute malaria.
[Table 148-1.
Diagnostic Features of
Plasmodium
Species in Blood Smears]
Treatment
• Antimalarial drugs chosen by known resistance patterns of strain in area of acquisition
Malaria is particularly dangerous in children < 5 yr (mortality is highest in those < 2 yr), pregnant women,
and previously unexposed visitors to endemic areas. In case of a febrile illness during travel in an
endemic region, prompt professional medical evaluation is essential; when this is not possible, selfmedication with atovaquone-proguanil can be used pending evaluation.
If
P. falciparum
is suspected, therapy should be initiated immediately, even if the initial smear is negative.
P. falciparum
and, more recently,
P. vivax
have become increasingly resistant to antimalarial drugs.
Recommended dosages of antimalarial drugs are listed in
Tables 148-2
and
148-3
. Common adverse effects and contraindications are listed in
Table 148-4
.
[Table 148-2.
Treatment of Malaria]
Treatment of the acute attack:
Chloroquine is the drug of choice against
P. malariae, P. ovale
, and
chloroquine-sensitive
P. falciparum
and
P. vivax
. Chloroquine resistance is common among
P. falciparum
strains throughout endemic areas, with the exception of Central America north and west of the Panama
Canal, Mexico, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Paraguay, northern Argentina, North and South Korea,
Georgia, Armenia, most of rural China, and some Middle Eastern countries; current location of resistant
strains is available from the CDC at http://cdc-malaria.ncsa.uiuc.edu/
. Chloroquine resistance is not
always complete, but chloroquine should be used only for malaria acquired in areas where
Plasmodium
sp are known to be sensitive.
Artemisinin derivatives, particularly artemether, artesunate, and the new synthetic arteether, are used
globally for treatment of acute malaria in regions where chloroquine-resistance is present. They are
usually used in combination with a 2nd drug (eg, lumefantrine); in areas where artemisinins were used as
monotherapy for many years (China, Viet Nam, along the Thai-Cambodian border), resistance to
artemisinins has been confirmed in
P. falciparum
. Artemisinin derivatives act more rapidly than other
drugs and are well tolerated.
[Table 148-3.
Prevention of Malaria]
===PAGE:1560===
Although artemisinins are embryotoxic and associated with a low incidence of teratogenicity in animals,
they have not been reported to cause birth defects in humans. They are a pregnancy category C drug.
Uncomplicated chloroquine-resistant malaria can also be treated with atovaquoneproguanil. Quinine plus
doxycycline has long been used for uncomplicated and complicated chloroquine-resistant infections, but
quinine is associated with frequent side effects. If the patient is pregnant, quinine plus clindamycin can be
used. Mefloquine is another option, but adverse effects are common.
IV quinidine, quinine dihydrochloride, or artesunate (available from the CDC) is used in patients unable to
take oral drugs. If quinidine or quinine is used, hemodynamic and
[Table 148-4.
Adverse Reactions and Contraindications of Antimalarial Drugs]
ECG monitoring is required; the infusion is slowed or temporarily suspended if the QT interval is > 0.6
sec or the QRS widens > 25% beyond baseline. Parenteral therapy should be continued until oral drug is
tolerated. It is customary to supplement quinine and quinidine with doxycycline or clindamycin to prevent
late recrudescences. These antibiotics act too slowly to be used alone for the treatment of acute malaria.
Halofantrine (not available in the US) may prolong the QT interval and has been associated with sudden
death.
Patients with falciparum malaria must be monitored closely for hypoglycemia and proper hydration.
Exchange transfusions have been used in some patients with high parasitemia to remove infected RBCs,
but there is no uniform agreement on this approach. After successful treatment, patients usually improve
in 24 to 48 h, but symptoms can persist for 5 days with
P. falciparum
.
Chloroquine-resistant
P. vivax
is common in Papua New Guinea and Indonesia. It is treated with quinine
plus doxycycline or with mefloquine.
Curative therapy for hypnozoites:
The hypnozoite stage must be eliminated from the liver with
primaquine to prevent relapses of
P. vivax
or
P. ovale
malaria. Primaquine may be given simultaneously
with chloroquine or afterward. Some
P. vivax
strains are less sensitive and require repeated treatment
with higher doses. Primaquine therapy is not necessary for
P. falciparum
or
P. malariae
because these
Plasmodium
sp do not have a persistent hepatic phase.
Prevention
Prophylactic antimalarial drugs and insect repellants reduce but do not eliminate risk of malaria. Vaccines
are under development, but none is currently available.
Prophylaxis against mosquitoes includes using permethrin- or pyrethrum-containing residual insecticide
sprays (which have prolonged duration of action) on clothing or in homes and outbuildings, placing
screens on doors and windows, using mosquito netting (preferably impregnated with permethrin or
pyrethrum) around beds, using mosquito repellents such as DEET (diethyltoluamide), and wearing
protective clothing, especially between dusk and dawn, when
Anopheles
mosquitoes are active.
Chemoprophylaxis:
Regimens and dosing vary by geographic location and patient characteristics (see
Table 148-3
). Information for travelers is available from the CDC at www.cdc.gov/malaria/travel/index.htm
.
If exposure to
P. vivax
or
P. ovale
is intense or prolonged or if the traveler was splenectomized, a 14-day
prophylactic course of primaquine phosphate on return helps reduce the risk of recurrence. The main
adverse effect is hemolysis in people with G6PD deficiency. G6PD levels should be determined before
the drug is used.
Malaria during pregnancy poses a serious threat to both mother and fetus. Chloroquine can be used in
areas where
Plasmodium
sp are susceptible. In general, pregnant women should avoid travel to
chloroquine-resistant areas. The safety of mefloquine during pregnancy has not
been documented, but
limited experience suggests that it may be used when the benefits are judged to outweigh the risks.
Doxycycline, atovaquone-proguanil, and primaquine should not be used during pregnancy. Artemisinins
===PAGE:1561===
have a short half-life and are not useful for prophylaxis.
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis is infection with
Toxoplasma gondii
. Symptoms range from none to benign
lymphadenopathy (a mononucleosis-like illness) to life-threatening CNS disease or involvement
of other organs in immunocompromised people. Retinochoroiditis, seizures, and intellectual
disability occur in congenital infection. Diagnosis is by serologic tests, histology, or PCR.
Treatment is most often with pyrimethamine plus either sulfadiazine or clindamycin.
Corticosteroids are given concurrently for retinochoroiditis.
Human exposure to toxoplasmosis is common wherever cats are found; 20 to 40% of healthy adults in the
US are seropositive. The risk of developing disease is very low except for a fetus infected in utero and
people who are or become immunocompromised.
Pathophysiology
T. gondii
is ubiquitous in birds and mammals. This obligate intracellular parasite invades and multiplies
asexually as tachyzoites within the cytoplasm of any nucleated cell (see
Fig. 148-1
). When host immunity develops, multiplication of tachyzoites ceases and tissue cysts form;
cysts persist in a dormant state for years, especially in brain and muscle. The dormant
Toxoplasma
forms
within the cysts are called bradyzoites. Sexual reproduction of
T. gondii
occurs only in the intestinal tract
of cats; the resultant oocysts passed in the feces remain infectious in moist soil for months.
Infection can occur by
• Ingestion of oocysts
• Ingestion of tissue cysts
• Transplacental transmission
• Blood transfusion or organ transplantation
Ingestion of oocysts in food or water contaminated with cat feces is the most common mode of oral
infection. Infection can also occur by eating raw or undercooked meat containing tissue cysts, most
commonly lamb, pork, or rarely beef. After ingestion of oocysts or tissue cysts, tachyzoites are released
and spread throughout the body. This acute infection is followed by the development of protective
immune responses and the formation of tissue cysts in many organs. The cysts can reactivate, primarily
in immunocompromised patients. Toxoplasmosis reactivates in 30 to 40% of AIDS patients who are not
taking antibiotic prophylaxis, but the widespread use of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole for
Pneumocystis
prophylaxis has dramatically reduced the incidence.
Toxoplasmosis can be transmitted transplacentally if the mother becomes infected during pregnancy or if
immunosuppression reactivates a prior infection. Transmission of
Toxoplasma
to a fetus is extraordinarily
rare in immunocompetent mothers who have had toxoplasmosis earlier in life. Transmission may occur via
transfusion of whole blood or WBCs or via transplantation of an organ from a seropositive donor. In
otherwise healthy people, congenital or acquired infection can reactivate in the retina. Past infection
confers resistance to reinfection.
Symptoms and Signs
Infections may manifest in several ways:
• Acute toxoplasmosis
• CNS toxoplasmosis
===PAGE:1562===
• Congenital toxoplasmosis
• Ocular toxoplasmosis
• Disseminated or non-CNS disease in immunocompromised patients
Acute toxoplasmosis:
Acute infection is usually asymptomatic, but 10 to 20% of patients develop
bilateral, nontender cervical or axillary lymphadenopathy. A few of these also have a mild flu-like
syndrome of fever, malaise, myalgia, hepatosplenomegaly, and less commonly, pharyngitis, which may
mimic infectious mononucleosis. Atypical lymphocytosis, mild anemia, leukopenia, and slightly elevated
liver enzymes are common. The syndrome may persist for weeks but is almost always self-limited.
CNS toxoplasmosis:
Most patients with AIDS or other immunocompromised patients who develop
toxoplasmosis due to reactivation present with ring-enhancing intracranial mass lesions or encephalitis.
These patients typically have headache, altered mental status, seizures, coma, fever, and sometimes
focal neurologic deficits, such as motor or sensory loss, cranial nerve palsies, visual abnormalities, and
focal seizures.
Congenital toxoplasmosis:
This type results from a primary, often asymptomatic infection acquired by
the mother during pregnancy. Women infected before conception ordinarily do not transmit toxoplasmosis
to the fetus unless the infection is reactivated during pregnancy
[Fig. 148-1.

Toxoplasma gondii
life cycle.]
by immunosuppression. Spontaneous abortion and stillbirth may occur. The percentage of surviving
fetuses born with toxoplasmosis depends on when maternal infection is acquired; it increases from 15%
during the 1st trimester to 30% during the 2nd to 60% during the 3rd.
Disease in neonates may be severe, particularly if acquired early in pregnancy; symptoms include
jaundice, rash, hepatosplenomegaly, and the characteristic tetrad of abnormalities: bilateral
retinochoroiditis, cerebral calcifications, hydrocephalus or microcephaly, and psychomotor retardation.
Prognosis is poor.
Many children with less severe infections and most infants born to mothers infected during the 3rd
trimester appear healthy at birth but are at high risk of seizures, intellectual disability, retinochoroiditis, or
other symptoms developing months or even years later.
Ocular toxoplasmosis:
This type usually results from congenital infection that is reactivated, often
during the teens and 20s, but rarely, it occurs with acquired infections. Focal necrotizing retinitis and a
secondary granulomatous inflammation of the choroid occur and may cause ocular pain, blurred vision,
and sometimes blindness. Relapses are common.
Disseminated infection and non-CNS involvement:
Disease outside the eye and CNS is much less
common and occurs primarily in severely immunocompromised patients. They may present with
pneumonitis, myocarditis, polymyositis, diffuse maculopapular rash, high fevers, chills, and prostration. In
toxoplasmic pneumonitis, diffuse interstitial infiltrates may progress rapidly to consolidation and cause
respiratory failure, whereas endarteritis may lead to infarction of small lung segments. Myocarditis, in
which conduction defects are common but often asymptomatic, may rapidly lead to heart failure.
Untreated disseminated infections are usually fatal.
Diagnosis
• Serologic testing
• For CNS involvement, CT or MRI and lumbar puncture
The diagnosis is usually made serologically using an indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) test or enzyme
immunoassay (EIA) for IgG and IgM antibodies. Specific IgM antibodies appear during the first 2 wk of
===PAGE:1563===
acute illness, peak within 4 to 8 wk, and eventually become undetectable, but they may be present for as
long as 18 mo after acute infection. IgG antibodies arise more slowly, peak in 1 to 2 mo, and may remain
high and stable for months to years. Specific IgM antibodies with low IgG are consistent with recent
infection in immunocompetent patients. Acute infection should also be suspected if the IgG is positive in
immunocompromised patients with encephalitis.
Toxoplasma
-specific IgG antibody levels in AIDS patients
with
Toxoplasma
encephalitis are usually low to moderate but may be absent; IgM antibodies are not
present. Past infection in a healthy person typically produces a negative IgM test and a positive IgG test.
In patients with retinochoroiditis, low titers of IgG antibodies are usually present, but IgM antibodies are
not detected.
The diagnosis of acute toxoplasmosis during pregnancy and in the fetus or neonate can be difficult, and
consultation with an expert is recommended. If the patient is pregnant and IgG and IgM are positive, an
IgG avidity test should be done. High avidity antibodies in the first 12 to 16 wk of pregnancy essentially
rules out an infection acquired during gestation. But a low IgG avidity result cannot be interpreted as
indicating recent infection because some patients have persistent low IgG avidity for many months after
infection. Suspected recent infection in a pregnant woman should be confirmed before intervention by
having samples tested at a toxoplasmosis reference laboratory. If the patient has clinical illness
compatible with toxoplasmosis but the IgG titer is low, a follow-up titer 2 to 3 wk later should show an
increase in antibody titer if the illness is due to acute toxoplasmosis, unless the host is severely
immunocompromised.
In general, detection of specific IgM antibody in neonates suggests congenital infection. Maternal IgG
crosses the placenta, but IgM does not. Detection of
Toxoplasma
-specific IgA antibodies is more sensitive
than IgM in congenitally infected infants, but it is available only at special reference facilities (eg, Palo Alto
Medical Foundation [telephone 650-853-4828]). They should be consulted when fetal or congenital
infection is suspected.
Toxoplasma
are occasionally demonstrated histologically. Tachyzoites, which are present during acute
infection, take up Giemsa or Wright's stain but may be difficult to find in routine tissue sections. Tissue
cysts do not distinguish acute from chronic infection.
Toxoplasma
must be distinguished from other
intracellular organisms, such as
Histoplasma
,
Trypanosoma cruzi
, and
Leishmania
. PCR tests for
parasite DNA in blood, CSF, or amniotic fluid are available at several reference laboratories. PCR-based
analysis of amniotic fluid is the preferred method to diagnose toxoplasmosis during pregnancy.
If CNS toxoplasmosis is suspected, patients should have head CT with contrast agent, MRI, or both plus
a lumbar puncture if there are no signs of increased intracranial pressure. MRI is more sensitive than CT.
CSF may show lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated protein levels. CT typically shows single or multiple
dense, rounded, ring-enhancing lesions. Although these lesions are not pathognomonic, their presence in
patients with AIDS and CNS symptoms warrants a trial of chemotherapy for
T. gondii
. If the suspected
diagnosis of toxoplasmosis is correct, clinical or radiographic improvement should become evident within
7 to 14 days. If symptoms persist, a brain biopsy should be considered.
Treatment
• Pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine (when treatment is indicated)
Most immunocompetent patients do not require therapy unless visceral disease is present or severe
symptoms persist. However, specific treatment is indicated for acute toxoplasmosis of neonates, pregnant
women, and immunocompromised patients.
The most effective regimen in immunocompetent patients is pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine. Dosage for
pyrimethamine is 50 to 100 mg po q 12 h for 1 day, then 25 to 100 mg once/day for 3 to 4 wk in adults (1
mg/kg q 12 h for 3 days, then 1 mg/kg once/day for 4 wk in children; maximum 25 mg/day). Dosage for
sulfadiazine is 1 to 1.5 g po qid for 3 to 4 wk in adults (25 to 50 mg/kg qid for 4 wk in children). Higher
doses of pyrimethamine are used in HIV-infected patients with CNS toxoplasmosis. Some clinicians use a
loading dose of pyrimethamine 200 mg the first day, then 50 to 100 mg/day plus sulfadiazine for 4 to 6 wk.
In patients who have or develop sulfonamide hypersensitivity, clindamycin 600 to 800 mg po tid is given
instead of sulfonamides. Another option is atovaquone 1500 mg q 12 h plus pyrimethamine, starting with
===PAGE:1564===
a 200-mg loading dose followed by 75 mg/day for 6 wk. Relapses of toxoplasmosis are common in
patients with AIDS, and suppressive treatment should continue indefinitely unless the CD4 count
increases and remains above 200/
μ
L. Pyrimethamine bone marrow suppression can be minimized with
leucovorin (also called folinic acid; not folate, which blocks the therapeutic effect). The dosage is 10 to 25
mg po once/day. Patients with ocular toxoplasmosis should also be given corticosteroids.
Treatment of pregnant women with primary infection can decrease the incidence of fetal infection.
Spiramycin 1 g po tid or qid has been used safely to reduce transmission in pregnant women during the
1st trimester (available from the FDA [telephone 301-827-2335]), but spiramycin is less active than
pyrimethamine plus sulfonamide and does not cross the placenta. Spiramycin is continued until fetal
infection is documented or excluded at the end of the 1st trimester. If no transmission has occurred,
spiramycin can be continued to term. If the fetus is infected, pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine is used.
Pyrimethamine is a potent teratogen and should not be used during the 1st trimester. Consultation with an
infectious diseases expert is recommended.
Congenitally infected infants should be treated with pyrimethamine every 2 to 3 days and with
sulfadiazine once/day for about a year. Infants should also receive leucovorin while receiving
pyrimethamine and for 1 wk after pyrimethamine is stopped to prevent bone marrow suppression.
Prevention
Washing hands thoroughly after handling raw meat, soil, or cat litter is essential. Food possibly
contaminated with cat feces should be avoided. Meat should be cooked to 165 to 170° F.
Chemoprophylaxis is recommended for patients with HIV and a positive IgG
T. gondii
serologic test once
CD4+ cell counts are < 100/
μ
L. One double-strength tablet of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole once/day,
which also is prophylactic against
Pneumocystis jirovecii
, is one regimen. Alternatively, pyrimethamine
plus dapsone or atovaquone with or without pyrimethamine can be used.
===PAGE:1565===
Chapter 149. Viruses
Introduction
Viruses are the smallest parasites, ranging from 0.02 to 0.3
μ
m. They depend completely on cells
(bacterial, plant, or animal) to reproduce. Viruses have an outer cover of protein, and sometimes lipid, and
an RNA or DNA core. For infection to occur, the virus first attaches to the host cell. The viral DNA or RNA
then enters the host cell and separates from the outer cover (uncoating) and replicates inside the host
cell in a process that requires specific enzymes. Most RNA viruses replicate their nucleic acid in the
cytoplasm, whereas most DNA viruses replicate in the nucleus. The host cell typically dies, releasing new
viruses that infect other host cells.
The consequences of viral infection vary considerably. Many infections cause acute illness after a brief
incubation period, but some are asymptomatic or cause minor symptoms that may not be recognized
except in retrospect. Many viral infections are cleared by the body's defenses, but some remain in a latent
state. In latent infection, viral RNA or DNA remains in host cells but does not cause disease for a long
time, sometimes for many years. Latent viral infections may be transmissible during the asymptomatic
period, facilitating person-to-person spread. Sometimes a trigger (particularly immunosuppression)
causes reactivation. Common viruses that remain latent include
• Herpesviruses
• HIV
• Papovaviruses
Some disorders are caused by viral reactivation in the CNS after a very long latency period. These
diseases include progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (due to the JC virus, a polyomavirus),
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (due to the measles virus), and progressive rubella panencephalitis
(due to rubella virus). Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and bovine spongiform encephalopathy were formerly
termed slow viral diseases because they have lengthy incubations (years), but they are now known to be
caused by prions; prions are proteinaceous disease-causing agents that are not bacterial, fungal, or viral
and that contain no genetic material (.
Several hundred different viruses infect humans. Viruses that infect primarily humans often spread via
respiratory and enteric excretions. Some are transmitted sexually and through transfer of blood. Some
viruses are transmitted via arthropod vectors. Viruses exist worldwide, but their spread is limited by inborn
resistance, prior immunizing infections or vaccines, sanitary and other public health control measures,
and prophylactic antiviral drugs.
Zoonotic viruses (see
Chapter 153
) pursue their biologic cycles chiefly in animals; humans are secondary or
accidental hosts. These viruses are limited to areas and environments able to support their nonhuman
natural cycles of infection (vertebrates, arthropods, or both).
Viruses and cancer:
Some viruses are oncogenic and predispose to certain cancers:
•
Papillomavirus:
Cervical and anal carcinomas
•
Human T-lymphotropic virus 1:
Certain types of human leukemia and lymphoma
•
Epstein-Barr virus:
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Burkitt's lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma, and
lymphomas in immunosuppressed organ transplant recipients
•
Hepatitis B and C viruses:
Hepatocellular carcinoma
•
Human herpesvirus 8:
Kaposi's sarcoma, primary effusion lymphomas, and multicentric Castleman
disease (a lymphoproliferative disorder)
===PAGE:1566===
Diagnosis
Some viral disorders can be diagnosed clinically (eg, by well-known viral syndromes such as measles,
rubella, roseola infantum, erythema infectiosum, and chickenpox) or epidemiologically (eg, during
epidemic outbreaks such as influenza). Definitive laboratory diagnosis is necessary mainly when specific
treatment may be helpful or when the agent may be a public health threat (eg, HIV). Typical hospital
laboratories can test for some viruses, but for less common disorders (eg, rabies, Eastern equine
encephalitis), specimens must be sent to state health laboratories or the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
Serologic examination during acute and convalescent stages is sensitive and specific but slow; more
rapid diagnosis can sometimes be made using culture, PCR, or viral antigen tests. Histopathology with
electron (not light) microscopy can sometimes help. For specific diagnostic procedures, see
Chapter 130
.
Treatment
Antiviral drugs:
Progress in the use of antiviral drugs is occurring rapidly. Antiviral chemotherapy can be
directed at various phases
of viral replication: It can interfere with viral particle attachment to host cell
membranes or uncoating of viral nucleic acids, inhibit a cellular receptor or factor required for viral
replication, or block specific virus-coded enzymes and proteins that are produced in the host cells and
that are essential for viral replication but not for normal host cell metabolism.
Antiviral drugs are most often used therapeutically or prophylactically against herpesviruses (including
cytomegalovirus—see
Chapter 151
), respiratory viruses (see
Chapter 150
), and HIV (see
Chapter 154
). However,
some drugs are effective against many different kinds of viruses. Some drugs active against HIV are used
for other viral infections such as hepatitis B.
Interferons:
Interferons are compounds released from infected host cells in response to viral or other
foreign antigens. There are many different interferons, which have numerous effects such as blocking
translation and transcription of viral RNA and stopping viral replication without disturbing normal host cell
function. Interferons are sometimes given attached to polyethylene glycol (pegylated formulations),
allowing slow, sustained release of the interferon.
Viral disorders sometimes treated with interferon therapy include
• Chronic hepatitis B and C
• Condyloma acuminata
• Hairy cell leukemia
• Kaposi's sarcoma
Adverse effects of interferons include fever, chills, weakness, and myalgia, typically starting 7 to 12 h
after the first injection and lasting up to 12 h. Depression, hepatitis, and, when high doses are used, bone
marrow suppression are also possible.
Prevention
Vaccines:
Vaccines ( work by stimulating native immunity. Viral vaccines in general use
include hepatitis A, hepatitis B, human papillomavirus, influenza, measles, mumps, poliomyelitis, rabies,
rotavirus, rubella, varicella, and yellow fever. Adenovirus and smallpox vaccines are available but used
only in high-risk groups (eg, military recruits).
Immune globulins:
Immune globulins ( are available for passive immune prophylaxis in
limited situations. They can be used preexposure (eg, for hepatitis A), postexposure (eg, for rabies or
hepatitis), and for treating disease (eg, eczema vaccinatum).
===PAGE:1567===
Protective measures:
Many viral infections can be prevented by commonsense protective measures
(which vary depending on the transmission mode of a given agent). Important measures include hand
washing, appropriate food preparation and water treatment, avoidance of contact with sick people, and
safe-sex practices. For infections with an insect vector (eg, mosquitoes, ticks), avoiding the vector is
important.
Types of Viral Disorders
Categorizing viral infections by the organ system most commonly affected (eg, lungs, GI tract, skin, liver,
CNS, mucous membranes) can be clinically useful, although certain viral disorders (eg, mumps) are hard
to categorize. Many specific viruses and the disorders they cause are also discussed elsewhere in THE
MANUAL.
Respiratory infections:
The most common viral infections are probably URIs. Respiratory infections are
more likely to cause severe symptoms in infants, the elderly, and patients with a lung or heart disorder.
Respiratory viruses include influenza viruses (A, B, C), parainfluenza viruses 1 through 4, adenoviruses,
respiratory syncytial virus, and rhinoviruses (see
Table 149-1
and
Chapter 150
). They are typically spread from person to person by contact with infected
respiratory droplets.
GI infections:
Gastroenteritis is usually caused by viruses (
Chapter 16
) and transmitted from person-to
person by the oral-fecal route. Age group primarily affected depends on the virus:
•
Rotavirus:
Children
•
Norovirus:
Older children and adults
•
Astrovirus:
Usually infants and young children
•
Adenovirus 40 and 41:
Infants
•
Coronavirus-like agents:
Infants
Local epidemics may occur in children, particularly during colder months.
The main symptoms are vomiting and diarrhea.
No specific treatment is recommended, but supportive care, particularly rehydration, is important.
A rotavirus vaccine that is effective against most pathogenic strains is part of the recommended infant
vaccination schedule (see
Table 268-10
. Hand washing and good sanitation measures can help prevent spread.
Exanthematous infections:
Some viruses cause only skin lesions (as in molluscum contagiosum and
warts—see
Chapter 84
); others also cause systemic manifestations or lesions
[Table 149-1.
Some Respiratory Viruses]
elsewhere in the body (see
Table 149-2
). Transmission is typically from person to person; alphaviruses have a mosquito vector.
Hepatic infections:
At least 5 specific viruses (hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E viruses) can cause hepatitis;
each causes a specific type of hepatitis (see
Table 149-3
and
Chapter 28
). Hepatitis D virus can infect only when hepatitis B is present. Transmission is
from person to person by contact with infected blood or body secretions or by the fecal-oral route for
hepatitis A and E.
===PAGE:1568===
Other viruses can affect the liver as part of their disease process. Common examples are
cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and yellow fever virus. Less common examples are echovirus,
coxsackievirus, and herpes simplex, rubeola, rubella, and varicella viruses.
[Table 149-2.
Some Exanthematous Viruses]
[Table 149-3.
Viral Hepatitis]
Neurologic infections:
Most cases of encephalitis are caused by viruses (see
Table 149-4
and p.
). Many of these viruses are transmitted to humans by blood-eating arthropods,
mainly mosquitoes and ticks (see
Chapter 153
); these viruses are called arboviruses (arthropod-borne
viruses). For such infections, prevention includes avoiding mosquito and tick bites.
Hemorrhagic fevers:
Certain viruses cause fever and a bleeding tendency (see
Table 149-5
and
Chapter 153
). Transmission may involve mosquitoes, ticks, or contact with infected animals
(eg, rodents, monkeys, bats) and people. Prevention involves avoiding the means of transmission.
Cutaneous or mucosal infections:
Some viruses cause skin or mucosal lesions that recur and may
become chronic (see
Table 149-7
). Mucocutaneous infections are the most common type of herpes simplex virus infection (see
p.
). Human papillomavirus causes warts (see pp.
and
); some subtypes cause cervical
cancer (. Transmission is by person-to-person contact.
Multisystem diseases:
Enteroviruses, which include coxsackieviruses and echoviruses
[Table 149-4.
Some Neurologic Viruses]
[Table 149-5.
Some Viruses that Cause Hemorrhagic Fever]
(see
Chapter 152
), can cause various multisystem syndromes, as can cytomegaloviruses (see
Table 149-7
and p.
). Transmission is by the fecal-oral route.
Nonspecific febrile illness:
Some viruses cause nonspecific symptoms, including fever, malaise,
headaches, and myalgia (see
Tables 149-8
and
153-1
). Transmission is usually by an insect or arthropod vector.
Rift Valley fever rarely progresses to ocular disorders, meningoencephalitis, or a hemorrhagic form (which
has a 50% mortality rate).
[Table 149-6.
Some Viruses that Cause Recurrent or Chronic Skin or Mucosal Lesions]
[Table 149-7.
Some Viruses that Cause Multisystem Disease]
[Table 149-8.
Some Viruses that Cause Nonspecific Acute Febrile Illness]
===PAGE:1569===
Chapter 150. Respiratory Viruses
Introduction
(See also
Bronchiolitis
on p.
, Croup on p.
, and Pneumonia )
Viral infections commonly affect the upper or lower respiratory tract. Although these infections can be
classified by the causative virus (eg, influenza), they are generally classified clinically according to
syndrome (eg, the common cold, bronchiolitis, croup). Although specific pathogens commonly cause
characteristic clinical manifestations (eg, rhinovirus typically causes the common cold, respiratory
syncytial virus [RSV] typically causes bronchiolitis), each can cause many of the viral respiratory
syndromes (see
Table 150-1
).
Severity of viral respiratory illness varies widely; severe disease is more likely in the elderly and infants.
Morbidity may result directly from viral infection or may be indirect,
[Table 150-1.
Causes of Common Viral Respiratory Syndromes]
due to exacerbation of underlying cardiopulmonary conditions or bacterial superinfection of the lung,
paranasal sinuses, or middle ear.
Diagnosis
Detection of viral pathogens by PCR, culture, or serologic tests is generally too slow to be useful for
patient care but is useful for epidemiologic surveillance. More rapid diagnostic tests are available for
influenza and RSV, but the utility of these tests for routine care is not clear; they should be reserved for
situations in which pathogen-specific diagnosis affects clinical management. Management decisions are
usually based on clinical data and epidemiology.
Treatment
Treatment of viral respiratory infections is usually supportive. Antibacterial drugs are ineffective against
viral pathogens, and prophylaxis against secondary bacterial infections is not recommended. Antibiotics
should be given only when secondary bacterial infections develop. In patients with chronic lung disease,
antibiotics may be given with less restriction.
Aspirin should not be used in patients who are ≤18 yr and have respiratory infections because Reye's
syndrome is a risk.
Some patients continue to cough for weeks after resolution of an URI; these symptoms may lessen with
use of an inhaled bronchodilator or corticosteroids.
In some cases, antiviral drugs are useful. Amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, and zanamivir are
effective for influenza. Ribavirin, a guanosine analog that inhibits replication of many RNA and DNA
viruses, may be considered for severely immunocompromised patients with lower respiratory tract
infection due to RSV.
Adenovirus Infections
Infection with one of the many adenoviruses may be asymptomatic or result in specific
syndromes, including mild respiratory infections, keratoconjunctivitis, gastroenteritis, cystitis,
and primary pneumonia. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is supportive.
Adenoviruses are DNA viruses classified according to 3 major capsid antigens (hexon, penton, and fiber).
Adenoviruses are commonly acquired by contact with secretions (including those on fingers of infected
people) from an infected person or by contact with a contaminated object (eg, towel, instrument). Infection
may be airborne or waterborne (eg, acquired while swimming). Asymptomatic respiratory or GI viral
===PAGE:1570===
shedding may continue for months, or even years.
Symptoms and Signs
In immunocompetent hosts, most adenovirus infections are asymptomatic; when infections are
symptomatic, a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations is possible. The most common syndrome,
especially in children, involves fever that tends to be > 39° C and to last > 5 days. Sore throat, cough,
rhinorrhea, or other respiratory symptoms may occur. A separate syndrome involves conjunctivitis,
pharyngitis, and fever (pharyngoconjunctival fever). Rare adenoviral syndromes in infants include severe
bronchiolitis ( and pneumonia. In closed populations of young adults (eg, military recruits),
outbreaks of respiratory illness may occur; symptoms include fever and lower respiratory tract symptoms,
usually tracheobronchitis but occasionally pneumonia.
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis ( is sometimes severe and occurs sporadically and in epidemics.
Conjunctivitis is frequently bilateral. Preauricular adenopathy may develop. Chemosis, pain, and punctate
corneal lesions that are visible with fluorescein staining may be present. Systemic symptoms and signs
are mild or absent. Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis usually resolves within 3 to 4 wk, although corneal
lesions may persist much longer.
Nonrespiratory adenoviral syndromes include hemorrhagic cystitis, diarrhea in infants, and
meningoencephalitis.
Most patients recover fully. Even severe primary adenoviral pneumonia is not fatal except for rare
fulminant cases, predominantly in infants, military recruits, and immunocompromised patients.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Laboratory diagnosis of adenovirus infection rarely affects management. During the acute illness, virus
can be isolated from respiratory and ocular secretions and frequently from stool and urine. A 4-fold rise in
the serum antibody titer indicates recent adenoviral infection.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
To minimize transmission, heath care practitioners should change gloves and wash hands after examining
infected patients, sterilize instruments adequately, and avoid using ophthalmologic instruments in multiple
patients.
Prevention
Vaccines containing live adenovirus types 4 and 7, given orally in an enteric-coated capsule, can reduce
lower respiratory disease in military populations; however, these vaccines are no longer available.
Common Cold
(Upper Respiratory Infection; Coryza)
The common cold is an acute, usually afebrile, self-limited viral infection causing upper
respiratory symptoms, such as rhinorrhea, cough, and sore throat. Diagnosis is clinical. Hand
washing helps prevent its spread. Treatment is supportive.
About 50% of all colds are caused by one of the > 100 serotypes of rhinoviruses. Coronaviruses cause
some outbreaks, and infections caused by influenza, parainfluenza, enterovirus, adenovirus, respiratory
===PAGE:1571===
syncytial viruses, and metapneumoviruses may also manifest as the common cold, particularly in patients
who are experiencing reinfection.
Rhinovirus infections are most common during fall and spring and are less common during winter.
Rhinoviruses are most efficiently spread by direct person-to-person contact, although spread may also
occur via large-particle aerosols.
The most potent deterrent to infection is the presence of specific neutralizing antibodies in the serum and
secretions, induced by previous exposure to the same or a closely related virus. Susceptibility to colds is
not affected by exposure to cold temperature, host health and nutrition, or upper respiratory tract
abnormalities (eg, enlarged tonsils or adenoids).
Symptoms and Signs
After an incubation period of 24 to 72 h, symptoms begin with a "scratchy" or sore throat, followed by
sneezing, rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and malaise. Temperature is usually normal, particularly when the
pathogen is a rhinovirus or coronavirus. Nasal secretions are watery and profuse during the first days but
then become more mucoid and purulent. Mucopurulent secretions do not indicate a bacterial
superinfection. Cough is usually mild but often lasts into the 2nd wk. Most symptoms due to
uncomplicated colds resolve within 10 days. Colds may exacerbate asthma and chronic bronchitis.
Purulent sputum or significant lower respiratory tract symptoms are unusual with rhinovirus infection.
Purulent sinusitis and otitis
media may result from the viral infection itself or from secondary bacterial
infection.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is generally made clinically and presumptively, without diagnostic tests. Allergic rhinitis is the
most important consideration in differential diagnosis.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment
No specific treatment exists. Antipyretics and analgesics may relieve fever and sore throat. Nasal
decongestants may reduce nasal obstruction. Topical nasal decongestants are more effective than oral
decongestants, but the use of topical drugs for > 3 to 5 days may result in rebound congestion.
Rhinorrhea may be relieved with 1st-generation antihistamines (eg, chlorpheniramine) or intranasal
ipratropium bromide (2 sprays of a 0.03% solution bid or tid); however, these drugs should be avoided in
the elderly and people with benign prostatic hypertrophy or glaucoma. First-generation antihistamines
frequently cause sedation, but 2nd-generation (nonsedating) antihistamines are ineffective for treating the
common cold. Antihistamines and decongestants are not recommended for children < 4 yr.
Zinc, echinacea, and vitamin C have all been evaluated as common cold therapies, but none has been
clearly shown to be beneficial.
Prevention
There are no vaccines. Polyvalent bacterial vaccines, citrus fruits, vitamins, ultraviolet light, glycol
aerosols, and other folk remedies do not prevent the common cold. Hand washing and use of surface
disinfectant in a contaminated environment may reduce spread of infection.
Antibiotics should not be given unless there is clear evidence of secondary bacterial infection. In patients
with chronic lung disease, antibiotics may be given with less restriction.
Influenza
===PAGE:1572===
(Flu; Grippe; Grip)
Influenza is a viral respiratory infection causing fever, coryza, cough, headache, and malaise.
Mortality is possible during seasonal epidemics, particularly among high-risk patients (eg, those
who are institutionalized, at the extremes of age, have cardiopulmonary insufficiency, or are in
late pregnancy); during pandemics, even healthy, young patients may die. Diagnosis is usually
clinical and depends on local epidemiologic patterns. High-risk patients, their caregivers and
household contacts, health care practitioners, all people ≥ 50 yr, and all children aged 6 mo to 18
yr should receive annual influenza vaccination. Antiviral treatment reduces the duration of
illness by about 1 day and should be specifically considered for high-risk patients.
Influenza refers to illness caused by the influenza viruses, but the term is commonly and incorrectly used
to refer to similar illnesses caused by other viral respiratory pathogens. Influenza viruses are classified as
types A, B, or C by their nucleoproteins and matrix proteins. Influenza C virus infection does not cause
typical influenza illness and is not discussed here.
Influenza antigens:
Hemagglutinin (HA) is a glycoprotein on the influenza surface that allows the virus to
bind to cellular sialic acid and fuse with the host membrane. Neuraminidase (NA), another surface
glycoprotein, enzymatically removes sialic acid, promoting viral dispersion from the infected cell.
Antigenic drift
refers to relatively minor mutations in HA and NA of influenza A and B that result in the
frequent emergence of new viral strains. The result is decreased protection by antibody generated to the
previous strain.
Antigenic shift
refers to a major change in NA or HA that occurs in influenza A (antigenic shift) at
infrequent intervals (10 to 40 yr during the last century); as a result, the population has no immunity to the
new virus, and pandemic influenza may occur.
Epidemiology
Influenza causes widespread sporadic illness yearly during fall and winter in temperate climates.
Epidemics in the US occur about every 2 to 3 yr, most often caused by influenza A viruses. Pandemics
due to new influenza A serotypes may cause particularly severe disease. Influenza B viruses typically
cause mild disease but can cause epidemics with moderate or severe disease, usually in 3- to 5-yr
cycles. Although most influenza epidemics result from a single serotype, different influenza viruses may
appear sequentially in one location or may appear simultaneously, with one virus predominating in one
location and another virus predominating elsewhere.
Seasonal epidemics often occur in 2 waves—the first in schoolchildren and their household contacts
(generally younger people) and
the 2nd mostly in housebound or institutionalized people, particularly the
elderly.
Influenza viruses may be spread by airborne droplets, person-to-person contact, or contact with
contaminated items. Airborne spread appears to be the most important mechanism.
At-risk groups:
Certain patients are at high risk of complications from influenza:
• Children < 4 yr
• Adults > 65 yr
• People with chronic medical disorders (eg, cardiopulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, renal or hepatic
insufficiency, hemoglobinopathies, immuodeficiency)
• Women in the 2nd or 3rd trimester of pregnancy
• Patients with disorders that impair handling of respiratory secretions (eg, cognitive dysfunction,
===PAGE:1573===
neuromuscular disorders, stroke, seizure disorders)
• Patients ≤ 18 yr taking aspirin (because Reye's syndrome is a risk)
Morbidity and mortality in these patients may be due to exacerbation of underlying illness, acute
respiratory distress syndrome, primary influenza pneumonia, or secondary bacterial pneumonia.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period ranges from 1 to 4 days with an average of about 48 h. In mild cases, many
symptoms are like those of a common cold (eg, sore throat, rhinorrhea); mild conjunctivitis may also
occur. Typical influenza in adults is characterized by sudden onset of chills, fever, prostration, cough, and
generalized aches and pains (especially in the back and legs). Headache is prominent, often with
photophobia and retrobulbar aching. Respiratory symptoms may be mild at first, with scratchy sore throat,
substernal burning, nonproductive cough, and sometimes coryza. Later, lower respiratory tract illness
becomes dominant; cough can be persistent, raspy, and productive. GI symptoms may occur and appear
to be more common with the 2009 pandemic H1N1 strain. Children may have prominent nausea, vomiting,
or abdominal pain, and infants may present with a sepsis-like syndrome.
After 2 to 3 days, acute symptoms rapidly subside, although fever may last up to 5 days. Cough,
weakness, sweating, and fatigue may persist for several days or occasionally for weeks.
Complications:
Pneumonia is suggested by a worsening cough, bloody sputum, dyspnea, and rales.
Secondary bacterial pneumonia is suggested by persistence or recurrence of fever and cough after the
primary illness appears to be resolving.
Encephalitis, myocarditis, and myoglobinuria, sometimes with renal failure, develop infrequently after
influenza A or B infection. Reye's syndrome (,—characterized by encephalopathy; fatty liver;
elevation of liver enzymes, ammonia, or both; hypoglycemia; and lipidemia—often occurs during
epidemics of influenza B, particularly in children who have ingested aspirin.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes rapid diagnostic testing
• Pulse oximetry and chest x-ray for patients with severe respiratory symptoms
The diagnosis is generally made clinically in patients with a typical syndrome when influenza is known to
be present in the community. Although many rapid diagnostic tests are available, their sensitivities and
specificities vary widely in different studies and they usually add little to patient management. Diagnostic
tests should be done when results will affect clinical decisions. Reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR)
assays are sensitive and specific and can differentiate influenza types and subtypes. If this assay is
quickly available, results may be used to select appropriate antiviral therapy. These tests are also useful
to determine whether outbreaks of respiratory disease are due to influenza. Cell culture of
nasopharyngeal swabs or aspirates takes several days and is not useful for patient management
decisions.
If patients have lower respiratory tract symptoms and signs (eg, dyspnea, rales noted during lung
examination), pulse oximetry to detect hypoxemia and a chest x-ray to detect pneumonia should be done.
Primary influenza pneumonia appears as focal or diffuse interstitial infiltrates or as acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Secondary bacterial pneumonia is more likely to be lobar or segmental.
Prognosis
Most patients recover fully, although full recovery often takes 1 to 2 wk. However, influenza and influenzarelated pneumonia are important causes of increased morbidity or mortality in high-risk patients. Use of
===PAGE:1574===
antiviral treatment in these patients appears to reduce the incidence of lower respiratory disease and
hospitalization. Appropriate antibacterial therapy decreases the mortality rate due to secondary bacterial
pneumonia.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment
• Sometimes antiviral drugs
Treatment for most patients is symptomatic, including rest, hydration, and antipyretics as needed, but
aspirin is avoided in patients ≤ 18 yr. Complicating bacterial infections require appropriate antibiotics.
Drugs for influenza:
Antiviral drugs given within 1 to 2 days of symptom onset decrease the duration of
fever, severity of symptoms, and time to return to normal activity. Treatment with antiviral drugs is
recommended for high-risk patients who develop influenza-like symptoms; this recommendation is based
on data suggesting that early treatment may prevent complications in these patients.
Drugs for influenza include the following:
• Oseltamivir and zanamivir (neuraminidase inhibitors)
• Amantadine and rimantadine (adamantanes)
Neuraminidase inhibitors interfere with release of influenza virus from infected cells and thus halt spread
of infection.
Adamantanes block the M2 ion channel and thus interfere with viral uncoating inside the cell. They are
effective only against influenza A viruses (influenza B viruses lack the M2 protein).
Choice of antiviral drug is complicated by resistance of different influenza types and subtypes to different
drugs (see
Table 150-2
). If RT-PCR testing is rapidly available, results can be used to direct treatment. If RT-PCR is
not available, patients may be treated with zanamivir alone or with rimantadine plus oseltamivir.
Zanamivir is given by an inhaler, 2 puffs (10 mg) bid; it can be used in adults and children ≥ 7 yr.
Zanamivir sometimes causes bronchospasm and should not be given to patients with reactive airway
disease; some people cannot use the inhalation device.
Oseltamivir 75 mg po bid is given to patients > 12 yr; lower doses may be used in children as young as 1
yr. Oseltamivir may cause occasional nausea and vomiting. In children, oseltamivir may decrease the
incidence of otitis media; however, no other data clearly show that treatment of influenza prevents
complications.
Rimantadine is the preferred adamantane because it has fewer side effects and is better tolerated.
Treatment is stopped 1 to 2 days after symptoms resolve or after 3 to 5 days. For rimantadine or
amantadine, 100 mg po bid can be used. To avoid adverse effects due to drug accumulation, clinicians
reduce the dose for children (2.5 mg/kg bid to a maximum of 150 mg/day for children < 10 yr or 200
mg/day for children ≥ 10 yr). In patients with impaired renal function, dose is adjusted according to
creatinine clearance. The dose of rimantadine should not exceed 100 mg/day if patients have hepatic
dysfunction. Dose-related nervousness, insomnia, or other CNS effects occur in about 10% of people
receiving amantadine and in about 2% of people receiving rimantadine. These effects usually occur
within 48 h after starting the drug, are more prominent in the elderly and in patients with CNS diseases or
impaired renal function, and often resolve during continued use. Anorexia, nausea, and constipation may
also occur.
Prevention
===PAGE:1575===
Influenza infections can largely be prevented by
• Annual vaccination
• Sometimes chemoprophylaxis (ie, with antiviral drugs)
[Table 150-2.
Drug Sensitivities of Various Influenza Strains]
Prevention is indicated for all patients, but is especially important for high-risk patients and health care
practitioners.
Vaccines:
Vaccines are modified annually to include the most prevalent strains (usually 2 strains of
influenza A and 1 of influenza B). When the vaccine contains the same HA and NA as the strains in the
community, vaccination decreases infections by 70 to 90% in healthy adults. In the institutionalized elderly,
vaccines are less effective for prevention but decrease the rate of pneumonia and death by 60 to 80%.
Vaccine-induced immunity is decreased by antigenic drift and is absent if there is antigenic shift.
There are 2 types of vaccine:
• Trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (TIV)
• Live-attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV)
TIV
is given by IM injection. Patients aged 6 mo to 35 mo are given 0.25 mL, and those ≥ 3 yr are given
0.5 mL. Adverse effects are usually limited to mild pain at the injection site; it lasts no more than a few
days. Fever, myalgia, and other systemic effects are uncommon.
LAIV
is given intranasally at a dose of 0.25 mL in each nostril. It may be used for healthy people aged 2
to 49 yr. The vaccine is not recommended for high-risk patients, pregnant women, household contacts of
patients with severe immunodeficiency (eg, with hematopoietic stem cell transplants), or children who are
receiving long-term aspirin therapy. Adverse effects associated with the vaccine are mild; rhinorrhea is the
most common, and mild wheezing may occur. LAIV should not be given to children who are < 5 yr and
have reactive airway disease (eg, known asthma, recurrent or recent wheezing episodes).
For both vaccines, children who are < 8 yr and have not been vaccinated should be given a primary dose
and a booster dose 1 mo apart.
Vaccination recommendations:
Annual vaccination is recommended for
• All children aged 6 mo to 18 yr
• All people ≥ 50 yr
• People who are aged 19 to 49 yr and have chronic health disorders (eg, immunosuppression,
cardiopulmonary disorders, diabetes, renal failure, asthma) or who are residents of long-term care
facilities
• Women who are pregnant or will be pregnant during influenza season
• People who wish to avoid having influenza
• Health care practitioners and other people in contact with people at high risk of influenza (eg,
employees of long-term care facilities, household members and caregivers of at-risk people)
Influenza vaccine is given annually to maintain antibody titers and allow vaccine modification to
compensate for antigenic drift. Vaccine is best given in the fall, so that antibody titers will be high during
the winter influenza season (between November and March in the US).
===PAGE:1576===
Vaccination (both TIV and LAIV) should be avoided in people who
• Have a severe egg allergy
• Previously had a severe reaction to influenza vaccine
• Developed Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) within 6 wk of a previous influenza vaccination (it is not
known whether influenza vaccination increases risk of recurrent GBS in patients who have previously
had GBS that was not related to influenza vaccination)
• Have had GBS in the previous 6 wk, regardless of cause
• Are < 6 mo old
Antiviral drugs:
Although vaccination is the preferred method of prevention, antiviral drugs are also
effective. Prophylactic antiviral drugs are indicated when influenza is circulating in the community for
patients
• Who have been vaccinated only within the previous 2 wk
• For whom vaccination is contraindicated
• Who are immunocompromised and thus may not respond to vaccination
Antiviral drugs do not impair development of immunity from the vaccine. They can be stopped 2 wk after
vaccination. If vaccine cannot be given, antiviral drugs are continued for the duration of the epidemic.
If the circulating influenza types or subtypes are unknown, patients may be treated with either zanamivir
alone (in patients for whom it is not contraindicated) or with a combination of rimantadine and oseltamivir.
Avian Influenza
Avian influenza (bird flu) is caused by strains of influenza A that normally infect only wild birds
(and sometimes pigs). Infections due to these strains have recently been detected in humans.
Most human infections are caused by strains of avian influenza type H5N1, but H7N7, H7N3, and H9N2
have caused some human infections. Infections with these strains are asymptomatic in wild birds but can
cause highly lethal illness in domestic birds.
The first human cases of H5N1 were discovered in Hong Kong in 1997. Spread to humans was contained
by culling domestic bird populations. However, in 2003 and 2004, H5N1 infections in humans reappeared,
and occasional cases continue to be reported, primarily in Asia and the Middle East. Human infections
with other avian influenza strains have also been reported in Asia (H9N2), Canada (H7N3), and the
Netherlands (H7N7). Although most cases occurred through exposure to infected birds, some person-toperson transmission probably occurred in the Netherlands and in Asia.
All influenza viruses are capable of rapid genetic change, raising the possibility that avian strains could
acquire the ability to spread more easily from person to person via direct mutation or via recombination
with human strains in a human or porcine host. Many experts are concerned that if these strains acquire
the ability to spread efficiently from person to person, an influenza pandemic could result.
Human infection with avian influenza H5N1 strains can cause severe respiratory symptoms. Mortality was
33% in the 1997 outbreak and has been > 60% in subsequent infections. Infection with the H7 strains
most commonly causes conjunctivitis, although in the Netherlands outbreak, a few patients had flu-like
symptoms and one patient (of 83) died.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1577===
• RT-PCR
An appropriate clinical syndrome in a patient exposed to a person known to be infected or to birds in an
area with an ongoing avian influenza outbreak should prompt consideration of this infection. History of
recent travel to regions with ongoing transmission from birds to humans (eg, Egypt, Indonesia, Vietnam)
plus exposure to birds or infected people should prompt testing for influenza A by RT-PCR. Culture of the
organism should not be attempted.
Suspected and confirmed cases are reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Treatment
• A neuraminidase inhibitor
Treatment with oseltamivir or zanamivir at usual doses is indicated. The H5N1 virus is resistant to
amantadine and rimantadine; resistance to oseltamivir has also been reported.
H1N1 Swine Influenza
H1N1 swine influenza (flu) is caused by a new strain of H1N1 influenza A virus, which genetically
is a combination of swine, avian, and human influenza viruses.
Most often, pigs are infected by strains of influenza that are slightly different from those that infect people.
These strains very rarely spread to people, and when they do, they very rarely then spread from person
to person. The H1N1 swine flu virus is a combination of swine, bird (avian), and human influenza viruses
that spreads easily from person to person. The infection is not acquired through ingestion of pork and is
acquired very rarely by contact with infected pigs.
In June 2009, the World Health Organization declared H1N1 swine flu a pandemic; it has spread to > 70
countries and to all 50 US states. The majority of the deaths occurred in Mexico. The attack rate and
mortality for H1N1 swine flu are higher in young and middle-aged adults and lower in the elderly than they
are for seasonal flu. The pandemic entered the post-pandemic period in August 2010.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms, signs, and complications resemble those of ordinary influenza (, although
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may be more common. Symptoms are usually mild, but they can become
severe, leading to pneumonia or respiratory failure.
Diagnosis
• Sometimes PCR testing of respiratory samples
Because H1N1 swine flu is the predominant strain of influenza currently circulating worldwide, the
diagnosis should be considered in any patient with influenza-like symptoms.
A newly developed PCR test can detect the H1N1 virus in respiratory tract samples (eg, nasopharyngeal
swabs, nasal washings, tracheal aspirates). Mildly ill patients do not require testing other than for
epidemiologic or surveillance purposes; however, local hospital and public health requirements may vary.
Usual rapid antigen detection tests have decreased sensitivity for H1N1 swine flu and generally have little
clinical use in diagnosis.
Treatment
• Sometimes a neuraminidase inhibitor
Treatment focuses mainly on symptom relief (eg, acetaminophen or ibuprofen for fever
and aches).
Antiviral drugs may be used, particularly for high-risk patients ( and those who are seriously
===PAGE:1578===
ill. Oseltamivir and zanamivir appear to be effective; they are most effective when started within 48 h after
symptom onset. In the US, the FDA has issued Emergency Use Authorizations for the use of oseltamivir in
patients < 1 yr old and the use of peramivir, an IV neuraminidase inhibitor, in severely ill hospitalized
patients.
Most patients recover fully without taking these drugs.
Prevention
Vaccines for H1N1 infection have been developed. Guidelines for use of these vaccines are similar to
those for use of seasonal TIV and LAIV.
Commonsense steps (eg, staying home if influenza-like symptoms develop; thorough, frequent hand
washing with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand sanitizer) are recommended to reduce the spread
of infection.
Parainfluenza Virus Infections
Parainfluenza viruses include several closely related viruses that cause many respiratory
illnesses varying from the common cold to an influenza-like syndrome or pneumonia; croup is
the most common severe manifestation. Diagnosis is usually clinical. Treatment is supportive.
The parainfluenza viruses are paramyxoviruses types 1, 2, 3, and 4. They share antigenic cross-reactivity
but tend to cause diseases of different severity. Type 4 has antigenic cross-reactivity with mumps and
appears to be an uncommon cause of respiratory disease.
Childhood outbreaks of parainfluenza virus infections can occur in nurseries, pediatric wards, and
schools. Types 1 and 2 tend to cause epidemics in the autumn, with each serotype occurring in alternate
years. Type 3 disease is endemic and infects most children < 1 yr; incidence is increased in the spring.
Parainfluenza viruses can cause repeated infections, but reinfection generally causes milder illness.
Thus, in immunocompetent adults, most infections are asymptomatic or mild.
The most common illness in children is an upper respiratory illness with no or low-grade fever.
Parainfluenza type 1 probably causes croup (laryngotracheobronchitis—, primarily in infants
aged 6 to 36 mo. Croup begins with common cold symptoms. Later, fever, a barking cough, hoarseness,
and stridor develop. Respiratory failure due to upper airway obstruction is a rare but potentially fatal
complication.
Parainfluenza virus type 3 may cause pneumonia and bronchiolitis in young infants (. These
illnesses are generally indistinguishable from disease caused by respiratory syncytial virus (see below)
but are often less severe.
A specific viral diagnosis is unnecessary. Treatment is symptomatic.
Respiratory Syncytial Virus and Human Metapneumovirus Infections
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and human metapneumovirus (hMPV) infections cause
seasonal lower respiratory tract disease, particularly in infants and young children. Disease may
be asymptomatic, mild, or severe, including bronchiolitis and pneumonia. Although diagnosis is
usually clinical, laboratory diagnosis is readily available. Treatment is supportive.
RSV
is an RNA virus, classified as a pneumovirus. Subgroups A and B have been identified. RSV is
ubiquitous; almost all children are infected by age 4 yr. Outbreaks occur annually in winter or early spring.
Because the immune response to RSV does not protect against reinfection, the attack rate is about 40%
for all exposed people. However, antibody to RSV decreases illness severity. RSV is the most common
cause of lower respiratory tract illness in young infants and is responsible for > 100,000 hospitalizations
===PAGE:1579===
annually in the US.
hMPV
is a similar but separate virus. The seasonal epidemiology of hMPV appears to be similar to that of
RSV, but the incidence of infection and illness appears to be substantially lower.
Symptoms and Signs
The most recognizable clinical syndromes are bronchiolitis ( and pneumonia. These illnesses
typically begin with upper respiratory symptoms and fever, then progress over several days to dyspnea,
cough, and wheezing. Apnea may be the initial symptom of RSV in infants < 6 mo. In healthy adults and
older children, illness is usually mild and
may be inapparent or manifested only as an afebrile common
cold. However, patients who are elderly or immunocompromised or who have underlying cardiopulmonary
disorders may develop severe disease.
RSV and hMPV illness appear to be similar.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes rapid antigen tests of nasal washings or swabs
RSV (and possibly hMPV) infection is suspected in infants and young children with bronchiolitis or
pneumonia during RSV season. Because antiviral treatment is not typically recommended, a specific
laboratory diagnosis is unnecessary for patient management. However, a laboratory diagnosis may
facilitate hospital infection control by allowing segregation of children infected with the same virus. Rapid
antigen tests with high sensitivities for RSV are available for use in children; nasal washings or swabs are
used. These tests are insensitive in adults.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment of RSV and hMPV infections is supportive and includes supplemental O
and hydration as
needed (see
Bronchiolitis
.
Corticosteroids and bronchodilators are not generally helpful.
Antibiotics are reserved for patients with fever and evidence of pneumonia on chest x-ray (ie, who may
have a bacterial superinfection).
Palivizumab (monoclonal antibody to RSV) is not effective for treatment.
Inhaled ribavirin, an antiviral drug with activity against RSV, has little or no efficacy, is potentially toxic to
health care practitioners, and is no longer recommended except for infection in severely
immunocompromised patients.
Prevention
Contact precautions (eg, hand washing, gloves, isolation) are important, particularly in hospitals.
Passive prophylaxis with palivizumab decreases the frequency of hospitalization in high-risk infants. It is
cost-effective only for infants at high risk of hospitalization (ie, those < 2 yr with hemodynamically
significant congenital heart disease or chronic lung disease requiring medical treatment in the preceding 6
mo, those who were born at < 29 wk gestation and are < 1 yr old at the start of RSV season, and those
who were born at 29 to 32 wk gestation and are < 6 mo at the start of the season). The dose is 15 mg/kg
IM. The first dose is given just before the usual onset of the RSV season (early November in North
America). Subsequent doses are given at 1-mo intervals for the duration of the RSV season (usually a
===PAGE:1580===
total of 5 doses).
Coronaviruses and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus infections in humans most frequently cause common cold symptoms; however, in
2002, a relatively new coronavirus caused an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS), which was much more severe than other coronavirus infections.
Coronaviruses are enveloped RNA viruses. Coronaviruses 229E and OC43 cause the common cold, and
more recently, 2 new serotypes NL63 and HUK1 have also been associated with this syndrome. In late
2002, a relatively new coronavirus (SARS-CoV) caused an outbreak of SARS, an influenza-like illness
that occasionally leads to progressively severe respiratory insufficiency.
SARS-CoV was a new human pathogen that was first detected in the Guangdong province of China in
November 2002 and subsequently spread to >30 countries. As of mid-July 2003, > 8000 cases had been
reported worldwide, with > 800 deaths (about 10% case mortality rate). This outbreak subsided, and no
new cases have been identified since 2004.
Diagnosis is made clinically, and treatment is supportive.
===PAGE:1581===
Chapter 151. Herpesviruses
Introduction
Eight types of herpesviruses infect humans (see
Table 151-1
). After initial infection, all herpesviruses remain latent within specific host cells and may
subsequently reactivate or be shed. Herpesviruses do not survive long outside a host; thus, transmission
usually requires intimate contact, although varicellazoster virus (VZV) may spread by aerosol. In people
with latent infection, the virus can reactivate without causing symptoms; in such cases, asymptomatic
people can transmit infection. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human herpesvirus type 8 (HHV-8), also
known as Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), are tightly linked with cancer.
Drug Treatment of Herpesviruses
Drugs that have activity against herpesviruses include acyclovir, cidofovir, famciclovir, fomivirsen,
foscarnet, ganciclovir, idoxuridine, penciclovir, trifluridine, valacyclovir, valganciclovir, and vidarabine (see
Table 151-2
).
Chickenpox
(Varicella)
Chickenpox is an acute, systemic, usually childhood infection caused by the varicella-zoster
virus (human herpesvirus type 3). It usually begins with mild constitutional symptoms that are
followed shortly by skin lesions appearing
[Table 151-1.
Herpesviruses that Infect Humans]
[Table 151-2.
Drugs Used to Treat Herpesvirus Infections]
in crops and characterized by macules, papules, vesicles, and crusting. Patients at risk of
severe neurologic or other systemic complications (eg, pneumonia) include adults, neonates,
and patients who are immunocompromised or have certain underlying medical conditions.
Diagnosis is clinical. Those at risk of severe complications receive postexposure prophylaxis
with immune globulin and, if disease develops, are treated with antiviral drugs (eg, valacyclovir,
famciclovir, acyclovir). Vaccination provides effective prevention.
Chickenpox is caused by the varicella-zoster virus (human herpesvirus type 3); chickenpox is the acute
invasive phase of the virus, and herpes zoster (shingles) represents reactivation of the latent phase (see
p.
). Chickenpox, which is extremely contagious, is spread by infected droplets and is most
communicable during the prodrome and early stages of the eruption. It is communicable from 48 h before
the first skin lesions appear until the final lesions have crusted. Indirect transmission (by immune carriers)
does not occur.
Epidemics occur in winter and early spring in 3- to 4-yr cycles. Some infants may have partial immunity,
probably acquired transplacentally, until age 6 mo.
Symptoms and Signs
In immunocompetent children, chickenpox is rarely severe. In adults and immunocompromised children,
infection can be serious.
Mild headache, moderate fever, and malaise may occur 11 to 15 days after
exposure, about 24 to 36 h before lesions appear. This prodrome is more likely in patients > 10 yr and is
usually more severe in adults.
The initial rash, a macular eruption, may be accompanied by an evanescent flush. Within a few hours,
lesions progress to papules and then characteristic, sometimes pathognomonic teardrop vesicles, often
intensely itchy, on red bases. The lesions become pustular and then crust. Lesions initially develop on the
face and trunk and erupt in successive crops; some macules appear just as earlier crops begin to crust.
===PAGE:1582===
The eruption may be generalized (in severe cases) or more limited but almost always involves the upper
trunk. Ulcerated lesions may develop on the mucous membranes, including the oropharynx and upper
respiratory tract, palpebral conjunctiva, and rectal and vaginal mucosa. In the mouth, vesicles rupture
immediately, are indistinguishable from those of herpetic gingivostomatitis, and often cause pain during
swallowing. Scalp lesions may result in tender, enlarged suboccipital and posterior cervical lymph nodes.
New lesions usually cease to appear by the 5th day, and the majority are crusted by the 6th day; most
crusts disappear < 20 days after onset.
Complications:
Secondary bacterial infection (typically streptococcal or staphylococcal) of the vesicles
may occur, causing cellulitis or rarely streptococcal toxic shock. Pneumonia may complicate severe
chickenpox in adults, neonates, and immunocompromised patients of all ages but usually not in
immunocompetent young children. Myocarditis, transient arthritis or hepatitis, and hemorrhagic
complications may also occur.
Encephalopathy occurs in < 1/1000 cases, usually as the disease resolves or within the next 2 wk.
Complete neurologic recovery is likely, although rarely, persistent deficits or death occurs. One of the
most common neurologic complications is acute postinfectious cerebellar ataxia. Transverse myelitis,
cranial nerve palsies, and multiple sclerosis-like clinical manifestations have also occurred. Reye's
syndrome (, a rare but severe childhood complication, may begin 3 to 8 days after onset of
the rash; aspirin increases the risk. In adults, encephalitis, which can be life threatening, occurs in 1 to
2/1000 cases of chickenpox.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Chickenpox is suspected in patients with the characteristic rash, which is usually the basis for diagnosis.
The rash may be confused with that of other viral skin infections. If the diagnosis is in doubt, laboratory
confirmation can be done; it requires immunofluorescent detection of viral antigen in lesions or culture or
serologic findings. Samples are generally obtained with scraping and transported to the laboratory in viral
media.
Prognosis
Chickenpox in children is rarely severe. Severe or fatal disease is more likely in adults, patients with
depressed T-cell immunity (eg, lymphoreticular cancer), and those receiving corticosteroids or
chemotherapy.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment
• Valacyclovir or famciclovir for patients ≥ 12 yr, immunocompromised patients, and others at risk of
severe disease
Mild cases require only symptomatic treatment. Relief of itching and prevention of scratching, which
predisposes to secondary bacterial infection, may be difficult. Wet compresses or, for severe itching,
systemic antihistamines and colloidal oatmeal baths may help. Simultaneous use of large doses of
systemic and topical antihistamines can cause encephalopathy and should be avoided.
To prevent secondary bacterial infection, patients should bathe regularly and keep their underclothing
and hands clean and their nails clipped. Antiseptics should not be applied unless lesions become
infected; infection is treated with antibiotics.
Oral antivirals, when given to immunocompetent patients within 24 h of the rash's onset, slightly decrease
symptom duration and severity. However, because the disease is generally benign in children, antiviral
treatment is not routinely recommended. Oral valacyclovir, famciclovir, or acyclovir should be strongly
considered for immunocompromised patients and for healthy people at risk of moderate to severe
===PAGE:1583===
disease, including all patients ≥ 12 yr, those with skin disorders (particularly eczema) or chronic lung
disease, and those receiving corticosteroid therapy. The dose is famciclovir 500 mg tid or valacyclovir 1 g
tid. Acyclovir is a less desirable choice because it has poorer oral bioavailability, but it can be given at 20
mg/kg qid with a maximum daily dose of 3200 mg. Immunocompromised children > 1 yr should be given
500 mg/m
q 8 h.
Patients should not return to school or work until the final lesions have crusted.
Prevention
Infection provides lifelong protection. Potentially susceptible people should take strict precautions to avoid
people capable of transmitting the infection.
Vaccination:
All healthy children and susceptible adults should receive 2 doses of live-attenuated
varicella vaccine (see
Table 268-10
. Vaccination is particularly important for women of child-bearing age and adults
with underlying chronic medical conditions. Serologic testing to determine immune status before
vaccination in adults is usually not required. Although the vaccine may cause chickenpox in
immunocompetent patients, disease is usually mild (< 10 papules or vesicles) and brief and causes few
systemic symptoms.
Vaccination is contraindicated
in
• Patients with moderate to severe concurrent illness
• Immunocompromised patients
• Pregnant women
• Patients taking high doses of systemic corticosteroids
• Children using salicylates
Postexposure prophylaxis:
After exposure, chickenpox can be prevented or attenuated by IM
administration of varicella-zoster immune globulin, which is available as an investigational new drug from
FFF Enterprises (800-843-7477). Candidates for postexposure prophylaxis include people with leukemia,
immunodeficiencies, or other severe debilitating illness; susceptible pregnant women; and neonates
whose mother developed chickenpox within 5 days before or 2 days after delivery. The immune globulin
should be given within 4 days of exposure and may modify or prevent varicella. Vaccination should be
given as soon as possible in susceptible healthy patients eligible for vaccination, and vaccination can be
effective in preventing or ameliorating disease within 3 days and possibly up to 5 days after exposure.
Cytomegalovirus Infection
(Cytomegalic Inclusion Disease)
(See also
Congenital and Perinatal Cytomegalovirus Infection
)
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) can cause infections that have a wide range of severity. A syndrome
that is similar to infectious mononucleosis but lacks severe pharyngitis is common. Severe
focal disease, including retinitis, can develop in HIV-infected patients and, rarely, in organ
transplant recipients and other immunocompromised patients. Severe systemic disease can
develop in neonates and immunocompromised patients. Laboratory diagnosis, helpful for
severe disease, may involve culture, serologic testing, biopsy, or antigen or nucleic acid
detection. Ganciclovir and other antiviral drugs are used to treat severe disease, particularly
retinitis.
CMV (human herpesvirus type 5) is transmitted through blood, body fluids, or transplanted organs.
===PAGE:1584===
Infection may be acquired transplacentally or during birth. Prevalence increases with age; 60 to 90% of
adults have had CMV infection. Lower socioeconomic groups tend to have a higher prevalence.
Congenital infection ( may be asymptomatic or may cause abortion, stillbirth, or postnatal
death. Complications include extensive hepatic or CNS damage.
Acquired infections are often asymptomatic. An acute febrile illness, termed CMV mononucleosis or CMV
hepatitis, may cause hepatitis with elevated aminotransferases, atypical lymphocytosis similar to
infectious (Epstein-Barr virus [EBV]) mononucleosis, and splenomegaly.
Postperfusion/posttransfusion syndrome can develop 2 to 4 wk after transfusion with blood products
containing CMV. It causes fever lasting 2 to 3 wk and manifestations similar to CMV hepatitis.
In immunocompromised patients, CMV is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Disease often results
from reactivation of latent virus. The lungs, GI tract, or CNS may be involved. In the terminal phase of
AIDS, CMV infection causes retinitis in up to 40% of patients and causes funduscopically visible retinal
abnormalities. Ulcerative disease of the colon (with abdominal pain and GI bleeding) or of the esophagus
(with odynophagia) may occur.
Diagnosis
• Usually clinical evaluation
• Urine culture in infants
• Often biopsy in immunocompromised patients
CMV infection is suspected in healthy people with mononucleosis-like syndromes; immunocompromised
patients with GI, CNS, or retinal symptoms; and neonates with systemic disease.
CMV mononucleosis can sometimes be differentiated from infectious (EBV) mononucleosis by the
absence of pharyngitis, a negative heterophil antibody test, and serologic testing. CMV infection can be
differentiated from viral hepatitis by hepatitis serologic testing. Laboratory confirmation of primary CMV
infection is necessary only to differentiate it from other, particularly treatable, conditions or serious
disease.
Seroconversion can be demonstrated by development of CMV antibodies and indicates new CMV
infection. However, much CMV disease occurs from reactivation of latent disease in the
immunocompromised host. Reactivation of CMV can result in virus in the urine, other body fluids, or
tissues but does not always indicate disease and may merely represent shedding. Therefore, biopsy
showing CMV-induced abnormalities is often necessary to demonstrate invasive disease. Quantitative
detection of CMV antigen or DNA in the peripheral blood can also be very helpful because elevated or
rising CMV titers are often highly suggestive of invasive disease. Diagnosis in infants can be made by
urine culture.
Treatment
• For serious disease, antivirals (eg, ganciclovir, valganciclovir, foscarnet, cidofovir)
Retinitis:
CMV retinitis (, which occurs mostly in AIDS patients, is treated with antivirals.
Most patients receive induction therapy with either ganciclovir 5 mg/kg IV bid for 2 to 3 wk or
valganciclovir 900 mg po bid for 21 days. If induction fails more than once, another drug should be used.
After induction, patients receive maintenance or suppressive therapy with valganciclovir 900 mg po
once/day to delay progression. Maintenance therapy with ganciclovir 5 mg/kg IV once/day can also be
used to prevent recurrence. Alternatively, foscarnet can be given with or without ganciclovir. Foscarnet 90
mg/kg IV q 12 h for 2 to 3 wk is used for induction, followed by 90 to 120 mg/kg IV once/day for
===PAGE:1585===
maintenance therapy. Adverse effects of IV foscarnet are significant and include nephrotoxicity,
symptomatic hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypokalemia, and CNS effects.
Combination therapy with ganciclovir and foscarnet increases efficacy as well as adverse effects.
Cidofovir therapy consists of 5 mg/kg IV once/wk (induction) for 2 wk, followed by a similar dose every
other week for maintenance. Efficacy is similar to ganciclovir or foscarnet. Significant adverse effects,
including renal failure, limit its use. Cidofovir may cause iritis or ocular hypotony. The potential for
nephrotoxicity can be reduced by giving probenecid and prehydration with each dose. However, the
adverse effects of probenecid, including rash, headache, and fever, may be significant enough to prevent
its use.
Ganciclovir ocular implants can be used for prolonged treatment in some patients. Intraocular injections
into the vitreous are given sometimes, primarily if other measures have failed or are contraindicated
(salvage therapy). Such treatments include injection of ganciclovir or foscarnet. Potential adverse effects
of ocular injection therapy include direct retinal toxicity, vitreous hemorrhage, endophthalmitis, retinal
detachment, cystoid macular edema, and cataract formation.
Even patients receiving ocular injections and those with implants need systemic therapy to prevent CMV
in the contralateral eye and extraocular tissues. Ultimately, improvement of CD4+ count to > 200 cells/
μ
L
with systemic retroviral therapy should prevent the need for ocular implants and chemoprophylaxis.
Other CMV infections:
Anti-CMV drugs are used to treat severe disease other than retinitis but are less
consistently effective than in retinitis. Ganciclovir plus immune globulin has been used to treat CMV
pneumonia in bone marrow transplant recipients.
Prevention
Prophylaxis of CMV disease is necessary for solid organ or hematopoietic cell transplant recipients at risk
of CMV disease. Drugs used include ganciclovir, valganciclovir, and valacyclovir.
Herpes Simplex Virus Infections
Herpes simplex viruses (human herpesviruses 1 and 2) commonly cause recurrent infection
affecting the skin, mouth, lips, eyes, and genitals. Common severe infections include
encephalitis, meningitis, neonatal herpes, and, in immunocompromised patients, disseminated
infection. Mucocutaneous infections cause clusters of small painful vesicles on an
erythematous base. Diagnosis is clinical; laboratory confirmation by culture, PCR, direct
immunofluorescence, or serologic testing can be done. Treatment is symptomatic; antiviral
therapy with acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir is helpful for severe infections and, if begun
early, for recurrent or primary infections.
Both types of herpes simplex virus (HSV), HSV-1 and HSV-2, can cause oral or genital infection. Most
often, HSV-1 causes gingivostomatitis, herpes labialis, and herpes keratitis. HSV-2 usually causes genital
lesions. Transmission of HSV results from close contact with a person who is actively shedding virus.
Viral shedding generally occurs from lesions but can occur even when lesions are not apparent.
After the initial infection, HSV remains dormant in nerve ganglia, from which it can periodically emerge,
causing symptoms. Recurrent herpetic eruptions are precipitated by overexposure to sunlight, febrile
illnesses, physical or emotional stress, immunosuppression, or unknown stimuli. Generally, recurrent
eruptions are less severe and occur less frequently over time.
Diseases Caused by Herpes Simplex
Diseases include
• Mucocutaneous infection (most common)
• Ocular infection (herpes keratitis)
===PAGE:1586===
• CNS infection
• Neonatal herpes
HSV rarely causes fulminant hepatitis in the absence of cutaneous lesions. In patients with HIV infection,
herpetic infections can be particularly severe. Progressive and persistent esophagitis, colitis, perianal
ulcers, pneumonia, encephalitis, and meningitis may occur.
HSV outbreaks may be followed by erythema multiforme (, possibly caused by an immune
reaction to the virus. Eczema herpeticum ( is a complication of HSV infection in which severe
disease develops in skin regions with eczema.
Mucocutaneous infection:
Lesions may appear anywhere on the skin or mucosa but are most frequent
around or in the mouth or on the lips, conjunctiva and cornea, and genitals. Generally, after a prodromal
period (typically < 6 h in recurrent HSV-1) of tingling discomfort or itching, clusters of small, tense vesicles
appear on an erythematous base. Clusters vary in size from 0.5 to 1.5 cm but may coalesce. Lesions on
the nose, ears, eyes, fingers, or genitals may be particularly painful. Vesicles typically persist for a few
days, then rupture and dry, forming a thin, yellowish crust. Healing generally occurs 8 to 12 days after
onset. Lesions usually heal completely, but recurrent lesions at the same site may cause atrophy and
scarring. Skin lesions can develop secondary bacterial infection. In patients with depressed cell-mediated
immunity due to HIV infection or other conditions, prolonged or progressive lesions may persist for weeks
or longer. Localized infections can disseminate, particularly—and often dramatically—in
immunocompromised patients.
Acute herpetic gingivostomatitis
usually results from primary infection with HSV-1, typically in children.
Occasionally, through oral-genital contact, the cause is HSV-2. Intraoral and gingival vesicles rupture,
usually within several hours to 1 or 2 days, to form ulcers. Fever and pain often occur. Difficulty eating
and drinking may lead to dehydration. After resolution, the virus resides dormant in the semilunar
ganglion.
Herpes labialis
is usually a secondary outbreak of HSV. It develops as ulcers (cold sores) on the
vermilion border of the lip or, much less commonly, as ulcerations of the mucosa of the hard palate.
Herpetic whitlow,
a swollen, painful, erythematous lesion of the distal phalanx (, results from
inoculation of HSV through the skin and is most common among health care practitioners.
Genital herpes
is the most common ulcerative sexually transmitted disease in developed countries. It is
usually caused by HSV-2, although 10 to 30% of cases involve HSV-1. Primary lesions develop 4 to 7
days after contact. The vesicles usually erode to form ulcers that may coalesce. Lesions may occur on
the prepuce, glans penis, and penile shaft in men and on the labia, clitoris, perineum, vagina, and cervix
in women. They may occur around the anus and in the rectum in men or women who engage in receptive
rectal intercourse. Genital HSV infection may cause urinary hesitancy, dysuria, urinary retention, or
constipation. Severe sacral neuralgia may occur. Scarring may follow healing, and recurrences occur in
80% of patients with HSV-2 and in 50% with HSV-1. Primary genital lesions are usually more painful,
prolonged, and widespread and are more likely to be bilateral and involve regional adenopathy and
constitutional symptoms than recurrent genital lesions. Recurrent lesions may have severe prodromal
symptoms and may involve the buttock, groin, or thigh.
Herpes simplex keratitis:
HSV infection of the corneal epithelium causes pain, tearing, photophobia,
and corneal ulcers that often have a branching pattern (.
Neonatal herpes simplex:
Infection develops in neonates, including those whose mothers have no
suggestion of current or past herpes infection. It is most commonly transmitted during birth through
contact with vaginal secretions containing HSV and usually involves
HSV-2. It usually develops between
the 1st and 4th wk of life, often causing mucocutaneous vesicles or CNS involvement. It causes major
morbidity and mortality (.
===PAGE:1587===
CNS infection:
Herpes encephalitis (see also p.
) occurs sporadically and may be severe. Multiple
early seizures are characteristic.
Aseptic meningitis ( may result from HSV-2. It is usually self-limited and may involve lumbosacral myeloradiculitis, which
may cause urinary retention or obstipation.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Viral culture for serious disease
• PCR of CSF and MRI for HSV encephalitis
Diagnosis is often clinical based on characteristic lesions. Laboratory confirmation can be helpful,
especially if infection is severe, the patient is immunocompromised or pregnant, or lesions are atypical. A
Tzanck test (a superficial scraping from the base of a freshly ruptured vesicle stained with Wright'sGiemsa stain) often reveals multinucleate giant cells in HSV or varicella-zoster virus infection. Definitive
diagnosis is with culture, seroconversion involving the appropriate serotype (in primary infections), and
biopsy. Fluid and material for culture should be obtained from the base of a vesicle or of a freshly
ulcerated lesion. HSV can sometimes be identified using direct immunofluorescence assay of scrapings
of lesions. PCR of CSF and MRI are used to diagnose HSV encephalitis.
HSV should be distinguished from herpes zoster, which rarely recurs and usually causes more severe
pain and larger groups of lesions that are distributed along a dermatome. Clusters of vesicles or ulcers on
an erythematous base are unusual in genital ulcers other than herpes.
If herpes infections recur frequently, do not resolve, or do not respond to antiviral drugs as expected,
immunocompromise, possibly due to HIV infection, should be suspected.
Treatment
• Usually acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir
• For keratitis, topical idoxuridine or trifluridine
Mucocutaneous infection:
Isolated infections often go untreated without consequence. Acyclovir,
valacyclovir, or famciclovir can be used to treat infection, especially when it is primary. Infection with
acyclovir-resistant HSV is rare and occurs almost exclusively in immunocompromised patients. Foscarnet
may be effective for acyclovir-resistant infections. Secondary bacterial infections are treated with topical
antibiotics (eg, mupirocin or neomycin-bacitracin) or, if severe, with systemic antibiotics (eg, penicillinaseresistant
β
-lactams). All mucocutaneous herpes infections are treated symptomatically. Systemic
analgesics may help.
Gingivostomatitis typically requires only symptom relief with topical anesthetics applied directly with a
swab (eg, dyclonine 0.5% liquid or benzocaine 2 to 20% ointment q 2 h as needed). When many large
areas are affected, 5% lidocaine viscous may be used as a mouth rinse 5 min before mealtime. (NOTE:
Lidocaine must not be swallowed because it anesthetizes the oropharynx, hypopharynx, and possibly the
epiglottis. Children must be watched for signs of aspiration.) Severe cases can be treated with acyclovir,
valacyclovir, or famciclovir.
Herpes labialis
responds to oral and topical acyclovir. The duration of a recurrent eruption may be
decreased by about a day by applying penciclovir 1% cream q 2 h while awake for 4 days, beginning
during the prodrome or when the first lesion appears. Toxicity appears to be minimal. Famciclovir 1500 mg
as one dose or valacyclovir 2 g po q 12 h for 1 day can be used to treat recurrent herpes labialis.
Acyclovir-resistant strains are resistant to penciclovir. Docosanol 10% cream may be effective when used
5 times/day.
===PAGE:1588===
Genital herpes
is treated with antiviral drugs. Acyclovir 200 mg po 5 times/day for 10 days, valacyclovir 1
g po bid for 10 days, or famciclovir 250 mg po tid for 7 to 10 days can be used for primary eruptions.
These drugs reduce viral shedding and symptoms in severe primary infections. However, even early
treatment of primary infections does not prevent recurrences.
In recurrent eruptions, symptom duration and severity can be reduced marginally by antiviral treatment,
particularly during the prodromal phase. Acyclovir 200 mg po q 4 h for 5 days, valacyclovir 500 mg po bid
for 3 days, or famciclovir 1000 mg po bid for 1 day can be used. Patients with frequent eruptions (eg, > 6
eruptions/yr) may receive suppressive antiviral therapy with acyclovir 400 mg po bid, valacyclovir 500 to
1000 mg po once/day, or famciclovir 250 mg po bid. Doses should be adjusted for renal insufficiency.
Adverse effects are infrequent with oral administration but may include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
headache, and rash.
Herpes simplex keratitis:
Treatment involves topical antivirals, such as idoxuridine or trifluridine, and
should be supervised by an ophthalmologist (.
Neonatal herpes simplex:
Acyclovir 20 mg/kg IV q 8 h for 14 to 21 days should be used. A dose of 20
mg/kg IV q 8 h for 21 days is indicated for CNS and disseminated HSV disease.
CNS infection:
Encephalitis is treated with acyclovir 10 mg/kg IV q 8 h for 14 to 21 days. Up to 20 mg/kg
IV q 8 h can be used in children. Aseptic meningitis is usually treated with IV acyclovir. Acyclovir is
generally very well tolerated. However, adverse effects can include phlebitis, renal dysfunction, and,
rarely, neurotoxicity (lethargy, confusion, seizures, coma).
Herpes Zoster
(Shingles; Acute Posterior Ganglionitis)
Herpes zoster is infection that results when varicella-zoster virus reactivates from its latent
state in a posterior dorsal root ganglion. Symptoms usually begin with pain along the affected
dermatome, followed in 2 to 3 days by a vesicular eruption that is usually diagnostic. Treatment
is antiviral drugs and possibly corticosteroids given within 72 h after skin lesions appear.
Chickenpox and herpes zoster are caused by the varicella-zoster virus (human herpesvirus type 3);
chickenpox is the acute invasive phase of the virus (, and herpes zoster (shingles)
represents reactivation of the latent phase. Herpes zoster inflames the sensory root ganglia, the skin of
the associated dermatome, and sometimes the posterior and anterior horns of the gray matter, meninges,
and dorsal and ventral roots. Herpes zoster frequently occurs in elderly and HIV-infected patients and is
more severe in immunocompromised patients. There are no clear-cut precipitants.
Symptoms and Signs
Lancinating, dysesthetic, or other pain develops in the involved site, followed in 2 to 3 days by a rash,
usually crops of vesicles on an erythematous base. The site is usually one or more adjacent dermatomes
in the thoracic or lumbar region. Lesions are typically unilateral. The site is usually hyperesthetic, and
pain may be severe. Lesions usually continue to form for about 3 to 5 days. Herpes zoster may
disseminate to other regions of the skin and to visceral organs, especially in immunocompromised
patients.
Fewer than 4% of patients with herpes zoster experience another outbreak. However, many, particularly
the elderly, have persistent or recurrent pain in the involved distribution (postherpetic neuralgia), which
may persist for months, years, or permanently. Infection in the trigeminal nerve is particularly likely to lead
to severe, persistent pain. The pain of postherpetic neuralgia may be sharp and intermittent or constant
and may be debilitating.
Geniculate zoster
(Ramsay Hunt syndrome) results from involvement of the geniculate ganglion. Ear
pain, facial paralysis, and sometimes vertigo occur. Vesicles erupt in the external auditory canal, and taste
===PAGE:1589===
may be lost in the anterior two thirds of the tongue (see also
Herpes Zoster Oticus
.
Ophthalmic herpes zoster
(see also p.
) results from involvement of the gasserian ganglion, with
pain and vesicular eruption in and around the eye, in the distribution of the ophthalmic division of the 5th
cranial nerve. Vesicles on the tip of the nose (Hutchinson's sign) indicate involvement of the nasociliary
branch and often severe ocular disease. However, eye involvement may occur in the absence of lesions
on the tip of the nose.
Intraoral zoster
is uncommon but may produce a sharp unilateral distribution of lesions. No intraoral
prodromal symptoms occur.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Herpes zoster is suspected in patients with the characteristic rash and sometimes in patients with typical
pain in a dermatomal distribution. Diagnosis is usually based on the virtually pathognomonic rash. If the
diagnosis is equivocal, detecting multinucleate giant cells with a Tzanck test can confirm infection, but the
Tzanck test is positive with herpes zoster or herpes simplex. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) may cause
nearly identical lesions, but unlike herpes zoster, HSV tends to recur and is not dermatomal. Viruses can
be differentiated by culture. Antigen detection from a biopsy sample can be useful.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment
• Antivirals (acyclovir, famciclovir, valacyclovir) for immunocompromised or pregnant patients
Wet compresses are soothing, but systemic analgesics are often necessary. Treatment with
oral antivirals
decreases the severity and duration of the acute eruption, the incidence of postherpetic neuralgia, and
the rate of serious complications in immunocompromised patients and pregnant women. Treatment
should start as soon as possible, ideally during the prodrome, and is likely to be ineffective if given > 72 h
after skin lesions appear. Famciclovir 500 mg po tid for 7 days and valacyclovir 1 g po tid for 7 days have
better bioavailability with oral dosing than acyclovir, and therefore for herpes zoster, they are generally
preferred to oral acyclovir 800 mg 5 times/day for 7 to 10 days. Corticosteroids moderately increase the
rate of healing and resolution of acute pain but do not decrease the incidence of postherpetic neuralgia.
For immunocompromised patients, acyclovir is recommended at a dosage of 10 mg/kg IV q 8 h for 7 days
for adults and 20 mg/kg IV q 8 h for 7 days for children < 12 yr.
Management of postherpetic neuralgia can be particularly difficult. Treatments include gabapentin, cyclic
antidepressants, and topical capsaicin or lidocaine ointment. Opioid analgesics may be necessary.
Intrathecal methylprednisolone may be of benefit.
For treatment of ophthalmic herpes zoster, an ophthalmologist should be consulted (. For
treatment of otic herpes zoster, an otolaryngologist should be consulted (.
Prevention
Prevention involves preventing primary infection (chickenpox) by giving the varicella vaccine ( to children and susceptible adults. Adults ≥ 60 yr should have a single dose of zoster vaccine (a
more potent preparation of varicella vaccine) whether they have had herpes zoster or not. This vaccine
has been shown to decrease the incidence of zoster.
Infectious Mononucleosis
Infectious mononucleosis is caused by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, human herpesvirus type 4),
characterized by fatigue, fever, pharyngitis, and lymphadenopathy. Fatigue may persist weeks
===PAGE:1590===
or months. Severe complications, including splenic rupture and neurologic syndromes,
occasionally occur. Diagnosis is clinical or with EBV serologic testing. Treatment is supportive.
EBV is a herpesvirus that infects 50% of children before age 5. Its host is humans.
Pathophysiology
After initial replication in the nasopharynx, the virus infects B cells, which are induced to secrete
immunoglobulins, including heterophil antibodies. Morphologically abnormal (atypical) lymphocytes
develop, mainly from CD8+ T cells.
After primary infection, EBV remains within the host, primarily in B cells, for life and undergoes intermittent
asymptomatic shedding from the oropharynx. The virus is detectable in oropharyngeal secretions of 15 to
25% of healthy EBV-seropositive adults. Shedding increases in frequency and titer in
immunocompromised patients (eg, organ allograft recipients, HIV-infected people).
EBV has not been recovered from environmental sources and is not very contagious. Transmission may
occur via transfusion of blood products but much more frequently occurs via kissing between an
uninfected and an EBV-seropositive person who is shedding the virus asymptomatically. Only about 5% of
patients acquire EBV from someone who has acute infection. Early childhood transmission occurs more
frequently among lower socioeconomic groups and in crowded conditions.
Complications:
EBV is statistically associated with and likely has a causal role in Burkitt's lymphoma,
certain B-cell tumors in immunocompromised patients, and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. EBV does not
cause chronic fatigue syndrome. However, it may occasionally cause a syndrome of fever, interstitial
pneumonitis, pancytopenia, and uveitis (ie, chronic active EBV).
Symptoms and Signs
In most young children, primary EBV infection is asymptomatic. Symptoms of infectious mononucleosis
develop most often in older children and adults.
The incubation period is about 30 to 50 days. The triad of fever, pharyngitis, and adenopathy is present
in most patients. Fatigue can last months but is usually maximal during the first 2 to 3 wk. Fever usually
peaks in the afternoon or early evening, with a temperature around 39.5° C, although it may reach 40.5°
C. Pharyngitis may be severe, painful, and exudative and may resemble streptococcal pharyngitis.
Adenopathy is usually
symmetric and may involve any group of nodes, particularly the anterior and
posterior cervical chains. Adenopathy may be the only manifestation.
Splenomegaly, which occurs in about 50% of cases, is maximal during the 2nd and 3rd wk and usually
results in only a barely palpable splenic tip. Mild hepatomegaly and hepatic percussion tenderness may
occur. Patients may have periorbital edema and palatal petechiae. Less frequent findings include
maculopapular eruptions and jaundice.
Complications:
Although recovery is usually complete, complications may be dramatic.
Neurologic complications
are rare but may include encephalitis, seizures, Guillain-Barre syndrome,
peripheral neuropathy, aseptic meningitis, myelitis, cranial nerve palsies, and psychosis. Encephalitis may
manifest with cerebellar dysfunction, or it may be global and rapidly progressive, similar to herpes simplex
encephalitis, but is usually self-limited.
Hematologic complications
are usually self-limited. They include granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia,
and hemolytic anemia. Transient mild granulocytopenia or thrombocytopenia occurs in about 50% of
patients; severe cases, associated with bacterial infection or bleeding, occur less frequently. Hemolytic
anemia is often due to anti-i-specific antibodies.
Splenic rupture
can have severe consequences. It can result from splenic enlargement and capsular
swelling, which are maximal 10 to 21 days after presentation. A history of trauma is present only about
===PAGE:1591===
half of the time. Rupture is usually painful but occasionally causes painless hypotension. Treatment is
discussed elsewhere.
Respiratory complications
include, rarely, upper airway obstruction due to pharyngeal or paratracheal
lymphadenopathy; respiratory complications may respond to corticosteroids. Clinically silent interstitial
pulmonary infiltrates occur mostly in children and are usually visible on x-rays.
Hepatic complications
include elevated aminotransferase levels (about 2 to 3 times normal, returning to
baseline over 3 to 4 wk); they occur in about 95% of patients. If jaundice or more severe enzyme
elevations occur, other causes of hepatitis should be investigated.
Overwhelming infection with EBV occurs sporadically but may cluster in families, particularly those with Xlinked lymphoproliferative syndrome (see also p.
). Survivors of overwhelming primary EBV infection
are at risk of developing agammaglobulinemia or lymphoma.
Diagnosis
• Heterophil antibody test
• Sometimes EBV serologic testing
Infectious mononucleosis should be suspected in patients with typical symptoms and signs. Exudative
pharyngitis, anterior cervical lymphadenopathy, and fever may be clinically indistinguishable from those
caused by group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci. However, posterior cervical or generalized adenopathy or
hepatosplenomegaly suggests infectious mononucleosis. Moreover, detection of streptococci in the
oropharynx does not exclude infectious mononucleosis.
Primary HIV infection ( can produce a clinical picture resembling acute EBV infection. If
patients have risk factors for HIV infection, quantitative HIV RNA viral blood count, p24 antigen assay, and
CD4 count, plus EBV serologic testing, should be done. HIV enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA)/Western blot is usually negative during the acute infection and thus is not useful in early primary
HIV infection.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) may cause a syndrome similar to infectious mononucleosis, with atypical
lymphocytosis as well as hepatosplenomegaly and hepatitis but usually not with severe pharyngitis.
Toxoplasmosis, hepatitis B, rubella, or atypical lymphocytes associated with adverse drug reactions can
also cause infectious mononucleosis-like syndromes. These syndromes can usually be distinguished by
their other clinical features or by specific testing.
Laboratory diagnosis usually involves a CBC and EBV serologic testing. Lymphocytes that are
morphologically atypical account for up to 80% of the WBCs. Although individual lymphocytes may
resemble leukemic lymphocytes, lymphocytes are heterogeneous, which is unlikely in leukemia. Atypical
lymphocytes may also be present in HIV or CMV infection, hepatitis B, influenza B, rubella, or other viral
illnesses, so diagnosis requires serologic testing. However, very high atypical lymphocyte counts are
typically seen only in primary EBV and CMV infection. Two serologic tests are used to diagnose acute
EBV infection: heterophil antibody testing and specific EBV antibody testing.
Heterophil antibodies are measured using various card-agglutination (monospot) tests. However,
heterophil antibodies are present in only 50% of patients < 5 yr and in about 80 to 90% of adolescents
and adults. Importantly, the heterophil antibody test may be false-positive in some patients with acute HIV
infection. The
titer and prevalence of heterophil antibodies rise during the 2nd and 3rd wk of illness.
Thus, if the diagnosis is strongly suspected but the heterophil antibody test is negative, repeating the test
after 7 to 10 days of symptoms is reasonable. If the test remains negative, antibodies to EBV should be
measured. The presence of IgM antibodies to the EBV viral capsid antigen (VCA) indicates primary EBV
infection (these antibodies disappear within 3 mo after infection). EBV VCA-IgG antibodies develop later
(perhaps after 8 wk) in acute EBV infection and persist for life. If EBV antibody titers are negative or
indicate remote infection (ie, positive for IgG antibodies and negative for IgM antibodies), other diagnoses
(eg, acute HIV infection, CMV infection) should be considered.
===PAGE:1592===
Prognosis
Infectious mononucleosis is usually self-limited. Duration of illness varies; the acute phase lasts about 2
wk. Generally, 20% of patients can return to school or work within 1 wk, and 50% within 2 wk. Fatigue
may persist for several more weeks or, in 1 to 2% of cases, for months. Death occurs in < 1%, mostly
resulting from complications (eg, encephalitis, splenic rupture, airway obstruction).
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Corticosteroids possibly helpful for severe disease
Treatment is supportive. Patients are encouraged to rest during the acute phase but can resume activity
when fever, pharyngitis, and malaise abate. To prevent splenic rupture, patients should avoid heavy lifting
and contact sports for 1 mo after presentation and until splenomegaly (which can be monitored by
ultrasonography) resolves.
Although corticosteroids hasten defervescence and relieve pharyngitis, they generally should not be used
in uncomplicated disease. Corticosteroids can be helpful for complications such as impending airway
obstruction, severe thrombocytopenia, and hemolytic anemia. Although oral or IV acyclovir decreases
oropharyngeal shedding of EBV, there is no convincing evidence to warrant its clinical use.
Roseola Infantum
(Exanthem Subitum; Pseudorubella)
Roseola infantum is an infection of infants or very young children caused by human
herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) or, less commonly, HHV-7. The infection causes high fever and a
rubelliform eruption that occurs during or after defervescence, but localizing symptoms or signs
are absent. Diagnosis is clinical, and treatment is symptomatic.
Roseola infantum is the most well-described illness to result from HHV-6. HHV-6 may also cause visceral
disease in immunocompromised patients (eg, organ transplant recipients). Roseola infantum occurs most
often in the spring and fall. Minor local epidemics have been reported.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is about 5 to 15 days. Fever of 39.5 to 40.5° C begins abruptly and persists 3 to 5
days without any localizing symptoms or signs. Despite the high fever, the child is usually alert and active,
although febrile seizures may occur. Cervical and posterior auricular lymphadenopathy often develops.
Encephalitis or hepatitis occurs rarely.
The fever usually falls rapidly on the 4th day, and when the fall occurs, a macular or maculopapular
exanthem usually appears prominently on the chest and abdomen and, to a lesser extent, on the face and
extremities; it lasts for a few hours to 2 days and may be unnoticed in mild cases. In 70% of HHV-6
infections, the classic exanthem does not occur.
Diagnosis
If roseola is known to be in the community, it may be suspected when a child aged 6 mo to 3 yr develops
typical symptoms and signs. Testing is rarely needed, but diagnosis can be confirmed by culture, PCR, or
serologic tests.
Treatment
Treatment is generally symptomatic. Foscarnet or ganciclovir have been used to treat some
===PAGE:1593===
immunosuppressed patients with severe disease, although controlled trials are lacking. Foscarnet is more
consistently active than ganciclovir against HHV-6.
===PAGE:1594===
Chapter 152. Enteroviruses
Introduction
Enteroviruses include
• Coxsackieviruses A1 to A22, A24, and B1 to 6
• Echoviruses (enteric cytopathic human orphan viruses) 1 to 7, 9, 11 to 21, 24 to 27, and 29 to 33
• Enteroviruses 68 to 71, 73 to 91, and 100 to 101
• Polioviruses types 1 to 3
Enteroviruses, along with rhinoviruses (see
Common Cold
 and human parechoviruses, are
picornaviruses (
pico
, or small, RNA viruses). Human parechoviruses types 1 and 2 were previously
named echovirus 22 and 23 but have now been reclassified. All enteroviruses are antigenically
heterogeneous and have wide geographic distribution.
Enteroviruses are shed in respiratory secretions and stool and sometimes are present in the blood and
CSF of infected patients. Infection is usually transmitted by direct contact with respiratory secretions or
stool but can be transmitted by contaminated environmental sources (eg, water). Enteroviral diseases or
epidemics in the US occur in summer and fall. Infection transmitted by a mother during delivery can cause
severe disseminated neonatal infection, which may include hepatitis or hepatic necrosis,
meningoencephalitis, myocarditis, or a combination.
Intact humoral immunity and B-cell function are required for control of enteroviral disease. Severe
enteroviral infections (often manifesting as a slowly progressive meningoencephalitis) occur in patients
with agammaglobulinemia but usually not in those with other immune deficiencies.
Diseases Caused by Enteroviruses
Enteroviruses cause various syndromes (see
Table 152-1
). Epidemic pleurodynia, hand-foot-and-mouth disease, herpangina, and poliomyelitis are
caused almost exclusively by enteroviruses. Other disorders (eg, aseptic meningitis, myopericarditis) may
be caused by enteroviruses or other organisms.
Aseptic meningitis:
Aseptic meningitis is most common among infants and children. In infants and
young children, the cause is frequently a group A or B coxsackievirus, an echovirus, or a human
parechovirus. In older children and adults, other enteroviruses as well as other viruses may cause aseptic
meningitis.
[Table 152-1.
Syndromes Caused by Enteroviruses]
The course is usually benign. A rash may accompany enteroviral aseptic meningitis. Rarely, encephalitis,
which may be severe, also occurs.
Although rarely clinically necessary, the causative virus can often be isolated in a sample
from the throat,
stool, or CSF or be identified by reverse transcriptase-PCR.
Hemorrhagic conjunctivitis:
Rarely, this disorder occurs in epidemics in the US. Importation of the virus
from Africa, Asia, Mexico, and the Caribbean may make outbreaks more common.
The eyelids rapidly swell. Hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, unlike uncomplicated conjunctivitis, often leads to
subconjunctival hemorrhages or keratitis, causing pain, tearing, and photophobia. Systemic illness is
uncommon. However, when hemorrhagic conjunctivitis is due to enterovirus 70, transient lumbosacral
radiculomyelopathy or poliomyelitis-like illness (with paralysis) can occur but is rare. Recovery is usually
complete within 1 to 2 wk of onset.
===PAGE:1595===
complete within 1 to 2 wk of onset.
Coxsackievirus A24 also causes hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, but subconjunctival hemorrhage is less
frequent, and neurologic complications have not been described. Most patients recover in 1 to 2 wk.
Myopericarditis:
Cardiac infection may occur at any age, but most patients are 20 to 39 yr old. Patients
may present with chest pain, arrhythmias, or heart failure. Recovery is usually complete, but some
patients develop dilated cardiomyopathy. Diagnosis may require PCR of myocardial tissue.
Myocarditis neonatorum (cardiac infection at birth) is caused by group B coxsackieviruses and some
echoviruses. It causes fever and heart failure and has a high mortality rate.
Neonatal infection:
Usually, several days after birth, the neonate suddenly develops a syndrome
resembling sepsis with fever, lethargy, disseminated intravascular coagulation, bleeding, and multiple
organ (including heart) failure. CNS, hepatic, myocardial, pancreatic, or adrenal lesions may occur
simultaneously. Recovery may occur within a few weeks, but death may result from circulatory collapse
or, if the liver is involved, liver failure.
Rashes:
Certain coxsackieviruses and echoviruses may cause rashes, often during epidemics. Rashes
are usually nonpruritic, do not desquamate, and occur on the face, neck, chest, and extremities. They are
sometimes maculopapular or morbilliform but occasionally hemorrhagic, petechial, or vesicular. Fever is
common. Aseptic meningitis may develop simultaneously. The course is usually benign.
Respiratory infections:
These infections may result from enteroviruses. Symptoms include fever,
coryza, pharyngitis, and, in some infants and children, vomiting and diarrhea. Bronchitis and interstitial
pneumonia occasionally occur in adults and children. The course is usually mild.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of enteroviral diseases is clinical. Laboratory diagnosis is usually unnecessary but can often be
made by culturing the virus, by detecting viral RNA using reverse transcriptase-PCR or, less commonly,
by demonstrating seroconversion. Enteroviruses that cause aseptic meningitis can be cultured in a
sample from the throat, stool, blood, or CSF.
Treatment
Treatment of enteroviral disease is supportive. Patients with agammaglobulinemia are treated with IV
immune globulins with variable success.
Epidemic Pleurodynia
(Bornholm Disease)
Epidemic pleurodynia is a febrile disorder caused most commonly by a group B coxsackievirus.
Infection causes severe pleuritic chest or abdominal pain.
Epidemic pleurodynia may occur at any age but is most common among children. Severe, frequently
intermittent, often pleuritic pain begins suddenly in the epigastrium, abdomen, or lower anterior chest, with
fever and often headache, sore throat, and malaise. The involved truncal muscles may become swollen
and tender. Symptoms usually subside in 2 to 4 days but may recur within a few days and persist or recur
for several weeks. Up to 5% of cases are complicated by aseptic meningitis, orchitis, and, less commonly,
myopericarditis. After recovery, subsequent infection with another group B coxsackievirus is possible.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis may be obvious in a child who has unexplained severe pleuritic or abdominal pain during an
epidemic. However, in other situations, symptoms may be hard to distinguish from those due to other
===PAGE:1596===
conditions that cause chest or abdominal pain.
Laboratory diagnosis is not routinely necessary; it consists of isolating the virus in a throat or stool culture
or, less commonly, demonstrating seroconversion.
Treatment
Treatment includes NSAIDs and other symptomatic measures.
Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease is a febrile disorder usually caused by coxsackievirus A16,
enterovirus 71, or other enteroviruses. Infection causes a vesicular eruption of skin and
mucosa.
The disease is most common among young children. The course is similar to that of herpangina (see
below).
Children have a sore throat or mouth pain and may refuse to eat. Fever is common. Vesicles are
distributed over the buccal mucosa and tongue, the hands and feet, and, occasionally, the buttocks or
genitals; usually, the vesicles are benign and short-lived.
Infection with enterovirus 71 may be accompanied by severe neurologic manifestations (eg, meningitis,
encephalitis, polio-like paralysis). Morbidity and mortality are significantly higher with enterovirus 71 than
with coxsackievirus A16 or other enteroviruses.
The diagnosis of hand-foot-and-mouth disease is usually made clinically.
Treatment is symptomatic (.
Herpangina
Herpangina is a febrile disorder caused by numerous group A coxsackieviruses and
occasionally other enteroviruses. Infection causes oropharyngeal mucosal vesicular and
ulcerative lesions.
Herpangina tends to occur in epidemics, most commonly in infants and children. It is characterized by
sudden onset of fever with sore throat, headache, anorexia, and frequently neck pain. Infants may vomit.
Within 2 days after onset, up to 20 (mean, 4 to 5) 1- to 2-mm diameter grayish papules develop and
become vesicles with erythematous areolae. They occur most frequently on the tonsillar pillars but also
on the soft palate, tonsils, uvula, or tongue. During the next 24 h, the lesions become shallow ulcers,
seldom > 5 mm in diameter, and heal in 1 to 7 days.
Complications are unusual. Lasting immunity to the infecting strain follows, but repeated episodes caused
by other group A coxsackieviruses or other enteroviruses are possible.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on symptoms and characteristic oral lesions. Confirmatory testing is not usually
required but can be done by isolating the virus from the lesions, detecting virus by reverse transcriptasePCR, or by demonstrating a rise in specific antibody titer.
Recurrent aphthous ulcers may appear similar. Rarely, Bednar's aphthous ulcers occur in the pharynx but
usually without systemic symptoms. Herpetic stomatitis occurs sporadically and causes larger, more
persistent, and more numerous ulcers throughout the oropharynx than herpangina. Coxsackievirus A10
causes lymphonodular pharyngitis, which is similar except that the papules become 2- to 3-mm whitish to
===PAGE:1597===
yellowish nodules instead of vesicles and ulcers.
Treatment
Treatment of herpangina is symptomatic (.
Poliomyelitis
(Infantile Paralysis; Acute Anterior Poliomyelitis)
Poliomyelitis is an acute infection caused by a poliovirus. Manifestations include a nonspecific
minor illness (abortive poliomyelitis), sometimes aseptic meningitis without paralysis
(nonparalytic poliomyelitis), and, less often, flaccid weakness of various muscle groups
(paralytic poliomyelitis). Diagnosis is clinical, although laboratory diagnosis is possible.
Treatment is supportive.
Polioviruses have 3 serotypes. Type 1 is the most paralytogenic and used to be the most common cause
of epidemics. Humans are the only natural host. Infection is highly transmittable via direct contact.
Asymptomatic and minor infections (abortive poliomyelitis) are more common than nonparalytic or
paralytic infections by ≥ 60:1 and are the main source of spread. Extensive vaccination has almost
eradicated the disease in developed countries. However, cases still occur in regions with incomplete
immunization, such as sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia.
Pathophysiology
The virus enters the mouth via the fecal-oral route, then enters the lymphoid tissues of the GI tract. A
primary (minor) viremia follows with spread of virus to the reticuloendothelial system. Infection may be
contained at this point, or the virus may further multiply and cause several days of secondary viremia,
culminating in the development of symptoms and antibodies.
In paralytic infections, poliovirus enters the CNS—whether via secondary viremia or
via migration up
peripheral nerves is unclear. Significant damage occurs in only the spinal cord and brain, particularly in
the nerves controlling motor and autonomic function. Inflammation compounds the damage produced by
primary viral invasion. Factors predisposing to serious neurologic damage include increasing age
(throughout life), recent tonsillectomy or intramuscular injection, pregnancy, impairment of B-cell function,
and physical exertion concurrent with onset of the CNS phase.
Poliovirus is present in the throat and feces during incubation and, after symptom onset, persists 1 to 2
wk in the throat and ≥ 3 to 6 wk in feces; the fecal-oral route is the usual method of transmission.
Symptoms and Signs
Most (90 to 95%) infections cause no symptoms. Symptomatic disease is classified as abortive
poliomyelitis or as paralytic or nonparalytic poliomyelitis.
Abortive:
Most symptomatic infections, particularly in young children, are minor, with 1 to 3 days of slight
fever, malaise, headache, sore throat, and vomiting, which develop 3 to 5 days after exposure. There are
no neurologic symptoms or signs, and physical examination is unremarkable except for the presence of
fever.
Paralytic and nonparalytic:
Paralytic poliomyelitis occurs in about 0.1% of all infections. It may develop
without a preceding minor illness, particularly in older children and adults. Incubation is usually 7 to 14
days.
Common manifestations include aseptic meningitis, deep muscle pain, hyperesthesias, paresthesias, and,
during active myelitis, urinary retention and muscle spasms. Asymmetric flaccid paralysis may develop
and progress over 2 to 3 days. Encephalitic signs occasionally predominate.
===PAGE:1598===
Dysphagia, nasal regurgitation, and nasal voice are usually the earliest signs of bulbar involvement, but
some patients have pharyngeal paralysis and cannot control oral secretions. As with skeletal muscle
paralysis, bulbar involvement may worsen over 2 to 3 days and, in some patients, affects the respiratory
and circulatory centers of the brain stem, leading to respiratory compromise. Infrequently, respiratory
failure develops when the diaphragm or intercostal muscles are affected.
Some patients develop postpoliomyelitis syndrome (see below).
Diagnosis
• Lumbar puncture
• Viral culture (stool, throat, and CSF)
• Reverse transcriptase-PCR of blood or CSF
• Serologic testing for poliovirus serotypes, enteroviruses, and West Nile virus
When there are no CNS manifestations, symptomatic polio resembles other systemic viral infections and
is typically not considered or diagnosed except during an epidemic.
Nonparalytic poliomyelitis resembles other viral meningitides. In such patients, lumbar puncture is usually
done; typical CSF findings are normal glucose, mildly elevated protein, and a cell count of 10 to 500/
μ
L
(predominantly lymphocytes). Isolation of the virus from the throat, feces, or CSF or demonstration of a
rise in specific antibody titer confirms infection with poliovirus but is usually not needed in patients with
uncomplicated aseptic meningitis.
Asymmetric flaccid limb paralysis or bulbar palsies without sensory loss during an acute febrile illness in a
nonimmunized child or young adult almost always indicates paralytic poliomyelitis. However, certain group
A and B coxsackieviruses (especially A7), several echoviruses, and enterovirus type 71 may produce
similar findings. West Nile virus infection can also cause an acute flaccid paralysis that is clinically
indistinguishable from paralytic poliomyelitis due to polioviruses. Guillain-Barre syndrome (
causes flaccid paralysis but can be distinguished because it usually causes no fever, muscle weakness is
symmetric, sensory deficits occur in 70% of patients, and CSF protein is usually elevated and CSF cell
count is normal.
Epidemiologic clues (eg, immunization history, recent travel, age, season) can help suggest the cause.
Because identification of poliovirus or another enterovirus as the cause of acute flaccid paralysis is
important for public health reasons, viral culture of throat swabs, stool, and CSF and reverse
transcriptase-PCR of CSF and blood should be done in all cases. Specific serologic testing for
polioviruses, other enteroviruses, and West Nile virus should also be done.
Prognosis
In nonparalytic forms, recovery is complete.
In paralytic forms, about two thirds of patients have residual permanent weakness. Bulbar paralysis is
more likely to resolve than peripheral paralysis. Mortality is 4 to 6% but increases to 10 to 20% in adults
and in patients with bulbar disease.
Postpoliomyelitis syndrome:
Muscle fatigue and decreased endurance, often accompanied by
weakness, fasciculations, and atrophy, may develop years or decades after paralytic
poliomyelitis,
particularly in older patients and in patients who are severely affected initially. Damage usually occurs in
previously affected muscle groups. The cause may be related to further loss of anterior horn cells due to
aging in a population of neurons already depleted by earlier poliovirus infection. However, it rarely
substantially increases disability.
Treatment
===PAGE:1599===
• Supportive care
Standard treatment is supportive and includes rest, analgesics, and antipyretics as needed. Specific
antiviral therapy is not available.
During active myelitis, precautions to avoid complications of bed rest (eg, deep venous thrombosis,
atelectasis, UTI) and prolonged immobility (eg, contractures) may be necessary. Respiratory failure may
require mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation or bulbar paralysis requires intensive pulmonary
toilet measures.
Treatment of postpoliomyelitis syndrome is supportive.
Prevention
All infants and children should be immunized. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends
vaccination at ages 2 mo, 4 mo, and 6 to 18 mo and a booster dose at age 4 to 6 yr (see also p.
and
Table 268-10
. Childhood vaccination produces immunity in > 95% of recipients.
Salk inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) is preferred to Sabin live-attenuated oral polio vaccine (OPV),
which causes paralytic poliomyelitis in about 1 case per 2,400,000 doses and is thus no longer available
in the US. Serious adverse effects have not been associated with IPV.
Adults are not routinely vaccinated. Nonimmunized adults traveling to endemic or epidemic areas should
receive primary vaccination with IPV, including 2 doses given 4 to 8 wk apart and a 3rd dose given 6 to 12
mo later. At least 1 dose is given before travel. Immunized adults traveling to endemic or epidemic areas
should be given 1 dose of IPV. Immunocompromised hosts and their household contacts should not be
given OPV.
===PAGE:1600===
Chapter 153. Arboviridae, Arenaviridae, and Filoviridae
Introduction
Arbovirus (arthropod-borne virus) is a term applied to a group of viruses that are transmitted to
vertebrates by certain types of blood-eating insects, chiefly mosquitoes and ticks (arthropods). Arbovirus
is not part of the current viral classification system. Families in the current classification system that have
some arbovirus members include
• Bunyaviridae (including bunyaviruses, phleboviruses, nairoviruses, and hantaviruses)
• Flaviviridae (including flaviviruses)
• Reoviridae (including coltiviruses and orbiviruses)
• Togaviridae (including alphaviruses)
Arenaviridae and Filoviridae (including Marburg and Ebola viruses) are not arboviruses.
Arboviruses number > 250 and are distributed worldwide; at least 80 cause human disease. Birds are
often reservoirs for arboviruses, which are transmitted by mosquitoes to horses, other domestic animals,
and humans. Most arboviral diseases are not transmissible by humans, perhaps because the typical
viremia is inadequate to infect the arthropod vector; an exception is dengue fever, which can be
transmitted from person to person via mosquitoes. Some infections (eg, West Nile virus, Colorado tick
fever) can be spread by blood transfusion or organ donation. Reservoirs for Bunyaviridae include insects
and vertebrates, often rodents. These viruses spread to humans directly from their reservoirs, but humanto-human transmission may occur.
Arenaviruses are usually transmitted by rodents and their excreta; in the case of Lassa fever, human-tohuman transmission is possible.
Reservoirs for the Marburg and Ebola viruses are unknown, and human-to-human transmission occurs
readily.
Many infections are asymptomatic. When symptomatic, they generally begin with a minor nonspecific flulike illness that may evolve to one of a few syndromes (see
Table 153-1
). These syndromes include lymphadenopathy, rashes, aseptic meningitis, encephalitis,
arthralgias, arthritis, and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. Many cause fever and bleeding
[Table 153-1.
Arbovirus, Arenavirus, and Filovirus Diseases]
tendencies (hemorrhagic fever). Decreased synthesis of vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors,
disseminated intravascular coagulation, and altered platelet function contribute to bleeding.
Laboratory diagnosis often involves viral cultures, PCR, electron microscopy, and antigen and antibody
detection where available.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Sometimes ribavirin
Treatment for most of these infections is supportive. In hemorrhagic fevers, bleeding may require
phytonadione (see p.
under
Vitamin K Deficiency
). Transfusion of packed RBCs or fresh frozen
plasma may also be necessary. Aspirin and other NSAIDs are contraindicated because of antiplatelet
activity.
===PAGE:1601===
Ribavirin 30 mg/kg IV (maximum, 2 g) loading dose followed by 16 mg/kg IV (maximum, 1 g/dose) q 6 h for
4 days, then 8 mg/kg IV (maximum, 500 mg/dose) q 8 h for 6 days is recommended for hemorrhagic fever
caused by arenaviruses or bunyaviruses including Lassa fever, Rift Valley fever, and Crimean-Congo
hemorrhagic fever. For dosage in hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome, see p.
. Antiviral treatment
for other syndromes has not been adequately studied.
Prevention
Diseases transmitted by mosquitoes or ticks can often be prevented by wearing clothing that covers as
much of the body as possible, using insect repellants, and minimizing the likelihood of exposure to the
insect (eg, for mosquitoes, limiting time outdoors in wet areas; for ticks, see
Sidebar 139-1
.
Diseases transmitted by rodent excreta can be prevented by sealing sites of potential rodent entry into
homes and nearby buildings, preventing rodent access to food, and eliminating potential nesting sites
around the home. Guidelines for cleaning and working in areas with potential rodent excreta are available
through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Dengue
(Breakbone Fever; Dandy Fever)
Dengue is a mosquito-borne disease caused by a flavivirus. Dengue fever usually results in
abrupt onset of high fever, headache, myalgias, arthralgias, and lymphadenopathy, followed by
a rash that appears with a 2nd temperature rise after an afebrile period. Respiratory symptoms,
such as cough, sore throat, and rhinorrhea, can occur. Dengue can also cause potentially fatal
hemorrhagic fever with bleeding tendency and shock. Diagnosis involves serologic testing and
PCR. Treatment is symptomatic and, for dengue hemorrhagic fever, includes meticulously
adjusted intravascular volume replacement.
Dengue is endemic to the tropical regions of the world in latitudes from about 35° north to 35° south.
Outbreaks are most prevalent in Southeast Asia but also occur in the Caribbean, including Puerto Rico
and the US Virgin Islands, Oceania, and the Indian subcontinent; more recently, dengue incidence has
increased in Central and South America. Each year, only about 100 to 200 cases are imported to the US
by returning tourists, but an estimated 50 to 100 million cases occur worldwide, with about 20,000 deaths.
The causative agent, a flavivirus with 4 serogroups, is transmitted by the bite of
Aedes
mosquitoes. The
virus circulates in the blood of infected humans for 2 to 7 days;
Aedes
mosquitoes may acquire the virus
when they feed on humans during this period.
Symptoms and Signs
After an incubation period of 3 to 15 days, fever, chills, headache, retro-orbital pain with eye movement,
lumbar backache, and severe prostration begin abruptly. Extreme aching in the legs and joints occurs
during the first hours, accounting for the traditional name of breakbone fever. The temperature rises
rapidly to up to 40° C, with relative bradycardia. Bulbar and palpebral conjunctival injection and a
transient flushing or pale pink macular rash (particularly of the face) may occur. Cervical, epitrochlear,
and inguinal lymph nodes are often enlarged.
Fever and other symptoms persist 48 to 96 h, followed by rapid defervescence with profuse sweating.
Patients then feel well for about 24 h, after which fever may occur again (saddle-back pattern), typically
with a lower peak temperature than the first. Simultaneously, a blanching maculopapular rash spreads
from the trunk to the extremities and face.
Mild cases of dengue, usually lacking lymphadenopathy, remit in < 72 h. In more severe disease, asthenia
may last several weeks. Death is rare. Immunity to the infecting strain is long-lasting, whereas broader
immunity to other strains lasts only 2 to 12 mo.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1602===
• Acute and convalescent serologic testing
Dengue fever is suspected in patients in endemic areas if they develop sudden fever, headache,
myalgias, and adenopathy, particularly with the characteristic rash or recurrent fever. Evaluation should
rule out alternative diagnoses, especially malaria and leptospirosis. Diagnostic studies include serologic
testing, antigen detection, and PCR of blood. Serologic testing involves hemagglutination inhibiting or
complement fixation tests using paired sera, but cross-reactions with other flavivirus antibodies are
possible. Antigen detection is available in some parts of the world (not in the US), and PCR is usually
done only in laboratories with special expertise. Although rarely done and difficult, cultures can be done
using mosquitoes or specialized cell lines in specialized laboratories.
CBC may show leukopenia by the 2nd day of fever; by the 4th or 5th day, the WBC count may be 2000 to
4000/
μ
L with only 20 to 40% granulocytes. Urinalysis may show moderate albuminuria and a few casts.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is symptomatic. Acetaminophen can be used, but NSAIDs, including aspirin, should be avoided
because bleeding is a risk. Aspirin increases the risk of Reye's syndrome in children and should be
avoided for that reason.
Prevention
People in endemic areas should try to prevent mosquito bites. To prevent further transmission by
mosquitoes, patients with dengue should be kept under mosquito netting until the 2nd bout of fever has
resolved. Vaccines are being evaluated.
Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever
(Philippine, Thai, or Southeast Asian Hemorrhagic Fever; Dengue Shock Syndrome)
Dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) is a variant presentation that occurs primarily in children < 10 yr living
in areas where dengue is endemic. DHF requires prior infection with the dengue virus. It is an
immunopathologic disease; dengue virus-antibody immune complexes trigger release of vasoactive
mediators by macrophages. The mediators increase vascular permeability, causing vascular leakage,
hemorrhagic manifestations, hemoconcentration, and serous effusions, which lead to circulatory collapse
(ie, dengue shock syndrome).
Symptoms and Signs
In adults, DHF begins with abrupt fever and headache and is initially indistinguishable from classic
dengue. Shock and increasing illness may develop rapidly 2 to 6 days after onset. Bleeding tendencies
occur, usually as purpura, petechiae, or ecchymoses at injection sites; sometimes as hematemesis,
melena, or epistaxis; and occasionally as subarachnoid hemorrhage. Hepatomegaly is common, as is
bronchopneumonia with or without bilateral pleural effusions. Myocarditis can occur. Mortality is usually <
1% in experienced centers but otherwise can range up to 30%.
Diagnosis
• Clinical and laboratory criteria
DHF is suspected in children with WHO-defined clinical criteria for the diagnosis: sudden fever that stays
high for 2 to 7 days, hemorrhagic manifestations, and hepatomegaly. Hemorrhagic manifestations include
at least a positive tourniquet test and petechiae, purpura, ecchymoses, bleeding gums, hematemesis, or
melena. The tourniquet test is done
by inflating a BP cuff to midway between the systolic and diastolic BP
for 15 min. The number of petechiae that form within a 2.5-cm diameter circle are counted; > 20
===PAGE:1603===
petechiae suggests capillary fragility.
CBC, coagulation tests, urinalysis, liver function tests, and dengue serologic tests should be done.
Thrombocytopenia (≤ l00,000 platelets/
μ
L) and a prolonged PT characterize the coagulation
abnormalities. There may be mild proteinuria and increases in AST levels. Complement fixation antibody
titers against flaviviruses are usually high.
Patients with WHO-defined clinical criteria plus thrombocytopenia (≤ 100,000/
μ
L) or hemoconcentration
(Hct increased by ≥ 20%) are presumed to have the disease.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Patients require intensive treatment to maintain euvolemia. Both hypovolemia (which can cause shock)
and overhydration (which can cause acute respiratory distress syndrome) should be avoided. Urine
output and the degree of hemoconcentration can be used to monitor intravascular volume.
No antivirals have been shown to improve outcome.
Hantavirus Infection
Bunyaviridae contain the genus Hantavirus, which consists of at least 4 serogroups with 9 viruses
causing 2 major, sometimes overlapping, clinical syndromes:
• Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS)
• Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS)
Viruses causing HFRS are Hantaan, Seoul, Dobrava (Belgrade), and Puumala. Those causing HPS are
Sin Nombre, Black Creek Canal, Bayou, and New York-1.
Hantaviruses occur throughout the world in wild rodents, which shed the virus throughout life in urine and
feces. Transmission occurs between rodents. Transmission to humans is through inhalation of aerosols
of rodent excreta. Recent evidence suggests human-to-human transmission may occur rarely. Naturally
and laboratory-acquired infections are becoming more common.
Laboratory diagnosis of Hantavirus infection is established by serologic tests and reverse transcriptasePCR (RT-PCR). Serologic tests include enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Western and
strip immunoblot assays. Growth of the virus is technically difficult and requires a biosafety level 3
laboratory.
Hemorrhagic Fever With Renal Syndrome
(Epidemic Nephrosonephritis; Korean Hemorrhagic Fever; Nephropathia Epidemica)
Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) begins as a flu-like illness and may progress to
shock, bleeding, and renal failure. Diagnosis is with serologic tests and PCR. Mortality is 6 to
15%. Treatment includes IV ribavirin.
Some forms of HFRS are mild (eg, nephropathia epidemica, caused by Puumala virus, as occur in
Scandinavia, the western part of the former Soviet Union, and Europe). Others are severe (eg, those
caused by Hantaan, Seoul, and Dobrava viruses, as occur in Korea or the Balkans).
Symptoms and Signs
Incubation is about 2 wk. In mild forms, infection is often asymptomatic. When symptoms occur, onset is
sudden, with high fever, headache, backache, and abdominal pain. On the 3rd or 4th day, subconjunctival
===PAGE:1604===
hemorrhages, palatal petechiae, and a truncal petechial rash may appear. Diffuse reddening of the face
that resembles sunburn, with dermatographism, occurs in > 90% of patients. Relative bradycardia is
present, and transient mild hypotension occurs in about half of patients, with shock in a minority. After the
4th day, renal failure develops. About 20% of patients become mentally obtunded. Seizures or severe
focal neurologic symptoms occur in 1%. The rash subsides; patients develop polyuria and recover over
several weeks. Proteinuria, hematuria, and pyuria may develop.
Diagnosis
• Serologic testing or PCR
HFRS is suspected in patients with possible exposure if they have fever, a bleeding tendency, and renal
failure. CBC, electrolyte levels, renal function tests, coagulation tests, and urinalysis are then done.
During the hypotensive phase, Hct increases and leukocytosis and thrombocytopenia develop.
Albuminuria, hematuria, and RBC and WBC casts may develop, usually between the 2nd and 5th day.
During the diuretic phase, electrolyte abnormalities are common.
Diagnosis of HFRS is ultimately based on serologic testing or PCR.
Prognosis
Death can occur during the diuretic phase, secondary to volume depletion, electrolyte disturbances, or
secondary infections. Recovery usually takes 3 to 6 wk but may take up to 6 mo. Overall, mortality is 6 to
15%, almost always occurring in patients with the more severe forms. Residual renal dysfunction is
uncommon except in the severe form that occurs in the Balkans.
Treatment
• Ribavirin
• Sometimes renal dialysis
Treatment is with IV ribavirin: loading dose 33 mg/kg (maximum, 2.64 g), followed by 16 mg/kg q 6 h
(maximum, 1.28 g q 6 h) for 4 days, then 8 mg/kg q 8 h (maximum, 0.64 g q 8 h) for 3 days. Supportive
care, which may include renal dialysis, is critical, particularly during the diuretic phase.
Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) occurs in the US primarily in the southwestern states. It
begins as a flu-like illness and, within days, causes noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Diagnosis is with serologic tests and reverse transcriptase-PCR. Mortality is 50 to 75%.
Treatment is supportive.
Most cases of HPS are caused by the Sin Nombre hantavirus (Four Corners virus, Muerto Canyon virus);
others are caused by the Black Creek Canal virus or Bayou virus in the southeastern US, the New York
virus on the East Coast of the US, or the Andes virus or Laguna Negra virus in South America. Infection is
transmitted to humans via inhalation of excreta of sigmodontine rodents (especially the deer mouse).
Most cases occur west of the Mississippi River in spring or summer, typically after heavy rains.
Symptoms and Signs
HPS begins as a nonspecific flu-like illness, with acute fever, myalgia, headache, and GI symptoms. Two
to 15 days later (median 4 days), patients rapidly develop noncardiogenic pulmonary edema and
hypotension. Several patients have had a combination of HFRS and HPS. Mild cases of HPS can occur.
Diagnosis
• Serologic testing or PCR
===PAGE:1605===
HPS is suspected in patients with possible exposure if they have unexplained clinical or radiographic
pulmonary edema. Chest x-ray may show increased vascular markings, Kerley B lines, bilateral infiltrates,
or pleural effusions. If HPS is suspected, echocardiography should be done to exclude cardiogenic
pulmonary edema. CBC, liver function tests, and urinalysis are also usually done. HPS causes mild
neutrophilic leukocytosis, hemoconcentration, and thrombocytopenia. Modest elevation of LDH, AST, and
ALT, with decreased serum albumin, is typical. Urinalysis shows minimal abnormalities.
Diagnosis is with serologic testing or reverse transcriptase-PCR.
Prognosis
Patients who survive the first few days improve rapidly and recover completely over 2 to 3 wk, often
without sequelae. Mortality is 50 to 75%.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is supportive. Mechanical ventilation, meticulous volume control, and vasopressors may be
required. For severe cardiopulmonary insufficiency, extracorporal mechanical oxygenation may be
lifesaving. IV ribavirin is ineffective.
Lassa Fever
Lassa fever is an often fatal arenavirus infection that occurs mostly in Africa. It may involve
multiple organ systems but spares the CNS. Diagnosis is with serologic tests and PCR.
Treatment includes IV ribavirin.
Lassa fever outbreaks have occurred in Nigeria, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. Cases have been imported to
the US and the United Kingdom. The reservoir is
Mastomys natalensis
, a rat that commonly inhabits
houses in Africa. Most human cases probably result from contamination of food with rodent urine, but
human-to-human transmission can occur via urine, feces, saliva, vomitus, or blood.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is 5 to 16 days. Symptoms begin with gradually progressive fever,
weakness,
malaise, and GI symptoms (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dysphagia, stomach ache); symptoms and
signs of hepatitis may occur. Over the subsequent 4 to 5 days, symptoms progress to prostration with
sore throat, cough, chest pain, and vomiting. The sore throat becomes more severe during the first week;
patches of white or yellow exudate may appear on the tonsils, often coalescing into a pseudomembrane.
In 60 to 80% of patients, systolic BP is < 90 mm Hg with pulse pressures of < 20 mm Hg, and relative
bradycardia is possible. Facial and neck swelling and conjunctival edema occur in 10 to 30%.
Occasionally, patients have tinnitus, epistaxis, bleeding from the gums and venipuncture sites,
maculopapular rash, cough, and dizziness. Sensorineural hearing loss develops in 20%; it is often
permanent.
In patients who will recover, defervescence occurs; fatally ill patients often develop shock, delirium, rales,
pleural effusion, and, occasionally, generalized seizures. Pericarditis occasionally occurs. Degree of fever
and aminotransferase levels correlate with disease severity. Late sequelae include alopecia, iridocyclitis,
and transient blindness.
Diagnosis
• PCR or serologic testing
Lassa fever is suspected in patients with possible exposure if they have a viral prodrome followed by
===PAGE:1606===
unexplained disease of any organ system except the CNS. Liver function tests, urinalysis, serologic tests,
and possibly CBC should then be done. Proteinuria is common and may be massive. AST and ALT levels
rise (to 10 times normal), as do LDH levels. The most rapid diagnostic test is PCR, but demonstrating
either Lassa IgM antibodies or a 4-fold rise in IgG antibody titer using an indirect fluorescent antibody
technique is also diagnostic. Although the virus can be grown in cell culture, cultures are not routine.
Because infection is a risk, particularly in patients with hemorrhagic fever, cultures must be handled only
in a biosafety level 4 laboratory. Chest x-rays, obtained if lung involvement is suspected, may show
basilar pneumonitis and pleural effusions.
Prognosis
Recovery or death usually occurs 7 to 31 days (average 12 to 15 days) after symptoms begin. Mortality is
16 to 45%. Disease is severe during pregnancy. Mortality is 50 to 92% in women who are pregnant or
who have delivered within 1 mo. Most pregnant women lose the fetus.
Treatment
• Ribavirin
Ribavirin, if begun within the first 6 days, may reduce mortality up to 10-fold. Treatment with ribavirin is 30
mg/kg IV (maximum, 2 g) loading dose followed by 16 mg/kg IV (maximum, 1 g/dose) q 6 h for 4 days, then
8 mg/kg IV (maximum, 500 mg/dose) q 8 h for 6 days. Anti-Lassa fever plasma may be used as adjunctive
therapy in very ill patients. Supportive treatment, including correction of fluid and electrolyte imbalances,
is imperative. For infected pregnant women, particularly during the 3rd trimester, uterine evacuation
appears to reduce maternal mortality.
Prevention
Universal precautions, airborne isolation (including use of goggles, high-efficiency masks, a negativepressure room, and positive-pressure filtered air respirators), and surveillance of contacts are
recommended.
Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis is caused by an arenavirus. It usually causes a flu-like illness or
aseptic meningitis, sometimes with rash, arthritis, orchitis, parotitis, or encephalitis. Diagnosis
is by viral isolation or indirect immunofluorescence. Treatment is supportive.
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis is endemic in rodents. Human infection results most commonly from
exposure to dust or food contaminated by the gray house mouse or hamsters, which harbor the virus and
excrete it in urine, feces, semen, and nasal secretions. When transmitted by mice, the disease occurs
primarily in adults during autumn and winter.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is 1 to 2 wk. Most patients have no or minimal symptoms. Some develop a flu-like
illness. Fever, usually 38.5 to 40° C, with rigors is accompanied by malaise, weakness, myalgia
(especially lumbar), retro-orbital headache, photophobia, anorexia, nausea, and light-headedness. Sore
throat and dysesthesia occur less often. After 5 days to 3 wk, patients may improve for 1 or 2 days. Many
relapse with recurrent fever, headache, rashes, swelling of metacarpophalangeal and proximal
interphalangeal joints, meningeal signs, orchitis, parotitis, or alopecia of the scalp.
Aseptic meningitis occurs in a minority of patients. Rarely, frank encephalitis, ascending paralysis, bulbar
paralysis, transverse myelitis, or acute Parkinson's disease can occur. Neurologic sequelae are rare in
meningitis but occur in up to 33% of patients with encephalitis. Infection may cause fetal abnormalities,
including hydrocephalus and chorioretinitis.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1607===
• CSF analysis, antibody detection, and viral culture
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis is suspected in patients with murine exposure and an acute illness,
particularly aseptic meningitis or encephalitis. Aseptic meningitis may lower CSF glucose mildly but
occasionally to as low as 15 mg/dL. CSF WBCs range from a few hundred to a few thousand cells,
usually with > 80% lymphocytes. WBC counts of 2000 to 3000/
μ
L and platelet counts of 50,000 to
100,000/
μ
L typically occur during the first week of illness. Diagnosis can be made by isolating the virus
from the blood or CSF or by indirect immunofluorescence assays of inoculated cell cultures, although
these tests are most likely to be found in research laboratories. Diagnosis can also be made by detecting
seroconversion of antibody to the virus.
Treatment
Treatment is supportive.
Marburg and Ebola Virus Infections
Marburg and Ebola are filoviruses that cause hemorrhage, multiple organ failure, and high
mortality rates. Diagnosis is with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, PCR, or electron
microscopy. Treatment is supportive. Strict isolation and quarantine measures are necessary to
contain outbreaks.
Epidemics have occurred rarely and sporadically. Most index cases involve exposure to nonhuman
primates from sub-Saharan Africa or the Philippines. The vector and reservoir are unknown, although the
Marburg virus has been identified in bats, and cases have occurred in people exposed to bats.
Human-to-human transmission occurs via skin and mucous membrane contact with an infected person or
other primate. Aerosol transmission has been postulated.
Symptoms and Signs
After an incubation period of 5 to 10 days, fever, myalgia, and headache occur, often with abdominal
symptoms (nausea, vomiting, pain, diarrhea) and upper respiratory symptoms (cough, chest pain,
pharyngitis). Photophobia, conjunctival injection, jaundice, and lymphadenopathy also occur. Delirium,
stupor, and coma may occur, indicating CNS involvement. Hemorrhagic symptoms begin within the first
few days and include petechiae, ecchymoses, and frank bleeding around puncture sites and mucous
membranes. A maculopapular rash, primarily on the trunk, begins around day 5.
During the 2nd wk of symptoms, either defervescence occurs and patients begin recovery, or patients
develop fatal multiple organ failure. Recovery is prolonged and may be complicated by recurrent hepatitis,
uveitis, transverse myelitis, and orchitis. Mortality ranges from 25 to 90% (higher with Ebola).
Diagnosis
• Enzyme-linked immunosorbent blood assay and PCR
• Electron microscopy
Marburg or Ebola virus infection is suspected in patients with bleeding tendencies, fever, and travel to
endemic areas or exposure to primates from these areas. CBC, routine blood chemistries, liver function
and coagulation tests, and urinalysis are then done. Diagnostic tests include the enzyme-linked
immunosorbent blood assay (ELISA) and PCR. The gold standard is detection of characteristic virions
with electron microscopy of infected tissue (especially liver) or blood.
Treatment
• Supportive care
===PAGE:1608===
No effective antiviral therapy exists. Treatment is supportive and includes minimizing invasive procedures
and replacing depleted coagulation factors.
Prevention
A vaccine is currently in development. Mask-gown-glove precautions, thorough equipment sterilization,
hospital closures, and community education have shortened epidemics. All suspected cases, including the
cadavers, require strict isolation and special handling.
The US has strict quarantine procedures to prevent importation of infected monkeys.
Case reporting is required.
Yellow Fever
Yellow fever is a mosquito-borne flavivirus infection endemic in tropical South America and
sub-Saharan Africa. Symptoms may include sudden onset of fever, relative bradycardia,
headache, and, if severe, jaundice, hemorrhage, and multiple organ failure. Diagnosis is with
viral culture and serologic tests. Treatment is supportive. Prevention involves vaccination and
mosquito control.
In urban yellow fever, virus is transmitted by the bite of an
Aedes aegypti
mosquito infected about 2 wk
previously by feeding on a person with viremia. In jungle (sylvatic) yellow fever, the virus is transmitted by
Haemagogus
and other forest canopy mosquitoes that acquire the virus from wild primates. Incidence is
highest during months of peak rainfall, humidity, and temperature in South America and during the late
rainy and early dry seasons in Africa.
Symptoms and Signs
Infection ranges from asymptomatic (in 5 to 50% of cases) to a hemorrhagic fever with 50% mortality.
Incubation lasts 3 to 6 days. Onset is sudden, with fever of 39 to 40° C, chills, headache, dizziness, and
myalgias. The pulse is usually rapid initially but, by the 2nd day, becomes slow for the degree of fever
(Faget's sign). The face is flushed, and the eyes are injected. Nausea, vomiting, constipation, severe
prostration, restlessness, and irritability are common. Mild disease may resolve after 1 to 3 days.
However, in moderate or severe cases, the fever falls suddenly 2 to 5 days after onset, and a remission
of several hours or days ensues. The fever recurs, but the pulse remains slow. Jaundice, extreme
albuminuria, and epigastric tenderness with hematemesis often occur together after 5 days of illness.
There may be oliguria, petechiae, mucosal hemorrhages, confusion, and apathy.
Disease may last > 1 wk with rapid recovery and no sequelae. In the most severe form (called malignant
yellow fever), delirium, intractable hiccups, seizures, coma, and multiple organ failure may occur
terminally. During recovery, bacterial superinfections, particularly pneumonia, can occur.
Diagnosis
• Viral culture or serologic testing
Yellow fever is suspected in patients in endemic areas if they develop sudden fever with relative
bradycardia and jaundice; mild disease often escapes diagnosis. CBC, urinalysis, liver function tests,
coagulation tests, viral blood culture, and serologic tests should be done. Leukopenia with relative
neutropenia is common, as are thrombocytopenia, prolonged clotting, and increased PT. Bilirubin and
aminotransferase levels may be elevated acutely and for several months. Albuminuria, which occurs in
90% of patients, may reach 20 g/L; it helps differentiate yellow fever from hepatitis. In malignant yellow
fever, hypoglycemia and hyperkalemia may occur terminally.
Diagnosis is confirmed by culture, serologic tests, PCR, or identification of characteristic midzonal
hepatocyte necrosis at autopsy. Suspected or confirmed cases must be quarantined. Needle biopsy of
===PAGE:1609===
the liver during illness is contraindicated because hemorrhage is a risk.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Up to 10% of patients with disease severe enough to be diagnosed die.
Treatment is mainly supportive. Bleeding may be treated with vitamin K. An H
blocker and sucralfate can
be helpful as prophylaxis for GI bleeding and can be used in all patients ill enough to require
hospitalization.
Prevention
Preventive measures include
• Mosquito avoidance
• Vaccination
The most effective way to prevent outbreaks is to reduce the number of mosquitoes and limit mosquito
bites by using diethyltoluamide (DEET), mosquito netting, and protective attire. During jungle outbreaks,
people should evacuate the area until they are immunized and mosquitoes are controlled.
For people traveling to endemic areas, active immunization with the 17D strain of live-attenuated yellow
fever vaccine (0.5 mL sc q 10 yr) is indicated and is effective in 95%. In the US, the vaccine is given only
at US Public Health Service-authorized Yellow Fever Vaccination Centers. The vaccine is contraindicated
in pregnant women, in infants < 6 mo, and in people with compromised immunity. If infants aged 6 to 8 mo
cannot avoid travel to an endemic area, parents should discuss vaccination with their physician since the
vaccine is typically not offered until age 9 mo.
To prevent further mosquito transmission, infected patients should be isolated in rooms that are well
screened and sprayed with insecticides.
Other Infections
Chikungunya disease:
This disease is an acute febrile illness followed by more chronic polyarthritis. It
is transmitted by
Aedes
mosquitoes and is common in Africa, India, Guam, Southeast Asia, New Guinea,
and limited areas of Europe. Prevention involves avoiding mosquito bites.
Mayaro disease:
This dengue-like disease is transmitted by mosquitoes. It is common in Brazil, Bolivia,
and Trinidad. Prevention involves avoiding mosquito bites.
Tick-borne encephalitis:
Initially, a mild flu-like illness occurs, accompanied by leukocytopenia and
thrombocytopenia, which clears up within a few days. About 30% of patients develop more severe
symptoms (eg, meningitis, meningoencephalitis). A vaccine is available in Europe and Russia.
California encephalitis:
This encephalitis and related infections are transmitted by mosquitoes and
occur in the US Midwest and probably worldwide. This infection causes symptoms (eg, fever,
somnolence, obtundation, focal neurologic findings, seizures) primarily in children. Temporal lobe
involvement may mimic herpes encephalitis; 20% of patients develop behavioral problems or recurrent
seizures. Mortality rate is < 1%. No treatment is available.
Omsk hemorrhagic fever and Kyasanur Forest disease:
These infections are transmitted by ticks or
by direct contact with an infected animal (eg, rodent, monkey). Omsk hemorrhagic fever occurs in the
former Soviet Union, including Siberia; Kyasanur Forest disease occurs in India. They are acute febrile
illnesses accompanied by bleeding diathesis, low BP, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia; some patients
develop encephalitis in the 3rd wk. Mortality rate is < 3% for Omsk hemorrhagic fever and 3 to 5% for
===PAGE:1610===
Kyasanur Forest disease. Prevention involves avoiding tick bites and infected animals.
Rift Valley fever:
This infection is spread by mosquitoes and transmitted by direct or indirect contact
with the blood or organs of infected animals (eg, during slaughtering, butchering, or veterinary
procedures), inhalation of infected aerosols, or ingestion of raw milk from infected animals. Rift Valley
fever occurs in South Africa, eastern Africa, and Egypt. Rarely, it progresses to ocular disorders,
meningoencephalitis, or a hemorrhagic form (which has a 50% mortality rate). A vaccine for livestock is
available, and a human vaccine is under investigation.
===PAGE:1611===
Chapter 154. Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Introduction
(See also p.
, the National Institutes of Health's AIDSInfo web site, and the recommendations of the
HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America: Primary care guidelines for the
management of persons infected with HIV.)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection results from 1 of 2 similar retroviruses (HIV-1
and HIV-2) that destroy CD4+ lymphocytes and impair cell-mediated immunity, increasing risk of
certain infections and cancers. Initial infection may cause nonspecific febrile illness. Risk of
subsequent manifestations—related to immunodeficiency—is proportional to the level of CD4+
lymphocytes. Manifestations range from asymptomatic carriage to AIDS, which is defined by
serious opportunistic infections or cancers or a CD4 count of < 200/
μ
L. HIV infection can be
diagnosed by antibody or antigen testing. Screening should be routinely offered to all adults
and adolescents. Treatment aims to suppress HIV replication by using combinations of drugs
that inhibit HIV enzymes.
Retroviruses are enveloped RNA viruses defined by their mechanism of replication via reverse
transcription to produce DNA copies that integrate in the host cell genome. Several retroviruses, including
human T-lymphotropic virus (see
Sidebar 154-1
), cause disorders in people.
AIDS is defined as HIV infection that leads to any of the disorders in clinical category B or C of HIV
infection (see
Table 154-1
) or a CD4+ T lymphocyte (helper cell— count of < 200/
μ
L. The disorders in
categories B and C are
• Serious opportunistic infections
• Certain cancers, such as Kaposi's sarcoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, to which defective cellmediated immunity predisposes
• Neurologic dysfunction
Sidebar 154-1 HTLV Infections
Infection with human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV) 1 or 2 can cause T-cell leukemias and lymphomas,
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, skin lesions, and immunocompromise. Some
immunocompromised patients develop infections similar to those that occur in patients with AIDS. HTLV-1
can also cause myelopathy (see
Tropical Spastic Paraparesis/HTLV-1-Associated Myelopathy
.
Most cases are transmitted from mother to child by breastfeeding, but HTLV-1 can be transmitted sexually
and through blood.
HIV-1 causes most HIV infections worldwide, but HIV-2 causes a substantial proportion of infections in
parts of West Africa. In some areas of West Africa, both viruses are prevalent and may coinfect patients.
HIV-2 appears less virulent than HIV-1.
HIV-1 originated in rural central Africa in the first half of the 20th century, when a closely related
chimpanzee virus first infected humans. Epidemic global spread began in the late 1970s, and AIDS was
recognized in 1981. More than 40 million people are infected worldwide. Of the 3 million annual deaths
and 11,000 new daily infections, 95% occur in the developing world, one half are in women, and one
seventh are in children < 15 yr.
Transmission
===PAGE:1612===
Transmission of HIV requires contact with body fluids—specifically blood, semen, vaginal secretions,
breast milk, saliva, or exudates from wounds or skin and mucosal lesions—that contain free virions or
infected cells. Transmission is more likely with higher levels of virions, as is typical during primary
infection, even when people are asymptomatic. Transmission by saliva or droplets produced by coughing
or sneezing, although conceivable, is extremely unlikely. HIV is not transmitted by casual nonsexual
contact as may occur at work, school, or home.
Transmission is generally by
• Direct transfer of bodily fluids through sexual intercourse
• Sharing of blood-contaminated needles
• Childbirth
• Breastfeeding
• Medical procedures (eg, transfusions, exposure to contaminated instruments)
Sexual practices such as fellatio and cunnilingus appear to be relatively low risk but not absolutely safe
(see
Table 154-2
). Risk does not increase significantly if semen or vaginal secretions are swallowed. However,
open sores in the mouth may increase risk. The sexual practices with the highest risks are those that
cause mucosal trauma, typically intercourse. Anal-receptive intercourse poses the highest risk. Mucous
membrane inflammation facilitates HIV transmission; sexually transmitted diseases such as gonorrhea,
chlamydia, trichomoniasis, especially those that cause ulceration (eg, chancroid, herpes, syphilis),
increase risk. In heterosexuals, the estimated risk per coital act is about 1/1000; however, risk is
increased in early and advanced stages of HIV infection when HIV concentrations in plasma and genital
fluid are higher, in younger people, and in people with ulcerative genital diseases.
HIV can be transmitted from mother to off-spring transplacentally or perinatally; without treatment, risk of
transmission is about 25 to 35%. HIV is also excreted in breast milk, and breastfeeding by HIV-infected
mothers may transmit HIV to about 75% of infants who had previously escaped infection. Because many
women of childbearing age are infected, incidence of AIDS in children has increased (.
Risk of transmission after skin penetration with a medical instrument contaminated with infected blood is
on average about 1/300 without treatment. Immediate antiretroviral treatment probably reduces risk to
1/1500. Risk appears to be higher if the wound is deep or if blood is inoculated (eg, with a contaminated
hollow-bore needle). Risk of transmission from infected health care practitioners who take appropriate
precautions is unclear but appears minimal. In the 1980s, one dentist transmitted HIV to ≥ 6 of his patients
by unknown means. However, extensive investigations of patients cared for by other HIV-infected
physicians, including surgeons, have uncovered few other cases.
Although screening of blood donors has minimized risk of transmission via transfusion, a small risk still
exists because antibody-based screening tests may miss early infections (see Prevention .
Current risk of transmitting HIV via blood transfusion is probably between 1/500,000 and 1/1,000,000 per
unit transfused.
[Table 154-1.
Clinical Categories of HIV Infection*]
[Table 154-2.
HIV Transmission Risk of Several Sexual Activities]
Epidemiology
HIV has spread in 2 epidemiologically distinct patterns:
• Male homosexual intercourse or contact with infected blood (eg, through sharing needles in IV drug
===PAGE:1613===
users; before effective screening of donors, through transfusions)
• Heterosexual intercourse (affecting men and women equally)
The first pattern usually predominates in developed countries; the second pattern predominates in Africa,
South America, and southern Asia. In some countries (eg, Brazil, Thailand), both patterns are common. In
areas where heterosexual transmission is dominant, HIV infection follows routes of trade, transportation,
and economic migration to cities and spreads secondarily to rural areas. In Africa, particularly southern
Africa, the HIV epidemic has killed tens of millions of young adults, creating millions of orphans. Factors
that perpetuate spread include poverty, poor education, a deficient system of medical care, and lack of
effective drugs.
Many opportunistic infections that complicate HIV are reactivations of latent infections. Thus,
epidemiologic factors that determine the prevalence of latent infections also influence risk of specific
opportunistic infections. In many developing countries, prevalence of toxoplasmosis and TB is high in the
general population, and thus enormous increases in active TB have followed the HIV epidemic in these
countries. Similarly in the US, incidence of coccidioidomycosis, common in the Southwest, and
histoplasmosis, common in the Midwest, has increased because of HIV infection. In the US and Europe,
human herpesvirus 8 infection, which causes Kaposi's sarcoma, is common among homosexual and
bisexual men but uncommon among other HIV patients. Thus, in the US, > 90% of AIDS patients who
develop Kaposi's sarcoma are homosexual or bisexual men.
Pathophysiology
HIV attaches to and penetrates host T cells via CD4+ molecules and chemokine receptors (see
Fig. 154-1
). After attachment, HIV RNA and enzymes are released into the host cell. Viral replication
requires that reverse transcriptase (an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) copy HIV RNA, producing
proviral DNA; this copying mechanism is prone to errors, resulting in frequent mutations. These mutations
facilitate the generation of HIV that can resist control by the host's immune system and by antiretroviral
drugs. Proviral DNA enters the host cell's nucleus and is integrated into the host DNA in a process that
involves HIV integrase. With each cell division, the integrated proviral DNA is duplicated along with the
host DNA. Proviral HIV DNA is transcribed to viral RNA and translated to HIV proteins, including the
envelope glycoproteins 40 and 120. The HIV proteins are assembled into HIV virions at the inner cell
membrane and budded from the cell surface;
[Fig. 154-1.
Simplified HIV life cycle.]
each host cell may produce thousands of virions. After budding, protease, another HIV enzyme, cleaves
viral proteins, converting the immature virion into a mature, infectious form.
Infected CD4+ lymphocytes produce > 98% of plasma HIV virions. A subset of infected CD4+
lymphocytes constitutes a reservoir of HIV that can reactivate (eg, if antiviral treatment is stopped).
Virions have a plasma half-life of about 6 h. In moderate to heavy HIV infection, about 10
to 10
virions
are created and removed daily. The high volume of HIV replication and high frequency of transcription
errors by HIV reverse transcriptase result in many mutations, increasing the chance of producing strains
resistant to host immunity and drugs.
Immune system:
The main consequence of HIV infection is damage to the immune system, specifically
loss of CD4+ lymphocytes, which are involved in cell-mediated and, to a lesser extent, humoral immunity.
CD4+ lymphocyte depletion may result from the following:
• Direct cytotoxic effects of HIV replication
• Cell-mediated immune cytotoxicity
• Thymic damage that impairs lymphocyte production
Infected CD4+ lymphocytes have a half-life of about 2 days, which is much shorter than that of uninfected
===PAGE:1614===
CD4+ cells. Rates of CD4+ lymphocyte destruction correlate with plasma HIV level. Typically, during the
initial or primary infection,
HIV levels are highest (> 10
copies/mL), and the CD4 count drops rapidly. The
normal CD4 count is about 750/
μ
L, and immunity is minimally affected if the count is > 350/
μ
L. If the count
drops below about 200/
μ
L, a variety of opportunistic pathogens may produce clinical disease, often by
reactivating from latent states.
The humoral immune system is also affected. Hyperplasia of B cells in lymph nodes occurs, causing
lymphadenopathy, and secretion of antibodies to previously encountered antigens increases, often
leading to hyperglobulinemia. Total antibody levels (especially IgG and IgA) and titers against previous
antigens (eg, cytomegalovirus [CMV]) may be unusually high. However, response to new antigens (eg, in
vaccines) decreases as the CD4 count decreases.
Other tissues:
HIV also infects nonlymphoid monocytic cells (eg, dendritic cells in the skin,
macrophages, brain microglia) and cells of the heart and kidneys, causing disease in the corresponding
organ systems. HIV strains in several compartments, such as the nervous system (brain and CSF) and
genital tract (semen), can be genetically distinct from those in plasma. Thus, HIV levels and resistance
patterns in these compartments may differ from those in plasma.
Disease progression:
Antibodies to HIV are measurable usually within a few weeks after primary
infection; however, antibodies cannot fully control HIV infection because mutated forms of HIV that are not
controlled by the patient's current antibodies are generated.
Risk and severity of opportunistic infections, AIDS, and AIDS-related cancers are determined by 2 factors:
• CD4 count
• Exposure to potentially opportunistic pathogens
Plasma HIV virion levels, expressed as HIV RNA copies/mL, stabilize after about 6 mo at values (set
points) that vary widely among patients but average 30,000 to 100,000/mL (4.2 to 5 log
/mL). The
higher the set point, the more quickly the CD4 count decreases to a level that seriously impairs immunity
(< 200/
μ
L) and results in the opportunistic infections and cancers that define AIDS. Risk of specific
opportunistic infections increases below threshold CD4 counts of about 200/
μ
L for some and 50/
μ
L for
others. For example, risk of
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia, toxoplasmic encephalitis, and
cryptococcal meningitis rises when the CD4 count is < 200/
μ
L; CMV and
Mycobacterium avium
complex
(MAC) infections are a risk when the CD4 count is < 50/
μ
L. For every 3-fold (0.5 log
) increase in
plasma HIV RNA in untreated patients, risk of progression to AIDS or death over the next 2 to 3 yr
increases about 50%.
Without treatment, risk of progression to AIDS is about 1 to 2%/yr in the first 2 to 3 yr of infection and
about 5 to 6%/yr thereafter. Eventually, AIDS almost invariably develops.
Symptoms and Signs
Initially, primary HIV infection may be asymptomatic or cause transient nonspecific symptoms (acute
retroviral syndrome). Acute retroviral syndrome usually begins within 1 to 4 wk of infection and usually
lasts 3 to 14 days; it is characterized by fever, malaise, rash, arthralgia, generalized lymphadenopathy,
and sometimes aseptic meningitis. Symptoms are often mistaken for infectious mononucleosis or benign,
nonspecific viral syndromes.
After the first symptoms disappear, most patients, even without treatment, have no symptoms or only a
few, mild, intermittent, nonspecific symptoms for a highly variable time period (2 to 15 yr).
Symptoms may result from HIV directly or from opportunistic infections. The following are most common:
• Lymphadenopathy
===PAGE:1615===
• White plaques due to oral candidiasis
• Painful rash due to herpes zoster
• Diarrhea
• Fatigue
• Fever with intermittent sweats
Asymptomatic, mild-to-moderate cytopenias (eg, leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia) are also
common. In some patients, progressive wasting occurs.
Eventually, when the CD4 count drops to < 200/
μ
L, nonspecific symptoms may worsen and a succession
of AIDS-defining illnesses (those in category B or C of
Table 154-1
) develop. Evaluation may detect
infection by
Mycobacterium
sp,
P. jirovecii
,
Cryptococcus neoformans
, or other fungi. Infections that also
occur in the general population but suggest AIDS if they are unusually severe or frequently recur include
herpes zoster, herpes simplex, vaginal candidiasis, and
Salmonella
sepsis. In patients with HIV infection,
certain syndromes are common and may require different considerations (see
Table 154-3
). Some patients present with cancers (eg, Kaposi's sarcoma, B-cell lymphomas) that occur
more frequently, are unusually severe, or have unique features in patients with HIV infection (. In other patients, neurologic dysfunction may occur.
[Table 154-3.
Common Manifestations of HIV Infection by Organ System]
Diagnosis
• HIV antibody testing
• Nucleic acid amplification assays to determine HIV RNA level (viral load)
HIV infection is suspected in patients with persistent, unexplained, generalized adenopathy or any of the
disorders in category B or C (see
Table 154-1
). It may also be suspected in high-risk patients with
symptoms that could represent acute primary HIV infection.
Detection of antibodies to HIV is sensitive and specific except during the first few weeks after infection.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect HIV antibodies is highly sensitive, but rarely,
results are false-positive.
Positive ELISA results are therefore confirmed with a more specific test such as
Western blot. However, these tests have drawbacks:
• ELISA requires complex equipment.
• Western blot requires well-trained technicians and is expensive.
• The full testing sequence takes time.
Newer point-of-care tests using blood or saliva (eg, particle agglutination, immunoconcentration,
immunochromatography) can be done quickly and simply, allowing testing in a variety of settings and
immediate reporting to patients. Positive results of these tests should be confirmed by standard blood
tests (eg, Western blot).
If HIV infection is suspected despite negative antibody test results (eg, during the first few weeks), plasma
may be tested for HIV RNA (virion). The nucleic acid amplification assays used are highly sensitive and
specific. HIV RNA assays require advanced technology, such as reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) or
branched DNA (bDNA) measurement, which are sensitive to extremely low HIV RNA levels. Measurement
of p24 HIV antigen by ELISA is a less sensitive and less specific alternative for directly detecting HIV
protein in blood.
===PAGE:1616===
When HIV is diagnosed, CD4 count and plasma HIV RNA level should be determined; both are useful for
determining prognosis and monitoring treatment. The CD4 count is calculated as the product of the
following:
• WBC count
• Percentage of WBCs that are lymphocytes
• Percentage of lymphocytes that are CD4+
Normally, the CD4 count in adults is about 750 ± 250/
μ
L. Plasma HIV RNA level (viral load) reflects HIV
replication rates. The higher the set point (the relatively stable virus levels that occur after primary
infection), the more quickly the CD4 count decreases and the greater the risk of opportunistic infection,
even in patients without symptoms.
HIV infection can be staged in order of increasing severity as category A, B, or C (see
Table 154-1
).
Staging is by clinical manifestations or the CD4 count (A: ≥ 500; B: 200 to 499; and C: < 200/
μ
L). The
clinical category is determined by the most severe manifestation patients have had, past or present.
Patients are never restaged to a less severe category.
HIV-related conditions:
Diagnosis of the various opportunistic infections, cancers, and other syndromes
that occur in HIV-infected patients is discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL. Many have aspects unique
to HIV infection (see
Table 154-1
and p.
).
Hematologic disorders
(eg, cytopenias, lymphomas, cancers) are common and may be usefully
evaluated with bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. This procedure can also help diagnose disseminated
infections with MAC,
M. tuberculosis, Cryptococcus, Histoplasma
, human parvovirus B19,
P. jirovecii
,
and
Leishmania
. Most patients have normocellular or hypercellular marrow despite peripheral cytopenia,
reflecting peripheral destruction. Iron stores are usually normal or increased, reflecting anemia of chronic
disease (an iron-reutilization defect). Mild to moderate plasmacytosis, lymphoid aggregates, increased
numbers of histiocytes, and dysplastic changes in hematopoietic cells are common.
HIV-associated neurologic syndromes
can be differentiated via lumbar puncture with CSF analysis
and contrast-enhanced CT or MRI (see
Table 154-3
and elsewhere in THE MANUAL).
Screening:
Screening antibody tests should be offered routinely to adults and adolescents, particularly
pregnant women, regardless of their perceived risk. For people at highest risk, especially sexually active
people who have multiple partners and who do not practice safe sex, testing should be repeated every 6
to 12 mo. Such testing is confidential and available, often free of charge, in many public and private
facilities throughout the world.
Prognosis
Risk of AIDS, death, or both is predicted by the CD4 count in the short term and by plasma HIV RNA level
in the longer term. For every 3-fold (0.5 log
) increase in viral load, mortality over the next 2 to 3 yr
increases about 50%. HIV-associated morbidity and mortality vary by the CD count, with the most deaths
from HIV-related causes occurring at counts of < 50/
μ
L. However, with effective treatment, the HIV RNA
level decreases to undetectable levels, CD4 counts often increase dramatically, and risk of illness and
death falls.
A subgroup of HIV-infected persons (termed long-term nonprogressors) remains asymptomatic with high
CD4 counts and low HIV levels in the blood without antiretroviral treatment. They usually have vigorous
cellular and humoral immune responses to their infecting HIV strain as measured by assays in vitro. The
specificity of this effective response is shown by examples of superinfection with a second strain of HIV to
which their immune response is not as effective, resulting in their conversion to a more typical pattern of
progression. Thus, their unusually effective response
to the first strain did not apply to the second strain.
These cases provide a rationale for counseling HIV-infected people not to expose themselves to possible
HIV superinfection through unsafe sex or needle sharing.
===PAGE:1617===
Treatment
• Combinations of antiretroviral drugs
• Sometimes prophylaxis for opportunistic infections
Because adequate antiretroviral therapy can cause significant long-term morbidity, it is not recommended
for everyone. Current indications include a CD4 count of < 350/
μ
L and an HIV RNA level of > 55,000
copies/mL. Use of potent combinations of antiretroviral drugs for HIV therapy (highly active antiretroviral
therapy [HAART]) aims to reduce the plasma HIV RNA level and restore the CD4 count (immune
restoration or reconstitution). The lower the pretreatment CD4 count and the higher the HIV RNA level,
the less likely treatment is to succeed; however, marked improvement is likely even in patients with
advanced immunosuppression. The increase in CD4 count indicates a corresponding decrease in risk of
opportunistic infections, other complications, and death. With immune restoration, patients, even those
with complications that have no specific treatment (eg, HIV-induced cognitive dysfunction) or that were
previously considered untreatable (eg, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy), may improve.
Outcomes are also improved for patients with cancers (eg, lymphoma, Kaposi's sarcoma) and
opportunistic infections.
HAART aims to suppress viral replication to undetectable levels; this goal can usually be achieved if
patients take their drugs > 95% of the time. However, maintaining this degree of adherence is difficult.
Partial suppression (failure to lower plasma levels to undetectable levels) may select for single or multiple
mutations in HIV that make viruses completely or partially resistant and make subsequent treatment more
likely to fail.
Patients beginning HAART sometimes deteriorate clinically, despite increasing CD4 counts, because of
an immune reaction to subclinical opportunistic infections or to residual microbial antigens after
successful treatment of opportunistic infections. These sometimes serious reactions are termed immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndromes (IRIS). IRIS can complicate many infections and even cancers (eg,
Kaposi's sarcoma) but is usually self-limited or responds to treatment with brief regimens of
corticosteroids. Determining whether clinical deterioration is caused by treatment failure, IRIS, or both
requires assessment of the persistence of active infection with cultures and can be difficult.
The success of HAART is assessed by measuring plasma HIV RNA levels every 4 to 8 wk for the first 4 to
6 mo or until HIV levels are undetectable (ie, < 50 copies/mL) and every 3 to 6 mo thereafter. Increasing
levels are the earliest evidence of treatment failure and may precede a decreasing CD4 count by months.
Maintaining patients on failing drug regimens contributes to development of HIV mutants that are more
drug-resistant; however, compared with wild-type HIV, these mutants appear to reduce the CD4 count
less.
If treatment fails, drug susceptibility (resistance) assays can determine the susceptibility of the dominant
HIV strain to all available drugs. Genotypic and phenotypic assays are available and can help clinicians
select a new regimen that should contain at least 2 and preferably 3 drugs. The dominant HIV strain in
the blood of patients who are taken off antiretroviral therapy may revert over months to years to the wild
type (which is susceptible) because resistant mutants replicate more slowly. Thus, if patients have not
been treated recently, the full extent of resistance may not be apparent through resistance testing, but
when treatment resumes, strains with resistance mutations often reemerge.
Several classes of antiretrovirals are used in HAART (see
Table 154-4
). There are 5 classes of antiretrovirals; 3 of them inhibit reverse transcriptase by blocking its
RNA-dependent and DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity.
•
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs)
are phosphorylated to active metabolites that
compete for incorporation into viral DNA. They inhibit the HIV reverse transcriptase enzyme
competitively and terminate synthesis of DNA chains.
•
Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (nRTIs)
competitively inhibit the HIV reverse
===PAGE:1618===
transcriptase enzyme, as do NRTIs, but do not require initial phosphorylation.
•
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs)
bind directly to the reverse transcriptase
enzyme.
•
Protease inhibitors (PIs)
inhibit the viral protease enzyme that is crucial to maturation of immature HIV
virions after they bud from host cells.
•
Entry inhibitors (EIs),
sometimes called fusion inhibitors, interfere with the binding of HIV to CD4+
receptors and chemokine
[Table 154-4.
Antiretroviral Drugs]

co-receptors; this binding is required for HIV to enter cells. For example, CCR-5 inhibitors block the
CCR-5 receptor.
•
Integrase inhibitors
prevent HIV DNA from being integrated into human DNA.
Combinations of 3 or 4 drugs from different classes are usually necessary to fully suppress replication of
wild-type HIV. The specific drugs are chosen based on factors such as concomitant conditions (eg,
hepatic dysfunction) and other drugs being taken (to avoid drug interactions). To maximize adherence,
clinicians should choose an affordable, well-tolerated regimen that uses once/day (preferable) or bid
dosing. Guidelines from expert panels for initiating, selecting, switching, and interrupting therapy and
special issues in treating women and children change regularly and are updated at
www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines
. Interactions between antiretrovirals may synergistically increase efficacy.
For example, a subtherapeutic dose of ritonavir (100 mg once/day) can be combined with another PI (eg,
lopinavir, amprenavir, indinavir, atazanavir, tipranavir). Ritonavir inhibits the hepatic enzyme that
metabolizes the other PI, increasing the other drug's levels and efficacy. Another example is lamivudine
(3TC) plus zidovudine (ZDV). Use of either drug as monotherapy quickly results in resistance, but the
mutation that produces resistance in response to 3TC increases the susceptibility of HIV to ZDV. Thus,
used together, they are synergistic.
Conversely, interactions between antiretrovirals may decrease the efficacy of each drug. One drug may
increase elimination of another drug (eg, by inducing hepatic cytochrome P-450 enzymes responsible for
elimination). Another, poorly understood effect of some NRTI combinations (eg, ZDV plus stavudine [d4T])
results in decreased antiretroviral activity without increasing drug elimination.
Combining drugs often increases the risk that either drug will have an adverse effect. Possible
mechanisms include the following:
•
Hepatic metabolism of PIs by cytochrome P-450:
The result is decreased metabolism (and
increased levels) of other drugs.
•
Additive toxicities:
For example, combining NRTIs, such as d4T and didanosine (ddI), increases the
chance of adverse metabolic effects and peripheral neuropathy.
Many drugs may interfere with antiretrovirals; thus, interactions should always be checked before any
new drug is started. In addition to drug interactions, grapefruit juice and St. John's wort can decrease
activity of some antiretroviral drugs and should be avoided.
Adverse effects:
Antiretrovirals can have serious adverse effects (see
Table 154-4
). Some of these
effects, notably anemia, pancreatitis, hepatitis, and glucose intolerance, can be detected by blood tests
before they cause symptoms. Patients should be screened regularly, both clinically and with appropriate
laboratory testing (CBC and blood tests for hyperglycemia, hyperlidemia, hepatic damage, and renal
function), especially when new drugs are started or unexplained symptoms develop.
Metabolic effects
consist of interrelated syndromes of fat redistribution, hyperlipidemia, and insulin
resistance. Subcutaneous fat is commonly redistributed from the face and distal extremities to the trunk
===PAGE:1619===
and abdomen—a cosmetic effect that can stigmatize and distress patients. Treating the resulting deep
facial grooves with injected collagen or polylactic acid can be beneficial. Hyperlipidemia and
hyperglycemia due to insulin resistance may occur with lipodystrophy. Drugs from all classes appear to
contribute to these metabolic effects. Some, such as ritonavir or d4T, do so commonly; others, such as
atazanavir, appear to have minimal effects on lipid levels.
Mechanisms for metabolic effects appear to be multiple; one is mitochondrial toxicity. Risk of metabolic
effects (highest with PIs) and mitochondrial toxicity (highest with NRTIs) varies by drug class and within
drug classes (eg, among NRTIs, highest with d4T). Effects are dose-dependent and often begin in the
first 1 to 2 yr of treatment. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and lactic acidosis are uncommon but can be
lethal. Long-term effects and optimal management of metabolic effects are unclear. Lipid-lowering drugs
(statins) and insulin-sensitizing drugs (glitazones) may help. (See also the recommendations of the HIV
Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the Adult AIDS Clinical Trials
Group: Guidelines for the evaluation and management of dyslipidemia in HIV-infected adults receiving
antiretroviral therapy.)
Bone complications
of HAART include asymptomatic osteopenia and osteoporosis, which are common.
Uncommonly, osteonecrosis of large joints such as the hip and shoulder causes severe joint pain and
dysfunction. Mechanisms of bone complications are poorly understood.
Interruption of HAART is usually safe if all drugs are stopped simultaneously. Interruption may be
necessary if intervening illnesses require treatment or if drug toxicity is intolerable or needs to be
evaluated. After interruption
to determine which drug is responsible for toxicity, clinicians can safely restart
most drugs as monotherapy for up to a few days. NOTE: The most important exception is abacavir;
patients who had fever or rash during previous exposure to abacavir may develop severe, potentially fatal
hypersensitivity reactions with reexposure.
End-of-life care:
Although antiretroviral therapy has dramatically increased life expectancy for patients
with AIDS, many patients still deteriorate and die. Death may result from the following:
• Inability to take HAART consistently, resulting in progressive immunosuppression
• Occurrence of untreatable opportunistic infections and cancers
• Liver failure due to hepatitis B or C
Death is rarely sudden; thus, patients usually have time to make plans. Nonetheless, patients should
record their plans for health care early, with clear instructions for end-of-life care. Other legal documents,
including powers of attorney ( and wills, should be in place. These documents are
particularly important for homosexual patients because protection of assets and rights (including visitation
and decision-making) for their partners may be problems.
As patients near the end of life, clinicians may need to prescribe drugs to relieve pain, anorexia, agitation,
and other distressing symptoms. The profound weight loss in many people during the last stages of AIDS
makes good skin care difficult. The comprehensive support provided by hospice programs helps many
patients because hospice providers are unusually skilled at symptom management, and they support
caregivers and patient autonomy.
Prevention
Vaccines against HIV have been difficult to develop because HIV surface proteins mutate easily, resulting
in an enormous diversity of antigenic types. Nonetheless, research continues, and various candidates are
under study. At the present time, there is no effective AIDS vaccine.
Prevention of transmission:
Vaginal microbicides (including antiretroviral drugs) inserted before sexual
contact have proved ineffective, and some appear to increase risk for women, perhaps by damaging
natural barriers to HIV.
===PAGE:1620===
Effective measures include the following:
•
Public education:
Education is effective and appears to have decreased rates of infection in some
countries, notably Thailand and Uganda. Because sexual contact accounts for most cases, teaching
people to avoid unsafe sex practices is the most relevant measure (see
Table 154-2
).
•
Safe sex practices:
Unless both partners are known to be free of HIV and remain monogamous, safe
sex practices are essential. Safe sex practices are also advised when both partners are HIV-positive;
unprotected sex between HIV-infected people may expose a person to resistant or more virulent strains
of HIV and to other viruses (eg, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, hepatitis B
virus) that cause severe disease in AIDS patients. Condoms offer the best protection. Oil-based
lubricants should not be used because they may dissolve latex, increasing the risk of condom failure.
•
Counseling for parenteral drug users:
Counseling about the risk of sharing needles is important but
is probably more effective if combined with provision of sterile needles, treatment of drug dependence,
and rehabilitation.
•
Confidential testing for HIV infection:
Testing should be offered routinely to adolescents and adults
in virtually all health care settings. To facilitate routine testing, some states no longer require written
consent or extensive pre-test counseling.
•
Counseling for pregnant women:
If pregnant women test positive for HIV, risk of maternal-fetal
transmission should be explained (. Monotherapy with ZDV or nevirapine reduces risk by
two thirds, and 2- or 3-drug combination therapy probably reduces it even more. Some drugs can be
toxic to the fetus or mother and cannot be guaranteed to prevent transmission. If treatment is indicated,
combination therapy tailored to the woman's history and stage of pregnancy should be used throughout
pregnancy. Cesarean delivery can reduce risk of transmission. Some women choose to terminate their
pregnancy for this or other reasons.
•
Screening of blood and organs:
Transmission by blood transfusion is still possible because antibody
results may be false-negative during early infection. Currently, screening blood for antibody and p24
antigen is mandated in the US and probably further reduces risk of transmission. Risk is reduced
further by asking people with risk factors for HIV infection, even those with recent negative HIV antibody
test results, not to donate blood or organs for transplantation.
•
Antiretrovirals:
Giving antiretrovirals to HIV-infected people reduces risk of transmission, but how
much risk is reduced is unclear.
•
Circumcision of men:
In several African countries, circumcision reduced incidence
by about 50%; it is
probably also effective elsewhere.
•
Universal precautions:
Medical and dental health care practitioners should wear gloves in situations
that may involve contact with any patient's mucous membranes or body fluids and should be taught how
to avoid needlestick accidents. Home caregivers of patients with HIV infection should wear gloves if
their hands may be exposed to body fluids. Surfaces or instruments contaminated by blood or other
body fluids should be cleaned and disinfected. Effective disinfectants include heat, peroxide, alcohols,
phenolics, and hypochlorite (bleach). Isolation of HIV-infected patients is unnecessary unless indicated
by an opportunistic infection (eg, TB). Guidelines to prevent transmission from infected practitioners to
patients have not been established.
Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP):
Potential consequences of exposure to HIV have prompted the
development of policies and procedures, particularly preventive treatment, to decrease risk of infection to
health care workers. Preventive treatment is indicated after penetrating injuries involving HIV-infected
blood (usually needlesticks) or heavy exposure of mucous membranes (eye or mouth) to infected fluids.
Other body fluids of concern include
• Semen
===PAGE:1621===
• Vaginal secretions
• Body fluids obviously contaminated with blood
After initial exposure to blood, the exposed area is immediately cleaned with soap and water for skin
exposures and with antiseptic for puncture wounds. If mucous membranes are exposed, the area is
flushed with large amounts of water.
The following are documented:
• Nature and time of the exposure
• Clinical information, including risk factors and serologic tests for HIV, about the source patient for the
exposure and the person exposed

Nature of the exposure
is defined by
• Which body fluid was involved
• Whether exposure involved a penetrating injury (eg, needlestick, cut with sharp object)
• Whether the fluid had contact with nonintact skin (eg, abraded or chapped skin) or mucous membrane
Risk of infection
is categorized as high or low:
• High: Involves a hollow-bore needle with visible blood, direct exposure to a needle from a vein or an
artery of the source patient, or mucocutaneous exposure with a large amount of blood from a high-risk
source (viral load > 1500 copies/mL)
• Low: Involves a solid needle, superficial injury, or a low-risk source (viral load < 1500 copies/mL) and
includes most mucocutaneous exposures
Risk is about 0.3% after percutaneous exposure and about 0.09% after mucous membrane exposure.
The source
is qualified by whether it is known or unknown; if the source is unknown (eg, a needle on the
street or in a sharps disposal container), risk should be assessed based on the circumstances of the
exposure (eg, whether the exposure occurred in an area where injection drug use is prevalent, whether a
needle discarded in a drug-treatment facility was used). If the source is known but HIV status is not, the
source is assessed for HIV risk factors, and prophylaxis is considered (see
Table 154-5
).
The goal is to start PEP as soon after exposure as possible if prophylaxis is warranted. CDC
recommends providing PEP within 24 to 36 h after exposure; a longer interval after exposure requires the
advice of an expert.
Use of PEP is determined by risk of infection; guidelines recommend antiretroviral therapy with 2 NRTIs
(eg, ZDV plus 3TC) for low risk and the addition of one or more drugs (eg, 2 NRTIs plus a PI or an
NNRTI) for high risk; drugs are given for 28 days. Nevirapine is avoided because of the rare possibility of
severe hepatitis. Although evidence is not conclusive, ZDV alone probably reduces risk of transmission
after needlestick injuries by about 80%. For detailed recommendations, see
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/rr/rr5011.pdf
or www.nccc.ucsf.edu/Hotlines/PEPline.html
.
If the source's virus is known or suspected to be resistant to ≥ 1 drug, an expert in antiretroviral therapy
and HIV transmission should be consulted. However, clinicians should not delay PEP pending expert
consultation or drug susceptibility testing. Also, clinicians should provide immediate evaluation and faceto-face counseling and not delay follow-up care.
Prevention of opportunistic infections:
Effective chemoprophylaxis is available for many opportunistic
===PAGE:1622===
infections and reduces rates of disease due to
P. jirovecii, Candida, Cryptococcus
, and MAC. If therapy
restores CD4 counts to above threshold values for > 3 mo, chemoprophylaxis can be stopped.
Primary prophylaxis
depends on CD count:
[Table 154-5.
Postexposure Prophylaxis Recommendations]
•
CD4 count < 200/
μ
L:
Prophylaxis against
P. jirovecii
pneumonia and toxoplasmic encephalitis is
recommended. Double-strength trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) tablets given once/day or 3
times/wk are effective for both infections. Some adverse effects can be minimized with the 3 times/wk
dose or by gradual dose escalation. Some patients who cannot tolerate TMP/SMX can tolerate
dapsone (100 mg once/day). For the few patients who cannot tolerate either drug because of a
troublesome adverse effect (eg, fever, neutropenia, rash), aerosolized pentamidine 300 mg once/day or
atovaquone 1500 mg once/day can be used.
•
CD4 count < 75/
μ
L:
Prophylaxis against disseminated MAC with azithromycin, clarithromycin, or
rifabutin is recommended. Azithromycin can be given weekly as two 600-mg tablets; it provides
protection (70%) similar to daily clarithromycin and does not interact with other drugs.
If latent TB is suspected (based on tuberculin skin tests, high-risk exposure, or prior history of infection),
regardless of CD4 count, patients should be given either rifampicin 10 mg/kg po up to 600 mg or rifabutin
300 mg po daily plus either pyrazinamide 25 mg/kg po up to 2.5 g for 2 mo or isoniazid 5 mg/kg po up to
300 mg once/day for 9 mo to prevent reactivation.
For primary prophylaxis against some fungal infections (eg, esophageal candidiasis, cryptococcal
meningitis or pneumonia), oral fluconazole 100 to 200 mg once/day or 400 mg weekly is successful but is
infrequently used because the cost per infection prevented is high and diagnosis and treatment of these
infections are usually successful.
Secondary prophylaxis
is indicated if patients have had the following:
• Recurrent oral, vaginal, or esophageal candidiasis or cryptococcal infections: Fluconazole is used.
• Histoplasmosis: Itraconazole is used (.
• Latent toxoplasmosis: This disorder is indicated by serum antibodies (IgG) to
Toxoplasma gondii
.
TMP/SMX (in doses used to prevent
P. jirovecii
pneumonia) is used to prevent reactivation and
consequent toxoplasmic encephalitis. Latent infection is less common (about 15% of adults) in the US
than in Europe and most developing countries.
•
P. jirovecii
pneumonia (
• Herpes simplex infection (
• Aspergillosis (possibly—
Detailed guidelines for prophylaxis of fungal (including
Pneumocystis
), viral, mycobacterial,
and
toxoplasmic infections are available at www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines
.
Vaccination:
Vaccination (using nonviable vaccines) is indicated for pneumococcal disease (23-valent
vaccine if the CD4 count is > 200/
μ
L), influenza A (all patients annually), and hepatitis B and A (for
patients at risk); these vaccines are effective less often in patients who are HIV-positive than in those who
are HIV-negative. Vaccines against human papillomavirus and varicella (secondary boosting with
varicella-zoster, consisting of high-titer live virus) would potentially be valuable in HIV-infected adults, and
both are undergoing testing. But their safety needs to be evaluated because these live-virus vaccines are
potentially dangerous for patients with severe immunosuppression. For children with HIV infection,
vaccination recommendations vary (see p.
and
Table 281-4
.
===PAGE:1623===
Cancers Common in HIV-Infected Patients
Kaposi's sarcoma (, non-Hodgkin lymphoma (, and cervical cancer are AIDSdefining cancers in HIV-infected patients. Other cancers that appear to be increased in incidence or
severity include Hodgkin lymphoma (especially the mixed cellularity and lymphocyte-depleted subtypes),
primary CNS lymphoma, anal cancer, testicular cancer, melanoma and other skin cancers, and lung
cancer. Leiomyosarcoma is a rare complication of HIV infection in children.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma:
Incidence is 50 to 200 times higher in HIV-infected patients. Most cases are
B-cell, aggressive, high-grade histologic subtype lymphomas. At diagnosis, extranodal sites are usually
involved; they include bone marrow, GI tract, and other sites that are unusual in non-HIV-associated nonHodgkin lymphoma, such as the CNS and body cavities (eg, pleural, pericardial, peritoneal).
Common presentations include rapidly enlarging lymph nodes or extranodal masses or systemic
symptoms (eg, weight loss, night sweats, fevers).
Diagnosis is by biopsy with histopathologic and immunochemical analysis of tumor cells. Abnormal
circulating lymphocytes or unexpected cytopenias suggest involvement of the bone marrow, mandating
bone marrow biopsy. Tumor staging may require CSF examination and CT or MRI of the chest, abdomen,
and other areas where tumors are suspected.
Poor prognosis is predicted by the following:
• CD4 count of < 100/
μ
L
• Age > 35 yr
• Poor functional status
• Bone marrow involvement
• History of opportunistic infections
• High-grade histologic subtype
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is treated with systemic, multidrug chemotherapy (eg, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, and vincristine plus prednisone), usually combined with antiretrovirals, prophylactic
antibiotics and antifungals, and hematologic growth factors. Therapy may be limited by severe
myelosuppression, particularly when combinations of myelosuppressive antitumor or antiretroviral drugs
are used. Another possible treatment is IV anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab), which is effective
for non-Hodgkin lymphoma in patients without HIV. Radiation therapy may debulk large tumors and control
pain or bleeding.
Primary CNS lymphoma:
Incidence is markedly increased in HIV-infected patients with very low CD4
counts (see also p.
). These lymphomas consist of intermediate- or high-grade malignant B cells,
originating in CNS tissue, and do not spread systemically.
Presenting symptoms include headache, seizures, neurologic deficits (eg, cranial nerve palsies), and
mental status change.
Acute treatment requires control of cerebral edema and whole-brain radiation therapy. Radiographic
response is common, but median survival is < 6 mo. The role of antitumor chemotherapy is unclear, but
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) improves survival.
Cervical cancer:
In HIV-infected women, incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is
increased, oncogenic subtypes (types 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, and 39) persist, and the incidence of cervical
intraepithelial dysplasia (CIN) is up to 60%, but increased incidence of cervical cancer has not been
===PAGE:1624===
proved. However, cervical cancers, if they occur, are more extensive, are more difficult to cure, and have
higher recurrence rates after treatment. Confirmed risk factors for cancer include the following:
• Infection with HPV subtype 16 or 18
• CD4+ count of < 200/
μ
L
• Age > 34 yr
HIV infection does not change the management of CIN or cervical cancer. Frequent Papanicolaou tests
are important to monitor for progression. HAART may result in resolution of HPV infection and regression
of CIN but has no clear effects on cancer.
Squamous cell cancer of the anus and vulva:
Squamous cell cancers of the anus (see also p.
)
and vulva (see also p.
) are
caused by the same oncogenic types of HPV as cervical cancers and occur more commonly in
HIV-infected patients. The reason for the increased incidence in these patients appears to be the
increased rate of high-risk behaviors (eg, anal-receptive intercourse) rather than HIV itself. Anal dysplasia
is common, and squamous cell cancers can be very aggressive.
Treatments include surgical extirpation, radiation therapy, and combined chemotherapy with mitomycin or
cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil.
===PAGE:1625===
Chapter 155. Other Viruses
Introduction
The number of viral diseases affecting humans is large. Most of these are discussed elsewhere in THE
MANUAL. A few are not easily categorized and are discussed here. Most of these diseases tend to occur
in children but can occur in adults.
Measles
(Rubeola; Morbilli; 9-Day Measles)
Measles is a highly contagious, viral infection that is most common among children. It is
characterized by fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis, enanthem (Koplik's spots) on the buccal or
labial mucosa, and a maculopapular rash that spreads cephalocaudally. Diagnosis is usually
clinical. Treatment is supportive. Vaccination is highly effective.
Worldwide, measles infects about 20 million people causing about 200,000 deaths annually, primarily in
children. Measles is rare in the US because of routine childhood vaccination; an average of 63 cases/yr
were reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) from 2000 to 2007. However, in
2008, 131 cases were reported from January to July.
Pathophysiology
Measles is caused by a paramyxovirus and is a human disease with no known animal reservoir or
asymptomatic carrier state. It is extremely communicable; the secondary attack rate is > 90% among
susceptible people who are exposed.
Measles is spread mainly by secretions from the nose, throat, and mouth during the prodromal or early
eruptive stage. Communicability begins several days before and continues until several days after the
rash appears. Measles is not communicable once the rash begins to desquamate.
Transmission is typically by large respiratory droplets that are discharged by cough and briefly remain
airborne for a short distance. Transmission may also occur by small aerosolized droplets that can remain
airborne (and thus can be inhaled) for up to 2 h in closed areas (eg, in an office examination room).
Transmission by fomites seems less likely than airborne transmission because the measles virus is
thought to survive only for a short time on dry surfaces.
An infant whose mother has had measles receives antibodies transplacentally; these antibodies are
protective for most of the first 6 to 12 mo of life. Lifelong immunity is conferred by infection. In the US,
many measles cases are imported by travelers or immigrants; indigenous transmission occurs primarily
among unvaccinated people.
Symptoms and Signs
After a 7- to 14-day incubation period, measles begins with a prodrome of fever, coryza, hacking cough,
and tarsal conjunctivitis. The pathognomonic Koplik's spots appear 2 to 4 days later, usually on the
buccal mucosa opposite the 1st and 2nd upper molars. The spots resemble grains of white sand
surrounded by red areolae. They may be extensive, producing diffuse mottled erythema of the buccal
mucosa. Sore throat develops.
The rash (see
Plate 65
) appears 3 to 5 days after symptom onset, usually 1 to 2 days after Koplik's spots appear. It
begins on the face in front of and below the ears and on the side of the neck as irregular macules, soon
mixed with papules. Within 24 to 48 h, lesions spread to the trunk and extremities (including the palms
and soles) as they begin to fade on the face. Petechiae or ecchymoses may occur with severe rashes.
During peak disease severity, a patient's temperature may exceed 40°C, with periorbital edema,
===PAGE:1626===
conjunctivitis, photophobia, a hacking cough, extensive rash, prostration, and mild itching. Constitutional
symptoms and signs parallel the severity of the eruption and the
epidemic. In 3 to 5 days, the fever falls,
the patient feels more comfortable, and the rash fades rapidly, leaving a coppery brown discoloration
followed by desquamation.
Immunocompromised patients may not have a rash and can develop severe, progressive giant cell
pneumonia.
Complications:
Complications include
• Atypical measndrome
• Pneumonia
• Bacterial superinfection
• Acute thrombocytopenic purpura
• Encephalitis
• Transient hepatitis
• Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
Atypical measles syndrome
usually occurs in people previously immunized with the original killed-virus
measles vaccines, which have been unavailable since 1968. The older vaccines can alter disease
expression after infection with wild-type measles. Atypical measles syndrome may begin abruptly, with
high fever, prostration, headache, abdominal pain, and cough. The rash may appear 1 to 2 days later,
often beginning on the extremities, and may be maculopapular, vesicular, urticarial, or purpuric. Edema of
the hands and feet may occur. Pneumonia and hilar adenopathy are common and may be prolonged;
chest x-ray abnormalities may persist for weeks to months. Symptomatic hypoxemia may occur.
Pneumonia
due to measles virus infection of the lungs occurs in about 5% of patients, even during
apparently uncomplicated infection; in infants, it is a common cause of death.
Bacterial superinfections
include pneumonia and otitis media. Measles transiently suppresses delayed
hypersensitivity, which can worsen active TB and temporarily prevent reaction to tuberculin and
histoplasmin antigens in skin tests. Bacterial superinfection is suggested by pertinent focal signs or a
relapse of fever, leukocytosis, or prostration.
Acute thrombocytopenic purpura
may occur after infection resolves and cause a mild, self-limited
bleeding tendency, although occasionally bleeding is severe.
Encephalitis
occurs in 1/1000 to 2000 cases, usually 2 days to 2 wk after onset of the rash, often
beginning with recrudescence of high fever, headache, seizures, and coma. CSF usually has a
lymphocyte count of 50 to 500/
μ
L and a mildly elevated protein level but may be normal initially.
Encephalitis may resolve in about 1 wk or may persist longer, causing morbidity or death.
Transient hepatitis
may occur during an acute infection.
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
(SSPE) is a rare, progressive, ultimately fatal, late complication
of measles (.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Serologic testing
===PAGE:1627===
• Viral detection via culture or reverse transcription-PCR
Typical measles may be suspected in an exposed patient who has coryza, conjunctivitis, photophobia,
and cough but is usually suspected only after the rash appears. Diagnosis is usually clinical, by
identifying Koplik's spots or the rash. CBC is unnecessary but, if obtained, may show leukopenia with a
relative lymphocytosis. Laboratory identification is necessary for public health and outbreak control
purposes. It is most easily done by demonstration of the presence of measles IgM antibody in an acute
serum specimen or by viral culture or reverse transcription-PCR of throat swabs, blood, nasopharyngeal
swabs, or urine samples. A rise in IgG antibody levels between acute and convalescent sera is highly
accurate, but obtaining this information delays diagnosis. All cases of suspected measles should be
reported to the local health department even before laboratory confirmation.
Differential diagnosis
includes rubella, scarlet fever, drug rashes (eg, from phenobarbital or
sulfonamides), serum sickness, roseola infantum, infectious mononucleosis, erythema infectiosum (, and echovirus and coxsackievirus infections (see also
Table 149-7
). Atypical measles, because of its greater variability, can simulate even more conditions than
typical measles. Some of these conditions can be distinguished from typical measles as follows:
•
Rubella:
A recognizable prodrome is absent, fever and other constitutional symptoms are absent or less
severe, postauricular and suboccipital lymph nodes are enlarged (and usually tender), and duration is
short.
•
Drug rashes:
A drug rash often resembles the measles rash, but a prodrome is absent, there is no
cephalocaudal progression or cough, and there is usually a history of recent drug exposure.
•
Roseola infantum:
The rash resembles that of measles, but it seldom occurs in children > 3 yr. Initial
temperature is usually high, Koplik's spots and malaise are absent, and defer-vescence and rash occur
simultaneously.
Prognosis
Mortality is about 2/1000 in the US but is much higher in the developing world. Undernutrition and vitamin
A deficiency may predispose to mortality. Vitamin A supplementation is recommended for populations at
risk.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• For children, vitamin A
Treatment is supportive, including for encephalitis.
Vitamin A supplementation has been shown to reduce morbidity and mortality due to measles in children
in the developing world. Because low serum levels of vitamin A are associated with severe disease due to
measles, vitamin A treatment is recommended for all children with measles. The dose is given orally
once/day for 2 days and depends on the child's age:
• > 1 yr: 200,000 IU
• 6 to 11 mo: 100,000 IU
• < 6 mo: 50,000 IU
In children with clinical signs of vitamin A deficiency, a single age-specific dose of vitamin A is repeated 2
to 4 wk later.
===PAGE:1628===
Prevention
A live-attenuated virus vaccine containing measles, mumps, and rubella is routinely given to children in
most developed countries (see also p.
and
Table 268-10
. The first dose is recommended at age 12 to 15 mo but can be given as young
as age 6 mo during a measles outbreak. Two doses are recommended; the second is given at age 4 to 6
yr. Infants immunized at < 1 yr of age still require 2 further doses given after the first birthday. Vaccine
provides long-lasting immunity and has decreased measles incidence in the US by 99%. The vaccine
causes mild or inapparent, noncommunicable infection. Fever > 38° C occurs 5 to 12 days after
inoculation in < 5% of vaccinees and can be followed by a rash. CNS reactions are exceedingly rare; the
vaccine does not cause autism.
Contraindications to the vaccine include generalized cancers (eg, leukemia, lymphoma),
immunodeficiency, and therapy with immunosuppressants (eg, corticosteroids, irradiation, alkylating
agents, antimetabolites). HIV infection is a contraindication only if immunosuppression is severe (CDC
immunologic category 3 with CD4 < 15%); if not, the risks of wild measles outweigh the risk of acquiring
measles from the live vaccine. Reasons to defer vaccination include pregnancy, serious febrile illness,
active untreated TB, or administration of antibody (as whole blood, plasma, or any immune globulin).
Duration of deferral depends on the type and dose of immune globulin preparation given but may be as
long as 11 mo.
Postexposure prophylaxis:
Prevention in susceptible contacts is possible by giving the vaccine within
3 days of exposure. If vaccine should be deferred, immune globulin 0.25 mL/kg IM (maximum dose, 15
mL) is given immediately, with vaccination given 5 to 6 mo later if medically appropriate (eg, if the patient
is no longer pregnant). An exposed immunodeficient patient with a contraindication to vaccination is given
immune globulin 0.5 mL/kg IM (maximum, 15 mL). Immune globulin should not be given simultaneously
with vaccine.
Monkeypox
Monkeypox virus is structurally related to the smallpox virus and causes similar, but milder
illness.
Monkeypox, like smallpox, is a member of the Orthopoxvirus group. Although the reservoir is unknown,
monkeypox is endemic among rodents and monkeys in the rain forests of Africa, mostly in western and
central Africa. Human disease occurs in Africa sporadically and in occasional epidemics.
In the US, an outbreak of monkeypox occurred in 2003, when infected rodents imported as pets from
Ghana spread the virus to pet prairie dogs, which then infected people in the Midwest. The outbreak
involved 35 confirmed, 13 probable, and 22 suspected cases in 6 states, but there were no deaths.
Monkeypox is probably transmitted from animals via wounds or mucous membranes. Person-to-person
transmission occurs inefficiently, with an attack rate of 8 to 9%. Most patients are children. People who
have received smallpox vaccine may be at reduced risk. In Africa, mortality rate ranges from 4 to 22%.
Clinically, monkeypox is similar to smallpox; however, skin lesions occur more often in crops, and
lymphadenopathy may be more common.
Clinical differentiation of monkeypox from smallpox and chickenpox may be impossible. Diagnosis is by
culture, PCR, immunohistochemistry, or electron microscopy, depending on which tests are available.
Treatment is supportive. Cases are reported to public health authorities.
Mumps
(Epidemic Parotitis)
Mumps is an acute, contagious, systemic viral disease, usually causing painful enlargement of
===PAGE:1629===
the salivary glands, most commonly the parotids. Complications may include orchitis,
meningoencephalitis, and pancreatitis. Diagnosis is usually clinical; all cases are reported to
public health authorities. Treatment is supportive. Vaccination is effective for prevention.
The causative agent, a paramyxovirus, is spread by droplets or saliva. The virus probably enters through
the nose or mouth. It is in saliva up to 6 days before salivary gland swelling appears. It is also in blood
and urine and, if the CNS is involved, in CSF. One attack usually confers permanent immunity.
Mumps is less communicable than measles. It occurs mainly in unimmunized populations, but outbreaks
on college campuses among largely immunized populations have occurred. A combination of primary
vaccine failure (failure to develop immunity after vaccination) and waning immunity may have played a
part in these outbreaks. In 2006, there was a resurgence of mumps in the US with 6584 cases, which
occurred primarily in young adults with prior vaccination. As with measles, mumps cases may be imported,
leading to indigenous transmission, especially in congregate settings (eg, college campuses). Peak
incidence of mumps is during late winter and early spring. Disease occurs at any age but is unusual in
children < 2 yr, particularly those < 1 yr. About 25 to 30% of cases are clinically inapparent.
Symptoms and Signs
After a 14- to 24-day incubation period, most people develop headache, anorexia, malaise, and a low- to
moderate-grade fever. The salivary glands become involved 12 to 24 h later, with fever up to 39.5 to 40°
C. Fever persists 24 to 72 h. Glandular swelling peaks on about the 2nd day and lasts 5 to 7 days.
Involved glands are extremely tender during the febrile period.
Parotitis is usually bilateral. Pain while chewing or swallowing, especially while swallowing acidic liquids
such as vinegar or citrus juice, is its earliest symptom. It later causes swelling beyond the parotid in front
of and below the ear. Occasionally, the submandibular and sublingual glands also swell and, more rarely,
are the only glands affected. Submandibular gland involvement causes neck swelling beneath the jaw,
and suprasternal edema may develop, perhaps because of lymphatic obstruction by enlarged salivary
glands. When sublingual glands are involved, the tongue may swell. The oral duct openings of the
affected glands are edematous and slightly inflamed. The skin over the glands may become tense and
shiny.
Complications:
Mumps may involve organs other than the salivary glands, particularly in postpubertal
patients. Such complications include
• Orchitis or oophoritis
• Meningitis or encephalitis
• Pancreatitis
About 20% of postpubertal male patients develop orchitis (testicular inflammation), usually unilateral, with
pain, tenderness, edema, erythema, and warmth of the scrotum. Some testicular atrophy may ensue, but
testosterone production and fertility are usually preserved. In females, oophoritis (gonadal involvement) is
less commonly recognized, is less painful, and does not impair fertility.
Meningitis, typically with headache, vomiting, stiff neck, and CSF pleocytosis, occurs in 1 to 10% of
patients with parotitis. Encephalitis, with drowsiness, seizures, or coma, occurs in about 1/1000 to 5000
cases. About 50% of CNS mumps infections occur without parotitis.
Pancreatitis, typically with sudden severe nausea, vomiting, and epigastric pain, may occur toward the
end of the first week. These symptoms disappear in about 1 wk, leading to complete recovery.
Prostatitis, nephritis, myocarditis, hepatitis, mastitis, polyarthritis, deafness, and lacrimal gland
involvement occur extremely rarely. Inflammation of the thyroid and thymus glands may cause edema and
swelling over the sternum, but sternal swelling more often results from submandibular gland involvement.
===PAGE:1630===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Serologic testing
• Viral detection via tissue culture or reverse transcription-PCR
Mumps is suspected in patients with salivary gland inflammation and typical systemic symptoms,
particularly if there is parotitis or a known mumps outbreak. Laboratory testing is not needed to make a
diagnosis but is strongly recommended for public health purposes. Other conditions can cause similar
glandular involvement (see
Table 155-1
). Mumps is also suspected in patients with unexplained aseptic
[Table 155-1.
Causes of Parotid and Other Salivary Gland Enlargement]
meningitis or encephalitis during mumps outbreaks. Lumbar puncture is necessary for patients with
meningeal signs.
Laboratory diagnosis is necessary if disease is unilateral, is recurrent, occurs in previously immunized
patients, or causes prominent involvement of tissues other than the salivary glands. Testing is also
recommended for all patients with parotitis lasting ≥ 2 days without an identified cause. Acute and
convalescent sera are tested by complement fixation or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). If
the laboratory is capable, the virus can usually be cultured from the throat, CSF, and occasionally the
urine, or viral RNA can be detected by reverse transcription-PCR.
Other laboratory tests are generally unnecessary, although serum amylase level can also be measured;
elevation suggests mumps. WBC count is nonspecific; it may be normal but usually shows slight
leukopenia and neutropenia. In meningitis, CSF glucose is usually normal but is occasionally between 20
and 40 mg/dL (1.1 and 2.2 mmol/L), as in bacterial meningitis. CSF protein is only mildly elevated.
Prognosis
Uncomplicated mumps usually resolves, although a relapse occurs rarely after about 2 wk. Prognosis of
patients with meningitis is usually good, although permanent sequelae, such as unilateral (or rarely
bilateral) nerve deafness or facial paralysis, may result. Postinfectious encephalitis, acute cerebellar
ataxia, transverse myelitis, and polyneuritis occur rarely.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment of mumps and its complications is supportive. The patient is isolated until glandular swelling
subsides. A soft diet reduces pain caused by chewing. Acidic substances (eg, citrus fruit juices) that
cause discomfort should be avoided.
Repeated vomiting due to pancreatitis may necessitate IV hydration. For orchitis, bed rest and support of
the scrotum in cotton on an adhesive-tape bridge between the thighs to minimize tension or use of ice
packs often relieves pain. Corticosteroids have not been shown to hasten resolution of orchitis.
Prevention
Vaccination with live mumps virus vaccine (see p.
and
Table 268-10
 provides effective
prevention and causes no significant local or systemic reactions. Two doses, given as combined measles,
mumps and rubella vaccine, are recommended for children; the first is given at age 12 to 15 mo, and the
second at age 4 to 6 yr. Adults born during or after 1957 should have 1 dose, unless they have had
mumps diagnosed by a health care practitioner. Pregnant women and people with an impaired immune
system should not be given such live-attenuated vaccines.
===PAGE:1631===
Postexposure vaccination does not protect against mumps from that exposure. Mumps immune globulin
and serum immune globulin are also not helpful.
Rubella
(German Measles; 3-Day Measles)
(See also p.
.)
Rubella is a contagious viral infection that may cause adenopathy, rash, and sometimes
constitutional symptoms, which are usually mild and brief. Infection during early pregnancy can
cause spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, or congenital defects. Diagnosis is usually clinical. Cases
are reported to public health authorities Treatment is usually unnecessary. Vaccination is
effective for prevention.
Rubella is caused by an RNA virus, rubella virus, which is spread by respiratory droplets through close
contact or through the air. Patients can transmit rubella during asymptomatic infection or from 10 days
before the rash appears until 15 days after onset of the rash. Congenitally infected infants may transmit
rubella for many months after birth. Rubella is less contagious than measles. Immunity appears to be
lifelong after natural infection. However, in unvaccinated populations, 10 to 15% of young adults have not
had childhood
infection and are susceptible. At present, incidence in the US is at a historic low because
of routine childhood vaccination; all cases since 2002 have been linked to importation.
Symptoms and Signs
Many cases are mild. After a 14- to 21-day incubation period, a 1- to 5-day prodrome, usually consisting
of low-grade fever, malaise, and lymphadenopathy, occurs in adults but may be minimal or absent in
children. Tender swelling of the suboccipital, postauricular, and posterior cervical glands is characteristic.
There is pharyngeal injection at the onset.
The rash is similar to that of measles but is less extensive and more evanescent (see
Plate 64
); it is often the first sign in children. It begins on the face and neck and quickly spreads to the
trunk and extremities. At onset, a blanching, macular erythema may appear, particularly on the face. On
the 2nd day, the rash often becomes more scarlatiniform (pinpoint) with a reddish flush. Petechiae form on
the soft palate (Forschheimer's spots), later coalescing into a red blush. The rash lasts 3 to 5 days.
Constitutional symptoms in children are absent or mild and may include malaise and occasional
arthralgias. Adults usually have few or no constitutional symptoms but occasionally have fever, malaise,
headache, stiff joints, transient arthritis, and mild rhinitis. Fever typically resolves by the 2nd day of the
rash.
Encephalitis has occurred rarely during large military outbreaks. Complete resolution is typical, but
encephalitis is occasionally fatal. Thrombocytopenic purpura and otitis media occur rarely.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Serologic testing
Rubella is suspected in patients with characteristic adenopathy and rash. Laboratory diagnosis is
necessary for pregnant women, patients with encephalitis, and neonates. Also, laboratory evaluation is
strongly encouraged for all suspected cases of rubella for public health purposes. A ≥ 4-fold rise between
acute and convalescent (4 to 8 wk) antibody titers confirms the diagnosis, as can serum rubella IgM
antibody testing.
Differential diagnosis
includes measles, scarlet fever, secondary syphilis, drug rashes, erythema
===PAGE:1632===
infectiosum (, and infectious mononucleosis as well as echovirus and coxsackievirus
infections (see
Table 149-7
). Infections with enteroviruses and parvovirus B19 (erythema infectiosum)
may be clinically indistinguishable. Rubella is differentiated from measles by the milder, more evanescent
rash; milder and briefer constitutional symptoms; and absence of Koplik's spots, photophobia, and cough.
Within a day of onset, scarlet fever usually causes more severe constitutional symptoms and pharyngitis
than does rubella. In secondary syphilis, adenopathy is not tender, and the rash is usually prominent on
the palms and soles. Also, laboratory diagnosis of syphilis is usually readily available. Infectious
mononucleosis can be differentiated by its more severe pharyngitis, more prolonged malaise, and atypical
lymphocytosis and by Epstein-Barr virus antibody testing (.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is symptomatic. No specific therapy for encephalitis is available.
Prevention
Live-virus vaccine is given routinely (see
Table 268-10
. It produces immunity for ≥ 15 yr in >
95% of recipients and does not appear to transmit the infection. Because certain other infections are
clinically indistinguishable from rubella, a reported history of rubella does not guarantee immunity.
Vaccination is given to children as combined measles, mumps and rubella vaccine in 2 doses; the first is
given at age 12 to 15 mo, and the second at age 4 to 6 yr. One dose is recommended for all susceptible
postpubertal people, especially college students, military recruits, health care practitioners, recent
immigrants, and people working with young children. Routine vaccination is recommended for all
susceptible mothers immediately after delivery. Screening women of childbearing age for rubella
antibodies and immunizing those susceptible is also suggested. However, women receiving the vaccine
should prevent conception for at least 28 days afterward. The vaccine virus may be capable of infecting a
fetus during early pregnancy. The vaccine does not cause congenital rubella syndrome, but risk of fetal
damage is estimated at ≤ 3%;
use of vaccine is contraindicated throughout pregnancy
.
Fever, rash, lymphadenopathy, polyneuropathy, arthralgia, and arthritis occur rarely after vaccination in
children; painful joint swelling occasionally follows vaccination in adults, usually in women.
Progressive Rubella Panencephalitis
Progressive rubella panencephalitis is a neurologic disorder occurring in children with
congenital rubella. It is presumably due to persistence or reactivation of rubella virus infection.
Some children with congenital rubella syndrome (eg, with deafness, cataracts, microcephaly, and
intellectual disability) develop neurologic deficits in the early teens.
The diagnosis is considered when a child with congenital rubella develops progressive spasticity, ataxia,
mental deterioration, and seizures. Testing involves at least CSF examination and serologic testing. CSF
total protein and globulin and rubella antibody titers in CSF and serum are elevated. CT may show
ventricular enlargement due to cerebellar atrophy and white matter disease. Brain biopsy may be
necessary to exclude other causes of encephalitis or encephalopathy. Rubella virus usually cannot be
recovered by viral culture or immunohistologic testing.
No specific treatment exists.
Smallpox
(Variola)
Smallpox is a highly contagious disease caused by the smallpox virus, an orthopoxvirus. It
causes death in up to 30%. Indigenous infection has been eradicated. The main concern for
===PAGE:1633===
outbreaks is from bioterrorism. Severe constitutional symptoms and a characteristic pustular
rash develop. Treatment is supportive. Prevention involves vaccination, which, because of its
risks, is done selectively.
No cases of smallpox have occurred in the world since 1977 because of worldwide vaccination. In 1980,
the World Health Organization (WHO) recommended discontinuation of routine smallpox vaccination.
Routine vaccination in the US ended in 1972. Because humans are the only natural host of the smallpox
virus and because the virus cannot survive > 2 days in the environment, WHO has declared natural
infection eradicated. Recent concerns about terrorist access to existing stockpiles of smallpox virus raise
the possibility of a recurrence (.
Because immunity declines over time, nearly all people—even those previously vaccinated—are now
thought to be susceptible to smallpox.
Pathophysiology
There are at least 2 strains of smallpox virus. The more virulent strain causes variola major (classic
smallpox); the less virulent strain causes variola minor (alastrim).
Smallpox is transmitted from person to person by direct contact or inhalation of droplet nuclei.
Contaminated clothing or bed linens can also transmit infection. The infection is most communicable for
the first 7 to 10 days after the rash appears. Once crusts form on the skin lesions, infectivity declines.
The attack rate is as high as 85% in unvaccinated people, and infection may lead to as many as 4 to 10
secondary cases from each primary case. However, infection tends to spread slowly and mainly among
close contacts.
The virus invades the oropharyngeal or respiratory mucosa and multiplies in regional lymph nodes,
causing subsequent viremia. It eventually localizes in small blood vessels of the dermis and the
oropharyngeal mucosa. Other organs are seldom clinically involved, except for occasionally the CNS, with
encephalitis. Secondary bacterial infection may develop in skin lesions.
Symptoms and Signs
Variola major
has a 10- to 12-day incubation period (range 7 to 17 days), followed by a 2- to 3-day
prodrome of fever, headache, backache, and extreme malaise. Sometimes severe abdominal pain and
vomiting occur. After the prodrome, a maculopapular rash develops on the oropharyngeal mucosa, face,
and arms, spreading shortly thereafter to the trunk and legs. The oropharyngeal lesions quickly ulcerate.
After 1 or 2 days, the cutaneous lesions become vesicular, then pustular. Pustules are denser on the face
and extremities than on the trunk, and they may appear on the palms. The pustules are round and tense
and appear deeply embedded. Skin lesions of smallpox, unlike those of chickenpox, are all at the same
stage of development on a given body part. After 8 or 9 days, the pustules become crusted. Severe
residual scarring is typical. Mortality rate is about 30%, due to a massive inflammatory response causing
shock and multiple organ failure; death usually occurs in the 2nd wk of illness.
Variola minor
results in symptoms that are similar but much less severe, with a less extensive rash.
Mortality rate is < 1%.
About 5 to 10% of people with smallpox develop either a hemorrhagic or a malignant variant. The
hemorrhagic form is rarer and has a shorter, more intense prodrome, followed by generalized erythema
and cutaneous and
mucosal hemorrhage. It is uniformly fatal within 5 or 6 days. The malignant form has a
similar, severe prodrome, followed by development of confluent, flat, nonpustular skin lesions. In the rare
survivors, the epidermis frequently peels.
Diagnosis
• PCR
===PAGE:1634===
• Electron microscopy
Diagnosis is confirmed by documenting the presence of variola DNA by PCR of vesicular or pustular
samples. Or the virus can be confirmed by electron microscopy or viral culture of material scraped from
skin lesions (ideally, with subsequent confirmation by PCR). Suspected smallpox must be reported
immediately to local public health agencies or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) at
770-488-7100. These agencies then arrange for testing in a laboratory with high-level containment
capability (biosafety level 4).
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Isolation
• Possibly cidofovir
Treatment is generally supportive, with antibiotics for the occasional secondary bacterial infection.
Antiviral drugs have never been used clinically, but cidofovir may be considered for use under an
investigational new drug protocol sponsored by the CDC.
Isolation of people with smallpox is essential. In limited outbreaks, patients may be isolated in a hospital in
a negative-pressure room equipped with high-efficiency particulate (HEPA) filters. In mass outbreaks,
home isolation may be required. Contacts should be placed under surveillance, typically with daily
temperature measurement, and isolated at home if they develop a temperature of > 38° C or other sign of
illness.
Prevention
Smallpox vaccine consists of live vaccinia virus, which is related to smallpox and provides cross-immunity.
Vaccine is administered with a bifurcated needle dipped in reconstituted vaccine. The needle is rapidly
jabbed 15 times in an area about 5 mm in diameter and with sufficient force to draw a trace of blood. The
vaccine site is covered with a dressing to prevent spread of the vaccine virus to other body sites. Fever,
malaise, and myalgias are common the week after vaccination. Successful vaccination is indicated by
development of a pustule by about the 7th day. Revaccination may cause only a papule surrounded by
erythema, which peaks between 3 and 7 days. People without such signs of successful vaccination
should be given another dose of vaccine.
Until an outbreak in the population occurs, preexposure vaccination remains recommended only for
people at high risk of exposure to the virus (eg, laboratory technicians).
Vaccine complications:
Risk factors for complications include extensive skin disorders (particularly
eczema), immunosuppressive diseases or therapies, ocular inflammation, and pregnancy. Widespread
vaccination is not recommended because of the risk. Serious complications occur in about 100 per million
primary vaccines and include
• Postvaccinial encephalitis
• Progressive vaccinia
• Eczema vaccinatum
• Generalized vaccinia
Postvaccinial encephalitis occurs in about 1 of 300,000 recipients of primary vaccination, typically 8 to 15
days postvaccination.
Progressive vaccinia results in a nonhealing vaccinial (vesicular) skin lesion that spreads to adjacent skin
===PAGE:1635===
and ultimately other skin areas, bones, and viscera. Progressive vaccinia may occur after primary
vaccination or revaccination but occurs almost exclusively in patients with an underlying defect in cellmediated immunity; it can be fatal.
Eczema vaccinatum results in vaccinial skin lesions appearing on areas of active or even healed eczema.
Generalized vaccinia results from hematogenous dissemination of the vaccinia virus and causes vaccinia
lesions at multiple body locations; it is usually benign. If there is inadvertent ocular viral implantation,
vaccinia keratitis occurs rarely.
Some serious vaccine complications are treated with vaccinia immune globulin (VIG). In the past, high-risk
patients who required vaccination because of viral exposure were simultaneously given VIG to try to
prevent complications. The efficacy of this practice is unknown, and it is not recommended by the CDC.
VIG is available only from the CDC.
Postexposure prophylaxis:
Postexposure vaccination can prevent or significantly limit the severity of
illness and is indicated for family members and close personal contacts of smallpox patients. Early
administration is most effective, but some benefit is realized up to 4 days postexposure.
Subacute Sclerosing Panencephalitis
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a progressive, usually fatal brain disorder
occurring months to usually years after an attack of measles. It causes mental deterioration,
myoclonic jerks, and seizures. Diagnosis involves EEG, CT, CSF examination, and measles
serologic testing. Treatment is supportive.
SSPE is probably a persistent measles virus infection (. The measles virus is present in brain
tissue.
SSPE occurs in about 7 to 110 cases per million people who had wild measles and in about 1 case per
million people who received measles vaccine; all cases are probably due to unrecognized measles before
vaccination. Males are more often affected. Onset is usually before age 20. SSPE is exceedingly rare in
the US and Western Europe.
Symptoms and Signs
Often, the first signs are subtle—diminished performance in schoolwork, forgetfulness, temper tantrums,
distractibility, and sleeplessness. However, hallucinations and myoclonic jerks may then occur, followed
by generalized seizures. There is further intellectual decline and speech deterioration. Dystonic
movements and transient opisthotonos occur. Later, muscular rigidity, dysphagia, cortical blindness, and
optic atrophy may occur. Focal chorioretinitis and other funduscopic abnormalities are common. In the
final phases, hypothalamic involvement may cause intermittent hyperthermia, diaphoresis, and pulse and
BP disturbances.
Diagnosis
• Serologic testing
• EEG
• Neuroimaging
SSPE is suspected in young patients with dementia and neuromuscular irritability. EEG, CT or MRI, CSF
examination, and measles serologic testing are done. EEG shows periodic complexes with high-voltage
diphasic waves occurring synchronously throughout the recording. CT or MRI may show cortical atrophy
or white matter lesions. CSF examination usually reveals normal pressure, cell count, and total protein
content; however, CSF globulin is almost always elevated, constituting up to 20 to 60% of CSF protein.
Serum and CSF contain elevated levels of measles virus antibodies. Anti-measles IgG appears to
===PAGE:1636===
increase as the disease progresses.
If test results are inconclusive, brain biopsy may be needed.
Prognosis
The disease is almost invariably fatal within 1 to 3 yr (often pneumonia is the terminal event), although
some patients have a more protracted course. A few patients have remissions and exacerbations.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Anticonvulsants and other supportive measures are the only accepted treatments. Isoprinosine, interferon
alfa, and lamivudine are controversial, and antiviral drugs have generally not proved helpful.
===PAGE:1637===
Chapter 156. Sexually Transmitted Diseases
Introduction
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), also termed sexually transmitted infections (STIs), can be caused
by a number of microorganisms that vary widely in size, life cycle, symptoms, and susceptibility to
available treatments.
Bacterial STDs include syphilis, gonorrhea, chancroid, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale,
and chlamydial, mycoplasmal, and
Ureaplasma
infections.
Viral STDs include genital and anorectal warts, genital herpes (, molluscum contagiosum
(, and HIV infection (.
Parasitic infections that can be sexually transmitted include trichomoniasis (caused by protozoa), scabies
(caused by mites—, and pediculosis pubis (caused by lice—.
Many other infections not considered primarily to be STDs—including salmonellosis, shigellosis,
campylobacteriosis, amebiasis, giardiasis, hepatitis (A, B, and C), and cytomegalovirus infection—can be
transmitted sexually.
Because sexual activity includes close contact with skin and mucous membranes of the genitals, mouth,
and rectum, many organisms are efficiently spread between people. Inflammation or ulceration caused by
some STDs (eg, herpes, chancroid) predisposes to transmission of others (eg, HIV). STD prevalence
rates remain high in most of the world, despite diagnostic and therapeutic advances that can rapidly
render patients with many STDs noninfectious. Factors impeding control of STDs include
• Unprotected sexual activity with multiple partners
• Difficulty talking about sexual issues for both physicians and patients
• Inadequate funding for new therapy and research
• Susceptibility to reinfection if both partners are not treated simultaneously
• Incomplete treatment, which leads to development of drug-resistant organisms
• International travel, which facilitates rapid global dissemination of STDs
Symptoms and signs vary depending on the infection. Many STDs cause genital lesions (see
Table 156-1
).
STDs are diagnosed and treated in a variety of settings; for many, diagnostic tests are limited or
unavailable or patient follow-up is uncertain. Thus, identification of the causative organism is often not
pursued, and initial treatment is often syndromic—ie, directed at the organisms most likely to cause the
presenting syndrome (eg, urethritis, cervicitis, genital ulcers, pelvic inflammatory disease). Diagnostic
testing is done more often when the diagnosis is unclear, when the infection is severe, when initial
treatment is ineffective, or when other reasons (eg, public health surveillance, psychosocial reasons,
including extreme mental distress and depression) are compelling.
STD control depends on
• Adequate facilities and personnel for diagnosis and treatment
• Public health programs for locating and treating recent sex partners of patients
• Follow-up for treated patients to ensure that they have been cured
===PAGE:1638===
• Education of health care practitioners and the public
• Avoidance of high-risk behaviors by patients
[Table 156-1.
Differentiating Common Sexually Transmitted Genital Lesions]
Condoms and vaginal dams, if used correctly, greatly decrease risk. Vaccines are unavailable for most
STDs, except for hepatitis A and B and human papillomavirus infection.
Chancroid
Chancroid is infection of the genital skin or mucous membranes caused by
Haemophilus
ducreyi
and characterized by papules, painful ulcers, and enlargement of the inguinal lymph
nodes leading to suppuration. Diagnosis is usually clinical because culturing the organism is
difficult. Treatment is with a macrolide, ceftriaxone, or ciprofloxacin.
H. ducreyi
is a short, slender, gram-negative bacillus with rounded ends. Chancroid occurs in rare
outbreaks in developed countries but is a common cause of genital ulcers throughout much of the
developing world and often acquired by men from prostitutes. Like other sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs) causing genital ulcers, chancroid increases risk of HIV transmission.
Symptoms and Signs
After an incubation period of 3 to 7 days, small, painful papules appear and rapidly break down into
shallow, soft, painful ulcers with ragged, undermined edges (ie, with overhanging tissue) and a red
border. Ulcers vary in size and often coalesce. Deeper erosion occasionally leads to marked tissue
destruction. The inguinal lymph nodes become tender, enlarged, and matted together, forming a pusfilled
abscess (bubo). The skin over the abscess may become red and shiny and may break down to form a
sinus. The infection may spread to other areas of skin, resulting in new lesions. Phimosis, urethral
stricture, and urethral fistula may result from chancroid.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes culture or PCR
Chancroid is suspected in patients who have unexplained genital ulcers or buboes (which may be
mistaken for abscesses) and who have been in endemic areas. Genital ulcers with other causes (see
Table 156-1
) may resemble chancroid.
If available, a sample of pus from a bubo or exudate from the edge of an ulcer should be sent to a
laboratory that can identify
H. ducreyi
. However, diagnosis is usually based on clinical findings alone
because culture of the bacteria is difficult and microscopic identification is confounded by the mixed flora
in ulcers. PCR testing has a high sensitivity (98.4%) and a high specificity (99.6%) for
H. ducreyi
but is
not widely available. Clinical diagnosis has a lower sensitivity (53 to 95%) and specificity (41 to 75%).
Serologic testing for syphilis and HIV and cultures for herpes should be done to exclude other causes of
genital ulcers. However, interpretation of test results is complicated by the fact that genital ulcers due to
other causes may be co-infected with
H. ducreyi
.
Treatment
• Antibiotics (various)
Treatment should be started promptly, without waiting for test results. One of the following is
recommended:
===PAGE:1639===
• A single-dose of azithromycin 1 g po or ceftriaxone 250 mg IM
• Erythromycin 500 mg po qid for 7 days
• Ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid for 3 days
Patients treated for other causes of genital ulcers should be given antibiotics that also treat chancroid if
chancroid is suspected and laboratory testing is impractical. Treatment of patients with HIV infection,
particularly with single-dose regimens, may be ineffective.
Buboes can safely be aspirated for diagnosis or incised for symptomatic relief if patients are also given
effective antibiotics. Sex partners should be examined, and patients should be followed for 3 mo.
Chlamydial, Mycoplasmal, and Ureaplasmal Infections
Sexually transmitted urethritis, cervicitis, proctitis, and pharyngitis not due to gonorrhea are
caused predominantly by chlamydiae and infrequently by mycoplasmas or
Ureaplasma
sp.
Chlamydiae may also cause salpingitis, epididymitis, perihepatitis, neonatal conjunctivitis, and
infant pneumonia. Untreated chlamydial salpingitis can become chronic, causing minimal
symptoms but having serious consequences. Diagnosis is by culture, immunoassay for
antigens, or genetic methods. Treatment is with single-dose azithromycin or a week of
ofloxacin, levofloxacin, erythromycin, or a tetracycline.
Several organisms can cause nongonococcal sexually transmitted cervicitis in women and urethritis,
proctitis, and pharyngitis in both
sexes. These organisms include
Chlamydia trachomatis
(responsible for
about 50% of such cases of urethritis and most cases of mucopurulent cervicitis),
Mycoplasma
genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum
, and
Trichomonas vaginalis
(. Chlamydiae may also
cause lymphogranuloma venereum (. The imprecise terms nonspecific "urethritis" and
"nongonococcal urethritis" have been replaced by terms that specify the causative organism.
Symptoms and Signs
Men develop symptomatic urethritis after a 7- to 28-day incubation period, usually beginning with mild
dysuria, discomfort in the urethra, and a clear to mucopurulent discharge. Discharge may be slight, and
symptoms may be mild but are frequently more marked early in the morning; then, the urethral meatus is
often red and blocked with dried secretions, which may also stain underclothes. Occasionally, onset is
more acute, with dysuria, frequency, and a copious, purulent discharge that simulates gonococcal
urethritis. Infection may progress to epididymitis. After rectal or orogenital contact with an infected person,
proctitis or pharyngitis may develop.
Women are usually asymptomatic, although vaginal discharge, dysuria, increased urinary frequency and
urgency, pelvic pain, dyspareunia, and symptoms of urethritis may occur. Cervicitis with yellow,
mucopurulent exudate and cervical ectopy (expansion of the red endocervical epithelium onto the vaginal
surfaces of the cervix) are characteristic. Pelvic inflammatory disease (salpingitis and pelvic peritonitis)
may cause lower abdominal discomfort (typically bilateral) and marked tenderness when the abdomen,
adnexa, and cervix are palpated. Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome (perihepatitis) may cause right upper
quadrant pain, fever, and vomiting.
Chlamydiae may be transferred to the eye, causing acute conjunctivitis.
Reactive arthritis ( caused by immunologic reactions to genital and intestinal infections is an
infrequent complication of chlamydial infections in adults. Reactive arthritis sometimes causes skin and
eye lesions and noninfectious recurrent urethritis.
Infants born to women with chlamydial cervicitis may develop chlamydial pneumonia or ophthalmia
neonatorum (neonatal conjunctivitis—.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1640===
• Nucleic acid detection tests of cervical or urethral exudate or urine
Chlamydial, mycoplasmal, or ureaplasmal infection is suspected in patients with symptoms of urethritis,
salpingitis, cervicitis, or unexplained proctitis, but similar symptoms can also result from gonococcal
infection. If clinical evidence for urethritis is uncertain, finding ≥ 5 WBCs/high-power field in a urine
sample confirms the diagnosis. Examination of first-voided, morning samples is most sensitive.
Samples of cervical or male urethral exudates are obtained to check for chlamydia. Nucleic acid-based
tests (NAT) for chlamydial DNA may be done on nonamplified samples or may use one of several nucleic
acid amplification techniques. Tests are usually done on swab samples, but amplified NAT tests are highly
sensitive and specific and can also be done on urine, eliminating the need for doing an uncomfortable
swab of the urethra or cervix. Amplification techniques should be routinely used in patients at high risk
(eg, unprotected sex with new or multiple partners, history of prior sexually transmitted disease [STD],
exchanging sex for drugs or money). Because gonococcal infection sometimes coexists, testing should
also be done for that organism.
Detection of mycoplasmas and
Ureaplasma
sp is currently impractical in routine practice.
In the US, confirmed cases of chlamydial infection, gonorrhea, and syphilis must be reported to the public
health system. A serologic test for syphilis (STS) should be done.
Screening:
Urine testing using nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) is especially useful for screening
asymptomatic people at high risk of STDs because genital examination is not necessary. People who
should be screened include
• People with a history of a previous STD
• People with high-risk behaviors
• Sexually active adolescents and young adults < 24 yr
• Pregnant women < 24 yr
Treatment
• Oral antibiotics (various)
• Treatment of sex partners
Uncomplicated documented or suspected chlamydial, ureaplasmal, or mycoplasmal infections are treated
with one of the following:
• A single dose of azithromycin 1 g po
• Doxycycline 100 mg po bid for 7 days
• Erythromycin base 500 mg po qid for 7 days
• Ofloxacin 300 mg po bid for 7 days
• Levofloxacin 500 mg po once/day for 7 days
For pregnant women, azithromycin 1 g po once should be used.
These regimens do not reliably treat gonorrhea, which coexists in many patients with chlamydial
infections. Therefore, treatment should usually include a cephalosporin, such as a single dose of
ceftriaxone 125 mg IM.
===PAGE:1641===
Patients who relapse (about 10%) are usually coinfected with microbes that do not respond to
antichlamydial therapy, or they were rein-fected since treatment. They may require further diagnostic
evaluation and repeated or longer (21 to 28 days) courses, and their current sex partners should be
treated. Patients should abstain from sexual intercourse until they and their partners complete treatment.
If chlamydial genital infections are untreated, symptoms and signs subside within 4 wk in about two thirds
of patients. However, in women, asymptomatic cervical infection may persist, resulting in chronic
endometritis, salpingitis, or pelvic peritonitis and their sequelae—pelvic pain, infertility, and increased risk
of ectopic pregnancy. Because chlamydial infections can have serious long-term consequences for
women, even when symptoms are mild or absent, detecting the infection in women and treating them and
their male sex partners is crucial.
Genital Warts
(Condylomata Acuminata; Venereal Warts; Anogenital Warts)
Genital warts are lesions of the skin or mucous membranes of the genitals caused by certain
types of human papillomavirus (HPV). Some types of HPV cause flat warts in the cervical canal
or anus; these warts can become cancerous. Diagnosis of external warts is based on their
clinical appearance. Multiple treatments exist, but few are highly effective unless applied
repeatedly over weeks to months. Genital warts may resolve without treatment in
immunocompetent patients but may persist and spread in patients with decreased cellmediated immunity (eg, due to pregnancy or HIV infection).
In the US, an estimated 1.4 million people have genital warts at any given time. There are about 6 million
new cases of genital HPV infection each year, and about 80% of women have been infected at least once
by age 50. Most infections clear spontaneously within 1 to 2 yr, but some persist.
Etiology
There are > 70 known types of HPV. Some types cause common skin warts (, but others infect
primarily the skin and mucosa of the anogenital region. Important manifestations of anogenital HPV
include
• Genital warts (condyloma acuminatum)
• Intraepithelial neoplasia and carcinoma of the cervix, anus, or penis
• Bladder and oral cancers
• Bowenoid papulosis
Condylomata acuminata are benign anogenital warts most often caused by HPV types 6 and 11. Low- and
high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia and carcinoma may be caused by HPV types 16 and 18 and probably
other types.
HPV is transmitted from lesions during skin-to-skin contact. The types that affect the anogenital region
are usually transmitted sexually by penetrative vaginal or anal intercourse, but digital, oral, and
nonpenetrative genital contact may be involved.
Genital warts are more common among immunocompromised patients. Growth rates vary, but pregnancy,
immunosuppression, or maceration of the skin may accelerate the growth and spread of warts.
Symptoms and Signs
Warts appear after an incubation period of 1 to 6 mo. Visible anogenital warts are usually soft, moist,
minute pink or gray polyps (raised lesions) that enlarge, may become pedunculated, have rough surfaces,
===PAGE:1642===
and may occur in clusters. They are usually asymptomatic, but some patients have itching, burning, or
discomfort.
In men, warts occur most commonly under the foreskin, on the coronal sulcus, within the urethral meatus,
and on the penile shaft. They may occur around the anus and in the rectum, especially in homosexual
men. In women, warts occur most commonly on the vulva, vaginal wall, cervix, and perineum; the urethra
and anal region may be affected. HPV types 16 and 18 usually cause flat endocervical or anal warts that
are difficult to see and diagnose clinically.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation, sometimes including colposcopy, anoscopy, or both
Genital warts are usually diagnosed clinically. Their appearance usually differentiates them from
condyloma lata of secondary syphilis, which are flat-topped. However, serologic tests for syphilis (STS)
should be done initially and after 3 mo. Biopsies of atypical, bleeding, ulcerated, or persistent warts may
be necessary to exclude carcinoma. Endocervical and anal warts can be visualized only by colposcopy
and anoscopy. Applying a 3 to 5% solution of acetic
acid for a few minutes before colposcopy causes
warts to whiten and enhances visualization and detection of small warts. Nucleic acid amplification tests
(NAAT) for HPV DNA confirm the diagnosis and allow typing of HPV, but their role in HPV management is
not yet clear.
Treatment
• Manual removal (eg, by cryotherapy, electro-cauterization, laser, or surgical excision)
• Topical treatment (eg, with antimitotics, caustics, or interferon inducers)
No treatment of anogenital warts is completely satisfactory, and relapses are frequent and require
retreatment. In immunocompetent people, genital warts may resolve without treatment. In
immunocompromised patients, warts may be less responsive to treatment.
Genital warts may be removed by cryotherapy, electro-cauterization, laser, or surgical excision; a local or
general anesthetic is used depending on the size and number to be removed. Removal with a
resectoscope may be the most effective treatment; a general anesthetic is used.
Topical antimitotics (eg, podophyllotoxin, podophyllin, 5-fluorouracil), caustics (eg, trichloroacetic acid),
and interferon inducers (eg, imiquimod) are widely used but usually require multiple applications over
weeks to months and are frequently ineffective. Before topical treatments are applied, surrounding tissue
should be protected with petroleum jelly. Patients should be warned that after treatment, the area may be
painful.
Interferon alfa (eg, interferon alfa-2b, interferon alfa-n3), intralesionally or IM, has cleared intractable
lesions on the skin and genitals, but optimal administration and long-term effects are unclear. Also, in
some patients with bowenoid papulosis of the genitals (caused by type 16 HPV), lesions initially
disappeared after treatment with interferon alfa but reappeared as invasive cancers.
For intraurethral lesions, thiotepa (an alkylating drug), instilled in the urethra, is effective. In men, 5fluorouracil applied bid to tid is highly effective for urethral lesions, but rarely, it causes swelling, leading
to urethral obstruction. Endocervical lesions should not be treated until Papanicolaou (Pap) test results
rule out other cervical abnormalities (eg, dysplasia, cancer) that may dictate additional treatment.
By removing the moist underside of the prepuce, circumcision may prevent recurrences in uncircumcised
men.
Sex partners of women with endocervical warts and of patients with bowenoid papulosis should be
counseled and screened regularly for HPV-related lesions. A similar approach can be used for HPV in the
rectum.
===PAGE:1643===
Current sex partners of people with genital warts should be examined and, if infected, treated.
Prevention
A quadrivalent vaccine that protects against the 2 types of HPV (types 6 and 11) that cause > 90% of
visible genital warts is available. This vaccine also protects against the 2 types of HPV (types 16 and 18)
that cause most cervical cancers. The HPV vaccine has been recommended for girls and women aged 9
to 26 yr for prevention of initial infection. Three doses are given, preferably at age 11 to 12 yr. The
vaccine should be administered before onset of sexual activity, but girls and women who are sexually
active should still be vaccinated. The vaccine's role in preventing HPV in boys and men has not been
established. A bivalent vaccine against HPV types 16 and 18 is awaiting approval.
Because of the location of these warts, condoms may not fully protect against infection.
Gonorrhea
Gonorrhea is caused by the bacteria
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
. It typically infects epithelia of the
urethra, cervix, rectum, pharynx, or eyes, causing irritation or pain and purulent discharge.
Dissemination to skin and joints, which is uncommon, causes sores on the skin, fever, and
migratory polyarthritis or pauciarticular septic arthritis. Diagnosis is by microscopy, culture, or
nucleic acid amplification tests. Several oral or injectable antibiotics can be used, but drug
resistance is an increasing problem.
N. gonorrhoeae
occurs only in humans and is almost always transmitted by sexual contact. Urethral and
cervical infections are most common, but infection in the pharynx or rectum can occur after oral or anal
intercourse, and conjunctivitis may follow contamination of the eye. After an episode of vaginal
intercourse, likelihood of transmission from women to men is about 20%, but from men to women, it may
be higher. Neonates can acquire conjunctival infection during passage through the birth canal (, and children may acquire gonorrhea as a result of sexual abuse.
In 10 to 20% of women, cervical infection ascends via the endometrium to the fallopian tubes (salpingitis)
and pelvic peritoneum, causing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID—see
p.
). Chlamydiae or intestinal bacteria may also cause PID. Gonorrheal cervicitis is commonly
accompanied by dysuria or inflammation of Skene's ducts and Bartholin's glands. In a small fraction of
men, ascending urethritis progresses to epididymitis. Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) due to
hematogenous spread occurs in < 1% of cases, predominantly in women. DGI typically affects the skin,
tendon sheaths, and joints. Pericarditis, endocarditis, meningitis, and perihepatitis occur rarely.
Coinfection with
Chlamydia trachomatis
occurs in 15 to 25% of infected heterosexual men and 35 to 50%
of women.
Symptoms and Signs
About 10 to 20% of infected women and very few infected men are asymptomatic. About 25% of men
have minimal symptoms.
Male urethritis
has an incubation period from 2 to 14 days. Onset is usually marked by mild discomfort in
the urethra, followed by more severe penile tenderness and pain, dysuria, and a purulent discharge.
Urinary frequency and urgency may develop as the infection spreads to the posterior urethra.
Examination detects a purulent, yellow-green urethral discharge, and the meatus may be inflamed.
Epididymitis
usually causes unilateral scrotal pain, tenderness, and swelling. Rarely, men develop
abscesses of Tyson's and Littre's glands, periurethral abscesses, or infection of Cowper's glands, the
prostate, or the seminal vesicles.
Cervicitis
usually has an incubation period of > 10 days. Symptoms range from mild to severe and
include dysuria and vaginal discharge. During pelvic examination, clinicians may note a mucopurulent or
===PAGE:1644===
purulent cervical discharge, and the cervical os may be red and bleed easily when touched with the
speculum. Urethritis may occur concurrently; pus may be expressed from the urethra when the symphysis
pubis is pressed or from Skene's ducts or Bartholin's glands. Rarely, infections in sexually abused
prepubertal girls cause dysuria, purulent vaginal discharge, and vulvar irritation, erythema, and edema.
PID
occurs in 10 to 20% of infected women. PID may include salpingitis, pelvic peritonitis, and pelvic
abscesses and may cause lower abdominal discomfort (typically bilateral), dyspareunia, and marked
tenderness on palpation of the abdomen, adnexa, or cervix.
Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome
is gonococcal (or chlamydial) perihepatitis that occurs predominantly in
women and causes right upper quadrant abdominal pain, fever, nausea, and vomiting, often mimicking
biliary or hepatic disease.
Rectal gonorrhea
is usually asymptomatic. It occurs predominantly in men practicing receptive anal
intercourse and can occur in women who participate in anal sex. Symptoms include rectal itching, a
cloudy rectal discharge, bleeding, and constipation—all of varying severity. Examination with a
proctoscope may detect erythema or mucopurulent exudate on the rectal wall.
Gonococcal pharyngitis
is usually asymptomatic but may cause sore throat.
N. gonorrhoeae
must be
distinguished from
N. meningitidis
, a closely related organism that is often present in the throat without
causing symptoms or harm.
Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI),
also called the arthritis-dermatitis syndrome, reflects
bacteremia and typically manifests with fever, migratory pain or joint swelling (polyarthritis), and pustular
skin lesions (see
Plate 59
). In some patients, pain develops and tendons (eg, at the wrist or ankle) redden or swell. Skin
lesions occur typically on the arms or legs, have a red base, and are small, slightly painful, and often
pustular. Genital gonorrhea, the usual source of disseminated infection, may be asymptomatic. DGI can
mimic other disorders that cause fever, skin lesions, and polyarthritis (eg, the prodrome of hepatitis B
infection or meningococcemia); some of these disorders may cause genital symptoms (eg, reactive
arthritis—.
Gonococcal septic arthritis
is a more focal form of DGI that results in a painful arthritis with effusion,
usually of 1 or 2 large joints such as the knees, ankles, wrists, or elbows. Some patients used to have or
still have skin lesions of DGI. Onset is often acute, usually with fever, severe joint pain, and limitation of
movement. Infected joints are swollen, and the overlying skin may be warm and red.
Diagnosis
• Gram staining and culture
• Nucleic acid-based testing
Gonorrhea is diagnosed when gonococci are detected via microscopic examination using Gram stain,
culture, or a nucleic acid-based test of genital fluids, blood, or joint fluids (obtained by needle aspiration).
Gram stain
is sensitive and specific for gonorrhea in men with urethral discharge; gram-negative
intracellular diplococci typically are seen. Gram stain is much less accurate for infections of the cervix,
pharynx, and rectum and is not recommended for diagnosis at these sites.
Culture
is sensitive and specific, but because gonococci are fragile and fastidious, samples taken using
a swab need to be rapidly plated on an appropriate medium (eg, modified Thayer-Martin) and transported
to the laboratory in a CO
-containing environment. Blood and joint fluid samples should be sent to the
laboratory with notification that gonococcal infection is suspected.
Unamplified
nucleic acid-based tests
may be done on genital rectal or oral swabs. Most tests
simultaneously detect gonorrhea and chlamydial infection and then differentiate between them in a
subsequent specific test. Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) further increase the sensitivity
===PAGE:1645===
adequately to enable testing of urine samples in both sexes.
In the US, confirmed cases of gonorrhea, chlamydial infection and syphilis must be reported to the public
health system. A serologic test for syphilis (STS) and a screening test for chlamydial infection should be
done.
Men with urethritis:
Men with obvious discharge may be treated presumptively if likelihood of follow-up
is questionable or if clinic-based diagnostic tools are not available. Samples for Gram staining can be
obtained by touching a swab or slide to the end of the penis to collect discharge. Gram stain does not
identify chlamydiae, so urine or swab samples for NAAT are obtained.
Women with genital symptoms or signs:
A cervical swab should be sent for culture or nucleic acidbased testing. If a pelvic examination is not possible, NAAT of a urine sample can detect gonococcal (and
chlamydial) infections rapidly and reliably.
Pharyngeal or rectal exposures (either sex):
Swabs of the affected area are sent for culture or
nucleic acid-based tests.
Arthritis, DGI, or both:
An affected joint should be aspirated, and fluid should be sent for culture and
routine analysis ( Patients with skin lesions, systemic symptoms, or both should have blood,
urethral, cervical, and rectal cultures or NAAT. In about 30 to 40% of patients with DGI, blood cultures are
positive during the first week of illness. With gonococcal arthritis, blood cultures are less often positive,
but cultures of joint fluids are usually positive. Joint fluid is usually cloudy to purulent because of large
numbers of WBCs (typically > 20,000/
μ
L).
Screening:
Asymptomatic patients considered at high risk of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) can
be screened by NAAT of urine samples, thus not requiring invasive procedures to collect samples from
genital sites. Patients at risk include
• People with a history of a previous STD
• People with high-risk behaviors (eg, new or multiple sex partners, inconsistent use of condoms,
exchange of sex for money or drugs)
• Sexually active adolescents and young adults < 24 yr
• Pregnant women < 24 yr
Treatment
• For uncomplicated infection, a single dose of ceftriaxone or cefixime
• For DGI with arthritis, a longer course of parenteral antibiotics
• Concomitant treatment for chlamydial infection
• Treatment of sex partners
Uncomplicated gonococcal infection of the urethra, cervix, rectum, and pharynx can be treated with a
single dose of ceftriaxone 125 mg IM or cefixime 400 mg po. Previous alternative regimens with
quinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, ofloxacin) are no longer recommended because of increasing
drug resistance. Routinely, patients are simultaneously given a single dose of azithromycin 1 g po to treat
chlamydial infection ( because it often coexists in patients with gonorrhea.
DGI with gonococcal arthritis is initially treated with IM or IV antibiotics (eg, ceftriaxone 1 g IM or IV q 24 h,
ceftizoxime 1 g IV q 8 h, cefotaxime 1 g IV q 8 h) continued for 24 to 48 h once symptoms lessen, followed
by 4 to 7 days of oral therapy. Antichlamydial therapy is also routinely given.
===PAGE:1646===
Gonococcal arthritis does not usually require joint drainage. Initially, the joint is immobilized in a functional
position. Passive range-of-motion exercises should be started as soon as patients can tolerate them.
Once pain subsides, more active exercises, with stretching and muscle strengthening, should begin. Over
95% of patients treated for gonococcal arthritis recover complete joint function. Because sterile joint fluid
accumulations (effusions) may persist for prolonged periods, an anti-inflammatory drug may be beneficial.
Posttreatment cultures are unnecessary if symptomatic response is adequate. However, for patients with
symptoms for > 7 days, cultures are repeated, and antimicrobial sensitivity testing is done. Patients
should abstain from sexual activity until treatment is completed to avoid infecting sex partners.
Sex partners:
All sex partners who have had sexual contact with the patient within 60 days should be
tested for gonorrhea and other STDs
and treated if results are positive. Sex partners with contact within 2
wk should be treated presumptively for gonorrhea (epidemiologic treatment).
Expedited partner therapy
(EPT) involves giving patients a prescription or drugs to deliver to their
partner. EPT may enhance partner adherence and reduce treatment failure due to reinfection. It may be
most appropriate for partners of women with gonorrhea or chlamydial infection. However, a health care
visit is preferable to ascertain histories of drug allergies and to screen for other STDs.
Granuloma Inguinale
(Donovanosis)
Granuloma inguinale is a progressive infection of genital skin caused by
Calymmatobacterium
granulomatis
. Skin lesions are beefy red, raised, and often ulcerated. Diagnosis is by clinical
criteria and microscopy. Treatment is with antibiotics, usually tetracyclines, macrolides, or
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.
The bacteria
Calymmatobacterium
(formerly
Donovania
)
granulomatis
are very rare in most of the world.
Current epidemiologic data are unavailable, but historically, granuloma inguinale has been reported in
areas such as Papua New Guinea, northern Australia, southern Africa, and parts of Brazil and India.
Symptoms and Signs
Sites of infection are
• Penis, scrotum, groin, and thighs in men (see
Plate 63
)
• Vulva, vagina, and perineum in women (see
Plate 62
)
• Anus and buttocks in patients who engage in anal-receptive intercourse
• Face in both sexes
After an incubation period of about 1 to 12 wk, a painless, red skin nodule slowly enlarges, becoming a
raised, beefy red, moist, smooth, foul-smelling lesion. The lesion slowly enlarges and may spread to other
skin areas. Lesions heal slowly, with scarring. Secondary infections with other bacteria are common and
can cause extensive tissue destruction.
Occasionally, granuloma inguinale spreads through the bloodstream to the bones, joints, or liver; without
treatment, anemia, wasting, and uncommonly death may occur.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination showing Donovan bodies in fluid from a lesion
===PAGE:1647===
Granuloma inguinale is suspected in patients from endemic areas with characteristic lesions. Diagnosis is
confirmed microscopically by the presence of Donovan bodies (numerous bacilli in the cytoplasm of
macrophages shown by Giemsa or Wright's stain) in smears of fluid from scrapings from the edge of
lesions. These smears contain many plasma cells. Biopsy specimens are taken if the diagnosis is unclear
or if adequate tissue fluid cannot be obtained because lesions are dry, sclerotic, or necrotic. The bacteria
do not grow on ordinary culture media.
Treatment
• Antibiotics (various)
Many oral antibiotics kill the bacteria, but tetracyclines, macrolides, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
(TMP/SMX) are most effective, followed by ceftriaxone, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, and
chloramphenicol. Recommended oral regimens include doxycycline 100 mg bid for 3 wk, TMP/SMX
160/800 mg bid for 3 wk, erythromycin 500 mg qid for 3 wk, or azithromycin 1 g/wk for 3 wk. IV or IM
antibiotics (eg, ceftriaxone) are an alternative.
Response to treatment should begin within 7 days, but healing of extensive disease may be slow and
lesions may recur, requiring longer treatment. HIV-infected patients may also require prolonged or
intensive treatment. After apparently successful treatment, follow-up should continue for 6 mo. Current
sex partners should be examined and, if infected, treated.
Lymphogranuloma Venereum
Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) is a chlamydial disease characterized by a small, often
asymptomatic skin lesion, followed by regional lymphadenopathy in the groin or pelvis or by
proctitis in homosexual men. Without treatment, LGV may cause obstruction of lymph flow and
chronic swelling of genital tissues. Diagnosis is by clinical signs, but laboratory confirmation
with serologic or immunofluorescent testing is usually possible. Treatment is 21 days of a
tetracycline or erythromycin.
LGV is caused by serotypes L1, L2, and L3 of the bacteria
Chlamydia trachomatis
. These serotypes
differ from those that cause trachoma, inclusion conjunctivitis, urethritis, and cervicitis because they can
invade and reproduce in regional lymph nodes.
LGV occurs sporadically in the US but is endemic in parts of Africa, India, Southeast Asia, South America,
and the Caribbean. It is diagnosed much more often in men than women.
Symptoms and Signs
The 1st stage begins after an incubation period of about 3 days with a small skin lesion at the site of
entry. It may cause the overlying skin to break down (ulcerate) but heals so quickly that it may pass
unnoticed.
The 2nd stage usually begins in men after about 2 to 4 wk, with the inguinal lymph nodes on one or both
sides enlarging and forming large, tender, sometimes fluctuant masses (buboes). The buboes stick to
deeper tissues and cause the overlying skin to become inflamed, sometimes with fever and malaise. In
women, backache or pelvic pain is common; the initial lesions may be on the cervix or upper vagina,
resulting in enlargement and inflammation of deeper perirectal and pelvic lymph nodes. Multiple draining
sinus tracts may develop and discharge pus or blood.
In the 3rd stage, lesions heal with scarring, but sinus tracts can persist or recur. Persistent inflammation
due to untreated infection obstructs the lymphatic vessels, causing swelling and skin sores.
In homosexual men, proctitis or proctocolitis with bloody purulent rectal discharges may occur in the 1st
stage. In the chronic stages, colitis simulating Crohn's disease may cause tenesmus and strictures in the
rectum or pain due to inflamed pelvic nodes.
===PAGE:1648===
Diagnosis
• Antibody detection
LGV is suspected in patients who have genital ulcers, swollen inguinal lymph nodes, or proctitis and who
live in, have visited, or have sexual contact with people from areas where infection is common. LGV is
also suspected in patients with buboes, which may be mistaken for abscesses caused by other bacteria.
Diagnosis has usually been made by detecting antibodies to chlamydial endotoxin; levels are usually
elevated at presentation or shortly thereafter and remain elevated. Direct tests for chlamydial antigens
with immunoassays (eg, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) or with immunofluorescence using
monoclonal antibodies to stain pus or nucleic acid amplification tests may be available through reference
laboratories (eg, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the US).
All sex partners should be evaluated. After apparently successful treatment, patients should be followed
for 6 mo.
Treatment
• Oral tetracyclines or erythromycin
• Possibly drainage of buboes for symptomatic relief
Doxycycline 100 mg po bid, erythromycin 500 mg po qid, or tetracycline 500 mg po qid, each for 21 days,
are effective for early disease. Azithromycin 1 g po once/wk for 1 to 3 wk is probably effective, but neither
it nor clarithromycin has been adequately evaluated.
Swelling of damaged tissues in later stages may not resolve despite elimination of the bacteria. Buboes
may be drained by needle or surgically if necessary for symptomatic relief, but most patients respond
quickly to antibiotics. Buboes and sinus tracts may require surgery, but rectal strictures can usually be
dilated.
Sexually Transmitted Enteric Infections
Various pathogens—bacterial (
Shigella, Campylobacter
, or
Salmonella
), viral (hepatitis A, B, and C
viruses), and parasitic (
Giardia
sp or amebae)—are transmitted via sexual practices, especially those that
can involve fecal-oral contamination. In order of decreasing risk, these practices are oral-rectal, analgenital, oral-genital, and genital-genital intercourse.
Although some of the above pathogens may cause proctitis, they usually cause infection higher in the
intestinal tract; symptoms include diarrhea, fever, bloating, nausea, and abdominal pain. Multiple
infections are frequent, especially in people with many sex partners. Most of these pathogens can cause
infections without symptoms; asymptomatic infections are the rule with
Entamoeba dispar
, which
commonly occurs in homosexual men and was previously known as nonpathogenic
Entamoeba
histolytica
. For diagnosis and treatment of these infections, see elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Syphilis
(See also
Congenital Syphilis
)
Syphilis is caused by the spirochete
Treponema pallidum
and is characterized by 3 sequential
clinical, symptomatic stages separated by periods
of asymptomatic latent infection. Common
manifestations include genital ulcers, skin lesions, meningitis, aortic disease, and neurologic
syndromes. Diagnosis is by serologic tests and adjunctive tests selected based on the disease
stage. Penicillin is the drug of choice.
Syphilis is caused by
T. pallidum
, a spirochete that cannot survive for long outside the human body.
T.
pallidum
enters through the mucous membranes or skin, reaches the regional lymph nodes within hours,
===PAGE:1649===
and rapidly spreads throughout the body.
Syphilis occurs in primary, secondary, and tertiary stages (see
Table 156-2
), with long latent periods between them. Infected people are contagious during the first 2
stages.
Infection is usually transmitted by sexual contact (including genital, orogenital, and anorectal) but may be
transmitted non-sexually by skin contact or transplacentally (. Risk of transmission is about
30% from a single sexual encounter with a person who has primary syphilis and 60 to 80% from an
infected mother to a fetus. Infection does not lead to immunity against reinfection.
Symptoms and Signs
Syphilis may manifest at any stage and may affect multiple or single organs, mimicking many other
disorders. Syphilis may be accelerated by coexisting HIV infection; in these cases, eye involvement,
meningitis, and other neurologic complications are more common and more severe.
Primary syphilis:
After an incubation period of 3 to 4 wk (range 1 to 13 wk), a primary lesion (chancre
—see
Plate 66
) develops at the site of inoculation. The initial red papule quickly forms a chancre, usually a
painless ulcer with a firm base; when rubbed, it produces clear fluid containing numerous spirochetes.
Nearby lymph nodes may be enlarged, firm, and nontender. Chancres can occur anywhere but are most
common on the following:
• Penis, anus, and rectum in men
• Vulva, cervix, rectum, and perineum in women
• Lips or mouth in either sex
Secondary syphilis:
The spirochete spreads in the bloodstream, producing widespread mucocutaneous
lesions (see
Plate 67
), lymph
[Table 156-2.
Classification of Syphilis]
node swelling, and, less commonly, symptoms in other organs. Symptoms typically begin 6 to 12 wk after
the chancre appears; about 25% of patients still have a chancre. Fever, loss of appetite, nausea, and
fatigue are common. Headache, hearing or balance problems, visual disturbances, and bone pain can
also occur.
Over 80% of patients have mucocutaneous lesions; a wide variety of rashes and lesions occur, and any
body surface can be affected. Without treatment, lesions may disappear in a few days to weeks, persist
for months, or return after healing, but all eventually heal, usually without scarring.
Syphilitic dermatitis
is usually symmetric and more marked on the palms and soles. The individual
lesions are round, often scale, and may coalesce to produce larger lesions, but they generally do not itch
or hurt. After lesions resolve, the affected areas may be lighter or darker than normal. If the scalp is
involved, alopecia areata often occurs.
Condyloma lata
are hypertrophic, flattened, dull pink or gray papules at mucocutaneous junctions and in
moist areas of the skin (eg, in the perianal area, under the breasts); lesions are extremely infectious.
Lesions of the mouth, throat, larynx, penis, vulva, or rectum are usually circular, raised, and often gray to
white with a red border.
Secondary syphilis can affect any organ. About half of patients have lymphadenopathy, usually
generalized, with nontender, firm, discrete nodes, and often hepatosplenomegaly. About 10% of patients
have lesions of the eyes (uveitis), bones (periostitis), joints, meninges, kidneys (glomerulitis), liver
===PAGE:1650===
(hepatitis), or spleen. About 10 to 30% of patients have mild meningitis, but < 1% have meningeal
symptoms, which can include headache, neck stiffness, cranial nerve lesions, deafness, and eye
inflammation (eg, optic neuritis, retinitis).
Latent period:
Symptoms and signs are absent, but antibodies, detected by serologic tests for syphilis
(STS), persist. Because symptoms of primary and secondary syphilis are often minimal or ignored,
patients frequently are first diagnosed during the latent stage when routine blood tests for syphilis are
done. Syphilis may remain latent permanently, but relapses with contagious skin or mucosal lesions may
occur during the early latent period (< 1 yr after infection). Patients are often given antibiotics for other
disorders, which may cure latent syphilis and may account for the rarity of late-stage disease in
developed countries.
Late or tertiary syphilis:
About one third of untreated people develop late syphilis, although not until
years to decades after the initial infection. Lesions may be clinically classified as benign tertiary syphilis,
cardiovascular syphilis, or neurosyphilis.
Benign tertiary gummatous syphilis
usually develops within 3 to 10 yr of infection and may involve the
skin, bones, and internal organs. Gummas are soft, destructive, inflammatory masses that are typically
localized but may diffusely infiltrate an organ or tissue; they grow and heal slowly and leave scars.
Benign tertiary syphilis of bone
results in either inflammation or destructive lesions that cause a deep,
boring pain, characteristically worse at night.
Cardiovascular syphilis
usually manifests 10 to 25 yr after the initial infection as aneurysmal dilation of
the ascending aorta, insufficiency of the aortic valve, or narrowing of the coronary arteries. Pulsations of
the dilated aorta may cause symptoms by compressing or eroding adjacent structures in the chest.
Symptoms include brassy cough, infections, and obstruction of breathing due to pressure on the trachea,
hoarseness due to vocal cord paralysis resulting from compression of the left laryngeal nerve, and painful
erosion of the sternum and ribs or spine.
Neurosyphilis
has several forms:
• Asymptomatic neurosyphilis
• Meningovascular neurosyphilis
• Parenchymatous neurosyphilis
• Tabes dorsalis
Asymptomatic neurosyphilis
causes mild meningitis in about 15% of patients originally diagnosed as
having latent syphilis, in 25 to 40% of those with secondary syphilis, in 12% of those with cardiovascular
syphilis, and in 5% of those with benign tertiary syphilis. Without treatment, it evolves to symptomatic
neurosyphilis in 5%. If CSF examination does not detect evidence of meningitis 2 yr after the initial
infection, neurosyphilis is unlikely to develop.
Meningovascular neurosyphilis
results from inflammation of large- to medium-sized arteries of the
brain or spinal cord; symptoms typically occur 5 to 10 yr after infection and range from none to strokes.
Initial symptoms may include headache, neck stiffness, dizziness, behavioral abnormalities, poor
concentration, memory loss, lassitude, insomnia, and blurred vision. Spinal cord involvement may cause
weakness and wasting of shoulder-girdle and arm muscles, slowly progressive leg weakness with urinary
or fecal incontinence or both, and, rarely, sudden paralysis of the legs due to thrombosis of spinal
arteries.
Parenchymatous neurosyphilis
(general paresis, or dementia paralytica) results when
chronic
meningoencephalitis causes destruction of cortical parenchyma. It usually develops 15 to 20 yr after initial
infection and typically does not affect patients before their 40s or 50s. Behavior progressively
deteriorates, sometimes mimicking a mental disorder or dementia. Irritability, difficulty concentrating,
===PAGE:1651===
deterioration of memory, defective judgment, headaches, insomnia, fatigue, and lethargy are common;
seizures, aphasia, and transient hemiparesis are possible. Hygiene and grooming deteriorate. Patients
may become emotionally unstable and depressed and have delusions of grandeur with lack of insight;
wasting may occur. Tremors of the mouth, tongue, outstretched hands, and whole body may occur; other
signs include pupillary abnormalities, dysarthria, hyperreflexia, and, in some patients, extensor plantar
responses. Handwriting is usually shaky and illegible.
Tabes dorsalis
(locomotor ataxia) involves slow, progressive degeneration of the posterior columns and
nerve roots. It typically develops 20 to 30 yr after initial infection; mechanism is unknown. Usually, the
earliest, most characteristic symptom is an intense, stabbing (lightning) pain in the back and legs that
recurs irregularly. Gait ataxia, hyperesthesia, and paresthesia may produce a sensation of walking on
foam rubber. Loss of bladder sensation leads to urine retention, incontinence, and recurrent infections.
Erectile dysfunction is common.
Most patients with tabes dorsalis are thin and have characteristic sad facies and Argyll Robertson pupils
(pupils that accommodate for near vision but do not respond to light). Optic atrophy may occur.
Examination of the legs detects hypotonia, hyporeflexia, impaired vibratory and joint position sense,
ataxia in the heel-shin test, absence of deep pain sensation, and Romberg's sign. Tabes dorsalis tends to
be intractable even with treatment. Visceral crises (episodic pain) are a variant of tabes dorsalis;
paroxysms of pain occur in various organs, most commonly in the stomach (causing vomiting) but also in
the rectum, bladder, and larynx.
Other lesions:
Syphilitic ocular and otic manifestations can occur at any stage of the disease. Ocular
syndromes can affect virtually any part of the eye; they include interstitial keratitis, uveitis (anterior,
intermediate, and posterior), chorioretinitis, retinitis, retinal vasculitis, and cranial nerve and optic
neuropathies. Otosyphilis may affect the cochlea (causing hearing loss and tinnitus) or vestibular system
(causing vertigo and nystagmus).
Trophic lesions, secondary to hypoesthesia of the skin or periarticular tissues, may develop in the later
stages. Trophic ulcers may develop on the soles of the feet and penetrate as deeply as the underlying
bone. Neurogenic arthropathy (Charcot's joints), a painless joint degeneration with bony swelling and
abnormal range of movement, is a classic manifestation of neuropathy (.
Diagnosis
• Serologic reaginic tests (rapid plasma reagin, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory) for screening
• Serologic treponemal tests (eg, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption) for confirmation
Syphilis should be suspected in patients with typical mucocutaneous lesions or unexplained neurologic
disorders, particularly in areas where the infection is prevalent. In such areas, it should also be
considered in patients with a broad range of unexplained findings. Because clinical manifestations are so
diverse and advanced stages are now relatively rare in most developed countries, syphilis may escape
recognition. Patients with HIV and syphilis may have atypical or accelerated disease.
Diagnostic test selection depends on which stage of syphilis is suspected. Cases must be reported to
public health agencies.
Diagnostic tests for syphilis:
Tests include serologic tests for syphilis (STS), which consist of
screening (reaginic) and confirmatory (treponemal) tests, and darkfield microscopy.
T. pallidum
cannot be
grown in vitro.
Reaginic tests
use lipid antigens (cardiolipin from bovine hearts) to detect reagin (human antibodies that
bind to lipids). The Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and rapid plasma reagin (RPR) tests
are sensitive, simple, and inexpensive reaginic tests that are used for screening but are not specific for
syphilis. Results may be presented qualitatively (eg, reactive, weakly reactive, borderline, or nonreactive)
and quantitatively as titers (eg, positive at 1:16 dilution).
===PAGE:1652===
Many disorders other than treponemal infections (eg, SLE, antiphospholipid antibody syndromes) can
produce a positive (biologically false-positive) reagin test result. CSF reaginic tests are reasonably
sensitive for early disease but less so for late neurosyphilis. CSF reagin tests can be used to diagnose
neurosyphilis or to monitor response to treatment by measuring antibody titers.
Treponemal tests
detect antitreponemal antibodies qualitatively and are very specific for syphilis. They
include the following:
•
Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test
• Microhemagglutination assay for antibodies to
T. pallidum
(MHA-TP)
•
T. pallidum
hemagglutination assay (TPHA)
If they do not confirm treponemal infection after a positive reaginic test, the reaginic result is biologically
false-positive. Treponemal tests of CSF are controversial, but some authorities believe the FTA-ABS test
is sensitive.
Neither reaginic nor treponemal tests become positive until 3 to 6 wk after the initial infection. Thus, a
negative result is common in early primary syphilis and does not exclude syphilis until after 6 wk. Reaginic
titers decline after effective treatment, becoming negative by 1 yr in primary and by 2 yr in secondary
syphilis. Treponemal tests usually remain positive for many decades, despite effective treatment.
Darkfield microscopy
directs light obliquely through a slide of exudate from a chancre or lymph node
aspirate to directly visualize spirochetes. Although the skills and equipment required are not usually
available, darkfield microscopy is the most sensitive and specific test for early primary syphilis. The
spirochetes appear against a dark background as bright, motile, narrow coils that are about 0.25
μ
m wide
and 5 to 20
μ
m long. They must be distinguished morphologically from nonpathogenic spirochetes, which
may be part of the normal flora, especially of the mouth.
Primary syphilis:
Primary syphilis is usually suspected based on relatively painless genital (but
occasionally extragenital) ulcers. Syphilitic ulcers should be differentiated from other sexually transmitted
genital lesions (see
Table 156-1
). Co-infections with 2 ulcer-causing pathogens (eg, herpes simplex virus
plus
T. pallidum
) are not rare.
Darkfield microscopy of exudate from a chancre or lymph node aspirate may be diagnostic. If results are
negative or the test is unavailable, a reaginic STS is done. If results are negative or the test cannot be
done immediately but a skin lesion has been present for < 3 wk (before the STS becomes positive) and
an alternate diagnosis seems unlikely, treatment may be instituted, and the STS repeated in 2 to 4 wk.
Patients with syphilis should be tested for other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including HIV, at
diagnosis and 6 mo later.
Secondary syphilis:
Because syphilis can mimic many diseases, it should be considered when any
cutaneous eruption or mucosal lesion is undiagnosed, particularly if patients have any of the following:
• Generalized lymphadenopathy
• Lesions on the palms or soles
• Condyloma lata
• Risk factors (eg, HIV, multiple sex partners)
Clinically, secondary syphilis may be mistaken for a drug eruption, rubella, infectious mononucleosis,
erythema multiforme, pityriasis rubra pilaris, fungal infection, or, particularly, pityriasis rosea. Condyloma
lata may be mistaken for warts, hemorrhoids, or pemphigus vegetans; scalp lesions may be mistaken for
ringworm or idiopathic alopecia areata.
===PAGE:1653===
Secondary syphilis is excluded by a negative reaginic STS, which is virtually always reactive during this
stage, often with a high titer. A compatible syndrome with a positive STS (reaginic or treponemal)
warrants treatment. Uncommonly, this combination represents latent syphilis coexisting with another skin
disease. Patients with secondary syphilis should be tested for other STDs and for asymptomatic
neurosyphilis.
Latent syphilis:
Asymptomatic, latent syphilis is diagnosed when reaginic and treponemal STSs are
positive in the absence of symptoms or signs of active syphilis. Such patients should have a thorough
examination, particularly genital, skin, neurologic, and cardiovascular examinations, to exclude secondary
and tertiary syphilis. Treatment and serologic follow-up for up to several years may be needed to ensure
the success of therapy because reaginic STS titers decrease slowly.
Latent acquired syphilis must be differentiated from latent congenital syphilis (, latent yaws,
and other treponemal infections.
Late or tertiary syphilis:
Patients with symptoms or signs of tertiary syphilis (particularly unexplained
neurologic abnormalities) require STS. If the test is reactive, the following should be done:
• Lumbar puncture for CSF examination (including STS)
• Imaging of the brain and aorta
• Screening of any other organ systems clinically suspected to be involved
At this stage of syphilis, a reaginic STS is nearly always positive, except in a few cases of tabes dorsalis.
In benign tertiary syphilis, differentiation from other inflammatory mass lesions or ulcers may be difficult
without biopsy.
Cardiovascular syphilis is suggested by symptoms and signs of aneurysmal compression of adjacent
structures, particularly stridor or hoarseness.
Syphilitic aortic aneurysm is suggested by aortic insufficiency without aortic stenosis
and, on chest x-ray,
by widening of the aortic root and linear calcification on the walls of the ascending aorta. Diagnosis of
aneurysm is confirmed with aortic imaging (transesophageal echocardiography, CT, or MRI).
In neurosyphilis, most symptoms and signs, except for Argyll Robertson pupil, are non-specific, so that
diagnosis relies heavily on a high index of clinical suspicion. Asymptomatic neurosyphilis is diagnosed
based on abnormal CSF (typically, lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated protein) and a reactive CSF
reaginic test. In parenchymatous neurosyphilis, the CSF reaginic and serum treponemal tests are reactive
and CSF typically has lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated protein. If present, HIV may confound the
diagnosis because it causes mild pleocytosis and various other neurologic symptoms.
In tabes dorsalis, serum reaginic tests may be negative if patients have been previously treated, but
serum treponemal tests are usually positive. CSF usually has lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated
protein, and sometimes reaginic or treponemal test results are positive; however, in many treated
patients, CSF is normal.
Treatment
• Sustained-release penicillin
• Treatment of sex partners
The treatment of choice in all stages of syphilis and during pregnancy is sustained-release penicillin (ie,
benzathine penicillin). All sex partners within the past 3 mo (if primary syphilis is diagnosed) and within 1
yr (if secondary syphilis is diagnosed) should be evaluated and, if infected, treated.
===PAGE:1654===
Primary, secondary, and latent syphilis:
Benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM given once
produces blood levels that are sufficiently high for 2 wk to cure primary, secondary, and early (< 1 yr)
latent syphilis. Doses of 1.2 million units are usually given in each buttock to reduce local reactions.
Additional injections of 2.4 million units should be given 7 and 14 days later for late (> 1 yr) latent syphilis
or latent syphilis of unknown duration because treponemes occasionally persist in the CSF after singledose regimens.
Patients with a history of IgE (anaphylactic or urticarial) allergic reactions to penicillin should not be
treated with a cephalosporin because they may have an allergic reaction. Azithromycin 2 g po in a single
dose or doxycycline 100 mg po bid for 14 days may be used, but efficacy of these drugs is not welldefined, particularly for late latent syphilis, and the 14-day regimen requires good adherence. If
adherence to the 14-day regimen cannot be ensured, the risk of using a cephalosporin may be justifiable.
Ceftriaxone 125 mg IM or IV once/day for 10 days has been effective in a limited number of patients.
Late or tertiary syphilis:
Benign or cardiovascular tertiary syphilis can be treated in the same way as
late latent syphilis.
For ocular syphilis or neurosyphilis, aqueous penicillin 3 to 4 million units IV q 4 h for 10 days (best
penetrates the CNS but may be impractical) or procaine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM once/day plus 500
mg probenecid po qid is recommended; both drugs are given for 10 to 14 days, followed by benzathine
penicillin 2.4 million units once/wk for 3 wk. For patients who have penicillin allergies, azithromycin and
doxycycline are effective, so penicillin desensitization is usually not indicated. Ceftriaxone 2 g IM or IV
once/day for 14 days can also be effective, but cross-sensitivity with cephalosporins is a concern so it is
usually avoided.
Treatment of asymptomatic neurosyphilis appears to prevent the development of new neurologic deficits.
Patients with neurosyphilis may be given oral or IM antipsychotics to help control paresis. Patients with
tabes dorsalis and lightning pains should be given analgesics as needed; carbamazepine 200 mg po tid
or qid sometimes helps.
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (JHR):
Most patients with primary or secondary syphilis, especially those
with secondary syphilis, have a JHR within 6 to 12 h of initial treatment. It typically manifests as malaise,
fever, headache, sweating, rigors, anxiety, or a temporary exacerbation of the syphilitic lesions. The
mechanism is not understood, and JHR may be misdiagnosed as an allergic reaction. JHR usually
subsides within 24 h and poses no danger. However, patients with general paresis or a high CSF cell
count may have a more serious reaction, including seizures or strokes, and should be warned and
observed accordingly. Unanticipated JHR may occur if patients with undiagnosed syphilis are given
antitreponemal antibiotics for other infections.
Posttreatment surveillance:
After treatment, patients should have
• Examinations and reaginic tests at 3, 6, and 12 mo and annually thereafter until the test is nonreactive
• For neurosyphilis, CSF testing every 6 mo until CSF cell count is normal
The importance of repeated tests to confirm cure should be explained to patients before treatment.
Examinations and reaginic tests
should be done at 3, 6, and 12 mo after treatment and annually thereafter
until the test is nonreactive. Failure of titers to decline by 4-fold at 6 mo suggests treatment failure and
indicates the need for retreatment. After successful treatment, primary lesions heal rapidly, and plasma
reaginic titers fall and usually become qualitatively negative within 9 to 12 mo. In about 15% of patients
with primary or secondary syphilis treated as recommended, the reaginic titer does not decrease by 4-fold
—the criterion used to define response at 1 yr after treatment. Treponemal tests may remain positive for
decades or permanently and should not be measured to monitor progress. Serologic or clinical relapse,
usually affecting the nervous system, may occur after 6 to 9 mo, but the cause may be reinfection rather
than relapse.
Patients with neurosyphilis require CSF testing at 6-mo intervals until the CSF cell count is normal. In HIVinfected patients, persisting CSF pleocytosis may represent effects of HIV rather than persisting
===PAGE:1655===
neurosyphilis. Normal CSF, serologic test, and examination results for 2 yr indicates probable cure. If the
CSF WBC count remains abnormal 2 yr after maximal treatment, it is unclear whether treatment should be
continued. Indications for retreatment with a more intensive regimen of antibiotics include a reaginic test
that remains reactive for > 2 yr, an increasing titer, and clinical relapse.
Trichomoniasis
Trichomoniasis is infection of the vagina or male genital tract with
Trichomonas vaginalis
. It can
be asymptomatic or cause urethritis, vaginitis, or occasionally cystitis, epididymitis, or
prostatitis. Diagnosis is by microscopic examination of vaginal or prostatic secretions or by
urethral culture. Patients and sex partners are treated with metronidazole.
T. vaginalis
is a flagellated, sexually transmitted protozoan that more often infects women (about 20% of
women of reproductive age) than men. Infection may be asymptomatic in either sex, but asymptomatic is
the rule for men. In men, protozoa may persist for long periods in the GU tract without causing symptoms;
thus, protozoa may be transmitted unwittingly to sex partners. Trichomoniasis may account for up to 5%
of nongonococcal, nonchlamydial urethritis in men in some areas. Coinfection with gonorrhea and other
sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) is common.
Symptoms and Signs
In women, symptoms range from none to copious, yellow-green, frothy vaginal discharge with soreness of
the vulva and perineum, dyspareunia, and dysuria. Asymptomatic infection may become symptomatic at
any time as the vulva and perineum become inflamed and edema develops in the labia. The vaginal walls
and surface of the cervix may have punctate, red "strawberry" spots. Urethritis and possibly cystitis may
also occur.
Men are usually asymptomatic; however, sometimes urethritis results in a discharge that may be transient,
frothy, or purulent or that causes dysuria and frequency, usually early in the morning. Often, urethritis is
mild and causes only minimal urethral irritation and occasional moisture at the urethral meatus, under the
foreskin, or both. Epididymitis and prostatitis are rare complications.
Diagnosis
• Microscopic examination of vaginal secretions
• Culture of male urine or urethral swab
Trichomoniasis is suspected in women with vaginitis, in men with urethritis, and in their sex partners.
Suspicion is high if symptoms persist after patients have been evaluated and treated for other infections
such as gonorrhea and chlamydial, mycoplasmal, and ureaplasmal infections.
In women, diagnosis is based on clinical criteria and in-office testing. Vaginal secretions are obtained from
the posterior fornix. The pH is measured. Secretions are then placed on 2 slides; they are diluted with
10% K hydroxide on one slide (KOH wet mount) and with 0.9% NaCl on the other (saline wet mount). For
the whiff test, the KOH wet mount is checked for a fishy odor, which results from amines produced in
trichomonas vaginitis or bacterial vaginosis. The saline wet mount is examined microscopically as soon as
possible to detect trichomonads, which can become immotile and more difficult to recognize within
minutes after slide preparation. (Trichomonads are pear-shaped with flagella, often motile, and average 7
to 10
μ
m—about the size of WBCs—but occasionally reach 25
μ
m.) If trichomoniasis is present,
numerous neutrophils are also present.
If results are inconclusive, cultures, which are more sensitive than microscopy, are done. Trichomoniasis
is also commonly diagnosed when a Papanicolaou test is done.
In men, microscopy of urine is insensitive, although occasionally organisms are visible
in a first-voided
morning specimen or a centrifuged specimen. Cultures of urine and urethral swabs are more sensitive.
===PAGE:1656===
As with diagnosis of any STD, patients with trichomoniasis should be tested to exclude other common
STDs such as gonorrhea and chlamydial infection.
Treatment
• Oral metronidazole or tinidazole
• Treatment of sex partners
Metronidazole or tinidazole 2 g po in a single dose cures up to 95% of women if sex partners are treated
simultaneously. Effectiveness of single-dose regimens in men is not as clear, so treatment is typically with
metronidazole or tinidazole 500 mg bid for 5 to 7 days. IV metronidazole cures some women when
repeated oral doses are ineffective.
Metronidazole may cause leukopenia, disulfiram-like reactions to alcohol, or candidal superinfections. It is
relatively contraindicated during early pregnancy, although it may not be dangerous to the fetus after the
1st trimester. Tinidazole has not been established as safe during pregnancy and so is not used.
Sex partners should be screened and treated for trichomoniasis and other STDs. If poor adherence to
follow-up is likely, treatment can be initiated in sex partners of patients with documented trichomoniasis
without confirming the diagnosis in the partner.
===PAGE:1657===
12 - Psychiatric Disorders
Chapter 157. Approach to the Patient With Mental Symptoms
Introduction
Patients with mental complaints or concerns or disordered behavior present in a variety of clinical
settings, including primary care and emergency treatment centers. Complaints or concerns may be new
or a continuation of a history of mental problems. Complaints may be related to coping with a physical
condition or be the direct effects of a physical condition. The method of assessment depends on whether
the complaints constitute an emergency or are reported in a scheduled visit. In an emergency, a physician
may have to focus on more immediate history, symptoms, and behavior to be able to make a management
decision. In a scheduled visit, a more thorough assessment is appropriate.
Routine Psychiatric Assessment
Assessment includes a general medical and psychiatric history and a mental status examination.
History
The physician must determine whether the patient can provide a history, ie, whether the patient readily
and coherently responds to initial questions. If not, information is sought from family and caregivers. Even
when a patient is communicative, close family members, friends, or caseworkers may provide information
that the patient has omitted. Receiving information that is not solicited by the physician does not violate
patient confidentiality. Previous psychiatric assessments, treatments, and degree of adherence to past
treatments are reviewed, and records from such care are obtained as soon as possible.
Conducting an interview hastily and indifferently with closed-ended queries (following a rigid system
review) often prevents patients from revealing relevant information. Tracing the history of the presenting
illness with open-ended questions, so that patients can tell their story in their own words, takes a similar
amount of time and enables patients to describe associated social circumstances and reveal emotional
reactions.
The interview should first explore what prompted the need (or desire) for psychiatric assessment (eg,
unwanted or unpleasant thoughts, undesirable behavior). The interviewer then attempts to gain a broader
perspective on the patient's personality by reviewing significant life events—current and past—and the
patient's responses to them (see
Table 157-1
). Psychiatric, medical, social, and developmental history is also reviewed.
The personality profile that emerges may suggest traits that are adaptive (eg, resilience,
conscientiousness) or maladaptive (eg, self-centeredness, dependency, poor tolerance of frustration) and
may show the coping mechanisms used (see
Table 163-1
. The interview may reveal obsessions (unwanted and distressing thoughts or
impulses), compulsions (urges to do irrational or apparently useless acts), and delusions (fixed false
beliefs) and may determine whether distress is expressed in physical symptoms (eg, headache,
abdominal pain), mental symptoms (eg, phobic behavior, depression), or social behavior (eg, withdrawal,
rebelliousness). The patient should also be asked about attitudes regarding psychiatric treatments,
including drugs and psychotherapy, so that this information can be incorporated into the treatment plan.
The interviewer should establish whether a physical condition or its treatment is causing or worsening a
mental condition (. In addition to having direct effects (eg, symptoms, including mental ones),
many physical conditions cause enormous stress and require coping mechanisms to withstand the
pressures related to the condition. Most patients with severe physical conditions experience some kind of
adjustment disorder, and those with underlying mental disorders may become unstable.
Observation during an interview may provide evidence of mental or physical disorders. Body language
may reveal evidence of attitudes and feelings denied by the patient. For example, does the patient fidget
or pace back and forth despite denying anxiety? Does the patient seem sad despite denying feelings of
===PAGE:1658===
depression? General appearance may provide clues as well. For example, is the patient clean and wellkept? Is a tremor or facial droop present?
Mental Status Examination
A mental status examination uses observation and questions to evaluate several domains
[Table 157-1.
Areas to Cover in the Initial Psychiatric Assessment]
of mental function, including speech, emotional expression, thinking and perception, and cognitive
functions. Brief standardized screening questionnaires are available for assessing certain components of
the mental status examination, including those specifically designed to assess orientation and memory.
However, screening questionnaires cannot take the place of a broader, more detailed mental status
examination (see
Sidebar 168-1
.
General appearance
should be assessed for unspoken clues to underlying conditions. Patients'
appearance can help determine whether they are unable to care for themselves (eg, they appear
undernourished, disheveled, or dressed inappropriately for the weather or have significant body odor),
are unable or unwilling to comply with social norms (eg, they are garbed in socially inappropriate
clothing), or have engaged in substance abuse or attempted self-harm (eg, they have an odor of alcohol,
scars suggesting IV drug abuse or self-inflicted injury).
Speech
can be assessed by noting spontaneity, syntax, rate, and volume. A patient with depression may
speak slowly and softly, whereas a patient with mania may speak rapidly and loudly. Abnormalities such
as dysarthrias and aphasias may indicate a physical cause of mental status changes, such as head
injury, stroke, brain tumor, or multiple sclerosis.
Emotional expression
can be assessed by asking patients to describe their feelings. The patient's tone
of voice, posture, hand gestures, and facial expressions are all considered. Mood (emotions patients
report) and affect (emotional state interviewer notes) should be assessed.
Thinking and perception
can be assessed by noticing not only what is communicated but also how it is
communicated. Abnormal content may take the form of delusions (false, fixed beliefs), ideas of reference
(notions that everyday occurrences have special meaning or significance personally intended for or
directed to the patient), or obsessions. The physician can assess whether ideas seem to be linked and
goal-directed and whether transitions from one thought to the next are logical. Psychotic or manic patients
may have disorganized thoughts or an abrupt flight of ideas.
Cognitive functions
include the patient's level of alertness; attentiveness or concentration; orientation to
person, place, and time; memory; abstract reasoning; insight; and judgment. Abnormalities of cognition
most
often occur with delirium or dementia or with substance abuse or withdrawal but can also occur with
depression.
Medical Assessment of the Patient With Mental Symptoms
Medical assessment of patients with mental symptoms seeks to identify 2 things:
• Physical disorders
mimicking
mental disorders
• Physical disorders
accompanying
mental disorders
Numerous physical disorders cause symptoms mimicking specific mental disorders (see
Table 157-2
). Other physical disorders may not mimic specific mental syndromes but instead change
mood and energy.
Many drugs cause mental symptoms; the most common drug causes are
• CNS-active drugs (eg, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antipsychotics, sedative/hypnotics, stimulants)
===PAGE:1659===
• Anticholinergics (eg, antihistamines)
• Corticosteroids
Numerous other therapeutic drugs and drug classes have also been implicated; they include some
classes that may not ordinarily be considered (eg, antibiotics, antihypertensives). Drugs of abuse,
particularly alcohol, amphetamines, cocaine, hallucinogens, and phencyclidine (PCP), particularly in
overdose, are also frequent causes of mental symptoms. Withdrawal from alcohol, barbiturates, or
benzodiazepines may cause mental symptoms (eg, anxiety) in addition to symptoms of physical
withdrawal.
In addition to the problem of causing mental symptoms, patients with a mental disorder may develop a
physical disorder (eg, meningitis, diabetic ketoacidosis) that causes new or worsened mental symptoms.
Thus, a clinician should not assume that all mental symptoms in patients with a known mental disorder
are due to that disorder. The clinician may need to be proactive in addressing possible physical causes
for mental symptoms, especially in patients unable to describe their physical health because they have
psychosis or dementia.
Patients presenting for psychiatric care occasionally have undiagnosed physical disorders (including
substance abuse, diabetes, and hypothyroidism) that are not the cause of their mental symptoms but
nonetheless require evaluation and treatment.
[Table 157-2.
Selected Mental Symptoms Due to Physical Disorders]
Evaluation
Medical assessment by history, physical examination, and often brain imaging and laboratory testing is
required for patients with • New-onset mental symptoms
• Qualitatively different or atypical symptoms (ie, in a patient with a known or stable mental disorder)
• Mental symptoms that begin at an atypical age
The goal is to diagnose underlying and concomitant physical disorders rather than to make a specific
psychiatric diagnosis.
History: History of present illness
should note the nature of symptoms and their onset, particularly
whether onset was sudden or gradual and whether symptoms followed any possible precipitants (eg,
trauma, starting or stopping of a drug or abused substance). The clinician should ask whether patients
have had previous episodes of similar symptoms, whether a mental disorder has been diagnosed and
treated, and, if so, whether patients have stopped taking their drugs.
Review of systems
seeks symptoms that suggest possible causes:
• Vomiting, diarrhea, or both: Dehydration, electrolyte disturbance
• Palpitations: Hyperthyroidism, drug effects including withdrawal
• Polyuria and polydipsia: Diabetes mellitus
• Tremors: Parkinson's disease, withdrawal syndromes
• Difficulty walking or speaking: Multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, stroke
• Headache: CNS infection, complex migraine, hemorrhage, mass lesion
• Fever, cough, and dysuria: Systemic infection
===PAGE:1660===
• Paresthesias and weakness: Vitamin deficiency, stroke, demyelinating disease
Past medical history
should identify known chronic physical disorders that can cause mental symptoms
(eg, thyroid, liver, or kidney disease; diabetes; HIV infection). All prescription and OTC drugs should be
reviewed, and patients should be queried about any alcohol or illicit substance use (amount and
duration). Family history of physical disorders, particularly of thyroid disease and multiple sclerosis, is
assessed. Risk factors for infection (eg, unprotected sex, needle sharing, recent hospitalization,
residence in a group facility) are noted.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed, particularly for fever, tachypnea, and tachycardia.
Mental status is assessed (, particularly for signs of confusion or inattention. A full physical
examination is done, although the focus is on signs of infection (eg, meningismus, lung congestion, flank
tenderness), the neurologic examination (including gait testing), and funduscopy to detect signs of
increased intracranial pressure (eg, papilledema, loss of venous pulsations). Signs of liver disease (eg,
jaundice, ascites, spider angiomas) should be noted. The skin is carefully inspected for self-inflicted
wounds or other evidence of external trauma (eg, bruising).
Interpretation of findings:
Confusion and inattention (reduced clarity of awareness of the environment
—, especially if of sudden onset, fluctuating, or both, indicate the presence of a physical
disorder. However, the converse is not true (ie, a clear sensorium does not confirm that the cause is a
mental disorder). Other findings that suggest a physical cause include
• Abnormal vital signs (eg, fever, tachycardia, tachypnea)
• Meningeal signs
• Abnormalities noted during the neurologic examination
• Disturbance of gait, balance, or both
• Incontinence
Some findings help suggest a specific cause. Dilated pupils (particularly if accompanied by flushed, hot,
dry skin) suggest anticholinergic drug effects. Constricted pupils suggest opioid drug effects or pontine
hemorrhage. Rotary or vertical nystagmus suggests PCP intoxication, and horizontal nystagmus often
accompanies diphenylhydantoin toxicity. A preceding history of relapsing-remitting neurologic symptoms,
particularly when a variety of nerves appear to be involved, suggests multiple sclerosis. Stocking-glove
paresthesias may indicate thiamin or vitamin B
deficiency. In patients with hallucinations, the type of
hallucination is not particularly diagnostic except that command hallucinations or voices commenting on
the patient's behavior probably represent a mental disorder.
Symptoms that began shortly after significant trauma or after beginning a new drug may be due to those
events. Drug or alcohol abuse may or may not be the cause of mental symptoms; about 40 to 50% of
patients with a mental disorder also have substance abuse (dual diagnosis).
Testing:
Patients typically should have
• Pulse oximetry
• Fingerstick glucose testing
• Measurement of therapeutic drug levels
If patients with a known mental disorder have an exacerbation of their typical symptoms and they have no
medical complaints, a normal sensorium, and a normal physical examination (including vital signs, pulse
oximetry, and fingerstick glucose testing), they do not typically require further laboratory testing. Most
other patients should have
===PAGE:1661===
• Blood alcohol level, urine toxicology screens (which may also be required for inpatient admission at
certain psychiatric facilities), and HIV testing
Many clinicians also measure
• Serum electrolytes (including Ca and Mg), BUN, and creatinine
Electrolyte and renal function tests may be diagnostic and help inform subsequent drug management (eg,
for drugs that require adjustment in patients with renal insufficiency).
Other tests are commonly done based on specific findings:
• Head CT: Patients with new-onset mental symptoms or with delirium, headache, history of recent
trauma, or focal neurologic findings (eg, weakness of an extremity)
• Lumbar puncture: Patients with meningeal signs or with normal head CT findings plus fever, headache,
or delirium
• Thyroid function tests: Patients taking lithium, those with symptoms or signs of thyroid disease, and
those > 40 yr with new-onset mental symptoms (particularly females or patients with a family history of
thyroid disease)
• Chest x-ray, urinalysis and culture, CBC, C-reactive protein, and blood cultures: Patients with fever
• Liver function tests: Patients with symptoms or signs of liver disease, with history of alcohol or drug
abuse, or with no obtainable history
Less often, findings may suggest testing for SLE, syphilis, demyelinating disorders, or vitamin B
or
thiamin deficiency.
Behavioral Emergencies
Patients who are experiencing severe changes in mood, thoughts, or behavior or severe, potentially lifethreatening drug adverse effects need urgent assessment and treatment. Non-specialists are often the
first care providers for outpatients and inpatients on medical units, but whenever possible, such cases
should also be evaluated by a psychiatrist.
When a patient's mood, thoughts, or behavior is highly unusual or disorganized, assessment must first
determine whether the patient is a
• Threat to self
• Threat to others
The threat to self can include inability to care for self (leading to self-neglect) or suicidal behavior (. Self-neglect is a particular concern for patients with psychotic disorders, dementia, or substance
abuse because their ability to obtain food, clothing, and appropriate protection from the elements is
impaired.
Patients posing a threat to others include those who are actively violent, those who appear belligerent
and hostile (ie, potentially violent), and those who do not appear threatening to the examiner and staff
members but express intent to harm another person (eg, spouse, neighbor, public figure).
Causes:
Aggressive, violent patients are often psychotic and have diagnoses such as polysubstance
abuse, schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or acute mania. Other causes include physical disorders that
cause acute delirium (see
Table 157-2
) and intoxication with alcohol or other substances, particularly
methamphetamine, cocaine, and sometimes phencyclidine (PCP) and club drugs (eg, MDMA [3,4-
===PAGE:1662===
methylenedioxymethamphetamine]).
General Principles
Management typically occurs simultaneously with evaluation, particularly evaluation for a possible
physical disorder (; it is a mistake to assume that the cause of abnormal behavior is a mental
disorder or intoxication, even in patients who have a known psychiatric diagnosis or an odor of alcohol.
Because patients are often unable or unwilling to provide a clear history, other collateral sources of
information (eg, family members, friends, caseworkers, medical records) must be identified and consulted
immediately.
Actively violent patients
must first be restrained by
• Physical means
• Drugs (chemical restraint)
• Both
Such interventions are done to prevent harm to patients and others and to allow evaluation of the cause
of the behavior (eg, by taking vital signs and doing blood tests). Close monitoring, sometimes involving
constant observation by a trained sitter, is required. Although clinicians must be aware of legal issues
regarding involuntary treatment (see
Sidebar 157-1
and p.
), such issues must not delay potentially lifesaving interventions.
Potentially violent patients
require measures to defuse the situation. Measures that may help reduce
agitation and aggressiveness include • Moving patients to a calm, quiet environment (eg, a seclusion
room, when available)
• Removing objects that could be used to inflict harm to self or others
• Expressing sympathetic concern for patients and their complaints
• Responding in a confident yet supportive manner
Speaking directly—mentioning that patients seem angry or upset, asking them if they intend to hurt
someone—acknowledges their feelings and may elicit information; it does not make them more likely to
act out.
Counterproductive measures
include
• Arguing about the validity of patients' fears and complaints
• Issuing threats (eg, to call police, to commit them)
• Speaking in a condescending manner
• Attempting to deceive patients (eg, hiding drugs in food, promising them they will not be restrained)
Staff and public safety:
When hostile, aggressive patients are interviewed, staff safety must be
considered. Most hospitals have a policy to search for weapons (manually, with metal detectors, or both)
on patients presenting with disordered behavior.
Patients who are hostile but not yet violent typically do not assault staff members randomly; rather, they
assault staff members who anger or appear threatening to them. Doors to rooms should be left open and
staff members should avoid positioning themselves between patients and the door so that patients do not
feel trapped or threatened; it is preferable that patients run out than assault staff members. Staff
members may also avoid appearing threatening by sitting on the same level as patients. Staff members
===PAGE:1663===
may avoid angering patients by not responding to their hostility in kind, with loud, angry remarks or
arguing. If patients nonetheless become increasingly agitated and violence appears impending, staff
members should simply leave the room and summon sufficient additional staff to provide a show of force,
which sometimes deters patients. Typically, at least 4 or 5 people should be present (some preferably
young and male). However, the team should not bring restraints into the room unless they are definitely to
be applied; seeing restraints may further agitate patients.
Verbal threats must be taken seriously. In most states, when a patient expresses the intention to harm a
particular person, the evaluating physician is required to warn the intended victim and to notify a specified
law enforcement agency. Specific requirements vary by state. Typically, state regulations also require
reporting of suspected abuse of children, the elderly, and spouses.
Physical Restraints
Use of physical restraints is controversial and should be considered only when other
methods have failed
and a patient continues to pose a significant risk of harm to self or others. Restraints may be needed to
hold the patient long enough to administer drugs, do a complete assessment, or both. Because restraints
are applied without the patient's consent, certain legal and ethical issues should be considered (see
Sidebar 157-1
).
Restraints are used to
• Prevent clear, imminent harm to the patient or others
• Prevent the patient's medical treatment from being significantly disrupted (eg, by pulling out tubes or IVs)
when consent to the treatment has been provided
• Prevent damage to physical surroundings, staff members, or other patients
• Prevent a patient who requires involuntary treatment from leaving (when a locked room is unavailable)
Restraints should not be used for
• Punishment
• Convenience of staff members (eg, to prevent wandering)
Caution is required in overtly suicidal patients, who could use the restraint as a suicide device.
Procedure:
Restraints should be applied only by staff members adequately trained in correct techniques
and in protecting patient rights and safety.
First, adequate staff are assembled in the room, and patients are informed that restraints must be applied.
Patients are encouraged to cooperate to avoid a struggle. However, once the clinician has determined
that restraints are necessary, there is no negotiation, and patients are told that restraints will be applied
whether or not they agree. Some actually understand and appreciate having external limits on their
behavior. In preparation for applying restraints, one person is assigned to each extremity and another to
the patient's head. Then, each person simultaneously grasps their assigned extremity and places the
patient supine on the bed; one physically fit person can typically control a single extremity of even large,
violent patients (provided all extremities are grasped at the same time). However, an additional person is
needed to apply the restraints. Rarely, upright patients who are extremely combative may first need to be
sandwiched between 2 mattresses.
Leather restraints are preferred. One restraint is applied to each ankle and wrist and attached to the bed
frame, not the rail. Restraints are not applied around the chest, neck, or head, and gags (eg, to prevent
spitting and swearing) are forbidden. Patients who remain combative in restraints (eg, attempting to upset
the stretcher, bite, or spit) require chemical restraint.
===PAGE:1664===
Complications:
Agitated or violent people brought to the hospital by police are almost always in
restraints (eg, handcuffs). Occasionally, young, healthy people have died in
police restraints before or
shortly after hospital arrival. The cause is often unclear but probably involves some combination of
overexertion with subsequent metabolic derangement and hyperthermia, drug use, aspiration of stomach
contents into the respiratory system, embolism in people left in restraints for a long time, and occasionally
serious underlying medical disorders. Death is more likely if people are restrained in the hobble position,
with one or both wrists shackled to the ankles behind their back; this type of restraint may cause asphyxia
and should be avoided. Because of these complications, violent patients presenting in police custody
should be evaluated promptly and thoroughly and not dismissed as mere sociobehavioral problems.
Sidebar 157-1 Regulatory Issues in Use of Physical Restraints in Aggressive, Violent Patients
Use of physical restraints should be considered a last resort, when other steps have not sufficiently
controlled aggressive, potentially violent behavior. When restraints are needed for such a situation, they
are legal in all states as long as their use is properly ordered and documented in the patient's medical
record. Restraints have the advantage of being immediately removable, whereas drugs may alter
symptoms enough or in a way that delays assessment.
The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations guidelines for use of restraints in the
psychiatric setting state that restraints must be applied under the direction of a licensed independent
practitioner (LIP). The LIP must assess the patient within the first hour of restraint placement. The order
for continued restraint may be written for up to 4 h at a time. The patient must be evaluated by an LIP or
registered nurse during the 4-h interval and before further continuation of the restraint order. At 8 h, the
LIP must reevaluate the patient in person before continuing the restraint order.
Hospital accreditation standards require that patients in restraints be continuously observed by a trained
sitter. Immediately after restraints have been applied, the patient must be monitored for signs of injury;
circulation, range of motion, nutrition and hydration, vital signs, hygiene, and elimination are also
monitored. Physical and mental comfort and readiness for discontinuation of restraints as appropriate are
also assessed. These assessments should be done every 15 min.
Chemical Restraints
Drug therapy, if used, should target control of specific symptoms.
Drugs:
Patients can usually be rapidly calmed or tranquilized using
• Benzodiazepines
• Antipsychotics (typically a conventional antipsychotic, but a 2nd-generation drug may be used)
These drugs are better titrated and act more rapidly and reliably when administered IV (see
Table 157-3
),
but IM administration may be necessary when IV access cannot be achieved in struggling patients. Both
classes of drug are effective sedatives for agitated, violent patients. Benzodiazepines are probably
preferred for stimulant drug overdoses and for alcohol and benzodiazepine drug withdrawal syndromes,
and antipsychotics are preferred for clear exacerbations of known mental disorders. Sometimes a
combination of both drugs is more effective; when large doses of one drug are required, using another
drug class may limit adverse effects.
Adverse effects of benzodiazepines:
Parenteral benzodiazepines, particularly in the doses sometimes
needed for extremely violent patients, may cause respiratory depression. Airway management with
intubation and assisted ventilation may be required. The benzodiazepine antagonist, flumazenil, may be
used, but caution is required because if sedation is significantly reversed, the original behavioral problem
may reappear.
Benzodiazepines sometimes lead to further disinhibition of behavior.
===PAGE:1665===
Adverse effects of antipsychotic drugs:
Antipsychotics, particularly dopamine-receptor antagonists, at
therapeutic as well as toxic doses, can have acute extrapyramidal adverse effects (see
Table 157-4
), including acute dystonia and akathisia (an unpleasant sensation of motor restlessness).
These adverse effects may be dose dependent and may resolve once the drug is stopped. Several
antipsychotics, including thioridazine, haloperidol, olanzapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone, can cause
long QT-interval syndrome and ultimately increase the risk of fatal arrhythmias. Neuroleptic malignant
syndrome is also a possibility. For other adverse effects, see p.
.
Legal Considerations
Patients with severe changes in mood, thoughts, or behavior are usually hospitalized when their condition
is likely to deteriorate without psychiatric intervention and when appropriate alternatives are not available.
[Table 157-3.
Drug Therapy for Agitated or Violent Patients]
[Table 157-4.
Treatment of Acute Adverse Effects of Antipsychotics]
Consent and involuntary treatment:
If patients refuse hospitalization, the physician must decide
whether to hold them against their will. Doing so may be necessary to ensure the immediate safety of the
patient or of others or to allow completion of an assessment and implementation of treatment. Criteria
and procedures for involuntary hospitalization vary by jurisdiction. Usually, temporary restraint requires a
physician or psychologist and one additional clinician, family member, or close contact to certify that the
patient has a mental disorder, is a danger to self or to others, and refuses voluntary treatment.
Danger to self
includes but is not limited to
• Suicidal ideation or attempts
• Failure to attend to basic needs, including nutrition, shelter, and needed drugs
In most jurisdictions, knowledge of intent to commit suicide requires a health care practitioner to act
immediately to prevent the suicide, for example, by notifying the police or another responsible agency.
Danger to others
includes
• Homicidal intent
• Placing others in peril
• Failing to provide for the needs or safety of dependents because of the mental disorder
===PAGE:1666===
Chapter 158. Anxiety Disorders
Introduction
Everyone periodically experiences fear and anxiety. Fear is an emotional, physical, and behavioral
response to an immediately recognizable external threat (eg, an intruder, a runaway car). Anxiety is a
distressing, unpleasant emotional state of nervousness and uneasiness; its causes are less clear. Anxiety
is less tied to the exact timing of a threat; it can be anticipatory before a threat, persist after a threat has
passed, or occur without an identifiable threat. Anxiety is often accompanied by physical changes and
behaviors similar to those caused by fear.
Some degree of anxiety is adaptive; it can help people prepare, practice, and rehearse so that their
functioning is improved and can help them be appropriately cautious in potentially dangerous situations.
However, beyond a certain level, anxiety causes dysfunction and undue distress. At this point, it is
maladaptive and considered a disorder.
Anxiety occurs in a wide range of physical and mental disorders, but it is the predominant symptom of
several. Anxiety disorders are more common than any other class of psychiatric disorder. However, they
often are not recognized and consequently not treated. Left untreated, chronic, maladaptive anxiety can
contribute to or interfere with treatment of some physical disorders.
Etiology
The causes of anxiety disorders are not fully known, but both mental and physical factors are involved.
Many people develop anxiety disorders without any identifiable antecedent triggers. Anxiety can be a
response to environmental stressors, such as the ending of a significant relationship or exposure to a lifethreatening disaster. Some physical disorders can directly cause anxiety; they include the following:
• Hyperthyroidism
• Pheochromocytoma
• Hyperadrenocorticism
• Heart failure
• Arrhythmias
• Asthma
• COPD
Other physical causes include use of drugs; effects of corticosteroids, cocaine, amphetamines, and even
caffeine can mimic anxiety disorders. Withdrawal from alcohol, sedatives, and some illicit drugs can also
cause anxiety.
Symptoms and Signs
Anxiety can arise suddenly, as in panic, or gradually over many minutes, hours, or even days. Anxiety may
last from a few seconds to years; longer duration is more characteristic of anxiety disorders. Anxiety
ranges from barely noticeable qualms to complete panic. The ability to tolerate a given level of anxiety
varies from person to person.
Anxiety disorders can be so distressing and disruptive that depression may result. Alternatively, an anxiety
disorder and a depressive disorder may coexist, or depression may develop first, with symptoms and
signs of an anxiety disorder occurring later.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1667===
• Exclusion of other causes
• Assessment of severity
Deciding when anxiety is so dominant or severe that it constitutes a disorder depends on several
variables, and physicians differ at what point they make the diagnosis. Physicians must first use history,
physical examination, and appropriate laboratory tests to determine whether anxiety is due to a physical
disorder or drug. They must also determine whether anxiety is better accounted for by another mental
disorder. An anxiety disorder is present and merits treatment if the following apply:
• Other causes are not identified.
• Anxiety is very distressing.
• Anxiety interferes with functioning.
• Anxiety does not stop spontaneously within a few days.
Diagnosis of a specific anxiety disorder is based on its characteristic symptoms and signs. Clinicians
usually use specific criteria of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth Edition
Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), which describes the specific symptoms and requires exclusion of other
causes of symptoms.
A family history of anxiety disorders (except acute and posttraumatic stress disorders) helps in making the
diagnosis because some patients appear to inherit a predisposition to the same anxiety disorders that
their relatives have, as well as a general susceptibility to other anxiety disorders. However, some patients
appear to acquire the same disorders as their relatives through learned behavior.
Treatment
Treatments vary for the different anxiety disorders, but typically involve a combination of psychotherapy
and drug treatment. The most common drug classes used are the benzodiazepines and SSRIs.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is characterized by excessive, almost daily anxiety and
worry for ≥ 6 mo about many activities or events. The cause is unknown, although it commonly
coexists in people who have alcohol abuse, major depression, or panic disorder. Diagnosis is
based on history and physical examination. Treatment is psychotherapy, drug therapy, or both.
GAD is common, affecting about 3% of the population within a 1-yr period. Women are twice as likely to
be affected as men. The disorder often begins in childhood or adolescence but may begin at any age.
Symptoms and Signs
The focus of the worry is not restricted as it is in other mental disorders (eg, to having a panic attack,
being embarrassed in public, or being contaminated); the patient has multiple worries, which often shift
over time. Common worries include work and family responsibilities, money, health, safety, car repairs,
and chores.
The course is usually fluctuating and chronic, with worsening during stress. Most people with GAD have
one or more other comorbid psychiatric disorders, including major depression, specific phobia, social
phobia, and panic disorder.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
===PAGE:1668===
Diagnosis is clinical based on criteria in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
,
Fourth Edition Text Revision (see
Table 158-1
).
Treatment
• Antidepressants and often benzodiazepines
Certain antidepressants, including SSRIs (eg, paroxetine, starting dose of 20 mg po once/day) and
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (eg, venlafaxine extended-release, starting dose of 37.5 mg
po once/day) are effective but typically only after being taken for at least a few weeks. Benzodiazepines
(anxiolytics—see
Table 158-2
) in small to moderate doses are also often and more rapidly effective, although sustained use
usually causes physical dependence. One strategy involves starting with concomitant use of a
benzodiazepine and an antidepressant. Once the antidepressant becomes effective, the benzodiazepine
is tapered.
[Table 158-1.
Diagnosis of Generalized Anxiety Disorder]
Buspirone is also effective; the starting dose is 5 mg po bid or tid. However, buspirone can take at least 2
wk before it begins to help.
Psychotherapy, usually cognitive-behavioral therapy, can be both supportive and problem-focused.
Relaxation and biofeedback may be of some help, although few studies have documented their efficacy.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by anxiety-provoking ideas, images, or
impulses (obsessions) and by urges (compulsions) to do something that will lessen the anxiety.
The cause is unknown. Diagnosis is based on history. Treatment consists of psychotherapy,
drug therapy, or, especially in severe cases, both.
OCD occurs about equally in men and women and affects about 2% of the population.
Symptoms and Signs
The dominant theme of the obsessive thoughts may be harm, risk, danger, contamination, doubt, loss, or
aggression. Typically, affected people feel compelled to perform repetitive, purposeful rituals to balance
their obsessions, as in the following:
• Washing to balance contamination
• Checking to balance doubt
• Hoarding to balance loss
• Avoiding people who may provoke them to balance fear of behaving aggressively
Most rituals, such as hand washing or checking locks, are observable, but some rituals, such as repetitive
counting or statements muttered under the breath, are not.
At some point, people with OCD recognize that their obsessions do not reflect real risks and that the
behaviors they perform to relieve their concern are unrealistic and excessive. Preservation of insight,
although sometimes
[Table 158-2.
Benzodiazepines]
===PAGE:1669===
slight, differentiates OCD from psychotic disorders, in which contact with reality is lost.
Because people with this disorder fear embarrassment or stigmatization, they often conceal their
obsessions and rituals, on which they may spend several hours each day. Relationships often deteriorate,
and performance in school or at work may decline. Depression is a common secondary feature.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical based on criteria in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
,
Fourth Edition Text Revision.
Treatment
• Exposure and ritual prevention therapy
• Often antidepressants
Exposure and ritual prevention therapy is effective; its essential element is exposure to situations or
people that trigger the anxiety-provoking obsessions and rituals. After exposure, patients forgo rituals,
allowing the anxiety triggered by exposure to diminish through habituation. Improvement often continues
for years, especially in patients who master the approach and use it even after formal treatment has
ended. However, most patients have incomplete responses as they also do to drugs.
Many experts believe that combining psychotherapy and drug therapy is best, especially for severe
cases. SSRIs ( and clomipramine (a tricyclic antidepressant with potent serotonergic effects)
are effective. For most SSRIs, low doses (eg, fluoxetine 20 mg po once/day, fluvoxamine 100 mg po
once/day, sertraline 50 mg po once/day, paroxetine 40 mg po once/day) are often as effective as larger
ones.
Panic Attacks and Panic Disorder
A panic attack is the sudden onset of a discrete, brief period of intense discomfort, anxiety, or
fear accompanied by somatic or cognitive symptoms. Panic disorder is occurrence of repeated
panic attacks typically accompanied by fears about future attacks or changes in behavior to
avoid situations that might predispose to attacks. Diagnosis is clinical. Isolated panic attacks
may not require treatment. Panic disorder is treated with drug therapy, psychotherapy (eg,
exposure therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy), or both.
Panic attacks are common, affecting as many as 10% of the population in a single year. Most people
recover without treatment; a few develop panic disorder. Panic disorder is uncommon, affecting 2 to 3%
of the population in a 12-mo period. Panic disorder usually begins
in late adolescence or early adulthood
and affects women 2 to 3 times more often than men.
Symptoms and Signs
A panic attack involves the sudden onset of at least 4 of the 13 symptoms listed in
Table 158-3
. Symptoms usually peak within 10 min and dissipate within minutes thereafter, leaving little
for a physician to observe. Although uncomfortable—at times extremely so—panic attacks are not
medically dangerous.
Panic attacks may occur in any anxiety disorder, usually in situations tied to the core features of the
disorder (eg, a person with a phobia of snakes may panic at seeing a snake). In pure panic disorder,
however, some of the attacks occur spontaneously.
Most people with panic disorder anticipate and worry about another attack (anticipatory anxiety) and
avoid places or situations where they have previously panicked. People with panic disorder often worry
that they have a dangerous heart, lung, or brain disorder and repeatedly visit their family physician or an
emergency department seeking help. Unfortunately, in these settings, attention is focused on physical
===PAGE:1670===
symptoms, and the correct diagnosis often is not made. Many people with panic disorder also have
symptoms of major depression.
Diagnosis
Panic disorder is diagnosed after physical disorders that can mimic anxiety are eliminated and symptoms
meet diagnostic criteria stipulated in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth
Edition Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR).
[Table 158-3.
Symptoms of a Panic Attack]
Treatment
• Often antidepressants, benzodiazepines, or both
• Often nondrug measures (eg, exposure therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy)
Some people recover without treatment, particularly if they continue to confront situations in which attacks
have occurred. For others, especially without treatment, panic disorder follows a chronic waxing and
waning course.
Patients should be told that treatment usually helps control symptoms. If avoidance behaviors have not
developed, reassurance, education about anxiety, and encouragement to continue to return to and remain
in places where panic attacks have occurred may be all that is needed. However, with a long-standing
disorder that involves frequent attacks and avoidance behaviors, treatment is likely to require drug
therapy combined with more intensive psychotherapy.
Many drugs can prevent or greatly reduce anticipatory anxiety, phobic avoidance, and the number and
intensity of panic attacks:
•
Antidepressants:
The different classes—SSRIs, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs),
serotonin modulators, tricyclics (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)—are similarly
effective. However, SSRIs and SNRIs offer a potential advantage of fewer adverse effects in
comparison with other antidepressants.
•
Benzodiazepines:
These anxiolytics—(see
Table 158-2
) work more rapidly than antidepressants but
are more likely to cause physical dependence and such adverse effects as somnolence, ataxia, and
memory problems.
•
Antidepressants plus benzodiazepines:
These drugs are sometimes used in combination initially;
the benzodiazepine is slowly tapered after the antidepressant becomes effective.
Panic attacks often recur when drugs are stopped.
Different forms of psychotherapy are effective. Exposure therapy, in which patients confront their fears,
helps diminish the fear and complications caused by fearful avoidance. For example, patients who fear
that they will faint during a panic attack are asked to spin in a chair or to hyperventilate until they feel
faint, thereby learning that they will not faint during an attack. Cognitive-behavioral therapy involves
teaching patients to recognize and control their distorted thinking and false beliefs and to modify their
behavior so
that it is more adaptive. For example, if patients describe acceleration of their heart rate or
shortness of breath in certain situations or places and fear that they are having a heart attack, they are
taught the following:
• Not to avoid those situations
• To understand that their worries are unfounded
• To respond instead with slow, controlled breathing or other methods that promote relaxation
===PAGE:1671===
Phobic Disorders
Phobic disorders consist of persistent, unreasonable, intense fears (phobias) of situations,
circumstances, or objects. The fears provoke anxiety and avoidance. Phobic disorders are
classified as general (agoraphobia and social phobia) or specific. The causes of phobias are
unknown. Phobic disorders are diagnosed based on history. Treatment for agoraphobia and
social phobia is drug therapy, psychotherapy (eg, exposure therapy, cognitive-behavioral
therapy), or both. Some phobias, including specific phobias, are treated mainly with exposure
therapy.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms depend on the type of phobic disorder, which is classified as general (agoraphobia and social
phobia) or specific.
Agoraphobia:
Agoraphobia is fear of and anticipatory anxiety about being trapped in situations or places
without a way to escape easily and without help if intense anxiety develops. The situations are avoided or
they may be endured but with substantial anxiety. Agoraphobia can occur alone or as part of panic
disorder.
Agoraphobia without panic disorder affects about 4% of women and 2% of men during any 12-mo period.
Peak age at onset is the early 20s; first appearance after age 40 is unusual.
Common examples of situations or places that create fear and anxiety include standing in line at a bank
or at a supermarket checkout, sitting in the middle of a long row in a theater or classroom, and using
public transportation, such as a bus or an airplane. Some people develop agoraphobia after a panic
attack in a typical agoraphobic situation. Others simply feel uncomfortable in such a situation and may
never or only later have panic attacks there. Agoraphobia often interferes with function and, if severe
enough, can cause people to become housebound.
Social phobia (social anxiety disorder):
Social phobia is fear of and anxiety about being exposed to
certain social or performance situations. These situations are avoided or endured with substantial anxiety.
People with social phobia recognize that their fear is unreasonable and excessive.
Social phobia affects about 9% of women and 7% of men during any 12-mo period, but the lifetime
prevalence may be at least 13%. Men are more likely than women to have the most severe form of social
anxiety, avoidant personality disorder (.
Fear and anxiety in people with social phobia often centers on being embarrassed or humiliated if they fail
to meet expectations. Often the concern is that their anxiety will be apparent through sweating, blushing,
vomiting, or trembling (sometimes as a quavering voice) or that the ability to keep a train of thought or find
words to express themselves will be lost. Usually, the same activity done alone causes no anxiety.
Situations in which social phobia is common include public speaking, acting in a theatrical performance,
and playing a musical instrument. Other potential situations include eating with others, signing their name
before witnesses, or using public bathrooms.
A more generalized type of social phobia causes anxiety in a broad array of social situations.
Specific phobias:
A specific phobia is fear of and anxiety about a particular situation or object (see
Table 158-4
). The situation or object is usually avoided when possible, but if exposure occurs, anxiety
quickly develops. The anxiety may intensify to the level of a panic attack. People with specific phobias
typically recognize that their fear is unreasonable and excessive.
Specific phobias are the most common anxiety disorders. Among the most frequent are fear of animals
(zoophobia), heights (acrophobia), and thunderstorms (astraphobia or brontophobia). Specific phobias
affect about 13% of women and 4% of men during any 12-mo period. Some cause little inconvenience
—eg, fear of snakes (ophidiophobia) in city dwellers, unless they are asked to hike in an area where
===PAGE:1672===
snakes are found. However, other phobias interfere severely with functioning—eg, fear of closed places
(claustrophobia), such as elevators, in people who must work on an upper floor of a skyscraper. Phobia
of blood (hemophobia), injections (trypanophobia), needles or other sharp objects (belonephobia), or
injury (traumatophobia) occurs to some degree in at least 5% of the population. People
[Table 158-4.
Some Common Phobias*]
with a phobia of blood, needles, or injury, unlike those with other phobias or anxiety disorders, can
actually faint because an excessive vasovagal reflex causes bradycardia and orthostatic hypotension.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical based on criteria in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
,
Fourth Edition Text Revision.
Prognosis
If untreated, agoraphobia usually waxes and wanes in severity. Agoraphobia may disappear without
formal treatment, possibly because some affected people conduct their own form of exposure therapy. But
if agoraphobia interferes with functioning, treatment is needed.
Social phobia is almost always chronic, and treatment is needed.
The prognosis for specific phobias is more variable when untreated because it may be easy to avoid the
situation or object that causes fear and anxiety.
Treatment
• Exposure therapy
• For agoraphobia and social phobia, often cognitive-behavioral therapy
• Sometimes limited use of a benzodiazepine or
β
-blocker
Because many phobic disorders involve avoidance, exposure therapy, a form of psychotherapy, is the
treatment of choice. With structure and support from a clinician who prescribes exposure homework,
patients seek out, confront, and remain in contact with what they fear and avoid until their anxiety is
gradually relieved through a process called habituation. Exposure therapy helps > 90% of those who
carry it out faithfully and is almost always the only treatment needed for specific phobias. Cognitivebehavioral therapy is effective for agoraphobia and social phobia. Cognitive-behavioral therapy involves
teaching patients to recognize and control their distorted thinking and false beliefs as well as instructing
them on exposure therapy. For example, patients who describe acceleration of their heart rate or
shortness of breath in certain situations or places learn by being repeatedly exposed to those situations
that their worries about having a heart attack are unfounded and are taught to respond instead with slow,
controlled breathing or other methods that promote relaxation.
Very short-term therapy with a benzodiazepine (eg, lorazepam 0.5 to 1.0 mg po) or a
β
-blocker
(propranolol is generally preferred—10 to 40 mg po), ideally about 1 to 2 h before the exposure, is
occasionally useful when exposure to an object or situation cannot be avoided (eg, when a person who
has a phobia of flying must fly on short notice) or when cognitive-behavioral therapy is either unwanted or
has not been successful.
Many people with agoraphobia also have panic disorder, and many of them benefit from drug therapy with
an SSRI. SSRIs and benzodiazepines are effective for social phobia, but SSRIs are probably preferable in
most cases because, unlike benzodiazepines, they are unlikely to interfere with cognitive-behavioral
therapy.
β
-Blockers are useful for phobias related to public performance.
Stress Disorders
===PAGE:1673===
Stress disorders include acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder.
Acute Stress Disorder
Acute stress disorder is a brief period of intrusive recollections occurring within 4 wk of
witnessing or experiencing an overwhelming traumatic event.
In acute stress disorder, people have been through a traumatic event, have recurring recollections of the
trauma, avoid stimuli that remind them of the trauma, and have increased arousal. Symptoms begin within
4 wk of the traumatic event and last a minimum of 2 days but, unlike posttraumatic stress disorder, last no
more than 4 wk. People with this disorder experience dissociative symptoms.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on criteria recommended by the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders
, Fourth Edition Text Revision (see
Table 158-5
); these criteria include dissociative symptoms.
Treatment
• Nondrug measures
Many people recover once they are removed from the traumatic situation, shown understanding and
empathy, and given an opportunity to describe the event and their reaction to it. To prevent or minimize
this disorder, some experts recommend systematic debriefing to assist people who were involved in or
witnessed a traumatic event as they process what has happened and reflect on its effect. In one
approach to debriefing, the event is referred to as the critical incident and the debriefing is referred to as
critical incident stress debriefing (CISD). Other experts have expressed concern and some studies show
that CISD may be not be as helpful as supportive, empathic interviewing, may be quite distressful for
some patients, and may even impede natural recovery.
Drugs to assist sleep may help, but other drugs are generally not indicated.
[Table 158-5.
Diagnosis of Acute Stress Disorder]
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is recurring, intrusive recollections of an overwhelming
traumatic event. The pathophysiology of the disorder is incompletely understood. Symptoms
also include avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event, nightmares, and
flashbacks. Diagnosis is based on history. Treatment consists of exposure therapy and drug
therapy.
When terrible things happen, many people are lastingly affected; in some, the effects are so persistent
and severe that they are debilitating and constitute a disorder. Generally, events likely to evoke PTSD are
those that invoke feelings of fear, helplessness, or horror. These events might include experiencing
serious injury or the threat of death or witnessing others being seriously injured, threatened with death, or
actually dying. Combat, sexual assault, and natural or man-made disasters are common causes of PTSD.
Lifetime prevalence approaches 8%, with a 12-mo prevalence of about 5%.
Symptoms and Signs
Most commonly, patients have frequent, unwanted memories replaying the triggering event. Nightmares of
the event are common. Much rarer are transient waking dissociative states in which events are relived as
if happening (flashback), sometimes causing patients to react as if in the original situation (eg, loud
noises such as fireworks might trigger a flashback of being in combat, which in turn might cause patients
===PAGE:1674===
to seek shelter or prostrate themselves on the ground for protection).
Patients avoid stimuli associated with the trauma and often feel emotionally numb and disinterested in
daily activities. Sometimes the onset of symptoms is delayed, occurring many months or even years after
the traumatic event. PTSD is considered chronic if present > 3 mo. Depression, other anxiety disorders,
and substance abuse are common among patients with chronic PTSD.
In addition to trauma-specific anxiety, patients may experience guilt because of their actions during the
event or because they survived when others did not.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical based on criteria in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
,
Fourth Edition Text Revision (see
Table 158-6
).
Treatment
• Exposure therapy or other psychotherapy, including supportive psychotherapy
• SSRI or other drug therapy
If untreated, chronic PTSD often diminishes in severity without disappearing, but some people remain
severely impaired. The primary form of psychotherapy used, exposure therapy, involves exposure to
situations that the person
[Table 158-6.
Diagnosis of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder]
avoids because they may trigger recollections of the trauma. Repeated exposure in fantasy to the
traumatic experience itself usually lessens distress after some initial increase in discomfort. Stopping
certain ritual behaviors, such as excessive washing to feel clean after a sexual assault, also helps.
Drug therapy, particularly with SSRIs (, is effective. Drugs with mood-stabilizing effects, such
as valproate, carbamazepine, and topiramate, can help reduce arousal, nightmares, and flashbacks.
Because the anxiety is often intense, supportive psychotherapy plays an important role. Therapists must
be openly empathic and sympathetic, recognizing and acknowledging patients' mental pain and the reality
of the traumatic events. Therapists must also encourage patients to face the memories through
desensitizing exposure and learning techniques to control anxiety. For survivor guilt, psychotherapy aimed
at helping patients understand and modify their self-critical and punitive attitudes may be helpful.
===PAGE:1675===
Chapter 159. Dissociative Disorders
Introduction
Everyone occasionally experiences a failure in the normal automatic integration of memories, perceptions,
identity, and consciousness. For example, people may drive somewhere and then realize that they do not
remember many aspects of the drive because they are preoccupied with personal concerns, a program
on the radio, or conversation with a passenger. Typically, such a failure, referred to as nonpathologic
dissociation, does not disrupt everyday activities.
People with a dissociative disorder may totally forget a series of normal behaviors occupying minutes or
hours and may sense missing a period of time in their experience. Dissociation thus disrupts the
continuity of self and the recollection of life events. People may experience the following:
• Poorly integrated memory (dissociative amnesia)
• Fragmentation of identity and memory (dissociative fugue or dissociative identity disorder)
• Disruption of experience and self-perception (depersonalization disorder)
Dissociative disorders are usually attributed to overwhelming stress. Such stress may be generated by
traumatic events or by intolerable inner conflict.
Depersonalization Disorder
Depersonalization disorder consists of persistent or recurrent feelings of being detached from
one's body or mental processes, usually with a feeling of being an outside observer of one's
life. The disorder is often triggered by severe stress. Diagnosis is based on symptoms after
other possible causes are ruled out. Treatment consists of psychotherapy.
About 20 to 40% of the general population have had a transient experience of depersonalization,
frequently occurring in connection with life-threatening danger, acute drug intoxication (marijuana,
hallucinogens, ketamine, Ecstasy), sensory deprivation, or sleep deprivation. Depersonalization can also
occur as a symptom in many other mental disorders as well as in physical disorders such as seizure
disorders (ictal or postictal). When depersonalization occurs independently of other mental or physical
disorders and is persistent or recurrent, depersonalization disorder is present. It is estimated to occur in
about 2% of the general population.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients feel detached from their body, mind, feelings, or sensations. Most patients also say they feel
unreal (derealization), like an automaton, or as if they were in a dream or in some other way detached
from the world. Some patients cannot recognize or describe their emotions (alexithymia). Patients may
describe themselves as the "walking dead." Symptoms are almost always distressing and, when severe,
profoundly intolerable. Anxiety and depression are common.
Symptoms are often chronic; about one third of patients have recurrent episodes, and two thirds have
continuous symptoms. Episodic symptoms sometimes become continuous.
Patients often have great difficulty describing their symptoms and may fear or believe they are going
crazy. They always retain the knowledge
that their unreal experiences are not real but rather are just the
way that they feel. This awareness differentiates depersonalization disorder from a psychotic disorder, in
which such insight is always lacking.
Diagnosis
• Medical and psychiatric evaluation
===PAGE:1676===
Diagnosis is based on symptoms after ruling out physical disorders, ongoing substance abuse, and other
mental disorders (especially anxiety, depression, and other dissociative disorders). Initial evaluation
should include MRI and EEG to rule out physical causes, particularly if symptoms or progression are
atypical. Urine toxicology tests may also be indicated.
Psychologic tests and special structured interviews and questionnaires are helpful.
Prognosis
Patients often improve without intervention. Complete recovery is possible for many patients, especially if
symptoms result from treatable or transient stresses or have not been protracted. In others,
depersonalization becomes more chronic and refractory.
Even persistent or recurrent depersonalization symptoms may cause only minimal impairment if patients
can distract themselves from their subjective sense of self by keeping their mind busy and focusing on
other thoughts or activities. Some patients become disabled by the chronic sense of estrangement, by the
accompanying anxiety or depression, or both.
Treatment
• Psychotherapy
Treatment must address all stresses associated with onset of the disorder as well as earlier stresses (eg,
childhood emotional abuse or neglect), which may have predisposed patients to late onset of
depersonalization.
Various psychotherapies (eg, psychodynamic psychotherapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy) are successful
for some patients:
• Cognitive techniques can help block obsessive thinking about the unreal state of being.
• Behavioral techniques can help patients engage in tasks that distract them from the depersonalization.
• Grounding techniques use the 5 senses (eg, by playing loud music or placing a piece of ice in the hand)
to help patients feel more connected to themselves and the world and more real in the moment.
• Psychodynamic therapy focuses on underlying conflicts that make certain affects intolerable to the self
and thus dissociated.
• Moment-to-moment tracking and labeling of affect and dissociation in therapy sessions works well for
some patients.
Various drugs have been used, but none have clearly demonstrable efficacy. However, some patients are
apparently helped by serotonin reuptake inhibitors, lamotrigine, opioid antagonists, anxiolytics, and
stimulants. However, these drugs may largely be targeting other mental disorders (eg, anxiety,
depression) that are often associated with or precipitated by depersonalization.
Dissociative Amnesia
Dissociative amnesia is inability to recall important personal information that is too extensive to
be explained by normal forgetfulness. Diagnosis is based on history after ruling out other
causes of amnesia. Treatment is psychotherapy, sometimes combined with hypnosis or drugfacilitated interviews.
The information lost would normally be part of conscious awareness and would be described as
autobiographic memory—eg, the story of one's life: who one is, where one went, to whom one spoke, and
what one did, said, thought, experienced, and felt. Although the forgotten information may be inaccessible
to consciousness, it sometimes continues to influence behavior.
===PAGE:1677===
Dissociative amnesia is likely underdetected. Prevalence, although not well-established, has been
estimated at 2 to 6% in the general population. Dissociative amnesia is most commonly diagnosed in
young adults. The amnesia appears to be caused by traumatic or stressful experiences endured or
witnessed (eg, physical or sexual abuse, rape, combat, abandonment during natural disasters, death of a
loved one, financial troubles) or by tremendous internal conflict (eg, turmoil over guilt-ridden impulses,
apparently unresolvable interpersonal difficulties, criminal behaviors).
Symptoms and Signs
The main symptom is memory loss, usually of information regarding traumatic or stressful events or entire
periods of the patient's life. Characteristically, patients experience one or more episodes in which they
forget some or all of the events that occurred during a period of time. These periods, or gaps in memory,
may
represent only a few hours or can encompass years. Usually, the forgotten period of time is clearly
demarcated.
Patients seen shortly after they become amnestic may appear confused. Some are very distressed;
others are indifferent. Some, especially if the amnesia is for the remote past, may not even be aware of it,
and if they present for psychiatric help, the presenting complaint is often different.
Diagnosis
• Medical and psychiatric examination
Diagnosis requires a medical and psychiatric examination. Initial evaluation should include MRI to rule out
structural causes, EEG to rule out a seizure disorder, and blood and urine tests to rule out toxic causes,
such as illicit drug use. Psychologic testing can help better characterize the nature of the dissociative
experiences.
Prognosis
Most patients recover their missing memories, and amnesia resolves. However, some are never able to
reconstruct their missing past. The prognosis is determined mainly by the patient's life circumstances,
particularly stresses and conflicts associated with the amnesia, and by the patient's overall mental
adjustment.
Treatment
• To recover memory, a supportive environment and sometimes hypnosis or a drug-induced hypnotic state
• Psychotherapy to deal with issues associated with recovered memories
If memory of only a very short time period is lost, supportive treatment is usually adequate, especially if
patients have no apparent need to recover the memory of some painful event.
Treatment for more severe memory loss begins with creation of a safe and supportive environment. This
measure alone frequently leads to gradual recovery of missing memories. When it does not or when the
need to recover memories is urgent, questioning patients while they are under hypnosis or, rarely, in a
drug-induced (barbiturate or benzodiazepine) semihypnotic state can be successful. These strategies
must be done gently because the traumatic circumstances that stimulated memory loss are likely to be
recalled and to be very upsetting. The questioner also must carefully phrase questions so as not to
suggest the existence of an event and risk creating a false memory. The accuracy of memories recovered
with such strategies can be determined only by external corroboration. However, regardless of the degree
of historical accuracy, filling in the gap as much as possible is often therapeutically useful in restoring
continuity to the patient's identity and sense of self and in creating a cohesive narrative. Once the
amnesia is lifted, treatment helps with the following:
• Giving meaning to the underlying trauma or conflict
===PAGE:1678===
• Resolving problems associated with the amnestic episode
• Enabling patients to move on with their life
Dissociative Fugue
Dissociative fugue is one or more episodes of amnesia in which patients cannot recall some or
all of their past and either lose their identity or form a new identity. The episodes, called fugues,
result from trauma or stress. Dissociative fugue often manifests as sudden, unexpected,
purposeful travel away from home. Diagnosis is based on history, after ruling out other causes
of amnesia. Treatment consists of psychotherapy, sometimes combined with hypnosis or drugfacilitated interviews.
The incidence of dissociative fugue has been estimated at ≤ 0.2%, but the rate increases in connection
with wars, accidents, and natural disasters.
Etiology
Causes are similar to those of dissociative amnesia (, with some additional factors (eg,
prolonged and escalating subacute stress, extreme intrapsychic conflict, intense struggle between a wish
to escape from one's life as is and a very harsh superego).
Fugues are often mistaken for malingering ( because like malingering, fugues may absolve
people of accountability for their actions or of certain responsibilities or remove them from hazardous
situations. However, unlike malingering, fugues are spontaneous, unplanned, and not faked. Many fugues
appear to represent disguised wish fulfillment, the only permissible means of escape from severe
distress, especially for people with a rigid conscience. For example, a financially distressed executive
leaves a hectic life and lives as a farm hand in the country. A fugue may also remove the person from an
embarrassing situation or intolerable stress or may be related to issues of rejection or separation. For
example, the fugue may say, in effect, "I am not
the man who found his wife to be unfaithful." Some fugues
may be an alternative response to suicidal or homicidal impulses.
About half of people have only one dissociative fugue, and the others have a few episodes over their
lifetime. When dissociative fugue recurs more than a few times, people usually have an underlying
dissociative identity disorder.
Symptoms and Signs
The length of a fugue may range from hours to months, occasionally longer. During the fugue, people
may appear and act normal or be only mildly confused. They may assume a new name and identity and
engage in complex social interactions. However, at some point, confusion about the new identity or a
return of the original identity may make them aware of amnesia or cause distress. When the fugue ends,
shame, discomfort, grief, depression, intense conflict, and suicidal or aggressive impulses may appear
—people must deal with what they left behind. Failure to remember events that occurred during the fugue
may cause confusion, distress, or even terror. When the fugue ends, many people recall their past identity
and life up to fugue onset; however, for some, recalling is a lengthier and more gradual process, and
some aspects of their autobiographic past may never be recalled. A very few people remember nothing or
almost nothing about their past indefinitely.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation (usually the disorder is diagnosed retrospectively)
A fugue in progress is rarely recognized. It may be suspected when people seem confused about their
identity, puzzled about their past, or confrontational when their new identity is challenged. Often, the
fugue is not diagnosed until people abruptly return to their pre-fugue identity and are distressed to find
themselves in unfamiliar circumstances.
===PAGE:1679===
The diagnosis is usually made retrospectively, based on documentation of the circumstances before
travel, the travel itself, and the establishment of an alternate life. When clinicians suspect that a fugue is
faked, cross-checking information from multiple sources may reveal inconsistencies that preclude the
diagnosis.
Prognosis
Most fugues are brief and self-limited. Impairment after the fugue ends is usually mild and short-lived.
However, if the fugue was prolonged and complications due to behavior before or during the fugue are
significant, people may have considerable difficulties trying to return to their pre-fugue identity—eg, a
soldier who returns after a fugue may be charged with desertion, or a person who marries during a fugue
may have inadvertently become a bigamist.
Treatment
• During fugue, restoring missing information
• After fugue ends, psychotherapy
Rarely, people are identified while still in a fugue. In such cases, the following are important:
• Recovering information (possibly with help from law enforcement and social services personnel) about
their true identity
• Figuring out why it was abandoned
• Facilitating its restoration
Treatment after the fugue ends involves psychotherapy, sometimes combined with hypnosis or drugfacilitated (barbiturate or benzodiazepine) interviews. However, efforts to restore memory of the fugue
period are often unsuccessful. Regardless, a psychiatrist can help people explore how they handle the
types of situations, conflicts, and affects that precipitated the fugue and thus foster better future
adaptations and solutions and help prevent fugue recurrences.
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Dissociative identity disorder, formerly called multiple personality disorder, is characterized by
≥ 2 identities (called alters or self-states) that alternate. The disorder includes inability to recall
important personal information relating to some of the identities. The cause is almost invariably
overwhelming childhood trauma, and the disorder is best viewed as a developmental disorder
in which extreme trauma interferes with formation of a single cohesive identity. Diagnosis is
based on history, sometimes with hypnosis or drug-facilitated interviews. Treatment is longterm psychotherapy, sometimes with drug therapy.
What is known by one identity may or may not be known by another. Some identities appear to know and
interact with others in an elaborate inner world, and some identities do this more than others. The system
must be mapped out by the psychiatrist over time.
This disorder may be present in about 1% of the general population.
Etiology
Dissociative identity disorder is attributed to the interaction of the following:
• Overwhelming stress (typically extreme childhood mistreatment)
• Insufficient nurturing and compassion in response to overwhelmingly hurtful experiences during
===PAGE:1680===
childhood
• Dissociative capacity (ability to uncouple one's memories, perceptions, or identity from conscious
awareness)
Children are not born with a sense of a unified identity; it develops from many sources and experiences.
In overwhelmed children, many parts of what should have blended together remain separate. Chronic and
severe abuse (physical, sexual, or emotional) and neglect during childhood are frequently reported by
and documented in patients with dissociative identity disorder. Some patients have not been abused but
have experienced an important early loss (such as death of a parent), serious medical illness, or other
overwhelmingly stressful events.
In contrast to most children who achieve cohesive, complex appreciation of themselves and others,
severely mistreated children may go through phases in which different perceptions, memories, and
emotions of their life experiences are kept segregated. Such children may over time develop an
increasing ability to escape the mistreatment by "going away" or retreating into their own mind. Each
developmental phase or traumatic experience may be used to generate a different self-state.
Symptoms and Signs
Several symptoms are characteristic:
• Fluctuating symptom pictures
• Fluctuating levels of function from highly effective to disabled
• Severe headaches or other pains
• Time distortions, time lapses, and amnesia
• Depersonalization and derealization
Depersonalization refers to feeling unreal, removed from one's self, and detached from one's physical and
mental processes. Patients feel like an observer of their life, as if they were watching themselves in a
movie. Patients may even feel as if transiently they do not inhabit their bodies. Derealization refers to
experiencing familiar people and surroundings as if they were unfamiliar, strange, or unreal.
Patients typically lose time; they experience frequent bouts of amnesia after which they may discover
objects or samples of handwriting that they cannot account for or recognize. They may also find
themselves in different places from where they last remember being and have no idea why or how they
got there. They may refer to themselves in the first person plural (we) or in the third person (he, she,
they), sometimes without knowing why.
The switching of identities and the amnestic barriers between them frequently result in chaotic lives.
Because the identities often interact with each other, patients typically report hearing inner conversations
between other personalities, which comment on or address them. Thus, patients may be misdiagnosed
with a psychotic disorder. Although these voices are experienced as hallucinations, they have a distinctly
different quality from the typical hallucinations of psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia.
Patients often have a remarkable array of symptoms that can resemble those of anxiety disorders, mood
disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, personality disorders, eating disorders, bipolar disorder,
schizophrenia, and seizure disorders. Suicidal ideation and attempts are common, as are episodes of
self-mutilation. Many patients abuse substances.
Diagnosis
• Detailed interviews, sometimes with hypnosis or facilitated by drugs
===PAGE:1681===
Patients typically have been diagnosed with at least 3 different mental disorders and have been treated
unsuccessfully. On average, these patients are in the mental health system for about 6 to 8 yr before the
disorder is accurately diagnosed. The skepticism of some physicians regarding the validity of dissociative
identity disorder can contribute to misdiagnosis.
The diagnosis requires knowledge of and specific questions about dissociative phenomena. Prolonged
interviews, hypnosis, or drug-facilitated (barbiturate or benzodiazepine) interviews are sometimes used,
and patients may be asked to keep a journal between visits. All of these measures encourage a shift of
personality states during the evaluation. The clinician may over time attempt to map out the different selfstates and their interrelationships. Specially designed structured interviews and questionnaires can be
very helpful, especially for clinicians who have less experience with this disorder.
The clinician may also attempt to directly contact other identities by asking to speak to
the part of the
mind involved in behaviors for which patients had amnesia or that were experienced in a depersonalized
or derealized way.
Prognosis
Symptoms wax and wane spontaneously, but dissociative identity disorder does not resolve
spontaneously. Patients can be divided into groups based on their symptoms:
1: Symptoms are mainly dissociative and posttraumatic. These patients generally function well and
recover completely with treatment.
2: Dissociative symptoms are combined with prominent symptoms of other disorders, such as personality
disorders, mood disorders, eating disorders, and substance abuse disorders. These patients improve
more slowly, and treatment may be less successful or longer and more crisis-ridden.
3: Patients not only have severe symptoms due to coexisting mental disorders but may also remain
deeply emotionally attached to their abusers. These patients can be challenging to treat, often requiring
longer treatments that typically aim to help control symptoms more than to achieve integration.
Treatment
• Supportive care, including drug treatment as needed for associated symptoms
• Long-term integration of identity states when possible
Integration of the identity states is the most desirable outcome. Drugs are widely used to help manage
symptoms of depression, anxiety, impulsivity, and substance abuse but do not relieve dissociation per se;
treatment to achieve integration centers on psychotherapy. For patients who cannot or will not strive for
integration, treatment aims to facilitate cooperation and collaboration among the identities and to reduce
symptoms.
The first priority of psychotherapy is to stabilize patients and ensure safety, before evaluating traumatic
experiences and exploring problematic identities. Some patients benefit from hospitalization, during which
continuous support and monitoring are provided as painful memories are addressed. Hypnosis may help
with accessing the identities, facilitating communication between them, and stabilizing and interpreting
them. Modified exposure techniques can be used to gradually desensitize patients to traumatic memories,
which are sometimes tolerated only in small fragments.
As the reasons for dissociations are addressed and worked through, therapy can move toward
reconnecting, integrating, and rehabilitating the patient's alternate selves, relationships, and social
functioning. Some integration occurs spontaneously during treatment. Integration can be encouraged by
negotiating with and arranging the unification of the identities or facilitated with imagery and hypnotic
suggestion.
===PAGE:1682===
Chapter 160. Drug Use and Dependence
Introduction
Some people who use drugs use large enough amounts often enough and long enough to become
dependent.
Definitions
A single definition for drug dependence is elusive. Concepts that aid in defining drug dependence are
tolerance and psychologic and physical dependence.
Tolerance
describes the need to progressively increase the drug dose to produce the effect originally
achieved with smaller doses.
Psychologic dependence
includes feelings of satisfaction and a desire to repeat the drug experience or
to avoid the discontent of not having it. This anticipation of effect is a powerful factor in the chronic use of
psychoactive drugs and, with some drugs, may be the only obvious reason for intense craving and
compulsive use. Craving and compulsion to use a drug lead to using it in larger amounts, more frequently,
or over a longer period than was intended when use began. Psychologic dependence involves giving up
social, occupational, or recreational activities because of drug use, as well as persistent use despite
knowing that the drug is likely causing a physical or mental problem. Drugs that cause psychologic
dependence often have ≥ 1 of the following effects:
• Reduced anxiety and tension
• Elation, euphoria, or other pleasurable mood changes
•
Feelings of increased mental and physical ability
• Altered sensory perception
• Changes in behavior
Drugs that cause chiefly psychologic dependence include marijuana, amphetamine, 3,4methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), and hallucinogens, such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD),
mescaline, and psilocybin.
Physical dependence
is manifested by a withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome, in which untoward physical
effects occur when the drug is stopped or when its effect is counteracted by a specific antagonist. Drugs
that cause strong physical dependence include heroin, alcohol, benzodiazepines, and cocaine.
Abstinence syndromes are drug-specific or drug class-specific and may vary considerably based on the
amount and frequency of use and on patient characteristics, which may affect how patients experience
withdrawal.
Addiction
, a concept without a consistent, universally accepted definition, is used here to refer to
compulsive use and overwhelming involvement with a drug, including spending an increasing amount of
time obtaining the drug, using the drug, or recovering from its effects. It may occur without physical
dependence. Addiction implies the risk of harm and the need to stop drug use, regardless of whether the
addict understands and agrees.
Drug abuse
is definable only in terms of societal disapproval. Drug abuse may involve the following:
• Experimental and recreational use of drugs, which is usually illegal
• Unsanctioned or illegal use of psychoactive drugs to relieve problems or symptoms
• Use of drugs because of dependence or the need to prevent withdrawal
===PAGE:1683===
Illicit drug use, although usually considered abuse simply because it is illegal, does not always involve
dependence. Use of legal substances, such as alcohol and prescription drugs, may involve dependence
and abuse. Abuse of prescription and illegal drugs cuts across all socioeconomic groups.
Recreational drug use
has increasingly become a part of Western culture, although in general, it is not
sanctioned by society. Some users apparently are unharmed; they tend to use drugs episodically in
relatively small doses, precluding clinical toxicity and development of tolerance and physical dependence.
Many recreational drugs (eg, crude opium, alcohol, marijuana, caffeine, hallucinogenic mushrooms, coca
leaf) are "natural" (ie, close to plant origin); they contain a mixture of relatively low concentrations of
psychoactive compounds and are not isolated psychoactive compounds. Recreational drugs are most
often taken orally or inhaled. Taking these drugs by injection makes it harder to predict and control
desired and unwanted effects.
Intoxication
refers to development of a reversible substance-specific syndrome of mental and behavioral
changes that may involve altered perception, euphoria, cognitive impairment, impaired judgment, impaired
physical and social functioning, mood lability, belligerence, or a combination. Taken to the extreme,
intoxication can lead to overdose, significant morbidity, and risk of death.
Narcotics and scheduled drugs:
Narcotics are drugs that cause insensibility or stupor (narcosis), but
the term is typically restricted to drugs that bind to opiate receptors: opium, opium derivatives, and their
semisynthetic and synthetic analogues. However, the US government classifies cocaine as a narcotic,
even though it does not bind at opiate receptors or have morphine-like effects. Many narcotics
(specifically opioids) are used therapeutically to induce anesthesia and to relieve pain, cough, and
diarrhea. The morphine-like effects of opioids are welcomed in most clinical situations but contribute to
the attractiveness of narcotics for abuse.
In the US, the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 and subsequent
modifications require the pharmaceutical industry to maintain physical security of and strict record
keeping for certain classes of drugs (controlled substances—see
Table 160-1
). Controlled substances are divided into 5 schedules (or classes) on the basis of their
potential for abuse, accepted medical use, and accepted safety under medical supervision. The schedule
classification determines how a substance must be controlled.
• Schedule I: These substances have a high potential for abuse, no accredited medical use, and a lack of
accepted safety. They can be used only under government-approved research conditions.
• Schedule II to IV: Going from schedule II to IV, these drugs have progressively less potential for abuse.
They have an accredited medical use. Prescriptions for these drugs must bear the physician's federal
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) license number.
• Schedule V: These substances are least likely to be abused. Some Schedule V drugs do not require a
prescription.
[Table 160-1.
Some Examples of Controlled Substances]
State schedules may vary from federal schedules.
Drug Dependence
People usually progress from experimentation to occasional use and then to dependence. This
progression is complex and only partially understood. The process depends on interaction between the
drug, user, and setting.
Drug:
Commonly used psychoactive drugs vary in their potential for creating dependence.
User:
The user's predisposing physical characteristics (probably including genetic predisposition),
personal characteristics, and circumstances (eg, coexistence of other disorders) influence whether drug
===PAGE:1684===
dependence develops. For example, sadness, emotional distress that is symptomatically relieved by the
drug, and a sense of social alienation may lead to increased use and dependence or addiction.
Psychiatric disorders increase the risk of becoming drug dependent.
Patients with chronic pain (eg, back pain, pain due to sickle cell disease, neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia)
often require narcotics for relief; many subsequently become dependent, and a few become addicted.
However, in many of these patients, nonnarcotic drugs and other treatments ( are not
adequate to relieve pain and suffering.
Few differences exist between the biochemical, drug dispositional, and physical responsiveness of
people who become addicted or dependent and those who do not, although such differences have been
vigorously sought. However, exceptions exist; nonalcoholic relatives of alcoholics have a diminished
physical response to alcohol. Consequently, they need to drink more to get the desired effect.
A neural substrate for reinforcement (the tendency to seek more drugs and other stimuli) has been
identified in animal models. In these studies, self-administration of such drugs as opioids, cocaine,
amphetamine, nicotine, and benzodiazepines is associated with enhanced dopaminergic transmission in
specific mid-brain and cortical circuits. This finding suggests the existence of a brain reward pathway
involving dopamine in the mammalian brain. However, evidence that hallucinogens and cannabinoids
activate this system is insufficient, and not everyone who experiences these rewards becomes dependent
or addicted.
An addictive personality has been described variously by behavioral scientists, but little scientific
evidence backs this concept.
Setting:
Cultural and social factors include peer or group pressure and environmental stress (particularly
if accompanied by feelings of impotence to effect change or to accomplish goals).
Physicians may inadvertently contribute to harmful use of psychoactive drugs by overzealously
prescribing them to patients for stress relief or may be manipulated by patients to overprescribe the
drugs. Many social factors and the mass media may contribute to the expectation that drugs can safely
relieve all distress and gratify all needs.
Injection Drug Use
A number of drugs of abuse are given by injection to achieve a more rapid or potent effect or both. Drugs
are typically injected IV but
may be injected sc, IM, or even sublingually. Users typically access peripheral
veins, but when these have sclerosed because of chronic use, some learn to inject into large central
veins (eg, internal jugular, femoral, axillary).
Complications
People who inject illicit drugs risk not only the adverse pharmacodynamic effects of the drugs but also
complications related to contaminants, adulterants, and infectious agents that may be injected with the
drug.
Adulterants:
Some drug users crush tablets of prescription drugs, dissolve them, and inject the solution
IV, thus injecting themselves with an array of filler agents commonly present in tablets, including cellulose,
talc, and cornstarch. Filler agents can become trapped by the pulmonary capillary bed and result in
chronic inflammation and foreign body granulomatosis. Filler agents can also damage the endothelium of
heart valves, thus increasing the risk of endocarditis.
Street drugs such as heroin and cocaine are often "cut" with various adulterants (eg, amphetamines,
clenbuterol, dextromethorphan, fentanyl, ketamine, lidocaine, lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD],
pseudoephedrine, quinine, scopolamine, xylazine). Adulterants may be added to enhance mind-altering
properties or to substitute for pure drug; their presence can make diagnostic and therapeutic decisions
difficult.
===PAGE:1685===
Infectious agents:
Needle sharing and use of nonsterile techniques can lead to many infectious
complications. Injection site complications include cutaneous abscesses, cellulitis, lymphangitis,
lymphadenitis, and thrombophlebitis. Distant focal infectious complications due to septic emboli and
bacteremia include bacterial endocarditis and abscesses in various organs and sites. Septic lung emboli
and osteomyelitis (particularly lumbar vertebral) are particularly common. Infectious spondylitis and
sacroiliitis may occur.
Systemic infectious diseases are primarily hepatitis B and C and HIV infection. IV drug users are at high
risk of pneumonia, resulting from aspiration or hematogenous spread of bacteria. Other infections that are
not directly caused by drug injection but are common among IV drug users include TB, syphilis, and other
sexually transmitted diseases. Even botulism and tetanus can result from IV drug abuse.
Diagnosis
• History, physical examination, or both
Some patients readily admit to injection drug use, but for others, a thorough physical examination is
needed to detect evidence of injection. Chronic IV drug use can be confirmed by observing track marks
due to repeated injections into subcutaneous veins. Track marks are a linear area of tiny, dark punctate
lesions (needle punctures) surrounded by an area of darkened or discolored skin due to chronic
inflammation. Track marks are often found in easily accessible sites (eg, antecubital fossa, forearms), but
some drug users try to hide evidence of their injections by choosing less obvious sites (eg, axillae).
Subcutaneous injection (skin popping) can cause characteristic circular scars or ulcers; there may be
signs of previous abscesses. Addicts may deny stigmata of drug use by attributing track marks to frequent
blood donations, bug bites, or previous trauma.
Treatment
• Prevention and treatment of infectious complications
Drug users, especially those with a history of injection drug use, should be thoroughly evaluated for viral
hepatitis, HIV infection, and the wide range of other infectious diseases common among these patients
(eg, TB, syphilis, other sexually transmitted diseases). Also, vaccination to prevent hepatitis, influenza,
pneumococcal infection, and other infections should be offered to all appropriate patients.
The AIDS epidemic has triggered a harm-reduction movement, which aims to reduce the harm of drug use
without necessarily requiring cessation. For example, providing clean needles and syringes for users who
cannot stop injecting drugs reduces the spread of HIV and hepatitis.
Treatment of infectious complications is the same as that for similar infections resulting from other
conditions; it includes use of antibiotics and incision and drainage of abscesses. Treatment may be
complicated by difficulty obtaining venous access (and keeping the patient from using it to inject more
drugs) and by poor adherence to treatment regimens.
Drug Testing
Drug testing is done primarily to screen people systematically or randomly for evidence of use of one or
more substances with potential for abuse. Testing is done in the following circumstances:
• Certain groups of people, commonly including students, athletes, and prisoners
• People who are applying for or who already hold certain types of jobs (eg, pilots, commercial truck
drivers)
•
People who have been involved in motor vehicle or boating accidents or accidents at work
• People who have attempted suicide by unclear means
===PAGE:1686===
• People in a court-ordered treatment program or with terms of probation or parole requiring abstinence
(to monitor adherence)
• People in a substance abuse treatment program (as a standard feature, to obtain objective evidence
about substance abuse and thus optimize treatment)
• People required to participate in a drug testing program as part of custody or parental rights
Notification or consent may be a requirement before testing, depending on jurisdiction and circumstances.
Mere documentation of use may be sufficient for legal purposes; however, testing cannot determine
frequency and intensity of substance use and thus cannot distinguish casual users from those with more
serious problems. Also, drug testing targets only a limited number of substances and thus does not
identify many others. The clinician must use other measures (eg, thorough history, questionnaires) to
identify the degree to which substance use has affected each patient's life.
Alcohol, marijuana, cocaine, natural and semisynthetic opioids, amphetamines, and phencyclidine are the
substances most commonly tested for. Testing for benzodiazepines and barbiturates may also be done.
Urine, blood, breath, saliva, sweat, or hair samples may be used. Urine testing is most common because
it is noninvasive, quick, and able to qualitatively detect a wide range of drugs. The window of detection
depends on the frequency and amount of drug intake but is about 1 to 4 days for most drugs. Because
cannabinoid metabolites persist, urine tests for marijuana can remain positive longer after use is stopped.
Blood testing can be used to quantify levels of certain drugs but is less commonly done because it is
invasive and the window of detection for many drugs is much shorter, often only hours. Hair analysis is
not as widely available but provides the longest window of detection, ≥ 100 days for some drugs.
Validity of testing depends on the type of test done. Screening tests are typically rapid qualitative urine
immunoassays. Such screening tests are associated with a number of false-positive and false-negative
results, and they do not detect meperidine and fentanyl. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), gamma
hydroxybutyrate (GHB), mescaline, and inhaled hydrocarbons are not detected on readily available
screens. Confirmatory tests, which may require several hours, typically use gas chromatography or mass
spectroscopy.
False results:
Several factors can produce false-negative results, particularly in urine testing. Patients
may submit samples provided by others (presumably drug-free). This possibility can be eliminated by
directly observing sample collection and by sealing samples immediately with tamper-evident seals. Some
people attempt to defeat urine drug testing by drinking large quantities of fluids or by taking diuretics
before the test; however, samples that appear too clear can be rejected if specific gravity of the sample is
very low.
False positives can result from ingesting prescription and nonprescription therapeutic drugs and from
consuming certain foods. Poppy seeds may produce false-positive results for opioids. Pseudoephedrine,
tricyclic antidepressants, and quetiapine may produce false-positive results for amphetamines, and
ibuprofen may produce false-positive results for marijuana.
Body Packing
Body packing is the voluntary or coerced swallowing of drug-filled packets to smuggle drugs
across borders or other security checkpoints.
Body packing often involves drugs with a high street value (primarily heroin or cocaine). The drugs may
be placed in condoms or in packets enclosed by several layers of polyethylene or latex and sometimes
covered with an outer layer of wax. After body packers ("mules") swallow multiple packets, they typically
take antimotility drugs to decrease intestinal motility until the packets can be retrieved. Rupture of one or
more packets is a risk, resulting in abrupt toxicity and overdose. Specific symptoms depend on the drug,
but intractable seizures, tachycardia, hypertension, and hyperthermia are common with cocaine, and
coma and respiratory depression are common with heroin. Intestinal obstruction or rupture and peritonitis
are also risks.
===PAGE:1687===
Body stuffing
is similar to body packing; it occurs when people about to be apprehended by law
enforcement swallow drug packets to avoid detection. Sometimes packets are placed in the rectum or
vagina. Body stuffing usually involves much smaller amounts of drugs than does body packing, but the
drugs are usually less securely wrapped, so overdose is still a concern.
Diagnosis
Suspected body packers are usually brought to medical attention by law enforcement officials, but
clinicians should consider body packing if recent travelers and newly incarcerated people present with
coma or seizures of unknown etiology. Body packing can sometimes be confirmed when packets are
detected during rectal examination. Plain x-rays can often confirm the presence of packets in the GI tract.
Treatment
• Supportive treatment for complications
Treatment of patients with symptoms of overdose (and presumed packet rupture) is supportive and
includes airway protection, respiratory and circulatory support, and anticonvulsants, depending on patient
symptoms. Sometimes, specific antidotes are indicated (see under specific drugs). Usually, unruptured
packets can be removed by whole-bowel irrigation. However, once packets rupture, immediate surgical or
endoscopic removal (depending on location in the GI tract) of all packets is indicated but can rarely be
done in time; death commonly occurs because the quantity of drug released is large. Patients with
intestinal obstruction or perforation also need immediate surgery. Activated charcoal may be helpful but is
contraindicated in patients with obstruction or perforation.
Asymptomatic body packers should be observed for development of symptoms until the packets are
passed and followed by several packet-free stools. Some clinicians use whole-bowel irrigation with a
polyethylene glycol solution with or without metoclopramide as a promotility agent. Emergency endoscopy
is not indicated for asymptomatic patients.
Opioids
Opioids are euphoriants that, in high doses, cause sedation and respiratory depression.
Respiratory depression can be managed with specific antidotes (eg, naloxone) or with
endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. Withdrawal manifests initially as anxiety
and drug craving, followed by increased respiratory rate, diaphoresis, yawning, lacrimation,
rhinorrhea, mydriasis, and stomach cramps and later by piloerection, tremors, muscle twitches,
tachycardia, hypertension, fever, chills, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Diagnosis is
clinical plus with urine tests. Withdrawal can be treated by substitution with a long-acting opioid
(eg, methadone) or buprenorphine (a mixed opioid agonist-antagonist).
"Opioid" is a term for a number of natural substances (originally derived from the opium poppy) and their
semisynthetic and synthetic analogues that bind to specific opioid receptors. Opioids, which are potent
analgesics with a limited role in management of cough and diarrhea, are also common drugs of abuse
because of their wide availability and euphoriant properties (see also p.
).
Pathophysiology
There are 3 main opioid receptors: delta, kappa, and mu. They occur throughout the CNS but particularly
in areas and tracts associated with pain perception. Receptors are also located in some sensory nerves,
on mast cells, and in some cells of the GI tract.
Opioid receptors are stimulated by endogenous endorphins, which generally produce analgesia and a
sense of well-being. Opioids are used therapeutically primarily as analgesics. Opioids vary in their
receptor activity, and some (eg, buprenorphine) have combined agonist and antagonist actions.
Compounds with pure antagonist activity (eg, naloxone, naltrexone) are available.
Exogenous opioids can be taken by almost any route: orally, intravenously, subcutaneously, rectally,
===PAGE:1688===
through the nasal membranes, or inhaled as smoke. Peak effects are reached about 10 min after IV
injection, 10 to 15 min after nasal insufflation, and 90 to 120 min after oral ingestion, although time to
peak effects and duration of effect vary considerably depending on the specific drug.
Chronic effects:
Tolerance develops quickly, with escalating dose requirements. Tolerance to the
various effects of opioids frequently develops unevenly. Heroin users, for example, may become relatively
tolerant to the drug's euphoric and respiratory depression effects but continue to have constricted pupils
and constipation.
A minor withdrawal syndrome may occur after only several days' use. Severity of the syndrome increases
with the size of the opioid dose and the duration of dependence.
Long-term effects of the opioids themselves are minimal; even decades of methadone use appear to be
well tolerated physiologically, although some long-term opioid users experience chronic constipation,
excessive sweating, peripheral edema, drowsiness, and decreased libido. However, many long-term
users who inject opioids have adverse effects from contaminants
(eg, talc) and adulterants (eg,
nonprescription stimulant drugs) and cardiac, pulmonary, and hepatic damage due to infections such as
HIV infection and hepatitis B or C, which are spread by needle sharing and nonsterile injection techniques
(.
Pregnancy:
Use of opioids during pregnancy can result in physical dependence in the fetus (.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute effects:
Acute intoxication is characterized by euphoria and drowsiness. Mast cell effects (eg,
flushing, itching) are common, particularly with morphine. GI effects include nausea, vomiting, decreased
bowel sounds, and constipation.
Toxicity or overdose:
The main toxic effect is decreased respiratory rate and depth, which can progress
to apnea. Other complications (eg, pulmonary edema, which usually develops within minutes to a few
hours after opioid overdose) and death result primarily from hypoxia. Pupils are miotic. Delirium,
hypotension, bradycardia, decreased body temperature, and urinary retention may also occur.
Normeperidine, a metabolite of meperidine, accumulates with repeated use (including therapeutic); it
stimulates the CNS and may cause seizure activity.
Serotonin syndrome
( occasionally occurs when fentanyl, meperidine, or oxycodone is
taken concomitantly with other drugs that have serotonergic effects (eg, SSRIs, monoamine oxidase
inhibitors). This syndrome consists of one or more of the following:
• Hypertonia
• Tremor and hyperreflexia
• Spontaneous clonus
• Inducible clonus plus agitation or diaphoresis
• Ocular clonus plus agitation or diaphoresis
• Temperature > 38° plus ocular or inducible clonus
Withdrawal:
The withdrawal syndrome usually includes symptoms and signs of CNS hyperactivity. Onset
and duration of the syndrome depend on the specific drug and its half-life. Symptoms may appear as
early as 4 h after the last dose of heroin, peak within 48 to 72 h, and subside after about a week. Anxiety
and a craving for the drug are followed by increased resting respiratory rate (> 16 breaths/min), usually
with diaphoresis, yawning, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, mydriasis, and stomach cramps. Later, piloerection
===PAGE:1689===
(gooseflesh), tremors, muscle twitching, tachycardia, hypertension, fever and chills, anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea may develop. Opioid withdrawal does not cause fever, seizures, or altered mental
status. Although it may be distressingly symptomatic, opioid withdrawal is not fatal.
The withdrawal syndrome in people who were taking methadone (which has a long half-life) develops
more slowly and may be less acutely severe than heroin withdrawal, although users may describe it as
worse. Even after the withdrawal syndrome remits, lethargy, malaise, anxiety, and disturbed sleep may
persist up to several months. Drug craving may persist for years.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually made clinically and sometimes with urine drug testing (; laboratory tests
are done as needed to identify drug-related complications. Drug levels are not measured.
Treatment
• Supportive therapy
• For withdrawal, sometimes drug therapy (eg, with an opioid agonist, opioid agonist-antagonist, opioid
antagonist, or clonidine)
Toxicity or overdose:
Treatment to maintain the airway and support breathing is the first priority.
• Naloxone 0.4 mg IV
• Sometimes endotracheal intubation
Patients with spontaneous respirations can be treated with an opioid antagonist, typically naloxone 0.4
mg IV (for children < 20 kg, 0.1 mg/kg); naloxone has no agonist activity and a very short half-life (see
Table 340-8
. Naloxone rapidly reverses unconsciousness and apnea due to an opioid in most
patients. If IV access is not immediately available, IM or sc administration is also effective. A 2nd or 3rd
dose can be given if there is no response within 2 min. Almost all patients respond to three 0.4-mg doses.
If they do not, the patient's condition is unlikely to be due to an opioid overdose, although massive opioid
overdose may require higher doses of naloxone. Because some patients become agitated, delirious, and
combative as consciousness returns and because naloxone precipitates acute withdrawal, soft physical
restraints should be applied before naloxone is given. To ameliorate withdrawal in long-term users, some
experts suggest titrating very small doses of naloxone (0.1 mg) when the clinical situation does not
require emergency total reversal.
Apneic patients require endotracheal intubation. These patients should probably not receive total
naloxone reversal because they may become agitated and belligerent when they suddenly regain
consciousness.
In general, patients treated for overdose should be hospitalized and observed for at least 24 h because
the duration of action of naloxone is less than that of some opioids, and overdose symptoms can
redevelop. Respiratory depression may recur within several hours, especially with methadone or
sustained-released oxycodone or morphine tablets. If respiratory depression recurs, naloxone should be
readministered at an appropriate dose. Continuous naloxone infusion may be helpful for recurrent
respiratory depression; two thirds of the dose that relieved respiratory depression is given hourly. Patients
should be observed until no naloxone pharmacologic activity is present and they have no opioid-related
symptoms. The serum half-life of naloxone is about 1 h, so an observation period of 2 to 3 h after use of
naloxone should clarify disposition. The half-life of IV heroin is relatively short, and recurrent respiratory
depression after naloxone reversal of IV heroin is rare.
Acute pulmonary edema is treated with supplemental O
and often noninvasive or invasive modalities of
breathing support (eg, bilevel positive airway pressure [BiPAP], endotracheal intubation).
Withdrawal and detoxification:
Treatment may involve several strategies:
===PAGE:1690===
• No treatment ("cold turkey")
• Substitution with methadone or buprenorphine
• Clonidine to relieve symptoms
• Long-term support and possibly naltrexone
The withdrawal syndrome is self-limited and, although severely uncomfortable, is not life threatening.
Minor metabolic and physical withdrawal effects may persist up to 6 mo. Withdrawal is typically managed
in outpatient settings, unless patients require hospitalization for concurrent medical or mental health
problems.
Options for management of withdrawal include allowing the process to run its course ("cold turkey") after
the patient's last opioid dose and giving another opioid (substitution) that can be tapered on a controlled
schedule. Clonidine can provide some symptom relief during withdrawal.
Methadone substitution
is the preferred method of managing opioid withdrawal for more seriously
addicted patients because at appropriate doses, it has a long half-life and less profound sedation and
euphoria. Any physician can initiate methadone substitution during hospitalization or for 3 days in an
outpatient setting, but further treatment is continued in a licensed methadone treatment program.
Methadone is given orally in the smallest amount that prevents severe but not necessarily all symptoms of
withdrawal. Typical dose range is 15 to 30 mg once/day; doses ≥ 25 mg can result in dangerous levels of
sedation in patients who have not developed tolerance. Symptom scales are available for estimating the
appropriate dose. Higher doses should be given when evidence of withdrawal is observed. After the
appropriate dose has been established, it should be reduced progressively by 10 to 20%/day unless the
decision is made to continue the drug at a stable dose (methadone maintenance—. During
tapering of the drug, patients commonly become anxious and request more of the drug. Methadone
withdrawal for addicts who have been in a methadone maintenance program may be particularly difficult
because their dose of methadone may be as high as 100 mg once/day; in these patients, the dose should
be gradually reduced to 60 mg once/day over several weeks before attempting complete detoxification.
Buprenorphine
, a mixed opioid agonist-antagonist usually given sublingually, also has been successfully
used in withdrawal. It is available in a combination formulation with naloxone to prevent diversion to IV
use. The first dose is given when the first signs of withdrawal appear. The dose needed to effectively
control severe symptoms is titrated as quickly as possible; sublingual doses of 8 to 16 mg/day are
typically used. Buprenorphine is then tapered over several weeks. Protocols for using buprenorphine for
detoxification or maintenance therapy are available at the US Department of Health and Human Services
web site.
Clonidine
, a centrally acting adrenergic drug, can suppress symptoms and signs of opioid withdrawal.
Starting dosages are 0.1 mg po q 4 to 6 h and may be increased to 0.2 mg po q 4 to 6 h as tolerated.
Clonidine can cause hypotension and drowsiness, and its withdrawal may precipitate restlessness,
insomnia, irritability, tachycardia, and headache.
Rapid and ultrarapid protocols
have been evaluated for managing withdrawal and detoxification. In
rapid protocols, combinations of naloxone, nalmefene, and naltrexone are used to induce withdrawal, and
clonidine and various adjuvant drugs are used to suppress withdrawal symptoms. Some rapid protocols
use
buprenorphine to suppress opioid withdrawal symptoms. Ultrarapid protocols may use large boluses
of naloxone and diuretics to enhance excretion of the opioids while patients are under general
anesthesia; these ultrarapid protocols are not recommended because they have a high risk of
complications and no substantial additional benefit.
Clinicians must understand that detoxification is not treatment per se. It is only the first step and must be
followed by an ongoing treatment program, which may involve various kinds of counseling and possibly
nonopioid antagonists (eg, naltrexone).
===PAGE:1691===
Opioid Abuse and Rehabilitation
Heroin is commonly abused, and abuse of prescription analgesic opioids (eg, morphine, oxycodone,
hydrocodone, fentanyl) is increasing; some of the increase is due to people who began taking them for
legitimate medical purposes. Patients with chronic pain requiring long-term use should not be routinely
labeled addicts, although they commonly have tolerance and physical dependence.
Treatment
• For severe, relapsing dependence, maintenance preferred to opioid withdrawal
• For maintenance, buprenorphine or methadone
• Ongoing counseling and support
Physicians must be fully aware of federal, state, and local regulations concerning use of an opioid drug to
treat an addict. To comply, physicians must establish the existence of physical opioid dependence. In the
US, treatment is further complicated by negative societal attitudes toward addicts (including the attitudes
of law enforcement officers, physicians, and other health care practitioners) and toward treatment
programs, which some view as abetting drug consumption. In most cases, physicians should refer opioiddependent patients to specialized treatment centers. If trained to do so, physicians may provide officebased treatment for selected patients. In European countries, access to methadone or buprenorphine
maintenance programs and alternative maintenance strategies is easier, and the stigma attached to
prescribing psychoactive drugs is less.
Maintenance:
Long-term maintenance using an oral opioid such as methadone or buprenorphine (an
opioid agonist-antagonist) is an alternative to opioid substitution with tapering. Oral opioids suppress
withdrawal symptoms and drug craving without providing a significant high or oversedation and, by
eliminating the supply problems of addicts, enable them to be socially productive. In the US, thousands of
opioid addicts are in licensed methadone maintenance programs. For many, such programs work.
However, because the participants continue to take an opioid, many people in society disapprove of
these programs.
Eligibility criteria include the following:
• A positive drug screen for opioids
• Physical dependence for > 1 yr of continuous opioid use or intermittent use for even longer
• Evidence of withdrawal or physical findings confirming drug use
Clinicians and patients need to decide whether a withdrawal (detoxification) or opioid maintenance
approach is indicated. Generally, patients with severe, chronic, relapsing dependence do much better
with opioid maintenance. Withdrawal and detoxification, although effective in the short term, have poor
outcomes in patients with severe opioid dependence. Whichever course is chosen, it must be
accompanied by ongoing counseling and supportive measures.
Methadone is commonly used. Physicians can begin the substitution, but then use of methadone must be
supervised in a licensed methadone treatment program.
Buprenorphine is being used increasingly for maintenance. Its effectiveness is comparable to that of
methadone, and because it blocks receptors, it inhibits concomitant illicit use of heroin or other opioids.
Buprenorphine can be prescribed for office-based treatment by specially trained physicians, including
primary care physicians, who have received the required training and have been certified by the federal
government. The typical dosage is an 8- or 16-mg sublingual tablet once/day. Many patients prefer this
option because it eliminates the need for attending a methadone clinic. Buprenorphine is also available in
combination with naloxone; the addition of naloxone may further discourage illicit opioid use. The
combination formulation is used in office-based treatment.
===PAGE:1692===
Naltrexone, an opioid antagonist, blocks the effects of heroin. The usual dosage is 50 mg po once/day or
350 mg/wk po in 2 or 3 divided doses. A once-monthly depot IM formulation is also available. Because
naltrexone is an opioid antagonist and has no direct agonist effects on opioid receptors, naltrexone is
often unacceptable to opioid-dependent patients, especially those who have chronic, relapsing opioid
dependence. For such patients, opioid maintenance
treatment is much more effective. Naltrexone may be
useful for patients with less severe dependence, early-stage opioid dependence, and strong motivation to
remain abstinent. For example, opioid-dependent health care practitioners whose future employment is at
risk if opioid use persists may be excellent candidates for naltrexone.
Levomethadyl acetate (LAAM), a longer-acting opioid related to methadone, is no longer used because it
causes QT-interval abnormalities in some patients. LAAM could be used only 3 times/wk, thereby
reducing the expense and problems of daily client visits or take-home drugs. A dose of 100 mg 3 times/wk
is comparable to methadone 80 mg once/day.
Support:
Most treatment of opioid dependence occurs in outpatient settings, typically in licensed opioid
maintenance programs but increasingly in physician's offices.
The therapeutic community concept, pioneered by Daytop Village and Phoenix House, involves nondrug
treatment in communal residential centers, where drug users receive training, education, and redirection
to help them build new lives. Residency is usually 15 mo. These communities have helped, even
transformed, some users. However, initial dropout rates are extremely high. Questions of how well these
communities work, how many will be opened, and how much funding society will give remain
unanswered.
Alcohol
Alcohol (ethanol) is a CNS depressant. Large amounts consumed rapidly can cause respiratory
depression, coma, and death. Large amounts chronically consumed damage the liver and many
other organs. Alcohol withdrawal manifests as a continuum, ranging from tremor to seizures,
hallucinations, and life-threatening autonomic instability in severe withdrawal (delirium
tremens). Diagnosis is clinical.
About 45 to 50% of adults are current drinkers, 20% are former drinkers, and 30 to 35% are lifetime
abstainers. For most drinkers, the frequency and amount of alcohol consumption does not impair physical
or mental health or the ability to safely carry out daily activities. However, acute alcohol intoxication is a
significant factor in injuries, particularly those due to interpersonal violence, suicide, and motor vehicle
crashes. Chronic abuse interferes with the ability to socialize and work. About 7 to 10% of adults meet
criteria for an alcohol use disorder (abuse or dependence) in any given year. Binge drinking, defined as
consuming ≥ 5 drinks per occasion for men and ≥ 4 drinks per occasion for women, is a particular
problem among younger people.
Pathophysiology
One serving of alcohol (one 12-oz can of beer, one 6-oz glass of wine, or 1.5 oz of distilled liquor)
contains 10 to 15 g of ethanol. Alcohol is absorbed into the blood mainly from the small bowel, although
some is absorbed from the stomach. Alcohol accumulates in blood because absorption is more rapid than
oxidation and elimination. The concentration peaks about 30 to 90 min after ingestion if the stomach was
previously empty. About 5 to 10% of ingested alcohol is excreted unchanged in urine, sweat, and expired
air; the remainder is metabolized mainly by the liver, where alcohol dehydrogenase converts ethanol to
acetaldehyde. Acetaldehyde is ultimately oxidized to CO
and water at a rate of 5 to 10 mL/h (of absolute
alcohol); each milliliter yields about 7 kcal. Alcohol dehydrogenase in the gastric mucosa accounts for
some metabolism; much less gastric metabolism occurs in women.
Alcohol exerts its effects by several mechanisms. Alcohol binds directly to
γ
-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
receptors in the CNS, causing sedation. Alcohol also directly affects cardiac, hepatic, and thyroid tissue.
Chronic effects:
Tolerance to alcohol develops rapidly; similar amounts cause less intoxication.
===PAGE:1693===
Tolerance is caused by adaptational changes of CNS cells (cellular, or pharmacodynamic, tolerance) and
by induction of metabolic enzymes. People who develop tolerance may reach an incredibly high blood
alcohol content (BAC). However, ethanol tolerance is incomplete, and considerable intoxication and
impairment occur with a large enough amount. But even these drinkers may die of respiratory depression
secondary to alcohol overdose. Alcohol-tolerant people are susceptible to alcoholic ketoacidosis (, especially during binge drinking. Alcohol-tolerant people are cross-tolerant of many other CNS
depressants (eg, barbiturates, nonbarbiturate sedatives, benzodiazepines).
The physical dependence accompanying tolerance is profound, and withdrawal has potentially fatal
adverse effects.
Chronic heavy alcohol intake typically leads to liver disorders (eg, fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis, cirrhosis);
the amount and duration required vary (. Patients with a severe liver disorder often have
coagulopathy due to decreased hepatic synthesis of coagulation
factors, increasing the risk of significant
bleeding due to trauma (eg, from falls or vehicle crashes) and of GI bleeding (eg, due to gastritis, from
esophageal varices due to portal hypertension); alcohol abusers are at particular risk of GI bleeding.
Chronic heavy intake also commonly causes the following:
• Gastritis
• Pancreatitis
• Cardiomyopathy, often accompanied by arrhythmias and hypertension
• Peripheral neuropathy
• Brain damage, including Wernicke's encephalopathy, Korsakoff's psychosis, Marchiafava-Bignami
disease, and alcoholic dementia
• Certain cancers (eg, head and neck, esophageal), especially when drinking is combined with smoking
Indirect long-term effects include undernutrition, particularly vitamin deficiencies.
On the other hand, low to moderate levels of alcohol consumption (≤ 1 to 2 drinks/day) may decrease the
risk of death due to cardiovascular disorders. Numerous explanations, including increased high density
lipoprotein (HDL) levels and a direct antithrombotic effect, have been suggested. Nonetheless, alcohol
should not be recommended for this purpose, especially when there are several safer, more effective
approaches to reduce cardiovascular risk.
Special populations:
Young children who drink alcohol are at significant risk of hypoglycemia because
alcohol impairs gluconeogenesis and their smaller stores of glycogen are rapidly depleted. Women may
be more sensitive than men, even on a per-weight basis, because their gastric (first-pass) metabolism of
alcohol is less. Drinking during pregnancy increases the risk of fetal alcohol syndrome (.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute effects:
Symptoms progress proportionately to the BAC. Actual levels required to cause given
symptoms vary with tolerance, but in typical users
• 20 to 50 mg/dL: Tranquility, mild sedation, and some decrease in fine motor coordination
• 50 to 100 mg/dL: Impaired judgment and a further decrease in coordination
• 100 to 150 mg/dL: Unsteady gait, nystagmus, slurred speech, loss of behavioral inhibitions, and memory
impairment
• 150 to 300 mg/dL: Delirium and lethargy (likely)
===PAGE:1694===
Emesis is common with moderate to severe intoxication; because emesis usually occurs with obtundation,
aspiration is a significant risk.
In most US states, the legal definition of intoxication is a BAC of ≥ 0.08 to 0.10% (≥ 80 to 100 mg/dL);
0.08 is used most commonly.
Toxicity or overdose:
In alcohol-naive people, a BAC of 300 to 400 mg/dL often causes
unconsciousness, and a BAC ≥ 400 mg/dL may be fatal. Sudden death due to respiratory depression or
arrhythmias may occur, especially when large quantities are drunk rapidly. This problem is emerging in
US colleges but has been known in other countries where it is more common. Other common effects
include hypotension and hypoglycemia.
The effect of a particular BAC varies widely; some chronic drinkers seem unaffected and appear to
function normally with a BAC in the 300 to 400 mg/dL range, whereas non-drinkers and social drinkers
are impaired at a BAC that is inconsequential in chronic drinkers.
Chronic effects:
Stigmata of chronic use include Dupuytren's contracture of the palmar fascia, vascular
spiders, and, in men, signs of hypogonadism and feminization (eg, smooth skin, lack of male-pattern
baldness, gynecomastia, testicular atrophy). Undernutrition may lead to enlarged parotid glands.
Withdrawal:
A continuum of symptoms and signs of CNS (including autonomic) hyperactivity may
accompany cessation of alcohol intake.
A mild withdrawal syndrome includes tremor, weakness, headache, sweating, hyperreflexia, and GI
symptoms. Symptoms usually begin within about 6 h of cessation. Some patients have generalized tonicclonic seizures (called alcoholic epilepsy, or rum fits) but usually not > 2 in short succession.
Alcoholic hallucinosis (hallucinations without other impairment of consciousness) follows abrupt cessation
from prolonged, excessive alcohol use, usually within 12 to 24 h. Hallucinations are typically visual.
Symptoms may also include auditory illusions and hallucinations that frequently are accusatory and
threatening; patients are usually apprehensive and may be terrified by the hallucinations and by vivid,
frightening dreams. The syndrome may resemble schizophrenia, although thought is usually not
disordered and the history is not typical of schizophrenia. Symptoms do not resemble the delirious state
of an acute organic brain syndrome as much as does delirium tremens (DT) or other pathologic reactions
associated with withdrawal. Consciousness remains clear, and the signs
of autonomic lability that occur in
DT are usually absent. When hallucinosis occurs, it usually precedes DT and is transient.
DT usually begins 48 to 72 h after alcohol withdrawal; anxiety attacks, increasing confusion, poor sleep
(with frightening dreams or nocturnal illusions), profuse sweating, and severe depression also occur.
Fleeting hallucinations that arouse restlessness, fear, and even terror are common. Typical of the initial
delirious, confused, and disoriented state is a return to a habitual activity; eg, patients frequently imagine
that they are back at work and attempt to do some related activity. Autonomic lability, evidenced by
diaphoresis and increased pulse rate and temperature, accompanies the delirium and progresses with it.
Mild delirium is usually accompanied by marked diaphoresis, a pulse rate of 100 to 120 beats/min, and a
temperature of 37.2 to 37.8° C. Marked delirium, with gross disorientation and cognitive disruption, is
accompanied by significant restlessness, a pulse of > 120 beats/min, and a temperature of > 37.8° C; risk
of death is high.
During DT, patients are suggestible to many sensory stimuli, particularly to objects seen in dim light.
Vestibular disturbances may cause them to believe that the floor is moving, the walls are falling, or the
room is rotating. As the delirium progresses, resting tremor of the hand develops, sometimes extending to
the head and trunk. Ataxia is marked; care must be taken to prevent self-injury. Symptoms vary among
patients but are usually the same for a particular patient with each recurrence.
Diagnosis
• Usually clinical
===PAGE:1695===
• Acute: BAC, evaluation to rule out hypoglycemia and occult trauma
• Chronic: CBC, Mg, liver function tests, and PT/PTT
• Withdrawal: Evaluation to rule out CNS injury and infection
In acute intoxication, laboratory tests, except for fingerstick glucose to rule out hypoglycemia and tests to
determine BAC, are generally not helpful; diagnosis is usually made clinically. Confirmation by breath or
blood alcohol levels is useful for legal purposes (eg, to document intoxication in drivers or employees who
appear impaired). However, finding a low BAC in patients who have altered mental status and smell of
alcohol is helpful because it expedites the search for an alternate cause. Clinicians should not assume
that a high BAC in patients with apparently minor trauma accounts for their obtundation, which may be
due to intracranial injury or other abnormalities. Such patients should also have toxicology tests to search
for evidence of toxicity due to other substances.
Chronic alcohol abuse and dependence are clinical diagnoses; experimental markers of long-term use
have not proved sufficiently sensitive or specific for general use. However, heavy alcohol users may have
a number of metabolic derangements that are worth screening for, so CBC, electrolytes (including Mg),
liver function tests including coagulation profile (PT/PTT), and serum albumin are often recommended.
In severe withdrawal and toxicity, symptoms may resemble those of CNS injury or infection, so medical
evaluation with CT and lumbar puncture may be needed. Patients with mild symptoms do not require
routine testing unless improvement is not marked within 2 to 3 days.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
• For withdrawal, benzodiazepines
Toxicity or overdose:
Treatment may include the following:
• Airway protection
• Sometimes IV fluids with thiamin, Mg, and vitamins
The first priority is ensuring an adequate airway; endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are
required for apnea or inadequate respirations. IV hydration is needed for hypotension or evidence of
volume depletion but does not significantly enhance ethanol clearance. When IV fluids are used, a single
dose of thiamin 100 mg IV is given to treat or prevent Wernicke's encephalopathy. Many clinicians also
add multivitamins and Mg to the IV fluids.
Disposition of the acutely intoxicated patient depends on clinical response, not a specific BAC.
Withdrawal:
Patients with severe withdrawal or DT should be managed in an ICU until these symptoms
abate. Treatment may include the following to prevent Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome and other
complications:
• IV thiamin
• Benzodiazepines
Thiamin 100 mg IV is given to prevent Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.
Alcohol-tolerant people are cross-tolerant of some drugs commonly used to treat withdrawal (eg,
benzodiazepines).
===PAGE:1696===
Benzodiazepines are the mainstay of therapy. Dosage and route depend on degree of agitation, vital
signs, and mental status. Diazepam, given 5 to 10 mg IV or po hourly until sedation occurs, is a common
initial intervention; lorazepam 1 to 2 mg IV or po is an alternative. Chlordiazepoxide 50 to 100 mg po q 4 to
6 h, then tapered, is an older acceptable alternative for less severe cases of withdrawal. Phenobarbital
may help if benzodiazepines are ineffective, but respiratory depression is a risk with concomitant use.
Phenothiazines and haloperidol are not recommended initially because they may lower the seizure
threshold. For patients with a significant liver disorder, a short-acting benzodiazepine (lorazepam) or one
metabolized by glucuronidation (oxazepam) is preferred. (NOTE: Benzodiazepines may cause
intoxication, physical dependence, and withdrawal in alcoholics and therefore should not be continued
after the detoxification period. Carbamazepine 200 mg po qid may be used as an alternative and then
tapered.) For severe hyperadrenergic activity or to reduce benzodiazepine requirements, short-term
therapy (12 to 48 h) with titrated
β
-blockers (eg, metoprolol 25 to 50 mg po or 5 mg IV q 4 to 6 h) and
clonidine 0.1 to 0.2 mg IV q 2 to 4 h can be used.
A
seizure,
if brief and isolated, needs no specific therapy; however, some clinicians routinely give a
single dose of lorazepam 1 to 2 mg IV as prophylaxis against another seizure. Repeated or longer-lasting
(ie, > 2 to 3 min) seizures should be treated and often respond to lorazepam 1 to 3 mg IV. Routine use of
phenytoin is unnecessary and unlikely to be effective. Outpatient therapy with phenytoin is rarely
indicated for patients with simple alcohol withdrawal seizures when no other source of seizure activity has
been identified because seizures occur only under the stress of alcohol withdrawal, and patients who are
withdrawing or heavily drinking may not take the anticonvulsant.
DT
may be fatal and thus must be treated promptly with high-dose IV benzodiazepines, preferably in an
ICU. Dosing is higher and more frequent than in mild withdrawal. Very high doses of benzodiazepines
may be required, and there is no maximum dose or specific treatment regimen. Diazepam 5 to 10 mg IV or
lorazepam 1 to 2 mg IV q 10 min is given as needed to control delirium; some patients require several
hundred milligrams over the first few hours. Patients refractory to high-dose benzodiazepines may
respond to phenobarbital 120 to 240 mg IV q 20 min as needed. Severe drug-resistant DT can be treated
with a continuous infusion of lorazepam, diazepam, midazolam, or propofol, usually with concomitant
mechanical ventilation. Physical restraints should be avoided if possible to minimize additional agitation,
but patients must not be allowed to elope, remove IVs, or otherwise endanger themselves. Intravascular
volume must be maintained with IV fluids, and large doses of vitamins B and C, particularly thiamin, must
be given promptly. Appreciably elevated temperature with DT is a poor prognostic sign.
Alcohol Problems and Rehabilitation
Definitions
At-risk drinking
is defined solely by quantity and frequency of drinking:
• > 14 drinks/wk or 4 drinks per occasion for men
• > 7 drinks/wk or 3 drinks per occasion for women
Compared with lesser amounts, these amounts are associated with increased risk of a wide variety of
medical and psychosocial complications.
Alcohol abuse
refers to a maladaptive pattern of episodic drinking that results in failure to fulfill
obligations, drinking in physically hazardous situations (eg, driving, boating), legal problems, or social and
interpersonal problems without evidence of dependence.
Alcohol dependence
refers to frequent consumption of large amounts of alcohol with ≥ 3 of the
following:
• Tolerance
• Withdrawal symptoms
===PAGE:1697===
• Drinking larger amounts than intended
• Persistent desire to reduce use without success
• Substantial time spent obtaining, drinking, or recovering from alcohol
• Sacrifice of other life events for drinking
• Continued use despite physical or psychologic problems
Alcoholism is often used as an equivalent term for alcohol dependence, especially when drinking results
in significant toxicity and tissue damage.
Etiology
The maladaptive pattern of drinking that constitutes alcohol abuse may begin with a desire to reach a
state of feeling high. Some drinkers who find the feeling rewarding then focus on repeatedly reaching that
state. Many who abuse alcohol chronically have certain personality traits: feelings of isolation, loneliness,
shyness, depression, dependency, hostile and self-destructive impulsivity, and sexual immaturity.
Alcoholics may come from a broken home and have a disturbed relationship with their family. Societal
factors—attitudes transmitted through the culture or child rearing—affect patterns of drinking and
consequent behavior. However, such generalizations should not obscure the fact that alcohol use
disorders can occur in anyone, regardless of their age, sex, background, ethnicity, or social situation.
Thus, clinicians should screen for alcohol problems in all patients.
The incidence of alcohol abuse and dependence is higher in biologic children of people with alcohol
problems than in adoptive children, and the percentage of biologic children of alcoholics who are problem
drinkers is greater than that of the general population. There is evidence of genetic or biochemical
predisposition, including data that suggest some people who become alcoholics are less easily
intoxicated; ie, they have a higher threshold for CNS effects.
Symptoms and Signs
Serious social consequences usually occur. Frequent intoxication is obvious and destructive; it interferes
with the ability to socialize and work. Injuries are common. Eventually, failed relationships and job loss
due to absenteeism may result. People may be arrested because of alcohol-related behavior or be
apprehended for driving while intoxicated, often losing driving privileges for repeated offenses; in most US
states, the maximum legal blood alcohol concentration (BAC) while driving is 80 mg/dL (0.08%), and this
level is likely to be reduced in the future.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Screening
Some alcohol-related problems are diagnosed when people seek medical treatment for their drinking or
for obvious alcohol-related illness (eg, delirium tremens, cirrhosis). However, many of these people
remain unrecognized for a long time. Female alcoholics are, in general, more likely to drink alone and are
less likely to manifest some of the social signs. Therefore, many governmental and professional
organizations recommend alcohol screening during routine health care visits. A scaled approach (see
Table 160-2
) can help
[Table 160-2.
Levels of Screening for Alcohol Problems]
identify patients who require more detailed questioning; several validated detailed questionnaires are
available.
===PAGE:1698===
Treatment
• Rehabilitation programs
• Outpatient counseling
• Self-help groups
• Consideration of drugs (eg, naltrexone, disulfiram)
All patients should be counseled to decrease their alcohol use to below at-risk levels.
For patients identified as at-risk drinkers, treatment may begin with a brief discussion of the medical and
social consequences and a recommendation to reduce or cease drinking, with follow-up regarding
compliance (see
Table 160-3
).
For patients with more serious problems, particularly after less intensive measures have been
unsuccessful, a rehabilitation program is often the best approach. Rehabilitation programs combine
psychotherapy, including one-on-one and group therapy, with medical supervision. For most patients,
outpatient rehabilitation is sufficient; how long patients remain enrolled in programs varies, typically
weeks to months, but longer if needed. Inpatient rehabilitation programs are reserved for patients with
more severe alcohol dependence and those with significant and comorbid medical, psychoactive, and
substance abuse problems. Treatment duration is usually briefer (typically days to weeks) than that of
outpatient programs and may be dictated in part by patients' insurance.
Psychotherapy involves techniques that enhance motivation and teach patients to avoid circumstances
that precipitate drinking. Social support of abstinence, including the support of family and friends, is
important.
Maintenance:
Maintaining sobriety is difficult. Patients should be warned that after a few weeks, when
they have recovered from their last bout, they are likely to find an excuse to drink. They should also be
told that although they may be able to practice controlled drinking for a few days or, rarely, a few weeks,
they will most likely lose control eventually.
In addition to the counseling provided in outpatient and inpatient alcohol treatment programs, self-help
groups and certain drugs may help prevent relapse in some patients.
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is the most common self-help group. Patients must find an AA group they feel
comfortable in. AA provides patients with nondrinking friends who are always available and a nondrinking
environment in which to socialize. Patients also hear others discuss every rationalization they have ever
used for their own drinking. The help they give other alcoholics may give them the self-regard and
confidence formerly found only in alcohol. Many alcoholics are reluctant to go to AA and find individual
counseling or group or family treatment more acceptable. Alternative organizations, such as LifeRing
Recovery (Secular Organizations for Sobriety), exist for patients seeking another approach.
Drug therapy should be used with counseling rather than as sole treatment.
Disulfiram, the first drug available to prevent relapse in alcohol dependence, interferes with the
metabolism of acetaldehyde (an intermediary product in the oxidation of alcohol) so that acetaldehyde
accumulates. Drinking alcohol within 12 h of taking disulfiram causes
[Table 160-3.
Brief Interventions for Alcohol Problems]
facial flushing in 5 to 15 min, then intense vasodilation of the face and neck with suffusion of the
conjunctivae, throbbing headache, tachycardia, hyperpnea, and sweating. With high doses of alcohol,
nausea and vomiting may follow in 30 to 60 min and may lead to hypotension, dizziness, and sometimes
fainting and collapse. The reaction can last up to 3 h. Few patients risk drinking alcohol while taking
===PAGE:1699===
disulfiram because of the intense discomfort. Drugs that contain alcohol (eg, tinctures; elixirs; some OTC
liquid cough and cold preparations, which contain as much as 40% alcohol) must also be avoided.
Disulfiram is contraindicated during pregnancy and in patients with cardiac decompensation. It may be
given on an outpatient basis after 4 or 5 days of abstinence. The initial dosage is 0.5 g po once/day for 1
to 3 wk, followed by a maintenance dosage of 0.25 g once/day. Effects may persist for 3 to 7 days after
the last dose. Periodic physician visits are needed to encourage continuation of disulfiram as part of an
abstinence program. Disulfiram's general usefulness has not been established, and many patients are
nonadherent. Adherence usually requires adequate social support, such as observation of drinking. For
these reasons, use of disulfiram is now limited. Disulfiram is most effective when given under close
supervision to highly motivated patients.
Naltrexone, an opioid antagonist (, decreases the relapse rate and number of drinking days
in most patients who take it consistently. Naltrexone 50 mg po once/day is typically given, although there
is evidence that higher doses (eg, 100 mg once/day) may be more effective in some patients. Even with
counseling, adherence rates with oral naltrexone are modest. A long-acting depot form is also available:
380 mg IM once/mo. Naltrexone is contraindicated in patients with acute hepatitis or liver failure and in
those who are opioid dependent.
Acamprosate, a synthetic analogue of
γ
-aminobutyric acid, is given as 2 g po once/day. Acamprosate may
decrease the relapse rate and number of drinking days in patients who relapse.
Nalmefene, an opioid antagonist, and topiramate are under study for their ability to decrease alcohol
craving.
Wernicke's Encephalopathy
Wernicke's encephalopathy is characterized by acute onset of confusion, nystagmus, partial
ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia due to thiamin deficiency. Diagnosis is primarily clinical. The
disorder may remit with treatment, persist, or degenerate into Korsakoff's psychosis. Treatment
consists of thiamin and supportive measures.
Wernicke's encephalopathy results from inadequate intake or absorption of thiamin plus continued
carbohydrate ingestion. Severe alcoholism is a common underlying condition. Excessive alcohol intake
interferes with thiamin absorption from the GI tract and hepatic storage of thiamin; the poor nutrition
associated with alcoholism often precludes adequate thiamin intake. Wernicke's encephalopathy may
also result from other conditions that cause prolonged undernutrition or vitamin deficiency (eg, recurrent
dialysis, hyperemesis, starvation, gastric plication, cancer, AIDS). Loading carbohydrates in patients with
thiamin deficiency (ie, refeeding after starvation or giving IV dextrose-containing solutions to high-risk
patients) can trigger Wernicke's encephalopathy.
Not all thiamin-deficient alcohol abusers develop Wernicke's encephalopathy, suggesting that other
factors may be involved. Genetic abnormalities that result in a defective form of transketolase, an enzyme
that processes thiamin, may be involved.
Characteristically, CNS lesions are symmetrically distributed around the 3rd ventricle, aqueduct, and 4th
ventricle. Changes in the mamillary bodies, dorsomedial thalamus, locus ceruleus, periaqueductal gray
matter, ocular motor nuclei, and vestibular nuclei are common.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical changes occur suddenly. Oculomotor abnormalities, including horizontal and vertical nystagmus
and partial ophthalmoplegias (eg, lateral rectus palsy, conjugate gaze palsies), are common. Pupils may
be abnormal; they are usually sluggish or unequal.
Vestibular dysfunction without hearing loss is common, and the oculovestibular reflex may be impaired.
Gait ataxia may result from vestibular disturbances and cerebellar dysfunction; gait is wide-based and
slow, with short-spaced steps.
===PAGE:1700===
Global confusion is often present; it is characterized by profound disorientation, indifference, inattention,
drowsiness, or stupor. Peripheral nerve pain thresholds are often elevated, and many patients develop
severe autonomic dysfunction characterized by sympathetic hyperactivity (eg, tremor, agitation) or
hypoactivity (eg, hypothermia, postural hypotension, syncope). In untreated patients, stupor may progress
to coma, then to death.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is clinical and depends on recognition of underlying undernutrition or vitamin deficiency. There
are no characteristic
abnormalities in CSF, evoked potentials, brain imaging, or EEG. However, these
tests, as well as laboratory tests (eg, blood tests, glucose, CBC, liver function tests, ABG measurements,
toxicology screening), should be done to rule out other etiologies. Thiamin levels are not routinely
measured.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on timely diagnosis. If begun in time, treatment may correct all abnormalities. Ocular
symptoms usually begin to abate within 24 h after early thiamin administration. Ataxia and confusion may
persist days to months. Untreated, the disorder progresses; mortality is 10 to 20%. Of surviving patients,
80% develop Korsakoff psychosis; the combination is called Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.
Treatment
• Parenteral thiamin
• Parenteral Mg
Treatment consists of immediate administration of thiamin 100 mg IV or IM, continued daily for at least 3
to 5 days. Mg is a necessary cofactor in thiamin-dependent metabolism, and hypomagnesemia should be
corrected using Mg sulfate 1 to 2 g IM or IV q 6 to 8 h or Mg oxide 400 to 800 mg po once/day. Supportive
treatment includes rehydration, correction of electrolyte abnormalities, and general nutritional therapy,
including multivitamins. Patients with advanced disease require hospitalization. Alcohol cessation is
mandatory.
Because Wernicke's encephalopathy is preventable, all undernourished patients should be treated with
parenteral thiamin (typically 100 mg IM followed by 50 mg po once/day) plus vitamin B
and folate (1 mg
po once/day for both), particularly if IV dextrose is necessary. Thiamin is also prudent before any
treatment is begun in patients who present with a reduced level of consciousness. Patients who are
undernourished should continue to receive thiamin as outpatients.
Korsakoff's Psychosis
Korsakoff's psychosis is a late complication of persistent Wernicke's encephalopathy and
results in memory deficits, confusion, and behavioral changes.
Korsakoff's psychosis (Korsakoff's amnestic syndrome) occurs in 80% of untreated patients with
Wernicke's encephalopathy. Why Korsakoff's psychosis develops in only some patients with Wernicke's
encephalopathy is unclear. A severe or repeated attack of post-alcoholic delirium tremens can trigger
Korsakoff's psychosis whether or not a typical attack of Wernicke's encephalopathy has occurred first.
Other triggers include head injury, subarachnoid hemorrhage, thalamic hemorrhage, thalamic ischemic
stroke, and, infrequently, tumors affecting the paramedian posterior thalamic region.
Symptoms and Signs
Immediate memory is severely affected; retrograde and anterograde amnesia occurs in varying degrees.
===PAGE:1701===
Patients tend to draw on memory of remote events, which appears to be less affected than memory of
recent events. Disorientation to time is common. Emotional changes are common; they include apathy,
blandness, or mild euphoria with little or no response to events, even frightening ones. Spontaneity and
initiative may be decreased.
Confabulation is often a striking early feature. Bewildered patients unconsciously fabricate imaginary or
confused accounts of events they cannot recall; these fabrications may be so convincing that the
underlying disorder is not detected.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on typical symptoms in patients with a history of severe chronic alcohol dependence.
Other causes of symptoms (eg, CNS injury or infection) must be ruled out.
Prognosis
Prognosis is fairly good for patients with head injury, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or both; the amnesia is
transient. Prognosis is poor when the cause is thiamin deficiency or stroke; prolonged institutional care is
required for about 25% of patients, and only about 20% recover completely. However, they may improve
up to 12 to 24 mo after onset, and patients should not be prematurely institutionalized.
Treatment
Treatment consists of thiamin and adequate hydration.
Marchiafava-Bignami Disease
Marchiafava-Bignami disease is a rare demyelination of the corpus callosum that occurs in
chronic alcoholics, predominantly men.
Pathology and circumstances link this disorder to osmotic demyelination syndrome (previously called
central pontine myelinolysis),
of which it may be a variant (. In Marchiafava-Bignami disease,
agitation and confusion occur with progressive dementia and frontal release signs. Some patients recover
over several months; others experience seizures and coma, which may precede death.
Anxiolytics and Sedatives
Anxiolytics and sedatives (hypnotics) include benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and related drugs.
High doses can cause stupor and respiratory depression, which is managed with intubation and
mechanical ventilation. Chronic users may have a withdrawal syndrome of agitation and
seizures, so dependence is managed by slow tapering with or without substitution (ie, with
pentobarbital or phenobarbital).
The therapeutic benefit of anxiolytics and sedatives is well-established, but their value in alleviating
stress and anxiety is also probably the reason that they are abused so frequently. Abused anxiolytics and
sedatives include benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and other drugs taken to promote sleep.
Pathophysiology
Benzodiazepines and barbiturates potentiate
γ
-aminobutyric acid (GABA) at specific receptors thought to
be located near GABA receptors. The exact mechanism of this potentiation process remains unclear but
may be related to opening of chloride channels, producing a hyperpolarized state within the postsynaptic
neuron.
Chronic effects:
Patients taking high doses of sedatives frequently have difficulty thinking, slow speech
and comprehension (with some dysarthria), poor memory, faulty judgment, narrowed attention span, and
emotional lability. In susceptible patients, psychologic dependence on the drug may develop rapidly. The
extent of physical dependence is related to dose and duration of use; eg, pentobarbital 200 mg/day taken
===PAGE:1702===
for many months may not induce significant tolerance, but 300 mg/day for > 3 mo or 500 to 600 mg/day
for 1 mo may induce a withdrawal syndrome when the drug is stopped. Tolerance and tachyphylaxis
develop irregularly and incompletely; thus, considerable behavioral, mood, and cognitive disturbances
persist, even in regular users, depending on the dosage and the drug's pharmacodynamic effects. Some
cross-tolerance exists between alcohol and barbiturates and nonbarbiturate anxiolytics and sedatives,
including benzodiazepines. (Barbiturates and alcohol are strikingly similar in the dependence, withdrawal
symptoms, and chronic intoxication they cause.)
Pregnancy:
Prolonged use of barbiturates during pregnancy can cause withdrawal in the neonate (see
p.
).
Symptoms and Signs
Toxicity or overdose:
The signs of progressive anxiolytic and sedative intoxication are depression of
superficial reflexes, fine lateral-gaze nystagmus, slightly decreased alertness with coarse or rapid
nystagmus, ataxia, slurred speech, and postural unsteadiness.
Increasing toxicity can cause nystagmus on forward gaze, miosis, somnolence, marked ataxia with falling,
confusion, stupor, respiratory depression, and, ultimately, death. Overdose of a benzodiazepine rarely
causes hypotension, and these drugs do not cause arrhythmias.
Withdrawal:
When intake of therapeutic doses of anxiolytics and sedatives is stopped or reduced below
a critical level, a self-limited mild withdrawal syndrome can ensue. After only a few weeks, attempts to
stop using the drug can exacerbate insomnia and result in restlessness, disturbing dreams, frequent
awakening, and feelings of tension in the early morning.
Withdrawal from benzodiazepines is rarely life threatening. Symptoms can include tachypnea,
tachycardia, tremulousness, hyperreflexia, confusion, and seizures. Onset may be slow because the
drugs remain in the body a long time. Withdrawal may be most severe in patients who used drugs with
rapid absorption and a quick decline in serum levels (eg, alprazolam, lorazepam, triazolam). Many people
who misuse benzodiazepines have been or are heavy users of alcohol, and a delayed benzodiazepine
withdrawal syndrome may complicate alcohol withdrawal.
Withdrawal from barbiturates taken in large doses causes an abrupt, potentially life-threatening
withdrawal syndrome similar to delirium tremens. Occasionally, even after properly managed withdrawal
over 1 to 2 wk, a seizure occurs. Without treatment, withdrawal of a short-acting barbiturate causes the
following:
• Within the first 12 to 20 h: Increasing restlessness, tremulousness, and weakness
• By the 2nd day: More prominent tremulousness, sometimes increased deep tendon reflexes, and
increased weakness
• During the 2nd and 3rd days: Seizures (in 75% of patients who were taking ≥ 800 mg/day), sometimes
progressing to status epilepticus and death
•
From the 2nd to the 5th day: Delirium, insomnia, confusion, frightening visual and auditory
hallucinations, and often hyperpyrexia and dehydration
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is usually made clinically. Drug levels are not measured. Benzodiazepines and barbiturates are
usually included in routine immunoassay-based urine drug screens (.
Treatment
===PAGE:1703===
• Airway protection
• Flumazenil considered
• Urine alkalinization for barbiturates
Toxicity or overdose:
Acute intoxication generally requires nothing more than observation, although the
airway and respirations should be carefully assessed. If ingestion was within 1 h, the gag reflex is
preserved, and the patient can protect the airway, 50 g of activated charcoal may be given to reduce
further absorption; however, this intervention has not been shown to reduce morbidity or mortality.
Occasionally, intubation and mechanical ventilation are required.
The benzodiazepine receptor antagonist flumazenil can reverse severe sedation secondary to
benzodiazepine overdose. Dose is 0.2 mg IV given over 30 sec; 0.3 mg may be given after 30 sec,
followed by 0.5 mg q 1 min to total 3 mg. However, its clinical usefulness is not well-defined because most
people who overdose on benzodiazepines recover with only supportive care, and occasionally flumazenil
precipitates seizures. Contraindications to flumazenil include long-term benzodiazepine use (because
flumazenil may precipitate withdrawal), an underlying seizure disorder, presence of twitching or other
motor abnormalities, a concomitant epileptogenic drug overdose (especially of tricyclic antidepressants),
and cardiac arrhythmias.
If barbiturate overdose is diagnosed, urine should be alkalinized to increase excretion.
Withdrawal and detoxification:
Severe acute withdrawal requires hospitalization, preferably in an ICU,
and use of appropriate doses of IV benzodiazepines.
One approach for managing sedative dependence is to withdraw the drug on a strict schedule while
monitoring signs of withdrawal. Often, switching to a long-acting drug, which is easier to taper, is better.
As for alcohol withdrawal, patients going through anxiolytic or sedative withdrawal require close
monitoring, preferably in an inpatient setting if a moderate to severe withdrawal reaction is expected.
Marijuana (Cannabis)
Marijuana is a euphoriant that can cause sedation or dysphoria in some users. Overdose does
not occur. Psychologic dependence can develop with chronic use, but very little physical
dependence is clinically apparent. Withdrawal is uncomfortable but requires only supportive
treatment.
Marijuana is the most commonly used illicit drug; it is typically used episodically without evidence of social
or psychologic dysfunction.
In the US, marijuana is commonly smoked in cigarettes, made from the flowering tops and leaves of the
dried plant, or as hashish, the pressed resin of the plant. Much less commonly, marijuana is taken orally.
Dronabinol, a synthetic oral form of the active ingredient,
Δ
-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), is used to
treat nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy and to enhance appetite in AIDS
patients.
Pathophysiology
Δ
-9-THC binds at cannabinoid receptors, which are present throughout the brain.
Chronic effects:
Any drug that causes euphoria and diminishes anxiety can cause dependence, and
marijuana is no exception. However, heavy use and reports of inability to stop are unusual. Critics of
marijuana cite much scientific data regarding adverse effects, but most claims of significant biologic effect
are unsubstantiated. Findings are sparse even among relatively heavy users and in areas intensively
investigated (eg, immunologic and reproductive function). However, high-dose smokers develop
pulmonary symptoms (episodes of acute bronchitis, wheezing, coughing, and increased phlegm), and
===PAGE:1704===
pulmonary function may be altered, manifested as large airway changes of unknown significance. Even
daily smokers do not develop obstructive airway disease. There is no evidence of increased risk of head
and neck or airway cancers, as there is with tobacco. In a few case-control studies, diminished cognitive
function was identified in small samples of long-term high-dose users; this finding needs to be confirmed.
A sense of diminished ambition and energy is often described.
The effect of prenatal marijuana use on neonates is not clear. Decreased fetal weight has been reported,
but when all factors (eg, maternal
alcohol and tobacco use) are accounted for, the effect on fetal weight
appears less. THC is secreted in breast milk. Although harm to breastfed infants has not been shown,
breastfeeding mothers, like pregnant women, should avoid using marijuana.
Symptoms and Signs
Intoxication and withdrawal are not life threatening.
Acute effects:
Within minutes, smoking marijuana produces a dreamy state of consciousness in which
ideas seem disconnected, unanticipated, and free-flowing. Time, color, and spatial perceptions may be
altered. In general, intoxication consists of a feeling of euphoria and relaxation (a high). These effects last
4 to 6 h after inhalation.
Many of the other reported psychologic effects seem to be related to the setting in which the drug is
taken. Anxiety, panic reactions, and paranoia have occurred, particularly in naive users. Marijuana may
exacerbate or even precipitate psychotic symptoms in schizophrenics, even those being treated with
antipsychotics.
Physical effects are mild in most patients. Tachycardia, conjunctival injection, and dry mouth occur
regularly. Concentration, sense of time, fine coordination, depth perception, tracking, and reaction time
can be impaired for up to 24 h—all hazardous in certain situations (eg, driving, operating heavy
equipment). Appetite often increases.
Withdrawal:
Cessation after 2 to 3 wk of frequent, heavy use can cause a mild withdrawal syndrome,
which typically begins about 12 h after the last use. Symptoms consist of insomnia, irritability, depression,
nausea, and anorexia; symptoms peak at 2 to 3 days and last up to 7 days.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is usually made clinically. Drug levels are not measured. Most routine urine drug screens
include marijuana (.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
Treatment is usually unnecessary; for patients experiencing significant discomfort, treatment is
supportive. Management of abuse typically consists of behavioral therapy in an outpatient drug treatment
program.
Cocaine
Cocaine is a sympathomimetic drug with CNS stimulant and euphoriant properties. High doses
can cause panic, schizophrenic-like symptoms, seizures, hyperthermia, hypertension,
arrhythmias, stroke, aortic dissection, intestinal ischemia, and MI. Toxicity is managed with
supportive care, including IV benzodiazepines (for agitation, hypertension, and seizures) and
cooling techniques (for hyperthermia). Withdrawal manifests primarily as depression, difficulty
concentrating, and somnolence (cocaine washout syndrome).
===PAGE:1705===
Most cocaine users are episodic recreational users. However, about 25% (or more) of users meet criteria
for abuse or dependence. Use among adolescents has declined recently. Availability of highly biologically
active forms, such as crack cocaine, has worsened the problem of cocaine dependence. Most cocaine in
the US is about 50 to 60% pure; it may contain a wide array of fillers, adulterants, and contaminants.
Most cocaine in the US is volatilized and inhaled, but it may be snorted, or injected IV. For inhalation, the
powdered hydrochloride salt is converted to a more volatile form, usually by adding NaHCO
, water, and
heat. The resultant precipitate (crack cocaine) is volatilized by heating (it is not burned) and inhaled.
Onset of effect is quick, and intensity of the high rivals IV injection. Tolerance to cocaine occurs, and
withdrawal from heavy use is characterized by somnolence, difficulty concentrating, increased appetite,
and depression. The tendency to continue taking the drug is strong after a period of withdrawal.
Pathophysiology
Cocaine, an alkaloid present in the leaves of the coca plant, enhances norepinephrine, dopamine, and
serotonin activity in the central and peripheral nervous systems.
Enhancement of dopamine activity is the likely cause of the drug's intended effects and thus of the
reinforcement that contributes to developing abuse and dependence.
Norepinephrine activity accounts for the sympathomimetic effects: tachycardia, hypertension, mydriasis,
diaphoresis, and hyperthermia.
Cocaine also blocks Na channels, accounting for its action as a local anesthetic. Cocaine causes
vasoconstriction and thus can affect almost any organ. MI, cerebral ischemia and hemorrhage, aortic
dissection, intestinal ischemia, and renal ischemia are possible sequelae.
Onset of cocaine's effects depends on mode of use:
• IV injection and smoking: Immediate onset, peak effect after about 3 to 5 min, and duration of about 15
to 20 min
• Intranasal use: Onset after about 3 to 5 min, peak effect at 20 to 30 min, and duration of about 45 to 90
min
• Oral use: Onset after about 10 min, peak effect at about 60 min, and duration of about 90 min
Because cocaine is such a short-acting drug, heavy users may inject it or smoke it repeatedly every 10 to
15 min.
Pregnancy:
Use of cocaine during pregnancy can affect the fetus; the rate of placental abruption and
spontaneous abortion is higher (.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute effects:
Effects may differ depending on mode of use. When injected or smoked, cocaine causes
hyperstimulation, alertness, euphoria, a sense of increased energy, and feelings of competence and
power. The excitation and high are similar to those produced by injecting amphetamine. These feelings
are less intense and disruptive in users who snort cocaine powder.
Users who smoke the drug may develop pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum, causing chest pain,
dyspnea, or both. Myocardial ischemia due to cocaine use may also cause chest pain ("cocaine chest
pain"), but cocaine can also cause chest pain in the absence of myocardial ischemia; the mechanism is
unclear. Arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities may occur. Cardiac effects may result in sudden
death. Binges, often over several days, lead to an exhaustion syndrome, involving intense fatigue and
need for sleep.
Toxicity or overdose:
An overdose may cause severe anxiety, panic, agitation, aggression,
===PAGE:1706===
sleeplessness, hallucinations, paranoid delusions, impaired judgment, tremors, seizures, and delirium.
Mydriasis and diaphoresis are apparent, and heart rate and BP are increased. Death may result from MI
or arrhythmias.
Severe overdose causes a syndrome of acute psychosis (eg, schizophrenic-like symptoms),
hypertension, hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis, coagulopathy, renal failure, and seizures. Patients with
extreme clinical toxicity may, on a genetic basis, have decreased (atypical) serum cholinesterase, an
enzyme needed for clearance of cocaine.
The concurrent use of cocaine and alcohol produces a condensation product, cocaethylene, which has
stimulant properties and may contribute to toxicity.
Chronic effects:
Severe toxic effects occur in compulsive heavy users. Myocardial fibrosis, left
ventricular hypertrophy, and cardiomyopathy can develop. Rarely, repeated snorting causes nasal septal
perforation due to local ischemia. Cognitive impairment, including impaired attention and verbal memory,
occurs in some heavy users. Users who inject cocaine are subject to the typical infectious complications
(.
Withdrawal:
The main symptoms are depression, difficulty concentrating, and somnolence (cocaine
washout syndrome). Appetite is increased.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is usually made clinically. Drug levels are not measured. The cocaine metabolite,
benzoylecgonine, is part of most routine urine drug screens (.
Treatment
• IV benzodiazepines
• Avoidance of
β
-blockers
• Cooling for hyperthermia as needed
Toxicity or overdose:
Treatment of mild cocaine intoxication is generally unnecessary because the drug
is extremely short-acting. Benzodiazepines are the preferred initial treatment for most toxic effects,
including CNS excitation and seizures, tachycardia, and hypertension. Lorazepam 2 to 3 mg IV q 5 min
titrated to effect may be used. High doses and a continuous infusion may be required. Propofol infusion,
with mechanical ventilation, may be used for resistant cases. Hypertension that does not respond to
benzodiazepines is treated with IV nitrates (eg, nitroprusside) or phentolamine;
β
-blockers are not
recommended because they allow continued
α
-adrenergic stimulation. Hyperthermia can be life
threatening and should be managed aggressively with sedation plus evaporative cooling, ice packs, and
maintenance of intravascular volume and urine flow with IV normal saline solution. Phenothiazines lower
seizure threshold, and their anticholinergic effects can interfere with cooling; thus, they are not preferred
for sedation. Occasionally, severely agitated patients must be pharmacologically paralyzed and
mechanically ventilated to ameliorate acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, or multisystem dysfunction.
Cocaine-related chest pain is evaluated as for any other patient with potential myocardial
ischemia or
aortic dissection, with chest x-ray, serial ECG, and serum cardiac markers. As discussed above,
β
-
blockers are contraindicated, and benzodiazepines are a first-line drug. If coronary vasodilation is
required after benzodiazepines are given, nitrates are used, or phentolamine 1 to 5 mg IV given slowly
can be considered.
Abuse:
Heavy users and people who inject the drug IV or smoke it are most likely to become dependent.
Light users and people who take the drug nasally or orally are at lower risk of becoming dependent.
Stopping sustained use requires considerable assistance, and the depression that may result requires
===PAGE:1707===
close supervision and treatment. Many outpatient therapies, including support and self-help groups and
cocaine hotlines, exist. Inpatient therapy is used primarily when it is required by physical or mental
comorbidity or when outpatient therapy has repeatedly been unsuccessful.
For treatment of infants born to cocaine-addicted mothers, see
Prenatal Drug Exposure

Amphetamines
Amphetamines are sympathomimetic drugs with CNS stimulant and euphoriant properties
whose toxic adverse effects include delirium, hypertension, seizures, and hyperthermia (which
can cause rhabdomyolysis and renal failure). Toxicity is managed with supportive care,
including IV benzodiazepines (for agitation, hypertension, and seizures) and cooling techniques
(for hyperthermia). There is no stereotypical withdrawal syndrome.
The original drug in this class, amphetamine, has been modified by various substitutions on its phenyl
ring, resulting in many variations, including methamphetamine, methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA
or Ecstasy), methylenedioxyethylamphetamine (MDEA), and numerous others.
Some amphetamines, including dextroamphetamine, methamphetamine, and the related methylphenidate,
are widely used medically to treat attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, obesity, and narcolepsy, thus
creating a supply subject to diversion for illicit use. Methamphetamine is easily manufactured illicitly.
Pathophysiology
Amphetamines enhance release of catecholamines, increasing intrasynaptic levels of norepinephrine,
dopamine, and serotonin. The resulting marked
α
- and
β
-receptor stimulation and general CNS excitation
account for the "desired" effects of increased alertness, euphoria, and anorexia, as well as the adverse
effects of delirium, hypertension, hyperthermia, and seizures. Effects of amphetamines are similar,
varying in intensity and duration of psychoactive effects; MDMA and its relatives have more moodenhancing properties, perhaps related to a greater effect on serotonin. Amphetamines can be taken orally
as pills or capsules, nasally by inhaling or smoking, or by injection.
Chronic effects:
Repeated use of amphetamines induces dependence. Tolerance develops slowly, but
amounts several 100-fold greater than the amount originally used may eventually be ingested or injected.
Tolerance to various effects develops unequally. Tachycardia and increased alertness diminish, but
hallucinations and delusions may occur.
Amphetamines typically cause erectile dysfunction in men but enhance sexual desire. Use is associated
with unsafe sex practices, and users are at increased risk of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV
infection. Amphetamine abusers are prone to injury because the drug produces excitation and grandiosity
followed by excess fatigue and sleepiness.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute effects:
Many psychologic effects of amphetamines are similar to those of cocaine; they include
increased alertness and concentration, euphoria, and feelings of well-being and grandiosity. Palpitations,
tremor, diaphoresis, and mydriasis may also occur during intoxication.
Binges (perhaps over several days) lead to an exhaustion syndrome, involving intense fatigue and need
for sleep after the stimulation phase.
Toxicity or overdose:
Tachycardia, arrhythmias, chest pain, hypertension, dizziness, nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea can occur. CNS effects include acute delirium and toxic psychosis. Overdose can also
cause stroke (usually hemorrhagic), seizures, muscle rigidity, and hyperthermia (> 40° C); all of these
effects may precipitate rhabdomyolysis, which can lead to renal failure.
Chronic effects:
A paranoid psychosis may result from long-term use; rarely, the psychosis is
precipitated by a single high dose or by repeated moderate doses. Typical features include delusions of
===PAGE:1708===
persecution, ideas of reference (notions that everyday occurrences have special meaning or significance
personally meant for or directed to the patient), and feelings of omnipotence. Some users experience a
prolonged depression, during which suicide is possible. Recovery from even prolonged amphetamine
psychosis is usual but is slow. The more florid symptoms fade within a few days or weeks, but some
confusion, memory loss, and delusional ideas commonly persist for months.
Users have a high rate of severe tooth decay affecting multiple teeth; causes include decreased
salivation, acidic combustion products, and poor oral hygiene.
Withdrawal:
Although no stereotypical withdrawal syndrome occurs when amphetamines are stopped,
EEG changes occur, considered by some experts to fulfill the physical criteria for dependence. Abruptly
stopping use may uncover or exacerbate underlying depression or precipitate a serious depressive
reaction. Withdrawal is often followed by 2 or 3 days of intense fatigue or sleepiness and depression.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Testing as needed to exclude serious nondrug-related disorders (eg, causing altered mental status)
Diagnosis is usually made clinically, although when history of drug use and the diagnosis are unclear,
tests are done as indicated for the undifferentiated patient with altered mental status, hyperpyrexia, or
seizures. Evaluation then typically includes CT, lumbar puncture, and laboratory tests to identify infections
and metabolic abnormalities. Amphetamines are usually part of routine urine drug screens (,
which are done unless history of ingestion is clear; specific drug levels are not measured. Immunoassay
urine screening tests for amphetamines may produce false-positive results and may not detect
methamphetamine and methylphenidate.
Treatment
• IV benzodiazepines
• IV nitrates for hypertension unresponsive to benzodiazepines as needed
• Cooling for hyperthermia as needed
Toxicity or overdose:
When significant oral toxicity is recent (eg, < 1 to 2 h), activated charcoal may be
given to limit absorption, although this intervention has not been shown to reduce morbidity or mortality.
Urinary acidification hastens amphetamine excretion, but it may worsen myoglobin precipitation in the
renal tubules and thus is not recommended.
Benzodiazepines are the preferred initial treatment for CNS excitation, seizures, tachycardia, and
hypertension. Lorazepam 2 to 3 mg IV q 5 min titrated to effect may be used. High doses or a continuous
infusion may be required. Propofol, with mechanical ventilation, may be required for severe agitation.
Hypertension that does not respond to benzodiazepines is treated with nitrates (occasionally
nitroprusside) or other antihypertensives as needed, depending on the severity of the hypertension.
β
-
Blockers (eg, metoprolol 2 to 5 mg IV) may be used for severe ventricular arrhythmias or tachycardia.
Hyperthermia can be life threatening and should be managed aggressively with sedation plus evaporative
cooling, ice packs, and maintenance of intravascular volume and urine flow with IV normal saline solution.
Phenothiazines lower seizure threshold, and their anticholinergic effects can interfere with cooling; thus,
they are not preferred for sedation.
Withdrawal and rehabilitation:
No specific treatment is needed. BP and mood should be monitored
initially. Patients whose depression persists for more than a brief period after amphetamines are stopped
may respond to antidepressants.
===PAGE:1709===
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (a form of psychotherapy) is effective in some patients. There are no other
proven treatments for rehabilitation and maintenance after detoxification.
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (Ecstasy, MDMA)
MDMA (3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine) is an amphetamine analog with stimulant and
hallucinogenic effects.
MDMA acts primarily on neurons that produce and release serotonin, but it also affects dopaminergic
neurons. MDMA is usually taken as a pill; effects begin 30 to 60 min after ingestion and typically last 4 to
6 h. MDMA is often used at dance clubs, concerts, and rave parties.
Symptoms and Signs
MDMA causes a state of excitement and disinhibition and accentuates physical sensation, empathy, and
feelings of interpersonal closeness. Toxic effects are similar to those of the other amphetamines but are
less common, perhaps because use is more likely to be intermittent. However, even with casual use,
significant problems such as hyperthermia and centrally mediated hyponatremia may occur. The effects of
intermittent, occasional
use are uncertain. Rarely, fulminant hepatic failure occurs.
Chronic, repeated use may cause problems similar to those of amphetamines, including dependence.
Some users develop paranoid psychosis. Cognitive decline may also occur with repeated, frequent use.
Diagnosis
MDMA may not be detected by routine urine immunoassay drug screens.
Treatment
Treatment for acute toxicity and dependency is similar to that for amphetamines, although treatment for
acute overdose is less commonly needed.
Hallucinogens
Hallucinogens are a diverse group of drugs that can cause highly unpredictable, idiosyncratic
reactions. Intoxication typically causes hallucinations, with altered perception, impaired
judgment, ideas of reference, and depersonalization. There is no stereotypical withdrawal
syndrome. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is supportive.
Traditional hallucinogens include lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), psilocybin, and mescaline. All are
derived from natural products:
• LSD from a fungus that often contaminates wheat and rye flour
• Psilocybin from several types of mushrooms
• Mescaline from the peyote cactus
Dozens of newer synthetic compounds ("designer drugs") have been produced, usually based on
tryptamine or phenylethylamine molecules. Tryptamines include
N,N
-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and 5methoxyN,N
-diisopropyltryptamine (5-MeO-DIPT).
To complicate matters, many illicit drugs sold under one name actually contain another drug of abuse
—often ketamine or phencyclidine (PCP), anesthetic drugs, dextromethorphan, or other drugs.
Some other drugs, including marijuana, also have hallucinogenic properties. The term hallucinogen
persists, although use of these drugs may not cause hallucinations. Alternative terms, such as
psychedelic and psychotomimetic, are even less appropriate.
===PAGE:1710===
Pathophysiology
LSD, psilocybin, and many designer hallucinogens are serotonin receptor agonists. For mescaline, a
phenylethylamine similar to amphetamines, the exact mechanism has not been determined.
Mode of use and effects vary:
• LSD is taken orally from drug-impregnated blotter paper or as tablets. Onset of action is usually 30 to 60
min after ingestion; duration of effects can be 12 to 24 h.
• Psilocybin is taken orally; effects usually last about 4 to 6 h.
• Mescaline is taken orally as peyote buttons. Onset of effects is usually 30 to 90 min after ingestion;
duration of effects is about 12 h.
• DMT, when smoked, has onset in 2 to 5 min; duration of effects is 20 to 60 min (accounting for its street
name, "businessman's lunch").
A high degree of tolerance for LSD develops and disappears rapidly. Users tolerant of any of these drugs
are cross-tolerant of the other drugs. Psychologic dependence varies greatly; there is no evidence of
physical dependence or a withdrawal syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
Intoxication results in altered perceptions, including synesthesias (eg, seeing sounds, hearing colors),
intensification of sensations, enhanced empathy, depersonalization (feeling the self is not real), a
distorted sense of the environment's reality, and changes in mood (usually euphoric, sometimes
depressive). Users often refer to the combination of these effects as a trip. Periods of intense psychologic
effects may alternate with periods of lucidity. LSD may also have several physical effects, including
mydriasis, blurred vision, sweating, palpitations, and impaired coordination. Many other hallucinogens
cause nausea and vomiting. With all, judgment is impaired.
Responses to hallucinogens depend on several factors, including the user's expectations, ability to cope
with perceptual distortions, and the setting. With LSD, delusions and true hallucinations occur but are
rare, as are anxiety attacks, extreme apprehensiveness, and panic states. Psilocybin and mescaline are
more likely to cause hallucinations. When hallucinogenic reactions occur, they usually subside quickly if
treated appropriately in a secure setting. However, some people (especially after using LSD) remain
disturbed and may have a persistent psychotic state. Whether drug use has precipitated or uncovered
preexisting psychotic potential or can cause this state in previously stable people is unclear.
Some people, especially long-term or repeat users (particularly of LSD), experience apparent drug effects
long after they have stopped drug use. These episodes (flashbacks) are usually visual illusions but can
include distortions of virtually any sensation (including self-image or perceptions of time or space) and
hallucinations. Flashbacks can be precipitated by use of marijuana, alcohol, or barbiturates or by stress
or fatigue or can occur without apparent reason. Mechanisms are not known. Flashbacks tend to subside
within 6 to 12 mo.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is usually made clinically. Drug levels are not measured. Except for PCP, most hallucinogens
are not included in routine urine drug screens (.
Treatment
• For acute intoxication, supportive measures and relief of anxiety
===PAGE:1711===
• For persistent psychosis, psychiatric care
A quiet, calming environment with reassurance that the bizarre thoughts, visions, and sounds are due to
the drug and will go away soon usually suffices. Anxiolytics (eg, lorazepam, diazepam) may help reduce
severe anxiety.
Persistent psychotic states or other mental disorders require appropriate psychiatric care. Flashbacks
that are transient or not unduly distressing to the patient require no special treatment. However,
flashbacks associated with anxiety and depression may require anxiolytics as for acute adverse reactions.
Ketamine and Phencyclidine
Ketamine and phencyclidine are related drugs that can cause intoxication, sometimes with
confusion or a catatonic state. Overdose can cause coma and, rarely, death.
Ketamine and phencyclidine (PCP) are chemically related anesthetics. These drugs are often used to
adulterate or pass for other hallucinogens such as LSD.
Ketamine is available in liquid or powder form. When used illicitly, the powder form is typically snorted but
can be taken orally. The liquid form is taken IV, IM, or sc.
PCP, once common, is no longer being legally manufactured. It is illegally manufactured and sold on the
street under names such as angel dust; it is sometimes sold in combination with marijuana.
Symptoms and Signs
Intoxication, characterized by a giddy euphoria, occurs with lower doses; euphoria is often followed by
bursts of anxiety or mood lability. Overdose causes a withdrawn state of depersonalization and
disassociation; when doses are higher still, disassociation can become severe (known as a k-hole), with
combativeness, ataxia, dysarthria, muscular hypertonicity, nystagmus, hyperreflexia, and myoclonic jerks.
With very high doses, acidosis, hyperthermia, tachycardia, severe hypertension, seizures, and coma may
occur; deaths are unusual. Acute effects generally fade after 30 min.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is usually clinical. Ketamine is not detected by routine urine drug screens; high-performance
liquid chromatography testing must be requested when ketamine use must be confirmed.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
Patients should be kept in a quiet, calming environment and closely observed. Benzodiazepines can be
used to manage seizures. Further treatment is rarely needed.
Volatile Nitrites
Nitrites (poppers, as amyl, butyl, or isobutyl nitrite, sold with street names such as Locker Room and
Rush) may be inhaled to enhance sexual pleasure. There is little evidence of significant risk, although
nitrites and nitrates cause vasodilation, with brief hypotension, dizziness, and flushing, followed by reflex
tachycardia (see
Table 340-8
. Nitrites may cause methemoglobinemia. However, they are
dangerous when combined with drugs used for erectile enhancement; the combination can lead to severe
hypotension and death.
Volatile Solvents
===PAGE:1712===
Inhalation of volatile industrial solvents and solvents from aerosol sprays can cause a state of
intoxication. Chronic use can result in neuropathies and hepatotoxicity.
Use of volatile solvents (eg, acetates, alcohol, chloroform, ether, aliphatic and aromatic
hydrocarbons,
chlorinated hydrocarbons, ketones) continues to be an endemic problem among adolescents. Common
commercial products (eg, glues and adhesives, paints, cleaning fluids) contain these substances; thus,
children and adolescents can easily obtain them. About 10% of adolescents in the US have reportedly
inhaled volatile solvents.
Volatile solvents temporarily stimulate the CNS before depressing it. Partial tolerance and psychologic
dependence develop with frequent use, but a withdrawal syndrome does not occur.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute symptoms of dizziness, drowsiness, slurred speech, and unsteady gait occur early. Impulsiveness,
excitement, and irritability may occur. As effects on the CNS increase, illusions, hallucinations, and
delusions develop. Users experience a euphoric, dreamy high, culminating in a short period of sleep.
Delirium with confusion, psychomotor clumsiness, emotional lability, and impaired thinking develop. The
intoxicated state may last from minutes to > 1 h.
Sudden death can result from respiratory arrest or airway occlusion due to CNS depression or
arrhythmias (perhaps due to myocardial sensitization).
Complications of chronic use may result from the effect of the solvent or from other toxic ingredients (eg,
lead in gasoline). Carbon tetrachloride may cause a syndrome of hepatic and renal failure. Toluene may
cause degeneration of CNS white matter. Injuries to brain, peripheral nerves, liver, kidneys, and bone
marrow may result from heavy exposure or hypersensitivity.
Diagnosis
Volatile solvents are not detected by routine drug screens.
Treatment
Treatment of solvent-dependent adolescents is difficult, and relapse is frequent. However, most users
stop solvent use by the end of adolescence. Intensive attempts to broadly improve patients' social skills
and status in family, school, and society may help. For symptoms and treatment of poisoning with specific
solvents, see
Table 340-8

Gamma Hydroxybutyrate
Gamma hydroxybutyrate causes intoxication resembling alcohol or ketamine intoxication and,
especially when combined with alcohol, can lead to respiratory depression, seizures, and rarely
death.
Gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB, also called "G") is similar to the neurotransmitter
γ
-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), but it can cross the blood-brain barrier and so can be taken by mouth. It is similar to ketamine in
its effects but lasts longer and is far more dangerous.
GHB produces feelings of relaxation and tranquility. It may also cause fatigue and disinhibition. At higher
doses, GHB may cause dizziness, loss of coordination, nausea, and vomiting. Coma and respiratory
depression may also occur. Combining GHB and any other sedative, especially alcohol, is extremely
dangerous. Most deaths have occurred when GHB was taken with alcohol.
Withdrawal symptoms occur if GHB is not taken for several days after previous frequent use.
Treatment is directed at symptoms. Mechanical ventilation may be needed if breathing is affected. Most
===PAGE:1713===
people recover rapidly, although effects may not fade for 1 to 2 h.
Anabolic Steroids
Anabolic steroids are often used to enhance physical performance and promote muscle growth. When
used inappropriately, chronically at high doses and without medical supervision, they can cause erratic
and irrational behavior and a wide range of physical adverse effects.
Anabolic steroids include testosterone and any drugs chemically and pharmacologically related to
testosterone that promote muscle growth; numerous drugs are available. Anabolic steroids are used
clinically to treat low testosterone levels (see
Male Hypogonadism
. Additionally, because
anabolic steroids are anticatabolic and improve protein utilization, they are sometimes given to burn,
bedbound, or other debilitated patients to prevent muscle wasting. Some physicians prescribe them to
patients with AIDS-related wasting or with cancer. However, there are few data to recommend such
therapy and little guidance on how supplemental androgens may affect underlying disorders.
Testosterone has been reputed to benefit wound healing and muscle injury, although few data support
these claims.
Anabolic steroids are used illicitly to increase lean muscle mass and strength; resistance training and a
certain diet can enhance
these effects. There is no direct evidence that anabolic steroids increase
endurance or speed, but substantial anecdotal evidence suggests that athletes taking them can perform
more frequent high-intensity workouts. Muscle hypertrophy is unequivocal.
Estimates of lifetime incidence of anabolic steroid abuse range from 0.5 to 5% of the population, but
subpopulations vary significantly (eg, higher rates for bodybuilders and competitive athletes). In the US,
the reported rate of use is 6 to 11% among high school-aged males, including an unexpected number of
nonathletes, and about 2.5% among high school-aged females.
Pathophysiology
Anabolic steroids have androgenic effects (eg, changes in hair or in libido, aggressiveness) and anabolic
effects (eg, increased protein utilization, increased muscle mass). Androgenic effects cannot be separated
from the anabolic, but some anabolic steroids have been synthesized to minimize the androgenic effects.
Testosterone is rapidly degraded by the liver; oral testosterone is inactivated too rapidly to be effective,
and injectable testosterone must be modified (eg, by esterification) to retard absorption or delay
breakdown. Analogs modified by 17
α
-alkylation are often effective orally, but adverse effects may be
increased. Transdermal preparations are also available.
Chronic effects:
Adverse effects vary significantly by dose and drug. There are few adverse effects at
physiologic replacement doses (eg, methyltestosterone 10 to 50 mg/day or its equivalent). Athletes may
use doses 10 to 50 times this range. At high doses, some effects are clear; others are equivocal (see
Table 160-4
). Uncertainties exist because most studies involve abusers who may not report doses
accurately and who also use black market drugs, many of which are counterfeit and contain (despite
labeling) varying doses and substances.
Athletes may take steroids for a certain period, stop, then start again (cycling) several times a year.
Intermittently stopping the drugs is believed to allow endogenous testosterone levels, sperm count, and
the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis to return to normal. Anecdotal evidence suggests that cycling may
decrease harmful effects and the need for increasing drug doses to attain the desired effect.
Athletes frequently use many drugs simultaneously (a practice called stacking) and alternate routes of
administration (oral, IM, or transdermal). Increasing the dose through a cycle (pyramiding) may result in
doses 5 to 100 times the physiologic dose. Stacking and pyramiding are intended to increase receptor
binding and minimize adverse effects, but these benefits have not been proved.
[Table 160-4.
Adverse Effects of Anabolic Steroids]
===PAGE:1714===
Symptoms and Signs
The most characteristic sign is a rapid increase in muscle mass. The rate and extent of increase are
directly related to the doses taken. Patients taking physiologic doses have slow and often unnoticeable
growth; those taking megadoses may increase lean body weight by several pounds per month. Increases
in energy level and libido (in men) occur but are more difficult to identify.
Psychologic effects (usually only with very high doses) are often noticed by family members:
• Wide and erratic mood swings
• Irrational behavior
• Increased aggressiveness ("roid rage")
• Irritability
• Increased libido
• Depression
Increased acne is common in both sexes; libido may increase or, less commonly, decrease;
aggressiveness and appetite may increase. Gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and
decreased fertility may
occur in males. Virilizing effects (eg, alopecia, enlarged clitoris, hirsutism, deepened voice) are common
among females. Also, breast size may decrease; vaginal mucosa may atrophy; and menstruation may
change or stop. Virilization and gynecomastia may be irreversible.
Diagnosis
• Urine testing
A urine screen usually identifies users of anabolic steroids. Metabolites of anabolic steroids can be
detected in urine up to 6 mo (even longer for some types of anabolic steroids) after the drugs are
stopped. Testosterone taken exogenously is indistinguishable from endogenous testosterone. However, if
high levels of testosterone are detected, the ratio between testosterone and epitestosterone (an
endogenous steroid that chemically is nearly identical to testosterone) is measured. Normally, the ratio is
< 6:1; if exogenous testosterone is being used, the ratio is higher.
Treatment
• Cessation of use
The main treatment is cessation of use. Although physical dependence does not occur, psychologic
dependence, particularly in competitive bodybuilders, may exist. Gynecomastia may require surgical
reduction.
Prevention
Physicians caring for adolescents and young adults should be alert to the signs of steroid abuse and
teach patients about its risks. Education about anabolic steroids should start by the beginning of middle
school. Use of programs that teach alternative, healthy ways to increase muscle size and improve
performance through good nutrition and weight training techniques may help.
Substance Use in Children and Adolescents
Substance use is common among children, especially adolescents. Regardless of economic or ethnic
background, alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana are consistently the most commonly used substances. Use
of other substances, including amphetamines and methamphetamines, inhalants, hallucinogens, cocaine,
===PAGE:1715===
anabolic steroids, opioids, and so-called date rape drugs and club drugs (eg,
methylenedioxymethamphetamine [MDMA], ketamine, gamma hydroxybutyrate), is less common, and the
prevalence of use of each varies more over time. Of growing concern is a reported increase in the
prevalence of prescription opioid abuse.
Children and adolescents use drugs for a variety of reasons. Some do so to escape from perceived
pressures (eg, parental pressure, societal pressure) or to challenge authority; others are disposed to
novelty seeking and risk taking. Influence of peers and the media's portrayal of substances such as
alcohol are other commonly cited reasons. Poor self-control, lack of parental monitoring, or various
psychologic disorders (eg, conduct disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, depression) may
increase risk. Parental attitudes and the examples that parents set in their own use of alcohol, tobacco,
prescription drugs, and other substances are a powerful influence.
Diagnosis
• Screening
Primary care physicians should be prepared to screen their adolescent patients for use of alcohol and
drinking and provide counseling and, when necessary, referral to other treatment services and resources.
The CRAFFT questionnaire is one validated screening tool. Patients with ≥ 2 positive answers require
further evaluation. Physicians ask patients whether they do or have done the following:
• C: Ride in a
C
ar driven by someone (including themselves) who is "high" or has been drinking alcohol or
using drugs
• R: Drink alcohol or use drugs to
R
elax, feel better about themselves, or fit in
• A: Drink alcohol or use drugs while they are
A
lone
• F:
F
orget things they did while drinking or using drugs
• F: Are ever told by family members or
F
riends that they should drink or use drugs less
• T: Get into
T
rouble while drinking or using drugs
===PAGE:1716===
Chapter 161. Eating Disorders
Introduction
Eating disorders are grouped into 3 categories: anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and eating disorder
not otherwise specified (EDNOS). Within EDNOS, provisional diagnostic criteria are provided for binge
eating disorder.
Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is characterized by a relentless pursuit of thinness, a morbid fear of obesity, a
refusal to maintain a minimally normal body weight, resulting in body weight below the normal
range and, in women, amenorrhea. Diagnosis is clinical. Most treatment is with some form of
psychologic therapy. Olanzapine may help with weight gain.
Anorexia nervosa occurs predominantly in girls and young women. Onset is usually during adolescence.
The exact etiology is unknown. Other than being female, few risk factors have been identified. In Western
society, obesity is considered unattractive and unhealthy, and the desire to be thin is pervasive, even
among children. More than 50% of prepubertal girls diet or take other measures to control their weight.
Excessive concern about weight or a history of dieting appears to indicate increased risk, and some
genetic predisposition probably exists. Studies of identical twins have shown a concordance of < 50%.
Family and social factors probably play a role. Many patients belong to middle or upper socioeconomic
classes; are meticulous, compulsive, and intelligent; and have very high standards for achievement and
success.
Two types of anorexia nervosa are recognized:
• Restricting type: Patients restrict food intake but do not regularly engage in binge eating or purging
behavior.
• Binge-eating/purging type: Patients regularly binge, then induce vomiting, misuse laxatives, diuretics, or
enemas, or a combination.
Binges are defined as consumption of a much larger amount of food than most people would eat in a
similar time period under similar circumstances with loss of control, ie, perceived inability to resist or stop
eating.
Pathophysiology
Endocrine abnormalities are common; they include low levels of luteinizing hormone (decreased
secretion), low levels of thyroxine (T
) and triiodothyronine (T
), and increased cortisol secretion.
Menses usually cease. Bone mass declines. In severely undernourished patients, virtually every major
organ system may malfunction.
Dehydration and metabolic alkalosis may occur, and serum K may be low; all are aggravated by induced
vomiting and laxative or diuretic use.
Cardiac muscle mass, chamber size, and output decrease; mitral valve prolapse is commonly detected.
Some patients have prolonged QT intervals (even when corrected for heart rate), which, with the risks
imposed by electrolyte disturbances, may predispose to tachyarrhythmias. Sudden death, most likely due
to ventricular tachyarrhythmias, may occur.
Symptoms and Signs
Anorexia nervosa may be mild and transient or severe and long-standing. Most patients are lean yet are
concerned about body weight and restrict food intake. Preoccupation and anxiety about weight increase,
===PAGE:1717===
even as emaciation develops.
Anorexia is a misnomer because appetite remains until patients become cachectic. Patients are
preoccupied with food:
• They study diets and calories.
• They hoard, conceal, and waste food.
• They collect recipes.
• They prepare elaborate meals for other people.
Patients are often manipulative, lying about food intake and concealing behavior, such as induced
vomiting. Binge-eating/purging occurs in 30 to 50% of patients. The others simply restrict their food
intake.
Many anorectics also exercise excessively to control weight. Even patients who appear cachectic tend to
remain very active (including pursuing vigorous exercise programs), are free of symptoms of nutritional
deficiencies, and have no unusual susceptibility to infections.
Reports of bloating, abdominal distress, and constipation are common. Patients usually lose interest in
sex. Depression occurs frequently.
Common physical findings include bradycardia, low BP, hypothermia, lanugo hair or slight hirsutism, and
edema. Body fat is usually greatly reduced. Patients who vomit frequently may have eroded dental
enamel, painless salivary gland enlargement, and an inflamed esophagus.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
Denial is a prominent feature, and patients resist evaluation and treatment. They are usually brought to
the physician's attention by family members or by intercurrent illness.
Clinical characteristics include the following:
• Body weight ≤ 85% of expected weight (with a BMI of < 17.5 kg/m
)
• Fear of obesity
• Denial of illness (body image disturbance)
• Amenorrhea in females
Patients should otherwise appear well. The key to diagnosis is eliciting the central fear of fatness, which
is not diminished by weight loss.
Differential diagnosis:
Another mental disorder, such as schizophrenia or primary depression, may
cause similar findings.
Rarely, a severe physical disorder may cause substantial weight loss. Disorders to consider include
malabsorption syndromes (eg, due to inflammatory bowel disease or celiac sprue), new-onset type 1
diabetes, adrenal insufficiency, and CNS tumors. Amphetamine abuse may cause similar symptoms.
Prognosis
Without treatment, mortality rates approach 10%; unrecognized mild disease probably rarely leads to
===PAGE:1718===
death. With treatment, one half of patients regain most or all of lost weight and reverse any endocrine
and other complications. About one fourth have intermediate outcomes and may relapse. The remaining
one fourth have a poor outcome, including relapses and persistent physical and mental complications.
Treatment
• Nutrition supplementation
• Psychologic therapy (eg, cognitive-behavioral treatment)
• For adolescents, family therapy
Treatment may require life-saving short-term intervention to restore body weight. When weight loss has
been severe or rapid or when weight has fallen below about 75% of ideal, prompt restoration of weight
becomes critical, and hospitalization should be considered. If any doubt exists, patients should be
hospitalized. Removing patients from their home sometimes reverses a downhill course, but psychiatric
treatment is also required.
Nutritional therapy, which begins by providing about 30 to 40 kcal/kg/day, can produce weight gains of up
to 1.5 kg/wk during inpatient care and 0.5 kg/wk during outpatient care. Oral feedings are best, but very
resistant, undernourished patients occasionally require nasogastric feedings. Loss of bone mass should
be treated with elemental Ca 1200 to 1500 mg/day, vitamin D 600 to 800 IU/day, and, if severe, a
bisphosphonate.
Once nutritional, fluid, and electrolyte status has been stabilized, long-term treatment begins. Outpatient
psychologic therapy is the cornerstone of treatment. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is the modality of
choice, done over a period of 1 yr for weight-restored patients and up to 2 yr for low-weight patients.
Results are best in adolescents who have had the disorder < 6 mo. Family therapy, particularly using the
Maudsley model, is useful for adolescents. This model has 3 phases:
• Family members are taught how to refeed the adolescent (eg, through a supervised family meal) and
thus restore the adolescent's weight (in contrast to many approaches, this model does not assign blame
to the family or the adolescent).
• Control over eating is gradually returned to the adolescent.
• After the adolescent is able to maintain the restored weight, therapy focuses on engendering a healthy
adolescent identity.
Treatment is complicated by patients' abhorrence of weight gain, denial of illness, and manipulative
behavior. The physician should attempt to provide a calm, concerned, stable relationship while
encouraging a reasonable caloric intake.
Although psychologic therapy is primary, drugs are sometimes used. Second-generation antipsychotics
(eg, olanzapine 10 mg po once/day) may help produce weight gain and relieve the morbid fear of obesity.
Fluoxetine, beginning with 20 mg once/day, may help prevent relapse after weight has been restored.
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is characterized by recurrent episodes of binge eating followed by some form
of excessive compensatory behavior such as purging (self-induced vomiting, laxative or
diuretic abuse), fasting, or driven exercise occurring at least 2 times/wk for 3 mo. Diagnosis is
based on history and examination. Treatment is with psychologic therapy and antidepressants.
Bulimia nervosa affects about 1.6% of adolescent and young women and 0.5% of men of comparable
age. Those affected are persistently and
overly concerned about body shape and weight. Unlike patients
with anorexia nervosa, those with bulimia nervosa are usually of normal weight.
===PAGE:1719===
Pathophysiology
Serious fluid and electrolyte disturbances, especially hypokalemia, occur occasionally. Very rarely, the
stomach ruptures or the esophagus is torn during a binge, leading to life-threatening complications.
Because substantial weight loss does not occur, the serious nutritional deficiencies that occur with
anorexia nervosa are not present. Cardiomyopathy may result from long-term abuse of syrup of ipecac to
induce vomiting.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients typically describe binge-purge behavior. Binges involve rapid consumption of an amount of food
definitely larger than most people would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances
accompanied by feelings of loss of control.
Patients tend to consume high-calorie foods (eg, ice cream, cake). The amount of food consumed in a
binge varies, sometimes involving thousands of calories. Binges tend to be episodic, are often triggered
by psychosocial stress, may occur as often as several times a day, and are carried out in secret.
Binging is followed by purging: self-induced vomiting, use of laxatives or diuretics, excessive exercise, or
fasting.
Patients are typically of normal weight; a minority is overweight or obese. Most symptoms and physical
complications result from purging. Self-induced vomiting leads to erosion of dental enamel of the front
teeth, painless parotid (salivary) gland enlargement, and an inflamed esophagus. Danger signs include
• Swollen parotid glands
• Scars on the knuckles (from induced vomiting)
• Dental erosion
Patients with bulimia nervosa tend to be more aware of and remorseful or guilty about their behavior than
those with anorexia nervosa and are more likely to acknowledge their concerns when questioned by a
sympathetic physician. They also appear less introverted and more prone to impulsive behavior, drug and
alcohol abuse, and overt depression.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
Criteria for diagnosis include the following:
• Recurrent binge eating (the uncontrolled consumption of unusually large amounts of food) at least
twice/wk for 3 mo
• Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behavior to influence body weight (at least twice/wk for 3 mo)
• Self-evaluation unduly influenced by body shape and weight concerns
Treatment
• Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
• Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT)
• SSRIs
===PAGE:1720===
CBT is the treatment of choice. Therapy usually involves 16 to 20 individual sessions over 4 to 5 mo,
although it can also be done as group therapy. Treatment aims to increase motivation for change, replace
dysfunctional dieting with a regular and flexible pattern of eating, decrease undue concern with body
shape and weight, and prevent relapse. CBT eliminates binge eating and purging in about 30% to 50% of
patients. Many others show improvement; some drop out of treatment or do not respond. Improvement is
usually well-maintained over the long-term.
In IPT, the emphasis is on helping patients identify and alter current interpersonal problems that may be
maintaining the eating disorder. The treatment is both nondirective and noninterpretive and does not
focus directly on eating disorder symptoms. IPT can be considered an alternative when CBT is
unavailable.
SSRIs used alone reduce the frequency of binge eating and vomiting, although long-term outcomes are
unknown. SSRIs are also effective in treating comorbid anxiety and depression.
Binge Eating Disorder
Binge eating disorder is characterized by recurrent episodes of consuming large amounts of
food with a feeling of loss of control. It is not followed by inappropriate compensatory behavior,
such as self-induced vomiting or laxative abuse. Diagnosis is clinical.
Binge eating disorder affects about 3.5% of women and 2.0% of men in the general population. Unlike
bulimia nervosa, binge eating disorder occurs most commonly among obese people and contributes to
excessive caloric intake; it may be present in ≥ 30% of patients in
some weight reduction programs.
Compared with people with anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa, those with binge eating disorder are
older and more likely to be men.
People with binge eating disorder are usually distressed by it, especially if they are trying to lose weight.
Clinical depression and preoccupation with body shape, weight, or both are more common in obese
people with binge eating disorder than in obese people who are not binge eaters.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
Diagnosis requires binge eating for 2 days/wk for at least 6 mo and a sense of lack of control over eating,
according to research criteria in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth
Edition Text Revision. Other criteria include presence of ≥ 3 of the following:
• Eating much more rapidly than normal
• Eating until feeling uncomfortably full
• Eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry
• Eating alone because of embarrassment
• Feeling disgusted, depressed, or guilty after overeating
Treatment
• Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
• Sometimes interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT)
• Consideration of drug therapy with SSRIs or sibutramine
CBT is the most researched and best supported treatment. IPT and dialectical behavior therapy may also
===PAGE:1721===
be effective. Both CBT and IPT result in remission rates of ≥ 60%; improvement is usually wellmaintained over the long-term. These treatments do not produce significant weight loss in obese patients.
Conventional behavioral weight loss treatment has short-term effectiveness in reducing binge eating, but
patients tend to relapse. Antidepressant drugs also have short-term effectiveness in eliminating binge
eating, but long-term effectiveness is unknown. Initial results with the appetite-suppressing drug
sibutramine are promising.
===PAGE:1722===
Chapter 162. Mood Disorders
Introduction
(For mood disorders in children, see p.
.)
Mood disorders are emotional disturbances consisting of prolonged periods of excessive sadness,
excessive joyousness, or both. Mood disorders are categorized as depressive or bipolar. Anxiety and
related disorders ( also affect mood.
Sadness and joy (elation) are part of everyday life. Sadness is a universal response to defeat,
disappointment, and other discouraging situations. Joy is a universal response to success, achievement,
and other encouraging situations. Grief, a form of sadness, is considered a normal emotional response to
a loss. Bereavement refers specifically to the emotional response to death of a loved one.
A mood disorder is diagnosed when sadness or elation is overly intense and persistent and is
accompanied by a requisite number of other mood disorder symptoms. In such cases, intense sadness is
termed depression, and intense elation is termed mania. Depressive disorders are characterized by
depression; bipolar disorders are characterized by varying combinations of depression and mania.
Lifetime risk of suicide ( for people with a depressive disorder is 2 to 15%, depending on
severity of the disorder. Risk is further increased in the following cases:
• At the start of treatment, when psychomotor activity is returning to normal but mood is still dark
• During mixed bipolar states
• At personally significant anniversaries
• By severe anxiety
• By alcohol and substance use
Other complications include disability ranging from mild to complete inability to function, maintain social
interaction, and participate in routine activities; impaired food intake; severe anxiety; alcoholism; and
other drug dependencies.
Depressive Disorders
Depressive disorders are characterized by sadness severe enough or persistent enough to
interfere with function and often by decreased interest or pleasure in activities. Exact cause is
unknown but probably involves heredity,
changes in neurotransmitter levels, altered
neuroendocrine function, and psychosocial factors. Diagnosis is based on history. Treatment
usually consists of drugs, psychotherapy, or both and sometimes electroconvulsive therapy.
The term depression is often used to refer to any of several depressive disorders. Three are classified in
the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth Edition Revision (DSM-IV-TR) by
specific symptoms:
• Major depressive disorder (often called major depression)
• Dysthymia
• Depressive disorder not otherwise specified
Two others are classified by etiology:
===PAGE:1723===
• Depressive disorder due to a general physical condition
• Substance-induced depressive disorder
Depressive disorders occur at any age but typically develop during the mid teens, 20s, or 30s. In primary
care settings, as many as 30% of patients report depressive symptoms, but < 10% have major
depression.
The term depression is often used to describe the low or discouraged mood that results from
disappointments or losses. However, a better term for such a mood is demoralization. The negative
feelings of demoralization, unlike those of depression, resolve when circumstances or events improve;
the low mood usually lasts days rather than weeks or months, and suicidal thoughts and prolonged loss
of function are much less likely.
Etiology
Exact cause is unknown, but genetic and environmental factors contribute.
Heredity accounts for about half of the etiology (less so in late-onset depression). Thus, depression is
more common among 1st-degree relatives of depressed patients, and concordance between identical
twins is high. Also, genetic factors probably influence the development of depressive responses to
adverse events.
Other theories focus on changes in neurotransmitter levels, including abnormal regulation of cholinergic,
catecholaminergic (noradrenergic or dopaminergic), and serotonergic (5-hydroxytryptamine)
neurotransmission. Neuroendocrine dysregulation may be a factor, with particular emphasis on 3 axes:
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal, hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid, and growth hormone.
Psychosocial factors also seem to be involved. Major life stresses, especially separations and losses,
commonly precede episodes of major depression; however, such events do not usually cause lasting,
severe depression except in people predisposed to a mood disorder.
People who have had an episode of major depression are at higher risk of subsequent episodes. People
who are introverted and who have anxious tendencies may be more likely to develop a depressive
disorder. Such people often do not develop the social skills to adjust to life pressures. Depression may
also develop in people with other mental disorders.
Women are at higher risk, but no theory explains why. Possible factors include greater exposure to or
heightened response to daily stresses, higher levels of monoamine oxidase (the enzyme that degrades
neurotransmitters considered important for mood), higher rates of thyroid dysfunction, and endocrine
changes that occur with menstruation and at menopause. In postpartum depression (,
symptoms develop within 4 wk after delivery; endocrine changes have been implicated, but the specific
cause is unknown.
In seasonal affective disorder, symptoms develop in a seasonal pattern, typically during autumn or winter;
the disorder tends to occur in climates with long or severe winters.
Depressive symptoms or disorders may accompany various physical disorders, including thyroid and
adrenal gland disorders, benign and malignant brain tumors, stroke, AIDS, Parkinson's disease, and
multiple sclerosis (see
Table 162-1
). Certain drugs, such as corticosteroids, some
β
-blockers, interferon, and reserpine, can also
result in depressive disorders. Abuse of some recreational drugs (eg, alcohol, amphetamines) can lead to
or accompany depression. Toxic effects or withdrawal of drugs may cause transient depressive
symptoms.
Symptoms and Signs
Depression causes cognitive, psychomotor, and other types of dysfunction (eg, poor concentration,
===PAGE:1724===
fatigue, loss of sexual desire, loss of pleasure), as well as a depressed mood. Other mental symptoms or
disorders (eg, anxiety and panic attacks) commonly coexist, sometimes complicating diagnosis and
treatment.
Patients with all forms of depression are more likely to abuse alcohol or other recreational drugs in an
attempt to self-treat sleep disturbances or anxiety symptoms; however, depression is a less common
cause of alcoholism and drug abuse than was once thought. Patients are also more likely to become
heavy smokers and to neglect their health, increasing the risk of development or progression of other
disorders (eg, COPD).
[Table 162-1.
Some Causes of Symptoms in Depression and Mania]
Depression may reduce protective immune responses. Depression increases risk of cardiovascular
disorders, MIs, and stroke, perhaps because in depression, cytokines and factors that increase blood
clotting are elevated and heart rate variability is decreased—all potential risk factors for cardiovascular
disorders.
Major depression (unipolar disorder):
Periods (episodes) that include ≥ 5 mental or physical
symptoms and last ≥ 2 wk are classified as major depression. One of the symptoms must be sadness
deep enough to be described as despondency or despair (often called depressed mood) or loss of
interest or pleasure in usual activities (anhedonia). Other mental symptoms include feelings of
worthlessness or guilt, recurrent thoughts of death or suicide, and a reduced ability to concentrate.
Physical symptoms include changes in weight or appetite, loss of energy, fatigue, psychomotor
retardation or agitation, and sleep disorders (eg, insomnia, hypersomnia, early morning awakening).
Patients may appear miserable, with tearful eyes, furrowed brows, down-turned corners of the mouth,
slumped posture, poor eye contact, lack of facial expression, little body movement, and speech changes
(eg, soft voice, lack of prosody, use of monosyllabic words). Appearance may be confused with
Parkinson's disease. In some patients, depressed mood is so deep that tears dry up; they report that they
are unable to experience usual emotions and feel that the world has become colorless and lifeless.
Nutrition may be severely impaired, requiring immediate intervention. Some depressed patients neglect
personal hygiene or even their children, other loved ones, or pets.
Major depression is often divided into subgroups:
•
Psychotic:
This subgroup is characterized by delusions, often of having committed unpardonable sins
or crimes, of harboring incurable or shameful disorders, or of being persecuted. Patients with delusions
may also have auditory or visual hallucinations (eg, hearing accusatory or condemning voices). If only
voices are described, careful consideration should be given to whether the voices represent true
hallucinations.
•
Catatonic:
This subgroup is characterized by severe psychomotor retardation or excessive purposeless
activity, withdrawal, and, in some patients, grimacing and mimicry of speech (echolalia) or movement
(echopraxia).
•
Melancholic:
This subgroup is characterized by loss of pleasure in nearly all activities, inability to
respond to pleasurable stimuli, unchanging emotional expression, excessive or inappropriate guilt, early
morning awakening, marked psychomotor retardation or agitation, and significant anorexia or weight
loss.
•
Atypical:
This subgroup is characterized by a brightened mood in response to positive events and
rejection sensitivity, resulting in depressed overreaction to perceived criticism or rejection, feelings of
leaden paralysis or anergy, weight gain or increased appetite, and hypersomnia. Symptoms tend to
worsen as the day passes.
Dysthymia:
Low-level or subthreshold depressive symptoms that persist for ≥ 2 yr are classified as
dysthymia. Symptoms typically begin insidiously during adolescence and follow a low-grade course over
many years or decades (diagnosis requires a course of ≥ 2 yr); dysthymia may intermittently be
complicated by episodes of major depression. Affected patients are habitually gloomy, pessimistic,
===PAGE:1725===
humorless, passive, lethargic, introverted, hypercritical of self and others, and complaining. Patients with
chronic depressive states, whether dysthymia or chronic major depression, are also more likely to have
underlying anxiety, substance use, or personality (ie, borderline personality) disorders.
Depression not otherwise specified (NOS):
Clusters of symptoms that do not meet criteria for other
depressive disorders are classified as depression NOS. For example, minor depressive disorder may
involve ≥ 2 wk of any of the symptoms of major depression but fewer symptoms than the 5 required for
diagnosing major depression. Brief depressive disorder involves the same symptoms required for
diagnosing major depression but lasts only 2 days to 2 wk. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder involves a
depressed mood, anxiety, and decreased interest in activities but only during most menstrual cycles,
beginning in the luteal phase and ending within a few days after onset of menses.
Mixed anxiety-depression:
Although not considered a type of depression in DSM-IV-TR, this condition,
also called anxious depression, refers to concurrent mild symptoms common to anxiety and depression.
The course is usually chronically intermittent. Because depressive disorders are more serious, patients
with mixed anxiety-depression should be treated for depression.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria (DSM-IV-TR)
• CBC, thyroid-stimulating hormone, vitamin B
, and folate levels to rule out physical disorders that can
cause depression
Diagnosis is based on identifying the symptoms and signs (. Several brief questionnaires are
available for screening. They help elicit some depressive symptoms but cannot be used alone for
diagnosis. Specific close-ended questions help determine whether patients have symptoms required by
DSM-IV-TR criteria for diagnosis of major depression.
Severity is determined by the degree of pain and disability (physical, social, occupational) and by duration
of symptoms. A physician should gently but directly ask patients about any thoughts and plans to harm
themselves or others (. Psychosis and catatonia indicate severe depression. Melancholic
features indicate severe or moderate depression. Coexisting physical conditions, substance abuse
disorders, and anxiety disorders may add to severity.
Differential diagnosis:
Depressive disorders must be distinguished from demoralization. Other mental
disorders (eg, anxiety disorders) can mimic or obscure the diagnosis of depression. Sometimes more than
one disorder is present. Major depression (unipolar disorder) must be distinguished from bipolar disorder
(.
In elderly patients, depression can manifest as dementia of depression (formerly called pseudodementia),
which causes many of the symptoms and signs of dementia such as psychomotor retardation and
decreased concentration (. However, early dementia may cause depression. In general,
when the diagnosis is uncertain, treatment of a depressive disorder should be tried.
Differentiating chronic depressive disorders, such as dysthymia, from substance abuse disorders may be
difficult, particularly because they can coexist and may contribute to each other.
Physical disorders must also be excluded as a cause of depressive symptoms. Hypothyroidism often
causes symptoms of depression and is common, particularly among the elderly. Parkinson's disease, in
particular, may manifest with symptoms that mimic depression (eg, loss of energy, lack of expression,
paucity of movement). A thorough neurologic examination is needed to exclude this disorder.
Testing:
No laboratory findings are pathognomonic for depressive disorders. Tests for limbicdiencephalic dysfunction are rarely indicated or helpful. However, laboratory testing is necessary to
exclude physical conditions that can cause depression. Tests include CBC, TSH levels, and routine
electrolyte, vitamin B
, and folate levels. Testing for illicit drug use is sometimes appropriate.
===PAGE:1726===
Treatment
• Support
• Psychotherapy
• Drugs
Symptoms may remit spontaneously, particularly when they are mild or of short duration. Mild depression
may be treated with general support and psychotherapy. Moderate to severe depression is treated with
drugs, psychotherapy, or both and sometimes electroconvulsive therapy. Some patients require a
combination of drugs. Improvement may not be apparent until after 1 to 4 wk of drug treatment.
Depression, especially in patients who have had > 1 episode, is likely to recur; therefore, severe cases
often warrant long-term maintenance drug therapy.
Most people with depression are treated as outpatients. Patients with significant suicidal ideation,
particularly when family support is lacking, require hospitalization, as do those with psychotic symptoms
or physical debilitation.
Depressive symptoms in patients with substance abuse disorders often resolve within a
few months of
stopping substance use. Antidepressant treatment is much less likely to be effective while substance
abuse continues.
If a physical disorder or drug toxicity could be the cause, treatment is directed first at the underlying
disorder. However, if the diagnosis is in doubt or if symptoms are disabling or include suicidal ideation or
hopelessness, a therapeutic trial with an antidepressant or a mood-stabilizing drug may help.
Initial support:
Until definite improvement begins, a physician should see patients weekly or biweekly to
provide support and education and to monitor progress. Telephone calls may supplement office visits.
Patients and loved ones may be worried or embarrassed about the idea of having a mental disorder. The
physician can help by explaining that depression is a serious medical disorder caused by biologic
disturbances and requires specific treatment and that the prognosis with treatment is good. Patients and
loved ones should be reassured that depression does not reflect a character flaw (eg, laziness,
weakness). Telling patients that the path to recovery often fluctuates helps them put feelings of
hopelessness in perspective and improves adherence.
Encouraging patients to gradually increase simple activities (eg, taking walks, exercising regularly) and
social interactions must be balanced with acknowledging their desire to avoid activities. The physician
can suggest that patients avoid self-blame and explain that dark thoughts are part of the disorder and will
go away.
Psychotherapy:
Psychotherapy, often as cognitive-behavioral therapy (individual or group), alone is
often effective for milder forms of depression. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is increasingly used to combat
the inertia and self-defeating mental set of depressed patients. However, cognitive-behavioral therapy is
most useful when combined with antidepressants to treat moderate to severe depression. Cognitivebehavioral therapy may improve coping skills and enhance gains by providing support and guidance, by
removing cognitive distortions that prevent adaptive action, and by encouraging patients to gradually
resume social and occupational roles. Couple therapy may help reduce conjugal tensions and
disharmony. Long-term psychotherapy is usually unnecessary except for patients who have long-term
interpersonal conflicts or who are unresponsive to brief therapy.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs):
These drugs prevent reuptake of serotonin (5hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]). SSRIs include citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine,
and sertraline. Although these drugs have the same mechanism of action, differences in their clinical
properties make selection important. SSRIs have a wide therapeutic margin; they are relatively easy to
administer, with little need for dose adjustment (except for fluvoxamine).
===PAGE:1727===
By preventing reuptake of 5-HT presynaptically, SSRIs result in more 5-HT to stimulate postsynaptic 5HT receptors. SSRIs are selective to the 5-HT system but not specific for the different 5-HT receptors.
They stimulate 5-HT
receptors, with antidepressant and anxiolytic effects, but they also stimulate 5-HT
receptors, commonly causing anxiety, insomnia, and sexual dysfunction, and 5-HT
receptors, commonly
causing nausea and headache. Thus, SSRIs can paradoxically relieve and cause anxiety.
A few patients may seem more agitated, depressed, and anxious within a week of starting SSRIs or
increasing the dose. Patients and their loved ones should be warned of this possibility and instructed to
call the physician if symptoms worsen with treatment. This situation should be closely monitored because
some patients, especially younger children and adolescents, become increasingly suicidal if agitation,
increased depression, and anxiety are not detected and rapidly treated. Recent studies have determined
that children, adolescents, and young adults have an increased rate of suicidal ideation, suicide gestures,
and suicide attempts during the first few months of taking SSRIs (the same concern may apply to
serotonin modulators, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, and norepinephrine-dopamine
reuptake inhibitors); physicians must balance this risk with clinical need.
Sexual dysfunction (especially difficulty achieving orgasm but also decreased libido and erectile
dysfunction) occurs in one third or more of patients. Some SSRIs cause weight gain. Others, especially
fluoxetine, may cause anorexia in the first few months. SSRIs have few anticholinergic, adrenolytic, and
cardiac conduction effects. Sedation is minimal or nonexistent, but in the early weeks of treatment, some
patients tend to be sleepy during the day. Loose stools or diarrhea occurs in some patients.
Drug interactions are relatively uncommon; however, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine can inhibit
cytochrome P-450 (CYP450) isoenzymes, which can lead to serious drug interactions. For example, these
drugs can inhibit the metabolism of certain
β
-blockers, including propranolol and metoprolol, potentially
resulting in hypotension and bradycardia.
Discontinuation symptoms (eg, irritability, anxiety, nausea) can
occur if the drug is stopped abruptly; such effects are less likely with fluoxetine.
Serotonin modulators (5-HT
blockers):
These drugs block primarily the 5-HT
receptor and inhibit
reuptake of 5-HT and norepinephrine. Serotonin modulators include nefazodone, trazodone, and
mirtazapine. Serotonin modulators have antidepressant and anxiolytic effects but do not cause sexual
dysfunction. Unlike most antidepressants, nefazodone does not suppress REM (rapid eye movement)
sleep and produces restful sleep. Nefazodone can significantly interfere with drug-metabolizing liver
enzymes and has been associated with liver failure.
Trazodone is related to nefazodone but does not inhibit 5-HT reuptake presynaptically. Unlike
nefazodone, trazodone has caused priapism (in 1/1000) and, as an
α
-noradrenergic blocker, may cause
orthostatic (postural) hypotension. It is very sedating, so its use in antidepressant doses (> 200 mg/day)
is limited. It is most often given in 50- to 100-mg doses at bedtime to depressed patients with insomnia.
Mirtazapine inhibits 5-HT reuptake and blocks
α
-adrenergic autoreceptors, as well as 5-HT
and 5-HT
receptors. The result is increased serotonergic function and increased noradrenergic function without
sexual dysfunction or nausea. It has no cardiac adverse effects, has minimal interaction with drugmetabolizing liver enzymes, and is generally well tolerated, although it does cause sedation and weight
gain, mediated by H
(histamine) blockade.
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors:
These drugs (eg, venlafaxine, duloxetine) have a dual
5-HT and norepinephrine mechanism of action, as do tricyclic antidepressants. However, their toxicity
approximates that of SSRIs. Nausea is the most common problem during the first 2 wk; modest dosedependent increases in BP occur with high doses. Discontinuation symptoms (eg, irritability, anxiety,
nausea) often occur if the drug is stopped suddenly. Duloxetine resembles venlafaxine in effectiveness
and adverse effects.
Norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitors:
By mechanisms not clearly understood, these drugs
favorably influence catecholaminergic, dopaminergic, and noradrenergic function. They do not affect the
5-HT system.
===PAGE:1728===
Bupropion is currently the only drug in this class. It can help depressed patients with concurrent attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder or cocaine dependence and those trying to stop smoking. Bupropion causes
hypertension in a very few patients but has no other effects on the cardiovascular system. Bupropion can
cause seizures in 0.4% of patients taking doses > 150 mg tid (or > 200 mg sustained-release [SR] bid or
> 450 mg extended-release [XR] once/day); risk is increased in patients with bulimia. Bupropion does not
have sexual adverse effects and interacts little with coadministered drugs, although it does inhibit the
CYP2D6 hepatic enzyme. Agitation, which is common, is considerably attenuated by using the SR or XR
form.
Heterocyclic antidepressants:
This group of drugs, once the mainstay of treatment, includes tricyclic
(tertiary amines amitriptyline and imipramine and their secondary amine metabolites nortriptyline and
desipramine), modified tricyclic, and tetracyclic antidepressants. Acutely, these drugs increase the
availability of primarily norepinephrine and, to some extent, 5-HT by blocking reuptake in the synaptic
cleft. Long-term use downregulates
α
-adrenergic receptors on the postsynaptic membrane—a possible
final common pathway of their antidepressant activity.
Although effective, these drugs are now rarely used because overdose causes toxicity and they have
more adverse effects than other antidepressants. The more common adverse effects of heterocyclics are
due to their muscarinic-blocking, histamine-blocking, and
α
-adrenolytic actions. Many heterocyclics have
strong anticholinergic properties and are thus unsuitable for the elderly and for patients with benign
prostatic hypertrophy, glaucoma, or chronic constipation. All heterocyclics, particularly maprotiline and
clomipramine, lower the threshold for seizures.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs):
These drugs inhibit the oxidative deamination of the 3
classes of biogenic amines (norepinephrine, dopamine, 5-HT) and other phenylethylamines. MAOIs have
little or no effect on normal mood. Their primary value is for treating refractory or atypical depression
when SSRIs, tricyclic antidepressants, and sometimes even electroconvulsive therapy is ineffective.
MAOIs marketed as antidepressants in the US (eg, phenelzine, tranylcypromine, isocarboxazid) are
irreversible and nonselective (inhibiting MAO-A and MAO-B). Another MAOI (selegiline), which inhibits
only MAO-B at lower doses, is available as a patch.
MAOIs that inhibit MAO-A and MAO-B can cause hypertensive crises if a sympathomimetic drug or food
containing tyramine or dopamine
is ingested concurrently. This effect is called the cheese reaction
because mature cheese has a high tyramine content. MAOIs are used infrequently because of concern
about this reaction. The lower dosage of the selegiline patch is considered safe to use without specific
dietary restrictions, unless the dosage must be higher than starting levels (a 6-mg patch). More selective
and reversible MAOIs (eg, moclobemide, befloxatone), which inhibit MAO-A, are not yet available in the
US; they are relatively free of these interactions. To prevent hypertension and febrile crises, patients
taking MAOIs should avoid sympathomimetic drugs (eg, pseudoephedrine), dextromethorphan, reserpine,
and meperidine as well as malted beers, Chianti wines, sherry, liqueurs, and overripe or aged foods that
contain tyramine or dopamine (eg, bananas, fava or broad beans, yeast extracts, canned figs, raisins,
yogurt, cheese, sour cream, soy sauce, pickled herring, caviar, liver, extensively tenderized meats).
Patients can carry 25-mg tablets of chlorpromazine and, as soon as signs of such a hypertensive reaction
occur, take 1 or 2 tablets as they head to the nearest emergency department.
Common adverse effects include erectile dysfunction (least common with tranylcypromine), anxiety,
nausea, dizziness, insomnia, pedal edema, and weight gain. MAOIs should not be used with other classes
of antidepressants, and at least 2 wk (5 wk with fluoxetine, which has a long half-life) should elapse
between use of the 2 classes of drugs. MAOIs used with antidepressants that affect the 5-HT system (eg,
SSRIs, nefazodone) may cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome (malignant hyperthermia, muscle
breakdown, renal failure, seizures, and eventual death). Patients who are taking MAOIs and who also
need antiasthmatic or antiallergic drugs, a local anesthetic, or a general anesthetic should be treated by a
psychiatrist plus an internist, a dentist, or an anesthesiologist with expertise in
neuropsychopharmacology.
Drug choice and administration:
Choice of drug may be guided by past response to a specific
===PAGE:1729===
antidepressant. Otherwise, SSRIs are often the initial drugs of choice. Although the different SSRIs are
equally effective for typical cases, certain properties of the drugs make them more or less appropriate for
certain patients (see
Table 162-2
).
If one SSRI is ineffective, another SSRI can be substituted, but an antidepressant from a different class
may be more likely to help. Tranylcypromine in high doses (20 to 30 mg po bid) is often effective for
depression refractory to sequential trials of other antidepressants; it should be given by a physician
experienced in use of MAOIs. Psychologic
[Table 162-2.
Antidepressants]
support of patients and loved ones is particularly important in refractory cases.
Insomnia, a common adverse effect of SSRIs, is treated by reducing the dose or adding a low dose of
trazodone or another sedating antidepressant. Initial nausea and loose stools usually resolve, but
throbbing headaches do not always go away, necessitating a change in drug class. An SSRI should be
stopped if it causes agitation. When decreased libido, impotence, or anorgasmia occur during SSRI
therapy, dose reduction may help, or a change can be made to another drug class.
SSRIs, which tend to stimulate many depressed patients, should be given in the morning. Giving the
entire heterocyclic antidepressant dose at bedtime usually makes sedatives unnecessary, minimizes
adverse effects during the day, and improves adherence. MAOIs are usually given in the morning and
early afternoon to avoid excessive stimulation.
Therapeutic response with most classes of antidepressants usually occurs in about 2 to 3 wk (sometimes
as early as 4 days or as late as 8 wk). For a first episode of mild or moderate depression, the
antidepressant should be
given for 6 mo, then tapered gradually over 2 mo. If the episode is severe or is
a recurrence or if there is suicidal risk, the dose that produces full remission should be continued during
maintenance.
For psychotic depression, imipramine appears to be more effective than monotherapy with
antidepressants from other classes; dosing this drug can be guided by steady-state plasma levels. The
addition of an antipsychotic may improve the likelihood of response, but antipsychotic monotherapy
appears to be ineffective.
Continued therapy with an antidepressant for 6 to 12 mo (up to 2 yr in patients > 50) is usually needed to
prevent relapse. Most antidepressants, especially SSRIs, should be tapered off (by decreasing the dose
by about 25%/wk) rather than stopped abruptly; stopping SSRIs abruptly may result in discontinuation
syndrome (nausea, chills, muscles aches, dizziness, anxiety, irritability, insomnia, fatigue). The likelihood
and severity of withdrawal varies inversely with the half-life of the SSRI.
Medicinal herbs are used by some patients. St. John's wort ( may be effective for mild
depression, although data are contradictory. St. John's wort may interact with other antidepressants and
other drugs. A number of placebo-controlled studies of
ω
-3 supplementation, used as augmentation or as
monotherapy, have suggested that eicosapentaenoic acid 1 to 2 g once/day has useful antidepressant
effects.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT):
Severe suicidal depression, depression with agitation or
psychomotor retardation, delusional depression, or depression during pregnancy is often treated with
ECT if drugs are ineffective. Patients who have stopped eating may need ECT to prevent death. ECT is
also effective for psychotic depression. Response to 6 to 10 ECT treatments is usually dramatic and may
be lifesaving. Relapse after ECT is common, and drug therapy is often maintained after ECT is stopped.
Phototherapy:
Phototherapy is best known for its effects on seasonal depression but can also be
effective in other types of depression. Treatment can be provided at home with 2,500 to 10,000 lux at a
distance of 30 to 60 cm for 30 to 60 min/day (longer with a less intense light source). In patients who go
to sleep late at night and rise late in the morning, phototherapy is most effective in the morning,
===PAGE:1730===
sometimes supplemented with 5 to 10 min of exposure between 3 PM and 7 PM. For patients who go to
sleep and rise early, phototherapy is most effective between 3 PM and 7 PM.
Other therapies:
Psychostimulants (eg, dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate) are sometimes used,
often with antidepressants; however, they have not been well studied in controlled clinical trials.
Vagus nerve stimulation involves intermittently stimulating the vagus nerve via an implanted pulse
generator. It may be useful for depression refractory to other treatments but usually takes 3 to 6 mo to be
effective.
Deep brain stimulation and transcranial magnetic stimulation are still under study.
Bipolar Disorders
Bipolar disorders are characterized by episodes of mania and depression, which may alternate,
although many patients have a predominance of one or the other. Exact cause is unknown, but
heredity, changes in the level of brain neurotransmitters, and psychosocial factors may be
involved. Diagnosis is based on history. Treatment consists of mood-stabilizing drugs,
sometimes with psychotherapy.
Bipolar disorders usually begin in the teens, 20s, or 30s. Lifetime prevalence is about 4%. Rates are
about equal for men and women.
Bipolar disorders are classified as
• Bipolar I disorder: Defined by the presence of at least one full-fledged (ie, disrupting normal social and
occupational function) manic or mixed episode and usually depressive episodes
• Bipolar II disorder: Defined by the presence of major depressive episodes with at least one hypomanic
episode but no full-fledged manic episodes
• Bipolar disorder not otherwise specified (NOS): Disorders with clear bipolar features that do not meet
the specific criteria for other bipolar disorders
Etiology
Exact cause is unknown. Heredity plays a significant role. There is also evidence of dysregulation of
serotonin and norepinephrine. Psychosocial factors may be involved. Stressful life events are often
associated with initial development of symptoms and later exacerbations, although cause and effect have
not been established. Certain drugs can trigger exacerbations in some patients with bipolar disorder;
these drugs include sympathomimetics (eg, cocaine, amphetamines), alcohol, and certain
antidepressants (eg, tricyclics, MAOIs).
Symptoms and Signs
Bipolar disorder begins with an acute phase of symptoms, followed by a repeating course of remission
and relapse. Remissions are usually complete, although some patients have residual symptoms.
Relapses are discrete episodes of more intense symptoms that are manic, depressive, hypomanic, or a
mixture of depressive and manic features. Episodes last anywhere from a few weeks to 3 to 6 mo. Cycles
—time from onset of one episode to that of the next—vary in length among patients. Some patients have
infrequent episodes, perhaps only a few over a lifetime, whereas others have rapid-cycling forms (usually
defined as ≥ 4 episodes/yr). Only a minority alternate back and forth between mania and depression with
each cycle; in most, one or the other predominates to some extent.
Mania:
A manic episode is defined as ≥ 1 wk of a persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood plus
≥ 3 additional symptoms:
• Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
===PAGE:1731===
• Decreased need for sleep
• Greater talkativeness than usual
• Persistent elevation of mood
• Flight of ideas or racing of thoughts
• Distractibility
• Increased goal-directed activity
Manic patients are inexhaustibly, excessively, and impulsively involved in various pleasurable, high-risk
activities (eg, gambling, dangerous sports, promiscuous sexual activity) without insight into possible harm.
Symptoms are so severe that they impair functioning; unwise investments, spending sprees, and other
personal choices may have irreparable consequences.
Typically, patients in a manic episode are exuberant and flamboyantly or colorfully dressed; they have an
authoritative manner with a rapid, unstoppable flow of speech. Patients may make clang associations
(new thoughts that are triggered by word sounds rather than meaning). Easily distracted, patients may
constantly shift from one theme or endeavor to another. However, they tend to believe they are in their
best mental state. Lack of insight and an increased capacity for activity often lead to intrusive behavior
and can be a dangerous combination. Interpersonal friction results and may cause patients to feel that
they are being unjustly treated or persecuted. As a result, patients may become a danger to themselves
or to other people. Accelerated mental activity is experienced as racing thoughts by patients and is
observed as flights of ideas by the physician.
Manic psychosis
is a more extreme manifestation, with psychotic symptoms that may be difficult to
distinguish from schizophrenia. Patients may have extreme grandiose or persecutory delusions (eg, of
being Jesus or being pursued by the FBI), occasionally with hallucinations. Activity level increases
markedly; patients may race about and scream, swear, or sing. Mood lability increases, often with
increasing irritability. Full-blown delirium (delirious mania) may appear, with complete loss of coherent
thinking and behavior.
Hypomania:
A hypomanic episode is a less extreme variant of mania involving a distinct episode that
lasts ≥ 4 days and is distinctly different from the patient's usual nondepressed mood. During the
hypomanic period, mood brightens, the need for sleep decreases, and psychomotor activity accelerates.
For some patients, hypomanic periods are adaptive because they produce high energy, creativity,
confidence, and supernormal social functioning. Many do not wish to leave the pleasurable, euphoric
state. Some function quite well, and in most, functioning is not markedly impaired. However, in some
patients, hypomania manifests as distractibility, irritability, and labile mood, which the patient and others
find less attractive.
Depression:
A depressive episode has features typical of major depression (, including
depressed mood, anhedonia, psychomotor retardation, and feelings of pessimism and guilt. Sleeping and
eating often increase. Delusions of guilt accompanied by self-loathing are common in psychotic
depression, and some patients have hallucinations.
Mixed state:
A mixed episode blends depressive and manic or hypomanic features; the criteria for both
mania and depression are met. For example, patients may momentarily switch to tearfulness during the
height of mania, or their thoughts may race during a depressive period. Often, the switch follows circadian
factors (eg, going to bed depressed and waking early in the morning in a hypomanic state). In at least one
third of people with bipolar disorder, the entire episode is mixed. A common presentation consists of a
dysphorically excited mood, crying, curtailed sleep, racing thoughts, grandiosity, psychomotor
restlessness, suicidal ideation, persecutory delusions, auditory hallucinations, indecisiveness, and
confusion. This presentation is called dysphoric mania (ie, prominent depressive symptoms superimposed
on manic psychosis).
===PAGE:1732===
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria (
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth Edition Text Revision)
• Thyroxine (T
) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels to exclude hyperthyroidism
• Exclusion of stimulant drug abuse clinically or by urine testing
Diagnosis is based on identification of symptoms of mania or hypomania as described above, plus a
history of remission and relapse. Some patients who present with depressive symptoms may have
previously experienced hypomania or mania but do not report it unless they are specifically questioned.
Skillful questioning may reveal morbid signs (eg, excesses in spending, impulsive sexual escapades,
stimulant drug abuse), although such information is more likely to be provided by relatives. All patients
must be asked gently but directly about suicidal ideation, plans, or activity.
Similar acute manic or hypomanic symptoms may result from stimulant abuse, a schizoaffective disorder
(bipolar type), or physical disorders such as hyperthyroidism or pheochromocytoma. A review of
substance use (especially of amphetamines and cocaine) and urine drug screening can help identify drug
causes. However, because drug use may simply have triggered an episode in a patient with bipolar
disorder, seeking evidence of symptoms (manic or depressive) not related to drug use is important.
Patients with a schizoaffective disorder rarely return to normal between episodes, and they do not show
the interest in connecting with other people manifested by patients with mania (except those with the most
florid type). Patients with hyperthyroidism typically have other physical symptoms and signs (,
but thyroid function testing (T
and TSH levels) is a reasonable screen for new patients. Patients with
pheochromocytoma are markedly hypertensive; if not, testing is not indicated.
Patients with bipolar disorder may also have anxiety disorders (eg, social phobia, panic attacks,
obsessive-compulsive disorders), possibly confusing the diagnosis.
Treatment
• Mood stabilizers (eg, lithium, certain anticonvulsants), a 2nd-generation antipsychotic, or both
• Support and psychotherapy
Treatment usually has 3 phases:
• Acute: To stabilize and control the initial, sometimes severe manifestations
• Continuation: To attain full remission
• Maintenance or prevention: To keep patients in remission
Although most patients with hypomania can be treated as outpatients, severe mania or depression often
requires inpatient management.
Drugs for bipolar disorder include mood stabilizers and 2nd-generation antipsychotics. These drugs are
used alone or in combination for all phases of treatment, although at different dosages.
Mood stabilizers consist of lithium and certain anticonvulsants, especially valproate, carbamazepine, and
lamotrigine. Second-generation antipsychotics include aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone,
and ziprasidone. Specific antidepressants (eg, SSRIs) are sometimes added for severe depression, but
antidepressants (particularly heterocyclics) may trigger mania, and their effectiveness continues to be
studied. They are not recommended as sole therapy for depressive episodes.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is sometimes used for depression refractory to treatment and is also
effective for mania. Phototherapy can be useful in treating seasonal bipolar I or bipolar II disorder (with
===PAGE:1733===
autumn-winter depression and spring-summer hypomania). It is probably most useful as augmentative
therapy.
Drug selection and use:
Choice of drug can be difficult because all drugs have significant adverse
effects, drug interactions are common, and no drug is universally effective. Selection should be based on
what has previously been effective and well tolerated in a given patient. If there is no prior experience (or
it is unknown), choice is based on the patient's medical history (vis-a-vis the adverse effects of the
specific mood stabilizer) and the severity of symptoms.
For severe manic psychosis, in which immediate patient safety and management is compromised, urgent
behavioral control usually requires a sedating 2nd-generation antipsychotic, sometimes supplemented
initially with a benzodiazepine such as lorazepam or clonazepam 2 to 4 mg IM or po tid.
For less severe acute episodes in patients without contraindications (eg, renal disorders), lithium is a
good first choice for both mania and depressive episodes. Because its onset is slow (4 to 10 days),
patients with significant symptoms may also be given an anticonvulsant or a 2nd-generation
antipsychotic. For those with depression, lamotrigine may be a good choice of anticonvulsant.
Once remission is achieved, preventive treatment with mood stabilizers is indicated for all bipolar I
patients. If episodes recur during maintenance treatment, clinicians should determine whether adherence
is poor and, if so, whether nonadherence preceded or followed recurrence. Reasons for nonadherence
should be explored to determine whether a change in mood stabilizer type or dosing would render
treatment more acceptable.
Lithium:
As many as two thirds of patients with uncomplicated bipolar disorder may respond to lithium,
which attenuates bipolar mood swings but has no effect on normal mood. Whether lithium or another
mood stabilizer is being used, breakthroughs are more likely in patients who have mixed states, rapidcycling forms of bipolar disorder, comorbid anxiety, substance abuse, or a neurologic disorder.
Lithium carbonate is started at 300 mg po bid or tid and titrated, based on steady-state blood levels and
tolerance, to a range of 0.8 to 1.2 mEq/L. Levels should be drawn after 5 days at a stable dose and 12 h
after the last dose. Target drug levels for maintenance are lower, about 0.6 to 0.7 mEq/L. Higher
maintenance levels are more protective against manic (but not depressive) episodes but have more
adverse effects. Adolescents, whose glomerular function is excellent, need higher doses; elderly patients
need lower doses.
Lithium can cause sedation and cognitive impairment directly or indirectly (by causing hypothyroidism)
and often exacerbates acne and psoriasis. The most common acute, mild adverse effects are fine tremor,
fasciculation, nausea, diarrhea, polyuria, polydipsia, and weight gain (partly attributed to drinking highcalorie beverages). These effects are usually transient and often respond to decreasing the dose slightly,
dividing the dose (eg, tid), or using slow-release forms. Once dosage is established, the entire dose
should be given after the evening meal. This dosing may improve adherence. A
β
-blocker (eg, atenolol 25
to 50 mg po once/day) can control severe tremor; however, some
β
-blockers (eg, propranolol) may
worsen depression.
Acute lithium toxicity is manifested initially by gross tremor, increased deep tendon reflexes, persistent
headache, vomiting, and confusion and may progress to stupor, seizures, and arrhythmias. Toxicity is
more likely to occur in elderly patients, in patients with decreased creatinine clearance, and in those with
Na loss (eg, due to fever, vomiting, diarrhea, or use of diuretics). Thiazide diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and
NSAIDs other than aspirin may contribute to hyperlithemia. Lithium blood levels should be measured
every 6 mo and whenever the dose is changed.
Long-term effects include hypothyroidism, particularly when there is a family history of hypothyroidism,
and renal damage involving the distal tubule (mainly in patients with a history of renal parenchymal
disease). Therefore, TSH levels should be monitored when lithium is started and annually thereafter if
there is a family history of thyroid dysfunction or every other year for all other patients. Levels should also
be measured whenever symptoms suggest thyroid dysfunction (including when mania recurs) because
hypothyroidism may blunt the effect of mood stabilizers. BUN and creatinine should be measured at
===PAGE:1734===
baseline, 2 or 3 times during the first 6 mo, and then once or twice a year.
Anticonvulsants:
Anticonvulsants that act as mood stabilizers, especially valproate and carbamazepine,
are often used for acute mania and for mixed states (mania and depression). Lamotrigine is also effective
for mood-cycling and for depression; unlike some antidepressants, it does not induce mania. The precise
mechanism of action for anticonvulsants in bipolar disorder is unknown but may involve
γ
-aminobutyric
acid mechanisms and ultimately G-protein signaling systems. Their main advantages over lithium include
a wider therapeutic margin and lack of renal toxicity.
For valproate, a loading dose of 20 mg/kg is given, then 250 to 500 mg po tid (extended-release
formulation can be used); target blood levels are between 50 and 125
μ
g/mL. Adverse effects include
nausea, headache, sedation, dizziness, and weight gain; rare serious effects include hepatotoxicity and
pancreatitis.
Carbamazepine should not be loaded; it should be started at 200 mg po bid and be increased gradually in
200-mg/day increments to target levels between 4 and 12
μ
g/mL (maximum, 800 mg bid). Adverse effects
include nausea, dizziness, sedation, and unsteadiness. Very severe effects include aplastic anemia and
agranulocytosis.
Lamotrigine is started at 25 mg po once/day for 2 wk, then 50 mg once/day for 2 wk, then 100 mg/day for
1 wk, and then can be increased by 50 mg each week as needed up to 200 mg once/day. Dosage is
lower for patients taking valproate and higher for patients taking carbamazepine. Lamotrigine can cause
rash and, rarely, the life-threatening Stevens-Johnson syndrome (, particularly if the dosage is
increased more rapidly than recommended. While taking lamotrigine, patients should be encouraged to
report any
new rash, hives, fever, swollen glands, sores in the mouth and on the eyes, and swelling of the
lips or tongue.
Antipsychotics:
Acute manic psychosis is being increasingly managed with 2nd-generation
antipsychotics, such as risperidone (usually 4 to 6 mg po once/day), olanzapine (usually 10 to 20 mg po
once/day), quetiapine (200 to 400 mg po bid), ziprasidone (40 to 80 mg po bid), and aripiprazole (10 to 30
mg po once/day). In addition, evidence suggests that these drugs may enhance the effects of mood
stabilizers after the acute phase.
Although any of these drugs may have extrapyramidal adverse effects and cause akathisia, risk is lower
with more sedating drugs such as quetiapine and olanzapine. Less immediate adverse effects include
substantial weight gain and development of the metabolic syndrome (including weight gain, excess
abdominal fat, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia); risk may be lower with the least sedating 2ndgeneration antipsychotics, ziprasidone and aripiprazole. For extremely hyperactive psychotic patients with
poor food and fluid intake, an antipsychotic given IM plus supportive care in addition to lithium or an
anticonvulsant may be appropriate.
Precautions during pregnancy:
Lithium use during pregnancy has been associated with an increased
risk of cardiovascular malformations (particularly Ebstein's anomaly). However, the absolute risk of this
particular malformation is quite low. Taking lithium during pregnancy appears to increase the relative risk
of any congenital anomaly by about 2-fold, a risk similar to the 2- to 3-fold increased risk of congenital
anomalies associated with use of carbamazepine or lamotrigine and is substantially lower than the risk
associated with use of valproate.
Extensive study of the use of 1st-generation antipsychotics and tricyclic antidepressants during early
pregnancy has not revealed causes for concern. The same appears to be true of SSRIs, except for
paroxetine. Data about the risks of 2nd-generation antipsychotics to the fetus are sparse as yet, even
though these drugs are being more widely used for all phases of bipolar disorder.
Use of drugs (particularly lithium and SSRIs) before parturition may have carry-over effects on neonates.
Treatment decisions are complicated by the fact that with unplanned pregnancy, teratogenic effects may
already have taken place by the time practitioners' become aware of the issue. Consultation with a
perinatal psychiatrist should be considered. In all cases, discussing the risks and benefits of treatment
===PAGE:1735===
with patients is important.
Education and psychotherapy:
Enlisting the support of loved ones is crucial to preventing major
episodes. Group therapy is often recommended for patients and their partner; there, they learn about
bipolar disorder, its social sequelae, and the central role of mood stabilizers in treatment. Individual
psychotherapy may help patients better cope with problems of daily living and adjust to a new way of
identifying themselves.
Patients, particularly those with bipolar II disorder, may not adhere to mood-stabilizer regimens because
they believe that these drugs make them less alert and creative. The physician can explain that
decreased creativity is relatively uncommon because mood stabilizers usually provide opportunity for a
more even performance in interpersonal, scholastic, professional, and artistic pursuits.
Patients should be counseled to avoid stimulant drugs and alcohol, to minimize sleep deprivation, and to
recognize early signs of relapse. If patients tend to be financially extravagant, finances should be turned
over to a trusted family member. Patients with a tendency to sexual excesses should be given information
about conjugal consequences (eg, divorce) and infectious risks of promiscuity, particularly AIDS.
Cyclothymic Disorder
Cyclothymic disorder is characterized by hypomanic and mini-depressive periods that last a
few days, follow an irregular course, and are less severe than those in bipolar disorder.
Diagnosis is clinical and based on history. Management consists primarily of education,
although some patients with functional impairment require drug therapy.
Cyclothymic disorder is commonly a precursor of bipolar II disorder. However, it can also occur as extreme
moodiness without becoming a major mood disorder. In chronic hypomania, a form rarely seen clinically,
elated periods predominate, with habitual reduction of sleep to < 6 h. People with this form are constantly
overcheerful, self-assured, over-energetic, full of plans, improvident, overinvolved, and meddlesome; they
rush off with restless impulses and may act in an overfamiliar manner with people.
For some people, cyclothymic and chronic hypomanic dispositions contribute to success in business,
leadership, achievement, and artistic
creativity; however, they more often have serious detrimental
interpersonal and social consequences. Consequences often include instability with an uneven work and
schooling history, impulsive and frequent changes of residence, repeated romantic or marital breakups,
and an episodic abuse of alcohol and drugs.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Sometimes a mood stabilizer
Patients should be taught how to live with the extremes of their temperamental inclinations; however,
living with cyclothymic disorder is not easy because interpersonal relationships are often stormy. Jobs
with flexible hours are advised. Patients with artistic inclinations should be encouraged to pursue careers
in the arts because the excesses and fragility of cyclothymia may be better tolerated there.
The decision to use a mood stabilizer depends on the balance between functional impairment and the
social benefits or creative spurts that patients may experience. Divalproex 500 to 1000 mg po once/day is
often better tolerated than equivalent doses of lithium. Antidepressants should be avoided unless
depressive symptoms are severe and prolonged because switching and rapid cycling are risks.
Support groups (eg, Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance in Chicago) can help patients by providing a
forum to share their common experiences and feelings.
===PAGE:1736===
Chapter 163. Personality Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Dissociative Identity Disorder
)
Personality disorders are pervasive, inflexible, and stable patterns of behavior that cause
significant distress or functional impairment. Ten distinct personality disorders have been
identified and grouped into 3 clusters. All are believed to be caused by a combination of genetic
and environmental factors. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with psychotherapy and
sometimes drug therapy.
Personality traits are patterns of thinking, perceiving, reacting, and relating that are relatively stable over
time and in various situations. Personality traits are usually evident from late adolescence or early
adulthood, and although many traits persist throughout much of life, some fade with aging and some can
be modified. Personality disorders exist when these traits become so rigid and maladaptive that they
impair functioning. Mental coping mechanisms (defenses) that are used unconsciously at times by
everyone tend to be immature and maladaptive in people with personality disorders (see
Table 163-1
).
People with personality disorders are often frustrating and even infuriating to people around them
(including physicians). Most are distressed about their lives and have impaired work or social
relationships. Personality disorders often coexist with mood, anxiety, substance abuse, and eating
disorders. People with severe personality disorders are at high risk of hypochondriasis and violent or selfdestructive behaviors. They may have inconsistent, detached, overemotional, abusive, or irresponsible
styles of parenting, leading to physical and mental problems in their children.
About 13% of the general population is affected. Antisocial personality disorder occurs in about 2%, with
men outnumbering women 6:1. Borderline personality disorder occurs in about 1%, with women
outnumbering men 3:1.
Classification
The
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth Edition Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR)
recognizes 10 distinct personality disorders and divides them into 3 clusters:
A: Odd/eccentric
B: Dramatic/erratic
C: Anxious/fearful
Cluster A:
Patients tend to be detached and distrustful.
Paranoid personality
involves coldness and distancing in relationships, with a need for control and a
tendency toward jealousy if attachments are formed. Affected people are often secretive and untrusting.
They tend to be suspicious of changes and frequently find hostile and malevolent motives behind other
people's acts. Often, these hostile motives represent projections (see
Table 163-1
) of their own hostilities
onto others. Their reactions
[Table 163-1.
Coping Mechanisms]
sometimes surprise or scare others. They then use the resulting anger of or rejection by others (ie,
projective identification) to justify their original feelings. Paranoid people tend to feel a sense of righteous
indignation and often take legal action against others. These people may be highly efficient and
conscientious, although they usually need to work in relative isolation. This disorder must be
differentiated from paranoid schizophrenia.
===PAGE:1737===
Schizoid personality
is characterized by introversion, social withdrawal, isolation, and emotional
coldness and distancing. Affected people are often absorbed in their own thoughts and feelings and fear
closeness and intimacy with other people. They are reticent, are given
to daydreaming, and prefer
theoretical speculation to practical action.
Schizotypal personality,
like schizoid personality, involves social withdrawal and emotional coldness but
also includes oddities of thinking, perception, and communication, such as magical thinking, clairvoyance,
ideas of reference, or paranoid ideation. These oddities suggest schizophrenia ( but are
never severe enough to meet its criteria. People with schizotypal personality are believed to have a muted
expression of the genes that cause schizophrenia.
Cluster B:
Patients tend to be emotionally unstable, impulsive, and intense.
Borderline personality
is marked by unstable self-image, mood, behavior, and relationships. Affected
people tend to believe they were deprived of adequate care during childhood and consequently feel
empty, angry, and entitled to nurturance. As a result, they relentlessly seek care and are sensitive to its
perceived absence. Their relationships tend to be intense and dramatic. When feeling cared for, they
appear like lonely waifs who seek help for depression, substance abuse, eating disorders, and past
mistreatments. When they fear the loss of the caring person, they frequently express inappropriate and
intense anger. These mood shifts are typically accompanied by extreme changes in their view of the
world, themselves, and other people—eg, from bad to good, from hated to loved. When they feel
abandoned, they dissociate or become desperately impulsive. Their concept of reality is sometimes so
poor that they have brief episodes of psychotic thinking, such as paranoid delusions and hallucinations.
They often become self-destructive and may cut themselves (self-mutilate) or attempt suicide. They
initially tend to evoke intense, nurturing responses in caretakers, but after repeated crises, vague
unfounded complaints, and failures to adhere to therapeutic recommendations, they are viewed as helprejecting complainers. Borderline personality tends to become milder or to stabilize with aging.
Antisocial personality
is marked by the callous disregard for the rights and feelings of other people.
Affected people exploit others for materialistic gain or personal gratification. They become frustrated
easily and tolerate frustration poorly. Characteristically, they act out (see
Table 163-1
) their conflicts
impulsively and irresponsibly, sometimes with hostility and violence. They usually do not anticipate the
consequences of their behaviors and typically do not feel remorse or guilt afterward. Many of them have
a well-developed capacity for glibly rationalizing their behavior or blaming it on others. Dishonesty and
deceit permeate their relationships. Punishment rarely modifies their behavior or improves their judgment.
Antisocial personality often leads to alcoholism, drug addiction, promiscuity, failure to fulfill responsibilities,
frequent relocation, and difficulty abiding by laws. Life expectancy is decreased, but the disorder tends to
diminish or stabilize with age.
Narcissistic personality
involves grandiosity. Affected people have an exaggerated sense of superiority
and expect to be treated with deference. Their relationships are characterized by a need to be admired,
and they are extremely sensitive to criticism, failure, or defeat. When confronted with a failure to fulfill their
high opinion of themselves, they can become enraged or seriously depressed and suicidal. They often
believe other people envy them. They may exploit others because they think their superiority justifies it.
Histrionic personality
involves conspicuous attention seeking. Affected people are also overly
conscious of appearance and are dramatic. Their expression of emotions often seems exaggerated,
childish, and superficial. Still, they frequently evoke sympathetic or erotic attention from other people.
Relationships are often easily established and overly sexualized but tend to be superficial and transient.
Behind their seductive behaviors and their tendency to exaggerate somatic problems (ie,
hypochondriasis) often lie more basic wishes for dependency and protection.
Cluster C:
Patients tend to be nervous and passive or rigid and preoccupied.
Dependent personality
is characterized by the surrender of responsibility to other people. Affected
people may submit to others to gain and maintain support. For example, they often allow the needs of
people they depend on to supersede their own. They lack self-confidence and feel intensely inadequate
about taking care of themselves. They believe that others are more capable, and they are reluctant to
===PAGE:1738===
express their views for fear that their aggressiveness will offend the people they need. Dependency in
other personality disorders may be hidden by obvious behavioral problems; eg, histrionic or borderline
behaviors mask underlying dependency.
Avoidant personality
is marked by hypersensitivity to rejection and fear of starting relationships or
anything new because of the risk of failure or disappointment. Because affected people have a strong
conscious desire for affection and acceptance, they are openly distressed by their isolation and inability
to
relate comfortably to other people. They respond to even small hints of rejection by withdrawing.
Obsessive-compulsive personality
is characterized by conscientiousness, orderliness, and reliability,
but inflexibility often makes affected people unable to adapt to change. They take responsibilities
seriously, but because they hate mistakes and incompleteness, they can become entangled with details
and forget their purpose. As a result, they have difficulty making decisions and completing tasks. Such
problems make responsibilities a source of anxiety, and they rarely enjoy much satisfaction from their
achievements. Most obsessive-compulsive traits are adaptive, and as long as they are not too marked,
people who have them often achieve much, especially in the sciences and other academic fields in which
order, perfectionism, and perseverance are desirable. However, they can feel uncomfortable with feelings,
interpersonal relationships, and situations in which they lack control, they must rely on other people, or
events are unpredictable.
Other personality types:
Several other personality types have been described but are not classified as
disorders in the DSM-IV-TR.
Passive-aggressive (negativistic) personality
typically produces the appearance of ineptness or
passivity, but these behaviors are covertly designed to avoid responsibility or to control or punish other
people. Passive-aggressive behavior is often evidenced by procrastination, inefficiency, or unrealistic
protests of disability. Frequently, affected people agree to do tasks they do not want to do and then subtly
undermine completion of the tasks. Such behavior usually serves to deny or conceal hostility or
disagreements.
Cyclothymic personality
(see also p.
) alternates between high-spirited buoyancy and gloomy
pessimism; each mood lasts weeks or longer. Characteristically, the rhythmic mood changes are regular
and occur without justifiable external cause. When these features do not interfere with social adaptation,
cyclothymia is considered a temperament and is present in many gifted and creative people.
Depressive personality
is characterized by chronic moroseness, worry, and self-consciousness.
Affected people have a pessimistic outlook, which impairs their initiative and disheartens other people.
Self-satisfaction seems undeserved and sinful. They unconsciously believe their suffering is a badge of
merit needed to earn the love or admiration of others.
Diagnosis
• DSM-IV-TR criteria
Specific personality disorders are diagnosed based on DSM-IV-TR criteria. The general criteria in DSMIV-TR emphasize the need to consider whether other mental or physical disorders (eg, depression,
substance abuse, hyperthyroidism) can account for the patient's patterns of behavior.
Patients' emotional reactions and their perspectives on what causes their problems and how other people
treat them can provide information about their disorder. Diagnosis is based on observing repetitive
patterns of behavior or perceptions that cause distress and impair social functioning. Because the patient
often lacks insight into these patterns, physicians may initially seek information from and evaluation by
others who interact with the patient. Often, physicians suspect a personality disorder based on their own
discomfort, typically if they begin to feel angry or defensive.
Treatment
• Comprehensive approach, often requiring prolonged treatment
===PAGE:1739===
Although treatment differs according to the type of personality disorder, some general principles apply:
• Family members and friends can act in ways that either reinforce or diminish the patient's problematic
behavior or thoughts; thus, their involvement is helpful and often essential.
• An early effort should be made to get patients to see that the problem is really based on who they are.
• Treating a personality disorder takes a long time; repetitious confrontation in prolonged psychotherapy
or by peer encounters is usually required to make patients aware of their defenses, beliefs, and
maladaptive behavior patterns.
Because personality disorders are particularly difficult to treat, therapists need experience, enthusiasm,
and an understanding of the patient's expected areas of emotional sensitivity and usual ways of coping.
Kindness and guidance alone do not change personality disorders. Treatment may involve a combination
of psychotherapy and drug therapy. However, symptoms typically are not very responsive to drugs.
Relief of anxiety or depression
is the first goal, and drug therapy can be helpful. Reducing
environmental stress can also quickly relieve such symptoms.
Maladaptive behaviors,
such as recklessness, social isolation, lack of assertiveness, or temper
outbursts, can be changed in months. Group therapy and behavior modification, sometimes within day
hospital or residential settings, are effective. Participation in self-help groups or family therapy can also
help change socially undesirable behaviors. Behavioral change is most important for patients with
borderline, antisocial, or avoidant personality disorder. Dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT) is effective
for borderline personality disorder. DBT, which involves weekly individual psychotherapy and group
therapy as well as telephone contact with therapists between scheduled sessions, seeks to help patients
understand their behaviors and teach them problem solving and adaptive behaviors. Psychodynamic
therapy is effective for patients with borderline and avoidant personality disorders. Such therapies help
patients with personality disorders reorganize feeling states in themselves and think about the effect their
behaviors have on other people.
Interpersonal problems,
such as dependency, distrust, arrogance, and manipulativeness, usually take
> 1 yr to change. The cornerstone for effecting interpersonal changes is individual psychotherapy that
helps patients understand the sources of their interpersonal problems. A therapist must repeatedly point
out the undesirable consequences of the patient's thought and behavior patterns and must sometimes set
limits on the patient's behavior. Such therapy is essential for patients with histrionic, dependent, or
passive-aggressive personality disorder. For some patients with personality disorders that involve how
attitudes, expectations, and beliefs are mentally organized (eg, narcissistic or obsessive-compulsive
types), psychoanalysis is recommended, usually for ≥ 3 yr.
===PAGE:1740===
Chapter 164. Schizophrenia and Related Disorders
Introduction
Schizophrenia and related disorders—brief psychotic disorder, delusional disorder, schizoaffective
disorder, and schizophreniform disorder—are characterized by psychotic symptoms. Psychotic symptoms
include delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking and speech, and bizarre and inappropriate
behavior.
Brief Psychotic Disorder
Brief psychotic disorder consists of delusions, hallucinations, or other psychotic symptoms for
at least 1 day but < 1 mo, with eventual return to normal premorbid functioning. It is typically
caused by severe stress in susceptible people.
Brief psychotic disorder is uncommon. Preexisting personality disorders (eg, paranoid, histrionic,
narcissistic, schizotypal, borderline) predispose to its development. A major stressor, such as loss of a
loved one, may precipitate the disorder. The disorder causes at least one psychotic symptom:
• Delusions
• Hallucinations
• Disorganized speech
• Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior
This disorder is not diagnosed if a psychotic mood disorder, a schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, a
physical disorder, or an adverse drug effect (prescribed or illicit) better accounts for the symptoms.
Differentiating between brief psychotic disorder and schizophrenia in a patient without any prior psychotic
symptoms is based on duration of symptoms; if the duration exceeds 1 mo, the patient no longer meets
required diagnostic criteria for brief psychotic disorder.
Treatment is similar to that of an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia; supervision and short-term
treatment with antipsychotics may be required.
Delusional Disorder
Delusional disorder is characterized by nonbizarre delusions (false beliefs) that persist for at
least 1 mo, without other symptoms of schizophrenia.
Delusional disorder is distinguished from schizophrenia by the presence of delusions without other
symptoms of schizophrenia. The delusions tend to be nonbizarre and involve situations that could occur,
such as being
followed, poisoned, infected, loved at a distance, or deceived by one's spouse or lover.
In contrast to schizophrenia, delusional disorder is relatively uncommon. Onset generally occurs in middle
or late adult life. Psychosocial functioning is not as impaired as it is in schizophrenia, and impairments
usually arise directly from the delusional belief.
When delusional disorder occurs in elderly patients, it is sometimes called paraphrenia. It may coexist
with mild dementia. The physician must be careful to distinguish delusions from elder abuse being
reported by a mildly demented elderly patient.
Symptoms and Signs
Delusional disorder may arise from a preexisting paranoid personality disorder (. In such
people, a pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others and their motives begins in early adulthood and
extends throughout life. Early symptoms may include the feeling of being exploited, preoccupation with
===PAGE:1741===
the loyalty or trustworthiness of friends, a tendency to read threatening meanings into benign remarks or
events, persistent bearing of grudges, and a readiness to respond to perceived slights.
Several subtypes of delusional disorder are recognized:
•
Erotomanic:
Patients believe that another person is in love with them. Efforts to contact the object of
the delusion through telephone calls, letters, surveillance, or stalking are common. People with this
subtype may have conflicts with the law related to this behavior.
•
Grandiose:
Patients believe they have a great talent or have made an important discovery.
•
Jealous:
Patients believe that their spouse or lover is unfaithful. This belief is based on incorrect
inferences supported by dubious evidence. They may resort to physical assault.
•
Persecutory:
Patients believe that they are being plotted against, spied on, maligned, or harassed.
They may repeatedly attempt to obtain justice through appeals to courts and other government
agencies and may resort to violence in retaliation for the imagined persecution.
•
Somatic:
The delusion relates to a bodily function; eg, patients believe they have a physical deformity,
odor, or parasite.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis depends largely on making a clinical assessment, obtaining a thorough history, and ruling out
other specific conditions associated with delusions. Assessment of dangerousness, especially the extent
to which patients are willing to act on their delusion, is very important.
Prognosis
Delusional disorder does not usually lead to severe impairment or change in personality, but delusional
concerns may gradually progress. Most patients can remain employed.
Treatment
Treatment aims to establish an effective physician-patient relationship and to manage complications. If
patients are assessed to be dangerous, hospitalization may be required. Insufficient data are available to
support the use of any particular drug, although antipsychotics sometimes suppress symptoms.
A long-term treatment goal of shifting the patient's major area of concern away from the delusional locus
to a more constructive and gratifying area is difficult but reasonable.
Schizoaffective Disorder
Schizoaffective disorder is characterized by significant mood symptoms, psychosis, and other
symptoms of schizophrenia. It is differentiated from schizophrenia by occurrence of ≥ 1
episodes of depressive or manic symptoms.
Schizoaffective disorder is considered when a psychotic patient also demonstrates mood symptoms. The
diagnosis requires that significant mood symptoms (depressive or manic) be present for a substantial
portion of the total duration of illness, concurrent with symptoms of schizophrenia. Differentiating
schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia and mood disorders may require longitudinal assessment of
symptoms and symptom progression. The prognosis is somewhat better than that for schizophrenia but
worse than that for mood disorders.
Treatment
• Often a combination of drugs, psychotherapy, and community support
===PAGE:1742===
Because schizoaffective disorder often leads to long-term disability, comprehensive treatment (including
drugs, psychotherapy, and community support) is often required.
For treatment of the manic type, antipsychotics combined with lithium, carbamazepine, or valproate may
be more effective than antipsychotics alone.
For treatment of the depressive type, antipsychotics are commonly combined with antidepressants.
Antidepressants should usually be introduced once positive psychotic symptoms are stabilized. SSRIs are
preferred because of their safety profile. Second-generation antipsychotics may be more effective than
conventional antipsychotics in alleviating depression associated with psychosis.
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is characterized by psychosis (loss of contact with reality), hallucinations (false
perceptions), delusions (false beliefs), disorganized speech and behavior, flattened affect
(restricted range of emotions), cognitive deficits (impaired reasoning and problem solving), and
occupational and social dysfunction. The cause is unknown, but evidence for a genetic
component is strong. Symptoms usually begin in adolescence or early adulthood. One or more
episodes of symptoms must last ≥ 6 mo before the diagnosis is made. Treatment consists of
drug therapy, psychotherapy, and rehabilitation.
Worldwide, the prevalence of schizophrenia is about 1%. The rate is comparable among men and women
and relatively constant cross-culturally. The rate is higher among lower socioeconomic classes in urban
areas, perhaps because its disabling effects lead to unemployment and poverty. Similarly, a higher
prevalence among single people may reflect the effect of illness or illness precursors on social
functioning. The average age at onset is 18 yr in men and 25 yr in women. Onset is rare in childhood, but
early-adolescent onset or late-life onset (when it is sometimes called paraphrenia) may occur.
Etiology
Although its specific cause is unknown, schizophrenia has a biologic basis, as evidenced by alterations in
brain structure (eg, enlarged cerebral ventricles, decreased size of the anterior hippocampus and other
brain regions) and by changes in neurotransmitters, especially altered activity of dopamine and
glutamate. Some experts suggest that schizophrenia occurs in people with neurodevelopmental
vulnerabilities and that the onset, remission, and recurrence of symptoms are the result of interactions
between these enduring vulnerabilities and environmental stressors.
Neurodevelopmental vulnerability:
Vulnerability may result from genetic predisposition; intrauterine,
birth, or postnatal complications; or viral CNS infections. Maternal exposure to famine and influenza
during the 2nd trimester of pregnancy, birth weight < 2500 g, Rh incompatibility during a 2nd pregnancy,
and hypoxia increase risk.
Although most people with schizophrenia do not have a family history, genetic factors have been
implicated. People who have a 1st-degree relative with schizophrenia have about a 10% risk of
developing the disorder, compared with a 1% risk among the general population. Monozygotic twins have
a concordance of about 50%. Sensitive neurologic and neuropsychiatric tests suggest that aberrant
smooth-pursuit eye tracking, impaired cognition and attention, and deficient sensory gating occur more
commonly among patients with schizophrenia than among the general population. These markers
(endophenotypes) also occur among 1st-degree relatives of people with schizophrenia and may
represent the inherited component of vulnerability.
Environmental stressors:
Stressors can trigger the emergence or recurrence of symptoms in
vulnerable people. Stressors may be primarily biochemical (eg, substance abuse, especially marijuana) or
social (eg, becoming unemployed or impoverished, leaving home for college, breaking off a romantic
relationship, joining the Armed Forces); however, these stressors are not causative. There is no evidence
that schizophrenia is caused by poor parenting.
Protective factors that may mitigate the effect of stress on symptom formation or exacerbation include
===PAGE:1743===
good social support, coping skills, and antipsychotics (see Treatment .
Symptoms and Signs
Schizophrenia is a chronic illness that may progress through several phases, although duration and
patterns of phases can vary. Patients with schizophrenia tend to develop psychotic symptoms an average
of 12 to 24 mo before presenting for medical care.
Phases:
In the premorbid phase, patients may show no symptoms or may have impaired social
competence, mild cognitive disorganization or perceptual distortion, a diminished capacity to experience
pleasure (anhedonia), and other general coping deficiencies. Such traits may be mild and recognized only
in retrospect or may be more noticeable, with impairment of social, academic, and vocational functioning.
In the prodromal phase, subclinical symptoms may emerge; they include withdrawal or isolation, irritability,
suspiciousness, unusual
thoughts, perceptual distortions, and disorganization. Onset of overt
schizophrenia (delusions and hallucinations) may be sudden (over days or weeks) or slow and insidious
(over years).
In the middle phase, symptomatic periods may be episodic (with identifiable exacerbations and
remissions) or continuous; functional deficits tend to worsen.
In the late illness phase, the illness pattern may be established, and disability may stabilize or even
diminish.
Symptom categories:
Generally, symptoms are categorized as
• Positive: An excess or distortion of normal functions
• Negative: Diminution or loss of normal functions
• Disorganized: Thought disorders and bizarre behavior
• Cognitive: Deficits in information processing and problem solving
Patients may have symptoms from one or all categories.
Positive symptoms
can be further categorized as delusions and hallucinations. Delusions are
erroneous beliefs. In persecutory delusions, patients believe they are being tormented, followed, tricked,
or spied on. In delusions of reference, patients believe that passages from books, newspapers, song
lyrics, or other environmental cues are directed at them. In delusions of thought withdrawal or thought
insertion, patients believe that others can read their mind, that their thoughts are being transmitted to
others, or that thoughts and impulses are being imposed on them by outside forces. Hallucinations may
be auditory, visual, olfactory, gustatory, or tactile, but auditory hallucinations are by far the most common.
Patients may hear voices commenting on their behavior, conversing with one another, or making critical
and abusive comments. Delusions and hallucinations may be extremely vexing to patients.
Negative (deficit) symptoms
include blunted affect, poverty of speech, anhedonia, and asociality. With
blunted affect, the patient's face appears immobile, with poor eye contact and lack of expressiveness.
Poverty of speech refers to decreased speech and terse replies to questions, creating the impression of
inner emptiness. Anhedonia may be reflected by a lack of interest in activities and increased purposeless
activity. Asociality is shown by a lack of interest in relationships. Negative symptoms often lead to poor
motivation and a diminished sense of purpose and goals.
Disorganized symptoms,
which can be considered a type of positive symptom, involve thought
disorders and bizarre behaviors. Thinking is disorganized, with rambling, non-goal-directed speech that
shifts from one topic to another. Speech can range from mildly disorganized to incoherent and
incomprehensible. Bizarre behavior may include childlike silliness, agitation, and inappropriate
appearance, hygiene, or conduct. Catatonia is an extreme behavior that can include maintaining a rigid
===PAGE:1744===
posture and resisting efforts to be moved or engaging in purposeless and unstimulated motor activity.
Cognitive deficits
include impairment in attention, processing speed, working memory, abstract thinking,
problem solving, and understanding of social interactions. The patient's thinking may be inflexible, and
the ability to problem solve, understand the viewpoints of other people, and learn from experience may be
diminished. Symptoms of schizophrenia typically impair the ability to function and often markedly interfere
with work, social relations, and self-care. Unemployment, isolation, deteriorated relationships, and
diminished quality of life are common outcomes. Severity of cognitive impairment is a major determinant
of overall disability.
Subtypes:
Five subtypes of schizophrenia have been described:
• Paranoid: Characterized by delusions or auditory hallucinations, with preservation of cognition and
affect
• Disorganized: Characterized by disorganized speech, disorganized behavior, and flat or inappropriate
affect
• Catatonic: Characterized by physical symptoms, including either immobility or excessive motor activity
and the assumption of bizarre postures
• Residual: A clear history of schizophrenia with more prominent symptoms, followed by a prolonged
period of mild negative symptoms
• Undifferentiated: A mixture of symptoms from the other subtypes
Alternatively, some experts classify schizophrenia into deficit and nondeficit subtypes based on the
presence and severity of negative symptoms, such as blunted affect, lack of motivation, and diminished
sense of purpose. Patients with the deficit subtype have prominent negative symptoms unaccounted for
by other factors (eg, depression, anxiety, an understimulating environment, drug adverse effects). Those
with the nondeficit subtype may have delusions, hallucinations, and thought disorders but are relatively
free of negative symptoms.
Suicide:
About 10% of patients with schizophrenia commit suicide. Suicide is the major cause of
premature death among people with schizophrenia and explains, in part, why on average the disorder
reduces life span by 10 yr. Patients who have paranoid subtypes with late onset and good premorbid
functioning—the very patients with the best prognosis for recovery—are also at the greatest risk of
suicide. Because these patients retain the capacity for grief and anguish, they may be more prone to act
in despair based on a realistic recognition of the effect of their disorder (see also p.
).
Violence:
Schizophrenia is a relatively modest risk factor for violent behavior. Threats of violence and
minor aggressive outbursts are far more common than seriously dangerous behavior. Patients more likely
to engage in significant violence include those with substance abuse, persecutory delusions, or command
hallucinations and those who do not take their prescribed drugs. A very few severely depressed, isolated,
paranoid patients attack or murder someone whom they perceive as the single source of their difficulties
(eg, an authority, a celebrity, their spouse).
Diagnosis
• Combination of history, symptoms, and signs
No definitive test for schizophrenia exists. Diagnosis is based on a comprehensive assessment of history,
symptoms, and signs. Information from collateral sources, such as family members, friends, teachers, and
coworkers, is often important. According to the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
,
Fourth Edition Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), the diagnosis requires both of the following:
• ≥ 2 characteristic symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, disorganized behavior,
negative symptoms) for a significant portion of a 1-mo period
===PAGE:1745===
• Prodromal or attenuated signs of illness with social, occupational, or self-care impairments evident for a
6-mo period that includes 1 mo of active symptoms
Psychosis due to other medical disorders or substance abuse must be ruled out by history and
examination that includes laboratory tests and neuroimaging (. Although some patients with
schizophrenia have structural brain abnormalities present on imaging, these abnormalities are
insufficiently specific to have diagnostic value.
Other mental disorders with similar symptoms include several that are related to schizophrenia: brief
psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizoaffective disorder, and delusional disorder. In
addition, mood disorders can cause psychosis in some people. Certain personality disorders (especially
schizotypal) cause symptoms similar to those of schizophrenia, although they are usually milder and do
not involve psychosis.
Prognosis
During the first 5 yr after onset of symptoms, functioning may deteriorate and social and work skills may
decline, with progressive neglect of self-care. Negative symptoms may increase in severity, and cognitive
functioning may decline. Thereafter, the level of disability tends to plateau. Some evidence suggests that
severity of illness may lessen in later life, particularly among women. Spontaneous movement disorders
may develop in patients who have severe negative symptoms and cognitive dysfunction, even when
antipsychotics are not used.
Prognosis varies depending on the subtype. Patients with paranoid schizophrenia tend to be less
severely disabled and more responsive to available treatments. Patients with the deficit subtype are
typically more disabled, have a poorer prognosis, and are more resistant to treatment.
Schizophrenia can occur with other mental disorders. When associated with significant obsessivecompulsive symptoms (, prognosis is particularly poor; with symptoms of borderline
personality disorder (, prognosis is better. About 80% of people with schizophrenia
experience one or more episodes of major depression at some time in their life.
For the first year after diagnosis, prognosis is closely related to adherence to prescribed psychoactive
drugs. Overall, one third of patients achieve significant and lasting improvement; one third improve
somewhat but have intermittent relapses and residual disability; and one third are severely and
permanently incapacitated. Only about 15% of all patients fully return to their pre-illness level of
functioning.
Factors associated with a good prognosis include
• Good premorbid functioning (eg, good student, strong work history)
• Late and/or sudden onset of illness
• Family history of mood disorders other than schizophrenia
•
Minimal cognitive impairment
• Few negative symptoms
• Paranoid or nondeficit subtype
Factors associated with a poor prognosis include
• Young age at onset
• Poor premorbid functioning
===PAGE:1746===
• Family history of schizophrenia
• Disorganized or deficit subtype with many negative symptoms
Men have poorer outcomes than women; women respond better to treatment with antipsychotics.
Substance abuse is a significant problem in up to 50% of patients with schizophrenia. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that use of marijuana and other hallucinogens is highly disruptive for patients with schizophrenia
and should be strongly discouraged. Comorbid substance abuse is a significant predictor of poor
outcome and may lead to drug nonadherence, repeated relapse, frequent rehospitalization, declining
function, and loss of social support, including homelessness.
Treatment
• Antipsychotic drugs
• Rehabilitation, including community support services
• Psychotherapy
The time between onset of psychotic symptoms and first treatment correlates with the rapidity of initial
treatment response, quality of treatment response, and severity of negative symptoms. When treated
early, patients tend to respond more quickly and fully. Without ongoing use of antipsychotics after an
initial episode, 70 to 80% of patients have a subsequent episode within 12 mo. Continuous use of
antipsychotics can reduce the 1-yr relapse rate to about 30%.
General goals are to reduce severity of psychotic symptoms, prevent recurrences of symptomatic
episodes and associated deterioration of functioning, and help patients function at the highest level
possible. Antipsychotics, rehabilitation with community support services, and psychotherapy are the major
components of treatment. Because schizophrenia is a long-term and recurrent illness, teaching patients
illness self-management skills is a significant overall goal.
Drugs are divided into conventional antipsychotics and 2nd-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) based on
their specific neurotransmitter receptor affinity and activity. SGAs may offer some advantages both in
terms of modestly greater efficacy (although recent evidence casts doubt on SGAs' advantage as a class)
and reduced likelihood of an involuntary movement disorder and related adverse effects. However, risk of
metabolic syndrome (excess abdominal fat, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and hypertension) is greater
with SGAs than with conventional antipsychotics.
Conventional antipsychotics:
These drugs (see
Table 164-1
) act primarily by blocking the dopamine-2 receptor (dopamine-2 blockers). Conventional
antipsychotics can be classified as high, intermediate, or low potency. High-potency antipsychotics have
a higher affinity for dopamine receptors and less for
α
-adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. Low-potency
antipsychotics, which are rarely used, have less affinity for dopamine receptors and relatively more affinity
for
α
-adrenergic, muscarinic, and histaminic receptors. Different drugs are available in tablet, liquid, and
short- and long-acting IM preparations. A specific drug is selected primarily based on adverse effect
profile, required route of administration, and the patient's previous response to the drug.
Two conventional antipsychotics (and one SGA) are available as long-acting depot preparations (see
Table 164-2
). These preparations are useful for eliminating drug nonadherence. They may also help
patients who, because of disorganization, indifference, or denial of illness, cannot reliably take daily oral
drugs.
Conventional antipsychotics have several adverse effects, such as sedation, cognitive blunting, dystonia
and muscle stiffness, tremors, elevated prolactin levels, and weight gain (for treatment of adverse effects,
see
Table 157-4
. Akathisia (motor restlessness) is particularly unpleasant and may lead to
===PAGE:1747===
nonadherence. These drugs may also cause tardive dyskinesia, an involuntary movement disorder most
often characterized by puckering of the lips and tongue, writhing of the arms or legs, or both. The
incidence of tardive dyskinesia is about 5%/yr of drug exposure among patients taking conventional
antipsychotics. In about 2%, tardive dyskinesia is severely disfiguring. In some patients, tardive
dyskinesia persists indefinitely, even after the drug is stopped. Because of this risk, patients receiving
long-term maintenance therapy should be evaluated at least every 6 mo. Rating instruments, such as the
Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale, may be used (see
Table 164-3
). Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, a rare but potentially fatal adverse
[Table 164-1.
Conventional Antipsychotics]
[Table 164-2.
Depot Antipsychotic Drugs]
effect, is characterized by rigidity, fever, autonomic instability, and elevated CK.
About 30% of patients with schizophrenia do not respond to conventional antipsychotics. They may
respond to clozapine, an SGA.
Second-generation antipsychotics:
SGAs block dopamine receptors more selectively than
conventional antipsychotics, decreasing the likelihood of extrapyramidal (motor) adverse effects. Although
greater binding to serotonergic receptors was initially thought to contribute to the efficacy of SGAs, recent
studies suggest this binding is unrelated to efficacy or adverse effect profile. SGAs also do the following:
• Tend to alleviate positive symptoms
• May lessen negative symptoms to a greater extent than do conventional antipsychotics (although such
differences have been questioned)
• May cause less cognitive blunting
• Are less likely to have extrapyramidal (motor) adverse effects
• Have a lower risk of causing tardive dyskinesia
• Increase prolactin slightly or not at all (except risperidone, which increases prolactin as much as do
conventional antipsychotics)
Clozapine, the first SGA, is the only SGA shown to be effective in up to 50% of patients resistant to
conventional antipsychotics. Clozapine reduces negative symptoms, has few or no motor adverse effects,
and has minimal risk of causing tardive dyskinesia, but it has other adverse effects, including sedation,
hypotension, tachycardia, weight gain, type 2 diabetes, and increased salivation. It also may cause
seizures in a dose-dependent fashion. The most serious adverse effect is agranulocytosis, which can
occur in about 1% of patients. Consequently, frequent monitoring of WBCs is required, and clozapine is
generally reserved for patients who have responded inadequately to other drugs.
Newer SGAs (see
Table 164-4
) provide some of the benefits of clozapine without the risk of agranulocytosis and are
generally preferable to conventional antipsychotics for treatment of an acute episode and for prevention
of recurrence. However, in a recent, large, long-term, controlled clinical trial, symptom relief using any of
4 SGAs (olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone) was no greater than that with perphenazine, a
conventional antipsychotic. A follow-up study, in which patients who left the study prematurely were
randomized to one of the 3 other study SGAs or to clozapine, demonstrated a clear advantage of
clozapine over the other SGAs. Hence, clozapine seems to be the only effective treatment for patients
who have failed treatment with a conventional antipsychotic or an SGA. However, clozapine remains
underused, probably because of lower tolerability and need for continuous blood monitoring.
Newer SGAs are very similar to each other in efficacy but differ in adverse effects, so drug choice is
based on individual response and on other drug characteristics. For example, olanzapine, which has a
===PAGE:1748===
relatively high rate of sedation, may be prescribed for patients with prominent agitation or insomnia; less
sedating drugs might be preferred for patients with lethargy. A 4- to 8-wk trial is usually required to assess
efficacy. After acute symptoms have stabilized, maintenance treatment is initiated; for it, the lowest dose
that prevents symptom recurrence is used. Risperidone is the only SGA available in a long-acting
injectable formulation.
Weight gain, hyperlipidemia, and elevated risk of type 2 diabetes are the major adverse effects of SGAs.
Thus, before treatment with SGAs is begun, all patients should be screened for risk factors, including
personal or family history of diabetes, weight, waist circumference, BP, and fasting plasma glucose and
lipid profile. Those found to have or to be at significant risk of metabolic syndrome may be better treated
with ziprasidone or aripiprazole than
[Table 164-3.
Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale]
the other SGAs. Patient and family education regarding symptoms and signs of diabetes, including
polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, and diabetic ketoacidosis (nausea, vomiting, dehydration, rapid
respiration, clouding of sensorium), should be provided. In addition, nutritional and physical activity
counseling should be provided to all patients when they start taking an SGA. All patients taking an SGA
require periodic monitoring of weight, body mass index, and fasting plasma glucose and referral for
specialty evaluation if they develop hyperlipidemia or type 2 diabetes.
Rehabilitation and community support services:
Psychosocial skill training and vocational
rehabilitation programs help many patients work, shop, and care for themselves; manage a household;
get along with others; and work with mental health care practitioners. Supported employment, in which
patients are placed in a competitive work setting and provided with an on-site job coach to promote
adaptation to work, may be particularly valuable. In time, the job coach acts only as a backup for problem
solving or for communication with employers.
Support services enable many patients with schizophrenia to reside in the community. Although most can
live independently, some require supervised apartments where a staff member is present to ensure drug
adherence. Programs provide a graded level of supervision in different residential settings, ranging from
24-h support to periodic home visits. These programs help promote patient autonomy while providing
sufficient care to minimize the likelihood of relapse and need for inpatient hospitalization. Assertive
community treatment programs provide services in the patient's home or other residence and are based
on high staff-to-patient ratios; treatment teams directly provide all or nearly all required treatment
services.
Hospitalization or crisis care in a hospital alternative may be required during severe relapses, and
involuntary hospitalization may
[Table 164-4.
Second-Generation Antipsychotics*]
be necessary if patients pose a danger to themselves or others. Despite the best rehabilitation and
community support services, a small percentage of patients, particularly those with severe cognitive
deficits and those poorly responsive to drug therapy, require long-term institutional or other supportive
care.
Psychotherapy:
The goal of psychotherapy is to develop a collaborative relationship between the
patients, family members, and physician so that patients can learn to understand and manage their
illness, take drugs as prescribed, and handle stress more effectively. Although individual psychotherapy
plus drug
therapy is a common approach, few empirical guidelines are available. Psychotherapy that
begins by addressing the patient's basic social service needs, provides support and education regarding
the nature of the illness, promotes adaptive activities, and is based on empathy and a sound dynamic
understanding of schizophrenia is likely to be most effective. Many patients need empathic psychologic
support to adapt to what is often a lifelong illness that can substantially limit functioning.
For patients who live with their families, psychoeducational family interventions can reduce the rate of
relapse. Support and advocacy groups, such as the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill, are often helpful
===PAGE:1749===
to families.
Schizophreniform Disorder
Schizophreniform disorder is characterized by symptoms identical to those of schizophrenia but
that last ≥ 1 mo but < 6 mo.
At presentation, schizophrenia is likely to be suspected. Psychosis secondary to substance abuse or to a
physical disorder must also be ruled out. Differentiating between schizophreniform disorder and
schizophrenia in a patient without any prior psychotic symptoms is based on duration of symptoms. If
duration of symptoms or disability exceeds 6 mo, the patient no longer meets required diagnostic criteria
for schizophreniform disorder, and the diagnosis is likely to be schizophrenia, although the acute
psychosis may also evolve into a psychotic mood disorder, such as bipolar or schizoaffective disorder.
Longitudinal observation is often required to establish the diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
Treatment with antipsychotics and supportive psychosocial care is indicated. After symptoms resolve,
drug treatment is continued for 12 mo and then gradually tapered while closely monitoring for the return of
psychotic symptoms.
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder
Psychotic symptoms, particularly delusions and hallucinations, can result from a wide variety of
substances, including alcohol, amphetamines, marijuana, cocaine, hallucinogens, inhalants, opioids,
phencyclidine, and certain sedatives and anxiolytics.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made when symptoms begin during or < 1 mo after intoxication with or withdrawal from
the implicated substance and after other psychotic disorders are ruled out. Because symptoms may
overlap with brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, and acute episodes of psychotic mania
or schizophrenia, differentiating these conditions may be difficult. Diagnosis may require several days of
observation.
Treatment
• Symptomatic
Treatment may vary depending on the drug involved. Hallucinogen and phencyclidine psychosis may not
respond well to antipsychotics. A supportive approach is preferred, with reassuring, structured, and
protective surroundings. Agitation may be best treated with short-acting benzodiazepines, such as
lorazepam given po or IM.
===PAGE:1750===
Chapter 165. Sexuality and Sexual Disorders
Introduction
(For sexual dysfunction in men, see p.
; for sexual dysfunction in women, see p.
.)
Accepted norms of sexual behavior and attitudes vary greatly within and among different cultures. Health
care practitioners should never be judgmental of sexual behaviors, even under societal pressure.
Generally, what is normal and abnormal cannot be defined medically. However, when sexual behavior or
difficulties bother a patient or the patient's partner or cause harm, treatment is warranted.
Societal attitudes about sexuality also change with time, as has occurred with the following:
•
Masturbation:
Once widely regarded as a perversion and a cause of mental disorders,
masturbation is
now recognized as a normal sexual activity throughout life. It is considered abnormal only when it
inhibits partner-oriented behavior, is done in public, or is sufficiently compulsive to cause distress. About
97% of males and 80% of females masturbate. Although masturbation is harmless, guilt created by the
disapproval and punitive attitudes of other people may cause considerable distress and impair sexual
performance. Masturbation often continues at some level even in a sexually healthy relationship.
•
Homosexuality:
Homosexuality has not been considered a disorder by the American Psychiatric
Association for > 3 decades. About 4 to 5% of the population identify themselves as exclusively
homosexual for their entire lives. Like heterosexuality, homosexuality results from complex biologic and
environmental factors leading to an ability to become sexually aroused by people of the same sex. Like
heterosexuality, homosexuality is not a matter of choice.
•
Promiscuity:
Frequent sexual activity with many partners, often involving anonymous or one-time-only
encounters, may indicate a diminished capacity for intimacy. However, promiscuity is not in itself
evidence of a psychosexual disorder. Casual sex is common, although the fear of AIDS, herpes simplex
infections, and other sexually transmitted diseases has resulted in a decrease.
•
Extramarital sex:
Most cultures discourage extramarital sexual activity but accept premarital or
nonmarital sexual activity as normal. In the US, most people engage in sexual activity before marriage
or without marriage as part of the trend toward more sexual freedom in developed countries.
Extramarital sex occurs frequently among married people despite social taboos. This behavior has the
potential to pass diseases to unsuspecting spouses.
Accepted norms of sexual behavior and attitudes are influenced greatly by parents. A forbidding,
puritanical rejection of physical affection, including touching, by a parent engenders guilt and shame in
children and inhibits their capacity for enjoying sex and developing healthy intimate relationships as
adults. Relations with parents may be damaged by excessive emotional distance, by punitive behaviors,
or by overt seductiveness and sexual exploitation. Children exposed to verbal and physical hostility,
rejection, and cruelty are likely to develop problems with sexual and emotional intimacy. For example, love
and sexual arousal may become dissociated, so that although emotional bonds can be formed with
people from the same social class or intellectual circle, sexual relationships can be formed only with those
for whom there is no emotional intimacy, typically those who are perceived to be of a lower class or in
some way depreciated (eg, prostitutes, anonymous partners).
Well-informed health care practitioners can offer sensitive, disciplined advice on sexuality and should not
miss opportunities for helpful intervention. Behaviors that place patients at risk of sexually transmitted
diseases must be addressed. Practitioners have an opportunity to recognize and address psychosexual
issues, including sexual dysfunction (see pp.
and
), gender identity problems, and paraphilias.
Gender Identity Disorder and Transsexualism
Gender identity disorder is characterized by a strong, persistent cross-gender identification;
people believe they are victims of a biologic accident and are cruelly imprisoned in a body
incompatible with their subjective gender identity. Those with the most extreme form of gender
===PAGE:1751===
identity disorder are called transsexuals. These disorders are considered mental disorders
because the body does not match the person's psychologic (felt) gender.
Core gender identity is a subjective sense of knowing to which gender one belongs, ie, the awareness
that "I am a male" or "I am a female." Gender
identity
is the inner sense of masculinity or femininity.
Gender
role
is the objective, public expression of being male, female, or androgynous (blended). It is
everything that people say and do to indicate to others or to themselves the degree to which they are
male or female. For most people, there is congruity between their anatomic sex, gender identity, and
gender role. However, those with gender identity disorder experience some degree of incongruity
between their anatomic sex and their gender identity. The incongruity experienced by transsexuals is
usually complete, severe, disturbing, and long-standing. Labeling the condition a "disorder" can add to the
distress that frequently occurs, and the term should not be construed as being judgmental. Treatment is
aimed at helping patients adapt rather than trying to dissuade them from their identity; in any case, the
latter approach is ineffective.
Gender role behaviors fall on a continuum of traditional masculinity or femininity, with a growing cultural
recognition that some people do not fit into the traditional male-female dichotomy. Western cultures are
more tolerant of tomboyish behaviors in young girls (generally not considered a gender identity disorder)
than effeminate or "sissy" behaviors in boys. Many boys role-play as girls or mothers, including trying on
their sister's or mother's clothes. Usually, this behavior is part of normal development. Only in extreme
cases does this behavior and an associated expressed wish to be the other sex persist. Most boys with
gender identity disorder of childhood do not have the disorder as adults, but many are homosexual or
bisexual as adults.
Etiology
Although biologic factors (eg, genetic complement, prenatal hormonal milieu) largely determine gender
identity, the formation of a secure, unconflicted gender identity and gender role is influenced by social
factors (eg, the character of the parents' emotional bond, the relationship that each parent has with the
child). Rarely, transsexualism is associated with genital ambiguity or a genetic abnormality (eg, Turner's
syndrome, Klinefelter's syndrome).
When sex labeling and rearing are confusing (eg, in cases of ambiguous genitals or genetic syndromes
altering genital appearance, such as androgen insensitivity syndrome), children may become uncertain
about their gender identity or role, although the level of importance of environmental factors remains
controversial. However, when sex labeling and rearing are unambiguous, even the presence of
ambiguous genitals often does not affect a child's gender identity.
Symptoms and Signs
Childhood gender identity problems are usually present by age 2. Children experiencing difficulty with
gender identity commonly do the following:
• Prefer cross-dressing
• Insist that they are of the other sex
• Intensely and persistently desire to participate in the stereotypical games and activities of the other sex
• Have negative feelings toward their genitals
For example, a young girl may insist she will grow a penis and become a boy; she may stand to urinate. A
boy may fantasize about being female, and avoid rough-and-tumble play and competitive games. He may
sit to urinate and wish to be rid of his penis and testes. For boys with a gender identity disorder, distress
at the physical changes of puberty is often followed by a request during adolescence for feminizing
somatic treatments. Most children with these disorders are not evaluated until they are age 6 to 9, at a
point when the disorder is already chronic.
===PAGE:1752===
Although most transsexuals began having gender identity problems in early childhood, some do not
present until adulthood. Male-to-female transsexuals may be cross-dressers first and only later in life
come to accept their cross-gender identity. Marriage and military service are common among transsexual
men who seek to run from their cross-gender feelings. Once they accept their cross-gender (transgender)
feelings, many transsexuals adopt a convincing public feminine gender role. Some are satisfied with
mastering a more feminine appearance and obtaining an identity card (eg, driver's license) as a female to
help them work and live in society as women. Others experience problems, which may include depression
and suicidal behavior.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis in children requires the presence of both of the following:
• Cross-gender identification (the desire to be or insistence that they are the other sex)
• A sense of discomfort about their sex or sense of substantial inappropriateness in their gender role
Cross-gender identification must not be merely a desire for perceived cultural advantages of being the
other sex. For example, a boy who says he wants to be a girl so that he will receive the same special
treatment his younger sister receives is not likely to have gender identity disorder.
Assessment of adults focuses on determining whether there is significant distress or obvious impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Treatment
• For selected, motivated patients, hormone therapy, sex reassignment surgery, and psychotherapy
Cross-gender behavior, such as cross-dressing, may not require treatment if it occurs without concurrent
psychologic distress or functional impairment or if a person has a physical intersex condition (eg,
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, ambiguous genitals, androgen insensitivity syndrome).
Most transsexuals who request treatment are natal males who claim a feminine gender identity and
regard their genitals and masculine features with repugnance. However, as treatments improve, femaleto-male transsexualism is increasingly seen in medical and psychiatric practice. Transsexuals' primary
objective in seeking medical help is not to obtain psychologic treatment but to obtain hormones and
genital surgery that will make their physical appearance approximate their felt gender identity. The
combination of psychotherapy, hormonal reassignment, and sex reassignment surgery is often curative
when the disorder is appropriately diagnosed and clinicians follow the internationally accepted standards
of care for the treatment of gender identity disorders, available from the World Professional Association
for Transgender Health (WPATH).
Male-to-female transsexualism:
Taking moderate doses of a feminizing hormone (eg, ethinyl estradiol
0.1 mg once/day) plus electrolysis and other feminizing treatments may make the adjustment to a feminine
gender role more stable.
Many male-to-female transsexuals request sex reassignment surgery. Surgery involves removal of the
penis and testes and creation of an artificial vagina. A part of the glans penis is retained as a clitoris,
which is usually sexually sensitive and retains the capacity for orgasm in most cases. The decision to
pursue sex reassignment surgery often raises important social problems for patients. Many of these
patients are married and have children. A parent or spouse who changes sex will have substantial
adjustment issues in all intimate relationships and may lose loved ones in the process. In follow-up
studies, genital surgery has helped some transsexuals live happier and more productive lives and so is
justified in highly motivated, appropriately assessed and treated transsexuals who have completed a 1- to
2-yr real-life experience in the opposite gender role. Before surgery, transsexuals often need assistance
with passing in public, including help with gestures and voice modulation. Participation in gender support
groups, available in most large cities, is usually helpful.
===PAGE:1753===
Female-to-male transsexualism:
Patients ask for mastectomy early, then hysterectomy and
oophorectomy. Androgenic hormones (eg, IM testosterone ester preparations 300 to 400 mg q 3 wk or
equivalent doses of androgen transdermal patches or gels) are given to permanently alter the voice,
induce a more masculine muscle and fat distribution, and promote growth of facial and body hair.
Patients may opt for an artificial phallus (neophallus) to be fashioned from skin transplanted from the
inner forearm (phalloplasty) or for a micropenis to be created from fat tissue removed from the
testosterone-hypertrophied clitoris (metoidioplasty). Surgery may help certain patients achieve greater
adaptation and life satisfaction. Similar to male-to-female transsexuals, female-to-male transsexuals
should live in the male gender role for at least 1 yr before surgery. Anatomic results of neophallus surgical
procedures are often less satisfactory in terms of function and appearance than neovaginal procedures
for male-to-female transsexuals. Complications are common, especially in procedures that involve
extending the urethra into the neophallus.
Paraphilias
Paraphilias are recurrent, intense, sexually arousing fantasies, urges, or behaviors that are
distressing or disabling and that involve inanimate objects, children or other nonconsenting
adults, or suffering or humiliation of oneself or the partner.
Sexual preferences that seem unusual to another person or health care practitioner do not constitute
paraphilia simply because they are unusual. The arousal patterns are considered pathologic only when
the following apply:
• They become obligatory for sexual functioning (ie, erection or orgasm cannot occur without the
stimulus).
• They involve inappropriate partners (eg, children, nonconsenting adults).
• They cause significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.
People with a paraphilia may have an impaired or nonexistent capacity for affectionate, reciprocal
emotional and sexual intimacy with a consenting partner. Other aspects of personal and emotional
adjustment may be impaired as well.
The pattern of disturbed erotic arousal is usually fairly well developed before puberty. At least 3
processes are involved:
• Anxiety or early emotional trauma interferes with normal psychosexual development.
• The standard pattern of arousal is replaced by another pattern, sometimes through early exposure to
highly charged sexual experiences that reinforce the person's experience of sexual pleasure.
• The pattern of sexual arousal often acquires symbolic and conditioning elements (eg, a
fetish
symbolizes the object of arousal but may have been chosen because the fetish was accidentally
associated with sexual curiosity, desire, and excitement).
Whether all paraphilic development results from these psychodynamic processes is controversial, and
some evidence of altered brain functioning is present in some paraphilias (eg, pedophilia).
In most cultures, paraphilias are far more common among males. Biologic reasons for the unequal
distribution may exist but are poorly defined.
Many of the paraphilias are rare. The most common are pedophilia, voyeurism, transvestic fetishism, and
exhibitionism. Some paraphilias (such as pedophilia) are illegal and may result in being imprisoned and
being labeled and registered as a sex offender for life. Some of these offenders have significant
personality disorders accompanying the paraphilia (eg, antisocial, narcissistic), which make treatment
===PAGE:1754===
difficult. Often, more than one paraphilia is present.
Fetishism
Fetishism is use of an inanimate object (the fetish) as the preferred method of producing sexual
excitement. However, in common parlance, the word is often used to describe particular sexual
interests, such as sexual role-playing, preference for certain physical characteristics, and
preferred sexual activities.
Common fetishes include aprons, shoes, leather or latex items, and women's underclothing. The fetish
may replace typical sexual activity with a partner or may be integrated into sexual activity with a willing
partner. Minor fetishistic behavior as an adjunct to consensual sexual behavior is not considered a
disorder because distress, disability, and significant dysfunction are absent. More intense, obligatory
fetishistic arousal patterns may cause problems in a relationship or become all-consuming and destructive
in a person's life.
Transvestic fetishism:
Heterosexual males who dress in women's clothing typically begin such behavior
in late childhood (see also
Gender Identity Disorder and Transsexualism
. A more common
term for transvestite is cross-dresser. This behavior is associated, at least initially, with sexual arousal.
Cross-dressing per se is not a disorder because this behavior does not always cause distress or
impairment. Personality profiles of cross-dressing men are generally similar to age- and race-matched
norms. When their partner is cooperative, these men have intercourse in partial or full feminine attire.
When their partner is not cooperative, they may feel anxiety, depression, guilt, and shame associated with
the desire to cross-dress.
Most transvestites do not present for treatment. Those who do are usually brought in by an unhappy
spouse, referred by courts, or self-referred out of concern about experiencing negative social and
employment consequences. Some transvestites present for treatment of comorbid gender dysphoria,
substance abuse, or depression. Social and support groups for transvestites are usually very helpful. No
drugs are reliably effective; psychotherapy is aimed at self-acceptance and modulating risky behaviors.
Exhibitionism
Exhibitionism is characterized by achievement of sexual excitement through genital exposure,
usually to an unsuspecting stranger. It may also refer to a strong desire to be observed by other
people during sexual activity.
Exhibitionists (usually male) may masturbate while exposing or fantasizing about exposing themselves.
They may be aware of their need to surprise, shock, or impress the unwilling observer. The victim is
almost always a female adult or a child of either sex. Actual sexual contact is rarely sought. Age at onset
is usually the mid 20s; occasionally, the first act occurs during preadolescence or middle age. About 30%
of apprehended male sex offenders are exhibitionists. They have the highest recidivism rate of all sex
offenders; about 20 to 50% are re-arrested. Most exhibitionists are married, but the marriage is often
troubled by poor social and sexual adjustment, including frequent sexual dysfunction. Very few females
are diagnosed as exhibitionists; society sanctions some exhibitionistic behaviors in females (through
media and entertainment venues).
For some people, exhibitionism is expressed as a strong desire to have other people watch their sexual
acts. What appeals to such people is not the act of surprising an audience but rather of being seen by a
consenting audience. People with this form of exhibitionism may make pornographic films or become adult
entertainers. They are rarely troubled by this desire and thus may not have a psychiatric disorder.
Treatment
When laws are broken and sex offender status is conferred, treatment usually begins with
psychotherapy,
support groups, and SSRIs (. If these drugs are ineffective, antiandrogens should be
considered; full informed consent and appropriate monitoring of liver function and serum testosterone
===PAGE:1755===
levels are required.
Voyeurism
Voyeurism is achievement of sexual arousal by observing people who are naked, disrobing, or
engaging in sexual activity. When observation is of unsuspecting people, this sexual behavior
often leads to problems with the law and relationships.
Desire to watch others in sexual situations is common and not in itself abnormal. Voyeurism usually
begins during adolescence or early adulthood. Adolescent voyeurism is generally viewed more leniently;
few teenagers are arrested. When voyeurism is pathologic, voyeurs spend considerable time seeking out
viewing opportunities. Orgasm is usually achieved by masturbating during or after the voyeuristic activity.
Voyeurs do not seek sexual contact with the people being observed.
In many cultures, voyeurs have ample legal opportunities to watch sexual activity.
Treatment
When laws are broken and sex offender status is conferred, treatment usually begins with therapy,
support groups, and SSRIs (. If these drugs are ineffective, antiandrogens should be
considered; full informed consent and appropriate monitoring of liver function and serum testosterone
levels are required.
Sexual Masochism
Sexual masochism is intentional participation in an activity that involves being humiliated,
beaten, bound, or otherwise abused to experience sexual excitement.
Sadomasochistic fantasies and sexual behavior between consenting adults is very common. Masochistic
activity tends to be ritualized and chronic. For most participants, the humiliation and beating are simply
acted out; participants know that it is a game and carefully avoid actual humiliation or injury. However,
some masochists increase the severity of their activity with time, potentially leading to serious injury or
death.
Masochistic activities may be the preferred or exclusive mode of producing sexual excitement. People
may act on their masochistic fantasies themselves (eg, binding themselves, piercing their skin, applying
electrical shocks, burning themselves) or seek out a partner who may be a sexual sadist. Activities with a
partner include bondage, blindfolding, spanking, flagellation, humiliation by means of urination or
defecation on the person, forced cross-dressing, or simulated rape.
Treatment of this disorder is often ineffective.
Sexual Sadism
Sexual sadism is infliction of physical or mental suffering (eg, humiliation, terror) on the sex
partner to stimulate sexual excitement and orgasm.
Most sexual sadists have insistent, persistent fantasies in which sexual excitement results from suffering
inflicted on the partner, consenting or not. Mild sadism is a common sexual practice; when it becomes
pathologic is a matter of degree. Sexual sadism is not rape, a complex amalgam of sex and power over
the victim. Sexual sadism is diagnosed in < 10% of rapists.
Most sadistic sexual behavior occurs between consenting adults. As is the case with masochism, sadism
is usually limited in scope and not harmful. In some people, the behaviors escalate to the point of harm.
When practiced with nonconsenting partners, sexual sadism constitutes criminal activity and is likely to
continue until the sadist is apprehended. Sexual sadism is particularly dangerous when associated with
antisocial personality disorder (. This combination of disorders is particularly recalcitrant to
any form of psychiatric treatment.
===PAGE:1756===
Pedophilia
(See also p.
.)
Pedophilia is a preference for sexual activity with prepubertal children. Pedophilia often leads to
imprisonment; medical management should include drugs and psychotherapy.
Sexual offenses against children constitute a significant proportion of reported criminal sexual acts.
Arbitrarily, the age of a person with pedophilia is set at ≥ 16 yr, with the age difference between offender
and child victim set at ≥ 5 yr. The age of the child is usually ≤ 13 yr. For older adolescents with pedophilia
(ie, 17 to 18 yr old), no precise age difference is specified; clinical and legal judgment is relied on. Legal
criteria may be different from psychiatric criteria.
Most pedophiles are male. Attraction may be to young boys, girls, or both. But pedophiles prefer oppositesex to same-sex children 2:1. In most cases, the adult is known to the child and may be a family member,
stepparent, or a person with authority (eg, a teacher). Looking or touching seems more prevalent than
genital contact. Homosexual males typically have a less close acquaintanceship with the child.
Pedophiles may be attracted only to children (exclusive) or also adults (nonexclusive).
Some pedophiles limit their sexual activities to their own children or to close relatives (incest). Predatory
pedophiles, many of whom have antisocial personality disorder, may use force and threaten to physically
harm the child or the child's pets if the abuse is disclosed. The course of pedophilia is chronic, and
perpetrators often have or develop substance abuse or dependence and depression. Pervasive family
dysfunction, including marital conflict, is common.
Identifying a pedophile often poses an ethical crisis for health care practitioners. They can try to protect
the privacy of the patient but must protect the community of children. Practitioners should know the
reporting requirements in their state. If practitioners have reasonable suspicion of child sexual or physical
abuse, it must be reported to authorities.
Treatment
• Psychotherapy
• Treatment of associated disorders
• Drug treatment (eg, antiandrogens, SSRIs)
Long-term individual or group psychotherapy is usually necessary and may be especially helpful when it
is part of multimodal treatment that includes social skills training, treatment of comorbid physical and
mental disorders (eg, seizure disorders, attention deficit disorder, depression), and drug treatment.
Treatment is less effective when court ordered, although many adjudicated sex offenders have benefited
from treatments, such as group psychotherapy and antiandrogens.
In the US, IM medroxyprogesterone acetate is the treatment of choice; cyproterone is used in Europe.
Typical doses are medroxyprogesterone 200 mg IM 2 to 3 times/wk for 2 wk, followed by 200 mg 1 to 2
times/wk for 4 wk, then 200 mg q 2 to 4 wk. Serum testosterone should be monitored and maintained in
the normal female range (< 62 ng/dL). Treatment is usually long-term because deviant fantasies usually
recur weeks to months after treatment is stopped. Drugs that inhibit gonadotropin release (eg, leuprolide,
goserelin), given IM, have also been used. Liver function tests and serum testosterone levels should be
monitored as required.
The usefulness of antiandrogens in female pedophiles is less well established.
In addition to antiandrogens, SSRIs (eg, high-dose fluoxetine 60 to 80 mg po once/day or fluvoxamine 200
to 300 mg po once/day) may be useful. Drugs are most effective when used as part of a multimodal
treatment program.
===PAGE:1757===
Some pedophiles who are committed to treatment and monitoring can refrain from pedophilic activity and
be reintegrated into society.
===PAGE:1758===
Chapter 166. Somatoform and Factitious Disorders
Introduction
Somatization is the expression of mental phenomena as physical (somatic) symptoms. Typically, the
symptoms cannot be explained by a physical disorder. Disorders characterized by somatization extend in
a continuum from those in which symptoms develop unconsciously and nonvolitionally to those in which
symptoms develop consciously and volitionally. This continuum includes somatoform disorders, factitious
disorders, and malingering. Somatization typically leads to seeking medical evaluation and treatment.
Somatoform disorders
are characterized by physical symptoms that are not fully explained by another
disorder—physical or mental. Symptoms of somatoform disorders are not volitional. Somatoform disorders
are distressing and often impair social, occupational, academic, or other aspects of functioning. These
disorders include body dysmorphic disorder, conversion disorder, hypochondriasis, pain disorder,
somatization disorder, undifferentiated somatoform disorder, and somatoform disorder not otherwise
specified. Body dysmorphic disorder differs somewhat from other somatoform disorders in that it is
characterized by preoccupation with perceived defects in physical appearance.
Factitious disorders
involve the conscious and volitional feigning of symptoms without any external
incentive (eg, time off from work) and is thus distinguished from malingering. Patients gain gratification
from assuming the sick role through the simulation, exaggeration, or aggravation of symptoms and signs.
Symptoms and signs may be mental, physical, or both. The most severe and chronic form is Munchausen
syndrome.
Malingering
is intentional feigning of physical or mental symptoms motivated by an external incentive
(eg, feigning illness to avoid work or military duty, to evade criminal prosecution, or to obtain financial
compensation or drugs for abuse). Malingering is suspected in the following cases:
• Patients report symptoms, yet little is detected through unannounced observation, physical examination,
or laboratory testing.
• The claimed disability and objective findings are markedly discrepant.
• Patients do not cooperate with efforts to diagnose or treat potential causes of symptoms.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Body dysmorphic disorder is preoccupation with an imagined or a slight defect in appearance
that causes significant distress or impairment of social, occupational, academic, or other
aspects of functioning. Diagnosis is based on history. Treatment consists of drug therapy,
psychotherapy, or both.
Body dysmorphic disorder usually begins during adolescence and may be somewhat more common
among women.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms may develop gradually or abruptly. Although intensity may vary, the disorder is usually chronic
unless patients are appropriately treated. Concerns commonly involve the face or head but may involve
any body part or several parts and may change from one part to another. For example, patients may be
concerned about thinning hair, acne, wrinkles, scars, vascular markings, color of complexion, or
excessive facial or body hair. Or they may focus on the shape or size of the nose, eyes, ears, mouth,
breasts, buttocks, legs, or other body part. Men may have a form of the disorder called muscle
dysmorphia, which involves preoccupation with the idea that their body is not sufficiently lean and
muscular.
Patients usually spend many hours a day worrying about their perceived defects. Most check themselves
often in mirrors, others avoid mirrors, and still others alternate between the 2 behaviors. Other common
===PAGE:1759===
compulsive behaviors include excessive grooming, skin picking, reassurance seeking, and clothes
changing. Most try to camouflage their imagined defects—eg, by growing a beard to hide perceived scars
or by wearing a hat to cover slightly thinning hair. Many undergo cosmetic, medical (most often,
dermatologic), dental, or surgical treatment to correct their perceived defect, but such treatment is usually
unsuccessful and may intensify their preoccupation. Men with muscle dysmorphia may use androgen
supplements.
Because people with body dysmorphic disorder feel self-conscious about their appearance, they may
avoid going out in public. For most, social, occupational, academic, and other aspects of functioning are
impaired because of their concerns about appearance. Some leave their homes only at night; others, not
at all. Social isolation, repeated hospitalization, and suicidal behavior may result.
Diagnosis
• History
Because many patients are too embarrassed and ashamed to reveal their symptoms, the disorder may go
undiagnosed for years. It is distinguished from normal concerns about appearance because the
preoccupations are time-consuming and cause significant distress, impairment in functioning, or both.
Diagnosis is based on history. If the only concern is body shape and weight, an eating disorder may be
the more accurate diagnosis (; if the only concern is the appearance of sex characteristics,
gender identity disorder may be considered (.
Treatment
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors are often effective and are currently the drug of choice; relatively high doses
are often required. Cognitive-behavioral therapy that specifically targets symptoms of body dysmorphic
disorder is currently the psychotherapy of choice.
Conversion Disorder
Conversion disorder consists of symptoms or deficits that develop unconsciously and
nonvolitionally and usually involve motor or sensory
function. Manifestations resemble a
neurologic or other physical disorder but rarely conform to known pathophysiologic
mechanisms or anatomic pathways. Onset, exacerbation, or maintenance of conversion
symptoms is typically attributed to mental factors, such as stress. Diagnosis is based on history
after excluding physical disorders as the cause. Treatment begins by establishing a consistent,
supportive physician-patient relationship; psychotherapy can help, as may hypnosis.
Conversion disorder tends to develop during late childhood to early adulthood but may occur at any age.
It is more common among women.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms often develop abruptly, and onset can often be linked to a stressful event. Symptoms involve
apparent deficits in voluntary motor or sensory function and sometimes include seizures, thus suggesting
a neurologic or general physical disorder. For example, patients may present with impaired coordination
or balance, weakness, paralysis of an arm or a leg, loss of sensation in a body part, seizures, blindness,
double vision, deafness, aphonia, difficulty swallowing, sensation of a lump in the throat, or urinary
retention.
The symptoms are severe enough to cause significant distress or impair social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning. Patients may have a single episode or sporadic repeated ones; symptoms
may become chronic. Typically, episodes are brief.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1760===
The diagnosis is considered only after a physical examination and tests rule out physical disorders that
can fully account for the symptoms and their effects.
Treatment
A consistently trustful and supportive physician-patient relationship is essential. Collaborative treatment
that involves a psychiatrist and a physician from another field (eg, neurologist, internist) seems most
helpful. After the physician has excluded a physical disorder and reassured patients that the symptoms do
not indicate a serious underlying disorder, patients may begin to feel better, and symptoms may fade.
The following treatments may help:
• Hypnosis may help by enabling patients to control the effects of stress and their mental state on their
bodily functions.
• Narcoanalysis is a rarely used procedure similar to hypnosis except that patients are given a sedative to
induce a state of semisleep.
• Psychotherapy, including cognitive-behavioral therapy, is effective for some people.
Any coexisting psychiatric disorders (eg, depression) should be treated.
Hypochondriasis
Hypochondriasis is preoccupation with the fear of having, or with the idea that one has, a
serious disease, based on misinterpretation of nonpathologic physical symptoms or normal
bodily functions. Hypochondriasis is nonvolitional; the exact cause is unknown. Diagnosis is
confirmed when fears and symptoms persist for ≥ 6 mo despite reassurance after thorough
medical evaluation. Treatment includes establishing a consistent, supportive physician-patient
relationship; cognitive-behavioral therapy and drug therapy may help.
Hypochondriasis most commonly begins during early adulthood and appears to occur equally among men
and women.
Symptoms and Signs
A wide array of fears may derive from misinterpreting nonpathologic physical symptoms or normal bodily
functions (eg, borborygmi, abdominal bloating and crampy discomfort, heartbeat, sweating). The location,
quality, and duration of symptoms are often described in minute detail, but symptoms are usually not
associated with abnormal physical findings. Symptoms impair social and occupational functioning or
cause significant distress.
The course is often chronic—fluctuating in some, steady in others. Some patients recover.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is suggested by the history and confirmed when symptoms persist ≥ 6 mo despite
appropriate medical evaluation that excludes a physical disorder and reassurance, and when the
symptoms are not better accounted for by depression or another mental disorder.
Treatment
Treatment is difficult because patients believe that something is seriously wrong and that the physician
has failed to find the real cause. A trusting relationship with a caring,
reassuring physician can
nonetheless prove beneficial. If symptoms are not adequately relieved, patients may benefit from a
psychiatric referral while continuing under the care of the primary physician.
Treatment with SSRIs may be helpful, as may cognitive-behavioral therapy.
===PAGE:1761===
Munchausen Syndrome
Munchausen syndrome, a severe and chronic form of factitious disorder, consists of intentional
production or feigning of physical symptoms or signs without an external incentive; the
motivation for this behavior is to assume the sick role. Symptoms are usually acute, dramatic,
and convincing and are accompanied by a tendency to wander from one physician or hospital to
another for treatment. The exact cause is unknown, although stress and a severe personality
disorder, most often borderline personality disorder, are often implicated.
Patients with Munchausen syndrome may simulate many physical symptoms or conditions (eg, MI,
hematemesis, hemoptysis, diarrhea, FUO). Their abdominal wall may be crisscrossed by scars, or a digit
or a limb may have been amputated. Fevers are often due to self-inflicted injection with bacteria;
Escherichia coli
is often the infecting organism. These patients initially and sometimes chronically
become the responsibility of medical or surgical clinics. Nevertheless, the disorder is a mental problem, is
more complex than simple dishonest simulation of symptoms, and is associated with severe emotional
difficulties.
Patients may have prominent histrionic or borderline personality features and are usually intelligent and
resourceful. They know how to simulate disease and are sophisticated regarding medical practices. They
differ from malingerers because although their deceits and simulations are conscious and volitional, their
behavior is not motivated by external incentives, such as economic gain. It is unclear what they gain
beyond medical attention for their suffering, and their motivations and quest for attention are largely
unconscious and obscure.
Patients may have an early history of emotional and physical abuse. Patients may also have experienced
a severe illness during childhood or had a seriously ill relative. Patients appear to have problems with
their identity as well as unstable relationships. Feigning illness may be a way to increase or protect selfesteem by blaming failures on their illness, by being associated with prestigious physicians and medical
centers, and by appearing unique, heroic, or medically knowledgeable and sophisticated.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history and examination, along with any tests necessary to exclude physical
disorders. Less severe forms of factitious disorder may also involve the feigning of physical or mental
symptoms (eg, depression, hallucinations, delusions, symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder), with an
apparent goal to assume the sick role. These forms are not considered Munchausen, which is more
severe and chronic, with recurrent hospitalization, peregrination, and pseudologia fantastica (lying in a
manner that is intriguing to the listener).
Treatment
• No clearly effective treatments
Treatment is usually challenging, and there are no clearly effective treatments. Patients may obtain initial
relief by having their treatment demands met, but their symptoms typically escalate, ultimately surpassing
what physicians are willing or able to do. Confrontation or refusal to meet treatment demands often
results in angry reactions, and patients usually move from one physician or hospital to another (called
peregrination). Recognizing the disorder and requesting psychiatric or psychologic consultation early is
important, so that risky invasive testing, surgical procedures, and excessive or unwarranted use of drugs
can be avoided.
A nonaggressive, nonpunitive, nonconfrontational approach should be used to present the diagnosis of
Munchausen syndrome or other forms of factitious disorder to patients. To avoid suggesting guilt or
reproach, a physician can present the diagnosis as a cry for help. Alternatively, some experts recommend
providing mental health treatment without requiring patients to admit their role in causing their illness. In
either case, conveying that the physician and patient can cooperatively resolve the problem is helpful.
===PAGE:1762===
Munchausen Syndrome by Proxy
Munchausen syndrome by proxy is a variant in which caregivers (usually a parent) intentionally produce
or feign physical or mental symptoms or signs in a person in their care (usually a child).
The caregiver falsifies history and may injure the child with drugs or other agents or add blood or
bacterial contaminants to urine specimens to simulate disease. The caregiver seeks medical care for the
child and appears to be deeply concerned and protective. The child typically has a history of frequent
hospitalizations, usually for a variety of nonspecific symptoms, but no firm diagnosis. Victimized children
may be seriously ill and sometimes die.
Pain Disorder
(Somatoform Pain Disorder)
Pain disorder consists of pain in one or more anatomic sites severe enough to warrant clinical
attention and to cause clinically significant distress or impairment of social, occupational, or
other functioning. Mental factors are judged to have an important role in the onset, severity,
exacerbation, or maintenance of symptoms, but the pain is not intentionally produced or
feigned. Some patients may recall an initial stimulus that produced acute pain. Diagnosis is
based on history. Treatment begins by establishing a consistent, supportive physician-patient
relationship; drug therapy and psychotherapy can also help.
The proportion of people whose chronic pain is strongly influenced by mental factors is unknown.
However, pain is rarely, if ever, "all in a patient's head"; apperception of pain involves sensory and
emotional components (. In some cases, both mental and physical factors have important
roles in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain.
Symptoms and Signs
Physical pain may occur in mood and anxiety disorders, but in pain disorder, pain is a major complaint
and is severe enough to warrant clinical attention. Any body part may be affected; the back, head,
abdomen, and chest are commonly involved. The pain may be acute or chronic (≥ 6 mo).
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history after excluding a physical disorder that would adequately explain the pain
and its onset, severity, duration, and maintenance and the degree of disability. Detection of mental or
social stressors may help explain the disorder.
Treatment
• Effective treatment of pain
• For chronic pain, measures that correct dysfunction caused by pain's effects (eg, psychotherapy, various
drugs)
A thorough medical evaluation, followed by reassurance, may be sufficient. Sometimes, empathetically
pointing out a relationship with an obvious mental or social stressor is effective. However, many patients
develop chronic problems and are difficult to treat. They may visit many physicians with an expressed
wish to find a cure and are at risk of developing dependence on opioids or benzodiazepines.
For acute pain, the primary goal is to relieve the pain with analgesics, most commonly NSAIDs and
acetaminophen. Antidepressants and anticonvulsants are sometimes added.
For chronic pain (lasting ≥ 6 mo), it is important to not only manage the pain but also to reduce the pain's
effect on the patient's life and functioning. Psychotherapy and various drugs (eg, analgesics,
antidepressants, anticonvulsants) may help. Opioids can be safely and effectively used for chronic pain,
===PAGE:1763===
although some patients abuse and become dependent on them, especially those with a history of
substance abuse and dependence. All patients need ongoing monitoring for abuse and dependence.
Thorough regular reevaluations by a caring, empathetic physician, who remains alert to the possibility of
a new significant physical disorder while protecting the patient from unnecessary tests or procedures,
offers hope for long-term palliation.
Somatization Disorder
Somatization disorder is characterized by multiple physical complaints (eg, pain; GI, sexual, and
neurologic symptoms) over several years that cannot be explained fully by a physical disorder.
Symptoms usually begin before age 30 and are not intentionally produced or feigned. Diagnosis
is based on history after excluding physical disorders. Treatment focuses on establishing a
consistent, supportive physician-patient relationship that avoids exposing the patient to
unnecessary diagnostic testing and therapies.
Somatization disorder is often familial, although the etiology is unknown. Somatization disorder occurs
more often in women. Male relatives of affected women have an increased risk of antisocial personality
and substance-related disorders.
Symptoms and Signs
Recurring and multiple physical complaints usually begin before age 30. Severity may fluctuate, but
symptoms persist for at least several years. Complete symptom relief for any extended period is rare.
Some people become more overtly depressed.
Any body part may be affected, and specific symptoms and their frequency vary among cultures. In the
US, typical symptoms include headache, nausea and vomiting, bloating, abdominal pain, diarrhea or
constipation, dysuria, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and loss of sexual desire. Men frequently complain of
erectile or ejaculatory dysfunction. Neurologic symptoms are also present. Anxiety and depression may
occur. Typically, patients are dramatic and emotional when recounting their symptoms, often referring to
them as "unbearable," "beyond description," or "the worst imaginable."
Patients may become dependent on others, demanding help and emotional support and becoming angry
when they feel their needs are not met. They may also threaten or attempt suicide. Often dissatisfied with
their medical care, they typically go from one physician to another or seek treatment from several
physicians concurrently.
The intensity and persistence of symptoms may reflect a strong desire to be cared for. Symptoms may
help patients avoid responsibilities but may also prevent pleasure and act as punishment, suggesting
underlying feelings of unworthiness and guilt.
Diagnosis
• Usually clinical criteria
Patients are unaware of their underlying mental problem and believe that they have physical ailments, so
they pressure physicians for tests and treatments. Physicians usually do many examinations and tests to
eliminate a physical disorder as the cause. Because such patients may develop concurrent physical
disorders, appropriate examinations and tests should also be done when symptoms change significantly
or when objective signs develop. Patients, even those who have a satisfactory relationship with a primary
physician, are commonly referred to a psychiatrist.
Specific diagnostic criteria include the following:
• Onset of multiple physical symptoms before age 30
• Symptoms occurring over several years
===PAGE:1764===
• Treatment seeking or impaired functioning
• Pain affecting ≥ 4 body parts
• ≥ 2 GI symptoms other than pain (eg, nausea, bloating, food intolerance)
• ≥ 1 sexual or reproductive symptom other than pain (eg, sexual indifference, erectile dysfunction)
• ≥ 1 neurologic symptom other than pain (eg, weakness, imbalance, loss of sensation)
The diagnosis is supported by the dramatic nature of the complaints and the patient's sometimes
exhibitionistic, dependent, and suicidal behavior. Somatization disorder is distinguished from generalized
anxiety disorder, conversion disorder, and major depression by the predominance, multiplicity, and
persistence of physical symptoms.
Patients who do not meet the above diagnostic criteria for somatization disorder but who have ≥ 6 mo of ≥
1 physical complaints that are not fully explained by a physical disorder or another mental disorder and
who have clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning, are said to have undifferentiated
somatoform disorder.
Treatment
Treatment is usually difficult. Drug treatment of concurrent mental disorders (eg, depression) may help.
Psychotherapy, particularly cognitive-behavioral therapy, may also help. Patients benefit from having a
supportive relationship with a primary care physician, who coordinates all of their health care, offers
symptomatic relief, sees them regularly, and protects them from unnecessary tests and procedures.
===PAGE:1765===
Chapter 167. Suicidal Behavior
Introduction
Suicidal behavior includes 3 types of self-destructive acts: completed suicide, attempted
suicide, and suicide gestures. Thoughts and plans about suicide are referred to as suicide
ideation.
Completed suicide is a suicidal act that results in death. Attempted suicide is an act intended to be selflethal, but one that does not result in death. Frequently, suicide attempts involve at least some
ambivalence about wishing to die and may be a cry for help. Suicide gestures are attempts that involve an
action with a very low lethal potential (eg, inflicting superficial scratches on the wrist, overdosing on
vitamins). Suicide gestures and suicide ideation may reflect pleas for help from people who still wish to
live. However, they should not be dismissed lightly.
Epidemiology
Statistics on suicidal behavior are based mainly on death certificates and inquest reports and
underestimate the true incidence. Suicide ranks 11th among causes of death in the US, with 32,439
completed suicides in 2004. It is the 3rd leading cause of death among people 10 to 24 yr. Men ≥ 75 have
the highest rate of death by suicide. In all age groups, male deaths by suicide outnumber female deaths
by 4:1.
Each year, an estimated > 700,000 people attempt suicide. About 25 attempts are made for every death
that occurs by suicide. However, 3.5 to 12.5% of people who make an attempt eventually die by suicide
because many people make repeated attempts. About 20 to 30% of people who attempt suicide try again
within 1 yr. Women attempt suicide twice as often as men, but men complete suicide 4 times more often
than women.
People in a secure relationship have a significantly lower suicide rate than single people. Attempted and
completed suicide rates are higher among those who live alone. Suicide is less common among practicing
members of most religious groups (particularly Roman Catholics).
Group suicides, whether of many people or only 2 (such as lovers or spouses), represent an extreme
form of personal identification with others.
A suicide note is left by about 1 in 6 people who complete suicide. The content may indicate the mental
disorder that led to the suicidal act.
Etiology
Suicidal behaviors usually result from the interaction of several factors. The primary remediable risk factor
in suicide is
• Depression
Suicide and suicide attempts appear to be more common among patients with anxiety disorders, and
severe anxiety is associated with major depression or bipolar disorders.
Other factors include the following:
• Social factors
• Personality abnormalities
• Traumatic childhood experiences
• Serious physical disorders
===PAGE:1766===
• Alcohol and drugs of abuse
• Serious psychiatric disorders
Certain social factors (eg, disappointment, loss) and personality abnormalities (eg, impulsivity,
aggression) appear associated with suicide. Traumatic childhood experiences, particularly the distresses
of a broken home, parental deprivation, and abuse, are significantly more common among people who
commit suicidal acts. Suicide is sometimes the final act in a course of self-destructive behavior, such as
alcoholism, reckless driving, and violent antisocial acts. Often, one factor (commonly disruption of an
important relationship) is the last straw. Serious physical disorders, especially those that are chronic and
painful, play an important role in about 20% of suicides among the elderly.
Alcohol and drugs of abuse may increase disinhibition and impulsivity, as well as worsen mood, a
potentially lethal combination. About 30% of people who attempt suicide have consumed alcohol before
the attempt, and about one half of them were intoxicated at the time. Alcoholics are suicide-prone even
when sober.
Some patients with schizophrenia commit suicide, sometimes because of depression, to which these
patients are prone. The suicide method may be bizarre and violent. Attempted suicide is uncommon,
although it may be the first sign of psychiatric disturbance, occurring early in schizophrenia.
People with personality disorders are prone to attempted suicide—especially emotionally immature
people with a borderline or an antisocial personality disorder because they tolerate frustration poorly and
react to stress impetuously with violence and aggression.
Aggression toward others is sometimes evident in suicidal behavior. Rarely, former lovers or estranged
spouses are involved in murder-suicides; one person murders the other, then commits suicide.
Methods
Choice of methods is determined by many things, including cultural factors and availability as well as the
seriousness of intent. Some methods (eg, jumping from heights) make survival virtually impossible,
whereas others (eg, drug ingestion) may allow rescue. However, using a method that proves not to be
fatal does not necessarily imply that the intent was less serious.
A bizarre method suggests an underlying psychosis. Drug ingestion is the most common method used in
suicide attempts. Violent methods, such as shooting and hanging, are uncommon among attempted
suicides. Some methods, such as driving over cliffs, can endanger others. Suicide by police is a bizarre
form of suicide; people commit an act (eg, brandishing a weapon) that forces law enforcement agents to
kill them.
For completed suicides, firearms are most commonly used by both men (74%) and women (31%),
followed by hanging in men and drug ingestion in women.
Management of Suicidal Acts
A health care practitioner who foresees the likelihood of suicide in a patient is, in most jurisdictions,
required to inform an empowered agency to intervene. Failure to do so can result in criminal and civil
actions. Such patients should not be left alone until they are in a secure environment. They should be
transported to a secure environment (often a psychiatric facility) by trained professionals (eg, ambulance,
police), never by family members or friends.
Any suicidal act, regardless of whether it is a gesture or an attempt, must be taken seriously. Every
person with a serious self-injury should be evaluated and treated for the physical injury. If an overdose of
a potentially lethal drug is confirmed, immediate steps are taken to prevent absorption and expedite
excretion, administer any available antidote, and provide supportive treatment (see
Chapter 340
).
===PAGE:1767===
Initial assessment can be done by any health care practitioner trained in the assessment and
management of suicidal behavior. However, all patients require psychiatric assessment as soon as
possible. A decision must be made as to whether patients need to be admitted and whether involuntary
commitment or restraint is necessary. Patients with a psychotic disorder, delirium, or epilepsy and some
with severe depression and an unresolved crisis should be admitted to a psychiatric unit.
After a suicide attempt, the patient may deny any problems because the severe depression that led to the
suicidal act may be followed by a short-lived mood elevation. Nonetheless, the risk of later, completed
suicide is high unless the patient's problems are resolved.
Psychiatric assessment identifies some of the problems that contributed to the attempt and helps the
physician plan appropriate treatment. It consists of the following:
• Establishing rapport
• Understanding the suicide attempt, its background, the events preceding it, and the circumstances in
which it occurred
• Appreciating the current difficulties and problems
• Thoroughly understanding personal and family relationships, which are often pertinent to the suicide
attempt
• Fully assessing the patient's mental state, with particular emphasis on recognizing depression, anxiety,
agitation, panic attacks, severe insomnia, other mental disorders, and alcohol or drug abuse (many of
these problems require specific treatment in addition to crisis intervention)
• Interviewing close family members and friends
• Contacting the family physician
Prevention
Prevention requires identifying at-risk people and initiating appropriate interventions (see
Table 167-1
).
Although some attempted or completed suicides are a surprise and shock, even to close relatives and
associates, clear warnings may have been given to family members, friends, or health care practitioners.
Warnings are often explicit, as when patients actually discuss plans or suddenly write or change a will.
However, warnings can be more subtle, as when patients make comments about having nothing to live for
or being better off if dead.
On average, primary care physicians encounter ≥ 6 potentially suicidal people in their practice each year.
About 77% of people who commit suicide were seen by a physician within 1 yr before killing themselves,
and about 32% had been under the care of a mental health care practitioner during the preceding year.
Because severe and painful physical disorders, substance abuse, and mental disorders (particularly
depression) are often a factor
[Table 167-1.
Risk Factors and Warning Signs for Suicide]
in suicide, recognizing these possible factors and initiating appropriate treatment are important
contributions a physician can make to suicide prevention.
Each depressed patient should be questioned about thoughts of suicide. The fear that such inquiry may
implant the idea of self-destruction is baseless. Inquiry helps the physician obtain a clearer picture of the
depth of the depression, encourages constructive discussion, and conveys the physician's awareness of
the patient's deep despair and hopelessness.
===PAGE:1768===
Even people threatening imminent suicide (eg, those who call and declare that they are going to take a
lethal dose of a drug or who threaten to jump from a high height) may have some desire to live. The
physician or another person to whom they appeal for help must support the desire to live. Emergency
psychiatric aid for suicidal people includes the following:
• Establishing a relationship and open communication with them
• Reminding them of their identity (ie, using their name repeatedly)
• Helping sort out the problem that has caused the crisis
• Offering constructive help with the problem
• Encouraging them to take positive action
• Reminding them that family and friends care for them and want to help
Treatment of depression and risk of suicide:
People with depression have a significant risk of suicide
and should be carefully monitored for suicidality (suicidal behaviors and ideation). Risk of suicide may be
increased early in the treatment of depression, when psychomotor retardation and indecisiveness have
been ameliorated but the depressed mood is only partially lifted. When antidepressants are started or
when doses are increased, a few patients experience agitation, anxiety, and increasing depression, which
may increase suicidality. Recent public health warnings about the possible association between
antidepressant use and suicidality in children, adolescents, and young adults have led to a significant
reduction (> 20%) in antidepressant prescriptions to these populations.
However, youth suicide rates
increased by 14% during this period. Thus, by discouraging drug treatment of depression, these warnings
may have resulted in more, not fewer, deaths by suicide. Together, these findings suggest that the best
approach is to encourage treatment, but with appropriate precautions (dispensing antidepressants in
sublethal amounts, giving a clear warning to patients and to family members and significant others to be
alert for worsening symptoms or suicidal ideation, and, if either occurs, immediately calling the prescribing
clinician or seek care elsewhere).
Effects of Suicide
Any suicidal act has a marked emotional effect on all involved. The physician, family members, and
friends may feel guilt, shame, and remorse at not having prevented a suicide, as well as anger toward the
deceased or others. The physician can provide valuable assistance to the deceased's family members
and friends in dealing with their feelings of guilt and sorrow.
Assisted Suicide
Assisted suicide refers to the assistance given by physicians or other practitioners to people who wish to
end their life. Assistance may be requests about drugs that can be saved up to provide a lethal dose,
about instructions for a painless way to commit suicide, or for administration of a lethal dose of drug.
Assisted suicide is controversial and is illegal in most states in the US. Nonetheless, patients with painful,
debilitating, and untreatable conditions may initiate a discussion about it with a physician. Assisted suicide
may pose difficult ethical issues for physicians.
===PAGE:1769===
13 - Neurologic Disorders
Chapter 168. Approach to the Neurologic Patient
Introduction
Patients with neurologic symptoms are approached in a stepwise manner termed the neurologic method,
which consists of the following:
• Identifying the anatomic location of the lesion or lesions causing symptoms
• Identifying the pathophysiology involved
• Generating a differential diagnosis
• Selecting specific, appropriate tests
Identifying the anatomy and pathophysiology of the lesion through careful history taking and an accurate
neurologic examination markedly narrows the differential diagnosis and thus the number of tests needed.
This approach should not be replaced by reflex ordering of CT, MRI, and other laboratory testing; doing
so leads to error and unnecessary cost.
To identify the anatomic location, the examiner considers questions such as
• Is the lesion in one or multiple locations?
• Is the lesion confined to the nervous system, or is it part of a systemic disorder?
• What part of the nervous system is affected?
Specific parts of the nervous system to be considered include the cerebral cortex, subcortical white
matter, basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum, brain stem, spinal cord, brachial or pelvic plexus, peripheral
nerves, neuromuscular junction, and muscle.
Once the location of the lesion is identified, categories of pathophysiologic causes are considered; they
include
• Vascular
• Infectious
• Neoplastic
• Degenerative
• Traumatic
• Toxic-metabolic
• Immune-mediated
When appropriately applied, the neurologic method provides an orderly approach to even the most
complex case, and clinicians are far less likely to be fooled by neurologic mimicry—eg, when symptoms of
an acute stroke are actually due to a brain tumor or when rapidly ascending paralysis suggesting GuillainBarre is actually due to spinal cord compression.
History
===PAGE:1770===
The history is the most important part of the neurologic evaluation. Patients should be put at ease and
allowed to tell their story in their own words. Usually, a clinician can quickly determine whether a reliable
history
is forthcoming or whether a family member should be interviewed instead.
Specific questions clarify the quality, intensity, distribution, duration, and frequency of each symptom.
What aggravates and attenuates the symptom and whether past treatment was effective should be
determined. Specific disabilities should be described quantitatively (eg, walks at most 25 ft before
stopping to rest), and their effect on the patient's daily routine noted. Past medical history and a complete
review of systems are essential because neurologic complications are common in other disorders,
especially alcoholism, diabetes, cancer, vascular disorders, and HIV infection. Family history is important
because migraine and many metabolic, muscle, nerve, and neurodegenerative disorders are inherited.
Social, occupational, and travel history provides information about unusual infections and exposure to
toxins and parasites.
Sometimes neurologic symptoms and signs are functional or hysterical, reflecting a psychiatric disorder.
Typically, such symptoms and signs do not conform to the rules of anatomy and physiology, and the
patient is often depressed or unusually frightened. However, functional and physical disorders sometimes
coexist, and distinguishing them can be challenging.
Neurologic Examination
The neurologic examination begins with careful observation of the patient entering the examination area
and continues during history taking. The patient's speed, symmetry, and coordination while moving to the
examining table are noted, as are posture and gait. The patient's demeanor, dress, and responses
provide information about mood and social adaptation. Abnormalities in language, speech, or praxis;
neglect of space; unusual posturing; and other disorders of movement may be apparent before formal
testing.
As information is obtained, a skilled examiner may include certain components of the examination and
exclude others based on a preliminary hypothesis about the anatomy and pathophysiology of the
problem. If the examiner is less skilled, complete neurologic screening is done.
Mental status:
(See also
Chapter 157
.) The patient's attention span is assessed first; an inattentive patient
cannot cooperate fully and hinders testing. Any hint of cognitive decline requires examination of mental
status (see
Sidebar 168-1
), which involves testing multiple aspects of cognitive function (eg, orientation to
time, place, and person; attention and concentration; memory; verbal and mathematical abilities;
judgment; reasoning). Loss of orientation to person (ie, not knowing one's own name) occurs only when
obtundation, delirium, or dementia is severe; when it occurs as an isolated symptom, it suggests
malingering. Insight into illness and fund of knowledge in relation to educational level are assessed, as
are affect and mood (.
The patient is asked to follow a complex command that involves 3 body parts and discriminates between
right and left (eg, "Put your right thumb in your left ear, and stick out your tongue"). The patient is asked
to name simple objects and body parts and to read, write, and repeat simple phrases; if deficits are noted,
other tests of aphasia are needed (. Spatial perception can be assessed by asking the
patient to imitate simple and complex finger constructions and to draw a clock, cube, house, or
interlocking pentagons; the effort expended is often as informative as the final product. This test may
identify impersistence, perseveration, micrographia, and hemispatial neglect. Praxis (cognitive ability to do
complex motor movements) can be assessed by asking the patient to use a toothbrush or comb, light a
match, or snap the fingers.
Cranial nerves:
(See also
Chapter 181
.) Smell, a function of the 1st (olfactory) cranial nerve, is usually
evaluated only after head trauma or when lesions of the anterior fossa (eg, meningioma) are suspected or
patients report abnormal smell or taste. The patient is asked to identify odors (eg, soap, coffee, cloves)
presented to each nostril. Alcohol, ammonia, and other irritants, which test the nociceptive receptors of
the 5th (trigeminal) cranial nerve, are used only when malingering is suspected.
The 2nd (optic), 3rd (oculomotor), 4th (trochlear), and 6th (abducens) cranial nerves involve the visual
===PAGE:1771===
system.
For the
2nd cranial nerve
, visual acuity is tested using a Snellen chart for distance vision and a
handheld chart for near vision; each eye is assessed individually, with the other eye covered. Color
perception is tested using standard pseudoisochromatic Ishihara or Hardy-Rand-Ritter plates that have
numbers or figures embedded in a field of specifically colored dots. Visual fields are tested by directed
confrontation in all 4 visual quadrants. Direct and consensual pupillary responses are tested (see also p.
). Funduscopic examination is also done.
For the
3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerves
, eyes are observed for symmetry of movement, globe position,
asymmetry or droop of the eyelids (ptosis), and twitches or flutters of globes or lids. Extraocular
movements controlled by these nerves are tested by asking the patient to follow a moving target (eg,
examiner's finger, penlight) to all 4 quadrants (including across the midline); this test can detect
nystagmus and palsies of ocular muscles. Anisocoria or differences in pupillary size should be noted in a
dimly lit room. The pupillary light response is tested for symmetry and briskness.
Sidebar 168-1 Examination of Mental Status
The mental status examination is an assessment of current mental capacity through evaluation of general
appearance, behavior, any unusual or bizarre beliefs and perceptions (eg, delusions, hallucinations),
mood, and all aspects of cognition (eg, attention, orientation, memory).
Examination of mental status is done in anyone with an altered mental status or evolving impairment of
cognition whether acute or chronic. Many screening tools are available; the Mini-Mental State
Examination is one of the most commonly used. Baseline results are recorded, and the examination is
repeated yearly and whenever a change in mental status is suspected.
Patients should be told that recording of mental status is routine and that they should not be embarrassed
by its being done.
The examination is done in a quiet room, and the examiner should make sure that patients can hear the
questions clearly. Patients who do not speak English as their primary language should be questioned in
the language they speak fluently.
Mental status examination evaluates different areas of cognitive function. The examiner must first
establish that the patient is attentive—eg, by asking the patient to immediately repeat 3 words. Testing an
inattentive patient further is not useful.
The parameters of cognitive function to be tested include the following:
Orientation
Test the 3 parameters of orientation:
• Person (What is your name?)
• Time (What is today's date?)
• Place (What is the name of this place?)
Short-term
memory
Ask the patient to recall 3 objects after a 3-min delay.
Long-term
memory
Ask the patient a question about the past, such as "What color suit did you wear at your
wedding?" or "What was the make of your first car?"
Math
Use any simple mathematical test. Serial 7s are common: The patient is asked to start
with 100 and to subtract 7, then 7 from 93, etc. Alternatively, ask how many nickels are in
$1.35.
Word finding
Ask the patient to name as many objects in a single category, such as articles of clothing
or animals, as possible in 1 min.
===PAGE:1772===
Concentration
Ask the patient to spell a 5-letter word forward and backward. "World" is commonly used.
Naming
objects
Present an object, such as a pen, book, or ruler, and ask the patient to name it.
Following
commands
Start with a 1-step command, such as "Touch your nose with your right hand." Then test a
3-step command, such as "Take this piece of paper in your right hand. Fold it in half. Put
the paper on the floor."
Writing
Ask the patient to write a sentence. The sentence should contain a subject and an object
and should make sense. Spelling errors should be ignored.
Spatial
orientation
Ask the patient to draw a house or a clock and mark the clock with a specific time. Or ask
the patient to draw 2 intersecting pentagons.
Abstract
reasoning
Ask the patient to identify a unifying theme between 3 or 4 objects (eg, all are fruit, all are
vehicles of transportation, all are musical instruments). Ask the patient to interpret a
moderately challenging proverb, such as "People who live in glass houses should not
throw stones."
Judgment
Ask the patient about a hypothetical situation requiring good judgment, such as "What
would you do if you found a stamped letter on the sidewalk?" Placing it in the mailbox is
the correct answer; opening the letter suggests a personality disorder.
For the
5th (trigeminal) nerve
, the 3 sensory divisions (ophthalmic, maxillary, mandibular) are evaluated
by using a pinprick to test facial sensation and by brushing a wisp of cotton against the lower or lateral
cornea to evaluate the corneal reflex. If facial sensation is lost, the angle of the jaw should be examined;
sparing of this area (innervated by spinal root C2) suggests a trigeminal deficit. A weak blink due to facial
weakness (eg, 7th cranial nerve paralysis) should be distinguished from depressed or absent corneal
sensation, which is common in contact lens wearers. A patient with facial weakness feels the cotton wisp
normally on both sides, even though blink is decreased. Trigeminal motor function is tested by palpating
the masseter muscles while the patient clenches the teeth and by asking the patient to open the mouth
against resistance. If a pterygoid muscle is weak, the jaw deviates to that side when the mouth is opened.
The
7th (facial) cranial nerve
is evaluated by checking for hemifacial weakness. Asymmetry of facial
movements is often more obvious during spontaneous conversation, especially when the patient smiles
or, if obtunded, grimaces at a noxious stimulus; on the weakened side, the nasolabial fold is depressed
and the palpebral fissure is widened. If the patient has only lower facial weakness (ie, furrowing of the
forehead and eye closure are preserved), etiology of 7th nerve weakness is central rather than
peripheral. Taste in the anterior two thirds of the tongue can be tested with sweet, sour, salty, and bitter
solutions applied with a cotton swab first on one side of the tongue, then on the other. Hyperacusis may
be detected with a vibrating tuning fork held next to the ear.
Because the
8th (vestibulocochlear, acoustic, auditory) cranial nerve
carries auditory and vestibular
input, evaluation involves testing hearing ( and balance.
The
9th (glossopharyngeal) and 10th (vagus) cranial nerves
are usually evaluated together. Whether
the palate elevates symmetrically is noted. A tongue blade is used to touch one side of the posterior
pharynx, then the other, and symmetry of the gag reflex is observed; bilateral absence of the gag reflex is
common among healthy people and may not be significant. In an unresponsive, intubated patient,
suctioning the endotracheal tube normally triggers coughing. If hoarseness is noted, the vocal cords are
inspected. Isolated hoarseness (with normal gag and palatal elevation) should prompt a search for lesions
(eg, mediastinal lymphoma, aortic aneurysm) compressing the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
The
11th (spinal accessory) cranial nerve
is evaluated by testing the muscles it supplies. For the
sternocleidomastoid, the patient is asked to turn the head against resistance supplied by the examiner's
hand while the examiner palpates the active muscle (opposite the turned head). For the upper trapezius,
the patient is asked to elevate the shoulders against resistance supplied by the examiner.
The
12th (hypoglossal) cranial nerve
is evaluated by asking the patient to extend the tongue and
inspecting it for atrophy, fasciculations, and weakness (deviation is toward the side of a lesion).
===PAGE:1773===
Motor system:
The limbs and shoulder girdle should be fully exposed, then inspected for atrophy,
hypertrophy, asymmetric development, fasciculations, myotonia, tremor, and other involuntary movements,
including chorea (brief, jerky movements), athetosis (continuous, writhing movements), and myoclonus
(shocklike contractions of a muscle). Passive flexion and extension of the limbs in a relaxed patient
provide information about muscle tone. Decreased muscle bulk indicates atrophy, but bilateral atrophy or
atrophy in large or concealed muscles, unless advanced, may not be obvious. In the elderly, loss of some
muscle mass is common. Hypertrophy occurs when one muscle must work harder to compensate for
weakness in another; pseudohypertrophy occurs when muscle tissue is replaced by excessive connective
tissue or storage material.
Fasciculations (brief, fine, irregular twitches of the muscle visible under the skin) are relatively common.
Although they can occur in normal muscle, particularly in calf muscles of the elderly, fasciculations usually
indicate lesions of the lower motor neuron (eg, nerve degeneration or injury and regeneration). Myotonia
(slowed relaxation of muscle after a sustained contraction or direct percussion of the muscle) indicates
myotonic dystrophy and may be demonstrated by inability to quickly open a clenched hand. Increased
resistance followed by relaxation (clasp-knife phenomenon) and spasticity indicates upper motor neuron
lesions. Lead-pipe rigidity, often with cogwheeling, suggests a basal ganglia disorder.
Muscle strength:
Patients who report weakness may mean fatigue, clumsiness, or true muscle
weakness. Thus, the examiner must
define the precise character of symptoms, including exact location,
time of occurrence, precipitating and ameliorating factors, and associated symptoms and signs (see
Weakness . Limbs are inspected for weakness (when extended, a weak limb drifts downward),
tremor, and other involuntary movements. The strength of specific muscle groups is tested against
resistance, and one side of the body is compared with the other. However, pain may preclude a full effort
during strength testing. With hysterical weakness, resistance to movement may be initially normal,
followed by a sudden giving way.
Subtle weakness may be indicated by decreased arm swing while walking, pronator drift in an
outstretched arm, decreased spontaneous use of a limb, an externally rotated leg, slowing of rapid
alternating movements, or impairment of fine dexterity (eg, ability to fasten a button, open a safety pin, or
remove a match from its box). Subtle motor weakness can often be detected by Tiller and mini-Tiller
testing. With each hand, the patient makes a fist (in the Tiller test) or a fist with the index finger extended
(in the mini-Tiller test) and then rotates the 2 around each other. The weaker limb becomes fixed in space
while the stronger revolves around it.
Strength should be graded. The following scale, originally developed by The Medical Research Council
of the United Kingdom, is now used universally:
0: No visible muscle contraction
1: Visible muscle contraction with no or trace movement
2: Limb movement when gravity is eliminated
3: Movement against gravity but not resistance
4: Movement against resistance supplied by the examiner
5: Full strength
The difficulty with this and similar scales is the large range in strength possible between grades 4 and 5.
Distal strength can be semiquantitatively measured with a handgrip ergometer or with an inflated BP cuff
squeezed by the patient.
Functional testing often provides a better picture of the relationship between strength and disability. As
the patient does various maneuvers, deficiencies are noted and quantified as much as possible (eg,
number of squats done or steps climbed). Rising from a squatting position or stepping onto a chair tests
proximal leg strength; walking on the heels and on tiptoe tests distal strength. Pushing with the arms to
===PAGE:1774===
get out of a chair indicates quadriceps weakness. Swinging the body to move the arms indicates shoulder
girdle weakness. Rising from the supine position by turning prone, kneeling, and using the hands to climb
up the thighs and slowly push erect (Gowers' sign) suggests pelvic girdle weakness.
Gait, stance, and coordination:
Normal gait, stance, and coordination require integrity of the motor,
vestibular, and proprioceptive pathways (see also
Chapter 183
). A lesion in any of the pathways causes
characteristic deficits: Cerebellar ataxia requires a wide gait for stability; dropfoot causes a steppage gait
(lifting the leg higher than normal to avoid catching the foot on surface irregularities); pelvic muscle
weakness causes waddling; and spastic leg causes scissoring and circumduction. Patients with impaired
proprioception must constantly observe placement of their feet to avoid tripping or falling. Coordination
can be tested with finger-to-nose or knee-to-shin maneuvers, which help detect ataxic movements.
Sensation:
The best screening test for sensory loss uses a safety pin to lightly prick the face, torso, and
4 limbs; the patient is asked whether the pinprick feels the same on both sides and whether the sensation
is dull or sharp. The pin is discarded after use to avoid potential transmission of bloodborne disorders
(eg, HIV infection, hepatitis).
Cortical sensory function is evaluated by asking the patient to identify a familiar object (eg, coin, key)
placed in the palm of the hand (stereognosis) and numbers written on the palm (graphesthesia) and to
distinguish between 1 and 2 simultaneous, closely placed pinpricks on the fingertips (2-point
discrimination).
Temperature sense can be tested with a cold tuning fork that has one prong rubbed warm by the
examiner's palm or with test tubes containing warm and cold water.
Joint position sense is tested by moving the terminal phalanges of the patient's fingers, then the toes, up
or down a few degrees. If the patient cannot identify these tiny movements with eyes closed, larger upand-down movements are tried before testing the next most proximal joints (eg, testing the ankles if toe
movement is not perceived). Pseudoathetosis refers to involuntary writhing, snakelike movements of a
limb that result from severe loss of position sense; motor pathways, including those of the basal ganglia,
are preserved. The brain cannot sense where the limb is in space so the limb moves on its own, and the
patient must use vision to control the limb's movements. Typically, when the eyes are closed, the patient
cannot locate the limb in space. Inability to stand with feet together and eyes
closed (Romberg test)
indicates impaired position sense in the lower extremities. When cerebellar disease is present, the patient
stands with the feet apart but as close together as possible without falling and only then closes the eyes.
Rarely, a positive result is due to severe bilateral loss of vestibular function (eg, aminoglycoside toxicity).
To test vibration sense, the examiner places a finger under the patient's distal interphalangeal joint and
presses a lightly tapped 128-cycle tuning fork on top of the joint. The patient should note the end of
vibration about the same time as the examiner, who feels it through the patient's joint.
A cotton wisp can be used to test light touch.
If sensation is impaired, the anatomic pattern suggests location of the lesion (see
Figs. 168-1
,
168-2
, and
168-3
):
• Stocking-glove distribution: Distal peripheral nerves
• Single dermatomal or nerve branch distribution: Isolated nerves (mononeuritis multiplex) or nerve roots
(radiculopathy)
• Sensation reduced below a certain dermatomal level: Spinal cord
• Saddle area sensory loss: Cauda equina
• Crossed face-body pattern: Brain stem
===PAGE:1775===
• Hemisensory loss: Brain
• Midline hemisensory loss: Thalamus or functional (psychiatric)
Location of the lesion is confirmed by determining whether motor weakness and reflex changes follow a
similar pattern. Patchy sensory, motor, and reflex deficits in a limb suggest lesions of the brachial or pelvic
plexus.
Reflexes:
Deep tendon (muscle stretch) reflex testing evaluates afferent nerves, synaptic connections
within the spinal cord, motor nerves, and descending motor pathways. Lower motor neuron lesions (eg,
affecting the anterior horn cell, spinal root, or peripheral nerve) depress reflexes; upper motor neuron
lesions (ie, non-basal ganglia disorders anywhere above the anterior horn cell) increase reflexes (.
Reflexes tested include the biceps (innervated by C5 and C6), radial brachialis (by
[Fig. 168-1.
Sensory dermatomes.]
[Fig. 168-2.
Cutaneous nerve distribution: upper limb.]
C6), triceps (by C7), quadriceps knee jerk (by L4), and ankle jerk (by S1). Any asymmetric increase or
depression is noted. Jendrassik's maneuver can be used to augment hypoactive reflexes: The patient
locks the hands together and pulls vigorously apart as a tendon in the lower extremity is tapped.
Alternatively, the patient can push the knees together against each other, while the upper limb tendon is
tested.
[Fig. 168-3.
Cutaneous nerve distribution: lower limb.]
Lightly stroking the 4 quadrants of the abdomen should elicit a superficial abdominal reflex. Depression of
this reflex may be due to a central lesion, obesity, or lax skeletal muscles (eg, after pregnancy); its
absence may indicate spinal cord injury.
Pathologic reflexes (eg, Babinski's, Chaddock's, Oppenheim, snout, root, grasp) are reversions to
primitive responses and indicate loss of cortical inhibition.
Babinski's, Chaddock's, and Oppenheim reflexes
all evaluate the plantar response. The normal
reflex response is flexion of the great toe. An abnormal response is slower and consists of extension of
the great toe with fanning of the other toes and often knee and hip flexion. This reaction is of spinal reflex
origin and indicates spinal disinhibition due to an upper motor neuron lesion. For Babinski's reflex, the
lateral sole of the foot is firmly stroked from the heel to the ball of the foot with a tongue blade or end of a
reflex hammer. The stimulus must be noxious but not injurious; stroking should not veer too medially, or it
may inadvertently induce a primitive grasp reflex. In sensitive patients, the reflex response may be
masked by quick voluntary withdrawal of the foot, which is not a problem in Chaddock's or Oppenheim
reflex testing. For Chaddock's reflex, the lateral foot, from lateral malleolus to small toe, is stroked with a
blunt instrument. For the Oppenheim reflex, the anterior tibia, from just below the patella to the foot, is
firmly stroked with a knuckle.
The
snout reflex
is present if tapping a tongue blade across the lips causes pursing of the lips.
The
rooting reflex
is present if stroking the lateral upper lip causes movement of the mouth toward the
stimulus.
The
grasp reflex
is present if gently stroking the palm of the patient's hand causes the fingers to flex and
grasp the examiner's finger.
The
palmomental reflex
is present if stroking the palm of the hand causes contraction of the ipsilateral
mentalis muscle of the lower lip.
===PAGE:1776===
Hoffmann's sign
is present if flicking the nail on the 3rd or 4th finger elicits involuntary flexion of the
distal phalanx of the thumb and index finger.
For the
glabellar sign
, the forehead is tapped to induce blinking; normally, each of the first 5 taps
induces a single blink, then the reflex fatigues. Blinking persists in patients with diffuse cerebral
dysfunction.
Testing for
clonus
(rhythmic, rapid alternation of muscle contraction and relaxation caused by sudden,
passive tendon stretching) is done by rapid dorsiflexion of the foot at the ankle. Sustained clonus
indicates an upper motor neuron disorder.
Sphincteric reflexes
may be tested during the rectal examination. To test sphincteric tone (S2 to S4
nerve root levels), the examiner inserts a gloved finger into the rectum and asks the patient to squeeze it.
Alternatively, the perianal region is touched lightly with a cotton wisp; the normal response is contraction
of the external anal sphincter (anal wink reflex). Rectal tone typically becomes lax in patients with acute
spinal cord injury or cauda equine syndrome.
For the
bulbospongiosus reflex
, which tests S2 to S4 levels, the dorsum of the penis is tapped; normal
response is contraction of the bulbospongiosus muscle.
For the
cremasteric reflex
, which tests the L2 level, the medial thigh 7.6 cm (3 in) below the inguinal
crease is stroked upward; normal response is elevation of the ipsilateral testis.
Autonomic nervous system:
(See also p.
.) Assessment involves checking for postural
hypotension, heart rate changes in response to the Valsalva maneuver, decreased or absent sweating,
and evidence of Horner's syndrome (unilateral ptosis, pupillary constriction, facial anhidrosis).
Disturbances of bowel, bladder, sexual, and hypothalamic function should be noted.
Cerebrovascular examination:
In a patient presenting with acute stroke, radial pulse and BP in the 2
arms are compared to check for painless aortic dissection, which can occlude a carotid artery and cause
stroke. The skin, sclerae, fundi, oral mucosae, and nail beds are inspected for hemorrhages and
evidence of cholesterol or septic emboli; auscultation over the heart can detect new or evolving murmurs
and arrhythmias. Bruits over the cranium may indicate an arteriovenous malformation or fistula or,
occasionally, redirected blood flow across the circle of Willis after carotid occlusion. Auscultation over the
carotid arteries can detect bruits near the bifurcation; vigorous palpation should be avoided. By running
the bell of the stethoscope down the neck toward the heart, the examiner may identify a change in
character that can distinguish a bruit from a systolic heart murmur. Decreased vigor of the carotid
upstroke suggests a stenotic lesion.
Peripheral pulses are palpated to check for peripheral vascular disease. The temporal arteries are
palpated; enlargement or tenderness may suggest temporal arteritis.
Neurologic Diagnostic Procedures
Diagnostic procedures should not be used for preliminary screening, except perhaps in emergencies
when a complete neurologic evaluation is impossible. Evidence uncovered during the history and physical
examination should guide testing.
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap):
Lumbar puncture is used to evaluate intracranial pressure and CSF
composition (see
Table 168-1
), to therapeutically reduce intracranial pressure (eg, pseudotumor), and to administer
intrathecal drugs or a radiopaque agent for myelography.
Relative contraindications
include
• Infection at the puncture site
===PAGE:1777===
• Bleeding diathesis
• Increased intracranial pressure due to an intracranial mass lesion, obstructed CSF outflow (eg, due to
aqueductal stenosis or Chiari I malformation), or spinal cord CSF blockage (eg, due to tumor cord
compression)
If papilledema or focal neurologic deficits are present, CT or MRI should be done before lumbar puncture
to rule out presence of a mass that could precipitate transtentorial or cerebellar herniation.
[Table 168-1.
Cerebrospinal Fluid Abnormalities in Various Disorders]
For the procedure, the patient is typically in the left lateral decubitus position. A cooperative patient is
asked to hug the knees and curl up as tightly as possible. Assistants may have to hold patients who
cannot maintain this position, or the spine may be flexed better by having patients, particularly obese
patients, sit on the side of the bed and lean over a bedside tray table. An area 20 cm in diameter is
washed with iodine, then wiped with alcohol to remove the iodine and prevent its introduction into the
subarachnoid space. A lumbar puncture needle with stylet is inserted into the L4- to-L5 interspace (the L4
spinous process is typically on a line between the posterior-superior iliac crests); the needle is aimed
rostrally toward the patient's umbilicus and always kept parallel to the floor. Entrance into the
subarachnoid space is usually accompanied by a discernible pop; the stylet is withdrawn to allow CSF to
flow out. Opening pressure is measured with a manometer; 4 tubes are each filled with about 2 to 10 mL
of CSF for testing. The puncture site is then covered with a sterile adhesive strip. A post-lumbar puncture
headache ( occurs in about 10% of patients.
Normal CSF is clear and colorless; ≥ 300 cells/
μ
L produces cloudiness or turbidity. Bloody fluid may
indicate a traumatic puncture (pushing the needle in too far, into the venous plexus along the anterior
spinal canal) or subarachnoid hemorrhage. A traumatic puncture is distinguished by gradual clearing of
the CSF between the 1st and 4th tubes (confirmed by decreasing RBC count), absence of xanthochromia
(yellowish CSF due to lysed RBCs) in a centrifuged sample, and fresh, uncrenated RBCs. With intrinsic
subarachnoid hemorrhage, the CSF remains uniformly bloody throughout collection; xanthochromia is
often present if several hours have passed after ictus; and RBCs are usually older and crenated. Faintly
yellow fluid may also be due to senile chromogens, severe jaundice, or increased protein (> 100 mg/dL).
Cell count and differential and glucose and protein levels aid in the diagnosis of many neurologic
disorders (see
Table 168-1
). If infection is suspected, the centrifuged CSF sediment is stained for
bacteria (Gram stain), for TB (acid-fast stain or immunofluorescence), and for
Cryptococcus
sp (India ink).
Larger amounts of fluid (10 mL) improve the chances of detecting the pathogen, particularly acidfast
bacilli and certain fungi, in stains and cultures. In early meningococcal meningitis or severe leukopenia,
CSF protein may be too low for bacterial adherence to the glass slide during Gram staining, producing a
false-negative result. Mixing a drop of aseptic serum with CSF sediment prevents this problem. When
hemorrhagic meningoencephalitis is suspected, a wet mount is used to search for amebas. Latex particle
agglutination and coagglutination tests may allow rapid bacterial identification, especially when stains and
cultures are negative (eg, in partially treated meningitis). CSF should be cultured aerobically and
anaerobically and for acid-fast bacilli and fungi. Except for enteroviruses, viruses are seldom isolated from
the CSF. Viral antibody panels are available. Venereal Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL) testing
and cryptococcal antigen testing are often routinely done. PCR tests for herpes simplex virus and other
CNS pathogens are increasingly available.
Normally, CSF: blood glucose ratio is about 0.6, and except in severe hypoglycemia, CSF glucose is
typically > 50 mg/dL (> 2.78 mmol/L). Increased CSF protein (> 50 mg/dL) is a sensitive but nonspecific
index of disease; protein increases to > 500 mg/dL in purulent meningitis, advanced TB meningitis,
complete block by spinal cord tumor, or a bloody puncture. Special examinations for globulin (normally <
15%), oligoclonal banding, and myelin basic protein aid in diagnosis of a demyelinating disorder.
CT:
CT provides rapid, noninvasive imaging of the brain and skull. CT is superior to MRI in visualizing
fine bone detail in (but not the contents of) the posterior fossa, base of the skull, and spinal canal. A
radiopaque contrast agent helps detect brain tumors and abscesses. Noncontrast CT is used to rapidly
detect acute hemorrhage and various gross structural changes without concern about contrast allergy or
===PAGE:1778===
renal failure. With an intrathecal agent, CT can outline abnormalities encroaching on the brain stem,
spinal cord, or spinal nerve roots (eg, meningeal carcinoma, herniated disk) and may detect a syrinx in
the spinal cord. CT angiography using a contrast agent can show the cerebral blood vessels, obviating
the need for MRI or angiography.
Adverse effects of contrast agents ( include allergic reactions and contrast nephropathy.
MRI:
MRI provides better resolution of neural structures than CT. This difference is most significant
clinically for visualizing cranial nerves, brain stem lesions, abnormalities of the posterior fossa, and the
spinal cord; CT images of these regions are often marred by bony streak artifacts. Also, MRI is better for
detecting demyelinating plaques, early infarction, subclinical brain edema, cerebral contusions, incipient
transtentorial herniation, abnormalities of the craniocervical junction, and syringomyelia.
MRI is especially
valuable for identifying spinal abnormalities (eg, tumor, abscess) compressing the spinal cord and
requiring emergency intervention.
MRI is contraindicated in patients who have had a pacemaker or cardiac or carotid stents for < 6 wk or
who have ferromagnetic aneurysm clips or other metallic objects that may overheat or be displaced within
the body by the intense magnetic field.
Visualization of inflammatory, demyelinated, and neoplastic lesions may require enhancement with IV
paramagnetic contrast agents (eg, gadolinium). Although gadolinium is thought to be much safer than
contrast agents used with CT, nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy) has
been reported in patients with impaired renal function and acidosis.
There are several MRI techniques (; choice of technique depends on the specific tissue,
location, and suspected disorder. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) allows rapid, early detection of
ischemic stroke. Perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI) can detect areas of hypoperfusion in early ischemic
stroke but cannot yet reliably distinguish areas with benign oligemia from those with injurious
hypoperfusion that results in infarction. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is an extension of DWI that can
show white matter tracts in 3 dimensions (tractography) and can be used to monitor the integrity of CNS
tracts affected by aging and disease. Functional MRI (fMRI) detects brain regions activated (shown by
increased flow of oxygenated blood) by a specific cognitive or motor task, but its clinical use is still being
defined.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) uses MRI with or without a contrast agent to show cerebral
vessels and major arteries and their branches in the head and neck. Although MRA has not replaced
cerebral angiography, it is used when cerebral angiography cannot be done (eg, because the patient
refuses or has increased risk). As a check for stroke, MRA tends to exaggerate severity of arterial
narrowing and thus does not usually miss occlusive disease of large arteries.
Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) uses MRI to show the major veins and dural sinuses of the
cranium. MRV obviates the need for cerebral angiography in diagnosing cerebral venous thrombosis and
is useful for monitoring thrombus resolution and guiding the duration of anticoagulation. Magnetic
resonance spectroscopy can measure metabolites in the brain regionally to distinguish tumors from
abscess or stroke.
Echoencephalography:
Ultrasonography can be used at the bedside (usually in the neonatal ICU) to
detect hemorrhage and hydrocephalus in children < 2 yr. CT has replaced echoencephalography in older
children and adults.
Cerebral catheter angiography:
X-rays taken after a radiopaque agent is injected via an intraarterial
catheter show individual cerebral arteries and venous structures of the brain. With digital data processing
(digital subtraction angiography), small amounts of agent can produce high-resolution images. Cerebral
angiography supplements CT and MRI in delineating the site and vascularity of intracranial lesions; it has
been the gold standard for diagnosing stenotic or occluded arteries, congenitally absent vessels,
aneurysms, and arteriovenous malformations. Vessels, as small as 0.1 mm, can be visualized. However,
its use has decreased dramatically with the advent of MRA and CT angiography. It is still routinely used
===PAGE:1779===
when cerebral vasculitis is suspected and when angiographic interventions (eg, angioplasty, stent
placement, intra-arterial thrombolysis, aneurysm obliteration) may be necessary.
Duplex Doppler ultrasonography:
This noninvasive procedure can assess dissection, stenosis,
occlusion, and ulceration of the carotid bifurcation. It is safe and rapid, but it does not provide the detail of
angiography. It is preferable to periorbital Doppler ultrasonography and oculoplethysmography for
evaluating patients with carotid artery transient ischemic attacks and is useful for following an abnormality
over time. Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography helps evaluate residual blood flow after brain death,
vasospasm of the middle cerebral artery after subarachnoid hemorrhage, and vertebrobasilar stroke.
Myelography:
X-rays are taken after a radiopaque agent is injected into the subarachnoid space via
lumbar puncture. MRI has replaced myelography for evaluation of intraspinal abnormalities, but CT
myelography is still done when MRI is unavailable. Contraindications are the same as those for lumbar
puncture. Myelography may exacerbate the effects of spinal cord compression, especially if too much
fluid is removed too rapidly.
EEG:
Electrodes are distributed over the brain to detect electrical changes associated with seizure
disorders, sleep disorders, and metabolic or structural encephalopathies. Twenty electrodes are
distributed symmetrically over the scalp. The normal awake EEG shows 8- to 12-Hz, 50μ
V sinusoidal
alpha waves that wax and wane over the occipital and parietal lobes and > 12-Hz, 10- to 20μ
V beta
waves frontally, interspersed with 4- to 7-Hz theta waves. The EEG is examined for asymmetries between
the 2 hemispheres (suggesting a structural disorder), for excessive slowing (appearance of 1- to 4-Hz,
50- to 350μ
V delta waves, as occurs in depressed consciousness, encephalopathy, and dementia), and
for abnormal wave patterns.
Abnormal wave patterns may be nonspecific (eg, epileptiform sharp waves) or diagnostic (eg, 3-Hz spike
and wave discharges for absence seizures, 1-Hz periodic sharp waves for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease).
The EEG is particularly useful for appraising episodic altered consciousness of uncertain etiology. If a
seizure disorder is suspected and the routine EEG is normal, maneuvers that electrically activate the
cortex (eg, hyperventilation, photic stimulation, sleep, sleep deprivation) can sometimes elicit evidence of
a seizure disorder. Nasopharyngeal leads can sometimes detect a temporal lobe seizure focus when the
EEG is otherwise uninformative. Continuous ambulatory monitoring of the EEG (with or without video
monitoring) over 24 h can often determine whether fleeting memory lapses, subjective auras, or unusual
episodic motor behavior is due to seizure activity.
Measurement of evoked responses (potentials):
Visual, auditory, or tactile stimuli are used to
activate corresponding areas of the cerebral cortex, resulting in focal cortical electrical activity. Ordinarily,
these small potentials are lost in EEG background noise, but computer processing cancels out the noise
to reveal a waveform. Latency, duration, and amplitude of the evoked responses indicate whether the
tested sensory pathway is intact.
Evoked responses are particularly useful for detecting clinically inapparent deficits in a demyelinating
disorder, appraising sensory systems in infants, substantiating deficits suspected to be histrionic, and
following the subclinical course of disease. For example, visual evoked responses may detect
unsuspected optic nerve damage by multiple sclerosis. When integrity of the brain stem is in question,
brain stem auditory evoked responses is an objective test. Somatosensory evoked responses may
pinpoint the physiologic disturbance when a structural disorder (eg, metastatic carcinoma that invades the
plexus and spinal cord) affects multiple levels of the neuraxis.
Electromyography and nerve conduction velocity studies:
When determining whether weakness is
due to a nerve, muscle, or neuromuscular junction disorder is clinically difficult, these studies can identify
the affected nerves and muscles.
In electromyography, a needle is inserted in a muscle, and electrical activity is recorded while the muscle
is contracting and resting. Normally, resting muscle is electrically silent; with minimal contraction, action
potentials of single motor units appear. As contraction increases, the number of potentials increases,
forming an interference pattern. Denervated muscle fibers are recognized by increased activity with
needle insertion and abnormal spontaneous activity (fibrillations and fasciculations); fewer motor units are
===PAGE:1780===
recruited during contraction, producing a reduced interference pattern. Surviving axons branch to
innervate adjacent muscle fibers, enlarging the motor unit and producing giant action potentials. In muscle
disorders, individual fibers are affected without regard to their motor units; thus, amplitude of their
potentials is diminished, but the interference pattern remains full.
In nerve conduction velocity studies, a peripheral nerve is stimulated with electrical shocks at several
points along its course to a muscle, and the time to initiation of contraction is recorded. The time an
impulse takes to traverse a measured length of nerve determines conduction velocity. The time required
to traverse the segment nearest the muscle is called distal latency. Similar measurements can be made
for sensory nerves. When weakness is due to a muscle disorder, nerve conduction is normal. In
neuropathy, conduction is often slowed, and the response pattern may show a dispersion of potentials
due to unequal involvement of myelinated and unmyelinated axons. A nerve can be repeatedly stimulated
to evaluate the neuromuscular junction for fatigability; eg, a progressive decremental response occurs in
myasthenia gravis.
Weakness
Weakness is one of the most common reasons patients present to primary care clinicians. Weakness is
loss of muscle strength, although many patients also use the term when they feel generally fatigued or
have functional limitations (eg, due to pain or limited joint motion) even though muscle strength is normal.
Weakness may affect a few or many muscles and develop suddenly or gradually. Other symptoms may be
present depending on the cause. Weakness of specific muscle groups can cause disorders of eye
movement, dysarthria, dysphagia, or respiratory weakness.
Pathophysiology
Voluntary movement is initiated in the cerebral motor cortex, at the posterior aspect of the frontal lobe.
The neurons involved (upper motor or corticospinal tract neurons) synapse with neurons in the spinal
cord (lower motor neurons). Lower motor neurons transmit impulses to the neuromuscular junction to
initiate muscle contraction. Common mechanisms of weakness thus include dysfunction of
• Upper motor neurons (corticospinal and corticobulbar tract lesions)
• Lower motor neurons (eg, due to peripheral polyneuropathies or anterior horn cell lesions)
• Neuromuscular junction
• Muscle (eg, due to myopathies)
The location of certain lesions correlates with physical findings:
• Upper motor neuron dysfunction (except in the uncommon case when all other nearby motor pathways
are affected) disinhibits lower motor neurons, resulting in increased muscle tone (spasticity) and
increased muscle stretch reflexes (hyperreflexia). An extensor plantar (Babinski's) reflex is specific for
upper motor neuron (corticospinal tract) dysfunction.
• Lower motor neuron dysfunction disrupts reflex arcs, causing hyporeflexia and decreased muscle tone
(flaccidity), and may cause fasciculations; with time, muscles atrophy.
• Peripheral polyneuropathies tend to be most noticeable in the longest nerves (ie, weakness is more
prominent in the distal limb than the proximal and in legs more than arms) and produce signs of lower
motor neuron dysfunction (eg, decreased reflexes and muscle tone).
• The most common disorder of the neuromuscular junction—myasthenia gravis—typically causes
fluctuating weakness that worsens with activity and lessens with rest.
• Diffuse muscle dysfunction (eg, in myopathies) tends to be most noticeable in the largest muscle groups
===PAGE:1781===
(proximal muscles).
Etiology
The many causes of muscle weakness are categorized by location of the lesion (see
Table 168-2
). Usually, lesions in a given location manifest similar clinical findings. However, some
disorders have characteristics of lesions in more than one location. For example, patients with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) may have findings of both upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction.
Disorders of the spinal cord may affect tracts from upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons (anterior
horn cells), or both.
Common causes of
focal weakness
include
• Stroke (the most common cause of unilateral weakness)
• Neuropathies, including those that are caused by trauma or entrapment (eg, carpal tunnel syndrome)
and that are immunemediated (eg, Bell's palsy)
• Spinal root entrapment (eg, herniated intervertebral disk)
• Spinal cord compression (eg, cervical spondylosis, epidural cancer metastasis, trauma)
• Multiple sclerosis
The most common causes of
generalized weakness
are
• Generalized muscle wasting due to prolonged immobilization in an ICU (ICU myopathy)
• Critical illness polyneuropathy (ICU neuropathy)
• Common myopathies (eg, alcoholic myopathy, hypokalemia, corticosteroid myopathy)
• Use of paralytic drugs in a critical care patient
Fatigue:
Many patients report weakness when their problem is fatigue. Fatigue can prevent maximal
effort and muscle performance during strength testing. Common causes of fatigue include acute severe
illness of almost any cause, cancers, chronic infections (eg, HIV, hepatitis, endocarditis, mononucleosis),
endocrine disorders, renal failure, hepatic failure, heart failure, and anemia. Patients with fibromyalgia,
depression, or chronic fatigue syndrome may report weakness or fatigue but have no defined objective
abnormalities.
Evaluation
Evaluation should try to distinguish true muscular weakness from fatigue, then check for findings that help
establish the mechanism and, when possible, the cause.
History: History of present illness
should begin with open-ended questions, asking patients to
describe in detail what they are experiencing as weakness. Then, specific questions can be asked,
particularly about the ability to do specific tasks, including brushing teeth or hair, speaking, swallowing,
rising from a chair, climbing stairs, and walking. Clinicians should also ask about the onset (sudden or
gradual) and progression (eg, constant,
[Table 168-2.
Some Causes of Muscle Weakness]
worsening, intermittent) of symptoms. Close questioning is needed to differentiate sudden onset from
sudden recognition; patients may suddenly recognize symptoms only after slowly progressive weakness
crosses a threshold that prevents them from doing some normally routine task (eg, walking, tying shoes).
Important associated symptoms include sensory changes, double vision, memory loss, difficulty using
===PAGE:1782===
language, seizures, and headaches. Factors that worsen weakness, such as heat (suggesting multiple
sclerosis) or repetitive use of a muscle (suggesting myasthenia gravis), are noted.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including rash
(dermatomyositis, Lyme disease, syphilis); fevers (chronic infection); muscle pain (myositis); neck pain
(cervical myelopathy); vomiting or diarrhea (botulism); shortness of breath (heart failure, a pulmonary
disorder, anemia); anorexia and weight loss (cancer, other chronic illness); change in color of urine
(porphyria, liver or kidney disorder); heat or cold intolerance (thyroid dysfunction); and depressed mood,
poor concentration, anxiety, and loss of interest in usual activities (mood disorder).
Past medical history
should identify known disorders that can cause weakness or fatigue, including
thyroid, liver, kidney, or adrenal disorders; cancer or risk factors for cancer (paraneoplastic syndromes
—eg, Eaton-Lambert syndrome) such as heavy smoking; osteoarthritis (cervical myelopathy); and
infections. Clinicians should assess risk factors for possible causes, including those for infection (eg,
unprotected sexual intercourse, blood transfusions, exposure to TB) and stroke (eg, hypertension, atrial
fibrillation, atherosclerosis). Complete drug history should be reviewed.
Family history
should include known hereditary disorders (eg, hereditary muscle disorders,
channelopathies, metabolic myopathies, hereditary neuropathies) and presence of similar symptoms in
family members (suggesting a possible unrecognized hereditary disorder). Hereditary motor neuropathies
often go unrecognized in families because of variable, incomplete phenotypic expression. Hammer toes,
high arches in the feet, and poor performance in sports may indicate an undiagnosed hereditary motor
neuropathy.
Social history
should note use of alcohol (suggesting alcoholic myopathy), illicit drug use (suggesting
increased risk of HIV/AIDS, bacterial infections, TB, or stroke due to cocaine use), occupational or other
exposure to toxins (eg, organophosphate insecticides, heavy metals, industrial solvents), recent travel
(suggesting Lyme disease, tick paralysis, diphtheria, or a parasitic infection), and social stressors
(suggesting depression).
Physical examination:
A complete neurologic and muscle examination is done to identify localizing or
diagnostic findings. Key findings usually involve
• Cranial nerves
• Motor function
• Reflexes
Cranial nerve examination
includes inspection of the face for gross asymmetry and ptosis; mild facial
asymmetry can be normal. Extraocular movements and facial muscles, including masseters (for strength),
are tested. Palatal weakness is suggested by a nasal voice quality; testing the gag reflex and looking at
the palate directly are less helpful. Tongue weakness is suggested by inability to clearly articulate certain
consonants (eg, saying "ta-ta-ta") and slurring of speech (lingual dysarthria). Mild asymmetry during
tongue protrusion may be normal. Sternocleidomastoid and trapezius strength is tested by having the
patient rotate the head and shrug the shoulders against resistance. The patient is asked to blink
repeatedly to see whether blinking fatigues.
Motor examination
includes inspection, assessment of tone, and strength testing. The body is
inspected for kyphoscoliosis (sometimes suggesting chronic weakness of paraspinal muscles) and for
surgical and traumatic scars. Dystonic posturing (eg, torticollis) may interfere with movement, mimicking
weakness. Muscles are inspected for fasciculations and atrophy; both may begin focally or asymmetrically
in ALS. Fasciculations may be most visible in the tongue in patients with advanced ALS. Diffuse atrophy
may be most evident in the hands, face, and shoulder girdle.
Muscle tone is assessed using passive motion. Tapping a muscle (eg, hypothenar) may induce
fasciculations in neuropathies or a myotonic contraction in myotonic dystrophy.
===PAGE:1783===
Strength testing should include muscles that are proximal, distal, extensor, and flexor. Some tests of large,
proximal muscles include standing from a sitting position; squatting and rising; and flexing, extending, and
turning the head against resistance. Motor strength is often rated on a 0 to 5 scale (.
Although these numbers seem objective, rating strength between 3 and 5 (the typical levels during early
weakness, when diagnosis usually occurs) is rather subjective; if symptoms are unilateral, comparison
with the unaffected
side improves discrimination. Describing specifically what the patient can or cannot do
is often more useful than simply assigning a number for level of weakness, particularly for assessing
changes in weakness over time. A cognitive deficit may cause motor impersistence (inability to focus
attention on completing a motor task), motor perseveration, apraxia, or incomplete effort. Malingering and
other functional weakness is often characterized by give-way weakness, in which normal strength of effort
suddenly gives way.
Coordination
testing includes finger-to-nose and heel-to-shin maneuvers and toe-heel tandem gait to
check for cerebellar dysfunction, which can accompany cerebellar stroke, vermian atrophy (eg, due to
alcohol abuse), some hereditary spinocerebellar ataxias, multiple sclerosis, and the Miller Fisher variant
of Guillain-Barre syndrome.
Gait
is observed for ignition failure (temporary freezing in place when starting to walk, followed by
festination, as occurs in Parkinson's disease) and apraxia, as when feet stick to the floor (normalpressure hydrocephalus, other frontal lobe disorders); festination (Parkinson's disease); limb asymmetry,
as when patients drag a leg, have reduced arm swing, or both (hemispheric stroke); ataxia (midline
cerebellar disease); and instability during turns (parkinsonism). Walking on the toes and heels is tested;
distal muscle weakness makes these maneuvers difficult. Walking on the heels is particularly difficult
when corticospinal tract lesions are the cause of weakness. Spastic gait is notable for scissoring (legs
flexed slightly at the hips and knees, giving the appearance of crouching, with the knees and thighs
hitting or crossing in a scissors-like movement) and walking on the toes. A steppage gait may occur with
perineal palsy (drop foot).
Sensation
is tested; sensory deficits can help localize some lesions causing weakness (eg, sensory level
localizes the lesion to a spinal cord segment) or suggest certain specific causes of weakness (eg, distal
sensory loss helps confirm clinical suspicion of Guillain-Barre syndrome).
A bandlike tingling and pressure is a spinal cord sign that occurs with both intrinsic and extrinsic lesions.
Reflexes
are tested. If deep tendon reflexes appear absent, they may be elicited by augmentation with
Jendrassik's maneuver (eg, trying to pull the hands apart while they are clasped together). Hyporeflexia
may be normal, particularly with aging, but findings should be symmetric and augmentation should elicit
reflexes that are otherwise absent. The plantar reflex (extensor, flexor) is tested. The classic Babinski's
reflex (the great toe extends and the other toes fan apart) is highly specific for a corticospinal tract lesion.
A normal jaw jerk and hyperreflexic arms and legs suggest a cervical lesion affecting the corticospinal
tract, usually cervical stenosis. Anal tone, anal wink reflex, or both are reduced or absent in spinal cord
injury but are preserved in ascending paralysis due to Guillain-Barre syndrome. Abdominal reflexes are
absent below the level of spinal cord injury. A cremasteric reflex can test the integrity of the upper lumbar
cord and roots in males.
Evaluation also includes testing for back tenderness to percussion (present with vertebral inflammation,
some vertebral tumors, and epidural abscess), straight leg raising (painful with sciatica), and checking for
scapular winging (suggesting weakness of the shoulder girdle muscles).
General examination:
If patients have no objective motor weakness, the general examination is
particularly important; in such patients, nonneuromuscular disorders should be sought.
Signs of respiratory distress (eg, tachypnea, weak inspiration) are noted. The skin is examined for
jaundice, pallor, rash, and striae. Other important findings during inspection include the moon facies of
Cushing's syndrome and the parotid enlargement, smooth hairless skin, ascites, and vascular spiders of
chronic alcohol use. The neck, axillae, and inguinal area should be palpated for adenopathy; any
thyromegaly is noted.
===PAGE:1784===
Heart and lungs are auscultated for crackles, wheezes, prolonged expiration, murmurs, and gallops. The
abdomen is palpated for masses, including, if spinal cord dysfunction is possible, a grossly enlarged
bladder. A rectal examination is done to check for heme-positive stool. Joint range of motion is assessed.
If tick paralysis is suspected, the skin, particularly the scalp, should be thoroughly inspected for ticks.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Weakness that becomes severe over a few days or less
• Dyspnea
• Inability to raise the head against gravity
• Bulbar symptoms (eg, difficulty chewing, talking, and swallowing)
• Loss of ambulation
Interpretation of findings:
The history helps differentiate weakness from fatigue, defines
the time
course of the illness, and gives clues to the anatomic pattern of weakness. Weakness and fatigue tend to
cause different symptoms:
•
Weakness:
Patients typically complain that they cannot do specific tasks. They may also report limb
heaviness or stiffness. Weakness usually has a particular pattern in time, anatomy, or both.
•
Fatigue:
Fatigue reported as "weakness" tends to have no temporal pattern (eg, "tired all of the time")
or anatomic pattern (eg, "weak everywhere"); complaints center more on being tired than on being
unable to do specific tasks.
The
temporal pattern
of symptoms is useful.
• Weakness that becomes severe within minutes or less is usually caused by severe trauma or stroke; in
stroke, weakness is usually unilateral and can be mild or severe. Sudden weakness, numbness, and
severe pain localized to a limb are more likely caused by local arterial occlusion and limb ischemia,
which can be differentiated by vascular assessment (eg, pulse, color, temperature, capillary refill,
differences in Doppler-measured limb BPs). Spinal cord compression can also cause paralysis that
evolves over minutes (but usually over hours or days) and is readily distinguished by incontinence and
clinical findings of a discrete cord sensory and motor level.
• Weakness that progresses steadily over hours to days may be caused by acute or subacute disorders
(eg, spinal cord compression, transverse myelitis, spinal cord ischemia or hemorrhage, Guillain-Barre
syndrome, sometimes muscle wasting caused by a critical illness, rhabdomyolysis, botulism,
organophosphate poisoning).
• Weakness that progresses over weeks to months may be caused by subacute or chronic disorders (eg,
cervical myelopathy, most inherited and acquired polyneuropathies, myasthenia gravis, motor neuron
disorders, acquired myopathies, most tumors).
• Weakness that fluctuates from day to day may be caused by multiple sclerosis and sometimes metabolic
myopathies.
• Weakness that fluctuates over the course of a day may be caused by myasthenia gravis, Eaton-Lambert
syndrome, or periodic paralysis.
The
anatomic pattern
of weakness is characterized by specific motor tasks that are difficult to do.
Anatomic patterns suggest certain diagnoses:
===PAGE:1785===
• Proximal muscle weakness impairs reaching upward (eg, combing hair, lifting objects over the head),
ascending stairs, or getting up from a sitting position; this pattern is typical of myopathies.
• Distal muscle weakness impairs tasks such as stepping over a curb, holding a cup, writing, buttoning, or
using a key; this pattern is typical of polyneuropathies and myotonic dystrophy. Many disorders (eg,
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, Guillain-Barre syndrome, myasthenia gravis,
radiculopathies, Eaton-Lambert syndrome) cause proximal and distal weakness, but one pattern may be
more prominent at first.
• Bulbar weakness can cause facial weakness, dysarthria, and dysphagia, with or without impairment of
ocular movements; these manifestations are typical of certain neuromuscular disorders, such as
myasthenia gravis, Eaton-Lambert syndrome, or botulism, but also certain motor neuron disorders, such
as ALS or progressive supranuclear bulbar palsy.
Physical examination
further helps localize the lesion. First, general patterns are discerned:
• Weakness primarily of proximal muscles suggests myopathy.
• Weakness accompanied by hyperreflexia and increased muscle tone suggests upper motor neuron
(corticospinal or other motor tract) dysfunction, particularly if an extensor plantar (Babinski's) reflex is
present.
• Disproportionate impairment of fine finger dexterity (eg, fine pincer movements, playing the piano) with
relatively preserved grip strength indicates selective disruption of the corticospinal (pyramidal) tract.
• Complete paralysis accompanied by absent reflexes and severely depressed muscle tone (flaccidity)
occurs in sudden, severe spinal cord injury (spinal shock).
• Weakness accompanied by hyporeflexia, decreased muscle tone (with or without fasciculations), and
chronic muscle atrophy suggests lower motor neuron dysfunction.
• Weakness that is most noticeable in muscles innervated by the longest nerves (ie, distal more than
proximal, legs more than arms), particularly with loss of distal sensation, suggests lower motor neuron
dysfunction due to peripheral polyneuropathy.
• Absence of neurologic abnormalities (ie, normal reflexes, no muscle wasting or fasciculations, normal
strength or poor effort
during strength testing) or poor effort in patients with tiredness or with weakness
that has no temporal or anatomic pattern suggests fatigue rather than true muscular weakness.
However, if weakness is intermittent and is absent at the time of examination, abnormalities may be
missed.
Additional findings can help localize the lesion more precisely. For example, weakness accompanied by
upper motor signs plus other signs such as aphasia, mental status abnormalities, or other cortical
dysfunction suggests a brain lesion. Unilateral upper motor neuron signs (spasticity, hyperreflexia,
extensor plantar response) and weakness involving an arm and a leg on the same side of the body
suggest a contralateral hemispheric lesion, most often a stroke. Upper or lower motor neuron signs (or
both) plus loss of sensation below a segmental spinal cord level and loss of bowel or bladder control (or
both) suggest a spinal cord lesion. Weakness with lower motor neuron signs may result from a disorder
affecting one or more peripheral nerves; such a disorder has very specific patterns of weakness (eg, wrist
drop in radial nerve injury). When the brachial or pelvic plexus is damaged, motor, sensory, and reflex
deficits are often patchy and do not follow any one peripheral nerve pattern.
Determination of a specific causative disorder:
Sometimes combinations of findings suggest a cause
(see
Table 168-3
).
If
no symptoms or signs of true weakness
(eg, characteristic anatomic and temporal pattern,
objective signs) are present and patients complain only of overall weakness, fatigue, or lack of energy,
===PAGE:1786===
clinicians should consider nonneurologic disorders. However, among elderly patients who feel too weak
to walk, determining the contribution of muscle weakness may be difficult because gait dysfunction is
often multifactorial (see Geriatrics Essentials . Patients with many disorders may be
functionally limited but lack true loss of muscle strength. For example, cardiopulmonary dysfunction or
anemia can cause fatigue due to dyspnea or exercise intolerance. Joint dysfunction (eg, due to arthritis)
or muscle pain (eg, due to polymyalgia rheumatica or fibromyalgia) may make doing physical tasks
difficult. These and other physical disorders that cause complaints of weakness (eg, influenza, infectious
mononucleosis, renal failure) typically are already diagnosed or are suggested by findings during the
history, physical examination, or both.
[Table 168-3.
Findings Related to Weakness Suggesting a Specific Disorder]
In general, if history and physical examination do not detect abnormalities suggesting physical disorders,
these disorders are unlikely; disorders that cause constant, generalized fatigue with no physiologic
temporal or anatomic pattern (eg, depression, chronic fatigue syndrome) should be considered.
Testing:
Testing may be unnecessary in patients with fatigue rather than weakness. Although many tests
can be done if patients have true muscular weakness, such testing is often only adjunctive.
If
no true weakness
is present, other clinical findings (eg, dyspnea, pallor, jaundice, heart murmur), if
present, are used to guide testing.
If patients have no abnormal clinical findings, test results are unlikely to be abnormal. In such cases,
testing practices vary widely. If done, initial tests usually include some combination of CBC, electrolytes,
glucose, Ca, Mg, kidney and liver function tests, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), ESR, and hepatitis C
serologic testing.
If
sudden or severe general weakness or any respiratory symptoms
are present, forced vital
capacity and maximal inspiratory force must be tested to assess risk of acute ventilatory failure. Patients
with vital capacity < 15 mL/kg or inspiratory force < 20 cm H
O are at increased risk.
If
true weakness
is present (and usually after risk of acute ventilatory failure is assessed), initial testing
typically focuses on determining the mechanism of weakness. Unless the cause is obvious, routine
laboratory tests (CBC, electrolytes, glucose, Ca, Mg, kidney and liver function tests, TSH, ESR, hepatitis
C serologic testing) are usually done.
If
brain upper motor neuron dysfunction
is suspected as the cause of weakness, the key test is MRI.
CT is used when MRI testing is not possible (eg, in patients with a cardiac pacemaker).
If
myelopathy
is suspected, MRI can detect lesions in the spinal cord. It also detects other causes of
paralysis that may mimic myelopathy, including lesions of the cauda equina, spinal roots, and brachial and
pelvic plexuses. CT myelography may be used when MRI testing is not available. Other tests are done
(see
Table 168-2
). CSF analysis may be unnecessary for some disorders diagnosed during imaging (eg,
epidural tumor) and is contraindicated if CSF block (eg, due to epidural spinal cord compression) is
suspected.
If
polyneuropathies, myopathies, or neuromuscular junction disorders
are suspected, the key tests
that help differentiate these mechanisms of weakness are electrodiagnostic studies (electromyography
and nerve conduction velocity studies).
After nerve injury, changes in nerve conductance and muscle denervation can take up to a few weeks to
develop, so electrodiagnostic studies may not help when the disorder is acute. However, these studies
can help differentiate among certain acute disorders, such as acute demyelinating neuropathy (eg,
Guillain-Barre syndrome), acute botulism, and other acute neuromuscular junction disorders.
If myopathy is suspected (suggested by muscle weakness, muscle cramping, and pain), muscle enzymes
(eg, CK, aldolase, LDH) may be measured. Elevated levels are consistent with myopathy but can also be
high in neuropathies (reflecting muscle atrophy) and very high in ischemic rhabdomyolysis. Also, levels
===PAGE:1787===
may not be high in all myopathies. Regular crack cocaine use can also cause chronically moderately
elevated CK levels (mean value, 400 IU/L).
Clinicians can use MRI to identify muscle inflammation, as occurs in inflammatory myopathies. Muscle
biopsy may be necessary ultimately to diagnose myopathy. MRI or electromyography can help find a
suitable site for muscle biopsy. However, needlestick artifact can mimic muscle pathology and must be
avoided; thus, biopsy should never be done in the same muscle tested by electromyography.
If
motor neuron disorders
(eg, ALS) are suspected, tests include electromyography and nerve
conduction velocity studies to confirm the diagnosis and exclude treatable disorders that mimic motor
neuron disorders (eg, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, multifocal motor neuropathy
with conduction block). Brain MRI may show degeneration of the corticospinal tracts when ALS is
advanced. Spinal cord MRI (or CT myelography) is done routinely to rule out spinal cord compression or
other myelopathies (see
Table 168-2
).
Testing for specific disorders
may be needed:
• If findings suggest myasthenia gravis, edrophonium test and acetylcholine receptor antibody levels
• If findings suggest vasculitis, autoantibody testing
• If family history suggests a hereditary disorder, genetic testing
• If findings suggest polyneuropathy, other tests (see
Table 168-2
)
• If myopathy is unexplained by drugs, metabolic, or endocrine disorders, possibly muscle biopsy
Treatment
Causes are treated. For patients with life-threatening, acute weakness, ventilatory support may be
needed. Physical and occupational therapy can help people adapt to permanent weakness and minimize
loss of function.
Geriatrics Essentials
Some decrease in deep tendon reflexes is normal with aging, but asymmetry or absence of these reflexes
with augmentation is abnormal.
Because the elderly are more likely to have preexisting sarcopenia, bed rest can cause debilitating
muscle wasting rapidly, sometimes after only several days.
The elderly take more drugs and are more susceptible to drug-induced myopathies, neuropathies, and
fatigue; thus, drugs are a common cause of weakness in the elderly.
Feeling too weak to walk often has multiple causes. Factors may include muscle weakness (eg, caused
by stroke, use of certain drugs, myelopathy due to cervical spondylosis, or muscle atrophy), but also
hydrocephalus, parkinsonism, painful arthritis, and age-related loss of neural networks mediating postural
stability (vestibular system, proprioceptive pathways), coordination (cerebellum, basal ganglia), vision,
and praxis (frontal lobe). Evaluation should focus on reversible factors.
Physical therapy and rehabilitation are generally helpful no matter what the etiology of the weakness is.
Key Points
• True loss of muscle strength must be distinguished from a feeling of fatigue.
• Fatigue with no anatomic or temporal pattern of weakness in patients with a normal physical
examination may reflect chronic fatigue syndrome, an as yet undiscovered systemic illness (eg, severe
===PAGE:1788===
anemia, hypothyroidism, Addison's disease), a psychologic problem (eg, depression), or an adverse
drug effect.
• Initial evaluation of true muscle weakness focuses on determining whether weakness is caused by
dysfunction of the brain, spinal cord, plexuses, peripheral nerves, neuromuscular junction, or muscles.
• Hyperreflexia and increased muscle tone (spasticity), particularly if Babinski's reflex is present, suggest
an upper motor neuron (eg, corticospinal tract) lesion in the brain or spinal cord; MRI is usually
required.
• Hyporeflexia, decreased muscle tone, muscle atrophy, and muscle fasciculations suggest a lower motor
neuron lesion.
• Hyporeflexia and predominantly distal muscle weakness, particularly with distal sensory deficits or
paresthesias, suggest polyneuropathy.
• Difficulty climbing stairs, combing hair, and standing up with predominantly proximal muscle weakness
and intact sensation suggests myopathy.
• Physical therapy is usually helpful in improving strength no matter what the cause is.
===PAGE:1789===
Chapter 169. Neurotransmission
Introduction
A neuron generates and propagates an action potential along its axon, then transmits this signal across a
synapse by releasing neurotransmitters, which trigger a reaction in another neuron or an effector cell (eg,
muscle cells, most exocrine and endocrine cells). The signal may stimulate or inhibit the receiving cell,
depending on the neurotransmitter and receptor involved.
In the CNS, interconnections are complex. An impulse from one neuron to another may pass from axon to
cell body, axon to dendrite (a neuron's receiving branches), cell body to cell body, or dendrite to dendrite.
A neuron can simultaneously receive many impulses—excitatory and inhibitory—from other neurons and
integrate simultaneous impulses into various patterns of firing.
Propagation:
Action potential propagation along an axon is electrical, caused by the exchanges of Na
+
and K
+
ions across the axonal membrane. A particular neuron generates the same action potential after
each stimulus, conducting it at a fixed velocity along the axon. Velocity depends on axonal diameter and
degree of myelination and ranges from 1 to 4 m/sec in small unmyelinated fibers to 75 m/sec in large
myelinated ones. Propagation speed is higher in myelinated fibers because the myelin cover has regular
gaps (nodes of Ranvier) where the axon is exposed. The electrical impulse jumps from one node to the
next, skipping
the myelinated section of the axon. Thus, disorders that alter the myelin cover (eg, multiple
sclerosis) interfere with impulse propagation, causing various neurologic symptoms.
Transmission:
Impulse transmission is chemical, caused by release of specific neurotransmitters from
the nerve ending (terminal). Neurotransmitters diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind briefly to specific
receptors on the adjoining neuron or effector cell. Depending on the receptor, the response may be
excitatory or inhibitory.
One type of synapse, the electrical synapse, does not involve neurotransmitters; ion channels directly
connect the cytoplasm of the presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons. This type of transmission is the
fastest.
The nerve cell body produces enzymes that synthesize most neurotransmitters, which are stored in
vesicles at the nerve terminal (see
Fig. 169-1
). The amount in one vesicle (usually several thousand molecules) is a quantum. A membrane
action potential arriving at the terminal opens axonal Ca channels; Ca inflow releases neurotransmitter
molecules from many vesicles by fusing the vesicle membranes to the nerve terminal membrane.
Membrane fusion generates an opening through which the molecules are expelled into the synaptic cleft
via exocytosis.
The amount of neurotransmitters in the terminal is typically independent of nerve activity and kept
relatively constant by modifying uptake of neurotransmitter precursors or the activity of enzymes involved
in neurotransmitter synthesis or destruction. Stimulation of presynaptic receptors can decrease
presynaptic neurotransmitter synthesis, and blockade can increase it.
The neurotransmitter-receptor interaction must be terminated quickly to allow rapid, repeated activation of
receptors. One of the following can happen to neurotransmitters that have interacted with receptors:
• They can be quickly pumped back into the presynaptic nerve terminals by active, ATP-dependent
processes (reuptake).
• They can be destroyed by enzymes near the receptors.
• They can diffuse into the surrounding area and be removed.
Neurotransmitters taken up by the nerve terminals are repackaged in vesicles for reuse.
===PAGE:1790===
Receptors:
Neurotransmitter receptors are protein complexes that span the cell membrane. Their nature
determines whether a given neurotransmitter is excitatory or inhibitory. Receptors that are continuously
stimulated by neurotransmitters or drugs become desensitized (downregulated); those that are not
stimulated by their neurotransmitter or are chronically blocked by drugs become supersensitive
(upregulated). Downregulation or upregulation of receptors strongly influences the development of
tolerance and physical dependence. These concepts are particularly important in organ or tissue
transplantation, in which denervation deprives receptors of their neurotransmitter. Withdrawal symptoms
can be explained at least in part by a rebound phenomenon due to altered receptor affinity or density.
Most neurotransmitters interact primarily with postsynaptic receptors, but some receptors are located on
presynaptic neurons, providing fine control of neurotransmitter release.
[Fig. 169-1.
Neurotransmission.]
One family of receptors, termed ionotropic receptors (eg,
N
-methyl-D-glutamate, kinate-quisqualate,
nicotinic acetylcholine, glycine, and
γ
-aminobutyric acid [GABA] receptors), consist of ion channels that
open when bound to the neurotransmitter and effect a very rapid response. In the other family, termed
metabotropic receptors (eg, serotonin,
α
- and
β
-adrenergic, and dopaminergic receptors),
neurotransmitters interact with G proteins and activate another molecule (2nd messenger such as cAMP)
that catalyzes a chain of events through protein phosphorylation Ca mobilization, or both; cellular
changes mediated by 2nd messengers are slower and permit finer tuning of the rapid ionotropic
neurotransmitter response. Far more neurotransmitters activate specific receptors than 2nd messengers.
Major Neurotransmitters and Receptors
At least 100 substances can act as neurotransmitters; about 18 are of major importance. Several occur in
slightly different forms.
Glutamate and aspartate:
These amino acids are the major excitatory neurotransmitters in the CNS.
They occur in the cortex, cerebellum, and spinal cord. In neurons, synthesis of nitric oxide (NO) increases
in response to glutamate. Excess glutamate can be toxic, increasing intracellular Ca, free radicals, and
proteinase activity. These neurotransmitters may contribute to tolerance to opioid therapy and mediate
hyperalgesia.
Glutamate receptors are classified as NMDA (
N
-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors and non-NMDA receptors.
Phencyclidine (PCP, also known as angel dust) and memantine (used to treat Alzheimer's disease) bind to
NMDA receptors.
GABA:
GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. It is an amino acid derived from
glutamate, which is decarboxylated by glutamate decarboxylase. After interaction with its receptors, GABA
is actively pumped back into nerve terminals and metabolized. Glycine, which resembles GABA in its
action, occurs principally in interneurons (Renshaw cells) of the spinal cord and in circuits that relax
antagonist muscles.
GABA receptors are classified as GABA
A
(activating chloride channels) and GABA
B
(potentiating cAMP
formation). GABA
A
receptors are the site of action for several neuroactive drugs, including
benzodiazepines, barbiturates, picrotoxin, and muscimol. GABA
B
receptors are activated by baclofen,
used to treat muscle spasms (eg, in multiple sclerosis).
Serotonin:
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, or 5-HT) is generated by the raphe nucleus and midline
neurons of the pons and upper brain stem. Tryptophan is hydroxylated by tryptophan hydroxylase to 5hydroxytryptophan, then decarboxylated to serotonin. Serotonin levels are controlled by the uptake of
tryptophan and intraneuronal monoamine oxidase (MAO), which breaks down serotonin. Ultimately,
serotonin is excreted in the urine as 5-hydroxyindoacetic acid or 5-HIAA.
Serotoninergic (5-HT) receptors (with at least 15 subtypes) are classified as 5-HT
(with 4 subtypes), 5HT
, and 5-HT
. Selective serotonin receptor agonists (eg, sumatriptan) can abort migraines.
===PAGE:1791===
Acetylcholine:
Acetylcholine is the major neurotransmitter of the bulbospinal motor neurons, autonomic
preganglionic fibers, postganglionic cholinergic (parasympathetic) fibers, and many neurons in the CNS
(eg, basal ganglia, motor cortex). It is synthesized from choline and acetyl coenzyme A by choline
acetyltransferase, and its action is rapidly terminated via local hydrolysis to choline and acetate by
acetylcholinesterase. Acetylcholine levels are regulated by choline acetyltransferase and by choline
uptake. Levels of this neurotransmitter are decreased in patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Cholinergic receptors are classified as nicotinic N
(in the adrenal medulla and autonomic ganglia) or N
(in skeletal muscle) or muscarinic M
through M
(widely distributed in the CNS). M
occurs in the
autonomic nervous system, striatum, cortex, and hippocampus; M
occurs in the autonomic nervous
system, heart, intestinal smooth muscle, hindbrain, and cerebellum.
Dopamine:
Dopamine interacts with receptors on some peripheral nerve fibers and many central
neurons (eg, in the substantia nigra, midbrain, ventral tegmental area, and hypothalamus). The amino
acid tyrosine is taken up by dopaminergic neurons and converted by tyrosine hydroxylase to 3,4dihydroxyphenylalanine (dopa), which is decarboxylated by aromatic-L-amino-acid decarboxylase to
dopamine. After release and interaction with receptors, dopamine is actively pumped back (reuptake) into
the nerve terminal. Tyrosine hydroxylase and MAO (which breaks down dopamine) regulate dopamine
levels in nerve terminals.
Dopaminergic receptors are classified as D
through D
. D
and D
receptors play a role in thought
control (limiting the negative symptoms of schizophrenia); D
receptor activation controls the
extrapyramidal system. However, receptor affinity does not predict functional response (intrinsic activity);
eg, ropinirole, which has high affinity for the D
receptor, has intrinsic activity via activation of D
receptors.
Norepinephrine:
Norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter of most postganglionic sympathetic fibers and
many central neurons (eg, in the locus caeruleus and hypothalamus). The precursor tyrosine is converted
to dopamine, which is hydroxylated by dopamine
β
-hydroxylase to norepinephrine. After release and
interaction with receptors, some norepinephrine is degraded by catechol
O
-methyltransferase (COMT),
and the remainder is actively taken back into the nerve terminal, where it is degraded by MAO. Tyrosine
hydroxylase, dopamine
β
-hydroxylase, and MAO regulate intraneuronal norepinephrine levels.
Adrenergic receptors are classified as
α
(postsynaptic in the sympathetic system),
α
(presynaptic in the
sympathetic system and postsynaptic in the brain),
β
(in the heart), or
β
(in other sympathetically
innervated structures).
Endorphins and enkephalins:
Endorphins and enkephalins are opioids. Endorphins are large
polypeptides that activate many central neurons (eg, in the hypothalamus, amygdala, thalamus, and locus
caeruleus). The cell body contains a large polypeptide called proopiomelanocortin, the precursor of
α
-,
β
-,
and
γ
-endorphins. This polypeptide is transported down the axon and cleaved into fragments; one is
β
-
endorphin, contained in neurons that project to the periaqueductal gray matter, limbic structures, and
major catecholamine-containing neurons in the brain. After release and interaction with receptors,
β
-
endorphin is hydrolyzed by peptidases.
Met-enkephalin and leu-enkephalin are small polypeptides present in many central neurons (eg, in the
globus pallidus, thalamus, caudate, and central gray matter). Their precursor, proenkephalin, is formed in
the cell body, then split by specific peptidases into the active peptides. These substances are also
localized in the spinal cord, where they modulate pain signals. The neurotransmitters of pain signals in
the posterior horn of the spinal cord are glutamate and substance P. Enkephalins decrease the amount of
neurotransmitter released and hyperpolarize (make more negative) the postsynaptic membrane, reducing
the generation of action potentials and pain perception at the level of the postcentral gyrus. After release
and interaction with peptidergic receptors, enkephalins are hydrolyzed into smaller, inactive peptides and
amino acids. Rapid inactivation of exogenous enkephalins prevents these substances from being
clinically useful. More stable molecules (eg, morphine) are used as analgesics instead.
===PAGE:1792===
Endorphin-enkephalin (opioid) receptors are classified as
μ
and
μ
(affecting sensorimotor integration
and analgesia),
δ
and
δ
(affecting motor integration, cognitive function, and analgesia), and
κ
,
κ
, and
κ
(affecting water balance regulation, analgesia, and food intake).
σ
-Receptors, currently classified as
nonopioid and mostly localized in the hippocampus, bind PCP. New data suggest the presence of many
more receptor subtypes, with pharmacologic implications. Components of the molecular precursor to the
receptor protein can be rearranged during receptor synthesis to produce several receptor variants (eg, 27
splice variants of the
μ
opioid receptor). Also, 2 receptors can combine (dimerize) to form a new receptor.
Other neurotransmitters:
Dynorphins are a group of 7 peptides with similar amino acid sequences.
They, like enkephalins, are opioids.
Substance P, a peptide, occurs in central neurons (in the habenula, substantia nigra, basal ganglia,
medulla, and hypothalamus) and is highly concentrated in the dorsal root ganglia. Its release is triggered
by intense afferent painful stimuli. It modulates the neural response to pain and mood; it modulates
nausea and vomiting through the activation of NK1A receptors that are localized in the brain stem.
Nitric oxide (NO) is a labile gas that mediates many neuronal processes. It is generated from arginine by
NO synthase. Neurotransmitters that increase intracellular Ca
++
(eg, substance P, glutamate,
acetylcholine) stimulate NO synthesis in neurons that express NO synthetase. NO may be an intracellular
messenger; it may diffuse out of a cell into a 2nd neuron and produce physiologic responses (eg, longterm potentiation [strengthening of certain presynaptic and postsynaptic responses—a form of learning])
or enhance glutamate (NMDA-receptor-mediated) neurotoxicity (eg, in Parkinson's disease, stroke, or
Alzheimer's disease).
Substances with less firmly established roles in neurotransmission include histamine, vasopressin,
vasoactive intestinal peptide, carnosine, bradykinin, cholecystokinin, bombesin, somatostatin,
corticotropin releasing factor, neurotensin, and possibly adenosine.
Disorders Associated With Defects in Neurotransmission
Disorders or substances that alter the production, release, reception, breakdown, or reuptake of
neurotransmitters or that change the number and affinity of receptors can cause neurologic or psychiatric
symptoms and cause disease (see
Table 169-1
). Drugs that modify neurotransmission can alleviate many of these disorders (eg, Parkinson's
disease, depression).
[Table 169-1.
Examples of Disorders Associated with Defects in Neurotransmission]
===PAGE:1793===
Chapter 170. Autonomic Nervous System
Introduction
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) regulates physiologic processes. Regulation occurs without
conscious control, ie, autonomously. The 2 major divisions are the sympathetic and parasympathetic
systems.
Disorders of the ANS cause autonomic insufficiency or failure and can affect any system of the body.
Anatomy
The ANS receives input from parts of the CNS that process and integrate stimuli from the body and
external environment. These parts include the hypothalamus, nucleus of the solitary tract, reticular
formation, amygdala, hippocampus, and olfactory cortex.
The sympathetic and parasympathetic systems each consist of 2 sets of nerve bodies: one set (called
preganglionic) in the CNS, with connections to another set in ganglia outside the CNS. Efferent fibers
from the ganglia (postganglionic fibers) lead to effector organs (see
Fig. 170-1
).
Sympathetic:
The preganglionic cell bodies of the sympathetic system are located in the
intermediolateral horn of the spinal cord between T1 and L2 or L3. The sympathetic ganglia are adjacent
to the spine and consist of the vertebral (sympathetic chain) and prevertebral ganglia, including the
superior cervical, celiac, superior mesenteric, inferior mesenteric, and aorticorenal ganglia. Long fibers
run from these ganglia to effector organs, including the smooth muscle of blood vessels, viscera, lungs,
scalp (piloerector muscles), and pupils; the heart; and glands (sweat, salivary, and digestive).
Parasympathetic:
The preganglionic cell bodies of the parasympathetic system are located in the brain
stem and sacral portion of the spinal cord. Preganglionic fibers exit the brain stem with the 3rd, 7th, 9th,
and 10th (vagus) cranial nerves and exit the spinal cord at S2 and S3; the vagus nerve contains about
75% of all parasympathetic fibers. Parasympathetic ganglia (eg, ciliary, sphenopalatine, otic, pelvic, and
vagal ganglia) are located within the effector organs, and postganglionic fibers are only 1 or 2 mm long.
Thus, the parasympathetic system can produce specific, localized responses in effector organs, such as
blood vessels of the head, neck, and thoraco-abdominal viscera; lacrimal and salivary glands; smooth
muscle of glands and viscera (eg, liver, spleen, colon, kidneys, bladder, genitals); and ocular muscles.
Physiology
The ANS controls BP, heart rate, body temperature, weight, digestion, metabolism, fluid and electrolyte
balance, sweating, urination, defecation, sexual response, and other processes. Many organs are
controlled primarily by either the sympathetic or parasympathetic system, although they may receive input
from both; occasionally, functions are reciprocal (eg, sympathetic input increases heart rate;
parasympathetic decreases it).
The sympathetic nervous system is catabolic; it activates fight-or-flight responses. The parasympathetic
nervous system is anabolic; it conserves and restores (see
Table 170-1
).
Two major neurotransmitters in the ANS are
•
Acetylcholine:
Fibers that secrete acetylcholine (cholinergic fibers) include all preganglionic fibers, all
postganglionic parasympathetic fibers, and some postganglionic sympathetic fibers (those that
innervate piloerectors, sweat glands, and blood vessels).
•
Norepinephrine:
Fibers that secrete norepinephrine (adrenergic fibers) include most postganglionic
sympathetic fibers. Sweat glands on the palms and soles also respond to adrenergic stimulation to
some degree.
===PAGE:1794===
There are different subtypes of adrenergic receptors ( and cholinergic receptors (, which vary by location.
Etiology
Disorders causing autonomic insufficiency or failure can originate in the peripheral or central nervous
system and may be primary or secondary to other disorders.
The
most common causes
of autonomic insufficiency are
• Peripheral neuropathies
• Aging
• Parkinson's disease
Other causes
include
• Autoimmune autonomic neuropathy
• Multiple system atrophy
• Spinal cord disorders
• Drugs
• Disorders of the neuromuscular junction (eg, botulism, Lambert-Eaton syndrome)
[Fig. 170-1.
The autonomic nervous system.]
[Table 170-1.
Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System]
Evaluation
History:
Symptoms suggesting autonomic insufficiency include
• Orthostatic hypotension
• Heat intolerance
• Loss of bladder and bowel control
• Erectile dysfunction (an early symptom)
Other possible symptoms include dry eyes and dry mouth, but they are less specific.
Physical examination:
Important parts of the examination include the following:
• Postural BP and heart rate: In a normally hydrated patient, a sustained (eg, > 1 min) decrease of ≥ 20
mm Hg in systolic BP or a decrease of ≥ 10 mm Hg in diastolic BP with standing suggests autonomic
insufficiency. Heart rate change with respiration and standing should be noted; absence of physiologic
sinus arrhythmia and failure of heart rate to increase with standing indicate autonomic insufficiency. In
contrast, patients with postural tachycardia syndrome, a benign disorder, typically have postural
tachycardia without hypotension (.
• Eye examination: Miosis and mild ptosis (Horner's syndrome) suggest a sympathetic lesion. A dilated,
unreactive pupil (Adie's pupil) suggests a parasympathetic lesion.
===PAGE:1795===
• GU and rectal reflexes: Abnormal GU and rectal reflexes may indicate ANS deficits. Testing includes the
cremasteric reflex (normally, stroking the upper inner thigh results in retraction of the testes), anal wink
reflex (normally, stroking perianal skin results in contraction of the anal sphincter), and bulbocavernosus
reflex (normally, squeezing the glans penis or clitoris results in contraction of the anal sphincter).
Laboratory testing:
If patients have symptoms and signs suggesting autonomic insufficiency, sudomotor,
cardiovagal, and adrenergic testing is usually done to help determine severity and distribution of the
insufficiency.
Sudomotor testing
includes the following:
• Quantitative sudomotor axon-reflex test: This test evaluates integrity of postganglionic neurons using
iontophoresis; electrodes filled with acetylcholine are placed on the legs and wrist to stimulate sweat
glands, and the volume of sweat is then measured. The test can detect decreased or absent sweat
production.
• Thermoregulatory sweat test: This test evaluates both preganglionic and postganglionic pathways. After
a dye is applied to the skin, patients enter a closed compartment that is heated to cause maximal
sweating. Sweating causes the dye to change color, so that areas of anhidrosis and hypohidrosis are
apparent and can be calculated as a percentage of BSA.
Cardiovagal testing
evaluates heart rate response (via ECG rhythm strip) to deep breathing and to the
Valsalva maneuver. If the ANS is intact, heart rate varies with these maneuvers; normal responses to
deep breathing and the Valsalva ratio vary by age.
Adrenergic testing
evaluates response of beat-to-beat BP to the following:
• Head-up tilt: Blood is shifted to dependent parts, causing reflex responses in BP and heart rate. This
test helps differentiate autonomic neuropathies from postural tachycardia syndrome.
• Valsalva maneuver: This maneuver increases intrathoracic pressure and reduces venous return,
causing BP changes and reflex vasoconstriction.
With the head-up tilt test and Valsalva maneuvers, the pattern of responses is an index of adrenergic
function.
Plasma norepinephrine
levels can be measured with patients supine and then after they stand for > 5
min. Normally, levels increase after standing. If patients have autonomic insufficiency, levels may not
increase with standing and may be low in the supine position, particularly in postganglionic disorders (eg,
autonomic neuropathy, pure autonomic failure).
Autonomic Neuropathies
Autonomic neuropathies are peripheral nerve disorders with disproportionate involvement of
autonomic fibers.
The best known autonomic neuropathies are those accompanying peripheral neuropathy due to diabetes,
amyloidosis, or autoimmune disorders. Autoimmune autonomic neuropathy is an idiopathic disorder that
often develops after a viral infection; onset may be subacute. Autonomic insufficiency is usually a late
manifestation in alcoholic neuropathy.
Common symptoms of autonomic neuropathies include orthostatic hypotension, neurogenic bladder,
erectile dysfunction, gastroparesis, and intractable constipation. When somatic fibers are involved,
sensory loss in a stocking-and-glove distribution and distal weakness may occur (see also
Chapter 185
).
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1796===
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on demonstration of autonomic failure ( and of a specific cause of
neuropathy (eg, diabetes, amyloidosis). Autoimmune autonomic neuropathy may be suspected after a
viral infection. Ganglionic anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody A
is present in about one half of patients
with autoimmune autonomic neuropathy and is occasionally present in patients with other autonomic
neuropathies.
Treatment
Underlying disorders are treated. Autoimmune autonomic neuropathy may respond to immunotherapy;
plasma exchange or IV
γ
-globulin can be used for more severe cases.
Horner's Syndrome
Horner's syndrome is ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis due to dysfunction of cervical sympathetic
output.
Etiology
Horner's syndrome results when the cervical sympathetic pathway running from the hypothalamus to the
eye is disrupted. The causative lesion may be primary (including congenital) or secondary to another
disorder. Lesions are usually divided into
• Central (eg, brain stem ischemia, syringomyelia, brain tumor)
• Peripheral (eg, Pancoast's tumor, cervical adenopathy, neck and skull injuries, aortic or carotid
dissection, thoracic aortic aneurysm)
Peripheral lesions may be preganglionic or postganglionic in origin.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include ptosis, miosis, anhidrosis, and hyperemia of the affected side. In the congenital form,
the iris does not become pigmented and remains blue-gray.
Diagnosis
• Cocaine eye drop test
• MRI or CT to diagnose cause
Liquid cocaine 10% can be applied to the affected eye; poor pupillary dilation after 30 min indicates
Horner's syndrome. If results are positive, 1% hydroxyamphetamine solution or 5%
N
-methyl
hydroxyamphetamine can be applied to the eye 48 h later to determine whether the lesion is
preganglionic (if the pupil dilates) or postganglionic (if the pupil does not dilate). Patients with Horner's
syndrome require MRI or CT of the brain, spinal cord, chest, or neck, depending on clinical suspicion.
Treatment
The cause, if identified, is treated; there is no treatment for primary Horner's syndrome.
Multiple System Atrophy
Multiple system atrophy is a relentlessly progressive neurodegenerative disorder causing
pyramidal, cerebellar, and autonomic dysfunction. It includes 3 disorders previously thought to
be distinct: olivopontocerebellar atrophy, striatonigral degeneration, and Shy-Drager syndrome.
Symptoms include hypotension, urinary retention, constipation, ataxia, rigidity, and postural
===PAGE:1797===
instability. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is symptomatic, with volume expansion,
compression garments, and vasoconstrictor drugs.
Multiple system atrophy affects about twice as many men as women. Mean age at onset is about 53 yr;
after symptoms appear, patients live about 9 to 10 yr.
Etiology
Etiology is unknown, but neuronal degeneration occurs in several areas of the brain; the area and
amount damaged determine initial symptoms. A characteristic finding is cytoplasmic
inclusion bodies
containing
α
-synuclein within oligodendroglial cells.
Symptoms and Signs
Initial symptoms vary but include a combination of parkinsonism unresponsive to levodopa, cerebellar
abnormalities, and symptoms due to autonomic insufficiency.
Parkinsonian symptoms:
These symptoms predominate in striatonigral degeneration. They include
rigidity, bradykinesia, postural instability, and jerky postural tremor. Highpitched, quavering dysarthria is
common. In contrast to Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy usually does not cause resting
tremor and dyskinesia, and symptoms respond poorly and transiently to levodopa.
Cerebellar abnormalities:
These abnormalities predominate in olivopontocerebellar atrophy. They
include ataxia, dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesia (difficulty performing rapidly alternating movements), poor
coordination, and abnormal eye movements.
Autonomic symptoms:
Typically, autonomic insufficiency causes orthostatic hypotension (symptomatic
fall in BP when a person stands, often with syncope—, urinary retention or incontinence,
constipation, and erectile dysfunction.
Other autonomic symptoms, which may occur early or late, include decreased sweating, difficulty
breathing and swallowing, fecal incontinence, and decreased tearing and salivation. REM sleep behavior
disorder (eg, speech or skeletal muscle movement during REM sleep) and respiratory stridor are
common. Patients are often unaware of REM sleep behavior disorder. Patients may have nocturnal
polyuria; contributing factors may include a circadian decrease in arginine vasopressin and treatments
used to increase blood volume.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation (parkinsonism or cerebellar symptoms that respond poorly to levodopa plus
autonomic failure)
• MRI
Diagnosis is suspected clinically, based on the combination of autonomic failure and parkinsonism or
cerebellar symptoms. Similar symptoms may result from Parkinson's disease, Lewy body dementia, pure
autonomic failure, autonomic neuropathies, progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple cerebral infarcts, or
drug-induced parkinsonism.
No diagnostic test is definitive, but MRI abnormalities in the striatum, pons, and cerebellum strongly
suggest the disorder. Multiple system atrophy can be diagnosed antemortem based on these findings plus
symptoms of generalized autonomic failure and lack of response to levodopa.
Treatment
• Supportive care
There is no specific treatment, but symptoms are managed as follows:
===PAGE:1798===
• Orthostatic hypotension: Treatment includes intravascular volume expansion with salt and water
supplementation and sometimes fludrocortisone 0.1 to 0.4 mg po once/day. Use of compression
garments for the lower body (eg, abdominal binder, Jobst stockings) and
α
-adrenoreceptor stimulation
with midodrine 10 mg po tid may help. However, midodrine also increases peripheral vascular
resistance and supine BP, which may be problematic. Raising the head of the bed about 10 cm reduces
nocturnal polyuria and supine hypertension and may reduce morning orthostatic hypotension.
• Parkinsonism: Levodopa/carbidopa 25/100 mg po at bedtime or pergolide 0.1 mg po once/day, titrated
upward to 0.25 to 1.0 mg tid, may be tried to relieve rigidity and other parkinsonian symptoms, but these
drugs are usually ineffective or provide modest benefit.
• Urinary incontinence: If the cause is detrusor hyperreflexia, oxybutynin chloride 5 mg po tid or
tolterodine 2 mg po bid may be used.
• Urinary retention: Many patients must self-catheterize their bladder.
• Constipation: A high-fiber diet and stool softeners can be used; for refractory cases, enemas may be
necessary.
• Erectile dysfunction: Drugs such as sildenafil 50 mg po prn and various physical means can be used
(.
Pure Autonomic Failure
Pure autonomic failure results from neuronal loss in autonomic ganglia, causing orthostatic
hypotension and other autonomic symptoms.
Pure autonomic failure, previously called idiopathic orthostatic hypotension or Bradbury-Eggleston
syndrome, denotes generalized autonomic failure without CNS involvement. This disorder differs from
multiple system atrophy because it lacks central or preganglionic involvement. Pure autonomic failure
affects
more women, tends to begin during a person's 40s or 50s, and does not result in death.
Etiology is usually unknown. Some cases are due to a synucleinopathy (; occasionally, the
cause is an autoimmune autonomic neuropathy.
The main symptom is orthostatic hypotension; there may be other autonomic symptoms, such as
decreased sweating, heat intolerance, urinary retention, bladder spasms (possibly causing incontinence),
erectile dysfunction, fecal incontinence or constipation, and pupillary abnormalities.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is by exclusion. The norepinephrine level is usually < 100 pg/mL supine and does not increase
with standing. Postural tachycardia syndrome can be differentiated because with standing, it does not
usually cause hypotension, the norepinephrine level increases, and heart rate increases by > 30
beats/min or to 120 beats/min within 10 min.
Treatment
Treatment is symptomatic:
• Orthostatic hypotension: Vasopressors and support hose
• Constipation: High-fiber diet and stool softeners
===PAGE:1799===
• Bladder spasms: Bladder antispasmodics
• Urinary retention: Possibly self-catheterization of the bladder
• Sweating abnormalities: Avoidance of hot conditions
===PAGE:1800===
Chapter 171. Pain
Introduction
Pain is the most common reason patients seek medical care. Pain has sensory and emotional
components and is often classified as acute or chronic. Acute pain is frequently associated with anxiety
and hyperactivity of the sympathetic nervous system (eg, tachycardia, increased respiratory rate and BP,
diaphoresis, dilated pupils). Chronic pain does not involve sympathetic hyperactivity but may be
associated with vegetative signs (eg, fatigue, loss of libido, loss of appetite) and depressed mood. People
vary considerably in their tolerance for pain.
Pathophysiology
Acute pain, which usually occurs in response to tissue injury, results from activation of peripheral pain
receptors and their specific A delta and C sensory nerve fibers (nociceptors). Chronic pain (
related to ongoing tissue injury is presumably caused by persistent activation of these fibers. Chronic
pain may also result from ongoing damage to or dysfunction of the peripheral or central nervous system
(which causes neuropathic pain) (.
Nociceptive pain may be somatic or visceral. Somatic pain receptors are located in skin, subcutaneous
tissues, fascia, other connective tissues, periosteum, endosteum, and joint capsules. Stimulation of these
receptors usually produces sharp or dull localized pain, but burning is not uncommon if the skin or
subcutaneous tissues are involved. Visceral pain receptors are located in most viscera and the
surrounding connective tissue. Visceral pain due to obstruction of a hollow organ is poorly localized,
deep, and cramping and may be referred to remote cutaneous sites. Visceral pain due to injury of organ
capsules or other deep connective tissues may be more localized and sharp.
Although pain of predominantly psychologic origin is far less common than nociceptive or neuropathic
pain, psychologic factors commonly contribute to chronic pain and may contribute to pain-related
disability. Pain thought to be caused predominantly by psychologic factors is sometimes called
psychogenic pain; however, psychophysiologic pain is a more accurate term because the pain results
from interaction of physiologic and psychologic phenomena. This type of pain can be categorized in terms
of defined somato-form disorders (eg, chronic pain disorders, somatization disorders, hypochondriasis
— in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth Edition, Text
Revision (DSM-IV-TR).
Many pain syndromes are multifactorial. For example, chronic low back pain and most cancer pain
syndromes have a prominent nociceptive component but may also involve neuropathic pain (due to nerve
damage).
Pain transmission and modulation:
Pain fibers enter the spinal cord at the dorsal root
ganglia and
synapse in the dorsal horn. From there, fibers cross to the other side and travel up the lateral columns to
the thalamus and then to the cerebral cortex.
Repetitive stimulation (eg, from a prolonged painful condition) can sensitize neurons in the dorsal horn of
the spinal cord so that a lesser peripheral stimulus causes pain (wind-up phenomenon). Peripheral
nerves and nerves at other levels of the CNS may also be sensitized, producing long-term synaptic
changes in cortical receptive fields (remodeling) that maintain exaggerated pain perception.
Substances released when tissue is injured, including those involved in the inflammatory cascade, can
sensitize peripheral nociceptors. These substances include vasoactive peptides (eg, calcitonin generelated protein, substance P, neurokinin A) and other mediators (eg, prostaglandin E
, serotonin,
bradykinin, epinephrine).
The pain signal is modulated at multiple points in both segmental and descending pathways by many
neurochemical mediators, including endorphins (eg, enkephalin) and monoamines (eg, serotonin,
norepinephrine). These mediators interact in poorly understood ways to exaggerate or reduce the
===PAGE:1801===
perception of and response to pain. They mediate the potential benefit of CNS-active drugs (eg, opioids,
antidepressants, anticonvulsants, membrane stabilizers) that interact with specific receptors and
neurochemicals in the treatment of chronic pain.
Psychologic factors are important modulators. They not only affect verbal expression of pain (ie, whether
patients appear stoic or sensitive) but also generate neural output that modulates neurotransmission
along pain pathways. Psychologic reaction to protracted pain interacts with other CNS factors to induce
long-term changes in pain perception.
Evaluation
Clinicians should evaluate the cause, severity, and nature of the pain and its effect on activities and
psychologic well-being. Evaluation of the cause of acute pain (eg, back pain, chest pain—see elsewhere
in THE MANUAL) differs from that of chronic pain (.
The history should include the following information about the pain:
• Quality (eg, burning, cramping, aching, deep, superficial, boring, shooting)
• Severity
• Location
• Radiation pattern
• Duration
• Timing (including pattern and degree of fluctuation and frequency of remissions)
• Exacerbating and relieving factors
The patient's level of function should be assessed, focusing on activities of daily living (eg, dressing,
bathing), employment, avocations, and personal relationships (including sexual).
The patient's perception of pain can represent more than the disorder's intrinsic physiologic processes.
What pain means to the patient should be determined, with emphasis on psychologic issues, depression,
and anxiety. Reporting pain is more socially acceptable than reporting anxiety or depression, and
appropriate therapy often depends on sorting out these divergent perceptions. Pain and suffering should
also be distinguished, especially in cancer patients (; suffering may be due as much to loss
of function and fear of impending death as to pain. Whether secondary gain (external, incidental benefits
of a disorder—eg, time off, disability payments) contributes to pain or pain-related disability should be
considered. The patient should be asked whether litigation is ongoing or financial compensation for injury
will be sought. A personal or family history of chronic pain can often illuminate the current problem.
Whether family members perpetuate chronic pain (eg, by constantly asking about the patient's health)
should be considered.
Patients and sometimes family members and caregivers should be asked about the use, efficacy, and
adverse effects of prescription and OTC drugs and other treatments and about alcohol and recreational
or illicit drug use.
Pain severity:
Pain severity should be assessed before and after potentially painful interventions. In
verbal patients, self-report is the gold standard, and external signs of pain or distress (eg, crying, wincing,
rocking) are secondary. For patients who have difficulty communicating and for young children, nonverbal
indicators (behavioral and sometimes physiologic) may need to be the primary source of information.
Formal measures (see
Fig. 171-1
) include verbal category scales (eg, mild, moderate, severe), numeric scales, and the Visual
Analog Scale (VAS). For the numeric scale, patients are asked to rate their pain from 0 to 10 (0 = no pain;
===PAGE:1802===
10 = "the worst pain ever"). For the VAS, patients make a hash mark representing their degree of pain on
an unmarked 10-cm line with the left side labeled "no pain" and the right side labeled "unbearable pain."
The pain score is distance in mm from the left
[Fig. 171-1.
Some pain scales for quantifying pain as it is occurring.]
end of the line. Children and patients with limited literacy or known developmental problems may select
from images of faces ranging from smiling to contorted with pain or from fruits of varying sizes to convey
their perception of pain severity. When measuring pain, the examiner should specify a time period (eg, "on
average during the past week").
Demented and aphasic patients:
Assessing pain in patients with disorders affecting cognition, speech,
or language (eg, dementia, aphasia) can be difficult. Pain is suggested by facial grimacing, frowning, or
repetitive eye blinking. Sometimes caregivers can describe behaviors that suggest pain (eg, sudden
social withdrawal, irritability, grimacing). Pain should
be considered in patients who have difficulty
communicating and who inexplicably change their behavior. Many patients who have difficulty
communicating can communicate meaningfully when an appropriate pain scale is used. For example, the
Function Pain Scale has been validated and can be used in nursing home patients who have Mini-Mental
State Examination scores of ≥ 17.
Patients receiving neuromuscular blockade:
No validated instruments are available to assess pain
when neuromuscular blockade is used to facilitate mechanical ventilation. If the patient is given a
sedative, the dose can be adjusted until there is no evidence of consciousness. In such cases, specific
analgesics are not needed. If, however, the patient is sedated but continues to have evidence of
consciousness (eg, blinking, some eye movement response to command), pain treatment should be
considered based on the degree of pain usually caused by the condition (eg, burns, trauma). If a
potentially painful procedure (eg, turning a bedbound patient) is required, pretreatment with the selected
analgesic or anesthetic should be given.
Treatment of Pain
Nonopioid and opioid analgesics are the main drugs used to treat pain. Antidepressants, anticonvulsants,
and other CNS-active drugs may also be used for chronic or neuropathic pain and are first-line therapy
for some conditions. Neuraxial infusion, nerve stimulation, injection therapies, and neural blockade can
help selected patients. Cognitive-behavioral interventions (eg, incremental gains in function; changes in
relationships in the home; systematic use of relaxation techniques, hypnosis, or biofeedback; graduated
exercise) may reduce pain and painrelated disability and help patients cope.
Nonopioid Analgesics
Acetaminophen and NSAIDs are often effective for mild to moderate pain (see
Table 171-1
). Of these, only ketorolac can be given parenterally. Nonopioids do not cause physical
dependence or tolerance.
Acetaminophen has no anti-inflammatory or antiplatelet effects and does not cause gastric irritation.
NSAIDs include nonselective COX (COX-1 and COX-2) inhibitors and selective COX-2 inhibitors (coxibs);
all are effective analgesics. Aspirin is the least expensive but has prolonged antiplatelet effects. Coxibs
have lowest risk of ulcer formation and GI upset. However, when a coxib is used with low-dose aspirin, it
may have no GI benefit over other NSAIDs. Recent studies suggest that inhibition of COX-2, which occurs
with both nonselective COX inhibitors and coxibs, is associated with a prothrombotic effect that can
increase risk of MI, stroke, and claudication. This effect appears to be drug-related, as well as dose- and
duration-related. Although there is some evidence that the risk is very low with some of the nonselective
COX inhibitors (eg, ibuprofen, naproxen) and coxibs (celecoxib), it is prudent to consider the potential for
prothrombotic effects as a risk of all NSAID therapy.
If an NSAID is likely to be used only short-term, significant adverse effects are unlikely, regardless of the
drug used. Some clinicians use a coxib first whenever therapy is likely to be long-term (eg, months)
===PAGE:1803===
because the risk of GI adverse effects is lower; others limit coxib use to patients predisposed to GI
adverse effects (eg, the elderly, patients taking corticosteroids, those with a history of peptic ulcer
disease or GI upset due to other NSAIDs) and those who are not doing well with nonselective NSAIDs or
who have a history of intolerance to them. Although data are still limited, the prothrombotic risk suggests
that all NSAIDs should be used cautiously in patients with clinically significant atherosclerosis or multiple
cardiovascular risk factors. All NSAIDs should be used cautiously in patients with renal insufficiency;
coxibs are not renal-sparing.
If initial recommended doses provide inadequate analgesia, a higher dose is given, up to the conventional
safe maximum dose. If analgesia remains inadequate, the drug should be stopped. If pain is not severe,
another NSAID may be tried because response varies from drug to drug. It is prudent during long-term
NSAID therapy to monitor for occult blood in stool and changes in CBC, electrolytes, and hepatic and
renal function.
Opioid Analgesics
"Opioid" is a generic term for natural or synthetic substances that bind to specific opioid receptors in the
CNS, producing an agonist action. Opioids are also called narcotics. Some opioids used for analgesia
have both agonist and antagonist actions. Potential for abuse among those with a known history of abuse
or addiction may be less with agonist-antagonists than with pure agonists, but agonist-antagonist drugs
have a ceiling effect for analgesia and induce a withdrawal syndrome in patients already physically
dependent on opioids. In general, acute pain is best treated with short-acting pure agonist drugs, and
chronic pain is
[Table 171-1.
Nonopioid Analgesics]
best treated with longer-acting pure agonist drugs (see
Tables 171-2
and
171-3
).
Opioid analgesics are useful in managing severe acute or chronic pain. They are often underused,
resulting in needless pain and suffering because clinicians often underestimate the required dosage,
overestimate the duration of action and risk of adverse effects, and have unreasonable concerns about
addiction (. Physical dependence (development of withdrawal symptoms when a drug is
stopped) should be assumed to exist in all patients treated with opioids for more than a few days.
However, addiction (loss of control, compulsive use, craving and use despite harm) is very rare in
patients with no history of substance abuse. Before opioid therapy is initiated, clinicians should ask about
risk factors for abuse and addiction. These risk factors include prior alcohol or drug abuse, a family
history of alcohol or drug abuse, and a prior major psychiatric disorder. If risk factors are present,
treatment may still be appropriate; however, the clinician should use more controls to prevent abuse (eg,
small prescriptions, frequent visits, no refills for "lost" prescriptions) or should refer the patient to a pain
specialist or an addiction medicine specialist experienced in pain management.
Route of administration:
Almost any route can be used. The oral or transdermal route is preferred for
long-term use; both are effective
[Table 171-2.
Opioid Analgesics]
and provide stable blood levels. Modified-release oral and transdermal forms allow less frequent dosing,
which is particularly important for providing overnight relief. Formulations of fentanyl are now available for
delivery through the oral mucosa. Lozenges are used for sedation in children and as treatment of
breakthrough pain. Effervescent tablets are available for breakthrough pain. Breakthrough pain has been
targeted by these formulations because they have a relatively more rapid onset than the oral route; other
rapid-onset, transmucosal
[Table 171-3.
Equianalgesic Doses of Opioid Analgesics*]
formulations of fentanyl and other drugs are in development.
===PAGE:1804===
The IV route provides the most rapid onset and thus the easiest titration, but duration of analgesia is
short. Large, rapid fluctuations in blood levels (bolus effect) can lead to toxicity at peak levels early in the
dosing interval or later to breakthrough pain at trough levels. Continuous IV infusion, sometimes with
patient-controlled supplemental doses, eliminates this effect but requires an expensive pump; this
approach is used most often for postoperative pain.
The IM route provides analgesia longer than IV but is painful, and absorption can be erratic; it is not
recommended. Long-term continuous sc infusion can be used, particularly for cancer pain.
Intraspinal opioids (eg, morphine 5 to 10 mg epidurally or 0.5 to 1 mg intrathecally for acute pain) can
provide relief, which is prolonged when a hydrophilic drug like morphine is used; they are typically used
postoperatively. Implanted infusion devices can provide long-term neuraxial infusion. These devices can
also be used with other drugs (eg, local anesthetics, clonidine, ziconotide).
Dosing and titration:
Initial dose is modified according to the patient's response; it is increased
incrementally until analgesia is satisfactory or adverse effects limit treatment. Sedation and respiratory
rate are monitored when opioids are given parenterally to relatively opioid-naive patients. The elderly are
more sensitive to opioids and are predisposed to adverse effects; opioid-naive elderly patients typically
require lower doses than younger patients. Neonates, especially when premature, are also sensitive to
opioids, because they lack adequate metabolic pathways to eliminate them.
For moderate, transient pain, an opioid may be given prn. For severe or ongoing pain, doses should be
given regularly, without waiting for severe pain; supplemental doses are given as needed when treating
cancer pain and are typically considered case by case when treating chronic noncancer pain. A common
error is prescribing short-acting drugs at long intervals, allowing breakthrough pain.
For patient-controlled analgesia, a bolus dose (in a postoperative setting, typically morphine 1 mg q 6
min) is provided when patients push a button; a baseline infusion (eg, morphine 0.5 to 1 mg/h) may or
may not be given. The physician controls the amount and interval of the bolus. Patients with prior opioid
exposure or with chronic pain require a higher bolus and baseline infusion dose; the infusion dose is
further adjusted based on response.
Patients with dementia cannot use patient-controlled analgesia, nor can young children; however,
adolescents often can.
During long-term treatment, the effective opioid dose can remain constant for prolonged periods. Some
patients need intermittent dose escalation, typically in the setting of physical changes that suggest an
increase in the pain (eg, progressive neoplasm). Fear of tolerance should not inhibit appropriate early,
aggressive use of an opioid. If a previously adequate dose becomes inadequate, that dose must usually
be increased by 30 to 100% to control pain.
Nonopioid analgesics (eg, acetaminophen, NSAIDs) are often given concomitantly. Products containing
both drugs are convenient, but the nonopioid may limit upward titration of the opioid dose.
Adverse effects:
In opioid-naive patients, adverse effects common at the start of therapy include
sedation, mental clouding, constipation, nausea, vomiting, and itching. Respiratory depression is serious
but is rare when opioids are given at appropriate doses. Because steady-state plasma levels are not
approached until 4 to 5 half-lives have passed, drugs with a long half-life (particularly levorphanol and
methadone) have a risk of delayed toxicity as plasma levels rise. Modified-release opioids
typically
require several days to approach steady-state levels.
In the elderly, opioids tend to have more adverse effects (commonly, constipation and sedation or mental
clouding). Opioids may cause urinary retention in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Although tolerance to opioid-induced sedation, mental clouding, and nausea usually develops within
days, tolerance to opioid-induced constipation and urinary retention usually occurs much more slowly. Any
adverse effect may be persistent in some patients and this is much more likely with constipation.
===PAGE:1805===
Opioids should be used cautiously in patients with certain disorders:
• Hepatic disorders because drug metabolism is delayed, particularly with modified-release preparations
• COPD because respiratory depression is a risk
• Some neurologic disorders, such as dementia and encephalopathy, because delirium is a risk
• Severe renal insufficiency because metabolites may accumulate and cause problems; accumulation is
least likely with fentanyl and methadone
Constipation is common among patients who take opioids for more than a few days. For prevention in
predisposed patients (eg, the elderly), dietary fiber and fluids should be increased, and a stimulant
laxative (eg, senna— should be given. Persisting constipation can be managed with Mg citrate
90 mL po q 2 to 3 days, lactulose 15 mL po bid, or propylethylene glycol powder (dose is adjusted as
needed). Some patients require regular enemas.
While sedated after taking an opioid, patients should not drive and should take precautions to prevent
falls and other accidents. If sedation impairs quality of life, certain stimulant drugs may be given
intermittently (eg, before a family gathering or other event that requires alertness) or, to some patients,
regularly. Drugs that can be effective are methylphenidate (initially, 5 to 10 mg po bid),
dextroamphetamine (initially, 2.5 to 10 mg po bid), or modafinil (initially, 100 to 200 mg po once/day).
These drugs are typically given in the morning and as needed later. The maximum dose of
methylphenidate seldom exceeds 60 mg/day. For some patients, caffeine-containing beverages provide
enough stimulation. Stimulants may also potentiate analgesia.
Nausea can be treated with hydroxyzine 25 to 50 mg po q 6 h, metoclopramide 10 to 20 mg po q 6 h, or
an antiemetic phenothiazine (eg, prochlorperazine 10 mg po or 25 mg rectally q 6 h).
Respiratory depression is rare with conventional doses and with long-term use. If it occurs acutely,
ventilatory assistance may be needed until the opioid's effect can be reversed by an opioid antagonist.
For urinary retention, double voiding or using Crede's method during voiding may help; some patients
benefit from adding an
α
-adrenergic blocker such as tamsulosin 0.4 mg po once/day (starting dose).
Opioids can cause neuroendocrine effects, typically reversible hypogonadism. Symptoms may include
fatigue, loss of libido, infertility due to low levels of sex hormones, and, in women, amenorrhea.
Opioid antagonists:
Opioid antagonists are opioid-like substances that bind to opioid receptors but
produce little or no agonist activity. They are used mainly to reverse symptoms of opioid overdose,
particularly respiratory depression.
Naloxone acts in < 1 min when given IV and slightly less rapidly when given IM. It can also be given
sublingually or endotracheally. Duration of action is about 60 to 120 min. However, opioid-induced
respiratory depression usually lasts longer than the duration of antagonism; thus,
repeated doses of
naloxone and close monitoring are necessary
. The dose for acute opioid overdosage is 0.4 mg IV q 2 to
3 min prn. For patients receiving long-term opioid therapy, naloxone should be used only to reverse
respiratory depression and must be given more cautiously to avoid precipitating withdrawal or recurrent
pain. A reasonable regimen is 1 mL of a dilute solution (0.4 mg in 10 mL saline) IV q 1 to 2 min, titrated to
adequate respirations (not alertness). Nalmefene is similar to naloxone, but its duration of action is about
4 to 8 h. Nalmefene is occasionally used to ensure prolonged opioid reversal.
Naltrexone, an orally bioavailable opioid antagonist, is given as adjunctive therapy in opioid and alcohol
addiction. It is long-acting and generally well tolerated.
Adjuvant Analgesic Drugs
===PAGE:1806===
Many drugs are used as adjuvant analgesics, including anticonvulsants (eg, pregabalin, gabapentin) and
antidepressants (eg, tricyclics, duloxetine, venlafaxine, bupropion), and many others (see
Table 171-4
). These drugs have many uses, most notably to relieve pain with a neuropathic component.
Gabapentin is the most widely used drug for such purposes. The dose often needs to be high, up to 1200
mg tid
or sometimes higher. Pregabalin is similar to gabapentin but has more stable pharmacokinetics;
some patients who do not respond well to gabapentin do respond to pregabalin and visa versa.
Duloxetine is a new mixed mechanism (serotonin and norepinephrine) reuptake inhibitor, which has good
evidence of analgesic efficacy in diabetic neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia.
Topical drugs are also widely used. Capsaicin cream, topical NSAIDS, other compounded creams (eg,
local anesthetics), and a lidocaine 5% patch have little risk of adverse effects; they should be considered
for many types of pain.
Neural Blockade
Interrupting nerve transmission in peripheral or central pain pathways via drugs or physical methods
provides short-term and sometimes long-term relief. Neuroablation (pathway destruction is used rarely; it
is typically reserved for patients with an advanced disorders and a short life expectancy.
Local anesthetic drugs (eg, lidocaine) can be given IV, intrathecally, intrapleurally, transdermally, sc, or
epidurally. Epidural analgesia using local anesthetics or opioids is particularly useful for some types of
postoperative pain. Long-term epidural drug administration is occasionally used for patients with localized
pain and a short life expectancy. Generally, for long-term neuraxial infusion, an intrathecal route via an
implanted pump is preferred.
Neuroablation involves interrupting a nociceptive pathway surgically or using radio-frequency energy to
produce a lesion. The procedure is used mainly for cancer pain. Somatic pain is more responsive than
visceral pain. Neuroablation of the ascending spinothalamic tract (cordotomy) is usually used; it provides
relief for several years, although numbness and dysesthesias develop. Neuroablation of the dorsal roots
(rhizotomy) is used when a specific dermatome can be identified.
Neuromodulation
Stimulation of neural tissues may decrease pain, presumably by activating endogenous pain modulatory
pathways. The most common method is transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), which
applies a small current to the skin. Also, electrodes may be implanted along peripheral nerves or along
the dorsal columns in the epidural space. Stimulation of brain structures (deep brain stimulation and
motor cortex stimulation) has also been used, but evidence of benefit is slight.
Geriatrics Essentials
In the elderly, the most common causes of pain are musculoskeletal disorders. However, pain is often
chronic and multifactorial, and the causes may not be clear.
NSAIDs:
Risk of ulcers and GI bleeding due to NSAIDs for people > 65 is 3 to 4 times higher than that for
middle-aged people. Risk depends on drug dose and duration of therapy. Elderly patients at high risk of
GI adverse effects may benefit from concomitant use of cytoprotective drugs (usually, a proton pump
inhibitor; occasionally, the prostaglandin misoprostol).
The newly recognized risk of cardiovascular toxicity, which presumably occurs with nonselective COX-1
and COX-2 inhibitors and with selective COX-2 inhibitors (coxibs), is particularly relevant to the elderly,
who are more likely to have cardiovascular risk factors (eg, a history of MI or cerebrovascular or
peripheral vascular disease). These drugs should be prescribed cautiously for such patients.
Both nonselective and selective NSAIDs can impair renal function and cause Na and water retention; they
should be used cautiously in the elderly, particularly in those who have a renal or hepatic disorder, heart
failure, or hypovolemia. Rarely, NSAIDs cause cognitive impairment and personality changes in the
elderly. Indomethacin causes more confusion in the elderly than other NSAIDs and should be avoided.
===PAGE:1807===
Given the overall greater risk of serious toxicity in the elderly, low doses of NSAIDs should be used if
possible, and using short-term therapy or interrupted therapy to confirm effectiveness should be
considered.
Opioids:
In the elderly, opioids have a longer half-life and possibly a greater analgesic effect than in
younger patients. Opioid agonist-antagonists often have psychotomimetic effects (eg, delirium) in the
elderly and should usually be avoided. Opioids can contribute to constipation and urinary retention in
patients of any age, but the effects tend to be more problematic in the elderly.
Chronic Pain
(See also Fibromyalgia )
Chronic pain is pain that persists or recurs for > 3 mo, persists > 1 mo after resolution of an
acute tissue injury, or accompanies a nonhealing lesion. Causes include chronic disorders (eg,
cancer, arthritis, diabetes) and injuries (eg, herniated disk, torn ligament), and many primary
pain disorders (eg, neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia,
chronic headache). Various drugs and
psychologic treatments are used.
Unresolved, long-lasting disorders (eg, cancer, RA, herniated disk) that produce ongoing nociceptive
stimuli may account completely for chronic pain. Alternatively, injury, even mild injury, may lead to longlasting changes (sensitization) in the nervous system—from peripheral receptors to the cerebral cortex
—that may produce persistent pain in the absence of ongoing nociceptive stimuli. With sensitization,
discomfort that is due to a nearly resolved disorder and might otherwise be perceived as mild or trivial is
instead perceived as significant pain. Psychologic factors may also amplify persistent pain. Thus, chronic
pain commonly appears out of proportion to identifiable physical processes. In some cases (eg, chronic
back pain after injury), the original precipitant of pain is obvious; in others (eg, chronic headache, atypical
facial pain, chronic abdominal pain), the precipitant is remote or occult.
In most patients, physical processes are undeniably involved in sustaining chronic pain and are
sometimes (eg, in cancer pain) the main factor. However, even in these patients, psychologic factors
usually also play a role. Patients who have to continually prove that they are sick to obtain medical care,
insurance coverage, or work relief may unconsciously reinforce their pain perceptions, particularly when
litigation is involved. This response differs from malingering, which is conscious exaggeration of
symptoms for secondary gain (eg, time off, disability payments). Various factors in the patient's
environment (eg, family members, friends) may reinforce behaviors that perpetuate chronic pain.
Chronic pain can lead to psychologic problems. Constant, unremitting pain limits activities and may cause
depression and anxiety, interrupt sleep, and interfere with almost all activities. Distinguishing cause from
effect is often difficult.
Symptoms and Signs
Chronic pain often leads to vegetative signs (eg, lassitude, sleep disturbance, decreased appetite, loss of
taste for food, weight loss, diminished libido, constipation), which develop gradually; depression may
develop. Patients may become inactive, withdraw socially, and become preoccupied with physical health.
Psychologic and social impairment may be severe, causing virtual lack of function.
Some patients, particularly those without a clear-cut ongoing cause, have a history of failed medical and
surgical treatments, multiple (and duplicative) diagnostic tests, use of many drugs (sometimes involving
abuse or addiction), and inappropriate use of health care.
Diagnosis
• Evaluation for organic cause initially and if symptoms change
An organic cause should always be sought—even if a prominent psychologic contribution to the pain is
===PAGE:1808===
likely. Physical processes associated with the pain should be evaluated appropriately and characterized.
However, once a full evaluation is done, repeating tests in the absence of new findings is not useful. The
best approach is often to stop testing and focus on relieving pain and restoring function.
The effect of pain on the patient's life should be evaluated; evaluation by an occupational therapist may
be necessary. Formal psychiatric evaluation should be considered if a coexisting psychiatric disorder (eg,
major depression) is suspected as cause or effect.
Treatment
• Often multimodal therapy (eg, analgesics, physical methods, psychologic treatments)
Specific causes should be treated. Early, aggressive treatment of acute pain is always preferable and
may limit or prevent sensitization and remodeling and hence prevent progression to chronic pain.
Drugs or physical methods may be used. Psychologic and behavioral treatments are usually helpful.
Many patients who have marked functional impairment or who do not respond to a reasonable attempt at
management by their physician benefit from the multidisciplinary approach available at a pain clinic.
Many patients prefer to have their pain treated at home, even though an institution may offer more
advanced modalities of pain management. Also, pain control may be compromised by certain practices in
institutions; for example, they restrict visiting hours, use of televisions and radios (which provide useful
distraction), and use of heating pads (for fear of thermal injury).
Drugs:
Analgesics include NSAIDs, opioids, and adjuvant analgesics (eg, antidepressants,
anticonvulsants—see p.
and
Table 171-4
). One or more drugs may be appropriate.
[Table 171-4.
Drugs for Neuropathic Pain]
Adjuvant analgesics are most commonly used for neuropathic pain. For persistent, moderate-to-severe
pain that impairs function, opioids should be considered after determining the following:
• What conventional treatment practice is
• Whether other treatments are reasonable
• Whether the patient has an unusually high risk of adverse effects from an opioid
• Whether the patient is likely to be a responsible drug user
Prescription drug abuse may be a problem, and physicians should not offer long-term opioid therapy
unless they can assess risk of abuse, monitor patients appropriately, and respond reasonably to
problematic drug use. As pain lessens, patients usually need help reducing use of opioids. If depression
coexists with pain, antidepressants should be used.
Depending on the condition, trigger point injection, joint or spinal injections, nerve blocks, or neuraxial
infusion may be appropriate.
Physical methods:
Many patients benefit from physical therapy or occupational therapy. Spray-andstretch techniques can relieve myofascial trigger points. Some patients require an orthosis. Spinal cord
stimulation may be appropriate.
Psychologic treatments:
Behavioral treatments can improve patient function, even without reducing
pain. Patients should keep a diary of daily activities to pinpoint areas amenable to change. The physician
should make specific recommendations for gradually increasing physical activity and social engagement.
Activities should be prescribed in gradually increasing units of time; pain should not, if at all possible, be
allowed to abort the commitment to greater function. When activities are increased in this way, reports of
pain often decrease.
===PAGE:1809===
Various cognitive techniques of pain control (eg, relaxation training, distraction techniques, hypnosis,
biofeedback) may be useful. Patients may be taught to use distraction by guided imagery (organized
fantasy evoking calm and comfort—eg, imagining resting on a beach or lying in a hammock). Other
cognitive-behavioral techniques (eg, self-hypnosis) may require training by specialists.
Behavior of family members or fellow workers that reinforces pain behavior (eg, constant inquiries about
the patient's health or insistence that the patient do no chores) should be discouraged. The physician
should avoid reinforcing pain behavior, discourage maladaptive behaviors, applaud progress, and provide
pain treatment while emphasizing return of function.
Neuropathic Pain
Neuropathic pain results from damage to or dysfunction of the peripheral or central nervous
system, rather than stimulation of pain receptors. Diagnosis is suggested by pain out of
proportion to tissue injury, dysesthesia (eg, burning, tingling), and signs of nerve injury
detected during neurologic examination. Although neuropathic pain responds to opioids,
treatment is often with adjuvant drugs (eg, antidepressants, anticonvulsants, baclofen, topical
drugs).
Pain can develop after injury to any level of the nervous system, peripheral or central; the sympathetic
nervous system may be involved (causing sympathetically maintained pain). Specific syndromes include
postherpetic neuralgia (, root avulsions, painful traumatic mononeuropathy, painful
polyneuropathy (particularly due to diabetes), central pain syndromes (potentially caused by virtually any
lesion at any level of the nervous system), postsurgical pain syndromes (eg, postmastectomy syndrome,
postthoracotomy syndrome, phantom pain), and complex regional pain syndrome (reflex sympathetic
dystrophy and causalgia—.
Etiology
Peripheral nerve injury or dysfunction can result in neuropathic pain. Examples are mononeuropathies
(eg, carpal tunnel syndrome, radiculopathy), plexopathies (typically caused by nerve compression, as by
a neuroma, tumor, or herniated disk), and polyneuropathies (typically caused by various metabolic
neuropathies—see
Table 185-1
. Mechanisms presumably vary and may involve an increased number of Na
channels on regenerating nerves.
Central neuropathic pain syndromes appear to involve reorganization of central somatosensory
processing; the main categories are deafferentation pain and sympathetically maintained pain. Both are
complex and, although presumably related, differ substantially.
Deafferentation pain is due to partial or complete interruption of peripheral or central afferent neural
activity. Examples are postherpetic neuralgia, central pain (pain after CNS injury), and phantom pain (pain
felt in the region of an amputated body part). Mechanisms are unknown but may involve sensitization of
central neurons, with lower activation thresholds and expansion of receptive fields.
Sympathetically maintained pain depends on efferent sympathetic activity. Complex regional pain
syndrome sometimes involves
sympathetically maintained pain. Other types of neuropathic pain may
have a sympathetically maintained component. Mechanisms probably involve abnormal sympatheticsomatic nerve connections (ephapses), local inflammatory changes, and changes in the spinal cord.
Symptoms and Signs
Dysesthesias (spontaneous or evoked burning pain, often with a superimposed lancinating component)
are typical, but pain may also be deep and aching. Other sensations—eg, hyperesthesia, hyperalgesia,
allodynia (pain due to a nonnoxious stimulus), and hyperpathia (particularly unpleasant, exaggerated pain
response)—may also occur. Symptoms are long-lasting, typically persisting after resolution of the primary
cause (if one was present) because the CNS has been sensitized and remodeled.
===PAGE:1810===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Neuropathic pain is suggested by its typical symptoms when nerve injury is known or suspected. The
cause (eg, amputation, diabetes) may be readily apparent. If not, the diagnosis often can be assumed
based on the description. Pain that is ameliorated by sympathetic nerve block is sympathetically
maintained pain.
Treatment
• Multimodal therapy (eg, psychologic treatments, physical methods, antidepressants or anticonvulsants,
sometimes surgery)
Without concern for diagnosis, rehabilitation, and psychosocial issues, treatment has a limited chance of
success. For peripheral nerve lesions, mobilization is needed to prevent trophic changes, disuse atrophy,
and joint ankylosis. Surgery may be needed to alleviate compression. Psychologic factors must be
constantly considered from the start of treatment. Anxiety and depression must be treated appropriately.
When dysfunction is entrenched, patients may benefit from the comprehensive approach provided by a
pain clinic.
Several classes of drugs are moderately effective (see
Table 171-4
), but complete or near-complete relief
is unlikely. Antidepressants and anticonvulsants are most commonly used. Evidence of efficacy is strong
for several antidepressants and anticonvulsants.
Opioid analgesics can provide some relief but are less effective than for nociceptive pain; adverse effects
may prevent adequate analgesia. Topical drugs and a lidocaine-containing patch may be effective for
peripheral syndromes. Sympathetic blockade is usually ineffective except for some patients with complex
regional pain syndrome.
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
(Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy and Causalgia)
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is chronic neuropathic pain that follows soft-tissue or
bone injury (type I) or nerve injury (type II) and lasts longer and is more severe than expected
for the original tissue damage. Other manifestations include autonomic changes (eg, sweating,
vasomotor abnormalities), motor changes (eg, weakness, dystonia), and trophic changes (eg,
skin or bone atrophy, hair loss, joint contractures). Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment includes
drugs, physical therapy, and sympathetic blockade.
CRPS type I was previously known as reflex sympathetic dystrophy, and type II as causalgia. Both types
occur most often in young adults and are 2 or 3 times more common among women.
Etiology
CRPS type I typically follows an injury (usually of a hand or foot), most commonly after crush injuries,
especially in a lower limb. It may follow amputation, acute MI, stroke, or cancer (eg, lung, breast, ovary,
CNS); no precipitant is apparent in about 10% of patients. CRPS type II is similar to type I but involves
overt damage to a peripheral nerve.
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiology is unclear, but peripheral nociceptor and central sensitization and release of
neuropeptides (substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide) help maintain pain and inflammation. The
sympathetic nervous system is more involved in CRPS than in other neuropathic pain syndromes: Central
sympathetic activity is increased, and peripheral nociceptors are sensitized to norepinephrine (a
===PAGE:1811===
sympathetic neurotransmitter); these changes may lead to sweating abnormalities and poor blood flow
due to vasoconstriction. Nonetheless, only some patients respond to sympathetic manipulation (ie, central
or peripheral sympathetic blockade).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms vary greatly and do not follow a pattern; they include sensory, focal autonomic (vasomotor or
sudomotor), and motor abnormalities.
Pain—burning or aching—is common. It does not follow the distribution of a single peripheral nerve; it
may worsen with changes in environment or emotional stress. Allodynia and hyperalgesia may occur. Pain
often causes patients to limit use of an extremity.
Cutaneous vasomotor changes (eg, red, mottled, or ashen color; increased or decreased temperature)
and sudomotor abnormalities (dry or hyperhidrotic skin) may be present. Edema may be considerable and
locally confined. Other symptoms include trophic abnormalities (eg, shiny, atrophic skin; cracking or
excess growth of nails; bone atrophy; hair loss) and motor abnormalities (weakness, tremors, spasm,
dystonia with fingers fixed in flexion or equinovarus position of foot). Range of motion is often limited,
sometimes leading to joint contractures. Symptoms may interfere with fitting a prosthesis after amputation.
Psychologic distress (eg, depression, anxiety, anger) is common, fostered by the poorly understood
cause, lack of effective therapy, and prolonged course.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
The following clinical criteria must be present to establish the diagnosis of CRPS:
• Occurrence of pain (usually burning)
• Allodynia or hyperalgesia
• Focal autonomic dysregulation (vasomotor or sudomotor abnormalities)
• No evidence of another disorder that could explain the symptoms
If another disorder is present, CRPS should be considered possible or probable.
Other symptoms and findings may support the diagnosis: edema, trophic abnormalities, or a change in
temperature of the affected area. Thermography may be used to document the temperature change if
clinical evaluation is equivocal and if this finding would help establish the diagnosis. Bone changes (eg,
demineralization on x-ray, increased uptake on a triple-phase radionuclide bone scan) may be detected
and are usually evaluated only if the diagnosis is equivocal. However, imaging tests may also be
abnormal after trauma in patients without CRPS.
Sympathetic nerve block (cervical stellate ganglion or lumbar) can be used for diagnosis and treatment.
However, false-positive and false-negative results are common because not all CRPS pain is
sympathetically maintained and nerve block may also affect nonsympathetic fibers. In another test of
sympathetic involvement, a patient is given IV infusions of saline (placebo) or phentolamine 1 mg/kg over
10 min while pain scores are recorded; a decrease in pain after phentolamine but not placebo indicates
sympathetically maintained pain.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies and is difficult to predict. CRPS may remit or remain stable for years; in a few patients, it
progresses, spreading to other areas of the body.
===PAGE:1812===
Treatment
• Multimodal therapy (eg, drugs, physical therapy, sympathetic blockade, psychologic treatments,
neuromodulation)
Treatment is complex and often unsatisfactory, particularly if begun late. It includes drugs, physical
therapy, sympathetic blockade, psychologic treatments, and neuromodulation. Few controlled trials have
been done.
Many of the drugs used for neuropathic pain, including tricyclic antidepressants, anticonvulsants, and
corticosteroids (see
Table 171-4
), may be tried; none is known to be superior. Long-term treatment with
opioid analgesics may be useful for selected patients.
In some patients with sympathetically maintained pain, regional sympathetic blockade relieves pain,
making physical therapy possible. Oral analgesics (NSAIDs, opioids, and various adjuvant analgesics)
may also relieve pain sufficiently to allow rehabilitation.
For neuromodulation, implanted spinal cord stimulators are being increasingly used. Transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), applied at multiple locations with different stimulation parameters,
should be given a long trial. Other methods of neuromodulation include brisk rubbing of the affected part
(counterirritation) and acupuncture. No one form of neuromodulation is known to be more effective than
another, and a poor response to one form does not mean a poor response to another.
Neuraxial infusion with opioids, anesthetics, and clonidine may help, and intrathecal baclofen has
reduced dystonia in a few patients.
Physical therapy is essential. Goals include strengthening, increased range of motion, and vocational
rehabilitation.
===PAGE:1813===
Chapter 172. Function and Dysfunction of the Cerebral Lobes
Introduction
The cerebrum is divided by a longitudinal fissure into 2 hemispheres, each containing 5 discrete lobes.
The frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes cover the brain's surface; the insula is hidden under the
Sylvian fissure (see
Fig. 172-1
). Although specific functions are attributed to each lobe, most activities require coordination of
multiple areas in both hemispheres. For example, although the occipital lobe is essential to visual
processing, parts of the parietal, temporal, and frontal lobes on both sides also process complex visual
stimuli.
Function is extensively lateralized. Visual, tactile, and motor activities of the left side of the body are
directed predominantly by the right hemisphere and vice versa. Certain complex functions involve both
hemispheres but are directed predominantly by one (cerebral dominance). For example, the left
hemisphere is typically dominant for language, and the right is dominant for spatial attention.
The cerebral cortex contains the primary sensory and motor areas as well as multiple association areas.
The primary sensory areas receive somesthetic, auditory, visual, olfactory, and gustatory stimuli from
specialized sensory organs and peripheral receptors. Sensory stimuli are further processed in association
areas that relate to one or more senses. The primary motor cortex generates volitional body movements;
motor association areas help plan and execute complex motor activity. Some cortical areas are
heteromodal. They are not restricted to any single motor or sensory function but receive convergent
information from multiple sensory and motor areas of the brain. Heteromodal association areas in the
frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes integrate sensory data, motor feedback, and other information with
instinctual and acquired memories. This integration facilitates learning and creates thought, expression,
and behavior.
Frontal lobes:
The frontal lobes are anterior to the central sulcus. They are essential for planning and
executing learned and purposeful behaviors; they are also the site of many inhibitory functions. There are
several functionally distinct areas in the frontal lobes:
• The primary motor cortex is the most posterior part of the precentral gyrus. The primary motor cortex on
one side controls all moving parts on the contralateral side of the body (shown on a spatial map called
a homunculus—see
Fig. 172-2
); 90% of motor fibers from each hemisphere cross the midline in the brain stem. Thus, damage
to the motor cortex of one hemisphere causes weakness or paralysis mainly on the contralateral side of
the body.
[Fig. 172-1.
Areas of the brain.]
[Fig. 172-2.
Homunculus.]
• The medial frontal cortex (sometimes called the medial prefrontal area) is important in arousal and
motivation. If lesions in this area are large and extend to the most anterior part of the cortex (frontal
pole), patients sometimes become abulic (apathetic, inattentive, and markedly slow to respond).
• The orbital frontal cortex (sometimes called the orbital prefrontal area—see
Fig. 172-1
) helps modulate
social behaviors. Patients with orbital frontal lesions can become emotionally labile, indifferent to the
implications of their actions, or both. They may be alternately euphoric, facetious, vulgar, and indifferent
to social nuances. Bilateral acute trauma to this area may make patients boisterously talkative, restless,
and socially intrusive. With aging and in many types of dementia, disinhibition and abnormal behaviors
can develop; these changes probably result from degeneration of the frontal lobe, particularly the orbital
frontal cortex.
• The left posteroinferior frontal cortex (sometimes called Broca's area or the posteroinferior prefrontal
area—see
Fig. 172-1
) controls expressive language function. Lesions in this area cause expressive
aphasia (impaired expression of words—.
===PAGE:1814===
• The dorsolateral frontal cortex (sometimes called the dorsolateral prefrontal area) manipulates very
recently acquired information—a function called working memory. Lesions in this area can impair the
ability to retain information and process it in real time (eg, to spell words backwards or to alternate
between letters and numbers sequentially).
Parietal lobes:
Several areas in the parietal lobes have specific functions.
• The primary somatosensory cortex, located in the postrolandic area (postcentral gyrus) in the anterior
parietal lobes, integrates somesthetic stimuli for recognition and recall of form, texture, and weight. The
primary somatosensory cortex on one side receives all somatosensory input from the contralateral side
of the body (see
Fig. 172-2
). Lesions of the anterior parietal lobe can cause difficulty recognizing
objects by touch (astereognosis).
• Areas posterolateral to the postcentral gyrus generate visual-spatial relationships and integrate these
perceptions with other sensations
to create awareness of trajectories of moving objects. These areas
also mediate proprioception (awareness of the position of body parts in space).
• Parts of the midparietal lobe of the dominant hemisphere are involved in abilities such as calculation,
writing, left-right orientation, and finger recognition. Lesions in the angular gyrus can cause deficits in
writing, calculating, left-right disorientation, and finger-naming (Gerstmann's syndrome).
• The nondominant parietal lobe integrates the contralateral side of the body with its environment,
enabling people to be aware of this environmental space, and is important for abilities such as drawing.
Acute injury to the nondominant parietal lobe may cause neglect of the contralateral side (usually the
left), resulting in decreased awareness of that part of the body, its environment, and any associated
injury to that side (anosognosia). For example, patients with large right parietal lesions may deny the
existence of left-sided paralysis. Patients with smaller lesions may lose the ability to do learned motor
tasks (eg, dressing, other well-learned activities)—a spatial-manual deficit called apraxia.
Temporal lobes:
The temporal lobes are integral to auditory perception, receptive components of
language, visual memory, declarative (factual) memory, and emotion. Patients with right temporal lobe
lesions commonly lose the ability to interpret nonverbal auditory stimuli (eg, music). Left temporal lobe
lesions interfere greatly with the recognition, memory, and formation of language.
Patients with epileptogenic foci in the medial limbic-emotional parts of the temporal lobe commonly have
complex partial seizures, characterized by uncontrollable feelings and autonomic, cognitive, or emotional
dysfunction. Occasionally, such patients have personality changes, characterized by humorlessness,
philosophic religiosity, and obsessiveness.
Occipital lobes:
The occipital lobes contain the primary visual cortex and visual association areas.
Lesions in the primary visual cortex lead to a form of central blindness called Anton's syndrome; patients
become unable to recognize objects by sight and are generally unaware of their deficits. Seizures in the
occipital lobe can cause visual hallucinations, often consisting of lines or meshes of color superimposed
on the contralateral visual field.
Insula:
The insula integrates sensory and autonomic information from the viscera. It plays a role in
certain language functions, as evidenced by aphasia in patients with some insular lesions. The insula
processes aspects of pain and temperature sensation and possibly taste.
Pathophysiology
Cerebral dysfunction may be focal or global. Focal and global processes may also affect subcortical
systems, altering arousal (eg, causing stupor or coma) or integration of thought (eg, causing delirium).
Focal dysfunction
usually results from structural abnormalities (eg, tumors, stroke, trauma,
malformations, gliosis, demyelination). Manifestations depend on the lesion's location, size, and
development rate. Lesions that are < 2 cm in diameter or that develop very slowly may be asymptomatic.
===PAGE:1815===
Larger lesions, rapidly developing lesions (over weeks or months rather than years), and lesions that
simultaneously affect both hemispheres are more likely to become symptomatic. Focal lesions in white
matter can interrupt the connectivity between brain areas and cause the disconnection syndrome (inability
to do a task that requires coordinated activity of ≥ 2 brain regions, despite retention of basic functions of
each region).
Global dysfunction
is caused by toxicmetabolic disorders or sometimes by diffuse inflammation,
vasculopathy, major trauma, or disseminated cancer; these disorders affect multiple dimensions of
cerebral function.
Recovery:
Recovery from brain injury depends in part on the plasticity (ability of an area of the brain to
alter its function) of the remaining cerebrum, a capacity that varies from person to person and is affected
by age and general health. Plasticity is most prominent in the developing brain. For example, if the
dominant hemisphere language areas are severely damaged before age 8 yr, the opposite hemisphere
can often assume near-normal language function. Although capacity for recovery from brain injury is
considerable after the first decade of life, severe damage more often results in permanent deficits. Gross
reorganization of brain function after injury in adults is uncommon, although plasticity remains operative in
certain specific areas of the brain throughout life.
Cerebral dysfunction syndromes:
Specific syndromes include agnosia, amnesia, aphasia, and
apraxia. Psychiatric conditions (eg, depression, psychosis, anxiety disorders) sometimes include similar
elements.
Diagnosis
In general, diagnosis is clinical, often assisted by neuropsychologic testing. Diagnosis of the
cause
usually requires laboratory tests (blood and sometimes CSF analysis) and brain imaging, either structural
(CT, MRI) or functional (PET, single-photon emission CT).
Agnosia
Agnosia is inability to identify an object using one or more of the senses. Diagnosis is clinical,
often including neuropsychologic testing, with brain imaging (eg, CT, MRI) to identify the cause.
Prognosis depends on the nature and extent of damage and patient age. There is no specific
treatment, but occupational therapy may help patients compensate.
Agnosias are uncommon. They result from damage to (eg, by infarct, tumor, trauma) or degeneration of
areas of the brain that integrate perception, memory, and identification.
Discrete brain lesions can cause different forms of agnosia, which may involve any sense. Typically, only
one sense is affected. Examples are hearing (auditory agnosia, the inability to identify objects through
sound such as a ringing telephone), taste (gustatory agnosia), smell (olfactory agnosia), touch (tactile
agnosia), and sight (visual agnosia).
Other forms of agnosia involve very specific and complex processes within one sense. For example,
prosopagnosia is inability to identify well-known faces, including those of close friends, or to otherwise
distinguish individual objects among a class of objects, despite the ability to identify generic facial
features and objects.
Anosognosia often accompanies damage to the right, nondominant parietal lobe. Patients deny their
deficit, insisting that nothing is wrong even when one side of their body is completely paralyzed. When
shown the paralyzed body part, patients may deny that it is theirs. In an often related phenomenon,
patients ignore the paralyzed or desensitized body parts (hemi-inattention) or the space around them
(hemineglect). Hemineglect most often involves the left side of the body.
Occipitotemporal lesions may cause an inability to recognize familiar places (environmental agnosia),
visual disturbances (visual agnosia), or color blindness (achromatopsia). Right-sided temporal lesions
may cause an inability to interpret sounds (auditory agnosia) or impaired music perception (amusia).
===PAGE:1816===
Diagnosis
• Bedside and neuropsychologic testing
• Brain imaging
At bedside, patients are asked to identify common objects through sight, touch, or another sense. If
hemineglect is suspected, patients are asked to identify the paralyzed parts of their body or objects in
their hemivisual fields. Physical examination is done to detect primary deficits in individual senses or
communication that may interfere with testing for agnosias. For example, if light touch is defective,
patients may not sense an object even when cortical function is intact. Also, aphasias may interfere with
patient's expression. Neuropsychologic testing may help identify more subtle agnosias.
Brain imaging (eg, CT or MRI with or without angiographic protocols) is required to characterize a central
lesion (eg, infarct, hemorrhage, mass) and to check for atrophy suggesting a degenerative disorder.
Prognosis
Recovery may be influenced by size and location of lesions, degree of impairment, and patient age. Most
recovery occurs within the first 3 mo but may continue to a variable degree up to a year.
Treatment
There is no specific treatment. Rehabilitation with speech or occupational therapists can help patients
learn to compensate for their deficits.
Amnesias
Amnesia is partial or total inability to recall past experiences. It may result from traumatic brain
injury, degeneration, metabolic disorders, seizure disorders, or psychologic disturbances.
Diagnosis is clinical but often includes neuropsychologic testing and brain imaging (eg, CT,
MRI). Treatment is directed at the cause.
Processing of memories involves registration (taking in new information), encoding (forming associations,
time stamps, and other processes necessary for retrieval), and retrieval. Deficits in any of these steps can
cause amnesia. Amnesia, by definition, results from impairment of memory functions, not impairment of
other functions (eg, attention, motivation, reasoning, language), which may cause similar symptoms.
Amnesia can be classified as follows:
• Retrograde: Amnesia for events
before
the causative event
• Anterograde: Inability to store new memories
after
the causative event
•
Global: Amnesia for information related to all senses and past times
• Sense-specific: Amnesia for events processed by one sense—eg, an agnosia
Amnesia may be transient (as occurs after brain trauma), fixed (as occurs after a serious event such as
encephalitis, global ischemia, or cardiac arrest), or progressive (as occurs with degenerative dementias,
such as Alzheimer's disease).
Memory deficits more commonly involve facts (declarative memory) and, less commonly, skills (procedural
memory).
Etiology
===PAGE:1817===
Amnesia can result from diffuse cerebral impairment, bilateral lesions, or multifocal injuries that impair
memory-storage areas in the cerebral hemispheres. Predominant pathways for declarative memory are
located along the medial parahippocampal region and hippocampus as well as in the inferomedial
temporal lobes, orbital surface of the frontal lobes (basal forebrain), and diencephalon (which contains
the thalamus and hypothalamus). Of these structures, the hippocampal gyri, hypothalamus, nuclei of the
basal forebrain, and dorsomedial thalamic nuclei are critical. The amygdaloid nucleus contributes
emotional amplifications to memory. The thalamic intralaminar nuclei and brain stem reticular formation
stimulate the imprinting of memories. Bilateral damage to the mediodorsal nuclei of the thalamus severely
impairs recent memory and the ability to form new memories; the most common causes are
• Thiamin deficiency
• Hypothalamic tumors
• Vertebrobasilar ischemia
Other causes of amnesia include the following:
• Bilateral damage to the medial temporal lobes (especially the hippocampus)
• Degenerative dementias
• Severe brain trauma
• Global brain anoxia or ischemia
• Alcoholic-nutritional disorders (eg, Wernicke's encephalopathy, Korsakoff's psychosis—see pp.
and
)
• Various drug intoxications (eg, chronic solvent sniffing, amphotericin B or lithium toxicity)
Posttraumatic amnesias for the periods immediately before and after concussion or more severe head
trauma seem to result from medial temporal lobe injury. More severe injuries may affect larger areas of
memory storage and recall, as can many diffuse cerebral disorders that cause dementia.
Psychologic disturbances of memory result from extreme psychologic trauma or stress (.
With aging, many people gradually develop noticeable problems with memory, often first for names, then
for events, and occasionally for spatial relationships. This widely experienced so-called benign senescent
forgetfulness has no proven relationship to dementia, although some similarities are hard to overlook.
People who have a subjective memory problem, who perform worse on objective memory tests, but who
otherwise have intact cognition and daily function may have amnestic mild cognitive impairment (amnestic
MCI). People with amnestic MCI are more likely to develop Alzheimer's disease than agematched people
without memory problems.
Diagnosis
• Bedside testing
Simple bedside tests (eg, 3-item recall, location of objects previously hidden in the room) and formal tests
(eg, word list learning tests such as the California Verbal Learning Test and the Buschke Selective
Reminding Test) can help identify verbal memory loss. Assessment of nonverbal memory is more difficult
but may include recall of visual designs or a series of tones. Clinical findings usually suggest causes and
any necessary tests.
Treatment
• Treatment directed at the cause
===PAGE:1818===
Any underlying disorder or psychologic cause must be treated. However, some patients with acute
amnesia improve spontaneously. Certain disorders that cause amnesia (eg, Alzheimer's disease,
Korsakoff's psychosis, herpes encephalitis) can be treated; however, treatment of the underlying disorder
may or may not lessen the amnesia. If it does not, no specific measures can hasten recovery or improve
the outcome.
Transient Global Amnesia
Transient global amnesia is disturbed memory typically caused by vascular or ischemic lesions
in the brain. Diagnosis is primarily clinical but includes laboratory tests and CT, MRI, or both to
evaluate central circulation. The amnesia typically remits spontaneously but may recur. There is
no specific treatment, but underlying abnormalities are corrected.
Transient global amnesia is typically caused by ischemia (eg, due to atherosclerosis, thrombosis, or
thromboembolism) that transiently affects the posteromedial thalamus or hippocampus bilaterally, but this
amnesia can be caused by seizure activity or migraines.
A distinct benign form of transient global amnesia can follow excessive alcohol ingestion, moderately
large sedative doses of barbiturates, use of several illicit drugs, or sometimes relatively small doses of
benzodiazepines (especially midazolam and triazolam).
Symptoms and Signs
Patients present with acute global amnesic confusion that usually lasts 6 to 12 h but may last from 30 min
to 24 h (rarely). Patients have a retrograde memory deficit that can extend back for several years; they
are often disoriented to time and place but usually not to personal identity. Anterograde memory is less
disturbed. Many patients are anxious or agitated and may repeatedly ask questions about transpiring
events. Language function, attention, visual-spatial skills, and social skills are retained. Impairments
gradually resolve as the episode subsides.
The benign transient amnesia after substance ingestion is distinct because it is selectively retrograde (ie,
for events during and preceding intoxication), relates specifically to drug-accompanied events, does not
cause confusion (once acute intoxication resolves), and recurs only if similar amounts of the same drug
are ingested.
Diagnosis
• Primarily clinical evaluation
• Brain imaging
Diagnosis is primarily clinical. Neurologic examination typically does not detect any abnormalities other
than disturbed memory. Brain ischemia must be ruled out (. Laboratory tests should include
CBC, coagulation tests, and evaluation for hypercoagulable states. CT, MRI, or both, with or without
angiographic protocols, are done. EEG usually shows nonspecific abnormalities and is unnecessary
unless a seizure is suspected or episodes recur.
Prognosis
Prognosis is good. Symptoms typically last < 24 h. As the disorder resolves, the amnesia lessens, but
memory for events during the attack may be lost. Usually, episodes do not recur, unless the cause is
seizures or migraines. Overall lifetime recurrence rate is about 5 to 25%.
Treatment
No specific treatment is indicated. However, underlying ischemia ( or seizure ( should be treated.
===PAGE:1819===
Aphasia
Aphasia is language dysfunction that may involve impaired comprehension or expression of
words or nonverbal equivalents of words. It results from dysfunction of the language centers in
the cerebral cortex and basal ganglia or of the white matter pathways that connect them.
Diagnosis is clinical, often including neuropsychologic testing, with brain imaging (CT, MRI) to
identify cause. Prognosis depends on the cause and extent of damage and on patient age.
There is no specific treatment, but speech therapy may promote recovery.
Language function resides predominantly in the following:
• Posterosuperior temporal lobe, which contains Wernicke's area
• Adjacent inferior parietal lobe
• Posteroinferior part of the frontal lobe just anterior to the motor cortex, which contains Broca's area
• Subcortical connection between those regions—usually in the left hemisphere, even in left-handed
people
Damage to any part of this roughly triangular area (eg, by infarct, tumor, trauma, or degeneration)
interferes with some aspect of language function. Prosody (quality of rhythm and emphasis that adds
meaning to speech) is usually influenced by both hemispheres but is sometimes affected by dysfunction
of the nondominant hemisphere alone.
Aphasia is distinct from developmental disorders of language and from dysfunction of the motor pathways
and muscles that produce speech (dysarthria). It is broadly divided into receptive and expressive aphasia.
•
Receptive (sensory, fluent, or Wernicke's) aphasia:
Patients cannot comprehend words or
recognize auditory, visual, or tactile symbols. It is caused by a disorder of the posterosuperior temporal
gyrus of the language-dominant hemisphere (Wernicke's area). Often, alexia (loss of the ability to read
words) is also present.
•
Expressive (motor, nonfluent, or Broca's) aphasia:
The ability to create words is impaired, but
comprehension and ability to conceptualize are relatively preserved. It is
due to a disorder that affects
the dominant left frontal or frontoparietal area, including Broca's area. It often causes agraphia (loss of
the ability to write) and impairs oral reading.
There are other types of aphasia (see
Table 172-1
), which may overlap considerably. No aphasia classification system is ideal. Describing the
types of deficits is often the most precise way to describe a particular aphasia.
Symptoms and Signs
Wernicke's aphasia:
Patients speak normal words fluently, often including meaningless phonemes, but
do not know their meaning or relationships. The result is a jumble of words or "word salad." Patients are
typically unaware that their speech is incomprehensible to others. A right visual field cut commonly
accompanies Wernicke's aphasia because the visual pathway is near the affected area.
[Table 172-1.
Types of Aphasia]
Broca's aphasia:
Patients can comprehend and conceptualize relatively well, but their ability to form
words is impaired. Usually, the impairment affects speech production and writing (agraphia, dysgraphia),
greatly frustrating patients' attempts to communicate. Broca's aphasia may include anomia (inability to
name objects) and impaired prosody.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1820===
• Exclusion of other communication problems
• Bedside and neuropsychologic testing
• Brain imaging
Verbal interaction can typically identify gross aphasias. However, the clinician should try to differentiate
aphasias from communication problems that stem from severe dysarthria, impaired hearing, vision (eg,
when assessing reading), or motor writing ability.
Initially, Wernicke's aphasia may be mistaken for delirium. However, Wernicke's aphasia is a pure
language disturbance without other features of delirium (eg, fluctuating level of consciousness,
hallucinations, inattention).
Testing to identify specific deficits should include assessment of the following:
•
Spontaneous speech:
Speech is assessed for fluency, number of words spoken, ability to initiate
speech, presence of spontaneous errors, word-finding pauses, hesitations, and prosody.
•
Naming:
Patients are asked to name objects. Those who have difficulty naming often use
circumlocutions (eg, "what you use to tell time" for "clock").
•
Repetition:
Patients are asked to repeat grammatically complex phrases (eg, "no ifs, ands, or buts").
•
Comprehension:
Patients are asked to point to objects named by the clinician, carry out one-step and
multistep commands, and answer simple and complex yes-or-no questions.
•
Reading and writing:
Patients are asked to write spontaneously and to read aloud. Reading
comprehension, spelling, and writing in response to dictation are assessed.
Formal cognitive testing by a neuropsychologist or speech and language therapist may detect finer levels
of dysfunction and assist in planning treatment and assessing potential for recovery. Various formal tests
for diagnosing aphasia (eg, Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination, Western Aphasia Battery, Boston
Naming Test, Token Test, Action Naming Test) are available.
Brain imaging (eg, CT, MRI; with or without angiographic protocols) is required to characterize the lesion
(eg, infarct, hemorrhage, mass). Further tests are done to determine the etiology of the lesion (eg, stroke,
seizure disorder) as indicated (see pp.
and
).
Prognosis
Recovery is influenced by cause, size and location of lesions, extent of language impairment, and, to a
lesser degree, the age, education, and general health of the patient. Children < 8 yr often regain
language function after severe damage to either hemisphere. After that age, most recovery occurs within
the first 3 mo, but improvement continues to a variable degree up to a year.
Treatment
• Speech therapy
• Augmentative communication devices
Effectiveness of treatment is unclear, but most clinicians think that treatment by qualified speech
therapists helps and that patients treated soon after onset improve the most. Patients who cannot recover
basic language skills and caregivers of such patients are sometimes able to convey messages with
augmentative communication devices (eg, a book or communication board that contains pictures or
symbols of a patient's daily needs, computer-based devices).
===PAGE:1821===
Apraxia
Apraxia is inability to execute purposeful, previously learned motor tasks, despite physical
ability and willingness, as a result of brain damage. Diagnosis is clinical, often including
neuropsychologic testing, with brain imaging (eg, CT, MRI) to identify cause. Prognosis depends
on the cause and extent of damage and patient age. There is no specific treatment, but physical
and occupational therapy may modestly improve functioning and patient safety.
Apraxia results from brain damage (eg, by infarct, tumor, or trauma) or degeneration, usually in the
parietal lobes or their connections, which retain memories of learned movement patterns. Less commonly,
apraxia results from damage to other areas of the brain, such as the premotor cortex (the part of the
frontal lobe anterior to the motor cortex), other parts of the frontal lobe, or the corpus callosum, or from
diffuse damage related to degenerative dementias.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients cannot conceptualize or do learned complex motor tasks despite an ability to do the individual
component movements. For example, patients with constructional apraxia may be unable to copy a simple
geometric shape despite being able to see and recognize the stimulus, hold and use a pen, and
understand the task. Typically, patients do not recognize their deficits.
Diagnosis
• Bedside and neuropsychologic testing
• Brain imaging
Tests include asking patients to do or imitate common learned tasks (eg, saluting, stopping or starting to
walk, combing hair, striking and blowing out a match, opening a lock with a key, using a screwdriver or
scissors, taking a deep breath and holding it). Strength and range of motion must be assessed to exclude
motor weakness and musculoskeletal abnormalities as the cause of symptoms. Neuropsychologic testing
or assessment by a physical or occupational therapist may help identify more subtle apraxias.
Caregivers should be asked about the patient's ability to do activities of daily living, especially those that
involve household tools (eg, correct and safe use of eating utensils, toothbrush, kitchen utensils to
prepare a meal, hammer, and scissors) and writing.
Brain imaging (eg, CT, MRI; with or without angiographic protocols) is required to diagnose and
characterize central lesions (eg, infarct, hemorrhage, mass, focal atrophy).
Prognosis
In general, patients become dependent, requiring help with activities of daily living and at least some
degree of supervision. Patients with stroke may have a stable course and even improve somewhat.
Treatment
• Physical and occupational therapy
There is no specific medical treatment. Drugs that slow the symptomatic progression of dementia do not
appear beneficial. Physical and occupational therapy may modestly improve functioning but is more often
useful for making the environment safer and for providing devices that help patients circumvent the
primary deficit.
===PAGE:1822===
Chapter 173. Stroke
Introduction
(Cerebrovascular Accident)
Strokes are a heterogeneous group of disorders involving sudden, focal interruption of cerebral blood
flow that causes neurologic deficit. Strokes can be ischemic (80%), typically resulting from thrombosis or
embolism, or hemorrhagic (20%), resulting from vascular rupture (eg, subarachnoid or intracerebral
hemorrhage). Stroke symptoms lasting < 1 h are termed a transient ischemic attack (TIA). Strokes
damage brain tissue; TIAs often do not, and when damage occurs, it is less extensive than that due to
strokes. In Western countries, stroke is the 3rd most common cause of death and the most common
cause of neurologic disability.
Strokes involve the arteries of the brain (see
Fig. 173-1
), either the anterior circulation (branches of the internal carotid artery) or the posterior
circulation (branches of the vertebral and basilar arteries).
Risk factors:
Risk factors include the following:
• Prior stroke
• Older age
• Family history of stroke
• Alcoholism
• Male sex
• Hypertension
• Cigarette smoking
• Hypercholesterolemia
• Diabetes
• Use of certain drugs (eg, cocaine, amphetamines)
Certain risk factors predispose to a particular type of stroke (eg, hypercoagulability predisposes to
thrombotic stroke, atrial fibrillation to embolic stroke, and intracranial aneurysms to subarachnoid
hemorrhage).
Symptoms and Signs
Initial symptoms occur suddenly. Generally, they include numbness, weakness, or paralysis of the
contralateral limbs and the face; aphasia;
[Fig. 173-1.
Arteries of the brain.]
confusion; visual disturbances in one or both eyes (eg, transient monocular blindness); dizziness or loss
of balance and coordination; and headache.
Neurologic deficits reflect the area of brain involved (see
Table 173-1
). Anterior circulation stroke typically causes unilateral symptoms. Posterior circulation stroke
can cause unilateral or bilateral deficits and is more likely to affect consciousness, especially when the
basilar artery is involved.
===PAGE:1823===
Other manifestations, rather than neurologic deficits, often suggest the type of stroke. For example,
sudden, severe headache suggests subarachnoid hemorrhage. Impaired consciousness or coma, often
accompanied by headache, nausea, and vomiting, suggests increased intracranial pressure (, which can occur 48 to 72 h after large ischemic strokes and earlier with many hemorrhagic
strokes; fatal brain herniation may result (.
Complications:
Stroke complications can include sleep problems, confusion, depression, incontinence,
atelectasis, pneumonia, and swallowing dysfunction, which can lead to aspiration, dehydration, or
undernutrition. Immobility can lead to thromboembolic disease, deconditioning, sarcopenia, UTIs,
pressure ulcers, and contractures. Daily functioning (including the ability to walk, see, feel, remember,
think, and speak) may be decreased.
Evaluation
Evaluation aims to establish whether stroke has occurred, whether it is ischemic or hemorrhagic, and
whether immediate treatment is required.
Stroke is suspected in patients with any of the following:
• Sudden neurologic deficits compatible with brain damage in an arterial territory
• A particularly sudden, severe headache
• Sudden, unexplained coma
• Sudden impairment of consciousness
If stroke is suspected, immediate neuroimaging is required to differentiate hemorrhagic from ischemic
stroke and to detect signs of
[Table 173-1.
Selected Stroke Syndromes]
increased intracranial pressure. CT is sensitive for intracranial blood but may be normal or show only
subtle changes during the first hours of symptoms after anterior circulation ischemic stroke. CT also
misses some small posterior circulation strokes and up to 3% of subarachnoid hemorrhages. MRI is
sensitive for intracranial blood and may detect signs of ischemic stroke missed by CT, but CT can usually
be done more rapidly. If CT does not confirm clinically suspected stroke, diffusion-weighted MRI can
usually detect ischemic stroke (. If consciousness is impaired and lateralizing signs are
absent or equivocal, further tests to check for other causes are done (.
After the stroke is identified as ischemic or hemorrhagic, tests are done to determine the cause. Patients
are also evaluated for coexisting acute general disorders (eg, infection, dehydration, hypoxia,
hyperglycemia, hypertension). Patients are asked about depression, which commonly occurs after stroke.
A dysphagia team evaluates swallowing; sometimes a barium swallow study is necessary.
Treatment
• Stabilization
• Supportive measures and treatment of complications
Stabilization may need to precede complete evaluation. Comatose or obtunded patients (eg, Glasgow
Coma Score ≤ 8) may require airway support (. If increased intracranial pressure is
suspected, intracranial pressure monitoring ( and measures to reduce cerebral edema (see
p.
) may be necessary. Specific acute treatments vary by type of stroke.
Providing supportive care, correcting coexisting abnormalities (eg, fever, hypoxia, dehydration,
===PAGE:1824===
hyperglycemia, sometimes hypertension), and preventing and treating complications are vital during the
acute phase and convalescence (see
Table 173-2
); these measures clearly improve clinical outcomes. During convalescence, measures to
prevent aspiration, deep venous thrombosis, UTIs, pressure ulcers, and undernutrition may be necessary.
Passive exercises, particularly of paralyzed limbs, and breathing exercises are started early to prevent
contractures, atelectasis, and pneumonia. Most patients require occupational and physical therapy (see
p.
) to maximize functional recovery. Some need additional therapies (eg, speech therapy, feeding
restrictions). Depression after stroke may require antidepressants; many patients benefit from counseling.
For rehabilitation, an interdisciplinary approach is best. Modifying risk factors through lifestyle changes
(eg, stopping cigarette smoking) and drug therapy (eg, for hypertension) can help delay or prevent
subsequent strokes.
[Table 173-2.
Strategies to Prevent and Treat Stroke Complications]
Ischemic Stroke
Ischemic stroke is sudden neurologic deficits that result from focal cerebral ischemia
associated with permanent brain infarction (eg, positive diffusion-weighted MRI). Common
causes are (from most to least common) nonthrombotic occlusion of small, deep cortical
arteries (lacunar infarction); cardiogenic embolism; arterial thrombosis that decreases cerebral
blood flow; and artery-to-artery embolism. Diagnosis is clinical, but CT or MRI is done to
exclude hemorrhage and confirm the presence and extent of stroke. Thrombolytic therapy may
be useful acutely in certain patients. Depending on the cause of stroke, carotid endarterectomy,
antiplatelet drugs, or warfarin may help reduce risk of subsequent strokes.
Etiology
Ischemia usually results from thrombi or emboli. Even infarcts classified as lacunar based on clinical
criteria (morphology, size, and location) often involve small thrombi or emboli.
Thrombosis:
Atheromas, particularly if ulcerated, predispose to thrombi. Atheromas can occur in any
major cerebral artery and are common at areas of turbulent flow, particularly at the carotid bifurcation.
Partial or complete thrombotic occlusion occurs most often at the main trunk of the middle cerebral artery
and its branches but is also common in the large arteries at the base of the brain, in deep perforating
arteries, and in small cortical branches. The basilar artery and the segment of the internal carotid artery
between the cavernous sinus and supraclinoid process are often occluded.
Less common causes of thrombosis include vascular inflammation secondary to disorders such as acute
or chronic meningitis, vasculitic disorders, and syphilis; dissection of intracranial arteries or the aorta;
hypercoagulability disorders (eg, antiphospholipid syndrome, hyperhomocysteinemia); hyperviscosity
disorders (eg, polycythemia, thrombocytosis, hemoglobinopathies, plasma cell disorders); and rare
disorders (eg, moyamoya disease, Binswanger's disease). Older oral contraceptive formulations increase
risk of thrombosis.
Embolism:
Emboli may lodge anywhere in the cerebral arterial tree. Emboli may originate as cardiac
thrombi, especially in the following conditions:
• Atrial fibrillation
• Rheumatic heart disease (usually mitral stenosis)
• Post-MI
• Vegetations on heart valves in bacterial or marantic endocarditis
• Prosthetic heart valves
Other sources include clots that form after open-heart surgery and atheromas in neck arteries or in the
===PAGE:1825===
aortic arch. Rarely, emboli consist of fat (from fractured long bones), air (in decompression sickness), or
venous clots that pass from the right to the left side of the heart through a patent foramen ovale with
shunt (paradoxical emboli). Emboli may dislodge spontaneously or after invasive cardiovascular
procedures (eg, catheterization). Rarely, thrombosis of the subclavian artery results in embolic stroke in
the vertebral artery or its branches.
Lacunar infarcts:
Ischemic stroke can also result from lacunar infarcts. These small (≤ 1.5 cm) infarcts
result from nonatherothrombotic obstruction of small, perforating arteries that supply deep cortical
structures; the usual cause is lipohyalinosis (degeneration of the media of small arteries and replacement
by lipids and collagen). Whether emboli cause lacunar infarcts is controversial. Lacunar infarcts tend to
occur in elderly patients with diabetes or poorly controlled hypertension.
Other causes:
Less commonly, ischemic stroke results from vasospasm (eg, during migraine, after
subarachnoid hemorrhage, after use of sympathomimetic drugs such as cocaine or amphetamines) or
venous sinus thrombosis (eg, during intracranial infection, postoperatively, peripartum, secondary to a
hypercoagulation disorder).
Pathophysiology
Inadequate blood flow in a single brain artery can often be compensated for by an efficient collateral
system, particularly between the carotid and vertebral arteries via anastomoses at the circle of Willis and,
to a lesser extent, between major arteries supplying the cerebral hemispheres. However, normal
variations in the circle of Willis and in the caliber of various collateral vessels, atherosclerosis, and other
acquired arterial lesions can interfere with collateral flow, increasing the chance that blockage of one
artery will cause brain ischemia.
Some neurons die when perfusion is < 5% of normal for > 5 min; however, the extent of damage depends
on the severity of ischemia. If it is mild, damage proceeds slowly; thus, even if perfusion is 40% of
normal, 3 to 6 h may elapse before brain tissue is completely lost. However, if severe ischemia (ie,
decrease in perfusion) persists > 15 to 30 min, all of the affected tissue dies (infarction). Damage occurs
more rapidly during hyperthermia and more slowly during hypothermia. If tissues are ischemic but not yet
irreversibly damaged, promptly restoring blood flow may reduce or reverse injury. For example,
intervention may be able to salvage the moderately ischemic areas (penumbras) that often surround
areas of severe ischemia (these areas exist because of collateral flow).
Mechanisms of ischemic injury include edema, microvascular thrombosis, programmed
cell death
(apoptosis), and infarction with cell necrosis. Inflammatory mediators (eg, IL-1B, tumor necrosis factorα
)
contribute to edema and microvascular thrombosis. Edema, if severe or extensive, can increase
intracranial pressure. Many factors may contribute to necrotic cell death; they include loss of ATP stores,
loss of ionic homeostasis (including intracellular Ca accumulation), lipid peroxidative damage to cell
membranes by free radicals (an iron-mediated process), excitatory neurotoxins (eg, glutamate), and
intracellular acidosis due to accumulation of lactate.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs depend on the part of brain affected. Patterns of neurologic deficits often suggest
the affected artery (see
Table 173-1
), but correlation is often inexact.
Deficits may become maximal within several minutes of onset, typically in embolic stroke. Less often,
deficits evolve slowly, usually over 24 to 48 h (called evolving stroke or stroke in evolution), typically in
thrombotic stroke. In most evolving strokes, unilateral neurologic dysfunction (often beginning in one arm,
then spreading ipsilaterally) extends without causing headache, pain, or fever. Progression is usually
stepwise, interrupted by periods of stability. A stroke is considered submaximal when, after it is complete,
there is residual function in the affected area, suggesting viable tissue at risk of damage.
Embolic strokes often occur during the day; headache may precede neurologic deficits. Thrombi tend to
occur during the night and thus are first noticed on awakening. Lacunar infarcts may produce one of the
classic lacunar syndromes (eg, pure motor hemiparesis, pure sensory hemianesthesia, ataxic
===PAGE:1826===
hemiparesis, dysarthria-clumsy hand syndrome); signs of cortical dysfunction (eg, aphasia) are absent.
Multiple lacunar infarcts may result in multi-infarct dementia.
Deterioration during the first 48 to 72 h after onset of symptoms, particularly progressively impaired
consciousness, results more often from cerebral edema than from extension of the infarct. Unless the
infarct is large or extensive, function commonly improves within the first few days; further improvement
occurs gradually for up to 1 yr.
Diagnosis
• Primarily clinical evaluation
• Neuroimaging and bedside glucose testing
• Evaluation to identify the cause
Diagnosis is suggested by sudden neurologic deficits referable to a specific arterial territory. Ischemic
stroke must be distinguished from other causes of similar focal deficits (eg, hypoglycemia; postictal
[Todd's] paralysis; hemorrhagic stroke; rarely, migraine). Headache, coma or stupor, and vomiting are
more likely with hemorrhagic stroke.
Although diagnosis is clinical, neuroimaging and bedside glucose testing are mandatory. CT is done first
to exclude intracerebral hemorrhage, subdural or epidural hematoma, and a rapidly growing, bleeding, or
suddenly symptomatic tumor. CT evidence of even large anterior circulation ischemic stroke may be
subtle during the first few hours; changes may include effacement of sulci or the insular cortical ribbon,
loss of the gray-white junction between cortex and white matter, and a dense middle cerebral artery sign.
After 24 h of ischemia, medium-sized to large infarcts are usually visible as hypodensities; small infarcts
(eg, lacunar infarcts) may be visible only with MRI. Diffusion-weighted MRI (highly sensitive for early
ischemia) can be done immediately after CT initial neuroimaging.
Distinction between lacunar, embolic, and thrombotic stroke based on history, examination, and
neuroimaging is not always reliable, so tests to identify common or treatable causes and risk factors for all
of these types of strokes are routinely done. These tests typically include carotid duplex ultrasonography,
ECG, transesophageal echocardiography, and various blood tests (CBC, platelet count, PT/PTT, fasting
blood glucose, lipid profile, homocysteine, ESR, and, for at-risk patients, syphilis serology). Troponin I
level is measured to detect concomitant MI. Magnetic resonance or CT angiography is also often done.
Other tests (eg, antiphospholipid antibodies) are done if certain disorders are suspected clinically.
Prognosis
Stroke severity and progression are often assessed using standardized measures such as the National
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (see
Table 173-3
); the score on this scale correlates with extent of functional impairment and prognosis.
During the first days, progression and outcome can be difficult to predict. Older age, impaired
consciousness, aphasia, and brain stem signs suggest a poor prognosis. Early improvement and younger
age suggest a favorable prognosis.
About 50% of patients with moderate or severe hemiplegia and most with milder deficits have a clear
sensorium and eventually can take care of their basic needs and walk
[Table 173-3.
The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale*]
adequately. Complete neurologic recovery occurs in about 10%. Use of the affected limb is usually
limited, and most deficits that remain after 12 mo are permanent. Subsequent strokes often occur, and
each tends to worsen neurologic function. About 20% of patients die in the hospital; mortality rate
increases with age.
Treatment
===PAGE:1827===
• General stroke treatments
• Acute antihypertensive therapy only in certain circumstances
• Antiplatelet therapy
• Occasionally for acute treatment, tPA or thrombolysis-in-situ
• Sometimes anticoagulation
• Long-term control of risk factors
• Sometimes carotid endarterectomy
Acute:
Guidelines for early management of stroke are available from the Stroke Council of the American
Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Patients with acute ischemic strokes are usually
hospitalized. Supportive
measures ( may be needed during initial evaluation and stabilization.
Perfusion of an ischemic brain area may require a high BP because autoregulation is lost; thus, BP
should not be decreased except in the following situations:
• BP is > 220 mm Hg systolic or > 120 mm Hg diastolic on 2 successive readings > 15 min apart.
• There are signs of other end-organ damage (eg, aortic dissection, acute MI, pulmonary edema,
hypertensive encephalopathy, retinal hemorrhages, acute renal failure).
• Use of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is likely.
If indicated, nicardipine 2.5 mg/h IV is given initially; dose is increased by 2.5 mg/h q 5 min to a maximum
of 15 mg/h as needed to decrease systolic BP by 10 to 15%. Alternatively, IV labetalol can be used.
Patients with presumed thrombi or emboli may be treated with tPA, thrombolysis-in-situ, antiplatelet drugs,
and/or anticoagulants. Most patients are not candidates for thrombolytic therapy; they should be given an
antiplatelet drug (usually aspirin 325 mg po) when they are admitted to the hospital. Contraindications to
antiplatelet drugs include aspirin-or NSAID-induced asthma or urticaria, other hypersensitivity to aspirin or
to tartrazine, acute GI bleeding, G6PD deficiency, and use of warfarin.
Recombinant tPA
is used for patients with acute ischemic stroke of < 3 h duration and no
contraindications to tPA (see
Table 174-4
). Although tPA can cause fatal or other symptomatic brain hemorrhage, patients treated with
tPA strictly following protocol have a higher likelihood of functional neurologic recovery. Thus, only
physicians experienced in stroke management should use tPA to treat patients with acute stroke;
inexperienced physicians are more likely to violate protocols, resulting in more brain hemorrhages and
deaths. tPA must be given within 3 h of symptom onset—a difficult requirement. Because the precise time
of symptom onset may not be known, clinicians must start timing from the moment the patient was last
observed to be well. Before treatment with tPA, brain hemorrhage must be excluded by CT, and systolic
BP must be <185 mm Hg and diastolic BP <110 mm Hg; antihypertensive drugs may be given as above.
Dose of tPA is 0.9 mg/kg IV (maximum dose 90 mg); 10% is given by rapid IV injection, and the remainder
by constant infusion over 60 min. Vital signs are closely monitored for 24 h after treatment, and BP is
maintained below the target levels listed above. Any bleeding complications are aggressively managed.
Anticoagulants and antiplatelet drugs are not used within 24 h of treatment with tPA.
[Table 173-4.
Exclusion Criteria for Use of Tissue Plasminogen Activator in Stroke*]
Thrombolysis-in-situ
(angiographically directed intra-arterial thrombolysis) of a thrombus or embolus
can sometimes be used for major strokes if symptoms have begun > 3 h but < 6 h ago, particularly for
===PAGE:1828===
strokes due to large occlusions in the middle cerebral artery. Clots in the basilar artery may be intraarterially lysed up to 12 h after stroke onset, sometimes even later depending on the clinical
circumstances. This treatment, although standard of care in some large stroke centers, is often
unavailable in other hospitals.
Anticoagulation
with heparin or low molecular weight heparin is used for stroke caused by cerebral
venous thrombosis and is sometimes used for emboli due to atrial fibrillation and when stroke due to
presumed progressive thrombosis continues to evolve despite use of
antiplatelet drugs and cannot be
treated any other way (eg, with tPA or invasive methods). Warfarin is begun simultaneously with heparin.
Before anticoagulation, hemorrhage must be excluded by CT. Constant weight-based heparin infusion
(see
Fig. 194-2
 is used to increase PTT to 1.5 to 2 times baseline values until warfarin has
increased the INR to 2 to 3 (3 in hypercoagulable disorders). Because warfarin predisposes to bleeding
and is continued after hospital discharge, its use should be restricted to patients likely to comply with
dosage and monitoring requirements and not prone to falls.
Long term: Supportive care
is continued during convalescence. Controlling general medical risk
factors (especially hyperglycemia and fever) can limit brain damage after stroke, leading to better
functional outcomes.
Carotid endarterectomy
is indicated for patients with recent nondisabling, submaximal stroke attributed
to an ipsilateral carotid obstruction of 70 to 99% of the arterial lumen or to an ulcerated plaque if life
expectancy is at least 5 yr. In other symptomatic patients (eg, patients with TIAs), endarterectomy with
antiplatelet therapy is indicated for carotid obstruction of ≥ 60% with or without ulceration if life
expectancy is at least 5 yr. The procedure should be done by surgeons who have a morbidity and
mortality rate of < 3% with the procedure in the hospital where it will be done. If carotid stenosis is
asymptomatic, endarterectomy is beneficial only when done by very experienced surgeons, and that
benefit is likely to be small. For many patients, carotid stenting with an emboli-protection device (a type of
filter) is as effective as surgery.
Oral antiplatelet drugs
are used to prevent subsequent strokes (secondary prevention). Aspirin 81 or
325 mg once/day, clopidogrel 75 mg once/day, or the combination product aspirin 25 mg/extended-release
dipyridamole 200 mg bid may be used. In patients taking warfarin, antiplatelet drugs additively increase
risk of bleeding and are thus usually avoided; however, aspirin is occasionally used simultaneously with
warfarin in certain high-risk patients. The combination of clopidogrel and aspirin is avoided because it has
no advantage over aspirin alone in secondary stroke prevention and results in more bleeding
complications.
Transient Ischemic Attack
A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is focal brain ischemia that causes sudden neurologic deficits
and is not associated with permanent brain infarction (eg, negative results on diffusionweighted MRI). Diagnosis is clinical. Carotid endarterectomy, antiplatelet drugs, and warfarin
decrease risk of stroke after certain types of TIA.
TIA is similar to ischemic stroke except that symptoms last < 1 h; most TIAs last < 5 min. Infarction is very
unlikely if deficits resolve within 1 h. Deficits that resolve spontaneously within 1 to 24 h have been
shown on diffusion-weighted MRI and other studies to often be accompanied by infarction and are thus
no longer considered TIAs. TIAs are most common among the middle-aged and elderly. TIAs markedly
increase risk of stroke, beginning in the first 24 h.
Etiology
Most TIAs are caused by emboli, usually from carotid or vertebral arteries, although most of the causes of
ischemic stroke ( can also result in TIAs. Uncommonly, TIAs result from impaired perfusion
due to severe hypoxemia, reduced O
-carrying capacity of blood (eg, profound anemia, carbon monoxide
poisoning), or increased blood viscosity (eg, severe polycythemia), particularly in brain arteries with
preexisting stenosis. Systemic hypotension does not usually cause cerebral ischemia unless it is severe
===PAGE:1829===
or arterial stenosis preexists because autoregulation maintains brain blood flow at near-normal levels
over a wide range of systemic BPs.
In subclavian steal syndrome, a subclavian artery stenosed proximal to the origin of the vertebral artery
"steals" blood from the vertebral artery (in which blood flow reverses) to supply the arm during exertion,
causing signs of vertebrobasilar ischemia.
Occasionally, TIAs occur in children with a severe cardiovascular disorder that produces emboli or a very
high Hct.
Symptoms and Signs
Neurologic deficits are similar to those of strokes (see
Table 173-1
). Transient monocular blindness
(amaurosis fugax), which usually lasts < 5 min, may occur when the ophthalmic artery is affected.
Symptoms begin suddenly, usually last 2 to 30 min, then resolve completely. Patients may have several
TIAs daily or only 2 or 3 over several years. Symptoms are usually similar in successive carotid attacks
but vary somewhat in successive vertebrobasilar attacks.
Diagnosis
• Resolution of stroke-like symptoms within 1 h
• Neuroimaging
• Evaluation to identify the cause
Diagnosis is made retrospectively when sudden neurologic deficits referable to ischemia in an arterial
territory resolve within 1 h. Isolated peripheral facial nerve palsy, loss of consciousness, or impaired
consciousness does not suggest TIA. TIAs must be distinguished from other causes of similar symptoms
(eg, hypoglycemia, migraine aura, postictal [Todd's] paralysis). Because an infarct, a small hemorrhage,
and even a mass lesion cannot be excluded clinically, neuroimaging is required. Usually, CT is the study
most likely to be immediately available. However, CT may not identify infarcts for > 24 h. MRI usually
detects evolving infarction within hours. Diffusion-weighted MRI is the most accurate imaging test to rule
out an infarct in patients with presumed TIA but is not always available.
The cause of a TIA is sought as for that of ischemic strokes, including tests for carotid stenosis, cardiac
sources of emboli, atrial fibrillation, and hematologic abnormalities and screening for stroke risk factors.
Because risk of subsequent ischemic stroke is high and immediate, evaluation proceeds rapidly, usually
on an inpatient basis. It is not clear which patients, if any, can be safely discharged from the emergency
department.
Treatment
• Prevention of strokes
Treatment is aimed at preventing strokes; antiplatelet drugs are used (. Carotid
endarterectomy or arterial angioplasty plus stenting can be useful for some patients, particularly those
who have no neurologic deficits but who are at high risk of stroke. Warfarin is indicated if cardiac sources
of emboli are present. Modifying stroke risk factors, when possible, may prevent stroke.
Intracerebral Hemorrhage
Intracerebral hemorrhage is focal bleeding from a blood vessel in the brain parenchyma. The
cause is usually hypertension. Typical symptoms include focal neurologic deficits, often with
abrupt onset of headache, nausea, and impairment of consciousness. Diagnosis is by CT or
MRI. Treatment includes BP control, supportive measures, and, for some patients, surgical
evacuation.
===PAGE:1830===
Most intracerebral hemorrhages occur in the basal ganglia, cerebral lobes, cerebellum, or pons.
Intracerebral hemorrhage may also occur in other parts of the brain stem or in the midbrain.
Etiology
Intracerebral hemorrhage usually results from rupture of an arteriosclerotic small artery that has been
weakened, primarily by chronic arterial hypertension. Such hemorrhages are usually large, single, and
catastrophic. Use of cocaine or, occasionally, other sympathomimetic drugs can cause transient severe
hypertension leading to hemorrhage. Less often, intracerebral hemorrhage results from congenital
aneurysm, arteriovenous or other vascular malformation (see
Sidebar 173-1
), trauma (,
mycotic aneurysm, brain infarct (hemorrhagic infarction), primary or metastatic brain tumor, excessive
anticoagulation, blood dyscrasia, or a bleeding or vasculitic disorder.
Lobar intracerebral hemorrhages (hematomas in the cerebral lobes, outside the basal ganglia) usually
result from angiopathy due to amyloid deposition in cerebral arteries (cerebral amyloid angiopathy), which
affects primarily the elderly. Lobar hemorrhages may be multiple and recurrent.
Pathophysiology
Blood from an intracerebral hemorrhage accumulates as a mass that can dissect through and compress
adjacent brain tissues, causing neuronal dysfunction. Large hematomas increase intracranial pressure.
Pressure from supratentorial hematomas and the accompanying edema may cause transtentorial brain
herniation (see
Fig. 174-1
, compressing the brain stem and often causing secondary hemorrhages in the
midbrain and pons. If the hemorrhage ruptures into the ventricular system (intraventricular hemorrhage),
blood may cause acute hydrocephalus. Cerebellar hematomas can expand to block the 4th ventricle, also
causing acute hydrocephalus, or they can dissect into the brain stem. Cerebellar hematomas that are > 3
cm in diameter may cause midline shift or herniation. Herniation, midbrain or pontine hemorrhage,
intraventricular hemorrhage, acute hydrocephalus, or dissection into the brain stem can impair
consciousness and cause coma and death.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms typically begin with sudden headache, often during activity. However, headache may be mild or
absent in the elderly. Loss of consciousness is common, often within seconds or a few minutes. Nausea,
vomiting, delirium,
and focal or generalized seizures are also common. Neurologic deficits are usually
sudden and progressive. Large hemorrhages, when located in the hemispheres, cause hemiparesis;
when located in the posterior fossa, they cause cerebellar or brain stem deficits (eg, conjugate eye
deviation or ophthalmoplegia, stertorous breathing, pinpoint pupils, coma). Large hemorrhages are fatal
within a few days in about one half of patients. In survivors, consciousness returns and neurologic
deficits gradually diminish to various degrees as the extravasated blood is resorbed. Some patients have
surprisingly few neurologic deficits because hemorrhage is less destructive to brain tissue than infarction.
Sidebar 173-1 Vascular Lesions in the Brain
Common brain vascular lesions include arteriovenous malformations and aneurysms.
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs):
AVMs are tangled, dilated blood vessels in which arteries flow
directly into veins. AVMs occur most often at the junction of cerebral arteries, usually within the
parenchyma of the frontal-parietal region, frontal lobe, lateral cerebellum, or overlying occipital lobe. AVMs
can bleed or directly compress brain tissue; seizures or ischemia may result.
Neuroimaging may detect them incidentally; contrast or noncontrast CT can usually detect AVMs > 1 cm,
but the diagnosis is confirmed with MRI. Occasionally, a cranial bruit suggests an AVM. Conventional
angiography is required for definitive diagnosis and determination of whether the lesion is operable.
Superficial AVMs > 3 cm in diameter are usually obliterated by a combination of microsurgery,
===PAGE:1831===
radiosurgery, and endovascular surgery. AVMs that are deep or < 3 cm in diameter are treated with
stereotactic radiosurgery, endovascular therapy (eg, preresection embolization or thrombosis via an intraarterial catheter), or coagulation with focused proton beams.
Aneurysms:
Aneurysms are focal dilations in arteries. They occur in about 5% of people. Common
contributing factors may include arteriosclerosis, hypertension, and hereditary connective tissue disorders
(eg, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
syndrome). Occasionally, septic emboli cause mycotic aneurysms. Brain aneurysms are most often < 2.5
cm in diameter and saccular (noncircumferential); sometimes they have one or more small, thin-walled,
outpouchings (berry aneurysm). Most aneurysms occur along the middle or anterior cerebral arteries or
the communicating branches of the circle of Willis, particularly at arterial bifurcations. Mycotic aneurysms
usually develop distal to the first bifurcation of the arterial branches of the circle of Willis.
Many aneurysms are asymptomatic, but a few cause symptoms by compressing adjacent structures.
Ocular palsies, diplopia, squint, or orbital pain may indicate pressure on the 3rd, 4th, 5th, or 6th cranial
nerves. Visual loss and a bitemporal field defect may indicate pressure on the optic chiasm. Aneurysms
may bleed into the subarachnoid space, causing subarachnoid hemorrhage. Aneurysms occasionally
cause sentinel (warning) headaches before rupture; subarachnoid bleeding may accompany sentinel
headaches. Rupture causes a sudden severe headache called a thunderclap headache.
Neuroimaging may detect aneurysms incidentally.
Diagnosis requires angiography, CT angiography, or magnetic resonance angiography.
If < 7 mm, asymptomatic aneurysms in the anterior circulation rarely rupture and do not warrant the risks
of immediate treatment. They can be monitored with serial imaging. If aneurysms are larger, are in the
posterior circulation, or cause symptoms due to bleeding or to compression of neural structures,
endovascular therapy, if feasible, is required.
Small hemorrhages may cause focal deficits without impairment of consciousness and with minimal or no
headache and nausea. Small hemorrhages may mimic ischemic stroke.
Diagnosis
• Neuroimaging
• Bedside glucose measurement
Diagnosis is suggested by sudden onset of headache, focal neurologic deficits, and impaired
consciousness, particularly in patients with risk factors. Intracerebral hemorrhage must be distinguished
from ischemic stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and other causes
of acute neurologic deficits (eg,
seizure, hypoglycemia).
Immediate CT or MRI and bedside blood glucose measurement are necessary. Neuroimaging is usually
diagnostic. If neuroimaging shows no hemorrhage but subarachnoid hemorrhage is suspected clinically,
lumbar puncture is necessary.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
• Sometimes surgical evacuation (eg, for many cerebellar hematomas > 3 cm)
Treatment includes supportive measures and control of general medical risk factors. Anticoagulants and
antiplatelet drugs are contraindicated. If patients have used anticoagulants, the effects are reversed when
possible by giving fresh frozen plasma, vitamin K, or platelet transfusions as indicated. Hypertension
should be treated only if mean arterial pressure is > 130 mm Hg or systolic BP is > 185 mm Hg.
===PAGE:1832===
Nicardipine 2.5 mg/h IV is given initially; dose is increased by 2.5 mg/h q 5 min to a maximum of 15 mg/h
as needed to decrease systolic BP by 10 to 15%.
Cerebellar hemisphere hematomas that are > 3 cm in diameter may cause midline shift or herniation, so
surgical evacuation is often lifesaving. Early evacuation of large lobar cerebral hematomas may also be
lifesaving, but rebleeding occurs frequently, sometimes increasing neurologic deficits. Early evacuation of
deep cerebral hematomas is seldom indicated because surgical mortality is high and neurologic deficits
are usually severe.
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
Subarachnoid hemorrhage is sudden bleeding into the subarachnoid space. The most common
cause of spontaneous bleeding is a ruptured aneurysm. Symptoms include sudden, severe
headache, usually with loss or impairment of consciousness. Secondary vasospasm (causing
focal brain ischemia), meningismus, and hydrocephalus (causing persistent headache and
obtundation) are common. Diagnosis is by CT or MRI; if neuroimaging is normal, diagnosis is by
CSF analysis. Treatment is with supportive measures and neurosurgery or endovascular
measures, preferably in a referral center.
Etiology
Subarachnoid hemorrhage is bleeding between the arachnoid and pia mater. In general, head trauma is
the most common cause, but traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage is usually considered a separate
disorder (. Spontaneous (primary) subarachnoid hemorrhage usually results from ruptured
aneurysms. A congenital intracranial saccular or berry aneurysm is the cause in about 85% of patients.
Bleeding may stop spontaneously. Aneurysmal hemorrhage may occur at any age but is most common
from age 40 to 65. Less common causes are mycotic aneurysms, arteriovenous malformations, and
bleeding disorders.
Pathophysiology
Blood in the subarachnoid space causes a chemical meningitis that commonly increases intracranial
pressure for days or a few weeks. Secondary vasospasm may cause focal brain ischemia; about 25% of
patients develop signs of a transient ischemic attack (TIA) or ischemic stroke. Brain edema is maximal
and risk of vasospasm and subsequent infarction (called angry brain) is highest between 72 h and 10
days. Secondary acute hydrocephalus is also common. A 2nd rupture (rebleeding) sometimes occurs,
most often within about 7 days.
Symptoms and Signs
Headache is usually severe, peaking within seconds. Loss of consciousness may follow, usually
immediately but sometimes not for several hours. Severe neurologic deficits may develop and become
irreversible within minutes or a few hours. Sensorium may be impaired, and patients may become
restless. Seizures are possible. Usually, the neck is not stiff initially unless the cerebellar tonsils herniate.
However, within 24 h, chemical meningitis causes moderate to marked meningismus, vomiting, and
sometimes bilateral extensor plantar responses. Heart or respiratory rate is often abnormal. Fever,
continued headaches, and confusion are common during the first 5 to 10 days. Secondary hydrocephalus
may cause headache, obtundation, and motor deficits that persist for weeks. Rebleeding may cause
recurrent or new symptoms.
Diagnosis
• Usually noncontrast CT and, if negative, lumbar puncture
Diagnosis is suggested by characteristic symptoms. Testing should proceed as rapidly as possible, before
damage becomes irreversible. Noncontrast CT is > 90% sensitive. MRI
is comparably sensitive but less
likely to be immediately available. False-negative results occur if volume of blood is small. If subarachnoid
hemorrhage is suspected clinically but not identified on neuroimaging or if neuroimaging is not
===PAGE:1833===
immediately available, lumbar puncture is done. Lumbar puncture is contraindicated if increased
intracranial pressure is suspected because the sudden decrease in CSF pressure may lessen the
tamponade of a clot on the ruptured aneurysm, causing further bleeding.
CSF findings suggesting subarachnoid hemorrhage include numerous RBCs, xanthochromia, and
increased pressure. RBCs in CSF may also be caused by traumatic lumbar puncture. Traumatic lumbar
puncture is suspected if the RBC count decreases in tubes of CSF drawn sequentially during the same
lumbar puncture. About 6 h or more after a subarachnoid hemorrhage, RBCs become crenated and lyse,
resulting in a xanthochromic CSF supernatant and visible crenated RBCs (noted during microscopic CSF
examination); these findings usually indicate that subarachnoid hemorrhage preceded the lumbar
puncture. If there is still doubt, hemorrhage should be assumed, or the lumbar puncture should be
repeated in 8 to 12 h.
In patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage, conventional cerebral angiography is done as soon as
possible after the initial bleeding episode; alternatives include magnetic resonance angiography and CT
angiography. All 4 arteries (2 carotid and 2 vertebral arteries) should be injected because up to 20% of
patients (mostly women) have multiple aneurysms.
On ECG, subarachnoid hemorrhage may cause ST-segment elevation or depression. It can cause
syncope, mimicking MI. Other possible ECG abnormalities include prolongation of the QRS or QT
intervals and peaking or deep, symmetric inversion of T waves.
Prognosis
About 35% of patients die after the first aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage; another 15% die within a
few weeks because of a subsequent rupture. After 6 mo, a 2nd rupture occurs at a rate of about 3%/yr. In
general, prognosis is grave with an aneurysm, better with an arteriovenous malformation, and best when
4-vessel angiography does not detect a lesion, presumably because the bleeding source is small and has
sealed itself. Among survivors, neurologic damage is common, even when treatment is optimal.
Treatment
• Treatment in referral center
• Nicardipine if mean arterial pressure is > 130 mm Hg
• Nimodipine to prevent vasospasm
• Occlusion of causative aneurysms
Patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage should be treated in referral centers whenever possible.
Hypertension
should be treated only if mean arterial pressure is > 130 mm Hg; euvolemia is maintained,
and IV nicardipine is titrated as for intracerebral hemorrhage (. Bed rest is mandatory.
Restlessness and headache are treated symptomatically. Stool softeners are given to prevent
constipation, which can lead to straining. Anticoagulants and antiplatelet drugs are contraindicated.
Vasospasm
is prevented by giving nimodipine 60 mg po q 4 h for 21 days to prevent vasospasm, but BP
needs to be maintained in the desirable range (usually considered to be a mean arterial pressure of 70 to
130 mm Hg and a systolic pressure of 120 to 185 mm Hg). If clinical signs of acute hydrocephalus occur,
ventricular drainage should be considered.
Aneurysms
are occluded to reduce risk of rebleeding. Detachable endovascular coils can be inserted
during angiography to occlude the aneurysm. Alternatively, if the aneurysm is accessible, surgery to clip
the aneurysm or bypass its blood flow can be done, especially for patients with an evacuable hematoma
or acute hydrocephalus. If patients are arousable, most vascular neurosurgeons operate within the first
24 h to minimize risk of rebleeding and risks due to angry brain. If > 24 h have elapsed, some
neurosurgeons delay surgery until 10 days have passed; this approach decreases risks due to angry
===PAGE:1834===
brain but increases risk of rebleeding and overall mortality.The Merck Manual of Diagnosis & Therapy, 19th Edition Chapter 173. Stroke
===PAGE:1835===
Chapter 174. Coma and Impaired Consciousness
Introduction
Coma is unresponsiveness from which the patient cannot be aroused. Similar, but less severe
disturbances of consciousness may also occur. The mechanism involves dysfunction of both
cerebral hemispheres or of the reticular activating system (also known as the ascending
arousal system). Causes may be structural or nonstructural (eg, toxic or metabolic
disturbances). Damage may be focal or diffuse. Diagnosis is clinical; identification of cause
usually requires laboratory tests and neuroimaging. Treatment is immediate stabilization and
specific management of the cause. For long-term coma, adjunctive treatment includes passive
range-of-motion exercises, enteral feedings, and measures to prevent pressure ulcers.
Decreased or impaired consciousness or alertness refers to decreased responsiveness to external
stimuli. Severe impairment includes
•
Coma:
The patient usually cannot be aroused, and the eyes do not open in response to any
stimulation.
•
Stupor:
The patient can be awakened only by vigorous physical stimulation.
Less severely impaired levels of consciousness are often labeled as lethargy or, if more severe,
obtundation. However, differentiation between less severely impaired levels is often imprecise; the label is
less important than a precise clinical description (eg, "the best level of response is partial limb withdrawal
to nail bed pressure"). Delirium differs because cognitive disturbances (in attention, cognition, and level of
consciousness) fluctuate more; also, delirium is usually reversible (.
Pathophysiology
Maintaining alertness requires intact function of the cerebral hemispheres and preservation of arousal
mechanisms in the reticular activating system (RAS—also known as the ascending arousal system)—an
extensive network of nuclei and interconnecting fibers in the upper pons, midbrain, and posterior
diencephalon. Therefore, the mechanism of impaired consciousness must involve both cerebral
hemispheres or dysfunction of the RAS.
To impair consciousness, cerebral dysfunction must be bilateral; unilateral cerebral hemisphere disorders
are not sufficient, although they may cause severe neurologic deficits. However, rarely, a unilateral
massive hemispheric focal lesion (eg, left middle cerebral artery stroke) impairs consciousness if the
contralateral hemisphere is already compromised.
Usually, RAS dysfunction results from a condition that has diffuse effects, such as toxic or metabolic
disturbances (eg, hypoglycemia, hypoxia, uremia, drug overdose). RAS dysfunction can also be caused
by focal ischemia (eg, certain upper brain stem infarcts), hemorrhage, or direct, mechanical disruption.
Any condition that increases intracranial pressure may decrease cerebral perfusion pressure, resulting in
secondary brain ischemia. Secondary brain ischemia may affect the RAS or both cerebral hemispheres,
impairing consciousness.
When brain damage is extensive, brain herniation (see
Fig. 174-1
and
Table 174-1
) contributes to neurologic deterioration because it directly compresses brain tissue,
increases intracranial pressure, and may lead to hydrocephalus.
Impaired consciousness may progress to coma and ultimately to brain death (.
Etiology
Coma or impaired consciousness may result from structural disorders, which typically cause focal
===PAGE:1836===
damage, or nonstructural disorders, which typically cause diffuse damage (see
Table 174-2
). But causes are usually thought of as structural or diffuse.
Psychiatric disorders (eg, psychogenic unresponsiveness) can mimic impaired consciousness but are
usually distinguished from true impaired consciousness by neurologic examination.
Symptoms and Signs
Consciousness is decreased to varying degrees. Repeated stimuli arouse patients only briefly or not at
all.
Depending on the cause, other symptoms develop (see
Table 174-3
):
•
Eye abnormalities:
Pupils may be dilated, pinpoint, or unequal. One or both pupils may be fixed in
midposition. Eye movement may be dysconjugate or absent (oculomotor paresis). Homonymous
hemianopia may be present. Other abnormalities include absence
[Fig. 174-1.
Brain herniation.]

[Table 174-1.
Effects of Brain Herniation]
of blinking in response to visual threat (almost touching the eye), as well as loss of the oculocephalic
reflex (the eyes do not move in response to head rotation), the oculovestibular reflex (the eyes do not
move in response to caloric stimulation), and corneal reflexes.
•
Autonomic dysfunction:
Patients may have abnormal breathing patterns (Cheyne-Stokes or Biot's
respirations) or hypertension with bradycardia (Cushing's reflex). Abrupt respiratory and cardiac arrest
may occur.
•
Motor dysfunction:
Abnormalities include flaccidity, hemiparesis, asterixis, multifocal myoclonus,
decorticate posturing (elbow flexion and shoulder adduction with leg extension), and decerebrate
posturing (limb extension and internal shoulder rotation).
•
Other symptoms:
If the brain stem is compromised, nausea, vomiting, meningismus, occipital
headache, ataxia, and increasing somnolence can occur.
Diagnosis
• History
• General physical examination
• Neurologic examination, including eye examination
• Laboratory tests (eg, pulse oximetry, bedside glucose measurement, blood and urine tests)
• Immediate neuroimaging
• Sometimes measurement of intracranial pressure
• If diagnosis is unclear, lumbar puncture or EEG
Impaired consciousness is diagnosed if repeated stimuli arouse patients only briefly or not at all. If
stimulation triggers primitive reflex movements (eg, decerebrate or decorticate posturing), impaired
consciousness may be deepening into coma.
===PAGE:1837===
Diagnosis and initial stabilization (airway, breathing, and circulation) should occur simultaneously.
[Table 174-2.
Common Causes of Coma or Impaired Consciousness]
[Table 174-3.
Findings by Location*]
Glucose levels must be measured at bedside to identify low levels, which should be corrected
immediately. If trauma is involved, the neck is immobilized until clinical history, physical examination, or
imaging tests exclude an unstable injury and damage to the cervical spine.
History:
Medical identification bracelets or the contents of a wallet or purse may provide clues (eg,
hospital identification card, drugs). Relatives, paramedics, and police officers should be questioned about
the environment in which the patient was found; containers that may have held food, alcohol, drugs, or
poisons should be examined and saved for identification (eg, drug identification aided by a poison center)
and possible chemical analysis. Relatives should be asked about the onset of the problem (eg, whether
seizure, headache, vomiting, head trauma, or drug ingestion was observed), baseline mental status,
recent infections, psychiatric problems and symptoms, drug history, substance use, previous illnesses, the
last time the patient was normal, and any hunches they may have about what might be the cause (eg,
possible occult overdose, possible occult head trauma due to recent intoxication). Medical records should
be reviewed if available.
General physical examination:
Physical examination should be focused and efficient and should
include thorough examination of the head and face, skin, and extremities. Signs of head trauma include
periorbital ecchymosis (raccoon eyes), ecchymosis behind the ear (Battle's sign), hemotympanum,
instability of the maxilla, and CSF rhinorrhea and otorrhea. Scalp contusions and small bullet holes can
be missed unless the head is carefully inspected. If unstable injury and cervical spine damage have been
excluded, passive neck flexion is done; stiffness suggests subarachnoid hemorrhage or meningitis.
Fever, petechial or purpuric rash, hypotension, or severe extremity infections (eg, gangrene of one or
more toes) may suggest sepsis or CNS infection. Needle marks may suggest drug overdose (eg, of
opioids or insulin). A bitten tongue suggests seizure. Breath odor may suggest alcohol, other drug
intoxication, or diabetic ketoacidosis.
Neurologic examination:
The neurologic examination determines whether the brain stem is intact and
where the lesion is located within the CNS (. The examination focuses on the following:
• Level of consciousness
• Eyes (
•
Motor function
• Deep tendon reflexes
Level of consciousness is evaluated by attempting to wake patients first with verbal commands, then with
non-noxious stimuli, and finally with noxious stimuli (eg, pressure to the supraorbital ridge, nail bed, or
sternum). The Glasgow Coma Scale (see
Table 174-4
) was developed to assess patients with head trauma. For head trauma, the score assigned
by the scale is valuable prognostically. For coma or impaired consciousness of any cause, the scale is
used because it is a relatively reliable, objective measure of the severity of unresponsiveness and can be
used serially for monitoring. The scale assigns points based on responses to stimuli. Eye opening, facial
grimacing, and purposeful withdrawal of limbs from a noxious stimulus indicate that consciousness is not
greatly impaired. Asymmetric motor responses to pain or deep tendon reflexes may indicate a focal
hemispheric lesion.
As impaired consciousness deepens into coma, noxious stimuli may trigger stereotypic reflex posturing.
Decorticate posturing indicates hemispheric damage with preservation of motor centers in the upper
===PAGE:1838===
portion of the brain stem (eg, rubrospinal tract). Decerebrate posturing indicates that the upper brain stem
motor centers, which facilitate flexion, have been damaged and that only the lower brain stem centers (eg,
vestibulospinal tract, reticulospinal tract), which facilitate extension, are responding to sensory stimuli.
Flaccidity without movement indicates that the lower brain stem is not affecting movement, regardless of
whether the spinal cord is damaged. It is the worst possible motor response.
Asterixis and multifocal myoclonus suggest metabolic disorders such as uremia, hepatic encephalopathy,
hypoxic encephalopathy, and drug toxicity.
Psychogenic unresponsiveness can be differentiated because, although voluntary motor response is
typically absent, muscle tone and deep tendon reflexes remain normal, and all brain stem reflexes are
preserved.
Eye examination:
The following are evaluated:
• Pupillary responses
• Extraocular movements
• Fundi
• Other neuro-ophthalmic reflexes
Pupillary responses and extraocular movements provide information about brain stem function (see
Table 174-5
). One or both pupils usually become fixed early in coma due to structural lesions, but
pupillary responses are often preserved until very late when coma is due to diffuse metabolic disorders
(called toxic-metabolic encephalopathy), although responses may be sluggish.
[Table 174-4.
Glasgow Coma Scale*]
The fundi should be examined for papilledema, hemorrhages, and exudates. Papilledema or hemorrhages
may indicate increased intracranial pressure (ICP). Subhyaloid hemorrhage may indicate subarachnoid
hemorrhage.
In an unresponsive patient, the oculocephalic reflex is tested by the doll's-eye maneuver: The eyes are
observed while the head is passively rotated from side to side or flexed and extended.
This maneuver
should not be attempted if cervical spine instability is suspected
.
[Table 174-5.
Interpretation of Pupillary Response and Eye Movements]
• If the reflex is present, the maneuver causes the eyes to move in the opposite direction of head rotation,
flexion, or extension, indicating that the oculovestibular pathways in the brain stem are intact. Thus, in a
supine patient, the eyes continue to look straight up when the head is moved.
• If the reflex is absent, the eyes do not move and thus point in whatever direction the head is turned,
indicating the oculovestibular pathways are disrupted. The reflex is also absent in most patients with
psychogenic unresponsiveness.
If the patient is unconscious and the oculocephalic reflex is absent or the neck is immobilized,
oculovestibular (cold caloric) testing is done. After integrity of the tympanic membrane is confirmed, the
patient's head is elevated 30°, and with a syringe connected to a flexible catheter, the examiner irrigates
the external auditory canal with 50 mL of ice water over a 30-sec period.
• If both eyes deviate toward the irrigated ear, the brain stem is functioning normally, suggesting mildly
impaired consciousness.
• If nystagmus away from the irrigated ear also occurs, the patient is conscious and psychogenic
unresponsiveness is likely. In conscious patients, 1 mL of ice water is often enough to induce ocular
===PAGE:1839===
deviation and nystagmus. Thus, if psychogenic unresponsiveness is suspected, a small amount of
water should be used because cold caloric testing can induce severe vertigo, nausea, and vomiting in
conscious patients.
• If the eyes do not move or movement is dysconjugate after irrigation, the integrity of the brain stem is
uncertain and the coma is deeper. Prognosis may be less favorable.
Certain patterns of eye abnormalities and other findings may suggest brain herniation (see
Fig. 174-1
and
Table 174-1
).
Respiratory patterns:
The spontaneous respiratory rate and pattern should be documented unless
emergency airway intervention is required. It may suggest a cause.
• Periodic cycling of breathing (Cheyne-Stokes or Biot's respirations— may indicate dysfunction of both hemispheres or of the diencephalon.
•
Hyperventilation (central neurogenic hyperventilation) with respiratory rates of > 40 breaths/min may
indicate midbrain or upper pontine dysfunction.
• An inspiratory gasp with respiratory pauses of about 3 sec after full inspiration (apneustic breathing)
typically indicates pontine or medullary lesions; this type of breathing often progresses to respiratory
arrest.
Tests:
Initially, pulse oximetry, fingerstick plasma glucose measurements, and cardiac monitoring are
done. Blood tests should include a comprehensive metabolic panel (including at least serum electrolytes,
BUN, creatinine, and Ca levels), CBC with differential and platelets, liver function tests, and ammonia
level. ABGs are measured, and if carbon monoxide toxicity is suspected, carboxyhemoglobin level is
measured. Blood and urine should be obtained for culture and routine toxicology screening; serum
ethanol level is also measured. Additional toxicology tests (eg, additional toxicology screening, serum
drug levels) are done based on clinical suspicion. ECG (12-lead) should be done.
If the cause is not immediately apparent, noncontrast head CT should be done as soon as possible to
check for masses, hemorrhage, edema, and hydrocephalus. MRI can be done instead if immediately
available. Contrast CT can be done if noncontrast CT is not diagnostic. MRI or contrast CT may detect
isodense subdural hematomas, multiple metastases, sagittal sinus thrombosis, herpes encephalitis, or
other causes missed by noncontrast CT. Chest x-ray should also be taken.
If coma is unexplained after neuroimaging and other tests, lumbar puncture is done to check opening
pressure and exclude infection, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and other abnormalities. CSF analysis
includes cell and differential counts, protein, glucose, Gram stain, cultures, and sometimes, based on
clinical suspicion, specific tests (eg, cryptococcal antigen, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory [VDRL]
tests, PCR for herpes simplex, visual or spectrophotometric determination of xanthochromia). In
unconscious patients with or without focal neurologic deficits, cranial CT or MRI should be done before
lumbar puncture to exclude an intracranial mass and obstructive hydrocephalus because if either is
present, suddenly lowering CSF pressure by lumbar puncture could trigger brain herniation.
If increased ICP is suspected, pressure is measured. Hyperventilation should be considered under the
care of an ICU specialist. Hyperventilation produces hypocapnia, which in turn decreases cerebral blood
flow globally through vasoconstriction. Reduction in PCO
from 40 mm Hg to 30 mm Hg can reduce ICP
about 30%. It is recommended to maintain PCO
at 25 mm Hg to 30 mm Hg as required with the initiation
of other treatment modalities, but aggressive hypoventilation < 25 mm Hg should be avoided since this
may reduce cerebral blood flow excessively and result in cerebral ischemia.
If pressure is increased, it is monitored continuously (.
If diagnosis remains uncertain, EEG may be done. In most comatose patients, EEG shows slowing and
reductions in wave amplitude that are nonspecific but often occur in toxic-metabolic encephalopathy.
However, in the rare patient with nonconvulsive status epilepticus, EEG shows spikes, sharp waves, or
===PAGE:1840===
spike and slow complexes.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the cause, duration, and depth of the impairment of consciousness. Prognosis is
usually considered poor. However, if unresponsiveness lasts < 6 h, prognosis is more favorable.
After trauma, a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 3 to 5 may indicate fatal brain damage, especially if pupils
are fixed or oculovestibular reflexes are absent. If pupils are unreactive or the motor response to noxious
stimuli is absent or is only a reflex response 3 days after cardiac arrest, patients have virtually no chance
of a good neurologic recovery. After coma, the early return of speech (even if incomprehensible),
spontaneous eye movements, or ability to follow commands is a favorable prognostic sign. If the cause is
a reversible condition (eg, sedative overdose, some metabolic disorders such as uremia), patients may
lose all brain stem reflexes and all motor response and yet recover fully.
Treatment
• Immediate stabilization (airway, breathing, circulation)
• Supportive measures, including, when necessary, control of ICP
• Admission to an ICU
• Treatment of underlying disorder
Airway, breathing, and circulation must be ensured immediately. Hypotension must be corrected (. Patients are admitted to the ICU so that respiratory and neurologic status can be monitored.
Because some patients in coma are undernourished and susceptible to Wernicke encephalopathy,
thiamin 100 mg IV or IM should be given routinely. If plasma glucose is low, patients should be given 50
mL of 50% dextrose.
If opioid overdose is suspected, naloxone 2 mg IV is given. If trauma is involved, the
neck is immobilized until damage to the cervical spine is ruled out.
Endotracheal intubation:
Patients with infrequent, shallow, or stertorous respirations, low O
saturation
(determined by pulse oximetry or ABG measurements), impaired airway reflexes, or severe
unresponsiveness (including most patients with a Glasgow Coma Scale score ≤ 8) require endotracheal
intubation to prevent aspiration and ensure adequate ventilation. If increased ICP is suspected, intubation
should be done via rapid sequence oral intubation (using a paralytic drug) rather than via nasotracheal
intubation (see
Chapter 225
); nasotracheal intubation in a patient who is breathing spontaneously causes
more coughing and gagging, thus increasing ICP, which is already increased because of intracranial
abnormalities.
To minimize the increase in ICP that may occur when the airway is manipulated, some clinicians
recommend giving lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg IV 1 to 2 min before giving the paralytic. Patients are sedated
before the paralytic is given. Etomidate is a good choice in hypotensive or trauma patients because it has
minimal effects on BP; IV dose is 0.3 mg/kg for adults (or 20 mg for an average-sized adult) and 0.2 to 0.3
mg/kg for children. Alternatively, if hypotension is absent and unlikely and if propofol is readily available,
propofol 0.2 to 1.5 mg/kg may be used. Succinylcholine 1.5 mg/kg IV is typically used as a paralytic.
However, use of paralytics is minimized and, whenever possible, avoided because they can mask
neurologic findings and changes.
Pulse oximetry and ABGs (if possible, end-tidal CO
) should be used to assess adequacy of oxygenation
and ventilation.
ICP control:
If ICP is increased, intracranial and cerebral perfusion pressure should be monitored (, and pressures should be controlled. The goal is to maintain ICP at ≤ 20 mm Hg and cerebral
perfusion pressure at 50 to 70 mm Hg. Cerebral venous drainage can be enhanced (thus lowering ICP)
by elevating the head of the bed to 30
°
and by keeping the patient's head in a midline position.
===PAGE:1841===
Control of increased ICP involves several strategies:
•
Sedation:
Sedatives may be necessary to control agitation, excessive muscular activity (eg, due to
delirium), or pain, which can increase ICP. Propofol is often used in adults (contraindicated in children)
because onset and duration of action are quick; dose is 0.3 mg/kg/h by continuous IV infusion, titrated
gradually up to 3 mg/kg/h as needed. An initial bolus is not used. The most common adverse effect is
hypotension. Prolonged use at high doses can cause pancreatitis. Benzodiazepines (eg, midazolam,
lorazepam) can also be used. Because sedatives can mask neurologic findings and changes, their use
should be minimized and, whenever possible, avoided. Antipsychotics should be avoided if possible
because they can delay recovery.
•
Hyperventilation:
Hyperventilation causes hypocapnia, which causes vasoconstriction, thus
decreasing cerebral blood flow globally. Reduction in PCO
from 40 to 30 mm Hg can reduce ICP about
30%. Hyperventilation that reduces PCO
to 28 to 33 mm Hg decreases ICP for only about 30 min and
is used by some clinicians as a temporary measure until other treatments take effect. Aggressive
hypoventilation to < 25 mm Hg should be avoided because it may reduce cerebral blood flow
excessively and result in cerebral ischemia. Other measures may be used to control increased ICP (see
p.
).
•
Hydration:
Isotonic fluids are used. Providing free water through IV fluids (eg, 5% dextrose, 0.45%
saline) can aggravate cerebral edema and should be avoided. Fluids may be restricted to some degree,
but patients should be kept euvolemic. If patients have no signs of dehydration or fluid overload, IV
fluids with normal saline can be started at 50 to 75 mL/h. The rate can be increased or decreased
based on serum Na, osmolality, urine output, and signs of fluid retention (eg, edema).
•
Diuretics:
Serum osmolality should be kept at 295 to 320 mOsm/kg. Osmotic diuretics (eg, mannitol)
may be given IV to lower ICP and maintain serum osmolality. They do not cross the blood-brain barrier.
They pull water from brain tissue across an osmotic gradient into plasma, eventually leading to
equilibrium. Effectiveness of these drugs decreases after a few hours. Thus, they should be reserved
for patients whose condition is deteriorating or used preoperatively for patients with hematomas.
Mannitol 20% solution is given 0.5 to 1 g/kg IV (2.5 to 5 mL/kg) over 15 to 30 min, then given as often
as needed (usually q 6 to 8 h) in a dose ranging from 0.25 to 0.5 g/kg (1.25 to 2.5 mL/kg). Mannitol
must be used cautiously in patients with severe coronary artery disease, heart failure, renal
insufficiency, or pulmonary vascular congestion because mannitol rapidly expands intravascular volume.
Because osmotic diuretics increase renal
excretion of water relative to Na, prolonged use of mannitol
may result in water depletion and hypernatremia. Furosemide 1 mg/kg IV can decrease total body water,
particularly when transient hypervolemia associated with mannitol is to be avoided. Fluid and electrolyte
balance should be monitored closely while osmotic diuretics are used. A 3% saline solution is being
studied as another potential osmotic agent to control ICP.
•
BP control:
Systemic antihypertensives are needed only when hypertension is severe (> 180/95 mm
Hg). How much BP is reduced depends on the clinical context. Systemic BP needs to be high enough
to maintain cerebral perfusion pressure even when ICP increases. Hypertension can be managed by
titrating a nicardipine drip (5 mg/h, increased by 2.5 mg q 5 min to a maximum of 15 mg/h) or by boluses
of labetalol (10 mg IV over 1 to 2 min, repeated q 10 min to a maximum of 150 mg).
•
Corticosteroids:
These drugs are usually helpful for patients with a brain tumor or brain abscess, but
they are ineffective for patients with head trauma, cerebral hemorrhage, ischemic stroke, or hypoxic
brain damage after cardiac arrest. Corticosteroids increase plasma glucose; this increase may worsen
the effects of cerebral ischemia. After an initial dose of dexamethasone 20 to 100 mg, 4 mg once/day
appears to be effective while minimizing adverse effects.
If ICP continues to increase despite other measures to control it, the following may be used:
•
Pentobarbital coma:
Pentobarbital can reduce cerebral blood flow and metabolic demands. However,
its use is controversial because the effect on clinical outcome is not consistently beneficial. Coma is
induced by giving pentobarbital 10 mg/kg IV over 30 min, followed by 5 mg/kg/h for 3 h, then 1 mg/kg/h.
===PAGE:1842===
The dose may be adjusted to suppress bursts of EEG activity, which is continuously monitored.
Hypotension is common and is managed by giving fluids and, if necessary, vasopressors. Other
possible adverse effects include arrhythmias, myocardial depression, and impaired uptake or release of
glutamate.
•
Decompressive craniotomy:
Craniotomy with duraplasty can be done to provide room for brain
swelling. This procedure can prevent deaths, but overall functional outcome may not improve much. It
may be most useful for large cerebral infarcts with impending herniation, particularly in patients < 50.
Long-term care:
Patients require meticulous long-term care. Stimulants and opioids should be avoided.
Enteral feeding is started with precautions to prevent aspiration (eg, elevation of the head of the bed); a
percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy tube is placed if necessary. Early, vigilant attention to skin care,
including checking for breakdown especially at pressure points, is required to prevent pressure ulcers.
Topical ointments to prevent desiccation of the eyes are beneficial. Passive range-of-motion exercises
done by physical therapists and taping or dynamic flexion splitting of the extremities may prevent
contractures. Measures are also taken to prevent UTIs and deep venous thrombosis.
Vegetative State
A vegetative state is absence of responsiveness and awareness due to overwhelming
dysfunction of the cerebral hemispheres, with sufficient sparing of the diencephalon and brain
stem to preserve autonomic and motor reflexes and sleep-wake cycles. Patients may have
complex reflexes, including eye movements, yawning, and involuntary movements to noxious
stimuli but show no awareness of self or environment. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is
supportive. Prognosis with persistent deficits is bleak, and withdrawal of care should be
discussed with family members.
The vegetative state is a chronic condition that preserves the ability to maintain BP, respiration, and
cardiac function, but not cognitive function. Although medullary brainstem functions remain intact to
support cardiorespiratory functions, the presence of midbrain or pontine reflexes may be variable.
A vegetative state occurs when the reticular activating system (RAS) remains functional (making
wakefulness possible), but the cortex is severely damaged (eliminating cognitive function). The patient
has no awareness of self and interacts with the environment only via reflexes. Hypothalamic and brain
stem autonomic function are preserved and sufficient for survival if medical and nursing care is adequate.
A vegetative state is considered persistent if it lasts > 1 mo.
The most common causes are traumatic brain injury and diffuse cerebral hypoxia. However, any disorder
that results in brain damage can cause a vegetative state. Typically, a vegetative state occurs because
the function of the brain stem and diencephalon resumes after coma, but cortical function does not.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients show no evidence of awareness of self or environment and cannot interact with other people.
Purposeful responses to external stimuli are absent, as are language comprehension and expression.
Signs of an intact reticular formation (eg, eye opening) and an intact brain stem (eg, reactive pupils,
oculocephalic reflex) are present. Sleep-wake cycles occur but do not necessarily reflect a specific
circadian rhythm and are not associated with the environment. More complex brain stem reflexes,
including yawning, chewing, swallowing, and, uncommonly, guttural vocalizations, are also present.
Arousal and startle reflexes may be preserved; eg, loud sounds or blinking with bright lights may elicit eye
opening. Eyes may water and produce tears. Patients may appear to smile or frown. Spontaneous roving
eye movements—usually slow, of constant velocity, and without saccadic jerks—may be misinterpreted as
volitional tracking and can be misinterpreted by family members as evidence of awareness.
Patients cannot react to visual threat and cannot follow commands. The limbs may move, but the only
purposeful motor responses that occur are primitive (eg, grasping an object that contacts the hand). Pain
usually elicits a motor response (typically decorticate or decerebrate posturing) but no purposeful
===PAGE:1843===
avoidance. Patients have fecal and urinary incontinence. Cranial nerve and spinal reflexes are typically
preserved.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria after sufficient observation
• Sometimes functional brain imaging
A vegetative state is suggested by characteristic findings (eg, no purposeful activity or comprehension)
plus signs of an intact reticular formation. Diagnosis is based on clinical criteria. However, neuroimaging
is indicated to rule out treatable disorders.
The vegetative state must be distinguished from the minimally conscious state, which results from less
severe but sometimes widespread cerebral damage. Fragments of awareness may be observed in
patients in a minimally conscious state; they may reach for objects or visually fixate or speak a word or
gesture in response to a command. Both states can be permanent or temporary, and the physical
examination may not reliably distinguish one from the other. Sufficient observation is needed. If
observation is too brief, evidence of awareness may be overlooked, resulting in a false-positive
diagnosis.
CT or MRI can differentiate an ischemic infarct, an intracerebral hemorrhage, and a mass lesion involving
the cortex or the brainstem. MR angiography can be used to visualize the cerebral vasculature following
the exclusion of a cerebral hemorrhage. Additionally, diffusion-weighted MRI is becoming the desired
imaging modality to follow ongoing ischemic changes in the brain. PET and SPECT provide an alternative
method of imaging that assesses cerebral function rather than brain anatomy. If the diagnosis of
persistent vegetative state is in doubt, PET or SPECT should be done. EEG is useful in assessing
cortical dysfunction and identifying the presence of occult seizure activity.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies somewhat by cause and duration of the vegetative state. Prognosis may be better if the
cause is a reversible metabolic condition (eg, toxic encephalopathy) than if the cause is neuronal death
due to extensive hypoxia and ischemia or another injury. Also, younger patients may recover more motor
function than older patients but not more cognition, behavior, or speech.
Recovery from a vegetative state is unlikely after 1 mo if brain damage is nontraumatic and after 12 mo if
brain damage is traumatic. Even if some recovery occurs after these intervals, most patients are severely
disabled. Rarely, improvement occurs late; after 5 yr, about 3% of patients recover the ability to
communicate and comprehend, but even fewer can live independently; no patients regain normal
function.
Most patients in a persistent vegetative state die within 6 mo of the original brain damage. The cause is
usually pulmonary infection, UTI, or multiple organ failure, or death may be sudden and of unknown
cause. For most of the rest, life expectancy is about 2 to 5 yr; a few patients live for decades.
Treatment
• Supportive care
There is no specific treatment, but supportive care should include the following:
• Preventing systemic complications due to immobilization (eg, pneumonia, UTI, thromboembolic disease)
• Providing good nutrition
• Preventing pressure ulcers
===PAGE:1844===
• Providing physical therapy to prevent limb contractures
Decisions about life-sustaining care should involve social services, the hospital ethics committee, and
family members. Maintaining patients, especially those without advanced directives to guide decisions
about terminating
treatment (, in a prolonged vegetative state raises ethical and other (eg,
resource utilization) questions.
Locked-In Syndrome
Locked-in syndrome is a state of wakefulness and awareness with quadriplegia and paralysis of
the lower cranial nerves, resulting in inability to show facial expression, move, speak, or
communicate, except by coded eye movements.
Locked-in syndrome typically results from a pontine hemorrhage or infarct that causes quadriplegia and
disrupts and damages the lower cranial nerves and the centers that control horizontal gaze. Other
disorders that produce severe widespread motor paralysis (eg, Guillain-Barre syndrome) are a less
common cause.
Patients have intact cognitive function and are awake, with eye opening and normal sleepwake cycles.
They can hear and see. However, they cannot move their lower face, chew, swallow, speak, breathe,
move their limbs, or move their eyes laterally. Vertical eye movement is possible; patients can open and
close their eyes or blink a specific number of times to answer questions.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is primarily clinical. Because patients lack the motor responses (eg, withdrawal from painful
stimuli) usually used to measure responsiveness, they may be mistakenly thought to be unconscious.
Thus, all patients who cannot move should have their comprehension tested through requesting eye
blinking or vertical eye movements.
Tests are chosen for the same indications as persistent vegetative state (. Brain imaging with
CT or MRI is done and helps identify the pontine abnormality. PET or SPECT may be done if the
diagnosis is in doubt. In patients with locked-in syndrome, EEG shows normal sleep-wake patterns.
Prognosis
Prognosis is usually dire. However, locked-in syndrome due to transient ischemia or a small stroke in the
vertebrobasilar artery distribution may resolve completely. When the cause is partly reversible (eg,
Guillain-Barre syndrome), recovery can occur over months but is seldom complete. Favorable prognostic
features include early recovery of lateral eye movements and of evoked potentials in response to
magnetic stimulation of the motor cortex. Irreversible or progressive disorders (eg, cancers that involve
the posterior fossa and the pons) are usually fatal.
Treatment
• Supportive care
There is no specific treatment, but supportive care should include the following:
• Preventing systemic complications due to immobilization (eg, pneumonia, UTI, thromboembolic disease)
• Providing good nutrition
• Preventing pressure ulcers
• Providing physical therapy to prevent limb contractures
===PAGE:1845===
Speech therapists may help establish a communication code using eye blinks or movements. Because
cognitive function is intact, patients should make their own health care decisions if communication can be
established.
Brain Death
Brain death is loss of function of the entire cerebrum and brain stem, resulting in coma, no
spontaneous respiration, and loss of all brain stem reflexes. Spinal reflexes, including deep
tendon, plantar flexion, and withdrawal reflexes, may remain. Recovery does not occur.
The concept of brain death developed because ventilators and drugs can perpetuate cardiopulmonary
and other body functions despite complete cessation of all cerebral activity. The concept that brain death
(ie, total cessation of integrated brain function, especially that of the brain stem) constitutes a person's
death has been accepted legally and culturally in most of the world.
Diagnosis
• Serial determination of clinical criteria
• Apnea testing
• Sometimes EEG, brain vascular imaging, or both
For a physician to declare brain death, a known structural or metabolic cause of brain damage must be
present, and use of potentially anesthetizing or paralyzing drugs, especially self-administered, must be
ruled out. Hypothermia < 32°C must be corrected, and if status epilepticus is suspected, EEG should be
done. Sequential testing over 6 to 24 h is necessary (see
Table 174-6
). Examination includes assessment of pupil reactivity, oculovestibular and oculocephalic
reflexes, corneal reflexes, and apnea testing. EEG or tests of brain perfusion may be used to confirm
absence
[Table 174-6.
Guidelines for Determining Brain Death (In Patients > 1 YR)]
of brain activity or brain blood flow and thus provide additional evidence to family members, but these
tests are not required.
Prognosis
The diagnosis of brain death is equivalent to the person's death. No one who meets criteria for brain
death recovers. After brain death is confirmed, all supporting cardiac and respiratory treatments are
ended. Cessation of ventilatory support results in terminal arrhythmias. Spinal motor reflexes may occur
during terminal apnea; they include arching of the back, neck turning, stiffening of the legs, and upper
extremity flexion (the so-called Lazarus sign). Family members who wish to be present when the ventilator
is shut off need to be warned of such reflex movements.
===PAGE:1846===
Chapter 175. Delirium and Dementia
Introduction
Delirium (sometimes called acute confusional state) and dementia are the most common causes of
cognitive impairment, although affective disorders (eg, depression) can also disrupt cognition. Delirium
and dementia are separate disorders but are sometimes difficult to distinguish. In both, cognition is
disordered; however, dementia affects mainly memory, and delirium affects mainly attention.
Other specific characteristics help distinguish the 2 disorders (see
Table 175-1
). Delirium is typically caused by acute illness or drug toxicity (sometimes life threatening) and
is often reversible. Dementia is typically caused by anatomic changes in the brain, has slower onset, and
is generally irreversible. Delirium often develops in patients with dementia. Mistaking delirium for
dementia in an elderly patient—a common clinical error—must be avoided, particularly when delirium is
superimposed on chronic dementia. No laboratory test can definitively establish the cause of cognitive
impairment; a thorough history and physical examination as well as knowledge of baseline function are
essential.
Delirium
Delirium is an acute, transient, usually reversible, fluctuating disturbance in attention, cognition,
and consciousness level. Causes include almost any disorder, intoxication, or drug. Diagnosis is
clinical, with laboratory and usually imaging tests to identify the cause. Treatment is correction
of the cause and supportive measures.
Delirium may occur at any age but is more common among the elderly. At least 10% of elderly patients
who are admitted to the hospital have delirium; 15 to 50% experience delirium at some time during
hospitalization. Delirium is also common among nursing home residents. When delirium occurs in younger
[Table 175-1.
Differences Between Delirium and Dementia*]
people, it is usually due to drug use or a life-threatening systemic disorder. Delirium is sometimes called
acute confusional state or toxic or metabolic encephalopathy.
Etiology
The most common causes are the following:
• Drugs, particularly anticholinergics, psychoactive drugs, and opioids
• Dehydration
• Infection
Many other conditions can cause delirium (see
Table 175-2
). In about 10 to 20% of patients, no cause is identified.
Predisposing factors include brain disorders (eg, dementia, stroke, Parkinson's disease), advanced age,
sensory impairment, and multiple coexisting disorders. Precipitating factors include use of drugs
(particularly ≥ 3 new drugs), infection, dehydration, immobility, undernutrition, and use of bladder
catheters. Recent exposure to anesthesia also increases risk, especially if exposure is prolonged and if
anticholinergics are given during surgery. Decreased sensory stimuli at night may trigger delirium in at-risk
patients. For elderly patients in an ICU, risk of delirium (ICU psychosis) is particularly high.
Pathophysiology
Mechanisms are not fully understood but may involve reversible impairment of cerebral oxidative
metabolism, multiple neurotransmitter abnormalities, and generation of cytokines. Stress of any kind
===PAGE:1847===
upregulates sympathetic tone and downregulates parasympathetic tone, impairing cholinergic function
and thus contributing to delirium. The elderly are particularly vulnerable to reduced cholinergic
transmission, increasing their risk of delirium. Regardless of cause, the cerebral hemispheres or arousal
mechanisms of the thalamus and brain stem reticular activating system become impaired.
[Table 175-2.
Causes of Delirium]
Symptoms and Signs
Delirium is characterized primarily by difficulty focusing, maintaining, or shifting attention (inattention).
Consciousness level fluctuates; patients are disoriented to time and sometimes place or person. They
may have hallucinations. Confusion regarding day-to-day events and daily routines is common, as are
changes in personality and affect. Thinking becomes disorganized, and speech is often disordered, with
prominent slurring, rapidity, neologisms, aphasic errors, or chaotic patterns.
Symptoms fluctuate over minutes to hours; they may lessen during the day and worsen at night.
Symptoms may include inappropriate behavior, fearfulness, and paranoia. Patients may become irritable,
agitated, hyperactive, and hyperalert, or they may become quiet, withdrawn, and lethargic. Very elderly
people with delirium tend to become quiet and withdrawn—changes that may be mistaken for depression.
Some patients alternate between the two. Usually, patterns of sleeping and eating are grossly distorted.
Because of the many cognitive disturbances, insight is poor, and judgment is impaired. Other symptoms
and signs depend on the cause.
Diagnosis
• Mental status examination
• Standard diagnostic criteria to confirm delirium
• Thorough history
• Directed physical examination and selective testing to determine cause
Delirium, particularly in elderly patients, is often overlooked by clinicians. Clinicians should consider
delirium in any elderly patient who presents with impairment in memory or attention.
Mental status examination:
Patients with any sign of cognitive impairment require a formal mental
status examination (see
Sidebar 168-1
. Attention is assessed first. Simple tests include
immediate repetition of the names of 3 objects, digit span (ability to repeat 7 digits forward and 5
backward), and naming the days of the week forward and backward. Inattention (patient does not register
directions or other information) must be distinguished from poor short-term memory (patient registers
information but rapidly forgets it). Further cognitive testing is futile for patients who cannot register
information.
After initial assessment, standard diagnostic criteria, such as the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders
(DSM) or Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) may be used. The following features
are required for diagnosis: • Acute change in cognition that fluctuates during the day
• Inattention (eg, difficulty focusing or following what is said)
plus one of the following:
• Disturbance of consciousness (ie, less clarity) with DSM

or
• An altered level of consciousness (eg, hyperalert, lethargic, stuporous, comatose) or disorganized
===PAGE:1848===
thinking (eg, rambling, irrelevant conversation, illogical flow of ideas) with CAM
History:
History is obtained by interviewing family members, caregivers, and friends. It can determine
whether the change in mental status is recent and is distinct from any baseline dementia (see
Table 175-
). The history helps distinguish a mental disorder from delirium. Mental disorders, unlike delirium, almost
never cause inattention or fluctuating consciousness, and onset of mental disorders is nearly always
subacute. Sundowning (behavioral deterioration during evening hours), which is common among
institutionalized patients with dementia, may be difficult to differentiate; newly symptomatic deterioration
should be presumed to be delirium until proved otherwise.
History should also include use of alcohol and illicit, OTC, and prescription drugs, focusing particularly on
drugs with CNS effects and on new additions, discontinuations, or changes in dose, including overdosing.
Physical examination:
Examination, particularly in patients who are not fully cooperative, should focus
on the following:
• Vital signs
• Hydration status
• Potential foci for infection
• Skin, head and neck, and neurologic examination
Findings can suggest a cause. For example, fever, meningismus, or Kernig and Brudzinski signs suggest
CNS infection. Tremor and myoclonus suggest uremia, liver failure, drug intoxication, or certain electrolyte
disorders (eg, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia). Ophthalmoplegia and ataxia suggest WernickeKorsakoff syndrome (. Focal neurologic abnormalities (eg, cranial nerve palsies, motor or
sensory deficits) or papilledema
suggests a structural CNS disorder. Lesions, swelling, and other findings
suggest head trauma.
Testing:
Testing usually includes CT or MRI, tests for suspected infections (eg, CBC, blood cultures,
chest x-ray, urinalysis), and measurement of electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, plasma glucose, and levels of
any drugs suspected to be having toxic effects.
If the diagnosis is unclear, further testing may include pulse oximetry (or ABGs); liver function tests;
measurement of serum calcium and albumin, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), vitamin B
, ESR, and
antinuclear antibody (ANA); and a test for syphilis (eg, rapid plasma reagin [RPR] or Venereal Disease
Research Laboratory [VDRL] test).
If the diagnosis is still unclear, testing may include CSF analysis (particularly to rule out meningitis,
encephalitis, or subarachnoid hemorrhage), measurement of serum ammonia, and testing to check for
heavy metals.
If nonconvulsive status epilepticus, a rare cause, is suspected (based on history, subtle motor twitches,
automatisms, or presence of a steadier but less intense pattern of bewilderment and drowsiness), EEG
should be done.
Prognosis
Morbidity and mortality rates are higher in patients who have delirium when they are hospitalized or who
develop delirium during hospitalization.
Delirium due to certain conditions (eg, hypoglycemia, intoxication, infection, iatrogenic factors, drug
toxicity, electrolyte imbalance) typically resolves rapidly with treatment. However, recovery may be slow
(days to even weeks or months), especially in the elderly, resulting in longer hospital stays, increased risk
and severity of complications, increased costs, and long-term disability. Some patients never fully recover
from delirium. For up to 2 yr after delirium occurs, risk of cognitive and functional decline,
===PAGE:1849===
institutionalization, and death is increased.
Treatment
• Correction of the cause and removal of aggravating factors
• Supportive care
• Management of agitation
Correcting the cause (eg, treating infection, giving fluids and electrolytes for dehydration) and removing
aggravating factors (eg, stopping drugs) may result in resolution of delirium. Nutritional deficiencies (eg,
of thiamin or vitamin B
) should be corrected, and good nutrition and hydration should be provided.
General measures:
The environment should be stable, quiet, and well-lit and include visual cues to
orient the patient (eg, calendar, clocks, family photographs). Frequent reorientation and reassurance by
hospital staff or family members may also help. Sensory deficits should be minimized (eg, by replacing
hearingaid batteries, by encouraging patients who need eyeglasses or hearing aids to use them).
Approach to treatment should be interdisciplinary (with a physician, physical and occupational therapists,
nurses, and social workers); it should involve strategies to enhance mobility and range of motion, treat
pain and discomfort, prevent skin breakdown, ameliorate incontinence, and minimize risk of aspiration.
Agitation may threaten the well-being of the patient, a caregiver, or a staff member. Simplifying drug
regimens and avoiding use of IV lines, bladder catheters, and physical restraints (particularly in the longterm care setting) as much as possible can help prevent exacerbation of agitation and reduce risk of
injury. However, in certain circumstances, physical restraints may be needed to prevent patients from
harming themselves or others. Restraints should be applied by a staff member trained in their use; they
should be released at least every 2 h to prevent injury and discontinued as soon as possible. Use of
hospital-employed assistants (sitters) as constant observers may help avoid the need for restraints.
Explaining the nature of delirium to family members can help them cope. They should be told that delirium
is usually reversible but that cognitive deficits often take weeks or months to abate after resolution of the
acute illness.
Drugs:
Drugs, typically low-dose haloperidol (0.5 to 1.0 mg po, IV, or IM once, then repeated q 1 to 2 h as
needed), may lessen agitation or psychotic symptoms; occasionally, much higher doses are necessary.
However, drugs do not correct the underlying problem and may prolong or exacerbate delirium. Secondgeneration (atypical) antipsychotics (eg, risperidone 0.5 to 3 mg po q 12 h, olanzapine 2.5 to 15 mg po
once/day) may be used instead because they have fewer extrapyramidal adverse effects; however, longterm use in patients with dementia may increase risk of stroke and death. These drugs are not typically
given IV or IM.
Benzodiazepines (eg, lorazepam 0.5 to 1.0 mg po or IV once, then repeated q 1 to 2 h as needed) have a
more rapid onset of action (5 min after parenteral administration) than antipsychotics
but commonly
worsen confusion and sedation in patients with delirium.
Overall, antipsychotics and benzodiazepines are equally effective for managing agitation in delirium, but
antipsychotics have fewer adverse effects. Benzodiazepines are preferred for delirium attributed to
sedative withdrawal and for patients intolerant of antipsychotics (eg, those with Parkinson's disease or
Lewy body dementia). Dose of these drugs should be reduced as quickly as possible.
Prevention
Because delirium greatly worsens prognosis for hospitalized patients, prevention should be emphasized.
Hospital staff members should be trained to take measures to maintain orientation, mobility, and cognition
and to ensure sleep, good nutrition and hydration, and sufficient pain relief, particularly in elderly patients.
Family members can be encouraged to help with these strategies. The number and doses of drugs
===PAGE:1850===
should be reduced if possible.
Dementia
Dementia is chronic, global, usually irreversible deterioration of cognition. Diagnosis is clinical;
laboratory and imaging tests are used to identify treatable causes. Treatment is supportive.
Cholinesterase inhibitors can sometimes temporarily improve cognitive function.
Dementia may occur at any age but affects primarily the elderly (about 5% of those aged 65 to 74 and
40% of those > 85). It accounts for more than one half of nursing home admissions. At least 5 million
people in the US have dementia.
Dementias can be classified in several ways:
• Alzheimer's or non-Alzheimer's type
• Cortical or subcortical
• Irreversible or potentially reversible
• Common or rare
Etiology
Dementias may result from primary diseases of the brain or other conditions (see
Table 175-3
).
The most common types of dementia are Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, Lewy body dementia,
frontotemporal dementias, and HIV-associated dementia. Dementia also occurs in patients with
Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease,
Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome, other prion disorders, and neurosyphilis. Patients can have >
1 type (mixed dementia).
Some structural brain disorders (eg, normal-pressure hydrocephalus, subdural hematoma), metabolic
disorders (eg, hypothyroidism, vitamin B
deficiency), and toxins (eg, lead) cause a slow deterioration of
cognition that may resolve with treatment. This impairment is sometimes called reversible dementia, but
some experts restrict the term dementia to irreversible cognitive deterioration.
Depression may mimic dementia (and was formerly called pseudodementia); the 2 disorders often coexist.
However, depression may be the first manifestation of dementia.
Changes in cognition, including memory, occur with aging, but they are not dementia. The elderly have a
relative deficiency in recall, particularly in speed of recall, compared with recall during their youth.
However, this change does not affect daily function. Mild cognitive impairment is more severe than ageassociated memory impairment; memory is impaired compared with that of agematched controls, but other
cognitive domains and daily function are not affected. Up to 50% of patients with mild cognitive
impairment develop dementia within 3 yr.
Any disorder may exacerbate cognitive deficits in patients with dementia. Delirium often occurs in patients
with dementia. Drugs, particularly benzodiazepines and anticholinergics (eg, some tricyclic
antidepressants, antihistamines, antipsychotics, benztropine), may temporarily cause or worsen
symptoms of dementia, as may alcohol, even in moderate amounts. New or progressive renal or liver
failure may reduce drug clearance and cause drug toxicity after years of taking a stable drug dose (eg, of
propranolol).
Symptoms and Signs
Dementia impairs cognition globally. Onset is gradual, although family members may suddenly notice
===PAGE:1851===
deficits (eg, when function becomes impaired). Often, loss of short-term memory is the first sign. Although
symptoms exist in a continuum, they can be divided into early, intermediate, and late. Personality changes
and behavioral disturbances may develop early or late. Motor and other focal neurologic deficits occur at
different stages, depending on the type of dementia; they occur early in vascular dementia and late in
Alzheimer's disease. Incidence of seizures is somewhat increased during all stages. Psychosis
—hallucinations, delusions, or paranoia—occurs in about 10% of patients with dementia, although a
higher percentage may experience these symptoms temporarily.
[Table 175-3.
Classification of Some Dementias]
Early:
Recent memory is impaired; learning and retaining new information become difficult. Language
problems (especially with word finding), mood swings, and personality changes develop. Patients may
have progressive difficulty with independent activities of daily living (eg, balancing their checkbook,
finding their way around, remembering where they put things). Abstract thinking, insight, or judgment may
be impaired. Patients may respond to loss of independence and memory with irritability, hostility, and
agitation.
Functional ability may be further limited by the following:
• Agnosia: Impaired ability to identify objects despite intact sensory function (
• Apraxia: Impaired ability to do previously learned motor activities despite intact motor function (
• Aphasia: Impaired ability to comprehend or use language (
Although early dementia may not compromise sociability, family members may report strange behavior
accompanied by emotional lability.
Intermediate:
Patients become unable to learn and recall new information. Memory of remote events is
reduced but not totally lost. Patients may require help with basic activities of daily living (eg, bathing,
eating, dressing, toileting). Personality changes may progress. Patients may become irritable, anxious,
selfcentered, inflexible, or angry more easily, or they may become more passive, with a flat affect,
depression, indecisiveness, lack of spontaneity, or general withdrawal from social situations. Behavior
disorders may develop: Patients may wander or become suddenly and inappropriately agitated, hostile,
uncooperative, or physically aggressive (.
By this stage, patients have lost all sense of time and place because they cannot effectively use normal
environmental and social cues. Patients often get lost; they may be unable to find their own bedroom or
bathroom. They remain ambulatory but are at risk of falls or accidents secondary to confusion. Altered
sensation or perception may culminate in psychosis with hallucinations and paranoid and persecutory
delusions. Sleep patterns are often disorganized.
Late (severe):
Patients cannot walk, feed themselves, or do any other activities of daily living; they may
become incontinent. Recent and remote memory is completely lost. Patients may be unable to swallow.
They are at risk of undernutrition, pneumonia (especially due to aspiration), and pressure ulcers.
Because they depend completely on others for care, placement in a long-term care facility often becomes
necessary. Eventually, patients become mute.
Because such patients cannot relate any symptoms to a physician and because elderly patients often
have no febrile or leukocytic response to infection, a physician must rely on experience and acumen
whenever a patient appears ill. End-stage dementia results in coma and death, usually due to infection.
Diagnosis
• Differentiation of delirium from dementia, mainly by mental status examination
• Identification of treatable causes clinically and by laboratory testing and neuroimaging
===PAGE:1852===
• Sometimes formal neuropsychologic testing
Recommendations about diagnosis of dementia are available from the American Academy of Neurology.
Distinguishing type or cause of dementia can be difficult; definitive diagnosis often requires postmortem
pathologic examination of brain tissue. Thus, clinical diagnosis focuses on distinguishing dementia from
delirium and other disorders and identifying the cerebral areas affected and potentially reversible causes.
Dementia must be distinguished from the following:
• Delirium: Distinguishing between dementia and delirium is crucial (because delirium is usually reversible
with prompt treatment) but can be difficult. Attention is assessed first. If a patient is inattentive, the
diagnosis is likely to be delirium, although advanced dementia also severely impairs attention. Other
features that suggest delirium rather than dementia (eg, duration of cognitive impairment—see
Table
175-1
) are determined by the history, physical examination, and tests for specific causes.
• Age-associated memory impairment: This impairment is not severe enough to affect daily function. If
affected people are given enough time to learn new information, their intellectual performance is good.
• Mild cognitive impairment: Memory is impaired, but other cognitive domains and daily function are not
affected.
• Dementia of depression: This cognitive disturbance resolves with treatment of depression. Depressed
older patients may experience cognitive decline, but unlike patients with dementia, they tend to
exaggerate their memory loss and rarely forget important current events or personal matters. Neurologic
examinations are normal except for signs of psychomotor slowing. When tested, patients with
depression make little effort to respond, but those with dementia often try hard but respond incorrectly.
When depression and dementia coexist, treating depression does not fully restore cognition.
Clinical criteria:
The best screening test for dementia is a short-term memory test (eg, registering 3
objects and recalling them after 5 min); patients with dementia forget simple information within 3 to 5 min.
Another test assesses the ability to name objects within categories (eg, lists of animals, plants, or pieces
of furniture). Patients with dementia struggle to name a few; those without dementia easily name many.
In addition to loss of short-term memory, diagnosis of dementia requires at least one of the following
cognitive deficits:
• Aphasia
• Apraxia
• Agnosia
• Impaired ability to plan, organize, sequence, or think abstractly (executive dysfunction)
Each cognitive deficit must substantially impair function and represent a significant decline from a
previous level of functioning. Also, the deficits must not occur only during delirium.
A formal mental status examination (see
Sidebar 168-1
 should be done. The Mini-Mental
Status Examination is often used. When delirium is absent, the presence of multiple deficits, particularly in
patients with an average or a higher level of education, suggests dementia.
History and physical examination should then focus on signs of treatable disorders that cause cognitive
impairment (eg, vitamin B
deficiency, neurosyphilis, hypothyroidism, depression—see
Table 175-2
).
Laboratory testing:
Tests should include thyroid-stimulating hormone and vitamin B
levels. Routine
CBC and liver function tests are sometimes recommended, but yield is very low. If clinical findings
===PAGE:1853===
suggest a specific disorder, other tests (eg, for HIV or syphilis) are indicated. Lumbar puncture is rarely
needed but should be considered if a chronic infection or neurosyphilis is suspected. Other tests may be
used to exclude causes of delirium.
Neuroimaging:
CT or MRI should be done in the initial evaluation of dementia or after any sudden
change in cognition or mental
status. Neuroimaging can identify potentially reversible structural disorders
(eg, normal-pressure hydrocephalus, brain tumors, subdural hematoma) and certain metabolic disorders
(eg, Hallervorden-Spatz disease, Wilson's disease). Occasionally, EEG is useful (eg, to evaluate episodic
lapses in attention or bizarre behavior). Functional MRI or single-photon emission CT can provide
information about cerebral perfusion patterns and help with differential diagnosis (eg, in differentiating
Alzheimer's disease from frontotemporal dementia and Lewy body dementia).
Neuropsychologic testing:
If the diagnosis remains in doubt, patients should be referred for formal
neuropsychologic testing, which evaluates mood as well as all mental functions and takes 1 to 3 h. It is
done or supervised by a neuropsychologist. Such testing helps primarily in differentiating the following:
• Age-associated memory impairment, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia, particularly when
cognition is only slightly impaired or when the patient or family members are anxious for reassurance
• Dementia and focal syndromes of cognitive impairment (eg, amnesia, aphasia, apraxia, visuospatial
difficulties) when the distinction is not clinically evident
Testing may also help characterize specific deficits due to dementia.
Prognosis
Dementia is usually progressive. However, progression rate varies widely and depends on the cause.
Dementia shortens life expectancy, but survival estimates vary.
Treatment
• Measures to ensure safety
• Provision of appropriate stimulation, activities, and cues for orientation
• Elimination of drugs with sedating or anticholinergic effects
• Possibly cholinesterase inhibitors
• Assistance for caregivers
• Arrangements for end-of-life care
Recommendations about treatment of dementia are available from the American Academy of Neurology.
Measures to ensure patient safety and to provide an appropriate environment are essential to treatment,
as is caregiver assistance. Several drugs are available.
Patient safety:
Occupational and physical therapists can evaluate the home for safety; the goals are to
prevent accidents (particularly falls), to manage behavior disorders, and to plan for change as dementia
progresses.
How well patients function in various settings (ie, kitchen, automobile) should be evaluated using
simulations. If patients have deficits and remain in the same environment, protective measures (eg, hiding
knives, unplugging the stove, removing the car, confiscating car keys) may be required. Some states
require physicians to notify the Department of Motor Vehicles of patients with dementia because, at some
point, such patients can no longer drive safely. If patients wander, signal monitoring systems can be
installed, or patients can be registered in the Safe Return program. Information is available from the
Alzheimer's Association. Ultimately, assistance (eg, housekeepers, home health aides) or a change of
===PAGE:1854===
environment (living facilities without stairs, assisted-living facility, skilled nursing facility) may be indicated.
Environmental measures:
Patients with mild to moderate dementia usually function best in familiar
surroundings. Whether at home or in an institution, the environment should be designed to help preserve
feelings of self-control and personal dignity by providing the following:
• Frequent reinforcement of orientation
• A bright, cheerful, familiar environment
• Minimal new stimulation
• Regular, low-stress activities
Large calendars and clocks and a routine for daily activities can help with orientation; medical staff
members can wear large name tags and repeatedly introduce themselves. Changes in surroundings,
routines, or people should be explained to patients precisely and simply, omitting nonessential
procedures. Patients require time to adjust and become familiar with the changes. Telling patients about
what is going to happen (eg, about a bath or feeding) may avert resistance or violent reactions. Frequent
visits by staff members and familiar people encourage patients to remain social.
The room should be reasonably bright and contain sensory stimuli (eg, radio, television, night-light) to
help patients remain oriented and focus their attention. Quiet, dark, private rooms should be avoided.
Activities can help patients function better; those related to interests before dementia began are good
choices. Activities should be enjoyable, provide some stimulation, but not involve too many choices or
challenges. Exercise to reduce restlessness, improve balance, and maintain cardiovascular tone should
be done daily. Exercise can also help improve sleep
and manage behavior disorders. Occupational
therapy and music therapy help maintain fine motor control and provides nonverbal stimulation. Group
therapy (eg, reminiscence therapy, socialization activities) may help maintain conversational and
interpersonal skills.
Drugs:
Eliminating or limiting drugs with CNS activity often improves function. Sedating and
anticholinergic drugs, which tend to worsen dementia, should be avoided.
The cholinesterase inhibitors donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine ( are somewhat effective in improving cognitive function in patients with Alzheimer's disease or Lewy
body dementia and may be useful in other forms of dementia. These drugs inhibit acetylcholinesterase,
increasing the acetylcholine level in the brain.
Memantine, an NMDA (
N
-methyl-D-aspartate) antagonist, may help slow progression of moderate to
severe dementia and can be used with a cholinesterase inhibitor.
Other drugs (eg, antipsychotics) have been used to control behavior disorders (. Patients
with dementia and signs of depression should be treated with nonanticholinergic antidepressants,
preferably SSRIs.
Caregiver assistance:
Immediate family members are largely responsible for care of a patient with
dementia. Nurses and social workers can teach them and other caregivers how to best meet the patient's
needs (eg, how to deal with daily care and handle financial issues); teaching should be ongoing. Other
resources (eg, support groups, educational materials, Internet web sites) are available.
Caregivers may experience substantial stress. Stress may be caused by worry about protecting the
patient and by frustration, exhaustion, anger, and resentment from having to do so much to care for
someone. Health care practitioners should watch for early symptoms of caregiver stress and burnout and,
when needed, suggest support services (eg, social worker, nutritionist, nurse, home health aide). If a
patient with dementia has an unusual injury, the possibility of elder abuse should be investigated.
===PAGE:1855===
End-of-life issues:
Because insight and judgment deteriorate in patients with dementia, appointment of
a family member, guardian, or lawyer to oversee finances may be necessary. Early in dementia, before
the patient is incapacitated, the patient's wishes about care should be clarified, and financial and legal
arrangements (eg, durable power of attorney, durable power of attorney for health care) should be made.
When these documents are signed, the patient's capacity should be evaluated, and evaluation results
recorded (see also p.
). Decisions about artificial feeding and treatment of acute disorders are best
made before the need develops. In advanced dementia, palliative measures may be more appropriate
than highly aggressive interventions or hospital care.
Alzheimer's Disease
Alzheimer's disease causes progressive cognitive deterioration and is characterized by senile
plaques,
β
-amyloid deposits, and neurofibrillary tangles in the cerebral cortex and subcortical
gray matter.
Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia; it accounts for > 65% of dementias in the
elderly. The disease is twice as common among women as among men, partly because women have a
longer life expectancy. Alzheimer's disease affects about 4% of people aged 65 to 74 and 30% of those >
85. Prevalence in industrialized countries is expected to increase as the proportion of the elderly
increases.
Etiology
Most cases are sporadic, with late onset (≥ 60 yr) and unclear etiology. However, about 5 to 15% are
familial; one half of these cases have an early (presenile) onset (< 60 yr) and are typically related to
specific genetic mutations.
At least 5 distinct genetic loci, located on chromosomes 1, 12, 14, 19, and 21, influence initiation and
progression of Alzheimer's disease. Mutations in genes for the amyloid precursor protein, presenilin I, and
presenilin II may lead to autosomal dominant forms of Alzheimer's disease, typically with presenile onset.
In affected patients, the processing of amyloid precursor protein is altered, leading to deposition and
fibrillar aggregation of
β
-amyloid.
β
-Amyloid may lead to neuronal death and formation of neurofibrillary
tangles and senile plaques, which consist of degenerated axonal or dendritic processes, astrocytes, and
glial cells around an amyloid core.
Other genetic determinants include the apolipoprotein (apo) E alleles (
). Apo E proteins influence
β
-
amyloid deposition, cytoskeletal integrity, and efficiency of neuronal repair. Risk of Alzheimer's disease is
substantially increased in people with 2
4 alleles and may be decreased in those who have the
2 allele.
Variants in
SORL1
may also be involved; they are more common among people with lateonset Alzheimer's
disease. These variants may cause the gene to malfunction, possibly resulting in increased production of
β
-amyloid.
The relationship of other factors (eg, low hormone levels, metal exposure) and Alzheimer's disease is
under study, but no definite causal links have been established.
Pathophysiology
Typically, extracellular
β
-amyloid deposits, intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (paired helical filaments),
and senile plaques develop, and neurons are lost. Cerebrocortical atrophy is common, and use of
cerebral glucose is reduced, as is perfusion in the parietal lobe, temporal cortices, and prefrontal cortex.
Other common abnormalities include increased brain and CSF concentrations of the tau protein (a
component of neurofibrillary tangles and
β
-amyloid) and reduced levels of choline acetyltransferase and
various neurotransmitters (eg, somatostatin).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of Alzheimer's disease are similar to those of other dementias, with early,
===PAGE:1856===
intermediate, and late stages (. Loss of short-term memory is often the first sign. Cognitive
deficits tend to involve multiple functions. The disease progresses gradually but may plateau for periods
of time. Behavior disorders (eg, wandering, agitation, yelling, persecutory ideation) are common (.
Diagnosis
• Similar to that of other dementias
• Formal mental status examination
• History and physical examination
• Laboratory testing
• Neuroimaging
Generally, diagnosis is similar to that of other dementias (. Clinical criteria (including a
thorough history and standard neurologic examination) are 85% accurate in establishing the diagnosis
and differentiating Alzheimer's disease from other forms of dementia, such as vascular dementia and
Lewy body dementia.
Traditional diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer's disease include all of the following:
• Dementia established clinically and documented by a formal mental status examination Deficits in ≥ 2
areas of cognition
• Gradual onset and progressive worsening of memory and other cognitive functions
• No disturbance of consciousness
• Onset after age 40, most often after age 65
• No systemic or brain disorders that could account for the progressive deficits in memory and cognition
However, deviations from these criteria do not exclude a diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease, particularly
because patients may have mixed dementia.
Differential diagnosis:
Distinguishing Alzheimer's disease from other dementias is difficult. Assessment
tools (eg, Hachinski Ischemic Score—see
Table 175-4
) can help distinguish vascular dementia from Alzheimer's disease. Fluctuations in cognition,
parkinsonian symptoms, well-formed visual hallucinations, and relative preservation of short-term memory
suggest Lewy body dementia rather than Alzheimer's disease (see
Table 175-5
). Patients with Alzheimer's
disease are often better-groomed and neater than patients with other dementias.
Prognosis
Although progression rate varies, cognitive decline is inevitable. Average survival from time of diagnosis is
7 yr, although this figure
[Table 175-4.
Modified Hachinski Ischemic Score]
[Table 175-5.
Differences Between Alzheimer's Disease and Lewy Body Dementia]
is debated. Average survival from the time patients can no longer walk is about 6 mo.
Treatment
===PAGE:1857===
• Generally, similar to that of other dementias
• Possibly cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine
General treatment is the same as that of all dementias (.
Cholinesterase inhibitors
modestly improve cognitive function and memory in some patients. Four are
available; generally, donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine are equally effective, but tacrine is rarely
used because of its hepatotoxicity. Donepezil is a first-line drug because it has once/day dosing and is
well-tolerated. The recommended dose is 5 mg once/day for 4 to 6 wk, then increased to 10 mg once/day.
Treatment should be continued if functional improvement is apparent after several months, but otherwise
it should be stopped. The most common adverse effects are GI (eg, nausea, diarrhea). Rarely, dizziness
and cardiac arrhythmias occur. Adverse effects can be minimized by increasing the dose gradually (see
Table 175-6
).
Memantine,
an
N
-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, appears to slow the progression of
Alzheimer's disease. The dose is 5 mg po once/day, which is increased to 10 mg po bid over about 4 wk.
For patients with renal insufficiency, the dose should be reduced or the drug should be avoided.
Memantine can be used with a cholinesterase inhibitor.
Efficacy of high-dose vitamin E (1000 IU po once/day or bid), selegiline, NSAIDs,
Ginkgo biloba
extracts,
and statins is unclear. Estrogen therapy does not appear useful in prevention or treatment and may be
harmful.
Prevention
Preliminary, observational evidence suggests that risk of Alzheimer's disease may be decreased by the
following:
• Continuing to do challenging mental activities (eg, learning new skills, doing crossword puzzles) well into
old age
• Exercising
• Controlling hypertension
• Lowering cholesterol levels
• Consuming a diet rich in
ω
-3 fatty acids and low in saturated fats
• Drinking alcohol in modest amounts
[Table 175-6.
Drugs for Alzheimer's Disease]
However, there is no convincing evidence that people who do not drink alcohol should start drinking to
prevent Alzheimer's disease.
Vascular Dementia
Vascular dementia is acute or chronic cognitive deterioration due to diffuse or focal cerebral
infarction that is most often related to cerebrovascular disease.
Vascular dementia is the 2nd most common cause of dementia among the elderly. It is more common
among men and usually begins after age 70. It occurs more often in people who have vascular risk factors
(eg, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, smoking) and in those who have had several
strokes. Many people have both vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
Vascular dementia occurs when multiple small cerebral infarcts (or sometimes hemorrhages) cause
===PAGE:1858===
enough neuronal or axonal loss to impair brain function. Vascular dementias include the following:
•
Lacunar disease:
Small blood vessels are affected.
•
Multi-infarct dementia:
Medium-sized blood vessels are affected.
•
Strategic single-infarct dementia:
A single infarct occurs in a crucial area of the brain (eg, angular
gyrus, thalamus).
•
Binswanger's dementia (subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy):
This uncommon variant of
small-vessel dementia is associated with severe, poorly controlled hypertension and systemic vascular
disease. It involves multiple lacunar infarcts in deep hemispheric white and gray matter.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are similar to those of other dementias (. However, because infarction
is the cause, vascular dementia tends to progress in discrete steps; each episode is accompanied by
intellectual decline, sometimes followed by modest recovery.
As the disease progresses, focal neurologic deficits often develop:
• Exaggeration of deep tendon reflexes
• Extensor plantar response
• Gait abnormalities
• Weakness of an extremity
• Hemiplegias
• Pseudobulbar palsy with pathologic laughing and crying
• Other signs of extrapyramidal dysfunction
However, because small-vessel ischemic damage tends to cause small, incremental deficits, the decline
appears to be gradual.
Cognitive loss may be focal. For example, short-term memory may be less affected than in other
dementias. Patients with partial aphasia may be more aware of their deficits; thus, depression may be
more common than in other dementias.
Diagnosis
• Generally similar to diagnosis of other dementias
Diagnosis is similar to that of other dementias (. If focal signs or evidence of cerebrovascular
disease is present, a thorough evaluation for stroke should be done (.
CT and MRI may show bilateral multiple infarcts in the dominant hemisphere and limbic structures,
multiple lacunar strokes, or periventricular white-matter lesions extending into the deep white matter. In
Binswanger's dementia, imaging shows leukoencephalopathy in the cerebrum semiovale adjacent to the
cortex, often with multiple lacunae affecting structures deep in the gray matter (eg, basal ganglia, thalamic
nuclei).
The Hachinski Ischemic Score is sometimes used to help differentiate vascular dementia from Alzheimer's
disease (see
Table 175-4
).
===PAGE:1859===
Prognosis
The 5-yr mortality rate is 61%, which is higher than that for most forms of dementia, presumably because
other atherosclerotic disorders coexist.
Treatment
• Generally similar to treatment of other dementias
Generally, treatment is the same as that of other dementias (. However, vascular dementia
may be preventable, and its progression may be slowed by BP control, cholesterol-lowering therapy,
regulation of plasma glucose (90 to 150 mg/dL), and smoking cessation.
The efficacy of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine is uncertain. However, because many patients
also have Alzheimer's disease, these drugs may have some benefit. Adjunctive drugs for depression,
psychosis, and sleep disorders are useful.
Lewy Body Dementia
Lewy body dementia is chronic cognitive deterioration characterized by cellular inclusions
called Lewy bodies in the cytoplasm of cortical neurons.
Lewy body dementia is the 3rd most common dementia. Age of onset is typically > 60.
Lewy bodies are spherical, eosinophilic, neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions composed of aggregates of
α
-
synuclein, a synaptic protein. They occur in the cortex of some patients with primary Lewy body
dementia. Neurotransmitter levels and neuronal pathways between the striatum and the neocortex are
abnormal.
Lewy bodies also occur in the substantia nigra of patients with Parkinson's disease, and patients with
Parkinson's disease may develop Lewy body dementia. Thus, some experts think that Parkinson's
disease and Lewy body dementia may be part of a more generalized synucleopathy affecting the central
and peripheral nervous systems (. Lewy bodies sometimes occur in patients with Alzheimer's
disease, and patients with Lewy body dementia may have neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
Lewy body dementia, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease overlap considerably. Further
research is needed to clarify the relationships among them.
Symptoms and Signs
Initial cognitive deterioration resembles that of other dementias (. Extrapyramidal symptoms
occur. However, unlike in Parkinson's disease, in Lewy body dementia, cognitive and extrapyramidal
symptoms usually begin within 1 yr of each other. Also the extrapyramidal symptoms differ from those of
Parkinson's disease: In Lewy body dementia, tremor does not occur early, rigidity of axial muscles with
gait instability occurs early, and deficits tend to be symmetric. Repeated falls are common.
Fluctuating cognitive function is a relatively specific feature of Lewy body dementia. Periods of being
alert, coherent, and oriented may alternate with periods of being confused and unresponsive to
questions, usually over a period of days to weeks but sometimes during the same interview. Memory is
impaired, but the impairment appears to result more from deficits in alertness and attention than in
memory acquisition; thus, short-term recall is affected less than digit span memory (ability to repeat 7
digits forward and 5 backward). Patients may stare into space for long periods. Excessive daytime
drowsiness is common. Visuospatial and visuoconstructional abilities (tested by block design, clock
drawing, or figure copying) are affected more than other cognitive deficits. Thus, Lewy body dementia
may be difficult to distinguish from delirium, and all patients presenting with these symptoms and signs
should be evaluated for delirium.
Visual hallucinations are common and often threatening, unlike the benign hallucinations of Parkinson's
===PAGE:1860===
disease. Auditory, olfactory, and tactile hallucinations are less common. Delusions occur in 50 to 65% of
patients and are often complex and bizarre, compared with the simple persecutory ideation common in
Alzheimer's disease.
Autonomic dysfunction is common, and unexplained syncope may result. Autonomic dysfunction may
occur simultaneously with or after onset of cognitive deficits. Extreme sensitivity to antipsychotics is
typical. Many patients have rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder, a parasomnia
characterized by vivid dreams without the usual physiologic paralysis of skeletal muscles during REM
sleep. As a result, dreams may be acted out, sometimes injuring the bed partner.
Lewy body dementia progresses; prognosis is poor.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Neuroimaging to rule out other disorders
Diagnosis is clinical, but sensitivity and specificity are poor.
Diagnosis is considered probable if 2 of 3 features—fluctuations in cognition, visual hallucinations, and
parkinsonism—are present and possible if only one is present. Supportive evidence consists of repeated
falls, syncope, and sensitivity to antipsychotics. Overlap of symptoms in Lewy body dementia and
Parkinson's disease may complicate diagnosis. When motor deficits (eg, tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity)
precede and are more severe than cognitive impairment, Parkinson's disease is usually diagnosed. When
early cognitive impairment and behavioral disturbances predominate, Lewy body dementia is usually
diagnosed.
CT and MRI show no characteristic changes but are helpful initially in ruling out other causes of
dementia. Positron emission tomography with fluorine-18-labeled deoxyglucose and single-photon
emission CT (SPECT) with
I-FP-CIT (
N
-3-fluoropropyl-2
β
-carbomethoxy-3
β
-[4-iodophenyl]tropane), a
fluoroalkyl analog of cocaine, may help identify Lewy body dementia but are not routinely done. Definitive
diagnosis requires autopsy samples of brain tissue.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is generally supportive (. Rivastigmine 1.5 mg po bid, titrated upward as needed to
6 mg bid, may improve cognition. Other cholinesterase inhibitors may also be useful. In about one half of
patients, extrapyramidal symptoms respond to antiparkinsonian drugs (, but psychiatric
symptoms may worsen. If such drugs are needed, levodopa is preferred.
Traditional antipsychotics, even at very low doses, tend to acutely worsen extrapyramidal symptoms and
are best avoided.
HIV-Associated Dementia
HIV-associated dementia is chronic cognitive deterioration due to brain infection by HIV.
HIV-associated dementia (AIDS dementia complex) may occur in the late stages of HIV infection. Unlike
almost all other forms of dementia, it tends to occur in younger people. Purely HIV-associated dementia is
caused by neuronal damage by the HIV virus. However, in patients with HIV infection, dementia may
result from other infections, such as secondary infection with JC virus causing progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy. Other opportunistic infections (eg, fungal, bacterial, viral, protozoan) may also
contribute.
In purely HIV-associated dementia, subcortical pathologic changes result when infected macrophages or
===PAGE:1861===
microglial cells infiltrate into the deep gray matter (ie, basal ganglia, thalamus) and white matter.
Prevalence of dementia in late-stage HIV infection ranges from 7 to 27%, but 30 to 40% may have milder
forms. Incidence is inversely proportional to CD4+ count.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs may be similar to those of other dementias (. Early manifestations
include slowed thinking and expression, difficulty concentrating, and apathy; insight is preserved, and
manifestations of depression are few. Motor movements are slowed; ataxia and weakness may be
evident. Abnormal neurologic signs may include paraparesis, lower-extremity spasticity, ataxia, and
extensor-plantar responses. Mania or psychosis is sometimes present.
Diagnosis
• Generally similar to initial diagnosis of other dementias
• Prompt evaluation, including MRI, when deterioration is acute
Generally, diagnosis of dementia in patients with HIV infection is similar to that of other dementias (. However, when patients present with an acute change in cognitive function, the cause must be
identified as soon as possible.
CT or MRI should be done to check for signs of CNS infection (eg, toxoplasmosis). MRI is more useful
than CT because it can exclude other CNS causes of dementia (eg, progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy, cerebral lymphoma). Late-stage findings of HIV dementia may include diffuse
nonenhancing white matter hyperintensities, cerebral atrophy, and ventricular enlargement. If no
contraindication is identified by neuroimaging, lumbar puncture is done to rule out infection.
Prognosis
Patients with HIV infection and untreated dementia have a worse prognosis (average life expectancy of 6
mo) than those without dementia.
Treatment
• Highly active antiretroviral therapy
The primary treatment is highly active antiretroviral therapy, which increases CD4+ counts and improves
cognitive function (see
p.
). Supportive measures are similar to those for other dementias (.
Frontotemporal Dementia
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to sporadic and hereditary disorders that affect the frontal
and temporal lobes, including Pick's disease.
FTD accounts for up to 10% of dementias. Age at onset is typically younger (age 55 to 65) than in
Alzheimer's disease. FTDs affect men and women about equally. Pick's disease is a variant of FTD, which
may be pathologically characterized by severe atrophy, neuronal loss, gliosis, and presence of abnormal
neurons (Pick cells) containing inclusions (Pick bodies).
About one half of FTDs are inherited; most mutations involve chromosome 17q21-22 and result in
abnormalities of the microtubule-binding tau protein; thus, FTDs are considered tauopathies. Some
experts classify supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration with FTDs because they share similar
pathology and gene mutations affecting the tau protein. Symptoms, gene mutations, and pathologic
changes may not correspond to each other. For example, the same mutation causes FTD symptoms in
one family member but symptoms of corticobasal degeneration in another, and Pick's cells may be absent
===PAGE:1862===
in patients with typical symptoms of Pick's disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Generally, FTD affects personality, behavior, and usually language function (syntax and fluency) more
and memory less than does Alzheimer's disease. Abstract thinking and attention (maintaining and shifting)
are impaired; responses are disorganized. Orientation is preserved, but retrieval of information may be
impaired. Motor skills are generally preserved. Patients have difficulty sequencing tasks, although visualspatial and constructional tasks are affected less.
Frontal release signs (grasp, root, suck, snout, and palmomental reflexes and glabellar sign— appear late in the disease but also occur in other dementias. Some patients develop motor neuron
disease with generalized muscle atrophy, weakness, fasciculations, bulbar symptoms (eg, dysphagia,
dysphonia, difficulty chewing), and increased risk of aspiration pneumonia and early death.
Frontal variant FTD:
Social behavior and personality change because the orbitobasal frontal lobe is
affected. Patients become impulsive and lose their social inhibitions (eg, they may shoplift); they neglect
personal hygiene. Some have Kluver-Bucy syndrome, which involves emotional blunting, hypersexual
activity, hyperorality (eg, bulimia, sucking and smacking of lips), and visual agnosias. Impersistence
(impaired concentration), inertia, and mental rigidity appear.
Behavior becomes repetitive and stereotyped (eg, patients may walk to the same location every day).
Patients may pick up and manipulate random objects for no reason (called utilization behavior). Verbal
output is reduced; echolalia, perseveration (inappropriate repetition of a response), and eventually
mutism occur.
Primary progressive aphasia:
Language function deteriorates because of asymmetric (worse on left)
anterolateral temporal lobe atrophy; the hippocampus and memory are relatively spared. Most patients
present with difficulty finding words. Attention (eg, digit span) may be severely impaired. Many patients
have aphasia, with decreased fluency and difficulty comprehending language; hesitancy in speech
production and dysarthria are also common. In some patients, aphasia is the only symptom for ≥ 10 yr; in
others, global deficits develop within a few years.
Semantic dementia is a type of primary progressive aphasia. When the left side of the brain is affected
most, the ability to comprehend words is progressively lost. Speech is fluent but lacks meaning; a generic
or related term may be used instead of the specific name of an object. When the right side is affected
most, patients have progressive anomia (inability to name objects) and prosopagnosia (inability to
recognize familiar faces). They cannot remember topographic relationships. Some patients with semantic
dementia also have Alzheimer's disease.
Diagnosis
• Generally similar to diagnosis of other dementias
• Additional clinical evaluation to differentiate from some other dementias
Diagnosis is suggested by typical clinical findings. As for other dementias, cognitive deficits are evaluated
(. CT and MRI are done to determine location and extent of brain atrophy and to exclude
other possible causes (eg, brain tumors, abscesses, stroke). FTDs are characterized by severely
atrophic, sometimes paper-thin gyri in the temporal and frontal lobes. However, MRI or CT may not show
these changes until late in FTD. Thus, FTDs and Alzheimer's disease can usually be differentiated more
easily by clinical criteria. For example, primary progressive
aphasia differs from Alzheimer's disease in that
memory and visuospatial function are preserved and syntax and fluency are impaired.
Prognosis
FTDs usually progress gradually, but progression rate varies; if symptoms are limited to speech and
language, progression to general dementia may be slower.
===PAGE:1863===
Treatment
There is no specific treatment. Treatment is generally supportive (.
Normal-Pressure Hydrocephalus
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus is characterized by gait disturbance, urinary incontinence,
dementia, enlarged brain ventricles, and normal or slightly elevated CSF pressure.
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus is thought to result from a defect in CSF resorption in arachnoid
granulations. This disorder accounts for up to 6% of dementias.
Symptoms and Signs
Most commonly, the gait disturbance is nonspecific unsteadiness and impaired balance, although a
magnetic gait (the feet appear to stick to the floor) is considered the characteristic gait disturbance.
Dementia may not occur until late in the disorder. The most common early symptoms of dementia are
disturbances of executive function and attention; memory tends to become impaired later.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Neuroimaging
• Sometimes removal of CSF
The classic symptoms (gait disturbance, urinary incontinence, and dementia), even combined, are
nonspecific for normal-pressure hydrocephalus, particularly in the elderly. For example, some forms of
vascular dementia can cause dementia, gait disturbance, and, less commonly, urinary incontinence. Brain
imaging may show ventricular enlargement disproportionate to cortical atrophy; this finding is nonspecific
but may support the diagnosis of normal-pressure hydrocephalus.
Lumbar puncture with removal of 20 to 30 mL of CSF can be done as a diagnostic trial. Improvement in
gait, continence, and cognition after removal helps confirm the diagnosis, but improvement may not be
evident until several hours after removal.
Treatment
• Sometimes ventriculoperitoneal shunting
Ventriculoperitoneal shunting is useful for patients with acceptable surgical risks. Improvements after
lumbar puncture to remove CSF, done during diagnosis, may predict the response to shunting. In several
case series (but in no randomized trials), patients improved substantially, typically in gait, continence, and
daily functioning, after shunting; improvement in cognition was less common.
Behavioral and Psychologic Symptoms of Dementia
Disruptive actions are common among patients with dementia and are the primary reason for up to 50%
of nursing home admissions. Disruptive actions include wandering, restlessness, yelling, throwing, hitting,
refusing treatment, incessantly questioning, disrupting work of staff members, insomnia, and crying.
Behavioral and psychologic symptoms of dementia have not been well characterized, and their treatment
is poorly understood.
Deciding what actions constitute a behavioral symptom is highly subjective. Tolerability (what actions
caregivers can tolerate) depends partly on the patient's living arrangements, particularly safety. For
example, wandering may be tolerable if a patient lives in a safe environment (with locks and alarms on all
===PAGE:1864===
doors and gates); however, if the patient lives in a nursing home or hospital, wandering may be
intolerable because it disturbs other patients or interferes with the operation of the institution. Many
behaviors (eg, wandering, repeatedly questioning, being uncooperative) are better tolerated during the
day. Whether sundowning (exacerbation of disruptive behaviors at sundown or early evening) represents
decreased tolerance by caregivers or true diurnal variation is unknown. In nursing homes, 12 to 14% of
patients with dementia act disruptively more often during the evening than during the day.
Etiology
Behavioral and psychologic symptoms may result from functional changes related to dementia:
• Reduced inhibition of inappropriate behaviors (eg, patients may undress in public places)
• Misinterpretation of visual and auditory cues (eg, they may resist treatment, which they perceive as an
assault)
•
Impaired short-term memory (eg, they repeatedly ask for things already received)
• Reduced ability or inability to express needs (eg, they wander because they are lonely, frightened, or
looking for something or someone)
Patients with dementia often adapt poorly to the regimentation of institutional living. Mealtimes, bedtimes,
and toileting times are not individualized. For many elderly patients with dementia, behavioral and
psychologic symptoms develop or worsen after they are moved to a more restrictive environment.
Physical problems (eg, pain, shortness of breath, urinary retention, constipation, physical abuse) can
exacerbate behavioral and psychologic symptoms partly because patients may be unable to adequately
communicate. Physical problems can lead to delirium, and delirium superimposed on chronic dementia
may worsen the behavioral symptom.
Evaluation
• Characterization of behaviors (eg, by Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory)
• Recording of specific behaviors
• Evaluation for coexisting depression and psychosis
The best approach is to characterize and classify the behavior, rather than to label all such behaviors
agitation, a term with too many meanings to be useful. The Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory is
commonly used; it classifies behaviors as follows:
• Physically aggressive: For example, hitting, pushing, kicking, biting, scratching, or grabbing people or
things
• Physically nonaggressive: For example, handling things inappropriately, hiding things, dressing or
undressing inappropriately, pacing, repeating mannerisms or sentences, acting restless, or trying to go
elsewhere
• Verbally aggressive: For example, cursing, making strange noises, screaming, or having temper
outbursts
• Verbally nonaggressive: For example, complaining, whining, constantly requesting attention, not liking
anything, interrupting with relevant or irrelevant remarks, or being negative or bossy
Specific behaviors, precipitating events (eg, feeding, toileting, drug administration, visits), and time the
behavior started and resolved should be recorded; this information helps identify changes in pattern or
intensity of a behavior and makes planning a management strategy easier. If behavior changes, a
===PAGE:1865===
physical examination should be done to exclude physical disorders and physical abuse, but environmental
changes (eg, a different caregiver) should also be noted because they, rather than a patient-related
factor, may be the reason.
Depression, common among patients with dementia, may affect behavior and must be identified. It may
first manifest as an abrupt change in cognition, decreased appetite, deterioration in mood, a change in
sleep pattern (often hypersomnolence), withdrawal, decreased activity level, crying spells, talk of death
and dying, sudden development of irritability or psychosis, or other sudden changes in behavior. Often,
depression is suspected first by family members.
Psychotic behavior must also be identified because management differs. Presence of delusions or
hallucinations indicates psychosis. Delusions and hallucinations must be distinguished from
disorientation, fearfulness, and misunderstanding, which are common among patients with dementia.
Delusions without paranoia may be confused with disorientation, but delusions are usually fixed (eg, a
nursing home is repeatedly called a prison), and disorientation varies (eg, a nursing home is called a
prison, a restaurant, and a home). Hallucinations occur without external sensory stimuli; hallucinations
should be distinguished from illusions, which involve misinterpreting external sensory stimuli (eg, cellular
phones, pagers).
Treatment
• Environmental measures and caregiver support
• Drugs only when necessary
Management of behavioral and psychologic symptoms of dementia is controversial and has been
inadequately studied. Supportive measures are preferred; however, drugs are commonly used.
Environmental measures:
The environment should be safe and flexible enough to accommodate
behaviors that are not dangerous. Signs to help patients find their way and doors equipped with locks or
alarms can help ensure the safety of patients who wander. Flexible sleeping hours and organization of
beds can help patients with sleeping problems. Measures used to treat dementia generally also help
minimize behavioral symptoms:
• Providing cues about time and place
•
Explaining care before giving it
• Encouraging physical activity (
If an institution cannot provide an appropriate environment for a particular patient, transferring the patient
to one that can may be preferable to drug treatment.
Caregiver support:
Learning how dementia leads to behavioral and psychologic symptoms and how to
respond to disruptive behavior can help family members and other caregivers provide care for and cope
with the patient better.
Learning how to manage stress, which may be considerable, is essential. Stressed caregivers should be
referred to support services (eg, social workers, caregiver support groups, home health aides) and should
be told how to obtain respite care if such care is available.
Family members who are caregivers should be monitored for depression, which occurs in nearly half of
them. Depression in caregivers should be treated promptly.
Drugs:
Drugs that improve cognition may also help manage behavioral and psychologic symptoms in
patients with dementia. However, drugs directed primarily at behavior are used only when other
approaches are ineffective and when drugs are essential for safety. The need for continued treatment
should be reassessed at least every month. Drugs should be selected to target the most intolerable
===PAGE:1866===
behaviors. Antidepressants, preferably SSRIs, should be prescribed only for patients with signs of
depression.
Antipsychotics are often used even though their efficacy has been shown only in psychotic patients (see
p.
). Other patients are unlikely to benefit and likely to experience adverse effects, particularly
extrapyramidal symptoms. Tardive dyskinesia or tardive dystonia may develop; these conditions often do
not resolve when the dose is reduced or the drug is stopped.
Choice of antipsychotic depends on relative toxicity. Of conventional antipsychotics, haloperidol is
relatively nonsedating and has less potent anticholinergic effects but is most likely to cause
extrapyramidal symptoms; thioridazine and thiothixene are less likely to cause extrapyramidal symptoms
but are more sedating and have more anticholinergic effects than haloperidol. Second-generation
(atypical) antipsychotics (eg, aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone) are minimally
anticholinergic and cause fewer extrapyramidal symptoms than conventional antipsychotics; however,
these drugs, used for an extended period, may be associated with an increased risk of hyperglycemia
and all-cause mortality. Also, they may increase risk of stroke in elderly patients who have dementiarelated psychosis.
If antipsychotics are used, they should be given in a low dose (eg, olanzapine 2.5 to 15 mg po once/day;
risperidone 0.5 to 3 mg po q 12 h; haloperidol 0.5 to 1.0 mg po, IV, or IM) and for a short time.
Anticonvulsants, particularly valproate, may be useful in controlling impulsive behavioral outbursts.
Sedatives (eg, a short-acting benzodiazepine such as lorazepam 0.5 mg po q 12 h as needed) are
sometimes used in the short term to alleviate event-related anxiety, but such treatment is not
recommended for the long term.
===PAGE:1867===
Chapter 176. Seizure Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Febrile Seizures
on p.
,
Infantile Spasms
on p.
, and
Neonatal Seizure Disorders
on
p.
.)
A seizure is an abnormal, unregulated electrical discharge that occurs within the brain's cortical gray
matter and transiently interrupts normal brain function. A seizure typically causes altered awareness,
abnormal sensations, focal involuntary movements, or convulsions (widespread violent involuntary
contraction of voluntary muscles).
About 2% of adults have a seizure at some time during their life. Two thirds of these people never have
another one.
Definitions:
Terminology can be confusing.
Epilepsy
(also called epileptic seizure disorder) is a chronic brain disorder characterized by recurrent (≥
2), unprovoked seizures (ie, not related to reversible stressors). Epilepsy is often idiopathic, but various
brain disorders, such as malformations, strokes, and tumors, can cause symptomatic epilepsy.
Nonepileptic seizures
are provoked by a temporary disorder or stressor (eg, metabolic disorders, CNS
infections, cardiovascular disorders, drug toxicity or withdrawal).
[Table 176-1.
Causes of Seizures]
In children, fever can provoke a seizure (.
Symptomatic seizures
are due to a known cause (eg, brain tumor, stroke). Symptomatic seizures are
most common among neonates ( and the elderly.
Psychogenic seizures
(pseudoseizures) are symptoms that simulate seizures in patients with
psychiatric disorders but that do not involve an abnormal electrical discharge in the brain.
Etiology
Common causes of seizures (see
Table 176-1
) vary by age of onset:
•
Before age 2:
Developmental defects, birth injuries, and metabolic disorders
•
Ages 2 to 14:
Idiopathic seizure disorders
•
Adults:
Cerebral trauma, alcohol withdrawal, tumors, strokes, and unknown cause (in 50%)
•
The elderly:
Tumors and strokes
In reflex epilepsy, a rare disorder, seizures are triggered predictably by an external stimulus, such as
repetitive sounds, flashing lights, video games, or even touching certain parts of the body.
Classification
Seizures are classified as generalized or partial.
Generalized:
In generalized seizures, the aberrant electrical discharge diffusely involves the entire cortex
of both hemispheres
from the onset, and consciousness is usually lost. Generalized seizures result most
often from metabolic disorders and sometimes from genetic disorders. Generalized seizures include the
following:
===PAGE:1868===
• Infantile spasms
• Absence seizures
• Tonic-clonic seizures
• Atonic seizures
• Myoclonic seizures
Partial seizures:
In partial seizures, the excess neuronal discharge occurs in one cerebral cortex, and
most often results from structural abnormalities. Partial seizures may be
• Simple (no impairment of consciousness)
• Complex (reduced but not complete loss of consciousness)
Partial seizures may be followed by a generalized seizure (called secondary generalization), which
causes loss of consciousness. Secondary generalization occurs when a partial seizure spreads and
activates the entire cerebrum bilaterally. Activation may occur so rapidly that the initial partial seizure is
not clinically apparent or is very brief.
Symptoms and Signs
Seizures may be preceded by an aura. Auras may consist of sensory, autonomic, or psychic sensations
(eg, paresthesias, a rising epigastric sensation, abnormal smells, a sensation of fear, a deja vu
sensation).
Most seizures end spontaneously in 1 to 2 min. Generalized seizures are often followed by a postictal
state, characterized by deep sleep, headache, confusion, and muscle soreness; this state lasts from
minutes to hours. Sometimes the postictal state includes Todd's paralysis (a transient neurologic deficit,
usually weakness, of the limb contralateral to the seizure focus).
Most patients appear neurologically normal between seizures, although high doses of the drugs used to
treat seizure disorders, particularly anticonvulsants, can reduce alertness. Any progressive mental
deterioration is usually related to the neurologic disorder that caused the seizures rather than to the
seizures themselves. Rarely, seizures are unremitting.
Partial seizures:
There are several types of partial seizures.
Simple partial seizures
cause motor, sensory, or psychomotor symptoms without loss of consciousness.
Specific symptoms reflect the affected area of the brain (see
Table 176-2
). In jacksonian seizures, focal motor symptoms begin in one hand, then march up the arm.
Other focal seizures affect the face first, then spread to an arm and sometimes a leg. Some partial motor
seizures begin with an arm raising and the head turning toward the moving arm.
[Table 176-2.
Manifestations of Partial Seizures by Site]
Epilepsia partialis continua
, a rare disorder, causes focal motor seizures that usually involve the arm,
hand, or one side of the face; seizures recur every few seconds or minutes for days to years at a time. In
adults, the cause is usually a structural lesion (eg, stroke). In children, it is usually a focal cerebral cortical
inflammatory process (eg, Rasmussen encephalitis), possibly caused by a chronic viral infection or
autoimmune processes.
Complex partial seizures
are often preceded by an aura. During the seizure, patients may stare.
Consciousness is impaired, but patients have some awareness of the environment (eg, they purposefully
withdraw from noxious stimuli). The following may also occur:
===PAGE:1869===
• Oral automatisms (involuntary chewing or lip smacking)
•
Limb automatisms (eg, automatic purposeless movements of the hands)
• Utterance of unintelligible sounds without understanding what they say
• Resistance to assistance
• Tonic or dystonic posturing of the extremity contralateral to the seizure focus
• Head and eye deviation, usually in a direction contralateral to the seizure focus
• Bicycling or pedaling movements of the legs if the seizure emanates from the medial frontal or
orbitofrontal head regions
Motor symptoms subside after 1 to 2 min, but confusion and disorientation may continue for another 1 or
2 min. Postictal amnesia is common. Patients may lash out if restrained during the seizure or while
recovering consciousness if the seizure generalizes. However, unprovoked aggressive behavior is
unusual.
Left temporal lobe seizures may cause verbal memory abnormalities; right temporal lobe seizures may
cause visual spatial memory abnormalities.
Generalized seizures:
Consciousness is usually lost, and motor function is abnormal from the onset.
Infantile spasms
( are characterized by sudden flexion and adduction of the arms and
forward flexion of the trunk. Seizures last a few seconds and recur many times a day. They occur only in
the first 5 yr of life, then are replaced by other types of seizures. Developmental defects are usually
present.
Typical absence seizures
(formerly called petit mal seizures) consist of 10- to 30-sec loss of
consciousness with eyelid fluttering; axial muscle tone may or may not be lost. Patients do not fall or
convulse; they abruptly stop activity, then just as abruptly resume it, with no postictal symptoms or
knowledge that a seizure has occurred. Absence seizures are genetic and occur predominantly in
children. Without treatment, such seizures are likely to occur many times a day. Seizures often occur
when patients are sitting quietly, can be precipitated by hyperventilation, and rarely occur during exercise.
Neurologic and cognitive examination results are usually normal.
Atypical absence seizures
usually occur as part of the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, a severe form of
epilepsy that begins before age 4 yr. They differ from typical absence seizures as follows:
• They last longer.
• Jerking or automatic movements are more pronounced.
• Loss of awareness is less complete.
Many patients have a history of damage to the nervous system, developmental delay, abnormal
neurologic examination results, and other types of seizures. Atypical absence seizures usually continue
into adulthood.
Atonic seizures
occur most often in children, usually as part of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Atonic
seizures are characterized by brief, complete loss of muscle tone and consciousness. Children fall or
pitch to the ground, risking trauma, particularly head injury.
Tonic seizures
occur most often during sleep, usually in children. The cause is usually the LennoxGastaut syndrome. Tonic (sustained) contraction of axial muscles may begin abruptly or gradually, then
===PAGE:1870===
spread to the proximal muscles of the limbs. Tonic seizures usually last 10 to 15 sec. In longer tonic
seizures, a few, rapid clonic jerks may occur as the tonic phase ends.
Tonic-clonic seizures
may be primarily or secondarily generalized. Primarily generalized seizures
typically begin with an outcry; they continue with loss of consciousness and falling, followed by tonic
contraction, then clonic (rapidly alternating contraction and relaxation) motion of muscles of the
extremities, trunk, and head. Urinary and fecal incontinence, tongue biting, and frothing at the mouth
sometimes occur. Seizures usually last 1 to 2 min. There is no aura. Secondarily generalized tonic-clonic
seizures begin with a simple partial or complex partial seizure.
Myoclonic seizures
are brief, lightning-like jerks of a limb, several limbs, or the trunk. They may be
repetitive, leading to a tonic-clonic seizure. The jerks may be bilateral or unilateral. Unlike other seizures
with bilateral motor movements, consciousness is not lost unless the myoclonic seizure progresses into a
generalized tonic-clonic seizure.
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
is an epilepsy syndrome characterized by myoclonic, tonic-clonic, and
absence seizures. It typically appears during adolescence. Seizures begin with a few bilateral,
synchronous myoclonic jerks, followed in 90% by generalized tonic-clonic seizures. They often occur
when patients awaken in the morning, especially after sleep deprivation or alcohol use. Absence seizures
may occur in one third of patients.
Febrile seizures
occur, by definition, with fever and in the absence of intracranial infection; they are
considered a type of provoked seizure. They affect about 4% of children aged 3 mo to 5 yr (.
Benign febrile seizures are brief, solitary, and generalized tonic-clonic in appearance. Complicated febrile
seizures are focal, last > 15 min, or recur ≥ 2 times in < 24 h. Overall, 2% of patients with febrile seizures
develop a subsequent seizure disorder. However, incidence of seizure
disorders and risk of recurrent
febrile seizures are much greater among children with complicated febrile seizures, preexisting neurologic
abnormalities, onset before age 1 yr, or a family history of seizure disorders.
Status epilepticus:
Generalized convulsive status epilepticus involves at least one of the following:
• Tonic-clonic seizure activity lasting > 5 to 10 min
• ≥ 2 seizures between which patients do not fully regain consciousness
The previous definition of > 30-min duration was revised to encourage more prompt identification and
treatment. Untreated generalized seizures lasting > 60 min may result in permanent brain damage; longerlasting seizures may be fatal. Heart rate and temperature increase. Generalized convulsive status
epilepticus has many causes, including rapid withdrawal of anticonvulsants and head trauma.
Complex partial status epilepticus and absence status epilepticus often manifest as prolonged episodes
of mental status changes. EEG may be required for diagnosis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• For new-onset seizures, neuroimaging, laboratory testing, and usually EEG
• For known seizure disorder, usually anticonvulsant levels
• For new-onset or known seizure disorders, other testing as clinically indicated
Evaluation must determine whether the event was a seizure vs another cause of obtundation, a
pseudoseizure, or syncope), then identify possible causes or precipitants. Patients with new-onset
seizures are evaluated in an emergency department; they can sometimes be discharged after thorough
evaluation. Those with a known seizure disorder may be evaluated in a physician's office.
===PAGE:1871===
History:
Patients should be asked about unusual sensations, suggesting an aura and thus a seizure, and
about typical seizure manifestations. However, other conditions, such as suddenly decreased brain
circulation (eg, due to ventricular arrhythmia) can have similar manifestations, including loss of
consciousness and some myoclonic jerks.
History should include information about the first and any subsequent seizures (eg, duration, frequency,
sequential evolution, longest and shortest interval between seizures, aura, postictal state, precipitating
factors). All patients should be asked about risk factors for seizures:
• Prior head trauma or CNS infection
• Known neurologic disorders
• Drug use or withdrawal, particularly of recreational drugs
• Alcohol withdrawal
• Nonadherence to anticonvulsants
• Family history of seizures or neurologic disorders
Patients should also be asked about rare triggers (eg, repetitive sounds, flashing lights, video games,
touching certain parts of the body) and about sleep deprivation, which can lower the seizure threshold.
Physical examination:
A bitten tongue, incontinence (eg, urine or feces in clothing), or, in patients who
have lost consciousness, prolonged confusion suggest seizure.
In pseudoseizures, generalized muscular activity and lack of response to verbal stimuli may at first glance
suggest generalized tonic-clonic seizures. However, pseudoseizures can usually be distinguished from
true seizures by clinical characteristics:
• Pseudoseizures often last longer (several minutes or more).
• Postictal confusion tends to be absent.
• Typical tonic phase activity, followed by clonic phase, usually does not occur.
• The progression of muscular activity does not correspond to true seizure patterns (eg, jerks moving from
one side to the other and back [nonphysiologic progression], exaggerated pelvic thrusting).
• Intensity may wax and wane.
• Vital signs, including temperature, usually remain normal.
• Patients often actively resist passive eye opening.
Physical examination rarely indicates the cause when seizures are idiopathic but may provide clues when
seizures are symptomatic (see
Table 176-3
).
Testing:
Testing is done routinely, but normal results do not necessarily exclude a seizure disorder. Thus,
the diagnosis may ultimately be clinical. Testing depends on the status of seizures and results of the
neurologic examination.
If patients have a known seizure disorder and examination results are normal or unchanged, little testing
is required except for blood anticonvulsant levels, unless patients have symptoms or signs of a treatable
disorder such as trauma, infection, or a metabolic
===PAGE:1872===
[Table 176-3.
Clinical Clues to the Causes of Symptomatic Seizures]
disorder. If seizures are new-onset or if examination results are abnormal for the first time, neuroimaging
is required.
Head CT
is usually done immediately to exclude a mass or hemorrhage. Some experts say that CT can
be deferred and possibly avoided in children with typical febrile seizures whose neurologic status rapidly
returns to normal.
Follow-up MRI
is recommended when CT is negative. It provides better resolution of brain tumors and
abscesses and can detect cortical dysplasias, cerebral venous thrombosis, and herpes encephalitis. An
epilepsy-protocol MRI of the head uses high-resolution coronal T1 and T2 sequences, which can detect
hippocampal atrophy or sclerosis. MRI can detect some common causes of seizures, such as
malformations of cortical development in young children and mesial temporal sclerosis, traumatic gliosis,
and small tumors in adults.
EEG
is critical in the diagnosis of epileptic seizures, particularly of complex partial or absence status
epilepticus, when EEG may be the most definitive indication of a seizure. EEG may detect epileptiform
abnormalities (spikes, sharp waves, spike and slow-wave complexes, polyspike and slow-wave
complexes). Epileptiform abnormalities may be bilateral and generalized in patients with generalized
seizures and may be localized in patients with partial seizures. EEG findings may include the following:
• Epileptiform abnormalities in temporal lobe foci between seizures (interictal) in complex partial seizures
originating in the temporal lobe
• Interictal symmetric bursts of 4- to 7-Hz epileptiform activity in primarily generalized tonic-clonic seizures
• Focal epileptiform discharges in secondarily generalized seizures
• Spikes and slow-wave discharges at a rate of 3/sec in typical absence seizures
• Slow spike and wave discharges usually at a rate of < 2.5/sec in atypical absence seizures
• Bilateral polyspike and wave abnormality at a rate of 4- to 6-Hz in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
However, normal EEG cannot exclude the diagnosis of epileptic seizures, which must be made clinically.
EEG is less likely to detect abnormalities if seizures are infrequent. The initial EEG may detect an
epileptiform abnormality in only 30 to 55% of patients with a known epileptic seizure disorder. Serial EEG
may detect epileptiform abnormalities in up to 80 to 90% of such patients. In general, serial EEG with
extended recording times and with tests done during sleep deprivation greatly increases the chance of
detecting epileptiform abnormalities in patients with epileptic seizures. Inpatient combined video-EEG
monitoring, usually for 2 to 7 days, records EEG activity and clinical behavior simultaneously. It is the
most sensitive EEG testing available and is thus useful in differentiating epileptic from nonepileptic
seizures.
Testing is also done to check for other disorders:
• Laboratory tests (eg, plasma glucose, BUN, creatinine, Na, Ca, Mg, and P, liver function tests) are done
if a metabolic disorder is suspected.
• Head CT is done if meningitis or CNS infection is suspected; if results are normal, a lumbar puncture is
required.
• Drug screens may be done to check for unreported use of recreational drugs, although this
practice is
controversial because positive results do not indicate causality and test results can be inaccurate.
If seizures are refractory and surgical resection is being considered, advanced imaging tests may be done
in epilepsy centers. Functional MRI can identify functioning cortex and guide surgical resection. If EEG
===PAGE:1873===
and MRI do not clearly identify the epileptic focus, magnetoencephalography (MEG) with EEG (called
magnetic source imaging, or MSI) may localize the lesion, avoiding the need for invasive intraoperative
mapping procedures. Single-photon emission CT (SPECT) during the peri-ictal period may detect
increased perfusion in the seizure focus and help localize the area to be surgically removed. Because
injection of contrast is required at the time of seizure, patients must be admitted for continuous EEGvideo monitoring when SPECT is done during the peri-ictal period.
Neuropsychologic testing
may help identify functional deficits before and after surgery and help predict
social and psychologic prognosis and capacity for rehabilitation.
Prognosis
With treatment, seizures are eliminated in one third of patients with epileptic seizures, and frequency of
seizures is reduced by > 50% in another third. About 60% of patients whose seizures are well-controlled
by drugs can eventually stop the drugs and remain seizure-free.
Sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is a rare complication of unknown cause.
Treatment
• Elimination of the cause if possible
• Avoidance of or precautions during situations when loss of consciousness could be life threatening
• Drugs to control seizures
• Surgery if ≥ 2 drugs do not control seizures
Optimal treatment is to eliminate the causes whenever possible. If the cause cannot be corrected or
identified, anticonvulsants are often required, particularly after a 2nd seizure; usefulness of
anticonvulsants after a single seizure is controversial, and risks and benefits should be discussed with the
patient. Because the risk of a subsequent seizure is low, drugs may be withheld until a 2nd seizure
occurs, particularly in children. In children, certain anticonvulsants cause important behavior and learning
problems.
During a generalized tonic-clonic seizure, injury should be prevented by loosening clothing around the
neck and placing a pillow under the head. Attempting to protect the tongue is futile and likely to damage
the patient's teeth or the rescuer's fingers. Patients should be rolled onto their left side to prevent
aspiration. These measures should be taught to the patient's family members and coworkers.
Because partial seizures can become generalized, patients are at risk of losing consciousness and thus
should be advised to take certain precautions. Until seizures are controlled, patients should refrain from
activities in which loss of consciousness could be life threatening (eg, driving, swimming, climbing,
operating power tools, bathing in a bathtub). After seizures are completely controlled (typically for > 6 mo),
many such activities can be resumed if appropriate safeguards (eg, lifeguards) are used, and patients
should be encouraged to lead a normal life, including exercise and social activities. In a few states,
physicians must report patients with seizures to the Department of Motor Vehicles. However, most states
allow automobile driving after patients have been seizure-free for 6 mo to 1 yr.
Patients should be advised to avoid cocaine and some other illicit drugs (eg, phencyclidine,
amphetamines), which can trigger seizures, and to avoid alcohol. Some drugs (eg, haloperidol,
phenothiazines) may lower seizure threshold and should be avoided if possible.
Family members must be taught a commonsense approach toward the patient. Overprotection should be
replaced with sympathetic support that lessens negative feelings (eg, of inferiority or self-consciousness);
invalidism should be prevented. Institutional care is rarely advisable and should be reserved for severely
cognitively impaired patients and for patients with seizures so frequent and violent despite drug treatment
that they cannot be cared for elsewhere.
===PAGE:1874===
Acute seizures and status epilepticus:
Most seizures remit spontaneously in several minutes or less
and do not require emergency drug treatment. Status epilepticus and most seizures lasting > 5 min
require drugs to terminate the seizures, with monitoring of respiratory status. Endotracheal intubation is
necessary if there is any indication of airway compromise. IV access should be quickly obtained, and
lorazepam 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg IV is given at a rate of 2 mg/min. Larger doses are sometimes required.
However, if seizures continue after about 8 mg is given, fosphenytoin 15 to 20 PE (phenytoin
equivalents)/kg IV is given at a rate of 100 to 150 PE/min;
phenytoin 15 to 20 mg/kg IV at a rate of 50
mg/min is a 2nd choice. Additional seizures require an additional 5 to 10 PE/kg of fosphenytoin or 5 to 10
mg/kg of phenytoin. If IV access cannot be obtained, options include IM fosphenytoin and sublingual or
rectal benzodiazepines.
Seizures that persist after use of lorazepam and phenytoin define refractory status epilepticus.
Recommendations for a 3rd anticonvulsant vary and include phenobarbital, propofol, midazolam, and
valproate. Phenobarbital 15 to 20 mg/kg IV at 100 mg/min (3 mg/kg/min in children) is given; continued
seizures require another 5 to 10 mg/kg. A loading dose of valproate 10 to 15 mg/kg IV is an alternative. At
this point, if status epilepticus has not abated, intubation and general anesthesia are necessary. The
optimal anesthetic to use is controversial, but many physicians use propofol 15 to 20 mg/kg at 100 mg/min
or pentobarbital 5 to 8 mg/kg (loading dose) followed by infusion of 2 to 4 mg/kg/h until EEG
manifestations of seizure activity have been suppressed. Inhalational anesthetics are rarely used. After
initial treatment, the cause of status epilepticus must be identified and treated.
Posttraumatic seizures:
Drugs are given to prevent seizures if head injury causes significant structural
injury (eg, large contusions or hematomas, brain laceration, depressed skull fracture) or a Glasgow Coma
Scale (GCS) score of < 10. These drugs reduce risk of seizures during the first week after injury but do
not prevent permanent posttraumatic epilepsy months or years later. They should be stopped after 1 wk
unless seizures occur. If seizures begin > 1 wk after head injury, long-term treatment with drugs is
required.
Principles of long-term treatment:
No single drug controls all types of seizures, and different patients
require different drugs. Some patients require multiple drugs. Some general principles apply:
• A single drug, usually the 1st or 2nd one tried, controls epileptic seizures in about 60% of patients.
• If seizures are difficult to control from the outset (in 30 to 40% of patients), ≥ 2 drugs may eventually be
required.
• If seizures are intractable (refractory to an adequate trial of ≥ 2 drugs), patients should be referred to an
epilepsy center to determine whether they are candidates for surgery.
Some drugs (eg, phenytoin, valproate), given IV or orally, reach the targeted therapeutic range very
rapidly. Others (eg, lamotrigine, topiramate) must be started at a relatively low dose and gradually
increased over several weeks to the standard therapeutic dose, based on the patient's lean body mass.
Dose should be tailored to the patient's tolerance of the drug. Some patients have symptoms of drug
toxicity when blood drug levels are low; others tolerate high levels without symptoms. If seizures continue,
the daily dose is increased by small increments. The appropriate dose of any drug is the lowest dose that
stops all seizures and has the fewest adverse effects, regardless of blood drug level. Blood drug levels
are only guidelines. Once drug response is known, following the clinical course is more useful than
measuring blood levels.
If toxicity develops before seizures are controlled, the dose is reduced to the pretoxicity dose. Then,
another drug is added at a low dose, which is gradually increased until seizures are controlled. Patients
should be closely monitored because the 2 drugs can interact, interfering with either drug's rate of
metabolic degradation. The initial, ineffective drug is then slowly tapered and eventually withdrawn
completely. Use of multiple drugs should be avoided if possible because incidence of adverse effects,
poor adherence, and drug interactions increases significantly. Adding a 2nd drug helps about 10% of
patients, but incidence of adverse effects more than doubles. The blood level of anticonvulsants is
altered by many other drugs, and vice versa. Physicians should be aware of all potential drug-drug
===PAGE:1875===
interactions before prescribing a new drug.
Once seizures are controlled, the drug should be continued without interruption until patients have been
seizure-free for at least 2 yr. At that time, stopping the drug may be considered. Most of these drugs can
be tapered by 10% every 2 wk. Relapse is more likely in patients who have had any of the following:
• A seizure disorder since childhood
• Need for > 1 drug to be seizure-free
• Previous seizures while taking an anticonvulsant
• Partial or myoclonic seizures
• Underlying static encephalopathy
• Abnormal EEG results within the last year
Of patients who relapse, about 60% do so within 1 yr, and 80% within 2 yr. Patients who have a relapse
when they are not taking anticonvulsants should be treated indefinitely.
Drug choice for long-term treatment:
The drugs preferred vary according to type of seizure (see
Table 176-4
). For more detailed drug-specific information, see
Table 176-5
.
For partial seizures and generalized tonic-clonic seizures, the newer anticonvulsants
[Table 176-4.
Choice of Drugs for Seizures]
[Table 176-5.
Drugs Used in Seizure Disorders
a]
(eg, clonazepam, felbamate, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, pregabalin, tiagabine, topiramate,
zosinamide) are no more effective than the established drugs. However, the newer drugs tend to have
fewer adverse effects and to be better tolerated.
Infantile spasms, atonic seizures, and myoclonic seizures are difficult to treat. Valproate is preferred,
followed by clonazepam. For infantile spasms, corticosteroids for 8 to 10 wk are often effective. The
optimal regimen is controversial. ACTH 20 to 60 units IM once/day may be used. A ketogenic diet (a very
high fat diet that induces ketosis) may help but is difficult to maintain.
For juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, life-long treatment is usually recommended. Carbamazepine,
oxcarbazepine, or gabapentin can exacerbate the seizures.
For febrile seizures, drugs are not recommended unless children have a subsequent seizure in the
absence of febrile illness. Previously, many physicians gave phenobarbital or other anticonvulsants to
children with complicated febrile seizures to prevent nonfebrile seizures from developing, but this
treatment does not appear effective, and long-term use of phenobarbital reduces learning capacity.
For seizures due to alcohol withdrawal, drugs are not recommended. Instead, treating the withdrawal
syndrome tends to prevent seizures. Treatment usually includes a benzodiazepine.
Adverse drug effects:
All anticonvulsants may cause an allergic scarlatiniform or morbilliform rash, and
none is completely safe during pregnancy (.
For patients taking carbamazepine, CBC should be monitored routinely for the first year of therapy.
Decreases in WBC count and dose-dependent neutropenia (neutrophil count < 1000/
μ
L) are common.
Sometimes, if no other drug can be readily substituted, decreasing the dose can manage these effects.
However, if the WBC count decreases rapidly, the drug should be stopped.
===PAGE:1876===
Patients taking valproate should have liver function tests every 3 mo for 1 yr; if serum transaminases or
ammonia levels increase significantly (> 2 times the upper limit of normal), the drug should be stopped. An
increase in ammonia up to 1.5 times the upper limit of normal can be tolerated safely.
Carbamazepine, phenytoin, and valproate are pregnancy category D drugs (ie, teratogenicity occurs in
animal and human pregnancies). Risk of neural tube defects is somewhat greater with valproate than
other commonly used anticonvulsants. The newer drugs are category C (ie, teratogenicity occurs in
animals, but human risk is unknown).
Fetal antiepileptic drug syndrome (cleft lip, cleft palate, cardiac defects, microcephaly, growth retardation,
developmental delay, abnormal facies, limb or digit hypoplasia) occurs in 4% of children of women who
take anticonvulsants during pregnancy. Yet, because uncontrolled generalized seizures during pregnancy
can lead to fetal injury and death, continued treatment with drugs is generally advisable (.
The risk should be put in perspective: Alcohol is more toxic to the developing fetus than any
anticonvulsant. Taking folate supplements before conception helps reduce risk of neural tube defects and
should be recommended to all women who are of childbearing age and who take anticonvulsants.
Surgery:
About 10 to 20% of patients have intractable seizures refractory to medical treatment and are
potential surgical candidates. If seizures originate from a focal, resectable area in the brain, resection of
the epileptic focus usually improves seizure control markedly. If the focus is in the anteromesial temporal
lobe, resection eliminates seizures in about 60% of patients. After surgical resection, some patients
remain seizure-free without taking anticonvulsants, but many still require the drugs, but in reduced doses
and possibly as monotherapy. Because surgery requires extensive testing and monitoring, these patients
are best treated in specialized epilepsy centers.
Vagus nerve stimulation:
Intermittent electrical stimulation of the left vagus nerve with an implanted
pacemaker-like device (vagus nerve stimulator) is used as an adjunct to drug therapy in patients who
have intractable seizures and are not candidates for epilepsy surgery. This procedure reduces the
number of partial seizures by ≥ 50% in about 40%. After the device is programmed, patients can activate
it with a magnet to abort an imminent seizure. Adverse effects include deepening of the voice during
stimulation, cough, and hoarseness. Complications are minimal. Duration of effectiveness is unclear.
===PAGE:1877===
Chapter 177. Sleep and Wakefulness Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Sleep Apnea
on p.
; for sleep problems in children, see p.
.)
Almost half of all people in the US report sleep-related problems. Disordered sleep can cause emotional
disturbance, memory difficulty, poor motor skills, decreased work efficiency, and increased risk of traffic
accidents. It can even contribute to cardiovascular disorders and mortality.
Approach to the Patient With a Sleep or Wakefulness Disorder
The most commonly reported sleep-related symptoms are insomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness
(EDS).
•
Insomnia
is difficulty falling or staying asleep or a sensation of unrefreshing sleep.
•
EDS
is the tendency to fall asleep during normal waking hours.
Insomnia and EDS are not disorders themselves but are symptoms of various sleep-related disorders.
Parasomnias are abnormal sleep-related events.
Pathophysiology
There are 2 states of sleep, each marked by characteristic physiologic changes:
•
Nonrapid eye movement (NREM):
NREM sleep constitutes about 75 to 80% of total sleep time in
adults. It consists of 4 stages in increasing depth of sleep. Slow, rolling eye movements, which
characterize quiet wakefulness and early stage 1 sleep, disappear in deeper sleep stages. Muscle
activity decreases as well. Stages 3 and 4 are referred to as deep sleep because arousal threshold is
high; people may perceive these stages as high-quality sleep.
•
Rapid eye movement (REM):
REM sleep follows each cycle of NREM sleep. It is characterized by
low-voltage fast activity on the EEG and postural muscle atonia. Respiration rate and depth fluctuate
dramatically. Most dreams occur during REM sleep.
Progression through the stages, typically followed by a brief interval of REM sleep, occurs cyclically 5 to
6 times a night (see
Fig. 177-1
).
Individual sleep requirements vary widely, ranging from 6 to 10 h/24 h. Infants sleep a large part of the
day; with aging, total sleep time and deep sleep tend to decrease, and sleep becomes more interrupted.
In the elderly, stages 3 and 4 may disappear. These changes may account for increasing EDS and fatigue
with aging, but their clinical significance is unclear.
Etiology
Some disorders can cause either insomnia or EDS (sometimes both), and some cause one or the other
(see
Table 177-1
).
Insomnia is most often caused by
• Inadequate sleep hygiene
• Psychiatric disorders, particularly mood, anxiety, and substance use disorders
• Miscellaneous medical disorders such as cardiopulmonary disorders, musculoskeletal conditions, and
===PAGE:1878===
chronoic pain
• Adjustment sleep disorder and psychophysiologic insomnia
EDS is most often caused by
• Insufficient sleep syndrome
• Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
• Miscellaneous medical, neurologic, and psychiatric conditions
• Circadian rhythm disorders such as jet lag and shift work sleep disorders
Inadequate sleep hygiene
refers to behaviors that are not conducive to sleep. They include
consumption of caffeine or sympathomimetic or other stimulant drugs (typically near bedtime, but even in
the afternoon for people who are particularly sensitive), exercise or excitement (eg, a thrilling TV show)
late in the evening, and an irregular sleep-wake schedule. Patients who compensate for lost sleep by
sleeping late or by napping further fragment their nocturnal sleep.
Adjustment insomnia
results from acute emotional stressors (eg, job loss, hospitalization) that disrupt
sleep.
Psychophysiologic insomnia
is insomnia (regardless of cause) that persists well beyond resolution of
precipitating factors, usually because patients feel anticipatory anxiety about the prospect of another
sleepless night followed by another day of fatigue. Typically, patients spend hours in bed focusing on and
brooding about their sleeplessness, and they have greater difficulty falling asleep in their own bedroom
than falling asleep away from home.
[Fig. 177-1.
Typical sleep pattern in young adults.]
Physical disorders
that cause pain or discomfort (eg, arthritis, cancer, herniated disks), particularly
those that worsen with movement, can cause transient awakenings and poor sleep quality. Nocturnal
seizures can also interfere with sleep.
Most
major mental disorders
are associated with EDS and insomnia. About 80% of patients with major
depression report EDS and insomnia; conversely, 40% of chronic insomniacs have a major mental
disorder, most commonly a mood disorder.
Insufficient sleep syndrome
involves not sleeping enough at night despite adequate opportunity to do
so, typically because of various social or employment commitments.
Drug-related sleep disorders
result from chronic use of or withdrawal from various drugs (see
Table 177-2
).
Circadian rhythm disorders
result in misalignment between endogenous sleep-wake rhythms and
environmental light-darkness cycle. The cause may be external (eg, jet lag, shift work) or internal (eg,
delayed or advanced sleep phase syndrome).
Central sleep apnea
consists of repeated episodes of breathing cessation or shallow breathing during
sleep, lasting at least 10 sec, caused by diminished respiratory effort. The disorder typically manifests as
insomnia or as disturbed and unrefreshing sleep.
Obstructive sleep apnea
consists of episodes of partial or complete closure of the upper airway during
sleep, leading to cessation of breathing for > 10 sec. Sometimes patients awaken, gasping. These
episodes disrupt sleep and result in a feeling of unrefreshing sleep and EDS.
Narcolepsy
is characterized by chronic EDS, often with cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic or
===PAGE:1879===
hypnopompic hallucinations. Cataplexy is momentary muscular weakness or paralysis without loss of
consciousness that is evoked by sudden emotional reactions (eg, mirth, anger, fear, joy, surprise).
Weakness may be confined to the limbs (eg, patients may drop the rod when a fish strikes their line) or
may cause a limp fall during hearty laughter (as in "weak with laughter") or sudden anger. Sleep paralysis
is momentary inability to move when just falling asleep or immediately after awakening. Hypnagogic and
hypnopompic phenomena are vivid auditory or visual illusions or hallucinations that occur when just falling
asleep (hypnagogic) or, less often, immediately after awakening (hypnopompic).
Periodic limb movement disorder
(PLMD) is characterized by repetitive (usually every 20 to 40 sec)
twitching or kicking of the lower extremities during sleep. Patients usually complain of interrupted
nocturnal sleep or EDS. They are typically unaware of the movements
[Table 177-1.
Some Causes of Insomnia and Excessive Daytime Sleepiness]
and brief arousals that follow and have no abnormal sensations in the extremities.
Restless legs syndrome
is characterized by an irresistible urge to move the legs and, less frequently,
the arms, usually accompanied by paresthesias (eg, creeping or crawling sensations) in the limbs when
reclining. To relieve symptoms, patients move the affected extremity by stretching, kicking, or walking. As
a result, they have difficulty falling asleep, repeated nocturnal awakenings, or both.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should include duration and age at onset of symptoms and any
events (eg, a life or work change, new drug, new medical disorder) that coincided with onset. Symptoms
during sleeping and waking hours should be noted. The quality and quantity of sleep are identified by
determining bedtime, latency of sleep (time from bedtime to falling asleep), number and time of
awakenings, final morning awakening and arising times, and frequency and duration of naps. Having
patients keep a sleep log for several weeks is more accurate than questioning them. Bedtime events (eg,
food or alcohol consumption, physical or mental activity) should be evaluated. Intake of and withdrawal
from drugs, alcohol, caffeine, and nicotine as well as level and timing of physical activity should also be
included.
If EDS is the problem, severity should be quantified based on the propensity for falling asleep in different
situations (eg, resting comfortably vs when driving a car). The Epworth Sleepiness Scale (see
Table 177-3
) may be used; a cumulative score ≥ 10 represents abnormal daytime sleepiness.
Review of systems
should check for symptoms of specific sleep disorders, including snoring,
interrupted breathing patterns, other nocturnal respiratory disturbances (sleep apnea syndromes);
depression, anxiety, mania, and hypomania (mental sleep disorders); restlessness in the legs, an
irresistible desire to move them, and jerking leg movements (restless
[Table 177-2.
Some Drugs that Interfere with Sleep]
[Table 177-3.
Epworth Sleepiness Scale]
legs syndrome); and cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic phenomena (narcolepsy). Bed partners
or other family members can best identify some of these symptoms.
Past medical history
should check for known disorders that can interfere with sleep, including COPD,
asthma, heart failure, hyperthyroidism, gastroesophageal reflux, neurologic disorders (particularly
movement and degenerative disorders), and painful disorders (eg, RA). Risk factors for obstructive sleep
apnea include obesity, heart disorders, hypertension, stroke, smoking, snoring, and nasal trauma. Drug
history should include questions about use of any drugs associated with sleep disturbance (see
Table
177-2
).
Physical examination:
The physical examination is useful mainly for identifying signs associated with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Signs include obesity with fat distributed around the neck or midriff;
===PAGE:1880===
large neck circumference (≥ 43.2 cm in males, ≥ 40.6 cm in females); mandibular hypoplasia and
retrognathia; nasal obstruction; enlarged tonsils, tongue, uvula, or soft palate; decreased pharyngeal
patency; increased obstruction of uvula and soft palate by the tongue; and redundant pharyngeal
mucosa. The chest should be examined for expiratory wheezes and kyphoscoliosis. Signs of right
ventricular failure should be noted. A thorough neurologic examination should be done.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Falling asleep while driving or other potentially dangerous situations
• Repeated sleep attacks (falling asleep without warning)
• Breathing interruptions or awakening with gasping reported by bed partner
• Unstable cardiac or pulmonary status
• Recent stroke
• Status cataplecticus (continuous cataplexy attacks)
• History of violent behaviors or injury to self or others during asleep
• Frequent sleepwalking or other out-of-bed behavior
Interpretation of findings:
Inadequate sleep hygiene and situational stressors are usually apparent in
the history. EDS that disappears when sleep time is increased (eg, on weekends or vacations) suggests
inadequate sleep syndrome. EDS that occurs without insomnia and is accompanied by cataplexy,
hypnagogic/hypnopompic hallucinations, or sleep paralysis suggests narcolepsy.
Difficulty falling asleep (initial insomnia) should be distinguished from difficulty maintaining sleep (sleep
maintenance insomnia). Initial insomnia suggests delayed sleep phase syndrome, chronic
psychophysiologic insomnia, or childhood phobias. Sleep maintenance insomnia suggests advanced
sleep phase syndrome, major depression, central or obstructive sleep apnea, periodic limb movement
disorder, or aging. In patients with significant snoring, frequent awakenings, and other risk factors,
obstructive sleep apnea is quite likely.
Testing:
Tests are usually done when the clinical diagnosis is in doubt or when response to initial
presumptive treatment is inadequate. Patients with obvious problems (eg, poor sleep habits, transient
stress, shift work) do not require testing.
Polysomnography
is particularly useful when obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, narcolepsy, nocturnal
seizures, or periodic limb movement disorder is suspected. It also helps clinicians evaluate violent and
potentially injurious sleep-related behaviors. It monitors brain activity (via EEG), eye movements, heart
rate, respirations, O
saturation, and muscle tone and activity during sleep. Video recording may be used
to identify abnormal movements during sleep. Polysomnography is typically done in a sleep laboratory;
equipment for home use has been devised but is not widely used.
The
multiple sleep latency test
assesses speed of sleep onset in 5 daytime nap opportunities 2 h
apart during the patient's typical daytime. Patients lie in a darkened room and
are asked to sleep. Onset
and stage of sleep (including REM) are monitored by polysomnography. This test's main use is in the
diagnosis of narcolepsy.
For the
maintenance of wakefulness test
, patients are asked to stay awake in a quiet room. This test
is probably a more accurate measure of ability to remain awake in everyday situations.
Patients with EDS may require laboratory tests of renal, liver, and thyroid function.
Treatment
===PAGE:1881===
Specific conditions are treated. Good sleep hygiene (see
Table 177-4
) is important whatever the cause and is often the only treatment patients with mild problems
need.
Hypnotics:
General guidelines for use of hypnotics (see
Table 177-5
) aim at minimizing abuse, misuse, and addiction.
For commonly used hypnotics, see
Table 177-6
. All hypnotics except ramelteon act at the benzodiazepine recognition site on the
γ
-
aminobutyric (GABA) receptor and augment the inhibitory effects of GABA. The drugs differ primarily in
elimination half-life and onset of action. Drugs with a short half-life are used for sleep-onset insomnia.
Drugs with a longer half-life are useful for both sleep-onset and sleep-maintenance insomnia; they have
greater potential for daytime carryover effects, especially after prolonged use or in the elderly. Patients
who experience daytime sedation, incoordination, or other daytime
[Table 177-4.
Sleep Hygiene]
[Table 177-5.
Guidelines for the Use of Hypnotics]
effects should avoid activities requiring alertness (eg, driving), and the dose should be reduced, the drug
stopped, or, if needed, another drug used. Other adverse effects include amnesia, hallucinations,
incoordination, and falls.
Hypnotics should be used cautiously in patients with pulmonary insufficiency. In the elderly, any hypnotic,
even in small doses, can cause restlessness, excitement, or exacerbation of delirium and dementia.
Rarely, hypnotics can cause complex sleep-related behaviors, such as sleepwalking and even sleep
driving; use of higher-than-recommended doses and concurrent consumption of alcoholic beverages may
increase risk of such behaviors. Rarely, severe allergic reactions occur.
Prolonged use is discouraged because tolerance can develop ( and because abrupt
discontinuation can cause rebound insomnia or even anxiety, tremor, and seizures. These effects are
more common with benzodiazepines (particularly triazolam) and less common with the
nonbenzodiazepines. Difficulties can be minimized by using the lowest effective dose for brief periods and
by tapering the dose before stopping the drug (see also p.
).
Other sedatives:
Many drugs not specifically indicated for insomnia are used to induce and maintain
sleep.
Many patients use alcohol to help them sleep, but alcohol is a poor choice because after prolonged use
and at higher doses, it produces unrefreshing, disturbed sleep with frequent nocturnal awakenings, often
increasing daytime sleepiness. Alcohol can further impair respiration during sleep in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
OTC antihistamines (eg, doxylamine, diphenhydramine) can induce sleep. However, efficacy is
unpredictable, and these drugs have adverse effects such as daytime sedation, confusion, and systemic
anticholinergic effects, which are particularly worrisome in the elderly.
Low doses of some antidepressants at bedtime may improve sleep, eg, doxepin 25 to 50 mg, paroxetine 5
to 20 mg, trazodone 50 mg, trimipramine 75 to 200 mg. However, antidepressants should be used in
these low doses mainly when standard hypnotics are not tolerated (rare) or in higher (antidepressant)
doses when depression is present.
Melatonin is a hormone that is secreted by the pineal gland (and that occurs naturally in some foods).
Darkness stimulates secretion, and light inhibits it. By binding with melatonin receptors in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, melatonin mediates circadian rhythm, especially during physiologic sleep onset.
Oral melatonin (typically 0.5 to 5 mg at bedtime) may be effective for sleep problems due to delayed sleep
phase syndrome. It must be taken at the appropriate time (when endogenous melatonin is normally
===PAGE:1882===
secreted, in early evening for most people); taken at the wrong time, it can aggravate sleep problems. Its
efficacy is largely unproved, and its safety is in question because it appears to stimulate coronary artery
changes in animals. Available preparations of melatonin are unregulated, so content and purity cannot be
ensured, and the effects of long-term use are unknown. Its use should be supervised by a physician.
Key Points
• Poor sleep hygiene and situational disruptors (eg, shift work, emotional stressors) cause many cases of
insomnia.
• Medical conditions (eg, sleep apnea syndromes, pain disorders) and psychiatric conditions (eg, mood
disorders) must be considered.
• Sleep studies (eg, polysomnography) are usually done when sleep apnea syndrome, periodic limb
movements, or other sleep disorders are suspected; the clinical diagnosis
[Table 177-6.
Oral Hypnotics in Common Use]
is in doubt; or when response to initial presumptive treatment is inadequate.
• Hypnotics and sedatives should be used with caution in the elderly.
• Good sleep hygiene may be the only treatment needed by patients with mild insomnia problems.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders
Circadian rhythm sleep disorders are caused by desynchronization between internal sleepwake rhythms and the light-darkness cycle. Patients typically have insomnia, excessive
daytime sleepiness, or both, which typically resolve as the body clock realigns itself. Diagnosis
is clinical. Treatment depends on the cause.
In circadian rhythm disorders, endogenous sleep-wake rhythms (body clock) and the external lightdarkness cycle become misaligned (desynchronized). The cause may be internal (eg, delayed or
advanced sleep phase syndrome) or external (eg, jet lag, shift work).
If the cause is external, the timing of other circadian body rhythms, including temperature and hormone
secretion, is altered; in addition to insomnia and sleepiness, these alterations may cause nausea,
malaise, irritability, and depression. Risk of cardiovascular disorders may also be increased.
Repetitive circadian shifts (eg, due to frequent long-distance travel or rotating shift work) are particularly
difficult to adapt to, especially when the shifts change in a counterclockwise direction. Counterclockwise
shifts are those that shift awakening and sleeping times earlier
(eg, when flying eastward or when rotating
shifts from days to nights to evenings). Symptoms resolve over several days or, in some patients (eg, the
elderly), over a few weeks or months, as rhythms readjust. Because light is the strongest synchronizer of
circadian rhythms, exposure to bright light (sunlight or artificial light of 5,000 to 10,000 lux intensity) after
desired awakening time speeds readjustment. Melatonin given in the evening may be tried (.
Patients with circadian rhythm disorders often misuse alcohol, hypnotics, and stimulants.
Circadian rhythm disorders include the following.
Circadian rhythm sleep disorder, jet lag type (jeg lag disorder):
This syndrome is caused by rapid
travel across > 2 time zones. Eastward travel (advancing the sleep cycle) causes more severe symptoms
than westward travel (delaying sleep).
If possible, travelers should gradually shift their sleep-wake schedule before travel to approximate that of
their destination and maximize exposure to daylight (particularly in the morning) in the new locale. Shortacting hypnotics or wake-promoting drugs (eg, modafinil) may be used for brief periods after arrival.
===PAGE:1883===
Circadian rhythm sleep disorder, shift work type (shift work disorder):
Severity of symptoms is
proportional to the frequency of shift changes, the magnitude of each change, and the frequency of
counterclockwise (sleep advancing) changes. Fixed-shift work (ie, fulltime night or evening) is preferable;
rotating shifts should go clockwise (ie, day to evening to night). However, even fixed-shift workers have
difficulties because daytime noise and light interfere with sleep quality, and workers often shorten sleep
times to participate in social or family events.
Shift workers should maximize their exposure to bright light (sunlight or, for night workers, especially
constructed bright artificial lightboxes) at times when they should be awake and ensure that the bedroom
is as dark and quiet as possible during sleep. Sleep masks and white-noise devices are helpful. When
symptoms persist and interfere with functioning, judicious use of hypnotics with a short half-life and wakepromoting drugs is appropriate.
Circadian rhythm sleep disorder, altered sleep phase types:
In these syndromes, patients have
normal sleep quality and duration with a 24-h circadian rhythm cycle, but the cycle is out of synch with
desired or necessary wake times. Less commonly, the cycle is not 24 h, and patients awaken and sleep
earlier or later each day. If able to follow their natural cycle, patients have no symptoms.
• Delayed sleep phase syndrome: Patients consistently go to sleep and awaken late (eg, 3 AM and 10
AM). This pattern is more common during adolescence. If required to awaken earlier for work or school,
excessive daytime sleepiness results; patients often present because school performance is poor or
they miss morning classes. They can be distinguished from people who stay up late by choice because
they cannot fall asleep earlier even if they try. Mild phase delay (< 3 h) is treated by progressive earlier
arising plus morning bright light therapy, perhaps with melatonin 1 h before the desired bedtime. An
alternative method is to progressively delay bedtime and awakening time by 3 h/day until the correct
sleep and awake times are reached.
• Advanced sleep phase syndrome: This syndrome (early to bed and early to rise) is more common
among the elderly and responds to treatment with bright light in the evening and light-preventing
goggles in the morning.
• Non-24-h sleep-wake syndrome: Much less common, this syndrome is characterized by a free-running
sleep-wake rhythm. The sleep-wake cycle commonly remains constant in length but is > 24 h, resulting
in a delay of sleep and wake times by 1 to 2 h each day. This disorder is more common among blind
people.
Insomnia and Excessive Daytime Sleepiness
Many sleep disorders manifest with insomnia and usually excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS). Sleep
disorders may be caused by factors inside the body (intrinsic) or outside the body (extrinsic).
Inadequate sleep hygiene:
Sleep is impaired by certain behaviors. They include consumption of
caffeine or sympathomimetic or other stimulant drugs (typically near bedtime, but even in the afternoon for
people who are particularly sensitive), exercise or excitement (eg, a thrilling TV show) late in the evening,
and an irregular sleep-wake schedule. Patients who compensate for lost sleep by sleeping late or by
napping further fragment nocturnal sleep.
Insomniacs should adhere to a regular awakening time and avoid naps regardless of the amount of
nocturnal sleep.
Adequate sleep hygiene can improve sleep (see
Table 177-4
).
Adjustment insomnia:
Acute emotional stressors (eg, job loss, hospitalization) can
cause insomnia.
Symptoms typically remit shortly after the stressors abate; insomnia is usually transient and brief.
Nevertheless, if daytime sleepiness and fatigue develop, especially if they interfere with daytime
functioning, short-term treatment with hypnotics is warranted. Persistent anxiety may require specific
treatment.
===PAGE:1884===
Psychophysiologic insomnia:
Insomnia, regardless of cause, may persist well beyond resolution of
precipitating factors, usually because patients feel anticipatory anxiety about the prospect of another
sleepless night followed by another day of fatigue. Typically, patients spend hours in bed focusing on and
brooding about their sleeplessness, and they have greater difficulty falling asleep in their own bedroom
than falling asleep away from home.
Optimal treatment combines cognitive-behavioral strategies and hypnotics. Although cognitive-behavioral
strategies are more difficult to implement and take longer, effects are longer lasting, up to 2 yr after
treatment is ended. These strategies include sleep hygiene (particularly restriction of time in bed),
education, relaxation training, stimulus control, and cognitive therapy.
Hypnotics are suitable for patients who need rapid relief and whose insomnia has had daytime effects,
such as EDS and fatigue. These drugs must not be used indefinitely in most cases.
Physical sleep disorders:
Physical disorders may interfere with sleep and cause insomnia and EDS.
Disorders that cause pain or discomfort (eg, arthritis, cancer, herniated disks), particularly those that
worsen with movement, cause transient awakenings and poor sleep quality. Nocturnal seizures can also
interfere with sleep.
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder and symptom relief (eg, with bedtime analgesics).
Mental sleep disorders:
Most major mental disorders can cause insomnia and EDS. About 80% of
patients with major depression report these symptoms. Conversely, 40% of chronic insomniacs have a
major mental disorder, most commonly a mood disorder.
Patients with depression may have initial sleeplessness or sleep maintenance insomnia. Sometimes in
the depressed phase of bipolar disorder and in seasonal affective disorder, sleep is uninterrupted, but
patients complain of unrelenting daytime fatigue.
If depression is accompanied by sleeplessness, antidepressants that provide more sedation (eg,
amitriptyline, doxepin, mirtazapine, paroxetine, trazodone) may be chosen. These drugs are used at
regular, not low, doses to ensure correction of the depression. These drugs may cause EDS and other
adverse effects, such as weight gain. Alternatively, any antidepressant may be used with a hypnotic.
If depression is accompanied by EDS, antidepressants with activating qualities (eg, bupropion,
venlafaxine, certain SSRIs such as fluoxetine and sertraline) may be chosen.
Insufficient sleep syndrome (sleep deprivation):
Patients with this syndrome do not sleep enough at
night, despite adequate opportunity to do so, to stay alert when awake. The cause is usually various
social or employment commitments. This syndrome is probably the most common cause of EDS, which
disappears when sleep time is increased (eg, on weekends or vacations).
Drug-related sleep disorders:
Drug-related sleep disorders: Insomnia and EDS can result from chronic
use of CNS stimulants (eg, amphetamines, caffeine), hypnotics (eg, benzodiazepines), other sedatives,
antimetabolite chemotherapy, anticonvulsants (eg, phenytoin), oral contraceptives, methyldopa,
propranolol, alcohol, and thyroid hormone preparations (see
Table 177-2
). Commonly prescribed
hypnotics can cause irritability and apathy and reduce mental alertness. Many psychoactive drugs can
induce abnormal movements during sleep.
Insomnia can develop during withdrawal of CNS depressants (eg, barbiturates, opioids, sedatives),
tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, or illicit drugs (eg, cocaine, heroin, marijuana,
phencyclidine). Abrupt withdrawal of hypnotics or sedatives can cause nervousness, tremors, and
seizures.
Narcolepsy
Narcolepsy is characterized by chronic excessive daytime sleepiness, often with sudden loss
===PAGE:1885===
of muscle tone (cataplexy). Other symptoms include sleep paralysis and hypnagogic and
hypnopompic hallucinations. Diagnosis is by polysomnography and multiple sleep latency
testing. Treatment is with modafinil, various stimulants, or Na oxybate for excessive daytime
sleepiness and certain antidepressants for associated symptoms.
The cause is unknown. In Europe, Japan, and the US, incidence is 0.2 to 1.6/1000. Narcolepsy is equally
common in both sexes.
Narcolepsy is strongly associated with specific HLA haplotypes, and children of patients with narcolepsy
have a 40-fold increased risk,
suggesting a genetic cause. However, concordance in twins is low (25%),
suggesting a prominent role for environmental factors, which often trigger the disorder. The neuropeptide
hypocretin-1 is deficient in CSF of narcoleptic animals and most human patients, suggesting that the
cause may be HLA-associated autoimmune destruction of hypocretin-containing neurons in the lateral
hypothalamus.
Narcolepsy features dysregulation of the timing and control of REM sleep. Therefore, REM sleep intrudes
into wakefulness and into the transition from wakefulness to sleep. Many symptoms of narcolepsy result
from postural muscle paralysis and vivid dreaming, which characterize REM.
Symptoms and Signs
The main symptoms are excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS), cataplexy, hypnagogic and hypnopompic
hallucinations, and sleep paralysis; about 10% of patients have all 4. Nocturnal sleep is often also
disturbed and some patients develop hypersomnia (prolonged sleep times). Symptoms usually begin in
adolescents or young adults without prior illness, although onset can be precipitated by an illness, a
stressor, or a period of sleep deprivation. Once established, narcolepsy persists throughout life; life span
is unaffected.
EDS:
EDS can occur anytime. Sleep episodes vary from few to many per day, and each may last minutes
or hours. Patients can resist the desire to sleep only temporarily but can be roused as readily as from
normal sleep. Sleep tends to occur during monotonous conditions (eg, reading, watching television,
attending meetings) but may also occur during complex tasks (eg, driving, speaking, writing, eating).
Patients may also experience sleep attacks—episodes of sleep that strike without warning. Patients may
feel refreshed when they awaken yet fall asleep again in a few minutes. Nighttime sleep may be
unsatisfying and interrupted by vivid, frightening dreams. Consequences include low productivity,
breaches in interpersonal relationships, poor concentration, low motivation, depression, a dramatic
reduction in quality of life, and potential for physical injury (particularly due to motor vehicle collisions).
Cataplexy:
Momentary muscular weakness or paralysis occurs without loss of consciousness; it is
evoked by sudden emotional reactions, such as mirth, anger, fear, joy, or, often, surprise. Weakness may
be confined to the limbs (eg, patients may drop the rod when a fish strikes their line) or may cause a limp
fall during hearty laughter (as in "weak with laughter") or sudden anger. These attacks resemble the loss
of muscle tone that occurs during REM sleep. Cataplexy occurs in about three fourth of patients.
Sleep paralysis:
Patients are momentarily unable to move as they are just falling asleep or immediately
after they awaken. These occasional episodes may be very frightening. They resemble the motor
inhibition that accompanies REM sleep. Sleep paralysis occurs in about one fourth of patients but also in
some healthy children and, less commonly, in healthy adults.
Hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucinations:
Particularly vivid auditory or visual illusions or
hallucinations may occur when just falling asleep (hypnagogic) or, less often, immediately after awakening
(hypnopompic). They are difficult to distinguish from intense reverie and are somewhat similar to vivid
dreams, which are normal in REM sleep. Hypnagogic hallucinations occur in about one third of patients,
are common among healthy young children, and occasionally occur in healthy adults.
Diagnosis
• Polysomnography
===PAGE:1886===
• Multiple sleep latency testing
A delay of 10 yr from onset to diagnosis is common. A history of cataplexy strongly suggests narcolepsy
in patients with EDS. Nocturnal polysomnography, followed by multiple sleep latency testing, is
diagnostic. Findings include the following:
• REM episodes during at least 2 of 5 daytime nap opportunities
• Average sleep latency (time to fall asleep) of ≤ 8 min, observed after a minimum of 6 h of nocturnal
sleep
• No other diagnostic abnormalities on nocturnal polysomnography
The maintenance of wakefulness test does not help with diagnosis but does help monitor treatment
efficacy.
Other disorders that can cause chronic EDS are usually suggested by the history and physical
examination; brain imaging and blood and urine tests can confirm the diagnosis. These disorders include
space-occupying lesions affecting the hypothalamus or upper brain stem, increased intracranial pressure,
and certain forms of encephalitis. Hypothyroidism, hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, anemia, uremia,
hypercapnia, hypercalcemia, hepatic failure, and seizure disorders can also cause EDS with or without
hypersomnia. Acute,
relatively brief EDS and hypersomnia commonly accompany acute systemic
disorders such as influenza.
The Kleine-Levin syndrome, a very rare disorder in adolescent boys, causes episodic hypersomnia and
hyperphagia. Etiology is unclear but may be an autoimmune response to an infection.
Treatment
• Modafinil
• Sometimes amphetamine derivatives or Na oxybate
• Certain REM-suppressant antidepressants
Some patients who have occasional episodes of sleep paralysis or hypnagogic and hypnopompic
hallucinations, infrequent and partial cataplexy, and mild EDS need no treatment. For others, stimulant
drugs and anticataplectic drugs are used. Patients should also get enough sleep at night and take brief
naps (< 30 min) at the same time every day (typically afternoon).
Patients with mild to moderate EDS benefit from modafinil, a long-acting wake-promoting drug. Its
mechanism of action is unclear. Typically, modafinil 100 to 200 mg po is given in the morning. Dose is
increased to 400 mg as needed, but some patients require considerably more. If effects do not last into
the evening, a small 2nd dose (eg, 100 mg) at noon or 1 PM may be used, although this dose sometimes
interferes with nocturnal sleep. Adverse effects include nausea and headache, which are mitigated by
lower initial doses and slower titration. Modafinil can lower the effectiveness of oral contraceptives. It has
abuse potential, although this is low.
Patients who do not respond to modafinil are usually given amphetamine derivatives instead of or with
modafinil. Methylphenidate 5 mg po bid to 20 mg po tid is especially useful for immediate management
because modafinil's onset is delayed. Methamphetamine 5 to 20 mg po bid or dextroamphetamine 5 mg
po bid to 20 mg po tid may be used; all are available in long-acting preparations and therefore can be
dosed once/day in many patients. They can also be used on an as needed basis for patients already
taking modafinil because onset is rapid and duration is relatively short. Adverse effects include agitation,
hypertension, tachycardia, and mood changes (eg, manic reactions); abuse potential is high.
Pemoline, although less addictive than amphetamines, is not recommended because it may be
===PAGE:1887===
hepatotoxic and liver enzymes must be monitored every 2 wk.
Na oxybate can also be used to treat EDS and cataplexy. A dose of 2.25 g po is taken at bedtime while in
bed, followed by the same dose 2.5 to 4 h later. The maximum dose is 9 g/night. Adverse effects include
headache, nausea, dizziness, nasopharyngitis, somnolence, vomiting, urinary incontinence, and
sometimes sleepwalking. Na oxybate is a schedule III drug and has potential for abuse and dependence.
It is contraindicated in patients with succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency and should not be
used in patients with respiratory disorders.
Tricyclic antidepressants (particularly clomipramine, imipramine, and protriptyline) and monoamine
oxidase inhibitors are useful in treating cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic and hypnopompic
hallucinations. Clomipramine 25 to 150 mg po once/day in the morning seems to be the most potent
anticataplectic but should be taken only during the day to reduce nocturnal arousal. SSRIs can also be
used.
Idiopathic Hypersomnia
Idiopathic hypersomnia is EDS with or without long sleep time; it is differentiated from
narcolepsy by lack of cataplexy, hypnagogic hallucinations, and sleep paralysis.
Idiopathic hypersomnia is not well characterized. Cause is presumed to be CNS dysfunction.
In idiopathic hypersomnia with long sleep time, the history or sleep logs reveal noctural sleep > 10 h; in
idiopathic hypersomnia without long sleep time it is > 6 h but < 10 h. In both cases, polysomnography
shows no evidence of other sleep abnormalities. Multiple sleep latency testing shows short sleep
latencies (< 8 min) with fewer than 2 REM periods.
Treatment is similar to that of narcolepsy, except that anticataplectic drugs are unnecessary.
Parasomnias
Parasomnias are undesirable behaviors that occur during entry into sleep, during sleep, or
during arousal from sleep. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment may include drugs and
psychotherapy.
For many of these disorders, history and physical examination can confirm the diagnosis.
Somnambulism:
Sitting, walking, or other complex behavior occurs during sleep, usually with the eyes
open but without evidence of recognition. Somnambulism is most common
during late childhood and
adolescence and occurs after and during arousal from nonrapid eye movement (NREM) stage 3 or 4
sleep. Prior sleep deprivation and poor sleep hygiene increase the likelihood of these episodes, and risk
is higher for 1st-degree relatives of patients with the disorder. Patients may mumble repetitiously, and
some injure themselves on obstacles or stairs. There is no accompanying dream. Usually, patients do not
remember the episode.
Treatment is directed at protecting patients from injury. It includes using electronic alarms to awaken
patients when they leave the bed, using a low bed, and removing obstacles from the bedroom.
Benzodiazepines, particularly clonazepam 0.5 to 2 mg po, at bedtime may help.
Sleep (night) terrors:
During the night, patients have episodes of fear, screaming, and flailing, often with
sleepwalking. Patients are difficult to awaken. Sleep terrors are more common among children and occur
after arousal from NREM stages 3 or 4 sleep; thus, they do not represent nightmares. In adults, sleep
terrors can be associated with mental difficulties or alcoholism. If daily activities are affected (eg, if school
work deteriorates), intermediate- or long-acting oral benzodiazepines (eg, clonazepam 1 to 2 mg,
diazepam 2 to 5 mg) at bedtime may help.
Nightmares:
Children are more likely to have nightmares than adults. Nightmares occur during REM
sleep, more commonly when fever is present or after alcohol has been ingested. Treatment is directed at
===PAGE:1888===
any underlying mental distress.
REM sleep behavior disorder:
Verbalization (sometimes profane) and often violent movements (eg,
waving the arms, punching, kicking) occur during REM sleep. These behaviors may represent acting out
dreams by patients who, for unknown reasons, do not have the atonia normally present during REM
sleep.
This disorder is more common among the elderly, particularly those with CNS degenerative disorders (eg,
Parkinson's or Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, olivopontocerebellar degeneration, multiple
system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy). It can also occur in patients who have narcolepsy and
with use of norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (eg, atomoxetine, reboxetine, venlafaxine). Cause is
usually unknown.
Diagnosis may be suspected based on symptoms reported by patients or the bed partner.
Polysomnography can usually confirm the diagnosis. It may detect excessive motor activity during REM;
audiovisual monitoring may document abnormal body movements and vocalizations. A neurologic
examination is done to rule out neurodegenerative disorders. If an abnormality is detected, CT or MRI
may be done.
Treatment is with clonazepam 0.5 to 2 mg po at bedtime. Most patients need to take the drug indefinitely
to prevent recurrences; potential for tolerance or abuse is low. Bed partners should be warned about the
possibility of harm and may wish to sleep in another bed until symptoms resolve. Sharp objects should be
removed from the bedside.
Sleep-related leg cramps:
Muscles of the calf or foot muscles often cramp during sleep in otherwise healthy middle-aged and elderly
patients. Diagnosis is based on the history and lack of physical signs or disability.
Prevention includes stretching the affected muscles for several minutes before sleep. Stretching as soon
as cramps occur relieves symptoms promptly and is preferable to drug treatment. Numerous drugs (eg,
quinine, Ca and Mg supplements, diphenhydramine, benzodiazepines, mexiletine) have been used; none
is likely to be effective, and adverse effects may be significant (particularly with quinine and mexiletine).
Avoiding caffeine and other sympathetic stimulants may help.
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder and Restless Legs Syndrome
Periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD) and restless legs syndrome (RLS) are characterized
by abnormal motions of and sometimes sensations in the lower or upper extremities, which
may interfere with sleep.
PLMD and RLS are more common during middle and older age; > 80% of patients with RLS also have
PLMD.
The mechanism is unclear but may involve abnormalities in dopamine neurotransmission in the CNS. The
disorders can occur in isolation or during drug withdrawal, with use of stimulants or certain
antidepressants, during pregnancy, or in patients with chronic renal or hepatic failure, iron deficiency,
anemia, and other disorders. In primary RLS, heredity may be involved; more than one third of patients
with primary RLS have a family history of it. Risk factors may include a sedentary lifestyle, smoking, and
obesity.
Symptoms and Signs
PLMD is characterized by repetitive (usually every 20 to 40 sec) twitching or kicking of the
lower or upper
extremities during sleep. Patients usually complain of interrupted nocturnal sleep or excessive daytime
sleepiness. They are typically unaware of the movements and brief arousals that follow and have no
abnormal sensations in the extremities.
===PAGE:1889===
RLS is a sensorimotor disorder characterized by an irresistible urge to move the legs, usually
accompanied by paresthesias (eg, creeping or crawling sensations) and sometimes pain in the upper or
lower extremities, which are more prominent when patients are inactive or recline, and peak in severity
around bedtime. To relieve symptoms, patients move the affected extremity by stretching, kicking, or
walking. As a result, they have difficulty falling asleep, repeated nocturnal awakenings, or both.
Diagnosis
• For RLS, history alone
• For PLMD, history and polysomnography
Diagnosis may be suggested by the patient's or bed partner's history. Polysomnography is necessary to
confirm the diagnosis of PLMD, which is usually apparent as repetitive bursts of electromyographic
activity. Polysomnography may be also done after RLS is diagnosed to determine whether patients also
have PLMD, but polysomnography is not necessary for diagnosis of RLS itself.
Patients with either disorder should be evaluated medically for disorders that can contribute (eg, with
blood tests for anemia and iron deficiency and with hepatic and renal function tests).
Treatment
• Pramipexole or ropinirole
Numerous drugs (eg, dopaminergic drugs, benzodiazepines, anticonvulsants, vitamins and minerals) are
used; only dopaminergic drugs are specific for RLS.
Dopaminergic drugs, although often effective, may have adverse effects such as augmentation
(symptoms are felt earlier in the day), rebound (symptoms worsen after stopping the drug or after effects
of the drug dissipate), nausea, orthostatic hypotension, and insomnia. Two D
and D
dopamine
agonists, pramipexole and ropinirole, are effective and have few serious adverse effects. Pramipexole
0.125 mg po is given 2 h before onset of severe symptoms and increased, as needed, by 0.125 mg po q
2 nights until symptoms are relieved (maximum dose 0.5 mg). Ropinirole 0.25 mg po is given 1 to 3 h
before symptoms occur and is increased, as needed, by 0.25 mg nightly (maximum dose 4 mg).
Benzodiazepines may improve sleep continuity but do not reduce limb movements; they should be used
cautiously to avoid tolerance and daytime sleepiness. Gabapentin beginning with 300 mg at bedtime can
help when RLS is accompanied by pain. Dose is increased by 300 mg weekly (maximum dose 2700 mg).
Opioids may also work but are used as a last resort because of tolerance, adverse effects, and abuse
potential. Ferritin levels should be obtained and, if low (< 50
μ
g/L), supplementation with ferrous sulfate
325 mg with 100 to 200 mg of vitamin C at bedtime is warranted. Patients should exercise good sleep
hygiene.
===PAGE:1890===
Chapter 178. Headache
Approach to the Patient With Headache
Headache is pain in any part of the head, including the scalp, face (including the orbitotemporal area),
and interior of the head. Headache is one of the most common reasons patients seek medical attention.
Pathophysiology
Headache is due to activation of pain-sensitive structures in or around the brain, skull, face, sinuses, or
teeth.
Etiology
Headache may occur as a primary disorder or be secondary to another disorder. Primary headache
disorders include migraine, cluster headache (including chronic paroxysmal hemicrania and hemicrania
continua), and tension-type headache. Secondary headache has numerous causes (see
Table 178-1
).
Overall, the most common causes of headache are
• Tension-type headache
• Migraine
Some causes of headache are common; others are important to recognize because they are
[Table 178-1.
Disorders Causing Secondary Headache]
dangerous, require specific treatment, or both (see
Table 178-2
).
Evaluation
Evaluation focuses on determining whether a secondary cause is present. If no cause is identified, it
focuses on diagnosing primary headache disorders.
History: History of present illness
includes questions about headache location, duration, severity,
onset (eg, sudden, gradual), and quality (eg, throbbing, constant, intermittent, pressure-like).
Exacerbating and remitting factors (eg, head position, time of day, sleep, light, sounds, physical activity,
odors, chewing) are noted. If the patient has had previous or recurrent headaches, the previous diagnosis
(if any) needs to be identified, and whether the current headache is similar or different needs to be
determined. For recurrent headaches, age at onset, frequency of episodes, temporal pattern (including
any relationship to phase of menstrual cycle), and response to treatments (including OTC treatments) are
noted.
[Table 178-2.
Some Characteristics of Headache Disorders by Cause]
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting a cause, including
• Vomiting: Migraine, increased intracranial pressure
• Fever: Infection (eg, encephalitis, meningitis, sinusitis)
• Red eye and/or visual symptoms (halos, blurring): Acute angle-closure glaucoma
• Visual field deficits, diplopia, or blurring vision: Ocular migraine, brain mass lesion, idiopathic intracranial
hypertension
===PAGE:1891===
• Lacrimation and facial flushing: Cluster headache
• Rhinorrhea: Sinusitis
• Pulsatile tinnitus: Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
• Preceding aura: Migraine
• Focal neurologic deficit: Encephalitis, meningitis, intracerebral hemorrhage, subdural hematoma, tumor
or other mass lesion
• Seizures: Encephalitis, tumor or other mass lesion
• Syncope at headache onset: Subarachnoid hemorrhage
• Myalgias and/or vision changes (in people > 55 yr): Giant cell arteritis
Past medical history
should identify risk factors for headache, including exposure to drugs, substances
(particularly caffeine), and toxins (see
Table 178-1
), recent lumbar puncture, immunosuppressive
disorders or IV drug use (risk of infection); hypertension (risk of brain hemorrhage); cancer (risk of brain
metastases); and dementia, trauma, coagulopathy, or use of anticoagulants or ethanol (risk of subdural
hematoma).
Family and social history should include any family history of headaches, particularly because migraine
headache may be undiagnosed in family members.
Physical examination:
Vital signs, including temperature, are measured. General appearance (eg,
whether restless or calm in a dark room) is noted. A general examination, with a focus on the head and
neck, and a full neurologic examination are done.
The scalp is examined for areas of swelling and tenderness. The ipsilateral temporal artery is palpated,
and both temporomandibular joints are palpated for tenderness and crepitance while the patient opens
and closes the jaw.
The eyes and periorbital area are inspected for lacrimation, flushing, and conjunctival injection. Pupillary
size and light responses, extraocular movements, and visual fields are assessed. The fundi are checked
for spontaneous venous pulsations and papilledema. If patients have vision-related symptoms or eye
abnormalities, visual acuity is measured. If the conjunctiva is red, the anterior chamber and cornea are
examined with a slit lamp if possible, and intraocular pressure is measured.
The nares are inspected for purulence. The oropharynx is inspected for swellings, and the teeth are
percussed for tenderness.
Neck is flexed to detect discomfort, stiffness, or both, indicating meningismus. The cervical spine is
palpated for tenderness.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Neurologic symptoms or signs (eg, altered mental status, weakness, diplopia, papilledema, focal
neurologic deficits)
• Immunosuppression or cancer
• Meningismus
• Onset of headache after age 50
===PAGE:1892===
• Thunderclap headache (severe headache that peaks within a few seconds)
• Symptoms of giant cell arteritis (eg, visual disturbances, jaw claudication, fever, weight loss, temporal
artery tenderness, proximal myalgias)
• Systemic symptoms (eg, fever, weight loss)
• Progressively worsening headache
• Red eye and halos around lights
Interpretation of findings:
If similar headaches recur in patients who appear well and have a normal
examination, the cause is rarely ominous. Headaches that have recurred since childhood or young
adulthood suggest a primary headache disorder. If headache type or pattern clearly changes in patients
with a known primary headache disorder, secondary headache should be considered.
Most single symptoms of primary headache disorders other than aura are nonspecific. A combination of
symptoms and signs is more characteristic (see
Table 178-2
).
Red flag findings suggest a cause (see
Table 178-3
).
Testing:
Most patients can be diagnosed without testing. However, some serious disorders may require
urgent or immediate testing. Some patients require tests as soon as possible. CT (or MRI) should be
done in patients with any of the following findings:
• Thunderclap headache
• Altered mental status
• Meningismus
• Papilledema
• Signs of sepsis (eg, rash, shock)
• Acute focal neurologic deficit
• Severe hypertension (eg, systolic > 220 mm Hg or diastolic > 120 mm Hg on consecutive readings)
In addition, if meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or encephalitis is being considered,
[Table 178-3.
Matching Red Flag Findings with a Cause for Headache]
lumbar puncture and CSF analysis should be done, if not contraindicated by imaging results.
Tonometry should be done if findings suggest acute narrow-angle glaucoma (eg, visual halos, nausea,
corneal edema, shallow anterior chamber).
Other testing should be done within hours or days, depending on the acuity and seriousness of findings
and suspected causes.
Neuroimaging, usually MRI, should be done if patients have any of the following:
• Focal neurologic deficit of subacute or uncertain onset
• Age > 50 yr
===PAGE:1893===
• Weight loss
• Cancer
• HIV infection or AIDS
• Change in an established headache pattern
• Diplopia
ESR should be done if patients have visual symptoms, jaw or tongue claudication, temporal artery signs,
or other findings suggesting giant cell arteritis.
CT of the paranasal sinuses is done to rule out complicated sinusitis if patients have a moderately severe
systemic illness (eg, high fever, dehydration, prostration, tachycardia) and findings suggesting sinusitis
(eg, frontal, positional headache, epistaxis, purulent rhinorrhea).
Lumbar puncture and CSF analysis are done if headache is progressive and findings suggest idiopathic
intracranial hypertension (eg, transient obscuration of vision, diplopia, pulsatile intracranial tinnitus) or
chronic meningitis (eg, lethargy, vomiting, focal neurologic deficits).
Treatment
Treatment of headache is directed at the cause.
Geriatrics Essentials
New-onset headache after age 50 should be considered a secondary disorder until proven otherwise.
Key Points
• Recurrent headaches that began at a young age in patients with a normal examination are usually
benign.
• Immediate neuroimaging is recommended for patients with altered mental status, seizures, papilledema,
focal neurologic deficits, or thunderclap headache.
• CSF analysis is required for patients with meningismus and usually, after neuroimaging, for
immunosuppressed patients.
• Patients with thunderclap headache require CSF analysis even if CT and examination findings are
normal.
Cluster Headache
Cluster headaches cause excruciating, unilateral periorbital or temporal pain, with ipsilateral
autonomic symptoms (ptosis, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, nasal congestion). Diagnosis is clinical.
Acute treatment is with parenteral triptans, dihydroergotamine, or O
. Prevention is with
verapamil, lithium, topiramate, divalproex, or a combination.
Cluster headache affects primarily men, typically beginning at age 20 to 40; prevalence in the US is 0.4%.
Usually, cluster headache is episodic; for 1 to 3 mo, patients experience ≥ 1 attack/day, followed by
remission for months to years. Some patients have cluster headaches without remission.
Pathophysiology is unknown, but the periodicity suggests hypothalamic dysfunction. Alcohol intake
triggers cluster headache during the attack period but not during remission.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1894===
Symptoms are distinctive. Attacks usually occur at the same time each day, often awakening patients from
sleep. Pain is always unilateral in an orbitotemporal distribution. It is excruciating, peaking within minutes;
it usually subsides spontaneously within 30 min to 1 h. Patients are agitated, restlessly pacing the floor,
unlike migraine patients who prefer to lie quietly in a darkened room.
Autonomic features, including nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, lacrimation, facial flushing, and Horner's
syndrome, are prominent and usually occur on the same side as the headache.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on the distinctive symptom pattern and exclusion of intracranial abnormalities.
Other unilateral primary headache syndromes with autonomic symptoms should be excluded:
• Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania: Attacks are more frequent (> 5/day) and much briefer (usually just
minutes) than in cluster headache.
• Hemicrania continua: Moderately severe continuous unilateral head pain occurs with superimposed brief
episodes of more intense pain.
These 2 painful disorders, unlike cluster headache (and migraine), respond dramatically to indomethacin,
but not to other NSAIDs.
Treatment
• For aborting attacks, parenteral triptans, dihydroergotamine, or 100% O
• For long-term prophylaxis, verapamil, lithium, topiramate, divalproex, or a combination
Acute attacks of cluster headache can be aborted with either parenteral triptans or dihydroergotamine
alone (see
Table 178-4
) and/or 100% O
inhalation given by nonrebreathing face mask.
All patients require preventive drugs because cluster headache is frequent, severe, and incapacitating.
Prednisone (eg, 60 mg po once/day) or a greater occipital nerve block (with a local anesthetic and a
corticosteroid) can provide prompt temporary prevention while preventive drugs with slower onset of
action (eg, verapamil, lithium, topiramate, divalproex) are initiated.
Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension
(Benign Intracranial Hypertension; Pseudotumor Cerebri)
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension causes increased intracranial pressure without a mass
lesion or hydrocephalus, probably by obstructing venous drainage; CSF composition is normal.
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension typically occurs in women of childbearing age. Incidence is 1/100,000
in normal-weight women but 20/100,000 in obese women. Intracranial pressure is elevated (> 250 mm
H
O); the cause is unknown but probably involves obstruction of cerebral venous outflow.
Symptoms and Signs
Almost all patients have a daily or near daily generalized headache of fluctuating intensity, at times with
nausea. They may also have transient obscuration of vision, diplopia (due to 6th cranial nerve
dysfunction), and pulsatile intracranial tinnitus. Vision loss begins peripherally and may not be noticed by
===PAGE:1895===
patients until late in the course. Permanent vision loss is the most serious consequence.
Bilateral papilledema is common; a few patients have unilateral or no papilledema. In some asymptomatic
patients, papilledema is discovered during routine ophthalmoscopic examination. Neurologic examination
may detect partial 6th cranial nerve palsy but is otherwise unremarkable.
[Table 178-4.
Drugs for Migraine and Cluster Headaches*]
Diagnosis
• MRI with magnetic resonance venography
• Lumbar puncture
Diagnosis is suspected clinically and established by brain imaging (preferably MRI with magnetic
resonance venography) that shows normal results, followed by lumbar puncture showing elevated
opening pressure and normal CSF composition. Use of certain drugs and certain disorders can produce a
clinical picture resembling idiopathic intracranial hypertension (see
Table 178-5
).
Treatment
• Acetazolamide
• Often weight loss
• NSAIDs or drugs used for migraines
Treatment is aimed at reducing pressure and relieving symptoms. Acetazolamide 250 mg po qid is used
as a diuretic. Obese patients are encouraged to lose weight, which may help reduce intracranial
pressure. Serial lumbar punctures are controversial but are sometimes used. Any potential causes
(disorders or drugs) are corrected or eliminated if possible. NSAIDs or drugs used for migraine may
relieve headache.
[Table 178-5.
Conditions Associated with Papilledema and Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension]
If vision deteriorates despite treatment, optic nerve sheath fenestration, shunting (lumboperitoneal or
ventriculoperitoneal), or endovascular venous stenting may be indicated. Bariatric surgery with sustained
weight loss may cure the disorder in obese patients who were otherwise unable to lose weight.
Frequent ophthalmologic assessment (including quantitative visual fields) is required to monitor response
to treatment; testing visual acuity is not sensitive enough to warn of impending vision loss.
Migraine
Migraine is an episodic primary headache disorder. Symptoms typically last 4 to 72 h and may
be severe. Pain is often unilateral, throbbing, worse with exertion, and accompanied by
symptoms such as nausea and sensitivity to light, sound, or odors. Auras occur in about 25% of
patients, usually just before but sometimes after the headache. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment
is with triptans, dihydroergotamine, antiemetics, and analgesics. Preventive regimens include
lifestyle modifications (eg, of sleeping habits or diet) and drugs (eg,
β
-blockers, amitriptyline,
topiramate, divalproex).
Epidemiology
Migraine is the most common cause of recurrent moderate to severe headache; 1-year prevalence is 18%
for women and 6% for men in the US. Migraine most commonly begins during puberty or young
adulthood, waxing and waning in frequency and severity over the ensuing years; it often diminishes after
===PAGE:1896===
age 50. Studies show familial aggregation of migraine.
Pathophysiology
Migraine is thought to be a neurovascular pain syndrome with altered central neuronal processing
(activation of brain stem nuclei, cortical hyperexcitability, and spreading cortical depression) and
involvement of the trigeminovascular system (triggering neuropeptide release, which causes painful
inflammation in cranial vessels and the dura mater).
Many potential migraine triggers have been identified; they include the following:
• Drinking red wine
• Skipping meals
• Excessive afferent stimuli (eg, flashing lights, strong odors)
• Weather changes
• Sleep deprivation
• Stress
• Hormonal factors
Head trauma, neck pain, or temporomandibular joint dysfunction sometimes triggers or exacerbates
migraine.
Fluctuating estrogen levels are a potent migraine trigger. Many women have onset of migraine at
menarche, severe attacks during menstruation (menstrual migraine), and worsening during menopause.
For most women, migraines remit during pregnancy (but sometimes they worsen during the 1st or 2nd
trimester). Oral contraceptives and other hormone therapy occasionally trigger or worsen migraine and
have been associated with stroke in women who have migraine with aura.
A rare subtype of migraine called familial hemiplegic migraine is associated with genetic defects on
chromosomes 1, 2, and 19. The role of genes in the more common forms of migraine is under study.
Symptoms and Signs
Often, attacks are heralded by a prodrome (a sensation that a migraine is beginning), which may include
mood changes, loss of appetite, nausea, or a combination.
An aura precedes attacks in about 25% of patients. Auras are temporary neurologic disturbances that can
affect sensation, balance, muscle coordination, speech, or vision; they last minutes to an hour. The aura
may persist after headache onset. Most commonly, auras involve visual symptoms (fortification spectra
—eg, binocular flashes, arcs of scintillating lights, bright zigzags, scotomata). Paresthesias and
numbness (typically starting in one hand and marching to the ipsilateral arm and face), speech
disturbances, and transient brain stem dysfunction (causing, eg, ataxia, confusion or even obtundation)
are less common than visual auras. Some patients have an aura with little or no headache.
Headache varies from moderate to severe, and attacks last from 4 hours to several days, typically
resolving with sleep. The pain is often unilateral but may be bilateral, most often in a frontotemporal
distribution, and is typically described as pulsating or throbbing.
Migraine is more than a headache. Associated symptoms such as nausea (and occasionally vomiting),
photophobia, sonophobia, and osmophobia are prominent. Patients report difficulty concentrating during
attacks. Routine physical activity usually aggravates migraine headache; this effect, plus the photophobia
and sonophobia, encourages most patients to lie in a dark, quiet room during attacks. Severe attacks can
===PAGE:1897===
be incapacitating, disrupting family and work life.
Attacks vary significantly in frequency and severity. Many patients have several types of headache,
including milder attacks without nausea or photophobia; they may resemble tension-type headache but
are a forme fruste of migraine.
Chronic migraines:
Patients with episodic migraine can develop chronic migraine. These patients have
headaches ≥ 15 days/mo. This headache disorder used to be called combination or mixed headache
because it had features of migraine and tension-type headache. These headaches often develop in
patients who overuse drugs for acute treatment of headaches.
Other symptoms:
Other, rare forms of migraine can cause other symptoms. Basilar artery migraine
causes combinations of vertigo, ataxia, visual field loss, sensory disturbances, focal weakness, and
altered level of consciousness. Hemiplegic migraine, which may be sporadic or familial, causes unilateral
weakness.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on characteristic symptoms and a normal physical examination, which includes a
thorough neurologic examination.
Red flag findings include the following:
• Pain that reaches peak intensity within a few seconds or less (thunderclap headache)
• Onset after age 50
• Headaches that increase in intensity or frequency for weeks or longer
• History of cancer (brain metastases) or an immunosuppressive disorder (eg, HIV infection, AIDS)
• Fever, meningismus, altered mental status, or a combination
• Persistent focal neurologic deficits
• Papilledema
• A clear change in an established headache pattern
Patients with characteristic symptoms and no red flag findings do not require testing. Patients with red
flag findings often require brain imaging and sometimes lumbar puncture.
Common diagnostic errors include the following:
• Not realizing that migraine often causes bilateral pain and is not always described as throbbing
• Misdiagnosing migraine as sinus headache or eyestrain because of autonomic and visual symptoms of
migraine
• Assuming that any headache in patients known to have migraine represents another migraine attack—a
thunderclap headache or a change in the previous headache pattern may indicate a new, potentially
serious disorder
• Mistaking migraine with aura for a transient ischemic attack, especially when the aura occurs without
headache, in older people
===PAGE:1898===
Several unusual disorders can mimic migraine with aura: dissection of the carotid or
vertebral artery,
cerebral vasculitis, moyamoya disease, CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy), and MELAS (mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic
acidosis, and strokelike episodes) syndrome.
Prognosis
For some patients, migraine is an infrequent, tolerable inconvenience. For others, it is a devastating
disorder resulting in frequent periods of incapacity, loss of productivity, and severely impaired quality of
life.
Treatment
• Elimination of triggers
• For stress, behavioral interventions
• For mild headaches, acetaminophen or NSAIDs
• For severe attacks, triptans
A thorough explanation of the disorder helps patients understand that, although migraine cannot be
cured, it can be controlled, enabling them to better participate in treatment.
Patients are urged to keep a written headache diary to document the number and timing of attacks,
possible triggers, and response to treatment. Identified triggers are eliminated when possible. Behavioral
interventions (biofeedback, stress management, psychotherapy) are used when stress is a major trigger
or when analgesics are being overused. Treatment of acute migraine headache is based on frequency,
duration, and severity of attacks.
Mild to moderate attacks:
NSAIDs or acetaminophen is used. Analgesics containing opioids, caffeine,
or butalbital are helpful for infrequent, mild attacks but are prone to being overused, sometimes leading to
a type of daily headache syndrome called medication overuse headache. Opioids should be used as a
last resort (rescue drug) for severe headache when other measures are ineffective.
An antiemetic alone may be used to relieve mild or moderate attacks.
Severe attacks:
If mild attacks evolve into incapacitating migraine or if attacks are severe from the
onset, triptans are used. Triptans are selective serotonin 1B,1D receptor agonists. They are not analgesic
per se but specifically block the release of vasoactive neuropeptides that trigger migraine pain. Triptans
are most effective when taken at the onset of attacks. They are available in oral, intranasal, and sc forms
(see
Table 178-4
); sc forms are more effective but have more adverse effects. Overuse of triptans can
also lead to medication overuse headache. When nausea is prominent, combining a triptan with an
antiemetic at the onset of attacks is effective.
IV dihydroergotamine with a dopamine antagonist antiemetic (eg, metoclopramide 10 mg IV,
prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg IV) helps abort very severe, persistent attacks. Dihydroergotamine is also
available in an sc form and as a nasal spray.
Triptans and dihydroergotamine can cause coronary artery constriction and are thus contraindicated in
patients with coronary artery disease or uncontrolled hypertension; these drugs must be used with
caution in elderly patients and in patients with vascular risk factors.
A good response to dihydroergotamine or a triptan should not be interpreted as diagnostic for migraine
because these drugs may relieve headache due to subarachnoid hemorrhage and other structural
abnormalities.
Prochlorperazine suppositories (25 mg) or tablets (10 mg) are an option for patients who cannot tolerate
===PAGE:1899===
triptans and other vasoconstrictors.
Chronic migraines:
The same drugs used to prevent episodic migraine are used to treat chronic
migraine.
Prevention
Daily preventive therapy is warranted when frequent migraines interfere with activity despite acute
treatment.
For patients who use analgesics frequently, particularly those with medication overuse headache,
preventive drugs (see
Table 178-4
) should be combined with a program for stopping overused
analgesics. Choice of drug can be guided by coexisting disorders, as for the following:
• A small bedtime dose of amitriptyline for patients with insomnia
• A
β
-blocker for patients with anxiety or coronary artery disease
• Topiramate, which can induce weight loss, for obese patients or for patients who wish to avoid weight
gain
• Divalproex for patients with mania
Post-Lumbar Puncture and Other Low-Pressure Headaches
Low-pressure headaches result from reduction in CSF volume and pressure due to lumbar
puncture or spontaneous or traumatic CSF leaks.
Removal of CSF by lumbar puncture (LP) reduces CSF volume and pressure, as do spontaneous or
traumatic CSF leaks.
Headache after LP is common, usually occurring hours to a day or two afterward, and can be severe.
Younger patients with a small body mass are at greatest risk. Using small, noncutting needles reduces
risk. The amount of CSF removed and duration of recumbency after LP do not affect incidence.
Spontaneous CSF leaks may result when an arachnoid cyst along the spinal canal ruptures. Coughing or
sneezing may cause the rupture. CSF may leak after certain head or facial injuries (eg, basilar skull
fractures).
Headache results when head elevation while sitting or standing stretches the pain-sensitive basal
meninges. Headaches are intense, postural, and often accompanied by neck pain, meningismus, and
vomiting. Headache is alleviated only by lying completely flat.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Post-LP headache is clinically obvious, and testing is rarely needed; other low-pressure headaches may
require brain imaging. MRI with gadolinium often shows diffuse enhancement of the pachymeninges and,
in severe cases, downward sagging of the brain. CSF pressure is typically low or unobtainable if patients
have been upright for any length of time (gravity accelerates CSF loss).
Treatment
• Hydration and analgesics
• Sometimes an epidural blood patch
===PAGE:1900===
The first line of treatment is recumbency, hydration, an elastic abdominal binder, mild analgesics, and
caffeine. If post-LP headache persists after a day of such treatment, an epidural blood patch (injection of
a few mL of the patient's clotted venous blood into the lumbar epidural space) is usually effective. A blood
patch may also be effective for spontaneous or traumatic CSF leaks, which rarely require surgical
closure.
Tension-Type Headache
Tension-type headache causes mild generalized pain without the incapacity, nausea, or
photophobia associated with migraine.
Tension-type headaches may be episodic or chronic. Episodic tension-type headaches occur < 15
days/mo. Episodic tension-type headache is very common; most patients obtain relief with OTC
analgesics and do not seek medical attention. Tension-type headaches that occur ≥ 15 days/mo are
considered chronic.
Symptoms and Signs
The pain is usually mild to moderate and often described as viselike. These headaches originate in the
occipital or frontal region bilaterally and spread over the entire head. Unlike migraine headaches, tensiontype headaches are not accompanied by nausea and vomiting and are not made worse by physical
activity, light, sounds, or smells. Potential triggers for chronic tension-type headache include sleep
disturbances, stress, temporomandibular joint dysfunction, neck pain, and eyestrain.
Many patients with frequent tension-type headache often have mild headaches with some but not all
features of migraine; these headaches resemble tension-type headaches but are a forme fruste of
migraine and respond to migraine specific drugs.
Episodic headaches may last 30 min to several days. They typically start several hours after waking and
worsen as the day progresses. They rarely awaken patients from sleep.
Chronic headaches may vary in intensity throughout the day but are almost always present.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on characteristic symptoms and a normal physical examination, which includes a
neurologic examination. Potential triggers for chronic tension-type headache should be identified and
treated.
Treatment
• Analgesics
• Sometimes behavioral and psychologic intervention
Some drugs used to prevent migraine, particularly amitriptyline, can help prevent chronic tension-type
headache.
For most mild to moderate tension-type headaches, OTC analgesics (eg, aspirin, acetaminophen) can
provide relief. Massaging the affected area may help.
For severe headaches, prescription analgesics (eg, those that contain opioids) may be used.
Behavioral and psychologic interventions (eg, relaxation and stress management techniques) are often
used and are effective, especially when combined with drug treatment.
===PAGE:1901===
Chapter 179. Brain Infections
Introduction
Inflammation of the brain (encephalitis) is usually secondary to viral infection. Other brain infections
include brain abscesses, helminthic infections, prion diseases, and subdural empyema. Meningitis
(inflammation of the brain and spinal cord—, cytomegalovirus infection (, and
HIV infection ( can also affect the brain. Slow virus infections, such as progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (, caused by JC virus, or subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, caused
by the measles virus, are characterized by a long incubation and a prolonged course. Slow virus infection
involving the rubella virus is now very rare in the US.
Brain Abscess
A brain abscess is an intracerebral collection of pus. Symptoms may include headache,
lethargy, fever, and focal neurologic deficits. Diagnosis is by contrast-enhanced MRI or CT and
sometimes culture. Treatment is with antibiotics and usually surgical drainage.
An abscess forms when an area of cerebral inflammation becomes necrotic and encapsulated by glial
cells and fibroblasts. Edema around the abscess may increase intracranial pressure.
Etiology
A brain abscess can result from
• Direct extension of cranial infections (eg, osteomyelitis, mastoiditis, sinusitis, subdural empyema)
• Penetrating head wounds (including neurosurgical procedures)
• Hematogenous spread (eg, in bacterial endocarditis, congenital heart disease with right-to-left shunt, or
IV drug abuse)
• Unknown causes
The bacteria involved are usually anaerobic and sometimes mixed, often including anaerobic streptococci
or
Bacteroides
. Staphylococci are common after cranial trauma, neurosurgery, or endocarditis.
Enterobacteriaceae are common with ear infections. Fungi (eg,
Aspergillus
) and protozoa (eg,
Toxoplasma gondii
, particularly in HIV-infected patients) can cause abscesses.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms result from increased intracranial pressure and mass effect. Headache, nausea, vomiting,
lethargy, seizures, personality changes, papilledema, and focal neurologic deficits develop over days to
weeks. Fever, chills, and leukocytosis may develop before the infection is encapsulated, but they may be
absent or subside over time.
Diagnosis
• MRI
• Sometimes CT-guided aspiration
When symptoms suggest an abscess, contrast-enhanced MRI or CT is done. An abscess appears as an
edematous mass with ring enhancement, which may be difficult to distinguish from a tumor or occasionally
infarction; CT-guided aspiration, culture, surgical excision, or a combination may be necessary. Lumbar
puncture is not done because it may precipitate transtentorial herniation and because CSF findings are
nonspecific (see
===PAGE:1902===
Table 168-1
.
Treatment
• Antibiotics (initially cefotaxime or ceftriaxone, then as guided by culture and susceptibility testing)
• Usually surgical drainage
• Sometimes corticosteroids, anticonvulsants, or both
All patients receive antibiotics for ≥ 4 to 8 wk. Initial empiric antibiotics include cefotaxime 2 g IV q 4 h or
ceftriaxone 2 g IV q 12 h; both are effective against streptococci, Enterobacteriaceae, and most
anaerobes but not against
Bacteroides fragilis
, which requires metronidazole 15 mg/kg (loading dose),
then 7.5 mg/kg IV q 6 h. If
Staphylococcus aureus
is suspected, vancomycin 1 g q 12 h is used until
sensitivity to nafcillin (2 g q 4 h) is determined. Response to antibiotics is best monitored by serial CT or
MRI.
Drainage, stereotactic or open, provides optimal therapy and is necessary for most abscesses that are
solitary and surgically accessible, particularly those > 2 cm in diameter.
Patients with increased intracranial pressure may benefit from a short course of high-dose corticosteroids
(dexamethasone 10 mg IV once, then 4 mg IV q 6 h for 3 or 4 days). Anticonvulsants are sometimes
recommended to prevent seizures.
Encephalitis
Encephalitis is inflammation of the parenchyma of the brain, resulting from direct viral invasion.
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis is brain and spinal cord inflammation caused by a
hypersensitivity reaction to a virus or another foreign protein. Both disorders can be caused by
many viruses. Symptoms include fever, headache, and altered mental status, often
accompanied by seizures or focal neurologic deficits. Diagnosis requires CSF analysis and
neuroimaging. Treatment is supportive and, for certain causes, includes antiviral drugs.
Etiology
Encephalitis may be a primary manifestation or a secondary (postinfectious) immunologic complication of
viral infection.
Primary viral infection:
Viruses causing primary encephalitis directly invade the brain. These infections
may be
• Epidemic (eg, due to arbovirus, poliovirus, echovirus, or coxsackievirus)
• Sporadic (eg, due to herpes simplex, rabies, varicella-zoster, or mumps virus)
Mosquito-borne arboviral encephalitides infect people during the spring, summer, and early fall when the
weather is warm. Incidence in the US varies from 150 to > 4000 cases yearly, mostly in children. Most
cases occur during epidemics. Among arboviruses, La Crosse virus (California virus) is identified as a
cause primarily in the north central US. However, the virus is geographically widespread, and La Crosse
encephalitis is probably underrecognized and accounts for most cases of arbovirus encephalitis in
children. Mortality rate is probably < 1%. Until 1975, St. Louis encephalitis occurred every 10 yr, mostly in
the central and eastern US; it is now rare. As of 2009, West Nile encephalitis has spread from the East
Coast, where it first appeared in 1999, to all of the western states. Mortality rate is about 9%. Small
epidemics of eastern equine encephalitis occur every 10 to 20 yr in the eastern US, mainly among young
children and people > 55. Mortality rate is about 50 to 70%. For unknown reasons, western equine
encephalitis has largely disappeared from the US since 1988.
In the US, the most common sporadic encephalitis is caused by herpes simplex virus (HSV); hundreds to
===PAGE:1903===
several thousand cases occur yearly. Most are due to HSV-1, but HSV-2 may be more common among
immunocompromised patients. HSV encephalitis occurs at any time of the year, tends to affect patients <
20 or > 40 yr, and is often fatal if untreated.
Primary encephalitis can occur as a late consequence of a viral infection. The best known types are HIV
encephalopathy (which causes dementia—, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (which
occurs years after a measles infection and is thought to represent reactivation of the original infection
—, and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (which is caused by reactivation of JC
virus—.
Immunologic reaction:
Encephalitis can occur as a secondary immunologic complication of certain viral
infections or vaccinations. Inflammatory demyelination of the brain and spinal cord can occur 1 to 3 wk
later (as acute disseminated encephalomyelitis); the immune system attacks one or more CNS antigens
that resemble proteins of the infectious agent. The most common causes used to be measles, rubella,
chickenpox, and mumps (all now uncommon because childhood vaccination is widespread); smallpox
vaccine; and live-virus vaccines (eg, the older rabies vaccines prepared from sheep or goat brain). In the
US, most cases now result from influenza A or B virus, enteroviruses, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis A or B
virus, or HIV.
Pathophysiology
In acute encephalitis, cerebral edema and petechial hemorrhages occur throughout the hemispheres,
brain stem, cerebellum, and, occasionally, spinal cord. Direct viral invasion of the brain usually damages
neurons, sometimes producing visible inclusion bodies. Severe infection, particularly untreated HSV
encephalitis, can cause brain hemorrhagic necrosis.
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis is characterized by perivenous demyelination and absence of virus
in the brain.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include fever, headache, and altered mental status, often accompanied by seizures and focal
neurologic deficits. A GI or respiratory prodrome may precede these symptoms. Meningeal signs are
typically mild and less prominent than other manifestations. Status epilepticus, particularly convulsive
status epilepticus, or coma suggests severe brain inflammation and a poor prognosis. Olfactory seizures,
manifested as an aura of foul smells (rotten eggs, burnt meat), indicate temporal lobe involvement and
suggest HSV encephalitis.
Diagnosis
• MRI
• CSF testing
Encephalitis is suspected in patients with unexplained alterations in mental status. Clinical presentation
and differential diagnoses may suggest certain diagnostic tests, but MRI and CSF analysis (including
PCR for HSV) are usually done, sometimes with other tests to identify the causative virus. Despite
extensive testing, the cause of most cases of encephalitis remains unknown.
MRI:
MRI is sensitive for early HSV encephalitis, showing edema in the orbitofrontal and temporal areas,
which HSV typically infects. MRI shows demyelination in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy and
may show basal ganglia and thalamic abnormalities in West Nile and eastern equine encephalitis. MRI
can also exclude lesions that mimic viral encephalitis (eg, brain abscess, sagittal sinus thrombosis). CT is
much less sensitive than MRI for HSV encephalitis but can help because it is rapidly available and can
exclude disorders that make lumbar puncture risky (eg, mass lesions, hydrocephalus, cerebral edema).
CSF testing:
If encephalitis is present, CSF is characterized by lymphocytic pleocytosis, normal glucose,
mildly elevated protein, and an absence of pathogens using Gram stain and culture (similar to CSF in
===PAGE:1904===
aseptic meningitis). CSF abnormalities may not develop until 8 to 24 h after onset of symptoms.
Hemorrhagic necrosis can introduce many RBCs and some neutrophils into CSF, elevate protein, and
modestly lower glucose.
PCR testing of CSF for many viruses (eg, HSV-1, HSV-2, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, West
Nile virus, enteroviruses, JC virus) is becoming increasingly available. PCR for HSV in CSF is sensitive
and specific. However, results may not be available rapidly and, despite advances in technology, falsenegative and false-positive results may still occur due to a variety of causes, not all being technical
failures (eg, the blood in a mildly traumatic CSF tap may inhibit the PCR amplification step).
CSF viral cultures grow enteroviruses but not most other viruses.
CSF viral IgM titers are often useful for diagnosing acute infection, especially West Nile encephalitis, for
which they are more reliable than PCR. Paired acute and convalescent serologic tests of CSF and blood
must be drawn several weeks apart; they can detect an increase in viral titers specific for certain viral
infections.
Brain biopsy:
Brain biopsy may be indicated for patients who are worsening, who are responding poorly
to treatment with acyclovir or another antimicrobial, or who have a lesion that is still undiagnosed.
Prognosis
Mortality rate varies with cause, but severity of epidemics due to the same virus varies during different
years. Permanent neurologic deficits are more likely to occur in infants.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Acyclovir for HSV encephalitis
Supportive therapy includes treatment of fever, dehydration, electrolyte disorders, and seizures.
Euvolemia should be maintained.
If HSV encephalitis is suspected, acyclovir 10 mg/kg IV q 8 h is started promptly and continued usually for
14 days. Acyclovir is relatively nontoxic but can cause liver function abnormalities, bone marrow
suppression, and transient renal failure. Giving acyclovir IV slowly over 1 h helps prevent nephrotoxicity.
Helminthic Brain Infections
Parasitic helminthic worms infect the CNS of millions of people in developing countries. Infected people
who visit or immigrate to nonendemic areas, including the US, may present there. Worms may cause
meningitis, encephalitis, cerebral masses, hydrocephalus, stroke, and myelopathy.
Neurocysticercosis:
(See also p.
.) Among about 20 helminths that can cause neurologic
disorders, the pork tapeworm
Taenia solium
causes by far the most cases in the Western Hemisphere.
The resulting disorder is neurocysticercosis. After a person eats food contaminated with the worm's eggs,
larvae migrate to tissues, including the brain, spinal cord, and CSF pathways, and form cysts. Cyst
diameter rarely exceeds 1 cm in neural parenchyma but may exceed 5 cm in CSF spaces. Brain
parenchymal cysts cause few symptoms until death of the worms triggers local inflammation, gliosis, and
edema, causing seizures (most commonly), cognitive or focal neurologic deficits, or personality changes.
Larger cysts in CSF pathways may cause obstructive hydrocephalus. Cysts may rupture into CSF,
inducing subacute eosinophilic meningitis. Mortality rate for symptomatic neurocysticercosis is up to 50%.
Neurocysticercosis is suspected in patients who come from developing countries and who have
eosinophilic meningitis or unexplained seizures, cognitive or focal deficits, or personality changes. It is
suggested by multiple calcified
cystic lesions seen on CT or MRI; a contrast agent may enhance the
lesions. Diagnosis requires serum and CSF serologic tests and occasionally cyst biopsy.
===PAGE:1905===
Albendazole (7.5 mg/kg po q 12 h for 8 to 30 days; maximum daily dose, 800 mg) is the antihelminthic
drug of choice. Alternatively, praziquantel 20 to 33 mg/kg po tid may be given for 30 days.
Dexamethasone 8 mg once/day IV or po for the first 2 to 4 days may lessen the acute inflammatory
response as the worms die. Antihelminthic therapy can cause serious morbidity in patients with a large
number of cysts and may not help patients with a single cyst. Treatment must be carefully individualized.
Short- or long-term anticonvulsant treatment may be required. Surgical excision of cysts and ventricular
shunts may also be required.
Other infections:
In schistosomiasis (, necrotizing eosinophilic granulomas develop in the
brain, causing seizures, increased intracranial pressure, and diffuse and focal neurologic deficits.
Large, solitary echinococcal cysts (see
Echinococcosis
 can cause focal deficits and,
occasionally, seizures.
Coenurosis, caused by tapeworm larvae, usually produces grapelike cysts that may obstruct CSF outflow
in the 4th ventricle.
Gnathostomiasis, a rare infection, results in necrotic tracts surrounded by inflammation along the nerve
roots, spinal cord, and brain or in subarachnoid hemorrhage, causing low-grade fever, stiff neck,
photophobia, headache, migratory neurologic deficits (occasionally affecting the 6th or 7th cranial nerve),
and paralysis.
Prion Diseases
(Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies)
Prion diseases are progressive, fatal, and untreatable degenerative brain disorders. They include
• Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), the prototypic example
• Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease (GSS)
• Fatal insomnia (FI)
• Variant CJD (vCJD)
• Kuru
Prion diseases usually occur sporadically, with a worldwide annual incidence of about 1/1 million.
Prion diseases result from misfolding of a normal cell-surface brain protein called prion protein (PrP),
whose exact function is unknown. Misfolded prion proteins (or prions) induce previously normal PrP to
misfold; they are markedly resistant to degradation (similar to
β
-amyloid, which they resemble), resulting
in slow but inexorable intracellular accumulation and neuronal cell death. Accompanying pathologic
changes include gliosis and characteristic histologic vacuolar (spongiform) changes, resulting in dementia
and other neurologic deficits. Symptoms and signs develop months to years after exposure.
Prion diseases can be caused by spontaneous or hereditary defects of the
PrP
gene, contained in the
short arm of chromosome 20. Some defects cause familial CJD, some cause GSS, and others cause FI.
Small abnormalities in particular codons may determine the predominant symptoms and rate of disease
progression.
Prion diseases can also be transmitted by infected tissue. Cannibalism caused the spread of kuru in New
Guinea, and prions can be transmitted via organ transplants and rarely by blood transfusion. Prion
diseases can be transmitted between species via the food chain (eg, in vCJD). Prion diseases occur in
mink, elk, deer, domestic sheep and cattle, and other mammals. In several western US states and
Canada, chronic wasting disease of elk and deer, a prion disease, is a concern; whether this disease can
===PAGE:1906===
be transmitted to people who hunt, butcher, or eat affected animals is unknown.
Prion diseases should be considered in all patients with dementia, especially if it progresses rapidly.
Treatment is symptomatic. Prions resist standard disinfection techniques and pose risks to surgeons,
pathologists, and technicians who handle contaminated tissues and instruments.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is a sporadic or familial prion disease. Bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (mad cow disease) is a variant form. Symptoms include dementia, myoclonus,
and other CNS deficits; death occurs in 1 to 2 yr. Transmission can be prevented by taking
precautions when handling infected tissues and using bleach to clean contaminated
instruments. Treatment is supportive.
CJD typically affects people > 40 yr (median, about 60 yr). It occurs worldwide; incidence is higher among
North African Jews. Most cases are sporadic, but 5 to 15% are familial,
with autosomal dominant
transmission. In the familial form, age at onset is earlier and duration of disease is longer. CJD can be
transmitted iatrogenically (eg, after cadaveric corneal or dural transplants, use of stereotactic
intracerebral electrodes, or use of growth hormone prepared from human pituitary glands).
vCJD
is most common in the United Kingdom (UK); it develops at a younger average age (< 30 yr) than
does sporadic CJD. In the early 1980s, because of relaxed regulations for processing animal by-products,
tissue from sheep infected with scrapie, a prion disease, was introduced into cattle feed. Thousands of
cattle developed bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), called mad cow disease. Some people who
ate meat from affected cattle developed vCJD.
Because the incubation period in BSE is long, a connection between BSE and contaminated feed was not
recognized in the UK until BSE had become an epidemic, which was controlled by massive slaughter of
cattle. In the UK, the annual number of cases of vCJD starting in 1995 peaked at 28 in 2000 and then
steadily declined, with only 5 cases/yr reported between 2005 and 2007 and only 1 in 2008; as of
December 2008, the total number of cases was 167. However, 2 of 3 cases linked to blood transfusion
occurred in 2006. Whether there exists a latent pool of people who have received blood transfusions who
are thus at risk for development of vCJD is unclear. Although vCJD has been restricted to the UK and
Europe thus far, BSE has been reported in a small number of North American cattle.
Symptoms and Signs
About 70% of patients present with memory loss and confusion, which eventually occur in all patients; 15
to 20% present with incoordination and ataxia, which often develop early in the disease. Myoclonus
provoked by noise or other sensory stimuli (startle myoclonus) often develops in the middle to late stages
of disease. Although dementia, ataxia, and myoclonus are most characteristic, other neurologic
abnormalities (eg, hallucinations, seizures, neuropathy, various movement disorders) can occur. Ocular
disturbances (eg, visual field defects, diplopia, dimness or blurring of vision, visual agnosia) are common.
Prognosis
Death typically occurs after 6 to 12 mo, commonly due to pneumonia. Life expectancy in vCJD is longer
(averaging 1.5 yr).
Diagnosis
• MRI
• Exclusion of other disorders
CJD should be considered in elderly patients with rapidly progressive dementia, especially if
accompanied by myoclonus or ataxia; however, CNS vasculitis, hyperthyroidism, and bismuth intoxication
===PAGE:1907===
must be excluded.
vCJD is considered in younger patients who have ingested processed beef in the UK; Wilson's disease
should be excluded.
Diagnosis may be difficult, and diagnostic findings may develop only over time. MRI may show cerebral
atrophy. Diffusion-weighted MRI frequently shows basal ganglia and cortical abnormalities. CSF is
typically normal, but characteristic 14-3-3 protein is often detected. EEG may show characteristic periodic
sharp waves. Brain biopsy is usually unnecessary.
Prevention
Because there is no effective treatment, prevention is essential. Workers handling fluids and tissues from
patients suspected of having CJD must wear gloves and avoid mucous membrane exposure.
Contaminated skin can be disinfected by 5 to 10 min of exposure to 4% Na hydroxide, followed by
extensive washing with water. Steam autoclaving of materials at 132°C for 1 h or immersion in 4% Na
hydroxide or 10% Na hypochlorite solution for 1 h is recommended. Standard methods of sterilization (eg,
exposure to formalin) are ineffective. The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) currently carries out BSE
surveillance for 2000 to 5000 cattle/mo. In 2004, a positive BSE case in the US caused testing to be
expanded to an average 1000 cattle/day, but testing was subsequently reduced when ensuing years
yielded only 2 positive cases.
Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker Disease
Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease is an autosomal dominant prion brain disease that
begins during middle age.
GSS occurs worldwide and is similar to but about 100-fold less common than CJD. It develops at an
earlier age (40 vs 60 yr), and average life expectancy is longer (5 yr vs 6 mo).
Patients have cerebellar dysfunction with unsteady gait, dysarthria, and nystagmus. Gaze palsies,
deafness, dementia, parkinsonism,
hyporeflexia, and extensor plantar responses are also common.
Myoclonus is much less common than in CJD.
GSS should be considered in patients with characteristic symptoms and signs and a family history,
particularly if they are ≤ 45 yr. Genetic testing can confirm the diagnosis.
Fatal Insomnia
Fatal insomnia is a typically hereditary prion disorder causing difficulty sleeping, motor
dysfunction, and death.
FI, a very rare disease, usually results from an autosomal dominant mutation, but several sporadic cases
have been identified. Average age at onset is 40 yr (ranging from the late 30s to the early 60s).
Common early symptoms include difficulty falling asleep and intermittent motor dysfunction (eg,
myoclonus, spastic paresis). This stage can last for months but eventually progresses to severe
insomnia, myoclonus, sympathetic hyperactivity (eg, hypertension, tachycardia, hyperthermia, sweating),
and dementia. Death occurs in an average of 13 mo.
FI should be considered in patients with motor dysfunction, sleep disturbances, and a family history.
Genetic testing can confirm the diagnosis.
Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is caused by reactivation of the JC virus.
The disease usually occurs in patients with impaired cell-mediated immunity. It causes
subacute and progressive CNS demyelination, multifocal neurologic deficits, and death, usually
===PAGE:1908===
within a year. Diagnosis is with contrast-enhanced CT or MRI plus CSF PCR. In AIDS patients,
highly active antiretroviral therapy may slow down the progression, and patients taking
immunosuppressants may improve when those drugs are withdrawn. Treatment is otherwise
supportive.
Etiology
PML is caused by reactivation of the JC virus, a ubiquitous human papovavirus that is typically acquired
during childhood and remains latent in the kidneys and possibly other sites (eg, mononuclear cells, CNS).
The reactivated virus has a tropism for oligodendrocytes. Most patients have depressed cell-mediated
immunity due to AIDS (the most common risk factor), reticuloendothelial system disorders (eg, leukemia,
lymphoma), or other conditions (eg, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, organ transplantation). The risk in AIDS
increases with increasing HIV viral load; prevalence of PML has decreased because of widespread use
of more effective antiretrovirals. Rarely, PML occurs as a complication of immunomodulatory therapy (eg,
natalizumab, rituximab).
Symptoms and Signs
Clumsiness may be the first symptom. Hemiparesis is the most common finding. Aphasia, dysarthria, and
hemianopia are also common. Multifocal cortical damage produces cognitive impairment in two thirds of
patients. Sensory, cerebellar, and brain stem deficits may be present. Headaches and convulsive seizures
are rare and occur most often in patients with AIDS. Gradual, relentless progression culminates in death,
usually 1 to 9 mo after symptoms begin.
Diagnosis
• MRI
• CSF testing for JC viral antigen
PML is suspected in patients with unexplained progressive brain dysfunction, particularly in those with
depressed cell-mediated immunity. Provisional diagnosis is made by contrast-enhanced MRI, which
shows single or multiple white matter lesions on T2-weighted images. A contrast agent enhances, usually
faintly and peripherally, 5 to 15% of lesions. CT usually shows low-density, nonenhancing lesions but is
significantly less sensitive than MRI.
CSF is analyzed for JC viral antigen using PCR; a positive result with compatible neuroimaging findings is
nearly pathognomonic. Routine CSF analysis is usually normal.
Serologic tests are not helpful. Stereotaxic biopsy can provide a definitive diagnosis but is rarely
warranted.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is supportive. Experimental use of drugs such as cidofovir and other antivirals has failed to
provide benefit. However, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in AIDS patients has improved
outcome in PML, increasing the 1-yr survival rate from 10% to 50%. Withdrawal of immunosuppressants
may also result in clinical improvement.
However, using aggressive antiretroviral therapy (or stopping immunosuppressants) has been associated
with immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS—, in which the recovering immune
system produces an intense inflammatory response against the JC virus, thus worsening symptoms. If
IRIS develops, imaging shows new contrast enhancement of the lesions and may show significant
cerebral edema. Corticosteroids may be helpful.
Rabies
===PAGE:1909===
Rabies is a viral encephalitis transmitted by the saliva of infected bats and certain other
infected mammals. Symptoms include depression and fever, followed by agitation, excessive
salivation, and hydrophobia. Diagnosis is by serologic tests or biopsy. Vaccination is indicated
for people at high risk of exposure. Postexposure prophylaxis involves wound care and passive
and active immunoprophylaxis. The disorder is almost universally fatal. Treatment is
supportive.
Rabies causes > 50,000 human deaths worldwide annually, mostly in Latin America, Africa, and Asia,
where canine rabies is endemic. In the US, vaccination of domestic animals has reduced rabies cases in
people to < 6/yr, mostly transmitted by infected bats. Infected raccoons, skunks, and foxes can also
transmit rabies.
Rabid animals transmit the infection through their saliva, usually by biting. Rarely, the virus can enter
through a skin abrasion or across mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, or mouth. The virus travels from
the site of entry via peripheral nerves to the spinal cord (or to the brain stem when the face is bitten), then
to the brain. It spreads from the CNS via peripheral nerves to other parts of the body. Involvement of the
salivary glands and oral mucosa is responsible for transmissibility.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain or paresthesias may develop at the site of the bite. Rapidity of progression depends on the viral
inoculum and proximity of the wound to the brain. The incubation period averages 1 to 2 mo but may be >
1 yr. Initial symptoms are nonspecific: fever, headache, and malaise. Within days, encephalitis (furious
rabies; in 80%) or paralysis (dumb rabies; in 20%) develops. Encephalitis causes restlessness,
confusion, agitation, bizarre behavior, hallucinations, and insomnia. Salivation is excessive, and attempts
to drink cause painful spasms of the laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles (hydrophobia). In the paralytic
form, ascending paralysis and quadriplegia develop without delirium and hydrophobia.
Diagnosis
• Skin biopsy
• Sometimes PCR testing of fluid or tissue samples
Rabies is suspected in patients with encephalitis or ascending paralysis and a history of an animal bite or
exposure to bats; bat bites may be superficial and overlooked.
Direct fluorescence antibody testing of a biopsy specimen of skin from the nape of the neck is the
diagnostic test of choice. Diagnosis can also be made by PCR of CSF, saliva, or tissue. Specimens
tested for rabies antibodies include serum and CSF. CT, MRI, and EEG are normal or show nonspecific
changes.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is only supportive and includes heavy sedation (eg, with ketamine and midazolam) and comfort
measures. Death usually occurs 3 to 10 days after symptoms begin. Only a handful of patients have
survived; all but one of them received immunoprophylaxis before onset of symptoms. There is evidence
that giving rabies vaccine and immune globulin
after
clinical rabies develops may cause more rapid
deterioration.
Experimental therapies with ribavirin, amantadine, interferon-alfa, and other drugs are sometimes tried in
desperation.
Prevention
===PAGE:1910===
Preexposure:
Rabid animals can often be recognized by their strange behavior; they may be agitated
and vicious, weak, or paralyzed and may show no fear of people. Nocturnal animals (eg, bats, skunks,
raccoons) may be out during the day. Bats may make unusual noises and have difficulty flying. An animal
suspected of having rabies should not be approached. Local health authorities should be contacted to
remove the animal.
Human diploid cell rabies vaccine (HDCV) is safe and recommended for preexposure prophylaxis for
people at risk, including veterinarians, animal handlers, spelunkers, workers who handle the virus, and
travelers to endemic areas. A total of three 1-mL doses are given IM, one each on days 0, 7, and between
day 21 and 28.
Postexposure:
Exposure is considered to be a bite that breaks the skin or any contact
between mucous
membrane or broken skin and animal saliva. If exposure occurs, prompt, meticulously executed
prophylaxis almost always prevents human rabies. The wound is cleansed immediately and thoroughly
with soap and water or benzalkonium chloride. Deep puncture wounds are flushed with soapy water using
moderate pressure. Wounds are usually left open.
Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) with rabies vaccine and rabies immune globulin (RIG) is given
depending on the biting animal and circumstances (see
Table 179-1
). PEP is begun, and the animal's brain is tested for virus. Local or state health departments
or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention usually conduct testing and can advise on other
treatment issues.
For PEP, RIG 20 IU/kg is infiltrated around the wound for passive immunization; if injection volume is too
much for distal areas (eg, fingers, nose), some RIG may be given IM. This treatment is accompanied by
HDCV for active immunization. HDCV is given in a series of five 1-mL IM injections (deltoid area is
preferred), beginning on the day of exposure (day 0), in a limb other than the one used for RIG.
Subsequent injections occur on days 3, 7, 14, and 28. The WHO also recommends a 6th injection on day
90. Rarely, a serious systemic or neuroparalytic reaction occurs; then, completion of vaccination is
weighed against the patient's risk of developing rabies. Rabies antibody titer is measured to help assess
risk of stopping vaccination.
PEP for a person previously vaccinated against rabies includes 1-mL IM injections of HDCV on days 0
and 3 but no RIG.
Subdural Empyema
Subdural empyema is a collection of pus between the dura mater and arachnoid. Symptoms
include
[Table 179-1.
Rabies Postexposure Prophylaxis]
fever, lethargy, focal neurologic deficits, and seizures. Diagnosis is by contrast-enhanced CT or
MRI. Treatment is with surgical drainage and antibiotics.
Etiology
Subdural empyema is usually a complication of sinusitis (especially frontal, ethmoidal, or sphenoidal), but
it can follow ear infections, cranial trauma or surgery, or, rarely, bacteremia. Pathogens are similar to
those that cause brain abscess (. In children < 5 yr, the usual cause is bacterial meningitis;
because childhood meningitis is now uncommon, childhood subdural empyema is uncommon.
Complications:
Cortical venous thrombosis and brain abscess are common complications, and subdural
empyema can rapidly spread to involve an entire cerebral hemisphere.
Symptoms and Signs
Fever, headache, lethargy, focal neurologic deficits (suggesting widespread involvement of one cerebral
===PAGE:1911===
hemisphere), and seizures evolve over several days. Meningeal signs, vomiting, and papilledema are
common. Without treatment, coma and death occur rapidly.
Diagnosis
• MRI
Diagnosis is by contrast-enhanced MRI or CT. Blood and surgical specimens are cultured aerobically and
anaerobically. Lumbar puncture provides little useful information and may precipitate transtentorial
herniation. If subdural empyema is suspected (eg, based on symptom duration of several days, focal
deficits, or risk factors) in patients with meningeal signs, lumbar puncture is contraindicated until
neuroimaging excludes a mass lesion. In infants, a subdural tap may be diagnostic and may relieve
pressure.
Treatment
• Surgical drainage
• Antibiotics
Emergency surgical drainage of the empyema and any underlying sinusitis should be done. Pending
culture results, antibiotic coverage is the same as that for brain abscess except in young children, who
may require antibiotics for any accompanying meningitis (see
Table 180-2
on p.
and
Table 180-3
. Anticonvulsants and measures to reduce intracranial pressure may be needed.
===PAGE:1912===
Chapter 180. Meningitis
Introduction
(For brain infections, see
Chapter 179
)
Meningitis is inflammation of the meninges of the brain or spinal cord.
Meningitis is often infectious and is one of the most common CNS infections. Inflammation involves both
the meninges and brain parenchyma (meningoencephalitis). Meningitis may become evident over hours
or days (acute) or a longer period (subacute or chronic).
The most common types of acute meningitis are
• Acute bacterial meningitis
• Aseptic meningitis
Acute bacterial meningitis is a severe illness characterized by purulent CSF. It is rapidly progressive and,
without treatment, fatal.
Aseptic meningitis is milder and typically self-limited; it is usually caused by viruses.
Symptoms and Signs
Many cases of infectious meningitis begin with a vague prodrome of viral symptoms. The classic
meningitis triad of fever, headache, and nuchal rigidity develops over hours or days. Passive flexion of
the neck is restricted and painful, but rotation and extension are typically not as painful. In severe cases,
attempts at neck flexion may induce flexion of the hip or knee (Brudzinski's sign), and there may be
resistance to passive extension of the knee while the hip is flexed (Kernig's sign). Neck stiffness and
Brudzinski's and Kernig's signs are termed meningeal signs or meningismus; they occur because tension
on nerve roots passing through inflamed meninges causes irritation.
Although brain parenchyma is not typically involved early in meningitis, lethargy, confusion, seizures, and
focal deficits will develop if bacterial meningitis is left untreated.
Diagnosis
• Blood DNA PCR for bacterial pathogens
• CSF analysis
• Sometimes CT before lumbar puncture
Acute meningitis is a medical emergency that requires rapid diagnosis and treatment. After IV access is
secured, blood samples are drawn for culture, CBC, and PCR of bacterial pathogens if available.
Treatment is started empirically.
Lumbar puncture
is done to obtain CSF for Gram stain, culture, cell count and differential, glucose
concentration, protein content and other specialized tests. These tests must be done in a timely manner.
However, patients with signs compatible with a mass lesion (eg, focal deficits, papilledema, deterioration
in consciousness, seizures) require head CT before lumbar puncture because there is a small possibility
that lumbar puncture can cause cerebral herniation if a brain abscess or other mass lesion is present.
CSF findings
aid in the diagnosis of meningitis (see
Table 180-1
). Presence of bacteria on Gram stain or growth of bacteria in culture is diagnostic of
bacterial meningitis. Gram stain is positive about 80% of the time in bacterial meningitis and usually
differentiates among the common causative pathogens. CSF lymphocytosis and absence of pathogens
===PAGE:1913===
suggest aseptic meningitis but may represent partially treated bacterial meningitis.
Treatment
If patients appear ill and have findings of meningitis, antibiotics ( are started as soon as
blood cultures are drawn. If patients do not appear very ill and the diagnosis is less certain, antibiotics
can await CSF results.
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
(For neonatal meningitis, see p.
.)
Acute bacterial meningitis is a fulminant, often fatal pyogenic infection beginning in the
meninges. Symptoms include headache, fever, and stiff neck. Without rapid treatment,
obtundation and coma follow. Diagnosis is by CSF tests. Treatment requires antibiotics, often
beginning empirically with a 3rd-or 4th-generation cephalosporin, vancomycin, and ampicillin;
corticosteroids are usually given. Residual morbidity is common.
Etiology
Many bacteria can cause meningitis, but the most common are
• Group B streptococci (during the first 2 mo of life)
•
Neisseria meningitidis
(meningococci)
•
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(pneumococci)
Meningococci
exist in the nasopharynx of about 5% of people and spread by respiratory droplets and
close contact. Only a small fraction of carriers develop meningitis; what makes them susceptible is
unknown. Meningococcal meningitis occurs most often during the first year of life. It also tends to occur in
epidemics among closed populations (eg, in military barracks, college dormitories, and boarding schools).
Pneumococci
are the most common cause of meningitis in adults. Especially at risk are alcoholics and
people with chronic otitis, sinusitis, mastoiditis, CSF leaks, recurrent meningitis, pneumococcal
pneumonia, sickle cell disease, or asplenia. Incidence of pneumococcal meningitis is decreasing because
of routine vaccination.
Gram-negative organisms
(most often
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella
sp, or
Enterobacter
sp) can cause
meningitis in infants; in immunocompromised patients; or after CNS surgery, CNS trauma, bacteremia (eg,
due to GU manipulation), or hospital-acquired infections.
Pseudomonas
sp occasionally causes
meningitis in immunocompromised or colonized patients.
Haemophilus influenzae
type b meningitis, now
uncommon because of widespread vaccination, can occur in immunocompromised patients or after head
trauma in unvaccinated people.
Staphylococci
can cause meningitis after penetrating head wounds or neurosurgical procedures (often
as part of a mixed infection) or after bacteremia (eg, due to endocarditis).
Listeria
typically cause meningitis in the very young, the very old, and patients of any age who are
immunocompromised because of chronic renal failure, hepatic disorders, or corticosteroid or cytotoxic
therapy after organ transplantation.
Bacteria typically reach the meninges by hematogenous spread from sites of colonization in the
nasopharynx or other foci of infection (eg, pneumonia). Why some bacteria are more prone to colonize
CSF is not clear, but binding pili and encapsulation appear to play a role. Receptors for pili and other
bacterial surface components in the choroid plexus facilitate penetration into CSF.
Bacteria can also enter CSF by direct extension from nearby infections (eg, sinusitis, mastoiditis) or
===PAGE:1914===
through exterior openings in normally closed CSF pathways (eg, due to meningomyelocele, spinal dermal
sinus, penetrating injuries, or neurosurgical procedures).
Pathophysiology
Bacterial surface components, complement, and inflammatory cytokines (eg, tumor
[Table 180-1.
Cerebrospinal Fluid Abnormalities in Various Infections]
necrosis factor, IL-1) draw neutrophils into the CSF space. The neutrophils release metabolites that
damage cell membranes including those of the vascular endothelium. The result is vasculitis and
thrombophlebitis (which cause focal ischemia or infarction) and brain edema. Vasculitis also disrupts the
blood-brain barrier, further increasing brain edema. The purulent exudate in the CSF blocks CSF
reabsorption by the arachnoid villi, causing hydrocephalus. Brain edema and hydrocephalus increase
intracranial pressure.
Systemic complications
include
• Hyponatremia due to the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH)
• Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
• Septic shock
Occasionally, bilateral adrenal hemorrhagic infarction (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome) results,
particularly with meningococcal infection.
Symptoms and Signs
A respiratory illness or sore throat often precedes the more characteristic symptoms of fever, headache,
stiff neck, and vomiting. Kernig's and Brudzinski's signs appear in about half of patients. Adults may
become desperately ill within 24 h, and children even sooner. Seizures occur in about 30%. Cranial nerve
abnormalities (eg, 3rd [oculomotor] or 7th [facial] cranial nerve palsy; occasionally, deafness) and other
focal deficits occur in 10 to 20%. In patients > 2 yr, changes in consciousness progress through irritability,
confusion, drowsiness, stupor, and coma. Opisthotonic posturing may occur.
Dehydration is common, and vascular collapse causes shock. Infection, particularly meningococcal, may
be disseminated widely, to the joints, lungs, sinuses, and elsewhere. A petechial or purpuric rash
commonly occurs in meningococcal meningitis. Examination of the head, ears, spine, and skin may reveal
a source or route of infection. Spinal dimples, nevi, or tufts of hair suggest a spinal dermal sinus that
communicates with the meninges and provides a portal for bacteria entry.
Young children:
In children < 2 yr, meningeal signs may be absent. In those < 2 mo, symptoms and
signs are often nonspecific, particularly in early disease. Fever, hypothermia, poor feeding, lethargy,
vomiting, and irritability are common presenting symptoms. Seizures, a high-pitched cry, and bulging or
tight fontanelles are possible but often occur late. Subdural effusions may develop after several days;
typical signs are seizures, persistent fever, and enlarging head size.
Elderly:
The elderly may also have nonspecific symptoms (eg, confusion with or occasionally without
fever). Meningeal signs may be absent or mild. Arthritis may restrict neck motion, often in multiple
directions, and should not be mistaken for meningismus.
Patients with partially treated meningitis:
Patients seen early in the disease, before typical findings of
meningitis appear, are sometimes diagnosed with otitis media or sinusitis and given oral antibiotics.
Depending on the drug, the infection may be partially (but temporarily) suppressed. Patients may appear
less ill and have milder meningeal signs and slower disease progression. This situation can significantly
hamper recognition of meningitis.
===PAGE:1915===
Diagnosis
• CSF analysis
Acute bacterial meningitis is suspected in children < 2 yr with lethargy, progressive irritability, a highpitched cry, a bulging fontanelle, meningeal signs, or hypothermia. Signs are often nonspecific, and
threshold for suspecting meningitis must be low. Meningitis is suspected in patients > 2 yr with meningeal
signs or unexplained alterations in consciousness, particularly in those with fever or risk factors.
Because acute bacterial meningitis, especially meningococcal, can be lethal within hours, it must be
treated as soon as the diagnosis is suspected. Blood is drawn for culture, Gram stain, and bacterial DNA
PCR if available. Prompt lumbar puncture with or without prior CT is required, but these procedures
should not delay immediate treatment with corticosteroids and antibiotics.
CSF tests:
CSF pressure may be elevated. Gram stain shows organisms in CSF in 80% of patients with
acute bacterial meningitis. CSF contains a predominantly neutrophilic WBC count, usually between 1,000
μ
L and 10,000/
μ
L. Glucose is usually < 40 mg/dL because of impaired CNS glucose transport and
glucose consumption by neutrophils and bacteria. Protein is typically > 100 mg/dL. Cultures are positive
in 90%; they may be falsely negative in patients who are partially treated. Latex agglutination tests can be
used to detect antigens of meningococci,
H. influenzae
type b, pneumococci, group B streptococci, and
E. coli
K1 strains. However, these tests are not routinely done because they probably add little to other
routine CSF tests. The limulus amebocyte lysate test can detect endotoxin in gram-negative meningitis.
This test and the latex agglutination tests may be
helpful when patients have received prior antibiotics
(partial treatment), when patients are immunocompromised, or when other CSF tests do not identify the
causative organism. Broad range bacterial PCR for 16S ribosomal DNA testing can be useful if CSF
cultures detect no organisms. PCR testing is also available for meningococcus and pneumococcus.
Imaging tests:
CT, when done, may be normal or show small ventricles, effacement of the sulci, and
contrast enhancement over the convexities. MRI with gadolinium is more sensitive for subarachnoid
inflammation. Scans should be scrutinized for evidence of brain abscess, sinusitis, mastoiditis, skull
fracture, and congenital malformations. Evidence of venous infarctions or communicating hydrocephalus
may appear after days or weeks.
Other tests:
Peripheral blood tests include blood cultures (positive in 50%), cell count with differential,
electrolytes, glucose, renal function, coagulation tests, and PCR for bacterial pathogens (where
available). Serum Na is monitored for evidence of SIADH, and coagulation results are monitored for
evidence of DIC. Urine and any nasopharyngeal or respiratory secretions and skin lesions are cultured.
Alternate diagnoses:
Disorders that resemble bacterial meningitis can usually be differentiated by
clinical presentation, neuroimaging, and routine CSF tests.
Viral meningitis
can cause fever, headache, and stiff neck, but patients do not appear as ill, and CSF
test results are different (see
Table 180-1
).
Viral encephalitis
, especially herpes encephalitis, also causes fever, headache, confusion, seizure and
coma, which can be confused with bacterial meningitis. MRI and CSF testing are helpful in distinguishing
viral encephalitis from bacterial meningitis. Serum procalcitonin and C-reactive protein are elevated to a
much greater degree with bacterial than with viral infections.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
causes severe headache and a stiff neck, but onset is explosive and fever
is usually absent; CT shows hemorrhage, or the CSF contains RBCs or is xanthochromic.
Brain abscess
can cause fever, headache, and impaired consciousness, but the neck is typically supple
unless abscess contents have ruptured into the CSF space, causing a fulminant secondary meningitis.
Severe systemic infections
(eg, sepsis, infective endocarditis) can impair cognition or consciousness
by causing fever and compromising tissue perfusion; CSF is normal or contains a small number of WBCs,
and the neck is supple.
===PAGE:1916===
Cerebellar tonsillar herniation
can cause impaired consciousness (secondary to obstructive
hydrocephalus) and neck stiffness but usually not fever, and it can be differentiated by CT or MRI.
Cerebral vasculitis
(eg, due to SLE) and cerebral venous thrombosis can cause mild fever, headache,
altered mental status, and mild to moderate meningeal inflammation, typically producing CSF test results
similar to those of viral encephalitis.
Fungal meningitis or amebic
(Naegleria)
meningoencephalitis
occasionally causes acute, fulminant
meningitis with clinical findings and routine CSF test results similar to those of bacterial meningitis. Gram
stain and routine cultures show no bacteria. In such cases, CSF is checked for cryptococcal
polysaccharide antigen,
Histoplasma
polysaccharide antigen, and
Coccidioides immitis
complement
fixation antibodies; CSF is also examined using India ink and cultured for fungi (. In amebic
meningoencephalitis, ameboid movement can be detected in unspun wet mounts of CSF, and the amebas
can be cultured.
TB meningitis
is usually subacute or chronic but is occasionally acute; CSF characteristics are usually
intermediate between those of acute bacterial and aseptic meningitis. Special stains (eg, acid-fast,
immunofluorescent) and PCR are needed to identify TB.
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome:
This disorder should be suspected in any febrile patient who
remains in shock despite adequate volume replacement and who has rapidly evolving purpura and
evidence of DIC. With hemorrhagic necrosis of the adrenal glands, adrenocorticol insufficiency develops
rapidly. A serum cortisol level < 13
μ
g/dL (in combination with an increased ACTH level) suggests
glucocorticoid deficiency due to primary adrenal insufficiency. CT, MRI, or ultrasonography of the adrenal
glands is done.
Prognosis
Immediate empirical treatment with corticosteroids, antibiotics, and supportive care have improved
outcome and reduced mortality to < 10%. However, if meningitis is treated late or occurs in neonates, the
elderly, or immunocompromised patients, death is common. A poor outcome is predicted by persistent
leukopenia or development of Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome. Survivors occasionally have
deafness, other cranial nerve deficits, cerebral infarction, recurrent seizures, or intellectual disability.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Antibiotics (eg, ampicillin and ceftriaxone, with or without vancomycin)
If acute bacterial meningitis is suspected, corticosteroids and antibiotics are given as soon as blood
cultures are drawn. If the diagnosis is unclear and the patient does not appear ill, antibiotics may be
withheld pending CSF test results. Giving antibiotics before lumbar puncture slightly increases the
probability of false-negative cultures, particularly with pneumococci, but does not affect other test results.
Corticosteroids:
Dexamethasone 0.15 mg/kg IV q 6 h in children and 10 mg IV q 6 h in adults should be
given with the first dose of antibiotics and continued for 4 days. Dexamethasone may prevent hearing
loss and other neurologic sequelae by inhibiting release of proinflammatory cytokines triggered by
antibiotic-induced bacterial lysis. Because corticosteroids impede vancomycin's penetration into CSF,
vancomycin is given in a higher dose—15 to 20 mg/kg q 8 h.
In immunocompromised patients, the benefits of dexamethasone in reducing intracranial pressure must be
weighed against the risk of worsening immunodeficiency.
Antibiotics:
Choice of empiric antibiotics depends on the suspected pathogen and patient age (see
Table 180-2
; for antibiotic doses, see
Table 180-3
). Third-generation cephalosporins (eg, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime) are effective against
===PAGE:1917===
pathogens common in patients of all ages. Cefepime, a 4th-generation cephalosporin, can be substituted
for a 3rd-generation cephalosporin in children and can be useful for
Pseudomonas
infection. However,
because cephalosporin-resistant pneumococci are becoming increasingly prevalent, vancomycin, with or
without rifampin, is usually added. Meropenem is also effective against
Pseudomonas
and many gramnegative bacteria. Ampicillin is added to cover
Listeria
sp. Aminoglycosides penetrate the CNS poorly but
are still used empirically to cover gram-negative bacteria in neonates (. When meningitis due
to a gram-negative anaerobe is a consideration (eg, because of otitis, sinusitis, or mastoiditis),
meropenem should be added. For meningitis patients with a recent neurosurgical procedure or with an
intraventricular shunt, vancomycin, meropenem, plus metronidazole provide coverage against
staphylococci, gram-negative bacteria, and anaerobes.
Because herpes encephalitis can resemble bacterial meningitis at presentation, acyclovir is usually
included with the initial empirical therapy. Similarly, during tick season, doxycycline may be added to cover
CNS infection with Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
Reevaluation:
As the results of blood, CSF, and other tests become available and the pathogen and
drug susceptibility are identified, antibiotics are adjusted accordingly.
If no pathogen is identified in the CSF, addition of antibiotics for TB should be considered, especially if
CSF glucose levels are very low.
If no bacteria grow in culture or are otherwise identified after 24 to 48 h, corticosteroids are stopped;
corticosteroids continued for > 1 day without appropriate antibiotic coverage could worsen the infection.
When initial CSF tests are inconclusive, a repeat lumbar puncture in 8 to 24 h (or sooner if the patient
deteriorates) may help. If clinical and CSF findings continue to suggest aseptic meningitis, antibiotics are
withheld. If the patient's condition is serious, especially if antibiotics have been given (possibly causing
falsely sterile cultures), antibiotics should be continued.
Lumbar puncture should be repeated 24 to 48 h after starting antibiotics to confirm CSF sterility and
conversion to lymphocytic predominance. Generally, antibiotics are continued for ≥ 1 wk after fever
subsides and CSF is nearly normal (complete normalization may take weeks). Drug doses are not
reduced when clinical improvement occurs because drug penetration commonly decreases as meningeal
inflammation decreases.
Other measures:
Supportive therapy includes treatment of fever, dehydration, electrolyte disorders,
seizures, and shock.
If Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome is suspected, high-dose hydrocortisone (eg, 100 to 200 mg IV q 4
to 6 h or as a continuous infusion after an initial bolus) is given; treatment should not be delayed pending
measurement of hormone levels.
Cerebral edema can be minimized by avoiding overhydration. If brain herniation is suspected,
hyperventilation (PaCO
, 25 to 30 mm Hg acutely), mannitol (0.25 to 1.0 g/kg IV), and additional
dexamethasone (4 mg IV q 4 h) can be used; barbiturate-induced coma may be considered. Monitoring
intracranial pressure may be helpful. If ventricles are enlarged, intracranial pressure may be monitored
and CSF drained, but outcome is usually poor.
If infants up to 1 yr of age have subdural effusion, daily subdural taps through the cranial sutures usually
help. No more than 20 mL/day of CSF should be removed from one side to avoid sudden shifts in
intracranial contents. If effusion persists after 3 to 4 wk of
[Table 180-2.
Antibiotic Therapy for Acute Bacterial Meningitis]
[Table 180-3.
Common IV Antibiotic Dosages for Bacterial Meningitis*]
taps, surgical exploration for possible excision of a subdural membrane is indicated.
Patients with severe meningococcal meningitis may benefit from drotrecogin alfa (activated protein C),
===PAGE:1918===
which downregulates the inflammatory response. In patients with sepsis due to meningitis, intracranial
bleeding occurs more frequently, with or without drotrecogin alfa treatment.
Prevention
Physical measures:
Spread of meningitis is prevented by keeping patients in respiratory isolation
(droplet precautions) for the first 24 h of therapy. Gloves, masks, and gowns are used.
Vaccinations:
Certain types of bacterial meningitis can be prevented by vaccination.
A conjugated pneumococcal vaccine effective against 7 serotypes, including > 80% of organisms that
cause meningitis, is recommended for all children (see p.
and
Table 268-10
.
Routine vaccination against
H. influenzae
type b is highly effective and begins at age 2 mo.
A quadrivalent meningococcal vaccine is given to children aged 2 to 10 yr with immunodeficiencies or
functional asplenia, all children at age 11 to 12 yr (and older children, college students living in
dormitories, and military recruits who have not had the vaccine previously), travelers to endemic areas,
and laboratory personnel who routinely handle meningococcal specimens. Chemoprophylaxis is given to
close contacts of patients with meningococcal meningitis. During an epidemic, the population at risk must
be identified (eg, college students, a small town) and its size determined before proceeding to mass
vaccination. The effort is expensive and requires public education and support, but it saves lives and
reduces morbidity. NOTE: The meningococcal vaccine does not protect against serotype B
meningococcal meningitis; this information should kept in mind when a vaccinated patient presents with
symptoms of meningitis.
Chemoprophylaxis:
Anyone who has face-to-face contact with the patient (eg, family, medical staff
members) should receive postexposure chemoprophylaxis.
For meningococcal meningitis, chemoprophylaxis consists of one of the following:
• Rifampin 600 mg (for children > 1 mo, 10 mg/kg; for children < 1 mo, 5 mg/kg) po q 12 h for 4 doses
• Ceftriaxone 250 mg (for children < 15 yr, 125 mg) IM for 1 dose
• In adults, a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin 500 mg or ofloxacin 400 mg) po for 1 dose
Chemoprophylaxis against
H. influenzae
type b is rifampin 20 mg/kg po once/day (maximum: 600 mg/day)
for 4 days. There is no consensus on whether children < 2 yr require prophylaxis for exposure at day
care.
Chemoprophylaxis is not usually needed for contacts of patients with pneumococcal meningitis.
Aseptic Meningitis
Aseptic meningitis is inflammation of the meninges with CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis and no
cause
apparent after routine CSF stains and cultures. Viruses are the most common cause.
Other causes may be infectious or noninfectious. Symptoms include fever, headache, and
meningeal signs. Viral aseptic meningitis is usually self-limited. Treatment is usually
symptomatic.
Etiology
There are many causes (see
Table 180-4
), which are typically classified as
• Infectious (eg, viruses, rickettsiae, spirochetes, parasites)
===PAGE:1919===
• Noninfectious (eg, intracranial tumors and cysts, drugs, systemic disorders)
Viruses:
Enteroviruses, including echovirus, coxsackievirus, and enteroviruses 68 through 71, cause
most cases of aseptic meningitis. They are transmitted through a fecaloral, food-borne route, entering the
GI tract and spreading via the bloodstream.
The next most common causes of viral meningitis are herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2), HIV, and the
arthropod-borne viruses. Mumps virus is a common cause worldwide but has been minimized in the US
by vaccination.
Mollaret's meningitis is a syndrome of self-limited, recurrent aseptic meningitis characterized by large
atypical monocytes (once thought to be endothelial cells) in the CSF; it is caused by HSV-2 and
associated with prior exposure to genital herpes; most patients are unaware of their exposure.
Viruses that cause encephalitis typically also cause a low-grade aseptic meningitis.
Bacteria:
Bacteria may cause lymphocytic meningitis; they include spirochetes (in syphilis, Lyme
disease, or leptospirosis) and rickettsiae (in typhus, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, or ehrlichiosis). CSF
abnormalities may be transient or chronic.
Bacterial infections such as mastoiditis, sinusitis, brain abscess, and infective endocarditis can result in
CSF with characteristics of aseptic meningitis because infection adjacent to the meninges can induce a
sympathetic inflammatory response without bacteria being present.
Noninfectious causes:
Meningeal inflammation may result from neoplastic infiltration, leakage of the
contents of an intracranial cyst, intrathecal drugs, lead poisoning, and radiopaque agents. Infrequently,
inflammation results from certain systemically administered drugs, presumably as a hypersensitivity
reaction. The most common causative drugs are NSAIDs (especially ibuprofen), antimicrobials (especially
sulfa drugs), and immune modulators (eg, IV immune globulins, OKT3 monoclonal antibodies,
cyclosporine, vaccines).
Symptoms and Signs
Aseptic meningitis often follows a flu-like syndrome and usually causes fever and headache, but coryza is
not prominent. Meningeal signs are less marked and slower to develop than in acute bacterial meningitis.
Patients are usually not critically ill; systemic or nonspecific symptoms may predominate. Focal neurologic
symptoms are absent. Patients with noninfectious meningeal inflammation are often afebrile.
Diagnosis
• CSF analysis
• Sometimes CT before lumbar puncture
The initial concern is whether patients presenting with headache, fever, and meningeal signs have acute
bacterial meningitis requiring immediate antibiotic treatment. Viral or other aseptic meningitis should be
considered when patients appear less acutely ill.
Head CT or MRI is done before lumbar puncture if a brain mass is suspected (eg, based on focal
neurologic signs or papilledema). Idiopathic intracranial hypertension sometimes mimics aseptic
meningitis.
Differentiating bacterial meningitis from aseptic meningitis:
Because bacterial meningitis requires
immediate treatment and aseptic meningitis usually does not, rapid identification of bacterial meningitis is
important (and sometimes difficult).
CSF findings
help make the distinction (see
Table 180-1
). CSF glucose is usually decreased and protein
===PAGE:1920===
is elevated in bacterial meningitis but not in aseptic meningitis. CSF WBCs are predominantly
lymphocytes in aseptic meningitis; even a few CSF neutrophils (which may, however, be present in early
viral meningitis) should prompt consideration of early bacterial meningitis. However, several types of
bacterial meningitis have CSF characteristics that are similar to those of aseptic meningitis; they include
partially treated bacterial meningitis,
Listeria
meningitis (which may be difficult to detect using Gram stain
and may produce CSF monocytosis, which is more characteristic of aseptic meningitis), and TB
meningitis. Clues to TB meningitis are clinical findings, elevated CSF protein, and mildly decreased CSF
glucose (. CSF pressure is somewhat variable; although it is typically normal or mildly
[Table 180-4.
Other Causes of CSF Inflammatory Response*]
elevated in aseptic meningitis and quite high in bacterial meningitis, it may be markedly elevated in
aseptic meningitis.
Blood tests
sometimes help. Serum levels of procalcitonin and C-reactive protein are much higher in
bacterial infections than in viral ones.
Diagnosis of specific cause:
In viral meningitis, PCR is the quickest way to identify the specific
infectious agent, including enteroviruses, HSV-2, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. PCR is less reliable in West
Nile virus infection, which is usually diagnosed based on IgM titers.
Tests are also done to diagnose nonviral causes of aseptic meningitis (eg, rickettsial infection, Lyme
disease, syphilis). Drug-induced aseptic meningitis is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Treatment
• Supportive care
In most patients, the diagnosis is clear, and treatment requires only hydration, analgesics, and
antipyretics. If listerial, partially treated, and early bacterial meningitis cannot be excluded, antibiotics
effective against bacterial meningitis are given pending results of cultures or repeated CSF tests.
Drug-induced aseptic meningitis resolves when the causative drug is withdrawn.
Recurrent HSV-2 meningitis may be treated with acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir (see
Table 151-2
.
Subacute and Chronic Meningitis
Meningeal inflammation that lasts > 2 wk (subacute meningitis) or > 1 mo (chronic meningitis)
may have infectious or noninfectious causes (eg, cancer). Diagnosis requires CSF analysis,
usually after CT or MRI. Treatment is directed at the cause.
Etiology
Subacute or chronic meningitis may have infectious or noninfectious causes and may be an aseptic
meningitis (see
Table 180-4
). Infectious causes include fungal infections (most commonly with
Cryptococcus neoformans
), TB, Lyme disease, AIDS,
Actinomyces
infections, and syphilis; noninfectious
causes include sarcoidosis, vasculitis, Behcet's syndrome, and cancers such as lymphomas, leukemia,
melanomas, certain carcinomas, and gliomas (particularly glioblastoma, ependymoma, and
medulloblastoma). Other causes include chemical reactions to certain intrathecal injections.
Use of immunosuppressants and the AIDS epidemic have increased the incidence of fungal meningitis.
Cryptococcus
sp ( is the most common cause in patients with AIDS, Hodgkin lymphoma, or
lymphosarcoma and in those taking high-dose, long-term corticosteroids.
Coccidioides, Candida,
Actinomyces, Histoplasma
, and
Aspergillus
spp are less common causes (see
Chapter 142
).
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:1921===
Most manifestations are similar to those of acute meningitis but evolve over weeks. Fever may be
minimal. Headache, backache, and cranial nerve or spinal nerve root deficits are common.
Communicating hydrocephalus may develop and cause dementia. Intracranial pressure may remain
elevated and cause headache, vomiting, and decreased alertness for days or weeks. Without treatment,
death can occur within a few weeks or months (eg, with TB or tumor), or symptoms can continue for
years (eg, with Lyme disease).
Diagnosis
• CT or MRI
• CSF analysis
The diagnosis is suspected if meningeal symptoms or signs develop over > 2 wk, with or without
symptoms of cerebral dysfunction, particularly if a potential cause of meningitis (eg, active TB, cancer)
exists.
The diagnosis requires CSF analysis. CT or MRI is done to exclude mass lesions that cause slowly
evolving cerebral dysfunction (eg, tumors, abscesses, subdural effusions) and to determine whether
lumbar puncture can be done safely. CSF pressure is often elevated but may be normal. CSF cell count is
elevated with a lymphocytic predominance; glucose is slightly or moderately reduced but may be
significantly decreased in TB or fungal meningitis. CSF protein is high (see
Table 180-1
).
Other CSF tests (eg, special stains, fungal and acid-fast bacillus culture) are determined by the patient's
risk factors. For example, TB is suspected in patients who are alcoholic, HIV-positive, or from areas where
TB is endemic (. Identification of TB by microscopy has a notoriously low yield and requires
acid-fast staining or immunofluorescence and an exhaustive microscopic search of CSF sediment, ideally
from a large volume of CSF (30 to 50 mL), which may require 2 or 3 lumbar punctures (typically 20 to 30
mL can be withdrawn at a time). Positive cultures are the gold standard for diagnosis but also require 30
to 50 mL of CSF, and results take 2 to 6 wk. Although results differ among laboratories, PCR has a yield
of about 50% in TB meningitis and can provide a specific diagnosis within days. Measurement of CSF
tubulostearic acid by gas-liquid chromatography is specific but technically complex and not widely used.
Fungi may be detected microscopically in wet mounts or, for
Cryptococcus
sp, in India ink preparations
(see also p.
). CSF cultures grow
Cryptococcus
and
Candida
spp in a few days and less common
fungi in weeks. CSF cryptococcal antigen is highly specific and sensitive.
Neurosyphilis is diagnosed using the CSF Venereal Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL) test (. In Lyme disease (, diagnosis can be made by testing for serum antibodies against
Borrelia burgdorferi
. If serology is negative but clinical signs of meningitis are found, testing for
intrathecal antibodies can be useful for diagnosis.
Diagnosis of neoplastic meningitis requires detecting cancer cells in CSF; detection depends on
adequate CSF volume, frequency of collection (malignant cells may shed periodically; multiple samples
increase the yield), sampling site (cisternal CSF is more
often positive), and prompt fixation to preserve
cell morphology. For 95% sensitivity, 30 to 50 mL of CSF (typically requiring several lumbar punctures) is
collected and delivered to the laboratory promptly. For suspected neurosarcoidosis, ACE in CSF is
measured; it is elevated in up to 24 to 50% of patients. For certain tumors, CSF tumor markers (eg, IL-10
for lymphoma; soluble CD27 for lymphoid cancers, such as acute lymphoblastic leukemia and nonHodgkin lymphoma) can help with diagnosis or monitoring disease activity.
Some causes of subacute or chronic meningitis (eg, Behcet's syndrome) cannot be diagnosed by CSF
analysis and must be diagnosed clinically.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the cause (see elsewhere in THE MANUAL).
===PAGE:1922===

===PAGE:1923===
Chapter 181. Neuro-Ophthalmologic and Cranial Nerve Disorders
Introduction
(See also
Horner's Syndrome
on p.
and
Chs. 47
,
,
, and
.)
Dysfunction of certain cranial nerves may affect the eye, pupil, optic nerve, or extraocular muscles and
their nerves; thus, they can be considered cranial nerve disorders, neuroophthalmologic disorders, or
both. Neuroophthalmologic disorders may also involve dysfunction of the central pathways that control
and integrate ocular movement and vision. Cranial nerve disorders can also involve dysfunction of smell,
vision, chewing, facial sensation or expression, taste, hearing, balance, swallowing, phonation, head
turning and shoulder elevation, or tongue movements (see
Table 181-1
). One or more cranial nerves may be affected.
Causes and symptoms of neuro-ophthalmologic and cranial nerve disorders overlap. Both types of
disorders can result from tumors, inflammation, trauma, systemic disorders, and degenerative or other
processes, causing such symptoms as vision loss, diplopia, ptosis, pupillary abnormalities, periocular
pain, facial pain, or headache.
Diagnosis
Evaluation includes the following:
• Detailed questioning about symptoms
• Examination of the visual system (see also p.
)
• Tests to detect nystagmus (see
Sidebar 46-1

• Examination of the cranial nerves (
Visual system examination includes ophthalmoscopy and testing of visual acuity, visual fields (,
pupils (see
Table 181-2
), and eye movements (ocular motility—see
Table 181-3
). As part of this testing, the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerves are examined (see also p.
). Neuroimaging with CT or MRI is also usually required.
The following parts of the visual examination are of particular interest in diagnosing neuroophthalmologic
and cranial nerve disorders:
Pupils
are inspected for size, equality, and regularity. Normally, the pupils constrict promptly (within 1 sec)
and equally during accommodation and during exposure to direct light and to light directed at the other
pupil (consensual light reflex). Testing pupillary response to consensual light via a swinging flashlight test
can determine whether a defect is present. Normally, the degree of pupillary constriction does not change
as the flashlight is swung from eye to eye.
• If a relative afferent defect (deafferented pupil, afferent pupillary defect, or Marcus Gunn pupil) is
present, the pupil paradoxically dilates when the flashlight swings to the side of the defect. A
deafferented pupil constricts in response to consensual but not to direct light.
• If an efferent defect is present, the pupil responds sluggishly or does not respond to both direct and
consensual light.
Eye movements
are checked by having the patient hold the head steady while tracking the examiner's
finger as it moves to the far right,
[Table 181-1.
Cranial Nerves]
===PAGE:1924===
left, upward, downward, diagonally to either side, and inward toward the patient's nose (to assess
accommodation). However, such examination may miss mild paresis of ocular movement sufficient to
cause diplopia.
Diplopia may indicate a defect in bilateral coordination of eye movements (eg, in neural pathways) or in
the 3rd (oculomotor), 4th (trochlear), or 6th (abducens) cranial nerve. If diplopia persists when one eye is
closed (monocular diplopia), the cause is probably a nonneurologic eye disorder (. If diplopia disappears when either eye is closed (binocular diplopia), the cause is probably a
disorder of ocular motility. The 2 images are furthest apart when the patient looks in the direction served
by the paretic eye muscle (eg, to the left when the left lateral rectus muscle
[Table 181-2.
Common Pupillary Abnormalities]
is paretic). The eye that, when closed, eliminates the more peripheral image is paretic. Placing a red
glass over one eye can help identify the paretic eye. When the red glass covers the paretic eye, the more
peripheral image is red (see also p.
).
Treatment
Treatment of neuro-ophthalmologic and cranial disorders depends on the cause.
Conjugate Gaze Palsies
A conjugate gaze palsy is inability to move both eyes in a single horizontal (most commonly) or
vertical direction.
Gaze palsies most commonly affect horizontal gaze; some affect upward gaze, and fewer affect downward
gaze.
Horizontal gaze palsies:
Conjugate horizontal gaze is controlled by neural input from the cerebral
hemispheres, cerebellum, vestibular nuclei, and neck. Neural input from these sites converges at the
horizontal gaze center (paramedian pontine reticular formation) and is integrated into a final command to
the adjacent 6th cranial nerve nucleus, which controls the lateral rectus on the same side, and, via the
medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), to the contralateral 3rd cranial nerve nucleus and the medial rectus
it controls. Inhibitory signals to opposing eye muscles occur simultaneously.
[Table 181-3.
Common Disturbances of Ocular Motility]
The most common and devastating impairment of horizontal gaze results from pontine lesions that affect
the horizontal gaze center and the 6th cranial nerve nucleus. Strokes are a common cause, resulting in
loss of horizontal gaze ipsilateral to the lesion. In palsies due to stroke, the eyes may not move in
response to any stimulus (eg, voluntary or vestibular). Milder palsies may cause only nystagmus or
inability to maintain fixation.
Another common cause is a lesion in the contralateral cerebral hemisphere rostral to the frontal gyrus.
These lesions are typically caused by a stroke. The resulting palsy usually abates with time. Horizontal
conjugate gaze mediated by brain stem reflexes (eg, in response to cold-water caloric stimulation) is
preserved.
Vertical gaze palsies:
Upward and downward gaze depends on input from fiber paths that ascend from
the vestibular system through the MLF on both sides to the 3rd and 4th cranial nerve nuclei, the interstitial
nucleus of Cajal, and the rostral interstitial nucleus of the MLF. A separate system descends, presumably
from the cerebral hemispheres, through the midbrain pretectum to the 3rd and 4th cranial nerve nuclei.
The rostral interstitial nucleus of the MLF integrates the neural input into a final command for vertical
gaze.
Vertical gaze becomes more limited with aging.
===PAGE:1925===
Vertical gaze palsies commonly result from midbrain lesions, usually infarcts and tumors. Parinaud's
syndrome (dorsal midbrain syndrome), a conjugate upward vertical gaze palsy, may result from a pineal
tumor or, less commonly, a tumor or infarct of the midbrain pretectum. This syndrome is characterized by
impaired upward gaze, lid retraction (Collier's sign), downward gaze preference (setting-sun sign),
convergence-retraction nystagmus, and dilated pupils (about 6 mm) that respond poorly to light but better
to accommodation (light-near dissociation).
Downward gaze palsies:
Impaired downward gaze with preservation of upward gaze
usually indicates
progressive supranuclear palsy (; other causes are rare.
Internuclear Ophthalmoplegia
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia is characterized by paresis of eye adduction in horizontal gaze but
not in convergence. It can be unilateral or bilateral.
During horizontal gaze, the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) on each side of the brain stem enables
abduction of one eye to be coordinated with adduction of the other. The MLF connects the following
structures:
• 6th cranial nerve nucleus (which controls the lateral rectus, responsible for abduction)
• Adjacent horizontal gaze center (paramedian pontine reticular formation)
• Contralateral 3rd cranial nerve nucleus (which controls the medial rectus, responsible for adduction)
The MLF also connects the vestibular nuclei with the 3rd cranial nerve nuclei.
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia results from a lesion in the MLF. In young people, the disorder is commonly
caused by multiple sclerosis and may be bilateral. In the elderly, internuclear ophthalmoplegia is typically
caused by stroke and is unilateral. Occasionally, the cause is neurosyphilis, Lyme disease, tumor, or drug
intoxication (eg, with tricyclic antidepressants).
If a lesion in the MLF blocks signals from the horizontal gaze center to the 3rd cranial nerve, the eye on
the affected side cannot adduct (or adducts weakly) past the midline. The affected eye adducts normally
in convergence because convergence does not require signals from the horizontal gaze center. This
finding distinguishes internuclear ophthalmoplegia from 3rd cranial nerve palsy, which impairs adduction
in convergence (this palsy also differs because it causes limited vertical eye movement, ptosis, and
pupillary abnormalities).
During horizontal gaze to the side opposite the affected eye, images are horizontally displaced, causing
diplopia; nystagmus often occurs in the abducting eye. Sometimes vertical bilateral nystagmus occurs
during attempted upward gaze.
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder.
One-and-a-half syndrome:
This uncommon syndrome occurs if a lesion affects the horizontal gaze
center and the MLF on the same side. The eyes cannot move horizontally to either side except the eye on
the side opposite the lesion can abduct; convergence is unaffected. Causes include multiple sclerosis,
infarction, hemorrhage, and tumor.
With treatment (eg, radiation therapy for a tumor, treatment of multiple sclerosis), improvement may occur
but is often limited after infarction.
Third Cranial Nerve Disorders
Third cranial nerve disorders can impair ocular motility, pupillary function, or both. Symptoms
and signs include diplopia, ptosis, and paresis of eye adduction and of upward and downward
gaze. If the pupil is affected, it is dilated and light reflexes are impaired. If the pupil is affected or
===PAGE:1926===
patients are increasingly unresponsive, CT is done as soon as possible.
Etiology
Third cranial (oculomotor) nerve disorders that cause palsies and affect the pupil commonly result from
aneurysms (especially of the posterior communicating artery) and transtentorial brain herniation (see
Fig. 174-1
 and less commonly from meningitis affecting the brain stem (eg, TB meningitis).
The most common cause of palsies that spare the pupil, particularly partial palsies, is ischemia of the 3rd
cranial nerve (usually due to diabetes) or of the midbrain. Occasionally, a posterior communicating artery
aneurysm causes complete oculomotor palsy and spares the pupil.
Symptoms and Signs
Diplopia and ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelid) occur. The affected eye may deviate slightly out and
down in straight-ahead gaze; adduction is slow and may not proceed past the midline. Upward gaze is
impaired. When downward gaze is attempted, the superior oblique muscle causes the eye to adduct
slightly and rotate. The pupil may be normal or dilated; its response to direct or and consensual light may
be sluggish or absent (efferent defect). Mydriasis (pupil dilation) may be an early sign.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• CT or MRI
Differential diagnosis includes midbrain lesions that disrupt the oculomotor fascicle (Claude's syndrome,
Benedict's syndrome),
leptomeningeal tumor or infection, cavernous sinus disease (giant carotid
aneurysm, fistula, or thrombosis), intraorbital structural lesions (eg, orbital mucormycosis) that restrict
ocular motility, ocular myopathies (eg, due to hyperthyroidism or mitochondrial disorders), and disorders
of the neuromuscular junction (eg, due to myasthenia gravis or botulism). Differentiation may be clinical.
Exophthalmos or enophthalmos, a history of severe orbital trauma, or an obviously inflamed orbit
suggests an intraorbital structural disorder. Graves' orbitopathy (ophthalmopathy) should be considered in
patients with bilateral ocular paresis, paresis of upward gaze or abduction, exophthalmos, lid retraction,
lid lag during downward gaze (Graefe's sign), and a normal pupil.
CT or MRI is required. If a patient has a dilated pupil and a sudden, severe headache (suggesting
ruptured aneurysm) or is increasingly unresponsive (suggesting herniation), CT is done immediately. If
ruptured aneurysm is suspected and CT does not show blood or is not available rapidly, other tests, such
as lumbar puncture, magnetic resonance angiography, CT angiography, or cerebral angiography, are
indicated. Cavernous sinus disease and orbital mucormycosis require immediate MRI imaging for timely
treatment.
Fourth Cranial Nerve Palsy
Fourth cranial nerve palsy impairs the superior oblique muscle, causing paresis of vertical gaze,
mainly in adduction.
Fourth cranial (trochlear) nerve palsy is often idiopathic. Few causes have been identified. Causes
include closed head injury (common), which may cause unilateral or bilateral palsies, and infarction due to
small-vessel disease (eg, in diabetes). Rarely, this palsy results from aneurysms, tumors (eg, tentorial
meningioma, pinealoma), or multiple sclerosis.
Because the superior oblique muscle is paretic, the eyes do not adduct normally. Patients see double
images, one above and slightly to the side of the other; thus, going down stairs, which requires looking
down and inward, is difficult. However, tilting the head to the side opposite the palsied muscle can
compensate and eliminate the double images.
Examination may detect subtle impaired ocular motility, causing symptoms but not signs.
===PAGE:1927===
Oculomotor exercises or prism glasses may help restore concordant vision.
Sixth Cranial Nerve Palsy
Sixth cranial nerve palsy affects the lateral rectus muscle, impairing eye abduction. The eye
may be slightly adducted when the patient looks straight ahead. The palsy may be secondary to
nerve infarction, Wernicke's encephalopathy, trauma, infection, or increased intracranial
pressure, or it may be idiopathic. Determining the cause requires MRI and often lumbar
puncture and evaluation for vasculitis.
Etiology
Sixth cranial (abducens) nerve palsy may result from small-vessel disease, particularly in diabetics as part
of a disorder called mononeuritis multiplex (multiple mononeuropathy). It may result from compression of
the nerve by lesions in the cavernous sinus (eg, nasopharyngeal tumors), orbit, or base of the skull. The
palsy may also result from increased intracranial pressure, head trauma, or both. Other causes include
meningitis, meningeal carcinomatosis, Wernicke's encephalopathy, aneurysm, vasculitis, multiple
sclerosis, pontine stroke, and, rarely, low CSF pressure headache (eg, after lumbar puncture). Children
with respiratory infection may have recurrent palsy. However, the cause of an isolated 6th cranial nerve
palsy is often not identified.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include binocular horizontal diplopia when looking to the side of the paretic eye. Because the
tonic action of the medial rectus muscle is unopposed, the eye is slightly adducted when the patient looks
straight ahead. The eye abducts sluggishly, and even when abduction is maximal, the lateral sclera is
exposed. With complete paralysis, the eye cannot abduct past midline.
Palsy resulting from nerve compression by a thrombus (eg, due to head trauma or stroke), tumor, or
aneurysm in the cavernous sinus causes severe head pain, chemosis (conjunctival edema), anesthesia in
the distribution of the 1st division of the 5th cranial nerve, optic nerve compression with vision loss, and
paralysis of the 3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerves. Both sides are typically affected, although unevenly.
Diagnosis
• MRI
• If vasculitis is suspected, ESR, antinuclear antibodies, and rheumatoid factor
A 6th nerve palsy is usually obvious, but the cause is not. If retinal venous pulsations are
seen during
ophthalmoscopy, increased intracranial pressure is unlikely. CT is often done because it is often
immediately available. However, MRI is the test of choice; MRI provides greater resolution of the orbits,
cavernous sinus, posterior fossa, and cranial nerves. If imaging results are normal but meningitis or
increased intracranial pressure is suspected, lumbar puncture is done.
If vasculitis is suspected clinically, evaluation begins with measurement of ESR, antinuclear antibodies,
and rheumatoid factor. In children, if increased intracranial pressure is excluded, respiratory infection is
considered.
Treatment
In many patients, 6th cranial nerve palsies resolve once the underlying disorder is treated. Idiopathic
palsy usually abates within 2 mo.
Trigeminal Neuralgia
(Tic Douloureux)
===PAGE:1928===
Trigeminal neuralgia is severe paroxysmal, lancinating facial pain due to a disorder of the 5th
cranial nerve. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is usually with carbamazepine or gabapentin;
sometimes surgery is required.
Trigeminal neuralgia affects mainly adults, especially the elderly.
Etiology
Trigeminal neuralgia is usually caused by an intracranial artery (eg, anterior inferior cerebellar artery,
ectatic basilar artery) or, less often, a venous loop that compresses the 5th cranial (trigeminal) nerve at its
root entry zone into the brain stem. Other less common causes include compression by a tumor and
occasionally a multiple sclerosis plaque at the root entry zone, but these are distinguished usually by
accompanying sensory and other deficits. Other disorders that cause similar symptoms (eg, multiple
sclerosis) are sometimes considered to be trigeminal neuralgia and sometimes not. Recognizing the
cause is what is important.
The mechanism is unclear. One theory suggests that nerve compression causes local demyelination,
which may result in ectopic impulse generation and/or disinhibition of central pain pathways involving the
spinal trigeminal nucleus.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain occurs along the distribution of one or more sensory divisions of the trigeminal nerve, most often the
maxillary. The pain is paroxysmal, lasting seconds up to 2 min, but attacks may recur rapidly. It is
lancinating, excruciating, and sometimes incapacitating. Pain is often precipitated by stimulating a facial
trigger point (eg, by chewing, brushing the teeth, or smiling). Sleeping on that side of the face is often
intolerable.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Symptoms are almost pathognomonic. Thus, some other disorders that cause facial pain can be
differentiated clinically:
• Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania (Sjaastad syndrome) is differentiated by longer (5 to 8 min) attacks of
pain and its dramatic response to indomethacin.
• Postherpetic pain is differentiated by its constant duration (without paroxysms), typical antecedent rash,
scarring, and predilection for the ophthalmic division.
• Migraine, which may cause atypical facial pain, is differentiated by pain that is more prolonged and often
throbbing.
Neurologic examination is normal in trigeminal neuralgia. Thus, neurologic deficits (usually loss of facial
sensation) suggest that the trigeminal neuralgia-like pain is caused by another disorder (eg, tumor, stroke,
multiple sclerosis plaque, vascular malformation, other lesions that compress the trigeminal nerve or
disrupt its brain stem pathways.
Treatment
• Usually anticonvulsants
Carbamazepine 200 mg po tid or qid is usually effective for long periods; it is begun at 100 mg po bid,
increasing the dose by 100 to 200 mg/day until pain is controlled (maximum daily dose 1200 mg). Hepatic
enzymes and CBC should be checked after 2 wk, then every 3 to 6 mo. If carbamazepine is ineffective or
has adverse effects, one of the following may be tried:
===PAGE:1929===
• Oxcarbazepine 150 to 300 mg po bid
• Gabapentin 300 to 600 mg po tid (300 mg po once on day 1, 300 mg po bid on day 2, 300 mg po tid on
day 3, then increasing dose as needed to 600 mg po tid)
• Phenytoin 100 to 200 mg po bid (beginning with 100 mg po bid, then increasing as needed)
• Baclofen 10 to 30 mg po tid (beginning with 5 to 10 mg po tid, then increasing as needed by about 5
mg/day)
•
Amitriptyline 25 to 150 mg po taken at bedtime (beginning with 25 mg, then increasing by 25-mg
increments each week as needed)
Peripheral nerve block provides temporary relief.
If pain is severe despite these measures, neuroablative treatments are considered; however, efficacy may
be temporary, and improvement may be followed by recurrent pain that is more severe than the preceding
episodes. In a posterior fossa craniectomy, a small pad can be placed to separate the pulsating vascular
loop from the trigeminal root. In radiosurgery, a gamma knife can be used to cut the proximal trigeminal
nerve. Electrolytic or chemical lesions or balloon compression of the trigeminal (gasserian) ganglion can
be made via a percutaneous stereotaxically positioned needle. Occasionally, the trigeminal nerve fibers
between the gasserian ganglion and brain stem are cut. Sometimes, as a last resort to relieve intractable
pain, the trigeminal nerve is destroyed.
Hemifacial Spasm
Hemifacial spasm refers to unilateral painless, synchronous contractions of facial muscles due to
dysfunction of the 7th cranial (facial) nerve and/or its motor nucleus. Hemifacial spasm results from nerve
compression by a pulsating blood vessel, similar to that in trigeminal neuralgia.
Diagnosis is clinical. Focal seizures, blepharospasm, and tics cause similar symptoms and should be
considered.
Treatment is similar to that of trigeminal neuralgia except botulinum toxin (botulinum toxin type A or
botulinum toxin type B) can also be used effectively.
Bell's Palsy
Bell's palsy is sudden, idiopathic, unilateral peripheral 7th cranial nerve palsy. Symptoms are
hemifacial paresis of the upper and lower face. There are no specific tests for diagnosis.
Treatment may include corticosteroids, antiviral drugs (eg, acyclovir), lubrication of the eye, and
intermittent use of an eye patch.
Etiology
Cause is unknown, but the mechanism is presumably swelling of the 7th cranial (facial) nerve due to an
immune or viral disorder. Recent evidence suggests herpes simplex virus infection. The nerve is
compressed, resulting in ischemia and paresis, because the nerve passes through a narrow opening
(internal acoustic meatus) in the temporal bone.
The orbicularis oculi and frontalis muscles are paretic when the lesion is distal to the 7th cranial nerve
nucleus (ie, peripheral) but much less so when the lesion is proximal to the nucleus (ie, central). The
effects differ because the orbicularis oculi and frontalis muscles are controlled by the 7th cranial nerve
nuclei (central part of the facial nerve), which receive input from both left and right hemispheres. In
contrast, the lower facial muscles (below the zygomatic arch) receive input from mainly the peripheral part
of the facial nerve, distal to the 7th cranial nerve nuclei, which receives input from only one hemisphere.
Thus, the muscles are paretic regardless of the location of the lesion along the 7th cranial nerve.
===PAGE:1930===
Symptoms and Signs
Pain behind the ear often precedes facial paresis. Paresis, often with complete paralysis, develops within
hours and is usually maximal within 48 to 72 h. Patients may report a numb or heavy feeling in the face.
The affected side becomes flat and expressionless; ability to wrinkle the forehead, blink, and grimace is
limited or absent (see
Plate 68
). In severe cases, the palpebral fissure widens and the eye does not close, often irritating the
conjunctiva and drying the cornea.
Sensory examination is normal, but the external auditory canal and a small patch behind the ear (over the
mastoid) may be painful to the touch. If the nerve lesion is proximal to the geniculate ganglion, salivation,
taste, and lacrimation may be impaired, and hyperacusis may be present.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Testing if indicated by clinical findings
There are no specific diagnostic tests. Thus, Bell's palsy is a diagnosis of exclusion. It can be
distinguished from a central 7th cranial nerve lesion (eg, due to hemispheric stroke or tumor), which
causes weakness primarily of the lower face; patients with central lesions can usually furrow their brow
and close their eyes tightly. Other disorders that cause peripheral 7th cranial nerve palsies and must be
excluded include the following:
• Geniculate herpes (Ramsay Hunt syndrome, which is due to herpes zoster)
• Middle ear or mastoid infections
•
Sarcoidosis
• Lyme disease
• Petrous bone fractures
• Carcinomatous or leukemic nerve invasion
• Chronic meningitis
• Cerebellopontine angle or glomus jugulare tumors
Other disorders that cause peripheral 7th cranial nerve palsy typically develop more slowly than Bell's
palsy and may have other distinguishing symptoms or signs.
In Bell's palsy, MRI may show contrast enhancement of the 7th cranial nerve at or near the geniculate
ganglion. However, its enhancement may reflect other pathology, such as sarcoidosis or meningeal tumor.
If the paralysis progresses over weeks to months, the likelihood of tumor (eg, most commonly
schwannoma) compressing the 7th cranial nerve increases. MRI can also help exclude other structural
disorders causing 7th cranial nerve palsy. CT, usually negative in Bell's palsy, is done if a fracture is
suspected or if MRI is not immediately available and stroke is possible. Acute and convalescent serologic
tests for Lyme disease are done if patients have been in a geographic area where ticks are endemic. For
all patients, a chest x-ray is taken and serum ACE is measured to check for sarcoidosis. Viral titers are not
helpful.
Prognosis
The extent of nerve damage determines outcome. If some function remains, full recovery typically occurs
===PAGE:1931===
within several months. Nerve conduction studies and electromyography predict outcome. The likelihood
of complete recovery after total paralysis is 90% if nerve branches in the face retain normal excitability to
supramaximal electrical stimulation and is only about 20% if electrical excitability is absent.
Regrowth of nerve fibers may be misdirected, innervating lower facial muscles with periocular fibers and
vice versa. The result is contraction of unexpected muscles during voluntary facial movements
(synkinesia) or crocodile tears during salivation. Chronic disuse of the facial muscles may lead to
contractures.
Treatment
• Possibly corticosteroids, antiviral drugs, or both
• Supportive measures
No treatment has proved effective for idiopathic Bell's palsy. Corticosteroids, if begun within 48 h after
onset, may slightly reduce duration and degree of residual paralysis. Prednisone 60 to 80 mg po
once/day is given for 1 wk, then decreased gradually over the 2nd wk. Antiviral drugs effective against
herpes simplex virus (eg, valacyclovir 1 g po tid for 7 to 10 days, famciclovir 500 mg po tid for 5 to 10
days, acyclovir 400 mg po 5 times/day for 10 days) are also often given.
Corneal drying must be prevented by frequent use of natural tears, isotonic saline, or methylcellulose
drops and by intermittent use of tape or a patch to help close the eye, particularly during sleep.
Tarsorrhaphy is occasionally required.
Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is recurrent attacks of severe pain in the 9th cranial nerve
distribution (posterior pharynx, tonsils, back of the tongue, middle ear). Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment is usually with carbamazepine or gabapentin.
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia sometimes results from nerve compression by an aberrant, pulsating artery
similar to that in trigeminal neuralgia and hemifacial spasm. Rarely, the cause is a tumor in the
cerebellopontine angle or the neck. Often, no cause is identified. The disorder is rare, more commonly
affecting men, usually after age 40.
Symptoms and Signs
As in trigeminal neuralgia, paroxysmal attacks of unilateral brief, excruciating pain occur spontaneously or
are precipitated by certain movements (eg, chewing, swallowing, talking, sneezing). The pain, lasting
seconds to a few minutes, usually begins in the tonsillar region or at the base of the tongue and may
radiate to the ipsilateral ear. Occasionally, increased vagus nerve activity causes sinus arrest with
syncope; episodes may be very infrequent.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation, often including response to anesthetics
• MRI
Diagnosis is clinical. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is distinguished from trigeminal neuralgia by the
location of the pain. Also, in glossopharyngeal neuralgia, swallowing or touching the tonsils with an
applicator tends to precipitate pain, and applying lidocaine to the throat temporarily eliminates
spontaneous or evoked
pain. MRI is done to exclude tonsillar, pharyngeal, and cerebellopontine angle
tumors and metastatic lesions in the anterior cervical triangle. Local nerve blocks done by an ENT
physician can help distinguish between carotidynia, superior laryngeal neuralgia, and pain caused by
tumors.
===PAGE:1932===
Treatment
• Usually anticonvulsants
Treatment is the same as that for trigeminal neuralgia (. If oral drugs are ineffective, topical
cocaine applied to the pharynx may provide temporary relief, and surgery to decompress the nerve from a
pulsating artery may be necessary. If pain is restricted to the pharynx, surgery can be restricted to the
extracranial part of the nerve. If pain is widespread, surgery must involve the intracranial part of the
nerve.
===PAGE:1933===
Chapter 182. Craniocervical Junction Abnormalities
Craniocervical junction abnormalities are congenital or acquired abnormalities of the occipital
bone, foramen magnum, or first 2 cervical vertebrae that decrease the space for the lower brain
stem and cervical cord. These abnormalities can result in neck pain; syringomyelia; cerebellar,
lower cranial nerve, and spinal cord deficits; and vertebrobasilar ischemia. Diagnosis is by MRI
or CT. Treatment often involves reduction, followed by stabilization via surgery or an external
device.
Neural tissue is flexible and susceptible to compression. Craniocervical junction abnormalities can cause
or contribute to cervical spinal cord or brain stem compression; some abnormalities and their clinical
consequences include the following:
• Fusion of the atlas (C1) and occipital bone: Spinal cord compression if the anteroposterior diameter of
the foramen magnum behind the odontoid process is < 19 mm
• Basilar invagination (upward bulging of the occipital condyles): A short neck and compression that can
affect the cerebellum, brain stem, lower cranial nerves, and spinal cord
• Atlantoaxial subluxation or dislocation (displacement of the atlas anteriorly in relation to the axis): Acute
or chronic spinal cord compression
• Klippel-Feil malformation (fusion of cervical vertebrae): Deformity and limited motion of the neck but
usually no neurologic consequences
• Platybasia (flattening of the skull base so that the angle formed by the intersection of the clival and
anterior fossa planes is > 135°), seen on lateral skull imaging: No symptoms or cerebellar or spinal cord
deficits or normal-pressure hydrocephalus
Etiology
Craniocervical junction abnormalities can be congenital or acquired.
Congenital:
Congenital abnormalities may be specific structural abnormalities or general or systemic
disorders that affect skeletal growth and development. Many patients have multiple abnormalities.
Structural abnormalities
include the following:
• Os odontoideum (anomalous bone that replaces all or part of the odontoid process)
• Atlas assimilation (congenital fusion of the atlas and occipital bone)
• Congenital Klippel-Feil malformation (eg, with Turner's or Noonan's syndrome), often associated with
atlanto-occipital anomalies
• Atlas hypoplasia
• Chiari malformations (descent of the cerebellar tonsils or vermis into the cervical spinal canal,
sometimes associated with platybasia—
General or systemic disorders
that affect skeletal growth and development and involve the
craniocervical junction include the following:
• Achondroplasia (impaired epiphyseal bone growth, resulting in shortened, malformed bones) sometimes
causes the foramen magnum to narrow or fuse with the atlas and thus may compress the spinal cord or
brain stem.
• Down syndrome, Morquio's syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis IV), or osteogenesis imperfecta can
===PAGE:1934===
cause atlantoaxial subluxation or dislocation.
Acquired:
Acquired causes include injuries and disorders.
• Injuries may involve bone, ligaments, or both and are usually caused by vehicle or bicycle accidents,
falls, and particularly diving; some injuries are immediately fatal.
• RA (the most common disease cause) and Paget's disease of the cervical spine can cause atlantoaxial
dislocation or subluxation, basilar invagination, or platybasia.
• Metastatic tumors that affect bone can cause atlantoaxial dislocation or subluxation.
• Slowly growing craniocervical junction tumors (eg, meningioma, chordoma) can impinge on the brain
stem or spinal cord.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs can occur after a minor neck injury or spontaneously and may vary in progression.
Presentation varies by degree of compression and by structures affected. The most common
manifestations are
• Neck pain, often with headache
• Symptoms and signs of spinal cord compression
Neck pain
often spreads to the arms and may be accompanied by headache (commonly, occipital
headache radiating to the skull vertex); it is attributed to compression of the C2 root and the greater
occipital nerve and to local musculoskeletal dysfunction. Neck pain and headache usually worsen with
head movement and can be precipitated by coughing or bending forward. If patients with Chiari
malformation have hydrocephalus, being upright may aggravate the hydrocephalus and result in
headaches.
Spinal cord compression
involves the upper cervical cord. Deficits include spastic paresis in the arms,
legs, or both, caused by compression of motor tracts. Joint position and vibration senses (posterior
column function) are commonly impaired. Tingling down the back, often into the legs, with neck flexion
(Lhermitte's sign) may occur. Uncommonly, pain and temperature senses (spinothalamic tract function)
are impaired in a stocking-glove pattern.
Neck appearance, range of motion
, or both can be affected by some abnormalities (eg, platybasia,
basilar invagination, Klippel-Feil malformation). The neck may be short, webbed (with a skinfold running
approximately from the sternocleidomastoid to the shoulder), or in an abnormal position (eg, torticollis in
Klippel-Feil malformation). Range of motion may be limited.
Brain compression
(eg, due to platybasia, basilar invagination, or craniocervical tumors) may cause
brain stem, cranial nerve, and cerebellar deficits. Brain stem and cranial nerve deficits include sleep
apnea, internuclear ophthalmoplegia (ipsilateral weakness of eye adduction plus contralateral horizontal
nystagmus in the abducting eye with lateral gaze), downbeat nystagmus (fast component downward),
hoarseness, dysarthria, and dysphagia. Cerebellar deficits usually impair coordination (.
Vertebrobasilar ischemia
can be triggered by changing head position. Symptoms may include
intermittent syncope, drop attacks, vertigo, confusion or altered consciousness, weakness, and visual
disturbance.
Syringomyelia
(cavity in the central part of the spinal cord— is common in patients with
Chiari malformation. It may cause segmental flaccid weakness and atrophy, which first appear or are most
severe in the distal upper extremities; pain and temperature senses may be lost in a capelike distribution
over the neck and proximal upper extremities, but light touch is preserved.
===PAGE:1935===
Diagnosis
• MRI or CT of the brain and upper spinal cord
A craniocervical abnormality is suspected when patients have pain in the neck or occiput plus neurologic
deficits referable to the lower brain stem, upper cervical spinal cord, or cerebellum. Lower cervical spine
disorders can usually be distinguished clinically (based on level of spinal cord dysfunction) and by
neuroimaging.
Neuroimaging:
If a craniocervical abnormality is suspected, MRI or CT of the upper spinal cord and
brain, particularly the posterior fossa and craniocervical junction, is done. Acute or suddenly progressive
deficits are an emergency, requiring immediate imaging. Sagittal MRI best identifies associated neural
lesions (eg, hindbrain, cerebellar, spinal cord, and vascular abnormalities; syringomyelia) and soft-tissue
lesions. CT shows bone structures more accurately than MRI and may be done more easily in an
emergency.
If MRI and CT are unavailable, plain x-rays—lateral view of the skull showing the cervical spine,
anteroposterior view, and oblique views of the cervical spine—are taken.
If MRI is unavailable or inconclusive and CT is inconclusive, CT myelography (CT after intrathecal
injection of a radiopaque dye) is done. If MRI or CT suggests vascular abnormalities, magnetic resonance
angiography or vertebral angiography is done.
Treatment
• Reduction and immobilization
• Sometimes surgical decompression, fixation, or both
If neural structures are compressed, treatment consists of reduction (traction or changes in head position
to realign the craniocervical junction and thus relieve neural compression). After reduction, the head and
neck are immobilized.
Acute or suddenly progressive spinal cord compression requires emergency
reduction.
For most patients, reduction involves skeletal traction with a crown halo ring and weight of up to about 4
kg. Reduction with traction may take 5 to 6 days. If reduction is achieved, the neck is immobilized in a
halo vest for 8 to 12 wk; then x-rays must be taken to confirm stability.
If reduction does not relieve neural compression, surgical decompression, using a ventral or a dorsal
approach, is necessary. If instability persists after decompression, posterior fixation (stabilization) is
required. For some abnormalities (eg, due to RA), external immobilization alone is rarely successful; if it is
unsuccessful, posterior fixation or anterior decompression and stabilization are required.
Several different methods of instrumentation (eg, plates or rods with screws) can be used for temporary
stabilization until bones fuse and stability is permanent. In general, all unstable areas must be fused.
Bone disease:
Radiation therapy and a hard cervical collar often help patients with metastatic bone
tumors. Calcitonin, mithramycin, and bisphosphonates may help patients with Paget's disease.
===PAGE:1936===
Chapter 183. Movement and Cerebellar Disorders
Introduction
Voluntary movement requires interaction of the corticospinal (pyramidal) tracts, basal ganglia, and
cerebellum (the center for motor coordination). The pyramidal tracts pass through the medullary pyramids
to connect the cerebral cortex to lower motor centers of the brain stem and spinal cord. The basal ganglia
(caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra) form the
extrapyramidal system. They are located deep in the forebrain and direct their output mainly rostrally
through the thalamus to the cerebral cortex. Most neural lesions that cause movement disorders occur in
the extrapyramidal system; thus, movement disorders are also called extrapyramidal disorders.
Classification
Movement disorders are classified as those with decreased or slow purposeful movements (hypokinesia)
or those with excessive voluntary or abnormal involuntary movements (hyperkinesia). Although disorders
of the cerebellum also impair gait and movement, they are classified separately (.
Hypokinesia:
Most hypokinetic disorders are parkinsonian disorders, which are characterized by slow
and decreased movement, muscular rigidity, resting tremor, and postural instability (.
Hyperkinesia:
There are many hyperkinetic disorders (see
Fig. 183-1
and
Table 183-1
). They can be subclassified as rhythmic or non-rhythmic.
Rhythmic disorders are primarily tremors—regular alternating or oscillatory movements, which can occur
mainly at rest (as resting tremor) or during attempted movement (as intention tremor).
Nonrhythmic disorders are characterized as slow (eg, athetosis), sustained (eg, dystonias), or rapid.
Rapid disorders are characterized as suppressible (eg, tics) or nonsuppressible (eg, hemiballismus,
chorea, myoclonus). Athetosis and chorea often occur together as choreoathetosis. Chorea occurs in
Huntington's disease (. Tic disorders include Tourette's syndrome (.
Chorea, Athetosis, and Hemiballismus
Chorea is nonrhythmic, jerky, rapid, nonsuppressible involuntary movements, mostly of distal
muscles or the face; movements may merge imperceptibly into purposeful or semipurposeful
acts that mask the involuntary movements. Athetosis is nonrhythmic, slow, writhing, sinuous
movements predominantly in distal muscles, often alternating with postures of the proximal
limbs to produce a continuous, flowing stream of movement. Hemiballismus is usually a
unilateral, nonrhythmic, rapid, nonsuppressible, violent, flinging movement of the proximal arm.
[Fig. 183-1.
Classification of hyperkinesias.]
Chorea and athetosis
often occur together (as choreoathetosis). They are manifestations of overactivity
in certain pathways of the basal ganglia. Huntington's disease ( is the most common
degenerative disease causing chorea. Other causes include thyrotoxicosis, paraneoplastic syndromes,
SLE affecting the CNS, other autoimmune disorders, and drugs (eg, antipsychotics). Rheumatic fever
sometimes leads to Sydenham's chorea (. A tumor or infarct of the caudate nucleus can
cause acute unilateral chorea (hemichorea). Chorea may occur as an isolated symptom in patients > 60
(as senile chorea); this chorea tends to be symmetric and does not cause dementia.
The cause is treated or corrected if possible. Sydenham's chorea and chorea due to infarcts of the
caudate nucleus often lessen over time. Chorea due to thyrotoxicosis usually lessens when thyroid
dysfunction is corrected. In Huntington's disease, drugs that suppress dopaminergic activity, such as
antipsychotics (eg, risperidone), and dopamine-depleting drugs (eg, reserpine, tetrabenazine) can be
used. However, improvement may be limited.
===PAGE:1937===
Chorea gravidarum
occurs during pregnancy, often in patients who had rheumatic fever. Chorea usually
begins during the 1st trimester and resolves spontaneously by or after delivery. Treatment is sedation with
barbiturates; other sedatives may harm the fetus. Rarely, a similar disorder occurs in women taking oral
contraceptives.
Hemiballismus
is caused by a lesion, usually an infarct, around the contralateral subthalamic nucleus.
Although disabling, hemiballismus is usually self-limited, lasting 6 to 8 wk. Treatment with antipsychotics
is often effective.
Dystonias
Dystonias are sustained involuntary muscle contractions, often distorting body posture.
Dystonias can be primary or secondary, and they can be generalized, focal, or segmental.
Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment of generalized dystonia is often with a combination of
anticholinergic drugs, muscle relaxants, and benzodiazepines. Treatment of focal or segmental
dystonias is often with botulinum toxin; more generalized or refractory cases may benefit from
surgery.
Dystonia may be primary (idiopathic) or secondary to degenerative or metabolic CNS disorders (eg,
Wilson's disease, Hallervorden-Spatz disease, various lipidoses, multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, stroke,
brain hypoxia) or drugs (most often phenothiazines, thioxanthenes, butyrophenones, and antiemetics).
Generalized dystonia (dystonia musculorum deformans):
This rare dystonia is progressive and
characterized by movements that result in sustained, often bizarre postures. It is often hereditary, usually
as an autosomal dominant disorder with partial penetrance; asymptomatic siblings of patients often have
a forme fruste of
[Table 183-1.
Hyperkinetic Disorders]
the disorder. The causative gene is usually
DYT1
, causing DYT1 dystonia.
Symptoms usually begin in childhood with inversion and plantar fixation of the foot while walking. The
dystonia may affect only the trunk or a leg but sometimes affects the whole body. Patients with the most
severe form may become twisted into grotesque fixed postures and ultimately confined to a wheelchair.
Symptoms that begin during adulthood usually affect only the face or arms. Mental function is usually
preserved.
Focal dystonias:
These dystonias affect a single body part. They typically start in a person's 30s or 40s
and affect women more often. Initially, spasms may be periodic, occurring randomly or during stress; they
are triggered by certain movements of the affected body part and disappear during rest. Over days,
weeks, or many years, spasms may progress; they may be triggered by movements of unaffected body
parts and may continue during rest. Eventually, the affected body part remains distorted, sometimes in a
painful position, resulting in severe disability. Symptoms vary depending on the specific muscles involved.
Occupational dystonia consists of focal dystonic spasms initiated by performing skilled acts (eg, writer's
or typist's cramp, the yips in golfers).
Spasmodic dystonia consists of a strained, hoarse, or creaky voice due to abnormal involuntary
contraction of laryngeal muscles.
Torticollis begins with a pulling sensation followed by sustained torsion and deviation of the head and
neck. The cause is often unknown but, in some cases, is probably genetic. In early stages, it can be
voluntarily overcome. Patients may discover sensory or tactile tricks that make the spasm stop, such as
touching the face on the side contralateral to the deviation. Torticollis can also be caused by dopamineblocking drugs (eg, haloperidol).
Segmental dystonias:
These dystonias affect ≥ 2 contiguous body parts.
===PAGE:1938===
Meige's disease (blepharospasm-oromandibular dystonia) consists of involuntary blinking, jaw grinding,
and grimacing, usually beginning in late middle age. It may mimic the buccal-lingual-facial movements of
tardive dyskinesia.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment
• For generalized dystonia, anticholinergics, muscle relaxants, or both
• For focal dystonia, botulinum toxin
Treatment is often unsatisfactory. For generalized dystonia, a high-dose anticholinergic drug
(trihexyphenidyl 2 to 10 mg po tid, benztropine 3 to 15 mg po once/day) is most commonly used, often
with a muscle relaxant (usually baclofen), a benzodiazepine (eg, clonazepam), or both. Generalized
dystonia that is severe or does not respond to drugs may be treated with deep brain stimulation of the
globus pallidus interna, which requires surgery.
For focal or segmental dystonias or for generalized dystonia that severely affects specific body parts, the
treatment of choice is purified botulinum toxin type A injected into the affected muscles by an experienced
practitioner. Botulinum toxin weakens muscular contractions, but it does not alter the abnormal neural
stimulus. Toxin injection is particularly effective for blepharospasm and torticollis. Dosage varies greatly.
Treatments must be repeated every 3 to 6 mo.
Fragile X-Associated Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome
Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a genetic disorder affecting mostly men
and causing tremor, ataxia, and dementia.
FXTAS affects about 1/3000 men. A premutation (an increased number of CGG repeats) occurs in the
fragile X mental retardation (
FMR1
) gene on the X chromosome; if the mutation is full, > 200 repeats
occur, causing fragile X syndrome. People with the premutation are considered carriers. Daughters (but
not sons) of men with the premutation inherit the premutation. Their children (grandchildren of men with
the gene) have a 50% chance of inheriting the premutation, which can expand into a full mutation when
passed from mother to child (and thus cause fragile X syndrome). FXTAS develops in about 30% of men
with the premutation and in < 5% of women with the premutation. Risk of developing FXTAS increases
with age.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually develop in older age; average age of onset in 60 yr. The more CGG repeats, the more
severe are the symptoms.
Tremor that resembles essential tremor is a common early symptom, usually followed by ataxia within 2 yr.
Other symptoms may include slow movements, stiffness, and decreased facial expression, similar to
Parkinson's disease.
Cognitive impairment, including loss of short-term memory, slowed thought, and difficulty problem-solving,
varies. These symptoms
often progress to dementia. Depression, anxiety, impatience, hostility, and mood
lability may develop.
Sensation and reflexes in the feet may be lost. Dysautonomia (eg, orthostatic hypotension) may occur. In
later stages, bladder and bowel control may be lost. Life expectancy after motor symptoms is reported to
range from about 5 to 25 yr.
In women with the premutation, symptoms are usually less severe, possibly because the presence of
===PAGE:1939===
another X chromosome is protective. Symptoms more often suggest multiple sclerosis or fibromyalgia than
FXTAS. These women have an increased risk of early menopause, infertility, and ovarian dysfunction.
Diagnosis
• Genetic testing
Grandfathers of children who have fragile X syndrome should be asked whether they have neurologic
symptoms associated with FXTAS. MRI can detect the characteristic brightness in the middle cerebellar
peduncles, which is not always present in FXTAS but is rarely caused by other disorders. Diagnosis is
confirmed by genetic testing.
Treatment
Tremor can often be relieved with many of the drugs used to control tremors due to Parkinson's disease
(.
Huntington's Disease
(Huntington's Chorea; Chronic Progressive Chorea; Hereditary Chorea)
Huntington's disease is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by chorea and
progressive cognitive deterioration, usually beginning in middle age. Diagnosis is by genetic
testing. Treatment is supportive. First-degree relatives are encouraged to have genetic testing.
Huntington's disease affects both sexes equally. The caudate nucleus atrophies, the inhibitory medium
spiny neurons in the corpus striatum degenerate, and levels of the neurotransmitters
γ
-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) and substance P decrease.
Huntington's disease results from a gene mutation causing abnormal repetition of the DNA sequence
CAG that codes for the amino acid glutamine. The resulting gene product, a large protein called
huntingtin, has an expanded stretch of polyglutamine residues, which leads to disease via unknown
mechanisms. The more CAG repetitions, the earlier the disease begins and the more severe the effects.
The number of repeats can increase with successive generations and, over time, lead to a more severe
phenotype within a family tree.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs develop insidiously, starting at about age 35 to 50 but can develop before
adulthood. Dementia or psychiatric disturbances (eg, depression, apathy, irritability, anhedonia, antisocial
behavior, full-blown bipolar or schizophreniform disorder) develop before or simultaneously with the
movement disorder. Abnormal movements appear; they include myoclonic jerks or irregular movements of
the extremities, a lilting gait (like a puppet's), facial grimacing, ataxia, and inability to sustain a motor act
(motor impersistence) such as tongue protrusion.
The disorder progresses, making walking impossible, swallowing difficult, and dementia severe. Most
patients eventually require institutionalization. Death usually occurs 13 to 15 yr after symptoms begin.
The cause is usually pneumonia or coronary artery disease.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation, confirmed by genetic testing
• MRI to rule out other causes
Diagnosis is based on typical symptoms and signs plus a positive family history and is confirmed by
genetic testing. Neuroimaging is done to exclude other disorders; in advanced Huntington's disease, MRI
and CT coronal views show boxcar ventricles (ie, squared-off edges due to atrophy of the caudate head).
===PAGE:1940===
Treatment
• Supportive measures
• Genetic counseling
Because the disease is progressive, end-of-life care should be discussed early (.
Treatment is supportive. Chorea and agitation may be partially suppressed by antipsychotics (eg,
chlorpromazine 25 to 300 mg po tid, haloperidol 5 to 45 mg po bid); dose is increased until intolerable or
undesirable adverse effects (eg, lethargy, parkinsonism) occur. Alternatively, tetrabenazine may be used.
The dose is started at 12.5 mg po once/day; dosage is increased (to 12.5 mg bid in the 2nd wk, 12.5 mg
tid in the 3rd wk, up to a total of 100 mg/day divided into 3 doses) until intolerable adverse effects (eg,
sedation, akathisias,
parkinsonism, depression) occur or chorea resolves.
Experimental therapies aim to reduce glutamatergic neurotransmission via the
N
-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor and bolster mitochondrial energy production. Treatment to supplement GABA in the brain has
been ineffective.
People who have 1st-degree relatives with the disease should have genetic testing and counseling (see
also p.
) because people are likely to have children before symptoms appear. If such people are
interested in testing, they are referred to centers that have expertise in dealing with the complex ethical
and psychologic issues involved.
Myoclonus
Myoclonus is a brief, shocklike contraction of a muscle or group of muscles. Diagnosis is
clinical and by selective testing. Treatment includes correction of reversible causes and
sometimes oral drugs (eg, clonazepam, valproate).
Physiologic myoclonus may occur as a person falls asleep (nocturnal myoclonus). Myoclonus can result
from other disorders and certain drugs (see
Table 183-2
). The most common causes are hypoxia, drug toxicity, and metabolic disturbances; other
causes include degenerative disorders affecting the basal ganglia and some dementias.
[Table 183-2.
Causes of Myoclonus]
Myoclonus may be focal, segmental (contiguous areas), multifocal (noncontiguous areas), or generalized.
Symptoms and Signs
Myoclonus can vary in amplitude, frequency, and distribution. Muscle jerks may be induced by a stimulus
(eg, sudden noise, movement, light, visual threat). Myoclonus that occurs when patients are suddenly
startled (startle myoclonus) may be an early symptom of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease. Myoclonus due to
severe closed head trauma or hypoxicischemic brain damage may worsen with purposeful movements
(action myoclonus) or may occur spontaneously when movement is limited because of injury.
Myoclonus due to metabolic disturbances may be multifocal, asymmetric, and stimulus-induced; it usually
involves facial or proximal limb muscles. If the disturbance persists, generalized myoclonic jerks and,
ultimately, seizures may occur.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical. Testing is done based on clinically suspected causes.
Treatment
===PAGE:1941===
• Correction of metabolic disturbance
• Drug therapy to relieve symptoms
Treatment begins with correction of underlying metabolic disturbances.
For symptom relief, clonazepam 0.5 to 2 mg po tid is often effective. Valproate 250 to 500 mg po bid or
levetiracetam 250 to 500 mg po once/day to bid may be effective; rarely, other anticonvulsants help.
Doses of clonazepam or valproate may need to be lower in the elderly. Many forms of myoclonus respond
to the serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan (initially, 25 mg po qid, increased to 150 to 250 mg po
qid), which must be used with the oral decarboxylase inhibitor carbidopa (50 mg every morning and 25 mg
at noon or 50 mg every evening and 25 mg at bedtime).
Parkinson's Disease
Parkinson's disease is an idiopathic, slowly progressive, degenerative CNS disorder
characterized by resting tremor, muscular rigidity, slow and decreased movement, and postural
instability. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with levodopa plus carbidopa, other drugs, and, for
refractory symptoms, surgery.
Parkinson's disease affects about 0.4% of people > 40 yr, 1% of people ≥ 65 yr, and 10% of people ≥ 80
yr. The mean age at onset is about 57 yr. Rarely, Parkinson's disease begins in childhood or adolescence
(juvenile parkinsonism).
Parkinsonism refers to symptoms that are similar to those of Parkinson's disease but caused by another
condition.
Etiology
Synuclein is a presynaptic neuronal and glial cell protein, which can form insoluble fibrils in Lewy bodies.
Although there are rare cases of Parkinson's disease without Lewy bodies, the pathologic hallmark of
Parkinson's disease remains synuclein-filled Lewy bodies in the nigrostriatal system. However,
synucleinopathy can occur in many other parts of the nervous system, including the dorsal motor nucleus
of the vagus nerve, basal nucleus of Meynert, hypothalamus, neocortex, olfactory bulb, sympathetic
ganglia, and myenteric plexus of the GI tract. Lewy bodies appear in a temporal sequence, and many
experts believe that Parkinson's disease is a relatively late development in a systemic synucleinopathy,
which may also include Lewy body dementia. Patients with Parkinson's disease may also have
Alzheimer's disease. Parkinson's disease, Lewy body dementia, and Alzheimer's disease share several
features (; further research is needed to clarify their relationship to each other, including the
relative contributions of synucleinopathy.
In Parkinson's disease, pigmented neurons of the substantia nigra, locus ceruleus, and other brain stem
dopaminergic cell groups are lost. Loss of substantia nigra neurons, which project into the caudate
nucleus and putamen, depletes dopamine in these areas.
A genetic predisposition is likely, at least in some cases. About 15 to 20% of patients have a family history
of Parkinson's disease. Several abnormal genes have been identified. Inheritance is autosomal dominant
for some genes and autosomal recessive for others.
Symptoms and Signs
In most patients, the disease begins insidiously.
A resting tremor
of one hand is often the first symptom. The tremor is characterized as follows:
• Slow and coarse
• Maximal at rest, lessening during movement, and absent during sleep
===PAGE:1942===
• Amplitude increased by emotional tension or fatigue
• Often involving the wrist and fingers in movements similar to those used to manipulate small objects or
pills (pill-rolling tremor)
Usually, the hands, arms, and legs are most affected, in that order. The jaw and tongue may also be
affected, but not the voice. Tremor may become less prominent as the disease progresses.
Rigidity
develops without tremor in many patients. When a clinician moves a rigid joint, sudden, rhythmic
jerks due to variations in the intensity of the rigidity occur, producing a ratchet-like effect (cogwheel
rigidity).
Slow movements
(bradykinesia) are typical as rigidity progresses. Movement also becomes decreased
(hypokinesia) and difficult to initiate (akinesia).
Rigidity and hypokinesia may contribute to muscular aches and sensations of fatigue. The face becomes
masklike, with an open mouth, drooling, and reduced blinking. Early on, patients may appear depressed
because facial expression is lacking and movements are decreased and slowed. Speech becomes
hypophonic, with characteristic monotonous, stuttering dysarthria. Hypokinesia and impaired control of
distal musculature cause micrographia (writing in very small letters) and make activities of daily living
increasingly difficult. Without warning, voluntary movement, including walking, may suddenly halt (called
freezing).
Postural instability
develops, resulting in gait abnormalities. Patients have difficulty starting to walk,
turning, and stopping; the gait becomes shuffling with short steps, and the arms are held flexed to the
waist and do not swing with the stride. Steps may inadvertently quicken, and patients may break into a
run to keep from falling (festination). A tendency to fall forward (propulsion) or backward (retropulsion)
when the center of gravity is displaced results from loss of postural reflexes. Posture becomes stooped.
Dementia
can occur.
Sleep disorders
are common. Insomnia may result from nocturia or from the inability to turn in bed.
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder may develop; in it, violent bursts of physical activity
occur during REM sleep. Sleep deprivation may contribute to depression, exacerbate cognitive
impairment, or cause excessive daytime sleepiness.
Neurologic symptoms unrelated to parkinsonism
commonly develop because synucleinopathy
occurs in other areas of the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems. It may have the
following effects:
• Almost universal sympathetic denervation of the heart, contributing to orthostatic hypotension
• Esophageal dysmotility, contributing to dysphagia and increased risk of aspiration
• Lower bowel dysmotility, contributing to constipation
• Urinary hesitancy and/or urgency (common)
• Anosmia (common)
Seborrheic dermatitis
is also common.
Postencephalitic parkinsonism
causes forced, sustained deviation of the head and eyes (oculogyric
crises), other dystonias, autonomic instability, depression, and personality changes.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1943===
• Mainly by clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is clinical. Parkinson's disease is suspected in patients with characteristic unilateral resting
tremor, decreased movement, or rigidity. The tremor disappears (or attenuates) during finger-to-nose
coordination testing.
During the neurologic examination, patients cannot perform rapidly alternating or rapid successive
movements well. Sensation and strength are usually normal. Reflexes are normal but may be difficult to
elicit because of marked tremor or rigidity. Patients may not suppress eye closure when the frontal muscle
is tapped between the eyes (glabellar reflex; if persistent, called Myerson's sign).
Slowed and decreased movement due to Parkinson's disease must be differentiated from decreased
movement and spasticity due to lesions of the corticospinal tracts. Unlike Parkinson's disease,
corticospinal tract lesions cause paresis (weakness or paralysis), preferentially in distal antigravity
muscles; hyperreflexia; and extensor plantar responses (Babinski's sign). Spasticity due to corticospinal
tract lesions increases muscle tone and deep tendon reflex responses; muscle tone increases in
proportion to rate and degree of stretch placed on a muscle until resistance suddenly melts away (claspknife phenomenon). Rigidity in Parkinson's disease differs because resistance does not change through
the entire range of motion (moving the limb is similar to bending a lead pipe).
Diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of other characteristic signs (eg, infrequent blinking, lack of facial
expression, impaired postural reflexes, characteristic gait abnormalities). Tremor without other
characteristic signs suggests early disease or another diagnosis. In the elderly, decreased spontaneous
movements or a short-stepped gait may result from depression or dementia; such cases
may be difficult to
distinguish from Parkinson's disease.
To differentiate Parkinson's disease from secondary parkinsonism, clinicians note whether levodopa
results in dramatic improvement, suggesting Parkinson's disease. Causes of parkinsonism can be
identified by the following:
• Taking a thorough history, including occupational, drug, and family history
• Checking for neurologic deficits characteristic of disorders other than Parkinson's disease (such as
neurodegenerative disorders)
• Neuroimaging when indicated
Treatment
• Carbidopa/levodopa (mainstay of treatment)
• Amantadine, monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitors, or anticholinergic drugs used first as
monotherapy or late with levodopa
• Dopamine agonists at any stage
• Catechol
O
-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors sometimes used with levodopa
• Surgery if drugs are ineffective
• Exercise and adaptive measures
Many oral drugs are commonly used to relieve symptoms of Parkinson's disease (see
Table 183-3
). Traditionally, levodopa has been the first drug used. However, some experts believe that
early use of levodopa hastens development of adverse effects and inconsistency of drug response; they
prefer to delay levodopa, particularly in younger patients, if possible and to use MAO-B inhibitors,
anticholinergic drugs, amantadine, or dopamine agonists first if drug treatment is necessary. Levodopa is
then delayed until symptoms interfere with daily activities despite use of other treatments.
===PAGE:1944===
Doses are often reduced in the elderly. Drugs that cause or worsen symptoms, particularly antipsychotics,
are avoided.
Levodopa:
Levodopa, the metabolic precursor of dopamine, crosses the blood-brain barrier into the
basal ganglia, where it is decarboxylated to form dopamine. Coadministration of the peripheral
decarboxylase inhibitor carbidopa prevents levodopa catabolism, thus lowering the levodopa dosage
requirements and minimizing adverse effects. Levodopa is most effective at relieving bradykinesia and
rigidity, although tremor is often substantially reduced. Mildly affected patients who take levodopa may
return to nearly normal, and bedbound patients may become ambulatory.
Levodopa has central adverse effects; occasional hallucinations or delirium occurs, most often in the
elderly and patients with dementia. The dose that causes dyskinesias tends to decrease as treatment
continues. In some patients, the lowest dose that reduces parkinsonian symptoms also causes
dyskinesias.
Dosage of carbidopa/levodopa is increased every 4 to 7 days as tolerated until maximum benefit is
reached. Adverse effects may be minimized by increasing the dose gradually and by giving the drug with
or after meals; however, high-protein meals may impair absorption of levodopa. If peripheral adverse
effects predominate, increasing the amount of carbidopa may help. Most patients with Parkinson's
disease require 400 to 1000 mg/day of levodopa in divided doses every 2 to 5 h. A dissolvable immediaterelease oral form of carbidopa/levodopa can be taken without water; this form is useful for patients who
have difficulty swallowing. Doses are the same as for immediate-release carbidopa/levodopa.
Occasionally, levodopa must be used to maintain motor function despite levodopa-induced hallucinations
or delirium. Psychosis can sometimes be treated with oral quetiapine or clozapine; these drugs aggravate
parkinsonian symptoms much less than other antipsychotics (eg, risperidone, olanzapine) or not at all.
Haloperidol should be avoided. Quetiapine can be started at 25 mg once/day or bid and increased in 25mg increments every 1 to 3 days up to 800 mg/day as tolerated. Use of clozapine is limited because
agranulocytosis occurs in 1% of patients. When clozapine is used, the dose is 12.5 to 50 mg once/day to
12.5 to 25 mg bid. CBC is done weekly for 6 mo and every 2 wk thereafter.
After 2 to 5 yr of treatment, most patients experience fluctuations in their response to levodopa (on-off
effect). Whether dyskinesias and the on-off effect result from levodopa or the underlying disease is
controversial. Eventually, the period of improvement after each dose shortens, and drug-induced
dyskinesias result in swings from intense akinesia to uncontrollable hyperactivity. Traditionally, such
swings are managed by keeping the levodopa dose as low as possible and using dosing intervals as
short as every 1 to 2 h. Alternative methods include adjunctive use of dopamineagonists, controlledrelease levodopa/carbidopa, COMT and/or MAO inhibitors, and amantadine.
Amantadine:
This drug is useful as monotherapy for early, mild parkinsonism in 50% of patients and
later can be used to augment levodopa's effects. It may augment dopaminergic activity, anticholinergic
effects, or both. If used as monotherapy, amantadine often loses its effectiveness after several months.
Amantadine may ameliorate dyskinesias secondary to long-term use of levodopa.
Dopamine agonists:
These drugs directly activate dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia. Oral drugs
include bromocriptine, pramipexole, and ropinirole.
Oral dopamine agonists can be used as monotherapy but, as such, are rarely sufficient for more than a
few years. They may be useful at all stages of the disease. Using these drugs early in treatment, with
small doses of levodopa, may delay emergence of dyskinesias and on-off effects, possibly because
dopamine agonists stimulate dopamine receptors longer than levodopa does. This type of stimulation is
more physiologic and may better preserve the receptors. Dopamine agonists are particularly useful in
later stages when response to levodopa decreases or on-off effects are prominent.
Rotigotine was recently withdrawn from the market because of problems with consistent drug delivery.
Adverse effects may limit use of dopamine agonists. Reducing the levodopa dose may minimize adverse
===PAGE:1945===
effects of dopamine agonists. Agonists can cause compulsive gambling, hypersexuality, or overeating in 1
to 2% of patients, requiring a change in drug or a reduction in dose. Bromocriptine is rarely used because
cardiac valvular fibrosis and pleural fibrosis are concerns. Pergolide, another dopamine agonist, was
recalled because it increases risk of cardiac valvular fibrosis.
Apomorphine is an injectable dopamine agonist used as rescue therapy when off effects are severe.
Onset of action is rapid (5 to 10 min), and duration is short (60 to 90 min). Apomorphine 2 to 6 mg sc can
be given up to 5 times/day as needed. A 2-mg test dose is given first to check for orthostatic hypotension.
BP is checked in the standing and supine positions before treatment and 20, 40, and 60 min afterward.
Other adverse effects are similar to those of other dopamine agonists. Nausea can be prevented by
starting trimethobenzamide 300 mg po tid 3 days before apomorphine and continuing it for the first 2 mo
of treatment.
Selective monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitors:
Selegiline inhibits one of the 2 major
enzymes that break down dopamine in the brain, thereby prolonging the action of each dose of levodopa.
In some patients with mild on-off effects, selegiline helps prolong levodopa's effect. Used initially as
monotherapy, selegiline can delay the initiation of levodopa by about 1 yr. Selegiline may slow
progression of Parkinson's disease by potentiating residual brain dopamine in early disease or by
reducing oxidative metabolism of brain dopamine. A dose of 5 mg po bid does not cause hypertensive
crisis (sometimes triggered by consuming tyramine in foods, such as some cheeses, during MAO inhibitor
therapy); this adverse effect is common with nonselective MAO inhibitors, which block A and B
isoenzymes. Although virtually free of adverse effects, selegiline can potentiate levodopa-induced
dyskinesias, mental and psychiatric adverse effects, and nausea, requiring reduction in the levodopa
dose. Selegiline is also available in a formulation designed for buccal absorption (zydis-selegiline).
Rasagiline, an MAO-B inhibitor that is not metabolized to amphetamine, is effective and well-tolerated in
early and late disease. Whether rasagiline's effects are purely symptomatic or also neuroprotective is
unclear, but recent studies suggest rasagiline may alter disease progression.
Anticholinergic drugs:
These drugs can be used as monotherapy in early disease and later to
supplement levodopa. Commonly used anticholinergic drugs include benztropine and trihexyphenidyl.
Antihistamines with anticholinergic effects (eg, diphenhydramine 25 to 50 mg po bid to qid, orphenadrine
50 mg po once/day to qid) are occasionally useful for treating tremor. Anticholinergic tricyclic
antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline 10 to 150 mg po at bedtime), if used for depression, may be useful as
an adjunct to levodopa. Doses of anticholinergic drugs are increased very slowly. Adverse effects are
particularly troublesome in the elderly; if possible, they should not be given anticholinergic drugs.
Catechol
O
-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors:
These drugs (eg, entacapone, tolcapone) inhibit
the breakdown of dopamine and therefore appear to be useful adjuncts to levodopa. A combination of
levodopa, carbidopa, and entacapone can be used. For each dose of levodopa taken, 200 mg of
entacapone is given, to a maximum of 200 mg 8 times/day. Tolcapone, a potent COMT inhibitor, is less
commonly used because of rare reports of liver toxicity.
Surgery:
If drugs are ineffective and disease is advanced, surgery is considered. For patients with
levodopa-induced dyskinesias or significant motor fluctuations, deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic
nucleus or globus pallidus interna is often recommended. For patients with tremor only, stimulation of the
ventralis intermediate nucleus of the thalamus is sometimes recommended; however, because most
patients also have other symptoms, stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus, which relieves tremor as well
as other symptoms, is usually preferable.
Physical measures:
Maximizing activity is a goal. Patients should do daily activities to the extent
possible. If they cannot, physical or occupational therapy, which may involve a
[Table 183-3.
Some Commonly Used Oral Antiparkinsonian Drugs]
regular exercise program, may help condition them physically. Therapists may teach patients adaptive
strategies and help them make appropriate adaptations in the home (eg, installing grab bars to reduce the
risk of falls).
===PAGE:1946===
Because the disease, antiparkinsonian drugs, and inactivity can lead to constipation, patients should
consume a high-fiber diet, exercise when possible, and drink adequate amounts of fluids. Dietary
supplements (eg, psyllium) and stimulant laxatives (eg, bisacodyl 10 to 20 mg po once/day) can help.
Parkinsonism
Parkinsonism refers to symptoms that are similar to those of Parkinson's disease but caused by
another condition.
Parkinsonism results from drugs, disorders other than Parkinson's disease, or exogenous toxins (see
Table 183-4
). The mechanism is blockage of or interference with dopamine's action in the basal ganglia.
The most common cause is ingestion of drugs that block dopamine receptors (eg, phenothiazine,
thioxanthene, butyrophenone, antipsychotic drugs, reserpine).
[Table 183-4.
Some Causes of Parkinsonism]
Parkinsonism causes the same symptoms as Parkinson's disease (eg, resting tremor, rigidity,
bradykinesia, postural instability—.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation, response to levodopa therapy, and, for differential diagnosis, sometimes
neuroimaging
To differentiate Parkinson's disease from secondary parkinsonism, clinicians note whether levodopa
results in dramatic improvement, suggesting Parkinson's disease. Causes of parkinsonism can be
identified by the following:
• A thorough history, including occupational, drug, and family history
• Evaluation for neurologic deficits characteristic of disorders other than Parkinson's disease (such as
neurodegenerative disorders)
• Neuroimaging when indicated
Treatment
• Treatment of the cause
The cause is corrected or treated if possible, sometimes resulting in amelioration or disappearance of
symptoms. Drugs used to treat Parkinson's disease are often ineffective or have only transient benefit.
But amantadine or an anticholinergic drug (eg, benztropine) may ameliorate parkinsonism secondary to
use of antipsychotic drugs.
Physical measures to maintain mobility and independence are useful (as for Parkinson's disease, . Good nutrition is essential.
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy
(Steele-Richardson-Olszewski Syndrome)
Progressive supranuclear palsy is a rare, degenerative CNS disorder causing loss of voluntary
eye
movements, bradykinesia, muscular rigidity with progressive axial dystonia, pseudobulbar
palsy, and dementia.
The cause of progressive supranuclear palsy is unknown. Neurons in the basal ganglia and brain stem
degenerate; neurofibrillary tangles containing an abnormally phosphorylated tau protein are also present.
===PAGE:1947===
Multiple lacunar strokes may occur in the basal ganglia and deep white matter.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually begin in late middle age. The first symptom may be difficulty looking up without
extending the neck or difficulty climbing up and down stairs. Voluntary eye movements, particularly
vertical, are difficult, but reflexive eye movements are unaffected. Movements are slowed, muscles
become rigid, and axial dystonia develops. Patients tend to fall backward. Dysphagia and dysarthria with
emotional lability (pseudobulbar palsy) is common; these deficits occur in a stepwise progression as
occurs with multiple strokes. Dementia eventually occurs. Many patients become incapacitated within
about 5 yr and die within about 10 yr.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is unsatisfactory. Occasionally, levodopa, dopamine agonists and/or amantadine partially
relieve rigidity.
Because the disorder is fatal, patients should be encouraged to prepare advance directives soon after the
disorder is diagnosed. These directives should indicate what kind of medical care people want at the end
of life (.
Tremor
Tremors are involuntary, rhythmic, alternating, or oscillatory movements of interrelated muscle groups.
They typically involve the hands, head, facial structures, vocal cords, trunk, or legs. Tremors can be
characterized by
• Frequency of oscillation (rapid or slow)
• Amplitude of movement (fine or coarse)
• Movements or postures that evoke them (eg, rest, action, certain positions)
Pathophysiology
Tremors are considered a movement disorder. Movement is controlled by interaction of the corticospinal
(pyramidal) tracts, basal ganglia, and cerebellum. The basal ganglia consist of the caudate nucleus,
putamen, globus pallidus, and substantia nigra, which together form the extrapyramidal system.
Most neural lesions that cause movement disorders occur in the extrapyramidal system; thus, movement
disorders are also called extrapyramidal disorders. Neural dysfunction or lesions responsible for tremor
may result from injury, ischemic or metabolic insult, or a neurodegenerative disorder. Sometimes tremor is
an inherited condition (eg, essential tremor).
Classification:
Tremor is classified primarily based on when it occurs:
•
Resting tremors
are maximal at rest and decrease with activity; they occur at a frequency of 3 to 6
cycles/sec (Hz).
•
Postural tremors
are maximal when a limb is maintained in a fixed position against gravity (eg, holding
the arms out); they occur at a frequency of 5 to 18 Hz.
===PAGE:1948===
•
Intention tremors
are maximal during movement toward a target, as in finger-to-nose testing; they
occur at a frequency of 3 to 10 Hz.
Tremor can also be classified based on whether it is within the range of normal (physiologic tremor), a
primary disorder (essential tremor, Parkinson's disease), or a pathologic sign of CNS injury (eg,
poststroke).
Etiology
Physiologic tremor:
Physiologic tremor is the most common cause of tremor in otherwise healthy
people; it is present normally but usually causes such small movements that it is noticeable only when
enhanced by certain drugs or conditions (eg, anxiety; stress; fatigue; thyrotoxicosis; use of caffeine,
phosphodiesterase inhibitors,
β
-adrenergic agonists, or corticosteroids).
Nonphysiologic tremor:
There are many causes (see
Table 183-5
), but the most common are
• Essential tremor
• Parkinson's disease
• Cerebral or cerebellar injury (eg, from a stroke or multiple sclerosis)
• Hereditary disorders involving the cerebellum (eg, spinocerebellar ataxia)
Drugs can cause or aggravate different types of tremor (see
Table 183-6
). Low doses of some sedatives (eg, alcohol) may relieve some tremors (eg, essential and
physiologic tremor); higher doses may cause or exacerbate tremor.
[Table 183-5.
Some Causes of Tremor]
Evaluation
Because the diagnosis of tremor is largely clinical, a meticulous history and physical examination are
essential.
History: History of present illness
should cover acuity of onset (eg, gradual, abrupt), age at onset,
body parts affected, provoking factors (eg, movement, rest, standing), and alleviating or exacerbating
factors (eg, alcohol, caffeine, stress, anxiety). If onset is abrupt, patients should be asked about potential
triggering events (eg, recent trauma, use of a new drug).
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including double vision (multiple
sclerosis), recent onset of motor weakness or dysarthria (stroke), headaches and fevers (brain abscess
or tumor), muscle rigidity and slow movement (Parkinson's disease), weight loss and heat intolerance
(hyperthyroidism), sensory deficits (peripheral neuropathy), and agitation and hallucinations (alcohol
withdrawal).
Past medical history
should cover conditions associated with tremor (see
Table 183-5
).
[Table 183-6.
Some Drug Causes of Tremor by Type]
Family history should include questions about tremor in 1st-degree relatives. The drug profile should be
reviewed for causative drugs (see
Table 183-6
), and patients should be asked specifically about caffeine
intake and alcohol and recreational drug use (particularly recent discontinuation).
Physical examination:
Vital signs should be reviewed for tachycardia, hypertension, or fever. General
examination should note any cachexia, psychomotor agitation, and presence or absence of facial
expressions. The thyroid should be palpated for nodules or thyromegaly, and any signs of exophthalmus
===PAGE:1949===
or lid lag should be noted.
Focused examination of the tremor should note distribution and frequency of the tremor while the affected
body parts are at rest and fully supported (eg, in the patient's lap), while the patient assumes certain
postures (eg, holding the arms outstretched), and while the patient is walking or doing tasks with the
affected body part. The examiner should note whether the tremor changes during mental distraction tasks
(eg, serial subtraction of 7 from 100). The quality of the voice should be observed while the patient
sustains a long note.
A complete and extensive neurologic examination is mandatory and should include cranial nerve
evaluation, motor and sensory function testing, gait testing, assessment of deep tendon reflexes, and
evaluation of cerebellar maneuvers (eg, finger-to-nose, shin-to-heel, rapid alternating hand movements).
The examiner should test muscles for rigidity by moving the limbs through their range of motion.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Abrupt onset
• Onset in people < 50 and with no family history of tremor
• Other neurologic deficits (eg, change in mental status, motor weakness, cranial nerve palsy, ataxic gait,
dysarthria)
• Tachycardia and agitation
Interpretation of findings:
Clinical findings help suggest a cause (see also
Table 183-5
).
Tremor type and onset
are useful clues. Resting tremors usually indicate Parkinson's disease,
particularly when they are unilateral or when tremor is isolated to the chin, voice, or leg.
Intention tremors suggest a cerebellar disorder but may result from multiple sclerosis or Wilson's disease.
Postural tremor suggests physiologic or essential tremor if onset is gradual or a toxic or metabolic
disorder if onset is sudden.
Severe essential tremor is often confused with Parkinson's disease but can usually be distinguished by
specific characteristics (see
Table 183-7
). Occasionally, the 2 syndromes can overlap (mixed essential tremor-Parkinson's disease).
Sudden onset or stepwise progression suggests stroke, multiple sclerosis, or psychogenic etiology.
Sudden onset after drug use suggests a drug cause. Onset of tremor with agitation, tachycardia, and
hypertension within 24 to 72 h of hospitalization may suggest alcohol withdrawal.
Gait
is observed. Gait abnormalities suggest multiple sclerosis, stroke, Parkinson's disease, or a
cerebellar disorder. The gait is often normal in patients with essential tremor. It is characteristically
narrow-based and shuffling in Parkinson's disease and wide-based and ataxic in cerebellar disorders.
The gait may have histrionic or inconsistent qualities in patients with psychogenic tremor.
Complex tremor that decreases with mental distraction or whose frequency entrains to a volitional tapping
rhythm in an unaffected body part (maintaining 2 different volitional movement frequencies simultaneously
in 2 different body parts is difficult) suggests a psychogenic tremor.
Testing:
In most patients, history and physical examination are sufficient to identify the likely etiology.
However, MRI or CT of the brain should be done if
• Tremor onset is acute.
• Progression is rapid.
===PAGE:1950===
• Neurologic signs suggest stroke, a demyelinating disorder, or a structural lesion.
[Table 183-7.
Some Characteristics Differentiating Parkinson's Disease from Essential Tremor]
For certain patients (based on history and physical examination findings), thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) and thyroxine (T
) are measured to check for hyperthyroidism, Ca and parathyroid hormone are
measured to check for hyperparathyroidism, and glucose testing is done to rule out hypoglycemia.
In patients with toxic encephalopathy, the underlying condition is usually readily apparent, but
measurement of BUN and ammonia levels can help confirm the diagnosis. Measurement of free
metanephrines in plasma is indicated in patients with unexplained refractory hypertension; serum
ceruloplasmin and urinary copper levels should be measured in patients who are < 40 and have tremor
and no family history of benign tremor.
Although electromyography (EMG) can differentiate true tremor from other movement disorders (eg,
myoclonus, clonus, epilepsia partialis continua), it is rarely required. However, EMG may help establish
peripheral neuropathy as a potential cause of tremor if a neuropathy is clinically suspected.
Treatment
Physiologic tremors:
No treatment is necessary unless symptoms are bothersome.
Physiologic tremors enhanced by alcohol withdrawal or thyrotoxicosis respond to treatment of the
underlying condition.
Oral benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam 2 to 10 mg, lorazepam 1 to 2 mg, oxazepam 10 to 30 mg) given tid or
qid may be useful for people with tremor and chronic anxiety, but continuous use should be avoided.
Propranolol 20 to 80 mg po qid (and other
β
-blockers) is often effective for tremor enhanced by drugs or
acute anxiety (eg, stage fright). Primidone 50 to 250 mg po tid may be tried if
β
-blockers are ineffective or
poorly tolerated. For some patients, a small amount of alcohol is effective.
Essential tremors:
Propranolol 20 to 80 mg po qid (or other
β
-blockers) is often effective, as is
primidone 50 to 250 mg po tid.
Cerebellar tremors:
No effective drug is available; physical measures (eg, weighting the affected limbs
or teaching patients to brace the proximal limb during activity) sometimes help.
Parkinsonian tremors:
The underlying disorder is treated, usually with anticholinergic drugs or other
antiparkinson drugs such as amantadine, dopamine agonists, and levodopa.
Disabling tremor:
For patients with severe, disabling, drug-refractory essential tremor, surgical
management with stereotactic thalamotomy or chronic thalamic deep brain stimulation may be done.
Similarly, in Parkinson's disease, tremor substantially lessens after thalamic or subthalamic nucleus deep
brain stimulation. Although these techniques are widely available, they should be used only after all drug
treatment options have been tried.
Geriatrics Essentials
Many elderly patients attribute development of tremor to normal aging and may not seek medical
attention. Although essential tremor is more prevalent among the elderly, a thorough history and physical
examination are required to rule out other causes.
Comparatively lower doses of drugs may exacerbate tremor in the elderly, and adjusting doses of
chronically used drugs (eg, amiodarone, metoclopramide, SSRIs, thyroxine) to the lowest effective dose
should be considered. Similarly, elderly patients are more vulnerable to adverse effects of drugs used to
treat tremor (eg, anticholinergic drugs); thus, drugs should be used cautiously in the elderly, usually at
lower dosages than are otherwise considered optimal.
===PAGE:1951===
Tremor can significantly affect functional ability in the elderly, particularly if they have other physical or
cognitive impairments. Physical and occupational therapy can provide simple coping strategies, and
assistive devices may help maintain quality of life.
Key Points
• The most common causes of tremor include physiologic tremor, essential tremor, and Parkinson's
disease.
• Tremor can be classified as resting, postural, or intention.
• History and physical examination can typically identify the etiology of tremor.
• Abrupt onset of tremor or tremor in patients who are < 50 and do not have a family history of benign
tremor requires prompt, in-depth evaluation.
Cerebellar Disorders
Cerebellar disorders have numerous causes, including congenital malformations, hereditary
ataxias, and acquired conditions. Symptoms vary with the cause but typically include ataxia
(impaired muscle coordination). Diagnosis is clinical and often by imaging and sometimes
genetic testing. Treatment is usually supportive unless the cause is acquired and reversible.
The cerebellum has 3 parts:
•
Archicerebellum (vestibulocerebellum):
It includes the flocculonodular lobe, which is located in the
medial zone. It helps maintain equilibrium and coordinate eye, head, and neck movements; it is closely
interconnected with the vestibular nuclei.
•
Midline vermis (paleocerebellum):
It helps coordinate trunk and leg movements. Vermis lesions
result in abnormalities of stance and gait.
•
Lateral hemispheres (neocerebellum):
They control quick and finely coordinated limb movements,
predominantly of the arms.
There is growing consensus that, in addition to coordination, the cerebellum controls some aspects of
memory, learning, and cognition.
Ataxia is the archetypal sign of cerebellar dysfunction, but many other motor abnormalities may occur
(see
Table 183-8
).
Etiology
Congenital malformations:
Such malformations are almost always sporadic, often occurring as part of
complex malformation syndromes (eg, Dandy-Walker malformation— that affect other parts of
the CNS. Malformations manifest early in life and are nonprogressive. Manifestations vary markedly
depending on the structures involved; ataxia is usually present.
Hereditary ataxias:
Hereditary ataxias may be autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant. Autosomal
recessive ataxias include Friedreich's ataxia (the most prevalent), ataxia-telangiectasia,
abetalipoproteinemia, ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency, and cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis.
Friedreich's ataxia
results from a gene mutation causing abnormal repetition of the DNA sequence GAA
in the gene that codes for the mitochondrial protein frataxin. Decreased frataxin levels lead to
mitochondrial iron overload and impaired mitochondrial function. Gait unsteadiness begins between ages
5 and 15; it is followed by upper-extremity ataxia, dysarthria, and paresis, particularly of the lower
===PAGE:1952===
extremities. Mental function often declines. Tremor, if present, is slight. Reflexes and vibration and
position senses are lost. Talipes, scoliosis, and progressive cardiomyopathy are common.
Spinocerebellar ataxias
(SCAs) are the main autosomal dominant ataxias. Classification of these
ataxias has been revised many times recently as knowledge about genetics increases. Currently, at least
28 different gene loci are recognized; at least 10 involve expanded DNA sequence repeats. Some involve
a repetition of the DNA sequence CAG that codes for the amino acid glutamine, similar to that in
Huntington's disease. Manifestations vary. Some of the most common SCAs affect multiple areas in the
central and peripheral nervous systems; neuropathy, pyramidal signs, and restless leg syndrome, as well
as ataxia, are common. Some SCA usually cause only cerebellar ataxia. SCA3, formerly known as
[Table 183-8.
Signs of Cerebellar Disorders]
Machado-Joseph disease, may be the most common dominantly inherited SCA. Symptoms include ataxia
and possibly dystonia, facial twitching, ophthalmoplegia, and peculiar bulging eyes.
Acquired conditions:
Acquired ataxias may result from nonhereditary neurodegenerative disorders (eg,
multiple system atrophy—, systemic disorders, or toxin exposure, or they may be idiopathic.
Systemic disorders include alcoholism (alcoholic cerebellar degeneration), celiac sprue, hypothyroidism,
and vitamin E deficiency. Toxins include carbon monoxide, heavy metals, lithium, phenytoin, and certain
solvents.
In children, primary brain tumors (medulloblastoma, cystic astrocytoma) may be the cause; the midline
cerebellum is the most common site of such tumors. Rarely, in children, reversible diffuse cerebellar
dysfunction follows viral infections.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical and includes a thorough family history and search for acquired systemic disorders.
Neuroimaging, typically MRI, is done. Genetic testing is done if family history is suggestive.
Treatment
Some systemic disorders (eg, hypothyroidism, celiac sprue) and toxin exposure can be treated;
occasionally, surgery for structural lesions (tumor, hydrocephalus) is beneficial. However, treatment is
usually only supportive.
===PAGE:1953===
Chapter 184. Demyelinating Disorders
Introduction
Myelin sheaths cover many nerve fibers in the central and peripheral nervous system; they accelerate
axonal transmission of neural impulses. Disorders that affect myelin interrupt nerve transmission;
symptoms may reflect deficits in any part of the nervous system.
Myelin formed by oligodendroglia in the CNS differs chemically and immunologically from that formed by
Schwann cells peripherally. Thus, some myelin disorders (eg, Guillain-Barre syndrome, chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, some other peripheral nerve polyneuropathies—
tend to affect primarily the peripheral nerves, and others affect primarily the CNS (see
Table 184-1
). The most commonly affected areas in the CNS are the brain, spinal cord, and optic nerves.
Demyelination is often secondary to an infectious, ischemic, metabolic, or hereditary disorder. In primary
demyelinating disorders, cause is unknown, but an autoimmune mechanism is suspected because the
disorder sometimes follows a viral infection or viral vaccination.
Demyelination tends to be segmental or patchy, affecting multiple areas simultaneously or sequentially.
Remyelination often occurs, with repair, regeneration, and complete recovery of neural function. However,
extensive myelin loss is usually followed by axonal degeneration and often cell body degeneration; both
may be irreversible.
Demyelination should be considered in any patient with unexplained neurologic deficits. Primary
demyelinating disorders are suggested by the following:
• Diffuse or multifocal deficits
• Sudden onset, particularly in young adults
• Onset within weeks of an infection or vaccination
• Deficits that wax and wane
• Symptoms suggesting a specific demyelinating disorder (eg, unexplained optic neuritis or internuclear
ophthalmoplegia suggesting multiple sclerosis)
Specific tests and treatment depend on the specific disorder.
Multiple Sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterized by disseminated patches of demyelination in the brain
and spinal cord. Common symptoms include visual and oculomotor abnormalities,
paresthesias, weakness, spasticity, urinary dysfunction, and mild cognitive impairment.
Typically, neurologic deficits are multiple, with remissions and exacerbations gradually
producing disability. Diagnosis is by history of remissions and exacerbations plus clinical signs,
test results, lesions seen on MRI, or other criteria (depending on symptoms) to objectively
demonstrate
≥
2 separate neurologic abnormalities. Treatment includes corticosteroids for
acute exacerbations, immunomodulatory drugs to prevent exacerbations, and supportive
measures.
[Table 184-1.
Disorders that Can Cause CNS Demyelination]
MS is believed to involve an immunologic mechanism. One postulated cause is infection by a latent virus
(possibly a human herpesvirus such as Epstein-Barr virus), which, when activated, triggers a secondary
immune response. An increased incidence among certain families and presence of human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) allotypes (HLA-DR2) suggests genetic susceptibility. MS is more common among people
who spend their first 15 yr of life in temperate climates (1/2000) than in those who spend them in the
===PAGE:1954===
tropics (1/10,000). One explanation is that lower levels of vitamin D are associated with an increased risk
of MS, and vitamin D levels correlate with the degree of sun exposure, which is lower in temperate
climates. Cigarette smoking also appears to increase risk. Age at onset ranges from 15 to 60 yr, typically
20 to 40 yr; women are affected somewhat more often.
Neuromyelitis optica (Devic disease), previously considered a variant of MS, is now recognized as a
separate disorder (.
Pathophysiology
Localized areas of demyelination (plaques) occur, with destruction of oligodendroglia, perivascular
inflammation, and chemical changes in lipid and protein constituents of myelin in and around the plaques.
Axonal damage is possible, but cell bodies and axons tend to be relatively preserved. Fibrous gliosis
develops in plaques that are disseminated throughout the CNS, primarily in white matter, particularly in
the lateral and posterior columns (especially in the cervical regions), optic nerves, and periventricular
areas. Tracts in the midbrain, pons, and cerebellum are also affected. Gray matter in the cerebrum and
spinal cord can be affected but to a much lesser degree.
Symptoms and Signs
MS is characterized by varied CNS deficits, with remissions and recurring exacerbations. Exacerbations
average about 3/yr, but frequency varies greatly. Although MS may progress and regress unpredictably,
there are typical patterns of progression:
• Relapsing-remitting pattern: Exacerbations alternate with remissions, when partial or full recovery occurs
or symptoms are stable. Remissions may last months or years. Exacerbations can occur spontaneously
or can be triggered by an infection such as influenza.
• Primary progressive pattern: The disease progresses gradually with no remissions,
although there may
be temporary plateaus during which the disease does not progress. Unlike in the relapsing-remitting
pattern, there are no clear exacerbations.
• Secondary progressive pattern: This pattern begins with relapses alternating with remissions, followed
by gradual progression of the disease.
• Progressive relapsing pattern: The disease progresses gradually, but progression is interrupted by
sudden, clear relapses. This pattern is rare.
The most common initial symptoms are the following:
• Paresthesias in one or more extremities, in the trunk, or on one side of the face
• Weakness or clumsiness of a leg or hand
• Visual disturbances (eg, partial loss of vision and pain in one eye due to retrobulbar optic neuritis,
diplopia due to ocular palsy, scotomas)
Other common early symptoms include slight stiffness or unusual fatigability of a limb, minor gait
disturbances, difficulty with bladder control, vertigo, and mild affective disturbances; all usually indicate
scattered CNS involvement and may be subtle. Excess heat (eg, warm weather, a hot bath, fever) may
temporarily exacerbate symptoms and signs.
Mild cognitive impairment is common. Apathy, poor judgment, or inattention may occur. Affective
disturbances, including emotional lability, euphoria, or, most commonly, depression, are common.
Depression may be reactive or partly due to cerebral lesions of MS. A few patients have seizures.
Cranial nerves:
Unilateral or asymmetric optic neuritis and bilateral internuclear ophthalmoplegia are
typical. Optic neuritis causes loss of vision (ranging from scotomas to blindness), eye pain, and
===PAGE:1955===
sometimes abnormal visual fields, a swollen optic disk, or a partial or complete afferent pupillary defect
(.
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia results if there is a lesion in the medial longitudinal fasciculus connecting
the 3rd, 4th, and 6th nerve nuclei. During horizontal gaze, adduction of one eye is decreased, with
nystagmus of the other (abducting) eye; convergence is intact.
Rapid, small-amplitude eye oscillations in straight-ahead (primary) gaze (pendular nystagmus) are
uncommon but characteristic of MS. Vertigo is common. Intermittent unilateral facial numbness or pain
(resembling trigeminal neuralgia), palsy, or spasm may occur. Mild dysarthria may occur, caused by bulbar
weakness, cerebellar damage, or disturbance of cortical control. Other cranial nerve deficits are unusual
but may occur secondary to brain stem injury.
Motor:
Weakness is common. It usually reflects corticospinal tract damage in the spinal cord, affects the
lower extremities preferentially, and is bilateral and spastic. Deep tendon reflexes (eg, knee and ankle
jerks) are usually increased, and an extensor plantar response (Babinski's sign) and clonus are often
present. Spastic paraparesis produces a stiff, imbalanced gait; in advanced cases, it may confine patients
to a wheelchair. Painful flexor spasms in response to sensory stimuli (eg, bedclothes) may occur late.
Cerebral or cervical spinal cord lesions may result in hemiparesis, which sometimes is the presenting
symptom.
Cerebellar:
In advanced MS, cerebellar ataxia plus spasticity may be severely disabling; other cerebellar
manifestations include slurred speech, scanning speech (slow enunciation with a tendency to hesitate at
the beginning of a word or syllable), and Charcot's triad (intention tremor, scanning speech, and
nystagmus).
Sensory:
Paresthesias and partial loss of any type of sensation are common and often localized (eg, to
one or both hands or legs). Various painful sensory disturbances (eg, burning or electric shocklike pains)
can occur spontaneously or in response to touch, especially if the spinal cord is affected.
An example is Lhermitte's sign, an electric shocklike pain that radiates down the spine or into the legs
when the neck is flexed. Objective sensory changes tend to be transient and difficult to demonstrate.
Spinal cord:
Involvement commonly causes bladder dysfunction (eg, urinary urgency or hesitancy, partial
retention of urine, mild urinary incontinence). Constipation, erectile dysfunction in men, and genital
anesthesia in women may occur. Frank urinary and fecal incontinence may occur in advanced MS.
Progressive myelopathy, a variant of MS, causes spinal cord motor weakness but no other deficits.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Brain and spinal MRI
• Sometimes CSF IgG levels and evoked potentials
MS is suspected in patients with optic neuritis, internuclear ophthalmoplegia, or other symptoms that
suggest MS, particularly if deficits are multifocal or intermittent. Most
diagnostic criteria for MS require a
history of exacerbations and remissions plus objective demonstration by examination or testing of ≥ 2
separate neurologic abnormalities. Brain and spinal MRI is done. MRI plus clinical findings may be
diagnostic, but if they are inconclusive, additional testing may be necessary to objectively demonstrate
separate neurologic abnormalities. Such testing usually begins with CSF analysis and, if necessary,
includes evoked potentials.
MRI
is the most sensitive imaging test for MS and can exclude other treatable disorders that may mimic
MS, such as nondemyelinating lesions at the junction of the spinal cord and medulla (eg, subarachnoid
cyst, foramen magnum tumors). Gadolinium-contrast enhancement can distinguish actively inflamed from
===PAGE:1956===
older plaques. Alternatively, contrast-enhanced CT can be done. The sensitivity of MRI and CT is
increased by giving twice the dose of contrast agent (which is standard practice) and delaying scanning
(double-dose delayed scanning).
CSF examination,
including opening pressure, cell count and differential, protein, glucose, Ig, oligoclonal
bands, and usually myelin basic protein and albumin, is done. IgG is usually increased as a percentage of
CSF components, such as protein (normally < 11%) or CSF albumin (normally < 27%). IgG levels
correlate with disease severity. Oligoclonal bands can usually be detected by agarose electrophoresis of
CSF. Myelin basic protein may be elevated during active demyelination. CSF lymphocyte count and
protein content may be slightly increased.
Other tests
include evoked potentials (delays in electrical responses to sensory stimulation—, which are often more sensitive for MS than symptoms or signs. Visual evoked responses are
sensitive and particularly helpful in patients with no confirmed cranial lesions (eg, those with lesions only
in the spinal cord). Somatosensory evoked potentials and brain stem auditory evoked potentials are
sometimes also measured. Sometimes systemic disorders (eg, SLE) and infections (eg, Lyme disease)
can mimic MS and should be excluded with specific blood tests. Blood tests to measure an IgG antibody
specific for neuromyelitis optica (NMO-IgG) may be done to differentiate that disorder from MS.
Prognosis
The course is highly varied and unpredictable. In most patients, especially when MS begins with optic
neuritis, remissions can last months to > 10 yr. However, some patients, particularly men with onset in
middle age, have frequent exacerbations and are rapidly incapacitated. Cigarette smoking may accelerate
the course. Life span is shortened only in very severe cases.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids for acute exacerbations
• Immunomodulators to prevent exacerbations
• Baclofen or tizanidine for spasticity
• Gabapentin or tricyclic antidepressants for pain
• Supportive care
Goals include shortening acute exacerbations, decreasing frequency of exacerbations, and relieving
symptoms; maintaining the patient's ability to walk is particularly important.
Disease-modifying drugs:
Acute exacerbations that cause objective deficits sufficient to impair function
(eg, loss of vision, strength, or coordination) are treated with brief courses of corticosteroids (eg,
prednisone 60 to 100 mg po once/day tapered over 2 to 3 wk, methylprednisolone 500 to 1000 mg IV
once/day for 3 to 5 days). Some evidence indicates that IV corticosteroids shorten acute exacerbations,
slow progression, and improve MRI measures of disease. Immunomodulatory therapy, such as interferons
(IFNs) or glatiramer, decreases the frequency of acute exacerbations and delays eventual disability.
Typical regimens include interferon beta-1b 8 million IU sc every other day, interferon beta-1a 6 million IU
(30
μ
g) IM weekly, and interferon beta-1a 44
μ
g sc 3 times weekly. Common adverse effects of IFNs
include flu-like symptoms and depression (which tend to decrease over time), development of neutralizing
antibodies after months of therapy, and cytopenias. Glatiramer acetate 20 mg sc once/day may be used.
The immunosuppressant mitoxantrone, 12 mg/m
IV q 3 mo for 24 mo, may be helpful, particularly for
progressive MS that is refractory to other treatments. Natalizumab, an antiα
integrin antibody, inhibits
passage of leukocytes across the blood-brain barrier; given as a monthly infusion, it reduces number of
exacerbations and new brain lesions but may increase the risk of progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy. If immunomodulatory drugs are ineffective, monthly IV immune globulin may help.
===PAGE:1957===
Immunosuppressants other than mitoxantrone (eg, methotrexate, azathioprine, mycophenolate,
cyclophosphamide, cladribine) have been used for more severe, progressive
MS but are controversial.
Plasma exchange and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation may be somewhat useful for severe,
intractable disease.
Symptom control:
Other treatments can be used to control specific symptoms:
• Spasticity is treated with escalating doses of baclofen 10 to 20 mg po tid to qid or tizanidine 4 to 8 mg po
tid. Gait training and range-of-motion exercises can help weak, spastic limbs.
• Painful paresthesias are usually treated with gabapentin 100 to 600 mg po tid; alternatives include
tricyclic antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline 25 to 75 mg po at bedtime, desipramine 25 to 100 mg po at
bedtime if amitriptyline has intolerable anticholinergic effects), carbamazepine 200 mg po tid, and
opioids.
• Depression is treated with counseling and antidepressants.
• Bladder dysfunction is treated based on its underlying mechanism (.
• Fatigue can be treated with amantadine 100 mg po tid or modafinil 100 to 300 mg po once/day.
Supportive care:
Encouragement and reassurance help. Regular exercise (eg, stationary biking,
treadmill, swimming, stretching) is recommended, even for patients with advanced MS, because it
conditions the heart and muscles, reduces spasticity, prevents contractures, and has psychologic
benefits. Vitamin D supplements (800 to 1000 units daily) may decrease the risk of disease progression.
Vitamin D also reduces the risk of osteoporosis, particularly in patients at increased risk because mobility
is decreased or they take corticosteroids. Patients should maintain as normal and active a life as possible
but should avoid overwork, fatigue, and exposure to excess heat. Cigarette smoking should be stopped.
Vaccination does not appear to increase risk of exacerbations. Debilitated patients require measures to
prevent pressure ulcers and UTIs; intermittent urinary self-catheterization may be necessary.
Neuromyelitis Optica
(Devic Disease)
Neuromyelitis optica affects only the eyes and spinal cord. It causes acute optic neuritis, sometimes
bilateral, plus demyelination of the cervical or thoracic spinal cord. Neuromyelitis optica was previously
considered to be a variant of multiple sclerosis (MS) but is now recognized as a different disorder.
Symptoms include visual loss, paraparesis or quadriparesis, and incontinence.
Diagnosis
• Brain and spinal cord MRI
• Visual evoked potentials
Diagnosis usually includes brain and spinal cord MRI and visual evoked potentials. Blood tests to
measure an IgG antibody specific for neuromyelitis optica (NMO-IgG) may be done to differentiate it from
MS.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids and immunomodulatory or immunosuppressive treatments
There is no cure. However, treatment can prevent, slow, or decrease the severity of exacerbations.
Methylprednisolone and azathioprine are often used. Plasma exchange may help people who do not
===PAGE:1958===
respond to corticosteroids. Rituximab, an anti-B-cell antibody, reduces IgG production and has been
shown to be disease-stabilizing.
Treatment of symptoms is similar to that for MS (see above). Baclofen or tizanidine may relieve muscle
spasms.
===PAGE:1959===
Chapter 185. Peripheral Nervous System and Motor Unit Disorders
Introduction
The peripheral nervous system refers to parts of the nervous system outside the brain and spinal cord. It
includes the cranial nerves and spinal nerves from their origin to their end. The anterior horn cells,
although technically part of the CNS, are sometimes discussed with the peripheral nervous system
because they are part of the motor unit.
Motor neuron dysfunction results in muscle weakness or paralysis. Sensory neuron
dysfunction results in
abnormal or lost sensation. Some disorders are progressive and fatal.
Anatomy
A motor unit consists of an anterior horn cell, its motor axon, the muscle fibers it innervates, and the
connection between them (neuromuscular junction). The anterior horn cells are located in the gray matter
of the spinal cord and thus are technically part of the CNS. In contrast to the motor system, the cell
bodies of the afferent sensory fibers lie outside the spinal cord, in dorsal root ganglia.
Nerve fibers outside the spinal cord join to form anterior (ventral) motor roots and posterior (dorsal)
sensory root nerve roots. The ventral and dorsal roots combine to form a spinal nerve. Thirty of the 31
pairs of spinal nerves have dorsal and ventral roots; C1 has no sensory root (see
Fig. 186-1
.
The spinal nerves exit the vertebral column via an intervertebral foramen. Because the spinal cord is
shorter than the vertebral column, the more caudal the spinal nerve, the further the foramen is from the
corresponding cord segment. Thus, in the lumbosacral region, nerve roots from lower cord segments
descend within the spinal column in a near-vertical sheaf, forming the cauda equina. Just beyond the
intervertebral foramen, spinal nerves branch into several parts.
Branches of the cervical and lumbosacral spinal nerves anastomose peripherally into plexuses, then
branch into nerve trunks that terminate up to 1 m away in peripheral structures. The intercostal nerves
are segmental.
The term peripheral nerve refers to the part of a spinal nerve distal to the root and plexus. Peripheral
nerves are bundles of nerve fibers. They range in diameter from 0.3 to 22
μ
m. Schwann cells form a thin
cytoplasmic tube around each fiber and further wrap larger fibers in a multilayered insulating membrane
(myelin sheath).
Physiology
The myelin sheath enhances impulse conduction. The largest and most heavily myelinated fibers conduct
quickly; they convey motor, touch, and proprioceptive impulses. The less myelinated and unmyelinated
fibers conduct more slowly; they convey pain, temperature, and autonomic impulses. Because nerves are
metabolically active tissues, they require nutrients, supplied by blood vessels called the vasa nervorum.
Etiology
Disorders can result from damage to or dysfunction of the cell body, myelin sheath, axons, or
neuromuscular junction. Disorders can be genetic or acquired (due to toxic, metabolic, traumatic,
infectious, or inflammatory conditions—see
Table 185-1
). Peripheral neuropathies may affect one nerve (mononeuropathy), several discrete nerves
(multiple mononeuropathy, or mononeuritis multiplex), or multiple nerves diffusely (polyneuropathy). Some
conditions involve a plexus (plexopathy) or nerve root (radiculopathy). More than one site can be affected;
eg, in the most common variant of Guillain-Barre syndrome, multiple segments of cranial nerves, usually
the 2 facial nerves, may be affected.
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:1960===
Because sensory and motor cell bodies are in different locations, a nerve cell body disorder typically
affects either the sensory or motor component but rarely both.
Damage:
Damage to the myelin sheath (demyelination— slows nerve conduction.
Demyelination affects mainly heavily myelinated fibers, causing large-fiber sensory dysfunction (buzzing
and tingling sensations), motor weakness, and diminished reflexes. The hallmark of acquired
demyelinating polyneuropathy is severe motor weakness with minimal atrophy.
Because the vasa nervorum do not reach the center of a nerve, centrally located fascicles are most
vulnerable to vascular disorders (eg, vasculitis, ischemia). These disorders result in smallfiber sensory
dysfunction (sharp pain and burning sensations), motor weakness proportional to atrophy, and less
severe reflex abnormalities than in other nerve disorders. The distal two thirds of a limb is affected most.
Initially, deficits tend to be asymmetric because the vasculitic or ischemic process is random. However,
multiple infarcts may later coalesce, causing symmetric deficits (multiple mononeuropathy).
Toxic-metabolic or genetic disorders usually begin symmetrically. Immune-mediated processes may be
symmetric or, early in rapidly evolving processes, asymmetric.
Damage to the axon transport system for cellular constituents, especially microtubules and
microfilaments, causes significant axon dysfunction. First affected are the smaller fibers (because they
have greater metabolic requirements) at the most distal part of the nerve. Then, axonal degeneration
slowly ascends, producting
[Table 185-1.
Causes of Peripheral Nervous System Disorders]
the characteristic distal-to-proximal pattern of symptoms (stocking-glove sensory loss, weakness).
Recovery:
Damage to the myelin sheath (eg, by injury or Guillain-Barre syndrome) can often be repaired
by surviving Schwann cells in about 6 to 12 wk.
After axonal damage, the fiber regrows within the Schwann cell tube at about 1 mm/day once the
pathologic process ends. However,
regrowth may be misdirected, causing aberrant innervation (eg, of
fibers in the wrong muscle, of a touch receptor at the wrong site, or of a temperature instead of a touch
receptor).
Regeneration is virtually impossible when the cell body dies and is unlikely when the axon is completely
lost.
Evaluation
• Deficits defined by history and examination
• Attention to clinical clues to peripheral nervous system disorders
• Usually, nerve conduction velocity studies and electromyography
Clinical evaluation:
History should focus on type of symptom, onset, progression, and location, as well
as information about potential causes (eg, family history, toxic exposures, past medical disorders).
Physical and neurologic examination should further define the type of deficit (eg, motor deficit, type of
sensory deficit, combination). Sensation (using pinprick and light touch for small fibers and vibration for
large fibers), proprioception, motor strength, and deep tendon reflexes are evaluated (.
Cranial nerve as well as central and peripheral nerve function is evaluated. Whether motor weakness is
proportional to the degree of atrophy is noted, as are type and distribution of reflex abnormalities.
Autonomic function is evaluated (.
Physicians should suspect a peripheral nervous system disorder based on the pattern and type of
neurologic deficits, especially if deficits are in the territories of nerve roots, spinal nerves, plexuses,
===PAGE:1961===
specific peripheral nerves, or a combination. These disorders are also suspected in patients with mixed
sensory and motor deficits, with multiple foci, or with a focus that is incompatible with a single anatomic
site in the CNS.
Physicians should also suspect peripheral nervous system disorders in patients with generalized or
diffuse weakness but no sensory deficits; in these cases, peripheral nervous system disorders may be
overlooked because they are not the most likely cause of such symptoms. Clues that a peripheral
nervous system disorder may be the cause of generalized weakness include the following:
• Patterns of generalized weakness that suggest a specific cause (eg, predominant ptosis and diplopia,
which suggest early myasthenia gravis)
• Symptoms and signs other than weakness that suggest a specific disorder or group of disorders (eg,
cholinergic effects, which suggest organophosphate poisoning)
• Deficits in a stocking-glove distribution, which suggest diffuse axonal disorders or polyneuropathy
• Fasciculations
• Hypotonia
• Muscle wasting without hyperreflexia
• Weakness that is progressive, chronic, and unexplained
Clues that the cause may not be a peripheral nervous system disorder include hyperreflexia and
hypertonia. These deficits suggest an upper motor neuron disorder as the cause of weakness.
Hyporeflexia is consistent with peripheral nervous system deficits but is non-specific.
Although many exceptions are possible, certain clinical clues may also suggest possible causes of
peripheral nervous system deficits (see
Table 185-2
).
Clinical assessment narrows diagnostic possibilities and guides further testing.
Testing:
Usually, nerve conduction velocity studies and electromyography (collectively called
electrodiagnostic testing) are done (. These tests help identify level of involvement (nerve,
plexus, root) and distinguish demyelinating disorders (very slow conduction) from axonal disorders. Other
testing depends on whether a CNS lesion must be ruled out.
Patients with weakness but no sensory deficits are evaluated for weakness.
Treatment
• Treatment of underlying disorder
• Supportive care, often by a multidisciplinary team
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder when possible. Otherwise, treatment is supportive. A
multidisciplinary team approach helps patients cope with progressive neurologic disability:
• Physical therapists may help patients maintain muscle function.
• Occupational therapists can recommend adaptive braces and walking devices to help with activities of
daily living.
• Speech and language therapists may provide alternative communication devices.
===PAGE:1962===
• If pharyngeal weakness develops, nurses feed patients with extreme care.
• A gastroenterologist may recommend percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy.
• If respiratory weakness develops, pulmonary specialists are needed to determine whether noninvasive
respiratory support (eg, bilevel positive airway pressure) or
[Table 185-2.
Clinical Clues to Causes of Peripheral Nervous System* Disorders]
tracheostomy with full ventilatory support should be used.
Early in fatal disorders, health care practitioners must talk frankly with patients, family members, and
caregivers to determine the level of intervention acceptable (. These decisions should be
reviewed and confirmed at various stages of the disorder.
Disorders of Neuromuscular Transmission
Disorders of neuromuscular transmission affect the neuromuscular junction. They may involve
• Postsynaptic receptors (eg, in myasthenia gravis—
• Presynaptic release of acetylcholine (eg, in botulism)
• Breakdown of acetylcholine within the synapse (eg, due to drugs or neurotoxic chemicals)
Common features of these disorders include fluctuating fatigue and muscle weakness with no sensory
deficits.
Eaton-Lambert syndrome:
This disorder is due to impaired acetylcholine release from presynaptic
nerve terminals (.
Botulism:
Also due to impaired release of acetylcholine from presynaptic nerve terminals, botulism
develops when toxin produced by
Clostridium botulinum
spores irreversibly binds to the terminal
cholinergic nerve endings (. The result is severe weakness, sometimes with respiratory
compromise. Other systemic symptoms may include mydriasis, dry mouth, constipation, urinary
retention,
and tachycardia due to unopposed sympathetic nervous system activity (anticholinergic syndrome).
These systemic findings are absent in myasthenia gravis.
In botulism, electromyography (EMG) detects a mild decremental response to low-frequency (2- to 3-Hz)
repetitive nerve stimulation but a pronounced incremental response after 10 sec of exercise or with rapid
(50-Hz) repetitive nerve stimulation.
Drugs or toxic chemicals:
Cholinergic drugs, organophosphate insecticides, and most nerve gases
block neuromuscular transmission by excessive acetylcholine action that depolarizes postsynaptic
receptors. Miosis, bronchorrhea, and myasthenic-like weakness (cholinergic syndrome) result.
Aminoglycoside and polypeptide antibiotics decrease presynaptic acetylcholine release and sensitivity of
the postsynaptic membrane to acetylcholine. At high serum levels, these antibiotics may increase
neuromuscular block in patients with latent myasthenia gravis. Long-term penicillamine treatment may
cause a reversible syndrome that clinically and electromyographically resembles myasthenia gravis.
Excessive Mg po or IV (with blood levels approaching 8 to 9 mg/dL) can also induce severe weakness
resembling a myasthenic syndrome.
Treatment consists of eliminating the drug or toxic chemical and providing necessary respiratory support
and intensive nursing care. Atropine 0.4 to 0.6 mg po tid decreases bronchial secretions in patients with
cholinergic excess. Higher doses (eg, 2 to 4 mg IV q 5 min) may be necessary for organophosphate
insecticide or nerve gas poisoning.
===PAGE:1963===
Disorders With Neuromuscular Manifestations
Stiff-person syndrome:
The syndrome affects the CNS but has neuromuscular manifestations. It often
occurs in patients with type 1 diabetes. It may be autoimmune and can occur as a paraneoplastic
syndrome (most often with breast, lung, or colon cancer or with Hodgkin lymphoma). Autoantibodies
against several proteins involved in GABA (
γ
-aminobutyric acid)-glycine synapses are present, affecting
primarily inhibitory neurons that originate in the anterior horn of the spinal cord.
Progressive stiffness develops insidiously in the trunk and abdomen and, to a lesser degree, in the legs
and arms. Patients are otherwise normal, and examination detects only muscle hypertrophy and stiffness.
EMG shows only the electrical activity of normal contraction.
Only symptomatic therapy is available. Diazepam is the only drug that consistently relieves muscle
stiffness. Results of plasmapheresis are inconsistent.
Isaacs' syndrome:
This syndrome, generally thought to be a channelopathy, sometimes occurs as a
paraneoplastic syndrome. It may also occur in other disorders (eg, myasthenia gravis, thymoma, cancer,
amyloidosis) or can be inherited. Cause is unknown. Abnormalities are thought to originate in a peripheral
nerve because they are abolished by curare but usually persist after general anesthesia.
The limbs are most affected. The sine qua non is myokymia—continuous muscle twitching described as
bag-of-worms movements. Other symptoms include carpopedal spasms, intermittent cramps, increased
sweating, and pseudomyotonia (impaired relaxation after a strong muscle contraction but without the
typical waxing-and-waning EMG abnormality of true myotonia). Carbamazepine or phenytoin may relieve
these symptoms.
Guillain-Barre Syndrome
(Acute Idiopathic Polyneuritis; Acute Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy)
Guillain-Barre syndrome is an acute, usually rapidly progressive inflammatory polyneuropathy
characterized by muscular weakness and mild distal sensory loss. Cause is thought to be
autoimmune. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment includes plasmapheresis,
γ
-globulin, and, for
severe cases, mechanical ventilation.
Guillain-Barre syndrome is the most common acquired inflammatory neuropathy. Although the cause is not
fully understood, it is thought to be autoimmune. There are several variants. In some, demyelination
predominates; others affect the axon.
In about two thirds of patients, the syndrome begins 5 days to 3 wk after a banal infectious disorder,
surgery, or vaccination. Infection is the trigger in > 50% of patients; common pathogens include
Campylobacter jejuni,
enteric viruses, herpesviruses (including cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus),
and
Mycoplasma
sp. A cluster of cases followed the swine flu vaccination program in 1975.
Symptoms and Signs
Flaccid weakness predominates in most patients; it is always more prominent than sensory
abnormalities
and may be most prominent proximally. Relatively symmetric weakness with paresthesias usually begins
in the legs and progresses to the arms, but it occasionally begins in the arms or head. In 90% of patients,
weakness is maximal at 3 wk. Deep tendon reflexes are lost. Sphincters are usually spared. Facial and
oropharyngeal muscles are weak in > 50% of patients with severe disease. Dehydration and
undernutrition may result. Respiratory paralysis severe enough to require endotracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation occurs in 5 to 10%.
A few patients (possibly with a variant form) have significant, life-threatening autonomic dysfunction
causing BP fluctuations, inappropriate ADH secretion, cardiac arrhythmias, GI stasis, urinary retention,
and pupillary changes. An unusual variant (Fisher variant) may cause only ophthalmoparesis, ataxia, and
areflexia.
===PAGE:1964===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Electrodiagnostic testing
• CSF analysis
Diagnosis is primarily clinical. Similar acute weakness can result from myasthenia gravis, botulism,
poliomyelitis (mainly outside the US), tick paralysis, West Nile virus infection, and metabolic neuropathies,
but these disorders can usually be distinguished as follows:
• Myasthenia gravis is intermittent and worsened by exertion.
• Botulism may cause fixed dilated pupils (in 50%) and prominent cranial nerve dysfunction with normal
sensation.
• Poliomyelitis usually occurs in epidemics.
• Tick paralysis causes ascending paralysis but spares sensation.
• West Nile virus causes headache, fever, and asymmetric flaccid paralysis but spares sensation.
• Metabolic neuropathies occur with a chronic metabolic disorder.
Tests for infectious disorders and immune dysfunction, including tests for hepatitis and HIV and serum
protein electrophoresis, are done.
If Guillain-Barre syndrome is suspected, patients should be admitted to a hospital for electrodiagnostic
testing, CSF analysis, and monitoring by measuring forced vital capacity every 6 to 8 h. Initial
electrodiagnostic testing detects slow nerve conduction velocities and evidence of segmental
demyelination in two thirds of patients; however, normal results do not exclude the diagnosis and should
not delay treatment.
CSF analysis may detect albuminocytologic dissociation (increased protein but normal WBC count), but it
may not appear for up to 1 wk and does not develop in 10% of patients.
Prognosis
This syndrome is fatal in < 2%. Most patients improve considerably over a period of months, but about
30% of adults and even more children have some residual weakness at 3 yr. Patients with residual
defects may require retraining, orthopedic appliances, or surgery.
After initial improvement, 3 to 10% of patients develop chronic inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy (CIDP—.
Treatment
• Intensive supportive care
• Plasmapheresis or IV immune globulin
Guillain-Barre syndrome is a medical emergency,
requiring constant monitoring and support of vital
functions, typically in an ICU. Forced vital capacity should be measured frequently so that respiration can
be assisted if necessary; if vital capacity is < 15 mL/kg, endotracheal intubation is indicated. Inability to lift
the head off the pillow by flexing the neck is another danger sign; it frequently develops simultaneously
with phrenic nerve (diaphragm) weakness.
===PAGE:1965===
If oral fluid intake is difficult, IV fluids are given as needed to maintain a urine volume of at least 1 to 1.5
L/day. Extremities should be protected from trauma and from the pressure of bed rest. Heat therapy helps
relieve pain, making early physical therapy possible. Immobilization, which may cause ankylosis and
contractures, should be avoided. Passive full-range joint movement should be started immediately, and
active exercises should be initiated when acute symptoms subside. Heparin 5000 units sc bid helps
prevent deep venous thrombosis in bedbound patients.
Given early, immune globulin (
γ
-globulin) 400 mg/kg IV once/day for 5 consecutive days is the treatment
of choice; it has some benefit up to 1 mo from disease onset.
Plasmapheresis ( helps when done early in the syndrome; it is used if
γ
-globulin is
ineffective. Plasmapheresis is relatively safe, shortens the disease course and hospital stay, and reduces
mortality risk and incidence of permanent paralysis. Plasmapheresis removes any previously
administered
γ
-globulin, negating its benefits.
Corticosteroids do not improve the outcome and should not be used.
Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy
(Chronic Acquired Demyelinating Polyneuropathy; Chronic Relapsing Polyneuropathy)
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) is an immune-mediated
polyneuropathy characterized by symmetric weakness of proximal and distal muscles and by
progression continuing > 2 mo.
Progression for > 2 mo differentiates CIDP from Guillain-Barre syndrome, which is monophasic and selflimited. CIDP develops in 3 to 10% of patients with Guillain-Barre syndrome.
Diagnosis
• CSF analysis and electrodiagnostic tests
Testing includes CSF analysis and electrodiagnostic tests. Results are similar to those in Guillain-Barre
syndrome: CSF protein level is increased, and electrodiagnostic testing detects demyelination. Nerve
biopsy, which can detect demyelination, is seldom needed.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes plasmapheresis or IV immune globulin
Unlike Guillain-Barre syndrome, CIDP responds to corticosteroids. Azathioprine may be added to
decrease corticosteroid dependence. However, in severe or rapidly progressive cases, plasmapheresis or
IV immune globulin may be preferred. Immunosuppressants (eg, azathioprine) may be helpful. Treatment
may be needed for a long time.
Hereditary Neuropathies
Hereditary neuropathies include a variety of congenital degenerative peripheral neuropathies.
Hereditary neuropathies are classified as sensorimotor, sensory, or motor (see Motor Neuron Disorders
. Causes of secondary hereditary neuropathies include Refsum's disease, porphyria, and
Fabry's disease.
Sensorimotor neuropathies:
There are 3 main types (I, II, and III); all begin in childhood. Some less
common types begin at birth and result in greater disability.
===PAGE:1966===
Types I and II
(Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, peroneal muscular atrophy) are the most common; they are
usually autosomal dominant disorders. Type I results from a duplication (extra copy) of the peripheral
myelin protein-22 gene (
PMP22
), located on the short arm of chromosome 17. These disorders are
characterized by weakness and atrophy, primarily in peroneal and distal leg muscles. Patients may also
have other degenerative disorders (eg, Friedreich's ataxia) or a family history of them. Patients with type I
present in middle childhood with footdrop and slowly progressive distal muscle atrophy, causing stork leg
deformity. Intrinsic muscle wasting in the hands begins later. Vibration, pain, and temperature sensation
decreases in a stocking-glove pattern. Deep tendon reflexes are absent. High pedal arches or
hammertoes may be the only signs in family members who are carriers. Nerve conduction velocities are
slow, and distal latencies are prolonged. Segmental demyelination and remyelination occur. Enlarged
peripheral nerves may be palpated. The disease progresses slowly and does not affect life span. Type II
evolves more slowly; weakness usually develops later in life. Patients have relatively normal nerve
conduction velocities but low amplitude sensory nerve action potentials and compound muscle action
potentials. Biopsies detect axonal (wallerian) degeneration.
Type III
(hypertrophic interstitial neuropathy, Dejerine-Sottas disease), a rare autosomal recessive
disorder, begins in childhood with progressive weakness and sensory loss and absent deep tendon
reflexes. Although initially it resembles Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, the motor weakness progresses
more quickly. Demyelination and remyelination occur, producing enlarged peripheral nerves and onion
bulbs, detected by nerve biopsy.
Sensory neuropathies:
Hereditary sensory neuropathies are rare. Loss of distal pain and temperature
sensation is more prominent than loss of vibratory and position sense. The main complication is foot
mutilation due to pain insensitivity, resulting in a high risk of infections and osteomyelitis.
Diagnosis
The characteristic distribution of motor weakness, foot deformities, and family history suggests the
diagnosis, which should be
confirmed by electrophysiologic testing. Genetic analysis is available, but
there are no specific treatments.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Bracing helps correct footdrop; orthopedic surgery to stabilize the foot may help. Physical therapy (to
strengthen muscles) and occupational therapy may help; vocational counseling may help prepare young
patients to maintain vocational skills despite disease progression.
Hereditary Motor Neuropathy With Liability to Pressure Palsies
In hereditary motor neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP), nerves become
increasingly sensitive to pressure and stretch.
In HNPP, nerves lose their myelin sheath and do not conduct nerve impulses normally. Inheritance is
usually autosomal dominant. The cause is loss of one copy of peripheral myelin protein-22 gene
(
PMP22
), located on the short arm of chromosome 17. Two copies of the gene are needed for normal
function. Incidence of HNPP is estimated to be 2 to 5/100,000.
Usually, symptoms start during adolescence or young adulthood, but they may start at any age. Peroneal
nerve palsy with footdrop, ulnar nerve palsy, and carpal tunnel syndrome commonly develop. The
pressure palsies can be mild or severe and last from minutes to months. Numbness and weakness occur
in affected areas.
Diagnosis
HNPP should be suspected in patients with any of the following:
===PAGE:1967===
• Recurrent compression mononeuropathies
• Multiple mononeuropathy of unknown origin
• Symptoms suggesting recurrent demyelinating polyneuropathy
• A family history of carpal tunnel syndrome
Electrodiagnostic testing and genetic testing aid in diagnosis; rarely, biopsy is required.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment involves avoiding or modifying activities that cause symptoms. Wrist splints and elbow pads
can reduce pressure, prevent reinjury, and allow the nerve to repair the myelin over time. Surgery is rarely
indicated.
Motor Neuron Disorders
Motor neuron disorders (MNDs) are characterized by steady, relentless, progressive
degeneration of corticospinal tracts, anterior horn cells, bulbar motor nuclei, or a combination.
Symptoms vary in severity and may include muscle weakness and atrophy, fasciculations,
emotional lability, and respiratory muscle weakness. Diagnosis involves nerve conduction
velocity studies, electromyography, and exclusion of other disorders via MRI and laboratory
tests. Treatment is supportive.
MNDs may involve the CNS as well as the peripheral nervous system. Usually, etiology is unknown.
Nomenclature and symptoms vary according to the part of the motor system most affected. Myopathies
have similar features but are disorders of the muscle membrane, contractile apparatus, or organelles (see
p.
).
MNDs can be classified as upper and lower; some disorders (eg, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) have
features of both. They are more common among men, most often during their 50s.
Symptoms and Signs
Upper MNDs (eg, primary lateral sclerosis) affect neurons of the motor cortex, which extend to the brain
stem (corticobulbar tracts) or spinal cord (corticospinal tracts). Generally, symptoms consist of stiffness,
clumsiness, and awkward movements, usually affecting first the mouth, throat, or both, then spreading to
the limbs.
Lower MNDs affect the anterior horn cells or cranial nerve motor nuclei or their efferent axons to the
skeletal muscles. In bulbar palsies, only the cranial nerve motor nuclei in the brain stem (bulbar nuclei)
are affected. Patients usually present with facial weakness, dysphagia, and dysarthria. When anterior
horn cells of spinal (not cranial) nerves are affected, as in spinal muscular atrophies (,
symptoms usually include muscle weakness and atrophy, fasciculations (visible muscle twitches), and
muscle cramps, initially in a hand, a foot, or the tongue. Poliomyelitis, an
enteroviral infection that attacks
anterior horn cells, and postpolio syndrome are also lower MNDs (.
Physical findings help differentiate upper from lower MNDs (see
Table 185-3
) and weakness due to lower MNDs from that due to myopathy (see
Table 185-4
).
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS):
ALS (Lou Gehrig disease, Charcot's syndrome) is the most
common MND.
===PAGE:1968===
Most patients present with random, asymmetric symptoms, consisting of cramps, weakness, and muscle
atrophy of the hands (most commonly) or feet. Weakness progresses to the forearms, shoulders, and
lower limbs. Fasciculations, spasticity, hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, extensor plantar reflexes,
clumsiness, stiffness of movement, weight loss, fatigue, and difficulty controlling facial expression and
tongue movements soon follow. Other symptoms include hoarseness, dysphagia, slurred speech,
increased saliva production, and a tendency to choke on liquids. Late in the disorder, a pseudobulbar
affect occurs, with inappropriate, involuntary, and uncontrollable excesses of laughter or crying. Sensory
systems, consciousness, cognition, voluntary eye movements, sexual function, and urinary and anal
sphincters are usually spared.
Death is usually caused by failure of the respiratory muscles; 50% of patients die within 3 yr of onset,
20% live 5 yr, and 10% live 10 yr. Survival for > 30 yr is rare. In the bulbar variant, deterioration and death
occur more rapidly.
Progressive bulbar palsy:
The muscles innervated by cranial nerves and corticobulbar tracts are
predominantly affected, causing progressive difficulty with chewing, swallowing, and talking; nasal voice;
reduced gag reflex; fasciculations and weak movement of the facial muscles and tongue; and weak
palatal movement. A pseudobulbar affect, with emotional lability may occur if the corticobulbar tract is
affected. Commonly, the disorder spreads, affecting extrabulbar segments; then it is called bulbar-variant
ALS.
[Table 185-3.
Distinguishing Upper from Lower Motor Neuron Lesions]
[Table 185-4.
Distinguishing the Cause of Muscle Weakness: Lower Motor Neuron Dysfunction vs
Myopathy*]
Patients with dysphagia have a very poor prognosis; respiratory complications due to aspiration
frequently result in death within 1 to 3 yr.
Progressive muscular atrophy:
In many cases, especially those with childhood onset, inheritance is
autosomal recessive. Other cases are sporadic. The disorder can develop at any age. Anterior horn cell
involvement occurs alone or is more prominent than corticospinal involvement, and progression tends to
be more benign than that of other MNDs.
Fasciculations may be the earliest manifestation. Muscle wasting and marked weakness begin in the
hands and progress to the arms, shoulders, and legs, eventually becoming generalized. Patients may
survive ≥ 25 yr.
Primary lateral sclerosis and progressive pseudobulbar palsy:
Muscle stiffness and signs of distal
motor weakness gradually increase, affecting the limbs in primary lateral sclerosis and the lower cranial
nerves in progressive pseudobulbar palsy. Fasciculations and muscle atrophy may follow many years
later. These disorders usually take several years to result in total disability.
Diagnosis
• Electrodiagnostic tests
•
MRI of brain and, if no cranial nerve involvement, cervical spine
• Laboratory tests to check for other, more treatable causes
Diagnosis is suggested by progressive, generalized motor weakness without significant sensory
abnormalities. Other disorders that cause pure muscle weakness should be ruled out:
• Disorders of neuromuscular transmission
• Various myopathies (including noninflammatory and drug-induced)
===PAGE:1969===
• Spinal muscular atrophies (mostly in children)
• Polymyositis
• Dermatomyositis
• Thyroid and adrenal disorders
• Electrolyte abnormalities (eg, hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia)
• Various infections (eg, syphilis, Lyme disease, hepatitis C)
When cranial nerves are affected, a treatable cause is less likely. Upper and lower motor neuron signs
plus weakness in facial muscles strongly suggest ALS.
Electrodiagnostic tests should be done to check for evidence of disorders of neuromuscular transmission
or demyelination. Such evidence is not present in MNDs; nerve conduction velocities are usually normal
until late in the disease. Needle electromyography (EMG) is the most useful test, showing fibrillations,
positive waves, fasciculations, and sometimes giant motor units, even in unaffected limbs.
Brain MRI is required. When there is no clinical or EMG evidence of cranial nerve motor weakness, MRI
of the cervical spine is indicated to exclude structural lesions.
Laboratory tests are done to check for other, treatable causes. Tests include CBC, electrolytes, creatine
kinase, and thyroid function tests. Serum and urine protein electrophoresis with immunofixation for
monoclonal antibodies is done to check for a paraprotein that is rarely associated with MNDs.
Discovering an underlying paraproteinemia may indicate that the MND is paraneoplastic, and treatment of
the paraproteinemia may ameliorate the MND. Antimyelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) antibodies are
associated with a demyelinating motor neuropathy, which may mimic ALS. A 24-h urine collection is done
to check for heavy metals in patients who may have been exposed to them. Lumbar puncture should be
done; elevated WBCs or protein levels in CSF strongly suggest an alternative diagnosis.
Serum Venereal Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL) tests, ESR, and measurement of certain
antibodies (rheumatoid factor, Lyme titer, HIV, hepatitis C virus, antinuclear [ANA], anti-Hu [to check for
anti-Hu paraneoplastic syndrome]) are indicated only if suggested by risk factors or history. Genetic
testing (eg, for superoxide dismutase gene mutation or genetic abnormalities that cause spinal muscular
atrophies) and enzyme measurements (eg, hexosaminidase A) should not be done unless patients are
interested in genetic counseling; disorders detected by these tests have no known specific treatments.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Riluzole for bulbar-variant ALS
There is no specific treatment. However, an antiglutamate drug, riluzole 50 mg po bid, prolongs life in
patients with progressive bulbar palsy. A multidisciplinary team approach helps patients cope with
progressive neurologic disability.
The following drugs may help reduce symptoms:
• For spasticity, baclofen
• For cramps, quinine or phenytoin
• To decrease saliva production, a strong anticholinergic drug (eg, glycopyrrolate, amitriptyline,
benztropine, trihexyphenidyl, transdermal hyoscine, atropine)
===PAGE:1970===
• For pseudobulbar affect, amitriptyline and fluvoxamine
In patients with progressive bulbar palsy, surgery to improve swallowing has had limited success.
Myasthenia Gravis
Myasthenia gravis involves episodic muscle weakness and easy fatigability caused by
autoantibody- and cell-mediated destruction of acetylcholine receptors. It is more common
among young women but may occur at any age. Symptoms worsen with muscle activity and
lessen with rest. Diagnosis is by antibody testing to acetylcholine receptor (AChR),
electromyography, and IV edrophonium challenge, which briefly lessens the weakness.
Treatment includes anticholinesterase drugs, immunosuppressants, corticosteroids,
plasmapheresis, and possibly thymectomy.
Myasthenia gravis develops most commonly in women aged 20 to 40. It results from
an autoimmune
attack on postsynaptic acetylcholine receptors, which disrupts neuromuscular transmission. The trigger
for autoantibody production is unknown, but the disorder is associated with abnormalities of the thymus,
thyrotoxicosis, and other autoimmune disorders. The role of the thymus in myasthenia is unclear, but 65%
of patients have thymic hyperplasia, and 10% have a thymoma. About half of the thymomas are
malignant. Precipitating factors include infection, surgery, and certain drugs (eg, aminoglycosides,
quinine, Mg sulfate, procainamide, Ca channel blockers).
Some patients with generalized myasthenia have no antibodies to acetylcholine receptors (AChR) in
serum. About half of these patients have antibodies to muscle-specific receptor tyrosine kinase (MuSK), a
surface membrane enzyme that helps AChR molecules aggregate during development of the
neuromuscular junction. Anti-MuSK antibodies do not occur in patients with AChR antibodies or with
isolated ocular myasthenia. The clinical significance of anti-MuSK antibodies is still under study, but
patients with them may be less responsive to anticholinesterase drugs and require more aggressive early
immunotherapy than patients who have AChR antibodies.
Uncommon forms:
Ocular myasthenia gravis involves only extraocular muscles. It represents about
15% of cases.
Congenital myasthenia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that begins in childhood; it results from
structural abnormalities in the postsynaptic receptor rather than an autoimmune disorder.
Ophthalmoplegia is common.
Neonatal myasthenia affects 12% of infants born to women with myasthenia gravis. It is due to IgG
antibodies that passively cross the placenta. It causes generalized muscle weakness, which resolves in
days to weeks as antibody titers decline. Thus, treatment is usually supportive.
Symptoms and Signs
The most common symptoms are ptosis, diplopia, and muscle weakness after use of the affected muscle.
Weakness resolves when the affected muscles are rested but recurs when they are used again. Ocular
muscles are affected initially in 40% of patients and eventually in 85%. Only ocular muscles are affected
in 15%. Hand grip may alternate between weak and normal (milkmaid's grip). Neck muscles may become
weak. If generalized myasthenia is going to develop after ocular symptoms, it usually does so within the
first 3 yr. Proximal limb weakness is common. Some patients present with bulbar symptoms (eg, altered
voice, nasal regurgitation, choking, dysphagia). Sensation and deep tendon reflexes are normal.
Manifestations fluctuate in intensity over hours to days.
Myasthenic crisis,
a severe generalized quadriparesis or life-threatening respiratory muscle weakness,
occurs in about 10% of patients. It is often due to a supervening infection that reactivates the immune
system. Once respiratory insufficiency begins, respiratory failure may occur rapidly.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:1971===
• Bedside anticholinesterase test
• AChR antibody levels, electromyography, or both
Diagnosis is suggested by symptoms and signs and confirmed by tests. An anticholinesterase test, done
at bedside and using the short-acting (< 5 min) drug edrophonium, is positive in most patients who have
myasthenia with overt weakness. A muscle with obvious weakness is tested. Patients are asked to
exercise the affected muscle until fatigue occurs (eg, to hold the eyes open until ptosis occurs or to count
aloud until slurred speech develops); then, edrophonium 2 mg IV is given. If no adverse reaction (eg,
bradycardia, atrioventricular block) occurs within 30 sec, another 8 mg is given. Rapid (< 2 min) recovery
of muscle function is a positive result. However, a positive result is not definitive for myasthenia gravis
because such improvement may occur in other neuromuscular disorders. Also, results may be equivocal.
During the test, weakness due to cholinergic crisis may worsen. Resuscitation equipment and atropine
(as an antidote) must be available during the test.
Even if the anticholinesterase test is unequivocally positive, serum AChR antibody levels,
electromyography (EMG), or both are required to confirm the diagnosis. AChR antibodies are present in
80 to 90% of patients with generalized myasthenia but in only 50% with the ocular form. Antibody levels
do not correlate with disease severity. About half of patients without AChR antibodies test positive for antiMuSK antibodies.
EMG using repetitive stimuli (2 to 3/sec) shows a significant decrease in amplitude of the compound
muscle action potential response in 60% of patients. Single-fiber EMG can detect such a decrease in >
95%.
Once myasthenia is diagnosed, CT or MRI of the thorax should be done to check for a thymoma. Other
tests should be done to screen
for autoimmune disorders frequently associated with myasthenia gravis
(eg, vitamin B
deficiency, hyperthyroidism, RA, SLE).
Patients in myasthenic crisis should be evaluated for an infectious trigger. Bedside pulmonary function
tests (eg, forced vital capacity) help detect impending respiratory failure.
Treatment
• Anticholinesterase drugs and plasmapheresis to relieve symptoms
• Corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, and thymectomy to lessen the autoimmune reaction
• Supportive care
In patients with congenital myasthenia, anticholinesterase drugs and immunomodulating treatments are
not beneficial and should be avoided. Patients with respiratory failure require intubation and mechanical
ventilation.
Symptomatic treatment:
Anticholinesterase drugs are the mainstay of symptomatic treatment but do
not alter the underlying disease process. Moreover, they rarely relieve all symptoms, and myasthenia may
become refractory to these drugs. Pyridostigmine is begun at 30 to 60 mg po q 3 to 4 h and titrated up to
a maximum of 180 mg/dose based on symptoms. When parenteral therapy is necessary (eg, because of
dysphagia), neostigmine (1 mg = 60 mg of pyridostigmine) may be substituted. Anticholinesterase drugs
can cause abdominal cramps and diarrhea, which are treated with oral atropine 0.4 to 0.6 mg (given with
pyridostigmine) or propantheline 15 mg tid to qid.
Cholinergic crisis
is muscular weakness caused by a dose of neostigmine or pyridostigmine that is too
high. A mild crisis may be difficult to differentiate from worsening myasthenia. Severe cholinergic crisis
can usually be differentiated because it, unlike myasthenia gravis, results in increased lacrimation and
salivation, tachycardia, and diarrhea.
The approach to deterioration in patients who have been responding well to treatment is controversial.
===PAGE:1972===
Some experts believe an edrophonium test is useful because strength improves only during myasthenic
crisis. Others recommend initiating respiratory support and stopping anticholinesterase drugs for several
days.
Immunomodulating treatment:
Immunosuppressants interrupt the autoimmune reaction and slow the
disease course, but they do not relieve symptoms rapidly. After being given IV immune globulin 400 mg/kg
once/day for 5 days, 70% of patients improve in 1 to 2 wk. Effects may last 1 to 2 mo.
Corticosteroids are necessary as maintenance therapy for many patients but have little immediate effect
in myasthenic crisis. Over one half of patients worsen acutely after starting high-dose corticosteroids.
Initially, prednisone 20 mg po once/day is given; dose is increased by 5 mg q 2 to 3 days up to 60 or 70
mg, which is then given every other day. Improvement may take several months; then, the dose should be
reduced to the minimum necessary to control symptoms.
Azathioprine 2.5 to 3.5 mg/kg po once/day may be as effective as corticosteroids, although significant
benefit may not occur for many months. Cyclosporine 2 to 2.5 mg/kg po bid may allow the corticosteroid
dose to be reduced. These drugs require the usual precautions. Other drugs that may be beneficial
include methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, and mycophenolate mofetil.
Thymectomy is an option for most patients with generalized myasthenia if they are < 60 yr and should be
done in all patients with a thymoma. Subsequently, in 80%, remission occurs or the maintenance drug
dose can be lowered.
Plasmapheresis may be useful during myasthenia crisis and, for patients unresponsive to drugs, before
thymectomy.
Nerve Root Disorders
(Radiculopathies)
Nerve root disorders result in segmental radicular deficits (eg, pain or paresthesias in a
dermatomal distribution, weakness of muscles innervated by the root). Diagnosis may require
neuroimaging, electrodiagnostic studies, and systemic testing for underlying disorders.
Treatment depends on the cause but includes symptomatic relief with NSAIDs and other
analgesics.
Nerve root disorders (radiculopathies) are precipitated by chronic pressure on a root in or adjacent to the
spinal column. The most common cause is a herniated intervertebral disk. Bone changes due to RA or
osteoarthritis, especially in the cervical and lumbar areas, may also compress isolated nerve roots. Less
commonly, carcinomatous meningitis causes patchy multiple root dysfunction. Rarely, mass spinal lesions
(eg, epidural abscesses and tumors, spinal meningiomas, neurofibromas) may manifest with radicular
symptoms instead of the usual spinal cord dysfunction (. Diabetes can cause a painful
thoracic or extremity radiculopathy by causing
ischemia of the nerve root. Infectious disorders, such as
those due to fungi (eg, histoplasmosis) and spirochetes (eg, Lyme disease, syphilis), sometimes affect
nerve roots. Herpes zoster infection usually causes a painful radiculopathy with dermatomal sensory loss
and characteristic rash, but it may cause a motor radiculopathy with myotomic weakness and reflex loss.
Cytomegalovirus-induced polyradiculitis is a complication of AIDS.
Symptoms and Signs
Radiculopathies tend to cause characteristic radicular syndromes of pain and segmental neurologic
deficits based on the cord level of the affected root (see
Table 185-5
). Muscles innervated by the affected motor root become weak and atrophy; they also may be
flaccid with fasciculations. Sensory root involvement causes sensory impairment in a dermatomal
distribution. Corresponding segmental deep tendon reflexes may be diminished or absent. Electric shocklike pains may radiate along the affected nerve root's distribution.
Pain may be exacerbated by movements that transmit pressure to the nerve root through the
===PAGE:1973===
subarachnoid space (eg, moving the spine, coughing, sneezing, doing the Valsalva maneuver). Lesions of
the cauda equina, which affect multiple lumbar and sacral roots, cause radicular symptoms in both legs
and may impair sphincter and sexual function.
[Table 185-5.
Symptoms of Common Radiculopathies by Cord Level]
Findings indicating spinal cord compression include a sensory level (an abrupt change in sensation below
a horizontal line across the spine), flaccid paraparesis or quadriparesis, reflex abnormalities below the
site of compression, early-onset hyporeflexia followed later by hyperreflexia, and sphincter dysfunction.
Diagnosis
• Neuroimaging
• Sometimes electrodiagnostic tests
Radicular symptoms require MRI or CT of the affected area. Myelography is sometimes used if multiple
levels are affected. The area imaged depends on symptoms and signs; if the level is unclear,
electrodiagnostic studies should be done to localize the affected root, but electrodiagnostic studies
cannot identify the cause.
If imaging does not detect an anatomic abnormality, CSF analysis is done to check for infectious or
inflammatory causes, and fasting plasma glucose is measured to check for diabetes.
Treatment
• Treatment of the cause and of pain
Specific causes are treated. Acute pain requires appropriate analgesics (eg, acetaminophen, NSAIDs,
sometimes opioids). NSAIDs are particularly useful for disorders that involve inflammation. Muscle
relaxants, sedatives, and topical treatments rarely provide additional benefit. Chronic pain can be difficult
to manage (; acetaminophen and NSAIDs are often only partly effective, and chronic use of
NSAIDs has substantial risks. Opioids have a high risk of addiction. Tricyclic antidepressants and
anticonvulsants may be effective, as may physical therapy and consultation with a mental health
practitioner. For a few patients, alternative medical treatments (eg, transdermal electrical nerve
stimulation, spinal manipulation, acupuncture, medicinal herbs) may be tried if all other treatments are
ineffective.
Herniated Nucleus Pulposus
(Herniated, Ruptured, or Prolapsed Intervertebral Disk)
Herniated nucleus pulposus is prolapse of an intervertebral disk through a tear in the
surrounding
annulus fibrosus. The tear causes pain; when the disk impinges on an adjacent
nerve root, a segmental radiculopathy with paresthesias and weakness in the distribution of the
affected root results. Diagnosis is by CT, MRI, or CT myelography. Treatment of mild cases is
with analgesics as needed. Bed rest is rarely indicated. Patients with progressive or severe
neurologic deficits, intractable pain, or sphincter dysfunction may require immediate or elective
surgery (eg, diskectomy, laminectomy).
Spinal vertebrae are separated by cartilaginous disks consisting of an outer annulus fibrosus and an
inner nucleus pulposus. When degenerative changes (with or without trauma) result in protrusion or
rupture of the nucleus through the annulus fibrosus in the lumbosacral or cervical area, the nucleus is
displaced posterolaterally or posteriorly into the extradural space. Radiculopathy occurs when the
herniated nucleus compresses or irritates the nerve root. Posterior protrusion may compress the cord or
cauda equina, especially in a congenitally narrow spinal canal (spinal stenosis). In the lumbar area, >
80% of disk ruptures affect L5 or S1 nerve roots; in the cervical area, C6 and C7 are most commonly
affected. Herniated disks are common.
===PAGE:1974===
Symptoms and Signs
Herniated disks often cause no symptoms, or they may cause symptoms and signs in the distribution of
affected nerve roots. Pain usually develops suddenly, and back pain is typically relieved by bed rest. In
contrast, nerve root pain caused by an epidural tumor or abscess begins more insidiously, and back pain
is worsened by bed rest.
In patients with lumbosacral herniation, straight-leg raises stretch the lower lumbar roots and exacerbate
back or leg pain (bilateral if disk herniation is central); straightening the knee while sitting also causes
pain.
Cervical herniation causes pain during neck flexion or tilting. Cervical cord compression, if chronic,
manifests with spastic paresis of the lower limbs and, if acute, causes quadriparesis.
Cauda equina compression often results in urine retention or incontinence due to loss of sphincter
function.
Diagnosis
• CT, MRI, or CT myelography
CT, MRI, or CT myelography can identify the cause and precise level of the lesion. Electrodiagnostic
studies may help identify the involved root. Because asymptomatic herniated disk is common, the clinician
must carefully correlate symptoms with MRI abnormalities before invasive procedures are considered.
Treatment
• Conservative treatment initially
• Invasive procedures if neurologic deficits are progressive or severe
• Immediate surgical evaluation if spinal cord is compressed
Because a herniated disk desiccates over time, symptoms tend to abate regardless of treatment. Up to
95% of patients recover without surgery within 3 mo. Treatment should be conservative, unless
neurologic deficits are progressive or severe. Heavy or vigorous physical activity is restricted, but
ambulation and light activity (eg, lifting objects < 2.5 to 5 kg [≈ 5 to 10 lb] using correct techniques) are
permitted as tolerated; prolonged bed rest (including traction) is contraindicated. Acetaminophen, NSAIDs,
or other analgesics should be used as needed to relieve pain. Physical therapy and home exercises can
improve posture and strengthen back muscles and thus reduce spinal movements that further irritate or
compress the nerve root.
If lumbar radiculopathies result in persistent or worsening neurologic deficits, particularly objective deficits
(weakness, reflex deficits), or in severe, intractable nerve root pain or sensory deficits, invasive
procedures should be considered. Microscopic diskectomy and laminectomy with surgical removal of
herniated material are usually the procedures of choice. Percutaneous approaches to remove bulging
disk material are being evaluated. Dissolving herniated disk material with local injections of the enzyme
chymopapain is not recommended. Lesions acutely compressing the spinal cord or cauda equina (eg,
causing urine retention or incontinence) require immediate surgical evaluation (.
If cervical radiculopathies result in signs of spinal cord compression, surgical decompression is needed
immediately; otherwise, it is done electively when nonsurgical treatments are ineffective.
Peripheral Neuropathy
Peripheral neuropathy is dysfunction of one or more peripheral nerves (the part of a spinal
nerve distal to the root and plexus). It includes numerous syndromes characterized by varying
===PAGE:1975===
degrees of sensory disturbances, pain, muscle weakness and atrophy, diminished
deep tendon
reflexes, and vasomotor symptoms, alone or in any combination. Initial classification is based
on history and physical examination. Electromyography and nerve conduction velocity studies
help localize the lesion and determine whether the pathophysiology is primarily axonal (often
metabolic) or demyelinating (often autoimmune). Treatment is aimed mainly at the cause.
Peripheral neuropathy may affect a single nerve (mononeuropathy), ≥ 2 discrete nerves in separate areas
(multiple mononeuropathy), or many nerves simultaneously and often suggesting a diffuse process
(polyneuropathy).
Mononeuropathies
Single and multiple mononeuropathies are characterized by sensory disturbances and
weakness in the distribution of the affected nerve or nerves. Diagnosis is clinical but should be
confirmed with electrodiagnostic tests. Treatment is directed at the cause, sometimes with
splinting, NSAIDs, corticosteroid injections, and, for severe cases of nerve entrapment, surgery.
Trauma is the most common cause of acute mononeuropathy and may result as follows:
• Violent muscular activity or forcible over-extension of a joint may cause focal neuropathy, as may
repeated small traumas (eg, tight gripping of small tools, excessive vibration from air hammers).
• Prolonged, uninterrupted pressure at bony prominences can cause pressure neuropathy, usually
affecting superficial nerves (ulnar, radial, peroneal), particularly in thin people; such pressure may occur
during sound sleep, intoxication, bicycle riding, or anesthesia.
• Compression of nerves in narrow passageways causes entrapment neuropathy (eg, in carpal tunnel
syndrome).
• Nerve compression by a tumor, bony hyperostosis, a cast, crutches, or prolonged cramped postures (eg,
during gardening) may cause compression paralysis.
Hemorrhage that compresses a nerve, exposure to cold or radiation, or direct tumor invasion may also
cause neuropathy. Compression of a nerve may be transient (eg, caused by an activity) or fixed (eg,
caused by a mass or anatomic abnormality).
Multiple mononeuropathy
(mononeuritis multiplex) is usually secondary to connective tissue disorders
(eg, polyarteritis nodosa, SLE, other types of vasculitis, Sjogren's syndrome, RA), sarcoidosis, metabolic
disorders (eg, diabetes, amyloidosis), or infectious disorders (eg, Lyme disease, HIV infection, leprosy).
However, diabetes usually causes sensorimotor distal polyneuropathy (.
Symptoms and Signs
Single and multiple mononeuropathies are characterized by pain, weakness, and paresthesias in the
distribution of the affected nerve or nerves. Pure motor nerve involvement begins with painless
weakness; pure sensory nerve involvement begins with sensory disturbances and no weakness. Multiple
mononeuropathy is often asymmetric at its onset; nerves may be involved all at once or progressively.
Extensive involvement of many nerves may simulate polyneuropathy.
Ulnar nerve palsy
of the elbow is often caused by trauma to the nerve in the ulnar groove of the elbow
by repeated leaning on the elbow or by asymmetric bone growth after a childhood fracture (tardy ulnar
palsy). The ulnar nerve can also be compressed at the cubital tunnel. Compression at the level of the
elbow can cause paresthesias and a sensory deficit in the 5th digit and medial half of the 4th digit; the
thumb adductor, 5th digit abductor, and interosseus muscles are weak and may be atrophied. Severe
chronic ulnar palsy causes a clawhand deformity. Sensory symptoms due to this syndrome are similar to
those due to C8 root dysfunction secondary to cervical radiculopathy; however, radiculopathy normally
affects the more proximal aspects of the C8 dermatome.
===PAGE:1976===
Carpal tunnel syndrome
(see also p.
) may be unilateral or bilateral. It results from compression of
the median nerve in the volar aspect of the wrist between the transverse superficial carpal ligament and
the flexor tendons of the forearm muscles. The compression causes paresthesias in the radial-palmar
aspect of the hand and pain in the wrist and palm. Pain may be referred to the forearm and shoulder. Pain
may be more severe at night. A sensory deficit in the palmar aspect of the first 3 fingers may follow, and
the muscles that control thumb abduction and opposition may become weak and atrophied. Sensory
symptoms due to this syndrome are similar to those due to C6 root dysfunction secondary to cervical
radiculopathy.
Peroneal nerve palsy
is usually caused by compression of the nerve against the lateral aspect of the
fibular neck. It is most common among emaciated bedbound patients and thin people who habitually cross
their legs. It causes footdrop (weakened dorsiflexion and
eversion of the foot) and, occasionally, a
sensory deficit in the anterolateral aspect of the lower leg and the dorsum of the foot or in the web space
between the 1st and 2nd metatarsals.
Radial nerve palsy
(Saturday night palsy) is caused by compression of the nerve against the humerus,
as when the arm is draped over the back of a chair for a long time (eg, during intoxication or deep sleep).
Typical symptoms include wristdrop (weakness of the wrist and finger extensors) and sensory loss in the
dorsal aspect of the first dorsal interosseous muscle.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Electrodiagnostic testing if clinical diagnosis is inconclusive
Symptoms and examination findings may be nearly pathognomonic. Palpating muscles while they are
contracting may detect weakness better than testing movement because during movement, other muscles
may compensate for the weak one.
Electrodiagnostic tests are usually done to clarify the diagnosis, particularly when clinical findings are
inconclusive for example:
• To distinguish sensory symptoms due to ulnar nerve palsy from C8 root dysfunction due to cervical
radiculopathy
• To distinguish sensory symptoms due to carpal tunnel syndrome from C6 root dysfunction due to
cervical radiculopathy
Electrodiagnostic tests also help localize the lesion, assess severity, and estimate prognosis.
Treatment
Underlying disorders are treated. Treatment of compression neuropathy depends on cause:
• Fixed compression (eg, by tumor) often must be relieved surgically.
• For transient compression, rest, heat, limited courses of NSAIDs in doses that reduce inflammation (eg,
ibuprofen 800 mg tid), and avoidance or modification of the causative activity usually relieve symptoms.
• For carpal tunnel syndrome, corticosteroid injections are sometimes helpful.
Braces or splints are often used pending resolution to prevent contractures. Surgery should be
considered when progression occurs despite conservative treatment.
Polyneuropathy
A polyneuropathy is a diffuse peripheral nerve disorder that is bilaterally symmetrical and thus
===PAGE:1977===
not confined to the distribution of a single nerve or a single limb. Electrodiagnostic tests should
always be done to classify the nerve structures involved, distribution, and severity of the
disorder and thus help identify the cause. Treatment is directed toward correcting the cause.
Some polyneuropathies (eg, due to lead toxicity, dapsone use, tick bite, porphyria, or Guillain-Barre
syndrome) affect primarily motor fibers; others (eg, due to dorsal root ganglionitis of cancer, leprosy, AIDS,
diabetes mellitus, or chronic pyridoxine intoxication) affect primarily sensory fibers. Some disorders (eg,
Guillain-Barre syndrome, Lyme disease, diabetes, diphtheria) can also affect cranial nerves. Certain
drugs and toxins can affect sensory or motor fibers or both (see
Table 185-6
).
Symptoms and Signs
Because pathophysiology and symptoms are related, polyneuropathies are often classified by area of
dysfunction: myelin, vasa nervorum, or axon. They may be acquired or inherited (.
Myelin dysfunction:
Myelin dysfunction polyneuropathies most often result from a parainfectious
immune response triggered by an encapsulated bacterium (eg,
Campylobacter
sp), virus (eg, enteric or
influenza viruses, HIV), or vaccine (eg, influenza vaccine). Presumably, antigens in these agents crossreact with antigens in the peripheral nervous system, causing an immune response (cellular, humoral, or
both) that culminates in varying degrees of myelin dysfunction. In acute cases (eg, in Guillain-Barre
syndrome—, rapidly progressive weakness and respiratory failure may develop. In chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), symptoms may recur or progress over months and
years.
Myelin dysfunction usually results in large-fiber sensory disturbances (paresthesias), significant muscle
weakness greater than expected for degree of atrophy, and greatly diminished reflexes. Trunk
musculature and cranial nerves may be involved. Demyelination typically occurs along the entire length of
a nerve, causing proximal and distal symptoms. There may be side-to-side asymmetries, and the upper
body may be affected before the lower body, or vice versa. Muscle bulk and tone are relatively preserved.
Vasa nervorum compromise:
Chronic arteriosclerotic ischemia, vasculitis, and hypercoagulable states
can compromise the vascular supply to nerves.
[Table 185-6.
Toxic Causes of Neuropathies]
Usually, small-fiber sensory and motor dysfunction occurs first. Patients typically have painful, often
burning sensory disturbances. Abnormalities tend to be asymmetric early in the disorder and rarely affect
the proximal one third of the limb or trunk muscles. Cranial nerve involvement is rare, except in diabetes,
which commonly affects the 3rd cranial (oculomotor) nerve. Later, if nerve lesions coalesce, symptoms
and signs may appear symmetric. Dysautonomia and skin changes (eg, atrophic, shiny skin) sometimes
occur. Muscle weakness tends to be proportional to atrophy, and reflexes are rarely lost completely.
Axonopathy:
Axonopathies tend to be distal; they may be symmetric or asymmetric.
Symmetric axonopathies result most often from toxic-metabolic disorders. Common causes include the
following:
• Diabetes mellitus
• Chronic renal insufficiency
• Adverse effects of chemotherapy drugs (eg, vinca alkaloids)
Axonopathy may result from nutritional deficiencies (most commonly, of thiamin or vitamin B
, B
, or E)
or from excess intake of vitamin B
or alcohol. Less common metabolic causes include hypothyroidism,
porphyria, sarcoidosis, and amyloidosis. Other causes include certain infections (eg, Lyme disease),
drugs (eg, nitrous oxide), and exposure to certain chemicals (eg, Agent Orange,
n
-hexane) or heavy
===PAGE:1978===
drugs (eg, nitrous oxide), and exposure to certain chemicals (eg, Agent Orange,
n
-hexane) or heavy
metals (eg, lead, arsenic, mercury). In a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with small-cell lung cancer,
loss of dorsal root ganglia and their sensory axons results in subacute sensory neuropathy.
Primary axon dysfunction may begin with symptoms of large- or small-fiber dysfunction or both. Usually,
the resulting neuropathy has a distal symmetric, stocking-glove distribution; it evenly affects the lower
extremities before the upper extremities and progresses symmetrically from distal to proximal areas.
Asymmetric axonopathy can result from parainfectious or vascular disorders.
Diagnosis
• Electrodiagnostic testing
• Laboratory tests, determined by suspected type of neuropathy
Polyneuropathy is suspected in patients with diffuse or multifocal sensory deficits, weakness without
hyperreflexia, or both. Clinical findings, particularly tempo of onset, aid in diagnosis and identification of
the cause, as in the following:
•
Asymmetric neuropathies suggest a disorder affecting the myelin sheath or vasa nervorum.
• Symmetric, distal neuropathies suggest toxic or metabolic causes.
• Slowly progressive, chronic neuropathies tend to be inherited or due to long-term toxic exposure or
metabolic disorders.
• Acute neuropathies suggest an autoimmune response, vasculitis, or a postinfectious cause.
• Rash, skin ulcers, and Raynaud's syndrome in patients with an asymmetric axonal neuropathy suggest a
hypercoagulable state or parainfectious or autoimmune vasculitis.
• Weight loss, fever, lymphadenopathy, and mass lesions may suggest a tumor or paraneoplastic
syndrome.
Electrodiagnostic tests:
Regardless of clinical findings, electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction
velocity studies are necessary to classify type of neuropathy. At a minimum, EMG of both lower
extremities should be done to assess for asymmetry and full extent of axon loss. Because EMG and nerve
conduction studies assess primarily large myelinated fibers in distal limb segments, EMG may be normal
in patients with proximal myelin dysfunction (eg, early in Guillain-Barre syndrome) and in patients with
primarily small-fiber dysfunction. In such cases, quantitative sensory or autonomic testing or both may be
done depending on the presenting symptoms.
Laboratory tests:
Baseline laboratory tests for all patients include CBC, electrolytes, renal function
tests, rapid plasma reagin test, and measurement of fasting plasma glucose, HbA
1C
, vitamin B
, folate,
and thyroid-stimulating hormone. Some clinicians include serum protein electrophoresis. The need for
other tests is determined by polyneuropathy subtype. When EMG and clinical differentiation are
inconclusive, tests for all subtypes may be necessary.
For acute myelin dysfunction neuropathies, the approach is the same as that for Guillain-Barre syndrome
(; forced vital capacity is measured to check for incipient respiratory failure. In acute or
chronic myelin dysfunction, tests for infectious disorders and immune dysfunction, including tests for
hepatitis and HIV and serum protein electrophoresis, are done. A lumbar puncture should also be done;
myelin dysfunction due to an autoimmune response often causes albuminocytologic dissociation:
increased CSF protein (> 45 mg%) but normal WBC count (≤ 5/
μ
L).
For vasa nervorum compromise or asymmetric axonal polyneuropathies, tests for hypercoagulable states
and parainfectious or autoimmune vasculitis, particularly if suggested by clinical findings, should be done;
the minimum is ESR, serum protein electrophoresis, and measurement of rheumatoid factor, antinuclear
===PAGE:1979===
antibodies, and serum CK. CK may be elevated when rapid onset of disease results in muscle injury.
Coagulation studies (eg, protein C, protein S, antithrombin III, anticardiolipin antibody, and homocysteine
levels) should be done only if personal or family history suggests a hypercoagulable state. Tests for
sarcoidosis, hepatitis C, or Wegener's granulomatosis should be done only if symptoms and signs
suggest one of these disorders. If no cause is identified, nerve and muscle biopsy should be done. An
affected sural nerve is usually biopsied. A muscle adjacent to the biopsied sural nerve or a quadriceps,
biceps brachii, or deltoid muscle may be biopsied. The muscle should be one with moderate weakness
that has not been tested by EMG using a needle. An abnormality is more often detected when the
contralateral muscle has EMG abnormalities, particularly when the neuropathy is somewhat symmetric.
Nerve biopsies are useful in symmetric and asymmetric polyneuropathies but are particularly useful in
asymmetric axonopathies.
If initial tests do not identify the cause of distal symmetric axonopathies, a 24-h urine collection is tested
for heavy metals, and urine protein electrophoresis is done. If chronic heavy metal poisoning is
suspected, testing of hairs from the pubis or axillary region may help.
Whether tests for other causes are needed depends on history and physical examination findings.
Treatment
• Treatment directed at the cause
• Supportive care
Treatment focuses on correcting the causes when possible; a causative drug or toxin can be eliminated,
or a dietary deficiency corrected. Although these actions may halt progression and lessen symptoms,
recovery is slow and may be incomplete. If the cause cannot be corrected, treatment focuses on
minimizing disability and pain. Physical and occupational therapists can recommend useful assistive
devices. Amitriptyline, gabapentin, mexiletine, and topical lidocaine may relieve neuropathic pain (eg,
diabetic burning feet).
For myelin dysfunction polyneuropathies, immune system-modifying treatments are usually used:
• Plasmapheresis or IV immune globulin for acute myelin dysfunction
• Corticosteroids or antimetabolite drugs for chronic myelin dysfunction
Plexus Disorders
Disorders of the brachial or lumbosacral plexus cause a painful mixed sensorimotor disorder of
the corresponding limb.
Because several nerve roots intertwine within the plexus (see
Fig. 185-1
), the symptom pattern does not fit the distribution of individual roots or nerves. Disorders of the
rostral brachial plexus affect the shoulders, those of the caudal brachial plexus affect the hands, and
those of the lumbosacral plexus affect the legs.
Plexus disorders (plexopathies) are usually due to physical compression or injury. In infants, traction
during birth may cause plexopathy. In adults, the cause is usually trauma (typically, for the brachial plexus,
a fall that forces the head away from the shoulder) or invasion by metastatic cancer (typically, breast or
lung cancer for the brachial plexus and intestinal or GU tumors for the lumbosacral plexus). In patients
receiving anticoagulants, a hematoma may compress the lumbosacral plexus. Neurofibromatosis ( occasionally involves a plexus. Other causes include postradiation fibrosis (eg, after radiation
therapy for breast cancer) and diabetes.
Acute brachial neuritis (neuralgic amyotrophy, Parsonage-Turner syndrome) occurs primarily in men and
typically in young adults, although it can occur at any age. Cause is unknown, but viral or immunologic
inflammatory processes are suspected.
===PAGE:1980===
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations include extremity pain and motor or sensory deficits that do not correspond to an isolated
nerve root or peripheral nerve.
For acute brachial neuritis, symptoms include severe supraclavicular pain, weakness, and diminished
reflexes, with minor sensory abnormalities in the distribution of the brachial plexus. Usually, weakness
develops and reflexes decrease as pain resolves. Severe weakness develops within 3 to 10 days, then
typically regresses over the next few months. The most commonly affected muscles are the serratus
anterior (causing winging of the scapula), other muscles innervated by the upper trunk, and muscles
innervated by the anterior interosseus nerve (in the forearm—patients may not be able to make an O with
the thumb and index finger).
Diagnosis
• Electromyography and somatosensory evoked potentials
• Sometimes MRI
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical findings. Electromyography and somatosensory evoked potentials
should be done to clarify the anatomic distribution (including possible nerve root involvement). MRI of the
appropriate plexus and adjacent spine is indicated for all nontraumatic plexopathies that are not a typical
case of brachial neuritis.
Treatment
• Treatment directed at the cause
Corticosteroids, although commonly prescribed, have no proven benefit. Surgery may be indicated for
injuries, hematomas, and benign or metastatic tumors. Metastases should also be treated with radiation
therapy, chemotherapy, or both. Glycemic control can benefit patients with diabetic plexopathy.
[Fig. 185-1.
Plexuses.]
Spinal Muscular Atrophies
Spinal muscular atrophies include several types of hereditary disorders characterized by
skeletal muscle wasting due to progressive degeneration of anterior horn cells in the spinal
cord and of motor nuclei in the brain stem. Manifestations may begin in infancy or childhood.
They vary by the specific type and may include hypotonia; hyporeflexia; difficulty sucking,
swallowing, and breathing; unmet developmental milestones; and, in more severe types, very
early death. Diagnosis is by genetic testing. Treatment is supportive.
Spinal muscular atrophies usually result from autosomal recessive mutations of a single gene locus on
the short arm of chromosome 5, causing a homozygous deletion. They may involve the CNS and thus are
not purely peripheral nervous system disorders. There are 4 main types.
Type I spinal muscular atrophy (Werdnig-Hoffmann disease)
is present in utero and becomes
symptomatic by about age 6 mo. Affected infants have hypotonia (often notable at birth), hyporeflexia,
tongue fasciculations, and pronounced difficulty sucking, swallowing, and eventually breathing. Death,
usually due to respiratory failure, occurs within the first yr in 95% and by age 4 yr in all.
In
type II (intermediate) spinal muscular atrophy,
symptoms usually manifest between age 3 and 15
mo; < 25% of affected children learn to sit, and none walk or crawl. Children have flaccid muscle
weakness and fasciculations, which may be hard to see in young children. Deep tendon reflexes are
absent. Dysphagia may be present. The disorder is often fatal in early life, frequently resulting from
respiratory complications. However, progression can stop spontaneously, leaving children with
===PAGE:1981===
permanent, nonprogressive weakness and a high risk of severe scoliosis and its complications.
Type III spinal muscular atrophy (Wohlfart-Kugelberg-Welander disease)
usually manifests
between age 15 mo and 19 yr. Findings are similar to those of type I, but progression is slower and life
expectancy is longer; some patients have a normal life span. Some familial cases are secondary to
specific enzyme defects (eg, hexosaminidase deficiency). Symmetric weakness and wasting progress
from proximal to distal areas and are most evident in the legs, beginning in the quadriceps and hip flexors.
Later, arms are affected. Life expectancy depends on whether respiratory complications develop.
Type IV spinal muscular atrophy
can be recessive, dominant, or X-linked, with adult onset (age 30 to
60 yr) and slow progression of primarily proximal muscle weakness and wasting. Differentiating this
disorder from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis that involves predominantly lower motor neurons may be
difficult.
Diagnosis
• Electrodiagnostic testing
• Genetic testing
The diagnosis should be suspected in patients with unexplained muscle wasting and flaccid weakness,
particularly in infants and children.
Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity studies should be done; muscles innervated by
cranial nerves should be included. Conduction is normal, but affected muscles, which are often clinically
unaffected, are denervated.
Definitive diagnosis is by genetic testing, which detects the causative mutation in about 95% of patients.
Muscle biopsy is done occasionally. Serum enzymes (eg, CK, aldolase) may be slightly increased.
Amniocentesis, done if family history is positive, is often diagnostic.
Treatment
• Supportive care
There is no specific treatment. Physical therapy, braces, and special appliances can benefit patients with
static or slowly progressive disease by preventing scoliosis and contractures. Adaptive devices available
through physical and occupational therapists may improve children's independence and self-care by
enabling them to feed themselves, write, or use a computer.
Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndromes
Thoracic outlet compression syndromes are a group of poorly defined disorders characterized
by pain and paresthesias in a hand, the neck, a shoulder, or an arm. They appear to involve
compression of the brachial plexus (and perhaps the subclavian vessels) as these structures
traverse the thoracic outlet. Diagnostic techniques have not been established. Treatment
includes physical therapy, analgesics, and, in severe cases, surgery.
Pathogenesis is often unknown but sometimes involves compression of the lower trunk
of the brachial
plexus (and perhaps the subclavian vessels) as these structures traverse the thoracic outlet below the
scalene muscles and over the 1st rib, before they enter the axilla, but this involvement is unclear.
Compression may be caused by a cervical rib, an abnormal 1st thoracic rib, abnormal insertion or position
of the scalene muscles, or a malunited clavicle fracture. Thoracic outlet syndromes are more common
among women and usually develop between age 35 and 55.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain and paresthesias usually begin in the neck or shoulder and extend to the medial aspect of the arm
===PAGE:1982===
and hand and sometimes to the adjacent anterior chest wall. Many patients have mild to moderate
sensory impairment in the C8 to T1 distribution on the painful side; a few have prominent vascularautonomic changes in the hand (eg, cyanosis, swelling). In even fewer, the entire affected hand is weak.
Rare complications include Raynaud's syndrome and distal gangrene.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes electrodiagnostic tests, MRI, or both
Diagnosis is suggested by distribution of symptoms. Various maneuvers are alleged to demonstrate
compression of vascular structures (eg, by extending the brachial plexus), but sensitivity and specificity
are not established. Auscultating bruits at the clavicle or apex of the axilla or finding a cervical rib by x-ray
can aid in diagnosis. Although angiography may detect kinking or partial obstruction of axillary arteries or
veins, neither finding is incontrovertible evidence of disease. Other testing is controversial, but evaluation
as for brachial plexopathy (eg, electrodiagnostic tests, MRI— may be reasonable.
Treatment
• Physical therapy and analgesia
• In severe cases, surgery
Most patients without objective neurologic deficits respond to physical therapy, NSAIDs, and low-dose
tricyclic antidepressants.
If cervical ribs or subclavian artery compression is identified, an experienced specialist should decide
whether surgery is necessary. With few exceptions, surgery should be reserved for patients who have
significant or progressive neurovascular deficits and who do not respond to conservative treatment.
===PAGE:1983===
Chapter 186. Spinal Cord Disorders
Introduction
Spinal cord disorders can cause permanent severe neurologic disability. For some patients, such
disability can be avoided or minimized if evaluation and treatment are rapid. Spinal cord disorders usually
result from conditions extrinsic to the cord—eg, compression due to spinal stenosis, herniated disk, tumor,
abscess, or hematoma. Less commonly, disorders are intrinsic to the cord. Intrinsic insults include
infarction, hemorrhage, transverse myelitis, arteriovenous malformation, HIV infection, poliovirus infection
(, syphilis (which can cause tabes dorsalis—, trauma (, vitamin B
deficiency (which causes subacute combined degeneration—, decompression sickness (, lightning injury (which can cause keraunoparalysis—, radiation therapy (which can cause myelopathy), syrinx, or spinal cord tumor (. Spinal
nerve roots outside of the spinal cord may also be damaged (.
Anatomy
The spinal cord extends caudally from the medulla at the foramen magnum and terminates at the upper
lumbar vertebrae, where it forms the conus medullaris. In the lumbosacral region, nerve roots from lower
cord segments descend within the spinal column in a nearly vertical sheaf, forming the cauda equina.
The white matter at the cord's periphery contains ascending and descending tracts of myelinated sensory
and motor nerve fibers. The central H-shaped gray matter is composed of cell bodies and nonmyelinated
fibers (see
Fig. 186-1
). The anterior (ventral) horns of the "H" contain lower motor neurons, which receive impulses
from the motor cortex via the descending corticospinal tracts and, at the local level, from internuncial
neurons and afferent fibers from muscle spindles. The axons of the lower motor neurons are the efferent
fibers of the spinal nerves. The posterior (dorsal)
[Fig. 186-1.
Spinal nerve.]
horns contain sensory fibers that originate in cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia. The gray matter also
contains many internuncial neurons that carry motor, sensory, or reflex impulses from dorsal to ventral
nerve roots, from one side of the cord to the other, or from one level of the cord to another. The
spinothalamic tract transmits pain and temperature sensation contralaterally in the spinal cord; most other
tracts transmit information ipsilaterally. The cord is divided into functional segments (levels) corresponding
approximately to the attachments of the 31 pairs of spinal nerve roots.
Symptoms and Signs
Neurologic dysfunction due to spinal cord disorders occurs at the involved spinal cord segment (see
Table 186-1
) and at all segments below it. The exception is the central cord syndrome (see
Table 186-2
), which may spare segments below.
Spinal cord disorders cause various patterns of deficits depending on which nerve tracts within the cord
or which spinal roots outside the cord are damaged. Disorders affecting spinal nerves, but not directly
affecting the cord, cause sensory or motor abnormalities or both only in the areas supplied by the affected
spinal nerves.
Spinal cord dysfunction causes paresis, loss of sensation, reflex changes, and autonomic dysfunction
(eg, bowel, bladder, and erectile dysfunction; loss of sweating). Dysfunction may be partial (incomplete).
Autonomic and reflex abnormalities are usually
[Table 186-1.
Effects of Spinal Cord Dysfunction by Segmental Level]
[Table 186-2.
Spinal Cord Syndromes]
===PAGE:1984===
the most objective signs of cord dysfunction; sensory abnormalities are the least objective.
Corticospinal tract lesions cause upper motor neuron dysfunction. Acute, severe lesions (eg, infarction,
traumatic lesions) cause spinal shock with flaccid paresis (decreased muscle tone, hyporeflexia, and no
extensor plantar responses). After days or weeks, upper motor neuron dysfunction evolves into spastic
paresis (increased muscle tone, hyperreflexia, and clonus). Extensor plantar responses and autonomic
dysfunction are present. Flaccid paresis that lasts more than a few weeks suggests lower motor neuron
dysfunction (eg, due to Guillain-Barre syndrome).
Specific cord syndromes include transverse sensorimotor myelopathy, Brown-Sequard syndrome, central
cord syndrome, anterior cord syndrome, and conus medullaris syndrome (see
Table 186-2
).
Cauda equina syndrome, which involves damage to nerve roots at the caudal end of the cord, is not a
spinal cord syndrome. However, it mimics conus medullaris syndrome, causing distal leg paresis and
sensory loss in and around the perineum and anus (saddle anesthesia), as well as bladder, bowel, and
pudendal dysfunction (eg, urinary retention, urinary frequency, urinary or fecal incontinence, erectile
dysfunction, loss of rectal tone, abnormal bulbocavernosus and anal wink reflexes).
Diagnosis
• MRI
Neurologic deficits at segmental levels suggest a spinal cord disorder. Similar deficits, especially if
unilateral, may result from nerve root or peripheral nerve disorders, which can usually be differentiated
clinically. Level
and pattern of spinal cord dysfunction help determine presence and location of a spinal
cord lesion but not always type of lesion.
MRI is the most accurate imaging test for spinal cord disorders; MRI shows spinal cord parenchyma, softtissue lesions (eg, abscesses, hematomas, tumors, abnormalities involving intervertebral disks), and bone
lesions (eg, erosion, severe hypertrophic changes, collapse, fracture, subluxation, tumors). Myelography
with a radiopaque dye followed by CT is used less often. It is not as accurate as MRI and is more invasive
but may be more readily available. Plain x-rays may help detect bone lesions.
Acute Transverse Myelitis
Acute transverse myelitis is acute inflammation of gray and white matter in one or more
adjacent spinal cord segments, usually thoracic. Causes include multiple sclerosis, infections,
autoimmune or postinfectious inflammation, vasculitis, and certain drugs. Symptoms include
bilateral motor, sensory, and sphincter deficits below the level of the lesion. Diagnosis is
usually by MRI, CSF analysis, and blood tests. IV corticosteroids and plasma exchange may be
helpful early. Otherwise, treatment is supportive measures and correction of any causes.
Acute transverse myelitis is most commonly due to multiple sclerosis but can occur with vasculitis,
mycoplasmal infections, Lyme disease, syphilis, TB, or viral meningoencephalitis or in patients taking
amphetamines, IV heroin, or antiparasitic or antifungal drugs. Transverse myelitis occurs with optic
neuritis in a variant of multiple sclerosis called neuromyelitis optica (Devic disease—. The
mechanism of transverse myelitis is often unknown, but some cases follow viral infection or vaccination,
suggesting an autoimmune reaction. Inflammation tends to involve the spinal cord diffusely at one or more
levels, affecting all spinal cord functions.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain in the neck, back, or head may occur. A bandlike tightness around the chest or abdomen, weakness,
tingling, numbness of the feet and legs, and difficulty voiding develop over hours to a few days. Deficits
may progress over several more days to a complete transverse sensorimotor myelopathy, causing
paraplegia, loss of sensation below the lesion, urinary retention, and fecal incontinence. Occasionally,
position and vibration sensation are spared, at least initially. The syndrome occasionally recurs in patients
with multiple sclerosis, SLE, or antiphospholipid syndrome.
===PAGE:1985===
Diagnosis
• MRI and CSF analysis
• Other tests to identify treatable causes
Diagnosis is suggested by transverse sensorimotor myelopathy with segmental deficits. Guillain-Barre
syndrome ( can be distinguished because it does not localize to a specific spinal segment.
Diagnosis requires MRI and CSF analysis. MRI typically shows cord swelling and helps exclude other
treatable causes of spinal cord dysfunction (eg, spinal cord compression). CSF usually contains
monocytes, protein content is slightly increased, and IgG index is elevated (normal, ≤ 0.85). A new and
specific antibody marker for neuromyelitis optica (NMO-IgG), which distinguishes neuromyelitis optica
from multiple sclerosis, has been recently described.
Tests for treatable causes should include chest x-ray; PPD; serologic tests for mycoplasma, Lyme
disease, and HIV; vitamin B
and folate levels; ESR; antinuclear antibodies; and CSF and blood
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) tests. History may suggest a drug as a cause. Brain MRI
is done; multiple sclerosis develops in 50% of patients who have multiple periventricular T2 bright lesions
and in 5% who do not have them.
Prognosis
Generally, the more rapid the progression is, the worse the prognosis. Pain suggests more intense
inflammation. About one third of patients recover, one third retain some weakness and urinary urgency,
and one third are bedbound and incontinent. Multiple sclerosis eventually develops in about 10 to 20% of
the patients in whom the cause is initially unknown.
Treatment
• Treatment of the cause
• Sometimes corticosteroids
Treatment is directed at the cause or associated disorder but is otherwise supportive. In idiopathic cases,
high-dose corticosteroids are often given and sometimes followed by plasma exchange because the
cause may be autoimmune. Efficacy of such a regimen is uncertain.
Arteriovenous Malformations
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) in or around the spinal cord can cause cord compression,
ischemia, parenchymal hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or a combination. Symptoms
may include gradually progressive, ascending, or waxing and waning segmental neurologic
deficits; radicular pain; and sudden back pain with sudden segmental neurologic deficits.
Diagnosis is by MRI. Treatment is with surgery or stereotactic radiosurgery and may include
angiographic embolization.
AVMs are the most common spinal vascular malformations. Most are thoracolumbar, posterior, and
outside the cord (extramedullary). The rest are cervical or upper thoracic and often inside the cord
(intramedullary). AVMs may be small and localized or may affect up to half the cord. They may compress
or even replace normal spinal cord parenchyma, or they may rupture, causing focal or generalized
hemorrhage.
Symptoms and Signs
A cutaneous angioma sometimes overlies a spinal AVM. AVMs commonly compress nerve roots, causing
pain that radiates down the distribution of a nerve root (radicular pain), or compress the spinal cord,
causing segmental neurologic deficits that gradually progress or that wax and wane. Combined lower and
===PAGE:1986===
upper motor neuron deficits are common. AVMs may rupture into the spinal cord parenchyma, causing
sudden, severe back pain and sudden segmental neurologic deficits. Rarely, high cervical AVMs rupture
into the subarachnoid space, causing sudden and severe headache, nuchal rigidity, and impaired
consciousness (.
Diagnosis
• Imaging
Spinal cord AVMs may be detected incidentally during imaging. AVMs are suspected clinically in patients
with unexplained segmental neurologic deficits or subarachnoid hemorrhage, particularly those who have
sudden, severe back pain or cutaneous midline angiomas. Diagnosis is by MRI, magnetic resonance
angiography, selective arteriography, or, occasionally, myelography plus CT.
Treatment
Surgery is indicated if spinal cord function is threatened, but expertise in specialized microtechniques is
required. Stereotactic radiosurgery is helpful if the AVM is small and located in a surgically inaccessible
location. Angiographic embolization occludes feeder arteries and often precedes surgical removal or
stereotactic radiosurgery.
Cervical Spondylosis and Spondylotic Cervical Myelopathy
Cervical spondylosis is osteoarthritis of the cervical spine causing stenosis of the canal and
sometimes cervical myelopathy due to encroachment of bony osteoarthritic growths
(osteophytes) on the lower cervical spinal cord, sometimes with involvement of lower cervical
nerve roots (radiculomyelopathy).
Cervical spondylosis due to osteoarthritis is common. Occasionally, particularly when the spinal canal is
congenitally narrow (< 10 mm), osteoarthritis leads to stenosis of the canal and bony impingement on the
cord, causing compression and myelopathy (functional disturbance of the spinal cord). Hypertrophy of the
ligamentum flavum can aggravate this effect. Osteophytes in the neural foramina, most commonly
between C5 and C6 or C6 and C7, can cause radiculopathy (a nerve root disorder—see also p.
).
Manifestations vary according to the neural structures involved but commonly include pain.
Symptoms and Signs
Cord compression commonly causes gradual spastic paresis, paresthesias, or both in the hands and feet
and may cause hyperreflexia. Neurologic deficits may be asymmetric, nonsegmental, and aggravated by
cough or Valsalva maneuvers. After trauma, people with cervical spondylosis may develop central cord
syndrome. Eventually, muscle atrophy and flaccid paresis may develop in the upper extremities at the
level of the lesion, with spasticity below the level of the lesion.
Nerve root compression commonly causes early radicular pain; later there may be weakness,
hyporeflexia, and muscle atrophy.
Diagnosis
• MRI or CT
Cervical spondylosis is suspected when characteristic neurologic deficits occur in patients who are
elderly, have osteoarthritis, or have radicular pain at the C5 or C6 levels. Diagnosis is by MRI or CT.
Treatment
• For radiculopathy only, NSAIDs and a soft cervical collar
• For cord involvement or refractory radiculopathy, cervical laminectomy
===PAGE:1987===
For patients with cord involvement, cervical laminectomy is usually needed; a posterior approach can
relieve the compression but leaves anterior compressive osteophytes and may result in spinal instability
and kyphosis. Thus, an anterior approach with spinal fusion is generally preferred. Patients with only
radiculopathy may try nonsurgical treatment with NSAIDs and a soft cervical collar; if this approach is
ineffective, surgical decompression may be required.
Hereditary Spastic Paraparesis
Hereditary spastic paraparesis is a group of rare hereditary disorders characterized by
progressive, spinal, nonsegmental, spastic leg paresis, sometimes with intellectual disability,
seizures, and other extraspinal deficits.
The genetic basis of hereditary spastic paraparesis varies and, for many forms, is unknown. In all forms,
the descending corticospinal tracts and, to a lesser extent, the dorsal columns and spinocerebellar tracts
degenerate, sometimes with loss of anterior horn cells. Onset can be at any age, from the first year of life
to old age, depending on the specific genetic form.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs include spastic leg paresis, with progressive gait difficulty, hyperreflexia, clonus, and
extensor plantar responses. Sensation and sphincter function are usually spared. The arms may also be
affected. Deficits are not localized to a spinal cord segment. In some forms, patients also have extraspinal
neurologic deficits (eg, spinocerebellar and ocular symptoms, extrapyramidal symptoms, optic atrophy,
retinal degeneration, intellectual disability, dementia, polyneuropathy).
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Hereditary spastic paraparesis is suggested by a family history and any signs of spastic paraparesis.
Diagnosis is by exclusion of other causes and sometimes by genetic testing.
Treatment
• Drugs to relieve spasticity
Treatment for all forms is symptomatic. Baclofen 10 mg po bid, increased as needed up to 40 mg po bid,
is given for spasticity. Alternatives include diazepam, clonazepam, dantrolene, botulinum toxin (botulinum
toxin type A or botulinum toxin type B), and tizanidine.
Spinal Cord Infarction
(Ischemic Myelopathy)
Spinal cord infarction usually results from ischemia originating in an extravertebral artery.
Symptoms include sudden and severe back pain, bilateral flaccid limb weakness, and loss of
sensation, particularly pain and temperature. Diagnosis is by MRI. Treatment is generally
supportive.
The primary vascular supply for the posterior third of the spinal cord is the posterior spinal arteries; for
the anterior two thirds, it is the anterior spinal arteries. Each of the anterior spinal arteries has only a few
feeder arteries in the upper cervical region and one large feeder (the artery of Adamkiewicz) in the lower
thoracic region. The feeder arteries originate in the aorta.
Because collateral circulation for the anterior spinal artery is sparse in places, certain cord segments (eg,
those around the 2nd to 4th thoracic segments) are especially vulnerable to ischemia. Injury to an
extravertebral feeder artery or the aorta (eg, due to atherosclerosis, dissection, or clamping during
===PAGE:1988===
surgery) causes infarction more commonly than do intrinsic disorders of spinal arteries. Thrombosis is an
uncommon cause, and polyarteritis nodosa is a rare cause.
Symptoms and Signs
Sudden pain in the back with tightness radiating circumferentially is followed by segmental bilateral flaccid
weakness and sensory loss. Pain and temperature sensation are disproportionately impaired. The
anterior spinal artery is typically affected, resulting in the anterior cord syndrome (see
Table 186-2
).
Position and vibration sensation, conducted by the posterior columns, and often light touch are relatively
spared. If the infarct is small and affects primarily tissue farthest away from an occluded artery (toward
the center of the cord), central cord syndrome is also possible. Neurologic deficits may partially resolve
after the first few days.
Diagnosis
• MRI
Infarction is suspected when severe back pain and characteristic deficits develop suddenly. Diagnosis is
by MRI. Acute transverse myelitis, spinal cord compression, and demyelinating disorders may cause
similar findings but are usually more gradual and are excluded by MRI and by CSF analysis.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Occasionally, the cause of infarction (eg, aortic dissection, polyarteritis nodosa) can be treated, but often
the only possible treatment is supportive.
Spinal Cord Compression
(See also p.
for treatment of spinal trauma.)
Various lesions can compress the spinal cord, causing segmental sensory, motor, reflex, and
sphincter deficits. Diagnosis is by MRI. Treatment is directed at relieving compression.
Compression is caused far more commonly by lesions outside the spinal cord (extramedullary) than by
lesions within it (intramedullary). Compression may be acute, subacute, or chronic.
Acute compression
develops within minutes to hours. It is often due to trauma (eg, vertebral crush
fracture with displacement of fracture fragments, disk herniation, metastatic tumor, severe bone or
ligamentous injury causing hematoma, vertebral subluxation or dislocation). It is occasionally due to
abscess and rarely due to spontaneous epidural hematoma. Acute compression may follow subacute and
chronic compression, especially if the cause is abscess or tumor.
Subacute compression
develops over days to weeks. It is usually caused by a metastatic
extramedullary tumor, a subdural or an epidural abscess or hematoma, or a cervical or, rarely, thoracic
herniated disk.
Chronic compression
develops over months to years. It is commonly caused by bony protrusions into
the cervical, thoracic, or lumbar spinal canal (eg, due to osteophytes or spondylosis, especially when the
spinal canal is narrow, as occurs in spinal stenosis—. Compression can be aggravated by a
herniated disk and hypertrophy of the ligamentum flavum. Less common causes include arteriovenous
malformations and slow-growing extramedullary tumors.
Atlantoaxial subluxation ( and other craniocervical junction abnormalities ( may
cause acute, subacute, or chronic spinal cord compression.
===PAGE:1989===
Lesions that compress the spinal cord may also compress nerve roots or, rarely, occlude the spinal cord's
blood supply, causing infarction.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute or advanced spinal cord compression causes segmental deficits, paraparesis or quadriparesis,
hyperreflexia, extensor plantar responses, loss of sphincter tone (with bowel and bladder dysfunction),
and sensory deficits. Subacute or chronic compression may begin with local back pain, often radiating
down the distribution of a nerve root (radicular pain), and sometimes hyperreflexia and loss of sensation.
Sensory loss may begin in the sacral segments. Complete loss of function may follow suddenly and
unpredictably, possibly resulting from secondary spinal cord infarction. Spinal percussion tenderness is
prominent if the cause is metastatic carcinoma, abscess, or hematoma.
Intramedullary lesions tend to cause poorly localized burning pain rather than radicular pain and to spare
sensation in sacral dermatomes. These lesions usually result in spastic paresis.
Diagnosis
• MRI or CT myelography
Spinal cord compression is suggested by spinal or radicular pain with reflex, motor, or sensory deficits,
particularly at a segmental level. MRI is done immediately if available. If MRI is unavailable, CT
myelography is done; a small amount of iohexol (a nonionic, low osmolar radiopaque dye) is introduced
via a lumbar puncture and allowed to run cranially to check for complete CSF block. If a block is detected,
a radiopaque dye is introduced via a cervical puncture to determine the rostral extension of the block. If
traumatic bone abnormalities (eg, fracture, dislocation, subluxation) that require immediate spinal
immobilization are suspected, plain spinal x-rays can be done. However, CT detects bone abnormalities
better.
Treatment
• Relief of compression
Treatment is directed at relieving pressure on the cord. Incomplete or very recent complete loss of
function may be reversible, but
complete loss of function rarely is; thus,
for acute compression, diagnosis
and treatment must occur immediately.
If compression is due to a tumor, IV dexamethasone 100 mg is given immediately, followed by 25 mg q 6 h
and immediate surgery or radiation therapy. Surgery is indicated in the following cases:
• Neurologic deficits worsen despite nonsurgical treatment.
• A biopsy is needed.
• The spine is unstable.
• Tumors recur after radiation therapy.
• An abscess or a compressive subdural or epidural hematoma is suspected.
Spinal Epidural Abscess
A spinal epidural abscess is an accumulation of pus in the epidural space that can mechanically
compress the spinal cord.
Spinal epidural abscesses usually occur in the thoracic or lumbar regions. An underlying infection is often
present; it may be remote (eg, endocarditis, furuncle, dental abscess) or contiguous (eg, vertebral
osteomyelitis, pressure ulcer, retroperitoneal abscess). In about one third of cases, the cause cannot be
===PAGE:1990===
determined. The most common causative organism is
Staphylococcus aureus
, followed by
Escherichia
coli
and mixed anaerobes. Occasionally, the cause is a tuberculous abscess of the thoracic spine (Pott's
disease). Rarely, a similar abscess occurs in the subdural space.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms begin with local or radicular back pain and percussion tenderness, which become severe.
Fever is common. Spinal cord compression may develop; compression of lumbar spinal roots may cause
cauda equina syndrome, with neurologic deficits resembling those of conus medullaris syndrome (eg, leg
paresis, saddle anesthesia, bladder and bowel dysfunction). Deficits progress over hours to days.
Diagnosis
• MRI
The diagnosis is suggested by characteristic neurologic deficits and by back pain worsened by
recumbency, particularly in patients who have a fever or have had a recent infection. Diagnosis is by MRI;
myelography followed by CT can be used if MRI is not available. Samples from blood and infectious
areas are cultured. Lumbar puncture is contraindicated because it may trigger cord herniation if the
abscess causes complete obstruction of CSF. Plain x-rays are not routinely indicated but may show
osteomyelitis in about one third of patients.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
• If abscess causes neurologic compromise, immediate drainage
Antibiotics with or without parenteral needle aspiration may be sufficient; however, abscesses causing
neurologic compromise (eg, paresis, bowel or bladder dysfunction) are surgically drained immediately.
Pus is gramstained and cultured. Pending culture results, antibiotics to cover staphylococcus and
anaerobes are given as for brain abscess (. If the abscess developed after a neurosurgical
procedure, an aminoglycoside is added to cover gram-negative bacteria.
Spinal Subdural or Epidural Hematoma
A spinal subdural or epidural hematoma is an accumulation of blood in the subdural or epidural
space that can mechanically compress the spinal cord.
Spinal subdural or epidural hematoma (usually thoracic or lumbar) is rare but may result from back
trauma, anticoagulant or thrombolytic therapy, or, in patients with bleeding diatheses, lumbar puncture.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms begin with local or radicular back pain and percussion tenderness; they are often severe.
Spinal cord compression may develop; compression of lumbar spinal roots may cause cauda equina
syndrome and lower extremity paresis. Deficits progress over minutes to hours.
Diagnosis
• MRI
Hematoma is suspected in patients with acute, nontraumatic spinal cord compression or sudden,
unexplained lower extremity paresis, particularly if a possible cause (eg, trauma, bleeding diathesis) is
present. Diagnosis is by MRI or, if MRI is not immediately available, by CT myelography.
Treatment
===PAGE:1991===
• Drainage
Treatment is immediate surgical drainage. Patients taking coumarin anticoagulants are
given
phytonadione (vitamin K
) 2.5 to 10 mg sc and fresh frozen plasma as needed to normalize INR. Patients
with thrombocytopenia are given platelets (.
Syrinx
A syrinx is a fluid-filled cavity within the spinal cord (syringomyelia) or brain stem
(syringobulbia). Predisposing factors include craniocervical junction abnormalities, spinal cord
trauma, and spinal cord tumors. Symptoms include flaccid weakness of the hands and arms and
deficits in pain and temperature sensation in a capelike distribution over the back and neck;
light touch and position and vibration sensation are not affected. Diagnosis is by MRI. Treatment
includes correction of the cause and surgical procedures to drain the syrinx or otherwise open
CSF flow.
Syrinxes usually result from lesions that partially obstruct CSF flow. At least one half of syrinxes occur in
patients with congenital abnormalities of the craniocervical junction (eg, herniation of cerebellar tissue
into the spinal canal, called Chiari malformation), brain (eg, encephalocele—, or spinal cord
(eg, myelomeningocele—. For unknown reasons, these congenital abnormalities often
expand during the teen or young adult years. A syrinx can also develop in patients who have a spinal cord
tumor, scarring due to previous spinal trauma, or no known predisposing factors. About 30% of people
with a spinal cord tumor eventually develop a syrinx.
Syringomyelia is a paramedian, usually irregular, longitudinal cavity. It commonly begins in the cervical
area but may extend downward along the entire length of the spinal cord. Syringobulbia, which is rare,
usually occurs as a slitlike gap within the lower brain stem and may disrupt or compress the lower cranial
nerves or ascending sensory or descending motor pathways.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually begin insidiously between adolescence and age 45. Syringomyelia develops in the
center of the spinal cord, causing a central cord syndrome (see
Table 186-2
). Pain and temperature
sensory deficits occur early but may not be recognized for years. The first abnormality recognized may be
a painless burn or cut. Syringomyelia typically causes weakness, atrophy, and often fasciculations and
hyporeflexia of the hands and arms; a deficit in pain and temperature sensation in a capelike distribution
over the shoulders, arms, and back is characteristic. Light touch and position and vibration sensation are
not affected. Later, spastic leg weakness develops. Deficits may be asymmetric.
Syringobulbia may cause vertigo, nystagmus, unilateral or bilateral loss of facial sensation, lingual
atrophy and weakness, dysarthria, dysphagia, hoarseness, and sometimes peripheral sensory or motor
deficits due to medullary compression.
Diagnosis
• MRI of spinal cord and brain with gadolinium
A syrinx is suggested by an unexplained central cord syndrome or other characteristic neurologic deficits,
particularly pain and temperature sensory deficits in a capelike distribution. MRI of the entire spinal cord
and brain is done. Gadolinium enhancement is useful for detecting any associated tumor.
Treatment
• Sometimes surgical decompression
Underlying problems (eg, craniocervical junction abnormalities, postoperative scarring, spinal tumors) are
corrected when possible. Surgical decompression of the foramen magnum and upper cervical cord is the
only useful treatment, but surgery usually cannot reverse severe neurologic deterioration.
===PAGE:1992===
Tropical Spastic Paraparesis/HTLV-1-Associated Myelopathy
Tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-1-associated myelopathy is a slowly progressive viral
immunemediated disorder of the spinal cord caused by the human T-lymphotropic virus 1
(HTLV-1). It causes spastic weakness of both legs. Diagnosis is by serologic and PCR tests of
serum and CSF. Treatment includes supportive care and possibly immunosuppressive
therapies.
The HTLV-1 retrovirus is transmitted via sexual contact, IV drug use, exposure to infected blood, or from
mother to child, via breastfeeding. It is most common among prostitutes, IV drug users, hemodialysis
patients, and people from endemic areas such as equatorial regions, southern Japan, and parts of South
America. HTLV-2 may cause a similar disorder.
The virus resides in T cells in blood and CSF. CD4+ memory T cells, CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, and
macrophages infiltrate the perivascular areas and parenchyma of the spinal cord; astrocytosis occurs. For
several years after onset of neurologic symptoms,
inflammation of spinal gray and white matter
progresses, causing preferential degeneration of the lateral and posterior columns. Myelin and axons in
the anterior columns are also lost.
Symptoms and Signs
Spastic weakness develops gradually in both legs, with extensor plantar responses and bilateral
symmetric loss of position and vibratory sensation in the feet. Achilles tendon reflexes are often absent.
Urinary incontinence and urgency are common. Symptoms usually progress over several years.
Diagnosis
• Serologic and PCR tests of serum and CSF
The disorder is suggested by typical neurologic deficits that are otherwise unexplained, particularly in
patients with risk factors. Serum and CSF serologic tests, PCR tests, and spinal cord MRI are indicated. If
CSF-to-serum ratio of HTLV-1 antibodies is > 1 or if PCR detects HTLV-1 antigen in CSF, the diagnosis is
very likely. Protein and Ig levels in CSF may also be elevated, often with oligoclonal bands; lymphocytic
pleocytosis occurs in up to 50% of patients. Spinal cord lesions often appear hyperintense on T2weighted MRI.
Treatment
• Immunomodulatory or immunosuppressive therapies
No treatment has proved effective, but interferon alfa, IV immune globulin, and oral methylprednisolone
may have some benefit. Treatment of spasticity is symptomatic (eg, with baclofen or tizanidine).
===PAGE:1993===
Chapter 187. Intracranial and Spinal Tumors
Introduction
Intracranial tumors may involve the brain or other structures (eg, cranial nerves, meninges). The tumors
usually develop during early or middle adulthood but may develop at any age; they are becoming more
common among the elderly. Brain tumors are found in about 2% of routine autopsies.
Some tumors are benign, but because the cranial vault allows no room for expansion, even these tumors
can be serious.
Classification
Some primary intracranial tumors (eg, gliomas, medulloblastomas, ependymomas) originate in brain
parenchyma; others (eg, meningiomas, acoustic neuromas, other schwannomas) originate in extraneural
structures. Extracranial tumors may metastasize to any intracranial structure or to the skull. In the brain,
metastases are about 10 times more common than primary tumors.
Type of tumor varies somewhat by site (see
Table 187-1
) and patient age (see
Table 187-2
).
Pathophysiology
Neurologic dysfunction may result from the following:
• Invasion and destruction of brain tissue by the tumor
• Direct compression of adjacent tissue by the tumor
• Increased intracranial pressure (because the tumor occupies space within the skull)
• Bleeding within or outside the tumor
• Cerebral edema
• Obstruction of dural venous sinuses (especially by bone or extradural metastatic tumors)
• Obstruction of CSF drainage (occurring early with 3rd-ventricle or posterior fossa tumors)
• Obstruction of CSF absorption (eg, when leukemia or carcinoma involves the meninges)
• Obstruction of arterial flow
• Rarely, paraneoplastic syndromes (
A malignant tumor can develop new internal blood vessels, which can bleed or become occluded,
resulting in necrosis and neurologic dysfunction that mimics stroke.
Benign tumors grow slowly. They may become quite large before causing symptoms, partly because often
there is no cerebral edema. Malignant tumors grow rapidly but rarely spread beyond the CNS. Death
results from local tumor growth and thus can result from benign as well as malignant tumors. Therefore,
distinguishing between benign and malignant
[Table 187-1.
Common Localizing Manifestations of Brain Tumors]
is prognostically less important for brain tumors than for other tumors.
===PAGE:1994===
Symptoms and Signs
Many symptoms result from increased intracranial pressure:
• Headache
• Deterioration in mental status
• Focal brain dysfunction
Headache is the most common symptom. Headache may be most intense when patients awake from
deep non-REM sleep (usually several hours after falling asleep) because hypoventilation, which
increases cerebral blood flow and thus intracranial pressure, is usually maximal during non-REM sleep.
Headache is also progressive and may be worsened by recumbency or the Valsalva maneuver. When
intracranial pressure is very high, the headache may be accompanied by vomiting, sometimes with little
nausea preceding it. Papilledema develops in about 25% of patients with a brain tumor but may be
absent even when intracranial pressure is increased. In infants and very young children, increased
intracranial pressure may enlarge the head. If intracranial pressure increases sufficiently, brain herniation
occurs (see
Fig. 174-1
.
Deterioration in mental status is the 2nd most common symptom. Manifestations include drowsiness,
lethargy, personality changes, disordered conduct, and impaired cognition, particularly with malignant
brain tumors. Generalized seizures may occur, more often with primary than metastatic brain
[Table 187-2.
Common Tumors]
tumors. Impaired consciousness ( can result from herniation, brain stem dysfunction, or
diffuse bilateral cortical dysfunction. Airway reflexes may be impaired.
Some symptoms result from focal brain dysfunction. Focal neurologic deficits, endocrine dysfunction, or
focal seizures (sometimes with secondary generalization) may develop depending on the tumor's location
(see
Table 187-1
). Focal deficits often suggest the tumor's location. However, sometimes focal deficits do
not correspond to the tumor's location. Such deficits, called false localizing signs, include the following:
• Unilateral or bilateral lateral rectus palsy (with paresis of eye abduction) due to increased intracranial
pressure compressing the 6th cranial nerve
• Ipsilateral hemiplegia due to compression of the contralateral cerebral peduncle against the tentorium
(Kernohan's notch)
• Ipsilateral visual field defect due to ischemia in the contralateral occipital lobe
Some tumors cause meningeal inflammation, resulting in subacute or chronic meningitis (.
Diagnosis
• T1-weighted MRI with gadolinium or CT with contrast
Early-stage brain tumors are often misdiagnosed. A brain tumor should be considered in patients with any
of the following:
• Progressive focal or global deficits of brain function
• New seizures
• Persistent, unexplained, recent-onset headaches, particularly if worsened by sleep
===PAGE:1995===
• Evidence of increased intracranial pressure (eg, papilledema, unexplained vomiting)
• Pituitary or hypothalamic endocrinopathy
Similar findings can result from other intracranial masses (eg, abscess, aneurysm, arteriovenous
malformation, intracerebral hemorrhage, subdural hematoma, granuloma, parasitic cysts such as
neurocysticercosis) or ischemic stroke.
A complete neurologic examination, neuroimaging, and chest x-rays (for a source of metastases) should
be done. T1-weighted MRI with gadolinium is the study of choice. CT with contrast agent is an
alternative. MRI usually detects low-grade astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas earlier than CT and
shows brain structures near bone (eg, the posterior fossa) more clearly. If whole-brain imaging does not
show sufficient detail in the target area (eg, sella turcica, cerebellopontine angle, optic nerve), closely
spaced images or other special views of the area are obtained. If neuroimaging is normal but increased
intracranial pressure is suspected, idiopathic intracranial hypertension ( should be
considered and lumbar puncture done.
Radiographic clues to the type of tumor, mainly location (see
Table 187-1
) and pattern of enhancement
on MRI, may be inconclusive; brain biopsy, sometimes excisional biopsy, may be required. Specialized
tests (eg, molecular and genetic tumor markers in blood and CSF) can help in some cases; eg, in patients
with AIDS, Epstein-Barr virus titers in CSF typically increase as CNS lymphoma develops.
Treatment
• Airway protection
• Dexamethasone for increased intracranial pressure
• Mannitol for herniation
• Definitive therapy with excision, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination
Patients in a coma or with impaired airway reflexes require endotracheal intubation. Brain herniation due
to tumors is treated with mannitol 25 to 100 g infused IV, a corticosteroid (eg, dexamethasone 16 mg IV,
followed by 4 mg po or IV q 6 h), and endotracheal intubation. Mass lesions should be surgically
decompressed as soon as possible.
Increased intracranial pressure due to tumors but without herniation is treated with corticosteroids (eg,
dexamethasone as for herniation above or prednisone 30 to 40 mg po bid).
Treatment of the brain tumor depends on pathology and location (for acoustic neuroma, .
Surgical excision should be used for diagnosis (excisional biopsy) and symptom relief. It may cure benign
tumors. For tumors infiltrating the brain parenchyma, treatment is multimodal. Radiation therapy is
required, and chemotherapy appears to benefit some patients.
Treatment of metastatic tumors includes radiation therapy and sometimes stereotactic radiosurgery. For
patients with a solitary metastasis, surgical excision of the tumor before radiation therapy improves
outcome.
End-of-life issues:
If brain tumors are expected to soon be fatal, end-of-life issues should be considered
(.
Radiation Therapy and Neurotoxicity
Radiation therapy may be directed diffusely to the whole head for diffuse or multicentric
tumors or locally
for well-demarcated tumors. Localized brain radiation therapy may be conformal, targeting the tumor with
the aim of sparing normal brain tissue, or stereotactic, involving brachytherapy, a gamma knife, or a linear
===PAGE:1996===
accelerator. In brachytherapy, radioactive stable iodine (
I
) or iridium-192 (
Ir
) is implanted in or
near the tumor. Gliomas are treated with conformal radiation therapy; a gamma knife or linear accelerator
is useful for metastases. Giving radiation daily tends to maximize efficacy and minimize neurotoxicity
damage to normal CNS tissue (.
Degree of neurotoxicity depends on
• Cumulative radiation dose
• Individual dose size
• Duration of therapy
• Volume of tissue irradiated
• Individual susceptibility
Because susceptibility varies, prediction of radiation neurotoxicity is imprecise. Symptoms can develop in
the first few days (acute) or months of treatment (early-delayed) or several months to years after
treatment (late-delayed). Rarely, radiation causes gliomas, meningiomas, or peripheral nerve sheath
tumors years after therapy.
Acute radiation neurotoxicity:
Typically, acute neurotoxicity involves headache, nausea, vomiting,
somnolence, and sometimes worsening focal neurologic signs in children and adults. It is particularly
likely if intracranial pressure is high. Using corticosteroids to lower intracranial pressure can prevent or
treat acute toxicity. Acute toxicity lessens with subsequent treatments.
Early-delayed neurotoxicity:
In children or adults, early-delayed neurotoxicity can cause
encephalopathy, which must be distinguished by MRI or CT from worsening or recurrent brain tumor. It
occurs in children who have received prophylactic whole-brain radiation therapy for leukemia; they
develop somnolence, which lessens spontaneously over several days to weeks, possibly more rapidly if
corticosteroids are used.
After radiation therapy to the neck or upper thorax, early-delayed neurotoxicity can result in a myelopathy,
characterized by Lhermitte's sign (an electric shock-like sensation radiating down the back and into the
legs when the neck is flexed). The myelopathy resolves spontaneously.
Late-delayed neurotoxicity:
After diffuse brain radiation therapy, many children and adults develop
late-delayed neurotoxicity if they survive long enough. The most common cause in children is diffuse
therapy given to prevent leukemia or to treat medulloblastoma. After diffuse therapy, the main symptom is
progressive dementia; adults also develop an unsteady gait. MRI or CT shows cerebral atrophy.
After localized therapy, neurotoxicity more often involves focal neurologic deficits. MRI or CT shows a
mass that may be enhanced by contrast agent and that may be difficult to distinguish from recurrence of
the primary tumor. Excisional biopsy of the mass is diagnostic and often ameliorates symptoms.
Late-delayed myelopathy can develop after radiation therapy for extraspinal tumors (eg, due to Hodgkin
lymphoma). It is characterized by progressive paresis and sensory loss, often as a Brown-Sequard
syndrome (ipsilateral paresis and proprioceptive sensory loss, with contralateral loss of pain and
temperature sensation). Most patients eventually become paraplegic.
Gliomas
Gliomas are primary tumors that originate in brain parenchyma. Symptoms and diagnosis are
similar to those of other brain tumors. Treatment involves surgical excision, radiation therapy,
and, for some tumors, chemotherapy. Excision rarely cures.
===PAGE:1997===
Gliomas include astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, medulloblastomas, and ependymomas. Many gliomas
infiltrate brain tissue diffusely and irregularly.
Astrocytomas
are the most common gliomas. They are classified, in ascending order of malignancy, as
• Grade 1 or 2: Low-grade astrocytomas
• Grade 3: Anaplastic astrocytomas
• Grade 4: Glioblastomas, including glioblastoma multiforme, the most malignant
Low-grade or anaplastic astrocytomas tend to develop in younger patients and can evolve into
glioblastomas (secondary glioblastomas). Glioblastomas contain chromosomally heterogeneous cells.
They can develop de novo (primary glioblastomas), usually in middle-aged or elderly people. Primary and
secondary glioblastomas have distinct genetic characteristics, which can change as the tumors evolve.
Some astrocytomas contain oligodendroglioma cells; patients with these tumors (called
oligoastrocytomas) have a better prognosis than those with pure astrocytomas.
Oligodendrogliomas
are among the most benign gliomas. They affect mainly the cerebral cortex,
particularly the frontal lobes. Some oligodendrogliomas are characterized by deletion of the p arm of
chromosome 1(1p deletion), deletion of the q arm of chromosome 19 (19q deletion), or both. These
deletions
predict longer survival and better response to radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Anaplastic
oligodendrogliomas are a more malignant form of oligodendrogliomas and are managed accordingly.
Medulloblastomas
and
ependymomas
usually develop near the 4th ventricle. Medulloblastomas
develop mainly in children and young adults. Ependymomas, which are uncommon, develop mainly in
children. Both types of tumors predispose to obstructive hydrocephalus.
Symptoms and signs vary by location (see
Table 187-1
). Diagnosis is the same as that of other brain
tumors.
Treatment
• Surgical excision
• Radiation therapy
• Chemotherapy for some types
Anaplastic astrocytomas and glioblastomas:
Treatment involves surgery, radiation therapy, and
chemotherapy to reduce tumor mass. Excising as much tumor as possible is safe, prolongs survival, and
improves neurologic function.
After surgery, patients receive a full tumor dose of radiation therapy (60 Gy over 6 wk); ideally, conformal
radiation therapy, which targets the tumor and spares normal brain tissue, is used.
For glioblastomas, chemotherapy with temozolomide is now routinely given with radiation therapy. The
dose is 75/mg/m
/day (including weekend days when radiation is skipped) for 42 days, then 150 mg/m
po once/day for 5 days/mo during the next month, followed by 200 mg/m
po once/day for 5 days/mo in
subsequent months for a total of 6 to 12 mo. During treatment with temozolomide,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 800 mg/160 mg is given 3 times/wk to prevent
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia.
Patients receiving chemotherapy require a CBC at varying intervals. Implantation of chemotherapy wafers
during surgical resection may be appropriate for some patients.
Investigational therapies (eg, stereotactic radiosurgery, new chemotherapeutic drugs, gene or immune
===PAGE:1998===
therapy, radiation therapy plus temozolomide) should also be considered.
After conventional multimodal treatment, the survival rate for patients with anaplastic astrocytomas or
glioblastomas is about 50% at 1 yr, 25% at 2 yr, and 10 to 15% at 5 yr. Prognosis is better in the following
cases:
• Patients are < 45 yr
• Histology is anaplastic astrocytoma (rather than glioblastoma multiforme)
• Initial excision improves neurologic function and leaves minimal or no residual tumor
Low-grade astrocytomas:
These tumors are excised if possible, followed by radiation therapy. When
radiation therapy should begin is controversial. Early treatment may maximize efficacy but may cause
brain damage earlier.
With treatment, 5-yr survival rate is about 40 to 50%.
Oligodendrogliomas:
Treatment involves excision and radiation therapy, similar to low-grade
astrocytomas. Chemotherapy is sometimes also used.
With treatment, 5-yr survival rate is about 50 to 60%.
Medulloblastomas:
Treatment involves whole-brain radiation therapy using about 35 Gy, a posterior
fossa boost using 15 Gy, and spinal cord radiation therapy using about 35 Gy. Chemotherapy may be
given as adjunctive therapy and for recurrences. Several drugs are effective for certain patients; these
drugs include nitrosoureas, procarbazine, vincristine alone or in combination, intrathecal methotrexate,
combination chemotherapy (eg, mechlorethamine, vincristine [Oncovin], procarbazine, plus prednisone
[MOPP]), cisplatin, and carboplatin. However, no regimen is consistently effective.
With treatment, survival rates are at least 50% at 5 yr and about 40% at 10 yr.
Ependymomas:
Usually, surgery to excise the tumor and open CSF pathways is done, followed by
radiation therapy. For histologically benign ependymomas, radiation therapy is directed at the tumor; for
more malignant tumors with residual tumor after surgery, whole-brain radiation therapy is used. For
tumors with evidence of dissemination, radiation therapy is directed at the whole brain and spinal cord.
How much of the tumor can be excised may predict survival best. With treatment, overall 5-yr survival rate
is about 50%; however, for patients with no residual tumor, the 5-yr survival rate is > 70%.
Meningiomas
Meningiomas are benign tumors of the meninges that can compress adjacent brain tissue.
Symptoms depend on the tumor's location. Diagnosis is by MRI with contrast agent. Treatment
may include excision, stereotactic radiosurgery, and sometimes radiation therapy.
Meningiomas, particularly those < 2 cm in diameter, are among the most common intracranial tumors.
Meningiomas are the only
brain tumor more common among women. These tumors tend to occur
between ages 40 and 60 but can occur during childhood. These benign tumors can develop wherever
there is dura, most commonly over the convexities near the venous sinuses, along the base of the skull,
in the posterior fossa, and rarely within ventricles. Multiple meningiomas may develop. Meningiomas
compress but do not invade brain parenchyma. They can invade and distort adjacent bone. There are
many histologic types; all follow a similar clinical course, and some become malignant.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms depend on which part of the brain is compressed and thus on the tumor's location (see
Table 187-3
). Midline tumors in the elderly can cause dementia with few other focal neurologic findings.
===PAGE:1999===
Diagnosis
• MRI
Diagnosis is similar to that of other brain tumors, usually by MRI with a paramagnetic contrast agent.
Bone abnormalities (eg, brain atrophy, hyperostosis around the cerebral convexities, changes in the
tuberculum sellae) may be seen incidentally on CT or plain x-rays.
Treatment
• For symptomatic or enlarging meningiomas, excision or radiation therapy
For asymptomatic small meningiomas, particularly in older adults, monitoring with serial neuroimaging is
sufficient.
Symptomatic or enlarging meningiomas should be excised if possible. If they are large, encroach on blood
vessels (usually surrounding
[Table 187-3.
Symptoms of Meningiomas by Site]
veins), or are close to critical brain areas (eg, brain stem), surgery may cause more damage than the
tumor and is thus deferred.
Stereotactic radiosurgery is used for surgically inaccessible meningiomas and electively for other
meningiomas. It is also used when tumor tissue remains after surgical excision or when patients are
elderly.
If stereotactic radiosurgery is impossible or if a meningioma recurs, radiation therapy may be useful.
Pineal Region Tumors
Most pineal region tumors are germ cell tumors.
Common primary pineal region tumors include germ cell tumors: germinomas (most common),
choriocarcinomas, yolk-sac tumors, and teratomas. Less common primary pineal tumors include
pineocytomas and the rare malignant pineoblastomas.
Pineal region tumors tend to occur during childhood but can occur at any age.
These tumors may increase intracranial pressure by compressing the aqueduct of Sylvius. They may also
cause paresis of upward gaze, ptosis, and loss of pupillary light and accommodation reflexes by
compressing the pretectum rostral to the superior colliculi (Parinaud's syndrome). These tumors may
cause precocious puberty, especially in boys, probably because the hypothalamus is compressed.
CSF
β
-human chorionic gonadotropin or
α
-fetoprotein may be elevated, depending on the tumor type.
Elevated levels suggest the diagnosis; levels may be measured to monitor response to treatment.
Prognosis and treatment depend on tumor histology. Radiation therapy, chemotherapy, radiosurgery, and
surgery are used alone or in combination. Germinomas are very sensitive to radiation therapy and are
often cured.
Pituitary Tumors
Most pituitary tumors are adenomas. Symptoms include headache and endocrinopathies;
endocrinopathies result when the tumor produces hormones or destroys hormone-producing
tissue. Diagnosis is by MRI. Treatment includes correction of any endocrinopathy and surgery,
radiation therapy, or dopaminergic agonists.
===PAGE:2000===
Most tumors of the pituitary and suprasellar region are pituitary adenomas. Rarely, pituitary tumors are
carcinomas. Meningiomas, craniopharyngiomas, metastases, and dermoid cysts may also develop in the
region of the sella turcica.
Adenomas may be secretory or nonsecretory. Secretory adenomas produce pituitary hormones; many
secretory adenomas are < 10 mm in size (microadenomas). Secretory adenomas can be classified by
histologic staining characteristics (eg, acidophilic, basophilic, chromophobe [nonstaining]). The hormone
produced often correlates with these characteristics; eg, acidophilic adenomas overproduce growth
hormone, and basophilic adenomas overproduce ACTH. The hormone most commonly overproduced is
prolactin.
Any tumor that grows out of the pituitary can compress optic nerve tracts, including the chiasm. Tumors
may also compress or destroy pituitary or hypothalamic tissue, impairing hormone production or secretion.
Symptoms and Signs
Headache may result from an enlarging pituitary adenoma, even when intracranial pressure is not
increased. Visual manifestations such as bitemporal hemianopia, unilateral optic atrophy, and
contralateral hemianopia may develop if a tumor compresses optic nerve tracts (see
Fig. 69-1
.
Many patients present with an endocrinopathy due to hormone deficiency or excess:
• Diabetes insipidus if less vasopressin is released because the hypothalamus is compressed
• Amenorrhea and galactorrhea in women and, less commonly, erectile dysfunction and gynecomastia in
men if prolactin is overproduced
• Gigantism before puberty or acromegaly after puberty if growth hormone is overproduced
• Cushing's syndrome if ACTH is overproduced
Rarely, hemorrhage into a pituitary tumor causes pituitary apoplexy, with sudden headache,
ophthalmoplegia, and visual loss.
Diagnosis
• MRI with 1-mm slices
Pituitary tumors are suspected in patients with unexplained headaches, characteristic visual
abnormalities, or endocrinopathies. Neuroimaging with 1-mm thick slices is done. MRI is usually much
more sensitive than CT, particularly for microadenomas.
Treatment
Endocrinopathies are treated.
Pituitary tumors that produce ACTH, growth hormone, or thyroid-stimulating hormone are surgically
excised, usually using a transsphenoidal approach. Sometimes, particularly for surgically inaccessible or
multifocal tumors, radiation therapy is required.
Adenomas that produce prolactin are treated with dopaminergic agonists (eg, bromocriptine, pergolide,
cabergoline), which lower blood levels and often shrink the tumor. Surgery and radiation therapy are
usually unnecessary.
Primary Brain Lymphomas
===PAGE:2001===
Primary brain lymphomas originate in neural tissue and are usually B-cell tumors. Diagnosis
requires neuroimaging and sometimes CSF analysis (including Epstein-Barr titers) or brain
biopsy. Treatment includes corticosteroids, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy.
Incidence of primary brain lymphomas is increasing, particularly among immunocompromised patients and
the elderly. Lymphomas tend to infiltrate the brain diffusely, often as multicentric masses adjacent to the
ventricles, but may occur as solitary brain masses. Lymphomas may also occur in the meninges, uvea, or
vitreous humor. Most are B-cell tumors, often immunoblastic. The Epstein-Barr virus may contribute to
development of lymphomas in immunocompromised patients. Most patients do not develop subsequent
systemic lymphoma.
Diagnosis
• MRI
• Sometimes CSF analysis or biopsy
MRI can suggest the diagnosis. MRI may be unable to distinguish cerebral toxoplasmosis, which is
common among patients with AIDS, from lymphoma.
If there are meningeal signs, CSF is examined; it may contain lymphoma cells. In immunocompromised
patients, Epstein-Barr virus DNA may be detected in CSF. If CSF does not contain lymphoma cells or
Epstein-Barr virus DNA, guided-needle or open biopsy is required. Because lymphoma is initially highly
sensitive to corticosteroids, giving these drugs just before biopsy may cause the lesion to disappear,
resulting in a false-negative biopsy.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Chemotherapy
• Radiation therapy
Most primary brain lymphomas are difficult to cure because they infiltrate the brain diffusely. Usually,
corticosteroids result in rapid improvement initially. Many chemotherapy regimens, particularly those
containing methotrexate (delivered as high-dose IV infusions), are effective; with methotrexate, median
survival may approach 4 yr. Methotrexate can also be delivered intrathecally, usually via an sc
intraventricular device (Ommaya reservoir). The drug is sometimes infused into the carotid artery after
general anesthesia is induced and 25% mannitol is given IV to open the bloodbrain barrier.
Chemotherapy regimens may be followed by radiation therapy, usually after 12 to 16 wk but sometimes
delayed until the tumor recurs. The delay helps reduce radiation toxicity.
Spinal Cord Tumors
Spinal cord tumors may develop within the spinal cord parenchyma, directly destroying tissue,
or outside the cord parenchyma, often compressing the cord or nerve roots. Symptoms include
progressive back pain and neurologic deficits referable to the spinal cord or spinal nerve roots.
Diagnosis is by MRI. Treatment may include corticosteroids, surgical excision, and radiation
therapy.
Spinal cord tumors may be intramedullary (within the cord parenchyma) or extramedullary (outside the
parenchyma).
Intramedullary tumors:
The most common are gliomas (eg, ependymomas, low-grade astrocytomas).
Intramedullary tumors infiltrate and destroy cord parenchyma; they may extend over multiple spinal cord
segments or result in a syrinx (.
===PAGE:2002===
Extramedullary tumors:
These tumors may be intradural or extradural. Most intradural tumors are
benign, usually meningiomas and neurofibromas, which are the most common primary spinal tumors.
Most extradural tumors are metastatic, usually from carcinomas of the lungs, breasts, prostate, kidneys,
or thyroid or from lymphoma (eg, Hodgkin lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, reticulum cell sarcoma).
Intradural and extradural tumors cause neurologic damage by compressing the spinal cord or nerve roots.
Most extradural tumors invade and destroy bone before compressing the cord.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain is an early symptom, especially for extradural tumors. It is progressive, unrelated
to activity, and
worsened by recumbency. Pain may occur in the back, radiate along the sensory distribution of a
particular dermatome (radicular pain), or both. Usually, neurologic deficits referable to the spinal cord
eventually develop. Common examples are spastic weakness, incontinence, and dysfunction of some or
all of the sensory tracts at a particular segment of the spinal cord and below. Deficits are usually bilateral.
Many patients with extramedullary tumors present with pain, but some present with sensory deficits of the
distal lower extremities, segmental neurologic deficits, symptoms of spinal cord compression, or a
combination. Symptoms of spinal cord compression can worsen rapidly and result in paraplegia and loss
of bowel and bladder control. Symptoms of nerve root compression are also common; they include pain
and paresthesias followed by sensory loss, muscular weakness, and, if compression is chronic, muscle
wasting, which occurs along the distribution of the affected roots.
Diagnosis
• MRI
Patients with segmental neurologic deficits or suspected spinal cord compression require emergency
diagnosis and treatment.
The following suggest spinal tumors:
• Progressive, unexplained, or nocturnal back or radicular pain
• Segmental neurologic deficits
• Unexplained neurologic deficits referable to the spinal cord or nerve roots
• Unexplained back pain in patients with primary tumors of the lungs, breasts, prostate, kidneys, or thyroid
or with lymphoma
Diagnosis is by MRI of the affected area of the spinal cord. CT with myelography is an alternative but is
less accurate.
If MRI does not show a spinal cord tumor, clinicians consider other spinal masses (eg, abscesses,
arteriovenous malformations— and paravertebral tumors. Spinal x-rays, taken for other
reasons, may show bone destruction, widening of the vertebral pedicles, or distortion of paraspinal
tissues, especially if the tumor is metastatic.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Excision, radiation therapy, or both
For patients with neurologic deficits, corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone 50 mg IV, then 10 mg po qid) are
begun immediately to reduce spinal cord edema and preserve function. Tumors compressing the spinal
===PAGE:2003===
cord are treated as soon as possible.
Some well-localized primary spinal cord tumors can be excised surgically. Deficits resolve in about half of
these patients. If tumors cannot be surgically excised, radiation therapy is used, with or without surgical
decompression. Compressive metastatic extradural tumors are usually surgically excised from the
vertebral body, then treated with radiation therapy. Noncompressive metastatic extradural tumors may be
treated with radiation therapy alone but may require excision if radiation therapy is ineffective.
===PAGE:2004===
14 - Pulmonary Disorders
Chapter 188. Approach to the Patient With Pulmonary Symptoms
Introduction
Key components in the evaluation of patients with pulmonary symptoms are the history, physical
examination, and, in most cases, a chest x-ray. These components establish the need for subsequent
testing, which may include pulmonary function testing and ABG analysis (, CT or other
imaging test (, and bronchoscopy (.
History
The history can often establish whether symptoms of dyspnea, chest pain, wheezing, stridor, hemoptysis,
and cough are likely to be pulmonary in origin. When more than one symptom occurs concurrently, the
history should focus on which symptom is primary and whether constitutional symptoms, such as fever,
weight loss, and night sweats, are also present. Other important information includes occupational and
environmental exposures; family history, travel history, and contact history; previous illnesses and use of
prescription, OTC, or illicit drugs; and previous test results (eg, tuberculin skin test, chest x-rays).
Physical Examination
Physical examination starts with assessment of general appearance. Discomfort and anxiety, body
habitus, and the effect of talking or movement on symptoms (eg, inability to speak full sentences without
pausing to breathe) all can be assessed while greeting the patient and taking a history and may provide
useful information relevant to pulmonary status. Next, inspection, auscultation, and chest percussion and
palpation are done.
Inspection:
Inspection should focus on
• Signs of respiratory difficulty and hypoxemia (eg, restlessness, tachypnea, cyanosis, accessory muscle
use)
• Signs of possible chronic pulmonary disease (eg, clubbing, pedal edema)
• Chest wall deformities
• Abnormal breathing patterns (eg, Cheyne-Stokes respiration, Kussmal's respirations)
• Jugular venous distention
Signs of hypoxemia
include cyanosis (bluish discoloration of the lips, face, or nail beds), which signifies
low arterial O
saturation (< 85%); the absence of cyanosis does not exclude the presence of hypoxemia.
Signs of respiratory difficulty
include tachypnea and use of accessory respiratory muscles
(sternocleidomastoids, intercostals, scalene) to breathe. Patients with COPD sometimes brace their arms
against their legs or the examination table while seated (ie, tripod position) in a subconscious effort to
provide more leverage to accessory muscles and thereby enhance respiration. Intercostal retractions
(inward movement of the rib inter-spaces) are common among infants and older patients with severe
airflow limitation; paradoxical breathing (inward motion of the abdomen during inspiration) signifies
respiratory muscle fatigue or weakness.
Signs of possible chronic pulmonary disease
include clubbing, barrel chest (the increased anteriorposterior diameter of the chest present in some patients with emphysema), and pursed lip breathing.
Clubbing is enlargement of the fingertips (or toes) due to proliferation of connective tissue between the
fingernail and the bone. Diagnosis is based on an increase in the profile angle of the nail as it exits the
finger (to > 176°) or on an increase in the phalangeal depth ratio (to > 1—see
===PAGE:2005===
Fig. 188-1
). "Sponginess" of the nail bed beneath the cuticle also suggests clubbing. Clubbing is most
commonly observed in patients with lung cancer but is an important sign of chronic pulmonary disease,
such as cystic fibrosis and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; it also occurs (but less commonly) in cyanotic
heart disease, chronic infection (eg, infective endocarditis), stroke, inflammatory bowel disease, and
cirrhosis. Clubbing occasionally occurs with osteoarthropathy and periostitis (primary or hereditary
hypertrophic osteoarthropathy); in this instance, clubbing may be accompanied by skin changes, such as
hypertrophied skin on the dorsa of the hands (pachydermoperiostosis), seborrhea, and coarse facial
features. Digital clubbing can also occur as a benign hereditary abnormality that can be distinguished
from pathologic clubbing by the absence of pulmonary symptoms or disease and by the presence of
clubbing from an early age (by patient report).
Chest wall deformities
, such as pectus excavatum and kyphoscoliosis, may restrict respirations and
exacerbate symptoms of preexisting pulmonary disease.
[Fig. 188-1.
Measuring finger clubbing.]
Abnormal breathing patterns
cause fluctuations in respiratory rate so respiratory rate should be
assessed and counted for 1 min.
•
Cheyne-Stokes respiration
(periodic breathing) is a cyclic fluctuation of respiratory rate and depth.
From periods of brief apnea, patients breathe progressively faster and deeper (hyperpnea), then slower
and shallower until they become apneic and repeat the cycle. Cheyne-Stokes respiration is most often
caused by heart failure, a neurologic disorder (eg, stroke, advanced dementia), or drugs. The pattern in
heart failure has been attributed to delays in cerebral circulation; respiratory centers lag in recognition
of systemic acidosis/hypoxia (causing hyperpnea) or alkalosis/hypocapnia (causing apnea).
•
Biot's respiration
is an uncommon variant of Cheyne-Stokes respiration in which irregular periods of
apnea alternate with periods in which 4 or 5 deep, equal breaths are taken. It differs from CheyneStokes respiration in that it is characterized by abrupt starts and stops and lacks periodicity. It results
from injury to the CNS and occurs in such disorders as meningitis.
•
Kussmaul's respirations
are deep, regular respirations caused by metabolic acidosis.
Jugular venous distention
, sometimes observed during inspection, indicates an increase in right atrial
and right ventricular pressure. The elevated pressure is usually caused by left ventricular dysfunction, but
it may also be due to a pulmonary disorder causing pulmonary hypertension (. The presence
of jugular venous distension should prompt a search for other signs of cardiac disorder (eg, 3rd heart
sound [S
gallop], dependent edema).
Auscultation:
Auscultation is arguably the most important component of the physical examination. All
fields of the chest should be listened to, including the flanks, to detect abnormalities associated with each
lobe of the lung. Features to listen for include
• Character and volume of breath sounds
• Presence or absence of vocal sounds
• Pleural friction rubs
• Ratio of inspiration to expiration (I:E ratio)
Cardiac auscultation (, conducted simultaneously with pulmonary auscultation, may reveal signs of pulmonary
hypertension, such as a loud pulmonic 2nd heart sound (P
), and of right heart failure, such as a right
ventricular 4th heart sound (S
) and tricuspid regurgitation.
The character and volume of breath sounds are useful in identifying pulmonary disorders. Vesicular
===PAGE:2006===
breath sounds are the normal sounds heard over most lung fields. Bronchial breath sounds are slightly
louder, harsher, and higher pitched; they normally can be heard over the trachea and over areas of lung
consolidation, such as occur with pneumonia.
Adventitious sounds are abnormal sounds, such as crackles, rhonchi, wheezes, and stridor.
•
Crackles
(previously called rales) are discontinuous adventitious breath sounds. Fine crackles are short
high-pitched sounds; coarse crackles are longer-lasting low-pitched sounds. Crackles have been
compared to the sound of crinkling plastic wrap and can be simulated by rubbing strands of hair
together between 2 fingers near one's ear. They occur most commonly with atelectasis, alveolar filling
processes (eg, pulmonary edema), and interstitial lung disease (eg, pulmonary fibrosis); they signify
opening of collapsed alveoli.
•
Rhonchi
are low-pitched respiratory sounds that can be heard during inspiration or expiration. They
occur in various conditions,
including chronic bronchitis. The mechanism may relate to variations in
obstruction as airways distend with inhalation and narrow with exhalation.
•
Wheezes
are whistling, musical breath sounds that are worse during expiration than inspiration.
Wheezing can be a physical finding or a symptom and is usually associated with dyspnea.
•
Stridor
is a high-pitched, predominantly inspiratory sound formed by extrathoracic upper airway
obstruction. It usually can be heard without a stethoscope. Stridor is usually louder than wheezing, is
predominantly inspiratory, and is heard loudly over the larynx. It should trigger a concern for lifethreatening upper airway obstruction.
•
Decreased breath sounds
signify poor air movement in airways, as occurs with asthma and COPD
where bronchospasm or other mechanisms limit airflow. Breath sounds may also be decreased in the
presence of a pleural effusion, pneumothorax, or obstructing endobronchial lesion.
Vocal sounds involve auscultation while patients vocalize.
•
Bronchophony
and
whispered pectoriloquy
occur when the patient's spoken or whispered voice is
clearly transmitted through the chest wall. Voice transmission results from alveolar consolidation, as
occurs with pneumonia.
•
Egophony
is said to occur when a patient says the letter "E" and the examiner hears the letter "A" on
auscultation, again as occurs with pneumonia.
Friction rubs are grating or creaking sounds that fluctuate with the respiratory cycle and sound like skin
rubbing against wet leather. They are a sign of pleural inflammation and are heard in patients with
pleurisy or empyema and after thoracotomy.
I:E ratio is normally 1:2 but is prolonged to ≥ 1:3 when airflow is limited, such as in asthma and COPD,
even in the absence of wheezing.
Percussion and palpation:
Percussion is the primary physical maneuver used to detect the presence
and level of pleural effusion. Finding areas of dullness during percussion signifies underlying fluid or, less
commonly, consolidation.
Palpation includes tactile fremitus (vibration of the chest wall felt when a patient is asked to speak); it is
decreased in pleural effusion and pneumothorax and increased in pulmonary consolidation (eg, lobar
pneumonias). Point tenderness on palpation may signal underlying rib fracture or pleural inflammation.
In cor pulmonale (, a right ventricular impulse at the left lower sternal border may become
evident and may be increased in amplitude and duration (right ventricular heave).
Chest Pain
===PAGE:2007===
Pulmonary, pleural, and chest wall disorders cause chest pain; examples are
• Pneumonia
• Pulmonary embolism
• Pleuritis
• Lung cancer
• Rib fractures
Cardiac, GI, and musculoskeletal disorders also cause chest pain. The evaluation of patients with chest
pain is discussed elsewhere.
Cough
Cough is an explosive expiratory maneuver that is reflexively or deliberately intended to clear the airways.
It is the 5th most common symptom prompting physician visits.
Likely causes of cough (see
Table 188-1
) differ depending on whether the symptom is acute (< 3 wk) or chronic.
In acute cough, the most common causes are
• URI (including acute bronchitis)
• Postnasal drip
• COPD exacerbation
• Pneumonia
In chronic cough, the most common causes are
• Chronic bronchitis
• Postnasal drip
• Airway hyperresponsiveness after resolution of a viral or bacterial respiratory infection (ie, postinfection
cough)
• Gastroesophageal reflux
The causes in children ( are similar to those in adults, but asthma and foreign body
aspiration may be more common.
Very rarely, impacted cerumen or a foreign body in the external auditory canal triggers reflex cough
through stimulation of the auricular branch of the vagus nerve. Psychogenic cough is even rarer and is a
diagnosis of exclusion.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover the duration and characteristics of the
[Table 188-1.
Some Causes of Cough]
cough (eg, whether dry or productive of sputum or blood) and whether it is accompanied by dyspnea,
===PAGE:2008===
chest pain, or both.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible cause, including runny nose and sore throat
(URI, postnasal drip); fever, chills, and pleuritic chest pain (pneumonia); night sweats and weight loss
(tumor, TB); heartburn (gastroesophageal reflux); and difficulty swallowing or choking episodes while
eating or drinking (aspiration).
Past medical history
should note recent respiratory infections (ie, within previous 1 to 2 mo); history of
allergies, asthma, COPD, and gastroesophageal reflux disease; risk factors for (or known) TB or HIV
infection; and smoking history. Drug history should specifically include use of ACE inhibitors. Patients with
chronic cough should be asked about exposure to potential respiratory irritants or allergens and travel to
or residence in regions with endemic fungal illness.
Physical examination:
Vital signs should be reviewed for the presence of tachypnea and fever.
General examination should look for signs of respiratory distress and chronic illness (eg, wasting,
lethargy).
Examination of the nose and throat should focus on appearance of the nasal mucosa (eg, color,
congestion) and presence of discharge (external or in posterior pharynx). Ears should be examined for
triggers of reflex cough.
The cervical and supraclavicular areas should be inspected and palpated for lymphadenopathy.
A full lung examination is done, particularly including adequacy of air entry and exit; symmetry of breath
sounds; and presence of crackles, wheezes, or both. Signs of consolidation (eg, egophony, dullness to
percussion) should be sought.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
•
Dyspnea
• Hemoptysis
• Weight loss
• Risk factors for TB or HIV infection
Interpretation of findings:
Some findings point to particular diagnoses (see
Table 188-1
).
Other important findings are less specific. For example, the color (eg, yellow, green) and thickness of
sputum do not help differentiate bacterial from other causes. Wheezing may occur with several causes.
Hemoptysis in small amounts may occur with severe cough of many etiologies, although larger amounts
of hemoptysis suggest bronchitis, bronchiectasis, TB, or primary lung cancer. Fever, night sweats, and
weight loss may occur with many chronic infections as well as with cancer.
Testing:
Patients with red flag findings of dyspnea or hemoptysis and patients in whom suspicion of
pneumonia is high should have pulse oximetry and chest x-ray. Those with weight loss or risk factors
should have chest x-ray and testing for TB and HIV infection.
For many patients without red flag findings, clinicians can base the diagnosis on history and physical
examination findings and begin treatment without testing. For patients without a clear cause but no red
flag findings, many clinicians empirically begin treatment for postnasal drip (eg, antihistamine and
decongestant combinations, nasal corticosteroid sprays) or gastroesophageal reflux disease (eg, proton
pump inhibitors, H
blockers). An adequate response to these interventions usually precludes the need
for further evaluation.
Patients with chronic cough in whom presumptive treatment is ineffective should have a chest x-ray. If the
===PAGE:2009===
x-ray findings are unremarkable, many clinicians sequentially test for asthma (pulmonary function tests
with methacholine challenge), sinus disease (sinus CT), and gastroesophageal reflux disease
(esophageal pH monitoring). Sputum culture is helpful for patients with a possible indolent infection, such
as pertussis, TB, or nontuberculous mycobacterial infection. Sputum cytology is noninvasive and should
be done if cancer is suspected and the patient is producing sputum or having hemoptysis. Chest CT and
possibly bronchoscopy should be done in patients in whom lung cancer or another bronchial tumor is
suspected (eg, patients with a long smoking history, nonspecific constitutional signs) and in patients in
whom empiric therapy has failed and who have inconclusive findings on preliminary testing.
Treatment
Treatment is management of the cause.
There is little evidence to support the use of cough suppressants or mucolytic agents. Coughing is an
important mechanism for clearing secretions from the airways and can assist in recovery from respiratory
infections. Therefore, although patients often expect or request cough suppressants, such treatment
should be given with caution and reserved for patients with a URI and for patients receiving therapy for
the underlying disorder for whom cough is still troubling.
Antitussives depress the medullary cough center (dextromethorphan and codeine) or anesthetize stretch
receptors of vagal afferent fibers in bronchi and alveoli (benzonatate). Dextromethorphan, a congener of
the opioid levorphanol, is effective as a tablet or syrup at a dose of 15 to 30 mg po 1 to 4 times/day for
adults or 0.25 mg/kg po qid for children. Codeine has antitussive, analgesic, and sedative effects, but
dependence is a potential problem, and nausea, vomiting, constipation, and tolerance are common
adverse effects. Usual doses are 10 to 20 mg po q 4 to 6 h as needed for adults and 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg po
qid for children. Other opioids (hydrocodone, hydromorphone, methadone, morphine) have antitussive
properties but are avoided because of high potential for dependence and abuse. Benzonatate, a
congener of tetracaine that is available in liquid-filled capsules, is effective at a dose of 100 to 200 mg po
tid.
Expectorants
are thought to decrease viscosity and facilitate expectoration (coughing up) of secretions
but are of limited benefit. Guaifenesin (200 to 400 mg po q 4 h in syrup or tablet form) is most commonly
used because it has no serious adverse effects, but multiple expectorants exist, including bromhexine,
ipecac, and saturated solution of K iodide (SSKI). Aerosolized expectorants such as N-acetylcysteine and
DNAse are generally reserved for hospital-based treatment of cough in patients with bronchiectasis or
cystic fibrosis. Ensuring adequate hydration may facilitate expectoration, as may inhalation of steam,
although neither technique has been rigorously tested.
Topical treatments
, such as acacia, licorice, glycerin, honey, and wild cherry cough drops or syrups
(demulcents), are locally and perhaps emotionally soothing, but their use is not supported by scientific
evidence.
Protussives
, which stimulate cough, are indicated for such disorders as cystic fibrosis and
bronchiectasis, in which a productive cough is thought to be important for airway clearance and
preservation of pulmonary function. DNAse or hypertonic saline is given in
conjunction with chest physical
therapy and postural drainage to promote cough and expectoration. This approach is beneficial in cystic
fibrosis but not in most other causes of chronic cough.
Bronchodilators
, such as albuterol and ipratropium or inhaled corticosteroids, can be effective for cough
after URI and in cough-variant asthma.
Key Points
• Danger signs include respiratory distress, chronic fever, weight loss, and hemoptysis.
• Clinical diagnosis is usually adequate.
• Occult gastroesophageal reflux disease should be remembered as a possible cause.
===PAGE:2010===
• Antitussives and expectorants should be used selectively.
Dyspnea
Dyspnea is unpleasant or uncomfortable breathing. It is experienced and described differently by patients
depending on the cause.
Pathophysiology
Although dyspnea is a relatively common problem, the pathophysiology of the uncomfortable sensation of
breathing is poorly understood. Unlike those for other types of noxious stimuli, there are no specialized
dyspnea receptors, although recent MRI studies have identified a few specific areas in the midbrain that
may mediate perception of dyspnea.
The experience of dyspnea likely results from a complex interaction between chemoreceptor stimulation,
mechanical abnormalities in breathing, and the perception of those abnormalities by the CNS. Some
authors have described the imbalance between neurologic stimulation and mechanical changes in the
lungs and chest wall as neuromechanical uncoupling.
Etiology
Dyspnea has many pulmonary, cardiac, and other causes, which vary by acuity of onset (see
Table 188-2
).
The most common causes include
• Asthma
• Pneumonia
• COPD
• Myocardial ischemia
• Deconditioning
The most common cause of dyspnea in patients with chronic pulmonary or cardiac disorders is
• Exacerbation of their disease
However, such patients may also acutely develop another condition (eg, a patient with long-standing
asthma may have an MI, a patient with chronic heart failure may develop pneumonia).
[Table 188-2.
Some Causes of Dyspnea]
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover the duration, temporal onset (eg, abrupt, insidious),
and provoking or exacerbating factors (eg, allergen exposure, cold, exertion, supine position). Severity
can be determined by assessing the activity level required to cause dyspnea (ie, dyspnea at rest is more
severe than dyspnea only with climbing stairs). For patients with baseline dyspnea, the physician should
note how much dyspnea has changed from the patient's usual state.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including chest pain or
pressure
(pulmonary embolism [PE], myocardial ischemia, pneumonia); dependent edema, orthopnea, and
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (heart failure); fever, chills, cough, and sputum production (pneumonia);
black, tarry stools or heavy menses (occult bleeding possibly causing anemia); and weight loss or night
===PAGE:2011===
sweats (cancer or chronic lung infection).
Past medical history
should cover disorders known to cause dyspnea, including asthma, COPD, and
heart disease, as well as risk factors for the different etiologies:
• Smoking history—for cancer, COPD, and heart disease
• Family history, hypertension, and high cholesterol levels—for coronary artery disease
• Recent immobilization or surgery, recent long-distance travel, cancer or risk factors for or signs of occult
cancer, prior or family history of clotting, pregnancy, oral contraceptive use, calf pain, leg swelling, and
known deep venous thrombosis—for PE
Occupational exposures (eg, gases, smoke, asbestos) should be investigated.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for fever, tachycardia, and tachypnea.
Examination focuses on the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems.
A full lung examination is done, particularly including adequacy of air entry and exit, symmetry of breath
sounds, and presence of crackles, rhonchi, stridor, and wheezes. Signs of consolidation (eg, egophony,
dullness to percussion) should be sought. The cervical, supraclavicular, and inguinal areas should be
inspected and palpated for lymphadenopathy.
Neck veins should be inspected for distention, and the legs and presacral area should be palpated for
pitting edema (both suggesting heart failure).
Heart sounds should be auscultated with notation of any extra heart sounds, muffled heart sounds, or
murmur. Testing for pulsus paradoxus (a > 12-mm Hg drop of systolic BP during inspiration) can be done
by inflating a BP cuff to 20 mm Hg above the systolic pressure and then slowly deflating until the first
Korotkoff sound is heard only during expiration. As the cuff is further deflated, the point at which the first
Korotkoff sound is audible during both inspiration and expiration is recorded. If the difference between the
first and second measurement is > 12 mm Hg, then pulsus paradoxus is present.
Conjunctiva should be examined for pallor. Rectal examination and stool guaiac testing should be done.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Dyspnea at rest during examination
• Decreased level of consciousness or agitation or confusion
• Accessory muscle use and poor air excursion
• Chest pain
• Crackles
• Weight loss
• Night sweats
Interpretation of findings:
The history and physical examination often suggest a cause and guide
further testing (see
Table 188-2
). Several findings are of note. Wheezing ( suggests asthma
or COPD. Stridor ( suggests extrathoracic airway obstruction (eg, foreign body, epiglottitis,
vocal cord dysfunction). Crackles suggest left heart failure, interstitial lung disease, or, if accompanied by
signs of consolidation, pneumonia.
===PAGE:2012===
However, the symptoms and signs of life-threatening conditions such as myocardial ischemia and PE can
be nonspecific. Furthermore, the severity of symptoms is not always proportional to the severity of the
cause (eg, PE in a fit, healthy person may cause only mild dyspnea). Thus, a high degree of suspicion for
these common conditions is prudent. It is often appropriate to rule out these conditions before attributing
dyspnea to a less serious etiology.
A clinical prediction rule (see
Table 194-2
 can help estimate the risk of PE. Note that a normal O
saturation does not
exclude PE.
Hyperventilation syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion. Because hypoxia may cause tachypnea and
agitation, it is unwise to assume every rapidly breathing, anxious young person merely has
hyperventilation syndrome.
Testing:
Pulse oximetry should be done in all patients, and a chest x-ray should be done as well unless
symptoms are clearly caused by a mild or moderate exacerbation of a known condition. For example,
patients with asthma or heart failure do not require an x-ray for each flare-up, unless clinical findings
suggest another cause or an unusually severe attack. Most adults should have an ECG to detect
myocardial ischemia (and serum cardiac marker testing if suspicion is high) unless myocardial ischemia
can be excluded clinically.
In patients with severe or deteriorating respiratory status, ABGs should be measured to more precisely
quantify hypoxemia, measure PaCO
, diagnose any acid-base disorders stimulating hyperventilation, and
calculate the alveolar-arterial gradient.
Patients who have no clear diagnosis after chest x-ray and ECG and are at moderate or high risk of
having PE (from the clinical prediction rule—see
Table 194-2
on p.
should
undergo ventilation/perfusion scanning or CT angiography. Patients who are at low risk may
have D-dimer testing (to detect the presence of clot); a normal D-dimer level effectively rules out PE in a
low-risk patient.
Chronic dyspnea may warrant additional tests, such as CT, pulmonary function tests, echocardiography,
and bronchoscopy.
Treatment
Treatment is correction of the underlying disorder.
Hypoxemia is treated with supplemental O
as needed to maintain SaO
> 88% or PaO
> 55 mm Hg,
because levels above these thresholds provide adequate O
delivery to tissues. Levels below these
thresholds are on the steep portion of the O
-Hb dissociation curve, in which small declines in arterial O
tension result in large declines in Hb saturation. O
saturation should be maintained at > 93% if
myocardial or cerebral ischemia is a concern.
Morphine 0.5 to 5 mg IV helps reduce anxiety and the discomfort of dyspnea in various conditions,
including MI, PE, and the dyspnea that commonly accompanies terminal illness. However, opioids can be
deleterious in patients with acute airflow limitation (eg, asthma, COPD) because they suppress the
ventilatory drive and worsen respiratory acidemia.
Key Points
• Pulse oximetry is a key component of the examination.
• Low O
saturation (< 90%) indicates a significant problem, but normal saturation does not rule one out.
• Accessory muscle use, low O
saturation, or decreased level of consciousness requires emergency
evaluation and hospitalization.
===PAGE:2013===
evaluation and hospitalization.
• Myocardial ischemia and PE are relatively common, but symptoms and signs can be nonspecific.
• Exacerbation of known conditions (eg, asthma, COPD, heart failure) is common, but patients may also
develop new problems.
Hyperventilation Syndrome
Hyperventilation syndrome is anxiety-related dyspnea and tachypnea often accompanied by
systemic symptoms.
Hyperventilation syndrome most commonly occurs among young women but can affect either sex at any
age. It is sometimes precipitated by emotionally stressful events. Hyperventilation syndrome is separate
from panic disorder (, although the 2 conditions overlap; about half of patients with panic disorder have hyperventilation
syndrome and one quarter of patients with hyperventilation syndrome have panic disorder. It occurs in
both acute and chronic forms. Chronic hyperventilation is more common; however, the acute form is
easier to recognize.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with acute hyperventilation syndrome present with dyspnea sometimes so severe that they liken
it to suffocation. It is accompanied by agitation and a sense of terror or by symptoms of chest pain,
paresthesias (peripheral and perioral), peripheral tetany (eg, stiffness of fingers or arms), and presyncope
or syncope or sometimes by a combination of all of these findings. Tetany occurs because respiratory
alkalosis causes both hypophosphatemia and hypocalcemia. On examination, patients may appear
anxious, tachypneic, or both; lung examination is unremarkable.
Patients with chronic hyperventilation syndrome present far less dramatically and often escape detection;
they sigh deeply and frequently and often have nonspecific somatic symptoms in the context of mood and
anxiety disorders and emotional stress.
Diagnosis
• Testing to exclude other diagnoses (chest x-ray, ECG, pulse oximetry)
Hyperventilation syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion; the challenge is to use tests and resources
judiciously to distinguish this syndrome from more serious diagnoses. Basic testing includes pulse
oximetry, chest x-ray, and ECG. Pulse oximetry in hyperventilation syndrome shows O
saturation at or
close to 100%. Chest x-ray is normal. ECG is done to detect cardiac ischemia, although hyperventilation
syndrome itself can cause ST-segment depressions, T-wave inversions, and prolonged QT intervals.
ABGs are needed when other causes of hyperventilation are suspected, such as metabolic acidosis.
Occasionally, acute hyperventilation syndrome is indistinguishable from acute pulmonary embolism, and
tests for pulmonary embolism (eg, D-dimer, ventilation/
perfusion scanning, CT angiography) may be
necessary.
Treatment
• Supportive counseling
• Sometimes psychiatric or psychologic treatment
Treatment is reassurance. Some physicians advocate teaching the patient maximal exhalation and
diaphragmatic breathing. Most patients require treatment for underlying mood or anxiety disorders; such
treatment includes cognitive therapy, stress reduction techniques, drugs (eg, anxiolytics, antidepressants,
lithium), or a combination of these techniques.
Hemoptysis
===PAGE:2014===
Hemoptysis is coughing up of blood from the respiratory tract. Massive hemoptysis is production of ≥ 600
mL of blood (about a full kidney basin's worth) within 24 h.
Pathophysiology
Most of the lung's blood (95%) circulates through low-pressure pulmonary arteries and ends up in the
pulmonary capillary bed, where gas is exchanged. About 5% of the blood supply circulates through highpressure bronchial arteries, which originate at the aorta and supply major airways and supporting
structures. In hemoptysis, the blood generally arises from this bronchial circulation, except when
pulmonary arteries are damaged by trauma, by erosion of a granulomatous or calcified lymph node or
tumor, or, rarely, by pulmonary arterial catheterization or when pulmonary capillaries are affected by
inflammation.
Etiology
Blood-streaked sputum is common in many minor respiratory illnesses, such as URI and viral bronchitis.
The differential diagnosis is broad (see
Table 188-3
).
In adults, 70 to 90% of cases are caused by
• Bronchitis
• Bronchiectasis
• TB
• Necrotizing pneumonia
Primary lung cancer is an important cause in smokers ≥ 40 yr, but metastatic cancer rarely causes
hemoptysis. Cavitary
Aspergillus
infection is increasingly recognized as a cause but is not as common as
cancer.
In children, common causes are
• Lower respiratory tract infection
• Foreign body aspiration
Massive hemoptysis:
The most common causes have changed over time and vary by geographic
region but include the following:
• Bronchogenic carcinoma
• Bronchiectasis
• Tuberculous and other pneumonias
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover the duration and temporal patterns (eg, abrupt onset,
cyclical recurrence), provoking factors (eg, allergen exposure, cold, exertion, supine position), and
approximate volume of hemoptysis (eg, streaking, teaspoon, cup). Patients may need specific prompting
to differentiate between true hemoptysis, pseudohemoptysis (ie, bleeding originating in the nasopharynx
that is subsequently coughed up), and hematemesis. A sensation of postnasal drip or any bleeding from
the nares without coughing is suggestive of pseudohemoptysis. Concomitant nausea and vomiting with
===PAGE:2015===
black, brown, or coffee-ground-colored blood is characteristic of hematemesis. Frothy sputum, bright red
blood, and (if massive) a sensation of choking are characteristic of true hemoptysis.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including fever and sputum
production (pneumonia); night sweats, weight loss, and fatigue (cancer, TB); chest pain and dyspnea
(pneumonia, pulmonary embolism); leg pain and leg swelling (pulmonary embolism); hematuria
(Goodpasture's syndrome); and bloody nasal discharge (Wegener's granulomatosis).
Patients should be asked about risk factors for causes. These risk factors include HIV infection, use of
immunosuppressants (TB, fungal infection); exposure to TB; long smoking history (cancer); and recent
immobilization or surgery, known cancer, prior or family history of clotting, pregnancy, use of estrogencontaining drugs, and recent long-distance travel (pulmonary embolism).
Past medical history
should cover known conditions that can cause hemoptysis, including chronic lung
disease (eg, COPD, bronchiectasis, TB, cystic fibrosis), cancer, bleeding disorders, heart failure, thoracic
aortic aneurysm, and pulmonary-renal syndromes (eg, Goodpasture's syndrome, Wegener's
granulomatosis). Exposure to TB is important, particularly in patients with HIV infection or another
immunocompromised state.
[Table 188-3.
Some Causes of Hemoptysis]
A history of frequent nosebleeds, easy bruising, or liver disease suggests possible coagulopathy. The
drug profile should be reviewed for use of anticoagulants and antiplatelet drugs.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, and low O
saturation. Constitutional signs (eg, cachexia) and level of patient distress (eg, accessory muscle use,
pursed lip breathing, agitation, decreased level of consciousness) should also be noted.
A full lung examination is done, particularly including adequacy of air entry and exit, symmetry of breath
sounds, and presence of crackles, rhonchi, stridor, and wheezing. Signs of consolidation (eg, egophony,
dullness to percussion) should be sought. The cervical and supraclavicular areas should be inspected
and palpated for lymphadenopathy (suggesting cancer or TB).
Neck veins should be inspected for distention, and the legs and presacral area should be palpated for
pitting edema (suggesting heart failure). Heart sounds should be auscultated with notation of any extra
heart sounds or murmur that might support a diagnosis of heart failure and elevated pulmonary pressure.
The abdominal examination should focus on signs of hepatic congestion or masses, which could suggest
either cancer or hematemesis from potential esophageal varices.
The skin and mucous membranes should be examined for ecchymoses, petechiae, telangiectasia,
gingivitis, or evidence of bleeding from the oral or nasal mucosa.
If the patient can reproduce hemoptysis during examination, the color and amount of blood should be
noted.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Massive hemoptysis
• Back pain
• Presence of a pulmonary artery catheter
• Malaise, weight loss, fatigue
• Extensive smoking history
===PAGE:2016===
• Dyspnea at rest during examination or absent or decreased breath sounds
Interpretation of findings:
The history and physical examination often suggest a diagnosis and guide
further testing (see
Table 188-3
).
Despite the many possibilities, some generalities can be made. A previously healthy person with a normal
examination and no risk factors (eg, for TB, pulmonary embolism) who presents with acute-onset cough
and fever most likely has hemoptysis due to an acute respiratory illness; chronic disorders are much
lower on the list of possibilities. However, if risk factors are present, those specific disorders must be
strongly suspected. A clinical prediction rule (see
Table 194-2
 can help estimate the risk of
pulmonary embolism. A normal O
saturation does not exclude pulmonary embolism.
Patients whose hemoptysis is due to a lung disorder (eg, COPD, cystic fibrosis, bronchiectasis) or heart
disease (eg, heart failure) typically have a clear history of those disorders. Hemoptysis is not an initial
manifestation.
Patients with known immunocompromise should be suspected of having TB or a fungal infection.
Patients with symptoms or signs of chronic illness but no known disorders should be suspected of having
cancer or TB, although hemoptysis can be the initial manifestation of lung cancer in a patient who is
otherwise asymptomatic.
Several specific findings are of note. Known renal failure or hematuria suggests a pulmonary-renal
syndrome (eg, Goodpasture's syndrome, Wegener's granulomatosis). Patients with Wegener's
granulomatosis may have nasal mucosal lesions. Visible telangiectasias suggest arteriovenous
malformations. Patients with hemoptysis due to a bleeding disorder usually have cutaneous findings
(petechiae, purpura, or both) or a history of anticoagulant or antiplatelet drug use. Recurrent hemoptysis
coinciding with menses strongly suggests pulmonary endometriosis.
Testing:
Patients with massive hemoptysis require treatment and stabilization, usually in an ICU, before
testing. Patients with minor hemoptysis can undergo outpatient testing.
Imaging
is always done. A chest x-ray is mandatory. Patients with normal results, a consistent history,
and nonmassive hemoptysis can undergo empiric treatment for bronchitis. Patients with abnormal results
and patients without a supporting history should undergo CT and bronchoscopy. CT may reveal
pulmonary lesions that are not apparent on the chest x-ray and can help locate lesions in anticipation of
bronchoscopy and biopsy. Ventilation/perfusion scanning or CT angiography can confirm the diagnosis of
pulmonary embolism. CT and pulmonary angiography can also detect pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas.
Fiberoptic inspection
of the pharynx, larynx, and airways may be indicated along with esophagogastric
endoscopy when the etiology is obscure to distinguish hemoptysis from hematemesis and from
nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal bleeding.
Laboratory testing
is also done. Patients usually should have a CBC, a platelet count, and
measurement of PT and PTT. Anti-factor Xa testing can be used to detect supratherapeutic
anticoagulation in patients receiving low mol wt heparin. Urinalysis should be done to look for signs of
glomerulonephritis (hematuria, proteinuria, casts). TB skin testing and sputum culture should be done as
the initial tests for active TB, but negative results do not preclude the need to induce sputum or do
fiberoptic bronchoscopy to obtain samples for further acid-fast bacillus testing if an alternative diagnosis
is not found.
Cryptogenic hemoptysis:
The cause of hemoptysis remains unknown in 30 to 40% of patients, but the
prognosis for patients with cryptogenic hemoptysis is generally favorable,
usually with resolution of
bleeding within 6 mo of evaluation.
Treatment
Massive hemoptysis:
Initial treatment of massive hemoptysis has two objectives:
===PAGE:2017===
• Prevent aspiration of blood into the uninvolved lung (which can cause asphyxiation)
• Prevent exsanguination from ongoing bleeding
It can be difficult to protect the uninvolved lung because it is often initially unclear which side is bleeding.
Once the bleeding side is identified, strategies include positioning the patient with the bleeding lung in a
dependent position and selectively intubating and obstructing the bronchus going to the bleeding lung.
Prevention of exsanguination involves reversal of any bleeding diathesis and direct efforts to stop the
bleeding. Clotting deficiencies can be reversed with fresh-frozen plasma and factor-specific or platelet
transfusions. Laser therapy, cauterization, or direct injection with epinephrine or vasopressin can be done
bronchoscopically.
Massive hemoptysis is one of the few indications for rigid (as opposed to flexible) bronchoscopy, which
provides control of the airway, allows for a larger field of view than flexible bronchoscopy, allows better
suctioning, and is more suited to therapeutic interventions, such as laser therapy.
Embolization of a pulmonary segment via bronchial artery catheterization is becoming the preferred
method with which to stop massive hemoptysis, with reported success rates of up to 90%. Emergency
surgery is indicated for massive hemoptysis not controlled by rigid bronchoscopy or embolization and is
generally considered a last resort.
Once a diagnosis is made, further treatment is directed at the cause.
Minor hemoptysis:
Treatment of minor hemoptysis is directed at the cause.
Early resection may be indicated for bronchial adenoma or carcinoma. Broncholithiasis (erosion of a
calcified lymph node into an adjacent bronchus) may require pulmonary resection if the stone cannot be
removed via rigid bronchoscopy. Bleeding secondary to heart failure or mitral stenosis usually responds to
specific therapy for heart failure. In rare cases, emergency mitral valvulotomy is necessary for lifethreatening hemoptysis due to mitral stenosis.
Bleeding from a pulmonary embolism is rarely massive and almost always stops spontaneously. If emboli
recur and bleeding persists, anticoagulation may be contraindicated, and placement of an inferior vena
cava filter is the treatment of choice.
Because bleeding from bronchiectatic areas usually results from infection, treatment of the infection with
appropriate antibiotics and postural drainage is essential.
Key Points
• Hemoptysis needs to be distinguished from hematemesis and nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal
bleeding.
• Bronchitis, bronchiectasis, TB, and necrotizing pneumonia or lung abscess are the most common
causes in adults.
• Lower respiratory tract infection and foreign body aspiration are the most common causes in children.
• Patients with massive hemoptysis require treatment and stabilization before testing.
• With massive hemoptysis, if the side of bleeding is known, patients should be positioned with the
affected lung in the dependent position.
• Bronchial artery embolization is the preferred treatment for massive hemoptysis.
Solitary Pulmonary Nodule
===PAGE:2018===
A solitary pulmonary nodule is defined as a discrete lesion < 3 cm in diameter that is completely
surrounded by lung parenchyma (ie, does not touch the hilum, mediastinum, or pleura and is without
associated atelectasis or pleural effusion (for evaluation of a mediastinal mass, .
Solitary pulmonary nodules are most often detected incidentally when a chest x-ray is taken for other
reasons. Nonpulmonary soft-tissue densities caused by nipple shadows, warts, cutaneous nodules, and
bone abnormalities are often confused for a nodule on chest x-ray.
Etiology
Although cancer is usually the primary concern, solitary pulmonary nodules have many causes (see
Table 188-4
). Of these, the most common vary by age and risk factors, but typically include
• Granulomas
• Pneumonia
• Bronchogenic cysts
Evaluation
The primary goal of evaluation is to detect cancer and active infection.
[Table 188-4.
Some Causes of a Solitary Pulmonary Nodule]
History:
History may reveal information that suggests malignant and nonmalignant causes of a solitary
pulmonary nodule and includes
• Current or past cigarette smoking
• History of cancer or an autoimmune disorder
• Occupational risk factors for cancer (eg, exposure to asbestos, vinyl chloride, radon)
• Travel to areas with endemic mycosis or high prevalence of TB
• Risk factors for opportunistic infections (eg, HIV, immune deficiency)
Older age, cigarette smoking, and history of cancer all increase the probability of cancer and are used
along with the nodule diameter to estimate likelihood ratios for cancer (see
Table 188-5
).
Physical examination:
A thorough physical examination may uncover findings that suggest an etiology
(eg, a breast lump or skin lesion suggestive of cancer) for a pulmonary nodule but cannot definitely
establish the cause.
Testing:
The goal of initial testing is to estimate the malignant potential of the solitary pulmonary nodule.
The first step is a review of plain x-rays and then usually CT.
Radiographic characteristics
help define the malignant potential of a solitary pulmonary nodule:
•
Growth rate
is determined by comparison with previous chest x-ray or CT, if available. A lesion that has
not enlarged in ≥ 2 yr suggests a benign etiology. Tumors that have volume doubling times from 21 to
400 days are likely to be malignant. Small nodules (< 1 cm) should be monitored at 3 mo, 6 mo, and
then yearly for 2 yr.
•
Calcification
suggests benign disease, particularly if it is central (tuberculoma, histoplasmoma),
===PAGE:2019===
concentric (healed histoplasmosis), or in a popcorn configuration (hamartoma).
•
Margins
that are spiculated or irregular (scalloped) are more indicative of cancer.
•
Diameter
< 1.5 cm strongly suggests a benign etiology; diameter > 5.3 cm strongly suggests cancer.
However, nonmalignant exceptions include lung abscess, Wegener's granulomatosis, and hydatid cyst.
These characteristics are sometimes evident on the original plain film but usually require CT. CT can also
distinguish pulmonary from pleural radiopacities. CT has a sensitivity of 70% and a specificity of 60% for
detecting cancer.
PET
has an uncertain role in evaluation. It has a sensitivity > 90% and a specificity of about 78% for
detecting cancer, but it is relatively new, and its role in evaluating pulmonary nodules is still being
developed. False-negative PET scans can result from metabolically inactive tumors, and false-positive
results can occur in various infectious and inflammatory conditions.
[Table 188-5.
Estimating the Probability of Cancer in a Solitary Pulmonary Nodule]
Cultures
may be useful when historical information suggests an infectious cause (eg, TB,
coccidioidomycosis) as a possible diagnosis.
Invasive testing
options include CT- or ultrasonography-guided transthoracic needle aspiration,
fiberoptic bronchoscopy, and surgical biopsy. Although cancers can be diagnosed by biopsy, definitive
treatment is resection, and so patients with a high likelihood of cancer with a resectable lesion should
proceed to surgical resection. Transthoracic needle aspiration is best for peripheral lesions and is
particularly useful if infectious etiologies are strongly considered because using the transthoracic
approach, as opposed to bronchoscopy, avoids the possibility of contamination of the specimen with
upper airway organisms. The main disadvantage of transthoracic needle aspiration is the risk of
pneumothorax, which is about 10%. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy allows for endobronchial washing, brushing,
needle aspiration, and transbronchial biopsy. Yield is higher for larger, more centrally located lesions, but
very experienced operators using specially designed thin scopes can successfully biopsy peripheral
lesions that are < 1 cm in diameter. In cases in which nodules are not accessible from these less invasive
approaches, open surgical biopsy is necessary.
Treatment
• Sometimes surgery
• Sometimes observation
If the suspicion of cancer is very low, the lesions are very small (< 1 cm), or the patient refuses or is not a
candidate for surgical intervention, observation is reasonable. Monitoring with follow-up at 3 mo, 6 mo,
and then yearly for 2 yr is recommended. If the lesion has not grown for > 2 yr, it is likely benign.
When cancer is the most likely cause or when nonmalignant causes are unlikely, patients should undergo
resection unless surgery is contraindicated due to poor pulmonary function, comorbidities, or withholding
of consent.
Stridor
Stridor is a high-pitched, predominantly inspiratory sound. It is most commonly associated with acute
disorders, such as foreign body aspiration but can be due to more chronic disorders, such as
tracheomalacia.
Pathophysiology
Stridor is produced by the rapid, turbulent flow of air through a narrowed or partially obstructed segment
of the extrathoracic upper airway. Involved areas include the pharynx, epiglottis, larynx, and the
===PAGE:2020===
extrathoracic trachea.
Etiology
Most causes manifest acutely, but some patients present with chronic or recurrent symptoms (see
Table 188-6
).
Acute causes are usually infectious except for foreign body and allergy. Chronic causes are usually a
congenital or acquired structural abnormality of the upper airway.
Children:
The most common causes of acute stridor in children include
• Croup
• Foreign body aspiration
Epiglottitis has historically been a common cause of stridor in children, but its incidence has decreased
since the introduction of the
Haemophilus influenzae
type B (HiB) vaccine. Various congenital airway
disorders can manifest as recurrent stridor in neonates and infants.
Adults:
Common causes in adults include
• Vocal cord dysfunction
• Postextubation laryngeal edema
• Vocal cord edema or paralysis
• Laryngeal tumors
• Allergic reactions
Vocal cord dysfunction often mimics asthma, so many patients with vocal cord dysfunction are incorrectly
given drugs for asthma but do not respond. Epiglottitis may be becoming more common among adults, but
adults with epiglottitis are less likely than children to have stridor.
[Table 188-6.
Some Causes of Stridor]
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should first identify whether symptoms are acute or chronic. If
acute, any symptoms of URI (runny nose, fever, sore throat) or allergy (itching, sneezing, facial swelling,
rash, potential allergen exposure) are noted. Recent intubation or neck surgery should be clinically
obvious. If chronic, the age at onset (eg, since birth, since infancy, only in adulthood) and duration are
determined, as well as whether symptoms are continuous or intermittent. For intermittent symptoms,
provoking or exacerbating factors (eg, position, allergen exposure, cold, anxiety, feeding, crying) are
sought. Important associated symptoms in all cases include cough, pain, drooling, respiratory distress,
cyanosis, and difficulty feeding.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting causative disorders, including heartburn or other
reflux symptoms (laryngospasm); night sweats, weight loss, and fatigue (cancer); and voice change,
trouble swallowing, and recurrent aspiration (neurologic disorders).
Past medical history
in children should cover perinatal history, particularly regarding need for
endotracheal intubation, presence of known congenital anomalies, and vaccination history (particularly
HiB). In adults, history of prior endotracheal intubation, tracheotomy, recurrent respiratory infections, and
tobacco and alcohol use should be elicited.
===PAGE:2021===
Physical examination:
The first step is to determine the presence and degree of respiratory distress by
evaluating vital signs (including pulse oximetry) and doing a quick examination. Signs of severe distress
include cyanosis, decreased level of consciousness, low O
saturation (eg, < 90%), air hunger, use of
accessory inspiratory muscles, and difficulty speaking. Children with epiglottitis may sit upright with arms
braced on the legs or examination table, lean forward, and hyperextend the neck with the jaw thrust
forward and mouth open in an effort to enhance air exchange (tripod position). Moderate distress is
indicated by tachypnea, use of accessory muscles or respiration, and intercostal retractions. If distress is
severe, further examination is deferred until equipment and personnel are arranged for emergency
management of the airway.
Oropharyngeal examination of a patient (particularly a child) with epiglottitis may provoke anxiety, leading
to functional obstruction and loss of the airway. Thus, if epiglottitis is suspected, a tongue depressor or
other instrument should not be placed in the mouth. When suspicion is low and patients are in no
distress, they may undergo imaging; others should be sent to the operating room for direct laryngoscopy,
which should be done by an otolaryngologist with the patient under anesthesia.
If the patient's vital signs and airway are stable and acute epiglottitis is not suspected, the oral cavity
should be thoroughly examined for pooled secretions, hypertrophic tonsils, in-duration, erythema, or
foreign bodies. The neck is palpated for masses and tracheal deviation. Careful auscultation of the nose,
oropharynx, neck, and chest may help discern the location of the stridor. Infants should be examined with
special attention to craniofacial morphology (looking for signs of congenital malformations), patency of the
nares, and cutaneous abnormalities.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Drooling and agitation
• Tripod position
• Cyanosis or hypoxemia on pulse oximetry
• Decreased level of consciousness
Interpretation of findings:
The distinction between acute and chronic stridor is important. Other clinical
findings are also often helpful (see
Table 188-6
).
Acute manifestations are more likely to reflect an immediately life-threatening disorder. With these
disorders, fever indicates infection. Fever plus barking cough suggests croup or, very rarely, tracheitis.
Patients with croup typically have more prominent URI symptoms and less of a toxic appearance. Fever
without cough, particularly if accompanied by toxic appearance, sore throat, difficulty swallowing, or
respiratory distress, suggests epiglottitis and, in young children, the less common retropharyngeal
abscess. Drooling and the tripod position are suggestive of epiglottitis, whereas retropharyngeal abscess
may manifest with neck stiffness and inability to extend the neck.
Patients without fever or URI symptoms may have an acute allergic reaction or aspirated foreign body.
Acute allergic reaction severe enough to cause stridor usually has other manifestations of airway edema
(eg, oral or facial edema, wheezing) or anaphylaxis (itching, urticaria). Foreign body obstruction of the
upper airway that causes stridor is always acute but may be occult in toddlers (older children and adults
can communicate the event unless there is near-complete airway obstruction, which will manifest as such,
not as stridor). Cough is often present with foreign body but rare with allergic reaction.
Chronic stridor that begins early in childhood and without a clear inciting factor suggests a congenital
anomaly or an upper airway tumor. In adults, heavy smoking and alcohol use should raise suspicion of
laryngeal cancer. Vocal cord paralysis usually has a clear precipitant, such as surgery or intubation, or is
associated with other neurologic findings, such as muscle weakness. Patients with tracheomalacia
frequently have cough productive of sputum and have a history of recurrent respiratory infections.
Testing:
Testing should include pulse oximetry. In patients with minimal respiratory distress, soft-tissue
===PAGE:2022===
neck x-rays may help. An enlarged epiglottis or retropharyngeal space can be seen on the lateral view,
and the subepiglottic narrowing of croup (steeple sign) may be seen on the anteroposterior view. X-rays
may also identify foreign objects in the neck or chest.
In other cases, direct laryngoscopy can detect vocal cord abnormalities, structural abnormalities, and
tumors. CT of the neck and chest should be done if there is concern about a structural abnormality, such
as an upper airway tumor or tracheomalacia. Flow-volume loops can be useful in chronic and intermittent
stridor to show the presence of an upper airway obstruction. Abnormal flow-volume loop findings
generally require follow up with CT or laryngoscopy.
Treatment
Definitive treatment of stridor involves treating the underlying disorder. As a temporizing measure in
patients with severe distress, a mixture of helium and O
(heliox) improves airflow and reduces stridor in
disorders of the large airways, such as postextubation laryngeal edema, croup, and laryngeal tumors.
The mechanism of action is thought to be reduced flow turbulence as a result of lower density of helium
compared with O
and nitrogen.
Nebulized racemic epinephrine (0.5 to 0.75 mL of 2.25% racemic epinephrine added to 2.5 to 3 mL of
normal saline) and dexamethasone (10 mg IV, then 4 mg IV q 6 h) may be helpful in patients in whom
airway edema is the cause.
Endotracheal intubation should be used to secure the airway in patients with advanced respiratory
distress, impending loss of airway, or decreased level of consciousness. When significant edema is
present, endotracheal intubation can be difficult, and emergency surgical airway measures (eg,
cricothyrotomy, tracheostomy) may be required.
Key Points
• Inspiratory stridor is often a medical emergency.
• Assessment of vital signs and degree of respiratory distress is the first step.
• In some cases, securing the airway may be necessary before or in parallel with the physical
examination.
• Acute epiglottitis is uncommon in children who have received HiB vaccine.
Vocal Cord Dysfunction
Paradoxical or dysfunctional movement of the vocal cords is defined as adduction of the true vocal cords
on inspiration and abduction on expiration; it causes inspiratory airway obstruction and stridor that is often
mistaken for asthma. Vocal cord paralysis (unilateral and bilateral) is discussed elsewhere. The general
evaluation of patients with stridor is discussed elsewhere.
Vocal cord dysfunction occurs more commonly among women aged 20 to 40. Etiology is unclear, but it
appears to be associated with anxiety, depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, and personality
disorders. It is not considered a factitious disorder (ie, patients are not doing it consciously).
Symptoms are usually inspiratory stridor and less often expiratory wheezing. Other manifestations can
include hoarseness, throat tightness, a choking sensation, and cough.
Diagnosis is made by observing inspiratory closure of the vocal cords with direct laryngoscopy.
Sometimes a diagnosis of vocal cord dysfunction is entertained only after patients have been
misdiagnosed as having asthma and then not responded to bronchodilators or corticosteroids.
Treatment involves educating the patient about the nature of the problem; counseling from a speech
therapist on special breathing techniques, such as panting, which can relieve episodes of stridor and
===PAGE:2023===
obstruction; and avoiding asthma misdiagnosis and treatment.
Vocal cord dysfunction associated with psychiatric diagnoses is often resistant to these measures.
Referral for psychiatric counseling is indicated in these cases.
Wheezing
Wheezing is a relatively high-pitched whistling noise produced by movement of air through narrowed or
compressed small airways. It is a symptom as well as a physical finding.
Pathophysiology
Airflow through a narrowed or compressed segment of a small airway becomes turbulent, causing
vibration of airway walls; this vibration produces the sound of wheezing.
Wheezes are more common during expiration because increased intrathoracic pressure during this phase
narrows the airways. Wheezing during expiration alone indicates milder obstruction than wheezing during
both inspiration and expiration, which suggests more severe airway narrowing.
By contrast, turbulent flow of air through a narrowed segment of the large, extrathoracic airways
produces a whistling inspiratory noise (stridor—.
Etiology
Small airway narrowing may be caused by bronchoconstriction, mucosal edema, or external compression,
or partial obstruction by a tumor, foreign body, or thick secretions.
Overall, the most common causes are
• Asthma
• COPD
But wheezing may occur in other disorders affecting the small airways, including heart failure (cardiac
asthma), anaphylaxis, and toxic inhalation. Sometimes, healthy patients manifest wheezing during a bout
of acute bronchitis. In children, bronchiolitis and foreign body aspiration are also causes (see
Table 188-7
).
Evaluation
When patients are in significant respiratory distress, evaluation and treatment proceed at the same time.
History: History of present illness
should determine whether the wheezing is new or recurrent. If
recurrent, patients are asked the previous diagnosis and whether current symptoms are different in nature
or severity. Particularly when the diagnosis is unclear, the acuity of onset (eg, abrupt or gradual),
temporal patterns (eg, persistent vs intermittent, seasonal variations), and provoking or exacerbating
factors (eg, current URI, allergen exposure, cold air, exercise, feeding in infants) are noted. Important
associated symptoms include shortness of breath, fever, cough, and sputum production.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms and signs of causative disorders, including fever, sore
throat, and rhinorrhea (respiratory infection); orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and peripheral
edema (heart failure); night sweats, weight loss, and fatigue (cancer); nasal congestion, itching eyes,
sneezing, and rash (allergic reaction); and vomiting, heartburn, and swallowing difficulties
(gastroesophageal reflux disease with aspiration).
Past medical history
should ask about conditions known to cause wheezing, particularly asthma,
COPD, and heart failure. Sometimes the patient's drug list may be the only indication of such diagnoses
(eg, inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids in COPD; diuretics and ACE inhibitors in heart failure).
===PAGE:2024===
Patients with known disease should be asked about indicators of disease severity, such as previous
hospitalization, intubation, or ICU admission. Also, conditions that predispose to heart failure are
identified, including atherosclerotic or congenital heart disease and hypertension. Smoking history and
exposure to secondhand smoke should be noted.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for presence of fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, and low
O
saturation.
Any signs of respiratory distress (eg, accessory muscle use, intercostal retractions, pursed lip breathing,
agitation, cyanosis, decreased level of consciousness) should be immediately noted.
Examination focuses on the lungs, particularly adequacy of air entry and exit, symmetry of breath sounds,
and localization of wheezing (diffuse vs localized; inspiratory, expiratory, or both). Any signs of
consolidation (eg, egophony, dullness to percussion) or crackles should be noted.
The cardiac examination should focus on findings that might indicate heart failure, such as murmurs, a
3rd heart sound (S
gallop), and jugular venous distention.
The nose and throat examination should note appearance of the nasal mucosa (eg, color, congestion),
swelling of the face or tongue, and signs of rhinitis, sinusitis, or nasal polyps.
The extremities are examined for clubbing and edema, and the skin is examined for signs of allergic
reactions (eg, urticaria, rash) or atopy (eg, eczema). The patient's general appearance is noted for
constitutional signs, such as the cachexia and barrel chest of severe COPD.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Accessory muscle use, clinical signs of tiring, or decreased level of consciousness
• Fixed inspiratory and expiratory wheezing
• Swelling of the face and tongue (angioedema)
Interpretation of findings: Recurrent
wheezing in a patient with a known history of
[Table 188-7.
Some Causes of Wheezing]
disorders such as asthma, COPD, or heart failure is usually presumed to represent an exacerbation. In
patients who have both lung and heart disease, manifestations may be similar (eg, neck vein distention
and peripheral edema in cor pulmonale due to COPD and in heart failure), and testing is often required.
When the cause is known asthma or COPD, a history of cough, postnasal drip, or exposure to allergens
or to toxic or irritant gases (eg, cold air, dust, tobacco smoke, perfumes) may suggest a trigger.
Clinical findings help suggest a cause of wheezing in patients without a known history (see
Table 188-7
).
Acute
(sudden-onset) wheezing in the absence of URI symptoms suggests an allergic reaction or
impending anaphylaxis, especially if urticaria or angioedema is present. Fever and URI symptoms
suggest infection: acute bronchitis in older children and adults and bronchiolitis in children < 2 yr.
Crackles, distended neck veins, and peripheral edema suggest heart failure. Association of wheezing with
feeding or vomiting in infants can be a result of gastroesophageal reflux.
Patients with asthma usually have paroxysmal or intermittent bouts of acute wheezing.
Persistent
, localized wheezing suggests focal bronchial obstruction by a tumor or foreign body.
Persistent wheezing manifesting very early in life suggests a congenital or structural abnormality.
Persistent wheezing with sudden onset is consistent with foreign body aspiration, whereas the slowly
progressive onset of wheezing may be a sign of extraluminal bronchial compression by a growing tumor
or lymph node.
===PAGE:2025===
Testing:
Testing seeks to assess severity, determine diagnosis, and identify complications.
• Pulse oximetry
• Chest x-ray (if diagnosis unclear)
• Sometimes ABG
• Sometimes pulmonary function testing
Severity is assessed by pulse oximetry and, in patients with respiratory distress or clinical signs of tiring,
ABG testing. Patients known to have asthma usually have bedside peak flow measurements (or, when
available, forced expiratory volume in 1 sec [FEV]).
Patients with new-onset or undiagnosed persistent wheezing should have a chest x-ray. X-ray can be
deferred in patients with asthma who are having a typical exacerbation and in patients having an obvious
allergic reaction. Cardiomegaly, pleural effusion, and fluid in the major fissure suggest heart failure.
Hyperinflation and hyperlucency suggest COPD. Segmental or subsegmental atelectasis or infiltrate
suggests an obstructing endobronchial lesion. Radiopacity in the airways or focal areas of hyperinflation
suggest a foreign body.
If the diagnosis is unclear in patients with recurrent wheezing, pulmonary function testing can confirm
airflow limitation and quantify its reversibility and severity. Methacholine challenge testing and exercise
testing can confirm airway hyperreactivity in patients for whom the diagnosis of asthma is in question.
Treatment
Definitive treatment of wheezing is treatment of underlying disorders.
Wheezing itself can be relieved with inhaled bronchodilators (eg, albuterol 2.5 mg nebulized solution or
180 mg metered dose inhalation). Long-term control of persistent asthmatic wheezing may require inhaled
corticosteroids and leukotriene inhibitors.
Intravenous H
blockers (diphenhydramine), corticosteroids (methylprednisolone), and subcutaneous and
inhaled racemic epinephrine are indicated in cases of anaphylaxis.
Key Points
• Asthma is the most common cause, but not all wheezing is asthma.
• Acute onset of wheezing in a patient without a lung disorder may be due to aspiration, allergic reaction,
or heart failure.
• Reactive airway disease can be confirmed via spirometry.
• Inhaled bronchodilators are the mainstay of acute treatment.
===PAGE:2026===
Chapter 189. Tests of Pulmonary Function
Introduction
Pulmonary function tests provide measures of airflow, lung volumes, gas exchange, response to
bronchodilators, and respiratory muscle function. Basic pulmonary function tests available in the
ambulatory setting include spirometry and pulse oximetry; these tests provide physiologic measures of
pulmonary function and can be used to quickly narrow a differential diagnosis and suggest a subsequent
strategy of additional testing or therapy. More complicated testing includes measurement of lung volumes;
lung, chest wall, and respiratory system compliance (which requires measurement of esophageal
pressure); and complete cardiopulmonary exercise testing. These tests provide a more detailed
description of physiologic abnormalities and the likely underlying pathology. The choice and sequence of
testing are guided by information taken from the history and physical examination.
Airflow, Lung Volumes, and Flow-Volume Loop
Airflow and lung volume measurements can be used to differentiate obstructive from restrictive pulmonary
disorders, to characterize severity, and to measure responses to therapy. Measurements are typically
reported as absolute flows and volumes and as percentages of predicted values using data derived from
large populations of people presumed to have normal lung function. Variables used to predict normal
values include age, sex, ethnicity, and height.
Airflow:
Quantitative measures of inspiratory and expiratory flow are obtained by forced spirometry.
Nose clips are used to occlude the nares.
In assessments of
expiratory flow
, patients inhale as deeply as possible, seal the lips around a
mouthpiece, and exhale as forcefully and completely as possible into an apparatus that records the
exhaled volume (forced vital capacity [FVC]) and the volume exhaled in the first second (the forced
expiratory volume in 1 sec [FEV]—see
Fig. 189-1
). Most currently used devices measure only airflow and integrate time to estimate the expired
volume.
In assessments of
inspiratory flow
and volume, patients exhale as completely as possible, then forcibly
inhale. These maneuvers provide several measures. The FVC is the maximal amount of air that the
patient can forcibly exhale after taking a maximal inhalation. The FEV
is the most reproducible flow
parameter and is especially useful in diagnosing and monitoring patients with obstructive pulmonary
disorders (eg, asthma, COPD).
The forced expiratory flow averaged over the time during which 25 to 75% of the FVC is exhaled may be
a more sensitive marker of mild, small airway airflow limitation than the FEV
, but the reproducibility of
this variable is poor. The peak expiratory flow (PEF) is the peak flow occurring during exhalation. This
variable is used primarily for home monitoring of patients with asthma and for determining diurnal
variations in airflow.
Interpretation of these measures depends on good patient effort, which is often improved by coaching
during the actual maneuver. Acceptable spiro-grams demonstrate good test initiation (eg, a quick and
forceful onset of exhalation), no coughing, smooth curves, and absence of early termination of expiration
(eg, minimum exhalation time of 6 sec with
[Fig. 189-1.
Normal spirogram.]
no change in volume for the last 1 sec). Reproducible efforts agree within 5% or 100 mL with other
efforts. Results not meeting these minimum acceptable criteria should be interpreted with caution.
Lung volume:
Lung volumes (see
Fig. 189-2
) are measured by determining functional residual capacity (FRC) and with spirometry.
===PAGE:2027===
FRC is measured using gas dilution techniques or a plethysmograph (which is more accurate in patients
who have airflow limitation and trapped gas).
Gas dilution
techniques include
• Nitrogen washout
• Helium equilibration
With nitrogen washout, the patient exhales to FRC and then breathes from a spirometer containing 100%
O
. The test ends when the exhaled nitrogen concentration is zero. The collected volume of exhaled
nitrogen is equal to 81% of the initial FRC.
With helium equilibration, the patient exhales to FRC and then is connected to a closed system containing
known volumes of helium and O
. Helium concentration is measured until it is the same on inhalation and
exhalation, indicating it has equilibrated with the volume of gas in the lung, which can then be estimated
from the change in helium concentration that has occurred.
Both of these techniques may underestimate FRC because they measure only the lung volume that
communicates with the airways. In patients with severe airflow limitation, a considerable volume of
trapped gas may communicate very poorly or not at all.
Body plethysmography
uses Boyle's law to measure the compressible gas volume within the thorax
and is more accurate than gas dilution techniques. While sitting in an airtight box, the patient tries to
inhale against a closed mouthpiece from FRC. As the chest wall expands, the pressure in the closed box
rises. Knowing the pre-inspiratory box volume and the pressure in the box before and after the inspiratory
effort allows for calculation of the change in box volume, which must equal the change in lung volume.
Knowing FRC allows the lungs to be divided into subvolumes that are either measured with spirometry or
calculated (see
Fig. 189-2
). Normally the FRC represents about 40% of total lung capacity (TLC).
Flow-volume loop:
In contrast to the spiro-gram, which displays airflow (in L) over time (in sec), the
flow-volume loop (see
Fig. 189-3
) displays airflow (in L/sec) as it relates to lung volume (in L) during maximal inspiration from
complete exhalation (residual volume [RV]) and during maximum expiration from complete inhalation
(TLC). The principal advantage of the flow-volume loop is that it can show whether airflow is appropriate
for a particular lung volume. For example, airflow is normally slower at low lung volumes. Because
patients with pulmonary fibrosis have low lung volumes, airflow appears to be decreased if measured
alone. However, when airflow is presented as a function of lung volume, it becomes apparent that airflow
is actually higher than normal (as a result of the increased elastic recoil characteristic of fibrotic lungs).
[Fig. 189-2.
Normal lung volumes.]
[Table 189-1.
Characteristic Physiologic Changes Associated with Pulmonary Disorders]
Flow-volume loops require that absolute lung volumes be measured. Unfortunately, many laboratories
simply plot airflow against the FVC; the flow-FVC loop does not have an inspiratory limb and therefore
does not provide as much information.
Patterns of Abnormalities
Most common respiratory disorders can be categorized as obstructive or restrictive on the basis of airflow
and lung volumes (see
Table 189-1
).
Obstructive disorders:
Obstructive disorders are characterized by a reduction in airflow, particularly the
FEV
and the FEV
expressed as a percentage of the FVC (FEV
/FVC). The degree of reduction in
===PAGE:2028===
FEV
compared with predicted values determines the degree of the obstructive defect (see
Table 189-2
). Obstructive defects are caused by
• Increased resistance to flow due to abnormalities within the airway lumen (eg, tumors, secretions,
mucosal thickening)
• Changes in the wall of the airway (eg, contraction of smooth muscle, edema)
• Decreased elastic recoil (eg, the parenchymal destruction that occurs in emphysema)
With decreased airflow, expiratory times are longer than usual, and air may become trapped in the lungs
due to incomplete emptying, thereby increasing lung volumes (eg, TLC, RV).
[Table 189-2.
Severity of Obstructive and Restrictive Lung Disorders*]
[Fig. 189-3.
Flow-volume loops.]
Improvement of FEV
and FEV
/FVC by ≥ 12% or 200 mL with the administration of a bronchodilator
confirms the diagnosis of asthma or airway hyperresponsiveness. However, some patients with asthma
can have normal pulmonary function and normal spirometric parameters between exacerbations. When
suspicion of asthma remains high despite normal spirometry results, provocative testing with
methacholine, a synthetic analog of acetylcholine that is a nonspecific bronchial irritant, is indicated to
detect or exclude bronchoconstriction. In a methacholine challenge test, spirometric parameters are
measured at baseline and after inhalation of increasing concentrations of methacholine. Laboratories
have different definitions of airway hyperreactivity, but in general patients showing at least a 20% drop in
FEV
from baseline (PC
) when the concentration of inhaled methacholine is < 1 mg/mL is considered
diagnostic of increased bronchial reactivity, whereas a PC
> 16 mg/mL excludes the diagnosis. PC
values between 1 and 16 mg/mL are inconclusive.
Exercise testing may be used to detect exercise-induced bronchoconstriction but is less sensitive than
methacholine challenge testing for detecting general airway hyperresponsiveness. The patient does a
constant level of work on a treadmill or cycle ergometer for 6 to 8 min at an intensity selected to produce
a heart rate of 80% of predicted maximum heart rate. The FEV
and FVC are measured before and 5, 15,
and 30 min after exercise. Exercise-induced bronchospasm reduces FEV
or FVC ≥ 15% after exercise.
Eucapnic voluntary hyperventilation (EVH) may also be used to diagnose exercise-induce
bronchoconstriction and is the method accepted by the International Olympic Committee. EVH involves
hyperventilation of a gas mixture of 5% CO
and 21% O
at 85% of maximum voluntary ventilation for 6
min. FEV
is then measured at specified intervals after the test. As with other bronchial provocation tests,
the drop in FEV
that is diagnostic of exercise-induced bronchospasm varies by laboratory.
Restrictive disorders:
Restrictive disorders are characterized by a reduction in lung volume, specifically
a TLC < 80% of the predicted value. The decrease in TLC determines the severity of restriction (see
Table 189-2
). The decrease in lung volumes causes a decrease in airflow (reduced FEV
—see
Fig. 189B). However, airflow relative to lung volume is increased, so the FEV
/FVC ratio is normal or increased.
Restrictive defects are caused by the following:
• Loss in lung volume (eg, lobectomy)
• Abnormalities of structures surrounding the lung (eg, pleural disorder, kyphosis, obesity)
• Weakness of the inspiratory muscles of respiration (eg, neuromuscular disorders)
• Abnormalities of the lung parenchyma (eg, pulmonary fibrosis)
The feature common to all is a decrease in the compliance of the lungs, the chest wall, or both.
===PAGE:2029===
Measurement of Gas Exchange
Gas exchange is measured through several means, including diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide,
pulse oximetry, and arterial blood gas sampling.
Diffusing Capacity for Carbon Monoxide
The diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) is a measure of the ability of gas to transfer from the
alveoli across the alveolar epithelium and the capillary endothelium to the RBCs. The DLCO depends not
only on the area and thickness of the blood-gas barrier but also on the volume of blood in the pulmonary
capillaries. The distribution of alveolar volume and ventilation also affects the measurement.
DLCO is measured by sampling end-expiratory gas for carbon monoxide (CO) after patients inspire a
small amount of CO, hold their breath, and exhale. Measured DLCO should be adjusted for alveolar
volume (which is estimated from dilution of helium) and the patient's Hct. DLCO is reported as mL/min/mm
Hg and as a percentage of a predicted value.
Conditions that decrease DLCO:
Conditions that primarily affect the pulmonary vasculature, such as
primary pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary embolism, decrease DLCO. Conditions that affect the
lung diffusely, such as emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis, decrease both DLCO and alveolar ventilation
(V
A
). Reduced DLCO also occurs in patients with previous lung resection because total lung volume is
smaller, but DLCO corrects to or even exceeds normal when adjusted for V
A
because increased
additional vascular surface area is recruited in the remaining lung. Anemic patients have lower DLCO
values that correct when adjusted for Hb.
Conditions that increase DLCO:
DLCO may be higher than predicted in patients with heart failure,
presumably because the increased pulmonary venous and arterial pressure recruits additional pulmonary
microvessels. DLCO is also increased in patients with erythrocythemia, in part because of increased Hct
and because of the vascular recruitment that occurs with increased pulmonary pressures due to
increased viscosity. DLCO is increased in patients with alveolar hemorrhage because RBCs in the
alveolar space can also bind CO. DLCO is also increased in patients with asthma. Although this increase
is attributed to presumed vascular recruitment, recent data suggest it may also be due to growth factorstimulated neovascularization.
Pulse Oximetry
Transcutaneous pulse oximetry estimates O
saturation (SpO
) of capillary blood based on the
absorption of light from light-emitting diodes positioned in a finger clip or adhesive strip probe. The
estimates are generally very accurate and correlate to within 5% of measured arterial O
saturation
(SaO
). Results may be less accurate in patients with highly pigmented skin; patients wearing nail polish;
and patients with arrhythmias, hypotension, or profound systemic vasoconstriction, in whom the amplitude
of the signal may be dampened. Also, pulse oximetry is able to detect only oxyhemoglobin or reduced Hb
but not other types of Hb (eg, carboxyhemoglobin, methemoglobin); those types are assumed to be
oxyhemoglobin and falsely elevate the SpO
measurement.
Arterial Blood Gas Sampling
ABG sampling is done to obtain accurate measures of PaO
, PaCO
, and blood pH; these variables
combined with the patient's temperature allow for calculation of HCO
level (which can also be measured
directly from venous blood) and SaO
. ABG sampling can also accurately measure carboxyhemoglobin
and methemoglobin.
The radial artery is usually used. Because arterial puncture in rare cases leads to thrombosis and
impaired perfusion of distal tissue, Allen's test is first done to ensure adequate collateral circulation. With
this maneuver, the radial and ulnar pulses are simultaneously occluded until the hand becomes pale. The
===PAGE:2030===
ulnar pulse is then released while the pressure on the radial pulse is maintained. A blush across the entire
hand within 7 sec of release of the ulnar pulse suggests adequate flow through the ulnar artery.
Under sterile conditions, a 22- to 25-gauge needle attached to a heparinized syringe is inserted just
proximal to the maximal impulse of the radial arterial pulse and advanced slightly distally into the artery
until pulsatile blood is returned. Systolic BP often pushes back the syringe plunger. After 3 to 5 mL of
blood is collected, the needle is quickly withdrawn, and firm pressure is applied to the puncture site to
facilitate hemostasis. Simultaneously, the ABG specimen is placed on ice to reduce O
consumption and
CO
production by WBCs and is sent to the laboratory.
Oxygenation
Hypoxemia is a decrease in PO
in arterial blood; hypoxia is a decrease in the PO
in the tissue. ABGs
accurately assess the presence of hypoxemia, which is generally defined as a PaO
low enough to
reduce the SaO
below 90% (ie, PaO
< 60 mm Hg). Abnormalities in Hb (eg, methemoglobin), higher
temperatures, lower pH, and higher levels of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
[Fig. 189-4.
Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve.]
reduce Hb O
saturation despite an adequate PaO
, as indicated by the oxyhemoglobin dissociation
curve (see
Fig. 189-4
).
Causes of hypoxemia can be classified based on whether the alveolar-arterial PO
gradient [(A-a)DO],
defined as the difference between alveolar O
tension (PAO
) and PaO
, is elevated or normal. PAO
is
calculated as follows:
where FIO
is the fraction of inspired O
(eg, 0.21 at room air), P
atm
is the ambient barometric pressure
(eg, 760 mm Hg at sea level), PH
O is the partial pressure of water vapor (eg, usually 47 mm Hg),
PaCO
is the measured partial pressure of arterial CO
, and R is the respiratory quotient, which is
assumed to be 0.8 in a resting patient eating a normal diet.
For patients at sea level and breathing room air, FIO
= 0.21, and the (A-a)DO
can be simplified as
follows:
(A - a)DO
= 150 - PaCO
/0.8 - PaCO
where (A-a)DO
is typically < 20 but increases with age (because of age-related decline in pulmonary
function) and with increasing FIO
(because, although Hb becomes 100% saturated at a PaO
of about
150 mm Hg, O
is soluble in blood, and the O
content of plasma continues to increase at increasing
FIO
). Estimations of normal (A-a)DO
values as < (2.5 + [FIO
× age in years]) or as less than the
absolute value of the FIO
(eg, < 21 on room air; < 30 on 30% FIO
) correct for these effects.
Hypoxemia with increased (A-a)DO
:
This situation is caused by
• Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch
• Right-to-left shunting
• Severely impaired diffusing capacity
V/Q mismatch
is one of the more common reasons for hypoxemia and contributes to the hypoxemia
occurring with COPD and asthma. In normal lungs, regional perfusion closely matches regional ventilation
===PAGE:2031===
because of the arteriolar vasoconstriction that occurs in response to alveolar hypoxia. In disease states,
dysregulation leads to perfusion of alveolar units that are receiving less than complete ventilation (V/Q
mismatch). As a result, systemic venous blood passes through the pulmonary capillaries without achieving
normal levels of PaO
. Supplemental O
can correct hypoxemia due to V/Q mismatch by increasing the
PaO
, although the increased (A-a)DO
persists.
Right-to-left shunting
is an extreme example of V/Q mismatch. With shunting, deoxygenated pulmonary
arterial blood arrives at the left side of the heart without having passed through ventilated lung segments.
Shunting may occur through lung parenchyma, through abnormal connections between the pulmonary
arterial and venous circulations, or through intracardiac communications (eg, patent foramen ovale).
Hypoxemia due to right-to-left shunting does not respond to supplemental O
.
Impaired diffusing capacity
only rarely occurs in isolation; usually it is accompanied by significant V/Q
mismatch. Because O
completely saturates Hb after only a fraction of the time that blood is in contact
with alveolar gas, hypoxemia due to impaired diffusing capacity occurs only when cardiac output is
increased (eg, with exercise), when barometric pressure is low (eg, at high altitudes), or when > 50% of
the pulmonary parenchyma is destroyed. As with V/Q mismatch, the (A-a)DO
is increased, but PaO
can
be increased by increasing the FIO
. Hypoxemia due to impaired diffusing capacity responds to
supplemental O
.
Hypoxemia with normal (A-a)DO
:
This situation is caused by
• Hypoventilation
• Low partial pressures of inspired O
(PIO
)
Hypoventilation
(reduced alveolar ventilation) decreases the PAO
and increases the PaCO
, there by
decreasing PaO
. In cases of pure hypoventilation, the (A-a)DO
is normal. Causes of hypoventilation
include decreased respiratory rate or depth (eg, due to neuromuscular disorders, severe obesity, or drug
overdose) or an increase in the fraction of dead space ventilation in patients already at their maximal
ventilatory limit (eg, an exacerbation of severe COPD). Hypoventilatory hypoxemia responds to
supplemental O
.
Decreased PIO
is a final uncommon cause of hypoxemia that in most cases occurs only at high altitude.
Although FIO
does not change with altitude, ambient air pressure decreases exponentially; thus, PIO
decreases as well. For example, PIO
is only 43 mm Hg at the summit of Mt. Everest (altitude, 8848 m
[29,028 ft]). The (A-a)DO
remains normal. Hypoxic stimulation of respiratory drive increases alveolar
ventilation and decreases PaCO
level. This type of hypoxemia responds to supplemental O
.
Carbon Dioxide
PCO
normally is maintained between 35 and 45 mm Hg. A dissociation curve similar to that for O
exists
for CO
but is nearly linear over the physiologic range of PaCO
. Abnormal PCO
is always linked to
disorders of ventilation and is always associated with acid-base changes.
Hypercapnia:
Hypercapnia is PCO
> 45 mm Hg. Causes of hypercapnia are the same as those of
hypoventilation (see above). Disorders that increase CO
production (eg, hyperthyroidism, fever) when
combined with an inability to increase ventilation also cause hypercapnia.
Hypocapnia:
Hypocapnia is PCO
< 35 mm Hg. Hypocapnia is always caused by hyperventilation due
to pulmonary (eg, pulmonary edema or embolism), cardiac (eg, heart failure), metabolic (eg, acidosis),
drug-induced (eg, aspirin, progesterone), CNS (eg, infection, tumor, bleeding, increased intracranial
pressure), or physiologic (eg, pain, pregnancy) disorders or conditions. Hypocapnia is thought to directly
increase bronchoconstriction and lower the threshold for cerebral and myocardial ischemia, perhaps
===PAGE:2032===
through its effects on acid-base status.
Carboxyhemoglobinemia
CO binds to Hb with an affinity 210 times that of O
and prevents O
transport. Clinically toxic
carboxyhemoglobin levels are most often the result of exposure to exhaust fumes or from smoke
inhalation, although cigarette smokers have detectable levels. Patients with CO poisoning (
may present with nonspecific symptoms such as malaise, headache, and nausea. Because poisoning
often occurs during colder months (because of indoor use of combustible fuel heaters), symptoms may be
confused with a viral syndrome such as influenza. Clinicians must be alert to the possibility of CO
poisoning and measure levels of carboxyhemoglobin when indicated; COHb can be directly measured
from venous blood—an arterial sample is unnecessary.
Treatment is the administration of 100% O
(which shortens the half-life of carboxyhemoglobin) and
sometimes the use of a hyperbaric chamber.
Methemoglobinemia
Methemoglobin is Hb in which the iron is oxidized from its ferrous (Fe
2+
) to its ferric (Fe
3+
) state.
Methemoglobin does not carry O
and shifts the normal HbO
dissociation curve to the left, thereby
limiting the release of O
to the tissues. Methemoglobinemia is caused by certain drugs (eg, dapsone,
local anesthetics, nitrates, primaquine, sulfonamides) or, less commonly, by certain chemicals (eg, aniline
dyes, benzene derivatives). Methemoglobin level can be directly measured by co-oximetry (which emits 4
wavelengths of light and is capable of detecting methemoglobin, COHb, Hb, and HbO
) or may be
estimated by the difference between
the O
saturation calculated from the measured PaO
and the
directly measured SaO
. Patients with methemoglobinemia most often have asymptomatic cyanosis. In
severe cases, O
delivery is reduced to such a degree that symptoms of tissue hypoxia result, such as
confusion, angina, and myalgias. Stopping the causative drug or chemical exposure is often sufficient.
Rarely, methylene blue (a reducing agent; a 1% solution is given 1 to 2 mg/kg slowly IV) or exchange
transfusion is needed.
Tests of Respiratory Muscle Function
Maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP) and maximal expiratory pressure (MEP) measurements may aid in
evaluating respiratory muscle weakness.
MIP
is the pressure generated during maximal inspiratory effort against a closed system. It is usually
measured at residual volume (RV) because inspiratory muscle strength is inversely related to lung volume
(in a curvilinear fashion).
MEP
is measured during a similar maneuver at total lung capacity (TLC) because expiratory muscle
strength is directly related to lung volume (again in a curvilinear fashion). The information available from
these maneuvers is nonspecific, however, and cannot distinguish between insufficient effort, muscle
weakness, and a neurologic disorder.
The
maximal voluntary ventilation
(MVV) is another measure of the neuromuscular and respiratory
systems. The MVV is the total volume of air exhaled during 12 sec of rapid, deep breathing, which can be
compared with a predicted MVV defined as the forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
) × 35 or 40. A
significant difference between the predicted and measured MVV may indicate insufficient neuromuscular
reserve, abnormal respiratory mechanics, or an inadequate effort. Progressive reduction of tidal volumes
during the test is consistent with neuromuscular abnormalities but also occurs with gas trapping as a
result of disorders that cause airflow limitation.
The
sniff test
is sometimes used in suspected cases of diaphragmatic paralysis or paresis. During
continuous fluoroscopic examination, the patient makes a quick, short, strong inspiratory effort ("sniff").
This maneuver minimizes the contribution of the other muscles of respiration (eg, intercostals). A
===PAGE:2033===
weakened hemidiaphragm may have decreased excursion compared with the contralateral diaphragm or
may move upward paradoxically. Occasionally, electromyographic interrogation of the diaphragm and
phrenic nerve is done but is of uncertain diagnostic accuracy. Muscle and nerve biopsies may be helpful
in selected cases.
Exercise Testing
The two most common forms of exercise testing used to evaluate pulmonary disorders are the 6-min walk
test and full cardiopulmonary exercise testing.
Six-minute walk test:
This simple test measures the maximal distance that patients can walk at their
own pace in 6 min. The test assesses global functional capacity but does not provide specific information
on the individual systems involved in exercise capacity (ie, cardiac, pulmonary, hematologic,
musculoskeletal). Neither does it assess patient effort. This test is used for preoperative and
postoperative evaluation of patients undergoing lung transplantation and lung volume reduction surgery,
to monitor response to therapeutic interventions and pulmonary rehabilitation, and to predict mortality and
morbidity in patients with cardiac and pulmonary vascular disorders.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET):
This computerized test provides a breath-by-breath
analysis of respiratory gas exchange and cardiac function at rest and during a period of exercise, the
intensity of which is increased incrementally until symptoms limit testing. Information on airflow, O
consumption, CO
production, and heart rate are collected and used for computation of other variables;
ABGs may also be sampled. Exercise is done on a treadmill or on a bicycle ergometer; the ergometer may
be preferable because work rate can be directly measured.
CPET primarily determines whether patients have normal or reduced maximal exercise capacity
(VO
max) and, if so, suggests probable causes. CPET is used to define which organ systems contribute
to a patient's symptoms of exertional dyspnea and exercise intolerance and to what extent. The test is
also more sensitive for detecting early or subclinical disease than are less comprehensive tests that are
done at rest. Examples of applications include
• Assessment of exercise capacity for disability evaluation
• Preoperative assessment
• Determination of whether dyspnea symptoms result from cardiac or pulmonary problems in patients who
have disorders of both organ systems
•
Selection of candidates for cardiac transplantation
• Assessment of prognosis in selected disorders (eg, heart disease, pulmonary vascular disorders, and
cystic fibrosis)
CPET can also help gauge responses to therapeutic interventions and guide prescription of exercise in
rehabilitation programs. In following the response to therapy or disease progression, a steady-state CPET
involving at least 6 min of constant work at 50 to 70% of the maximal work rate achieved during a maximal
CPET may be more useful than an incremental, maximal CPET. Repeated evaluation at this work rate
over time provides comparable data and is sensitive to improvement or decline in cardiopulmonary
function.
Several variables are assessed during CPET, and no single one is diagnostic of a cause for exercise
limitation. Instead, an integrative approach using clinical data, trends during exercise, and recognition of
underlying patterns of physiologic responses is used.
===PAGE:2034===
Chapter 190. Diagnostic and Therapeutic Pulmonary Procedures
Introduction
Diagnostic tests besides pulmonary function testing ( include various types of chest imaging,
electrocardiography, and ventilation/perfusion scanning. Diagnostic procedures include bronchoscopy,
mediastinoscopy and mediastinotomy, pleural biopsy, thoracentesis, thoracoscopy and video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery, thoracotomy, transthoracic needle biopsy, and tube thoracostomy. Pulmonary
artery catheterization is discussed elsewhere (. Therapeutic procedures include chest physiotherapy and pulmonary rehabilitation.
Chest Imaging
Imaging includes use of x-rays, MRI, nuclear scanning, and ultrasonography. There are no absolute
contraindications to undergoing noninvasive imaging procedures.
X-Ray Techniques
X-ray techniques that are used to image the chest include plain x-rays, fluoroscopy, high-resolution and
helical (spiral) CT, and CT angiography.
Chest x-ray:
Plain chest x-rays and fluoroscopy are used to provide images of the lungs and
surrounding structures.
Plain chest x-rays
provide images of structures in and around the thorax and are most useful for
identifying abnormalities in the heart, lung parenchyma, pleura, chest wall, diaphragm, mediastinum, and
hilum. They are usually the initial test done to evaluate the lungs. The standard chest x-ray is taken from
back to front (posteroanterior view) to minimize x-ray scatter that could artifactually enlarge the cardiac
silhouette and from the side of the thorax (lateral view). Lordotic or oblique views can be obtained to
evaluate pulmonary nodules or to clarify abnormalities that may be due to superimposed structures,
although chest CT provides more information and has largely superseded these views. Lateral decubitus
views may be used to distinguish free-flowing from loculated pleural effusion, but again CT provides more
information. End-expiratory views can be used to detect small pneumothoraces. Screening chest x-rays
are often done but are almost never indicated; one exception is in asymptomatic patients with positive
tuberculin skin test results, in whom a single posteroanterior chest x-ray without a lateral view is used to
make decisions regarding treatment for pulmonary TB. Portable (usually anteroposterior) chest x-rays are
almost always suboptimal and should be used only when patients are too ill to be transported to the
radiology department.
Chest fluoroscopy
is the use of a continuous x-ray beam to image movement. It is useful for detecting
unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. During a sniff test, in which the patient is instructed to forcibly inhale
through the nose (or sniff), a paralyzed hemidiaphragm moves cranially (paradoxically) while the
unaffected hemidiaphragm moves caudally.
Computed tomography:
CT defines intrathoracic structures and abnormalities more clearly than does a
chest x-ray. Conventional (planar) CT provides multiple 10-mm-thick
cross-sectional images through the
thorax. Its main advantage is wide availability. Disadvantages are motion artifact and limited detail from
volume averaging of tissue within each 10-mm slice.
High-resolution CT (HRCT)
provides 1-mm-thick cross-sectional images. HRCT is particularly helpful in
evaluating interstitial lung diseases (eg, lymphangitic carcinomatosis, sarcoid, fibrosing alveolitis) and
bronchiectasis.
Helical (spiral) CT
provides multiplanar images of the entire chest as patients hold their breath for 8 to
10 sec while being moved continuously through the CT gantry. Helical CT is thought to be at least
equivalent to conventional CT for most purposes. Its main advantages are speed, less radiation exposure,
and an ability to construct 3-dimensional images. Software can also generate images of bronchial mucosa
(virtual bronchoscopy). Its main disadvantages are less availability and the requirement for breath-
===PAGE:2035===
holding, which can be difficult for patients with symptomatic pulmonary disease.
CT angiography
uses a bolus of IV contrast to highlight the pulmonary arteries, which is useful in
diagnosis of pulmonary embolism. Dye load is comparable to conventional angiography, but the test is
quicker and less invasive. Several studies have confirmed sufficient accuracy of CT angiography for the
detection of pulmonary emboli, so it has largely replaced ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scanning and
conventional pulmonary angiography (except in patients unable to tolerate contrast).
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI has a relatively limited role in pulmonary imaging but is preferred over CT in specific circumstances,
such as assessment of superior sulcus tumors, possible cysts, and other lesions that abut the chest wall.
In patients with suspected pulmonary embolism in whom IV contrast cannot be used, MRI can sometimes
identify large proximal emboli but usually is limited in this disorder. The use of MRI to evaluate pulmonary
hypertension is being studied, and this practice may become more common.
Advantages include absence of radiation exposure, excellent visualization of vascular structures, lack of
artifact from bone, and excellent soft-tissue contrast. Disadvantages include respiratory and cardiac
motion and the time it takes to do the procedure.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is primarily used to facilitate procedures such as thoracentesis and central venous
catheter insertion. Endobronchial ultrasonography is sometimes used in conjunction with fiberoptic
bronchoscopy to help localize masses and enlarged lymph nodes. Ultrasonography is also useful for
evaluating presence and size of pleural effusions.
Nuclear Scanning
Nuclear scanning techniques used to image the chest include ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scanning and
positron emission tomography (PET) scanning.
V/Q scanning:
V/Q scanning uses inhaled radionuclides to detect ventilation and IV radionuclides to
detect perfusion. Areas of ventilation without perfusion, perfusion without ventilation, or matched
increases and decreases in both can be detected with 6 to 8 views of the lungs.
V/Q scanning is most commonly used for diagnosing pulmonary embolism but has largely been replaced
by CT angiography. Split-function ventilation scanning, in which the degree of ventilation is quantified for
each lobe, is used to predict the effect of lobar or lung resection on pulmonary function; post-surgical
forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
) is estimated as the percentage of uptake of ventilation tracer in
the healthy fraction of the lungs multiplied by preoperative FEV
(in liters). A value of < 0.8 L (or < 40% of
that predicted for the patient) indicates limited pulmonary reserve and a high likelihood of unacceptably
high perioperative morbidity and mortality.
PET scanning:
PET scanning uses radioactively labeled glucose (fluorodeoxyglucose) to measure
metabolic activity in tissues. It is used in pulmonary disorders to determine whether lung nodules or
mediastinal lymph nodes harbor tumor (metabolic staging) and whether cancer is recurrent in previously
irradiated, scarred areas of the lung. PET is superior to CT for mediastinal staging because PET can
identify tumor in normal-sized lymph nodes and at extrathoracic sites, thereby decreasing the need for
invasive procedures such as mediastinoscopy and needle biopsy. Current spatial resolution of PET is 7 to
8 mm; thus, the test is not useful for lesions < 1 cm. PET reveals metastatic disease in up to 14% of
patients in whom it would not otherwise be suspected. The sensitivity of PET (80 to 95%) is comparable
to that of histologic tissue examination. False-positive results can occur with inflammatory lesions, such
as granulomas; slowly growing tumors (eg, bronchoalveolar carcinoma, carcinoid tumor, some metastatic
cancers) may cause false-negative results.
Newer combined CT-PET scanners may become the most
cost-effective technology for lung cancer diagnosis and staging.
Electrocardiography
===PAGE:2036===
Electrocardiography is a useful adjunct to other pulmonary tests because it provides information about the
right side of the heart ( and therefore pulmonary disorders such as chronic pulmonary
hypertension and pulmonary embolism.
Chronic pulmonary hypertension
leading to chronic right atrial and ventricular hypertrophy and dilation
may manifest as prominent P waves (P pulmonale) and ST-segment depression in leads II, III, and aVF;
rightward shift in QRS axis; inferior shift of the P wave vector; and decreased progression of R waves in
precordial leads.
COPD
patients commonly have low voltage due to interposition of hyperexpanded lungs between the
heart and ECG electrodes.
Pulmonary embolism
(submassive or massive) may cause acute right ventricle overload or failure,
which manifests as right axis deviation (R > S in V
), with S-wave deepening in lead I, Q-wave deepening
in lead III, and ST-segment elevation and T-wave inversion in lead III and the precordial leads (S
Q
T
pattern). Right bundle branch block also sometimes occurs.
Bronchoscopy
Bronchoscopy is introduction of an endoscope into the airways. Flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy has
replaced rigid bronchoscopy for virtually all diagnostic, and most therapeutic, indications.
Rigid bronchoscopy
is now used only when a wider aperture and channels are required for better
visualization and instrumentation such as when
• Investigating vigorous pulmonary hemorrhage (in which the rigid bronchoscope can better identify the
bleeding source and, with its larger suction channel, can better suction the blood and prevent
asphyxiation)
• Viewing and removing aspirated foreign bodies in young children
• Viewing obstructive endobronchial lesions (requiring laser debulking or stent placement)
Flexible bronchoscopes
are nearly all color video-compatible, facilitating airway visualization and
documentation of findings.
Diagnostically, flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy allows for
• Direct airway visualization down to, and including, subsegmental bronchi
• Sampling of respiratory secretions and cells via bronchial washings, brushings, and lavage of peripheral
airways and alveoli
• Biopsy of endobronchial, parenchymal, and mediastinal structures
Therapeutic uses include suctioning of retained secretions, endobronchial stent placement, and balloon
dilation of airway stenoses.
Contraindications: Absolute contraindications
include
• Untreatable life-threatening arrhythmias
• Inability to adequately oxygenate the patient during the procedure
• Acute respiratory failure with hypercapnia (unless the patient is intubated and ventilated)
Relative contraindications
include
===PAGE:2037===
• Uncooperative patient
• Recent MI
• High-grade tracheal obstruction
• Uncorrectable coagulopathy
Transbronchial biopsy should be done with caution in patients with uremia, superior vena cava
obstruction, or pulmonary hypertension because of increased risk of bleeding. Inspection of the airways
is safe in these patients, however.
Procedure:
Bronchoscopy should be done only by a pulmonologist or trained surgeon in a monitored
setting, typically a bronchoscopy suite, operating room, or ICU (for ventilated patients).
Patients should receive nothing by mouth for at least 4 h before bronchoscopy and have IV access,
intermittent BP monitoring, continuous pulse oximetry, and cardiac monitoring. Supplemental O
should
be available. Premedication with atropine 0.01 mg/kg IM or IV to decrease secretions and vagal tone is
common, although this practice has been called into question by recent studies. Shortacting
benzodiazepines, opioids, or both are generally given to patients before the procedure to decrease
anxiety, discomfort, and cough.
The pharynx and vocal cords are anesthetized with nebulized or aerosolized lidocaine (1 or 2%, to a
maximum of 250 to 300 mg for a 70-kg patient). The bronchoscope is lubricated with lidocaine jelly and
passed through the nostril or through the mouth with use of an oral airway or bite block. After inspecting
the nasopharynx and larynx, the clinician passes the bronchoscope through the vocal cords
during
inspiration, into the trachea and then further distally into the bronchi.
Several ancillary procedures can be done as needed, with or without fluoroscopic guidance:
•
Bronchial washing:
Saline is injected through the bronchoscope and subsequently aspirated from the
airways.
•
Bronchial brushing:
A brush is advanced through the bronchoscope and used to abrade suspicious
lesions to obtain cells.
•
Bronchoalveolar lavage:
50 to 200 mL of sterile saline is infused into the distal bronchoalveolar tree
and subsequently suctioned out, retrieving cells, protein, and microorganisms located at the alveolar
level. Local areas of pulmonary edema created by lavage may cause transient hypoxemia.
•
Transbronchial biopsy:
Forceps are advanced through the bronchoscope and airway to obtain
samples from one or more sites in the lung parenchyma. Transbronchial biopsy can be done without xray guidance, but evidence supports increased diagnostic yields and lower incidence of pneumothorax
when fluoroscopic guidance is used.
•
Transbronchial needle aspiration:
A retractable needle is inserted through the bronchoscope and can
be used to sample enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes or masses.
Patients are typically given supplemental O
and observed for 2 to 4 h after the procedure. Return of a
gag reflex and maintenance of O
saturation when not receiving O
are the two primary indices of
recovery. Standard practice is to obtain a posteroanterior chest x-ray after transbronchial lung biopsy to
exclude pneumothorax.
Complications:
Serious complications are uncommon; minor bleeding from a biopsy site and fever occur
in 10 to 15% of patients. Premedication can cause oversedation with respiratory depression,
hypotension, and cardiac arrhythmias. Rarely, topical anesthesia causes laryngospasm, bronchospasm,
===PAGE:2038===
seizures, methemoglobinemia with refractory cyanosis, or cardiac arrhythmias or arrest.
Bronchoscopy itself may cause minor laryngeal edema or injury with hoarseness, hypoxemia in patients
with compromised gas exchange, arrhythmias (most commonly premature atrial contractions, ventricular
premature beats, or bradycardia), and, very rarely, transmission of infection from suboptimally sterilized
equipment. Mortality is 1 to 4/10,000 patients. The elderly and patients with serious comorbidities (severe
COPD, coronary artery disease, pneumonia with hypoxemia, advanced cancers, mental dysfunction) are
at greatest risk.
Transbronchial biopsy can cause pneumothorax (2 to 5%) and significant hemorrhage (1 to 1.5%);
mortality increases to 12/10,000 patients, but doing the procedure can avoid the need for thoracotomy.
Mediastinoscopy and Mediastinotomy
Mediastinoscopy is introduction of an endoscope into the mediastinum. Mediastinotomy is surgical
opening of the mediastinum. The two are complementary. Mediastinotomy gives direct access to
aortopulmonary window lymph nodes, which are inaccessible by mediastinoscopy. Both procedures are
done to evaluate or excise mediastinal lymphadenopathy or masses and to stage cancers (eg, lung
cancer, esophageal cancer), although PET scanning is decreasing the need for these procedures for
cancer staging.
Contraindications:
Contraindications include the following:
• Superior vena cava syndrome
• Previous mediastinal irradiation
• Mediastinoscopy
• Median sternotomy
• Tracheostomy
• Aneurysm of the aortic arch
Mediastinoscopy and mediastinotomy are done by surgeons in an operating room using general
anesthesia. For mediastinoscopy, the soft tissue of the neck is bluntly dissected down to the trachea and
distally to the carina through an incision in the suprasternal notch. A mediastinoscope is inserted into the
space allowing access to the paratracheal, tracheobronchial, azygous, and subcarinal nodes and to the
superior posterior mediastinum. Anterior mediastinotomy (the Chamberlain procedure) is surgical entry to
the mediastinum through an incision in the parasternal 2nd left intercostal space, allowing access to
anterior mediastinal and aortopulmonary window lymph nodes, common sites of metastases for left upper
lobe lung cancers.
Complications:
Complications occur in < 1% of patients and include bleeding, infection, vocal cord
paralysis due to recurrent laryngeal nerve damage, chylothorax from duct injury, and pneumothorax.
Pleural Biopsy
Pleural biopsy is done to determine the cause of an exudative pleural effusion when
thoracentesis is not
diagnostic. The yield of closed pleural biopsy is about twice as high for TB than it is for pleural cancers.
Improved laboratory techniques, newer diagnostic tests for pleural fluid (eg, adenosine deaminase levels,
interferonγ
, PCR studies for suspected TB), and more widespread availability of thoracoscopy have
made the procedure less necessary.
Percutaneous pleural biopsy should be done only by a pulmonologist or surgeon trained in the procedure
and should be done only in patients who are cooperative and have no coagulation abnormalities.
Technique is essentially the same as that for thoracentesis and can be done at the bedside; no specific
===PAGE:2039===
additional patient preparation is necessary. At least 3 specimens obtained from one skin location, with 3,
6, and 9 o'clock positioning of the needle-cutting chamber, are needed for histology and culture.
Chest x-ray should be done after biopsy because of increased risk of complications, which are the same
as those for thoracentesis but with higher incidence of pneumothorax and hemorrhage.
Thoracentesis
Thoracentesis is puncture through the chest wall for the purpose of aspirating pleural fluid. It is used to
determine the etiology of a pleural effusion (diagnostic thoracentesis), to relieve dyspnea caused by
pleural fluid (therapeutic thoracentesis), and, occasionally, to carry out pleurodesis.
Contraindications:
No
absolute contraindications
to thoracentesis exist except refusal of or inability to
consent to the procedure.
Relative contraindications
include
• Uncertain fluid location by examination
• Minimal fluid volume
• Altered chest wall anatomy
• Pulmonary disease severe enough to make complications life threatening
• Bleeding diatheses or coagulopathy
• Uncontrolled coughing
Procedure:
Thoracentesis can be safely done at the patient's bedside or in an outpatient setting.
Presence and location of pleural fluid is verified by physical examination (chest percussion) or by imaging
techniques. Ultrasonography, CT, or both may be useful if chest x-rays are equivocal, if prior
thoracentesis attempts were unsuccessful, or if the fluid is loculated.
Thoracentesis is best done with the patient sitting upright and leaning slightly forward with arms
supported. Recumbent or supine thoracentesis (eg, in a ventilated patient) is possible but best done with
ultrasound or CT guidance. Only unstable patients and patients at high risk of decompensation due to
complications require monitoring (eg, pulse oximetry, ECG).
Under sterile conditions, 1 to 2% lidocaine is injected with a 25-gauge needle to anesthetize the skin. A
larger (20- or 22-gauge) needle with anesthetic is then inserted at the upper border of the rib one
intercostal space below the fluid level in the midscapular line. The needle is advanced with periodic
aspiration (to avoid inadvertent insertion into a blood vessel and intravascular injection), and anesthetic is
injected at progressively deeper levels. The most painful level after the skin is the parietal pleura, which
should be infiltrated the most. The needle is then advanced beyond the parietal pleura until pleural fluid is
aspirated, at which point the depth of the needle should be noted. A large-bore (16- to 19-gauge)
thoracentesis needle-catheter device is then attached to a 3-way stopcock, which is connected to a 30- to
50-mL syringe and tubing that drains into a container. The thoracentesis needle is passed through the
skin and subcutaneous tissue along the upper border of the rib into the effusion at about the same depth
noted during anesthesia. The catheter is inserted through the needle, and the needle is withdrawn to
decrease the risk of pneumothorax.
Pleural fluid can then be aspirated and, with a turn of the stopcock, collected in tubes or bags for further
evaluation. Fluid should be removed in stages not to exceed 1.5 L/day because hypotension and
pulmonary edema may occur with removal of > 1.5 L of fluid at one sitting or with rapid evacuation of the
pleural space using a vacuum or suction bottle. When large volumes of fluid must be removed, blood
pressure should be monitored continuously.
===PAGE:2040===
It has been standard practice to obtain a chest x-ray after thoracentesis to rule out pneumothorax,
document the extent of fluid removal, and view lung fields previously obscured by fluid, but evidence
suggests that routine chest x-ray is not necessary in asymptomatic patients.
Coughing is common as the lung re-expands; it does not signify pneumothorax. If the pleural process is
inflammatory, pleuritic pain, an audible pleural rub, or both may develop as fluid is removed because of
approximation of inflamed visceral and parietal pleura. When substantial volumes of fluid are removed
from the pleural space, the plunger on the syringe should be released periodically
during aspiration. If the
fluid in the syringe is drawn back into the pleural space when negative pressure on the syringe is
decreased, pleural pressure may be too negative, and the lung may be restricted from re-expanding
because of enveloping adhesions or tumor.
Complications:
Complications include
• Pneumothorax
• Hemoptysis due to lung puncture
• Re-expansion pulmonary edema or hypotension after rapid removal of large volumes of fluid
• Hemothorax due to damage to intercostal vessels
• Puncture of the spleen or liver
• Vasovagal syncope
Bloody fluid that does not clot in a collecting tube indicates that blood in the pleural space was not
iatrogenic, because free blood in the pleural space rapidly defibrinates.
Thoracoscopy and Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery
Thoracoscopy is introduction of an endoscope into the pleural space. Thoracoscopy can be used for
visualization (pleuroscopy) or for surgical procedures. Surgical thoracoscopy is more commonly referred
to as video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). Pleuroscopy can be done with the patient under
conscious sedation in an endoscopy suite, whereas VATS requires general anesthesia and is done in the
operating room. Both procedures induce a pneumothorax to create a clear view.
Thoracoscopy is used to evaluate exudative effusions and various pleural and lung lesions when
noninvasive testing is inconclusive. The diagnostic accuracy for malignant and tuberculous disease of the
pleura is 95%. The procedure is also used for pleurodesis in patients with recurrent malignant effusions
and to break up loculations in patients with empyema.
Indications for VATS include correction of spontaneous primary pneumothorax, bullectomy and lung
volume reduction surgery in emphysema, wedge resection, and, in some medical centers, lobectomy and
even pneumonectomy. Less common indications are excision of benign mediastinal masses; biopsy and
staging of esophageal cancer; sympathectomy for severe hyperhidrosis or causalgia; and repair of
traumatic injuries to the lung, pleura, and diaphragm.
Contraindications:
Contraindications are the same as those for thoracentesis; adhesive obliteration of
the pleural space is an absolute contraindication. Biopsy is contraindicated in patients with highly
vascular cancers, severe pulmonary hypertension, and severe bullous lung disease.
Procedure:
Although some pulmonologists do pleuroscopy, VATS is done by thoracic surgeons. Both
procedures are similar to chest tube insertion; a trocar is inserted into an intercostal space through a skin
incision, through which a thoracoscope is inserted. Additional incisions permit the use of video cameras
and accessory instruments.
After thoracoscopy, a chest tube is usually required for 1 to 2 days.
===PAGE:2041===
Complications:
Complications are similar to those of thoracentesis. Postprocedural fever is common
(16%); pleural tears causing air leak, subcutaneous emphysema, or both are less common (2% each).
Hemorrhage, lung perforation, and gas embolism are serious but rare.
Thoracotomy
Thoracotomy is surgical opening of the chest. It is done to evaluate and treat pulmonary problems when
noninvasive procedures are nondiagnostic or unlikely to be definitive.
Contraindications:
Contraindications are those general to surgery and include coagulopathy that cannot
be corrected, acute cardiac ischemia, and instability or insufficiency of major organ systems.
Procedure:
Three basic approaches are used.
• Limited anterior or lateral thoracotomy: A 6- to 8-cm intercostal incision is made to approach the anterior
structures.
• Posterolateral thoracotomy: The posterolateral approach gives access to pleurae, hilum, mediastinum,
and the entire lung.
• Sternal splitting incision (median sternotomy): When access to both lungs is desired, as in lung volume
reduction surgery, a sternal splitting incision is used.
Patients undergoing limited thoracotomy require a chest tube for 1 to 2 days and in many cases can leave
the hospital in 3 to 4 days. The principal indications for thoracotomy are lobectomy and pneumonectomy
(eg, lung cancer surgery). Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery has replaced thoracotomy for open
pleural and lung biopsies.
Complications:
Complications are greater than those for any other pulmonary biopsy procedure
because of the risks of general anesthesia, surgical trauma, and a longer hospital stay with more
postoperative discomfort.
Hemorrhage, infection, pneumothorax, bronchopleural fistula, and reactions to
anesthetics are the greatest hazards. Mortality for exploratory thoracotomy ranges from 0.5 to 1.8%.
Transthoracic Needle Biopsy
Transthoracic needle biopsy of thoracic or mediastinal structures uses a cutting needle to aspirate a core
of tissue for histologic analysis. Transthoracic needle biopsy is done to evaluate peripheral lung nodules
or masses; hilar, mediastinal, and pleural abnormalities; and undiagnosed infiltrates or pneumonias when
bronchoscopy is contraindicated or nondiagnostic. When done with the use of CT guidance and with a
skilled cytopathologist in attendance, transthoracic needle biopsy confirms the diagnosis of cancer with >
95% accuracy. Needle biopsy yields an accurate diagnosis in benign processes only 50 to 60% of the
time.
Contraindications:
Contraindications are similar to those of thoracentesis. Additional contraindications
include the following:
• Mechanical ventilation
• Contralateral pneumonectomy
• Suspected vascular lesions
• Putrid lung abscess
• Hydatid cyst
• Pulmonary hypertension
===PAGE:2042===
• Bullous lung disease
• Intractable coughing
• Coagulopathy, platelet count < 50,000/
μ
L, and other bleeding diatheses
Procedure:
Transthoracic needle biopsy is usually done by an interventional radiologist, often with a
cytopathologist present. Under sterile conditions, local anesthesia, and imaging guidance—usually CT
but sometimes ultrasonography for pleural-based lesions—a biopsy needle is passed into the suspected
lesion while patients hold their breath. Lesions are aspirated with or without saline; 2 or 3 samples are
collected for cytologic and bacteriologic processing. After the procedure, fluoroscopy and chest x-rays are
used to rule out pneumothorax and hemorrhage. Core needle biopsies are used to obtain a cylinder of
tissue suitable for histologic examination.
Complications:
Complications include pneumothorax (10 to 37%), hemoptysis (10 to 25%), parenchymal
hemorrhage, air embolism, and subcutaneous emphysema.
Tube Thoracostomy
Tube thoracostomy is insertion of a tube into the pleural space. It is used to drain air or fluid from the
chest (eg, for large or recurrent effusion refractory to thoracentesis, pneumothorax, complicated
parapneumonic effusions, empyema, or hemothorax) and to do pleurodesis or fibrinolytic adhesiolysis.
Procedure:
Chest tube insertion is best done by a physician trained in the procedure. Other physicians
can handle emergency situations (eg, tension pneumothorax) using a needle and syringe. Tube insertion
requires 1 or 2 hemostats or Kelly clamps, a silk suture, gauze dressing, and a chest tube. Recommended
tube sizes are 16 to 24 French (F) for pneumothorax; 20 to 24 F for malignant pleural effusion; 28 to 36 F
for bronchopleural fistula, complicated parapneumonic effusions, and empyema; and 32 to 40 F for
hemothorax.
The insertion site and patient position depend on whether air or fluid is being drained. For pneumothorax,
the tube is usually inserted in the 4th intercostal space and for other indications in the 5th or 6th
intercostal space, in the midaxillary line with the ipsilateral arm abducted above the head.
No specific patient preparation is necessary except, in some cases, conscious sedation. Under sterile
conditions, the skin, subcutaneous tissue, rib periosteum, and parietal pleura are locally anesthetized,
more generously than for thoracentesis (. Proper location is confirmed by return of air or fluid
in the anesthetic syringe. A purse-string suture can be placed but not yet tied around the site while the
anesthetic takes effect. A 2-cm skin incision is made, and the intercostal soft tissue down to the pleura is
then bluntly dissected by advancing a clamped hemostat or Kelly clamp and opening it; the pleura is then
perforated with the clamped instrument and opened in the same way. A finger can be used to widen the
tract and confirm entry into the pleural space. The chest tube, with a clamp grasping the tip, is inserted
through the tract and directed inferoposteriorly for effusions, or apically for pneumothorax, until all of the
tube's holes are inside the chest wall. The pursestring suture is closed, the tube is sutured to the chest
wall, and a sterile dressing with petroleum gauze to help seal the wound is placed over the site.
The tube is connected to water seal to prevent air from entering the chest through the tube and to allow
drainage without suction (for effusions or empyema) or with suction (for
pneumothorax). Posteroanterior
and lateral chest x-rays are obtained after insertion to check the tube's position.
The tube is removed when the condition for which it was placed resolves. In the case of pneumothorax,
suction is stopped and the tube is placed on water seal for several hours to ensure that the air leak has
stopped and that the lung remains expanded. At the moment of removal, the patient is asked to take a
deep breath and then to forcibly exhale; the tube is removed during exhalation and the site is covered
with petroleum gauze, a sequence that reduces the chance of pneumothorax during removal. For
effusions or hemothorax, the tube is typically removed when the drainage is < 100 mL/day.
===PAGE:2043===
Complications:
Complications include the following:
• Malpositioning of the tube in the lung parenchyma, in the lobar fissure, under the diaphragm, or
subcutaneously
• Clotting, kinking, or dislodgement of the tube, requiring replacement
• Re-expansion pulmonary edema
• Subcutaneous emphysema
• Infection of residual pleural fluid or recurrent effusion
• Pulmonary or diaphragmatic laceration
• Rarely perforation of other structures
Chest Physiotherapy
Chest physiotherapy consists of external mechanical maneuvers, such as chest percussion, postural
drainage, and vibration, to augment mobilization and clearance of airway secretions. It is indicated for
patients in whom cough is insufficient to clear thick, tenacious, or loculated secretions. Examples include
patients with cystic fibrosis, bronchiectasis, lung abscess, neuromuscular disorders, and pneumonias in
dependent lung regions.
Contraindications:
Contraindications all are relative and include the following:
• Discomfort caused by physical positions or manipulations
• Anticoagulation
• Rib or vertebral fractures or osteoporosis
• Recent hemoptysis
Procedure:
Chest physiotherapy may be administered by a respiratory therapist, although the
techniques can often be taught to family members of patients.
The most common procedure used is postural drainage and chest percussion, in which the patient is
rotated to facilitate drainage of secretions from a specific lobe or segment while being clapped with
cupped hands to loosen and mobilize retained secretions that can then be expectorated or drained. The
procedure is somewhat uncomfortable and tiring for the patient. Alternatives to chest percussion by hand
include use of mechanical vibrators and inflatable vests.
Other methods that help clear airways include using controlled patterns of breathing, positive expiratory
pressure devices to maintain airway patency, and ultra-low-frequency airway oscillation devices to
mobilize sputum. The methods of airway clearance are comparable, and methods should be selected
based on individual patient needs and preferences.
Complications:
Complications are unusual but include position-related hypoxia and aspiration of
secretions in other lung regions.
Pulmonary Rehabilitation
Pulmonary rehabilitation is the use of exercise, education, and behavioral intervention to enhance quality
of life. It is indicated for any condition in which respiratory symptoms restrict activity (eg, COPD, interstitial
lung disease, neuromuscular disorders causing chest wall weakness) and for respiratory retraining after
prolonged ventilator dependence.
===PAGE:2044===
For many patients with chronic respiratory disorders, medical therapy only partially allays the symptoms
and complications of the disorder. A comprehensive program of pulmonary rehabilitation may lead to
significant clinical improvement by reducing shortness of breath, increasing exercise tolerance, and, to a
lesser extent, decreasing the number of hospitalizations. However, these programs do not improve
survival. There are no complications from pulmonary rehabilitation beyond those expected from physical
exertion and exercise.
Contraindications:
Contraindications are relative and include comorbidities that could complicate
attempts to increase a patient's level of exercise (eg, untreated angina, left ventricular dysfunction).
These comorbidities do not preclude application of other components of pulmonary rehabilitation
programs, however.
Procedure:
Pulmonary rehabilitation is best administered as part of an integrated program of exercise
training, education, and psychosocial and behavioral intervention by a
team of physicians, nurses,
respiratory therapists, physical and occupational therapists, and psychologists or social workers.
Exercise training
involves aerobic exercise and respiratory muscle and extremity strength training; lower
extremity strength training may be particularly important for patients with COPD.
Education
revolves around smoking cessation; teaching breathing strategies (such as pursed-lip
breathing, in which exhalations are begun against closed lips to decrease respiratory rate, thereby
decreasing gas trapping); principles of conserving physical energy; treatment options, including drug
therapy; and advanced-care planning.
Psychosocial interventions
involve counseling and feedback for the depression, anxieties, and fear
that obstruct the patient's full participation in activities.
===PAGE:2045===
Chapter 191. Asthma
Introduction
Asthma is a disease of diffuse airway inflammation caused by a variety of triggering stimuli
resulting in partially or completely reversible bronchoconstriction. Symptoms and signs include
dyspnea, chest tightness, cough, and wheezing. The diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination, and pulmonary function tests. Treatment involves controlling triggering factors
and drug therapy, most commonly with inhaled
β
-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids.
Prognosis is good with treatment.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of asthma has increased continuously since the 1970s, and it now affects an estimated 4
to 7% of people worldwide. More than 20 million people in the US are affected. Asthma is one of the most
common chronic diseases of childhood, affecting more than 6 million children; it occurs more frequently in
boys before puberty and in girls after puberty. It also occurs more frequently in blacks and Puerto Ricans.
Despite its increasing prevalence, however, there has been a recent decline in mortality. About 4000
deaths occur from asthma annually in the US. However, the death rate is 5 times higher for blacks than
for whites. Asthma is the leading cause of hospitalization for children and is the number one chronic
condition causing elementary school absenteeism. In 2002, the total cost of asthma care was $14 billion.
Etiology
Development of asthma is multifactorial and depends on the interactions among multiple susceptibility
genes and environmental factors.
Susceptibility genes
are thought to include those for T-helper 1 and 2 (T
H
1 and T
H
2) cells, IgE,
cytokines (IL-3, -4, -5, -9, and -13), granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), tumor
necrosis factorα
(TNFα
), and the
ADAM33
gene, which may stimulate airway smooth muscle and
fibroblast proliferation or regulate cytokine production.
Environmental factors
may include the following:
• Allergen exposure
• Diet
• Perinatal factors
Evidence clearly implicates household allergens (eg, dust mite, cockroach, pets) and other environmental
allergens in disease development in older children and adults. Diets low in vitamins C and E and in
ω
-3
fatty acids have been linked to asthma, as has obesity. Asthma has also been linked to perinatal factors,
such as young maternal age, poor maternal nutrition, prematurity, low birthweight, and lack of
breastfeeding.
On the other hand, endotoxin exposure early in life can induce tolerance and may be protective. Air
pollution is not definitively linked to disease development, though it may trigger exacerbations. The role of
childhood exposure to cigarette smoke is controversial, with some studies finding a contributory and some
a protective effect.
Genetic and environmental components may interact by determining the balance between T
H
1 and T
H
cell lineages. Infants may be born with a predisposition toward proallergic and proinflammatory T
H
immune responses, characterized by growth and activation of eosinophils and IgE production. Early
childhood exposure to bacterial and viral infections and endotoxins may shift the body to T
H
1 responses,
which suppresses T
H
2 cells and induces tolerance. Trends in developed countries toward smaller
===PAGE:2046===
families with fewer children, cleaner indoor environments, and
early use of vaccinations and antibiotics
may deprive children of these T
H
2-suppressing, tolerance-inducing exposures and may partly explain the
continuous increase in asthma prevalence in developed countries (the hygiene hypothesis).
Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS):
Indoor exposures to nitrogen oxide and volatile
organic compounds are implicated in the development of RADS, a persistent asthma-like syndrome in
people with no history of asthma (. RADS appears to be distinct from asthma and may be, on
occasion, a form of environmental lung disease. However, RADS and asthma have many clinical
similarities (eg, wheezing, dyspnea, cough), and both may respond to corticosteroids.
Pathophysiology
Asthma involves
• Bronchoconstriction
• Airway edema and inflammation
• Airway hyperreactivity
• Airway remodeling
In patients with asthma, T
H
2 cells and other cell types—notably, eosinophils and mast cells, but also
other CD4+ subtypes and neutrophils—form an extensive inflammatory infiltrate in the airway epithelium
and smooth muscle, leading to airway remodeling (ie, desquamation, subepithelial fibrosis, angiogenesis,
smooth muscle hypertrophy). Hypertrophy of smooth muscle narrows the airways and increases reactivity
to allergens, infections, irritants, parasympathetic stimulation (which causes release of pro-inflammatory
neuropeptides, such as substance P, neurokinin A, and calcitonin gene-related peptide), and other
triggers of bronchoconstriction. Additional contributors to airway hyperreactivity include loss of inhibitors
of bronchoconstriction (epithelium-derived relaxing factor, prostaglandin E
) and loss of other substances
called endopeptidases that metabolize endogenous bronchoconstrictors. Mucus plugging and peripheral
blood eosinophilia are additional classic findings in asthma and may be epiphenomena of airway
inflammation.
Triggers:
Common triggers of an asthma attack include
• Environmental and occupational allergens (numerous)
• Infections
• Exercise
• Inhaled irritants
• Emotion
• Aspirin
• Gastroesophageal reflux
Infectious triggers in young children include respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovirus, and parainfluenza virus
infection. In older children and adults, URIs (particularly with rhinovirus) and pneumonia are common
infectious triggers. Exercise can be a trigger, especially in cold or dry environments. Inhaled irritants, such
as air pollution, cigarette smoke, perfumes, and cleaning products, are often involved. Emotions such as
anxiety, anger, and excitement sometimes trigger attacks. Aspirin is a trigger in up to 30% of older patients
and in patients with more severe asthma. Aspirin-induced asthma is typically accompanied by nasal
polyps with nasal and sinus congestion. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a common
===PAGE:2047===
exacerbating factor among some patients with asthma, possibly via esophageal acid-induced reflex
bronchoconstriction or by microaspiration of acid. Allergic rhinitis often coexists with asthma; it is unclear
whether the two are different manifestations of the same allergic process or whether rhinitis is a discrete
asthma trigger.
Response:
In the presence of triggers, there is reversible airway narrowing and uneven lung ventilation.
Relative perfusion exceeds relative ventilation in lung regions distal to narrowed airways; thus, alveolar
O
tensions fall and alveolar CO
tensions rise. Most patients can compensate by hyperventilating, but in
severe exacerbations, diffuse bronchoconstriction causes severe gas trapping, and the respiratory
muscles are put at a marked mechanical disadvantage so that the work of breathing increases. Under
these conditions, hypoxemia worsens and PaCO
rises. Respiratory and metabolic acidosis may result
and, if left untreated, cause respiratory and cardiac arrest.
Classification
Unlike, eg, hypertension, in which one parameter (BP) defines the severity of the disorder and the
efficacy of treatment, asthma causes a number of clinical and testing abnormalities. Also unlike most
hypertension, asthma manifestations typically wax and wane. Thus, monitoring (and studying) asthma
requires a consistent terminology and defined benchmarks.
Severity
is the intrinsic intensity of the disease process (ie, how bad it is). Severity can usually be
assessed directly only before treatment is started, because patients who have responded
well to
treatment by definition have few symptoms. Asthma severity is categorized as
• Intermittent
• Mild persistent
• Moderate persistent
• Severe persistent
The term status asthmaticus describes severe, intense, prolonged bronchospasm that is resistant to
treatment.
Control
is the degree to which symptoms, impairments, and risks are minimized by treatment. Control is
the parameter assessed in patients receiving treatment. Good control is the goal of asthma management
whatever the disease severity. Control is classified as
• Well controlled
• Not well controlled
• Very poorly controlled
Severity and control are assessed in terms of patient impairment and risk (see
Table 191-1
).
Impairment
refers to the frequency and intensity of patients' symptoms and functional limitations.
Impairment is assessed by spirometry, mainly forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
), and the ratio of
FEV
to forced vital capacity (FVC), as well as clinical features such as
• How often symptoms are experienced
• How often the patient awakens at night
• How often the patient uses a short-acting
β
-agonist for symptom relief
===PAGE:2048===
• How often asthma interferes with normal activity
Risk
refers to the likelihood of future exacerbations or decline in lung function and the risk of adverse
drug effects. Risk is assessed by long-term trends in spirometry and clinical features such as
• Frequency of need for oral corticosteroids
• Need for hospitalization
• Need for ICU admission
• Need for intubation
It is important to remember that the severity category does not predict how serious an exacerbation a
patient may have. For example, a patient who has mild asthma with long periods of no or mild symptoms
and normal pulmonary function may have a severe, life-threatening exacerbation.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with mild asthma are typically asymptomatic between exacerbations. Patients with more severe
disease and those with exacerbations experience dyspnea, chest tightness, audible wheezing, and
coughing. Coughing may be the only symptom in some patients (cough-variant asthma). Symptoms can
follow a circadian rhythm and worsen during sleep, often around 4 AM. Many patients with more severe
disease waken during the night (nocturnal asthma).
Signs include wheezing, pulsus paradoxus (ie, a fall of systolic BP > 10 mm Hg during inspiration—, tachypnea, tachycardia, and visible efforts to breathe (use of neck and suprasternal [accessory]
muscles, upright posture, pursed lips, inability to speak). The expiratory phase of respiration is prolonged,
with an inspiratory:expiratory ratio of at least 1:3. Wheezes can be present through both phases or just on
expiration, but patients with severe bronchoconstriction may have no audible wheezing because of
markedly limited airflow.
Patients with a severe exacerbation and impending respiratory failure typically have some combination of
altered consciousness, cyanosis, pulsus paradoxus > 15 mm Hg, O
saturation (O
2sat
) < 90%, PaCO
>
45 mm Hg, or hyperinflation. Rarely, pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum is seen on chest x-ray.
Symptoms and signs disappear between acute attacks, although soft wheezes may be audible during
forced expiration at rest, or after exercise in some asymptomatic patients. Hyperinflation of the lungs may
alter the chest wall in patients with long-standing uncontrolled asthma, causing a barrel-shaped thorax.
All symptoms and signs are nonspecific, are reversible with timely treatment, and typically are brought on
by exposure to one or more triggers.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Pulmonary function testing
Diagnosis is based on history and physical examination and is confirmed with pulmonary function tests.
Diagnosis of causes and the exclusion of other disorders that cause wheezing are also important. Asthma
and COPD are sometimes easily confused; they cause similar symptoms and produce similar results on
pulmonary function tests but differ in important biologic ways that are not always clinically apparent.
Pulmonary function tests:
Patients suspected of having asthma should undergo pulmonary
===PAGE:2049===
[Table 191-1.
Classification of Asthma Control*]
function testing to confirm and quantify the severity and reversibility of airway obstruction. Pulmonary
function data quality is effort-dependent and requires patient education before the test. If it is safe to do
so, bronchodilators should be stopped before the test: 6 h for short-acting
β
-agonists, such as albuterol;
8 h for ipratropium; 12 to 36 h for theophylline; 24 h for long-acting
β
-agonists, such as salmeterol and
formoterol; and 48 h for tiotropium.
Spirometry (see
Chapter 189
) should be done before and after inhalation of a short-acting bronchodilator.
Signs of airflow limitation before bronchodilator inhalation include reduced FEV
and a reduced
FEV
/FVC ratio. The FVC may also be decreased because of gas trapping, such that lung volume
measurements may show an increase in the residual volume, the functional residual capacity, or both. An
improvement in FEV
of > 12% or an increase ≥ 10% of predicted FEV
in response to bronchodilator
treatment confirms reversible airway obstruction, although absence of this finding should not preclude a
therapeutic trial of bronchodilators. Spirometry should be repeated at least every 1 to 2 yr in patients with
asthma to monitor disease progression.
Flow-volume loops should also be reviewed to diagnose vocal cord dysfunction, a common cause of
upper airway obstruction that mimics asthma.
Provocative testing, in which inhaled methacholine (or alternatives, such as inhaled histamine, adenosine,
or bradykinin, or exercise testing) is used to provoke bronchoconstriction, is indicated for patients
suspected of having asthma who have normal findings on spirometry and flow-volume testing, and for
patients suspected of having cough-variant asthma, provided there are no contraindications.
Contraindications include FEV
< 1 L or < 50%, recent MI or stroke, and severe hypertension (systolic BP
> 200 mm Hg; diastolic BP > 100 mm Hg). A decline in FEV
of > 20% on provocative testing supports
the diagnosis of asthma. However, FEV
may decline in response to these drugs in other disorders, such
as COPD.
Other tests:
Other tests may be helpful in some circumstances:
• Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO)
• Chest x-ray
• Allergy testing
DLCO testing can help distinguish asthma from COPD. Values are normal or elevated in asthma and
usually reduced in COPD, particularly in patients with emphysema.
A chest x-ray may help exclude some causes of asthma or alternative diagnoses, such as heart failure or
pneumonia. The chest x-ray in asthma is usually normal but may show hyperinflation or segmental
atelectasis, a sign of mucous plugging. Infiltrates, especially those that come and go and that are
associated with findings of central bronchiectasis, suggest allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (see
p.
).
Allergy testing may be indicated for children whose history suggests allergic triggers (particularly for
allergic rhinitis) because these children may benefit from immunotherapy. It should be considered for
adults whose history indicates relief of symptoms with allergen avoidance and for those in whom a trial of
therapeutic anti-IgE antibody therapy ( is being considered. Skin testing and measurement of
allergen-specific IgE via radioallergosorbent testing (RAST) can identify specific allergic triggers (.
Elevated blood eosinophils (> 400 cells/
μ
L) and nonspecific IgE (> 150 IU) are suggestive but not
diagnostic of allergic asthma because they can be elevated in other conditions.
===PAGE:2050===
Sputum evaluation for eosinophils is not commonly done; finding large numbers of eosinophils is
suggestive of asthma but is neither sensitive nor specific.
Peak expiratory flow (PEF) measurements with inexpensive handheld flow meters are recommended for
home monitoring of disease severity and for guiding therapy.
Evaluation of exacerbations:
Patients with asthma with an acute exacerbation should have certain
tests:
• Pulse oximetry
• PEF or FEV
measurement
All 3 measures help establish the severity of an exacerbation and document treatment response. PEF
values are interpreted in light of the patient's personal best, which may vary widely among patients who
are equally well controlled. A 15 to 20% reduction from this baseline indicates a significant exacerbation.
When baseline values are not known, the percent predicted value gives a general idea of airflow
limitation but not the individual patient's degree of worsening.
Chest x-ray is not necessary for most exacerbations but should be done in patients with symptoms
suggestive of pneumonia or pneumothorax.
ABG measurements should be taken in patients with marked respiratory distress or symptoms and signs
of impending respiratory failure.
Prognosis
Asthma resolves in many children, but for as many as 1 in 4, wheezing persists into adulthood or relapse
occurs in later years. Female sex, smoking, earlier age of onset, sensitization to household dust mites,
and airway hyperresponsiveness are risk factors for persistence and relapse.
About 4000 deaths/yr in the US are attributable to asthma, most of which are preventable with treatment.
Thus, the prognosis is good with adequate access and adherence to treatment. Risk factors for death
include increasing requirements for oral corticosteroids before hospitalization, previous hospitalization for
acute exacerbations, and lower peak flow measurements at presentation. Several studies show that use
of inhaled corticosteroids decreases hospital admission and mortality rates.
Over time, the airways in some patients with asthma undergo permanent structural changes (remodeling)
that prevent return to normal lung functioning. Early aggressive use of anti-inflammatory drugs may help
prevent this remodeling.
Treatment
• Control of triggers
• Drug therapy
• Monitoring
• Patient education
• Treatment of acute exacerbations
Treatment objectives are to minimize impairment and risk, including preventing exacerbations and
minimizing chronic symptoms, including nocturnal awakenings; to minimize the need for emergency
department visits or hospitalizations; to maintain baseline (normal) pulmonary function and activity levels;
and to avoid adverse treatment effects.
===PAGE:2051===
Control of triggering factors:
Triggering factors in some patients may be controlled with use of
synthetic fiber pillows and impermeable mattress covers and frequent washing of bed sheets,
pillowcases, and blankets in hot water. Upholstered furniture, soft toys, carpets, and pets should be
removed (dust mites, animal dander). Dehumidifiers should be used in basements and in other poorly
aerated, damp rooms (molds). Steam treatment of homes diminishes dust mite allergens. House cleaning
and extermination to eliminate cockroach exposure is especially important. Although control of triggering
factors is more difficult in urban environments, the importance of these measures is not diminished. Highefficiency particulate air (HEPA) vacuums and filters may relieve symptoms, but beneficial effects on
pulmonary function and on the need for drugs are unproved. Sulfite-sensitive patients should avoid red
wine. Nonallergenic triggers, such as cigarette smoke, strong odors, irritant fumes, cold temperatures,
high humidity, and exercise, should also be avoided or controlled when possible. Avoidance of viral URIs
is also important. Patients with aspirin-induced asthma can use acetaminophen, choline magnesium
salicylate, or selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors in place of NSAIDs. Asthma is a relative
contraindication to the use of nonselective
β
-blockers, including topical formulations, but cardioselective
drugs (eg, metoprolol, atenolol) probably have no adverse effects.
Drug therapy:
Major drug classes commonly used in the treatment of chronic asthma and asthma
exacerbations include
• Bronchodilators (
β
-agonists, anticholinergics)
• Corticosteroids
• Leukotriene modifiers
• Mast cell stabilizers
• Methylxanthines
Drugs in these classes (see
Table 191-2
) are inhaled or taken orally; inhaled drugs come in aerosolized and powdered forms. Use of
aerosolized forms with a spacer or holding chamber facilitates deposition of the drug in the airways rather
than the pharynx; patients are advised to wash and dry their spacers after each use to prevent bacterial
contamination. In addition, use of aerosolized forms requires coordination between actuation of the
inhaler (drug delivery) and inhalation; powdered forms reduce the need for coordination, because drug is
delivered only when the patient inhales. In addition, powdered forms reduce the release of fluorocarbon
propellants into the environment.
β
-Agonists
relax bronchial smooth muscle, decrease mast cell degranulation and histamine release,
inhibit microvascular leakage into the airways, and increase mucociliary clearance.
β
-Agonists come in
short- and long-acting preparations (see
Table 191-2
). Short-acting
β
-agonists (eg, albuterol) 2 puffs
inhaled q 4 h prn are the drug of choice for relieving acute bronchoconstriction and
preventing exerciseinduced asthma. They are not used for long-term maintenance. They take effect within minutes and are
active for up to 6 to 8 h, depending on the drug. Tachycardia and tremor are the most common acute
adverse effects of inhaled
β
-agonists and are dose-related. Mild hypokalemia occurs uncommonly. Use
of levalbuterol (a solution containing the
R
-isomer of albuterol) theoretically minimizes adverse effects,
but its long-term efficacy and safety are unproved. Oral
β
-agonists have more systemic effects and
generally should be avoided.
Long-acting
β
-agonists (eg, salmeterol) are active for up to 12 h and are used for moderate and severe
asthma but should never be used as monotherapy. They interact synergistically with inhaled
corticosteroids and permit lower dosing of corticosteroids. The safety of regular long-term use of
β
-
agonists is controversial. Long-acting
β
-agonists may increase the risk of asthma-related death.
Therefore, when treating patients with asthma, salmeterol should be used only as additional therapy, not
monotherapy, for patients whose condition is not adequately controlled with other asthma controllers (eg,
low- to mediumdose inhaled corticosteroids) or whose disease severity clearly warrants additional
===PAGE:2052===
maintenance therapies. Daily use of
β
-agonists, increased dosing or diminishing effects, or use of ≥ 1
canisters a month suggests inadequate control and the need to begin or intensify other therapies.
[Table 191-2.
Drug Treatment of Chronic Asthma*]
Anticholinergics
relax bronchial smooth muscle through competitive inhibition of muscarinic (M
)
cholinergic receptors. Ipratropium may have an additive effect when combined with short-acting
β
-
agonists. Adverse effects include pupillary dilation, blurred vision, and dry mouth. Tiotropium is a 24-h
inhaled anticholinergic that has not been adequately evaluated for asthma use.
Corticosteroids
inhibit airway inflammation, reverse
β
-receptor down-regulation, and inhibit cytokine
production and adhesion protein activation. They block the late response (but not the early response) to
inhaled allergens. Routes of administration include oral, IV, and inhaled. In acute asthma exacerbation,
early use of systemic corticosteroids often aborts the exacerbation, decreases the need for
hospitalization, prevents relapse, and speeds recovery. Oral and IV routes are equally effective. Inhaled
corticosteroids have no role in acute exacerbation but are indicated for long-term suppression, control,
and reversal of inflammation and symptoms. They substantially reduce the need for maintenance oral
corticosteroid therapy. Adverse local effects of inhaled corticosteroids include dysphonia and oral
candidiasis, which
can be prevented or minimized by having the patient use a spacer, gargle with water
after corticosteroid inhalation, or both. Systemic effects are all dose-related, can occur with oral or inhaled
forms, and occur mainly with inhaled doses > 800
μ
g/day. They include suppression of the adrenalpituitary axis, osteoporosis, cataracts, skin atrophy, hyperphagia, and easy bruisability. Whether inhaled
corticosteroids suppress growth in children is controversial: Most children reach their predicted adult
height. Latent TB may be reactivated by systemic corticosteroid use.
Mast cell stabilizers
inhibit histamine release from mast cells, reduce airway hyperresponsiveness, and
block the early and late responses to allergens. They are given by inhalation prophylactically to patients
with exercise-induced or allergen-induced asthma. They are ineffective once symptoms have occurred.
They are the safest of all antiasthmatic drugs but the least effective.
Leukotriene modifiers
are taken orally and can be used for long-term control and prevention of
symptoms in patients with mild persistent to severe persistent asthma. The main adverse effect is liver
enzyme elevation (which occurs with zileuton). Although rare, patients have developed a clinical
syndrome resembling that of Churg-Strauss syndrome.
Methylxanthines
relax bronchial smooth muscle (probably by inhibiting phosphodiesterase) and may
improve myocardial and diaphragmatic contractility through unknown mechanisms. Methylxanthines
appear to inhibit intracellular release of Ca, decrease microvascular leakage into the airway mucosa, and
inhibit the late response to allergens. They decrease the infiltration of eosinophils into bronchial mucosa
and of T lymphocytes into epithelium. Methylxanthines are used for long-term control as an adjunct to
β
-
agonists; extended-release theophylline helps manage nocturnal asthma. Theophylline is falling into
disuse because of its many adverse effects and interactions compared with other drugs. Adverse effects
include headache, vomiting, cardiac arrhythmias, and seizures. Methylxanthines have a narrow
therapeutic index; multiple drugs (any metabolized by the cytochrome P-450 pathway, eg, macrolide
antibiotics) and conditions (eg, fever, liver disease, heart failure) alter methylxanthine metabolism and
elimination. Serum theophylline levels should be monitored periodically and maintained between 5 and 15
μ
g/mL (28 and 83
μ
mol/L).
Immunomodulators include omalizumab, an anti-IgE antibody developed for use in severely allergic
patients with asthma who have elevated IgE levels. Omalizumab may decrease asthma exacerbations,
decreases corticosteroid requirements, and relieves symptoms. Dosing is determined by a dosing chart
based on the patient's weight and IgE levels. The drug is administered sc q 2 to 4 wk. Clinicians who
administer omalizumab should be prepared to identify and treat anaphylaxis, which may occur.
Other drugs
are used uncommonly in specific circumstances. Magnesium is often used in the emergency
department, but it is not recommended in the management of chronic asthma. Immunotherapy may be
indicated when symptoms are triggered by allergy, as suggested by history and confirmed by allergy
===PAGE:2053===
testing. Immunotherapy is generally more effective in children than adults. If symptoms are not
significantly relieved after 24 mo, then therapy is stopped. If symptoms are relieved, therapy should
continue for ≥ 3 yr, although the optimum duration is unknown. Other drugs that suppress the immune
system are occasionally prescribed to reduce dependence on high-dose oral corticosteroids, but these
drugs have a significant risk of toxicity. Low-dose methotrexate (5 to 15 mg once/wk) can lead to modest
improvements in FEV
and modest decreases in daily oral corticosteroid use. Gold and cyclosporine are
also modestly effective, but toxicity and need for monitoring limit their use. Other therapies for
management of chronic asthma include nebulized lidocaine, nebulized heparin, colchicine, and high-dose
IV immune globulin. Limited evidence supports the use of any of these therapies, and their benefits are
unproved, so none are currently recommended for routine clinical use.
Monitoring response to treatment:
Guidelines recommend office use of spirometry (FEV
, FEV
/FVC,
FVC) to measure airflow limitation and assess impairment and risk. Outside the office, home PEF
monitoring, in conjunction with patient symptom diaries and the use of an asthma action plan, is
especially useful for charting disease progression and response to treatment in patients with moderate to
severe persistent asthma. When asthma is quiescent, one PEF measurement in the morning suffices.
Should PEF measurements fall to < 80% of the patient's personal best, then twice/day monitoring to
assess circadian variation is useful. Circadian variation of > 20% indicates airway instability and the need
to re-evaluate the therapeutic regimen.
Patient education:
The importance of patient education cannot be overemphasized. Patients do better
when they know more about asthma—what triggers an attack, what drug to use when, proper inhaler
technique, how to use a spacer with a metered-dose inhaler (MDI), and the importance of early use of
corticosteroids in exacerbations. Every patient should have a written action plan for day-to-day
management, especially for management of acute attacks, that is based on the patient's best personal
peak flow rather than on a predicted normal value. Such a plan leads to much better asthma control,
largely attributable to improved adherence to therapies.
Treatment of acute exacerbation:
The goal of asthma exacerbation treatment is to relieve symptoms
and return patients to their best lung function. Treatment includes
• Inhaled bronchodilators (
β
-agonists and anticholinergics)
• Usually systemic corticosteroids
Patients having an attack are instructed to self-administer 2 to 4 puffs of inhaled albuterol or a similar
short-acting
β
-agonist up to 3 times spaced 20 min apart for an acute exacerbation and to measure PEF
if possible. When these short-acting rescue drugs are effective (symptoms are relieved and PEF returns
to > 80% of baseline), the acute exacerbation may be managed in the outpatient setting. Patients who do
not respond, have severe symptoms, or have a PEF persistently < 80% should follow a treatment
management program outlined by the physician or should go to the emergency department (see
Table 191-3
for specific dosing information).
Inhaled bronchodilators (
β
-agonists and anticholinergics) are the mainstay of asthma
[Table 191-3.
Drug Treatment of Asthma Exacerbations*]
treatment in the emergency department. In adults and older children, albuterol given by an MDI and
spacer is as effective as that given by nebulizer. Nebulized treatment is preferred for younger children
because of difficulties coordinating MDIs and spacers; evidence suggests that bronchodilator response
improves when the nebulizer is powered with helium-O
(heliox) rather than with O
. Subcutaneous
epinephrine 1:1000 solution or terbutaline is an alternative for children. Terbutaline may be preferable to
epinephrine because of its lesser cardiovascular effects and longer duration of action, but it is no longer
produced in large quantities and is expensive. Subcutaneous administration of
β
-agonists in adults
raises concerns of adverse cardiostimulatory effects. However, clinically important adverse effects are
few, and subcutaneous administration may benefit patients unresponsive to maximal inhaled therapy or
patients unable to receive effective nebulized treatment (eg, those who cough excessively, have poor
===PAGE:2054===
ventilation, or are uncooperative). Nebulized ipratropium can be co-administered with nebulized albuterol
for patients who do not respond optimally to albuterol alone; some evidence favors simultaneous highdose
β
-agonist and ipratropium as first-line treatment, but no data favor continuous
β
-agonist
nebulization over intermittent administration. Theophylline has very little role in treatment.
Systemic corticosteroids (prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone) should be given for all but the
mildest acute exacerbation; they are unnecessary for patients whose PEF normalizes after 1 or 2
bronchodilator doses. IV and oral routes of administration are probably equally effective. IV
methylprednisolone can be given if an IV line is already in place and can be switched to oral dosing
whenever necessary or convenient. Tapering usually starts after 7 to 10 days and should last 2 to 3 wk.
Antibiotics are indicated only when history, examination, or chest x-ray suggests underlying bacterial
infection; most infections underlying asthma exacerbations are probably viral in origin.
Supplemental O
is indicated for hypoxemia and should be given by nasal cannula or face mask at a flow
rate or concentration sufficient to maintain O
2sat
> 90%.
Reassurance is the best approach when anxiety is the cause of asthma exacerbation. Anxiolytics and
morphine are relatively contraindicated because they are associated with increased mortality and the
need for mechanical ventilation.
Hospitalization generally is required if patients have not returned to their baseline within 4 h of aggressive
emergency department treatment. Criteria for hospitalization vary, but definite indications are failure to
improve, worsening fatigue, relapse after repeated
β
-agonist therapy, and significant decrease in PaO
(< 50 mm Hg) or increase in PaCO
(> 40 mm Hg), indicating progression to respiratory failure.
Patients who continue to deteriorate despite aggressive treatment are candidates for noninvasive positive
pressure ventilation or endotracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation (.
Patients requiring intubation may benefit from sedation, but neuromuscular blocking agents should be
avoided because of possible interactions with corticosteroids that can cause prolonged neuromuscular
weakness.
Generally, volume-cycled ventilation in assist-control mode is used because it provides constant alveolar
ventilation when airway resistance is high and changing. The ventilator should be set to a relatively low
frequency with a relatively high inspiratory flow rate (> 80 L/min) to prolong exhalation time, minimizing
autopositive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). Initial tidal volumes can be set to 6 to 10 mL/kg. High peak
airway pressures can generally be ignored, because they result from high airway resistance and
inspiratory flow rates and do not reflect the degree of lung distention caused by alveolar pressure.
However, if plateau pressures exceed 30 to 35 cm H
O, then tidal volume should be reduced to limit the
risk of pneumothorax. When reduced tidal volumes are necessary, a moderate degree of hypercapnia is
acceptable, but if arterial pH falls below 7.10, a slow NaHCO
infusion is indicated to maintain pH
between 7.20 and 7.25. Once airflow obstruction is relieved and PaCO
and arterial pH normalize,
patients can usually be quickly weaned from the ventilator.
Other therapies are reportedly effective for asthma exacerbation, but none have been thoroughly studied.
Heliox is used to decrease the work of breathing and improve ventilation through a decrease in turbulent
flow attributable to helium, a gas less dense than O
. Despite the theoretical benefits of heliox, studies
have reported conflicting results concerning its efficacy; lack of ready availability also limits its use.
Magnesium sulfate relaxes smooth muscle, but efficacy in management of asthma exacerbation in the
emergency department is debated. General anesthesia in patients with status asthmaticus causes
bronchodilation by an unclear mechanism, perhaps by a direct relaxant effect on airway smooth muscle or
attenuation of cholinergic tone.
Treatment of chronic asthma:
Current asthma guidelines initiate treatment based on the severity
classification. Continuing therapy is based on assessment of control (see
Table 191-1
). Therapy is
increased in a stepwise fashion (see
===PAGE:2055===
Table 191-4
) until the best control of impairment and risk is achieved (step-up). Before therapy is stepped
up, adherence, exposure to environmental factors (eg, trigger exposure), and presence of comorbid
conditions (eg, obesity, allergic rhinitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, COPD, obstructive sleep apnea,
vocal cord dysfunction) are reviewed. These factors should be addressed before increasing drug therapy.
Once asthma has been well controlled for at least 3 mo, drug therapy is reduced if possible to the
minimum that maintains good control (step-down). For specific drugs and doses, see
Table 191-2
.
Exercise-induced asthma:
Exercise-induced asthma can generally be prevented by inhalation of a
short-acting
β
-agonist or mast cell stabilizer before starting the exercise. If
β
-agonists are not effective
or if exercise-induced asthma is associated with severe symptoms, the patient has more severe asthma
than is recognized and requires controller therapy.
[Table 191-4.
Steps of Asthma Management*]
Aspirin-sensitive asthma:
The primary treatment for aspirin-sensitive asthma is avoidance of NSAIDs.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors do not appear to be triggers. Leukotriene modifiers can blunt the
response to NSAIDs. Alternatively, inpatient desensitization has been successful in a few patients.
Future therapies:
Multiple therapies are being developed to target specific components of the
inflammatory cascade. Therapies directed at IL-4, IL-13, tumor necrosis factorα
, other chemokines, and
cytokines or their receptors are all under investigation or consideration as therapeutic targets.
Special Populations
Infants, children, and adolescents:
Asthma is difficult to diagnose in infants; thus, under-recognition
and undertreatment are common. Empiric trials of inhaled bronchodilators and anti-inflammatory drugs
may be helpful for both. Drugs may be given by nebulizer or MDI with a holding chamber with or without a
face mask. Infants and children < 5 yr requiring treatment > 2 times/wk should be given daily antiinflammatory therapy with inhaled corticosteroids (preferred), leukotriene receptor antagonists, or
cromolyn.
Children > 5 yr and adolescents with asthma can be treated similarly to adults but should be encouraged
to maintain physical activities, exercise, and sports participation. Predicted norms for pulmonary function
tests in adolescents are closer to childhood (not adult) standards. Adolescents and mature younger
children should participate in developing their own asthma management plans and establishing their own
goals for therapy to improve adherence. The action plan should be understood by teachers and school
nurses to ensure reliable and prompt access to rescue drugs. Cromolyn and nedocromil are often tried in
this group but are not as beneficial as
inhaled corticosteroids. Long-acting drugs prevent the
embarrassment of having to take drugs at school.
Pregnant women:
About one third of women with asthma who become pregnant notice relief of
symptoms, one third notice worsening (at times to a severe degree), and one third notice no change.
GERD may be an important contributor to symptomatic disease in pregnancy. Asthma control during
pregnancy is crucial (, because poorly controlled maternal disease can result in increased
prenatal mortality, premature delivery, and low birth weight. Asthma drugs have not been shown to have
adverse fetal effects, but safety data are lacking.
Elderly patients:
The elderly have a high prevalence of other obstructive lung disease (eg, COPD), so it
is important to determine the magnitude of the reversible component of airflow obstruction (eg, by a 2- to
3-wk trial of inhaled corticosteroids or pulmonary function testing with bronchodilator challenge). The
elderly may be more sensitive to adverse effects of
β
-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids. Patients
requiring inhaled corticosteroids, particularly those with risk factors for osteoporosis, may benefit from
measures to preserve bone density (eg, Ca and vitamin D supplements, bisphosphonates).
Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a hypersensitivity reaction to
Aspergillus
fumigatus
that occurs almost exclusively in patients with asthma or, less commonly, cystic
===PAGE:2056===
fibrosis. Immune responses to
Aspergillus
antigens cause airway obstruction and, if untreated,
bronchiectasis and pulmonary fibrosis. Symptoms and signs are those of asthma with the
addition of productive cough and, occasionally, fever and anorexia. Diagnosis is suspected
based on history and imaging tests and confirmed by
Aspergillus
skin testing and measurement
of IgE levels, circulating precipitins, and
A. fumigatus
-specific antibodies. Treatment is with
corticosteroids and, in patients with refractory disease, itraconazole.
ABPA develops when airways of patients with asthma or cystic fibrosis become colonized with
Aspergillus
sp (ubiquitous fungi in the soil).
Pathophysiology
For unclear reasons, colonization in these patients prompts vigorous antibody (IgE and IgG) and cellmediated immune responses (type I, III, and IV hypersensitivity reactions) to
Aspergillus
antigens, leading
to frequent, recurrent asthma exacerbations. Over time, the immune reactions, combined with direct toxic
effects of the fungus, lead to airway damage with dilatation and, ultimately, bronchiectasis and fibrosis.
The disorder is characterized histologically by mucoid impaction of airways, eosinophilic pneumonia,
infiltration of alveolar septa with plasma and mononuclear cells, and an increase in the number of
bronchiolar mucous glands and goblet cells. Rarely, other fungi, such as
Penicillium
,
Candida
,
Curvularia
,
Helminthosporium
, and
Drechslera
spp, cause an identical syndrome called allergic
bronchopulmonary mycosis in the absence of underlying asthma or cystic fibrosis.
Aspergillus
is present intraluminally but is not invasive. Thus, ABPA must be distinguished from invasive
aspergillosis, which occurs in immunocompromised patients; from aspergillomas, which are collections of
Aspergillus
in patients with established cavitary lesions or cystic airspaces; and from the rare
Aspergillus
pneumonia, which occurs in patients who take low doses of prednisone long term (eg, patients with
COPD).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are those of asthma or pulmonary cystic fibrosis exacerbation, with the addition of cough
productive of dirty-green or brown plugs and, occasionally, hemoptysis. Fever, headache, and anorexia
are common systemic symptoms in severe disease. Signs are those of airway obstruction, specifically,
wheezing and prolonged expiration, which are indistinguishable from asthma exacerbation.
Diagnosis
• History of asthma
• Chest x-ray or high-resolution CT
• Skin prick test with
Aspergillus
antigen
•
Aspergillus
precipitins in blood
• IgE levels
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with asthma with recurrent asthma exacerbations, migratory or
nonresolving infiltrates on chest x-ray (often due to atelectasis from mucoid plugging and bronchial
obstruction), evidence of bronchiectasis on imaging studies (, sputum cultures positive for
A.
fumigatus
, or notable peripheral eosinophilia.
Several criteria have been proposed for the diagnosis (see
Table 191-5
), but in practice 4 essential criteria are generally assessed. An immediate wheal-and-flare
reaction to an initial skin prick test with
Aspergillus
antigen should prompt measurement of serum IgE and
Aspergillus
precipitins; up to 25% of patients with asthma without ABPA may have a positive skin test. An
IgE level > 1000 ng/mL and positive precipitins suggest the diagnosis, which should be confirmed by
===PAGE:2057===
measurement of specific antiAspergillus
immunoglobulins (up to 10% of healthy patients have circulating
precipitins). A finding of
A. fumigatus
-specific IgG and IgE antibodies in concentrations at least twice
those found in patients without ABPA establishes the diagnosis. Whenever test results diverge, such as
with an IgE > 1000 ng/mL but negative
A. fumigatus
-specific immunoglobulins, testing should be
repeated, the patient should be monitored over time to definitively establish or exclude the diagnosis.
Treatment
• Prednisone
• Sometimes antifungal drugs
[Table 191-5.
Diagnostic Criteria for Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis]
[Table 191-6.
Stages of Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis*]
Treatment is based on disease stage (see
Table 191-6
). Stage I is treated with prednisone 0.5 to 0.75
mg/kg once/day for 2 to 4 wk, then tapered over 4 to 6 mo. Chest x-ray, blood eosinophils, and IgE levels
should be checked quarterly for improvement, defined as resolution of infiltrates, ≥ 50% decline in
eosinophils, and 33% decline in IgE. Patients who achieve stage II disease require annual monitoring
only. Stage II patients who relapse (Stage III) are given another trial of prednisone. Stage I or III patients
who do not improve with prednisone (Stage IV) are candidates for antifungal treatment. Itraconazole 200
mg po bid for 4 to 6 mo with a 6-mo taper is recommended as a substitute for prednisone and as a
corticosteroid-sparing drug. Itraconazole therapy requires checking drug levels and monitoring liver
enzymes and triglyceride and potassium levels.
All patients should be optimally treated for their underlying asthma or cystic fibrosis. In addition, patients
taking long-term corticosteroids should be monitored for complications, such as cataracts, hyperglycemia,
and osteoporosis, and possibly prescribed treatments to prevent bone demineralization and
Pneumocystis jirovecii
lung infection.
===PAGE:2058===
Chapter 192. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Introduction
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is partially reversible airflow limitation caused
by an inflammatory response to inhaled toxins, often cigarette smoke.
α
-Antitrypsin deficiency
and various occupational exposures are less common causes in nonsmokers. Symptoms are
productive cough and dyspnea that develop over years; common signs include decreased
breath sounds, prolonged expiratory phase of respiration, and wheezing. Severe cases may be
complicated by weight loss, pneumothorax, frequent acute decompensation episodes, right
heart failure, and acute or chronic respiratory failure. Diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination, chest x-ray, and pulmonary function tests. Treatment is with bronchodilators,
corticosteroids, and, when necessary, O
and antibiotics. About 50% of patients die within 10 yr
of diagnosis.
COPD comprises
• Chronic obstructive bronchitis (clinically defined)
• Emphysema (pathologically or radiologically defined)
Many patients have features of both.
Chronic obstructive bronchitis
is chronic bronchitis with airflow obstruction. Chronic bronchitis is
defined as productive cough on most days of the week for at least 3 mo total duration in 2 successive
years. Chronic bronchitis becomes chronic obstructive bronchitis if spirometric evidence of airflow
obstruction develops. Chronic asthmatic bronchitis is a similar, overlapping condition characterized by
chronic productive cough, wheezing, and partially reversible airflow obstruction; it occurs predominantly in
smokers with a history of asthma. In some cases, the distinction between chronic obstructive bronchitis
and chronic asthmatic bronchitis is unclear.
Emphysema
is destruction of lung parenchyma leading to loss of elastic recoil and loss of alveolar septa
and radial airway traction, which increases the tendency for airway collapse. Lung hyperinflation, airflow
limitation, and air trapping follow. Airspaces enlarge and may eventually develop bullae.
Epidemiology
An estimated 24 million people in the US have airflow limitation, of whom about half have COPD. COPD
is the 4th leading cause of death, resulting in 122,000 deaths in 2003—compared with 52,193 deaths in
1980. From 1980 to 2000, the COPD mortality rate increased 64% (from 40.7 to 66.9/100,000).
Prevalence, incidence, and mortality rates increase with age. Prevalence is higher in men, but total
mortality is similar in both sexes. Incidence and mortality are generally higher in whites, blue-collar
workers, and people with fewer years of formal education, probably because these groups have a higher
prevalence of smoking. COPD seems to aggregate in families independent of
α
-antitrypsin (
α
-
antiprotease inhibitor) deficiency (.
COPD is increasing worldwide because of the increase in smoking in developing countries, the reduction
in mortality due to infectious diseases, and the widespread use of biomass fuels. It caused an estimated
2.74 million deaths worldwide in the year 2000 and is projected to become one of the top 5 causes of
disease burden globally by the year 2020.
Etiology
There are several causes of COPD:
• Smoking (and less often other inhalational exposures)
===PAGE:2059===
• Genetic factors
Inhalational exposure:
Of all inhalational exposures, cigarette smoking is the primary risk factor in most
countries, although only about 15% of smokers develop clinically apparent COPD; an exposure history of
40 or more pack-years is especially predictive. Smoke from burning biomass fuels for indoor cooking and
heating is an important contributing factor in developing countries. Smokers with preexisting airway
reactivity (defined by increased sensitivity to inhaled methacholine), even in the absence of clinical
asthma, are at greater risk of developing COPD than are those without.
Low body weight, childhood respiratory disorders, and exposure to passive cigarette smoke, air pollution,
and occupational dust (eg, mineral dust, cotton dust) or inhaled chemicals (eg, cadmium) contribute to the
risk of COPD but are of minor importance compared with cigarette smoking.
Genetic factors:
The best-defined causative genetic disorder is
α
-antitrypsin deficiency
(,
which is an important cause of emphysema in nonsmokers and influences susceptibility to disease in
smokers.
Polymorphisms in microsomal epoxide hydrolase, vitamin D-binding protein, IL-1
β
, IL-1 receptor
antagonist, phospholipase A
, matrix metalloproteinase 9, and
ADAM-33
genes are all associated with
rapid decline in forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
) in selected populations.
Pathophysiology
Various factors cause the airflow limitation and other complications of COPD.
Inflammation:
Inhalational exposures can trigger an inflammatory response in airways and alveoli that
leads to disease in genetically susceptible people. The process is thought to be mediated by an increase
in protease activity and a decrease in antiprotease activity (. Lung proteases, such as
neutrophil elastase, matrix metalloproteinases, and cathepsins, break down elastin and connective tissue
in the normal process of tissue repair. Their activity is normally balanced by antiproteases, such as
α
-
antitrypsin, airway epithelium-derived secretory leukoproteinase inhibitor, elafin, and matrix
metalloproteinase tissue inhibitor. In patients with COPD, activated neutrophils and other inflammatory
cells release proteases as part of the inflammatory process; protease activity exceeds antiprotease
activity, and tissue destruction and mucus hypersecretion result. Neutrophil and macrophage activation
also leads to accumulation of free radicals, superoxide anions, and hydrogen peroxide, which inhibit
antiproteases and cause bronchoconstriction, mucosal edema, and mucous hypersecretion.
Neutrophilinduced oxidative damage, release of profibrotic neuropeptides (eg, bombesin), and reduced
levels of vascular endothelial growth factor may contribute to apoptotic destruction of lung parenchyma.
The inflammation in COPD increases with increasing disease severity, and, in severe (advanced)
disease, inflammation does not resolve completely with smoking cessation. This inflammation does not
seem to respond to corticosteroids.
Infection:
Respiratory infection (which COPD patients are prone to), in conjunction with cigarette
smoking, may amplify progression of lung destruction.
Bacteria, especially
Haemophilus influenzae
, colonize the normally sterile lower airways of about 30% of
patients with COPD. In more severely affected patients (eg, those with previous hospitalizations),
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
colonization is common. Smoking and airflow obstruction may lead to impaired
mucus clearance in lower airways, which predisposes to infection. Repeated bouts of infection increase
the inflammatory burden that hastens disease progression. There is no evidence, however, that long-term
use of antibiotics slows the progression of COPD.
Airflow limitation:
The cardinal pathophysiologic feature of COPD is airflow limitation caused by airway
obstruction, loss of elastic recoil, or both.
Airway obstruction is caused by inflammation-mediated mucus hypersecretion, mucus plugging, mucosal
===PAGE:2060===
edema, bronchospasm, peribronchial fibrosis, or a combination of these mechanisms. Alveolar
attachments and alveolar septa are destroyed, contributing to loss of airway support and airway closure
during expiration.
Enlarged alveolar spaces sometimes consolidate into bullae, defined as airspaces ≥ 1 cm in diameter.
Bullae may be entirely empty or have strands of lung tissue traversing them in areas of locally severe
emphysema; they occasionally occupy the entire hemithorax. These changes lead to loss of elastic recoil
and lung hyperinflation.
Increased airway resistance increases the work of breathing, as does lung hyperinflation. Increased work
of breathing may lead to alveolar hypoventilation with hypoxia and hypercapnia, although hypoxia is also
caused by ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch.
Complications:
In addition to airflow limitation and sometimes respiratory insufficiency, complications
include
• Pulmonary hypertension
• Respiratory infection
• Weight loss and other comorbidities
Chronic hypoxemia increases pulmonary vascular tone, which, if diffuse, causes pulmonary hypertension
( and cor pulmonale (.
Viral or bacterial respiratory infections are common among patients with COPD and cause a large
percentage of acute exacerbations. It is currently thought that acute bacterial infections are due to
acquisition of new strains of bacteria rather than overgrowth of chronic colonizing bacteria.
Weight loss may occur, perhaps in response to decreased caloric intake and increased levels of
circulating tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-
α
.
Other coexisting or complicating disorders that adversely affect quality of life and survival include
osteoporosis, depression, coronary
artery disease, lung cancer, muscle atrophy, and gastroesophageal
reflux. The extent to which these disorders are consequences of COPD, smoking, and the accompanying
systemic inflammation is unclear.
Symptoms and Signs
COPD takes years to develop and progress. Most patients have smoked ≥ 20 cigarettes/day for > 20 yr.
Productive cough usually is the initial symptom, developing among smokers in their 40s and 50s.
Dyspnea that is progressive, persistent, exertional, or worse during respiratory infection appears when
patients are in their late 50s or 60s. Symptoms usually progress quickly in patients who continue to
smoke and in those who have a higher lifetime tobacco exposure. Morning headache develops in more
advanced disease and signals nocturnal hypercapnia or hypoxemia.
Acute exacerbations
occur sporadically during the course of COPD and are heralded by increased
symptom severity. The specific cause of any exacerbation is almost always impossible to determine, but
exacerbations are often attributed to viral URIs or acute bacterial bronchitis. As COPD progresses, acute
exacerbations tend to become more frequent, averaging about 3 episodes/yr.
Signs of COPD include wheezing, increased expiratory phase of breathing, lung hyperinflation manifested
as decreased heart and lung sounds, and increased anteroposterior diameter of the thorax (barrel chest).
Patients with advanced emphysema lose weight and experience muscle wasting that has been attributed
to immobility, hypoxia, or release of systemic inflammatory mediators, such as TNFα
. Signs of advanced
disease include pursed-lip breathing, accessory muscle use, paradoxical inward movement of the lower
intercostal interspaces during inspiration (Hoover's sign), and cyanosis. Signs of cor pulmonale include
neck vein distention, splitting of the 2nd heart sound with an accentuated pulmonic component, tricuspid
===PAGE:2061===
insufficiency murmur, and peripheral edema. Right ventricular heaves are uncommon in COPD because
the lungs are hyperinflated.
Spontaneous pneumothorax may occur as a result of rupture of bullae and should be suspected in any
patient with COPD whose pulmonary status abruptly worsens.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Pulmonary function testing
Diagnosis is suggested by history, physical examination, and chest imaging and is confirmed by
pulmonary function tests. Differential diagnosis includes asthma, heart failure, and bronchiectasis. COPD
and asthma are sometimes easily confused. Asthma (see also p.
) and COPD are distinguished by
numerous factors (see
Table 192-1
).
Systemic disorders that may have a component of airflow limitation may suggest COPD; they include HIV
infection, abuse of IV drugs (particularly cocaine and amphetamines), sarcoidosis, Sjogren's syndrome,
bronchiolitis obliterans, lymphangioleiomyomatosis, and eosinophilic granuloma.
Pulmonary function tests:
Patients suspected of having COPD should undergo complete pulmonary
function testing (see also p.
) to confirm airflow limitation, to quantify its severity and reversibility, and
to distinguish COPD from other disorders. Pulmonary function testing is also useful for following disease
progression and monitoring response to treatment. The primary diagnostic tests are
• FEV
, which is the volume of air forcefully expired during the first second after taking a full breath
• Forced vital capacity (FVC), which is the total volume of air expired with maximal force
• Flow-volume loops, which are simultaneous spirometric recordings of airflow and volume during forced
maximal expiration and inspiration
Reductions of FEV
, FVC, and the ratio of FEV
/FVC are the hallmark of airflow limitation. Flow-volume
loops show a concave pattern in the expiratory tracing (see
Fig. 189-3
. FEV
declines up to 60 mL/yr in smokers, compared with a less steep decline of
25 to 30 mL/yr in nonsmokers, beginning at about age 30. In middle-aged smokers who already have a
low FEV
, the decline occurs more rapidly. When the FEV
falls below about 1 L, patients develop
dyspnea with activities of daily living (although dyspnea is more closely related to the degree of air
trapping than to the degree of airflow limitation); when the FEV
falls below about 0.8 L, patients are at
risk of hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and cor pulmonale. FEV
and FVC are easily measured with office
spirometry and define severity of disease (see
Table 192-2
) because they correlate with symptoms and mortality. Normal reference values are
determined by patient age, sex, and height.
Additional pulmonary function testing is necessary only in specific circumstances,
[Table 192-1.
Factors that May Help Differentiate Asthma and COPD]
such as before lung volume reduction surgery (. Other test abnormalities may include
increased total lung capacity, functional residual capacity, and residual volume, which can help distinguish
COPD from restrictive pulmonary disease, in which these measures are diminished; decreased vital
capacity; and decreased single-breath diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO). Decreased DLCO
is nonspecific and is reduced in other disorders that affect the pulmonary vascular bed, such as interstitial
lung disease, but can help distinguish emphysema from asthma, in which DLCO is normal or elevated.
===PAGE:2062===
Imaging tests:
The chest x-ray may have characteristic findings. Changes in emphysema can include
lung hyperinflation manifested as a flat diaphragm (ie, increase in the angle formed by the sternum and
anterior diaphragm on a lateral film from the normal value of 45° to > 90°), rapid tapering of hilar vessels,
and bullae (ie, radiolucencies > 1 cm surrounded by arcuate, hairline shadows). Other typical findings
include widening of the retrosternal airspace and a narrow cardiac shadow. Emphysematous changes
occurring predominantly in the lung bases suggest
α
-antitrypsin deficiency (. The lungs may
look normal or have increased lucency secondary to loss of parenchyma. Among patients with chronic
obstructive bronchitis, chest x-rays may be normal or may show a bibasilar increase in bronchovascular
markings as a result of bronchial wall thickening.
Prominent hila suggest large central pulmonary arteries that may signify pulmonary hypertension. Right
ventricular enlargement that occurs in cor pulmonale may be masked by lung hyperinflation or may
manifest as
[Table 192-2.
Stages and Treatment of COPD]
encroachment of the heart shadow on the retrosternal space or by widening of the transverse cardiac
shadow in comparison with previous chest x-rays.
CT may reveal abnormalities that are not apparent on the chest x-ray and may also suggest coexisting or
complicating disorders, such as pneumonia, pneumoconiosis, or lung cancer. CT helps assess the extent
and distribution of emphysema, estimated either by visual scoring or with analysis of the distribution of
lung density. Indications for obtaining CT in patients with COPD include evaluation for lung volume
reduction surgery, suspicion of coexisting or complicating disorders that are not clearly evident or
excluded by chest x-ray, and suspicion of cancer.
Adjunctive tests:

α
-Antitrypsin levels should be measured in patients < 50 yr with symptomatic COPD
and in nonsmokers of any age with COPD to detect
α
-antitrypsin deficiency (. Other
indications of
α
-antitrypsin deficiency include a family history of premature COPD or infantile liver
disease, lower-lobe distribution of emphysema, and COPD associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibody (ANCA)-positive vasculitis. If levels of
α
-antitrypsin are low, the diagnosis should be confirmed
by establishing the
α
-antitrypsin phenotype.
ECG, often done to exclude cardiac causes of dyspnea, typically shows diffusely low QRS voltage with a
vertical heart axis caused by lung hyperinflation and increased P-wave voltage or rightward shifts of the
P-wave vector caused by right atrial enlargement in patients with advanced emphysema. Findings of right
ventricular hypertrophy include an R or R´ wave as tall as or taller than the S wave in lead V
; an R wave
smaller than the S wave in lead V
; right-axis deviation > 110° without right bundle branch block; or some
combination of these. Multifocal atrial tachycardia, an arrhythmia that can accompany COPD, manifests
as a tachyarrhythmia with polymorphic P waves and variable PR intervals.
Echocardiography is occasionally useful for assessing right ventricular function and
pulmonary
hypertension, although air trapping makes it technically difficult in patients with COPD. Echocardiography
is most often indicated when coexistent left ventricular or valvular heart disease is suspected.
CBC is of little diagnostic value in the evaluation of COPD but may show erythrocythemia (Hct > 48%) if
the patient has chronic hypoxemia. Patients with anemia (for reasons other than COPD) have
disproportionately severe dyspnea.
Evaluation of exacerbations:
Patients with acute exacerbations usually have combinations of
increased work of breathing, low O
saturation on pulse oximetry, diaphoresis, tachycardia, anxiety, and
cyanosis. However, patients with exacerbations accompanied by retention of CO
may be lethargic or
somnolent, a very different appearance. All patients requiring hospitalization for an acute exacerbation
should undergo ABG sampling to quantify hypoxemia and hypercapnia. Hypercapnia may exist with
hypoxemia.
===PAGE:2063===
Findings of PaO
< 50 mm Hg or PaCO
> 50 mm Hg in the setting of respiratory acidemia define acute
respiratory failure (. However, some patients chronically manifest such levels of PaO
and
PaCO
in the absence of acute respiratory failure.
A chest x-ray is often done to check for pneumonia or pneumothorax. Very rarely, infiltrates among
patients receiving chronic systemic corticosteroids may represent
Aspergillus
pneumonia.
Yellow or green sputum is a reliable indicator of neutrophils in the sputum and suggests bacterial
colonization or infection. Culture is usually done in hospitalized patients but is not usually necessary in
outpatients. In samples from outpatients, Gram stain usually shows neutrophils with a mixture of
organisms, often gram-positive diplococci (
Streptococcus pneumoniae
), gram-negative bacilli (
H.
influenzae
), or both. Other oropharyngeal commensal organisms, such as
Moraxella
(
Branhamella
)
catarrhalis
, occasionally cause exacerbations. In hospitalized patients, cultures may show resistant gramnegative organisms (eg,
Pseudomonas
) or, rarely,
Staphylococcus
.
Prognosis
Severity of airway obstruction predicts survival in patients with COPD. The mortality rate in patients with
an FEV
≥ 50% of predicted is slightly greater than that of the general population. If the FEV
is 0.75 to
1.25 L, 5-yr survival is about 40 to 60%; if < 0.75 L, about 30 to 40%.
More accurate prediction of death risk is possible by simultaneously measuring body mass index (
B
), the
degree of airflow obstruction (
O
, which is the FEV
), dyspnea (
D
, which is measured with a Modified
Medical Research Council [MMRC] dyspnea scale), and exercise capacity (
E
, which is measured with a
6-min walking test); this is the BODE index. Also, heart disease, anemia, resting tachycardia,
hypercapnia, and hypoxemia decrease survival, whereas a significant response to bronchodilators
predicts improved survival. Risk factors for death in patients with acute exacerbation requiring
hospitalization include older age, higher PaCO
, and use of maintenance oral corticosteroids.
Patients at high risk of imminent death are those with progressive unexplained weight loss or severe
functional decline (eg, those who experience dyspnea with self-care, such as dressing, bathing, or
eating). Mortality in COPD may result from intercurrent illnesses rather than from progression of the
underlying disorder in patients who have stopped smoking. Death is generally caused by acute
respiratory failure, pneumonia, lung cancer, heart disease, or pulmonary embolism.
Treatment of Stable COPD
• Inhaled bronchodilators, corticosteroids, or both
• Supportive care (eg, smoking cessation, O
therapy, pulmonary rehabilitation)
COPD management involves treatment of chronic stable disease and of exacerbations. Treatment of cor
pulmonale, a common complication of long-standing, severe COPD, is discussed elsewhere (.
Treatment of chronic stable COPD aims to prevent exacerbations and improve lung and physical function
through drug and O
therapy, smoking cessation, exercise, enhancement of nutrition, and pulmonary
rehabilitation. Surgical treatment of COPD is indicated for selected patients.
Drug therapy:
Recommended drug therapy is summarized in
Table 192-2
.
Inhaled bronchodilators
are the mainstay of COPD management; drugs include
•
β
-agonists
• Anticholinergics (antimuscarinics)
===PAGE:2064===
These two classes are equally effective. Patients with mild (stage 1) disease are treated only when
symptomatic. Those with stage 2 or higher COPD should be taking drugs from one or both of these
classes regularly to improve
pulmonary function and increase exercise capacity. The frequency of
exacerbations can be reduced with the use of anticholinergics, inhaled corticosteroids, or long-acting
β
-
agonists. However, there is no evidence that regular bronchodilator use slows deterioration of lung
function. The initial choice among short-acting
β
-agonists, long-acting
β
-agonists, anticholinergics (which
have a greater bronchodilating effect), and combination
β
-agonist and anticholinergic therapy is often a
matter of tailoring cost and convenience to the patient's preferences and symptoms.
In treatment of chronic stable disease, administration by metered-dose inhaler or dry-powder inhaler is
preferred over nebulized home treatment; home nebulizers are prone to contamination from incomplete
cleaning and drying. Patients should be taught to exhale to functional residual capacity, inhale the aerosol
slowly to total lung capacity, and hold the inhalation for 3 to 4 sec before exhaling. Spacers help ensure
optimal delivery of drug to the distal airways and reduce the importance of coordinating activation of the
inhaler with inhalation. Some spacers alert patients if they are inhaling too rapidly. Newer metered-dose
inhalers that use hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) propellants require slightly different techniques than inhalers
containing older environmentally damaging chlorinated fluorocarbon propellants; inhalers containing HFA
require 2 to 3 priming doses if they are new or not recently used.
β
-Agonists
relax bronchial smooth muscle and increase mucociliary clearance. Albuterol aerosol, 2 puffs
(90 to 100
μ
g/puff) inhaled from a metered-dose inhaler 4 to 6 times/day prn, is usually the drug of choice
because of low cost. Long-acting
β
-agonists are preferable for patients with nocturnal symptoms or for
those who find frequent dosing inconvenient. Options include salmeterol powder, 1 puff (50
μ
g) inhaled
bid, and formoterol powder, 1 puff (12
μ
g) inhaled bid. The dry-powder formulations may be more
effective for patients who have trouble coordinating use of a metered-dose inhaler. Patients should be
taught the difference between short-acting and long-acting drugs, because long-acting drugs that are
used as needed or more than twice/day increase the risk of cardiac arrhythmias. Adverse effects
commonly result from use of any
β
-agonist and include tremor, anxiety, tachycardia, and mild, temporary
hypokalemia.
Anticholinergics
relax bronchial smooth muscle through competitive inhibition of muscarinic receptors
(M
, M
, and M
). Ipratropium is most commonly used because of low cost and ready availability; dose is
2 to 4 puffs (18
μ
g/puff) from a metered-dose inhaler q 4 to 6 h. Ipratropium has a slower onset of action
(within 30 min; peak effect in 1 to 2 h), so a
β
-agonist is often prescribed with it in a single combination
inhaler or as a separate as-needed rescue drug. Tiotropium, a long-acting quaternary anticholinergic
inhaled as a powder formulation, is M
and M
selective and may therefore have an advantage over
ipratropium, because M
receptor blockade (as occurs with ipratropium) may limit bronchodilation. Dose
is 1 puff (18
μ
g) once/day. Adverse effects of all anticholinergics are pupillary dilation, blurred vision, and
dry mouth.
Corticosteroids
are often part of treatment. Inhaled corticosteroids seem to reduce airway inflammation,
reverse
β
-receptor down-regulation, and inhibit leukotriene and cytokine production. They do not alter the
course of pulmonary function decline in patients with COPD who continue to smoke, but they do relieve
symptoms and improve short-term pulmonary function in some patients, are additive to the effect of
bronchodilators, and may diminish the frequency of COPD exacerbations. They are indicated for patients
who have repeated exacerbations or symptoms despite optimal bronchodilator therapy. Dose depends on
the drug; examples include fluticasone 500 to 1000
μ
g/day and beclomethasone 400 to 2000
μ
g/day. The
long-term risks of inhaled corticosteroids in elderly people are not proved but probably include
osteoporosis, cataract formation, and an increased risk of nonfatal pneumonia. Long-term users therefore
should undergo periodic ophthalmologic and bone densitometry screening and should possibly receive
supplemental calcium, vitamin D, and a bisphosphonate as indicated. Corticosteroid therapy should be
stopped if no subjective or objective improvement results (eg, after a few months).
Combinations of a long-acting
β
-agonist (eg, salmeterol) and an inhaled corticosteroid (eg, fluticasone)
are more effective than either drug alone in the treatment of chronic stable disease.
===PAGE:2065===
Oral or systemic corticosteroids should usually not be used to treat chronic stable COPD.
Theophylline
plays only a small role in the treatment of chronic stable COPD now that safer, more
effective drugs are available. Theophylline decreases smooth muscle spasm, enhances mucociliary
clearance, improves right
ventricular function, and decreases pulmonary vascular resistance and arterial
pressure. Its mode of action is poorly understood but appears to differ from that of
β
-agonists and
anticholinergics. Its role in improving diaphragmatic function and dyspnea during exercise is controversial.
Low-dose theophylline (300 to 400 mg/day) has anti-inflammatory properties and may enhance the effects
of inhaled corticosteroids.
Theophylline can be used for patients who have not adequately responded to inhaled drugs and who
have shown symptomatic benefit from a trial of the drug. Serum levels need not be monitored unless the
patient does not respond to the drug, develops symptoms of toxicity, or is questionably adherent; slowly
absorbed oral theophylline preparations, which require less frequent dosing, enhance adherence. Toxicity
is common and includes sleeplessness and GI upset, even at low blood levels. More serious adverse
effects, such as supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias and seizures, tend to occur at blood levels >
20 mg/L. Hepatic metabolism of theophylline varies greatly and is influenced by genetic factors, age,
cigarette smoking, hepatic dysfunction, and some drugs, such as macrolide and fluoroquinolone
antibiotics and nonsedating histamine
blockers.
Oxygen therapy:
Long-term O
therapy prolongs life in patients with COPD whose PaO
is chronically
< 55 mm Hg. Continual 24-h use is more effective than a 12-h nocturnal regimen. O
therapy brings Hct
toward normal levels; improves neuropsychologic factors, possibly by facilitating sleep; and ameliorates
pulmonary hemodynamic abnormalities. O
therapy also increases exercise tolerance in many patients.
O
saturation should be measured during exercise and while at rest. Similarly, a sleep study should be
considered for patients with advanced COPD who do not meet the criteria for long-term O
therapy while
they are awake (see
Table 192-3
) but whose clinical assessment suggests pulmonary hypertension in the absence of daytime
hypoxemia. Nocturnal O
may be prescribed if a sleep study shows episodic desaturation to ≤ 88%. Such
treatment prevents progression of pulmonary hypertension, but its effects on survival are unknown.
O
is administered by nasal cannula at a flow rate sufficient to achieve a PaO
> 60 mm Hg (SaO
>
90%), usually ≤ 3 L/min at rest. O
is supplied by electrically driven O
concentrators, liquid O
systems,
or cylinders of compressed gas. Concentrators, which limit mobility but are the least expensive, are
preferable for patients who spend most of their time at home. Such patients require small O
tanks for
backup in case of an electrical failure and for portable use.
[Table 192-3.
Indications for Long-Term O
Therapy in COPD]
A liquid system is preferable for patients who spend much time out of their home. Portable canisters of
liquid O
are easier to carry and have more capacity than portable cylinders of compressed gas. Large
compressed-air cylinders are the most expensive way of providing O
and should be used only if no other
source is available. All patients must be taught the dangers of smoking during O
use.
Various O
-conserving devices can reduce the amount of O
used by the patient, either by using a
reservoir system or by permitting O
flow only during inspiration. Systems with these devices correct
hypoxemia as effectively as do continuous flow systems.
Some patients need supplemental O
during air travel, because flight cabin pressure in commercial
airliners is below sea level air pressure (often equivalent to 1830 to 2400 m [6000 to 8000 ft]). Eucapnic
COPD patients who have a PaO
> 68 mm Hg at sea level generally have an in-flight PaO
> 50 mm Hg
and do not require supplemental O
. All patients with COPD with a PaO
≤ 68 mm Hg at sea level,
hypercapnia, significant anemia (Hct < 30), or a coexisting heart or cerebrovascular disorder should use
===PAGE:2066===
supplemental O
during long flights and should notify the airline when making their reservation. Airlines
can provide supplemental O
, and most require a
minimum notice of 24 h, a physician's statement of
necessity, and an O
prescription before the flight. Patients should bring their own nasal cannulas,
because some airlines provide only face masks. Patients are not permitted to transport or use their own
liquid O
, but many airlines now permit use of portable battery-operated O
concentrators, which also
provide a suitable O
source on arrival.
Smoking cessation:
Smoking cessation ( is both extremely difficult and extremely important;
it slows but does not halt the rate of FEV
decline (see
Fig. 192-1
). Simultaneous use of multiple strategies is most effective: establishment of a quit date,
behavior modification techniques, group sessions, nicotine replacement therapy (by gum, transdermal
patch, inhaler, lozenge, or nasal spray), varenicline or bupropion, and physician encouragement. Quit
rates > 50% at 1 yr have not been demonstrated even with the most effective interventions, such as use
of bupropion combined with nicotine replacement or use of varenicline alone.
Vaccinations:
All patients with COPD should be given annual influenza vaccinations. If a patient is
unable to receive a vaccination or if the prevailing influenza strain is not included in the annual vaccine
formulation, prophylactic treatment (amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir) is appropriate
during community influenza outbreaks. Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, although of unproven
efficacy in COPD, has minimal adverse effects and should probably also be given.
Nutrition:
COPD patients are at risk of weight loss and nutritional deficiencies because of a 15 to 25%
increase in resting energy expenditure from breathing; a higher energy cost of daily activities; reduced
caloric intake relative to need because of dyspnea; and the catabolic effect of inflammatory cytokines
such as TNFα
. Generalized muscle strength and efficiency of O
use are impaired. Patients with poorer
nutritional status have a worse prognosis, so it is prudent to recommend a balanced diet with adequate
caloric intake in conjunction with exercise to prevent or reverse undernutrition and muscle atrophy.
However, excessive weight gain should be avoided, and obese patients should strive to gradually reduce
body fat. Studies of nutritional supplementation alone have not shown improvement in pulmonary function
or exercise capacity. Trials of anabolic steroids (eg, megestrol, oxandrolone), growth
[Fig. 192-1.
Patients who quit smoking compared with those who continue.]
hormone supplementation, and TNF antagonists in reversing undernutrition and improving functional
status and prognosis in COPD have been disappointing.
Pulmonary rehabilitation:
Pulmonary rehabilitation programs serve as adjuncts to drug treatment to
improve physical function; many hospitals and health care organizations offer formal multidisciplinary
rehabilitation programs. Pulmonary rehabilitation includes exercise, education, and behavioral
interventions. Treatment should be individualized; patients and family members are taught about COPD
and medical treatments, and patients are encouraged to take as much responsibility for personal care as
possible. The benefits of rehabilitation are greater independence and improved quality of life and
exercise capacity. Pulmonary rehabilitation typically does not improve pulmonary function or increase
longevity, however. A carefully integrated rehabilitation program helps patients with severe COPD
accommodate to physiologic limitations while providing realistic expectations for improvement. Patients
with severe disease require a minimum of 3 mo of rehabilitation to benefit and should continue with
maintenance programs.
An exercise program can be helpful in the home, in the hospital, or in institutional settings. Graded
exercise can ameliorate skeletal muscle deconditioning resulting from inactivity or prolonged
hospitalization for respiratory failure. Specific training of respiratory muscles is less helpful than general
aerobic conditioning.
A typical training program begins with slow walking on a treadmill or unloaded cycling on an ergometer for
a few minutes. Duration and exercise load are progressively increased over 4 to 6 wk until the patient can
exercise for 20 to 30 min nonstop with manageable dyspnea. Patients with very severe COPD can usually
achieve an exercise regimen of walking for 30 min at 1 to 2 mph. Maintenance exercise should be done 3
===PAGE:2067===
to 4 times/wk to maintain fitness levels. O
saturation is monitored, and supplemental O
is provided as
needed.
Upper extremity resistance training helps the patient in doing daily tasks (eg, bathing, dressing, house
cleaning). The usual benefits of exercise are modest increases in lower extremity strength, endurance,
and maximum O
consumption.
Patients should be taught ways to conserve energy during activities of daily living and to pace their
activities. Difficulties in sexual function should be discussed and advice should be given on using energyconserving techniques for sexual gratification.
Surgery:
Surgical options for treatment of severe COPD include lung volume reduction and
transplantation.
Lung volume reduction surgery
consists of resecting nonfunctioning emphysematous areas. The
procedure improves exercise tolerance and decreases 2-yr mortality in patients with severe,
predominantly upper-lung emphysema who have low baseline exercise capacity after pulmonary
rehabilitation. Other patients may experience symptom relief and improved exercise capacity after
surgery, but mortality has been the same as or increased when compared with that for drug therapy. The
effect on ABGs is variable and not predictable, but most patients who require O
before surgery continue
to need it. Long-term effects of the procedure are unknown. Improvement is less than that with lung
transplantation. The mechanism of improvement is believed to be enhanced lung recoil and improved
diaphragmatic function. Operative mortality is about 5%. The best candidates for lung volume reduction
surgery are patients with an FEV
20 to 40% of predicted, a DLCO > 20% of predicted, significantly
impaired exercise capacity, heterogeneous pulmonary disease on CT with an upper-lobe predominance,
PaCO
< 50 mm Hg, and absence of severe pulmonary hypertension and coronary artery disease.
Rarely, patients have extremely large bullae that compress the functional lung. These patients can be
helped by surgical resection of these bullae, with resulting relief of symptoms and improved pulmonary
function. Generally, resection is most beneficial for patients with bullae affecting more than one third of a
hemithorax and an FEV
about half of the predicted normal value. Improved pulmonary function is related
to the amount of normal or minimally diseased lung tissue that was compressed by the resected bullae.
Serial chest x-rays and CT scans are the most useful procedures for determining whether a patient's
functional status is due to compression of viable lung by bullae or to generalized emphysema. A markedly
reduced DLCO (< 40% predicted) indicates widespread emphysema and suggests a poorer outcome from
surgical resection.
Single-lung transplantation
has largely replaced double-lung transplantation in patients with COPD.
Candidates for transplantation are patients < 60 to 65 yr with an FEV
< 25% predicted after
bronchodilator therapy or with severe pulmonary hypertension. The
goal of lung transplantation is to
improve quality of life, because survival time is rarely increased. The 5-yr survival after transplantation for
emphysema is 45 to 60%. Lifelong immunosuppression is required, with the attendant risk of opportunistic
infections.
Treatment of Acute COPD Exacerbation
• O
supplementation
• Bronchodilators
• Corticosteroids
• Antibiotics
• Sometimes ventilatory assistance
The immediate objectives are to ensure adequate oxygenation and near-normal blood pH, reverse airway
===PAGE:2068===
The immediate objectives are to ensure adequate oxygenation and near-normal blood pH, reverse airway
obstruction, and treat any cause.
The cause of an acute exacerbation is usually unknown, although some acute exacerbations result from
bacterial or viral infections. Smoking, irritative inhalational exposure, and high levels of air pollution also
contribute. Mild exacerbations often can be treated on an outpatient basis in patients with adequate home
support. Elderly, frail patients and patients with comorbidities, a history of respiratory failure, or acute
changes in ABG measurements are admitted to the hospital for observation and treatment. Patients with
life-threatening exacerbations manifested by uncorrected moderate to severe acute hypoxemia, acute
respiratory acidosis, new arrhythmias, or deteriorating respiratory function despite hospital treatment
should be admitted to the ICU and their respiratory status monitored frequently.
Oxygen:
Most patients require O
supplementation, even those who do not need it chronically.
Hypercapnia may worsen in patients given O
. This worsening has traditionally been thought to result
from an attenuation of hypoxic respiratory drive. However, increased V/Q mismatch probably is a more
important factor. Before O
administration, pulmonary vasoconstriction minimizes V/Q mismatch by
decreasing perfusion of the most poorly ventilated areas of the lungs. Increased V/Q mismatch occurs
because O
administration attenuates this hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. The Haldane effect may
also contribute to worsening hypercapnia, although this theory is controversial. The Haldane effect is a
decrease in Hb's affinity for CO
, which results in increased amounts of CO
dissolved in plasma. O
administration, even though it may worsen hypercapnia, is recommended; many patients with COPD have
chronic as well as acute hypercapnia and thus severe CNS depression is unlikely unless PaCO
is > 85
mm Hg. The target level for PaO
is about 60 mm Hg; higher levels offer little advantage and increase the
risk of hypercapnia. O
is given via Venturi mask so it can be closely regulated, and the patient is closely
monitored. Patients whose condition deteriorates with O
therapy (eg, those with severe acidemia or
CNS depression) require ventilatory assistance.
Many patients who require home O
for the first time when they are discharged from the hospital after an
exacerbation improve within 30 days and no longer require O
. Thus, the need for home O
should be
reassessed 60 to 90 days after discharge.
Ventilatory assistance:
Noninvasive positivepressure ventilation (eg, pressure support or bilevel
positive airway pressure ventilation by face mask— is an alternative to full mechanical
ventilation. Noninvasive ventilation appears to decrease the need for intubation, reduce hospital stay, and
reduce mortality in patients with severe exacerbations (defined as a pH < 7.30 in hemodynamically stable
patients not at immediate risk of respiratory arrest). Noninvasive ventilation appears to have no effect in
patients with less severe exacerbation. However, it may be indicated for patients with less severe
exacerbations whose ABGs worsen despite initial drug or O
therapy or who appear to be imminent
candidates for full mechanical ventilation but who do not require intubation for control of the airway or
sedation for agitation. Deterioration while receiving noninvasive ventilation necessitates invasive
mechanical ventilation.
Deteriorating ABG values and mental status and progressive respiratory fatigue are indications for
endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. Ventilator settings, management strategies, and
complications are discussed elsewhere (. Risk factors for ventilatory dependence include an FEV
< 0.5 L, stable ABGs with a PaO
< 50
mm Hg, or a PaCO
> 60 mm Hg, severe exercise limitation, and poor nutritional status. Therefore, a
discussion of patients' wishes regarding intubation and mechanical ventilation should be initiated and
documented (. However, overconcern about possible ventilator dependence should not delay
management of acute respiratory failure; many patients who require mechanical ventilation can return to
their pre-exacerbation level of health.
In patients who require prolonged intubation (eg, > 2 wk), a tracheostomy is indicated
to facilitate comfort,
communication, and eating. With a good multidisciplinary rehabilitation program, including nutritional and
psychologic support (, many patients who require prolonged mechanical ventilation can be
successfully liberated and can return to their former level of function. Specialized programs are available
===PAGE:2069===
for patients who remain ventilator-dependent after acute respiratory failure. Some patients can remain off
the ventilator during the day. For patients with adequate home support, training of family members can
permit some patients to be sent home with ventilators.
Drug therapy:

β
-Agonists and anticholinergics, with or without corticosteroids, should be started
concurrently with O
therapy (regardless of how O
is administered) with the aim of reversing airway
obstruction. Methylxanthines, once considered essential to treatment of acute COPD exacerbations, are
no longer used; toxicities exceed benefits.
Short-acting
β
-agonists
are the cornerstone of drug therapy for acute exacerbations. The most widely
used drug is albuterol 2.5 mg by nebulizer or 2 to 4 puffs (100
μ
g/puff) by metered-dose inhaler q 2 to 6 h.
Inhalation using a metered-dose inhaler causes rapid bronchodilation; there are no data indicating that
doses taken with nebulizers are more effective than the same doses correctly taken with metered-dose
inhalers. In life-threatening exacerbations, risks of the exacerbation usually exceed those of high-dose
α
-
agonists; thus,
β
-agonists may be given continuously via nebulizer until improvement occurs.
Ipratropium
, the most commonly used anticholinergic, is effective in acute COPD exacerbations and
should be given concurrently or alternating with
β
-agonists. Dosage is 0.25 to 0.5 mg by nebulizer or 2 to
4 inhalations (17 to 18
μ
g of drug delivered per puff) by metered-dose inhaler q 4 to 6 h. Ipratropium
generally provides bronchodilating effect similar to that of usual recommended doses of
α
-agonists. The
role of the longer-acting anticholinergic tiotropium in treating acute exacerbations has not been defined.
Corticosteroids
should be begun immediately for all but mild exacerbations. Options include prednisone
30 to 60 mg po once/day for 5 days or tapered over 7 to 14 days, or methylprednisolone 60 to 500 mg IV
once/day for 3 days and then tapered over 7 to 14 days. These drugs are equivalent in their acute
effects; inhaled corticosteroids have no role in the treatment of acute exacerbations.
Antibiotics
are recommended for exacerbations in patients with purulent sputum. Some physicians give
antibiotics empirically for change in sputum color or for nonspecific chest x-ray abnormalities. Routine
cultures and Gram stains are not necessary before treatment unless an unusual or resistant organism is
suspected (eg, in hospitalized, institutionalized, or immunosuppressed patients). Drugs directed against
oral flora are indicated. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 160 mg/800 mg po bid, amoxicillin 250 to 500 mg
po tid, tetracycline 250 mg po qid, and doxycycline 50 to 100 mg po bid given for 7 to 14 days are all
effective and inexpensive. Choice of drug is dictated by local patterns of bacterial sensitivity and patient
history. If the patient is seriously ill or if clinical evidence suggests that the infectious organisms are
resistant, more expensive 2nd-line drugs can be used. These drugs include amoxicillin/clavulanate 250 to
500 mg po tid, fluoroquinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin), 2nd-generation cephalosporins (eg,
cefuroxime, cefaclor), and extended-spectrum macrolides (eg, azithromycin, clarithromycin). These drugs
are effective against
β
-lactamase-producing strains of
H. influenzae
and
M. catarrhalis
but have not been
shown to be more effective than first-line drugs for most patients. Patients can be taught to recognize a
change in sputum from normal to purulent as a sign of impending exacerbation and to start a 10- to 14day course of antibiotic therapy. Long-term antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended only for patients with
underlying structural changes in the lung, such as bronchiectasis or infected bullae.
Antitussives
, such as dextromethorphan and benzonatate, have little role.
Opioids
(eg, codeine, hydrocodone, oxycodone) should be used judiciously for relief of symptoms (eg,
severe coughing paroxysms, pain) insofar as these drugs may suppress a productive cough, impair
mental status, and cause constipation.
End-of-life care:
With very severe disease, particularly when death is imminent, exercise is unwarranted
and activities of daily living are arranged to minimize energy expenditure. For example, patients may
arrange to live on one floor of the house, have several small meals rather than fewer large meals, and
avoid wearing shoes that must be tied. End-of-life care should be discussed, including whether to pursue
mechanical ventilation, the use of palliative sedation, and appointment of a surrogate medical decisionmaker in the event of the patient's incapacitation.
α
-Antitrypsin Deficiency
===PAGE:2070===
α
-Antitrypsin deficiency is congenital lack of a primary lung antiprotease,
α
-antitrypsin, which
leads to increased protease-mediated tissue destruction and emphysema in adults. Hepatic
accumulation of abnormal
α
-antitrypsin can cause liver disease in both children and adults.
Serum
α
-antitrypsin level < 11
μ
mol/L (< 80 mg/dL) confirms the diagnosis. Treatment is
smoking cessation, bronchodilators, early treatment of infection, and, in selected cases,
α
-
antitrypsin replacement. Severe liver disease may require transplantation. Prognosis is related
mainly to degree of lung impairment.
Pathophysiology
α
-Antitrypsin is a neutrophil elastase inhibitor (an antiprotease), the major function of which is to protect
the lungs from proteasemediated tissue destruction. Most
α
-antitrypsin is synthesized by hepatocytes
and monocytes and passively diffuses through the circulation into the lungs; some is secondarily
produced by alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells. The protein conformation (and hence
functionality) and quantity of circulating
α
-antitrypsin are determined by codominant expression of
parental alleles; > 90 different alleles have been identified and described by protease inhibitor (PI*)
phenotype.
Liver:
Inheritance of some variant alleles causes a change in conformation of the
α
-antitrypsin
molecule, leading to polymerization and retention within hepatocytes. The hepatic accumulation of
aberrant
α
-antitrypsin molecules causes neonatal cholestatic jaundice in 10 to 20% of patients; the
remaining patients are probably able to degrade the abnormal protein, although the exact protective
mechanism is unclear. About 20% of cases of neonatal hepatic involvement result in development of
cirrhosis in childhood. About 10% of patients without childhood liver disease develop cirrhosis as adults.
Liver involvement increases the risk of liver cancer.
Lungs:
In the lungs,
α
-antitrypsin deficiency increases neutrophil elastase activity, which facilitates
tissue destruction leading to emphysema (especially in smokers, because cigarette smoke also increases
protease activity).
α
-Antitrypsin deficiency accounts for 1 to 2% of all cases of COPD.
α
-Antitrypsin
deficiency most commonly causes early emphysema; symptoms and signs of lung involvement occur
earlier in smokers than in nonsmokers but in both cases are rare before age 25.
Other tissues:
Other disorders possibly associated with
α
-antitrypsin allele variants include panniculitis
(an inflammatory disorder of the subcutaneous tissue), life-threatening hemorrhage (through a mutation
that converts
α
-antitrypsin from a neutrophil elastase to a coagulation factor inhibitor), aneurysms,
ulcerative colitis, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-positive vasculitis, and glomerular
disease.
Classification
The normal PI phenotype is PI*MM. More than 95% of people with severe
α
-antitrypsin deficiency and
emphysema are homozygous for the Z allele (PI*ZZ) and have
α
-antitrypsin levels of about 30 to 40
mg/dL (5 to 6
μ
mol/L). Prevalence in the general population is 1/1500 to 1/5000. Most are whites of
Northern European descent; the Z allele is rare in people of Asian descent and blacks. Though
emphysema is common among PI*ZZ patients, many nonsmoking patients who are homozygous for PI*ZZ
do not develop emphysema; patients who do typically have a family history of COPD. PI*ZZ smokers
have a lower life expectancy than PI*ZZ nonsmokers, who have a lower life expectancy than PI*MM
nonsmokers and smokers. Nonsmoking people who are PI*MZ heterozygous are more likely to
experience more rapid decreases in forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
) over time than do people in
the general population.
Other rare phenotypes include PI*SZ and two types with nonexpressing alleles, PI*Z-null and PI*null-null
(see
Table 192-4
). The null phenotype leads to undetectable serum levels of
α
-antitrypsin. Normal serum
===PAGE:2071===
levels of malfunctioning
α
-antitrypsin may occur with rare mutations.
Symptoms and Signs
Neonates with hepatic involvement present with cholestatic jaundice and hepatomegaly during the first
week of life; jaundice usually resolves by 2 to 4 mo of age. Cirrhosis may develop in childhood or
adulthood (symptoms and signs of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma are discussed elsewhere in
THE MANUAL). Adults with emphysema have symptoms and signs of COPD (, including
dyspnea, cough, wheezing, and prolonged expiration. Severity of pulmonary disease varies greatly
depending on phenotype, smoking status, and other factors. Pulmonary function is well preserved in
some PI*ZZ smokers and can be severely impaired in some PI*ZZ nonsmokers. PI*ZZ people identified in
[Table 192-4.
Expression of Phenotype in
α
-Antitrypsin Deficiency]
population surveys (ie, those without symptoms or pulmonary disease) tend to have better pulmonary
function, whether they smoke or not, than do index people (those identified because they have pulmonary
disease). Airflow obstruction occurs more frequently in men and in people with asthma, recurrent
respiratory infections, occupational dust exposure, and a family history of pulmonary disease.
Panniculitis, an inflammatory disorder of subcutaneous soft tissue, manifests as indurated, tender,
discolored plaques or nodules, typically on the lower abdomen, buttocks, and thighs (.
Diagnosis
• Serum
α
-antitrypsin level
• Genotyping
α
-Antitrypsin deficiency is suspected in the following:
• Smokers who develop emphysema before age 45
• Nonsmokers without occupational exposures who develop emphysema at any age
• Patients whose chest x-ray shows predominately lower lung emphysema
• Patients with a family history of emphysema or unexplained cirrhosis
• Patients with panniculitis
• Neonates with jaundice or liver enzyme elevations
• Patients with unexplained bronchiectasis or liver disease
Diagnosis is made by identifying serum
α
-antitrypsin levels < 80 mg/dL (< 11
μ
mol/L) if measured by the
radial immunodiffusion method or levels < 50 mg/dL (< 6.9
μ
mol/L) if measured by nephelometry. Patients
with low levels should have confirmation by genotyping.
Prognosis
As a group, people with severe
α
-antitrypsin deficiency who have never smoked have a normal life
expectancy and only moderate impairment of pulmonary function. The most common cause of death in
α
-antitrypsin deficiency is emphysema, followed by cirrhosis, often with hepatic carcinoma.
Treatment
• Supportive care
===PAGE:2072===
• For pulmonary disease, often
α
-antitrypsin replacement
Treatment of pulmonary disease is with purified human
α
-antitrypsin (60 mg/kg IV over 45 to 60 min
given once/wk or 250 mg/kg over 4 to 6 h given once/mo [pooled only]), which can maintain the serum
α
-
antitrypsin level above a target protective level of 80 mg/dL (35% of normal). Because emphysema
causes permanent structural change, therapy cannot repair damaged lung structure or improve lung
function but is given to halt progression. Treatment is expensive and is therefore reserved for nonsmoking
patients in whom both alleles are abnormal and who have mild to moderately abnormal pulmonary
function and confirmation of diagnosis by low serum
α
-antitrypsin levels. It is not indicated for patients
who have severe disease or for patients in whom one or both alleles are normal.
Smoking cessation, use of bronchodilators, and early treatment of respiratory infections are particularly
important for
α
-antitrypsin-deficient patients with emphysema. Experimental treatments, such as phenyl
butyric acid that can reverse the misfolding of the abnormal
α
-antitrypsin proteins in the hepatocytes,
thereby stimulating protein release, are being investigated. For severely impaired people < 60 yr, lung
transplantation should be considered. Lung volume reduction in treating the emphysema of
α
-antitrypsin
deficiency is controversial. Gene therapy is under study.
Treatment of liver disease is supportive. Enzyme replacement does not help because the disease is
caused by abnormal processing rather than by enzyme deficiency. Liver transplantation may be used for
patients with liver failure.
Treatment of panniculitis is not well defined. Corticosteroids, antimalarials, and tetracyclines have been
used.
===PAGE:2073===
Chapter 193. Sleep Apnea
Introduction
Breathing disorders that occur during sleep include obstructive sleep apnea and central sleep apnea.
Less severe forms include snoring and upper airway resistance syndrome. The term sleep-disordered
breathing is used to encompass all such disorders. (See also
Chapter 177
.)
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) consists of episodes of partial or complete closure of the upper
airway that occur during sleep and lead to breathing cessation (defined as a period of apnea >
10 sec). Symptoms include restlessness, snoring, recurrent awakening, morning headache, and
excessive daytime sleepiness. Diagnosis is based on sleep history and polysomnography.
Treatment is with nasal continuous positive airway pressure, oral appliances, and, in refractory
cases, surgery. Prognosis is good with treatment. Most cases remain undiagnosed and
untreated and are often associated with hypertension, heart failure, and injury or death due to
motor vehicle crashes and other accidents resulting from hypersomnolence.
In at-risk patients, sleep destabilizes patency of the upper airway, leading to partial or complete
obstruction of the nasopharynx, oropharynx, or both. When breathing is diminished but not absent, the
condition is called obstructive sleep hypopnea.
The prevalence of OSA is 2 to 9% in adults; the condition is under-recognized and often undiagnosed
even in symptomatic patients. OSA is up to 4 times more common among men and 7 times more common
among people who are obese (ie, body mass index [BMI] > 30). Severe OSA (apnea-hypopnea index
[AHI] > 30/h) increases the risk of death in middle-aged men.
Etiology
Anatomic risk factors include obesity, an oropharynx "crowded" by a short or retracted mandible, a
prominent tongue base or tonsils, a rounded head shape and a short neck, a neck circumference > 43
cm, thick lateral pharyngeal walls, or lateral parapharyngeal fat pads. Other identified risk factors include
postmenopausal status, aging, and alcohol or sedative use. A family history of sleep apnea is present in
25 to 40% of cases, perhaps reflective of intrinsic ventilatory drive or craniofacial structure. The likelihood
of other family members having sleep apnea increases as more family members have it.
Many people with OSA have disorders such as hypertension, stroke, diabetes, gastroesophageal reflux
disease, nocturnal angina, heart failure, acromegaly, and hypothyroidism. OSA can also be associated
with cardiac arrhythmias (eg, atrial fibrillation).
Because obesity is a common risk factor for both OSA and obesity-hypoventilation syndrome (,
the two conditions may coexist.
Airway obstruction causes paroxysms of inspiratory effort, reductions in gas exchange, disruption of
normal sleep architecture, and partial or complete arousals from sleep. Factors that may interact to cause
the characteristic symptoms and signs include hypoxia, hypercapnia, and sleep fragmentation.
OSA is an extreme form of sleep-related upper airway resistance. Less severe forms that do not cause
O
desaturation include snoring; pharyngeal airflow resistance causing noisy inspiration but without sleep
arousals; and upper airway resistance syndrome, characterized by crescendo snoring terminated by
respiratory effort-related arousals (RERAs). People with upper airway resistance syndrome are typically
younger and less obese than those with OSA and they complain of daytime sleepiness more than do
those with primary snoring. The symptoms, diagnostic evaluation, and treatment of snoring and upper
airway resistance syndrome are otherwise the same as for OSA.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2074===
Although loud disruptive snoring is reported by 85% of OSA patients, most people who snore do not have
OSA. Other symptoms of OSA may include choking, gasping, or snorting during sleep, restless and
unrefreshing sleep, and difficulty staying asleep. Most patients are unaware of these symptoms (because
they occur during sleep) but are informed of them by bed partners, roommates, or housemates.
When awake, patients may experience hypersomnolence, fatigue, and impaired concentration. The
frequency of sleep complaints and the degree of daytime sleepiness do not correlate well with number of
nocturnal arousals.
Diagnosis
• Symptom criteria
• Sleep studies
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with identifiable risk factors, symptoms, or both. Criteria for
diagnosis consist of daytime symptoms, nighttime symptoms, and sleep monitoring that documents > 5
episodes of hypopnea and apnea per hour. Specifically, in regard to symptoms, there should be ≥ 1 of the
following:
• Daytime sleepiness, unintentional sleep episodes, unrefreshing sleep, fatigue, or insomnia
• Awakening with breath holding, gasping, or choking
• Reports by a bed partner of loud snoring, breathing interruptions, or both in the patient's sleep
The patient and any bed partners, roommates, or housemates should be interviewed. The differential
diagnosis of excessive daytime sleepiness is broad ( and includes
• Reduced quantity or quality of sleep due to poor sleep hygiene
• Sedation or mental status changes due to drugs, chronic diseases (including cardiovascular or
respiratory diseases), metabolic disturbances, and accompanying therapies
• Depression
• Alcohol or drug abuse
• Narcolepsy
• Other primary sleep disorders (eg, periodic limb movement disorder, restless legs syndrome)
An extended sleep history should be taken in all patients who
• Are over the age of about 65
• Report daytime fatigue, sleepiness, or insomnia
• Are overweight (BMI > 30)
• Have poorly controlled hypertension (which may be caused or exacerbated by OSA), heart failure (which
may cause OSA), stroke, or diabetes
Most patients who report only snoring, without other symptoms or cardiovascular risks, do not need an
extensive evaluation for OSA.
The physical examination should include evaluation for nasal obstruction, tonsillar hypertrophy, and
===PAGE:2075===
pharyngeal structure and identification of clinical features of hypothyroidism and acromegaly.
The diagnosis is confirmed with polysomnography (, which includes continuous measurement of breathing effort by plethysmography, airflow at the
nose and mouth using flow sensors, O
saturation by oximetry, sleep architecture by EEG, chin
electromyography (looking for hypotonia), and electro-oculograms to assess the occurrence of rapid eye
movements. Polysomnography records and helps classify stages of sleep and the occurrence and
duration of apneic and hypopneic periods. The patient is also observed by video, and ECG monitoring is
used to determine whether arrhythmias occur in conjunction with the apneic episodes. Other variables
evaluated include limb muscle activity (to assess nonrespiratory causes of sleep arousal, such as restless
legs syndrome and periodic limb movements disorder) and body position (apnea may occur only in the
supine position).
The common summary measure used to describe respiratory disturbances during sleep is the AHI, which
is the total number of episodes of apnea and hypopnea occurring during sleep divided by the hours of
sleep time. AHI values can be computed for different sleep stages. The respiratory disturbance index
(RDI) is a similar measure, describing the number of times per hour that blood O
saturation falls > 3%
but also includes RERAs. If EEG monitoring is used, an arousal index (AI) can be computed, which is the
number of arousals per hour of sleep. The AI may be correlated with AHI or RDI, but about 20% of
apneas and desaturation episodes are not accompanied by arousals, or other causes of arousals are
present. An AHI > 5 is required for the diagnosis of OSA; a value of > 15 indicates a moderate level of
sleep apnea and a value > 30 indicates a severe level of apnea. Snoring loudly enough to be heard in the
next room confers a 10-fold increase in the likelihood of having AHI > 5. The AI and RDI correlate only
moderately with a patient's symptoms.
Ambulatory diagnostic tools are being used more often to diagnose OSA. Portable monitors can measure
heart rate, pulse oximetry, effort, position, and nasal airflow to provide estimates of respiratory
disturbances during self-reported sleep, thereby providing a value for AHI/RDI. Ambulatory diagnostic
tools are often used in combination with tools that calculate patients' risk (the sensitivity and specificity of
the test depend on pre-test probability). When ambulatory diagnosis is used, coexisting sleep disorders
(eg, restless legs syndrome) are not excluded. Follow-up polysomnography may still be needed.
Adjunctive testing may include upper airway imaging, measurement of thyroid-stimulating hormone, and
other tests as appropriate to assess chronic medical conditions associated with OSA.
Prognosis
Prognosis is excellent if effective treatment is instituted.
Untreated or unrecognized OSA leads to cognitive impairment as a result of sleeplessness, which, in turn,
can lead to serious injury or death caused by accidents, especially motor vehicle crashes. Sleepy patients
should be warned of the risk of driving, operating heavy machinery, or engaging in other activities during
which sleep attacks would be hazardous.
Adverse effects of hypersomnolence, such as loss of employment and sexual dysfunction, can affect
families considerably.
Long-term cardiovascular sequelae of untreated OSA include poorly controlled hypertension and heart
failure.
In addition, perioperative complications, including cardiac arrest, have been attributed to OSA, probably
because anesthesia can cause airway obstruction after a mechanical airway is removed. Patients should
therefore inform their anesthesiologist of the diagnosis before undergoing surgery and should expect to
receive continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) when they receive preoperative drugs and during
recovery.
Treatment
===PAGE:2076===
• Control of risk factors
• CPAP or oral appliances
• Possibly airway surgery for anatomic encroachment or intractable disease
The aim of treatment is to reduce episodes of hypoxia and sleep fragmentation; treatment is tailored to
the patient and to the degree of impairment. Cure is defined as a resolution of symptoms with AHI
reduction below a threshold, usually 10/h.
Treatment is directed first at risk factors and then at OSA itself. Specific treatments for OSA include CPAP,
oral appliances, and airway surgery.
Control of risk factors:
Initial treatment aims at optimal control of modifiable risk factors, including
obesity, alcohol and sedative use, hypothyroidism, acromegaly, and other chronic disorders. Although
modest weight loss (15%) may result in clinically meaningful improvement, weight loss is extremely
difficult for most people, especially those who are fatigued or sleepy. Bariatric surgery reverses symptoms
and improves AHI in 85% of morbidly obese (BMI > 40) patients.
CPAP:
Nasal CPAP is the treatment of choice for most patients with OSA and subjective daytime
sleepiness; adherence is lower in patients who do not experience sleepiness. CPAP improves upper
airway patency by applying positive pressure to the collapsible upper airway segment. Effective
pressures typically range from 3 to 15 cm H
O. Disease severity does not correlate with pressure
requirements. If clinical improvement is not apparent, pressure can be titrated during monitoring with
repeat polysomnography. Regardless of improvement in the AHI, CPAP will reduce cognitive impairment
and BP. If CPAP is withdrawn, symptoms recur over several days, though short interruptions of therapy for
acute medical conditions are usually well tolerated. Duration of therapy is indefinite.
Failures of nasal CPAP are common because of limited patient adherence. Adverse effects include
dryness and nasal irritation, which can be alleviated in some cases with the use of warm humidified air,
and discomfort resulting from a poorly fitting mask.
CPAP can be augmented with inspiratory assistance (bilevel positive airway pressure) for patients with
obesity-hypoventilation syndrome (.
Oral appliances:
Oral appliances are designed to advance the mandible or, at the very least, prevent
retrusion with sleep. Some are also designed to pull the tongue forward. Use of these appliances to treat
both snoring and OSA is gaining acceptance. Comparisons of appliances to CPAP show equivalence in
mild to moderate OSA, but results of costeffectiveness studies are not available.
Airway surgery:
Surgical correction of upper airway obstruction caused by enlarged tonsils and nasal
polyps should be considered. Surgery for macroglossia or micrognathia is also an option. Surgery is a
first-line treatment if anatomic encroachment is identified; otherwise, surgery is a second-tier approach.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) is the most commonly used procedure. It involves resection of
submucosal tissue from the tonsillar pillars to the arytenoepiglottic folds, including resection of the
adenoids, to enlarge the upper airway. Equivalence with CPAP was shown in one study using CPAP as a
bridge to surgery, but the interventions have not been directly compared. UPPP may not be successful in
patients who are morbidly obese or who have anatomic narrowing of the airway. Moreover, recognition of
sleep apnea after UPPP is obscured because of a lack of snoring. Such silent obstructions may be as
severe as apneic episodes before surgical intervention.
Adjunctive surgical procedures include midline glossectomy, hyoid advancement, and mandibulomaxillary
advancement. The
latter is often offered as a 2nd-stage procedure if UPPP is not curative. Studies of
multistage approaches across centers in unselected patients are not available.
Tracheostomy is the most effective therapeutic maneuver for OSA but is done as a last resort. It bypasses
the site of obstruction and is indicated for patients most severely affected (eg, those with cor pulmonale).
===PAGE:2077===
Laser-assisted uvuloplasty, uvular splints, and radiofrequency tissue ablation have been promoted as
treatments for loud snoring in patients without OSA. Although they may transiently decrease snoring
loudness, efficacy declines over months to years.
Adjunctive treatments:
Adjunctive treatments are commonly used but have no proven role as first-line
treatment.
Modafinil can be used for residual sleepiness in OSA in patients who are effectively using CPAP.
Supplemental O
improves blood oxygenation, but a beneficial clinical effect cannot be predicted. Also,
O
may provoke respiratory acidosis and morning headache in some patients.
A number of drugs have been used to stimulate ventilatory drive (eg, tricyclic antidepressants,
theophylline) but cannot be routinely advocated because of limited efficacy, a low therapeutic index, or
both.
Nasal dilatory devices and throat sprays sold OTC for snoring have not been studied sufficiently to prove
benefits for OSA.
Patient education and support:
An informed patient and family are better able to cope with a treatment
strategy, including tracheostomy. Patient support groups provide helpful information and effectively
support timely treatment and follow-up.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Children
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is episodes of partial or complete closure of the upper airway
that occur during sleep and lead to breathing cessation. Symptoms include snoring and
sometimes restless sleep, nocturnal sweating, and morning headache. Complications may
include growth disturbance, cor pulmonale, pulmonary hypertension, and learning or behavioral
disturbances. Diagnosis is by polysomnography. Treatment is usually adenotonsillectomy.
The prevalence of OSA in children is about 2%. The condition is underdiagnosed and can lead to serious
sequelae.
Etiology
Risk factors for OSA in children include the following:
• Enlarged tonsils or adenoids
• Certain dental abnormalities (eg, large overbite)
• Obesity
• Craniofacial abnormalities (eg, micrognathia, retrognathia, midfacial hypoplasia, excessively angled skull
base)
• Certain drugs (eg, sedatives, opioids)
• Mucopolysaccharidoses
• Disorders causing hypotonia or hypertonia (eg, Down syndrome, cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophies)
• Possibly genetic factors
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2078===
Almost all affected children snore. Other sleep symptoms may include restless sleep, sweating at night,
and observed apnea. Daytime symptoms may include nasal obstruction, mouth breathing, morning
headache, and problems concentrating. Children may have nocturnal enuresis. Excessive daytime
sleepiness is less common than among adults with OSA.
Complications of OSA may include cor pulmonale, pulmonary hypertension, growth disturbance, and
problems with learning and behavior.
Examination may reveal no abnormalities or may show anatomic facial, nasal, or oral abnormalities
contributing to obstruction, increase in the pulmonic component of the 2nd heart sound, or growth
disturbance.
Diagnosis
• Polysomnography with end-tidal CO
monitoring
OSA is considered in children with snoring or risk factors. If symptoms of OSA are present, diagnostic
testing is done; clinical criteria are not accurate. Diagnosis is by overnight polysomnography in a sleep
laboratory that includes end-tidal CO
monitoring. The accuracy of home polysomnography is under
evaluation. Although criteria for OSA in adults do not apply to children, experts disagree on what criteria
should be used to diagnose OSA in children. Outcome data are lacking. However, OSA is generally
considered present if polysomnography shows the following:
• > 1 apneic or > 2 hypopneic events/h (an event lasts > 2 breaths)
• End-tidal CO
> 50 mm Hg for > 10% total sleep time together with paradoxical respiration or snoring in
patients without lung disorders
Patients with OSA are evaluated for cardiopulmonary complications with ECG and chest x-ray.
Treatment
• Adenotonsillectomy or correction of congenital micrognathia
• CPAP as 2nd-line therapy
Children who are otherwise healthy are treated with adenotonsillectomy, which is usually effective.
Adenoidectomy alone is often ineffective. The risk of perioperative airway obstruction is higher among
children with OSA than among children without OSA who undergo adenotonsillectomy; thus, close
monitoring is important.
For children who are not otherwise healthy, who have complex anatomic abnormalities or genetic
conditions altering respiratory control, or who have cardiopulmonary complications, a physician
experienced in management of OSA in children should be consulted. Adenotonsillectomy may be effective
or may provide some relief. Depending on the anatomic abnormality causing OSA, an alternate surgical
procedure may be indicated (eg, uvulopalatopharyngoplasty, tongue or midface surgeries).
CPAP can be used for children who are not candidates for corrective surgery or who continue to have
OSA after adenotonsillar surgery. Weight loss can decrease OSA severity in obese children and has other
health benefits but is rarely sufficient treatment for OSA as monotherapy. Nocturnal O
supplementation
may help prevent hypoxemia until definitive treatment can be accomplished. Corticosteroids and
antibiotics are not usually indicated.
Central Sleep Apnea
Central sleep apnea (CSA) is a heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by changes in
ventilatory drive without airway obstruction. Most of these conditions cause asymptomatic
===PAGE:2079===
changes in breathing pattern during sleep.
Etiology
Patients with CSA fall into 2 groups. One group presents with hypercapnia with decreased ventilatory
drive. Causes include hypothyroidism and central lesions, such as brain stem infarctions, encephalitis,
and Arnold-Chiari malformation. This type of CSA may also complicate neuromuscular diseases (eg,
muscular dystrophy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, postpolio syndrome) and chest wall abnormalities
(notably, kyphoscoliosis). The other group presents with eucapnia or hypocapnia with increased
ventilatory drive but with sleep-induced apnea, periodic breathing, or both. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is a
discrete pattern of this form of CSA thought to be caused by delays in circulation time that, in turn, cause
a lag in recognition by respiratory centers of acidosis, hypoxia, or both (causing hyperpnea) and of
alkalosis, hypocapnia, or both (causing apnea). High altitude is another cause of recurrent CSA
manifesting with hypocapnia. Use of opioids can cause either hypercapneic or hypocapneic CSA.
Congenital central hypoventilation (a form of Ondine's curse) is a rare form of idiopathic CSA in neonates
and may be associated with Hirschsprung's disease. A mutation in the
PHOX2
gene is responsible for 80
to 90% of cases. This mutation produces variable phenotypes, and clinically evident cases are inherited
in a dominant pattern.
Symptoms and Signs
CSA is usually asymptomatic and is detected by caretakers or bed partners who notice long respiratory
pauses, shallow breaths, or restless sleep. Patients with hypercapnic forms may experience daytime
somnolence, lethargy, and morning headache.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is suspected on the basis of history and is confirmed by polysomnography. However, testing
may not be necessary if CSA causes no symptoms or is clearly related to an identifiable disorder. To
diagnose causes of CSA, brain or brain stem imaging may be indicated.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Primary treatment is optimal management of underlying conditions and avoidance of opioids and other
sedatives. Secondary treatment of symptomatic patients can be a trial of supplemental O
or, in patients
with hypercapnic CSA who have symptoms despite other treatments, noninvasive continuous or bi-level
positive airway pressure. Acetazolamide is effective in CSA caused by high altitude. Phrenic nerve pacing
is an option for children > 2 yr with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome.
===PAGE:2080===
Chapter 194. Pulmonary Embolism
Introduction
Pulmonary embolism (PE) is the occlusion of ≥ 1 pulmonary arteries by thrombi that originate
elsewhere, typically in the large veins of the lower extremities or pelvis. Risk factors are
conditions that impair venous return, conditions that cause endothelial injury or dysfunction,
and underlying hypercoagulable states. Symptoms are nonspecific and include dyspnea,
pleuritic chest pain, cough, and, in severe cases, syncope or cardiorespiratory arrest. Signs are
also nonspecific and may include tachypnea, tachycardia, hypotension, and a loud pulmonic
component of the 2nd heart sound. Diagnosis is based on a CT angiogram, ventilation/perfusion
scan, or a pulmonary arteriogram. Treatment is with anticoagulants and, sometimes, clot
dissolution with thrombolytics or surgical removal. Preventive measures include anticoagulants
and sometimes insertion of an inferior vena caval filter.
PE affects an estimated 117 people per 100,000 person years, resulting in about 350,000 cases yearly,
and causes up to 85,000 deaths/yr. PE affects mainly adults.
Etiology
Nearly all PEs arise from thrombi in the lower extremity or pelvic veins (deep venous thrombosis [DVT]
—. Thrombi in either the lower extremity or pelvic veins may be occult. Risk of embolization is
higher with thrombi proximal to the calf veins. Thromboemboli can also originate in upper extremity veins
(associated with central venous catheters) or from right-sided cardiac chambers. Risk factors for DVT and
PE are similar in children and adults and include conditions that impair venous return, conditions that
cause endothelial injury or dysfunction, and underlying hypercoagulability disorders (see
Table 194-1
). Bed rest and confinement without walking, even for a few hours, are common precipitators.
Pathophysiology
Once DVT develops, clots may dislodge and travel through the venous system and right side of the heart
to lodge in the pulmonary arteries, where they partially or completely occlude one or more vessels. The
consequences depend on the size and number of emboli, the pulmonary reaction, the underlying
condition of the lungs, and the ability of the body's intrinsic thrombolytic system to dissolve the clots.
[Table 194-1.
Risk Factors for Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Embolism]
Small emboli may have no acute physiologic effects; many begin to lyse immediately and resolve within
hours or days. Larger emboli can cause a reflex increase in ventilation (tachypnea), hypoxemia due to
ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch, shunting and low mixed venous O
content as a result of low
cardiac output, atelectasis due to alveolar hypocapnia
and abnormalities in surfactant, and an increase in
pulmonary vascular resistance caused by mechanical obstruction and vasoconstriction. Endogenous lysis
reduces most emboli, even those of moderate size, without treatment, and physiologic alterations
decrease over hours or days. Some emboli resist lysis and may organize and persist. Occasionally,
chronic residual obstruction leads to pulmonary hypertension (chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension) that may develop over years and result in chronic right heart failure. When large emboli
occlude major arteries, or when many small emboli occlude > 50% of the distal arterial system, right
ventricular pressure increases, causing acute right ventricular failure, failure with shock (massive PE), or
sudden death in severe cases. Risk factors for death include age > 70 yr, cancer, and COPD. The risk of
death depends on the degree and rate of rise of right-sided pressures and on the patient's underlying
cardiopulmonary status; higher pressures more commonly occur among patients with preexisting
cardiopulmonary disease. Otherwise healthy patients may survive a PE that occludes > 50% of the
pulmonary vascular bed.
Pulmonary infarction occurs in < 10% of patients diagnosed with PE. This low rate has been attributed to
the dual blood supply to the lung (ie, bronchial and pulmonary).
===PAGE:2081===
PE can also arise from nonthrombotic sources (see
Sidebar 194-1
).
Symptoms and Signs
Most PEs are small, physiologically insignificant, and asymptomatic. Even when present, symptoms are
nonspecific and vary in frequency and intensity, depending on the extent of pulmonary vascular occlusion
and preexisting cardiopulmonary function.
Larger emboli cause acute dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, or both. Dyspnea may be intermittent or occur
only with exercise. Less common symptoms include cough and hemoptysis. The first symptom in an
elderly patient may be altered mental status. Massive PE manifests with hypotension, tachycardia,
syncope, or cardiac arrest.
The most common signs of PE are tachycardia and tachypnea. Less commonly, patients have
hypotension, a loud 2nd heart sound (S
) due to a loud pulmonic component (P
), and crackles or
wheezing. In the presence of right ventricular failure, distended internal jugular veins and a right
ventricular heave may be evident, and right ventricular gallop (3rd and 4th heart sounds [S
and S]),
with or without tricuspid regurgitation, may be audible. Fever can occur; DVT and PE are often
overlooked causes of fever.
Pulmonary infarction is typically characterized by chest pain (mainly pleuritic), fever, and, occasionally,
hemoptysis. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension causes symptoms and signs of right heart
failure, including exertional dyspnea, easy fatigue, and peripheral edema that develops over months to
years.
Diagnosis
• High index of suspicion
• Assessment of pretest probability (based on clinical findings, pulse oximetry, and chest x-ray)
• Subsequent testing based on pre-test probability
Diagnosis is challenging, because symptoms and signs are nonspecific and diagnostic tests have
imperfect diagnostic accuracy or are invasive. Most important is to include PE in the differential diagnosis
when nonspecific symptoms, such as dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, fever, hemoptysis, and cough, are
encountered. Thus, PE should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients suspected of having
such conditions as cardiac ischemia, heart failure, COPD exacerbation, pneumothorax, pneumonia,
sepsis, acute chest syndrome (in patients with sickle cell disease), and acute anxiety with
hyperventilation. PE also should be considered in any elderly patient with tachypnea and altered mental
status.
Initial evaluation should include pulse oximetry and chest x-ray. Some experts also recommend ECG,
ABG, or both, sometimes to exclude other diagnoses (eg, acute MI). The chest x-ray usually is
nonspecific but may show atelectasis, focal infiltrates, an elevated hemidiaphragm, or a pleural effusion.
The classic findings of focal loss of vascular markings (Westermark's sign), a peripheral wedge-shaped
density (Hampton's hump), or enlargement of the right descending pulmonary artery (Palla's sign) are
suggestive but uncommon (ie, insensitive) and have an unknown specificity. Chest x-ray can also help
exclude pneumonia.
Pulse oximetry provides a quick way to assess oxygenation; hypoxemia is one sign of PE, and it requires
further evaluation. ABG measurement may show an increased alveolar to arterial oxygen (A-a) gradient
( or hypocapnia; one or both of these tests are moderately sensitive for PE but are not
specific. ABG testing should be considered particularly for patients with dyspnea or tachypnea who do not
have hypoxemia detected with pulse oximetry.
Sidebar 194-1 Nonthrombotic Pulmonary Embolism
===PAGE:2082===
PE caused by various nonthrombotic sources causes clinical syndromes that differ from those caused by
thrombotic PE. Treatment of all includes supportive measures.
Air embolism
is caused by introduction of large amounts of air into systemic veins or into the right side
of the heart, which then move to the pulmonary arterial system. Pulmonary outflow tract obstruction may
occur, which can be rapidly fatal. Causes include surgery, blunt trauma, defective or uncapped venous
catheters, and errors occurring during the insertion or removal of central venous catheters. Treatment
includes placement of patient in left lateral decubitus position, preferably in the Trendelenburg position
(ie, head lower than feet), to trap air in the apex of the right ventricle and thus prevent brain embolism and
supportive measures. Rapid decompression after underwater diving may cause microbubble formation in
the pulmonary circulation, a different problem, which results in endothelial damage, hypoxemia, and
diffuse infiltrates (.
Fat embolism
is caused by introduction of fat or bone marrow particles into the systemic venous system
and then into pulmonary arteries. Causes include fractures of long bones, orthopedic procedures,
microvascular occlusion or necrosis of bone marrow in patients with sickle cell crisis, and, rarely, toxic
modification of native or parenteral serum lipids. Fat embolism causes a pulmonary syndrome similar to
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), with severe hypoxemia of rapid onset often accompanied by
neurologic changes and a petechial rash. Early splinting of fractures of long bones and operative rather
than external fixation are thought to help prevent fat embolism.
Amniotic fluid embolism
is a rare syndrome caused by introduction of amniotic fluid into the maternal
venous and then pulmonary arterial system. The syndrome occurs around the time of labor (
or, even less often, during prepartum uterine manipulations. Patients can have cardiac and respiratory
distress due to anaphylaxis, vasoconstriction causing acute severe pulmonary hypertension, and direct
pulmonary microvascular toxicity with hypoxemia and pulmonary infiltrates.
Septic embolism
occurs when infected material embolizes to the lung. Causes include IV drug use,
right-sided infective endocarditis, and septic thrombophlebitis. Septic embolism causes symptoms and
signs of pneumonia or sepsis. Initially, nodular opacities appear on the chest x-ray; the appearance may
progress to peripheral infiltrates, and emboli may cavitate (particularly emboli caused by
Staphylococcus
aureus
). Treatment includes that of the underlying infection.
Foreign body embolism
caused by introduction of particulate matter into the pulmonary arterial system,
usually by IV injection of inorganic substances, such as talc by heroin users or elemental mercury by
patients with mental disorders. Focal pulmonary infiltrates may result.
Tumor embolism
is a rare complication of cancer (usually adenocarcinoma) in which neoplastic cells
from an organ enter the systemic venous and pulmonary arterial system, where they lodge, proliferate,
and obstruct flow. Patients typically present with dyspnea and pleuritic chest pain and signs of cor
pulmonale that develop over weeks to months. Diagnosis, which is suggested by micronodules or diffuse
pulmonary infiltrates on chest x-ray, can be confirmed by biopsy or occasionally by cytologic aspiration
and histologic study of pulmonary capillary blood.
ECG most often shows tachycardia and various ST-T wave abnormalities, which are not specific for PE
(see
Fig. 194-1
). An S
Q
T
or a new right bundle branch block may indicate the effect of abrupt rise in right
ventricular pressure on right ventricular conduction; these findings are moderately specific but insensitive,
occurring in only about 5% of patients. Right axis deviation (R > S in V
) and P-pulmonale may be
present. T-wave inversion in leads V
to V
also occurs.
Clinical probability:
Clinical probability of PE can be assessed by combining ECG and chest x-ray
findings with findings from the history and physical examination (see
Table 194-2
). Judgment of whether PE is more likely than an alternate diagnosis is somewhat subjective.
PE should probably be considered more likely if ≥ 1 of its symptoms and signs, particularly dyspnea,
===PAGE:2083===
hemoptysis, tachycardia, or hypoxemia, cannot be explained clinically or by chest x-ray results. Patients
with a low clinical
[Fig. 194-1.
An ECG in pulmonary embolism.]
[Table 194-2.
Clinical Prediction Rule for Diagnosing Pulmonary Embolism]
probability of PE may need only minimal additional testing. Patients with an intermediate clinical
probability are likely to need more additional testing. Patients with a high probability may be candidates
for immediate treatment pending confirmation with additional testing. Patients do not need any testing for
PE if the clinical probability is very low and there are no objective cardiopulmonary abnormalities.
Noninvasive testing:
Noninvasive testing typically can be obtained more quickly and carries less
morbidity than invasive testing. Tests most useful for diagnosing or excluding PE are D-dimer testing, V/Q
scanning, duplex ultrasonography, CT angiography (helical CT with IV contrast), and echocardiography.
There is no universally accepted algorithm for the best choice and sequence of tests, but one common
approach is
• Screening with D-dimer testing
• Lower extremity ultrasonography (which exposes the patient to no ionizing radiation) when the D-dimer
result is positive
• CT angiography (or V/Q scanning) if duplex ultrasonography is negative
Patients with a moderate to high probability of disease based on clinical criteria who have low- or
intermediate-probability V/Q scans usually require pulmonary arteriography or CT angiography to make or
exclude the diagnosis. Lower-extremity ultrasonography is not diagnostic for PE, but a study that reveals
thrombus formation establishes the need for anticoagulation and obviates the need for further diagnostic
testing. A negative result on ultrasonography does not negate the need for additional studies. D-Dimer
measurements, ECG, ABG measurements, chest x-ray, and echocardiography are adjunctive tests;
positive results of these tests lack sufficient specificity to be diagnostic alone.
D-Dimer
is a by-product of intrinsic fibrinolysis; thus, elevated levels occur in the presence of a recent
thrombus. However, elevated levels are not specific for venous thrombus because many patients without
DVT or PE also have elevated levels. More importantly, absence of elevated levels suggests the absence
of recent thrombus because the test is sensitive; > 95% of patients with DVT or PE have elevated levels.
Thus, a low D-dimer level has a negative predictive value of > 95%, making such a result sufficiently
reliable for excluding the diagnosis of PE in routine practice among patients with a low or moderate pretest probability.
V/Q scans
detect areas of lung that are ventilated but not perfused, as occurs in PE; results are reported
as low, intermediate, or high probability of PE based on patterns of V/Q mismatch. A completely normal
scan excludes PE with nearly 100% accuracy, but a low probability scan still carries a 15% likelihood of
PE. Perfusion deficits may occur in many other lung conditions, including pleural effusion, chest mass,
pulmonary hypertension, pneumonia, and COPD. With an intermediate probability scan, there is a 30 to
40% probability of PE; with a high probability scan, there is an 80 to 90% probability of PE.
Duplex ultrasonography
is a safe, noninvasive, portable technique for detecting lower extremity
(primarily femoral vein) thrombi. A clot can be detected by visualizing the lining of the vein, by showing
incompressibility of the vein, or by showing reduced flow by Doppler ultrasonography. The test has a
sensitivity of > 90% and a specificity of > 95% for thrombus. It cannot reliably detect a clot in calf or iliac
veins. Absence of thrombi in the femoral veins does not exclude the possibility of thrombus from other
sources, but patients with negative results on Doppler duplex ultrasonography have > 95% event-free
survival, because thrombi from other sources are so much less common.
CT angiography
is an alternative to V/Q scanning and pulmonary arteriography in most settings because
===PAGE:2084===
it is fast, available, and noninvasive and gives more information about other lung pathology. However,
patients must be able to hold their breath for several seconds. The sensitivity of CT angiography is
highest for PE in lobar and segmental vessels and lowest for emboli in smaller subsegmental vessels
(about 30% of all PEs) and thus is less sensitive than perfusion scans. In studies done using older
scanners, overall sensitivities range from 53 to 100%; values are at the lower end of the range for
subsegmental vessels. Specificities range from 81 to 100%. A positive scan may be diagnostic of PE, but
a negative scan does not necessarily exclude subsegmental disease, though the clinical significance of
emboli in smaller subsegmental vessels remains to be determined. Newer multidetector scans are more
sensitive (about 83%) and are specific (about 96%) overall. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is
an alternative to CT angiography for patients who cannot tolerate contrast agents and for pregnant
patients.
Echocardiography
as a diagnostic test for PE is controversial. Its sensitivity is > 80% for detecting right
ventricular dysfunction (eg, dilation and hypokinesis, which occur when pulmonary artery pressure
exceeds 40 mm Hg). Right ventricular dysfunction is a useful
measure of hemodynamic severity in acute
PE, but dysfunction is present in several disorders, including COPD, heart failure, and sleep apnea, and
is therefore a nonspecific finding. Estimation of pulmonary artery systolic pressure using Doppler flow
signals gives additional useful information about the severity of acute PE. Absence of right ventricular
dysfunction or pulmonary hypertension makes the diagnosis of a large PE unlikely but does not exclude
the diagnosis of a smaller one.
Cardiac marker testing
is evolving as a useful means of stratifying mortality risk in patients with acute
PE. Elevated troponin levels can signify right ventricular strain. Elevated brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)
and pro-BNP levels are not helpful, but low levels appear to signify good prognosis. The clinical role of
these tests remains to be determined, because they are not specific for right ventricular strain or for PE.
Patients with PE and no known risk factors should be considered for hypercoagulability testing (, especially if they are < 35 yr, have recurrent PE, or have a positive family history.
Invasive tests:
Pulmonary arteriography is indicated
• When the pre-test probability of PE is moderate or high and noninvasive tests are inconclusive
• When the need to make or exclude the diagnosis is urgent, such as in an acutely ill patient
• When anticoagulation is contraindicated
• When chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension is suspected
Pulmonary arteriography is still the most accurate test for diagnosing PE, but it is needed much less often
because of the sensitivity of ultrasonography and CT angiography. A pulmonary arteriogram that reveals
intraluminal filling defects or abrupt cutoff of flow is positive. Findings suggestive but not diagnostic of PE
include partial occlusion of pulmonary arterial branches with increased proximal and decreased distal
caliber, oligemic zones, and persistence of dye in the proximal artery during the late (venous) phase of
the pulmonary arteriogram. In lung segments with obstructed arteries, venous filling with contrast medium
is delayed or absent.
Prognosis
An estimated 10% of patients with PE die within 1 h. Of those patients who survive the first hour, only
about 30% are diagnosed and receive treatment; > 95% of these patients survive. Thus, most patients
with PE are never diagnosed; it is in such patients that most mortality from PE occurs. The best prospects
for reducing mortality lie in improving diagnosis, not in improving treatment. Patients with chronic
thromboembolic disease represent a tiny fraction of patients with PE who survive. Anticoagulant therapy
reduces the rate of recurrence of PE to about 5% in all patients.
Treatment
===PAGE:2085===
• Anticoagulation
• Inferior vena cava filter placement when anticoagulation contraindicated or ineffective
• Clot elimination (eg, thrombolytic therapy, embolectomy) for massive emboli
Initial treatment of PE is O
for hypoxemia and IV 0.9% saline and vasopressors for hypotension and
anticoagulation. All patients with strongly suspected or confirmed PE should be hospitalized and, ideally,
should also be continually monitored for life-threatening cardiovascular complications in the first 24 to 48
h. Clot elimination should be considered in patients with massive PE at the time of diagnosis.
Clot elimination:
Clot elimination by means of embolectomy or dissolution by IV thrombolytic therapy
should be considered for hypotensive patients. It may also be indicated for patients with clinical, ECG, or
echocardiographic evidence of right ventricular overload or failure, but data supporting use in these
patients are scarce and not definitive, and controlled prospective studies are unlikely to be done.
Embolectomy
is reserved for patients with PE who are hypotensive despite supportive measures
(persistent systolic BP ≤ 90 mm Hg after fluid therapy and O
or if pressor therapy is required) or on the
verge of cardiac or respiratory arrest. Surgical embolectomy appears to improve survival in patients with
massive PE but is not widely available. Catheter-based embolectomy can be done by some interventional
radiologists. The decision to proceed with embolectomy and the choice of technique depend on local
resources and expertise.
Thrombolytic therapy
with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), streptokinase, or urokinase offers a
noninvasive way to rapidly restore pulmonary blood flow but is controversial because long-term benefits
do not clearly outweigh the risk of hemorrhage. In patients with submassive PE (ie, who are normotensive
but have right ventricular dysfunction), thrombolytics speed the resolution of radiographic abnormalities
and the return of hemodynamic function (heart rate and right ventricular function) and prevent
cardiopulmonary
deterioration but have not been shown to improve survival. Some experts recommend
thrombolytics for patients with submassive PE suspected on the basis of echocardiographic evidence of
proximal pulmonary artery (large) embolism or of right ventricular dysfunction due to either PE or
preexisting disease. Others reserve thrombolytic therapy for patients with massive PE.
Absolute contraindications to thrombolytics include prior hemorrhagic stroke, ischemic stroke within 1 yr,
active external or internal bleeding from any source, intracranial injury or surgery within 2 mo, intracranial
tumor, GI bleeding within 6 mo, and CPR.
Relative contraindications include recent surgery (≤ 10 days), hemorrhagic diathesis (as in hepatic
insufficiency), pregnancy, current use of anticoagulants and an INR > 2, punctures of large
noncompressible veins (eg, subclavian or internal jugular veins), recent femoral artery catheterization (eg,
≤ 10 days), peptic ulcer disease or other conditions that increase the risk of bleeding, and severe
hypertension (systolic BP > 180 or diastolic BP > 110 mm Hg).
Options for thrombolysis include streptokinase, urokinase, and alteplase (recombinant tPA). Standard IV
regimens are streptokinase 250,000 units over 30 min followed by continuous infusion of 100,000 units/h
for 24 h; urokinase 4400 units/kg over 10 min followed by 4400 units/kg/h for 12 h; or alteplase 100 mg
continuous infusion over 2 h followed by an additional 40 mg over another 4 h (10 mg/h) if clinical
presentation and repeat pulmonary angiogram suggest failure of clot lysis and initial dosing does not
cause bleeding. Although no drug has proved superior to the others, streptokinase is now rarely used
because of the risk of allergic and pyrogenic reactions and because administration requires constant
infusion for > 24 h.
An initial loading dose of heparin should be given concurrently, but the activated PTT should be allowed
to fall to 1.5 to 2.5 times the baseline value before beginning continuous heparin infusion. Direct delivery
of thrombolytics to the clot via a pulmonary artery catheter is occasionally used for patients with massive
PE or for those with relative contraindications to systemic thrombolytics, but this approach does not
prevent systemic thrombolysis. Bleeding, if it occurs, can be reversed with cryoprecipitate or fresh frozen
plasma. Accessible vascular access sites can be compressed.
===PAGE:2086===
Anticoagulation:
Because embolization rarely involves an entire venous thrombus, anticoagulation is
required acutely to prevent residual clot from extending and embolizing. Patients in whom anticoagulants
are contraindicated or those who have thromboemboli despite therapeutic anticoagulation should have
placement of a removable percutaneous inferior vena cava filter.
Heparin
, either unfractionated or low molecular weight, is the mainstay of treatment of acute DVT and
PE and should be given immediately on diagnosis or sooner if clinical suspicion is high and if the patient
has cardiorespiratory compromise. Inadequate anticoagulation in the first 24 h is linked to increased risk
of recurrent PE for up to 3 mo. Heparin accelerates the action of antithrombin III, an inhibitor of
coagulation factors; unfractionated heparin also has antithrombin III-mediated anti-inflammatory
properties, which may facilitate clot organization and reduce thrombophlebitis. Unfractionated heparin
should be given as a bolus and infusion by protocol (see
Fig. 194-2
) to achieve an activated PTT 1.5 to 2.5 times that of normal control. Subcutaneous low
molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is as effective as unfractionated heparin and may cause less
thrombocytopenia (for dosing, see
Table 194-3
). Because of its long half-life, it is useful in outpatient treatment (usually restricted to patients
with DVT without PE) and to facilitate earlier discharge of patients who have not achieved therapeutic
anticoagulation with warfarin.
Adverse effects of all heparins include the following:
• Bleeding
• Thrombocytopenia
• Urticaria
• Thrombosis or anaphylaxis (rarely)
Long-term heparin administration may cause the following:
• Hypokalemia
• Liver enzyme elevations
• Osteoporosis
Before use, patients should be screened for GI bleeding by testing for occult blood in stool. During
treatment, they should be monitored for bleeding with serial CBCs and tests for occult blood in stool.
Bleeding caused by over-heparinization can be stopped with a maximum of 50 mg of protamine per 5000
units unfractionated heparin infused over 15 to 30 min (or 1 mg in 20 mL normal saline infused over 10 to
20 min for LMWH, though the precise dose is undefined because protamine only partially neutralizes
LMWH inactivation of factor Xa). Treatment with heparin or LMWH is continued until full anticoagulation
has been achieved with oral warfarin. The use of LMWH in long-term anticoagulation
[Fig. 194-2.
Weight-based heparin dosing.]
after acute PE has not been studied but will likely be limited by cost and ease of administration compared
with oral warfarin.
Warfarin
is the oral drug of choice for long-term anticoagulation in all patients except pregnant women
and patients with new or worsening venous thromboembolism during warfarin treatment. Five to 10 mg po
once/day should be started when the PTT has been consistently ≥ 1.5 to 2.0 times control values. The
therapeutic goal with warfarin is usually an INR of 2 to 3.
Physicians prescribing warfarin should be wary of drug interactions (see
Table 194-4
), including interactions with nonprescription drugs and medicinal herbs. Patients with
===PAGE:2087===
temporary risk factors for DVT or PE (eg, fracture or surgery) can stop the drug after 3 to 6 mo. Patients
with permanent risk factors (eg, hypercoagulability), no known risk factors, or recurrent DVT or PE should
take warfarin for at least 6 mo and possibly for life unless complications of therapy intervene. In low-risk
patients, low-intensity warfarin (to maintain
[Table 194-3.
Some Low Molecular Weight Heparin* Options in Thromboembolic Disease]
INR at 1.5 to 2.0) may be safe and effective for at least 2 to 4 yr, but this regimen requires further proof of
safety before it can be routinely recommended.
Bleeding is the most common complication of warfarin treatment; patients > 65 and those with
comorbidities (especially diabetes, recent MI, Hct < 30%, or creatinine > 1.5 mg/dL) and a history of
stroke or GI bleeding seem to be at greatest risk. Bleeding can be reversed with 2.5 to 10 mg of vitamin K
sc or po and, in an emergency, with fresh frozen plasma. Vitamin K may cause flushing, local pain, and,
rarely, anaphylaxis.
[Table 194-4.
Drug, Herbal Preparation, and Food Interactions with Warfarin]
Prevention
Prevention of PE means prevention of DVT; the need depends on the patient's risks. Bedbound patients
and patients undergoing surgical, especially orthopedic, procedures especially benefit, and most of these
patients can be identified before a thrombus forms (see
Table 194-5
). Preventive measures include low-dose unfractionated heparin (LDUH), LMWH, warfarin,
newer anticoagulants, compression devices, and elastic compression stockings. Choice of drug or device
depends on whether patients are undergoing surgery (and the type of surgery), duration of treatment,
contraindications, relative costs, and ease of use.
Drugs: LDUH
is given in doses of 5000 units sc 2 h preoperatively and q 8 to 12 h thereafter for 7 to 10
days or until the patient is fully ambulatory. Immobilized patients not
[Table 194-5.
Risk of Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Embolism in Surgical Patients]
undergoing surgery should receive 5000 units sc q 12 h until they are ambulatory.
LMWH
dosing depends on the drug and on whether the drug is being used for prevention or treatment;
enoxaparin, dalteparin, and tinzaparin are equally effective as LDUH for preventing DVT and PE.
Fondaparinux
2.5 mg sc once/day is as effective as LMWH for orthopedic surgery and in some other
settings. It is a selective factor Xa inhibitor.
Warfarin
is usually effective and safe at a dose of 2 to 5 mg po once/day or at a dose adjusted to
maintain an INR of 2 to 3.
Newer anticoagulants
, including hirudin, a subcutaneous direct thrombin inhibitor, and lepirudin, a
recombinant hirudin, have demonstrated efficacy in DVT and PE prevention but warrant further study to
determine their cost-effectiveness and safety relative to heparins and warfarin (also see
Tables 194-3
and
194-6
).
Aspirin
is better than placebo but worse than all other available drugs for preventing DVT and PE.
Devices:
Inferior vena cava filters, intermittent pneumatic compression, and graded elastic compression
stockings may be used in combination with drugs to prevent PE.
An
inferior vena cava filter
(IVCF) may help prevent PE in patients with lower extremity DVT, but IVCF
placement may risk long-term complications. Benefits outweigh risks if a 2nd PE is predicted to be life
threatening; however, risks outweigh benefits in most patients. A filter is most commonly
===PAGE:2088===
[Table 194-6.
Some Anticoagulation Options Other Than Heparin in Thromboembolic Disease]
placed in patients with contraindications to anticoagulation, with recurrent DVT (or emboli) despite
adequate anticoagulation, after embolectomy, and, occasionally, in those whose marginal
cardiopulmonary function raises concern for their ability to tolerate additional small emboli. Because
venous collaterals can develop, providing a pathway for emboli to circumvent the IVCF, patients with
recurrent DVT or nonmodifiable risk factors for DVT may still require anticoagulation. An IVCF is placed in
the inferior vena cava just below the renal veins via catheterization of an internal jugular or femoral vein.
Some IVCFs are removable. Occasionally, a filter dislodges, may migrate up the venous bed, even to the
heart, and needs to be removed or replaced. A filter can also become clotted, causing bilateral lower
extremity venous congestion (including acute phlegmasia cerulea dolens), lower body ischemia, and
acute renal failure. Filter clotting requires careful evaluation for complications and risks of intervention.
Intermittent pneumatic compression
(IPC) provides rhythmic external compression to the legs or to
the legs and thighs. It is more effective for preventing calf than proximal DVT and thus is considered
inadequate after hip or knee surgery. IPC is contraindicated in obese patients and can theoretically trigger
PE in immobilized patients who have developed occult DVT while not undergoing preventive treatment.
Graded elastic compression stockings
have largely been abandoned in favor of external pneumatic
leg compression.
Choice of prevention:
For surgical procedures with a high incidence of venous thromboembolism, such
as hip and lower extremity orthopedic surgery, LDUH q 8 h, LMWH, or adjusted-dose warfarin is
recommended. For total knee replacement, risk reductions provided by LMWH and IPC are comparable
but not optimal, so both should be used. The regimens for orthopedic surgery may be initiated
preoperatively and should be continued for at least 7 days postoperatively. In selected patients at very
high risk of both venous thromboembolism and bleeding, placement of an IVCF is an option for
prophylaxis.
A high risk of venous thromboembolism also occurs in patients undergoing elective neurosurgery and
those with acute spinal cord injury and multiple trauma. Although physical methods (IPC, elastic
stockings) have been used in neurosurgical patients because of concern about intracranial bleeding,
LMWH appears to be an acceptable alternative. The combination of IPC and LMWH may be more
effective than either alone in high-risk patients. Limited data support the combination of IPC, elastic
compression stockings, and LMWH in patients with spinal cord injury or in multiple trauma. For very highrisk patients, an IVCF may be considered.
The most common nonsurgical conditions in which DVT prophylaxis is indicated are acute MI and
ischemic stroke. For MI patients, LDUH is effective; IPC, elastic compression stockings, or both may be
used when anticoagulants are contraindicated. For stroke patients, LDUH or LMWH can be used; IPC,
elastic compression stockings, or both may be beneficial.
Recommendations for some other nonsurgical conditions include LDUH for patients with heart failure;
adjusted-dose warfarin (INR 1.3 to 1.9) for patients with metastatic breast cancer; and warfarin 1 mg/day
for cancer patients with an indwelling central venous catheter.
===PAGE:2089===
Chapter 195. Acute Bronchitis
Acute bronchitis is inflammation of the upper airways, commonly following a URI. The cause is
usually a viral infection, though it is sometimes a bacterial infection; the pathogen is rarely
identified. The most common symptom is cough, with or without fever, and possibly sputum
production. In patients with COPD, hemoptysis, burning chest pain, and hypoxemia may also
occur. Diagnosis is based on clinical findings. Treatment is supportive; antibiotics are necessary
only for selected patients with chronic lung disease. Prognosis is excellent in patients without
lung disease, but in patients with COPD, acute respiratory failure may result.
Acute bronchitis is frequently a component of a URI caused by rhinovirus, parainfluenza, influenza A or B,
respiratory syncytial virus, coronavirus, or human metapneumovirus. Less common causes may be
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
,
Bordetella pertussis
, and
Chlamydia pneumoniae
. Patients at risk include
those who smoke and those with COPD or other diseases that impair bronchial clearance
mechanisms,
such as cystic fibrosis or conditions leading to bronchiectasis (.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are a nonproductive or minimally productive cough accompanied or preceded by URI
symptoms. Subjective dyspnea results from chest pain or tightness with breathing, not from hypoxia,
except in patients with underlying lung disease. Signs are often absent but may include scattered rhonchi
and wheezing. Sputum may be clear, purulent, or, occasionally, bloody. Sputum characteristics do not
correspond with a particular etiology (ie, viral vs bacterial). Mild fever may be present, but high or
prolonged fever is unusual and suggests influenza or pneumonia.
On resolution, cough is the last symptom to subside and often takes several weeks or even longer to do
so.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes chest x-ray
Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation. Chest x-ray is necessary only if findings suggest pneumonia
(eg, abnormal vital signs, crackles, signs of consolidation, hypoxemia). Elderly patients are the occasional
exception. They may require chest x-ray for productive cough and fever in the absence of auscultatory
findings (particularly if there is a history of COPD or another lung disorder).
Sputum Gram stain and culture usually have no role.
Cough resolves within 2 wk in 75% of patients. Patients with persistent cough should undergo a chest xray. Evaluation for pertussis, with a culture from nasopharyngeal secretions, and noninfectious etiologies,
such as postnasal drip, allergic rhinitis, and coughvariant asthma, may be needed.
Treatment
• Symptom relief (acetaminophen, hydration, possibly antitussives)
• Inhaled
β
-agonist or anticholinergic for wheezing
• Sometimes oral antibiotics for patients with COPD
Acute bronchitis in otherwise healthy patients is a major reason that antibiotics are overused. Nearly all
patients require only symptomatic treatment, such as acetaminophen and hydration. Antitussives should
be used only if the cough is interfering with sleep (. Patients with wheezing may benefit from
an inhaled
β
-agonist (eg, albuterol) or an anticholinergic (eg, ipratropium) for ≤ 7 days. If cough persists
===PAGE:2090===
for > 2 wk because of airway irritation, some patients benefit from a few days of inhaled corticosteroids.
Oral antibiotics are typically not used except in patients with pertussis or in patients with COPD who have
at least 2 of the following:
• Increased cough
• Increased dyspnea
• Increase in sputum purulence
Drugs include amoxicillin 500 mg po tid for 7 days, doxycycline 100 mg po bid for 7 days, azithromycin
500 mg po once/day for 4 days, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 160/800 mg po bid for 7 days.
===PAGE:2091===
Chapter 196. Pneumonia
Introduction
(See also
Neonatal Pneumonia
)
Pneumonia is acute inflammation of the lungs caused by infection. Initial diagnosis is usually
based on chest x-ray. Causes, symptoms, treatment, preventive measures, and prognosis differ
depending on whether the infection is bacterial, viral, fungal, or parasitic; whether it is acquired
in the community, hospital, or nursing home; and whether it develops in a patient who is
immunocompetent or immunocompromised.
An estimated 2 to 3 million people in the US develop pneumonia each year, of whom about 45,000 die.
Pneumonia is the most common fatal hospital-acquired infection and the most common overall cause of
death in developing countries.
Bacteria are the most common cause of pneumonia in adults > 30 yr,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
infection being the most common pathogen in all age groups, settings, and geographic regions. However,
pathogens of every sort, from viruses to parasites, cause pneumonia.
The airways and lungs are constantly exposed to pathogens in the external environment; the upper
airways and oropharynx in particular are colonized with so-called normal
flora rendered harmless by host
defenses. Infection develops when pathogens that are inhaled or aspirated or reach the lungs via the
bloodstream or contiguous spread overcome multiple host defenses.
Upper airway defenses include salivary IgA, proteases, and lysozymes; growth inhibitors produced by
normal flora; and fibronectin, which coats the mucosa and inhibits adherence. Nonspecific lower airway
defenses include cough, mucociliary clearance, and airway angulation preventing infection in airspaces.
Specific lower airway defenses include various pathogen-specific immune mechanisms, including IgA and
IgG opsonization, anti-inflammatory effects of surfactant, phagocytosis by alveolar macrophages, and Tcell-mediated immune responses. These mechanisms protect most people against infection. But
numerous conditions alter normal flora (eg, systemic illness, undernutrition, hospital or nursing home
exposure, antibiotic exposure) or impair these defenses (eg, cigarette smoking, nasogastric or
endotracheal intubation). Pathogens that then reach airspaces can multiply and cause pneumonia.
Specific pathogens causing pneumonia cannot be found in < 50% of patients, even with extensive
diagnostic investigation. But because pathogens and outcomes tend to be similar by setting and host risk
factors, pneumonias can be categorized as
• Community-acquired
• Hospital-acquired (including ventilator-acquired and postoperative)
• Nursing home-acquired
• Occurring in immunocompromised people
These categorizations allow treatment to be selected empirically.
The term interstitial pneumonia refers to various unrelated conditions of varied and sometimes unknown
causes characterized by inflammation and fibrosis of the pulmonary interstitium (.
Community-Acquired Pneumonia
Community-acquired pneumonia develops in people with limited or no contact with medical
institutions or settings. The most commonly identified pathogens are
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
,
Haemophilus influenzae
, and atypical organisms (ie,
Chlamydia pneumoniae
,
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
,
Legionella
sp). Symptoms and signs are fever, cough, pleuritic chest
===PAGE:2092===
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
,
Legionella
sp). Symptoms and signs are fever, cough, pleuritic chest
pain, dyspnea, tachypnea, and tachycardia. Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation and
chest x-ray. Treatment is with empirically chosen antibiotics. Prognosis is excellent for
relatively young or healthy patients, but many pneumonias, especially when caused by
S.
pneumoniae
or influenza virus, are fatal in older, sicker patients.
Etiology
Many organisms cause community-acquired pneumonia, including bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Pathogens
vary by patient age and other factors (see
Tables 196-1
and
196-2
), but the relative importance of each as a cause of community-acquired pneumonia is uncertain,
because most patients do not undergo thorough testing, and because even with testing, specific agents
are identified in < 50% of cases.
S. pneumoniae
,
H. influenzae
,
C. pneumoniae
, and
M. pneumoniae
are the most common bacterial
causes. Pneumonia caused by chlamydia and mycoplasma are often clinically indistinguishable from
other pneumonias. Common viral agents include respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), adenovirus, influenza
viruses, metapneumovirus, and parainfluenza viruses. Bacterial superinfection can make distinguishing
viral from bacterial infection difficult.
C. pneumoniae
accounts for 2 to 5% of community-acquired pneumonia and is the 2nd most common
cause of lung infections in healthy people aged 5 to 35 yr.
C. pneumoniae
is commonly responsible for
outbreaks of respiratory infection within families, in college dormitories, and in military training camps. It
causes a relatively benign form of pneumonia that infrequently requires hospitalization.
Chlamydia
psittaci
pneumonia (psittacosis) is rare and occurs in patients who own or are often exposed to birds.
A host of other organisms causes lung infection in immunocompetent patients, although the term
community-acquired pneumonia is usually reserved for the more common bacterial and viral etiologies.
Q fever, tularemia, anthrax, and plague are uncommon bacterial syndromes in which pneumonia may be a
prominent feature; the latter three should raise the suspicion of bioterrorism.
Adenovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and coxsackievirus are common viruses that rarely cause pneumonia.
Varicella virus and hantavirus cause lung infection as part of adult chickenpox and hantavirus pulmonary
syndrome; a coronavirus causes severe acute respiratory syndrome (
SARS
—.
Common fungal pathogens include
Histoplasma capsulatum
(histoplasmosis) and
Coccidioides immitis
(coccidioidomycosis). Less
[Table 196-1.
Community-Acquired Pneumonia in Children]
common fungi include
Blastomyces dermatitidis
(blastomycosis) and
Paracoccidioides braziliensis
(paracoccidioidomycosis).
Pneumocystis jirovecii
commonly causes pneumonia in patients who have HIV
infection or are immunosuppressed.
Parasites causing lung infection in developed countries include
Toxocara canis
or
T. catis
(visceral larva
migrans),
Dirofilaria immitis
(dirofilariasis), and
Paragonimus westermani
(paragonimiasis). (For a
discussion of pulmonary TB or of specific microorganisms, see p.
.)
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include malaise, cough, dyspnea, and chest pain. Cough typically is productive in older
children and adults and dry in infants, young children, and the elderly. Dyspnea usually is mild and
exertional and is rarely present at rest. Chest pain is pleuritic and is adjacent to the infected area.
Pneumonia may manifest as upper abdominal pain when lower lobe infection irritates the diaphragm.
Symptoms become variable at the extremes of age. Infection in infants may manifest as nonspecific
irritability and restlessness; in the elderly, as confusion and obtundation.
===PAGE:2093===
Signs include fever, tachypnea, tachycardia, crackles, bronchial breath sounds, egophony, and dullness
to percussion. Signs of pleural effusion may also be present (. Nasal flaring, use of
accessory muscles, and cyanosis are common among infants. Fever is frequently absent in the elderly.
Symptoms and signs were previously thought to differ by type of pathogen, but presentations overlap
considerably. In addition, no single symptom or sign is sensitive or specific enough to predict the
organism. Symptoms are even similar for noninfective lung diseases such as pulmonary embolism,
pulmonary cancer, and other inflammatory lung diseases.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Consideration of pulmonary embolism
• Sometimes identification of pathogen
Diagnosis is suspected on the basis of clinical presentation and is confirmed by chest x-ray (see
Table 196-3
). The most serious condition misdiagnosed as pneumonia is pulmonary embolism, which may
be more likely in patients with minimal sputum production, no accompanying URI or systemic symptoms,
and risk factors for thromboembolism (see
Table 194-1
.
Chest x-ray almost always shows some degree of infiltrate; rarely, an infiltrate is absent in the first 24 to
48 h of illness. In general, no specific findings distinguish one type of infection from another, although
multilobar infiltrates suggest
S. pneumoniae
or
Legionella pneumophila
infection and interstitial
pneumonia suggests viral or mycoplasmal etiology.
Hospitalized patients ( should undergo WBC count and electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine testing to classify risk and
hydration status. Two sets of blood cultures are often obtained to detect pneumococcal bacteremia and
sepsis, because about 12% of all patients hospitalized with pneumonia have bacteremia;
S. pneumoniae
accounts for two thirds of these cases. Whether the results of blood cultures alter therapy commonly
enough to warrant the expense is under study. Pulse oximetry or ABG should also be done.
Pathogens:
Attempts to identify a pathogen are not routinely indicated; exceptions may be made for
critically ill patients, patients in whom a drug-resistant or unusual organism is suspected (eg, TB,
P.
jirovecii
), and patients who are deteriorating or not responding to treatment within 72 h.
The use of Gram stain and culture of sputum for diagnosis is of uncertain benefit, because specimens
often are contaminated and because overall diagnostic yield is low. Samples can be obtained
noninvasively by simple expectoration or after hypertonic saline nebulization for those unable to produce
sputum. Alternatively, patients can undergo bronchoscopy or endotracheal suctioning, either of which can
be easily done through an endotracheal tube in mechanically ventilated patients. Testing should include
mycobacterial and fungal stains and cultures in patients whose condition is deteriorating and in those
unresponsive to broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Additional tests are indicated in some circumstances. Patients at risk of
Legionella
pneumonia (eg,
patients who smoke, have chronic pulmonary disease, are > 40, receive chemotherapy
[Table 196-2.
Community-Acquired Pneumonia in Adults*]
therapy, or take immunosuppressants for organ transplantation) should undergo testing for urinary
Legionella
antigen, which remains present long after treatment is initiated, but the test detects only
L.
pneumophila
serogroup 1 (70% of cases). A 4-fold rise in antibody titers to ≥ 1:128 (or a single titer of ≥
1:256 in a convalescent patient) is also considered diagnostic. These tests are specific (95 to 100%) but
are not very sensitive (40 to 60%); thus, a positive test indicates infection, but a negative test does not
===PAGE:2094===
exclude it.
Infants and young children with possible RSV infection should undergo rapid antigen testing of specimens
obtained with nasal or throat swabs. No other tests for viral pneumonias are done; viral culture and
serologic tests are rarely clinically warranted.
PCR testing for mycoplasma and chlamydia species, although not widely available, holds promise as a
highly sensitive and specific rapid diagnostic test and is likely to play a greater role as PCR technologies
are refined.
Prognosis
Candidates for outpatient treatment usually improve over 24 to 72 h. Hospitalized patients
[Table 196-3.
Probability of Pneumonia Given Chest X-Ray Infiltrate]
may improve or deteriorate depending on comorbidities. Aspiration is a major risk factor for death, as are
older age and number and type of comorbidities. Pneumonia caused by certain organisms may also
increase the risk of death. Death may be caused by pneumonia itself, progression to sepsis syndrome
affecting other organs, or exacerbation of comorbidities.
Pneumococcal
infection accounts for about two thirds of fatal cases of community-acquired pneumonia
in which an etiologic agent is known. The overall mortality rate in hospitalized patients is about 12%. Poor
prognostic factors include age < 1 or > 60 yr; involvement of > 1 lobe; peripheral WBC count < 5000/
μ
L;
comorbidities (eg, heart failure, alcoholism, hepatic or renal insufficiency), immunosuppression (eg,
agammaglobulinemia, anatomic or functional asplenia), infection with serotypes 3 and 8; and
hematogenous spread with either positive blood cultures or extrapulmonary complications (usually
arthritis, meningitis, endocarditis). Infants and children are at special risk of pneumococcal otitis media,
bacteremia, and meningitis.
Mortality in
Legionella
infection is 10 to 20% among community-acquired cases and is higher among
immunosuppressed or hospitalized patients. Patients who respond do so slowly, and x-ray abnormalities
usually persist for ≥ 1 mo. Most patients require hospitalization, many require ventilator support, and 10 to
20% die despite appropriate antibiotic therapy.
Prognosis in
mycoplasma
pneumonia is excellent; nearly all patients recover.
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
responds more slowly to treatment than mycoplasma pneumonia and tends
to recur if therapy is stopped prematurely. Young adults with
C. pneumoniae
usually do well, but the
elderly have a mortality rate of 5 to 10%.
Treatment
• Risk stratification
• Antibiotics
• Antivirals for influenza or varicella
• Supportive measures
A prediction rule may be used to estimate mortality risk. The rule has been used to identify those patients
who can be safely treated as outpatients and those who require hospitalization because of high risk of
complications (see
Table 196-4
). However, the rule was not developed to determine site of care. Thus,
the rule should supplement, not replace, clinical judgment, because many unrepresented factors, such as
likelihood of adherence, ability to care for self, and wishes to avoid hospitalization, should also influence
triage decisions. Also, certain criteria that extend across a conotinuum of severity have dichotomous
cutoffs; eg, a heart rate of 124 beats/min may indicate distress, but points are not assigned unless heart
===PAGE:2095===
rate is ≥ 125 beats/min. ICU admission is required for patients who need mechanical ventilation and for
those with hypotension (systolic BP < 90 mm Hg) that is unresponsive to volume resuscitation. Other
criteria that mandate consideration for ICU admission include respiratory rate > 30/min, PaO
/fraction of
inspired O
(FIO
) < 250, multilobar pneumonia, diastolic BP < 60 mm Hg, confusion, and BUN > 19.6
mg/dL.
Appropriate treatment involves starting antibiotics as soon as possible, preferably ≤ 8 h after presentation.
Supportive care includes fluids, antipyretics, analgesics, and, for patients with hypoxemia, O
.
Because organisms are difficult to identify, antibiotics are selected based on likely pathogens and severity
of illness. Consensus guidelines have been developed by many professional organizations; one widely
used set is detailed in
Table 196-2
. Guidelines should be adapted to local susceptibility patterns, drug
formularies, and individual patient circumstances. Importantly, none provide recommendations for
treatment of viral pneumonia.
Ribavirin and RSV Ig have been used alone and in combination for RSV bronchiolitis in children, but their
effectiveness is controversial, and neither is standard practice. Ribavirin is not used in adults with RSV
infection.
[Table 196-4.
Risk Stratification for Community-Acquired Pneumonia]
Oseltamivir 75 mg po bid or zanamivir 10 mg inhaled bid started within 48 h of symptom onset and given
for 5 days reduces the duration and severity of symptoms in patients who develop influenza infection.
Acyclovir 5 to 10 mg/kg IV q 8 h for adults or 250 to 500 mg/m
body surface area IV q 8 h for children is
recommended for varicella lung infections. Some patients with viral pneumonia, especially those with
influenza, develop superimposed bacterial infections and require antibiotics directed against
S.
pneumoniae
,
H. influenzae
, and
Staphylococcus aureus
.
With empiric treatment, 90% of patients with bacterial pneumonia improve. Improvement is manifested by
decreased cough and dyspnea, defervescence, relief of chest pain, and decline in WBC count. Failure to
improve should trigger suspicion of an unusual organism, resistance to the antimicrobial used for
treatment, empyema, coinfection or superinfection with a 2nd infectious agent, an obstructive
endobronchial lesion, immunosuppression, metastatic focus of infection with reseeding (in the case of
pneumococcal infection), or nonadherence to treatment (in the case of outpatients). If none of these can
be proved, treatment failure is likely due to inadequate host defenses.
Most viral pneumonias resolve without specific treatment.
Chest physical therapy can be used to treat pneumonia; however, there is no clear evidence for its
efficacy. Follow-up x-rays should be obtained 6 wk after treatment in patients > 35; persistence of an
infiltrate at ≥ 6 wk raises suspicions of an underlying, possibly malignant endobronchial lesion or of TB.
Prevention
Some forms of community-acquired pneumonia are preventable with pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
(for patients < 2 yr),
H. influenzae
type b (Hib) vaccine (for patients < 2 yr), pneumococcal pneumonia
vaccine (for patients at high risk, such as those with underlying heart, lung, or immune system disorders),
varicella vaccine (for patients < 18 mo and a later booster vaccine), and influenza vaccine (for patients
age ≥ 65 and those at high risk—see
Table 131-2
on p.
and see
Table 268-10
. Oseltamivir 75 mg po once/day or zanamivir 10 mg once/day can be given for 2
wk to prevent influenza (although resistance has recently been described for oseltamivir) for household
contacts of patients with influenza and to high-risk patients not vaccinated against influenza during
influenza epidemics. Pneumococcal pneumonia vaccination is recommended for all patients ≥ 65 (.
Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia
===PAGE:2096===
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) develops at least 48 h after hospital admission. The most
common pathogens are gram-negative bacilli and
Staphylococcus aureus
; drug-resistant
organisms are an important concern. Symptoms and signs are the same as those for
community-acquired pneumonia, but in ventilated patients, pneumonia may also manifest as
worsening oxygenation and increased tracheal secretions. Diagnosis is suspected on the basis
of clinical presentation and chest x-ray and is confirmed by blood culture or bronchoscopic
sampling of the lower respiratory tract. Treatment is with antibiotics. Overall prognosis is poor,
due in part to comorbidities.
HAP includes ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), postoperative pneumonia, and pneumonia that
develops in unventilated but otherwise moderately or critically ill hospitalized inpatients. It also includes
the new category healthcare-associated pneumonia (HCAP), which refers to pneumonia acquired by
patients in healthcare facilities such as chronic care facilities, dialysis centers, and infusion centers.
Etiology
The most common cause is microaspiration of bacteria that colonize the oropharynx and upper airways in
seriously ill patients.
Risk factors:
Endotracheal intubation with mechanical ventilation poses the greatest overall risk; VAP
constitutes > 85% of all cases, with pneumonia occurring in 17 to 23% of ventilated patients.
Endotracheal intubation breaches airway defenses, impairs cough and mucociliary clearance, and
facilitates microaspiration of bacteria-laden secretions that pool above the inflated endotracheal tube cuff.
In addition, bacteria form a biofilm on and within the endotracheal tube that protects them from antibiotics
and host defenses.
In nonintubated patients, risk factors include previous antibiotic treatment, high gastric pH (due to stress
ulcer prophylaxis or therapy), and coexisting cardiac, pulmonary, hepatic, or renal insufficiency. Major risk
factors for postoperative pneumonia are age > 70, abdominal or thoracic surgery, and dependent
functional status.
Pathogens:
Pathogens and antibiotic resistance patterns vary significantly among institutions and can
vary within institutions over short periods (eg, month to month). In general, the most important pathogen is
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
, which is especially common in pneumonias acquired in intensive care settings
and in patients with cystic fibrosis, neutropenia, advanced AIDS, and bronchiectasis. Other important
pathogens include enteric gram-negative bacteria (mainly
Enterobacter
sp,
Klebsiella pneumoniae
,
Escherichia coli
,
Serratia marcescens
,
Proteus
sp, and
Acinetobacter
sp) and both methicillin-sensitive
and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
.
S. aureus
,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
, and
Haemophilus influenzae
are most commonly implicated when
pneumonia develops within 4 to 7 days of hospitalization, whereas enteric gram-negative organisms
become more common with increasing duration of intubation. Patients with HAP due to
S. aureus
or
gram-negative bacilli tend to be elderly or have serious circumstances, such as needing a ventilator,
undergoing chemotherapy for cancer, or having chronic pulmonary disease.
Prior antibiotic treatment greatly increases the likelihood of polymicrobial infection, resistant organisms,
particularly methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
, and
Pseudomonas
infection. Infection with a resistant organism
markedly worsens mortality and morbidity.
High-dose corticosteroids increase the risk of
Legionella
and
Pseudomonas
infections.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs in nonintubated patients are generally the same as those for community-acquired
pneumonia (. Pneumonia in critically ill, mechanically ventilated patients more typically
causes fever and increased respiratory rate or heart rate or changes in respiratory parameters, such as
an increase in purulent secretions or worsening hypoxemia.
===PAGE:2097===
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and clinical criteria (limited accuracy)
• Sometimes bronchoscopy, blood cultures
Diagnosis is imperfect. In practice, HAP is often suspected on the basis of the appearance of a new
infiltrate on a chest x-ray that is taken for evaluation of new symptoms or signs or of leukocytosis.
However, no symptom, sign, or x-ray finding is sensitive or specific for the diagnosis, because all can be
caused by atelectasis, pulmonary embolism, or pulmonary edema and may be part of the clinical findings
in acute respiratory distress syndrome. Alternative diagnoses should be sought, particularly in patients
who have a pneumonia risk score < 6 (see
Table 196-5
).
Gram stain and culture of endotracheal aspirates are of uncertain benefit, because specimens are likely
to be contaminated with bacteria that are colonizers as well as pathogens, and a positive culture may or
may not
[Table 196-5.
Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia Risk Index]
indicate infection. Bronchoscopic sampling of lower airway secretions for quantitative culture seems to
yield more reliable specimens, but the effect of this approach on outcomes is undetermined.
Measurement of inflammatory mediators in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid may play a future role in
diagnosis; eg, a concentration of soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells (a protein
expressed and shed by immune cells during infection) > 5 pg/mL may help distinguish bacterial and
fungal pneumonia from noninfectious causes of clinical and radiographic changes in ventilated patients.
However, this approach requires further investigation. The only finding that reliably identifies both
pneumonia and the responsible organism is a pleural fluid culture that is positive for a respiratory
pathogen. Blood cultures are relatively specific if a respiratory pathogen is identified but are insensitive.
Prognosis
The mortality associated with HAP due to gram-negative infection is about 25 to 50% despite the
availability of effective antibiotics. Whether death is due to underlying illness or to the pneumonia itself is
uncertain. Women may be at greater risk of death. The mortality rate with
S. aureus
pneumonia is 10 to
40%, in part due to the serious circumstances with which it is associated.
Treatment
• Empirically chosen antibiotics active against resistant gram-negative and gram-positive organisms
If the diagnosis is suspected, treatment is with antibiotics that are chosen empirically based on local
sensitivity patterns, specific patient risk factors, and the conditions noted in
Table 196-2
.
Indiscriminate use of antibiotics is a major contributor to development of antimicrobial resistance.
Therefore, treatment may begin with initial use of broad-spectrum drugs, which are replaced by the most
specific drug available for the pathogens identified by culture. Alternative strategies for limiting resistance
that have not proved effective include stopping antibiotics after 72 h in patients whose pulmonary
infection scores (see
Table 196-5
) improve to < 6 and regularly rotating empirically chosen antibiotics (eg,
q 3 to 6 mo).
Multiple regimens exist, but all should include antibiotics that are effective against both resistant gramnegative and gram-positive organisms. Options include
• A carbapenem (imipenem/cilastatin 500 mg IV q 6 h or 1 g q 8 h or meropenem 1 g IV q 8 h),
monobactam (aztreonam 1 to 2 g IV q 8 h), or piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g q 6 h
===PAGE:2098===
• Ceftazidime 2 g IV q 8 h or cefepime 1 to 2 g q 8 to 12 h
• These drugs are given alone or combined with vancomycin 15 mg/kg q 12 h
Linezolid 600 mg IV q 12 h may be used for some pulmonary infections involving methicillin-resistant
S.
aureus
. Daptomycin should not be used for pulmonary infections.
Prevention
Most measures focus on preventing VAP. Semiupright or upright positioning reduces risk of aspiration and
pneumonia compared with recumbent positioning and is the simplest and most effective preventive
method. Noninvasive ventilation using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bilevel positive
airway pressure (BiPAP) prevents the breach in airway defense that occurs with endotracheal intubation
and eliminates the need for intubation in some patients.
Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions using a specially designed endotracheal tube attached to a
suction device seems to reduce the risk of aspiration.
Selective decontamination of the oropharynx (using topical gentamicin, colistin, chlorhexidine,
vancomycin cream, or a combination) or of the entire GI tract (using polymyxin, an aminoglycoside or
quinolone, and either nystatin or amphotericin B) is controversial because of concerns about resistant
strains and because decontamination, although it decreases incidence of HAP, has not been shown to
decrease mortality.
Surveillance cultures and routinely changing ventilator circuits or endotracheal tubes have not been
shown to decrease VAP.
Incentive spirometry is recommended to help prevent postoperative pneumonia.
Nursing Home-Acquired Pneumonia
Common nursing home-acquired pneumonia pathogens include gram-negative bacilli,
Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae
, anaerobes, and
influenza viruses. Symptoms and signs are similar to those of pneumonia that occurs in other
settings, except many elderly patients have less prominent changes in vital signs. Diagnosis is
based on clinical presentation and chest x-ray, which is often not immediately available in
nursing homes. Treatment is with antibiotics provided in the nursing home for less severe
illness and in the hospital for more severe illness. Mortality is moderately high but may be due
in part to comorbidities.
Nursing home-acquired pneumonia falls between community-acquired and hospital-acquired pneumonia
in etiology and management.
Streptococcus pneumoniae
and gram-negative bacilli may be roughly
equally responsible for most infections, though there is debate over whether gram-negative bacilli are
pathogens or merely colonizers.
Haemophilus influenzae
and
Moraxella catarrhalis
are next most
common;
Chlamydia
,
Mycoplasma
, and
Legionella
spp are rarely identified. Risk factors are common
among debilitated nursing home residents; they include poor functional status, mood disorder, altered
mental status, difficulty swallowing, immunosuppression, older age, use of tube feedings, influenza or
other viral respiratory infections, conditions that predispose to bacteremia (eg, indwelling bladder
catheter, pressure ulcers), and presence of a tracheostomy tube.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms often resemble those of community-acquired or hospital-acquired pneumonia but may be more
subtle. Cough and altered mental status are common, as are nonspecific symptoms of anorexia,
weakness, restlessness and agitation, falling, and incontinence. Subjective dyspnea occurs but is less
common. Signs include diminished or absent responsiveness, fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, wheezes or
crackles, and stertorous, wet breathing.
===PAGE:2099===
Diagnosis
• Clinical manifestations
• Chest x-ray
• Assessment of renal function and oxygenation
Diagnosis is based on clinical manifestations and chest x-ray. Because detection of physical changes
may be delayed in a nursing home setting and because these patients are at greater risk of
complications, evaluation for hypoxemia with pulse oximetry and for decreased intravascular volume with
serum BUN and creatinine should also be done.
X-rays are often difficult to obtain in nursing home patients, so it may be necessary to transfer them to a
hospital at least for initial evaluation. In some cases (eg, if clinical diagnosis is clear, if illness is mild, or if
aggressive care is not the goal), treatment may be started without x-ray confirmation. It is thought that
nursing home patients may initially lack a radiographic infiltrate, presumably because of the dehydration
that commonly accompanies febrile pneumonia in the elderly or a blunted immune response, although the
phenomenon is not proved to occur.
Prognosis
Mortality rate for patients requiring admission for treatment is 13 to 41%, whereas that
for patients treated
in the nursing home is 7 to 19%. Mortality rate exceeds 30% in patients with > 2 of the following findings:
• Respiratory rate > 30 breaths/min
• Heart rate > 125 beats/min
• Acute mental status change
• History of dementia
An alternative predictive index incorporates laboratory data (see
Table 196-6
). Physicians should follow all medical directives, because pneumonia is often a terminal
event in debilitated nursing home patients.
Treatment
• Antibiotics given before hospitalization in patients being hospitalized
Few data are available to guide decisions about where treatment should take place. In general, patients
should be hospitalized if they have ≥ 2 unstable vital signs and if the nursing home cannot administer
acute care. Some nursing home patients are not candidates for aggressive treatment or hospital transfer
under any circumstances. In patients who are to be hospitalized, one dose of antibiotics that are effective
against
S. pneumoniae
,
H. influenzae
, and common gram-negative bacilli should be given before
transfer; a common regimen is an oral antipneumococcal quinolone (eg, levofloxacin 750 mg once/day or
moxifloxacin 400 mg once/day). Ceftriaxone, ertapenem, and ampicillin/sulbactam (each as monotherapy)
are alternatives.
Pneumonia in Immunocompromised Patients
Pneumonia in immunocompromised patients is often caused by unusual pathogens. Symptoms
and signs depend on the pathogen. Diagnosis is based on blood cultures and bronchoscopic
sampling of respiratory secretions, sometimes with quantitative cultures. Treatment depends
on the host defect and pathogen.
The potential pathogens in patients with compromised defenses are legion. Likely pathogens based on
===PAGE:2100===
the type of defect in host defenses are listed in
Table 196-7
. However, respiratory symptoms and changes on chest x-rays in immunocompromised
patients may be due to various processes other than infection, such as pulmonary hemorrhage,
pulmonary edema, radiation injury, pulmonary toxicity due to cytotoxic drugs, and tumor infiltrates.
[Table 196-6.
Nursing Home-Acquired Pneumonia Risk Index]
[Table 196-7.
Pneumonia in Immunocompromised Patients]
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs may be the same as those found with community-acquired or hospital-acquired
pneumonia in immunocompetent patients, though immunocompromised patients may have no fever or
respiratory signs and are less likely to have purulent sputum if they are neutropenic. In some patients, the
only sign is fever.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Assessment of oxygenation
• Induction or bronchoscopy to obtain sputum
• Blood cultures
• Pathogens predicted based on symptoms, x-ray changes, and type of immunodeficiency
An immunocompromised patient with respiratory symptoms, signs, or fever should undergo chest x-ray
and assessment of oxygenation (usually by pulse oximetry). If an infiltrate is present, diagnostic studies
should include sputum Gram stain and culture and blood cultures. Chest x-ray may be normal in
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia, but hypoxia is usually present. Optimally, a firm diagnosis is made
with induced sputum, bronchoscopy, or both, especially in patients with chronic pneumonia, atypical
presentation, severe defects in immune function, or failure to respond to broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Likely pathogens can often be predicted based on symptoms, x-ray changes, and the type of
immunodeficiency. In patients with acute symptoms, likely diagnoses are bacterial infection, hemorrhage,
pulmonary edema, a leukocyte agglutinin reaction, and pulmonary emboli. A subacute or chronic
presentation is more suggestive of a fungal or mycobacterial infection, an opportunistic
viral infection,
P.
jirovecii
pneumonia, tumor, a cytotoxic drug reaction, or radiation injury.
X-rays showing localized consolidation usually indicate an infection involving bacteria, mycobacteria,
fungi, or
Nocardia
sp. A diffuse interstitial pattern is more likely to represent a viral infection,
P. jirovecii
pneumonia, drug or radiation injury, or pulmonary edema. Diffuse nodular lesions suggest mycobacteria,
Nocardia
sp, fungi, or tumor. Cavitary disease suggests mycobacteria,
Nocardia
sp, fungi, or bacteria.
In organ or marrow transplantation recipients with bilateral interstitial pneumonia, the usual cause is
cytomegalovirus, or the disease is idiopathic. A pleural-based consolidation is usually aspergillosis. In
AIDS patients, bilateral pneumonia is usually
P. jirovecii
pneumonia. About 30% of patients with HIV
infection have
P. jirovecii
pneumonia as the initial AIDS-defining diagnosis, and > 80% of AIDS patients
have this infection at some time if prophylaxis is not given (. Patients with HIV infection
become vulnerable to
P. jirovecii
pneumonia when the CD4
+
helper cell count is < 200/
μ
L.
Treatment
• Broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy
===PAGE:2101===
In neutropenic patients, empiric treatment depends on the host defect, x-ray, and severity of illness.
Generally, broad-spectrum drugs are needed to cover gram-negative bacilli,
Staphylococcus aureus
, and
anaerobes, as for hospital-acquired pneumonia (. If patients with conditions other than HIV
do not improve with 5 days of antibiotic therapy, antifungal therapy is frequently added empirically.
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Pneumonia
P. jirovecii
is a common cause of pneumonia in immunosuppressed patients, especially in those
infected with HIV and in those receiving systemic corticosteroids. Symptoms include fever,
dyspnea, and dry cough. Diagnosis requires demonstration of the organism in an induced
sputum specimen or bronchoscopic brushing. Treatment is with antibiotics, usually
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or dapsone/trimethoprim, clindamycin/primaquine, atovaquone,
or pentamidine. Patients with PaO
< 70 mm Hg receive systemic corticosteroids. Prognosis is
generally good with timely treatment.
P. jirovecii
is a ubiquitous organism transmitted by aerosol route and causes no disease in
immunocompetent patients. Patients with HIV infection and CD4+ counts < 200/
μ
L, organ transplant
recipients, patients who have hematologic cancers, and patients taking corticosteroids are at risk of
developing
P. jirovecii
pneumonia. Most have fever, dyspnea, and a dry, nonproductive cough that
evolves subacutely over several weeks (HIV infection) or acutely over several days (other causes of
compromised cell-mediated immunity).
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Pulse oximetry
• Histopathologic confirmation
Patients should have chest x-ray and assessment of oxygenation by pulse oximetry. The chest x-ray
characteristically shows diffuse, bilateral perihilar infiltrates, but 20 to 30% of patients have normal x-rays.
However, hypoxemia is often present even when chest x-ray shows no infiltrate; this finding can be an
important clue to diagnosis. When pulse oximetry is abnormal, ABGs are often obtained to show severity
of hypoxemia (including an increase in the alveolar-arterial O
gradient). If obtained, pulmonary function
tests show altered diffusing capacity (although this is rarely done as a diagnostic test).
Confirmation of diagnosis requires histopathologic demonstration of the organism with methenamine
silver, Giemsa, Wright-Giemsa, modified Grocott, Weigert-Gram, or monoclonal antibody stain. Sputum
specimens are usually obtained by induced sputum or bronchoscopy. Sensitivity ranges from 30 to 80%
for induced sputum and is > 95% for bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage.
Prognosis
Overall mortality for
P. jirovecii
pneumonia in hospitalized patients is 15 to 20%. Risk factors for death
may include previous history of
P. jirovecii
pneumonia, older age, and, in HIV-infected patients, CD4+ cell
count < 50/
μ
L.
Treatment
• Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
• Corticosteroids if PaO
< 70 mm Hg
Treatment is with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) 4 to 5 mg/kg IV or po tid for 14 to 21 days.
Treatment can be started before diagnosis is confirmed because
P. jirovecii
cysts persist in the lungs for
weeks. Adverse effects of treatment are more common among patients with AIDS and include rash,
===PAGE:2102===
neutropenia, hepatitis, and fever. Alternative regimens are pentamidine 4 mg/kg IV once/day; atovaquone
750 mg po bid; TMP 5 mg/kg po qid with dapsone 100 mg po once/day; or clindamycin 300 to 900 mg IV
q 6 to 8 h with primaquine base 15 to 30 mg/day po, also for 21 days. The major limitation of pentamidine
is the high frequency of toxic adverse effects, including renal failure, hypotension, and hypoglycemia.
Adjunctive therapy with corticosteroids is recommended for patients with a PaO
< 70 mm Hg. The
suggested regimen is prednisone 40 mg bid (or its equivalent) for the first 5 days, 40 mg once/day for the
next 5 days (or 20 mg bid), and then 20 mg once/day for the duration of treatment.
Prevention
HIV-infected patients who have had
P. jirovecii
pneumonia or who have a CD4+ count < 200/
μ
L should
receive prophylaxis with TMP/SMX 80/400 mg once/day; if this regimen is not tolerated, dapsone 100 mg
po once/day or aerosolized pentamidine 300 mg once/month can be used. These prophylactic regimens
are also probably indicated for non-HIV-infected patients at risk of
P. jirovecii
pneumonia.
Aspiration Pneumonitis and Pneumonia
Aspiration pneumonitis and pneumonia are caused by inhaling toxic substances, usually gastric
contents, into the lungs. Chemical pneumonitis, bacterial pneumonia, or airway obstruction can
occur. Symptoms include cough and dyspnea. Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation and
chest x-ray findings. Treatment and prognosis differ by aspirated substance.
Aspiration can cause lung inflammation (chemical pneumonitis), infection (bacterial pneumonia or
abscess), or airway obstruction. However, most episodes of aspiration cause minor symptoms or
pneumonitis rather than infection or obstruction, and some patients aspirate with no sequelae. Drowning
is discussed on p.
; airway obstruction is discussed elsewhere.
Risk factors for aspiration include impaired cognition, impaired swallowing, vomiting, GI and respiratory
devices and procedures (eg, nasogastric or endotracheal tube placement, dental work), and
gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Pathophysiology
Chemical pneumonitis:
Multiple substances are directly toxic to the lungs or stimulate an inflammatory
response when aspirated; gastric acid is the most common such aspirated substance, but others include
petroleum products (particularly of low viscosity, such as petroleum jelly) and laxative oils (such as
mineral, castor, and paraffin oil), all of which cause lipoid pneumonia. Aspirated gasoline and kerosene
also cause a chemical pneumonitis (.
Gastric contents
cause damage mainly from gastric acid, although food and other ingested material (eg,
activated charcoal as in treatment of overdose) are injurious in quantity. Gastric acid causes a chemical
burn of the airways and lung leading to rapid bronchoconstriction, atelectasis, edema, and alveolar
hemorrhage. Symptoms include acute dyspnea with cough that is sometimes productive of pink frothy
sputum, tachypnea, tachycardia, fever, diffuse crackles, and wheezing. Chest x-ray shows diffuse
infiltrates frequently but not exclusively in dependent segments, while pulse-oximetry and ABGs
demonstrate hypoxemia. Treatment is supportive, often involving supplemental O
and mechanical
ventilation. Antibiotics often are given to patients with witnessed or known gastric aspiration. The
syndrome may resolve spontaneously, usually within a few days, or may progress to acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Sometimes bacterial superinfection occurs.
Oil or petroleum jelly
aspiration causes exogenous lipoid pneumonia, which is characterized
histologically by chronic granulomatous inflammation with fibrosis. It is often asymptomatic and is detected
incidentally on chest x-ray or may manifest with low-grade fever, gradual weight loss, and crackles. Chest
x-ray findings vary; consolidation, cavitation, interstitial or nodular infiltrates, pleural effusion, and other
changes may be slowly progressive. Treatment is avoidance of the toxic substance. Anecdotal reports
suggest systemic corticosteroids may be beneficial.
Aspiration pneumonia:
Healthy people commonly aspirate small amounts of oral secretions, but normal
===PAGE:2103===
Aspiration pneumonia:
Healthy people commonly aspirate small amounts of oral secretions, but normal
defense mechanisms usually clear the inoculum without sequelae. Aspiration of larger amounts, or
aspiration in a patient with impaired pulmonary defenses, often causes pneumonia and/or abscess (see
also
Chapter 197
). Elderly patients tend to aspirate because of conditions associated with aging that alter
consciousness, such as sedative use and disorders (eg, neurologic disorders, weakness). Empyema (see
p.
) also occasionally complicates aspiration.
Anaerobes often can be cultured from sputum, but it is unclear whether they are primary
infecting
organisms to which treatment should be directed or whether they are simply one of several organisms
causing infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of pneumonia and abscess are similar and include chronic low-grade dyspnea,
fever, weight loss, and cough productive of putrid, foul-tasting sputum. Patients may have signs of poor
oral hygiene.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
Chest x-ray shows an infiltrate, frequently but not exclusively, in the dependent lung segments, ie, the
superior or posterior basal segments of a lower lobe or the posterior segment of an upper lobe.
Treatment
• Antibiotics, usually clindamycin
Abscess:
Treatment of lung abscess is with clindamycin 450 to 900 mg IV q 8 h followed by 300 mg po
qid once fever and clinical symptoms subside. An alternative is a combination of penicillin (either penicillin
G 1 to 2 million units q 4 to 6 h or amoxicillin 0.5 to 1 g po tid) plus either metronidazole 500 mg po tid,
amoxicillin/clavulanate 875/125 mg po tid, or imipenem. Treatment is continued for 6 wk to 3 mo.
Pneumonia:
Treatment of aspiration pneumonia can be with clindamycin, but other antibiotics with lower
risk of adverse effects may be effective, because it is not clear that all the anaerobes cultured from the
infection require specific treatment. Duration of treatment is usually 1 to 2 wk.
===PAGE:2104===
Chapter 197. Lung Abscess
Introduction
Lung abscess is a necrotizing lung infection characterized by a pus-filled cavitary lesion. It is
almost always caused by aspiration of oral secretions by patients who have impaired
consciousness. Symptoms are persistent cough, fever, sweats, and weight loss. Diagnosis is
based primarily on chest x-ray. Treatment usually is with clindamycin or combination
β
-lactam/
β
-lactamase inhibitors.
Etiology
Most lung abscesses develop after aspiration of oral secretions by patients with gingivitis or poor oral
hygiene. Typically, patients have altered consciousness as a result of alcohol intoxication, illicit drugs,
anesthesia, sedatives, or opioids. Older patients and those unable to handle their oral secretions, often
because of neurologic disease, are also at risk.
A less common cause of lung abscess is necrotizing pneumonia that may develop from hematogenous
seeding of the lungs due to suppurative thromboembolism (eg, septic embolism due to IV drug use) or
right-sided endocarditis. In contrast to aspiration, these conditions typically cause multiple rather than
isolated lung abscesses.
The most common pathogens of lung abscesses due to aspiration are anaerobic bacteria, but about half
of all cases involve both anaerobic and aerobic organisms (see
Table 197-1
). The most common aerobic pathogens are streptococci and staphylococci—sometimes
methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA). An unusual but very important acute and often lethal
form of lung necrosis is caused by
S. aureus
with genes for Panton-Valentine leukocidin. Very serious and
fulminant cases may be caused by MRSA (USA 300 strain), which has become a rare but very important
cause of necrotizing pneumonia in young previously healthy adults and children. Occasionally, cases are
due to gram-negative bacteria, especially
Klebsiella
. Immunocompromised patients with lung abscess
may have infection with
Nocardia
,
Mycobacteria
sp, or fungi. Some people, especially those from
developing countries, are at risk of abscess due to
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
, and rare cases are due
to amebic infection (eg, with
Entamoeba histolytica
), paragonimiasis, or
Burkholderia pseudomallei
.
Introduction of these pathogens into the lungs first causes inflammation, which leads to tissue necrosis
and then abscess formation. The abscess usually ruptures into a bronchus, and its contents are
expectorated, leaving an air- and fluid-filled cavity. In about one third of cases, direct or indirect extension
(via bronchopleural fistula) into the pleural cavity results in empyema.
Cavitary pulmonary lesions are not always caused by infection. Noninfectious causes include the
following:
• Bullae with air-fluid level
• Bronchiectasis
• Lung cancer
•
Lung infarction
• Nodular silicosis nodule with central necrosis
• Pulmonary embolism
• Pulmonary sequestration
• Sarcoidosis
===PAGE:2105===
• Wegener's granulomatosis
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of abscess due to anaerobic bacteria or mixed anaerobic and aerobic bacteria
[Table 197-1.
Infectious Causes of Cavitary Lung Lesions]
are usually chronic (eg, over weeks or months) and include productive cough, fever, sweats, and weight
loss. Severe prostration may occur. Sputum may be purulent or blood-streaked and classically smells or
tastes foul. Symptoms of abscess due to aerobic bacteria develop more acutely and resemble bacterial
pneumonia. Abscesses due to organisms other than anaerobes (eg,
Mycobacteria
,
Nocardia
) lack putrid
respiratory secretions and may be more likely to occur in nondependent lung regions.
Signs of lung abscess, when present, are nonspecific and resemble those of pneumonia: decreased
breath sounds indicating consolidation or effusion, temperature ≥ 38°C, crackles over the affected area,
egophony, and dullness to percussion in the presence of effusion. Patients typically have signs of
periodontal disease and a history of a predisposing cause of aspiration, such as dysphagia or a condition
causing impaired consciousness.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• CT as needed
• Sputum cultures (unless anaerobic infection is very likely), including for fungi and mycobacteria
• Bronchoscopy as needed to exclude cancer
Lung abscess is suspected based on history in a patient who is aspiration-prone due to altered
consciousness or dysphagia and is confirmed by chest x-ray. In an anaerobic infection due to aspiration,
chest x-ray classically shows consolidation with a single cavity containing an air-fluid level in portions of
the lung that would be dependent when the patient is recumbent (eg, the posterior segments of the upper
lobes or the superior or lateral basal segments of the lower lobes). This pattern helps distinguish
anaerobic abscess from other causes of cavitary pulmonary disease, because diffuse or embolic
pulmonary disease often causes multiple cavitations, and TB typically involves the apices.
CT is not routinely needed but may be useful when the x-ray suggests a cavitating lesion or when an
underlying pulmonary mass obstructing the drainage of a lung segment is suspected.
Bronchial carcinoma can lead to obstruction that causes pneumonia and abscess formation. This should
be suspected in smokers, recent smokers, and patients with unexplained cavitary lesions and no fever.
Bronchoscopy is sometimes done to exclude cancer or the presence of a foreign body or to detect
unusual pathogens, such as fungi.
Cultures:
Anaerobic bacteria are rarely identifiable on culture because uncontaminated specimens are
difficult to obtain and because most laboratories do not culture anaerobes well or often. If sputum is
putrid, then anaerobic infection is assumed to be the cause. However, if empyema is present, pleural fluid
provides a good source for anaerobic culture.
When clinical findings make anaerobic infection less likely, aerobic, fungal, or mycobacterial infection
should be suspected, and attempts should be made to identify a pathogen. Cultures of sputum,
bronchoscopic aspirates, or both are helpful. MRSA is generally found in both the sputum and blood
cultures.
Treatment
===PAGE:2106===
• IV antibiotics or, for less seriously affected patients, oral antibiotics
• Percutaneous drainage or surgery if empyema present or no response to antibiotics
Treatment is with antibiotics. Clindamycin 600 mg IV q 6 to 8 h is usually the drug of choice because it
has excellent activity against streptococci and anaerobic organisms. The primary alternative is a
combination
β
-lactam/
β
-lactamase inhibitor (eg, ampicillin/sulbactam 1 to 2 g IV q 6 h,
ticarcillin/clavulanate 3 to 6 g IV q 6 h, piperacillin/tazobactam 3 g IV q 6 h). Metronidazole 500 mg q 8 h
may be used but must be combined with penicillin 2 million units q 6 h IV. Less seriously ill patients may
be given oral antibiotics such as clindamycin 300 mg po q 6 h or amoxicillin/clavulanate 875/125 mg po q
12 h. IV regimens can be converted to oral ones when the patient defervesces. For very serious infections
involving MSRA, the best treatment is vancomycin or linezolid.
Optimal duration of treatment is unknown, but common practice is to treat until the chest x-ray shows
complete resolution, which generally takes 3 to 6 wk or longer. In general, the larger the abscess, the
longer it will take for x-rays to show resolution.
Most authorities do not recommend chest physical therapy and postural drainage because they may
cause spillage of infection into other bronchi with extension of the infection or acute obstruction. If the
patient is weak or paralyzed or has respiratory failure, tracheostomy and suctioning may be necessary.
Rarely, bronchoscopic aspiration helps facilitate drainage. An accompanying empyema must be drained.
Percutaneous or surgical drainage of lung abscesses is necessary in the roughly 10% of patients in
whom lesions do not respond to antibiotics. Resistance to antibiotic treatment is most common with large
cavities and with infections that complicate obstructions.
When surgery is necessary, lobectomy is the most common procedure; segmental resection may suffice
for small lesions (< 6 cm diameter cavity). Pneumonectomy may be necessary for multiple abscesses or
for pulmonary gangrene unresponsive to drug therapy.
===PAGE:2107===
Chapter 198. Bronchiectasis
Introduction
Bronchiectasis is dilation and destruction of larger bronchi caused by chronic infection and
inflammation. Common causes are cystic fibrosis, immune defects, and recurrent infections,
though some cases seem to be idiopathic. Symptoms are chronic cough and purulent sputum
expectoration; some patients may also have fever and dyspnea. Diagnosis is based on history
and imaging, usually involving high-resolution CT, though standard chest x-rays may be
diagnostic. Treatment and prevention of acute exacerbations are with antibiotics, drainage of
secretions, and management of complications, such as superinfection and hemoptysis.
Treatment of underlying disorders is important whenever possible.
Etiology
Bronchiectasis may affect many areas of the lung (diffuse bronchiectasis), or it may appear in only one or
two areas (focal bronchiectasis). Diffuse bronchiectasis develops in patients with genetic, immune, or
anatomic defects that affect the airways. Cystic fibrosis is the most common cause. Immunodeficiencies
may also cause diffuse disease, as may rare abnormalities in airway structure. Diffuse bronchiectasis is
an uncommon complication of more common conditions, such as RA or Sjogren's syndrome. Allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is a hypersensitivity reaction to
Aspergillus
sp (. It occurs
primarily in people with asthma and less
commonly in people with cystic fibrosis and can lead to
bronchiectasis.
Focal bronchiectasis develops from untreated pneumonia or obstruction (eg, due to foreign bodies and
tumors). Mycobacteria can cause focal bronchiectasis as well as colonize the lungs of patients with
bronchiectasis due to other disorders (see
Table 198-1
). Some cases have no readily apparent cause.
Pathophysiology
All the causative conditions impair airway clearance mechanisms and host defenses, resulting in an
inability to clear secretions, which, in turn, predisposes patients to chronic infection and inflammation. As
a result of frequent infections, most commonly with
Haemophilus influenzae
(35%),
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
(31%),
Moraxella catarrhalis
(20%),
Staphylococcus aureus
(14%), and
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
(13%), airways become inspissated with viscous mucous containing inflammatory mediators
and pathogens and slowly become dilated, scarred, and distorted. Histologically, bronchial walls are
thickened by edema, inflammation, and neovascularization. Destruction of surrounding interstitium and
alveoli causes fibrosis, emphysema, or both.
Superinfection with multidrug-resistant organisms, including
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
, and
mycobacteria other than
M. tuberculosis
can cause recurrent exacerbations and worsen airflow limitation
on pulmonary function tests. Pulmonary hypertension and right-sided heart failure may ensue because
functional lung tissue decreases.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms characteristically begin insidiously and gradually worsen over years. The major presenting
symptom of bronchiectasis
[Table 198-1.
Factors Predisposing to Bronchiectasis]
is chronic cough that almost always produces large volumes of thick, tenacious, purulent sputum.
Dyspnea and wheezing are common. Hemoptysis, which can be massive, is due to neovascularization of
the airways from the bronchial (as opposed to pulmonary) arteries. Acute exacerbations of disease due to
new or worsened infection increase the extent of cough and the volume and purulence of sputum
production. Low-grade fever may also be present.
===PAGE:2108===
Halitosis and abnormal breath sounds, including crackles, rhonchi, and wheezing, are typical signs of
disease. Finger clubbing may also be present. In advanced cases, hypoxemia and signs of pulmonary
hypertension (eg, shortness of breath, dizziness) and right-sided heart failure can occur.
Diagnosis
• History and physical examination
• Chest x-ray
• High-resolution CT for confirmation
• Pulmonary function tests for baseline function and progression of disease
• Specific tests for suspected causes
Diagnosis is based on a history, physical examination, and radiologic testing, beginning with a chest x-ray.
Chronic bronchitis may mimic bronchiectasis clinically, but bronchiectasis is distinguished by more
voluminous daily production of purulent sputum and by dilated airways on imaging studies.
Imaging:
X-ray findings suggestive of bronchiectasis include scattered irregular opacities caused by
mucous plugs, honeycombing, and rings and "tram lines" caused by thickened, dilated airways located
perpendicular to the x-ray beam. Radiographic patterns may differ by underlying disease: Bronchiectasis
due to cystic fibrosis develops predominantly in upper lobes, whereas that due to other causes is more
diffuse or predominates in the lower lobes.
High-resolution CT is the test of choice for defining the extent of bronchiectasis. The test is nearly 100%
sensitive and specific. CT typically shows thickening of airways characterized by tram-track parallel lines
or ring shadows representing thickened bronchial walls when imaged in cross-section. Cysts (sometimes
appearing as grapelike clusters), scattered mucous plugs, and airways that are dilated > 1.5 times the
diameter of nearby blood vessels can also be seen. Dilated medium-sized bronchi may extend almost to
the pleurae. Atelectasis, consolidation, and decreased vascularity are nonspecific findings. A differential
diagnosis of dilated airways includes bronchitis and traction bronchiectasis that occurs when pulmonary
fibrosis pulls airways open.
Pulmonary function tests:
Pulmonary function tests can be helpful for documenting baseline function
and for following the progression of disease over time. Bronchiectasis causes airflow limitation (reduced
forced expiratory volume in 1 sec [FEV], forced vital capacity [FVC], and FEV
/FVC); the FEV
can
improve in response to
β
-agonist bronchodilators. Lung volume measurements may be increased or
decreased, and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) may be decreased.
Diagnosis of cause:
Tests to help diagnose a cause include sputum evaluation, including staining and
cultures for bacterial, mycobacterial (
Mycobacterium avium
complex and
M. tuberculosis
), and fungal
(
Aspergillus
) infection. Mycobacterial superinfection is diagnosed by repeatedly culturing mycobacteria
other than TB in high colony counts and by finding granulomas on biopsy with concurrent radiologic
evidence of disease. Additional tests may include the following:
• Sweat chloride testing to diagnose cystic fibrosis (which should be done even in older patients)
• Rheumatoid factor and other serologic tests to look for connective tissue diseases
• Immunoglobulin measurement (including IgG subclass determination),
Aspergillus
precipitins, IgE, and
eosinophilia to rule out allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
•
α
-Antitrypsin levels to document
α
-antitrypsin deficiency
===PAGE:2109===
When the clinical presentation suggests ciliary dyskinesia (by concurrent sinus disease and middle and
lower lobe bronchiectasis with or without infertility), a nasal or bronchial epithelial sample should be
obtained and examined by transmission electron microscopy for abnormal ciliary structure. A less invasive
alternative is examination of sperm motility. The diagnosis of ciliary dyskinesia should be made cautiously
by an experienced physician trained in specialized electron microscopic techniques because nonspecific
structural defects can be present in up to 10% of cilia in healthy patients and in patients with pulmonary
disease; infection can cause transient dyskinesia; and ciliary ultrastructure may be normal in patients with
primary ciliary dyskinesia syndromes characterized by abnormal ciliary function.
Bronchoscopy is indicated when an anatomic or an obstructing object or lesion is suspected.
Prognosis
Overall, prognosis is thought to be good, with about 80% of patients having no further deterioration of
lung function on the basis of bronchiectasis alone. However, cystic fibrosis patients have a median
survival of 36 yr, and most patients continue to have intermittent acute exacerbations.
Treatment
• Prevention of exacerbations with antibiotics and regular vaccinations
• Measures to help clear secretions
• Antibiotics for acute exacerbations
• Sometimes surgical resection
There is no consensus on the best approach to prevent or limit acute exacerbations. Options include daily
prophylactic oral antibiotics (eg, ciprofloxacin 500 mg bid) and, in patients who have cystic fibrosis and
are colonized with
P. aeruginosa
, inhaled tobramycin (300 mg bid every other month). In patients with
diffuse bronchiectasis due to other causes, aerosolized gentamicin (40 mg bid) may also be effective.
Chronic therapy with azithromycin 500 mg po 3 times/wk has demonstrated efficacy in patients with cystic
fibrosis; it is unclear whether macrolides are useful in other
patients. The mechanism of this effect is not
known and may not be due to antibiotic effect.
As with all patients with chronic pulmonary disease, annual vaccination against influenza and vaccination
every 5 yr against pneumococcus is recommended.
Various techniques can facilitate clearance of secretions, including postural drainage and chest
percussion, positive expiratory pressure devices, intrapulmonary percussive ventilators, pneumatic vests,
and autogenic drainage (a breathing technique thought to help move secretions from peripheral to central
airways). Nebulized drugs, including a mucolytic (rhDNase) or hypertonic (7%) saline, have clinical utility
in patients with cystic fibrosis. Patients should be introduced to these techniques by a respiratory
therapist and should use whichever technique is most effective for them because no evidence favors one
technique.
Additional treatment depends on the cause. For cystic fibrosis, see p.
. Allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis is treated with corticosteroids and possibly with azole antifungals (. Patients
with immunoglobulin or
α
-antitrypsin deficiencies should receive replacement therapy.
Acute exacerbations:
Acute exacerbations are treated with antibiotics and increased efforts to clear
sputum from the airways with the use of bronchodilators and mucolytics. Inflammation may be treated with
inhaled or oral corticosteroids. Antibiotic choice depends on whether patients have cystic fibrosis or noncystic fibrosis bronchiectasis.
Antibiotics for non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis should initially cover
H. influenzae
,
P. aeruginosa
,
M.
catarrhalis
,
S. aureus
, and
S. pneumoniae
(eg, ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid or levofloxacin 500 mg po
once/day for 7 to 14 days) and should be adjusted according to culture results.
===PAGE:2110===
Antibiotic selection for cystic fibrosis exacerbations is guided by sputum culture. Routine annual sputum
cultures should be done on all patients with cystic fibrosis. During childhood, common infecting organisms
are
S. aureus
and
H. influenzae
and quinolone antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin may be
used. In the later stages of cystic fibrosis, infections involve highly resistant strains of certain gramnegative organisms including
P. aeruginosa
,
Burkholderia cepacia
, and
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
.
In these patients, treatment is with multiple antibiotics (eg, tobramycin, aztreonam, ticarcillin/clavulanate,
ceftazidime, cefepime). IV administration is frequently required.
Complications:
Significant hemoptysis is usually treated with bronchial artery embolization, but surgical
resection may be considered if pulmonary function is adequate.
Superinfection with mycobacterial organisms such as
M. avium
complex almost always requires multiple
drug regimens that include clarithromycin 500 mg po bid or azithromycin 250 mg once/day; rifampin 600
mg po once/day or rifabutin 300 mg po once/day; and ethambutol 25 mg/kg po once/day for 2 mo followed
by 15 mg/kg once/day. Drug therapy is modified based on culture and sensitivity results. All drugs should
be taken until sputum cultures have been negative for 12 mo.
Surgical resection for localized bronchiectasis is rarely needed but is considered when medical therapy
has been optimized and the symptoms are intolerable. In certain patients with diffuse bronchiectasis, lung
transplantation is also an option. Five-year survival rates as high as 65 to 75% have been reported when
a heart-lung or double lung transplantation is done. Pulmonary function usually improves within 6 mo, and
the improvement may be sustained for at least 5 yr.
===PAGE:2111===
Chapter 199. Interstitial Lung Diseases
Introduction
(Diffuse Parenchymal Lung Diseases)
Interstitial lung diseases are a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by alveolar septal
thickening, fibroblast proliferation, collagen deposition, and, if the process remains unchecked, pulmonary
fibrosis. Interstitial lung diseases can be classified using various criteria (eg, acute vs chronic,
granulomatous vs nongranulomatous, known cause vs unknown cause, primary lung disease vs
secondary to systemic disease).
Among the numerous possible causes are most connective tissue disorders and occupational lung
exposures and many drugs (see
Table 199-1
and also
Chapter 201
). A number of interstitial diseases of unknown etiology have characteristic
histology, clinical features, or presentation
[Table 199-1.
Causes of Interstitial Lung Disease]
and thus are considered unique diseases, including eosinophilic pulmonary diseases, pulmonary
Langerhans' cell granulomatosis (histiocytosis), lymphangioleiomyomatosis, pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis, and sarcoidosis. In up to 30% of patients who have interstitial diseases with no clear cause,
the processes are distinguished primarily by characteristic histopathologic features; these processes are
termed the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias.
Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonias
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias (IIPs) are interstitial lung diseases of unknown etiology that
share similar clinical and radiologic features and are distinguished primarily by the
histopathologic patterns on lung biopsy. Classified into 6 histologic subtypes, all are
characterized by varying degrees of inflammation and fibrosis and all cause dyspnea. Diagnosis
is based on history, physical examination, imaging, pulmonary function tests, and lung biopsy.
Treatment varies by subtype but typically involves corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs, or both;
treatment is frequently ineffective. Prognosis varies by subtype and ranges from excellent to
nearly always fatal.
The 6 histologic subtypes of IIP in decreasing order of frequency are
• Usual interstitial pneumonia, known clinically as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
• Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
• Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia
• Respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial lung disease (RBILD)
• Desquamative interstitial pneumonia
• Acute interstitial pneumonia
These subtypes are characterized by varying degrees of interstitial inflammation and fibrosis. All cause
dyspnea; diffuse usually reticular opacities on chest x-ray; and inflammation, fibrosis, or both on biopsy.
The subtypes are important to distinguish, however, because they have different clinical features (see
Table 199-2
) and respond differently to treatment. Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia, although still
considered a subtype of IIP, is now thought to be part of the lymphoproliferative disease spectrum rather
than a primary interstitial lung disease (.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2112===
Symptoms and signs are usually nonspecific. Cough and dyspnea on exertion are typical, with variable
onset and progression. Common signs include tachypnea, reduced chest expansion, and bibasilar endinspiratory dry crackles.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• High-resolution CT (HRCT)
• Pulmonary function tests
• Lung biopsy
IIP should be suspected in any patient with unexplained interstitial lung disease. Clinicians, radiologists,
and pathologists should exchange information to determine the diagnosis in individual patients. Potential
causes (see
Table 199-1
) are assessed systematically. For maximum diagnostic yield, history should
address the following criteria:
• Symptom duration
• Family history of lung disease, especially lung fibrosis
• History of tobacco use (because some diseases occur mostly among current or former smokers)
• Current and prior drug use
• Detailed review of home and work environments, including those of family members. A chronologic
listing of the patient's entire employment history, including specific duties and known exposures to
dusts, gases, and chemicals, is obtained. The degree of exposure, duration of exposure, latency of
exposure, and the use of protective devices is elicited.
Chest x-rays are always done as are pulmonary function tests (. HRCT, which distinguishes
airspace from interstitial disease, provides better assessment of the extent and distribution of disease and
is more likely to detect underlying or coexisting disease (eg, occult mediastinal adenopathy, cancer,
emphysema). HRCT is best done with the patient prone to reduce dependent lung atelectasis.
The initial laboratory evaluation includes liver and renal function tests and CBC to check for anemia,
polycythemia, and leukocytosis. Other tests are done for patients who have clinical features suggesting a
connective tissue disorder, vasculitis, or environmental exposure. Such tests include ESR, antinuclear
antibodies, rheumatoid factor, hypersensitivity panel (a collection of tests for antibodies to common
antigens from microbial, fungal, and animal sources), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and antibasement membrane antibody.
Bronchoscopic transbronchial biopsy can exclude interstitial lung disease, establishing
[Table 199-2.
Key Features of Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonias*]
a diagnosis of another disorder, but the biopsy does not yield enough tissue to diagnose one of the IIPs.
Bronchoalveolar lavage helps narrow the differential diagnosis in some patients and can provide
information about disease progression and response to therapy. The usefulness of this procedure in the
initial clinical assessment and follow-up of most patients with these diseases has not been established,
however.
Surgical lung biopsy is usually needed to confirm the diagnosis except when HRCT shows a pattern
consistent with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Biopsy of multiple sites with an open or video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) procedure is required.
===PAGE:2113===
Treatment
Treatment may vary by disorder (see
Table 199-3
). Smoking cessation is always recommended to avoid accelerating disease progression.
Corticosteroids are recommended for cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, lymphoid interstitial pneumonia,
and nonspecific interstitial pneumonia. Lung transplantation may be recommended for end-stage
disorders.
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis
(Cryptogenic Fibrosing Alveolitis)
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), the most common form of IIP, causes progressive
pulmonary fibrosis predominantly in male smokers. Symptoms and signs develop over months
to years and include exertional dyspnea, cough, and fine (Velcro) crackles. Diagnosis is based
on history, physical examination, chest x-ray, and pulmonary function tests and is confirmed
with HRCT, lung biopsy, or both if necessary. No specific treatment has proved effective. Most
patients deteriorate; median survival is < 3 yr from diagnosis.
IPF, identified histologically as usual interstitial pneumonia, accounts for about 50% of cases of IIP. IPF
affects men and women in their 50s and 60s in a ratio of 2:1. Current or former cigarette smoking is most
strongly associated with the disease. There is some genetic predisposition; familial clustering occurs in
up to 3% of cases.
Etiology
Environmental, genetic, or other unknown factors are thought to initially trigger alveolar epithelial cell
injury, but self-perpetuating
[Table 199-3.
Treatment and Prognosis of Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonias*]
and aberrant interstitial fibroblast and mesenchymal cell proliferation (with collagen deposition and
fibrosis) are thought to account for development of clinical disease.
Pathophysiology
The key histologic findings are subpleural fibrosis with sites of fibroblast proliferation (fibroblast foci) and
dense scarring, alternating with areas of normal lung tissue (heterogeneity). Scattered interstitial
inflammation occurs with lymphocyte, plasma cell, and histiocyte infiltration. Cystic dilatation of peripheral
alveoli (honeycombing) occurs in all patients and increases with advanced disease. A similar histologic
pattern uncommonly occurs in cases of interstitial lung diseases of known etiology (see
Table 199-2
).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs typically develop over 6 mo to several years and include dyspnea on exertion and
nonproductive cough. Constitutional symptoms, such as low-grade fever and myalgias, are uncommon.
The classic sign of IPF is fine, dry, bibasilar inspiratory crackles (Velcro crackles). Clubbing is present in
about 50% of cases. The remainder of the examination is normal until disease is advanced, at which time
signs of pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular systolic dysfunction may develop.
Diagnosis
• HRCT
• Pulmonary function tests
• Often surgical lung biopsy
===PAGE:2114===
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with subacute dyspnea, nonproductive cough, and Velcro crackles on
chest examination. However, IPF is commonly overlooked initially because of clinical similarities to other
more common diseases, such as bronchitis, asthma, and heart failure. Diagnosis requires HRCT,
pulmonary function tests, and often surgical lung biopsy.
Chest x-ray typically shows diffuse reticular opacities in the lower and peripheral lung zones. Small cystic
lesions (honeycombing) and dilated airways due to traction bronchiectasis are additional findings.
Pulmonary function tests typically reveal a restrictive pattern (. Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) is also reduced. ABGs show hypoxemia, which is
often exaggerated or elicited by exercise and low arterial CO
levels.
HRCT shows diffuse, patchy, subpleural, reticular opacities with irregularly thickened interlobular septa
and intralobular lines; subpleural honeycombing; and traction bronchiectasis. Ground-glass opacities
affecting > 30% of the lung suggest an alternative diagnosis.
Laboratory testing plays little role in diagnosis.
Prognosis
Most patients have moderate to advanced clinical disease at the time of diagnosis and deteriorate despite
treatment. Normal PaO
at presentation and fewer fibroblastic foci on biopsy predict a better prognosis.
Prognosis is worse with advanced age, poor pulmonary function at presentation (forced vital capacity
[FVC] < 55% of predicted or DLCO < 35% of predicted), and severe dyspnea. Median survival is < 3 yr
from time of diagnosis.
Causes of acute deterioration include infections, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax, and heart failure.
Also, acute exacerbations without an identifiable cause are common and have a high morbidity. Lung
cancer occurs more frequently in patients with IPF, but cause of death is usually respiratory failure,
respiratory infection, or heart failure with ischemia and arrhythmia. Because of the poor prognosis of IPF,
discussions with the patient and family about advance care planning and end-of-life care are important at
the early stages of diagnosis and management (.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Possibly corticosteroids and immunosuppressants
• Sometimes lung transplantation
No specific treatment has proved effective. Supportive therapy consists of O
for hypoxemia, pulmonary
rehabilitation, and antibiotics for pneumonias. Smoking must be stopped. Joining a support group may
help reduce the stress of the illness. Treatment of IPF with corticosteroids and cytotoxic agents is of
unproven benefit and causes substantial morbidity; thus, combined therapy should not be routinely
prescribed. Drugs such as
N
-acetylcysteine, bosentan, pirfenidone, warfarin, and etanercept show
promise, but there is insufficient evidence to recommend their general use.
Lung transplantation is successful for otherwise healthy IPF patients < 55 yr with end-stage pulmonary
disease (< 40% of all IPF patients). Otherwise healthy IPF patients should be
evaluated for lung
transplantation at the time of diagnosis.
Nonspecific Interstitial Pneumonia
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia is an idiopathic interstitial pneumonia that occurs mainly in
women, nonsmokers, and patients < 50 yr.
===PAGE:2115===
Idiopathic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia is the second most common idiopathic interstitial pneumonia.
Most patients are between the ages of 40 and 50 and have no known cause or association. However, a
similar pathologic process can occur in patients with a connective tissue disorder (in particular, systemic
sclerosis or polymyositis/dermatomyositis), in some forms of drug-induced lung injury, and in patients with
hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Clinical presentation is similar to that of IPF. Cough and dyspnea are present for months to years.
Constitutional symptoms are unusual, although a low-grade fever and malaise are possible.
Diagnosis
• HRCT
• Pulmonary function tests
• Biopsy
The diagnosis should be considered in patients with unexplained subacute or chronic cough and
dyspnea. Diagnosis usually requires chest x-ray, HRCT, pulmonary function tests, and biopsy. In contrast
to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, antinuclear antibodies and rheumatoid factor may be positive in low titer.
Pulmonary function tests usually show a restrictive pattern. Hypoxemia is often present at rest and is
even more prominent with exercise.
Chest x-ray primarily shows lower-zone reticular opacities. Bilateral patchy opacities are also possible.
HRCT findings include bilateral patchy ground-glass attenuation, bilateral areas of consolidation, irregular
lines, and bronchial dilatation. Ground-glass attenuation is the predominant finding in most cases and is
the sole abnormality in about one third of cases. More than half of patients have an increased percentage
of lymphocytes in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
The main histologic feature of nonspecific interstitial pneumonia is homogenous inflammation and fibrosis,
as opposed to the heterogeneity in usual interstitial pneumonia. The changes are temporally uniform, but
the process may be patchy, with intervening areas of unaffected lung. Honeycomb areas are rare.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
Most patients respond to corticosteroids. Relapse may occur. The disease progresses in a small
percentage of patients and these die 5 to 10 yr after diagnosis. The estimated overall 10-yr mortality is <
15 to 20%.
Cryptogenic Organizing Pneumonia
(Bronchiolitis Obliterans Organizing Pneumonia)
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP) is an idiopathic condition in which granulation tissue
obstructs alveolar ducts and alveolar spaces with chronic inflammation occurring in adjacent
alveoli.
COP affects men and women equally, usually in their 40s or 50s. Cigarette smoking does not seem to be
a risk factor.
About one half of patients recall having a community-acquired pneumonia-like syndrome (ie, a
nonresolving flu-like illness characterized by cough, fever, malaise, fatigue, and weight loss) at the onset
of the illness. Progressive cough and exertional dyspnea are what usually prompt the patient to seek
medical attention. Chest examination demonstrates Velcro crackles.
===PAGE:2116===
Diagnosis
• HRCT
• Pulmonary function tests
• Often biopsy
Diagnosis requires imaging tests, pulmonary function tests, and, if the diagnosis is not clear from these
tests, biopsy. Chest x-ray shows bilateral, diffuse, peripherally distributed alveolar opacities with normal
lung volumes; a peripheral distribution similar to chronic eosinophilic pneumonia may occur. Rarely,
alveolar opacities are unilateral. Recurrent and migratory pulmonary opacities are common. Rarely,
irregular linear or nodular interstitial opacities or honeycombing are visible at presentation. HRCT of the
lung shows patchy airspace consolidation (present in 90% of patients), ground-glass opacities, small
nodular opacities, and bronchial wall thickening and dilatation. The patchy opacities are more common in
the periphery of the lung, often in the lower lung zone. CT may show much more extensive disease than
is expected from review of the chest x-ray.
Pulmonary function tests usually show a restrictive defect, although an obstructive defect (ratio of forced
expiratory volume in 1 sec to forced vital capacity [FEV
/FVC] < 70%) is found in 21% of patients, and
pulmonary function is occasionally normal. Hypoxemia during rest and exercise is common.
Routine laboratory test results are nonspecific. Leukocytosis without an increase in eosinophils occurs in
about one half of patients. The initial ESR often is elevated.
Lung biopsy shows excessive proliferation of granulation tissue within small airways and alveolar ducts,
with chronic inflammation in the surrounding alveoli. Foci of organizing pneumonia are nonspecific and
can occur secondary to other pathologic processes, including infections, Wegener's granulomatosis,
lymphoma, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and eosinophilic pneumonia.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
Clinical recovery follows treatment with corticosteroids in two thirds of patients, often within 2 wk.
Relapses occur in up to 50% of patients, but these patients are responsive to additional courses of
corticosteroids. Recovery after treatment is common when COP appears on HRCT as parenchymal
consolidation, ground-glass opacity, or nodules. In contrast, recovery is less common when COP appears
on HRCT as linear and reticular opacities.
Respiratory Bronchiolitis-Associated Interstitial Lung Disease
Respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial lung disease (RBILD) is a syndrome of small
airway inflammation and interstitial lung disease occurring in smokers.
Most smokers develop a subclinical bronchiolitis characterized by mild or moderate inflammation of the
small airways. The few patients who develop more severe inflammation with clinically significant
interstitial disease are said to have RBILD. Male-to-female ratio is 2:1. RBILD is characterized
histologically by submucosal inflammation of the membranous and respiratory bronchioles manifested by
the presence of tan-brown pigmented macrophages (resulting from increased iron content, as occurs in
smokers), mucus stasis, and metaplastic cuboidal epithelium in bronchioles and alveoli. Alveolar septal
scarring always occurs. Similar findings, however, occur in some hypersensitivity reactions, occupational
lung exposures (usually due to mineral dusts), viral infections, and drug reactions. RBILD also resembles
desquamative interstitial pneumonia histologically, but in RBILD inflammation is patchier and less
extensive. The similarity of the 2 conditions has led to the suggestion that they are different
manifestations of the same disease caused by cigarette smoking.
===PAGE:2117===
Symptoms of cough and breathlessness with exertion resemble those of other interstitial lung diseases,
especially idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, but are milder. Crackles on examination are the only physical
finding.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray, CT
• Pulmonary function tests
Diagnosis is considered in patients being evaluated for interstitial lung disease. Diagnostic testing
includes imaging tests, pulmonary function tests, and biopsy. Chest x-ray findings include the following:
• Diffuse, fine reticular or nodular opacities
• Bronchial wall thickening
• Prominent peribronchovascular interstitium
• Small regular and irregular opacities
• Small peripheral ring shadows
HRCT often shows attenuation nodules and patchy areas of hazy ground-glass opacities. A mixed
obstructive-restrictive pattern is common on pulmonary function tests, although results may be normal or
show an isolated increase in residual volume. ABG measurements show mild hypoxemia. Routine
laboratory tests are not helpful.
Treatment
• Smoking cessation
Treatment is smoking cessation and avoidance of even passive cigarette smoke exposure, which may
prevent improvement or lead to recurrence of the illness. There is only anecdotal evidence of the efficacy
of corticosteroids. The natural clinical course of the disease is unknown, but prognosis is good with
smoking cessation.
Desquamative Interstitial Pneumonia
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia is chronic lung inflammation characterized by
mononuclear cell infiltration of the airspaces; it occurs almost exclusively in current or former
cigarette smokers.
Over 90% of patients with desquamative interstitial pneumonia are smokers, who tend to develop the
disease in their 30s or 40s. The disease tends to affect the lung parenchyma uniformly. The alveolar walls
are lined with plump cuboidal pneumocytes; there is moderate infiltration of the alveolar septum by
lymphocytes, plasma cells, and, occasionally, eosinophils. Alveolar septal fibrosis, if present, is mild. The
most striking feature is the presence of numerous pigmented macrophages within distal airspaces,
mistaken as desquamated pneumocytes when the disease was first described. Honeycombing is rare.
Similar but much less extensive findings occur in RBILD, leading to the suggestion that desquamative
interstitial pneumonia and RBILD are different manifestations of the same disease caused by cigarette
smoking.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray, CT
Chest x-ray abnormalities include bibasilar hazy opacities without honeycombing; findings may be normal
===PAGE:2118===
in up to 20% of cases. HRCT shows multifocal or diffuse, basilar, subpleural ground-glass opacities.
Irregular linear and reticular opacities are common but are not usually the dominant features.
Honeycombing may be visible, occurs in the minority of patients, and is usually limited.
Treatment
• Smoking cessation
• Sometimes corticosteroids or cytotoxic drugs
Smoking cessation results in clinical improvement in an estimated 75% of patients. Patients who do not
improve may respond to corticosteroids or cytotoxic drugs. Prognosis is good, with about 70% survival at
10 yr.
Acute Interstitial Pneumonia
(Accelerated Interstitial Pneumonia; Hamman-Rich Syndrome)
Acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP) is an idiopathic version of acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS—.
AIP equally affects apparently healthy men and women usually > 40 yr.
AIP is defined histologically by organizing diffuse alveolar damage, a nonspecific pattern that occurs in
other causes of lung injury unrelated to IIP. The hallmark of organizing diffuse alveolar damage is diffuse,
marked alveolar septal edema with inflammatory cell infiltration; fibroblast proliferation; occasional hyaline
membranes; and thickening of the alveolar walls. Septa are lined with atypical, hyperplastic type II
pneumocytes, and airspaces are collapsed. Thrombi develop in small arteries but are nonspecific.
Symptoms consist of the abrupt onset of fever, cough, and shortness of breath, which in most patients
increase in severity over 7 to 14 days, progressing to respiratory failure.
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with symptoms, signs, and chest x-ray findings of ARDS (eg, diffuse
bilateral airspace opacification). Diagnosis is supported by HRCT but usually requires biopsy. HRCT
shows bilateral patchy symmetric areas of ground-glass attenuation and sometimes bilateral areas of
airspace consolidation in a predominantly subpleural distribution. Mild honeycombing, usually affecting <
10% of the lung, may be present. Routine laboratory tests are nonspecific and generally not helpful.
Diagnosis is confirmed by surgical lung biopsy showing diffuse alveolar damage in the absence of known
causes of ARDS and diffuse alveolar damage (eg, sepsis, drugs, toxins, radiation, viral infection). Biopsy
is often required to distinguish AIP from diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndrome, acute eosinophilic
pneumonia, and cryptogenic organizing pneumonia.
Treatment is supportive and usually requires mechanical ventilation. Corticosteroid therapy is generally
used, but efficacy has not been established.
Mortality is > 60%; most patients die within 6 mo of presentation, and death is usually due to respiratory
failure. Patients who survive the initial acute episode may recover complete pulmonary function, although
the disease may recur.
Drug-Induced Pulmonary Disease
Drug-induced pulmonary disease is not a single disorder, but rather a common clinical problem in which a
patient without previous pulmonary disease develops respiratory symptoms, chest x-ray changes,
deterioration of pulmonary function, histologic changes, or several of these findings in association with
drug therapy. Over 150 drugs or categories of drugs have been reported to cause pulmonary disease; the
mechanism is rarely known, but many drugs are thought to provoke a hypersensitivity response. Some
drugs (eg, nitrofurantoin) can cause different injury patterns in different patients.
===PAGE:2119===
Depending on the drug, drug-induced syndromes can cause interstitial fibrosis, organizing
pneumonia,
asthma, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, pleural effusions, pulmonary eosinophilia, pulmonary
hemorrhage, or veno-occlusive disease (see
Table 199-4
).
Diagnosis is based on observation of responses to withdrawal from and, if practical, reintroduction to the
suspected drug.
Treatment is stopping the drug. A screening pulmonary function test is commonly done in patients about
to begin or already taking drugs with pulmonary toxicities, but the benefits of screening for prediction or
early detection of toxicity are unproved.
Eosinophilic Pulmonary Diseases
Eosinophilic pulmonary diseases are a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by the
accumulation of eosinophils in alveolar spaces, the interstitium, or both. Peripheral blood eosinophilia is
also common. Known causes of eosinophilic pulmonary disease include
• Infections (especially helminthic infections)
• Drug-induced pneumonitis (eg, antibiotics, phenytoin, L-tryptophan)
• Inhaled toxins (eg, cocaine)
• Systemic disorders (eg, Churg-Strauss syndrome)
• Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Often the cause is unknown.
Diagnosis is based on demonstration of opacities on chest x-ray and identification of eosinophilia (>
450/
μ
L) in peripheral blood, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, or lung biopsy tissue. However, pulmonary
eosinophilia may occur in the absence of peripheral eosinophilia.
[Table 199-4.
Substances with Toxic Pulmonary Effects]
Pulmonary opacities on chest x-ray associated with blood eosinophilia are sometimes called PIE
(pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia) syndrome.
Eosinophils are primarily tissue-dwelling and are several hundred-fold more abundant in tissues than in
blood. Consequently, blood eosinophil numbers do not necessarily indicate the extent of eosinophilic
involvement in affected tissues. Eosinophils are most numerous in tissues with a mucosal epithelial
interface with the environment, such as the respiratory, GI, and lower GU tracts. Eosinophils are not
present in the lungs of healthy people, so their presence in tissue or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (> 5%
of differential count) identifies a pathologic process.
Eosinophils are exquisitely sensitive to corticosteroids and completely disappear from the bloodstream
within a few hours after administration of corticosteroids. This rapid disappearance from the blood may
obscure the diagnosis in patients who receive corticosteroids before the diagnostic assessment is
instituted.
The two primary eosinophilic pulmonary diseases of unknown etiology are chronic and acute eosinophilic
pneumonia. Hypereosinophilic syndrome, a systemic disease affecting multiple organs, is discussed
elsewhere (.
Chronic Eosinophilic Pneumonia
===PAGE:2120===
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia (CEP) is a disorder of unknown etiology characterized by an
abnormal, chronic accumulation of eosinophils in the lung.
CEP is not truly chronic; rather it is an acute or subacute illness that recurs (thus, a better name might be
recurrent eosinophilic pneumonia). The prevalence and incidence of CEP are unknown. Etiology is
suspected to be an allergic diathesis. Most patients are nonsmokers.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients often present with fulminant illness characterized by cough, fever, progressive breathlessness,
wheezing, and night sweats. The clinical presentation may suggest a community-acquired pneumonia.
Asthma accompanies or precedes the illness in > 50% of cases. Those with recurrent symptoms may
have weight loss.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Exclusion of infectious causes of pneumonia
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with characteristic symptoms and typical radiographic appearance.
Diagnosis also requires CBC, ESR, sometimes iron studies, and exclusion of infectious causes by
appropriate cultures (. Peripheral blood eosinophilia, a very high ESR, iron deficiency
anemia, and thrombocytosis are all frequently present. Chest x-ray findings of bilateral peripheral or
pleural-based opacities, most commonly in the middle and upper lung zones, is described as the
photographic negative of pulmonary edema and is virtually pathognomonic (although present in < 25% of
patients). A similar pattern is present on CT in virtually all cases. Bronchoalveolar lavage and biopsy are
almost always done. Eosinophilia > 40% in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid is suggestive of CEP; serial
bronchoalveolar lavage examinations may help document the course of disease. Biopsy shows interstitial
and alveolar eosinophils and histiocytes, including multinucleated giant cells, and organizing pneumonia.
Fibrosis is minimal.
Treatment
• Systemic corticosteroids
• Sometimes maintenance therapy with inhaled corticosteroids, oral corticosteroids, or both
Patients with CEP are uniformly responsive to IV or oral corticosteroids; failure to respond suggests
another diagnosis. Initial treatment is prednisone 40 to 60 mg once/day. Clinical improvement is often
striking and rapid, often occurring within 48 h. Complete resolution of symptoms and x-ray abnormalities
occurs within 14 days in most patients and by 1 mo in almost all. Symptoms and plain chest x-rays are
both reliable and efficient guides to therapy. Although CT is more sensitive for the detection of
radiographic abnormalities, there is no benefit gained by repeating it. Peripheral eosinophil counts, ESR,
and IgE levels can also be used to follow the clinical course during treatment. However, not all patients
have abnormal laboratory test results.
Symptomatic or radiographic relapse occurs in 50 to 80% of cases either after cessation of therapy or,
less commonly, with tapering of the corticosteroid dose. Relapse can occur months to years after the
initial episode. Thus, corticosteroid therapy is occasionally continued indefinitely. Inhaled corticosteroids
(eg, fluticasone or beclomethasone 500 to 750
μ
g bid) appear to be effective, especially in reducing the
maintenance dose of oral corticosteroid.
Relapse does not appear to indicate treatment failure, a worse prognosis, or greater morbidity. Patients
continue to respond to corticosteroids as during the initial episode. Fixed airflow obstruction can occur in
some patients who recover, but the abnormalities are usually of borderline clinical significance.
CEP occasionally leads to physiologically important restrictive lung function abnormalities as a result of
===PAGE:2121===
irreversible fibrosis, but abnormalities are usually mild enough that CEP is an extremely unusual cause of
morbidity or death.
Acute Eosinophilic Pneumonia
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP) is a disorder of unknown etiology characterized by rapid
eosinophilic infiltration of the lung interstitium.
In contrast to CEP, AEP is an acute illness that occurs once and does not recur. Incidence and prevalence
are unknown. AEP can occur at any age but most often affects patients between 20 and 40 yr, with a
male-to-female ratio of 21:1. The cause is unknown, but AEP may be an acute hypersensitivity reaction to
an unidentified inhaled antigen in an otherwise healthy person. Cigarette or other smoke exposure may
be involved.
Symptoms and Signs
AEP causes an acute febrile illness of short duration (usually < 7 days). Symptoms are nonproductive
cough, dyspnea, malaise, myalgias, night sweats, and pleuritic chest pain. Signs include tachypnea, fever
(often > 38.5° C), and bibasilar inspiratory crackles and, occasionally, rhonchi on forced exhalation.
Patients with AEP frequently present with acute respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation.
Rarely, distributive (hyperdynamic) shock can occur.
Diagnosis
• HRCT
• Usually CBC, pleural fluid analysis, and pulmonary function testing
• Bronchoscopy
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with symptoms of acute pneumonia that progresses to respiratory
failure and does not respond to antibiotics. Diagnosis is based on findings from routine testing and is
confirmed by bronchoscopy. AEP is a diagnosis of exclusion and requires the absence of known causes
of eosinophilic pneumonia (eg, drug- and toxininduced, helminthic and fungal infection-related, ChurgStrauss syndrome, idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome, tumors). The CBC in most patients
demonstrates markedly elevated eosinophil counts. ESR and IgE levels are high but are nonspecific.
The chest x-ray initially may show only subtle reticular or ground-glass opacities, often with Kerley B
lines. Isolated alveolar (about 25% of cases) or reticular (about 25% of cases) opacities may also be
observed. The pattern is unlike that occurring in chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, in which the opacities
are localized to the lung periphery. Small pleural effusions occur in two thirds of patients and are
frequently bilateral.
HRCT is always abnormal with bilateral, random, patchy ground-glass or reticular opacities.
Pleural fluid examination shows marked eosinophilia with high pH. Pulmonary function tests often show a
restrictive process with reduced diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO).
Bronchoscopy should be done for lavage and, occasionally, biopsy. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid often
shows a high number and percentage (> 25%) of eosinophils. The most common histopathologic features
on biopsy include eosinophilic infiltration with acute and organizing diffuse alveolar damage, but few
patients have undergone lung biopsy.
Treatment
• Systemic corticosteroids
Some patients improve spontaneously. Most are treated with prednisone 40 to 60 mg po once/day. In
===PAGE:2122===
patients with respiratory failure, methylprednisolone 60 to 125 mg IV q 6 h is preferred. The prognosis is
excellent; response to corticosteroids and complete recovery without recurrence is almost universal.
Pleural effusions resolve more slowly than parenchymal opacities.
Loffler's Syndrome
Loffler's syndrome is characterized by absent or mild respiratory symptoms (most often dry cough),
fleeting migratory pulmonary opacities, and peripheral blood eosinophilia. Parasitic infections, especially
Ascaris lumbricoides
, may be the cause, but an identifiable etiologic agent is not found in up to one third
of patients. The disease usually resolves within 1 mo. Treatment is symptomatic and consists of
corticosteroids.
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
(Extrinsic Allergic Alveolitis)
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is a syndrome of cough, dyspnea, and fatigue caused by
sensitization and subsequent hypersensitivity to environmental (frequently occupational)
antigens. Acute, subacute, and chronic forms exist; all are characterized by acute interstitial
inflammation and development of granulomas and fibrosis with long-term exposure. Diagnosis
is based on a combination of history, physical examination, imaging tests, bronchoalveolar
lavage, and biopsy. Short-term treatment is with corticosteroids; long-term treatment is antigen
avoidance.
Etiology
Over 300 antigens have been identified as triggers for hypersensitivity pneumonitis, although farming,
birds, and water contamination account for about 75% of cases. Antigens are commonly categorized by
type and occupation (see
Table 199-5
); farmer's lung, caused by inhalation of hay dust containing thermophilic actinomycetes, is
the prototype. Substantial overlap exists between hypersensitivity pneumonitis and chronic bronchitis in
farmers, in whom chronic bronchitis is far more common, occurs independently of smoking status, is
linked to thermophilic actinomycete exposure, and leads to findings similar to those of hypersensitivity
pneumonitis on diagnostic testing.
[Table 199-5.
Examples of Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis]
Pathophysiololgy
The disorder seems to represent a type IV hypersensitivity reaction, in which repeated exposure to
antigen in genetically susceptible people leads to acute neutrophilic and mononuclear alveolitis, followed
by interstitial lymphocytic infiltration and granulomatous reaction. Fibrosis with bronchiolar obliteration
occurs with continued exposure.
Circulating precipitins (antibodies sensitized to antigen) seem not to have a primary etiologic role, and
clinical history of allergy (such as asthma and seasonal allergies) is not a predisposing factor. Cigarette
smoking seems to delay or prevent development, perhaps through down-regulation of the lung's immune
response to inhaled antigens. However, smoking may exacerbate the disease once established.
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis has clinical similarities to other disorders that have different
pathophysiologies. Organic dust toxic syndrome (pulmonary mycotoxicosis, grain fever), for example, is a
syndrome consisting of fever, chills, myalgias, and dyspnea that does not require prior sensitization and is
thought
to be caused by inhalation of toxins produced by fungi or other contaminants of organic dust. Silo
filler's disease may lead to respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and
bronchiolitis obliterans or bronchitis but is caused by inhalation of toxic nitrogen oxides produced by
freshly fermented corn or alfalfa silage. Occupational asthma causes dyspnea in people previously
sensitized to an inhaled antigen, but features such as airflow obstruction, airway eosinophilia, and
differences in triggering antigens distinguish it from hypersensitivity pneumonitis (.
===PAGE:2123===
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs tend to depend on whether onset is acute, subacute, or chronic. Only a small
proportion of exposed people develop symptoms and in most cases only after weeks to months of
exposure and sensitization.
Acute disease occurs in previously sensitized people with acute high-level antigen exposure and
manifests as fever, chills, cough, bilateral vice-like chest tightness (as can occur in asthma), and dyspnea
4 to 8 h after exposure. Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting may also be present. Physical examination shows
tachypnea, diffuse fine-to-medium inspiratory crackles, and, in almost all cases, absence of wheezing.
Chronic disease occurs in people with chronic low-level antigen exposure (such as owners of birds) and
manifests as onset over months to years of exertional dyspnea, productive cough, fatigue, and weight
loss. There are few physical findings; clubbing uncommonly occurs and fever is absent. In advanced
cases, pulmonary fibrosis causes symptoms and signs of right heart failure, respiratory failure, or both.
Subacute disease falls between the acute and chronic forms and manifests either as cough, dyspnea,
fatigue, and anorexia that develops over days to weeks or as acute superimposed on chronic symptoms.
Diagnosis
• Specific clinical criteria
• Chest x-ray and high-resolution CT (HRCT)
• Pulmonary function tests
• Bronchoalveolar lavage
• Histologic examination and serologic tests
Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion in patients at risk and with compatible symptoms and a
compatible occupational, avocational, or domestic exposure history. Chest x-ray, HRCT, and pulmonary
function tests are done routinely. Bronchoalveolar lavage and biopsy may be necessary if results are
inconclusive. Diagnosis is categorized as definite, probable, subclinical, or sensitization based on specific
criteria (see
Table 199-6
). The differential diagnosis is broad and includes environmental pulmonary diseases (see
Chapter 201
), sarcoidosis, bronchiolitis obliterans, connective tissue-associated pulmonary disease, and other
interstitial lung diseases.
[Table 199-6.
Diagnostic Criteria for Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis]
Clues in the history include
• Recurring atypical pneumonias
• Symptom onset after moving to a new job or home
• A hot tub, a sauna, a swimming pool, or other sources of standing water or water damage in the home or
regular exposure to them elsewhere
• Having birds as pets
• Exacerbation and relief of symptoms in and away from specific settings
Examination often is not useful in making the diagnosis, although abnormal lung sounds and clubbing
may be present.
===PAGE:2124===
Imaging tests:
Imaging tests are typically done for patients with appropriate history, symptoms, and
signs.
Chest x-ray is neither sensitive nor specific for detecting disease and is frequently normal in patients with
acute and subacute forms. It may show reticular or nodular opacities, usually when symptoms are
present. Chest x-rays of patients with chronic disease are more likely to show reticular or nodular
opacities in the upper lobes with reduced lung volumes and honeycombing, similar to that of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis.
HRCT is far more likely to show abnormalities and is considered standard for evaluating parenchymal
changes in hypersensitivity pneumonitis. The most typical HRCT finding is the presence of profuse,
poorly defined centrilobular micronodules. These micronodules may be present in patients with acute,
subacute, or chronic disease and, in the correct clinical context, strongly suggest hypersensitivity
pneumonitis. Occasionally, ground-glass opacification (attenuation) is the predominant or only finding. It is
usually diffuse but sometimes spares the periphery of the secondary lobule. Focal areas of hyperlucency,
similar to those present in obliterative bronchiolitis, may be a prominent feature in some patients (eg,
mosaic attenuation with air trapping on expiratory HRCT). In chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, there
are findings of lung fibrosis (eg, lobar volume loss, linear or reticular opacities, or honeycombing). Some
nonsmoking patients with chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis have findings of upper lobe emphysema.
Mediastinal lymphadenopathy is uncommon, thereby distinguishing hypersensitivity pneumonitis from
sarcoidosis.
Pulmonary function tests:
These should be done as part of the standard evaluation of suspected
cases of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. The syndrome can cause obstructive, restrictive, or a mixed
pattern of airway changes. Advanced disease most commonly causes a restrictive defect (decreased lung
volumes), a decreased diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO), and hypoxemia. Airway
obstruction is unusual in acute disease but may develop in chronic disease.
Bronchoalveolar lavage:
Results are rarely specific for the diagnosis but are often a component of the
diagnostic assessment for chronic respiratory symptoms and pulmonary function abnormalities. A
lymphocytosis in lavage fluid (> 60%) with CD4
+
/CD8
+
ratio < 1.0 (the normal ratio ± standard error of
the mean = 2.3 ± 0.2) is characteristic of the disorder; by contrast, lymphocytosis with CD4
+
predominance (ratio > 1.0) is more characteristic of sarcoidosis. Other findings may include mast cells >
1% (after acute exposure) and increased neutrophils and eosinophils.
Lymphocyte transformation testing is an in vitro test of sensitization and is particularly useful in detecting
sensitization to metals. The test can be done on peripheral blood but is better done on bronchial lavage
fluid. In this test, the patient's lymphocytes are exposed to potential antigens. If the lymphocytes transform
into blasts and proliferate, they (and hence the patient) were previously sensitized to that antigen.
Lung biopsy:
Biopsy is indicated when noninvasive testing is inconclusive. Transbronchial biopsy done
through a bronchoscope is sufficient as long as multiple specimens are taken from areas of active
disease and multiple sequential sections of tissue are examined histologically. Findings vary but include
lymphocytic alveolitis, noncaseating granulomas, and granulomatosis. Interstitial fibrosis may be present
but is usually mild in the absence of advanced radiographic changes.
Other tests:
Additional testing is indicated when additional support for the diagnosis is required or to
detect other causes of interstitial lung disease. Circulating precipitins (specific precipitating antibodies to
the suspected antigen) are suggestive of an exposure that may be the cause of the illness. When
combined with other criteria, they can be helpful diagnostically and avoid the need for biopsy. However, in
isolation, presence of circulating precipitins is neither sensitive nor specific. Identification of a specific
precipitating antigen may require detailed aerobiologic or microbiologic assessment or both of the
workplace by industrial hygiene specialists, but workplace assessments usually are guided by known
sources of inciting antigens (eg,
Bacillus subtilis
in detergent factories). Skin tests are not helpful, and
eosinophilia is absent. Tests helpful in detecting
other disorders include serologic tests and cultures (for
psittacosis and other pneumonias) and autoantibodies (for collagen-vascular disease). Elevated
===PAGE:2125===
eosinophils may suggest chronic eosinophilic pneumonias. Hilar and paratracheal lymph node
enlargement is more characteristic of sarcoidosis.
Prognosis
Pathologic changes are completely reversible if detected early and if antigen exposure is eliminated.
Acute disease is self-limiting with antigen avoidance; symptoms usually lessen within hours. Chronic
disease has a more complicated prognosis: fibrosis is usually irreversible but may not progress if the
patient is no longer exposed to the antigen.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
Treatment of acute or subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis is with corticosteroids, usually prednisone
60 mg po once/day for 1 to 2 wk, then tapered over the next 2 to 4 wk to 20 mg once/day, followed by
weekly decrements of 2.5 mg until the drug is stopped. This regimen relieves initial symptoms but does
not appear to alter long-term outcome.
Prevention
The most important aspect of long-term management is avoidance of exposure to antigens. A complete
change of environment is rarely realistic, especially for farmers and other workers, in which case dust
control measures (such as wetting down compost before disturbing it) or using air filters or protective
masks may be effective. Fungicides may be used to prevent the growth of antigenic microorganisms (eg,
in hay or on sugar cane), but the long-term safety of this approach is unknown. Extensive cleaning of wet
ventilation systems, removal of moist carpets, and maintenance of low humidity are also effective in some
settings. Patients must be told, however, that these measures may be inadequate in the presence of
continued exposure.
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is nonmalignant growth of smooth muscle cells throughout
the lung, pulmonary blood vessels, lymphatics, and pleurae. It is rare and occurs exclusively in
young women. The cause is unknown. Symptoms are dyspnea, cough, chest pain, and
hemoptysis; spontaneous pneumothorax is common. Diagnosis is suspected on the basis of
symptoms and chest x-ray and is confirmed by high-resolution CT. Prognosis is uncertain, but
the disorder is slowly progressive and over years often leads to respiratory failure and death.
Primary treatment is lung transplantation.
LAM is not an interstitial lung disease, but patients are occasionally misdiagnosed as having interstitial
lung disease (and also asthma or COPD).
LAM is a rare disease exclusive to women, typically affecting those between 20 and 40 yr. Whites are at
greatest risk. LAM affects < 1 in 1 million people. It is characterized by nonmalignant proliferation of
atypical smooth muscle cells throughout the chest, including lung parenchyma, vasculature, lymphatics,
and pleurae, leading to distortion of lung architecture, cystic emphysema, and progressive deterioration
of lung function.
Etiology
The cause of LAM is unknown. The tempting hypothesis that female sex hormones play a role in
pathogenesis remains unproved. The disease usually arises spontaneously, but LAM bears many
similarities to the pulmonary findings of tuberous sclerosis (TS—; LAM occurs in some
patients with TS and is thought by some to be a forme fruste of TS. Mutations in the tuberous sclerosis
complex-2 gene (
TSC-2
) have been described in LAM cells and angiomyolipomas (benign renal
hamartomas made of smooth muscle, blood vessels, and adipose). Also, angiomyolipomas occur in up to
50% of patients with LAM. These observations suggest 1 of 2 possibilities: (1) somatic mosaicism for
===PAGE:2126===
TSC-2
mutations within the lungs and kidneys results in foci of disease superimposed against a
background of normal cells within these tissues (although multiple discrete sites of disease might be
expected) or (2) LAM represents dissemination of angiomyolipoma tissue to the lung in a fashion
analogous to the syndrome of benign metastasizing leiomyoma.
Symptoms and Signs
Initial symptoms are dyspnea and, less commonly, cough, chest pain, and hemoptysis. There are few
signs of disease, but some women have crackles and rhonchi. Many patients present with spontaneous
pneumothorax. They may also present with manifestations of lymphatic obstruction, including chylothorax,
chylous ascites, and chyluria. Symptoms are thought to worsen during pregnancy. Angiomyolipomas,
although usually asymptomatic,
can cause bleeding if they grow large (eg, > 4 cm), which usually
presents as hematuria or flank pain.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and high-resolution CT (HRCT)
• Lung biopsy if HRCT is nondiagnostic
Diagnosis is suspected in young women with dyspnea plus interstitial changes with normal or increased
lung volumes on chest x-ray, spontaneous pneumothorax, or chylous effusion. HRCT is done in all
patients suspected of having the disorder; findings of multiple, small, diffusely distributed cysts are
generally pathognomonic for LAM.
Biopsy is indicated only when HRCT findings are nondiagnostic. Findings of an abnormal proliferation of
smooth muscle cells (LAM cells) associated with cystic changes on histologic examination confirm
disease.
Pulmonary function tests support the diagnosis and are especially useful for monitoring. Typical findings
are of an obstructive or mixed obstructive and restrictive pattern. The lungs are usually hyperinflated with
an increase in the total lung capacity (TLC) and thoracic gas volume. Gas trapping (an increase in
residual volume [RV] and RV/TLC ratio) is commonly present. The PaO
and diffusing capacity for carbon
monoxide (DLCO) are commonly reduced. Exercise performance is decreased in most patients.
Prognosis
Prognosis is unclear because the disorder is so rare and because the clinical course of patients with LAM
is variable. In general, the disease is slowly progressive, leading eventually to respiratory failure and
death, but the time to death varies widely among reports. Median survival is likely > 8 yr from diagnosis.
Lung function declines 2 to 3 times faster than it does in healthy people. Women should be advised that
progression may accelerate during pregnancy.
Treatment
• Lung transplantation
Standard treatment is lung transplantation, but the disorder can recur in transplanted lungs. Alternative
treatments, such as hormonal manipulation with progestins, tamoxifen, and oophorectomy, are largely
ineffective. Pneumothoraces may be difficult to manage because they are often recurrent, bilateral, and
less responsive to standard measures. Recurrent pneumothorax requires pleural abrasion, talc or
chemical pleurodesis, or pleurectomy. Embolization to prevent bleeding should be considered for
angiomyolipomas > 4 cm.
Air travel is well-tolerated by most patients but may be contraindicated in those with
• New or worsening respiratory symptoms
===PAGE:2127===
• Prior pneumothorax or hemoptysis
• Evidence of extensive subpleural bullous or cystic changes on HRCT
Patients can receive education and psychologic support from the LAM Foundation in the US.
Lymphoid Interstitial Pneumonia
(Lymphocytic Interstitial Pneumonitis)
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia (LIP) is lymphocytic infiltration of the alveolar interstitium and
air spaces. The cause is unknown. It most often occurs in children with HIV infection and in
people of any age with an autoimmune disorder. Symptoms and signs are cough, progressive
dyspnea, and crackles. Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, imaging tests,
pulmonary function tests, and lung biopsy. Treatment is with corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs, or
both, although efficacy is unknown. Five-year survival is 50 to 66%.
LIP is a rare disorder characterized by infiltration of alveoli and alveolar septa with small lymphocytes and
varying numbers of plasma cells. Noncaseating, poorly formed granulomas may be present but are
usually rare and inconspicuous.
LIP is the most common cause of pulmonary disease after
Pneumocystis
infection in HIV-positive children
and is the AIDS-defining illness in up to one half of HIV-positive children. LIP affects < 1% of adults with
or without HIV infection. Women and girls are affected more commonly.
The cause is postulated to be an autoimmune disease or a nonspecific response to infection with
Epstein-Barr virus, HIV, or other viruses. Evidence of an autoimmune etiology includes its frequent
association with Sjogren's syndrome (25% of cases of LIP) and other diseases (eg, SLE, RA,
Hashimoto's thyroiditis—14% of cases). Evidence of an indirect viral etiology includes frequent
association with immunodeficient states (HIV/AIDS, combined variable immunodeficiency,
agammaglobulinemia—14% of cases) and findings of Epstein-Barr virus DNA and HIV RNA in lung tissue
of LIP patients. According to this theory, LIP is an extreme manifestation of the normal ability of lymphoid
tissue in the lung to respond to inhaled and circulating antigens.
Symptoms and Signs
In adults, LIP causes symptoms of progressive dyspnea and cough. These manifestations progress over
months or, in some cases, years and appear at a mean age of 54. Weight loss, fever, arthralgias, and
night sweats occur but are less common.
In children, LIP causes bronchospasm, cough, or respiratory distress and failure to thrive, usually at age 2
or 3 yr.
Examination may reveal crackles. Findings such as hepatosplenomegaly, arthritis, and lymphadenopathy
are uncommon and suggest an accompanying or alternative diagnosis.
Diagnosis
• High-resolution CT (HRCT)
• Pulmonary function tests
• For confirmation, biopsy (or sometimes serum protein abnormality in children)
Diagnosis is usually suspected in at-risk patients with compatible symptoms. Imaging tests, pulmonary
function tests, and sometimes lung biopsy are done.
Chest x-ray shows bibasilar linear reticular or nodular opacities, a nonspecific finding that is present in a
===PAGE:2128===
number of pulmonary infections. Alveolar opacities, cystic dilatation of peripheral alveoli (honeycombing),
or both may be present in more advanced disease. HRCT of the chest is done and helps establish the
extent of disease, define the hilar anatomy, and identify pleural involvement. The HRCT findings of LIP
are variable; however, their lymphatic distribution, along the peribronchovascular interstitium, interlobular
septa, and presence within the visceral pleura distinguish LIP from usual interstitial pneumonia.
Characteristic findings are centrilobular and subpleural nodules, thickened bronchovascular bundles,
ground-glass opacities, and, rarely, diffuse cystic structures.
Pulmonary function tests show restrictive defects with reduced lung volumes and diffusing capacity for
carbon monoxide (DLCO) and preserved airflow. Marked hypoxemia may occur. Bronchoalveolar lavage
should be done to rule out infection and may reveal an increased number of lymphocytes.
About 80% of patients have a serum protein abnormality, most commonly a polyclonal gammopathy and,
especially in children, hypogammaglobulinemia, the significance of which is unknown. These elements
are sufficient to confirm the diagnosis in HIV-positive children. In adults, diagnosis requires lung biopsy
with demonstration of expansion of the alveolar septae with lymphocytic and other immune cell (plasma
cell, immunoblastic, and histiocytic) infiltrates. Infiltrates appear occasionally along bronchi and vessels
but most commonly along alveolar septa. Immunohistochemical staining and flow cytometry must be done
on the tissue to distinguish LIP from primary lymphomas. In LIP, the infiltrate is polyclonal (both T and B
cells), whereas other lymphomas produce monoclonal infiltrates. Other common findings include germinal
centers and multinucleated giant cells with noncaseating granulomas.
Prognosis
The natural history and prognosis of LIP are poorly understood. Good prognosis may correlate with more
severe radiographic abnormalities, which may indicate a more vigorous immune response. Spontaneous
resolution, resolution after treatment with corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive drugs, progression
to lymphoma, or development of pulmonary fibrosis with respiratory insufficiency may ensue. Five-year
survival is 50 to 66%. Common causes of death are infection, development of malignant lymphoma (5%),
and progressive fibrosis.
Treatment
Treatment is with corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs, or both, but, as with many other causes of interstitial
lung diseases, the efficacy of this approach is unknown.
Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis is accumulation of surfactant in alveoli. Etiology is almost
always unknown. Symptoms are dyspnea, fatigue, and malaise. Diagnosis is based on
bronchoalveolar lavage, although characteristic x-ray and laboratory test abnormalities occur.
Treatment is with whole lung lavage. Five-year survival is about 80% with treatment.
Etiology
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis is most often idiopathic and occurs in otherwise healthy men and women
between 30 and 50 yr. Rare secondary forms occur in patients with acute silicosis,
Pneumocystis jirovecii
infection, hematologic cancers, or immunosuppression by drugs and in patients with significant inhalation
exposures to aluminum, titanium, cement, and cellulose dusts. Rare congenital forms causing neonatal
respiratory failure also exist. It is unclear whether idiopathic and secondary cases share a common
pathophysiology.
Pathophysiology
Impaired alveolar macrophage processing of surfactant due to abnormal granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor (GM-CSF) signaling is thought to contribute to the disorder, perhaps due to reduced or
absent function of the common
β
chain of the GM-CSF/IL-13/IL-5 receptor on mononuclear cells (present
in some children but not in adults with the disorder). Anti-GM-CSF antibodies have also been found in
===PAGE:2129===
most patients. Toxic lung injury is suspected but not proved in secondary inhalation causes.
Alveoli are filled with acellular lipoprotein surfactant that stains periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive.
Alveolar and interstitial cells remain normal. Posterobasal lung segments are mostly affected. The pleura
and mediastinum are unaffected.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with progressive exertional dyspnea and weight loss, fatigue, malaise, or low-grade
fever. Cough, occasionally producing chunky or gummy sputum, occurs but is less common. Clubbing and
cyanosis are uncommon. Inspiratory crackles are rare because alveoli are fluid-filled; when crackles are
present, they suggest infection.
Diagnosis
• Bronchoalveolar lavage
• Sometimes biopsy
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis is usually first suspected when a chest x-ray is taken for nonspecific
respiratory symptoms. The x-ray shows bilateral mid- and lower-lung field opacities in a butterfly
distribution with normal hila.
Bronchoalveolar lavage is done. Lavage fluid is milky or opaque, stains PAS-positive, and is characterized
by scattered surfactant-engorged macrophages, an increase in T lymphocytes, and high levels of
surfactant apoprotein-A. Thoracoscopic or open lung biopsy is done when bronchoscopy is
contraindicated or when specimens from lavage fluid are nondiagnostic. Tests typically done before
treatment begins include high-resolution CT (HRCT), pulmonary function tests, ABGs, and laboratory
tests.
HRCT shows ground-glass opacification, thickened intralobular structures, and interlobular septa in
typical polygonal shapes (crazypaving). This finding is not specific, however, as it may also occur in
patients with lipoid pneumonia, bronchoalveolar cell carcinoma, and
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia.
Pulmonary function tests show reduction in diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) that is
disproportionate to the decreases in vital capacity, residual volume, functional residual capacity, and total
lung capacity.
Laboratory test abnormalities include polycythemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, increased serum LDH
levels, and increased serum surfactant proteins A and D. All abnormalities are suggestive but
nondiagnostic. ABGs may show hypoxemia with mild to moderate exercise or at rest if disease is more
severe.
Prognosis
Without treatment, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis remits spontaneously in up to 10% of patients. A single
whole lung lavage is curative in up to 40%; other patients require lavage every 6 to 12 mo for many years.
Five-year survival is about 80%; the most common cause of death is respiratory failure, typically occurring
within the first year after diagnosis. Secondary pulmonary infections with bacteria (eg,
Mycobacteria
,
Nocardia
) and other organisms (
Aspergillus
,
Cryptococcus
, and other opportunistic fungi) occasionally
develop because of impaired macrophage function; these infections require treatment.
Treatment
• Whole lung lavage
Treatment is unnecessary for patients without symptoms or for those with only mild symptoms. Whole
lung lavage is done in patients with troubling dyspnea by using general anesthesia and a double-lumen
===PAGE:2130===
endotracheal tube. Lavage of one lung is done up to 15 times with 1 to 2 L saline while the other lung is
ventilated. The process is then reversed. Lung transplantation is not done because the disorder recurs in
the transplanted lung.
Systemic corticosteroids play no role in management and may increase the risk of secondary infection.
The role of GM-CSF (IV or sc) in management remains to be determined. An open-label study showed
clinical improvement in 57% of the patients studied.
Pulmonary Langerhans' Cell Histiocytosis
(Eosinophilic Granuloma; Pulmonary Granulomatosis X; Pulmonary Langerhans' Cell Granulomatosis;
Histiocytosis X)
Pulmonary Langerhans' cell histiocytosis (PLCH) is proliferation of monoclonal Langerhans'
cells in lung interstitium and airspaces. Etiology is
unknown, but cigarette smoking plays a
primary role. Symptoms are dyspnea, cough, fatigue, and pleuritic chest pain. Diagnosis is
based on history and imaging tests and sometimes on bronchoalveolar lavage and biopsy
findings. Treatment is smoking cessation. Corticosteroids are given in many cases, but efficacy
is unknown. Lung transplantation is curative when combined with smoking cessation. Five-year
survival is about 74%. Patients are at increased risk of cancer.
PLCH is a disease in which monoclonal CD1a-positive Langerhans' cells (a type of histiocyte) infiltrate
the bronchioles and alveolar interstitium, accompanied by lymphocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils, and
eosinophils. PLCH is one manifestation of Langerhans' cell histiocytosis (, which can affect
organs in isolation (most notably the lungs, skin, bones, pituitary, and lymph nodes) or simultaneously.
PLCH occurs in isolation ≥ 85% of the time.
The etiology of PLCH is unknown, but the disease occurs almost exclusively in whites 20 to 40 yr of age
who smoke. Men and women are affected equally. Women develop disease later, but any differences in
disease presentation by sex may represent differences in smoking behavior. Pathophysiology may involve
recruitment and proliferation of Langerhans' cells in response to cytokines and growth factors secreted by
alveolar macrophages in response to cigarette smoke.
Symptoms and Signs
Typical symptoms and signs of PLCH are dyspnea, nonproductive cough, fatigue, fever, weight loss, and
pleuritic chest pain, and 10 to 25% of patients have sudden, spontaneous pneumothorax. About 15% of
patients are asymptomatic, with disease noted incidentally on a chest x-ray taken for another reason.
Bone pain due to bone cysts (18%), rash (13%), and polyuria due to diabetes insipidus (5%) are the most
common manifestations of extrapulmonary involvement and occur in up to 15% of patients, rarely being
the presenting symptoms of PLCH. There are few signs of PLCH; the physical examination results are
usually normal.
Diagnosis
• High-resolution CT (HRCT)
• Pulmonary function tests
• Sometimes bronchoscopy and biopsy
PLCH is suspected based on history and chest x-ray and is confirmed by HRCT and bronchoscopy with
biopsy and bronchoalveolar lavage.
Chest x-ray classically shows bilaterally symmetric nodular opacities in the middle and upper lung fields
with cystic changes and normal or increased lung volumes. The lung bases are often spared. Appearance
may mimic COPD or lymphangioleiomyomatosis (. Confirmation on HRCT of middle and
upper lobe cysts (often with bizarre shapes) and/or nodules with interstitial thickening is considered
===PAGE:2131===
diagnostic of PLCH. Pulmonary function test findings are normal, restrictive, obstructive, or mixed
depending on when the test is done during the course of the disease. Most commonly, the diffusing
capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) is reduced and exercise is impaired.
Bronchoscopy and biopsy are indicated when imaging and pulmonary function tests are inconclusive.
Finding > 5% of CD1a cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid is highly suggestive of the disease. Biopsy
shows proliferation of Langerhans' cells with occasional clustering of eosinophils (the origin of the
outdated term eosinophilic granuloma) in the midst of cellular and fibrotic nodules that may take on a
stellate configuration. Immunohistochemical staining is positive for CD1a, S-100 protein, and HLA-DR
antigens.
Treatment
• Smoking cessation
• Possibly corticosteroids and cytotoxic drugs or lung transplantation
The main treatment is smoking cessation, which leads to symptom resolution in up to one third of
patients. Empiric use of corticosteroids and cytotoxic drugs is common practice even though their
effectiveness is unproved. Lung transplantation is an option for otherwise healthy patients with
accelerating respiratory insufficiency, but the disorder may recur in the transplanted lung if the patient
continues or resumes smoking.
Spontaneous resolution of symptoms occurs in some patients with minimally symptomatic disease; 5-yr
survival is about 75%, and median survival is 12 yr. However, some patients develop slowly progressive
disease, for which the clinical markers include continued smoking, age extremes, multiorgan involvement,
persistent constitutional symptoms, numerous cysts on chest x-ray, reduced DLCO, low forced expiratory
volume in 1 sec (FEV
)/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio (< 66%), high residual volume (RV)/total lung
capacity (TLC) ratio (> 33%), and need for prolonged corticosteroid use. Cause of death is respiratory
insufficiency or cancer. Lung cancer risk is increased because of cigarette smoking.
===PAGE:2132===
Chapter 200. Sarcoidosis
Introduction
Sarcoidosis is a disorder resulting in noncaseating granulomas in one or more organs and
tissues; etiology is unknown. The lungs and lymphatic system are most often affected, but
sarcoidosis may affect any organ. Pulmonary symptoms range from none (limited disease) to
exertional dyspnea and, rarely, lung or other organ failure (advanced disease). Diagnosis
usually is first suspected because of pulmonary involvement and is confirmed by chest x-ray,
biopsy, and exclusion of other causes of granulomatous inflammation. First-line treatment is
corticosteroids. Prognosis is excellent for limited disease but poor for more advanced disease.
Sarcoidosis affects mostly people aged 20 to 40 but occasionally affects children and older adults.
Worldwide, prevalence is greatest in black Americans and northern Europeans, especially Scandinavians.
Disease presentation varies widely by racial and ethnic background, with black Americans and Puerto
Ricans having more frequent extrathoracic manifestations. Sarcoidosis is slightly more prevalent in
women. The incidence increases in winter and early spring for unknown reasons.
Lofgren's syndrome:
Lofgren's syndrome is a type of acute sarcoidosis that manifests as a triad of
acute polyarthritis, erythema nodosum, and hilar adenopathy. It has distinct features, including fever,
malaise, joint disease, and sometimes uveitis and parotitis. It is more common among Scandinavian and
Irish women.
Lofgren's syndrome is often self-limited. Patients usually respond to NSAIDs. Rate of relapse is low.
Etiology
Sarcoidosis is thought to be due to an inflammatory response to environmental exposure in a genetically
susceptible person. Proposed triggers include
• Viral, bacterial, and mycobacterial infections
• Inhalation of various agents: inorganic (eg, aluminum, zirconium, talc) or organic (eg, pine tree pollen,
clay)
Pathophysiology
The unknown antigen triggers a cell-mediated immune response that is characterized by the accumulation
of T lymphocytes and macrophages, release of cytokines and chemokines, and organization of
responding cells into granulomas. Clusters of disease in families and communities suggest a genetic
predisposition, shared exposures, or, less likely, person-to-person transmission.
The result of the inflammatory process is formation of noncaseating granulomas, the pathologic hallmark
of sarcoidosis. Granulomas are collections of mononuclear cells and macrophages that are differentiated
into epithelioid and multinucleated giant cells, surrounded by lymphocytes, plasma cells, mast cells,
fibroblasts, and collagen. Granulomas occur most commonly in the lungs and lymph nodes but can
involve the liver, spleen, eyes (, sinuses, skin, bones, joints, skeletal muscle, kidneys,
reproductive organs, heart, salivary glands, and nervous system. Granulomas in the lungs are distributed
along lymphatics, with most occurring in peribronchiolar, subpleural, and perilobular regions.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs depend on the site and degree of involvement and vary over time, ranging from
spontaneous remission to chronic indolent illness. Accordingly, frequent reassessment for new symptoms
in different organs is needed. Most cases are probably asymptomatic and thus go undetected. Pulmonary
disease occurs in > 90% of adult patients.
Symptoms and signs may include dyspnea, cough, chest discomfort, and crackles. Fatigue, malaise,
===PAGE:2133===
weakness, anorexia, weight loss, and low-grade fever are also common; sarcoidosis is an unusual cause
of fever of unknown origin. Nontender lymphadenopathy is often the only sign. Systemic involvement
causes various symptoms (see
Table 200-1
), which vary by race, sex, and age. Blacks are more likely than whites to have involvement of
the eye, liver, bone marrow, peripheral lymph nodes, and skin; erythema nodosum is an exception.
Women are more likely to have erythema nodosum and eye or nervous system involvement. Men and
older patients are more likely to be hypercalcemic.
In children < 4 yr, arthritis, rash, and uveitis are the most common manifestations. Sarcoidosis may be
confused with juvenile RA in this age group.
Diagnosis
• Chest imaging
• Biopsy
• Exclusion of other granulomatous disorders
[Table 200-1.
Systemic Involvement in Sarcoidosis]
Sarcoidosis is most often suspected when hilar adenopathy is incidentally detected on chest x-ray. These
changes are the most common abnormality, and the x-ray appearance is roughly predictive of the
likelihood of spontaneous remission (see
Table 200-2
) in patients with pulmonary involvement. Therefore, if sarcoidosis is suspected, a chest x-ray
should be the first test if it has not already been done.
A normal chest x-ray generally excludes the diagnosis; however, high-resolution CT may be indicated if
sarcoidosis is strongly suspected because CT is more sensitive for detecting hilar and mediastinal
lymphadenopathy. CT findings in more advanced stages (II to IV) include thickening of the
bronchovascular bundles and bronchial walls; beading of the interlobular septa; ground-glass
opacification; parenchymal nodules, cysts, or cavities; and traction bronchiectasis.
When imaging suggests sarcoidosis, the diagnosis is confirmed by demonstration of noncaseating
granulomas on biopsy and exclusion of alternative causes of granulomatous disease (see
Table 200-3
).
[Table 200-2.
Staging Sarcoidosis]
The diagnostic evaluation, therefore, requires the following:
• Selection of a biopsy site
• Exclusion of other causes of granulomatous disease
• Assessment of the severity and extent of disease to determine whether therapy is indicated
Sites for biopsy:
Appropriate biopsy sites may be obvious from physical examination and initial
assessment; peripheral lymph nodes, skin lesions, and conjunctivae are all easily accessible. However,
bronchoscopic transbronchial biopsy is the diagnostic procedure of choice in patients with intrathoracic
involvement because sensitivity is as high as 90% when an experienced clinician does the procedure.
Video-assisted thoracoscopy can provide access to lung tissue when bronchoscopic transbronchial
biopsy is nondiagnostic. Mediastinoscopy is sometimes done when hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy
exists in the absence of pulmonary infiltrates, especially if lymphoma is in the differential diagnosis.
However, even in patients with only mediastinal adenopathy on x-ray or CT, transbronchial biopsies are
often diagnostic. Open lung biopsy provides another way to obtain tissue but requires general anesthesia
and is now rarely necessary. Clinical and x-ray findings may be accurate enough for diagnosis in stage I
disease or in stage II disease when biopsy is not possible.
===PAGE:2134===
Exclusion of other diagnoses:
Exclusion of other diagnoses is critical, especially when symptoms and
x-ray signs are minimal, because many other disorders and processes can cause granulomatous
inflammation (see
Table 200-3
). Biopsy tissue should be cultured for fungi and mycobacteria. Exposure
history to occupational (silicates, beryllium), environmental (moldy hay, birds, and other antigenic triggers
of hypersensitivity pneumonitis), and infectious (TB, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis) antigens should
be explored. PPD skin testing should be done early in the assessment along with anergy controls.
Disease severity assessment:
Severity is assessed with
• Pulmonary function tests
• Exercise pulse oximetry
Pulmonary function test results are often normal in early stages but demonstrate restriction and reduced
diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) in advanced disease. Airflow obstruction also occurs and
may suggest involvement of the bronchial mucosae. Pulse oximetry is often normal when measured
[Table 200-3.
Differential Diagnosis of Sarcoidosis]
at rest but may show effort desaturation with more extensive lung involvement. ABG analysis at rest and
during exercise is more sensitive than pulse oximetry.
Recommended screening tests for extrapulmonary disease
include
• ECG
• Slit-lamp ophthalmologic examination
• Routine blood tests to evaluate renal and hepatic function
• Serum Ca levels
Echocardiography, neuroimaging, lumbar puncture, bone x-rays or MRI, and electromyography may be
appropriate when symptoms suggest cardiac, neurologic, or rheumatologic disorders. Abdominal CT with
radiopaque dye is not routinely recommended but can provide evidence of hepatic or splenic involvement
(eg, enlargement, hypolucent lesions).
Laboratory testing
plays an adjunctive role in establishing the diagnosis and extent of organ
involvement. CBC may show anemia, eosinophilia, or leukopenia. Serum Ca may be elevated because
vitamin D analogs are produced by activated macrophages. BUN, creatinine, and liver function test
results may be elevated in renal and hepatic sarcoidosis. Total protein may be elevated because of
hypergammaglobulinemia. Elevated ESR is common but nonspecific. Measurement of Ca in a urine
specimen collected over 24 h is recommended to exclude hypercalciuria, even in patients with normal
serum Ca levels. Elevated serum ACE levels also suggest sarcoidosis but are nonspecific and may be
low in patients taking ACE inhibitors or elevated in patients with various other conditions (eg,
hyperthyroidism, Gaucher's disease, silicosis, mycobacterial disease, hypersensitivity pneumonitis).
However, ACE levels may be useful for monitoring disease activity and therapeutic response in patients
with confirmed sarcoidosis. Increased ACE levels in CSF may be useful for diagnosing CNS sarcoidosis.
Other adjunctive tests
include bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and gallium scanning. BAL is used to help
exclude other forms of interstitial lung disease if the diagnosis of sarcoidosis is in doubt and to rule out
infection. The findings on BAL vary considerably, but lymphocytosis (lymphocytes > 10%), a CD4+/CD8+
ratio of > 3.5 in the lavage fluid cell differential, or both suggest the diagnosis in the proper clinical
context. However, absence of these findings does not exclude sarcoidosis.
Whole-body gallium scanning may provide useful supportive evidence in the absence of tissue
confirmation. Symmetric increased uptake in mediastinal and hilar nodes (lambda sign) and in lacrimal,
===PAGE:2135===
parotid, and salivary glands (panda sign) are patterns highly suggestive of sarcoidosis. A negative result
in patients taking prednisone is unreliable.
Prognosis
Although spontaneous improvement is common, the manifestations of the disorder and its severity are
highly variable, and many patients require corticosteroids some time during the course of their disease.
Thus, serial monitoring for evidence of relapse is imperative. In about 90% of patients who have
spontaneous remission, remission occurs within the first 2 yr after diagnosis; < 10% of these patients
have relapses after 2 yr. Patients who do not experience remission within 2 yr are likely to have chronic
disease.
Sarcoidosis is thought to be chronic in up to 30% of patients, and 10 to 20% experience permanent
sequelae. The disease is fatal in 1 to 5% of patients, typically due to respiratory failure caused by
pulmonary fibrosis, and less often due to pulmonary hemorrhage caused by aspergilloma. However, in
Japan, infiltrative cardiomyopathy causing heart failure and arrhythmias is the most common cause of
death.
Prognosis is worse for patients with extrapulmonary sarcoidosis and for blacks. Recovery occurs in 89%
of whites and 76% of blacks with no extrathoracic disease and in 70% of whites and 46% of blacks with
extrathoracic disease.
Good prognostic signs
include
• Erythema nodosum
• Acute arthritis
Poor prognostic signs
include
• Uveitis
• Lupus pernio
• Chronic hypercalcemia
• Neurosarcoidosis
• Nephrocalcinosis
• Myocardial disease
• Extensive pulmonary involvement
Little difference is demonstrable in long-term outcome between treated and untreated patients, and
relapse is common when treatment ends.
Treatment
• Sometimes corticosteroids
• Rarely immunosuppressants
Because sarcoidosis often spontaneously resolves, asymptomatic patients and patients with mild
symptoms do not require treatment, although they should be monitored for signs of deterioration. These
patients can be followed with serial x-rays, pulmonary function tests (including diffusing capacity), and
markers of extrathoracic involvement (eg, routine renal and liver function testing). Patients who require
treatment regardless of stage include those with the following:
===PAGE:2136===
• Worsening symptoms
• Limitation of activity
• Markedly abnormal or deteriorating lung function
• Worrisome x-ray changes (cavitation, fibrosis, conglomerate masses, signs of pulmonary hypertension)
• Heart, nervous system, or eye involvement
• Renal or hepatic insufficiency or failure
• Disfiguring skin or joint disease
Treatment is with corticosteroids. A standard protocol is prednisone 0.3 to 1 mg/kg po once/day
depending on symptoms and severity of findings. Alternate-day regimens are also used: eg, prednisone
40 to 60 mg po once every other day. Although patients rarely require > 40 mg/day, higher doses may be
needed to reduce complications in patients with ocular, myocardial, or neurologic disease. Response
usually occurs within 2 to 4 wk, so symptoms and results of chest x-ray and pulmonary function tests may
be reassessed between 4 and 12 wk. Chronic, insidious cases may respond more slowly. Corticosteroids
are tapered to a maintenance dose (eg, prednisone ≤ 10 mg every other day if possible) after evidence of
response and are continued for a minimum of 12 mo if improvement occurs. The optimal duration of
treatment is unknown. Premature taper can result in relapse. The drug is slowly stopped if response is
absent or equivocal. Corticosteroids can ultimately be stopped in most patients, but because relapse
occurs up to 50% of the time, monitoring should be repeated, usually every 3 to 6 mo. Corticosteroid
treatment should be resumed for recurrence of symptoms and signs, including dyspnea, arthralgia, fever,
hepatic insufficiency, cardiac arrhythmia, CNS involvement, hypercalcemia, ocular disease uncontrolled
by local drugs, and disfiguring skin lesions.
Data on use of inhaled corticosteroids for pulmonary sarcoidosis are not definitive, but some evidence
suggests that this route of administration can relieve cough in patients with endobronchial involvement.
Topical corticosteroids may be useful in some cases of dermatologic and ocular disease.
About 10% of patients requiring therapy are unresponsive to tolerable doses of a corticosteroid and
should be given a 6-mo trial of methotrexate starting at 2.5 mg po once/wk and increasing in increments
of 2.5 mg/wk to a total of 10 to 15 mg/wk as tolerated to keep the WBC count > 3000/
μ
L. Initially,
methotrexate
and corticosteroids are both given; over 8 wk, the corticosteroid dose can be tapered and,
in many cases, stopped. The maximal response to methotrexate, however, may take 6 to 12 mo. In such
cases, prednisone must be tapered more slowly. Serial blood counts and liver enzyme tests should be
done every 1 to 2 wk initially and then every 4 to 6 wk once a stable dose is achieved. Foliate (1 mg po
once/day) is recommended for patients treated with methotrexate.
Other drugs reported to be effective in small numbers of patients who are corticosteroid-resistant or who
experience complicating adverse effects include azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil,
chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, thalidomide, pentoxifylline, and infliximab.
Hydroxychloroquine 200 mg po bid to tid can be as effective as corticosteroids for treating hypercalcemia
or disfiguring skin sarcoidosis. Although immunosuppressants are often more effective in refractory cases,
relapse is common after cessation.
No available drugs have consistently prevented pulmonary fibrosis.
Lung transplantation is an option for patients with end-stage pulmonary involvement, although disease
may recur in the transplanted organ.
===PAGE:2137===
Chapter 201. Environmental Pulmonary Diseases
Introduction
Environmental pulmonary diseases result from inhalation of dusts, allergens, chemicals, gases, and
environmental pollutants. The lungs are continually exposed to the external environment and are
susceptible to a host of environmental diseases. Pathologic processes can involve any part of the lungs,
including the airways (eg, in occupational asthma, reactive airways dysfunction syndrome, or toxic
inhalations), interstitium (eg, or pneumoconioses in hypersensitivity pneumonitis), and pleura (eg, in
asbestos-related diseases).
Prevention of occupational and environmental pulmonary diseases centers on reducing exposure
(primary prevention). Exposure can be limited by the use of
• Administrative controls (eg, limiting the number of people exposed to hazardous conditions)
• Engineering controls (eg, enclosures, ventilation systems, safe clean-up procedures)
• Product substitution (eg, using safer, less toxic materials)
• Respiratory protection devices (eg, respirator, dust mask, gas mask)
Many clinicians erroneously assume that a patient who has used a respirator or another respiratory
protection device has been well protected. Although respirators do afford a degree of protection,
especially when fresh air is provided by tank or air hose, the benefit is limited and idiosyncratic. When
recommending use of a respirator, clinicians should consider several factors. Workers with cardiovascular
disease may be unable to carry out jobs that require strenuous work, especially if they must wear a selfcontained breathing apparatus (tank). Respirators that are tight-fitting and that require the wearer to draw
air through filter cartridges can increase the work of breathing, which can be especially difficult for
patients with asthma, COPD, or interstitial lung diseases.
Medical surveillance is a form of secondary prevention. Workers can be offered medical tests that identify
disorders early when treatment might help reduce long-term consequences.
Air Pollution-Related Illness
The major components of air pollution in developed countries are nitrogen dioxide (from combustion of
fossil fuels), ozone (from the effect of sunlight on nitrogen dioxide and hydrocarbons), and suspended
solid or liquid particles. Indoors, passive smoking is an additional source, as is burning of biomass fuel in
developing countries (eg, for cooking and heating).
High levels of air pollution can adversely affect lung function and trigger asthma and COPD
exacerbations. People living in areas with high traffic, especially when stagnant air is created by thermal
inversions, are at particular risk. All of the so-called criteria air pollutants (oxides of nitrogen, oxides of
sulfur, ozone, carbon monoxide, lead, particulates), except carbon monoxide and lead, cause airway
hyperreactivity. Long-term exposure may increase respiratory infections and symptoms in the general
population, especially in children.
Ozone, which is the major component of smog, is a strong respiratory irritant and oxidant. Ozone levels
tend to be highest in the summer and in the late morning and early afternoon. Short-term exposures can
cause dyspnea, chest pain, and airways reactivity. Children who regularly participate in outdoor sports
during days on which ozone pollution is high are more likely to develop asthma. Long-term exposure to
ozone produces a small, permanent decrease in lung function.
Oxides of sulfur, resulting from combustion of fossil fuels that are high in sulfur content, can create acid
aerosols with high solubility, which are likely to be deposited in the upper airways. Sulfur oxides can
induce airway inflammation, possibly increasing the risk of chronic bronchitis as well as inducing
bronchoconstriction.
===PAGE:2138===
Particulate air pollution is a complex mixture, derived from fossil fuel combustion (especially diesel). The
particles can have both local and systemic inflammatory effects, suggesting an explanation for their
impact on both pulmonary and cardiovascular health. So-called PM2.5 (particulate matter < 2.5
μ
m
diameter) produce a greater inflammatory response per mass than do larger particles. Data suggest that
particulate air pollution increases death rates from all causes, especially cardiovascular and respiratory
illness.
Air pollution data have raised concerns regarding the potential health effects of even smaller particles, socalled nanoparticles, but clinical evidence of disorders related to exposure to nanoparticles has yet to be
reported.
Asbestos-Related Disorders
Asbestos-related disorders are caused by inhalation of asbestos fibers. The disorders include
asbestosis, lung carcinoma, nonmalignant pleural plaque formation and thickening, benign
pleural effusions, and mesothelioma. Asbestosis and mesothelioma both cause progressive
dyspnea, as do extensive effusions and plaques. Diagnosis is based on history and chest x-ray
or CT findings and, in the case of cancer, tissue biopsy. Treatment is supportive, except for
cancer, which may require surgery, chemotherapy, or both.
Asbestos is a family of naturally occurring silicates whose heat-resistant and structural properties made it
useful for inclusion in construction and shipbuilding materials, automobile brakes, and some textiles.
Chrysotile (a serpentine fiber), crocidolite, and amosite (amphibole, or straight fibers) are the 3 main types
of asbestos that cause disease. Asbestos can affect the lung, the pleura, or both.
Asbestosis
Asbestosis is a form of interstitial pulmonary fibrosis caused by asbestos exposure.
Asbestosis is a much more common consequence of asbestos exposure than cancer. Shipbuilders, textile
and construction workers, home remodelers, workers who do asbestos abatement, and miners who are
exposed to asbestos fibers are among the many workers at risk. Secondhand exposure may occur among
family members of exposed workers and among people who live close to mines.
Pathophysiology
Alveolar macrophages attempting to engulf inhaled fibers release cytokines and growth factors that
stimulate inflammation, oxidative injury, collagen deposition, and ultimately fibrosis. Asbestos fibers may
also be directly toxic to lung tissue. Risk of disease is generally related to duration and intensity of
exposure and type, length, and thickness of inhaled fibers.
Symptoms and Signs
Asbestosis is initially asymptomatic but can cause progressive dyspnea, nonproductive cough, and
fatigue. The disorder progresses in > 10% of patients even after cessation of exposure. Advanced
asbestosis may cause clubbing, dry bibasilar crackles, and, in severe cases, symptoms and signs of right
ventricular failure (cor pulmonale).
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray, preferably chest CT
• Pulmonary function tests
• Sometimes bronchoalveolar lavage or lung biopsy
Diagnosis is based on history of exposure and chest x-ray or chest CT. Chest x-ray shows linear reticular
===PAGE:2139===
opacities signifying fibrosis, usually in the peripheral lower lobes. Opacities are often bilateral and are
often accompanied by pleural changes (. Honeycombing signifies more advanced disease,
which may involve the mid and lower lung fields. As with silicosis, severity is graded on the International
Labor Organization scale (International Classification of Radiographs of Pneumoconioses) based on size,
shape, location, and profusion of opacities. In contrast
to silicosis, asbestosis produces reticular opacities
with a lower lobe predominance. Hilar and mediastinal adenopathy and nodular opacities are
uncharacteristic and suggest a different diagnosis. Chest x-ray is insensitive; thin-section chest CT is
useful when asbestosis is a likely diagnosis. CT is also superior to chest x-ray in identifying pleural
abnormalities.
Pulmonary function tests, which may show reduced lung volumes and diffusing capacity for carbon
monoxide (DLCO), are nonspecific but help characterize changes in lung function over time. Pulse
oximetry measured at rest and with exertion is nonspecific but sensitive for detecting asbestos-induced
impairment.
Bronchoalveolar lavage or lung biopsy is indicated only when noninvasive measures fail to provide
conclusive diagnosis; demonstration of asbestos fibers indicates asbestosis in people with pulmonary
fibrosis, although such fibers can occasionally be found in lungs of exposed people without disease and
may not be present in specimens from patients with asbestosis. Thus, demonstration of asbestos fibers
may be helpful but is not necessary for diagnosis.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies; many patients have no or mild symptoms and do well, whereas some develop
progressive dyspnea and a few develop respiratory failure, right ventricular failure, and cancer.
Lung cancer (usually non-small cell lung carcinoma) develops in patients with asbestosis at 8 to 10 times
the rate of those without asbestosis and is especially common among workers exposed to amphibole
fibers, although all forms of inhaled asbestos have been associated with an elevated cancer risk.
Asbestos and smoking have a synergistic effect on lung cancer risk (.
Treatment
• Supportive care
No specific treatment exists. Early detection of hypoxemia and right ventricular failure leads to use of
supplemental O
and treatment of heart failure. Pulmonary rehabilitation can be helpful for patients with
impairment.
Prevention
Preventive measures include eliminating exposure, asbestos abatement in occupational and
nonoccupational settings, smoking cessation, and pneumococcal and influenza vaccination. Smoking
cessation is particularly important in light of the multiplicative risk of lung cancer in patients who have
both tobacco smoke and asbestos exposures.
Mesothelioma
Pleural mesothelioma is the only known pleural cancer and is caused by asbestos exposure in
nearly all cases.
Asbestos workers have up to a 10% lifetime risk of developing the disorder, with an average latency of 30
yr. Risk is independent of smoking. Mesothelioma can spread locally, or it can metastasize to the hilar and
mediastinal lymph nodes, pericardium, diaphragm, peritoneum, liver, adrenals, or kidneys and, rarely, the
tunica vaginalis of the testis.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2140===
Patients most often present with dyspnea and nonpleuritic chest pain. Constitutional symptoms are
uncommon at presentation. Invasion of the chest wall and other adjacent structures may cause severe
pain, hoarseness, dysphagia, Horner's syndrome, brachial plexopathy, or ascites.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Pleural fluid cytology or pleural biopsy
• Sometimes video-assisted thorascopic surgery (VATS) or thoracotomy
• Staging with chest CT, mediastinoscopy, and MRI or sometimes with PET and bronchoscopy
The pleural form of mesothelioma, which represents > 90% of all cases (the other 10% include pericardial
and peritoneal mesotheliomas), appears on x-ray as diffuse unilateral or bilateral pleural thickening that
appears to encase the lungs, usually producing blunting of the costophrenic angles. Pleural effusions are
present in 95% of cases and are typically unilateral, large, and hemorrhagic. Diagnosis is based on
pleural fluid cytology or pleural biopsy. If diagnosis is uncertain after these procedures, biopsy by VATS or
thoracotomy is done.
Staging is done with chest CT, mediastinoscopy, and MRI. Sensitivity and specificity of MRI and CT are
comparable, although MRI is helpful in determining tumor extension into the spine or spinal cord. PET
may have better sensitivity and specificity for distinguishing benign from malignant pleural thickening.
Bronchoscopy should be done to
exclude coexisting endobronchial lung cancers. Increased levels of
hyaluronidase in pleural fluid are suggestive but not diagnostic of mesothelioma. Soluble mesothelinrelated proteins released into the serum by mesothelial cells are being studied as possible tumor markers
for disease detection and monitoring, but the false-positive rate may limit their effectiveness.
Prognosis
Mesothelioma remains an incurable cancer, and long-term survival is uncommon. Surgery to remove the
pleura, ipsilateral lung, phrenic nerve, hemidiaphragm, and pericardium combined with chemotherapy or
radiation therapy may be considered, although it does not substantially change prognosis or survival time.
No treatment substantially prolongs survival. Survival from time of diagnosis averages 8 to 15 mo,
depending on the location and cell type. A few patients, usually younger patients with shorter duration of
symptoms, have a more favorable prognosis, sometimes surviving for several years after diagnosis.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Pleurodesis or pleurectomy for pleural effusions and relief of dyspnea
• Analgesia with opioids and sometimes radiation therapy
• Chemotherapy for tumor shrinkage and symptom relief
• Experimental therapies
Complete surgical resection usually is not feasible. Combination pemetrexed (an antifolate antimetabolite)
and cisplatin shows promise but warrants further study.
The major focus of treatment is supportive care and relief of pain and dyspnea. Given the diffuse nature
of the disorder, radiation therapy is usually unsuitable except to treat localized pain or needle-tract
metastases. It is not generally used for treatment of nerve root pain. Pleurodesis or pleurectomy can be
used to help reduce dyspnea caused by pleural effusions. Adequate analgesia is important but difficult to
===PAGE:2141===
achieve. Usually, opioids, both transdermal and delivered via indwelling epidural catheters, are used.
Chemotherapy using cisplatin and gemcitabine relieves symptoms in most cases and sometimes
decreases tumor size. Multimodality therapies are advocated by some authorities. Intrapleural injection of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor or interferonγ
1b, IV ranpirnase (a ribonuclease), and
gene therapies are under study.
Other Asbestos-Related Pleural Disease
Pleural disease, a hallmark of asbestos exposure, includes formation of pleural plaques,
calcification, thickening, rounded atelectasis, adhesions, effusion, and mesothelioma (.
Pleural disease causes effusion but few symptoms. All pleural changes are diagnosed by chest x-ray or
CT, though chest CT is more sensitive than chest x-ray for detecting pleural disorders. Treatment is rarely
needed except for cancer.
Discrete plaques
, which occur in up to 60% of workers exposed to asbestos, typically affect the bilateral
parietal pleurae between the 5th and 9th ribs and adjacent to the diaphragm. Plaque calcification is
common and can lead to misdiagnosis of severe pulmonary disease when radiographically superimposed
on lung fields. CT can distinguish pleural from parenchymal disease in this setting. Fat stripes may be
mistaken for pleural plaques on chest x-ray. CT can distinguish pleural disease from fat.
Diffuse thickening
affects visceral as well as parietal pleurae. It may be an extension of pulmonary
fibrosis from parenchyma to the pleurae or a nonspecific reaction to pleural effusion. With or without
calcification, pleural thickening can cause a restrictive defect.
Rounded atelectasis
is a benign manifestation of pleural thickening in which invagination of pleura into
the parenchyma can entrap lung tissue, causing atelectasis. On chest x-ray and CT, it typically appears
as a curvilinear cicatricial mass, often in the lower lung zones, and can be confused with a pulmonary
cancer.
Pleural effusions
occur but are less common than the other pleural changes they accompany. These
benign effusions are usually bilateral, exudative, and often hemorrhagic. They typically resolve
spontaneously (.
Beryllium Disease
(Berylliosis)
Acute beryllium disease and chronic beryllium disease are caused by inhalation of dust or
fumes from beryllium compounds and products. Acute beryllium disease is now rare; chronic
beryllium disease is characterized by formation of granulomas throughout the body, especially
in the lungs, intrathoracic lymph nodes, and skin. Chronic beryllium disease causes progressive
dyspnea, cough, and fatigue. Diagnosis is by history, beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test,
and biopsy. Treatment is with corticosteroids.
Etiology
Beryllium exposure is a common but under-recognized cause of illness in many industries, including
beryllium mining and extraction, alloy production, metal alloy machining, electronics, telecommunications,
nuclear weapon manufacture, defense, aircraft, automotive, aerospace, and metal scrap, computer, and
electronics recycling. Because small amounts of beryllium are toxic and are added to many copper,
aluminum, nickel, and magnesium alloys, workers are often unaware of their exposure and its risks.
Pathophysiology
Acute beryllium disease is a chemical pneumonitis causing diffuse parenchymal inflammatory infiltrates
and nonspecific intra-alveolar edema. Other tissues (eg, skin and conjunctivae) may be affected. Acute
===PAGE:2142===
beryllium disease is now rare because most industries have reduced exposure levels, but cases were
common between 1940 and 1970, and many cases progressed from acute to chronic beryllium disease.
Chronic beryllium disease remains a common illness in industries that use beryllium and beryllium alloy. It
differs from most pneumoconioses in that it is a cell-mediated hypersensitivity disease. Beryllium is
presented to CD4+ T lymphocytes by antigen-presenting cells, principally in HLA-DP molecules. T
lymphocytes in the blood, lungs, or other organs, in turn, recognize the beryllium, proliferate, and form Tlymphocyte clones. These clones then release proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factorα
, IL-2, and interferonγ
. These cytokines amplify the immune response, resulting in formation of
mononuclear cell infiltrates and noncaseating granulomas in target organs where beryllium has deposited.
On average, about 2% to 6% of beryllium-exposed people develop beryllium sensitization (defined by
positive blood lymphocyte proliferation to beryllium salts in vitro), with most progressing to disease. In
certain high-risk groups, such as beryllium metal and alloy machinists, chronic beryllium disease
prevalence is > 17%. Workers with bystander exposures, such as secretaries and security guards, also
develop sensitization and disease but at lower rates. The typical pathologic consequence is a diffuse
pulmonary, hilar, and mediastinal lymph node granulomatous reaction that is histologically
indistinguishable from sarcoidosis. Early granuloma formation with mononuclear and giant cells can also
occur. Many lymphocytes are found when cells are washed from the lungs (bronchoalveolar lavage [BAL])
during bronchoscopy. These T lymphocytes proliferate when exposed to beryllium in vitro, much as the
blood cells do (a test called beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test [BeLPT]).
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with chronic beryllium disease often have dyspnea, cough, weight loss, and a variable chest xray pattern, typically showing nodular opacities in the mid and upper lung zones, frequently with hilar and
mediastinal adenopathy. Patients complain of insidious and progressive exertional dyspnea, cough, chest
pain, weight loss, night sweats, and fatigue. Symptoms may develop within months of first exposure or >
40 yr after exposure has ceased. Some people remain asymptomatic.
Diagnosis
• Beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test (using blood or bronchoalveolar lavage cells)
• Chest x-ray or CT
Diagnosis depends on a history of exposure, the appropriate clinical manifestations, and an abnormal
blood or BAL BeLPT or both. BAL BeLPT is highly sensitive and specific, helping to distinguish chronic
beryllium disease from sarcoidosis and other forms of diffuse pulmonary disease. Chest x-ray may be
normal or show diffuse infiltrates that can be nodular, reticular, or have a hazy ground-glass appearance,
often with hilar adenopathy resembling the pattern seen in sarcoidosis. A miliary pattern also occurs.
High-resolution CT is more sensitive than x-ray, although cases of biopsy-proven disease occur even in
people with normal imaging tests.
Prognosis
Acute beryllium disease can be fatal, but prognosis is usually excellent unless progression to chronic
beryllium disease occurs. Chronic beryllium disease often results in progressive loss of respiratory
function. Early abnormalities include air flow obstruction and decreased oxygenation on ABG at rest and
during exercise testing. Decreased diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) and restriction appear
later. Pulmonary hypertension and right venticular failure develop in about 10% of cases, with death due
to cor pulmonale. Beryllium sensitization progresses to chronic beryllium disease at a rate of about 6%/yr
after initial detection through workplace medical surveillance programs. Subcutaneous
granulomatous
nodules caused by inoculation with beryllium splinters or dust usually persist until excised.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
===PAGE:2143===
• In acute beryllium disease, sometimes mechanical ventilation
• In chronic beryllium disease, sometimes supplemental O
, pulmonary rehabilitation, and treatment for
right ventricular failure
• In end-stage chronic beryllium disease, sometimes lung transplantation
In acute disease, the lungs often become edematous and hemorrhagic. Mechanical ventilation is
necessary in severely affected patients.
Some patients with chronic beryllium disease never require treatment because the disease progresses
relatively slowly. When needed, treatment is with corticosteroids, which decrease symptoms and improve
oxygenation. Treatment is generally started only in patients with significant symptoms and evidence of
abnormal gas exchange or evidence of an accelerated decline in lung function or oxygenation. In
symptomatic patients with abnormal pulmonary function, prednisone 40 to 60 mg po once/day or every
other day is given for 3 to 6 mo. Then, measures of pulmonary physiology and gas exchange are
repeated to document a response to therapy, and the dose is gradually tapered to the lowest dose that
maintains symptomatic and objective improvement (usually about 10 to 15 mg once/day or every other
day). Lifelong treatment with corticosteroids is usually required. There is anecdotal evidence that the
addition of methotrexate (10 to 25 mg po once/wk) reduces the need for corticosteroids as it does in
sarcoidosis.
Spontaneous remission of chronic beryllium disease is rare. In patients with end-stage disease, lung
transplantation can be lifesaving. Other supportive measures, such as supplemental O
therapy,
pulmonary rehabilitation, and drugs for treatment of right ventricular failure, are used as needed.
Prevention
Industrial dust suppression is the basis for preventing beryllium exposure. Exposures must be reduced to
levels that are as low as reasonably achievable—preferably more than 50-fold below current
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards—to reduce the risk of sensitization and
chronic beryllium disease. Medical surveillance, using blood BeLPT and chest x-ray, is recommended for
all exposed workers, including those with indirect contact. Both acute and chronic disease must be
promptly recognized and affected workers removed from further beryllium exposure.
Building-Related Illnesses
Building-related illnesses (BRIs) are a heterogeneous group of disorders whose etiology is linked to the
environment of modern airtight buildings. Such buildings are characterized by sealed windows and
dependence on heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems for circulation of air. Most cases occur
in nonindustrial office buildings, but cases can occur in apartment buildings, single-family homes, schools,
museums, and libraries.
BRIs can be specific or nonspecific.
Specific BRIs:
Specific BRIs are those for which a link between building-related exposure and illness is
proved. Examples include
•
Legionella
infection
(
•
Occupational asthma
(
•
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(
• Inhalational fever
Inhalational fever
is a febrile reaction caused by exposure to organic aerosols or dusts. Names used to
describe this type of BRI include humidifier fever, grain fever, swine confinement fever, and mycotoxicosis,
===PAGE:2144===
depending on the causative agent. Metal fumes and polymer fumes can also cause febrile illness. The
term organic dust toxic syndrome (ODTS) has been used to encompass the subacute febrile and
respiratory reaction to organic dust that is typically highly contaminated with bacterial endotoxin. Toxic
pneumonitis is a commonly used but less specific term.
Humidifier fever
occurs in nonindustrial buildings as a consequence of humidifiers or other types of
ventilation units serving as a reservoir for the growth of bacteria or fungi and as a method of aerosolizing
these contaminants. The disorder usually manifests as low-grade fever, malaise, cough, and dyspnea.
Improvement after removal from exposure (eg, weekend away from the office building) is often one of the
first indications of etiology. Humidifier fever has an acute onset and is self-limiting (usually 2 to 3 days).
Physical signs may be absent or subtle. Clusters of cases are common.
Unlike immunologically mediated conditions (eg, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, building-related asthma),
inhalational fevers do not require a period of sensitization. The disorder
can occur after initial exposure.
Acute episodes do not generally require treatment apart from antipyretics and removal from the
contaminated environment. If symptoms persist, evaluation may be required to rule out infection,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, or other conditions. Biologic sampling to detect airborne microbials in the
work environment can be costly and time consuming but is sometimes necessary to document the source
of contaminated air. Inhalational fevers of all types are usually prevented by good maintenance of
ventilation systems.
Nonspecific BRIs:
Nonspecific BRIs are those for which a link between building-related exposure and
illness is more difficult to prove. The term sick building syndrome has been used to refer to illnesses that
occur in clusters within a building and that cause often nonspecific symptoms, including
• Itchy, irritated, dry or watery eyes
• Rhinorrhea or nasal congestion
• Throat soreness or tightness
• Dry itchy skin or unexplained rashes
• Headache, lethargy, or difficulty concentrating
Some building-related factors appear to account for symptoms in some instances. These factors include
higher building temperature, higher humidity, and poor ventilation, typically with a failure to incorporate
sufficient fresh air from outdoors. Patient factors, including female sex, history of atopy, increased
attention to body sensations, worry about the meaning of symptoms, anxiety, depression, and
occasionally mass hysteria, also seem to underlie experience of symptoms.
Byssinosis
Byssinosis is a form of reactive airways disease characterized by bronchoconstriction in cotton,
flax, and hemp workers. The etiologic agent is unknown. Symptoms are chest tightness and
dyspnea that worsen on the first day of the work week and subside as the week progresses.
Diagnosis is based on history and pulmonary function test findings. Treatment includes
avoidance of exposure and use of asthma drugs.
Etiology
Byssinosis occurs almost entirely in workers who contact unprocessed, raw cotton, especially those who
are exposed to open bales or who work in cotton spinning or in the card room. Byssinosis can occur after
acute exposure but usually occurs in workers with a history of chronic exposure. Evidence suggests that
some agent in the cotton bract leads to bronchoconstriction. Although bacterial endotoxin is a likely
cause, the absence of similar symptoms in other settings in which workers are exposed to endotoxin
leaves some uncertainty. Prolonged exposure to cotton dust was once thought to cause emphysema, a
theory now disproved. Chronic bronchitis symptoms are common among people exposed to cotton dust.
===PAGE:2145===
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are chest tightness and dyspnea that lessen with repeated exposure. Symptoms develop on
the first day of work after a weekend or vacation and diminish or disappear by the end of the week. With
repeated exposure over a period of years, chest tightness tends to return and persist through midweek
and occasionally to the end of the week or as long as the person continues to work. This typical temporal
pattern distinguishes byssinosis from asthma.
Signs of acute exposure are tachypnea and wheezing. Patients with more chronic exposure may have
crackles.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history and pulmonary function tests that show typical airflow obstruction and a
reduction in ventilatory capacity, especially if measured at the start and end of a first work shift.
Hyperresponsiveness to methacholine is also often observed. Surveillance measures, including symptom
reporting and spirometry in textile workers, can aid in early detection.
Treatment
Treatment includes avoidance or reduction of exposure and use of asthma drugs.
Coal Workers' Pneumoconiosis
(Anthracosis; Black Lung Disease; Coal Miner's Pneumoconiosis)
Coal workers' pneumoconiosis (CWP) is caused by inhalation of coal dust. Deposition of dust
produces dust-laden macrophages around bronchioles (coal macules), occasionally causing
focal bronchiolar emphysema. CWP usually causes no symptoms but can progress to
progressive
massive fibrosis (PMF) with impaired lung function. Diagnosis is based on history
and chest x-ray findings. Treatment is generally supportive.
Etiology
CWP is caused by chronic inhalation of dust from high-carbon coal (anthracite and bituminous) and rarely
graphite, typically over ≥ 20 yr. Inhalation of silica contained in coal may also contribute to clinical
disease.
Pathophysiology
Alveolar macrophages engulf the dust, release cytokines that stimulate inflammation, and collect in lung
interstitium around bronchioles and alveoli (coal macules). Coal nodules develop as collagen
accumulates, and focal emphysema develops as bronchiole walls weaken and dilate. Fibrosis can occur
but is usually limited to areas adjacent to coal macules. Distortion of lung architecture, airflow obstruction,
and functional impairment are usually mild but can be highly destructive in some patients.
Two forms of CWP are described:
• Simple, with individual coal macules
• Complicated, with coalescence of macules and PMF
Patients with simple CWP develop PMF at a rate of about 1 to 2%. In PMF, nodules coalesce to form
black, rubbery parenchymal masses usually in the upper posterior fields. The masses may encroach on
and destroy vascular supply and airways or may cavitate. PMF can develop and progress even after
exposure to coal dust has ceased. Despite the similarity of coal-induced PMF and conglomerate silicosis,
the development of PMF in coal workers is unrelated to the silica content of the coal.
===PAGE:2146===
Complications:
An association between CWP and features of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is welldescribed. It is unclear whether CWP predisposes miners to developing RA, whether RA takes on a
unique form in patients with CWP, or whether RA alters the response of miners to coal dust. Multiple
rounded nodules in the lung appearing over a relatively short time (Caplan's syndrome) represent an
immunopathologic response related to rheumatoid diathesis. Histologically, they resemble rheumatoid
nodules but have a peripheral region of more acute inflammation. Patients with CWP are at a slightly
increased risk of developing active TB and non-TB mycobacterial infections. Weak associations have
been reported between CWP and progressive systemic sclerosis and stomach cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
CWP does not usually cause symptoms. Most chronic pulmonary symptoms in coal miners are caused by
other conditions, such as industrial bronchitis due to coal dust or coincident emphysema due to smoking.
Cough can be chronic and problematic in patients even after they leave the workplace, even in those who
do not smoke.
PMF causes progressive dyspnea. Occasionally, patients cough up black sputum (melanoptysis), which
occurs when PMF lesions rupture into the airways. PMF often progresses to pulmonary hypertension with
right ventricular and respiratory failure.
Diagnosis
• History of exposure to coal dust
• Chest CT or chest x-ray
Diagnosis is based on a history of exposure and chest x-ray or chest CT appearance. In patients with
CWP, x-ray or CT reveals diffuse, small, rounded opacities or nodules. The finding of at least one opacity
> 10 mm suggests PMF. The specificity of the chest x-ray for PMF is low because up to one third of the
lesions identified as being PMF turn out to be cancers, scars, or other disorders. Chest CT is more
sensitive than chest x-ray for detecting coalescing nodules, early PMF, and cavitation.
Pulmonary function tests are nondiagnostic but are useful for characterizing lung function in patients in
whom obstructive, restrictive, or mixed defects may develop. Because abnormalities of gas exchange
occur in some patients with extensive simple CWP and in those with complicated CWP, baseline and
periodic measures of diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) and ABG at rest and during exercise
are recommended.
Because patients with CWP often have had exposure to both silica dust and coal dust, surveillance for
TB is usually done. Patients with CWP should have annual tuberculin skin testing. In those with positive
test results, sputum culture and cytology, CT, and bronchoscopy may be needed to confirm TB.
Treatment
• Sometimes supplemental O
and pulmonary rehabilitation
• Restriction from further exposure
Treatment is rarely necessary in simple CWP, although smoking cessation and TB surveillance are
recommended. Patients with pulmonary hypertension, hypoxemia, or both
are given supplemental O
therapy. Pulmonary rehabilitation can help more severely affected workers carry out activities of daily
living. Workers with CWP, especially those with PMF, should be restricted from further exposure,
especially to high concentrations of dust. TB is treated in accordance with current recommendations (see
p.
).
Prevention
===PAGE:2147===
Preventive measures include eliminating exposure, stopping smoking, and giving pneumococcal and
influenza vaccinations. CWP can be prevented by suppressing coal dust at the coal face. Despite longstanding regulations, exposures continue to occur in the mining trade. Respiratory masks provide only
limited protection.
Occupational Asthma
Occupational asthma is reversible airway obstruction that develops after months to years of
sensitization to an allergen encountered in the workplace. Symptoms are dyspnea, wheezing,
cough, and, occasionally, upper respiratory allergic symptoms. Diagnosis is based on
occupational history, including assessment of job activities, allergens in the work environment,
and a temporal association between work and symptoms. Allergen skin testing and provocative
inhalational challenge may be used in specialized centers but are usually unnecessary.
Treatment involves removing the person from the work environment and using asthma drugs
as needed.
Occupational asthma is development of asthma in a worker who has no previous history of asthma.
Symptoms typically develop over months to years because of sensitization to an allergen encountered in
the workplace. Once sensitized, the worker invariably responds to much lower concentrations of the
allergen than that which initiated the response. Occupational asthma differs from occupationally
aggravated asthma, which is an exacerbation or worsening of asthma in workers with preexisting asthma
by single or repeated workplace exposures to pulmonary irritants such as dusts and fumes.
Occupationally aggravated asthma, which is more common than occupational asthma, generally subsides
with reduction of exposure and appropriate asthma treatment. It has a better prognosis and does not
require the same level of clinical investigation of specific triggering allergens.
Several other airway diseases caused by inhalational workplace exposures can be distinguished from
occupational and occupationally aggravated asthma.
In
reactive airways dysfunction syndrome
(RADS), which is nonallergenic, people with no history of
asthma develop persistent, reversible airway obstruction after acute overexposure to irritant dust, fumes,
or gas. Airway inflammation persists even after removal of the acute irritant, and the syndrome is
indistinguishable from asthma.
In
reactive upper airways syndrome
, upper airway (ie, nasal, pharyngeal) mucosal symptoms develop
after acute or repeated exposure to airways irritants.
In
irritant-associated vocal cord dysfunction
, which mimics asthma, abnormal apposition and closure
of the vocal cords, especially during inspiration, occur after acute irritant inhalation.
In
industrial bronchitis
(irritant-induced chronic bronchitis), bronchial inflammation causes cough after
acute or chronic irritant inhalation.
In
bronchiolitis obliterans
, bronchiolar damage occurs after acute inhalation of gases (eg, anhydrous
ammonia). The 2 major forms are proliferative and constrictive. The constrictive form is more common and
may or may not be associated with other forms of diffuse lung injury. Recently, cases of bronchiolitis
obliterans have been reported in workers exposed to the chemical diacetyl during the manufacture of
butter-flavored microwave popcorn. So-called popcorn workers' lung may occur in workers exposed to
other flavorings and possibly in some consumers exposed to this chemical.
Etiology
Occupational asthma is caused by both immune- and non-immune-mediated mechanisms. Immune
mechanisms involve IgE- and non-IgE-mediated hypersensitivity to workplace allergens. Hundreds of
occupational allergens exist, ranging from low molecular weight chemicals to large proteins. Examples
include grain dust, proteolytic enzymes used in detergent manufacturing, red cedar wood, isocyanates,
formalin (rarely), antibiotics (eg, ampicillin, spiramycin), epoxy resins, and tea.
===PAGE:2148===
Non-immune-mediated inflammatory mechanisms cause direct irritation of the respiratory epithelium and
upper airway mucosae.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include shortness of breath, chest tightness, wheezing, and cough, often with upper
respiratory symptoms such as sneezing, rhinorrhea, and tearing. Upper airway and conjunctival
symptoms may precede the typical asthmatic symptoms by months or years. Symptoms may develop
during work hours after specific dust or vapor exposure but often do not become apparent until several
hours after leaving work, thereby making the association with occupational exposure less obvious.
Nocturnal wheezing may be the only symptom. Often, symptoms disappear on weekends or during
vacations, although with ongoing exposure temporal exacerbations and relief become less apparent.
Diagnosis
• Occupational history of allergen exposure
• Immunologic testing
• Sometimes inhalation challenge test
Diagnosis depends on recognizing the link between workplace allergens and asthma. Diagnosis is
suspected on the basis of an occupational history of allergen exposure. A materials safety data sheet can
be used to identify potential allergens, and substances listed can be used to direct immunologic testing
(eg, skin prick, puddle, or patch testing) of suspected antigens to demonstrate that an agent in the
workplace is affecting a person. An increase in bronchial hyperresponsiveness after exposure to the
suspected antigen is also helpful in making the diagnosis.
In difficult cases, a carefully controlled inhalation challenge test done in the laboratory confirms the cause
of the airway obstruction. Such procedures should be done only at centers experienced in inhalation
challenge testing and capable of monitoring and treating the sometimes severe reactions that can occur.
Pulmonary function tests or peak expiratory flow measurements that show decreasing airflow during work
are further evidence that occupational exposure is causative. Methacholine challenge tests can be used
to establish the degree of airway hyperreactivity. Sensitivity to methacholine may decrease after exposure
to the occupational allergen has ceased.
Differentiation from idiopathic asthma is generally based on the pattern of symptoms, demonstration that
allergens are present in the workplace, and the relationship between exposure to allergens and
symptoms and physiologic worsening.
Treatment
Treatment is the same as that for idiopathic asthma, including inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids
(. Treatment should also include removal of the patient from ongoing exposure to the
causative agent.
Prevention
Dust suppression is essential. However, elimination of all instances of sensitization and clinical disease
may not be possible. Once sensitized, patients with occupational asthma may react to extremely low
levels of airborne allergen. Patients who return to environments in which the allergen persists generally
have a poorer prognosis, with more respiratory symptoms, more abnormal lung physiology, a greater need
for drugs, and more frequent and severe exacerbations. Whenever possible, a symptomatic person
should be removed from a setting known to cause symptoms. If exposure continues, symptoms tend to
persist. Occupational asthma can sometimes be cured if it is diagnosed early and exposure ceases.
Silicosis
===PAGE:2149===
Silicosis is caused by inhalation of unbound (free) crystalline silica dust and is characterized by
nodular pulmonary fibrosis. Chronic silicosis initially causes no symptoms or only mild dyspnea
but over years can advance to involve most of the lung and cause dyspnea, hypoxemia,
pulmonary hypertension, and respiratory impairment. Diagnosis is based on history and chest
x-ray findings. No effective treatment exists except supportive care and, for severe cases, lung
transplantation.
Etiology
Silicosis, the oldest known occupational pulmonary disease, is caused by inhalation of tiny particles of
silicon dioxide in the form of unbound (free) crystalline silica (usually quartz) or, less commonly, by
inhalation of silicates, minerals containing silicon dioxide bound to other elements, such as talc. Workers
at greatest risk are those who move or blast rock and sand (miners, quarry workers, stonecutters) or who
use silica-containing rock or sand abrasives (sand blasters; glass makers; foundry, gemstone, and
ceramic workers; potters). Coal miners are at risk of mixed silicosis and coal workers' pneumoconiosis
(.
Factors that influence the likelihood of development of silicosis include
• Duration and intensity of exposure
• Form of silicon (exposure to the crystalline form poses greater risk than the bound form)
• Surface characteristics (exposure to the uncoated form poses greater risk than the coated form)
• Rapidity of inhalation after the dust is fractured and becomes airborne (exposure immediately after
fracturing poses greater risk than delayed exposure)
Pathophysiology
Alveolar macrophages engulf inhaled free silica particles and enter lymphatics and interstitial tissue. The
macrophages cause release of cytokines (tumor necrosis factorα
, IL-1), growth factors (tumor growth
factorβ
), and oxidants, stimulating parenchymal inflammation, collagen synthesis, and, ultimately, fibrosis.
When the macrophages die, they release the silica into interstitial tissue around the small bronchioles,
causing formation of the pathognomonic silicotic nodule. These nodules initially contain macrophages,
lymphocytes, mast cells, fibroblasts with disorganized patches of collagen, and scattered birefringent
particles that are best seen by polarized light microscopy. As they mature, the centers of the nodules
become dense balls of fibrotic scar with a classic onion-skin appearance and are surrounded by an outer
layer of inflammatory cells. In low-intensity or short-term exposures, these nodules remain discrete and do
not compromise lung function (simple chronic silicosis). But with higher-intensity or more prolonged
exposures (complicated chronic silicosis), these nodules coalesce and cause progressive fibrosis and
reduction of lung volumes (total lung capacity, ventilatory capacity) on pulmonary function tests, or they
coalesce, sometimes forming large conglomerate masses (called progressive massive fibrosis).
Chronic silicosis
is the most common form of the disorder and generally develops only after exposure
over decades.
Acute silicosis
and the rarer
accelerated silicosis
are caused by intense silica dust exposure over
short periods (several months or years). Mononuclear cells infiltrate alveolar septa, and alveolar spaces
fill with a proteinaceous material that stains periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive and is similar to that found
in pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (silicoproteinosis—. The occupational history of acute
exposure is needed to distinguish silicoproteinosis from the idiopathic variety.
Conglomerate
(complicated) silicosis is the advanced form of chronic or accelerated silicosis and is
characterized by widespread masses of fibrosis, typically in the upper lung zones.
Complications:
Patients with silicosis are at risk of other disorders:
===PAGE:2150===
• TB
• Lung cancer
• Progressive systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
• Possibly RA
All patients with silicosis are at about a 30-fold increased risk of pulmonary TB or nontubercular
mycobacterial disease and are more likely to develop both pulmonary and extrapulmonary manifestations.
Increased risk may result from impaired macrophage function and an increased risk of activation of latent
infection. People exposed to silica but without silicosis have 3 times the risk of developing TB compared
with the nonexposed general population.
Other complications include spontaneous pneumothorax, broncholithiasis, and tracheobronchial
obstruction. Emphysema is a common finding in areas immediately peripheral to conglomerate nodules
and in areas of progressive massive fibrosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Chronic silicosis is often asymptomatic, but many patients eventually develop dyspnea during exertion
that progresses to dyspnea at rest. Productive cough, when present, may be due to silicosis, coexisting
chronic occupational (industrial) bronchitis, or smoking. Breath sounds diminish as the disorder
progresses, and pulmonary consolidation, pulmonary hypertension, and respiratory failure with or without
right ventricular failure may develop in advanced disease.
Patients with accelerated silicosis experience the same symptoms as those with chronic silicosis, but
symptoms develop over a shorter period.
Acute silicosis patients experience rapid progression of dyspnea, weight loss, and fatigue with diffuse
bilateral crackles. Respiratory failure often develops within 2 yr.
Conglomerate silicosis causes severe, chronic respiratory symptoms.
Diagnosis
• Occupational history of silica exposure
• Chest CT or chest x-ray
• Sometimes tissue biopsy for confirmation
• Adjunctive tests for distinguishing silicosis from other disorders
Imaging:
Silicosis is usually recognized on the basis of chest x-ray or CT appearance in patients with a
history of exposure. CT is more sensitive than x-ray, especially when helical CT and high-resolution
techniques are used. In most cases, chest CT is preferable because it is more sensitive for detecting
silicosis as well as the transition from simple to conglomerate silicosis. Chest CT can also better
distinguish asbestosis from silicosis, although this differentiation can usually be made on the basis of
chest x-ray and exposure history. In patients who develop RA, 3- to 5-mm pulmonary rheumatoid nodules
are visible on chest x-ray or CT.
Chronic silicosis
produces multiple 1- to 3-mm rounded opacities or nodules recognized on chest x-ray
or CT, usually in upper lung fields. Severity is graded on a standardized scale developed by the
International Labor Organization, in which specially trained readers examine the chest x-ray for size and
shape of opacities, concentration of opacities (profusion), and pleural changes. An equivalent scale does
not exist for CT appearance. Calcified hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes are common and occasionally
===PAGE:2151===
resemble eggshells. Pleural thickening is uncommon unless a severe parenchymal disease abuts the
pleura. Rarely, calcified pleural thickening occurs in patients with little parenchymal involvement. Bullae
commonly form around the conglomerate masses. Tracheal deviation may occur when the masses
become large and cause volume loss. True cavities may indicate TB.
Numerous disorders resemble chronic silicosis on x-ray; they include welders' siderosis, hemosiderosis,
sarcoidosis, chronic beryllium disease, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, coal workers' pneumoconiosis,
miliary TB, fungal pulmonary diseases, and metastatic cancer. Eggshell calcifications in hilar and
mediastinal lymph nodes may help distinguish silicosis from other pulmonary disorders but are not a
pathognomonic finding and are not commonly present.
Accelerated silicosis
resembles chronic silicosis on x-ray but develops more rapidly.
Acute silicosis
is recognized by rapid progression of symptoms. X-ray findings include diffuse alveolar
bibasilar opacities representing fluid-filled alveoli. On CT, areas of ground-glass density consisting of
reticular infiltration and areas of patchy increased attenuation and inhomogeneity occur. These areas are
best observed on thin-section, spiral CT views. The multiple rounded opacities of chronic and
accelerated silicosis are not characteristic of acute silicosis.
Conglomerate silicosis
is recognizable by confluent opacities > 10 mm in diameter against a
background of chronic silicosis findings.
Adjunctive tests:
Tuberculin skin testing, sputum culture and cytology, PET, and bronchoscopy all may
assist in distinguishing silicosis from disseminated TB or cancer.
Pulmonary function tests and measures of gas exchange (diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide [DLCO],
ABGs) are not diagnostic but help monitor progression. Early chronic silicosis may manifest with reduced
lung volumes that are at the lower end of the predicted range and with normal functional residual capacity
and residual volume. In conglomerate silicosis, pulmonary function tests reveal decreased lung volumes,
decreased DLCO, and airway obstruction. ABGs show hypoxemia usually without CO
retention.
Measurement of gas exchange during exercise, using pulse oximetry or preferably an indwelling arterial
catheter, is one of the most sensitive measures of pulmonary impairment.
Antinuclear antibodies and elevated rheumatoid factor are detectable in some patients and are suggestive
but not diagnostic of a coexisting connective tissue disorder (eg, scleroderma, RA).
Treatment
• Sometimes whole lung lavage
• Sometimes oral corticosteroids
• Rarely lung transplantation
• Empiric use of bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids for obstruction
• Removal from further exposure
Whole lung lavage may be useful in some cases of acute silicosis. Whole lung lavage can reduce the
total mineral dust load in the lungs of patients with chronic silicosis. Some studies have shown short-term
reduction in symptoms after lavage, but controlled trials have not been done. Anecdotal evidence
supports the use of oral corticosteroids in acute and accelerated silicosis. Lung transplantation is a last
resort.
Patients with airway obstruction may be treated empirically with bronchodilators and inhaled
corticosteroids. Patients should be monitored and treated for hypoxemia to forestall pulmonary
hypertension. Pulmonary rehabilitation may help patients carry out activities of daily living. Workers who
develop silicosis should be removed from further exposure.
===PAGE:2152===
Management of TB is the same as for other patients with TB except that longer courses are usually
recommended because relapse is more common in patients with silicotuberculosis.
Prevention
The most effective preventive interventions occur at an industrial rather than clinical level and include
dust suppression, process isolation, ventilation, and use of non-silicacontaining abrasives. Respiratory
masks provide imperfect protection and, although helpful, are not an adequate solution. Surveillance of
exposed workers with respiratory questionnaires, spirometry, and chest x-rays is recommended.
Frequency of surveillance depends to some degree on the expected intensity of the exposure. Other
preventive measures include smoking cessation and pneumococcal and influenza vaccination.
Physicians must be alert to the risk of TB and nontuberculous mycobacterial infections in silica-exposed
patients, especially miners. People exposed to silica should have annual tuberculin testing. Those with a
positive skin test should have sputum culture for TB. In some cases, CT and bronchoscopy may be
needed to confirm TB. Patients with a positive tuberculin test and negative TB cultures should be given
isoniazid chemoprophylaxis in keeping with standard guidelines for tuberculin reactors.
Irritant Gas Inhalation Injury
Irritant gases are those which, when inhaled, dissolve in the water of the respiratory tract mucosa and
cause an inflammatory response, usually from the release of acidic or alkaline radicals. Irritant gas
exposures predominantly affect the airways, causing tracheitis, bronchitis, and bronchiolitis. Other inhaled
agents may be directly toxic (eg, cyanide, carbon monoxide) or cause harm simply by displacing O
and
producing asphyxia (eg, methane, carbon dioxide).
The effect of inhaling irritant gases depends on the extent and duration of exposure and on the specific
agent. Chlorine, phosgene, sulfur dioxide, hydrogen chloride or sulfide, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, and
ammonia are among the most important irritant gases. Hydrogen sulfide is also a potent cellular toxin,
blocking the cytochrome system and inhibiting cellular respiration. A common exposure involves mixing
household ammonia with cleansers containing bleach; the irritant gas chloramine is released.
Acute Exposure
Acute exposure to high concentrations of toxic gas over a short time is characteristic of industrial
accidents resulting from a faulty valve or pump in a gas tank or occurring during gas transport. Many
people may be exposed and affected. The release of methyl isocyanate from a chemical plant in Bhopal,
India in 1984 killed > 2000 people.
Respiratory damage is related to the concentration of the gas and its solubility.
More water-soluble gases (eg, chlorine, ammonia, sulfur dioxide, hydrogen chloride) dissolve in the upper
airway and immediately cause mucous membrane irritation, which may alert people to the need to escape
the exposure. Permanent damage to the upper respiratory tract, distal airways, and lung parenchyma
occurs only if escape from the gas source is impeded.
Less soluble gases (eg, nitrogen dioxide, phosgene, ozone) may not dissolve until they are well into the
respiratory tract, often reaching the lower airways. These agents are less likely to produce early warning
signs (phosgene in low concentrations has a pleasant odor), are more likely to cause severe bronchiolitis,
and often have a lag of ≥ 12 h before symptoms of pulmonary edema develop.
Complications:
The most serious immediate complication is ARDS, which usually occurs within 24 h.
Patients with significant lower airway involvement may develop bacterial infection.
Ten to 14 days after acute exposure to some agents (eg, ammonia, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide,
mercury), some patients develop bronchiolitis obliterans progressing to ARDS. Bronchiolitis obliterans
with organized pneumonia can ensue when granulation tissue accumulates in the terminal airways and
===PAGE:2153===
alveolar ducts during the body's reparative process. A minority of these patients develop late pulmonary
fibrosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Soluble irritant gases cause severe burning and other manifestations of irritation of the eyes, nose,
throat, trachea, and major bronchi. Marked cough, hemoptysis, wheezing, retching, and dyspnea are
common. The upper airway may be obstructed by edema, secretions, or laryngospasm. Severity is
generally doserelated. Nonsoluble gases cause fewer immediate symptoms but can cause dyspnea or
cough.
Patients who develop ARDS have worsening dyspnea and increasing O
requirements.
Diagnosis
• History of exposure
• Chest x-ray
Diagnosis is usually obvious from the history. Patients should have a chest x-ray and pulse oximetry.
Chest x-ray findings of patchy or confluent alveolar consolidation usually indicate pulmonary edema.
CT is used to evaluate patients with late-developing symptoms. Those with bronchiolitis obliterans that
progresses to respiratory failure manifest a pattern of bronchiolar thickening and a patchy mosaic of
hyperinflation.
Prognosis
Most people recover fully, but some have persistent lung injury with reversible airway obstruction (reactive
airways dysfunction syndrome) or pulmonary fibrosis; smokers may be at greater risk.
Treatment
• Removal from exposure and 24-h observation
• Bronchodilators and supplemental O
• Sometimes inhaled racemic epinephrine, endotracheal intubation, and mechanical ventilation
Management does not differ by specific inhaled agent but rather by symptoms. Patients should be moved
into fresh air and given supplemental O
. Treatment is directed toward ensuring adequate oxygenation
and alveolar ventilation. Bronchodilators and O
therapy may suffice in less severe cases. Severe airflow
obstruction is managed with inhaled racemic epinephrine, endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy, and
mechanical ventilation. The efficacy of corticosteroid therapy (eg, prednisone 45 to 60 mg once/day for 1
to 2 wk) is unproved, but it is frequently used.
Because of the risk of ARDS, any patient with respiratory tract symptoms after toxic inhalation should be
observed for 24 h.
After the acute phase has been managed, physicians must remain alert to the development of reactive
airways dysfunction syndrome, bronchiolitis obliterans with or without organized pneumonia, pulmonary
fibrosis, and delayed-onset ARDS.
Prevention
Care in handling gases and chemicals is the most important preventive measure. The availability of
adequate respiratory protection (eg, gas masks with a self-contained air supply) for rescuers is also very
===PAGE:2154===
important; rescuers without protective gear who rush in to extricate a victim often succumb themselves.
Chronic Exposure
Low-level continuous or intermittent exposure to irritant gases or chemical vapors may lead to chronic
bronchitis, although the role of such exposure is especially difficult to substantiate in smokers.
Chronic inhalational exposure to some agents (eg, bis[chloromethyl]ether, certain metals) causes lung
and other cancers (eg, liver angiosarcomas after vinyl chloride monomer exposure).
===PAGE:2155===
Chapter 202. Pulmonary Hypertension
Introduction
Pulmonary hypertension is increased pressure in the pulmonary circulation. It has many
secondary causes; some cases are idiopathic. In pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary vessels
become constricted, hypertrophied, and fibrosed. Severe pulmonary hypertension leads to right
ventricular overload and failure. Symptoms are fatigue, exertional dyspnea, and, occasionally,
chest discomfort and syncope. Diagnosis is made by measuring pulmonary artery pressure.
Treatment is with vasodilators and diuretics. In some advanced cases, lung transplantation is an
option. Prognosis is poor overall if a treatable secondary cause is not found.
Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a mean pulmonary arterial pressure ≥ 25 mm Hg at rest or ≥ 35 mm
Hg during exercise.
Etiology
Many conditions and drugs cause pulmonary hypertension. A small number of cases occur sporadically,
unrelated to any identifiable disorder; these cases are termed idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension.
The most common overall causes of pulmonary hypertension include
• Left heart failure, including diastolic dysfunction
• Parenchymal lung disease with hypoxia
• Miscellaneous: Sleep apnea, connective tissue disorders, and pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary hypertension is currently classified into 5 groups (see
Table 202-1
) based on a number of pathologic, physiologic, and clinical factors. In the first group
(pulmonary arterial hypertension), the primary disorder affects the small pulmonary arterioles.
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiologic mechanisms that cause pulmonary hypertension include increased
[Table 202-1.
Classification of Pulmonary Hypertension]
pulmonary vascular resistance and increased pulmonary venous pressure. Pulmonary vascular
resistance can be caused by obliteration of the pulmonary vascular bed or hypoxic vasoconstriction.
Pulmonary hypertension is characterized by variable vasoconstriction, smooth muscle hypertrophy, and
vascular wall remodeling. Vasoconstriction is thought to be due in part to enhanced activity of
thromboxane and endothelin-1 (both vasoconstrictors) and reduced activity of prostacyclin and nitric
oxide (both vasodilators). The increased pulmonary vascular pressure that results from vascular
obstruction further injures the endothelium. Injury activates coagulation at the intimal surface, which may
worsen the hypertension. Thrombotic coagulopathy due to increased activity of plasminogen activator
inhibitor type 1 and fibrinopeptide A and decreased tissue plasminogen activator activity may also
contribute. Focal coagulation at the endothelial surface should not be confused with chronic
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension, in which pulmonary hypertension is caused by organized
pulmonary emboli.
In most patients, pulmonary hypertension eventually leads to right ventricular hypertrophy followed by
dilation and right ventricular failure.
Symptoms and Signs
Progressive exertional dyspnea and easy fatigability occur in almost all patients. Atypical chest discomfort
and exertional light-headedness or presyncope may accompany dyspnea. These symptoms are due
primarily to insufficient cardiac output. Raynaud's syndrome occurs in about 10% of patients with
===PAGE:2156===
idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension; the majority are women. Hemoptysis is rare but may be fatal.
Hoarseness due to recurrent laryngeal nerve compression by an enlarged pulmonary artery (ie, Ortner
syndrome) also occurs rarely.
In advanced disease, signs may include right ventricular heave, widely split 2nd heart sound (S
), an
accentuated pulmonic component (P
) of S
, a pulmonary ejection click, a right ventricular 3rd heart
sound (S
), tricuspid murmur, and jugular vein distention. Liver congestion and peripheral edema are
common late manifestations.
Diagnosis
• Exertional dyspnea
• Initial confirmation: Chest x-ray, spirometry, ECG, echocardiography, and CBC
• Identification of underlying disorder: Ventilation-perfusion scan or CT angiography, pulmonary function
testing, polysomnography, HIV testing, liver function testing, and antinuclear antibodies
• Determination of severity: Right heart catheterization
Pulmonary hypertension is suspected in patients with significant exertional dyspnea who are otherwise
relatively healthy and have no history or signs of other diseases known to cause pulmonary symptoms.
Patients initially undergo chest x-ray, spirometry, and ECG to identify more common causes of dyspnea,
followed by Doppler echocardiography to assess right ventricular and pulmonary artery pressures as well
as to detect structural heart disease that might be causing pulmonary hypertension. CBC is obtained to
document the presence or absence of polycythemia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia.
The most common x-ray finding in pulmonary hypertension is enlarged hilar vessels that rapidly prune into
the periphery and a right ventricle that fills the anterior airspace on lateral view. Spirometry and lung
volumes may be normal or detect mild restriction, and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) is
usually reduced. Common ECG findings include right axis deviation, R > S in V
, S
Q
T
, and peaked P
waves.
Additional tests are obtained as indicated to diagnose secondary causes that are not apparent clinically.
These tests include
• Ventilation-perfusion scanning or CT angiography to detect thromboembolic disease
• Pulmonary function tests to identify obstructive or restrictive lung disease
• Serum serologic tests to gather evidence for or against rheumatologic disease
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension is suggested by CT or lung scan findings and is
confirmed by arteriography. CT angiography is useful to evaluate proximal clot and fibrotic encroachment
of the vascular lumen. Other tests, such as HIV testing, liver function tests, and polysomnography, are
done in the appropriate clinical context.
When the initial evaluation detects no conditions known to be associated with pulmonary hypertension,
pulmonary artery catheterization is necessary to measure right atrial and ventricular, pulmonary artery,
and pulmonary artery occlusion pressures; cardiac output; and left ventricular diastolic pressure. Rightsided O
saturation should be measured to exclude atrial septal defect. Although finding a mean
pulmonary arterial pressure of > 25 mm Hg in the absence of an underlying disorder identifies pulmonary
hypertension, most patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension present with substantially higher
pressure (eg, mean of 60 mm Hg). Vasodilating drugs, such as inhaled nitric oxide, IV epoprostenol, or
adenosine, are often administered during catheterization. Decreasing right-sided pressures in response to
these drugs may help in the choice of drugs for treatment. Lung biopsy, once widely done, is neither
===PAGE:2157===
needed nor recommended because of its associated high morbidity and mortality.
Once pulmonary hypertension is diagnosed, the patient's family history should be reviewed to detect
possible genetic transmission (eg, premature deaths in otherwise healthy members of the extended
family). In familial pulmonary arterial hypertension, genetic counseling is needed to advise mutation
carriers of the risk of disease (about 20%) and to advocate serial screening with echocardiography.
Testing for mutations in the
BMPR2
gene in idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension may have a future
role.
Prognosis
Untreated patients have a median survival of 2.5 yr. Cause of death is usually sudden
death in the
context of right ventricular failure. Five-year survival for epoprostenol-treated patients is 54%, whereas
that for the small minority of patients who respond to Ca channel blockers is > 90%. Signs predictive of
poor survival include low cardiac output, higher pulmonary artery and right atrial pressures, lack of
response to vasodilators, heart failure, hypoxemia, and reduced overall physical functioning. Patients with
the connective tissue disorder systemic sclerosis are at high risk of pulmonary arterial hypertension and
have a poor prognosis.
Treatment
• Avoidance of activities that may exacerbate the condition (eg, cigarette smoking, use of
sympathomimetics)
• Idiopathic and familial pulmonary arterial hypertension: Ca channel blockers; IV epoprostenol; inhaled,
oral, or sc prostacyclin analogs; oral endothelin-receptor antagonists; and/or oral phosphodiesterase
inhibitors
• Secondary pulmonary arterial hypertension: Treatment of the underlying disorder
• Rarely lung transplantation
• Adjunctive therapy: Supplemental O
, diuretics, and/or anticoagulants
Patients are encouraged to avoid activities or circumstances that may exacerbate their condition.
Examples include cigarette smoking, exposure to high altitudes, and drugs that lead to vasoconstriction,
such as sympathomimetics.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension, group 1:
Treatment is rapidly evolving. Oral Ca channel blockers
reduce pulmonary arterial pressure or pulmonary vascular resistance in about 5% of patients. No
differences in efficacy exist among Ca channel blocker types, though most specialists avoid verapamil
because of its negative inotropic effects. Response to Ca channel blockers is a favorable prognostic sign,
and patients who respond should continue this treatment. Patients who do not respond at the time of
diagnosis are given other drugs.
IV epoprostenol, a prostacyclin analog, improves function and lengthens survival even in patients who are
unresponsive to a vasodilator during catheterization. Epoprostenol is currently the most effective therapy
for pulmonary arterial hypertension. Disadvantages are the need for continuous central catheter infusion
and frequent, troubling adverse effects, including flushing, diarrhea, and bacteremia associated with the
indwelling central catheter. Prostacyclin analogs that are inhaled (iloprost) or given sc or IV (treprostinil)
are available.
Two oral endothelin-receptor antagonists, bosentan and ambrisentan, are available in the US; these
drugs are useful in some patients, generally those with milder disease at diagnosis. Oral sildenafil is also
effective.
Lung transplantation offers the only hope of cure but has high morbidity because of rejection, infection,
and bronchiolitis obliterans. The 5-yr survival rate is 60%. Lung transplantation is reserved for patients
===PAGE:2158===
with New York Heart Association class IV disease (defined as dyspnea associated with minimal activity,
leading to bed to chair limitations) in whom all therapies have failed and who meet other health criteria to
be a transplant candidate.
Many patients require adjunctive therapies to treat heart failure, including diuretics, and most should
receive warfarin unless there is a contraindication.
Pulmonary hypertension, groups 2 to 5:
Primary treatment involves management of the underlying
disorder. Patients with left-sided heart disease may need surgery for valvular disease. Patients with lung
disorders and hypoxia benefit from supplemental O
as well as treatment of the primary disorder. Patients
with severe pulmonary hypertension secondary to chronic thromboembolic disease should be considered
for pulmonary thromboendarterectomy. During cardiopulmonary bypass, an organized endothelialized
thrombus is dissected along the pulmonary trunk in a procedure more complex than acute surgical
embolectomy. This procedure cures pulmonary hypertension in a substantial percentage of patients and
restores cardiopulmonary function; operative mortality is < 10% in patients treated in centers that have
extensive experience.
Portopulmonary Hypertension
Portopulmonary hypertension is pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with portal
hypertension without other secondary causes.
Pulmonary hypertension occurs in patients with various conditions that involve portal hypertension with or
without cirrhosis. Portopulmonary hypertension occurs less commonly than the hepatopulmonary
syndrome in patients with chronic liver disease (3.5 vs 12%).
Presenting symptoms are dyspnea and fatigue. Chest pain and hemoptysis can also occur. Patients have
physical findings and ECG abnormalities consistent with pulmonary hypertension and may develop
evidence of cor pulmonale (elevated jugular venous pulse, edema). Tricuspid regurgitation is common.
The diagnosis is suspected based on echocardiography findings and confirmed by right heart
catheterization.
Treatment is the same as that of pulmonary arterial hypertension except that hepatotoxic drugs should be
avoided. Some patients benefit from vasodilator therapy. The underlying liver disease is a major
determinant of outcome. Portopulmonary hypertension is a relative contraindication to liver
transplantation because of increased morbidity and mortality from the procedure. However, in some
patients who receive a transplant, particularly those with mild pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary
hypertension regresses. Some centers consider transplantation in patients who have mean pulmonary
arterial pressures < 35 mm Hg after a trial of vasodilator therapy.
Hepatopulmonary Syndrome
Hepatopulmonary syndrome is hypoxemia caused by pulmonary microvascular vasodilation in
patients with portal hypertension; dyspnea and hypoxemia are worse in the upright position.
The hepatopulmonary syndrome results from the formation of microscopic intrapulmonary arteriovenous
dilations in patients with chronic liver disease. The mechanism is unknown but is thought to be due to
increased hepatic production or decreased hepatic clearance of vasodilators, possibly nitric oxide. The
vascular dilations cause overperfusion relative to ventilation, leading to hypoxemia. Because the lesions
frequently are more numerous at the lung bases, the hepatopulmonary syndrome causes platypnea
(dyspnea) and orthodeoxia (hypoxemia), which occur in the seated or upright position and are relieved by
recumbency. Most patients also have characteristic findings of chronic liver disease, such as spider
angiomas. About 20% of patients present with pulmonary symptoms alone.
Diagnosis
• Pulse oximetry
===PAGE:2159===
• Contrast echocardiography and sometimes other imaging
Hepatopulmonary syndrome should be suspected in a patient with known liver disease who reports
dyspnea (particularly platypnea). Patients with clinically significant symptoms should have pulse oximetry.
If the syndrome is advanced, ABGs should be measured with the patient breathing room air and 100% O
to determine shunt fraction.
A useful diagnostic test is contrast echocardiography. Intravenous microbubbles from agitated saline that
are normally trapped in the pulmonary capillaries rapidly (ie, within 7 heartbeats) traverse the lung and
appear in the left atrium. Similarly, IV technetium-99m-labeled albumin may traverse the lungs and appear
in the kidneys and brain. Pulmonary angiography may reveal a diffusely fine or blotchy vascular
configuration. Angiography is generally not needed unless thromboembolism is suspected.
Treatment
• Supplemental O
The main treatment is supplemental O
for symptoms. Other therapies, such as somatostatin to inhibit
vasodilation, are of modest benefit in only some patients. Coil embolization is virtually impossible because
of the number and size of the lesions. Inhaled nitric oxide synthesis inhibitors may be a future treatment
option. Hepatopulmonary syndrome may regress after liver transplantation or if the underlying liver
disease subsides. Prognosis is poor without treatment (survival < 2 yr).
===PAGE:2160===
Chapter 203. Diffuse Alveolar Hemorrhage and Pulmonary-Renal Syndromes
Introduction
Some alveolar hemorrhage syndromes are associated with glomerulonephritis; then, the disorder is called
pulmonary-renal syndrome (.
Diffuse Alveolar Hemorrhage Syndrome
Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndrome is persistent or recurrent pulmonary hemorrhage. There
are numerous causes, but autoimmune disorders are the most common. Most patients present
with dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis, and new alveolar infiltrates. Diagnostic tests are directed at
the suspected cause. Treatment is with immunosuppressants for patients with autoimmune
causes and respiratory support if needed.
Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndrome is not a specific entity but is a syndrome that suggests a
differential diagnosis and a specific sequence of testing.
Pathophysiology
Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndrome results from widespread damage of the pulmonary small vessels,
leading to blood collection within the alveoli, thereby disrupting O
and CO
exchange. The specific
pathophysiology and manifestations vary depending on cause. For example, isolated pauci-immune
pulmonary capillaritis is a small-vessel vasculitis limited to the lung; its only manifestation is alveolar
hemorrhage affecting people aged 18 to 35 yr. Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis is diffuse alveolar
hemorrhage syndrome with no detectable underlying disorder; it occurs mainly in children < 10 yr and is
thought to be due to a defect in the alveolar capillary endothelium, possibly due to autoimmune injury.
Etiology
Many disorders can cause alveolar hemorrhage; they include
• Autoimmune disorders (eg, systemic vasculitides, Goodpasture's syndrome, antiphospholipid antibody
syndrome)
• Pulmonary infections (eg, invasive aspergillosis, hantavirus infection)
• Toxic exposures (eg, trimellitic anhydride, isocyanates, crack cocaine, certain pesticides)
• Drug reactions (eg, propylthiouracil, diphenylhydantoin, amiodarone, methotrexate, nitrofurantoin,
bleomycin, montelukast, infliximab)
• Cardiac disorders (eg, mitral stenosis)
• Coagulation disorders caused by diseases or anticoagulant drugs
• Isolated pauci-immune pulmonary capillaritis
• Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
• Bone marrow or solid organ transplantation
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of milder diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndrome are dyspnea, cough, and fever;
however, many patients present with acute respiratory failure, sometimes leading to death. Hemoptysis is
common but may be absent in up to one third of patients. Children with idiopathic pulmonary
===PAGE:2161===
hemosiderosis may have failure to thrive.
There are no specific physical examination findings.
Other manifestations depend on the underlying disorder (eg, diastolic murmur in patients with mitral
stenosis).
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Sometimes bronchoscopy
• Serologic and other tests to diagnose the cause
Diagnosis is suggested by dyspnea, cough, and hemoptysis accompanied by chest x-ray findings of
diffuse bilateral alveolar infiltrates. Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) may be done to
confirm the diagnosis when manifestations are atypical or an airway source of hemorrhage has not been
excluded. Specimens show blood with numerous erythrocytes and siderophages; lavage fluid typically
remains hemorrhagic even after sequential sampling.
Evaluation of the cause:
Further testing for the cause should be done. Urinalysis is indicated to exclude
glomerulonephritis; serum BUN and creatinine also should be done. Other routine tests include CBC,
coagulation studies, platelet counts, and serologic tests (antinuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA
(anti-dsDNA), antiglomerular basement membrane [anti-GBM] antibodies, antineutrophil
cytoplasmic
antibodies [ANCA], antiphospholipid antibody) to look for underlying disorders; perinuclear-ANCA (pANCA) titers are elevated in some cases of isolated pauciimmune pulmonary capillaritis. Diagnosis of
idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis involves demonstration of iron deficiency anemia and hemosiderinladen macrophages in BAL fluid or lung biopsy specimens when there is no evidence of small-vessel
vasculitis (pulmonary capillaritis) or of other diagnoses.
Other tests depend on clinical context. Pulmonary function tests may be done to document lung function.
They may show increased diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) due to increased uptake of
carbon monoxide by intra-alveolar Hb; however, this finding, which is consistent with hemorrhage, does
not assist with establishing a diagnosis. Echocardiography may be indicated to exclude mitral stenosis.
BAL is done when diffuse alveolar hemorrhage is suspected. Lung or kidney biopsy is frequently needed
when a cause remains unclear or the progression of disease is too rapid to await the results of serologic
testing.
Prognosis
Patients can require mechanical ventilation and even die as a result of hemorrhage-associated
respiratory failure. Recurrent alveolar hemorrhage causes pulmonary hemosiderosis and fibrosis, both of
which develop when ferritin aggregates within alveoli and exerts toxic effects. COPD occurs in some
patients with recurrent diffuse alveolar hemorrhage secondary to microscopic polyarteritis.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes cyclophosphamide or plasmapheresis
• Supportive measures
Treatment involves correcting the cause. Corticosteroids and possibly cyclophosphamide are used to
treat vasculitides, connective tissue disorders, and Goodpasture's syndrome. Plasmapheresis may be
used to treat Goodpasture's syndrome. Corticosteroids are also used to treat idiopathic pulmonary
hemosiderosis; immunosuppressants are added for nonresponders. Several studies have reported
===PAGE:2162===
successful use of recombinant activated human factor VII in treating alveolar hemorrhage.
Other possible management measures include supplemental O
, bronchodilators, reversal of any
coagulopathy, intubation with bronchial tamponade, protective strategies for the less involved lung, and
mechanical ventilation.
Pulmonary-Renal Syndrome
Pulmonary-renal syndrome (PRS) is diffuse alveolar hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis
occurring simultaneously. Cause is almost always an autoimmune disorder. Diagnosis is by
serologic tests and sometimes lung and renal biopsy. Treatment typically includes
immunosuppression with corticosteroids and cytotoxic drugs.
PRS is not a specific entity but is a syndrome that suggests a differential diagnosis and a specific
sequence of testing.
Pulmonary pathology is small-vessel vasculitis involving arterioles, venules, and, frequently, alveolar
capillaries. Renal pathology is small-vessel vasculitis resulting in a form of focal proliferative
glomerulonephritis.
Etiology
PRS is almost always a manifestation of an underlying autoimmune disorder. Goodpasture's syndrome is
the prototype cause, but PRS can also be caused by SLE, Wegener's granulomatosis, microscopic
polyangiitis, and, less commonly, by other vasculitides and connective tissue disorders (see
Table 203-1
).
PRS is less commonly a manifestation of IgA-mediated disorders, such as IgA nephropathy or HenochSchonlein purpura, and of immune complex-mediated renal disease, such as essential mixed
cryoglobulinemia. Rarely, rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis alone can cause PRS through a
mechanism involving renal failure, volume overload, and pulmonary edema with hemoptysis.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs typically include dyspnea, cough, fever, and hemoptysis in combination with
peripheral edema and hematuria or other signs of glomerulonephritis.
Diagnosis
• Serologic testing
• Sometimes lung and renal biopsies
PRS is suspected in patients with hemoptysis not obviously attributable to other causes (eg, pneumonia,
carcinoma, bronchiectasis), particularly when hemoptysis is accompanied by diffuse parenchymal
infiltrates and findings suggesting renal disease.
Initial testing includes urinalysis for evidence of hematuria and red cell casts (suggesting
[Table 203-1.
Causes of Pulmonary-Renal Syndrome]
glomerulonephritis), serum creatinine for renal function assessment, and CBC for evidence of anemia.
Chest x-ray is done if not yet obtained.
Serum antibody testing may help distinguish some causes, as in the following:
• Antiglomerular basement membrane antibodies: Goodpasture's syndrome
===PAGE:2163===
• Antibodies to double-stranded DNA and reduced serum complement levels: SLE
• Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) to proteinase-3 (PR3-ANCA or cytoplasmic ANCA [cANCA]): Wegener's granulomatosis
• ANCA to myeloperoxidase (MPO-ANCA, or perinuclear ANCA [p-ANCA]): Microscopic polyangiitis
Definitive diagnosis requires lung biopsy with findings of small-vessel vasculitis and renal biopsy with
findings of glomerulonephritis with or without antibody deposition.
Pulmonary function tests and bronchoalveolar lavage are not diagnostic of PRS but can be used to help
confirm diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in patients with glomerulonephritis and pulmonary infiltrates but
without hemoptysis. Lavage fluid that remains hemorrhagic after sequential sampling establishes diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage, especially in the context of falling Hct.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes cyclophosphamide
Immunosuppression is the cornerstone of treatment. Standard induction-remission regimens include pulse
IV methylprednisolone (500 to 1000 mg IV once/day for 3 to 5 days). As life-threatening features subside,
the corticosteroid dose can be reduced; 1 mg/kg prednisone (or equivalent) po once/day is given for the
first month, then tapered over the next 3 to 4 mo. Cyclophosphamide should be added to corticosteroid
therapy in critically ill patients with generalized disease, at a dose of 0.5 to 1 g/m
IV given as a pulse
once/mo or orally (1 to 2 mg/kg once/day).
Transition to maintenance therapy may occur 6 to 12 mo after the initiation of induction therapy or after
clinical remission. Maintenance therapy includes low-dose corticosteroids coupled with cytotoxic agents.
However, relapse may occur despite ongoing therapy.
Goodpasture's Syndrome
(Anti-GBM Antibody Disease)
Goodpasture's syndrome, a subtype of PRS, is an autoimmune syndrome of alveolar
hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis caused by circulating anti-glomerular basement membrane
(anti-GBM) antibodies. Goodpasture's syndrome most often develops in genetically susceptible
people who smoke cigarettes, but hydrocarbon exposure and viral respiratory infections are
additional possible triggers. Symptoms are dyspnea, cough, fatigue, hemoptysis, and
hematuria. Goodpasture's syndrome is suspected in patients with hemoptysis or hematuria and
is confirmed by the presence of anti-GBM antibodies in the blood or in a renal biopsy specimen.
Prognosis is good when treatment is begun before onset of respiratory or renal failure.
Treatment includes plasmapheresis, corticosteroids, and immunosuppressants, such as
cyclophosphamide.
Pathophysiology
Goodpasture's syndrome is the combination of glomerulonephritis with alveolar hemorrhage and antiGBM antibodies. Goodpasture's syndrome most often manifests as diffuse alveolar hemorrhage and
glomerulonephritis together but can occasionally cause glomerulonephritis (10 to 20%) or pulmonary
disease
(10%) alone. Men are affected more often than women.
Anti-GBM antibodies are directed against the noncollagenous (NC-1) domain of the
α
3 chain of type IV
collagen, which occurs in highest concentration in the basement membranes of renal and pulmonary
capillaries. Environmental exposures—cigarette smoking, viral URI, and hydrocarbon solvent inhalation
most commonly and pneumonia less commonly—expose alveolar capillary antigens to circulating antibody
===PAGE:2164===
in genetically susceptible people, most notably those with HLA-DRw15, -DR4, and -DRB1 alleles.
Circulating anti-GBM antibodies bind to basement membranes, fix complement, and trigger a cellmediated inflammatory response, causing glomerulonephritis, pulmonary capillaritis, or both.
Symptoms and Signs
Hemoptysis is the most prominent symptom; however, hemoptysis may not occur in patients with
hemorrhage, and patients may present with only chest x-ray infiltrates or with infiltrates and respiratory
distress, respiratory failure, or both. Dyspnea, cough, fatigue, fever, and weight loss are common. Up to
40% of patients have gross hematuria, although pulmonary hemorrhage may precede renal
manifestations by weeks to years.
Signs vary over time and range from clear lungs on auscultation to crackles and rhonchi. Some patients
have peripheral edema due to renal failure and pallor due to anemia.
Diagnosis
• Serum anti-GBM antibody tests
• Sometimes renal biopsy
Definitive diagnosis of Goodpasture's syndrome requires demonstration of serum anti-GBM antibodies by
indirect immunofluorescence testing or, when available, direct enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) with recombinant or human NC-1
α
3. However, ANCA testing is positive (in a peripheral pattern)
in only 25% of patients with Goodpasture's syndrome.
Renal biopsy is indicated in patients with glomerulonephritis (hematuria, proteinuria, red cell casts
detected with urinalysis, renal insufficiency, or a combination of these findings). A rapidly progressive
focal segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis with crescent formation is found in biopsy specimens in
patients with Goodpasture's syndrome and all other causes of PRS. Immunofluorescence staining of
renal or lung tissue classically shows linear IgG deposition along the glomerular or alveolar capillaries.
IgG deposition also occurs in the kidneys of patients with diabetes or with fibrillary glomerulonephritis (a
rare disorder causing PRS), but GBM binding of antibodies in these disorders is nonspecific and does not
occur in linear patterns.
Prognosis
Goodpasture's syndrome is often rapidly progressive and can be fatal if prompt recognition and treatment
are delayed; prognosis is good when treatment begins before onset of respiratory or renal failure. Longterm morbidity is related to the degree of renal impairment at presentation; patients requiring dialysis at
presentation and those with > 50% crescents in the biopsy specimen (who often will require dialysis)
usually survive for < 2 yr unless kidney transplantation is done. Hemoptysis may be a good prognostic
sign because it leads to earlier detection; the minority of patients who are ANCA-positive respond better
to treatment. Relapse occurs in a small number and is linked to continued tobacco use and respiratory
infection. In patients with end-stage renal disease who receive kidney transplantation, disease can recur
in the graft.
Treatment
• Plasmapheresis
• Corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide
Immediate survival in patients with pulmonary hemorrhage and respiratory failure is linked to airway
control; endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are recommended for patients with borderline
ABGs and impending respiratory failure. Patients with significant renal impairment may require dialysis or
kidney transplantation.
===PAGE:2165===
Treatment is daily or every-other-day plasmapheresis for 2 to 3 wk using 4-L exchanges to remove antiGBM antibodies, combined with a corticosteroid (usually methylprednisolone 1 g IV over 20 min once/day
or every other day for 3 doses followed by prednisone (1 mg/kg po once/day for 3 wk, then titrated down
to 20 mg po once/day for 6 to 12 mo) and cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg po or IV once/day for 6 to 12 mo)
to prevent formation of new antibodies. Therapy can be tapered when pulmonary and renal function stop
improving.
===PAGE:2166===
Chapter 204. Mediastinal and Pleural Disorders
Introduction
Mediastinal and pleural disorders include masses, mediastinitis, pleural effusion, pleural fibrosis and
calcification, pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, and viral pleuritis.
Mediastinal Masses
Mediastinal masses are caused by a variety of cysts and tumors; likely causes differ by patient
age and by location of the mass (anterior, middle, or posterior mediastinum). The masses may
be asymptomatic (in adults) or cause obstructive respiratory symptoms (in children). Testing
involves CT with biopsy and adjunctive tests as needed. Treatment differs by cause.
Etiology
Mediastinal masses are divided into those that occur in the anterior, middle, and posterior mediastinum.
The anterior mediastinum extends from the sternum to the pericardium and brachiocephalic vessels
posteriorly. The middle mediastinum lies between the anterior and posterior mediastinum. The posterior
mediastinum is bounded by the pericardium and trachea anteriorly and the vertebral column posteriorly.
Adults:
In adults, thymomas and lymphomas (both Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin) are the most common
anterior lesions, lymph node enlargement and vascular masses are the most common middle lesions, and
neurogenic tumors and esophageal abnormalities are the most common posterior lesions. For other
causes, see
Fig. 204-1
.
Children:
In children, the most common mediastinal masses are neurogenic tumors and cysts. For other
causes, see
Table 204-1
.
Symptoms and Signs
Many mediastinal masses are asymptomatic. In general, malignant lesions and masses in children are
much more likely to cause symptoms. The most common symptoms are chest pain and weight loss.
Lymphomas may manifest with fever and weight loss. In children, mediastinal masses are more likely to
cause tracheobronchial compression and stridor or symptoms of recurrent bronchitis or pneumonia.
Symptoms and signs also depend on location. Large anterior mediastinal masses may cause dyspnea
when patients are supine. Lesions in the middle mediastinum may compress blood vessels or airways,
causing the superior
[Fig. 204-1.
Some causes of mediastinal masses in adults.]
[Table 204-1.
Some Causes of Mediastinal Masses in Children]
vena cava syndrome or airway obstruction. Lesions in the posterior mediastinum may encroach on the
esophagus, causing dysphagia or odynophagia.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• CT
• Sometimes tissue examination
Mediastinal masses are most often incidentally discovered on chest x-ray or other imaging tests during an
===PAGE:2167===
examination for chest symptoms. Additional diagnostic testing, usually imaging and biopsy, is indicated to
determine etiology.
CT with IV contrast is the most valuable imaging technique. With thoracic CT, normal variants and benign
tumors, such as fat- and fluid-filled cysts, can be distinguished from other processes. A definitive
diagnosis can be obtained for many mediastinal masses with needle aspiration or needle biopsy. Fineneedle aspiration techniques usually suffice for carcinomatous lesions, but a cutting-needle biopsy should
be done whenever lymphoma, thymoma, or a neural mass is suspected. If ectopic thyroid tissue is
considered, thyroid-stimulating hormone is measured.
Treatment
Treatment depends on etiology. Some benign lesions, such as pericardial cysts, can be observed. Most
malignant tumors should be removed surgically, but some, such as lymphomas, are best treated with
chemotherapy. Granulomatous disease should be treated with the appropriate antimicrobial drug.
Mediastinitis
Mediastinitis is inflammation of the mediastinum. Acute mediastinitis usually results from
esophageal perforation or median sternotomy. Symptoms include severe chest pain, dyspnea,
and fever. The diagnosis is confirmed by chest x-ray or CT. Treatment is with antibiotics (eg,
clindamycin plus ceftriaxone) and sometimes surgery.
The 2 most common causes of acute mediastinitis are esophageal perforation and median sternotomy.
Esophageal perforation may complicate esophagoscopy or insertion of a Sengstaken-Blakemore or
Minnesota tube (for esophageal variceal bleeding). Rarely, it results from forceful vomiting (Boerhaave's
syndrome). Another possible cause is swallowing caustic substances (eg, lye, certain button batteries).
Certain pills or esophageal ulcers (eg, in AIDS patients with esophagitis) can contribute.
Patients with esophageal perforation become acutely ill within hours, with severe chest pain and dyspnea
due to mediastinal inflammation. Diagnosis is usually obvious from clinical presentation and a history of
instrumentation or of another risk factor. The diagnosis should also be considered in patients who are
very ill, have chest pain, and may have a risk factor that they cannot describe (eg, in intoxicated patients
who may have vomited forcefully but do not remember and in preverbal children who may have ingested a
button battery). The diagnosis is confirmed by chest x-ray or CT showing air in the mediastinum.
Treatment is with parenteral antibiotics selected to be effective against oral and GI flora (eg, clindamycin
450 mg IV q 6 h plus ceftriaxone 2 g once/day, for at least 2 wk). Patients who have severe mediastinitis
with pleural effusion or pneumothorax require emergency exploration of the mediastinum with primary
repair of the esophageal tear and drainage of the pleural space and mediastinum.
Median sternotomy:
This procedure is complicated by mediastinitis in about 1% of cases. Patients most
commonly present with wound drainage or sepsis. Diagnosis is based
on finding infected fluid obtained
by a needle aspiration through the sternum. Treatment consists of immediate surgical drainage,
debridement, and parenteral broad-spectrum antibiotics. Mortality approaches 50% in some series.
Chronic fibrosing mediastinitis:
This condition is usually is due to TB or histoplasmosis but can be due
to sarcoidosis, silicosis, or other fungal diseases. An intense fibrotic process develops, leading to
compression of mediastinal structures that can cause the superior vena cava syndrome, tracheal
narrowing, or obstruction of the pulmonary arteries or veins.
Diagnosis is based on CT. If the cause is TB, anti-TB therapy is indicated. Otherwise, no known
treatment is beneficial, but insertion of vascular or airway stents can be considered.
Pleural Effusion
Pleural effusions are accumulations of fluid within the pleural space. They have multiple causes
===PAGE:2168===
and usually are classified as transudates or exudates. Detection is by physical examination and
chest x-ray; thoracentesis and pleural fluid analysis are often required to determine cause.
Asymptomatic transudates require no treatment. Symptomatic transudates and almost all
exudates require thoracentesis, chest tube drainage, pleurodesis, pleurectomy, or a
combination.
Normally, 10 to 20 mL of pleural fluid, similar in composition to plasma but lower in protein (< 1.5 g/dL), is
spread thinly over visceral and parietal pleurae, facilitating movement between the lung and chest wall.
The fluid enters the pleural space from systemic capillaries in the parietal pleurae and exits via parietal
pleural stomas and lymphatics. Pleural fluid accumulates when too much fluid enters or too little exits the
pleural space.
Etiology
Pleural effusions are usually categorized as transudates or exudates based on laboratory characteristics
of the fluid (see
Table 204-2
). Whether unilateral or bilateral, a transudate can usually be treated without extensive
evaluation, whereas the cause of an exudate requires investigation. There are numerous causes (see
Table 204-3
).
Transudative effusions
are caused by some combination of increased hydrostatic pressure and
decreased plasma oncotic pressure. Heart failure is the most common cause, followed by cirrhosis with
ascites and hypoalbuminemia, usually due to the nephrotic syndrome.
Exudative effusions
are caused by local processes leading to increased capillary permeability resulting
in exudation of fluid, protein, cells, and other serum constituents. Causes are numerous; the most
common are pneumonia, cancer, pulmonary embolism, viral infection, and TB. Yellow nail syndrome is a
rare disorder causing chronic exudative pleural effusions, lymphedema, and dystrophic yellow nails—all
thought to be the result of impaired lymphatic drainage.
[Table 204-2.
Criteria for Identifying Exudative Pleural Effusions]
[Table 204-3.
Causes of Pleural Effusion]
Chylous effusion
(chylothorax) is a milky white effusion high in triglycerides caused by traumatic or
neoplastic (most often lymphomatous) damage to the thoracic duct. Chylous effusion also occurs with the
superior vena cava syndrome.
Chyliform (cholesterol or pseudochylous) effusions
resemble chylous effusions but are low in
triglycerides and high in cholesterol. Chyliform effusions are thought to be due to release of cholesterol
from lysed RBCs and neutrophils in long-standing effusions when absorption is blocked by the thickened
pleura.
Hemothorax
is bloody fluid (pleural fluid Hct > 50% peripheral Hct) in the pleural space due to trauma or,
rarely, as a result of coagulopathy or after rupture of a major blood vessel, such as the aorta or
pulmonary artery.
Empyema
is pus in the pleural space. It can occur as a complication of pneumonia, thoracotomy,
abscesses (lung, hepatic, or subdiaphragmatic), or penetrating trauma with secondary infection.
Empyema necessitatis is soft-tissue extension of empyema leading to chest wall infection and external
drainage.
Trapped lung
is a lung encased by a fibrous peel caused by empyema or tumor. Because the lung
cannot expand, the pleural pressure becomes more negative than normal, increasing transudation of fluid
from parietal pleural capillaries. The fluid characteristically is borderline between a transudate and an
exudate; ie, the biochemical values are within 15% of the cutoff levels for Light's criteria (see
Table 204-
).
===PAGE:2169===
Iatrogenic effusions
can be caused by migration or misplacement of a feeding tube into the trachea or
perforation of the superior vena cava by a central venous catheter, leading to infusion of tube feedings or
IV solution into the pleural space.
Effusions with no obvious cause
are often due to occult pulmonary emboli, TB, or cancer. Etiology is
unknown for about 15% of effusions even after extensive study; many of these effusions are thought to
be due to viral infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Some pleural effusions are asymptomatic and are discovered incidentally during physical examination or
on chest x-ray. Many cause dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, or both. Pleuritic chest pain, a vague discomfort
or sharp pain that worsens during inspiration, indicates inflammation of the parietal pleura. Pain is usually
felt over the inflamed site, but referred pain is possible. The posterior and peripheral portions of the
diaphragmatic pleura are supplied by the lower 6 intercostal nerves, and irritation there may cause pain in
the lower chest wall or abdomen that may simulate intra-abdominal disease. Irritation of the central
portion of the diaphragmatic pleura, innervated by the phrenic nerves, causes pain referred to the neck
and shoulder.
Physical examination reveals absent tactile fremitus, dullness to percussion, and decreased breath
sounds on the side of the effusion. These findings can also be caused by pleural thickening. With largevolume effusions, respiration is usually rapid and shallow. A pleural friction rub, although infrequent, is the
classic physical sign. The friction rub varies from a few intermittent sounds that may simulate crackles to
a fully developed harsh grating, creaking, or leathery sound synchronous with respiration, heard during
inspiration and expiration. Friction sounds adjacent to the heart (pleuropericardial rub) may vary with the
heartbeat and may be confused with the friction rub of pericarditis. Pericardial rub is best heard over the
left border of the sternum in the 3rd and 4th intercostal spaces, is characteristically a to-and-fro sound
synchronous with the heartbeat, and is not influenced significantly by respiration. Sensitivity and
specificity of the physical examination for detecting effusion are probably low.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• Pleural fluid analysis
• Sometimes helical CT or other tests
Pleural effusion is suspected in patients with pleuritic pain, unexplained dyspnea, or suggestive signs.
Diagnostic tests are indicated to document the presence of pleural fluid and to determine its cause (see
Fig. 204-2
).
Presence of effusion:
Chest x-ray is the first test done to confirm the presence of pleural fluid. The
lateral upright chest x-ray should be examined when a pleural effusion is suspected. In an upright x-ray,
75 mL of fluid blunts the posterior costophrenic angle. Blunting of the lateral costophrenic angle usually
requires about 175 mL but may take as much as 500 mL. Larger pleural effusions opacify portions of the
hemithorax and may cause mediastinal shift; effusions > 4 L may cause complete opacification of the
hemithorax and mediastinal shift to the contralateral side.
Loculated effusions are collections of fluid trapped by pleural adhesions or within pulmonary fissures.
Lateral decubitus x-rays, chest CT, or ultrasonography should be done if it is unclear whether an x-ray
density represents fluid or parenchymal infiltrates or whether suspected fluid is loculated or free-flowing;
[Fig. 204-2.
Diagnosis of pleural effusion.]
these tests are more sensitive than upright x-rays and can detect fluid volumes < 10 mL. Loculated
effusions, particularly those in the horizontal or oblique fissure, can be confused with a solid pulmonary
mass (pseudotumor). They may change shape and size with changes in the patient's position and amount
===PAGE:2170===
of pleural fluid.
CT is not routinely indicated but is valuable for evaluating the underlying lung parenchyma for infiltrates
or masses when the lung is obscured by the effusion or when the detail on chest x-rays is insufficient and
for distinguishing loculated fluid from a solid mass.
Cause of effusion:
Thoracentesis ( should be done in almost all patients who have pleural
fluid that is ≥ 10 mm in thickness on CT, ultrasonography, or lateral decubitus x-ray and that is new or of
uncertain etiology. In general, the only patients who do not require thoracentesis are those who have
heart failure with symmetric pleural effusions and no chest pain or fever; in these patients, diuresis can be
tried, and thoracentesis avoided unless effusions persist for ≥ 3 days.
Despite common practice, chest x-ray need not be repeated after thoracentesis unless patients develop
symptoms suggesting pneumothorax (dyspnea or chest pain) or unless there is reason to suspect that air
may have entered the pleural space during the procedure. Thoracentesis and subsequent pleural fluid
analysis often are not necessary for pleural effusions that are chronic, have a known cause, and cause
no symptoms.
Ultrasonography is helpful for identifying the site for thoracentesis when the amount of pleural fluid is
small, the fluid is loculated, or blind thoracentesis is unsuccessful.
Pleural fluid analysis is done to diagnose the cause of pleural effusion. Analysis begins with visual
inspection, which can
• Distinguish bloody and chylous (or chyliform) from other effusions
• Identify purulent effusions strongly suggestive of empyema
• Identify viscous fluid, which is characteristic of some mesotheliomas
Fluid should always be sent for total protein, LDH, cell count and cell differential, Gram stain, and aerobic
and anaerobic bacterial cultures. Other tests (glucose, cytology, TB fluid markers [adenosine deaminase
or interferonγ], amylase, mycobacterial and fungal stains and cultures) are used in appropriate clinical
settings.
Fluid chemistries help distinguish transudates from exudates; multiple criteria exist, but not one perfectly
discriminates between the 2 types. When Light's criteria are used (see
Table 204-2
), serum LDH and total
protein levels should be measured as close as possible to the time of thoracentesis for comparison with
pleural fluid. Light's criteria correctly identify almost all exudates but misidentify about 20% of transudates
as exudates. If transudative effusion is suspected (eg, due to heart failure or cirrhosis) and none of the
biochemical measurements are > 15% above the cutoff levels for Light's criteria, the difference between
serum and the pleural fluid protein is measured. If the difference is > 3.1 g/dL, the patient probably has a
transudative effusion.
If the diagnosis remains unclear after pleural fluid analysis, helical CT is indicated to look for pulmonary
emboli, pulmonary infiltrates, or mediastinal lesions. Findings of pulmonary emboli indicate the need for
long-term anticoagulation; parenchymal infiltrates, the need for bronchoscopy; and mediastinal lesions,
the need for transthoracic needle aspiration or mediastinoscopy. However, helical CT requires patients to
hold their breath for ≥ 24 sec, and not all patients can comply. If helical CT is unrevealing, observation is
the best course unless the patient has a history of cancer, weight loss, persistent fever, or other findings
suggesting cancer or TB, in which case thoracoscopy may be indicated. Needle biopsy of the pleura can
be done when thoracoscopy is unavailable. When thoracoscopy is unrevealing, an open thoracotomy
must sometimes be done. Most patients with exudative effusions should have a PPD placed with a control
on the other arm, but TB can neither be diagnosed if the PPD result is positive nor definitively excluded if
it is negative, so pleural biopsy is generally needed.
Treatment
===PAGE:2171===
• Treatment of symptoms and underlying disorder
• Drainage of some symptomatic effusions
• Other treatments for parapneumonic and malignant effusions
The effusion itself generally does not require treatment if it is asymptomatic when the underlying disorder
is treated because many effusions resorb spontaneously, especially those due to uncomplicated
pneumonias, pulmonary embolism, or surgery. Pleuritic pain can usually be managed with NSAIDs or
other oral analgesics. At times, a short course of oral opioids is required.
Thoracentesis is sufficient treatment for many symptomatic effusions and can be repeated for effusions
that reaccumulate. Removal of fluid can be continued until the patient develops chest tightness, chest
pain, or severe coughing.
Effusions that are chronic, recurrent, and causing symptoms can be treated with pleurodesis or by
intermittent drainage with an indwelling catheter (. Effusions caused by pneumonia and
cancer may require additional specific measures.
Parapneumonic effusion and empyema:
In patients with adverse prognostic factors (pH < 7.20,
glucose < 60 mg/dL, positive Gram stain or culture, loculations), the effusion should be completely
drained via thoracentesis or tube thoracostomy. If complete drainage is impossible, a thrombolytic
(fibrinolytic) drug (eg, urokinase 100,000 units or tissue plasminogen activator 10 mg in 100 mL saline
solution) can be administered intrapleurally, but the effectiveness of this intervention is unproved. If
attempts at drainage are unsuccessful, thoracoscopy should be done to lyse adhesions and remove
fibrous tissue coating the lung to allow the lung to expand. If thoracoscopy is unsuccessful, thoracotomy
with surgical decortication (eg, removal of scar, clot, or fibrous membrane surrounding the lung) is
necessary.
Malignant pleural effusion:
If dyspnea caused by malignant pleural effusion is relieved by thoracentesis
but fluid reaccumulates (with dyspnea), chronic (intermittent) drainage or pleurodesis is indicated.
Asymptomatic effusions and effusions causing dyspnea unrelieved by thoracentesis do not require
additional procedures.
Indwelling catheter drainage is the preferred approach for ambulatory patients because hospitalization is
not necessary for catheter insertion and the pleural fluid can be drained intermittently into vacuum bottles.
Pleurodesis is done by instilling a sclerosing agent into the pleural space to fuse the visceral and parietal
pleura and eliminate the space. The most effective and commonly used sclerosing agents are talc,
doxycycline, and bleomycin delivered via chest tube or thoracoscopy. Pleurodesis is contraindicated if the
mediastinum has shifted toward the side of the effusion or if the lung does not expand after a chest tube
is inserted.
Shunting of pleural fluid to the peritoneum (pleuroperitoneal shunt) is useful for patients with malignant
effusion in whom pleurodesis is unsuccessful and in patients who have trapped lung.
Pleural Fibrosis and Calcification
Pleural fibrosis and calcification are usually benign sequelae of pleural inflammation or
asbestos exposure.
Pleural fibrosis and calcification can be either postinflammatory or asbestos related. These disorders are
suspected and diagnosed based on imaging studies.
Postinflammatory:
Pleural inflammation commonly causes acute pleural thickening due to fibrosis. In
most cases, the thickening resolves almost completely. Some patients are left with minor degrees of
pleural thickening, which usually causes no symptoms or impairment of lung function. Occasionally, the
lung becomes encased with a thick, fibrous pleural peel that limits expansion, pulls the mediastinum
toward the side of disease, and impairs pulmonary function. Chest x-ray shows asymmetry of the lungs
===PAGE:2172===
with thickened pleura (trapped lung). Differentiating localized pleural thickening from loculated pleural
fluid may be difficult on x-ray, but this differentiation is easily made with CT.
Pleural fibrosis after inflammation can, on occasion, calcify. Calcification produces a dense image on the
chest x-ray and almost always involves the visceral pleura. Postinflammatory calcifications are invariably
unilateral.
Asbestos-related:
Exposure to asbestos can lead to focal, plaquelike pleural fibrosis, at times with
calcification, occurring up to ≥ 20 yr after the initial exposure. Diagnosis is usually by chest-x-ray. The
diameter of the plaques can vary from several millimeters to 10 cm. Any pleural or pericardial surface can
be affected, but asbestos-related pleural plaques are usually in the lower two thirds of the thorax and are
bilateral. Calcification most often affects the parietal and diaphragmatic pleura and spares the
costophrenic sulci and apices. Calcification may be the only evidence of exposure. Dense pleural fibrosis
surrounding the entire lung and >1 cm in thickness can also follow asbestos exposure.
Pneumomediastinum
Pneumomediastinum is air in mediastinal interstices.
The 3 main causes of pneumomediastinum are alveolar rupture with dissection of air into the
mediastinum, esophageal perforation, and esophageal or bowel rupture with dissection of air from the
neck or the abdomen into the mediastinum.
The primary symptom is substernal chest pain which can, on occasion, be severe. Physical examination
may show subcutaneous emphysema, usually in the suprasternal notch, along with a crunching or
clicking
noise synchronous with the heartbeat; this noise is best heard over the heart when the patient is
in the left lateral decubitus position (Hamman's sign).
The diagnosis is confirmed by chest x-ray, which shows air in the mediastinum.
Treatment usually is not necessary, although tension pneumomediastinum with compression of
mediastinal structures (rare) can be relieved with needle aspiration, leaving the needle open to the
atmosphere as is done with tension pneumothorax. Hospital admission is required if pneumomediastinum
is secondary to esophageal or bowel rupture but not necessarily if secondary to alveolar rupture.
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax is air in the pleural space causing partial or complete lung collapse.
Pneumothorax can occur spontaneously or result from trauma or medical procedures.
Diagnosis is based on clinical criteria and chest x-ray. Most pneumothoraces require
transcatheter aspiration or tube thoracostomy.
Intrapleural pressure is normally negative (less than atmospheric pressure) because of inward lung and
outward chest wall recoil. In pneumothorax, air enters the pleural space from outside the chest or from the
lung itself via mediastinal tissue planes or direct pleural perforation. Intrapleural pressure increases, and
lung volume decreases.
Etiology
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax
occurs in patients without underlying pulmonary disease,
classically in tall, thin young men in their teens and 20s. It is thought to be due to spontaneous rupture of
subpleural apical blebs or bullae that result from smoking or that are inherited. It generally occurs at rest,
although some cases occur during activities involving reaching or stretching. Primary spontaneous
pneumothorax also occurs during diving and high-altitude flying because of unequally transmitted
pressure changes in the lung.
Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax
occurs in patients with underlying pulmonary disease. It most
often results from rupture of a bleb or bulla in patients with severe COPD (forced expiratory volume in 1
===PAGE:2173===
sec [FEV] < 1 L), HIV-related
Pneumocystis jirovecii
infection, cystic fibrosis, or any underlying
pulmonary parenchymal disease (see
Table 204-4
). Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax is more serious than primary spontaneous
pneumothorax because it occurs in patients whose underlying lung disease decreases their pulmonary
reserve. Catamenial pneumothorax is a rare form of secondary spontaneous pneumothorax that occurs
within 48 h of the onset of menstruation in premenopausal women and sometimes in postmenopausal
women taking estrogen. The cause is intrathoracic endometriosis, possibly due to migration of peritoneal
endometrial tissue through diaphragmatic defects or embolization through pelvic veins.
[Table 204-4.
Causes of Secondary Spontaneous Pneumothorax]
Traumatic pneumothorax
is a common complication of penetrating or blunt chest injuries.
Tension pneumothorax
is a pneumothorax causing a progressive rise in intrapleural pressure to levels
that become positive throughout the respiratory cycle and collapse the lung, shift the mediastinum, and
impair venous return to the heart. Air continues to get into the pleural space but cannot exit. Without
appropriate treatment, the impaired venous return can cause systemic hypotension and respiratory and
cardiac arrest (pulseless electrical activity) within minutes. Tension pneumothorax most commonly occurs
in patients receiving positive-pressure ventilation (with mechanical ventilation or particularly during
resuscitation). Rarely, it is a complication of traumatic pneumothorax, when a chest wound acts as a oneway valve that traps increasing volumes of air in the pleural space during inspiration.
Iatrogenic pneumothorax
is caused by medical interventions, including transthoracic needle aspiration,
thoracentesis, central venous catheter placement, mechanical ventilation, and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation.
Symptoms and Signs
Small pneumothoraces are occasionally asymptomatic. Symptoms of pneumothoraces include dyspnea
and pleuritic chest pain. Dyspnea may be sudden or gradual in onset depending on the rate of
development and size of the pneumothorax. Pain can simulate pericarditis, pneumonia, pleuritis,
pulmonary embolism, musculoskeletal injury (when referred to the shoulder), or an intra-abdominal
process (when referred to the abdomen). Pain can also simulate cardiac ischemia, although typically the
pain of cardiac ischemia is not pleuritic.
Physical findings classically consist of absent tactile fremitus, hyperresonance to percussion, and
decreased breath sounds on the affected side. If the pneumothorax is large, the affected side may be
enlarged with the trachea visibly shifted to the opposite side. With tension pneumothorax, hypotension
can occur.
Diagnosis
• Upright inspiratory chest x-ray
The diagnosis is suspected in stable patients with dyspnea or pleuritic chest pain and is confirmed with
upright inspiratory chest x-ray. Radiolucent air and the absence of lung markings juxtaposed between a
shrunken lobe or lung and the parietal pleura are diagnostic of pneumothorax. Tracheal deviation and
mediastinal shift occur with large pneumothoraces.
The size of a pneumothorax is defined as the percentage of the hemithorax that is vacant. This
percentage is estimated by taking 1 minus the ratio of the cubes of the width of the lung and hemithorax.
For example, if the width of the hemithorax is 10 cm and the width of the lung is 5 cm, the ratio is 5
/10
= 0.125. Thus, the size of the pneumothorax is about 1 minus 0.125, or 87.5%. If adhesions are present
between the lung and the chest wall, the lung does not collapse symmetrically, the pneumothorax may
appear atypical or loculated, and the calculation is not accurate.
Small pneumothoraces (eg, < 10%) are sometimes overlooked on chest x-ray. Conditions that mimic
===PAGE:2174===
pneumothorax radiographically include emphysematous bullae, skinfolds, folded bed sheets, and overlap
of stomach or bowel markings on lung fields.
Tension pneumothorax is suspected in patients with sudden, unexplained hypotension and dyspnea or
some risk factor, particularly positive pressure ventilation. If such a patient also has signs of
pneumothorax, such as decreased breath sounds and hyperresonance to percussion, tension
pneumothorax should be assumed.
Treatment
• Immediate needle decompression for tension pneumothoraces
• Observation and follow-up x-ray for small, asymptomatic primary spontaneous pneumothoraces
• Catheter aspiration for large or symptomatic primary spontaneous pneumothoraces
• Tube thoracostomy for secondary and traumatic pneumothoraces
Patients should receive supplemental O
until chest x-ray results are available because O
accelerates
pleural reabsorption of air. Treatment then depends on the type, size, and effects of pneumothorax.
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax that is < 20% and that does not cause respiratory or cardiac
symptoms can be safely observed without treatment if follow-up chest x-rays obtained at about 6 and 48 h
show no progression. Larger or symptomatic primary spontaneous pneumothoraces should be evacuated
by catheter aspiration. Tube thoracostomy is an alternative.
Catheter aspiration is accomplished by insertion of a small-bore (about 7 to 9 French) IV or pigtail
catheter into the chest in the 2nd intercostal space at the midclavicular line. The catheter is attached to a
3-way stopcock and syringe. Air is withdrawn from the pleural space through the stopcock into the syringe
and expelled into the room. The process is repeated until the lung re-expands or until 4 L of air are
removed. If the lung expands, the catheter can be removed or kept in place attached to a one-way
Heimlich valve (thus permitting ambulation), and the patient need not be hospitalized. If the lung does not
expand, a chest tube should be inserted, and the patient should be hospitalized. Primary spontaneous
pneumothoraces can also be managed initially with a chest tube attached to a water seal without or with
suction. Patients with primary spontaneous pneumothoraces should also undergo smoking cessation
counseling.
Secondary and traumatic pneumothoraces are generally treated with tube thoracostomy. (.
Symptomatic patients with iatrogenic pneumothoraces are best managed initially with aspiration.
Tension pneumothorax is a medical emergency, and time should not be wasted confirming the
diagnosis with a chest x-ray.
It should be treated immediately by inserting a 14- or 16-gauge needle with
a catheter through the chest wall in the 2nd intercostal space at the midclavicular line. The sound of highpressure air escaping confirms diagnosis. The catheter can be left open to air or attached to a Heimlich
valve. Emergency decompression must be followed immediately by tube thoracostomy, after which the
catheter is removed.
Complications
The 3 main problems encountered when treating pneumothorax are air leaks, failure of the lung to
expand, and re-expansion pulmonary edema.
Air leaks are usually due to the primary defect—ie, continued leakage of air from the lung into the pleural
space—but can be due to air leaking around the chest tube insertion site if the site is not properly sutured
and sealed. Air leaks are more common in secondary than in primary spontaneous pneumothorax. Most
resolve spontaneously in < 1 wk.
Failure of the lung to re-expand is usually due to a persistent air leak, an endobronchial obstruction, a
trapped lung, or a malpositioned chest tube. Thoracoscopy or thoracotomy should be considered if an air
===PAGE:2175===
leak or an incompletely expanded lung persists beyond 1 wk.
Re-expansion pulmonary edema occurs when the lung is rapidly expanded, as occurs when a chest tube
is connected to negative pressure after the lung has been collapsed for > 2 days. Treatment is
supportive, with O
, diuretics, and cardiopulmonary support as needed.
Prevention
Recurrence approaches 50% in the 3 yr after initial spontaneous pneumothorax. The best preventive
procedure is video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) in which blebs are stapled and pleurodesis is done
with pleural abrasion, parietal pleurectomy, or talc insufflation; in some medical centers, thoracotomy is
still used. These procedures are recommended when catheter aspiration fails with spontaneous
pneumothorax, when pneumothorax recurs, or when patients have secondary spontaneous
pneumothorax. Recurrence after these procedures is < 5%. If thoracoscopy cannot be done or is
contraindicated, chemical pleurodesis through a chest tube may be done (; this procedure,
though much less invasive, reduces the recurrence rate to only about 25%.
Viral Pleuritis
Viral pleuritis is a viral infection of the pleurae.
Viral pleuritis is most commonly caused by infection with coxsackie B virus. Occasionally, echovirus
causes a rare condition known as epidemic or Bornholm's pleurodynia, manifesting as pleuritis, fever, and
chest muscle spasms. The condition occurs in the late summer and affects adolescents and young adults.
The primary symptom of viral pleuritis is pleuritic pain; pleural friction rub may be a sign (.
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with pleuritic chest pain with or without systemic symptoms of viral
infection. Chest x-ray is usually done. Other causes of pleuritic chest pain, such as pulmonary emboli and
pneumonia, need to be considered and sometimes ruled out with testing.
Treatment is symptomatic, with oral NSAIDs or a short course of oral opioids if needed.
===PAGE:2176===
Chapter 205. Tumors of the Lungs
Introduction
Lung tumors may be primary or metastatic from other sites in the body. Primary tumors of the lung may be
malignant (see
Table 205-1
) or benign (see
Table 205-2
). The most common lung tumor is lung carcinoma, also called bronchogenic carcinoma or
lung cancer.
Lung Carcinoma
Lung carcinoma is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. About 85% of cases are
related to cigarette smoking. Symptoms can include cough, chest discomfort or pain, weight
loss, and, less commonly, hemoptysis; however, many patients present with metastatic disease
without any clinical symptoms. The diagnosis is typically made by chest x-ray or CT scan and
[Table 205-1.
Classification of Primary Malignant Lung Tumors]
confirmed by biopsy. Depending on the stage of the disease, treatment includes surgery,
chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or a combination. Despite advances in treatment, the
prognosis remains poor, with only 15% of patients surviving > 5 yr from time of diagnosis. For
patients with stage IV (metastatic) disease, the 5-yr overall survival rate is < 1%. Improving
survival requires focusing attention on smoking cessation, early detection, and research into
the genetic profile of lung tumors and developing novel forms of therapy.
Epidemiology
In 2007, an estimated 213,380 new cases of lung cancer were diagnosed in the US, and about 160,390
people died from the disease. The incidence of lung cancer has been rising in women but appears to be
leveling off in men.
Etiology
Cigarette smoking is the most important cause of lung cancer, accounting for about 85% of cases. The
risk of cancer differs by age, smoking intensity, and smoking duration; the risk of cancer declines after
smoking cessation, but it never returns to baseline. About 15% of people who develop lung cancer have
never smoked. In these people, the exact reason lung cancer develops is unknown. Recent studies have
reported that some never-smoking people with lung cancer have genetic mutations in the epidermal
growth factor gene (
EGFR
). Although an environmental association has not clearly been established, it is
theorized that exposure to radon gas, a breakdown product of naturally occurring radium and uranium,
may be an environmental risk factor. Other possible risk factors include exposure to secondhand smoke
and exposure to carcinogens, such as asbestos, radiation, arsenic, chromates, nickel, chloromethyl
ethers, mustard gas, or coke-oven emissions, encountered or breathed in at work.
The risk of lung cancer increases with combined exposure to occupational carcinogens, toxins, and
cigarette smoking. It is suspected that COPD and pulmonary fibrosis (
α
-antitrypsin deficiency) may
increase susceptibility to lung cancer. Also, active smokers who take
β
-carotene supplements have an
increased risk of developing lung cancer. Air pollution and cigar smoke contain carcinogens; these
substances have not been shown to cause lung cancer, although they may be associated with an
increased risk. People whose lungs are scarred by other lung diseases (eg, TB) are at an increased risk
of lung cancer.
Respiratory epithelial cells require prolonged exposure to cancer-promoting agents and accumulation of
multiple genetic mutations before becoming neoplastic (an effect called field carcinogenesis). Over time,
mutations in genes that stimulate cell growth (
K-ras, MYC
) cause abnormalities in growth factor receptor
signaling (
EGFR, HER2/neu
), inhibit apoptosis (
BCL-2
), and contribute to proliferation of abnormal cells.
===PAGE:2177===
In addition, mutations that inhibit tumor-suppressor genes (
p53, APC
) can lead to cancer.
[Table 205-2.
Classification of Benign Lung Tumors]
Classification
Lung cancer is classified into 2 major categories:
• Small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
• Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
SCLC is highly aggressive and almost always occurs in smokers. It is rapidly growing, and roughly 60%
of patients have widespread metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis.
The clinical behavior of NSCLC is more variable and depends on histologic type, but about 40% of
patients have metastatic disease outside of the chest at the time of diagnosis.
Other features of the 2 categories (eg, location, risks, treatment, complications) also vary (see
Table 205-3
).
Symptoms and Signs
About 25% of lung cancers are asymptomatic and are detected incidentally with chest imaging. Symptoms
and signs can result from local tumor progression, regional spread, or distant metastases. Paraneoplastic
syndromes and constitutional symptoms may occur at any stage of the disease. Although symptoms are
not specific to the classification or histology of the cancer, certain complications may be more likely with
different types (see
Table 205-3
).
Local tumor:
The local tumor can cause cough and, less commonly, dyspnea due to airway obstruction,
postobstructive atelectasis, and lymphangitic spread. Fever may occur with postobstructive pneumonia.
Up to half of patients report vague or localized chest pain. Hemoptysis is less common, and blood loss is
minimal, except in rare instances when the tumor erodes into a major artery, causing massive hemorrhage
and death by exsanguination and asphyxiation.
Regional spread:
Regional spread of the tumor may cause pleuritic chest pain or dyspnea
[Table 205-3.
Features of Lung Cancer]
due to development of a pleural effusion, hoarseness due to tumor encroachment on the recurrent
laryngeal nerve, and dyspnea and hypoxia caused by diaphragmatic paralysis due to involvement of the
phrenic nerve.
Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome results from compression or invasion of the SVC and can cause
headache or a sensation of head fullness, facial or upper-extremity swelling, supine breathlessness, and
flushing (plethora). Physical signs of SVC syndrome include facial and upper-extremity edema, dilated
neck and subcutaneous veins in the face and upper trunk, and facial and truncal plethora.
Apical tumors, usually NSCLC, can invade the brachial plexus, pleura, or ribs, causing shoulder and
upper-extremity pain and weakness or atrophy of the ipsilateral hand (Pancoast's tumor). Horner's
syndrome (ptosis, miosis, enophthalmos, and anhidrosis) results when the paravertebral sympathetic
chain or cervical stellate ganglion is involved. Spread of the tumor to the pericardium may be
asymptomatic or lead to constrictive pericarditis or cardiac tamponade (. Rarely, esophageal
compression causes dysphagia.
Metastases:
Metastases eventually cause symptoms that vary by location. Metastases to the liver cause
pain, GI symptoms, and ultimately hepatic insufficiency. Metastases to the brain cause behavioral
changes, confusion, aphasia, seizures, paresis or paralysis, nausea and vomiting, and ultimately coma
===PAGE:2178===
and death. Bone metastases can lead to severe pain and pathologic fractures. Although lung cancer
commonly metastasizes to the adrenal glands, it rarely leads to adrenal insufficiency.
Paraneoplastic syndromes:
Paraneoplastic syndromes are symptoms that occur at sites distant from a
tumor or its metastases (. Common paraneoplastic syndromes in patients with lung cancer
include hypercalcemia (in patients with squamous cell carcinoma, which results because the tumor
produces parathyroid hormone-related protein), syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
(SIADH), finger clubbing with or without hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy, hypercoagulability with
migratory superficial thrombophlebitis (Trousseau's syndrome), myasthenia (Eaton-Lambert syndrome),
and various neurologic syndromes, including neuropathies, encephalopathies, encephalitides,
myelopathies, and cerebellar disease. Mechanisms for neuromuscular syndromes involve tumor
expression of autoantigens with production of autoantibodies, but the cause of most other syndromes is
unknown.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• CT or combined PET-CT
• Cytopathology examination of pleural fluid or sputum
• Usually bronchoscopy-guided biopsy and fine-needle aspiration
• Sometimes open lung biopsy
Chest x-ray is often the initial imaging test. It may show clearly defined abnormalities, such as a single
mass or multifocal masses or a solitary pulmonary nodule (, an enlarged hilum, widened
mediastinum, tracheobronchial narrowing, atelectasis, nonresolving parenchymal infiltrates, cavitary
lesions, or unexplained pleural thickening or effusion. These findings are suggestive but not diagnostic of
lung cancer and require follow-up with CT or combined PET-CT and cytopathologic confirmation.
CT demonstrates many characteristic anatomic patterns and appearances that may confirm the
diagnosis. CT also can guide needle biopsy of accessible lesions and is useful for staging. If a lesion
found on a plain x-ray is highly likely to be lung cancer, PET-CT may be done. This study combines
anatomic imaging from CT with functional imaging from PET. The PET images can help differentiate
inflammatory and malignant processes.
The method used to obtain cells or tissue for confirmation depends on the accessibility of tissue and the
location of lesions. Sputum or pleural fluid cytology is the least invasive method. In patients with
productive cough, sputum specimens obtained on awakening may contain high concentrations of
malignant cells, but yield for this method is < 50% overall. Pleural fluid is another convenient source of
cells; a malignant effusion is a poor prognostic sign (see
Table 205-4
). In general, false-negative cytology readings can be minimized by obtaining as large a
volume of sputum or fluid as possible early in the day and sending the sample to the pathology laboratory
immediately to minimize delays in processing, which lead to cell breakdown.
A percutaneous biopsy is the next least invasive procedure. It is more useful for metastatic sites
(supraclavicular or other peripheral lymph nodes, pleura, liver, adrenals) than for lung lesions because of
the 20 to 25% risk of pneumothorax and the risk of false-negative results.
Bronchoscopy is the procedure most often used for diagnosing lung cancer. In theory, the procedure of
choice for obtaining tissue is
the one that is least invasive. In practice, bronchoscopy is often done in
addition to or instead of less invasive procedures because diagnostic yields are greater and because
bronchoscopy is important for staging. A combination of washings, brushings, biopsies, and fine-needle
aspirations of visible endobronchial lesions and of paratracheal, subcarinal, mediastinal, and hilar lymph
nodes often yields a tissue diagnosis.
===PAGE:2179===
Mediastinoscopy is the gold standard test for evaluating mediastinal lymph nodes but is a higher-risk
procedure, which is usually used before surgery to confirm or exclude the presence of tumor in enlarged
mediastinal lymph nodes.
Open lung biopsy, done via open thoracotomy or using video assistance (, is indicated when
less invasive methods do not provide a diagnosis in patients whose clinical characteristics and
radiographic features strongly suggest that the tumor is resectable.
Screening:
No screening studies are universally accepted for healthy patients who do not have lung
cancer. Clinical trials have evaluated screening chest x-rays in high-risk patients (smokers) to try to detect
lung cancers at earlier stages, but mortality did not decline. Screening CT is being evaluated because it is
more sensitive, but CT produces more false-positive results, which increase the number of unnecessary
invasive diagnostic procedures needed to verify the CT findings. Such procedures are costly and risk
additional complications. A strategy of yearly CT screening of smokers with follow-up PET or highresolution CT (HRCT) to evaluate indeterminate lesions is currently being studied. So far, this strategy
does not seem to lessen mortality and cannot be recommended as routine practice. The future of
screening may lie in a combination of molecular analysis for genetic markers (eg,
K-ras
,
p53
,
EGFR
),
sputum cytometry, and detection of cancer-related volatile organic compounds (eg, alkane, benzene) in
exhaled breath.
[Table 205-4.
Proposed International Staging System for Lung Cancer*]
Staging
SCLC has 2 stages: limited and extensive. Limited-stage SCLC is cancer confined to one hemithorax
(including ipsilateral lymph nodes) that can be encompassed within one tolerable radiation therapy port,
unless there is a pleural or pericardial effusion. Extensive-stage disease is cancer outside a single
hemithorax or the presence of malignant cells detected in pleural or pericardial effusions. Less than one
third of patients with SCLC present with limited-stage disease; the remainder of patients often have
extensive distant metastases.
NSCLC has 4 stages: I through IV. Staging is based on tumor size, tumor and lymph node location, and
the presence or absence of distant metastases (see
Table 205-4
).
Tests for initial evaluation and staging: All lung cancer patients need whole-body imaging. Different
combinations of tests can be done. Some tests are done routinely, and others are done depending on
whether the results would affect treatment decisions:
• PET or integrated PET-CT
• CT from neck to pelvis (done if PET-CT is not available)
• MRI of chest (for tumors near apex or diaphragm to evaluate vascular supply)
• Biopsy of questionable nodes (if PET is indeterminate)
•
Bone scan (done with CT if PET-CT is not available)
• Head CT or brain MRI
Measurement of serum Ca and alkaline phosphatase; evaluation of liver function, immune system, and
kidney function; platelets; Hb; and electrolytes are needed to assist with treatment decisions.
If PET-CT is not available, thin-section CT scanning from the neck to the upper abdomen (to detect
cervical and supraclavicular and hepatic and adrenal metastases) is one of the first staging tests for both
SCLC and NSCLC. However, CT often cannot distinguish postinflammatory changes from malignant
intrathoracic lymph node enlargement or benign lesions from malignant hepatic or adrenal lesions
(distinctions that determine stage). Thus, other tests are usually done when abnormalities are present in
===PAGE:2180===
these areas. PET is a reasonably accurate, noninvasive test used to identify malignant mediastinal lymph
nodes and other distant metastases (metabolic staging). Integrated PET-CT, in which PET and CT
images are combined into a single image by scanners in a single gantry, is more accurate for NSCLC
staging than CT or PET alone or than visual correlation of the 2 tests. The use of PET and integrated
PET-CT is limited by cost, availability, and specificity (ie, the test is quite sensitive and has an excellent
negative predictive value, but its positive predictive value is not as high). When PET results are
indeterminate, bronchoscopy, mediastinoscopy, or video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) can be
used to biopsy questionable mediastinal lymph nodes. Without PET, hepatic or adrenal lesions must be
evaluated by needle biopsy.
MRI of the chest is slightly more accurate than high-chest HRCT for staging apical tumors and cancers
close to the diaphragm and provides evaluation of the vasculature surrounding the tumors.
Blood tests are usually done. Ca and alkaline phosphatase levels, if elevated, suggest possible bone
metastases. Other blood tests, such as CBC, serum albumin levels, AST, ALT, total bilirubin, electrolytes,
and creatinine levels, have no role in staging but provide important prognostic information about the
patient's ability to tolerate treatment and may detect paraneoplastic syndromes.
All patients with suspected lung cancer should undergo brain imaging. Brain imaging is especially
necessary in patients with headache or neurologic abnormalities. Patients with bone pain or elevated
serum Ca or alkaline phosphatase levels should undergo a PET-CT or radionuclide bone scanning if
PET-CT is not available.
Prognosis
The overall prognosis for lung cancer is poor. The median survival time for limited-stage SCLC is 20 mo,
with a 5-yr survival rate of 20%. Patients with extensive-stage SCLC do especially poorly, with a 5-yr
survival rate of < 1%.
The 5-yr survival rate of patients with NSCLC varies by stage, from 60 to 70% for patients with stage I
disease to < 1% for patients with stage IV disease. On average, untreated patients with metastatic
NSCLC survive 6 mo, whereas the median survival for treated patients is about 9 mo. Recently, patient
survival has improved in both early and later stage NSCLC. Evidence shows improved survival in earlystage disease when platinum-based chemotherapy regimens are used after surgical resection. In
addition, targeted therapies have improved survival in patients with stage IV disease. However, given the
disappointing results in patients with metastatic disease, efforts at reducing mortality have increasingly
focused on early detection and active interventions to prevent disease. Basing therapy on molecular
signatures within the tumors has been the focus of laboratory and translational research.
Treatment
• Surgery (depending on cell type and stage)
• Chemotherapy
• Radiation therapy
Treatment varies by cell type and by stage of disease. Many patient factors not related to the tumor affect
treatment choice. Poor cardiopulmonary reserve, undernutrition, frailty or poor physical performance
status, comorbidities (including cytopenias), and psychiatric or cognitive illness all may lead to a decision
for palliative rather than curative treatment or for no treatment at all, even though a cure with aggressive
therapy might technically be possible.
Radiation therapy has the risk of radiation pneumonitis when large areas of the lung are exposed to high
doses of radiation over time. Radiation pneumonitis can occur up to 3 mo after treatment is completed.
Cough, dyspnea, low-grade fever, or pleuritic chest pain may signal the condition, as may crackles or a
pleural friction rub detected during chest auscultation. Chest x-ray findings may be nonspecific; CT may
show a nonspecific infiltrate without an obvious mass. The diagnosis is often one of exclusion. Radiation
===PAGE:2181===
pneumonitis can be treated with a corticosteroid taper over several weeks and bronchodilators for
symptom relief.
Multiple chemotherapy regimens exist for treatment of lung cancer. In addition to standard chemotherapy
drugs, several biologic
agents that specifically target lung tumors are under investigation. EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors may be used in patients who have not responded to platinum-based or docetaxel
therapy. Bevacizumab, a vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor, is now used in combination with
standard chemotherapy regimens in certain patients. Many other biologic agents are under investigation;
some specifically target cancer cell signal transduction pathways or the angiogenesis pathways that
supply O
and nutrition to growing tumor cells.
Radiofrequency ablation, in which high-frequency electrical current is used to destroy tumor cells, is a
newer technique that can sometimes be used in patients who have small, early-stage tumors or small
tumors that have recurred in a previously irradiated chest. This procedure may preserve more lung
function than open surgery does and, because it is less invasive, may be appropriate for patients who are
not candidates for open surgery.
SCLC:
Typically, SCLC of any stage is initially responsive to treatment, but responses are usually shortlived. Chemotherapy, with or without radiation therapy, is given depending on the stage of disease. In
many patients, chemotherapy prolongs survival and improves quality of life enough to warrant its use.
Surgery generally plays no role in treatment of SCLC, although it may be curative in the rare patient who
has a small focal tumor without spread (such as a solitary pulmonary nodule) and who had surgical
resection before the tumor was identified as SCLC.
Chemotherapy regimens of etoposide and a platinum compound (either cisplatin or carboplatin) are
commonly used, as are other drugs, such as irinotecan, topotecan, vinca alkaloids (vinblastine,
vincristine, vinorelbine), alkylating agents (cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide), doxorubicin, taxanes
(docetaxel, paclitaxel), and gemcitabine. In limited-stage disease, radiation therapy further improves
response; the very definition of limited-stage disease as disease confined to a hemithorax is based on the
significant improvement in survival observed with radiation therapy. The use of cranial radiation to prevent
brain metastases is also advocated in certain cases of limited- and extensive-stage disease;
micrometastases are common in SCLC, and chemotherapy has less ability to cross the blood-brain
barrier.
In extensive-stage disease, treatment is based on chemotherapy rather than radiation therapy, although
radiation therapy is often used as palliative treatment for metastases to bone or brain. In patients with an
excellent response to chemotherapy, prophylactic brain irradiation is sometimes used, as in limited-stage
SCLC to prevent growth of SCLC in the brain. It is unclear whether replacing etoposide with
topoisomerase inhibitors (irinotecan or topotecan) improves survival. These drugs alone or in combination
with other drugs are also commonly used in refractory disease and in cancer of either stage that has
recurred.
In general, patients with recurrent SCLC have a poor prognosis, although patients who maintain a good
performance status should be offered a clinical trial.
NSCLC:
Treatment for NSCLC typically involves assessment of eligibility for surgery followed by choice
of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or a combination of modalities as appropriate, depending on
tumor type and stage.
For stage I and II disease, the standard approach is surgical resection with either lobectomy or
pneumonectomy combined with mediastinal lymph node sampling or complete lymph node dissection.
Lesser resections, including segmentectomy and wedge resection, are considered for patients with poor
pulmonary reserve. Surgery is curative in about 55 to 75% of patients with stage I and in 35 to 55% of
patients with stage II disease.
Surgery is done only if NSCLC patients will have adequate pulmonary reserve once a lobe or lung is
resected. Patients with preoperative forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
) > 2 L generally tolerate
===PAGE:2182===
pneumonectomy. Those with FEV
< 2 L should have a quantitative xenon radionuclide perfusion scan to
determine the proportion of function the patient can expect to lose from resection. Postoperative FEV
can be predicted by multiplying percent perfusion of the nonresected lung by the preoperative FEV
. A
predicted FEV
> 800 mL or > 40% of the predicted normal FEV
suggests adequate postoperative lung
function, although studies of lung volume reduction surgery in COPD patients suggest that patients with
FEV
< 800 mL can tolerate resection if the cancer is located in poorly functional, bullous (generally
apical) lung regions. Patients undergoing resection at hospitals that do more resections have fewer
complications and are more likely to survive than those who undergo surgery at hospitals that do fewer
lung cancer procedures.
Adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery is now standard practice for patients with stage II or stage III
disease, possibly also for patients with stage IB disease with tumors > 4 cm. Clinical trials have shown an
increase in 5-yr survival rates with the use of adjuvant chemotherapy. However, the decision for adjuvant
chemotherapy should depend on the patient's comorbidities and risk assessment. The role
of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in early-stage NSCLC is under investigation.
Stage III disease is treated with either chemotherapy, radiation therapy, surgery, or a combination; the
sequence and choice of treatment depend on the location of the patient's disease and comorbidities. In
general, concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy are considered standard treatment for
unresectable clinically staged IIIA disease, but survival remains poor (median survival, 10 to 14 mo).
Patients with stage IIIB disease plus contralateral mediastinal nodal disease or supraclavicular nodal
disease are offered either radiation therapy or chemotherapy or both. Patients with locally advanced
tumors invading the heart, great vessels, mediastinum, or spine usually receive radiation therapy. In some
patients (with T4 N0 M0 tumors), surgical resection with either neoadjuvant or adjuvant combined
chemotherapy and radiation therapy may be feasible. The 5-yr survival rate for patients with treated stage
IIIB disease is 5%.
In stage IV disease, palliation of symptoms is the goal. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy may be used
to reduce tumor burden, treat symptoms, and improve quality of life. However, median survival is only 9
mo, and < 25% of patients survive 1 yr. Surgical palliative procedures may be required and may include
thoracentesis and pleurodesis of recurrent effusions, placement of indwelling pleural drainage catheters,
bronchoscopic fulguration of tumors involving the trachea and mainstem bronchi, placement of stents to
prevent airway occlusion, and, in some cases, spinal stabilization for impending spinal cord compression.
Recurrent disease:
Treatment options for disease that recurs after treatment vary by location and
include repeat chemotherapy for local recurrence, radiation therapy for metastases, and brachytherapy
for endobronchial disease when additional external radiation cannot be tolerated. Rarely, surgical
resection of a solitary metastasis or for palliative purposes is considered. The treatment of a locally
recurrent NSCLC follows the same guidelines as for primary tumor stages I to III. If surgery was used
initially, radiation therapy is the main modality. If the recurrence manifests as distant metastases, patients
are treated as stage IV with a focus on palliation.
Complications:
Asymptomatic malignant pleural effusions require no treatment. Initial treatment of a
symptomatic effusion is with thoracentesis; symptomatic effusions that recur despite multiple
thoracenteses are drained through a chest tube. Infusion of talc (or occasionally, tetracycline or
bleomycin) into the pleural space (a procedure called pleurodesis) scars the pleura, eliminates the pleural
space, and is effective in > 90% of cases (.
Treatment of SVC syndrome is the same as treatment of lung cancer, with chemotherapy (SCLC),
radiation therapy (NSCLC), or both (NSCLC). Corticosteroids are commonly used but are of unproven
benefit.
Treatment of Horner's syndrome caused by apical tumors is with surgery with or without preoperative
radiation or with radiation therapy with or without adjuvant chemotherapy.
Treatment of paraneoplastic syndromes varies by syndrome (.
===PAGE:2183===
End-of-life care:
Because many patients with lung cancer die, the need for end-of-life care should be
anticipated (. Symptoms of breathlessness can be treated with supplemental oxygen and
bronchodilators. Pain, anxiety, nausea, and anorexia are especially common and can be treated with
parenteral morphine; oral, transdermal, or parenteral opioids; and antiemetics. The care provided by
hospice programs is extremely well-accepted by patients and families, yet this intervention is markedly
underused.
Prevention
No active interventions to prevent lung cancer have proved to be effective except for smoking cessation
(. Remediation of high radon levels in private residences removes known cancer-promoting
radiation, but a reduction in lung cancer incidence is unproved. Increasing dietary intake of fruits and
vegetables high in retinoids and
β
-carotene appears to have no effect on lung cancer incidence. Vitamin
supplementation is either unproved (vitamin E) or harmful (
β
-carotene) in smokers. Preliminary evidence
hinting that NSAIDs and vitamin E supplementation may protect former smokers from lung cancer requires
confirmation. New molecular approaches targeting cell signaling and cell cycle pathways and tumorassociated antigens are under investigation.
Airway Tumors
The airway can be affected by primary tracheobronchial tumors, primary tumors that are
adjacent to and invade the airway, or cancers that metastasize to the airway.
Primary tracheal tumors are rare (0.1/100,000 people). They are often malignant and found at a locally
advanced stage. The most common malignant tracheal tumors include
adenoid cystic carcinoma,
squamous cell carcinoma, carcinoid, and mucoepidermoid carcinomas. The most common benign airway
tumor is a squamous papilloma, although pleomorphic adenomas and granular cell and benign
cartilaginous tumors also occur.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients often present with dyspnea, cough, wheezing, hemoptysis, and stridor. Hemoptysis may occur
with a squamous cell carcinoma and can potentially lead to earlier diagnosis, whereas wheezing or stridor
occurs more often with the adenoid cystic variant. Dysphagia and hoarseness can also be present initially
and usually indicate advanced disease.
Diagnosis
• Bronchoscopic biopsy
Symptoms of airway narrowing can herald life-threatening airway obstruction and require immediate
hospitalization and evaluation with bronchoscopy. Bronchoscopy can both stabilize the airways and allow
specimens to be obtained for diagnosis. If cancer is found, more extensive testing for metastases is done
(.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the histology. Squamous cell carcinomas tend to metastasize to regional lymph
nodes and directly invade mediastinal structures, leading to high local and regional recurrence rates.
Even with definitive surgical resection, the 5-yr survival is only 20 to 40%. Adenoid cystic carcinomas are
typically indolent but tend to metastasize to the lungs and to spread perineurally, leading to high
recurrence rates after resection. However, these patients have a higher 5-yr survival of 60 to 75%
because of the slow rate of growth.
Treatment
• Surgery
===PAGE:2184===
• Sometimes radiation therapy
• Obstruction reduction techniques
Primary airway tumors should be treated definitively with surgical resection if possible. Tracheal,
laryngotracheal, or carinal resections are the most common procedures. Up to 50% of the length of the
trachea can be safely resected with primary re-anastomosis. If a lung or thyroid cancer invades the
airway, surgery is sometimes still feasible if assessment indicates sufficient tissue is available for airway
reconstruction. Adjuvant radiation therapy is recommended if adequate surgical margins cannot be
obtained.
Most primary airway tumors are not resectable because of metastasis, locally advanced stage, or patient
comorbidities. In cases of endoluminal tumors, a therapeutic bronchoscopy can mechanically core-out the
tumor. Other techniques to eliminate obstruction include laser vaporization, photodynamic therapy,
cryotherapy, and endobronchial brachytherapy. Tumors that compress the trachea are treated with airway
stenting, radiation therapy, or both.
Bronchial Carcinoid
Bronchial carcinoids are rare, slow-growing neuroendocrine tumors arising from bronchial
mucosa; they affect patients in their 40s to 60s.
Half of patients are asymptomatic, and half present with symptoms of airway obstruction, including
dyspnea, wheezing, and cough, which often leads to a misdiagnosis of asthma. Recurrent pneumonia,
hemoptysis, and chest pain are also common. Paraneoplastic syndromes, including Cushing's syndrome
due to ectopic ACTH, acromegaly due to ectopic growth hormone-releasing factor, and Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome due to ectopic gastrin production, are more common than carcinoid syndrome (,
which occurs in < 3% of patients with the tumor. A left-sided heart murmur (mitral stenosis or
regurgitation) occurs rarely due to serotonin-induced valvular damage (as opposed to the right-sided
valvular lesions of GI carcinoid).
Diagnosis is based on bronchoscopic biopsy, but evaluation often initially involves chest CT, which
reveals tumor calcifications in up to one third of patients. Indium-111-labeled octreotide scans are useful
for determining regional and metastatic spread. Increased urinary serotonin and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic
acid levels support the diagnosis, but these substances are not commonly elevated.
Treatment is with surgical removal with or without adjuvant therapy. Prognosis depends on tumor type.
Five-year survival for typical (well-differentiated) carcinoids is > 90%; for atypical tumors, it is 50 to 70%.
Chest Wall Tumors
Chest wall tumors are benign or malignant tumors that can interfere with pulmonary function.
Primary chest wall tumors account for 5% of all thoracic tumors and 1 to 2% of all primary tumors. Almost
half are benign; the most common are osteochondroma, chondroma,
and fibrous dysplasia. A wide range
of malignant chest wall tumors exist. Over half are metastases from distant organs or direct invasions
from adjacent structures (breast, lung, pleura, mediastinum). The most common malignant primary tumors
arising from the chest wall are sarcomas; about 45% originate from soft tissue, and 55% from
cartilaginous or bone tissue. Chondrosarcomas are the most common primary bone chest wall sarcoma
and arise in the anterior tract of ribs and less commonly from the sternum, scapula, or clavicle. Other
bone tumors include osteosarcoma and small-cell malignant tumors (Ewing's sarcoma, Askin's tumor).
The most common soft-tissue primary malignant tumors are fibrosarcomas (desmoids,
neurofibrosarcomas) and malignant fibrous histiocytomas. Other primary tumors include
chondroblastomas, osteoblastomas, melanomas, lymphomas, rhabdomyosarcomas,
lymphangiosarcomas, multiple myeloma, and plasmacytomas.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2185===
Soft-tissue chest wall tumors often manifest as a localized mass without other symptoms. Some patients
have fever. Patients usually do not experience pain until the tumor is more advanced. In contrast, primary
cartilaginous and bone tumors are often painful.
Diagnosis
Patients with chest wall tumors require chest x-ray, CT, MRI, and sometimes PET-CT to determine the
original site and extent of the tumor and its status (primary chest wall tumor or a metastasis). Biopsy and
histologic evaluation confirm the diagnosis.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies by cancer type, cell differentiation, and stage; firm conclusions are limited by the low
incidence of any given tumor. Sarcomas have been the most well studied, and primary chest wall
sarcomas have a reported 5-yr survival of 17%. Survival is better with early-stage disease.
Treatment
• Surgery
• Sometimes combination chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery
Most chest wall tumors are treated with surgical resection and reconstruction. Reconstruction often uses
a combination of myocutaneous flaps and prosthetic materials. The presence of a malignant pleural
effusion is a contraindication for surgical resection. Also, in cases of multiple myeloma or isolated
plasmacytoma, chemotherapy and radiation should be the primary therapy. Small-cell malignant tumors
such as Ewing's sarcoma and Askin's tumor should be treated with a multimodality approach combining
chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery. In cases of chest wall metastasis from distant tumors, a
palliative chest wall resection is recommended only when nonsurgical options do not alleviate symptoms.
===PAGE:2186===
15 - Cardiovascular Disorders
Chapter 206. Approach to the Cardiac Patient
Introduction
Symptoms or the physical examination may suggest a cardiovascular disorder. For confirmation, selected
noninvasive and invasive tests are usually done (see
Chapter 207
).
History
A thorough history is fundamental; it cannot be replaced by testing. The history must include a thorough
systems review because many symptoms apparently occurring in other systems (eg, dyspnea,
indigestion) are often caused by cardiac disease. A family history is taken because many cardiac
disorders (eg, coronary artery disease, systemic hypertension, bicuspid aortic valve, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, mitral valve prolapse) have a heritable basis.
Serious cardiac symptoms include chest pain or discomfort, dyspnea (, weakness, fatigue,
palpitations, light-headedness, sense of an impending faint, syncope, and edema. These symptoms
commonly occur in more than one cardiac disorder and in noncardiac disorders.
Physical Examination
Complete examination of all systems is essential to detect peripheral and systemic effects of cardiac
disorders and evidence of noncardiac disorders that might affect the heart. Examination includes the
following:
• Vital sign measurement
• Pulse palpation and auscultation
• Vein observation
• Chest inspection, percussion, auscultation, and palpation
• Cardiac percussion, palpation, and auscultation
• Lung examination (
• Extremity and abdomen examination
Vital Signs
BP
is measured in both arms and, for suspected congenital cardiac disorders or peripheral vascular
disorders, in both legs. The bladder of an appropriately sized cuff encircles 80% of the limb's
circumference, and the bladder's width is 40% of the circumference. The first sound heard as the Hg
column falls is systolic pressure; disappearance of the sound is diastolic pressure (5th-phase Korotkoff
sound). Up to a 15 mm Hg pressure differential between the right and left arms is normal; a greater
differential suggests a vascular abnormality (eg, dissecting thoracic aorta) or a peripheral vascular
disorder. Leg pressure is usually 20 mm Hg higher than arm pressure. Ankle-brachial index (ratio of ankle
to arm systolic BP) is normally > 1. A Doppler probe may be used to measure the ankle BP if the pedal
pulses are not easily palpable.
Heart rate and rhythm
are assessed by palpating the carotid or radial pulse or by cardiac auscultation if
arrhythmia is suspected; some heartbeats during arrhythmias may be audible but do not generate a
palpable pulse.
===PAGE:2187===
Respiratory rate,
if abnormal, may indicate cardiac decompensation or a primary lung disorder. The rate
increases in patients with heart failure or anxiety and decreases or becomes intermittent in the moribund.
Shallow, rapid respirations may indicate pleuritic pain.
Temperature
may be elevated by acute rheumatic fever or cardiac infection (eg, endocarditis). After MI,
low grade fever is very common. Other causes are sought only if fever persists > 72 h.
Orthostatic changes:
BP and heart rate are measured with the patient supine, seated, and standing; a
1-min interval is needed between each change in position. A difference of ≤ 10 mm Hg is normal; the
difference tends to be a little greater in the elderly due to loss of vascular elasticity.
Pulsus paradoxus:
Normally during inspiration, systolic arterial BP can decrease as much as 10 mm Hg,
and pulse rate increases to compensate. A greater decrease in systolic BP or weakening of the pulse
during inspiration is considered pulsus paradoxus. Pulsus paradoxus occurs in
• Cardiac tamponade (commonly)
• Constrictive pericarditis, severe asthma, and COPD (occasionally)
• Restrictive cardiomyopathy, severe pulmonary embolism, and hypovolemic shock (rarely)
BP decreases during inspiration because negative intrathoracic pressure increases venous return and
hence right ventricular (RV) filling; as a result, the interventricular septum bulges slightly into the left
ventricular (LV) outflow tract, decreasing cardiac output and thus BP. This mechanism (and the drop in
systolic BP) is exaggerated in disorders that cause high negative intrathoracic pressure (eg, asthma) or
that restrict RV filling (eg, cardiac tamponade, cardiomyopathy) or outflow (eg, pulmonary embolism).
Pulsus paradoxus is quantified by inflating a BP cuff to just above systolic BP and deflating it very slowly
(eg, ≤ 2 mm Hg/heartbeat). The pressure is noted when Korotkoff sounds are first heard (at first, only
during expiration) and when Korotkoff sounds are heard continuously. The difference between the
pressures is the "amount" of pulsus paradoxus.
Pulses
Peripheral pulses:
Major peripheral pulses in the arms and legs are palpated for symmetry and volume
(intensity); elasticity of the arterial wall is noted. Absence of pulses may suggest an arterial disorder (eg,
atherosclerosis) or systemic embolism. Peripheral pulses may be difficult to feel in obese or muscular
people. The pulse has a rapid upstroke, then collapses in disorders with a rapid runoff of arterial blood
(eg, arteriovenous communication, aortic regurgitation). The pulse is rapid and bounding in thyrotoxicosis
and hypermetabolic states; it is slow and sluggish in myxedema. If pulses are asymmetric, auscultation
over peripheral vessels may detect a bruit due to stenosis.
Carotid pulses:
Observation, palpation, and auscultation of both carotid pulses may suggest a specific
disorder (see
Table 206-1
).
[Table 206-1.
Carotid Pulse Amplitude and Associated Disorders]
Aging and arteriosclerosis lead to vessel rigidity, which tends to eliminate the characteristic findings. In
very young children, the carotid pulse may be normal, even when severe aortic stenosis is present.
Auscultation over the carotid arteries can distinguish murmurs from bruits. Murmurs originate in the heart
or great vessels and are usually louder over the upper precordium and diminish toward the neck. Bruits
are higher-pitched, are heard only over the arteries, and seem more superficial. An arterial bruit must be
distinguished from a venous hum. Unlike an arterial bruit, a venous hum is usually continuous, heard best
with the patient sitting or standing, and is eliminated by compression of the ipsilateral internal jugular vein.
Veins
===PAGE:2188===
Peripheral veins:
The peripheral veins are observed for varicosities, arteriovenous malformations
(AVMs) and shunts, and overlying inflammation and tenderness due to thrombophlebitis. An AVM or a
shunt produces a continuous murmur (heard on auscultation) and often a palpable thrill (because
resistance is always lower in the vein than in the artery during systole and diastole).
Neck veins:
The neck veins are examined to estimate venous wave height and waveform. Height is
proportional to right atrial pressure, and waveform reflects events in the cardiac cycle; both are best
observed in the internal jugular vein.
The jugular veins are usually examined with the patient reclining at 45°. The top of the venous column is
normally just below the clavicles (upper limit of normal: 4 cm above the sternal notch in a vertical plane).
The venous column is elevated in heart failure, volume overload, cardiac tamponade, constrictive
pericarditis, tricuspid stenosis, superior vena cava obstruction, or reduced compliance of the RV. If such
conditions are severe, the venous column can extend to jaw level, and its top can be detected only when
the patient sits upright or stands. The venous column is low in hypovolemia.
Normally, the venous column can be briefly elevated by firm hand pressure on the abdomen
(hepatojugular or abdominojugular reflux); the column falls back in a few seconds (maximum 3 respiratory
cycles or 15 sec) despite continued abdominal pressure (because a compliant RV increases its stroke
volume via the Frank-Starling mechanism). However, the column remains elevated (> 3 cm) during
abdominal pressure in disorders that cause a dilated and poorly compliant RV or in obstruction of RV
filling by tricuspid stenosis or right atrial tumor.
Normally, the venous column falls slightly during inspiration as lowered intrathoracic pressure draws blood
from the periphery into the vena cava. A rise in the venous column during inspiration (Kussmaul's sign)
occurs typically in chronic constrictive pericarditis, right ventricular MI, and COPD, and usually in heart
failure and tricuspid stenosis.
Jugular vein waves (see
Fig. 206-1
) can usually be discerned clinically but are better seen on the screen during central venous
pressure monitoring.
[Fig. 206-1.
Normal jugular vein waves.]
The
a
waves are increased in pulmonary hypertension and tricuspid valve stenosis. Giant
a
waves
(Cannon waves) are seen in atrioventricular dissociation when the atrium contracts while the tricuspid
valve is closed. The
a
waves disappear in atrial fibrillation and are accentuated when RV compliance is
poor (eg, in pulmonary hypertension or pulmonic stenosis). The
v
waves are very prominent in tricuspid
regurgitation. The
x
descent is steep in cardiac tamponade. When RV compliance is poor, the
y
descent
is very abrupt because the elevated column of venous blood rushes into the RV when the tricuspid valve
opens, only to be stopped abruptly by the rigid RV wall (in restrictive myopathy) or the pericardium (in
constrictive pericarditis).
Chest Inspection and Palpation
Chest contour and any visible cardiac impulses are inspected. The precordium is palpated for pulsations
(determining apical impulse and thus cardiac situs) and thrills.
Inspection:
Chest deformities, such as shield chest and pectus carinatum (a prominent birdlike sternum),
may be associated with hereditary disorders involving congenital cardiac defects (eg, Turner's syndrome).
Rarely, a localized upper chest bulge indicates aortic aneurysm due to syphilis. Pectus excavatum
(depressed sternum) with a narrow anteroposterior chest diameter and an abnormally straight thoracic
spine may suggest myxomatous degeneration of valves or chordae (particularly mitral) or Marfan
syndrome.
Palpation:
A central precordial heave is a palpable lifting sensation under the sternum and anterior chest
wall to the left of the sternum; it suggests severe RV hypertrophy (RVH). Occasionally, in congenital
===PAGE:2189===
disorders that cause severe RVH, the precordium visibly bulges asymmetrically to the left of the sternum.
A sustained thrust at the apex (easily differentiated from the less focal, somewhat diffuse precordial heave
of RVH) suggests LV hypertrophy (LVH). Abnormal focal systolic impulses in the precordium can
sometimes be felt in patients with a dyskinetic ventricular aneurysm. An abnormal diffuse systolic impulse
lifts the precordium in patients with severe mitral regurgitation. The lift occurs because the left atrium
expands, causing anterior cardiac displacement. A diffuse and inferolaterally displaced apical impulse is
found when the LV is dilated and hypertrophied (eg, in mitral regurgitation).
Location of thrills (palpable buzzing sensation present with particularly loud murmurs) suggests the cause
(see
Table 206-2
).
A sharp impulse at the 2nd intercostal space to the left of the sternum may result from exaggerated
pulmonic valve closure in pulmonary hypertension. A similar early systolic impulse at the cardiac apex
may represent closure of a stenotic mitral valve; opening of the stenotic valve sometimes can be felt at
the beginning of diastole. These findings coincide with an augmented 1st heart sound and an opening
snap of mitral stenosis, heard on auscultation.
Cardiac Auscultation
Auscultation of the heart requires excellent hearing and the ability to distinguish subtle
[Table 206-2.
Location of Thrills and Associated Disorders]
differences in pitch and timing. Hearing-impaired health care practitioners can use amplified
stethoscopes. High-pitched sounds are best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. Low-pitched
sounds are best heard with the bell. Very little pressure should be exerted when using the bell. Excessive
pressure converts the underlying skin into a diaphragm and eliminates very low-pitched sounds.
The entire precordium is examined systematically, typically beginning over the apical impulse with the
patient in the left lateral decubitus position. The patient rolls supine, and auscultation continues at the
lower left sternal border, proceeds cephalad with auscultation of each interspace, then caudad from the
right upper sternal border. The clinician also listens over the left axilla and above the clavicles. The
patient sits upright for auscultation of the back, then leans forward to aid auscultation of aortic and
pulmonic diastolic murmurs or pericardial friction rub.
Major auscultatory findings include
• Heart sounds
• Murmurs
• Rubs
Heart sounds
are brief, transient sounds produced by valve opening and closure; they are divided into
systolic and diastolic sounds.
Murmurs
are produced by blood flow turbulence and are more prolonged than heart sounds; they may
be systolic, diastolic, or continuous. They are graded by intensity (see
Table 206-3
) and are described by their location and when they occur within the cardiac cycle.
Rubs
are high-pitched, scratchy sounds often with 2 or 3 separate components; during tachycardia, the
sound may be almost continuous.
The clinician focuses attention sequentially on each phase of the cardiac cycle, noting each heart sound
and murmur. Intensity, pitch, duration, and timing of the sounds and the intervals between them are
analyzed, often providing an accurate diagnosis. A diagram of the major auscultatory and palpatory
===PAGE:2190===
findings of the precordium should be routinely drawn in the patient's chart each time the patient's
cardiovascular system is examined (see
Fig. 206-2
). With such diagrams, findings from each examination can be compared.
Systolic heart sounds:
Systolic sounds include the following:
• 1st heart sound (S
)
• Clicks
[Table 206-3.
Heart Murmur Intensity]
S
and the 2nd heart sound (S
, a diastolic heart sound) are normal components of the cardiac cycle, the
familiar "lub-dub" sounds.
S
occurs just after the beginning of systole and is predominantly due to mitral closure but may also
include tricuspid closure components. It is often split and has a high pitch. S
is loud in mitral stenosis. It
may be soft or absent in mitral regurgitation due to valve leaflet sclerosis and rigidity but is often distinctly
heard in mitral regurgitation due to myxomatous degeneration of the mitral apparatus or due to ventricular
myocardial abnormality (eg, papillary muscle dysfunction, ventricular dilation).
Clicks occur only during systole; they are distinguished from S
and S
by their higher pitch and briefer
duration. Some clicks occur at different times during systole as hemodynamics change. Clicks may be
single or multiple.
Clicks in congenital aortic or pulmonic stenosis are thought to result from abnormal ventricular wall
tension. These clicks occur early in systole (very near S
) and are not affected by hemodynamic
changes. Similar clicks occur in severe pulmonary hypertension. Clicks in mitral or tricuspid valve
prolapse, typically occurring in mid to late systole, are thought to result from abnormal tension on
redundant and elongated chordae tendineae or valve leaflets.
Clicks due to myxomatous degeneration of valves may occur any time during systole but move toward S
during maneuvers that transiently decrease ventricular filling volume (eg, standing, Valsalva maneuver). If
ventricular filling volume is increased (eg, by lying supine), clicks move toward S
, particularly in mitral
valve prolapse. For unknown reasons, characteristics of the clicks may vary greatly between
examinations, and clicks may come and go.
[Fig. 206-2.
Diagram of physical findings in a patient with aortic stenosis and mitral regurgitation.]
Diastolic heart sounds:
Diastolic sounds include the following:
• 2nd, 3rd, and 4th heart sounds (S
, S
, and S
)
• Diastolic knocks
• Mitral valve sounds
Unlike systolic sounds, diastolic sounds are low-pitched; they are softer in intensity and longer in
duration. Except for S
, these sounds are always abnormal in adults.
S
occurs at the beginning of diastole, due to aortic and pulmonic valve closure. Aortic valve closure
normally precedes pulmonic valve closure unless the former is late or the latter is early. Aortic valve
closure is late in left bundle branch block or aortic stenosis; pulmonic valve closure is early in some forms
of preexcitation phenomena. Delayed pulmonic valve closure may result from increased blood flow
through the RV (eg, in atrial septal defect of the common secundum variety) or complete right bundle
branch block. Increased RV flow in atrial septal defect also abolishes the normal respiratory variation in
===PAGE:2191===
aortic and pulmonic valve closure, producing a fixed split S
. Left-to-right shunts with normal RV volume
flow (eg, in membranous ventricular septal defects) do not cause fixed splitting. A single S
may occur
when the aortic valve is regurgitant, severely stenotic, or atretic (in truncus arteriosus when there is a
common valve).
S
occurs in early diastole, when the ventricle is dilated and noncompliant. It occurs during passive
diastolic ventricular filling and indicates serious ventricular dysfunction in adults; in children, it can be
normal. RV S
is heard best (sometimes only) during inspiration (because negative intrathoracic pressure
augments RV filling volume) with the patient supine. LV S
is best heard during expiration (because the
heart is nearer the chest wall) with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position.
S
is produced by augmented ventricular filling, caused by atrial contraction, near the end of diastole. It is
similar to S
and heard best or only with the bell of the stethoscope. During inspiration, RV S
increases
and LV S
decreases. S
is heard much more often than S
and indicates a lesser degree of ventricular
dysfunction, usually diastolic. S
is absent in atrial fibrillation (because the atria do not contract) but is
almost always present in active myocardial ischemia or soon after MI. S
, with or without S
, is usual in
significant systolic LV dysfunction; S
without S
is usual in diastolic LV dysfunction.
A
summation gallop
occurs when S
and S
are present in a patient with tachycardia, which shortens
diastole so that the 2 sounds merge. Loud S
and S
may be palpable at the apex when the patient is in
the left lateral decubitus position.
A
diastolic knock
occurs at the same time as S
, in early diastole. It is not accompanied by S
and is a
louder, thudding sound, which indicates abrupt arrest of ventricular filling by a noncompliant, constricting
pericardium.
An
opening snap
may occur in early diastole in mitral stenosis or, rarely, in tricuspid stenosis. Mitral
opening snap is very high pitched, brief, and heard best with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. The more
severe mitral stenosis is (ie, the higher the left atrial pressure), the closer the opening snap is to the
pulmonic component of S
. Intensity is related to the compliance of the valve leaflets: The snap sounds
loud when leaflets remain elastic, but it gradually softens and ultimately disappears as sclerosis, fibrosis,
and calcification of the valve develop. Mitral opening snap, although sometimes heard at the apex, is
often heard best or only at the lower left sternal border.
[Table 206-4.
Etiology of Murmurs by Timing]
Approach to murmurs:
Timing of the murmur in the cardiac cycle correlates with the cause (see
Table
206-4
); auscultatory findings correlate with specific heart valve disorders. Various maneuvers (eg,
inspiration, Valsalva, handgrip, squatting, amyl nitrate inhalation) can modify cardiac physiology slightly,
making differentiation of causes of heart murmur possible (see
Table 206-5
).
All patients with heart murmurs are evaluated by chest x-ray and ECG. Most require echocardiography to
confirm the diagnosis, determine severity, and track severity over time. Usually, a cardiac consultation is
obtained if significant disease is suspected.
Systolic murmurs:
Systolic murmurs may be normal or abnormal. They may be early, mid, or late
systolic, or holosystolic (pansystolic). Systolic murmurs may be divided into ejection, regurgitant, and
shunt murmurs.
Ejection murmurs
are due to turbulent forward flow through narrowed or irregular valves or outflow
tracts (eg, due to aortic or pulmonic stenosis). They are typically mid systolic and have a crescendodiminuendo character that usually becomes louder and longer as flow becomes more obstructed. The
greater the stenosis and turbulence, the longer the crescendo phase and the shorter the diminuendo
===PAGE:2192===
phase.
Systolic ejection murmurs may occur without hemodynamically significant outflow tract obstruction and
thus do not necessarily indicate a disorder. In normal infants
[Table 206-5.
Maneuvers that Aid in Diagnosis of Murmurs]
and children, flow is often mildly turbulent, producing soft ejection murmurs. The elderly often have
ejection murmurs due to valve and vessel sclerosis.
During pregnancy, many women have soft ejection murmurs at the 2nd intercostal space to the left or right
of the sternum. The murmurs occur because a physiologic increase in blood volume and cardiac output
increases flow velocity through normal structures. The murmurs may be greatly exaggerated if severe
anemia complicates the pregnancy.
Regurgitant murmurs
represent retrograde or abnormal flow (eg, due to mitral regurgitation, tricuspid
regurgitation, or ventricular septal defects) into chambers that are at lower resistance. They are typically
holosystolic and tend to be louder with high-velocity, low-volume regurgitation or shunts and softer with
high-volume regurgitation or shunts. Late systolic murmurs, which may or may not be preceded by a click,
are typical of mitral valve prolapse or papillary muscle dysfunction. Various maneuvers are usually
required for more accurate diagnosis of timing and type of murmur (see
Table 206-5
).
Shunt murmurs
may originate at the site of the shunt (eg, patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal
defects) or result from altered hemodynamics remote from the shunt (eg, pulmonic systolic flow murmur
due to an atrial septal defect with left-to-right shunt).
Diastolic murmurs:
Diastolic murmurs are always abnormal; most are early or mid diastolic, but they
may be late diastolic (presystolic). Early diastolic murmurs are typically due to aortic or pulmonic
regurgitation. Mid diastolic (or early to mid diastolic) murmurs are typically due to mitral or tricuspid
stenosis. A late diastolic murmur may be due to rheumatic mitral stenosis in a patient in sinus rhythm.
A mitral or tricuspid murmur due to an atrial tumor or thrombus may be evanescent and may vary with
position and from one examination to the next because the position of the intracardiac mass changes.
Continuous murmurs:
Continuous murmurs occur throughout the cardiac cycle. They are always
abnormal, indicating a constant shunt flow throughout systole and diastole. They may be due to various
cardiac defects (see
Table 206-4
). Some defects produce a thrill; many are associated with signs of RVH
and LVH. As pulmonary artery resistance increases in shunt lesions, the diastolic component gradually
decreases. When pulmonary and systemic resistance equalize, the murmur may disappear.
Patent ductus arteriosus murmurs are loudest at the 2nd intercostal space just below the medial end of
the left clavicle. Aorticopulmonary window murmurs are central and heard at the 3rd intercostal space
level. Murmurs of systemic arteriovenous fistulas are best heard directly over the lesions; those of
pulmonic arteriovenous fistulas and pulmonary artery branch stenosis are more diffuse and heard
throughout the chest.
During pregnancy, a continuous venous hum from breast vessels (mammary souffle) may be mistaken for
a continuous cardiac murmur.
Pericardial friction rub:
A pericardial friction rub is caused by movement of inflammatory adhesions
between visceral and parietal pericardial layers. It is a high-pitched or squeaking sound; it may be
systolic, diastolic and systolic, or triphasic (when atrial contraction accentuates the diastolic component
during late diastole). The rub sounds like pieces of leather squeaking as they are rubbed together. Rubs
are best heard with the patient leaning forward or on hands and knees with breath held in expiration.
Extremity and Abdominal Examination
The extremities and abdomen are examined for signs of fluid overload, which may occur with heart failure
===PAGE:2193===
as well as noncardiac disorders (eg, renal, hepatic, lymphatic).
Extremities:
In the extremities (primarily the legs), fluid overload is manifest as edema (,
which is swelling of soft tissues due to increased interstitial fluid. Edema may be visible on inspection, but
modest amounts of edema in very obese or muscular people may be difficult to recognize visually. Thus,
extremities are palpated for presence and degree of pitting (visible and palpable depressions caused by
pressure from the examiner's fingers, which displaces the interstitial fluid). The area of edema is
examined for extent, symmetry (ie, comparing both extremities), warmth, erythema, and tenderness. With
significant fluid overload, edema may also be present over the sacrum, genitals, or both.
Tenderness, erythema, or both, particularly when unilateral, suggests an inflammatory cause (eg, cellulitis
or thrombophlebitis). Nonpitting edema is more suggestive of lymphatic or vascular obstruction than fluid
overload.
Abdomen:
In the abdomen, significant fluid overload manifests as ascites (. Marked ascites causes visible abdominal distention, which is tense and nontender to palpation, with
shifting dullness on abdominal percussion and a fluid wave. The liver may be distended and slightly
tender, with a hepatojugular reflux ( present.
Chest Pain
Chest pain is a very common complaint. Many patients are well aware that it is a warning of potential lifethreatening disorders and seek evaluation for minimal symptoms. Other patients, including many with
serious disease, minimize or ignore its warnings. Pain perception (both character and severity) varies
greatly between individuals as well as between men and women. However described, chest pain should
never be dismissed without an explanation of its cause.
Pathophysiology
The heart, lungs, esophagus, and great vessels provide afferent visceral input through the same thoracic
autonomic ganglia. A painful stimulus in these organs is typically perceived as originating in the chest, but
because afferent nerve fibers overlap in the dorsal ganglia, thoracic pain may be felt (as referred pain)
anywhere between the umbilicus and the ear, including the upper extremities.
Painful stimuli from thoracic organs can cause discomfort described as pressure, tearing, gas with the
urge to eructate, indigestion, burning, aching, stabbing, and sometimes sharp needle-like pain. When the
sensation is visceral in origin, many patients deny they are having pain and insist it is merely "discomfort."
Etiology
Many disorders cause chest pain or discomfort. These disorders may involve the
cardiovascular, GI,
pulmonary, neurologic, or musculoskeletal systems (see
Table 206-6
).
Some disorders are immediately life threatening:
• Acute coronary syndromes (acute MI/unstable angina)
• Thoracic aortic dissection
• Tension pneumothorax
• Esophageal rupture
• Pulmonary embolism (PE)
Other causes range from serious, potential threats to life to causes that are simply uncomfortable. Often,
no cause can be confirmed even after full evaluation.
===PAGE:2194===
Overall, the most common causes are
• Chest wall disorders (ie, those involving muscle, rib, or cartilage)
• Pleural disorders
• GI disorders (eg, esophageal reflux or spasm, ulcer disease, cholelithiasis)
• Idiopathic
• Acute coronary syndromes
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should note the location, duration, character, and quality of the
pain. The patient should be asked about any precipitating events (eg, straining or overuse of chest
muscles), as well as any triggering and relieving factors. Specific factors to note include whether pain is
present during exertion or at rest, presence of psychologic stress, whether pain occurs during respiration
or coughing, difficulty swallowing, relationship to meals, and positions that relieve or exacerbate pain (eg,
lying flat, leaning forward). Previous similar episodes and their circumstances should be noted with
attention to the similarity or lack thereof. Important associated symptoms to seek include
[Table 206-6.
Some Causes of Chest Pain]
dyspnea, palpitations, syncope, diaphoresis, nausea or vomiting, cough, fever, and chills.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including leg pain, swelling, or both
(deep venous thrombosis [DVT] and therefore possible PE) and chronic weakness, malaise, and weight
loss (cancer).
Past medical history
should document known causes, particularly cardiovascular and GI disorders, and
any cardiac investigations or procedures (eg, stress testing, catheterization). Risk factors for coronary
artery disease (CAD—eg, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, tobacco use)
or PE (eg, lower extremity injury,
recent surgery, immobilization, known cancer, pregnancy) should also be
noted.
Drug history should note use of drugs that can trigger coronary artery spasm (eg, cocaine, triptans,
phosphodiesterase inhibitors) or GI disease (particularly alcohol, NSAIDs).
Family history should note history of MI (particularly at an early age) and hyperlipidemia.
Physical examination:
Vital signs and weight are measured, and body mass index (BMI) is calculated.
Pulses are palpated in both arms and both legs, BP is measured in both arms, and pulsus paradoxus is
measured.
General appearance is noted (eg, pallor, diaphoresis, cyanosis, anxiety).
Neck is inspected for venous distention and hepatojugular reflux, and the venous wave forms are noted.
The neck is palpated for carotid pulses, lymphadenopathy, or thyroid abnormality. The carotid arteries are
auscultated for bruit.
Lungs are percussed and auscultated for presence and symmetry of breath sounds, signs of congestion
(dry or wet rales, rhonchi), consolidation (pectorilloquy), pleural friction rubs, and effusion (decreased
breath sounds, dullness to percussion).
The cardiac examination notes the intensity and timing of the 1st heart sound (S
) and 2nd heart sound
(S
), the respiratory movement of the pulmonic component of S
, clicks and snap of the mitral apparatus,
===PAGE:2195===
pericardial friction rubs, murmurs, and gallops. When murmurs are detected, the timing, duration, pitch,
shape, and intensity and the response to changes of position, handgrip, and the Valsalva maneuver
should be noted. When gallops are detected, differentiation should be made between the 4th heart sound
(S
), which is often present with diastolic dysfunction or myocardial ischemia, and the 3rd heart sound
(S
), which is present with systolic dysfunction.
The chest is inspected for skin lesions of trauma or herpes zoster infection and palpated for crepitance
(suggesting subcutaneous air) and tenderness. The abdomen is palpated for tenderness, organomegaly,
and masses or tenderness, particularly in the epigastric and right upper quadrant regions.
The legs are examined for arterial pulses, adequacy of perfusion, edema, varicose veins, and signs of
DVT (eg, swelling, erythema, and tenderness).
Red flags:
Certain findings raise suspicion of a more serious etiology of chest pain:
• Abnormal vital signs (tachycardia, bradycardia, tachypnea, hypotension)
• Signs of hypoperfusion (eg, confusion, ashen color, diaphoresis)
• Shortness of breath
• Asymmetric breath sounds or pulses
• New heart murmurs
• Pulsus paradoxus > 10 mm Hg
Interpretation of findings:
Symptoms and signs of thoracic disorders vary greatly, and those of serious
and nonserious conditions often overlap. Although red flag findings indicate a high likelihood of serious
disease, and many disorders have "classic" manifestations (see
Table 206-6
), many patients who have
serious illness do not present with these classic symptoms and signs. For example, patients with
myocardial ischemia may complain only of indigestion or have a very tender chest wall on palpation. A
high index of suspicion is important when evaluating patients with chest pain. Nonetheless, some
distinctions and generalizations are possible.
Duration of pain
can provide clues to the severity of the disorder. Long-standing pain (ie, for weeks or
months) is not a manifestation of a disorder that is immediately life threatening. Such pain is often
musculoskeletal in origin, although GI origin or a cancer should be considered, particularly in patients who
are elderly. Similarly, brief (< 5 sec), sharp, intermittent pains rarely result from serious disorders. Serious
disorders typically manifest pain lasting minutes to hours, although episodes may be recurrent (eg,
unstable angina may cause several bouts of pain over 1 or more days).
Patient age
is helpful in evaluating chest pain. Chest pain in children and young adults (< 30 yr) is less
likely to result from myocardial ischemia, although MI can occur in people in their 20s. Musculoskeletal
and pulmonary disorders are more common causes in these age groups.
Exacerbation and relief
of symptoms also are helpful in evaluating chest pain. Although angina can be
felt anywhere between the ear and the umbilicus (and often not in the chest), it is typically consistently
related to physical or emotional stress, ie, patients do not experience angina from climbing one flight of
stairs one day and tolerate 3 flights the next day. Nocturnal angina is characteristic of heart failure or
coronary artery spasm.
Pain from many disorders, both serious and minor, can be exacerbated by respiration, movement, or
palpation of the chest. These findings are not specific for origin in the chest wall; about 15% of patients
with acute MI have chest tenderness on palpation.
Nitroglycerin may relieve pain of both myocardial ischemia and noncardiac smooth muscle spasm (eg,
esophageal or biliary disorders); its efficacy or lack thereof should not be used for diagnosis.
===PAGE:2196===
Associated findings
may also suggest a cause. Fever is nonspecific but, if accompanied by cough,
suggests a pulmonary cause. Patients with Raynaud's syndrome or migraine headaches sometimes have
coronary spasm.
The presence or absence of risk factors for CAD (eg, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, smoking,
obesity, diabetes, positive family history) alters the probability of underlying CAD but does not help
diagnose the cause of a given episode of acute chest pain. Patients with those factors may well have
another cause of chest pain, and patients without them may have an acute coronary syndrome. However,
known CAD in a patient with chest pain raises the likelihood of that diagnosis as the cause (particularly if
the patient describes the symptoms as "like my angina" or "like my last heart attack").
Testing:
For adults with acute chest pain, immediate life threats must be ruled out. Most patients should
initially have pulse oximetry, ECG, and chest x-ray. If symptoms suggest an acute coronary syndrome or if
no other cause is clear (particularly in at-risk patients), troponin and CK levels are measured. If a PE is
considered possible, D-dimer testing is done. Expeditious evaluation is essential because if MI or other
acute coronary syndrome is present, the patient should be sent immediately to the heart catheterization
laboratory (when available); the therapeutic window for primary percutaneous coronary intervention is 90
min and that for thrombolysis is only slightly longer.
Some abnormal findings on these tests confirm a diagnosis (eg, acute MI, pneumothorax, pneumonia).
Other abnormalities suggest a diagnosis or at least the need to pursue further investigation (eg, abnormal
aortic contour suggests need for testing for thoracic aortic dissection). Thus, if these initial test results are
normal, thoracic aortic dissection, tension pneumothorax, and esophageal rupture are highly unlikely.
However, in acute coronary syndromes, ECG may not change for several hours or sometimes not at all,
and in PE, oxygenation may be normal. Thus, other studies may need to be obtained based on findings
from the history and physical examination (see
Table 206-6
).
Because a single normal set of cardiac markers does not rule out a cardiac cause, patients whose
symptoms suggest an acute coronary syndrome should have serial measurement of cardiac markers
(troponin and CK-MB fraction) and ECGs. Some clinicians follow these tests (acutely or within several
days) with a stress ECG or a stress imaging test. Drug treatment is begun while awaiting results from the
2nd set of markers unless there is a clear contraindication. A diagnostic trial of sublingual nitroglycerin or
an oral liquid antacid does not adequately differentiate myocardial ischemia from gastroesophageal reflux
disease or gastritis. Either drug may relieve symptoms of either disorder. Troponin will be elevated in all
acute coronary syndromes except new-onset angina and often in other disorders that damage the
myocardium (eg, myocarditis, pericarditis, aortic dissection involving coronary artery flow, PE, heart
failure, severe sepsis). CK may be elevated from damage to any muscle tissue, but CK-MB elevation is
specific to damage to the myocardium. ST-segment abnormality on the ECG may be nonspecific or due to
antecedent disorders, so comparison with previous ECGs is important.
The likelihood of PE is affected by a number of factors (see
Table 194-2
, which can be used in an algorithm to derive an approach to testing.
In patients with chronic chest pain, immediate threats to life are unlikely. Most clinicians initially obtain a
chest x-ray and do other tests based on symptoms and signs.
Treatment
Specific identified disorders are treated. If etiology is not clearly benign, patients are usually admitted to
the hospital or an observation unit for cardiac monitoring and more extensive evaluation. Symptoms are
treated with acetaminophen or opioids as needed (, pending a diagnosis. Pain relief following
opioid treatment should not diminish the urgency of ruling out serious and life-threatening disease.
Geriatrics Essentials
The probability of serious and life-threatening disease increases with age. Many elderly patients recover
more slowly than younger patients but survive for significant time if properly diagnosed and treated. Drug
===PAGE:2197===
doses are usually lower, and rapidity of dose escalation is slower. Chronic disorders (eg, decreased renal
function) are often present and may complicate diagnosis and treatment.
Key Points
• Immediate life threats must be ruled out first.
• Some serious disorders, particularly coronary ischemia and PE, often do not have a classic
presentation.
• Most patients should have pulse oximetry, ECG, cardiac markers, and chest x-ray.
• Evaluation must be prompt so that patients with ST-elevation MI can be in the heart catheterization
laboratory (or have thrombolysis) within the 90-min standard.
• If PE is highly likely, antithrombin drugs should be given while the diagnosis is pursued; another
embolus in a patient who is not receiving anticoagulants may be fatal.
Edema
Edema is swelling of soft tissues due to increased interstitial fluid. The fluid is predominantly water, but
protein and cell-rich fluid can accumulate if there is infection or lymphatic obstruction.
Edema may be generalized or local (eg, limited to a single extremity or part of an extremity). It sometimes
appears abruptly; patients complain that an extremity suddenly swells. More often, edema develops
insidiously, beginning with weight gain, puffy eyes at awakening in the morning, and tight shoes at the
end of the day. Slowly developing edema may become massive before patients seek medical care.
Edema itself causes few symptoms other than occasionally a feeling of tightness or fullness; other
symptoms are usually related to the underlying disorder. Patients with edema due to heart failure (a
common cause) often have dyspnea during exertion, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
Patients with edema due to deep venous thrombosis (DVT) often have pain.
Edema due to extracellular fluid volume expansion is often dependent. Thus, in ambulatory patients,
edema is in the feet and lower legs; patients requiring bed rest develop edema in the buttocks, genitals,
and posterior thighs. Women who lie on only one side may develop edema in the dependent breast.
Lymphatic obstruction causes edema distal to the site of obstruction.
Pathophysiology
Edema results from increased movement of fluid from the intravascular to the interstitial space or
decreased movement of water from the interstitium into the capillaries or lymphatic vessels. The
mechanism involves one or more of the following:
• Increased capillary hydrostatic pressure
• Decreased plasma oncotic pressure
• Increased capillary permeability
• Obstruction of the lymphatic system
As fluid shifts into the interstitial space, intravascular volume is depleted. Intravascular volume depletion
activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-ADH system, resulting in renal Na retention. By increasing
osmolality, renal Na retention triggers water retention by the kidneys and helps maintain plasma volume.
Increased renal Na retention also may be a primary cause of fluid overload and hence edema. Excessive
exogenous Na intake may also contribute.
===PAGE:2198===
Less often, edema results from decreased movement of fluid out of the interstitial space into the
capillaries due to lack of adequate plasma oncotic pressure as in nephrotic syndrome, protein-losing
enteropathy, or starvation.
Increased capillary permeability occurs in infections or as the result of toxin or inflammatory damage to
the capillary walls.
The lymphatic system is responsible for removing protein and WBCs (along with some water) from the
interstitium. Lymphatic obstruction allows these substances to accumulate in the interstitium.
Etiology
Generalized edema
is most commonly caused by
• Heart failure
• Liver failure
• Kidney disorders (especially nephrotic syndrome)
Localized edema
is most commonly caused by
• DVT or another venous obstruction (eg, by tumor)
• Infection
• Angioedema
• Lymphatic obstruction
Chronic venous insufficiency may involve one or both legs.
Common causes are listed by primary mechanism in
Table 206-7
.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should include location and duration of edema and presence and
degree of pain or discomfort.
[Table 206-7.
Some Causes of Edema]
Female patients should be asked whether they are pregnant and whether edema seems related to
menstrual periods. Having patients with chronic edema keep a log of weight gain or loss is valuable.
Review of systems
should include symptoms of causative disorders, including dyspnea during exertion,
orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (heart failure); alcohol or hepatotoxin exposure, jaundice,
and easy bruising (a liver disorder); malaise and anorexia (cancer or a liver or kidney disorder); and
immobilization, extremity injury, or recent surgery (DVT).
Past medical history
should include any disorders known to cause edema, including heart, liver, and
kidney disorders and cancer (including any related surgery or radiation therapy). The history should also
include predisposing conditions for these causes, including streptococcal infection, recent viral infection
(eg, hepatitis), chronic alcohol abuse, and hypercoagulable disorders. Drug history should include
specific questions about drugs known to cause edema (see
Table 206-7
). Patients are asked about the
amount of Na used in cooking and at the table.
Physical examination:
The area of edema is identified and examined for extent, warmth, erythema, and
===PAGE:2199===
tenderness; symmetry or lack of it is noted. Presence and degree of pitting (visible and palpable
depressions caused by pressure from the examiner's fingers on the edematous area, which displaces the
interstitial fluid) are noted.
In the general examination, the skin is inspected for jaundice, bruising, and spider angiomas (suggesting
a liver disorder).
Lungs are examined for dullness to percussion, reduced or exaggerated breath sounds, crackles, rhonchi,
and pleural friction rub.
The internal jugular vein height, waveform, and reflux are noted.
The heart is palpated for thrills, thrust, parasternal lift, and asynchronous abnormal systolic bulge.
Auscultation for 3rd (S
) or 4th (S
) heart sounds, murmurs, and pericardial rub or knock is done; all
suggest cardiac origin.
The abdomen is inspected, palpated, and percussed for ascites, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly to
check for a liver disorder or heart failure. The kidneys are palpated, and the bladder is percussed. An
abnormal abdominal mass, if present, should be palpated.
Red flags:
Certain findings raise suspicion of a more serious etiology of edema:
• Sudden onset
• Significant pain
• Shortness of breath
• History of a heart disorder or an abnormal cardiac examination
• Hemoptysis, dyspnea, or pleural friction rub
• Hepatomegaly, jaundice, ascites, splenomegaly, or hematemesis
• Unilateral leg swelling with tenderness
Interpretation of findings:
Potential acute life threats, which typically manifest with sudden onset of
focal edema, must be identified. Such a presentation suggests acute DVT, soft-tissue infection, or
angioedema. Acute DVT may lead to pulmonary embolism (PE), which can be fatal. Soft-tissue infections
range from minor to life threatening, depending on the infecting organism and the patient's health. Acute
angioedema sometimes progresses to involve the airway, with serious consequences.
Dyspnea may occur with edema due to heart failure, DVT if PE has occurred, acute respiratory distress
syndrome, or angioedema that involves the airways.
Generalized, slowly developing edema suggests a chronic heart, kidney, or liver disorder. Although these
disorders can also be life threatening, complications tend to take much longer to develop.
These factors and other clinical features help suggest the cause (see
Table 206-7
).
Testing:
For most patients with generalized edema, testing should include CBC, serum electrolytes,
BUN, creatinine, liver function tests, serum protein, and urinalysis (particularly noting the presence of
protein and microscopic hematuria). Other tests should be done based on the suspected cause (see
Table 206-7
)—eg, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) for suspected heart failure or D-dimer for suspected
PE.
Patients with isolated lower-extremity swelling should usually have venous obstruction excluded by
ultrasonography.
===PAGE:2200===
Treatment
Specific causes are treated.
Patients with Na retention often benefit from restriction of dietary Na. Patients with heart failure should
eliminate salt in cooking and at the table and avoid prepared foods with added salt. Patients with
advanced cirrhosis or nephrotic syndrome often require more severe Na restriction (≤ 1 g/day). K salts
are often substituted for Na salts to make Na restriction tolerable; however, care should be taken,
especially in patients receiving K-sparing diuretics, ACE inhibitors, or angiotensin receptor blockers and in
those with a kidney disorder because potentially fatal hyperkalemia can result.
People with conditions involving Na retention may also benefit from loop or thiazide diuretics. However,
diuretics should not be prescribed only to improve the appearance caused by edema. When diuretics are
used, K wasting can be dangerous in some patients; K-sparing diuretics (eg, amiloride, triamterene,
spironolactone, eplerenone) inhibit Na reabsorption in the distal nephron and collecting duct. When used
alone, they modestly increase Na excretion. Both triamterene and amiloride have been combined with a
thiazide to prevent K wasting. An ACE inhibitor-thiazide combination also reduces K wasting.
Geriatrics Essentials
In the elderly, use of drugs that treat causes of edema requires special caution, such as the following:
• Starting doses low and evaluating patients thoroughly when the dose is changed
• Monitoring for orthostatic hypotension if diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, or
β
-
blockers are used
• Evaluating for bradycardia or heart block if digoxin, rate-limiting Ca channel blockers, or
β
-blockers are
used
• Frequently testing for hypokalemia or hyperkalemia
• Not stopping Ca channel blockers because of pedal edema, which is benign
Logging daily weight helps in monitoring clinical improvement or deterioration immensely.
Key Points
• Edema may result from a generalized or local process.
•
Main causes of generalized edema are chronic heart, liver, and kidney disorders.
• Sudden onset should trigger prompt evaluation.
• Edema may occur anywhere in the body, including the brain.
• Not all edema is harmful; consequences depend mainly on the cause.
Orthostatic Hypotension
Orthostatic (postural) hypotension is an excessive fall in BP when an upright position is assumed. The
consensus definition is a drop of > 20 mm Hg systolic, 10 mm Hg diastolic, or both. Symptoms of
faintness, light-headedness, dizziness, confusion, or blurred vision occur within seconds to a few minutes
of standing and resolve rapidly on lying down. Some patients experience falls, syncope (, or
even generalized seizures. Exercise or a heavy meal may exacerbate symptoms. Most other associated
symptoms and signs relate to the cause. Orthostatic hypotension is a manifestation of abnormal BP
regulation due to various conditions, not a specific disorder.
===PAGE:2201===
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS):
POTS (also called postural autonomic
tachycardia or chronic or idiopathic orthostatic intolerance) is a syndrome of orthostatic intolerance in
younger patients. Various symptoms (eg, fatigue, light-headedness, exercise intolerance, cognitive
impairment) and tachycardia occur with standing; however, there is little or no fall in BP. The reason for
symptoms is unclear.
Pathophysiology
Normally, the gravitational stress of suddenly standing causes blood (1/2 to 1 L) to pool in the
capacitance veins of the legs and trunk. The subsequent transient decrease in venous return reduces
cardiac output and thus BP. In response, baroreceptors in the aortic arch and carotid bodies activate
autonomic reflexes to rapidly return BP to normal. The sympathetic system increases heart rate and
contractility and increases vasomotor tone of the capacitance vessels. Simultaneous parasympathetic
(vagal) inhibition also increases heart rate. In most people, changes in BP and heart rate with standing
are minimal and transient, and symptoms do not occur.
With continued standing, activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and ADH secretion
cause Na and water retention and increase circulating blood volume.
Etiology
Homeostatic mechanisms may be inadequate to restore low BP if afferent, central, or efferent portions of
the autonomic reflex arc are impaired by disorders or drugs, if myocardial contractility or vascular
responsiveness is depressed, if hypovolemia is present, or if hormonal responses are faulty (see
Table 206-8
).
Causes differ depending on whether symptoms are acute or chronic.
The most common causes of acute orthostatic hypotension include
• Hypovolemia
• Drugs
• Prolonged bed rest
• Adrenal insufficiency
The most common causes of chronic orthostatic hypotension include
• Age-related changes in BP regulation
• Drugs
• Autonomic dysfunction
Postprandial orthostatic hypotension is also common. It may be caused by the insulin response to highcarbohydrate meals and blood pooling in the GI tract; this condition is worsened by alcohol intake.
Evaluation
Orthostatic hypotension is diagnosed when a marked fall in measured BP and symptoms suggesting
hypotension are provoked by standing and relieved by lying down. A cause must be sought.
History: History of present illness
should identify the duration and severity (eg, whether associated
with syncope or falls) of symptoms. The patient is asked about known triggers (eg, drugs, bed rest, fluid
loss) and the relationship of symptoms to meals.
===PAGE:2202===
Review of symptoms
seeks symptoms of causative disorders, particularly symptoms of autonomic
insufficiency such as visual impairment (due to mydriasis and loss of accommodation), incontinence or
urinary retention, constipation, heat intolerance (due to impaired sweating), and erectile dysfunction.
Other important symptoms include tremor, rigidity, and difficulty walking (Parkinson's disease, multiple
system atrophy); weakness and fatigue (adrenal insufficiency, anemia); and black, tarry stool (GI
hemorrhage). Other symptoms of neurologic and cardiovascular disorders and cancer are noted.
[Table 206-8.
Causes of Orthostatic Hypotension]
Past medical history
should identify known potential causes, including diabetes, Parkinson's disease,
and cancer (ie, causing a paraneoplastic syndrome). The drug profile should be reviewed for offending
prescription drugs (see
Table 206-8
) particularly
antihypertensives and nitrates. A family history of
orthostatic symptoms suggests possible familial dysautonomia.
Physical examination:
BP and heart rate are measured after 5 min supine and at 1 and 3 min after
standing; patients unable to stand may be assessed while sitting upright. Hypotension without a
compensatory increase in heart rate (< 10 beats/min) suggests autonomic impairment. Marked increase
(to > 100 beats/min or by > 30 beats/min) suggests hypovolemia or, if symptoms develop without
hypotension, POTS.
The skin and mucosae are inspected for signs of dehydration and for pigment changes suggestive of
Addison's disease (eg, hyperpigmented areas, vitiligo). A rectal examination is done to detect GI bleeding.
During the neurologic examination, GU and rectal reflexes are tested to evaluate autonomic function;
assessment includes the cremasteric reflex (normally, stroking the thigh results in retraction of the testes),
anal wink reflex (normally, stroking perianal skin results in contraction of the anal sphincter), and
bulbocavernosus reflex (normally, squeezing the glans penis or clitoris results in contraction of the anal
sphincter). Signs of peripheral neuropathy (eg, abnormalities of strength, sensation, and deep tendon
reflexes) are assessed.
Red flags:
Certain findings suggest a more serious etiology:
• Bloody or heme-positive stool
• Abnormal neurologic examination
Interpretation of findings:
In patients with acute symptoms, the most common causes—drugs, bed rest,
and volume depletion—are often apparent clinically.
In patients with chronic symptoms, an important goal is to detect any neurologic disorder causing
autonomic dysfunction. Patients with movement abnormalities may have Parkinson's disease or multiple
system atrophy. Patients with findings of peripheral neuropathy may have an apparent cause (eg,
diabetes, alcoholism), but a paraneoplastic syndrome due to an occult cancer and amyloidosis must be
considered. Patients who have only peripheral autonomic symptoms may have pure autonomic failure.
Testing:
ECG and serum electrolytes and glucose are routinely checked. However, these and other tests
are usually of little benefit unless suggested by specific symptoms.
Autonomic function can be evaluated with bedside cardiac monitoring. When the autonomic system is
intact, heart rate increases in response to inspiration. The heart is monitored as the patient breathes
slowly and deeply (about a 5-sec inspiration and a 7-sec expiration) for 1 min. The longest interbeat (R-R)
interval during expiration is normally at least 1.15 times the minimum R-R interval during inspiration; a
shorter interval suggests autonomic dysfunction. A similar variation in R-R interval should exist between
rest and a 10- to 15-sec Valsalva maneuver. Patients with abnormal R-R intervals or with autonomic
symptoms or signs require further evaluation for diabetes, Parkinson's disease, and possibly multiple
system atrophy ( and pure autonomic failure (; the last may require plasma
norepinephrine or ADH (vasopressin) measurements with the patient supine and upright.
===PAGE:2203===
The dose of a suspected drug may be reduced or the drug stopped to confirm the drug as the cause.
Tilt table testing
( may be done when autonomic dysfunction is suspected; it gives more
consistent results than supine and upright BP assessment and eliminates augmentation of venous return
by leg muscle contraction. The patient may remain upright for 30 to 45 min of BP assessment.
Treatment
Patients requiring prolonged bed rest should sit up each day and exercise in bed when possible. Patients
should rise slowly from a recumbent or sitting position, consume adequate fluids, limit or avoid alcohol,
and exercise regularly when feasible. Regular modest-intensity exercise promotes overall vascular tone
and reduces venous pooling. Elderly patients should avoid prolonged standing. Sleeping with the head of
the bed raised may relieve symptoms by promoting Na retention and reducing nocturnal diuresis.
Postprandial hypotension can often be prevented by reducing the size and carbohydrate content of
meals, minimizing alcohol intake, and avoiding sudden standing after meals.
Waist-high fitted elastic hose may increase venous return, cardiac output, and BP after standing. In
severe cases, inflatable aviator-type antigravity suits, although often poorly tolerated, may be needed to
produce adequate leg and abdominal counterpressure.
Increasing Na intake may expand intravascular volume and lessen symptoms. In the absence of heart
failure or hypertension, Na intake can be increased 5 to 10 g above the usual dietary level by liberally
salting food or
taking NaCl tablets. This approach risks heart failure, particularly in elderly patients and
patients with impaired myocardial function; development of dependent edema without heart failure does
not contraindicate continuing this approach.
Fludrocortisone, a mineralocorticoid, causes Na retention, which expands plasma volume, and often
lessens symptoms but is effective only when Na intake is adequate. Dosage is 0.1 mg po at bedtime,
increased weekly to 1 mg or until peripheral edema occurs. This drug may also improve the peripheral
vasoconstrictor response to sympathetic stimulation. Supine hypertension, heart failure, and hypokalemia
may occur; K supplements may be needed.
Midodrine, a peripheral
α
-agonist that is both an arterial and venous constrictor, is often effective. Dosage
is 2.5 mg to 10 mg po tid. Adverse effects include paresthesias and itching (probably secondary to
piloerection). This drug is not recommended for patients with coronary artery or peripheral arterial
disease.
NSAIDs (eg, indomethacin 25 to 50 mg po tid) may inhibit prostaglandin-induced vasodilation, increasing
peripheral vascular resistance. However, NSAIDs may cause GI symptoms and unwanted vasopressor
reactions (reported with concurrent use of indomethacin and sympathomimetic drugs).
L-Dihydroxyphenylserine, a norepinephrine precursor, may be beneficial for autonomic dysfunction
(reported in limited trials).
Propranolol or other
β
-blockers may enhance the beneficial effects of Na and mineralocorticoid therapy.
β
-Blockade with propranolol leads to unopposed
α
-adrenergic peripheral vascular vasoconstriction,
preventing the vasodilation that occurs when some patients stand.
Geriatrics Essentials
Orthostatic hypotension occurs in about 20% of the elderly; it is more common among people with
coexisting disorders, especially hypertension, and among residents of long-term care facilities. Many falls
may result from unrecognized orthostatic hypotension.
The increased incidence in the elderly is due to decreased baroreceptor responsiveness plus decreased
arterial compliance. Decreased baroreceptor responsiveness delays cardioacceleration and peripheral
===PAGE:2204===
vasoconstriction in response to standing. Paradoxically, hypertension may contribute to poor baroreceptor
sensitivity, increasing vulnerability to orthostatic hypotension. The elderly also have decreased resting
parasympathetic tone, so that cardioacceleration due to reflex vagal withdrawal is lessened.
Key Points
• Orthostatic hypotension typically involves volume depletion or autonomic dysfunction.
• Some degree of autonomic dysfunction is common in the elderly, but neurologic disorders must be ruled
out.
• Bedside tests of autonomic function and often tilt table testing are done.
• Treatment involves physical measures to reduce venous pooling, increased Na intake, and sometimes
fludrocortisone or midodrine.
Palpitations
Palpitations are the perception of cardiac activity. They are often described as a fluttering, racing, or
skipping sensation. They are common; some patients find them unpleasant and alarming. Palpitations can
occur in the absence of heart disease or can result from life-threatening heart disorders. The key to
diagnosis and treatment is to "capture" the rhythm on ECG and make careful observations during the
palpitations.
Pathophysiology
The mechanisms responsible for the sensation of palpitations are unknown. Ordinarily, sinus rhythm at a
normal rate is not perceived, and palpitations thus usually reflect changes in cardiac rate, rhythm, or
contractility. In all cases, it is the abnormal movement of the heart within the chest that is felt. In cases of
isolated extrasystoles, the patient may actually perceive the augmented post-extrasystolic beat as the
"skipped" beat rather than the premature beat itself, probably because the extrasystole blocks the next
sinus beat and allows longer ventricular filling and thus a higher stroke volume.
The clinical perception of cardiac phenomena is highly variable. Some patients are aware of virtually
every premature ventricular beat, but others are unaware of even complex atrial or ventricular
tachyarrhythmias. Awareness is heightened in sedentary, anxious, or depressed patients and reduced in
active, happy patients. In some cases, palpitations are perceived in the absence of any abnormal cardiac
activity.
Etiology
Some patients simply have heightened awareness of normal cardiac activity, particularly when exercise,
febrile illness, or anxiety increases heart rate. However, in most cases, palpitations result from arrhythmia.
Arrhythmias range from benign to life threatening.
The
most common arrhythmias
include
• Premature atrial contractions (PACs)
• Premature ventricular contractions (PVCs)
Both of these arrhythmias usually are harmless.
Other common arrhythmias include
• Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT)
• Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia
===PAGE:2205===
• Atrial fibrillation or flutter
• Ventricular tachycardia
• Bradyarrhythmias and heart block
Causes of arrhythmias:
Some arrhythmias (eg, PACs, PVCs, PSVT) often occur spontaneously in
patients without serious underlying disorders, but others are often caused by a serious cardiac disorder.
Serious cardiac causes
include myocardial ischemia or other myocardial disorders, congenital heart
disease, valvular heart disease, and conduction system disturbances (eg, disturbances that cause
bradycardia or heart block). Patients with orthostatic hypotension commonly sense palpitations caused by
sinus tachycardia on standing.
Noncardiac disorders
that increase myocardial contractility (eg, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma,
anxiety) may cause palpitations.
Some drugs, including digitalis, caffeine, alcohol, nicotine, and sympathomimetics (eg, albuterol,
amphetamines, cocaine, dobutamine, epinephrine, ephedrine, isoproterenol, norepinephrine, and
theophylline), frequently cause palpitations.
Metabolic disturbances, including anemia, hypoxia, hypovolemia, and electrolyte abnormalities (eg,
diuretic-induced hypokalemia), can trigger or exacerbate palpitations.
Consequences:
Many arrhythmias that cause palpitations have no adverse physiologic consequences
of their own (ie, independent of the underlying disorder). However, bradyarrhythmias, tachyarrhythmias,
and heart blocks can be unpredictable and may adversely affect cardiac output and cause hypotension or
death. Ventricular tachycardia sometimes degenerates to ventricular fibrillation.
Evaluation
A complete history and physical examination are essential. Observations by other medical personnel or
reliable observers should be sought.
History: History of present illness
should cover the frequency and duration of palpitations and
provoking or exacerbating factors (eg, emotional distress, activity, change in position, intake of caffeine or
other drugs). Important associated symptoms include syncope, light-headedness, tunnel vision, dyspnea,
and chest pain. Asking the patient to tap out the rate and cadence of palpitations is better than a verbal
description and often allows a definitive diagnosis, as in the "missed beat" of atrial or ventricular
extrasystoles or the rapid total irregularity of atrial fibrillation.
Review of systems
should cover symptoms of causative disorders, including heat intolerance, weight
loss, and tremor (hyperthyroidism); chest pain and dyspnea on exertion (cardiac ischemia); and fatigue,
weakness, heavy vaginal bleeding, and dark tar-like stools (anemia).
Past medical history
should identify known potential causes, including documented arrhythmias and
heart or thyroid disorders. Family history should note occurrences of syncope or sudden death at an early
age.
The drug profile should be reviewed for offending prescription drugs (eg, antiarrhythmics, digitalis,
β
-
agonists, theophylline, and rate-limiting drugs); OTC drugs (eg, cold and sinus medications, dietary
supplements containing stimulants), including alternative medicines; and illicit drugs (eg, cocaine,
methamphetamines). Caffeine (eg, coffee, tea, numerous soft drinks and energy drinks), alcohol, and
tobacco use should be determined.
Physical examination:
The general examination should note whether an anxious demeanor or
psychomotor agitation is present. Vital signs are reviewed for fever, hypertension, hypotension,
===PAGE:2206===
tachycardia, bradycardia, tachypnea, and low O
saturation. Orthostatic changes in BP and heart rate
should be measured.
Examination of the head and neck should note any abnormality or dyssynchrony of the jugular pulse
waves compared with the carotid pulse or auscultated heart rhythm and findings of hyperthyroidism, such
as thyroid enlargement or tenderness and exophthalmos. The conjunctivae, palmar creases, and buccal
mucosa should be inspected for pallor.
Cardiac auscultation should note the rate and regularity of the rhythm as well as any murmurs or extra
heart sounds that might indicate underlying valvular or structural heart disease.
Neurologic examination should note whether resting tremors or brisk reflexes are present (suggesting
excess sympathetic stimulation). An abnormal neurologic finding suggests that seizures rather than a
cardiac disorder may be the cause if syncope is one of the symptoms.
Red flags:
Certain findings suggest a more serious etiology:
• Light-headedness or syncope (particularly if injury occurs from syncope)
• Chest pain
• New onset of irregularly irregular heart rhythm
• Heart rate >120 beats/min or < 45 beats/min while at rest
• Significant underlying heart disease
• Family history of sudden death
Interpretation of findings:
History (see
Table 206-9
) and, to a lesser extent, physical examination provide clues to the diagnosis.
Palpation of the arterial pulse and cardiac auscultation may reveal a rhythm disturbance. However, the
examination is not always diagnostic of a specific rhythm, except when it identifies the unique irregular
irregularity of some cases of rapid atrial fibrillation, the regular irregularity of coupled atrial or ventricular
extrasystoles, the regular tachycardia at 150 beats/min of atrial flutter (in adults, this rate is rare with any
other arrhythmia), and the regular bradycardia of < 35 beats/min of complete atrioventricular block.
Careful examination of the jugular venous pulse waves simultaneously with cardiac auscultation and
palpation of the carotid artery allows diagnosis of most arrhythmias if an ECG is not available, because
the jugular waves will show the atrial rhythm while the auscultated sounds or the pulse in the carotids are
the product of ventricular contraction.
[Table 206-9.
Suggestive Historical Findings with Palpitations]
Thyroid enlargement or tenderness with exophthalmos suggests thyrotoxicosis. Marked hypertension and
regular tachycardia suggest pheochromocytoma.
Testing:
Testing typically is done.
• ECG, sometimes with ambulatory monitoring
• Laboratory testing
• Sometimes imaging studies, stress testing, or both
ECG
is done, but unless the recording is done while symptoms are occurring, it may not provide a
diagnosis. Many cardiac arrhythmias are intermittent and show no fixed ECG abnormalities; exceptions
include
===PAGE:2207===
• Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
• Long QT syndrome
• Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia cardiomyopathy
• Brugada syndrome and its variants
If no diagnosis is apparent and symptoms are frequent, Holter monitoring for 24 to 48 h is useful; for
intermittent symptoms, an event recorder worn for longer periods and activated by the patient when
symptoms are felt is better. These tests are used mainly when a sustained arrhythmia is suspected, rather
than when symptoms suggest only occasional skipped beats. Patients with very infrequent symptoms that
clinicians suspect represent a serious arrhythmia may have a device implanted beneath the skin of the
upper chest. This device continuously records the rhythm and can be interrogated by an external machine
that allows the cardiac rhythm to be printed.
Laboratory testing
is needed in all patients. All patients should have measurement of CBC, serum
electrolytes including Mg and Ca, and C-reactive protein (indicating inflammation that may be affecting
the heart or coronary arteries). Cardiac markers (eg, troponin and CK) should be measured in patients
with ongoing arrhythmias, chest discomfort, or other symptoms suggesting active or recent coronary
ischemia, myocarditis, or pericarditis.
Thyroid function tests are indicated when atrial fibrillation is newly diagnosed or there are symptoms of
hyperthyroidism. Patients with paroxysms of high BP should be evaluated for pheochromocytoma.
Sometimes tilt-table testing is done in patients with postural syncope.
Imaging
is often needed. Patients with findings suggesting cardiac dysfunction or structural heart
disease require echocardiography and sometimes cardiac MRI. Patients with symptoms on exertion
require stress testing sometimes with stress echocardiography, nuclear scanning, or PET.
Treatment
Precipitating drugs and substances are stopped. If dangerous or debilitating arrhythmias are caused by a
necessary therapeutic drug, a different drug should be tried.
For isolated PACs and PVCs in patients without structural heart disease, simple reassurance is
appropriate. For otherwise healthy patients in whom these phenomena are disabling, a
β
-blocker can be
given provided efforts are made to avoid reinforcing the perception by anxious patients that they have a
serious disorder.
Identified rhythm disturbances and underlying disorders are investigated and treated (see
Table 206-10
).
Geriatrics Essentials
Elderly patients are at particular risk of adverse effects of antiarrhythmics; reasons include lower GFR
and concomitant use of other drugs. When drug treatment is needed, lower doses should be used to
start. Subclinical conduction abnormalities may be present (recognized on ECG or other studies), which
might worsen with use of antiarrhythmics; such patients may require a pacemaker to allow the use of
antiarrhythmics.
Key Points
• Palpitations are a frequent but relatively nonspecific symptom.
• Palpitations are not a reliable indicator of a significant arrhythmia, but palpitations in a patient with
===PAGE:2208===
structural heart disease or an abnormal ECG may be a sign of a serious problem and warrant
investigation.
• An ECG or other recording done during symptoms is essential; a normal ECG in a symptom-free interval
does not rule out significant disease.
• Most antiarrhythmics themselves can cause arrhythmias.
• If in doubt about a rapid tachyarrhythmia in a patient in hemodynamic distress, use electrocardioversion
first and ask questions later.
Syncope
Syncope
is a sudden, brief loss of consciousness (LOC) with loss of postural tone followed by
spontaneous revival. The patient
[Table 206-10.
Some Treatments for Arrhythmias]
is motionless and limp and usually has cool extremities, a weak pulse, and shallow breathing.
Near syncope
is light-headedness and a sense of an impending faint without LOC. It is usually classified
and discussed with syncope because the causes are the same.
Seizures
can cause sudden LOC but are not considered syncope. However, seizures must be
considered in patients presenting for apparent syncope because history may be unclear or unavailable,
and some seizures do not cause tonic-clonic convulsions. Furthermore, a brief (< 5 sec) seizure
sometimes occurs with true syncope.
Diagnosis depends on a careful history, eyewitness accounts, or fortuitous examination during the event.
Pathophysiology
Most syncope results from insufficient cerebral blood flow. Some cases involve adequate flow but with
insufficient cerebral substrate (O
, glucose, or both).
Insufficient cerebral blood flow:
Most deficiencies in cerebral blood flow result from decreased cardiac
output (CO).
Decreased CO
can be caused by
• Cardiac disorders that obstruct outflow
• Cardiac disorders of systolic dysfunction
• Cardiac disorders of diastolic dysfunction
• Arrhythmias (too fast or too slow)
• Conditions that decrease venous return
Outflow obstruction can be exacerbated by exercise, vasodilation, and hypovolemia (particularly in aortic
stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), which may precipitate syncope.
Arrhythmias cause syncope when the heart rate is too fast to allow adequate ventricular filling (eg, > 150
to 180 beats/min) or too slow to provide adequate output (eg, < 30 to 35 beats/min).
Venous return can be decreased by hemorrhage, increased intrathoracic pressure, increased vagal tone
(which can also decrease heart rate), and loss of sympathetic tone (eg, from drugs, carotid sinus
===PAGE:2209===
pressure, autonomic dysfunction). Syncope involving these mechanisms (except for hemorrhage) is often
termed
vasovagal
or neurocardiogenic and is common and benign.
Orthostatic hypotension, a common benign cause of syncope, results from failure of normal mechanisms
(eg, sinus tachycardia, vasoconstriction, or both) to compensate for the temporary decrease in venous
return that occurs with standing (.
Cerebrovascular disorders
(eg, strokes, transient ischemic attacks) rarely cause syncope because
most of them do not involve the centrencephalic structures that must be affected to produce LOC.
However, basilar artery ischemia, due to transient ischemic attack or migraine, may cause syncope.
Rarely, patients with severe cervical arthritis or spondylosis develop vertebrobasilar insufficiency with
syncope when the head is moved in certain positions.
Insufficient cerebral substrate:
The CNS requires O
and glucose to function. Even with normal
cerebral blood flow, a significant deficit of either will cause LOC. In practice, hypoglycemia is the primary
cause because hypoxia rarely develops in a manner causing abrupt LOC (other than in flying or diving
incidents). LOC due to hypoglycemia is seldom as abrupt as in syncope or seizures because warning
symptoms occur (except in patients taking
β
-blockers); however, the onset may be unclear to the
examiner unless the event was witnessed.
Etiology
Causes are usually classified by the mechanism (see
Table 206-11
).
The
most common causes
are
• Vasovagal
• Idiopathic
Many cases never have a firm diagnosis but lead to no apparent harm. A smaller number of cases have a
serious cause, usually cardiac.
Evaluation
Evaluation should be done as soon as possible after the event. The more remote the syncopal event, the
more difficult the diagnosis. Information from witnesses is quite helpful and best obtained as soon as
possible.
History: History of present illness
should ascertain events leading up to the syncope, including the
patient's activity (eg, exercising, arguing, in a potentially emotional situation), position (eg, lying or
standing), and, if standing, for how long. Important associated symptoms immediately before or after the
event include whether there was a sense of impending LOC, nausea, sweating, blurred or tunnel vision,
tingling of lips or fingertips, chest pain, or palpitations. Witnesses, if any, should be sought and asked to
describe events, particularly the presence and duration of any seizure activity.
Review of systems
should ask about any areas of pain or injury, episodes of dizziness or near syncope
on arising, and episodes of palpitations or chest pain with exertion. Patients should be asked about
symptoms suggesting possible causes, including bloody or tarry stools, heavy menses (anemia); vomiting,
diarrhea, or excess urination (dehydration or electrolyte abnormalities); and risk factors for pulmonary
embolism (recent surgery or immobilization, known cancer, previous clots or hypercoagulable state).
Past medical history
should ask about previous syncopal events, known cardiovascular disease, and
known seizure disorders. Drugs used should be identified (particularly antihypertensives, diuretics,
vasodilators, and antiarrhythmics—see
Table 206-12
). Family history should note presence at a young age of heart disease or sudden death in
any family member.
===PAGE:2210===
Physical examination:
Vital signs are essential. Heart rate and BP are measured with the patient
supine and after 2 min of standing. Pulse is palpated for irregularity.
General examination notes patient's mental status, including any confusion or hesitancy suggesting a
postictal state and any signs of injury (eg, bruising, swelling, tenderness, tongue bite).
The heart is auscultated for murmurs; if present, any change in the murmur with a Valsalva maneuver,
standing, or squatting is noted.
Careful evaluation of the jugular venous waves (see
Fig. 206-1
) while palpating the carotid or
auscultating the heart may allow diagnosis of an arrhythmia if an ECG is not available.
Some clinicians carefully apply unilateral carotid sinus pressure during ECG monitoring with the patient
supine to detect bradycardia or heart block, suggesting carotid sinus hypersensitivity. Carotid sinus
pressure should not be applied if a carotid bruit is present.
Abdomen is palpated for tenderness, and a rectal examination is done to check for gross or occult blood.
A full neurologic examination is done to identify any focal abnormalities, which suggest a CNS cause (eg,
seizure disorder).
Red flags:
Certain findings suggest a more serious etiology:
• Syncope during exertion
• Multiple recurrences within a short time
• Heart murmur or other findings suggesting structural heart disease (eg, chest pain)
[Table 206-11.
Some Causes of Syncope]
• Older age
• Significant injury during syncope
• Family history of sudden unexpected death
Interpretation of findings:
Although the cause is often benign, it is important to identify the occasional
life-threatening cause (eg, tachyarrhythmia, heart block) because sudden death is a risk. Clinical findings
(see
Table 206-11
) help suggest a cause in 40 to 50% of cases. A few generalizations are useful.
Benign causes
often lead to syncope. Syncope precipitated by unpleasant physical or emotional stimuli
(eg, pain, fright), usually occurring in the upright position and often preceded by vagally mediated warning
symptoms (eg, nausea, weakness, yawning, apprehension, blurred vision, diaphoresis), suggests
vasovagal syncope.
Syncope that occurs most often when assuming an upright position (particularly in elderly patients after
prolonged bed rest or in patients taking drugs in certain classes) suggests orthostatic syncope. Syncope
that occurs after standing for long periods without moving is usually due to venous pooling.
LOC that is abrupt in onset; is associated with muscular jerking or convulsions, incontinence, or tongue
biting; and is followed by postictal confusion or somnolence suggests a seizure.
Red flag findings suggest a
dangerous cause
.
Syncope with exertion suggests cardiac outflow obstruction. Such patients sometimes also have chest
pain, palpitations, or both. Cardiac findings may help identify a cause. A harsh, late-peaking, basal
===PAGE:2211===
murmur radiating to the carotid arteries suggests aortic stenosis; a systolic
[Table 206-12.
Some Drug Causes of Syncope]
murmur that increases with the Valsalva maneuver and disappears with squatting suggests hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. A systolic click followed by a blowing systolic murmur that moves closer to the 1st heart
sound on standing suggests mitral valve prolapse (suggesting the cause is an arrhythmia).
Syncope that begins and ends suddenly and spontaneously is typical of cardiac causes, most commonly
an arrhythmia. Because vasovagal and orthostatic mechanisms do not cause syncope in the recumbent
position, syncope while lying down also suggests an arrhythmia.
If the patient is injured during the episode of syncope, the likelihood of a cardiac cause or seizure is
somewhat greater, and therefore the event is of greater concern. The warning signs and slower LOC that
accompany benign vasovagal syncope somewhat reduce the likelihood of injury.
Testing:
Testing typically is done.
• ECG
• Pulse oximetry
• Sometimes echocardiography
• Sometimes tilt table testing
• Blood tests only if clinically indicated
• CNS imaging rarely indicated
In general, if syncope results in an injury or is recurrent (particularly within a brief period), more intensive
evaluation is warranted.
Patients with suspected arrhythmia, myocarditis, or ischemia should be evaluated as in-patients. Others
may be evaluated as outpatients.
ECG
is done for all patients. The ECG may reveal arrhythmia, a conduction abnormality, ventricular
hypertrophy, pre-excitation, QT prolongation, pacemaker malfunction, myocardial ischemia, or MI. If there
are no clinical clues, measuring cardiac markers and obtaining serial ECGs to rule out MI in older patients
plus ECG monitoring for at least 24 h are prudent. Any detected arrhythmia must be associated with
altered consciousness in order to be implicated as the cause, but most patients do not experience
syncope during monitoring. On the other hand, the presence of symptoms in the absence of rhythm
disturbance helps rule out a cardiac cause. An event recorder may be useful if warning symptoms
precede syncope. A signal-averaged ECG may identify predisposition to ventricular arrhythmias in
patients with ischemic heart disease or in post-MI patients.
Pulse oximetry
should be done during or immediately after an episode to identify hypoxemia (which may
indicate pulmonary embolism). If hypoxemia is present, a CT scan or lung scan is indicated to rule out
pulmonary embolism.
Laboratory tests
are done based on clinical suspicion; reflexively obtained laboratory panels are of little
use. However, all females of childbearing age should have a pregnancy test. Hct is measured if anemia is
suspected. Electrolytes are measured only if an abnormality is clinically suspected (eg, by symptoms or
drug use). Cardiac markers (eg, serum troponin, CK-MB) are measured if acute MI is suspected.
Echocardiography
is indicated for patients with exercise-induced syncope, cardiac murmurs, or
suspected intracardiac tumors (eg, those with positional syncope).
===PAGE:2212===
Tilt table testing
is done if history and physical examination indicate vasodepressor or other reflexinduced syncope. It is also used to evaluate exercise-induced syncope if echocardiography or exercise
stress testing is negative.
Stress testing
(exercise or pharmacologic) is done when intermittent myocardial ischemia is suspected.
It is often done for patients with exercise-induced symptoms.
Invasive electrophysiologic testing
is considered if noninvasive testing does not identify arrhythmia in
patients with unexplained recurrent syncope; a negative response defines a low-risk subgroup with a high
rate of remission of syncope. The use of electrophysiologic testing is controversial in other patients.
Exercise testing is less valuable unless physical activity precipitated syncope.
EEG
is warranted if a seizure disorder is suspected.
CT
and
MRI
of the head and brain are indicated only if signs and symptoms suggest a focal CNS
disorder.
Treatment
In witnessed syncope, pulses are checked immediately. If the patient is pulseless, CPR is begun and
cardiac resuscitation is done. If pulses are present, severe bradycardia is treated with atropine or external
transthoracic pacing. Isoproterenol can be used to maintain adequate heart rate while a temporary
pacemaker is placed.
Tachyarrhythmias are treated (see also p.
); a direct-current synchronized shock is quicker and safer
for unstable patients. Inadequate venous return is treated by keeping the patient supine, raising the legs,
and giving IV normal saline. Tamponade is relieved by pericardiocentesis. Tension pneumothorax requires
insertion of a pleural cannula and drainage. Anaphylaxis is treated with parenteral epinephrine.
Placing the patient in a horizontal position with legs elevated typically ends the syncopal
episode if lifethreatening disorders are ruled out. If the patient sits upright too rapidly, syncope may recur; propping the
patient upright or transporting the patient in an upright position may prolong cerebral hypoperfusion and
prevent recovery.
Specific treatment depends on the cause and its pathophysiology.
Geriatrics Essentials
The most common cause of syncope in the elderly is postural hypotension due to a combination of
factors. Factors include rigid, noncompliant arteries, reduced skeletal muscle pumping of venous return
due to physical inactivity, and degeneration of the sinoatrial node and conduction system due to
progressive structural heart disease.
In the elderly, syncope often has more than one cause. For example, the combination of taking several
heart and BP drugs and standing in a hot church during a long or emotional service may lead to syncope
even though no single factor might cause syncope.
Key Points
• Syncope results from global CNS dysfunction, usually from insufficient cerebral blood flow.
• Most syncope results from benign causes.
• Some less common causes involve cardiac arrhythmia or outflow obstruction and are serious or
potentially fatal.
• Vasovagal syncope usually has an apparent trigger, warning symptoms, and a few minutes of
postrecovery symptoms.
===PAGE:2213===
• Syncope from cardiac arrhythmias typically occurs abruptly and with quick recovery.
• Seizures have a prolonged (eg, hours) recovery period.
• If a benign etiology is not clear, driving and use of machinery should be prohibited until the etiology is
determined and treated—the next manifestation of an unrecognized cardiac cause may be fatal.
===PAGE:2214===
Chapter 207. Cardiovascular Tests and Procedures
Introduction
Many noninvasive and invasive tests can delineate cardiac structure and function (see
Table 207-1
). Also, treatments can be administered during certain invasive diagnostic tests (eg,
percutaneous coronary intervention during cardiac catheterization, radiofrequency ablation during
electrophysiologic testing).
Cardiac Catheterization
Cardiac catheterization is the passage of a catheter through peripheral arteries or veins into cardiac
chambers and coronary arteries. Cardiac catheterization can be used to do various tests, including
angiography, intravascular ultrasonography, measurement of cardiac output (CO), detection and
quantification of shunts, endomyocardial biopsy, and measurements of myocardial metabolism. These
tests define coronary artery anatomy, cardiac anatomy, and cardiac function to establish diagnoses and
help select treatment. Cardiac catheterization is also the basis for several therapeutic interventions.
Procedure
Patients must be npo for 4 to 6 h before cardiac catheterization. Most patients do not require overnight
hospitalization.
Left heart catheterization
is most commonly used to assess coronary artery anatomy; it is also useful
for assessing aortic BP and systemic vascular resistance, aortic and mitral valve function, and left
ventricular (LV) pressure and function. The procedure is done by percutaneous femoral, radial, or brachial
artery puncture, with a catheter passed into the coronary artery ostia or across the aortic valve into the
LV. Catheterization of the left atrium (LA) and LV is occasionally done using transseptal perforation during
right heart catheterization.
Right heart catheterization
is most commonly used to assess right atrial (RA), right ventricular (RV),
and pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP—see
Fig. 207-1
and p.
); PAOP approximates LA and LV end-diastolic pressure. In seriously ill patients, PAOP helps assess
volume status and, with simultaneous measurements of CO, can help guide therapy. Right heart
catheterization is also useful for assessing pulmonary vascular resistance, tricuspid
[Table 207-1.
Tests for Assessing Cardiac Anatomy and Function]
or pulmonic valve function, and RV pressure; RV pressure may help in the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy,
constrictive pericarditis, and cardiac tamponade when noninvasive testing is nondiagnostic. The
procedure is done by femoral, subclavian, internal jugular, or antecubital vein puncture. A catheter is
passed into the RA, through the tricuspid valve, into the RV, and across the pulmonary valve into the
pulmonary artery (. Selective catheterization of the coronary sinus can also be done.
Specific Tests During Cardiac Catheterization
Angiography:
Injection of radiopaque dye into coronary or pulmonary arteries, the aorta, and cardiac
chambers is useful in certain circumstances. Digital subtraction angiography is used for nonmoving
arteries and for chamber cineangiography.
Coronary angiography via left heart catheterization is used to evaluate coronary artery anatomy in various
clinical situations, as in patients with suspected coronary atherosclerotic or congenital disease, valvular
disorders before valvular replacement, or unexplained heart failure.
Pulmonary angiography via right heart catheterization is used to diagnose pulmonary embolism.
Intraluminal filling defects or arterial cutoffs are diagnostic. Radiopaque dye is usually selectively injected
into one or both pulmonary arteries and their segments. Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography
===PAGE:2215===
(CTPA) has largely replaced right heart catheterization for diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.
Aortic angiography via left heart catheterization is used to assess aortic regurgitation, coarctation, patent
ductus arteriosus, and dissection.
Ventriculography is used to visualize ventricular wall motion and ventricular outflow tracts, including
subvalvular, valvular, and supravalvular regions. After LV mass and volume are determined from single
planar or biplanar ventricular angiograms, end-systolic and end-diastolic volumes and ejection fraction
can be calculated.
Intravascular ultrasonography:
Miniature ultrasound transducers on the end of coronary artery
catheters can produce images of coronary vessel lumina and walls and delineate blood flow. This
technique is being increasingly used at the same time as coronary angiography.
Tests for cardiac shunts:
Measuring blood O
content at successive levels in the heart and great
vessels can help determine the presence, direction, and volume of central shunts. The maximal normal
difference in O
content is 0.5 mL/dL between the pulmonary artery and RV, 0.9 mL/dL between the RV
and RA, and 1.9 mL/dL between the RA and superior vena cava. If the blood O
content in a chamber
exceeds that of the more proximal chamber by more than these values, a left-to-right shunt at that level is
probable. Right-to-left shunts are strongly suspected when LA, LV, or arterial O
saturation is low (≤ 92%)
and does not improve when pure O
(fractional
[Fig. 207-1.
Diagram of the cardiac cycle, showing pressure curves of the cardiac chambers, heart
sounds, jugular pulse wave, and the ECG.]
inspirational O
= 1.0) is given. Left heart or arterial desaturation plus increased O
content in blood
samples drawn beyond the shunt site on the right side of circulation suggests a bidirectional shunt.
Measurement of cardiac output and flow:
CO is the volume of blood ejected by the heart per minute
(normal at rest: 4 to 8 L/min). Techniques used to calculate CO include the Fick, indicator-dilution, and
thermodilution techniques (see
Table 207-2
).
With the Fick technique, CO is proportional to O
consumption divided by arteriovenous O
difference.
Dilution techniques rely on the assumption that after an indicator is injected into the circulation, it appears
and disappears proportionately to CO.
Usually, CO is expressed in relation to BSA as the cardiac index (CI) in L/min/m
(ie, CI = CO/BSA—see
Table 207-3
). BSA is calculated using DuBois' height (ht)-weight (wt) equation:
BSA in m
= (wt in kg)
0.425
× (ht in cm)
0.725
× 0.007184
Endomyocardial biopsy:
This procedure helps assess transplant rejection and myocardial disorders
due to infection or infiltrative diseases. The biopsy catheter (bioptome) can be passed into either
ventricle, usually the right. Three to 5 samples of myocardial tissue are removed from the septal
endocardium. The main complication, cardiac perforation, occurs in 0.3 to 0.5% of patients; it may cause
hemopericardium leading to cardiac tamponade.
Coronary artery flow measurements:
Coronary angiography shows the presence and degree of
stenosis but not the functional significance of the lesion (ie, how much blood flows across the stenosis).
Extremely thin guidewires are available with pressure sensors or Doppler flow sensors. Data from these
sensors can be used to estimate blood flow, which is expressed as fractional flow reserve (FFR). FFR is
the ratio of maximal flow through the stenotic area to normal maximal flow; an FFR of < 0.75 to 0.8 is
considered abnormal. These flow estimates correlate well with the need for intervention and long-term
outcome; lesions with good FFR do not seem to benefit from stenting. These flow measurements are
===PAGE:2216===
most useful with intermediate lesions (40 to 70% stenosis) and with multiple lesions (to identify those that
are clinically most significant).
[Table 207-2.
Cardiac Output Equations]
[Table 207-3.
Normal Values for Cardiac Index and Related Measurements]
Contraindications
Relative contraindications
to cardiac catheterization include
• Renal insufficiency
• Coagulopathy
• Fever
• Systemic infection
• Uncontrolled arrhythmia or hypertension
• Uncompensated heart failure
• Radiopaque dye allergies in patients who have not been appropriately premedicated (
Complications
Injection of radiopaque dye produces a transient sense of warmth throughout the body in many patients.
Tachycardia, a slight fall in systemic pressure, an increase in CO, nausea, vomiting, and coughing may
occur. Serious
complications (eg, cardiac arrest, anaphylactic reactions, shock, seizures, cyanosis, renal
toxicity) are rare. Rarely, bradycardia occurs when a large amount of dye is injected; asking the patient to
cough often restores normal rhythm. Patients with a high Hct are susceptible to thrombosis; the Hct
should be < 65% before angiography is done. Allergic reactions may include urticaria and conjunctivitis,
which usually respond to diphenhydramine 50 mg IV. Bronchospasm, laryngeal edema, and dyspnea are
rare reactions; they are treated with salbutamol or epinephrine. Anaphylactic shock is treated with
epinephrine and other supportive measures. If the catheter tip contacts the ventricular endocardium,
ventricular arrhythmias commonly occur, but ventricular fibrillation is rare. If it occurs, direct current (DC)
cardioversion is administered immediately (. Radiopaque dyes, all hypertonic, are excreted
by the kidneys and may worsen renal insufficiency. For patients at risk, infusion of normal saline IV, and
perhaps premedication with acetylcysteine, reduces this risk.
Mortality rate is 0.1 to 0.2%. MI (0.1%) and stroke (0.1%) may result in significant morbidity. Incidence of
stroke is higher in patients > 80 yr. Dissection of a coronary artery can complicate angiography. Local
vascular injury at the peripheral insertion site of catheterization can cause hemorrhage or formation of
pseudoaneurysms or arteriovenous fistulas.
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG—see also p.
) involves bypassing native coronary arteries
with high-grade stenosis or occlusion not amenable to angioplasty with stenting. Indications are changing
as percutaneous interventions ( are being increasingly used.
Traditional CABG Procedure
The procedure involves thoracotomy via a midline (median) sternotomy. A heart-lung machine is used to
establish cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), allowing the heart to be stopped and emptied of blood to
maximize operative exposure and facilitate vessel anastomosis; stopping the heart also markedly
decreases myocardial O
demand. Before initiation of CPB, the patient is given a very high dose of
===PAGE:2217===
heparin to prevent clotting in the bypass circuit. Then the aorta is cross-clamped and the heart is stopped
by injection of a cardioplegic solution (crystalloid or more commonly blood-based) that also contains
substances that help myocardial cells tolerate ischemia and reperfusion. The cardioplegic solution and
the heart are sometimes cooled slightly to enhance tolerance of ischemia; the patient's body is cooled via
the CPB machine for similar reasons.
The left internal mammary artery is typically used as a pedicled graft to the left anterior descending
coronary artery. Other grafts consist of segments of saphenous vein removed from the leg. Occasionally,
the right internal mammary artery or radial artery from the non-dominant arm can be used.
On completion of the vascular anastomoses, the aorta is unclamped, allowing the coronary arteries to be
perfused by oxygenated blood, which typically restores cardiac activity. Heparin anticoagulation is
reversed by giving protamine. Despite cardioprotective measures, stopping the heart is not without
consequences. During reperfusion, myocardial dysfunction is common and can lead to bradycardia,
arrhythmias (eg, ventricular fibrillation), and low cardiac output; these events are treated by standard
measures, such as pacing, defibrillation, and inotropic drugs.
Typically, hospital stays are 4 to 5 days unless prolonged by complications.
Complications:
Complications and disadvantages of traditional CABG involve mainly
• Sternotomy
• CPB
Median sternotomy is surprisingly well tolerated; however, healing takes 4 to 6 wk. Also, wound infections
occasionally cause mediastinitis or sternal osteomyelitis, which can be vexing to treat.
CPB causes several complications, including
• Bleeding
• Organ dysfunction
• Neuropsychiatric effects
• Stroke
Post-CPB bleeding is a common problem caused by various factors, including hemodilution, heparin use,
platelet dysfunction due to exposure to the bypass pump, consumptive coagulopathy, and induced
hypothermia. Also, the CPB machine evokes a systemic inflammatory response (probably due to exposure
of blood components to the foreign material of the bypass circuit); this response can cause organ
dysfunction in any system (eg, pulmonary, renal, brain, GI). Aortic cannulation, cross-clamping, and
release can trigger release of emboli, causing stroke in about 1.5%;
microemboli may contribute to postCPB neuropsychiatric effects, which appear in about 5 to 10%.
Other common complications of CABG include focal and global myocardial ischemia and dysrhythmias.
Perioperative MI occurs in about 1% of patients. Atrial fibrillation occurs in 15 to 40% of patients, typically
2 to 4 days after surgery. Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia may occur in up to 50% of patients.
Mortality
depends mainly on patients' underlying health; operator and institutional experience (ie, number
of annual procedures) also is important. In an experienced program, periprocedural mortality in otherwise
healthy patients is typically < 1 to 3%.
Alternative CABG Procedures
Newer techniques seek to limit the complications of traditional CABG by
===PAGE:2218===
• Avoiding CPB (off-pump CABG)
• Avoiding median sternotomy (minimally invasive CABG)
• Both
CPB can be avoided in select patients by using new techniques that allow the surgeon to revascularize
the beating heart. Various devices and methods stabilize a portion of the myocardium, holding the
operative site relatively motionless. Off-pump procedures are more commonly done through small
parasternal or intercostal incisions (minimally invasive CABG), sometimes with endoscopy or even robotic
assistance, but they may be done through a traditional median sternotomy, which provides better
operative exposure.
Allowing the heart to beat means that the myocardium requires more O
than when CPB is used. Thus,
the heart is sensitive to the interruption of blood flow necessitated while the vascular anastomosis is
done; this interruption can cause ischemia or infarction in the myocardium supplied by the affected
vessel. Some surgeons place a temporary coronary artery shunt to provide distal perfusion.
The minimally invasive technique is somewhat more difficult to do and may not be suitable when multiple
bypass grafts, particularly those involving vessels behind the heart, are required. Transfusion
requirements, length of stay, and costs are typically less with off-pump CABG, but in some studies, the
rate of the more serious complications of death, MI, and stroke are similar to that of CABG using CPB.
Thus, the theoretic advantages of avoiding CPB do not seem to have been fully realized.
Minimally invasive CABG is usually done off-pump but may be done using CPB. In such cases, CPB is
done endovascularly using special catheters inserted into the arterial and venous systems; the aorta is
occluded by a balloon at the end of the aortic catheter rather than an external clamp. Although avoiding
median sternotomy complications, this technique otherwise has similar rates of mortality and major
perioperative complications as conventional techniques.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography uses ultrasound waves to produce an image of the heart and great vessels. It helps
assess heart wall thickness (eg, in hypertrophy or atrophy) and motion and provides information about
ischemia and infarction. It can be used to assess diastolic filling patterns of the left ventricle, which can
help in the diagnosis of left ventricular hypertrophy, hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy, severe
heart failure, constrictive pericarditis, and severe aortic regurgitation.
Techniques:
There are 2 techniques for doing echocardiography:
• Transthoracic
• Transesophageal
In transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), the most common technique, a transducer is placed along the
left or right sternal border, at the cardiac apex, at the suprasternal notch (to allow visualization of the
aortic valve, left ventricular outflow tract, and descending aorta), or over the subxiphoid region. TTE
provides 2- or 3-dimensional tomographic images of most major cardiac structures.
In transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), a transducer on the tip of an endoscope allows visualization
of the heart via the esophagus. TEE is used to assess cardiac disorders when transthoracic study is
technically difficult, as in obese patients and in patients with COPD. It reveals better detail of small
abnormal structures (eg, endocarditic vegetations or patent foramen ovale) and posterior cardiac
structures (eg, left atrium, left atrial appendage, interatrial septum) because they are closer to the
esophagus than to the anterior chest wall. TEE can also produce images of the ascending aorta, which
arises behind the 3rd costal cartilage; of structures < 3 mm (eg, thrombi, vegetations); and of prosthetic
valves.
===PAGE:2219===
Methodology:
Two-dimensional (cross-sectional) echocardiography is most commonly used; contrast
and spectral Doppler echocardiography provide additional information.
Contrast echocardiography
is 2-dimensional TTE done while agitated saline is rapidly
injected into the
cardiac circulation. Agitated saline develops microbubbles, which produce a cloud of echoes in the right
cardiac chambers and which, if a septal defect is present, appear on the left side of the heart. Usually, the
microbubbles do not traverse the pulmonary capillary bed; however, one agent, sonicated albumin
microbubbles, can do so and can enter left heart structures after IV injection.
Spectral Doppler echocardiography
can record velocity, direction, and type of blood flow. This
technique is useful for detecting abnormal blood flow (eg, due to regurgitant lesions) or velocity (eg, due
to stenotic lesions). Spectral Doppler echocardiography does not provide spatial information about the
size or shape of the heart or its structures.
Color Doppler echocardiography
combines 2-dimensional and spectral Doppler echocardiography to
provide information about the size and shape of the heart and its structures as well as the velocity of and
direction of blood flow around the valves and outflow tracts. Color is used to code blood flow information;
by convention, red is toward and blue away from the transducer.
Tissue Doppler imaging
uses Doppler techniques to measure the velocity of myocardial tissue
contraction (rather than of blood flow). These data can be used to calculate myocardial strain
(percentage change in length between contraction and relaxation) and myocardial strain rate (rate of
change in length). Strain and strain rate measurements can help assess systolic and diastolic function
and identify ischemia during stress testing.
Stress echocardiography:
TTE is an alternative to radionuclide imaging to identify myocardial ischemia
during and after exercise or pharmacologic stress. Stress echocardiography shows regional wall motion
abnormalities that result from an imbalance in blood flow in epicardial coronary vessels during stress.
Computer programs can provide side-by-side assessment of ventricular contraction during systole and
diastole at rest and under stress. Exercise and pharmacologic protocols are the same as those used in
radionuclide stress testing. Stress echocardiography and radionuclide stress testing detect ischemia
equally well. The choice between tests is often based on availability, the provider's experience, and cost.
Electrocardiography
The standard ECG provides 12 different vector views of the heart's electrical activity as reflected by
electrical potential differences between positive and negative electrodes placed on the limbs and chest
wall. Six of these views are vertical (using frontal leads I, II, and III and limb leads aVR, aVL, and aVF),
and 6 are horizontal (using precordial leads V
, V
, V
, V
, V
, and V
). The 12-lead ECG is crucial for
establishing many cardiac diagnoses, especially arrhythmias and myocardial ischemia (see
Table 207-4
). It can also identify atrial enlargement, ventricular hypertrophy (see
Table 207-5
), and conditions that predispose to syncope or sudden death (eg, Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome, long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome).
Standard ECG Components
By convention, the ECG tracing is divided into the P wave, PR interval, QRS complex, QT interval, ST
segment, T wave, and U wave (see
Fig. 207-2
).
P wave:
The P wave represents atrial depolarization. It is upright in most leads except aVR. It may be
biphasic in leads II and V
; the initial component represents right atrial activity, and the 2nd component
represents left atrial activity.
An increase in amplitude of either or both components occurs with atrial enlargement. Right atrial
enlargement produces a P wave > 2 mm in leads II, III, and aVF (P pulmonale); left atrial enlargement
produces a P wave that is broad and double-peaked in lead II (P mitrale). Normally, the P axis is between
0° and 75°.
===PAGE:2220===
PR interval:
The PR interval is the time between onset of atrial depolarization and onset of ventricular
depolarization. Normally, it is 0.10 to 0.20 sec; prolongation defines 1st-degree atrioventricular block.
QRS complex:
The QRS complex represents ventricular depolarization. The Q wave is the initial
downward deflection; normal Q waves last < 0.05 sec in all leads except V
1-3
, in which any Q wave is
considered abnormal, indicating past or current infarction. The R wave is the first upward deflection;
criteria for normal height or size are not absolute, but taller R waves may be caused by ventricular
hypertrophy. A 2nd upward deflection in a QRS complex is designated R´. The S wave is the 2nd
downward deflection if there is a Q wave and the first downward deflection if not. The QRS complex may
be R alone, QS (no R), QR (no S), RS (no Q), or RSR´, depending on the ECG lead, vector, and
presence of heart disorders.
Normally, the QRS interval is 0.07 to 0.10 sec. An interval of 0.10 to 0.11 sec is considered incomplete
bundle branch block or a nonspecific intraventricular conduction
[Table 207-4.
Interpretation of Abnormal ECGs]
delay, depending on QRS morphology; ≥ 0.12 sec is considered complete bundle branch block or an
intraventricular conduction delay. Normally, the QRS axis is 90° to -30°. An axis of -30° to -90° is
considered left axis deviation and occurs in left anterior fascicular block (-60°) and inferior MI. An axis of
90° to 180° is considered right axis deviation; it occurs in any condition that increases pulmonary
pressures and causes right ventricular hypertrophy (cor pulmonale, acute pulmonary embolism,
pulmonary hypertension), and it sometimes occurs in right bundle branch block or left posterior fascicular
block.
QT interval:
The QT interval is the time between onset of ventricular depolarization and end of
ventricular repolarization. The QT interval must be corrected for heart rate using the formula:
where QT
c
is the corrected QT interval; R-R interval is the time between 2 QRS complexes. All intervals
are recorded in seconds. QT
c
prolongation is strongly implicated in development
[Table 207-5.
Criteria for ECG Diagnosis of Left Ventricular Hypertrophy]
of torsades de pointe ventricular tachycardia (. QT
c
is often difficult to calculate because the
end of the T wave is often unclear or followed by a U wave with which it merges.
ST segment:
The ST segment represents completed ventricular myocardial depolarization. Normally, it is
horizontal along the baseline of the PR (or TP) intervals or slightly off baseline.
ST segment elevation
can be caused by
• Early repolarization
• Left ventricular hypertrophy
• Myocardial ischemia and infarction
• Left ventricular aneurysm
• Pericarditis
• Hyperkalemia
===PAGE:2221===
• Hypothermia
• Pulmonary embolism
ST segment depression
can be caused by
• Hypokalemia
• Digoxin
• Subendocardial ischemia
• Reciprocal changes in acute MI
T wave:
The T wave reflects ventricular repolarization. It usually takes the same direction as the QRS
complex (concordance); opposite polarity (discordance) may indicate past or current infarction. The T
wave is usually smooth and rounded but may be of low amplitude in hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia
and may be tall and peaked in hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, and left ventricular hypertrophy.
U wave:
The U wave appears commonly in patients who have hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, or
ischemia. It is often present in healthy people.
Specialized ECG Tests
A standard 12-lead ECG represents only a single brief period of cardiac activity; enhanced techniques
can provide additional information.
Additional precordial leads:
Additional precordial leads are used to help diagnose right ventricular and
posterior wall MI.
Right-sided leads are placed across the right side of the chest to mirror standard left-sided leads. They
are labeled V
R to V
R; sometimes only V
R is used, because it is the most sensitive for right ventricular
MI.
Additional left-sided leads can be placed in the 5th intercostal space, with V
at the posterior axillary line,
V
at the midscapular line, and V
at the left border of the spine. These leads are rarely used but may
help diagnose a true posterior MI.
Esophageal lead:
An esophageal lead is much closer to the atria than surface leads; it
[Fig. 207-2.
ECG waves.]
is an option when the presence of P waves on a standard recording is uncertain and when detecting
atrial electrical activity is important, as when atrial or ventricular origin of wide-complex tachycardia must
be differentiated or when atrioventricular dissociation is suspected. An esophageal lead may also be used
to monitor intraoperative myocardial ischemia or to detect atrial activity during cardioplegia. The lead is
placed by having the patient swallow an electrode, which is then connected to a standard ECG machine,
often in the lead II port.
Signal averaging:
Signal-averaging of QRS waveforms creates a digital composite of several hundred
cardiac cycles to detect high-frequency, low-amplitude potentials and microcurrents at the terminal part of
the QRS complex. These findings represent areas of slow conduction through abnormal myocardium,
indicating increased risk of reentrant ventricular tachycardia. Signal-averaged ECG is still largely a
research technique but is occasionally used to assess risk of sudden cardiac death (eg, in post-MI
patients without evidence of conduction delay, patients with myocardial ischemia and unexplained
syncope, and those with nonischemic cardiomyopathy) and to assess efficacy of surgery to correct the
arrhythmia. This technique may also be useful for assessing the proarrhythmic effects of antiarrhythmic
===PAGE:2222===
drugs and for detecting rejection of heart transplants. Signal averaging of P waves is being studied as a
way to identify patients at risk of atrial fibrillation.
Continuous ST-segment monitoring:
This type of monitoring is used for early detection of ischemia
and serious arrhythmias. Monitoring can be automated (dedicated electronic monitoring units are
available) or done clinically using serial ECGs. Applications include emergency department monitoring of
patients with crescendo angina, evaluation after percutaneous intervention, intraoperative monitoring, and
postoperative care.
QT dispersion:
QT dispersion (the difference between the longest and shortest QT intervals on a 12lead ECG) has been proposed as a measure of myocardial repolarization heterogeneity. Increased
dispersion suggests electrically heterogeneous myocardium caused by ischemia or fibrosis, with
increased risk of reentrant
arrhythmias and sudden death. QT dispersion predicts mortality risk but is not
widely measured because measurement error is common, values in patients with and without disease
overlap substantially, there is no reference standard, and other validated risk predictors are available.
Heart rate variability:
This measurement reflects the balance between sympathetic and
parasympathetic (vagal) input to the heart. Decreased variability suggests decreased vagal input and
increased sympathetic input, which predict increased risk of arrhythmias and mortality. The most common
measure of variability is the mean of the standard deviations of all normal R-R intervals in a 24-h ECG
recording. Heart rate variability is used primarily in research, but evidence suggests that it provides useful
information about left ventricular dysfunction after MI, heart failure, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Most Holter monitors have software that measures and analyzes heart rate variability.
Holter monitor:
Holter monitoring is continuous monitoring and recording of the ECG, BP, or both for 24
or 48 h. It is useful for evaluating intermittent arrhythmias and, secondarily, for detecting hypertension.
The Holter monitor is portable, enabling patients to participate in normal daily activities; it may also be
used for sedentary hospitalized patients if automated monitoring is unavailable. Patients are asked to
record symptoms and activities so that they may be correlated with events on the monitor. The Holter
monitor does not automatically analyze the ECG data; a physician does so at a later date.
Event recorder:
Event recorders are worn for up to 30 days and can detect infrequent rhythm
disturbances that 24-h Holter monitoring may miss. The recorder does not operate continuously but is
activated by the patient when symptoms occur. A memory loop enables information to be stored for
seconds or minutes before and after activation. The patient can transmit ECG data by telephone to be
read by a physician. If patients have serious events (eg, syncope) at intervals of > 30 days, an event
recorder may be placed subcutaneously; it can be activated by a small magnet. Battery life for
subcutaneous recorders is 14 mo.
Electrophysiologic Studies
In electrophysiologic studies, recording and stimulating electrodes are inserted via right- or left-sided
cardiac catheterization into all 4 cardiac chambers. Atria are paced from the right or left atrium, ventricles
are paced from the right ventricular apex or right ventricular outflow tract, and cardiac conduction is
recorded. Programmed stimulation techniques may be used to trigger and terminate a reentrant
arrhythmia.
Electrophysiologic studies are indicated primarily for evaluation and treatment of arrhythmias that are
difficult to capture, serious, or sustained. These studies may be used to make a primary diagnosis, to
evaluate the efficacy of antiarrhythmic drugs, or to map arrhythmia foci before radiofrequency catheter
ablation (. Various mapping techniques are available.
Cardiac Imaging Tests
Standard imaging tests include echocardiography (, chest x-ray, CT, MRI, and various
radionuclide techniques (. Standard CT and MRI have limited application because the heart
constantly beats, but faster CT and MR techniques can provide useful cardiac images; sometimes
patients are given a drug (eg, a
β
-blocker) to slow the heart rate during imaging. In addition, by
===PAGE:2223===
synchronizing image recording (or reconstruction) with the ECG (ECG gating), information from several
cardiac cycles can be used to create single images of selected points in the cardiac cycle. CT gating that
uses the ECG to trigger the x-ray beam at the desired portion of the cardiac cycle gives less x-ray
exposure than gating that simply reconstructs information from only the desired portion of the cardiac
cycle (gated reconstruction) and does not interrupt the x-ray beam.
Chest x-rays:
Chest x-rays are often useful as a starting point in a cardiac diagnosis. Posteroanterior
and lateral views provide a gross view of atrial and ventricular size and shape and pulmonary
vasculature, but additional tests are almost always required for precise characterization of cardiac
structure and function.
CT: Spiral (helical) CT
may be used to evaluate pericarditis, congenital cardiac disorders (especially
abnormal arteriovenous connections), disorders of the great vessels (eg, aortic aneurysm, aortic
dissection), cardiac tumors, acute pulmonary embolism, chronic pulmonary thromboembolic disease, and
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. However, CT requires a radiopaque dye, which may limit its
use in patients with renal impairment.
Electron beam CT
, formerly called ultrafast CT or cine CT, unlike conventional CT, does
not use a
moving x-ray source and target. Instead, the direction of the x-ray beam is guided by a magnetic field and
detected by an array of stationary detectors. Because mechanical motion is not required, images can be
acquired in a fraction of a second (and targeted to a specific point in the cardiac cycle). Electron beam
CT is used primarily to detect and quantify coronary artery calcification, an early sign of atherosclerosis.
However, spatial resolution is poor and the equipment cannot be used for noncardiac disorders, so newer
standard CT techniques are becoming preferred for cardiac use.
Multidetector CT (MDCT)
, with ≥ 64 detectors, has a very rapid scan time; some advanced machines
may generate an image from a single heartbeat, although typical acquisition times are 30 sec. Dualsource CT uses 2 x-ray sources and 2 multidetector arrays on a single gantry, which cuts scan time in
half. Both of these modalities appear able to identify coronary calcifications and flow-limiting (ie, > 50%
stenosis) coronary artery obstruction. Typically, an IV contrast agent is used, although nonenhanced
scans can detect coronary artery calcification.
MDCT is currently used mainly for patients with indeterminate stress imaging test results as a
noninvasive alternative to coronary angiography. However, radiation dose is significant, about 15 mSv (vs
0.1 mSv for a chest x-ray and 7 mSv for coronary angiography). The presence of high-density calcified
plaques creates imaging artifacts that interfere with interpretation.
MRI: Standard MRI
is useful for evaluating areas around the heart, particularly the mediastinum and
great vessels (eg, for studying aneurysms, dissections, and stenoses). With ECG-gated data acquisition,
image resolution can approach that of CT or echocardiography, clearly delineating myocardial wall
thickness and motion, chamber volumes, intraluminal masses or clot, and valve planes. Sequential MRI
after injecting a paramagnetic contrast agent (gadolinium-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid [Gd-DTPA])
produces higher resolution of myocardial perfusion patterns than does radionuclide imaging. However,
patients with impaired renal function can develop nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, a potentially lifethreatening disorder, after use of gadolinium contrast. Using contrast, 3-dimensional information on infarct
size and location can be obtained, and blood flow velocities in cardiac chambers can be measured. MRI
can assess tissue viability by assessing the contractile response to inotropic stimulation with dobutamine
or by using a contrast agent (eg, Gd-DTPA, which is excluded from cells with intact membranes).
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
is used to assess blood volumes of interest (eg, blood
vessels in the chest or abdomen); all blood flow can be assessed simultaneously. MRA can be used to
detect aneurysms, stenosis, or occlusions in the carotid, coronary, renal, or peripheral arteries. Use of
this technique to detect deep venous thrombosis is being studied.
PET:
PET can demonstrate myocardial perfusion and metabolism.
Perfusion agents include carbon-11 (
C) CO
, oxygen-15 (
O) water, nitrogen-13 (
N) ammonia, and
===PAGE:2224===
rubidium-82 (
Rb). Only
Rb does not require an on-site cyclotron.
Metabolic agents include fluorine-18 (
F)-labeled deoxyglucose (FDG) and
C acetate. FDG detects
the enhancement of glucose metabolism under ischemic conditions, and can thus distinguish ischemic but
still viable myocardium from scar tissue. Sensitivity is greater than with myocardial perfusion imaging,
possibly making FDG imaging useful for selecting patients for revascularization and for avoiding such
procedures when only scar tissue is present. This use may justify the greater expense of PET. Half-life of
F is long enough (110 min) that FDG can often be produced off-site. Techniques that enable FDG
imaging to be used with conventional single-photon emission CT (SPECT) cameras may make this type
of imaging widely available.
Uptake of
C acetate appears to reflect overall O
metabolism by myocytes. Uptake does not depend on
such potentially variable factors as blood glucose levels, which can affect FDG distribution.
C acetate
imaging may better predict postintervention recovery of myocardial function than FDG imaging. However,
because of a 20-min half-life,
C must be produced by an on-site cyclotron.
Percutaneous Coronary Interventions
Percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) include percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty
(PTCA) with or without stenting. Primary indications are treatment of angina pectoris (stable or unstable),
myocardial ischemia, and acute MI (particularly in patients with developing or established cardiogenic
shock). Primary PTCA and stent placement within 90 min of onset of pain is the optimal
treatment of
transmural ST-segment-elevation MI. Elective PCI may be appropriate for post-MI patients who have
recurrent or inducible angina before hospital discharge and for patients who have angina and remain
symptomatic despite medical treatment. Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) is used to treat
peripheral arterial disease (.
Procedure:
PTCA is done via percutaneous femoral, radial, or brachial artery puncture. A guiding
catheter is inserted into a large peripheral artery and threaded to the appropriate coronary ostium. A
balloon-tipped catheter, guided by fluoroscopy or intravascular ultrasonography, is aligned within the
stenosis, then inflated to disrupt the atherosclerotic plaque and dilate the artery. Angiography is repeated
after the procedure to document any changes. The procedure is commonly done in 2 or 3 vessels as
needed.
Stents:
Stents are most useful for
• Short lesions in large native coronary arteries not previously treated with PTCA
• Focal lesions in saphenous vein grafts
• Treatment of abrupt closure during PTCA
The role of stenting in acute MI, ostial or left main disease, chronic total occlusions, and bifurcation
lesions is still evolving.
Types of stents:
Bare metal stents (BMS) are made of nickel-titanium alloy. Drug eluting stents (DES)
have drugs (eg, sirolimus, paclitaxel) bonded to the metal that limit neointimal proliferation to reduce the
risk of restenosis. In intracoronary brachytherapy, the site of stenosis is exposed to radiation in the form
of small pellets embedded in a nylon ribbon temporarily (eg, 30 min) placed in the coronary artery prior to
stenting. This technique appears to decrease the risk of early restenosis, but it is unclear whether later
stenosis is slightly increased; trials are ongoing. Radioactive stents have not proven effective at limiting
restenosis.
Anticoagulation:
Various anticoagulation regimens are used during and after angioplasty to reduce the
incidence of thrombosis at the site of balloon dilation. Clopidogrel and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors are
the standard of care for patients with unstable non-ST-segment elevation MI. Clopidogrel (often in
===PAGE:2225===
combination with aspirin) is continued for 9 to 12 mo after PCI. Ca channel blockers and nitrates may also
reduce risk of coronary spasm.
Contraindications
Absolute contraindications
include
• Lack of cardiac surgical support
• Significant obstruction of the left main coronary artery without a nonobstructed bypass graft to the left
anterior descending or left circumflex arteries
Relative contraindications
include
• Coagulopathy
• Hypercoagulable states
• Diffusely diseased vessels without focal stenoses
• A single diseased vessel providing all perfusion to the myocardium
• Total occlusion of a coronary artery
• Stenosis < 50%
Complications
The main complications of balloon angioplasty and stenting are
• Thrombosis
• Restenosis
Thrombosis causes complete blockage and may occur at any time—acutely (immediately during or after
the procedure), subacutely (within 30 days), or late (> 30 days). Stent thrombosis may be due to
inadequate stent expansion or apposition at the time of the procedure, discontinuation of dual antiplatelet
therapy (eg, from nonadherence, need for noncardiac surgery), or both.
Restenosis is typically due to collagen deposition and thus does not occur until several weeks after the
procedure or later; it may cause partial or, less commonly, complete vessel blockage.
With balloon angioplasty, risk of acute thrombosis is about 5 to 10%, risk of subacute restenosis is about
5%, and the overall restenosis rate is about 30 to 45%. Use of stents has almost eliminated the need for
emergency coronary artery bypass grafting following PCI. With stenting, the rate of acute and subacute
thrombosis or restenosis is < 1%. With BMS, risk of late restenosis is decreased to 20 to 30%. Use of a
DES lowers late restenosis risk to about 5 to 10%. However, using a DES increases risk of late stent
thrombosis, about 0.6%/yr up to 3 yr.
Complications besides restenosis are similar to those of coronary angiography, although risk of death, MI,
and stroke is greater. Of all angiographic procedures, PCI has the highest risk of contrast nephropathy;
this risk can be reduced by preprocedural hydration and possibly by use of a nonionic contrast agent,
acetylcysteine, or hemofiltration in patients with preexisting renal insufficiency. Stenting, in addition to the
above, has complications of bleeding secondary to aggressive adjunctive anticoagulation, side branch
occlusion, and stent embolism.
Radionuclide Imaging
===PAGE:2226===
Radionuclide imaging uses a special detector (gamma camera) to create an image following injection of
radioactive material. This test is done to evaluate coronary artery disease (CAD), valvular or congenital
cardiac disorders, cardiomyopathy, and other cardiac disorders. Radionuclide imaging exposes patients to
less radiation than do comparable x-ray studies. However, because the radioactive material is retained in
the patient briefly, sophisticated radiation alarms (eg, in airports) may be triggered by the patient for
several days after such testing.
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT):
Planar techniques, which produce a 2dimensional image, are rarely used; SPECT, which uses a rotating camera system and tomographic
reconstruction to produce a 3-dimensional image, is more common in the US. With multihead SPECT
systems, imaging can often be completed in ≤ 10 min. Visual comparison of stress and delayed images
can be supplemented by quantitative displays. With SPECT, inferior and posterior abnormalities and small
areas of infarction and the vessels responsible for infarction can be identified. The mass of infarcted and
viable myocardium can be quantified, helping determine prognosis.
Myocardial Perfusion Imaging
In myocardial perfusion imaging, IV radionuclides are taken up by cardiac tissues in rough proportion to
perfusion; thus, areas of decreased uptake represent areas of relative or absolute ischemia. For this
reason, myocardial perfusion imaging is used with stress testing to evaluate patients with chest pain of
uncertain origin, to determine the functional significance of coronary artery stenosis or collateral vessels
seen on angiography, and to evaluate the success of reperfusion interventions (eg, coronary artery
bypass grafting [CABG], percutaneous intervention, thrombolysis). After acute MI, myocardial perfusion
imaging can help estimate prognosis because it can show extent of the perfusion abnormality due to
acute MI, extent of scarring due to previous infarcts, and residual peri-infarct or other areas of reversible
ischemia.
Radioactive thallium-201 (
Tl), which acts as a K analog, was the original tracer used in stress testing.
It is injected at peak stress and imaged with SPECT, followed 4 h later by injection of one half the original
dose during rest and by repeat SPECT. The goal of this protocol is to evaluate reversible perfusion
defects that may warrant intervention. After stress testing, the perfusion imbalance between normal
coronary arteries and those distal to a stenosis appears as a relative decrease in
Tl uptake in the
areas perfused by the stenosed arteries. Sensitivity of stress testing with
Tl for CAD is similar whether
imaging is done after exercise or pharmacologic stress.
Because the imaging characteristics of
Tl are not ideal for the gamma camera, several technetium99m (
99m
Tc) myocardial perfusion markers have been developed: sestamibi (commonly used),
tetrofosmin, and teboroxime (see
Table 207-6
). Protocols
[Table 207-6.
Technetium-99M Myocardial Perfusion Markers]
include 2-day stress-rest, 1-day rest-stress, and 1-day stress-rest. Some protocols use dual isotopes
(
Tl and
99m
Tc), although this approach is expensive. With either of these markers, sensitivity is about
90%, and specificity is about 71%.
For 2-day protocols, imaging at rest may be omitted if the initial stress test shows no evidence of
abnormal perfusion. When higher doses of
99m
Tc (> 30 mCi) are used, first-transit function studies (with
ventriculography) may be used with perfusion imaging.
Other radionuclides include iodine-123 (
I)-labeled fatty acids, which produces cold spots where
myocardium is ischemic; gallium citrate-67 (
Ga), which accumulates in sites of active inflammation (eg,
in acute inflammatory cardiomyopathy); and
I metaiodobenzylguanidine, a neurotransmitter analog
taken up and stored in neurons of the sympathetic nervous system and used in research to evaluate
heart failure, diabetes, certain arrhythmias, and arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia.
===PAGE:2227===
Attenuation of myocardial activity by overlying soft tissue may cause false-positive results. Attenuation by
breast tissue in women is especially common. Attenuation by the diaphragm and abdominal contents may
produce spurious inferior wall defects in both sexes but is more common among men. Attenuation is more
likely with
99m
Tc than with
Tl.
Infarct Avid Imaging
Infarct avid imaging uses radiolabeled markers that accumulate in areas of damaged myocardium, such
as
99m
Tc pyrophosphate and antimyosin (indium-111 [In]-labeled antibodies to cardiac myosin).
Images usually become positive 12 to 24 h after acute MI and remain positive for about 1 wk; they may
remain positive if myocardial necrosis continues post-MI or if aneurysms develop. This technique is rarely
used now because other diagnostic tests for MI (eg, biomarkers) are more readily available and less
expensive and because it provides no prognostic information other than infarct size.
Radionuclide Ventriculography
Radionuclide ventriculography is used to evaluate ventricular function. It is useful for measuring resting
and exercise ejection fraction in CAD, valvular heart disease, and congenital heart disease. Some
clinicians prefer it for serial assessment of ventricular function in patients taking cardiotoxic cancer
chemotherapy (eg, anthracyclines). However, radionuclide ventriculography has been largely replaced by
echocardiography, which is less expensive, does not require radiation exposure, and theoretically can
measure ejection fractions as accurately.
99m
Tc-labeled RBCs are injected into the ventricles. Left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV)
function can be evaluated by first-transit studies (a type of beat-to-beat evaluation) or by gated (ECGsynchronized) blood pool imaging done over several minutes (multiple-gated acquisition [MUGA]). Either
study can be done during rest or after exercise. First-transit studies are rapid and relatively easy, but
MUGA provides better images and is more widely used.
In first-transit studies, 8 to 10 cardiac cycles are imaged as the marker mixes with blood and passes
through the central circulation. First-transit studies are ideal for assessing RV function and intracardiac
shunts.
In MUGA, imaging is synchronized with the R wave of the ECG. Multiple images are taken of short,
sequential portions of each cardiac cycle for 5 to 10 min. Computer analysis generates an average blood
pool configuration for each portion of the cardiac cycle and synthesizes the configurations into a
continuous cinematic loop resembling a beating heart.
MUGA can quantitate numerous indexes of ventricular function, including regional wall motion, ejection
fraction (EF); ratio of stroke volume to end-diastolic volume, ejection and filling rates, LV volume, and
indexes of relative volume overload (eg, LV:RV stroke volume ratios). EF is used most commonly.
MUGA during rest has virtually no risk. It is used for serially evaluating RV and LV function in various
disorders (eg, valvular heart disorders); for monitoring patients taking potentially cardiotoxic drugs (eg,
doxorubicin); and for assessing the effects of angioplasty, CABG, thrombolysis, and other procedures in
patients with CAD or MI. Arrhythmias are a relative contraindication because there may be few normal
cardiac cycles.
LV:
MUGA is useful for detecting LV aneurysms; sensitivity and specificity are > 90% for typical anterior
or anteroapical true aneurysms. Conventional gated blood pool imaging shows inferoposterior LV
aneurysms less well than it shows anterior and lateral aneurysms; additional views are required. Gated
SPECT imaging takes longer (about 20 to 25 min with a multihead camera) than a single planar gated
view (5 to 10 min) but shows all portions of the ventricles.
RV:
MUGA is used to assess RV function in patients who have a lung disorder or an inferior LV infarct
that may involve the RV. Normally, RVEF (40 to 55% with most techniques) is lower than LVEF. RVEF is
===PAGE:2228===
subnormal in
many patients with pulmonary hypertension and in patients with RV infarction or
cardiomyopathy affecting the RV. Idiopathic cardiomyopathy is usually characterized by biventricular
dysfunction, unlike typical CAD, which usually causes more LV than RV dysfunction.
Valves:
MUGA can be used with rest-stress protocols to assess valvular disorders that result in LV
volume overload. In aortic regurgitation, a reduction in resting EF or no increase in EF with exercise is a
sign of deteriorating cardiac function and may indicate a need for valvular repair. MUGA also can be used
to calculate the regurgitant fraction in regurgitation of any valve. Normally, the stroke volume of the 2
ventricles is equal. However, in patients with left-sided valvular regurgitation, LV stroke volume exceeds
that of the RV by an amount proportional to the regurgitant fraction. Thus, if the RV is normal, the
regurgitant fraction of the LV can be calculated from the LV:RV stroke volume ratio.
Shunts:
With MUGA and commercially available computer programs, size of a congenital shunt can be
quantified by the stroke volume ratio or, during the first transit of the marker, by the ratio of abnormal early
pulmonary recirculation of radioactivity to total pulmonary radioactivity.
Stress Testing
In stress testing, the heart is monitored by ECG and often imaging studies during an induced episode of
increased cardiac demand so that ischemic areas potentially at risk of infarction can be identified. Heart
rate is increased to 85% of age-predicted maximum (target heart rate) or until symptoms develop,
whichever occurs first.
Stress testing is used for diagnosis of coronary artery disease (CAD) and for risk stratification and
monitoring of patients with known CAD. In patients with CAD, a blood supply that is adequate at rest may
be inadequate when cardiac demands are increased by exercise or other forms of stress. Stress testing is
less invasive and less expensive than cardiac catheterization, and it detects pathophysiologic
abnormalities of blood flow; however, it is less accurate for diagnosis in patients with a low pretest
likelihood of CAD. It can define the functional significance of abnormalities in coronary artery anatomy
identified with coronary angiography during catheterization. Because coronary artery plaques that are not
significantly stenotic (ie, do not result in ischemia during stress testing) may nonetheless rupture and
cause an acute coronary syndrome, a normal stress test result does not guarantee future freedom from
MI.
Risks of stress testing include infarction and sudden death, which occur in about 1/5000 patients tested.
Stress testing has several contraindications (see
Table 207-7
). Patients must be npo for 4 to 6 h before the test.
Stress Methodology
Cardiac demand can be increased by exercise or drugs.
[Table 207-7.
Contraindications to Exercise Stress Testing]
Exercise stress testing:
Exercise is preferred to drugs for increasing cardiac demand because it more
closely replicates ischemia-inducing stressors. Usually, a patient walks on a conventional treadmill,
following the Bruce protocol or a similar exercise schedule, until the target heart rate is reached or
symptoms occur. The Bruce protocol increases treadmill speed and slope incrementally at roughly 3-min
intervals.
Pharmacologic stress testing:
Pharmacologic stress testing is usually used when patients cannot walk
on a treadmill long enough to reach their target heart rate because of deconditioning, musculoskeletal
disorders, obesity, peripheral arterial disease, or other disorders. Drugs used include IV dipyridamole,
adenosine, and dobutamine.
Dipyridamole augments endogenous adenosine, causing coronary artery vasodilation. It increases
myocardial blood flow in normal coronary arteries but not in arteries distal to a stenosis, creating a "steal"
phenomenon from stenosed arteries and an imbalance in perfusion. Dipyridamole-induced ischemia or
===PAGE:2229===
other adverse effects (eg, nausea, vomiting, headache, bronchospasm) occur in about 10% of patients,
but these effects can be reversed by IV aminophylline. Severe reactions occur in < 1% of patients.
Contraindications include asthma, acute phase MI, unstable angina pectoris, critical aortic stenosis, and
systemic hypotension (systolic BP < 90 mm Hg).
Adenosine has the same effect as dipyridamole but must be given in a continuous IV infusion because it is
rapidly degraded in the plasma. Adverse effects include transient flushing and chest pain, which can be
reversed by terminating the infusion.
Dobutamine is an inotrope, chronotrope, and vasodilator used mainly when dipyridamole and adenosine
are contraindicated (eg, in patients with asthma or 2nd-degree atrioventricular block) and when
echocardiography is used to image the heart. Dobutamine must be used with caution in patients who
have severe hypertension or arrhythmia, left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, multiple previous MIs, or
acute MI.
Xanthine compounds (eg, aminophylline, theophylline, caffeine) may produce a false-negative result
during stress testing with dipyridamole, so such substances (including tea and coffee) should be avoided
for 24 h before testing.
Diagnostic Methodology
Several imaging tests can detect ischemia after exercise or pharmacologic stress:
• ECG
• Radionuclide perfusion imaging
• Echocardiography
ECG
is always used with stress testing to diagnose CAD and help determine prognosis. ECG is most
useful in patients with intermediate likelihood of CAD based on age and sex and with a normal ECG at
rest. Diagnosis involves assessment of ST-segment response (a measure of global subendocardial
ischemia), BP response, and the patient's symptoms. Average sensitivity is 67%; average specificity is
72%. Sensitivity and specificity are lower in women partly because incidence of CAD is lower in young
and middle-aged women. Prognosis worsens with depth of ST depression.
Radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging
( is more sensitive (85 to 90%) and specific
(70 to 80%) than ECG stress testing; combining findings from both tests increases sensitivity for CAD.
Myocardial perfusion imaging is particularly useful for patients with baseline ECG abnormalities that may
interfere with interpretation of ECG changes during a stress test (eg, patients with bundle branch block,
those with fixed-rate pacemakers, those taking digitalis). It is also useful for groups with a high probability
of false-positive results on exercise ECGs (eg, premenopausal women, patients with mitral valve
prolapse). This imaging test can help determine the functional significance of coronary artery stenosis,
identified by coronary angiography, when surgeons are choosing lesions to bypass or dilate via
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.
Echocardiography
is useful when information about more than just perfusion is needed;
echocardiography detects wall motion abnormalities that are a sign of regional ischemia and, using
Doppler techniques, helps evaluate valvular disorders that may contribute to or result from ischemia or
valvular disorders unrelated to ischemia but which deserve concomitant evaluation (. The
echocardiogram is typically obtained immediately before and after an exercise treadmill test or during
dobutamine infusion. Echocardiography is relatively portable, does not use ionizing radiation, has a rapid
acquisition time, and is inexpensive, but it is difficult to carry out in obese patients and in patients with
COPD and lung hyperinflation. Done by experts, stress echocardiography has a predictive value similar to
that of stress myocardial radionuclide perfusion testing.
Radionuclide ventriculography
is occasionally used with exercise stress testing instead of
echocardiography to assess exercise ejection
fraction (EF), the best prognostic indicator in patients with
===PAGE:2230===
CAD. Normally, EF is ≥ 5 percentage points higher during exercise than at rest. Ventricular dysfunction
(eg, due to valvular heart disorders, cardiomyopathy, or CAD) can decrease exercise EF below baseline
or prevent it from increasing. In patients with CAD, the 8-yr survival rate is 80% with an exercise EF of 40
to 49%, 75% with an exercise EF of 30 to 39%, and 40% with an exercise EF of < 30%.
Tilt Table Testing
Tilt table testing is used to evaluate syncope in younger, apparently healthy patients and, when cardiac
and other tests have not provided a diagnosis, in elderly patients. Tilt table testing produces maximal
venous pooling, which can trigger vasovagal (neurocardiogenic) syncope and reproduce the symptoms
and signs that accompany it (nausea, light-headedness, pallor, hypotension, bradycardia).
After an overnight fast, a patient is placed on a motorized table with a foot board at one end and is held in
place by a single strap over the stomach; an IV line is inserted. After the patient remains supine for 15
min, the table is tilted nearly upright to 60 to 80° for 45 min. If vasovagal symptoms develop, vasovagal
syncope is confirmed. If they do not occur, a drug (eg, isoproterenol) may be given to induce them.
Sensitivity varies from 30 to 80% depending on the protocol used. The false-positive rate is 10 to 15%.
With vasovagal syncope, heart rate and BP usually decrease. Some patients have only a decrease in
heart rate (cardioinhibitory); others have only a decrease in BP (vasodepressor). Other responses include
a gradual decrease in systolic and diastolic BP with little change in heart rate (dysautonomic pattern),
significant increase in heart rate (> 30 beats/min) with little change in BP (postural orthostatic tachycardia
syndrome), and report of syncope with no hemodynamic changes (psychogenic syncope).
Relative contraindications include severe aortic or mitral stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and
severe coronary artery disease (CAD). In particular, isoproterenol should not be used in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or severe CAD.
===PAGE:2231===
Chapter 208. Arterial Hypertension
Introduction
Hypertension is sustained elevation of resting systolic BP (≥ 140 mm Hg), diastolic BP (≥ 90 mm
Hg), or both. Hypertension with no known cause (primary; formerly, essential hypertension) is
most common. Hypertension with an identified cause (secondary hypertension) is usually due
to a renal disorder. Usually, no symptoms develop unless hypertension is severe or longstanding. Diagnosis is by sphygmomanometry. Tests may be done to determine cause, assess
damage, and identify other cardiovascular risk factors. Treatment involves lifestyle changes and
drugs, including diuretics,
β
-blockers, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, and Ca
channel blockers.
In the US, about 65 million people have hypertension. Only about 70% of these people are aware that
they have hypertension, only 59% are being treated, and only 34% have adequately controlled BP. In
adults, hypertension occurs more often in blacks (32%) than in whites (23%) or Mexican Americans
(23%), and morbidity and mortality are greater in blacks.
BP increases with age. About two thirds of people > 65 have hypertension, and people with a normal BP
at age 55 have a 90% lifetime risk of developing hypertension. Because hypertension becomes so
common with age, the age-related increase in BP may seem innocuous, but higher BP increases
morbidity and mortality risk. Hypertension may develop during pregnancy (see pp.
and
).
Etiology
Hypertension may be primary (85 to 95% of cases) or secondary.
Primary hypertension:
Hemodynamics and physiologic components (eg, plasma volume, activity of the
renin-angiotensin system) vary, indicating that primary hypertension is unlikely to have a single cause.
Even if one factor is initially responsible, multiple factors are probably involved in sustaining elevated BP
(the mosaic theory). In afferent systemic arterioles, malfunction of ion pumps on sarcolemmal membranes
of smooth muscle
cells may lead to chronically increased vascular tone. Heredity is a predisposing factor,
but the exact mechanism is unclear. Environmental factors (eg, dietary Na, obesity, stress) seem to affect
only genetically susceptible people.
Secondary hypertension:
Causes include renal parenchymal disease (eg, chronic glomerulonephritis
or pyelonephritis, polycystic renal disease, connective tissue disorders, obstructive uropathy),
renovascular disease (, pheochromocytoma, Cushing's syndrome, primary aldosteronism,
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, hyperthyroidism, myxedema, and coarctation of the aorta. Excessive
alcohol intake and use of oral contraceptives are common causes of curable hypertension. Use of
sympathomimetics, NSAIDs, corticosteroids, cocaine, or licorice commonly contributes to hypertension.
Pathophysiology
Because BP equals cardiac output (CO) × total peripheral vascular resistance (TPR), pathogenic
mechanisms must involve increased CO, increased TPR, or both.
In most patients, CO is normal or slightly increased, and TPR is increased. This pattern is typical of
primary hypertension and hypertension due to pheochromocytoma, primary aldosteronism, renovascular
disease, and renal parenchymal disease.
In other patients, CO is increased (possibly because of venoconstriction in large veins), and TPR is
inappropriately normal for the level of CO. Later in the disorder, TPR increases and CO returns to normal,
probably because of autoregulation. Some disorders that increase CO (thyrotoxicosis, arteriovenous
fistula, aortic regurgitation), particularly when stroke volume is increased, cause isolated systolic
hypertension. Some elderly patients have isolated systolic hypertension with normal or low CO, probably
due to inelasticity of the aorta and its major branches. Patients with high, fixed diastolic pressures often
have decreased CO.
===PAGE:2232===
Plasma volume tends to decrease as BP increases; rarely, plasma volume remains normal or increases.
Plasma volume tends to be high in hypertension due to primary aldosteronism or renal parenchymal
disease and may be quite low in hypertension due to pheochromocytoma. Renal blood flow gradually
decreases as diastolic BP increases and arteriolar sclerosis begins. GFR remains normal until late in the
disorder; as a result, the filtration fraction is increased. Coronary, cerebral, and muscle blood flow is
maintained unless severe atherosclerosis coexists in these vascular beds.
Abnormal Na transport:
In many cases of hypertension, Na transport across the cell wall is abnormal,
because the Na-K pump (Na
+
, K
+
-ATPase) is defective or inhibited or because permeability to Na
+
is
increased. The result is increased intracellular Na, which makes the cell more sensitive to sympathetic
stimulation. Ca follows Na, so accumulation of intracellular Ca may be responsible for the increased
sensitivity. Because Na
+
, K
+
-ATPase may pump norepinephrine back into sympathetic neurons (thus
inactivating this neurotransmitter), inhibition of this mechanism could also enhance the effect of
norepinephrine, increasing BP. Defects in Na transport may occur in normotensive children of
hypertensive parents.
Sympathetic nervous system:
Sympathetic stimulation increases BP, usually more in patients with
prehypertension (systolic BP 120 to 139 mm Hg, diastolic BP 80 to 89 mm Hg) or hypertension (systolic
BP ≥ 140 mm Hg, diastolic BP ≥ 90 mm Hg, or both) than in normotensive patients. Whether this
hyperresponsiveness resides in the sympathetic nervous system or in the myocardium and vascular
smooth muscle is unknown. A high resting pulse rate, which may result from increased sympathetic
nervous activity, is a well-known predictor of hypertension. In some hypertensive patients, circulating
plasma catecholamine levels during rest are higher than normal.
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system:
This system helps regulate blood volume and therefore BP.
Renin, an enzyme formed in the juxtaglomerular apparatus, catalyzes conversion of angiotensinogen to
angiotensin I. This inactive product is cleaved by ACE, mainly in the lungs but also in the kidneys and
brain, to angiotensin II, a potent vasoconstrictor that also stimulates autonomic centers in the brain to
increase sympathetic discharge and stimulates release of aldosterone and ADH. Aldosterone and ADH
cause Na and water retention, elevating BP. Aldosterone also enhances K excretion; low plasma K (< 3.5
mEq/L) increases vasoconstriction through closure of K channels. Angiotensin III, present in the
circulation, stimulates aldosterone release as actively as angiotensin II but has much less pressor activity.
Because chymase enzymes also convert angiotensin I to angiotensin II, drugs that inhibit ACE do not fully
suppress angiotensin II production.
Renin secretion is controlled by at least 4 mechanisms, which are not mutually exclusive: (1) A renal
vascular receptor responds to
changes in tension in the afferent arteriolar wall; (2) a macula densa
receptor detects changes in the delivery rate or concentration of NaCl in the distal tubule; (3) circulating
angiotensin has a negative feedback effect on renin secretion; and (4) via the renal nerve, the
sympathetic nervous system stimulates renin secretion mediated by
β
-receptors.
Angiotensin is generally acknowledged to be responsible for renovascular hypertension, at least in the
early phase, but the role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in primary hypertension is not
established. However, in black and elderly patients with hypertension, renin levels tend to be low. The
elderly also tend to have low angiotensin II levels.
Hypertension due to chronic renal parenchymal disease (renoprival hypertension) results from the
combination of a renin-dependent mechanism and a volume-dependent mechanism. In most cases,
increased renin activity is not evident in peripheral blood. Hypertension is typically moderate and
sensitive to Na and water balance.
Vasodilator deficiency:
Deficiency of a vasodilator (eg, bradykinin, nitric oxide) rather than excess of a
vasoconstrictor (eg, angiotensin, norepinephrine) may cause hypertension. If the kidneys do not produce
adequate amounts of vasodilators (because of renal parenchymal disease or bilateral nephrectomy), BP
can increase. Vasodilators and vasoconstrictors (mainly endothelin) are also produced in endothelial
cells. Therefore, endothelial dysfunction greatly affects BP.
===PAGE:2233===
Pathology and complications:
No pathologic changes occur early in hypertension. Severe or
prolonged hypertension damages target organs (primarily the cardiovascular system, brain, and kidneys),
increasing risk of coronary artery disease (CAD), MI, stroke (particularly hemorrhagic), and renal failure.
The mechanism involves development of generalized arteriolosclerosis and acceleration of atherogenesis
(. Arteriolosclerosis is characterized by medial hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and hyalinization; it
is particularly apparent in small arterioles, notably in the eyes and the kidneys. In the kidneys, the
changes narrow the arteriolar lumen, increasing TPR; thus, hypertension leads to more hypertension.
Furthermore, once arteries are narrowed, any slight additional shortening of already hypertrophied
smooth muscle reduces the lumen to a greater extent than in normal-diameter arteries. These effects may
explain why the longer hypertension has existed, the less likely specific treatment (eg, renovascular
surgery) for secondary causes is to restore BP to normal.
Because of increased afterload, the left ventricle gradually hypertrophies, causing diastolic dysfunction.
The ventricle eventually dilates, causing dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure (HF) due to systolic
dysfunction. Thoracic aortic dissection is typically a consequence of hypertension; almost all patients with
abdominal aortic aneurysms have hypertension.
Symptoms and Signs
Hypertension is usually asymptomatic until complications develop in target organs. Dizziness, flushed
facies, headache, fatigue, epistaxis, and nervousness are not caused by uncomplicated hypertension.
Severe hypertension (hypertensive emergencies— can cause severe cardiovascular,
neurologic, renal, and retinal symptoms (eg, symptomatic coronary atherosclerosis, HF, hypertensive
encephalopathy, renal failure).
A 4th heart sound is one of the earliest signs of hypertensive heart disease.
Retinal changes may include arteriolar narrowing, hemorrhages, exudates, and, in patients with
encephalopathy, papilledema (. Changes are classified (according to the Keith, Wagener, and
Barker classification) into 4 groups with increasingly worse prognosis: constriction of arterioles only
(grade 1), constriction and sclerosis of arterioles (grade 2), hemorrhages and exudates in addition to
vascular changes (grade 3), and papilledema (grade 4).
Diagnosis
• Multiple measurements of BP to confirm
• Urinalysis and urinary albumin:creatinine ratio; if abnormal, consider renal ultrasonography
• Blood tests: Fasting lipids, creatinine, K
• Renal ultrasonography if creatinine increased
• Evaluate for aldosteronism if K decreased
• ECG: If left ventricular hypertrophy, consider echocardiography
• Sometimes thyroid-stimulating hormone measurement
• Evaluate for pheochromocytoma if BP elevation sudden and labile or severe
Hypertension is diagnosed and classified by sphygmomanometry. History, physical examination, and other
tests help identify etiology and determine whether target organs are damaged.
BP must be measured twice—first with the patient supine or seated, then after the patient has been
standing for ≥ 2 min—on 3 separate
days. The average of these measurements is used for diagnosis. BP
is classified as normal, prehypertension, or stage 1 (mild) or stage 2 hypertension (see
===PAGE:2234===
Table 208-1
). Normal BP is much lower for infants and children.
Ideally, BP is measured after the patient rests > 5 min and at different times of day. A BP cuff is applied to
the upper arm. An appropriately sized cuff covers two thirds of the biceps; the bladder is long enough to
encircle > 80% of the arm, and bladder width equals at least 40% of the arm's circumference. Thus,
obese patients require large cuffs. The health care practitioner inflates the cuff above the expected
systolic pressure and gradually releases the air while listening over the brachial artery. The pressure at
which the first heartbeat is heard as the pressure falls is systolic BP. Disappearance of the sound marks
diastolic BP. The same principles are followed to measure BP in a forearm (radial artery) and thigh
(popliteal artery). Sphygmomanometers that contain mercury are most accurate. Mechanical devices
should be calibrated periodically; automated readers are often inaccurate.
BP is measured in both arms; if BP in one arm is much higher, the higher value is used. BP is also
measured in a thigh (with a much larger cuff) to rule out coarctation of the aorta, particularly in patients
with diminished or delayed femoral pulses; with coarctation, BP is significantly lower in the legs. If BP is in
the low-hypertensive range or is markedly labile, more BP measurements are desirable. BP
measurements may be sporadically high before hypertension becomes sustained; this phenomenon
probably accounts for "white coat hypertension," in which BP is elevated when measured in the
physician's office but normal when measured at home or by ambulatory BP monitoring. However, extreme
BP elevation alternating with normal readings is unusual and possibly suggests pheochromocytoma or
unacknowledged drug use.
[Table 208-1.
JNC 7 Classification of Blood Pressure in Adults]
History:
The history includes the known duration of hypertension and previously recorded levels; any
history or symptoms of CAD, HF, or other relevant coexisting disorders (eg, stroke, renal dysfunction,
peripheral arterial disease, dyslipidemia, diabetes, gout); and a family history of any of these disorders.
Social history includes exercise levels and use of tobacco, alcohol, and stimulant drugs (prescribed and
illicit). A dietary history focuses on intake of salt and stimulants (eg, tea, coffee, caffeine-containing
sodas, energy drinks).
Physical examination:
The physical examination includes measurement of height, weight, and waist
circumference; funduscopic examination ( for retinopathy; auscultation for bruits in the neck
and abdomen; and a full cardiac, respiratory, and neurologic examination. The abdomen is palpated for
kidney enlargement and abdominal masses. Peripheral arterial pulses are evaluated; diminished or
delayed femoral pulses suggest aortic coarctation, particularly in patients < 30.
Testing:
The more severe the hypertension and the younger the patient, the more extensive is the
evaluation. Generally, when hypertension is newly diagnosed, routine testing to detect target-organ
damage and cardiovascular risk factors is done. Tests include urinalysis, spot urine albumin:creatinine
ratio, blood tests (creatinine, K, Na, fasting plasma glucose, lipid profile), and ECG. Thyroid-stimulating
hormone is often measured. Ambulatory BP monitoring, renal radionuclide imaging, chest x-ray, screening
tests for pheochromocytoma, and renin-Na profiling are not routinely necessary. Peripheral plasma renin
activity is not helpful in diagnosis or drug selection.
Depending on results of initial tests and examination, other tests may be needed. If urinalysis detects
albuminuria (proteinuria), cylindruria, or microhematuria or if serum creatinine is elevated (≥ 1.4 mg/dL in
men; ≥ 1.2 mg/dL in women), renal ultrasonography to evaluate kidney size may provide useful
information. Patients with hypokalemia unrelated to diuretic use are evaluated for primary aldosteronism
( and high salt intake.
On ECG, a broad, notched P-wave indicates atrial hypertrophy and, although nonspecific, may be one of
the earliest signs of hypertensive
heart disease. Left ventricular hypertrophy, indicated by a sustained
apical thrust and abnormal QRS voltage with or without evidence of ischemia, may occur later. If either of
these findings is present, echocardiography is often done. In patients with an abnormal lipid profile or
symptoms of CAD, tests for other cardiovascular risk factors (eg, C-reactive protein) may be useful.
If coarctation of the aorta is suspected, chest x-ray, echocardiography, CT, or MRI helps confirm the
===PAGE:2235===
diagnosis.
Patients with labile, significantly elevated BP and symptoms such as headache, palpitations, tachycardia,
excessive perspiration, tremor, and pallor are screened for pheochromocytoma (eg, by measuring plasma
free metanephrines—.
Patients with symptoms suggesting Cushing's syndrome, a connective tissue disorder, eclampsia, acute
porphyria, hyperthyroidism, myxedema, acromegaly, or CNS disorders are evaluated (see elsewhere in
THE MANUAL).
Prognosis
The higher the BP and the more severe the retinal changes and other evidence of target-organ
involvement, the worse is the prognosis. Systolic BP predicts fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events
better than diastolic BP. Without treatment, 1-yr survival is < 10% in patients with retinal sclerosis, cottonwool exudates, arteriolar narrowing, and hemorrhage (grade 3 retinopathy), and < 5% in patients with the
same changes plus papilledema (grade 4 retinopathy). CAD is the most common cause of death among
treated hypertensive patients. Ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke is a common consequence of inadequately
treated hypertension. However, effective control of hypertension prevents most complications and
prolongs life.
General Treatment
• Weight loss and exercise
• Smoking cessation
• Diet: Increased fruits and vegetables, decreased salt, limited alcohol
• Drugs if BP is initially high (> 160/100 mm Hg) or unresponsive to lifestyle modifications
Primary hypertension has no cure, but some causes of secondary hypertension can be corrected. In all
cases, control of BP can significantly limit adverse consequences. Despite the theoretical efficacy of
treatment, BP is lowered to the desired level in only one third of hypertensive patients in the US.
For all patients, treatment aims to reduce BP to < 140/90 mm Hg; for those with a kidney disorder or
diabetes, the goal is < 130/80 mm Hg or as near this level as tolerated. Even the elderly and frail elderly
can tolerate a diastolic BP as low as 60 to 65 mm Hg well and without an increase in cardiovascular
events. Ideally, patients or family members measure BP at home, provided they have been trained to do
so, they are closely monitored, and the sphygmomanometer is regularly calibrated. Treatment of
hypertension during pregnancy requires special considerations because some antihypertensive drugs
can harm the fetus (.
Lifestyle modifications:
Recommendations include regular aerobic physical activity at least 30 min/day
most days of the week; weight loss to a body mass index of 18.5 to 24.9; smoking cessation; a diet rich in
fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy products with reduced saturated and total fat content; dietary sodium
[Na
+] of < 2.4 g/day (< 6 g NaCl); and alcohol consumption of ≤ 1 oz/day in men and ≤ 0.5 oz/day in
women. In stage 1 (mild) hypertension with no signs of target-organ damage, lifestyle changes may make
drugs unnecessary. Patients with uncomplicated hypertension do not need to restrict their activities as
long as BP is controlled. Dietary modifications can also help control diabetes, obesity, and dyslipidemias.
Patients with prehypertension are encouraged to follow these lifestyle recommendations.
Drugs:
If systolic BP remains > 140 mm Hg or diastolic BP remains > 90 mm Hg after 6 mo of lifestyle
modifications, antihypertensive drugs are required. Unless hypertension is severe, drugs are usually
started at low doses. Drugs are initiated simultaneously with lifestyle changes for all patients with
prehypertension or hypertension plus diabetes, a kidney disorder, target-organ damage, or cardiovascular
risk factors and for those with an initial BP of > 160/100 mm Hg. Signs of hypertensive emergencies
require immediate BP reduction with parenteral antihypertensives.
===PAGE:2236===
For most hypertensive patients, one drug, usually a thiazide-type diuretic, is given initially. Depending on
the patient's characteristics and coexisting disorders, other drugs can be used initially or added to the
thiazide. Low-dose aspirin (81 mg once/day) appears to reduce incidence of cardiac events in
hypertensive patients and is recommended when tolerated and not contraindicated; some evidence
suggests it is better to take the aspirin in the evening rather than in the morning—this timing appears to
increase efficacy of antihypertensive drugs.
Some antihypertensives are contraindicated in certain disorders (eg,
β
-blockers in asthma) or are
indicated particularly for certain disorders (eg,
β
-blockers or Ca channel blockers for angina pectoris, ACE
inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers for diabetes or proteinuria—see
Tables 208-2
and
208-3
). When a single drug is used, black men may respond best to a Ca channel blocker (eg, diltiazem).
Thiazide-type diuretics appear to be particularly effective in people > 60 and in blacks.
If the initial drug is ineffective or has intolerable adverse effects, another drug can be substituted. If the
initial drug is only partly effective but well tolerated, the dose can be increased or a second drug with a
different mechanism added.
If initial systolic BP is > 160 mm Hg, 2 drugs are often used. Options include combining a diuretic with a
β
-blocker, an ACE inhibitor, or an angiotensin II receptor blocker and combining a Ca channel blocker with
an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker. An appropriate combination and dose are
determined; many are available as single tablets, which improve compliance (see
Table 208-4
). For severe or refractory hypertension, 3 or 4 drugs may be necessary.
Achieving adequate control often requires several evaluations and changes in drug therapy. Reluctance
to titrate or add drugs until BP is at an acceptable level must be overcome. Lack of patient adherence,
particularly because lifelong treatment is required, can interfere with adequate BP control. Education, with
empathy and support, is essential for success.
Drugs for Hypertension
Diuretics:
Main classes (see
Table 208-5
) are thiazide-type diuretics, loop diuretics, and K-sparing diuretics. Loop diuretics are used to
treat hypertension only in patients who have lost > 50% of kidney function; these diuretics are given twice
daily. Diuretics modestly reduce plasma volume and reduce vascular resistance, possibly via shifts in Na
from intracellular to extracellular loci. These drugs are the least expensive initial therapy, and the dose
needed is small, especially for the elderly (eg, for most people > 60 hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg is
sufficient). Thiazide-type diuretics are most commonly used. In addition to other antihypertensive effects,
they cause vasodilation as long as intravascular volume is normal. All thiazides are equally effective in
equivalent doses.
All diuretics except the K-sparing distal tubular diuretics cause significant K loss, so serum K is measured
every 1 mo until the
[Table 208-2.
Choice of Antihypertensive Drug Class]
[Table 208-3.
Antihypertensives for High-Risk Patients]
level stabilizes. Unless serum K is normalized, K channels in the arterial walls close and the resulting
vasoconstriction makes achieving the BP goal difficult. Patients with K levels < 3.5 mEq/L are given K
supplements. Supplements may be continued long-term at a lower dose, or a K-sparing diuretic (eg, daily
spironolactone 25 to 100 mg, triamterene 50 to 150 mg, amiloride 5 to 10 mg) may be added.
Supplements or addition of a K-sparing diuretic is also recommended for any patients who are also taking
digitalis, have a known heart disorder, have an abnormal ECG, have ectopy or arrhythmias, or develop
ectopy or arrhythmias while taking a diuretic. Although the K-sparing diuretics do not cause hypokalemia,
hyperuricemia, or hyperglycemia, they are not as effective as thiazide-type diurectics in controlling
hypertension and thus are not used for initial treatment. K-sparing diuretics or supplements are not
===PAGE:2237===
needed when an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker is used because these drugs increase
serum K.
In most patients with diabetes, thiazide-type diuretics do not affect control of diabetes. Uncommonly,
diuretics precipitate or worsen type 2 diabetes in patients with metabolic syndrome.
Thiazide-type diuretics can increase serum cholesterol slightly (mostly low-density lipoprotein) and also
increase triglyceride levels, although these effects may not persist > 1 yr. Furthermore, levels seem to
increase in only a few patients. The increase is apparent within 4 wk of treatment and can be ameliorated
by a low-fat diet. The possibility of a slight increase in lipid levels does not contraindicate diuretics in
hyperlipidemic patients.
A hereditary predisposition probably explains the few cases of gout due to diuretic-induced
hyperuricemia. Diuretic-induced hyperuricemia without gout does not require treatment or discontinuation
of the diuretic.
β
-Blockers:
These drugs (see
Table 208-6
) slow heart rate and reduce myocardial contractility, thus reducing BP. All
β
-blockers are
similar in antihypertensive efficacy. In patients with diabetes, chronic peripheral arterial disease, or
COPD, a cardioselective
β
-blocker (acebutolol, atenolol, betaxolol, bisoprolol, metoprolol) may be
preferable, although cardioselectivity is only relative and decreases as dose increases. Even
cardioselective
β
-blockers are contraindicated in patients with asthma or in patients with COPD with a
prominent bronchospastic component.
β
-Blockers are particularly useful in patients who have angina, who have had an MI, or who have HF,
although atenolol may worsen prognosis in patients with CAD. These drugs are no longer considered
problematic for the elderly.
β
-Blockers with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (eg, acebutolol, carteolol, penbutolol, pindolol) do not
adversely affect serum lipids; they are less likely to cause severe bradycardia.
β
-Blockers have CNS adverse effects (sleep disturbances, fatigue, lethargy) and exacerbate depression.
Nadolol affects the CNS the least and may be best when CNS effects must be avoided.
β
-Blockers are
contraindicated in patients with 2nd- or 3rd-degree atrioventricular block, asthma, or sick sinus syndrome.
Ca channel blockers:
Dihydropyridines (see
Table 208-7
) are potent peripheral vasodilators and reduce BP by decreasing TPR; they sometimes
cause reflexive tachycardia. The nondihydropyridines verapamil and diltiazem slow the heart rate,
decrease atrioventricular conduction, and decrease myocardial contractility. These drugs should not be
prescribed for patients with 2nd- or
[Table 208-4.
Combination Drugs Used for Hypertension]
3rd-degree atrioventricular block or with left ventricular failure.
Long-acting nifedipine, verapamil, or diltiazem is used to treat hypertension, but short-acting nifedipine
and diltiazem are associated with a high rate of MI and are not recommended.
A Ca channel blocker is preferred to a
β
-blocker in patients with angina pectoris and a bronchospastic
disorder, with coronary spasms, or with Raynaud's syndrome.
ACE inhibitors:
These drugs (see
Table 208-8
) reduce BP by interfering with the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II and by
inhibiting the degradation of bradykinin, thereby decreasing peripheral vascular resistance without
causing reflex tachycardia. These drugs reduce BP in many hypertensive patients, regardless of plasma
renin activity. Because these drugs provide renal protection, they are the drugs of choice for patients with
diabetes and may be preferred for blacks.
===PAGE:2238===
A dry, irritating cough is the most common adverse effect, but angioedema is the most serious and, if it
affects the oropharynx, can be fatal. Angioedema is most common among blacks and smokers. ACE
inhibitors may
[Table 208-5.
Oral Diuretics for Hypertension]
[Table 208-6.
Oral
β
-Blockers for Hypertension]
[Table 208-7.
Oral Calcium Channel Blockers for Hypertension]
increase serum K and creatinine levels, especially in patients with chronic renal failure and those taking
K-sparing diuretics, K supplements, or NSAIDs. ACE inhibitors are the least likely of the antihypertensives
to cause erectile dysfunction. ACE inhibitors are contraindicated during pregnancy. In patients with a renal
disorder, serum creatinine and K levels are monitored at least every 3 mo. Patients who have stage 3
nephropathy (estimated GFR of < 60 mL/min to > 30 mL/min) and are given ACE inhibitors can usually
tolerate up to a 30 to 35% increase in serum creatinine above baseline. ACE inhibitors can cause acute
renal failure in patients who are hypovolemic or who have severe HF, severe bilateral renal artery
stenosis, or severe stenosis in the artery to a solitary kidney.
Thiazide-type diuretics enhance the antihypertensive activity of ACE inhibitors more than that of other
classes of antihypertensives. Spironolactone and eplerenone also appear to enhance the effect of ACE
inhibitors.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers:
These drugs (see
Table 208-8
) block angiotensin II receptors and
therefore interfere with the renin-angiotensin system. Angiotensin II receptor blockers and ACE inhibitors
are equally effective as antihypertensives. Angiotensin II receptor blockers may provide added benefits
via tissue ACE blockade. The 2 classes have the same beneficial effects in patients with left ventricular
failure or with nephropathy due to type 1 diabetes. An angiotensin II receptor blocker used with an ACE
inhibitor or a
β
-blocker reduces the hospitalization rate for patients with HF. Angiotensin II receptor
blockers may be safely started in people < 60 with initial serum creatinine of ≤ 3 mg/dL.
Incidence of adverse events is low; angioedema occurs but much less frequently than with ACE inhibitors.
Precautions for use of angiotensin II receptor blockers in patients with renovascular hypertension,
hypovolemia, and severe HF are the same as those for ACE inhibitors. Angiotensin II receptor blockers
are contraindicated during pregnancy.
Direct renin inhibitor:
Aliskiren, a direct renin inhibitor, is used in the management of hypertension.
Dosage is 150 to 300 mg po once/day, with a starting dose of 150 mg. Clinical trials are ongoing to
assess its efficacy for slowing diabetic nephropathy and reducing mortality in HF.
[Table 208-8.
Oral ACE Inhibitors and Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers for Hypertension]
Adrenergic modifiers:
This class (see
Table 208-9
) includes central
α
-agonists, postsynaptic
α
-blockers, and peripheral-acting adrenergic
blockers.
α
-Agonists (eg, methyldopa, clonidine, guanabenz, guanfacine) stimulate
α
-adrenergic receptors in the
brain stem and reduce sympathetic nervous activity, lowering BP. Because they have a central action,
they are more likely than other antihypertensives to cause drowsiness, lethargy, and depression; they are
no longer widely used. Clonidine can be applied transdermally once/wk as a patch; thus, it may be useful
for nonadherent patients (eg, those with dementia).
Postsynaptic
α
-blockers (eg, prazosin, terazosin, doxazosin) are no longer used for primary treatment of
hypertension because evidence suggests no reduction in mortality. Also, doxazosin used alone or with
antihypertensives other than diuretics increases risk of HF.
Peripheral-acting adrenergic blockers (eg, reserpine, guanethidine, guanadrel) deplete tissue stores of
===PAGE:2239===
norepinephrine. Reserpine also depletes the brain of norepinephrine and serotonin. Guanethidine and
guanadrel block sympathetic transmission at the neuroeffector junction. Guanethidine, in particular, is
potent but difficult to titrate, so it is rarely used. Guanadrel is shorter acting and has fewer adverse
effects. These 3 adrenergic blockers are not routinely recommended for initial therapy; they are used as
3rd or 4th drugs if required.
Direct vasodilators:
These drugs (including minoxidil and hydralazine—see
Table 208-10
) work directly on vessels, independently of the autonomic nervous system. Minoxidil is more
potent than hydralazine but has more adverse effects, including Na and water retention and
hypertrichosis, which is poorly tolerated by women. Minoxidil should be reserved for severe, refractory
hypertension. Hydralazine is used during pregnancy (eg, for preeclampsia) and as an adjunct
antihypertensive. Long-term, high-dose (> 300 mg/day) hydralazine has been associated with a druginduced lupus syndrome, which resolves when the drug is stopped.
[Table 208-9.
Adrenergic Modifiers for Hypertension]
[Table 208-10.
Direct Vasodilators for Hypertension]
Renovascular Hypertension
Renovascular hypertension is BP elevation due to partial or complete occlusion of one or more
renal arteries or their branches. It is usually asymptomatic unless long-standing. A bruit can be
heard over one or both renal arteries in < 50% of patients. Diagnosis is by physical examination
and renal imaging with duplex ultrasonography, radionuclide imaging, or magnetic resonance
angiography. Angiography is done before definitive treatment with surgery or angioplasty.
Renovascular disease is one of the most common causes of curable hypertension but accounts for < 2%
of all cases of hypertension. Stenosis or occlusion of one or both main renal arteries, an accessory renal
artery, or any of their branches can cause hypertension by stimulating release of renin from
juxtaglomerular cells of the affected kidney. The area of the arterial lumen must be decreased by ≥ 70%
before stenosis is likely to cause hypertension. For unknown reasons, renovascular hypertension is much
less common among blacks than among whites.
Overall, about two thirds of cases are caused by atherosclerosis and one third by fibromuscular
dysplasia. Atherosclerosis is more common among men > 50 and affects mainly the proximal one third of
the renal artery. Fibromuscular dysplasia is more common among younger patients (usually women) and
usually affects the distal two third of the main renal artery and the branches of the renal arteries. Rarer
causes include emboli, trauma, inadvertent ligation during surgery, and extrinsic compression of the renal
pedicle by tumors.
Renovascular hypertension is characterized by high cardiac output and high peripheral resistance.
Symptoms and Signs
Renovascular hypertension is usually asymptomatic. A systolic-diastolic bruit in the epigastrium, usually
transmitted to one or both upper quadrants and sometimes to the back, is almost pathognomonic, but it is
present in only about 50% of patients with fibromuscular dysplasia and is rare in patients with renal
atherosclerosis.
Renovascular hypertension should be suspected if diastolic hypertension develops abruptly in a patient <
30 or > 50; if new or previously stable hypertension rapidly worsens within 6 mo; or if hypertension is
initially very severe, associated with worsening renal function, or highly refractory to drug treatment. A
history of trauma to the back or flank or acute pain in this region with or without hematuria suggests
renovascular hypertension (possibly due to arterial injury), but these historical findings are rare.
Asymmetric renal size (discovered incidentally during imaging tests) and recurrent episodes of
unexplained acute pulmonary edema or heart failure also suggest it.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:2240===
• Initial identification with ultrasonography, magnetic resonance angiography, or radionuclide imaging
• Confirmation with renal angiography (also may be therapeutic)
If renovascular hypertension is suspected, ultrasonography, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), or
radionuclide imaging may be done to identify patients who should have renal angiography, the definitive
test.
Duplex Doppler ultrasonography can assess renal blood flow and is a reliable noninvasive method for
identifying significant stenosis (eg, > 60%) in the main renal arteries. Sensitivity and specificity approach
90% when experienced technicians do the test. It is less accurate in patients with branch stenosis.
MRA is a more accurate and specific noninvasive test to assess the renal arteries.
Radionuclide imaging is often done before and after an oral dose of captopril 50 mg. The ACE inhibitor
causes the affected artery to narrow, decreasing perfusion on the scintiscan. Narrowing also causes an
increase in serum renin, which is measured before and after captopril administration. This test may be
less reliable in blacks and in patients with decreased renal function.
Renal angiography is done if MRA indicates a lesion amenable to angioplasty or stenting or if other
screening tests are positive. Digital subtraction angiography with selective injection of the renal arteries
can also confirm the diagnosis, but angioplasty or stent placement cannot be done in the same
procedure.
Measurements of renal vein renin activity are sometimes misleading and, unless surgery is being
considered, are not necessary. However, in unilateral disease, a renal vein renin activity ratio of > 1.5
(affected to unaffected side) usually predicts a good outcome with revascularization. The test is done
when patients are depleted of Na, stimulating the release of renin.
Treatment
• Angioplasty sometimes with stent placement
• Rarely bypass graft
If the renal vein renin activity ratio is > 1.5:1, opening the obstructed renal artery using angioplasty with or
without a stent usually relieves hypertension. Even when the ratio is lower, revascularization or removal
of the affected kidney often cures hypertension.
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) is recommended for most patients, including younger
patients with fibromuscular dysplasia of the renal artery. Placement of a stent reduces the risk of
restenosis; antiplatelet drugs (aspirin, clopidogrel) are given afterward. Saphenous vein bypass grafting is
recommended only when extensive disease in the renal artery branches makes PTA technically
unfeasible. Sometimes complete surgical revascularization requires microvascular techniques that can
only be done ex vivo with autotransplantation of the kidney. Cure rate is 90% in appropriately selected
patients; surgical mortality rate is < 1%. Medical treatment is always preferable to nephrectomy in young
patients whose kidneys cannot be revascularized for technical reasons.
Atherosclerotic lesions respond less well to surgery and angioplasty than do lesions due to fibromuscular
dysplasia, presumably because patients are older and vascular disease is more extensive. Hypertension
may persist, and surgical complications are more common. Surgical mortality rate is higher than that in
young patients with fibromuscular dysplasia. Restenosis occurs within 2 yr after PTA in up to 50% of
patients with renovascular atherosclerosis, especially when the lesion is located at the ostium of the renal
artery, and, with stenting, in about 25%.
Without treatment, the prognosis is similar to that for patients with untreated primary hypertension.
Medical treatment is inadequate without intervention to alleviate the stenosis, but aggressive medical
===PAGE:2241===
treatment in adherent patients usually ameliorates and sometimes controls hypertension.
Hypertensive Emergencies
A hypertensive emergency is severe hypertension with signs of damage to target organs
(primarily the brain, cardiovascular system, and kidneys). Diagnosis is by BP measurement,
ECG, urinalysis, and serum BUN and creatinine measurements. Treatment is immediate BP
reduction with IV drugs (eg, nitroprusside,
β
-blockers, hydralazine).
Target-organ damage includes hypertensive encephalopathy, preeclampsia and eclampsia, acute left
ventricular failure with pulmonary edema, myocardial ischemia, acute aortic dissection, and renal failure.
Damage is rapidly progressive and often fatal.
Hypertensive encephalopathy may involve a failure of cerebral autoregulation of blood flow. Normally, as
BP increases, cerebral vessels constrict to maintain constant cerebral perfusion. Above a mean arterial
pressure (MAP) of about 160 mm Hg (lower for normotensive people whose BP suddenly increases), the
cerebral vessels begin to dilate rather than remain constricted. As a result, the very high BP is transmitted
directly to the capillary bed with transudation and exudation of plasma into the brain, causing cerebral
edema, including papilledema. Pathophysiology of other target-organ manifestations is discussed
elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Although many patients with stroke and intracranial hemorrhage present with elevated BP, elevated BP is
often a consequence rather than a cause of the condition. Whether rapidly lowering BP is beneficial in
these conditions is unclear; it may even be harmful.
Hypertensive urgencies:
Very high blood pressure (eg, diastolic pressure > 120 to 130 mm Hg) without
target-organ damage (except perhaps grades 1 to 3 retinopathy— may be considered a
hypertensive urgency. BP at these levels often worries the physician; however, acute complications are
unlikely, so immediate BP reduction is not required. However, patients should be started on a 2-drug oral
combination (, and close evaluation (with evaluation of treatment efficacy) should be
continued on an outpatient basis.
Symptoms and Signs
BP is elevated, often markedly (diastolic pressure > 120 mm Hg). CNS symptoms include rapidly
changing neurologic abnormalities (eg, confusion, transient cortical blindness, hemiparesis, hemisensory
defects, seizures). Cardiovascular symptoms include chest pain and dyspnea. Renal involvement may be
asymptomatic, although severe azotemia due to advanced renal failure may cause lethargy or nausea.
Physical examination focuses on target organs, with neurologic examination, funduscopy, and
cardiovascular examination. Global cerebral deficits (eg, confusion, obtundation, coma), with or without
focal deficits, suggest encephalopathy; normal mental status with focal deficits suggests stroke. Severe
retinopathy (sclerosis, cotton-wool spots, arteriolar narrowing, hemorrhage, papilledema) is usually
present with hypertensive encephalopathy, and some degree of retinopathy is present
in many other
hypertensive emergencies. Jugular venous distention, basilar lung crackles, and a 3rd heart sound
suggest pulmonary edema. Asymmetry of pulses between arms suggests aortic dissection.
Diagnosis
• Very high BP
• Identify target-organ involvement: ECG, urinalysis, BUN, creatinine; if neurologic findings, head CT
Testing typically includes ECG, urinalysis, and serum BUN and creatinine. Patients with neurologic
findings require head CT to diagnose intracranial bleeding, edema, or infarction. Patients with chest pain
or dyspnea require chest x-ray. ECG abnormalities suggesting target-organ damage include signs of left
ventricular hypertrophy or acute ischemia. Urinalysis abnormalities typical of renal involvement include
RBCs, RBC casts, and proteinuria.
===PAGE:2242===
Diagnosis is based on the presence of a very high BP and findings of target-organ involvement.
Treatment
• Admit to ICU
• Short-acting IV drug: nitrate, fenoldopam, nicardipine, or labetalol
• Goal: 20 to 25% reduction MAP in 1 to 2 h
Hypertensive emergencies are treated in an ICU; BP is progressively (although not abruptly) reduced
using a short-acting, titratable IV drug. Choice of drug and speed and degree of reduction vary somewhat
with the target organ involved, but generally a 20 to 25% reduction in MAP over an hour or so is
appropriate, with further titration based on symptoms. Achieving "normal" BP urgently is not necessary.
Typical first-line drugs include nitroprusside, fenoldopam, nicardipine, and labetalol (see
Table 208-11
). Nitroglycerin alone is less potent.
Oral drugs are not indicated because onset is variable and the drugs are difficult to titrate. Although shortacting oral nifedipine reduces BP rapidly, it may lead to acute cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events
(sometimes fatal) and is therefore not recommended.
Nitroprusside is a venous and arterial dilator, reducing preload and afterload; thus, it is the most useful for
hypertensive patients with heart failure. It is also used for hypertensive encephalopathy and, with
β
-
blockers, for aortic dissection. Starting dose is 0.25 to 1.0
μ
g/kg/min titrated in increments of 0.5
μ
g/kg to
a maximum of 8 to 10
μ
g/kg/min; maximum dose is given for ≤ 10 min to minimize risk of cyanide toxicity.
The drug is rapidly broken down into cyanide and nitric oxide (the active moiety). Cyanide is detoxified to
thiocyanate. However, administration of > 2
μ
g/kg/min can lead to cyanide accumulation with toxicity to
the CNS and heart; manifestations include agitation, seizures, cardiac instability, and an anion gap
metabolic acidosis. Prolonged administration (> 1 wk or, in patients with renal insufficiency, 3 to 6 days)
leads to accumulation of thiocyanate, with lethargy, tremor, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Other adverse
effects include transitory elevation of hair follicles (cutis anserina) if BP is reduced too rapidly.
Thiocyanate levels should be monitored daily after 3 consecutive days of therapy, and the drug should be
stopped if the serum thiocyanate level is > 12 mg/dL (> 2 mmol/L). Because the drug is broken down by
ultraviolet light, the IV bag and tubing are wrapped in an opaque covering.
Fenoldopam is a peripheral dopamine-1 agonist that causes systemic and renal vasodilation and
natriuresis. Onset is rapid and half-life is brief, making it an effective alternative to nitroprusside, with the
added benefit that it does not cross the blood-brain barrier. Initial dosage is 0.1
μ
g/kg/min IV infusion,
titrated upward by 0.1
μ
g/kg q 15 min to a maximum of 1.6
μ
g/kg/min.
Nitroglycerin is a vasodilator that affects veins more than arterioles. It can be used to manage
hypertension during and after coronary artery bypass graft surgery, acute MI, unstable angina pectoris,
and acute pulmonary edema. IV nitroglycerin is preferable to nitroprusside for patients with severe
coronary artery disease because nitroglycerin increases coronary flow, whereas nitroprusside tends to
decrease coronary flow to ischemic areas, possibly because of a "steal" mechanism. Starting dose is 10
to 20
μ
g/min titrated upward by 10
μ
g/min q 5 min to maximum antihypertensive effect. For long-term BP
control, nitroglycerin must be used with other drugs. The most common adverse effect is headache (in
about 2%); others include tachycardia, nausea, vomiting, apprehension, restlessness, muscular twitching,
and palpitations.
Nicardipine, a dihydropyridine Ca channel blocker with less negative inotropic effects than nifedipine, acts
primarily as a vasodilator. It is most often used for postoperative hypertension and during pregnancy.
Dosage is 5 mg/h IV, increased q 15 min to a maximum of 15 mg/h. It may cause flushing, headache, and
tachycardia; it can decrease GFR in patients with renal insufficiency.
[Table 208-11.
Parenteral Drugs for Hypertensive Emergencies]
===PAGE:2243===
Labetalol is a
β
-blocker with some
α
-blocking effects, thus causing vasodilation without the typical
accompanying reflex tachycardia. It can be given as a constant infusion or as frequent boluses; use of
boluses has not been shown to cause significant hypotension. Labetalol is used during pregnancy, for
intracranial disorders requiring BP control, and after MI. Infusion is 0.5 to 2 mg/min, titrated upward to a
maximum of 4 to 5 mg/min. Boluses begin
with 20 mg IV followed every 10 min by 40 mg, then 80 mg (up
to 3 doses) to a maximum total of 300 mg. Adverse effects are minimal, but because of its
β
-blocking
activity, labetalol should not be used for hypertensive emergencies in patients with asthma. Low doses
may be used for left ventricular failure if nitroglycerin is given simultaneously.
===PAGE:2244===
Chapter 209. Arteriosclerosis
Introduction
Arteriosclerosis is a general term for several disorders that cause thickening and loss of elasticity in the
arterial wall. Atherosclerosis, the most common form, is also the most serious because it causes coronary
artery disease and cerebrovascular disease. Nonatheromatous forms of arteriosclerosis include
arteriolosclerosis and Monckeberg's arteriosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis is patchy intimal plaques (atheromas) in medium-sized and large arteries; the
plaques contain lipids, inflammatory cells, smooth muscle cells, and connective tissue. Risk
factors include dyslipidemia, diabetes, cigarette smoking, family history, sedentary lifestyle,
obesity, and hypertension. Symptoms develop when growth or rupture of the plaque reduces or
obstructs blood flow; symptoms vary by artery affected. Diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by
angiography, ultrasonography, or other imaging tests. Treatment includes risk factor and dietary
modification, physical activity, antiplatelet drugs, and antiatherogenic drugs.
Atherosclerosis can affect all large and medium-sized arteries, including the coronary, carotid, and
cerebral arteries; the aorta; its branches; and major arteries of the extremities. It is the leading cause of
morbidity and mortality in the US and in most developed countries. In recent years, age-related mortality
attributable to atherosclerosis has been decreasing, but in 2005, cardiovascular disease, primarily
coronary and cerebrovascular atherosclerosis still caused almost 870,000 deaths in the US (more than
cancer and almost 9 times more than injuries). Atherosclerosis is rapidly increasing in prevalence in
developing countries, and as people in developed countries live longer, incidence will increase. By 2020,
atherosclerosis is expected to be the leading cause of death worldwide.
Pathophysiology
The hallmark of atherosclerosis is the atherosclerotic plaque, which contains lipids (intracellular and
extracellular cholesterol and phospholipids), inflammatory cells (eg, macrophages, T cells), smooth
muscle cells, connective tissue (eg, collagen, glycosaminoglycans, elastic fibers), thrombi, and Ca
deposits. All stages of atherosclerosis—from initiation and growth to complication of the plaque—are
considered an inflammatory response to injury. Endothelial injury is thought to have a primary role.
Atherosclerosis preferentially affects certain areas of the arterial tree. Nonlaminar or turbulent blood flow
(eg, at branch points in the arterial tree) leads to endothelial dysfunction and inhibits endothelial
production of nitric oxide, a potent vasodilator and anti-inflammatory molecule. Such blood flow also
stimulates endothelial cells to produce adhesion molecules, which recruit and bind inflammatory cells.
Risk factors for atherosclerosis (eg, dyslipidemia, diabetes, cigarette smoking, hypertension), oxidative
stressors (eg, superoxide radicals), angiotensin II, and systemic infection and inflammation also inhibit
nitric oxide production and stimulate production of adhesion molecules, proinflammatory cytokines,
chemotactic proteins, and vasoconstrictors; exact mechanisms are unknown. The net effect is endothelial
binding of monocytes and T cells, migration of these cells to the subendothelial space, and initiation and
perpetuation of a local vascular inflammatory response. Monocytes in the subendothelium transform into
macrophages. Lipids in the blood, particularly low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and very-low-density
lipoprotein (VLDL), also bind to endothelial cells and are oxidized in the subendothelium. Uptake of
oxidized lipids and macrophage transformation into lipid-laden foam cells result in the typical early
atherosclerotic lesions called fatty streaks. Degraded erythrocyte membranes that result from rupture of
vasa vasorum and intraplaque hemorrhage may be an important additional source of lipids within
plaques.
Macrophages elaborate proinflammatory cytokines that recruit smooth muscle cell migration from the
media and that further attract and stimulate growth of macrophages. Various factors promote smooth
muscle cell replication and increase production of dense extracellular matrix. The result is a
subendothelial fibrous plaque with a fibrous cap, made of intimal smooth muscle cells surrounded by
connective tissue and intracellular and extracellular lipids. A process similar to bone formation causes
===PAGE:2245===
calcification within the plaque.
Atherosclerotic plaques may be stable or unstable. Stable plaques regress, remain static, or grow slowly
over several decades until they may cause stenosis or occlusion. Unstable plaques are vulnerable to
spontaneous erosion, fissure, or rupture, causing acute thrombosis, occlusion, and infarction long before
they cause stenosis. Most clinical events result from unstable plaques, which do not appear severe on
angiography; thus, plaque stabilization may be a way to reduce morbidity and mortality.
The strength of the fibrous cap and its resistance to rupture depend on the relative balance of collagen
deposition and degradation. Plaque rupture involves secretion of metalloproteinases, cathepsins, and
collagenases by activated macrophages in the plaque. These enzymes digest the fibrous cap, particularly
at the edges, causing the cap to thin and ultimately rupture. T cells in the plaque contribute by secreting
cytokines. Cytokines inhibit smooth muscle cells from synthesizing and depositing collagen, which
normally reinforces the plaque.
Once the plaque ruptures, plaque contents are exposed to circulating blood, triggering thrombosis;
macrophages also stimulate thrombosis because they contain tissue factor, which promotes thrombin
generation in vivo. One of 5 outcomes may occur:
• The resultant thrombus may organize and be incorporated into the plaque, changing the plaque's shape
and causing its rapid growth.
• The thrombus may rapidly occlude the vascular lumen and precipitate an acute ischemic event.
• The thrombus may embolize.
• The plaque may fill with blood, balloon out, and immediately occlude the artery.
• Plaque contents (rather than thrombus) may embolize, occluding vessels downstream.
Plaque stability depends on multiple factors, including plaque composition (relative proportion of lipids,
inflammatory cells, smooth muscle cells, connective tissue, and thrombus), wall stress (cap fatigue), size
and location of the core, and configuration of the plaque in relation to blood flow. By contributing to rapid
growth and lipid deposition, intraplaque hemorrhage may play an important role in transforming stable into
unstable plaques. In general, unstable coronary artery plaques have a high macrophage content, a thick
lipid core, and a thin fibrous cap; they narrow the vessel lumen by < 50% and tend to rupture
unpredictably. Unstable carotid artery plaques have the same composition but typically cause problems
through severe stenosis and occlusion or deposition of platelet thrombi, which embolize rather than
rupture. Low-risk plaques have a thicker cap and contain fewer lipids; they often narrow the vessel lumen
by > 50% and may produce predictable exercise-induced stable angina.
Clinical consequences of plaque rupture in coronary arteries depend not only on plaque anatomy but also
on relative balance of procoagulant and anticoagulant activity in the blood and on the vulnerability of the
myocardium to arrhythmias.
A link between infection and atherosclerosis has been observed, specifically an association between
serologic evidence of certain infections (eg,
Chlamydia pneumoniae
, cytomegalovirus) and coronary
artery disease (CAD). Putative mechanisms include indirect effects of chronic inflammation in the
bloodstream, cross-reactive antibodies, and inflammatory effects of infectious pathogens on the arterial
wall.
Risk Factors
There are numerous risk factors (see
Table 209-1
). Certain factors tend to cluster as the metabolic syndrome, which is becoming increasingly
prevalent. This syndrome includes abdominal obesity, atherogenic dyslipidemia, hypertension, insulin
resistance, a prothrombotic state, and a proinflammatory state in sedentary patients (. Insulin
resistance is not synonymous with the metabolic syndrome but may be key in its etiology.
===PAGE:2246===
Dyslipidemia (high total, high LDL, or low high-density lipoprotein [HDL] cholesterol), hypertension, and
diabetes promote atherosclerosis by amplifying or augmenting endothelial dysfunction and inflammatory
pathways in vascular endothelium.
In dyslipidemia, subendothelial uptake and oxidation of LDL increases; oxidized lipids stimulate production
of adhesion molecules and inflammatory cytokines and may be antigenic, inciting a T cell-mediated
immune response and inflammation in the arterial
[Table 209-1.
Risk Factors for Atherosclerosis]
wall. HDL protects against atherosclerosis via reverse cholesterol transport (; it may also
protect by transporting antioxidant enzymes, which can break down and neutralize oxidized lipids. The
role of hypertriglyceridemia in atherogenesis is complex, although it may have a small independent effect.
Hypertension may lead to vascular inflammation via angiotensin II-mediated mechanisms. Angiotensin II
stimulates endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and macrophages to produce proatherogenic
mediators, including proinflammatory cytokines, superoxide anions, prothrombotic factors, growth factors,
and lectin-like oxidized LDL receptors.
Diabetes leads to the formation of advanced glycation end products, which increase the production of
proinflammatory cytokines from endothelial cells. Oxidative stress and reactive O
radicals, generated in
diabetes, directly injure the endothelium and promote atherogenesis.
Tobacco smoke contains nicotine and other chemicals that are toxic to vascular endothelium. Smoking,
including passive smoking, increases platelet reactivity (possibly promoting platelet thrombosis) and
plasma fibrinogen levels and Hct (increasing blood viscosity). Smoking increases LDL and decreases
HDL; it also promotes vasoconstriction, which is particularly dangerous in arteries already narrowed by
atherosclerosis. HDL increases by about 6 to 8 mg/dL (0.16 to 0.21 mmol/L) within 1 mo of smoking
cessation.
Hyperhomocysteinemia increases risk of atherosclerosis, although not as much as the above risk factors.
It may result from folate deficiency or a genetic metabolic defect. The pathophysiologic mechanism is
unknown but may involve direct endothelial injury, stimulation of monocyte and T-cell recruitment, LDL
uptake by macrophages, and smooth muscle cell proliferation.
Lipoprotein(a) is a modified form of LDL that has a cysteine-rich region homologous with the fibrin-binding
domain of plasminogen. High levels of lipoprotein(a) may compete with fibrin to bind with plasminogen
and thus interfere with thrombolysis, predisposing to atherothrombosis.
A high level of small, dense LDL, characteristic of diabetes, is highly atherogenic. Mechanisms may
include increased susceptibility to oxidation and nonspecific endothelial binding (.
A high C-reactive protein (CRP) level does not reliably predict extent of atherosclerosis but can predict
increased likelihood of ischemic events. In the absence of other inflammatory disorders, it may indicate
increased risk of atherosclerotic plaque rupture, ongoing ulceration or thrombosis, or increased activity of
lymphocytes and macrophages. CRP may have a direct role in atherogenesis through multiple
mechanisms, including downregulation of nitric oxide synthesis and upregulation of angiotensin type I
receptors, chemoattractant proteins, and adhesion molecules.
C. pneumoniae
infection or other infections (eg, viral,
Helicobacter pylori
) may cause endothelial
dysfunction through direct infection, exposure to endotoxin, or stimulation of systemic or subendothelial
inflammation.
Renal insufficiency promotes development of atherosclerosis via several pathways, including worsening
hypertension and insulin resistance; decreased apolipoprotein A-I levels; and increased lipoprotein(a),
homocysteine, fibrinogen, and CRP levels.
===PAGE:2247===
Prothrombotic states ( increase likelihood of atherothrombosis.
5-Lipoxygenase polymorphisms (deletion or addition of alleles) may promote atherosclerosis by
increasing leukotriene production within plaques, which causes vascular permeability and monocytemacrophage migration, thus increasing subendothelial inflammation and dysfunction.
Documented vascular disease:
The presence of atherosclerotic disease in one vascular territory
increases the likelihood of disease in other vascular territories. Patients with non-coronary atherosclerotic
vascular disease have cardiac event rates comparable to those of patients with known CAD, and they are
now considered to have a CAD risk equivalent and should be treated as aggressively.
Symptoms and Signs
Atherosclerosis is initially asymptomatic, often for decades. Symptoms and signs develop when lesions
impede blood flow. Transient ischemic symptoms (eg, stable exertional angina, transient ischemic attacks,
intermittent claudication) may develop when stable plaques grow and reduce the arterial lumen by > 70%.
Symptoms of unstable angina or infarction, ischemic stroke, or rest pain in the limbs may develop when
unstable plaques rupture and acutely occlude a major artery, with superimposition of thrombosis or
embolism. Atherosclerosis may also cause sudden death without preceding stable or unstable angina
pectoris.
Atherosclerotic involvement of the arterial wall can lead to aneurysms and arterial dissection, which can
manifest as pain, a pulsatile mass, absent pulses, or sudden death.
Diagnosis
Approach depends on the presence or absence of symptoms.
Symptomatic patients:
Patients with symptoms and signs of ischemia are evaluated for the amount and
location of vascular occlusion by various invasive and noninvasive tests, depending on the organ
involved (see elsewhere in THE MANUAL). Such patients also should be evaluated for atherosclerosis
risk factors by using
• History and physical examination
• Fasting lipid profile
• Plasma glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA
1c
) levels
Patients with documented disease at one site (eg, peripheral arteries) should be evaluated for disease at
other sites (eg, coronary and carotid arteries).
Because not all atherosclerotic plaques have similar risk, various imaging technologies are being studied
as a way to identify plaques especially vulnerable to rupture. Most technologies are catheter-based; they
include intravascular ultrasonography (which uses an ultrasound transducer on the tip of a catheter to
produce images of the arterial lumen and wall), angioscopy, plaque thermography (to detect the increased
temperature in plaques with active inflammation), optical coherence tomography (which uses infrared
laser light for imaging), and elastography (to identify soft, lipid-rich plaques). Immunoscintigraphy is a
noninvasive alternative using radioactive tracers that localize in vulnerable plaque.
Some clinicians measure serum markers of inflammation. CRP levels > 3 mg/dL (> 3000
μ
g/L) are highly
predictive of cardiovascular events. High levels of lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 appear to
predict cardiovascular events in patients with a normal or low LDL level.
Asymptomatic patients (screening):
In patients with risk factors for atherosclerosis but no symptoms
or signs of ischemia, the role of additional testing beyond the fasting lipid profile is unclear. Although
imaging studies such as electron beam or multidetector row CT, MRI, and ultrasonography ( can detect atherosclerotic plaque, they probably do not improve prediction of ischemic events over
===PAGE:2248===
assessment of risk factors or established prediction tools (eg, Framingham risk index—see
Table 100-6
on p.
; see
Table 100-7
 and are not routinely recommended.
Urinary microalbuminuria (> 30 mg albumin/24 h) is a marker for renal disorders and their progression, as
well as a strong predictor of cardiovascular and noncardiovascular morbidity and mortality; however, the
direct relationship between microalbuminuria and atherosclerosis has not been established.
Treatment
• Lifestyle changes (diet, smoking, physical activity)
• Drug treatment of diagnosed risk factors
•
Antiplatelet drugs
• Possibly statins, ACE inhibitors,
β
-blockers
Treatment involves aggressive modification of risk factors to slow progression and induce regression of
existing plaques. Recent evidence suggests that LDL should be < 70 mg/dL (< 1.81 mmol/L) in patients
with disease or at high risk of cardiovascular events. Lifestyle changes include diet modification, smoking
cessation, and regular participation in physical activity. Drugs to treat dyslipidemia, hypertension, and
diabetes are often required. These lifestyle changes and drugs directly or indirectly improve endothelial
function, reduce inflammation, and improve clinical outcome. The statins can decrease atherosclerosisrelated morbidity and mortality even when serum cholesterol is normal or slightly high. Antiplatelet drugs
help all atherosclerotic patients. Patients with CAD may benefit additionally from ACE inhibitors and
β
-
blockers.
Diet:
Several changes are beneficial:
• Less saturated fat
• No trans fats
• More fruits and vegetables
• More fiber
• Moderate (if any) alcohol
Substantial decreases in saturated fat and simple carbohydrate intake and increases in fruit, vegetable,
and fiber intake are recommended. These dietary changes are a prerequisite for lipid control and weight
reduction and are essential for all patients. Calorie intake should be limited to keep weight within the
normal range.
Small decreases in fat intake do not appear to lessen or stabilize atherosclerosis. Effective change
requires limiting fat intake to 20 g/day, consisting of 6 to 10 g of polyunsaturated fat with
ω
-6 (linoleic
acid) and
ω
-3 (eicosapentaenoic acid, docosahexaenoic acid) fatty acids in equal proportion, ≤ 2 g of
saturated fat, and the rest as monounsaturated fat. Trans fats, which are highly atherogenic, should be
avoided.
Increasing carbohydrates to compensate for decreasing saturated fats in the diet increases plasma
triglyceride levels and reduces HDL levels. Thus, any caloric deficiency should be made up with proteins
and unsaturated fats rather than simple carbohydrates. Excessive sugar intake should be avoided,
although sugar intake has not been directly related to cardiovascular risk. Instead, consumption of
complex carbohydrates (eg, vegetables, whole grains) is encouraged.
Fruits and vegetables (5 daily servings) seem to decrease risk of coronary atherosclerosis, but whether
===PAGE:2249===
this effect is due to phytochemicals or to a proportional decrease in saturated fat intake and increase in
fiber and vitamin intake is unclear. Phytochemicals called flavonoids (in red and purple grapes, red wine,
black teas, and dark beers) appear especially protective; high concentrations in red wine may help
explain why incidence of coronary atherosclerosis in the French is relatively low, even though they use
more tobacco and consume more fat than Americans do. But no clinical data indicate that eating
flavonoid-rich foods or using supplements instead of foods prevents atherosclerosis.
Increased fiber intake decreases total cholesterol and may have a beneficial effect on glucose and insulin
levels. Daily intake of at least 5 to 10 g of soluble fiber (eg, oat bran, beans, soy products, psyllium) is
recommended; this amount decreases LDL by about 5%. Insoluble fiber (eg, cellulose, lignin) does not
appear to affect cholesterol but may confer additional health benefits (eg, reduced risk of colon cancer,
possibly by stimulating bowel movement or reducing contact time with dietary carcinogens). However,
excessive fiber interferes with the absorption of certain minerals and vitamins. In general, foods rich in
phytochemicals and vitamins are also rich in fiber.
Alcohol increases HDL and has poorly defined antithrombotic, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory
properties. These effects appear to be the same for wine, beer, and hard liquor, and occur at moderate
levels of consumption; about 30 mL (1 oz) 5 to 6 times/wk protects against coronary atherosclerosis.
However, at higher doses, alcohol can cause significant health problems. Thus, the relationship between
alcohol and total mortality rate is J-shaped; mortality rate is lowest for men who consume < 14 drinks/wk
and women who consume < 9 drinks/wk.
There is little evidence that dietary supplementation with vitamins, phytochemicals, and trace minerals
reduces risk of atherosclerosis. The one exception is fish oil supplements (. Although
alternative medicines and health foods are becoming more popular, and some may have minor effects on
blood pressure or cholesterol, these treatments are not always proven safe or effective and may have
negative interactions with proven drugs. Levels of coenzyme Q10, which is necessary for the basic
functioning of cells, tend to decrease with age and may be low in patients with certain heart
and other
chronic diseases; thus, coenzyme Q10 supplementation has been used or recommended, but its
therapeutic benefit remains controversial.
Physical activity:
Regular physical activity (eg, 30 to 45 min of walking, running, swimming, or cycling 3
to 5 times/wk) reduces incidence of some risk factors (hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes), CAD (eg,
MI), and death attributable to atherosclerosis in patients with and without previous ischemic events.
Whether the association is causal or merely indicates that healthier people are more likely to exercise
regularly is unclear. Optimal intensity, duration, frequency, and type of exercise have not been
established, but most evidence suggests an inverse linear relationship between aerobic physical activity
and risk. Walking regularly increases the distance patients with peripheral vascular disease can walk
without pain.
An exercise program that involves aerobic exercise has a clear role in preventing atherosclerosis and
promoting weight loss (. Before starting a new exercise program, the elderly and people who
have risk factors for atherosclerosis or who have had recent ischemic events should probably be
evaluated by a physician. Evaluation includes history, physical examination, and assessment of risk factor
control.
Antiplatelet drugs:
Oral antiplatelet drugs are essential because most complications result from plaque
fissure or rupture with platelet activation and thrombosis. The following are used:
• Aspirin
• Sometimes clopidogrel
Aspirin is most widely used but, despite its proven benefits, remains underused. It is indicated for
secondary prevention and recommended for primary prevention of coronary atherosclerosis in patients at
high risk (eg, patients with diabetes with or without atherosclerosis, patients with ≥ 20% risk of cardiac
events within 10 yr). Optimal dose and duration are unknown, but 75 to 325 mg po once/day indefinitely is
commonly used for primary and secondary prevention because it is effective while minimizing risk of
===PAGE:2250===
bleeding. In about 10 to 20% of patients taking aspirin for secondary prevention, ischemic events recur.
The reason may be aspirin resistance; assays to detect lack of thromboxane suppression (indicated by
elevated urinary 11-dehydro thromboxane B
) are being studied for clinical use. Some evidence suggests
that ibuprofen can interfere with aspirin's antithrombotic effect, so other NSAIDs are recommended for
patients taking aspirin for prevention. However, all NSAIDs, some more than others, including COX-2
selective inhibitors (eg, rofecoxib), appear to increase cardiovascular risks.
Clopidogrel (usually 75 mg/day) is substituted for aspirin when ischemic events recur in patients taking
aspirin and in patients intolerant of aspirin. Clopidogrel in combination with aspirin is effective in treating
acute ST-segment and non-ST-segment elevation MI (; the combination is also given for 9 to
12 mo after percutaneous intervention (PCI) to reduce risk of recurrent ischemic events.
Ticlopidine is no longer widely used because it causes severe neutropenia in 1% of users and has severe
GI adverse effects.
Other drugs:
ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, statins, and thiazolidinediones (eg,
rosiglitazone, pioglitazone) have anti-inflammatory properties that reduce risk of atherosclerosis
independent of their effects on BP, lipids, and glucose. ACE inhibitors inhibit the contributions of
angiotensin to endothelial dysfunction and inflammation. Statins enhance endothelial nitric oxide
production, stabilize atherosclerotic plaques, reduce lipid accumulation in the arterial wall, and induce
regression of plaques. Thiazolidinediones may control expression of proinflammatory genes, although
recent studies suggest that they may increase the risk of coronary events. Routine use of statins for
primary prevention of ischemic events is controversial. However, several well-controlled studies support
their use in high-risk patients (eg, diabetics with normal BP and lipid levels and patients with multiple risk
factors, including hyperlipidemia and/or hypertension). Statins are sometimes recommended for patients
with normal LDL and high CRP; few data now support this practice, but it is under study.
Folate (folic acid) 0.8 mg po bid has been previously used to treat hyperhomocysteinemia but does not
appear to reduce the risk of acute coronary events. Vitamins B
and B
also lower homocysteine levels,
but current data do not justify their use alone or in combination with folate. Macrolide and other antibiotics
are being studied to determine whether treating chronic occult
C. pneumoniae
infections can suppress
inflammation and alter the course and manifestations of atherosclerosis.
Nonatheromatous Arteriosclerosis
Nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis is age-related fibrosis in the aorta and its major branches.
Nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis causes intimal thickening and weakens and disrupts the elastic
lamellae. The smooth muscle (media) layer atrophies, and the lumen of the affected artery widens
(becomes ectatic), predisposing to aneurysm or dissection. Hypertension is a major factor in development
of aortic arteriosclerosis and aneurysm. Intimal injury, ectasia, and ulceration may lead to thrombosis,
embolism, or complete arterial occlusion.
Arteriolosclerosis affects distal arteries in patients with diabetes or hypertension. Hyaline
arteriolosclerosis affects small arteries and arterioles in patients with diabetes; typically, hyaline
thickening occurs, the arteriolar wall degenerates, and the lumen narrows, causing diffuse ischemia,
especially in the kidneys. Hyperplastic arteriolosclerosis occurs more often in patients with hypertension;
typically, laminated, concentric thickening and luminal narrowing occur, sometimes with fibrinoid deposits
and vessel wall necrosis (necrotizing arteriolitis). Hypertension promotes these changes, and
arteriolosclerosis, by increasing arteriolar rigidity and increasing peripheral resistance, may help sustain
the hypertension.
Monckeberg's arteriosclerosis (medial calcific sclerosis) affects patients > 50; age-related medial
degeneration occurs with focal calcification and even bone formation within the arterial wall. Segments of
the artery may become a rigid calcified tube without luminal narrowing. The diagnosis is usually obvious
by plain x-ray. This disorder is clinically important only because it can greatly reduce arterial
compressibility, causing extremely but falsely elevated BP readings.
===PAGE:2251===

===PAGE:2252===
Chapter 210. Coronary Artery Disease
Introduction
Coronary artery disease (CAD) involves impairment of blood flow through the coronary arteries,
most commonly by atheromas. Clinical presentations include silent ischemia, angina pectoris,
acute coronary syndromes (unstable angina, MI), and sudden cardiac death. Diagnosis is by
symptoms, ECG, stress testing, and sometimes coronary angiography. Prevention consists of
modifying reversible risk factors (eg, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, physical inactivity,
obesity, and smoking). Treatment includes drugs and procedures to reduce ischemia and
restore or improve coronary blood flow.
In developed countries, CAD is the leading cause of death in both sexes, accounting for about one third
of all deaths. Mortality rate among white men is about 1/10,000 at ages 25 to 34 and nearly 1/100 at ages
55 to 64. Mortality rate among white men aged 35 to 44 is 6.1 times that among age-matched white
women. For unknown reasons, the sex difference is less marked in nonwhites. Mortality rate among
women increases after menopause and, by age 75, equals or even exceeds that of men.
Etiology
Usually, CAD is due to subintimal deposition of atheromas in large and medium-sized coronary arteries
(atherosclerosis—. Less often, CAD is due to coronary spasm. Rare causes include coronary
artery embolism, dissection, aneurysm (eg, in Kawasaki disease), and vasculitis (eg, in SLE, syphilis).
Pathophysiology
Coronary atherosclerosis is often irregularly distributed in different vessels but typically occurs at points
of turbulence (eg, vessel bifurcations). As the atheromatous plaque grows, the arterial lumen
progressively narrows, resulting in ischemia (often causing angina pectoris). The degree of stenosis
required to produce ischemia varies with O
demand.
Occasionally, an atheromatous plaque ruptures or splits. Reasons are unclear but probably relate to
plaque morphology, plaque Ca content, and plaque softening due to an inflammatory process. Rupture
exposes collagen and other thrombogenic material, which
activates platelets and the coagulation
cascade, resulting in an acute thrombus, which interrupts coronary blood flow and causes some degree
of myocardial ischemia. The consequences of acute ischemia, collectively referred to as acute coronary
syndromes (ACS), depend on the location and degree of obstruction and range from unstable angina to
transmural infarction.
Coronary artery spasm
is a transient, focal increase in vascular tone, markedly narrowing the lumen
and reducing blood flow; symptomatic ischemia (variant angina— may result. Marked
narrowing can trigger thrombus formation, causing infarction or life-threatening arrhythmia. Spasm can
occur in arteries with or without atheroma. In arteries without atheroma, basal coronary artery tone is
probably increased, and response to vasoconstricting stimuli is probably exaggerated. The exact
mechanism is unclear but may involve abnormalities of nitric oxide production or an imbalance between
endothelium-derived contracting and relaxing factors. In arteries with atheroma, the atheroma may cause
local hypercontractility; proposed mechanisms include loss of sensitivity to intrinsic vasodilators (eg,
acetylcholine) and increased production of vasoconstrictors (eg, angiotensin II, endothelin, leukotrienes,
serotonin, thromboxane) in the area of the atheroma. Recurrent spasm may damage the intima, leading to
atheroma formation. Use of vasoconstricting drugs (eg, cocaine, nicotine) and emotional stress also can
trigger coronary spasm.
Risk Factors
Risk factors for CAD are the same as those for atherosclerosis: high blood levels of low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and lipoprotein a, low blood levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol, diabetes mellitus (particularly type 2), smoking, obesity, and physical inactivity. Smoking may
===PAGE:2253===
be a stronger predictor of MI in women (especially those < 45). Genetic factors play a role, and several
systemic disorders (eg, hypertension, hypothyroidism) and metabolic disorders (eg,
hyperhomocysteinemia) contribute to risk. A high level of apoprotein B (apo B) is an important risk factor;
it may identify increased risk when total cholesterol or LDL level is normal.
High blood levels of C-reactive protein indicate plaque instability and inflammation and may be a stronger
predictor of risk of ischemic events than high levels of LDL. High blood levels of triglycerides and insulin
(reflecting insulin resistance) may be risk factors, but data are less clear. CAD risk is increased by
smoking; a diet high in fat and calories and low in phytochemicals (found in fruits and vegetables), fiber,
and vitamins C and E; a diet relatively low in
ω
-3 (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), at least in
some people; and poor stress management.
Anatomy
The right and left coronary arteries arise from the right and left coronary sinuses in the root of the aorta
just above the aortic valve orifice. The coronary arteries divide into large and medium-sized arteries that
run along the heart's surface (epicardial coronary arteries) and subsequently send smaller arterioles into
the myocardium. The left coronary artery begins as the left main artery and quickly divides into the left
anterior descending (LAD) and circumflex arteries. The LAD artery usually follows the anterior
interventricular groove and, in some people, continues over the apex. This artery supplies the anterior
septum (including the proximal conduction system) and the anterior free wall of the left ventricle (LV). The
circumflex artery, which is usually smaller than the LAD artery, supplies the lateral LV free wall. Most
people have right dominance: The right coronary artery passes along the atrioventricular (AV) groove over
the right side of the heart; it supplies the sinus node (in 55%), right ventricle, and usually the AV node and
inferior myocardial wall. About 10 to 15% of people have left dominance: The circumflex artery is larger
and continues along the posterior AV groove to supply the posterior wall and AV node.
Treatment
• Percutaneous coronary intervention
• For acute thrombosis, sometimes fibrinolytic drugs
• Coronary artery bypass grafting
Treatment generally aims to reduce cardiac workload, improve coronary artery blood flow, and, over the
long term, halt and reverse the atherosclerotic process. Coronary blood flow can be improved by
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). An acute coronary
thrombosis may sometimes be dissolved by fibrinolytic drugs (.
PCI:
At first, PCI was done with balloon angioplasty alone. However, roughly 50% of patients developed
restenosis within 6 mo, and 1 in 3 ultimately required repeat angioplasty or CABG. Insertion of a baremetal
stent following angioplasty reduced the rate of restenosis, but many patients still required repeat
treatment. Drug-eluting stents, which secrete an antiproliferative drug (eg, sirolimus, paclitaxel) over a
period of several weeks, have reduced the rate of restenosis to about 10%. Now, most PCI is done with
stents, and about three fourths of all stents used in the US are drug-eluting stents. With the recent
controversy over drug-eluting stents and abrupt restenosis, use of the new drug-eluting stents appears to
be decreasing in most centers. Patients with acute stenoses (ie, with unstable angina or acute MI) seem
to do better with bare-metal stents. Patients without significant infarct or complications may quickly return
to work and usual activities, but strenuous activities should be avoided for 6 wk.
In-stent thrombosis occurs because of the inherent thrombogenicity of metallic stents. Most cases occur
within the first 24 to 48 h. However, late stent thrombosis, occurring after 30 days and as late as ≥ 1 yr,
can occur with both bare-metal and drug-eluting stents, especially after cessation of antiplatelet therapy.
Progressive endothelialization of the bare-metal stent occurs within the first few months and reduces the
risk of thrombosis. However, the antiproliferative drugs secreted by drug-eluting stents inhibit this process
and prolong the risk of thrombosis. Thus, patients who undergo stent placement are treated with various
antiplatelet drugs and anticoagulants (. The current standard regimen for patients with a
===PAGE:2254===
bare-metal or drug-eluting stent consists of aspirin given indefinitely, either clopidogrel or prasugrel for at
least 12 mo, and intraprocedural anticoagulation with heparin or a similar agent (eg, bivalirudin,
particularly those at high risk of bleeding). Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors are no longer routinely used in
stable patients (ie, no comorbidities, no acute coronary syndrome) having elective stent placement.
Although controversial, they may be beneficial in some patients with an acute coronary syndrome but
should not be considered routine. It is unclear whether it is beneficial to give glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors
before arrival in the cardiac catheterization laboratory. After stent insertion, a HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitor (statin) is added if one is not already being used.
Overall risk of PCI is comparable with that for CABG. Mortality rate is 1 to 3%; MI rate is 3 to 5%. In < 3%,
intimal dissection causes obstruction requiring emergency CABG.
CABG:
CABG uses sections of autologous veins (eg, saphenous) or, preferably, arteries (eg, internal
mammary, radial) to bypass diseased segments. At 1 yr, about 85% of venous bypass grafts are patent,
but after 10 yr, as many as 97% of internal mammary artery grafts are patent. Arteries also hypertrophy to
accommodate increased flow.
CABG is typically done during cardiopulmonary bypass with the heart stopped; a bypass machine pumps
and oxygenates blood. Risks of the procedure include stroke and MI. For patients with a normal-sized
heart, no history of MI, good ventricular function, and no additional risk factors, risk is < 5% for
perioperative MI, 2 to 3% for stroke, and ≤ 1% for mortality; risk increases with age and presence of
underlying disease. Operative mortality rate is 3 to 5 times higher for a second bypass than for the first;
thus, timing of the first bypass should be optimal.
After cardiopulmonary bypass, about 25 to 30% of patients develop cognitive dysfunction, possibly
caused by microemboli originating in the bypass machine. Dysfunction ranges from mild to severe and
may persist for weeks to years. To minimize this risk, some centers use a beating heart technique (ie, no
cardiopulmonary bypass), in which a device mechanically stabilizes the part of the heart upon which the
surgeon is working.
CAD may progress despite bypass surgery. Postoperatively, the rate of proximal obstruction of bypassed
vessels increases. Vein grafts become obstructed early if thrombi form and later (several years) if
atherosclerosis causes slow degeneration of the intima and media. Aspirin prolongs vein graft patency.
Continued smoking has a profound adverse effect on patency.
Prevention
Prevention of CAD involves modifying atherosclerosis risk factors (: smoking cessation,
weight loss, a healthful diet, regular exercise, modification of serum lipid levels, and control of
hypertension and diabetes. Antihypertensives should be used to achieve a goal blood pressure of <
130/80 mm Hg. Modification of serum lipid levels (particularly with statins) may slow or even partially
reverse the progression of CAD. LDL targets are < 100 mg/dL (< 2.59 mmol/L) for patients with known
CAD or 70 to 80 mg/dL (1.81 to 2.07 mmol/L) for those with a history of an ischemic event. Nicotinic acid
or a fibrate should be added for patients with an HDL < 40 mg/dL (< 1.03 mmol/L).
Angina Pectoris
Angina pectoris is a clinical syndrome of precordial discomfort or pressure due to transient
myocardial ischemia without infarction. It is typically precipitated by exertion or psychologic
stress and relieved by rest or sublingual nitroglycerin. Diagnosis is by symptoms, ECG, and
myocardial imaging. Treatment may include nitrates,
β
-blockers, Ca channel blockers, and
coronary angioplasty or coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
Etiology
Angina pectoris occurs when cardiac workload and resultant myocardial O
demand exceed the ability of
coronary arteries to supply an adequate amount of oxygenated blood, as can occur when the arteries are
narrowed. Narrowing usually results from atherosclerosis but may result from coronary artery spasm or,
===PAGE:2255===
rarely, coronary artery embolism. Acute coronary thrombosis can cause angina if obstruction is partial or
transient, but it usually causes MI.
Because myocardial O
demand is determined mainly by heart rate, systolic wall tension, and contractility,
narrowing of a coronary artery typically results in angina that occurs during exertion and is relieved by
rest.
In addition to exertion, cardiac workload can be increased by disorders such as hypertension, aortic
stenosis, aortic regurgitation, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In such cases, angina can result whether
atherosclerosis is present or not. These disorders can also decrease relative myocardial perfusion
because myocardial mass is increased (causing decreased diastolic flow).
A decreased O
supply, as in severe anemia or hypoxia, can precipitate or aggravate angina.
Pathophysiology
In stable angina, the relationship between workload or demand and ischemia is usually relatively
predictable. However, atherosclerotic arterial narrowing is not entirely fixed; it varies with the normal
fluctuations in arterial tone that occur in all people. Thus, more people have angina in the morning, when
arterial tone is relatively high. Also, abnormal endothelial function may contribute to variations in arterial
tone; eg, in endothelium damaged by atheromas, stress of a catecholamine surge causes
vasoconstriction rather than dilation (normal response).
As the myocardium becomes ischemic, coronary sinus blood pH falls, cellular K is lost, lactate
accumulates, ECG abnormalities appear, and ventricular function deteriorates. Left ventricular (LV)
diastolic pressure usually increases during angina, sometimes inducing pulmonary congestion and
dyspnea. The exact mechanism by which ischemia causes discomfort is unclear but may involve nerve
stimulation by hypoxic metabolites.
Symptoms and Signs
Angina may be a vague, barely troublesome ache or may rapidly become a severe, intense precordial
crushing sensation. It is rarely described as pain. Discomfort is most commonly felt beneath the sternum,
although location varies. Discomfort may radiate to the left shoulder and down the inside of the left arm,
even to the fingers; straight through to the back; into the throat, jaws, and teeth; and, occasionally, down
the inside of the right arm. It may also be felt in the upper abdomen. The discomfort of angina is never
above the ears or below the umbilicus.
Some patients have atypical angina (eg, bloating, gas, abdominal distress), often ascribing symptoms to
indigestion; belching may even seem to relieve the symptoms. Others have dyspnea due to the sharp,
reversible increase in LV filling pressure that often accompanies ischemia. Frequently, the patient's
description is imprecise, and whether the problem is angina, dyspnea, or both may be difficult to
determine. Because ischemic symptoms require a minute or more to resolve, brief, fleeting sensations
rarely represent angina.
Between and even during attacks of angina, physical findings may be normal. However, during the attack,
heart rate may increase modestly, BP is often elevated, heart sounds become more distant, and the apical
impulse is more diffuse. The 2nd heart sound may become paradoxical because LV ejection is more
prolonged during an ischemic attack. A 4th heart sound is common, and a 3rd heart sound may develop. A
mid or late systolic apical murmur shrill—or blowing but not especially loud—may occur if ischemia
causes localized papillary muscle dysfunction, causing mitral regurgitation.
Angina pectoris is typically triggered by exertion or strong emotion, usually persists no more than a few
minutes, and subsides with rest. Response to exertion is usually predictable, but in some patients,
exercise that is tolerated one day may precipitate angina the next because of variations in arterial tone.
Symptoms are exaggerated when exertion follows a meal or occurs in cold weather; walking into the wind
or first contact with cold air after leaving a warm room may precipitate an attack. Symptom severity is
often classified by the degree of exertion resulting in angina (see
===PAGE:2256===
Table 210-1
).
[Table 210-1.
Canadian Cardiovascular Classification System of Angina Pectoris]
Attacks may vary from several a day to symptom-free intervals of weeks, months, or years. They may
increase in frequency (called crescendo angina) to a fatal outcome or gradually decrease or disappear if
adequate collateral coronary circulation develops, if the ischemic area infarcts, or if heart failure or
intermittent claudication supervenes and limits activity.
Nocturnal angina may occur if a dream causes striking changes in respiration, pulse rate, and BP.
Nocturnal angina may also be a sign of recurrent LV failure, an equivalent of nocturnal dyspnea. The
recumbent position increases venous return, stretching the myocardium and increasing wall stress, which
increases O
demand.
Angina may occur spontaneously during rest (called angina decubitus). It is usually accompanied by a
modestly increased heart rate and a sometimes markedly higher BP, which increase O
demand. These
increases may be the cause of rest angina or the result of ischemia induced by plaque rupture and
thrombus formation. If angina is not relieved, unmet myocardial O
demand increases further, making MI
more likely.
Unstable angina:
Because angina characteristics are usually predictable for a given patient, any
changes (ie, rest angina, new-onset angina, increasing angina) should be considered serious. Such
changes are termed unstable angina and require prompt evaluation and treatment.
Unstable angina is classified based on severity and clinical situation (see
Table 210-2
). Also considered are whether unstable angina occurs during treatment for chronic stable
angina and whether transient changes in ST-T waves occur during angina. If angina has occurred within
48 h and no contributory extracardiac condition is present, troponin levels may be measured to help
estimate prognosis; troponin-negative indicates a better prognosis than troponin-positive.
Diagnosis
• Typical symptoms
• ECG
• Stress testing with ECG or imaging (echocardiographic or nuclear)
• Coronary angiography for significant symptoms or positive stress test
Diagnosis is suspected if chest discomfort is typical and is precipitated by exertion and relieved by rest.
Patients whose chest discomfort lasts > 20 min or occurs during rest or who have syncope or heart failure
are evaluated for an acute coronary syndrome (. Chest discomfort may also be caused by GI
disorders (eg, reflux, esophageal spasm, indigestion, cholelithiasis), costochondritis, anxiety, panic
attacks, hyperventilation, and other cardiac disorders (eg, pericarditis, mitral valve prolapse,
supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation), even when coronary blood flow is not compromised (.
ECG:
If typical exertional symptoms are present, ECG is indicated. Because angina resolves quickly with
rest, ECG rarely can be done during an attack except during stress testing. If done during an attack, ECG
is likely to show reversible ischemic changes: T wave discordant to the QRS vector, ST-segment
depression (typically), ST-segment elevation, decreased R-wave height, intraventricular or bundle branch
conduction disturbances, and arrhythmia (usually ventricular extrasystoles). Between attacks, the ECG
(and usually LV function) at rest is normal
[Table 210-2.
Braunwald Classification of Unstable Angina*]
===PAGE:2257===
in about 30% of patients with a typical history of angina pectoris, even those with extensive 3-vessel
disease. In the remaining 70%, the ECG shows evidence of previous infarction, hypertrophy, or
nonspecific ST-segment and T-wave (ST-T) abnormalities. An abnormal resting ECG alone does not
establish or refute the diagnosis.
Stress testing:
More specific tests include stress testing with ECG or with myocardial imaging (eg,
echocardiography, radionuclide imaging) and coronary angiography. Further testing is needed to confirm
the diagnosis, evaluate disease severity, determine appropriate exercise levels for the patient, and help
predict prognosis.
Noninvasive tests are considered first. For coronary artery disease (CAD), the most accurate are stress
echocardiography and myocardial perfusion imaging with single-photon emission CT (SPECT) or PET.
However, these tests are more expensive than simple stress testing with ECG.
If a patient has a normal resting ECG and can exercise, exercise stress testing with ECG is done. In men
with chest discomfort suggesting angina, stress ECG testing has a specificity of 70%; sensitivity is 90%.
Sensitivity is similar in women, but specificity is lower, particularly in women < 55 (< 70%). However,
women are more likely than men to have an abnormal resting ECG when CAD is present (32% vs 23%).
Although sensitivity is reasonably high, exercise ECG can miss severe CAD (even left main or 3-vessel
disease). In patients with atypical symptoms, a negative stress ECG usually rules out angina pectoris and
CAD; a positive result may or may not represent coronary ischemia and indicates need for further testing.
When the resting ECG is abnormal, false-positive ST-segment shifts are common on the stress ECG, so
patients should have stress testing with myocardial imaging. Exercise or pharmacologic stress (eg, with
dobutamine or dipyridamole infusion) may be used. The choice of imaging technique depends on
institutional availability and expertise. Imaging tests can help assess LV function and response to stress;
identify areas of ischemia, infarction, and viable tissue; and determine the site and extent of myocardium
at risk. Stress echocardiography can also detect ischemia-induced mitral regurgitation.
Angiography:
Coronary angiography (see also p.
) is the standard for diagnosing CAD but is not always necessary to confirm the diagnosis. It is
indicated primarily to locate and assess severity of coronary artery lesions when revascularization
(percutaneous intervention [PCI] or coronary artery bypass grafting [CABG]) is being considered.
Angiography may also be indicated when knowledge of coronary anatomy is necessary to advise about
work or lifestyle needs (eg, discontinuing job or sports activities).
Obstruction is assumed to be
physiologically significant when the luminal diameter is reduced > 70%. This reduction correlates well
with the presence of angina pectoris unless spasm or thrombosis is superimposed.
Intravascular ultrasonography provides images of coronary artery structure. An ultrasound probe on the
tip of a catheter is inserted in the coronary arteries during angiography. This test can provide more
information about coronary anatomy than other tests; it is indicated when the nature of lesions is unclear
or when apparent disease severity does not match symptom severity. Used with angioplasty, it can help
ensure optimal placement of stents.
Imaging:
Electron beam CT can detect the amount of Ca present in coronary artery plaque. The Ca
score (from 1 to 100) is roughly proportional to the risk of subsequent coronary events. However,
because Ca may be present in the absence of significant stenosis, the score does not correlate well with
the need for angioplasty or CABG. Thus, the American Heart Association recommends that screening with
electron beam CT should be done only for select groups of patients and is most valuable when combined
with historical and clinical data to estimate risk of death or nonfatal MI. These groups may include
asymptomatic patients with an intermediate Framingham 10-yr risk estimate of 10 to 20% and
symptomatic patients with equivocal stress test results.
Multidetector row CT (MDRCT) coronary angiography can accurately identify coronary stenosis and has
a number of advantages. The test is noninvasive, can exclude coronary stenosis with high accuracy, can
establish stent or bypass graft patency, can visualize cardiac and coronary venous anatomy, and can
assess calcified and noncalcified plaque burden. However, radiation exposure is significant, and the test
is not suitable for patients with a heart rate of > 65 beats/min, those with irregular heart beats, and
===PAGE:2258===
pregnant women. Patients must also be able to hold their breath for 15 to 20 sec, 3 to 4 times during the
study.
Evolving indications for MDRCT coronary angiography include
• Asymptomatic high-risk patients or patients with atypical or typical angina who have inconclusive
exercise stress test results, cannot undergo exercise stress testing, or need to undergo major
noncardiac surgery
• Patients in whom invasive coronary angiography was unable to locate a major coronary artery or graft
Cardiac MRI has become invaluable in evaluating many cardiac and great vessel abnormalities. It may be
used to evaluate CAD by several techniques, which enable direct visualization of coronary stenosis,
assessment of flow in the coronary arteries, evaluation of myocardial perfusion and metabolism,
evaluation of wall motion abnormalities during stress, and assessment of infracted myocardium vs viable
myocardium.
Current indications for cardiac MRI include evaluation of cardiac structure and function, assessment of
myocardial viability, and possibly diagnosis and risk assessment of patients with either known or
suspected CAD.
Prognosis
The main adverse outcomes are unstable angina, MI, and sudden death due to arrhythmias. Annual
mortality rate is about 1.4% in patients with angina, no history of MI, a normal resting ECG, and normal
BP. However, women with CAD tend to have a worse prognosis. Mortality rate is about 7.5% when
systolic hypertension is present, 8.4% when the ECG is abnormal, and 12% when both are present. Type
2 diabetes about doubles the mortality rate for each scenario.
Prognosis worsens with increasing age, increasingly severe anginal symptoms, presence of anatomic
lesions, and poor ventricular function. Lesions in the left main coronary artery or proximal left anterior
descending artery indicate particularly high risk. Although prognosis correlates with number and severity
of coronary arteries affected, prognosis is surprisingly good for patients with stable angina, even those
with 3-vessel disease, if ventricular function is normal.
Treatment
• Modification of risk factors (smoking, BP, lipids)
• Antiplatelet drugs (aspirin plus clopidogrel)
•
β
-Blockers
• Nitroglycerin and Ca channel blockers for symptom control
• Revascularization if symptoms persist despite medical therapy
• ACE inhibitors and statins
Reversible risk factors are modified as much as possible (see also p.
). Smokers should stop
smoking; ≥ 2 yr after stopping smoking, risk of MI is reduced to that of people who never smoked.
Hypertension is treated diligently because even mild hypertension increases cardiac workload. Weight
loss alone often reduces the severity of angina. Sometimes treatment of mild LV failure markedly lessens
angina. Paradoxically, digitalis occasionally intensifies
angina, presumably because increased myocardial
contractility increases O
demand, arterial tone is increased, or both. Aggressive reduction of total and
LDL cholesterol (via diet plus drugs as necessary) slows the progression of CAD, may cause some
lesions to regress (, and improves endothelial function and thus arterial response to stress. An
exercise program emphasizing walking often improves the sense of well-being, reduces CAD risk, and
===PAGE:2259===
improves exercise tolerance.
Drugs:
The main goals are to relieve acute symptoms, prevent or reduce ischemia (see
Table 210-3
), and prevent future ischemic events. For an acute attack, sublingual nitroglycerin is the most
effective drug.
To prevent ischemia, all patients diagnosed with CAD or at high risk of developing CAD should take an
antiplatelet drug daily.
β
-Blockers, unless contraindicated or not tolerated, are given to most patients. For
some patients, prevention of symptoms requires Ca channel blockers or long-acting nitrates.
Antiplatelet drugs
inhibit platelet aggregation. Aspirin binds irreversibly to platelets and inhibits
cyclooxygenase and platelet aggregation. Clopidogrel blocks adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet
aggregation. Either drug can reduce risk of ischemic events (MI, sudden death), but the drugs are most
effective when given together. Patients unable to tolerate one should receive the other drug alone.
β
-Blockers
limit symptoms and prevent infarction and sudden death better than other drugs.
β
-Blockers
block sympathetic stimulation of the heart and reduce systolic BP, heart rate, contractility, and cardiac
output, thus decreasing myocardial O
demand and increasing exercise tolerance. They also increase
the threshold for ventricular fibrillation. Most patients tolerate these drugs well. Many
β
-blockers are
available and effective. Dose is titrated upward as needed until limited by bradycardia or adverse effects.
Patients who cannot tolerate
β
-blockers are given a Ca channel blocker with negative chronotropic
effects (eg, diltiazem, verapamil). Those at risk of
β
-blocker intolerance (eg, those with asthma) may be
tried on a cardioselective
β
-blocker (eg, carvedilol), perhaps with pulmonary function testing before and
after drug administration to detect drug-induced bronchospasm.
Nitroglycerin
is a potent smooth-muscle relaxant and vasodilator. Its main sites of action are in the
peripheral vascular tree, especially in the venous or capacitance system, and in coronary blood vessels.
Even severely atherosclerotic vessels may dilate in areas without atheroma. Nitroglycerin lowers systolic
BP and dilates systemic veins, thus reducing myocardial wall tension, a major determinant of myocardial
O
need. Sublingual nitroglycerin is given for an acute attack or for prevention before exertion. Dramatic
relief usually occurs within 1.5 to 3 min, is complete by about 5 min, and lasts up to 30 min. The dose may
be repeated every 4 to 5 min up to 3 times if relief is incomplete. Patients should always carry
nitroglycerin tablets or aerosol spray to use promptly at the onset of an angina attack. Patients should
store tablets in a tightly sealed, light-resistant glass container, so that potency is not lost. Because the
drug deteriorates quickly, small amounts should be obtained frequently.
Long-acting nitrates
(oral or transdermal) are used if symptoms persist after the
β
-blocker dose is
maximized. If angina occurs at predictable times, a nitrate is given to cover those times. Oral nitrates
include isosorbide dinitrate and mononitrate (the active metabolite of the dinitrate). They are effective
within 1 to 2 h; their effect lasts 4 to 6 h. Sustained-release formulations of isosorbide mononitrate appear
to be effective throughout the day. For transdermal use, cutaneous nitroglycerin patches have largely
replaced nitroglycerin ointments primarily because ointments are inconvenient and messy. Patches slowly
release the drug for a prolonged effect; exercise capacity improves 4 h after patch application and wanes
in 18 to 24 h. Nitrate tolerance may occur, especially when plasma concentrations are kept constant.
Because MI risk is highest in early morning, an afternoon or early evening respite period from nitrates is
reasonable unless a patient commonly has angina at that time. For nitroglycerin, an 8- to 10-h respite
period seems sufficient. Isosorbide may require a 12-h respite period. If given once/day, sustainedrelease isosorbide mononitrate does not appear to elicit tolerance.
Ca channel blockers
may be used if symptoms persist despite use of nitrates or if nitrates are not
tolerated. Ca channel blockers are particularly useful if hypertension or coronary spasm is also present.
Different types of Ca channel blockers have different effects. Dihydropyridines (eg, nifedipine,
amlodipine, felodipine) have no chronotropic effects and vary substantially in their negative inotropic
effects. Shorter-acting dihydropyridines may cause reflex tachycardia and are associated with increased
mortality in CAD patients; they should not be used to treat stable angina.
[Table 210-3.
Drugs for Coronary Artery Disease]
===PAGE:2260===
Longer-acting formulations of dihydropyridines have fewer tachycardic effects; they are most commonly
used with a
β
-blocker. In this group, amlodipine has the weakest negative inotropic effects; it may be used
in patients with LV systolic dysfunction. Diltiazem and verapamil, other types of Ca channel blockers, have
negative chronotropic and inotropic effects. They can be used alone in patients with
β
-blocker intolerance
or asthma and normal LV systolic function but may increase cardiovascular mortality in patients with LV
systolic dysfunction.
Revascularization:
Revascularization, either with PCI (eg, angioplasty, stenting) or CABG should be
considered if angina persists despite drug therapy and worsens quality of life or if anatomic lesions
(noted during angiography) put a patient at high risk of mortality. The choice between PCI and CABG
depends on extent and location of anatomic lesions, the experience of the surgeon and medical center,
and, to some extent, patient preference.
PCI is usually preferred for 1- or 2-vessel disease with suitable anatomic lesions. Lesions that are long or
near bifurcation points are often not amenable to PCI. However, as stent technology improves, PCI is
being used for more complicated cases.
CABG is very effective in selected patients with angina. The ideal candidate has severe angina pectoris
and localized disease, or diabetes mellitus. About 85% of patients have complete or dramatic symptom
relief. Exercise stress testing shows positive correlation between graft patency and improved exercise
tolerance, but exercise tolerance sometimes remains improved despite graft closure.
CABG improves survival for patients with left main disease, those with 3-vessel disease and poor LV
function, and some patients with 2-vessel disease. However, for patients with mild or moderate angina
(class I or II) or 3-vessel disease and good ventricular function, CABG appears to only marginally improve
survival. For patients with 1-vessel disease, outcomes with drug therapy, PCI, and CABG are similar;
exceptions are left main disease and proximal left anterior descending disease, for which
revascularization appears advantageous.
Variant Angina
Variant angina is angina pectoris secondary to epicardial coronary artery spasm (Prinzmetal's
angina).
Most patients with variant angina have significant fixed proximal obstruction of at least one major
coronary artery. Spasm usually occurs within 1 cm of the obstruction (often accompanied by ventricular
arrhythmia).
Symptoms are anginal discomfort occurring mainly during rest, often at night, and only rarely and
inconsistently during exertion (unless significant coronary artery obstruction is also present). Attacks tend
to occur regularly at certain times of day.
Diagnosis is suspected if ST-segment elevation occurs during the attack. Between anginal attacks, the
ECG may be normal or show a stable abnormal pattern. Confirmation
is by provocative testing with
ergonovine or acetylcholine, which may precipitate coronary artery spasm, identified by significant STsegment elevation or by observation of a reversible spasm during cardiac catheterization. Testing is done
most commonly in a cardiac catheterization laboratory and occasionally in a coronary care unit.
Average survival at 5 yr is 89 to 97%, but mortality risk is greater for patients with both variant angina and
atherosclerotic coronary artery obstruction. Usually, sublingual nitroglycerin promptly relieves variant
angina. Ca channel blockers may effectively prevent symptoms. Theoretically,
β
-blockers may exacerbate
spasm by allowing unopposed
α
-adrenergic vasoconstriction, but this effect has not been proved
clinically. Oral drugs most commonly used are sustained-release diltiazem 120 to 540 mg once/day,
sustained-release verapamil 120 to 480 mg once/day (dose must be reduced in patients with renal or
hepatic dysfunction), or amlodipine 15 to 20 mg once/day (dose must be reduced in elderly patients and
patients with hepatic dysfunction). In refractory cases, amiodarone may be useful. Although these drugs
relieve symptoms, they do not appear to alter prognosis.
===PAGE:2261===
Syndrome X
Syndrome X is cardiac microvascular dysfunction or constriction causing angina (microvascular
angina).
Some patients with typical angina that is relieved by rest or nitroglycerin have normal coronary
arteriograms (eg, no atherosclerosis, embolism, or inducible arterial spasm). Some of these patients have
ischemia detected during stress testing; others do not. In some patients, the cause of ischemia seems to
be reflex intramyocardial coronary constriction and reduced coronary flow reserve. Other patients have
microvascular dysfunction within the myocardium: The abnormal vessels do not dilate in response to
exercise or other cardiovascular stressors; sensitivity to cardiac pain may also be increased. Prognosis is
good, although symptoms of ischemia may recur for years. In many patients,
β
-blockers relieve
symptoms. This disorder should not be confused with variant angina due to epicardial coronary spasm or
with another disorder called syndrome X, which refers to the metabolic syndrome (.
Silent Ischemia
Patients with CAD (particularly diabetics) may have ischemia without symptoms. Ischemia is evidenced by
transient asymptomatic ST-T abnormalities seen during 24-h Holter monitoring. Radionuclide studies can
sometimes document asymptomatic myocardial ischemia during physical or mental stress (eg, mental
arithmetic). Silent ischemia and angina pectoris may coexist, occurring at different times. Prognosis
depends on severity of CAD.
Acute Coronary Syndromes
(Unstable Angina; Acute MI)
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS) result from acute obstruction of a coronary artery.
Consequences depend on degree and location of obstruction and range from unstable angina to
non-ST-segment elevation MI (NSTEMI), ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI), and sudden cardiac
death. Symptoms are similar in each of these syndromes (except sudden death) and include
chest discomfort with or without dyspnea, nausea, and diaphoresis. Diagnosis is by ECG and
the presence or absence of serologic markers. Treatment is antiplatelet drugs, anticoagulants,
nitrates,
β
-blockers, and, for STEMI, emergency reperfusion via fibrinolytic drugs, percutaneous
intervention, or, occasionally, coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
In the US, about 1.5 million MIs occur annually. MI results in death for 400,000 to 500,000 people, with
about half dying before they reach the hospital (see
Cardiac Arrest
.
Etiology
These syndromes usually occur when an acute thrombus forms in an atherosclerotic coronary artery.
Atheromatous plaque sometimes becomes unstable or inflamed, causing it to rupture or split, exposing
thrombogenic material, which activates platelets and the coagulation cascade and produces an acute
thrombus. Platelet activation involves a conformational change in membrane glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa
receptors, allowing cross-linking (and thus aggregation) of platelets. Even atheromas causing minimal
obstruction can rupture and result in thrombosis; in > 50% of cases, stenosis is < 40%. The resultant
thrombus abruptly interferes with blood flow to parts of the myocardium. Spontaneous thrombolysis
occurs in about two thirds of patients; 24 h later, thrombotic obstruction is found in only about 30%.
However, in virtually all cases, obstruction lasts long enough to cause tissue necrosis.
Rarely, these syndromes are caused by arterial embolism (eg, in mitral or aortic stenosis, infective
endocarditis, or marantic endocarditis). Cocaine use and other causes of coronary spasm can sometimes
result in MI. Spasm-induced MI may occur in normal or atherosclerotic coronary arteries.
Pathophysiology
Initial consequences vary with size, location, and duration of obstruction and range from transient
===PAGE:2262===
ischemia to infarction. Measurement of newer, more sensitive markers indicates that some cell necrosis
probably occurs even in mild forms; thus, ischemic events occur on a continuum, and classification into
subgroups, although useful, is somewhat arbitrary. Sequelae of the acute event depend primarily on the
mass and type of cardiac tissue infarcted.
Myocardial dysfunction:
Ischemic (but not infarcted) tissue has impaired contractility, resulting in
hypokinetic or akinetic segments; these segments may expand or bulge during systole (called paradoxical
motion). The size of the affected area determines effects, which range from minimal to mild heart failure to
cardiogenic shock. Some degree of heart failure occurs in about two thirds of hospitalized patients with
acute MI. It is termed ischemic cardiomyopathy if low cardiac output and heart failure persist. Ischemia
involving the papillary muscle may lead to mitral valve regurgitation.
MI:
MI is myocardial necrosis resulting from abrupt reduction in coronary blood flow to part of the
myocardium. Infarcted tissue is permanently dysfunctional; however, there is a zone of potentially
reversible ischemia adjacent to infarcted tissue.
MI affects predominantly the left ventricle (LV), but damage may extend into the right ventricle (RV) or the
atria. RV infarction usually results from obstruction of the right coronary or a dominant left circumflex
artery; it is characterized by high RV filling pressure, often with severe tricuspid regurgitation and reduced
cardiac output. An inferoposterior infarction causes some degree of RV dysfunction in about half of
patients and causes hemodynamic abnormality in 10 to 15%. RV dysfunction should be considered in any
patient who has inferoposterior infarction and elevated jugular venous pressure with hypotension or
shock. RV infarction complicating LV infarction may significantly increase mortality risk.
Anterior infarcts tend to be larger and result in a worse prognosis than inferoposterior infarcts. They are
usually due to left coronary artery obstruction, especially in the anterior descending artery; inferoposterior
infarcts reflect right coronary or dominant left circumflex artery obstruction.
Transmural infarcts involve the whole thickness of myocardium from epicardium to endocardium and are
usually characterized by abnormal Q waves on ECG. Nontransmural or subendocardial infarcts do not
extend through the ventricular wall and cause only ST-segment and T-wave (ST-T) abnormalities.
Subendocardial infarcts usually involve the inner one third of myocardium, where wall tension is highest
and myocardial blood flow is most vulnerable to circulatory changes. These infarcts may follow prolonged
hypotension. Because the transmural depth of necrosis cannot be precisely determined clinically, infarcts
are usually classified by the presence or absence of ST-segment elevation or Q waves on the ECG.
Volume of myocardium destroyed can be roughly estimated by the extent and duration of CK elevation.
Electrical dysfunction:
Ischemic and necrotic cells are incapable of normal electrical activity, resulting in
various ECG changes (predominantly ST-T abnormalities), arrhythmias, and conduction disturbances.
ST-T abnormalities of ischemia include ST-segment depression (often downsloping from the J point), Twave inversion, ST-segment elevation (often referred to as injury current), and peaked T waves in the
hyperacute phase of infarction. Conduction disturbances can reflect damage to the sinus node, the
atrioventricular (AV) node, or specialized conduction tissues. Most changes are transient; some are
permanent.
Classification
Classification is based on ECG changes and presence or absence of cardiac markers in blood.
Distinguishing NSTEMI and STEMI is useful because prognosis and treatment are different.
Unstable angina
(acute coronary insufficiency, preinfarction angina, intermediate syndrome) is defined
as:
• Rest angina that is prolonged (usually > 20 min)
• New-onset angina of at least class III severity in the Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS)
classification (see
Table 210-1
)
===PAGE:2263===
• Increasing angina, ie, previously diagnosed angina that has become distinctly more frequent, more
severe, longer in duration, or lower in threshold (eg, increased by ≥ 1 CCS class or to at least CCS
class III)
Also, ECG changes such as ST-segment depression, ST-segment elevation, or T-wave inversion may
occur during unstable angina but are transient. Of cardiac markers, CK is not elevated but troponin I or T
may be slightly increased. Unstable angina is clinically unstable and often a prelude to MI or arrhythmias
or, less commonly, to sudden death.
Non-ST-segment elevation MI
(NSTEMI, subendocardial MI) is myocardial necrosis (evidenced by
cardiac markers in blood; troponin I or T and CK will be elevated) without acute ST-segment elevation or
Q waves. ECG changes such as ST-segment depression, T-wave inversion, or both may be present.
ST-segment elevation MI
(STEMI, transmural MI) is myocardial necrosis with ECG changes showing
ST-segment elevation that is not quickly reversed by nitroglycerin or showing new left bundle branch
block. Q waves may be present. Both troponin and CK are elevated.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of ACS depend somewhat on the extent and location of obstruction and are quite variable.
Except when infarction is massive, recognizing the amount of ischemia by symptoms alone is difficult.
After the acute event, many complications can occur. They usually involve electrical dysfunction (eg,
conduction defects, arrhythmias), myocardial dysfunction (eg, heart failure, interventricular septum or free
wall rupture, ventricular aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm, mural thrombus formation, cardiogenic shock), or
valvular dysfunction (typically mitral regurgitation). Electrical dysfunction can be significant in any form of
ACS, but usually, large parts of myocardium must be ischemic to cause significant myocardial dysfunction.
Other complications of ACS include recurrent ischemia and pericarditis. Pericarditis that occurs 2 to 10 wk
after an MI is known as post-MI syndrome or Dressler's syndrome.
Unstable angina:
Symptoms are those of angina pectoris (, except that the pain or
discomfort of unstable angina usually is more intense, lasts longer, is precipitated by less exertion, occurs
spontaneously at rest (as angina decubitus), is progressive (crescendo) in nature, or involves any
combination of these features.
NSTEMI and STEMI:
Symptoms of NSTEMI and STEMI are the same. Days to weeks before the event,
about two thirds of patients experience prodromal symptoms, including unstable or crescendo angina,
shortness of breath, and fatigue. Usually, the first symptom of infarction is deep, substernal, visceral pain
described as aching or pressure, often radiating to the back, jaw, left arm, right arm, shoulders, or all of
these areas. The pain is similar to angina pectoris but is usually more severe and long-lasting; more often
accompanied by dyspnea, diaphoresis, nausea, and vomiting; and relieved little or only temporarily by
rest or nitroglycerin. However, discomfort may be mild; about 20% of acute MIs are silent (ie,
asymptomatic or causing vague symptoms not recognized as illness by the patient), more commonly in
diabetics. Some patients present with syncope. Patients often interpret their discomfort as indigestion,
particularly because spontaneous relief may be falsely attributed to belching or antacid consumption.
Women are more likely to present with atypical chest discomfort. Elderly patients may report dyspnea
more than ischemic-type chest pain. In severe ischemic episodes, the patient often has significant pain
and feels restless and apprehensive. Nausea and vomiting may occur, especially with inferior MI.
Dyspnea and weakness due to LV failure, pulmonary edema, shock, or significant arrhythmia may
dominate.
Skin may be pale, cool, and diaphoretic. Peripheral or central cyanosis may be present. Pulse may be
thready, and BP is variable, although many patients initially have some degree of hypertension during
pain.
Heart sounds are usually somewhat distant; a 4th heart sound is almost universally present. A soft
systolic blowing apical murmur (reflecting papillary muscle dysfunction) may occur. During initial
examination, a friction rub or more striking murmurs suggest a preexisting heart disorder or another
===PAGE:2264===
diagnosis. Detection of a friction rub within a few hours after onset of MI symptoms suggests acute
pericarditis rather than MI. However, friction rubs, usually evanescent, are common on days 2 and 3 postSTEMI. The chest wall is tender when palpated in about 15% of patients.
In RV infarction, signs include elevated RV filling pressure, distended jugular veins (often with Kussmaul's
sign—, clear lung fields, and hypotension.
Diagnosis
• Serial ECGs
• Serial cardiac markers
• Immediate coronary angiography for patients with STEMI or complications (eg, persistent chest pain,
markedly elevated cardiac markers, unstable arrhythmias)
• Delayed angiography (24 to 48 h) for patients with NSTEMI or unstable angina
[Fig. 210-1.
Acute anterior left ventricular infarction (tracing obtained within a few hours of onset of
illness).]
[Fig. 210-2.
Acute anterior left ventricular infarction (after the first 24 h).]
[Fig. 210-3.
Acute anterior left ventricular infarction (several days later).]
[Fig. 210-4.
Acute inferior (diaphragmatic) left ventricular infarction (tracing obtained within a few hours of
onset of illness).]
[Fig. 210-5.
Acute inferior (diaphragmatic) left ventricular infarction (after the first 24 h).]
[Fig. 210-6.
Acute inferior (diaphragmatic) left ventricular infarction (several days later).]
ACS should be considered in men > 30 yr and women > 40 yr (younger in patients with diabetes) whose
main symptom is chest pain or discomfort. Pain must be differentiated from the pain of pneumonia,
pulmonary embolism, pericarditis, rib fracture, costochondral separation, esophageal spasm, acute aortic
dissection, renal calculus, splenic infarction, or various abdominal disorders. In patients with previously
diagnosed hiatus hernia, peptic ulcer, or a gallbladder disorder, the clinician must be wary of attributing
new symptoms to these disorders.
The approach is the same when any ACS is suspected: initial and serial ECG and serial cardiac marker
measurements, which distinguish among unstable angina, NSTEMI, and STEMI. Every emergency
department should have a triage system to immediately identify patients with chest pain for rapid
assessment and ECG. Pulse oximetry and chest x-ray (particularly to look for mediastinal widening, which
suggests aortic dissection) is also done.
ECG:
ECG is the most important test and should be done within 10 min of presentation. It is the center of
the decision pathway because fibrinolytics benefit patients with STEMI but may increase risk for those
with NSTEMI. Also, urgent cardiac catheterization is indicated for patients with acute STEMI but not for
those with NSTEMI.
For STEMI, initial ECG is usually diagnostic, showing ST-segment elevation ≥ 1 mm in 2 or more
===PAGE:2265===
contiguous leads sub-tending the damaged area (see
Figs. 210-1
,
210-2
,
210-3
,
210-4
,
210-5
, and
210-
).
Pathologic Q waves are not necessary for the diagnosis. The ECG must be read carefully because STsegment elevation may be subtle, particularly in the inferior leads (II, III, aVF); sometimes the reader's
attention is mistakenly focused on leads with ST-segment depression. If symptoms are characteristic, STsegment elevation on ECG has a specificity of 90% and a sensitivity of 45% for diagnosing MI. Serial
tracings (obtained every 8 h for 1 day, then daily) showing a gradual evolution toward a stable, more
normal pattern or development of abnormal Q waves over a few days tends to confirm the diagnosis.
Because nontransmural (non-Q-wave) infarcts are usually in the subendocardial or midmyocardial layers,
they do not produce diagnostic Q waves or distinct ST-segment elevation on the ECG. Instead, they
commonly produce only varying degrees of ST-T abnormalities that are less striking, variable, or
nonspecific and sometimes difficult to interpret (NSTEMI). If such abnormalities resolve (or worsen) on
repeat ECGs, ischemia is very likely. However, when repeat ECGs are unchanged, acute MI is unlikely
and, if still suspected clinically, requires other evidence to make the diagnosis. A normal ECG taken when
a patient is pain free does not rule out unstable angina; a normal ECG taken during pain, although it does
not rule out angina, suggests that the pain is not ischemic.
If RV infarction is suspected, a 15-lead ECG is usually recorded; additional leads are placed at V
R, and,
to detect posterior infarction, V
and V
.
ECG diagnosis of MI is more difficult when a left bundle branch block configuration is present because it
resembles STEMI changes. ST-segment elevation concordant with the QRS complex strongly suggests
MI as does > 5-mm ST-segment elevation in at least 2 precordial leads. But generally, any patient with
suggestive symptoms and new-onset (or not known to be old) left bundle branch block is treated as for
STEMI.
Cardiac markers:
Cardiac markers are cardiac enzymes (eg, CK-MB) and cell contents (eg, troponin I,
troponin T, myoglobin) that are released into the bloodstream after myocardial cell necrosis. The markers
appear at different times after injury and decrease at different rates (see
Fig. 210-7
).
Usually, several different markers are measured at regular intervals, typically every 6 to 8 h for 1 day.
Newer bedside tests, which are more convenient, can be just as sensitive when done at shorter intervals
(eg, time 0, 1, 3, and 6 h after presentation).
Troponins are most specific for MI but can also be elevated by ischemia without infarction; elevated levels
(actual number varies with assay used) are considered diagnostic. Borderline elevated troponin levels in
patients with unstable angina indicate increased risk of adverse events and thus the need for further
evaluation and treatment. False-positives sometimes occur in heart failure and renal failure. CK-MB is
slightly less specific. False-positives occur in renal failure, hypothyroidism, and skeletal muscle injury.
Myoglobin is not specific for MI but, because it increases earlier than other markers, may be an early
warning sign to assist in triage of patients with nondiagnostic ECGs.
Coronary angiography:
Coronary angiography most often combines diagnosis with percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI, ie, angioplasty, stenting). Angiography is obtained urgently for patients with
STEMI, patients with persistent chest pain despite maximal medical therapy, and patients with
complications (eg, markedly elevated cardiac markers, presence of cardiogenic shock, acute mitral
regurgitation, ventricular septal
[Fig. 210-7.
Relative timing and levels of cardiac markers in blood after acute MI.]
defect, unstable arrhythmias). Patients with uncomplicated NSTEMI or unstable angina whose symptoms
have resolved typically undergo angiography within the first 24 to 48 h of hospitalization to detect lesions
that may require treatment.
After initial evaluation and therapy, coronary angiography may be used in patients with evidence of
===PAGE:2266===
ongoing ischemia (ECG findings or symptoms), hemodynamic instability, recurrent ventricular
tachyarrhythmias, and other abnormalities that suggest recurrence of ischemic events. Some experts also
recommend that angiography be done before hospital discharge in STEMI patients with inducible
ischemia on stress imaging or an ejection fraction < 40%.
Other tests:
Routine laboratory tests are nondiagnostic but, if obtained, show non-specific abnormalities
compatible with tissue necrosis (eg, increased ESR, moderately elevated WBC count with a shift to the
left). A fasting lipid profile should be obtained within the first 24 h for all patients hospitalized with ACS.
Myocardial imaging (see also p.
) is not needed to make the diagnosis if cardiac markers or ECG is
positive. However, in patients with MI, bedside echocardiography is invaluable for detecting mechanical
complications. Before or shortly after discharge, patients with symptoms suggesting an ACS but
nondiagnostic ECGs and normal cardiac markers should have a stress imaging test (radionuclide or
echocardiographic imaging with pharmacologic or exercise stress). Imaging abnormalities in such patients
indicate increased risk of complications in the next 3 to 6 mo.
Right heart catheterization using a balloon-tipped pulmonary artery catheter ( can be used to
measure right heart, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary artery occlusion pressures and cardiac output. This
test is usually done only if patients have significant complications (eg, severe heart failure, hypoxia,
hypotension).
Prognosis
Unstable angina:
About 30% of patients with unstable angina have an MI within 3 mo of onset; sudden
death is less common. Marked ECG changes with chest pain indicate higher risk of subsequent MI or
death.
NSTEMI and STEMI:
Overall mortality rate is about 30%, with 50 to 60% of these patients dying before
reaching the hospital (typically due to ventricular fibrillation). Inhospital mortality rate is about 10%
(typically due to cardiogenic shock) but varies significantly with severity of LV failure (see
Table 210-4
).
Most patients who die of cardiogenic shock have an infarct or a combination of scar and new infarct
affecting ≥ 50% of LV mass. Five clinical characteristics predict 90% of the mortality in patients who
present with STEMI (see
Table 210-5
): older age (31% of
[Table 210-4.
Killip Classification and Mortality Rate of Acute MI*]
total mortality), lower systolic BP (24%), Killip class > 1 (15%), faster heart rate (12%), and anterior
location (6%). Mortality rate of diabetics and women tends to be higher.
Mortality rate of patients who survive initial hospitalization is 8 to 10% in the year after acute MI. Most
fatalities occur in the first 3 to 4 mo. Persistent ventricular arrhythmia, heart failure, poor ventricular
function, and recurrent ischemia indicate high risk. Many authorities recommend stress ECG before
hospital discharge or within 6 wk. Good exercise performance without ECG abnormalities is associated
with a favorable prognosis; further evaluation is usually not required. Poor exercise performance is
associated with a poor prognosis.
Cardiac performance after recovery depends largely on how much functioning myocardium survives the
acute attack. Scars from previous infarcts add to the acute damage. When > 50% of LV mass is
damaged, prolonged survival is unusual.
General Treatment
• Monitoring and O
• Bed rest initially, with early ambulation
===PAGE:2267===
• Low-salt, low-fat diet
• Stool softeners and anxiolytics as needed
Treatment is designed to relieve distress, interrupt thrombosis, reverse ischemia, limit infarct size, reduce
cardiac workload, and prevent and treat complications. An ACS is a medical emergency; outcome is
greatly influenced by rapid diagnosis and treatment.
Treatment occurs simultaneously with diagnosis. A reliable IV route must be established, O
given
(typically 2 L by nasal cannula), and continuous single-lead ECG monitoring started. Prehospital
interventions by ambulance personnel (including ECG, chewed aspirin (325 mg), early thrombolysis when
indicated and possible, and triage to the appropriate hospital) can reduce risk of mortality and
complications. Early diagnostic data and response to treatment can help determine the need for and
timing of revascularization (.
Bedside cardiac marker tests can help identify low-risk patients with a suspected ACS (eg, those with
initially negative cardiac markers and nondiagnostic ECGs), who can be managed in 24-h observation
units or chest pain centers. Higher-risk patients should be admitted to a monitored inpatient unit or
coronary care unit (CCU). Several validated tools can help stratify risk. Thrombolysis in MI (TIMI) risk
scores may be the most widely used (see
Tables 210-5
and
210-6
).
Patients with suspected NSTEMI and intermediate or high risk should be admitted to an inpatient care
unit. Those with STEMI should be admitted to a CCU.
Only heart rate and rhythm recorded by single-lead ECG are consistently useful for routine, continuous
monitoring. However, some clinicians recommend routine multilead monitoring with continuous STsegment recording to identify transient, recurrent ST-segment elevations or depressions. Such findings,
even in patients without symptoms, suggest ischemia and identify higher-risk patients who may require
more aggressive evaluation and treatment.
Qualified nurses can interpret the ECG for arrhythmia and initiate protocols for its treatment. All staff
members should know how to do CPR.
[Table 210-5.
Mortality Risk at 30 Days in Stemi]
Contributing disorders (eg, anemia, heart failure) are aggressively treated.
The care unit should be a quiet, calm, restful area. Single rooms are preferred; privacy consistent with
monitoring should be ensured. Usually, visitors and telephone calls are restricted to family members
during the first few days. A wall clock, a calendar, and an outside window help orient the patient and
prevent a sense of isolation, as can access to a radio, television, and newspaper.
Bed rest is mandatory for the first 24 h. On day 1, patients without complications (eg, hemodynamic
instability, ongoing ischemia), including those in whom reperfusion with fibrinolytics or PCI is successful,
can sit in a chair, begin passive exercises, and use a
[Table 210-6.
Risk of Adverse Events* at 14 Days in Nstemi]
commode. Walking to the bathroom and doing nonstressful paperwork is allowed shortly thereafter.
Recent studies have shown that patients with successful, uncomplicated primary PCI for acute MI may be
ambulated quickly and be safely discharged in 3 to 4 days. If reperfusion is not successful or
complications are present, patients require longer bed rest, but they (particularly elderly patients) are
mobilized as soon as possible. Prolonged bed rest results in rapid physical deconditioning, with
development of orthostatic hypotension, decreased work capacity, increased heart rate during exertion,
and increased risk of deep venous thrombosis. Prolonged bed rest also intensifies feelings of depression
===PAGE:2268===
and helplessness.
Anxiety, mood changes, and denial are common. A mild tranquilizer (usually a benzodiazepine) is often
given, but many experts believe such drugs are rarely needed.
Reactive depression is common by the 3rd day of illness and is almost universal at some time during
recovery. After the acute phase of illness, the most important tasks are often management of depression,
rehabilitation, and institution of long-term preventive programs. Overemphasis on bed rest, inactivity, and
the seriousness of the disorder reinforces anxiety and depressive tendencies, so patients are encouraged
to sit up, get out of bed, and engage in appropriate activities as soon as possible. The effects of the
disorder, prognosis, and individualized rehabilitation program should be explained to the patient.
Maintaining normal bowel function with stool softeners (eg, docusate) to prevent straining is important.
Urinary retention is common among elderly patients, especially after several days of bed rest or if
atropine was given. A catheter may be required but can usually be removed when the patient can stand or
sit to void.
Because smoking is prohibited, a hospital stay should be used to encourage smoking cessation. All
caregivers should devote considerable effort to making smoking cessation permanent.
Although acutely ill patients have little appetite, tasty food in modest amounts is good for morale. Patients
are usually offered a soft diet of 1500 to 1800 kcal/day with Na reduction to 2 to 3 g. Na reduction is not
required after the first 2 or 3 days if there is no evidence of heart failure. Patients are given a diet low in
cholesterol and saturated fats, which is used to teach healthy eating.
For diabetic patients with STEMI, intensive glucose control is no longer recommended; guidelines call for
an insulin-based regimen to achieve and maintain glucose levels < 180 mg/dL while avoiding
hypoglycemia.
Because the chest pain of MI usually subsides within 12 to 24 h, any chest pain that remains or recurs
later is investigated. It may indicate such complications as recurrent ischemia, pericarditis, pulmonary
embolism, pneumonia, gastritis, or ulcer.
Drugs
• Aspirin, clopidogrel, or both (prasugrel is an alternative to clopidogrel if fibrinolytic therapy has not been
given)
•
β
-Blocker
• GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor considered for certain patients undergoing PCI and for some others at high risk (eg,
with markedly elevated cardiac markers, TIMI risk score ≥ 4, persistent symptoms)
• A heparin (unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin) or bivalirudin (particularly in STEMI patients
at high risk of bleeding)
• IV nitroglycerin (unless low-risk, uncomplicated MI)
• Fibrinolytics for select patients with STEMI when timely PCI unavailable
• ACE inhibitor (as early as possible) and a statin
Antiplatelet and antithrombotic drugs, which stop clots from forming, are used routinely. Anti-ischemic
drugs (eg,
β
-blockers, IV nitroglycerin) are frequently added, particularly when chest pain or hypertension
is present (see
Table 210-3
). Fibrinolytics
should be used if not contraindicated
for STEMI if primary PCI
is not immediately available but worsen outcome for unstable angina and NSTEMI.
Chest pain can be treated with morphine or nitroglycerin. Morphine 2 to 4 mg IV, repeated q 15 min as
===PAGE:2269===
needed, is highly effective but can depress respiration, can reduce myocardial contractility, and is a
potent venous vasodilator. Hypotension and bradycardia secondary to morphine can usually be overcome
by prompt elevation of the lower extremities. Nitroglycerin is initially given sublingually, followed by
continuous IV drip if needed.
BP is normal or slightly elevated in most patients on arrival at the emergency department; BP gradually
falls over the next several hours. Continued hypertension requires treatment with antihypertensives,
preferably IV nitroglycerin, to lower BP and reduce cardiac workload. Severe hypotension or other signs
of shock are ominous and must be treated aggressively with IV fluids and sometimes vasopressors (see
p.
).
Antiplatelet drugs:
Aspirin, clopidogrel, ticlopidine, and GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are examples. All patients
are given aspirin 160 to 325 mg (not enteric-coated), if not contraindicated, at presentation and 81 mg
once/day indefinitely thereafter. Chewing the first dose before swallowing quickens absorption. Aspirin
reduces short- and long-term mortality risk. If aspirin cannot be taken, clopidogrel 75 mg once/day or
ticlopidine 250 mg bid may be used. Clopidogrel has largely replaced ticlopidine for routine use because
neutropenia is a risk with ticlopidine and the WBC count must be monitored regularly. Patients with
unstable angina or NSTEMI in whom intervention is not possible or recommended are given both aspirin
and clopidogrel for at least 1 mo. The optimal duration of double antiplatelet therapy for these patients is
the subject of ongoing investigation.
In patients undergoing PCI, a clopidogrel loading dose (300 to 600 mg po once) improves outcomes,
particularly when administered 24 h in advance. However, delaying PCI for 24 h is not appropriate for
many patients. Further, such a loading dose increases risk of perioperative bleeding in patients who
require coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) because their coronary anatomy proves unfavorable for
PCI. Thus, many clinicians administer a clopidogrel loading dose only in the catheterization laboratory
once coronary anatomy and lesions have been proven to be amenable to PCI.
For patients receiving a stent for revascularization, aspirin is continued indefinitely, and clopidogrel should
be used for at least 1 mo in patients with a bare-metal stent. Patients with a drug-eluting stent have a
prolonged risk of thrombosis and may benefit from 12 mo of clopidogrel treatment, although the
recommended duration is still unclear.
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors (abciximab, tirofiban, eptifibatide) are potent antiplatelet drugs that must be given IV.
Although there is some controversy, evidence indicates that patients with ACS undergoing PCI may
benefit from a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor; results appear to be better if the drug is initiated at least 6 h before PCI
and continued for 18 to 24 h thereafter. If PCI is not being done, some clinicians give a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor
to all high-risk patients (eg, those with markedly elevated cardiac markers, a TIMI risk score ≥ 4, or
persistent symptoms despite adequate drug therapy). The GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor is continued for 24 to 36 h,
and angiography is done before the infusion period is over. GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are not recommended for
patients receiving fibrinolytics. Abciximab, tirofiban, and eptifibatide appear to have equivalent efficacy,
and the choice of drug should depend on other factors (eg, cost, availability, familiarity).
Anticoagulant drugs:
Either a low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), unfractionated heparin, or
bivalirudin is given routinely to patients with ACS unless contraindicated (eg, by active bleeding or
planned use of streptokinase or anistreplase). Choice of agent is somewhat involved.
Unfractionated heparin is more complicated to use because it requires frequent (q 6 h) dosing
adjustments to achieve an activated PTT (aPTT) 1.5 to 2 times the control value. In patients undergoing
angiography, further dosing adjustment is done to achieve an activated clotting time (ACT) of 200 to 250
sec if the patient is treated with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor and 250 to 300 sec if a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor is not
being given. However, the effects of unfractionated heparin are shorter and can be reversed (with prompt
discontinuation of heparin infusion and with administration of protamine sulfate) if bleeding develops
following catheterization.
The LMWHs have better bioavailability, are given by simple weight-based dose without monitoring aPTT
and dose titration, and have lower risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. They also may produce an
incremental benefit in outcomes relative to unfractionated heparin in patients with ACS. Of the LMWHs,
===PAGE:2270===
enoxaparin appears to be superior to dalteparin or nadroparin. However, enoxaparin may pose a higher
bleeding risk in patients with STEMI who are > 75, and its effects are not completely reversible with
protamine.
Thus, taking all into account, many published guidelines recommend LMWH (eg, enoxaparin) over
unfractionated heparin in patients with unstable angina or NSTEMI and in patients < 75 with STEMI who
are not undergoing PCI. By contrast, unfractionated heparin is recommended when emergency PCI is
done (eg, patients with acute STEMI who proceed to the catheterization laboratory), when CABG is
indicated within the next 24 h, and when patients are at high risk of bleeding complications (eg, history of
GI bleeding within the last 6 mo) or have creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min. Ongoing studies should help
clarify the choice between LMWH and unfractionated heparin.
Bivalirudin is an acceptable anticoagulant for patients undergoing primary PCI who are at high risk of
bleeding and is recommended for those with a known or suspected history of
heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. For patients with unstable angina or NSTEMI, dose is an initial bolus of 0.1 mg/kg IV
followed by a drip of 0.25 mg/kg/h. For patients with STEMI, initial dose is 0.75 mg/kg IV followed by 1.75
mg/kg/h.
For patients undergoing PCI, postprocedure heparin is no longer recommended unless patients are at
high risk of thromboembolic events (eg, those with large anterior MI, known LV thrombus, atrial
fibrillation), because postprocedure ischemic events have decreased with the use of stents and
antiplatelet drugs. For patients not undergoing PCI, heparin is continued for 48 h (or longer if symptoms
persist).
The difficulties with the heparins (including bleeding complications, the possibility of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia, and, with unfractionated heparin, the need for dosing adjustments) have led to the
search for better anticoagulants. The direct thrombin inhibitors, bivalirudin and argatroban, may have a
lower incidence of serious bleeding and improved outcomes, particularly in patients with renal
insufficiency (hirudin, another direct thrombin inhibitor, appears to cause more bleeding than the other
drugs). The factor Xa inhibitor, fondaparinux, reduces mortality and reinfarction in patients with NSTEMI
who undergo PCI without increasing bleeding but may result in worse outcomes than unfractionated
heparin in patients with STEMI. Although routine use of these alternative anticoagulants is thus not
currently recommended, they should be used in place of unfractionated heparin or LMWH in patients with
a known or suspected history of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
Patients at high risk of systemic emboli also require long-term therapy with oral warfarin. Conversion to
warfarin should begin 48 h after symptom resolution or PCI.
β
-Blockers:
These drugs are recommended unless contraindicated (eg, by bradycardia, heart block,
hypotension, or asthma), especially for high-risk patients.
β
-Blockers reduce heart rate, arterial pressure,
and contractility, thereby reducing cardiac workload and O
demand. IV
β
-blockers given within the first
few hours improve prognosis by reducing infarct size, recurrence rate, incidence of ventricular fibrillation,
and mortality risk. Infarct size largely determines cardiac performance after recovery.
Heart rate and BP must be carefully monitored during treatment with
β
-blockers. Dosage is reduced if
bradycardia or hypotension develops. Excessive adverse effects may be reversed by infusion of the
β
-
adrenergic agonist isoproterenol 1 to 5
μ
g/min.
Nitrates:
A short-acting nitrate, nitroglycerin, is used to reduce cardiac workload in selected patients.
Nitroglycerin dilates veins, arteries, and arterioles, reducing LV preload and afterload. As a result,
myocardial O
demand is reduced, lessening ischemia. IV nitroglycerin is recommended during the first
24 to 48 h for patients with heart failure, large anterior MI, persistent chest discomfort, or hypertension.
BP can be reduced by 10 to 20 mm Hg but not to < 80 to 90 mm Hg systolic. Longer use may benefit
patients with recurrent chest pain or persistent pulmonary congestion. In high-risk patients, nitroglycerin
given in the first few hours reduces infarct size and short-term and possibly long-term mortality risk.
Nitroglycerin is not routinely given to low-risk patients with uncomplicated MI.
Fibrinolytics:
Tenecteplase (TNK), alteplase (rTPA), reteplase (rPA), streptokinase, and anistreplase
===PAGE:2271===
(anisoylated plasminogen activator complex—APSAC), all given IV, are plasminogen activators. They
convert single chain plasminogen to double-chain plasminogen, which has fibrinolytic activity. They have
different characteristics and dosing regimens (see
Table 210-7
) and are appropriate only for selected
patients with STEMI (.
Tenecteplase and reteplase are recommended most often because of their simplicity of administration;
tenecteplase is given as a single bolus over 5 sec and reteplase as a double bolus 30 min apart.
Administration time and drug errors are reduced compared with other fibrinolytics. Tenecteplase, like
alteplase, has an intermediate risk of intracranial hemorrhage, has a higher rate of recanalization than
other fibrinolytics, and is expensive. Reteplase has the highest risk of intracranial hemorrhage and a
recanalization rate similar to that of tenecteplase, and it is expensive.
Streptokinase may induce allergic reactions, especially if it has been used previously, and must be given
by infusion over 30 to 60 min; however, it has a low incidence of intracerebral hemorrhage and is
relatively inexpensive. Anistreplase, related to streptokinase, is similarly allergenic and slightly more
expensive but can be given as a single bolus. Neither drug requires concomitant heparin use. For both,
recanalization rate is lower than that with other plasminogen activators. Because of the possibility of
allergic reactions, patients who previously received streptokinase or anistreplase are not given that drug.
[Table 210-7.
IV Fibrinolytic Drugs Available in the US]
Alteplase is given in an accelerated or front-loaded dosage over 90 min. Alteplase with concomitant IV
heparin improves patency, is nonallergenic, has a higher recanalization rate than other fibrinolytics, and is
expensive.
Other drugs:
ACE inhibitors appear to reduce mortality risk in MI patients, especially in those with
anterior infarction, heart failure, or tachycardia. The greatest benefit occurs in the highest-risk patients
early during convalescence. ACE inhibitors are given > 24 h after thrombolysis stabilization and, because
of continued beneficial effect, may be prescribed long-term.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers may be an effective alternative for patients who cannot tolerate ACE
inhibitors (eg, because of cough). Currently, they are not first-line treatment after MI. Contraindications
include hypotension, renal failure, bilateral renal artery stenosis, and known allergy.
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) have long been used for prevention of coronary artery disease
and ACS, but there is now increasing evidence that they also have short-term benefits, such as stabilizing
plaque, reversing endothelial dysfunction, decreasing thrombogenicity, and reducing inflammation. Thus,
all patients without contraindications to therapy should receive a statin as early as possible following
ACS. LDL levels of 70 to 80 mg/dL (1.81 to 2.07 mmol/L) are the recommended ultimate target.
Revascularization Modalities and Indications
Revascularization is the restoration of blood supply to ischemic myocardium in an effort to limit ongoing
damage, reduce ventricular irritability, and improve short-term and long-term outcomes. Modes of
revascularization include thrombolysis with fibrinolytic drugs, PCI with or without stent placement, and
CABG.
The use, timing, and modality of revascularization depend on which ACS is present, timing of
presentation, extent and location of anatomic lesions, and availability of personnel and facilities (see
Fig. 210-8
).
Unstable angina and NSTEMI:
Immediate reperfusion is not as urgent in patients with uncomplicated
NSTEMI (in whom a completely occluded infarct-related artery at presentation is uncommon) or in those
with unstable angina who respond to medical therapy. Such
[Fig. 210-8.
Approach to acute coronary syndromes.]
===PAGE:2272===
patients typically undergo angiography within the first 24 to 48 h of hospitalization to identify coronary
lesions requiring PCI or CABG. A noninterventional approach and a trial of medical management are used
for those in whom angiography demonstrates only a small area of myocardium at risk, lesion morphology
not amenable to PCI, anatomically insignificant disease (< 50% coronary stenosis), or significant left main
disease in patients who are candidates for CABG. Further, angiography or PCI should be deferred in
favor of medical management for patients with a high risk of procedure-related morbidity or mortality.
By contrast, patients with persistent chest pain despite maximal medical therapy or complications (eg,
markedly elevated cardiac markers, presence of cardiogenic shock, acute mitral regurgitation, ventricular
septal defect, unstable arrhythmias) should proceed directly to the cardiac catheterization laboratory to
identify coronary lesions requiring PCI or CABG.
As in patients with stable angina, CABG is generally preferred over PCI for patients with left main or left
main equivalent disease, for those with 3- or 2-vessel disease involving the left anterior descending
artery, and for those with left ventricular dysfunction or diabetes. CABG must also be considered when
PCI is unsuccessful, cannot be used (eg, in lesions that are long or near bifurcation points), or causes
acute coronary artery dissection.
Fibrinolytics are not indicated for unstable angina or NSTEMI. Risk outweighs potential benefit.
STEMI:
Emergency PCI is the preferred treatment of STEMI when available in a timely fashion (door to
balloon-inflation time < 90 min) by an experienced operator. Indications for urgent PCI later in the course
of STEMI include hemodynamic instability, malignant arrhythmias requiring transvenous pacing or
repeated cardioversion, and age > 75. If the lesions necessitate CABG, there is about 4 to 12% mortality
and a 20 to 43% morbidity rate.
If there is likely to be a significant delay in availability of PCI, thrombolysis should be done for STEMI
patients meeting criteria (see
Table 210-8
). Reperfusion using fibrinolytics is most effective if given in the
first few minutes to hours after onset of MI. The earlier a fibrinolytic is begun, the better. The goal is a
door-to-needle time of 30 to 60 min. Greatest benefit occurs within 3 h, but the drugs may be effective up
to 12 h. Used with aspirin, fibrinolytics reduce hospital mortality rate by 30 to 50% and improve ventricular
function. Although controversial, prehospital use of fibrinolytics by trained paramedics can significantly
reduce time to treatment and should be considered in situations in which PCI within 90 min is not
possible, particularly in patients presenting within 3 h of symptom onset.
[Table 210-8.
Fibrinolytic Therapy for Stemi]
Regardless, most patients who undergo thrombolysis will ultimately require transfer to a PCI-capable
facility for elective angiography and PCI as necessary prior to discharge. PCI should be considered after
fibrinolytics if chest pain or ST-segment elevation persists ≥ 60 min after initiation of fibrinolytics or if pain
and ST-segment elevation recur, but only if PCI can be initiated < 90 min after onset of recurrence. If PCI
is unavailable, fibrinolytics can be repeated.
Characteristics and selection of fibrinolytic drugs are discussed elsewhere.
Complications
Electrical dysfunction occurs in > 90% of MI patients (see also p.
). Electrical dysfunction that
commonly causes mortality in the first 72 h includes tachycardia (from any focus) rapid enough to reduce
cardiac output and lower BP, Mobitz type II block (2nd degree) or complete (3rd degree) AV block,
ventricular tachycardia (VT), and ventricular fibrillation (VF). Asystole is uncommon, except as a terminal
manifestation of progressive LV failure and shock. Patients with disturbances of cardiac rhythm are
checked for hypoxia and electrolyte abnormalities, which can be causative or contributory.
Sinus node disturbances:
If the artery supplying the sinus node is affected, sinus node disturbances
can occur; they are more likely if there is a preexisting sinus node disorder (common among the elderly).
Sinus bradycardia, the most common sinus node disturbance, is usually not treated unless there is
hypotension or the heart rate is < 50 beats/min. A lower heart rate, if not extreme, means reduced cardiac
===PAGE:2273===
workload and possibly reduced infarct size. For bradycardia with hypotension (which may reduce
myocardial perfusion), atropine sulfate 0.5 to 1 mg IV is used; it can be repeated after several minutes if
response is inadequate. Several small doses are best because high doses may induce tachycardia.
Occasionally, a temporary transvenous pacemaker must be inserted.
Persistent sinus tachycardia is usually ominous, often reflecting LV failure and low cardiac output. Without
heart failure or another evident cause, this arrhythmia may respond to a
β
-blocker, given po or IV
depending on degree of urgency.
Atrial arrhythmias:
Atrial arrhythmias (atrial ectopic beats, atrial fibrillation [AF], and, less commonly,
atrial flutter) occur in about 10% of MI patients and may reflect LV failure or right atrial infarction.
Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia is uncommon and usually occurs in patients who have had previous
episodes of it. Atrial ectopy is usually benign but if frequency increases, causes, particularly heart failure,
are sought. Frequent atrial ectopic beats may respond to a
β
-blocker.
AF is usually transient if it occurs within the first 24 h. Risk factors include age > 70, heart failure,
previous history of MI, large anterior infarction, atrial infarction, pericarditis, hypokalemia,
hypomagnesemia, a chronic lung disorder, and hypoxia. Fibrinolytics reduce incidence. Recurrent
paroxysmal AF is a poor prognostic sign and increases risk of systemic emboli.
For AF, heparin is usually used because systemic emboli are a risk (. IV
β
-blockers (eg, atenolol 2.5 to 5.0 mg over 2 min to total dose of 10 mg in 10 to 15 min,
metoprolol 2 to 5 mg q 2 to 5 min to a total dose of 15 mg in 10 to 15 min) slow the ventricular rate. Heart
rate and BP are closely monitored. Treatment is withheld when ventricular rate decreases satisfactorily or
systolic BP is < 100 mm Hg. IV digoxin, which is not as effective as
β
-blockers, is used cautiously and
only in patients with AF and LV systolic dysfunction. Usually, digoxin takes at least 2 h to effectively slow
heart rate and may rarely aggravate ischemia in patients with recent ACS. For patients without evident LV
systolic dysfunction or conduction delay manifested by a wide QRS complex, IV verapamil or IV diltiazem
may be considered. Diltiazem may be given as an IV infusion to control heart rate for long periods.
If AF compromises circulatory status (eg, causing LV failure, hypotension, or chest pain), urgent electrical
cardioversion is done. If AF returns after cardioversion, IV amiodarone should be considered.
For atrial flutter, rate is controlled as for AF, but heparin is not required. Low-energy direct current (DC)
cardioversion will terminate atrial flutter.
Conduction defects:
Mobitz type I block (Wenckebach block, progressive prolongation of PR interval) is
relatively common with an inferior-diaphragmatic infarction; it is usually self-limited and rarely progresses
to higher grade block. Mobitz type II block (dropped beats) usually indicates massive anterior MI, as does
complete heart block with wide QRS complexes (atrial impulses do not reach the ventricle); both are
uncommon. Frequency of complete (3rd degree) AV block depends on site of infarction. Complete AV
block occurs in 5 to 10% of patients with inferior infarction and is usually transient. It occurs in < 5% with
uncomplicated anterior infarction but in up to 26% of those with right bundle branch block and left
posterior hemiblock.
Mobitz type I block usually does not warrant treatment. For true Mobitz type II block with dropped beats or
for AV block with slow, wide QRS complexes, temporary transvenous pacing is the treatment of choice.
External pacing can be used until a temporary transvenous pacemaker can be placed. Although
isoproterenol infusion may restore rhythm and rate temporarily, it is not used because it increases O
demand and risk of rhythm abnormalities. Atropine 0.5 mg IV q
3 to 5 min to a total dose of 2.5 mg may be
useful for narrow-complex AV block with a slow ventricular rate but is not recommended for new widecomplex AV block.
Ventricular arrhythmias:
These arrhythmias are common and may result from hypoxia, electrolyte
imbalance (hypokalemia, possibly hypomagnesemia), or sympathetic overactivity in ischemic cells
adjacent to infarcted tissue (which is not electrically active). Treatable causes of ventricular arrhythmias
are sought and corrected. Serum K should be kept above 4.0 mEq/L. IV KCl is recommended; usually, 10
mEq/h can be infused, but for severe hypokalemia (K < 2.5 mEq/L), 20 to 40 mEq/h can be infused
===PAGE:2274===
through a central venous line.
Ventricular ectopic beats, which are common after MI, do not warrant specific treatment.
Nonsustained VT (ie, < 30 sec) and even sustained slow VT (accelerated idioventricular rhythm) without
hemodynamic instability do not usually require treatment in the first 24 to 48 h. Polymorphic VT, sustained
(≥ 30 sec) monomorphic VT, or any VT with symptoms of instability (eg, heart failure, hypotension, chest
pain) is treated with synchronized cardioversion. VT without hemodynamic instability may be treated with
IV lidocaine, procainamide, or amiodarone. Some clinicians also treat complex ventricular arrhythmias with
Mg sulfate 2 g IV over 5 min whether or not serum Mg is low. VT may occur months after MI. Late VT is
more likely to occur in patients with transmural infarction and to be sustained.
VF occurs in 5 to 12% of patients during the first 24 h after MI, usually within 6 h. Late VF usually
indicates continued or recurrent myocardial ischemia and, when accompanied by hemodynamic
deterioration, is a poor prognostic sign. VF is treated with immediate unsynchronized cardioversion (see
p.
).
An IV
β
-blocker early in MI followed by continued oral
β
-blockers reduces the incidence of ventricular
arrhythmias (including VF) and mortality in patients who do not have heart failure or hypotension.
Prophylaxis with other drugs (eg, lidocaine) increases mortality risk and is not recommended.
After the acute phase, the presence of complex ventricular arrhythmias or nonsustained VT, especially
with significant LV systolic dysfunction, increases mortality risk. An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator
(ICD) should be considered. Programmed endocardial stimulation can help select the most effective
antiarrhythmics or determine the need for an ICD. Before treatment with an antiarrhythmic or ICD,
coronary angiography and other tests are done to look for recurrent myocardial ischemia, which may
require PCI or CABG.
Heart failure:
Patients with large infarctions (determined by ECG or serum markers) and those with
mechanical complications, hypertension, or diastolic dysfunction are more likely to develop heart failure.
Clinical findings depend on infarct size, elevation of LV filling pressure, and degree of reduction in cardiac
output. Dyspnea, inspiratory rales at the lung bases, and hypoxemia are common.
Treatment depends on severity. For mild cases, a loop diuretic (eg, furosemide 20 to 40 mg IV once/day
or bid) to reduce ventricular filling pressure is often sufficient. For severe cases, vasodilators (eg, IV
nitroglycerin) are often used to reduce preload and afterload; during treatment, pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure is often measured via right heart (Swan-Ganz) catheterization. ACE inhibitors are used
as long as systolic BP remains > 100 mm Hg. A short-acting ACE inhibitor given in low doses (eg,
captopril 3.125 to 6.25 mg po q 4 to 6 h, increasing doses as tolerated) is best for initial treatment. Once
the maximum dose is reached (maximum for captopril, 50 mg tid), a longer-acting ACE inhibitor (eg,
fosinopril, lisinopril, ramipril) is substituted for the long-term. If heart failure remains in New York Heart
Association class II or worse (see
Table 211-2
, an aldosterone inhibitor (eg, eplerenone, spironolactone) should be added. For
severe heart failure, an intraarterial counterpulsation balloon pump may provide temporary hemodynamic
support. When revascularization or surgical repair is not feasible, heart transplantation is considered.
Long-term LV or biventricular implantable assist devices may be used as a bridge to transplantation; if
transplantation is impossible, the LV assist device is occasionally used as permanent treatment.
Occasionally, use of such a device results in recovery and can be removed in 3 to 6 mo.
If heart failure causes hypoxemia, O
is given by nasal prongs (to maintain PaO
at about 100 mg Hg). It
may help oxygenate myocardium and limit the ischemic zone.
Papillary muscle disorders:
Functional papillary muscle insufficiency occurs in about 35% of patients
during the first few hours of infarction. Papillary muscle ischemia causes incomplete coaptation of the
mitral valve leaflets, which is transient in most patients. But in some patients, papillary muscle or free wall
scarring causes permanent mitral regurgitation. Functional papillary muscle insufficiency is characterized
by an apical late
systolic murmur and typically resolves without treatment.
===PAGE:2275===
Papillary muscle rupture occurs most often after an inferoposterior infarct due to right coronary artery
occlusion. It produces acute, severe mitral regurgitation. Papillary muscle rupture is characterized by the
sudden appearance of a loud apical holosystolic murmur and thrill, usually with pulmonary edema.
Occasionally, when severe regurgitation is silent but suspected clinically, echocardiography is done. Mitral
valve repair or replacement is effective.
Myocardial rupture:
Interventricular septum or free wall rupture occurs in 1% of patients with acute MI. It
causes 15% of hospital mortality.
Interventricular septum rupture, although rare, is 8 to 10 times more common than papillary muscle
rupture. Intraventricular septum rupture is characterized by the sudden appearance of a loud systolic
murmur and thrill medial to the apex along the left sternal border in the 3rd or 4th intercostal space,
accompanied by hypotension with or without signs of LV failure. Diagnosis may be confirmed using a
balloon-tipped catheter and comparing blood O
saturation or PO
of right atrial, RV, and pulmonary
artery samples. A significant increase in RV PO
is diagnostic, as is Doppler echocardiography, which
may demonstrate the actual shunt of blood across the ventricular septum. Treatment is surgery, which
should be delayed for up to 6 wk after MI so that infarcted myocardium can heal maximally; if
hemodynamic instability persists, earlier surgery is indicated despite a high mortality risk.
Free wall rupture increases in incidence with age and is more common among women. It is characterized
by sudden loss of arterial pressure with momentary persistence of sinus rhythm and often by signs of
cardiac tamponade. Surgery is rarely successful. Rupture of a free wall is almost always fatal.
Ventricular aneurysm:
A localized bulge in the ventricular wall, usually the LV wall, can occur at the site
of a large infarction. Ventricular aneurysms are common, especially with a large transmural infarct (usually
anterior). Aneurysms may develop in a few days, weeks, or months. They are unlikely to rupture but may
lead to recurrent ventricular arrhythmias, low cardiac output, and mural thrombosis with systemic
embolism. A ventricular aneurysm may be suspected when paradoxical precordial movements are seen or
felt. ECG shows persistent ST-segment elevation, and chest x-ray shows a characteristic bulge of the
cardiac shadow. Echocardiography is done to confirm the diagnosis and determine whether a thrombus is
present. Surgical excision may be indicated when LV failure or arrhythmia persists. Use of ACE inhibitors
during acute MI modifies LV remodeling and may reduce the incidence of aneurysm.
Pseudoaneurysm is incomplete rupture of the free LV wall; it is limited by the pericardium.
Pseudoaneurysms almost always contain a thrombus and often rupture completely. They are repaired
surgically.
Hypotension and cardiogenic shock:
Hypotension may be due to decreased ventricular filling or loss
of contractile force secondary to massive MI. Marked hypotension (eg, systolic BP < 90 mm Hg) with
tachycardia and symptoms of end-organ hypoperfusion (reduced urine output, mental confusion,
diaphoresis, cold extremities) is termed cardiogenic shock (see also p.
). Pulmonary congestion
develops rapidly in cardiogenic shock.
Decreased LV filling is most often caused by reduced venous return secondary to hypovolemia, especially
in patients receiving intensive loop diuretic therapy, but it may reflect RV infarction. Marked pulmonary
congestion suggests loss of LV contractile force (LV failure) as the cause. Treatment depends on the
cause. In some patients, determining the cause requires use of a pulmonary artery catheter to measure
intracardiac pressures. If pulmonary artery occlusion pressure is < 18 mm Hg, decreased filling, usually
due to hypovolemia, is likely; if pressure is > 18 mm Hg, LV failure is likely. For hypotension due to
hypovolemia, cautious fluid replacement with 0.9% saline is usually possible without left heart overload
(excessive rise in left atrial pressure). However, sometimes LV function is so compromised that adequate
fluid replacement sharply increases pulmonary artery occlusion pressure to levels associated with
pulmonary edema (> 25 mm Hg). If left atrial pressure is high, hypotension is probably due to LV failure,
and if diuretics are ineffective, inotropic therapy or circulatory support may be required.
In cardiogenic shock, an
α
- or
β
-agonist may be temporarily effective. Dopamine, a catecholamine with
α
and
β
1 effects, is given at 0.5 to 1
μ
g/kg/min, increased until response is satisfactory or dose is about 10
μ
g/kg/min. Higher doses induce vasoconstriction and atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. Dobutamine, a
β
-
===PAGE:2276===
agonist, may be given IV at 2.5 to 10
μ
g/kg/min or in higher doses. It often causes or exacerbates
hypotension; it is most effective when hypotension is secondary to
low cardiac output with increased
peripheral vascular resistance. Dopamine may be more effective than dobutamine when a vasopressor
effect is also required. In refractory cases, dobutamine and dopamine may be combined. An intraaortic
counterpulsation balloon pump can often temporarily support the patient. Definitive treatment for
postinfarction cardiogenic shock is revascularization by thrombolysis of the clot, angioplasty, or
emergency CABG. Revascularization usually greatly improves ventricular function. PCI or CABG may be
considered for persistent ischemia, refractory ventricular arrhythmia, hemodynamic instability, or shock if
coronary anatomy is suitable.
RV ischemia or infarction:
RV infarction rarely occurs in isolation; it usually accompanies inferior LV
infarction, and the first sign may be hypotension developing in a previously stable patient. Right-sided
ECG leads may show ST-segment changes. Volume loading with 1 to 2 L of 0.9% saline is often
effective. Dobutamine may help. Nitrates and diuretics are not used; they reduce preload (and hence
cardiac output), causing severe hypotension. Increased right-sided filling pressure should be maintained
by IV fluid infusion.
Recurrent ischemia:
Any chest pain that remains or recurs 12 to 24 h post-MI may represent recurrent
ischemia. Post-MI ischemic pain indicates that more myocardium is at risk of infarction. Usually, recurrent
ischemia can be identified by reversible ST-T changes on the ECG; BP may be elevated. However,
because recurrent ischemia may be silent (ECG changes without pain) in up to one third of patients,
serial ECGs are routinely obtained every 8 h for 1 day and then daily. Recurrent ischemia is treated
similarly to unstable angina. Sublingual or IV nitroglycerin is usually effective. Coronary angiography and
PCI or CABG should be considered to salvage ischemic myocardium.
Mural thrombosis:
Mural thrombosis occurs in about 20% of patients with acute MI. Systemic embolism
occurs in about 10% of patients with LV thrombosis; risk is highest in the first 10 days but persists at least
3 mo. Risk is highest (about 60%) for patients with large anterior infarctions (especially involving the distal
septum and apex), a dilated and diffusely hypokinetic LV, or chronic AF. Anticoagulants are given to
reduce risk of emboli. If not contraindicated, full-dose IV heparin followed by warfarin for 3 to 6 mo is
given to maintain INR between 2 and 3. Anticoagulants are continued indefinitely when a dilated diffusely
hypokinetic LV, LV aneurysm, or chronic AF is present. Aspirin may also be given indefinitely.
Pericarditis:
Pericarditis ( results from extension of myocardial necrosis through the wall to
the epicardium; it develops in about one third of patients with acute transmural MI. A friction rub usually
begins 24 to 96 h after MI onset. Earlier onset of the friction rub is unusual, although hemorrhagic
pericarditis occasionally complicates the early phase of MI. Acute tamponade is rare. Pericarditis is
diagnosed by ECG, which shows diffuse ST-segment elevation and sometimes PR-interval depression.
Echocardiography is frequently done, but results are usually normal. Occasionally, small pericardial
effusions and even unsuspected tamponade are detected. Aspirin or another NSAID usually relieves
symptoms. High doses or prolonged use of NSAIDs or corticosteroids may impair infarct healing and
should be avoided. Anticoagulation is not contraindicated in early peri-infarction pericarditis but is
contraindicated in later post-MI (Dressler's) syndrome.
Post-MI syndrome (Dressler's syndrome):
Post-MI syndrome develops in a few patients several days
to weeks or even months after acute MI; incidence appears to have decreased in recent years. It is
characterized by fever, pericarditis with a friction rub, pericardial effusion, pleurisy, pleural effusions,
pulmonary infiltrates, and joint pain. This syndrome is caused by an autoimmune reaction to material from
necrotic myocytes. It may recur. Differentiating post-MI syndrome from extension or recurrence of
infarction may be difficult. However, in post-MI syndrome, cardiac markers do not increase significantly,
and ECG changes are nonspecific. NSAIDs are usually effective, but the syndrome can recur several
times. In severe cases, a short, intensive course of another NSAID or a corticosteroid may be necessary.
High doses of an NSAID or a corticosteroid are not used for more than a few days because they may
interfere with early ventricular healing after an acute MI.
Rehabilitation and Postdischarge Treatment
• Functional evaluation
===PAGE:2277===
• Changes in lifestyle: Regular exercise, diet modification, weight loss, smoking cessation
• Drugs: Continuation of aspirin,
β
-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and statins
Functional evaluation:
Patients who did not have coronary angiography during admission, have no
high-risk features (eg, heart failure, recurrent angina, VT or VF after 24 h,
[Table 210-9.
Functional Evaluation After MI]
mechanical complications such as new murmurs, shock), and have an ejection fraction > 40% whether or
not they received fibrinolytics usually should have stress testing of some sort before or shortly after
discharge (see
Table 210-9
).
Activity:
Physical activity is gradually increased during the first 3 to 6 wk after discharge. Resumption of
sexual activity, often of great concern to the patient, and other moderate physical activities may be
encouraged. If good cardiac function is maintained 6 wk after acute MI, most patients can return to all
their normal activities. A regular exercise program consistent with lifestyle, age, and cardiac status
reduces risk of ischemic events and enhances general well-being.
Risk factors:
The acute illness and treatment of ACS should be used to strongly motivate the patient to
modify risk factors. Evaluating the patient's physical and emotional status and discussing them with the
patient, advising about lifestyle (eg, smoking, diet, work and play habits, exercise), and aggressively
managing risk factors may improve prognosis.
Drugs:
Several drugs clearly reduce mortality risk post-MI and are used unless contraindicated or not
tolerated.
Aspirin reduces mortality and reinfarction rates in post-MI patients by 15 to 30%. Enteric-coated aspirin 81
mg once/day is recommended long-term. Data suggest that warfarin with or without aspirin reduces
mortality and reinfarction rates.
β
-Blockers are considered standard therapy. Most available
β
-blockers (eg, acebutolol, atenolol,
metoprolol, propranolol, timolol) reduce post-MI mortality rate by about 25% for at least 7 yr.
ACE inhibitors are given to all post-MI patients. These drugs may provide long-term cardioprotection by
improving endothelial function. If an ACE inhibitor is not tolerated because of cough or rash (but not
angioedema or renal dysfunction), an angiotensin II receptor blocker may be substituted.
Statins are prescribed. Reducing cholesterol levels after MI reduces rates of recurrent ischemic events
and mortality in patients with elevated or normal cholesterol levels. Statins appear to benefit post-MI
patients regardless of their initial cholesterol level. Post-MI patients whose primary problem is a low HDL
level or an elevated triglyceride level may benefit from a fibrate, but evidence of benefit is less clear. A
lipid-lowering drug should be continued indefinitely, unless significant adverse effects occur, and dose
should be increased to achieve an LDL level of 70 to 80 mg/dL (1.81 to 2.07 mmol/L).
===PAGE:2278===
Chapter 211. Heart Failure
Introduction
(Congestive Heart Failure) (For heart failure in children, see p.
.)
Heart failure (HF) is a syndrome of ventricular dysfunction. Left ventricular failure causes
shortness of breath and fatigue, and right ventricular failure causes peripheral and abdominal
fluid accumulation; the ventricles can be involved together or separately. Diagnosis is initially
clinical, supported by chest x-ray, echocardiography, and levels of plasma natriuretic peptides.
Treatment includes diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers,
β
-blockers,
aldosterone antagonists, digitalis, specialized implantable pacemakers, and correction of the
underlying disorder.
HF affects about 5 million people in the US; > 500,000 new cases occur each year.
Physiology
Cardiac contractility (force and velocity of contraction), ventricular performance, and myocardial O
requirements are determined by preload, afterload, substrate availability (eg, O
, fatty acids, glucose),
heart rate and
rhythm, and amount of viable myocardium. Cardiac output (CO) is the product of stroke
volume and heart rate; it is also affected by venous return, peripheral vascular tone, and neurohumoral
factors.
Preload is the loading condition of the heart at the end of its relaxation phase (diastole) just before
contraction (systole). Preload represents the degree of end-diastolic fiber stretch and end-diastolic
volume, which is influenced by ventricular diastolic pressure and the composition of the myocardial wall.
Typically, left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic pressure, especially if higher than normal, is a reasonable
measure of preload. LV dilation, hypertrophy, and changes in myocardial distensibility (compliance) modify
preload.
Afterload is the force resisting myocardial fiber contraction at the start of systole; it is determined by
chamber pressure, volume, and wall thickness at the time the aortic valve opens. Clinically, systemic
systolic BP at or shortly after the aortic valve opens represents peak systolic wall stress and
approximates afterload.
The Frank-Starling principle describes the relationship between preload and cardiac performance. It
states that, normally, systolic contractile performance (represented by stroke volume or CO) is
proportional to preload within the normal physiologic range (see
Fig. 211-1
). Contractility is difficult to measure without cardiac catheterization but is reasonably reflected
by the ejection fraction (EF), which is the percentage of end-diastolic volume ejected with each
contraction (LV stroke volume/end-diastolic volume); contractility can generally be adequately assessed
noninvasively with echocardiography.
Cardiac reserve is the ability of the heart to increase its performance above resting levels in response to
emotional or physical stress; body O
consumption may increase from 250 to ≥ 1500 mL/min during
maximal exertion. Mechanisms include increasing heart rate, systolic and diastolic volume, stroke volume,
and tissue extraction of O
(the difference between O
content in arterial blood and mixed venous or
pulmonary artery blood). In well-trained young adults during maximal exercise, heart rate may increase
from 55 to 70 beats/min at rest to 180 beats/min, and CO may increase from 6 to ≥ 25 L/min. At rest,
arterial blood contains about 18 mL O
/dL of blood, and mixed venous or pulmonary artery blood contains
about 14 mL/dL. O
extraction is thus about 4 mL/dL, but when demand is increased, it may increase to
12 to 14 mL/dL. This mechanism also helps compensate for reduced tissue blood flow in HF.
[Fig. 211-1.
Frank-Starling principle.]
===PAGE:2279===
Pathophysiology
In HF, the heart may not provide tissues with adequate blood for metabolic needs, and cardiac-related
elevation of pulmonary or systemic venous pressures may result in organ congestion. This condition can
result from abnormalities of systolic or diastolic function or, commonly, both. Although a primary
abnormality may be a change in myocyte function, there are also changes in collagen turnover of the
extracellular matrix. Cardiac structural defects (eg, congenital defects, valvular disorders), rhythm
abnormalities (including persistently high heart rate), and high metabolic demands (eg, from
thyrotoxicosis) also can cause HF.
Systolic dysfunction:
In systolic dysfunction, the ventricle contracts poorly and empties inadequately,
leading initially to increased diastolic volume and pressure and decreased EF. Many defects in energy
utilization, energy supply, electrophysiologic functions, and contractile element interaction occur, with
abnormalities in intracellular Ca modulation and cAMP production.
Predominant systolic dysfunction is common in HF due to MI, myocarditis, and dilated cardiomyopathy.
Systolic dysfunction may affect primarily the LV or the right ventricle (RV); LV failure often leads to RV
failure.
Diastolic dysfunction:
In diastolic dysfunction (also called HF with preserved systolic function or HF
with preserved/normal EF), ventricular filling is impaired, resulting in reduced ventricular end-diastolic
volume, increased end-diastolic pressure, or both. Contractility and hence EF remain normal; EF may
even increase as the poorly filled LV empties more completely to maintain CO. Markedly reduced LV filling
can cause low CO and systemic symptoms. Elevated left atrial pressures can cause pulmonary
hypertension and pulmonary congestion.
Diastolic dysfunction usually results from impaired ventricular relaxation (an active process), increased
ventricular stiffness, valvular disease, or constrictive pericarditis. Acute myocardial ischemia is also a
cause of diastolic dysfunction. Resistance to filling increases with age, probably reflecting myocyte loss
and increased interstitial collagen deposition; thus, diastolic dysfunction is particularly common among the
elderly. Diastolic dysfunction predominates in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, disorders with ventricular
hypertrophy (eg, hypertension, significant aortic stenosis), and amyloid infiltration of the myocardium. LV
filling and function may also be impaired if marked increases in RV pressure shift the interventricular
septum to the left.
Diastolic dysfunction is increasingly being recognized as a cause of HF. Estimates vary, but about 50% of
patients with HF have diastolic dysfunction and a normal EF; the prevalence increases with age.
LV failure:
In failure due to LV dysfunction, CO decreases and pulmonary venous pressure increases.
When pulmonary capillary pressure exceeds the oncotic pressure of plasma proteins (about 24 mm Hg),
fluid extravasates from the capillaries into the interstitial space and alveoli, reducing pulmonary
compliance and increasing the work of breathing. Lymphatic drainage increases but cannot compensate
for the increase in pulmonary fluid. Marked fluid accumulation in alveoli (pulmonary edema) significantly
alters ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) relationships: Deoxygenated pulmonary arterial blood passes through
poorly ventilated alveoli, decreasing systemic arterial oxygenation (PaO
) and causing dyspnea.
However, dyspnea may occur before V/Q abnormalities, probably because of elevated pulmonary venous
pressure and increased work of breathing; the precise mechanism is unclear. In severe or chronic LV
failure, pleural effusions characteristically develop in the right hemithorax and later bilaterally, further
aggravating dyspnea. Minute ventilation increases; thus, PaCO
decreases and blood pH increases
(respiratory alkalosis). Marked interstitial edema of the small airways may interfere with ventilation,
elevating PaCO
—a sign of impending respiratory failure.
RV failure:
In failure due to RV dysfunction, systemic venous pressure increases, causing fluid
extravasation and consequent edema, primarily in dependent tissues (feet and ankles of ambulatory
patients) and abdominal viscera. The liver is affected most, but the stomach and intestine also become
congested; fluid accumulation in the peritoneal cavity (ascites) can occur. RV failure commonly causes
moderate hepatic dysfunction, with usually modest increases in conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin,
===PAGE:2280===
PT, and hepatic enzymes (eg, alkaline phosphatase, AST, ALT). The impaired liver breaks down less
aldosterone, further contributing to fluid accumulation. Chronic venous congestion in the viscera can
cause anorexia, malabsorption of nutrients and drugs, protein-losing enteropathy (characterized by
diarrhea and marked hypoalbuminemia), chronic GI blood loss, and rarely ischemic bowel infarction.
Cardiac response:
If ventricular function is impaired, a higher preload is required to maintain CO. As a
result, the ventricles are remodeled over time: The LV becomes less ovoid and more spherical, dilates,
and hypertrophies; the RV dilates and may hypertrophy. Initially compensatory, these changes eventually
increase diastolic stiffness and wall tension (ie, diastolic dysfunction develops), compromising cardiac
performance, especially during physical stress. Increased wall stress raises O
demand and accelerates
apoptosis (programmed cell death) of myocardial cells. Dilation of the ventricles can also cause mitral or
tricuspid valve regurgitation with further increases in end-diastolic volumes.
Hemodynamic responses:
With reduced CO, tissue O
delivery is maintained by increasing O
extraction and sometimes shifting the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (see
Fig. 189-4
 to the right to favor O
release.
Reduced CO with lower systemic BP activates arterial baroreflexes, increasing sympathetic tone and
decreasing parasympathetic tone. As a result, heart rate and myocardial contractility increase, arterioles
in selected vascular beds constrict, venoconstriction occurs, and Na and water are retained. These
changes compensate for reduced ventricular
performance and help maintain hemodynamic homeostasis
in the early stages of HF. However, these compensatory changes increase cardiac work, preload, and
afterload; reduce coronary and renal perfusion; cause fluid accumulation resulting in congestion; increase
K excretion; and may cause myocyte necrosis and arrhythmias.
Renal responses:
As cardiac function deteriorates, renal blood flow and GFR decrease, and blood flow
within the kidneys is redistributed. The filtration fraction and filtered Na decrease, but tubular resorption
increases, leading to Na and water retention. Blood flow is further redistributed away from the kidneys
during exercise, but renal blood flow improves during rest, possibly contributing to nocturia.
Decreased perfusion of the kidneys (and possibly decreased arterial systolic stretch secondary to
declining ventricular function) activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (see also p.
),
increasing Na and water retention and renal and peripheral vascular tone. These effects are amplified by
the intense sympathetic activation accompanying HF.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) system causes a cascade of
potentially deleterious long-term effects. Angiotensin II worsens HF by causing vasoconstriction, including
efferent renal vasoconstriction, and by increasing aldosterone production, which not only enhances Na
reabsorption in the distal nephron but also causes myocardial and vascular collagen deposition and
fibrosis. Angiotensin II increases norepinephrine release, stimulates release of ADH, and triggers
apoptosis. Angiotensin II may be involved in vascular and myocardial hypertrophy, thus contributing to the
remodeling of the heart and peripheral vasculature, potentially worsening HF. Aldosterone can be
synthesized in the heart and vasculature independently of angiotensin II (perhaps mediated by
corticotropin, nitric oxide, free radicals, and other stimuli) and may have deleterious effects in these
organs.
HF that causes progressive renal dysfunction (including that renal dysfunction caused by drugs used to
treat HF) contributes to worsening HF and has been termed the cardiorenal syndrome.
Neurohumoral responses:
In conditions of stress, neurohumoral responses help increase heart
function and maintain BP and organ perfusion, but chronic activation of these responses is detrimental to
the normal balance between myocardial-stimulating and vasoconstricting hormones and between
myocardial-relaxing and vasodilating hormones.
The heart contains many neurohumoral receptors (
α
,
β
,
β
,
β
, angiotensin II type 1 [AT] and type 2
[AT], muscarinic, endothelin, serotonin, adenosine, cytokine); the role of these receptors is not yet fully
defined. In patients with HF,
β
receptors (which constitute 70% of cardiac
β
receptors) are down-
===PAGE:2281===
regulated, probably in response to intense sympathetic activation. The result of down-regulation is
impaired myocyte contractility and increased heart rate.
Plasma norepinephrine levels are increased, largely reflecting sympathetic nerve stimulation because
plasma epinephrine levels are not increased. Detrimental effects include vasoconstriction with increased
preload and afterload, direct myocardial damage including apoptosis, reduced renal blood flow, and
activation of other neurohumoral systems, including the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-ADH system.
ADH is released in response to a fall in BP via various neurohormonal stimuli. Increased ADH decreases
renal excretion of free water, possibly contributing to hyponatremia in HF. ADH levels in HF with normal
BP vary.
Atrial natriuretic peptide is released in response to increased atrial volume and pressure; brain (B-type)
natriuretic peptide (BNP) is released from the ventricle in response to ventricular stretching. These
peptides enhance renal excretion of Na, but in patients with HF, the effect is blunted by decreased renal
perfusion pressure, receptor downregulation, and perhaps enhanced enzymatic degradation.
Because endothelial dysfunction occurs in HF, fewer endogenous vasodilators (eg, nitric oxide,
prostaglandins) are produced, and more endogenous vasoconstrictors (eg, endothelin) are produced,
thus increasing afterload.
The failing heart and other organs produce tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-
α
. This cytokine increases
catabolism and is possibly responsible for cardiac cachexia (loss of lean tissue ≥ 10%), which may
accompany severely symptomatic HF, and for other detrimental changes. The failing heart also
undergoes metabolic changes with increased free fatty acid utilization and decreased glucose utilization;
these changes may become therapeutic targets.
Changes with aging:
Age-related changes in the heart and cardiovascular system lower the threshold
for expression of HF. Interstitial collagen within the myocardium increases, the myocardium stiffens, and
myocardial relaxation is prolonged. These changes lead to a significant reduction in diastolic LV
function,
even in healthy elderly people. Modest decline in systolic function also occurs with aging. An age-related
decrease in myocardial and vascular responsiveness to
β
-adrenergic stimulation further impairs the ability
of the cardiovascular system to respond to increased work demands.
As a result of these changes, peak exercise capacity decreases significantly (about 8%/decade after age
30), and CO at peak exercise decreases more modestly. This decline can be slowed by regular physical
exercise. Thus, elderly patients are more prone than are younger ones to develop HF symptoms in
response to the stress of systemic disorders or relatively modest cardiovascular insults. Stressors include
infections (particularly pneumonia), hyperthyroidism, anemia, hypertension, myocardial ischemia, hypoxia,
hyperthermia, renal failure, perioperative IV fluid loads, nonadherence to drug regimens or to low-salt
diets, and use of certain drugs (including NSAIDs,
β
-blockers, and certain Ca channel blockers).
Etiology
Both cardiac and systemic factors can impair cardiac performance and cause or aggravate HF (see
Table 211-1
).
Classification
The traditional distinction of left and right ventricular failure is somewhat misleading because the heart is
an integrated pump, and changes in one chamber ultimately affect the whole heart. However, these terms
indicate the major site of pathology leading to HF and can be useful for initial evaluation and treatment.
Other common descriptive terms include acute or chronic; congestive; high output or low output; systolic
or diastolic; dilated or nondilated; and ischemic, hypertensive, or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.
LV failure
characteristically develops in ischemic heart disease, hypertension, mitral or aortic valvular
regurgitation, aortic stenosis, most forms of cardiomyopathy, and congenital heart disorders (eg,
ventricular septal defect or patent ductus arteriosus with large shunts).
===PAGE:2282===
RV failure
is most commonly caused by previous LV failure (which increases pulmonary venous pressure
and leads to pulmonary arterial hypertension, thus overloading the RV) or by a severe lung disorder
(when it is called cor pulmonale—. Other causes are multiple pulmonary emboli, RV
infarction, primary pulmonary hypertension, tricuspid regurgitation or stenosis, mitral
[Table 211-1.
Causes of Heart Failure]
stenosis, pulmonary artery or valve stenosis, pulmonary venous occlusive disease, or congenital
disorders such as Ebstein's anomaly or Eisenmenger's syndrome. Some conditions mimic RV failure,
except cardiac function may be normal; they include volume overload and increased systemic venous
pressure in polycythemia or overtransfusion, acute renal failure with retention of Na and water,
obstruction of either vena cava, and hypoproteinemia from any cause resulting in low plasma oncotic
pressure and peripheral edema.
Biventricular failure
results from disorders that affect the whole myocardium (eg, viral myocarditis,
amyloidosis, Chagas' disease) or long-standing LV failure causing RV failure.
High-output HF
results from a persistently high CO, which may eventually result in an inability of a
normal heart to maintain adequate output. Conditions that may increase CO include severe anemia,
beriberi, thyrotoxicosis, advanced Paget's disease, arteriovenous fistula, and persistent tachycardia. CO
is high in various forms of cirrhosis, but much of the observed fluid retention is due to hepatic
mechanisms.
Cardiomyopathy
is a general term reflecting disease of the myocardium. Most commonly, the term refers
to a primary disorder of the ventricular myocardium that is not caused by congenital anatomic defects;
valvular, systemic, or pulmonary vascular disorders; isolated pericardial, nodal, or conduction system
disorders; or epicardial coronary artery disease (CAD). The term is sometimes used to reflect etiology
(eg, ischemic vs hypertensive cardiomyopathy). Cardiomyopathy does not always lead to symptomatic
HF. It is often idiopathic and is classified as dilated congestive, hypertrophic, infiltrative-restrictive, or
apical-ballooning cardiomyopathy.
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations differ depending on the extent to which the LV and RV are initially affected. Clinical
severity varies significantly and is usually classified according to the New York Heart Association system
(see
Table 211-2
); the examples of ordinary activity may be modified for elderly, debilitated patients. Severe LV
failure may cause pulmonary edema ( or cardiogenic shock (.
History:
In LV failure, the most common symptoms are dyspnea, reflecting pulmonary congestion, and
fatigue, reflecting low CO. Dyspnea usually occurs during exertion and is relieved by rest. As HF
worsens, dyspnea can occur during rest and at night, sometimes causing nocturnal cough. Dyspnea
occurring immediately or soon after lying flat and relieved promptly by sitting up (orthopnea) is common as
HF advances. In paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND), dyspnea awakens patients several hours after
they lie down and is relieved only after they sit up for 15 to 20 min. In severe HF, periodic cycling of
breathing (Cheyne-Stokes respiration——a brief period of increased breathing [hyperpnea] followed by a brief period of no breathing
[apnea]—can occur during the day or night); the sudden hyperpneic phase may awaken the patient from
sleep. This breathing differs from PND in that the hyperpneic phase is short, lasting only a few seconds
and resolving in < 1 min. PND is associated with pulmonary congestion, and Cheyne-Stokes respiration
with low CO. Sleep-related breathing disorders, such as sleep apnea (, are common in HF
and may aggravate HF. Severely reduced cerebral blood flow and hypoxemia can cause chronic irritability
and impair mental performance.
In RV failure, the most common symptoms are ankle swelling and fatigue. Sometimes patients feel a
sensation of fullness in the abdomen or neck. Hepatic congestion can cause right upper quadrant
abdominal discomfort, and stomach and intestinal congestion can cause anorexia and abdominal bloating.
===PAGE:2283===
Less specific HF symptoms include cool peripheries, postural light-headedness, nocturia, and decreased
daytime micturition. Skeletal muscle wasting can occur in severe biventricular failure and may reflect
some disuse but also increased catabolism associated with increased cytokine production. Significant
weight loss (cardiac cachexia) is an ominous sign associated with high mortality.
In the elderly, presenting complaints may be atypical, such as confusion, delirium, falls, sudden functional
decline, nocturnal urinary incontinence, or sleep disturbance. Coexisting cognitive impairment and
depression may also influence assessment and therapeutic interventions and may be worsened by the
HF.
Examination:
General examination may detect signs of systemic disorders that cause or aggravate HF
(eg, anemia, hyperthyroidism, alcoholism, hemochromatosis).
In LV failure, tachycardia and tachypnea may occur. Patients with severe LV failure may appear visibly
dyspneic or cyanotic, hypotensive, and confused or agitated because of hypoxia and poor cerebral
perfusion. Some of these less specific symptoms (eg, confusion) are more common in the elderly.
Central cyanosis (affecting all of the body, including warm areas such as the tongue and mucous
membranes) reflects severe hypoxemia.
[Table 211-2.
New York Heart Association (Nyha) Classification of Heart Failure]
Peripheral cyanosis of the lips, fingers, and toes reflects low blood flow with increased O
extraction. If
vigorous massage improves nail bed color, cyanosis may be peripheral; increasing local blood flow does
not improve color if cyanosis is central.
Cardiac findings in LV systolic dysfunction include a diffuse, sustained, and laterally displaced apical
impulse; audible and occasionally palpable 3rd (S
) and 4th (S
) heart sounds, and an accentuated
pulmonic component (P
) of the 2nd heart sound (S
). A pansystolic murmur of mitral regurgitation at the
apex may occur. Pulmonary findings include inspiratory basilar crackles that do not clear with coughing
and, if pleural effusion is present, dullness to percussion and diminished breath sounds at lung bases.
Signs of RV failure include nontender peripheral pitting edema (digital pressure leaves visible and
palpable imprints, sometimes quite deep) in the feet and ankles; an enlarged and sometimes pulsatile
liver palpable below the right costal margin; abdominal swelling and ascites; and visible elevation of the
jugular venous pressure, sometimes with large
a
or
v
waves that are visible even when the patient is
seated or standing (see
Fig. 206-1
. In severe cases, peripheral edema can extend to the thighs or even the sacrum,
scrotum, lower abdominal wall, and occasionally even higher. Severe edema in multiple areas is termed
anasarca. Edema may be asymmetric if patients lie predominantly on one side.
With hepatic congestion, the liver may be palpably enlarged or tender, and hepatojugular or abdominaljugular reflux may be detected (. Precordial palpation may detect the left parasternal lift of RV enlargement, and auscultation may
detect the murmur of tricuspid regurgitation or the RV
S
along the left sternal border; both findings are
augmented upon inspiration.
Diagnosis
• Sometimes only clinical evaluation
• Chest x-ray
• Echocardiography
• Sometimes BNP or N-terminal-proBNP (NT-proBNP) levels
===PAGE:2284===
• ECG and other tests for etiology as needed
Clinical findings (eg, exertional dyspnea or fatigue, orthopnea, edema, tachycardia, pulmonary crackles,
S
, jugular venous distention) suggest HF but are not apparent early. Similar symptoms may result from
COPD or recurrent pneumonia or may be erroneously attributed to obesity or old age. Suspicion for HF
should be high in patients with a history of MI, hypertension, or valvular disorders or murmurs and should
be moderate in any elderly or diabetic patient.
Chest x-ray, ECG, and an objective test of cardiac function, typically echocardiography, should be done.
Blood tests, except for BNP levels, are not used for diagnosis but are useful for identifying cause and
systemic effects.
Chest x-ray:
Chest x-ray findings suggesting HF include an enlarged cardiac silhouette, pleural effusion,
fluid in the major fissure, and horizontal lines in the periphery of lower posterior lung fields (Kerley B
lines). These findings reflect chronic elevation of left atrial pressure and chronic thickening of the
intralobular septa due to edema. Upper lobe pulmonary venous congestion and interstitial or alveolar
edema may also be present. Careful examination of the cardiac silhouette on a lateral projection can
identify specific ventricular and atrial chamber enlargement. The x-ray may also suggest alternative
diagnoses (eg, COPD, pneumonia, interstitial pulmonary fibrosis, lung cancer).
ECG:
ECG findings are not diagnostic, but an abnormal ECG, especially showing previous MI, LV
hypertrophy, left bundle branch block, or tachyarrhythmia (eg, rapid atrial fibrillation), increases suspicion
for HF and may help identify the cause. An entirely normal ECG is uncommon in chronic HF.
Imaging:
Echocardiography can help evaluate chamber dimensions, valve function, EF, wall motion
abnormalities, LV hypertrophy, and pericardial effusion. Intracardiac thrombi, tumors, and calcifications
within the heart valves, mitral annulus, and aortic wall abnormalities can be detected. Localized or
segmental wall motion abnormalities strongly suggest underlying CAD but can also be present with
patchy myocarditis. Doppler or color Doppler echocardiography accurately detects valvular disorders and
shunts. Doppler studies of mitral and pulmonary venous inflow often help identify and quantify LV diastolic
dysfunction; tissue Doppler imaging is more accurate. Measuring LVEF can distinguish between
predominant diastolic dysfunction (EF > 0.50) and systolic dysfunction (EF < 0.40). It is important to reemphasize that HF can occur with a normal LVEF. Three-dimensional echocardiography may become
important but currently is available only in specialized centers.
Radionuclide imaging also can help assess systolic and diastolic function, previous MI, and inducible
ischemia or myocardial hibernation. Cardiac MRI provides accurate images of cardiac structures and is
becoming more widely available. In many centers, multimode imaging (eg, stress MIBI [thallium and
sestamibi stress tests] plus CT angiography) is becoming common, although there is growing concern
about the radiation dose with CT angiography.
Blood tests:
Serum BNP levels are high in HF; this finding may help when clinical findings are unclear or
other diagnoses (eg, COPD) need to be excluded. It may be particularly useful for patients with a history
of both pulmonary and cardiac disorders. NT-proBNP, an inactive moiety created when proBNP is
cleaved, can be used similarly.
Recommended blood tests include CBC, creatinine, BUN, electrolytes (including Mg and Ca), glucose,
albumin, and liver function tests. Thyroid function tests are recommended for patients with atrial fibrillation
and for selected, especially elderly, patients.
Other tests:
Coronary angiography is indicated when CAD is suspected or the etiology of HF is
uncertain. Cardiac catheterization with intracardiac pressure measurements may be helpful in the
diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathies and constrictive pericarditis.
Endocardial biopsy is sometimes done when an infiltrative cardiomyopathy is strongly suspected but
cannot be confirmed with noninvasive imaging (eg, cardiac MRI).
===PAGE:2285===
Prognosis
Generally, patients with HF have a poor prognosis unless the cause is correctable. Mortality rate at 1 yr
from first hospitalization for HF is about 30%. In chronic HF, mortality depends on severity of symptoms
and ventricular dysfunction and can range from 10 to 40%/yr. Specific factors that suggest a poor
prognosis include hypotension, low EF, presence of
CAD, troponin release, elevation of BUN, reduced
GFR, hyponatremia, and poor functional capacity (eg, as tested by a 6-min walk test).
HF usually involves gradual deterioration, interrupted by bouts of severe decompensation, and ultimately
death, although the time course is being lengthened with modern therapies. However, death can also be
sudden and unexpected, without prior worsening of symptoms.
End-of-life care:
All patients and family members should be taught about disease progression. For some
patients, improving quality of life is as important as increasing quantity of life. Thus, it is important to
determine patients' wishes about resuscitation (eg, endotracheal intubation, CPR) if their condition
deteriorates, especially when HF is already severe. All patients should be reassured that symptoms will
be relieved, and they should be encouraged to seek medical attention early if their symptoms change
significantly. Involvement of pharmacists, nurses, social workers, and clergy, who may be part of an
interdisciplinary team or disease management program already in place, is particularly important in endof-life care.
Treatment
• Diet and lifestyle changes
• Treatment of cause
• Drugs (numerous classes)
• Sometimes device therapy (eg, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, biventricular pacing)
• Multidisciplinary care
Immediate inpatient treatment is required for patients with acute or worsening HF due to certain disorders
(eg, acute MI, atrial fibrillation with a very rapid ventricular rate, severe hypertension, acute valvular
regurgitation), as well as for patients with pulmonary edema (, severe symptoms, new-onset
HF, or HF unresponsive to outpatient treatment. Patients with mild exacerbations of previously diagnosed
HF can be treated at home.
The primary goal is to diagnose and to correct or treat the disorder that led to HF.
Short-term goals include relieving symptoms; improving hemodynamics; avoiding hypokalemia, renal
dysfunction, and symptomatic hypotension; and correcting neurohumoral activation.
Long-term goals include correcting hypertension, preventing MI and atherosclerosis, improving cardiac
function, reducing hospitalizations, and improving survival and quality of life. Treatment involves dietary
and lifestyle changes, drugs (, devices, and sometimes percutaneous coronary interventions
or surgery.
Treatment is tailored to the patient, considering causes, symptoms, and response to drugs, including
adverse effects. Treatment of systolic and diastolic dysfunction has become more similar, although there
are more evidence-based therapies for systolic HF.
General management:
General measures, especially patient and caregiver education and diet and
lifestyle modifications, are important for all HF patients.
• Education
===PAGE:2286===
• Na restriction
• Appropriate weight and fitness levels
• Correction of underlying conditions
Patient and caregiver education are critical to long-term success. The patient and family should be
involved in treatment choices. They should be taught the importance of drug adherence, warning signs of
decompensation, and how to link cause with effect (eg, increased salt in the diet with weight gain or
symptoms).
Many centers (eg, specialized outpatient clinics) have integrated health care practitioners from different
disciplines (eg, HF nurses, pharmacists, social workers, rehabilitation specialists) into multidisciplinary
teams or outpatient HF management programs. These approaches can improve outcomes and reduce
hospitalizations and are most effective in the sickest patients.
Dietary Na restriction helps limit fluid retention. All patients should eliminate salt in cooking and at the
table and avoid salted foods; the most severely ill should limit Na to < 2 g/day by consuming only low-Na
foods. Monitoring daily morning weight helps detect Na and water accumulation early. If weight increases
> 2 kg over a few days, patients may be able to adjust their diuretic dose themselves, but if weight gain
continues or symptoms occur, patients should seek medical attention. Intensive case management,
particularly by monitoring drug adherence and frequency of unscheduled visits to the physician or
emergency department and hospitalizations, can identify when intervention is needed. Specialized HF
nurses are valuable in education, follow-up, and dosage adjustment according to predefined protocols.
Patients with atherosclerosis or diabetes should strictly follow a diet appropriate for their disorder. Obesity
may cause and always aggravates the symptoms of HF; patients should attain a body mass index (BMI)
of 21 to 25.
Regular light activity (eg, walking), tailored to symptoms, is generally encouraged.
Activity prevents
skeletal muscle deconditioning, which worsens functional status; whether this measure improves survival
is under study. Rest is appropriate during acute exacerbations. The role of formal exercise rehabilitation
programs is being studied; initial results appear favorable.
If hypertension, severe anemia, hemochromatosis, uncontrolled diabetes, thyrotoxicosis, beriberi,
alcoholism, Chagas' disease, or toxoplasmosis is successfully treated, patients may dramatically improve.
Significant myocardial ischemia should be treated aggressively; treatment may include revascularization
by percutaneous coronary intervention ( or bypass surgery (. Management of
extensive ventricular infiltration (eg, in amyloidosis) remains unsatisfactory.
Arrhythmias (see also p.
):
It is important to identify and treat the cause of an arrhythmia.
• Electrolytes are normalized.
• Atrial and ventricular rate are controlled.
• Sometimes antiarrhythmic drugs are given.
Sinus tachycardia, a common compensatory change in HF, usually subsides when HF treatment is
effective. If it does not, associated causes (eg, hyperthyroidism, pulmonary emboli, fever, anemia) should
be sought. If it persists despite correction of causes, a
β
-blocker, given in gradually increasing doses,
should be considered.
Atrial fibrillation with an uncontrolled ventricular rate must be treated; the target resting ventricular rate is
typically < 80 beats/min.
β
-Blockers are the treatment of choice, although rate-limiting Ca channel
blockers may be used cautiously if systolic function is preserved. Adding digoxin or low-dose amiodarone
may help some patients. Routine conversion to and maintenance of sinus rhythm has not been shown to
be superior to rate control alone in a recent large clinical trial. If rapid atrial fibrillation does not respond to
===PAGE:2287===
drugs, permanent pacemaker insertion with complete or partial ablation of the atrioventricular node may
be considered in selected patients.
Isolated ventricular premature beats, which are common in HF, do not require specific treatment.
However, optimization of HF treatments and correction of electrolyte abnormalities (especially K and Mg)
reduce the risk of ventricular arrhythmias. Sustained ventricular tachycardia that persists despite
correction of cause (eg, low K or Mg, ischemia) and optimal medical treatment of HF may require an
antiarrhythmic drug. Amiodarone and
β
-blockers are the drugs of choice because other antiarrhythmics
have adverse proarrhythmic effects when LV systolic dysfunction is present. Because amiodarone
increases digoxin levels, the digoxin dose should be decreased by half. Because long-term use of
amiodarone can cause adverse effects, a low-dose (200 to 300 mg po once/day) is used when possible;
blood tests for liver function and thyroid-stimulating hormone are done every 6 mo, and if chest x-ray is
abnormal or dyspnea worsens significantly, chest x-ray and pulmonary function tests are done yearly to
check for pulmonary fibrosis. For sustained ventricular arrhythmias, amiodarone may be required; to
reduce risk of sudden death, a loading dose of 400 to 800 mg po bid is given for 1 to 3 wk until rhythm
control is adequate, then dose is decreased over 1 mo to a maintenance dose of 400 mg po once/day.
Device therapy:
Use of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) or biventricular pacing is
appropriate for some patients.
An ICD is recommended for patients with an otherwise good life expectancy if they have symptomatic
sustained ventricular tachycardia (especially if it causes syncope), ventricular fibrillation, or an LVEF
persistently < 0.30 while receiving good medical therapy.
Biventricular pacing (cardiac resynchronization therapy [CRT]) may relieve symptoms and reduce HF
hospitalizations for patients who have HF, LVEF < 0.35, and a widened QRS complex (> 0.12 sec). Better
ways of detecting ventricular dyssynchrony may help identify patients most likely to respond to CRT. CRT
devices are effective but expensive, and patients must be appropriately selected.
Ultrafiltration (venovenous filtration) can be useful in selected hospitalized patients with severe volume
overload if they have not responded well to diuretic therapy and have rising serum creatinine (cardiorenal
syndrome). Long-term benefits are still unclear.
An intra-aortic counterpulsation balloon pump is helpful in selected patients who have a good chance of
recovery (eg, acute HF following MI). LV assist devices are implantable pumps that augment LV output.
They were initially used only as a short-term intervention to maintain patients with severe HF awaiting
transplant but are sometimes now used for extended periods (1 to 2 yr) in patients who are not transplant
candidates. However, although survival can be prolonged, few patients are able to recover sufficiently to
tolerate device removal.
Surgery:
Surgery may be appropriate when certain underlying disorders are present. Usually, surgery in
HF patients should be done in a specialized center. Surgical closure of congenital or acquired
intracardiac shunts can be curative. Coronary artery bypass grafting to reduce ischemia may help some
patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and is currently being studied in a large clinical trial of HF patients
with ischemic systolic dysfunction. If HF is primarily due to a valvular disorder, valve repair or replacement
is considered (see
Chapter 214
). Patients with primary mitral regurgitation are more likely to benefit than
patients with mitral regurgitation secondary to LV dilation, in whom myocardial function is likely to continue
to be poor postoperatively. Surgery is preferably done before myocardial dilation and damage become
irreversible.
Heart transplantation ( is the treatment of choice for patients < 60 who have severe,
refractory HF and no other life-threatening conditions and who are highly adherent to management
recommendations. Some older patients with otherwise excellent health may be considered. Survival is
82% at 1 yr and 75% at 3 yr; however, mortality rate while waiting for a donor is 12 to 15%. Human organ
donation remains low. LV assist devices can be a bridge to transplantation or recovery in carefully
selected patients.
Experimental therapies:
Artificial hearts are not yet a viable alternative. Stem cell transplantation is in
===PAGE:2288===
early-stage trials. Surgical options studied include implantation of restraining devices to reduce
progressive dilation and a modified aneurysmectomy called surgical ventricular restoration, but neither
showed clinical benefit.
Dynamic cardiomyoplasty, endocardial laser therapy, and excision of segments of dilated myocardium are
no longer recommended.
Persistent HF:
After treatment, symptoms often persist. Reasons include persistence of the underlying
disorder (eg, hypertension, ischemia, valvular regurgitation) despite treatment; suboptimal treatment of
HF; drug nonadherence; excess intake of dietary Na or alcohol; and presence of an undiagnosed thyroid
disorder, anemia, or supervening arrhythmia (eg, atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response,
intermittent ventricular tachycardia). Also, drugs used to treat other disorders may interfere with HF
treatment. NSAIDs, thiazolidinediones (eg, pioglitazone) for diabetes, and short-acting dihydropyridine or
nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers can worsen HF and should be avoided unless no alternative
exists; patients who must take such drugs should be followed closely.
Drugs
• Symptom relief: Diuretics, nitrates, or digoxin
• Long-term management and improved survival: ACE inhibitors,
β
-blockers, aldosterone receptor
blockers, or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
All these drug classes have been studied in systolic dysfunction, but fewer have been adequately studied
in diastolic dysfunction. However, ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and
β
-blockers are generally used to treat
diastolic HF. In patients with severe diastolic dysfunction, diuretics and nitrates should be used in lower
doses because these patients do not tolerate reduced BP or plasma volume well. In patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (, digoxin is not effective and may be harmful. All patients
should be given clear and explicit information about their drugs, including the importance of timely
prescription renewal and adherence to therapy, how to recognize adverse effects, and when to contact
their physician. Research is seeking plasma biomarkers that may predict which patients might respond
best to which drug or drug combination.
Diuretics:
Diuretics (see
Table 208-5
 are given to all patients with symptomatic systolic dysfunction and current or
previous volume overload; dose is adjusted to the lowest dose that stabilizes weight and relieves
symptoms. Loop diuretics are preferred. Furosemide is used most often, starting at 20 to 40 mg po
once/day, increased to 120 mg once/day (or 60 mg bid) if needed based on response and renal function.
Bumetanide is an alternative. In refractory cases, furosemide 40 to 160 mg IV, ethacrynic acid 50 to 100
mg IV, bumetanide 0.5 to 2 mg po or 0.5 to 1.0 mg IV, or metolazone 2.5 to 10 mg po may have an additive
effect. IV infusion of furosemide (5 to 10 mg/h) may be helpful in selected patients with severe edema.
Loop diuretics (particularly when used with metolazone) may cause hypovolemia with hypotension,
hyponatremia, hypomagnesemia, and severe hypokalemia. The dose of diuretic required acutely can
usually be gradually reduced when HF improves, and the diuretic may be stopped if other drugs improve
heart function and clear HF symptoms. Using larger than required doses of diuretics lowers CO, impairs
renal function, causes hypokalemia, and increases mortality. Serum electrolytes are monitored, initially
daily (when diuretics are given IV) and subsequently as needed, particularly after a dose increase.
A K-sparing diuretic, either spironolactone or eplerenone (which are aldosterone receptor
blockers), can
be added to offset the K-losing effects of higher-dose loop diuretics. Hyperkalemia may result, especially
when ACE inhibitors or ARBs are also taken, so electrolytes must still be monitored, especially during a
dehydrating illness that could cause renal dysfunction. These drugs may have particular benefit in chronic
RV failure, in which hepatic congestion results in elevated aldosterone levels as its metabolism is
reduced.
Thiazide diuretics are not normally used as a single agent unless hypertension is present but may be
added to furosemide for added diuresis.
===PAGE:2289===
Reliable patients are taught to take additional diuretic doses as needed when weight or peripheral edema
increases. They should seek medical attention promptly if weight gain persists.
Experimental ADH blockers increase water excretion and serum Na levels and may cause less
hypokalemia and renal dysfunction. Their clinical role remains to be defined.
ACE inhibitors:
All patients with systolic dysfunction are given oral ACE inhibitors unless contraindicated
(eg, by plasma creatinine > 2.8 mg/dL [> 250
μ
mol/L], bilateral renal artery stenosis, renal artery stenosis
in a solitary kidney, or previous angioedema due to ACE inhibitors).
ACE inhibitors reduce production of angiotensin II and breakdown of bradykinin, mediators that affect the
sympathetic nervous system, endothelial function, vascular tone, and myocardial performance.
Hemodynamic effects include arterial and venous vasodilation, sustained decreases in LV filling pressure
during rest and exercise, decreased systemic vascular resistance, and favorable effects on ventricular
remodeling. ACE inhibitors prolong survival and reduce HF hospitalizations. For patients with
atherosclerosis and a vascular disorder, these drugs reduce MI and stroke risk. For patients with
diabetes, they delay onset of nephropathy. Thus, ACE inhibitors may be used in patients with diastolic
dysfunction and any of these disorders.
The starting dose typically should be low (usually one fourth to one half of the target dose depending on
BP and renal function); the dose is gradually adjusted upward over 8 wk as tolerated, then continued
indefinitely. Usual target doses of representative drugs include enalapril 10 to 20 mg bid, lisinopril 20 to
30 mg once/day, ramipril 5 mg bid, and captopril 50 mg tid.
If the hypotensive effect (more marked in patients with hyponatremia or volume depletion) is troublesome,
it can often be minimized by separating administration of other BP-lowering drugs or reducing the dose of
concomitant diuretics. ACE inhibitors often cause mild to moderate reversible serum creatinine elevation
due to vasodilation of the efferent glomerular arteriole. An initial 20 to 30% increase in creatinine is no
reason to stop the drug but does require slower increases in dose, reduction in diuretic dose, or
avoidance of NSAIDs. Because aldosterone's effect is reduced, K retention may result, especially in
patients receiving K supplements. Cough occurs in 5 to 15% of patients, probably because bradykinin
accumulates, but other causes of cough should also be considered. Occasionally, rash or dysgeusia
occurs. Angioedema is rare but can be life threatening and is a contraindication to this class of drugs.
Alternatively, ARBs can be used, although rarely cross-reactivity is reported. Both are contraindicated in
pregnancy.
Serum electrolytes and renal function should be measured before an ACE inhibitor is started, at 1 mo, and
after each significant increase in dose or change in clinical condition. If dehydration or poor renal function
due to acute illness develops, the ACE inhibitor dose may need to be reduced or the drug may be
temporarily withheld.
ARBs:
These drugs are not demonstrably superior to ACE inhibitors but are less likely to cause cough
and angioedema; they may be used when these adverse effects prohibit ACE inhibitor use. ACE inhibitors
and ARBs are equally effective post MI; however, their equivalence is less clear in chronic HF, and the
best dose is still under study. Usual oral target doses are valsartan 160 mg bid, candesartan 32 mg
once/day, and losartan 50 to 100 mg once/day. Introduction, upward titration, and monitoring of ARBs and
ACE inhibitors are similar. Like ACE inhibitors, ARBs can cause reversible renal dysfunction, and the dose
may need to be reduced or withheld temporarily during an acute dehydrating illness.
Adding an ARB to a regimen of an ACE inhibitor,
β
-blocker, and diuretic should be considered for HF
patients with persistent symptoms and repeated hospitalizations. Such combination therapy requires
increased monitoring of BP, serum electrolytes, and renal function.
Aldosterone receptor blockers:
Because aldosterone can be produced independently of the reninangiotensin system, its adverse effects are not inhibited completely even by maximal use of ACE
inhibitors and ARBs. Thus, the aldosterone receptor blockers spironolactone, 25 to 50 mg po once/day,
and eplerenone, 10 mg po once/day (does not cause gynecomastia in males), can reduce mortality,
including from sudden death, in
patients with LVEF < 30% and severe chronic HF or acute HF
===PAGE:2290===
complicating acute MI. K supplements should be stopped. Serum K and creatinine should be checked
every 1 to 2 wk for the first 4 to 6 wk and after dose changes; dose is lowered if K is between 5.5 and 6.0
mEq/L and stopped if K is > 6.0 mEq/L, if creatinine increases above 2.5 mg/dL (220
μ
mol/L), or if ECG
changes of hyperkalemia are present. These drugs are usually not used in patients receiving both an
ACE inhibitor and an ARB because of the high risk of hyperkalemia and renal dysfunction.
β
-Blockers:

β
-Blockers, unless otherwise contraindicated (by asthma, 2nd- or 3rd-degree atrioventricular
block, or previous intolerance), are an important addition to ACE inhibitors for chronic systolic dysfunction
in most patients, including the elderly, and for diastolic dysfunction in hypertension and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. They are best started when the patient has no evidence of pulmonary congestion. Some
of these drugs improve LVEF, survival, and other major cardiovascular outcomes in patients with chronic
systolic dysfunction, including those with severe symptoms.
β
-Blockers are particularly useful for diastolic
dysfunction because they reduce heart rate, prolonging diastolic filling time, and possibly improve
ventricular relaxation.
The starting dose should be low (one fourth of the target daily dose), then dose is gradually increased
over 8 wk as tolerated. The acute negative inotropic effects of
β
-blockade may cause cardiac depression
and fluid retention. In such cases, a temporary increase in diuretic dose and slower upward titration of the
β
-blocker dose is warranted. Tolerance may improve over time, and efforts should be made to reach
target doses. Usual oral target doses are carvedilol 25 mg bid (50 mg bid for patients ≥ 85 kg), bisoprolol
10 mg once/day, and metoprolol 50 to 75 mg bid (tartrate) or 200 mg once/day (succinate extendedrelease). Carvedilol, a 3rd-generation nonselective
β
-blocker, is also a vasodilator with
α
-blocking and
antioxidant effects; it is the preferred and most widely studied
β
-blocker but is more expensive in many
countries. Some
β
-blockers (eg, bucindolol, xamoterol) do not appear beneficial and may be harmful.
During a severe, acute decompensation,
β
-blockers should not be started until patients are stabilized and
have little evidence of fluid retention. For patients already taking a
β
-blocker, the dose may be temporarily
reduced or, in severe decompensation, temporarily withheld but restarted and titrated again when patients
are stable. For milder decompensations, the
β
-blocker dose should be continued with a temporary
increase in diuretic dose.
After initial treatment, heart rate and myocardial O
consumption decrease, and stroke volume and filling
pressure are unchanged. With the slower heart rate, diastolic function improves. Ventricular filling returns
to a more normal pattern (increasing in early diastole), which appears less restrictive. Improved
myocardial function is measurable in some patients after 6 to 12 mo but may take longer; EF and CO
increase, and LV filling pressure decreases. Exercise capacity improves.
Vasodilators:
Hydralazine plus isosorbide dinitrate may help patients truly intolerant of ACE inhibitors or
ARBs (usually because of significant renal dysfunction), although long-term benefit of this combination is
limited. In African-American patients, this combination may also provide some additional benefits when
added to standard therapy. As vasodilators, these drugs improve hemodynamics, reduce valvular
regurgitation, and increase exercise capacity without causing significant renal impairment. Hydralazine is
started at 25 mg po qid and increased every 3 to 5 days to a target total dose of 300 mg/day, although
many patients cannot tolerate > 200 mg/day because of hypotension. Isosorbide dinitrate is started at 20
mg po tid (with a 12-h nitrate-free interval) and increased to a target of 40 to 50 mg tid. Whether lower
doses (frequently used in clinical practice) provide long-term benefit is unknown. In general, vasodilators
have been replaced by ACE inhibitors, which are easier to use, are usually better tolerated, and have
greater proven benefit.
Nitrates alone can relieve HF symptoms; patients can be taught to use sublingual nitroglycerin spray as
needed for acute dyspnea and a transdermal patch for nocturnal dyspnea. Nitrates are safe, effective,
and well tolerated and are particularly helpful in patients with HF and angina. Adverse effects include
hypotension and headache.
Other vasodilators such as Ca channel blockers are not used to treat systolic dysfunction. Short-acting
dihydropyridines (eg, nifedipine) and nondihydropyridines (eg, diltiazem, verapamil) may be deleterious.
However, amlodipine and felodipine are well tolerated and may be useful for patients with HF and
associated angina or hypertension. Both drugs may cause peripheral edema; rarely, amlodipine causes
===PAGE:2291===
pulmonary edema. Felodipine should not be taken with grapefruit juice, which significantly increases
plasma levels and adverse effects by inhibiting cytochrome P-450 metabolism. In patients with diastolic
dysfunction, Ca channel blockers may be used as needed to treat hypertension or ischemia or to control
ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation. Verapamil may be used in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Digitalis preparations:
These drugs inhibit the Na-K pump (Na
+
, K
+
-ATPase). As a result, they cause
weak positive inotropism, reduce sympathetic activity, block the atrioventricular node (slowing the
ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation or prolonging the PR interval in sinus rhythm), reduce vasoconstriction,
and improve renal blood flow. Digoxin is the most commonly prescribed digitalis preparation. It is excreted
by the kidneys; elimination half-life is 36 to 40 h in patients with normal renal function.
Digoxin has no proven survival benefit but, when used with diuretics and an ACE inhibitor, may help
control symptoms and reduce the likelihood of hospitalization. Digoxin is most effective in patients with
large LV end-diastolic volumes and an S
. Acute withdrawal of digoxin may increase the hospitalization
rate and worsen symptoms. In patients with normal renal function, digoxin, 0.125 to 0.375 mg po once/day
depending on age, sex, and body size, achieves full digitalization in about 1 wk (5 half-lives). More rapid
digitalization can be achieved with digoxin 0.5 mg IV over 15 min followed by 0.25 mg IV at 8 and 16 h or
with 0.5 mg po followed by 0.25 mg po at 8, 16, and 24 h. Prescription patterns vary widely by physician
and by country, but in general, doses are lower than those used in the past, and a trough (8- to 12-h postdose) digoxin level of 1 ng/mL is acceptable.
Toxicity is a concern, especially in patients with renal dysfunction and perhaps in women. These patients
may need a lower oral dose, as may elderly patients, patients with a low lean body mass, and patients
also taking amiodarone; patients > 80 kg may need a higher dose. Digoxin (and all digitalis glycosides)
has a narrow therapeutic window. The most important toxic effects are life-threatening arrhythmias (eg,
ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, complete atrioventricular block). Bidirectional ventricular
tachycardia, nonparoxysmal junctional tachycardia in the presence of atrial fibrillation, and hyperkalemia
are serious signs of digitalis toxicity. Nausea, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, confusion, amblyopia, and,
rarely, xerophthalmia may occur. If hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia (often due to diuretic use) is present,
lower doses and serum levels can still cause toxicity. Electrolyte levels should be monitored in patients
taking diuretics and digoxin, so that abnormalities can be prevented if possible; K-sparing diuretics may
be helpful.
When digitalis toxicity occurs, the drug should be stopped; electrolyte abnormalities should be corrected
(IV if abnormalities are severe and toxicity is acute). Patients with severe toxicity are admitted to a
monitored unit, and digoxin immune Fab (ovine antidigoxin antibody fragments) is given if arrhythmias are
present or if significant overingestion is accompanied by a serum K of > 5 mEq/L. This drug is also useful
for glycoside toxicity due to plant ingestion. Dose is based on the steady-state serum digoxin level or total
amount ingested. Ventricular arrhythmias are treated with lidocaine or phenytoin. Atrioventricular block
with a slow ventricular rate may require a temporary transvenous pacemaker. Isoproterenol is
contraindicated because it increases risk of ventricular arrhythmia.
Other drugs:
Various positive inotropic drugs have been evaluated in HF but, except for digoxin, they
increase mortality risk. Regular outpatient IV infusions of inotropes (eg, dobutamine) increase mortality
and are not recommended. Drugs under study include Ca sensitizers (eg, levosimendan), cytokine
blockers, endothelin blockers, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitors, and immune modulators.
Pulmonary Edema
Pulmonary edema is acute, severe left ventricular failure with pulmonary venous hypertension
and alveolar flooding. Findings are severe dyspnea, diaphoresis, wheezing, and sometimes
blood-tinged frothy sputum. Diagnosis is clinical and by chest x-ray. Treatment is with O
, IV
nitrates, diuretics, and sometimes morphine and short-term IV positive inotropes, endotracheal
intubation, and mechanical ventilation.
If left ventricular (LV) filling pressure increases suddenly, plasma fluid moves rapidly from pulmonary
capillaries into interstitial spaces and alveoli, causing pulmonary edema. Although precipitating causes
===PAGE:2292===
vary by age and country, about one half of cases result from acute coronary ischemia; some from
decompensation of significant underlying heart failure (HF), including diastolic dysfunction
HF due to
hypertension; and the rest from arrhythmia, an acute valvular disorder, or acute volume overload often
due to IV fluids. Drug or dietary nonadherence is often involved.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients present with extreme dyspnea, restlessness, and anxiety with a sense of suffocation. Cough
producing blood-tinged sputum, pallor, cyanosis, and marked diaphoresis are common; some patients
froth at the mouth. Frank hemoptysis is uncommon. The pulse is rapid and low volume, and BP is
variable. Marked hypertension indicates significant cardiac reserve; hypotension with systolic BP < 100
mg Hg is ominous. Inspiratory fine crackles are widely dispersed anteriorly and posteriorly over both lung
fields. Marked wheezing (cardiac asthma) may occur. Noisy respiratory efforts often make cardiac
auscultation difficult; a summation gallop—merger of 3rd (S
) and 4th (S
) heart sounds—may be
present. Signs of right ventricular (RV) failure (eg, neck vein distention, peripheral edema) may be
present.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation showing severe dyspnea and pulmonary crackles
• Chest x-ray
• Sometimes serum brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal-pro BNP (NT-pro-BNP)
• ECG, cardiac markers, and other tests for etiology as needed
A COPD exacerbation can mimic pulmonary edema due to LV failure or even that due to biventricular
failure if cor pulmonale (see below) is present. Pulmonary edema may be the presenting symptom in
patients without a history of cardiac disorders, but COPD patients with such severe symptoms usually
have a history of COPD, although they may be too dyspneic to relate it.
A chest x-ray, done immediately, is usually diagnostic, showing marked interstitial edema. Bedside
measurement of serum BNP levels (elevated in pulmonary edema; normal in COPD exacerbation) is
helpful if the diagnosis is in doubt. ECG, pulse oximetry, and blood tests (cardiac markers, electrolytes,
BUN, creatinine, and, for severely ill patients, ABGs) are done. An echocardiogram may be helpful to
determine the cause of the pulmonary edema (eg, MI, valvular dysfunction, hypertensive heart disease,
dilated cardiomyopathy) and may influence the choice of therapies. Hypoxemia can be severe. CO
retention is a late, ominous sign of secondary hypoventilation.
Treatment
• O
• Furosemide
• Nitrates
• IV morphine
• Ventilatory assistance as needed
• Treatment of cause
Initial treatment includes 100% O
by nonrebreather mask; upright position; furosemide 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg
IV; nitroglycerin 0.4 mg sublingually q 5 min, followed by an IV drip at 10 to 20
μ
g/min, titrated upward at
μ
g/min q 5 min as needed to a maximum 300
μ
g/min if systolic BP is > 100 mm Hg; and morphine 1 to
===PAGE:2293===
5 mg IV once or twice. If hypoxia is significant, noninvasive ventilatory assistance with bilevel positive
airway pressure (BiPAP) is helpful, but if CO
retention is present or the patient is obtunded, tracheal
intubation and assisted ventilation are required.
Specific additional treatment depends on etiology:
• For acute MI or another acute coronary syndrome, thrombolysis or direct percutaneous coronary
angioplasty with or without a stent
• For severe hypertension, an IV vasodilator
• For supraventricular or ventricular tachycardia, direct-current cardioversion
• For rapid atrial fibrillation, to slow the ventricular rate, an IV
β
-blocker, IV digoxin, or cautious use of an
IV Ca channel blocker (cardioversion is preferred)
Other treatments, such as IV BNP (nesiritide) and new inotropic drugs (levosimendan), remain under
study to elucidate safety profiles and efficacy. Because fluid status before onset of pulmonary edema is
usually normal in patients with acute MI, diuretics are less useful than in patients with chronic HF and may
precipitate hypotension. If systolic BP falls < 100 mm Hg or shock develops, IV dobutamine and an intraaortic balloon pump (counterpulsation) may be required (.
Once patients are stabilized, long-term HF treatment is as described 
Cor Pulmonale
Cor pulmonale is right ventricular enlargement secondary to a lung disorder that causes
pulmonary artery hypertension. Right ventricular failure follows. Findings include peripheral
edema, neck vein distention, hepatomegaly, and a parasternal lift. Diagnosis is clinical and by
echocardiography. Treatment is directed at the cause.
Cor pulmonale results from a disorder of the lung or its vasculature; it does not refer to right ventricular
(RV) enlargement secondary to left ventricular (LV) failure, a congenital heart disorder (eg, ventricular
septal defect), or an acquired valvular disorder. Cor pulmonale is usually chronic but may be acute and
reversible. Primary pulmonary hypertension (ie, not caused by a pulmonary or cardiac disorder) is
discussed elsewhere (.
Pathophysiology
Lung disorders cause pulmonary hypertension by several mechanisms:
• Loss of capillary beds (eg, due to bullous changes in COPD or thrombosis in pulmonary embolism)
• Vasoconstriction caused by hypoxia, hypercapnia, or both
• Increased alveolar pressure (eg, in COPD, during mechanical ventilation)
• Medial hypertrophy in arterioles (often a response to pulmonary hypertension due to other mechanisms)
Pulmonary hypertension increases afterload on the RV, resulting in a cascade of events that is similar to
what occurs in LV failure, including elevated end-diastolic and central venous pressure and ventricular
hypertrophy and dilation. Demands on the RV may be intensified by increased blood viscosity due to
hypoxia-induced polycythemia. Rarely, RV failure affects the LV if a dysfunctional septum bulges into the
LV, interfering with filling and thus causing diastolic dysfunction.
Etiology
Acute cor pulmonale has few causes. Chronic cor pulmonale is usually caused by COPD, but there are
===PAGE:2294===
several less common causes (see
Table 211-3
). In patients with COPD, an acute exacerbation or pulmonary infection may trigger RV
overload. In chronic cor pulmonale, risk of venous thromboembolism is increased.
Symptoms and Signs
Initially, cor pulmonale is asymptomatic, although patients usually have significant symptoms due to the
underlying lung disorder (eg, dyspnea, exertional fatigue). Later, as RV pressures increase, physical
signs commonly include a left parasternal systolic lift, a loud pulmonic component of the 2nd heart sound
(S
), and murmurs of functional tricuspid and pulmonic insufficiency. Later, an RV gallop rhythm (3rd [S]
and 4th [S] heart sounds) augmented during inspiration, distended jugular veins (with a dominant
a
wave unless tricuspid regurgitation is present), hepatomegaly, and lower-extremity edema may occur.
[Table 211-3.
Causes of Cor Pulmonale]
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion
• Echocardiography
Cor pulmonale should be suspected in all patients with one of its causes. Chest x-rays show RV and
proximal pulmonary artery enlargement with distal arterial attenuation. ECG evidence of RV hypertrophy
(eg, right axis deviation, QR wave in lead V
, and dominant R wave in leads V
to V
) correlates well with
degree of pulmonary hypertension. However, because pulmonary hyperinflation and bullae in COPD
cause realignment of the heart, physical examination, x-rays, and ECG may be relatively insensitive.
Echocardiography or radionuclide imaging is done to evaluate LV and RV function; echocardiography can
assess RV systolic pressure but is often technically limited by the lung disorder. Right heart
catheterization may be required for confirmation.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
Treatment is difficult; it focuses on the cause (see elsewhere in THE MANUAL), particularly
alleviation or
moderation of hypoxia. Early identification and treatment are important before structural changes become
irreversible.
If peripheral edema is present, diuretics may seem appropriate, but they are helpful only if LV failure and
pulmonary fluid overload are also present; they may be harmful because small decreases in preload often
worsen cor pulmonale. Pulmonary vasodilators (eg, hydralazine, Ca channel blockers, nitrous oxide,
prostacyclin, phosphodiesterase inhibitors), although beneficial in primary pulmonary hypertension, are
not effective. Bosentan, an endothelin receptor blocker, also may benefit patients with primary pulmonary
hypertension, but its use is not well studied in cor pulmonale. Digoxin is effective only if patients have
concomitant LV dysfunction; caution is required because patients with COPD are sensitive to digoxin's
effects. Phlebotomy during hypoxic cor pulmonale has been suggested, but the benefits of decreasing
blood viscosity are not likely to offset the harm of reducing O
-carrying capacity unless significant
polycythemia is present. For patients with chronic cor pulmonale, long-term anticoagulants reduce risk of
venous thromboembolism.
===PAGE:2295===
Chapter 212. Cardiomyopathies
Introduction
A cardiomyopathy is a primary disorder of the heart muscle. It is distinct from structural cardiac disorders
such as coronary artery disease, valvular disorders, and congenital heart disorders. Cardiomyopathies
are divided into 3 main types: dilated, hypertrophic, and restrictive (see
Fig. 212-1
) based on the pathologic features. The term ischemic cardiomyopathy refers to the dilated,
poorly contracting myocardium that sometimes occurs in patients with severe coronary artery disease
(with or without areas of infarction). Although it does not describe a primary myocardial disorder, the term
remains in common use.
Manifestations of cardiomyopathies are usually those of heart failure and vary depending on whether
there is systolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, or both (. Some cardiomyopathies may
also cause chest pain, syncope, or sudden death.
Evaluation typically includes ECG and echocardiography and sometimes MRI. Some patients require
endomyocardial biopsy (transvenous right ventricular or retrograde left ventricular). Other tests are done
as needed to determine the cause. Treatment depends on the specific type and cause of cardiomyopathy
(see
Table 212-1
).
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is myocardial dysfunction causing heart failure in which
ventricular dilation and systolic dysfunction predominate. Symptoms include dyspnea, fatigue,
and peripheral edema. Diagnosis is clinical and by chest x-ray and echocardiography. Treatment
is directed at the cause; if progressive and severe, heart transplantation may be needed.
Pathophysiology
In some patients, DCM is believed to start with acute myocarditis (probably viral in most cases), followed
by a variable latent phase, a phase with diffuse necrosis of myocardial myocytes (due to an autoimmune
reaction to virus-altered myocytes), and chronic fibrosis. Regardless of the cause, the myocardium
dilates, thins, and hypertrophies in compensation (see
Fig. 212-1
), often leading to functional mitral or
tricuspid regurgitation and atrial dilation.
The disorder affects both ventricles in most patients, only the left ventricle (LV) in a few (unless with an
ischemic etiology), and only the right ventricle (RV) rarely.
Mural thrombi frequently form once chamber dilation is significant, especially during the acute myocarditis
phase. Cardiac arrhythmias often complicate the acute myocarditis and late chronic dilated phases as
may atrioventricular (AV) block. Atrial fibrillation commonly occurs as the left atrium dilates.
Etiology
DCM has many known and probably many unidentified causes (see
Table 212-2
). The most common cause in temperate zones is diffuse coronary artery disease (CAD) with
diffuse ischemic myopathy. More than 20 viruses can cause DCM; in temperate zones, coxsackievirus B
is most common. In Central
and South America, Chagas' disease due to
Trypanosoma cruzi
is the most
common infectious cause. DCM is becoming increasingly common among patients with HIV infection.
Other causes include toxoplasmosis, thyrotoxicosis, and beriberi. Many toxic substances, particularly
alcohol, various organic solvents, and certain chemotherapeutic drugs (eg, doxorubicin, trastuzumab),
damage the heart.
Stress and other hyperadrenergic states can trigger acute DCM that is typically reversible (as is that
caused by prolonged episodes of tachycardia). An example is acute apical ballooning cardiomyopathy
(takotsubo cardiomyopathy); in this disorder, only the apex of the LV is affected, causing regional wall
===PAGE:2296===
(takotsubo cardiomyopathy); in this disorder, only the apex of the LV is affected, causing regional wall
dysfunction and sometimes focal dilation (ballooning).
Genetic factors play a role in 20 to 35% of cases; several genes and loci have been implicated.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually gradual except in acute myocarditis, acute apical ballooning cardiomyopathy, and
tachyarrhythmia-induced myopathy. Symptoms depend on which ventricle is affected. LV dysfunction
causes exertional dyspnea and fatigue due to elevated LV diastolic pressure and low cardiac output. RV
failure causes peripheral edema and neck vein distention. Infrequently the RV is predominantly affected in
younger patients, and atrial arrhythmias and sudden death due to malignant ventricular tachyarrhythmias
are typical. About 25% of all patients with DCM have atypical chest pain.
[Fig. 212-1.
Forms of cardiomyopathy.]
[Table 212-1.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Cardiomyopathies]
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
• ECG
• Echocardiography
• Testing for cause as indicated
Diagnosis is by history, physical examination, and exclusion of other common causes of ventricular failure
(eg, systemic hypertension, primary valvular disorders, MI—see
Table 212-1
). Thus, chest x-ray, ECG,
and echocardiography are required. If acute symptoms or chest pain is present, serum cardiac markers
are measured; although typically indicative of coronary ischemia, troponin levels can be elevated in heart
failure, especially if renal function is decreased. Specific causes suspected clinically are diagnosed (see
elsewhere in THE MANUAL). If no specific cause is clinically apparent, serum ferritin and iron-binding
capacity and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels are measured and serologic tests for
Toxoplasma
,
T.
cruzi
,
[Table 212-2.
Causes of Dilated Cardiomyopathy]
coxsackievirus, and echovirus may be done in appropriate cases.
Chest x-ray
shows cardiomegaly, usually of all chambers. Pleural effusion, particularly on the right, often
accompanies increased pulmonary venous pressure and interstitial edema.
The
ECG
may show sinus tachycardia and nonspecific ST-segment depression with low voltage or
inverted T waves. Sometimes pathologic Q waves are present in the precordial leads, simulating previous
MI. Left bundle branch block is common.
Echocardiography
shows dilated, hypokinetic cardiac chambers and rules out primary valvular
disorders. Segmental wall motion abnormalities, typical of MI, can also occur in DCM because the
process may be patchy. Echocardiography may also show a mural thrombus. MRI is not routinely done
but may be useful when detailed imaging of myocardial structure or function is needed. In
cardiomyopathy, MRI may show abnormal myocardial tissue texture.
Coronary angiography
is required when the diagnosis is in doubt after noninvasive tests, particularly for
patients with chest pain or several cardiovascular risk factors or for elderly patients, who are more likely
to have CAD. However, nonobstructive coronary artery lesions detected by angiography may not be the
cause of DCM. Either ventricle can be biopsied during catheterization, but biopsy is not usually done
because the yield can be low, the disease process can be patchy, and results may not change treatment.
===PAGE:2297===
Prognosis
Prognosis generally is poor, although prognosis has improved with current management regimens (eg,
use of
β
-blockers): About 20% die in the first year and then about 10%/yr thereafter; about 40 to 50% of
deaths are sudden, due to a malignant arrhythmia or an embolic event. Prognosis is better if
compensatory hypertrophy preserves ventricular wall thickness and is worse if ventricular walls thin
markedly and the ventricle dilates.
Treatment
• Cause (if any) treated
• Measures for heart failure
• Anticoagulants in some patients
• Possibly implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, biventricular pacing, or transplantation
Treatable primary causes (eg, toxoplasmosis, hemochromatosis, thyrotoxicosis, beriberi) are corrected.
Otherwise, treatment is the same as for heart failure (: ACE inhibitors,
β
-blockers,
aldosterone receptor blockers, angiotensin II receptor blockers, diuretics, digoxin, and nitrates.
Corticosteroids, azathioprine, and equine antithymocyte globulin are no longer used; although they may
shorten the acute phase of certain inflammatory myocarditic myopathies (eg, acute postviral or sarcoid
myocarditis), they do not improve long-term outcome. Antivirals are not helpful.
Because mural thrombi may form, prophylactic oral anticoagulants ( are often given to help
prevent systemic or pulmonary emboli, and a large randomized trial is underway to test whether this
approach is effective. Patients with a previous cerebrovascular embolism, those with acute severe
myocarditis, and some with severe LV dilation should receive anticoagulants.
Aggressive treatment of heart failure reduces risk of arrhythmia, but significant cardiac arrhythmias may
be treated with antiarrhythmic drugs. Permanent pacemakers may be required if AV block occurs during
the chronic dilated phase. However, AV block during acute myocarditis often resolves, so permanent
pacemakers are usually not needed. If patients have a widened QRS interval with a low LV ejection
fraction and severe symptoms despite optimized medical treatment, biventricular pacing should be
considered. An implantable cardioverterdefibrillator may be used to prevent sudden arrhythmia-induced
death.
Because prognosis may be poor, patients with DCM may become candidates for heart transplantation.
Selection criteria include absence of associated systemic disorders and psychologic disorders and high,
irreversible pulmonary vascular resistance; because donor hearts are scarce, younger patients (usually <
60) are given higher priority.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a congenital or acquired disorder characterized by
marked ventricular hypertrophy with diastolic dysfunction but without increased afterload (eg,
from valvular aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta, systemic hypertension). Symptoms
include dyspnea, chest pain, syncope, and sudden death. A systolic murmur, increased by
Valsalva maneuver, is typically present in the hypertrophic obstructive type. Diagnosis is by
echocardiography. Treatment is with
β
-blockers, verapamil, disopyramide, and sometimes
chemical reduction or surgical removal of outflow tract obstruction.
HCM is a common cause of sudden death in young athletes (. It may cause unexplained
syncope and may not be diagnosed before autopsy.
Etiology
===PAGE:2298===
Most cases of HCM are inherited. At least 50 different mutations that are inherited in an
autosomally
dominant pattern have been identified; spontaneous mutations are common. Perhaps 1 in 500 people is
affected; phenotypic expression varies markedly.
Pathophysiology
The myocardium is abnormal with cellular and myofibrillar disarray, although this finding is not specific for
HCM. In the most common form, the upper interventricular septum below the aortic valve is markedly
hypertrophied and thickened, with little or no hypertrophy of the left ventricular (LV) posterior wall; this
pattern is called asymmetric septal hypertrophy. During systole, the septum thickens, and sometimes the
anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, already abnormally oriented because of the abnormally shaped
ventricle, is sucked toward the septum by a Venturi effect of high velocity blood flow, further obstructing
the outflow tract and decreasing cardiac output. The resulting disorder may be termed hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy. Less commonly, midventricular hypertrophy leads to an intracavitary gradient
at the papillary muscle level. In both forms, the distal LV may ultimately thin and dilate. Apical hypertrophy
can also occur but does not obstruct outflow, although it may obliterate the apical portion of the LV during
systole. Sometimes the hypertrophy is diffuse and symmetrical.
Contractility is grossly normal, resulting in a normal ejection fraction (EF). Later, EF is elevated because
the ventricle has a small volume and empties nearly completely to maintain cardiac output.
Hypertrophy results in a stiff, noncompliant chamber (usually the LV) that resists diastolic filling, elevating
end-diastolic pressure and thus increasing pulmonary venous pressure. As resistance to filling increases,
cardiac output decreases, an effect worsened by any outflow tract gradient present. Because tachycardia
allows less time for filling, symptoms tend to appear mainly during exercise or tachyarrhythmias.
Coronary blood flow may be impaired, causing angina pectoris, syncope, or arrhythmias in the absence
of epicardial coronary artery disease (CAD). Flow may be impaired because capillary density relative to
myocyte size is inadequate (capillary/myocyte imbalance) or lumen diameter of intramyocardial coronary
arteries is narrowed by intimal and medial hyperplasia and hypertrophy. Also, exercise lowers peripheral
vascular resistance and aortic root diastolic pressure, thus reducing coronary perfusion pressure.
In some cases, myocytes gradually die, probably because capillary/myocyte imbalance causes chronic
diffuse ischemia. As myocytes die, they are replaced by diffuse fibrosis. Then, the hypertrophied ventricle
with diastolic dysfunction gradually dilates and systolic dysfunction also develops.
Infective endocarditis can complicate HCM because of the mitral valve abnormality and because of rapid
blood flow through the outflow tract during early systole. Atrioventricular block is sometimes a late
complication.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, symptoms appear between ages 20 and 40 and are exertional. They include dyspnea, chest
pain (usually resembling typical angina—, palpitations, and syncope. Because systolic
function is preserved, fatigability is seldom reported.
Syncope usually occurs without warning during exertion either because outflow obstruction worsens with
the increased contractility or because of nonsustained ventricular or atrial arrhythmia.
Syncope is a
marker of increased risk of sudden death,
which is thought to result from ventricular tachycardia or
fibrillation.
BP and heart rate are usually normal, and signs of increased venous pressure are rare. When the outflow
tract is obstructed, the carotid pulse has a brisk upstroke, bifid peak, and rapid downstroke. The apex
beat may have a sustained thrust due to LV hypertrophy. A 4th heart sound (S
) is often present and is
associated with a forceful atrial contraction against a poorly compliant LV in late diastole.
Septal hypertrophy produces a systolic ejection-type murmur that does not radiate to the neck and may
===PAGE:2299===
be heard at the left sternal edge in the 3rd or 4th intercostal space. A mitral regurgitation murmur due to
distortion of the mitral apparatus may be heard at the apex. When the right ventricular outflow tract is
narrowed, a systolic ejection murmur is sometimes heard in the 2nd interspace at the left sternal border.
The LV outflow ejection murmur of HCM can be increased by a Valsalva maneuver (which reduces
venous return and LV diastolic volume), by measures to lower aortic pressure (eg, nitroglycerin), or by a
postextrasystolic contraction (which increases the outflow tract pressure gradient). Handgrip increases
aortic pressure, thereby reducing the murmur's intensity.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion (syncope and murmur)
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected based on a typical murmur and symptoms. Unexplained syncope in young
athletes should always raise suspicion. HCM must be distinguished from aortic stenosis and CAD, which
cause similar symptoms. ECG and 2-dimensional echocardiography (the best noninvasive confirmatory
test) are done. Chest x-ray is often taken but is usually normal because the ventricles are not dilated
(although the left atrium may be enlarged). Patients with syncope or sustained arrhythmias should be
evaluated as inpatients. Exercise testing and 24-h ambulatory monitoring may be helpful for patients
considered at high risk, although identifying such patients is difficult.
The ECG usually shows voltage criteria for LV hypertrophy (eg, S wave in lead V
plus R wave in lead V
or V
> 35 mm). Very deep septal Q waves in leads I, aVL, V
, and V
are often present with asymmetric
septal hypertrophy; HCM sometimes produces a QRS complex in V
and V
, simulating previous septal
infarction. T waves are usually abnormal; the most common finding is deep symmetric T-wave inversion in
leads I, aVL, V
, and V
. ST-segment depression in the same leads is common (particularly in the apical
obliterative form). The P wave is often broad and notched in leads II, III, and aVF, with a biphasic P wave
in leads V
and V
, indicating left atrial hypertrophy. Incidence of preexcitation phenomenon of the WolffParkinson-White syndrome type, which may cause palpitations, is increased. Bundle branch block is
common.
Two-dimensional Doppler echocardiography can differentiate the forms of cardiomyopathy (see
Fig. 212-
) and quantify the degree of outflow tract obstruction, including pressure gradient and area of the
stenotic segment. These measurements are particularly useful for monitoring the effect of medical or
surgical treatment. Midsystolic closure of the aortic valve sometimes occurs when outflow tract
obstruction is severe.
Cardiac catheterization is usually done only when invasive therapy is considered. Usually, no significant
stenoses are present in the coronary arteries, but elderly patients may have coexisting CAD.
Prognosis
Overall, annual mortality is 1 to 3% for adults but is higher for children. Mortality rate is inversely
proportional to the age at which symptoms appear and is highest in patients who have frequent
nonsustained ventricular tachycardia or syncope or have been resuscitated after sudden cardiac arrest.
Prognosis is worse for young patients with a family history of sudden death and for patients > 45 yr with
angina or exertional dyspnea. Death is usually sudden, and sudden death is the most common sequelae;
chronic heart failure occurs less often. Genetic counseling is appropriate for patients with asymmetric
septal hypertrophy, which appears to accelerate during puberty.
Treatment
•
β
-Blockers
• Rate-limiting and negative inotropic Ca channel blockers
===PAGE:2300===
• Avoidance of nitrates, diuretics, and ACE inhibitors
• Possibly implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and sometimes surgery or ablative procedures
Treatment is directed primarily at abnormal diastolic compliance.
β
-Blockers and rate-limiting Ca channel
blockers with a lower arterial dilation capacity (usually verapamil), alone or combined, are the mainstays.
By decreasing myocardial contractility, these drugs dilate the heart. By slowing the heart rate, they
prolong the diastolic filling period. Both effects decrease outflow obstruction, thus improving ventricular
diastolic function. In severe cases, disopyramide may be added for its negative inotropic effect.
Drugs that reduce preload (eg, nitrates, diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers)
decrease chamber size and worsen symptoms and signs. Vasodilators increase the outflow tract gradient
and cause a reflex tachycardia that further worsens ventricular diastolic function. Inotropic drugs (eg,
digitalis glycosides, catecholamines) worsen outflow tract obstruction, do not relieve the high enddiastolic pressure, and may induce arrhythmias.
If syncope or sudden cardiac arrest has occurred or if ventricular arrhythmia is confirmed by ECG or 24-h
ambulatory monitoring, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator or antiarrhythmics should be considered.
Competitive sports should be avoided because many sudden deaths occur during increased exertion.
Treatment of the dilated congestive phase of HCM is the same as that of dilated cardiomyopathy with
predominant systolic dysfunction.
If septal hypertrophy and outflow tract obstruction cause significant symptoms despite medical therapy,
surgery is needed. Catheter alcohol ablation is variably effective but is becoming more widely used;
surgical septal
myotomy or myomectomy reduces symptoms more reliably but does not prolong life.
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is characterized by noncompliant ventricular walls that resist
diastolic filling; one or both ventricles, most commonly the left, may be affected. Symptoms
include fatigue and exertional dyspnea. Diagnosis is by echocardiography and cardiac
catheterization. Treatment is often unsatisfactory and is best directed at the cause. Surgery is
sometimes useful.
RCM is the least prevalent form of cardiomyopathy. It is classified as
• Nonobliterative (myocardial infiltration by an abnormal substance)
• Obliterative (fibrosis of the endocardium and subendocardium)
Either type may be diffuse or nondiffuse (when the disorder affects only one ventricle or part of one
ventricle unevenly).
Etiology
The cause is usually unknown; identified causes are listed in
Table 212-3
. Some disorders that cause RCM also affect other tissues (eg, amyloidosis,
hemochromatosis). Some myocardial infiltrative disorders also affect other cardiac tissue. Rarely,
amyloidosis affects coronary arteries. Sarcoidosis and Fabry's disease may also affect nodal conduction
tissue. Loffler's syndrome (a subcategory of hypereosinophilic syndrome with primary cardiac
involvement), which occurs in the tropics, begins as an acute arteritis with eosinophilia, followed by
thrombus formation on the endocardium, chordae, and atrioventricular (AV) valves, progressing to fibrosis.
Endocardial fibroelastosis, which occurs in temperate zones, affects only the left ventricle.
Pathophysiology
Endocardial thickening or myocardial infiltration (sometimes with death of myocytes, papillary muscle
===PAGE:2301===
infiltration, compensatory myocardial hypertrophy, and fibrosis) may occur in one, typically the left, or both
ventricles. As a result, the mitral or tricuspid valves may malfunction, leading to regurgitation. Functional
AV valve regurgitation may result from myocardial infiltration or endocardial thickening. If nodal and
conduction tissues are affected, the sinoatrial node malfunctions, sometimes causing various grades of
AV block.
[Table 212-3.
Causes of Restrictive Cardiomyopathy]
The main hemodynamic consequence is diastolic dysfunction ( with a rigid, noncompliant
ventricle, impaired diastolic filling, and high filling pressure, leading to pulmonary venous hypertension.
Systolic function may deteriorate if compensatory hypertrophy of infiltrated or fibrosed ventricles is
inadequate. Mural thrombi can form, resulting in systemic emboli.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are exertional dyspnea, orthopnea, and, when the right ventricle is affected, peripheral edema.
Fatigue results from a fixed cardiac output due to resistance to ventricular filling. Atrial and ventricular
arrhythmias and AV block are common; angina and syncope are uncommon. Symptoms and signs closely
mimic those of constrictive pericarditis (.
Physical examination detects a quiet precordium, a low-volume and rapid carotid pulse, pulmonary
crackles, and pronounced neck vein distention with a rapid
y
descent (see
Fig. 206-1
. A 4th heart sound (S
) is almost always present; a 3rd heart sound (S
) may occur and must be
differentiated from the precordial knock of constrictive pericarditis. In some cases, a murmur of functional
mitral or tricuspid regurgitation results because myocardial or endocardial infiltration or fibrosis changes
chordae or ventricular geometry. Pulsus paradoxus does not occur.
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
• Testing for cause
ECG, chest x-ray, and echocardiography are required. The ECG is usually nonspecifically abnormal,
showing ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities and sometimes low voltage. Pathologic Q waves, not due
to previous MI, sometimes occur. Left ventricular hypertrophy due to compensatory myocardial
hypertrophy sometimes occurs. On chest x-ray, the heart size is often normal or small but can be enlarged
in late-stage amyloidosis or hemochromatosis.
Echocardiography shows normal systolic function. Common findings include dilated atria and myocardial
hypertrophy. RCM due to amyloidosis has an unusually bright echo pattern from the myocardium.
Echocardiography helps differentiate constrictive pericarditis with its thickened pericardium, but
paradoxical septal motion can occur in either disorder. If the diagnosis is still in doubt, CT may be more
sensitive in showing whether the pericardium is normal, and MRI can show abnormal myocardial texture
in disorders with myocardial infiltration (eg, by amyloid or iron).
Cardiac catheterization and myocardial biopsy are not often necessary. If done, catheterization detects
high atrial pressure in RCM, with a prominent
y
descent and an early diastolic dip followed by a high
diastolic plateau in the ventricular pressure curve. In contrast to constrictive pericarditis findings, diastolic
pressure is usually a few mm Hg higher in the left ventricle than in the right. Angiography detects normalsized ventricular cavities with normal or decreased systolic shortening. AV valve regurgitation may be
present. Biopsy can detect endocardial fibrosis and thickening, myocardial infiltration by iron or amyloid,
and chronic myocardial fibrosis. Coronary angiography is normal, except when amyloidosis affects
epicardial coronary arteries. Occasionally, cardiac catheterization is not diagnostic, and rarely,
thoracotomy is required to explore the pericardium.
Tests for the most common causes of RCM (eg, rectal biopsy for amyloidosis, iron tests or liver biopsy for
===PAGE:2302===
hemochromatosis) should be done.
Prognosis
Prognosis is poor (see
Table 212-1
) because the diagnosis is often made at a late stage. No treatment is
available for most patients; symptomatic, supportive care can be provided.
Treatment
• Cause treated
• Diuretics considered
Diuretics may be used for patients with edema or pulmonary vascular congestion but must be given
cautiously because they can lower preload; the noncompliant ventricles depend on preload to maintain
cardiac output. Digitalis does little to alter hemodynamic abnormalities and may cause serious
arrhythmias in cardiomyopathy due to amyloidosis, in which extreme digitalis sensitivity is common. If
heart rate is elevated,
β
-blockers or rate-limiting Ca channel blockers may be used cautiously in low
doses. Afterload reducers (eg, nitrates) may cause profound hypotension and usually are not useful.
If the diagnosis is made at an early stage, specific treatment of hemochromatosis, sarcoidosis, and
Loffler's syndrome may help.
Transplantation is not recommended because the disorder may recur in the transplanted heart.
===PAGE:2303===
Chapter 213. Arrhythmias and Conduction Disorders
Introduction
The normal heart beats in a regular, coordinated way because electrical impulses generated and spread
by myocytes with unique electrical properties trigger a sequence of organized myocardial contractions.
Arrhythmias and conduction disorders are caused by abnormalities in the generation or conduction of
these electrical impulses or both.
Any heart disorder, including congenital abnormalities of structure (eg, accessory atrioventricular
connection) or function (eg, hereditary ion channelopathies), can disturb rhythm. Systemic factors that
can cause or contribute to a rhythm disturbance include electrolyte abnormalities (particularly low K or
Mg), hypoxia, hormonal imbalances (eg, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism), and drugs and toxins (eg,
alcohol, caffeine).
Anatomy
At the junction of the superior vena cava and high lateral right atrium is a cluster of
cells that generates
the initial electrical impulse of each normal heart beat, called the sinoatrial (SA) or sinus node. Electrical
discharge of these pacemaker cells stimulates adjacent cells, leading to stimulation of successive regions
of the heart in an orderly sequence. Impulses are transmitted through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV)
node via preferentially conducting internodal tracts and unspecialized atrial myocytes. The AV node is
located on the right side of the interatrial septum. It has a slow conduction velocity and thus delays
impulse transmission. AV nodal transmission time is heart-rate-dependent and is modulated by autonomic
tone and circulating catecholamines to maximize cardiac output at any given atrial rate.
The atria are electrically insulated from the ventricles by the annulus fibrosus except in the anteroseptal
region. There, the bundle of His, the continuation of the AV node, enters the top of the interventricular
septum, where it bifurcates into the left and right bundle branches, which terminate in Purkinje fibers. The
right bundle branch conducts impulses to the anterior and apical endocardial regions of the right ventricle.
The left bundle branch fans out over the left side of the interventricular septum. Its anterior portion (left
anterior hemifascicle) and its posterior portion (left posterior hemifascicle) stimulate the left side of the
interventricular septum, which is the first part of the ventricles to be electrically activated. Thus, the
interventricular septum depolarizes left to right, followed by near-simultaneous activation of both
ventricles from the endocardial surface through the ventricular walls to the epicardial surface.
Physiology
An understanding of normal cardiac physiology is essential before rhythm disturbances can be
understood.
Electrophysiology:
The passage of ions across the myocyte cell membrane is regulated through
specific ion channels that cause cyclical depolarization and repolarization of the cell, called an action
potential. The action potential of a working myocyte begins when the cell is depolarized from its diastolic -
90 mV transmembrane potential to a potential of about -50 mV. At this threshold potential, voltagedependent fast Na channels open, causing rapid depolarization mediated by Na influx down its steep
concentration gradient. The fast Na channel is rapidly inactivated and Na influx stops, but other time- and
voltage-dependent ion channels open, allowing Ca to enter through slow Ca channels (a depolarizing
event) and K to leave through K channels (a repolarizing event). At first, these 2 processes are balanced,
maintaining a positive transmembrane potential and prolonging the plateau phase of the action potential.
During this phase, Ca entering the cell is responsible for electromechanical coupling and myocyte
contraction. Eventually, Ca influx ceases, and K efflux increases, causing rapid repolarization of the cell
back to the -90 mV resting transmembrane potential. While depolarized, the cell is resistant (refractory) to
a subsequent depolarizing event. Initially, a subsequent depolarization is not possible (absolute refractory
period), and after partial but incomplete repolarization, a subsequent depolarization is possible but occurs
slowly (relative refractory period).
There are 2 general types of cardiac tissue:
===PAGE:2304===
• Fast-channel tissues
• Slow-channel tissues
Fast-channel tissues
(working atrial and ventricular myocytes, His-Purkinje system) have a high density
of fast Na channels and action potentials characterized by little or no spontaneous diastolic depolarization
(and thus very slow rates of pacemaker activity), very rapid initial depolarization rates (and thus rapid
conduction velocity), and loss of refractoriness coincident with repolarization (and thus short refractory
periods and the ability to conduct repetitive impulses at high frequencies).
Slow-channel tissues
(SA and AV nodes) have a low density of fast Na channels and action potentials
characterized by more rapid spontaneous diastolic depolarization (and thus more rapid rates of
pacemaker activity), slow initial depolarization rates (and thus slow conduction velocity), and loss of
refractoriness that is delayed after repolarization (and thus long refractory periods and the inability to
conduct repetitive impulses at high frequencies).
Normally, the SA node has the most rapid rate of spontaneous diastolic depolarization, so its cells
produce spontaneous action potentials at a higher frequency than other tissues. Thus, the SA node is the
dominant automatic tissue (pacemaker) in a normal heart. If the SA node does not produce impulses,
tissue with the next highest automaticity rate, typically the AV node, functions as the pacemaker.
Sympathetic stimulation increases the discharge frequency of pacemaker tissue, and parasympathetic
stimulation decreases it.
Normal rhythm:
The resting sinus heart rate in adults is usually 60 to 100 beats/min. Slower rates (sinus
bradycardia) occur in young people, particularly athletes (, and during sleep. Faster rates
(sinus tachycardia)
occur with exercise, illness, or emotion through sympathetic neural and circulating
catecholamine drive. Normally, a marked diurnal variation in heart rate occurs, with lowest rates just
before early morning awakening. A slight increase in rate during inspiration with a decrease in rate during
expiration (respiratory sinus arrhythmia) is also normal; it is mediated by oscillations in vagal tone and is
particularly common among healthy young people. The oscillations lessen but do not entirely disappear
with age. Absolute regularity of the sinus rhythm rate is pathologic and occurs in patients with autonomic
denervation (eg, in advanced diabetes) or with severe heart failure.
Most cardiac electrical activity is represented on the ECG (see
Fig. 207-1
, although SA node, AV node, and His-Purkinje depolarization does not involve
enough tissue to be detected. The P wave represents atrial depolarization. The QRS complex represents
ventricular depolarization, and the T wave represents ventricular repolarization.
The PR interval (from the beginning of the P wave to the beginning of the QRS complex) is the time from
the beginning of atrial activation to the beginning of ventricular activation. Much of this interval reflects
slowing of impulse transmission in the AV node. The R-R interval (time between 2 QRS complexes)
represents the ventricular rate. The QT interval (from the beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the
T wave) represents the duration of ventricular depolarization. Normal values for the QT interval are
slightly longer in women; they are also longer with a slower heart rate. The QT interval is corrected (QTc)
for influence of heart rate. The most common formula (all intervals in sec) is:
Pathophysiology
Rhythm disturbances result from abnormalities of impulse formation, impulse conduction, or both.
Bradyarrhythmias result from decreased intrinsic pacemaker function or blocks in conduction, principally
within the AV node or the His-Purkinje system. Most tachyarrhythmias are caused by reentry; some result
from enhanced normal automaticity or from abnormal mechanisms of automaticity.
Reentry
is the circular propagation of an impulse around 2 interconnected pathways with different
===PAGE:2305===
conduction characteristics and refractory periods (see
Fig. 213-1
).
Under certain conditions, typically precipitated by a premature beat, reentry can produce continuous
circulation of an activation wavefront, causing a tachyarrhythmia (see
Fig. 213-2
). Normally, reentry is prevented by tissue refractoriness following stimulation. However, 3
conditions favor reentry: shortening of tissue refractoriness (eg, by sympathetic stimulation), lengthening
of the conduction pathway (eg, by hypertrophy or abnormal conduction pathways), and slowing of
impulse conduction (eg, by ischemia).
Symptoms and Signs
Arrhythmia and conduction disturbances may be asymptomatic or cause palpitations (sensation of
skipped beats or rapid or forceful beats—, symptoms of hemo-dynamic compromise (eg,
dyspnea, chest discomfort, presyncope, syncope), or cardiac arrest. Occasionally, polyuria results from
release of atrial natriuretic peptide during prolonged supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs).
Palpation of pulse and cardiac auscultation can determine ventricular rate and its regularity or irregularity.
Examination of the jugular venous pulse waves may help in the diagnosis of AV blocks and atrial
tachyarrhythmias. For example, in complete AV block, the atria intermittently contract when the AV valves
are closed, producing large
a
(cannon) waves in the jugular venous pulse (. Other physical findings of arrhythmias are few.
Diagnosis
• ECG
History and physical examination may detect an arrhythmia and suggest possible causes, but diagnosis
requires a 12-lead ECG or, less reliably, a rhythm strip, preferably obtained during symptoms to establish
the relationship between symptoms and rhythm.
The ECG is approached systematically; calipers measure intervals and identify subtle irregularities. The
key diagnostic features are rate of atrial activation, rate and regularity of ventricular activation, and the
relationship between the two. Irregular activation signals are classified as regularly irregular or irregularly
irregular (no detectible pattern). Regular irregularity is intermittent irregularity in an otherwise regular
rhythm (eg, premature beats) or a predictable pattern of irregularity (eg, recurrent relationships between
groups of beats).
A narrow QRS complex (< 0.12 sec) indicates a supraventricular origin (above the His
[Fig. 213-1.
Mechanism of typical reentry.]
bundle bifurcation). A wide QRS complex (≥ 0.12 sec) indicates a ventricular origin (below the His bundle
bifurcation) or a supraventricular rhythm conducted with an intraventricular conduction defect or with
ventricular preexcitation in the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.
Bradyarrhythmias:
ECG diagnosis of bradyarrhythmias depends on the presence or absence of P
waves, morphology of the P waves, and the relationship between P waves and QRS complexes.
A bradyarrhythmia with no relationship between P waves and QRS complexes indicates AV dissociation;
the escape rhythm can be junctional (narrow QRS complex) or ventricular (wide QRS complex).
A regular QRS rhythm with a 1:1 relationship between P waves and QRS complexes indicates absence of
AV block. P waves preceding QRS complexes indicate sinus bradycardia (if P waves are normal) or sinus
arrest with an escape atrial bradycardia (if P waves are abnormal). P waves after QRS complexes
indicate sinus arrest with a junctional or ventricular escape rhythm and retrograde atrial activation. A
ventricular escape rhythm results in a wide QRS complex; a junctional escape
===PAGE:2306===
[Fig. 213-2.
Initiation of an atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia.]
rhythm usually has a narrow QRS (or a wide QRS with bundle branch block or preexcitation).
When the QRS rhythm is irregular, P waves usually outnumber QRS complexes; some P waves produce
QRS complexes, but some do not (indicating 2nd-degree AV block—. An irregular QRS
rhythm with a 1:1 relationship between P waves and the following QRS complexes usually indicates sinus
arrhythmia with gradual acceleration and deceleration of the sinus rate (if P waves are normal).
Pauses in an otherwise regular QRS rhythm may be caused by blocked P waves (an abnormal P wave
can usually be discerned just after the preceding T wave or distorting the morphology of the preceding T
wave), sinus arrest, or sinus exit block (, as well as by 2nd-degree AV block.
Tachyarrhythmias:
Tachyarrhythmias may be divided into 4 groups, defined by being visibly regular vs
irregular and by having a narrow vs wide QRS complex.
Irregular, narrow QRS complex
tachyarrhythmias include atrial fibrillation (AF), atrial flutter or true atrial
tachycardia with variable AV conduction, and multifocal atrial tachycardia. Differentiation is based on atrial
ECG signals, which are best seen in the longer pauses between QRS complexes. Atrial ECG signals that
are continuous, irregular in timing and morphology, and very rapid (> 300/min) without discrete P waves
indicate AF. Discrete P waves that vary from beat to beat with at least 3 different morphologies suggest
multifocal atrial tachycardia. Regular, discrete, uniform atrial signals without intervening isoelectric periods
suggest atrial flutter.
Irregular, wide QRS complex
tachyarrhythmias include the above 4 atrial tachyarrhythmias, conducted
with either bundle branch block or ventricular preexcitation, and polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT).
Differentiation is based on atrial ECG signals and the presence in polymorphic VT of a very rapid rate (>
250/min).
Regular, narrow QRS complex
tachyarrhythmias include sinus tachycardia, atrial flutter or true atrial
tachycardia with a consistent AV conduction ratio, and paroxysmal SVTs (AV nodal reentrant SVT,
orthodromic reciprocating AV tachycardia in the presence of an accessory AV connection, and SA nodal
reentrant SVT). Vagal maneuvers or pharmacologic AV nodal blockade can help distinguish among these
tachycardias. With these maneuvers, sinus tachycardia is not terminated, but it slows or AV block
develops, disclosing normal P waves. Similarly, atrial flutter and true atrial tachycardia are usually not
terminated, but AV block discloses flutter waves or abnormal P waves. The most common forms of
paroxysmal SVT (AV nodal reentry and orthodromic reciprocating tachycardia) must terminate if AV block
occurs.
Regular, wide QRS complex
tachyarrhythmias include those listed for a regular, narrow QRS complex
tachyarrhythmia, each with bundle branch block or ventricular pre-excitation, and monomorphic VT. Vagal
maneuvers can help distinguish among them. ECG criteria to distinguish between VT and SVT with an
intraventricular conduction defect have been proposed (see
Table 213-1
). When in doubt, the rhythm is assumed to be VT because some drugs for SVTs can worsen
the clinical state if the rhythm is VT; however, the reverse is not true.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Sometimes antiarrhythmic drugs, implantable cardioverter-defibrillators, and pacemakers
The need for treatment varies; it is guided by symptoms and risks of the arrhythmia. Asymptomatic
arrhythmias without serious risks do not require treatment even if they
[Table 213-1.
Modified Brugada Criteria for Ventricular Tachycardia]
worsen. Symptomatic arrhythmias may require treatment to improve quality of life. Potentially life-
===PAGE:2307===
threatening arrhythmias require treatment.
Treatment is directed at causes. If necessary, direct antiarrhythmic therapy, including anti-arrhythmic
drugs, cardioversion-defibrillation, pacemakers, or a combination, is used. Patients with arrhythmias that
have caused or are likely to cause symptoms of hemodynamic compromise may have to be restricted
from driving until response to treatment has been assessed.
Drugs for Arrhythmias
Most antiarrhythmic drugs are grouped into 4 main classes (Vaughan Williams classification) based on
their dominant cellular electrophysiologic effect (see
Table 213-2
). Digoxin and adenosine are not included in the Vaughan Williams classification. Digoxin
shortens atrial and ventricular refractory periods and is vagotonic, thereby prolonging AV nodal
conduction and AV nodal refractory periods. Adenosine slows or blocks AV nodal conduction and can
terminate tachyarrhythmias that rely upon AV nodal conduction for their perpetuation.
Class I:
Na channel blockers (membrane-stabilizing drugs) block fast Na channels, slowing conduction in
fast-channel tissues (working atrial and ventricular myocytes, His-Purkinje system). In the ECG, this effect
may be reflected as widening of the P wave, widening of the QRS complex, prolongation of the PR
interval, or a combination.
Class I drugs are subdivided based on the kinetics of the Na channel effects. Class Ib drugs have fast
kinetics, class Ic drugs have slow kinetics, and class Ia drugs have intermediate kinetics. The kinetics of
Na channel blockade determine the heart rates at which their electrophysiologic effects become manifest.
Because class Ib drugs have fast kinetics, they express their electrophysiologic effects only at fast heart
rates. Thus, an ECG obtained during normal rhythm at normal rates usually shows no evidence of fastchannel tissue conduction slowing. Class Ib drugs are not very potent antiarrhythmics and have minimal
effects on atrial tissue. Because class Ic drugs have slow kinetics, they express their electrophysiologic
effects at all heart rates. Thus, an ECG obtained during normal rhythm at normal heart rates usually
shows fast-channel tissue conduction slowing. Class Ic drugs are more potent antiarrhythmics. Because
class Ia drugs have intermediate kinetics, their fast-channel tissue conduction slowing effects may or may
not be evident on an ECG obtained during normal rhythm at normal rates. Class Ia drugs also block
repolarizing K channels, prolonging the refractory periods of fast-channel tissues. On the ECG, this effect
is reflected as QT-interval prolongation even at normal rates. Class Ib drugs and class Ic drugs do not
block K channels directly.
The primary indications are SVTs for class Ia and Ic drugs and VTs for all class I drugs. The most
worrisome adverse effect is proarrhythmia, a drug-related arrhythmia worse than the arrhythmia being
treated. Class Ia drugs may cause torsades de pointes VT; class Ia and class Ic drugs may organize and
slow atrial tachyarrhythmias enough to permit 1:1 AV conduction with marked acceleration of the
ventricular response rate. All class I drugs may worsen VTs. They also tend to depress ventricular
contractility. Because these adverse effects are more likely to occur in patients with a structural heart
disorder, class I drugs are not generally recommended for such patients. Thus, these drugs are usually
used only in patients who do not have a structural heart disorder or in patients who have a structural
heart disorder but who have no other therapeutic alternatives.
Class II:
Class II drugs are
β
-blockers, which affect predominantly slow-channel tissues (SA and AV
nodes), where they decrease rate of automaticity, slow conduction velocity, and prolong refractoriness.
Thus, heart rate is slowed, the PR interval is lengthened, and the AV node transmits rapid atrial
depolarizations at a lower frequency. Class II drugs are used primarily to treat SVTs, including sinus
tachycardia, AV nodal reentry, AF, and atrial flutter. These drugs are also used to treat VTs to raise the
threshold for ventricular fibrillation (VF) and reduce the ventricular proarrhythmic effects of
β
-
adrenoceptor stimulation.
β
-Blockers are generally well tolerated; adverse effects include lassitude, sleep
disturbance, and GI upset. These drugs are contraindicated in patients with asthma.
Class III:
Class III drugs are primarily K channel blockers, which prolong action potential duration and
refractoriness in slow-and fast-channel tissues. Thus, the capacity of all cardiac tissues to transmit
impulses at high frequencies is reduced, but conduction velocity is not significantly affected. Because the
===PAGE:2308===
action potential is prolonged, rate of automaticity is reduced. The predominant effect on the ECG is QTinterval prolongation. These drugs are used to treat SVTs and VTs. Class III drugs have a risk of
ventricular
[Table 213-2.
Antiarrhythmic Drugs (Vaughan Williams Classification)]
proarrhythmia, particularly torsades de pointes VT.
Class IV:
Class IV drugs are the nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers, which depress Ca-dependent
action potentials in slow channel tissues and thus decrease the rate of automaticity, slow conduction
velocity, and prolong refractoriness. Heart rate is slowed, the PR interval is lengthened, and the AV node
transmits rapid atrial depolarizations at a lower frequency. These drugs are used primarily to treat SVTs.
Devices and Procedures
Direct-current (DC) cardioversiondefibrillation:
A transthoracic DC shock of sufficient magnitude
depolarizes the entire myocardium, rendering the entire heart momentarily refractory to repeat
depolarization. Thereafter, the most rapid intrinsic pacemaker, usually the SA node, reassumes control of
heart rhythm. Thus, DC cardioversion-defibrillation very effectively terminates tachyarrhythmias that result
from reentry. However, it is less effective for terminating tachyarrhythmias that result from automaticity
because the return rhythm is likely to be the automatic tachyarrhythmia. For tachyarrhythmias other than
VF, the DC shock must be synchronized to the QRS complex (called DC cardioversion) because a shock
that falls during the vulnerable period (near the peak of the T wave) can induce VF. In VF, synchronization
of a shock to the QRS complex is neither necessary nor possible. A DC shock applied without
synchronization to a QRS complex is DC defibrillation.
When DC cardioversion is elective, patients should fast for 6 to 8 h to avoid the possibility of aspiration.
Because the procedure is frightening and painful, brief general anesthesia or IV analgesia and sedation
(eg, fentanyl 1
μ
g/kg, then midazolam 1 to 2 mg q 2 min to a maximum of 5 mg) is necessary. Equipment
and personnel to maintain the airways must be present.
The electrodes (pads or paddles) used for cardioversion may be placed anteroposteriorly (along the left
sternal border over the 3rd and 4th intercostal spaces and in the left infrascapular region) or
anterolaterally (between the clavicle and the 2nd intercostal space along the right sternal border and over
the 5th and 6th intercostal spaces at the apex of the heart). After synchronization to the QRS complex is
confirmed on the monitor, a shock is given. The most appropriate energy level varies with the
tachyarrhythmia being treated. Cardioversion efficacy increases with use of biphasic shocks, in which the
current polarity is reversed part way through the shock waveform. Complications are usually minor and
include atrial and ventricular premature beats and muscle soreness. Less commonly, but more likely if
patients have marginal left ventricular function or multiple shocks are used, cardioversion precipitates
myocyte damage and electromechanical dissociation.
DC cardioversion-defibrillation can also be applied directly to the heart during a thoracotomy or through
use of an intracardiac electrode catheter; then, much lower energy levels are required.
Pacemakers:
Pacemakers sense electrical events and respond when necessary by delivering electrical
stimuli to the heart. Permanent pacemaker leads are placed via thoracotomy or transvenously, but some
temporary emergency pacemaker leads can be placed on the chest wall.
Indications are numerous (see
Table 213-3
) but generally involve symptomatic bradycardia or high-grade AV block. Some
tachyarrhythmias may be terminated by over-drive pacing with a brief period of pacing at a faster rate; the
pacemaker is then slowed to the desired rate. Nevertheless, ventricular tachyarrhythmias are better
treated with devices that can cardiovert and defibrillate as well as pace (implantable cardioverter
defibrillators).
Types of pacemakers are designated by 3 to 5 letters (see
Table 213-4
), representing which cardiac chambers are paced, which chambers are sensed, how the
===PAGE:2309===
pacemaker responds to a sensed event (inhibits or triggers pacing), whether it can increase heart rate
during exercise (rate-modulating), and whether pacing is multisite (in both atria, both ventricles, or more
than one pacing lead in a single chamber). For example, a VVIR pacemaker paces (V) and senses (V)
events in the ventricle, inhibits pacing in response to sensed event (I), and can increase its rate during
exercise (R).
VVI and DDD pacemakers are the devices most commonly used. They offer equivalent survival benefits.
Compared with VVI pacemakers, physiologic pacemakers (AAI, DDD, VDD) appear to reduce risk of AF
and heart failure and slightly improve quality of life.
Advances in pacemaker design include lower-energy circuitry, new battery designs, and corticosteroideluting leads (which reduce pacing threshold), all of which increase pacemaker longevity. Mode switching
refers to an automatic change in the mode of pacing in response to sensed events (eg, from DDDR to
VVIR during AF).
Pacemakers may malfunction by oversensing or undersensing events, failing to pace or
[Table 213-3.
Indications for Permanent Pacemakers]
[Table 213-4.
Pacemaker Codes]
capture, or pacing at an abnormal rate. Tachycardias are an especially common complication. Ratemodulating pacemakers may increase stimuli in response to vibration, muscle activity, or voltage induced
by magnetic fields during MRI. In pacemaker-mediated tachycardia, a normally functioning dual-chamber
pacemaker senses a ventricular premature or paced beat transmitted to the atrium through the AV node or
a retrograde-conducting accessory pathway, which triggers ventricular stimulation in a rapid, repeating
cycle.
Additional complications associated with normally functioning devices include crosstalk inhibition, in which
sensing of the atrial pacing impulse by the ventricular channel of a dual-chamber pacemaker leads to
inhibition of ventricular pacing, and pacemaker syndrome, in which AV asynchrony induced by ventricular
pacing causes fluctuating, vague cerebral (eg, light-headedness), cervical (eg, neck pulsations), or
respiratory (eg, dyspnea) symptoms. Pacemaker syndrome is managed by restoring AV synchrony by
atrial pacing (AAI), single-lead atrial sensing ventricular pacing (VDD), or dual-chamber pacing (DDD),
most commonly the latter.
Environmental interference comes from electromagnetic sources such as surgical electrocautery and MRI,
although MRI may be safe when the pacemaker generator and leads are not inside the magnet. Cellular
telephones and electronic security devices are a potential source of interference; telephones should not
be placed close to the device but are not a problem when used normally for talking. Walking through
metal detectors does not cause pacemaker malfunction as long as patients do not linger.
Complications during implantation are uncommon but may include myocardial perforation, bleeding, and
pneumothorax. Postoperative complications include infection, lead migration, and impulse generator
migration.
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs):
ICDs cardiovert or defibrillate the heart in response to
VT or VF. Contemporary tiered-therapy ICDs also provide antibradycardia pacing and antitachycardia
pacing (to terminate responsive atrial or ventricular tachycardias) and store intracardiac electrograms.
ICDs are implanted subcutaneously or subpectorally, with electrodes inserted transvenously into the right
ventricle and sometimes also the right atrium. A biventricular ICD has a left ventricular epicardial lead
placed.
ICDs are the preferred treatment for patients who have had an episode of VF or hemodynamically
significant VT not due to reversible or transient conditions (eg, electrolyte disturbance, antiarrhythmic
drug proarrhythmia, acute MI). ICDs may also be indicated for patients with VT or VF inducible during an
electrophysiologic study and for patients with idiopathic or ischemic cardiomyopathy, a left ventricular
ejection fraction of < 35%, and a high risk of VT or VF. Other indications are less clear (see
===PAGE:2310===
Table 213-5
).
Because ICDs treat rather than prevent VT or VF, patients prone to these arrhythmias may require an ICD
and antiarrhythmic drugs to reduce the number of episodes and need for uncomfortable shocks; this
approach also prolongs the life of the ICD.
Impulse generators for ICDs typically last about 5 yr. ICDs may malfunction by delivering inappropriate
pacing or shocks in response to sinus rhythm or SVTs or by not delivering appropriate pacing or shocks
when needed. Causes include lead or impulse generator migration, undersensing and an
[Table 213-5.
Indications for Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillators in Ventricular Tachycardia and
Ventricular Fibrillation]
increase in pacing threshold due to epicardial fibrosis at the site of prior shocks, and battery depletion.
In patients who report that the ICD has discharged but that no associated symptoms of syncope,
dyspnea, chest pain or persistent palpitations occurred, follow up with the electro-physiologist within the
week is appropriate. The ICD can then be electronically interrogated to determine the reason for
discharge. If such associated symptoms were present, or the patient received multiple shocks, emergency
department referral is indicated to look for a treatable cause (eg, coronary ischemia, electrolyte
abnormality) or device malfunction.
Radiofrequency (RF) ablation:
If a tachyarrhythmia depends on a specific pathway or ectopic site of
automaticity, the site can be ablated by low-voltage, high-frequency (300 to 750 MHz) electrical energy,
applied through an electrode catheter. This energy heats and necroses an area < 1 cm in diameter and
up to 1 cm deep. Before energy can be applied, the target site or sites must be mapped during an
electrophysiologic study (.
Success rate is > 90% for reentrant tachycardias (via the AV node or an accessory pathway), focal atrial
tachycardia and flutter, and focal idiopathic VTs (right ventricular outflow tract, left septal, or bundle
branch reentrant VT). Because AF often originates or is maintained by an arrhythmogenic site in the
pulmonary veins, this site can be ablated directly or, more commonly, electrically isolated by ablations at
the pulmonary vein-left atrial junction or in the left atrium. Alternatively, in patients with refractory AF and
rapid ventricular rates, the AV node may be ablated after permanent pacemaker implantation. RF ablation
is sometimes successful in patients with VT refractory to drugs and with ischemic heart disease.
RF ablation is safe; mortality is < 1/2000. Complications include valvular damage, pulmonary vein
stenosis or occlusion (if used to treat atrial fibrillation), stroke or other embolism, cardiac perforation,
tamponade (1%), and unintended AV node ablation.
Surgery:
Surgery to remove a focus of a tachyarrhythmia is becoming less necessary as the less
invasive RF ablation techniques evolve. But it is still indicated when an arrhythmia is refractory to RF
ablation or when another indication requires a cardiac surgical procedure, most commonly when patients
with AF require valve replacement or repair or when patients with VT require revascularization or
resection of a left ventricular aneurysm.
Sinus Node Dysfunction
(Sick Sinus Syndrome)
Sinus node dysfunction refers to a number of conditions causing physiologically inappropriate
atrial rates. Symptoms may be minimal or include weakness, palpitations, and syncope.
Diagnosis is by ECG. Symptomatic patients require a pacemaker.
Sinus node dysfunction includes inappropriate sinus bradycardia, alternating bradycardia and atrial
tachyarrhythmias (bradycardiatachycardia syndrome), sinus pause or arrest, and sinoatrial (SA) exit
block. Sinus node dysfunction affects mainly the elderly, especially those with another cardiac disorder or
diabetes.
===PAGE:2311===
Sinus pause is temporary cessation of sinus node activity, seen on ECG as disappearance of P waves for
seconds to minutes. The pause usually triggers escape activity in lower pacemakers (eg, atrial or
junctional), preserving heart rate and function, but long pauses cause dizziness and syncope.
In SA exit block, the SA node depolarizes, but conduction of impulses to atrial tissue is impaired. In 1stdegree SA block, the SA node impulse is merely slowed, and ECG is normal. In type I 2nd-degree SA (SA
Wenckebach) block, impulse conduction slows before blocking, seen on the ECG as a P-P interval that
decreases progressively until the P wave drops altogether, creating a pause and the appearance of
grouped beats; the duration of the pause is less than 2 P-P cycles. In type II 2nd-degree SA block,
conduction of impulses is blocked without slowing beforehand, producing a pause that is a multiple
(usually twice) of the P-P interval and the appearance of grouped beats. In 3rd-degree SA block,
conduction is blocked; P waves are absent, giving the appearance of sinus arrest.
The most common cause of sinus node dysfunction is idiopathic SA node fibrosis, which may be
accompanied by degeneration of lower elements of the conducting system. Other causes include drugs,
excessive vagal tone, and many ischemic, inflammatory, and infiltrative disorders.
Symptoms and Signs
Many patients are asymptomatic, but depending on the heart rate, all the symptoms of bradycardias and
tachycardias can occur (.
Diagnosis
A slow, irregular pulse suggests the diagnosis, which is confirmed by ECG, rhythm strip, or continuous
24-h ECG recording. Some
patients present with atrial fibrillation (AF), and the underlying sinus node
dysfunction manifests only after conversion to sinus rhythm.
Prognosis
Prognosis is mixed; without treatment, mortality is about 2%/yr, primarily resulting from an underlying
structural heart disorder. Each year, about 5% of patients develop AF with its risks of heart failure and
stroke.
Treatment
• Pacemaker
Treatment is pacemaker implantation. Risk of AF is greatly reduced when a physiologic (atrial or atrial and
ventricular) pacemaker rather than a ventricular pacemaker is used. Newer dual chamber pacemakers
that minimize ventricular pacing may further reduce risk of AF. Antiarrhythmic drugs may prevent
paroxysmal tachyarrhythmias after pacemaker insertion. Theophylline and hydralazine are options to
increase heart rate in healthy, younger patients who have bradycardia without syncope.
Ectopic Supraventricular Rhythms
Various rhythms result from supraventricular foci (usually in the atria); many are asymptomatic
and require no treatment.
Atrial premature beats:
Atrial premature beats (APBs), or premature atrial contractions (PACs), are
common episodic impulses. They may occur in normal hearts with or without precipitating factors (eg,
coffee, tea, alcohol, pseudoephedrine) or may be a sign of a cardiopulmonary disorder. They are common
in patients with COPD. They occasionally cause palpitations. Diagnosis is by ECG (see
Fig. 213-3
).
APBs may be normally, aberrantly, or not conducted and are usually followed by a non-compensatory
pause. Aberrantly conducted APBs (usually with right bundle branch block morphology) must be
===PAGE:2312===
distinguished from premature beats of ventricular origin.
Atrial escape beats are ectopic atrial beats that emerge after long sinus pauses or sinus arrest. They may
be single or multiple; escape beats from a single focus may produce a continuous rhythm (called ectopic
atrial rhythm). Heart rate is typically slower, P wave morphology is typically different, and PR interval is
slightly shorter than in sinus rhythm.
Wandering atrial pacemaker:
Wandering atrial pacemaker (multifocal atrial rhythm) is an irregularly
irregular rhythm caused by the random discharge of multiple ectopic atrial foci. By definition, heart rate is
≤ 100 beats/min. This arrhythmia most typically occurs in patients who have a pulmonary disorder and are
hypoxic, acidotic, theophylline-intoxicated, or a combination. On ECG, P-wave morphology differs from
beat to beat, and there are ≥ 3 distinct P-wave morphologies. The presence of P waves distinguishes
wandering atrial pacemaker from atrial fibrillation.
Multifocal atrial tachycardia:
Multifocal atrial tachycardia (chaotic atrial tachycardia) is an irregularly
irregular rhythm caused by the random discharge of multiple ectopic atrial foci. By definition, heart rate is
> 100 beats/min. Except for the rate, features are the same as those of wandering atrial pacemaker.
Symptoms, when they occur, are those of rapid tachycardia. Treatment is directed at the underlying
pulmonary disorder.
Atrial tachycardia:
Atrial tachycardia is a regular rhythm caused by the consistent, rapid atrial activation
from a single atrial focus. Heart rate is usually 150 to 200 beats/min; however, with a very rapid atrial rate,
nodal dysfunction, or digitalis toxicity, atrioventricular (AV) block may be present, and ventricular rate may
be slower. Mechanisms include enhanced atrial automaticity and intra-atrial reentry. Atrial tachycardia is
the least common form (5%) of supraventricular tachycardia and
[Fig. 213-3.
Atrial premature beat (APB).]
[Fig. 213-4.
True atrial tachycardia.]
usually occurs in patients with a structural heart disorder. Other causes include atrial irritation (eg,
pericarditis), drugs (eg, digoxin), alcohol, and toxic gas inhalation. Symptoms are those of other
tachycardias. Diagnosis is by ECG; P waves, which differ in morphology from normal sinus P waves,
precede QRS complexes but may be hidden within the preceding T wave (see
Fig. 213-4
).
Vagal maneuvers may be used to slow the heart rate, allowing visualization of P waves when they are
hidden, but these maneuvers do not usually terminate the arrhythmia (demonstrating that the AV node is
not an obligate part of the arrhythmia circuit). Treatment involves managing causes and slowing
ventricular response rate using a
β
-blocker or Ca channel blocker. An episode may be terminated by
direct-current cardioversion. Pharmacologic approaches to termination and prevention of atrial
tachycardia include antiarrhythmic drugs in class Ia, Ic, or III. If these noninvasive measures are
ineffective, alternatives include overdrive pacing and radiofrequency ablation.
Nonparoxysmal junctional tachycardia:
Nonparoxysmal junctional tachycardia is caused by abnormal
automaticity in the AV node or adjacent tissue, which typically follows open heart surgery, acute inferior
MI, myocarditis, or digitalis toxicity. Heart rate is 60 to 120 beats/min; thus, symptoms are usually absent.
ECG shows regular, normal-appearing QRS complexes without identifiable P waves or with retrograde P
waves (inverted in the inferior leads) that occur shortly before (< 0.1 sec) or after the QRS complex. The
rhythm is distinguished from paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia by the lower heart rate and gradual
onset and offset. Treatment is directed at causes.
Atrioventricular Block
Atrioventricular (AV) block is partial or complete interruption of impulse transmission from the
atria to the ventricles. The most common cause is idiopathic fibrosis and sclerosis of the
conduction system. Diagnosis is by ECG; symptoms and treatment depend on degree of block,
but treatment, when necessary, usually involves pacing.
===PAGE:2313===
AV block is caused by idiopathic fibrosis and sclerosis of the conduction system in about 50% of patients
and by ischemic heart disease in 40%; the rest are due to drugs (eg,
β
-blockers, Ca channel blockers,
digoxin, amiodarone); increased vagal tone; valvulopathy; or congenital heart, genetic, or other disorders.
First-degree AV block:
All normal P waves are followed by QRS complexes, but the PR interval is longer
than normal (> 0.20 sec—see
Fig. 213-5
).
First-degree AV block may be physiologic in younger patients with high vagal tone and in well-trained
athletes. First-degree AV block is rarely symptomatic and no treatment is required, but further investigation
may be indicated when it accompanies another heart disorder or appears to be caused by drugs.
Second-degree AV block:
Some normal P waves are followed by QRS complexes, but some are not.
Three types exist:
In Mobitz type I 2nd-degree AV block, the PR interval progressively lengthens with each beat until the
atrial impulse is not conducted and the QRS complex is dropped (Wenckebach phenomenon); AV nodal
conduction resumes with the next beat, and the sequence is repeated (see
Fig. 213-6
).
Mobitz type I 2nd-degree AV block may be physiologic in younger and more athletic
[Fig. 213-5.
Atrioventricular block.]
[Fig. 213-6.
Mobitz type I 2nd-degree atrioventricular block.]
[Fig. 213-7.
Mobitz type II 2nd-degree atrioventricular block.]
patients. The block occurs at the AV node in about 75% of patients with a narrow QRS complex and at
infranodal sites (His bundle, bundle branches, or fascicles) in the rest. If the block becomes complete, a
reliable junctional escape rhythm typically develops. Treatment is therefore unnecessary unless the block
causes symptomatic bradycardia and transient or reversible causes have been excluded. Treatment is
pacemaker insertion, which may also benefit asymptomatic patients with Mobitz type I 2nd-degree AV
block at infranodal sites detected by electrophysiologic studies done for other reasons.
In Mobitz type II 2nd-degree AV block, the PR interval remains constant. Beats are intermittently
nonconducted and QRS complexes dropped, usually in a repeating cycle of every 3rd (3:1 block) or 4th
(4:1 block) P wave (see
Fig. 213-7
).
Mobitz type II 2nd-degree AV block is always pathologic; the block occurs at the His bundle in 20% of
patients and in the bundle branches in the rest. Patients may be asymptomatic or experience lightheadedness, presyncope, and syncope, depending on the ratio of conducted to blocked beats. Patients
are at risk of developing symptomatic high-grade or complete AV block, in which the escape rhythm is
likely to be ventricular and thus too slow and unreliable to maintain systemic perfusion; therefore, a
pacemaker is indicated.
In high-grade 2nd-degree AV block, every 2nd (or more) P wave is blocked (see
Fig. 213-8
).
The distinction between Mobitz type I and Mobitz type II block is difficult to make because
[Fig. 213-8.
Second-degree atrioventricular block (high grade).]
[Fig. 213-9.
Third-degree atrioventricular block.]
===PAGE:2314===
2 P waves are never conducted in a row. Risk of complete AV block is difficult to predict, and a pacemaker
is indicated.
Patients with any form of 2nd-degree AV block and a structural heart disorder should be considered
candidates for permanent pacing unless there is a transient or reversible cause.
Third-degree AV block:
Heart block is complete (see
Fig. 213-9
).
There is no electrical communication between the atria and ventricles and no relationship between P
waves and QRS complexes (AV dissociation). Cardiac function is maintained by an escape junctional or
ventricular pacemaker. Escape rhythms originating above the bifurcation of the His bundle produce
narrow QRS complexes, relatively rapid (> 40 beats/min) and reliable heart rates, and mild symptoms (eg,
fatigue, postural light-headedness, effort intolerance). Escape rhythms originating below the bifurcation
produce wider QRS complexes, slower and unreliable heart rates, and more severe symptoms (eg,
presyncope, syncope, heart failure). Signs include those of AV dissociation, such as cannon
a
waves, BP
fluctuations, and changes in loudness of the 1st heart sound (S
). Risk of asystole-related syncope and
sudden death is greater if low escape rhythms are present.
Most patients require a pacemaker (see
Table 213-4
). If the block is caused by anti-arrhythmic drugs,
stopping the drug may be effective, although temporary pacing may be needed. A block caused by acute
inferior MI usually reflects AV nodal dysfunction and may respond to atropine or resolve spontaneously
over several days. A block caused by anterior MI usually reflects extensive myocardial necrosis involving
the His-Purkinje system and requires immediate transvenous pacemaker insertion with interim external
pacing as necessary. Spontaneous resolution may occur but warrants evaluation of AV nodal and
infranodal conduction (eg, electrophysiologic study, exercise testing, 24-h ECG).
Most patients with congenital 3rd-degree AV block have a junctional escape rhythm that maintains a
reasonable rate, but they require a permanent pacemaker before they reach middle age. Less commonly,
patients with congenital AV block have a slow escape rhythm and require a permanent pacemaker at a
young age, perhaps even during infancy.
Atrial Fibrillation
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a rapid, irregularly irregular atrial rhythm. Symptoms include palpitations
and sometimes weakness, dyspnea, and presyncope. Atrial thrombi often form, causing a
significant risk of embolic stroke. Diagnosis is by ECG. Treatment involves rate control with
drugs, prevention of thromboembolism with anticoagulation, and sometimes conversion to
sinus rhythm by drugs or cardioversion.
AF has been attributed to multiple wave-lets with chaotic reentry within the atria. However, in many cases,
firing of an ectopic focus within venous structures adjacent to the atria (usually the pulmonary veins) is
responsible for initiation and perhaps maintenance of AF. In AF, the atria do not contract, and the
atrioventricular (AV) conduction system is
bombarded with many electrical stimuli, causing inconsistent
impulse transmission and an irregularly irregular ventricular rate, which is usually in the tachycardia rate
range.
AF is one of the most common arrhythmias, affecting about 2.3 million adults in the US. Men and whites
are more likely to have AF than women and blacks. Prevalence increases with age; almost 10% of people
> 80 yr are affected. It tends to occur in patients with a heart disorder, sometimes precipitating heart
failure because cardiac output decreases. The absent atrial contractions predispose to thrombus
formation; annual risk of cerebrovascular embolic events is about 7%. Risk of stroke is higher in patients
with a rheumatic valvular disorder, hyperthyroidism, hypertension, diabetes, left ventricular systolic
dysfunction, or previous thromboembolic events. Systemic emboli can also cause malfunction or necrosis
of other organs (eg, heart, kidneys, GI tract, eyes) or a limb.
Etiology
The most common causes are hypertension, ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy, mitral or tricuspid
===PAGE:2315===
valvular disorders, hyperthyroidism, and binge alcohol drinking (holiday heart). Less common causes
include pulmonary embolism, atrial septal and other congenital heart defects, COPD, myocarditis, and
pericarditis. AF without an identifiable cause in patients < 60 yr is called lone AF.
Classification
Acute AF is new-onset AF lasting < 48 h.
Paroxysmal AF is recurrent AF that typically lasts < 48 h and that converts spontaneously to normal sinus
rhythm.
Persistent AF lasts > 1 wk and requires treatment to convert to normal sinus rhythm.
Permanent AF cannot be converted to sinus rhythm. The longer AF is present, the less likely is
spontaneous conversion and the more difficult is cardioversion because of atrial remodeling (rapid atrial
rate-induced changes in atrial electrophysiology that are dominated by a decrease in atrial refractoriness
and may also include increase in spatial dispersion of atrial refractoriness slowed atrial conduction
velocity, or both).
Symptoms and Signs
AF is often asymptomatic, but many patients have palpitations, vague chest discomfort, or symptoms of
heart failure (eg, weakness, light-headedness, dyspnea), particularly when the ventricular rate is very
rapid (often 140 to 160 beats/min). Patients may also present with symptoms and signs of acute stroke or
of other organ damage due to systemic emboli.
The pulse is irregularly irregular with loss of
a
waves in the jugular venous pulse. A pulse deficit (the
apical ventricular rate is faster than the rate palpated at the wrist) may be present because left ventricular
stroke volume is not always sufficient to produce a peripheral pressure wave at fast ventricular rates.
Diagnosis
• ECG
• Echocardiography
• Thyroid function tests
Diagnosis is by ECG. Findings include absence of P waves, f (fibrillatory) waves between QRS
complexes (irregular in timing, irregular in morphology; baseline undulations at rates > 300/min not always
apparent in all leads), and irregularly irregular R-R intervals (see
Fig. 213-10
).
Other irregular rhythms may resemble AF on ECG but can be distinguished by the presence of discrete P
or flutter waves, which can sometimes be made more visible with vagal maneuvers. Muscle tremor or
electrical interference may resemble f waves, but the underlying rhythm is regular. AF may also cause a
phenomenon that mimics ventricular extrasystoles or ventricular tachycardia (Ashman phenomenon). This
phenomenon typically occurs when a short R-R interval follows a long R-R interval; the longer interval
lengthens the refractory period of the infra-Hisian conduction system, and subsequent QRS complexes
are conducted aberrantly, typically with right bundle branch morphology.
Echocardiography and thyroid function tests are important in the initial evaluation. Echocardiography is
done to assess structural heart defects (eg, left atrial enlargement, left ventricular wall motion
abnormalities suggesting past or present ischemia, valvular disorders, cardiomyopathy) and to identify
additional risk factors for stroke (eg, atrial blood stasis or thrombus, complex aortic plaque). Atrial thrombi
are more likely in the atrial appendages, where they are best detected by transesophageal rather than
transthoracic echocardiography.
===PAGE:2316===
Treatment
• Rate control with drugs or AV node radio-frequency ablation
• Sometimes rhythm control with cardioversion, drugs, or AF substrate ablation
• Prevention of thromboembolism
If a significant underlying disorder is suspected, patients with new-onset AF may benefit from
hospitalization, but those with recurrent episodes do not require hospitalization unless
[Fig. 213-10.
Atrial fibrillation.]
other symptoms suggest the need for it. Once causes have been managed, treatment of AF focuses on
ventricular rate control, rhythm control, and prevention of thromboembolism.
Ventricular rate control:
Patients with AF of any duration require rate control (typically to < 80 beats/min
at rest) to control symptoms and prevent tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.
For acute paroxysms of rapid rate (eg, 140 to 160 beats/min), IV AV node blockers are used (for doses,
see
Table 213-2
). CAUTION
: AV node blockers should not be used in patients with Wolff-ParkinsonWhite syndrome when an accessory AV pathway is involved (indicated by wide QRS duration); these
drugs increase frequency of conduction via the bypass tract, possibly causing ventricular fibrillation.

β
-
Blockers (eg, metoprolol, esmolol) are preferred if excess catecholamines are suspected (eg, in thyroid
disorders, exercise-triggered cases). Nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers (eg, verapamil, diltiazem)
are also effective. Digoxin is the least effective but may be preferred if heart failure is present. These
drugs may be used orally for long-term rate control. When
β
-blockers, nondihydropyridine Ca channel
blockers, and digoxin—separately or in combination—are ineffective, amiodarone may be required.
Rhythm control:
In patients with heart failure or other hemodynamic compromise directly attributable to
new-onset AF, restoration of normal sinus rhythm is indicated to improve cardiac output. In other cases,
conversion of AF to normal sinus rhythm is optimal, but the antiarrhythmic drugs that are capable of doing
so (class Ia, Ic, III) have a risk of adverse effects and may increase mortality. Conversion to sinus rhythm
does not necessarily eliminate the need for chronic anticoagulation.
For acute conversion, synchronized cardioversion or drugs can be used. Before conversion is attempted,
the ventricular rate should be controlled to < 120 beats/min, and, if AF has been present > 48 h, patients
should be given anticoagulants (conversion, regardless of method used, increases risk of
thromboembolism). Anticoagulation with warfarin ( should be maintained for > 3 wk before
conversion when possible and continued indefinitely because AF may recur. Alternatively, the patient can
be anticoagulated with heparin, and transesophageal echocardiography done; if there is no intra-atrial
clot, cardioversion can be done immediately.
Synchronized cardioversion (100 joules, followed by 200 and 360 joules as needed) converts AF to
normal sinus rhythm in 75 to 90% of patients, although recurrence rate is high. Efficacy and maintenance
of sinus rhythm after the procedure is improved with use of class Ia, Ic, or III drugs 24 to 48 h before the
procedure. Cardioversion is more effective in patients with shorter duration of AF, lone AF, or AF with a
reversible cause; it is less effective when the left atrium is enlarged (> 5 cm), atrial appendage flow is low,
or a significant underlying structural heart disorder is present.
Drugs for conversion to sinus rhythm include class Ia (procainamide, quinidine, disopyramide), Ic
(flecainide, propafenone), and III (amiodarone, dofetilide, ibutilide, sotalol) antiarrhythmics (see
Table 213-
). All are effective in about 50 to 60% of patients, but adverse effects differ. These drugs should not
be
used until rate has been controlled by a
β
blocker or nondihydropyridine Ca channel blocker. These
converting drugs are also used for long-term maintenance of sinus rhythm (with or without previous
cardioversion). Choice depends on patient tolerance. However, for paroxysmal AF that occurs only or
almost only at rest or during sleep when vagal tone is high, drugs with vagolytic effects (eg,
disopyramide) may be particularly effective. Exercise-induced AF may be better prevented with a
β
-
===PAGE:2317===
blocker.
For certain patients with recurrent paroxysmal AF who also can identify its onset by symptoms, some
clinicians provide a single oral loading dose of flecainide (300 mg for patients ≥ 70 kg otherwise 200 mg)
or propafenone (600 mg for patients ≥ 70 kg, otherwise 450 mg) that patients carry and self-administer
when palpitations develop ("pillin-the-pocket" approach). This approach must be limited to patients who
have no sinoatrial or AV node dysfunction, bundle branch block, QT prolongation, Brugada syndrome, or
structural heart disease. Its hazard (estimated at 1%) is the possibility of converting AF to a slowish atrial
flutter that conducts 1:1 in the 200 to 240 beat/min range.
ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, and aldosterone blockers may attenuate the myocardial
fibrosis that provides a substrate for AF in patients with heart failure, but the role of these drugs in routine
AF treatment has yet to be defined.
Ablation procedures:
For patients who do not respond to or cannot take rate-controlling drugs,
radiofrequency ablation of the AV node may be done to produce complete heart block; insertion of a
permanent pacemaker is then necessary. Ablation of only one AV nodal pathway (AV node modification)
reduces the number of atrial impulses reaching the ventricles and eliminates the need for a pacemaker,
but this approach is considered less effective than complete ablation and is rarely used.
Ablation procedures that isolate the pulmonary veins from the left atrium can prevent AF without
producing AV block. In comparison to other ablation procedures, pulmonary vein isolation has a lower
success rate (60 to 80%) and a higher complication rate (1 to 5%). Accordingly, this procedure is often
reserved for the best candidates—younger patients with drug-resistant AF who have no significant
structural heart disease.
Prevention of thromboembolism:
Measures to prevent thromboembolism are necessary at the time of
cardioversion and during long-term treatment of most patients.
Warfarin titrated to an INR of 2 to 3 should be given for ≥ 3 wk before elective cardioversion of lone AF
present for > 48 h and continued for 4 wk after successful cardioversion. Anticoagulants should be
continued indefinitely for patients with recurrent paroxysmal, persistent, or permanent AF in the presence
of risk factors for thromboembolism. Healthy patients with a single episode of lone AF are given
anticoagulants for 4 wk.
Aspirin is less effective than warfarin but is used for patients with no risk factors for thromboembolism or
those with contraindications to warfarin. Direct thrombin inhibitors that do not require INR monitoring may
be equivalent to warfarin for stroke prevention in high-risk patients, but they require further study before
being recommended for mainstream use. The left atrial appendage may be surgically ligated or closed
with a transcatheter device when warfarin and antiplatelet drugs are absolutely contraindicated.
Atrial Flutter
Atrial flutter is a rapid regular atrial rhythm due to an atrial macro-reentrant circuit. Symptoms
are mainly palpitations. Atrial thrombi may form and embolize. Diagnosis is by ECG. Treatment
involves rate control with drugs, prevention of thromboembolism with anticoagulants, and often
conversion to sinus rhythm with drugs or cardioversion.
Atrial flutter is much less common than atrial fibrillation, but its causes and hemodynamic consequences
are similar. Many patients with atrial flutter also have periods of atrial fibrillation.
Classical atrial flutter is due to a large reentrant circuit involving most of the right atrium. The atria
depolarize at a rate of 250 to 350/min (typically 300/min). Because the atrioventricular (AV) node cannot
usually conduct at this rate, typically half of the impulses get through (2:1 block), resulting in a regular
ventricular rate of 150 beats/min. Sometimes the block varies from moment to moment, causing an
irregular ventricular rhythm. Less commonly, a fixed 3:1, 4:1, or 5:1 block may be present.
The probability of a thromboembolic event, once considered rare in atrial flutter, is now thought to be
===PAGE:2318===
about half of that in atrial fibrillation.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms depend primarily on ventricular rate and the nature of any underlying heart
disorder. If
ventricular rate is < 120 beats/min and regular, there are likely to be few or no symptoms. Faster rates
and variable AV conduction usually cause palpitations, and decreased cardiac output may cause
symptoms of hemodynamic compromise (eg, chest discomfort, dyspnea, weakness, syncope). Close
inspection of the jugular venous pulse reveals flutter
a
waves.
Diagnosis
• ECG
The diagnosis is by ECG, which shows continuous and regular atrial activation with a sawtooth pattern,
most obvious in leads II, III, and aVF (see
Fig. 213-11
).
Carotid sinus massage can increase AV block and better expose the typical flutter waves. A similar
response may follow pharmacologic AV nodal blockade (eg, with adenosine), but such therapy does not
terminate atrial flutter.
Treatment
• Rate control with drugs
• Rhythm control with cardioversion, drugs, or ablation
• Prevention of thromboembolism
As for atrial fibrillation, treatment focuses on ventricular rate control, rhythm control, and prevention of
thromboembolism. However, pharmacologic rate control is more difficult to achieve in atrial flutter than in
atrial fibrillation. Thus for most patients, electrical conversion (using synchronized cardioversion or
overdrive pacing) is the treatment of choice for an initial episode and is mandatory with 1:1 AV conduction
or hemodynamic compromise. Typically, low-energy (50 joules) conversion is effective. Anticoagulation, as
in atrial fibrillation, is necessary before cardioversion.
If drugs are used to restore sinus rhythm, rate must first be controlled with
β
-blockers or
nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers (eg, verapamil, diltiazem). Many of the antiarrhythmics that can
restore sinus rhythm (especially class Ia and Ic) can slow atrial flutter, shorten AV nodal refractoriness (by
their vagolytic effects), or do both enough to allow 1:1 conduction with paradoxical increase in ventricular
rate and hemodynamic compromise. These drugs may be used for long-term maintenance as required to
prevent recurrence.
An antitachycardia pacing system is an alternative to long-term use of antiarrhythmics in selected
patients. Also, ablation procedures designed to interrupt the atrial reentrant circuit may effectively prevent
atrial flutter, particularly classic atrial flutter.
Patients with chronic or recurrent atrial flutter require warfarin (to maintain an INR of 2 to 3) or aspirin
therapy long-term. The choice between the 2 therapies is based on the same considerations as for atrial
fibrillation.
[Fig. 213-11.
Atrial flutter with variable atrioventricular block.]
Reentrant Supraventricular Tachycardias
Reentrant supraventricular tachycardias involve reentrant pathways with a component above
the bifurcation of the His bundle. Patients have sudden episodes of palpitations that begin and
===PAGE:2319===
terminate abruptly; some have dyspnea or chest discomfort. Diagnosis is clinical and by ECG.
Treatment is with vagotonic maneuvers and, if they are ineffective, with IV adenosine or
nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers for narrow QRS rhythms, procainamide or amiodarone
for wide QRS rhythms, or synchronized cardioversion for all cases.
Pathophysiology
The reentry pathway (see
Fig. 213-1
) in supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is within the atrioventricular
(AV) node in about 50%, involves an accessory bypass tract in 40%, and is within the atria or sinoatrial
(SA) node in 10%.
AV nodal reentrant tachycardia occurs most often in otherwise healthy patients. It is most commonly
triggered by an atrial premature beat.
Accessory pathway reentrant tachycardia involves tracts of conducting tissue that partially or totally
bypass normal AV connections (bypass tracts). They run most commonly from the atria directly to the
ventricles and less commonly from the atrium to a portion of the conduction system or from a portion of
the conduction system to the ventricle. They can be triggered by atrial premature beats or ventricular
premature beats.
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome:
WPW (preexcitation) syndrome is the most common
accessory pathway SVT, occurring in about 1 to 3/1000 people. WPW syndrome is mainly idiopathic,
although it is more common among patients with hypertrophic or other forms of cardiomyopathy,
transposition of the great vessels, or Epstein's anomaly.
In classic (or manifest) WPW syndrome, antegrade conduction occurs over both the accessory pathway
and the normal conducting system during sinus rhythm. The accessory pathway, being faster, depolarizes
some of the ventricle early, resulting in a short PR interval and a slurred upstroke to the QRS complex
(delta wave—see
Fig. 213-12
).
The delta wave prolongs QRS duration to > 0.1 sec, although the overall configuration, apart from the
delta wave, may appear normal. Depending on the orientation of the delta wave, a pseudoinfarction
pattern Q-wave may be present. Because the early depolarized parts of the ventricle also repolarize early,
the T-wave vector may be abnormal.
In concealed WPW syndrome, the accessory pathway does not conduct in an antegrade direction;
consequently, the above ECG abnormalities do not appear. However, it conducts in a retrograde direction
and thus can participate in reentrant tachycardia.
In the most common form of reentrant tachycardia (called orthodromic reciprocating tachycardia), the
circuit uses the normal AV conduction pathway to activate the ventricles, returning to the atrium via the
accessory AV connection. The resultant QRS complex is thus narrow (unless bundle branch block
[Fig. 213-12.
Classic Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome.]
coexists) and without a delta wave. Orthodromic reciprocating tachycardia is typically a short RP
tachycardia with the retrograde P wave in the ST segment.
Rarely, the reentrant circuit revolves in the opposite direction, from the atrium to the ventricle via the
accessory AV connection, and returns from the ventricle in the retrograde direction up the normal AV
conduction system (called antidromic reciprocating tachycardia). The QRS complex is wide because the
ventricles are activated abnormally. In patients with 2 accessory AV connections (not uncommon), a
reciprocating tachycardia using one accessory connection in the antegrade direction and the other in the
retrograde direction may occur.
Tachycardias in WPW syndrome may begin as or degenerate into atrial fibrillation (AF), which can be very
dangerous (. Enlarged atria due to hypertrophic and other forms of cardiomyopathy makes
===PAGE:2320===
patients with WPW syndrome more prone to AF.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present during young adulthood or middle age. They typically have episodes of suddenonset, sudden-offset, rapid, regular palpitations often associated with symptoms of hemodynamic
compromise (eg, dyspnea, chest discomfort, light-headedness). Attacks may last only a few seconds or
persist for several hours (rarely, > 12 h).
Infants present with episodic breathlessness, lethargy, feeding problems, or rapid precordial pulsations. If
the episode of tachycardia is protracted, they may present with heart failure.
Examination is usually unremarkable except for a heart rate of 160 to 240 beats/min.
Diagnosis
• ECG
Diagnosis is by ECG showing rapid, regular tachycardia. Previous tracings, if available, are reviewed for
signs of manifest WPW syndrome.
P waves vary. In most cases of AV node re-entry, retrograde P waves are in the terminal portion of the
QRS complex (often producing a pseudo-R´ deflection in lead V
); about one third occur just after the
QRS complex, and very few occur before. P waves always follow the QRS complex in orthodromic
reciprocating tachycardia of WPW syndrome.
QRS complex is narrow except with coexisting bundle branch block, antidromic tachycardia, or dual
accessory connection reciprocating tachycardia. Wide-complex tachycardia must be distinguished from
ventricular tachycardia (see
Table 213-5
and
Figs. 213-12
and
213-13
).
Treatment
• Vagotonic maneuvers
• Adenosine
• Verapamil or diltiazem if narrow QRS complex
• For frequent recurrence, radiofrequency ablation
Many episodes stop spontaneously before treatment. Vagotonic maneuvers (eg, Valsalva maneuver,
unilateral carotid sinus massage, ice water facial immersion, swallowing of ice-cold water), particularly if
used early, may terminate the tachyarrhythmia; some patients use these maneuvers at home.
If these maneuvers are ineffective and the QRS complex is narrow (indicating orthodromic conduction),
AV node blockers are used;
[Fig. 213-13.
Narrow QRS tachycardia: Orthodromic reciprocating tachycardia using an accessory
pathway in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.]
blocking conduction through the AV node for one beat interrupts the reentrant cycle. Adenosine is the first
choice. Dose is 6 mg by rapid IV bolus (0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg in children), followed by a 20-mL saline bolus. If
this dosage is ineffective, 2 subsequent 12-mg doses are given q 5 min. Adenosine sometimes causes a
brief (2- to 3-sec) period of cardiac standstill, which may distress patient and physician. Verapamil 5 mg IV
or diltiazem 0.25 to 0.35 mg/kg IV are alternatives.
For a regular, wide QRS complex tachycardia known to be an antidromic reciprocating tachycardia not
===PAGE:2321===
involving double accessory pathways (which must be identified by the history; they cannot be established
acutely), AV nodal blockers may also be effective. However, if the mechanism of the tachycardia is
unknown, ventricular tachycardia has not been excluded, and AV nodal blockers should be avoided
because they may worsen ventricular tachycardias. In such cases (or those in which drugs are
ineffective), IV procainamide or amiodarone can be used. Alternatively, synchronized cardioversion with
50 joules (0.5 to 2 joules/kg for children) is quick and safe and may be preferred to these more toxic
drugs.
When episodes of AV nodal reentrant tachycardia are frequent or bothersome, options include long-term
antiarrhythmics or transvenous catheter radiofrequency ablation. Generally, ablation is recommended, but
if it is not acceptable, drug prophylaxis usually begins with digoxin and proceeds, as required, to
β
-
blockers, nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers, or both, then to one or more class Ia, class Ic, or class
III antiarrhythmics.
Atrial Fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a medical emergency in the setting of antegrade conduction over an
accessory pathway in Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome.
In manifest WPW syndrome, antegrade conduction occurs over the accessory pathway. If AF develops,
the normal rate-limiting effects of the atrioventricular (AV) node are bypassed, and the resultant excessive
ventricular rates (sometimes 200 to 240 beats/min) may lead to ventricular fibrillation (see
Fig. 213-14
) and sudden death. Patients with concealed WPW syndrome are not at risk because in them,
antegrade conduction does not occur over the accessory connection.
[Fig. 213-14.
Atrial fibrillation in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.]
The treatment of choice is direct-current cardioversion. The usual rate-slowing drugs used in AF are not
effective, and digoxin and the nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers (eg, verapamil, diltiazem) are
contraindicated because they may increase the ventricular rate and cause ventricular fibrillation. If
cardioversion is impossible, drugs that prolong the refractory period of the accessory connection should
be used. IV procainamide or amiodarone is preferred, but any class Ia, class Ic, or class III antiarrhythmic
can be used.
Bundle Branch and Fascicular Block
Bundle branch block is partial or complete interruption of impulse conduction in a bundle
branch; fascicular block is similar interruption in a hemifascicle of the bundle. The 2 disorders
often coexist. There are usually no symptoms, but presence of either suggests a heart disorder.
Diagnosis is by ECG. No specific treatment is indicated.
Conduction blocks can be caused by many heart disorders, including intrinsic degeneration without
another associated heart disorder.
Right bundle branch block (RBBB—see
Fig. 213-15
) can occur in apparently normal people. It may also occur with anterior MI, indicating
substantial myocardial injury. New appearance of RBBB should prompt a search for underlying cardiac
pathology, but often, none is found. Transient RBBB may occur after pulmonary embolism. Although
RBBB distorts the QRS complex, it does not significantly interfere with ECG diagnosis of MI.
Left bundle branch block (LBBB—see
Fig. 213-16
) is associated with a structural heart disorder more often than is RBBB. LBBB usually
precludes use of ECG for diagnosis of MI.
Fascicular block involves the anterior or posterior fascicle of the left bundle branch. Interruption of the left
anterior fascicle causes left anterior hemiblock characterized by modest QRS prolongation (< 120 msec)
and a frontal plane QRS axis more negative than -30° (left axis deviation). Left posterior hemiblock is
associated with a frontal plane QRS axis more positive than +120°. The associations between hemiblocks
===PAGE:2322===
and a structural heart disorder are the same as for LBBB.
Hemiblocks may coexist with other conduction disturbances: RBBB and left anterior or posterior
hemiblock (bifascicular block); and left anterior or posterior hemiblock, RBBB, and 1st-degree
atrioventricular (AV) block (incorrectly called trifascicular block; 1st-degree block is usually AV nodal in
origin). Trifascicular block refers to RBBB with alternating left anterior and left posterior hemiblock or
alternating LBBB and RBBB. Presence of bifascicular or trifascicular block after MI implies extensive
cardiac damage. Bifascicular blocks require no direct treatment unless intermittent 2nd- or 3rd-degree AV
block is present. True trifascicular blocks require immediate, then permanent pacing.
Nonspecific intraventricular conduction defects are diagnosed when the QRS complex is
[Fig. 213-15.
Right bundle branch block.]
[Fig. 213-16.
Left bundle branch block.]
prolonged (> 120 msec), but the QRS pattern is not typical of LBBB or RBBB. The conduction delay may
occur beyond the Purkinje fibers and result from slow cell-to-cell myocyte conduction. No specific
treatment is indicated.
Ventricular Premature Beats
Ventricular premature beats (VPBs) are single ventricular impulses caused by reentry within the
ventricle or abnormal automaticity of ventricular cells. They are extremely common in healthy
patients and in patients with a heart disorder. VPBs may be asymptomatic or cause palpitations.
Diagnosis is by ECG. Treatment is usually not required.
VPBs, also called premature ventricular contractions (PVCs), may occur erratically or at predictable
intervals (eg, every 3rd [trigeminy] or 2nd [bigeminy] beat). VPBs may increase with stimulants (eg,
anxiety, stress, alcohol, caffeine, sympathomimetic drugs), hypoxia, or electrolyte abnormalities.
VPBs may be experienced as missed or skipped beats; the VPB itself is not sensed but rather the
following augmented sinus beat. When VPBs are very frequent, particularly when they represent every
2nd heart beat, mild hemodynamic symptoms are possible because the sinus rate has been effectively
halved. Existing ejection murmurs may be accentuated because of increased cardiac filling and
augmented contractility after the compensatory pause.
Diagnosis
• ECG
Diagnosis is by ECG showing a wide QRS complex without a preceding P wave, typically followed by a
fully compensatory pause.
Prognosis
VPBs are not significant in patients without a heart disorder, and no treatment is required beyond avoiding
obvious triggers.
β
-Blockers are offered only if symptoms are intolerable. Other antiarrhythmics that
suppress VPBs increase risk of more serious arrhythmias.
Treatment
•
β
-Blockers for patients with symptomatic heart failure and after MI
In patients with a structural heart disorder (eg, aortic stenosis, post MI), treatment is controversial even
though frequent VPBs (> 10/h) correlate with increased mortality, because no studies have shown that
pharmacologic suppression reduces mortality. In post-MI patients, mortality rate is higher with class I
antiarrhythmics than with placebo. This finding probably reflects adverse effects of the antiarrhythmics.
β
-
===PAGE:2323===
Blockers are beneficial in symptomatic heart failure and post MI. If VPBs increase during exercise in a
patient with coronary artery disease, evaluation for percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty or
coronary artery bypass graft surgery should be considered.
Ventricular Tachycardia
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is ≥ 3 consecutive ventricular beats at a rate ≥ 120 beats/min.
Symptoms depend on duration and vary from none to palpitations to hemodynamic collapse
and death. Diagnosis is by ECG. Treatment of more than brief episodes is with cardioversion or
antiarrhythmics depending on symptoms. If necessary, long-term treatment is with an
implantable cardioverter defibrillator.
Some experts use a cutoff rate of ≥ 100 beats/min for VT. Repetitive ventricular rhythms at slower rates
are called accelerated idioventricular rhythms or slow VT; they are usually benign and are not treated
unless associated with hemodynamic symptoms.
Most patients with VT have a significant heart disorder, particularly prior MI or a cardiomyopathy.
Electrolyte abnormalities (particularly hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia), acidemia, hypoxemia, and
adverse drug effects contribute. The long QT syndrome (congenital or acquired) is associated with a
particular form of VT, torsades de pointes.
VT may be monomorphic or polymorphic and nonsustained or sustained. Monomorphic VT results from a
single abnormal focus or reentrant pathway and has regular, identical-appearing QRS complexes.
Polymorphic VT results from several different foci or pathways and is thus irregular, with varying QRS
complexes. Nonsustained VT lasts < 30 sec; sustained VT lasts ≥ 30 sec or is terminated sooner because
of hemodynamic collapse. VT frequently deteriorates to ventricular fibrillation and thus cardiac arrest (see
p.
).
Symptoms and Signs
VT of short duration or slow rate may be asymptomatic. Sustained VT is almost always symptomatic,
causing palpitations, symptoms of hemodynamic compromise, or sudden cardiac death.
Diagnosis
• ECG
Diagnosis is by ECG (see
Fig. 213-17
). Any wide QRS complex tachycardia (QRS ≥ 0.12 sec) should be considered VT until proved
otherwise. Diagnosis is supported by ECG findings of dissociated P-wave activity, fusion or capture
beats, uniformity of QRS vectors in the V leads (concordance) with discordant T-wave vector (opposite
QRS vectors), and a frontal-plane QRS axis in the northwest quadrant. Differential diagnosis includes
supraventricular tachycardia conducted with bundle branch block or via an accessory pathway (see
Table
213-1
). However, because some patients tolerate VT surprisingly well, concluding that a well-tolerated
wide
[Fig. 213-17.
Broad QRS ventricular tachycardia.]
QRS complex tachycardia must be of supraventricular origin is a mistake. Using drugs appropriate for
supraventricular tachycardia (eg, verapamil, diltiazem) in patients with VT may cause hemodynamic
collapse and death.
Treatment
• Acute: Sometimes synchronized direct-current cardioversion, sometimes lidocaine
• Long-term: Usually an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator
===PAGE:2324===
Acute:
Treatment depends on symptoms and duration of VT. Hypotensive VT requires synchronized
direct-current cardioversion with ≥ 100 joules. Stable sustained VT can be treated with IV drugs, usually
lidocaine (see
Table 213-2
), which acts quickly but is frequently ineffective. If lidocaine is ineffective, IV
procainamide may be given, but it may take up to 1 h to work. Failure of IV procainamide is an indication
for cardioversion.
Nonsustained VT does not require immediate treatment unless the runs are frequent or long enough to
cause symptoms. In such cases, antiarrhythmics are used as for sustained VT.
Long-term:
The primary goal is preventing sudden death, rather than simply suppressing the arrhythmia.
It is best accomplished by use of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD—. However,
the decision about whom to treat is complex and depends on the estimated probability of life-threatening
VTs and the severity of underlying heart disorders (see
Table 213-5
).
Long-term treatment is not required when the index episode of VT resulted from a transient cause (eg,
during the 48 h after onset of MI) or a reversible cause (acid-base disturbances, electrolyte abnormalities,
proarrhythmic drug effect).
In the absence of a transient or reversible cause, patients who have had an episode of sustained VT
typically require an ICD. Most patients with sustained VT and a significant structural heart disorder should
also receive a
β
-blocker. If an ICD cannot be used, amiodarone may be the preferred antiarrhythmic for
prevention of sudden death.
Because nonsustained VT is a marker for increased risk of sudden death in patients with a structural
heart disorder, such patients (particularly those with an ejection fraction < 0.35) require further evaluation.
Such patients should receive an ICD.
When prevention of VTs is important (usually in patients who have an ICD and are having frequent
episodes of VT), antiarrhythmics or transcatheter radiofrequency or surgical ablation of the
arrhythmogenic substrate is required. Any class Ia, Ib, Ic, II, or III drug can be used. Because
β
-blockers
are safe, they are the first choice unless contraindicated. If an additional drug is required, sotalol is
commonly used, then amiodarone.
Transcatheter radiofrequency ablation is used most commonly in patients who have VT with well-defined
syndromes (eg, right ventricular outflow tract VT or left septal VT [Belhassen VT, verapamil-sensitive VT])
and otherwise healthy hearts.
Long QT Syndrome and Torsades de Pointes Ventricular Tachycardia
Torsades de pointes is a specific form of polymorphic VT in patients with a long QT interval. It is
characterized by rapid, irregular QRS complexes, which appear to be twisting around the ECG
baseline. This arrhythmia may cease spontaneously or degenerate into ventricular fibrillation. It
causes significant hemodynamic compromise and often death. Diagnosis is by ECG. Treatment
is with IV Mg, measures to shorten the QT interval, and often direct-current cardioversion.
The long QT interval responsible for torsades de pointes can be congenital or drug-induced. QT-interval
prolongation predisposes to arrhythmia by prolonging repolarization, which induces early afterdepolarizations and spatial dispersion of refractoriness.
Congenital:
At least 10 distinct forms of congenital long QT syndrome have been described. Most cases
fall into the first 3 subgroups:
• Long QT syndrome type 1 (LQT1), caused by a loss of function mutation of gene
KCNQ1
, which
encodes an adrenergic-sensitive cardiac K current I
Ks
• Long QT syndrome type 2 (LQT2), caused by a loss of function mutation of gene
HERG
, which
encodes another cardiac K channel (I
Kr
)
===PAGE:2325===
• Long QT syndrome type 3 (LQT3), caused by a mutation in gene
SCN5A
, which disrupts fast
inactivation of the cardiac Na channel (I
Na
)
These forms are inherited as autosomal dominant disorders with incomplete penetrance and, in the past,
were referred to as Romano-Ward syndrome. In rare patients with 2 abnormal copies of the genetic
abnormality (particularly LQT1), the disorder is associated with congenital deafness and, in the past, was
referred to as the Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome. Patients with long QT syndrome are prone to
recurrent syncope secondary to torsade de pointes and to sudden
[Fig. 213-18.
Torsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia.]
death secondary to torsade de pointes degenerating into ventricular fibrillation.
Drug-induced:
More commonly, torsades de pointes results from a drug, usually a class Ia, Ic, or III
antiarrhythmic. Other drugs that can induce torsades de pointes include tricyclic antidepressants,
phenothiazines, and certain antivirals and antifungals (see www.torsades.org
for an up-to-date list).
Symptoms and Signs
Patients often present with syncope because the underlying rate (200 to 250 beats/min) is nonperfusing.
Palpitations are common among conscious patients. Sometimes the long QT interval is detected after
resuscitation.
Diagnosis
• ECG
Diagnosis is by ECG showing an undulating QRS axis, with the polarity of complexes shifting around the
baseline (see
Fig. 213-18
). ECG between episodes shows a long QT interval after correction for heart
rate (QTc). Normal values average about 0.44 sec, although they vary among individuals and by sex. A
family history may suggest a congenital syndrome.
Treatment
• Usually unsynchronized direct-current cardioversion
• Sometimes magnesium sulfate (MgSO
) IV
An acute episode prolonged enough to cause hemodynamic compromise is treated with unsynchronized
cardioversion, beginning with 100 joules. Nevertheless, early recurrence is the rule. Patients often
respond to Mg: MgSO
2 g IV over 1 to 2 min. If this treatment is unsuccessful, a 2nd bolus is given in 5
to 10 min, and an Mg infusion of 3 to 20 mg/min may be started in patients without renal insufficiency.
Lidocaine (class Ib) shortens the QT interval and may be effective especially for drug-induced torsades
de pointes. Class Ia, Ic, and III antiarrhythmics are avoided.
If a drug is the cause, it is stopped, but until drug clearance is complete, patients with frequent or long
runs of torsades de pointes require treatment to shorten the QT interval. Because increasing the heart
rate shortens the QT interval, temporary pacing, IV isoproterenol, or both are often effective. Long-term
treatment is required for patients with a congenital long QT-interval syndrome. Treatment choices include
β
-blockers, permanent pacing, ICD, or a combination. Family members should be evaluated by ECG.
Patients with congenital long QT syndrome should clearly avoid drugs that prolong the QT interval, and
patients with exercise-related symptoms (usually LQT1 or LQT2) should avoid strenuous exercise.
Treatment options include
β
-blockers, pacing to maintain faster heart rates (which shortens the QT
interval), and the ICD, alone or in combinations. Current guidelines recommend the ICD for patients
resuscitated from cardiac arrest and those with syncope despite
β
-blocker treatment.
===PAGE:2326===
Brugada Syndrome
Brugada syndrome is an inherited disorder of cardiac electrophysiology causing an increased
risk of syncope and sudden death.
Several different mutations are involved, most affecting the
SCN5A
gene that encodes the
α
-subunit of
the voltage-dependent cardiac Na channel. Typically, patients have no structural heart disease.
Nevertheless, relationships with other genetic and acquired structural heart diseases are increasingly
being recognized, as are overlap syndromes with LQT3 and with arrhythmogenic right ventricular
dysplasia (ARVD).
In some patients, Brugada syndrome has no clinical expression. However, in many patients it leads to
syncope or sudden cardiac death due to polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation.
Events occur more often at night and are not usually related to exercise. Events may also be brought on
by fever and by treatment with certain drugs including Na channel blockers,
[Fig. 213-19.
Type 1 Brugada syndrome.]
β
-blockers, tricyclic antidepressants, lithium, and cocaine.
Initial diagnosis is based on a characteristic ECG pattern (type 1 Brugada ECG pattern—see
Fig. 213-19
)
with prominent ST elevation in V
and V
(sometimes involving V
) that causes the QRS complex in
these leads to resemble right bundle branch block. The ST segment is coved and descends to an
inverted T-wave. Lesser degrees of these patterns (type 2 and type 3 Brugada ECG patterns) are not
considered diagnostic. The type 2 and type 3 patterns may change to a type 1 pattern spontaneously,
with fever, or in response to drugs. The latter is the basis of a challenge diagnostic test usually using
ajmaline or procainamide. Diagnosis should be considered in patients with unexplained cardiac arrest or
syncope or a family history of such. Role of electrophysiologic testing is currently unclear and is the
subject of onging study.
Patients presenting with syncope and patients resuscitated from arrest should receive an implantable
cardioverter-defrillator. Best treatment of patients diagnosed based on ECG changes and family history is
unclear, although they do have increased risk of sudden death.
Ventricular Fibrillation
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) causes uncoordinated quivering of the ventricle with no useful
contractions. It causes immediate syncope and death within minutes. Treatment is with
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, including immediate defibrillation.
VF is due to multiple wavelet reentrant electrical activity and is manifested on ECG by ultrarapid baseline
undulations that are irregular in timing and morphology (see
Fig. 213-14
).
VF is the presenting rhythm for about 70% of patients in cardiac arrest and is thus the terminal event in
many disorders. Overall, most patients with VF have an underlying heart disorder (typically ischemic, but
also hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathies, arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia [ARVD], or
Brugada syndrome). Risk of VF in any disorder is increased by electrolyte abnormalities, acidosis,
hypoxemia, or ischemia.
VF is much less common among infants and children, in whom asystole is the more common presentation
of cardiac arrest.
Treatment is with cardiopulmonary resuscitation, including defibrillation (. The success rate
for immediate (within 3 min) defibrillation is about 95%, provided that overwhelming pump failure does not
preexist. When it does, even immediate defibrillation is only 30% successful, and most resuscitated
patients die of pump failure before hospital discharge.
===PAGE:2327===
Patients who have VF without a reversible or transient cause are at high risk of future VF events and of
sudden death. Most of these patients require an implantable cardioverterdefibrillator; many require
concomitant antiarrhythmics to reduce the frequency of subsequent episodes of ventricular tachycardia
and VF.
===PAGE:2328===
Chapter 214. Valvular Disorders
Introduction
Any heart valve can become stenotic or insufficient, causing hemodynamic changes long before
symptoms. Most often, valvular stenosis or insufficiency occurs in isolation in individual valves, but
multiple valvular disorders may coexist and a single valve may be both stenosed and insufficient.
Treatment depends on severity of disease but usually involves catheter-based valvuloplasty (eg,
percutaneous balloon commissurotomy, valvotomy) or surgery (eg, surgical commissurotomy, valve repair,
valve replacement). Two kinds of valve prosthesis are used: bioprosthetic (porcine) and mechanical
(manufactured).
Traditionally, a mechanical valve has been used in patients < 65 and in older patients with a long life
expectancy, because bioprosthetic valves deteriorate over 10 to 12 yr. Patients with a mechanical valve or
bioprosthetic mitral valve require lifelong anticoagulation to an INR of 2.5 to 3.5 (to prevent
thromboembolism) and antibiotics before some medical or dental procedures (to prevent endocarditis). An
aortic bioprosthetic valve, which does not require anticoagulation beyond the immediate postoperative
period, has been used in patients > 65, younger patients with a life expectancy < 10 yr, and those with
some right-sided lesions. However, newer bioprosthetic valves may be more durable than 1st-generation
valves; thus, patient preference regarding valve type can now be considered.
Women of childbearing age who require valve replacement and plan to become pregnant must balance
the increased risk of teratogenicity from warfarin with mechanical valves against that of accelerated valve
deterioration with bioprosthetic valves. These risks can be reduced by use of heparin instead of warfarin
in the first 12 wk and last 2 wk of the pregnancy, but management is difficult and careful discussion is
required before surgery.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is rarely indicated for patients with valvular heart disorders (.
Aortic Regurgitation
Aortic regurgitation (AR) is incompetency of the aortic valve causing flow from the aorta into the
left ventricle during diastole. Causes include idiopathic valvular degeneration, rheumatic fever,
endocarditis, myxomatous degeneration, congenital bicuspid aortic valve, aortic root dilatation
or dissection, and connective tissue or rheumatologic disorders. Symptoms include exertional
dyspnea, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, palpitations, and chest pain. Signs include
widened pulse pressure and an early diastolic murmur. Diagnosis is by physical examination
and echocardiography. Surgical treatment is aortic valve replacement.
Etiology
AR may be acute or chronic. The primary causes of acute AR are infective endocarditis and dissection of
the ascending aorta. Mild chronic AR in adults is most often caused by a bicuspid or fenestrated aortic
valve (2% of men and 1% of women), especially when severe diastolic hypertension (pressure ≥ 110 mm
Hg) is present. Moderate to severe chronic AR in adults is most often caused by idiopathic degeneration
of the aortic valves or root, rheumatic fever, infective endocarditis, myxomatous degeneration, or trauma.
In children, the most common cause is a ventricular septal defect with aortic valve prolapse. Rarely, AR is
caused by seronegative spondyloarthropathies (ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriatic
arthritis), RA, SLE, arthritis associated with ulcerative colitis, luetic (syphilitic) aortitis, osteogenesis
imperfecta, thoracic aortic aneurysm, aortic dissection, supravalvular aortic stenosis, Takayasu's arteritis,
rupture of a sinus of Valsalva, acromegaly, and temporal (giant cell) arteritis. AR due to myxomatous
degeneration may develop in patients with Marfan syndrome or EhlersDanlos syndrome.
Pathophysiology
In chronic AR, left ventricular (LV) volume and LV stroke volume gradually increase because the LV
===PAGE:2329===
receives aortic blood regurgitated in diastole in addition to blood from the pulmonary veins and left atrium.
LV hypertrophy compensates for the increase in LV volume over years, but decompensation eventually
develops. These changes may ultimately cause arrhythmias, LV impairment, and heart failure (HF).
Symptoms and Signs
Acute AR causes symptoms of HF and cardiogenic shock. Chronic AR is typically asymptomatic for years;
progressive exertional
dyspnea, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and palpitations develop
insidiously. Symptoms of HF correlate poorly with objective measures of LV function. Chest pain (angina
pectoris) affects only about 5% of patients who do not have coexisting coronary artery disease (CAD)
and, when it occurs, is especially common at night. Patients may present with endocarditis (eg, fever,
anemia, weight loss, embolic phenomena) because the abnormal aortic valve is predisposed to bacterial
seeding.
Signs vary by severity. As chronic disease progresses, systolic BP increases while diastolic BP
decreases, creating a widened pulse pressure. With time, the LV impulse may become enlarged,
sustained, increased in amplitude, and displaced downward and laterally, with systolic depression of the
entire left parasternal area, giving a rocking motion to the left chest.
A systolic apical or carotid thrill may become palpable in later stages of AR; it is caused by large forward
stroke volumes and low aortic diastolic pressure.
Auscultatory findings include a normal 1st heart sound (S
) and a nonsplit, loud, sharp or slapping 2nd
heart sound (S
) caused by increased elastic aortic recoil. The murmur of AR is often unimpressive. The
murmur is blowing, high-pitched, diastolic, and decrescendo, beginning soon after the aortic component
of S
(A
); it is loudest at the 3rd or 4th left parasternal intercostal space. The murmur is heard best with
the diaphragm of the stethoscope when the patient is leaning forward, with breath held at end-expiration.
It increases in volume in response to maneuvers that increase afterload (eg, squatting, isometric
handgrip). If AR is slight, the murmur may occur only in early diastole. If LV diastolic pressure is very high,
the murmur is short because aortic and LV diastolic pressures equalize earlier in diastole.
Other abnormal sounds include a forward ejection and backward regurgitant flow (to-and-fro) murmur, an
ejection click soon after the S
, and an aortic ejection flow murmur. A diastolic murmur heard near the
axilla or mid left thorax (Cole-Cecil murmur) is caused by fusion of the aortic murmur with the 3rd heart
sound (S
), which is due to simultaneous filling of LV from the left atrium and AR. A mid-to-late diastolic
rumble heard at the apex (Austin Flint murmur) may result from rapid regurgitant flow into the LV, causing
mitral valve leaflet vibration at the peak of atrial flow; this murmur mimics the diastolic murmur of mitral
stenosis.
Other signs are unusual; sensitivity and specificity are low or unknown. Visible signs include head
bobbing (Musset's sign) and pulsation of the fingernail capillaries (Quincke's sign, best seen with slight
pressure) or uvula (Muller's sign). Palpable signs include a large-volume pulse with rapid rise and fall
(slapping, water-hammer, or collapsing pulse) and pulsation of the carotid arteries (Corrigan's sign),
retinal arteries (Becker's sign), liver (Rosenbach's sign), or spleen (Gerhard's sign). BP findings may
include popliteal systolic pressure ≥ 60 mm Hg higher than brachial pressure (Hill's sign) and a fall in
diastolic BP of > 15 mm Hg with arm elevation (Mayne's sign). Auscultatory signs include a sharp sound
heard over the femoral pulse (pistol-shot sound, or Traube's sign) and a femoral systolic bruit distal and a
diastolic bruit proximal to arterial compression (Duroziez's murmur).
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected based on history and physical examination and confirmed by echocardiography.
Doppler echocardiography is the test of choice to detect and quantify the magnitude of regurgitant blood
flow. Two-dimensional echocardiography can quantify aortic root size and anatomy and LV function. An
end-systolic LV volume > 60 mL/m
, endsystolic LV diameter > 50 mm, and LV ejection fraction (LVEF) <
===PAGE:2330===
50% suggest decompensation. Echocardiography can also assess severity of pulmonary hypertension
secondary to LV failure, detect vegetations or pericardial effusions (eg, in aortic dissection), and provide
information about prognosis.
Radionuclide imaging may be used to determine LVEF if echocardiographic results are borderline
abnormal or if echocardiography is technically difficult.
An ECG and chest x-ray should be obtained. ECG may show repolarization abnormalities with or without
QRS voltage criteria of LV hypertrophy, left atrial enlargement, and T-wave inversion with ST-segment
depression in precordial leads. Chest x-ray may show cardiomegaly and a prominent aortic root in
patients with chronic progressive AR. If AR is severe, signs of pulmonary edema and HF may also be
present. Exercise testing may help assess functional capacity and symptoms in patients with documented
AR and equivocal symptoms.
Coronary angiography should be done before surgery, even if no angina is present,
because about 20%
of patients with severe AR have significant CAD, which may need concomitant coronary artery bypass
graft surgery.
Prognosis
With treatment, the 10-yr survival for patients with mild to moderate AR is 80 to 95%. With appropriately
timed valve replacement (ie, before HF and using criteria below), long-term prognosis for patients with
moderate to severe AR is good. However, the prognosis for those with severe AR and HF is considerably
poorer.
Treatment
• Aortic valve replacement
• Sometimes vasodilators, diuretics, and nitrates
Treatment of acute AR is aortic valve replacement. Treatment of chronic AR varies by symptoms and
degree of LV dysfunction. Patients with symptoms precipitated by normal daily activity or during exercise
testing require aortic valve replacement; patients who prefer to avoid surgery may be treated with
vasodilators (eg, long-acting nifedipine 30 to 90 mg po once/day or ACE inhibitors). Also, diuretics or
nitrates to reduce preload may be beneficial for severe AR. Asymptomatic patients with LVEF < 55%, an
end-systolic diameter ≥ 55 mm (55 rule), or an end-diastolic diameter > 75 mm also require surgery; oral
drugs are a 2nd-best option for this group. Additional surgical criteria have been proposed, including
fractional shortening < 25 to 29%, end-diastolic radius to myocardial wall thickness ratio > 4.0, and
cardiac index < 2.2 to 2.5 L/min/m
.
Patients who do not meet these criteria should be reevaluated by physical examination,
echocardiography, and possibly rest-exercise radionuclide cineangiography to measure LV contractility
every 6 to 12 mo.
Antibiotic prophylaxis against endocarditis is no longer recommended except for patients who have had
valve replacement (see
Table 215-4
).
Aortic Stenosis
Aortic stenosis (AS) is narrowing of the aortic valve obstructing blood flow from the left
ventricle to the ascending aorta during systole. Causes include a congenital bicuspid valve,
idiopathic degenerative sclerosis with calcification, and rheumatic fever. Progressive untreated
AS ultimately results in one or more of the classic triad of syncope, angina, and exertional
dyspnea; heart failure and arrhythmias may develop. A carotid pulse with small amplitude and
delayed upstroke and a crescendo-decrescendo ejection murmur are characteristic. Diagnosis
is by physical examination and echocardiography. Asymptomatic AS often requires no
===PAGE:2331===
treatment. For progressive severe or symptomatic AS in children, balloon valvotomy is used;
adults require valve replacement.
Etiology
Aortic sclerosis, a degenerative aortic valve disease with thickening of aortic valve structures by fibrosis
and calcification initially without causing significant obstruction, is the most common cause of AS in
elderly patients. Over years, aortic sclerosis progresses to stenosis in as many as 15% of patients. Aortic
sclerosis resembles atherosclerosis, with deposition of lipoproteins, active inflammation, and calcification
of the valves; risk factors are similar (.
The most common cause of AS in patients < 70 yr is a congenital bicuspid aortic valve. Congenital AS
occurs in 3 to 5/1000 live births and affects more males.
In developing countries, rheumatic fever is the most common cause in all age groups. Supravalvular AS
caused by a discrete, congenital membrane or hypoplastic constriction just above the sinuses of Valsalva
is uncommon. A sporadic form of supravalvular AS is associated with a characteristic facies (high and
broad forehead, hypertelorism, strabismus, upturned nose, long philtrum, wide mouth, dental
abnormalities, puffy cheeks, micrognathia, low-set ears). When associated with idiopathic hypercalcemia
of infancy, this form is known as Williams syndrome. Subvalvular AS caused by a congenital membrane or
fibrous ring just beneath the aortic valve is uncommon.
Pathophysiology
Aortic regurgitation may accompany AS, and about 60% of patients > 60 yr with significant AS also have
mitral annular calcification, which may lead to significant mitral regurgitation.
The left ventricle (LV) gradually hypertrophies in response to AS. Significant LV hypertrophy causes
diastolic dysfunction and, with progression, may lead to decreased contractility, ischemia, or fibrosis, any
of which may cause systolic dysfunction and heart failure (HF). LV chamber enlargement is a late finding
unless there is coexisting MI. Patients with AS have a higher incidence of GI bleeding
(called Heyde's
syndrome) because the high shear stress of stenotic valves makes multimeric von Willebrand's factor
more susceptible to cleavage by a plasma metalloprotease and may increase platelet clearance. GI
bleeding may also be due to angiodysplasia.
Symptoms and Signs
Congenital AS is usually asymptomatic until at least age 10 or 20 yr, when symptoms may begin to
develop insidiously. In all forms, progressive untreated AS ultimately results in exertional syncope, angina,
and dyspnea (SAD triad). Other symptoms and signs may include those of HF and arrhythmias, including
ventricular fibrillation leading to sudden death.
Exertional syncope occurs because cardiac output cannot increase enough to meet the demands of
physical activity. Nonexertional syncope may result from altered baroreceptor responses or ventricular
tachycardia. Exertional angina pectoris affects about two thirds of patients; about one half have
significant coronary artery atherosclerosis, and one half have normal coronary arteries but have ischemia
induced by LV hypertrophy, altered coronary flow dynamics, or both.
There are no visible signs of AS. Palpable signs include carotid and peripheral pulses that are reduced in
amplitude and slow rising (pulsus parvus, mollus et tardus) and an apical impulse that is sustained
(thrusts with the 1st heart sound [S] and relaxes with the 2nd heart sound [S]) because of LV
hypertrophy. The LV impulse may become displaced when systolic dysfunction develops. A palpable 4th
heart sound (S
), felt best at the apex, and a systolic thrill, corresponding with the murmur of AS and felt
best at the left upper sternal border, are occasionally present in severe cases. Systolic BP may be high
with mild or moderate AS and falls as AS becomes more severe.
On auscultation, S
is normal and S
is single because aortic valve closing is delayed and merges with
===PAGE:2332===
the pulmonic (P
) component of S
. The aortic component may also be soft. Paradoxical splitting of S
may be heard. An S
may be audible. An ejection click may also be audible early after S
in patients with
congenital bicuspid AS when valve leaflets are stiff but not completely immobile. The click does not
change with dynamic maneuvers.
The hallmark finding is a crescendodecrescendo ejection murmur, heard best with the diaphragm of the
stethoscope at the right and left upper sternal border when a patient who is sitting upright leans forward.
The murmur typically radiates to the right clavicle and both carotid arteries (left often louder than right)
and has a harsh or grating quality. But in elderly patients, vibration of the un-fused cusps of calcified
aortic valve leaflets may transmit a louder, more high-pitched, "cooing" or musical sound to the cardiac
apex, with softening or absence of the murmur parasternally (Gallavardin's phenomenon), thereby
mimicking mitral regurgitation. The murmur is soft when stenosis is less severe, grows louder as stenosis
progresses, and becomes longer and peaks in volume later in systole (ie, crescendo phase becomes
longer and decrescendo phase becomes shorter) as stenosis becomes more severe. As LV contractility
decreases in critical AS, the murmur becomes softer and shorter. The intensity of the murmur may
therefore be misleading in these circumstances.
The murmur of AS typically increases with maneuvers that increase LV volume and contractility (eg, legraising, squatting, Valsalva release, after a ventricular premature beat) and decreases with maneuvers
that decrease LV volume (Valsalva maneuver) or increase afterload (isometric handgrip). These dynamic
maneuvers have the opposite effect on the murmur of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which can otherwise
resemble that of AS. The murmur of mitral regurgitation due to prolapse of the posterior leaflet may also
mimic AS.
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected clinically and confirmed by echocardiography. Two-dimensional transthoracic
echocardiography is used to identify a stenotic aortic valve and possible causes, to quantify LV
hypertrophy and degree of diastolic or systolic dysfunction, and to detect coexisting valvular heart
disorders (aortic regurgitation, mitral valve disorders) and complications (eg, endocarditis). Doppler
echocardiography is used to quantify degree of stenosis by measuring aortic valve area, jet velocity, and
transvalvular systolic pressure gradient.
A valve area of 0.5 to 1.0 cm
or a mean gradient > 45 to 50 mm Hg represents severe stenosis. The
gradient may be overestimated in aortic regurgitation and underestimated in LV systolic dysfunction. The
rate of progression of AS from mild to severe is quite variable and does not necessarily proceed in a
linear fashion.
Cardiac catheterization is necessary to determine whether coronary artery disease
(CAD) is the cause of
angina and, occasionally, to resolve differences between clinical and echocardiographic findings.
An ECG and chest x-ray are obtained. ECG typically shows changes of LV hypertrophy with or without an
ischemic ST- and T-wave pattern. Chest x-ray findings may include calcification of the aortic cusps (seen
on the lateral projection or on fluoroscopy) and evidence of HF. Heart size may be normal or only mildly
enlarged.
Prognosis
AS may progress slowly or quickly and thus requires regular follow-up to detect progression, particularly
in sedentary elderly patients. In such patients, flow may become significantly compromised without
triggering symptoms.
Overall, about 3 to 6% of asymptomatic patients with normal systolic function develop symptoms or LV
ejection fraction depression every year. However, surgery is usually delayed until symptoms develop
because the risk of surgery outweighs the survival benefit in asymptomatic patients. Surgery should not
===PAGE:2333===
be delayed once symptoms develop. Mean survival in untreated symptomatic patients is about 2 to 3 yr.
Aortic valve replacement relieves symptoms and improves survival. Risk with surgery increases for
patients who require simultaneous coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) and for those with depressed
systolic LV function.
About 50% of deaths occur suddenly. While awaiting surgery, patients with severe AS should be advised
to restrict physical exertion.
Treatment
• Sometimes aortic valve replacement
Asymptomatic patients with a maximum gradient ≤ 25 mm Hg and a valve area > 1.0 cm
have a low
mortality and low overall risk of requiring surgery in the next 2 yr; annual evaluation for symptom
progression, including echocardiography to determine gradient and valve area, is appropriate.
Asymptomatic patients with gradients of 25 to 50 mm Hg or valve area < 1.0 cm
are at higher risk of
developing symptoms in the next 2 yr, but generally elective valve replacement is not required in the
absence of symptoms. Valve replacement is indicated for patients who have moderate or severe AS and
primarily require CABG. Surgery may be indicated for patients who become hypotensive during exercise
treadmill testing and for those with LV ejection fraction < 50%. Patients with ventricular arrhythmias and
severe LV hypertrophy are also often referred for surgery, but benefits are less clear. Recommendations
for patients without any of these qualifying conditions include more frequent monitoring for progression of
symptoms, LV hypertrophy, gradients, and valve area with medical management as needed. It is unclear
whether statins reduce the progression of AS. Other drugs may be detrimental, especially those that can
cause hypotension. Small studies suggest that perhexilene maleate may decrease symptoms.
Nitroprusside has been used as a temporizing measure to reduce afterload in patients with
decompensated HF in the hours before valve replacement, but because this drug can have the same
effect as rapid-acting nitrates, it must be used cautiously and monitoring is required.
Symptomatic patients should undergo valve replacement or balloon valvotomy. Valve replacement is
indicated for virtually all who can tolerate surgery. In younger patients, the patient's own pulmonic valve
can be used, providing good durability; a bioprosthesis is then used to replace the pulmonic valve (Ross
procedure). Most often, the aortic valve is replaced with a mechanical or bio-prosthetic valve.
Preoperative evaluation for CAD is indicated so that CABG and valve replacement, if indicated, can be
done during the same procedure.
Balloon valvotomy is used primarily in children and very young adults with congenital AS. In older patients
who are unfit for surgery, balloon valvuloplasty can provide temporary relief of symptoms, perhaps for 6 to
12 mo, and can be repeated in selected patients. Minimally invasive percutaneous valve replacement is
being used as an alternative procedure in very elderly or frail patients.
Mitral Valve Prolapse
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) is a billowing of mitral valve leaflets into the left atrium during
systole. The most common cause is idiopathic myxomatous degeneration. MVP is usually
benign, but complications include mitral regurgitation, endocarditis, valve rupture, and possibly
thromboembolism. MVP is usually asymptomatic in the absence of important regurgitation,
although there are reports that some patients experience chest pain, dyspnea, dizziness, and
palpitations. Signs include a crisp mid-systolic click, followed by a late systolic murmur if
regurgitation is present. Diagnosis is by physical examination and echocardiography. Prognosis
is excellent in the absence of significant regurgitation,
but chordal rupture and endocarditis may
occur. No specific treatment is necessary unless mitral regurgitation is present.
MVP is common; prevalence is 1 to 3% in otherwise normal populations, depending on the
echocardiographic criteria used. Women and men are affected equally; onset usually follows the
adolescent growth spurt.
===PAGE:2334===
Etiology
MVP is most often caused by myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve and chordae tendineae.
Degeneration is usually idiopathic, although it may be inherited in an autosomal dominant or, rarely, in an
X-linked recessive fashion. Myxomatous degeneration may also be caused by connective tissue disorders
(eg, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, adult polycystic kidney disease, osteogenesis
imperfecta, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, SLE, polyarteritis nodosa) and muscular dystrophies. MVP is
more common among patients with Graves' disease, hypomastia, von Willebrand's syndrome, sickle cell
disease, and rheumatic heart disease. Myxomatous degeneration may also affect the aortic or tricuspid
valve, resulting in aortic or tricuspid prolapse. Tricuspid regurgitation is uncommon.
Mitral regurgitation (MR) may occur in patients with apparently normal mitral valve leaflets (ie,
nonmyxomatous) if papillary muscle dysfunction is present or the mitral annulus is dilated (eg, in dilated
cardiomyopathy). In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with outflow obstruction, MR occurs due to interference
with the closure of the mitral leaflets (which may also be abnormal). Transient MVP may occur when
intravascular volume decreases significantly, as occurs in severe dehydration or sometimes during
pregnancy (when the woman is recumbent and the gravid uterus compresses the inferior vena cava,
reducing venous return).
MR is the most common complication of MVP. MR may be acute (due to ruptured chordae tendineae or
flail mitral valve leaflets) or chronic; sequelae of chronic MR include heart failure and atrial fibrillation (AF)
with thromboembolism. Whether MVP causes stroke independent of MR and AF is unclear. In addition,
MR increases the risk of infective endocarditis.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients are asymptomatic. Some experience nonspecific symptoms (eg, chest pain, dyspnea,
palpitations, dizziness, near syncope, migraines, anxiety), thought to be due to poorly defined associated
abnormalities in adrenergic signaling and sensitivity rather than to mitral valve pathology. In about one
third of patients, emotional stress precipitates palpitations, which may be a symptom of benign
arrhythmias (atrial premature beats, paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, ventricular premature beats, complex
ventricular ectopy).
Occasionally, patients present with MR. Rarely, patients present with endocarditis (eg, fever, weight loss,
thromboembolic phenomena) or stroke. Sudden death occurs in < 1%, most often resulting from ruptured
chordae tendineae and flail mitral valve leaflets. Death due to a fatal arrhythmia is rare.
Typically, MVP causes no visible or palpable cardiac signs. MVP alone causes a crisp mid-systolic click
heard best with the diaphragm of the stethoscope over the left apex when the patient is in the left lateral
decubitus position. MVP with MR causes a click with a late-systolic MR murmur. The click becomes
audible or moves closer to the 1st heart sound (S
) and becomes louder with maneuvers that decrease
left ventricle (LV) size (eg, sitting, standing, Valsalva maneuver); the same maneuvers cause an MR
murmur to appear or become louder and last longer. These effects occur because decreasing LV size
causes papillary muscles and chordae tendineae to pull together more centrally beneath the valve,
resulting in quicker, more forceful prolapse with earlier, more severe regurgitation. Conversely, squatting
or isometric handgrip delays the S
click and shortens the MR murmur. The systolic click may be
confused with the click of congenital aortic stenosis, which can be distinguished because it occurs very
early in systole and does not move with postural or LV volume changes. Other findings include a systolic
honk or whoop, thought to be caused by valvular leaflet vibration; these findings are usually transient and
may vary with respiratory phase. An early diastolic opening snap caused by return of the prolapsed valve
to its normal position is rarely heard.
Other physical findings associated with but not diagnostic of MVP include hypomastia, pectus excavatum,
straight back syndrome, and a narrow anteroposterior chest diameter.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:2335===
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suggested clinically and confirmed by 2-dimensional echocardiography. Holosystolic
displacement of ≥ 3 mm or late systolic displacement of ≥ 2 mm identifies
95% of patients with MVP; the
percentage is slightly higher if echocardiography is done while the patient is standing. Thickened,
redundant mitral valve leaflets and displacement of ≥ 5 mm are thought to indicate more extensive
myxomatous degeneration and greater risk of endocarditis and MR.
Holter monitoring and 12-lead ECG may be useful for documenting arrhythmias in patients with
palpitations.
Prognosis
MVP is usually benign, but severe myxomatous degeneration of the valve can lead to MR. In patients with
severe MR, incidence of LV or left atrium enlargement, arrhythmias (eg, AF), infective endocarditis, stroke,
need for valve replacement, and death is about 2 to 4%/yr.
Treatment
• Usually none
• Sometimes
β
-blockers
MVP does not usually require treatment.
β
-Blockers may be used to relieve symptoms of excess
sympathetic tone (eg, palpitations, migraines, dizziness) and to reduce risk of tachyarrhythmias, although
no data support this practice. A typical regimen is atenolol 25 to 50 mg po once/day or propranolol 20 to
40 mg po bid. AF may require additional treatment (.
Treatment of MR depends on severity and associated left atrial and LV changes.
Antibiotic prophylaxis against endocarditis is no longer recommended. Anticoagulants to prevent
thromboembolism are recommended only for patients with AF or prior transient ischemic attack or stroke.
Mitral Regurgitation
Mitral regurgitation (MR) is incompetency of the mitral valve causing flow from the left ventricle
(LV) into the left atrium during systole. Common causes include mitral valve prolapse, ischemic
papillary muscle dysfunction, rheumatic fever, and annular dilation secondary to LV systolic
dysfunction and dilation. Complications include progressive heart failure, arrhythmias, and
endocarditis. Symptoms and signs include palpitations, dyspnea, and a holosystolic apical
murmur. Diagnosis is by physical examination and echocardiography. Prognosis depends on LV
function and severity and duration of MR. Patients with mild, asymptomatic MR may be
monitored, but progressive or symptomatic MR requires mitral valve repair or replacement.
Etiology
MR may be acute or chronic. Causes of acute MR include ischemic papillary muscle dysfunction or
rupture; infective endocarditis; acute rheumatic fever; spontaneous, traumatic, or ischemic tears or
rupture of the mitral valve leaflets or subvalvular apparatus; acute dilation of the LV due to myocarditis or
ischemia; and mechanical failure of a prosthetic mitral valve.
Common causes of chronic MR include those of acute MR plus myxomatous degeneration of the mitral
leaflets or chordae tendineae, mitral valve prolapse (MVP), mitral annular enlargement, and nonischemic
papillary muscle dysfunction (eg, due to LV enlargement). Uncommon causes of chronic MR include a
congenital endocardial cushion defect with a cleft anterior leaflet, SLE, acromegaly, myxoma involving the
valve or chordae, and calcification of the mitral annulus (mainly in elderly women).
In infants, the most likely causes of MR are papillary muscle dysfunction, endocardial fibroelastosis, acute
===PAGE:2336===
myocarditis, cleft mitral valve with or without an endocardial cushion defect, and myxomatous
degeneration of the mitral valve. MR may coexist with mitral stenosis when thickened valvular leaflets do
not close.
Pathophysiology
Acute MR may cause acute pulmonary edema and biventricular failure with cardiogenic shock or sudden
cardiac death. Complications of chronic MR include gradual enlargement of the left atrium (LA); LV
enlargement and hypertrophy, which initially compensates for regurgitant flow (preserving forward stroke
volume) but eventually decompensates (reducing forward stroke volume); atrial fibrillation (AF), which
may be further complicated by thromboembolism; and infective endocarditis.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute MR causes the same symptoms and signs as acute heart failure and cardiogenic shock (. Most patients with chronic MR are initially asymptomatic and develop symptoms insidiously as the
LA enlarges, pulmonary artery and venous pressure increases, and LV remodeling occurs. Symptoms
include dyspnea, fatigue (due to heart failure), orthopnea, and palpitations (often due to AF). Rarely,
patients present with endocarditis (eg, fever, weight loss, embolic phenomena).
Signs develop only when MR becomes moderate to severe. Inspection and palpation
may detect a brisk
apical impulse and sustained left parasternal movement due to systolic expansion of an enlarged LA. An
LV impulse that is sustained, enlarged, and displaced downward and to the left suggests LV hypertrophy
and dilation. A diffuse precordial lift occurs with severe MR because the LA enlarges, causing anterior
cardiac displacement, and pulmonary hypertension causes right ventricular hypertrophy. A regurgitant
murmur (or thrill) may also be palpable in severe cases.
On auscultation, the 1st heart sound (S
) may be soft (or occasionally loud). A 3rd heart sound (S
) at
the apex reflects a dilated LV and important MR.
The cardinal sign of MR is a holosystolic (pansystolic) murmur, heard best at the apex with the diaphragm
of the stethoscope when the patient is in the left lateral decubitus position. In mild MR, the systolic
murmur may be abbreviated or occur late in systole. The murmur begins with S
in conditions causing
leaflet incompetency throughout systole, but it often begins after S
(eg, when chamber dilation during
systole distorts the valve apparatus or when myocardial ischemia or fibrosis alters dynamics). When the
murmur begins after S
, it always continues to the 2nd heart sound (S
). The murmur radiates toward the
left axilla; intensity may remain the same or vary. If intensity varies, the murmur tends to crescendo in
volume up to S
. MR murmurs increase in intensity with handgrip or squatting because peripheral
vascular resistance to ventricular ejection increases, augmenting regurgitation into the LA; murmurs
decrease in intensity with standing or the Valsalva maneuver. A short rumbling mid-diastolic inflow murmur
due to torrential mitral diastolic flow may be heard following an S
. In patients with posterior leaflet
prolapse, the murmur may be coarse and radiate to the upper sternum, mimicking aortic stenosis.
MR murmurs may be confused with tricuspid regurgitation, which can be distinguished because its
murmur is augmented during inspiration.
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected clinically and confirmed by echocardiography. Doppler echocardiography is used
to detect regurgitant flow and help quantify its severity; 2-dimensional or 3-dimensional echocardiography
is used to determine the cause of MR and to detect pulmonary hypertension.
If endocarditis or valvular thrombi are suspected, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) can provide a
more detailed view of the mitral valve and LA. TEE is also indicated when mitral valve repair instead of
replacement is being considered to confirm the anatomy in more detail.
===PAGE:2337===
An ECG and chest x-ray are usually obtained initially. ECG may show LA enlargement and LV hypertrophy
with or without ischemia. Sinus rhythm is usually present when MR is acute because the atria have not
had time to stretch and remodel.
Chest x-ray in acute MR may show pulmonary edema; abnormalities in cardiac silhouette are not evident
unless an underlying chronic disorder is also present. Chest x-ray in chronic MR may show LA and LV
enlargement. It may also show pulmonary vascular congestion and pulmonary edema with heart failure.
Cardiac catheterization is done before surgery, mainly to determine whether coronary artery disease
(CAD) is present. A prominent systolic
c-v
wave is seen on pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
(pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) tracings during ventricular systole. Ventriculography can be used to
quantify MR. Cardiac MRI can accurately measure regurgitant fraction and determine the underlying
cause of dilated myopathy with MR.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies by acuity and cause of MR. Once MR becomes severe, about 10% of asymptomatic
patients become symptomatic per year thereafter. About 10% of patients with chronic MR caused by MVP
require surgical intervention.
Treatment
• Mitral valve repair or replacement
Acute MR requires emergency mitral valve repair or replacement; patients with ischemic papillary muscle
rupture may also require coronary revascularization. Pending surgery, nitroprusside or nitroglycerin
infusion may be used to reduce afterload, thus improving forward stroke volume and reducing ventricular
and regurgitant volume.
Definitive treatment of chronic MR is also mitral valve repair or replacement, but patients with
asymptomatic or mild chronic MR and no pulmonary hypertension or AF may do well with periodic
monitoring. ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers are used to decrease left ventricular preload
and afterload. They are used in patients with moderate mitral insufficiency to delay dilation of the LV. Loop
diuretics such as furosemide are
helpful in patients with exertional or nocturnal dyspnea. Digoxin may
reduce symptoms in patients with AF or those in whom valve surgery is not appropriate. The ideal timing
for surgery is uncertain, but intervention before ventricular decompensation (defined as
echocardiographic end-diastolic dimension > 70 mm, end-systolic dimension > 45 mm, and ejection
fraction < 60%) improves outcomes and decreases the chance of worsening LV function. After
decompensation, ventricular function becomes dependent on the afterload reduction of MR, and in about
50% of decompensated patients, valve replacement causes a markedly depressed ejection fraction. For
patients with moderate MR and significant CAD, perioperative mortality rate is 1.5% with bypass surgery
alone and 25% with concomitant valve replacement. If technically feasible, valve repair instead of
replacement is preferred; perioperative mortality rate is 2 to 4% (compared with 5 to 10% for
replacement), and long-term prognosis is good (80 to 94% survival rate at 5 to 10 yr, compared with 40 to
60% for replacement).
New percutaneous procedures that tailor the mitral leaflets have been used in elderly and high-risk
patients, and percutaneous placement of artificial valves is under trial.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended except for patients who have had valve replacement
(see
Table 215-4
).
Anticoagulants are used to prevent thromboemboli ( in patients with heart failure or AF.
Although severe MR without mitral stenosis or AF is less likely to be complicated by atrial thrombosis,
most cardiologists still recommend anticoagulants.
Mitral Stenosis
===PAGE:2338===
Mitral stenosis (MS) is narrowing of the mitral orifice that impedes blood flow from the left
atrium to the left ventricle. The (almost) invariable cause is rheumatic fever. Common
complications are pulmonary hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and thromboembolism. Symptoms
are those of heart failure; signs include an opening snap and a diastolic murmur. Diagnosis is by
physical examination and echocardiography. Prognosis is good. Medical treatment includes
diuretics,
β
-blockers or rate-limiting Ca channel blockers, and anticoagulants. Effective
treatment for more severe disease consists of balloon valvotomy, surgical commissurotomy, or
valve replacement.
In MS, mitral valve leaflets become thickened and immobile and the mitral orifice becomes narrowed due
to fusion of the commissures. The chordae are usually thickened, matted, and shortened to a variable
degree, contributing to the reduced mobility of the leaflets. The most common cause is rheumatic fever
(, even though many patients do not recall the disorder. Less common causes include
bacterial endocarditis, SLE, atrial myxoma, RA, malignant carcinoid syndrome with an atrial right-to-left
shunt, and methysergide. Occasionally, MS is congenital. If the valve cannot close completely, mitral
regurgitation (MR) may coexist with MS. Patients with MS due to rheumatic fever may also have lesions
of the aortic or tricuspid valve or both.
The normal area of the mitral valve orifice is 4 to 5 cm
. An area of 1 to 1.5 cm
reflects moderate MS
and often causes exertional symptoms. An area < 1 cm
represents severe stenosis and may cause
symptoms during rest. However, the relationship between the area of the valve orifice and symptoms is
not always reliable. Left atrial (LA) size and pressure increase progressively to compensate for MS;
pulmonary venous and capillary pressures also increase and may cause secondary pulmonary
hypertension, leading to right ventricular (RV) heart failure and tricuspid and pulmonic regurgitation. Rate
of progression varies.
LA enlargement predisposes to atrial fibrillation (AF), a risk factor for thromboembolism. The faster heart
rate and loss of atrial contraction with onset of AF often leads to sudden worsening of symptoms.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms correlate poorly with disease severity because the disease often progresses insidiously and
patients reduce their activity without being aware of it. Many patients are asymptomatic until they become
pregnant or AF develops. Initial symptoms are usually those of heart failure (eg, exertional dyspnea,
orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, fatigue). They typically do not appear until 15 to 40 yr after an
episode of rheumatic fever, but in developing countries, much younger children may become symptomatic
because streptococcal infections may not be treated with antibiotics and recurrent infections are common.
Paroxysmal or chronic AF exacerbates existing diastolic dysfunction, precipitating pulmonary edema and
acute dyspnea when ventricular rate is poorly controlled. AF may also cause palpitations; in up to 15% of
unanticoagulated patients, it causes systemic embolism with symptoms of stroke or other organ ischemia.
Less common symptoms include hemoptysis due to rupture of small pulmonary vessels and pulmonary
edema, particularly during pregnancy when blood volume increases; hoarseness due to compression of
the left recurrent laryngeal nerve by a dilated LA or pulmonary artery (Ortner's syndrome); and symptoms
of pulmonary hypertension ( and RV failure (.
Inspection and palpation may detect palpable 1st and 2nd heart sounds (S
and S
). S
is best palpated
at the apex, and S
at the upper left sternal border. The pulmonic component of S
(P
) is responsible for
the impulse and results from pulmonary hypertension. An RV impulse (heave) palpable at the left sternal
border may accompany jugular venous distention when pulmonary hypertension is present and RV
diastolic dysfunction develops.
Auscultatory findings include a loud S
caused by the leaflets of a stenotic mitral valve closing abruptly
(M
), like a sail on "coming about"; it is heard best at the apex. A normally split S
with an exaggerated P
due to pulmonary hypertension is also heard. Most prominent is an early diastolic opening snap as the
leaflets billow into the left ventricle (LV), which is loudest close to left lower sternal border; it is followed by
a low-pitched decrescendo-crescendo rumbling diastolic murmur, heard best with the bell of the
===PAGE:2339===
stethoscope at the apex (or over the palpable apex beat) at end-expiration when the patient is in the left
lateral decubitus position. The opening snap may be soft or absent if the mitral valve is calcified; the snap
moves closer to S
(increasing duration of the murmur) as MS becomes more severe and LA pressure
increases. The diastolic murmur increases after a Valsalva maneuver (when blood pours into the LA),
after exercise, and in response to squatting and handgrip. The murmur may be softer or absent when an
enlarged RV displaces the LV posteriorly and when other disorders (pulmonary hypertension, right-sided
valve abnormalities, AF with fast ventricular rate) decrease blood flow across the mitral valve. The
presystolic crescendo is caused by increased flow with atrial contraction. However, the closing mitral
valve leaflets during LV contraction may also contribute to this finding but only at the end of short
diastoles when LA pressure is still high.
Diastolic murmurs that may coexist with the MS murmur are the early diastolic murmur of coexisting aortic
regurgitation (AR), which may be conducted to the apex; the Austin Flint murmur (a low-pitched middiastolic murmur heard at the apex due to AR); Graham Steell's murmur (a soft decrescendo diastolic
murmur heard best along the left sternal border and caused by pulmonic regurgitation secondary to
severe pulmonary hypertension); a diastolic flow murmur in the presence of severe MR; and (rarely) an
obstructing left atrial myxoma or ball thrombus.
MS may cause signs of cor pulmonale (. The classic mitral facies, a plum-colored malar
flush, occurs only when cardiac output is low and pulmonary hypertension is severe; cause is cutaneous
vasodilation and chronic hypoxemia.
Occasionally, the initial symptoms and signs of MS are those of an embolic event such as stroke.
Endocarditis is rare in MS unless MR is also present.
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected clinically and confirmed by echocardiography. Two-dimensional echocardiography
provides information about the degree of valvular calcification and stenosis and LA size. Doppler
echocardiography provides information about the transvalvular gradient and pulmonary artery pressure.
Transesophageal echocardiography can be used to detect or exclude small LA thrombi, especially those
in the LA appendage, which usually cannot be seen transthoracically.
An ECG and chest x-ray are usually obtained. The ECG may show LA enlargement, manifest as a P
wave lasting > 0.12 msec with prominent negative deflection of its terminal component (duration: > 0.04
msec; amplitude: > 0.10 mV) in V
; broad, notched P waves in lead II; or both. Low voltage in V
, right
axis QRS deviation, and tall R waves in V
suggest RV hypertrophy.
Chest x-ray usually shows straightening of the left cardiac border due to a dilated LA appendage, and
widening of the carina. With barium in the esophagus, the lateral chest x-ray will show the dilated LA
displacing the esophagus posteriorly. The main pulmonary artery (trunk) may be prominent; the
descending right pulmonary artery diameter is ≥ 16 mm if pulmonary hypertension is significant. The
upper lobe pulmonary veins may be dilated. A double shadow of an enlarged LA may be seen along the
right cardiac border. Horizontal lines in the lower posterior lung fields (Kerley B lines) indicate interstitial
edema associated with high LA pressure.
Cardiac catheterization, indicated only for perioperative assessment of coronary artery
disease (CAD)
before surgical repair, can confirm elevated LA and pulmonary artery pressures, mitral gradient and valve
area.
Prognosis
The natural history of MS varies, but the interval between onset of symptoms and severe disability is
about 7 to 9 yr. Outcome is affected by the patient's preprocedural age and functional status, pulmonary
hypertension, and degree of MR. Symptomatic results of balloon valvotomy and surgical commissurotomy
===PAGE:2340===
are equivalent in patients with noncalcified valves. However, after a variable period of time, function
deteriorates in most patients due to restenosis, and valve replacement may become necessary. Risk
factors for death are AF and pulmonary hypertension. Cause of death is most commonly heart failure or
pulmonary or cerebrovascular embolism.
Treatment
• Diuretics and sometimes
β
-blockers or Ca channel blockers
• Valvotomy, commissurotomy, or valve replacement
Asymptomatic patients require no treatment.
Mildly symptomatic patients usually respond to diuretics and, if sinus tachycardia or AF is present, to
β
-
blockers or Ca channel blockers, which can control ventricular rate. Anticoagulants are indicated to
prevent thromboembolism. All patients should be encouraged to continue at least low levels of physical
exercise despite exertional dyspnea.
More severely symptomatic patients and patients with evidence of pulmonary hypertension require
valvotomy, commissurotomy, or valve replacement.
Percutaneous balloon valvotomy is the procedure of choice for younger patients and for patients without
heavily calcified valves, subvalvular distortion, LA thrombi, or significant MR. In this fluoroscopic- and
echocardiographic-guided procedure, a transvenous catheter with an inflatable distal balloon is passed
transseptally from the right atrium to the LA and inflated to separate fused mitral valve leaflets. Outcomes
are equivalent to those of more invasive procedures. Complications are uncommon but include MR,
embolism, and tamponade.
Patients with severe subvalvular disease, valvular calcification, or LA thrombi may be candidates for
surgical commissurotomy, in which fused mitral valve leaflets are separated using a dilator passed
through the LV (closed commissurotomy) via a thoracotomy, or by direct vision (open commissurotomy) via
a sternotomy. Choice of procedure is based on surgeon's experience and the morphology of the valve,
although closed valvotomy is now done less frequently in Western countries.
Valve replacement is confined to patients with severe morphologic changes that make the valve
unsuitable for balloon or surgical valvotomy.
Antibiotic prophylaxis against endocarditis is no longer recommended except for patients who have had
valve replacement (see
Table 215-4
.
Pulmonic Regurgitation
Pulmonic (pulmonary) regurgitation (PR) is incompetency of the pulmonic valve causing blood
flow from the pulmonary artery into the right ventricle during diastole. The most common cause
is pulmonary hypertension. PR is usually asymptomatic. Signs include a decrescendo diastolic
murmur. Diagnosis is by echocardiography. Usually, no specific treatment is necessary except
for management of conditions causing pulmonary hypertension.
Secondary pulmonary hypertension (see
Table 202-1
 is by far the most common cause of PR. Less common causes are infective
endocarditis, surgical repair of tetralogy of Fallot, idiopathic pulmonary artery dilation, and congenital
valvular heart disease. Carcinoid syndrome, rheumatic fever and catheter-induced trauma are rare
causes. Severe PR is rare and most often results from an isolated congenital defect involving dilation of
the pulmonary artery and pulmonary valve annulus.
PR may contribute to development of right ventricular (RV) dilatation and eventually RV dysfunctioninduced heart failure (HF), but in most cases, pulmonary hypertension contributes to this complication
much more significantly. Rarely, acute RV dysfunction-induced HF develops when endocarditis causes
===PAGE:2341===
acute PR.
Symptoms and Signs
PR is usually asymptomatic. A few patients develop symptoms and signs of RV dysfunction-induced HF
(.
Palpable signs are attributable to pulmonary hypertension and RV hypertrophy. They include a palpable
pulmonic component (P
) of the 2nd heart sound (S
) at the left upper sternal border and a sustained RV
impulse that is increased in amplitude at the left middle and lower sternal border.
On auscultation, the 1st heart sound (S
) is normal. The S
may be split or single. When split, P
may be
loud and audible shortly after
the aortic component of S
(A
) because of pulmonary hypertension, or P
may be delayed because of increased RV stroke volume. S
may be single because of prompt pulmonic
valve closing with a merged A
-P
or, rarely, because of congenital absence of the pulmonic valve. An RV
3rd heart sound (S
), 4th heart sound (S
), or both may be audible with RV dysfunction-induced HF or
RV hypertrophy; these sounds can be distinguished from left ventricular heart sounds because they are
located at the left parasternal 4th intercostal space and because they grow louder with inspiration.
The murmur of PR due to pulmonary hypertension is a high-pitched, early diastolic decrescendo murmur
that begins with P
and ends before S
and that radiates toward the mid-right sternal edge (Graham
Steell's murmur); it is heard best at the left upper sternal border with the diaphragm of the stethoscope
while the patient holds the breath at end-expiration and sits upright. The murmur of PR without pulmonary
hypertension is shorter, lower-pitched (rougher in quality), and begins after P
. Both murmurs may
resemble the murmur of aortic regurgitation but can be distinguished by inspiration (which makes the PR
murmur louder) and by Valsalva release. After Valsalva release, the PR murmur immediately becomes loud
(because of immediate venous return to the right side of the heart), but the aortic regurgitation murmur
requires 4 or 5 beats to do so. Also, a soft PR murmur may sometimes become even softer during
inspiration because this murmur is usually best heard at the 2nd left intercostal space, where inspiration
pushes the stethoscope away from the heart.
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
PR is usually incidentally detected during a physical examination or Doppler echocardiography done for
other reasons. An ECG and chest x-ray are obtained. Either may show signs of RV hypertrophy; chest xray typically shows evidence of conditions underlying pulmonary hypertension.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Rarely valve replacement
Treatment is management of the condition causing PR. Pulmonic valve replacement is an option if
symptoms and signs of RV dysfunction-induced HF develop, but outcomes and risks are unclear because
the need for replacement is so infrequent.
Pulmonic Stenosis
Pulmonic stenosis (PS) is narrowing of the pulmonary outflow tract causing obstruction of blood
flow from the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery during systole. Most cases are congenital;
many remain asymptomatic until adulthood. Signs include a crescendo-decrescendo ejection
murmur. Diagnosis is by echocardiography. Symptomatic patients and those with large
gradients require balloon valvuloplasty.
===PAGE:2342===
Etiology
PS is most often congenital and affects predominantly children; stenosis may be valvular or just below the
valve in the outflow tract (infundibular). It commonly is a component of tetralogy of Fallot. Less common
causes are Noonan's syndrome (a familial syndrome similar to Turner's syndrome but with no
chromosomal defect) and carcinoid syndrome in adults.
Symptoms and Signs
Many children remain asymptomatic for years and do not present to a physician until adulthood. Even
then many patients remain asymptomatic. When symptoms develop, they resemble those of aortic
stenosis (syncope, angina, dyspnea). Visible and palpable signs reflect the effects of right ventricular
(RV) hypertrophy and include a prominent jugular venous
a
wave (due to forceful atrial contraction
against a hypertrophied RV), an RV precordial lift or heave, and a left parasternal systolic thrill at the 2nd
intercostal space.
On auscultation, the 1st heart sound (S
) is normal and the 2nd heart sound (S
) splitting is widened
because of prolonged pulmonic ejection (pulmonic component of S
[P] is delayed). In RV failure and
hypertrophy, the 3rd and 4th heart sounds (S
and S
) are rarely audible at the left parasternal 4th
intercostal space. A click in congenital PS is thought to result from abnormal ventricular wall tension. The
click occurs early in systole (very near S
) and is not affected by hemodynamic changes. A harsh
crescendodecrescendo ejection murmur is audible and is heard best at the left parasternal 2nd (valvular
stenosis) or 4th (infundibular stenosis) intercostal space with the diaphragm of the stethoscope when the
patient leans forward. Unlike the aortic stenosis murmur, a PS murmur does not radiate, and the
crescendo component lengthens as stenosis progresses. The murmur grows louder immediately with
Valsalva release and with inspiration; the patient may need to be standing for this effect to be heard.
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is confirmed by Doppler echocardiography, which can characterize the stenosis as mild (≤ 40
mm Hg peak gradient), moderate (41 to 79 mm Hg), or severe (≥ 80 mm Hg). ECG is often part of the
evaluation; it may be normal or show RV hypertrophy or right bundle branch block. Right heart
catheterization is indicated only when 2 levels of obstruction are suspected (valvular and infundibular),
when clinical and echocardiographic findings differ, or before intervention is done.
Treatment
• Sometimes balloon valvuloplasty
Prognosis without treatment is generally good and improves with appropriate intervention. Treatment is
balloon valvuloplasty, indicated for symptomatic patients and asymptomatic patients with normal systolic
function and a peak gradient > 40 to 50 mm Hg.
Tricuspid Regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) is insufficiency of the tricuspid valve causing blood flow from the
right ventricle to the right atrium during systole. The most common cause is dilation of the right
ventricle. Symptoms and signs are usually absent, but severe TR can cause neck pulsations, a
holosystolic murmur, and right ventricular-induced heart failure or atrial fibrillation. Diagnosis is
by physical examination and echocardiography. TR is usually benign and does not require
treatment, but some patients require annuloplasty or valve repair or replacement.
Etiology
TR is most commonly caused by dilation of the right ventricle (RV) with malfunction of a normal valve, as
===PAGE:2343===
occurs in pulmonary hypertension, RV dysfunction-induced heart failure (HF), and pulmonary outflow tract
obstruction. TR results less commonly from infective endocarditis in IV drug abusers, carcinoid syndrome,
chest or abdominal injury, rheumatic fever, idiopathic myxomatous degeneration, ischemic papillary
muscle dysfunction, congenital defects (eg, cleft tricuspid valve, endocardial cushion defects), Ebstein's
anomaly (downward displacement of a distorted tricuspid cusp into the RV), Marfan syndrome, and use of
certain drugs (eg, ergotamine, fenfluramine, phentermine).
Long-standing severe TR may lead to RV dysfunction-induced HF and atrial fibrillation (AF).
Symptoms and Signs
TR usually causes no symptoms, but some patients experience neck pulsations due to elevated jugular
pressures. Acute or severe TR may cause symptoms of RV dysfunction-induced HF. Patients may also
develop symptoms of AF or atrial flutter.
Pedal edema or ascites can occur in severe TR.
The only visible sign of moderate to severe TR is jugular venous distention, with a prominent merged
c-v
wave and a steep
y
descent. In severe TR, a right jugular venous thrill may be palpable, as may systolic
hepatic pulsation and an RV impulse at the left lower sternal border. On auscultation, the 1st heart sound
(S
) may be normal or barely audible if a TR murmur is present; the 2nd heart sound (S
) may be split
(with a loud pulmonic component [P] in pulmonary hypertension) or single because of prompt pulmonic
valve closing with merger of P
and the aortic component (A
). An RV 3rd heart sound (S
) may be
audible near the sternum with RV dysfunction-induced HF.
The murmur of TR is a holosystolic murmur heard best at the left middle or lower sternal border or at the
epigastrium with the bell of the stethoscope when the patient is sitting upright or standing. The murmur
may be high-pitched if TR is trivial and due to pulmonary hypertension, or it may be medium-pitched if TR
is severe and has other causes. Sometimes the murmur is not present at all and the diagnosis is best
made by the appearance of the jugular venous wave pattern and the presence of hepatic systolic
pulsations. The murmur varies with respiration, becoming louder with inspiration (Carvallo's sign).
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
Mild TR is most often detected on echocardiography done for other reasons. More moderate or severe
TR may be suggested by history and physical examination and confirmed by Doppler echocardiography.
An ECG and chest x-ray are also often obtained. ECG is usually normal but, in advanced cases, may
show tall peaked P waves caused by right atrial enlargement, a tall R or QR wave in V
characteristic of
RV hypertrophy, or AF. Chest x-ray is usually normal but, in advanced cases with RV hypertrophy or RV
dysfunction-induced HF, may show an enlarged superior
vena cava, an enlarged right atrial or RV
silhouette (behind the upper sternum in the lateral projection), or pleural effusion.
Cardiac catheterization is rarely indicated for evaluation of TR. When catheterization is indicated (eg, to
evaluate coronary anatomy), findings include a prominent right atrial
c-v
wave during ventricular systole.
Prognosis
Few reliable data about prognosis exist because so few patients develop severe TR in isolation.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Sometimes valve repair or replacement
===PAGE:2344===
TR is usually well tolerated and often does not require surgical treatment. Medical treatment of causes
(eg, HF, endocarditis) is indicated. The tricuspid valve may be repaired during surgery for left-sided heart
lesions, such as mitral stenosis or regurgitation. Surgery may also be indicated for TR alone when RV
impairment or cirrhosis threatens.
Surgical options include annuloplasty, valve repair, and valve replacement. Annuloplasty, in which the
tricuspid valve annulus is sutured to a prosthetic ring or a tailored reduction in annulus circumferential
size is done, is indicated when TR is due to annular dilation. Valve repair or replacement is indicated
when TR is due to primary valve abnormalities or when annuloplasty is not technically feasible. Tricuspid
valve replacement is indicated when TR is due to carcinoid syndrome or Ebstein's anomaly. A
bioprosthetic valve is used to reduce the risk of thromboembolism associated with the low pressures of
the right heart; in the right heart, unlike the left heart, bioprosthetic valves last > 10 yr.
If endocarditis has damaged the tricuspid valve and cannot be cured with antibiotics, the valve may be
totally excised and not replaced until 6 to 9 mo later; this procedure is well tolerated.
Tricuspid Stenosis
Tricuspid stenosis (TS) is narrowing of the tricuspid orifice that obstructs blood flow from the
right atrium to the right ventricle. Almost all cases result from rheumatic fever. Symptoms
include a fluttering discomfort in the neck, fatigue, cold skin, and right upper quadrant
abdominal discomfort. Jugular pulsations are prominent, and a presystolic murmur is often
heard at the left sternal edge in the 4th intercostal space and is increased during inspiration.
Diagnosis is by echocardiography. TS is usually benign, requiring no specific treatment, but
symptomatic patients may benefit from surgery.
TS is almost always due to rheumatic fever; tricuspid regurgitation is almost always also present, as is a
mitral valve disorder (usually mitral stenosis). Rare causes of TS include SLE, right atrial (RA) myxoma,
congenital malformations, and metastatic tumors. The RA becomes hypertrophied and distended, and
sequelae of right heart disease-induced heart failure develop but without right ventricular (RV)
dysfunction; the RV remains underfilled and small. Uncommonly, atrial fibrillation occurs.
Symptoms and Signs
The only symptoms of severe TS are fluttering discomfort in the neck (due to giant
a
waves in the jugular
pulse), fatigue and cold skin (due to low cardiac output), and right upper quadrant abdominal discomfort
(due to an enlarged liver).
The primary visible sign is a giant flickering
a
wave with gradual
y
descent in the jugular veins. Jugular
venous distention may occur, increasing with inspiration (Kussmaul's sign). The face may become dusky
and scalp veins may dilate when the patient is recumbent (suffusion sign). Hepatic congestion and
peripheral edema may occur.
On auscultation, TS may produce a soft opening snap and a mid-diastolic rumble with presystolic
accentuation. The murmur becomes louder and longer with maneuvers that increase venous return
(exercise, inspiration, leg-raising, Muller's maneuver) and softer and shorter with maneuvers that
decrease venous return (standing, Valsalva maneuver).
Findings of TS often coexist with those of mitral stenosis and are less prominent. The murmurs can be
distinguished clinically (see
Table 214-1
).
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected based on history and physical examination and confirmed by Doppler
===PAGE:2345===
echocardiography showing a pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve. Two-dimensional
echocardiography shows thickened leaflets with reduced movement and RA enlargement. An ECG and
chest x-ray are often obtained. ECG may show RA enlargement out of proportion to RV hypertrophy and
tall, peaked P waves in inferior leads and V
. Chest x-ray may show a dilated superior vena
[Table 214-1.
Distinguishing Murmurs of Tricuspid and Mitral Stenosis]
cava and RA enlargement, indicated by an enlarged right heart border. Liver enzymes are elevated
because of passive hepatic congestion.
Cardiac catheterization ( is rarely indicated for evaluation of TS. When catheterization is
indicated (eg, to evaluate coronary anatomy), findings include elevated RA pressure with a slow fall in
early diastole and a diastolic pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve.
Treatment
• Diuretics and aldosterone antagonists
• Rarely valve repair or replacement
Evidence to guide treatment is scarce. For all symptomatic patients, treatment should include a low-salt
diet, diuretics, and aldosterone antagonists. Patients with hepatic congestion leading to cirrhosis or
severe systemic venous congestion and effort limitation may benefit from interventions such as balloon
valvotomy or valve repair or replacement. Comparative outcomes are unstudied.
===PAGE:2346===
Chapter 215. Endocarditis
Introduction
Endocarditis usually refers to infection of the endocardium (ie, infective endocarditis). The term can also
include noninfective endocarditis, in which sterile platelet and fibrin thrombi form on cardiac valves and
adjacent endocardium. Noninfective endocarditis sometimes leads to infective endocarditis. Both can
result in embolization and impaired cardiac function.
Infective Endocarditis
Infective endocarditis is infection of the endocardium, usually with bacteria (commonly,
streptococci and staphylococci) or fungi. It causes fever, heart murmurs, petechiae, anemia,
embolic phenomena, and endocardial vegetations. Vegetations may result in valvular
incompetence or obstruction, myocardial abscess, or mycotic aneurysm. Diagnosis requires
demonstration of microorganisms in blood and usually echocardiography. Treatment consists of
prolonged antimicrobial treatment and sometimes surgery.
Endocarditis can occur at any age. Men are affected about twice as often. IV drug abusers and
immunocompromised patients are at highest risk.
Etiology
The normal heart is relatively resistant to infection. Bacteria and fungi do not easily adhere to the
endocardial surface, and constant blood flow helps prevent them from settling on endocardial structures.
Thus, 2 factors are generally required for endocarditis: a predisposing abnormality of the endocardium
and microorganisms in the bloodstream (bacteremia). Rarely, massive bacteremia or particularly virulent
microorganisms cause endocarditis on normal valves.
Endocardial factors:
Endocarditis usually involves the heart valves. Major predisposing factors are
congenital heart defects, rheumatic valvular disease, bicuspid or calcific aortic valves, mitral valve
prolapse, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Prosthetic valves are a particular risk. Occasionally, mural
thrombi, ventricular-septal defects, and patent ductus arteriosus sites become infected. The actual nidus
for infection is usually a sterile
fibrin-platelet vegetation formed when damaged endothelial cells release
tissue factor.
Infective endocarditis occurs most often on the left side (eg, mitral or aortic valve). About 10 to 20% of
cases are right-sided (tricuspid or pulmonic valve). IV drug abusers have a much higher incidence of
right-sided endocarditis (about 30 to 70%).
Microorganisms:
Microorganisms that infect the endocardium may originate from distant infected sites
(eg, cutaneous abscess, inflamed or infected gums, UTI) or have obvious portals of entry such as a
central venous catheter or a drug injection site. Almost any implanted foreign material (eg, ventricular or
peritoneal shunt, prosthetic device) is at risk of bacterial colonization, thus becoming a source of
bacteremia and hence endocarditis. Endocarditis also may result from asymptomatic bacteremia, such as
typically occurs during invasive dental, medical, or surgical procedures. Even toothbrushing and chewing
can cause bacteremia (usually due to viridans streptococci) in patients with gingivitis.
Causative microorganisms vary by site of infection, source of bacteremia, and host risk factors (eg, IV
drug abuse), but overall, streptococci and
Staphylococcus aureus
cause 80 to 90% of cases.
Enterococci, gram-negative bacilli, HACEK organisms (
Haemophilus
sp,
Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans, Cardio-bacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens,
and
Kingella kingae
—, and fungi cause most of the rest. Why streptococci and staphylococci frequently adhere to
vegetations and why gram-negative aerobic bacilli seldom adhere are unclear. However, the ability of
S.
aureus
to adhere to fibronectin may play a role, as may dextran production by viridans streptococci.
After colonizing vegetations, microorganisms are covered by a layer of fibrin and platelets, which prevents
===PAGE:2347===
access by neutrophils, Ig, and complement and thus blocks host defenses.
Pathophysiology
Endocarditis has local and systemic consequences.
Local consequences:
Local consequences include formation of myocardial abscesses with tissue
destruction and sometimes conduction system abnormalities (usually with low septal abscesses). Severe
valvular regurgitation may develop suddenly, causing heart failure and death (usually due to mitral or
aortic valve lesions). Aortitis may result from contiguous spread of infection. Prosthetic valve infections
are particularly likely to involve valve ring abscesses, obstructing vegetations, myocardial abscesses, and
mycotic aneurysms manifested by valve obstruction, dehiscence, and conduction disturbances.
Systemic consequences:
Systemic consequences are primarily due to embolization of infected material
from the heart valve and, primarily in chronic infection, immune-mediated phenomena. Right-sided lesions
typically produce septic pulmonary emboli, which may result in pulmonary infarction, pneumonia, or
empyema. Left-sided lesions may embolize to any tissue, particularly the kidneys, spleen, and CNS.
Mycotic aneurysms can form in any major artery. Cutaneous and retinal emboli are common. Diffuse
glomerulonephritis may result from immune complex deposition.
Classification
Infective endocarditis may have an indolent, subacute course or a more acute, fulminant course with
greater potential for rapid decompensation.
Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE),
although aggressive, usually develops insidiously and
progresses slowly (ie, over weeks to months). Often, no source of infection or portal of entry is evident.
SBE is caused most commonly by streptococci (especially viridans, microaerophilic, anaerobic, and
nonenterococcal group D streptococci and enterococci) and less commonly by
S. aureus,
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Gemella morbillorum, Abiotrophia defectiva, Granulicatella
sp, and
fastidious
Haemophilus
sp. SBE often develops on abnormal valves after asymptomatic bacteremia due
to periodontal, GI, or GU infections.
Acute bacterial endocarditis (ABE)
usually develops abruptly and progresses rapidly (ie, over days). A
source of infection or portal of entry is often evident. When bacteria are virulent or bacterial exposure is
massive, ABE can affect normal valves. It is usually caused by
S. aureus
, group A hemolytic streptococci,
pneumococci, or gonococci.
Prosthetic valvular endocarditis (PVE)
develops in 2 to 3% of patients within 1 yr after valve
replacement and in 0.5%/yr thereafter. It is more common after aortic than after mitral valve replacement
and affects mechanical and bioprosthetic valves equally. Early-onset infections (< 2 mo after surgery) are
caused mainly by contamination during surgery with antimicrobial-resistant bacteria (eg,
S. epidermidis
,
diphtheroids, coliform bacilli,
Candida
sp,
Aspergillus
sp). Late-onset infections are caused mainly by
contamination
with low-virulence organisms during surgery or by transient asymptomatic bacteremias,
most often with streptococci;
S. epidermidis
; diphtheroids; and the fastidious gram-negative bacilli,
Haemophilus
sp,
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans
, and
Cardiobacterium hominis
.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary based on the classification but are nonspecific.
SBE:
Initially, symptoms are vague: low-grade fever (< 39° C), night sweats, fatigability, malaise, and
weight loss. Chills and arthralgias may occur. Symptoms and signs of valvular insufficiency may be a first
clue. Initially, ≤ 15% of patients have fever or a murmur, but eventually almost all develop both. Physical
examination may be normal or include pallor, fever, change in a preexisting murmur or development of a
new regurgitant murmur, and tachycardia.
Retinal emboli can cause round or oval hemorrhagic retinal lesions with small white centers (Roth's
===PAGE:2348===
spots). Cutaneous manifestations include petechiae (on the upper trunk, conjunctivae, mucous
membranes, and distal extremities), painful erythematous subcutaneous nodules on the tips of digits
(Osler's nodes), nontender hemorrhagic macules on the palms or soles (Janeway lesions), and splinter
hemorrhages under the nails. About 35% of patients have CNS effects, including transient ischemic
attacks, stroke, toxic encephalopathy, and, if a mycotic CNS aneurysm ruptures, brain abscess and
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Renal emboli may cause flank pain and, rarely, gross hematuria. Splenic
emboli may cause left upper quadrant pain. Prolonged infection may cause splenomegaly or clubbing of
fingers and toes.
ABE and PVE:
Symptoms and signs are similar to those of SBE, but the course is more rapid. Fever is
almost always present initially, and patients appear toxic; sometimes septic shock develops. Heart murmur
is present initially in about 50 to 80% and eventually in > 90%. Rarely, purulent meningitis occurs.
Right-sided endocarditis:
Septic pulmonary emboli may cause cough, pleuritic chest pain, and
sometimes hemoptysis. A murmur of tricuspid regurgitation is typical.
Diagnosis
• Blood cultures
• Echocardiography
• Clinical criteria
Because symptoms and signs are nonspecific, vary greatly, and may develop insidiously, diagnosis
requires a high index of suspicion. Endocarditis should be suspected in patients with fever and no
obvious source of infection, particularly if a heart murmur is present. Suspicion of endocarditis should be
very high if blood cultures are positive in patients who have a history of a heart valve disorder, who have
had certain recent invasive procedures, or who abuse IV drugs. Patients with documented bacteremia
should be examined thoroughly and repeatedly for new valvular murmurs and signs of emboli.
If endocarditis is suspected, 3 blood cultures (20 mL each) should be obtained within 24 h (if presentation
suggests ABE, 2 cultures within the first 1 to 2 h). When endocarditis is present and no prior antibiotic
therapy was given, all 3 blood cultures usually are positive because the bacteremia is continuous; at least
one culture is positive in 99%. Premature use of empiric antibiotic therapy should be avoided in patients
with acquired or congenital valvular or shunt lesions to avoid culture-negative endocarditis. If prior
antimicrobial therapy was given, blood cultures should still be obtained, but they may be negative.
Echocardiography, typically transthoracic (TTE) rather than transesophageal (TEE), should be done.
Although TEE is somewhat more accurate (ie, capable of revealing vegetations too small to be seen on
TTE), it is invasive and more costly. TEE should be done when endocarditis is suspected in patients with
prosthetic valves, when TTE is nondiagnostic, and when diagnosis of infective endocarditis has been
established clinically.
Other than positive blood cultures, there are no specific laboratory findings. Established infections often
cause a normocytic-normochromic anemia, elevated WBC count, increased ESR, increased Igs,
circulating immune complexes, and rheumatoid factor, but these findings are not diagnostically helpful.
Urinalysis often shows microscopic hematuria and, occasionally, RBC casts, pyuria, or bacteriuria.
Identification of the organism and its antimicrobial susceptibility is vital to guide treatment. Blood cultures
may require 3 to 4 wk incubation for certain organisms; however, some proprietary, automated culture
monitoring systems can identify positive cultures within a week. Other organisms (eg,
Aspergillus
sp) may
not produce positive cultures. Some organisms (eg,
Coxiella burnetii, Bartonella
sp,
Chlamydia psittaci,
Brucella
sp) require serodiagnosis; others (eg,
Legionella
pneumophila
) require special culture media or
PCR (eg,
Tropheryma whippelii
). Negative blood culture results may indicate suppression due to prior
antimicrobial therapy, infection with organisms that do not grow in standard culture media, or another
diagnosis (eg, non-infective endocarditis, atrial myxoma with embolic phenomena, vasculitis).
===PAGE:2349===
Infective endocarditis is definitively diagnosed when microorganisms are seen histologically in (or cultured
from) endocardial vegetations obtained during cardiac surgery, embolectomy, or autopsy. Because
vegetations are not usually available for examination, clinical criteria for establishing a diagnosis (with a
sensitivity and specificity > 90%) have been developed (see
Table 215-1
).
Prognosis
Untreated, infective endocarditis is always fatal. Even with treatment, death is more likely and the
prognosis is generally poorer for older people and people who have infection with resistant organisms, an
underlying disorder, or a long delay in treatment. The prognosis is also poorer for people with aortic or
multiple valve involvement, large vegetations, polymicrobial bacteremia, prosthetic valve infections,
mycotic aneurysms, valve ring abscess, and major embolic events. The mortality rate for viridans
streptococcal endocarditis without major complications is < 10% but is virtually 100% for
Aspergillus
endocarditis after prosthetic valve surgery.
The prognosis is better with right-sided than left-sided endocarditis because tricuspid valve dysfunction is
tolerated better, systemic emboli are absent, and right-sided
S. aureus
endocarditis responds better to
antimicrobial therapy.
Treatment
• IV antibiotics (based on the organism and its susceptibility)
• Sometimes valve debridement, repair, or replacement
Treatment consists of a prolonged course of antimicrobial therapy. Surgery may be needed for
mechanical complications or resistant organisms. Typically, antimicrobials are given IV. Because they
must be given for 2 to 8 wk, home IV therapy is often used.
Any apparent source of bacteremia must be managed: necrotic tissue d
ε
brided, abscesses drained, and
foreign material and infected devices removed. Existing IV catheters (particularly central venous ones)
should be changed. If endocarditis persists in a patient
[Table 215-1.
Revised Duke Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for Infective Endocarditis]
with a newly inserted central venous catheter, that catheter should also be removed. Organisms within
biofilms adherent to catheters and other devices may not respond to antimicrobial therapy, leading to
treatment failure or relapse. If continuous infusions are used instead of intermittent boluses, infusions
should not be interrupted for long periods.
Antibiotic regimens:
Drugs and dosages depend on the microorganism and its antimicrobial
susceptibility (for typical regimens, see
Table 215-2
). Initial therapy before organism identification (but after adequate blood cultures have been
obtained) should be broad spectrum to cover all likely organisms. Typically, patients with native valves
and no IV drug abuse receive ampicillin 500 mg/h continuous IV infusion plus nafcillin 2 g IV q 4 h plus
gentamicin 1 mg/kg IV q 8 h. Patients with a prosthetic valve receive vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV q 12 h plus
gentamicin 1 mg/kg q 8 h plus rifampin 300 po q 8 h. IV drug abusers receive nafcillin 2 g IV q 4 h. In all
regimens, penicillin-allergic patients require substitution of vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV q 12 h.
IV drug abusers frequently do not adhere to treatment, abuse IV access lines, and tend to leave the
hospital too soon. For such patients, short-course IV or (less preferably) oral therapy may be used. For
right-sided endocarditis caused by methicillin-sensitive
S. aureus
, nafcillin 2 g IV q 4 h plus gentamicin 1
mg/kg IV q 8 h for 2 wk is effective, as is a 4-wk oral regimen of ciprofloxacin 750 mg po bid plus rifampin
300 mg po bid. Left-sided endocarditis does not respond to 2-wk courses.
Cardiac valve surgery:
Surgery (debridement, valve repair or replacement) is frequently required for
abscess, persistent infection despite antimicrobial therapy (ie, persistent positive blood cultures or
===PAGE:2350===
recurrent emboli), or severe valvular regurgitation.
Timing of surgery requires experienced clinical judgment. If heart failure caused by a correctable lesion is
worsening (particularly when the organism is
S. aureus
, a gram-negative bacillus, or a fungus), surgery
may be required after only 24 to 72 h of antimicrobial therapy. In patients with prosthetic valves, surgery
may be required when TEE shows
[Table 215-2.
Antibiotic Regimens for Endocarditis]
valve dehiscence on a paravalvular abscess, when valve dysfunction precipitates heart failure, when
recurrent emboli are detected, or when the infection is caused by an antimicrobial-resistant organism.
Response to treatment:
After starting therapy, patients with penicillin-susceptible streptococcal
endocarditis usually feel better, and fever is reduced within 3 to 7 days. Fever may continue for reasons
other than persistent
infection (eg, drug allergy, phlebitis, infarction due to emboli). Patients with
staphylococcal endocarditis tend to respond more slowly. Diminution of vegetation size can be followed
by serial echocardiography.
Relapse usually occurs within 4 wk. Antibiotic retreatment may be effective, but surgery may also be
required. In patients without prosthetic valves, recrudescence of endocarditis after 6 wk usually results
from a new infection rather than a relapse. Even after successful antimicrobial therapy, sterile emboli and
valve rupture may occur up to 1 yr later.
Prevention
Preventive dental examination and therapy before surgery to repair heart valves or congenital heart
lesions is recommended.
Patients:
The American Heart Association (AHA) recommends antimicrobial prophylaxis for patients at
high risk of an adverse outcome from infective endocarditis (see AHA guidelines). Such patients include
those with
• Prosthetic heart valves
• Previous infective endocarditis
• Certain congenital heart diseases (CHD): Unrepaired cyanotic CHD (including palliative shunts and
conduits), completely repaired CHD during the first 6 mo after surgery if prosthetic material or device
was used, repaired CHD that has residual defects at or adjacent to the site of repair
• Heart transplant recipients with valvulopathy
Procedures:
Most procedures for which prophylaxis is required for high-risk patients are oral-dental
procedures that manipulate the gingiva or the periapical region of teeth or perforate the oral mucosa.
Other procedures include those respiratory tract procedures in which mucosa is incised, and GI, GU, or
musculo-skeletal procedures that involve an area with an established infection (see
Table 215-3
).
Antibiotic regimens:
For most patients and procedures, a single dose shortly before the procedure is
effective.
For oral-dental and respiratory procedures, a drug effective against viridans group streptococci is used
(see
Table 215-4
).
For GI, GU, and musculoskeletal procedures on areas involving infected tissue, antibiotics should be
selected based on the known organism and its sensitivities. If infection is present but the infecting
organism has not been identified, antibiotics for GI and GU prophylaxis should be effective against
===PAGE:2351===
enterococci (eg, amoxicillin or ampicillin, and vancomycin for patients who are allergic to penicillin).
Antibiotics for skin and musculoskeletal
[Table 215-3.
Procedures Requiring Antimicrobial Endocarditis Prophylaxis in High-Risk Patients]
[Table 215-4.
Recommended Endocarditis Prophylaxis During Oral-Dental or Respiratory Tract
Procedures*]
prophylaxis should be effective against staphylococci and
β
-hemolytic streptococci (eg, a cephalosporin
or vancomycin or clindamycin if infection with methicillin-resistant staphylococci is possible).
Noninfective Endocarditis
Noninfective endocarditis (nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis) refers to formation of sterile
platelet and fibrin thrombi on cardiac valves and adjacent endocardium in response to trauma,
circulating immune complexes, vasculitis, or a hypercoagulable state. Symptoms are those of
systemic arterial embolism. Diagnosis is by echocardiography and negative blood cultures.
Treatment consists of anticoagulants.
Etiology
Vegetations are caused by physical trauma, not infection. They may be clinically undetectable or become
a nidus for infection (leading to infective endocarditis), produce emboli, or impair valvular function.
Catheters passed through the right side of the heart may injure the tricuspid and pulmonic valves,
resulting in platelet and fibrin attachment at the site of injury. In disorders such as SLE, circulating immune
complexes may result in friable platelet and fibrin vegetations along a valve leaflet closure (Libman-Sacks
lesions). These lesions do not usually cause significant valvular obstruction or regurgitation.
Antiphospholipid syndrome (lupus anticoagulants, recurrent venous thrombosis, stroke, spontaneous
abortions, livdo reticularis) also can lead to sterile endocardial vegetations and systemic emboli. Rarely,
Wegener's granulomatosis leads to noninfective endocarditis.
Marantic endocarditis:
In patients with chronic wasting diseases, disseminated intravascular
coagulation, mucin-producing metastatic carcinomas (of lung, stomach, or pancreas), or chronic
infections (eg, TB, pneumonia, osteomyelitis), large thrombotic vegetations may form on valves and
produce significant emboli to the brain, kidneys, spleen, mesentery, extremities, and coronary arteries.
These vegetations tend to form on congenitally abnormal cardiac valves or those damaged by rheumatic
fever.
Symptoms and Signs
Vegetations themselves do not cause symptoms. Symptoms result from embolization and depend on the
organ affected (eg, brain, kidneys, spleen). Fever and a heart murmur are sometimes present.
Diagnosis
• Blood cultures
• Echocardiography
Noninfective endocarditis should be suspected when chronically ill patients develop symptoms suggesting
arterial embolism. Serial blood cultures ( and echocardiography should be done. Negative
blood cultures and valvular vegetations (but not atrial myxoma) suggest the diagnosis. Examination of
embolic fragments after embolectomy can help make the diagnosis. Differentiation from culture-negative
infective endocarditis may be
difficult but is important. An anticoagulant is often needed in noninfective
endocarditis but is contraindicated in infective endocarditis.
Prognosis
===PAGE:2352===
Prognosis is generally poor, more because of the seriousness of predisposing disorders than the cardiac
lesion.
Treatment
• Anticoagulation
Treatment consists of anticoagulation with heparin or warfarin, although results of such treatment have
not been evaluated. Predisposing disorders should be treated whenever possible.
===PAGE:2353===
Chapter 216. Pericarditis
Introduction
Pericarditis is inflammation of the pericardium, often with fluid accumulation. Pericarditis may
be caused by many disorders (eg, infection, MI, trauma, tumors, metabolic disorders) but is
often idiopathic. Symptoms include chest pain or tightness, often worsened by deep breathing.
Cardiac output may be greatly reduced. Diagnosis is based on symptoms, a friction rub, ECG
changes, and evidence of pericardial fluid accumulation on x-ray or echocardiogram. Finding
the cause requires further evaluation. Treatment depends on the cause, but general measures
include analgesics, anti-inflammatory drugs, and sometimes surgery.
Pericarditis is the most common pericardial disorder. Congenital pericardial disorders are rare.
Anatomy
The pericardium has 2 layers. The visceral pericardium is a single layer of mesothelial cells that is
attached to the myocardium, folds back (reflects) on itself over the origin of the great vessels, and joins
with a tough, fibrous layer to envelop the heart as the parietal pericardium. The sac created by these
layers contains a small amount of fluid (< 25 to 50 mL), composed mostly of an ultrafiltrate of plasma. The
pericardium limits distention of the cardiac chambers and increases the heart's efficiency.
The pericardium is richly innervated with sympathetic and somatic afferents. Stretch-sensitive
mechanoreceptors sense changes in cardiac volume and tension and may be responsible for transmitting
pericardial pain. The phrenic nerves are embedded in the parietal pericardium and are vulnerable to
injury during surgery on the pericardium.
Pathophysiology
Pericarditis may be
• Acute
• Chronic
Acute pericarditis develops quickly, causing an inflammatory reaction. Chronic pericarditis (defined as
persisting > 6 mo) develops more slowly; its prominent feature is effusion. Acute disease may become
chronic. Adverse hemodynamic effects and rhythm disturbance are rare, although cardiac tamponade is
possible. Occasionally, pericarditis causes a marked thickening and stiffening of the pericardium
(constrictive pericarditis). Pericarditis can lead to inflammation of the epicardial myocardium.
Pericardial effusion
is accumulation of fluid in the pericardium. The fluid may be serous fluid (sometimes
with fibrin strands), serosanguineous fluid, blood, pus, or chyle.
Cardiac tamponade
occurs when a large pericardial effusion impairs cardiac filling, leading to low
cardiac output and sometimes shock and death. If fluid (usually blood) accumulates rapidly, even small
amounts (eg, 150 mL) may cause tamponade because the pericardium cannot stretch quickly enough to
accommodate it. Slow accumulation of up to 1500 mL may not cause tamponade. Loculated effusion may
cause localized tamponade on the right or left side of the heart.
Constrictive pericarditis,
which is uncommon, results from marked inflammatory, fibrotic thickening of
the pericardium. Sometimes the visceral and parietal layers adhere to each other or to the myocardium.
The fibrotic tissue often contains Ca deposits. The stiff, thickened pericardium markedly impairs
ventricular filling, decreasing stroke volume and cardiac output. Significant pericardial fluid accumulation
is rare. Rhythm disturbance is common. The diastolic pressures in the ventricles, atria, and venous beds
become virtually the same. Systemic venous congestion occurs, causing considerable transudation of
fluid from systemic capillaries, with dependent edema and, later, ascites. Chronic elevation of
systemic
venous and hepatic venous pressure may lead to cardiac cirrhosis. Constriction of the left atrium, the left
===PAGE:2354===
ventricle, or both may elevate pulmonary venous pressure.
Etiology
Acute pericarditis may result from infection, autoimmune and inflammatory disorders, uremia, trauma, MI,
or certain drugs (see
Table 216-1
). Infectious pericarditis is most often viral. Purulent bacterial pericarditis is uncommon but
may follow infective endocarditis, pneumonia, septicemia, penetrating trauma, or cardiac surgery. Often,
the cause cannot be identified (called nonspecific or idiopathic pericarditis), but many of these cases are
probably viral. Overall, the most common causes are viral and idiopathic. Acute MI causes 10 to 15% of
cases of acute pericarditis. Post-MI syndrome (Dressler's syndrome) is a less common cause now,
occurring mainly when reperfusion with percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) or
thrombolytic drugs is ineffective in patients with transmural infarction. Pericarditis occurs after
pericardiotomy (called postpericardiotomy syndrome) in 5 to 30% of cardiac operations.
[Table 216-1.
Causes of Acute Pericarditis]
Chronic pericardial effusion or constrictive pericarditis may follow almost any disorder that causes acute
pericarditis, as well as TB, a tumor, irradiation, rheumatoid disease, and cardiac surgery. Sometimes no
cause of chronic pericarditis is identified. Pericarditis with large effusion (serous, serosanguineous, or
bloody) is most commonly caused by metastatic tumors, most often by lung or breast carcinoma, sarcoma,
melanoma, leukemia, or lymphoma.
Fibrosis of the pericardium may follow purulent pericarditis or myocardial infection (myocarditis—a
common cause in young people) or accompany a connective tissue disorder. In elderly patients, common
causes are malignant tumors, MI, and TB. Hemopericardium (accumulation of blood within the
pericardium) may lead to pericarditis or pericardial fibrosis; common causes include chest trauma,
iatrogenic injury (eg, from cardiac catheterization, pacemaker insertion, or central venous line placement),
and rupture of a thoracic aortic aneurysm.
Symptoms and Signs
Some patients present with symptoms and signs of inflammation (acute pericarditis); others present with
those of fluid accumulation (pericardial effusion). Symptoms and signs vary depending on the severity of
inflammation and the amount and rate of fluid accumulation. Even a large amount of pericardial fluid may
be asymptomatic if it develops slowly (eg, over months).
Acute pericarditis:
Acute pericarditis tends to cause chest pain and a pericardial rub, sometimes with
dyspnea. The first evidence can be tamponade, with hypotension, shock, or pulmonary edema.
Because the innervation of the pericardium and myocardium is the same, the chest pain of pericarditis is
sometimes similar to that of myocardial inflammation or ischemia: Dull or sharp precordial or substernal
pain may radiate to the neck, trapezius ridge (especially the left), or shoulders. Pain ranges from mild to
severe. Unlike ischemic chest pain, pain due to pericarditis
is usually aggravated by thoracic motion,
cough, breathing, or swallowing food; it may be relieved by sitting up and leaning forward. Tachypnea and
nonproductive cough may be present; fever, chills, and weakness are common. In 15 to 25% of patients
with idiopathic pericarditis, symptoms recur intermittently for months or years.
The most important physical finding is a triphasic or a systolic and diastolic precordial friction rub.
However, the rub is often intermittent and evanescent; it may be present only during systole or, less
frequently, only during diastole. If no rub is heard with the patient seated and leaning forward,
auscultation may be attempted by listening with the diaphragm of the stethoscope while the patient is on
all fours. Sometimes, a pleural component to the rub is noted during breathing, which is due to
inflammation of the pleura adjacent to the pericardium. Considerable amounts of pericardial fluid may
muffle heart sounds, increase the area of cardiac dullness, and change the size and shape of the cardiac
silhouette.
Pericardial effusion:
Pericardial effusion is often painless, but when it occurs with acute pericarditis,
===PAGE:2355===
pain may be present. Typically, heart sounds are muffled. A pericardial rub may be heard. With large
effusions, compression of the base of the left lung can decrease breath sounds (heard near the left
scapula) and cause crackles. Arterial pulse, jugular venous pulse, and BP are normal unless
intrapericardial pressure increases substantially, causing tamponade.
In the post-MI syndrome, pericardial effusion can occur with fever, friction rub, pleurisy, pleural effusions,
and joint pain. This syndrome usually occurs within 10 days to 2 mo after MI. It is usually mild but may be
severe. Occasionally, the heart ruptures post-MI, causing hemopericardium and tamponade, usually 1 to
10 days post-MI and more commonly in women.
Cardiac tamponade:
The clinical findings are similar to those of cardiogenic shock: decreased cardiac
output, low systemic arterial pressure, tachycardia, and dyspnea. Neck veins are markedly dilated.
Severe cardiac tamponade is nearly always accompanied by a fall of > 10 mm Hg in systolic BP during
inspiration (pulsus paradoxus—. In advanced cases, pulse may disappear during inspiration.
(However, pulsus paradoxus can also occur in COPD, bronchial asthma, pulmonary embolism, right
ventricular infarction, and noncardiogenic shock.) Heart sounds are muffled unless the effusion is small.
Constrictive pericarditis:
Fibrosis or calcification rarely causes symptoms unless constrictive
pericarditis develops. The only early abnormalities may be elevated ventricular diastolic, atrial, pulmonary,
and systemic venous pressures. Symptoms and signs of peripheral venous congestion (eg, peripheral
edema, neck vein distention, hepatomegaly) may appear with an early diastolic sound (pericardial knock),
often best heard during inspiration. This sound is due to abrupt slowing of diastolic ventricular filling by
the rigid pericardium. Ventricular systolic function (based on ejection fraction) is usually preserved.
Prolonged elevation of pulmonary venous pressure results in dyspnea (particularly during exertion) and
orthopnea. Fatigue may be severe. Distention of neck veins with a rise in venous pressure during
inspiration (Kussmaul's sign) is present; it is absent in tamponade. Pulsus paradoxus is rare and is
usually less severe than in tamponade. Lungs are not congested unless severe left ventricular
constriction develops.
Diagnosis
• ECG and chest x-ray
• Echocardiography
• Tests to identify cause (eg, pericardial fluid aspiration, pericardial biopsy)
Acute pericarditis:
If acute pericarditis is suspected, hospitalization is sometimes required for initial
evaluation. ECG and chest x-ray are done. If symptoms or signs of elevated right-sided pressure,
tamponade, or an enlarged cardiac silhouette are present, echocardiography to check for effusion and
cardiac filling abnormalities is also done. Blood tests may detect leukocytosis and an elevated ESR, but
these findings are nonspecific.
The diagnosis is based on the presence of typical clinical findings and ECG abnormalities. Serial ECGs
may be needed to show abnormalities.
The ECG in acute pericarditis may show abnormalities confined to ST segments and T waves, usually in
most leads (see
Fig. 216-1
). The ST segments in 2 or 3 of the standard leads become elevated but subsequently return to
baseline. Unlike MI, acute pericarditis does not cause reciprocal depression in ST segments (except in
leads aVR and V
), and there are no pathologic Q waves. The PR segment may be depressed. After
several days or longer, T waves may become flattened and then inverted throughout the ECG, except in
lead aVR; T wave-inversion occurs after the ST segment
has returned to baseline and thus differs from
the pattern of acute ischemia or MI.
Because the pain of pericarditis may resemble that of acute MI or pulmonary infarction, additional tests
(eg, serum cardiac marker measurement, lung scan) may be required if the history and ECG findings are
atypical for pericarditis. Troponin is almost always elevated in acute pericarditis due to epicardial
===PAGE:2356===
inflammation so it cannot discriminate between acute infarction and pulmonary embolism. The CK level is
usually normal in acute pericarditis unless myocarditis is also present.
Postpericardiotomy and post-MI syndromes may be difficult to identify and must be distinguished from
recent MI, pulmonary embolism, and pericardial infection after surgery. Pain, friction rub, and fever
appearing 2 wk to several months after surgery and a rapid response to aspirin, NSAIDs, or
corticosteroids aid diagnosis.
Pericardial effusion:
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical findings but often is suspected only after finding
an enlarged cardiac silhouette on chest x-ray. On ECG, QRS voltage is often decreased, and sinus
rhythm remains in about 90% of patients. With large, chronic effusions, the ECG may show electrical
alternans (ie, P, QRS, or T wave amplitude increases and decreases on alternate beats). Electrical
alternans is associated with variation in cardiac position (swinging heart). Echocardiography has a high
degree of sensitivity and specificity for detecting pericardial fluid.
Patients with a normal ECG, small (< 0.5 L) effusion, and no suspicious findings from the history and
examination may be observed with serial examination and echocardiography. Other patients must be
evaluated further to determine etiology.
Constrictive pericarditis:
Diagnosis may be suspected based on ECG, chest x-ray, and Doppler
echocardiography findings, but cardiac catheterization and CT (or MRI) are usually required. Because
ventricular filling is restricted, ventricular pressure tracings show a sudden dip followed by a plateau
(resembling a square root sign) in early diastole. Rarely, right heart biopsy is needed to exclude restrictive
cardiomyopathy.
ECG changes are nonspecific. QRS voltage is usually low. T waves are usually non-specifically
abnormal. Atrial fibrillation occurs in about one third of patients; atrial flutter is less common.
Lateral chest x-rays often show pericardial calcification best, but the finding is nonspecific.
The changes on echocardiogram are also nonspecific. When the right and left ventricular filling pressures
are equally elevated, Doppler echocardiography helps distinguish constrictive pericarditis from restrictive
cardiomyopathy. During inspiration, mitral diastolic flow velocity usually falls > 25% in
[Fig. 216-1.
Acute pericarditis: Stage 1 ECG.]
constrictive pericarditis but < 15% in restrictive cardiomyopathy. In constrictive pericarditis, inspiratory
tricuspid flow velocity increases more than it normally does, but it does not do so in restrictive
cardiomyopathy. Determining tissue velocities at the mitral annulus may be helpful when excessively high
left atrial pressure blunts respiratory variation in transvalvular velocities.
If clinical and echocardiographic findings suggest constrictive pericarditis, right heart cardiac
catheterization is done. It helps confirm and quantify the abnormal hemodynamics that define constrictive
pericarditis: Mean pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure), pulmonary
artery diastolic pressure, right ventricular end-diastolic pressure, and mean right atrial pressure are all at
about 10 to 30 mm Hg. The pulmonary artery and right ventricular systolic pressures are normal or
modestly elevated, so that pulse pressures are small. In the atrial pressure curve,
x
and
y
descents are
typically accentuated; in the ventricular pressure curve, a diastolic dip occurs at the time of rapid
ventricular filling. These changes almost always occur with significant constrictive pericarditis.
Right ventricular systolic pressure of > 50 mm Hg often occurs in restrictive cardiomyopathy but less often
in constrictive pericarditis. When the pulmonary artery occlusion pressure equals the right atrial mean
pressure and an early diastolic dip in the ventricular pressure curve occurs with large
x
and
y
waves in
the right atrial curve, either disorder may be present.
CT or MRI can identify pericardial thickening > 5 mm. Such thickening with typical hemodynamic changes
can confirm a diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis. When no pericardial thickening or fluid is seen, the
diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathy is favored but not proved; a normal pericardial thickness does not
===PAGE:2357===
exclude the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis.
Cardiac tamponade:
Low voltage and electrical alternans on the ECG suggest cardiac tamponade, but
these findings lack sensitivity and specificity. When tamponade is suspected, echocardiography is done
unless even a brief delay might be life threatening. Then pericardiocentesis is done immediately for
diagnosis and treatment. On an echocardiogram, respiratory variation of transvalvular and venous flows
and compression or collapse of right cardiac chambers in the presence of a pericardial effusion support
the diagnosis.
If tamponade is suspected, right heart (Swan-Ganz) catheterization may be done. In cardiac tamponade,
there is no early diastolic dip in the ventricular pressure record. In the atrial pressure curve,
x
descent is
preserved and
y
descent is lost. In contrast, in severe congestive states due to dilated cardiomyopathy,
pulmonary artery occlusion or left ventricular diastolic pressure usually exceeds right atrial mean pressure
and right ventricular diastolic pressure by ≥ 4 mm Hg.
Diagnosis of cause:
After pericarditis is diagnosed, tests to determine etiology and the effect on cardiac
function are done. In a young, previously healthy adult who presents with a viral infection and pericarditis,
an extensive evaluation is usually unnecessary. Differentiating viral from idiopathic pericarditis is difficult,
expensive, and generally of little practical importance.
A biopsy of pericardial tissue or aspiration of pericardial fluid may be needed to establish a diagnosis.
Acid-fast stains and cultures of pericardial fluid help identify infectious causes. Samples are examined for
malignant cells. However, complete drainage of a newly identified pericardial effusion is usually
unnecessary for diagnosis. Persistent (usually > 3 mo) or progressive effusion, particularly when the
etiology is uncertain, also warrants pericardiocentesis.
The choice between needle pericardiocentesis and surgical drainage depends on institutional resources
and physician experience, the etiology of the effusion, the need for diagnostic tissue samples, and the
prognosis of the patient. Needle pericardiocentesis is often best when the etiology is known or the
presence of tamponade is in question. Surgical drainage is best when the presence of tamponade is
certain but the etiology is unclear.
Laboratory tests of pericardial fluid other than culture and cytology are usually nonspecific. But specific
diagnoses are sometimes possible using newer visual, cytologic, and immunologic analysis of fluid
obtained via pericardioscopic-guided biopsy.
Cardiac catheterization may be useful for evaluating pericarditis and identifying the cause of reduced
cardiac function.
CT or MRI can help identify metastases, although echocardiography is usually sufficient.
Other tests include CBC, acute-phase reactants, routine chemistries, cultures, autoimmune tests, and,
when appropriate, tests for HIV, histoplasmosis complement fixation (in endemic areas), streptozyme, and
neutralizing antibodies for coxsackievirus, influenza
virus, and echovirus. Anti-DNA and anti-RNA antibody
tests may be useful. A PPD skin test is done.
Treatment
• Varies by cause
• NSAIDs and sometimes colchicine or corticosteroids for pain and inflammation
• Pericardiocentesis for tamponade and some large effusions
• Sometimes intrapericardial drugs (eg, triamcinolone)
• Sometimes pericardial resection for constrictive pericarditis
===PAGE:2358===
• Treatment of cause
Hospitalization to watch for complications is often advisable. Possible causative drugs (eg,
anticoagulants, procainamide, phenytoin) are stopped. For cardiac tamponade, immediate
pericardiocentesis (see
Fig. 216-2
) is done; removal of even a small volume of fluid may be lifesaving.
Pain can usually be controlled with aspirin 325 to 650 mg po q 4 to 6 h or other NSAIDs (eg, ibuprofen
600 to 800 mg po q 6 to 8 h); duration of therapy varies, and patients should be treated until an effusion,
if present, has resolved. Colchicine 1 mg/day (for 3 mo), added to NSAIDs or given alone, is effective for
the initial episode of pericarditis and helps prevent recurrences. The intensity of therapy is dictated by the
patient's distress. Severe pain may require opioids and corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 60 to 80 mg po
once/day for 1 wk, followed by rapid tapering of the dose). Corticosteroids are particularly useful in acute
pericarditis due to uremia or a connective tissue disorder, but tuberculous and pyogenic pericarditis
should be excluded before corticosteroid therapy is initiated. Intrapericardial instillation of triamcinolone
(300 mg/m
)
[Fig. 216-2.
Pericardiocentesis.]
avoids systemic adverse effects and is highly effective. Anticoagulants are usually contraindicated in
acute pericarditis because they may cause intrapericardial bleeding and even fatal tamponade; however,
they can be given in early pericarditis complicating acute MI. Uncommonly, pericardial resection is
required.
Infections are treated with specific antimicrobials. Complete drainage is often necessary.
In postpericardiotomy syndrome, post-MI syndrome, or idiopathic pericarditis, antibiotics are not indicated.
An NSAID at full doses may control pain and effusion. When required to control pain, fever, and effusion,
prednisone 20 to 60 mg po once/day may be given for 3 to 4 days. If the response is satisfactory, the
dose is gradually reduced, and the drug may be stopped in 7 to 14 days. But sometimes many months of
treatment are needed.
For pericarditis due to rheumatic fever, another connective tissue disorder, or tumor, therapy is directed at
the underlying process.
For pericardial effusion due to trauma, surgery is sometimes required to repair the injury and evacuate
blood from the pericardium.
Pericarditis due to uremia may respond to increased frequency of hemodialysis, aspiration, or systemic or
intrapericardial adrenal corticosteroids. Intrapericardial triamcinolone may be useful.
Chronic effusions are best treated by treating the cause, if known. Recurrent or persistent symptomatic
effusions may be treated with balloon pericardiotomy or a surgical pericardial window. Recurrent effusion
due to malignant tumor invasion may be treated with sclerosing drugs. Asymptomatic effusions of
unknown cause may require only observation.
Congestion in chronic constrictive pericarditis may be alleviated with bed rest, salt restriction, and
diuretics. Digoxin is indicated only if atrial arrhythmias or ventricular systolic dysfunction is present.
Symptomatic constrictive pericarditis usually requires pericardial resection. However, patients with mild
symptoms, heavy calcification, or extensive myocardial damage may be poor surgical candidates. The
mortality rate for pericardial resection may approach 40% in New York Heart Association (NYHA)
functional class IV patients. Patients who have constrictive pericarditis due to irradiation or a connective
tissue disorder are especially likely to have severe myocardial damage and may not benefit from
pericardial resection.
===PAGE:2359===
Chapter 217. Diseases of the Aorta and Its Branches
Introduction
The aorta originates at the left ventricle above the aortic valve (aortic root), travels upward (ascending
thoracic aorta) to the first branch of the aorta (brachiocephalic or innominate artery), arches up and
behind the heart (aortic arch), then turns downward distal to the left subclavian artery (descending aorta)
through the thorax (thoracic aorta) and abdomen (abdominal aorta). The abdominal aorta ends by dividing
into the 2 common iliac arteries.
Aneurysms
Aneurysms are abnormal dilations of arteries caused by weakening of the arterial wall.
Common causes include hypertension, atherosclerosis, infection, trauma, and hereditary or
acquired connective tissue disorders. Aneurysms are usually asymptomatic but can cause pain
and lead to ischemia, thromboembolism, spontaneous dissection, and rupture, which may be
fatal. Diagnosis is by imaging tests (eg, ultrasonography, CT angiography, magnetic resonance
angiography, aortography). Treatment of unruptured aneurysms is with risk factor modification
(eg, strict BP control) plus surveillance imaging or with open or endovascular stent-graft
surgery, depending on size and location of the aneurysm and presence of symptoms.
Treatment of ruptured aneurysms is immediate repair by either an open surgical synthetic graft
or an endovascular stent-graft.
Aneurysms, defined as a ≥ 50% increase in arterial diameter compared with normal segments, result from
localized weakening of an arterial wall. True aneurysms involve all
3 layers of the artery (intima, media,
and adventitia). A pseudoaneurysm (false aneurysm) is a communication between the arterial lumen and
overlying connective tissue resulting from arterial rupture; a blood-filled cavity forms outside the vessel
wall and seals the leak as it thromboses. Aneurysms are classified as fusiform (circumferential widening
of the artery) or saccular (localized outpouchings of the artery wall). Thrombi that develop in layers
(laminated thrombi) may line the walls of either type and are a sign that blood flow beyond the aneurysm
is normal or near normal.
Aneurysms may occur in any artery. Abdominal and thoracic aortic aneurysms are most common and
significant; aneurysms of the major branches (subclavian and splanchnic arteries) are much less
common. Aneurysms of the cerebrovascular system are discussed in
Sidebar 173-1

Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms
Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) account for three fourths of aortic aneurysms and affect 0.5 to 3.2%
of the population. Prevalence is 3 times greater in men. AAAs typically begin below the renal arteries but
may include renal arterial ostia; about 50% involve the iliac arteries. Generally, aortic diameter ≥ 3 cm
constitutes an AAA. Most AAAs are fusiform; some are saccular. Many are lined with laminated thrombi.
AAAs involve all layers of the aorta and do not involve dissection; however, a thoracic aortic dissection
may extend to the distal abdominal aorta.
Etiology
The most common cause is weakening of the arterial wall, usually associated with atherosclerosis. Other
causes include trauma, vasculitis, cystic medial necrosis, and post-surgical anastomotic disruption.
Uncommonly, syphilis and localized bacterial or fungal infection, typically due to sepsis or infective
endocarditis, weaken the arterial wall and cause infected (mycotic) aneurysms.
Smoking is the strongest risk factor. Other risk factors include hypertension, older age (peak incidence at
age 70 to 80), family history (in 15 to 25%), race (more common in whites than in blacks), and male sex.
Symptoms and Signs
Most AAAs are asymptomatic; symptoms and signs, when they do occur, may not be specific. As AAAs
===PAGE:2360===
expand, they may cause pain, which is steady, deep, boring, visceral, and felt most prominently in the
lumbosacral region; patients may be aware of an abnormally prominent abdominal pulsation. Rapidly
enlarging aneurysms that are about to rupture are frequently tender, but most aneurysms grow slowly
without symptoms.
The aneurysm may or may not be palpable as a pulsatile mass, depending on its size and patient habitus.
The probability that a patient with a pulsatile palpable mass has an aneurysm > 3 cm is about 40%
(positive predictive value). A systolic bruit may be audible over the aneurysm.
If an AAA ruptures, patients who do not die immediately typically present with abdominal or back pain,
hypotension, and tachycardia. They may have a history of recent upper abdominal trauma, often minimal,
or isometric straining (eg, lifting a heavy object).
Patients with an occult AAA sometimes present with symptoms of complications (eg, extremity pain due to
embolization of mural thrombi) or of the cause (eg, fever, malaise, or weight loss due to infection or
vasculitis). Uncommonly, large AAAs cause disseminated intravascular coagulation, perhaps because
large areas of abnormal endothelial surface trigger rapid thrombosis and consumption of coagulation
factors.
Diagnosis
• Often incidental
• Confirmation by ultrasonography or CT
• Sometimes CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography
Most AAAs are diagnosed incidentally when they are detected during physical examination or when
abdominal ultrasonography, CT, or MRI is done for other reasons. An AAA should be considered in elderly
patients who present with acute abdominal or back pain whether a palpable pulsatile mass is present or
not.
When symptoms or physical examination findings suggest AAA, abdominal ultra-sonography or CT is
usually the test of choice. Symptomatic patients should have immediate testing to make the diagnosis
before catastrophic rupture. For hemodynamically unstable patients with presumed rupture,
ultrasonography provides bedside results more rapidly, but intestinal gas and distention may limit its
accuracy. Laboratory tests, including CBC, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, PT, PTT, blood type and crossmatch, are done in preparation for possible surgery.
If rupture is not suspected, CT angiography (CTA) or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) can more
precisely characterize aneurysm size and anatomy. If thrombi line the aneurysm wall, CTA may
underestimate true size; noncontrast CT may provide a more accurate estimate. Aortography is essential
if renal artery or aortoiliac disease is suspected or if correction with endovascular stent-grafts
(endografts) is being considered.
Plain abdominal x-rays are neither sensitive nor specific; however, if obtained for other purposes, aortic
calcification may outline the aneurysm wall. If a mycotic aneurysm is suspected, bacterial and fungal
blood cultures should be done.
Treatment
• Surgery or endovascular stent grafting
Some AAAs enlarge at a steady rate (2 to 3 mm/yr), some enlarge exponentially, and, for unknown
reasons, about 20% remain the same size indefinitely. The need for treatment is related to size, which is
linked to risk of rupture (see
Table 217-1
).
===PAGE:2361===
Ruptured AAAs require immediate open surgery or endovascular stent grafting. Without treatment,
mortality rate approaches 100%. With open surgical treatment, mortality rate is about 50%; mortality with
endovascular stent grafting is generally lower (20 to 30%). The mortality remains high because many
patients have coexisting coronary, cerebrovascular, and peripheral atherosclerosis. Patients who present
in hemorrhagic shock require fluid resuscitation ( and blood transfusions, but mean arterial
pressure should not be elevated to > 70 to 80 mm Hg because bleeding may increase. Preoperative
control of hypertension is important.
Elective surgical repair is recommended for aneurysms > 5 to 5.5 cm (when risk of rupture increases to >
5 to 10%/yr), unless coexisting medical conditions contraindicate surgery. Additional indications for
elective surgery include increase in aneurysm size by > 0.5 cm within 6 mo regardless of size, chronic
abdominal pain, thromboembolic complications, and an iliac or femoral artery aneurysm that causes
lower-limb ischemia. Before elective repair, clinical recognition of coronary artery disease (CAD) is
essential (see
Table 207-1
 because many patients with an AAA have generalized atherosclerosis and
surgical repair poses a major risk of cardiovascular events. Aggressive medical treatment and risk factor
control are essential, and revascularization should be considered only in patients with unstable CAD.
Routine preoperative coronary angioplasty or bypass surgery has not been shown to be necessary in
most patients who can be prepared with good medical management before aneurysm repair.
[Table 217-1.
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Size and Rupture Risk*]
Surgical repair consists of replacing the aneurysmal portion of the abdominal aorta with a synthetic graft.
If the iliac arteries are involved, the graft must be extended to include them. If the aneurysm extends
above the renal arteries, the renal arteries must be reimplanted into the graft, or bypass grafts must be
created.
Placement of an endovascular stent-graft within the aneurysmal lumen via the femoral artery is a less
invasive alternative and is indicated when risk of perioperative complications is high. This procedure
excludes the aneurysm from systemic blood flow and reduces risk of rupture. The aneurysm eventually
thromboses, and 50% of aneurysms decrease in diameter. Short-term results are good, but long-term
results are unknown. Complications include angulation, kinking, thrombosis, migration of the stent-graft,
and endoleak (persistent flow of blood into the aneurysm sac after endovascular stent-graft placement).
Thus, follow-ups must be more frequent after endovascular stent-graft placement than after a traditional
repair. If no complications occur, imaging tests are recommended at 1 mo, 6 mo, 12 mo, and every year
thereafter. Complex anatomy (eg, short aneurysm neck below renal arteries, severe arterial tortuosity)
makes endovascular stent grafting difficult in 30 to 40% of patients.
Repair of aneurysms < 5 cm does not appear to improve survival. These aneurysms should be monitored
with ultrasonography every 6 to 12 mo for expansion that warrants treatment. Control of atherosclerotic
risk
factors, especially smoking cessation and use of antihypertensives as appropriate, is important. If a
small or moderate-sized aneurysm becomes > 5.5 cm and if risk of perioperative complications is lower
than estimated risk of rupture, AAA repair is indicated; risk of rupture vs that of perioperative
complications should be discussed frankly with the patient.
Treatment of a mycotic aneurysm consists of vigorous antimicrobial therapy directed at the pathogen,
followed by excision of the aneurysm. Early diagnosis and treatment improve outcome.
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs) account for one fourth of aortic aneurysms. Men and women are
affected equally. About 40% of TAAs occur in the ascending thoracic aorta (between the aortic valve and
brachiocephalic, or innominate, artery), 10% occur in the aortic arch (including the brachiocephalic,
carotid, and subclavian arteries), 35% occur in the descending thoracic aorta (distal to the left subclavian
artery), and 15% occur in the upper abdomen (as thoracoabdominal aneurysms).
Etiology
===PAGE:2362===
Most TAAs result from atherosclerosis. Risk factors for both include prolonged hypertension, dyslipidemia,
and smoking; additional risk factors for TAAs include presence of aneurysms elsewhere and older age
(peak incidence at age 65 to 70).
Congenital connective tissue disorders (eg, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome) cause cystic
medial necrosis, a degenerative change that leads to TAAs complicated by aortic dissection (
and by widening of the proximal aorta and aortic valve (annuloaortic ectasia), which causes aortic
regurgitation. Marfan syndrome causes 50% of cases of annuloaortic ectasia, but cystic medial necrosis
and its complications can occur in young people even if no congenital connective tissue disorder is
present.
Infected (mycotic) TAAs result from hematogenous spread of systemic or local infections (eg, sepsis,
pneumonia), lymphangitic spread (eg, in TB), or direct extension (eg, in osteomyelitis or pericarditis).
Bacterial endocarditis and tertiary syphilis are uncommon causes. TAAs occur in some connective tissue
disorders (eg, temporal arteritis, Takayasu's arteritis, Wegener's granulomatosis).
Blunt chest trauma causes pseudoaneurysms (extramural hematomas due to blood that has leaked
through the torn aortic wall).
TAAs may dissect, compress or erode into adjacent structures, lead to thromboembolism, leak, or rupture.
Symptoms and Signs
Most TAAs are asymptomatic until complications (eg, thromboembolism, rupture, aortic regurgitation,
dissection) develop. However, compression of adjacent structures can cause chest or back pain, cough,
wheezing, dysphagia, hoarseness (due to left recurrent laryngeal or vagus nerve compression), chest
pain (due to coronary artery compression), and superior vena cava syndrome. Erosion of aneurysms into
the lungs causes hemoptysis or pneumonitis; erosion into the esophagus (aortoesophageal fistula)
causes massive hematemesis. Dissection manifests with tearing pain, often radiating to the back.
Thromboembolism may cause stroke, abdominal pain (due to mesenteric embolism), or extremity pain.
Patients who do not immediately die of a ruptured TAA present with severe chest or back pain and
hypotension or shock; exsanguination most commonly occurs into the pleural or pericardial space.
Additional signs include Horner syndrome due to compression of sympathetic ganglia, palpable
downward pull of the trachea with each cardiac contraction (tracheal tug), and tracheal deviation. Visible
or palpable chest wall pulsations, occasionally more prominent than the left ventricular apical impulse, are
unusual but may occur.
Syphilitic aneurysms of the aortic root classically lead to aortic regurgitation and inflammatory stenosis of
the coronary artery ostia, which may manifest as chest pain due to myocardial ischemia. Syphilitic
aneurysms do not dissect.
Diagnosis
• Incidental x-ray finding
• Confirmation by CTA, MRA, or transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
TAAs are usually first suspected when a chest x-ray incidentally shows a widened mediastinum or
enlargement of the aortic knob. These findings or symptoms and signs suggesting an aneurysm should
be followed up with a 3-dimensional imaging test. CTA can delineate aneurysm size and proximal or
distant extent, detect leakage, and identify coincident pathology. MRA may provide similar detail. TEE can
delineate size and extent and detect leakage of aneurysms of the ascending but not descending aorta;
TEE is especially useful for detecting aortic dissection. Contrast
angiography provides the best image of
the arterial lumen but no information on extraluminal structures, is invasive, and has a significant risk of
renal and extremity atheroembolism and contrast nephropathy. Choice of imaging test is based on
availability and local experience; however, if rupture is suspected, TEE or CTA, depending on availability,
is done immediately.
===PAGE:2363===
Aortic root dilation or unexplained ascending aorta aneurysms warrant serologic testing for syphilis. If a
mycotic aneurysm is suspected, bacterial and fungal blood cultures are done.
Prognosis
TAAs enlarge an average of 3 to 5 mm/yr; risk factors for rapid enlargement include larger size of
aneurysm, location in the descending aorta, and presence of mural thrombi. Median diameter at
aneurysm rupture is 6 cm for ascending aneurysms and 7 cm for descending aneurysms, but rupture of
smaller aneurysms may occur in patients with Marfan syndrome. Survival rate of patients with untreated
large TAAs is 65% at 1 yr and 20% at 5 yr.
Treatment
• Endovascular stent grafting or open surgical repair
• Control of hypertension
Treatment is endovascular stent grafting when anatomically possible and open surgical repair for more
complex aneurysms. Immediate control of hypertension is essential.
Ruptured TAAs, if untreated, are universally fatal; they require immediate intervention, as do leaking
aneurysms and those that cause acute dissection or acute valvular regurgitation. Surgery involves a
median sternotomy (for ascending and aortic arch aneurysms) or left thoracotomy (for descending and
thoracoabdominal aneurysms) and subsequent excision of the aneurysm and replacement with a
synthetic graft. Transcatheter-placed endovascular stent-grafts (endografts) for descending TAAs are
being used more frequently as a less invasive alternative to open surgery. With emergency surgery, 1-mo
mortality rate is about 40 to 50%. In patients who survive, incidence of serious complications (eg, renal
failure, respiratory failure, severe neurologic damage) is high.
Elective surgery is indicated for large aneurysms (diameter > 5 to 6 cm in the ascending aorta, > 6 to 7
cm in the descending aorta, and, for patients with Marfan syndrome, > 5 cm in any location) and also for
those that rapidly enlarge (> 1 cm/yr). Elective surgery is also indicated for symptomatic, traumatic, or
syphilitic aneurysms. For syphilitic aneurysms, benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units once/wk IM is given
for 3 wk afterward. For patients allergic to penicillin, tetracycline or erythromycin 500 mg po qid for 30
days is acceptable.
Although surgical repair of an intact TAA improves outcome, mortality rate may still exceed 5 to 10% at 30
days and is 40 to 50% at 10 yr. Risk of death increases greatly if aneurysms are complicated (eg, in the
aortic arch or thoracoabdominal aorta) or if patients have CAD, are older, are symptomatic, or have
preexisting renal insufficiency. Perioperative complications (eg, stroke, spinal injury, renal failure) occur in
about 10 to 20%.
Asymptomatic aneurysms that do not meet criteria for elective surgical or endovascular repair are treated
with aggressive BP control using a
β
-blocker and other antihypertensives if necessary. Smoking
cessation is essential. Patients require frequent follow-ups to check for symptoms and serial CT every 6
to 12 mo.
Aortic Branch Aneurysms
Aneurysms may occur in any major aortic branch; such aneurysms are much less common than
abdominal or thoracic aortic aneurysms. Risk factors include atherosclerosis, hypertension, cigarette
smoking, and older age. Localized infection can cause mycotic aneurysms.
Subclavian artery aneurysms are sometimes associated with cervical ribs or thoracic outlet syndrome.
Splanchnic artery aneurysms are uncommon. About 60% occur in the splenic artery, 20% in the hepatic
artery, and 5.5% in the superior mesenteric artery. Splenic artery aneurysms occur in more women than
===PAGE:2364===
men (4:1). Causes include medial fibromuscular dysplasia, portal hypertension, multiple pregnancies,
penetrating or blunt abdominal trauma, pancreatitis, and infection. Hepatic artery aneurysms occur in
more men than women (2:1). They may result from previous abdominal trauma, illicit IV drug use, medial
degeneration of the arterial wall, or periarterial inflammation. Renal artery aneurysms may dissect or
rupture, causing acute occlusion (.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms vary. Subclavian aneurysms can cause local pain, a pulsating sensation, venous thrombosis or
edema (due to compression of adjacent veins), distal ischemic symptoms,
transient ischemic attacks,
stroke, or hoarseness or impaired motor and sensory function (due to compression of the recurrent
laryngeal nerve or brachial plexus). Superior mesenteric aneurysms may cause abdominal pain and
ischemic colitis.
Regardless of location, mycotic or inflammatory aneurysms may cause local pain and sequelae of
systemic infection (eg, fever, malaise, weight loss).
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography or CT
Most aortic branch aneurysms are not diagnosed before rupture, although calcified asymptomatic or
occult aneurysms may be seen on x-rays or other imaging tests done for other reasons. Ultrasonography
or CT is typically used to detect or confirm aortic branch aneurysms. Angiography can be used as needed
to evaluate distal symptoms thought to be due to the aneurysm or embolism.
Treatment
• Open repair or sometimes endovascular stent grafting
Treatment is surgical removal and replacement with a graft. Endovascular repair is an option for some
patients. The decision to repair asymptomatic aneurysms is based on risk of rupture, extent and location
of the aneurysm, and perioperative risk.
Surgery for subclavian artery aneurysms may involve removal of a cervical rib (if present) before repair
and replacement.
For splanchnic aneurysms, risk of rupture and death is as high as 10% and is particularly high for women
of childbearing age and for patients with hepatic aneurysms (> 35%). Elective repair of splanchnic
aneurysms is therefore indicated for women of childbearing age, for symptomatic aneurysms in other age
groups, and for hepatic aneurysms. For splenic aneurysms, repair may consist of ligation without arterial
reconstruction or aneurysm exclusion and vascular reconstruction. Depending on location of the
aneurysm, splenectomy may be necessary.
Treatment of mycotic aneurysms is aggressive antibiotic therapy directed at the specific pathogen.
Generally, these aneurysms must also be surgically repaired.
Aortic Dissection
Aortic dissection is the surging of blood through a tear in the aortic intima with separation of the
intima and media and creation of a false lumen. The intimal tear may be a primary event or
secondary to hemorrhage within the media. The dissection may occur anywhere along the aorta
and extend proximally or distally into other arteries. Hypertension is an important contributor.
Symptoms and signs include abrupt onset of tearing chest or back pain, and dissection may
result in aortic regurgitation and compromised circulation in branch arteries. Diagnosis is by
imaging tests (eg, transesophageal echocardiography, CT angiography, MRI, contrast
aortography). Treatment always involves aggressive BP control and serial imaging to monitor
progression of dissection; surgical repair of the aorta and placement of a synthetic graft are
===PAGE:2365===
needed for ascending aortic dissection and for certain descending aortic dissections.
Endovascular stent-grafts are used for certain patients, especially when dissection involves the
descending thoracic aorta. One fifth of patients die before reaching the hospital, and up to one
third die of operative or perioperative complications.
Evidence of dissection is found in 1 to 3% of all autopsies. African-Americans, men, the elderly, and
people with hypertension are especially at risk. Peak incidence occurs at age 50 to 65 or, for patients with
congenital connective tissue disorders (eg, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome), at age 20 to 40.
Aortic dissections are classified anatomically. The DeBakey classification system is most widely used.
• Type I (50% of dissections): These dissections start in the ascending aorta and extend at least to the
aortic arch and sometimes beyond.
• Type II (35%): These dissections start in and are confined to the ascending aorta.
• Type III (15%): These dissections start in the descending thoractic aorta just beyond the origin of the left
subclavian artery and extend distally or, less commonly, proximally.
The Stanford system is simpler.
• Type A: These dissections involve the ascending aorta.
• Type B: These dissections are confined to the descending thoracic aorta.
Although dissection may originate anywhere along the aorta, it occurs most commonly at the proximal
ascending aorta (within 5 cm of the aortic valve) or the descending thoracic aorta (just beyond the origin
of the left subclavian artery). Rarely, dissection is confined to individual arteries (eg, coronary or carotid
arteries), typically in pregnant or postpartum women.
Etiology
Aortic dissection always occurs in the setting of preexisting degeneration of the aortic media. Causes
include connective tissue disorders and injury (see
Table 217-2
).
Atherosclerotic risk factors, notably hypertension, contribute in more than two thirds of patients. After
rupture of the intima, which is a primary event in some patients and secondary to hemorrhage within the
media in others, blood flows into the media, creating a false channel that extends distally or, less
commonly, proximally along the artery.
Pathophysiology
Dissections may communicate back with the true aortic lumen through intimal rupture at a distal site,
maintaining systemic blood flow. But serious consequences are common:
• Compromise of the blood supply of tributary arteries (including coronary arteries)
• Aortic valvular dilation and regurgitation
• Heart failure
• Fatal rupture of the aorta through the adventitia into the pericardium, right atrium, or left pleural space
Acute dissections and those present < 2 wk are most likely to cause these complications. Risk decreases
at ≥ 2 wk if evidence indicates thrombosis of the false lumen and loss of communication between the true
and false lumina.
===PAGE:2366===
Variants of aortic dissection include separation of the intima and media by intramural hematoma without a
clear intimal tear or flap, intimal tear and bulge without hematoma or false lumen, and dissection or
hematoma caused by ulceration of atherosclerotic plaque. These variants are thought to be precursors of
classic aortic dissection.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, excruciating precordial or inter-scapular pain, often described as tearing or ripping, occurs
abruptly. The pain frequently migrates from the original location as the dissection extends along the aorta.
Up to 20% of patients present with syncope due to severe pain, aortic baroreceptor activation,
extracranial cerebral artery obstruction, or cardiac tamponade.
Occasionally, patients present with symptoms of stroke, MI, intestinal infarction, paraparesis or paraplegia
due to interruption of the blood supply to the spinal cord, or ischemic limb due to acute distal arterial
occlusion.
About 20% of patients have partial or complete deficits of major arterial pulses, which may wax and wane.
Limb BPs may differ, sometimes by > 30 mm Hg; this finding suggests a poor prognosis. A murmur of
aortic regurgitation is heard in about 50% of patients with proximal dissection. Peripheral signs of aortic
regurgitation may be present. Rarely, heart failure results from severe acute aortic regurgitation. Leakage
of blood or inflammatory serous fluid into the left pleural space may lead to signs of pleural effusion;
occlusion of a limb artery may cause signs of peripheral ischemia or neuropathy. Renal artery occlusion
may cause oliguria or anuria. Cardiac tamponade may cause pulsus paradoxus and jugular venous
distention.
[Table 217-2.
Conditions Contributing to Aortic Dissection]
Diagnosis
• Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), CT angiography (CTA), or magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA)
Aortic dissection must be considered in any patient with chest pain, thoracic back pain, unexplained
syncope or abdominal pain, stroke, or acute-onset heart failure, especially when pulses or BPs in the
limbs are unequal. Such patients require a chest x-ray; in 60 to 90%, the mediastinal shadow is widened,
usually with a localized bulge signifying the site of origin. Left pleural effusion is common.
If chest x-ray suggests dissection, TEE, CTA, or MRA is done immediately after the patient is stabilized.
Findings of an intimal flap and double lumina confirm dissection.
Multiplanar TEE is 97 to 99% sensitive and, with M-mode echocardiography, is nearly 100% specific. It
can be done at the bedside in < 20 min and does not require contrast agents. If TEE is unavailable, CTA
is recommended; it has a positive predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value of 86%.
MRA has nearly 100% sensitivity and specificity for aortic dissection. But it is time-consuming and illsuited for emergencies. It is probably best used for stable patients with sub-acute or chronic chest pain
when dissection is suspected.
Contrast aortography is an option if surgery is being considered. In addition to identifying the origin and
extent of dissection, severity of aortic regurgitation, and extent of involvement of the aorta's major
branches, aortography helps determine whether simultaneous coronary artery bypass surgery is needed.
Echocardiography should also be done to check for aortic regurgitation and thus determine whether the
aortic valve should be repaired or replaced concomitantly.
ECG is nearly universally done. However, findings range from normal to markedly abnormal (in acute
coronary artery occlusion or aortic regurgitation), so the test is not diagnostically helpful. Assays for
soluble elastin compounds and smooth-muscle myosin heavy-chain protein are being studied; they look
promising but are not routinely available. Serum CK-MB and troponin may help distinguish aortic
===PAGE:2367===
dissection from MI, except when dissection causes MI.
Routine laboratory tests may detect slight leukocytosis and anemia if blood has leaked from the aorta.
Increased LDH may be a non-specific sign of celiac or mesenteric arterial trunk involvement.
A cardiothoracic surgeon should be consulted early during the diagnostic evaluation.
Prognosis
About 20% of patients with aortic dissection die before reaching the hospital. Without treatment, mortality
rate is 1 to 3%/h during the first 24 h, 30% at 1 wk, 80% at 2 wk, and 90% at 1 yr.
Hospital mortality rate for treated patients is about 30% for proximal dissection and 10% for distal. For
treated patients who survive the acute episode, survival rate is about 60% at 5 yr and 40% at 10 yr. About
one third of late deaths are due to complications of the dissection; the rest are due to other disorders.
Treatment
•
β
-Blockers and other drugs to control BP
• Surgery
Patients who do not immediately die of aortic dissection should be admitted to an ICU with intra-arterial
BP monitoring; an in-dwelling urethral catheter is used to monitor urine output. Blood should be typed and
cross-matched for 4 to 6 units of packed RBCs when surgery is likely. Hemodynamically unstable patients
should be intubated.
Drugs to decrease arterial pressure, arterial shear stress, ventricular contractility, and pain are started
immediately to maintain systolic BP at ≤ 110 mm Hg or the lowest level compatible with adequate
cerebral, coronary, and renal perfusion. A
β
-blocker is usually used first. Options include metoprolol 5 mg
IV up to 4 doses 15 min apart, esmolol 50 to 200
μ
g/kg/min in a constant IV infusion, and labetalol (an
α
-
and
β
-adrenergic blocker) 1 to 2 mg/min in a constant IV infusion or 5 to 20 mg IV initial bolus with
additional doses of 20 to 40 mg given q 10 to 20 min until BP is controlled or a total of 300 mg has been
given, followed by additional 20- to 40-mg doses q 4 to 8 h prn. Alternatives to
β
-blockers include Ca
channel blockers (eg, verapamil 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg IV bolus or diltiazem 0.25 mg/kg [up to 25 mg] IV bolus
or 5 to 10 mg/h by continuous infusion).
If systolic BP remains > 110 mm Hg despite use of
β
-blockers, nitroprusside in a constant IV infusion can
be started at 0.2 to 0.3
μ
g/kg/min and titrated upward (often to 200 to 300
μ
g/min) as necessary to control
BP. Nitroprusside should not be given without a
β
-blocker or Ca channel blocker, because reflex
sympathetic activation in response to vasodilation can increase ventricular inotropy and aortic shear
stress, worsening the dissection.
A trial of drug therapy alone is appropriate for uncomplicated, stable dissection confined to the
descending aorta (type B) and for stable, isolated dissection of the aortic arch. Surgery is virtually always
indicated if dissection involves the proximal aorta. Surgery is also indicated for limb or visceral ischemia,
uncontrolled hypertension, continued aortic enlargement, extension of the dissection, and evidence of
aortic rupture, regardless of dissection type. Surgery may also be best for acute distal dissections in
patients with Marfan syndrome.
The goal of surgery is to obliterate entry into the false channel and reconstitute the aorta with a synthetic
graft. If present, significant aortic regurgitation must be treated by
resuspending the aortic leaflets or
replacing the valve. Surgical outcomes are best with early, aggressive intervention; mortality rate ranges
from 7 to 36%. Predictors of poor outcome include hypotension, renal failure, age > 70, abrupt onset of
chest pain, pulse deficit, and ST-segment elevation on ECG.
Stent-grafts that seal entry to the false lumen and improve patency of the true lumen, balloon fenestration
(in which an opening is made in the dissection flap that separates the true and false lumina), or both may
===PAGE:2368===
be less invasive alternatives for patients with type B dissection if peripheral ischemic complications
develop.
All patients, including those treated by surgery or endovascular methods, are given long-term
antihypertensive drug therapy, usually including
β
-blockers, Ca channel blockers, and ACE inhibitors.
Almost any combination of antihypertensives is acceptable; exceptions are those that act mainly by
vasodilation (eg, hydralazine, minoxidil) and
β
-blockers that have intrinsic sympathomimetic action (eg,
acebutolol, pindolol). Avoidance of strenuous physical activity is often recommended. MRI may be done
before discharge and repeated at 6 mo and 1 yr, then every 1 to 2 yr.
The most important late complications include redissection, formation of localized aneurysms in the
weakened aorta, and progressive aortic regurgitation. These complications may require surgical or
endovascular repair.
Aortitis
Aortitis is inflammation of the aorta, sometimes causing aneurysm or occlusion.
Aortitis is caused by several connective tissue disorders (eg, Takayasu's arteritis, temporal arteritis,
ankylosing spondylitis, relapsing polychondritis) and infections (eg, bacterial endocarditis, syphilis, Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, fungal infections). It is also a feature of Cogan's syndrome (inflammatory keratitis,
vestibular and auditory dysfunction, and aortitis).
Inflammation usually involves all layers of the aorta (intima, media, adventitia) and may lead to occlusion
of the aorta or its branches or weakening of the arterial wall, resulting in aneurysms. Pathogenesis,
symptoms and signs, diagnosis, and treatment differ by etiology.
Abdominal Aortic Branch Occlusion
Various branches of the aorta can be occluded by atherosclerosis, fibromuscular dysplasia, or
other conditions, causing symptoms and signs of ischemia or infarction. Diagnosis is by
imaging tests. Treatment is with embolectomy, angioplasty, or sometimes surgical bypass
grafting.
Acute occlusion of branches of the abdominal aorta may result from embolism, atherothrombosis, or
dissection; chronic occlusion may result from atherosclerosis, fibromuscular dysplasia, or external
compression by mass lesions. Common sites of occlusion include
• Superior mesenteric arteries
• Celiac axis
• Renal arteries
• Aortic bifurcation
Chronic occlusion of the celiac axis is more common among women for unclear reasons.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical manifestations (eg, pain, organ failure, necrosis) result from ischemia or infarction and vary
depending on artery involved and acuity.
Acute mesenteric occlusion ( causes intestinal ischemia and infarction, resulting in severe, diffuse abdominal pain typically out of
proportion to the minimal physical findings. Acute occlusion of the celiac axis may cause liver or spleen
infarction.
===PAGE:2369===
Chronic mesenteric vascular insufficiency rarely causes symptoms unless both the superior mesenteric
artery and celiac axis are substantially narrowed or occluded, because collateral circulation between the
major splanchnic trunks is extensive. Symptoms of chronic mesenteric vascular insufficiency typically
occur postprandially (as intestinal angina) because digestion requires increased mesenteric blood flow;
pain begins about 30 min to 1 h after eating and is steady, severe, and usually periumbilical and may be
relieved by sublingual nitroglycerin. Patients become fearful of eating; weight loss, often extreme, is
common. Rarely, malabsorption develops and contributes to weight loss. Patients may have an abdominal
bruit, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation, and dark stools.
Acute renal artery embolism causes sudden flank pain, followed by hematuria (. Chronic
occlusion may be asymptomatic or result in new or hard-to-control hypertension and other sequelae of
renal insufficiency or failure.
Acute occlusion of the aortic bifurcation or distal branches can cause sudden onset of pain at rest, pallor,
paralysis, absence of peripheral pulses, and coldness in the legs (. Chronic occlusion can
cause intermittent claudication in the legs and buttocks and
erectile dysfunction (Leriche syndrome).
Femoral pulses are absent. A limb may be jeopardized.
Diagnosis
• Imaging tests
Diagnosis is based primarily on history and physical examination and is confirmed by duplex
ultrasonography, CT angiography, magnetic resonance angiography, or traditional angiography.
Treatment
• Embolectomy or percutaneous angioplasty for acute occlusion
• Surgery or angioplasty for chronic occlusion
Acute occlusion is a surgical emergency requiring embolectomy or percutaneous transluminal angioplasty
(PTA) with or without stent placement. Chronic occlusion, if symptomatic, may require surgery or
angioplasty. Risk factor modification and antiplatelet drugs may help.
Acute mesenteric occlusion (eg, in the superior mesenteric artery), which causes significant morbidity and
mortality, requires prompt revascularization. Prognosis is poor if the intestine is not revascularized within 4
to 6 h.
For chronic occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery and celiac axis, dietary modifications may
temporarily relieve symptoms. If symptoms are severe, surgical bypass from the aorta to the splanchnic
arteries distal to the occlusion usually results in revascularization. Long-term patency of the grafts
exceeds 90%. In appropriately selected patients (particularly among older patients who may be poor
candidates for surgery), revascularization by PTA with or without stent placement may be successful.
Symptoms may resolve rapidly, and weight may be regained.
Acute renal artery occlusion requires embolectomy; sometimes PTA can be done. Initial treatment of
chronic occlusion involves antihypertensives. If BP is not controlled adequately or if renal function
deteriorates, PTA with stent placement or, when PTA is impossible, open surgical bypass or
endarterectomy can improve blood flow.
Occlusion of the aortic bifurcation requires urgent embolectomy, usually done transfemorally. If chronic
occlusion of the aortic bifurcation causes claudication, an aortoiliac or aortofemoral graft can be used to
surgically bypass the occlusion. PTA is an alternative for selected patients.
===PAGE:2370===
Chapter 218. Peripheral Arterial Disorders
Introduction
Peripheral arterial disorders include acrocyanosis, erythromelalgia, fibromuscular dysplasia, peripheral
arterial aneurysms, peripheral arterial disease (caused by atherosclerosis), Raynaud's syndrome, and
thromboangiitis obliterans.
Acrocyanosis
Acrocyanosis is persistent, painless, symmetric cyanosis of the hands, feet, or face caused by
vasospasm of the small vessels of the skin in response to cold.
Acrocyanosis usually occurs in women and is not associated with occlusive arterial disease. The digits
and hands or feet are persistently cold and bluish, sweat profusely, and may swell. In acrocyanosis, unlike
Raynaud's syndrome, cyanosis persists and is not easily reversed, trophic changes and ulcers do not
occur, and pain is absent. Pulses are normal.
Treatment, other than reassurance and avoidance of cold, is usually unnecessary. Vasodilators may be
tried but are usually ineffective.
Erythromelalgia
Erythromelalgia is distressing paroxysmal vaso-dilation of small arteries in the feet and hands
and, less commonly, in the face, ears, or knees; it causes burning pain, increased skin
temperature, and redness.
This rare disorder may be primary (cause unknown) or secondary to myeloproliferative disorders (eg,
polycythemia vera, thrombocythemia), hypertension, venous insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, SLE, RA,
lichen sclerosus, gout, spinal cord disorders, or multiple sclerosis. Less commonly, the disorder
is related
to the use of some drugs (eg, nifedipine, bromocriptine). A rare hereditary form of erythromelalgia starts at
birth or during childhood.
Burning pain, heat, and redness in the feet or hands last a few minutes to several hours. In most patients,
symptoms are triggered by warmth (temperatures of 29 to 32° C) and are typically relieved by immersion
in ice water. Trophic changes do not occur. Symptoms may remain mild for years or become severe
enough to cause total disability. Generalized vasomotor dysfunction is common, and Raynaud's syndrome
may occur.
Diagnosis is clinical. Testing is done to detect causes. Because erythromelalgia may precede a
myeloproliferative disorder by several years, repeated blood counts may be indicated. Differential
diagnosis includes posttraumatic reflex dystrophies, shoulder-hand syndrome, peripheral neuropathy,
causalgia, Fabry's disease, and bacterial cellulitis.
Treatment is warmth avoidance, rest, elevation of the extremity, and application of cold. For primary
erythromelalgia, gabapentin may be of benefit. For secondary erythromelalgia, the underlying disorder is
treated; aspirin may be helpful when a myeloproliferative disorder is involved.
Fibromuscular Dysplasia
Fibromuscular dysplasia includes a heterogenous group of nonatherosclerotic,
noninflammatory arterial changes, causing some degree of vascular stenosis, occlusion, or
aneurysm.
Fibromuscular dysplasia usually occurs in women aged 40 to 60. The cause is unknown. However, there
may be a genetic component, and smoking may be a risk factor. Fibromuscular dysplasia is more common
among people with certain connective tissue disorders (eg, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type 4, cystic medial
necrosis, hereditary nephritis, neurofibromatosis).
===PAGE:2371===
Medial dysplasia, the most common type, is characterized by alternating regions of thick and thin
fibromuscular ridges containing collagen along the media. In perimedial dysplasia, extensive collagen
deposition occurs in the outer half of the media. Fibromuscular dysplasia may affect the renal arteries (60
to 75%), carotid and intracranial arteries (25 to 30%), intra-abdominal arteries (9%), or external iliac
arteries (5%).
Fibromuscular dysplasia is usually asymptomatic regardless of location. Symptoms, when they occur,
vary by location:
• Claudication in the thighs and calves, femoral bruits, and decreased femoral pulses when leg arteries
are affected
• Secondary hypertension when renal arteries are affected
• Transient ischemic attack or stroke symptoms when carotid arteries are affected
• Aneurysmal symptoms when intracranial arteries are affected
• Rarely, mesenteric ischemic symptoms when intra-abdominal arteries are affected
Ultrasonography may suggest the diagnosis, but definitive diagnosis is made by angiography showing a
beaded appearance (in medial or perimedial dysplasia) or a concentric band or long, smooth narrowing
(in other forms).
Treatment varies by location. It may involve percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, bypass surgery, or
aneurysm repair. Smoking cessation is important. Control of other risk factors for atherosclerosis
(hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes) helps prevent accelerated development of flow-limiting arterial
stenoses.
Peripheral Arterial Aneurysms
Peripheral arterial aneurysms are abnormal dilations of the peripheral arteries caused by
weakening of the arterial wall (see also p.
).
About 70% of peripheral arterial aneurysms are popliteal aneurysms; 20% are iliofemoral aneurysms.
Aneurysms at these locations frequently accompany abdominal aortic aneurysms, and > 50% are
bilateral. Rupture is relatively infrequent, but these aneurysms may lead to thromboembolism. They occur
in men much more often than women (> 20:1); mean age at presentation is 65. Aneurysms in arm arteries
are relatively rare; they may cause limb ischemia, distal embolism, and stroke.
Infectious (mycotic) aneurysms may occur in any artery but are most common in the femoral. They are
usually due to salmonellae, staphylococci, or
Treponema pallidum
(which causes syphilitic aneurysm).
Common causes include atherosclerosis, popliteal artery entrapment, and septic emboli (which cause
mycotic aneurysms).
Peripheral arterial aneurysms are usually asymptomatic at the time of detection. Thrombosis or embolism
(or rarely, aneurysm rupture)
causes extremities to be painful, cold, pale, paresthetic, or pulseless.
Infectious aneurysms may cause local pain, fever, malaise, and weight loss.
Diagnosis is by ultrasonography, magnetic resonance angiography, or CT. Popliteal aneurysms may be
suspected when physical examination detects an enlarged, pulsatile artery; the diagnosis is confirmed by
imaging tests.
Risk of rupture of extremity aneurysms is low (< 5% for popliteal and 1 to 14% for iliofemoral aneurysms).
For leg artery aneurysms, surgical repair is therefore often elective. It is indicated when the arteries are
twice normal size or when the patient is symptomatic. However, surgical repair is indicated for all arm
===PAGE:2372===
artery aneurysms because serious complications (eg, thromboembolism) are a greater risk. The affected
segment of artery is excised and replaced with a graft. Limb salvage rate after surgical repair is 90 to 98%
for asymptomatic patients and 70 to 80% for symptomatic patients.
In certain patients, an endovascular-covered stent-graft is another option for repair.
Peripheral Arterial Disease
(Peripheral Vascular Disease)
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is atherosclerosis of the extremities (virtually always lower)
causing ischemia. Mild PAD may be asymptomatic or cause intermittent claudication; severe
PAD may cause rest pain with skin atrophy, hair loss, cyanosis, ischemic ulcers, and gangrene.
Diagnosis is by history, physical examination, and measurement of the ankle-brachial index.
Treatment of mild PAD includes risk factor modification, exercise, antiplatelet drugs, and
cilostazol or possibly pentoxifylline as needed for symptoms. Severe PAD usually requires
angioplasty or surgical bypass and may require amputation. Prognosis is generally good with
treatment, although mortality rate is relatively high because coronary artery or cerebrovascular
disease often coexists.
Etiology
PAD affects about 12% of people in the US; men are affected more commonly. Risk factors are the same
as those for atherosclerosis: hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia (high low-density lipoprotein [LDL]
cholesterol, low high-density lipoprotein [HDL] cholesterol), cigarette smoking (including passive smoking)
or other forms of tobacco use, diabetes, and a family history of atherosclerosis. Obesity, male sex, and a
high homocysteine level are also risk factors.
Atherosclerosis is a systemic disorder; 50 to 75% of patients with PAD also have clinically significant
coronary artery disease (CAD) or cerebrovascular disease. However, CAD may be silent because PAD
may prevent patients from exerting themselves enough to trigger angina.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, PAD causes intermittent claudication, which is a painful, aching, cramping, uncomfortable, or
tired feeling in the legs that occurs during walking and is relieved by rest. Claudication usually occurs in
the calves but can occur in the feet, thighs, hips, buttocks, or, rarely, arms. Claudication is a manifestation
of exercise-induced reversible ischemia, similar to angina pectoris. As PAD progresses, the distance that
can be walked without symptoms may decrease, and patients with severe PAD may experience pain
during rest, reflecting irreversible ischemia. Rest pain is usually worse distally, is aggravated by leg
elevation (often causing pain at night), and lessens when the leg is below heart level. The pain may be
burning, tightening, or aching, although this finding is nonspecific. About 20% of patients with PAD are
asymptomatic, sometimes because they are not active enough to trigger leg ischemia. Some patients
have atypical symptoms (eg, nonspecific exercise intolerance, hip or other joint pain).
Mild PAD often causes no signs. Moderate to severe PAD commonly causes diminished or absent
peripheral (popliteal, tibialis posterior, dorsalis pedis) pulses; Doppler ultra-sonography can often detect
blood flow when pulses cannot be palpated.
When below heart level, the foot may appear dusky red (called dependent rubor). In some patients,
elevating the foot causes loss of color and worsens ischemic pain; when the foot is lowered, venous filling
is prolonged (> 15 sec). Edema is usually not present unless the patient has kept the leg immobile and in
a dependent position to relieve pain. Patients with chronic PAD may have thin, pale (atrophic) skin with
hair thinning or loss. Distal legs and feet may feel cool. The affected leg may sweat excessively and
become cyanotic, probably because of sympathetic nerve overactivity.
As ischemia worsens, ulcers may appear (typically on the toes or heel, occasionally on the leg or foot),
especially after local trauma. The ulcers tend to be surrounded by black, necrotic tissue (dry gangrene).
===PAGE:2373===
They are
usually painful, but people with peripheral neuropathy due to diabetes or alcoholism may not
feel them. Infection of ischemic ulcers (wet gangrene) occurs readily, causing rapidly progressive cellulitis.
The level of arterial occlusion influences location of symptoms. Aortoiliac PAD may cause buttock, thigh,
or calf claudication; hip pain; and, in men, erectile dysfunction (Leriche syndrome). In femoropopliteal
PAD, claudication typically occurs in the calf; pulses below the femoral artery are weak or absent. In PAD
of more distal arteries, femoropopliteal pulses may be present, but foot pulses are absent.
Arterial occlusive disease occasionally affects the arms, especially the left proximal subclavian artery,
causing arm fatigue with exercise and occasionally embolization to the hands.
Diagnosis
• Ankle-brachial BP index
• Ultrasonography
• Angiography before surgery
PAD is suspected clinically but is under-recognized because many patients have atypical symptoms or are
not active enough to have symptoms. Spinal stenosis may also cause leg pain during walking but can be
distinguished because the pain (called pseudo-claudication) requires sitting, not just rest, for relief, and
distal pulses remain intact.
Diagnosis is confirmed by noninvasive testing. First, bilateral arm and ankle systolic BP is measured;
because ankle pulses may be difficult to palpate, a Doppler probe may be placed over the dorsalis pedis
or posterior tibial arteries. Doppler ultrasonography is often used, because pressure gradients and pulse
volume waveforms can help distinguish isolated aortoiliac PAD from femoropopliteal PAD and below-theknee PAD.
A low (≤ 0.90) ankle-brachial index (ratio of ankle to arm systolic BP) indicates PAD, which can be
classified as mild (0.71 to 0.90), moderate (0.41 to 0.70), or severe (≤ 0.40). If the index is normal (0.91 to
1.30) but suspicion of PAD remains high, the index is determined after exercise stress testing. A high
index (> 1.30) may indicate noncompressible leg vessels (as occurs in Monckeberg's arteriosclerosis with
calcification of the arterial wall). If the index is > 1.30 but suspicion of PAD remains high, additional tests
(eg, Doppler ultrasonography, measurement of BP in the first toe using toe cuffs) are done to check for
arterial stenoses or occlusions. Ischemic lesions are unlikely to heal when systolic BP is < 55 mm Hg in
patients without diabetes or < 70 mm Hg in patients with diabetes; below-the-knee amputations usually
heal if BP is ≥ 70 mm Hg. Peripheral arterial insufficiency can also be assessed by transcutaneous
oximetry (TcO
). A TcO
level < 40 mm Hg is predictive of poor healing, and a value < 20 mm Hg is
consistent with critical limb ischemia.
Angiography provides details of the location and extent of arterial stenoses or occlusion; it is a
prerequisite for surgical correction or percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA). It is not a substitute
for noninvasive testing because it provides no information about the functional significance of abnormal
findings. Magnetic resonance angiography and CT angiography are noninvasive tests that may
eventually supplant contrast angiography.
Treatment
• Risk factor modification
• Exercise
• Antiplatelet drugs
• Sometimes pentoxifylline or cilostazol for claudication
===PAGE:2374===
• PTA or surgery for severe disease
All patients require aggressive risk factor modification, including smoking cessation and control of
diabetes, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and hyperhomocysteinemia.
β
-Blockers are safe unless PAD is very
severe.
Exercise—35 to 50 min of treadmill or track walking in an exercise-rest-exercise pattern 3 to 4 times/wk
—is an important but underused treatment. It can increase symptom-free walking distance and improve
quality of life. Mechanisms probably include increased collateral circulation, improved endothelial function
with microvascular vasodilation, decreased blood viscosity, improved RBC filterability, decreased
ischemia-induced inflammation, and improved O
extraction.
Patients are advised to keep the legs below heart level. For pain relief at night, the head of the bed can
be elevated about 10 to 15 cm (4 to 6 inches) to improve blood flow to the feet.
Patients are also advised to avoid cold and drugs that cause vasoconstriction (eg, pseudoephedrine,
contained in many sinus and cold remedies).
Preventive foot care is crucial, especially for patients with diabetes. It includes daily foot inspection for
injuries and lesions; treatment of calluses and corns by a podiatrist; daily washing of the feet in lukewarm
water with mild soap, followed by gentle, thorough drying; and avoidance of thermal, chemical,
and
mechanical injury, especially that due to poorly fitting footwear. For foot ulcer management, see also p.
.
Antiplatelet drugs may modestly lessen symptoms and improve walking distance; more importantly, these
drugs modify atherogenesis and help prevent acute coronary syndromes ( and transient
ischemic attacks (. Options include aspirin 81 to 162 mg once/day, aspirin 25 mg plus
dipyridamole 200 mg po once/day, and clopidogrel 75 mg po once/day or ticlopidine 250 mg po bid with or
without aspirin. Aspirin is typically used alone first, followed by addition or substitution of other drugs if
PAD progresses.
For relief of claudication, pentoxifylline 400 mg po tid with meals or cilostazol 100 mg po bid may be used
to relieve intermittent claudication by improving blood flow and enhancing tissue oxygenation in affected
areas; however, these drugs are no substitute for risk factor modification and exercise. Use of
pentoxifylline is controversial because evidence of its effectiveness is mixed. A trial of ≥ 2 mo may be
warranted, because adverse effects are uncommon and mild. The most common adverse effects of
cilostazol are headache and diarrhea. Cilostazol is contraindicated by severe heart failure.
Other drugs that may relieve claudication are being studied; they include L-arginine (the precursor of
endothelium-dependent vasodilator), nitric oxide, vasodilator prostaglandins, and angiogenic growth
factors (eg, vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF], basic fibroblast growth factor [bFGF]). Gene
therapy for PAD is also being studied. In patients with severe limb ischemia, long-term parenteral use of
vasodilator prostaglandins may decrease pain and facilitate ulcer healing, and intramuscular gene
transfer of DNA encoding VEGF may promote collateral blood vessel growth.
Percutaneous transluminal intervention:
PTA with or without stent insertion is the primary nonsurgical
method for dilating vascular occlusions. PTA with stent insertion may keep the artery open better than
balloon compression alone, with a lower rate of reocclusion. Stents work best in large arteries with high
flow (iliac and renal); they are less useful for smaller arteries and for long occlusions.
Indications for PTA are similar to those for surgery: intermittent claudication that inhibits daily activities,
rest pain, and gangrene. Suitable lesions are flow-limiting, short iliac stenoses (< 3 cm) and short, single
or multiple stenoses of the superficial femoropopliteal segment. Complete occlusions (up to 10 or 12 cm
long) of the superficial femoral artery can be successfully dilated, but results are better for occlusions ≤ 5
cm. PTA is also useful for localized iliac stenosis proximal to a bypass of the femoropopliteal artery.
PTA is less useful for diffuse disease, long occlusions, and eccentric calcified plaques. Such lesions are
particularly common in patients with diabetes, often affecting small arteries.
===PAGE:2375===
Complications of PTA include thrombosis at the site of dilation, distal embolization, intimal dissection with
occlusion by a flap, and complications related to heparin use.
With appropriate patient selection (based on complete and adequate angiography), the initial success
rate approaches 85 to 95% for iliac arteries and 50 to 70% for thigh and calf arteries. Recurrence rates
are relatively high (25 to 35% at ≤ 3 yr); repeat PTA may be successful.
Surgery:
Surgery is indicated for patients who can safely tolerate a major vascular procedure and whose
severe symptoms do not respond to noninvasive treatments. The goal is to relieve symptoms, heal ulcers,
and avoid amputation. Because many patients have underlying CAD, which places them at risk of acute
coronary syndromes during surgical procedures for PAD, patients usually undergo cardiac evaluation
prior to surgery.
Thromboendarterectomy (surgical removal of an occlusive lesion) is used for short, localized lesions in
the aortoiliac, common femoral, or deep femoral arteries.
Revascularization (eg, femoropopliteal bypass grafting) uses synthetic or natural materials (often the
saphenous or another vein) to bypass occlusive lesions. Revascularization helps prevent limb amputation
and relieve claudication.
In patients who cannot undergo major vascular surgery, sympathectomy may be effective when a distal
occlusion causes severe ischemic pain. Chemical sympathetic blocks are as effective as surgical
sympathectomy, so the latter is rarely done.
Amputation is a procedure of last resort, indicated for uncontrolled infection, unrelenting rest pain, and
progressive gangrene. Amputation should be as distal as possible, preserving the knee for optimal use
with a prosthesis.
External compression therapy:
External pneumatic compression of the lower limb to increase distal
blood flow is an option for limb salvage in patients who have severe PAD and are not candidates for
surgery. Theoretically, it controls edema and improves arterial flow, venous return, and tissue
oxygenation, but
data supporting its use are lacking. Pneumatic cuffs or stockings are placed on the lower
leg and inflated rhythmically during diastole, systole, or part of both periods for 1 to 2 h several times/wk.
Acute Peripheral Arterial Occlusion
Peripheral arteries may be acutely occluded by a thrombus, an embolus, aortic dissection, or
acute compartment syndrome.
Acute peripheral arterial occlusion may result from rupture and thrombosis of an atherosclerotic plaque,
an embolus from the heart or thoracic or abdominal aorta, an aortic dissection, or acute compartment
syndrome (.
Symptoms and signs are sudden onset in an extremity of the 5 P's: severe pain, polar sensation
(coldness), paresthesias (or anesthesias), pallor, and pulselessness. The occlusion can be roughly
localized to the arterial bifurcation just distal to the last palpable pulse (eg, at the common femoral
bifurcation when the femoral pulse is palpable; at the popliteal bifurcation when the popliteal pulse is
palpable). Severe cases may cause loss of motor function. After 6 to 8 h, muscles may be tender when
palpated.
Diagnosis is clinical. Immediate angiography is required to confirm location of the occlusion, identify
collateral flow, and guide therapy.
Treatment consists of embolectomy (catheter or surgical), thrombolysis, or bypass surgery. The decision
to do surgical thromboembolectomy vs thrombolysis is based on the severity of ischemia, the extent or
location of the thrombus, and the general medical condition of the patient.
===PAGE:2376===
A thrombolytic (fibrinolytic) drug, especially when given by regional catheter infusion, is most effective for
patients with acute arterial occlusions of < 2 wk and intact motor and sensory limb function. Tissue
plasminogen activator and urokinase are most commonly used. A catheter is threaded to the occluded
area, and the thrombolytic drug is given at a rate appropriate for the patient's size and the extent of
thrombosis. Treatment is usually continued for 4 to 24 h, depending on severity of ischemia and signs of
thrombolysis (relief of symptoms and return of pulses or improved blood flow shown by Doppler
ultrasonography). About 20 to 30% of patients with acute arterial occlusion require amputation within the
first 30 days.
Raynaud's Syndrome
Raynaud's syndrome is vasospasm of parts of the hand in response to cold or emotional stress,
causing reversible discomfort and color changes (pallor, cyanosis, erythema, or a combination)
in one or more digits. Occasionally, other acral parts (eg, nose, tongue) are affected. The
disorder may be primary or secondary. Diagnosis is clinical; testing focuses on distinguishing
primary from secondary disease. Treatment of uncomplicated cases includes avoidance of
cold, biofeedback, smoking cessation, and, as needed, vasodilating Ca channel blockers (eg,
nifedipine) or prazosin.
Overall prevalence is about 3 to 5%; women are affected more than men, and younger people are
affected more than older people. Raynaud's syndrome is probably due to an exaggerated
α
-adrenergic
response that triggers vasospasm; the mechanism is not defined.
Primary Raynaud's syndrome is much more common (> 80% of cases) than secondary; it occurs without
symptoms or signs of other disorders. In the remaining 20% of patients with Raynaud's symptoms, a
causative underlying disease (eg, systemic sclerosis) will be evident at initial presentation or diagnosed
subsequently.
Secondary Raynaud's syndrome accompanies various disorders and conditions, mostly connective tissue
disorders (see
Table 218-1
).
Nicotine commonly contributes to it but is often overlooked. Raynaud's syndrome may accompany
migraine headaches, variant angina, and pulmonary hypertension, suggesting that these disorders share
a common vasospastic mechanism.
Symptoms and Signs
Sensations of coldness, burning pain, paresthesias, or intermittent color changes of one or more digits
are precipitated by exposure to cold, emotional stress, or vibration. All can be reversed by removing the
stimulus. Re-warming the hands accelerates restoration of normal color and sensation.
Color changes are clearly demarcated across the digit. They may be triphasic (pallor, followed by
cyanosis and after warming by erythema due to reactive hyperemia), biphasic (cyanosis, erythema), or
uniphasic (pallor or cyanosis only). Changes are often symmetric. Raynaud's syndrome does not occur
proximal to the metacarpophalangeal joints; it most commonly affects the middle 3 fingers and rarely
affects the thumb. Vasospasm may last minutes to hours but is rarely severe enough to cause tissue loss.
[Table 218-1.
Causes of Secondary Raynaud's Syndrome]
Raynaud's syndrome secondary to a connective tissue disorder may progress to painful digital gangrene;
Raynaud's syndrome secondary to systemic sclerosis tends to cause extremely painful, infected ulcers on
the fingertips.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
===PAGE:2377===
• Examination and testing for underlying disorder
Raynaud's syndrome itself is diagnosed clinically. Acrocyanosis ( also causes color change
of the digits in response to cold but differs from Raynaud's in that it is persistent, not easily reversed, and
does not cause trophic changes, ulcers, or pain.
Primary and secondary forms are distinguished clinically, supported by vascular laboratory studies and
blood testing. Vascular laboratory testing includes digital pulse wave forms and pressures. The primary
blood testing is the panel for collagen vascular diseases.
Clinical findings:
A thorough history and physical examination directed at identifying a causative
disorder are helpful but rarely diagnostic.
Findings suggesting primary Raynaud's syndrome are the following:
• Age at onset < 40 (in two thirds of cases)
• Mild symmetric attacks affecting both hands
• No tissue necrosis or gangrene
• No history or physical findings suggesting another cause
Findings suggesting secondary Raynaud's syndrome are the following:
• Age at onset > 30
• Severe painful attacks that may be asymmetric and unilateral
• Ischemic lesions
• History and findings suggesting an accompanying disorder
Laboratory testing:
Blood tests (eg, measurement of ESR, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor,
anticentromere antibody, anti-SCL-70 antibody) are done to detect accompanying disorders.
Treatment
• Trigger avoidance
• Smoking cessation
• Ca channel blockers or prazosin
Treatment of the primary form involves avoidance of cold, smoking cessation, and, if stress is a triggering
factor, relaxation techniques (eg, biofeedback) or counseling. Drugs are used more often than behavioral
treatments because of convenience. Vasodilating Ca channel blockers (extended-release nifedipine 60 to
90 mg po once/day, amlodipine 5 to 20 mg po once/day, felodipine 2.5 to 10 mg po bid, or isradipine 2.5 to
5 mg po bid) are most effective, followed by prazosin 1 to 5 mg po once/day or bid. Topical nitroglycerine
paste, pentoxifylline 400 mg po bid or tid with meals, or both may be effective, but no evidence supports
routine use.
β
-Blockers, clonidine, and ergot preparations are contraindicated because they cause
vasoconstriction and may trigger or worsen symptoms.
Treatment of the secondary form focuses on the underlying disorder. Ca channel blockers or prazosin is
also indicated. Antibiotics, analgesics, and, occasionally, surgical debridement may be necessary for
ischemic ulcers. Low-dose aspirin may prevent thrombosis but theoretically may worsen vasospasm via
prostaglandin inhibition. IV prostaglandins (alprostadil, epoprostenol, iloprost) appear to be effective and
may be an option for patients with ischemic digits. However, these drugs are not yet widely available, and
===PAGE:2378===
their role is yet to be defined. Cervical or local sympathectomy
is controversial; it is reserved for patients
with progressive disability unresponsive to all other measures, including treatment of underlying
disorders. Sympathectomy often abolishes the symptoms, but relief may last only 1 to 2 yr.
Thromboangiitis Obliterans
(Buerger's Disease)
Thromboangiitis obliterans is inflammatory thrombosis of small and medium-sized arteries and
some superficial veins, causing arterial ischemia in distal extremities and superficial
thrombophlebitis. Tobacco use is the primary risk factor. Symptoms and signs include
claudication, nonhealing foot ulcers, rest pain, and gangrene. Diagnosis is by clinical findings,
noninvasive vascular testing, angiography, and exclusion of other causes. Treatment is
cessation of tobacco use. Prognosis is excellent when tobacco use is stopped, but when it is
not, the disorder inevitably progresses, often requiring amputation.
Thromboangiitis obliterans occurs almost exclusively in tobacco users (nearly all of them smokers) and
predominantly affects men aged 20 to 40; it rarely occurs in women. It occurs more commonly in people
with HLAA9 and HLA-B5 genotypes. Prevalence is highest in Asia and the Far and Middle East.
Thromboangiitis obliterans produces segmental inflammation in small and medium-sized arteries and,
frequently, in superficial veins of the extremities. In acute thromboangiitis obliterans, occlusive thrombi
accompany neutrophilic and lymphocytic infiltration of the intima; endothelial cells proliferate, but the
internal elastic lamina remains intact. In an intermediate phase, thrombi organize and recanalize
incompletely; the media is preserved but may be infiltrated with fibroblasts. In older lesions, periarterial
fibrosis may occur, sometimes affecting the adjacent vein and nerve.
The cause is unknown, although cigarette smoking is a primary risk factor. The mechanism may involve
delayed hypersensitivity or toxic angiitis. According to another theory, thromboangiitis obliterans may be
an autoimmune disorder caused by cell-mediated sensitivity to types I and III human collagen, which are
constituents of blood vessels.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are those of arterial ischemia and superficial thrombophlebitis. Some patients have
a history of migratory phlebitis, usually in the superficial veins of a foot or leg.
Onset is gradual, starting in the most distal vessels of the upper and lower extremities with coldness,
numbness, tingling, or burning. These symptoms may develop before objective evidence of disease.
Raynaud's syndrome is common. Intermittent claudication occurs in the affected extremity (usually in the
arch of the foot or in the leg; rarely in the hand, arm, or thigh) and may progress to rest pain. Frequently,
if pain is severe and persistent, the affected leg feels cold, sweats excessively, and becomes cyanotic,
probably because of sympathetic nerve overactivity. Later, ischemic ulcers develop in most patients and
may progress to gangrene.
Pulses are impaired or absent in one or more pedal arteries and often at the wrist. In young men who
smoke and have extremity ulcers, a positive Allen's test (the hand remains pale after the examiner
simultaneously compresses the radial and ulnar arteries, then alternately releases them) suggests the
disorder. Pallor with elevation and rubor with dependency frequently occur in affected hands, feet, or
digits. Ischemic ulceration and gangrene, usually of one or more digits, may occur early in the disorder
but not acutely. Noninvasive tests show greatly decreased blood flow and pressure in the affected toes,
feet, and fingers.
Diagnosis
• Other causes of ischemia excluded by testing
• Angiography
===PAGE:2379===
History and physical examination suggest the diagnosis. It is confirmed when the ankle-brachial index
(ratio of ankle to arm systolic BP) for legs or segmental pressures for arms indicates distal ischemia,
when echocardiography excludes cardiac emboli, when blood tests (eg, measurement of antinuclear
antibody, rheumatoid factor, complement, anticentromere antibody, anti-SCL-70 antibody) exclude
vasculitis, when tests for antiphospholipid antibodies exclude antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
(although these levels may be slightly elevated in thromboangiitis obliterans), and when angiography
shows characteristic findings (segmental occlusions of the distal arteries in the hands and feet, tortuous,
corkscrew collateral vessels around occlusions, and no atherosclerosis).
Treatment
• Smoking cessation
• Local measures
• Sometimes drug therapy
Treatment is cessation of tobacco use (. Continuing to use tobacco inevitably leads to
disease progression and severe ischemia, often requiring amputation.
Other measures include avoiding cold; avoiding drugs that can cause vasoconstriction; and avoiding
thermal, chemical, and mechanical injury, especially that due to poorly fitting footwear. For patients in the
first phase of smoking cessation, iloprost 0.5 to 3 ng/kg/min IV infusion over 6 h may help prevent
amputation. Pentoxifylline, Ca channel blockers, and thromboxane inhibitors may be tried empirically, but
no data support their use. Use of antiendothelial cell antibody measurements to follow the course of
disease is being studied. When these options fail, lumbar sympathetic chemical ablation or surgical
sympathectomy can alleviate ischemic pain and enhance ulcer healing in about 70% of patients with an
ankle-brachial pressure index ≥ 0.35 and no diabetes mellitus.
===PAGE:2380===
Chapter 219. Peripheral Venous and Lymphatic Disorders
Introduction
Venous and lymphatic disorders usually involve impairment of flow, abnormal vessel dilation, or both.
Deep Venous Thrombosis
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is clotting of blood in a deep vein of an extremity (usually calf
or thigh) or the pelvis. DVT is the primary cause of pulmonary embolism. DVT results from
conditions that impair venous return, lead to endothelial injury or dysfunction, or cause
hypercoagulability. DVT may be asymptomatic or cause pain and swelling in an extremity.
Diagnosis is by history, physical examination, and duplex ultrasonography, with D-dimer or
other testing as necessary. Treatment is with anticoagulants. Prognosis is generally good with
prompt, adequate treatment. Common long-term complications include venous insufficiency
with or without postphlebitic syndrome.
DVT occurs most commonly occurs in the lower extremities, or pelvis (see
Fig. 219-1
). It can also develop in deep veins of the upper extremities (4 to 13% of DVT cases).
Lower extremity DVT is much more likely to cause pulmonary embolism (PE), possibly because of the
higher clot burden. The superficial femoral and popliteal veins in the thighs and the posterior tibial veins
in the calves are most commonly affected. Calf vein DVT is less likely to be a source of large emboli but
can cause repeated showers of small emboli or propagate to the proximal thigh veins and from there
cause PE. About 50% of patients with DVT have occult PE, and at least 30% with PE have demonstrable
DVT.
Etiology
Many factors can contribute to DVT (see
Table 219-1
). Cancer is a risk factor for DVT, particularly in elderly patients and in patients with recurrent
thrombosis. The association is strongest for mucin-secreting endothelial cell tumors. Occult cancers may
be present in patients with apparently idiopathic DVT, but extensive workup of patients for tumors is not
recommended.
Pathophysiology
Lower extremity DVT most often results from impaired venous return (eg, in immobilized patients),
endothelial injury or dysfunction (eg, after leg fractures), or hypercoagulability.
Upper extremity DVT most often results from endothelial injury due to central venous catheters,
pacemakers, or injection drug use. Upper extremity DVT occasionally occurs as part of superior vena
cava (SVC) syndrome or results from a hypercoagulable state or subclavian vein compression at the
thoracic outlet. The compression may be due to a normal or an accessory first rib or fibrous band
(thoracic outlet syndrome) or occur during strenuous arm activity (effort thrombosis, or Paget Schroetter
syndrome, which accounts for 1 to 4% of upper extremity DVT cases).
[Fig. 219-1.
Deep veins of the legs.]
DVT usually begins in venous valve cusps. Thrombi consist of thrombin, fibrin, and RBCs with relatively
few platelets (red thrombi); without treatment, thrombi may propagate proximally or travel to the lungs.
Complications:
Common complications include chronic venous insufficiency and postphlebitic
syndrome, as well as PE.
Much less commonly, acute DVT leads to phlegmasia alba dolens or phlegmasia cerulea dolens, both of
which, unless promptly diagnosed and treated, can result in venous gangrene.
===PAGE:2381===
In
phlegmasia alba dolens
, a rare complication of DVT during pregnancy, the leg turns milky white.
Pathophysiology is unclear, but edema may increase soft-tissue pressure beyond capillary perfusion
pressures, resulting in tissue ischemia and wet gangrene.
In
phlegmasia cerulea dolens
, massive iliofemoral venous thrombosis causes near-total venous
occlusion; the leg becomes ischemic, extremely painful, and cyanotic. Pathophysiology may involve
complete stasis of venous and arterial blood flow in the lower extremity because venous return is
occluded or massive edema cuts off arterial blood flow. Venous gangrene may result.
Rarely, venous clots can become infected. Jugular vein suppurative thrombophlebitis (Lemierre
syndrome), a bacterial (usually anaerobic) infection of the internal jugular vein and surrounding soft
tissues, may follow tonsillopharyngitis and is often complicated
[Table 219-1.
Risk Factors for Venous Thrombosis]
by bacteremia and sepsis. In septic pelvic thrombophlebitis, pelvic thromboses develop postpartum and
become infected, causing intermittent fever. Suppurative (septic) thrombophlebitis, a bacterial infection of
a superficial peripheral vein, is infection and clotting usually caused by venous catheterization.
Symptoms and Signs
DVT may occur in ambulatory patients or as a complication of surgery or major medical illness. Among
high-risk hospitalized patients, most deep vein thrombi occur in the small calf veins, are asymptomatic,
and are never detected.
When present, symptoms and signs (eg, vague aching pain, tenderness along the distribution of the
veins, edema, erythema) are nonspecific, vary in frequency and severity, and are similar in arms and legs.
Dilated collateral superficial veins may become visible or palpable. Calf discomfort elicited by ankle
dorsiflexion with the knee extended (Homans' sign) occasionally occurs with distal leg DVT but is neither
sensitive nor specific. Tenderness, swelling of the whole leg, > 3 cm difference in circumference between
calves, pitting edema, and collateral superficial veins may be most specific; DVT is likely with a
combination of ≥ 3 in the absence of another likely diagnosis (see
Table 219-2
).
Low-grade fever may be present; DVT may be the cause of fever without an obvious source, especially in
postoperative patients. If PE occurs, symptoms may include shortness of breath and pleuritic chest pain
(.
Common causes of asymmetric leg swelling that mimic DVT are soft-tissue trauma, cellulitis, pelvic
venous or lymphatic obstruction, and popliteal bursitis (Baker's cyst) that obstructs venous return.
Abdominal or pelvic tumors that obstruct venous or lymphatic return are less common causes. Use of
drugs that cause dependent edema (eg, dihydropyridine Ca channel blockers, estrogen, high-dose
opioids), venous hypertension (usually due to right heart failure), and hypoalbuminemia cause symmetric
bilateral leg swelling; swelling may be asymmetric if venous insufficiency coexists and is worse in one leg.
Common causes of calf pain that mimic acute DVT include venous insufficiency and postphlebitic
syndrome; cellulitis that causes painful erythema of the calf; ruptured popliteal (Baker's) cyst (pseudoDVT), which causes calf swelling, pain, and sometimes bruising in the region of the medial malleolus; and
partial or complete tears of the calf muscles or tendons.
[Table 219-2.
Probability of Deep Venous Thrombosis Based on Clinical Factors]
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography
• Sometimes D-dimer testing
===PAGE:2382===
History and physical examination help determine probability of DVT before testing (see
Table 219-2
).
Diagnosis is typically by ultrasonography with Doppler flow studies (duplex ultrasonography). The need
for additional tests (eg, D-dimer testing) and their choice and sequence depend on pretest probability and
sometimes ultrasonography results. No single testing protocol is best; one approach is described in
Fig. 219-2
.
Ultrasonography:
Ultrasonography identifies thrombi by directly visualizing the venous lining and by
demonstrating abnormal vein compressibility or, with Doppler flow studies, impaired venous flow. The test
is > 90% sensitive and > 95% specific for femoral and popliteal vein thrombosis but is less accurate for
iliac or calf vein thrombosis.
D-Dimer:
D-Dimer is a byproduct of fibrinolysis; elevated levels suggest recent presence
[Fig. 219-2.
One approach to testing for suspected deep venous thrombosis.]
and lysis of thrombi. D-dimer assays vary in sensitivity and specificity; however, most are sensitive and
not specific. Only the most accurate tests should be used. For example, a highly sensitive test is enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which has a sensitivity of about 95%.
If pretest probability of DVT is low, DVT can be safely excluded in patients with a normal D-dimer level on
a sensitive test. Thus, a negative D-dimer test can identify patients who have a low probability of DVT
and do not require ultrasonography. However, a positive test result is nonspecific; because levels can be
elevated by other conditions (eg, liver disease, trauma, pregnancy, positive rheumatoid factor,
inflammation, recent surgery, cancer), further testing is necessary.
If pretest probability of DVT is moderate or high, D-dimer testing can be done at the same time as duplex
ultrasonography. A positive ultrasound result confirms the diagnosis regardless of the D-dimer level. If
ultrasonography does not reveal evidence of DVT, a normal D-dimer level helps exclude DVT. Patients
with an elevated D-dimer level should have repeat ultrasonography in a few days or possibly immediate
venography depending on clinical suspicion. Newer latex qualitative assays are highly specific (up to
about 99%) but should not yet be used to confirm DVT without ultrasonography.
Venography:
Contrast venography was the definitive test for the diagnosis of DVT but has been largely
replaced by ultrasonography, which is noninvasive, more readily available, and almost equally accurate
for detecting DVT. Venography may be indicated when ultrasonography results are normal but pretest
suspicion for DVT is high. The complication rate is 2%, mostly because of contrast dye allergy.
Other testing:
Noninvasive alternatives to contrast venography are being studied. They
include
magnetic resonance venography and direct MRI of thrombi using T1-weighted gradient-echo sequencing
and a water-excitation radiofrequency pulse; theoretically, the latter test can provide simultaneous views
of thrombi in deep veins and subsegmental pulmonary arteries (for diagnosis of PE).
If symptoms and signs suggest PE, additional imaging (eg, ventilation/perfusion [V/Q] scanning or helical
CT) is required.
Determination of cause:
Patients with confirmed DVT and an obvious cause (eg, immobilization,
surgical procedure, leg trauma) need no further testing. Testing to detect hypercoagulability is
controversial but is sometimes done in patients who have idiopathic recurrent DVT, in patients who have
a personal or family history of other thromboses, and in young patients with no obvious predisposing
factors. Some evidence suggests that presence of hypercoagulability does not predict DVT recurrence as
well as clinical risk factors.
Screening patients with DVT for cancer has a low yield. Selective testing guided by complete history and
physical examination aimed at detecting cancer is probably adequate.
Prognosis
Without adequate treatment, lower extremity DVT has a 3% risk of fatal PE; death due to upper extremity
===PAGE:2383===
DVT is very rare. Risk of recurrent DVT is lowest for patients with transient risk factors (eg, surgery,
trauma, temporary immobility) and greatest for patients with persistent risk factors (eg, heart failure,
cancer), idiopathic DVT, or incomplete resolution of past DVT (residual thrombus). A normal D-dimer level
obtained after warfarin is stopped may help predict a relatively low risk of DVT or PE recurrence. Risk of
venous insufficiency is impossible to predict. Risk factors for post-phlebitic syndrome include proximal
thrombosis, recurrent ipsilateral DVT, and body mass index (BMI) ≥ 22 kg/m
.
Treatment
• Anticoagulation
Treatment is aimed primarily at PE prevention (see also p.
) and secondarily at symptom relief and
prevention of DVT recurrence, chronic venous insufficiency, and post-phlebitic syndrome. Treatment of
lower and upper extremity DVT is generally the same.
All patients with DVT are given anticoagulants, initially an injectable heparin (unfractionated or low
molecular weight), followed by warfarin started within 24 to 48 h. Inadequate anticoagulation in the first 24
h may increase risk of recurrence or PE. Acute DVT can be treated on an outpatient basis unless severe
symptoms require parenteral analgesics, other disorders preclude safe outpatient discharge, or other
factors (eg, functional, socioeconomic) might prevent the patient from adhering to prescribed treatments.
General supportive measures include pain control with analgesics other than aspirin and NSAIDs
(because of their antiplatelet effects) and, during periods of inactivity, elevation of legs (supported by a
pillow or other soft surface to avoid venous compression). Patients may be as physically active as they
can tolerate; there is no evidence that early activity increases risk of clot dislodgement and PE.
Anticoagulants:
The anticoagulants most often used are the following:
• Low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs)
• Unfractionated heparin (UFH)
• Fondaparinux
• Warfarin
LMWHs (eg, enoxaparin, dalteparin, tinzaparin—see
Table 194-3
 are the initial treatment of choice because they can be given on an outpatient
basis. LMWHs are as effective as UFH for reducing DVT recurrence, thrombus extension, and risk of
death due to PE. Like UFH, LMWHs catalyze the action of antithrombin (which inhibits coagulation factor
proteases), leading to inactivation of coagulation factor Xa and, to a lesser degree, factor IIa. LMWHs
also have some antithrombin-mediated anti-inflammatory properties, which facilitate clot organization and
resolution of symptoms and inflammation.
LMWHs are typically given sc in a standard weight-based dose (eg, enoxaparin 1.5 mg/kg sc once/day or
1 mg/kg sc q 12 h or dalteparin 200 units/kg sc once/day). Patients with renal insufficiency may be treated
with UFH or with reduced doses of LMWH. Monitoring is not reliable because LMWHs do not significantly
prolong the results of global tests of coagulation. Furthermore, they have a predictable dose response,
and there is no clear relationship between LMWH overdose and bleeding. Treatment is continued until full
anticoagulation is achieved with warfarin. However, evidence suggests that LMWH is effective for longterm DVT treatment in high-risk patients, such as those with cancer. Thus, LMWH may become an
acceptable alternative to warfarin for some patients, although warfarin is likely to be the treatment of
choice for most patients because of its low cost and oral route of administration.
UFH may be used instead of LMWH for hospitalized patients and for patients who have renal
insufficiency or failure (creatinine clearance 10 to 30 mL/min) because UFH is not cleared by the kidneys.
UFH is given as a bolus and infusion (see
Fig. 194-2
 to achieve full anticoagulation, (eg, activated PTT [aPTT] 1.5 to 2.5 times that of
the reference range). UFH 333 units/kg initial bolus, then 250 units/kg sc q 12 h can be substituted for IV
===PAGE:2384===
UFH to facilitate mobility in outpatients; the dose does not appear to need adjustment based on aPTT.
Treatment is continued until full anticoagulation has been achieved with warfarin.
Complications of heparin include bleeding, thrombocytopenia (less common with LMWHs), urticaria, and,
rarely, thrombosis and anaphylaxis. Long-term use of UFH causes hypokalemia, liver enzyme elevations,
and osteoporosis. Rarely, UFH given sc causes skin necrosis. Inpatients and possibly outpatients should
be screened for bleeding with serial CBCs and tests for occult blood in stool. Bleeding due to
overheparinization can be stopped with protamine sulfate. The dose is 1 mg protamine for each milligram
of LMWH given as 1 mg in 20 mL of normal saline infused slowly over 10 to 20 min. If a 2nd dose is
required, it should be at one half the first dose. However, the precise dose is undefined because
protamine only partially neutralizes LMWH inactivation of factor Xa. With all infusions, the patient should
be observed for hypotension and a reaction similar to an anaphylactic reaction. Because UFH given IV
has a half-life of 30 to 60 min, protamine is not given to patients receiving UFH (eg, if UFH was given >
60 min beforehand) or is given at a dose based on the amount of heparin estimated to be remaining in
plasma, based on the half-life of UFH.
Fondaparinux, a selective factor Xa inhibitor, may be used as an alternative to UFH or LMWH for the
initial treatment of DVT or PE. It is given in a fixed dose of 7.5 mg sc once/day (10 mg for patients > 100
kg, 5 mg for patients < 50 kg). It has the advantage of fixed dosing and is less likely to cause
thrombocytopenia.
Vitamin K antagonists, including warfarin, are the drugs of choice for long-term anticoagulation for all
patients except pregnant women (who should continue to take heparin) and patients who have had new
or worsening venous thromboembolism during warfarin treatment (who may be candidates for an inferior
vena cava filter). Warfarin 5 to 10 mg can be started immediately with heparin. The elderly and patients
with a liver disorder typically require lower warfarin doses. Therapeutic goal is an INR of 2.0 to 3.0. INR is
monitored weekly for the first 1 to 2 mo of warfarin treatment and monthly thereafter; the dose is
increased or decreased by 0.5 to 3 mg to maintain the INR within this range. Patients taking warfarin
should be informed of possible drug interactions, including interactions with foods and nonprescription
medicinal herbs (see
Table 194-4
.
Patients with transient risk factors for DVT (eg, immobilization, surgery) can stop taking warfarin after 3 to
6 mo. Patients with non-modifiable risk factors (eg, hypercoagulability), spontaneous DVT with no known
risk factors, or recurrent DVT should take warfarin for at least 6 mo and probably for life unless
complications occur.
Bleeding is the most common complication. Risk factors for severe bleeding (defined as life-threatening
hemorrhage or loss of ≥ 2 units of blood in ≤ 7 days) include age ≥ 65; history of prior GI bleeding or
stroke; recent MI; and coexisting anemia (Hct < 30%), renal insufficiency (serum creatinine > 1.5 mg/dL),
or diabetes. Anticoagulation can be reversed with vitamin K; the dose is 1 to 4 mg po if INR is 5 to 9, 5 mg
po if INR is > 9, and 10 mg IV (given slowly to avoid anaphylaxis) if hemorrhage occurs. If hemorrhage is
severe, a transfusion of coagulation factors, fresh frozen plasma, or prothrombin complex concentrate
should also be given. Overanticoagulation (INR > 3 or 4) without bleeding can be managed by omitting
several warfarin doses and more frequent INR monitoring, then giving warfarin at a lower dose. Rarely,
warfarin causes skin necrosis in patients with protein C or S deficiency or factor V Leiden mutations.
Other anticoagulants, such as direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs, eg, hirudin given sc; lepirudin, bivalirudin,
desirudin, argatroban, given parenterally; dabigatran given po) and oral factor Xa inhibitors (eg,
rivaroxaban and apixaban) are being evaluated for the treatment of DVT (see
Table 194-6
.
Inferior vena cava filter (IVCF):
An IVCF may help prevent PE in patients with lower extremity DVT and
contraindications to anticoagulants or with recurrent DVT (or emboli) despite adequate anticoagulation.
An IVCF is placed in the inferior vena cava just below the renal veins via catheterization of an internal
jugular or femoral vein. Some IVCFs are removable and can be used temporarily (eg, until
contraindications to anticoagulation subside or resolve). IVCFs reduce risk of acute and subacute
thrombotic complications
but can have longer-term complications (eg, venous collaterals can develop,
===PAGE:2385===
providing a pathway for emboli to circumvent the IVCF). Also, IVCFs can dislodge or become obstructed
by clot. Thus, patients with recurrent DVT or nonmodifiable risk factors for DVT may still require
anticoagulation. A clotted filter may cause bilateral lower extremity venous congestion (including acute
phlegmasia cerulea dolens), lower body ischemia, and acute renal failure. Treatment for a dislodged filter
is removal, using angiographic, or, if necessary, surgical methods. Despite widespread use of IVCFs,
efficacy in preventing PE is unstudied and unproved.
Thrombolytic (fibrinolytic) drugs:
Streptokinase, urokinase, and alteplase lyse clots and appear to
more effectively prevent post-phlebitic syndrome than heparin alone, but risk of bleeding is higher. Their
use is under study. Thrombolytics may be indicated for large proximal thrombi, especially those in the
iliofemoral veins, and for phlegmasia alba or cerulea dolens. Local perfusion with an indwelling catheter
may be preferable to IV administration.
Surgery:
Surgery is rarely needed. However, thrombectomy, fasciotomy, or both are mandatory for
phlegmasia alba or cerulea dolens unresponsive to thrombolytics to try to prevent limb-threatening
gangrene.
Prevention
• Prevention of immobility
• Assessment of risk
• Anticoagulation (eg, LMWH, fondaparinux, adjusted-dose warfarin)
• Intermittent pneumatic compression
• IVCF
Patients at low risk of DVT (eg, those who are undergoing minor surgery but have no clinical risk factors
for DVT; those who must be temporarily inactive for long periods, as during an airplane flight) should be
encouraged to walk or otherwise move their legs periodically; no medical treatment is needed.
Dorsiflexion 10 times/h is probably sufficient.
Patients at higher risk of DVT (eg, those undergoing minor surgery if they have clinical risk factors for
DVT; those undergoing major surgery, especially orthopedic surgery, even without risk factors; bedbound
patients with major medical illnesses) require additional preventive treatment (see
Table 194-5
. Most of these patients can be identified and should receive thrombosis
prophylaxis.
After surgery, elevating the legs and avoiding sitting in chairs (which, by placing the legs in a dependent
position, impedes venous return) can help. Additional treatment may involve low-dose UFH, LMWH,
warfarin, newer anticoagulants such as fondaparinux, compression devices or stockings, or a
combination, depending on patient's risk level, type of surgery (if applicable), projected duration of
preventive treatment, contraindications, adverse effects, relative cost, ease of use, and local practice.
Low-dose UFH 5000 units sc is given 2 h before surgery and q 8 to 12 h thereafter for 7 to 10 days or
until patients are fully ambulatory. Bedbound patients who are not undergoing surgery are given 5000
units sc q 12 h until risk factors are reversed.
LMWHs are more effective than low-dose UFH for preventing DVT and PE, but widespread use is limited
by cost. For example, enoxaparin 30 mg sc q 12 h, dalteparin 2500 units once/day, and tinzaparin 3500
units once/day are equally effective. Fondaparinux, 2.5 mg once/day, is equal to or more effective than
LMWH depending on the surgical setting (eg, orthopedic surgery).
Warfarin, using a target INR of 2.0 to 3.0, is proven to be effective in orthopedic surgery.
Newer anticoagulants (eg, hirudin, lepirudin) are effective for preventing DVT and PE, but their costeffectiveness and safety compared with heparin and warfarin require further study. Aspirin is better than
===PAGE:2386===
placebo but worse than all other available drugs for preventing DVT and PE and is not recommended as
the sole method of prevention (see
Table 194-5
.
Intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) uses a pump to cyclically inflate and deflate hollow plastic
leggings, providing external compression to the lower legs and sometimes thighs. IPC may be used
instead of or with anticoagulants before and during surgery. IPC is recommended after knee surgery. IPC
is probably more effective for preventing calf than proximal DVT. IPC is usually contraindicated in obese
patients and can theoretically trigger PE in immobilized patients who, without preventive treatment,
develop occult DVT.
The benefit of graded compression stockings is questionable except for low-risk surgical patients.
However, combining stockings with other preventive measures may be more protective than any single
approach.
For elective neurosurgery, spinal cord injury, or multiple trauma, low-dose UFH (q 8 h), LMWH, or
adjusted-dose warfarin is recommended. For hip and other lower extremity orthopedic surgery, LMWH,
fondaparinux, or
adjusted-dose warfarin is recommended. For patients undergoing total knee replacement
and some other high-risk patients, IPC is also beneficial. For orthopedic surgery, preventive treatment
may be started before or after surgery and continued for at least 14 days. Fondaparinux 2.5 mg once/day
is more effective than LMWH for orthopedic surgery. For neurosurgery patients, physical measures (IPC,
elastic stockings) have been used because intracranial bleeding is a concern; however, LMWH appears
to be an acceptable alternative. Limited data support the combination of IPC, elastic stockings, and
LMWH in patients with spinal cord injury or multiple trauma.
For patients who are at very high risk of venous thromboembolism and bleeding and are taking
anticoagulants, IVCF placement is an option.
Preventive treatment is also indicated for patients who have a major medical illnesses requiring bed rest
(eg, MI, ischemic stroke). Low-dose UFH is effective in patients who are not already receiving IV heparin
or thrombolytics; IPC, elastic stockings, or both may be used when anticoagulants are contraindicated.
After a stroke, low-dose UFH or LMWH can be used; IPC, elastic stockings, or both may be beneficial.
Other recommendations include low-dose UFH for patients with heart failure, warfarin (target INR 2.0 to
3.0) for those with metastatic breast cancer, and warfarin 1 mg once/day for those with cancer and an
indwelling central venous catheter. Fondaparinux 2.5 mg once/day is also recommended in patients with
major medical illnesses.
In patients with symptomatic DVT, primary prevention of venous insufficiency and postphlebitic syndrome
is recommended; knee-high compression stockings providing 30 to 40 mm Hg pressure are used.
Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Postphlebitic Syndrome
Chronic venous insufficiency is impaired venous return, sometimes causing lower extremity
discomfort, edema, and skin changes. Postphlebitic (postthrombotic) syndrome is symptomatic
chronic venous insufficiency after deep venous thrombosis (DVT). Causes of chronic venous
insufficiency are disorders that result in venous hypertension, usually through venous damage
or incompetence of venous valves, as occurs (for example) after DVT. Diagnosis is by history,
physical examination, and duplex ultrasonography. Treatment is compression, wound care, and,
rarely, surgery. Prevention requires adequate treatment of DVT and compression stockings.
Chronic venous insufficiency affects up to 5% of people in the US. Postphlebitic syndrome may affect one
fifth to two thirds of patients with DVT, usually within 1 to 2 yr after acute DVT.
Etiology
Venous return from the lower extremities relies on contraction of calf muscles to push blood from
intramuscular (soleal) sinusoids and gastrocnemius veins into and through deep veins. Venous valves
direct blood proximally to the heart. Chronic venous insufficiency occurs when venous obstruction (eg, in
DVT), venous valvular insufficiency, or decreased contraction of muscles surrounding the veins (eg, due
===PAGE:2387===
to immobility) decrease forward venous flow and increase venous pressure (venous hypertension). Fluid
accumulation in the lower extremities (eg, in right heart failure) can also contribute by causing venous
hypertension. Prolonged venous hypertension causes tissue edema, inflammation, and hypoxia, leading
to symptoms. Pressure may be transmitted to superficial veins if valves in perforator veins, which connect
deep and superficial veins, are ineffective.
DVT is the most common identifiable risk factor for chronic venous insufficiency, followed by trauma, age,
and obesity. Idiopathic cases are often attributed to a history of occult DVT.
Symptomatic chronic venous insufficiency that follows DVT is referred to as postphlebitic (or
postthrombotic) syndrome. Risk factors for postphlebitic syndrome in patients with DVT include proximal
thrombosis, recurrent ipsilateral DVT, and body mass index (BMI) ≥ 22 kg/m
. Age, female sex, and
estrogen therapy are also associated with the syndrome but are probably nonspecific. Use of
compression stockings after DVT decreases risk.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinically evident chronic venous insufficiency may not cause any symptoms but always causes signs;
postphlebitic syndrome always causes symptoms. Both disorders are a concern because their symptoms
can mimic those of acute DVT and both can lead to substantial reductions in physical activity and quality
of life.
Symptoms include a sense of fullness, heaviness, aching, cramps, pain, tiredness, and paresthesias in
the legs; these symptoms worsen with standing or walking and are relieved by rest and elevation. Pruritus
may accompany skin changes. Signs occur along a continuum: no changes to varicose veins (rare) to
stasis dermatitis on the lower legs and at the ankles, with or without ulceration (see
Table 219-3
). The calf may be painful when compressed.
Venous stasis dermatitis consists of reddish brown hyperpigmentation, induration, venous ectasia,
lipodermatosclerosis (fibrosing subcutaneous panniculitis), and venous stasis ulcers.
Venous stasis ulcers may develop spontaneously or after affected skin is scratched or injured. They
typically occur around the medial malleolus, tend to be shallow and moist, and may be malodorous
(especially when poorly cared for) or painful. They do not penetrate the deep fascia. In contrast, ulcers
due to peripheral arterial disease eventually expose tendons or bone.
Leg edema tends to be unilateral or asymmetric; bilateral symmetric edema is more likely to result from a
systemic disorder (eg, heart failure, hypoalbuminemia) or certain drugs (eg, Ca channel blockers).
In general, unless the lower extremities are adequately cared for, patients with any manifestation of
chronic venous insufficiency or postphlebitic syndrome are at risk of progression to more advanced forms.
[Table 219-3.
Clinical Classification of Chronic Venous Insufficiency]
Diagnosis
• Clinical diagnosis
• Ultrasonography to exclude DVT
Diagnosis is usually based on history and physical examination. A clinical scoring system that ranks 5
symptoms (pain, cramps, heaviness, pruritus, paresthesia) and 6 signs (edema, hyperpigmentation,
induration, venous ectasia, blanching hyperemia, pain with calf compression) on a scale of 0 (absent or
minimal) to 3 (severe) is increasingly recognized as a standard diagnostic tool of disease severity. Scores
of 5 to 14 on 2 visits separated by ≥ 6 mo indicate mild-to-moderate disease, and scores of ≥ 15 indicate
severe disease.
Lower-extremity duplex ultrasonography helps exclude DVT. Absence of edema and a reduced ankle-
===PAGE:2388===
brachial index suggest peripheral arterial disease rather than chronic venous insufficiency and
postphlebitic syndrome.
Treatment
• Elevation
• Compression
• Topical treatments
Treatment involves leg elevation; compression using bandages, stockings, and pneumatic devices;
topical wound care; and surgery, depending on the disorder's severity. Some experts believe that weight
loss, regular exercise, and reduction of dietary sodium may benefit patients with bilateral chronic venous
insufficiency. However, all interventions may be difficult to implement.
Elevating the leg above the level of the right atrium decreases venous hypertension and edema, is
appropriate for all patients, and should be done a minimum of 3 times/day for ≥ 30 min. However, most
patients cannot adhere to this schedule during the day.
Compression is effective for treatment and prevention of the effects of chronic venous insufficiency and
postphlebitic syndrome and is indicated for all patients. Elastic bandages are used initially until edema
and ulcers resolve and leg size stabilizes; commercial compression stockings are then used. Stockings
that provide 20 to 30 mm Hg of distal circumferential pressure are indicated for smaller varicose veins and
mild chronic venous insufficiency; 30 to 40 mm Hg is indicated for larger varicose veins and moderate
disease; and 40 to > 60 mm Hg is indicated for severe disease. Stockings should be put on when patients
awaken, before leg edema worsens with activity, and should exert maximal pressure at the ankles and
gradually less
pressure proximally. Adherence to this treatment varies; many younger or more active
patients consider stockings irritating, restricting, or cosmetically undesirable; elderly patients may have
difficulty putting them on.
Intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) uses a pump to cyclically inflate and deflate hollow plastic
leggings. IPC provides external compression, squeezing blood and fluid out of the lower legs. It effectively
treats severe post-phlebitic syndrome and venous stasis ulcers but may be no more effective than
compression stockings alone and is much less practical for patients to adhere to on an ongoing basis.
Topical wound care is important in venous stasis ulcer management (see p.
for full discussion). When an Unna boot (zinc oxide-impregnated bandages) is properly applied,
covered by compression bandages, and changed weekly, almost all ulcers heal. Occlusive interactive
dressings (eg, hydrocolloids such as aluminum chloride) provide a moist environment for wound healing
and promote growth of new tissue; they may be used for ulcers with light to moderate exudate, but they
probably add little to simple Unna bandaging and are expensive. Passive dressings are absorptive,
making them most appropriate for heavier exudate.
Drugs have no role in routine treatment of chronic venous insufficiency, although many patients are given
aspirin, topical corticosteroids, diuretics for edema, or antibiotics. Surgery (eg, venous ligation, stripping,
valve reconstruction) is also generally ineffective. Grafting autologous skin or skin created from epidermal
keratinocytes or dermal fibroblasts may be an option for patients with stasis ulcers when all other
measures are ineffective, but the graft will reulcerate unless underlying venous hypertension is managed.
Prevention
Primary prevention involves adequate anticoagulation after DVT and use of compression stockings for up
to 2 yr after DVT or lower extremity venous trauma. Lifestyle changes (eg, weight loss, regular exercise,
reduction of dietary sodium) can decrease risk by decreasing lower extremity venous pressure.
Superficial Venous Thrombosis
===PAGE:2389===
Superficial venous thrombosis is a blood clot in a superficial vein of the upper or lower
extremities or, less commonly, in one or more veins of the chest or breast (Mondor's disease).
Superficial venous thrombosis in the upper extremity most commonly results from IV infusions or
catheterization; varicose veins seem to be the main risk factor for the lower extremity, especially among
women. Superficial venous thrombi rarely cause serious complications and rarely become emboli.
Typically, patients present with pain, tenderness, or an indurated cord along a palpable superficial vein.
The overlying skin is usually warm and erythematous. Migratory superficial venous thrombosis, which
develops, resolves, and recurs in normal veins of the arms, legs, and torso at various times, is a possible
harbinger of pancreatic cancer and other adenocarcinomas (Trousseau's syndrome).
Diagnosis is based on history and physical examination. Patients with superficial phlebitis above the knee
have an increased risk of deep venous thrombosis and should probably have ultrasonography. Treatment
traditionally involves warm compresses and NSAIDs, but local thrombectomy with a local anesthetic is
very effective. In patients with extensive superficial phlebitis, heparin is often beneficial.
Varicose Veins
Varicose veins are dilated superficial veins in the lower extremities. Usually, no cause is
obvious. Varicose veins are typically asymptomatic but may cause a sense of fullness,
pressure, and pain or hyperesthesia in the legs. Diagnosis is by physical examination.
Treatment may include compression, wound care, sclerotherapy, and surgery.
Varicose veins may occur alone or with chronic venous insufficiency.
Etiology is usually unknown, but varicose veins may result from primary venous valvular insufficiency with
reflux or from primary dilation of the vein wall due to structural weakness. In some people, varicose veins
result from chronic venous insufficiency and venous hypertension. Most people have no obvious risk
factors. Varicose veins are common within families, suggesting a genetic component. Varicose veins are
more common among women because estrogen affects venous structure, pregnancy increases pelvic and
leg venous pressures, or both. Rarely, varicose veins are part of Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome,
which includes congenital arteriovenous fistulas and diffuse cutaneous capillary angiomas.
Symptoms and Signs
Varicose veins may initially be tense and palpable but are not necessarily visible. Later,
they may
progressively enlarge, protrude, and become obvious; they can cause a sense of fullness, fatigue,
pressure, and superficial pain or hyperesthesia in the legs. Varicose veins are most visible when the
patient stands. For unclear reasons, stasis dermatitis and venous stasis ulcers are uncommon. When skin
changes (eg, induration, pigmentation, eczema) occur, they typically affect the medial malleolar region.
Ulcers may develop after minimal trauma to an affected area; they are usually small, superficial, and
painful. Varicose veins occasionally thrombose, causing pain. Superficial varicose veins may cause thin
venous bullae in the skin, which may rupture and bleed after minimal trauma. Very rarely, such bleeding, if
undetected during sleep, is fatal.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is usually obvious from the physical examination. Trendelenburg's test (comparing venous
filling before and after release of a thigh tourniquet) is no longer commonly used to identify retrograde
blood flow past incompetent saphenous valves. Duplex ultra-sonography is an accurate test, but it is not
clear whether it is routinely necessary. Ultra-sonography can be done to assess the function of the deep
veins prior to surgery.
Treatment
===PAGE:2390===
• Compression stockings
• Sometimes sclerotherapy or surgery
Treatment aims to relieve symptoms, improve the leg's appearance, and, in some cases, prevent
complications. Treatment includes compression stockings and local wound care as needed.
Injection therapy (sclerotherapy) and surgery are indicated for prevention of recurrent variceal thrombosis
and for skin changes; these procedures are also commonly used for cosmetic reasons. Sclerotherapy
uses an irritant (eg, Na tetradecyl sulfate) to induce a thrombophlebitic reaction that fibroses and
occludes the vein; however, many varicose veins recannulate. Surgery involves ligation or stripping of the
long and sometimes the short saphenous veins. These procedures provide good short-term symptom
relief, but long-term efficacy is poor (ie, patients often develop recurrent varicose veins). Laser therapy is
being used experimentally by some surgeons.
Regardless of treatment, new varicose veins develop, and treatment often must be maintained
indefinitely.
Idiopathic Telangiectasias
Idiopathic telangiectasias are fine, dilated intracutaneous veins that are not clinically significant
but may be extensive and unsightly.
Telangiectasias are usually asymptomatic. However, some patients report a burning sensation or pain,
and many people consider even the smallest telangiectasias cosmetically unacceptable.
Telangiectasias can usually be eliminated by intracapillary injections of 0.3% solution of Na tetradecyl
sulfate through a fine-bore needle. Hypertonic saline 23.4% is sometimes used but causes fairly severe,
temporary, localized pain; therefore, large areas of spider veins (multiple telangiectasias) may require
several treatments. Pigmentation may develop but usually subsides, often completely. Skin ulceration may
result if the injection is extravascular or too large. Laser treatment is effective, but large areas require
several treatments. Small telangiectasias may persist or recur after initial treatment.
Arteriovenous Fistula
An arteriovenous fistula is an abnormal communication between an artery and a vein.
An arteriovenous fistula may be congenital (usually affecting smaller vessels) or acquired as a result of
trauma (eg, a bullet or stab wound) or erosion of an arterial aneurysm into an adjacent vein.
The fistula may cause symptoms and signs of arterial insufficiency (eg, ulceration due to reduced arterial
flow or ischemia) or chronic venous insufficiency due to high-pressure arterial flow in the affected veins
(eg, peripheral edema, varicose veins, stasis pigmentation). Emboli (eg, causing ulceration) may pass
from the venous to the arterial circulation, although pressure differences make this unlikely. If the fistula is
near the surface, a mass can be felt, and the affected area is usually swollen and warm with distended,
often pulsating superficial veins. A thrill can be palpated over the fistula, and a continuous loud, to-and-fro
(machinery) murmur with accentuation during systole can be heard during auscultation. Rarely, if a
significant portion of cardiac output is diverted through the fistula to the right heart, high-output heart
failure develops.
Congenital fistulas need no treatment unless significant complications develop (eg,
leg lengthening in a
growing child). When necessary, percutaneous vascular techniques can be used to place coils or plugs
into the vessels to occlude the fistula. Treatment is seldom completely successful, but complications are
often controlled. Acquired fistulas usually have a single large connection and can be effectively treated by
surgery.
Lymphedema
===PAGE:2391===
Lymphedema is edema of a limb due to lymphatic hypoplasia (primary) or to obstruction or
disruption (secondary) of lymphatic vessels. Symptoms and signs are brawny, fibrous,
nonpitting edema in one or more limbs. Diagnosis is by physical examination. Treatment
consists of exercise, pressure gradient dressings, massage, and sometimes surgery. Cure is
unusual, but treatment may lessen symptoms, slow progression, and prevent complications.
Patients are at risk of cellulitis, lymphangitis, and, rarely, lymphangiosarcoma.
Etiology
Lymphedema may be primary (due to lymphatic hypoplasia) or secondary (due to obstruction or disruption
of lymphatic vessels).
Primary lymphedemas:
Primary lymphedemas are inherited and uncommon. They vary in phenotype
and patient age at presentation.
Congenital lymphedema appears before age 2 and is due to lymphatic aplasia or hypoplasia. Milroy's
disease is an autosomal dominant familial form of congenital lymphedema attributed to vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor-3 (
VEGFR-3
) gene mutations and sometimes associated with
cholestatic jaundice and edema or diarrhea due to a protein-losing enteropathy caused by intestinal
lymphangiectasia.
Lymphedema praecox appears between ages 2 and 35, typically in women at the onset of menses or
pregnancy. Meige's disease is an autosomal dominant familial form of lymphedema praecox attributed to
mutations in a transcription factor gene (
FOXC2
) and associated with extra eyelashes (distichiasis); cleft
palate; and leg, arm, and sometimes facial edema.
Lymphedema tarda occurs after age 35. Familial and sporadic forms exist; the genetic basis of both is
unknown. Clinical findings are similar to those of lymphedema praecox but may be less severe.
Lymphedema is prominent in some other genetic syndromes, including Turner's syndrome; yellow nail
syndrome, characterized by pleural effusions and yellow nails; and Hennekam syndrome, a rare
congenital syndrome of intestinal and other lymphangiectases, facial anomalies, and intellectual disability.
Secondary lymphedema:
Secondary lymphedema is far more common than primary. It is most
commonly caused by surgery (especially lymph node dissection, typically for breast cancer), radiation
therapy (especially axillary or inguinal), trauma, lymphatic obstruction by a tumor, and, in developing
countries, lymphatic filariasis. Mild lymphedema may also result from leakage of lymph into interstitial
tissues in patients with chronic venous insufficiency.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of secondary lymphedema include aching discomfort and a sensation of heaviness or fullness.
The cardinal sign is soft-tissue edema, graded in 3 stages:
• In stage 1, the edema is pitting, and the affected area often returns to normal by morning.
• In stage 2, the edema is nonpitting, and chronic soft-tissue inflammation causes early fibrosis.
• In stage 3, the edema is brawny and irreversible, largely because of soft-tissue fibrosis.
The swelling is most often unilateral and may worsen when the weather is warm, before menstruation
occurs, and after the limb remains for a long time in a dependent position. It can affect any part of the limb
(isolated proximal or distal) or the entire extremity; it can restrict range of motion when swelling is
periarticular. Disability and emotional distress can be significant, especially when lymphedema results
from medical or surgical treatment.
Skin changes are common and include hyperkeratosis, hyperpigmentation, verrucae, papillomas, and
===PAGE:2392===
fungal infections.
Complications:
Lymphangitis ( may develop, most often when bacteria enter through skin
cracks between the toes as a result of fungal infections or through cuts to the hand. Lymphangitis is
almost always streptococcal, causing erysipelas; sometimes it is staphylococcal. The affected limb
becomes red and feels hot; red streaks may extend proximally from the point of entry, and
lymphadenopathy may develop. Rarely, the skin breaks down. Rarely, long-standing lymphedema leads to
lymphangiosarcoma (Stewart-Treves
syndrome), usually in postmastectomy patients and in patients with
filariasis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical diagnosis
• CT or MRI if cause not apparent
Primary lymphedema is usually obvious, based on characteristic soft-tissue edema throughout the body
and other information from the history and physical examination. Diagnosis of secondary lymphedema is
usually obvious from physical examination. Additional tests are indicated when secondary lymphedema is
suspected unless the diagnosis and cause are obvious. CT and MRI can identify sites of lymphatic
obstruction; radionuclide lymphoscintigraphy can identify lymphatic hypoplasia or sluggish flow.
Progression can be monitored by measuring limb circumference, measuring water volume displaced by
the submerged limb, or using skin or soft-tissue tonometry; these tests have not been validated. In
developing countries, tests for lymphatic filariasis should be done (. If lymphedema seems
much greater than expected (eg, on the basis of lymph node dissection) or appears after a delay in a
woman treated for breast cancer, cancer recurrence should be considered.
Prognosis
Cure is unusual once lymphedema occurs. Meticulous treatment and possibly preventive measures can
lessen symptoms, slow or halt disease progression, and prevent complications.
Treatment
• Sometimes surgical reconstruction for primary lymphedema
• Mobilizing fluid (eg, by elevation and compression, massage, pressure bandages, intermittent pneumatic
compression)
Treatment of primary lymphedema may include surgical soft-tissue reduction (removal of subcutaneous
fat and fibrous tissue) and reconstruction if quality of life is significantly reduced.
Treatment of secondary lymphedema involves managing its cause. For lymphedema itself, several
interventions to mobilize fluid (complex decongestive therapy) can be used. They include manual
lymphatic drainage, in which the limb is elevated and compressed ("milked") toward the heart; gradient
pressure bandages or sleeves; limb exercises; and limb massage, including intermittent pneumatic
compression. Surgical soft-tissue reduction, lymphatic reanastomoses, and formation of drainage
channels are sometimes tried but have not been rigorously studied.
Preventive measures include avoiding heat, vigorous exercise, and constrictive garments (including blood
pressure cuffs) around the affected limb. Skin and nail care require meticulous attention; vaccination,
phlebotomy, and IV catheterization in the affected limb should be avoided.
Cellulitis and lymphangitis are treated with
β
-lactamase-resistant antibiotics that are effective against
gram-positive organisms (eg, oxacillin, cloxacillin, dicloxacillin).
===PAGE:2393===
Chapter 220. Sports and the Heart
Introduction
Exercise and athletic training are of significant overall cardiovascular benefit, but occasionally they have
adverse consequences.
Sudden Cardiac Death in Athletes
An estimated 1/200,000 apparently healthy young athletes develops abrupt-onset ventricular tachycardia
or fibrillation and dies suddenly during exercise. Males are affected 10 times more often than females.
Basketball and football players in the US and soccer players in Europe may be at highest risk.
In
young athletes
, sudden cardiac death has many causes (see
Table 220-1
) but the most common is
• Undetected hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Athletes with thin, compliant chest walls are at risk of commotio cordis (sudden ventricular tachycardia or
fibrillation after a blow to the precordium) even when no cardiovascular disorder is present. The blow may
involve a moderate-force projectile (eg, baseball, hockey puck, lacrosse ball) or impact
[Table 220-1.
Causes of Sudden Cardiovascular Death in Young Athletes*]
with another player during a vulnerable phase of myocardial repolarization. Other causes include
inherited arrhythmia syndromes (eg, long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome). Some young athletes die of
aortic aneurysm rupture (in Marfan syndrome).
In
older athletes
, sudden cardiac death is typically caused by
• Coronary artery disease
Occasionally, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, mitral valve prolapse, or acquired valvular disease is
involved.
In other conditions underlying sudden death in athletes (eg, asthma, heatstroke, illicit or performanceenhancing drug-related complications), ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation is a terminal, not a primary
event.
Symptoms and signs are those of cardiovascular collapse; diagnosis is obvious. Immediate treatment with
advanced cardiac life support is successful in < 20%; the percentage may increase as distribution of
community-based, automated external defibrillators expands. For survivors, treatment is management of
the underlying condition. In some cases, an implanted cardioverter-defibrillator may ultimately be required.
Screening
Athletes are commonly screened to identify risk before participation in sports, and they are reevaluated
every 2 yr (if high school age) or every 4 yr (if college age or older).
Screening recommendations for all children, adolescents, and college-age young adults include
• Medical, family, and drug history (including use of performance-enhancing drugs and drugs that
predispose to long QT syndrome)
• Physical examination (including BP and supine and standing cardiac auscultation)
• Selected testing based on findings on history and physical examination
===PAGE:2394===
Screening for older adults also includes incremental symptom-limited exercise testing.
Athletes with a family history or symptoms or signs of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (, long
QT syndrome (, or Marfan syndrome ( require further evaluation, typically with
ECG, echocardiography, or both. Confirmation of any of these disorders may preclude sports
participation. Athletes with presyncope or syncope should also be evaluated for anomalous coronary
arteries (eg, by cardiac catheterization). If ECG reveals Mobitz type II heart block, complete heart block,
true right bundle branch block, or left bundle branch block, a search for cardiac disease is required.
Athletes should be counseled against use of illicit and performance-enhancing drugs.
History and examination are neither sensitive nor specific; false-negative and false-positive findings are
common because prevalence of cardiac disorders in an apparently healthy population is very low. Use of
screening ECG or echocardiography would improve disease detection but would produce even more
false-positive diagnoses and is impractical at a population level.
Genetic testing for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or long QT syndrome is not recommended or even
feasible for the screening of athletes.
Athlete's Heart
Athlete's heart is a constellation of structural and functional changes that occur in the heart of
people who train for > 1 h most days. The changes are asymptomatic; signs include
bradycardia, a systolic murmur, and extra heart sounds. ECG abnormalities are common.
Diagnosis is clinical or by echocardiography. No treatment is necessary. Athlete's heart is
significant because it must be distinguished from serious cardiac disorders.
Intensive, prolonged endurance and strength training causes many physiologic adaptations. Volume and
pressure loads in the left ventricle (LV) increase, which, over time, increase LV muscle mass, wall
thickness, and chamber size. Maximal stroke volume and cardiac output increase, contributing to a lower
resting heart rate and longer diastolic filling time. Lower heart rate results primarily from increased vagal
tone, but decreased sympathetic activation and other nonautonomic factors that decrease intrinsic sinus
node activity may play a role. Bradycardia decreases myocardial O
demand; at the same time, increases
in total Hb and blood volume enhance O
transport. Despite these changes, systolic function and
diastolic function remain normal. Structural changes in women are typically less than those in men of the
same age, body size, and training.
Symptoms and Signs
There are no symptoms. Signs vary but may include bradycardia; an LV impulse that is laterally displaced,
enlarged, and increased in amplitude; a systolic ejection (flow) murmur at the left lower sternal border; a
3rd heart sound (S
) due to early, rapid diastolic ventricular filling; a 4th heart sound (S
), heard best
during resting bradycardia because diastolic filling time is increased; and hyperdynamic carotid pulses.
These signs reflect structural cardiac changes that are adaptive for intense exercise.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Usually ECG
• Sometimes echocardiography
• Rarely stress testing
Findings are typically detected during routine screening or during evaluation of unrelated symptoms. Most
athletes do not require extensive testing, although ECG is often warranted. If symptoms suggest a cardiac
disorder (eg, palpitations, chest pain), ECG, echocardiography, and exercise stress testing are done.
===PAGE:2395===
Athlete's heart is a diagnosis of exclusion; it must be distinguished from disorders that cause similar
findings but are life threatening (eg, hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathies, ischemic heart disease,
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia).
ECG:
Numerous changes in rhythm and ECG morphology can occur; they correlate poorly with level of
training and cardiovascular performance. The most common ECG finding is
• Sinus bradycardia
Rarely, heart rate is < 40 beats/min. Sinus arrhythmia often accompanies the slow heart rate. Resting
bradycardia may also predispose to
• Atrial or ventricular ectopy (including couplets and bursts of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia);
pauses after ectopic beats do not exceed 4 sec
• Wandering supraventricular pacemaker
• Atrial fibrillation
Other ECG findings that may occur include
• First-degree atrioventricular (AV) block (in up to one third of athletes)
• Second degree AV block (mainly type I); this finding occurs during rest and disappears with exercise
• High voltage QRS with inferolateral T-wave changes (reflecting LV hypertrophy)
• Deep anterolateral T-wave inversion
• Incomplete right bundle branch block
However, 3rd-degree AV block is abnormal and should be investigated thoroughly.
These ECG and rhythm changes have not been associated with adverse clinical events, suggesting that
various arrhythmias are not abnormal in athletes. The arrhythmias are usually abolished or substantially
reduced after a relatively brief period of deconditioning.
Echocardiography:
Echocardiography can usually distinguish athlete's heart from cardiomyopathies
(see
Table 220-2
), but the distinction is not always clear because there is a continuum from physiologic to
pathologic cardiac enlargement. The zone of overlap between the athlete's heart and cardiomyopathy is
left ventricular septal thickness between 13 to 15 mm in men and 11 to 13 mm in women. In this overlap
area, the presence of mitral valve systolic anterior motion strongly suggests hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
In general, echocardiographic changes correlate poorly with level of training and cardiovascular
performance. Trace mitral
[Table 220-2.
Features Distinguishing Athlete's Heart from Cardiomyopathy]
regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation are commonly detected.
Stress testing:
During exercise stress testing, heart rate remains lower than normal at submaximal
stress and increases appropriately and comparably to nonathletes at maximal stress; it rapidly recovers
after exercise. BP response is normal: Systolic BP increases, diastolic BP falls, and mean BP stays
relatively constant. Many resting ECG changes decrease or disappear during exercise; this finding is
unique to athlete's heart, distinguishing it from pathologic conditions. However, pseudonormalization of Twave inversions could reflect myocardial ischemia and thus warrants further investigation in older
athletes.
===PAGE:2396===
Prognosis
Although gross structural changes resemble those in some cardiac disorders, no adverse effects are
apparent. In most cases, structural changes and bradycardia regress with detraining, although up to 20%
of elite athletes have residual chamber enlargement, raising questions, in the absence of long-term data,
about whether athlete's heart is truly benign.
Treatment
No treatment is required, although 3 mo of deconditioning may be needed to monitor LV regression as a
way of distinguishing this syndrome from cardiomyopathy. Such deconditioning can greatly interfere with
an athlete's life and may meet with resistance.
===PAGE:2397===
Chapter 221. Cardiac Tumors
Introduction
Cardiac tumors may be primary (benign or malignant) or metastatic (malignant). Myxoma, a
benign primary tumor, is the most common type. Cardiac tumors may occur in any cardiac
tissue. They can cause valvular or inflow-outflow tract obstruction, thromboembolism,
arrhythmias, or pericardial disorders. Diagnosis is by echocardiography followed by biopsy.
Treatment of benign tumors is usually surgical resection; tumors may recur. Treatment of
metastatic cancer depends on tumor type and origin; prognosis is generally poor.
Primary cardiac tumors are found in < 1/2000 people at autopsy. Metastatic tumors are 30 to 40 times
more common. Usually, primary
cardiac tumors originate in the myocardium or endocardium; they may
also originate in valve tissue, cardiac connective tissue, or the pericardium.
Classification
Some of the more common primary and secondary cardiac tumors are listed (see
Table 221-1
).
Benign primary tumors:
Examples are myxomas, papillary fibroelastomas, rhabdomyomas, fibromas,
hemangiomas, teratomas, lipomas, paragangliomas, and pericardial cysts.
Myxoma
is most common, accounting for 50% of all primary cardiac tumors. Incidence in women is 2 to 4
times that in men. In uncommon familial forms (Carney complex), men are affected more often. About 75%
of myxomas occur in the left atrium, and the rest occur in the other chambers as a solitary tumor or, less
commonly, at several sites. About 75% are pedunculated and may prolapse through the mitral valve and
obstruct ventricular filling during diastole; the remainder are broad-based and sessile. Myxomas may be
myxoid and gelatinous; smooth, firm, and lobular; or friable and irregular. Friable irregular myxomas
increase risk of systemic embolism.
Carney complex is a familial, autosomal dominant syndrome of recurrent cardiac myxomas with some
combination of cutaneous myxomas, myxoid mammary fibroadenomas, pigmented skin lesions (lentigines,
ephelides, blue nevi), multiple endocrine neoplasia (primary pigmented nodular adreno-cortical disease
causing Cushing's syndrome, growth hormone and prolactin-producing pituitary adenoma, testicular
tumors, thyroid adenoma or carcinoma, and ovarian cysts), psammomatous melanotic schwannoma,
breast ductal adenoma, and osteochondromyxoma. Patients are often younger at presentation (median
age, 20 yr), have multiple myxomas (particularly in the ventricles), and have a higher risk of myxoma
recurrence.
[Table 221-1.
Types of Cardiac Tumors]
Papillary fibroelastomas
are the 2nd most common benign primary tumor. They are avascular
papillomas that predominantly occur on the aortic and mitral valves. Men and women are affected equally.
They have papillary fronds branching from a central core, resembling sea anemones. About 45% are
pedunculated. They do not cause valvular dysfunction but increase risk of embolism.
Rhabdomyomas
account for 20% of all primary cardiac tumors and 90% of those in children.
Rhabdomyomas affect mainly infants and children, 50% of whom also have tuberous sclerosis.
Rhabdomyomas are usually multiple and located intramurally in the septum or free wall of the left
ventricle, where they affect the cardiac conduction system. They are firm white lobules that typically
regress with age. A minority of patients develop tachyarrhythmias and heart failure due to left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction.
Fibromas
occur mainly in children and are associated with adenoma sebaceum of the skin and kidney
tumors. They occur primarily on valve tissue and may develop in response to inflammation. They can
compress or invade the cardiac conduction system, causing arrhythmias and sudden death. Some
fibromas occur as part of a syndrome with generalized body overgrowth, jaw keratocytes, skeletal
===PAGE:2398===
abnormalities, and various benign and malignant tumors (Gorlin's or basal cell nevus syndrome).
Hemangiomas
account for 5 to 10% of benign tumors. They cause symptoms in a minority of patients.
Most often, they are incidentally detected during examinations done for other reasons.
Teratomas
of the pericardium affect mainly infants and children. They are often attached to the base of
the great vessels. About 90% are located in the anterior mediastinum; the rest, mainly in the posterior
mediastinum.
Lipomas
can develop at a wide range of ages. They originate in the endocardium or epicardium and
have a large pedunculated base. Many are asymptomatic, but some obstruct flow or cause arrhythmias.
Paragangliomas
, including pheochromocytomas, rarely occur in the heart; when they do, they are
usually localized to the base of the heart near vagus nerve endings. They may manifest with symptoms
due to catecholamine secretion.
Pericardial cysts
may resemble a cardiac tumor or pericardial effusion on chest x-ray. They are usually
asymptomatic, although some cause compressive symptoms (eg, chest pain, dyspnea, cough).
Malignant primary tumors:
Malignant primary tumors include sarcomas, pericardial mesothelioma, and
primary lymphomas.
Sarcoma
is the most common malignant and 2nd most common primary cardiac tumor (after myxoma).
Sarcomas affect mainly middle-aged adults (mean, 41 yr). Almost 40% are angiosarcomas, most of which
originate in the right atrium and involve the pericardium, causing right ventricular inflow tract obstruction,
pericardial tamponade, and lung metastasis. Other types include undifferentiated sarcoma (25%),
malignant fibrous histiocytoma (11 to 24%), leiomyosarcoma (8 to 9%), fibrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
liposarcoma, and osteosarcoma; these types are more likely to originate in the left atrium, causing mitral
valve obstruction and heart failure.
Pericardial mesothelioma
is rare. It affects all ages, males more than females. It causes tamponade
and can metastasize to the spine, adjacent soft tissues, and brain.
Primary lymphoma
is extremely rare. It usually occurs in AIDS patients or other people with
immunodeficiency. These tumors grow rapidly and cause heart failure, arrhythmias, tamponade, and
superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome.
Metastatic tumors:
Lung and breast carcinoma, soft-tissue sarcoma, and renal cancer are the most
common sources of metastases to the heart. Malignant melanoma, leukemia, and lymphoma often
metastasize to the heart, but the metastases may not be clinically significant. When Kaposi's sarcoma
spreads systemically in immunodeficient (usually AIDS) patients, it may spread to the heart, but clinical
cardiac complications are uncommon.
Symptoms and Signs
Cardiac tumors cause symptoms and signs typical of much more common disorders (eg, heart failure,
stroke, coronary artery disease). Symptoms and signs of benign primary cardiac tumors depend on tumor
type, location, size, and friability and can be classified as extracardiac, intramyocardial, or intracavitary.
Extracardiac symptoms and signs may be constitutional or mechanical. Constitutional symptoms of fever,
chills, lethargy, arthralgias, and weight loss are caused exclusively by myxomas, perhaps as a result of
cytokine (eg, IL-6) release. Petechiae may also occur. These and other findings may erroneously suggest
bacterial endocarditis, connective tissue disorders, and occult cancer. Mechanical symptoms (eg,
dyspnea, chest discomfort) result from compression of cardiac chambers or coronary arteries or from
pericardial irritation or tamponade caused by growth or hemorrhage within the pericardium. Pericardial
tumors may produce pericardial friction rubs.
Intramyocardial symptoms and signs are caused by arrhythmias, usually atrioventricular or intraventricular
===PAGE:2399===
block or paroxysmal supraventricular or ventricular tachycardias due to compression or encroachment on
the conduction system (notably rhabdomyomas and fibromas).
Intracavitary symptoms and signs are due to tumors that obstruct valvular function, blood flow, or both
(causing valvular stenosis, valvular insufficiency, or heart failure) or to tumors (especially gelatinous
myxomas) that cause thrombus or tumor fragments to embolize into the systemic circulation (brain,
coronary arteries, kidneys, spleen, extremities) or the lungs. Intracavitary symptoms and signs may vary
with body position, which can alter hemodynamics and physical forces associated with the tumor.
Myxomas usually cause some combination of constitutional and intracavitary symptoms and signs.
Myxomas may cause a diastolic murmur that mimics that of mitral stenosis but whose loudness and
location vary from beat to beat with body position. About 15% of pedunculated left atrial myxomas
produce an audible "tumor plop" as they drop into the mitral orifice during diastole. Myxomas may also
cause arrhythmias. Raynaud's syndrome and finger clubbing are less typical but may occur.
Fibroelastomas, often discovered incidentally at autopsy, are usually asymptomatic; however, they may be
a source of systemic emboli. Rhabdomyomas are usually asymptomatic. Fibromas cause arrhythmias and
sudden death. Hemangiomas are usually asymptomatic but may cause any of the extracardiac,
intramyocardial, or intracavitary symptoms. Teratomas cause respiratory distress and cyanosis due to
compression of the aortic and pulmonary artery or SVC syndrome.
Symptoms and signs of malignant cardiac tumors are more acute in onset and progress
more rapidly.
Cardiac sarcomas most commonly cause symptoms of ventricular inflow tract obstruction and pericardial
tamponade. Mesothelioma causes symptoms of pericarditis or tamponade. Primary lymphoma causes
refractory progressive heart failure, tamponade, arrhythmias, and SVC syndrome. Metastatic cardiac
tumors may manifest as sudden cardiac enlargement, tamponade (due to rapid accumulation of
hemorrhagic pericardial effusion), heart block, other arrhythmias, or sudden unexplained heart failure.
Fever, malaise, weight loss, night sweats, and loss of appetite may also be present.
Diagnosis
• Echocardiography
• Biopsy (during catheterization or thoracotomy)
Diagnosis, which is often delayed because symptoms and signs mimic those of much more common
disorders, is confirmed by echocardiography and is tissue-typed by biopsy. Transesophageal
echocardiography is better for visualizing atrial tumors, and transthoracic echocardiography is better for
ventricular tumors. If results are equivocal, MRI is useful as are gated radionuclide imaging and CT.
Infrequently, contrast ventriculography during cardiac catheterization is required. Biopsy is done during
catheterization or open thoracotomy.
Extensive testing often precedes echocardiography in patients with myxomas because their symptoms are
nonspecific. Anemia; thrombocytopenia; and elevation of WBC count, ESR, C-reactive protein, and
γ
-
globulins are common. ECG may show left atrial enlargement. Routine chest x-ray may show Ca deposits
in right atrial myxomas or in teratomas seen as anterior mediastinal masses. Myxomas are sometimes
diagnosed when tumor cells are found in a surgically removed embolus.
Arrhythmias and heart failure with features of tuberous sclerosis suggest rhabdomyomas or fibromas.
New cardiac symptoms and signs in a patient with a known extracardiac cancer suggest cardiac
metastases. Chest x-ray may show bizarre changes in the cardiac silhouette.
Treatment
• Benign primary: Excision
• Malignant primary: Palliation
===PAGE:2400===
• Metastatic: Depends on tumor origin
Treatment of benign primary tumors is surgical excision followed by serial echocardiography over 5 to 6 yr
to monitor for recurrence. Tumors are excised unless another disorder (eg, dementia) contraindicates
surgery. Surgery is usually curative (95% survival at 3 yr). Exceptions are rhabdomyomas, most of which
regress spontaneously and do not require treatment, and pericardial teratoma, which may require urgent
pericardiocentesis. Patients with fibroelastoma may also require valvular repair or replacement. When
rhabdomyomas or fibromas are multi-focal, surgical excision is usually ineffective, and prognosis is poor
after the first year of life; survival at 5 yr may be as low as 15%.
Treatment of malignant primary tumors is usually palliative (eg, radiation therapy, chemotherapy,
management of complications) because prognosis is poor.
Treatment of metastatic cardiac tumors depends on tumor origin. It may include systemic chemotherapy
or palliation.
===PAGE:2401===
16 - Critical Care Medicine
Chapter 222. Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
Introduction
Critical care medicine specializes in caring for the most seriously ill patients. These patients are best
treated in an ICU staffed by experienced personnel. Some hospitals maintain separate units for special
populations (eg, cardiac, surgical, neurologic, pediatric, or neonatal patients). ICUs have a high
nurse:patient ratio to provide the necessary high intensity
of service, including treatment and monitoring
of physiologic parameters.
Supportive care for the ICU patient includes provision of adequate nutrition ( and prevention of
infection, stress ulcers and gastritis (, and pulmonary embolism (. Because 15 to
25% of patients admitted to ICUs die there, physicians should know how to minimize suffering and help
dying patients maintain dignity (.
Patient Monitoring and Testing
Some monitoring is manual (ie, by direct observation and physical examination) and intermittent, with the
frequency depending on the patient's illness. This monitoring usually includes measurement of vital signs
(temperature, BP, pulse, and respiration rate), quantification of all fluid intake and output, and often daily
weight. BP may be recorded by an automated sphygmomanometer; a transcutaneous sensor for pulse
oximetry is used as well.
Other monitoring is ongoing and continuous, provided by complex devices that require special training
and experience to operate. Most such devices generate an alarm if certain physiologic parameters are
exceeded. Every ICU should strictly follow protocols for investigating alarms.
Blood Tests
Although frequent blood draws can destroy veins, cause pain, and lead to anemia, ICU patients typically
have routine daily blood tests to help detect problems early. Generally, patients need a daily set of
electrolytes and a CBC. Patients with arrhythmias should also have Mg, phosphate, and Ca levels
measured. Patients receiving TPN need weekly liver enzymes and coagulation profiles. Other tests (eg,
blood culture for fever, CBC after a bleeding episode) are done as needed.
Point-of-care testing uses miniaturized, highly automated devices to do certain blood tests at the patient's
bedside or unit (particularly ICU, emergency department, and operating room). Commonly available tests
include blood chemistries, glucose, ABGs, CBC, cardiac markers, and coagulation tests. Many are done
in < 2 min and require < 0.5 mL blood.
Cardiac Monitoring
Most critical care patients have cardiac activity monitored by a 3-lead system; signals are usually sent to
a central monitoring station by a small radio transmitter worn by the patient. Automated systems generate
alarms for abnormal rates and rhythms and store abnormal tracings for subsequent review.
Some specialized cardiac monitors track advanced parameters associated with coronary ischemia,
although their clinical benefit is unclear. These parameters include continuous ST-segment monitoring
and heart rate variability. Loss of normal beat-to-beat variability signals a reduction in autonomic activity
and possibly coronary ischemia and increased risk of death.
Pulmonary Artery Catheter Monitoring
Use of a pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) is becoming less common in ICU patients. This balloon-tipped,
flow-directed catheter is inserted via central veins through the right side of the heart into the pulmonary
artery. The catheter typically contains several ports that can monitor pressure or inject fluids. Some PACs
===PAGE:2402===
also include a sensor to measure central (mixed) venous O
saturation. Data from PACs are used mainly
to determine cardiac output and preload. Preload is most commonly estimated by the pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure (. However, preload may be more accurately determined by right ventricular end-diastolic volume,
which is measured using fast-response thermistors gated to heart rate.
Despite longstanding use, PACs have not been shown to reduce morbidity and mortality. Rather, PAC use
has been associated with excess mortality. This finding may be explained by complications of PAC use
and misinterpretation of the data obtained. Nevertheless, some physicians believe PACs, when combined
with other objective and clinical data, aid in the management of certain critically ill patients. As with many
physiologic measurements, a changing trend is typically more significant than a single abnormal value.
Possible indications for PACs are listed in
Table 222-1
.
Procedure:
The PAC is inserted through a special catheter in the subclavian or internal jugular vein with
the balloon deflated. Once the catheter tip reaches the superior vena cava, partial inflation of the balloon
permits blood flow to guide the catheter. The position of the catheter tip is usually determined by pressure
monitoring (see
Table 222-2
for intracardiac and great vessel pressures) or occasionally by fluoroscopy. Entry into the
right ventricle is indicated by a sudden increase in systolic pressure to about 30 mm Hg; diastolic
pressure remains unchanged from
[Table 222-1.
Potential Indications for Pulmonary Artery Catheterization]
right atrial or vena caval pressure. When the catheter enters the pulmonary artery, systolic pressure does
not change, but diastolic pressure rises above right ventricular end-diastolic pressure or central venous
pressure (CVP); ie, the pulse pressure narrows. Further movement of the catheter wedges the balloon in
a distal pulmonary artery. A chest x-ray confirms proper placement.
The systolic pressure (normal, 15 to 30 mm Hg) and diastolic pressure (normal, 5 to 13 mm Hg) are
recorded with the catheter balloon deflated. The diastolic pressure corresponds well to the occlusion
pressure, although diastolic pressure can exceed occlusion pressure when pulmonary vascular
resistance is elevated secondary to primary pulmonary disease (eg, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary
hypertension).
Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP):
With the balloon inflated, pressure at the tip of the
catheter reflects the static back pressure of the pulmonary veins. The balloon must not remain inflated for
> 30 sec to prevent pulmonary infarction. Normally, PAOP approximates left atrial pressure, which in turn
approximates left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP). LVEDP reflects left ventricular end-diastolic
volume (LVEDV). The LVEDV represents preload, which is the actual target parameter. Many factors
cause PAOP to reflect LVEDV inaccurately. These factors include mitral stenosis, high levels of positive
end-expiratory pressure (> 10 cm H
O), and changes in left ventricular compliance (eg, due to MI,
pericardial effusion, or increased afterload). Technical difficulties result from excessive balloon inflation,
improper catheter position, alveolar pressure exceeding pulmonary venous pressure, or severe
pulmonary hypertension (which may make the balloon difficult to wedge).
Elevated PAOP occurs in left-sided heart failure. Decreased PAOP occurs in hypovolemia or decreased
preload.
Mixed venous oxygenation:
Mixed venous blood comprises blood from the superior and inferior vena
cava that has passed through the right heart to the pulmonary artery. The blood may be sampled from the
distal port of the PAC, but some catheters have embedded fiberoptic sensors that directly measure O
saturation.
[Table 222-2.
Normal Pressures in the Heart and Great Vessels]
Causes of low mixed venous O
content (SmvO
) include anemia, pulmonary disease,
carboxyhemoglobin, low cardiac output, and increased tissue metabolic needs. The ratio of SaO
to
===PAGE:2403===
(SaO
- SmvO
) determines the adequacy of O
delivery. The ideal ratio is 4:1, whereas 2:1 is the
minimum acceptable ratio to maintain aerobic metabolic needs.
Cardiac output:
Cardiac output (CO) is measured by intermittent bolus injection of ice water or, in new
catheters, continuous warm thermodilution. The cardiac index divides the CO by body surface area to
correct for patient size (see
Table 222-3
).
Other variables can be calculated from CO. They include systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance
and right ventricular stroke work (RVSW) and left ventricular stroke work (LVSW).
Complications and precautions:
PACs may be difficult to insert. Cardiac arrhythmias are the most
common complication. Pulmonary infarction secondary to overinflated or permanently wedged balloons,
pulmonary artery perforation, intracardiac perforation, valvular injury, and endocarditis may occur. Rarely,
the catheter may curl into a knot within the right ventricle (especially in patients with heart failure,
cardiomyopathy, or increased pulmonary pressure).
[Table 222-3.
Normal Values for Cardiac Index and Related Measurements]
Pulmonary artery rupture occurs in < 0.1% of PAC insertions. This catastrophic complication is often fatal
and occurs immediately on wedging the catheter either initially or during a subsequent occlusion pressure
check. Thus, many physicians prefer to monitor pulmonary artery diastolic pressures rather than
occlusion pressures.
Noninvasive Cardiac Output
Other methods of determining CO, such as thoracic bioimpedance and the esophageal Doppler monitor,
are being developed to avoid the complications of PACs. Although these methods are potentially useful,
neither is yet as reliable as a PAC.
Thoracic bioimpedance:
These systems use topical electrodes on the anterior chest and neck to
measure electrical impedance of the thorax. This value varies with beat-to-beat changes in thoracic blood
volume and hence can estimate CO. The system is harmless and provides values quickly (within 2 to 5
min); however, the technique is very sensitive to alteration of the electrode contact with the patient.
Thoracic bioimpedance is more valuable in recognizing changes in a given patient than in precisely
measuring CO.
Esophageal Doppler monitor (EDM):
This device is a soft 6-mm catheter that is passed
nasopharyngeally into the esophagus and positioned behind the heart. A Doppler flow probe at its tip
allows continuous monitoring of CO and stroke volume. Unlike the invasive PAC, the EDM does not
cause pneumothorax, arrhythmia, or infection. An EDM may actually be more accurate than a PAC in
patients with cardiac valvular lesions, septal defects, arrhythmias, or pulmonary hypertension. However,
the EDM may lose its waveform with only a slight positional change and produce dampened, inaccurate
readings.
Intracranial Pressure Monitoring
Intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring is standard for patients with severe closed head injury. These
devices are used to optimize cerebral perfusion pressure (mean arterial pressure minus intracranial
pressure). Typically, the cerebral perfusion pressure should be kept > 60 mm Hg.
Several types of ICP monitors are available. The most useful method places a catheter through the skull
into a cerebral ventricle (ventriculostomy catheter). This device is preferred because the catheter can
also drain
CSF and hence decrease ICP. However, the ventriculostomy is also the most invasive method,
has the highest infection rate, and is the most difficult to place. Occasionally, the ventriculostomy
becomes occluded due to severe brain edema.
Other types of intracranial devices include an intraparenchymal monitor and an epidural bolt. Of these,
===PAGE:2404===
the intraparenchymal monitor is more commonly used. All ICP devices should usually be changed or
removed after 5 to 7 days because infection is a risk.
Other Types of Monitoring
Sublingual capnometry
uses a similar correlation between elevated sublingual PCO
and systemic
hypoperfusion to monitor shock states using a noninvasive sensor placed under the tongue. This device
is easier to use than gastric tonometry and responds quickly to perfusion changes with resuscitation.
Tissue spectroscopy
uses a noninvasive near infrared (NIR) sensor usually placed on the skin above
the target tissue to monitor mitochondrial cytochrome a,a redox states, which reflect tissue perfusion. NIR
may help diagnose acute compartment syndromes (eg, in trauma) or ischemia after free tissue transfer
and may be helpful in postoperative monitoring of lower-extremity vascular bypass grafts. NIR monitoring
of small-bowel pH may be used to gauge the adequacy of resuscitation.
Scoring Systems
Several scoring systems have been developed to grade the severity of illness in critically ill patients.
These systems are moderately accurate in predicting individual survival. However, these systems are
more valuable for monitoring quality of care and for conducting research studies because they allow
comparison of outcomes among groups of critically ill patients with similar illness severity.
The most common system is the 2nd version of the Acute Physiologic Assessment and Chronic Health
Evaluation II (APACHE II) score introduced in 1985. It generates a point score ranging from 0 to 71 based
on 12 physiologic variables, age, and underlying health (see
Table 222-4
). The APACHE III system was developed in 1991. This system is more complex, has 17
physiologic variables, and is somewhat less used. There are many other systems, including the 2nd
Simplified Acute Physiology Score (SAPS II) and several mortality probability models.
Vascular Access
A number of procedures are used to gain vascular access.
Peripheral Vein Catheterization
Most patients' needs for IV fluid and drugs can be met with a percutaneous peripheral venous catheter.
Venous cutdown can be used when percutaneous catheter insertion is not feasible. Typical cutdown sites
are the cephalic vein in the arm and the saphenous vein at the ankle.
Common complications (eg, local infection, venous thrombosis, thrombophlebitis, interstitial fluid
extravasation) can be reduced by using a meticulous sterile technique during insertion and by replacing
or removing the catheters within 72 h.
Central Venous Catheterization
Patients needing secure or long-term vascular access (eg, to receive antibiotics, chemotherapy, or TPN)
are best treated with a central venous catheter (CVC). CVCs allow infusion of solutions that are too
concentrated or irritating for peripheral veins and allow monitoring of central venous pressure (CVP—see
p.
).
Procedure:
CVCs are inserted using sterile technique and a local anesthetic (eg, 1% lidocaine). The
superior vena cava is entered via percutaneous puncture of the subclavian or the internal or external
jugular vein or by venous cutdown on the basilic vein. The inferior vena cava may be entered through the
common femoral vein percutaneously or by cutdown on the saphenous vein. The choice of site depends
on operator preference and patient habitus and ambulatory status. However, femoral venous catheters
have a slightly higher rate of complications than those above the waist. Also, during cardiac arrest, fluid
and drugs given through a femoral or saphenous vein CVC often fail to circulate above the diaphragm
because of the increased intrathoracic pressure generated by CPR. In this case, a subclavian or internal
===PAGE:2405===
jugular approach may be preferred.
If possible, the patient's coagulation status and platelet count should be normalized before CVC insertion.
Percutaneous femoral lines must be inserted below the inguinal ligament. Otherwise, laceration of the
external iliac vein or artery above the inguinal ligament may result in retroperitoneal hemorrhage; external
compression of these vessels is nearly impossible. The subclavian vein also is not
[Table 222-4.
Acute Physiologic Assessment and Chronic Health Evaluation (Apache) II Scoring System*]
compressible with external pressure, and thus hemorrhage can be serious. A cutdown decreases the risk
of bleeding-associated complications, particularly if coagulopathy is present.
After a subclavian or internal jugular catheter is inserted, a chest x-ray is taken to locate the catheter tip
and to exclude a pneumothorax. To prevent cardiac arrhythmias, clinicians should withdraw catheters in
the right atrium or ventricle until the tip is within the superior vena cava.
To reduce the risk of venous thrombosis and catheter sepsis, clinicians should remove CVCs as soon as
possible. The skin entry site must be cleansed and inspected daily for local infection; the catheter must
be replaced if local or systemic infection occurs. Some clinicians feel it is beneficial to change CVC
catheters at regular intervals (eg, every 5 to 7 days) in patients with sepsis who remain febrile; this
approach may reduce the risk of bacterial colonization of the catheter.
Complications:
CVCs can cause many complications (see
Table 222-5
). Pneumothorax occurs in 1% of patients after CVC insertion. Atrial or ventricular arrhythmias
frequently occur during catheter insertion but are generally self-limited and subside when the guide wire
or catheter is withdrawn from within the heart. The incidence of catheter bacterial colonization without
systemic infection may be as high as 35%, whereas that of true sepsis is 2 to 8%. Rarely, accidental
arterial catheterization requires surgical repair of the artery. Hydrothorax and hydromediastinum may
occur when catheters are positioned extravascularly. Catheter damage to the tricuspid valve, bacterial
endocarditis, and air and catheter embolism occur rarely.
Arterial Catheterization
The use of automated noninvasive BP devices has diminished the use of arterial catheters simply for
pressure monitoring. However, these catheters are beneficial in unstable patients who require minute-tominute pressure measurement and in those requiring frequent ABG sampling. Indications include
refractory shock and respiratory failure. BP is frequently somewhat higher when measured by an arterial
catheter than by sphygmomanometry. Initial upstroke, maximum systolic pressure, and pulse pressure
increase the more distal the point of measurement, whereas the diastolic and mean arterial pressures
decline. Vessel calcification, atherosclerosis, proximal occlusion, and extremity position can all affect the
value of arterial catheter measurements.
[Table 222-5.
Complications Associated with Central Venous Catheters]
Procedure:
Arterial catheters are inserted using sterile technique and a local anesthetic (eg, 1%
lidocaine). They are typically inserted percutaneously into the radial, femoral, axillary, brachial, dorsalis
pedis, and (in children) temporal arteries. The radial artery is most frequently used; insertion into the
femoral artery has fewer complications but should be avoided after vascular bypass surgery (due to
potential injury to the bypass graft) and in patients with distal vascular insufficiency (to avoid precipitating
ischemia). When percutaneous insertion is unsuccessful, a cutdown may be done.
Before radial artery catheterization, Allen's test (digital compression of both ulnar and radial arteries
causes palmar blanching followed by hyperemia when either artery is released) can determine whether
there is sufficient ulnar collateral flow to perfuse the hand in the event
of radial artery occlusion. If
reperfusion does not occur within 8 sec of releasing the compressed ulnar artery, arterial catheterization
should not be done.
Complications:
At all sites, bleeding, infection, thrombosis, and distal embolism may occur. Catheters
===PAGE:2406===
should be removed if signs of local or systemic infection are present.
Radial arterial complications include ischemia of the hand and forearm due to thrombosis or embolism,
intimal dissection, or spasm at the site of catheterization. The risk of arterial thrombosis is higher in small
arteries (explaining the greater incidence in women) and with increased duration of catheterization.
Occluded arteries nearly always recanalize after catheter removal.
Femoral arterial complications include atheroembolism during guide wire insertion. The incidence of
thrombosis and distal ischemia is much lower than that for radial arterial catheterization.
Axillary arterial complications include hematomas, which are infrequent but may require urgent care
because brachial plexus compression can result in permanent peripheral neuropathy. Flushing the axillary
arterial catheter may introduce air or a clot. To avoid neurologic sequelae of these emboli, clinicians
should select the left axillary artery for catheterization (the left axillary artery branches further distal to the
carotid vessels than does the right).
Intraosseous Infusion
Any fluid or substance routinely given IV (including blood products) may be given via a sturdy needle
inserted in the medullary cavity of select long bones. Fluids reach the central circulation as quickly as
with venous infusion. This technique is used almost exclusively in infants and young children, whose
bony cortices are thin and easily penetrated and in whom peripheral and central venous access can be
quite difficult, particularly in shock or cardiac arrest. However, this technique can be used in older patients
with special devices.
Procedure:
A special-purpose intraosseous needle with stylet is used. The preferred insertion sites in
children are the proximal tibia and distal femur; both areas are given a sterile preparation and are
included in the operative field. For tibial insertion, the needle is placed on the broad, flat anteromedial
surface 1 to 2 cm distal to the tibial tubercle. For the femur, the site is 3 cm above the lateral condyle in
the midline. For older children, the medial surface of the distal tibia 2 cm above the medial malleolus may
be easier.
For all sites, the needle is inserted with a rotary, coring motion. Stabilizing the needle shaft at the skin
surface with a gloved fingertip aids control, allowing advancement to be stopped once the cortex is
penetrated. On entering the medullary cavity, the stylet is removed and infusion is begun.
Complications:
Poor control during insertion may result in the needle exiting the opposite cortex; then,
subsequent infusion largely enters the soft tissues, so a site on another bone should be tried.
Osteomyelitis may occur but is uncommon (eg, < 2 to 3%). Growth plate damage has not been reported.
Other complications include bleeding and compartment syndrome.
Oxygen Desaturation
(Hypoxia)
ICU (and other) patients without respiratory disorders may develop hypoxia (O
saturation < 90%) during
a hospital stay. Hypoxia in patients with known respiratory conditions is discussed under those disorders.
Etiology
Numerous disorders cause hypoxia (eg, dyspnea, respiratory failure; see
Table 222-6
); however, acute hypoxia developing in a patient hospitalized with a nonrespiratory illness
usually has a more limited set of causes. These causes can be divided into
• Disorders of ventilation
• Disorders of oxygenation
===PAGE:2407===
Evaluation
Total fluid volume given during the hospital stay and, in particular, the previous 24 h should be
ascertained to identify volume overload. Drugs should be reviewed for sedative administration and
dosage. In significant hypoxia (O
saturation < 85%), treatment begins simultaneously with evaluation.
History:
Very sudden onset dyspnea and hypoxia suggest pulmonary embolus (PE) or pneumothorax
(mainly in a patient on positive pressure ventilation). Fever, chills, and productive cough (or increased
secretions) suggest pneumonia. A history of cardiopulmonary disease (eg, asthma, COPD, heart failure)
may indicate an exacerbation of the disease. Unilateral extremity pain suggests deep venous thrombosis
(DVT) and hence possible
[Table 222-6.
Some Causes of Oxygen Desaturation]
PE. Preceding major trauma or sepsis requiring significant resuscitation suggests acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Preceding chest trauma suggests pulmonary contusion.
Physical examination:
Patency of the airway and strength and adequacy of respirations should be
assessed immediately. For patients on mechanical ventilation, it is important to determine that the
endotracheal tube is not obstructed or dislodged. Unilateral decreased breath sounds with clear lung
fields suggest pneumothorax or right mainstem bronchus intubation; with crackles and fever, pneumonia
is more likely. Distended neck veins with bilateral lung crackles suggest volume overload; distention with
clear lungs and tracheal deviation suggests tension pneumothorax. Bilateral lower-extremity edema
suggests heart failure, but unilateral edema suggests DVT and hence possible PE. Wheezing represents
bronchospasm (typically asthma or allergic reaction, but it occurs rarely with PE or heart failure).
Decreased mental status suggests hypoventilation.
Testing:
Hypoxia is generally recognized initially by pulse oximetry. Patients should have a chest x-ray,
ECG, and ABGs (to confirm hypoxia and evaluate adequacy of ventilation). If diagnosis remains unclear
after these tests, testing for PE ( should be considered. Bronchoscopy may be done in
intubated patients to rule out (and remove) a tracheobronchial plug. Pulmonary artery catheterization may
be needed to rule out heart failure if volume status is unclear.
Treatment
Identified causes are treated as discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL. If hypoventilation persists,
mechanical ventilation via noninvasive positive pressure ventilation or endotracheal intubation is
necessary (. Persistent hypoxia requires supplemental O
.
O
therapy:
The amount of O
given is guided by ABG or pulse oximetry to maintain PaO
between 60
and 80 mm Hg (ie, 92 to 100% saturation) without causing O
toxicity. This level provides satisfactory
tissue O
delivery; because the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve is sigmoidal, increasing PaO
to > 80
mm Hg increases O
delivery very little and is not necessary. The lowest fractional inspired O
(FIO
)
that provides an acceptable PaO
should be provided. O
toxicity is both concentration- and timedependent. Sustained elevations in FIO
> 60% result in inflammatory changes, alveolar infiltration, and,
eventually, pulmonary fibrosis. An FIO
> 60% should be avoided unless necessary for survival. An FIO
< 60% is well tolerated for long periods.
An FIO
< 40% can be given via nasal cannula or simple face mask. A nasal cannula uses an O
flow of
1 to 6 L/min. Because 6 L/min is sufficient to fill the nasopharynx, higher flow rates are of no benefit.
Simple face masks and nasal cannulas do not deliver a precise FIO
because of inconsistent admixture
of O
with room air from leakage and mouth breathing. However, Venturi-type masks can deliver very
accurate O
concentrations.
An FIO
> 40% requires use of an O
mask with a reservoir that is inflated by O
from the supply. In the
===PAGE:2408===
typical nonrebreather mask, the patient inhales 100% O
from the reservoir, but during exhalation, a
rubber flap valve diverts exhaled breath to the environment, preventing admixture of CO
and water
vapor with the inspired O
. Nonetheless, because of leakage, such masks deliver an FIO
of at most 80
to 90%.
Oliguria
Oliguria is urine output < 500 mL in 24 h in an adult or < 0.5 mL/kg/h in an adult or child (< 1 mL/kg/h in
neonates).
Etiology
Causes of oliguria are typically divided into 3 categories:
• Prerenal (blood-flow related)
• Renal (intrinsic kidney disorders)
• Postrenal (outlet obstruction)
There are numerous such entities (, but a limited number cause most cases of acute oliguria
in hospitalized patients (see
Table 222-7
).
Evaluation
History:
In communicative patients, a marked urge to void suggests outlet obstruction, whereas thirst and
no urge to void suggest volume depletion. In obtunded (and presumably catheterized) patients, a sudden
decrease in urine flow in a normotensive patient suggests catheter occlusion (eg, caused by a clot or
kinking) or displacement, whereas a gradual decrease is more likely due to acute tubular necrosis (ATN)
or a prerenal cause.
Recent medical events are helpful; they include review of recent BP readings, surgical procedures, and
drug and x-ray contrast administration. Recent surgery or trauma may be consistent with hypovolemia. A
severe crush injury, deep electrical burn, or heatstroke suggests rhabdomyolysis.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed, particularly for hypotension, tachycardia, or both
(suggesting hypovolemia or sepsis) and fever (suggesting sepsis). Signs of focal infection and cardiac
failure should be sought. Palpable bladder distention indicates an outlet obstruction. Dark brown urine
suggests myoglobinuria.
Testing:
In all catheterized patients (and those with an ileal conduit), patency should be ascertained by
irrigation before further testing; this approach may solve the problem. In many of the remaining patients,
etiology (eg, shock, sepsis) is clinically apparent. In others, particularly those with multiple disorders,
testing is needed to differentiate prerenal from renal (ATN) causes. In patients without a urinary catheter,
placement of a catheter should be considered; this will diagnose and treat obstruction and provide
continuous monitoring of output.
[Table 222-7.
Some Causes of Oliguria]
If a central venous or pulmonary artery catheter is in place, volume status (and with a pulmonary artery
catheter, cardiac output) can be determined by measuring central venous pressure ( or
pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (. However, many physicians would not insert such a
line for acute oliguria unless other indications were present. An alternative in the patient without signs of
volume overload is to rapidly
give a test bolus of IV fluid, 500 mL 0.9% saline (20 mL/kg in children); an
increase in output suggests a prerenal cause.
===PAGE:2409===
Laboratory tests should be done. Serum electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine are standard; often urine Na
and creatinine concentration are also done. Prerenal conditions typically result in a BUN/creatinine ratio >
20, vs ≤ 10 in both normal states and ATN. In prerenal conditions, urine Na is < 20 mEq/L as the kidney
attempts to retain maximum Na to preserve intravascular volume. In ATN, urine Na is usually > 40 mEq/L.
The fractional Na excretion (FE
Na
) is a more accurate representation of the kidney's ability to retain Na
and is defined as
A ratio < 1 indicates the kidney is able to reabsorb Na, and hence the problem is prerenal. A ratio > 3
indicates a probable renal cause.
Treatment
Identified causes are treated; outflow obstruction is corrected, volume is replaced, cardiac output is
normalized. Nephrotoxic drugs are stopped, and another drug is substituted. Hypotension should be
avoided to prevent further renal insults. Patients with renal failure that cannot be reversed may require
renal replacement therapy (eg, continuous venovenous hemofiltration or hemodialysis).
Agitation, Confusion, and Neuromuscular Blockade
ICU patients are often agitated, confused, and uncomfortable. They can become delirious (ICU delirium).
These symptoms are unpleasant for patients and often interfere with care and safety. At worst, they may
be life threatening (eg, patients dislodge the endotracheal tube or IV lines).
Etiology
In a critically ill patient, agitation, confusion, or both can result from the original medical condition, from
medical complications, or from treatment or the ICU environment (see
Table 222-8
). It is important to remember that neuromuscular blockade merely masks pain and agitation, it
does not prevent it; paralyzed patients may be suffering significantly.
Evaluation
The chart should be reviewed and the patient examined before sedatives are ordered for "agitation."
History:
The presenting injury or illness is a prime causative suspect. Nursing notes and discussion with
personnel may identify downward trends in BP and urine output (suggesting CNS hypoperfusion) and
dysfunctional sleep patterns. Drug administration records are reviewed to identify inadequate or
excessive analgesia and sedation.
[Table 222-8.
Some Causes of Agitation or Confusion in Critical Care Patients]
Past medical history is reviewed for potential causes. Underlying liver disease suggests possible hepatic
encephalopathy. Known substance dependency or abuse suggests a withdrawal syndrome.
Awake, coherent patients are asked what is troubling them and are questioned specifically about pain,
dyspnea, and previously unreported substance dependency.
Physical examination:
O
saturation < 90% suggests a hypoxic etiology. Low BP and urine output
suggest CNS hypoperfusion. Fever and tachycardia suggest sepsis or delirium tremens. Neck stiffness
suggests meningitis, although this finding may be difficult to demonstrate in an agitated patient. Focal
findings on neurologic examination suggest stroke, hemorrhage, or increased intracranial pressure (ICP).
The degree of agitation can be quantified using a scale such as the Riker Sedation-Agitation Scale (see
Table 222-9
) or the Ramsay Sedation Scale. Use of such scales allows better consistency between
observers and the identification of trends. Patients who are under neuromuscular blockade are difficult to
===PAGE:2410===
evaluate because they may be highly agitated and uncomfortable despite appearing motionless. It is
typically necessary to allow paralysis to wear off periodically (eg, daily) so that the patient can be
assessed.
Testing:
Identified abnormalities (eg, hypoxia, hypotension, fever) should be clarified further with
appropriate testing. Head CT need not routinely be done unless focal neurologic findings are present or
no other etiology is found. A bispectral index (BIS) monitor may be helpful in determining the level of
sedation/agitation of patients under neuromuscular blockade.
Treatment
Underlying conditions (eg, hypoxia, shock, drugs) should be addressed. The environment should be
optimized (eg, darkness, quiet, and minimal sleep interruption at night) as much as is compatible with
medical care. Clocks, calendars, outside windows, and TV or radio programs also help connect the
patient with the world, lessening confusion. Family presence and consistent nursing personnel may be
calming.
Drug treatment is dictated by the most vexing symptoms. Pain is treated with analgesics; anxiety and
insomnia are treated with sedatives; and psychosis and delirium are treated with small doses of an
antipsychotic drug. Intubation may be needed when sedative and analgesic requirements are high
enough to jeopardize the airway or respiratory drive. Many drugs are available; generally, short-acting
drugs are preferred for patients who need frequent neurologic examination or who are being weaned to
extubation.
Analgesia:
Pain should be treated with appropriate doses of IV opioids; conscious patients with painful
conditions (eg, fractures, surgical incisions) who are unable to communicate should be assumed to have
pain and receive analgesics accordingly. Mechanical ventilation is somewhat uncomfortable, and patients
generally should receive a combination of opioid and amnestic sedative drugs. Fentanyl is the opioid of
choice because of its potency, short duration of action, and minimal cardiovascular effects. A common
regimen can be 30 to 100
μ
g/h of fentanyl; individual requirements are highly variable.
Sedation:
Despite analgesia, many patients remain sufficiently agitated as to require sedation. A
sedative can also provide
[Table 222-9.
Riker Sedation-Agitation Scale]
patient comfort at a lower dose of analgesic. Benzodiazepines (eg, lorazepam, midazolam) are most
common, but propofol, a sedative-hypnotic drug, may be used. A common regimen for sedation is
lorazepam 1 to 2 mg IV q 1 to 2 h or a continuous infusion at 1 to 2 mg/h if the patient is intubated. These
drugs pose risks of respiratory depression, hypotension, delirium, and prolonged physiologic effects in
some patients. Long-acting benzodiazepines such as diazepam, flurazepam, and chlordiazepoxide should
be avoided in the elderly. Antipsychotics with less anticholinergic effect, such as haloperidol 1 to 3 mg IV,
may work best when combined with benzodiazepines.
Neuromuscular blockade:
For intubated patients, neuromuscular blockade is
not
a substitute for
sedation; it only removes visible manifestations of the problem (agitation) without correcting it. However,
neuromuscular blockade may be required during tests (eg CT, MRI) or procedures (eg, central line
placement) that require patients to be motionless or in patients who cannot be ventilated despite
adequate analgesia and sedation. Prolonged neuromuscular blockade should be avoided unless patients
have severe lung injury and cannot do the work of breathing safely. Use for > 1 to 2 days may lead to
prolonged weakness, particularly when corticosteroids are concomitantly given. Common regimens
include vecuronium (continuous infusion as directed by stimulation).
===PAGE:2411===
Chapter 223. Cardiac Arrest
Introduction
Cardiac arrest is the terminal event in any fatal disorder. It may also occur suddenly (defined as within 24
h of onset of symptoms in a previously functioning person) and, as such, occurs outside the hospital in
about 400,000 people/yr in the US, with a 90% mortality.
Respiratory arrest and cardiac arrest are distinct, but without treatment, one inevitably leads to the other.
(See also respiratory failure in
Chapter 225
, dyspnea on p.
, and hypoxia )
Etiology
In adults
, sudden cardiac arrest results primarily from cardiac disease (of all types, but especially
coronary artery disease). In a significant percentage of patients, sudden cardiac arrest is the first
manifestation of heart disease. Other causes include circulatory shock due to noncardiac disorders
(especially pulmonary embolism, GI hemorrhage, or trauma), ventilatory failure, and metabolic disturbance
(including drug overdose).
In children
, cardiac causes of sudden cardiac arrest are much less common (< 15 to 20%). Instead,
predominant causes include trauma, poisoning, and various respiratory disorders (eg, airway obstruction,
smoke inhalation, drowning, infection, sudden infant death syndrome).
Pathophysiology
Cardiac arrest causes global ischemia with consequences at the cellular level that adversely affect organ
function after resuscitation. The main consequences involve direct cellular damage and edema formation.
Edema is particularly harmful in the brain, which has minimal room to expand, and often results in
increased intracranial pressure and corresponding decreased cerebral perfusion postresuscitation. A
significant proportion of successfully resuscitated patients have short-term or long-term cerebral
dysfunction manifested by altered alertness (from mild confusion to coma), seizures, or both.
Decreased ATP production leads to loss of membrane integrity with efflux of K and influx of Na and Ca.
Excess Na causes cellular edema. Excess Ca damages mitochondria (depressing ATP production),
increases nitric oxide production (leading to formation of damaging free radicals), and, in certain
circumstances, activates proteases that further damage cells.
Abnormal ion flux also results in depolarization of neurons, releasing neurotransmitters, some of which
are damaging (eg, glutamate activates a specific Ca channel, worsening intracellular Ca overload).
Inflammatory mediators (eg, IL-1B, tumor necrosis factorα
) are elaborated; some of them may cause
microvascular thrombosis and loss of vascular integrity with further edema formation. Some mediators
trigger apoptosis, resulting in accelerated cell death.
Symptoms and Signs
In critically or terminally ill patients, cardiac arrest is often preceded by a period of clinical
deterioration
with rapid, shallow breathing, arterial hypotension, and a progressive decrease in mental alertness. In
other cases of cardiac arrest, collapse occurs without warning, occasionally accompanied by a brief (< 5
sec) seizure.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Cardiac monitor
• Sometimes testing for cause (eg, echocardiography, chest x-ray, or chest ultrasonography)
===PAGE:2412===
Diagnosis is by clinical findings of apnea, pulselessness, and unconsciousness. Arterial pressure is not
measurable. Pupils dilate and become unreactive to light after about 1 to 2 min.
A cardiac monitor should be applied; it may indicate ventricular fibrillation (VF), ventricular tachycardia
(VT), or asystole. Sometimes a perfusing rhythm (eg, extreme bradycardia) is present; this rhythm may
represent true pulseless electrical activity (electromechanical dissociation) or extreme hypotension with
failure to detect a pulse.
The patient is evaluated for potentially treatable causes, such as hypoxia, massive volume loss, cardiac
tamponade, tension pneumothorax, or massive pulmonary embolus. Unfortunately, many causes are not
identified during CPR. Clinical examination, chest ultrasonography, and chest x-ray can detect tension
pneumothorax. Cardiac ultrasonography can detect cardiac contractions and recognize cardiac
tamponade, extreme hypovolemia (empty heart), right ventricular overload suggesting pulmonary
embolism, and focal wall motion abnormalities suggesting MI.
Prognosis
Survival to hospital discharge, particularly neurologically intact survival, is a more meaningful outcome
than simply return of spontaneous circulation.
Survival rates vary significantly; favorable factors include
• Witnessed arrest
• In-hospital location (particularly a monitored unit)
• Early and effective bystander-initiated CPR
• Initial rhythm of VF or VT
• Early defibrillation (of VT or VF after initial chest compression)
• Hypothermia (eg, submersion in ice water) preceding onset of cardiac arrest
If many factors are favorable (eg, VF is witnessed in an ICU or emergency department), about 20% of
patients survive to hospital discharge. When factors are uniformly unfavorable (eg, patient in asystole
after unwitnessed, out-of-hospital arrest), survival is unlikely. Overall, reported survival after out-ofhospital arrest ranges between 1% and 70%; the wide range reflects reporting differences and inclusion
criteria as well as differences in system effectiveness. About 8 to 30% of survivors have neurologic
dysfunction, and one third return to prearrest status. In-hospital arrest survival is 26%.
Treatment
• CPR (see below)
• When possible, treatment of primary cause
• Postresuscitative care
Rapid intervention is essential.
CPR is an organized, sequential response to cardiac arrest; rapid initiation of chest compressions and
early defibrillation of patients who are in VF or VT (more commonly adults) are the keys to success.
In children, who most often have asphyxial causes of cardiac arrest, the presenting rhythm is typically a
bradyarrhythmia followed by asystole. However, about 15 to 20% of children (particularly when sudden
cardiac arrest has not been preceded by respiratory symptoms) present with VT or VF and thus also
===PAGE:2413===
require prompt defibrillation. The incidence of VF as the initial recorded rhythm increases in children > 12
yr.
Primary causes must be promptly treated. If no treatable conditions are present but cardiac motion is
detected or pulses are detected by Doppler, severe circulatory shock is identified, and IV fluid (eg, 1 L
0.9% saline, 5% serum albumin, whole blood, or a combination for blood loss) is given. If response to IV
fluid is inadequate, most clinicians give one or more vasopressor drugs (eg, norepinephrine, epinephrine,
dopamine, vasopressin); however, there is no firm proof that they improve survival.
In addition to treatment of cause, postresuscitative care typically includes methods to optimize O
delivery, antiplatelet therapy, and therapeutic hypothermia.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
(For neonatal resuscitation, see p.
.)
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is an organized, sequential response to cardiac arrest, including
•
Recognition of absent breathing and circulation
• Basic life support with chest compressions and rescue breathing
• Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) with definitive airway and rhythm control
• Postresuscitative care
Prompt initiation of chest compression and early defibrillation (when indicated) are the keys to success.
Speed, efficiency, and proper application of CPR determine successful outcome; the rare exception is
profound hypothermia caused by cold water immersion, when successful resuscitation may be
accomplished even after prolonged arrest (up to 60 min).
Overview:
Guidelines for health care professionals from the American Heart Association are followed
(see
Fig. 223-1
). If a person has collapsed with possible cardiac arrest, a rescuer first establishes
unresponsiveness and confirms absence of breathing or the presence of only gasping respirations. Then,
the rescuer calls for help. Anyone answering is directed to activate the emergency response system (or
appropriate in-hospital resuscitation personnel) and, if possible, obtain a defibrillator. If no one responds,
the rescuer first activates the emergency response system and then begins basic life support by giving 30
chest compressions at a rate of 100/min and then opening the airway (lifting the chin and tilting back the
forehead) and giving 2 rescue breaths. The cycle of compressions and breaths is continued (see
Table 223-1
) without interruption; preferably each rescuer is relieved every 2 min. When a defibrillator
(manual or automated) becomes available, a person in ventricular fibrillation (VF) or pulseless ventricular
tachycardia (VT) is given an unsynchronized shock. If the cardiac arrest is witnessed and a defibrillator is
on the scene, a person in VF or VT is immediately defibrillated; early defibrillation may promptly convert
VF or pulseless VT to a perfusing rhythm. Defibrillation is further discussed elsewhere.
For children, unless collapse is sudden and witnessed, the first step if no one answers the call for help is
to do 5 cycles of CPR before activating the emergency response system.
Airway and Breathing
In a change from previous recommendations, opening the airway is given 2nd priority ( after
beginning chest compressions.
Mouth-to-mouth (adults and children) or combined mouth-to-mouth-and-nose (infants) rescue breathing or
bag-valve-mask ventilation is begun for asphyxial cardiac arrest. If available, an oropharyngeal airway
may be inserted. Cricoid pressure is no longer recommended.
===PAGE:2414===
If abdominal distention develops, the airway is rechecked for patency and the amount of air delivered
during rescue breathing is reduced. Nasogastric intubation to relieve gastric distention is delayed until
suction equipment is available because regurgitation with aspiration of gastric contents may occur during
insertion. If marked gastric distention interferes with ventilation and cannot be corrected by the above
methods, patients are positioned on their side, the epigastrium is compressed, and the airway is cleared.
When qualified providers are present, an advanced airway (endotracheal tube or supraglottic device) is
placed
without interruption of chest compression
as described under Airway Establishment and Control
(. A breath is given every 6 to 8 sec (8 to 10 breaths/min) without interrupting chest
compression. However, chest compression and defibrillation take precedence over endotracheal
intubation. Unless highly experienced providers are available, endotracheal intubation may be delayed in
favor of ventilation with bag-valve-mask, laryngeal mask airway, or similar device.
Circulation
Chest compression:
In witnessed cardiac arrest, defibrillation, if available immediately, precedes chest
compression. In an unresponsive patient whose collapse was unwitnessed, the trained rescuer should
immediately begin external (closed chest) cardiac compression, followed by rescue breathing. Chest
compressions must be interrupted as little as possible (eg, for intubation, central IV catheter placement, or
transport). A compression cycle should consist of 50% compression and 50% release. Mechanical chest
compression devices are available; these devices are no more effective than properly executed manual
compressions but can minimize effects of performance error and fatigue and can be helpful during patient
transport.
Ideally, external cardiac compression produces a palpable pulse with each compression, although cardiac
output is only 20 to 30% of normal. However, palpation of pulses during chest compression is difficult,
even for experienced clinicians, and often unreliable. End-tidal CO
monitoring provides a better estimate
of cardiac output during chest compression; patients with inadequate perfusion have little venous return
to the lungs and
[Fig. 223-1.
Adult comprehensive emergency cardiac care.]
[Table 223-1.
CPR Techniques for Health Care Practitioners]
hence a low end-tidal CO
. Normal-sized, light-responsive pupils signal adequate brain circulation and
oxygenation. Light-responsive but dilated pupils may indicate inadequate cerebral oxygenation, although
brain injury may not have occurred. However, persistently dilated, nonreactive pupils do not prove brain
injury or death because adrenergic drugs, especially epinephrine and atropine, or cataracts may modify
pupil size and reaction. Restoration of spontaneous breathing or eye opening indicates restoration of
spontaneous circulation (ROSC).
Open-chest cardiac compression may be effective, but its use is restricted to patients after penetrating
chest injuries, shortly after cardiac surgery (ie, within 48 h), in cases of cardiac tamponade, and most
especially after cardiac arrest in the operating room when the patient's chest is already open. However,
thoracotomy requires training and experience and is best done only within these limited indications.
Complications of chest compression:
Laceration of the liver is a rare but potentially serious
(sometimes fatal) complication and is usually caused by compressing the abdomen below the sternum.
Rupture of the stomach (particularly if the stomach is distended with air) is also a rare complication.
Delayed rupture of the spleen is very rare. An occasional complication, however, is regurgitation followed
by aspiration of gastric contents, causing life-threatening aspiration pneumonia in resuscitated patients.
Costochondral separation and fractured ribs often cannot be avoided because it is important to compress
the chest deeply enough to produce sufficient blood flow. Fractures are quite rare in children because of
the flexibility of the chest wall. Bone marrow emboli to the lungs have rarely been reported after external
cardiac compression, but there is no clear evidence that they contribute to mortality. Lung injury is rare,
but pneumothorax after a penetrating rib fracture may occur. Serious myocardial injury caused by
compression is very unlikely, with the possible exception of injury to a preexisting ventricular aneurysm.
===PAGE:2415===
Concern for these injuries should not deter the rescuer from doing CPR.
Monitor and IV:
ECG monitoring is established to identify the underlying cardiac rhythm. An IV line is
started; 2 lines minimize the risk of losing IV access during CPR. Large-bore peripheral lines in the
antecubital veins are preferred. In adults, if a peripheral line cannot be established, a subclavian or
internal jugular central line can be placed provided it can be done without stopping chest compression
(often difficult). Intraosseous and femoral lines ( are the preferred alternatives, especially in
children. Femoral vein catheters (preferably long catheters advanced centrally) are practical because
CPR does not need to be stopped and they have less potential for lethal complications; however, they
may have a lower rate of successful placement because no discrete femoral arterial pulsations are
available to guide insertion.
The type and volume of fluids or drugs given depend on the clinical circumstances. Usually, IV 0.9%
saline is given slowly (sufficient only to keep an IV line open); vigorous volume replacement (crystalloid
and colloid solutions, blood) is required only when arrest results from hypovolemia (.
Defibrillation
The most common rhythm in witnessed adult cardiac arrest is VF; rapid conversion to a perfusing rhythm
is essential. Pulseless VT is treated the same as VF.
A precordial thump is advised only when a defibrillator is not available. A forceful precordial thump can
rarely convert VF or VT to a functional cardiac rhythm, and there is no evidence of deleterious effect (eg,
converting VT to VF) in the cardiac arrest setting. However, it is not recommended for children. One or 2
blows can be delivered to the junction of the middle and lower third of the sternum with a clenched fist
held 20 to 25 cm above the chest.
Prompt direct current cardioversion is more effective than antiarrhythmic drugs; however, the success of
defibrillation is time dependent, with about a 10% decline in success after each minute of VF (or pulseless
VT). Automated external defibrillators (AEDs) allow minimally trained rescuers to treat VT or VF. Their use
by first responders (police and fire services) and their prominent availability in public locations has
increased the likelihood of resuscitation.
Defibrillating paddles or AED pads are placed between the clavicle and the 2nd intercostal space along
the right sternal border and over the 5th or 6th intercostal space at the apex of the heart. Conventional
defibrillator paddles are used with conducting paste; pads have conductive gel incorporated into them.
Only 1 initial countershock is now advised (the previous recommendation was 3 stacked shocks), after
which chest compression is resumed. Energy level for biphasic defibrillators is between 120 and 200
joules (2 joules/kg in children); monophasic defibrillators are set at 360 joules. Postshock rhythm is not
checked until after 2 min of chest compression. Subsequent shocks are delivered at the same or higher
energy level (maximum 360 joules, 2 to 4 joules/kg in children). Patients remaining in VF or VT receive
continued chest compression and ventilation and optional drug therapy as discussed below.
Special Circumstances
In accidental electrical shock, rescuers must be certain that the patient is no longer in contact with the
electrical source to avoid shocking themselves. Use of nonmetallic grapples or rods and grounding of the
rescuer allows for safe removal of the patient before starting CPR.
In near drowning, rescue breathing may be started in shallow water, although chest compression is not
likely to be effectively done until the patient is placed horizontally on a firm surface, such as a surfboard
or float.
If cardiac arrest follows traumatic injury, airway opening maneuvers and a brief period of external
ventilation after clearing the airway have the highest priority because airway obstruction is the most likely
treatable cause of arrest. To minimize cervical spine injury, jaw thrust, but not head tilt and chin lift, is
advised. Other survivable causes of traumatic cardiac arrest include cardiac tamponade and tension
pneumothorax, for which immediate needle decompression is lifesaving. However, most patients with
===PAGE:2416===
traumatic cardiac arrest have severe hypovolemia due to blood loss (for which chest compressions may
be ineffective) or nonsurvivable brain injuries.
Drugs for ACLS
Despite widespread and long-standing use, no drug or drug combination has been definitively shown to
increase survival to hospital discharge in patients with cardiac arrest. Some drugs do seem to improve the
likelihood of ROSC and thus may reasonably be given (for dosing, including pediatric, see
Table 223-2
). Drug therapy for shock and cardiac arrest continues to be researched.
In a patient with a peripheral IV line, drug administration is followed by a fluid bolus ("wide open" IV in
adults; 3 to 5 mL in young children) to flush the drug into the central circulation. In a patient without IV or
intraosseous access, atropine and epinephrine, when indicated, may be given via the endotracheal tube
at 2 to 2.5 times the IV dose. During administration of a drug via endotracheal tube, compressions should
be briefly stopped.
First-line drugs:
First-line drugs include
• Epinephrine or vasopressin
Epinephrine has been the main drug used in cardiac arrest, although, as noted previously, its benefit is
increasingly challenged. It may be given q 3 to 5 min. Epinephrine has combined
α
-adrenergic and
β
-
adrenergic effects. The
α
-adrenergic effects may augment coronary diastolic pressure, thereby increasing
subendocardial perfusion during chest compressions. Epinephrine also increases the likelihood of
successful defibrillation. However,
β
-adrenergic effects may be detrimental because they increase O
requirements (especially of the heart) and cause vasodilation. Intracardiac injection of epinephrine is not
recommended because, in addition to interrupting precordial compression, pneumothorax,
[Table 223-2.
Drugs for Resuscitation*]
coronary artery laceration, and cardiac tamponade may occur.
A single dose of vasopressin 40 units, which has a duration of activity of 40 min, is an alternative to
epinephrine (adults only); it has not been proved more effective than epinephrine.
Amiodarone 300 mg can be given once if defibrillation is unsuccessful after epinephrine or vasopressin,
followed by 1 dose of 150 mg. It is also of potential value if VT or VF recurs after successful defibrillation;
a lower dose is given over 10 min followed by a continuous infusion. There is no persuasive proof that it
increases survival to hospital discharge.
Other drugs:
A range of additional drugs may be useful in specific settings.
Atropine sulfate is a vagolytic drug that increases heart rate and conduction through the atrioventricular
node. It is given for symptomatic bradyarrhythmias and high-degree atrioventricular nodal block. It is no
longer recommended for asystole or pulseless electrical activity.
Ca chloride is recommended for patients with hyperkalemia, hypermagnesemia, hypocalcemia, or Ca
channel blocker toxicity. In others, because intracellular Ca is already higher than normal, additional Ca is
likely to be detrimental. Because cardiac arrest in patients on renal dialysis is often a result of or
accompanied by hyperkalemia, these patients may benefit from a trial of Ca if bedside K determination is
unavailable. Caution is necessary because Ca exacerbates digitalis toxicity and can cause cardiac arrest.
Mg sulfate has not been shown to improve outcome in randomized clinical studies. However, it may be
helpful in patients with torsades de pointes or known or suspected Mg deficiency (ie, alcoholics, patients
with protracted diarrhea).
Procainamide is a 2nd-line drug for treatment of refractory VF or VT. However, procainamide is not
recommended for pulseless arrest in children.
===PAGE:2417===
Phenytoin may rarely be used to treat VF or VT, but only when VF or VT is due to digitalis toxicity and is
refractory to other drugs. A dose of 50 mg/min is given until rhythm improves or the total dose reaches 18
mg/kg.
NaHCO
(sodium bicarbonate) is no longer recommended unless cardiac arrest is caused by
hyperkalemia, hypermagnesemia, or tricyclic antidepressant overdose with complex ventricular
arrhythmias. In children, NaHCO
may be considered when cardiac arrest is prolonged (> 10 min); it is
given only if there is good ventilation. When NaHCO
is used, arterial pH should be monitored before
infusion and after each 50-mEq dose (1 to 2 mEq/kg in children).
Lidocaine and bretylium are no longer recommended for management of cardiac arrest.
Dysrhythmia Treatment
VF or pulseless VT
is treated with one direct current shock, preferably with biphasic
waveform,
immediately after witnessed arrest and after 2 min of chest compression in patients with unwitnessed
arrest; chest compression is interrupted as little as possible. Recommended energy levels vary: 120 to
200 joules for biphasic waveform and 360 joules for monophasic. If this treatment is unsuccessful,
epinephrine 1 mg IV is administered and repeated q 3 to 5 min. Alternatively, vasopressin 40 U IV may be
given only once (not in children) although its value is questioned. Cardioversion at the same energy level
is attempted 1 min after each drug administration. If VF persists, amiodarone 300 mg IV is given. Then, if
VF/VT recurs, 150 mg is given followed by infusion of 1 mg/min q 6 h, then 0.5 mg/min. Current versions
of AEDs provide a pediatric cable that effectively reduces the energy delivered to children. (For pediatric
energy levels, see
Table 223-3
; for drug doses, see
Table 223-2
.)
Asystole can be mimicked by a loose or disconnected monitor lead; thus, monitor connections should be
checked and rhythm viewed in an alternative lead. If asystole is confirmed and heart block is suspected,
transcutaneous pacing is done and the patient is given epinephrine 1 mg IV repeated q 3 to 5 min and
atropine 1 mg IV repeated q 3 to 5 min to a total dose of 0.04 mg/kg. Electrical pacing is not successful in
other settings. Pacing and atropine, however, are contraindicated in children with asystole. Defibrillation
of apparent asystole (because it "might be fine VF") is discouraged because electrical shocks injure the
nonperfused heart.
Pulseless electrical activity is circulatory collapse that occurs despite satisfactory electrical complexes on
the ECG. Patients with pulseless electrical activity receive 500- to 1000-mL (20 mL/kg) infusion of 0.9%
saline. Epinephrine may be given in amounts of 0.5 to 1.0 mg IV repeated q 3 to 5 min. If the heart rate is
< 60/min, atropine 0.5 to 1 mg IV is given. Cardiac tamponade can cause pulseless electrical activity, but
this disorder usually occurs in patients after thoracotomy and in patients with known pericardial effusion
or major chest trauma. In such settings, immediate pericardiocentesis or thoracotomy is done (see
Fig. 216-2
. Tamponade is rarely an occult cause of cardiac arrest but, if suspected, can be
confirmed by ultrasonography or, if ultrasonography is unavailable, pericardiocentesis.
Termination of Resuscitation
CPR must be continued until the cardiopulmonary system is stabilized, the patient is pronounced dead, or
a lone rescuer is physically unable to continue. If cardiac arrest occurs in hypothermic patients, CPR
should be continued until the body is rewarmed to 34° C.
The decision to pronounce death is somewhat subjective, taking into account duration of arrest before
treatment, age, prior medical conditions, and other factors but typically is made after failure to establish
spontaneous circulation after 30 to 45 min of CPR and ACLS measures.
Postresuscitative Care
Restoration of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) is only an intermediate goal in resuscitation. Only 3 to 8%
of patients with ROSC survive to hospital discharge. To maximize the likelihood of a good outcome,
===PAGE:2418===
clinicians must manage underlying conditions. In adults, it is particularly important to recognize MI ( and institute reperfusion therapy (preferably percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty)
promptly. (CAUTION:
Thrombolysis after aggressive CPR sometimes causes cardiac tamponade, and
therefore angioplasty is preferred.
)
Postresuscitation laboratory studies include ABG, CBC, and blood chemistries, including electrolytes,
glucose, BUN, creatinine, and cardiac markers. (Creatine phosphokinase is usually elevated because of
skeletal muscle damage caused by CPR.) Arterial PaO
should be kept near normal values (80 to 100
mm Hg). Hct should be maintained at ≥ 30, and glucose at < 200 mg/dL; electrolytes, especially K, should
be within the normal range.
BP support:
Current recommendations are to maintain a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of > 80 mm Hg in
older adults or > 60 mm Hg in younger and previously healthy patients. In patients known to be
hypertensive, a reasonable target is systolic BP 30 mm Hg below prearrest level. MAP is best measured
with an intra-arterial catheter. Use of a flow-directed pulmonary artery catheter for hemodynamic
monitoring has been largely discarded.
BP support includes
• IV 0.9% saline
• Sometimes inotropic or vasopressor drugs
• Rarely intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation
Patients with low MAP and low central venous pressure should have IV fluid challenge with 0.9% saline
infused in 250-mL increments.
Although use of inotropic and vasopressor drugs is not proved to enhance long-term survival, older adults
with moderately low MAP (70 to 80 mm Hg) and normal or high central
[Table 223-3.
Guide to Pediatric Resuscitation—Mechanical Measures]
venous pressure may receive an infusion of an inotrope (eg, dobutamine started at 2 to 5
μ
g/kg/min).
Alternatively, amrinone or milrinone is used (see
Table 223-2
). If this therapy is ineffective, the inotrope
and vasoconstrictor dopamine may be considered. Alternatives are epinephrine and the peripheral
vasoconstrictors norepinephrine and phenylephrine (see
Table 223-2
). However, vasoactive drugs should
be used at the minimal dose necessary to achieve low-normal MAP because they may increase vascular
resistance and decrease organ perfusion, especially in the mesenteric bed. They also increase the
workload of the heart at a time when its capability is decreased because of postresuscitation myocardial
dysfunction. If MAP remains < 70 mm Hg in patients who may have sustained an MI, intra-aortic balloon
counterpulsation should be considered. Patients with normal MAP and high central venous pressure may
improve with either inotropic therapy or afterload reduction with nitroprusside or nitroglycerin.
Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation can assist low-output circulatory states due to left ventricular pump
failure that is refractory to drugs. A balloon catheter is introduced via the femoral artery, percutaneously or
by arteriotomy, retrograde into the thoracic aorta just distal to the left subclavian artery. The balloon
inflates during each diastole, augmenting coronary artery perfusion, and deflates during systole,
decreasing afterload. Its primary value is as a temporizing measure when the cause of shock is potentially
correctable by surgery or percutaneous intervention (eg, acute MI with major coronary obstruction, acute
mitral insufficiency, ventricular septal defect).
Dysrhythmia treatment:
Although VF or VT may recur after resuscitation, prophylactic antiarrhythmic
drugs do not improve survival and are no longer routinely used. However, patients manifesting such
rhythms may be treated with procainamide or amiodarone (.
Postresuscitation rapid supraventricular tachycardias occur frequently because of high levels of
β
-
adrenergic catecholamines (both endogenous and exogenous) during cardiac arrest and resuscitation.
===PAGE:2419===
These rhythms should be treated if extreme, prolonged, or associated with hypotension or signs of
coronary ischemia. An esmolol IV infusion is given, beginning at 50
μ
g/kg/min.
Patients who had arrest caused by VF or VT not associated with acute MI are candidates for an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). Current ICDs are implanted similarly to pacemakers and have
intracardiac leads and sometimes subcutaneous electrodes. They can sense arrhythmias and deliver
either cardioversion or cardiac pacing as indicated.
Neurologic support:
Between 8% and 30% of adults have CNS dysfunction after resuscitation from
cardiac arrest. Hypoxic brain injury is a result of ischemic damage and cerebral edema (see also
Pathophysiology . Both damage and recovery may evolve over 48 to 72 h after resuscitation.
Maintenance of oxygenation and cerebral perfusion pressure (avoiding hypotension) may reduce cerebral
complications. Both hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia may damage the postischemic brain and should be
treated.
Additionally, there is now persuasive evidence of the benefits of inducing mild hypothermia. Surface
cooling with ice packs can reduce core body temperature to between 30° and 34° C. Alternative methods
of cooling include cardiopulmonary bypass or intravascular cooling devices.
Numerous pharmacologic treatments, including free radical scavengers, antioxidants, glutamate inhibitors,
and Ca channel blockers, are of theoretic benefit; many have been successful in animal models, but none
have proved effective in human trials.
CPR in Infants and Children
Despite the use of CPR, mortality rates for cardiac arrest are 80 to 97% for infants and children. The
mortality rate is almost 25% for respiratory arrest alone. Neurologic outcome is often severely
compromised.
About 50 to 65% of children requiring CPR are < 1 yr; of these, most are < 6 mo. About 6% of neonates
require resuscitation at delivery (; the incidence increases significantly if birth weight is <
1500 g.
Standardized outcome guidelines should be followed in reporting outcomes of CPR in children; eg, the
modified Pittsburgh Outcome Categories Scale reflects cerebral and overall performance (see
Table 223-4
).
Major Differences Between Pediatric and Adult CPR
Prearrest:

Bradycardia in a distressed child is a sign of impending cardiac arrest
. Neonates, infants,
and young children are more likely to develop bradycardia caused by hypoxemia, whereas older children
initially tend to have tachycardia. An infant or child with a heart rate < 60/min and signs of poor perfusion
that do not rise with ventilatory support should have cardiac compressions (see
Fig. 223-2
). Bradycardia secondary to heart block is unusual.
[Table 223-4.
Pediatric Cerebral Performance Category Scale*]
After adequate oxygenation and ventilation, epinephrine is the drug of choice.
BP should be measured with an appropriatesized cuff, but direct invasive arterial BP monitoring is
mandatory in severely compromised children.
Because BP varies with age, an easy guideline to remember the lower limits of normal for systolic BP (<
5th percentile) by age is as follows: < 1 mo, 60 mm Hg; 1 mo to 1 yr, 70 mm Hg; > 1 yr, 70 + (2 × age in
yr). Thus, in a 5-yr-old child, hypotension would be defined by a BP of < 80 mm Hg (70 + [2 × 5]). Of
significant importance is that children maintain BP longer because of stronger compensatory mechanisms
(increased heart rate, increased systemic vascular resistance). Once hypotension occurs,
===PAGE:2420===
cardiorespiratory arrest may rapidly follow. All effort should be made to start treatment when
compensatory signs of shock (eg, increased heart rate, cool extremities, capillary refill > 2 sec, poor
peripheral pulses) are present but before hypotension develops.
Equipment and environment:
Equipment size, drug dosage, and CPR parameters vary with patient
age and weight (see
Tables 223-1
,
223-2
, and
223-3
). Size-variable equipment includes defibrillator
paddles or electrode pads, masks, ventilation bags, airways, laryngoscope blades, endotracheal tubes,
and suction catheters. Weight should be measured rather than guessed; alternatively, commercially
[Fig. 223-2.
Chest compression.]
available measuring tapes that are calibrated to read standard patient weight based on body length can
be used. Some tapes are printed with the recommended drug dose and equipment size for each weight.
Dosages should be rounded down; eg, a 2 1/2-yr-old child should receive the dose for a 2-yr-old child.
Susceptibility to heat loss is greater in infants and children because of a large surface area relative to
body mass and less subcutaneous tissue. A neutral external thermal environment is crucial during CPR
and postresuscitation and may range from 36.5° C in a neonate to 35° C in a child. Hypothermia with core
temperature < 35° C makes resuscitation more difficult (distinct from the beneficial effects of
postresuscitation hypothermia discussed .
Airway:
Upper airway anatomy is different in children. The head is large with a small face, mandible, and
external nares, and the neck is relatively short. The tongue is large relative to the mouth, and the larynx
lies higher in the neck and is angled more anteriorly. The epiglottis is long, and the narrowest portion of
the trachea is inferior to the vocal cords at the cricoid ring, allowing the use of uncuffed endotracheal
tubes. In younger children, a straight laryngoscope blade generally allows better visualization of the vocal
cords than a
curved blade because the larynx is more anterior and the epiglottis is more floppy and
redundant.
Rhythm disturbances:
In asystole, atropine and pacing are not used.
VF and pulseless VT occur in only about 15 to 20% of cardiac arrests. Vasopressin is not indicated. When
cardioversion is used, the absolute energy dose is less than that for adults; waveform can be biphasic
(preferred) or monophasic (see
Table 223-3
). For either waveform, the recommended energy dose is 2
joules/kg for the first shock, increasing to 4 joules/kg for subsequent attempts (if necessary—.
AEDs with adult cables may be used for children as young as 1 yr, but an AED with pediatric cables
(maximum biphasic shock of 50 joules) is preferred for children between 1 yr and 8 yr. There is
insufficient evidence to recommend for or against the use of AEDs in children < 1 yr.
===PAGE:2421===
Chapter 224. Respiratory Arrest
Introduction
Respiratory and cardiac arrest are distinct, but inevitably if untreated, one leads to the other. (See also
respiratory failure on p.
, dyspnea on p.
, and hypoxia .
Interruption of pulmonary gas exchange for > 5 min may irreversibly damage vital organs, especially the
brain. Cardiac arrest almost always follows unless respiratory function is immediately restored. However,
aggressive ventilation may also have negative hemodynamic consequences, particularly in the periarrest
period and in other circumstances when cardiac output is low. In most cases, the ultimate goal is to
restore adequate ventilation and oxygenation without further compromising a tentative cardiovascular
situation.
Etiology
Respiratory arrest (and impaired respiration that can progress to respiratory arrest) can be caused by
• Airway obstruction
• Decreased respiratory effort
• Respiratory muscle weakness
Airway obstruction:
Obstruction may involve the
• Upper airway
• Lower airway
Infants < 3 mo are usually nose breathers and thus may have upper airway obstruction secondary to
nasal blockage. At all ages, loss of muscular tone with decreased consciousness may cause upper
airway obstruction as the posterior portion of the tongue displaces into the oropharynx. Other causes of
upper airway obstruction include blood, mucus, vomitus, or foreign body; spasm or edema of the vocal
cords; and pharyngolaryngeal tracheal inflammation (eg, epiglottitis, croup), tumor, or trauma. Patients
with congenital developmental disorders often have abnormal upper airways that are more easily
obstructed.
Lower airway obstruction may result from aspiration, bronchospasm, airspace filling disorders (eg,
pneumonia, pulmonary edema, pulmonary hemorrhage), or drowning.
Decreased respiratory effort:
Decreased respiratory effort reflects CNS impairment due to one of the
following:
• CNS disorder
• Adverse drug effect
• Metabolic disorder
CNS disorders that affect the brain stem (eg, stroke, infection, tumor) can cause hypoventilation.
Disorders that increase intracranial pressure usually cause hyperventilation initially, but hypoventilation
may develop if the brain stem is compressed.
Drugs that decrease respiratory effort include opioids and sedative-hypnotics (eg, barbiturates, alcohol;
less commonly, benzodiazepines). Usually, an overdose (iatrogenic, intentional, or unintentional) is
involved, although a lower dose may decrease effort in patients who are more sensitive to the effects of
these drugs (eg, the elderly, those with chronic respiratory insufficiency).
===PAGE:2422===
CNS depression due to severe hypoglycemia or hypotension ultimately compromises respiratory effort.
Respiratory muscle weakness:
Weakness may be caused by
• Neuromuscular disorders
• Fatigue
Neuromuscular causes include spinal cord injury, neuromuscular diseases (eg, myasthenia gravis,
botulism, poliomyelitis, Guillain-Barre syndrome), and neuromuscular blocking drugs.
Respiratory muscle fatigue can occur if patients breathe for extended periods at a minute ventilation
exceeding about 70% of their maximum voluntary ventilation (eg, because of severe metabolic acidosis or
hypoxemia).
Symptoms and Signs
With respiratory arrest, patients are unconscious or about to become so.
Patients with hypoxemia may be cyanotic, but cyanosis can be masked by anemia or by carbon monoxide
or cyanide intoxication. Patients being treated with high-flow O
may not be hypoxemic and therefore may
not exhibit cyanosis or desaturation until after respiration ceases for several minutes. Conversely, patients
with chronic lung disease and polycythemia may exhibit cyanosis without respiratory arrest. If respiratory
arrest remains uncorrected, cardiac arrest follows within minutes of onset of hypoxemia, hypercarbia, or
both.
Impending respiratory arrest:
Before complete respiratory arrest, patients with intact neurologic
function may be agitated, confused, and struggling to breathe. Tachycardia and diaphoresis are present;
there may be intercostal or sternoclavicular retractions. Patients with CNS impairment or respiratory
muscle weakness have feeble, gasping, or irregular respirations and paradoxical breathing movements.
Patients with a foreign body in the airway may choke and point to their necks, exhibit inspiratory stridor, or
neither. Monitoring end-tidal CO
can alert practitioners to impending respiratory arrest in
decompensating patients.
Infants, especially if < 3 mo, may develop acute apnea without warning, secondary to overwhelming
infection, metabolic disorders, or respiratory fatigue. Asthmatics or patients with other chronic lung
diseases may become hypercarbic and fatigued after prolonged periods of respiratory distress and
suddenly become obtunded and apneic with little warning, despite adequate oxygen saturation.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Respiratory arrest is usually clinically obvious; treatment begins simultaneously with diagnosis. The first
consideration is to exclude a foreign body obstructing the airway; if a foreign body is present, resistance
to ventilation is marked during mouth-to-mask or bag-valve-mask ventilation. Foreign material may be
discovered during laryngoscopy for endotracheal intubation (see p.
for removal).
Treatment
Treatment is clearing the airway, establishing an alternate airway, and providing mechanical ventilation
(.
Airway Establishment and Control
Airway management consists of clearing the upper airway, maintaining an open air passage with a
mechanical device, and sometimes assisting respirations. There are many indications for airway control
===PAGE:2423===
(see
Table 224-1
) and many methods of establishing an airway.
[Table 224-1.
Situations Requiring Airway Control]
Whatever airway management techniques are used, tidal volume should be 6 to 8 cc/kg (significantly less
than previously recommended) and ventilatory rate should be 8 to 10 breaths/min (significantly slower
than previously recommended to avoid negative hemodynamic consequences).
Clearing and Opening the Upper Airway
To relieve airway obstruction caused by soft tissues of the upper airway and provide optimal position for
bag-valve-mask (BVM) ventilation and laryngoscopy, the operator flexes the patient's neck to elevate the
head until the external auditory meatus is in the same plane as the sternum and positions the face roughly
parallel to the ceiling (see
Fig. 224-1
). This position is slightly different from the previously taught head tilt position. The mandible
should be displaced upwards by lifting the lower jaw and submandibular soft tissue or by pushing the rami
of the mandible upward (see
Fig. 224-2
).
[Fig. 224-1.
Head and neck positioning to open the airway.]
[Fig. 224-2.
Jaw lift.]
Anatomic restriction, various abnormalities, or considerations caused by trauma (eg, inadvisability of
moving a possibly fractured neck) may obviate the operator's ability to employ these maneuvers, but
careful attention to optimal positioning can maximize airway patency and improve BVM ventilation and
laryngoscopy.
Obstruction by dentures and oropharyngeal foreign material (eg, blood, secretions) may be removed by
finger sweep of the oropharynx and suction, taking care not to push the material deeper (more likely in
infants and young children, in whom a blind finger sweep is contraindicated). Deeper material can be
removed with Magill forceps or by suction.
Heimlich maneuver (subdiaphragmatic abdominal thrusts):
The Heimlich maneuver consists of
manual thrusts to the upper abdomen or, in the case of pregnant or extremely obese patients, chest
thrusts until the airway is clear or the patient becomes unconscious; it is the preferred initial method in the
awake, choking patient and in the unconscious patient if the above methods are unsuccessful.
An unconscious adult is rolled into the supine position. The rescuer sits astride the patient above the
knees with the heel of a hand in the upper abdominal area below the xiphoid process. To avoid damaging
chest structures and the liver, the rescuer should never place the hand on the xiphoid process or lower rib
cage. The other hand is placed on top of the first and a firm upward thrust is delivered (see
Fig. 224-3
). For chest thrusts, the hand is placed over the sternum similarly to the position used for
cardiac compression. With both
[Fig. 224-3.
Abdominal thrusts with victim lying (conscious or unconscious).]
techniques, 5 quick, firm thrusts are recommended, followed by reevaluation of the airway.
In conscious adults, the rescuer stands behind the patient with arms encircling the patient's midsection.
One fist is clenched and placed midway between the umbilicus and xiphoid. The other hand grabs the fist,
and a firm inward and upward thrust is delivered by pulling with both arms (see
Fig. 224-4
).
In older children, the Heimlich maneuver may be used. However, in children < 20 kg (typically < 5 yr), very
moderate pressure should be applied, and the rescuer should kneel at the child's feet rather than astride.
===PAGE:2424===
In infants < 1 yr, the Heimlich maneuver should not be done; they should be held in a prone, head-down
position, supporting the head with the fingers of one hand, while delivering 5 back blows (see
Fig. 224-5
). Five chest thrusts should then be delivered with the infant in a head-down position with the
infant's back on the rescuer's thigh (supine). This sequence of back blows and chest thrusts is repeated
until the airway is cleared.
Airway and Respiratory Devices
If no spontaneous respiration occurs after airway opening and no respiratory devices are available,
rescue breathing (mouth-to-mask or mouth-to-barrier device) is started; mouth-to-mouth ventilation is
rarely recommended. Exhaled air contains 16 to 18% O
and 4 to 5% CO
, which is adequate to maintain
blood O
and CO
values close to normal. Larger-than-necessary volumes of air may cause gastric
distention with associated risk of aspiration.
Bag-valve-mask (BVM) devices:
These devices consist of a self-inflating bag (resuscitator bag) with a
nonrebreathing valve mechanism and a soft mask that conforms to the tissues of the face; when
connected to an O
supply, they deliver from 60 to 100% inspired O
. In the hands of experienced
practitioners, a BVM provides adequate temporary ventilation in many situations, allowing time to
systematically achieve definitive airway control. However, if BVM ventilation is used for > 5 min, air is
typically introduced into the stomach, and an NGT should be inserted to evacuate the accumulated air.
These devices do not maintain airway patency, so patients with soft-tissue relaxation require careful
positioning and manual maneuvers (see
Figs. 224-1
and
224-2
), as well as additional devices to keep the
airway open. An oropharyngeal airway or a nasal trumpet is used during BVM ventilation to keep soft
tissues of the oropharynx from blocking the airway. These devices cause gagging and the potential for
vomiting and aspiration in conscious patients. Devices must be sized appropriately; an oropharyngeal
airway should be as long as the distance between the corner of the patient's mouth and the angle of the
jaw.
Resuscitator bags are also used with artificial airways, including endotracheal tubes and supraglottic and
pharyngeal airways. Pediatric bags have an adjustable pressure relief valve that limits peak airway
pressures (usually to 35 to 45 cm H
O); practitioners must monitor the valve setting to avoid inadvertent
hypoventilation.
[Fig. 224-4.
Abdominal thrusts with victim standing or sitting (conscious).]
[Fig. 224-5.
Expired air ventilation—child.]
Laryngeal mask airways (LMAs):
An LMA or other supraglottic airway can be inserted into the lower
oropharynx to prevent airway obstruction by soft tissues and to create an effective channel for ventilation
(see
Fig. 224-6
). As the name implies, these devices seal the laryngeal inlet (rather than the face-mask
interface) and thus avoid the difficulty of maintaining an adequate face-mask seal and the risk of
displacing the jaw and tongue. LMAs have become the standard rescue ventilation technique for
situations in which endotracheal intubation cannot be accomplished, as well as for certain elective
anesthesia cases and emergencies. Complications include vomiting and aspiration in patients who have
an intact gag reflex, who are receiving excessive ventilation, or both.
There are numerous techniques for LMA insertion. The standard approach is to press the deflated mask
against the hard palate (using the long finger of the dominant hand) and rotate it past the base of the
tongue until the mask reaches the hypopharynx so that the tip then sits in the upper esophagus. Once in
the correct position, the mask is inflated. Inflating the mask with half the recommended volume before
insertion stiffens the tip, possibly making insertion easier.
Although an LMA does not isolate the airway from the esophagus as well as an endotracheal tube, it has
some advantages over BVM ventilation: It minimizes gastric inflation and provides some protection against
passive regurgitation. Newer versions of LMAs have an opening through which a small tube can be
===PAGE:2425===
inserted to decompress the stomach.
The efficacy of the airway seal with an LMA, unlike endotracheal tubes, is not directly correlated with the
mask inflation pressure. With endotracheal tubes, higher balloon pressure causes a tighter seal; with an
LMA, overinflation makes the mask more rigid and
less
able to adapt to the patient's anatomy. If the seal
is inadequate, mask pressure should be
lowered
somewhat; if this approach does not work, a larger
mask size should be tried.
In emergencies, LMAs should be viewed as bridging devices. Prolonged placement, overinflation of the
mask, or both may compress the tongue and cause tongue edema. Also, if noncomatose patients are
given muscle relaxants before LMA insertion (eg, for laryngoscopy), they may gag and possibly aspirate
when such drugs wear off. Either the device should be removed (assuming ventilation and gag reflexes
are adequate), or drugs should be given to eliminate the gag response and provide time for an alternative
intubation technique.
Endotracheal tubes:
An endotracheal tube is inserted directly into the trachea via the mouth or, less
commonly, the nose. Endotracheal tubes have high-volume, low-pressure balloon cuffs to prevent air
leakage and minimize the risk of aspiration. Cuffed tubes were traditionally used only in adults and
children > 8 yr; however, cuffed tubes are increasingly being used in infants and younger children to limit
air leakage (particularly during transport); sometimes cuffs are not inflated or inflated only to the extent
needed to prevent obvious leakage.
An endotracheal tube is the definitive method to secure a compromised airway, limit aspiration, and initiate
mechanical ventilation in comatose patients, in patients who cannot protect their own airways, and in
those who need prolonged mechanical ventilation. It also permits suctioning of the lower respiratory tract.
Although drugs can be delivered via an endotracheal tube during cardiac arrest, this practice is
discouraged.
Placement typically requires laryngoscopy by a skilled practitioner, but a variety of novel insertion devices
that provide other options are becoming available.
Other devices:
Another class of rescue ventilation devices is laryngeal tube or twin-lumen airways (eg,
Combitube®, King LT®). These devices use 2 balloons to create a seal above and below the larynx and
have ventilation ports overlying the laryngeal inlet (which is between the balloons). As with LMAs,
prolonged placement and balloon overinflation can cause tongue edema.
Tracheal Intubation
Most patients requiring an artificial airway can be managed with tracheal intubation.
[Fig. 224-6.
Laryngeal mask airway (LMA).]
Orotracheal intubation, typically done via direct laryngoscopy, is preferred in apneic and critically ill
patients because it can usually be done faster than nasotracheal intubation, which is reserved for awake,
spontaneously breathing patients or for cases when the mouth must be avoided.
Before intubation:
Maneuvers to create a patent airway and to ventilate and oxygenate the patient are
always indicated before attempting tracheal intubation. Once a decision to intubate has been made,
preparatory measures include
• Correct patient positioning (see
Fig. 224-1
)
• Ventilation with 100% O
• Readying of necessary equipment (including suction devices)
• Sometimes drugs
===PAGE:2426===
Ventilation with 100% O
denitrogenates healthy patients and significantly prolongs the safe apneic time
(effect is less in patients with severe cardiopulmonary disorders).
Strategies to predict difficult laryngoscopy (eg, Mallampati scoring, thyromental distance testing) are of
limited value in emergencies.
Practitioners should always be prepared to use an alternate technique (eg,
LMA, BVM ventilation) if laryngoscopy does not work.
During cardiac arrest, chest compressions should not be halted for intubation attempts. If practitioners
cannot intubate while compressions are being done (or during the brief pause that occurs during
compressor changes), an alternate airway technique should be used.
Suction should be immediately available with a rigid tonsil-tip suction device to clear secretions and other
material from the airway.
Anterior cricoid pressure (Sellick's maneuver) has previously been recommended before and during
intubation to prevent passive regurgitation. However, current literature suggests that this maneuver may
be less effective than once thought and may compromise laryngeal view during laryngoscopy.
Drugs (, including sedatives, muscle relaxants, and sometimes vagolytics, are typically given
to conscious or semiconscious patients before laryngoscopy.
Tube selection and preparation:
Most adults can accept a tube with an internal diameter of ≥ 8 mm;
these tubes are preferable to smaller ones because they have lower airflow resistance (reducing the work
of breathing), facilitate suctioning of secretions, allow passage of a bronchoscope, and may aid in
liberation from mechanical ventilation.
For infants and children ≥ 1 yr, uncuffed tube size is calculated by (patient's age + 16)/4; thus, a 4-yr-old
should have a (4 + 16)/4 = 5 mm endotracheal tube. The tube size suggested by this formula should be
reduced by 0.5 (1 tube size) if a cuffed tube is to be used. Reference charts (see
Table 223-3
) or devices
such as the Broselow Tape or Pedi-Wheel can rapidly identify appropriate-sized laryngoscope blades and
endotracheal tubes for infants and children.
For adults (and sometimes in children), a rigid stylet should be placed in the tube, taking care to stop the
stylet 1 to 2 cm before the distal end of the endotracheal tube, so that the tube tip remains soft. The stylet
should then be used to make the tube straight to the beginning of the distal cuff; from that point, the tube
is bent upward about 35° to form a hockey stick shape. This straight-to-cuff shape improves tube delivery
and avoids blocking the operator's view of the cords during tube passage. Routinely filling the distal ET
tube cuff with air to check the balloon is not required; if this technique is used, care must be taken to
remove all the air before tube insertion.
Insertion technique:
Successful intubation on the first attempt is important. Repeated laryngoscopy (≥ 3
attempts) is associated with much higher rates of significant hypoxemia, aspiration, and cardiac arrest. In
addition to correct positioning, several other general principles are critical for success:
• Visualizing the epiglottis
• Visualizing the posterior laryngeal structures (ideally, the vocal cords)
• Not passing the tube unless tracheal insertion is ensured
The laryngoscope is held in the left hand, and the blade is inserted into the mouth and used as a retractor
to displace the mandible and tongue up and away from the laryngoscopist, revealing the posterior
pharynx. Avoiding contact with the incisors and not placing undue pressure on laryngeal structures are
important.
The importance of identifying the epiglottis cannot be overstated.
Identifying the epiglottis allows the
operator to recognize critical airway landmarks and correctly position the laryngoscope blade. The
epiglottis may rest against the posterior pharyngeal wall, where it blends in with the other pink mucus
===PAGE:2427===
membranes or gets lost in the pool of secretions that invariably exists in the cardiac arrest patient's
airway.
Once the epiglottis is found, the operator may pick it up with the tip of the blade (the typical straight blade
approach) or advance the tip of the blade into the vallecula to indirectly lift the epiglottis up and out of the
line of sight (the typical curved blade approach). Success with the curved blade depends on the proper
positioning of the blade tip in the vallecula and the direction of the lifting force (see
Fig. 224-7
). Lifting the epiglottis by either technique reveals the posterior laryngeal structures (arytenoid
cartilages, interarytenoid notch), glottis, and vocal cords. If the tip of the blade is too deep, laryngeal
landmarks may be entirely bypassed, and the dark, round hole of the esophagus may be mistaken for the
glottis opening.
If identifying structures is difficult, manipulating the larynx with the right hand placed on the anterior neck
(allowing the right and left hands to work together) may optimize the laryngeal view (see
Fig. 224-7
).
Another technique involves lifting the head higher (lifting at the occiput, not atlanto-occipital extension),
which distracts the jaw and improves the line of sight. Head elevation is inadvisable in patients with
potential cervical spine injury and is difficult in the morbidly obese (who must be placed in a ramped or
head-elevated position beforehand).
[Fig. 224-7.
Bimanual laryngoscopy.]
In an optimal view, the vocal cords are clearly seen. If the vocal cords are not seen, at a minimum, the
posterior laryngeal landmarks must be viewed and the tip of the tube must be seen passing above the
interarytenoid notch and posterior cartilages. Operators must clearly identify laryngeal landmarks to avoid
potentially fatal esophageal intubation. If operators are not confident that the tube is going into the
trachea, the tube should not be inserted.
Once an optimal view has been achieved, the right hand inserts the tube through the larynx into the
trachea (if operators have been applying anterior laryngeal pressure with the right hand, an assistant
should continue applying this pressure). If the tube does not pass easily, a 90° clockwise twist of the tube
may help it pass more smoothly over the anterior tracheal rings. Before withdrawing the laryngoscope,
operators should confirm that the tube is passing between the cords. Appropriate tube depth is usually 21
to 23 cm in adults and 3 times the endotracheal tube size in children (for a 4.0-mm endotracheal tube, 12
cm; for a 5.5-mm endotracheal tube, 16.5 cm). In adults, the tube, if inadvertently advanced, typically
migrates into the right mainstem bronchus.
Alternative intubation devices:
A number of devices and techniques are increasingly used for
intubation after failed laryngoscopy or as a primary means of intubation. Devices include
• Video laryngoscopes
• Mirror laryngoscopes
• LMAs with a passage that allows tracheal intubation
• Fiberoptic scopes and optical stylets
• Tube introducers
Each device has its own subtleties; practitioners who are skilled in standard laryngoscopic intubation
techniques should not assume they can use one of these devices (especially after use of muscle
relaxants) without becoming thoroughly familiarized with it.
Video and mirror laryngoscopes
enable practitioners to look around the curvature of the tongue and
usually provide excellent laryngeal views. However, the tube requires an exaggerated bend angle to go
around the tongue and thus may be more difficult to manipulate and insert.
To pass an endotracheal tube through an LMA, practitioners must understand how to optimally position
===PAGE:2428===
the mask over the laryngeal inlet; there are sometimes mechanical difficulties passing the endotracheal
tube.
Flexible fiberoptic scopes and optical stylets
are very maneuverable and can be used in patients
with abnormal anatomy. However, practice is required to recognize laryngeal landmarks from a fiberoptic
perspective. Compared with video and mirror laryngoscopes, fiberoptic scopes are more difficult to master
and are more susceptible to problems with blood and secretions; also, they do not separate and divide
tissue but instead must be moved through open channels.
Tube introducers
(commonly called gum elastic bougies) are semirigid stylets that can be used when
laryngeal visualization is suboptimal (eg, the epiglottis is visible, but the laryngeal opening is not). In such
cases, the introducer is passed along the undersurface of the epiglottis; from this point, it is likely to enter
the trachea. Tracheal entry is suggested by the tactile feedback, noted as the tip bounces over the
tracheal rings. An endotracheal tube is then advanced over the introducer.
Postinsertion:
The stylet is removed and the balloon cuff is inflated with air using a 10-mL syringe; a
manometer is used to verify that balloon pressure is < 30 cm H
O. Properly sized endotracheal tubes
may need considerably < 10 mL of air to create the correct pressure.
After balloon inflation, tube placement should be checked using a variety of methods, including
• Inspection and auscultation
• CO
detection
• Esophageal detector devices
• Sometimes chest x-ray
When a tube is correctly placed, manual ventilation should produce symmetric chest rise, good breath
sounds over both lungs, and no gurgling over the upper abdomen.
Exhaled air should contain CO
and gastric air should not; detecting CO
with a colori-metric end-tidal
CO
device or waveform capnography confirms tracheal placement. However, in prolonged cardiac arrest
(ie, with little or no metabolic activity), CO
may not be detectable even with correct tube placement. In
such cases, an esophageal detector device may be used. These devices use an inflatable bulb or a large
syringe to apply negative pressure to the endotracheal tube. The flexible esophagus collapses, and little
or no air flows into the device; in contrast, the rigid trachea does not collapse, and the resultant airflow
confirms tracheal placement.
In the absence of cardiac arrest, tube placement is typically also confirmed with a chest x-ray.
After correct placement is confirmed, the tube should be secured using a commercially available device or
adhesive tape. Adapters connect the endotracheal tube to a resuscitator bag, T-piece supplying humidity
and O
, or a mechanical ventilator.
Endotracheal tubes can be displaced, particularly in chaotic resuscitation situations, so tube position
should be rechecked frequently. If breath sounds are absent on the left, right mainstem bronchus
intubation is probably more likely than a left-sided tension pneumothorax, but both should be considered.
Nasotracheal intubation:
If patients are spontaneously breathing, this technique can be used in certain
emergency situations—eg, when patients have severe oral or cervical disorders (eg, injuries, edema,
limitation of motion) that make laryngoscopy difficult. Historically, nasal intubation was also used when
muscle relaxants were unavailable or forbidden (eg, prehospital settings, certain emergency departments)
and when patients with tachypnea, hyperpnea, and upright positioning (eg, those with heart failure) might
literally inhale a tube. However, availability of noninvasive means of ventilation (eg, bilevel positive airway
pressure [BiPAP]), improved access to and training in pharmacologic adjuncts to intubation, and newer
===PAGE:2429===
airway devices have markedly decreased the use of nasal intubation. Additional considerations are
problems with nasal intubation, including sinusitis (universal after 3 days), and the fact that tubes large
enough to permit bronchoscopy (eg, ≥ 8 mm) can rarely be inserted nasotracheally.
When nasotracheal intubation is done, a vasoconstrictor (eg, phenylephrine) and topical anesthetic (eg,
benzocaine, lidocaine) must be applied to the nasal mucosa and the larynx to prevent bleeding and to
blunt protective reflexes. Some patients may also require IV sedatives, opioids, or dissociative drugs. After
the nasal mucosa is prepared, a soft nasal trumpet should be inserted to ensure adequate patency of the
selected nasal passage and to serve as a conduit for topical drugs to the pharynx and larynx. The trumpet
may be placed using a plain or anesthetic (eg, lidocaine) lubricant. The nasal trumpet is removed after the
pharyngeal mucosa has been sprayed. The nasotracheal tube is then inserted to about 14 cm depth (just
above the laryngeal inlet in most adults); at this point, air movement should be audible. As the patient
breathes in, opening the vocal cords, the tube is promptly passed into the trachea. More flexible
endotracheal tubes with a controllable tip improve likelihood of success. Some practitioners soften tubes
by placing them in warm water to lessen the risk of bleeding and make insertion easier. A small
commercially available whistle can also be attached to the proximal tube connector to accentuate the
noise of air movement when the tube is in the correct position above the larynx and in the trachea.
Surgical Airway
If the upper airway is obstructed because of a foreign body or massive trauma or if ventilation cannot be
accomplished by other means, surgical entry into the trachea is required. Historically, a surgical airway
was also the response to failed intubation. However, surgical airways require on average about 100 sec
from initial incision to ventilation; LMAs and other devices provide a faster means of rescue ventilation,
and very few patients require an emergency surgical airway.
Cricothyrotomy:
Cricothyrotomy (see
Fig. 224-8
) is typically used for emergency surgical access because it is faster and simpler than
tracheostomy.
Unlike positioning for laryngoscopy or ventilation, the correct position for cricothyrotomy involves
extending the neck and arching the shoulders backward. After sterile preparation, the larynx is grasped
with the nondominant hand while a blade held in the dominant hand is used to incise the skin,
subcutaneous tissue, and cricothyroid membrane. A tracheal hook helps keep the space open and
prevent retraction of the trachea while a small endotracheal tube (6.0 mm internal diameter [ID]) or small
tracheotomy tube (cuffed 4.0 Shiley preferred) is advanced through the surgical site into the trachea.
Complications include hemorrhage, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumomediastinum, and pneumothorax.
Various commercial products allow rapid surgical access to the
[Fig. 224-8.
Emergency cricothyrotomy.]
cricothyroid space and provide a tube that allows adequate oxygenation and ventilation.
Tracheostomy:
Tracheostomy is a more complex procedure because the trachea rings are very close
together and part of at least one ring usually must be removed to allow tube placement. Tracheostomy is
preferably done in an operating room by a surgeon. In emergencies, the procedure has a higher rate of
complications than cricothyrotomy and offers no advantage. However, it is the preferred procedure for
patients requiring long-term ventilation.
Percutaneous tracheostomy is an attractive alternative for critically ill patients who cannot be moved to
the operating room. This bedside technique uses skin puncture and dilators to insert a tracheostomy
tube. Fiberoptic assistance (within the trachea) is usually used to prevent puncture of the membranous
(posterior) trachea and esophagus.
Complications of Tracheal Intubation
Complications include
===PAGE:2430===
• Direct trauma
• Esophageal intubation
• Tracheal erosion or stenosis
Laryngoscopy can damage lips, teeth, tongue, and supraglottic and subglottic areas.
Tube placement in the esophagus, if unrecognized, causes failure to ventilate and potentially death or
hypoxic injury. Insufflating a tube in the stomach causes regurgitation, which can result in aspiration,
compromise subsequent BVM ventilation, and obscure visualization in subsequent intubation attempts.
Any translaryngeal tube injures the vocal cords somewhat; sometimes ulceration, ischemia, and
prolonged cord paralysis occur. Subglottic stenosis can occur later (usually 3 to 4 wk).
Rarely, tracheostomy insertion causes hemorrhage, thyroid damage, pneumothorax, recurrent laryngeal
nerve paralysis, injury to major vessels, or late tracheal stenosis at the insertion site.
Erosion of the trachea is uncommon. It results more commonly from excessively high cuff pressure.
Rarely, hemorrhage from major vessels (eg, innominate artery), fistulas (especially tracheoesophageal),
and tracheal stenosis occur. Using high-volume, low-pressure cuffs with tubes of appropriate size and
measuring cuff pressure frequently (every 8 h) to maintain it at < 30 cm H
O decrease the risk of
ischemic pressure necrosis, but patients in shock, with low cardiac output, or with sepsis remain
especially vulnerable.
Drugs to Aid Intubation
Pulseless and apneic or severely obtunded patients can (and should) be intubated without pharmacologic
assistance. Other patients are given sedating and paralytic drugs to minimize discomfort and facilitate
intubation (termed rapid sequence intubation).
Pretreatment:
Pretreatment typically includes
• 100% O
• Lidocaine
• Sometimes atropine, a neuromuscular blocker, or both
If time permits, patients should be placed on 100% O
for 3 to 5 min; this measure may maintain
satisfactory oxygenation in previously healthy patients for up to 8 min. However, O
demand and safe
apnea times are very dependent on pulse rate, pulmonary function, RBC count, and numerous other
metabolic factors.
Laryngoscopy causes a sympathetic-mediated pressor response with an increase in heart rate, BP, and
possibly intracranial pressure. To blunt this response, when time permits, some practitioners give
lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg IV 1 to 2 min before sedation and paralysis.
Children and adolescents often have a vagal response (marked bradycardia) in response to
intubation
and are given atropine 0.02 mg/kg IV (minimum: 0.1 mg in infants, 0.5 mg in children and adolescents) at
the same time.
Some physicians include a small dose of a neuromuscular blocker (NMB), such as vecuronium 0.01
mg/kg IV, in patients > 4 yr to prevent muscle fasciculations caused by full doses of succinylcholine.
Fasciculations may result in muscle pain on awakening and cause transient hyperkalemia; however, the
actual benefit of such pretreatment is unclear.
===PAGE:2431===
Sedation and analgesia:
Laryngoscopy and intubation are uncomfortable; in conscious patients, a
short-acting IV drug with sedative or combined sedative and analgesic properties is mandatory.
Etomidate 0.3 mg/kg, a nonbarbiturate hypnotic, may be the preferred drug. Fentanyl 5
μ
g/kg (2 to 5
μ
g/kg in children; NOTE: this dose is higher than the analgesic dose) also works well and causes no
cardiovascular depression. Fentanyl is an opioid and thus has analgesic as well as sedative properties.
However, at higher doses, chest wall rigidity may occur. Ketamine 1 to 2 mg/kg is a dissociative
anesthetic with cardiostimulatory properties. It is generally safe but may cause hallucinations or bizarre
behavior on awakening. Thiopental 3 to 4 mg/kg and methohexital 1 to 2 mg/kg are effective but tend to
cause hypotension and are used less often.
Paralysis:
Skeletal muscle relaxation with an IV NMB markedly facilitates intubation.
Succinylcholine (1.5 mg/kg IV, 2.0 mg/kg for infants), a depolarizing NMB, has the most rapid onset (30
sec to 1 min) and shortest duration (3 to 5 min). It should be avoided in patients with burns, muscle crush
injuries > 1 to 2 days old, spinal cord injury, neuromuscular disease, renal failure, or possibly penetrating
eye injury. About 1/15,000 children (and fewer adults) have a genetic susceptibility to malignant
hyperthermia ( from succinylcholine. Succinylcholine should always be given with atropine in
children because pronounced bradycardia may occur.
Alternative nondepolarizing NMBs have longer duration of action (> 30 min) but also have slower onset
unless used in high doses that prolong paralysis significantly. Drugs include atracurium 0.5 mg/kg,
mivacurium 0.15 mg/kg, rocuronium 1.0 mg/kg, and vecuronium 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg injected over 60 sec.
Topical anesthesia:
Intubation of an awake patient (typically not done in children) requires anesthesia of
the nose and pharynx. A commercial aerosol preparation of benzocaine, tetracaine, butyl aminobenzoate
(butamben), and benzalkonium is commonly used. Alternatively, 4% lidocaine can be nebulized and
inhaled via face mask.
===PAGE:2432===
Chapter 225. Respiratory Failure and Mechanical Ventilation
Introduction
Respiratory failure is a life-threatening impairment of oxygenation or CO
elimination.
Respiratory failure may occur because of impaired gas exchange, decreased ventilation, or
both. Common manifestations include dyspnea, use of accessory muscles of respiration,
tachypnea, tachycardia, diaphoresis, cyanosis, altered consciousness, and, without treatment,
eventually obtundation, respiratory arrest, and death. Diagnosis is clinical, supplemented by
ABGs and chest x-ray. Treatment is usually in an ICU and involves correction of the underlying
cause, supplemental O
, control of secretions, and ventilatory assistance if needed.
The respiratory system oxygenates and eliminates CO
from venous blood. Thus, a useful classification
of respiratory failure is whether the principal abnormality is inadequate oxygenation or inadequate CO
elimination (which means inadequate ventilation), although many disorders affect both. Although
temporizing measures exist, respiratory failure frequently necessitates mechanical ventilation.
Overview of Mechanical Ventilation
Mechanical ventilation can be noninvasive, involving various types of face masks, or invasive, involving
endotracheal intubation. Selection and use of appropriate techniques require an understanding of
respiratory mechanics.
Indications:
There are numerous indications for endotracheal intubation and mechanical
ventilation (see
Table 224-1
, but in general, mechanical ventilation should be considered when there are
clinical or laboratory signs that the patient cannot maintain an airway or adequate oxygenation or
ventilation. Concerning findings include respiratory rate > 30/min, inability to maintain arterial O
saturation > 90% with fractional inspired O
(FIO
) > 0.60, and PaCO
> 50 mm Hg with pH < 7.25. The
decision to initiate mechanical ventilation should be based on clinical judgment that considers the entire
clinical situation and should not be delayed until the patient is in extremis.
Respiratory Mechanics
Normal inspiration generates negative intrapleural pressure, which creates a pressure gradient between
the atmosphere and the alveoli, resulting in air inflow. In mechanical ventilation, the pressure gradient
results from increased (positive) pressure of the air source.
Peak airway pressure
is measured at the airway opening (Pao) and is routinely displayed by
mechanical ventilators. It represents the total pressure needed to push a volume of gas into the lung and
is composed of pressures resulting from inspiratory flow resistance (resistive pressure), the elastic recoil
of the lung and chest wall (elastic pressure), and the alveolar pressure present at the beginning of the
breath (positive end-expiratory pressure [PEEP]—see also
Fig. 225-1
). Thus
Peak airway pressure = resistive pressure + elastic pressure + PEEP
Resistive pressure
is the product of circuit resistance and airflow. In the mechanically ventilated patient,
resistance to airflow occurs in the ventilator circuit, the endotracheal tube, and, most importantly, the
patient's airways. NOTE: Even when these factors are constant, an increase in airflow increases resistive
pressure.
Elastic pressure
is the product of the elastic recoil of the lungs and chest wall (elastance) and the
volume of gas delivered. For a given volume, elastic pressure is increased by increased lung stiffness (as
in pulmonary fibrosis) or restricted excursion of the chest wall or diaphragm (eg, in tense ascites or
massive obesity). Because elastance is the inverse of compliance, high elastance is the same as low
compliance.
===PAGE:2433===
End-expiratory pressure
in the alveoli is normally the same as atmospheric pressure. However, when
the alveoli fail to empty completely because of airway obstruction, airflow limitation, or shortened
expiratory time, end-expiratory pressure may be positive relative to the atmosphere. This pressure is
called intrinsic PEEP or autoPEEP to differentiate it from externally applied (therapeutic) PEEP, which is
created by adjusting the mechanical ventilator or by placing a tight-fitting mask that applies positive
pressure throughout the respiratory cycle.
Any elevation in peak airway pressure (eg, > 25 cm H
O) should prompt measurement of the endinspiratory pressure (plateau pressure) by an end-inspiratory hold maneuver to determine the relative
contributions of resistive and elastic pressures. The maneuver keeps the exhalation valve closed for an
additional 0.3 to 0.5 sec after inspiration, delaying exhalation. During this time, airway pressure falls from
its peak value as airflow ceases. The resulting end-inspiratory pressure represents the elastic pressure
once PEEP is subtracted (assuming the patient is not making active inspiratory or expiratory muscle
contractions at the time of measurement). The difference between peak and plateau pressure is the
resistive pressure.
Elevated resistive pressure (eg, > 10 cm H
O) suggests that the endotracheal tube has been kinked or
plugged with secretions or that an intraluminal mass, increased intraluminal secretions, or bronchospasm
is present. An increase in elastic pressure (eg, > 10 cm H
O) suggests decreased lung compliance due to
edema, fibrosis, or lobar atelectasis; large pleural effusions, pneumothorax or fibrothorax; extrapulmonary
restriction as may result from circumferential burns or other chest wall deformity, ascites, pregnancy, or
massive obesity; or a tidal volume too large for the amount of lung being ventilated (eg, a normal tidal
volume being delivered to a single lung because the endotracheal tube is malpositioned).
Intrinsic PEEP can be measured in the passive patient through an end-expiratory hold maneuver.
Immediately before a breath, the expiratory port is closed for 2 sec. Flow ceases, eliminating resistive
pressure; the resulting pressure reflects alveolar pressure at the end of expiration (intrinsic PEEP). A
nonquantitative method of identifying intrinsic PEEP is to inspect the expiratory flow tracing. If expiratory
flow continues until the next breath or the patient's chest fails to come to rest before the next breath,
intrinsic PEEP is present. The consequences of elevated intrinsic PEEP include increased inspiratory
work of breathing and decreased venous return, which may result in decreased cardiac output and
hypotension.
[Fig. 225-1.
Components of airway pressure during mechanical ventilation, illustrated by an inspiratoryhold maneuver.]
The demonstration of intrinsic PEEP should prompt a search for causes of airflow obstruction (eg, airway
secretions, bronchospasm); however, a high minute ventilation (> 20 L/min) alone can result in intrinsic
PEEP in a patient with no airflow obstruction. If the cause is airflow limitation, intrinsic PEEP can be
reduced by shortening inspiratory time (ie, increasing inspiratory flow) or reducing the respiratory rate,
thereby allowing a greater fraction of the respiratory cycle to be spent in exhalation.
Means and Modes of Mechanical Ventilation
Mechanical ventilators are typically volume or pressure cycled; some newer models combine features of
both. Because pressures and volumes are directly linked by the pressure-volume curve, any given
volume will correspond to a specific pressure, and vice versa, regardless of whether the ventilator is
pressure or volume cycled.
Adjustable ventilator settings differ with mode but include respiratory rate, tidal volume, trigger sensitivity,
flow rate, waveform, and inspiratory/expiratory (I/E) ratio.
Volume-cycled ventilation:
In this mode, which includes assist-control (A/C) and synchronized
intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV), the ventilator delivers a set tidal volume. The resultant airway
pressure is not fixed but varies with the resistance and elastance of the respiratory system and with the
flow rate selected.
===PAGE:2434===
A/C
ventilation is the simplest and most effective means of providing full mechanical ventilation. In this
mode, each inspiratory effort beyond the set sensitivity threshold triggers delivery of the fixed tidal
volume. If the patient does not trigger the ventilator frequently enough, the ventilator initiates a breath,
ensuring the desired minimum respiratory rate.
SIMV
also delivers breaths at a set rate and volume that is synchronized to the patient's efforts. In
contrast to A/C, however, patient efforts above the set respiratory rate are unassisted, although the intake
valve opens to allow the breath. This mode remains popular, despite the fact that it neither provides full
ventilator support as does A/C nor facilitates liberating the patient from mechanical ventilation.
Pressure-cycled ventilation:
This form of mechanical ventilation includes pressure control ventilation
(PCV), pressure support ventilation (PSV), and several noninvasive modalities applied via a tight-fitting
face mask. In all of these modalities, the ventilator delivers a set inspiratory pressure. Hence, tidal volume
varies depending on the resistance and elastance of the respiratory system. In this mode, changes in
respiratory system mechanics can result in
unrecognized changes in minute ventilation. Because it limits
the distending pressure of the lungs, this mode can theoretically benefit patients with acute lung
injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ALI/ARDS); however, no clear clinical advantage over A/C has
been shown.
Pressure control ventilation
is similar to A/C; each inspiratory effort beyond the set sensitivity threshold
delivers full pressure support maintained for a fixed inspiratory time. A minimum respiratory rate is
maintained.
In
pressure support ventilation,
a minimum rate is not set; all breaths are triggered by the patient.
Pressure is typically cut off when back-pressure causes flow to drop below a certain point. Thus, a longer
or deeper inspiratory effort by the patient results in a larger tidal volume. This mode is commonly used to
liberate patients from mechanical ventilation by letting them assume more of the work of breathing.
However, no studies indicate that this approach is more successful.
Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV):
NIPPV is the delivery of positive pressure
ventilation via a tight-fitting mask that covers the nose or both the nose and mouth. Because of its use in
spontaneously breathing patients, it is primarily applied as a form of PSV, although volume control can be
used.
NIPPV can be given as continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bilevel positive airway pressure
(BiPAP). In CPAP, constant pressure is maintained throughout the respiratory cycle with no additional
inspiratory support. With BiPAP, the physician sets both the expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP)
and the inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP), with respirations triggered by the patient. Because the
airway is unprotected, aspiration is possible, so patients must have adequate mentation and airway
protective reflexes and no imminent indication for surgery or transport off the floor for prolonged
procedures. NIPPV should be avoided in patients who are hemodynamically unstable and in those with
evidence of impaired gastric emptying, as occurs with ileus, bowel obstruction, or pregnancy. In such
circumstances, swallowing large quantities of air may result in vomiting and life-threatening aspiration.
Indications for conversion to endotracheal intubation and conventional mechanical ventilation include the
development of shock or frequent arrhythmias, myocardial ischemia, and transport to a cardiac
catheterization laboratory or surgical suite where control of the airway and full ventilatory support are
desired. Obtunded patients and patients with copious secretions are not good candidates. Also, IPAP
must be set below esophageal opening pressure (20 cm H
O) to avoid gastric insufflation.
NIPPV can be used in the outpatient setting. For example, CPAP is often used for patients with
obstructive sleep apnea (, whereas BiPAP can be used for those with concomitant central
sleep apnea ( and obstructive sleep apnea or for chronic ventilation in patients with
progressive neuromuscular diseases.
Ventilator settings:
Ventilator settings are tailored to the underlying condition, but the basic principles
are as follows.
===PAGE:2435===
Tidal volume and respiratory rate set the minute ventilation. Too high a volume risks overinflation; too low
a volume risks atelectasis. Too high a rate risks hyperventilation and respiratory alkalosis along with
inadequate expiratory time and autoPEEP; too low a rate risks inadequate minute ventilation and
respiratory acidosis. A tidal volume of 8 to 10 mL/kg ideal body weight ( is usually
appropriate, although some patients with normal lung mechanics (particularly those with neuromuscular
disease) benefit from tidal volumes on the high end of this range to prevent atelectasis, whereas patients
with ALI/ARDS or acute exacerbations of COPD or asthma may require lower volumes (.
Ideal body weight (IBW) rather than actual body weight is used to determine the appropriate tidal volume
for patients with lung disease and receiving mechanical ventilation:
Males: IBW (kg) =

50 + 2.3 (height in inches - 60)

or
50 + 0.91 (height in cm - 152.4)
Females: IBW (kg) =

45.5 + 2.3 (height in inches - 60)

or
45.5 + 0.91 (height in cm - 152.4)
Sensitivity adjusts the level of negative pressure required to trigger the ventilator. A typical setting is -2 cm
H
O. Too high a setting causes weak patients to be unable to trigger a breath. Too low a setting may
lead to overventilation by causing the machine to auto-cycle. Patients with high levels of autoPEEP may
have difficulty inhaling deeply enough to achieve a sufficiently negative intra-airway pressure.
The ratio of time spent in inhalation versus that spent in exhalation (I:E ratio) can be adjusted in some
modes of ventilation. A normal setting for patients with normal mechanics is 1:3. Patients with asthma or
COPD
exacerbations should have ratios of 1:4 or even more to limit the degree of autoPEEP.
The inspiratory flow rate can be adjusted in some modes of ventilation (ie, either the flow rate or the I:E
ratio can be adjusted, not both). The inspiratory flow should generally be set at about 60 L/min but can be
increased up to 120 L/min for patients with airflow limitation to facilitate having more time in exhalation,
thereby limiting autoPEEP.
FIO
is initially set at 1.0 and is subsequently decreased to the lowest level necessary to maintain
adequate oxygenation.
PEEP
can be applied in any ventilator mode. PEEP increases end-expired lung volume and reduces
airspace closure at the end of expiration. Most patients undergoing mechanical ventilation may benefit
from the application of PEEP at 5 cm H
O to limit the atelectasis that frequently accompanies
endotracheal intubation, sedation, paralysis, and/or supine positioning. Higher levels of PEEP improve
oxygenation in disorders such as cardiogenic pulmonary edema and ARDS. PEEP permits use of lower
levels of FIO
while preserving adequate arterial oxygenation. This effect may be important in limiting the
lung injury that may result from prolonged exposure to a high FIO
(≥ 0.6). PEEP increases intrathoracic
pressure and thus may impede venous return, provoking hypotension in a hypovolemic patient, and may
overdistend portions of the lung, thereby causing ventilator-associated lung injury (VALI). By contrast, if
PEEP is too low, it may result in cyclic airspace opening and closing, which in turn may also cause VALI
from the resultant repetitive shear forces.
Patient positioning:
Mechanical ventilation is typically done with the patient in the semiupright position.
However, in patients with ALI/ARDS, prone positioning may result in better oxygenation primarily by
creating more uniform ventilation. Uniform ventilation reduces the amount of lung that has no ventilation
(ie, the amount of shunt), which is generally greatest in the dorsal and caudal lung regions, while having
minimal effects on perfusion distribution.
Although many investigators advocate a trial of prone positioning in patients with ALI/ARDS who require
high levels of PEEP (eg, > 12 cm H
O) and FIO
(eg, > 0.6), trials have not shown any improvement in
mortality with this strategy. Prone positioning is contraindicated in patients with spinal instability or
increased intracranial pressure. This position also requires concerted effort by the ICU staff to avoid
===PAGE:2436===
complications, such as dislodgement of the endotracheal tube or intravascular lines.
Sedation and comfort:
Although some patients tolerate mechanical ventilation via endotracheal tube
without sedatives, most require continuous IV administration of sedatives (eg, propofol, lorazepam,
midazolam) and analgesics (eg, morphine, fentanyl) to minimize stress and anxiety. These drugs can also
reduce energy expenditure to some extent, thereby reducing CO
production and O
consumption.
Doses should be titrated to the desired effect, guided by standard sedation/analgesia scoring systems.
Patients undergoing mechanical ventilation for ALI/ARDS typically require higher levels of sedation and
analgesia. The use of propofol for longer than 24 to 48 h requires periodic monitoring of serum
triglyceride levels.
Neuromuscular blocking agents are now rarely used in patients undergoing mechanical ventilation
because of the risk of prolonged neuromuscular weakness and the need for continuous heavy sedation.
Exceptions include for failure to tolerate some of the more sophisticated and complicated modes of
mechanical ventilation and for prevention of shivering when cooling is used after cardiac arrest.
Complications and safeguards:
Complications can be divided into those resulting from endotracheal
intubation, from mechanical ventilation itself, or from prolonged immobility and inability to eat normally.
The presence of an endotracheal tube causes risk of sinusitis (which is rarely of clinical importance),
ventilator-associated pneumonia (, tracheal stenosis, vocal cord injury, and rarely tracheal-esophageal or trachealvascular fistula.
Purulent tracheal aspirate in a febrile patient who has an elevated WBC count > 48 h after ventilation has
begun suggests ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Complications of ongoing mechanical ventilation itself include pneumothorax, O
toxicity, hypotension,
and VALI.
If acute hypotension develops in a mechanically ventilated patient, particularly when it is accompanied by
tachycardia and/or a sudden increase in peak inspiratory pressure, tension pneumothorax must always
be considered; patients with such findings should immediately have a chest examination and a chest x-ray
(or immediate treatment if examination is confirmatory). More commonly, however, hypotension is a result
of sympathetic lysis caused by sedatives or opioids used to facilitate intubation and ventilation.
Hypotension can also be caused by decreased venous return due to high intrathoracic pressure in
patients receiving high levels of PEEP or in those with high levels of intrinsic PEEP due to asthma or
COPD. If there are no physical findings suggesting tension pneumothorax and if ventilation-related
causes of hypotension are a possible etiology, pending a portable chest x-ray, the patient may be
disconnected from the ventilator and gently bagged manually at 2 to 3 breaths/min with 100% O
while
fluids are infused (eg, 500 to 1000 mL of 0.9% saline in adults, 20 mL/kg in children). An immediate
improvement suggests a ventilation-related cause, and ventilator settings should be adjusted accordingly.
Relative immobility increases the risk of venous thromboembolic disease, skin breakdown, and
atelectasis.
Most hospitals have standardized protocols to reduce complications. Elevating the head of the bed to >
30° decreases risk of ventilator-associated pneumonia, and routine turning of the patient every 2 h
decreases the risk of skin breakdown. All patients receiving mechanical ventilation should receive deep
venous thrombosis prophylaxis, either heparin 5000 units sc bid to tid or low molecular weight heparin or,
if heparin is contraindicated, sequential compression devices. To prevent GI bleeding, patients should
receive an H
blocker (eg, famotidine 20 mg enterally or IV bid) or sucralfate (1 g enterally qid). Proton
pump inhibitors should be reserved for patients with a preexisting indication or active bleeding. Routine
nutritional evaluations are mandatory, and enteral tube feedings should be initiated if ongoing mechanical
ventilation is anticipated.
The most effective way to reduce complications of mechanical ventilation is to limit its duration. Daily
"sedation vacations" and spontaneous breathing trials help determine the earliest point at which the
patient may be liberated from mechanical support.
===PAGE:2437===
Acute Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure
Acute hypoxemic respiratory failure (AHRF) is severe arterial hypoxemia that is refractory to
supplemental O
. It is caused by intrapulmonary shunting of blood secondary to airspace filling
or collapse. Findings include dyspnea and tachypnea. Diagnosis is by ABGs and chest x-ray.
Treatment usually requires mechanical ventilation.
Etiology
Airspace filling in AHRF may result from
• Elevated alveolar capillary hydrostatic pressure, as occurs in left ventricular failure or hypervolemia
• Increased alveolar capillary permeability, as occurs in any of the conditions predisposing to acute lung
injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ALI/ARDS)
• Blood, as seen in diffuse alveolar hemorrhage
Pathophysiology
ALI/ARDS:
ALI resulting in more severe hypoxemia is known as ARDS. However, differentiation between
these 2 forms (see
Table 225-1
) is arbitrary given that Pao
correlates poorly with lung pathology and clinical course.
In ALI/ARDS, pulmonary or systemic inflammation leads to release of cytokines and other proinflammatory
molecules. The cytokines activate alveolar macrophages and recruit neutrophils to the lungs, which in
turn release leukotrienes, oxidants, platelet-activating factor, and proteases. These substances damage
capillary endothelium and alveolar epithelium, disrupting the barriers between capillaries and airspaces.
Edema fluid, protein, and cellular debris flood the airspaces and interstitium, causing disruption of
surfactant, airspace collapse, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, shunting, and pulmonary hypertension. The
injury is distributed heterogeneously but mainly affects dependent lung zones.
Causes of ALI/ARDS (see
Table 225-2
) may involve direct lung injury (eg, pneumonia, acid aspiration) or indirect lung injury (eg,
sepsis, pancreatitis, massive blood transfusion, nonthoracic trauma). Sepsis and pneumonia account for
about 60% of cases.
Refractory hypoxemia:
In both types of AHRF, flooded airspaces allow no inspired
[Table 225-1.
Consensus Definition of ALI/ARDS]
[Table 225-2.
Causes of ALI/ARDS]
gas to enter, so the blood perfusing those alveoli remains at the mixed venous O
content no matter how
high the fractional inspired O
(FIO
). This effect ensures constant admixture of deoxygenated blood into
the pulmonary vein and hence arterial hypoxemia. In contrast, hypoxemia that results from ventilating
alveoli that have less ventilation than perfusion (ie, low ventilation-to-perfusion ratios as occurs in asthma
or COPD and, to some extent, in ARDS/ALI) is readily corrected by supplemental O
.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute hypoxemia (see also p.
) may cause dyspnea, restlessness, and anxiety. Signs include
confusion or alteration of consciousness, cyanosis, tachypnea, tachycardia, and diaphoresis. Cardiac
arrhythmia and coma can result. Airway flooding or closure causes crackles, detected during chest
auscultation; the crackles are typically diffuse but sometimes worse at the lung bases. Jugular venous
distention occurs with high levels of PEEP or severe right ventricular failure.
===PAGE:2438===
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ABGs
• Clinical definition (see
Table 225-1
)
Hypoxemia is usually first recognized using pulse oximetry. Patients with low O
saturation should have a
chest x-ray and ABGs. Symptomatic patients should be treated with supplemental O
while awaiting test
results.
If supplemental O
does not improve the O
saturation to > 90%, right-to-left shunting of blood should be
suspected. An obvious alveolar infiltrate on chest x-ray implicates alveolar flooding as the cause, rather
than an intracardiac shunt. However, at the onset of illness, hypoxemia is often present before changes
are seen on x-ray.
Once AHRF is diagnosed, the cause must be determined, considering both pulmonary and
extrapulmonary causes. Sometimes a known ongoing disorder (eg, acute MI, pancreatitis, sepsis) is an
obvious cause. In other cases, history is suggestive; pneumonia should be suspected in an
immunocompromised patient, and alveolar hemorrhage is suspected after bone marrow transplant or in a
patient with a connective tissue disease. Frequently, however, critically ill patients have received a large
volume of IV fluids for resuscitation, and high-pressure AHRF (eg, caused by ventricular failure or fluid
overload) resulting from treatment must be distinguished from an underlying low-pressure AHRF (eg,
caused by sepsis or pneumonia).
High-pressure pulmonary edema is suggested by a 3rd heart sound, jugular venous distention, and
peripheral edema on examination and by the presence of diffuse central infiltrates, cardiomegaly, and an
abnormally wide vascular pedicle on chest x-ray. The diffuse, bilateral infiltrates of ALI/ARDS are
generally more peripheral. Focal infiltrates are typically caused by lobar pneumonia, atelectasis, or lung
contusion. Although echocardiography may show left ventricular dysfunction, implying a cardiac origin,
this finding is not specific because sepsis can also reduce myocardial contractility.
When ALI/ARDS is diagnosed but the cause is not obvious (eg, trauma, sepsis, severe pulmonary
infection, pancreatitis), a review of drugs and recent diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments may
suggest an unrecognized cause, such as use of a radiographic contrast
agent, air embolism, or
transfusion. When no predisposing cause can be uncovered, some experts recommend doing
bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage to exclude alveolar hemorrhage and eosinophilic pneumonia
and, if this procedure is not revealing, a lung biopsy to exclude other disorders (eg, extrinsic allergic
alveolitis, acute interstitial pneumonitis).
Prognosis
Prognosis is highly variable and depends on a variety of factors, including etiology of respiratory failure,
severity of disease, age, and chronic health status. In particular, mortality in ALI/ARDS was very high (40
to 60%) but has declined in recent years to 25 to 40%, probably because of improvements in mechanical
ventilation and in treatment of sepsis. Most often, death is not caused by respiratory dysfunction but by
sepsis and multiorgan failure. Persistence of neutrophils and high cytokine levels in bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid predict a poor prognosis. Mortality otherwise increases with age, presence of sepsis, and
severity of preexisting organ insufficiency or coexisting organ dysfunction. Pulmonary function returns to
close to normal in 6 to 12 mo in most ALI/ARDS patients who survive; however, patients with a protracted
clinical course or severe disease may have residual pulmonary symptoms, and many have persistent
neuromuscular weakness.
Treatment
• Mechanical ventilation if saturation is < 90% on high-flow O
===PAGE:2439===
Underlying conditions must be addressed as discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL. AHRF is initially
treated with high flows of 70 to 100% O
by a nonrebreather face mask. If O
saturation > 90% is not
obtained, mechanical ventilation probably should be instituted. Specific management varies by condition.
Mechanical ventilation in cardiogenic pulmonary edema:
Mechanical ventilation benefits the failing
left ventricle in several ways. Positive inspiratory pressure reduces left and right ventricular preload and
left ventricular afterload and unloads the respiratory muscles, reducing the work of breathing. Reducing
the work of breathing may allow redistribution of a limited cardiac output away from overworked
respiratory muscles. Expiratory pressure (expiratory positive airway pressure [EPAP] or positive endexpiratory pressure [PEEP]) redistributes pulmonary edema from alveoli to the interstitium, allowing more
alveoli to participate in gas exchange.
Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) is useful in averting endotracheal intubation in many
patients because drug therapy often leads to rapid improvement. Typical settings are inspiratory positive
airway pressure (IPAP) of 10 to 15 cm H
O and EPAP of 5 to 8 cm H
O.
Conventional mechanical ventilation can use several ventilator modes. Most often, assist-control (A/C) is
used in the acute setting, when full ventilatory support is desired. Initial settings are tidal volume of 6
mL/kg ideal body weight (see
Sidebar 225-1
), respiratory rate of 25/min, FIO
of 1.0, and PEEP of 5 to 8
cm H
O. PEEP may then be titrated upward in 2.5-cm H
O increments while the FIO
is decreased to
nontoxic levels. Pressure support ventilation can also be used (with similar levels of PEEP). The initial
pressure delivered should be sufficient to fully rest the respiratory muscles as judged by subjective
patient assessment, respiratory rate, and accessory muscle use. Typically, a pressure support level of 10
to 20 cm H
O over PEEP is required.
Mechanical ventilation in ALI/ARDS:
Nearly all patients require mechanical ventilation (see
Sidebar
225-1
), which, in addition to improving oxygenation, reduces O
demand by resting respiratory muscles.
Targets include
• Plateau transpulmonary pressures < 30 cm H
O (estimated from plateau alveolar pressures and a
consideration of factors that potentially decrease chest wall and abdominal compliance)
• Tidal volume 6 mL/kg predicted body weight to minimize further lung injury
• FIO
as low as is allowed to maintain adequate SaO
to minimize possible O
toxicity
NIPPV is occasionally useful with ALI/ARDS. However, compared with treatment of cardiogenic pulmonary
edema, higher levels of support for a longer duration are often required, and EPAP of 8 to 12 cm H
O is
often necessary to maintain adequate oxygenation. Achieving this expiratory pressure requires inspiratory
pressures > 18 to 20 cm H
O, which are poorly tolerated; maintaining an adequate seal becomes difficult,
the mask becomes more uncomfortable, and skin necrosis and gastric insufflation may occur. Also,
NIPPV-treated patients who subsequently need intubation have generally progressed to a more advanced
condition than if they had been intubated earlier; thus, critical desaturation is possible at the time of
intubation. Intensive monitoring and careful selection of patients ( are required.
Conventional mechanical ventilation in ALI/ARDS previously focused on normalizing ABG values. It is now
clear that ventilating with lower tidal volumes reduces mortality. Accordingly, in most patients, tidal volume
should be set at 6 mL/kg ideal body weight (see
Sidebar 225-1
). This necessitates an increase in
respiratory rate, even up to 35/min, to produce sufficient alveolar ventilation to allow for adequate CO
removal. On occasion, however, respiratory acidosis develops, some degree of which is accepted for the
greater good of limiting ventilator-associated lung injury and is generally well tolerated, particularly when
pH is ≥ 7.15. If pH drops below 7.15, bicarbonate infusion may be helpful. Because hypercapnia may
cause dyspnea and cause the patient to breathe in a fashion that is not coordinated with the ventilator,
analgesics (fentanyl or morphine) and sedatives may be needed (eg, propofol initiated at 5
μ
g/kg/min and
increasing to effect up to 50
μ
g/kg/min; because of the risk of hypertriglyceridemia, triglyceride levels
should be checked every 48 h). Sedation is preferred to neuromuscular blockade because blockade still
===PAGE:2440===
requires sedation and may cause residual weakness.
Sidebar 225-1 Initial Ventilator Management in ALI/ARDS
Generally, the following approach is recommended for ventilator management in ALI/ARDS:
• Assist-control mode is used initially with a tidal volume 6 mL/kg ideal body weight, respiratory rate
25/min, flow rate 60 L/min, FIO
1.0, and PEEP 15 cm H
O.
• Once O
saturation is > 90%, FIO
is decreased.
• Then, PEEP is decreased in 2.5-cm H
O increments as tolerated to find the least PEEP associated with
an arterial O
saturation of 90% on an FIO
of ≤ 0.6.
• The respiratory rate is increased up to 35/min to achieve a pH of > 7.15 or until the expiratory flow
tracing shows end-expiratory flow.
Ideal body weight (IBW) rather than actual body weight is used to determine the appropriate tidal volume
for patients with lung disease receiving mechanical ventilation:
Males: IBW (kg) =

50 + 2.3 (height in inches - 60)

or
50 + 0.91 (height in cm - 152.4)
Females: IBW (kg) =

45.5 + 2.3 (height in inches - 60)

or
45.5 + 0.91 (height in cm - 152.4)
PEEP improves oxygenation in ALI/ARDS by increasing the volume of aerated lung through alveolar
recruitment, permitting the use of a lower FIO
. The optimal level of PEEP and the way to identify it have
been debated. Many clinicians simply use the least amount of PEEP that results in an adequate arterial
O
saturation on a nontoxic FIO
. In most patients, this level is a PEEP of 8 to 15 cm H
O, although
occasionally, patients with severe ARDS require levels > 20 cm H
O. In these cases, close attention must
be paid to other means of optimizing O
delivery and minimizing O
consumption (.
The best indicator of alveolar overdistention is measurement of a plateau pressure through an endinspiratory hold maneuver (; it should be checked every 4 h and after each change in PEEP
or tidal volume. The target plateau pressure is < 30 cm H
O. If the plateau pressure exceeds this value
and there is no problem with the chest wall that could be contributing (eg, ascites, pleural effusion, acute
abdomen, chest trauma), the physician should reduce the tidal volume in 0.5- to 1.0-mL/kg increments as
tolerated to a minimum of 4 mL/kg, raising the respiratory rate to compensate for the reduction in minute
ventilation and inspecting the ventilator waveform display to ensure that full exhalation occurs. The
respiratory rate may often be raised as high as 35/min before overt gas trapping due to incomplete
exhalation results. If plateau pressure is < 25 cm H
O and tidal volume is < 6 mL/kg, tidal volume may be
increased to 6 mL/kg or until plateau pressure is > 25 cm H
O. Some investigators believe pressure
control ventilation protects the lungs better, although supportive data are lacking and it is the peak
pressure rather than the plateau pressure that is being controlled.
Prone positioning ( improves oxygenation in some patients by allowing recruitment of
nonventilating lung regions. However, there is no evidence of improved survival.
Optimal fluid management of patients with ALI/ARDS balances the requirement for an adequate
circulating volume to preserve end-organ perfusion with the goal of lowering preload and thereby limiting
transudation of fluid in the lungs. Recently, a large multicenter trial has shown that a conservative
===PAGE:2441===
approach to
fluid management, in which less fluid is given, shortens the duration of mechanical ventilation
and ICU length of stay when compared with a more liberal strategy. However, there was no difference in
survival between the 2 approaches, and use of a pulmonary artery catheter also did not improve
outcome. Patients not in shock are candidates for such an approach but should be monitored closely for
evidence of decreased end-organ perfusion, such as hypotension, oliguria, thready pulses, or cool
extremities (.
A definitive pharmacologic treatment for ALI/ARDS that reduces morbidity and mortality remains elusive.
Inhaled nitric oxide, surfactant replacement, and many other agents directed at modulating the
inflammatory response have been studied and found not to reduce morbidity or mortality. Some small
studies suggest that systemic corticosteroids may be beneficial in late-stage ALI/ARDS, but a larger,
prospective randomized trial found no reduction in mortality. Corticosteroids may be deleterious when
given early in the course of the condition.
Ventilatory Failure
Ventilatory failure is a rise in PaCO
(hypercapnia) that occurs when the respiratory load can no
longer be supported by the strength or activity of the system. The most common causes are
acute exacerbations of asthma and COPD, overdoses of drugs that suppress ventilatory drive,
and conditions that cause respiratory muscle weakness (eg, Guillain-Barre syndrome,
myasthenia gravis, botulism). Findings include dyspnea, tachypnea, and confusion. Death can
result. Diagnosis is by ABGs and patient observation; chest x-ray and clinical evaluation may
help delineate cause. Treatment varies by condition but often includes mechanical ventilation.
Pathophysiology
Hypercapnia occurs when alveolar ventilation either falls or fails to rise adequately in response to
increased CO
production. A fall in alveolar ventilation results from a decrease in minute ventilation or an
increase in dead space ventilation.
Minute ventilation decreases when there is an imbalance between the load on the respiratory system
(including resistive loads, lung and chest wall elastic loads, and minute ventilation loads) and
neuromuscular competence for an effective inspiratory effort (see
Fig. 225-2
for causes).
Physiologic dead space is the part of the respiratory tree that does not participate in gas exchange. It
includes the anatomic dead space (oropharynx, trachea, and airways) and alveolar dead space (ie,
alveoli that are ventilated but not perfused). The physiologic dead space is normally about 30 to 40% of
tidal volume but increases to 50% in intubated patients and to > 70% in massive pulmonary embolism,
severe emphysema, and status asthmaticus. Thus, for any given minute ventilation, the greater the dead
space, the poorer the CO
elimination.
Increased CO
production, as occurs with fever, sepsis, trauma, burns, hyperthyroidism, and malignant
hyperthermia, is not a primary cause of ventilatory failure because patients should increase their
ventilation to compensate. Ventilatory failure cause by these problems results only when the ability to
compensate is compromised.
Hypercapnia lowers arterial pH (respiratory acidosis). Severe acidemia (pH < 7.2) contributes to
pulmonary arteriolar vasoconstriction, systemic vascular dilation, reduced myocardial contractility,
hyperkalemia, hypotension, and cardiac irritability, with the potential for life-threatening arrhythmias. Acute
hypercapnia also causes cerebral vasodilation and increased intracranial pressure, a major problem in
patients with acute head injury. Over time, tissue buffering and renal compensation can largely correct the
acidemia. However, sudden increases in PaCO
can occur faster than compensatory changes (PaCO
rises 3 to 6 mm Hg/min in a totally apneic patient).
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2442===
The predominant symptom is dyspnea. Signs include vigorous use of accessory ventilatory muscles,
tachypnea, tachycardia, diaphoresis, anxiety, declining tidal volume, irregular or gasping breathing
patterns, and paradoxical abdominal motion.
CNS manifestations range from subtle personality changes to marked confusion, obtundation, or coma.
Chronic hypercapnia is better tolerated than acute and has fewer symptoms.
Diagnosis
• ABGs
• Chest x-ray
• Tests to determine etiology
Ventilatory failure should be suspected in patients with respiratory distress, visible ventilatory fatigue or
cyanosis, or changes in sensorium and in those with disorders causing neuromuscular weakness.
Tachypnea is also
[Fig. 225-2.
The balance between load (resistive, elastic, and minute ventilation) and neuromuscular
competence (drive, transmission, and muscle strength) determines the ability to sustain alveolar
ventilation.]
a concern; respiratory rates > 28 to 30/min cannot be sustained for very long, particularly in elderly or
weakened patients.
If ventilatory failure is suspected, ABG analysis, continuous pulse oximetry, and a chest x-ray should be
done. Respiratory acidosis on the ABG (eg, pH < 7.35 and PCO
> 50) confirms the diagnosis. Patients
with chronic ventilatory failure often have quite elevated PCO
(eg, 60 to 90 mm Hg) at baseline, typically
with a pH that is only slightly acidemic. In such patients, the degree of acidemia rather than the PCO
must serve as the primary marker for acute hypoventilation.
Because ABGs can be normal in patients with incipient ventilatory failure, certain bedside pulmonary
function tests can help predict ventilatory failure, particularly in patients with neuromuscular weakness
who may succumb to ventilatory failure without exhibiting respiratory distress. Vital capacity < 10 to 15
mL/kg and a maximum negative inspiratory force of ≤ 15 cm H
O suggest imminent ventilatory failure.
Once ventilatory failure is diagnosed, the cause must be identified. Sometimes a known ongoing disorder
(eg, coma, acute asthma, COPD exacerbation, myxedema, myasthenia gravis, botulism) is an obvious
cause. In other cases, history is suggestive; sudden onset of tachypnea and hypotension after surgery
suggests pulmonary embolism, and focal neurologic findings suggest a CNS or neuromuscular cause.
Neuromuscular competence may be assessed through measurement of inspiratory muscle strength
(negative inspiratory force and positive expiratory force), neuromuscular transmission (nerve conduction
tests and electromyography), and investigations into causes of diminished drive (toxicology screens, brain
imaging, sleep studies, and thyroid function tests).
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Often positive pressure ventilation
Treatment aims to correct the imbalance between the strength of the respiratory system and its load and
varies with etiology. Obvious precipitants (eg, bronchospasm, mucus plugging, foreign bodies) should be
corrected if possible.
The 2 most common causes are acute exacerbation of asthma (ie, status asthmaticus) and COPD.
===PAGE:2443===
Respiratory failure due to COPD is termed acute-on-chronic respiratory failure (ACRF).
Status asthmaticus (SA):
Patients should be treated in an ICU by personnel skilled in airway
management.
Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) can immediately reduce the work of breathing and may
forestall endotracheal intubation until drug therapy can take effect. In contrast to patients with COPD, who
often welcome NIPPV, the mask often increases the perception of dyspnea in asthmatic patients, so
introduction must be done carefully, perhaps starting with titration of expiratory positive airway pressure
(EPAP) alone (because one of the major functions of inspiratory positive airway pressure [IPAP] is to
increase tidal volume, and in these patients, end-expiratory lung volume approaches total lung capacity).
After an explanation of its benefit, patients hold the mask against their face while modest amounts of
pressure are applied (continuous positive airway pressure [CPAP] 3 to 5 cm H
O). Once tolerated, the
mask is strapped in place while pressures are increased to patient comfort and reduced work of breathing
as assessed by respiratory rate and accessory muscle use. Final settings are typically IPAP 10 to 15 cm
H
O and EPAP 5 to 8 cm H
O. Patients should be selected carefully (.
Conventional mechanical ventilation via endotracheal intubation is indicated for impending respiratory
failure as indicated clinically by obtundation, monosyllabic speech, slumped posture, and shallow
breathing. ABGs showing worsening hypercapnia are also an indication, although blood-gas confirmation
is not required and should not replace the physician's judgment. Oral intubation is preferred over nasal
because a larger endotracheal tube, which decreases airway resistance and permits easier suctioning,
can be used.
Hypotension and pneumothorax occasionally occur after intubation for SA (see also p.
). These
complications and their corresponding mortality have declined significantly because of a ventilator
strategy that emphasizes limiting dynamic hyperinflation over achieving eucapnia. In SA, ventilation
sufficient to achieve a normal pH typically causes severe hyperinflation. To avoid hyperinflation, initial
ventilator settings include a tidal volume of 5 to 7 mL/kg and a respiratory rate of 10 to 18/min. Inspiratory
flows may need to be quite high (eg, 70 to 120 L/min) with a square wave pattern to facilitate maximum
time in exhalation. Dangerous dynamic hyperinflation is unlikely so long as the measured plateau
pressure is < 30 to 35 cm H
O and intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) is < 15 cm H
O
(although these pressures may be difficult to measure because of inspiratory and expiratory respiratory
muscle activity). Plateau pressure > 35 cm H
O is managed by reducing the tidal volume (assuming that
clinical evaluation does not indicate that the high pressures are the result of decreased compliance of the
chest wall or abdomen) or the respiratory rate.
Although it is possible to reduce peak airway pressure by reducing peak flow rate or by changing the
waveform to a descending profile, it should
not
be done. Although high flow rates require a high pressure
to overcome the high airway resistance of SA, this pressure is dissipated across robust, cartilagecontaining airways. Lower flow rates (eg, < 60 L/min) reduce time available for exhalation, thereby
increasing the end-expiratory volume (and the resultant intrinsic PEEP) and allowing a greater inspiratory
volume during the next breath.
Using low tidal volumes often results in hypercapnia, which is permitted for the greater good of reducing
dynamic hyperinflation. An arterial pH > 7.15 is generally well tolerated but often requires large doses of
sedatives and opioids. Neuromuscular blockers should be avoided after the peri-intubation period
because use of these agents in combination with corticosteroids can cause a severe and occasionally
irreversible myopathy, particularly after 24 h of combined use. Patient agitation should be managed with
sedation rather than paralysis, but ideally ventilation can be adjusted to patients' needs so as to reduce
the need for sedation.
Most patients with SA improve to the point of liberation from mechanical ventilation within 2 to 5 days,
although a minority experience protracted severe airflow obstruction. The general approach to liberation
is discussed elsewhere.
ACRF:
In patients with ACRF caused by COPD, the O
cost of breathing is several times that of patients
===PAGE:2444===
without underlying lung
disease. This increased respiratory load occurs in the setting of barely adequate
neuromuscular competence, so patients easily become too tired to maintain ventilation. These patients
are vulnerable to respiratory failure from seemingly trivial insults, and recovery requires systematic
identification and correction of these precipitants (see also p.
). To restore the balance between
neuromuscular competence and load, clinicians reduce airflow obstruction and dynamic hyperinflation
with bronchodilators and corticosteroids and treat infection with antibiotics. Low serum levels of K,
phosphorus, and Mg may exacerbate muscle weakness, frustrating recovery, and must be identified and
treated.
NIPPV is the preferred initial treatment for many patients with ACRF, resulting in decreased rates of
ventilator-associated pneumonia, length of stay, and mortality compared with endotracheal intubation.
Perhaps 75% of patients managed with NIPPV do not require endotracheal intubation. Advantages
include the ease of application and removal; once initial stabilization has occurred, NIPPV may be
stopped temporarily to allow oral intake in selected patients. Trials of unassisted breathing are easily
done, and NIPPV can be reapplied as indicated.
Typical settings are IPAP of 10 to 15 cm H
O and EPAP of 5 to 8 cm H
O, titrated to the work of
breathing as assessed by patient report, respiratory rate and tidal volume, and accessory muscle use.
The same concerns regarding the potential effect of excessive IPAP on total lung capacity as discussed
above exist in these patients as well. Deterioration (and need for endotracheal intubation) is best
assessed clinically; ABGs may be misleading. Although worsening hypercapnia typically indicates
treatment failure, patients differ markedly in tolerance of hypercapnia. Some with PaCO
> 100 mm Hg
are alert and conversant on NIPPV, whereas others require intubation at much lower levels.
Conventional mechanical ventilation in ACRF aims to minimize dynamic hyperinflation and counter the
adverse effects of intrinsic PEEP while resting the fatigued respiratory muscles. Initial recommended
settings are assist-control (A/C) with a tidal volume of 5 to 7 mL/kg and a respiratory rate of 20 to 24/min,
although some patients need lower initial rates to limit intrinsic PEEP. This intrinsic PEEP represents an
inspiratory threshold load that must be overcome by the patient to trigger the ventilator, further increasing
the work of breathing and preventing full rest on the ventilator. To counterbalance the effect of intrinsic
PEEP, external PEEP should be applied to a level ≤ 85% of intrinsic PEEP (typical setting 5 to 10 cm
H
O). This application decreases the inspiratory work of breathing to maximize the time for expiration
without increasing dynamic hyperinflation. High inspiratory flow rates should be used to maximize the time
for expiration. These settings minimize the risk of alkalemia that follows overly vigorous initial ventilation.
Hypotension may also occur immediately after intubation (.
Most patients require full ventilatory support for 24 to 48 h before spontaneous breathing trials are
considered. It has not been determined whether this duration of treatment is needed to rest the
respiratory muscles or to allow hyperinflation to diminish, thereby increasing respiratory muscle strength.
The patient often sleeps heavily during this time and, in contrast to patients with asthma, typically
requires little sedation. Adequate rest is often not achieved unless sufficient attention is paid to ongoing
patient effort. This effort may manifest as accessory muscle use, inappropriately low airway pressures at
the onset or throughout inspiration, or frequent failures to trigger the ventilator, indicating high intrinsic
PEEP, weakness, or both.
Other Types of Respiratory Failure
Perioperative respiratory failure
is usually caused by atelectasis. Effective means of preventing or
treating atelectasis include incentive spirometry, ensuring adequate analgesia for chest and abdominal
incisions, upright positioning, and early mobilization. Atelectasis caused by abdominal distention should
be alleviated according to the cause (eg, nasogastric suction for excessive intraluminal air, paracentesis
to evacuate tense ascites).
Hypoperfusion
, regardless of cause, may result in respiratory failure through inadequate delivery of O
to respiratory muscles coupled with excess respiratory muscle load (eg, acidosis, sepsis). Mechanical
ventilation is useful for diverting blood flow from overworked respiratory muscles to critical organs such as
the brain, kidney, and gut.
===PAGE:2445===
Liberation From Mechanical Ventilation
The discontinuation of ventilatory support is best achieved not by gradually reducing the level of
ventilatory support (weaning) but by
systematically identifying and eliminating the precipitants of
respiratory failure. Once this goal has been achieved, the ventilator is no longer necessary. However, if
precipitants are still present or recovery is incomplete, reducing needed ventilatory support is more likely
to delay recovery. It is now clear that daily spontaneous breathing trials on a T-piece reduce the duration
of mechanical ventilation compared with gradual reduction of the respiratory rate using synchronized
intermittent mandatory ventilation and, in some studies, compared with pressure support trials.
Once the patient is no longer in shock, has an adequate arterial saturation on a fractional inspired O
(FIO
) ≤ 0.5 with a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) ≤ 7.5 cm H
O and does not have an
obviously unsustainable respiratory load (eg, minute ventilation > 20 L/min), a daily spontaneous
breathing trial is done using a T-piece or continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) of 5 cm H
O.
Patients capable of sustaining spontaneous breathing generally breathe slowly and deeply, instead of
rapidly and shallowly. This observation has been formalized as the rapid shallow breathing (RSB) index,
determined by dividing the patient's unassisted respiratory rate (in breaths/min) by the tidal volume (in L).
A value < 105 suggests that spontaneous breathing is likely to be successful, although a single isolated
measurement is not perfectly predictive of success. Recently, the decision of whether to extubate a
patient after a spontaneous breathing trial has shifted away from the use of the RSB index and has relied
more on clinical assessment during the course of the trial, supplemented by measuring ABGs. Patients
who fare well during a brief 1- to 2-h spontaneous breathing trial and who have favorable ABGs are good
candidates for extubation. The decision to extubate is a separate one from the decision to stop ventilatory
support and requires evaluation of the patient's mentation and airway protective reflexes, as well as the
patency of the airway.
Although sedatives and opioids are essential for ensuring comfort, rest, and synchrony with the ventilator,
their use may prolong mechanical ventilation. Such drugs may accumulate and cause protracted
sedation, frustrating attempts to do spontaneous breathing trials even when the cause of respiratory
failure has been corrected. The level of sedation should be continually assessed, and progressive
sedative withdrawal should be begun as soon as possible. Formal protocols can be used, or simple daily
interruption can be carried out. The infusion is stopped until the patient is either awake and following
commands or needs re-sedation for agitation, breathing asynchronously with the ventilator, or other
physiologic derangements. If sedation is still needed, it is restarted at half the previous dose and titrated
as necessary. Several studies have shown that the mean duration of mechanical ventilation is reduced in
institutions that use either daily "sedation vacations" or other sedation protocols, as well as daily
spontaneous breathing trials.
===PAGE:2446===
Chapter 226. Shock and Fluid Resuscitation
Introduction
(See also
Chapter 227
.)
The fundamental defect in shock is reduced perfusion of vital tissues. Definitive treatment restores
adequate tissue perfusion, usually by giving IV fluids.
Shock
Shock is a state of organ hypoperfusion with resultant cellular dysfunction and death.
Mechanisms may involve decreased circulating volume, decreased cardiac output, and
vasodilation, sometimes with shunting of blood to bypass capillary exchange beds. Symptoms
include altered mental status, tachycardia, hypotension, and oliguria. Diagnosis is clinical,
including BP measurement. Treatment is with IV fluids, correction of the underlying disorder,
and sometimes vasopressors.
Pathophysiology
The fundamental defect in shock is reduced perfusion of vital tissues. Once perfusion declines so that O
is inadequate for aerobic metabolism, cells shift to anaerobic metabolism with increased production of
CO
and accumulation of lactic acid. Cellular function declines, and if shock persists, irreversible cell
damage and death occur.
During shock, both the inflammatory and clotting cascades may be triggered in areas of hypoperfusion.
Hypoxic vascular endothelial cells activate WBCs, which bind to the endothelium and release directly
damaging substances (eg, reactive O
species, proteolytic enzymes) and inflammatory mediators (eg,
cytokines, leukotrienes, tumor necrosis factor [TNF]). Some of these mediators bind to cell surface
receptors and activate nuclear factor kappa B (NF
κ
B), which leads to production of additional cytokines
and nitric oxide (NO), a potent vasodilator. Septic shock ( may be more proinflammatory than
other forms because of the actions of bacterial toxins, especially endotoxin.
Vasodilation of capacitance vessels leads to pooling of blood and hypotension because of "relative"
hypovolemia (ie, too much volume to be filled by the existing amount of blood). Localized vasodilation may
shunt blood past the capillary exchange beds, causing focal hypoperfusion despite normal cardiac output
and BP. Additionally, excess NO is converted to peroxynitrite, a free radical that damages mitochondria
and decreases ATP production.
Blood flow to microvessels including capillaries is reduced even though large-vessel blood flow is
preserved in settings of septic shock. Mechanical microvascular obstruction may, at least in part, account
for such limiting of substrate delivery. Leukocytes and platelets adhere to the endothelium, and the
clotting system is activated with fibrin deposition.
Multiple mediators, along with endothelial cell dysfunction, markedly increase microvascular permeability,
allowing fluid and sometimes plasma proteins to escape into the interstitial space. In the GI tract,
increased permeability possibly allows translocation of the enteric bacteria from the lumen to the
bloodstream, potentially leading to sepsis or metastatic infection.
Neutrophil apoptosis may be inhibited, enhancing the release of inflammatory mediators. In other cells,
apoptosis may be augmented, increasing cell death and thus worsening organ function.
BP is not always low in the early stages of shock (although hypotension eventually occurs if shock is not
reversed). Similarly, not all patients with "low" BP have shock. The degree and consequences of
hypotension vary with the adequacy of physiologic compensation and the patient's underlying diseases.
Thus, a modest degree of hypotension that is well tolerated by a young, relatively healthy person might
result in severe cerebral, cardiac, or renal dysfunction in a patient with significant arteriosclerosis.
===PAGE:2447===
Compensation:
Initially, when O
delivery (DO
) is decreased, tissues compensate by extracting a
greater percentage of delivered O
. Current guidelines provide for interventions that will maintain mixedvenous O
saturation above 30%. Additionally, low arterial pressure triggers an adrenergic response with
sympathetic-mediated vasoconstriction and often increased heart rate. Initially, vasoconstriction is
selective, shunting blood to the heart and brain. Circulating
β
-adrenergic amines (epinephrine,
norepinephrine) also increase cardiac contractility and trigger release of corticosteroids from the adrenal
gland, renin from the kidney, and glucose from the liver. Increased glucose may overwhelm ailing
mitochondria, causing further lactate production.
Reperfusion:
Reperfusion of ischemic cells can cause further injury. As substrate is reintroduced,
neutrophil activity may increase, increasing production of damaging superoxide and hydroxyl radicals.
After blood flow is restored, inflammatory mediators may be circulated to other organs.
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS):
The combination of direct and reperfusion injury may
cause MODS—the progressive dysfunction of ≥ 2 organs consequent to life-threatening illness or injury.
MODS can follow any type of shock but is most common when infection is involved; organ failure is one
of the defining features of septic shock (. MODS also occurs in > 10% of patients with
severe traumatic injury and is the primary cause of death in those surviving > 24 h.
Any organ system can be affected, but the most frequent target organ is the lung, in which increased
membrane permeability leads to flooding of alveoli due to capillary leaks. Progressive hypoxia may be
increasingly resistant to supplemental O
therapy. This condition is termed acute lung injury or, if severe,
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS—.
The kidneys are injured when renal perfusion is critically reduced, leading to acute tubular necrosis and
renal insufficiency manifested by oliguria and progressive rise in serum creatinine.
In the heart, reduced coronary perfusion and mediators (including TNF and IL-1) may depress
contractility, worsen myocardial compliance, and down-regulate
β
-receptors. These factors decrease
cardiac output, further worsening both myocardial and systemic
perfusion and causing a vicious circle
often culminating in death.
In the GI tract, ileus and submucosal hemorrhage can develop. Liver hypoperfusion can cause focal or
extensive hepatocellular necrosis, transaminase elevation, and decreased production of clotting factors.
Etiology and Classification
There are several mechanisms of organ hypoperfusion and shock. Shock may be due to a low circulating
volume (hypovolemic shock), vasodilation (distributive shock), a primary decrease in cardiac output (both
cardiogenic and obstructive shock), or a combination.
Hypovolemic shock:
Hypovolemic shock is caused by a critical decrease in intravascular volume.
Diminished venous return (preload) results in decreased ventricular filling and reduced stroke volume.
Unless compensated for by increased heart rate, cardiac output decreases.
A common cause is bleeding (hemorrhagic shock), typically due to trauma, surgical interventions, peptic
ulcer, esophageal varices, or aortic aneurysm. Bleeding may be overt (eg, hematemesis, melena) or
concealed (eg, ruptured ectopic pregnancy).
Hypovolemic shock may also follow increased losses of body fluids other than blood (see
Table 226-1
).
Hypovolemic shock may be due to inadequate fluid intake (with or without increased fluid loss). Water
may be unavailable, neurologic disability may impair the thirst mechanism, or physical disability may
impair access.
===PAGE:2448===
[Table 226-1.
Hypovolemic Shock Caused by Body Fluid Loss]
In hospitalized patients, hypovolemia can be compounded if early signs of circulatory insufficiency are
incorrectly ascribed to heart failure and fluids are withheld or diuretics are given.
Distributive shock:
Distributive shock results from a relative inadequacy of intravascular volume caused
by arterial or venous vasodilation; circulating blood volume is normal. In some cases, cardiac output (and
DO
) is high, but increased blood flow through arteriovenous shunts bypasses capillary beds, causing
cellular hypoperfusion (demonstrated by decreased O
consumption). In other situations, blood pools in
venous capacitance beds and cardiac output falls.
Distributive shock may be caused by anaphylaxis (anaphylactic shock—; bacterial infection
with endotoxin release (septic shock—; severe injury to the brain or spinal cord (neurogenic
shock); and ingestion of certain drugs or poisons, such as nitrates, opioids, and adrenergic blockers.
Anaphylactic shock and septic shock often have a component of hypovolemia as well.
Cardiogenic and obstructive shock:
Cardiogenic shock is a relative or absolute reduction in cardiac
output due to a primary cardiac disorder. Mechanical factors that interfere with filling or emptying of the
heart or great vessels explain obstructive shock. Causes are listed in
Table 226-2
.
Symptoms and Signs
Lethargy, confusion, and somnolence are common. The hands and feet are pale, cool, clammy, and often
cyanotic, as are the earlobes, nose, and nail beds. Capillary filling time is prolonged, and except in
distributive shock, the skin appears grayish or dusky and moist. Overt diaphoresis may occur. Peripheral
pulses are weak and typically rapid; often, only femoral or carotid pulses are palpable. Tachypnea and
hyperventilation may be present. BP tends to be low (< 90 mm Hg systolic) or unobtainable; direct
measurement by intra-arterial catheter, if done, often gives higher and more accurate values. Urine output
is low.
Distributive shock produces similar symptoms, except the skin may appear warm or flushed, especially
during sepsis. The pulse may be bounding rather than weak. In septic shock, fever, usually preceded by
chills, is generally present. Some patients with anaphylactic shock have urticaria or wheezing.
Numerous other symptoms (eg, chest pain, dyspnea, abdominal pain) may be due to the underlying
disease or secondary organ failure.
[Table 226-2.
Mechanisms of Cardiogenic and Obstructive Shock]
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is mostly clinical, based on evidence of insufficient tissue perfusion (obtundation, oliguria,
peripheral cyanosis) and signs of compensatory mechanisms (tachycardia, tachypnea, diaphoresis).
Specific criteria include obtundation, heart rate > 100, respiratory rate > 22, hypotension (systolic BP <
90 mm Hg) or a 30-mm Hg fall in baseline BP, and urine output < 0.5 mL/kg/h. Laboratory findings that
support the diagnosis include lactate > 3 mmol/L, base deficit < -5 mEq/L, and PaCO
< 32 mm Hg.
However, none of these findings alone is diagnostic, and each is evaluated in the overall clinical context,
including physical signs. Recently, measurement of sublingual PCO
has been introduced as a
noninvasive and rapid measurement of the severity of shock.
Diagnosis of cause:
Recognizing the cause of shock is more important than categorizing the type.
Often, the cause is obvious or can be recognized quickly by history and physical examination, aided by
simple testing.
Chest pain (with or without dyspnea) suggests MI, aortic dissection, or pulmonary embolism. A systolic
murmur may indicate ventricular septal rupture or mitral insufficiency due to acute MI. A diastolic murmur
===PAGE:2449===
may indicate aortic regurgitation due to aortic dissection involving the aortic root. Cardiac tamponade is
suggested by jugular venous distention, muffled heart sounds, and a paradoxical pulse. Pulmonary
embolism severe enough to produce shock typically produces decreased O
saturation and occurs more
often in special settings, including prolonged bed rest and after a surgical procedure. Tests include ECG,
troponin I, chest x-ray, ABG measurements, lung scan, helical CT, and echocardiography.
Abdominal or back pain or a tender abdomen suggests pancreatitis, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm,
peritonitis, and, in women of childbearing age, ruptured ectopic pregnancy. A pulsatile midline mass
suggests ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm. A tender adnexal mass suggests ectopic pregnancy.
Testing typically includes abdominal CT (if the patient is unstable, bedside ultrasound can be helpful),
CBC, amylase, lipase, and, for women of childbearing age, urine pregnancy test.
Fever, chills, and focal signs of infection suggest septic shock, particularly in immunocompromised
patients. Isolated fever, contingent on history and clinical settings, may point to heatstroke. Tests include
chest x-ray; urinalysis; CBC; and cultures of wounds, blood, urine, and other relevant body fluids.
In a few patients, the cause is occult. Patients with no focal symptoms or signs indicative of cause should
have ECG, cardiac enzymes, chest x-ray, and ABGs. If results of these tests are normal, the most likely
causes include drug overdose, occult infection (including toxic shock), and obstructive shock.
Ancillary testing:
If not already obtained, ECG, chest x-ray, CBC, serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine,
PT, PTT, liver function tests, and fibrinogen and fibrin split products are done to monitor patient status
and serve as a baseline. If the patient's volume status is difficult to determine, monitoring of central
venous pressure (CVP) or pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP) may be useful. CVP < 5 mm Hg
(< 7 cm H
O) or PAOP < 8 mm Hg may indicate hypovolemia, although CVP may be greater in
hypovolemic patients with preexisting pulmonary hypertension.
Prognosis and Treatment
Untreated shock is usually fatal. Even with treatment, mortality from cardiogenic shock after MI and from
septic shock is high (60 to 65%). Prognosis depends on the cause, preexisting or complicating illness,
time between
onset and diagnosis, and promptness and adequacy of therapy.
General management:
First aid involves keeping the patient warm. Hemorrhage is controlled, airway
and ventilation are checked, and respiratory assistance is given if necessary. Nothing is given by mouth,
and the patient's head is turned to one side to avoid aspiration if emesis occurs.
Treatment begins simultaneously with evaluation. Supplemental O
by face mask is provided. If shock is
severe or if ventilation is inadequate, airway intubation with mechanical ventilation is necessary. Two
large (16- to 18-gauge) IV catheters are inserted into separate peripheral veins. A central venous line or
an intraosseous needle, especially in children, provides an alternative when peripheral veins cannot
promptly be accessed (see also p.
).
Typically, 1 L (or 20 mL/kg in children) of 0.9% saline is infused over 15 min. In major hemorrhage,
Ringer's lactate is commonly used. Unless clinical parameters return to normal, the infusion is repeated.
Smaller volumes (eg, 250 to 500 mL) are used for patients with signs of high right-sided pressure (eg,
distention of neck veins) or acute MI. A fluid challenge should probably not be done in a patient with signs
of pulmonary edema. Further fluid therapy is based on the underlying condition and may require
monitoring of CVP or PAOP.
Patients in shock are critically ill and should be admitted to an ICU. Monitoring includes ECG; systolic,
diastolic, and mean BP, preferably by intra-arterial catheter; respiratory rate and depth; pulse oximetry;
urine flow by indwelling bladder catheter; body temperature; and clinical status, including sensorium (eg,
Glasgow Coma Scale—see
Table 174-4
, pulse volume, skin temperature, and color. Measurement of CVP, PAOP, and
thermodilution cardiac output using a balloon-tipped pulmonary arterial catheter may be helpful for
diagnosis and initial management of patients with shock of uncertain or mixed etiology or with severe
===PAGE:2450===
shock, especially when accompanied by oliguria or pulmonary edema. Echocardiography (bedside or
transesophageal) is a less invasive alternative. Serial measurements of ABGs, Hct, electrolytes, serum
creatinine, and blood lactate are obtained. Sublingual CO
measurement (, if available, is a
noninvasive monitor of visceral perfusion. A well-designed flow sheet is helpful.
Because tissue hypoperfusion makes intramuscular absorption unreliable, all parenteral drugs are given
IV. Opioids generally are avoided because they may cause vasodilation, but severe pain may be treated
with morphine 1 to 4 mg IV given over 2 min and repeated q 10 to 15 min if necessary. Although cerebral
hypoperfusion may cause anxiety, sedatives or tranquilizers are not routinely given.
After initial resuscitation, specific treatment is directed at the underlying condition. Additional supportive
care is guided by the type of shock.
Hemorrhagic shock:
In hemorrhagic shock, surgical control of bleeding is primary. Vigorous volume
replacement (see also p.
) accompanies rather than precedes surgical control. Blood transfusion is
used for hemorrhagic shock unresponsive to 2 L (or 40 mL/kg in children) of crystalloid. Failure to
respond usually indicates insufficient volume administration or unrecognized ongoing hemorrhage.
Vasopressor agents are not indicated for treatment of hemorrhagic shock unless cardiogenic, obstructive,
or distributive causes are also present.
Distributive shock:
Distributive shock with profound hypotension after initial fluid replacement with 0.9%
saline may be treated with inotropic or vasopressor agents (eg, dopamine, norepinephrine—see
Table 226-3
). Patients with septic shock also receive at least two broad-spectrum antibiotics (. Patients with anaphylactic shock unresponsive to fluid challenge (especially if accompanied by
bronchoconstriction) receive epinephrine 0.05 to 0.1 mg IV, followed by epinephrine infusion of 5 mg in
500 mL 5% D/W at 10 mL/h or 0.02
μ
g/kg/min (see also p.
).
Cardiogenic shock:
In cardiogenic shock, structural disorders (eg, valvular dysfunction, septal rupture)
are repaired surgically. Coronary thrombosis is treated either by percutaneous interventions (angioplasty,
stenting), coronary artery bypass surgery, or thrombolysis (see also
Chapter 210
). Tachydysrhythmia (eg,
rapid atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia) is slowed by cardioversion or with drugs. Bradycardia is
treated with a transcutaneous or transvenous pacemaker; atropine 0.5 mg IV up to 4 doses q 5 min may
be given pending pacemaker placement. Isoproterenol (2 mg/500 mL 5% D/W at 1 to 4
μ
g/min [0.25 to 1
mL/min]) is occasionally useful if atropine is ineffective, but it is not advised in patients with myocardial
ischemia due to coronary artery disease.
Shock after acute MI is treated with volume expansion if PAOP is low or normal; 15 to 18 mm Hg is
considered optimal. If a pulmonary artery catheter is not in place, cautious volume infusion (250- to 500mL bolus
of 0.9% saline) may be tried while auscultating the chest frequently for signs of fluid overload.
Shock after right ventricular MI usually responds partially to volume expansion; however, vasopressor
agents may be needed.
If hypotension is moderate (eg, mean arterial pressure [MAP] 70 to 90 mm Hg), dobutamine infusion may
be used to improve cardiac output and reduce left ventricular filling pressure. Tachycardia and
arrhythmias occasionally occur during dobutamine administration, particularly at higher doses,
necessitating dose reduction. Vasodilators (eg, nitroprusside, nitroglycerin), which increase venous
capacitance or lower systemic vascular resistance, reduce the workload on the damaged myocardium
and may increase cardiac output in patients without severe hypotension. Combination therapy (eg,
dopamine or dobutamine with nitroprusside or nitroglycerin) may be particularly useful but requires close
ECG and pulmonary and systemic hemodynamic monitoring.
For more serious hypotension (MAP < 70 mm Hg), norepinephrine or dopamine may be given, with a
target systolic pressure of 80 to 90 mm Hg (and not > 110 mm Hg). Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation is
valuable for temporarily reversing shock in patients with acute MI. This procedure should be considered
as a bridge to permit cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography before possible surgical
intervention in patients with acute MI complicated by ventricular septal rupture or severe acute mitral
regurgitation who require vasopressor support for > 30 min.
===PAGE:2451===
In obstructive shock, cardiac tamponade requires immediate pericardiocentesis, which can be done at the
bedside. Tension pneumothorax should be immediately decompressed with a catheter inserted into the
2nd intercostal space, midclavicular line. Massive pulmonary embolism resulting in shock is treated with
thrombolysis or surgical embolectomy.
Intravenous Fluid Resuscitation
Almost all circulatory shock states require large-volume IV fluid replacement, as does severe intravascular
volume depletion (eg, due to diarrhea or heatstroke). Intravascular volume deficiency is acutely
compensated for by vasoconstriction, followed over hours by migration of fluid from the extravascular
compartment to the intravascular compartment, maintaining circulating volume at the expense of total
body water. However, this compensation is overwhelmed after major losses. See
Chapter 97
for maintenance
fluid requirement discussion, and see
Chapter 278
for mild dehydration discussion.
Fluids
Choice of resuscitation fluid depends on the cause of the deficit.
Hemorrhage:
Loss of RBCs diminishes O
-carrying capacity. However, the body increases cardiac
output to maintain O
delivery (DO
) and increases O
extraction. These factors provide a safety margin
of about 9 times the resting O
requirement. Thus, non-O
2carrying fluids (eg, crystalloid or colloid
solutions) may be used to restore intravascular volume in mild to moderate blood loss.
[Table 226-3.
Inotropic and Vasoactive Catecholamines]
However, once Hb declines to < 7 g/dL, in the absence of cardiac or cerebral vascular disease, O
-
carrying capacity must be restored by infusion of blood (or in the future by blood substitutes). Patients
with coronary or cerebral vascular disease require blood for Hb < 10 g/dL.
Crystalloid solutions
for intravascular volume replenishment are typically isotonic (eg, 0.9% saline or
Ringer's lactate [RL]). H
O freely travels outside the vasculature, so as little as 10% of isotonic fluid
remains in the intravascular space. With hypotonic fluid (eg, 0.45% saline), even less remains in the
vasculature, and thus, this fluid is not used for resuscitation. Both 0.9% saline and RL are equally
effective; RL may be preferred in hemorrhagic shock because it somewhat minimizes acidosis. However,
the Ca in RL may interfere with concurrently infused drugs and may trigger clotting in transfused blood
unless the ratio of blood:RL is > 2:1. For patients with acute brain injury and hemorrhagic shock, 0.9%
saline is preferred. Hypertonic saline (7.5%) is also an effective crystalloid; it shifts more volume from the
extravascular space and therefore requires lower absolute volume, which has practical advantages in a
prehospital setting.
Colloid solutions
(eg, hydroxyethyl starch, albumin, dextrans) are also effective for volume replacement
during major hemorrhage. Despite theoretical benefits over crystalloid, no differences in survival have
been proved. Albumin is the colloid of choice, although it may have a negative inotropic effect. Both
dextrans and hydroxyethyl starch may adversely affect coagulation when > 1.5 L is given.
Blood
typically is given as packed RBCs, which should be cross-matched, but in an urgent situation, 1 to
2 units of type O Rh-negative blood are an acceptable alternative. When > 1 to 2 units are transfused
(eg, in major trauma), blood is warmed to 37°C. Patients receiving > 8 to 10 units may require
replacement of clotting factors with infusion of fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate and platelet
transfusion (see also p.
).
Blood substitutes
are O
-carrying fluids that can be Hb-based or perfluorocarbons. Hb-based fluids
may contain free Hb that is liposome-encapsulated or modified (eg, by surface modification or crosslinking with other molecules) to limit renal excretion and toxicity. Because the antigen-bearing RBC
membrane is not present, these substances do not require cross-matching. They can also be stored > 1
yr, providing a more stable source than banked blood. Perfluorocarbons are IV carbon-fluorine emulsions
that carry large amounts of O
. However, they have not been proved to increase survival and cannot be
===PAGE:2452===
given in amounts sufficient to compensate for critical RBC losses.
Nonhemorrhagic hypovolemia:
Isotonic crystalloid solutions are typically given for intravascular
repletion during shock and hypovolemia. Colloid solutions are generally not used. Patients with
dehydration and adequate circulatory volume typically have a free water deficit, and hypotonic solutions
(eg, D5 0.45% saline) are used.
Route and Rate of Fluid Administration
Standard, large (eg, 14- to 16-gauge) peripheral IV catheters are adequate for most fluid resuscitation.
With an infusion pump, they typically allow infusion of 1 L of crystalloid in 10 to 15 min and 1 unit of
packed RBCs in 20 min. For patients at risk of exsanguination, a large (eg, 8.5 French) central venous
catheter provides more rapid infusion rates; a pressure infusion device can infuse 1 unit of packed RBCs
in < 5 min.
Patients in shock typically require and tolerate infusion at the maximum rate. Adults are given 1 L of
crystalloid (20 mL/kg in children) or, in hemorrhagic shock, 5 to 10 mL/kg of colloid or packed RBCs, and
the patient is reassessed. An exception is a patient with cardiogenic shock who typically does not require
large volume infusion.
Patients with intravascular volume depletion without shock can receive infusion at a controlled rate,
typically 500 mL/h. Children should have fluid deficit calculated ( and replacement given over
24 h (one half in the first 8 h).
End Point and Monitoring
The actual end point of fluid therapy in shock is normalization of DO
. However, this parameter is not
often measured directly. Surrogate end points include clinical indicators of end-organ perfusion and
measurements of preload.
Adequate end-organ perfusion is best indicated by urine output of > 0.5 to 1 mL/kg/h. Heart rate, mental
status, and capillary refill may be affected by the underlying disease process and are less reliable
markers. Because of compensatory vasoconstriction, mean arterial pressure (MAP) is only a rough
guideline; organ hypoperfusion may be present despite apparently normal values. An elevated arterial
blood lactate level reflects hypoperfusion; however, levels do not decline for several hours after
successful resuscitation. Sublingual tissue CO
level responds more rapidly (eg, within minutes) and may
be a more useful indicator.
Central venous pressure:
Because urine output does not provide a minute-to-minute indication,
measures of preload may be helpful in guiding fluid resuscitation for critically ill patients. Central venous
pressure (CVP) is the mean pressure in the superior vena cava, reflecting right ventricular end-diastolic
pressure or preload. Normal CVP ranges from 2 to 7 mm Hg (3 to 9 cm H
O). A sick or injured patient with
a CVP < 3 mm Hg is presumed to be volume depleted and may be given fluids with relative safety. When
the CVP is within the normal range, volume depletion cannot be excluded, and the response to 100- to
200-mL fluid boluses should be assessed; a modest increase in CVP in response to fluid generally
indicates hypovolemia. An increase of > 3 to 5 mm Hg in response to a 100-mL fluid bolus suggests
limited cardiac reserve. A CVP > 12 to 15 mm Hg casts doubt on hypovolemia as the sole etiology of
hypoperfusion, and fluid administration risks fluid overload.
Because CVP may be unreliable in assessing volume status or left ventricular function, pulmonary artery
catheterization ( may be considered for diagnosis or for more precise titration of fluid therapy
if there is no cardiovascular improvement after initial therapy. Care must be taken when interpreting filling
pressures in patients during mechanical ventilation, particularly when positive end-expiratory pressure
(PEEP) levels exceeding 10 cm H
O are being used or during respiratory distress when pleural
pressures fluctuate widely. Measurements are made at the end of expiration, and the transducer is
referenced to atrial zero levels (mid chest) and carefully calibrated.
===PAGE:2453===
Traumatic hemorrhagic shock:
These patients may require a slightly different approach. Experimental
and clinical evidence indicates that internal hemorrhage (eg, due to visceral or vascular laceration or
crush) may be worsened by resuscitation to normal or supranormal MAP. Some physicians advocate an
MAP of 60 to 80 mm Hg as the resuscitation end point in such patients pending surgical control of
bleeding.
After blood loss is controlled, Hct is used to guide the need for further transfusion. A target Hct of 23 to
28% is suggested to minimize the use of blood products. Patients who may have difficulty tolerating
moderate anemia (eg, those with coronary or cerebral artery disease) are kept above 30%. A higher Hct
does not improve outcome and, by causing increased blood viscosity, may impair perfusion of capillary
beds.
Complications
Overly rapid infusion of any type of fluid may precipitate pulmonary edema.
Hemodilution from crystalloid infusion is not of itself injurious, although Hct must be monitored to note
whether threshold values for transfusion are met.
RBC transfusion has a low risk of directly transmitting infection, but in critically ill patients, it seems to
cause a slightly higher rate of hospital-acquired infection. This risk may be minimized by using blood < 12
days old; such RBCs are more plastic and less likely to cause sludging in the microvasculature. For other
complications of massive transfusion, see p.
.
===PAGE:2454===
Chapter 227. Sepsis and Septic Shock
Introduction
(See also
Chapter 226
.)
Sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock are inflammatory states resulting from the systemic
response to bacterial infection. In severe sepsis and septic shock, there is critical reduction in
tissue perfusion. Common causes include gram-negative organisms, staphylococci, and
meningococci. Symptoms often begin with shaking chills and include fever, hypotension,
oliguria, and confusion. Acute failure of multiple organs, including the lungs, kidneys, and liver,
can occur. Treatment is aggressive fluid resuscitation, antibiotics, surgical excision of infected
or necrotic tissues and drainage of pus, supportive care, and sometimes intensive control of
blood glucose and administration of corticosteroids and activated protein C.
A spectrum of severity exists (see
Table 227-1
).
Sepsis
is infection accompanied by an acute inflammatory reaction with systemic manifestations
associated with release into the bloodstream of numerous endogenous mediators of inflammation. Acute
pancreatitis and major trauma, including burns, may manifest with signs of sepsis. The inflammatory
reaction typically manifests with ≥ 2 of the following:
• Temperature > 38°C or < 36°C
•
Heart rate > 90 beats/min
• Respiratory rate > 20 breaths/min or PaCO
< 32 mm Hg
• WBC count > 12,000 cells/
μ
L or < 4,000 cells/
μ
L or > 10% immature forms
However, these criteria are now viewed as suggestive but not sufficiently precise to be diagnostic.
Severe sepsis
is sepsis accompanied by signs of failure of at least one organ. Cardiovascular failure is
typically manifested by hypotension, respiratory failure by hypoxemia, renal failure by oliguria, and
hematologic failure by coagulopathy.
Septic shock
is severe sepsis with organ hypoperfusion and hypotension that are poorly responsive to
initial fluid resuscitation.
Etiology
Most cases of septic shock are caused by hospital-acquired gram-negative bacilli or gram-positive cocci
and often occur in immunocompromised patients and patients with chronic and debilitating diseases.
Rarely, it is caused by
Candida
or other fungi. A unique form of shock caused by staphylococcal and
streptococcal toxins is called toxic shock (.
Septic shock occurs more often in neonates (, patients > 35 yr, and pregnant women.
Predisposing factors include diabetes mellitus; cirrhosis; leukopenia, especially that associated with
cancer or treatment with cytotoxic drugs; invasive devices, including endotracheal tubes, vascular or
urinary catheters, drainage tubes, and other foreign materials; and prior treatment with antibiotics or
corticosteroids. Common causative sites of infection include the lungs and the urinary, biliary, and GI
tracts.
Pathophysiology
The pathogenesis of septic shock is not completely understood. An inflammatory stimulus (eg, a bacterial
===PAGE:2455===
toxin) triggers production of proinflammatory mediators, including tumor necrosis factor and IL-1. These
cytokines cause neutrophil-endothelial cell adhesion, activate the clotting mechanism, and generate
microthrombi. They also release numerous other mediators, including leukotrienes, lipoxygenase,
histamine, bradykinin, serotonin, and IL-2. They are opposed by anti-inflammatory mediators, such as IL-4
and IL-10, resulting in a negative feedback mechanism.
Initially, arteries and arterioles dilate, decreasing peripheral arterial resistance; cardiac output typically
increases. This stage has been referred to as warm shock. Later, cardiac output may decrease, BP falls
(with or without an increase in peripheral resistance), and typical features of shock appear.
Even in the stage of increased cardiac output, vasoactive mediators cause blood flow to bypass capillary
exchange vessels (a distributive defect). Poor capillary flow from this shunting along with capillary
obstruction by microthrombi decreases delivery of O
and impairs removal of CO
and waste products.
Decreased perfusion causes dysfunction and sometimes failure of one or more organs, including the
kidneys, lungs, liver, brain, and heart.
Coagulopathy may develop because of intravascular coagulation with consumption of major clotting
factors, excessive fibrinolysis in reaction thereto, and more often a combination of both.
Symptoms and Signs
With sepsis, the patient typically has fever, tachycardia, and tachypnea; BP remains
[Table 227-1.
Sepsis in the United States]
normal. Other signs of the causative infection are generally present. As severe sepsis or septic shock
develops, the first sign may be confusion or decreased alertness. BP generally falls, yet the skin is
paradoxically warm. Oliguria (< 0.5 mL/kg/h) is likely to be present. Later, extremities become cool and
pale, with peripheral cyanosis and mottling. Organ failure causes additional symptoms and signs specific
to the organ involved.
Diagnosis
Sepsis is suspected when a patient with a known infection develops systemic signs of inflammation or
organ dysfunction. Similarly, a patient with otherwise unexplained signs of systemic inflammation should
be evaluated for infection by history, physical examination, and tests, including urinalysis and urine culture
(particularly in patients who have indwelling catheters), serial blood cultures, and cultures of other
suspect body fluids. Blood levels of procalcitonin and C-reactive protein are elevated in severe sepsis
and may facilitate diagnosis, but they are not specific. Ultimately, diagnosis is clinical.
Other causes of shock (eg, hypovolemia, MI) should be sought via history, physical examination, ECG,
and serum cardiac markers. Even without MI, hypoperfusion may result in ECG findings of ischemia
including non-specific ST-T wave abnormalities, T-wave inversions, and supraventricular and ventricular
arrhythmias.
CBC, ABGs, chest x-ray, serum electrolytes, lactate levels or sublingual PCO
, and liver function are
monitored. At the onset of septic shock, the WBC count may initially decrease to < 4000/
μ
L, and PMNs
may be as low as 20%. However, this situation reverses within 1 to 4 h, and a significant increase in both
the total WBC count to > 15,000/
μ
L and PMNs to > 80% (with predominantly juvenile forms) usually
occurs. A sharp decrease in platelet count to ≤ 50,000/
μ
L is often present early.
Hyperventilation with respiratory alkalosis (low PaCO
and increased arterial pH) occurs early, in part as
compensation for lactic acidemia. Serum HCO
is usually low, and serum and blood lactate levels
increase. As shock progresses, metabolic acidosis worsens, and blood pH decreases. Early respiratory
failure leads to hypoxemia with PaO
< 70 mm Hg. Diffuse infiltrates may appear on the chest x-ray (see
Respiratory Arrest . BUN and creatinine usually increase progressively as a result of renal
insufficiency. Bilirubin and transaminases may rise, although overt hepatic failure is uncommon.
===PAGE:2456===
Up to 50% of patients with severe sepsis develop relative adrenal insufficiency (ie, normal or slightly
elevated baseline cortisol levels that do not increase significantly in response to further stress or
exogenous ACTH). Adrenal function may be tested by measuring serum cortisol at 8 AM; a level < 5
mg/dL is inadequate. Alternatively, cortisol can be measured before and after injection of 250
μ
g of
synthetic ACTH; a rise of < 9
μ
g/dL is considered insufficient. However, most physicians simply give
replacement doses of corticosteroids without testing.
Hemodynamic measurements with a central venous or pulmonary artery catheter can be used when the
specific type of shock is unclear or when large fluid volumes (eg, > 4 to 5 L 0.9% saline over 6 to 8 h) are
needed. Unlike in hypovolemic shock, cardiac output in septic shock is more likely to be normal or
increased, and peripheral resistance is decreased. Neither central venous pressure (CVP) nor pulmonary
artery occlusive pressure (PAOP) is likely to be abnormal, unlike in hypovolemic, obstructive, or
cardiogenic shock (. Echocardiography (including transesophageal echocardiography) is a
useful alternative for evaluating cardiac performance.
Prognosis
Overall mortality in patients with septic shock is decreasing and now averages 40% (range 10 to 90%,
depending on patient characteristics). Poor outcomes often follow failure to institute early aggressive
therapy (eg, within 6 h of suspected diagnosis). Once severe lactic acidosis with decompensated
metabolic acidosis becomes established, especially in conjunction with multiorgan failure, septic shock is
likely to be irreversible and fatal.
Treatment
• Fluid resuscitation with 0.9% normal saline
• O
• Broad-spectrum antibiotics (modified by culture results)
• Drainage of abscesses and excision of necrotic tissue
• Normalization of blood glucose levels
• Replacement-dose corticosteroids
Patients with septic shock should be treated in an ICU. The following should be monitored frequently (see
also p.
): systemic pressure; CVP, PAOP, or both; pulse oximetry; ABGs; blood glucose, lactate, and
electrolyte levels; renal function, and possibly sublingual PCO
. Urine output, a good indicator of
renal
perfusion, should be measured, usually with an indwelling catheter.
Fluid resuscitation with 0.9% saline should be given until CVP reaches 8 mm Hg (10 cm H
O) or PAOP
reaches 12 to 15 mm Hg. Oliguria with hypotension is not a contraindication to vigorous fluid
resuscitation. The quantity of fluid required often far exceeds the normal blood volume and may reach 10
L over 4 to 12 h. PAOP or echocardiography can identify limitations in left ventricular function and
incipient pulmonary edema due to fluid overload.
If a patient with septic shock remains hypotensive after CVP or PAOP has been raised to target levels,
dopamine may be given to increase mean BP to at least 60 mm Hg. If dopamine dose exceeds 20
μ
g/kg/min, another vasopressor, typically norepinephrine, may be added. However, vasoconstriction
caused by higher doses of dopamine and norepinephrine poses risks of organ hypoperfusion and
acidosis, and these drugs have not been shown to improve survival.
O
is given by mask or nasal prongs. Tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation may be needed
subsequently for respiratory failure (.
===PAGE:2457===
Parenteral antibiotics should be given after specimens of blood, body fluids, and wound sites have been
taken for Gram stain and culture. Very prompt empiric therapy, started immediately after suspecting
sepsis, is essential and may be lifesaving. Antibiotic selection requires an educated guess based on the
suspected source, clinical setting, knowledge or suspicion of causative organisms and of sensitivity
patterns common to that specific inpatient unit, and previous culture results.
One regimen for septic shock of unknown cause is gentamicin or tobramycin 5.1 mg/kg IV once/day plus
a 3rd-generation cephalosporin (cefotaxime 2 g q 6 to 8 h or ceftriaxone 2 g once/day or, if
Pseudomonas
is suspected, ceftazidime 2 g IV q 8 h). Alternatively, ceftazidime plus a fluoroquinolone (eg, ciprofloxacin)
may be used. Monotherapy with maximal therapeutic doses of ceftazidime (2 g IV q 8 h) or imipenem (1 g
IV q 6 h) may be effective but is not recommended.
Vancomycin must be added if resistant staphylococci or enterococci are suspected. If there is an
abdominal source, a drug effective against anaerobes (eg, metronidazole) should be included. When
culture and sensitivity results are available, the antibiotic regimen is changed accordingly. Antibiotics are
continued for at least 5 days after shock resolves and evidence of infection subsides.
Abscesses must be drained, and necrotic tissues (eg, infarcted bowel, gangrenous gall-bladder,
abscessed uterus) must be surgically excised. The patient's condition will continue to deteriorate despite
antibiotic therapy unless septic foci are eliminated.
Normalization of blood glucose improves outcome in critically ill patients, even those not known to be
diabetic. A continuous IV insulin infusion (crystalline zinc 1 to 4 U/h) is titrated to maintain glucose
between 80 to 110 mg/dL (4.4 to 6.1 mmol/L). This approach necessitates frequent (eg, q 1 to 4 h)
glucose measurement.
Corticosteroid therapy seems beneficial. Treatment is with replacement doses rather than pharmacologic
doses. One regimen consists of hydrocortisone 50 mg IV q 6 h (or 100 mg q 8 h) plus fludrocortisone 50
μ
g po once/day during hemodynamic instability and for 3 days thereafter.
Activated protein C (drotrecogin alfa), a recombinant drug with fibrinolytic and anti-inflammatory activity,
seems beneficial for severe sepsis and septic shock if it is begun early; benefit has been shown only in
patients with significant risk of death as defined by an APACHE II score of > 25 (see
Table 222-4
. Dosage is 24
μ
g/kg/h by continuous IV infusion for 96 h. Bleeding is the most
common complication; thus, contraindications include hemorrhagic stroke within 3 mo, spinal or
intracranial surgery within 2 mo, acute trauma with a risk of bleeding, and intracranial neoplasm. Riskbenefit assessment is required in other patients with increased risk of serious bleeding (eg, with
thrombocytopenia or recent GI bleeding, receiving concurrent heparin, or with recent aspirin or other
anticoagulant use).
Other emerging therapies for severe sepsis include cooling for hyperthermia and early treatment of renal
failure (eg, with continuous venovenous hemofiltration).
Trials of monoclonal antibodies to the lipid A fraction of endotoxin, antileukotrienes, and antibodies to
tumor necrosis factor have been unsuccessful.
===PAGE:2458===
17 - Genitourinary Disorders
Chapter 228. Approach to the Genitourinary Patient
Introduction
Although some disorders can affect both the kidneys and the lower urinary tract (eg, pyelonephritis,
calculi), renal and urologic disorders usually require different approaches. Common GU symptoms include
dysuria, hematospermia, hematuria, proteinuria, scrotal mass, testicular pain, and priapism. (See also
Urinary Incontinence
on p.
and
Urinary Tract Infections
)
Approach to the Renal Patient
In patients with renal disorders, symptoms and signs may be nonspecific, absent until the disorder is
severe, or both. Findings most often are local (eg, reflecting kidney inflammation or mass), result from the
systemic effects of kidney dysfunction, or affect urination (eg, changes in urine itself or in urine
production).
History
History plays a limited role because symptoms are nonspecific.
Hematuria is relatively specific for a GU disorder, but patients who report red urine may instead have one
of the following:
• Myoglobinuria
• Hemoglobinuria
• Porphyrinuria
• Porphobilinuria
• Food-induced urine coloring (some foods, eg, beets, rhubarb, sometimes food coloring, may make urine
appear red)
• Drug-induced urine coloring (some drugs, most commonly phenazopyridine, but sometimes cascara,
diphenylhydantoin, methyldopa, phenacetin, phenindione, phenolphthalein, phenothiazines, and senna
may make urine appear red)
High concentrations of urinary protein cause frothy or sudsy urine. Urinary frequency (
should be distinguished from polyuria ( in patients who report excessive urination. Nocturia
may be a feature of either but is often the result of excess fluid intake too close to bedtime or of chronic
kidney disease. Family history is useful for identifying inheritance patterns and risk of polycystic kidney
disease or other hereditary nephropathies (eg, hereditary nephritis, thin basement membrane disease,
nail-patella syndrome, cystinuria, hyperoxaluria).
Physical Examination
Patients with moderate or severe chronic kidney disease sometimes appear pale, wasted, or ill. Deep
(Kussmaul's) respirations suggest hyperventilation in response to metabolic acidosis with acidemia.
Chest examination:
Pericardial and pleuritic friction rubs may be signs of uremia.
Abdominal examination:
Visual fullness of the upper abdomen is an unusual, nonspecific finding of
polycystic kidney disease. It may also indicate a kidney or abdominal mass or hydronephrosis. A soft,
lateralizing bruit is occasionally audible in the epigastrium or the flank in renal artery stenosis; presence
of a diastolic component increases the probability of renovascular hypertension.
===PAGE:2459===
Pain elicited by mild striking of the back, flanks, and angle formed by the 12th rib and lumbar spine with a
fist (costovertebral tenderness) may indicate pyelonephritis or urinary tract obstruction (eg, due to calculi).
Normal kidneys are not usually palpable. However, in some women, the lower pole of the right kidney can
occasionally be felt with palpation during deep inspiration, and large kidneys or masses can sometimes
be felt without special maneuvers. In neonates, the kidneys can be felt with the thumbs when the thumbs
are placed anterior and the fingers posterior to the costovertebral angle.
Transillumination can distinguish solid from cystic renal masses in some children < 1 yr if the kidney and
mass are manipulated against the abdominal wall.
Skin examination:
Chronic kidney disease can cause any of the following:
• Xerosis due to sebaceous and eccrine sweat gland atrophy
• Pallor due to anemia
• Hyperpigmentation due to melanin deposition
• Sallow or yellow-brown skin due to urochrome deposition
• Petechiae or ecchymoses due to platelet dysfunction
Uremic frost, the deposition of white-to-tan urea crystals on the skin after sweat evaporation, is rare.
Neurologic examination:
Patients with acute renal failure may be drowsy, confused,
or inattentive;
speech may be slurred. Asterixis can be detected in handwriting or by observation of outstretched hands
maximally extended at the wrists; after several seconds in this position, a hand flap in the flexor direction
is asterixis. Asterixis suggests one of the following:
• Chronic kidney disease
• Chronic liver failure
• CO
narcosis
Testing
Urinalysis and measurement of serum creatinine are the initial steps in evaluation of renal disorders.
Other urine, blood, and imaging tests (eg, ultrasonography, CT, MRI) are done in specific circumstances.
Ideally, after the urethral meatus is cleaned, the urine specimen is collected midstream (clean-catch
specimen) during the first void of the morning; the urine should be examined immediately because delays
can lead to changes in test results. Bladder catheterization or suprapubic aspiration can be used for
collection when urine cannot be obtained by spontaneous voiding or when vaginal material contaminates
the urine specimen. However, the trauma of catheterization may falsely increase the number of RBCs in
the specimen, so catheterization is usually avoided if the outcome of interest is microscopic hematuria. A
specimen from a catheter collection bag is not acceptable for microscopic or bacteriologic tests.
Urinalysis:
A complete urinalysis includes the following:
• Inspection for color, appearance, and odor
• Measurement of pH, specific gravity, protein, glucose, RBCs, nitrites, and WBC esterase by dipstick
reagents
• Microscopic analysis for casts, crystals, and cells (urine sediment)
Bilirubin and urobilinogen, although standard parts of many dipstick tests, no longer play significant roles
===PAGE:2460===
in evaluation of renal or hepatic disorders.
Color
is the most obvious of urine attributes, and observation of color is an integral part of urinalysis (see
Table 228-1
). Urine color may suggest possible causes and help direct additional testing.
Odor
, often unintentionally noted during visual inspection, conveys useful information only in rare cases
of inherited disorders of amino acid metabolism when urine has a distinctive smell (eg, maple syrup in
maple syrup urine disease, sweaty feet in isovaleric acidemia, tomcat urine in multiple carboxylase
deficiency).
[Table 228-1.
Causes of Urine Color Changes]
pH
is normally 5.0 to 6.0 (range 4.5 to 8.0). Measuring with a glass pH electrode is recommended when
precise values are necessary for decision making, as when diagnosing renal tubular acidosis; in these
cases, a layer of mineral oil should be added to the urine specimen to prevent escape of CO
. Delay in
processing a specimen may elevate pH because ammonia is released as bacteria break down urea.
Infection with urease-producing pathogens can spuriously increase pH.
Specific gravity
provides a rough measure of urine concentration (osmolality). Normal range is 1.001 to
1.035; values may be low in the elderly or in patients with impaired renal function, who are less able to
concentrate urine. It is measured by hydrometer or refractometer or estimated with a dipstick. Accuracy of
the
dipstick test is controversial, but the test may be sufficient for patients who have calculi and are
advised to self-monitor urine concentration to maintain dilute urine. Specific gravity by dipstick may be
spuriously elevated when urine pH is < 6 or low when pH is > 7. Hydrometer and refractometer
measurements may be elevated by high levels of large molecules (eg, radiopaque contrast agent,
albumin, glucose, carbenicillin) in the urine.
Protein
, detected by standard dipstick tests, reflects mainly urinary albumin concentration, classified as
negative (< 10 mg/dL), trace (15 to 30 mg/dL), or 1+ (30 to 100 mg/dL) through 4+ (> 500 mg/dL).
Microalbuminuria, an important marker for renal complications in patients with diabetes, is not detected by
standard dipsticks, but special microalbumin dipsticks are available. Light-chain proteins (eg, due to
multiple myeloma) also are not detected. Significance of proteinuria depends on total protein excretion
rather than protein concentration estimated by dipstick; thus, when proteinuria is detected with dipstick
testing, quantitative measures of urinary protein ( should be done. False-negative results can
be caused by dilute urine. False-positive results can be caused by any of the following:
• High pH (> 9)
• Presence of cells
• Radiopaque contrast agents
• Concentrated urine
Glucose
usually appears in the urine when serum glucose increases to > 180 mg/dL (> 10.1 mmol/L) and
renal function is normal. Threshold for detection by urine dipstick is 50 mg/dL (2.8 mmol/L). Any amount is
abnormal. Falsely low or negative results can result from any of the following:
• Ascorbic acid
• Ketones
• Aspirin
• Levodopa
• Tetracycline
===PAGE:2461===
• Very high urine pH
• Dilute urine
Hematuria
is detected when RBCs lyse on a dipstick test strip, releasing Hb and causing a color change.
Range is from negative (0) to 4+. Trace blood (corresponding to 3 to 5 RBCs/high-power field [HPF]) is
normal under some circumstances (eg, exercise) in some people. Because the test strip reagent reacts
with Hb, free Hb (eg, due to intravascular hemolysis) or myoglobin (eg, due to rhabdomyolysis) causes a
positive result. Hemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria can be distinguished from hematuria by the absence of
RBCs on microscopic examination and by the pattern of color change on the test strip. RBCs create a
dotted or speckled pattern; free Hb and myoglobin create a uniform color change. Povidone iodine
causes false-positive results (uniform coloring); ascorbic acid causes false-negative results.
Nitrites
are produced when bacteria reduce urinary nitrates derived from amino acid metabolism. Nitrites
are not normally present and signify bacteriuria. The test is either positive or negative. False-negative
results may occur with any of the following:
• Infection with certain pathogens that cannot convert nitrate to nitrite (eg,
Enterococcus faecalis
,
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
,
Pseudomonas
sp)
• Urine that has not stayed long enough (< 4 h) in the bladder
• Low urinary excretion of nitrate
• Enzymes (of certain bacteria) that reduce nitrates to nitrogen
• High urine urobilinogen level
• Presence of ascorbic acid
• Urine pH < 6.0
Nitrites are used mainly with WBC esterase testing to monitor patients with recurrent urine infections,
particularly children with vesicoureteral reflux, and sometimes to confirm the diagnosis of uncomplicated
UTI in women of childbearing age.
WBC esterase
is released by lysed neutrophils. Its presence in urine reflects acute inflammation, most
commonly due to bacterial infection but sometimes due to interstitial nephritis, nephrolithiasis, or renal TB.
Threshold for detection is about 5 WBCs/HPF, and test results range from negative to 4+. The test is not
very sensitive for detection of infection. Contamination of a urine specimen with vaginal flora is the most
common cause of false-positive results. False-negative results may result from any of the following:
• Very dilute urine
• Glycosuria
• Urobilinogen
• Use of phenazopyridine, nitrofurantoin, rifampin, or large amounts of vitamin C
WBC esterase is used mainly with nitrite testing to monitor patients with recurrent urine infections and
sometimes to diagnose uncomplicated UTI in women of childbearing age. If both tests are negative, the
likelihood of a positive urine culture is small.
Microscopic analysis:
Detection of solid elements (cells, casts, crystals) requires
microscopic analysis,
ideally done immediately after voiding, and dipstick testing. The specimen is prepared by centrifuging 10
to 15 mL of urine at 1500 to 2500 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant is fully decanted; a small amount of
urine remains with the residue at the bottom of the centrifuge tube. The residue can be mixed back into
===PAGE:2462===
solution by gently agitating the tube or tapping the bottom. A single drop is pipetted onto a slide and
covered with a coverslip. For routine microscopic analysis, staining is optional. The specimen is examined
under reduced light with the low-power objective and under full-intensity light with the high-power
objective; the latter is typically used for semiquantitative estimates (eg, 10 to 15 WBCs/HPF). Polarized
light is used to identify some crystals and lipids in the urine. Phase-contrast microscopy enhances
identification of cells and casts.
Epithelial cells
(renal tubular, transitional, squamous cells) frequently are found in urine; most common
are squamous cells lining the end of the urethra and contaminants from the vagina. Only renal tubular
cells are diagnostically important; however, except when found in casts, they are difficult to distinguish
from transitional cells. A few renal tubular cell casts appear in normal urine, but a large number suggests
tubular injury (eg, acute tubular necrosis, tubulointerstitial nephropathy, nephrotoxins, nephrotic
syndrome).
RBCs
< 3/HPF may be normal (< 5/HPF is sometimes normal, eg, after exercise), and any hematuria
should be interpreted in clinical context (. On microscopic analysis, glomerular RBCs are
dysmorphic, with spicules, folding, and blebs; nonglomerular RBCs retain their normal shape.
WBCs
< 5/HPF may be normal; special staining can distinguish eosinophils from neutrophils (see above).
Pyuria is defined as > 5 WBCs/HPF in a sample of centrifuged urine.
Lipiduria
is most characteristic of the nephrotic syndrome; renal tubular cells absorb filtered lipids, which
appear microscopically as oval fat bodies, and cholesterol, which produces a Maltese cross pattern under
polarized light. Lipids and cholesterol can also be free floating or incorporated into casts.
Crystals
in urine are common and usually clinically insignificant (see
Table 228-2
). Crystal formation depends on all of the following:
• Urine concentration of crystal constituents
• pH
• Absence of crystallization inhibitors
Drugs are an underrecognized cause of crystals (see
Table 228-3
).
Casts
are made up of glycoprotein of unknown function (Tamm-Horsfall protein) secreted from the thick
ascending loop of Henle. They are cylindrical and have regular margins. Their presence indicates renal
origin, which may be helpful diagnostically. Types of casts differ in constituents and appearance (see
Table 228-4
).
Other urine tests:
Other tests are useful in specific instances.
Total protein excretion
can be measured in a 24-h collection or can be estimated by the
[Table 228-2.
Types of Urinary Crystals]
[Table 228-3.
Drugs That Cause Crystal Formation]
protein/creatinine ratio, which, in a random urine sample, correlates well with values in g/1.73 m
BSA
from a 24-h collection (eg, 400 mg/dL protein and 100 mg/dL creatinine in a random sample equal 4
g/1.73 m
in a 24-h collection). The protein/creatinine ratio is less accurate when creatinine excretion is
significantly increased (eg, in muscular athletes) or decreased (eg, in cachexia).
Microalbuminuria
is albumin excretion persistently between 30 and 300 mg/day (20 to 200
μ
g/min);
lesser amounts are considered within the range of normal, and amounts > 300 mg/day (> 200
μ
g/min) are
===PAGE:2463===
considered overt proteinuria. Use of the urine albumin/urine creatinine ratio is a reliable and more
convenient screening test because it avoids timed urine specimens and correlates well with 24-h values.
A value > 30 mg/g (> 0.03 mg/mg) suggests microalbuminuria. The reliability of the test is best when a
midmorning specimen is used, vigorous exercise is avoided before the test, and unusual creatinine
production (in cachectic or very muscular patients) is not present. Microalbuminuria can occur in all of the
following:
• Diabetes mellitus
• Hypertension
• Renal allograft dysfunction
• Preeclampsia
• UTI
Microalbuminuria is highly predictive of subsequent nephropathy in type 1 but not type 2 diabetes.
Microalbuminuria is a risk factor for cardiovascular disorders and early cardiovascular mortality
independent of diabetes or hypertension.
Sulfosalicylic acid
(SSA) test strips can be used to detect protein other than albumin (eg, Igs in multiple
myeloma) when dipstick urine tests are negative; urine supernatant mixed with SSA becomes turbid if
protein is present. The test is semiquantitative with a scale of 0 (no turbidity) to 4+ (flocculent
precipitates). Readings are falsely elevated by radiopaque contrast agents.
Ketones
spill into urine with ketonemia, but use of test strips to measure urinary ketones is no longer
widely recommended because they measure only acetoacetic acid and acetone, not
β
-hydroxybutyric
acid. Thus, a false-negative result is possible even without an exogenous cause (eg, vitamin C,
phenazopyridine,
N
-acetylcysteine); direct measurement of serum ketones is more accurate. Ketonuria is
caused by endocrine and metabolic disorders and does not reflect renal dysfunction.
Osmolality
, the total number of solute particles per unit mass (mOsm/kg [mmol/kg]), can be measured
directly by osmometer. Normally, osmolality is 50 to 1200 mOsm/kg. Measurement is most useful for
evaluating hypernatremia, hyponatremia, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
(SIADH), and diabetes insipidus.
Electrolyte measurements
help diagnose specific disorders. Na level can help distinguish whether
volume depletion (urine Na < 10 mEq/L) or acute tubular necrosis (urine Na > 40 mEq/L) is the cause of
acute renal insufficiency or failure. The fractional excretion of Na (FE
Na
) is the percentage of filtered Na
that is excreted. It is calculated as the ratio of excreted to filtered Na, which can be simplified to the
following:
where U
Na
is urine Na, P
Na
is plasma Na, P
Cr
is plasma creatinine, and UCr is urine creatinine.
This ratio is a more reliable measure than U
Na
alone because U
Na
levels between 10 and 40 mEq/L are
nonspecific. FE
Na
< 1% suggests prerenal causes, such as volume depletion; however, acute
glomerulonephritis or certain types of acute tubular necrosis (eg, rhabdomyolysis, radiocontrast-induced
renal failure) can result in FE
Na
< 1%. A value > 1% suggests acute tubular necrosis or acute interstitial
nephritis.
Other useful measurements include the following:
• Fractional excretion of HCO
in evaluation of renal tubular acidosis (
===PAGE:2464===
• Cl levels and urine anion gap for diagnosis of metabolic alkalosis ( and nonanion gap
metabolic acidosis (
• K levels in determining the cause of hypokalemia or hyperkalemia
[Table 228-4.
Urinary Casts]
• Levels of Ca, Mg, uric acid, oxalate, citrate, and cystine in evaluation of calculi
Eosinophils
, cells that stain bright red or pink-white with Wright's or Hansel staining, most commonly
indicate one of the following:
• Acute interstitial nephritis
• Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
• Acute prostatitis
• Renal atheroembolism
Cytology
is used for the following:
• To screen for cancer in high-risk populations (eg, petrochemical workers)
• To evaluate painless hematuria in the absence of glomerular disease (suggested by the
absence of
dysmorphic RBCs, proteinuria, and renal failure)
• To check for recurrence after bladder tumor resection
Sensitivity is about 90% for carcinoma in situ; however, sensitivity is considerably lower for low-grade
transitional cell carcinomas. Inflammatory or reactive hyperplastic lesions or cytotoxic drugs for carcinoma
may produce false-positive results. Accuracy for detecting bladder tumors may be increased by vigorous
bladder lavage with a small volume of 0.9% saline solution (50 mL pushed in and then aspirated by
syringe through a catheter). Cells collected in the saline are concentrated and examined.
Gram stain and cultures
with susceptibility testing are indicated when GU tract infections are
suspected; a positive result must be interpreted in the clinical context (.
Amino acids
are normally filtered and reabsorbed by the proximal tubules. They may appear in urine
when a hereditary or acquired tubular transport defect (eg, Fanconi syndrome, cystinuria) is present.
Measuring type and amount of amino acids may help in the diagnosis of certain types of calculi, renal
tubular acidosis, and inherited disorders of metabolism.
Blood tests:
Blood tests are useful in evaluation of renal disorders.
Serum creatinine
values > 1.3 mg/dL (> 114
μ
mol/L) in men and > 1 mg/dL (> 90
μ
mol/L) in women are
usually abnormal. Serum creatinine depends on creatinine generation as well as renal creatinine
excretion. Because creatinine turnover increases with higher muscle mass, muscular people have higher
serum creatinine levels and elderly and undernourished people have lower levels.
Serum creatinine may also be increased in the following conditions:
• Use of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers
• Consumption of large amounts of meat
===PAGE:2465===
• Use of some drugs (cimetidine, trimethoprim, cefoxitin, flucytosine)
ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers reversibly decrease GFR and increase serum
creatinine because they vasodilate efferent more than afferent glomerular arterioles, mainly in people who
are dehydrated or are receiving diuretics. In general, serum creatinine alone is not a good indicator of
kidney function. The Cockcroft and Gault formula and the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease formula
estimate GFR based on serum creatinine and other parameters and more reliably evaluate kidney
function.
BUN/creatinine ratio
is used to distinguish prerenal from renal or postrenal (obstructive) azotemia; a
value > 15 is considered abnormal and may occur in prerenal and postrenal azotemia. However, BUN is
affected by protein intake and by several nonrenal processes (eg, trauma, infection, GI bleeding,
corticosteroids) and, although suggestive, is generally inconclusive as evidence of renal dysfunction.
Cystatin C
, a serine proteinase inhibitor that is produced by all nucleated cells and filtered by the
kidneys, can also be used to evaluate kidney function. Its plasma concentration is independent of sex,
age, and body weight. Testing is not always available, and values are not standardized across
laboratories.
Serum electrolytes
(eg, Na, K, HCO
) may become abnormal and the anion gap (Na - [Cl + HCO])
may increase in acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease. Serum electrolytes should be monitored
periodically.
CBC
may detect anemia in chronic kidney disease or, rarely, polycythemia in renal cell carcinoma or
polycystic kidney disease. Anemia is often multifactorial (mainly due to erythropoietin deficiency and
sometimes worsened or caused by blood loss in dialysis circuits or the GI tract); it may be microcytic or
normocytic, and may be hypochromic or normochromic.
Renin
, a proteolytic enzyme, is stored in the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys. Renin secretion is
stimulated by reduced blood volume and renal blood flow and is inhibited by Na and water retention.
Plasma renin is assayed by measuring renin activity as the amount of angiotensin I generated per hour.
Specimens should be drawn from well-hydrated, Na- and K-replete patients. Plasma renin, aldosterone,
cortisol, and ACTH should be measured in evaluation of all of the following:
• Adrenal insufficiency
• Hyperaldosteronism
• Refractory hypertension (see
Renovascular Hypertension

The plasma aldosterone/renin ratio calculated from measurements obtained with the patient in an upright
posture is the best screening test for hyperaldosteronism, provided that plasma renin activity is > 0.5
ng/mL/h and aldosterone is > 12 to 15 ng/dL.
Evaluating Kidney Function
Kidney function is evaluated using values calculated from formulas based on results of blood and urine
tests.
GFR:
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), the volume of blood filtered through the kidney per
minute, is the
best overall measure of kidney function; it is expressed in mL/min. Because normal GFR increases with
increasing body size, a correction factor using body surface area (BSA) typically is applied. This
correction is necessary to compare a patient's GFR to normal and to define different stages of chronic
kidney disease. Given the mean normal BSA of 1.73 m
, the correction factor is 1.73/patient BSA;
adjusted GFR results are then expressed as mL/min/1.73 m
.
Normal GFR in young, healthy adults is about 120 to 130 mL/min/1.73 m
and declines with age to about
===PAGE:2466===
75 mL/min/1.73 m
at age 70. Chronic kidney disease is defined by a GFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m
for > 3
mo. The gold standard for GFR measurement is inulin clearance. Inulin is neither absorbed nor secreted
by the renal tubule and therefore it is the ideal marker for evaluation of kidney function. However, its
measurement is cumbersome and therefore it is mostly used in research settings.
Creatinine clearance:
Creatinine is produced at a constant rate by muscle metabolism and is freely
filtered by the glomeruli and also is secreted by the renal tubules. Because creatinine is secreted,
creatinine clearance (CrCl) overestimates GFR by about 10 to 20% in people with normal kidney function
and by up to 50% in patients with advanced renal failure; thus, use of CrCl to estimate GFR in chronic
kidney disease is discouraged.
Using a timed (usually 24-h) urine collection, CrCl can be calculated as
where UCr is urine creatinine in mg/mL, UVol is urine volume in mL/min of collection (1440 min for a full
24-h collection), and PCr is plasma creatinine in mg/mL.
Estimating creatinine clearance:
Because serum creatinine by itself is inadequate for evaluation of
kidney function, several formulas have been devised to estimate CrCl using serum creatinine and other
factors.
The
Cockcroft and Gault
formula can be used to estimate CrCl. It uses age, lean body weight, and
serum creatinine level. It is based on the premise that daily creatinine production is 28 mg/kg/day with a
decrease of 0.2 mg/yr of age.
The
modification of diet in renal disease (MDRD)
study formula (current 4-factor formula) can also be
used, although it requires a calculator or computer:
CrCl
(est)
= 186 × (serum creatinine)
-1.154

× (age)
-0.203
× 0.742 (if female)

× 1.210 (if African-American)
Approach to the Urologic Patient
Urologic patients may have symptoms referable to the kidneys as well as to other parts of the GU tract.
History
Pain originating in the kidneys or ureters is usually vaguely localized to the flanks or lower back and may
radiate into the ipsilateral iliac fossa, upper thigh, testis, or labium. Typically, pain caused by calculi is
colicky and may be prostrating; it is more constant if caused by infection. Acute urinary retention distal to
the bladder causes agonizing suprapubic pain; chronic urinary retention causes less pain and may be
asymptomatic. Dysuria is a symptom of bladder or urethral irritation (. Prostatic pain
manifests as vague discomfort or fullness in the perineal, rectal, or suprapubic regions.
Symptoms of bladder obstruction in men include urinary hesitancy, straining, decrease in force and
caliber of the urinary stream, and terminal dribbling. Incontinence has various forms (.
Enuresis after age 3 to 4 yr may be a symptom of urethral stenosis in girls, posterior urethral valves in
boys, psychologic distress, or, if onset is new, infection.
===PAGE:2467===
Pneumaturia (air passed with urine) suggests a vesicovaginal, vesicoenteric, or ureteroenteric fistula; the
last 2 may be caused by diverticulitis, Crohn's disease, abscess, or colon cancer. Pneumaturia could also
be due to emphysematous pyelonephritis.
Physical Examination
Physical examination focuses on the costovertebral angle, abdomen, rectum, groin, and genitals. Pelvic
examination is usually done in women with urinary symptoms.
Costovertebral angle:
Pain elicited by blunt striking of the back, flanks, and angle formed by
the 12th
rib and lumbar spine with a fist (costovertebral tenderness) may indicate pyelonephritis, calculi, or urinary
tract obstruction.
Abdomen:
Visual fullness of the upper abdomen is an extremely rare and nonspecific finding of
hydronephrosis or a kidney or abdominal mass. Dullness to percussion in the lower abdomen suggests
bladder distention; normally, even a full bladder cannot be percussed above the symphysis pubis. Bladder
palpation can be used to confirm distention and urinary retention.
Rectum:
During digital rectal examination, prostatitis may be detected as a boggy, tender prostate. Focal
nodules and less discrete hard areas must be distinguished from prostate cancer. The prostate may be
symmetrically enlarged, rubbery, and nontender with benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Groin and genitals:
Inguinal and genital examination should be done with patients standing. Inguinal
hernia or adenopathy may explain scrotal or groin pain. Gross asymmetry, swelling, erythema, or
discoloration of the testes may indicate infection, torsion, tumor, or other mass. Horizontal testicular lie
(bell-clapper deformity) indicates increased risk of testicular torsion. Elevation of one testis (normally the
left is lower) may be a sign of testicular torsion. The penis is examined with and without retracting the
foreskin. Inspection of the penis can detect
• Hypospadias or epispadias in young boys
• Peyronie's disease in men
• Priapism, ulcers, and discharge in either group
Palpation may reveal an inguinal hernia. Cremasteric reflex may be absent with testicular torsion.
Location of masses in relation to the testis and the degree and location of tenderness may help
differentiate among testicular masses (eg, spermatoceles, epididymitis, hydroceles, tumors). If swelling is
present, the area should be transilluminated to help determine whether the swelling is cystic or solid.
Fibrous plaques on the penile shaft are signs of Peyronie's disease.
Testing
Urinalysis ( is critical for evaluating urologic disorders. Imaging tests (eg, ultrasonography,
CT, MRI) are frequently required. For semen testing, see p.
.
Bladder tumor antigen testing for transitional cell cancer of the urinary tract is more sensitive than urinary
cytology for detecting low-grade cancer; it is not sensitive enough to replace endoscopic examination.
Urine cytology is the best test to detect high-grade cancer.
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a glycoprotein with unknown function produced by prostatic epithelial
cells. Levels can be elevated in prostate cancer and in some common noncancerous disorders (eg,
benign prostatic hyperplasia, infection, trauma). PSA is measured to detect recurrence of cancer after
treatment; its widespread use for cancer screening is controversial (.
Imaging Tests
Imaging tests are often used to evaluate patients with renal and urologic disorders.
===PAGE:2468===
Plain X-Rays Without Contrast
Abdominal x-rays without radiopaque contrast agents are virtually useless in evaluation of renal and
urologic disorders. These x-rays are not sensitive, showing only about 50 to 60% of renal calculi (Ca
oxalate calculi and rarely staghorn calculi); calcifications consistent with calculi are also nonspecific.
X-Rays With Use of Contrast
Images taken after administration of water-soluble contrast agents highlight the kidneys and urinary
collecting system. Nonionic isoosmolal agents (eg, iohexol, iopamidol) are now widely used; they have
fewer adverse effects than older hyperosmolal agents but still pose a risk of acute renal injury (contrast
nephropathy—.
In urography, an x-ray is taken after IV, percutaneous antegrade or retrograde, or cystoscopic retrograde
administration of a radiopaque contrast agent. Primary contraindications for all patients are iodine allergy
and risk factors for contrast nephropathy.
IVU (IV urography or pyelography):
IVU has been largely superseded by rapid multidimensional CT
and MRI with or without a contrast agent. When IVU is done, abdominal compression may improve
visualization of the renal pelvis and proximal ureters (with application) and distal ureters (after release).
Additional x-rays at 12 and 24 h after contrast administration may be indicated for detection of postrenal
obstruction or hydronephrosis.
Percutaneous anterograde urography:
For percutaneous anterograde urography, a radiopaque
contrast agent is introduced through an existing nephrostomy tube or, less commonly, through
percutaneous puncture of the renal pelvis guided by fluoroscopy. Occasionally, a ureterostomy or an ileal
conduit can be used. Anterograde urography is used in the following circumstances:
•
When retrograde urography is unsuccessful (eg, because of tumor obstruction at bladder level)
• When large kidney calculi requiring percutaneous surgery must be evaluated
• When transitional cell carcinoma of the upper collecting system is suspected
• When patients cannot tolerate general anesthesia or the degree of sedation required for retrograde
urography
Complications relate to puncture and placement of the catheter in the GU tract and include bleeding,
sepsis, injury to adjacent organs, microscopic hematuria, pain, and urinary extravasation.
Retrograde urography:
Retrograde urography uses cystoscopy and ureteral catheterization to introduce
a radiopaque contrast agent directly into the ureters and renal collecting system. Sedation or general
anesthesia is required. This technique is used when CT or MRI is required (eg, to identify the exact
location or cause of obstruction) but is unsuccessful.
It is also useful for detailed examination of the pelvicaliceal collecting system, ureters (eg, to check for
ureterovaginal fistulas), and bladder. However, overdistention and back-flow may distort calyces and
obscure details. Risk of infection is higher than that with other types of urography. Acute ureteral edema
and secondary stricture formation are rare complications.
Cystourethrography:
For cystourethrography, the radiopaque contrast agent is introduced directly into
the urethra and bladder. This technique provides more details than other imaging studies for evaluation of
the following:
• Vesicoureteral reflux
• Urinary incontinence
===PAGE:2469===
• Recurrent UTIs
• Urethral strictures
• Suspected urethral or bladder trauma
Voiding cystourethrograms are taken during urination and are used to identify posterior urethral valves.
No patient preparation is necessary. Adverse effects include UTIs and urosepsis. Severe urethral stricture
is a relative contraindication.
Angiography:
Conventional catheter angiography has been largely replaced by noninvasive vascular
imaging (eg, magnetic resonance angiography, CT angiography, ultrasonography, radionuclide scanning).
Remaining indications include renal vein renin imaging, and, among patients with renal artery stenosis,
angioplasty and stenting. Arteriography is also rarely used for evaluation and treatment of renal
hemorrhage and before kidney-sparing surgery. Digital subtraction angiography is no longer used when
rapid-sequence multidimensional CT or helical (spiral) CT is available.
Ultrasonography
Doppler ultrasonography is widely used to image the renal arteries, kidneys, bladder, prostate, testes,
and penis. The test is safe but provides no information about renal function, and renal images may be
difficult to obtain in overweight or obese patients. Also, there is no means to improve distinction between
types of tissues, and image quality is operator-dependent. No patient preparation is necessary, but a full
bladder facilitates its imaging. Ultrasonography can show urine volume after micturition (postvoiding
residual). Doppler ultrasonography in patients with testicular pain helps distinguish torsion from other
causes by assessing testicular blood flow.
Computed Tomography
CT provides a broad view of the urinary tract and surrounding structures. Conventional or helical
scanners are used for most purposes with or without IV contrast agents. Use of contrast agents with
either technique resembles IVU but provides additional detail. Helical CT without contrast agents is the
study of choice for imaging of calculi. Radiopaque contrast agents are also best avoided for CT
evaluation of trauma and other disorders that may involve acute hemorrhage (which appears bright white
and can be confused with contrast agents) or urine extravasation. CT angiography is a less invasive
alternative to conventional angiography (.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI is safer than CT for patients at risk of contrast nephropathy and exposes patients to no ionizing
radiation. Uses include all of the following:
• Differentiation between hemorrhage and infection within renal cysts
• Determination of extent of tumor invasion within the bladder wall
• Precise imaging of the pelvis and genitals using a pelvic or endorectal coil
Magnetic resonance angiography, used to enhance images of blood vessels, has virtually replaced
conventional angiography for evaluating renal artery stenosis and renal vein thrombosis in patients with
normal renal function. However, nephrogenic systemic fibrosis is a risk from gadolinium-containing
contrast agents, particularly when GFR is < 30 mL/min/1.73 m
BSA. MRI defines
intrarenal calcifications
poorly because they have few mobile protons. MRI with IV lymphotropic superparamagnetic nanoparticles
(eg, monocrystalline iron oxide) can identify lymph node metastases in prostate cancer but is not widely
available.
Radionuclide Scanning
===PAGE:2470===
Cortical tracers that bind to proximal tubular cells (eg, technetium-99m dimercaptosuccinic acid [99m
Tc
DMSA]) are used to image the renal parenchyma. Excretory tracers that are rapidly filtered and excreted
into urine (eg, iodine-125 iothalmate,
99m
Tc diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid [DTPA],
99m
Tc
mercaptoacetyltriglycine-3 [MAG3]) are used to assess GFR and overall renal perfusion. Radionuclide
scanning can be used to evaluate renal function when use of IV contrast is undesirable. Radionuclide
scanning also provides more information than does IVU or cross-sectional imaging about the following:
• Segmental renal emboli
• Renal parenchymal scarring due to vesicoureteral reflux
• Functional significance of renal artery stenosis
• Kidney function in living donors before transplantation
99m
Tc pertechnetate can be used to image blood flow to the testes and to distinguish torsion from
epididymitis in patients with acute testicular pain, although Doppler ultrasonography is used more
commonly because it is quicker. No patient preparation is necessary for radionuclide scanning, but
patients should be asked about known allergies to the tracer.
Procedures
Some procedures are used for diagnosis alone, and others can be used for either diagnosis or therapy.
Bladder Catheterization
Bladder catheterization is used to do the following:
• Obtain urine for examination
• Measure residual urine volume
• Relieve urinary retention or incontinence
• Deliver radiopaque contrast agents or drugs directly to the bladder
• Irrigate the bladder
Catheterization may be urethral or suprapubic.
Catheters:
Catheters vary by caliber, tip configuration, number of ports, balloon size, type of material,
and length:
Caliber
is standardized in French (F) units—also known as Charriere (Ch) units. Each unit is 0.33 mm, so
a 14-F catheter is 4.6 mm in diameter. Sizes range from 14 to 24 F for adults and 8 to 12 F for children.
Smaller catheters are usually sufficient for uncomplicated urinary drainage and useful for urethral
strictures and bladder neck obstruction; bigger catheters are indicated for bladder irrigation and some
cases of hemorrhage (eg, postoperatively or in hemorrhagic cystitis) and pyuria, because clots could
obstruct smaller caliber catheters.
Tips
are straight in most catheters (eg, Robinson, whistle-tip) and are used for intermittent urethral
catheterization (ie, catheter is removed immediately after bladder drainage). Foley catheters have a
straight tip and an inflatable balloon for self-retention. Other self-retaining catheters may have an
expanded tip shaped like a mushroom (de Pezzer catheter) or a 4-winged perforated mushroom (Malecot
catheter); they are used in suprapubic catheterization or nephrostomy. Elbowed (coude) catheters, which
may have balloons for self-retention, have a bent tip to ease catheterization through strictures or
===PAGE:2471===
obstructions (eg, prostatic obstruction).
Ports
are present in all catheters used for continuous urinary drainage. Many catheters have ports for
balloon inflation, irrigation, or both (eg, 3-way Foley).
Balloons
on self-retaining catheters have different volumes, from 2.5 to 5 mL in balloons intended for use
in children and 10 to 30 mL in balloons used in adults. Larger balloons and catheters are generally used
to manage bleeding; traction on the catheter pulls the balloon against the base of the bladder and puts
pressure on vessels.
Stylets
are flexible metal guides inserted through the catheter to give stiffness and to facilitate insertion
through strictures or obstructions.
Catheter material
chosen depends on the intended use. Plastic, latex, or polyvinyl chloride catheters are
for intermittent use. Latex with silicone, hydrogel, or polymer (to diminish bacterial colonization) catheters
are for continuous use. Silicone catheters are used in patients with latex allergy.
Urethral catheterization:
A urethral catheter can be inserted by any health care practitioner and
sometimes by patients themselves. No prior patient preparation is necessary; thus, the bladder is
catheterized through the urethra unless the urethral route is contraindicated. Relative contraindications
are the following:
• Urethral strictures
• Current UTI
•
Urethral reconstruction or bladder surgery
• Urethral trauma
After the urethral meatus is carefully cleaned with an antibacterial solution, using strict sterile technique,
the catheter is lubricated with sterile gel and gently advanced through the urethra into the bladder.
Lidocaine jelly may be injected through the male urethra before the catheter is passed to help relieve
discomfort.
Complications of bladder catheterization include all of the following:
• Urethral or bladder trauma with bleeding or microscopic hematuria (common)
• UTI (common)
• Creation of false passages
• Scarring and strictures
• Bladder perforation (rare)
Suprapubic catheterization:
Suprapubic catheterization via percutaneous cystostomy is done by a
urologist or another experienced physician. No prior patient preparation is necessary. General indications
include need for long-term bladder drainage and inability to pass a catheter through the urethra or
contraindication to catheter use when bladder catheterization is necessary.
Contraindications include the following:
• Inability to define bladder location clinically or ultrasonographically
• An empty bladder
===PAGE:2472===
• Suspected pelvic or lower abdominal adhesions
After the abdomen above the pubic area is numbed with a local anesthetic, a spinal needle is inserted into
the bladder; ultrasound guidance is used if available. A catheter is then placed through a special trocar or
over a guide wire threaded through the spinal needle. Prior lower abdominal surgery contraindicates blind
insertion. Complications include UTI, intestinal injury, and bleeding.
Cystoscopy
Cystoscopy is insertion of a rigid or flexible fiberoptic instrument into the bladder.
Indications include the following:
• Helping diagnose urologic disorders (eg, bladder tumors or calculi)
• Treating urethral strictures
• Accessing the bladder for ureteral x-rays or placement of JJ stents (stents with coiled ends placed in the
renal pelvis and bladder)
The main contraindication is active UTI.
Cystoscopy is usually done in an outpatient setting with use of local anesthesia or, when necessary,
conscious sedation or general anesthesia. Complications include UTI, bleeding, and bladder and urethral
trauma.
Biopsy
Biopsy requires a trained specialist (nephrologist, urologist, or interventional radiologist).
Renal biopsy:
Indications for diagnostic biopsy include unexplained nephritic or nephrotic syndrome or
acute kidney injury. Biopsy is occasionally done to assess response to treatment. Relative
contraindications include bleeding diathesis and uncontrolled hypertension. Mild preoperative sedation
with a benzodiazepine may be needed. Complications are rare but may include renal bleeding requiring
transfusion or radiologic or surgical intervention.
Bladder biopsy:
Bladder biopsy is indicated to diagnose certain disorders (eg, bladder cancer,
sometimes interstitial cystitis or schistosomiasis) and occasionally to assess response to treatment.
Contraindications include bleeding diathesis and acute tuberculous cystitis. Preoperative antibiotics are
necessary only if active UTI is present. The biopsy instrument is inserted into the bladder through a
cystoscope; rigid or flexible instruments can be used. The biopsy site is cauterized to prevent bleeding. A
drainage catheter is left in place to facilitate healing and drainage of clots. Complications include
excessive bleeding, UTI, and bladder perforation.
Prostate biopsy:
Prostate biopsy is usually done to diagnose prostate cancer. Contra-indications
include bleeding diathesis, acute prostatitis, and UTIs. Patient preparation includes stopping maintenance
aspirin a week before biopsy, preoperative antibiotics (usually a fluoroquinolone), and an enema to clear
the rectum. With the patient in a lateral position, the prostate is located by palpation or, preferably,
ultrasonography. Overlying structures (perineum or rectum) are anesthetized, a spring-loaded biopsy
needle is inserted into the prostate, and usually 12 tissue cores are obtained. Complications include the
following:
• Urosepsis
• Hemorrhage
• Urinary retention
===PAGE:2473===
• Hematuria
• Hematospermia (often for 3 to 6 mo after biopsy)
Urethral Dilation
Urethral dilation is used to treat the following:
• Urethral strictures
• Urethral (urgency-frequency) syndrome
• Meatal stenosis
Contraindications include untreated infection, bleeding diathesis, a long segment stenosis, and severe
scarring of the urethra. In cases of stricture, a fine filiform probe is passed through, then followers
(dilators) of progressively larger diameter are attached to the distal end of the filiform probe and passed
behind the probe to dilate the stricture until urine stream becomes adequate; the procedure is usually
done over several sessions.
Dysuria
Dysuria is painful or uncomfortable urination, typically a sharp, burning sensation. Some disorders cause
a painful ache over the bladder or perineum. Dysuria is an extremely common symptom in women, but it
can affect men and can occur at any age.
Pathophysiology
Dysuria results from irritation of the bladder trigone or urethra. Inflammation or stricture of the urethra
causes difficulty in starting urination and burning on urination. Irritation of the trigone causes bladder
contraction, leading to frequent and painful urination. Dysuria most frequently results from an infection in
the lower urinary tract, but it could also be associated with an upper UTI. Impaired renal concentrating
ability is the main reason for frequent urination in upper UTIs.
Etiology
Dysuria is typically caused by urethral or bladder inflammation, although perineal lesions in women (eg,
from vulvovaginitis or herpes simplex virus infection) can be painful when exposed to urine. Most cases
are caused by infection, but sometimes noninfectious inflammatory disorders are responsible (see
Table 228-5
).
Overall, the
most common causes
of dysuria are
• Cystitis
• Urethritis from a sexually transmitted disease (STD)
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover duration of symptoms and whether they have
occurred in the past. Important accompanying symptoms include fever, flank pain, urethral or vaginal
discharge, and symptoms of bladder irritation (frequency, urgency) or obstruction (hesitancy, dribbling).
Patients should be asked whether the urine is bloody, cloudy, or malodorous and the nature of any
discharge (eg, thin and watery or thick and purulent). Clinicians should also ask whether patients have
recently engaged in unprotected intercourse, have applied potential irritants to the perineum, have had
recent urinary instrumentation (eg, cystoscopy, catheterization, surgery), or might be pregnant.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of a possible cause, including back or joint pain and eye
===PAGE:2474===
irritation (connective tissue disorder) and GI symptoms, such as diarrhea (reactive arthritis).
Past medical history
should note prior urinary infections (including those during childhood) and any
known abnormality of the urinary tract. As with any potentially infectious illness, a history of immune
compromise or recent hospitalization is important.
Physical examination:
Examination begins with review of vital signs, particularly to note the presence
of fever.
Skin, mucosa, and joints are examined for lesions suggesting reactive arthritis (eg, conjunctivitis, oral
ulcers, vesicular or crusting lesions of palms, soles, and around nails, joint tenderness). The flank is
percussed for tenderness over the kidneys. The abdomen is palpated for tenderness over the bladder.
Women should have a pelvic examination to detect perineal inflammation or lesions and vaginal or
cervical discharge. Swabs for STD testing and wet mount should be obtained at this time rather than
doing a 2nd examination.
Men should undergo external inspection to detect penile lesions and discharge; the area under the
foreskin should be examined. Testes and epididymis are palpated to detect tenderness or swelling. Rectal
examination is done to palpate the prostate for size, consistency, and tenderness.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Fever
• Flank pain or tenderness
• Recent instrumentation
• Immunocompromised patient
• Recurrent episodes (including frequent childhood infections)
• Known urinary tract abnormality
Interpretation of findings:
Some findings are highly suggestive (see
Table 228-5
). In young, healthy
women with dysuria and significant symptoms of bladder irritation, cystitis is the most likely cause. Visible
urethral or cervical discharge suggests an STD. Thick purulent material is usually gonococcal; thin or
watery discharge is nongonococcal. Vaginitis and the ulcerative lesions of herpes simplex virus infection
are typically apparent on inspection. In men, a very tender prostate suggests
[Table 228-5.
Some Causes of Dysuria]
prostatitis, and a tender, swollen epididymis suggests epididymitis. Other findings also are helpful but may
not be diagnostic; eg, women with findings of vulvovaginitis may also have a UTI or another cause of
dysuria.
Findings suggestive of infection are more concerning in patients with red flag findings. Fever, flank pain,
or both suggest an accompanying pyelonephritis. History of frequent UTIs should raise concern for an
underlying
anatomic abnormality or compromised immune status. Infections following hospitalization or
instrumentation may indicate an atypical or resistant pathogen.
Testing:
No single approach is uniformly accepted. Many clinicians presumptively give antibiotics for
cystitis without any testing (sometimes not even urinalysis) in young, otherwise healthy women presenting
with classic dysuria, frequency, and urgency and without red flag findings. Others evaluate everyone with
a clean-catch midstream urine sample for urinalysis and culture. Some clinicians defer culture unless
dipstick testing detects WBCs. In women of childbearing age, a pregnancy test is done (UTI during
pregnancy is of concern because it may increase the risk of preterm labor or premature rupture of the
===PAGE:2475===
membranes). Vaginal discharge warrants a wet mount. Many clinicians routinely obtain samples of
cervical (women) or urethral (men) exudate for STD testing (gonococcus and chlamydia culture or PCR)
because many infected patients do not have a typical presentation.
A finding of > 10
bacteria colony-forming (CFU) units/mL suggests infection. In symptomatic patients,
sometimes counts as low as 10
or 10
CFUs indicate UTI. WBCs detected with urinalysis in patients
with sterile cultures are nonspecific and may occur with an STD, vulvovaginitis, prostatitis, TB, tumor, or
other causes. RBCs detected with urinalysis in patients with no WBCs and sterile cultures may be due to
cancer, calculus, foreign body, glomerular abnormalities, or recent instrumentation of the urinary tract.
Cystoscopy and imaging of the urinary tract may be indicated to check for obstruction, anatomic
abnormalities, cancer, or other problems in patients who have no response to antibiotics, recurrent
symptoms, or hematuria without infection. Pregnant patients, older patients, and patients with prolonged
or recurrent dysuria need closer attention and a more thorough investigation.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause. Many clinicians do not treat dysuria in women without red flag findings
if no cause is apparent from examination and the results of a urinalysis. If treatment is decided upon, a 3day course of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim alone, or a fluoroquinolone is recommended.
Some clinicians give presumptive treatment for an STD in men with similarly unremarkable findings; other
clinicians await STD test results, particularly in reliable patients.
Acute, intolerable dysuria due to cystitis can be relieved somewhat by phenazopyridine 100 to 200 mg po
tid for the first 24 to 48 h. This drug turns urine red-orange; patients should be cautioned not to confuse
this effect with progression of infection or hematuria. Upper UTI requires 10 to 14 days of treatment with
an antibiotic that is effective against gram-negative organisms, particularly
Escherichia coli
.
Key Points
• Dysuria is not always caused by a bladder infection.
• STDs should be considered.
Hematospermia
Hematospermia is blood in semen. It is often frightening to patients but is usually benign.
Pathophysiology
Semen is composed of sperm from the distal epididymis and fluids from the seminal vesicles, prostate,
and Cowper's and bulbourethral glands. Thus, a lesion anywhere along this pathway could introduce
blood into the semen.
Etiology
Most cases of hematospermia are
• Idiopathic
Such cases resolve spontaneously within a few days to a few months.
The most common known cause is
• Prostate biopsy
Less common causes include benign prostatic hyperplasia, infections (eg, prostatitis, urethritis,
===PAGE:2476===
epididymitis), and prostate cancer (in men > 35 to 40 yr). Occasionally, tumors of the seminal vesicles and
testes are associated with hematospermia. Hemangiomas of the prostatic urethra or spermatic duct may
cause massive hematospermia.
Schistosoma haematobium
, a parasitic fluke that causes significant disease in Africa (and to a lesser
extent India and parts of the Middle East), can invade the urinary tract, causing hematuria and not
infrequently hematospermia. Schistosomiasis is a consideration only in men who have spent time in areas
where the disorder is endemic.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should note the duration of symptoms. Patients who do not
volunteer information should be asked
specifically about a recent prostate biopsy. Important associated
symptoms include hematuria, difficulty starting or stopping urine flow, nocturia, burning with urination, and
penile discharge.
Review of systems
should note symptoms of excessive bleeding, including easy bruising, frequent
nosebleeds, and excessive gum bleeding with tooth brushing or dental procedures.
Past medical history
should specifically ask about known disorders of the prostate, history of or
exposure to TB or HIV, risk factors for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs—eg, unprotected intercourse,
multiple sex partners), known bleeding disorders, and known disorders that predispose to bleeding (eg,
cirrhosis). Drug history should note use of anticoagulants or antiplatelet drugs. Patients should be asked
about any family history of prostate cancer and travel to regions where schistosomiasis is endemic.
Physical examination:
The external genitals should be inspected and palpated for signs of inflammation
(erythema, mass, tenderness), particularly along the course of the epididymis. A digital rectal examination
is done to examine the prostate for enlargement, tenderness, or a lump.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Symptoms lasting > 1 mo
• Palpable lesion along the epididymis or in the prostate
• Travel to a region where schistosomiasis is prevalent
Interpretation of findings:
Patients whose symptoms followed prostate biopsy can be reassured that
the hematospermia is harmless and will go away.
Healthy patients with a brief duration of hematospermia, an otherwise normal history and examination,
and no travel history likely have an idiopathic disorder.
Patients with abnormal findings on prostate examination may have prostate cancer, benign prostatic
hyperplasia, or prostatitis. Urethral discharge suggests an STD.
Epididymal tenderness suggests an STD or rarely TB (more likely in patients with risk factors of exposure
or who are immunocompromised).
Characteristic findings of a bleeding disorder or use of drugs that increase risk of bleeding suggests a
precipitating cause but does not rule out an underlying disorder.
Testing:
In most cases, especially in men < 35 to 40 yr, hematospermia is almost always benign. If no
significant abnormality is found on physical examination (including digital rectal examination), urinalysis
and urine culture are done, but no further work-up is necessary.
Patients who may have a more serious underlying disorder and should have testing include those who
have
===PAGE:2477===
• A longer duration of symptoms (> 1 mo)
• Hematuria
• Obstructive urinary symptoms
• Abnormal examination findings
These findings are of particular concern in men > 40 yr. Testing includes urinalysis, urine culture,
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing, and transrectal ultrasonography (TRUS). Occasionally, MRI and
cystoscopy are needed. Semen inspection and analysis are rarely done but can be useful when travel
history suggests possible exposure to
S. haematobium
.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause if known. For almost all men, reassurance that hematospermia is not a
sign of cancer and does not affect sexual function is the only intervention necessary. If prostatitis is
suspected, it can be treated with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or a fluoroquinolone for 4 to 6 wk.
Key Points
• Most cases are idiopathic or follow prostate biopsy.
• Testing is required mainly for patients with prolonged symptoms or abnormal examination findings.
• Schistosomiasis should be considered in patients who have traveled to endemic areas.
Isolated Hematuria
Hematuria is RBCs in urine, specifically > 3 RBCs per high-power field on urine sediment examination.
Urine may be red or bloody (gross hematuria) or not visibly discolored (microscopic hematuria). Isolated
hematuria is urinary RBCs without other urine abnormalities (eg, proteinuria, casts).
Red urine is not always due to RBCs. Red or reddish brown discoloration may result from the following:
• Hb or myoglobin in urine
• Porphyria (most types)
• Foods (eg, beets, rhubarb, sometimes food coloring)
• Drugs (most commonly phenazopyridine, but sometimes cascara, diphenylhydantoin, methyldopa,
phenacetin, phenindione, phenolphthalein, phenothiazine, and senna)
Pathophysiology
RBCs may enter urine from anywhere along the urinary tract—from the kidneys, collecting system and
ureters, prostate, bladder, and urethra.
Etiology
Most cases involve transient microscopic hematuria that is self-limited and idiopathic. Transient
microscopic hematuria is particularly common in children, present in up to 5% of their urine samples.
There are numerous specific causes (see
Table 228-6
).
The
most common specific causes
differ somewhat by age, but overall the most common are
===PAGE:2478===
• UTI
• Prostatitis
• Urinary calculi (in adults)
Cancer and prostate disease are a concern mainly in patients > 50, although younger patients with risk
factors may develop cancer.
Glomerular disorders can be a cause at all ages. Glomerular disorders may represent a primary renal
disorder (acquired or hereditary) or be secondary to many causes, including infections (eg, group A
β
-
hemolytic streptococcal infection), connective tissue disorders (eg, SLE at all ages, Henoch-Schonlein
purpura [HSP] in children), and blood disorders (eg, mixed cryoglobulinemia, serum sickness). Worldwide,
IgA nephropathy is the most common form of glomerulonephritis.
Schistosoma haematobium
, a parasitic fluke that causes significant disease in Africa (and, to a lesser
extent, in India and parts of the Middle East), can invade the urinary tract, causing hematuria.
Schistosomiasis is considered only if people have spent time in endemic areas.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
includes duration of hematuria and any previous episodes. Urinary
obstructive symptoms (eg, incomplete emptying, nocturia, difficulty starting or stopping) and irritative
symptoms (eg, irritation, urgency, frequency, dysuria) should be noted. Patients should be asked about
the presence of pain and its location and severity.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including joint pain and rashes
(connective tissue disorder).
Past medical history
should include questions about any recent infections, particularly a sore throat that
may indicate a group A
β
-hemolytic streptococcal infection. Conditions known to cause urinary tract
bleeding (particularly kidney calculi, sickle cell disease or trait, and glomerular disorders) should be
sought. Also, conditions that predispose to a glomerular disorder, such as a connective tissue disorder
(particularly SLE and RA), endocarditis, shunt infections, and abdominal abscesses, should be identified.
Risk factors for GU cancer should be identified, including smoking (the most significant), drugs (eg,
cyclophosphamide, phenacetin), and exposure to industrial chemicals (eg, nitrates, nitrilotriacetate,
nitrites, trichloroethylene).
Family history should identify relatives with known polycystic kidney disease, a glomerular disorder, or GU
cancer. Patients should be asked about travel to areas where schistosomiasis is endemic. Drug history
should note use of anticoagulants or antiplatelet drugs (although anticoagulation itself does not cause
hematuria).
Physical examination:
Vital signs should be reviewed for fever and hypertension.
The heart should be auscultated for murmurs (suggesting endocarditis).
The abdomen should be palpated for masses; flanks should be percussed for tenderness over the
kidneys. In men, a digital rectal examination should be done to check for prostate enlargement, nodules,
and tenderness.
The face and extremities should be inspected for edema (suggesting a glomerular disorder), and the skin
should be inspected for rashes (suggesting vasculitis, SLE, or HSP).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Gross hematuria
===PAGE:2479===
• Persistent microscopic hematuria, especially in older patients
• Age > 50
• Hypertension and edema
Interpretation of findings:
Clinical manifestations of the various causes overlap significantly, so urine
and often blood tests are required. Depending on results, imaging tests may then be needed. However,
some clinical findings provide helpful clues (see
Table 228-6
).
• Blood clots in urine essentially rule out a glomerular disorder. Glomerular disorders are often
accompanied by edema, hypertension, or both; symptoms may be preceded by an infection (particularly
a group A
β
-hemolytic streptococcal infection in children).
• Calculi usually manifest with excruciating, colicky pain. Less severe, more continuous pain is more likely
to result from infection, cancer, polycystic kidney disease,
[Table 228-6.
Some Common Specific Causes of Hematuria]
glomerulonephritis, and loin pain-hematuria syndrome.
• Urinary irritative symptoms suggest bladder or prostate infection but may accompany certain cancers
(mainly bladder and prostate).
• Urinary obstructive symptoms usually suggest prostate disease.
• An abdominal mass suggests polycystic kidney disease or renal cell carcinoma.
• A family history of nephritis, sickle cell disease or trait, or polycystic kidney disease suggests that as a
cause.
• Travel to Africa, the Middle East, or India suggests the possibility of schistosomiasis.
On the other hand, some common findings (eg, prostate enlargement, anticoagulant use), although
potential causes of hematuria,
should not be assumed to be the cause without further evaluation.
Testing:
Before testing proceeds, true hematuria should be distinguished from red urine by urinalysis. In
women with vaginal bleeding, the specimen should be obtained by straight catheterization to avoid
contamination by a nonurinary source of blood. Red urine without RBCs suggests myoglobinuria or
hemoglobinuria, porphyria, or ingestion of certain drugs or foods.
Presence of casts, protein, or dysmorphic RBCs (unusually shaped, with spicules, folding, and blebs)
indicates a glomerular disorder. WBCs or bacteria suggest an infectious etiology. However, because
urinalysis shows predominantly RBCs in some patients with cystitis, urine culture is usually done. A
positive culture result warrants treatment with antibiotics. If hematuria resolves after treatment and no
other symptoms are present, no further evaluation is required for patients < 50, especially women.
If patients < 50 (including children) have only microscopic hematuria and no urine findings suggesting a
glomerular disorder, no clinical manifestations suggesting a cause, and no risk factors for cancer, they
can be observed, with urinalysis repeated every 6 to 12 mo. If hematuria is persistent, ultrasonography or
CT with contrast is suggested.
Patients < 50 with gross hematuria require ultrasonography or CT of the abdomen and pelvis.
If urine or clinical findings suggest a glomerular disorder, renal function is evaluated by measuring BUN,
serum creatinine, and electrolytes; doing a urinalysis; and periodically determining the urine
protein/creatinine ratio. Further evaluation of a glomerular disorder may require serologic tests, kidney
===PAGE:2480===
biopsy, or both.
All patients ≥ 50 yr require cystoscopy, as do patients who are < 50 but have risk factors, such as a family
history of cancer. Men ≥ 50 require testing for prostate-specific antigen; those with elevated levels require
further evaluation for prostate cancer.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause.
Key Points
• Red urine should be differentiated from hematuria (RBCs in urine).
• Urinalysis and urine sediment examination help differentiate glomerular from nonglomerular causes.
• Risk of serious disease increases with aging and with duration and degree of hematuria.
• Cystoscopy and imaging tests are usually needed only for patients > 50 or for younger patients with risk
factors for cancer.
Polyuria
Polyuria is urine output of > 3 L/day; it must be distinguished from urinary frequency, which is the need to
urinate many times during the day or night but in normal or less-than-normal volumes. Either problem can
include nocturia.
Pathophysiology
Water homeostasis is controlled by a complex balance of water intake (itself a matter of complex
regulation), renal perfusion, glomerular filtration and tubular reabsorption of solutes, and reabsorption of
water from the renal collecting ducts.
When water intake increases, blood volume increases and thus renal perfusion and GFR increase,
resulting in increased urine volume. However, the increased water intake lowers blood osmolality,
decreasing release of ADH (also referred to as arginine vasopressin) from the hypothalamic-pituitary
system. Because ADH promotes water reabsorption in the renal collecting ducts, decreased levels of ADH
increase urine volume, allowing body water to return to normal.
Additionally, high amounts of solutes within the renal tubule cause a passive osmotic diuresis (solute
diuresis) and thus an increase in urine volume. The classic example of this process is the glucoseinduced osmotic diuresis in uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, when high urinary glucose levels (> 250
mg/dL) exceed tubular reabsorption capacity, leading to high glucose levels in the renal tubules; water
follows passively, resulting in glucosuria and increased urine volume.
Therefore, polyuria results from any process that involves
• Sustained increase in water intake (polydipsia)
• Decreased ADH secretion (central diabetes insipidus)
• Decreased peripheral ADH sensitivity (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus)
• Solute diuresis
Etiology
The most common cause of polyuria (see
===PAGE:2481===
Table 228-7
) in both adults and children is
• Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
[Table 228-7.
Some Causes of Polyuria]
In the absence of diabetes mellitus, the most common causes are
• Primary polydipsia
• Central diabetes insipidus
• Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should include the amounts of fluid consumed and voided to
distinguish between polyuria and urinary frequency. If polyuria is present, patients should be asked about
the age at onset, rate of onset (eg, abrupt vs gradual), and any recent clinical factors that may cause
polyuria (eg, IV fluids, tube feedings, resolution of urinary obstruction, stroke, head trauma, surgery).
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including dry eyes and dry
mouth (Sjogren's syndrome) and weight loss and night sweats (cancer).
Past medical history
should be reviewed for conditions associated with polyuria, including diabetes
mellitus, psychiatric disorders, sickle cell disease, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, and hyperparathyroidism. A
family history of polyuria should be noted. Drug history should note use of any drugs associated with
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (see
Table 228-7
) and agents that increase urine output (eg, diuretics,
alcohol, caffeinated beverages).
Physical examination:
The general examination should note signs of obesity (as a risk factor for type 2
diabetes mellitus) or undernutrition or cachexia that might reflect an underlying cancer or an eating
disorder with surreptitious diuretic use.
The head and neck examination should note dry eyes or dry mouth (Sjogren's syndrome). Skin
examination should note the presence of any hyperpigmented or hypopigmented lesions, ulcers, or
subcutaneous nodules that may suggest sarcoidosis. Comprehensive neurologic examination should note
any focal deficits that suggest an underlying neurologic insult and assess mental status for indications of
a thought disorder.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Abrupt onset or onset during the first few years of life
• Night sweats, cough, and weight loss, especially when there is an extensive smoking history
• Psychiatric disorder
Interpretation of findings:
History can often distinguish polyuria from frequency, but rarely a 24-h urine
collection may be needed.
Clinical evaluation may suggest a cause (see
Table 228-7
), but testing is usually necessary. Diabetes
insipidus is suggested by a history of cancer or chronic granulomatous disease (due to hypercalcemia),
use of certain drugs (lithium, cidofovir, foscarnet, ifosfamide), and less common conditions (eg, sickle cell
disease, renal amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, Sjogren's syndrome) that have manifestations that are often more
prominent than and precede the polyuria.
Abrupt onset of polyuria at a precise time suggests central diabetes insipidus, as does preference for
===PAGE:2482===
extremely cold or iced water. Onset during the first few years of life is typically related to inherited central
or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus or uncontrolled type 1 diabetes mellitus. Polyuria caused by diuresis is
suggested by a history of diuretic use or diabetes mellitus. Psychogenic polydipsia is more common in
patients with a history of a psychiatric disorder (primarily bipolar disorder or schizophrenia) rather than as
an initial manifestation.
Testing:
Once excess urine output has been verified by history or measurements, serum or fingerstick
glucose determination should be done to rule out uncontrolled diabetes.
If hyperglycemia is not present, then testing is required:
• Serum and urine chemistries (electrolytes, Ca)
• Serum and urine osmolality and sometimes plasma ADH level
These tests look for hypercalcemia, hypokalemia (due to surreptitious diuretic use), and hypernatremia or
hyponatremia:
• Hypernatremia (Na > 142 mEq/L) suggests excess free water loss due to central or nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus.
• Hyponatremia (Na < 137 mEq/L) suggests excess free water intake secondary to polydipsia.
• Urine osmolality is typically < 300 mOsm/kg with water diuresis and > 300 mOsm/kg with solute diuresis.
If the diagnosis remains unclear, then measurement of serum and urine Na and osmolality in response to
a
water deprivation test
and exogenous ADH administration should be done. Because serious
dehydration may result from this testing, the test should be done only while patients are under constant
supervision; hospitalization is usually required. Additionally, patients in whom psychogenic polydipsia is
suspected must be observed to prevent surreptitious drinking.
The test is started in the morning by weighing the patient, obtaining venous blood to determine serum
electrolyte concentrations and osmolality, and measuring urine osmolality. Voided urine is collected hourly,
and its osmolality is measured. Dehydration is continued until orthostatic hypotension and postural
tachycardia appear, ≥ 5% of the initial body weight has been lost, or the urinary concentration does not
increase > 30 mOsm/kg in sequentially voided specimens. Serum electrolytes and osmolality are again
determined, and 5 units of aqueous vasopressin are injected sc. Urine for osmolality measurement is
collected one final time 60 min postinjection, and the test is terminated.
A normal response produces maximum urine osmolality after dehydration (> 700 mOsm/kg), and
osmolality does not increase more than an additional 5% after injection of vasopressin.
In
central diabetes insipidus,
patients are typically unable to concentrate urine to greater than the
plasma osmolality but are able to increase their urine osmolality after vasopressin administration. The
increase in urine osmolality is 50 to 100% in central diabetes insipidus vs 15 to 45% with partial central
diabetes insipidus.
In
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus,
patients are unable to concentrate urine to greater than the plasma
osmolality and show no additional response to vasopressin administration. Occasionally in partial
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, the increase in urine osmolality can be up to 45%, but overall these
numbers are much lower than those that occur in partial central diabetes insipidus (usually < 300
mOsm/kg).
In
psychogenic polydipsia,
urine osmolality is < 100 mOsm/kg. Decreasing water intake will lead to
decreasing urine output, increasing plasma osmolality and serum Na concentration.
Measurement of circulating ADH is the most direct method of diagnosing central diabetes insipidus.
Levels at the end of the water deprivation test (before the vasopressin injection) are low in central
===PAGE:2483===
diabetes insipidus and appropriately elevated in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. However, ADH levels are
not routinely available. In addition, water deprivation is so accurate that direct measurement of ADH is
rarely necessary. Plasma ADH levels are diagnostic after either dehydration or infusion of hypertonic
saline.
Treatment
Treatment varies by cause.
Key Points
• Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus is the most common cause of polyuria in both adults and children.
• In the absence of diabetes mellitus, the most common causes of chronic polyuria are primary polydipsia,
central diabetes insipidus, and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
• Hypernatremia usually indicates central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
• Hyponatremia is more characteristic of polydipsia.
• Abrupt onset of polyuria suggests central diabetes insipidus.
• A water deprivation test can help with diagnosis but should only be done with the patient under close
supervision.
Priapism
Priapism is painful, persistent, abnormal erection unaccompanied by sexual desire or excitation. It is most
common in boys 5 to 10 yr and in men age 20 to 50 yr.
Pathophysiology
The penis is composed of 3 corporeal bodies: 2 corpora cavernosa and 1 corpus spongiosum. Erection is
the result of smooth muscle relaxation and increased arterial flow into the corpora cavernosa, causing
engorgement and rigidity.
Ischemic priapism:
Most cases of priapism involve failure of detumescence and are most commonly
due to failure of venous outflow (ie, low flow), also known as ischemic priapism. Severe pain from
ischemia occurs after 4 h. If prolonged > 4 h, priapism can lead to corporeal fibrosis and subsequent
erectile dysfunction or even penile necrosis and gangrene.
Stuttering priapism
is a recurrent form of ischemic priapism with repeated episodes and intervening
periods of detumescence.
Nonischemic priapism:
Less commonly, priapism is due to unregulated arterial inflow (ie, high flow),
usually as a result of formation of an arterial fistula after trauma. Nonischemic priapism is not painful and
does not lead to necrosis. Subsequent erectile dysfunction is common.
Etiology
In adults, the most common cause (see
Table 228-8
) is
• Drug therapy for erectile dysfunction
In children, the most common causes are
• Hematologic disorders (eg, sickle cell disease, less commonly leukemia)
===PAGE:2484===
[Table 228-8.
Some Causes of Priapism]
In many cases, priapism may be idiopathic and recurrent.
Evaluation
Priapism requires urgent treatment to prevent chronic complications (primarily erectile dysfunction).
Evaluation and treatment should be done simultaneously.
History: History of present illness
should cover the duration of erection, presence of partial or
complete rigidity, presence or absence of pain, and any recent or past genital trauma. The drug history
should be reviewed for offending drugs, and patients should be directly asked about the use of
recreational drugs and drugs used to treat erectile dysfunction.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting a cause, including dysuria (UTIs), urinary
hesitancy or frequency (prostate cancer), fever and night sweats (leukemia), and lower-extremity
weakness (spinal cord pathology).
Past medical history
should identify known conditions associated with priapism (see
Table 228-8
),
particularly hematologic disorders. Patients should be asked about a family history of hemoglobinopathies
(sickle cell disease or thalassemia).
Physical examination:
A focused genital examination should be done to evaluate extent of rigidity and
tenderness and determine whether the glans and corpus spongiosum are also affected. Penile or perineal
trauma and signs of infection, inflammation, or gangrenous change should be noted.
The general examination should note any psychomotor agitation, and the head and neck examination
should look for pupillary dilation associated with stimulant use. The abdomen and suprapubic area should
be palpated to detect any masses or splenomegaly, and a digital rectal examination should be done to
detect prostatic enlargement or other pathology. Neurologic examination is useful to detect any signs of
lower-extremity weakness or saddle paresthesias that might indicate spinal pathology.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Pain
• Priapism in a child
• Recent trauma
• Fever and night sweats
Interpretation of findings:
In most cases, the clinical history reveals a history of drug treatment for
erectile dysfunction, illicit drug use, or a history of sickle cell disease or trait; in these cases, no testing is
indicated.
In patients with ischemic priapism, physical examination typically reveals complete rigidity with pain and
tenderness of the corpus cavernosa and sparing of the glans and corpus spongiosum. By contrast,
nonischemic priapism is painless and nontender, and the penis may be partially or completely rigid.
Testing:
If the cause is not obvious, screening is done for hemoglobinopathies, leukemia, lymphoma,
UTI, and other causes:
• CBC
• Urinalysis and culture
===PAGE:2485===
• Hb electrophoresis in blacks and men of Mediterranean descent
Many clinicians also do drug screening, intracavernosal ABG testing, and duplex ultrasonography. Penile
duplex ultrasonography will show little or absent cavernosal blood flow in men with ischemic priapism and
normal to high cavernosal blood flow in men with nonischemic priapism. Ultrasonography may also reveal
anatomic abnormalities, such as cavernous arterial fistula or pseudoaneurysm, which usually indicate
nonischemic priapism. Occasionally, MRI with contrast is useful to demonstrate arteriovenous fistulas or
aneurysms.
Treatment
Treatment is often difficult and sometimes unsuccessful, even when the etiology is known. Whenever
possible, patients should be referred to an emergency department; patients should preferably be seen
and treated by a urologist. Other disorders should be treated. For example, priapism often resolves when
sickle cell crisis is treated. Measures used to treat priapism itself depend on the type.
Ischemic priapism:
Treatment should begin immediately, typically with aspiration of blood from the base
of one of the corpora cavernosa using a nonheparinized syringe, often with saline irrigation and
intracavernous injection of the
α
-receptor agonist phenylephrine. For phenylephrine injections, 1 mL of
1% phenylephrine (10 mg/mL) is added to 19 mL of 0.9% saline to make 500
μ
g/mL; 100 to 500
μ
g (0.2 to
1 mL) is injected every 5 to 10 min until relief occurs or a total dose of 1000
μ
g is given. Before aspiration
or injection, anesthesia is provided with a dorsal nerve block or local infiltration.
If these measures are unsuccessful or if priapism has lasted > 48 h (and is thus unlikely to resolve with
these measures), a surgical shunt can be created between the corpus cavernosum and glans penis or
corpus spongiosum and another vein.
Stuttering priapism:
Stuttering priapism, when acute, is treated in the same way as other forms of
ischemic priapism. There is a report of several cases caused by sickle cell disease that responded to a
single oral dose of sildenafil. Treatments that may help prevent recurrences of stuttering priapism include
antiandrogen therapy with gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs, estrogen, bicalutamide, flutamide,
phosphodiesterase type-5 inhibitors, and ketoconazole. The goal of antiandrogen therapy is to decrease
the plasma testosterone level to < 10% of normal. Digoxin, terbutaline, gabapentin, and hydroxyurea have
also been tried with some success.
Nonischemic priapism:
Conservative therapy (eg, ice packs and analgesics) is usually successful; if
not, selective embolization or surgery is indicated.
Refractory priapism:
If other treatments are ineffective, a penile prosthesis can be placed.
Key Points
• Priapism requires urgent evaluation and treatment.
• Drugs (prescription and recreational) and sickle cell disease are the most common causes.
• Acute treatment is with
α
-agonists, needle decompression, or both.
Proteinuria
Proteinuria is protein, usually albumin, in urine. High concentrations of protein cause frothy or sudsy
urine. In many renal disorders, proteinuria occurs with other urinary abnormalities (eg, hematuria).
Isolated proteinuria is urinary protein without other symptoms or urinary abnormalities.
Pathophysiology
Although the glomerular basement membrane is a very effective barrier against larger molecules (eg,
most plasma proteins, including albumin), a small amount of protein passes through the capillary
===PAGE:2486===
basement membranes into the glomerular filtrate. Some of this filtered protein is degraded and
reabsorbed by the proximal tubules, but some is excreted in the urine. The upper limit of normal urinary
protein excretion is considered to be 150 mg/day, which can be measured in a 24-h urine collection or
estimated by random urine protein/creatinine ratio (values < 0.3 are abnormal); for albumin it is about 30
mg/day. Albumin excretion between 30 and 300 mg/day (20 to 200
μ
g/min) is considered
microalbuminuria, and higher levels are considered macroalbuminuria. Mechanisms of proteinuria may be
categorized as
• Glomerular
• Tubular
• Overflow
• Functional
Glomerular proteinuria
results from glomerular disorders, which typically involve increased glomerular
permeability; this permeability allows increased amounts of plasma proteins (sometimes very large
amounts) to pass into the filtrate.
Tubular proteinuria
results from renal tubulointerstitial disorders that impair reabsorption of protein by
the proximal tubule, causing proteinuria (mostly from smaller proteins such as immunoglobulin light chains
rather than albumin). Causative disorders are often accompanied by other defects of tubular function (eg,
HCO
wasting, glycosuria, aminoaciduria) and sometimes by glomerular pathology (which also
contributes to the proteinuria).
Overflow proteinuria
occurs when excessive amounts of small plasma proteins (eg, immunoglobulin
light chains produced in multiple myeloma) exceed the reabsorptive capacity of the proximal tubules.
Functional proteinuria
occurs when increased renal blood flow (eg, due to exercise, fever, high-output
heart failure) delivers increased amounts of protein to the nephron, resulting in increased protein in the
urine (usually < 1 g/day). Functional proteinuria reverses when renal blood flow returns to normal.
Orthostatic proteinuria
is a benign condition (most common among children and adolescents) in which
proteinuria occurs mainly when the patient is upright. Thus, urine typically contains more protein during
waking hours (when people are more often upright) than during sleep. It has a very good prognosis and
requires no special intervention.
Consequences:
Proteinuria caused by renal disorders usually is persistent (ie, present on serial testing)
and, when in the nephrotic range, can cause significant protein wasting. Presence of protein in the urine
is toxic to the kidneys and causes renal damage.
Etiology
Causes can be categorized by mechanism. The most common causes of proteinuria are glomerular
disorders, typically manifesting as nephrotic syndrome (see
Table 228-9
).
The most common causes in adults are
• Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
• Membranous nephropathy
• Diabetic nephropathy
The most common causes in children are
===PAGE:2487===
• Minimal change disease (in young children)
• Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (in older children)
Evaluation
Proteinuria itself is usually recognized only on urinalysis or urine dipstick testing. History and physical
examination occasionally give clues to cause.
History and physical examination:
The
review of systems
seeks symptoms suggesting cause,
including red or brown urine (glomerulonephritis) or bone pain (myeloma).
Patients are asked about existing conditions that can cause proteinuria, including recent serious illness
(particularly with fever), intense physical activity, known renal disorders, diabetes, pregnancy, sickle cell
disease, SLE, and cancer (particularly myeloma and related disorders).
Physical examination
is of limited use, but vital signs should be reviewed for increased BP, suggesting
glomerulonephritis. The examination should seek signs of peripheral edema and ascites reflective of fluid
overload and possibly a glomerular disorder.
Testing:
Urine dipstick primarily detects albumin. Precipitation techniques, such as heating and
sulfosalicylic acid test strips, detect all proteins. Thus, isolated proteinuria detected incidentally is usually
albuminuria. Dipstick testing is relatively insensitive for detection of microalbuminuria, so a positive urine
dipstick test usually suggests overt proteinuria. Dipstick testing is also unlikely to detect excretion of
smaller proteins characteristic of tubular and overflow proteinuria.
Patients with a positive dipstick test (for protein or any other component) should have routine microscopic
urinalysis. Abnormalities on urinalysis (eg, casts and dysmorphic RBCs suggesting glomerulonephritis;
glucose, ketones, or both suggesting diabetes) or disorders suggested by history and physical
examination (eg, peripheral edema suggesting a glomerular disorder) require further work up.
If urinalysis is otherwise normal, further testing can be deferred pending repeat urine protein assessment.
If proteinuria is no longer present, particularly in patients who have had recent intense exercise, fever, or
heart failure exacerbation, functional proteinuria is likely. Persistent proteinuria is a sign of a glomerular
disorder and requires further testing and referral to a nephrologist. Further testing includes CBC;
measurement of serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, and glucose; determination of GFR (;
quantification of urinary protein (by 24-h measurement or random urine protein/creatinine ratio); and
evaluation of kidney size (by ultrasonography or CT). In most patients with glomerulopathy, proteinuria is
in the nephrotic range (> 3.5 g/day or urine protein/creatinine ratio > 2.7).
[Table 228-9.
Causes of Proteinuria]
Other testing is usually done to determine the cause of a glomerular disorder, including lipid profile,
complement levels, cryoglobulins, hepatitis B and C serology, antinuclear antibody testing, and urine and
serum protein electrophoresis. If these noninvasive tests are not diagnostic (as is often the case), renal
biopsy is necessary. Unexplained proteinuria and renal failure, especially in older patients, could be due
to myelodysplastic disorders (eg, multiple myeloma) or amyloidosis.
Among patients < 30 yr, orthostatic proteinuria should be considered. Diagnosis requires 2 urine
collections, one done from 7 AM to 11 PM (day sample) and the other from 11 PM to 7 AM (night sample).
The diagnosis is confirmed if the urinary protein exceeds normal values in the day sample (or if urine
protein/creatinine ratio is > 0.3) and does not in the night sample.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause.
Painless Scrotal Mass
===PAGE:2488===
A painless scrotal mass is often noticed by the patient but may be an incidental finding on routine physical
examination.
Scrotal pain and painful scrotal masses or swelling ( can be caused by testicular torsion,
appendiceal torsion, epididymitis, epididymo-orchitis, scrotal abscess, trauma, strangulated inguinal
hernias, orchitis, and Fournier's gangrene.
Etiology
There are several causes (see
Table 228-10
) of a painless scrotal mass but the most common include the following:
• Hydrocele
• Nonincarcerated inguinal hernia
• Varicocele (present in up to 20% of adult men)
Less common causes include spermatocele, hematocele, fluid overload, and occasionally testicular
cancer. Testicular cancer is the most concerning cause of a painless scrotal mass. Although it is rare
compared with the other listed causes, it is the most common solid cancer in men < 40 yr; because it
responds well to treatment, prompt recognition is important.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should address duration of symptoms, the effect of upright position
and increase in intra-abdominal pressure, and presence and characteristics of associated symptoms such
as pain.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including abdominal pain,
anorexia, or vomiting (inguinal hernia with intermittent strangulation); dyspnea and leg swelling (right
heart failure); abdominal distention (ascites); and decreased libido, feminization, and infertility (testicular
atrophy with bilateral varicoceles).
Past medical history
should identify existing disorders that can cause masses (eg, right heart failure,
ascites causing bilateral lymphedema); known scrotal disorders (eg, testicular tumor or epididymitis
causing hydrocele); and inguinal hernia.
Physical examination:
Physical examination includes evaluation for systemic disorders that can cause
edema (eg, heart failure, ascites) and detailed inguinal and genital examination.
Inguinal and genital examination should be done with patients standing and recumbent. The inguinal area
is inspected and palpated, particularly for reducible masses. The testes, epididymides, and spermatic
cords should be palpated for swelling, masses, and tenderness. Careful palpation can usually localize a
discrete mass to one of these structures. Nonreducible masses should be transilluminated to help
determine whether they are cystic or solid.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Nonreducible mass that obscures normal spermatic cord structures
• Mass that is part of or attached to the testis and does not transilluminate
Interpretation of findings:
A nonreducible mass that obscures normal spermatic cord structures
suggests an incarcerated inguinal hernia. If a mass is part of or attached to the testis and does not
transilluminate, testicular cancer is possible.
===PAGE:2489===
Other clinical characteristics can provide important clues (see
Table 228-10
). For example, a mass that
transilluminates is probably cystic (eg, hydrocele, spermatocele). A mass that disappears or becomes
smaller when recumbent suggests varicocele, inguinal hernia, or communicating hydrocele. The presence
of a hydrocele makes assessment for other scrotal masses by examination difficult. Rarely, a varicocele
persists when the patient is recumbent or is present on the right side; either finding suggests inferior vena
caval obstruction.
Testing:
Clinical evaluation may be diagnostic (eg, in varicocele, lymphedema, inguinal hernia);
otherwise, testing is typically done. Ultrasonography is done when
• The diagnosis is uncertain
• Usually when hydrocele is present (to diagnose causative scrotal lesions)
• The mass does not transilluminate
If ultrasonography confirms a solid testicular mass, further testing is done for testicular cancer (, including the following:
•
β
-Human chorionic gonadotropin level (hCG)
•
α
-Fetoprotein level
• LDH level
• CT of the abdomen
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause. No treatment is indicated for all masses. If inguinal hernia is
suspected, reduction can be attempted (.
[Table 228-10.
Some Causes of a Painless Scrotal Mass]
Key Points
• A nonreducible mass that obscures normal spermatic cord structures suggests an incarcerated inguinal
hernia.
• A solid mass, one that does not transilluminate, or both mandates evaluation for testicular cancer.
• The cause of a hydrocele must be determined.
Scrotal Pain
Scrotal pain can occur in males of any age, from neonates to the elderly.
Etiology
The most common causes of scrotal pain include
• Testicular torsion
• Torsion of the testicular appendage
• Epididymitis
There are a number of less common causes (see
===PAGE:2490===
Table 228-11
). Age, onset of symptoms, and other findings can help determine the cause.
Evaluation
Expeditious evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment are required because untreated testicular torsion may
cause loss of a testis.
History: History of present illness
should determine location (unilateral or bilateral), onset (acute or
subacute), and duration of pain. Important associated symptoms include fever, dysuria, penile discharge,
and presence of scrotal mass. Patients should be asked about preceding events, including injury,
straining or lifting, and sexual contact.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including purpuric rash, abdominal
pain, and arthralgias (Henoch-Schonlein purpura); intermittent scrotal masses, groin swelling, or both
(inguinal hernia); fever and parotid gland swelling (mumps orchitis); and flank pain or hematuria (renal
calculus).
Past medical history
should identify known disorders that may cause referred pain, including hernias,
abdominal aortic aneurysm, renal calculi, and risk factors for serious disorders, including diabetes and
peripheral vascular disease (Fournier's gangrene).
Physical examination:
Physical examination begins with a review of vital signs and assessment of the
severity of pain. Examination focuses on the abdomen, inguinal region, and genitals.
The abdomen is examined for tenderness and masses (including bladder distention). Flanks are
percussed for costovertebral angle tenderness.
Inguinal and genital examination should be done with the patient standing. Inguinal area is inspected and
palpated for adenopathy, swelling, or erythema. Examination of the penis should note ulcerations, urethral
discharge, and piercings and tattoos (sources of bacterial infections). Scrotal examination should note
asymmetry, swelling, erythema or discoloration, and positioning of the testes (horizontal vs vertical, high
vs low). Cremasteric reflex should be tested bilaterally. The testes, epididymides, and spermatic cords
should be palpated for swelling and tenderness. If swelling is present, the area should be transilluminated
to help determine whether the swelling is cystic or solid.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Sudden onset of pain; exquisite tenderness; and a high-riding, horizontally displaced testis (testicular
torsion)
• Inguinal or scrotal nonreducible mass with severe pain, vomiting, and constipation (incarcerated hernia)
• Scrotal or perineal erythema, necrotic or blistered skin lesions, and toxic appearance (Fournier's
gangrene)
• Sudden onset of pain, hypotension, weak pulse, pallor, dizziness, and confusion (ruptured abdominal
aortic aneurysm)
Interpretation of findings:
The focus is to distinguish causes that require immediate treatment from
others. Clinical findings provide important clues (see
Table 228-11
).
Aortic catastrophes and Fournier's gangrene occur primarily in patients > 50 yr; the other conditions that
require immediate treatment can occur at any age. However, testicular torsion is most common in
neonates and postpubertal boys, torsion of the testicular appendage occurs most commonly in
prepubertal boys (7 to 14 yr), and epididymitis is most common in adolescents and adults.
Severe, sudden onset of pain suggests testicular torsion or renal calculus. Pain from epididymitis,
incarcerated hernia, or appendicitis is of more gradual onset. Patients with torsion of the testicular
===PAGE:2491===
appendage present with moderate pain that develops over a few days; pain is localized to the upper pole.
Bilateral pain suggests infection (eg, orchitis, particularly if accompanied by fever and viral symptoms) or
a referred cause. Flank pain that radiates to the scrotum suggests renal calculus or, in men > 55 yr,
abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Normal findings on scrotal and perineal examination suggest referred pain. Attention must then be
directed to extrascrotal disorders, particularly appendicitis, renal calculi, and, in men > 55, abdominal
aortic aneurysm.
Abnormal scrotal and perineal examination findings often suggest a cause. Sometimes, early in
epididymitis, tenderness and induration may be localized to the epididymis; early in torsion, the testis may
be clearly high-riding, with a horizontal lie and the epididymis not
[Table 228-11.
Some Causes of Scrotal Pain]
particularly tender. However, frequently the testis and epididymis are both swollen and tender, there is
scrotal edema, and it is not possible to differentiate epididymitis from torsion by palpation. However, the
cremasteric reflex is absent in torsion, as are findings of a sexually transmitted disease (STD—eg,
purulent urethral discharge); the presence of both of these findings makes epididymitis quite likely.
Sometimes, a scrotal mass caused by a hernia may be palpable in the inguinal canal; in other cases,
hernia can be difficult to distinguish from testicular swelling.
Painful erythema of the scrotum with no tenderness of the testes or epididymides should raise suspicion
of infection, either cellulitis or early Fournier's gangrene.
A vasculitic rash, abdominal pain, and arthralgias are consistent with a systemic vasculitis syndrome such
as Henoch-Schonlein purpura or polyarteritis nodosa.
Testing:
Testing is typically done.
• Urinalysis and culture (all patients)
• STD testing (all patients with positive urinalysis, discharge, or dysuria)
• Color Doppler ultrasonography to rule out torsion (no clear-cut alternate cause)
• Other testing as suggested by findings (see
Table 228-11
)
Urinalysis and culture are always required. Findings of UTI (eg, pyuria, bacteriuria) suggest epididymitis.
Patients with findings that suggest UTI and patients with urethral discharge or dysuria should be tested
for STDs as well as other bacterial causes of UTI.
Timely diagnosis of testicular torsion is critical. If findings are highly suggestive of torsion, immediate
surgical exploration is done in preference to testing. If findings are equivocal and there is no clear
alternate cause of acute scrotal pain, color Doppler ultrasonography is done. If Doppler ultrasonography
is not available, radionuclide scanning may be used but is less sensitive and specific.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause and can range from emergency surgery (testicular torsion) to bedrest
(torsion of the testicular appendage). If testicular torsion is present, prompt surgery (< 12 h after
presentation) is generally required. Delayed surgery may lead to testicular infarction, long-term testicular
damage, or the loss of a testis. Surgical detorsion of the testis relieves the pain immediately, and
simultaneous bilateral orchiopexy prevents recurrence of torsion.
Analgesics, such as morphine or other opioids, are indicated for the relief of acute pain.
Antibiotics are
indicated for cases of bacterial epididymitis or orchitis.
===PAGE:2492===
Geriatrics Essentials
Testicular torsion is uncommon in elderly men, and when present, the manifestations are usually atypical
and therefore diagnosis is delayed. Epididymitis, orchitis, and trauma are more common in elderly men.
Occasionally, inguinal hernia, colon perforation, or renal colic may cause scrotal pain in elderly men.
Key Points
• Always consider testicular torsion in patients with acute scrotal pain, particularly in children and
adolescents; quick, accurate diagnosis is essential.
• Other common causes of scrotal pain are torsion of the testicular appendage and epididymitis.
• Color Doppler ultrasonography is usually done when the diagnosis is unclear.
• Normal findings on scrotal and perineal examination suggest referred pain.
Urinary Frequency
Urinary frequency is the need to urinate many times during the day, at night (nocturia), or both but in
normal or less-than-normal volumes. Frequency may be accompanied by a sensation of an urgent need
to void (urinary urgency). Urinary frequency is distinguished from polyuria, which is urine output of > 3
L/day.
Pathophysiology
Urinary frequency usually results from disorders of the lower GU tract. Inflammation of the bladder,
urethra, or both causes a sensation of the need to urinate. However, this sensation is not relieved by
emptying the bladder, so once the bladder is emptied, patients continue trying to void but pass only small
volumes of urine.
Etiology
There are many causes of urinary frequency (see
Table 228-12
), but the most common include
• UTIs
• Urinary incontinence
• Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
• Urinary tract calculi
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should first ask about the amounts of fluid consumed and voided to
distinguish between urinary frequency and polyuria. If urinary frequency is present, patients are asked
about acuity of onset, presence or absence of irritative symptoms (eg, irritation, urgency, dysuria),
obstructive symptoms (eg, hesitancy, poor flow, sensation of incomplete voiding, nocturia), and recent
sexual contacts.
Review of systems
should cover symptoms suggestive of a cause, including fever, flank or groin pain,
and hematuria (infection); missed menses, breast swelling, and morning sickness (pregnancy); and
arthritis and conjunctivitis (reactive arthritis).
Past medical history
should ask about known causes, including prostate disease and previous pelvic
===PAGE:2493===
radiation or surgeries. Drugs and diet are reviewed for the use of agents that increase urine output (eg,
diuretics, alcohol, caffeinated beverages).
Physical examination:
Examination focuses on the GU system.
Any urethral discharge or any lesions consistent with sexually transmitted diseases are noted. Rectal
examination in men should note the size and consistency of the prostate; pelvic examination in women
should note the presence of any cystocele. Patients should be instructed to cough while the urethra is
observed for signs of urinary leakage.
The costovertebral angle should be palpated for tenderness, and the abdominal examination should note
the presence of any masses or suprapubic tenderness.
Neurologic examination should test for lower-extremity weakness.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Lower-extremity weakness
• Fever and back pain
Interpretation of findings:
Dysuria suggests frequency is due to UTI or calculi. Prior pelvic surgery
suggests incontinence. Weak urine stream, nocturia, or both suggests BPH. Urinary frequency in an
otherwise healthy young patient may be due to excessive intake of alcohol or caffeinated beverages.
Gross hematuria suggests UTI and calculi in younger patients and cancer in older patients.
Testing:
All patients require urinalysis and culture, which are easily done and can detect infection and
hematuria.
[Table 228-12.
Some Causes of Urinary Frequency]
Cytoscopy, cystometry, and urethrography can be done to diagnose cystitis, bladder outlet obstruction,
and cystocele. Prostate-specific antigen level determination, ultrasonography, and prostate biopsy may be
required, especially in older men, to differentiate BPH from prostate cancer.
Treatment
Treatment varies by cause.
Geriatrics Essentials
Urinary frequency in elderly men is often caused by bladder neck obstruction secondary to prostate
enlargement or cancer. These patients usually require postvoid residual urine volume determination. UTI
or use of diuretics may be a cause in both sexes.
Key Points
• UTI is the most common cause in children and women.
• Prostate disease is a common cause in men > 50 yr.
• Excessive intake of caffeine can cause urinary frequency in healthy people.
===PAGE:2494===
Chapter 229. Male Reproductive Endocrinology
Introduction
Male sexual development and function depend on a complex feedback circuit involving the hypothalamus,
pituitary, and testes. Male sexual dysfunction can be secondary to hypogonadism or numerous other
disorders.
Physiology
The hypothalamus produces gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which is released in a pulsatile
fashion every 60 to 120 min. The anterior pituitary responds to each pulse of GnRH by producing a
corresponding pulse of luteinizing hormone (LH) and, to a lesser degree, follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH). Continuous stimulation by GnRH (as might occur therapeutically) suppresses pituitary release of
LH and FSH.
The Leydig cells of the testes respond to LH by producing between 5 and 10 mg of testosterone daily.
Testosterone levels are highest in early morning, except in older men, who may lose circadian variation.
Testosterone is synthesized from cholesterol through several intermediate compounds, including
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and androstenedione. Circulating testosterone is mostly protein-bound,
about 40% to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and 58% to albumin. Because testosterone is avidly
bound to SHBG, only albumin-bound testosterone (which is less avidly bound) and the 1 to 2% that
constitute free testosterone are bioavailable.
In target tissues, about 4 to 8% of testosterone is converted to a more potent metabolite,
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), by the enzyme 5
α
-reductase. DHT has important trophic effects in the
prostate and mediates androgenic alopecia. In adults, spermatogenesis requires adequate intratesticular
testosterone, but the role of DHT in spermatogenesis is unclear.
Testosterone and DHT have metabolic effects, including increasing protein anabolism and nitrogen
retention, increasing bone density and muscle mass, and modulating the immune system. Testosterone
undergoes conversion to estradiol; estrogen mediates much of the effect of testosterone on organs such
as bones and the brain.
Testosterone, DHT, and estradiol provide negative feedback on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. In males,
estradiol is the main inhibitor of LH production, whereas both estradiol and inhibin B, a peptide produced
by Sertoli cells of the testes, inhibit production of FSH. In the presence of testosterone, FSH stimulates
the Sertoli cells and induces spermatogenesis. In spermatogenesis, each germinal cell (spermatogonium),
located adjacent to the Sertoli cells, undergoes differentiation into 16 primary spermatocytes, each of
which generates 4 spermatids. Each spermatid matures into a spermatozoon. Spermatogenesis takes 72
to 74 days and yields about 100 million new spermatozoa each day. Upon maturation, spermatozoa are
released into the rete testis, where they migrate to the epididymis and eventually to the vas deferens.
Migration requires an additional 14 days. Before ejaculation, spermatozoa are mixed with secretions from
the seminal vesicles, prostate, and bulbourethral glands.
Sexual Differentiation, Adrenarche, and Puberty
In the embryo, the presence of a Y chromosome triggers development and growth of the testes, which
begin secreting testosterone and a mullerian duct inhibitor by about 7 wk of gestation. Testosterone
virilizes the wolffian
[Fig. 229-1.
Puberty—when male sexual characteristics develop.]
duct (which develops into the epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicles). DHT promotes
development of the remainder of the male genitals. Testosterone levels peak in the 2nd trimester and fall
to almost zero by birth. Testosterone production rises briefly during the first 6 mo of life, the function of
===PAGE:2495===
which is unclear. Thereafter, testosterone levels remain low until puberty.
LH and FSH are elevated at birth but fall to low levels within a few months, remaining low or undetectable
throughout the prepubertal years. Through an unknown mechanism, blood levels of the adrenal
androgens DHEA and DHEA sulfate begin to increase several years before puberty. Their conversion to
testosterone in small amounts initiates pubic and axillary hair growth (adrenarche).
The mechanisms that initiate puberty are unclear, although early in puberty the hypothalamus becomes
less sensitive to the inhibitory effects of sex hormones. This desensitization increases secretion of LH
and FSH, stimulating testosterone production. Secretion of LH and FSH increases initially only during
sleep; later, secretion increases throughout the 24-h period. The increased testosterone levels in boys
cause pubertal changes, the first of which are growth of the testes (> 2.5 cm on the long axis, > 3 to 4 mL
in volume) and thinning of scrotal skin. Later, penile length, muscle mass, and bone density increase; the
voice deepens; and pubic and axillary hair becomes denser and thicker (see
Fig. 229-1
).
Effects of Aging
Both hypothalamic secretion of GnRH and the response of Leydig cells to FSH and LH diminish with
aging. Beginning at about age 30, a man's serum total testosterone level declines by 1%/yr. Men aged 70
to 80 tend to have serum testosterone levels that are about one half to two thirds of those of men in their
20s. In addition, SHBG levels increase with aging, causing an even greater decline in serum free and
bioavailable testosterone. FSH and LH levels tend to be normal or high-normal. These age-related
changes are sometimes referred to as the andropause, although there are no abrupt changes in hormone
levels as occur in the menopause. The decline in testosterone may contribute to age-related muscle loss,
osteopenia, loss of libido, and cognitive decline. Testosterone supplementation for men with low-normal
levels of testosterone is controversial. Some experts recommend a trial of testosterone supplementation
in older men with symptoms or signs of hypogonadism and whose serum testosterone levels are below
the lower limit of normal for men aged 20 to 40 yr. No data favor any of the testosterone preparations
specifically for use in older men.
Male Hypogonadism
(See also p.
.)
Hypogonadism is defined as testosterone deficiency with associated symptoms or signs,
deficiency of spermatozoa production, or both. It may result from a disorder of the testes
(primary hypogonadism) or of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis (secondary hypogonadism). Both
may be congenital or acquired as the result of aging, disease, drugs, or other factors.
Additionally, a number of congenital enzyme deficiencies cause varying degrees of target organ
androgen resistance. Diagnosis is confirmed by hormone levels. Treatment varies with etiology
but typically includes testosterone replacement.
Etiology
Primary hypogonadism involves failure of the testes to respond to follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinizing hormone (LH). When primary hypogonadism affects testosterone production, testosterone is
insufficient to inhibit production of FSH and LH; hence, FSH and LH levels are elevated. The most
common cause of primary hypogonadism is Klinefelter's syndrome. It involves seminiferous tubule
dysgenesis and a 47,XXY karyotype (.
Secondary hypogonadism is failure of the hypothalamus (or pituitary) to produce enough FSH and LH.
With secondary hypogonadism, testosterone levels are low, but levels of FSH and LH are low or
inappropriately normal. Any acute systemic illness can cause temporary secondary hypogonadism. Some
syndromes of hypogonadism have both primary and secondary causes (mixed hypogonadism).
Table 229-1
lists some common causes of hypogonadism by category.
Some syndromes of hypogonadism (eg, cryptorchidism, some systemic disorders) affect spermatozoon
production more than testosterone levels.
===PAGE:2496===
Symptoms and Signs
Age at onset of testosterone deficiency dictates the clinical presentation: congenital, childhood-onset, or
adult-onset hypogonadism. Congenital hypogonadism may be of 1st-, 2nd-, or 3rd-trimester onset.
First-trimester onset results in inadequate male sexual differentiation. Complete absence of testosterone's
effects results in normal-appearing female external genitals. Partial testosterone deficiency results in
abnormalities ranging from ambiguous external genitals to hypospadias. Second- or 3rd-trimester onset of
testosterone deficiency results in microphallus and undescended testes.
Childhood-onset testosterone deficiency ( has few consequences and usually is
unrecognized until puberty is delayed. Untreated hypogonadism impairs development of secondary
sexual characteristics. As adults, affected patients have poor muscle development, a high-pitched voice, a
small scrotum, decreased phallic and testicular growth, sparse pubic and axillary hair, and an absence of
body hair. They may develop gynecomastia and eunuchoidal body proportions (span > height by 5 cm
and pubic to floor
[Table 229-1.
Causes of Hypogonadism*]
length > crown to pubic length by > 5 cm) because of delayed fusion of the epiphyses and continued long
bone growth.
Adult-onset testosterone deficiency has varied manifestations depending on the degree and duration of
the deficiency. Decreased libido; erectile dysfunction; decline in cognitive skills, such as visual-spatial
interpretation; sleep disturbances; vasomotor instability (in acute, severe male hypogonadism); and mood
changes, such as depression and anger, are common. Decreased lean body mass, increased visceral fat,
testicular atrophy, osteopenia, gynecomastia, and sparse body hair typically take months to years to
develop. Testosterone deficiency may increase the risk of coronary artery disease.
Diagnosis
• Testing, beginning with FSH, LH, and testosterone levels
Congenital and childhood-onset hypogonadism are often suspected because of developmental
abnormalities or delayed puberty. Adult-onset hypogonadism should be suspected on the basis of
symptoms or signs but is easily missed because these markers are insensitive and nonspecific.
Klinefelter's syndrome should be considered in adolescent males in whom puberty is delayed, young men
with hypogonadism, and all adult men with very small testes. Hypogonadism requires confirmatory testing
(see
Fig. 229-2
).
Diagnosis of primary and secondary hypogonadism:
Increases in FSH and LH are more sensitive
for primary hypogonadism than are decreases in testosterone levels. Levels of FSH and LH also help
determine whether hypogonadism is primary or secondary; high gonadotropin levels, even with lownormal testosterone levels, indicate primary hypogonadism, whereas gonadotropin levels that are low or
lower than expected for the level of testosterone indicate secondary hypogonadism. Alternatively, in boys
of short stature with delayed puberty, low testosterone plus low gonadotropin levels might result from
constitutional delay of puberty. Elevation of serum FSH with normal levels of serum testosterone and LH
often occurs when spermatogenesis is impaired but testosterone production is normal. The cause of
hypogonadism is often evident clinically. Primary hypogonadism requires no further testing, although
some clinicians do a karyotype to definitively diagnose Klinefelter's syndrome.
Total (or calculated free and weakly bound) serum testosterone, serum FSH, and serum LH levels are
measured simultaneously. The normal range for total testosterone is 300 to 1000 ng/dL (10.5 to 35
nmol/L). The initial screening testosterone level may be done at any time of day, but a second
testosterone level should be drawn in the morning to confirm hypogonadism. Because of the increase in
sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) with aging, total testosterone level is less sensitive for
===PAGE:2497===
hypogonadism after age 50. Although serum free testosterone more accurately reflects functional
testosterone levels, its measurement requires equilibrium dialysis, which is technically difficult and not
widely available. Some commercially available kits, including the analog free testosterone assay, attempt
to measure serum free testosterone levels, but the results are often inaccurate, particularly in conditions
such as type 2 diabetes, obesity, and hypothyroidism that alter SHBG levels. Free testosterone levels can
be calculated based on SHBG, albumin, and testosterone values: there are calculators available online.
Because of the pulsatile secretion of FSH and LH, they are sometimes measured as a pooled sample of
3 venipunctures taken at 20-min intervals, but these pooled samples seldom add clinically important
information compared with a single blood sample. Serum FSH and LH levels are usually ≤ 5 mIU/mL
before puberty and between 5 and 15 mIU/mL in adulthood.
Sperm count can be useful and should be assessed in men who are seeking fertility treatment. In
adolescents or adults, a semen sample collected by masturbation after 2 days of abstinence from
ejaculation provides an excellent index of seminiferous tubular function. A normal semen sample has a
volume of > 2.5 mL with > 20 million sperm/mL, of which 60% are of normal morphology and are motile
(see also p.
).
Evaluation of secondary hypogonadism:
Because any systemic illness can temporarily decrease
levels of testosterone, FSH, and LH, secondary hypogonadism should be confirmed by measuring these
levels again after at least a 4-wk interval after resolution of the systemic illness. To confirm secondary
hypogonadism in adolescents, the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) test is sometimes done. If, in
response to IV GnRH, levels of FSH and LH increase, puberty is simply delayed. If levels do not increase,
true hypogonadism is likely.
To help determine the cause of confirmed secondary hypogonadism, testing should
[Fig. 229-2.
Laboratory evaluation of male hypogonadism.]
include serum prolactin level and transferrin saturation (to screen for hemochromatosis—.
Sella imaging with MRI or CT is done to exclude a pituitary macroadenoma or other mass in men < 60 yr
with no other identified cause for hypogonadism and in all men with very low total testosterone levels (<
200 ng/dL), elevated prolactin levels, or symptoms consistent with a pituitary tumor (eg, headache, visual
symptoms). Also, if there are symptoms or signs of Cushing's syndrome, 24-h urine collection for free
cortisol or a dexamethasone suppression test is done (. If no abnormalities are identified, the
diagnosis is acquired idiopathic secondary hypogonadism.
Treatment
• Testosterone therapy
• Gonadotropin replacement therapy for restoration of fertility due to secondary hypogonadism
Treatment is directed toward providing adequate androgen replacement conveniently and safely. Although
patients with primary hypogonadism will not become fertile with any endocrine therapy, patients with
secondary hypogonadism often become fertile with gonadotropin therapy. Testosterone formulations
discussed here are those available in the US. Other formulations may be available in other countries.
Testosterone therapy:
Males who have no signs of puberty and are near age 15 may be given longacting testosterone enanthate 50 mg IM once/mo for 4 to 8 mo. These low doses cause some virilization
without restricting adult height. Older adolescents with testosterone deficiency receive long-acting
testosterone enanthate or cypionate at a dose that is increased gradually over 18 to 24 mo from 50 to 100
to 200 mg IM q 1 to 2 wk. Transcutaneous gel may also be used, although it is more expensive, could
possibly be transferred to others during intimate contact, and is more difficult to accurately dose. It is
reasonable to convert older adolescents to testosterone gel 1% at adult dosages when their IM dosage
has reached the equivalent of 100 to 200 mg q 2 wk.
Adults with established testosterone deficiency may benefit from replacement therapy. Treatment prevents
or attenuates osteopenia, muscle loss, vasomotor instability, loss of libido, and occasionally erectile
===PAGE:2498===
dysfunction. Although the effects of testosterone on coronary artery disease are not completely
understood, testosterone replacement therapy may improve coronary artery blood flow and may decrease
the risk of coronary artery disease. Options for replacement therapy include testosterone gel 1% (5 to 10
g daily to deliver 5 to 10 mg daily), IM testosterone enanthate or cypionate (100 mg q 7 days or 200 mg q
10 to 14 days), a buccal mucosal patch (30 mg bid), or a transdermal testosterone patch (5 to 10 mg
daily). Testosterone gel maintains physiologic blood levels more consistently than other treatments, but IM
or patch systems are sometimes used because of their lower cost.
Potential adverse effects of testosterone and its analogs include erythrocytosis (particularly in men > 50
yr receiving IM testosterone), acne, gynecomastia, and very rarely prostatic enlargement or edema;
prostatic obstructive symptoms are rare. Treatment may enhance growth of an existing prostate
carcinoma and theoretically may awaken a dormant prostate cancer. Injectable or transdermal forms of
testosterone are preferable to most oral formulations, which, except for testosterone undecanoate, carry a
significant risk of hepatocellular dysfunction and hepatic adenoma.
Hct should be checked every 6 to 12 mo. Digital rectal examination and serum prostate-specific antigen
(PSA) testing should be offered every 6 mo. If Hct is ≥ 54%, the testosterone dose should be reduced by
one fourth or one third. Because the effect of testosterone replacement on PSA levels is not clear,
significant increases in PSA level should prompt consideration of prostate biopsy in men who would
otherwise be candidates for prostate cancer diagnosis and treatment.
Treatment of infertility due to hypogonadism:
Infertility, which has many possible causes other than
hypogonadism, is discussed in full elsewhere (. Infertility due to primary hypogonadism does
not respond to hormonal therapy. Men with primary hypogonadism occasionally have a few intratesticular
sperm that can be harvested with various microsurgical techniques and used to fertilize an egg by an
assisted reproductive technique (eg, intracytoplasmic injection).
Infertility due to secondary hypogonadism usually responds to gonadotropin replacement therapy. Other
symptoms of secondary hypogonadism respond well to testosterone replacement therapy alone. If
secondary hypogonadism results from pituitary disease, gonadotropin replacement therapy usually is
successful. Therapy begins with LH replacement. After all exogenous androgens are stopped, LH
replacement is generally initiated using human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Doses begin at 375 to 750
IU sc 2 to 3 times/wk and are increased if necessary to 1000 to 2000 IU
sc 2 to 3 times/wk. The dose is
adjusted after 3 mo to achieve normal serum testosterone levels. Sperm counts are done monthly, but
counts are not expected to increase for at least 4 mo. FSH replacement, which is expensive, begins if 6 to
12 mo of LH replacement does not stimulate spermatogenesis. FSH replacement uses human menotropic
gonadotropin or human recombinant FSH, beginning with 75 to 150 IU 3 times/wk. The dose may be
doubled if conception has not occurred within 6 mo of combination therapy with hCG. Many men become
fertile with treatment despite sperm counts that do not usually result in fertility (eg, < 5 million/mL).
Secondary hypogonadism due to a hypothalamic defect (eg, Kallmann syndrome) is treated initially with
LH and FSH because of their ready availability; if these treatments are ineffective, GnRH replacement
therapy (q 2 h sc by a programmable minipump) might be more effective. Most (80 to 90%) of men
respond successfully to these regimens.
Male Sexual Dysfunction
Male sexual dysfunction is a problem with 1 of the 4 main components of male sexual function (libido,
erection, ejaculation, orgasm) that interferes with interest in or ability to engage in sexual intercourse.
Many drugs and numerous physical and psychologic disorders affect sexual function.
Libido:
Libido is the conscious component of sexual function. Decreased libido manifests as a lack of
sexual interest or a decrease in the frequency and intensity of sexual thoughts, either spontaneous or in
response to erotic stimuli. Libido is sensitive to testosterone levels as well as to general nutrition, health,
and drugs. Conditions particularly likely to decrease libido include hypogonadism (, uremia,
and depression. Drugs that sometimes decrease libido include weak androgen receptor antagonists, such
as spironolactone or cimetidine, and virtually all drugs that are active in the CNS, such as SSRIs, tricyclic
antidepressants, and antipsychotics. Loss of libido due to SSRIs or tricyclic anti-depressants sometimes
===PAGE:2499===
is reversible with the addition of bupropion or trazodone.
Erection:
Erection occurs as the result of a complex neuropsychologic process. Higher cortical input and
a sacrally mediated parasympathetic reflex arc combine to stimulate erection. Nerve output travels
through the pudendal nerves, which traverse the posterolateral aspect of the prostate. Terminating in the
penis, these nonadrenergic, noncholinergic nerves activate nitric oxide synthase, producing nitric oxide,
which relaxes smooth muscle lining the sinusoidal spaces that connect the arterioles and venules within
the corpus cavernosa. The blood flow within the sinusoids increases markedly, distending them and
compressing the venules, causing veno-occlusion. The increased inflow and veno-occlusion together
produce penile rigidity. Many factors affect the ability to have an erection (see below).
Ejaculation and orgasm:
Ejaculation is controlled by the sympathetic nervous system.
α
-Adrenergic
stimulation causes contractions of the epididymis, vas deferens, prostate, and muscles of the pelvic floor.
In addition, the neck of the bladder closes, preventing retrograde ejaculation of semen into the bladder.
SSRIs may delay or inhibit ejaculation.
Orgasm is the highly pleasurable sensation that occurs in the brain generally simultaneously with
ejaculation. Anorgasmia may be a physical phenomenon due to decreased penile sensation (eg, from
neuropathy) or a neuropsychologic phenomenon due to psychiatric disorders or psychoactive drugs.
Ejaculatory insufficiency is reduced or absent semen volume that may result from retrograde ejaculation
or interruption of sympathetic stimulation. Retrograde ejaculation is common in men with diabetes and
can also be caused by surgery on the neck of the bladder or transurethral resection of the prostate.
Sympathetic interruption, either from surgery or with drugs (eg, guanethidine, phentolamine,
phenoxybenzamine, thioridazine), diminishes ejaculatory volume.
Premature ejaculation is ejaculation occurring sooner than desired by the man or his partner. It is usually
caused by sexual inexperience, anxiety, and other psychologic factors instead of disease. It can be
treated successfully with sex therapy and SSRIs.
Erectile Dysfunction
(Impotence)
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is the inability to attain or sustain an erection satisfactory for sexual
intercourse. Most erectile dysfunction is related to vascular, neurologic, psychologic, and
hormonal disorders; drug use can also be a cause. Evaluation typically includes screening for
underlying disorders and measuring testosterone levels. Treatment options include oral
phosphodiesterase inhibitors or apomorphine, intraurethral
or intracavernosal prostaglandins,
mechanical pump devices, and surgical implants.
The term impotence has been replaced by the term erectile dysfunction. In the US, at least 10 to 20
million men > 18 are affected. The prevalence of partial or complete ED is about 50% in men 40 to 70
and increases with aging. However, many men can be successfully treated.
Etiology
Primary ED (ie, the man has never been able to attain or sustain erections) is rare and is almost always
due to psychologic factors (guilt, fear of intimacy, depression, severe anxiety) or clinically obvious
anatomic abnormalities. Most often, ED is secondary (ie, a man who previously could attain and sustain
erections no longer can). Over 80% of secondary ED cases have an organic etiology. However, in many
men with organic disease, ED leads to secondary psychologic difficulties that compound the problem.
Psychologic factors must be considered in every case.
Psychologic causes may relate to performance anxiety, stress, or a mood disorder (particularly
depression). ED may be situational, involving a particular place, time, or partner.
The major organic causes of ED are vascular and neurologic disorders, often stemming from
===PAGE:2500===
atherosclerosis and diabetes. Complications of surgery, usually prostate surgery, are another common
cause. Other causes include hormonal disorders, drugs, and structural disorders of the penis (eg,
Peyronie's disease).
The most common vascular cause is atherosclerosis of penile arteries, often secondary to diabetes.
Atherosclerosis and aging decrease the capacity for dilation of arterial blood vessels and smooth muscle
relaxation, limiting the amount of blood that can enter the penis. Inadequate impedance of venous outflow
(venous leaks) may cause ED or, more commonly, failure to maintain tumescence as long as desired.
Venous leaks make it difficult for blood to remain in the penis during erection, so erections occur but
cannot be sustained. Priapism, particularly as in sickle cell disease, may damage penile vasculature and
lead to ED.
Stroke, partial complex seizures, multiple sclerosis, peripheral and autonomic neuropathies, and spinal
cord injuries are among the neurologic causes. Diabetic neuropathy and surgical injury are particularly
common causes.
Any endocrinopathy associated with testosterone deficiency (hypogonadism) may decrease libido and
cause ED. However, erectile function only rarely improves with normalization of serum testosterone
levels.
Numerous drug causes are possible (see
Table 229-2
). Alcohol can cause temporary ED.
Of men who have undergone transurethral resection of the prostate, up to 40% can experience problems
with erections for reasons that are not clear. ED is more common after more extensive prostatic resection
(eg, radical prostatectomy). Prolonged perineal pressure (as occurs during bicycle riding) can cause
temporary ED.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Screening for depression
• Testosterone level
Evaluation should include history of drug and alcohol use, smoking, diabetes, hypertension, and
atherosclerosis and symptoms of vascular, hormonal, neurologic, and psychologic disorders. It is vital to
screen for depression, which may not always be apparent. The Beck Depression Scale or, in older men,
the Yesavage Geriatric Depression Scale (see
Table 307-7
 is easy to administer and may be useful. Satisfaction with sexual relationships
should also be explored. Partner sexual dysfunction (eg, atrophic vaginitis, depression) must be
considered and evaluated.
Examination is focused on the genitals and extragenital signs of hormonal, neurologic, and vascular
disorders. Genitals are examined for anomalies, signs of hypogonadism, and fibrous bands or plaques
(Peyronie's disease). Poor rectal tone, perineal sensation, or abnormal anal wink or bulbocavernosus
reflexes may indicate neurologic dysfunction. Diminished peripheral pulses suggest vascular dysfunction.
A psychologic cause should be suspected in young healthy men with abrupt onset of ED, particularly if
onset is associated with a specific emotional event or if the dysfunction occurs only in certain settings. A
history of ED with spontaneous improvement also suggests psychologic origin (psychogenic ED). Men
with psychogenic ED usually have normal nocturnal erections and erections upon awakening, whereas
men with organic ED often do not.
Laboratory assessment should include measurement of testosterone level; if the level is low or lownormal, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) should be measured (. Evaluation for occult diabetes, dyslipidemias, hyperprolactinemia, thyroid disease, and Cushing's
===PAGE:2501===
syndrome should be done based on clinical suspicion.
[Table 229-2.
Commonly Used Drugs that Can Cause Erectile Dysfunction]
A penile pressure-brachial pressure index (systolic BP in the penis divided by systolic BP in the arm) <
0.6 indicates impaired blood flow to the penis, but this test is seldom done in general clinical practice.
Additional invasive or provocative penile tests include duplex ultrasonography before and after injection of
a vasoactive drug and cavernosography or cavernosometry; these tests can be considered in some
patients, such as those with posttraumatic erectile dysfunction or before penile reconstructive surgery
(eg, for Peyronie's disease).
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Usually an oral phosphodiesterase inhibitor
• Sometimes a mechanical device or an intracavernosal or intraurethral prostaglandin
Underlying organic disorders require appropriate treatment. Drugs that are temporally related to onset of
ED should be stopped or switched. Depression may require treatment. For all patients, reassurance and
education (including of the patient's partner whenever possible) are important.
For further therapy, noninvasive methods (mechanical devices and drugs) are tried first. All drugs and
devices should be tried ≥ 5 times before being considered ineffective.
Mechanical devices:
Men who can develop but not sustain an erection may use a constriction ring. As
soon as erection occurs, a metal or elastic ring or a leather band with snaps (sold by prescription in
pharmacies or OTC in sex paraphernalia stores as a "cock ring") is placed around the base of the penis,
preventing venous outflow. If the man cannot develop an erection, a vacuum device can draw blood into
the penis, after which the band or ring is placed at the base of the penis to retain the erection. Bruising of
the penis, coldness of the tip of the penis, and lack of spontaneity are some drawbacks to this modality. A
constriction ring and vacuum devices might also be useful adjuncts for patients who do not respond
satisfactorily to drug therapy.
Drugs:
The primary drugs for ED are oral phosphodiesterase inhibitors, oral apomorphine (not available
in the US), and intracavernosal or intraurethral prostaglandins. Almost all patients prefer oral drug therapy
to other methods for treating ED.
Oral phosphodiesterase inhibitors
selectively inhibit cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-specific
phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5), the predominant phosphodiesterase isoform in the penis. These drugs
include sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil. By increasing cGMP, these drugs enhance the nitric oxide
release essential for normal erection. Although vardenafil and tadalafil are more selective for the penile
vasculature than sildenafil, adverse effects of these drugs are similar. Although no clinical trials directly
compare the drugs, all 3 appear to be equally effective (60 to 75%). Sildenafil dose is 50 mg, although
most men respond best to 100 mg. Tadalafil has a significantly longer half-life (24 to 48 h) than sildenafil
and vardenafil (about 4 to 6 h), which might lead to more convenient dosing. The usual dosage for
tadalafil and vardenafil is 5 to 20 mg. All PDE5 inhibitors are generally taken at least 1 h before sexual
intercourse. Dosing frequency should not be ≤ 24 h for sildenafil and vardenafil and not ≤ 48 h for
tadalafil. All PDE5 inhibitors cause direct coronary vasodilation and potentiate the hypotensive effects of
other nitrates, including those used to treat cardiovascular disease as well as recreational amyl nitrate
("poppers"). Thus, all nitrates are contraindicated for 24 h after the administration of any PDE5 inhibitor.
Other adverse effects of PDE5 inhibitors include flushing, visual abnormalities, and headache. Sildenafil
and vardenafil may cause abnormal color perception. Tadalafil use has been linked with myalgias. Some
users of PDE5 inhibitors have rarely developed anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, but whether there is a
causal relationship is unclear. Vardenafil should be administered cautiously and at lower initial dosages to
patients receiving
α
-blockers, such as prazosin, doxazosin, and tamsulosin, because of the risk of
prolonged
hypotension. One study showed that sildenafil may be safely administered with doxazosin.
===PAGE:2502===
Apomorphine
increases erectile neurogenic signals by CNS mechanisms. It appears to be only
moderately effective and can cause nausea, somnolence, and hypotension.
Alprostadil
(the prostaglandin PGE
), given via intraurethral insertion or intracavernosal injection, can
produce erections with a mean duration of about 60 min. It causes priapism ( in ≤ 1% and
penile pain in about 10%. The intracavernosal dose is adjusted by the physician to minimize priapism; the
patient can then self-inject at home. Priapism is less common with intraurethral therapy, but intraurethral
therapy is much less effective (50 to 60%) than intracavernosal injection, the most effective
pharmacotherapy for erectile dysfunction (80 to 90%). Combination therapy with a PDE5 inhibitor and
alprostadil may be useful for some patients who fail to respond to oral PDE5 inhibitors alone.
Surgery:
For patients who do not respond to drug therapy, invasive treatment options include
implantation of a penile prosthesis. Prostheses can be rigid plastic rods or hydraulically operated devices.
Both involve the risks of general anesthesia, infection, and prosthetic malfunction.
Gynecomastia
Gynecomastia is hypertrophy of breast glandular tissue in males. It must be differentiated from
pseudogynecomastia, which is increased breast fat, but no enlargement of breast glandular tissue.
Pathophysiology
During infancy and puberty, enlargement of the male breast is normal (physiologic gynecomastia).
Enlargement is usually transient, bilateral, smooth, firm, and symmetrically distributed under the areola;
breasts may be tender. Physiologic gynecomastia that develops during puberty usually resolves within
about 6 mo to 2 yr. Similar changes may occur during old age and may be unilateral or bilateral. Most of
the enlargement is due to proliferation of stroma, not of breast ducts. The mechanism is usually a
decrease in androgen effect or an increase in estrogen effect (eg, decrease in androgen production,
increase in estrogen production, androgen blockade, displacement of estrogen from sex-hormone binding
globulin, androgen receptor defects).
If evaluation reveals no cause for gynecomastia, it is considered idiopathic. The cause may not be found
because gynecomastia is physiologic or because there is no longer any evidence of the inciting event.
Etiology
In infants and boys, the most common cause is
• Physiologic gynecomastia
In men, the most common causes are (see
Table 229-3
)
• Persistent pubertal gynecomastia
• Idiopathic gynecomastia
• Drugs (particularly spironolactone, anabolic steroids, and antiandrogens—see
Table 229-4
)
Breast cancer, which is uncommon in males, may cause unilateral breast abnormalities but is rarely
confused with gynecomastia.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should help clarify the duration of breast enlargement, whether
secondary sexual characteristics are fully developed, the relationship between onset of gynecomastia
===PAGE:2503===
and puberty, and the presence of any genital symptoms (eg, decreased libido, erectile dysfunction) and
breast symptoms (eg, pain, nipple discharge).
Review of systems
should seek symptoms that suggest possible causes, such as weight loss and
fatigue (cirrhosis, undernutrition, chronic kidney disease, hyperthyroidism); skin discoloration (chronic
kidney disease, cirrhosis); hair loss and frequent infections (undernutrition); fragility fractures
(undernutrition, hypogonadism); mood and cognitive changes (hypogonadism); and tremor, heat
intolerance, and diarrhea (hyperthyroidism).
Past medical history
should address disorders that can cause gynecomastia and include a history of all
prescribed and OTC drugs.
Physical examination:
Complete examination is done, including assessment of vital signs, skin, and
general appearance. The neck is examined for goiter. The abdomen is examined for ascites, venous
distention, and suspected adrenal masses. Development of secondary sexual characteristics (eg, the
penis, pubic hair, and axillary hair) is assessed. The testes are examined for masses and atrophy.
The breasts are examined while patients are recumbent with their hands behind their head. Examiners
bring their thumb and forefinger together from opposite sides of the nipple until they meet. Lumps are
assessed and characterized in terms of location, consistency, fixation to underlying tissues, and skin
changes. The
[Table 229-3.
Some Causes of Gynecomastia]
axilla is examined for lymph node involvement in men who have breast lumps.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Localized or eccentric breast swelling, particularly with nipple discharge, fixation to the skin, or hard
consistency
• Symptoms or signs of hypogonadism
• Symptoms or signs of hyperthyroidism
• Testicular mass
• Recent onset of painful, tender gynecomastia in an adult
Interpretation of findings:
With pseudogynecomastia, the examiner feels no resistance between the
thumb and forefinger until they meet at the nipple. In contrast, with gynecomastia, a rim of tissue > 0.5 cm
in diameter surrounds the nipple symmetrically and is
[Table 229-4.
Common Drug Causes of Gynecomastia*]
similar in consistency to the nipple itself. Breast cancer is suggested by swelling with any of the following
characteristics:
• Eccentric unilateral location
• Firm or hard consistency
• Fixation to skin or fascia
• Nipple discharge
• Skin dimpling
===PAGE:2504===
• Nipple retraction
• Axillary lymph node involvement
Gynecomastia in an adult that is of recent onset and causes pain is more often caused by a hormonal
abnormality (eg, tumor, hypogonadism) or drugs. Other examination findings may also be helpful (see
Table 229-5
).
Testing:
If breast cancer is considered, mammography should be done. If another disorder is suspected,
appropriate testing should be done (see
Table 229-3
). Extensive testing is often unnecessary, especially
for patients in whom the gynecomastia is chronic and detected only on physical examination. Because
hypogonadism is somewhat common with aging, some authorities recommend measuring the serum
testosterone level in older men, particularly if other findings suggest hypogonadism. However, in adults
with recent onset of painful gynecomastia without a drug or evident pathologic cause, measurement of
serum levels of LH, FSH, testosterone, estradiol and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) are
recommended. Patients with physiologic or idiopathic gynecomastia are evaluated again in 6 mo.
Treatment
In most cases, no specific treatment is needed because gynecomastia usually remits spontaneously or
disappears after any causative drug (except perhaps anabolic steroids) is stopped or underlying disorder
is treated. Some clinicians try tamoxifen 10 mg po bid if pain and tenderness are very troublesome in men
or adolescents, but this treatment is not always effective. Tamoxifen may also help prevent gynecomastia
in men being treated with high-dose antiandrogen (eg, bicalutamide) therapy for prostate cancer; breast
radiation therapy is an alternative. Resolution of gynecomastia is unlikely after 12 mo. Thus, after 12 mo,
if cosmetic appearance is unacceptable, surgical removal of excess breast tissue (eg, suction lipectomy
alone or with cosmetic surgery) may be used.
Key Points
• Gynecomastia must be differentiated from increased fat tissue in the breast.
• Gynecomastia is often physiologic or idiopathic.
• A wide variety of drugs can cause gynecomastia.
• Patients should be evaluated for clinically suspected genital or systemic disorders.
[Table 229-5.
Interpretation of Some Findings in Gynecomastia]
===PAGE:2505===
Chapter 230. Voiding Disorders
Introduction
Voiding disorders affect urine storage or release because both are controlled by the same neural and
urinary tract mechanisms. The result is incontinence or retention.
For normal urinary function, the autonomic and voluntary nervous systems must be intact, and muscles of
the urinary tract must be functional. Normally, bladder filling stimulates stretch receptors in the bladder
wall to send impulses via spinal nerves S2 to S4 to the spinal cord, then to the sensory cortex, where the
need to void is perceived. A threshold volume, which differs from person to person, triggers awareness of
the need to void. However, the external urinary sphincter at the bladder outlet is under voluntary control
and usually remains contracted until a person decides to urinate. The micturition inhibitory center in the
frontal lobe also helps control urination. When the decision is made, voluntary signals in the motor cortex
initiate urination. These impulses are transmitted to the pontine micturition center, which coordinates
simultaneous signals to contract detrusor smooth muscle throughout the bladder (via parasympathetic
cholinergic nerve fibers) and to relax the internal sphincter (via alpha sympathetic nerve fibers) and
striated muscle of the external sphincter and pelvic floor (see
Fig. 230-1
). In addition to normal urinary function, continence and normal voiding require normal cognitive
function (including motivation), mobility, access to a toilet, and manual dexterity.
Damage to or dysfunction of any of the components involved in voiding can cause urinary incontinence or
retention.
Urinary Incontinence
(See also
Incontinence in Children

Urinary incontinence is involuntary loss of urine; some experts consider it present only when a patient
thinks it is a problem. The disorder is greatly underrecognized and under-reported. Many patients do not
report the problem to their physician, and many physicians do not ask about incontinence specifically.
Incontinence can occur at any age but is more common among the elderly and among women, affecting
about 30% of elderly women and 15% of elderly men.
Incontinence greatly reduces quality of life by causing embarrassment, stigmatization, isolation, and
depression. Many elderly patients are institutionalized because incontinence is a burden to caregivers. In
bedbound patients, urine irritates and macerates skin, contributing to sacral pressure ulcer formation.
Elderly people with urgency are at increased risk of falls and fractures.
Types:
Incontinence may manifest as near-constant dribbling or as intermittent voiding with or without
awareness of the need to void. Some patients have extreme urgency (irrepressible need to void) with little
or no warning and may be unable to inhibit voiding until reaching a bathroom. Incontinence may occur or
worsen with maneuvers that increase intra-abdominal pressure. Postvoid dribbling is extremely common
and probably a normal variant in men. Identifying the clinical pattern is sometimes useful, but causes often
overlap and much of treatment is the same.
Urge incontinence
is uncontrolled urine leakage (of moderate to large volume) that occurs immediately
after an urgent, irrepressible need to void. Nocturia and nocturnal incontinence are common. Urge
incontinence is the most common type of incontinence in the elderly but may affect younger people. It is
often precipitated by use of a diuretic and is exacerbated by inability to quickly reach a bathroom. In
women, atrophic vaginitis, common with aging, contributes to thinning and irritation of the urethra and
urgency.
Stress incontinence
is urine leakage due to abrupt increases in intra-abdominal pressure (eg, with
coughing, sneezing, laughing, bending, or lifting). Leakage volume is usually low to moderate. It is the
2nd most common type of incontinence in women, largely because of complications of childbirth and
development of atrophic urethritis. Stress incontinence is typically more severe in obese people because
of pressure from abdominal contents on the top of the bladder.
===PAGE:2506===
Overflow incontinence
is dribbling of urine from an overly full bladder. Volume is usually small, but
leaks may be constant, resulting in large total losses. Overflow incontinence is the 2nd most common
type of incontinence in men.
Functional incontinence
is urine loss due to cognitive or physical impairments (eg, due to dementia or
stroke) or environmental barriers that interfere with control of voiding. For example, the patient may not
recognize the need to void, may not know where the toilet
[Fig. 230-1.
Normal micturition occurs when bladder contraction is coordinated with urethral sphincter
relaxation.]
is, or may not be able to walk to a remotely located toilet. Neural pathways and urinary tract mechanisms
that maintain continence may be normal.
Mixed incontinence
is any combination of the above types. The most common combinations are urge
with stress incontinence and urge or stress with functional incontinence.
Etiology
The disorder tends to differ among age groups. With aging, bladder capacity decreases, ability to inhibit
urination declines, involuntary bladder contractions (detrusor overactivity) occur more often, and bladder
contractility is impaired. Thus, voiding becomes more difficult to postpone and tends to be incomplete.
Postvoid residual volume increases, probably to ≤ 100 mL (normal < 50 mL). Endopelvic fascia weakens.
In postmenopausal women, decreased estrogen levels lead to atrophic urethritis and atrophic vaginitis
and to decreasing urethral resistance, length, and maximum closure pressure. In men, prostate size
increases, partially obstructing the urethra and leading to incomplete bladder emptying and strain on the
detrusor muscle. These changes occur in many normal, continent elderly people and may facilitate
incontinence but do not cause it.
In younger patients, incontinence often begins suddenly, may cause little leakage, and
usually resolves
quickly with little or no treatment. Often, incontinence has one cause in younger patients but has several
in the elderly.
Conceptually, categorization into reversible (transient) or established causes may be useful. However,
causes and mechanisms often overlap and occur in combination.
Transient incontinence:
There are several causes of transient incontinence (see
Table 230-1
). A useful mnemonic for many transient causes is DIAPPERS (with an extra P):
D
elirium,
I
nfection (commonly, symptomatic UTIs),
A
trophic urethritis and vaginitis,
P
harmaceuticals (eg, those with
α
-adrenergic, cholinergic, or anticholinergic properties; diuretics; sedatives),
P
sychiatric disorders
(especially depression),
E
xcess urine output (polyuria),
R
estricted mobility, and
S
tool impaction.
Established incontinence:
Established incontinence is caused by a persistent problem affecting nerves
or muscles. Mechanisms usually used to describe these problems are bladder outlet incompetence or
obstruction, detrusor overactivity or underactivity, detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, or a combination (see
Table 230-2
). However, these mechanisms are also involved in some transient causes.
Outlet incompetence
is a common cause of stress incontinence. In women, it is usually due to
weakness of the pelvic floor or of the endopelvic fascia. Such weakness commonly results from multiple
vaginal deliveries, pelvic surgery (including hysterectomy), age-related changes (including atrophic
urethritis), or a combination. As a result, the vesicourethral junction descends, the bladder neck and
urethra become hypermobile, and pressure in the urethra falls below that of the bladder. In men, a
common cause is damage to the sphincter or to the bladder neck and posterior urethra after radical
prostatectomy.
Outlet obstruction
is a common cause of incontinence in men, although most men with obstruction are
not incontinent. Obstruction in men commonly results from benign prostatic hyperplasia, prostate cancer,
===PAGE:2507===
or urethral stricture. In women, outlet obstruction is rare but can result from previous surgery for
incontinence or from a prolapsed cystocele that causes the urethra to kink during straining to void. In both
sexes, fecal impaction can cause obstruction. Obstruction leads to a chronically overdistended bladder,
which loses its ability to contract; then the bladder does not empty completely, resulting in overflow.
Obstruction also may lead to detrusor overactivity and urge incontinence. If the detrusor muscle loses its
ability to contract, overflow incontinence may follow. Some causes of outlet obstruction (eg, large bladder
diverticula, cystoceles, bladder infections, calculi, and tumors) are reversible.
Detrusor overactivity
is a common cause of urge incontinence in elderly and younger patients. The
detrusor muscle contracts intermittently for no apparent reason, usually when the bladder is partially or
nearly full. Detrusor overactivity may be idiopathic or may result from dysfunction of the frontal micturition
inhibitory center (commonly due to age-related changes, dementia, or stroke) or outlet obstruction.
Detrusor overactivity (hyperactivity) with impaired contractility (DHIC) is a variant of urge incontinence
characterized by urgency, frequency, a weak flow rate, urinary retention, bladder trabeculation, and a
postvoid residual volume of > 50 mL. This variant may mimic prostatism in men or stress incontinence in
women.
Detrusor underactivity
causes urinary retention and overflow incontinence in about 5% of patients with
incontinence. It may be caused by injury to the spinal cord ( or to nerve roots supplying the
bladder (eg, by disk compression, tumor, or surgery), by peripheral or autonomic neuropathies, or by
other neurologic disorders (see
Table 230-2
). Anticholinergics and opioids greatly decrease detrusor
contractility; these drugs are common transient causes. The detrusor may become underactive in men
with chronic outlet obstruction as the detrusor is replaced by fibrosis and connective tissue, preventing
the bladder from emptying even when the obstruction is removed. In women, detrusor underactivity is
usually idiopathic. Less severe detrusor weakness is common among elderly women. Such weakness
does not cause incontinence but can complicate treatment if other causes of incontinence coexist.
Detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia
(loss of coordination between bladder contraction and external urinary
sphincter relaxation) may cause outlet obstruction, with resultant overflow incontinence. Dyssynergia is
often due to a spinal cord lesion that interrupts pathways to the pontine micturition center, which
coordinates sphincter relaxation and bladder contraction. Rather than relaxing when the bladder
contracts, the sphincter contracts, obstructing the bladder outlet. Dyssynergia causes severe
trabeculation, diverticula, a "Christmas tree" deformation of the bladder, hydronephrosis, and renal failure.
Functional impairment
(eg, cognitive impairment, reduced mobility, reduced manual dexterity, coexisting
disorders, lack of motivation), particularly in the elderly, may contribute to established incontinence but
rarely causes it.
[Table 230-1.
Causes of Transient Incontinence]
Evaluation
• History
• Examination: neurologic, pelvic, rectal
• Testing: urinalysis, urine culture, BUN, and creatinine; postvoid residual volume; sometimes urodynamic
testing
Most patients, embarrassed to mention incontinence, do not volunteer information about it, although they
may mention related symptoms (eg, frequency, nocturia, hesitancy). All adults should therefore be
screened with a question such as "Do you ever leak urine?"
Clinicians should not assume that incontinence is irreversible just because it is longstanding. Also, urinary
retention ( must be excluded before treatment for detrusor overactivity is started.
History:
History focuses on duration and patterns of voiding, bowel function, drug use, and obstetric and
pelvic surgical history. A voiding diary can provide clues to causes. Over 48 to 72 h, the patient or
===PAGE:2508===
caregiver records volume and time of each void and each incontinent episode in relation to associated
activities (especially eating, drinking, and drug use) and during sleep. The amount of urine leakage can
be estimated as drops, small, medium, or soaking; or by pad tests (measuring the weight of urine
absorbed by feminine pads or incontinence pads during a 24-h period). If the volume of most nightly voids
is much smaller than functional bladder capacity (defined as the largest single voided volume recorded in
the diary), the cause is a sleep-related problem (patients void because they are awake anyway) or a
bladder abnormality (patients without bladder dysfunction or a sleep-related problem awaken to void only
when the bladder is full).
Of men with obstructive symptoms (hesitancy, weak urinary stream, intermittency, feeling of incomplete
bladder emptying), about one third have detrusor overactivity without obstruction.
Urgency or an abrupt gush of urine without warning or without preceding increase in intra-abdominal
pressure (often called reflex or unconscious incontinence) typically indicates detrusor overactivity.
Physical examination:
Neurologic, pelvic, and rectal examinations are the focus.
Neurologic examination involves assessing mental status, gait, and lower extremity function and checking
for signs of peripheral or autonomic neuropathy, including orthostatic hypotension. Neck and upper
extremities should be checked for signs of cervical spondylosis or stenosis. The spinal column should be
checked for evidence of prior surgeries and for deformities, dimples, or hair tufts suggesting neural tube
defects.
Innervation of the external urethral sphincter, which shares the same sacral roots as the anal sphincter,
can be tested by assessing:
• Perineal sensation
• Volitional anal sphincter contraction (S2 to S4)
• The anal wink reflex (S4 to S5), which is anal sphincter contraction triggered by lightly stroking perianal
skin
• The bulbocavernosus reflex (S2 to S4), which is anal sphincter contraction triggered by pressure on the
glans penis or clitoris
However, the absence of these reflexes is not necessarily pathologic.
Pelvic examination in women can identify atrophic vaginitis and urethritis, urethral hypermobility, and
pelvic floor weakness. Pale, thin
[Table 230-2.
Causes of Established Incontinence]
vaginal mucosae with loss of rugae indicate atrophic vaginitis. Urethral hypermobility can be seen during
coughing when the posterior vaginal wall is stabilized with a speculum. A cystocele, an enterocele, a
rectocele, or uterine prolapse suggests pelvic floor weakness (. When the opposite wall is
stabilized with a speculum, bulging of the anterior wall indicates a cystocele, and bulging of the posterior
wall indicates a rectocele or enterocele. Pelvic floor weakness does not suggest a cause, unless a large,
prolapsed cystocele is present.
Rectal examination can identify fecal impaction, rectal masses, and, in men, prostate nodules or masses.
Prostate size should be noted but correlates poorly with outlet obstruction. Suprapubic palpation and
percussion to detect bladder distention are usually of little value except in extreme acute cases of urinary
retention.
If stress incontinence is suspected, urinary stress testing can be done on the examination table; it has a
sensitivity and specificity of > 90%. The bladder must be full; a patient sits upright or close to upright with
the legs spread, relaxes the perineal area, and coughs vigorously once. Immediate leakage that starts
===PAGE:2509===
and stops with the cough confirms stress incontinence. Delayed or persistent leakage suggests detrusor
overactivity triggered by the cough. If cough triggers incontinence, the maneuver can be repeated while
the examiner places 1 or 2 fingers inside the vagina to elevate the urethra (Marshall-Bonney test);
incontinence that is
corrected by this maneuver may respond to surgery. Results can be false-positive if
patients have an abrupt urge to void during the test or false-negative if patients do not relax, the bladder
is not full, the cough is not strong, or a large cystocele is present (in women). In the last case, the test
should be repeated with the patient supine and the cystocele reduced, if possible.
Testing:
Urinalysis, urine culture, and measurement of BUN and serum creatinine are required. Other
tests may include serum glucose and Ca (with albumin for estimation of protein-free Ca levels) if the
voiding diary suggests polyuria, electrolytes if patients are confused, and vitamin B
levels if clinical
findings suggest a neuropathy.
Postvoid residual volume should be determined by catheterization or ultrasonography. Postvoid residual
volume plus voided volume estimates total bladder capacity and helps assess bladder proprioception. A
volume < 50 mL is normal; < 100 mL is usually acceptable in patients > 65 but abnormal in younger
patients; and > 100 mL may suggest detrusor underactivity or outlet obstruction.
Urodynamic testing is indicated when clinical evaluation combined with the appropriate tests is not
diagnostic or when abnormalities must be precisely characterized before surgery.
Cystometry may help diagnose urge incontinence, but sensitivity and specificity are unknown. Sterile
water is introduced into the bladder in 50-mL increments using a 50-mL syringe and a 12- to 14-F urethral
catheter until the patient experiences urgency or bladder contractions, detected by changes in fluid level
in the syringe. If < 300 mL causes urgency or contractions, detrusor overactivity and urge incontinence
are likely.
Peak urinary flow rate testing with a flow meter is used to confirm or exclude outlet obstruction in men.
Results depend on initial bladder volume, but a peak flow rate of < 12 mL/sec with a urinary volume of ≥
200 mL and prolonged voiding suggest outlet obstruction or detrusor underactivity. A rate of ≥ 12 mL/sec
excludes obstruction and may suggest detrusor overactivity. During testing, patients are instructed to
place their hand on their abdomen to check for straining during urination, especially if stress incontinence
is suspected and surgery is contemplated. Straining suggests detrusor weakness that may predispose
patients to postoperative retention.
In cystometrography, pressure-volume curves and bladder sensation are recorded while the bladder is
filled with sterile water; provocative testing (with bethanechol or ice water) is used to stimulate bladder
contractions. Electromyography of perineal muscle is used to assess sphincter innervation and function.
Urethral, abdominal, and rectal pressures may be measured. Pressure-flow video studies, usually done
with voiding cystourethrography (, can correlate bladder contraction, bladder neck
competency, and detrusor-sphincter synergy, but equipment is not widely available.
Treatment
• Bladder training
• Kegel exercises
• Drugs
Specific causes are treated, and drugs that can cause or worsen incontinence are stopped or the dosing
schedule is altered (eg, a diuretic dose is timed so that a bathroom is near when the drug takes effect).
Other treatment is based on type of incontinence. Regardless of type and cause, some general measures
are usually helpful.
General measures:
Patients may benefit from bladder training (to change voiding habits) and changes
in fluid intake. Bladder training usually involves timed voiding (every 2 to 3 h) while awake. Prompted
voiding is used for cognitively impaired patients; they are asked about every 2 h whether they need to
===PAGE:2510===
void or whether they are wet or dry. A voiding diary helps establish how often and when voiding is
indicated and whether patients can sense a full bladder. Patients are instructed to limit fluid intake at
certain times (eg, before going out, 3 to 4 h before bedtime), to avoid fluids that irritate the bladder (eg,
caffeine-containing fluids), and to drink 48 to 64 oz (1500 to 2000 mL) of fluid a day (because
concentrated urine irritates the bladder).
Pelvic muscle exercises (eg, Kegel exercises) are often effective, especially for stress incontinence.
Patients must contract the pelvic muscles (pubococcygeus and paravaginal) rather than the thigh,
abdominal, or buttock muscles. The muscles are contracted for 10 sec, then relaxed for 10 sec 10 to 15
times tid. Re-instruction is often necessary, and biofeedback is often useful. In women < 75 yr, cure rate is
10 to 25%, and improvement occurs in an additional 40 to 50%, especially if patients are motivated; do
the exercises as instructed; and receive written instructions, follow-up visits for encouragement, or both.
Pelvic floor electrical stimulation is an automated version of Kegel exercises; it uses electrical current to
inhibit detrusor overactivity and contract pelvic muscles. Advantages are improved compliance and
contraction of the
correct pelvic muscles, but benefits over behavioral changes alone are unclear.
Some patients, especially those with restricted mobility or cognitive impairment, benefit from a portable
commode. Others use absorbent pads or specialized padded undergarments. These products can greatly
improve the quality of life of patients and their caregivers. However, they should not be substituted for
measures that can control or eliminate incontinence, and they must be changed often to avoid skin
irritation and development of UTIs.
Drugs:
Drugs are often useful (see
Table 230-3
). Such drugs include anticholinergics and antimuscarinics, which relax the detrusor, and
α
-
agonists, which increase sphincter tone. Drugs with strong anticholinergic effects should be used
judiciously in the elderly.
α
-Antagonists and 5
α
-reductase inhibitors may be used to treat outlet obstruction
in men with urge or overflow incontinence.
Urge incontinence:
Treatment aims to reduce detrusor overactivity; it begins with bladder training,
Kegel exercises, and relaxation techniques. Biofeedback can be used with these treatments. Drugs may
also be needed, as may intermittent self-catheterization (eg, when postvoid residual volume is large).
Infrequently, sacral nerve stimulation, intravesical therapies, and surgery are used.
Bladder training helps patients tolerate and ultimately inhibit detrusor contractions. Regular voiding
intervals are gradually lengthened (eg, 30 min every 3 days that urinary control is maintained) to improve
tolerance of detrusor contractions. Relaxation techniques can improve emotional and physical responses
to the urge to void. Relaxing, standing in place or sitting down (rather than rushing to the toilet), and
tightening pelvic floor muscles can help patients suppress the urge to void.
Drugs (see
Table 230-3
) should supplement, not replace, behavioral changes. The most commonly used
are oxybutynin and tolterodine; both are anticholinergic and antimuscarinic and are available in extendedrelease forms that can be taken po once/day. Oxybutynin is available as a skin patch that is changed
twice/wk. Newer drugs with anticholinergic and antimuscarinic properties include solifenacin and
darifenacin, which are taken po once/day, and trospium, which is taken once/day or bid. Drugs may be
required to suppress urgency symptoms due to DHIC. Drugs with a rapid onset of action (eg, immediaterelease oxybutynin) can be used prophylactically if incontinence occurs at predictable times.
Combinations of drugs may increase both efficacy and adverse effects, possibly limiting this approach in
the elderly.
Sacral nerve stimulation is indicated for patients with severe urge incontinence refractory to other
treatments. It is thought to work by centrally inhibiting bladder sensory afferents. The procedure begins
with percutaneous nerve stimulation for at least 3 days; if patients respond, a neurostimulator is
permanently implanted.
Rarely, intravesical instillation of capsaicin or resiniferatoxin (a capsaicin analog) is used when urge
incontinence results from spinal cord injuries and other CNS disorders. This experimental treatment
desensitizes C-fiber bladder afferents responsible for reflex bladder emptying. Injecting botulinum toxin
type A into the detrusor muscle is under study as an alternative.
===PAGE:2511===
Surgery is a last resort, usually used only for younger patients with severe urge incontinence refractory to
other treatments. Augmentation cystoplasty, in which a section of intestine is sewn into the bladder to
increase bladder capacity, is most common. Intermittent self-catheterization may be required if
augmentation cystoplasty results in weak bladder contractions or poor coordination of abdominal
pressure (Valsalva maneuver) with sphincter relaxation. Detrusor myomectomy may be done to decrease
undesired bladder contractions. As a last resort, a urinary diversion can be created to divert the urine
away from the bladder. Choice of procedure is based on presence of other disorders, physical limitations,
and patient preference. Neuromodulation, in which electrodes are implanted around the spinal nerve
roots, is under study.
Stress incontinence:
Treatment includes bladder training and Kegel exercises. Drugs, surgery, other
procedures, or, in women, occlusive devices are also usually needed. Treatment is generally directed at
outlet incompetence but includes treatments for urge incontinence if detrusor overactivity is present.
Avoiding physical stresses that provoke incontinence can help. Losing weight may help lessen
incontinence in obese patients.
Drugs (see
Table 230-3
) include pseudo-ephedrine, which may be useful in women with outlet
incompetence; imipramine, which may be used for mixed stress and urge incontinence or for either
separately; and duloxetine. If stress incontinence is due to atrophic urethritis, topical estrogen (0.3 mg
conjugated or 0.5 mg estradiol once/day for 3 wk, then twice/wk after) is often effective.
Surgery and other procedures provide the best chance of cure when noninvasive treatments are
ineffective. Bladder neck suspension
[Table 230-3.
Drugs Used to Treat Incontinence]
is used to correct urethral hypermobility. Suburethral slings, injection of periurethral bulking agents, or
surgical insertion of an artificial sphincter is used to treat sphincter deficiency. Choice depends on the
patient's ability to tolerate surgery and need for other surgeries (eg, hysterectomy, cystocele repair) and
on local experience.
Occlusive devices may be used in elderly women with or without bladder or uterine prolapse if surgical
risks are high or if prior surgery for stress incontinence was ineffective. Pessaries may be effective; they
elevate the bladder neck, elevate the vesicourethral junction, and increase urethral resistance by
pressing the urethra against the pubic symphysis. Newer, possibly more acceptable alternatives include
silicone suction caps over the urethral meatus, intraurethral occlusive devices inserted with an applicator,
and intravaginal
bladder neck support prostheses. Removable intraurethral plugs are under study.
Exercise regimens using vaginal cones—in which progressively heavier cones are inserted into the
vagina and retained for 15 min bid by contracting pelvic floor muscles—are also under study.
Overflow incontinence:
Treatment depends on whether the cause is outlet obstruction, detrusor
underactivity, or both.
Outlet obstruction due to benign prostatic hyperplasia ( or cancer ( is treated
with drugs or surgery; that due to urethral stricture is treated with dilation or stenting. Cystoceles in
women are treated with surgery or can be reduced using a pessary (; unilateral suture
removal or urethral adhesiolysis may be effective if cystoceles resulted from surgery. If urethral
hypermobility coexists, bladder neck suspension should be done.
Detrusor underactivity requires bladder decompression (reduction of residual volume) by intermittent selfcatheterization or, rarely, temporary use of an indwelling catheter. Several weeks of decompression may
be required to restore bladder function. If bladder function is not fully restored, maneuvers to augment
voiding (eg, double voiding, Valsalva maneuver, application of suprapubic pressure [Crede's method]
during voiding) are used. A completely acontractile detrusor requires intermittent self-catheterization or
use of an indwelling catheter. Using antibiotics or methenamine mandelate to prevent UTIs in patients
who require intermittent self-catheterization is controversial but probably indicated if patients have
===PAGE:2512===
frequent symptomatic UTIs or a valvular or orthopedic prosthesis. Such prophylaxis is not helpful with
indwelling catheters.
Additional treatments that may induce bladder contraction and promote emptying include electrical
stimulation and the cholinergic agonist bethanechol. However, bethanechol is usually ineffective and has
adverse effects (see
Table 230-3
).
Refractory incontinence:
Absorbent pads, special undergarments, and intermittent self-catheterization
may be needed. Indwelling urethral catheters are an option for patients who cannot walk to the toilet or
who have urinary retention and cannot self-catheterize; these catheters are not recommended for urge
incontinence because they may exacerbate detrusor contractions. If a catheter is necessary (eg, to allow
healing of a pressure ulcer in patients with refractory detrusor overactivity), a narrow catheter with a small
balloon should be used because it will minimize irritability; irritability can force urine out, even around a
catheter. For men who can comply with treatment, condom catheters may be preferable because they
reduce risk of UTIs; however, these catheters may cause skin breakdown and reduce motivation to
become dry. New external collection devices may be effective in women. If involuntary bladder
contractions persist, oxybutynin or tolterodine can be used. If mobility is restricted, measures to prevent
skin irritation and breakdown due to urine are essential (.
Urinary Retention
Urinary retention is incomplete emptying of the bladder or cessation of urination; it may be acute or
chronic. Causes include impaired bladder contractility, bladder outlet obstruction, detrusor-sphincter
dyssynergia (lack of coordination between bladder contraction and sphincter relaxation), or a
combination. Retention is most common among men, in whom prostate abnormalities or urethral strictures
cause outlet obstruction. In either sex, retention may be due to drugs (particularly those with
anticholinergic effects, including many OTC drugs), severe fecal impaction (which increases pressure on
the bladder trigone), or neurogenic bladder in patients with diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's
disease, or prior pelvic surgery resulting in bladder denervation.
Urinary retention can cause urinary frequency and urge or overflow incontinence. It may cause abdominal
distention and pain. When retention develops slowly, pain may be absent. Long-standing retention
predisposes to UTI and can increase bladder pressure, causing obstructive uropathy (.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is obvious in patients who cannot void. In those who can void, diagnosis is by postvoid
catheterization showing a residual urine volume > 100 mL. Other tests (eg, urinalysis, blood tests,
ultrasonography, uro-dynamic testing, cystoscopy, cystography) are done based on clinical findings.
Treatment
• Urethral catheterization and treatment of cause
Relief of acute urinary retention requires urethral catheterization. Subsequent treatment depends on
cause. In men with benign prostatic hypertrophy, drugs (usually
α
-adrenergic blockers or 5
α
-reductase
inhibitors) or surgery
may help decrease bladder outlet resistance. No treatment is effective for impaired
bladder contractility or a neurogenic bladder; intermittent self-catheterization or indwelling catheterization
is usually required. Urinary diversion is a last resort.
Neurogenic Bladder
Neurogenic bladder is bladder dysfunction (flaccid or spastic) caused by neurologic damage.
The primary symptom is overflow incontinence. Risk of serious complications (eg, recurrent
infection, vesicoureteral reflux, autonomic dysreflexia) is high. Diagnosis involves imaging and
cystoscopy or urodynamic testing. Treatment involves catheterization or measures to trigger
urination.
===PAGE:2513===
Any condition that impairs bladder and bladder outlet afferent and efferent signaling can cause
neurogenic bladder. Causes may involve the CNS (eg, stroke, spinal injury, meningomyelocele,
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), peripheral nerves (eg, diabetic, alcoholic, or vitamin B
deficiency
neuropathies; herniated disks; damage due to pelvic surgery), or both (eg, Parkinson's disease, multiple
sclerosis, syphilis). Bladder outlet obstruction often coexists and may exacerbate symptoms.
In
flaccid (hypotonic) neurogenic bladder
, volume is large, pressure is low, and contractions are
absent. It may result from peripheral nerve damage or spinal cord damage at the S2 to S4 level. After
acute cord damage, initial flaccidity may be followed by long-term flaccidity or spasticity, or bladder
function may improve after days, weeks, or months.
In
spastic bladder
, volume is normal or small, and involuntary contractions occur. It usually results from
brain damage or spinal cord damage above T12. Precise symptoms vary by site and severity of the
lesion. Bladder contraction and external urinary sphincter relaxation are typically uncoordinated (detrusorsphincter dyssynergia).
Mixed patterns
(flaccid and spastic bladder) may be caused by many disorders, including syphilis,
diabetes mellitus, brain or spinal cord tumors, stroke, ruptured intervertebral disk, and demyelinating or
degenerative disorders (eg, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis).
Symptoms and Signs
Overflow incontinence is the primary symptom in patients with a flaccid or spastic bladder. Patients retain
urine and have constant overflow dribbling. Men typically also have erectile dysfunction. Patients with
spastic bladder may have frequency, nocturia, and urgency or spastic paralysis with sensory deficits.
Common complications include recurrent UTIs and urinary calculi. Hydronephrosis with vesicoureteral
reflux may occur because the large urine volume puts pressure on the vesicoureteral junction, causing
dysfunction with reflux and, in severe cases, nephropathy. Patients with high thoracic or cervical spinal
cord lesions are at risk of autonomic dysreflexia (a life-threatening syndrome of malignant hypertension,
bradycardia or tachycardia, headache, piloerection, and sweating due to unregulated sympathetic
hyperactivity). This disorder may be triggered by acute bladder distention (due to urinary retention) or
bowel distention (due to constipation or fecal impaction).
Diagnosis
• Postvoid residual volume
• Renal ultrasonography
• Serum creatinine
• Usually cystography, cystoscopy, and cystometrography with urodynamic testing
Diagnosis is suspected clinically. Usually, postvoid residual volume is measured, renal ultrasonography is
done to detect hydronephrosis, and serum creatinine is measured to assess renal function. Further
studies are often not obtained in patients who are not able to self-catheterize or ask to go to the bathroom
(eg, severely debilitated elderly or post-stroke patients). In patients with hydronephrosis or nephropathy
who are not severely debilitated, cystography, cystoscopy, and cystometrography with urodynamic testing
are usually recommended and may guide further therapy. Cystography is used to evaluate bladder
capacity and detect reflux. Cystoscopy is used to evaluate duration and severity of retention (by detecting
bladder trabeculations) and to check for bladder outlet obstruction. Cystometrography can determine
whether bladder volume and pressure are high or low; if done during the recovery phase of flaccid
bladder after spinal cord injury, it can help evaluate detrusor functional capacity and predict rehabilitation
prospects (. Urodynamic testing of voiding flow rates with sphincter electromyography can
show whether bladder contraction and sphincter relaxation are coordinated (.
Treatment
===PAGE:2514===
• Catheterization
• Increased fluid intake
• Surgery as last resort
Prognosis is good if the disorder is diagnosed and treated before kidneys are damaged.
Specific treatment involves catheterization or measures to trigger urination. General treatment includes
renal function monitoring, control of UTIs, high fluid intake to decrease risk of UTIs and urinary calculi
(although this measure may exacerbate incontinence), early ambulation, frequent changes of position,
and dietary Ca restriction to inhibit calculus formation.
For flaccid bladder, especially if the cause is an acute spinal cord injury, immediate continuous or
intermittent catheterization is needed. Intermittent self-catheterization is preferable to indwelling urethral
catheterization, which has a high risk of recurrent UTIs and, in men, a high risk of urethritis, periurethritis,
prostatic abscesses, and urethral fistulas. Suprapubic catheterization may be used if patients cannot selfcatheterize.
For spastic bladder, treatment depends on the patient's ability to retain urine. Patients who can retain
normal volumes can use techniques to trigger voiding (eg, applying suprapubic pressure, scratching the
thighs); anticholinergics may be effective. For patients who cannot retain normal volumes, treatment is the
same as that of urge incontinence (, including drugs (see
Table 230-3
) and sacral nerve
stimulation.
Surgery is a last resort. It is usually indicated if patients have had or are at risk of severe acute or chronic
sequelae or if social circumstances, spasticity, or quadriplegia prevents use of continuous or intermittent
bladder drainage. Sphincterotomy (for men) converts the bladder into an open draining conduit. Sacral
(S3 and S4) rhizotomy converts a spastic into a flaccid bladder. Urinary diversion may involve an ileal
conduit or ureterostomy.
An artificial, mechanically controlled urinary sphincter, surgically inserted, is an option for patients who
have adequate bladder capacity, good bladder emptying, and upper extremity motor skills and who can
comply with instructions for use of the device; if patients do not comply, life-threatening situations (eg,
renal failure, urosepsis) can result.
Interstitial Cystitis
Interstitial cystitis is noninfectious bladder inflammation that causes pain (suprapubic, pelvic,
and abdominal), urinary frequency, and urgency with incontinence. Diagnosis is by history and
exclusion of other disorders clinically and by cystoscopy and biopsy. With treatment, most
patients improve, but cure is rare. Treatment varies but includes dietary changes, bladder
training, pentosan, analgesics, and intravesical therapies.
Incidence of interstitial cystitis is unknown, but the disorder appears to be more common than once
thought and may underlie other clinical syndromes (eg, chronic pelvic pain). Whites are more susceptible,
and 90% of cases occur in women.
Cause is unknown, but pathophysiology may involve loss of protective urothelial mucin, with penetration
of urinary K and other substances into the bladder wall, activation of sensory nerves, and smooth muscle
damage. Mast cells may mediate the process, but their role is unclear.
Symptoms and Signs
Interstitial cystitis is initially asymptomatic, but symptoms appear and worsen over years as the bladder
wall is damaged. Suprapubic and pelvic pressure or pain occurs, usually with urinary frequency (up to 60
times/day) or urgency. These symptoms worsen as the bladder fills and diminish when patients void; in
===PAGE:2515===
some people, symptoms worsen during ovulation, menstruation, seasonal allergies, physical or emotional
stress, or sexual intercourse. Foods with high K content (eg, citrus fruits, chocolate, caffeinated drinks,
tomatoes) may cause exacerbations. Tobacco, alcohol, and spicy foods may worsen symptoms. If the
bladder wall becomes scarred, bladder compliance and capacity decrease, causing urinary urgency and
frequency.
Diagnosis
• Clinical
• Cystoscopy
Diagnosis is suggested by symptoms after testing has excluded more common disorders that cause
similar symptoms (eg, UTIs, pelvic inflammatory disease, chronic prostatitis or prostatodynia,
diverticulitis). Cystoscopy is necessary and sometimes reveals benign bladder (Hunner's) ulcers; biopsy
is required to exclude bladder cancer. Assessment of symptoms with a standardized symptom scale or
during intravesical KCl infusion (K sensitivity testing) may improve diagnostic accuracy but is not yet
routine practice.
Treatment
• Diet modification
• Bladder training
•
Drugs (eg, pentosan, tricyclic antidepressants, NSAIDs, dimethyl sulfoxide instillation)
• Surgery as la3esort
Up to 90% of patients improve with treatment, but cure is rare. Treatment should involve avoidance of
tobacco, alcohol, foods with high K content, and spicy foods as well as bladder training, drugs,
intravesical therapies, and surgery as needed. Stress reduction and biofeedback (to strengthen pelvic
floor muscles, eg, with Kegel exercises) may help. No treatment has been proved effective, but a
combination of ≥ 2 nonsurgical treatments is recommended before surgery is considered.
The most commonly used drug is pentosan, a heparin similar to urothelial glycosaminoglycan; doses of
100 mg po tid may help restore the bladder's protective surface lining. Improvement may not be noticed
for 2 to 4 mo. Intravesical instillation of 15 mL of a solution containing 100 mg of pentosan or 40,000 units
of heparin plus 80 mg of lidocaine and 3 mL of Na bicarbonate may benefit patients unresponsive to oral
drugs. Tricyclic antidepressants (eg, imipramine 25 to 50 mg po once/day) and NSAIDs in standard doses
may relieve pain. Antihistamines (eg, hydroxyzine 10 to 50 mg once before bedtime) may help by directly
inhibiting mast cells or by blocking allergic triggers.
Dimethyl sulfoxide instilled into the bladder through a catheter and retained for 15 min may deplete
substance P and trigger mast cell granulation; 50 mL q 1 to 2 wk for 6 to 8 wk, repeated as needed,
relieves symptoms in up to one half of patients. Intravesical instillation of BCG and hyaluronic acid are
under study.
Bladder hydrodistention, cystoscopic resection of a Hunner's ulcer, and sacral nerve root (S3) stimulation
help some patients.
Surgery (eg, partial cystectomy, bladder augmentation, neobladder, and urinary diversion) is a last resort
for patients with intolerable pain refractory to all other treatments. Outcome is unpredictable; in some
patients, symptoms persist.
===PAGE:2516===
Chapter 231. Obstructive Uropathy
Introduction
(Urinary Tract Obstruction)
Obstructive uropathy is structural or functional hindrance of normal urine flow, sometimes
leading to renal dysfunction (obstructive nephropathy). Symptoms, less likely in chronic
obstruction, are pain radiating to the T11 to T12 dermatomes, anuria, nocturia, or polyuria.
Diagnosis is based on results of bladder catheterization, ultrasonography, CT,
cystourethroscopy, cystourethrography, or pyelography, depending on the level of obstruction.
Treatment, depending on cause, may require prompt drainage, instrumentation, surgery (eg,
endoscopy, lithotripsy), hormonal therapy, or a combination of these modalities.
Each year about 2/1000 people in the US are hospitalized for obstructive uropathy. The condition has a
bimodal distribution. In childhood, it is due mainly to congenital anomalies of the urinary tract. Incidence
then declines until after age 60, when incidence rises, particularly in men because of the increased
incidence of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer. Overall, obstructive uropathy is
responsible for about 4% of end-stage renal disease. Hydronephrosis is found at postmortem examination
in 2 to 4% of patients.
Etiology
Many conditions can cause obstructive uropathy, which may be acute or chronic, partial or complete, and
unilateral or bilateral (see
Table 231-1
). In children, the most common causes are anatomic abnormalities (including urethral valves
or stricture and stenosis at the ureterovesical or ureteropelvic junction). In young adults, the most
common cause is a calculus. In older adults, the most common causes are BPH or prostate cancer,
retroperitoneal or pelvic tumors, and calculi. Obstruction may occur at any level, from the renal tubules
(casts, crystals) to the external urethral meatus. Proximal to the obstruction, effects may include increased
intraluminal pressure, urinary stasis, UTI, or calculus formation (which may also cause obstruction).
Obstruction is much more common in males, but acquired and congenital urethral strictures and meatal
stenosis occur in both males
[Table 231-1.
Causes of Obstructive Uropathy]
and females. In females, urethral obstruction may occur secondary to a tumor or as a result of stricture
formation after radiation therapy, surgery, or urologic instrumentation (usually repeated dilation).
Pathophysiology
Pathologic findings consist of dilation of the collecting ducts and distal tubules and chronic tubular
atrophy with little glomerular damage. Dilation takes 3 days from the onset of obstructive uropathy to
develop; before then, the collecting system is relatively noncompliant and less likely to dilate. Obstructive
uropathy without dilation can also occur when fibrosis or a retroperitoneal tumor encases the collecting
systems, when obstructive uropathy is mild and renal function is not impaired, and in the presence of an
intrarenal pelvis.
Obstructive nephropathy:
Obstructive nephropathy is renal dysfunction (renal insufficiency, renal
failure, or tubulointerstitial damage) resulting from urinary tract obstruction. The mechanism involves,
among many factors, increased intratubular pressure, local ischemia, and, often, UTI. Obstruction may
result in type 1 renal tubular acidosis due to reduced distal hydrogen secretion probably because of a
defect in the hydrogen ion transporter. In this case, Na wasting can occur and predispose to ECF volume
depletion. If obstruction is bilateral, nephropathy may result in renal insufficiency. Renal insufficiency may
rarely occur when obstruction is unilateral because autonomic-mediated vascular or ureteral spasm may
affect the functioning kidney.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2517===
Symptoms and signs vary with the site, degree, and rapidity of onset of obstructive uropathy.
Pain is common when obstruction acutely distends the bladder, collecting system (ie, the ureter plus the
renal calyces), or renal capsule. Upper ureteral or renal pelvic lesions cause flank pain or tenderness,
whereas lower ureteral obstruction causes pain that may radiate to the ipsilateral testis or labia. The
distribution of kidney and ureteral pain is usually along T11 to T12. Acute complete ureteral obstruction
(eg, an obstructing ureteral calculus) may cause severe pain accompanied by nausea and vomiting. A
large fluid load (eg, from beer drinking or osmotic diuresis due to an IV contrast agent) causes dilation
and pain if urine production increases to a level greater than the flow rate through the area of obstruction.
Pain is typically minimal or absent with partial or slowly developing obstructive uropathy (eg, congenital
ureteropelvic junction obstruction, pelvic tumor). Hydronephrosis may occasionally produce a palpable
flank mass, particularly in massive hydronephrosis of infancy and childhood.
Urine volume does not diminish in unilateral obstruction unless it occurs in the only functioning kidney.
Absolute anuria occurs with complete obstruction at the level of the bladder or urethra. Partial obstruction
at that level may cause difficulty voiding or abnormalities of the urine stream. In partial obstruction, urine
output is often normal and is rarely increased. Increased urine output with polyuria and nocturia occur if
the ensuing nephropathy causes impaired renal concentrating capacity and Na reabsorption. Longstanding nephropathy may also result in hypertension.
Infection complicating obstruction may cause dysuria, pyuria, urinary urgency and frequency, referred
kidney and ureteral pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, fever, and, occasionally, septicemia.
Diagnosis
• Urinalysis and serum electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine
• Bladder catheterization, sometimes followed by cystourethroscopy and voiding cystourethrography for
suspected urethral obstruction
• Imaging for suspected ureteral or more proximal obstruction or for hydronephrosis without apparent
obstruction
Obstructive uropathy should be considered in patients with any of the following:
• Diminished or absent urine output
• Unexplained renal insufficiency
• Pain that suggests distention in the urinary tract
• A pattern of oliguria or anuria alternating with polyuria
The history may suggest symptoms of BPH, prior cancer, or urolithiasis. Because early relief of
obstruction usually achieves the best outcome, diagnosis should be as rapid as possible.
Urinalysis and serum chemistries (serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine) should be obtained. Other tests
are done depending on symptoms and suspected level of obstruction. Infection with urinary obstruction
requires immediate evaluation and treatment.
In an asymptomatic patient with longstanding obstructive uropathy, urinalysis may be normal or reveal
only a few casts, WBCs, or RBCs. In a patient with acute renal failure who has a normal urinalysis,
bilateral obstructive nephropathy should be considered.
If serum chemistries indicate renal insufficiency, obstruction is probably bilateral and severe or complete.
Other findings in bilateral obstruction with nephropathy may include hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia may
result from type 1 renal tubular acidosis due to decreased hydrogen ion and K secretion by distal
===PAGE:2518===
segments of the nephron.
Evaluation of suspected urethral obstruction:
If urine output is diminished or if there is a distended
bladder or suprapubic pain, bladder catheterization should be done. If catheterization results in a normal
flow of urine or if the catheter is difficult to pass, a urethral obstruction (eg, prostatic enlargement,
stricture, or valve) is suspected. Patients with such findings should have cystourethroscopy along with
voiding cystourethrography.
Voiding cystourethrography
shows nearly all bladder neck and urethral obstructions as well as
vesicoureteral reflux, adequately displaying the anatomy and the volume of urine left in the bladder after
voiding (postvoiding residual volume).
If symptoms of urethral obstruction are absent or if cystourethroscopy and voiding cystourethrography
show no obstruction, the site of obstruction is presumed to be at the ureters or proximal to them.
Evaluation of ureteral or more proximal obstruction:
Patients undergo imaging tests to detect the
presence and site of obstruction. The choice and sequencing of tests depend on the clinical scenario.
Abdominal ultrasonography
is the initial imaging test of choice in most patients without urethral
abnormalities because it avoids potential allergic and toxic complications of contrast agents and allows
assessment of associated renal parenchymal atrophy. Ultrasonography is aimed at detection of
hydronephrosis. However, the false-positive rate is 25% if only minimal criteria (visualization of the
collecting systems) are considered in the diagnosis. Also, absence of hydronephrosis (and false-negative
results) can occur if obstruction is early (in the first few days) or mild or if retroperitoneal fibrosis or tumor
encases the collecting system, preventing dilation of the ureter.
CT
is sensitive for diagnosing obstructive nephropathy and is used when obstruction cannot be shown by
ultrasonography or by intravenous urography. Unenhanced helical CT is the modality of choice. It is
particularly accurate for obstruction due to ureteral calculi. The combination of ultrasonography, plain
abdominal x-ray, and, if necessary, CT reveals
obstructive uropathy in > 90% of patients, but
ultrasonography and CT may not be able to differentiate hydronephrosis from multiple renal or parapelvic
cysts.
Duplex Doppler ultrasonography
can usually show unilateral obstructive uropathy in the first few days
of acute obstruction before the collecting system dilates by detecting an increased resistive index (a
reflection of increased renal vascular resistance) in the affected kidney. This modality is less useful in
obesity and in bilateral obstruction, which cannot be distinguished from intrinsic renal disease.
IVU
(contrast urography, intravenous pyelography [IVP], excretory urography) has been largely
superseded by CT and MRI (with or without contrast). However, when CT cannot identify the level of
obstructive uropathy and when acute obstructive uropathy is thought to be caused by calculi, sloughed
papilla, or a blood clot, IVU or retrograde pyelography may be indicated.
Antegrade or retrograde pyelography
is preferred to studies that involve vascular administration of
contrast agents in the azotemic patient. Retrograde studies are done through a cystoscope, whereas
antegrade studies require placement of a catheter percutaneously into the renal pelvis. Patients with
intermittent obstruction should be studied when they are having symptoms; otherwise, the obstruction
may be missed.
Radionuclide scans
also require some renal function but can detect obstruction without the use of
contrast agents. When a kidney is assessed as nonfunctioning, a radionuclide scan can determine
perfusion and identify functional renal parenchyma. Because this test cannot detect specific areas of
obstruction, it is mainly used in conjunction with diuresis renography to evaluate hydronephrosis without
apparent obstruction.
MRI
can be used when avoiding ionizing radiation is important (eg, in young children or pregnant women).
However, it is not superior in accuracy to ultrasonography or CT.
===PAGE:2519===
Evaluation of hydronephrosis without apparent obstruction:
Testing may be necessary to determine
whether back or flank pain is caused by obstruction in patients who have hydronephrosis but no obvious
obstruction revealed by other imaging tests. Testing may also be done to detect otherwise unrecognized
obstruction in patients with incidentally recognized hydronephrosis.
In
diuresis renography
, a loop diuretic (eg, furosemide 0.5 mg/kg IV) is given before a radionuclide renal
scan (or an IVU). The patient must have sufficient renal function to respond to the diuretic. If obstruction
is present, the rate of washout of the radionuclide (or contrast agent) from the time the tracer appears in
the renal pelvis is reduced to a half-life of > 20 min (normal is < 15 min). If the renogram is negative or
equivocal but the patient is symptomatic, a perfusion pressure flow study is done via percutaneous
insertion of a catheter into the dilated renal pelvis, followed by fluid perfusion into the pelvis at 10 mL/min.
The patient is in a prone position. If obstructive uropathy is present, in spite of the marked increase in
urine flow, the rate of washout of the radionuclide during renal scanning is delayed, and there will be
further dilation of the collecting system on IVU and elevation of the renal pelvic pressure to > 22 mm Hg
during perfusion. A renogram or perfusion study that causes pain similar to the patient's initial complaint is
interpreted as positive. If the perfusion study is negative, the pain probably has a nonrenal cause. Falsepositive and false-negative results are common for both tests.
Prognosis
Most obstruction can be corrected, but a delay in therapy can lead to irreversible renal damage. How long
it takes for nephropathy to develop and how reversible nephropathy is vary depending on the underlying
pathology, the presence or absence of UTI, and the degree and duration of the obstruction. In general,
acute renal failure due to a ureteral calculus is reversible, with adequate return of renal function. With
chronic progressive obstructive uropathy, renal dysfunction may be partially or completely irreversible.
Prognosis is worse if UTI remains untreated.
Treatment
• Relief of obstruction
Treatment consists of eliminating the obstruction by surgery, instrumentation (eg, endoscopy, lithotripsy),
or drug therapy (eg, hormonal therapy for prostate cancer). Prompt drainage in hydronephrosis is
indicated if renal function is compromised, UTI persists, or pain is uncontrollable or persistent. Lower
obstructive uropathy may require catheter or more proximal drainage. Indwelling pigtail ureteral catheters
can be placed for acute or long-term drainage in selected patients. Temporary drainage using a
percutaneous technique
may be needed in severe obstructive uropathy, UTI, or calculi. Intensive
treatment for UTI and renal failure is imperative.
In the case of hydronephrosis without evident obstruction, surgery should be considered if the patient has
pain and a positive diuretic renogram. However, no therapy is necessary in an asymptomatic patient with
a negative diuretic renogram or with a positive diuretic renogram but normal renal function.
===PAGE:2520===
Chapter 232. Urinary Calculi
Introduction
(Nephrolithiasis; Stones; Urolithiasis)
Urinary calculi are solid particles in the urinary system. They may cause pain, nausea, vomiting,
hematuria, and, possibly, chills and fever from secondary infection. Diagnosis is based on
urinalysis and radiologic imaging, usually noncontrast helical CT. Treatment is with analgesics,
antibiotics for infection, and, sometimes, extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy or endoscopic
procedures.
About 1/1000 adults in the US is hospitalized annually because of urinary calculi, which are also found in
about 1% of all autopsies. Up to 12% of men and 5% of women will develop a urinary calculus by age 70.
Calculi vary from microscopic crystalline foci to calculi several centimeters in diameter. A large calculus,
called a staghorn calculus, can fill an entire renal calyceal system.
Etiology
About 85% of calculi in the US are composed of Ca, mainly Ca oxalate (see
Table 232-1
); 10% are uric acid; 2% are cystine; and the remainder are Mg ammonium phosphate
(struvite).
General risk factors include disorders that increase urinary salt concentration, either by increased
excretion of Ca or uric acid salts, or by decreased excretion of urine or citrate.
For
Ca calculi,
risk factors vary by population. The main risk factor in the US is hypercalciuria, a
hereditary condition present in 50% of men and 75% of women with Ca calculi; thus, patients with a
family history of calculi are at increased risk of recurrent calculi. These patients have normal serum Ca
but elevated urinary Ca: > 250 mg/day (> 6.2 mmol/day) in men and > 200 mg/day (> 5.0 mmol/day) in
women. Hypocitruria (urinary citrate < 350 mg/day [1820
μ
mol/day]), present in about 40 to 50% of Ca
calculi-formers, promotes Ca calculi formation because citrate normally binds urinary Ca and inhibits the
crystallization of Ca salts. About 5 to 8% of calculi are caused by renal tubular acidosis. About 1 to 2% of
patients with Ca calculi have primary hyperparathyroidism. Rare causes are sarcoidosis, vitamin D
intoxication, hyperthyroidism, multiple myeloma, metastatic cancer, and hyperoxaluria. Hyperoxaluria
(urinary oxalate > 40 mg/day [> 440
μ
mol/day]) can be primary or caused by excess ingestion of oxalatecontaining foods (eg, rhubarb, spinach, cocoa, nuts, pepper, tea) or by excess oxalate absorption due to
various enteric diseases (eg, bacterial overgrowth syndromes, chronic pancreatic or biliary disease) or
ileojejunal surgery. Other risk factors include taking high doses of vitamin C, a Ca-restricted diet (possibly
because dietary Ca binds dietary oxalate), and mild hyperuricosuria. Mild hyperuricosuria, defined as
urinary uric acid > 800 mg/day (> 5 mmol/day) in men or > 750 mg/day (> 4 mmol/day) in women, is
almost always caused by excess intake of purine (in proteins, usually from meat, fish, and poultry); it may
cause Ca oxalate calculus formation (hyperuricosuric Ca oxalate nephrolithiasis).
Uric acid calculi
develop with increased urine acidity (urine pH < 5.5), or rarely with severe
hyperuricosuria (urinary uric acid > 1500 mg/day [> 9 mmol/day]), which crystallizes undissociated uric
acid. Uric acid crystals may comprise the entire calculus or, more commonly, provide a nidus on which Ca
or mixed Ca and uric acid calculi can form.
Cystine calculi
occur only in the presence of cystinuria (.
Mg ammonium phosphate calculi
(struvite, infection calculi) indicate the presence of a UTI caused by
urea-splitting bacteria (eg,
Proteus
sp
, Klebsiella
sp). The calculi must be treated as infected foreign
bodies and
[Table 232-1.
Composition of Urinary Calculi]
removed in their entirety. Unlike other types of calculi, Mg ammonium phosphate calculi occur 3 times
===PAGE:2521===
removed in their entirety. Unlike other types of calculi, Mg ammonium phosphate calculi occur 3 times
more frequently in women.
Pathophysiology
Urinary calculi may remain within the renal parenchyma or renal pelvis or be passed into the ureter and
bladder. During passage, calculi irritate the ureter and may become lodged, obstructing urine flow and
causing hydroureter and sometimes hydronephrosis. Common areas of lodgment include the
ureteropelvic junction, the distal ureter (at the level of the iliac vessels), and the ureterovesical junction.
Typically, a calculus must have a diameter > 5 mm to become lodged. Calculi ≤ 5 mm are likely to pass
spontaneously.
Even partial obstruction causes decreased glomerular filtration, which may persist briefly after the
calculus has passed. With hydronephrosis and elevated glomerular pressure, renal blood flow declines,
further worsening renal function. Generally, however, permanent renal dysfunction occurs only after about
28 days of complete obstruction.
Secondary infection can occur with longstanding obstruction, but most patients with Ca-containing calculi
do not have infected urine.
Symptoms and Signs
Even large calculi remaining in the renal parenchyma or renal pelvis are usually asymptomatic unless
they cause obstruction. Symptoms, such as severe pain, often accompanied by nausea and vomiting, and
sometimes gross hematuria, usually occur when calculi pass into the ureter, cause obstruction, or both.
Pain (renal colic) is of variable intensity but is typically excruciating and intermittent, often occurs
cyclically, and lasts 20 to 60 min. Nausea and vomiting are common. Pain in the flank or kidney area that
radiates across the abdomen suggests upper ureteral or renal pelvic obstruction. Pain that radiates along
the course of the ureter into the genital region suggests lower ureteral obstruction. Suprapubic pain along
with urinary urgency and frequency suggests a distal ureteral, ureterovesical, or bladder calculus.
On examination, patients may be in obvious extreme discomfort, often ashen and diaphoretic. Patients
with renal colic may be unable to lie still and may pace, writhe, or constantly shift position. The abdomen
may be somewhat tender on the affected side as palpation increases pressure in the already-distended
ureter, but peritoneal signs (guarding, rebound, rigidity) are lacking. For some patients, the first symptom
is hematuria or either gravel or a calculus in the urine. Other patients may have symptoms of a UTI, such
as fever, dysuria, or cloudy or foul-smelling urine.
Diagnosis
• Clinical differential diagnosis
• Urinalysis
• Imaging
• Determination of calculus composition
The symptoms and signs suggest the diagnosis. With peritonitis (eg, due to appendicitis, ectopic
pregnancy, or pelvic inflammatory disease), pain is usually constant, and
patients lie still because
movement worsens pain. Patients often have rebound tenderness or rigidity. Cholecystitis may cause
colicky pain, usually in the epigastrium or right upper quadrant, often with Murphy's sign. Bowel
obstruction may cause colicky abdominal pain and vomiting, but the pain is usually bilateral and not
located primarily in the flank or along the ureter. Pancreatitis may cause upper abdominal pain and
vomiting, but the pain is usually constant, may be bilateral, and is usually not along the flank or ureter.
With most of these disorders, urinary symptoms are uncommon and other symptoms may suggest which
organ system is actually involved (eg, vaginal discharge or bleeding in pelvic disorders among females).
Dissecting aortic aneurysm must be considered, particularly in the elderly, because, if a renal artery is
affected, it can cause hematuria, pain that radiates along a ureteral distribution, or both. Other
===PAGE:2522===
considerations in the general evaluation of acute abdominal pain are discussed elsewhere (.
Patients suspected of having a calculus causing colic require urinalysis and usually an imaging study. If
calculus is confirmed, evaluation of the underlying disorder, including calculus composition testing, is
required.
Urinalysis:
Macroscopic or microscopic hematuria is common, but urine may be normal despite multiple
calculi. Pyuria with or without bacteria may be present. Pyuria suggests infection, particularly if combined
with suggestive clinical findings, such as foul-smelling urine or a fever. A calculus and various crystalline
substances may be present in the sediment. If so, further testing is usually necessary because the
composition of the calculus and crystals cannot be determined conclusively by microscopy. The only
exception is when typical hexagonal crystals of cystine are found in a concentrated, acidified specimen,
confirming cystinuria.
Imaging tests:
Noncontrast helical CT should be done. This study can detect the location of a calculus
as well as the degree of obstruction. Moreover, helical CT may also reveal another cause of the pain (eg,
aortic aneurysm). For patients who have recurrent calculi, cumulative radiation exposure from multiple CT
scans is a concern. For patients with typical symptoms, ultrasonography or plain abdominal x-rays can
usually confirm presence of a calculus with minimal or no radiation exposure.
Although most urinary calculi are demonstrable on plain x-ray, neither their presence nor their absence
obviates the need for more definitive imaging, so this study can be avoided. Both renal ultrasonography
and intravenous urography (IVU) can identify calculi and hydronephrosis, but ultrasonography is less
sensitive for small calculi in patients without hydronephrosis, and IVU is time consuming and exposes the
patient to the risk of IV contrast agents; these studies are generally used if helical CT is unavailable.
Identifying the cause:
The calculus is obtained by straining the urine (or, if necessary, during operative
removal) and sent to the laboratory for crystallography. Some calculi are brought in by patients. Urine
specimens that show microscopic crystals can also be sent for crystallography. Patients with a single Ca
calculus without additional risk factors for calculi require only urinalysis and plasma Ca concentration on 2
occasions to exclude hyperparathyroidism. Predisposing factors, such as a high-protein diet or vitamin C
or D supplements, should be sought. Patients with a strong family history of calculi, conditions that might
predispose to calculi formation (eg, sarcoidosis, bone metastases, multiple myeloma), or conditions that
would make it difficult to treat calculi (eg, solitary kidney, urinary tract anomalies) require evaluation for all
possible causative disorders and risk factors. This evaluation should include serum electrolytes, uric acid,
and Ca on 2 separate occasions. Follow-up determination of parathyroid hormone levels is done if
necessary. Urine tests should include routine urinalysis and 2 separate 24-h urine collections for urine
volume, pH, and excretion of Ca, uric acid, citrate, oxalate, Na, and creatinine.
Treatment
• Analgesia
• Facilitate calculus passage (eg, with
α
-receptor blockers or Ca channel blockers)
• For persistent or infection-causing calculi, removal using extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy or
endoscopic techniques
Analgesia:
Renal colic may be relieved with opioids, such as morphine and, for a rapid onset, fentanyl.
Ketorolac 30 mg IV is rapidly effective and nonsedating. Vomiting usually resolves as pain decreases, but
persistent vomiting can be treated with an antiemetic (eg, ondansetron 10 mg IV).
Facilitating calculus passage:
Although increasing fluids (either oral or IV) has traditionally been
recommended, it has not been proved to speed the passage of calculi. Patients with calculi with a
diameter of < 1 cm who have no infection or obstruction, whose
pain is controlled with analgesics, and
who can tolerate liquids can be treated at home with analgesics and with
α
-receptor blockers (eg,
tamsulosin 0.4 mg po once/day) or Ca channel blockers to facilitate calculus passage. Calculi that have
not passed within 6 wk typically require removal. In patients with infection and obstruction, calculi should
===PAGE:2523===
be removed as soon as possible.
Calculus removal:
The technique used for removal depends on the location and size of the calculi.
Techniques include extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy and endoscopic techniques. Endoscopic
techniques may involve rigid or flexible scopes and may involve direct-vision removal (basketing),
fragmentation with some sort of lithotripsy (eg, pneumatic, electrohydraulic, laser), or both. For
symptomatic calculi < 1 cm in diameter in the renal pelvis or proximal ureter, extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy is a reasonable first option for therapy. For larger calculi or if lithotripsy is unsuccessful,
ureteroscopy (done in a retrograde fashion) with holmium laser lithotripsy is usually used. Sometimes
removal is possible using an endoscope inserted anterograde through the kidney. For midureteral calculi,
ureteroscopy with holmium laser lithotripsy is usually the treatment of choice. Shock wave lithotripsy is an
alternative. For distal ureteral calculi, endoscopic techniques, such as direct removal and use of
lithotripsy (eg, pneumatic, electro-hydraulic, laser), are considered by many to be the procedures of
choice. Shock wave lithotripsy can also be used.
Calculus dissolution:
Uric acid calculi in the upper or lower urinary tract occasionally may be dissolved
by prolonged alkalinization of the urine with K citrate 20 mEq po bid to tid, but chemical dissolution of
other calculi is not possible.
Prevention
In a patient who has passed a first Ca calculus, the likelihood of forming a 2nd calculus is about 15% at 1
yr, 40% at 5 yr, and 80% at 10 yr. Recovery and analysis of the calculus, measurement of calculusforming substances in the urine, and the clinical history are needed to plan prophylaxis. In < 3% of
patients, no metabolic abnormality is found. These patients seemingly cannot tolerate normal amounts of
calculus-forming salts in their urine without crystallization. Thiazide diuretics, K citrate, and increased fluid
intake may reduce their calculus production rate.
For
hypercalciuria,
patients may receive thiazide diuretics (eg, chlorthalidone 25 mg po once/day or
indapamide 1.25 mg po once/day) to lower urine Ca excretion and thus prevent urinary supersaturation
with Ca oxalate. Patients are encouraged to increase their fluid intake to ≥ 3 L/day. A diet that is low in Na
and high in K is recommended. Restriction of dietary animal protein is also recommended.
For patients with
hypocitruria,
K citrate (20 mEq bid) enhances citrate excretion. A normal Ca intake is
recommended, and Ca restriction is avoided. Oral orthophosphate has not been thoroughly studied.
Hyperoxaluria
prevention varies. Patients with small-bowel disease can be treated with a combination of
high fluid intake, Ca loading (usually in the form of Ca citrate 400 mg po bid), cholestyramine, and a lowoxalate, low-fat diet. Hyperoxaluria may respond to pyridoxine 5 to 500 mg po once/day, possibly by
increasing transaminase activity, because this activity is responsible for the conversion of glyoxylate, the
immediate oxalate precursor, to glycine.
In
hyperuricosuria,
intake of meat, fish, and poultry should be reduced. If the diet cannot be changed,
allopurinol 300 mg each morning lowers uric acid production. For uric acid calculi, the urine pH must be
increased to between 6 and 6.5 by giving an oral alkalinizing drug that contains K (eg, K citrate 20 mEq
bid) along with increased fluid intake.
Infection with
urea-splitting bacteria
requires culture-specific antibiotics and complete removal of all
calculi. If eradication of infection is impossible, long-term suppressive therapy (eg, with nitrofurantoin)
may be necessary. In addition, acetohydroxamic acid can be used to reduce the recurrence of struvite
calculi.
To prevent recurrent
cystine calculi,
urinary cystine levels must be reduced to < 250 mg cystine/L of
urine. Any combination of increasing urine volume along with reducing cystine excretion (eg. with
α
-
mercaptopropionylglycine or penicillamine) should reduce the urinary cystine concentration.
===PAGE:2524===
Chapter 233. Urinary Tract Infections
Introduction
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) can be divided into upper tract infections, which involve the kidneys, and
lower tract infections, which involve the bladder, urethra, or prostate. However, in practice, and
particularly in children, differentiating between the sites may be difficult or impossible. Moreover, infection
often moves from one area to the other.
Most UTIs are caused by enteric bacteria. The remainder are due to sexually transmitted pathogens (see
p.
), mycobacteria (, fungi (see pp.
and
), viruses, and parasites. The
predominant parasitic causes of UTIs are filariasis, trichomoniasis, leishmaniasis, malaria, and
schistosomiasis. These parasitic diseases are discussed in other chapters of THE MANUAL. Of the
parasitic diseases, only trichomoniasis is common in the US. Adenoviruses are implicated in hemorrhagic
cystitis.
Bacterial Urinary Tract Infections
(See also
Chapter 135
and
Prostatitis
)
Bacterial UTIs can involve the urethra, prostate, bladder, or kidneys. Symptoms may be absent
or include urinary frequency and urgency, dysuria, lower abdominal pain, and flank pain.
Systemic symptoms and even sepsis may occur with kidney infection. Diagnosis is based on
analysis and culture of urine. Treatment is with antibiotics.
Among adults aged 20 to 50 yr, UTIs are about 50-fold more common in women. The incidence increases
in patients > 50 yr, but the female:male ratio decreases because of the increasing frequency of prostate
disease.
Pathophysiology
The urinary tract, from the kidneys to the urethral meatus, is normally sterile and resistant to bacterial
colonization despite frequent contamination of the distal urethra with colonic bacteria. Mechanisms that
maintain the tract's sterility include urine acidity, emptying of the bladder at micturition, ureterovesical and
urethral sphincters, and various immunologic and mucosal barriers.
About 95% of UTIs occur when bacteria ascend the urethra to the bladder and, in the case of acute
uncomplicated pyelonephritis, ascend the ureter to the kidney. The remainder of UTIs are hematogenous.
Systemic infection can result from UTI, particularly in the elderly. About 6.5% of cases of hospitalacquired bacteremia are attributable to UTI.
Complicated UTI
is considered to be present when there are underlying factors that predispose to
ascending bacterial infection. Predisposing factors include urinary instrumentation (eg, catheterization,
cystoscopy), anatomic abnormalities, and obstruction of urine flow or poor bladder emptying. A common
consequence of anatomic abnormality is vesicoureteral reflux (VUR), which is present in 30 to 45% of
young children with symptomatic UTI (. VUR is usually caused by a congenital defect that
results in incompetence of the ureterovesical valve. It is most often due to a short intramural segment (the
ureter normally transits the bladder wall at an angle; the resultant lengthy segment is more readily closed
by muscular contraction than the shorter segment that occurs when the ureter passes straight through the
wall). VUR can also be acquired in patients with a flaccid bladder due to spinal cord injury. Other
anatomic abnormalities predisposing to UTI include urethral valves (a congenital obstructive abnormality),
delayed bladder neck maturation, bladder diverticulum, and urethral duplications. Urine flow can be
compromised by calculi and tumors. Bladder emptying can be impaired by neurogenic dysfunction (, pregnancy, uterine prolapse, cystocele, and prostatic enlargement. UTI caused by congenital
factors presents most commonly in childhood. Most other factors are more common in the elderly.
Uncomplicated UTI
occurs without underlying abnormality or impairment of urine flow. It is most common
in young women but also somewhat common in younger men who have unprotected anal intercourse, an
===PAGE:2525===
uncircumcised penis, unprotected intercourse with a woman whose vagina is colonized with urinary
pathogens, or AIDS. Risk factors in women include sexual intercourse, diaphragm and spermicide use,
antibiotic use, and a history of recurrent UTIs. Even use of spermicide-coated condoms increases risk of
UTI in women. The increased risk of UTI in women using antibiotics or spermicides probably occurs
because of alterations in vaginal flora that allow overgrowth of
Escherichia coli
. In elderly women, soiling
of the perineum due to fecal incontinence
increases risk. Patients of both sexes with diabetes have an
increased incidence and severity of infections.
Etiology
Commensal colonic gram-negative aerobic bacteria cause most bacterial UTIs. In relatively normal tracts,
strains of
E. coli
with specific attachment factors for transitional epithelium of the bladder and ureters are
the most frequent causes. The remaining gram-negative urinary pathogens are other enterobacteria,
especially
Klebsiella, Proteus mirabilis
, and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
. Enterococci (group D
streptococci) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (eg,
Staphylococcus saprophyticus)
are the most
frequently implicated gram-positive organisms.
E. coli
causes > 75% of community-acquired UTIs in all age groups;
S. saprophyticus
accounts for about
10%. In hospitalized patients,
E. coli
accounts for about 50% of cases. The gram-negative species
Klebsiella, Proteus
,
Enterobacter
, and
Serratia
account for about 40%, and the gram-positive bacterial
cocci
Enterococcus faecalis
and
S. saprophyticus
and
S. aureus
account for the remainder.
Classification
Urethritis:
Infection of the urethra with bacteria (or with protozoa, viruses, or fungi) occurs when
organisms that gain access to it acutely or chronically colonize the numerous periurethral glands in the
bulbous and pendulous portions of the male urethra and in the entire female urethra. The sexually
transmitted pathogens
Chlamydia trachomatis
(,
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(,
Trichomonas vaginalis
(, and herpes simplex virus ( are common causes in both
sexes.
Cystitis:
In women, sexual intercourse usually precedes uncomplicated cystitis (honeymoon cystitis). In
men, bacterial infection of the bladder is usually complicated and generally results from ascending
infection from the urethra or prostate or is secondary to urethral instrumentation. The most common
cause of recurrent cystitis in men is chronic bacterial prostatitis.
Acute urethral syndrome:
Acute urethral syndrome, which occurs in women, causes dysuria and pyuria
(dysuria-pyuria syndrome) due to bacterial urinary pathogens. Occasionally, it is caused by
N.
gonorrhoeae
, TB, or fungal disease or by trauma or inflammation of the urethra. Patients with acute
urethral syndrome have dysuria, frequency, and pyuria, but urine cultures are either negative or show
colony counts that are < 10
/mL, which is less than the traditional criterion for bacterial UTI.
Asymptomatic bacteruria:
Certain patients, primarily elderly women and patients with diabetes or those
who require long-term use of indwelling catheters, have persistent bacteriuria with changing flora that is
both asymptomatic and refractory to treatment. WBC count in urine may be modestly elevated. Most of
these patients are best left untreated because the usual result of treatment is the establishment of highly
resistant organisms. Asymptomatic bacteriuria can also occur in pregnant women and may cause infection
of the urinary tract, sepsis, low birth weight, spontaneous abortion, premature delivery (, and
stillbirth, so treatment is indicated.
Acute pyelonephritis:
Pyelonephritis is bacterial infection of the kidney parenchyma. The term should
not be used to describe tubulointerstitial nephropathy unless infection is documented. In women, about
20% of community-acquired bacteremias are due to pyelonephritis. Pyelonephritis is uncommon in men
with a normal urinary tract.
Although obstruction (eg, strictures, calculi, tumors, neurogenic bladder, VUR) predis-poses to
pyelonephritis, most women with pyelonephritis have no demonstrable functional or anatomic defects.
===PAGE:2526===
Cystitis alone or anatomic defects may cause reflux. This tendency is greatly enhanced when ureteral
peristalsis is inhibited (eg, during pregnancy, by obstruction, by endotoxins of gram-negative bacteria).
Pyelonephritis or focal abscess may be due to hematogenous spread, which is infrequent and usually
results from bacteremia with virulent bacilli (eg,
Salmonella
sp,
S. aureus
). Pyelonephritis is common in
young girls and in pregnant women after instrumentation or bladder catheterization.
The kidney usually is enlarged because of inflammatory PMNs and edema. Infection is focal and patchy,
beginning in the pelvis and medulla and extending into the cortex as an enlarging wedge. Chronic
inflammatory cells appear within a few days, and medullary and subcortical abscesses may develop.
Normal parenchymal tissue between foci of infection is common. Papillary necrosis may be evident in
acute pyelonephritis associated with diabetes, obstruction, sickle cell disease, pyelonephritis in renal
transplants, pyelonephritis due to candidiasis, or analgesic nephropathy. Although acute pyelonephritis is
frequently associated with renal scarring in children, similar scarring in adults is not detectable in the
absence of reflux or obstruction.
Symptoms and Signs
In the elderly, UTIs are often asymptomatic. Elderly patients, and those with a neurogenic bladder or an
indwelling catheter, may present with sepsis and delirium but without symptoms referable to the urinary
tract.
When symptoms are present, they may not correlate with the location of the infection within the urinary
tract because there is considerable overlap; however, some generalizations are useful.
In
urethritis,
the main symptoms are dysuria and, primarily in males, urethral discharge. Discharge tends
to be purulent when due to
N. gonorrhoeae
and whitish and mucoid when not.
Cystitis
onset is usually sudden, typically with frequency, urgency, and burning or painful voiding of small
volumes of urine. Nocturia, with suprapubic and often low back pain, is common. The urine is often turbid,
and gross hematuria occurs in about 30% of patients. A low-grade fever may develop. Pneumaturia
(passage of air in the urine) can occur when infection results from a vesicoenteric or vesicovaginal fistula
or from emphysematous cystitis.
In
acute pyelonephritis,
symptoms may be the same as those of cystitis; one third of patients have
frequency and dysuria. However, with pyelonephritis, symptoms typically include chills, fever, flank pain,
colicky abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. If abdominal rigidity is absent or slight, a tender, enlarged
kidney is sometimes palpable. Costovertebral angle percussion tenderness is generally present on the
infected side. In children, symptoms often are meager and less characteristic (.
Diagnosis
• Urinalysis
• Sometimes urine culture
Diagnosis by culture is not always necessary. If done, diagnosis by culture requires demonstration of
significant bacteriuria in properly collected urine.
Urine collection:
If a sexually transmitted disease (STD) is suspected, a urethral swab for STD testing is
obtained prior to voiding. Urine collection is then by clean-catch or catheterization.
To obtain a
clean-catch, midstream-voided specimen,
the urethral opening is washed with a mild,
nonfoaming disinfectant and air dried. Contact of the urinary stream with the mucosa should be minimized
by spreading the labia in women and by pulling back the foreskin in uncircumcised men. The first 5 mL of
urine is not captured; the next 5 to 10 mL is collected in a sterile container.
A
specimen obtained by catheterization
is preferable in older women (who typically have difficulty
===PAGE:2527===
obtaining a clean-catch specimen) and in women with vaginal bleeding or discharge. Many clinicians also
use catheterization to obtain a specimen if evaluation includes a pelvic examination. Diagnosis in patients
with indwelling catheters is discussed elsewhere (.
Urine testing: Microscopic examination
of urine is useful but not definitive. Pyuria is defined as ≥ 8
WBCs/
μ
L of uncentrifuged urine, which corresponds to 2 to 5 WBCs/high-power field in spun sediment.
Most truly infected patients have > 10 WBCs/
μ
L. The presence of bacteria in the absence of pyuria,
especially when several strains are found, is usually due to contamination during sampling. Microscopic
hematuria occurs in up to 50% of patients, but gross hematuria is uncommon. WBC casts, which require
special stains to differentiate from renal tubular casts, indicate only an inflammatory reaction; they can be
present in pyelonephritis, glomerulonephritis, and noninfective tubulointerstitial nephritis.
Dipstick tests
also are commonly used. A positive nitrite test on a freshly voided specimen (bacterial
replication in the container renders results unreliable if the specimen is not tested rapidly) is highly
specific for UTI, but the test is not very sensitive. The leukocyte esterase test is very specific for the
presence of > 10 WBCs/
μ
L and is fairly sensitive. In adult women with uncomplicated UTI with typical
symptoms, most clinicians consider positive microscopic and dipstick tests sufficient; in these cases,
given the likely pathogens, cultures are unlikely to change treatment but add significant expense.
Cultures
are recommended when symptoms are suggestive but urinalysis is nondiagnostic; for
complicated UTI, including UTI in patients with diabetes, immunosuppression, recent hospitalization or
urethral instrumentation, or recurrent UTI; for patients > 65 yr; and perhaps for patients with symptoms of
pyelonephritis. All prepubertal children should have a urine culture when a UTI is suspected. Urine should
be cultured as soon as possible or stored at 4° C if a delay of > 10 min is expected. Samples
contaminated with large numbers of epithelial cells are unlikely to be helpful. An uncontaminated
specimen should be obtained for culture. Criteria, based on the guidelines of the Infectious Diseases
Society of America, for bacteriuria are:
•
Among women with suspected asymptomatic bacteriuria, 2 consecutive clean-catch voided specimens
from which the same bacterial strain is isolated in colony counts of > 10
/mL
• Among women with suspected acute urethral syndrome, a clean-catch voided specimen from which a
single bacterial species is isolated in colony counts from 10
to 10
/mL
• Among men, a clean-catch voided specimen from which a single bacterial species is isolated in colony
counts > 10
/mL
• Among women or men, a catheter-obtained specimen from which a single bacterial species is isolated in
colony counts of > 10
/mL
Occasionally, UTI is present despite lower colony counts, possibly because of prior antibiotic therapy,
very dilute urine (sp gr < 1.003), or obstruction to the flow of grossly infected urine. Repeating the culture
improves the diagnostic accuracy of a positive result, ie, may differentiate between a contaminant and a
true positive result.
Infection localization:
Clinical differentiation between upper and lower UTI is impossible in many
patients, and testing is not usually advisable. When the patient has high fever, costovertebral angle
tenderness, and gross pyuria with casts, pyelonephritis is highly likely. The best noninvasive technique
for differentiating bladder from kidney infection appears to be the response to a short course of antibiotic
therapy. If the urine has not cleared after 3 days of treatment, pyelonephritis should be sought.
Symptoms similar to those of cystitis and urethritis can occur with vaginitis, which may cause dysuria from
the passage of urine across inflamed labia. Vaginitis can often be distinguished by the presence of
vaginal discharge, vaginal odor, and dyspareunia.
Other testing:
Seriously ill patients require evaluation for sepsis, typically with CBC, electrolytes, BUN,
creatinine, and blood cultures. Patients with abdominal pain or tenderness are evaluated for other causes
===PAGE:2528===
of an acute abdomen (. Pyuria without bacteriuria can be present with appendicitis,
inflammatory bowel disease, and other extrarenal disorders.
Most adults do not require assessment for structural abnormalities unless infections recur or are
complicated, nephrolithiasis is suspected, there is painless hematuria or new renal insufficiency, or fever
persists for ≥ 72 h. Imaging choices include ultrasonography, CT, and IVU. Occasionally, voiding
cystourethrography, retrograde urethrography, or cystoscopy is warranted. Urologic investigation is not
routinely needed in women with symptomatic or asymptomatic recurrent cystitis, because findings do not
influence therapy. Children with UTI often require imaging (.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
• Occasionally surgery (eg, to drain abscesses, correct underlying structural abnormalities, or relieve
obstruction)
All forms of bacterial UTI require antibiotics. Obstructive uropathy, anatomic abnormalities, and
neuropathic urinary tract lesions such as compression of the spinal cord usually require surgical
correction. Catheter drainage of an obstructed urinary tract aids in prompt control of UTI. Occasionally, a
renal cortical abscess or perinephric abscess requires surgical drainage. Instrumentation of the lower
urinary tract in the presence of infected urine should be deferred if possible. Sterilization of the urine
before instrumentation and antibiotic therapy for 3 to 7 days after instrumentation can prevent lifethreatening urosepsis. For patients with troublesome dysuria, phenazopyridine may help control
symptoms until the antibiotics do (usually within 48 h).
Urethritis:
Sexually active patients with symptoms are usually treated presumptively for STDs pending
test results. A typical regimen is ceftriaxone 125 mg IM plus either azithromycin 1 g po once or doxycycline
100 mg po bid for 7 days. For non-STD urethritis in men, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) or a
fluoroquinolone is given for 10 to 14 days; women are treated with a regimen for cystitis.
Cystitis:
A 3-day oral course of TMP/SMX or a fluoroquinolone effectively treats acute cystitis and
eradicates potential bacterial pathogens in vaginal and GI reservoirs. Single-dose therapy results in
higher recurrence rates and is not recommended. Longer courses of therapy (7 to 14 days) are
prescribed for patients with a history of recent UTI, diabetes mellitus, or symptoms lasting > 1 wk.
If pyuria but not bacteriuria is present in a sexually active woman, then
C. trachomatis
urethritis is
diagnosed presumptively, and appropriate treatment is given to the patient and her sex partner. If
symptoms recur and culture reveals an organism sensitive to the drugs used for 3-day antibiotic therapy
or if pyelonephritis is suspected, a 14-day course
of TMP/SMX or a fluoroquinolone is given as for
pyelonephritis.
Acute urethral syndrome:
Acute urethral syndrome with pyuria is treated with doxycycline 100 mg po
bid for 7 to 10 days or TMP/SMX 160/800 mg po bid for 3 days. If neither pyuria nor bacteriuria is
present, antibiotics are not indicated. A course of urinary analgesics may be appropriate.
Asymptomatic bacteriuria:
Ordinarily, asymptomatic bacteriuria in patients with diabetes, elderly
patients, or patients with chronically indwelling bladder catheters should not be treated. However,
asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnant women is actively sought and treated as a symptomatic UTI,
although many antibiotics cannot be safely used. Oral
β
-lactams, sulfonamides, and nitrofurantoin are
considered safe in early pregnancy, but sulfonamides should be avoided near parturition because of a
possible role in the development of kernicterus.
Treatment may also be indicated in asymptomatic UTI in patients with neutropenia, patients with recent
renal transplantation, patients scheduled for instrumentation of the urinary tract (after removal of a
bladder catheter that has been in place for > 1 wk), young children with gross VUR, and patients with
frequent UTI symptoms from a struvite calculus that cannot be removed. Therapy typically consists of an
appropriate antibiotic (based on culture results) for 3 to 14 days or long-term suppressive therapy for
===PAGE:2529===
untreatable obstructive problems (eg, calculi, reflux).
Acute pyelonephritis:
Outpatient treatment with oral antibiotics is possible if the patient is reliable in
following medical advice and is immunocompetent and has no nausea or vomiting, signs of volume
depletion, or evidence of septicemia. Typical regimens are 14 days of TMP/SMX 160/800 mg po bid or
ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid. Otherwise, patients should be hospitalized and given parenteral therapy
selected on the basis of local sensitivity patterns of the most common strains. Common regimens include
ampicillin plus gentamicin, TMP/SMX and a fluoroquinolone, and broad-spectrum cephalosporins (eg,
ceftriaxone). Aztreonam,
β
-lactam/
β
-lactam inhibitor combinations (ampicillin/sulbactam,
ticarcillin/clavulanate, piperacillin/tazobactam), and imipenem/cilastatin are generally reserved for patients
with more complicated pyelonephritis (eg, obstruction, calculi, resistant bacteria, hospital-acquired
infection) or recent urinary tract instrumentation. If parenteral therapy is required, it is continued until
defer-vescence and other signs of clinical improvement occur. In > 80% of patients, improvement occurs
within 72 h. Oral therapy can then begin, and the patient can be discharged for the remainder of the 14day treatment course. For complicated cases, prolonged antibiotic suppression may be needed as well as
urologic correction of anatomic defects.
When pyelonephritis is diagnosed during pregnancy, hospitalization and parenteral therapy with a
β
-
lactam with or without an aminoglycoside is appropriate.
Prevention
In women who experience ≥ 3 UTIs/yr, voiding immediately after sexual intercourse and avoiding use of a
diaphragm may be helpful. Drinking cranberry juice (50 mL of concentrate or about 300 mL of juice daily)
reduces pyuria and bacteriuria. Increasing total fluid intake may also help.
If these techniques are unsuccessful, low-dose oral antibiotic prophylaxis greatly reduces the incidence of
recurrent UTIs—eg, TMP/SMX 40/200 mg once/day or 3 times/wk, nitrofurantoin (macrocrystals) 50 or
100 mg once/day, or a fluoroquinolone (eg, ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin, lome-floxacin, enoxacin).
Long-term use of nitrofurantoin increases the risk of adverse effects and is contraindicated in patients
with renal failure. Postcoital TMP/SMX or a fluoroquinolone may be effective. If UTI recurs after 6 mo of
this therapy, prophylaxis may be reinstituted for 2 or 3 yr.
Because of potential injury to a fetus, users of fluoroquinolones should also use effective contraception.
Some antibiotics (macrolides, tetracyclines, rifampin, metronidazole, penicillins, and TMP/SMX) interfere
with the effectiveness of oral contraceptives by interrupting the enterohepatic recycling of estrogen or by
inducing hepatic estrogen metabolism. Women who use oral contraceptives should use barrier
contraceptives while they are taking these antibiotics.
In pregnant women, effective prophylaxis of UTI is similar to that in nonpregnant women. Appropriate
patients include those with acute pyelonephritis during a pregnancy, patients with > 1 episode (despite
treatment) of UTI or bacteriuria during pregnancy, and patients who required prophylaxis for recurrent UTI
before pregnancy.
In postmenopausal women, antibiotic prophylaxis is similar to that described previously. Additionally,
topical estrogen therapy markedly reduces the incidence of recurrent
UTI in women with atrophic vaginitis
or atrophic urethritis.
Bacterial Urinary Tract Infections in Patients With Indwelling Bladder Catheters
Patients with indwelling bladder catheters are predisposed to bacteriuria and UTIs. Symptoms
may be vague or may suggest sepsis. Diagnosis depends on the presence of symptoms.
Testing includes urinalysis and culture after the catheter has been removed and a new one
inserted. The most effective preventive measures are avoiding unnecessary catheterization
and removing catheters as soon as possible.
Bacteria can enter the bladder with the insertion of the catheter, through the catheter lumen, or from
around the outside of the catheter. A biofilm develops around the outside of the catheter and on the
===PAGE:2530===
uroepithelium. Bacteria enter this biofilm, which protects them from the mechanical flow of urine, host
defenses, and antibiotics, making bacterial elimination difficult. Even with thoroughly aseptic catheter
care, the chance of developing significant bacteriuria every day the catheter is indwelling is 3 to 10%. Of
patients who develop bacteriuria, 10 to 25% develop symptoms of UTI. Fewer develop symptoms of
sepsis. Risk factors for UTI include duration of catheterization, female sex, diabetes mellitus, opening a
closed system, and suboptimal aseptic techniques. Indwelling bladder catheters can also predispose to
fungal UTI (.
UTI can also develop in women during the days after a catheter has been removed.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with UTI who have indwelling catheters may not have symptoms typical of UTIs. Symptoms of
lower tract UTI in patients with indwelling catheters may be caused by obstruction of the catheter,
development of bladder stones, and periurinary tract infections. Symptoms of acute or chronic
pyelonephritis may also develop without the typical urinary tract symptoms. Patients may have
nonspecific symptoms such as malaise, fever, flank pain, anorexia, and sepsis with fever, altered mental
status, decreased BP, and tachypnea.
Diagnosis
• Urinalysis and urine culture for patients with symptoms or at high risk of sepsis
Testing is done only in patients who have symptoms, because treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria is
not recommended except for patients at high risk of developing sepsis, such as patients with
granulocytopenia, organ transplant patients taking immunosuppressants, pregnant women, and patients
undergoing urologic surgery. Diagnostic testing includes urinalysis and urine culture. If bacteremia is
suspected, blood cultures are done. Urine cultures should be taken by a direct needle stick of the
catheter with aseptic technique, so that contamination of the specimen is minimized. Pyuria tends to
predict bacteriuria but not necessarily symptoms of UTI or bacteremia, so whether to treat is a clinical
decision.
Women who have had a catheter removed should receive urine culture within 48 h regardless of whether
symptoms occur.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
Treatment includes antibiotics and supportive measures. A 14-day course of a fluoroquinolone is a
reasonable empiric choice, depending on local resistance patterns. Antibiotic choice should be modified
by the results of urine or blood culture and sensitivity testing. Asymptomatic women and men with recent
catheter removal who have UTI diagnosed by urine culture should be treated based on the culture
results.
Prevention
The most effective preventive measures are avoiding catheterization and removing catheters as soon as
possible. Optimizing aseptic technique and maintaining a closed drainage system also reduce risk.
Routine, periodic catheter replacement is not recommended. Routine use of prophylactic antibiotics is
controversial: Fluoroquinolones may slightly decrease bacteriuria and symptomatic UTIs, although this
finding is not firmly established. A recent study has shown a decrease in UTI using catheters impregnated
with nitrofurazone in trauma patients. However, most patients with bacteriuria do not develop symptoms,
and bacteriuria develops almost inevitably when antibiotics are stopped.
Chronic Pyelonephritis
(Chronic Infective Tubulointerstitial Nephritis)
===PAGE:2531===
Chronic pyelonephritis is chronic pyogenic infection of the kidney that occurs almost
exclusively in patients with major anatomic abnormalities. Symptoms include fever, malaise,
and flank pain. Diagnosis is with urinalysis, culture, and imaging tests. Treatment is with
antibiotics and correction of any structural disorders.
Reflux of infected urine into the renal pelvis is the usual mechanism. Causes include obstructive uropathy,
struvite calculi, and, most commonly, VUR.
Pathologically there is atrophy and calyceal deformity with overlying parenchymal scarring. The disease
may progress to renal failure. Chronic pyelonephritis causes about 2 to 3% of end-stage renal disease.
Patients with chronic pyelonephritis may have residual foci of infection that may predispose to bacteremia
or, among kidney transplant patients, seed the urinary tract and transplanted kidney.
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis
(XPN) is an unusual variant that typically occurs in middle-aged
women with a history of recurrent UTIs. It is a complication of obstruction due to renal calculi and is
typically associated with
Proteus
infections. The kidney is enlarged, and perirenal fibrosis and adhesions
to adjacent retroperitoneal structures are common. The disease is almost always unilateral and appears
to represent an abnormal inflammatory response to infection. Giant cells, lipid-laden macrophages, and
cholesterol clefts account for the yellow color of the infected tissue. The disease may also occur in
children.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are often vague and inconsistent. Some patients have fever, flank or abdominal
pain, malaise, or anorexia. In XPN, a unilateral renal mass can usually be palpated.
Diagnosis
• Urinalysis and urine culture
• Imaging
Chronic pyelonephritis is suspected in patients with a history of recurrent UTIs and acute pyelonephritis.
However, most patients, except for children with VUR, do not have such a history. Sometimes the
diagnosis is suspected because typical findings are incidentally noted on an imaging study. Symptoms,
because they are vague and nonspecific, may not suggest the diagnosis.
Urinalysis and urine culture and usually imaging tests are done. On urinalysis, proteinuria is absent,
minimal, or intermittent even when renal scarring is far advanced. Urinary sediment is usually scant, but
renal epithelial cells, granular casts, and occasionally WBC casts are present. When both kidneys are
involved, defects in concentrating ability and hyperchloremic acidosis may appear before significant
azotemia occurs. Urine culture may be sterile or positive for gram-negative organisms.
Initial imaging is usually with ultrasonography or helical CT. The hallmark of chronic pyelonephritis
(usually with reflux or obstruction) on imaging is classically a large, deep, segmental, coarse cortical scar
usually extending to one or more of the renal calyces. The upper pole is the most common site. Initially,
renal cortex is lost and the renal parenchyma thins. Uninvolved renal tissue may hypertrophy locally with
segmental enlargement in patients with chronic pyelonephritis. Ureteral dilation may be present, reflecting
the changes induced by chronic severe reflux. Similar changes can occur with urinary tract TB (. Other studies are not done routinely.
In XPN, urinalysis and urine culture indicate the presence of infection, but diagnosis is confirmed by
radiologic examination. CT can exclude renal carcinoma and other lesions and is preferred over IVU.
Blood tests reveal nonspecific findings including anemia and mild liver dysfunction.
Prognosis
===PAGE:2532===
The course of chronic pyelonephritis is extremely variable, but the disease typically progresses very
slowly. Most patients have adequate renal function for ≥ 20 yr after onset. Frequent exacerbations of
acute pyelonephritis, although controlled, usually further deteriorate renal structure and function.
Continued obstruction predisposes to or perpetuates pyelonephritis and increases intrapelvic pressure,
which damages the kidney directly.
Treatment
If obstruction cannot be eliminated and recurrent UTIs are common, long-term therapy with antibiotics (eg,
TMP/SMX, trimethoprim, a fluoroquinolone, nitrofurantoin) is useful and may be required indefinitely.
Complications of uremia or hypertension must be treated appropriately.
For XPN, an initial course of antibiotics should be given to control local infection, followed by en bloc
nephrectomy with removal of all involved tissue and closure of any fistulas.
Patients undergoing renal transplantation who have chronic pyelonephritis may require nephrectomy
before the transplant.
Fungal Urinary Tract Infections
Fungal infections of the urinary tract primarily affect the bladder and kidneys.
Species of
Candida
, the most common cause, are normal commensals in humans.
Candida
colonization
differs from infection in that infection produces tissue reaction. All invasive fungi (eg,
Cryptococcus
neoformans
,
Aspergillus
sp,
Mucoraceae
sp,
Histoplasma capsulatum
,
Blastomyces
sp,
Coccidioides
immitis
) may infect the kidneys as part of systemic or disseminated mycotic infection (. Their
presence alone indicates infection.
Lower UTI
with
Candida
usually occurs with urinary catheters, typically after bacteriuria and antibiotic
therapy, although candidal and bacterial infections frequently occur simultaneously.
C. albicans
prostatitis
occurs infrequently in patients with diabetes, usually after instrumentation.
Renal candidiasis
is usually spread hematogenously and commonly originates from the GI tract.
Ascending infection is possible and occurs mainly in patients with nephrostomy tubes, other permanent
indwelling devices, and stents. At high risk are patients who are immunocompromised because of tumor,
AIDS, chemotherapy, or immunosuppressants. A major source of candidemia in such high-risk
hospitalized patients is an in-dwelling intravascular catheter. Renal transplantation increases the risk
because of the combination of indwelling catheters, stents, antibiotics, anastomotic leaks, obstruction,
and immunosuppressive therapy.
Complications
of candidal infection can include emphysematous cystitis or pyelonephritis and fungus
balls in the renal pelvis, ureter, or bladder. Bezoars may form in the bladder. Lower or upper tract
obstruction may occur. Papillary necrosis and intrarenal and perinephric abscesses may form. Although
renal function often declines, severe renal failure is rare without postrenal obstruction.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with candiduria are asymptomatic. Whether
Candida
can cause urethral symptoms (mild
urethral itching, dysuria, watery discharge) in men is uncertain. Rarely, dysuria in women is caused by
candidal urethritis, but it may result from the urine coming into contact with periurethral tissue that is
inflamed due to candidal vaginitis.
Among
lower UTIs
, cystitis due to
Candida
may result in frequency, urgency, dysuria, and suprapubic
pain. Hematuria is common, and, in patients with poorly controlled diabetes, pneumaturia due to
emphysematous cystitis has occurred. Fungus balls or bezoars may cause symptoms of urethral
obstruction.
With
renal candidiasis
that is hematogenously spread, most patients lack symptoms referable to the
===PAGE:2533===
kidney but may have antibiotic-resistant fever, candiduria, and unexplained deteriorating renal function.
Fungus ball elements in the ureter and renal pelvis frequently cause hematuria and urinary obstruction.
Occasionally, papillary necrosis or intrarenal or perinephric abscesses cause pain, fever, hypertension,
and hematuria. Patients may have manifestations of candidiasis in other sites (eg, CNS, skin, eyes, liver,
spleen).
Diagnosis
• Urine culture
• Evidence of tissue reaction (in cystitis) or pyelonephritis
Candida
UTI is considered in patients with predisposing factors and symptoms suggesting UTI and in all
patients with candidemia.
Candida
should be suspected in men with symptoms of urethritis only when all
other causes of urethritis have been excluded.
Diagnosis of
Candida
UTI is by culture, usually from urine. The level at which candiduria reflects true
Candida
UTI and not merely colonization or contamination is unknown. Differentiating
Candida
colonization from infection requires evidence of tissue reaction.
Cystitis
is usually diagnosed in high-risk patients with candiduria by the presence of bladder
inflammation or irritation, as evidenced by pyuria. Cystoscopy and ultrasonography of the kidney and
bladder may help detect bezoars and obstruction.
Renal candidiasis
is considered in patients with fever, candiduria, or passage of fungus balls. Severe
renal failure suggests postrenal obstruction. Imaging of the urinary tract may help reveal the degree of
involvement. Blood cultures for
Candida
are often negative.
Unexplained candiduria should prompt evaluation of the urinary tract for structural abnormalities.
Treatment
• Only for symptomatic or high-risk patients
• Antifungal drugs
Fungal colonization of catheters does not require treatment. Asymptomatic candiduria
rarely requires
therapy. Candiduria should be treated in the following:
• Symptomatic patients
• Neutropenic patients
• Patients with renal allografts
• Patients who are undergoing urologic manipulation
Urinary stents and Foley catheters should be removed (if possible). Treatment with fluconazole (200 mg
po once/day for 7 to 14 days) and with IV amphotericin B ( has been successful. In the
absence of renal insufficiency, flucytosine (25 mg/kg po qid) may help eradicate candiduria due to nonalbicans species of
Candida
; however, resistance may emerge rapidly when this compound is used
alone. Bladder irrigation with amphotericin B may transiently clear candiduria but is rarely indicated. Even
with apparently successful local or systemic antifungal therapy for candiduria, relapse is frequent, and
this likelihood is increased by continued use of a urinary catheter.
In patients with
renal candidiasis
, IV amphotericin B and high-dose oral fluconazole (≥ 400 mg/day) are
equally effective in the primary treatment of invasive infection with
C. albicans
and
C. tropicalis
. Even
when amphotericin B is used initially, oral fluconazole should be substituted early in the course of
===PAGE:2534===
treatment. However, some less common
Candida
species are not susceptible to fluconazole.The Merck Manual of Diagnosis & Therapy, 19th Edition Chapter 233. Urinary Tract Infections
===PAGE:2535===
Chapter 234. Cystic Kidney Disease
Introduction
Cystic kidney disease may be congenital or acquired. Congenital disorders may be inherited as
autosomal dominant disorders or autosomal recessive disorders or have other causes (eg, sporadic
mutations, chromosomal abnormalities, teratogens). Some are part of a malformation syndrome—see
Table 234-1
).
Acquired Renal Cysts
Acquired renal cysts are simple cysts that must be distinguished from more serious causes of
cystic disease.
Acquired cysts are usually simple, ie, they are round and sharply demarcated with smooth walls. They
may be solitary or multiple.
Solitary cysts:
Isolated cysts are most often detected incidentally on imaging studies; they are
distinguished from other cystic renal disorders and renal masses, such as renal cell carcinoma, which is
typically irregular or multiloculated with irregular walls, septae, and areas of unclear demarcation. Their
cause is unknown. They are generally clinically insignificant but rarely can cause hematuria or become
infected.
Multiple cysts:
Multiple cysts are most common in patients with chronic kidney disease, especially
patients undergoing dialysis. Cause is unknown, but the cysts may be due to compensatory hyperplasia
of residually functioning nephrons. Usual criterion for diagnosis is ≥ 4 cysts in each kidney detected with
ultrasonography or CT. Multiple acquired cysts (acquired cystic disease) can usually be differentiated
from autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease by the absence of family history and by small or
normal-sized kidneys.
Acquired cysts are usually asymptomatic, but occasional patients develop hematuria, renal or perirenal
hemorrhage, infection, or flank pain. Acquired cysts are significant mainly because patients have a higher
incidence of renal cell carcinoma; whether the cysts become malignant is unknown. For this reason, some
physicians periodically screen patients with acquired cysts for renal carcinoma using ultrasonography or
CT. Cysts that cause persistent bleeding or infection may require percutaneous drainage or, rarely, partial
or complete nephrectomy.
Congenital Renal Cystic Dysplasia
Congenital renal cystic dysplasia is a broad category of congenital malformations involving
metanephric malformation or congenital obstructive uropathies.
Congenital renal cystic dysplasia affects one or both kidneys. Renal cystic dysplasia may be an isolated
congenital anomaly, or it may be part of a malformation syndrome (ie, associated with other clinical
features—see
Table 234-1
). Associated urologic abnormalities may include ureteropelvic and
[Table 234-1.
Major Groups of Cystic Nephropathies]
ureterovesicular junction obstruction, neurogenic bladder, ureterocele, posterior urethral valves, and
prune-belly syndrome (a triad of abdominal wall muscle defects, urinary tract abnormalities [eg, dilated
ureters, enlarged bladder and urethra], and bilateral cryptorchidism—.
Symptoms and signs vary by how much renal parenchyma is preserved and whether involvement is
unilateral or bilateral. Some degree of renal insufficiency or renal failure may develop. Congenital renal
cystic dysplasia is commonly discovered by ultrasonography prenatally or during early childhood.
Prognosis is highly unpredictable due to an inability to quantify residual functional parenchyma.
Treatment is surgical correction of any associated GU abnormalities and, if renal insufficiency or renal
===PAGE:2536===
failure is present, renal replacement therapy.
Medullary Sponge Kidney
Medullary sponge kidney is formation of diffuse, bilateral medullary cysts caused by
abnormalities in pericalyceal terminal collecting ducts.
The cause of medullary sponge kidney is unknown, but genetic transmission occurs in < 5% of cases.
Most patients are asymptomatic, and the disorder usually remains undiagnosed. It predisposes to
calculus formation and UTI, so the most common presenting symptoms are the following:
• Renal colic
• Hematuria
• Dysuria
Medullary sponge kidney is benign, and long-term prognosis is excellent. Obstruction by renal calculi may
transiently reduce GFR and increase serum creatinine.
Diagnosis
• CT or IVU
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with recurrent calculi or UTIs or on the basis of incidental
radiographic findings. Urinalysis typically shows evidence of incomplete distal renal tubular acidosis
(overt metabolic acidosis is rare) and decreased urine-concentrating ability in patients without
symptomatic polyuria.
Diagnosis is generally confirmed by CT, but IVU can be used. Ultrasonography is not helpful because
cysts are small and located deep in the medulla.
Treatment
Treatment is indicated only for UTIs and for recurrent calculus formation. Thiazide diuretics (eg,
hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg po bid) and high fluid intake inhibit calculus formation and may reduce
incidence of obstructive complications in patients with recurrent calculi.
Nephronophthisis and Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease Complex
Nephronophthisis and medullary cystic kidney disease are inherited disorders that cause cysts
restricted to the renal medulla or corticomedullary border and, eventually, end-stage renal
disease.
Nephronophthisis and medullary cystic kidney disease are grouped together because they share many
features. Pathologically, they cause cysts restricted to the renal medulla or corticomedullary border, as
well as a triad of tubular atrophy, tubular basement membrane disintegration, and interstitial fibrosis. They
probably share similar mechanisms, although these are not well characterized. Features of both disorders
include the following:
• An ADH (vasopressin)-resistant urine-concentrating defect that leads to polyuria and polydipsia
• Na wasting severe enough to require supplementation
• Anemia
• A tendency toward mild proteinuria and a benign urinary sediment
===PAGE:2537===
• Eventually, end-stage renal disease
Key differences between nephronophthisis and medullary cystic kidney disease include inheritance
patterns and age at onset of chronic kidney disease.
Nephronophthisis
Inheritance is autosomal recessive. Nephronophthisis accounts for up to 15% of chronic kidney disease
with renal failure in children and young adults (< 20 yr). There are 3 types: infantile (median age at onset
1 yr), juvenile (median age at onset 13 yr), and adolescent (median age at onset 19 yr).
Nine gene mutations have been identified in patients with nephronophthisis. Mutations of the
NPHP1
gene are the most common, identified in about 30 to 60% of patients. About 10% of patients with
nephronophthisis also have other manifestations, including retinitis pigmentosa, hepatic fibrosis,
intellectual disability, and other neurologic abnormalities.
End-stage renal disease often develops during childhood and causes growth retardation and bone
disease. However, in many patients, these problems develop slowly over years and are so well
compensated for that they are not recognized as abnormal until significant uremic symptoms appear.
Hypertension sometimes develops.
Diagnosis
• Imaging, genetic testing, or both
The diagnosis should be suspected in children with the following, particularly if the urinary sediment is
benign:
• Polydipsia and polyuria
• Progressively decreasing renal function, particularly without hypertension
• Associated extrarenal findings
Proteinuria is usually absent. Diagnosis is confirmed by imaging, but cysts often occur
only late in
disease. Ultrasonography, CT, or MRI may show smooth renal outlines with normal-sized or small
kidneys, loss of corticomedullary differentiation, and multiple cysts at the corticomedullary junction.
Hydronephrosis is typically absent. Genetic testing is available.
Treatment
• Supportive care
In early disease, treatment involves management of hypertension, electrolyte and acid-base disorders,
and anemia. Children with growth retardation may respond to nutritional supplements and growth
hormone therapy. Ultimately, all patients develop renal failure and require dialysis or transplantation.
Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease
Inheritance is autosomal dominant. The disease affects people in their 30s through 70s. There are 2
types, which differ by median age at onset (type 1, 62 yr; type 2, also known as familial juvenile
hyperuricemic nephropathy, 32 yr) and by genetic mutation (type 1 is localized to chromosome 1; type 2,
to chromosome 16). About 15% of patients have no family history, suggesting a sporadic new mutation.
Hypertension is common. Hyperuricemia and gout are the only extrarenal manifestations; they tend to
develop early in type 2 and late in type 1. End-stage renal disease typically develops at age 30 to 50.
Medullary cystic kidney disease should be suspected in patients with the following, particularly if the
===PAGE:2538===
urinary sediment is benign:
• Polydipsia and polyuria
• Gout at a young age
• Family history of gout and chronic kidney disease
Mild proteinuria is possible. Results of imaging studies have many similarities to that of nephronophthisis;
however, renal medullary cysts are only sometimes visible. Genetic testing can confirm the diagnosis of
type 2. Kidney biopsy may be necessary for diagnosis of type 1.
Treatment is generally similar to that of nephronophthisis. Allopurinol can help control gout.
Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a hereditary disorder of renal cyst formation causing gradual
enlargement of both kidneys, sometimes with progression to renal failure. Almost all forms are
caused by a familial genetic mutation. Symptoms and signs include flank and abdominal pain,
hematuria, and hypertension. Diagnosis is by CT or ultrasonography. Treatment is symptomatic
before renal failure and with dialysis or transplantation afterward.
Etiology
Inheritance of PKD is autosomal dominant or recessive; sporadic cases occur rarely. Autosomal dominant
polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) has an incidence of 1/1000 and accounts for about 5% of patients
with end-stage renal disease requiring replacement therapy. Clinical manifestations are rare before
adulthood, but penetrance is essentially complete; all patients ≥ 80 yr have some signs. In contrast,
autosomal recessive PKD is rare; incidence is 1/10,000. It frequently causes renal failure during
childhood (.
In 86 to 96% of cases, ADPKD is caused by mutations in the
PKD1
gene on chromosome 16, which
codes for the protein polycystin 1; most other cases are caused by mutations in the
PKD2
gene on
chromosome 4, which codes for polycystin 2. A few familial cases are unrelated to either locus.
Pathophysiology
Polycystin 1 may regulate tubular epithelial cell adhesion and differentiation; polycystin 2 may function as
an ion channel, with mutations causing fluid secretion into cysts. Mutations in these proteins may alter the
function of renal cilia, which enable tubular cells to sense flow rates. A leading hypothesis proposes that
tubular cell proliferation and differentiation are linked to flow rate and that ciliary dysfunction may thus
lead to cystic transformation.
Early in the disorder, tubules dilate and slowly fill with glomerular filtrate. Eventually, the tubules separate
from the functioning nephron and fill with secreted rather than filtered fluid, forming cysts. Hemorrhage
into cysts may occur, causing hematuria; patients are also at higher risk of acute pyelonephritis and
urinary calculi (in 20%). Vascular sclerosis and interstitial fibrosis eventually develop via unknown
mechanisms and typically affect < 10% of tubules; nonetheless, renal failure develops in about 35 to 45%
of patients by age 60.
Extrarenal manifestations
are common:
• Most patients have hepatic cysts, which typically do not affect liver function.
•
Patients also have a higher incidence of pancreatic and intestinal cysts, colonic diverticula, and inguinal
and abdominal wall hernias.
• Valvular heart disorders (most often mitral valve prolapse and aortic regurgitation) can be detected by
===PAGE:2539===
cardiac ultrasonography in 25 to 30% of patients; other valvular disorders may be due to collagen
abnormalities.
• Aortic regurgitation results from aortic root dilation due to arterial wall changes (including aortic
aneurysm).
• Coronary artery aneurysms occur.
• About 4% of young adults and up to 10% of elderly patients have cerebral aneurysms. Aneurysms
rupture in 65 to 75% of patients, usually before age 50; risk factors include family history of aneurysm
or rupture, larger aneurysms, and poorly controlled hypertension.
Symptoms and Signs
ADPKD usually causes no symptoms initially; one half of patients remain asymptomatic, never develop
renal insufficiency or failure, and are never diagnosed. Most patients who develop symptoms do so by the
end of their 20s. Symptoms include low-grade flank, abdominal, and lower back pain due to cystic
enlargement and symptoms of infection. Acute pain, when it occurs, is usually due to hemorrhage into
cysts or passage of a calculus; fever is common with acute pyelonephritis. Hepatic cysts may cause right
upper quadrant pain if they enlarge or become infected. Valvular disorders rarely cause symptoms but
occasionally cause heart failure and require valvular replacement. Symptoms and signs of unruptured
cerebral aneurysm can be absent or may include headache, nausea and vomiting, and cranial nerve
deficits; these manifestations warrant immediate intervention (see
Sidebar 173-1
.
Signs are nonspecific and include hematuria and hypertension (each in about 40 to 50%) and proteinuria
(in 20%). Anemia is less common than in other types of chronic renal failure, presumably because
erythropoietin production is preserved. In advanced disease, the kidneys may become grossly enlarged
and palpable, causing fullness in the upper abdomen and flank.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography
• Sometimes CT or MRI or genetic testing
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with the following:
• A positive family history
• Typical symptoms or signs
• Cysts detected incidentally on imaging studies
Patients should be counseled before undergoing diagnostic testing, particularly if they are asymptomatic.
For example, many authorities recommend against testing asymptomatic young patients because no
disease-modifying treatment is effective at this age and diagnosis has potential negative effects on ability
to obtain health insurance and on mood. Diagnosis is usually by imaging, showing extensive cystic
changes throughout the kidneys and a moth-eaten appearance due to cysts that displace functional
tissue. These changes develop with age and are less often present or obvious in younger patients.
Ultrasonography is usually done first. If ultrasonography results are inconclusive, CT or MRI, which are
both more sensitive (particularly when done using contrast), is done. Urinalysis, renal function tests, and
CBC are done, but results are not specific.
Urinalysis detects mild proteinuria and microscopic or macroscopic hematuria. Gross hematuria may be
due to a dislodged calculus or to hemorrhage from a ruptured cyst. Pyuria is common even without
bacterial infection. Initially, BUN and creatinine are normal or only mildly elevated, but they slowly
increase, especially when hypertension is present. Rarely, CBC detects polycythemia.
===PAGE:2540===
Patients with symptoms of cerebral aneurysm require high-resolution CT or magnetic resonance
angiography. However, there is no consensus on whether asymptomatic patients should be screened for
cerebral aneurysm, at what age, and how often. A reasonable approach is to screen patients with ADPKD
and a family history of hemorrhagic stroke or cerebral aneurysm.
Genetic testing
for PKD mutations is currently reserved for any of the following:
• Patients with suspected PKD and no known family history
• Patients with inconclusive results on imaging
• Younger patients (eg, age < 30, in whom imaging results are often inconclusive) in whom the diagnosis
must be made (eg, a potential kidney donor)
Genetic counseling is recommended for 1st-degree relatives of patients with ADPKD.
Prognosis
By age 75, 50 to 75% of patients with ADPKD require renal replacement therapy
(dialysis or
transplantation). Predictors of more rapid progression to renal failure include the following:
• Earlier age at diagnosis
• Male sex
• Sickle cell trait
•
PKD1
genotype
• Larger or rapidly increasing kidney size
• Gross hematuria
• Hypertension
ADPKD does not increase risk of renal cancer, but if patients with ADPKD develop renal cancer, it is more
likely to be bilateral. Renal cancer rarely causes death. Patients usually die of heart disease (sometimes
valvular), disseminated infection, or ruptured cerebral aneurysm.
Treatment
• Control of risk factors
• Supportive measures
Strict BP control is essential. UTIs should be treated promptly. Percutaneous aspiration of cysts may help
manage severe pain due to hemorrhage or compression but has no effect on long-term outcome.
Nephrectomy is an option to relieve severe symptoms due to massive kidney enlargement (eg, pain,
hematuria) or recurrent UTIs. Hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, or kidney transplantation is required in
patients who develop chronic renal failure. ADPKD does not recur in grafts. With dialysis, patients with
ADPKD maintain higher Hb levels than any other group of patients with renal failure.
===PAGE:2541===
Chapter 235. Glomerular Disorders
Introduction
Glomerular disorders are classified as those that manifest predominantly with hematuria (nephritic
syndrome), high-level proteinuria (nephrotic syndrome), or both. Disorders tend to manifest at different
ages (see
Table 235-1
) although there is much overlap. The disorders may be primary or have secondary causes
(see
Tables 235-2
and
235-4
).
The pathophysiology of nephritic and nephrotic disorders differs substantially, but their clinical overlap is
considerable—eg, several disorders may manifest with the same clinical picture—and the presence of
hematuria or proteinuria does not itself predict response to treatment or prognosis.
A glomerular disorder is usually suspected when screening or diagnostic testing reveals an elevated
serum creatinine level and abnormal urinalysis (hematuria with or without casts, proteinuria, or both).
Approach to the patient involves distinguishing predominant-nephritic from predominant-nephrotic
features and identifying likely causes by patient age, accompanying illness (see
Tables 235-1
and
235-4
),
and other elements of the history (eg, time course, systemic manifestations, family history).
Renal biopsy is indicated when diagnosis is unclear from history or when histology influences choice of
treatment and outcomes (eg, lupus nephritis).
Nephritic Syndrome
Nephritic syndrome is defined by hematuria and the presence of dysmorphic RBCs and RBC
casts on microscopic examination of urinary sediment. Often ≥ 1 of the following elements are
present: mild to moderate proteinuria, edema, hypertension, elevated serum creatinine, and
oliguria. It has both primary and secondary causes. Diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination, and sometimes renal biopsy. Treatment and prognosis vary by cause.
Nephritic syndrome is a manifestation of glomerular inflammation (glomerulonephritis [GN]) and occurs at
any age. Causes differ by age (see
Table 235-1
), and mechanisms differ by cause. The syndrome can be
acute or chronic and primary (idiopathic) or secondary.
Postinfectious GN is the prototype of acute GN, but the condition may be caused by other
glomerulopathies and by systemic disorders such as connective tissue disorders and hematologic
dyscrasias (see
Table 235-2
). Chronic GN has features similar to those of acute GN but develops slowly
and may cause mild to moderate proteinuria. Examples include IgA nephropathy and hereditary nephritis.
Hereditary Nephritis
(Alport's Syndrome)
Hereditary nephritis is a genetically heterogenous disorder characterized by hematuria,
[Table 235-1.
Glomerular Disorders by Age and Presentation]
impaired renal function, sensorineural deafness, and ocular abnormalities. Cause is a gene
mutation affecting type IV collagen. Symptoms and signs are those of nephritic syndrome (ie,
hematuria, eventual renal insufficiency) often with sensorineural deafness and, less commonly,
ophthalmologic symptoms. Diagnosis is by history, including family history, urinalysis, and
biopsy (renal or skin). Treatment is the same as that of chronic kidney disease.
Hereditary nephritis is caused by a mutation in the
COL4A5
gene that encodes the
α
-5 chain of type IV
collagen and results in altered type IV collagen strands. The mechanism by which collagen alteration
===PAGE:2542===
collagen and results in altered type IV collagen strands. The mechanism by which collagen alteration
causes a glomerular disorder is unknown, but impaired structure and function are presumed; in most
families, thickening and thinning of the glomerular and tubular basement membranes occur, with
multilamination of the lamina densa in a focal or local distribution. Glomerular scarring and interstitial
fibrosis eventually result.
The disorder is most commonly inherited in X-linked fashion, although autosomal recessive varieties exist.
There are 2 forms: a juvenile form with onset of renal insufficiency between ages 20 and 30 yr and an
adult form with onset of renal insufficiency after age 30.
Symptoms and Signs
Because of X-linked transmission, women usually are asymptomatic and have little functional impairment.
Most men eventually develop renal symptoms and signs similar to those of acute nephritic syndrome (eg,
microscopic hematuria, eventually gross hematuria) and progress to renal insufficiency between ages 20
and 30 (juvenile form).
Sensorineural deafness frequently is present, affecting higher frequencies; it may
[Table 235-2.
Causes of Glomerulonephritis]
not be noticed during early childhood. Some men develop renal insufficiency after age 30 (adult form) with
deafness that occurs late or is mild. Some patients have sensorineural deafness alone without renal
disease but can transmit renal disease to their children.
Ophthalmologic abnormalities—cataracts (most common), anterior lenticonus (a regular conical protrusion
on the anterior aspect of the lens due to thinning of the lens capsule), spherophakia (spherical lens
deformation that can predispose to lens subluxation), nystagmus, retinitis pigmentosa, blindness—also
occur but less frequently than deafness.
Other nonrenal manifestations include polyneuropathy and thrombocytopenia.
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings and urinalysis
• Renal biopsy
Diagnosis is suggested in patients who have microscopic hematuria on urinalysis or recurrent episodes of
gross hematuria, particularly if an abnormality of hearing or vision or a family history of chronic kidney
disease is present.
Urinalysis and usually renal biopsy are done. The urine may contain small amounts of protein, WBCs,
and casts of various types. Nephrotic syndrome occurs rarely. No distinguishing histologic changes are
seen on light microscopy. The diagnosis can be confirmed by any of the following:
• Renal biopsy with immunostaining for the subtypes of type IV collagen
• Characteristic disorganization of the lamina densa of the glomerular capillary seen using electron
microscopy
• Skin biopsy with immunostaining for the type IV collagen subtypes in a patient with a positive family
history
A combination of immunostaining and electron microscopy is often needed to distinguish hereditary
nephritis from some forms of thin basement membrane disease. Although not yet widely available,
molecular techniques for evaluating DNA gene mutations or mRNA may become the diagnostic
techniques of choice.
===PAGE:2543===
Treatment
• Same as that for other causes of chronic kidney disease
Treatment is indicated only when uremia occurs; its management is the same as that for other causes of
chronic kidney disease (. Anecdotal reports suggest that ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers may slow
progression of renal disease. Transplantation has been successful. Genetic counseling is indicated.
Immunoglobulin A Nephropathy
IgA nephropathy is deposition of IgA immune complexes in glomeruli, manifesting as slowly
progressive hematuria, proteinuria, and, often, renal insufficiency. Diagnosis is based on
urinalysis and renal biopsy. Prognosis is generally good. Treatment options include ACE
inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, and
ω
-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids.
IgA nephropathy is a form of chronic GN characterized by the deposition of IgA immune complexes in
glomeruli. It is the most common form of GN worldwide. It occurs at all ages, with a peak onset in the
teens and 20s; affects men 2 to 6 times more frequently than women; and is more common in whites and
Asians than in blacks. Prevalence estimates for IgA kidney deposits are 5% in the US, 10 to 20% in
southern Europe and Australia, and 30 to 40% in Asia. However, some people with IgA deposits do not
develop clinical disease.
Cause is unknown, but evidence suggests that there may be several mechanisms, including increased
IgA1 production, defective IgA1 glycosylation causing increased binding to mesangial cells, decreased
IgA1 clearance, a defective mucosal immune system, and overproduction of cytokines stimulating
mesangial cell proliferation. Familial clustering has also been observed, suggesting genetic factors at
least in some cases.
Renal function is initially normal, but symptomatic renal disease may develop. A few patients present with
acute renal failure or chronic kidney disease, severe hypertension, or nephrotic syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
The most common manifestation is persistent or recurrent macroscopic hematuria (90% of involved
children) or asymptomatic microscopic hematuria with mild proteinuria. Other symptoms are usually not
prominent.
Gross hematuria usually begins 1 or 2 days after a febrile mucosal (upper respiratory, sinus, enteral)
illness, thus mimicking acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis, except the onset of hematuria is earlier
(coinciding with or immediately after the febrile illness). Rapidly progressive GN is the initial manifestation
in < 10% of patients.
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings and urinalysis
• Sometimes renal biopsy
Diagnosis is suggested by any of the following:
• Gross hematuria, particularly within 2 days of a febrile mucosal illness or with flank pain
• Incidentally noted findings on urinalysis
• Occasionally, rapidly progressive GN
===PAGE:2544===
When manifestations are moderate or severe, diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy.
Urinalysis
demonstrates microscopic hematuria, usually with dysmorphic RBCs and RBC casts. Mild
proteinuria (< 1 g/day) is typical and may occur without hematuria; nephrotic syndrome develops in ≤
20%. Serum creatinine level is usually normal.
Renal biopsy
shows granular deposition of IgA and complement (C3) on immunofluorescent staining in
an expanded mesangium with foci of segmental proliferative or necrotizing lesions. Importantly, mesangial
IgA deposits are nonspecific and also occur in many other disorders, including Henoch-Schonlein
purpura, cirrhosis, inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, HIV infection, lung cancer, and several
connective tissue disorders. Glomerular IgA deposition is a primary feature of Henoch-Schonlein purpura,
and the 2 disorders may be indistinguishable based on biopsy specimens, leading to speculation that
Henoch-Schonlein purpura may be a systemic form of IgA nephropathy. However, Henoch-Schonlein
purpura is clinically distinct from IgA nephropathy, usually manifesting as purpuric rash, arthralgias, and
abdominal pain (.
Other serum immunologic tests are usually unnecessary. Complement concentrations are usually normal.
Plasma IgA concentration may be elevated and circulating IgA-fibronectin complexes are present;
however, these findings are not helpful diagnostically.
Prognosis
IgA nephropathy usually progresses slowly; renal insufficiency and hypertension develop within 10 yr in
15 to 20% of patients. Progression to end-stage renal disease occurs in 25% of patients after 20 yr.
When IgA nephropathy is diagnosed in childhood, prognosis is usually good. However, persistent
hematuria invariably leads to hypertension, proteinuria, and renal insufficiency. Risk factors for
progressive deterioration in renal function include the following:
• Proteinuria > 500 mg/24 h for > 6 mo
• Elevated creatinine
• Uncontrolled hypertension
• Microscopic hematuria for > 6 mo
• Extensive fibrotic changes in the glomerulus or interstitium
• Crescents on biopsy
Treatment
• Often ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers for hypertension, creatinine > 1.2 mg/dL, or
urinary protein > 1 g/day
• Corticosteroids and possibly immunosuppressants for progressive disease, urinary protein > 2 g/day, or
creatinine clearance < 60 mL/min
• Transplantation rather than dialysis if possible
Normotensive patients with intact renal function (creatinine < 1.2 mg/dL) and only mild proteinuria (< 0.5
g/day) usually are not treated. Patients with renal insufficiency or more severe proteinuria and hematuria
are usually offered treatment, which ideally should be started before significant renal insufficiency
develops.
Angiotensin inhibition:
ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers are used on the premise that
they reduce BP, proteinuria, and glomerular fibrosis. Patients with the DD genotype for the ACE gene may
be at greater risk of disease progression but may also be more likely to respond to ACE inhibitors or
===PAGE:2545===
angiotensin II receptor blockers. For patients with hypertension, ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor
blockers are the antihypertensives of choice even for relatively mild chronic kidney disease.
Corticosteroids and immunosuppressants:
Corticosteroids have been used for many years, but
benefit is not well documented. One protocol uses methylprednisolone 1 g IV once/day for 3 days at the
beginning of months 1, 3, and 5 plus prednisone 0.5 mg/kg po every other day for 6 mo. Because of the
risk of adverse effects, corticosteroids should probably be reserved for patients with any of the following:
• Progression, as shown by worsening proteinuria or renal function
• Heavy proteinuria (> 2 g/day)
• Significant renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance < 60 mL/min)
Combinations of corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, and azathioprine are also used, but efficacy and
safety compared with corticosteroids alone are uncertain. Mycophenolate mofetil is under investigation.
None of these drugs, however, prevents recurrence in transplant patients.
Other treatments:

ω
-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids (eg, 4 to 12 g/day), available in fish
oil supplements,
have been used to treat IgA nephropathy, but data on efficacy are contradictory. Mechanism of effect may
include alterations in inflammatory cytokines.
Other interventions have been tried to lower IgA overproduction and to inhibit mesangial proliferation.
Elimination of gluten, dairy products, eggs, and meat from the diet; tonsillectomy; and immune globulin (1
g/kg IV 2 days/mo for 3 mo followed by immune globulin 0.35 mL/kg of 16.5% solution IM q 2 wk for 6 mo)
all theoretically reduce IgA production. Heparin, dipyridamole, and statins are just a few examples of in
vitro mesangial cell inhibitors. Data supporting any of these interventions are limited or absent, and none
can be recommended for routine treatment.
Renal transplantation is better than dialysis because of excellent long-term disease-free survival. The
condition recurs in ≤ 15% of graft recipients.
Postinfectious Glomerulonephritis
Postinfectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN) occurs after infection, usually with a nephritogenic
strain of group A
β
-hemolytic streptococcus. Diagnosis is suggested by history and urinalysis
and confirmed by finding a low complement level and sometimes by antibody testing.
Prognosis is excellent. Treatment is supportive.
Etiology
PIGN is the most common cause of a glomerular disorder in children between 5 and 15 yr; it is rare in
children < 2 yr and uncommon in adults > 40 yr.
Most cases are caused by nephritogenic strains of group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci, most notably type 12
(which causes pharyngitis) and type 49 (which causes impetigo); an estimated 5 to 10% of patients with
streptococcal pharyngitis and about 25% of those with impetigo develop PIGN. A latency period of 6 to 21
days between infection and GN onset is typical, but latency may extend up to 6 wk.
Less common pathogens are nonstreptococcal bacteria, viruses, parasites, rickettsiae, and fungi (see
Table 235-2
). Bacterial endocarditis and ventriculoatrial shunt infections are additional important
conditions in which PIGN develops; ventriculoperitoneal shunts are more resistant to infection.
The mechanism is unknown, but microbial antigens are thought to bind to the glomerular basement
membrane and activate complement both directly and via interaction with circulating antibodies, causing
glomerular damage, which may be focal or diffuse.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2546===
Symptoms and signs range from asymptomatic hematuria (in about 50%) and mild proteinuria to full-blown
nephritis with microscopic or gross hematuria (cola-colored, brown, smoky, or frankly bloody urine),
proteinuria, oliguria, edema, hypertension, and renal insufficiency. Severe, late disease is a relatively
uncommon cause of nephrotic syndrome. Renal failure that causes fluid overload with heart failure and
urgent or malignant hypertension and requires dialysis affects 1 to 2% of patients and may manifest as a
pulmonary-renal syndrome with hematuria and hemoptysis (. Fever is unusual and suggests
persistent infection.
Clinical manifestations of nonstreptococcal PIGN may mimic other disorders (eg, polyarteritis nodosa,
renal emboli, antimicrobial drug-induced acute interstitial nephritis).
Diagnosis
• Clinical evidence of recent infection
• Urinalysis showing GN
• Often hypocomplementemia
Streptococcal PIGN is suggested by history of pharyngitis or impetigo plus either typical symptoms of
PIGN or incidental findings on urinalysis. Tests done to confirm the diagnosis depend on clinical findings.
Antistreptolysin O, antihyaluronidase, and antideoxyribonuclease (anti-DNAase) antibodies are commonly
measured. Serum creatinine and complement levels (C3 and total hemolytic complement activity) are also
usually measured; however, in patients with classic findings, some tests can be omitted. Sometimes other
tests are done. Biopsy confirms the diagnosis but is rarely necessary; demonstration of
hypocomplementemia is essentially confirmatory.
Antistreptolysin O
level, the most common laboratory evidence of recent streptococcal infection,
increases and remains elevated for several months in about 75% of patients with pharyngitis and in about
50% of patients with impetigo, but it is not specific. An increase in antihyaluronidase and
antideoxyribonuclease titers is more specific for detecting recent streptococcal skin infection but is not
widely available.
Urinalysis
shows proteinuria (0.5 to 2 g/m
/day); dysmorphic RBCs; WBCs; renal tubular cells; and
RBC, WBC, and granular casts. Random (spot) urinary protein/creatinine ratio may be between 0.2 and 2
(normal, < 0.2).
Serum creatinine
may rise rapidly but usually peaks below a level requiring dialysis.
C3
and total hemolytic complement activity (CH50) levels fall during active disease and return to normal
within 6 to 8 wk in 80% of PIGN cases; C1q, C2, and C4 levels are only minimally decreased or remain
normal. Cryoglobulinemia may appear and persist for several months, whereas circulating immune
complexes are detectable for only a few weeks.
Biopsy specimens
show enlarged and hypercellular glomeruli, initially with neutrophilic or eosinophilic
infiltration and later with mononuclear infiltration. Epithelial cell hyperplasia is a common early, transient
feature. Microthrombosis may occur; if damage is severe, hemodynamic changes produce oliguria,
frequently accompanied by epithelial crescents (formed within Bowman's space from epithelial cell
hyperplasia). Endothelial and mesangial cells multiply, and the mesangial regions often are greatly
expanded by edema and contain neutrophils, dead cells, cellular debris, and subepithelial deposits of
electron-dense material. Immunofluorescence microscopy usually shows immune complex deposition with
IgG and complement in a granular pattern. On electron microscopy, these deposits are semilunar or
hump-shaped and are located in the subepithelial area. The presence of these deposits initiates a
complement-mediated inflammatory reaction that leads to glomerular damage. Although the immune
complex is presumed to contain an antigen related to streptococcal organisms, no such antigen has been
found.
===PAGE:2547===
Prognosis
Normal renal function is retained or regained by 85 to 95% of patients. GFR usually returns to normal
over 1 to 3 mo, but proteinuria may persist for 6 to 12 mo and microscopic hematuria for several years.
Transient changes in urinary sediment may recur with minor URIs. Renal cellular proliferation disappears
within weeks, but residual sclerosis is common. In 10% of adults and 1% of children, PIGN evolves into
rapidly progressive GN.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is supportive and may include restriction of dietary protein, Na, and fluid and, in more severe
cases, treatment of edema and hypertension. Dialysis is occasionally necessary. Antimicrobial therapy is
preventive only when given within 36 h of infection and before GN becomes established.
Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis
(Crescentic Glomerulonephritis)
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) causes microscopic glomerular crescent
formation with progression to renal failure within weeks to months. Diagnosis is based on
history, urinalysis, serologic tests, and renal biopsy. Treatment is with corticosteroids, with or
without cyclophosphamide, and sometimes plasmapheresis.
RPGN is extensive glomerular crescent formation (which can be seen in a biopsy specimen) that, if
untreated, progresses to end-stage renal disease over weeks to months. It is relatively uncommon,
affecting 10 to 15% of patients with GN, and occurs predominantly in patients 20 to 50 yr. Types and
causes are classified by findings using immunofluorescence microscopy (see
Table 235-3
).
Anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibody disease
(type 1 RPGN) is autoimmune GN
and accounts for up to 10% of RPGN cases. It may arise when respiratory exposures (eg, cigarette
smoke, viral URI) or some other stimulus exposes alveolar capillary collagen, triggering formation of
anticollagen antibodies. The anticollagen antibodies cross-react with GBM, fixing complement and
triggering a cell-mediated inflammatory response in the kidneys and usually the lungs. The term
Goodpasture's syndrome usually refers to a combination of GN and alveolar hemorrhage in the presence
of anti-GBM antibodies ( but sometimes refers to GN without alveolar hemorrhage in the presence of anti-GBM antibodies.
Immunofluorescent staining of renal biopsy tissue demonstrates linear IgG deposits.
Immune complex RPGN
(type 2 RPGN) complicates numerous infectious and connective tissue
disorders and also occurs with other primary glomerulopathies. Immunofluorescent staining demonstrates
nonspecific granular immune deposits. The condition accounts for up to 40% of RPGN cases.
Pathogenesis is usually unknown.
Pauci-immune RPGN
(type 3 RPGN) is distinguished by the absence of immune complex or
complement deposition on immunofluorescent staining. It constitutes up to 50% of all RPGN cases.
Almost all patients have elevated antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs, usually myeloperoxidaseANCA) and systemic vasculitis.
Double-antibody disease
(type 4 RPGN) has features of types 1 and 3, with the presence
[Table 235-3.
Classification of Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis Based on Immunofluorescence
Microscopy]
of anti-GBM and ANCA antibodies. It is rare.
===PAGE:2548===
Idiopathic cases
are rare. They include patients with either of the following:
• Immune complexes (similar to type 2) but no obvious cause such as infection, connective tissue
disorder, or glomerular disorder
• Pauci-immune features (similar to type 3) but absence of ANCA antibodies
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations are usually insidious, with weakness, fatigue, fever, nausea and vomiting, anorexia,
arthralgia, and abdominal pain. Some patients present similarly to those with PIGN, with abrupt-onset
hematuria. About 50% of patients have edema and a history of an acute influenza-like illness within 4 wk
of onset of renal failure, usually followed by severe oliguria. Nephrotic syndrome is present in 10 to 30%.
Hypertension is uncommon and rarely severe. Patients with anti-GBM antibody disease may have
pulmonary hemorrhage, which can manifest with hemoptysis or be detectable only by finding diffuse
alveolar infiltrates on chest x-ray (pulmonary-renal or diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndrome—.
Diagnosis
• Progressive renal failure over weeks to months
• Nephritic urinary sediment
• Serologic testing
• Renal biopsy
Diagnosis is suggested by acute renal failure in patients with hematuria and RBC casts. Testing includes
serum creatinine, urinalysis, CBC, serologic tests, and renal biopsy. Diagnosis is usually by serologic
tests and renal biopsy.
Serum creatinine
is almost always elevated. Hematuria and RBC casts are always present, and
telescopic sediment (ie, sediment with multiple elements, including WBCs and RBCs, and WBC, RBC,
granular, waxy, and broad casts) is common.
On
CBC
, anemia is always present, and leukocytosis is common.
Serologic testing
should include anti-GBM antibodies (anti-GBM antibody disease); antistreptolysin O
antibodies, anti-DNA antibodies, or cryoglobulins (immune complex RPGN); and ANCA titers (pauciimmune RPGN). Complement measurement may be useful in suspected immune complex RPGN,
because hypocomplementemia is common.
Early
renal biopsy
is essential. The feature common to all types of RPGN is focal proliferation of
glomerular epithelial cells, sometimes interspersed with numerous neutrophils, that forms a crescentic
cellular mass (crescents) and that fills Bowman's space in > 50% of glomeruli. The glomerular tuft usually
appears hypocellular and collapses. Necrosis within the tuft or involving the crescent may occur and may
be the most prominent abnormality. In such patients, histologic evidence of vasculitis should be sought.
Immunofluorescence microscopy findings differ for each type.
• In anti-GBM antibody disease (type 1), linear or ribbon-like deposition of IgG along the GBM is most
prominent and is often accompanied by linear and sometimes granular deposition of C3.
• In immune complex RPGN (type 2), immunofluorescence reveals diffuse, irregular mesangial IgG and C3
deposits.
• In pauci-immune RPGN (type 3), immune staining and deposits are not detected. However, fibrin occurs
===PAGE:2549===
within the crescents, regardless of the fluorescence pattern.
• In double antibody RPGN (type 4), linear staining of the GBM is present (similar to type 1).
• In idiopathic RPGN some patients have immune complexes (similar to those of type 2) and others have
absence of immune staining and deposits (similar to type 3).
Prognosis
Spontaneous remission is rare, and 80 to 90% of untreated patients progress to end-stage renal disease
within 6 mo. Prognosis improves with early treatment.
Favorable prognostic factors
include RPGN caused by the following:
• Anti-GBM disease if treated early, especially when treated before oliguria occurs and when creatinine
level is < 7 mg/dL
• PIGN
• SLE
• Wegener's granulomatosis
• Polyarteritis nodosa
Unfavorable prognostic factors
include the following:
• Age > 60 yr
• Oliguric renal failure
• Higher serum creatinine level
• Circumferential crescents in > 75% of glomeruli
• Among patients with pauci-immune RPGN, no response to treatment
About 30% of patients with pauci-immune RPGN do not respond to treatment; among nonresponders,
about 40% require dialysis, and 33% die within 4 yr. In contrast, among patients who respond to
treatment, < 20% of patients require dialysis, and about 3% die.
Patients with double-antibody disease appear to have a renal prognosis no better than patients with antiGBM antibody disease and worse than patients with pauci-immune RPGN.
Patients who recover normal renal function after RPGN demonstrate residual histologic changes
principally in glomeruli, consisting chiefly of hypercellularity, with little or no sclerosis within the glomerular
tuft or the epithelial cells and minimal fibrosis of the interstitium.
Death is usually due to infectious or cardiac causes, providing that a uremic death is prevented by
dialysis.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Cyclophosphamide
• Plasmapheresis for anti-GBM RPGN
===PAGE:2550===
Treatment varies by disease type, although no regimens have been rigorously studied. Therapy should
be instituted early, ideally when serum creatinine is < 5 mg/dL and before the biopsy shows crescentic
involvement of all glomeruli or organizing crescents as well as fibrotic interstitium and atrophic tubules.
Treatment becomes less effective as these features become more prominent and may be harmful in some
patients (eg, the elderly, patients with infection).
For
anti-GBM antibody disease
, plasma-pheresis (daily 3- to 4-L exchanges for 14 days) is
recommended; the role of plasmapheresis is less well defined for immune complex and pauci-immune
RPGN. Plasmapheresis is believed to be effective because it rapidly removes free antibody, intact
immune complexes, and mediators of inflammation (eg, fibrinogen, complement). Prednisone and
cyclophosphamide are typically started and continued to minimize new antibody formation.
For
immune complex
and
pauci-immune RPGN
, corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 1 g IV once/day
over 30 min for 3 to 5 days followed by prednisone 1 mg/kg po once/day) may reduce serum creatinine
levels or delay dialysis for > 3 yr in 50% of patients. Cyclophosphamide 1.5 to 2 mg/kg po once/day is
usually given and may particularly benefit ANCA-positive patients; monthly pulse regimens may lessen
adverse effects, but their role is not defined.
Lymphocytapheresis, a technique to remove peripheral lymphocytes from circulation, may benefit pauciimmune RPGN but requires further investigation. Patients with idiopathic disease are usually treated with
corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide, but data regarding efficacy are scarce.
Renal transplantation is effective for all types, but disease may recur in the graft; risk diminishes with
time. In anti-GBM antibody disease, the anti-GBM titers should be undetectable for at least 12 mo before
transplantation.
Thin Basement Membrane Disease
(Benign Familial Hematuria)
Thin basement membrane disease is diffuse thinning of the glomerular basement membrane
from a width of 300 to 400 nm in normal subjects to 150 to 225 nm.
Thin basement membrane disease is hereditary and usually transmitted in autosomal dominant fashion.
Not all genetic mutations have been characterized, but in some families with thin basement membrane
disease there is a mutation in the type IV collagen
α
4 gene. Prevalence is estimated to be 5 to 9%.
Most patients are asymptomatic and are incidentally noted to have microscopic hematuria on routine
urinalysis, although mild proteinuria and gross hematuria are occasionally present. Renal function is
typically normal, but a few patients develop progressive renal failure for unknown reasons. Recurrent
flank pain, similar to that in IgA nephropathy, is a rare manifestation.
Diagnosis is based on family history and findings of hematuria without other symptoms or pathology,
particularly if asymptomatic family members also have hematuria. Renal biopsy is unnecessary but is
often done as part of a hematuria evaluation. Early on, thin basement membrane disease may be difficult
to differentiate from hereditary nephritis because of histologic similarities.
Long-term prognosis is excellent, and no treatment is necessary in most cases. Patients with frequent
gross hematuria, flank pain, or proteinuria (eg, urine protein/creatinine ratio of > 0.2) may benefit from
ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor II blockers, which may lower intraglomerular pressure.
Nephrotic Syndrome
Nephrotic syndrome is urinary excretion of > 3 g of protein/day due to a glomerular disorder. It
is more common among children and has both primary and secondary causes. Diagnosis is by
determination of urine protein/creatinine ratio in a random urine sample or measurement of
urinary protein in a 24-h urine collection; cause is diagnosed based on history, physical
===PAGE:2551===
examination, serologic testing, and renal biopsy. Prognosis and treatment vary by cause.
Etiology
Nephrotic syndrome occurs at any age but is more prevalent in children, mostly between ages 1 1/2 and 4
yr. At younger ages, boys are affected more often than girls, but both are affected equally at older ages.
Causes differ by age (see
Table 235-1
) and may be primary or secondary (see
Table 235-4
).
The most common primary causes are the following:
• Minimal change disease
• Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
• Membranous nephropathy
Secondary causes account for < 10% of childhood cases but > 50% of adult cases, most commonly the
following:
• Diabetic nephropathy
• Preeclampsia
Amyloidosis, an underrecognized cause, is responsible for 4% of cases.
Pathophysiology
Proteinuria occurs because of changes to capillary endothelial cells, the glomerular basement membrane
(GBM), or podocytes,
[Table 235-4.
Causes of Nephrotic Syndrome]
which normally filter serum protein selectively by size and charge.
The mechanism of damage to these structures is unknown in primary and secondary glomerular
diseases, but evidence suggests that T cells may up-regulate a circulating permeability factor or downregulate an inhibitor of permeability factor in response to unidentified immunogens and cytokines. Other
possible factors include hereditary defects in proteins that are integral to the slit diaphragms of the
glomeruli, activation of complement leading to damage of the glomerular epithelial cells and loss of the
negatively charged groups attached to proteins of the GBM and glomerular epithelial cells.
Complications:
The disorder results in urinary loss of macromolecular proteins, primarily albumin but
also opsonins, immunoglobulins, erythropoietin, transferrin, hormone-binding proteins (including thyroidbinding globulin and vitamin D-binding protein), and antithrombin III. Deficiency of these and other
proteins contribute to a number of complications (see
Table 235-5
); other physiologic factors also play a role.
Symptoms and Signs
Primary symptoms include anorexia, malaise, and frothy urine (caused by high concentrations of protein).
Fluid retention may cause dyspnea (pleural effusion or laryngeal edema), arthralgia (hydrarthrosis), or
abdominal pain (ascites or, in children, mesenteric edema).
Corresponding signs may develop, including peripheral edema and ascites. Edema may obscure signs of
muscle wasting and cause parallel white lines in fingernail beds (Muehrcke's lines).
Other symptoms and signs are attributable to the many complications of nephrotic syndrome (see
Table
235-5
).
===PAGE:2552===
Diagnosis
• Urine protein/creatinine ratio ≥ 3 or proteinuria ≥ 3 g/24 h
• Serologic testing and renal biopsy unless the cause is clinically obvious
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with edema and proteinuria on urinalysis and confirmed by random
(spot) urine protein and creatinine levels or 24-h measurement of urinary protein. The cause may be
suggested by clinical findings (eg, SLE, preeclampsia, cancer); when the cause is unclear, additional (eg,
serologic) testing and renal biopsy are indicated.
Urine testing:
A finding of significant
proteinuria
(3 g protein in a 24-h urine collection) is diagnostic
(normal excretion is < 150 mg/day). Alternatively, the protein/creatinine ratio in a random urine specimen
usually reliably estimates grams of protein/1.73 m
BSA in a 24-h collection (eg, values of 40 mg/dL
protein and 10 mg/dL creatinine in a random urine sample are equivalent to the finding of 4 g/1.73 m
in a
24-h specimen). Calculations based on random specimens may be less reliable when creatinine excretion
is high (eg, during athletic training) or low (eg, in cachexia). However, calculations based on random
specimens are usually preferred to 24-h collection because random collection is more convenient and
less prone to error (eg, due to lack of adherence); more convenient
[Table 235-5.
Complications of Nephrotic Syndrome]
testing facilitates monitoring changes that occur during treatment.
Besides proteinuria,
urinalysis
may demonstrate RBCs and casts (hyaline, granular, fatty, waxy, RBC, or
epithelial cell). Lipiduria, the presence of free lipid or lipid within tubular cells (oval fat bodies), within
casts (fatty casts), or as free globules, suggests a glomerular disorder causing nephrotic syndrome.
Urinary cholesterol can be detected with plain microscopy and demonstrates a Maltese cross pattern
under crossed polarized light; Sudan staining must be used to show triglycerides.
Adjunctive testing:
Adjunctive testing helps characterize severity and complications.
• BUN and creatinine concentrations vary by degree of renal impairment.
• Serum albumin often is < 2.5 g/dL.
• Total cholesterol and triglyceride levels are typically increased.
It is not routinely necessary to measure levels of
α
- and
γ
-globulins, immunoglobulins, hormone-binding
proteins, ceruloplasmin, transferrin, and complement components, but these levels may also be low.
Secondary causes:
The role of testing for secondary causes (see
Table 235-4
) is controversial because
yield may be low. Tests are best done as indicated by clinical context. Tests may include the following:
• Serum glucose or glycosylated Hb (HbA
1c
)
• Antinuclear antibodies
• Hepatitis B and C serologic tests
• Serum or urine protein electrophoresis
• Cryoglobulins
Test results may alter management and preclude the need for biopsy. For example, demonstration of
cryoglobulins suggests mixed cryoglobulinemia (eg, from chronic inflammatory disorders such as SLE,
===PAGE:2553===
Sjogren's syndrome, or hepatitis C virus infection), and demonstration of a monoclonal protein on serum
or urine protein electrophoresis suggests a monoclonal gammopathy
(eg, multiple myeloma), especially in
patients > 50 yr.
Renal biopsy
is indicated in adults to diagnose the disorder causing idiopathic nephrotic syndrome.
Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in children is most likely minimal change disease and is usually presumed
without biopsy unless the patient fails to improve during a trial of corticosteroids. Specific biopsy findings
are discussed under the individual disorders.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies by cause. Complete remissions may occur spontaneously or with treatment. The
prognosis generally is favorable in corticosteroid-responsive disorders.
In all cases, prognosis may be worsened by the following:
• Infection
• Hypertension
• Significant azotemia
• Hematuria
• Thromboses in cerebral, pulmonary, peripheral, or renal veins
The recurrence rate is high in kidney transplantation patients with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis,
SLE, IgA nephropathy, and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (especially type II).
Treatment
• Treatment of causative disorder
• Angiotensin inhibition
• Na restriction
• Statins
• Rarely, nephrectomy
Causative disorder:
Treatment of underlying disorders may include prompt treatment of infections (eg,
staphylococcal endocarditis, malaria, syphilis, schistosomiasis), allergic desensitization (eg, for poison
oak or ivy and insect antigen exposures), and stopping drugs (eg, gold, penicillamine, NSAIDs); these
measures may cure nephrotic syndrome in specific instances.
Proteinuria:
Angiotensin inhibition (ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers) is indicated to
reduce systemic and intraglomerular BP and proteinuria. These drugs may cause or exacerbate
hyperkalemia in patients with moderate to severe renal insufficiency.
Protein restriction is no longer recommended because of lack of demonstrated effect on progression.
Edema:
Na restriction (< 2 g Na, or about 100 mmol/day) is recommended for patients with symptomatic
edema.
Loop diuretics are usually required to control edema but may worsen preexisting renal insufficiency and
hypovolemia, hyperviscosity, and hypercoagulability and thus should be used only if Na restriction is
ineffective.
===PAGE:2554===
Hyperlipidemia:
Statins are indicated for hyperlipidemia.
Limitation of saturated fat and cholesterol intake is recommended to help control hyperlipidemia.
Hypercoagulability:
Anticoagulants are indicated for treatment of thromboembolism, but few data exist
to support their use as primary prevention.
Infection risk:
All patients should receive pneumococcal vaccination if not otherwise contraindicated.
Nephrectomy:
Rarely, bilateral nephrectomy is necessary in severe nephrotic syndrome because of
persistent hypoalbuminemia. The same result can sometimes be achieved by embolizing the renal
arteries with coils, thus avoiding surgery in high-risk patients. Renal replacement therapy is used as
necessary.
Congenital Nephrotic Syndromes
Congenital and infantile nephrotic syndromes are those that manifest during the first year of
life. They include diffuse mesangial sclerosis and Finnish-type nephrotic syndrome.
Diffuse mesangial sclerosis:
This nephrotic syndrome is rare. Inheritance is variable. Progression to
end-stage renal failure occurs by age 2 or 3 yr.
Patients with severe proteinuria may require bilateral nephrectomy because of severe hypoalbuminemia;
dialysis should be initiated early to ameliorate nutritional deficits and mitigate failure to thrive. The
disorder usually recurs in a renal graft.
Finnish-type nephrotic syndrome:
This syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder that affects
1/8200 Finnish neonates and is caused by a mutation in the
NPHS1
gene, which codes for a podocytic
slit-diaphragm protein (nephrin).
Finnish-type nephrotic syndrome is rapidly progressive and usually necessitates dialysis within 1 yr. Most
patients die within 1 yr, but a few have been supported nutritionally until renal failure occurs and then
managed with dialysis or transplantation. However, the disorder may recur in a renal graft.
Other syndromes:
Several other rare congenital nephrotic syndromes are now genetically
characterized. These include corticosteroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome
(defective
NPS2
gene coding
for podocin), familial focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (defective
ACTN 4
gene coding for
α
-actin 4),
and Denys-Drash syndrome, which is characterized by diffuse mesangial sclerosis, male
pseudohermaphroditism, and Wilms' tumor (defective
WT1
gene).
Diabetic Nephropathy
(See also p.
.)
Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is glomerular sclerosis and fibrosis caused by the metabolic and
hemodynamic changes of diabetes mellitus. It manifests as slowly progressive albuminuria
with worsening hypertension and renal insufficiency. Diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination, urinalysis, and urine albumin/creatinine ratio. Treatment is strict glucose control,
angiotensin inhibition (ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers), and control of BP and
lipids.
DN is the most common cause of nephrotic syndrome in adults and of end-stage renal disease in the US,
accounting for up to 80% of cases of the latter. The prevalence of renal failure is probably about 40%
among patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. The prevalence of renal failure among patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus is usually stated as 20 to 30%, but this figure is probably low. Renal failure is particularly
common in certain ethnic groups, such as blacks, Mexican-Americans, Polynesians, and Pima Indians.
Other risk factors include the following:
===PAGE:2555===
• Duration and degree of hyperglycemia
• Hypertension
• Dyslipidemia
• Cigarette smoking
• Certain polymorphisms affecting the reninangiotensin-aldosterone axis
• Family history of diabetic nephropathy
• Genetic variables (decreased number of glomeruli)
Renal failure usually takes ≥ 10 yr after the onset of nephropathy to develop; however, because type 2
diabetes is often present for several years before being recognized, nephropathy often develops < 10 yr
after diabetes is diagnosed.
Pathophysiology
Pathogenesis begins with small vessel disease. Pathophysiology is complex, involving glycosylation of
proteins, hormonally influenced cytokine release (eg, transforming growth factorβ
), deposition of
mesangial matrix, and alteration of glomerular hemodynamics. Hyperfiltration, an early functional
abnormality, is only a relative predictor for the development of renal failure.
Hyperglycemia causes glycosylation of glomerular proteins, which may be responsible for mesangial cell
proliferation and matrix expansion and vascular endothelial damage. The GBM classically becomes
thickened.
Lesions of diffuse or nodular intercapillary glomerulosclerosis are distinctive. There is marked hyalinosis
of afferent and efferent arterioles as well as arteriosclerosis; interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy may
be present. Only mesangial matrix expansion appears to correlate with progression to end-stage renal
disease.
DN begins as glomerular hyperfiltration (increased GFR); GFR normalizes with early renal injury and mild
hypertension, which worsens over time. Microalbuminuria, urinary excretion of albumin in a range of 30 to
300 mg albumin/day, then occurs. Urinary albumin in these concentrations is called microalbuminuria
because detection of proteinuria by dipstick on routine urinalysis usually requires > 300 mg albumin/day.
Microalbuminuria progresses to proteinuria > 0.5 g/day at a variable course, usually over years. Nephrotic
syndrome (proteinuria ≥ 3 g/day) precedes end-stage renal disease, on average, by about 3 to 5 yr, but
this timing is also highly variable. Other urinary tract abnormalities commonly occurring with DN that may
accelerate the decline of renal function include papillary necrosis, type IV renal tubular acidosis, and
UTIs. In DN, the kidneys are usually of normal size or larger.
Symptoms and Signs
DN is asymptomatic in early stages. Sustained microalbuminuria is the earliest warning sign.
Hypertension and some measure of dependent edema eventually develop in most untreated patients. In
later stages, patients develop symptoms and signs of uremia (eg, nausea, vomiting, anorexia) earlier (ie,
with higher GFR) than do patients without DN, possibly because the combination of end-organ damage
due to diabetes (eg, neuropathy) and renal failure worsens symptoms.
Diagnosis
• Screening of all patients with diabetes with random urine albumin/creatinine ratio
• Urinalysis for signs of other renal disorders (eg, hematuria, RBC casts)
===PAGE:2556===
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with diabetes who have proteinuria, particularly if they have
diabetic retinopathy (indicating small vessel disease) or risk factors for DN.
Other renal disorders should
be considered if there are any of the following:
• Heavy proteinuria with only a brief history of diabetes
• Absence of diabetic retinopathy
• Rapid onset of heavy proteinuria
• Gross hematuria
• RBC casts
• Rapid decline in GFR
• Small kidney size
Urinary protein:
Patients are tested for proteinuria by routine urinalysis; if proteinuria is present, testing
for microalbuminuria is unnecessary because the patient already has macroalbuminuria suggestive of
diabetic renal disease. In patients without proteinuria on urinalysis, an albumin/creatinine ratio should be
calculated from a mid-morning urine specimen. A ratio ≥ 0.03 mg/mg (≥ 30 mg/g) indicates
microalbuminuria if it is present on at least 2 of 3 specimens within 3 to 6 mo and if it cannot be explained
by infection or exercise. Some experts recommend that microalbuminuria be measured from a 24-h urine
collection, but this approach is less convenient, and many patients have difficulty accurately collecting a
specimen. The random urine albumin/creatinine ratio overestimates 24-h collection of microalbuminuria in
up to 30% of patients > 65 due to reduced creatinine production from reduced muscle mass. Inaccurate
results can also occur in very muscular patients or if vigorous exercise precedes urine collection.
For most patients with diabetes who have proteinuria, the diagnosis is clinical. Renal biopsy can confirm
the diagnosis but is rarely necessary.
Screening:
Patients with type 1 diabetes without known renal disease should be screened for proteinuria
and, if proteinuria is absent on routine urinalysis, for microalbuminuria, beginning 5 yr after diagnosis and
at least annually thereafter.
Patients with type 2 diabetes should be screened at the time of diagnosis and annually thereafter.
Prognosis
Prognosis is good for patients who are meticulously treated and monitored. Such care is often difficult in
practice, however, and most patients slowly lose renal function; even prehypertension (BP 120 to 139/80
to 89 mm Hg) or stage 1 hypertension (BP 140 to 159/90 to 99 mm Hg) may accelerate injury. Systemic
atherosclerotic disease (stroke, MI, peripheral arterial disease) predicts an increase in mortality.
Treatment
• Maintenance of glycosylated Hb (HbA
1c
) ≤ 7.0
• Aggressive BP control, beginning with angiotensin inhibition
Primary treatment is strict glucose control to maintain HbA
1c
≤ 7.0; maintenance of euglycemia reduces
microalbuminuria but may not retard disease progression once DN is well established. Glucose control
must also be accompanied by strict control of BP to < 130/80 mm Hg. Some experts suggest BP should
be 110 to 120/65 to 80 mm Hg, particularly in patients with protein excretion of > 1 g/day; however, others
claim that BP values < 120/85 mm Hg are associated with increased cardiovascular mortality and heart
failure. Dyslipidemia should also be treated.
===PAGE:2557===
Angiotensin inhibition
is first-line therapy. Thus, ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers are
the antihypertensives of choice; they reduce BP and proteinuria and slow the progression of DN. ACE
inhibitors are usually less expensive, but angiotensin II receptor blockers can be used instead if ACE
inhibitors cause persistent cough. Treatment should be started when microalbuminuria is detected
regardless of whether hypertension is present; some experts recommend drugs be used even before
signs of renal disease appear.
Diuretics
are required by most patients in addition to angiotensin inhibition to reach target BP levels.
Dose should be decreased if symptoms of orthostatic hypotension develop or serum creatinine increases
by more than 30%.
Nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers
(diltiazem and verapamil) are also antiproteinuric and
renoprotective and can be used if proteinuria does not meaningfully decrease when target BP is reached
or as alternatives for patients with hyperkalemia or other contraindications to ACE inhibitors or
angiotensin II receptor blockers. In contrast, dihydropyridine Ca channel blockers (eg, nifedipine,
felodipine, amlodipine) are relatively contraindicated because they may worsen proteinuria and renal
function. ACE inhibitors and nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers have greater antiproteinuric and
renoprotective effects when used together, and their antiproteinuric effect is enhanced by Na restriction.
Nondihydropyridine Ca channel blockers should be used with caution in patients taking
β
-blockers.
Dietary protein restriction
yields mixed results. The American Diabetic Association recommends that
people with diabetes and overt nephropathy be restricted to 0.8 g protein/kg/day. Significant protein
restriction
should be done only with close dietary monitoring to ensure a balanced supply of amino acids,
because undernutrition may be a significant risk.
Kidney transplantation
with or without simultaneous or subsequent pancreas transplantation ( is an option for patients with end-stage renal disease. The 5-yr survival rate for patients with type 2
diabetes receiving a kidney transplant is almost 60%, compared with 2% for dialysis-dependent patients
who do not undergo transplantation (though this statistic probably represents significant selection bias).
Renal allograft survival rate is > 85% at 2 yr.
Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is scattered (segmental) mesangial sclerosis in
some but not all (focal) glomeruli. It is most often idiopathic but may be secondary to use of
heroin or other drugs, HIV infection, obesity, sickle cell disease, atheroembolic disease, or
nephron loss (eg, in reflux nephropathy or subtotal nephrectomy). It manifests mainly in
adolescents but also in young and middle-aged adults. Patients have insidious onset of
proteinuria, mild hematuria, hypertension, and azotemia. Diagnosis is confirmed by renal
biopsy. Treatment is with angiotensin inhibition and, for idiopathic disease, corticosteroids and
sometimes cytotoxic drugs.
FSGS is now the most common cause of idiopathic (or primary) nephrotic syndrome among adults in the
US. It is especially common in black men. Though usually idiopathic, FSGS can occur in association with
other factors (secondary FSGS), including drugs (eg, heroin, interferon alfa, pamidronate, cyclosporine,
or acetaminophen or NSAIDs [causing analgesic nephropathy]), atheroembolic disease affecting the
kidneys, obesity, HIV infection (, and disorders causing nephron loss (eg, reflux nephropathy,
subtotal nephrectomy, renal dysgenesis). Familial cases exist.
In FSGS, because charge as well as size ultrafiltration barriers are defective, proteinuria is typically
nonselective, affecting high molecular-weight proteins (eg, Igs) as well as albumin. Kidneys tend to be
small.
Symptoms and Signs
FSGS patients commonly present with heavy proteinuria, hypertension, renal dysfunction, edema, or a
combination; however, asymptomatic, non-nephrotic-range proteinuria is sometimes the only sign.
===PAGE:2558===
Microscopic hematuria is occasionally present.
Diagnosis
• Renal biopsy, when possible, with immunostaining and electron microscopy
FSGS is suspected in patients with nephrotic syndrome, proteinuria, or renal dysfunction with no obvious
cause, particularly patients who have disorders or use drugs associated with FSGS.
Urinalysis is done and BUN, serum creatinine, and 24-h urinary protein excretion are measured.
Diagnosis is confirmed by renal biopsy, which shows focal and segmental hyalinization of the glomeruli,
often with immunostaining showing IgM and complement (C3) deposits in a nodular and coarse granular
pattern. Electron microscopy reveals diffuse effacement of podocyte foot processes. Global sclerosis may
be visible, along with secondary atrophic glomeruli. Biopsy may be falsely negative if areas of focal
abnormalities are not sampled.
Prognosis
Prognosis is poor. Spontaneous remissions occur in < 10% of patients. Renal failure occurs in > 50% of
patients within 10 yr; in 20%, end-stage renal disease occurs within 2 yr despite treatment. The disorder
is more rapidly progressive in adults than in children. The presence of segmental sclerosis consistently at
the glomerular pole where the tubule originates (tip lesion) may portend a more favorable response to
corticosteroid therapy. Another variant, in which the capillary walls are wrinkled or collapsed (collapsing
glomerulopathy, which is typical in association with IV drug abuse or HIV infection), suggests more severe
disease and rapid progression to renal failure. Pregnancy may exacerbate FSGS.
FSGS may recur after renal transplantation; proteinuria sometimes returns within hours of transplantation.
Of patients whose transplant was for end-stage renal disease caused by FSGS, about 8 to 20% lose their
graft due to recurrent FSGS; risk is highest in young children, patients who develop renal failure < 3 yr
after disease onset, and patients with mesangial proliferation.
Heroin addicts with nephrotic syndrome due to FSGS can experience complete remission if they cease
taking heroin early in the disease.
Treatment
• Angiotensin inhibition
• Corticosteroids and sometimes cytotoxic drugs for idiopathic FSGS
Treatment often is not effective. Patients with FSGS should be treated with angiotensin inhibition (an ACE
inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker) unless contraindicated by angioedema or hyperkalemia.
Patients with nephrotic syndrome should be treated with a statin. In patients with secondary FSGS, the
primary disorder should be treated. A trial of immunosuppressive therapy is indicated in idiopathic FSGS
if proteinuria reaches the nephrotic range or if any degree of renal dysfunction is present.
Immunosuppressive therapy:
Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 1 mg/kg po once/day or 2 mg/kg every
other day) are recommended for at least 2 mo, although some experts recommend use for up to 9 mo.
Response rates of 30 to 50% have been reported with prolonged therapy. After a 2-wk remission of
proteinuria, the corticosteroid is slowly tapered over ≥ 2 mo. Secondary and familial cases are more likely
to be corticosteroid-resistant.
If only slight improvement or relapse occurs with corticosteroid therapy, cyclosporine (1.5 to 2 mg/kg po
bid for 6 mo) or, alternatively, mycophenolate mofetil (750 to 1000 mg po bid for 6 mo in patients > 1.25
m
BSA or 600 mg/m
BSA bid up to 1000 mg bid) may induce remission. In patients with
contraindications to high-dose corticosteroids (eg, diabetes, osteoporosis), cyclosporine can be given
along with a lower dose of corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 0.15 mg/kg po once/day). An alternative is
plasmapheresis with tacrolimus immunosuppression.
===PAGE:2559===
HIV-Associated Nephropathy
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is characterized by clinical findings similar to those of focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis and often biopsy features of collapsing glomerulopathy (a variant
of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis).
HIVAN seems to be more common among black patients with HIV who are injection drug users. Infection
of renal cells with HIV may contribute.
Most clinical findings are similar to those of FSGS, but hypertension is less common and the kidneys
remain enlarged. Most patients experience rapid progression to end-stage renal disease within 1 to 4 mo.
Diagnosis
• Renal biopsy
HIVAN is suspected in patients with nephrotic syndrome or nephropathy who have AIDS or symptoms of
AIDS. HIVAN should be distinguished from the many other disorders that occur with higher frequency in
HIV-infected patients and cause renal disease, such as thrombotic microangiopathy (hemolyticuremic
syndrome and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura), immune complex-mediated glomerulonephritis, and
drug-induced interstitial nephritis (due to indinavir and ritonavir) and rhabdomyolysis (due to statins).
In HIVAN, ultrasonography, if done, shows that the kidneys are enlarged and highly echogenic. Renal
biopsy typically is done. Light microscopy shows capillary collapse of varying severity (collapsing
glomerulopathy) and differing degrees of increased mesangial matrix. Tubular cells show marked
degenerative changes and tubular atrophy or microcytic dilation. Interstitial immune cell infiltrate, fibrosis,
and edema are common. Tubular reticular inclusions, similar to those in SLE, are found within endothelial
cells but are now rare with more effective HIV therapy. Normotension and persistently enlarged kidneys
help to differentiate HIVAN from FSGS.
Treatment
• Antiretroviral therapy and ACE inhibitors
Control of the HIV infection may help minimize renal damage. ACE inhibitors are probably of some benefit.
The role of corticosteroids is not well defined. Dialysis is usually required. At some centers, outcomes
after transplantation have been excellent.
Membranous Nephropathy
Membranous nephropathy (MN) is deposition of immune complexes on the GBM with GBM
thickening. Cause is usually unknown, altions, autoimmune disorders, and cancer.
Manifestations include insidious onset of edema and heavy proteinuria with benign urinary
sediment, normal renal function, and normal or elevated BP. Diagnosis is by renal biopsy.
Spontaneous remission is common. Treatment of patients at high risk of progression is usually
with corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide or chlorambucil.
MN mostly affects adults, in whom it is a common cause of nephrotic syndrome.
Etiology
MN is usually idiopathic but may be secondary to any of the following:
•
Drugs (eg, gold, penicillamine, NSAIDs)
• Infections (eg, hepatitis B virus infection, syphilis)
===PAGE:2560===
• Autoimmune disorders (eg, SLE)
• Thyroiditis
• Cancer
• Parasitic diseases (eg, malaria, schistosomiasis, leishmaniasis)
Depending on the patient's age, 4 to 20% have an underlying cancer, including solid cancers of the lung,
colon, stomach, breast, or kidney; Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lymphoma; chronic lymphocytic leukemia; and
melanoma.
MN is rare in children and, when it occurs, is usually due to hepatitis B virus infection or SLE.
Renal vein thrombosis is especially frequent in MN but is usually clinically silent unless it progresses to
pulmonary embolism.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients typically present with edema and nephrotic-range proteinuria and occasionally with microscopic
hematuria and hypertension. Symptoms and signs of a disorder causing MN (eg, a cancer) may be
present initially.
Diagnosis
• Renal biopsy
• Evaluation for secondary causes
Diagnosis is suggested by development of nephrotic syndrome, particularly in patients who have potential
causes of MN. The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy.
Proteinuria is in the nephrotic range in 80%. Laboratory testing is done as indicated for nephrotic
syndrome. The GFR, if measured, is normal or decreased. Immune complexes are seen as dense
deposits on electron microscopy (see
Fig. 235-1
). Subepithelial dense deposits occur with early disease, with spikes of lamina densa between
the deposits. Later, deposits appear within the GBM, and marked thickening occurs. A diffuse, granular
pattern of IgG deposition occurs along the GBM without cellular proliferation, exudation, or necrosis.
Evaluation of patients diagnosed with MN usually includes the following:
• A search for occult cancer, particularly in a patient who has lost weight, has unexplained anemia or
heme-positive stools, or is elderly
• Consideration of drug-induced MN
• Hepatitis B and C serologic testing
• Antinuclear antibody testing
The search for occult cancer is usually limited to age-appropriate screening (eg, colonoscopy for patients
age > 50 or with other symptoms or risk factors, mammogram for women age > 40, prostate-specific
antigen measurement for men age > 50 [age > 40 for blacks], chest x-ray and possibly chest CT for
patients at risk of lung cancer).
Prognosis
About 25% of patients undergo spontaneous remission, 25% develop persistent, nonnephrotic-range
===PAGE:2561===
proteinuria, 25% develop persistent nephrotic syndrome, and 25% progress to end-stage renal disease.
Women, children, and young adults with non-nephrotic-range proteinuria and patients with persistently
normal renal function 3 yr after diagnosis tend to have little disease progression. More than 50% of
patients with nephrotic-range proteinuria who are asymptomatic or who have edema that can be
controlled with diuretics will have a partial or complete remission within 3 to 4 yr.
Risk of progression to renal failure is highest among patients with
• Proteinuria ≥ 10 g/day, particularly men age > 50 yr
• An elevated serum creatinine level at presentation or diagnosis
• Biopsy evidence of substantial interstitial inflammation
Treatment
• Treatment of secondary causes and of nephrotic syndrome as indicated
• Immunosuppressive therapy for patients at high risk of progression
Primary treatment is that of the causes. Among patients with idiopathic MN, asymptomatic patients with
non-nephrotic-range proteinuria do not require treatment; renal function should be monitored periodically
(eg, twice yearly when apparently stable). Patients with nephrotic-range proteinuria who are
asymptomatic or who have edema that can be controlled with diuretics should be treated for nephrotic
syndrome. Patients with hypertension should be given an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker;
these drugs may also benefit patients without hypertension by reducing proteinuria.
Immunosuppressive therapy:
Immuno suppressants should be considered only for patients with
symptomatic idiopathic nephrotic syndrome and for those most at risk of progressive disease. Older and
chronically ill patients are at greater risk of infectious complications from immunosuppressants. No
consensus protocol exists, but one approach
[Fig. 235-1.
Electron microscopic features in immunologic glomerular disorders.]
uses methylprednisolone 1 g IV for 3 days, after which prednisone 0.5 mg/kg po once/day is given for the
next 27 days. The following month, chlorambucil 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg po once/day is given for 1 mo. These 2
monthly regimens are alternated for a total of 6 mo. This protocol remains controversial and should be
used with caution, especially in the elderly because of the increased risk of infection. Some experts favor
use of combinations of cyclophosphamide and corticosteroids because of their better safety profile.
For patients who are intolerant of cytotoxic drugs or who do not respond to them, cyclosporine 4 to 6
mg/kg po once/day for 4 mo may be beneficial. Therapies of unproven long-term value include IV immune
globulin and NSAIDs.
Minimal Change Disease
(Lipoid Nephrosis; Nil Disease)
Minimal change disease (MCD) causes abrupt onset of edema and heavy proteinuria, mostly in
children. Renal function is typically normal. Diagnosis is based on clinical findings or renal
biopsy. Prognosis is excellent. Treatment is with corticosteroids or, in patients who do not
respond, cyclophosphamide or cyclosporine.
MCD is the most common cause of nephrotic syndrome in children 4 to 8 yr (80 to 90% of childhood
nephrotic syndrome), but it also occurs in adults (10 to 20% of adult nephrotic syndrome). The cause is
almost always unknown, although rare cases may occur secondary to drug use (especially NSAIDs) and
hematologic cancers (especially Hodgkin lymphoma).
===PAGE:2562===
MCD causes nephrotic syndrome, usually without hypertension or azotemia; microscopic hematuria
occurs in about 20% of patients, mainly adults. Azotemia can occur in secondary cases and in patients >
60 yr. Albumin is lost in the urine of patients with MCD more so than larger serum proteins probably
because MCD causes changes in the charge barrier that affect albumin selectively.
Diagnosis
• Renal biopsy in adults with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome
In children, the following:
• Sudden onset of unexplained nephrotic-range proteinuria that is mainly albumin
• Normal renal function
• Non-nephritic urine sediment
• Renal biopsy in atypical cases
Renal biopsy is required in atypical cases and in adults. Electron microscopy demonstrates edema with
diffuse swelling (effacement) of foot processes of the epithelial podocytes (see
Fig. 235-1
). Complement
and Ig deposits are absent on immunofluorescence. Although effacement is not observed in the absence
of proteinuria, heavy proteinuria may occur with normal foot processes.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
• Sometimes cyclophosphamide or cyclosporine
Spontaneous remissions occur in 40% of cases, but most patients are given corticosteroids. About 80 to
90% of patients respond to initial corticosteroid therapy (eg, prednisone 60 mg/m
po once/day for 4 to 6
wk in children and 1 to 1.5 mg/kg po once/day for 6 to 8 wk in adults), but 40 to 60% of responders
relapse. Patients who respond (ie, have cessation of proteinuria or a diuresis if edema is present) should
continue prednisone for another 2 wk and change to a maintenance regimen to minimize toxicity (2 to 3
mg/kg on alternate days for 4 to 6 wk in children and for 8 to 12 wk in adults, tapering during the next 4
mo). More prolonged initial therapy and slower tapering of prednisone lower relapse rates.
Nonresponsiveness may be due to underlying focal sclerosis that was missed on biopsy due to sampling
error.
In corticosteroid nonresponders (< 5% of children and > 10% of adults), frequent relapsers, and
corticosteroid-dependent patients, prolonged remission may be achieved with an oral cytotoxic drug
(usually cyclophosphamide 2 to 3 mg/kg once/day for 12 wk or chlorambucil 0.15 mg/kg once/day for 8
wk). However, these drugs may suppress gonadal function (most serious in prepubertal adolescents),
cause hemorrhagic cystitis, have mutagenic potential, and suppress bone marrow and lymphocyte
function. Dosage should be monitored with frequent CBCs, and hemorrhagic cystitis should be sought by
urinalysis. Adults, particularly if older or hypertensive, are more prone to adverse effects from these
cytotoxic drugs. Another alternative is cyclosporine 3 mg/kg po bid, adjusted to obtain a whole-blood
trough concentration of 50 to 150
μ
g/L (40 to 125 nmol/L).
Complete remission occurs in > 80% of patients treated with corticosteroids, and treatment is usually
continued for 1 to 2 yr. However, half or more relapse, requiring treatment with the same or a different
regimen. Patients responsive to cyclosporine frequently relapse when the drug is stopped.
Most patients who are unresponsive to these interventions respond to alternative therapies, including
ACE inhibitors, thioguanine, levamisole, azathioprine, and mycophenolate mofetil; < 5% progress to renal
failure.
===PAGE:2563===
Nephritic and Nephrotic Syndromes
Several glomerular disorders typically manifest with features of both nephritic and nephrotic syndromes.
These disorders include fibrillary and immunotactoid glomerulopathies, membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis (GN), and lupus nephritis.
Fibrillary and Immunotactoid Glomerulopathies
Fibrillary and immunotactoid glomerulopathies are rare conditions defined pathologically by
organized deposition of nonamyloid microfibrillar or microtubular structures within the renal
mesangium and basement membrane.
Fibrillary and immunotactoid glomerulopathies are thought by some experts to be related disorders. They
are found in about 0.6% of renal biopsy specimens, occur equally in men and women, and have been
described in patients ≥ 10 yr. Average age at diagnosis is about 45. Mechanism is unknown, although
deposition of immunoglobulin, particularly IgG
κ
and
λ
light chains and complement (C3), suggests
immune system dysfunction. Patients may have accompanying paraproteinemia, cryoglobulinemia,
plasma cell dyscrasia, hepatitis C infection, or SLE, or they may have a primary renal disease without
evidence of systemic disease.
All patients have proteinuria, > 60% in the nephrotic range. Microscopic hematuria is present in about
60%; hypertension, in about 70%. Slightly > 50% have renal insufficiency at presentation.
Diagnosis
• Renal biopsy
Diagnosis is suggested by laboratory data and confirmed by renal biopsy. If nephrotic syndrome is
present, testing is done as for other cases of nephrotic syndrome. Urinalysis usually shows features of
nephritic and nephrotic syndromes. Serum C3 and C4 are usually measured and are occasionally
decreased. Light microscopy of a biopsy specimen shows
mesangial expansion by amorphous
eosinophilic deposits and mild mesangial hypercellularity. Various other changes may be present on light
microscopy (eg, crescent formation, membranoproliferative patterns). Congo red staining is negative for
amyloid. Immunostaining reveals IgG and C3 and sometimes
κ
and
λ
light chains in the area of the
deposits. Electron microscopy shows glomerular deposits consisting of extracellular, elongated, nonbranching microfibrils or microtubules. The diameter of the microfibrils and microtubules varies from 9 nm
to > 50 nm. Some experts distinguish immunotactoid from fibrillary glomerulopathy by the presence of
microtubular (as opposed to smaller microfibrillar) structures in the deposits; others distinguish them by
the presence of a related systemic illness such as a paraproteinemia, cryoglobulinemia, or SLE in
immunotactoid GN.
Prognosis
The condition is usually slowly progressive with renal insufficiency, progressing to end-stage renal
disease in 50% of patients within 2 to 4 yr. A more rapid decline is predicted within the presence of
hypertension, nephrotic-range proteinuria, and renal insufficiency at presentation.
Treatment
Evidence to support specific treatments is lacking. Immunosuppressants have been used based on
anecdotal evidence; success may be greater with corticosteroids when serum complement is decreased.
Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis
(Mesangiocapillary Glomerulonephritis; Lobular Glomerulonephritis)
Membranoproliferative GN is a heterogeneous group of disorders that share mixed nephritic
and nephrotic features and microscopic findings. They mostly affect children. Cause is immune
===PAGE:2564===
complex deposition that is idiopathic or secondary to a systemic disorder. Diagnosis is by renal
biopsy. Prognosis is generally poor. Treatment, when indicated, is with corticosteroids and
antiplatelet drugs.
Membranoproliferative GN is a group of immune-mediated disorders characterized histologically by
glomerular basement membrane (GBM) thickening and proliferative changes on light microscopy. There
are 3 types, each of which may have primary (idiopathic) or secondary causes. Primary forms affect
children and young adults between ages 8 and 30 and account for 10% of cases of nephrotic syndrome
in children; secondary causes tend to affect adults > 30. Men and women are affected equally. Reported
familial cases of some types suggest genetic factors play a role in at least some cases. Many factors
contribute to hypocomplementemia.
Type I
(mesangial proliferation with immune deposits) accounts for 80 to 85% of cases. The idiopathic
form is rare. Type I most commonly occurs secondary to one of the following:
• Systemic immune complex disorder (eg, SLE, mixed cryoglobulinemia, Sjogren's syndrome)
• Chronic infection (eg, bacterial endocarditis, HIV infection, hepatitis B or C infection, visceral abscess,
ventriculoatrial shunt infection)
• Cancer (eg, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, lymphomas, melanoma)
• Other disorders (eg, partial lipodystrophy, C2 or C3 deficiencies, sarcoidosis, thrombotic
microangiopathies)
Type II
(similar to type I with less mesangial proliferation and with GBM dense deposits) accounts for 15
to 20%. It is probably an autoimmune disorder in which an IgG autoantibody (C3 nephritic factor) binds C3
convertase, rendering C3 resistant to inactivation; immunofluorescent staining identifies C3 around dense
deposits and in mesangium.
Type III
is thought to be a disorder similar to type I and accounts for few cases. Cause is unknown but
may be related to immune complex (IgG, C3) deposition. An IgG autoantibody against the terminal
component of complement is found in 70% of patients. Subepithelial deposits can occur focally and
appear to disrupt the GBM.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are those of nephrotic syndrome in 60 to 80% of cases. Symptoms and signs of
nephritic syndrome (acute GN) are presenting features in 15 to 20% of cases of type I and III disease and
in a higher percentage of type II disease. At diagnosis, 30% of patients have hypertension and 20% have
renal insufficiency; hypertension often develops even before GFR declines. Patients with type II disease
have a greater incidence of ocular abnormalities (basal laminar drusen, diffuse retinal pigment alterations,
diskiform macular detachment, choroidal neovascularization), which ultimately impair vision.
Diagnosis
• Renal biopsy
• Serum complement profile
• Serologic tests
Diagnosis is confirmed by renal biopsy, but other tests are done.
Serum complement profiles
are more frequently abnormal in membranoproliferative GN than in other
glomerular disorders and provide supportive evidence of the diagnosis. C3 levels are often low. In type I
disease, C3 is depressed more often than C4 at diagnosis and decreases further during follow-up, but
eventually normalizes. In type II disease, C3 is more frequently and severely reduced. In type III disease,
===PAGE:2565===
C3 is reduced but C4 is normal. C3 nephritic factor is detectable in 80% of patients with type II and in
some patients with type I disease. Terminal complement nephritic factor is detectable in 20% of patients
with type I, rare patients with type II, and 70% of patients with type III disease.
Serologic tests
(eg, for SLE, hepatitis B and C virus, and cryoglobulinemia) are warranted to check for
secondary causes of type I disease.
CBC, often obtained in the course of diagnostic evaluation, demonstrates normochromicnormocytic
anemia, often out of proportion to the stage of renal insufficiency (possibly because of hemolysis), and
thrombocytopenia from platelet consumption.
Prognosis
Prognosis is good if a condition causing secondary membranoproliferative GN is successfully treated.
Idiopathic type I membranoproliferative GN often progresses slowly; type II progresses more rapidly. In
general, the long-term prognosis is poor. End-stage renal disease occurs in 50% of patients at 10 yr and
in 90% at 20 yr. Spontaneous remission occurs in < 5% with type II. Type I membranoproliferative GN
recurs in 30% of kidney transplantation patients; type II recurs in 90%. Outcome tends to be worse if
proteinuria is in the nephrotic range.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids for children with nephrotic-range proteinuria
• Dipyridamole and aspirin for adults
Underlying disorders are treated when possible. Specific therapy is probably not indicated in patients with
non-nephrotic-range proteinuria because the disorder usually progresses slowly.
Among children with nephrotic-range proteinuria, treatment with corticosteroids, eg, prednisone 2.5 mg/kg
po once/day on alternate days (maximum 80 mg/day) for 1 yr, followed by tapering to a maintenance dose
of 20 mg on alternate days for 3 to 10 yr, may stabilize renal function. However, corticosteroid treatment
may retard growth and cause hypertension.
Among adults, dipyridamole (225 mg po once/day) with aspirin (975 mg po once/day) for 1 yr may
stabilize renal function at 3 to 5 yr, but at 10 yr there is no difference from placebo. Studies of antiplatelet
therapy yield inconsistent results.
Alternate therapies are sometimes substituted for the usual treatments (eg, corticosteroids could
exacerbate underlying hepatitis C). Alternative therapies include pegylated interferon alfa 2A or 2B (with
addition of ribavirin if creatinine clearance is > 50 mL/min) for hepatitis C virus-associated disease and
plasmapheresis with corticosteroids for concomitant severe cryoglobulinemia or rapidly progressive GN.
ACE inhibitors may decrease proteinuria and help control hypertension.
Lupus Nephritis
Lupus nephritis is GN caused by SLE. Clinical findings include hematuria, nephrotic-range
proteinuria, and, in advanced stages, azotemia. Diagnosis is based on renal biopsy. Treatment is
of the underlying disorder and usually involves corticosteroids and cytotoxic or other
immunosuppressant drugs.
Lupus nephritis is diagnosed in about 50% of SLE patients ( and typically develops within 1 yr
of diagnosis. However, the total incidence is probably > 90%, because renal biopsy in patients with
suspected SLE without clinical evidence of renal disease shows changes of GN.
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiology involves immune complex deposition with development of GN. The immune complexes
===PAGE:2566===
consist of nuclear antigens (especially DNA), high-affinity complement-fixing IgG antinuclear antibodies,
and antibodies to DNA. Subendothelial, intramembranous, subepithelial, or mesangial deposits are
characteristic. Wherever immune complexes are deposited, immunofluorescence staining is positive for
complement and for IgG, IgA, and IgM in varying proportions. Epithelial cells may proliferate, forming
crescents. Classification of lupus nephritis is based on histologic findings (see
Table 235-6
).
Antiphospholipid syndrome nephropathy:
This syndrome may occur with or without lupus nephritis in
up to one third of patients with SLE. In the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, circulating lupus
anticoagulant ( causes microthrombi, endothelial damage, and cortical ischemic atrophy.
Antiphospholipid syndrome nephropathy increases a patient's risk of hypertension and renal insufficiency
or failure compared with lupus nephritis alone.
Symptom and Signs
The most prominent symptoms and signs are those of SLE; patients who present with renal disease may
have edema, foaming urine, hypertension, or a combination.
Diagnosis
• Urinalysis and serum creatinine (all patients with SLE)
• Renal biopsy
Diagnosis is suspected in all patients with SLE, particularly in patients who have proteinuria, microscopic
hematuria, RBC casts, or hypertension. Diagnosis is also suspected in patients with unexplained
hypertension, elevated serum creatinine levels, or abnormalities on urinalysis who have clinical features
suggesting SLE.
Urinalysis is done and serum creatinine is measured. If either is abnormal, renal biopsy is usually done to
confirm the diagnosis and classify the disorder histologically. Histologic
[Table 235-6.
Classification of Lupus Nephritis]
classification helps determine prognosis and direct treatment.
Some of the histologic subtypes are similar to other glomerulopathies; eg, membranous and diffuse
proliferative lupus nephritis are histologically similar to idiopathic membranous GN and type I
membranoproliferative GN, respectively. Overlap between these categories is substantial, and patients
may progress from one class to another over time.
Renal function and SLE activity should be monitored regularly. A rising serum creatinine level reflects
deteriorating renal function, while a falling serum complement level or a rising anti-DNA antibody titer
suggests increased disease activity.
Prognosis
Class of nephritis influences renal prognosis (see
Table 235-6
), as do other renal histologic features.
Renal biopsies are scored with a semiquantitative activity score and with a chronicity index.
The
activity score
describes the degree of inflammation. The score is based on cellular proliferation,
fibrinoid necrosis, cellular crescents, hyaline thrombi, wire loop lesions, glomerular leukocyte infiltration,
and interstitial mononuclear cell infiltration.
The
chronicity index
describes the degree of scarring. It is based on presence of glomerular sclerosis,
fibrous crescents, tubular atrophy, and interstitial fibrosis. The chronicity index predicts progression of
lupus nephritis to renal failure. A mild to moderate chronicity score suggests at least partially reversible
disease, whereas more severe chronicity scores may indicate irreversible disease. The activity score is
===PAGE:2567===
less well correlated with disease progression, perhaps because it is based on the degree of inflammation,
which is more reversible with treatment.
Patients with lupus nephritis are at high risk of cancers, primarily B-cell lymphomas. Risk of
atherosclerotic complications (eg, coronary artery disease, ischemic stroke) is also high, because of
frequent vasculitis, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and use of corticosteroids.
Treatment
• Angiotensin inhibition for hypertension or proteinuria
• Cyclophosphamide and prednisone for active, potentially reversible nephritis
Immunosuppression:
Treatment is toxic and thus is reserved for nephritis that has the following
characteristics:
• Is active
• Has the potential for a poor prognosis
• Is potentially reversible
Activity is estimated by the activity score as well as clinical criteria (eg, urine sediment, increasing urine
protein, increasing serum creatinine). Many experts believe that a mild to moderate chronicity score,
because it suggests reversibility, should provoke more aggressive therapy than a more severe chronicity
score. Nephritis with the potential for deterioration and for reversibility is usually class III or IV; it is unclear
whether class V nephritis warrants aggressive treatment.
Treatment usually combines cytotoxic drugs, corticosteroids, and sometimes other immunosuppressants.
Induction is with cyclophosphamide, which is usually given in IV boluses (monthly for up to 6 mo)
beginning with 0.75 g/m
in a saline solution over 30 to 60 min and, assuming a WBC count > 3000/
μ
L,
increasing to a maximum of 1 g/m
. Oral or IV fluid administration to create rapid urine flow minimizes the
bladder toxicity of cyclophosphamide, as does mesna (. Prednisone is begun at 60 to 80 mg
po once/day and tapered according to response to 20 to 25 mg every other day over 6 to 12 mo. The
amount of prednisone is determined by the extrarenal manifestations and number of relapses. Relapses
are usually treated with increasing doses of prednisone.
Many experts are replacing the more toxic cyclophosphamide maintenance regimens (after induction with
6 or 7 monthly IV cyclophosphamide doses) with protocols using mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg to 1 g po
bid) or azathioprine (2 mg/kg po once/day, maximum 150 to 200 mg/day). Chlorambucil, cyclosporine, and
tacrolimus have also been used, but relative efficacies are not clear. Low-dose prednisone (0.05 to 0.2
mg/kg po once/day) is continued and titrated based on disease activity. Duration of maintenance therapy
is at least 1 yr.
Other treatments:
Angiotensin inhibition with an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker is
indicated for patients with even mild hypertension (eg, BP > 130/80 mm Hg) or proteinuria. Also,
hyperlipidemia and risk factors for atherosclerosis should be treated aggressively.
Anticoagulation is of theoretical benefit for patients with antiphospholipid syndrome nephropathy, but the
value of such treatment has not been established.
===PAGE:2568===
Chapter 236. Tubulointerstitial Diseases
Introduction
Tubulointerstitial diseases are clinically heterogeneous disorders that share similar features of tubular
and interstitial injury. In severe and prolonged cases, the entire kidney may become involved, with
glomerular dysfunction and even renal failure. The primary categories of tubulointerstitial disease are
acute tubular necrosis and acute or chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis.
Pathophysiology
The kidneys are exposed to unusually high concentrations of toxins. The kidneys have the highest blood
supply of all tissues (about 3.5 mL/g/min), and unbound solutes leave the circulation via glomerular
filtration at ≥ 100 mL/min; as a result, toxic agents are delivered at a rate 50 times that of other tissues
and in much higher concentrations. When urine is concentrated, the luminal surfaces of tubular cells may
be exposed to molecule concentrations 300 to 1000 times greater than those of plasma. The fine brush
border of proximal tubular cells exposes an enormous surface area. A countercurrent flow mechanism
increases ionic concentration of the interstitial fluid of the medulla (and thereby increases urine
concentration) up to 4 times the plasma concentration.
In addition, factors can affect cellular vulnerability after exposure to toxins. Tubular transport mechanisms
separate drugs from their binding proteins, which normally protect cells from toxicity. Transcellular
transport exposes the interior of the cell and its organelles to newly encountered chemicals. Binding sites
of some agents (eg, sulfhydryl groups) may facilitate entry but retard exit (eg, heavy metals). Chemical
reactions (eg, alkalinization, acidification) may alter transport in either direction. Blockade of transport
receptors may alter tissue exposure (eg, diuresis from blockade of adenosine A1 receptors may decrease
exposure). Finally, the kidneys have the highest O
and glucose consumption per gram of tissue and are
therefore vulnerable to toxins affecting cell energy metabolism.
Acute Tubular Necrosis
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) is kidney injury characterized by acute tubular cell injury and
dysfunction. Common causes are hypotension causing renal hypoperfusion and nephrotoxic
drugs. The condition is asymptomatic unless it causes renal failure. The diagnosis is suspected
when azotemia develops after a hypotensive event, severe sepsis, or drug exposure and is
distinguished from prerenal azotemia by laboratory testing and response to volume expansion.
Treatment is supportive.
Causes of ATN include the following:
• Hypotension (ischemic ATN; common)
• Nephrotoxins (common)
• Sepsis (common)
• Major surgery
• Third-degree burns covering > 15% of BSA
• The heme pigments myoglobin and hemoglobin (uncommon)
• Disorders resulting in other endogenous toxins, such as tumor lysis or multiple myeloma (uncommon)
• Poisons, such as ethylene glycol (uncommon)
• Herbal and folk remedies, such as ingestion of fish gallbladder in Southeast Asia (uncommon)
===PAGE:2569===
Common nephrotoxins include the following:
• Aminoglycosides
• Amphotericin B
• Cisplatin
• Radiocontrast (particularly agents with osmolality > 100 mL)
• NSAIDs
Massive volume loss, particularly in patients with septic or hemorrhagic shock or pancreatitis or in
patients who have had serious surgery, increases the risk of ischemic ATN; patients with serious
comorbidities are at highest risk. Serious surgery and advanced hepatobiliary disease, poor perfusion
states, and advanced age increase the risk of aminoglycoside toxicity. Certain drug combinations (eg,
aminoglycosides with amphotericin B) may be especially nephrotoxic. NSAIDs may cause several types of
intrinsic kidney disease, including ATN. Toxic exposures cause patchy, segmental, tubular luminal
occlusion with casts and cellular debris or segmental tubular necrosis.
ATN is more likely to develop in patients with the following:
• Baseline creatinine clearance < 47 mL/min
• Diabetes mellitus
• Preexisting hypovolemia or poor renal perfusion
Symptoms and Signs
ATN is usually asymptomatic but may cause symptoms or signs of acute renal failure, typically oliguria
( initially.
Diagnosis
• Differentiation from prerenal azotemia, based mainly on laboratory findings and, in the case of blood or
fluid loss, response to volume expansion
ATN is suspected when serum creatinine rises ≥ 0.5 mg/dL/day above baseline after an apparent trigger
(eg, hypotensive event, exposure to a nephrotoxin); the rise in creatinine may occur days after exposure
to some nephrotoxins. ATN must be differentiated from prerenal azotemia because treatment differs. In
prerenal azotemia, renal perfusion is decreased enough to elevate serum BUN out of proportion to
creatinine, but not enough to cause ischemic damage to tubular cells. Prerenal azotemia can be caused
by direct intravascular fluid loss (eg, from hemorrhage, GI tract or urinary losses) or by a relative
decrease in effective circulating volume
without
loss of total body fluid (eg, in heart failure, portal
hypertension with ascites). If fluid loss is the cause, volume expansion using IV normal saline solution
normalizes serum creatinine level. If ATN is the cause, IV saline typically causes no rapid change in serum
creatinine.
Laboratory findings also help distinguish ATN from prerenal azotemia (see
Table 236-1
).
Prognosis
In otherwise healthy patients, prognosis is good when the underlying insult is corrected; serum creatinine
typically returns to normal or near-normal within 1 to 3 wk. In sick patients, even when acute renal failure
is mild, morbidity and mortality are increased. Prognosis is better in patients who do not require ICU care
===PAGE:2570===
(32% mortality) than in those who do (72% mortality). Predictors of mortality include mainly decreased
urine volume (eg, anuria, oliguria) and severity of the underlying illness and comorbid disorders.
Cause of death is usually infection or the underlying disorder.
Treatment
• Supportive care
Treatment is supportive and includes stopping nephrotoxins whenever possible, maintenance of
euvolemia, nutritional support, and treatment of infections (preferably with drugs that are not nephrotoxic).
Diuretics are commonly used to maintain urine output in oliguric ATN but are of unproven benefit; there is
no evidence to support use of mannitol or dopamine. General management of acute renal failure is
discussed elsewhere.
Prevention
Prevention includes the following:
• Maintaining euvolemia and renal perfusion in critically ill patients
• Avoiding nephrotoxic drugs when possible
• Closely monitoring renal function when nephrotoxic drugs must be used
• Taking measures to prevent contrast nephropathy
• Among patients with diabetes, controlling blood sugar levels
There is no evidence that loop diuretics, mannitol, or dopamine helps prevent ATN.
[Table 236-1.
Laboratory Findings Distinguishing Acute Tubular Necrosis From Prerenal Azotemia]
Contrast Nephropathy
Contrast nephropathy is worsening of renal function after IV administration of radiocontrast and
is usually temporary. Diagnosis is based on a progressive rise in serum creatinine 24 to 48 h
after contrast is given. Treatment is supportive. Volume loading with isotonic saline before and
after contrast administration may help in prevention.
All iodinated radiocontrast agents are nephrotoxic. However, risk is lower with newer contrast agents,
which have a lower osmolality than older agents, whose osmolality is about 1400 to 1800 mOsm/kg. For
example, 2nd-generation, low-osmolal agents (eg, iohexol, iopamidol, ioxaglate) have an osmolality of
about 500 to 850 mOsm/kg, which is still higher than blood osmolality. Iodixanol, the first of the even
newer iso-osmolal agents, has an osmolality of 290 mOsm/kg, about equal to that of blood.
The precise mechanism of radiocontrast toxicity is unknown but is suspected to be some combination of
renal vasoconstriction and direct cytotoxic effects, perhaps through formation of reactive O
species,
causing ATN.
Risk factors:
Risk factors for nephrotoxicity are the following:
• Older age
• Preexisting renal insufficiency (eg, serum creatinine > 1.5 mg/dL)
• Diabetes mellitus
===PAGE:2571===
• Heart failure
• Multiple myeloma
• High doses (eg, > 100 mL) of a hyperosmolar contrast agent (eg, during percutaneous coronary
interventions)
• Factors that reduce renal perfusion, such as volume depletion or the concurrent use of NSAIDs or ACE
inhibitors
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on a progressive rise in serum creatinine 24 to 48 h after a contrast study. Most
patients have no symptoms. Renal function typically later returns to normal.
After femoral artery catheterization, contrast nephropathy may be difficult to distinguish from renal
atheroembolism. Factors that can suggest renal atheroemboli include the following:
• Delay in onset of increased creatinine > 48 h after the procedure
• Presence of other atheroembolic findings (eg, in skin, toes)
• Persistently poor renal function
• Transient eosinophilia or eosinophiluria and low complement levels (measured if atheroemboli are
seriously considered)
Treatment
Treatment is supportive.
Prevention
Prevention involves avoiding contrast when possible (eg, not using CT to diagnose appendicitis) and,
when contrast is necessary, using the agent with the lowest osmolality for patients with risk factors. When
contrast is given, mild volume expansion with isotonic NaCl (ie, 154 mEq/L) is recommended; 1 mL/kg/h is
given beginning 6 to 12 h before contrast is given and continued for 6 to 12 h after the procedure.
Infusion of NaHCO
has no proven advantage over normal saline and may even be harmful. Nephrotoxic
drugs are avoided before and after the procedure. Acetylcysteine is an antioxidant that may be helpful;
protocols vary, but acetylcysteine, 600 mg po bid the day before and the day of the procedure, may be
given, combined with NaCl infusion. Acetylcysteine and volume expansion may be most helpful in patients
with mild preexisting renal disease and exposure to a low dose of contrast.
Periprocedural continuous venovenous hemofiltration has no proven benefit compared with other less
invasive strategies in preventing acute kidney injury in patients who have chronic kidney disease and who
require high doses of contrast and also is not practical. Therefore, this procedure is not recommended.
Patients undergoing regular hemodialysis for end-stage renal disease who require contrast do not need
supplementary, prophylactic hemodialysis after the procedure.
Tubulointerstitial Nephritis
Tubulointerstitial nephritis is primary injury to renal tubules and interstitium resulting in
decreased renal function. The acute form is most often due to allergic drug reactions or to
infections. The chronic form occurs with a diverse array of causes, including genetic or
metabolic disorders, obstructive uropathy, and chronic exposure to environmental toxins or to
certain drugs and herbs. Diagnosis is suggested by history and urinalysis and often confirmed
by biopsy. Treatment and prognosis vary by the etiology and potential reversibility of the
===PAGE:2572===
disorder at the time of diagnosis.
Etiology
Tubulointerstitial nephritis can be primary, but a similar process can result from glomerular damage (see
p.
) or renovascular disorders (.
Primary tubulointerstitial nephritis may be
• Acute (see
Table 236-2
)
• Chronic (see
Table 236-3
)
Acute tubulointerstitial nephritis (ATIN):
ATIN involves an inflammatory infiltrate and edema affecting
the renal interstitium that often develops over days to months. Over 95% of cases result from infection or
an allergic drug reaction. A syndrome of ATIN associated with uveitis (renal-ocular syndrome) also occurs
and is idiopathic. ATIN causes acute renal insufficiency or failure; severe cases, delayed therapy, or
continuance of an offending drug can lead to permanent injury with chronic renal failure.
[Table 236-2.
Causes of Acute Tubulointerstitial Nephritis]
[Table 236-3.
Causes of Chronic Tubulointerstitial Nephritis]
Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis (CTIN):
CTIN arises when chronic tubular insults cause gradual
interstitial infiltration and fibrosis, tubular atrophy and dysfunction, and a gradual deterioration of renal
function, usually over years. Glomerular involvement (glomerulosclerosis) is much more common in CTIN
than in ATIN. Causes of CTIN are myriad; they include immunologically mediated disorders, infections,
reflux or obstructive nephropathy, drugs, and other disorders. CTIN due to toxins, metabolic
derangements, hypertension, and inherited disorders results in symmetric and bilateral disease; with
other causes, renal scarring may be unequal and involve only one kidney. Some well-characterized forms
of CTIN include analgesic, metabolic, heavy metal, and reflux nephropathy and myeloma kidney
(hereditary cystic kidney diseases are discussed in
Chapter 234
).
Symptoms and Signs
ATIN:
Symptoms and signs of ATIN may be nonspecific and are often absent unless symptoms and signs
of renal failure develop. Many patients develop polyuria and nocturia (due to a defect in urinary
concentration and Na reabsorption). Symptom onset may be as long as several weeks after initial toxic
exposure or as soon as 3 to 5 days after a 2nd exposure; extremes in latency range from 1 day with
rifampin to 18 mo with an NSAID. Fever and urticarial rash are characteristic early manifestations of druginduced ATIN, but the classically described triad of fever, rash, and eosinophilia is insensitive. Abdominal
pain, weight loss, and bilateral renal masses (caused by interstitial edema) may also occur in ATIN and
with fever may mistakenly suggest renal cancer or polycystic kidney disease. Peripheral edema and
hypertension are uncommon unless renal insufficiency or renal failure occurs.
CTIN:
Symptoms and signs are generally absent in CTIN unless renal failure develops. Edema usually is
not present, and BP is normal or only mildly elevated in the early stages. Polyuria and nocturia may
develop.
Diagnosis
• Risk factors
• Active urinary sediment, particularly with sterile pyuria (including eosinophils)
• Sometimes biopsy
===PAGE:2573===
Few clinical and routine laboratory findings are specific. Thus, suspicion should be high when the
following are present:
• Typical symptoms or signs
• Risk factors, particularly a temporal relationship between onset and use of a potentially causative drug
• Characteristic urinalysis findings, particularly sterile pyuria (including eosinophils)
• Modest proteinuria, usually < 1 g/day (except with use of NSAIDs, which may cause nephrotic-range
proteinuria)
• Evidence of tubular dysfunction (eg, renal tubular acidosis, Fanconi syndrome)
Other tests (eg, imaging) may be necessary to differentiate ATIN or CTIN from other disorders. Renal
biopsy is sometimes done.
ATIN:
Signs of active kidney inflammation (active urinary sediment), including RBCs, WBCs, and WBC
casts, and absence of bacteria on culture (sterile pyuria) are typical; marked hematuria and dysmorphic
RBCs are uncommon. Eosinophiluria has a positive predictive value of 50% (specificity of about 85 to
93%) and a negative predictive value of up to 90% for ATIN (sensitivity of about 63 to 91%). Thus, the
presence of urinary eosinophils is not diagnostic, but their absence significantly decreases the likelihood
of the diagnosis. Proteinuria is usually minimal but may reach nephrotic range with combined ATINglomerular disease induced by NSAIDs, ampicillin, rifampin, interferon alfa, or ranitidine. Blood test
findings of tubular dysfunction include hypokalemia (caused by a defect in K reabsorption) and a
nonanion gap metabolic acidosis (caused by a defect in HCO
reabsorption or acid excretion).
Ultrasonography, radionuclide scanning, or both may be needed to differentiate ATIN from other causes of
acute renal failure, such as acute tubular necrosis. In ATIN, ultrasonography may show kidneys that are
greatly enlarged and echogenic because of interstitial inflammatory cells and edema. Radionuclide scans
may show kidneys avidly taking up radioactive gallium-67 or radionuclide-labeled WBCs. Positive scans
strongly suggest ATIN (and indicate that acute tubular necrosis is less likely), but a negative scan does
not exclude ATIN.
Renal biopsy
is usually reserved for patients with the following:
• An uncertain diagnosis
• Progressive renal injury
• No improvement after potential causative drugs are stopped
In ATIN, glomeruli are usually normal. The earliest finding is interstitial edema, typically followed by
interstitial infiltration with lymphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils, and a few PMNs. In severe cases,
inflammatory cells can be seen invading the space between the cells lining the tubular basement
membrane (tubulitis); in other specimens, granulomatous reactions resulting from exposure to methicillin,
sulfonamides, mycobacteria, or fungi may be seen. The presence of noncaseating granulomas suggests
sarcoidosis. Immunofluorescence or electron microscopy seldom reveals any pathognomonic changes.
CTIN:
Findings of CTIN are generally similar to those of ATIN, although urinary RBCs and WBCs are
uncommon. Because CTIN is insidious in onset and interstitial fibrosis is common, imaging tests may
show small kidneys with evidence of scarring and asymmetry.
In CTIN, renal biopsy is not often done for diagnostic purposes but has helped characterize the nature
and progression of tubulointerstitial disease. Glomeruli vary from normal to completely destroyed. Tubules
may be absent or atrophied. Tubular lumina vary in diameter but may show marked dilation, with
homogeneous casts. The interstitium contains varying degrees of inflammatory cells and fibrosis.
===PAGE:2574===
Nonscarred areas appear almost normal. Grossly, the kidneys are small and atrophic.
Prognosis
In drug-induced ATIN, renal function usually recovers within 6 to 8 wk when the offending drug is stopped,
although some residual scarring is common. Recovery may be incomplete, with persistent azotemia above
baseline. When other factors cause ATIN, histologic changes usually are reversible if the cause is
recognized and removed; however, some severe cases progress to fibrosis and renal
failure. Regardless
of cause, irreversible injury is suggested by the following:
• Diffuse rather than patchy interstitial infiltrate
• Significant interstitial fibrosis
• Delayed response to prednisone
• Acute kidney injury lasting > 3 wk
In CTIN, prognosis depends on the cause and on the ability to recognize and stop the process before
irreversible fibrosis occurs. Many genetic (eg, cystic kidney disease), metabolic (eg, cystinosis), and toxic
(eg, heavy metal) causes may not be modifiable, in which case CTIN usually evolves to end-stage renal
disease.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Corticosteroids for immune-mediated and sometimes drug-induced tubulointerstitial nephritis
Treatment of both ATIN and CTIN is management of the cause. For immunologically induced disease in
ATIN and perhaps CTIN and sometimes drug-induced ATIN, corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 1 mg/kg po
once/day with gradual tapering of the dose over 4 to 6 wk) may accelerate recovery. Treatment of CTIN
often requires supportive measures such as controlling BP and treating anemia associated with kidney
disease. In patients with CTIN and progressive renal injury, ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor
blockers may slow disease progression.
Analgesic Nephropathy
Analgesic nephropathy (AN) is CTIN caused by cumulative lifetime use of large amounts (eg, ≥ 2
kg) of certain analgesics.
AN was originally described in conjunction with overuse of combination analgesics containing phenacetin
(typically with aspirin, acetaminophen, codeine, or caffeine). However, despite removal of phenacetin
from the market, AN continued to occur. Studies to identify the causal agent are equivocal, but
acetaminophen, aspirin, and other NSAIDs have been implicated. Mechanism is unclear. Whether COX-2
inhibitors cause AN is not known, but these drugs probably can cause ATIN and nephrotic syndrome due
to minimal change disease or membranous nephropathy.
AN predominates in women (peak incidence, 50 to 55 yr) and, in the US, is responsible for 3 to 5% of
cases of end-stage renal disease (13 to 20% in Australia and South Africa).
Patients present with renal insufficiency and usually non-nephrotic proteinuria with a bland urinary
sediment or sterile pyuria. Hypertension, anemia, and impaired urinary concentration are common once
renal insufficiency develops. Flank pain and hematuria are signs of papillary necrosis that occur late in
the course of disease. Chronic complaints of musculoskeletal pain, headache, malaise, and dyspepsia
may be related to long-term analgesic use rather than AN.
Diagnosis is based on history of chronic analgesic use and noncontrast CT. CT signs of AN are the
===PAGE:2575===
following:
• Decreased renal size
• Bumpy contours, defined as at least 3 indentations in the normally convex outline of the kidney
• Papillary calcifications
The combination of these findings has a sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 93% for early diagnosis,
but these specificity and sensitivity numbers are based on studies done when use of phenacetincontaining analgesics was widespread.
Renal function stabilizes when analgesics are stopped unless renal insufficiency is advanced, in which
case it may progress to renal failure. Patients with AN are at greater risk of transitional cell carcinomas of
the urinary tract.
Metabolic Nephropathies
Tubulointerstitial disorders can result from several metabolic disturbances.
Acute urate nephropathy:
This disorder is not a true form of ATIN but rather an intraluminal obstructive
uropathy caused by uric acid crystal deposition within the lumen of renal tubules; acute oliguric or anuric
kidney injury results. Causes include the following:
• Tumor lysis syndrome ( after treatment of lymphoma, leukemia, or other myeloproliferative
disorders (the most common cause)
• Seizures
• Treatment of solid tumors
• Rare primary disorders of urate overproduction (hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribo-syltransferase
deficiency) or overexcretion due to decreased proximal tubule reabsorption (Fanconi-like syndromes).
Typically, no symptoms are present. Diagnosis is suspected when acute kidney injury occurs in patients
with marked hyperuricemia (> 15 mg/dL). Urinalysis results may be normal or may show urate crystals.
Prognosis for complete recovery of renal function is excellent if treatment is initiated
rapidly. Treatment is
usually with allopurinol plus aggressive IV hydration in patients with normal cardiac and renal function.
Supportive measures are indicated. Hemodialysis may be recommended to remove excess circulating
urate in severe cases where diuresis cannot be induced with a loop diuretic and IV saline.
Prevention is indicated for patients at high risk (eg, those at risk of tumor lysis syndrome). Prevention is
by use of allopurinol 300 mg po bid to tid plus saline loading to maintain a urine output > 2.5 L/day before
chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Urate oxidase (rasburicase), which catalyzes urate to a much more
soluble compound, is also preventive and is being more commonly used in patients with severe
hyperuricemia. However, patients given rasburicase must be carefully monitored because the drug must
be given IV and can cause anaphylaxis, hemolysis, and other adverse effects.
Chronic urate nephropathy:
This condition is CTIN caused by deposition of Na urate crystals in the
medullary interstitium in patients with chronic hyperuricemia. Sequelae are chronic inflammation and
fibrosis, with ensuing chronic renal insufficiency and renal failure. Chronic urate nephropathy was once
common in patients with tophaceous gout but is now rare because gout is more often effectively treated.
A bland urine sediment and hyperuricemia disproportionate to the degree of renal insufficiency (eg, urate
> 9 mg/dL with serum creatinine < 1.5 mg/dL, or > 10 mg/dL with serum creatinine 1.5 to 2 mg/dL, and >
12 mg/dL with more advanced renal failure) are suggestive but nonspecific; many causes of
tubulointerstitial diseases may have these findings, lead nephropathy being the most common. Treatment
is that of hyperuricosuria (.
===PAGE:2576===
Hyperoxaluria:
Hyperoxaluria is a common cause of nephrolithiasis but an uncommon cause of acute
and chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis. Causes and prevention of hyperoxaluria are discussed elsewhere
(.
Hypercalcemia:
Hypercalcemia ( causes nephropathy by 2 mechanisms. Severe (> 12
mg/dL) temporary hypercalcemia may cause reversible renal insufficiency by renal vasoconstriction and
natriuresis-induced volume depletion. Long-standing hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria lead to CTIN with
calcification and necrosis of tubular cells, interstitial fibrosis, and calcification (nephrocalcinosis).
Common associated findings include
• Nephrolithiasis
• Renal tubular acidosis
• Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Diagnosis is based on presence of hypercalcemia and unexplained renal insufficiency; nephrocalcinosis
can be detected by ultrasonography or noncontrast CT. Treatment is management of hypercalcemia.
Chronic hypokalemia:
Chronic hypokalemia of a moderate to severe degree may cause nephropathy
with impaired urinary concentration and vacuolation of proximal tubular cells and occasionally of distal
tubular cells. Chronic interstitial inflammatory changes, fibrosis, and renal cysts have been found in renal
biopsies of patients with hypokalemia of ≥ 1 mo. Treatment consists of correction of the underlying
disorder and oral K supplements. Although the hypokalemia as well as the number and size of the cysts
are reversible, the CTIN and renal insufficiency may be irreversible.
Heavy Metal Nephropathy
Exposure to heavy metals and other toxins can result in tubulointerstitial disorders.
Lead:
CTIN results as lead accumulates in proximal tubular cells. Short-term lead exposure causes
proximal tubular dysfunction, including decreased urate secretion and hyperuricemia (urate is the
substrate for saturnine gout), aminoaciduria, and renal glucosuria. Chronic lead exposure (ie, for 5 to ≥ 30
yr) causes progressive tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis, with renal insufficiency, hypertension, and
gout. However, chronic low-level exposure may cause renal insufficiency and hypertension independent
of tubulointerstitial disease. The following groups are at highest risk:
• Children exposed to lead paint dust or chips
• Welders
• Battery workers
• Drinkers of moonshine alcohol
Exposed children may develop nephropathy during adulthood.
Hyperuricemia disproportionate to the degree of renal insufficiency (eg, urate > 9 mg/dL with serum
creatinine < 1.5 mg/dL, or > 10 mg/dL with serum creatinine 1.5 to 2 mg/dL, and > 12 mg/dL with more
advanced renal failure) and a bland urinary sediment are common. Diagnosis is usually made by
measuring whole blood lead levels. Alternatively, x-ray fluorescence may be used to detect increased
bone lead concentrations, which reflect high cumulative lead exposure. Treatment with chelation therapy
( can stabilize renal function, but recovery may be incomplete.
Cadmium:
Cadmium from contaminated water, food, and tobacco and, mainly, from
workplace exposures
can cause nephropathy. It can also cause a glomerulopathy that is usually asymptomatic. Early
manifestations of cadmium nephropathy are those of tubular dysfunction, including low molecular weight
===PAGE:2577===
tubular proteinuria (eg,
β
-microglobulin), aminoaciduria, and renal glucosuria. Symptoms and signs,
when they occur, are attributable to chronic renal insufficiency and failure. Renal disease follows a doseresponse curve. Diagnosis is likely with the following:
• History of occupational exposure
• Increased levels of urinary
β
-microglobulin (missed by urinary dipstick protein testing but detected
using radioimmunoassay)
• Increased urinary cadmium levels (> 7
μ
g/g creatinine)
Treatment is elimination of cadmium exposure; chelation with Na calcium edetate (EDTA) may increase
cadmium nephrotoxicity. Tubular proteinuria usually is irreversible.
Other heavy metals:
Other heavy metals that are nephrotoxic include
• Copper
• Gold
• Uranium
• Arsenic
• Iron
• Mercury
• Bismuth
• Chromium
All cause tubular damage and dysfunction (eg, tubular proteinuria, aminoaciduria) as well as tubular
necrosis, but glomerulopathies may predominate with some compounds (mercury, gold). Treatment
involves removal of the patient from further exposure and either or both of the following:
• Chelating agents (copper, arsenic, bismuth)
• Dialysis (chromium, arsenic, bismuth), often used when chelation fails or simultaneously with chelation
for severe arsenic poisoning
Reflux Nephropathy
Reflux nephropathy is renal scarring presumably induced by vesicoureteral reflux of infected
urine into the renal parenchyma. The diagnosis is suspected in children with UTI or a family
history. Diagnosis is by voiding cystourethrography or radionuclide cystography. Children with
moderate or severe reflux are treated with prophylactic antibiotics or surgical correction.
Traditionally, the mechanism of renal scarring has been thought to be chronic pyelonephritis. However,
reflux is probably the single most important factor, and factors unrelated to reflux or pyelonephritis (eg,
congenital factors) can contribute. Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) affects about 1% of newborns and 30 to
45% of young children with a febrile UTI (; it is common among children with renal scars and,
for unknown reasons, is less common among black children than white children. Familial predisposition is
common. Children with gross reflux (up to the renal pelvis plus ureteral dilatation) are at highest risk of
scarring and subsequent renal failure.
Reflux requires incompetent ureterovesical valves or mechanical obstruction in the lower urinary tract.
Young children with shorter intravesical portions of the ureter are most susceptible; normal growth usually
===PAGE:2578===
results in spontaneous cessation of intrarenal and vesicoureteral reflux by age 5. New scars in children >
5 yr are unusual but may occur after acute pyelonephritis.
Symptoms and Signs
Few symptoms and signs other than occasional UTI are present in young children, and the diagnosis is
often overlooked until adolescence, when patients present with polyuria, nocturia, hypertension,
symptoms and signs of renal insufficiency, laboratory abnormalities, or a combination.
Diagnosis
• Voiding cystourethrography or radionuclide cystography
The diagnosis may be suspected prenatally or postnatally. Diagnosis and staging of reflux nephropathy
(prenatal or postnatal presentation) are made by a voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG), which can
demonstrate the degree of ureteral dilatation. Radionuclide cystography (RNC) can also be used; it
provides less anatomic detail than VCUG but involves less radiation exposure. Because these tests
involve catheterization (and risk of UTI) as well as radiation exposure, thresholds for obtaining them can
be controversial. Renal scarring is diagnosed with technetium-99m-labeled dimercaptosuccinic acid
(DMSA) radionuclide scanning.
Prenatal presentation:
The diagnosis is suspected prenatally if ultrasonography, done because of a
family history or for unrelated reasons, shows hydronephrosis; 10 to 40% of such patients are diagnosed
postnatally with VUR. Some experts recommend VCUG or RNC only if family history is strong or if
postnatal renal ultrasonography is markedly or persistently abnormal; however, it is not clear whether
renal ultrasonography is sufficiently sensitive to detect VUR. DMSA scanning
is typically done in
neonates (as well as infants < 6 mo) who have worrisome UTIs (eg, febrile or recurrent UTIs).
Postnatal presentation:
VUR is suspected postnatally in patients with any of the following:
• UTI at age ≤ 3 yr
• Febrile UTI at age ≤ 5 yr
• Recurrent UTIs in children
• UTI in males
• Strong family history, such as a sibling with VUR (controversial)
• Adults (or children > 5 yr) with recurrent UTI in whom renal ultrasonography reveals scarring or a urinary
tract anatomic abnormality
Laboratory abnormalities may include proteinuria, Na wasting, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, renal
insufficiency, or a combination. Testing for these patients is with RNC or VCUG. DMSA scanning may be
done for infants or children with UTIs as listed above.
In older children in whom reflux is no longer active, a VCUG may not show reflux, although the DMSA
scan shows scarring; cystoscopy can demonstrate evidence of previous reflux at ureteral orifices. Thus,
DMSA scanning and cystoscopy may be done if prior reflux is suspected but not confirmed. Renal biopsy
at this late stage shows CTIN and focal glomerulosclerosis, the cause of mild (1 to 1.5 g/day) to
nephrotic-range proteinuria.
Treatment
• Usually prophylactic antibiotics
• Surgical treatment if VUR is moderate or severe
===PAGE:2579===
Treatment is based on the unproven assumption that decreasing reflux and UTIs prevents renal scarring.
Children with very mild VUR require no treatment, but they should be closely observed for symptoms of
UTI. Children with moderate reflux are usually given antibiotics. However, drug therapy predisposes to
new episodes of acute pyelonephritis, and it is not clear whether prophylactic antibiotics are more
effective than close observation. Patients with severe reflux are at higher risk of renal insufficiency and
are usually given antibiotic prophylaxis or undergo surgical interventions, including ureteral reimplantation
or endoscopic injection of materials behind the ureter to prevent reflux (bladder contraction during voiding
compresses the ureter between the bladder and the material). Incidence of new renal scars is similar in
patients treated with surgery and with drugs.
Reflux spontaneously resolves in about 80% of young children within 5 yr.
Myeloma-Related Kidney Disease
Patients with multiple myeloma overproduce monoclonal Ig light chains (Bence Jones
proteins); these light chains are filtered by glomeruli, are nephrotoxic, and can damage virtually
all areas of the kidney parenchyma. Diagnosis is by urine tests (sulfosalicylic acid test or
protein electrophoresis) or renal biopsy. Treatment focuses on the multiple myeloma and
ensuring adequate urine flow.
Tubulointerstitial and glomerular damage are the most common types of renal damage. The mechanisms
by which light chains damage nephrons directly are unknown. Hypercalcemia contributes to renal
insufficiency by decreasing renal blood flow.
Tubulointerstitial disease:
Light chains saturate the reabsorptive capacity of the proximal tubule, reach
the distal nephron, and combine with filtered proteins and Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein (secreted by cells
of the thick ascending limb of Henle) to form obstructive casts. The term myeloma kidney or myeloma
cast nephropathy generally refers to renal insufficiency caused by the tubulointerstitial damage that
results. Factors that predispose to cast formation include the following:
• Low urine flow
• Radiocontrast agents
• Hyperuricemia
• NSAIDs
• Elevation of luminal NaCl concentration (eg, due to a loop diuretic)
• Increased intratubular Ca from the hypercalcemia that often occurs secondary to bone lysis in multiple
myeloma
Other types of tubulointerstitial lesions that occur with Bence Jones proteinuria include proximal tubular
transport dysfunction causing Fanconi syndrome and light chain interstitial deposition with inflammatory
infiltrates and active tubular damage.
Glomerulopathies:
Myeloma glomerulopathy has 2 common mechanisms: primary (AL) amyloidosis (see
also p.
) and glomerular light chain or rarely heavy chain deposition. AL amyloidosis results in
glomerular deposition of AL amyloid in the mesangial, subepithelial, or subendothelial areas or a
combination. Amyloid deposition is with randomly oriented, nonbranching fibrils composed of the variable
regions of
λ
light chains. Light chain deposition disease (LCDD), which also can occur with lymphoma
and Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, is glomerular deposition of nonpolymerized light
chains (ie,
without fibrils), generally the constant regions of
κ
chains.
Rarely, a nonproliferative, noninflammatory glomerulopathy that causes nephrotic-range proteinuria can
develop in advanced myeloma-related renal disease. A proliferative glomerulonephritis occasionally
===PAGE:2580===
develops as an early form of LCDD with progression to membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and
nodular glomerulopathy reminiscent of diabetic nephropathy; nephrotic-range proteinuria is common.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are predominantly those of the myeloma (eg, skeletal pain, pathologic fractures,
diffuse osteoporosis) and a normochromic-normocytic anemia.
Diagnosis
• Urine sulfosalicylic acid test or urine protein electrophoresis (myeloma kidney)
• Biopsy (glomerulopathy)
Diagnosis of myeloma-related kidney disease is suggested by the following combination of findings:
• Renal insufficiency
• Bland urine sediment
• Negative or trace-positive dipstick for protein (unless urine albumin is elevated in a patient with an
accompanying nephrotic syndrome)
The diagnosis should be suspected even in patients without a history of or findings suggesting multiple
myeloma. Diagnosis of light chain tubulointerstitial disease (myeloma kidney) is confirmed by a markedly
positive urine sulfosalicylic acid test suggesting significant nonalbumin proteins, by urine protein
electrophoresis (UPEP), or both. Diagnosis of glomerulopathy is confirmed by renal biopsy. Renal biopsy
may demonstrate light chain deposition in 30 to 50% of patients with myeloma despite the absence of
detectable serum or urine paraproteins by immuno-electrophoresis.
Prognosis
Kidney disease is a major predictor of overall prognosis in multiple myeloma. Prognosis is good for
patients with tubulointerstitial and glomerular LCDD who receive treatment. Prognosis is worse for
patients with AL amyloidosis, in whom amyloid deposition continues and progresses to renal failure in
most cases. In either form without treatment, virtually all renal lesions progress to renal failure.
Treatment
• Management of multiple myeloma
• Prevention of volume depletion and maintenance of a high urine flow rate
Management of multiple myeloma (, prevention of volume depletion, and maintenance of a
high urine flow rate are the primary treatments. In addition, factors that worsen renal function (eg,
hypercalcemia, hyperuricemia, use of nephrotoxic drugs) should be avoided or treated. Several measures
are often recommended but are of unproven efficacy. Plasmapheresis may be tried to remove light chains.
Alkalinization of the urine to help change the net charge of the light chain and reduce charge interaction
with Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein may make the light chains more soluble. Colchicine may be given to
decrease secretion of Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein into the lumen and to decrease the interaction with
light chains, thus decreasing toxicity. Loop diuretics may be avoided to prevent volume depletion and high
distal Na concentrations that can worsen myeloma-related kidney disease (loop diuretics are indicated if
hypercalcemia is present).
===PAGE:2581===
Chapter 237. Renal Transport Abnormalities
Introduction
Many substances are secreted or reabsorbed in the renal tubule system, including electrolytes, protons,
HCO
molecules, and free water. Dysfunction of these processes can result in clinical syndromes.
Syndromes are inherited, acquired, or both. Syndromes that almost always manifest in childhood (eg,
Bartter syndrome, Gitelman's syndrome, cystinuria, Hartnup disease, and hypophosphatemic rickets) are
discussed in
Chapter 297
.
Fanconi Syndrome
Fanconi syndrome consists of multiple defects in renal proximal tubular reabsorption, causing
glucosuria, phosphaturia, generalized aminoaciduria,
and HCO
wasting. Symptoms in children
are failure to thrive, growth retardation, and rickets. Symptoms in adults are osteomalacia and
muscle weakness. Diagnosis is by showing glucosuria, phosphaturia, and aminoaciduria.
Treatment is HCO
replacement and measures directed at renal failure.
Etiology
Fanconi syndrome can be
• Hereditary
• Acquired
Hereditary Fanconi syndrome:
This disorder usually accompanies another genetic disorder,
particularly cystinosis. Cystinosis is an inherited (autosomal recessive) metabolic disorder in which
cystine accumulates within cells and tissues (and is not excreted to excess in the urine as occurs in
cystinuria—. Besides renal tubular dysfunction, other complications of cystinosis include eye
disorders, hepatomegaly, hypothyroidism, and other manifestations.
Fanconi syndrome may also accompany Wilson's disease, hereditary fructose intolerance, galactosemia,
glycogen storage disease, oculocerebrorenal syndrome (Lowe syndrome), mitochondrial cytopathies, and
tyrosinemia. Inheritance patterns vary with the associated disorder.
Acquired Fanconi syndrome:
This disorder may be caused by various drugs, including certain cancer
chemotherapy drugs (eg, ifosfamide, streptozocin), antiretrovirals (eg, didanosine, cidofovir), and
outdated tetracycline. All of these drugs are nephrotoxic. Acquired Fanconi syndrome also may occur after
renal transplantation and in patients with multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, intoxication with heavy metals or
other chemicals, or vitamin D deficiency.
Pathophysiology
Various defects of proximal tubular transport function occur, including impaired resorption of glucose,
phosphate, amino acids, HCO
, uric acid, water, K, and Na. The aminoaciduria is generalized, and, unlike
that in cystinuria, increased cystine excretion is a minor component. The basic pathophysiologic
abnormality is unknown but may involve a mitochondrial disturbance. Low levels of serum phosphate
cause rickets, which is worsened by decreased proximal tubular conversion of vitamin D to its active form.
Symptoms and Signs
In hereditary Fanconi syndrome, the chief clinical features—proximal tubular acidosis, hypophosphatemic
rickets, hypokalemia, polyuria, and polydipsia—usually appear in infancy.
When Fanconi syndrome occurs because of cystinosis, failure to thrive and growth retardation are
common. The retinas show patchy depigmentation. Interstitial nephritis develops, leading to progressive
===PAGE:2582===
renal failure that may be fatal before adolescence.
In acquired Fanconi syndrome, adults present with the laboratory abnormalities of renal tubular acidosis
(proximal type 2), hypophosphatemia, and hypokalemia. They may present with symptoms of bone
disease (osteomalacia) and muscle weakness.
Diagnosis
• Urine testing for glucose, phosphates, and amino acids
Diagnosis is made by showing the abnormalities of renal function, particularly glucosuria (in the presence
of normal serum glucose), phosphaturia, and aminoaciduria. In cystinosis, slit-lamp examination may
show cystine crystals in the cornea.
Treatment
• Sometimes NaHCO
or KHCO
or Na citrate or K citrate
• Sometimes K supplementation
Other than removing the offending nephrotoxin, there is no specific treatment. Acidosis may be lessened
by giving tablets or solutions of Na or K HCO
or citrate, eg, Shohl's solution (Na citrate and citric acid; 1
mL is equivalent to 1 mmol of HCO
) given 1 mEq/kg bid to tid or 5 to 15 mL after meals and at bedtime.
K depletion may require replacement therapy with a K-containing salt. Hypophosphatemic rickets can be
treated (. Renal transplantation has been successful in treating renal failure. However, when
cystinosis is the underlying disease, progressive damage may continue in other organs and eventually
result in death.
Liddle Syndrome
Liddle syndrome is a rare hereditary disorder in which the kidneys excrete K but retain too
much Na and water, leading to hypertension. Symptoms are of hypertension, fluid retention,
and metabolic alkalosis. Diagnosis is through measurement of urinary electrolytes. K-sparing
diuretics provide the best treatment.
Liddle syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder of renal epithelial transport that clinically
resembles primary aldosteronism
(, with hypertension and hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis but
without elevated plasma renin or aldosterone levels. The syndrome results from an inherently increased
activity of the luminal membrane Na channels, which accelerates Na resorption and K secretion in the
collecting tubule.
Patients with Liddle syndrome present at age < 35 yr. Hypertension and symptoms and signs of
hypokalemia ( and metabolic alkalosis occur.
Diagnosis
• Urine Na level
• Plasma renin and aldosterone levels
Diagnosis is suggested by the presence of hypertension in a young patient, particularly one with a
positive family history. Low urine Na (< 20 mEq), normal plasma renin and aldosterone levels, and
response to empiric treatment usually are considered sufficient to confirm the diagnosis. Definitive
diagnosis can be achieved through genetic testing.
Treatment
===PAGE:2583===
Triamterene 100 to 200 mg po bid and amiloride 5 to 20 mg po once/day are both effective because they
close Na channels. Spironolactone is ineffective.
Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
(See also Central Diabetes Insipidus )
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is an inability to concentrate urine due to impaired renal
tubule response to ADH (vasopressin), which leads to excretion of large amounts of dilute
urine. It can be inherited or occur secondary to conditions that impair renal concentrating ability.
Symptoms and signs include polyuria and those related to dehydration and hypernatremia.
Diagnosis is based on measurement of urine osmolality changes after water deprivation and
administration of exogenous ADH. Treatment consists of adequate free water intake, thiazide
diuretics, NSAIDs, and a low-salt, low-protein diet.
NDI is characterized by inability to concentrate urine in response to ADH. Central diabetes insipidus is
characterized by lack of ADH. Either type of diabetes insipidus may be complete or partial.
Etiology
NDI can be
• Inherited
• Acquired
Inherited NDI:
The most common inherited disorder is an X-linked trait that affects the arginine
vasopressin (AVP) receptor 2 gene. In rare cases, NDI is caused by an autosomal recessive or autosomal
dominant mutation that affects the aquaporin-2 gene. Except with the autosomal dominant form, patients
who are homozygous are completely unresponsive to ADH. Patients who are heterozygous have normal
or slightly impaired responsiveness to ADH.
Acquired NDI:
Acquired NDI can occur when disorders (some of them heritable) or drugs disrupt the
medulla or distal nephrons and impair urine concentrating ability, making the kidneys appear insensitive to
ADH. These disorders include the following:
• Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
• Nephronophthisis and medullary cystic kidney disease
• Sickle cell nephropathy
• Release of obstructing periureteral fibrosis
• Medullary sponge kidney
• Pyelonephritis
• Hypokalemic and hypercalcemic nephropathies
• Amyloidosis
• Sjogren's syndrome
• Bardet-Biedl syndrome
• Certain cancers (eg, myeloma, sarcoma)
===PAGE:2584===
• Many drugs, especially lithium, but also others (eg, demeclocycline, amphotericin B, aminoglycosides,
cidofovir, cisplatin, foscarnet, ifosfamide, methoxyflurane, ofloxacin, orlistat, rifampin)
Acquired NDI can also be idiopathic. A mild form of acquired NDI can occur in any patient who is elderly
or sick or who has acute or chronic renal insufficiency.
In addition, certain clinical syndromes can resemble NDI:
• The placenta can secrete vasopressinase during the 2nd half of pregnancy (a syndrome called
gestational diabetes insipidus).
• After pituitary surgery, some patients secrete an ineffective ADH precursor rather than ADH.
Symptoms and Signs
Generation of large amounts of dilute urine (3 to 20 L/day) is the hallmark. Patients
typically have a good
thirst response, and serum Na remains near normal. However, patients who do not have good access to
water or who cannot communicate thirst (eg, infants, elderly patients with dementia) typically develop
hypernatremia from extreme dehydration. Hypernatremia may cause neurologic symptoms, such as
neuromuscular excitability, confusion, seizures, or coma.
Infants with inherited NDI may develop brain damage with permanent intellectual disability if treatment
is not started early
. Even with treatment, physical growth is often retarded in affected children
presumably because of frequent dehydration.
Diagnosis
• 24-h urine volume and osmolality
• Serum electrolytes
• Water deprivation test
NDI is suspected in any patient with polyuria (see also p.
). Initial testing includes 24-h urine
collection (without fluid restriction) for volume and osmolality, and serum electrolytes.
Patients with NDI excrete > 50 mL/kg of urine/day (polyuria). If urine osmolality is < 300 mOsm/kg (water
diuresis), central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is likely. With NDI, urine osmolality is typically < 200
mOsm/kg despite clinical signs of hypovolemia (normally, urine osmolality is high in patients with
hypovolemia). If osmolality is > 300 mOsm/kg, solute diuresis is likely. Glucosuria and other causes of
solute diuresis must be excluded.
Serum Na is mildly elevated (142 to 145 mEq/L) in patients with adequate free water intake but can be
dramatically elevated in patients who do not have adequate access to free water.
The diagnosis is confirmed by a water deprivation test (, which assesses the maximum urine
concentrating ability and response to exogenous ADH. After 3 to 6 h of water deprivation, the maximal
osmolality of urine in patients with NDI is abnormally low (< 400 mOsm/kg, usually < 300 mOsm/kg). NDI
can be distinguished from central diabetes insipidus (lack of ADH) by administering exogenous ADH
(aqueous vasopressin 5 units sc or desmopressin 10
μ
g intranasally) and measuring urine osmolality. In
patients with central diabetes insipidus (, urine osmolality increases 50 to 100% over the 2 h
after administration of exogenous ADH (15 to 45% in partial central diabetes insipidus). Patients with NDI
usually have only a minimal rise in urine osmolality (< 50 mOsm/kg; up to 45% in partial NDI).
Treatment
• Adequate free water intake
===PAGE:2585===
• Restriction of dietary salt and protein
• Correction of the cause
• Sometimes a thiazide diuretic, an NSAID, or amiloride
Treatment consists of ensuring adequate free water intake; providing a low-salt, low-protein diet; and
correcting the cause or stopping any likely nephrotoxin. Serious sequelae are rare if patients can drink at
will.
If symptoms persist despite these measures, drugs can be given to lower urine output. Thiazide diuretics
(hydrochlorothiazide, 25 mg po once/day or bid) can paradoxically reduce urine output by diminishing
water delivery to ADH-sensitive sites in the collecting tubules. NSAIDs (eg, indomethacin) or amiloride can
also help.
Renal Glucosuria
(Renal Glycosuria)
Renal glucosuria is glucose in the urine without hyperglycemia; it results from either an
acquired or an inherited, isolated defect in glucose transport or occurs with other renal tubule
disorders.
Renal glucosuria is the excretion of glucose in the urine in the presence of normal blood glucose levels.
The inherited form usually involves a reduction in the glucose transport maximum (the maximum rate at
which glucose can be resorbed) and subsequent escape of glucose in the urine. The acquired form of
renal glucosuria occurs primarily in advanced chronic kidney disease.
The inherited disorder is usually transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait but is occasionally recessive.
Renal glucosuria may occur without any other abnormalities of renal function or as part of a generalized
defect in proximal tubule function (. It also may occur with various systemic disorders,
including Fanconi syndrome, cystinosis, Wilson's disease, hereditary tyrosinemia, and oculocerebrorenal
syndrome (Lowe syndrome).
Renal glucosuria is asymptomatic and without serious sequelae. However, if there is an associated
generalized defect in proximal tubular function, symptoms and signs may include hypophosphatemic
rickets, volume
depletion, short stature, muscle hypotonia, and ocular changes of cataracts or glaucoma
(oculocerebrorenal syndrome) or Kayser-Fleischer rings (Wilson's disease). With such findings, transport
defects other than glucosuria should be sought.
The disorder is typically initially noted on routine urinalysis. Diagnosis is based on finding glucose in a 24h urine collection (when the diet contains 50% carbohydrate) in the absence of hyperglycemia (serum
glucose < 140 mg/dL). To confirm that the excreted sugar is glucose and to exclude pentosuria,
fructosuria, sucrosuria, maltosuria, galactosuria, and lactosuria, the glucose oxidase method should be
used for all laboratory measurements. A normal result on an oral glucose tolerance test is also required
for the diagnosis according to some experts.
Isolated renal glucosuria is benign; no treatment is necessary.
Renal Tubular Acidosis
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is acidosis and electrolyte disturbances due to impaired renal
hydrogen ion excretion (type 1), impaired HCO
resorption (type 2), or abnormal aldosterone
production or response (type 4). (Type 3 is extremely rare and is not discussed.) Patients may
be asymptomatic, display symptoms and signs of electrolyte derangements, or progress to
chronic kidney disease. Diagnosis is based on characteristic changes in urine pH and
electrolytes in response to provocative testing. Treatment corrects pH and electrolyte
imbalances using alkaline agents, electrolytes, and, rarely, drugs.
===PAGE:2586===
RTA defines a class of disorders in which excretion of hydrogen ions or reabsorption of filtered HCO
is
impaired, leading to a chronic metabolic acidosis ( with a normal anion gap. Hyperchloremia is
usually present, and secondary derangements may involve other electrolytes, such as K (frequently) and
Ca (rarely—see
Table 237-1
).
Chronic RTA is often associated with structural damage to renal tubules and may progress to chronic
kidney disease (.
Type 1 (distal) RTA:
Type 1 is impairment in hydrogen ion secretion in the distal tubule, resulting in a
persistently high urine pH (> 5.5) and systemic acidosis. Plasma HCO
is usually < 15 mEq/L, and
hypokalemia, hypercalciuria, and decreased citrate excretion are often present. Hypercalciuria is the
primary abnormality in some familial cases, with Ca-induced tubulointerstitial damage causing distal RTA.
Nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis are possible complications of hypercalciuria and hypocitraturia if
urine is relatively alkaline.
This syndrome is rare. Sporadic cases occur most often in adults and may be primary (nearly always in
women) or secondary. Familial cases usually first manifest in childhood and are most often autosomal
dominant. Secondary type 1 RTA may result from various disorders, drugs, or kidney transplantation:
• Autoimmune disease with hypergamma-globulinemia, particularly Sjogren's syndrome or RA
• Kidney transplantation
• Nephrocalcinosis
• Medullary sponge kidney
• Chronic obstructive uropathy
[Table 237-1.
Some Features of Different Types of Renal Tubular Acidosis*]
•
Drugs (mainly amphotericin B, ifosfamide, and lithium)
• Cirrhosis
• Sickle cell anemia
K level may be high with chronic obstructive uropathy or sickle cell anemia.
Type 2 (proximal) RTA:
Type 2 is impairment in HCO
resorption in the proximal tubules, producing a
urine pH > 7 if plasma HCO
concentration is normal, and a urine pH < 5.5 if plasma HCO
concentration is already depleted from ongoing losses. This syndrome may occur as part of a generalized
dysfunction of proximal tubules and can be associated with increased urinary excretion of glucose, uric
acid, phosphate, amino acids, citrate, Ca, K, and protein. Osteomalacia or osteopenia (including rickets in
children) may develop. Mechanisms may include hypercalciuria, hyperphosphaturia, alterations in vitamin
D metabolism, and secondary hyperparathyroidism. Type 2 RTA is very rare and most often occurs in
patients who have one of the following:
• Fanconi syndrome
• Light chain nephropathy due to multiple myeloma
• Various drug exposures (usually acetazolamide, sulfonamides, ifosfamide, outdated tetracycline, or
streptozocin)
===PAGE:2587===
It sometimes has other etiologies, including vitamin D deficiency, chronic hypocalcemia with secondary
hyperparathyroidism, kidney transplantation, heavy metal exposure, and other inherited diseases (eg,
fructose intolerance, Wilson's disease, oculocerebrorenal syndrome [Lowe syndrome], cystinosis).
Type 4 (generalized) RTA:
Type 4 results from aldosterone deficiency or unresponsiveness of the distal
tubule to aldosterone. Because aldosterone triggers Na resorption in exchange for K and hydrogen, there
is reduced K excretion, causing hyperkalemia, and reduced acid excretion. Hyperkalemia may decrease
ammonia excretion, contributing to metabolic acidosis. Urine pH is usually appropriate for serum pH
(usually < 5.5 when there is serum acidosis). Plasma HCO
is usually > 17 mEq/L. This disorder is the
most common type of RTA. It typically occurs sporadically secondary to impairment in the
reninaldosterone-renal tubule axis (hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism), which occurs in patients with the
following:
• Diabetic nephropathy
• Chronic interstitial nephritis
Other factors that can contribute to type 4 RTA include the following:
• ACE inhibitor use
• Aldosterone synthase type I or II deficiency
• Angiotensin II receptor blocker use
• Chronic kidney disease, usually due to diabetic nephropathy or chronic interstitial nephritis
• Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, particularly 21-hydroxylase deficiency
• Critical illness
• Cyclosporine use
• Heparin use (including low molecular weight heparins)
• HIV nephropathy (due, possibly in part, to infection with
Mycobacterium avium
complex or
cytomegalovirus)
• Interstitial renal damage (eg, due to SLE, obstructive uropathy, or sickle cell disease)
• K-sparing diuretics (eg, amiloride, eplere-none, spironolactone, triamterene)
• NSAID use
• Obstructive uropathy
• Other drugs (eg, pentamidine, trimethoprim)
• Primary adrenal insufficiency
• Pseudohypoaldosteronism (type I or II)
• Volume expansion (eg, in acute glomerulonephritis or chronic kidney disease)
Symptoms and Signs
RTA is usually asymptomatic. However, bony involvement (eg, bone pain and osteomalacia in adults and
rickets in children) may occur in type 2 and sometimes in type 1 RTA. Nephrolithiasis and
===PAGE:2588===
nephrocalcinosis are possible, particularly with type 1 RTA.
Severe electrolyte disturbances are rare but can be life threatening. People with type 1 or type 2 RTA
may show symptoms and signs of hypokalemia, including muscle weakness, hyporeflexia, and paralysis.
Type 4 RTA is usually asymptomatic with only mild acidosis, but cardiac arrhythmias or paralysis may
develop if hyperkalemia is severe. Signs of ECF volume depletion may develop from urinary water loss
accompanying electrolyte excretion in type 2 RTA.
Diagnosis
• Suspected in patients with metabolic acidosis with normal anion gap or with unexplained hyperkalemia
• Serum and urine pH, electrolyte levels, and osmolalities
• Often, testing after stimulation (eg, with ammonium Cl, HCO
, or a loop diuretic)
RTA is suspected in any patient with unexplained metabolic acidosis (low plasma HCO
and low blood
pH) with normal anion
gap. Type 4 RTA should be suspected in patients who have persistent
hyperkalemia with no obvious cause, such as K supplements, K-sparing diuretics, or chronic kidney
disease. ABG sampling is done to help confirm RTA and to exclude respiratory alkalosis as a cause of
compensatory metabolic acidosis. Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, and urine pH are measured in all
patients. Further tests and sometimes provocative tests are done, depending on which type of RTA is
suspected:
•
Type 1 RTA
is confirmed by a urine pH that remains > 5.5 during systemic acidosis. The acidosis may
occur spontaneously or be induced by an acid load test (administration of ammonium Cl, 100 mg/kg
po). Normal kidneys reduce urine pH to < 5.2 within 6 h of acidosis.
•
Type 2 RTA
is diagnosed by measurement of the urine pH and fractional HCO
excretion during an
HCO
infusion (NaHCO
, 0.5 to 1.0 mEq/kg/h IV). In type 2, urine pH rises above 7.5, and the fractional
excretion of HCO
is > 15%. Because IV HCO
can contribute to hypokalemia, K supplements should
be given in adequate amounts before infusion.
•
Type 4 RTA
is confirmed by a transtubular K concentration gradient of < 5 (normal value > 10), which
indicates inappropriately low urinary K excretion, suggesting hypoaldosteronism or tubular
unresponsiveness to aldosterone. The gradient is calculated by
Definitive diagnosis can be obtained by measuring plasma renin and aldosterone levels after provocation
(eg, administering a loop diuretic and having the patient remain upright for 3 h) but is usually not
necessary.
Treatment
• Varies by type
• Often alkali therapy
• Treatment of concomitant abnormalities related to K, Ca, and phosphate metabolism
Treatment consists of correction of pH and electrolyte balance with alkali therapy. Failure to treat RTA in
children slows growth.
Alkaline agents such as NaHCO
or Na citrate help achieve a relatively normal plasma HCO
===PAGE:2589===
concentration (22 to 24 mEq/L). K citrate can be substituted when persistent hypokalemia is present or,
because Na increases Ca excretion, when Ca calculi are present. Vitamin D (eg, ergocalciferol, 800 IU po
once/day) and oral Ca supplements (Ca carbonate, 1250 mg or 500 mg elemental Ca
2+
tid) may also be
needed to help reduce skeletal deformities resulting from osteomalacia or rickets.
Type 1 RTA:
Adults are given NaHCO
or Na citrate (0.25 to 0.5 mEq/kg po q 6 h). In children, the total
daily dose may need to be as much as 2 mEq/kg q 8 h; this dose can be adjusted as the child grows.
Type 2 RTA:
Plasma HCO
cannot be restored to the normal range, but HCO
replacement should
exceed the acid load of the diet (eg, NaHCO
, 1 mEq/kg po q 6 h in adults or 2 to 4 mEq/kg q 6 h in
children) to maintain serum HCO
at about 22 to 24 mEq/L because lower levels risk growth disturbance.
However, excess HCO
replacement increases KHCO
losses in the urine. Thus, citrate salts can be
substituted for NaHCO
and may be better tolerated.
K supplements or K citrate may be required in patients who become hypokalemic when given NaHCO
but is not recommended in patients with normal or high serum K levels. In difficult cases, treatment with
low-dose hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg po bid) may stimulate proximal tubule transport functions. In cases
of generalized proximal tubule disorder, hypophosphatemia and bone disorders are treated with
phosphate and vitamin D supplementation to normalize the plasma phosphate concentration.
Type 4 RTA:
Hyperkalemia is treated with volume expansion, dietary K restriction, and K-wasting
diuretics (eg, furosemide 20 to 40 mg po once/day or bid titrated to effect). Alkalinization is often
unnecessary. A few patients need mineralocorticoid replacement therapy (fludrocortisone, 0.1 to 0.2 mg
po once/day, often higher in hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism); mineralocorticoid replacement should be
used with caution, because it may exacerbate underlying hypertension, heart failure, or edema.
===PAGE:2590===
Chapter 238. Renovascular Disorders
Introduction
(See also Renovascular Hypertension )
Vascular disorders of the kidneys may involve partial or complete occlusion of large, medium, or small
renal vessels and most commonly affect the glomeruli (. Systemic vasculitis ( also
may affect glomeruli.
Benign Hypertensive Arteriolar Nephrosclerosis
Benign hypertensive arteriolar nephrosclerosis is progressive renal impairment caused by
chronic, poorly controlled hypertension. Symptoms and signs of chronic kidney disease may
develop (eg, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, pruritus, somnolence or confusion), as may signs of
end-organ damage secondary to hypertension. Diagnosis is primarily clinical, supported by
routine laboratory test findings. Treatment is strict BP control and support of renal function.
Benign hypertensive arteriolar nephrosclerosis results when chronic hypertension damages small blood
vessels, glomeruli, renal tubules, and interstitial tissues. As a result, progressive chronic kidney disease
develops.
Benign nephrosclerosis progresses to end-stage renal disease in only a small percentage of patients.
However, because chronic hypertension and benign nephrosclerosis are common, benign
nephrosclerosis is one of the most common diagnoses in patients with end-stage renal disease. It is
termed benign to distinguish it from malignant arteriolar nephrosclerosis, which is a synonym for
hypertensive emergency (.
Risk factors include older age, poorly controlled moderate to severe hypertension, and other renal
disorders (eg, diabetic nephropathy). Blacks are at increased risk; it is unclear if the risk is increased
because poorly treated hypertension is more common among blacks or because blacks are more
genetically susceptible to hypertension-induced renal damage.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of chronic kidney disease, such as anorexia, nausea, vomiting, pruritus, somnolence
or confusion, weight loss, and an unpleasant taste in the mouth, may develop (. Signs of
hypertension-related end-organ damage may occur in the vasculature of the eyes and in the skin, CNS,
and periphery.
Diagnosis
• History of hypertension
• Blood tests indicating renal failure
• Signs of hypertensive end-organ damage
• No other cause of chronic kidney disease
The diagnosis may be suspected when routine blood tests indicate deteriorating renal function (eg,
elevated creatinine and BUN, hyperphosphatemia) in a hypertensive patient. Diagnosis is usually inferred
because of the history and evidence of hypertension-related end-organ damage (eg, retinal changes, left
ventricular hypertrophy) on physical examination. Hypertension should be present before onset of
proteinuria and renal failure, and there should be no other clinically suspected cause of renal failure.
Urine testing should not suggest other causes of renal failure (eg, glomerulonephritis or hypertensive
emergency). On urinalysis, there should be few cells or casts in the sediment, and protein excretion is
===PAGE:2591===
usually < 1 g/day (it is occasionally higher and in the nephrotic range).
Ultrasonography is done only if other causes of renal failure must be excluded. It may show that kidney
size is reduced. Renal biopsy is done only if the diagnosis remains unclear.
Prognosis
Prognosis usually depends on adequacy of BP control and degree of renal failure. Usually, renal
impairment progresses slowly; after 5 to 10 yr, only 1 to 2% of patients develop clinically significant renal
dysfunction.
Treatment
• BP control
Treatment involves strict BP control (. The BP goal is < 140/90 mm Hg, although < 130/80
mm Hg is more appropriate for patients with diabetes or chronic kidney disease. Most experts suggest
low-dose thiazide diuretic therapy. Among patients with proteinuria, an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II
receptor blocker is added. Ca channel blockers
and
β
-blockers can be added as needed; most patients
require combination therapy for BP control. Weight loss, exercise, and salt and water restriction also help
control BP. Chronic renal failure should be managed (.
Renal Artery Stenosis and Occlusion
Renal artery stenosis is a decrease in blood flow through one or both of the main renal arteries
or their branches. Renal artery occlusion is a complete blockage of blood flow through one or
both of the main renal arteries or its branches. Stenosis and occlusion are usually due to
thromboemboli, atherosclerosis, or fibromuscular dysplasia. Symptoms of acute occlusion
include steady, aching flank pain, abdominal pain, fever, nausea, vomiting, and hematuria. Acute
renal failure may develop. Chronic, progressive stenosis causes refractory hypertension and
may lead to chronic kidney disease. Diagnosis is by imaging tests (eg, CT angiography,
magnetic resonance angiography). Treatment of acute occlusion is with anticoagulation and
sometimes fibrinolytics and surgical or catheter-based embolectomy, or a combination.
Treatment of chronic, progressive stenosis includes angioplasty with stenting, surgical bypass,
and removal of an infarcted kidney.
Renal hypoperfusion results in hypertension (see Renovascular Hypertension , renal failure,
and, if complete occlusion occurs, renal infarction and necrosis.
Etiology
Occlusion may be acute or chronic. Acute occlusion is usually unilateral. Chronic occlusion may be
unilateral or bilateral.
Acute occlusion:
The most common cause is thromboembolism. Emboli may originate in the heart (due
to atrial fibrillation, after MI, or from vegetations due to bacterial endocarditis) or the aorta (as
atheroemboli); less often, fat or tumor emboli are the cause. Thrombosis may occur in a renal artery
spontaneously or after trauma, surgery, angiography, or angioplasty. Other causes of acute occlusion
include dissection or rupture of a renal artery aneurysm.
Rapid, total occlusion of large renal arteries for 30 to 60 min results in infarction. The infarct is typically
wedge-shaped, radiating outward from the affected vessel.
Chronic progressive stenosis:
About 90% of cases are due to atherosclerosis, which is usually
bilateral. Almost 10% of cases are due to fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD), which is commonly unilateral.
Less than 1% of cases result from Takayasu's arteritis, Kawasaki disease, neurofibromatosis type 1,
aortic wall hematoma, or aortic dissection.
===PAGE:2592===
Atherosclerosis develops primarily in patients > 50 (more often men) and usually affects the aortic orifice
or proximal segment of the renal artery. Chronic progressive stenosis tends to become clinically evident
after about 10 yr of atherosclerosis, causing renal atrophy and chronic kidney disease.
FMD is pathologic thickening of the arterial wall, most often of the distal main renal artery or the intrarenal
branches. This disorder develops primarily in younger adults, particularly in women aged 20 to 50. It is
more common among 1st-degree relatives of patients with FMD and among people with the
ACE1
gene.
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations depend on rapidity of onset, extent, whether unilateral or bilateral, and duration of renal
hypoperfusion. Stenosis of one renal artery is often asymptomatic for a considerable time.
Acute complete occlusion of one or both renal arteries causes steady and aching flank pain, abdominal
pain, fever, nausea, and vomiting. Gross hematuria, oliguria, or anuria may occur; hypertension is rare.
After 24 h, symptoms and signs of acute renal failure may develop (. If the cause was
thromboembolic, features of thromboembolism at other sites (eg, blue toes, livedo reticularis, retinal
lesions on funduscopic examination) also may be present.
Chronic progressive stenosis causes hypertension, which may begin at an atypical age (eg, < 30 yr or
after age 50 yr) and which may be refractory to control despite use of multiple antihypertensives. Physical
examination may detect an abdominal bruit or signs of atherosclerosis. Symptoms and signs of chronic
kidney disease ( develop slowly.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion
• Imaging
Diagnosis is suspected in patients with renal failure and who have
• Symptoms of acute renal artery occlusion
• Symptoms or signs of thromboembolism
• Hypertension that begins before age 30 or is refractory to treatment with > 3 antihypertensive drugs
Blood and urine tests are done to confirm renal failure. Diagnosis is confirmed by imaging tests (see
Table 238-1
). Which tests are done depends on the patient's renal function and other characteristics and
on test availability.
Some tests (CT angiography, arteriography, digital subtraction angiography) require an IV ionic
radiocontrast agent, which may be nephrotoxic; this risk is lower with the nonionic hypo-osmolar or isoosmolar contrast agents that are now in widespread use (. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) requires the use of gadolinium contrast; in patients with
severe chronic kidney disease, gadolinium contrast carries the risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, a
condition that closely resembles systemic sclerosis and that has no satisfactory method of treatment.
When results of other tests are inconclusive or negative but clinical suspicion is strong, arteriography is
necessary for definitive diagnosis. Arteriography may also be needed before invasive interventions.
When a thromboembolic disorder is suspected, ECG (to detect atrial fibrillation) and hypercoagulability
studies may be needed to identify treatable embolic sources. Transesophageal echocardiography is done
to detect atheromatous lesions in the ascending and thoracic aorta and cardiac sources of thrombi or
valvular vegetations.
===PAGE:2593===
Blood and urine tests are nondiagnostic but are done to confirm renal failure, indicated by elevated
creatinine and BUN and by hyperkalemia. Leukocytosis, gross or microscopic hematuria, and proteinuria
may also be present.
Treatment
• Restoration of vascular patency in acute occlusions and, if patients have refractory hypertension or
potential for renal failure, in chronic stenosis
Treatment depends on the cause.
Acute renal artery occlusion:
A renal thromboembolic disorder may be treated with a combination of
anticoagulation, fibrinolytics, and surgical or catheter-based embolectomy. Treatment within 3 h of
symptom onset is likely to improve renal function. However, complete recovery is unusual, and early and
[Table 238-1.
Imaging Tests for Diagnosis of Renal Artery Stenosis or Occlusion]
late mortality rates are high because of extrarenal embolization or underlying atherosclerotic heart
disease.
Patients presenting within 3 h may benefit from fibrinolytic (thrombolytic) therapy (eg, streptokinase,
alteplase) given IV or by local intra-arterial infusion (. However, such rapid diagnosis and
treatment is rare.
All patients with a thromboembolic disorder require anticoagulation with IV heparin, unless
contraindicated. Long-term anticoagulation with oral warfarin can be initiated simultaneously with heparin
if no invasive intervention is planned. Anticoagulation should be continued for at least 6 to 12 mo
—indefinitely for patients with a recurrent thromboembolic disorder or a hypercoagulability disorder.
Surgery to restore vascular patency has a higher mortality rate than fibrinolytic therapy and has no
advantage in recovery of renal function. However, surgery, particularly if done within the first few hours, is
preferred for patients with traumatic renal artery thrombosis. If patients with nontraumatic, severe renal
failure do not recover function after 4 to 6 wk of drug therapy, surgical revascularization (embolectomy)
can be considered, but it helps only a few.
If the cause is thromboemboli, the source should be identified and treated appropriately (see Deep
Venous Thrombosis .
Chronic progressive renal artery stenosis:
Treatment is indicated when > 75% of the arterial
diameter is blocked (stenosis) and patients have any of the following:
• Unilateral stenosis with renal insufficiency
• Bilateral stenoses
• Stenosis in a solitary functioning kidney
• Unilateral or bilateral stenosis associated with hypertension that is refractory to treatment with ≥ 3 drugs
Treatment is with percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) plus stenting or with surgical bypass of
the stenotic segment. Usually, an extensively infarcted kidney must be removed if revascularization is not
expected to result in functional recovery. Surgery is usually more effective than PTA for atherosclerotic
occlusion; it cures or attenuates hypertension in 60 to 70% of patients. PTA is preferred for FMD; risk is
minimal, success rate is high, and restenosis rate is low. If PTA is ineffective, surgical revascularization is
needed.
Renovascular hypertension:
Treatments are typically ineffective unless vascular patency (
is restored. ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, or renin inhibitors can be used in unilateral
===PAGE:2594===
but not in bilateral renal artery stenosis. These drugs can reduce GFR and increase serum BUN and
creatinine levels. If GFR decreases enough to increase serum creatinine, Ca channel blockers (eg,
amlodipine, felodipine) or vasodilators (eg, hydralazine, minoxidil) should be added or substituted (.
Renal Atheroembolism
Renal atheroembolism is occlusion of renal arterioles by atherosclerotic emboli, causing
progressive chronic kidney disease. It results from rupture of atheromatous plaques.
Symptoms are those of renal failure; symptoms and signs of widespread arterial embolic
disease may be present. Diagnosis is by renal biopsy. Long-term prognosis is usually poor.
Treatment aims to prevent further embolization.
Atheromatous plaque rupture usually results from manipulation of the aorta during vascular surgery,
angioplasty, or arteriography. Spontaneous plaque rupture, which occurs most often in patients who have
diffuse erosive atherosclerosis or who are being treated with anticoagulants or fibrinolytics, is rare.
Atheroemboli tend to cause incomplete occlusion with secondary ischemic atrophy rather than renal
infarction. A foreign body immune reaction often follows embolization, leading to continued deterioration in
renal function for 3 to 8 wk. Acute renal impairment may also result from massive or recurrent episodes of
embolization.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are usually those of acute or chronic renal dysfunction with uremia (. Renal
atheroembolism rarely causes hypertension. Abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting can result from
concomitant compromised arterial microcirculation of abdominal organs (eg, pancreas, GI tract). Sudden
blindness and formation of bright yellow retinal plaques (Hollenhorst plaques) can result from emboli in
retinal arterioles. Signs of widespread peripheral embolism (eg, livedo reticularis, painful muscle nodules,
overt gangrene, which is often referred to as the trash syndrome, are sometimes present.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion
• Imaging (usually renal ultrasonography)
• Sometimes, renal biopsy
• Location of source of emboli
Diagnosis is suggested by worsening renal function in a patient with recent manipulation of the aorta,
particularly if there are signs of atheroemboli. Differential diagnosis includes contrast-induced and druginduced nephropathy. An imaging study (usually ultrasonography) should be done. If suspicion of
atheroembolism remains high, percutaneous renal biopsy is done; it has a sensitivity of about 75%.
Diagnosis is important because there may be treatable causes of emboli in the absence of vascular
obstruction. Cholesterol crystals in the emboli dissolve during tissue fixation, leaving pathognomonic
biconcave, needle-shaped clefts in the occluded vessel. Sometimes skin, muscle, or GI biopsy can
provide the same information and indirectly help establish the diagnosis.
Blood and urine tests can confirm the diagnosis of acute renal failure or chronic kidney disease but do not
establish cause. Urinalysis typically shows microscopic hematuria and minimal proteinuria; however,
proteinuria is occasionally in the nephrotic range (> 3 g/day). Eosinophilia, eosinophiluria, and transient
hypocomplementemia may be present.
If renal or systemic emboli recur and their source is unclear, transesophageal echocardiography is done
to detect atheromatous lesions in the ascending and thoracic aorta and cardiac sources of emboli; dual
helical CT may help characterize the ascending aorta and aortic arch.
===PAGE:2595===
Prognosis
With aggressive supportive therapy, survival has improved in recent years (eg, survival can be > 50% at 4
yr). Some patients require renal replacement therapy initially, but they improve later and dialysis may be
stopped.
Treatment
• Treatment of embolic source when possible
• Supportive measures
• Modification of risk factors
Sometimes the source of emboli can be treated (eg, anticoagulation for patients with emboli from a
cardiac source and atrial fibrillation and for patients in whom a clot becomes a source of new emboli).
However, no direct treatment of existing renal emboli is effective. Corticosteroids, antiplatelet drugs,
vasodilators, and plasma exchange are not helpful. There is no demonstrated benefit of anticoagulation,
and, according to most experts, its use may actually enhance atheroembolism.
Treatment of renal dysfunction includes control of hypertension and management of electrolytes and fluid
status; sometimes dialysis is required. Modifying risk factors for atherosclerosis may slow its progression
and induce regression. Strategies include management of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes;
smoking cessation; and encouragement of regular aerobic exercise and good nutrition (.
Renal Cortical Necrosis
Renal cortical necrosis is destruction of cortical tissue resulting from renal arteriolar injury and
leading to chronic kidney disease. This rare disorder typically occurs in neonates and in
pregnant or postpartum women when sepsis or pregnancy complications occur. Symptoms and
signs include gross hematuria, flank pain, decreased urine output, fever, and symptoms of
uremia. Symptoms of the underlying disorder may predominate. Diagnosis is by MRI, CT,
isotopic renal scanning, or renal biopsy. Mortality rate at 1 yr is > 20%. Treatment is directed at
the underlying disorder and at preserving renal function.
In renal cortical necrosis, which may be patchy or diffuse, bilateral renal arteriolar injury results in
destruction of cortical tissues and acute renal failure. Renal cortical tissues eventually calcify. The
juxtamedullary cortex, medulla, and the area just under the capsule are spared.
Etiology
Injury usually results from reduced renal artery perfusion secondary to vascular spasm, microvascular
injury, or intravascular coagulation.
About 10% of cases occur in infants and children. Pregnancy complications increase risk of this disorder
in neonates and in women, as does sepsis. Other causes (eg, disseminated intravascular coagulation
[DIC]) are less common (see
Table 238-2
).
Symptoms and Signs
Gross hematuria, flank pain, and sometimes decreased urine output or abrupt anuria occur. Fever is
common, and chronic kidney disease with hypertension develops. However, these symptoms are often
overshadowed by symptoms of the underlying disorder.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:2596===
• Imaging, usually with CT angiography
[Table 238-2.
Causes of Renal Cortical Necrosis]
Diagnosis is suspected when typical symptoms occur in patients with a potential cause.
Imaging tests can sometimes confirm the diagnosis. CT angiography is usually preferred despite the risks
of using an iodinated contrast agent. Because of the risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, use of
magnetic resonance angiography with gadolinium contrast is not recommended in these patients, who
usually have severe renal dysfunction.
An alternative is isotopic renal scanning using diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid. It shows enlarged,
nonobstructed kidneys, with little or no renal blood flow. Renal biopsy is done only if the diagnosis is
unclear and no contraindications exist. It provides definitive diagnosis and prognostic information.
Urinalysis, CBC, liver function tests, and serum electrolytes and renal function tests are done routinely.
These tests often confirm renal dysfunction (eg, indicated by elevated creatinine and BUN and by
hyperkalemia) and may suggest a cause. Severe electrolyte abnormalities may be present depending on
the cause (eg, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia). CBC often detects leukocytosis (even
when sepsis is not the cause) and may detect anemia and thrombocytopenia if hemolysis, DIC, or sepsis
is the cause. Transaminases may be increased in relative hypovolemic states (eg, septic shock,
postpartum hemorrhage). If DIC is suspected, coagulation studies are done. They may detect low
fibrinogen levels, increased fibrin-degradation products, and increasing PT/INR and PTT. Urinalysis
typically detects proteinuria and hematuria.
Prognosis
Prognosis of renal cortical necrosis was poor in the past, with mortality > 50% in the first year. More
recently, with aggressive supportive therapy, 1-yr mortality can be about 20%, and up to 20% of survivors
may recover some renal function.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder and at preserving renal function (eg, with early dialysis).
Renal Vein Thrombosis
Renal vein thrombosis is thrombotic occlusion of one or both main renal veins, resulting in
acute renal failure or chronic kidney disease. Common causes include nephrotic syndrome,
primary hypercoagulability disorders, malignant renal tumors, extrinsic compression, trauma,
and rarely inflammatory bowel disease. Symptoms of renal failure and sometimes nausea,
vomiting, flank pain, gross hematuria, decreased urine output, or systemic manifestations of
venous thromboembolism may occur. Diagnosis is by CT, magnetic resonance angiography, or
renal venography. With treatment, prognosis is generally good. Treatment is anticoagulation,
support of renal function, and treatment of the underlying disorder. Some patients benefit from
thrombectomy or nephrectomy.
Etiology
Renal vein thrombosis usually results from local and systemic hypercoagulability due to
nephrotic
syndrome associated with membranous nephropathy or membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. Overly
aggressive diuresis or prolonged high-dose corticosteroid treatment may contribute to thrombosis of the
renal vein in patients with these conditions (. Other causes include
• Allograft rejection
• Amyloidosis
===PAGE:2597===
• Diabetic nephropathy
• Estrogen therapy
• Pregnancy
• Primary hypercoagulability disorders (eg, antithrombin III deficiency, protein C or S deficiency, factor V
Leiden, prothrombin G20210A mutations)
• Renal vasculitis
• Sickle cell nephropathy
• SLE
Less common causes are related to reduced renal vein blood flow and include malignant renal tumors
that extend into the renal veins (typically renal cell carcinoma), extrinsic compression of the renal vein or
inferior vena cava (eg, by vascular abnormalities, tumor, retroperitoneal disease, ligation of the inferior
vena cava, aortic aneurysm), oral contraceptive use, trauma, dehydration, and, rarely, thrombophlebitis
migrans and cocaine abuse.
Symptoms and Signs
Usually, onset of renal dysfunction ( is insidious. However, onset may be acute, causing
renal infarction with nausea, vomiting, flank pain, gross hematuria, and decreased urine output.
When the cause is a hypercoagulability disorder, signs of venous thromboembolic disorders (eg, deep
venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism) may occur. When the cause is a renal cancer, its signs (eg,
hematuria, weight loss) predominate.
Diagnosis
• Vascular imaging
Renal vein thrombosis should be considered in patients with renal infarction or any unexplained
deterioration in renal function, particularly in patients with the nephrotic syndrome or other risk factors.
The traditional diagnostic test of choice and the gold standard is venography of the inferior vena cava;
this test is diagnostic, but it may mobilize clots. Because of the risks of conventional venography,
magnetic resonance venography and Doppler ultrasonography are being used increasingly. Magnetic
resonance venography can be done if GFR > 30 mL/min. Doppler ultrasonography sometimes detects
renal vein thrombosis but has high false-negative and false-positive rates. Notching of the ureter due to
dilated collateral veins is a characteristic finding in some chronic cases. CT angiography provides good
detail with high sensitivity and specificity and is fast but requires administration of a radiocontrast agent,
which may be nephrotoxic. Serum electrolytes and urinalysis are done and confirm deterioration of renal
function. Microscopic hematuria is often present. Proteinuria may be in the nephrotic range.
If no cause is apparent, testing for hypercoagulability disorders should be initiated (. Renal
biopsy is nonspecific but may detect a coexisting renal disorder.
Treatment
• Treatment of underlying disorder
• Anticoagulation
• Sometimes percutaneous catheter-directed thrombectomy or thrombolysis
Death is rare and usually related to complications such as pulmonary embolism and those due to
===PAGE:2598===
nephrotic syndrome or a malignant tumor.
The underlying disorder should be treated. Treatment options for renal vein thrombosis include
anticoagulation with heparin, thrombolysis, and catheter-directed or surgical thrombectomy. Long-term
anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin or oral warfarin should be started immediately if no
invasive intervention is planned. Anticoagulation minimizes risk of new thrombi, promotes recanalization
of vessels with existing clots, and improves renal function. Anticoagulation should be continued for at
least 6 to 12 mo and, if a hypercoagulability disorder (eg, persistent nephrotic syndrome) is present,
indefinitely.
Use of a percutaneous catheter for thrombectomy or thrombolysis is a promising new technique that has
a high success rate. Surgical thrombectomy is rarely used but may help if anticoagulation is ineffective or
contraindicated. Inferior vena cava filters may also be used in these cases to help prevent pulmonary
emboli.
Nephrectomy is done only if infarction is total (in certain cases) or if the underlying disorder warrants it.
===PAGE:2599===
Chapter 239. Renal Failure
Introduction
Renal failure is traditionally categorized as acute or chronic. The former develops rapidly, often over days,
whereas the latter progresses slowly over months to years. Some causes overlap.
Acute Renal Failure
(Acute Kidney Injury)
Acute renal failure (ARF) is a rapid decrease in renal function over days to weeks, causing an
accumulation of nitrogenous products in the blood (azotemia). It often results from severe
trauma, illness, or surgery but is sometimes caused by a rapidly progressive, intrinsic renal
disease. Symptoms include anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. Seizures and coma may occur if
the condition is untreated. Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders develop quickly. Diagnosis
is based on laboratory tests of renal function, including serum creatinine. Urinary indices,
urinary sediment examination, and often imaging and other tests are needed to determine the
cause. Treatment is directed at the cause but also includes fluid and electrolyte management
and sometimes dialysis.
In all cases of ARF, creatinine and urea build up in the blood over several days, and fluid and electrolyte
disorders develop. The most serious of these disorders are hyperkalemia and fluid overload (possibly
causing pulmonary edema). Phosphate retention leads to hyperphosphatemia. Hypocalcemia is thought
to occur because the impaired kidney no longer produces calcitriol and because hyperphosphatemia
causes Ca phosphate precipitation in the tissues. Acidosis develops because hydrogen ions cannot be
excreted. With significant uremia, coagulation may be impaired, and pericarditis may develop. Urine
output varies with the type and cause of ARF.
Etiology
Causes of ARF can be classified as prerenal, renal, or postrenal (see
Table 239-1
).
Prerenal
azotemia is due to inadequate renal perfusion. The main causes are ECF volume depletion and
cardiovascular disease. Prerenal conditions cause about 50 to 80% of ARF but do not cause permanent
renal damage (and hence are potentially reversible) unless hypoperfusion is severe enough to cause
tubular ischemia. Hypoperfusion of an otherwise functioning kidney leads to enhanced reabsorption of Na
and water, resulting in oliguria with high urine osmolality and low urine Na.
Renal
causes of ARF involve intrinsic renal disease or damage. Renal causes are responsible for about
10 to 40% of cases. Overall, the most common causes are prolonged renal ischemia and nephrotoxins
(including IV use of iodinated radiopaque contrast agents—see Contrast Nephropathy .
Disorders may involve the glomeruli, tubules, or interstitium. Glomerular disease reduces GFR and
increases glomerular capillary permeability to proteins; it may be inflammatory (glomerulonephritis) or the
result of vascular damage from ischemia or vasculitis. Tubules also may be damaged by ischemia and
may become obstructed by cellular debris, protein or crystal deposition, and cellular or interstitial edema.
Tubular damage impairs reabsorption of Na, so urinary Na tends to be elevated, which is helpful
diagnostically. Interstitial inflammation (nephritis) usually involves an immunologic or allergic phenomenon.
These mechanisms of tubular damage are complex and interdependent, rendering the previously popular
term acute tubular necrosis an inadequate description.
Postrenal
azotemia (obstructive nephropathy—see also p.
) is due to various types of obstruction in
the voiding and collecting parts of the urinary system and is responsible for about 5 to 10% of cases.
Obstruction can also occur within the tubules when crystalline or proteinaceous material precipitates. This
form of renal failure is often grouped with postrenal failure because the mechanism is obstructive.
Obstructed ultrafiltrate flow in tubules or more distally increases pressure in the urinary space of the
glomerulus, reducing GFR. Obstruction also affects renal blood flow, initially increasing the flow and
===PAGE:2600===
pressure in the glomerular capillary by reducing afferent arteriolar resistance. However, within 3 to 4 h,
the renal blood flow is reduced, and by 24 h, it has fallen to < 50% of normal because of increased
resistance of renal vasculature. Renovascular resistance may take up to a week to return to normal after
relief of a 24-h obstruction. To produce significant azotemia, obstruction at the level of the ureter requires
involvement of both ureters unless the patient has only a single functioning kidney. Bladder
[Table 239-1.
Major Causes of Acute Renal Failure]
outlet obstruction is probably the most common cause of sudden, and often total, cessation of urinary
output in men.
Urine output:
Prerenal causes typically manifest with oliguria, not anuria. Anuria usually occurs only in
obstructive uropathy or, less commonly, in bilateral renal artery occlusion, acute cortical necrosis, or
rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
A relatively preserved urine output of 1 to 2.4 L/day is initially present in most renal causes. In acute
tubular injury, output may have 3 phases.
• The
prodromal phase
, with usually normal urine output, varies in duration depending on causative
factors (eg, the amount of toxin ingested, the duration and severity of hypotension).
• The
oliguric phase
, with output typically between 50 and 400 mL/day, lasts an average of 10 to 14
days but varies from 1 day to 8 wk. However, many patients are never oliguric. Nonoliguric patients
have lower mortality and morbidity and less need for dialysis.
• In the
postoliguric phase
, urine output gradually returns to normal, but serum creatinine and urea
levels may not fall for several more days. Tubular dysfunction may persist and is manifested by Na
wasting, polyuria (possibly massive) unresponsive to vasopressin, or hyperchloremic metabolic
acidosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Initially, weight gain and peripheral edema may be the only findings. Often, predominant symptoms are
those of the underlying illness or those caused by the surgical complication that precipitated renal
deterioration. Later, as nitrogenous products accumulate, symptoms of uremia may develop, including
anorexia, nausea and vomiting, weakness, myoclonic jerks, seizures, confusion, and coma; asterixis and
hyperreflexia may be present on examination. Chest pain (typically worse with inspiration or when
recumbent), a pericardial friction rub, and findings of pericardial tamponade may occur if uremic
pericarditis is present. Fluid accumulation in the lungs may cause dyspnea and crackles on auscultation.
Other findings depend on the cause. Urine may be cola-colored in glomerulonephritis or myoglobinuria. A
palpable bladder may be present with outlet obstruction.
Diagnosis
• Serum creatinine
• Urinary sediment
• Urinary diagnostic indices
• Postvoid residual bladder volume if postrenal cause suspected
ARF is suspected when urine output falls or serum BUN and creatinine rise. Evaluation should determine
the presence and type of ARF and seek a cause. Blood tests generally include CBC, BUN, creatinine,
and electrolytes (including Ca and phosphate). Urine tests include Na and creatinine concentration and
microscopic analysis of sediment. Early detection and treatment increase the chances of reversing renal
failure.
===PAGE:2601===
A progressive daily rise in serum creatinine is diagnostic of ARF. Serum creatinine can increase by as
much as 2 mg/dL/day (180
μ
mol/L/day), depending on the amount of creatinine produced (which varies
with lean body mass) and total body water. A rise of > 2 mg/dL/day suggests overproduction due to
rhabdomyolysis.
Urea nitrogen may increase by 10 to 20 mg/dL/day (3.6 to 7.1 mmol urea/L/day), but BUN may be
misleading because it is frequently elevated in response to increased protein catabolism resulting from
surgery, trauma, corticosteroids, burns, transfusion reactions, parenteral nutrition or GI or internal
bleeding.
When creatinine is rising, 24-h urine collection for creatinine clearance and the various formulas used to
calculate creatinine clearance from serum creatinine are inaccurate and should not be used in estimating
GFR, because the rise in serum creatinine concentration is a delayed function of GFR decline.
Other laboratory findings are progressive acidosis, hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and anemia. Acidosis is
ordinarily moderate, with a plasma HCO
content of 15 to 20 mmol/L. Serum K concentration increases
slowly, but when catabolism is markedly accelerated, it may rise by 1 to 2 mmol/L/day. Hyponatremia
usually is moderate (serum Na, 125 to 135 mmol/L) and correlates with a surplus of water. Normochromicnormocytic anemia with an Hct of 25 to 30% is typical.
Hypocalcemia is common and may be profound in patients with myoglobinuric ARF, apparently because
of the combined effects of Ca deposition in necrotic muscle, reduced calcitriol production, and resistance
of bone to parathyroid hormone (PTH). During recovery from ARF, hypercalcemia may supervene as
renal calcitriol production increases, the bone becomes responsive to PTH, and Ca deposits are
mobilized from damaged tissue.
Determination of cause:
Immediately reversible prerenal or postrenal causes must be excluded first.
ECF volume depletion and
obstruction are considered in all patients. The drug history must be accurately
reviewed and all potentially renal toxic drugs stopped. Urinary diagnostic indices (see
Table 239-2
) are helpful in distinguishing prerenal azotemia from acute tubular injury, which are the most
common causes of ARF in hospitalized patients.
Prerenal causes
are often apparent clinically. If so, correction of an underlying hemodynamic
abnormality (eg, with volume infusion) should be attempted. Abatement of ARF confirms a prerenal cause.
Postrenal causes
should be sought in most cases of acute renal failure. Immediately after the patient
voids, a urethral catheter is placed or bedside ultrasonography is used to determine the residual urine in
the bladder. A postvoid residual urine volume > 200 mL suggests bladder outlet obstruction, although
detrusor muscle weakness and neurogenic bladder may also cause residual volume of this amount. The
catheter may be kept in for the first day to monitor hourly output but is removed once oliguria is confirmed
(if bladder outlet obstruction is not present) to decrease risk of infection. Renal ultrasonography is then
done to diagnose more proximal obstruction. However, sensitivity for obstruction is only 80 to 85% when
ultrasonography is used because the collecting system is not always dilated, especially when the
condition is acute, an intrarenal pelvis is present, the ureter is encased (eg, in retroperitoneal fibrosis or
neoplasm), or the patient has concomitant hypovolemia. If obstruction is strongly suspected, CT can
establish the site of obstruction and guide therapy.
The
urinary sediment
may provide etiologic clues. A normal urine sediment occurs in prerenal azotemia
and sometimes in obstructive uropathy. With renal tubular injury, the sediment characteristically contains
tubular cells, tubular cell casts, and many brown-pigmented granular casts. Urinary eosinophils suggest
allergic tubulointerstitial nephritis. RBC casts indicate glomerulonephritis or vasculitis.
Renal causes
are sometimes suggested by clinical findings. Patients with glomerulonephritis (see
Ch.
) often have edema, marked proteinuria (nephrotic syndrome), or signs of arteritis in the skin and
retina, often without a history of intrinsic renal disease. Hemoptysis suggests Wegener's granulomatosis
or Goodpasture's syndrome. Certain rashes (eg, erythema nodosum, cutaneous vasculitis, discoid lupus)
suggest polyarteritis, cryoglobulinemia, SLE, or Henoch-Schonlein purpura. Tubulointerstitial nephritis
===PAGE:2602===
and drug allergy are suggested by a history of drug ingestion and a maculopapular or purpuric rash.
To further differentiate renal causes, antistreptolysin-O and complement titers, antinuclear antibodies, and
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies are determined. Renal biopsy may be done if the diagnosis remains
elusive (see
Table 239-3
).
Imaging:
In addition to renal ultrasonography, other imaging tests are occasionally of use. In evaluating
for ureteral obstruction, noncontrast CT is preferred over antegrade and retrograde urography. In addition
to its ability to delineate soft-tissue structures and Ca-containing calculi, CT can detect nonradiopaque
calculi.
Contrast agents should be avoided if possible. However, renal arteriography or venography may
sometimes be indicated if vascular causes are suggested clinically. Magnetic resonance angiography was
increasingly being
[Table 239-2.
Urinary Diagnostic Indices in Prerenal Azotemia and Acute Tubular Injury]
[Table 239-3.
Causes of Acute Renal Failure Based on Laboratory Findings]
used for diagnosing renal artery stenosis as well as thrombosis of both arteries and veins because MRI
used gadolinium, which was thought to be safer than the iodinated contrast agents used in angiography
and contrast-enhanced CT. However, recent evidence suggests that gadolinium may be involved in the
pathogenesis of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, a serious complication that occurs only in patients with
renal failure. Thus, many experts recommend avoiding gadolinium in patients with renal failure.
Kidney size, as determined with imaging tests, is helpful to know, because a normal or enlarged kidney
favors reversibility, whereas a small kidney suggests chronic renal insufficiency.
Prognosis
Although many causes are reversible if diagnosed and treated early, the overall survival rate remains
about 50% because many patients with ARF have significant underlying disorders (eg, sepsis, respiratory
failure). Death is usually the result of these disorders rather than the renal failure itself. Most survivors
have adequate kidney function. About 10% require dialysis or transplantation—half right away and the
others as renal function slowly deteriorates.
Treatment
• Immediate treatment of pulmonary edema and hyperkalemia
• Dialysis as needed to control hyperkalemia, pulmonary edema, metabolic acidosis, and uremic
symptoms
• Adjustment of drug regimen
• Usually restriction of water, Na, and K intake, but provision of adequate protein
• Possibly phosphate binders and Na polystyrene sulfonate
Emergency treatment:
Life-threatening complications are addressed, preferably in a critical care unit.
Pulmonary edema ( is treated with O
, IV vasodilators (eg, nitroglycerin), and diuretics (often
ineffective in ARF). Hyperkalemia ( is treated as needed with IV infusion of 10 mL of 10% Ca
gluconate, 50 g of dextrose, and 5 to 10 units of insulin. These drugs do not reduce total body K, so
further (but slower acting) treatment with 30 g of oral or rectal Na polystyrene sulfonate is begun.
Although correction of an anion gap metabolic acidosis with NaHCO
is controversial, correction of the
nonanion gap portion of severe metabolic acidosis (pH < 7.20) is less controversial. The nonanion gap
===PAGE:2603===
portion may be treated with IV NaHCO
in the form of a slow infusion (≤ 150 mEq NaHCO
in 1 L of 5%
D/W at a
rate of 50 to 100 mL/h). The nonanion gap portion of metabolic acidosis is determined by
calculating the increase in anion gap above normal and then subtracting this number from the decrease in
HCO
from 24 mmol/L. HCO
is given to raise the serum HCO
by this difference. Because variations in
body buffer systems and the rate of acid production are hard to predict, calculating the amount of HCO
needed to achieve a full correction is usually not recommended. Instead, HCO
is given via continuous
infusion and the anion gap is monitored serially.
Hemodialysis
( or
hemofiltration
( is initiated when
• Severe electrolyte abnormalities cannot otherwise be controlled (eg, K > 6 mmol/L)
• Pulmonary edema persists despite drug treatment
• Metabolic acidosis is unresponsive to drug treatment
• Uremic symptoms occur (eg, vomiting thought to be due to uremia, asterixis, encephalopathy,
pericarditis, seizures)
BUN and creatinine levels are probably not the best guides for initiating dialysis in ARF. In asymptomatic
patients who are not seriously ill, particularly those in whom return of renal function is considered likely,
dialysis can be deferred until symptoms occur, thus avoiding placement of a central venous catheter with
its attendant complications.
General measures:
Nephrotoxic drugs are stopped, and all drugs excreted by the kidneys (eg, digoxin,
some antibiotics) are adjusted; serum levels are useful.
Daily water intake is restricted to a volume equal to the previous day's urine output plus measured
extrarenal losses (eg, vomitus) plus 500 to 1000 mL/day for insensible loss. Water intake can be further
restricted for hyponatremia or increased for hypernatremia. Although weight gain indicates excess fluid,
water intake is not decreased if serum Na remains normal; instead, dietary Na is restricted.
Na and K intake is minimized except in patients with prior deficiencies or GI losses. An adequate diet
should be provided, including daily protein intake of about 0.8 to 1 g/kg. If oral or enteral nutrition is
impossible, parenteral nutrition is used, but in ARF, risks of fluid overload, hyperosmolality, and infection
are increased by IV nutrition. Ca salts (carbonate, acetate) or synthetic non-Ca-containing phosphate
binders before meals help maintain serum phosphate at < 5 mg/dL (< 1.78 mmol/L). To help maintain
serum K at < 6 mmol/L in the absence of dialysis, a cation-exchange resin, Na polystyrene sulfonate, is
given 15 to 60 g po or rectally 1 to 4 times/day as a suspension in water or in a syrup (eg, 70% sorbitol).
An indwelling bladder catheter is rarely needed and should be used only when necessary because of an
increased risk of UTI and urosepsis.
In many patients, a brisk and even dramatic diuresis after relief of obstruction is a physiologic response to
the expansion of ECF during obstruction and does not compromise volume status. However, polyuria
accompanied by the excretion of large amounts of Na, K, Mg, and other solutes may cause hypokalemia,
hyponatremia, hypernatremia, hypomagnesemia, or marked contraction of ECF volume with peripheral
vascular collapse. In this postoliguric phase, close attention to fluid and electrolyte balance is mandatory.
Overzealous administration of salt and water after relief of obstruction can prolong diuresis. When
postoliguric diuresis occurs, replacement of urine output with 0.45% saline at about 75% of urine output
prevents volume depletion and the tendency for excessive free water loss while allowing the body to
eliminate excessive volume if this is the cause of the polyuria.
Prevention
ARF can often be prevented by maintaining normal fluid balance, blood volume, and BP in patients with
trauma, burns, or major hemorrhage and in those undergoing major surgery. Infusion of isotonic saline
and blood may be helpful. Use of contrast agents should be minimized, particularly in at-risk groups (eg,
===PAGE:2604===
the elderly and those with preexisting renal insufficiency, volume depletion, diabetes, or heart failure). If
contrast agents are necessary, risk can be lowered by minimizing volume of the IV contrast agent, using
nonionic and low osmolal or iso-osmolal contrast agents, avoiding NSAIDs, and pretreating with normal
saline at 1 mL/kg/h IV for 12 h before the test. Isotonic NaHCO
has been used successfully instead of
normal saline in some patients. However, further study is needed to confirm this finding.
N
-acetylcysteine
600 mg po bid the day before and the day of IV contrast administration has been used to prevent contrast
nephropathy, but reports of its efficacy are conflicting.
Before cytolytic therapy is initiated in patients with certain neoplastic diseases (eg, lymphoma, leukemia),
treatment with allopurinol should be considered along with increasing urine flow by increasing oral or IV
fluids to reduce urate crystalluria. Making the urine more alkaline (by giving oral or IV NaHCO

or
acetazolamide) has been recommended by some but is controversial because it may also induce urinary
Ca phosphate precipitation and crystalluria, which may cause ARF.
The renal vasculature is very sensitive to endothelin, a potent vasoconstrictor that reduces renal blood
flow and GFR. Endothelin is implicated in progressive renal damage, and endothelin receptor antagonists
have successfully slowed or even halted experimental renal disease. Antiendothelin antibodies and
endothelin-receptor antagonists are being studied to protect the kidney against ischemic ARF.
Chronic Kidney Disease
(Chronic Renal Failure)
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is long-standing, progressive deterioration of renal function.
Symptoms develop slowly and include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, dysgeusia,
nocturia, lassitude, fatigue, pruritus, decreased mental acuity, muscle twitches and cramps,
water retention, undernutrition, GI ulceration and bleeding, peripheral neuropathies, and
seizures. Diagnosis is based on laboratory testing of renal function, sometimes followed by
renal biopsy. Treatment is primarily directed at the underlying condition but includes fluid and
electrolyte management, erythropoietin for anemia, and often dialysis or transplantation.
Etiology
CKD may result from any cause of renal dysfunction of sufficient magnitude (see
Table 239-4
). The most common cause in the US is diabetic nephropathy (, followed by
hypertensive nephroangiosclerosis and various primary and secondary glomerulopathies. Metabolic
syndrome (, in which hypertension and type 2 diabetes are present, is a large and growing
cause of renal damage.
Pathophysiology
CKD can be roughly categorized as diminished renal reserve, renal insufficiency, or renal failure (endstage renal disease). Initially, as renal tissue loses function, there are few abnormalities because the
remaining tissue increases its performance (renal functional adaptation); a loss of 75% of renal tissue
causes a fall in GFR to only 50% of normal.
Decreased renal function interferes with the kidneys' ability to maintain fluid and electrolyte homeostasis.
Changes proceed predictably, but considerable overlap and individual variation exist. The ability to
concentrate urine declines early and is followed by decreases in ability to excrete phosphate, acid, and K.
When renal failure is advanced (GFR ≤ 10 mL/min/1.73 m
), the ability to dilute urine is lost; thus urine
osmolality is usually fixed close to that of plasma (300 to 320 mOsm/kg), and urinary volume does not
respond readily to variations in water intake.
Plasma concentrations of creatinine and urea (which are highly dependent on glomerular filtration) begin
a nonlinear rise as GFR diminishes. These changes are minimal early on. When the GFR falls below 10
mL/min/1.73 m
(normal = 100 mL/min/1.73 m
), their levels increase rapidly and are usually
===PAGE:2605===
[Table 239-4.
Major Causes of Chronic Kidney Disease]
associated with systemic manifestations (uremia). Urea and creatinine are not major contributors to the
uremic symptoms; they are markers for many other substances (some not yet well defined) that cause the
symptoms.
Despite a diminishing GFR, Na and water balance is well maintained by increased fractional excretion of
Na and a normal response to thirst. Thus, the plasma Na concentration is typically normal, and
hypervolemia is infrequent unless dietary intake of Na or water is very restricted or excessive. Heart
failure can occur from Na and water overload, particularly in patients with decreased cardiac reserve.
For substances whose secretion is controlled mainly through distal nephron secretion (eg, K), adaptation
usually maintains plasma levels at normal until renal failure is advanced. K-sparing diuretics, ACE
inhibitors,
β
-blockers, NSAIDs, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or angiotensin II receptor blockers may raise
plasma K levels in patients with less advanced renal failure.
Abnormalities of Ca, phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D metabolism, and renal
osteodystrophy can occur. Decreased renal production of calcitriol contributes to hypocalcemia.
Decreased renal excretion of phosphate results in hyperphosphatemia. Secondary hyperparathyroidism is
common and can develop in renal failure before abnormalities in Ca or phosphate concentrations occur.
For this reason, monitoring PTH in patients with moderate CKD, even before hyperphosphatemia occurs,
has been recommended.
Renal osteodystrophy (abnormal bone mineralization resulting from hyperparathyroidism, calcitriol
deficiency, elevated serum phosphate, or low or normal serum Ca) usually takes the form of increased
bone turnover due to hyperparathyroid bone disease (osteitis fibrosa) but can also involve decreased
bone turnover due to adynamic bone disease (with increased parathyroid suppression) or osteomalacia.
Calcitriol deficiency may cause osteopenia or osteomalacia.
Moderate acidosis (plasma HCO
content 15 to 20 mmol/L) and anemia are characteristic. The anemia of
CKD is normochromicnormocytic, with an Hct of 20 to 30% (35 to 50% in patients with polycystic kidney
disease). It is usually caused by deficient erythropoietin production due to a reduction of functional renal
mass (see
Chapter 105
). Other causes include deficiencies of iron, folate, and vitamin B
.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients with mildly diminished renal reserve are asymptomatic. Even patients with mild to moderate renal
insufficiency may have no symptoms despite elevated BUN and creatinine. Nocturia is often noted,
principally due to a failure to concentrate the urine. Lassitude, fatigue, anorexia, and decreased mental
acuity often are the earliest manifestations of uremia.
With more severe renal insufficiency (eg, creatinine clearance < 10 mL/min for patients without diabetes
and < 15 mL/min for those with diabetes), neuromuscular symptoms may be present, including coarse
muscular twitches, peripheral sensory and motor neuropathies, muscle cramps, hyperreflexia, and
seizures (usually the result of hypertensive or metabolic encephalopathy). Anorexia, nausea, vomiting,
weight loss, stomatitis, and an unpleasant taste in the mouth are almost uniformly present. The skin may
be yellow-brown. Occasionally, urea from sweat crystallizes on the skin (uremic frost). Pruritus may be
especially uncomfortable. Undernutrition leading to generalized tissue wasting is a prominent feature of
chronic uremia.
In advanced CKD, pericarditis and GI ulceration and bleeding are common. Hypertension is present in >
80% of patients with advanced CKD, is usually related to hypervolemia, and is occasionally the result of
activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Heart failure caused by hypertension or coronary
artery disease and renal retention of Na and water may lead to dependent edema.
Diagnosis
• Electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, phosphate, Ca, CBC, urinalysis (including urinary sediment examination)
===PAGE:2606===
• Ultrasonography
• Sometimes renal biopsy
CKD is usually first suspected when serum creatinine rises. The initial step is to determine whether the
renal failure is acute, chronic, or acute superimposed on chronic (ie, an acute disease that further
compromises renal function in a patient with CKD—see
Table 239-5
). The cause of renal failure is also determined. Sometimes determining the duration of renal
failure helps determine the cause; sometimes it is easier to determine the cause than the duration, and
determining the cause helps determine the duration.
Testing includes urinalysis with examination of the urinary sediment, electrolytes, urea nitrogen, and
creatinine, phosphate, Ca, and CBC. Sometimes specific serologic tests are needed to determine the
cause. Distinguishing acute from chronic renal failure is most helped by a history of an elevated
creatinine
[Table 239-5.
Distinguishing Acute Kidney Failure from Chronic Kidney Disease]
level or abnormal urinalysis. Urinalysis findings depend on the nature of the underlying disorder, but
broad (> 3 WBC diameters wide) or especially waxy (highly refractile) casts often are prominent in
advanced renal failure of any cause.
An ultrasound examination of the kidneys is usually helpful in evaluating for obstructive uropathy and in
distinguishing acute from chronic renal failure based on kidney size. Except in certain conditions (see
Table 239-4
), patients with chronic renal failure have small shrunken kidneys (usually < 10 cm in length)
with thinned, hyperechoic cortex. Obtaining a precise diagnosis becomes increasingly difficult as renal
function reaches values close to those of end-stage renal disease. The definitive diagnostic tool is renal
biopsy, but it is not recommended when ultrasonography indicates small, fibrotic kidneys.
Classification:
Staging CKD is a way of quantifying its severity. CKD has been classified into 5 stages.
• Stage 1: Normal GFR (≥ 90 mL/min/1.73 m
) plus either persistent albuminuria or known structural or
hereditary renal disease
• Stage 2: GFR 60 to 89 mL/min/1.73 m
• Stage 3: GFR 30 to 59 mL/min/1.73 m
• Stage 4: GFR 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m
• Stage 5: GFR < 15 mL/min/1.73 m
GFR (in mL/min/1.73 m
) in CKD can be estimated by: 186.3 × (serum creatinine)
-1.154
× (age)
-0.203
.
The result is multiplied by 0.742 if the patient is female and by 1.21 if African American. For female African
Americans, the result is multiplied by 0.742 × 1.21 (0.898).
Prognosis
Progression of CKD is predicted in most cases by the degree of proteinuria. Patients with nephroticrange proteinuria (> 3 g/24 h or urine protein/creatinine > 3) usually have a poorer prognosis and
progress to renal failure more rapidly. Progression may occur even if the underlying disorder is not active.
In patients with urine protein < 1.5 g/24 h, progression usually occurs more slowly if at all. Hypertension is
associated with more rapid progression as well.
Treatment
===PAGE:2607===
• Control of underlying disorders
• Possible restriction of dietary protein, phosphate, and K
• Vitamin D supplements
• Treatment of anemia and heart failure
• Doses of all drugs adjusted as needed
• Dialysis for severely decreased GFR, uremic symptoms, or sometimes hyperkalemia or heart failure
Underlying disorders and contributory factors must be controlled. In particular, controlling hyperglycemia
in patients with diabetic nephropathy and controlling hypertension in all patients substantially slows
deterioration
of GFR. Target BP should be about 110 to 130/< 80 mm Hg. ACE inhibitors and angiotensin
II receptor blockers decrease the rate of decline in GFR in patients with most causes of CKD, particularly
those with proteinuria.
Activity need not be restricted, although fatigue and lassitude usually limit a patient's capacity for
exercise. Pruritus may respond to phosphate binders if serum phosphate is elevated. If patients do not
respond, ultraviolet phototherapy may help.
Nutrition:
Severe protein restriction in renal disease is controversial. However, moderate restriction (0.8
g/kg/day) is safe and easy for most patients to tolerate. Some experts recommend 0.6 g/kg/day for
patients with diabetes and, for patients without diabetes, > 0.8 g/kg/day if GFR is 25 to 55 mL/min/1.73
m
or 0.6 g/kg/day if GFR is 13 to 24 mL/min/1.73 m
. Many uremic symptoms markedly lessen when
protein catabolism and urea generation are reduced. Sufficient carbohydrate and fat are given to meet
energy requirements and prevent ketosis. Patients for whom < 0.8 g/kg/day has been prescribed should
be closely followed by a dietician.
Because dietary restrictions may reduce necessary vitamin intake, patients should take a multivitamin
containing water-soluble vitamins. Administration of vitamin A and E is unnecessary. Vitamin D in the form
of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (calcitriol) or its analogs should be given as indicated by PTH concentrations.
Dose is determined by stage of CKD, PTH concentration, and phosphate concentrations (see
Table 239-6
). Target levels for Ca are 8.4 to 9.5 mg/dL (2.10 to 2.37 mmol/L); for the Ca-phosphate
product, < 55 mg
/dL
.
A typical starting dose is calcitriol (or a calcitriol analog) 0.25
μ
g po once/day or 1 to 4
μ
g 2 times/wk.
PTH levels are not corrected to normal because doing so risks precipitating adynamic bone disease.
Dietary modification may be helpful for hypertriglyceridemia. In patients with hypercholesterolemia, a
statin is effective. Fibric acid derivatives (clofibrate, gemfibrozil) may increase risk of rhabdomyolysis in
patients with CKD, especially if taken with statin drugs, whereas ezetimibe (which reduces cholesterol
absorption) appears relatively safe. Correction of hypercholesterolemia may slow progression of the
underlying renal disease and reduce coronary risk.
Fluid and electrolytes: Water intake
is restricted only when serum Na concentration is < 135 mmol/L.
Na restriction
of 2 g/day benefits patients, especially those with edema, heart failure, or hypertension.
K intake
is closely related to meat, vegetable, and fruit ingestion and usually does not require
adjustment. However, foods (especially salt substitutes) rich in K should generally be avoided.
Hyperkalemia is infrequent (unless there is hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism or K-sparing diuretic
therapy) until end-stage renal failure, when intake may need to be restricted to ≤ 50 mmol/day. Mild
hyperkalemia (< 6 mmol/L) can be treated by reducing K intake and correcting metabolic acidosis. More
severe hyperkalemia (> 6 mmol/L) warrants urgent treatment (see pp.
===PAGE:2608===
and
).
Phosphate
restriction to < 1 g/day is often sufficient to maintain phosphate level in the target range
during the early phase of stages 3 and 4 CKD. However, in the later phases, phosphate binders, such as
Ca salts (acetate or carbonate but avoid citrate) or non-Ca-containing phosphate binders (sevelamer) are
often necessary. No more than 1500 mg/day of elemental Ca should be given as binders (2000 mg/day of
total Ca; binders plus dietary Ca).
Mild
acidosis
(pH 7.30 to 7.35) requires no therapy. However, most patients with chronic metabolic
acidosis who have a pH < 7.3 have a plasma HCO
content < 15 mmol/L and symptoms of anorexia,
lassitude, dyspnea, and exaggerated protein catabolism and renal osteodystrophy. NaHCO
1 to 2 g po
bid is given and amount is increased gradually until HCO
concentration is about 20 mEq/L or until
evidence of Na overloading prevents further therapy.
Anemia and coagulation disorders:
Anemia is treated to keep the Hb between 11 and 12 g/dL. Anemia
slowly responds to recombinant human erythropoietin (eg, epoetin alfa 50 to 150 units/kg sc 1 to 3
times/wk). Because of increased iron utilization with stimulated erythropoiesis, iron stores must be
replaced, usually with parenteral iron. Iron concentrations, iron-binding capacity, and ferritin
concentrations should be followed closely. Transfusion should not be undertaken unless anemia is severe
(Hb < 8 g/dL) or causes symptoms.
The bleeding tendency in CKD rarely needs treatment. Cryoprecipitate, RBC transfusions, desmopressin
0.3 to 0.4
μ
g/kg (20
μ
g maximum) in 20 mL of isotonic saline IV over 20 to 30 min, or conjugated
estrogens 2.5 to 5 mg po once/day help when needed. The effects of these treatments last 12 to 48 h,
except for conjugated estrogens, which may last for several days.
Heart failure:
Symptomatic heart failure is treated with Na restriction and diuretics
[Table 239-6.
Target Levels for PTH and Phosphate in Chronic Kidney Disease]
(. If left ventricular function is depressed, ACE inhibitors and
β
-blockers (carvedilol or
metoprolol) should be used. Digoxin may be added, but the dosage must be reduced. Diuretics such as
furosemide usually are effective even when renal function is markedly reduced, although large doses may
be needed. Moderate or severe hypertension should be treated to avoid its deleterious effects on cardiac
and renal function. Patients who do not respond to moderate reduction in Na intake (4 g/day) need further
dietary Na restriction (2 g/day) and diuretic therapy (furosemide 80 to 240 mg po bid).
Hydrochlorothiazide 50 mg po bid or metolazone 5 to 10 mg po once/day may be added to high-dose
furosemide therapy if hypertension or edema is not controlled. Even in renal failure, the combination of a
thiazide with a loop diuretic is quite potent and must be used with caution to avoid overdiuresis.
Occasionally, dialysis may be required to control heart failure. If reduction of the ECF volume does not
control BP, conventional antihypertensives are added. Azotemia may increase with such treatment but is
acceptable short-term, even if temporary dialysis is required.
Drugs:
Renal excretion of drugs is often impaired in patients with renal failure. Common drugs that
require revised dosing include penicillins, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones,
vancomycin, and digoxin. Hemodialysis reduces the serum concentrations of some drugs, which should
be supplemented after hemodialysis. It is strongly recommended that physicians consult a reference on
drug dosing in renal failure before prescribing drugs to these very vulnerable patients.
Certain drugs should be avoided entirely in patients undergoing dialysis. They include nitrofurantoin,
metformin, and phenazopyridine.
Dialysis:
Dialysis is initiated when GFR reaches ≤ 10 mL/min in a patient without diabetes or ≤ 15
mL/min in a patient with diabetes. Patients with uremic symptoms (eg, anorexia, vomiting, weight loss,
pericarditis, pleuritis) or fluid overload who have no other conditions that would explain these symptoms
should be started on dialysis even if GFR has not reached these levels. Other indications for dialysis in
chronic kidney disease include hyperkalemia that causes ECG changes or that is persistent (K > 6
===PAGE:2609===
mmol/L) despite dietary restriction, heart failure poorly controlled with drugs, and metabolic acidosis that
is difficult to control. (For dialysis preparation, see p.
.)
Transplantation:
If a living kidney donor is available, better long-term outcomes occur when a patient
receives the transplanted kidney early, even before beginning dialysis. Patients who are transplant
candidates but have no living donor should receive a cadaveric renal transplant as early after initiating
dialysis as possible (.
===PAGE:2610===
Chapter 240. Renal Replacement Therapy
Introduction
Renal replacement therapy (RRT) replaces nonendocrine kidney function in patients with renal failure
and is occasionally used for some forms of poisoning. Techniques include intermittent hemodialysis,
continuous hemofiltration and hemodialysis, and peritoneal dialysis. All modalities exchange solute and
remove fluid from the blood, using dialysis and filtration across permeable membranes.
RRT does not correct the endocrine abnormalities (decreased erythropoietin and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D
production) of renal failure. In dialysis, serum solute (eg, Na, Cl, K, HCO
, Ca, Mg, phosphate, urea,
creatinine, uric acid) diffuses passively between fluid compartments down a concentration gradient
(diffusive transport). In filtration, serum water passes between compartments down a hydrostatic pressure
gradient, dragging solute with it (convective transport). The two processes are often used in combination
(hemodiafiltration). Hemoperfusion is a rarely used technique that removes toxins by flowing blood over a
bed of adsorbent material (usually a resin compound or charcoal).
Dialysis and filtration can be done intermittently or continuously. Continuous therapy is used exclusively
for acute renal failure; benefits over intermittent therapy are improved tolerability as a result of slower
removal of solute and water. All forms of RRT except peritoneal dialysis require vascular access;
continuous techniques require a direct arteriovenous or venovenous circuit.
The choice of technique depends on multiple factors, including the primary need (eg, solute or water
removal or both), underlying indication (eg, acute or chronic kidney failure, poisoning), vascular access,
hemodynamic stability, availability, local expertise, and patient preference.
Table 240-1
lists indications and contraindications for the common forms of RRT.
Care of patients requiring long-term RRT ideally involves a nephrologist, a psychiatrist, a social worker, a
renal dietitian, dialysis nurses, and the transplant surgical team. Patient assessment should begin when
end-stage renal failure is anticipated but before RRT is needed, so that care can be coordinated and
patients can be educated about their options, evaluated for resources and needs, and have vascular
access created. Psychosocial evaluation is important because RRT makes patients socially and
emotionally vulnerable. It interrupts routine work, school, and leisure activities; creates anger, frustration,
tension, and guilt surrounding dependency; and alters body image because of reduced physical energy,
loss or change in sexual function, changed appearance due to access surgery, dialysis catheter
placement, needle marks, bone disease, or other physical deterioration. Some patients express these
feelings by nonadherence or by being uncooperative with the treatment team. Personality traits that
improve prognosis for successful long-term adjustment include adaptability, independence, self-control,
tolerance for frustration, and optimism. Emotional stability, family encouragement, consistent treatment
team support, and patient and family participation in decision making are also important. Programs that
encourage patient independence and maximal resumption of former life interests are more successful in
decreasing psychosocial problems.
Hemodialysis
(Intermittent Hemodialysis)
In hemodialysis, a patient's blood is pumped into a dialyzer containing 2 fluid compartments configured as
bundles of hollow fiber capillary tubes or as parallel, sandwiched sheets of semipermeable membranes.
In either configuration, blood in the first compartment is pumped along one side of a semi-permeable
membrane while a crystalloid solution (dialysate) is pumped along the other side, in a separate
compartment, in the opposite direction. Concentration gradients of solute between blood and dialysate
lead to desired changes in the patient's serum solutes, such as a reduction in urea nitrogen and
creatinine; an increase in HCO
; and equilibration of Na, Cl, K, and Mg. The dialysate compartment is
under negative pressure relative to the blood compartment to prevent filtration of dialysate into the
bloodstream and to remove the excess fluid from the patient. The dialyzed blood is then returned to the
patient.
===PAGE:2611===
The patient is usually systemically anticoagulated during hemodialysis to prevent blood from clotting in
the dialysis machine. However hemodialysis treatment may also be done with regional anticoagulation of
the
[Table 240-1.
Indications and Contraindications to Common Renal Replacement Therapies]
dialysis circuit (using heparin or trisodium citrate) or with saline flush, in which 50 to 100 mL of saline
every 15 to 30 min clears the dialysis circuit of any blood clots.
The immediate objectives of hemodialysis are to correct electrolyte and fluid imbalances and remove
toxins. Longer-term objectives in patients with renal failure are to
• Optimize the patient's functional status, comfort, and BP
• Prevent uremia and its complications
• Improve survival
The optimal "dose" of hemodialysis is uncertain, but most patients do well with 3 to 5 h of hemodialysis 3
times/wk. One way to assess the adequacy of each session is by measuring BUN before and after each
session. A ≥ 65% decrease of BUN from predialysis level ([predialysis BUN - postdialysis
BUN]/predialysis BUN × 100% is ≥ 65%) indicates an adequate session. Specialists may use other, more
calculation-intensive formulas, such as KT/V ≥ 1.2 (where K is the urea clearance of the dialyzer in
mL/min, T is dialysis time in minutes, and V is volume of distribution
of urea [total body water] in mL).
Hemodialysis dose can be increased by increasing time on dialysis, blood flow, membrane surface area,
and membrane porosity, but benefits are unproven. Nightly hemodialysis sessions (6 to 8 h, 5 to 6
days/wk) and short (1.5- to 2.5-h) daily sessions are being studied as ways to increase effectiveness and
decrease complications.
Vascular access:
Hemodialysis is usually done through a surgically created arteriovenous fistula.
However, dialysis can be done through a central vein catheter if an arteriovenous fistula has not yet been
created or is not ready for use or if creation of an arteriovenous fistula is impossible. The primary
disadvantages of central vein catheters are a relatively narrow caliber that does not allow for blood flow
high enough to achieve optimal clearance and a high risk of catheter site infection and thrombosis.
Central venous catheterization for hemodialysis is best done by using the right internal jugular vein. Most
internal jugular vein catheters remain useful for 2 to 6 wk if strict aseptic skin care is practiced and if the
catheter is used only for hemodialysis. Also, catheters with a subcutaneous tunnel and fabric cuff have a
longer life span (50% functional at 1 yr) and may be useful for patients in whom creation of an
arteriovenous fistula is impossible.
Surgically created arteriovenous fistulas are better than central venous catheters because they are more
durable and less likely to become infected. But they are also prone to complications (thrombosis,
infection, aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm). A newly created fistula may take 3 to 6 mo to mature and be
useable, so in patients with chronic renal failure, the fistula should be created early, when GFR is
between 25 and 30 mL/min. The surgical procedure anastomoses the radial, brachial, or femoral artery to
an adjacent vein in an end-of-the-vein to the side-of-the-artery fashion. When the adjacent vein is not
suitable for access creation, a piece of prosthetic graft is used. For patients who have poor veins, an
autogenous saphenous vein graft is also an option.
Vascular access complications:
Complications such as infection, thrombosis, and pseudoaneurysm or
aneurysm, significantly limit the quality of hemodialysis that can be delivered, increase long-term
morbidity and mortality, and are common enough that patients and practitioners should be vigilant for
suggestive changes. These changes include pain, erythema, breaks in the skin overlying the access,
absence of bruit and pulse in the access, hematoma around the access, and prolonged bleeding from the
dialysis cannula puncture site. Infection is treated with antibiotics, surgery, or both.
The fistula may be monitored for signs of impending failure by serial Doppler dilution blood flow
===PAGE:2612===
measurements, thermal or urea dilution techniques, or by measurement of the static venous chamber
pressures. One of these tests is usually recommended at least monthly. Treatment of thrombosis,
pseudoaneurysm, or aneurysm may involve angioplasty, stenting, and surgery.
Dialysis complications:
Complications are listed in
Table 240-2
.
Hypotension is most common and has multiple causes, including too-rapid water removal, osmotic fluid
shifts across cell membranes, acetate in dialysate, heat-related vasodilation, and underlying conditions
(eg, autonomic neuropathy, myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias).
Many patients also experience cramps, pruritus, nausea and vomiting, headache, and chest and back
pain. In most cases, these complications occur for unknown reasons, but some may be part of a first-use
syndrome (when the patient's blood is exposed to cuprophane or cellulose membranes in the dialyzer) or
dialysis disequilibrium syndrome, a syndrome thought to be caused by cerebral edema. More severe
cases of dialysis dys-equilibrium manifest as disorientation, restlessness, blurred vision, confusion,
seizures, and even death.
Dialysis amyloidosis affects patients who have been on hemodialysis for years and manifests as carpal
tunnel syndrome, bone cysts, arthritis, and cervical spondyloarthropathy.
Prognosis:
Overall adjusted annual mortality in hemodialysis-dependent patients tends to be about 20%.
The 5-yr survival rate is lower for patients with diabetes than for patients with glomerulonephritis. Death is
generally mostly attributable to cardiovascular disease, followed by infection and withdrawal from
hemodialysis. Blacks have usually had a higher survival rate in all age groups. Nonhemodialysis
contributors to mortality include comorbidities (eg, hyperparathyroidism, diabetes), age, undernutrition,
and late referral for dialysis.
Continuous Hemofiltration and Hemodialysis
Continuous hemofiltration and hemodialysis procedures filter and dialyze blood without interruption. The
principal advantage is the ability to remove large volumes of fluid while
[Table 240-2.
Complications of Renal Replacement Therapy]
avoiding the hypotensive episodes caused by intermittent hemodialysis and its intermittent removal of
large volumes of fluid. These procedures are therefore indicated for managing patients with acute renal
failure who are hemo-dynamically unstable, who must receive large volumes of fluid (eg, patients with
multiple organ system failure or shock who require hyperalimentation or vasopressor drips), or both.
In continuous hemofiltration, water and solutes up to 20,000 daltons in molecular weight filter from the
blood by convection through a permeable membrane; the filtrate is discarded, and the patient must
receive infusions of physiologically balanced water and electrolytes. A dialysis circuit can be added to the
filter to improve solute clearance. Procedures may be arteriovenous or venovenous. In arteriovenous
procedures, the femoral artery is cannulated, and arterial pressure pushes blood through the filter into the
femoral vein. Filtration rates are typically low, especially in hypotensive
patients. In continuous
venovenous procedures, a pump is required to push blood from one large vein (femoral, subclavian, or
internal jugular) through the dialysis circuit and back into the venous circulation. Using a double-lumen
catheter, blood is drawn from and returned to the same vein.
The arteriovenous route has the advantage of a simple system without the requirement of a pump but
may give unreliable blood flows in hypotensive patients. Advantages of the venovenous route include
better control of BP and filtration rate with smoother removal of fluid. Also, the venovenous route requires
cannulation of only one vessel. Neither procedure is proven more effective than the other. All require
systemic anticoagulation.
Peritoneal Dialysis
===PAGE:2613===
Peritoneal dialysis uses the peritoneum as a natural permeable membrane through which water and
solutes can equilibrate. Peritoneal dialysis is less physiologically stressful than hemodialysis, does not
require vascular access, can be done at home, and allows patients much greater flexibility. However, it
requires much more patient involvement. Of the total estimated resting splanchnic blood flow of 1200
mL/min, only about 70 mL/min comes into contact with the peritoneum, so solute equilibration occurs
much more slowly than in hemodialysis. But because solute and water clearance is a function of contact
time and peritoneal dialysis is done nearly continuously, efficacy in terms of solute removal is equivalent
to that obtained with hemodialysis.
In general, dialysate is instilled through a catheter into the peritoneal space, is left to dwell, and then
drained. In the double-bag technique, the patient drains the fluid instilled in the abdomen in one bag and
then infuses fluid from the other bag into the peritoneal cavity.
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
(CAPD) is most commonly used because of ease of
performance and lack of need for a machine to do the exchanges. A typical adult infuses 2 to 3 L
(children, 30 to 40 mL/kg) of dialysate 4 to 5 times/day; dialysate is allowed to remain for 4 h during the
day and 8 to 12 h at night. The solution is manually drained. Flushing the infusion set before filling
reduces peritonitis rates.
Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis
(CCPD) uses a long (12 to 15 h) daytime dwell and 3 to 6
nighttime exchanges done with an automated cycler. Patients have more freedom during the day, but
cumbersome equipment inhibits nighttime mobility. Some patients require a combination of CAPD and
CCPD to achieve adequate clearances.
Intermittent peritoneal dialysis
(IPD) may be done using manual or automated techniques or both.
Manual IPD is simplest, achieves the highest solute clearance, and is useful chiefly in the treatment of
acute renal failure. In adults, 2 to 3 L (in children, 30 to 40 mL/kg) of dialysate, warmed to 37° C, is
infused over 10 to 15 min, allowed to dwell in the peritoneal cavity for 30 to 40 min, and drained in about
10 to 15 min. Multiple exchanges may be needed over 12 to 48 h. Automated cycler IPD uses an
automated system that cycles the infusion and removal of dialysate. The cycler is generally set up at
bedtime, and treatment occurs while the patient sleeps.
Access:
Peritoneal dialysis requires intraperitoneal access, usually via a soft silicone rubber or porous
polyurethane catheter. The catheter may be implanted in the operating room under direct visualization or
at the bedside by blind insertion of a trocar or under visualization through a peritoneoscope. Most
catheters incorporate a polyester fabric cuff that allows tissue ingrowth from the skin or preperitoneal
fascia, ideally resulting in a watertight, bacteria-impervious seal and preventing introduction of organisms
along the catheter tract. Allowing 10 to 14 days between catheter implantation and use improves healing
and reduces the frequency of early pericatheter leakage of dialysate. Double-cuff catheters are better
than single-cuff catheters. Also, a caudally directed exit site (the opening of the tunnel through which the
catheter enters the peritoneal cavity) lowers the incidence of exit site infections (eg, by collecting less
water while showering).
Once access is established, the patient undergoes a peritoneal equilibration test, in which dialysate
drained after a 4-h dwell time is analyzed and compared with serum to determine solute clearance rates.
This procedure helps determine the patient's peritoneal transport characteristics, the dose of dialysis
required, and the most appropriate technique. In general, adequacy is defined as a weekly KT/V ≥ 1.7
(where K is the urea clearance in mL/min, T is dialysis time in minutes, and V is volume of distribution of
urea [total body water] in mL).
Complications:
(See also
Table 240-2
). The most important and common are peritonitis and catheter
exit site infection. Symptoms and signs of peritonitis include abdominal pain, cloudy peritoneal fluid, fever,
nausea, and tenderness to palpation. Diagnosis is made
by clinical criteria and testing. A sample of
peritoneal fluid is obtained for Gram stain, culture, and WBC count with differential. Gram stain is often
unrevealing, but cultures are positive in > 90%. About 90% also have > 100 WBCs/
μ
L, usually neutrophils
(lymphocytes with fungal peritonitis). Negative cultures and WBC counts < 100/
μ
L do not exclude
peritonitis, so treatment is indicated if peritonitis is suspected based on clinical or laboratory criteria and
should begin immediately, before culture results are available. Peritoneal fluid studies may be falsely
===PAGE:2614===
negative due to prior antibiotic use, infection limited to the catheter exit site or tunnel, or sampling of too
little fluid.
Empiric treatment should be adapted to microbial resistance patterns of a given facility, but typical
recommendations are for initial treatment with drugs active against gram-positive organisms, eg, either
vancomycin or a 1st-generation cephalosporin, plus drugs active against gram-negative organisms, such
as a 3rd-generation cephalosporin (eg, ceftazidime) or an aminoglycoside (eg, gentamicin). Drugs are
adjusted based on the result of peritoneal dialysis fluid culture. Antibiotic therapy is usually given IV or
intraperitoneally (IP) for peritonitis and orally for exit site infections. Patients with peritonitis are admitted
to the hospital if IV treatment is necessary or if hemodynamic instability or other significant complications
arise.
Catheter tunnel exit site infection manifests as tenderness over the tunnel or at the exit site along with
crusting, erythema, or drainage. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment of infection without drainage is topical
antiseptics (eg, povidone iodine, chlorhexidine); if ineffective, a 1st-generation cephalosporin or a
penicillinase-resistant penicillin is used empirically, with culture results guiding subsequent therapy.
Prognosis:
Most cases of peritonitis respond to prompt antibiotic therapy, but those caused by
staphylococci or fungi also require dialysis catheter removal. Overall, 5-yr survival rate in peritoneal
dialysis patients is similar to that in hemodialysis patients (about 36%).
Medical Aspects of Long-Term Renal Replacement Therapy
All patients undergoing long-term renal replacement therapy (RRT) develop accompanying metabolic and
other disorders. These disorders require appropriate attention and adjunctive treatment. Approach varies
by patient but typically includes nutritional modifications and management of multiple metabolic
abnormalities (see also p.
).
Diet:
Diet should be tightly controlled. Generally, hemodialysis patients tend to be anorexic and should be
encouraged to eat a daily diet of 35 kcal/kg ideal body weight (in children, 40 to 70 kcal/kg/day depending
on age and activity). Daily Na intake should be limited to 2 g (88 mEq), K to 60 mEq, and P to 800 to 1000
mg. Fluid intake is limited to 1000 to 1500 mL/day and monitored by weight gain between dialysis
treatments. Patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis need a protein intake of 1.25 to 1.5 g/kg/day
(compared with 1.0 to 1.2 g/kg/day in hemodialysis patients) to replace peritoneal losses (10 to 20 g/day).
Survival is best among patients (both hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis) who maintain a serum albumin
> 3.5 g/dL; serum albumin is the best predictor of survival in these patients.
Anemia of renal failure:
The anemia that occurs in renal failure should be treated with recombinant
human erythropoietin and iron supplementation (. Because the absorption of oral iron is
limited, many patients require IV iron during hemodialysis (Na ferric gluconate and iron sucrose are
preferred to iron dextran, which has a higher incidence of anaphylaxis). Iron stores are assessed using
serum iron, total iron-binding capacity, and serum ferritin, typically before the start of erythropoietin
therapy and thereafter every other month. Iron deficiency is the most common reason for erythropoietin
resistance. However, some dialysis patients who have received multiple blood transfusions have iron
overload ( and should not be given iron supplements.
Coronary artery disease:
Risk factors must be managed aggressively because many patients who
require RRT are hypertensive, dyslipidemic, or diabetic; smoke cigarettes; and ultimately die of
cardiovascular disease. Continuous peritoneal dialysis is more effective than hemodialysis in removing
fluid; as a result, these patients require fewer antihypertensive drugs. Hypertension can also be
controlled in about 80% of hemodialysis patients by filtration alone. Antihypertensives are required in the
remaining 20%. Patients given ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers may need closer
monitoring of serum K
+
to prevent hyperkalemia. For approaches to dyslipidemia, see p.
; for diabetes
management, see p.
; and for smoking cessation, see p.
.
Hyperphosphatemia:
Hyperphosphatemia, a consequence of phosphate retention from low GFR,
increases risk for soft-tissue calcification, especially in coronary arteries and heart valves, when Ca × P >
70. It also stimulates development of secondary hyperparathyroidism. Initial treatment is Ca-based
===PAGE:2615===
antacids (eg, Ca carbonate 1.25 g po tid, Ca acetate 667 to 2001 mg po tid with meals), which function as
phosphate binders and reduce P levels. Constipation and abdominal bloating are complications of chronic
use. Patients should be monitored for hypercalcemia. Sevelamer hydrochloride 800 to 3200 mg or
lanthanum carbonate 250 to 1000 mg with each meal is an option for patients who develop hypercalcemia
while taking Ca-containing phosphate binders. Some patients (eg, those hospitalized with acute renal
failure and very high serum phosphate concentrations) require addition of aluminum-based phosphate
binders, but these should be used short-term only (eg, 1 to 2 wk as needed) to prevent aluminum toxicity.
Hypocalcemia and secondary hyperparathyroidism:
These complications often coexist as a result of
impaired renal production of vitamin D. Treatment of hypocalcemia is with calcitriol either orally (0.25 to
1.0
μ
g po once/day) or IV (1 to 3
μ
g in adults and 0.01 to 0.05
μ
g/kg in children per dialysis treatment).
Treatment can increase serum phosphate level and should be withheld until the level is normalized to
avoid soft-tissue calcification. Doses are titrated to suppress parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels, usually to
150 to 300 pg/mL (PTH reflects bone turnover better than serum Ca). Oversuppression decreases bone
turnover and leads to adynamic bone disease, which carries a high risk of fracture. The vitamin D
analogs doxercalciferol and paricalcitol have less effect on Ca and P absorption from the gut but
suppress PTH equally well. Early hints that these drugs may reduce mortality compared with calcitriol
require confirmation. Cinacalcet, a calcimimetic drug, increases sensitivity of parathyroid Ca-sensing
receptors to Ca and may also be indicated for hyperparathyroidism, but its role in routine practice has yet
to be defined. Its ability to decrease PTH levels by as much as 75% may decrease the need for
parathyroidectomy in these patients.
Aluminum toxicity:
Toxicity is a risk in hemodialysis patients who are exposed to aluminum-based
phosphate binders. Manifestations are osteomalacia, microcytic anemia (iron-resistant), and probably
dialysis dementia (a constellation of memory loss, dyspraxia, hallucinations, facial grimaces, myoclonus,
seizures, and a characteristic EEG). Diagnosis is by measurement of plasma aluminum before and 2 days
after IV infusion of defer-oxamine 5 mg/kg. Deferoxamine chelates aluminum, releasing it from tissues and
increasing the blood level among patients with aluminum toxicity. A rise in aluminum level of ≥ 50
μ
g/L
suggests toxicity. Aluminum-related osteomalacia can also be diagnosed by needle biopsy of bone
(requires special stains for aluminum). Treatment is avoidance of aluminum-based binders plus IV or
intraperitoneal deferoxamine.
Bone disease:
Renal osteodystrophy is abnormal bone mineralization. It has multiple causes, including
vitamin D deficiency, elevated serum phosphate, secondary hyperparathyroidism, chronic metabolic
acidosis, and aluminum toxicity; treatment is that of the cause.
Vitamin deficiencies:
Vitamin deficiencies result from dialysis-related loss of water-soluble vitamins (eg,
B, C, folate) and can be replenished with daily multivitamin supplements.
Calciphylaxis:
Calciphylaxis is a rare disorder of systemic arterial calcification causing ischemia and
necrosis in localized areas of the fat and skin of the trunk, buttocks, and lower extremities. Cause is
unknown, though hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D supplementation, and elevated Ca and P levels are
thought to contribute. It manifests as painful, violaceous, purpuric plaques and nodules that ulcerate, form
eschars, and become infected. It is often fatal. Treatment is usually supportive. Several cases have been
reported in which Na thiosul-fate given IV at the end of dialysis 3 times/wk along with aggressive efforts to
reduce the serum Ca × phosphate product has resulted in considerable improvement.
Constipation:
Constipation is a minor but troubling aspect of long-term RRT and, because of resulting
bowel distention, may interfere with catheter drainage in peritoneal dialysis. Many patients require
osmotic (eg, sorbitol) or bulk (eg, psyllium) laxatives. Laxatives containing Mg or phosphate should be
avoided.
===PAGE:2616===
Chapter 241. Penile and Scrotal Disorders
Introduction
Abnormalities of the external male genitals are psychologically disturbing and sometimes serious (see p.
; for testicular and scrotal anomalies, .
Balanitis, Posthitis, and Balanoposthitis
Balanitis is inflammation of the glans penis, posthitis is inflammation of the prepuce, and
balanoposthitis is inflammation of both.
Inflammation of the head of the penis has both infectious and noninfectious causes (see
Table 241-1
). Often, no cause can be found. Balanoposthitis often occurs in patients with a tight prepuce
(phimosis), which interferes with adequate hygiene. The subpreputial secretions may become infected
with anaerobic bacteria, resulting in inflammation. Diabetes mellitus predisposes to balanoposthitis.
Balanitis usually leads to posthitis except in circumcised patients. Chronic balanoposthitis increases the
risk of balanitis xerotica obliterans, phimosis, paraphimosis, and cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
Soreness, irritation, and a subpreputial discharge often occur 2 or 3 days after sexual intercourse.
Phimosis, superficial ulcerations, and inguinal adenopathy may follow.
Diagnosis
Patients should be tested for the causes listed, especially candidiasis. Blood should be tested for
glucose. The skin should be examined for lesions that suggest a dermatosis capable of genital
involvement. History should include investigation of latex condom use.
Treatment
Hygiene measures should be instituted and specific causes treated. Subpreputial irrigation to remove
secretions and detritus may be necessary. If phimosis persists after inflammation has resolved,
circumcision should be considered.
Cutaneous Penile Lesions
Common skin disorders and infections can cause cutaneous penile lesions (see
Table 241-2
).
Balanitis xerotica obliterans:
This lesion, another name for lichen sclerosus et atrophicus in men, is an
indurated, blanched area near the tip of the glans surrounding and often constricting the meatus. It results
from chronic inflammation and may lead to phimosis, paraphimosis, or urethral stricture. Topical drugs,
including corticosteroids, tacrolimus, antibiotics, and anti-inflammatory drugs, may be used, but their
efficacy is limited. Surgery is required in severe cases.
Carcinoma in situ:
This lesion can include erythroplasia of Queyrat and Bowen's disease of the penis;
both are well-circumscribed areas of reddish, velvety pigmentation in the genital area, usually on the
glans or at the corona, primarily in uncircumcised men. Paget's disease of the nipple (not to be confused
with Paget's disease of bone) is a rare intraepithelial adeno-carcinoma that can occur in extramammary
locations, including the penis. These conditions (and Bowenoid papulosis, which involves smaller, often
multiple papules on the shaft of the penis) are considered intraepithelial neoplasia or carcinoma in situ
and should be biopsied. Treatment consists of 5% fluorouracil
[Table 241-1.
Causes of Penile Inflammation]
[Table 241-2.
Causes of Cutaneous Penile Lesions]
===PAGE:2617===
cream, local excision, or laser therapy. Close follow-up is indicated.
Penile lichen planus:
This lesion occurs as small papules or macules, sometimes annular, on the glans
or shaft and may be mistaken for pemphigoid or erythema multiforme. Pruritus is common. A more severe
form of erosive lichen planus occurs on both oral and genital mucosa and is known as penogingival
syndrome in men and vulvovaginal gingival syndrome in women. Ulcers may develop and cause pain.
Lichen planus usually resolves spontaneously. If asymptomatic, it may not require treatment. Topical
corticosteroids may help relieve symptoms.
Pearly penile papules:
These papules are small, harmless angiofibromas that appear on the corona of
the penis as dome-shaped or hairlike projections and tend to be skin-colored. They may also appear on
the distal shaft. They are common, occurring in up to 10% of men. They are not associated with human
papillomavirus, although they may be mistaken for genital warts. Treatment is not required.
Contact dermatitis of the penis:
Contact dermatitis ( of the penis has become more
common with the widespread use of latex condoms. Dermatitis appears as red, pruritic lesions,
sometimes with weeping or fissures. Treatment is with topical corticosteroids and use of nonlatex
condoms (but not natural condoms, which do not provide adequate protection against HIV). Mild OTC
corticosteroids can be tried first, with use of middle or high potency prescription preparations as needed.
Epididymitis
Epididymitis is inflammation of the epididymis, occasionally accompanied by inflammation of
the testis (epididymo-orchitis). Scrotal pain and swelling usually occur unilaterally. Diagnosis is
based on physical examination. Treatment is with antibiotics, analgesics, and scrotal support.
Etiology
Bacterial:
Most epididymitis (and epididymoorchitis) is caused by bacteria. When inflammation involves
the vas deferens, vasitis ensues. When all spermatic cord structures also are involved, the diagnosis is
funiculitis. Rarely, epididymal abscess, scrotal extra-epididymal abscess, pyocele (accumulation of pus
within a hydrocele), or testicular infarction occurs.
In men < 35 yr, most cases are due to a sexually transmitted pathogen, especially
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
or
Chlamydia trachomatis
. Infection may begin as urethritis. In men > 35 yr, most cases are due to gramnegative coliform bacilli and typically occur in patients with urologic abnormalities, indwelling catheters, or
recent urologic procedures. Tuberculous epididymitis and syphilitic gummas are rare in the US except in
immunocompromised (eg, HIV-infected) patients.
Nonbacterial:
Viral causes (eg, cytomegalovirus infection) and mycotic causes (eg, actinomycosis,
blastomycosis) are rare in the US except in immunocompromised (eg, HIV-infected) patients. Epididymitis
and epididymo-orchitis of noninfectious etiology may be due to chemical irritation secondary to a
retrograde flow of urine into the epididymis, which may occur with Valsalva maneuver (eg, with heavy
lifting) or after local trauma.
Symptoms and Signs
Scrotal pain occurs in both bacterial and nonbacterial epididymitis. Pain can be severe and is sometimes
referred to the abdomen. In bacterial epididymitis, patients may also have fever, nausea, or urinary
symptoms. Urethral discharge may be present if the cause is urethritis.
Physical examination reveals swelling, induration, marked tenderness, and sometimes erythema of a
portion of or all of the affected epididymis and, sometimes, the adjacent testis. Sepsis is suggested by
fever, tachycardia, hypotension, and a toxic appearance.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:2618===
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes urethral swab and urine culture
Diagnosis is confirmed by finding swelling and tenderness of the epididymis. However, unless findings
are clearly isolated to the epididymis, testicular torsion ( must also be considered, particularly
in patients < 30 yr; immediate color Doppler ultrasonography is indicated. A GU consultation is indicated if
the cause is unclear or the disorder is recurrent.
Urethritis suggests that the cause of epididymitis is a sexually transmitted pathogen, and a urethral swab
is sent for gonococcus and chlamydia culture or PCR. Otherwise, the infecting organism usually can be
identified by urine culture. Urinalysis and culture are normal in nonbacterial causes.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
• Supportive measures
Treatment consists of bed rest, scrotal elevation (eg, with a jockstrap when upright) to decrease
repetitive, minor bumps, scrotal ice packs, anti-inflammatory analgesics, and a broad-spectrum antibiotic
such as ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid or levofloxacin 500 mg po once/day for 21 to 30 days. Alternatively,
doxycycline 100 mg po bid or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole double-strength (160/800 mg) po bid may by
used. If sepsis is suspected, an aminoglycoside such as tobramycin 1 mg/kg IV q 8 h or a 3rd-generation
cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone 1 to 2 g once/day IV may be useful until the infecting organism and its
sensitivities are known. Abscess and pyocele usually require surgical drainage.
Recurrent bacterial epididymitis secondary to incurable chronic urethritis or prostatitis occasionally can be
prevented by vasectomy. An epididymectomy, occasionally done for chronic epididymitis, may not relieve
symptoms. Patients who must continuously wear an indwelling urethral catheter are prone to develop
recurrent epididymitis and epididymo-orchitis. In such cases, placement of a suprapubic cystostomy or
institution of a self-catheterization regimen may be useful.
Treatment of nonbacterial epididymitis includes the above general measures, but antimicrobial therapy is
not warranted. Nerve block of the spermatic cord with local anesthesia can relieve symptoms in severe,
persistent cases.
Orchitis
Orchitis is infection of the testes, typically with mumps virus. Symptoms are testicular pain and
swelling. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is symptomatic. Antibiotics are given if bacterial
infection is identified.
Isolated orchitis (ie, infection localized to the testes) is nearly always viral in origin, and most cases are
due to mumps. Rare causes include congenital syphilis, TB, leprosy, echovirus infection, lymphocytic
choriomeningitis, coxsackievirus infection, infectious mononucleosis, varicella, and infection with group B
arborviruses. Most bacterial causes also involve the epididymis (epididymo-orchitis—.
Orchitis develops in 20 to 25% of males with mumps; 80% of cases occur in patients < 10 yr. Two thirds
of cases are unilateral and one third bilateral. Sixty percent of patients with mumps orchitis develop
testicular atrophy in at least one testis. Atrophy is unrelated to fertility or to the severity of the orchitis. The
incidence of tumor does not appear to be increased, but unilateral disease diminishes fertility in one
fourth of men after unilateral mumps orchitis and in two thirds of men who have had bilateral disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Unilateral mumps orchitis develops acutely between 4 and 7 days after parotid swelling in mumps. In 30%
of cases, the disease spreads to the other testis in 1 to 9 days. Pain may be of any degree of severity. In
===PAGE:2619===
addition to pain and swelling of the testes, systemic symptoms may develop, such as malaise, fever,
nausea, headache, and myalgias. Testicular examination reveals tenderness, enlargement, and
induration of the testis and edema and erythema of the scrotal skin.
Other infectious agents cause similar symptoms with speed of onset and intensity related to their
pathogenicity.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation and selective testing
History and physical examination usually indicate the diagnosis. Urgent differentiation of orchitis from
testicular torsion and other causes of acute scrotal swelling and pain is accomplished with color Doppler
ultrasonography. Mumps can be confirmed by serum immunofluorescence antibody testing. Other
infectious agents may be identified by urine culture or serology.
Treatment
Supportive care with analgesics and hot or cold packs is sufficient if bacterial infection has been ruled
out. Bacterial causes are treated with appropriate antibiotics. Urologic follow-up is recommended.
Peyronie's Disease
Peyronie's disease is fibrosis of the cavernous sheaths leading to contracture of the investing
fascia of the corpora, resulting in a deviated and sometimes painful erection.
The disease occurs in adults. The cause is unknown but appears to be similar to that of Dupuytren's
contracture. The contracture usually results in deviation of the erect penis to the involved side,
occasionally causes painful erections, and may prevent penetration. Fibrosis may extend into the corpus
cavernosum, compromising tumescence distally.
Resolution may occur spontaneously over many months. Mild Peyronie's disease that does not cause
sexual dysfunction does not warrant treatment.
Treatment
Treatment results are unpredictable. Oral vitamin E and K para-aminobenzoate have had varied success.
Surgical removal of the fibrosis and replacement with a patch graft may be successful or may result in
further scarring and exaggeration of the defect. A series of local injections of verapamil or high-potency
corticosteroids into the plaque may be effective, but oral corticosteroids are not. Ultrasound treatments
can stimulate blood flow, which may prevent further scarring. Radiation therapy may decrease pain;
however, radiation often worsens tissue damage. To assist penetration, a prosthesis may be implanted
but may require a patch procedure to straighten the penis.
Phimosis and Paraphimosis
Phimosis is inability to retract the foreskin; paraphimosis is entrapment of the foreskin in the
retracted position.
Phimosis:
Phimosis is normal in children and typically resolves by age 5. Treatment is not required in the
absence of complications such as balanitis, UTIs, urinary outlet obstruction, unresponsive dermatologic
disease, or suspicion of carcinoma.
Three months of betamethasone cream 0.05% bid to tid applied to the tip of the fore-skin and the area
touching the glans is often effective. Stretching the foreskin gently with 2 fingers or over an erect penis for
2 to 3 wk with care not to cause paraphimosis is also successful. Circumcision is the preferred surgical
option.
===PAGE:2620===
In adults, phimosis may result from balanoposthitis or prolonged irritation. Risk of UTI is increased. The
usual treatment is circumcision.
Paraphimosis:
Paraphimosis can occur when the foreskin is left retracted (behind the glans penis).
Retraction may occur during catheterization or physical examination. If the retracted foreskin is somewhat
tight, it functions as a tourniquet, causing the glans to swell, both blocking the foreskin from returning to
its normal position and worsening the constriction.
Paraphimosis should be regarded as an emergency, because constriction leads quickly to vascular
compromise and necrosis. Firm circumferential compression of the glans with the hand may relieve
edema sufficiently to allow the foreskin to be restored to its normal position. If this technique is ineffective,
a dorsal slit done using a local anesthetic relieves the condition temporarily. Circumcision is then done
when edema has resolved.
Testicular Torsion
Testicular torsion is an emergency condition due to rotation of the testis and consequent
strangulation of its blood supply. Symptoms are acute scrotal pain and swelling, nausea, and
vomiting. Diagnosis is based on physical examination and confirmed by color Doppler
ultrasonography. Treatment is immediate manual detorsion followed by surgical intervention.
Anomalous development of the tunica vaginalis and spermatic cord can lead to incomplete fixation of the
testis to the tunica vaginalis (bell-clapper deformity—see
Fig. 241-1
). This anomaly predisposes the testis to twisting on its cord spontaneously or after trauma.
The predisposing anomaly is present in about 12% of males. Torsion is most common between the ages
of 12 and 18, with a secondary peak in infancy. It is uncommon in men > age 30. It is more common in the
left testis.
Symptoms and Signs
Immediate symptoms are rapid onset of severe local pain, nausea, and vomiting,
[Fig. 241-1.
Abnormal testicular fixation leading to torsion.]
followed by scrotal edema and induration. Fever and urinary frequency may be present. The testis is
tender and may be elevated and horizontal. The contralateral testis may also be horizontal because the
anatomic defect is usually bilateral. The cremasteric reflex is usually absent on the affected side.
Sometimes, torsion can spontaneously resolve and then recur, which may appear to suggest a less acute
onset. Usually, however, the onset and resolution of pain is very rapid with each episode.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Often color Doppler ultrasonography
Torsion must be rapidly identified. Similar symptoms result mainly from epididymitis. With epididymitis,
pain and swelling are usually less acute and initially localized to the epididymis. However, in both
conditions, generalized swelling and tenderness often develop, making it difficult to distinguish torsion
from epididymitis. A clinical diagnosis usually is sufficient to proceed to treatment. An equivocal diagnosis
may be resolved by immediate imaging if available. Color Doppler ultrasonography of the scrotum is
preferred. Radioisotope scrotal scan is also diagnostic but takes longer and is less preferred.
Treatment
• Manual detorsion
• Surgery: Urgently if detorsion is unsuccessful, otherwise electively
===PAGE:2621===
Immediate manual detorsion without imaging can be attempted on the initial examination; its success is
variable. Because testes usually rotate inward, for detorsion the testis is rotated in an outward direction
(eg, for the left testis, detorsion is clockwise when viewed from the front—underneath the testis). More
than one rotation may be needed to resolve the torsion; pain relief guides the procedure. If detorsion fails,
immediate surgery is indicated, because exploration within a few hours offers the only hope of testicular
salvage. Testicular salvage drops rapidly from 80 to 100% at 6 to 8 h to near zero at 12 h. Fixation of the
contralateral testis is also done to prevent torsion on that side. When manual detorsion is successful,
bilateral testicular fixation is done electively.
Urethral Stricture
Urethral stricture is scarring that obstructs the anterior urethral lumen.
Urethral stricture can be congenital ( or acquired. Anything that damages the urethral
epithelium or corpus spongiosum can cause acquired stricture. The most common cause is trauma, such
as straddle injury and occasionally iatrogenic injury (eg, after traumatic endoscopy). Less common
causes may include lichen sclerosis and urethritis (usually chronic or untreated). Often strictures are
idiopathic.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms may not develop until the urethral lumen has been decreased considerably. Strictures may
cause a double-stream, obstructive voiding symptoms, or recurrent UTIs (including prostatitis). A urethral
diverticulum may develop, sometimes accompanied by abscess formation and, rarely, a fistula with
extravasation of urine into the scrotum and perineum.
Diagnosis
• Retrograde urethrography or cystoscopy
The diagnosis is usually suspected when urethral catheterization is difficult. It should also be considered
in males with gradual onset of obstructive symptoms or recurrent UTIs, particularly if they have risk
factors or are young. Diagnosis is usually by retrograde urethrography or cystoscopy.
Treatment
Treatment is determined by the type of obstruction. Often, dilation or endoscopy (internal urethrotomy) is
done. However, with certain types of strictures (eg, complicated or recurrent strictures), dilation and
endoscopy should be avoided; daily self-catheterization may be indicated. Open urethroplasty may be
indicated if the stricture is localized and causes recurrent problems.
===PAGE:2622===
Chapter 242. Benign Prostate Disease
Introduction
(Prostate Cancer is discussed elsewhere.)
The prostate can be affected by hyperplasia, infection, and cancer. The normal prostate is a walnut-sized
organ composed of glandular tissue that makes ejaculatory fluid, its only known function. Because
prostatic tissue surrounds the urethra, enlargement or other abnormalities may affect urination. The
prostate may be examined by digital rectal examination to determine its size, symmetry, texture, and
nodularity.
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
(Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy)
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is nonmalignant adenomatous overgrowth of the
periurethral prostate gland. Symptoms are those of bladder outlet obstruction—weak stream,
hesitancy, urinary frequency, urgency, nocturia, incomplete emptying, terminal dribbling,
overflow or urge incontinence, and complete urinary retention. Diagnosis is based primarily on
digital rectal examination and symptoms; cystoscopy, transrectal ultrasonography,
urodynamics, or other imaging studies may also be needed. Treatment options include 5
α
-
reductase inhibitors,
α
-blockers, and surgery.
Using the criteria of a prostate volume > 30 mL and a high American Urological Association Symptom
Score (see
Table 242-1
), the prevalence of BPH in men aged 55 to 74 without prostate cancer is 19%. But if voiding
criteria of a maximal urinary flow rate < 10 mL/sec and a postvoid residual urine volume > 50 mL are
included, the prevalence is only 4%. Based on autopsy studies, the prevalence of BPH increases from
8% in men aged 31 to 40 to 40 to 50% in men aged 51 to 60 and to > 80% in men > 80.
The etiology is unknown but probably involves hormonal changes associated with aging.
Pathophysiology
Multiple fibroadenomatous nodules develop in the periurethral region of the prostate, probably originating
within the periurethral glands rather than in the true fibromuscular prostate (surgical capsule), which is
displaced peripherally by progressive growth of the nodules.
As the lumen of the prostatic urethra narrows and lengthens, urine outflow is progressively obstructed.
Increased pressure associated with micturition and bladder distention
[Table 242-1.
American Urological Association Symptom Score for Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia]
can progress to hypertrophy of the bladder detrusor, trabeculation, cellule formation, and diverticula.
Incomplete bladder emptying causes stasis and predisposes to calculus formation and infection.
Prolonged obstruction, even if incomplete, can cause hydronephrosis and compromise renal function.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include progressive urinary frequency, urgency, and nocturia due to incomplete emptying and
rapid refilling of the bladder. Pain and dysuria are usually not present. Decreased size and force of the
urinary stream cause hesitancy and intermittency. Sensations of incomplete emptying, terminal dribbling,
overflow incontinence, or complete urinary retention may ensue. Straining to void can cause congestion
of superficial veins of the prostatic urethra and trigone, which may rupture and cause hematuria. Straining
also may acutely cause vasovagal syncope and, over the long term, may cause dilation of hemorrhoidal
veins or inguinal hernias.
===PAGE:2623===
Some patients present with sudden, complete urinary retention, with marked abdominal discomfort and
bladder distention. Retention may be precipitated by any of the following:
•
Prolonged attempts to retain urine
• Immobilization
• Exposure to cold
• Use of anesthetics, anticholinergics, sympathomimetics, opioids, or alcohol
Symptoms can be quantitated by the 7-question American Urological Association Symptom Score (see
Table 242-1
). This score also allows physicians to follow symptom progression: Scores > 10 but < 20
suggest moderate symptoms, and scores > 20 suggest severe symptoms.
On digital rectal examination, the prostate usually is enlarged and nontender, has a rubbery consistency,
and in many cases has lost the median furrow. However, prostate size as detected with digital rectal
examination may be misleading; an apparently small prostate may cause obstruction. If distended, the
urinary bladder may be palpable or percussible during abdominal examination.
Diagnosis
• Digital rectal examination
• Urinalysis and culture
• Prostate-specific antigen level
• Sometimes uroflowmetry and bladder ultrasonography
The lower urinary tract symptoms of BPH can also be caused by other disorders, including infection and
prostate cancer. Furthermore, BPH and prostate cancer may coexist. Although palpable prostate
tenderness suggests infection, digital rectal examination findings in BPH and cancer often overlap.
Although cancer may cause a stony, hard, nodular, irregularly enlarged prostate, most patients with
cancer, BPH, or both have a benign-feeling, enlarged prostate. Thus, patients with symptoms or palpable
prostatic abnormalities should undergo testing.
Typically, urinalysis and culture are done, and serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels are
measured. Men with moderate or severe symptoms of obstruction may also have uroflowmetry (an
objective test of urine volume and flow rate) with measurement of postvoid residual volume by bladder
ultrasonography. Flow rate < 15 mL/sec suggests obstruction, and postvoid residual volume > 100 mL
suggests retention.
Interpreting PSA levels can be complex. The PSA level is moderately elevated in 30 to 50% of patients
with BPH, depending on prostate size and degree of obstruction, and is elevated in 25 to 92% of patients
with prostate cancer, depending on the tumor volume. Typically, if the PSA level is > 4 ng/mL or if the
digital rectal examination indicates an abnormality (other than smooth, symmetric enlargement), then a
transrectal biopsy is recommended. For men < 50 or those at high risk of prostate cancer, a lower cutoff
(PSA > 2.5 ng/mL) may be used. Other measures, including rate of PSA increase, free-to-bound PSA
ratio, and other markers, may be useful (for full discussion of prostate cancer screening and diagnosis,
.
Transrectal biopsy is usually done with ultrasound guidance. Transrectal ultrasonography can also
measure prostate volume.
Clinical judgment must be used to evaluate the need for further testing. Contrast imaging studies (eg, CT
or IVU) are rarely necessary unless obstructive symptoms have been severe and prolonged. Upper
urinary tract abnormalities that usually result from bladder outlet obstruction include upward displacement
===PAGE:2624===
of the terminal portions of the ureters (fish hooking), ureteral dilation, and hydronephrosis. If an upper
tract imaging study is warranted due to pain or elevated serum creatinine level, ultrasonography may be
preferred because it avoids radiation and IV contrast exposure.
Treatment
• Avoidance of anticholinergics, sympathomimetics, and opioids
• Use of
α
-adrenergic blockers (eg, terazosin, doxazosin, tamsulosin, alfuzosin) or 5
α
-reductase inhibitors
(finasteride, dutasteride)
• Transurethral resection of the prostate or a less invasive procedure
Urinary retention:
Urinary retention requires immediate decompression. Passage of a standard urinary
catheter is first attempted; if a standard catheter cannot be passed, a catheter with a coude tip may be
effective. If this catheter cannot be passed, flexible cystoscopy or insertion of filiforms and followers
(guides and dilators that progressively open the urinary passage) may be necessary (this procedure
should usually be done by a urologist). Suprapubic percutaneous decompression of the bladder may be
used if transurethral approaches are unsuccessful.
Drug therapy:
For partial obstruction with troublesome symptoms, all anticholinergics,
sympathomimetics, and opioids should be stopped, and any infection should be treated with antibiotics.
For patients with mild to moderate obstructive symptoms,
α
-adrenergic blockers (eg, terazosin, doxazosin,
tamsulosin, alfuzosin) may improve voiding. The
α
-reductase inhibitors (finasteride, dutasteride) may
reduce prostate size, decreasing voiding problems over months, especially in patients with larger (> 30
mL) glands. A combination of both classes of drugs is superior to monotherapy.
Surgery:
Surgery is done when patients do not respond to drug therapy or develop recurrent UTI or
upper tract dilation. Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) is the standard. Erectile function and
continence are usually retained, although about 5 to 10% of patients experience some postsurgical
problems, most commonly retrograde ejaculation. The incidence of erectile dysfunction after TURP is
between 1 and 35%, and the incidence of incontinence is about 1 to 3%. About 10% of men undergoing
TURP need the procedure repeated within 10 yr because the prostate continues to grow. Larger
prostates (usually > 75 g) require open surgery via a suprapubic or retropubic approach. All surgical
methods require postoperative catheter drainage for 1 to 7 days.
Other procedures:
Less invasive procedures include microwave thermotherapy, laser ablation,
electrovaporization, high-intensity focused ultrasound, transurethral needle ablation, radiofrequency
vaporization, and intraurethral stents. The circumstances under which these procedures should be used
have not been firmly established, but those done in the physician's office (microwave thermotherapy and
radiofrequency procedures) are being more commonly used and do not require use of general or regional
anesthesia. Their long-term ability to alter the natural history of BPH is under study.
Prostatitis
(Prostatodynia)
Prostatitis refers to a disparate group of disorders that manifests with a combination of
predominantly irritative or obstructive urinary symptoms and perineal pain. Some cases result
from bacterial infection of the prostate gland and others, which are more common, from a
poorly understood combination of noninfectious inflammatory factors, spasm of the muscles of
the urogenital diaphragm, or both. Diagnosis is clinical, along with microscopic examination and
culture of urine samples obtained before and after prostate massage. Treatment is with an
antibiotic if the cause is bacterial. Nonbacterial causes are treated with warm sitz baths, muscle
relaxants, and anti-inflammatory drugs or anxiolytics.
Etiology
===PAGE:2625===
Prostatitis can be bacterial or, more commonly, nonbacterial. However, differentiating bacterial and
nonbacterial causes can be difficult, particularly in chronic prostatitis.
Bacterial prostatitis
can be acute or chronic and is usually caused by typical urinary pathogens (eg,
Klebsiella
,
Proteus
,
Escherichia coli
) and possibly by
Chlamydia
. How these pathogens enter and infect
the prostate is unknown. Chronic infections may be caused by sequestered bacteria that antibiotics have
not eradicated.
Nonbacterial prostatitis
can be inflammatory or noninflammatory. The mechanism is unknown but may
involve incomplete relaxation of the urinary sphincter and dyssynergic voiding. The resultant elevated
urinary pressure may cause urine reflux into the prostate (triggering an inflammatory response) or
increased pelvic autonomic activity leading to chronic pain ( without inflammation.
Classification
Prostatitis is classified into 4 categories (see
Table 242-2
). These categories are differentiated by clinical findings and by the presence or absence of
signs of infection and inflammation in 2 urine samples. The first sample is a midstream collection. Then
digital prostate massage is done, and patients void immediately; the first 10 mL of urine constitutes the
2nd sample. Infection is defined by bacterial growth in urine culture; inflammation is defined by the
presence of WBCs in urine.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms vary by category but typically involve some degree of urinary irritation or obstruction and pain.
Irritation is manifested by frequency and urgency, obstruction, a sensation of incomplete bladder
emptying, a need to void again shortly after urinating, or nocturia. Pain is typically in the perineum but
may be perceived at the tip of the penis, lower back, or testes. Some patients report painful ejaculation.
Acute bacterial prostatitis
often causes such systemic symptoms as fever, chills, malaise, and
myalgias. The prostate is exquisitely tender and focally or diffusely swollen, boggy, indurated, or a
combination. A generalized sepsis syndrome may result, characterized by tachycardia, tachypnea, and
sometimes hypotension.
Chronic bacterial prostatitis
manifests with recurrent episodes of infection with or without complete
resolution between bouts.
Symptoms and signs tend to be milder than in acute prostatitis.
Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome
typically has pain as the predominant complaint,
often including pain with ejaculation. The discomfort can be significant and often markedly interferes with
quality of life. Symptoms of urinary irritation or obstruction also may be present. On examination, the
prostate may be tender but usually is not boggy or swollen.
Asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis
causes no symptoms and is discovered incidentally during
evaluation for other prostate diseases when WBCs are present in the urine.
Diagnosis
• Urinalysis
• Prostate massage except possibly in acute bacterial prostatitis
Diagnosis of type I, II, or III is suspected clinically. Similar symptoms can result from urethritis, perirectal
abscess, or UTI. Examination is helpful diagnostically only in acute bacterial prostatitis.
Febrile patients with typical symptoms and signs of acute bacterial prostatitis usually have WBCs and
bacteria in a midstream urine sample. Prostate massage to obtain a postmassage urine sample is thought
to be unnecessary and possibly dangerous in these patients (although danger remains unproved)
because bacteremia can be induced. For the same reason, rectal examination should be done gently.
===PAGE:2626===
Blood cultures should be obtained in patients who have fever and severe weakness, confusion,
disorientation, hypotension, or cool extremities. For afebrile patients, urine samples before and after
massage are adequate for diagnosis.
For patients with acute or chronic bacterial prostatitis who do not respond favorably to antibiotics,
transrectal ultrasonography and sometimes cystoscopy may be necessary to rule out prostatic abscess or
destruction and inflammation of the seminal vesicles.
For patients with types II, III, and IV (non-acute prostatitis) disease, additional tests that can be considered
are cystoscopy and urine cytology (if hematuria is also present) and urodynamic measurements (if there
is suspicion of neurologic abnormalities or detrusorsphincter dyssynergia).
Treatment
Treatment varies significantly with etiology.
Acute bacterial prostatitis:
Nontoxic patients can be treated at home with antibiotics, bed rest,
analgesics, stool softeners, and hydration. Therapy with a fluoroquinolone (eg, ciprofloxacin 500 mg po
bid or ofloxacin 300 mg po bid) is usually effective and can be given until culture and sensitivity results
are known. If the clinical response is satisfactory,
[Table 242-2.
NIH Consensus Classification System for Prostatitis]
treatment is continued for about 30 days to prevent chronic bacterial prostatitis.
If sepsis is suspected, the patient is hospitalized and given broad-spectrum antibiotics IV (eg, ampicillin
plus gentamicin) started after the appropriate cultures are taken and continued until the bacterial
sensitivity is known. If the clinical response is adequate, IV therapy is continued until the patient is afebrile
for 24 to 48 h, followed by oral therapy usually for 4 wk.
Adjunctive therapies include NSAIDs and potentially
α
-blockers (if bladder emptying is poor) and
supportive measures such as sitz baths. Rarely, prostate abscess develops, requiring surgical drainage.
Chronic bacterial prostatitis:
Chronic bacterial prostatitis is treated with oral antibiotics such as
fluoroquinolones for at least 6 wk. Therapy is guided by culture results; empiric antibiotic treatment for
patients with equivocal or negative culture results has a low success rate. Other treatments include antiinflammatory drugs, muscle relaxants (eg, cyclobenzaprine to possibly relieve spasm of the pelvic
muscles),
α
-adrenergic blockers, and other symptomatic measures, such as sitz baths.
Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome:
Treatment is difficult and often unrewarding. In
addition to considering any and all of the above treatments, anxiolytics (eg, SSRIs, benzodiazepines),
sacral nerve stimulation, biofeedback, prostatic massage, and minimally invasive prostatic procedures
(such as microwave thermotherapy) have been attempted with varying results.
Asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis:
Asymptomatic prostatitis requires no treatment.
Prostate Abscess
Prostate abscesses are focal purulent collections that develop as complications of acute
bacterial prostatitis.
The usual infecting organisms are aerobic gram-negative bacilli or, less frequently,
Staphylococcus
aureus
. Urinary frequency, dysuria, and urinary retention are common. Perineal pain, evidence of acute
epididymitis, hematuria, and a purulent urethral discharge are less common. Fever is sometimes present.
Rectal examination may disclose prostate tenderness and fluctuance, but prostate enlargement is often
the only abnormality, and sometimes the gland feels normal.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:2627===
• Prostate ultrasonography and possibly cystoscopy
Abscess is suspected in patients with continued or recurrent UTIs despite antimicrobial therapy and
persistent perineal pain. Such patients should undergo prostate ultrasonography and possibly
cystoscopy. Many abscesses, however, are discovered unexpectedly during prostate surgery or
endoscopy; bulging of a lateral lobe into the prostatic urethra or rupture during instrumentation reveals
the abscess. Although pyuria and bacteriuria are common, urine may be normal. Blood cultures are
positive in some patients.
Treatment
Treatment involves appropriate antibiotics plus drainage by transurethral evacuation or transperineal
aspiration and drainage.
===PAGE:2628===
Chapter 243. Genitourinary Cancer
Introduction
GU cancers (bladder, penile, prostate, kidney and renal pelvic, testicular, ureteral, and urethral) account
for about 40% of cancers in men (primarily as prostate cancer) and 5.6% in women. For discussion of
gynecologic cancers, see
Chapter 256
.
Bladder Cancer
Bladder cancer is usually transitional cell carcinoma. Symptoms include hematuria; later,
urinary obstruction can cause pain. Diagnosis is by cystoscopy and biopsy. Treatment is with
fulguration, intravesical instillations, surgery, chemotherapy, or a combination.
In the US, > 70,000 new cases of bladder cancer and about 14,700 deaths occur each
year. Bladder
cancer is the 4th most common cancer among men and is less common among women; male:female
incidence is about 3:1. Bladder cancer is more common among whites than blacks, and incidence
increases with age.
Risk factors include the following:
• Smoking (the most common risk factor, causing ≥ 50% of new cases)
• Excess phenacetin use (analgesic abuse)
• Long-term cyclophosphamide use
• Chronic irritation (eg, in schistosomiasis or by bladder calculi)
• Exposure to hydrocarbons, tryptophan metabolites, or industrial chemicals, notably aromatic amines
(aniline dyes, such as naphthylamine used in the dye industry) and chemicals used in the rubber,
electric, cable, paint, and textile industries
Types of bladder cancer include
• Transitional cell carcinomas, which account for > 90% of bladder cancers. Most are papillary
carcinomas, which tend to be superficial and well-differentiated and to grow outward; sessile tumors are
more insidious, tending to invade early and metastasize.
• Squamous cell carcinomas, which are less common and usually occur in patients with parasitic bladder
infestation or chronic mucosal irritation.
• Adenocarcinomas, which may occur as primary tumors or may reflect metastasis from intestinal
carcinoma. Metastasis should be ruled out.
In > 40% of patients, tumors recur at the same or another site in the bladder, particularly if tumors are
large or poorly differentiated or if several tumors are present. Bladder cancer tends to metastasize to the
lymph nodes, lungs, liver, and bone. Expression of tumor gene
p53
may be associated with progression.
In the bladder, carcinoma in situ is high grade but noninvasive and usually multifocal; it tends to recur.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with unexplained hematuria (gross or microscopic). Some patients present with
anemia, and hematuria is detected during evaluation. Irritative voiding symptoms (dysuria, burning,
frequency) and pyuria are also common at presentation. Pelvic pain occurs with advanced cancer, when
a pelvic mass may be palpable.
===PAGE:2629===
Diagnosis
• Cystoscopy with biopsy
Bladder cancer is suspected clinically. Urine cytology, which may detect malignant cells, may be done.
Cystoscopy ( and biopsy of abnormal areas are usually also done initially because these
tests are needed even if urine cytology is negative. The role for urinary antigen tests is still evolving,
particularly for low-grade tumors.
For low-stage (superficial, stage T1) tumors, which comprise 70 to 80% of bladder cancers, cystoscopy
with biopsy is sufficient for staging. If a tumor is found to invade muscle (≥ stage T2), abdominal and
pelvic CT and chest x-ray are done to determine tumor extent and evaluate for metastases. Patients with
invasive tumors undergo bimanual examination (rectal examination in men, rectovaginal examination in
women) while under anesthesia for cystoscopy and biopsy. The standard TNM (tumor, node, metastasis)
staging system is used (see
Table 243-1
).
Prognosis
Superficial bladder cancer (carcinoma in situ, stage Ta or T1) rarely causes death. For patients with
invasion of the bladder musculature, the 5-yr survival rate is about 50%, but adjuvant chemotherapy may
improve these results. Generally, prognosis for patients with progressive or recurrent invasive bladder
cancer is poor. Prognosis for patients with squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma of the bladder is
also poor, because these cancers are usually highly infiltrative and detected only at an advanced stage.
Treatment
• Transurethral resection and intravesical chemotherapy (for superficial cancers)
• Cystectomy (for invasive cancers)
Superficial cancers:
Superficial cancers can be completely removed by transurethral resection or
fulguration. Repeated bladder instillations of chemotherapeutic drugs, such as mitomycin C, may reduce
risk of recurrence. Doxorubicin and thiotepa are alternatives but rarely used. For carcinoma in situ and
other high-grade, superficial, transitional cell carcinomas, immunotherapeutic treatments, such as BCG
instillation, alone or in conjunction with interferon alfa-2b, after transurethral resection is generally more
effective than chemotherapy instillations.
[Table 243-1.
Genitourinary Cancer Staging]
Invasive cancers:
Tumors that penetrate the muscle (ie, ≥ stage T2) usually require radical cystectomy
(removal of bladder and adjacent structures) with concomitant urinary diversion; partial cystectomy is
possible for < 5% of patients. Cystectomy is being done with increasing frequency after initial
chemotherapy in patients with locally advanced disease. Urinary diversion traditionally involves routing
urine through an ileal conduit to an abdominal stoma and collecting it in an external drainage bag.
Alternatives such as orthotopic neobladder or continent cutaneous diversion are very common and are
appropriate for many, if not most, patients. For both procedures, an internal reservoir is constructed from
the intestine. For the orthotopic neo-bladder, the reservoir is connected to the urethra. Patients empty the
reservoir by relaxing the pelvic floor muscles and increasing abdominal pressure, so that urine passes
through the urethra almost naturally. Most patients maintain urinary control during the day, but some
incontinence may occur at night. For continent cutaneous urinary diversion, the reservoir is connected to
a continent abdominal stoma. Patients empty the reservoir by self-catheterization at regular intervals
throughout the day.
If surgery is contraindicated or refused, radiation therapy alone or with chemotherapy may provide 5-yr
survival rates of 20 to 40%. Radiation therapy may cause radiation cystitis or proctitis or bladder
contracture.
===PAGE:2630===
Patients should be monitored every 3 to 6 mo for progression or recurrence.
Metastatic and recurrent cancers:
Metastases require chemotherapy, which is frequently effective but
rarely curative unless metastases are confined to lymph nodes. Combination chemotherapy may prolong
life in patients with metastatic disease.
Treatment of recurrent cancer depends on clinical stage and site of recurrence and previous treatment.
Recurrence after transurethral resection of superficial tumors is usually treated with a 2nd resection or
fulguration.
Metastatic Renal Cancer
Nonrenal cancers may metastasize to the kidneys. The most common cancers that metastasize to the
kidney are melanomas and solid tumors, particularly lung, breast, stomach, gynecologic, intestinal, and
pancreatic. Leukemia and lymphoma may invade the kidneys, which then appear enlarged, often
asymmetrically.
Despite extensive interstitial involvement, symptoms are rare, and renal function may not change from
baseline. Proteinuria is absent or insignificant, and blood urea and creatinine levels rarely increase
unless a complication (eg, uric acid nephropathy, hypercalcemia, bacterial infection) occurs.
Renal metastases are usually discovered during evaluation of the primary tumor or incidentally during
abdominal imaging. If there is no known primary tumor, diagnosis proceeds as for renal cell carcinoma
(.
Treatment is systemic therapy for the primary tumor, rarely surgery.
Penile Cancer
Most penile cancers are squamous cell carcinomas; they usually occur in elderly
uncircumcised men, particularly those with poor local hygiene. Diagnosis is by biopsy.
Treatment includes excision.
Human papillomavirus, particularly types 16 and 18, plays a role in etiology. Premalignant lesions include
erythroplasia of Queyrat, Bowen's disease, and bowenoid papulosis. Erythroplasia of Queyrat and
Bowen's disease progress to invasive squamous cell carcinoma in 5 to 10% of patients; bowenoid
papulosis does not appear to do so. The 3 lesions have different clinical manifestations and biologic
effects but are virtually the same histologically; they may be more appropriately called intraepithelial
neoplasia or carcinoma in situ.
Symptoms and Signs
Most squamous cell carcinomas originate on the glans, in the coronal sulcus, or under the foreskin. They
usually begin as a small erythematous lesion and may be confined to the skin for a long time. These
carcinomas may be fungating and exophytic or ulcerative and infiltrative. The latter type metastasizes
more commonly, usually to the superficial and deep inguinofemoral and pelvic nodes. Metastases to
distant sites (eg, lungs, liver, bone, brain) are rare until late in the disease.
Most patients present with a sore that has not healed, subtle induration of the skin, or sometimes a pusfilled or warty growth. The sore may be shallow or deep with rolled edges. Many patients do not notice
the cancer or do not report it promptly. Pain is uncommon.
Diagnosis
If cancer is suspected, biopsy is required; if possible, tissue under the lesion should be
sampled. CT or
MRI helps in staging localized cancer, checking for invasion of the corpora, and evaluating lymph nodes.
The standard TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) staging system is used (see
Table 243-1
).
===PAGE:2631===
Treatment
• Excision
Untreated penile cancer progresses, typically causing death within 2 yr. Treated early, penile cancer can
usually be cured.
Circumcision or laser ablation may be effective for small, superficial lesions. Partial penectomy is
appropriate if the tumor can be completely excised with adequate margins, leaving a penile stump that
permits urination and sexual function. Total penectomy is required for large infiltrative lesions. If tumors
are high-grade or invade the corpora cavernosa, bilateral ilioinguinal lymphadenectomy is required. The
role of radiation therapy has not been established. For advanced, invasive cancer, palliation may include
surgery and radiation therapy, but cure is unlikely. Chemotherapy for advanced cancer has had limited
success.
Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer is usually adenocarcinoma. Symptoms are rare until urethral obstruction
occurs. Diagnosis is suggested by digital rectal examination or prostate-specific antigen
measurement and confirmed by biopsy. Prognosis for most patients with prostate cancer,
especially when it is localized or regional, is very good; more men die with prostate cancer than
of it. Treatment is with prostatectomy, radiation therapy, palliative measures (eg, hormonal
therapy, radiation therapy, chemotherapy), or, for many elderly and even carefully selected
younger patients, active surveillance.
Adenocarcinoma of the prostate is the most common nondermatologic cancer in men > 50 in the US. In
the US, about 217,750 new cases and about 32,000 deaths (2010 estimates) occur each year. Incidence
increases with each decade of life; autopsy studies show prostate cancer in 15 to 60% of men age 60 to
90 yr, with incidence increasing with age. The lifetime risk of being diagnosed with prostate cancer is 1 in
6. Median age at diagnosis is 72, and > 75% of prostate cancers are diagnosed in men > 65. Risk is
highest for black men.
Sarcoma of the prostate is rare, occurring primarily in children. Undifferentiated prostate cancer,
squamous cell carcinoma, and ductal transitional carcinoma also occur infrequently. Prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia is considered a possible premalignant histologic change.
Hormonal influences contribute to the course of adenocarcinoma but almost certainly not to other types of
prostate cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
Prostate cancer usually progresses slowly and rarely causes symptoms until advanced. In advanced
disease, hematuria and symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction (eg, straining, hesitancy, weak or
intermittent urine stream, a sense of incomplete emptying, terminal dribbling) may appear. Bone pain may
result from osteoblastic metastases to bone (commonly pelvis, ribs, vertebral bodies).
Diagnosis
• Screening by digital rectal examination and prostate-specific antigen
• Assessment of abnormalities by transrectal needle biopsy
• Grading by histology
• Staging by CT and bone scanning
Sometimes stony, hard induration or nodules are palpable during digital rectal examination (DRE), but the
examination is often normal; induration and nodularity suggest cancer but must be differentiated from
===PAGE:2632===
granulomatous prostatitis, prostatic calculi, and other prostate disorders. Extension of induration to the
seminal vesicles and lateral fixation of the gland suggest locally advanced prostate cancer. Prostate
cancers detected by DRE tend to be large, and > 50% extend through the capsule.
Screening:
Most cancers today are found by screening with serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels
(and sometimes DRE), commonly done annually in men > 50 yr. Sometimes, annual screening is begun
earlier for men at high risk (eg, those with a family history of prostate cancer and blacks). Abnormal
findings require histologic confirmation, most commonly by transrectal ultrasound (TRUS)-guided
transrectal needle biopsy, which can be done in an office with use of local anesthesia. Hypoechoic areas
are more likely to represent cancer. Occasionally, prostate cancer is diagnosed incidentally in tissue
removed during surgery for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
It is still not certain whether screening decreases morbidity or mortality or whether any gains resulting
from screening outweigh the decreases in quality of life from treatment of
asymptomatic cancers. Most
clinicians recommend annual screening. However, most patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancers
have a normal DRE, and serum PSA is not ideal as a screening test. Although PSA is elevated in 25 to
92% of patients with prostate cancer (depending on tumor volume), it also is moderately elevated in 30 to
50% of patients with BPH (depending on prostate size and degree of obstruction), in some smokers, and
for several weeks after prostatitis. A level of ≥ 4 ng/mL has traditionally been considered an indication for
biopsy in men > 50 yr (in younger patients, levels > 2.5 ng/mL probably warrant biopsy because BPH, the
most common cause of PSA elevation, is rare in younger men). Although very high levels are significant
(suggesting extracapsular extension of the tumor or metastases) and likelihood of cancer increases with
increasing PSA levels, there is no cut-off below which there is no risk.
In asymptomatic patients, positive predictive value for cancer is 67% for PSA > 10 ng/mL and 25% for
PSA 4 to 10 ng/mL; recent evidence indicates a 15% prevalence of cancer in men ≥ 55 yr with PSA < 4
ng/mL and a 10% incidence with PSA between 0.6 and 1.0 ng/mL. Cancer present in men with lower
levels tends to be smaller (often < 1 mL) and of lower grade, although high-grade cancer (Gleason score
7 to 10) can be present at any level of PSA; perhaps 15% of cancers manifesting with PSA < 4 ng/mL are
high grade. Although it appears that a cut-off of 4 ng/mL will miss some potentially serious cancers, the
cost and morbidity resulting from the increased number of biopsies necessary to find them is unclear.
The decision whether to biopsy may be helped by other PSA-related factors, even in the absence of a
family history of prostate cancer. For example, the rate of change in PSA (PSA velocity) should be < 0.75
ng/mL/yr (lower in younger patients). Biopsy is indicated for PSA velocities higher than this.
Assays that determine the free-to-total PSA ratio and complex PSA are more tumor-specific than standard
total PSA measurements and may reduce the frequency of biopsies in patients without cancer. Prostate
cancer is associated with less free PSA; no standard cut-off has been established, but generally, levels <
10 to 20% warrant biopsy. Other isoforms of PSA and new markers for prostate cancer are being studied.
None of these other uses of PSA answers all of the concerns about possibly triggering too many
biopsies.
Clinicians should discuss the risks and benefits of PSA testing with patients. Some patients prefer to
eradicate cancer at all costs no matter how low the potential for progression and possible metastases is
and may prefer annual PSA testing. Others may value quality of life highly and can accept some
uncertainty; they may prefer less frequent (or no) PSA testing.
Grading and staging:
Grading, based on the resemblance of tumor architecture to normal glandular
structure, helps define the aggressiveness of the tumor. Grading takes into account histologic
heterogeneity in the tumor. The Gleason score is commonly used. The most prevalent pattern and the
next most prevalent pattern are each assigned a grade of 1 to 5, and the two grades are added to
produce a total score. Most experts consider a score ≤ 6 to be well differentiated, 7 moderately
differentiated, and 8 to 10 poorly differentiated. The lower the score, the less aggressive and invasive is
the tumor and the better is the prognosis. For localized tumors, the Gleason score helps predict the
likelihood of capsular penetration, seminal vesicle invasion, and spread to lymph nodes. Gleason score,
clinical stage, and PSA level together (using tables or nomograms) predict pathologic stage and
prognosis better than any of them alone.
===PAGE:2633===
Prostate cancer is staged to define extent of the tumor (see
Table 243-1
). TRUS may provide information
for staging, particularly about capsular penetration and seminal vesicle invasion. Patients with clinical
stage T1c to T2a tumors, low Gleason score (≤ 7), and PSA < 10 ng/mL usually get no additional staging
tests before proceeding to treatment. Radionuclide bone scans are rarely helpful for finding bone
metastases (they are frequently abnormal because of trauma of arthritic changes) until the PSA is > 20
ng/mL. CT (or MRI) of the abdomen and pelvis is commonly done to assess pelvic and retroperitoneal
lymph nodes if the Gleason score is 8 to 10 and the PSA is over 10 ng/mL, or if the PSA is > 20 ng/mL
with any Gleason score. Suspect lymph nodes can be further evaluated by using needle biopsy. An MRI
with endorectal coil may also help define the local extent of the tumor in patients with locally advanced
prostate cancer (stage T3). The role of IN-111 capromab pendetide scanning for staging is evolving but is
certainly not needed for early, localized disease. Elevated serum acid phosphatase—especially the
enzymatic assay—correlates well with the presence of metastases, particularly in lymph nodes. However,
this enzyme may also be elevated in BPH (and is slightly elevated after vigorous prostatic massage),
multiple myeloma, Gaucher's disease, and hemolytic anemia. It is rarely
used today to guide treatment or
to follow patients after treatment, especially because its value when done as a radioimmune assay (the
way it is usually done) has not been established. Reverse transcriptase-PCR assays for circulating
prostate cancer cells are being studied as staging and prognostic tools.
Risk of cancer spread is considered low if
• Stage is ≤ T2a
• Gleason score is ≤ 6
• PSA level is ≤ 10 ng/mL
T2b tumor, Gleason score 7, or PSA > 10 ng/mL are considered intermediate risk by most experts. T2c
tumor, Gleason score ≥ 8, or PSA > 20 ng/mL (or 2 intermediate risk factors) are generally high risk.
Both acid phosphatase and PSA levels decrease after treatment and increase with recurrence, but PSA is
the most sensitive marker for monitoring cancer progression and response to treatment and has virtually
replaced acid phosphatase for this purpose.
Prognosis
Prognosis for most patients with prostate cancer, especially when it is localized or regional, is very good.
Life expectancy for elderly men with prostate cancer may differ little from age-matched men without
prostate cancer, depending on their age and comorbidities. For many patients, long-term local control, or
even cure, is possible. Potential for cure, even when cancer is clinically localized, depends on the tumor's
grade and stage. Without early treatment, patients with high-grade, poorly differentiated cancer have a
poor prognosis. Undifferentiated prostate cancer, squamous cell carcinoma, and ductal transitional
carcinoma respond poorly to conventional therapies. Metastatic cancer has no cure. Median life
expectancy with metastatic disease is 1 to 3 yr, although some patients live for many years.
Treatment
• For localized cancer within the prostate, surgery or radiation therapy
• For cancer outside of the prostate, palliation with hormonal therapy, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy
• For some men who have low-risk cancers, active surveillance without treatment
Treatment is guided by PSA level, grade and stage of tumor, patient age, coexisting disorders, and life
expectancy. The goal of therapy can be
• Active surveillance (formerly known as watchful waiting when used for elderly patients)
===PAGE:2634===
• Definitive (aimed at cure)
• Palliative
Most patients, regardless of age, prefer definitive therapy if cancer is potentially curable. However,
therapy is palliative rather than definitive if cancer has spread outside the prostate, because cure is
unlikely.
Active surveillance:
Active surveillance is appropriate for many asymptomatic patients > 70 with lowrisk, or possibly even intermediate-risk, localized prostate cancer or if life-limiting disorders coexist; in
these patients, risk of death due to other causes is greater than that due to prostate cancer. This
approach requires periodic DRE, PSA measurement, and monitoring of symptoms. In healthy younger
men with low-risk cancer, active surveillance also requires periodic repeat biopsies. If the cancer
progresses, treatment is required. About 30% of patients undergoing active surveillance eventually
require therapy. In elderly men, active surveillance results in the same overall survival rate as
prostatectomy; however, patients who had surgery have a significantly lower risk of distant metastases
and disease-specific mortality.
Definitive therapies:
Definitive therapy is aimed at curing prostate cancer. Radical prostatectomy and
the minimally invasive techniques of cryotherapy and brachytherapy are used.
Radical
prostatectomy
(removal of prostate with seminal vesicles and regional lymph nodes) is probably
best for patients < 70 with a tumor confined to the prostate. Prostatectomy is appropriate for some elderly
patients, based on life expectancy, coexisting disorders, and ability to tolerate surgery and anesthesia.
Prostatectomy is done through an incision in the lower abdomen. More recently, a robot-assisted
laparoscopic approach has been developed that minimizes blood loss and hospital stay but has not been
shown to alter outcomes. Complications include urinary incontinence (in about 5 to 10%), bladder neck
contracture or urethral stricture (in about 7 to 20%), erectile dysfunction (in about 30 to 100%—heavily
dependent on age and current function), and rectal injury (in 1 to 2%). Nerve-sparing radical
prostatectomy reduces the likelihood of erectile dysfunction but cannot always be done, depending on
tumor stage and location.
Cryotherapy
(destruction of prostate cancer cells by freezing with cryoprobes, followed by thawing) is
less well established; long-term
outcomes are unknown. Adverse effects include bladder outlet
obstruction, urinary incontinence, erectile dysfunction, and rectal pain or injury.
Standard external beam
radiation therapy
usually delivers 70 Gy in 7 wk, but this technique has been
supplanted by conformal 3-dimensional radiation therapy and by intensity modulated radiation therapy
(IMRT), which safely deliver doses approaching 80 Gy to the prostate; data indicate that the rate of local
control is higher, especially for high-risk patients. Some decrease in erectile function occurs in at least
40%. Other adverse effects include radiation proctitis, cystitis, diarrhea, fatigue, and possibly urethral
strictures, particularly in patients with a prior history of transurethral resection of the prostate. Results
with radiation therapy and prostatectomy may be comparable, especially for patients with low
pretreatment PSA levels.
Brachytherapy
involves the implantation of radioactive seeds into the prostate through the perineum.
These seeds emit a burst of radiation over a finite period (usually 3 to 6 mo) and are then inert. Research
protocols are examining whether high-quality implants used as monotherapy or implants plus external
beam radiation therapy are superior for intermediate-risk patients. Brachytherapy also decreases erectile
function, although onset may be delayed and patients may be more responsive to phosphodiesterase
type 5 inhibitors than patients whose neurovascular bundles are resected or injured during surgery.
Urinary frequency, urgency, and, less often, retention are common but usually subside over time. Other
adverse effects include increased bowel movements; rectal urgency, bleeding, or ulceration; and
prostatorectal fistulas.
Palliative therapies:
For short-term palliation, ≥ 1 drugs may be used, including antiandrogens,
chemotherapy drugs (eg, mitoxantrone, estramustine, taxanes), corticosteroids, and ketoconazole;
docetaxel plus prednisone is a common combination. Local radiation therapy is usually palliative for
===PAGE:2635===
patients with symptomatic bone metastases.
Patients with a locally advanced tumor or metastases may benefit from androgen deprivation by
castration, either surgically with bilateral orchiectomy or medically with luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone (LHRH) agonists, such as leuprolide, goserelin, and buserelin, with or without radiation therapy.
Reduction in serum testosterone with LHRH agonists equals that with bilateral orchiectomy. All of these
treatments cause loss of libido and erectile dysfunction and may cause hot flashes. LHRH agonists may
cause PSA levels to increase temporarily. Some patients benefit from adding antiandrogens (eg,
flutamide, bicalutamide, nilutamide, cyproterone acetate [not available in US]) for total androgen
blockade. Maximal androgen blockade usually refers to LHRH agonists plus antiandrogens, but its
benefits appear minimally better than those of an LHRH agonist (or orchiectomy) alone. Another approach
is intermittent androgen blockade, which purports to delay emergence of androgen-independent prostate
cancer. Total androgen ablation is given until PSA levels are reduced (usually to undetectable levels),
then stopped. Treatment is started again when PSA levels rise above a certain threshold, although the
ideal threshold is not yet defined. The optimal schedules for treatment and time off treatment have not
been determined and vary widely among practitioners. Androgen deprivation may impair quality of life
significantly (eg, self-image, attitude toward the cancer and its treatment, energy levels) and cause
osteoporosis, anemia, and loss of muscle mass with long-term treatment. Exogenous estrogens are rarely
used because they have a risk of cardiovascular and thromboembolic complications. There is no
standard therapy for hormone-refractory prostate cancer.
Angiogenesis inhibitors (eg, thalidomide, endostatin), matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors, and cytotoxic
and biologic drugs (eg, genetically designed vaccines, antisense therapy, monoclonal antibodies) are
being studied and may provide palliation and prolong survival, but their superiority over corticosteroids
alone has not been proved. Sipuleucel-T, an autologous cellular immunotherapy drug, is now available for
some men with advanced prostate cancer.
For high-grade tumors that extend beyond the prostatic capsule, several treatment protocols exist.
Chemotherapy, with or without hormonal therapy, is used before surgery in some protocols and along with
radiation therapy in others. Chemotherapy regimens vary by center and trial.
Renal Cell Carcinoma
(Hypernephroma; Adenocarcinoma of the Kidneys)
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common renal cancer. Symptoms appear late and
include hematuria, flank pain, a palpable mass, and FUO. Diagnosis is by CT or MRI and
occasionally by biopsy. Treatment is with surgery
for early disease and targeted therapy, an
experimental protocol, or palliative therapy for advanced disease.
RCC, an adenocarcinoma, accounts for 90 to 95% of primary malignant renal tumors. Less common
primary renal tumors include transitional cell carcinoma, Wilms' tumor (most often in children), and
sarcoma.
In the US, about 58,000 cases of RCC and pelvic tumors and 13,000 deaths occur each year. RCC
occurs slightly more often in men (male:female incidence is about 3:2). People affected are usually
between 50 and 70 yr. Risk factors include the following:
• Smoking, which doubles the risk (in 20 to 30% of patients)
• Obesity
• Excess use of phenacetin
• Acquired cystic kidney disease in dialysis patients
• Exposure to certain radiopaque dyes, asbestos, cadmium, and leather tanning and petroleum products
===PAGE:2636===
• Some familial syndromes, particularly von Hippel-Lindau disease
RCC can trigger thrombus formation in the renal vein, which occasionally propagates into the vena cava.
Tumor invasion of the vein wall is uncommon. RCC metastasizes most often to the lymph nodes, lungs,
adrenal glands, liver, and bone.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually do not appear until late, when the tumor may already be large and metastatic. Gross or
microscopic hematuria is the most common manifestation, followed by flank pain, FUO, and a palpable
mass. Sometimes hypertension results from segmental ischemia or pedicle compression. Paraneoplastic
syndromes occur in 20% of patients. Polycythemia can result from increased erythropoietin activity.
However, anemia may also occur. Hypercalcemia is common and may require treatment (.
Thrombocytosis, cachexia, or secondary amyloidosis may develop.
Diagnosis
• CT with contrast or MRI
Most often, a renal mass is detected incidentally during abdominal imaging (eg, CT, ultrasonography)
done for other reasons. Otherwise, diagnosis is suggested by clinical findings and confirmed by
abdominal CT before and after injection of a radiocontrast agent or by MRI. A renal mass that is
enhanced by radiocontrast strongly suggests RCC. CT and MRI also provide information about local
extension and nodal and venous involvement. MRI provides further information about extension into the
renal vein and vena cava and has replaced inferior vena cavography. Ultrasonography and IVU may show
a mass but provide less information about the characteristics of the mass and extent of disease than do
CT or MRI. Often, nonmalignant and malignant masses can be distinguished radiographically, but
sometimes surgery is needed for confirmation. Needle biopsy does not have sufficient sensitivity when
findings are equivocal; it is recommended only when there is an infiltrative pattern instead of a discrete
mass, when the renal mass may be a metastasis from another known cancer, or sometimes to confirm a
diagnosis before chemotherapy for metastases.
Three-dimensional CT, CT angiography, or magnetic resonance angiography is used before surgery,
particularly before nephronsparing surgery, to define the nature of RCC, to more accurately determine the
number of renal arteries present, and to delineate the vascular pattern. These imaging techniques have
replaced aortography and selective renal artery angiography.
A chest x-ray and liver function tests are essential. If chest x-ray is abnormal, chest CT is done. If alkaline
phosphatase is elevated, bone scanning is needed. Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, and Ca are
measured. BUN and creatinine are unaffected unless both kidneys are diseased.
Staging:
Information from the evaluation makes preliminary staging possible. Robson's system is still
used in the US, but the TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) system is more precise and has almost completely
replaced it (see
Table 243-1
). At diagnosis, RCC is localized in 45%, locally invasive in about 33%, and
spread to distant organs in 25%.
Prognosis
Five-year survival rates range from 95% for the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage
grouping I (T1 N0 M0) to 20% for stage grouping IV (T4 with any N or M; or N2 with any T or M; or M1).
Prognosis is poor for patients with metastatic or recurrent RCC because treatments are usually ineffective
for cure, although they may be useful for palliation.
Treatment
• For early RCC, surgical treatment
•
For advanced RCC, palliative therapies or experimental protocols
===PAGE:2637===
Curative treatments:
Radical nephrectomy (removal of kidney, adrenal gland, perirenal fat, and
Gerota's fascia) is standard treatment for localized RCC and provides a reasonable chance for cure.
Results with open or laparoscopic procedures are comparable. Nephron-sparing surgery (partial
nephrectomy) is possible and appropriate for many patients, even in patients with a normal contralateral
kidney if the tumor is < 4 cm. Nonsurgical destruction of renal tumors via freezing (cryosurgery) or thermal
energy (radiofrequency ablation) is being done in highly selected patients, but long-term data about
efficacy and indications are not yet available.
For tumors involving the renal vein and vena cava, surgery may be curative if no nodal or distant
metastases exist.
If both kidneys are affected, partial nephrectomy of one or both kidneys is preferable to bilateral radical
nephrectomy if technically feasible.
Radiation therapy is no longer combined with nephrectomy.
Palliative treatments:
Palliation can include nephrectomy, tumor embolization, and possibly external
beam radiation therapy. Resection of metastases offers palliation and, if limited in number, prolongs life in
some patients, particularly those with a long interval between initial treatment (nephrectomy) and
development of metastases. Although metastatic RCC is traditionally characterized as radioresistant,
radiation therapy can be palliative when metastatic in bone.
For some patients, drug therapy reduces tumor size and prolongs life. About 10 to 20% of patients
respond to interferon alfa-2b or IL-2, although the response is long-lasting in < 5%. Five new targeted
therapies have shown efficacy for advanced tumors: sunitinib, sorafenib, and pazopanib (tyrosine kinase
inhibitors) and temsirolimus and everolimus, which inhibit the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR).
Other treatments are experimental. They include stem cell transplantation, other inter-leukins,
antiangiogenesis therapy (eg, bevacizumab, thalidomide), and vaccine therapy. Traditional
chemotherapeutic drugs, alone or combined, and progestins are ineffective. Cytoreductive nephrectomy
before systemic therapy, or as a delayed surgical procedure to remove the primary tumor after response
in the metastases, is commonly done in patients healthy enough to undergo it.
Renal Pelvic and Ureteral Cancers
Cancers of the renal pelvis and ureters are usually transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs) and
occasionally squamous cell carcinomas. Symptoms include hematuria and sometimes pain.
Diagnosis is by CT, cytology, and sometimes biopsy. Treatment is surgery.
TCC of the renal pelvis accounts for about 7 to 15% of all kidney tumors. TCC of the ureters accounts for
about 4% of upper tract tumors. Risk factors are the same as those for bladder cancer. Also, inhabitants
of the Balkans with endemic familial nephropathy are inexplicably predisposed to develop upper tract
TCC.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with hematuria; dysuria and frequency may occur if the bladder also is involved.
Colicky pain may accompany obstruction (. Uncommonly, hydronephrosis results from a renal pelvic tumor.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography or CT with contrast
• Cytology or histology
In patients with unexplained urinary tract symptoms, typically ultrasonography or CT with contrast is done.
If the diagnosis cannot be excluded, cytologic or histologic analysis is done for confirmation.
===PAGE:2638===
Ureteroscopy is done when biopsy of the upper tract is needed or when urine cytology is positive but no
source of the malignant cells is obvious. Abdominal and pelvic CT and chest x-ray are done to determine
tumor extent and to check for metastases. The standard TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) staging system is
used (see
Table 243-1
).
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on depth of penetration into or through the uroepithelial wall, which is difficult to
determine. Likelihood of cure is > 90% for patients with a superficial, localized tumor but is 10 to 15% for
those with a deeply invasive tumor. If tumors penetrate the wall or distant metastases occur, cure is
unlikely.
Treatment
• Excision or ablation
•
Posttreatment surveillance with cystoscopy
Usual treatment is radical nephroureterectomy, including excision of a cuff of bladder. Partial
ureterectomy is indicated in some carefully selected patients (eg, patients with a distal ureteral tumor,
decreased renal function, or a solitary kidney). Laser fulguration for accurately staged and adequately
visualized renal pelvic or low-grade ureteral tumors is sometimes possible. Occasionally, a drug, such as
mitomycin C or BCG, is instilled. However, efficacy of laser therapy and chemotherapy has not been
established.
Periodic cystoscopy is indicated because renal pelvic and ureteral cancers tend to recur in the bladder,
and such recurrence, if detected at an early stage, may be treated by fulguration, transurethral resection,
or intravesical instillations. Management of metastases is the same as that for metastatic bladder cancer.
Testicular Cancer
Testicular cancer begins as a scrotal mass, which is usually not painful. Diagnosis is by
ultrasonography. Treatment is with orchiectomy and sometimes lymph node dissection,
radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination, depending on histology and stage.
Testicular cancer is the most common solid cancer in males aged 15 to 35, with about 8500 cases
annually. Incidence is 2.5 to 20 times higher in patients with cryptorchidism. This excess risk is decreased
or eliminated if orchiopexy is done before age 10 yr. Cancer can also develop in the contralateral normally
descended testis. The cause of testicular cancer is unknown.
Most testicular cancers originate in primordial germ cells. Germ cell tumors are categorized as seminomas
(40%) or nonseminomas (tumors containing any nonseminomous elements). Nonseminomas include
teratomas, embryonal carcinomas, endodermal sinus tumors (yolk sac tumors), and choriocarcinomas.
Histologic combinations are common; eg, teratocarcinoma contains teratoma plus embryonal carcinoma.
Functional interstitial cell carcinomas of the testis are rare.
Even patients with apparently localized tumors may have occult nodal or visceral metastases. For
example, almost 30% of patients with nonseminomas will relapse with nodal or visceral metastases if they
undergo no treatment after orchiectomy (surveillance). Risk of metastases is highest for choriocarcinoma
and lowest for teratoma.
Tumors originating in the epididymis, testicular appendages, and spermatic cord are usually benign
fibromas, fibroadenomas, adenomatoid tumors, and lipomas. Sarcomas, most commonly
rhabdomyosarcoma, occur occasionally, primarily in children.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with a scrotal mass, which is painless or sometimes associated with dull, aching
===PAGE:2639===
pain. In a few patients, hemorrhage into the tumor may cause acute local pain and tenderness. Many
patients discover the mass themselves after minor scrotal trauma.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography for scrotal masses
• Exploration if testicular mass present
• Staging by abdominal, pelvic, and chest CT as well as tissue examination
Many patients discover the mass themselves during self-examination. Monthly self-examination should be
encouraged among young men.
The origin and nature of scrotal masses must be determined accurately because most testicular masses
are malignant, but most extratesticular masses are not; distinguishing between the two during physical
examination may be difficult. Scrotal ultrasonography can confirm testicular origin. If a testicular mass is
confirmed, serum markers
α
-fetoprotein and
β
-human chorionic gonadotropin should be measured and a
chest x-ray taken. Then, inguinal exploration is indicated; the spermatic cord is exposed and clamped
before the abnormal testis is manipulated.
If cancer is confirmed, abdominal, pelvic, and chest CT is needed for clinical staging using the standard
TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) system (see
Table 243-1
). Tissue obtained during treatment (usually
radical inguinal orchiectomy) helps provide important histopathologic information, particularly about the
proportion of histologic types and presence of intratumoral vascular or lymphatic invasion. Such
information can predict the risk of occult lymph node and visceral metastases. Patients with
nonseminomas have about a 30% risk of recurrence despite normal x-rays and serum markers and
having what appears to be localized disease. Seminomas recur in about 15% of such patients.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on histology and extent of the tumor. The 5-yr survival rate is > 95% for patients with
a seminoma or nonseminoma
localized to the testis or with a nonseminoma and low-volume metastases in
the retroperitoneum. The 5-yr survival rate for patients with extensive retroperitoneal metastases or with
pulmonary or other visceral metastases ranges from 48% (for some nonseminomas) to > 80%, depending
on site, volume, and histology of the metastases, but even patients with advanced disease at
presentation may be cured.
Treatment
• Radical inguinal orchiectomy
• Radiation therapy for seminomas
• Usually retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for nonseminomas
Radical inguinal orchiectomy is the cornerstone of treatment and helps provide important diagnostic
information; it also helps formulate the subsequent treatment plan.
Radiation therapy:
Standard treatment for seminoma after unilateral orchiectomy is radiation therapy,
usually 20 to 40 Gy (higher dose is used for patients with a nodal mass) to the para-aortic regions up to
the diaphragm. The ipsilateral ilioinguinal region is no longer routinely treated. Occasionally, the
mediastinum and left supraclavicular regions are also irradiated, depending on clinical stage.
Lymph node dissection:
For nonseminomas, many experts consider standard treatment to be
retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. For clinical stage 1 tumors in patients who have no prognostic
factors that predict relapse, an alternative is active surveillance (frequent serum marker measurements,
chest x-rays, CT). Intermediate-sized retroperitoneal nodal masses may require retroperitoneal lymph
===PAGE:2640===
node dissection and chemotherapy (eg, bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin), but the optimal sequence is
undecided.
Lymph node dissection is done laparoscopically at some centers. The most common adverse effect of
lymph node dissection overall is failure to ejaculate. However, a nerve-sparing dissection is often
possible, particularly for early-stage tumors, which usually preserves ejaculation.
Chemotherapy:
Nodal masses > 5 cm, lymph node metastases above the diaphragm, or visceral
metastases require initial platinum-based combination chemotherapy followed by surgery for residual
masses. Such treatment commonly controls the tumor long term. Fertility is often impaired, but no risk to
the fetus has been proved if pregnancy does occur.
Supportive measures:
A cosmetic testicular prosthesis may be placed during orchiectomy. Silicone
prostheses are not widely available because of the problems with silicone breast implants. However,
saline implants have been developed.
For men who wish to retain reproductive capacity, sperm banking is potentially available in anticipation of
radiation therapy or chemotherapy.
Surveillance:
Surveillance is appropriate for some patients, although many clinicians do not offer this
option because it requires rigorous follow-up protocols and excellent patient compliance to be safe. It is
more commonly offered to patients at low risk of relapse. High-risk patients usually get retroperitoneal
lymph node dissections or, in some centers, 2 courses of chemotherapy after orchiectomy instead of
surgery.
Recurrences:
Nonseminoma recurrences are usually treated with chemotherapy, although delayed
retroperitoneal lymph node dissection may be appropriate for some patients with nodal relapse and no
evidence of visceral metastases. Surveillance is not used as often for seminomas because the morbidity
of 2 wk of radiation therapy is so low and the results in preventing late relapse so high that there is less
reason to try to avoid treatment.
Urethral Cancer
Urethral cancer is rare and occurs in both sexes; it may be squamous or transitional cell
carcinoma or, occasionally, adenocarcinoma.
Most patients are age ≥ 50. Certain strains of human papillomavirus have been implicated in certain
cases. Urethral tumors invade adjacent structures early and thus tend to be advanced when diagnosed.
External groin or pelvic (obturator) lymph nodes are usually the first sites of metastasis.
Symptoms and Signs
Most women present with hematuria and obstructive voiding symptoms or urinary retention. Most have a
history of urinary frequency or urethral syndrome (hypersensitivity of the pelvic floor muscles). Most men
present with symptoms of urethral stricture; only a few present with hematuria or a bloody discharge.
Sometimes if the tumor is advanced, a mass is felt.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is suggested clinically and confirmed by cystourethroscopy. Biopsy may be required to
differentiate urethral carcinoma,
prolapse, and caruncle. CT or MRI is used for staging.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the precise location in the urethra and extent of the cancer, particularly depth of
invasion. The 5-yr survival rates are > 60% for patients with distal tumors and 10 to 20% for patients with
proximal tumors. Recurrence rate is > 50%.
===PAGE:2641===
Treatment
• Usually excision or ablation
For superficial or minimally invasive distal tumors in the anterior urethra, treatment is with surgical
excision, radiation therapy (interstitial or a combination of interstitial and external beam), fulguration, or
laser ablation. Larger and more deeply invasive anterior tumors and proximal tumors in the posterior
urethra require multimodal therapy with radical surgery and urinary diversion, usually in combination with
radiation therapy. Surgery includes bilateral pelvic and sometimes inguinal lymph node dissection, often
with removal of part of the symphysis pubis and inferior pubic rami. The value of chemotherapy, which is
sometimes used, has not been established.
===PAGE:2642===
18 - Gynecology and Obstetrics
Chapter 244. Approach to the Gynecologic Patient
Introduction
Gynecologic evaluation may be necessary to assess a specific problem such as pelvic pain, vaginal
bleeding, or vaginal discharge (see also
Chapter 253
). Women also need routine gynecologic evaluations,
which may be provided by a gynecologist, an internist, or a family practitioner; evaluations are
recommended every year for all women who are sexually active or > 18 yr. Many women expect their
gynecologist to provide general as well as gynecologic health care. Obstetric evaluation focuses on
issues related to pregnancy (see
Chapter 261
).
General Gynecologic Evaluation
Most women, particularly those seeking general preventive care, require a complete history and physical
examination as well as a gynecologic evaluation.
History
Gynecologic history consists of a description of the problem prompting the visit (chief complaint, history
of present illness); menstrual, obstetric, and sexual history; and history of gynecologic symptoms,
disorders, and treatments.
Current symptoms
are explored using open-ended questions followed by specific questions about the
following:
• Pelvic pain (location, duration, character, quality, triggering and relieving factors)
• Abnormal vaginal bleeding (quantity, duration, relation to the menstrual cycle)
• Vaginal discharge (color, odor, consistency), irritation, or both
Patients of reproductive age are asked about symptoms of pregnancy (eg, morning sickness, breast
tenderness, delayed menses).
Menstrual history
includes the following:
• Age at menarche
• Number of days of menses
• Length and regularity of the interval between cycles
• Start date of the last menstrual period (LMP)
• Dates of the preceding period (previous menstrual period, or PMP)
• Color and volume of flow
• Any symptoms that occur with menses (eg, cramping, loose stools)
Usually, menstrual fluid is medium or dark red, and flow lasts for 5 (± 2) days, with 21 to 35 days between
menses; average blood loss is 30 mL (range, 13 to 80 mL), with the most bleeding on the 2nd day. A
saturated pad or tampon absorbs 5 to 15 mL. Cramping is common on the day before and on the first day
of menses. Vaginal bleeding that is painless, scant, and dark, is abnormally brief or prolonged, or occurs
at irregular intervals suggests absence of ovulation (anovulation).
===PAGE:2643===
Obstetric history
( includes dates and outcomes of all pregnancies and previous ectopic or
molar pregnancies.
Sexual history
should be obtained in a professional and nonjudgmental way and includes the following:
• Frequency of sexual activity
• Number and sex of partners
• Use of contraception
• Participation in unsafe sex
• Effects of sexual activity (eg, pleasure, orgasm, dyspareunia)
Past gynecologic history
includes questions about previous gynecologic symptoms (eg, pain), signs
(eg, vaginal bleeding, discharge), and known diagnoses, as well the results of any testing.
Screening for domestic violence
should be routine. Methods include self-administered questionnaires
and a directed interview by a staff member or physician. In patients who do not admit to experiencing
abuse, findings that suggest past abuse include the following:
• Inconsistent explanations for injuries
• Delay in seeking treatment for injuries
• Unusual somatic complaints
• Psychiatric symptoms
• Frequent emergency department visits
• Head and neck injuries
• Prior delivery of a low-birth-weight infant
Physical Examination
The examiner should explain the examination, which includes breasts (, abdomen, and
pelvis, to the patient.
For the pelvic examination, the patient lies supine on an examination table with her legs in stirrups and is
usually draped. A chaperone may be required, particularly when the examiner is male, and may also
provide assistance. The
pubic area and hair are inspected for lesions, folliculitis, and lice. The perineum
is inspected for redness, swelling, excoriations, abnormal pigmentation, and lesions (eg, ulcers, pustules,
nodules, warts, tumors). Structural abnormalities due to congenital malformations or female genital
mutilation are noted. A vaginal opening that is < 3 cm may indicate infibulation, a severe form of genital
mutilation (.
Next, the introitus is palpated between the thumb and index finger for cysts or abscesses in Bartholin's
glands. While spreading the labia and asking the patient to bear down, the examiner checks the vaginal
opening for signs of pelvic relaxation: an anterior bulge (suggesting cystocele), a posterior bulge
(suggesting rectocele), and displacement of the cervix toward the introitus (suggesting prolapsed uterus
—.
Before speculum and bimanual examination, the patient is asked to relax her legs and hips and breathe
deeply.
===PAGE:2644===
Speculum examination:
The speculum is sometimes kept warm with a heating pad and may be
moistened or lubricated before insertion, particularly when the vagina is dry. If a Papanicolaou (Pap) test
or cervical culture is planned, the speculum is rinsed with warm water; lubricant should not be used. A
gloved finger is inserted into the vagina to determine the position of the cervix. Then, the speculum is
inserted with the blades nearly in the vertical plane (at about 1 and 7 o'clock) while widening the vagina
by pressing 2 fingers on the posterior vaginal wall (perineal body). The speculum is fully inserted toward
the cervix, then rotated so that the handle is down, and gently opened; it is pulled back as needed to
visualize the cervix. When the cervix is seen, the blades are positioned so that the posterior blade is
deeper than the cervix (in the posterior fornix) and the anterior blade is allowed to rise gently and rest
anterior to the cervix (in the anterior fornix). The examiner should take care to open the anterior blade
slowly and gently and not to pinch the labia or perineum as the speculum is opened. Normally, the cervix
is pink and shiny, and there is no discharge.
A specimen for the Pap test is taken from the endocervix and external cervix with a brush and plastic
spatula or with a cervical sampler that can simultaneously collect cells from the cervical canal and the
transition zone; the specimen is rinsed in a liquid, producing a cell suspension to be analyzed for
cancerous cells and human papillomavirus. Specimens for detection of sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs) are taken from the endocervix. The speculum is withdrawn, taking care not to pinch the labia with
the speculum blades.
Bimanual examination:
The index and middle fingers of the dominant hand are inserted into the vagina
to just below the cervix. The other hand is placed just above the pubic symphysis and gently presses
down to determine the size, position, and consistency of the uterus and, if possible, the ovaries. Normally,
the uterus is about 6 cm by 4 cm and tilts anteriorly (anteversion), but it may tilt posteriorly (retroversion)
to various degrees. The uterus may also be bent at an angle anteriorly (anteflexion) or posteriorly
(retroflexion). The uterus is movable and smooth; irregularity suggests uterine fibroids (leiomyomas).
Normally, the ovaries are about 2 cm by 3 cm in young women and are not palpable in postmenopausal
women. With ovarian palpation, mild nausea and tenderness are normal. Significant pain when the cervix
is gently moved from side to side (cervical motion tenderness) suggests pelvic inflammation.
Rectal examination:
After bimanual palpation, the examiner palpates the rectovaginal septum by
inserting the index finger in the vagina and the middle finger in the rectum.
Children:
The examination should be adjusted according to children's psychosexual development and is
usually limited to inspection of the external genitals. Young children can be examined on their mother's
lap. Older children can be examined in the knee-chest position or on their side with one knee drawn up to
their chest. Vaginal discharge can be collected, examined, and cultured.
Sometimes a small catheter attached to a syringe of saline is used to obtain washings from the vagina. If
cervical examination is required, a fiberoptic vaginoscope, cystoscope, or flexible hysteroscope with
saline lavage should be used.
In children, pelvic masses may be palpable in the abdomen.
Testing
Testing is guided by the symptoms present.
Pregnancy testing:
Most women who are of reproductive age and have gynecologic symptoms are
tested for pregnancy (. Urine assays of the
β
subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (
β
-
hCG) are specific and highly sensitive; they become positive within about 1 wk of conception. Serum
assays are specific and even more sensitive.
Pap testing:
Specimens of cervical cells taken for the Pap test are examined for signs of cervical cancer;
the examination may also
detect uterine cancer and human papillomavirus. Pap tests are done routinely
for most of a woman's life (.
Microscopic examination of vaginal secretions:
This examination helps identify vaginal infections
===PAGE:2645===
(eg, trichomoniasis, bacterial vaginosis, yeast infection—see
Chapter 253
).
Microbiologic testing:
Culture or molecular methods (eg, PCR) are used to analyze specimens for
specific STD organisms (eg,
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis
) if patients have symptoms
or risk factors; in some practices, such analysis is always done.
Cervical mucus inspection:
Bedside inspection of a cervical mucus specimen by a trained examiner
can provide information about the menstrual cycle and hormone states; this information may help in
assessment of infertility and time of ovulation. The specimen is placed on a slide, allowed to dry, and
assessed for degree of microscopic crystallization (ferning—, which reflects levels of
circulating estrogens. Just before ovulation, cervical mucus is clear and copious with abundant ferning
because estrogen levels are high. Just after ovulation, cervical mucus is thick and ferns little.
Imaging tests:
Imaging of suspected masses and other lesions usually involves ultrasonography, which
may be done in the office; both transvaginal and transabdominal probes are used. MRI is highly specific
but expensive. CT is usually less desirable because it is somewhat less accurate, involves significant
radiation exposure, and often requires a radiopaque agent.
Laparoscopy:
This surgical procedure can detect structural abnormalities too small to be detected by
imaging, as well as abnormalities on the surfaces of internal organs (eg, endometriosis, inflammation,
scarring). It is also used to sample tissue.
Culdocentesis:
Culdocentesis, now rarely used, is needle puncture of the posterior vaginal fornix to
obtain fluid from the cul-de-sac (which is posterior to the uterus) for culture and for tests to detect blood
from a ruptured ectopic pregnancy or ovarian cyst.
Endometrial aspiration:
This procedure is done if women > 35 have unexplained vaginal bleeding. A
thin, flexible, plastic suction curette is inserted through the cervix to the level of the uterine fundus;
dilation is often not required. Suction is applied to the device, which is turned 360° and moved up and
down a few times to sample different parts of the endometrial cavity. Sometimes the uterus must be
stabilized with a cervical tenaculum.
Other tests:
Pituitary and hypothalamic hormones ( and ovarian hormones ( may be measured when infertility is evaluated or when abnormalities are suspected.
Pelvic Mass
(See also
Chs. 250
and
.)
A pelvic mass may be detected during routine gynecologic examination.
Etiology
Pelvic masses may originate from gynecologic organs (cervix, uterus, uterine adnexa) or from other pelvic
organs (intestine, bladder, ureters, skeletal muscle, bone).
Type of mass tends to vary by age group.
In
infants,
in utero maternal hormones may stimulate development of adnexal cysts during the first few
months of life. This effect is rare.
At
puberty,
menstrual fluid may accumulate and form a vaginal mass (hematocolpos) because outflow is
obstructed. The cause is usually an imperforate hymen; other causes include congenital malformations of
the uterus, cervix, or vagina.
In
women of reproductive age,
the most common cause of symmetric uterine enlargement is
pregnancy, which may be unsuspected. Another common cause is fibroids, which may extend outward.
Common adnexal masses include graafian follicles (usually 5 to 8 cm) that develop normally but do not
===PAGE:2646===
release an egg (called functional ovarian cysts). These cysts often resolve spontaneously within a few
months. Adnexal masses may also result from ectopic pregnancy, ovarian or fallopian tube cancers,
benign tumors (eg, benign cystic teratomas), or hydrosalpinges. Endometriosis can cause single or
multiple masses anywhere in the pelvis, usually on the ovaries.
In
postmenopausal women,
masses are more likely to be cancerous. Many benign ovarian masses (eg,
endometriomas, myomas) depend on ovarian hormone secretion and thus become less common after
menopause.
Evaluation
History:
General medical and complete gynecologic histories are obtained. Vaginal bleeding and pelvic
pain suggest ectopic pregnancy or, rarely, gestational trophoblastic disease. Dysmenorrhea suggests
endometriosis or uterine fibroids. In young girls, precocious puberty may indicate a masculinizing or
feminizing ovarian tumor. In women, virilization may indicate a masculinizing ovarian tumor;
menometrorrhagia or postmenopausal bleeding may indicate a feminizing ovarian tumor.
Examination:
During the general examination, the examiner should look for signs of nongynecologic (eg,
GI, endocrine) disorders and for ascites. A complete gynecologic examination is done. Distinguishing
uterine from adnexal masses may be difficult. Endometriomas are usually nonmobile cul-de-sac masses.
Adnexal cancers, benign tumors (eg, benign cystic teratomas), and adnexal masses due to ectopic
pregnancy are mobile. Hydrosalpinges are usually fluctuant, tender, nonmobile, and sometimes bilateral.
In young girls, pelvic organ masses may be palpable in the abdomen because the pelvis is too small to
contain a large mass.
Testing:
If the presence or origin (gynecologic vs nongynecologic) of a mass cannot be determined
clinically, an imaging test can usually do so. Usually, pelvic ultrasonography is done first. If it does not
clearly delineate size, location, and consistency of the mass, another imaging test (eg, CT, MRI) may.
Ovarian masses with radiographic characteristics of cancer (eg, a solid component, surface
excrescences, irregular shape) require needle aspiration or biopsy. Tumor markers may help in the
diagnosis of specific tumors (.
Women of reproductive age are tested for pregnancy; if the test is positive, imaging is not always
necessary ( unless ectopic pregnancy is suspected. In women of reproductive age, simple,
thin-walled cystic adnexal masses that are 5 to 8 cm (usually graafian follicular cysts) do not require
further investigation unless they persist for > 3 menstrual cycles.
Pelvic Pain
Pelvic pain is discomfort in the lower abdomen; it is a common complaint in women. It is considered
separately from perineal pain, which occurs in the external genitals and nearby perineal skin.
Etiology
Pelvic pain may originate in reproductive organs (cervix, uterus, uterine adnexa) or other organs.
Sometimes the cause is unknown.
Gynecologic disorders:
Some gynecologic disorders (see
Table 244-1
) cause cyclic pain (ie, pain recurring during the same phase of the menstrual cycle). In
others, pain is a discrete event unrelated to menstrual cycles. Whether onset of pain is sudden or gradual
helps discriminate between the two.
[Table 244-1.
Some Gynecologic Causes of Pelvic Pain]
Overall, the most common gynecologic causes of pelvic pain include
• Dysmenorrhea
===PAGE:2647===
• Ovulation (mittelschmerz)
• Endometriosis
Nongynecologic disorders:
These disorders ( may be
• GI (eg, gastroenteritis, inflammatory bowel disease, appendicitis, diverticulitis, tumors, constipation,
intestinal obstruction, perirectal abscess, irritable bowel syndrome)
• Urinary (eg, cystitis, interstitial cystitis, pyelonephritis, calculi)
• Musculoskeletal (eg, diastasis of the pubic symphysis due to previous vaginal deliveries, abdominal
muscle strains)
• Psychogenic (eg, somatization; effects of previous physical, psychologic, or sexual abuse)
The most common is difficult to specify.
Evaluation
Evaluation must be expeditious because some causes of pelvic pain (eg, ectopic pregnancy, adnexal
torsion) require immediate treatment. Pregnancy should be excluded in women of childbearing age
regardless of stated history.
History: History of present illness
should include gynecologic history (gravity, parity, menstrual history,
history of sexually transmitted disease) and onset, duration, location, and character of pain. Severity of
pain and its relationship to the menstrual cycle are noted. Important associated symptoms include vaginal
bleeding or discharge and symptoms of hemodynamic instability (eg, dizziness, light-headedness,
syncope or near-syncope).
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including morning sickness,
breast swelling or tenderness, or missed menses (pregnancy); fever and chills (infection); abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting, or change in stool habits (GI disorders); and urinary frequency, urgency, or dysuria
(urinary disorders).
Past medical history
should note history of infertility, ectopic pregnancy, pelvic inflammatory disease,
urolithiasis, diverticulitis, and any GI or GU cancers. Any previous abdominal or pelvic surgery should be
noted.
Physical examination:
The physical examination begins with review of vital signs for signs of instability
(eg, fever, hypotension) and focuses on abdominal and pelvic examinations.
The abdomen is palpated for tenderness, masses, and peritoneal signs. Rectal examination is done to
check for tenderness, masses, and occult blood. Location of pain and any associated findings may
provide clues to the cause (see
Table 244-2
).
Pelvic examination includes inspection of external genitals, speculum examination, and bimanual
examination. The cervix is inspected for discharge, uterine prolapse, and cervical stenosis or lesions.
Bimanual examination should assess cervical motion tenderness, adnexal masses or tenderness, and
uterine enlargement or tenderness.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Syncope or hemorrhagic shock (eg, tachycardia, hypotension)
• Peritoneal signs (rebound, rigidity, guarding)
===PAGE:2648===
• Postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
• Fever or chills
• Sudden severe pain with nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, or agitation
Interpretation of findings:
Acuity and severity of pain and its relationship to menstrual cycles can
suggest the most likely causes (see
Table 244-1
). Quality and location of pain and associated findings
also provide clues (see
Table 244-2
):
Testing:
All patients should have
• Urinalysis
• Urine pregnancy test
If a patient is pregnant, ectopic pregnancy is assumed until excluded by ultrasonography or, if
ultrasonography is unclear, by other tests (. If a suspected pregnancy may be < 5 wk, a
serum pregnancy test should be done; a urine pregnancy test may not be sensitive enough to rule out
pregnancy that early in gestation.
Other testing depends on which disorders are clinically suspected. If a patient cannot be adequately
examined (eg, because of pain or inability to cooperate) or if a mass is suspected, pelvic ultrasonography
is done. If the cause of severe or persistent pain remains unidentified, laparoscopy is done.
Pelvic ultrasonography using a vaginal probe can be a useful adjunct to pelvic examination; it can better
define a mass or help diagnose a pregnancy after 5 wk gestation. For example, free pelvic fluid and a
positive pregnancy test plus no evidence of an intrauterine pregnancy help confirm ectopic pregnancy.
Treatment
The underlying disorder is treated when possible.
[Table 244-2.
Some Clues to Diagnosis of Pelvic Pain]
Pain is initially treated with oral NSAIDs. Patients who do not respond well to one NSAID may respond to
another. If NSAIDs are ineffective, other analgesics or hypnosis may be tried. Musculoskeletal pain may
also require rest, heat, physical therapy, or, for fibromyalgia, injection of tender points.
For patients with intractable pain due to dysmenorrhea or another disorder, uterosacral nerve ablation or
presacral neurectomy can be tried. If all measures are ineffective, hysterectomy can be done, but it may
be ineffective or even worsen the pain.
Geriatrics Essentials
Pelvic pain symptoms in elderly women may be vague. Careful review of systems with attention to bowel
and bladder function is essential.
A sexual history should be obtained; clinicians often do not realize that many women remain sexually
active throughout their life. Whether a woman's partner is living should be determined before inquiring
about sexual activity. In elderly women, vaginal irritation, itching, urinary symptoms, or bleeding may occur
secondary to sexual intercourse. Such
problems often resolve after a few days of pelvic rest.
Acute loss of appetite, weight loss, dyspepsia, or a sudden change in bowel habits may be signs of
ovarian or uterine cancer and requires thorough clinical evaluation.
Key Points
===PAGE:2649===
• Pelvic pain is common and may have a gynecologic or nongynecologic cause.
• Pregnancy should be ruled out in women of childbearing age.
• Quality, severity, and location of pain and its relationship to the menstrual cycle can suggest the most
likely causes.
• Dysmenorrhea is a common cause of pelvic pain but is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Vaginal Bleeding
Abnormal vaginal bleeding includes
• Menses that are prolonged (menorrhagia), excessive (menorrhagia or hypermenorrhea), or too frequent
(polymenorrhea)
• Bleeding that is unrelated to menses, occurring irregularly between menses (metrorrhagia)
• Postmenopausal bleeding (ie, > 6 mo after the last normal menses)
Vaginal bleeding may occur during early pregnancy ( or late pregnancy (.
Pathophysiology
Most abnormal vaginal bleeding involves
• Hormonal abnormalities in the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis (most common)
• Structural, inflammatory, or other gynecologic disorders (eg, tumors)
• Bleeding disorders (uncommon)
With hormonal causes, ovulation does not occur or occurs infrequently. During an anovulatory cycle, the
corpus luteum does not form, and thus the normal cyclical secretion of progesterone does not occur.
Without progesterone, estrogen causes the endometrium to continue to proliferate, eventually outgrowing
its blood supply. The endometrium then sloughs and bleeds incompletely, irregularly, and sometimes
profusely or for a long time.
Etiology
Causes in adults (see
Table 244-3
) and children (see
Table 244-4
) vary.
Overall, the most common specific causes in adult women who are not known to be pregnant are
• Complications of an early, undiagnosed pregnancy
• Anovulatory bleeding
• Submucous myoma
• Midcycle bleeding associated with ovulation
• Breakthrough bleeding while women are taking oral contraceptives
Evaluation
===PAGE:2650===
Unrecognized pregnancy must be suspected and diagnosed in women of childbearing age because some
causes of bleeding during pregnancy (eg, ectopic pregnancy) are life threatening.
History: History of present illness
should include quantity (eg, by number of pads used per day or
hour) and duration of bleeding, as well as the relationship of bleeding to menses and intercourse.
Menstrual history should be obtained; it should include date of last normal menstrual period, age at
menarche and menopause (when appropriate), cycle length and regularity, and quantity and duration of
typical menstrual bleeding. Previous episodes of abnormal bleeding, including frequency, duration,
quantity, and pattern (cyclicity) of bleeding, should be identified.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including missed menses, breast
swelling, and nausea (pregnancy-related bleeding); abdominal pain, light-headedness, and syncope
(ectopic pregnancy or ruptured ovarian cyst); chronic pain and weight loss (cancer); and easy bruising,
excessive bleeding due to toothbrushing, minor lacerations, or venipuncture (a bleeding disorder).
Past medical history
should identify disorders known to cause bleeding, including a recent spontaneous
or therapeutic abortion and structural disorders (eg, uterine fibroids, ovarian cysts). Clinicians should
identify risk factors for endometrial cancer, including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, prolonged
unopposed estrogen use (ie, without progesterone), and polycystic ovary syndrome. Drug history should
include specific questions about hormone use.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for signs of hypovolemia (eg, tachycardia, tachypnea,
hypotension).
During the general examination, clinicians should look for signs of anemia (eg, conjunctival pallor) and
evidence of possible causes of bleeding, including the following:
• Warm and moist or dry skin, eye abnormalities, tremor, abnormal reflexes, or goiter (a thyroid disorder)
[Table 244-3.
Some Causes of Abnormal Vaginal Bleeding in Adult Women]
• Hepatomegaly, jaundice, asterixis, or splenomegaly (a liver disorder)
• Nipple discharge (hyperprolactinemia)
• Low body mass index and loss of subcutaneous fat (possibly anovulation)
• High body mass index and excess subcutaneous fat (androgen or estrogen excess or polycystic ovary
syndrome)
• Hirsutism, acne, obesity, and enlarged ovaries (polycystic ovary syndrome)
• Easy bruising, petechiae, purpura, or mucosal (eg, gingival) bleeding (a bleeding disorder)
• In children, breast development and presence of pubic and axillary hair (puberty)
The abdomen is examined for distention, tenderness, and masses (particularly an enlarged uterus). If the
uterus is enlarged, auscultation for fetal heart sounds is done.
A complete gynecologic examination is done unless abdominal examination suggests a late-stage
pregnancy; then, digital pelvic examination is contraindicated until placental position is determined. In all
other cases, speculum examination helps identify lesions of the urethra, vagina, and cervix. Bimanual
examination is done to evaluate uterine size and ovarian enlargement. If no blood is present in the vagina,
rectal examination is done to determine whether bleeding is GI in origin.
[Table 244-4.
Common Causes of Vaginal Bleeding in Children]
===PAGE:2651===
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Hemorrhagic shock (tachycardia, hypotension)
• Premenarchal and postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
• Vaginal bleeding in pregnant patients
Interpretation of findings:
Significant hypovolemia or hemorrhagic shock is unlikely except with
ruptured ectopic pregnancy or, rarely, ovarian cyst (particularly when a tender pelvic mass is present).
In children, breast development and pubic or axillary hair suggest precocious puberty and premature
menses. In those without such findings, the possibility of sexual abuse should be investigated unless an
explanatory lesion or foreign body is obvious.
In women of reproductive age, examination may detect a causative gynecologic lesion or other findings
suggesting a cause. If younger patients taking hormone therapy have no apparent abnormalities during
examination and bleeding is spotty, bleeding is probably related to the hormone therapy. If the problem is
excessive menstrual bleeding only, a uterine disorder or bleeding diathesis should be considered.
Inherited bleeding disorders may initially manifest as heavy menstrual bleeding beginning at menarche or
during adolescence.
In postmenopausal women, gynecologic cancer should be suspected.
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding, the most common cause during reproductive years, is a diagnosis of
exclusion after other causes are ruled out; testing is usually required.
Testing:
All women of reproductive age require
• A urine pregnancy test
During early pregnancy (before 5 wk), a urine pregnancy test may not be sensitive enough. Urine
contaminated with blood may lead to false results. A qualitative serum
β
subunit of human chorionic
gonadotropin (
β
-hCG) test should be done if the urine test is negative and pregnancy is suspected.
Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy requires a specific approach (see pp.
and
).
Blood tests
include CBC if bleeding is unusually heavy (eg, > 1 pad or tampon/h) or has lasted at least
several days or if findings suggest anemia or hypovolemia. If anemia is identified and is not obviously due
to iron deficiency (eg, based on microcytic, hypochromic RBC indices), iron studies are done.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone and prolactin levels are usually measured, even when galactorrhea is
absent.
If a bleeding disorder is suspected, von Willebrand's factor, platelet count, PT, and PTT are determined.
If polycystic ovary syndrome is suspected, testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS)
levels are measured.
Imaging
includes transvaginal ultrasonography if women have any of the following:
• Age > 35
• Risk factors for endometrial cancer
• Bleeding that continues despite use of empiric hormonal therapy
Focal thickening of the endometrium that is detected during screening ultrasonography may require
hysteroscopy or saline-infusion sonohysterography to identify small intrauterine masses (eg, endometrial
===PAGE:2652===
polyps, submucous myomas).
Other testing
includes endometrial sampling if examination and ultrasonography are inconclusive in
women who are > 35, who have risk factors for cancer, or who have endometrial thickening > 4 mm.
Sampling can be done by aspiration or, if the cervical canal requires dilation, by D & C.
Treatment
Hemorrhagic shock is treated. Women with iron deficiency anemia may require supplemental oral iron.
Definitive treatment of vaginal bleeding is directed at the cause. Hormones, usually oral contraceptives,
are used to treat dysfunctional uterine bleeding.
Geriatrics Essentials
Postmenopausal bleeding (bleeding > 6 mo after menopause) is abnormal in most women and requires
further evaluation to exclude cancer unless it clearly results from withdrawal of exogenous hormones.
In women not taking exogenous hormones, the most common cause of postmenopausal bleeding is
endometrial and vaginal atrophy. In some older women, physical examination of the vagina can be difficult
because lack of estrogen leads to increased friability of the vaginal mucosa, vaginal stenosis, and
sometimes adhesions in the vagina. For these patients, a pediatric speculum may be more comfortable.
Key Points
• Pregnancy must be excluded in women of reproductive age even when history does not suggest it.
• Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is the most common cause of abnormal vaginal bleeding during the
reproductive years.
• Vaginitis, foreign bodies, trauma, and sexual abuse are common causes of vaginal bleeding before
menarche.
• Postmenopausal vaginal bleeding needs further evaluation to exclude cancer as the cause.
Vaginal Itching and Discharge
Vaginal itching (pruritus), discharge, or both result from infectious or noninfectious inflammation of the
vaginal mucosa (vaginitis), often with inflammation of the vulva (vulvovaginitis). Symptoms may also
include irritation, burning, erythema, and sometimes dysuria and dyspareunia. Symptoms of vaginitis are
one of the most common gynecologic complaints.
Pathophysiology
Some vaginal discharge is normal, particularly when estrogen levels are high a few days before ovulation.
Estrogen levels are also high during the first 2 wk of life (because maternal estrogens are transferred
before birth), during the few months before menarche and during pregnancy (when estrogen production
increases), and with use of drugs that contain estrogen or that increase estrogen production (eg, some
fertility drugs). However, irritation, burning, and pruritus are never normal.
Normally in women of reproductive age,
Lactobacillus
sp is the predominant constituent of normal vaginal
flora. Colonization by these bacteria keeps vaginal pH in the normal range (3.8 to 4.2), thereby preventing
overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria. Also, high estrogen levels maintain vaginal thickness, bolstering local
defenses.
Factors that predispose to overgrowth of bacterial vaginal pathogens include
• Use of antibiotics (which may decrease lactobacilli)
===PAGE:2653===
• Alkaline vaginal pH due to menstrual blood, semen, or a decrease in lactobacilli
• Poor hygiene
• Frequent douching
• Pregnancy
• Diabetes mellitus
Etiology
The most common causes vary by patient age (see
Table 244-5
and Geriatrics Essentials .
Children:
Vaginitis usually involves infection with GI tract flora (nonspecific vulvovaginitis). A common
contributing factor in girls aged 2 to 6 yr is poor perineal hygiene (eg, wiping from back to front after
bowel movements, not washing their hands after bowel movements). Chemicals in bubble baths or soaps
may cause inflammation and pruritus of the vulva, which often recur. Foreign bodies may cause
nonspecific vaginitis, often with a scant bloody discharge.
Women of reproductive age:
Vaginitis is usually infectious. The most common types are
• Bacterial vaginosis
• Candidal vaginitis
• Trichomonal vaginitis (usually sexually transmitted)
Vaginitis may also result from foreign bodies (eg, a forgotten tampon). Inflammatory noninfectious vaginitis
is uncommon.
Women of all ages:
At any age, conditions that predispose to vaginal or vulvar infection include fistulas
between the intestine and genital tract (which allow intestinal flora to seed the genital tract) and pelvic
radiation or tumors (which break down tissue and thus compromise normal host defenses). Fistulas are
usually obstetric in origin (due to vaginal birth trauma or a complication of episiotomy infection) but are
sometimes due to inflammatory bowel disease
[Table 244-5.
Some Causes of Vaginal Pruritus and Discharge]
or occur as a complication of pelvic surgery (eg, hysterectomy, anal surgery).
Noninfectious vulvitis accounts for up to 30% of vulvovaginitis cases. It may result from hypersensitivity or
irritant reactions to various agents, including hygiene sprays or perfumes, menstrual pads, laundry soaps,
bleaches, fabric softeners, and sometimes spermicides, vaginal creams or lubricants, latex condoms,
vaginal contraceptive rings, and diaphragms.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
includes nature of symptoms (eg, pruritus, burning, pain,
discharge), duration, and intensity. If vaginal discharge is present, patients should be asked about the
color and odor of the discharge and any exacerbating and remitting factors (particularly those related to
menses and intercourse). They should also be asked about use of hygiene sprays or perfumes,
spermicides,
vaginal creams or lubricants, latex condoms, vaginal contraceptive rings, and diaphragms.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including fever or chills and
abdominal or suprapubic pain (pelvic inflammatory disease [PID] or cystitis) and polyuria and polydipsia
===PAGE:2654===
(new-onset diabetes).
Past medical history
should note risk factors for candidal infection (eg, recent antibiotic use, diabetes,
HIV infection, other immunosuppressive disorders), fistulas (eg, Crohn's disease, GU or GI cancer, pelvic
or rectal surgery, lacerations during delivery), and sexually transmitted diseases (eg, unprotected
intercourse, multiple partners).
Physical examination:
Physical examination focuses on the pelvic examination.
The external genitals are examined for erythema, excoriations, and swelling. A water-lubricated speculum
is used to check the vaginal walls for erythema, discharge, and fistulas. The cervix is inspected for
inflammation (eg, trichomoniasis) and discharge. Vaginal pH is measured, and samples of secretions are
obtained for testing. A bimanual examination is done to identify cervical motion tenderness and adnexal or
uterine tenderness (indicating PID).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Trichomonal vaginitis in children (suggesting sexual abuse)
• Fecal discharge (suggesting a fistula, even if not seen)
Interpretation of findings:
Often, the history and physical examination help suggest a diagnosis (see
Table 244-5
), although there can be much overlap.
In
children,
a vaginal discharge suggests a foreign body in the vagina. If no foreign body is present and
children have trichomonal vaginitis, sexual abuse is likely. If they have unexplained vaginal discharge,
cervicitis, which may be due to a sexually transmitted disease, should be considered. Nonspecific
vulvovaginitis is a diagnosis of exclusion.
In
women of reproductive age,
discharge due to vaginitis must be distinguished from normal discharge.
Normal vaginal discharge is commonly milky white or mucoid, odorless, and nonirritating; it can result in
vaginal wetness that dampens underwear.
Bacterial vaginosis produces a thin, gray discharge with a fishy odor. A trichomonal infection produces a
frothy, yellow-green vaginal discharge and causes vulvovaginal soreness. Candidal vaginitis produces a
white discharge that resembles cottage cheese, often increasing the week before menses; symptoms
worsen after sexual intercourse.
Contact irritant or allergic reactions cause significant irritation and inflammation with comparatively
minimal discharge.
Discharge due to cervicitis (eg, due to PID) can resemble that of vaginitis. Abdominal pain, cervical motion
tenderness, or cervical inflammation suggests PID.
In
women of all ages,
vaginal pruritus and discharge may result from skin disorders (eg, psoriasis, tinea
versicolor), which can usually be differentiated by history and skin findings.
Discharge that is watery, bloody, or both may result from vulvar, vaginal, or cervical cancer; cancers can
be differentiated from vaginitis by examination and Papanicolaou (Pap) tests.
In atrophic vaginitis, discharge is scant, dyspareunia is common, and vaginal tissue appears thin and dry.
Testing:
All patients require the following in-office testing:
• pH
• Wet mount
===PAGE:2655===
• K hydroxide (KOH) preparation
Testing for gonorrhea and chlamydial infections is typically done unless a noninfectious cause (eg,
allergy, foreign body) is obvious.
Vaginal secretions are tested using pH paper with 0.2 intervals from pH 4.0 to 6.0. Then, a cotton swab is
used to place secretions on 2 slides; secretions are diluted with 0.9% NaCl on one slide (saline wet
mount) and with 10% KOH on the other (KOH preparation).
The KOH preparation is sniffed (whiff test) for a fishy odor, which results from amines produced in
trichomonal vaginitis and bacterial vaginosis. The slide is examined using a microscope; KOH dissolves
most cellular material except yeast hyphae, making identification easier.
The saline wet mount is examined using a microscope as soon as possible to detect motile trichomonads,
which can become immotile and more difficult to recognize within minutes after slide preparation.
If clinical criteria and in-office test results are inconclusive, the discharge may be cultured for fungi and
trichomonads.
Treatment
Any specific cause is treated.
The vulva should be kept as clean as possible. Soaps and unnecessary topical preparations (eg,
feminine hygiene sprays) should be avoided. Intermittent use of ice packs or warm sitz baths (with or
without baking soda) may reduce soreness and pruritus. If chronic vulvar inflammation is due to being
bedbound or incontinent, better vulvar hygiene may help.
If symptoms are moderate or severe or do not respond to other measures, drugs may be
needed. For
pruritus, topical corticosteroids (eg, 1% hydrocortisone bid prn) can be applied to the vulva but not into
the vagina. Oral antihistamines lessen pruritus and cause drowsiness, helping patients sleep.
Prepubertal girls should be taught good perineal hygiene (eg, wiping front to back after bowel movements
and voiding, washing their hands, avoiding fingering the perineum).
Geriatrics Essentials
In postmenopausal women, a marked decrease in estrogen causes vaginal thinning, increasing
vulnerability to infection and inflammation (atrophic vaginitis). Other common causes of decreased
estrogen in older women include oophorectomy, pelvic radiation, and certain chemotherapy drugs.
In atrophic vaginitis, discharge is scant, dyspareunia is common, and vaginal tissue appears thin and dry.
Poor hygiene (eg, in patients who are incontinent or bedbound) can lead to chronic vulvar inflammation
due to chemical irritation by urine or feces.
Bacterial vaginosis, candidal vaginitis, and trichomonal vaginitis are uncommon among postmenopausal
women but may occur in those with risk factors.
Key Points
• Vaginal complaints are often nonspecific.
• Causes vary depending on the patient's age.
• Most patients require measurement of vaginal pH, microscopic examination of secretions, and, if
needed, culture for sexually transmitted organisms.
===PAGE:2656===
Chapter 245. Female Reproductive Endocrinology
Introduction
Hormonal communication between the hypothalamus, anterior pituitary gland, and ovaries regulates the
female reproductive system. The hypothalamus secretes a small peptide, gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH), also known as luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone. GnRH regulates release of the
gonadotropins luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from specialized cells
(gonadotropes) in the anterior pituitary gland (see
Fig. 245-1
and p.
). These hormones are released in short bursts (pulses) every 1 to 4 h. LH and FSH
promote ovulation and stimulate secretion of the sex hormones estradiol (an estrogen) and progesterone
from the ovaries.
Estrogen and progesterone circulate in the bloodstream almost entirely bound to plasma proteins. Only
unbound estrogen and progesterone appear to be biologically active. They stimulate the target organs of
the reproductive system (eg, breasts, uterus, vagina). They usually inhibit but, in certain situations (eg,
around the time of ovulation), may stimulate gonadotropin secretion.
Puberty
Puberty is the sequence of events in which a child acquires adult physical characteristics
[Fig. 245-1.
The CNS-hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal target organ axis.]
and capacity for reproduction. Circulating LH and FSH levels are elevated at birth but fall to low levels
within a few months and remain low until puberty. Until puberty, few qualitative changes occur in
reproductive target organs.
Over the last 150 yr, the age at which puberty begins has been decreasing, primarily because of
improved health and nutrition, but this trend has stabilized. Puberty often occurs earlier than average in
moderately obese girls and later than average in severely under-weight and undernourished girls. Such
observations suggest that a critical body weight is necessary for puberty. Puberty occurs earlier in girls
whose mothers matured earlier and, for unknown reasons, in girls who live in urban areas or who are
blind.
Physical changes of puberty occur sequentially during adolescence (
Fig. 245-2
). Breast budding (see
Fig. 245-3
) and onset of the growth spurt are usually the first changes recognized. Then, pubic and
axillary hair appears (see
Fig. 245-4
), and the growth spurt peaks. Menarche (the first menstrual period) occurs about 2 yr after
breast budding. The growth spurt peaks early in puberty; it is limited after menarche. Body habitus
changes; the pelvis and hips widen. Body fat increases and accumulates in the hips and thighs.
Mechanisms initiating puberty are unclear. Central influences may inhibit release of GnRH during
childhood, then initiate its release to induce puberty in early adolescence. Early in puberty, hypothalamic
GnRH release becomes less sensitive to inhibition by estrogen and progesterone. The resulting
increased release of GnRH promotes LH and FSH secretion, which stimulates production of sex
hormones, primarily estrogen. Estrogen stimulates development of secondary sexual characteristics.
Pubic and axillary hair growth may be stimulated by the adrenal androgens dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA) and DHEA sulfate; production of these androgens increases several years before puberty in a
process called adrenarche.
Ovarian Follicular Development
A female is born with a finite number of egg precursors (germ cells). Germ cells begin
[Fig. 245-2.
Puberty—when female sexual characteristics develop.]
===PAGE:2657===
[Fig. 245-3.
Diagrammatic representation of Tanner stages I to V of human breast maturation.]
[Fig. 245-4.
Diagrammatic representation of Tanner stages I to V for development of pubic hair in girls.]
as primordial oogonia that proliferate markedly by mitosis through the 4th mo of gestation. During the 3rd
mo, some oogonia begin to undergo meiosis, which reduces the number of chromosomes by one half. By
the 7th mo, all viable germ cells develop a surrounding layer of granulosa cells, forming a primordial
follicle, and are arrested in meiotic prophase; these cells are primary oocytes. Beginning after the 4th mo
of gestation, oogonia (and later oocytes) are lost spontaneously in a process called atresia; eventually,
99.9% are lost. In older mothers, the long time that surviving oocytes spend arrested in meiotic prophase
may account for the increased incidence of genetically abnormal pregnancies.
During each menstrual cycle, 3 to 30 follicles are recruited for accelerated growth. Usually in each cycle,
only one follicle is selected for ovulation. This dominant follicle releases its oocyte at ovulation and
promotes atresia of the other recruited follicles.
Menstrual Cycle
Menstruation is the periodic discharge of blood and sloughed endometrium (collectively called menses or
menstrual flow) through the vagina; menstruation occurs throughout a woman's reproductive life in the
absence of pregnancy. Menopause is the permanent cessation of menses (.
Average duration of menses is 5 (± 2) days. Blood loss per cycle averages 30 mL (normal range, 13 to 80
mL) and is usually greatest on the 2nd day. A saturated pad or tampon absorbs 5 to 15 mL. Menstrual
blood does not usually clot (unless bleeding is very heavy), probably because fibrinolysin and other
factors inhibit clotting.
The median menstrual cycle length is 28 days (usual range, about 25 to 36 days). Generally, variation is
maximal and intermenstrual intervals are longest in the years immediately after menarche and immediately
before menopause, when ovulation occurs less regularly. The menstrual cycle begins and ends with the
first day of menses (day 1).
The menstrual cycle can be divided into follicular (preovulatory), ovulatory, and luteal (postovulatory)
phases (see
Fig. 245-5
).
Follicular phase:
This phase varies in length more than other phases do. In the first half of the follicular
phase (early follicular phase), the primary event is growth of recruited follicles. At this time, the
gonadotropes in the anterior pituitary contain little LH and FSH, and estrogen and progesterone
production is low. As a result, overall FSH secretion increases slightly, stimulating growth of recruited
follicles. Also, circulating LH levels increase slowly, beginning 1 to 2 days after the increase in FSH. The
recruited ovarian follicles soon increase production of
[Fig. 245-5.
The idealized cyclic changes in pituitary gonadotropins, estradiol (E
), progesterone (P), and
uterine endometrium during the normal menstrual cycle.]
estradiol; estradiol stimulates LH and FSH synthesis but inhibits their secretion.
During the 2nd half of the follicular phase (late follicular phase), the follicle selected for ovulation matures
and accumulates hormone-secreting granulosa cells; its antrum enlarges with follicular fluid, reaching 18
to 20 mm before ovulation. FSH levels decrease; LH levels are affected less. FSH and LH levels diverge
partly because estradiol inhibits FSH secretion more than LH secretion. Also, developing follicles produce
the hormone inhibin, which inhibits FSH secretion but not LH secretion. Other contributing factors may
include disparate half-lives (20 to 30 min for LH; 2 to 3 h for FSH) and unknown factors. Levels of
estrogen, particularly estradiol, increase exponentially.
Ovulatory phase:
Ovulation (ovum release) occurs. Estradiol levels usually peak as the ovulatory phase
begins. Progesterone levels also begin to increase. Stored LH is released in massive amounts (LH
===PAGE:2658===
surge), usually over 36 to 48 h, with a smaller increase in FSH. The LH surge occurs because at this
time, high levels of estradiol trigger LH secretion by gonadotropes (positive feedback). The LH surge is
also stimulated by GnRH and progesterone. During the LH surge, estradiol levels decrease, but
progesterone levels continue to increase. The LH surge stimulates enzymes that initiate breakdown of the
follicle wall and release of the now mature ovum within about 16 to 32 h. The LH surge also triggers
completion of the first meiotic division of the oocyte within about 36 h.
Luteal phase:
The follicle is transformed into a corpus luteum. The length of this phase is the most
constant, averaging 14 days, after which the corpus luteum degenerates. The corpus luteum secretes
primarily progesterone in increasing quantities, peaking at about 25 mg/day 6 to 8 days after ovulation.
Progesterone stimulates development of the secretory endometrium, which is necessary for embryonic
implantation. Because progesterone is thermogenic, basal body temperature increases by 0.5°C for the
duration of this phase. Because levels of circulating estradiol, progesterone, and inhibin are high during
most of the luteal phase, LH and FSH levels decrease. Estradiol and progesterone levels decrease late in
this phase.
If implantation occurs, the corpus luteum does not degenerate but remains, supported by human chorionic
gonadotropin that is produced by the developing embryo.
Cyclic Changes in Other Reproductive Organs
Endometrium:
The endometrium, which consists of glands and stroma, has a basal layer, an
intermediate spongiosa layer, and a layer of compact epithelial cells that line the uterine cavity. Together,
the spongiosa and epithelial layers form the functionalis, a transient layer that is sloughed during menses.
After menstruation, the endometrium is typically < 2 mm thick with dense stroma and narrow, straight,
tubular glands lined with low columnar epithelium. As estradiol levels increase, the intact basal layer
regenerates the endometrium to a maximum thickness of 11 mm late in the follicular phase. The mucosa
thickens and the glands lengthen and coil, becoming
tortuous. During the luteal phase, progesterone
stimulates the glands to dilate, fill with glycogen, and become secretory, while stromal vascularity
increases. As estradiol and progesterone levels decrease late in the luteal phase, the stroma becomes
edematous, and the endometrium and its blood vessels necrose, leading to bleeding and menstrual flow.
Because histologic changes are specific to the phase of the menstrual cycle, the cycle phase or tissue
response to sex hormones can be determined accurately by endometrial biopsy. The endometrium can
also be seen using transvaginal ultrasonography; late in the follicular phase, it characteristically has a trilaminar pattern, with hyperechoic basal and luminal layers and an intervening hypoechoic layer. After
ovulation, the endometrium appears homogeneously echogenic.
Cervix:
During the follicular phase, increasing estradiol levels increase cervical vascularity and edema
and cervical mucus quantity, elasticity, and NaCl concentration. The external os opens slightly and fills
with mucus at ovulation. During the luteal phase, increasing progesterone levels make the cervical mucus
thicker and less elastic. Menstrual cycle phase can sometimes be identified by microscopic examination
of cervical mucus dried on a glass slide; ferning (palm leaf arborization of mucus) indicates increased
NaCl in cervical mucus. Ferning becomes prominent just before ovulation, when estrogen levels are high;
it is minimal or absent during the luteal phase.
Vagina:
Early in the follicular phase, when estradiol levels are low, the vaginal epithelium is thin and pale.
Later in the follicular phase, as estradiol levels increase, squamous cells mature and become cornified,
causing epithelial thickening. During the luteal phase, the number of precornified intermediate cells
increases, and the number of leukocytes and amount of cellular debris increase as mature squamous
cells are shed.
===PAGE:2659===
Chapter 246. Menstrual Abnormalities
Introduction
(For a description of the menstrual cycle, see p.
.)
Menstrual abnormalities include amenorrhea, dysfunctional uterine bleeding, dysmenorrhea, and
premenstrual syndrome. Irregular or absent menses and nonmenstrual vaginal bleeding have many
causes, but in women of reproductive age, pregnancy should always be suspected. Abnormal vaginal
bleeding in nonpregnant women ( is evaluated differently from vaginal bleeding in pregnant
women (see pp.
and
).
Amenorrhea
Amenorrhea (the absence of menstruation) can be primary or secondary.
Primary amenorrhea
is failure of menses to occur by any of the following:
• Age 16 or 2 yr after the onset of puberty
• About age 14 in girls who have not gone through puberty (eg, growth spurt, development of secondary
sexual characteristics)
Secondary amenorrhea
is cessation of menses after they have begun; evaluation for amenorrhea is
usually done if menses are absent for > 6 mo.
Pathophysiology
Normally, the hypothalamus generates pulses of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which
stimulates the pituitary to produce gonadotropins (follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH] and luteinizing
hormone [LH])—. Gonadotropins stimulate the ovaries to produce estrogen (mainly estradiol), androgens (mainly
testosterone), and progesterone. Estrogen stimulates the endometrium, causing it to proliferate. After
ovulation, the corpus luteum produces progesterone, which causes the endometrium to become secretory
and prepares it for egg implantation. If pregnancy does not occur, estrogen and progesterone production
decreases, and the endometrium breaks down and is sloughed during menses.
When part of this system malfunctions, ovulatory dysfunction occurs; the cycle of gonadotropin-stimulated
estrogen production and cyclic endometrial changes is disrupted, and menstrual flow does not occur,
resulting in anovulatory amenorrhea. Most amenorrhea, particularly secondary amenorrhea, is
anovulatory.
However, amenorrhea can occur when ovulation is normal, as occurs when genital
anatomic
abnormalities (eg, congenital anomalies causing outflow obstruction, intrauterine adhesions [Asherman's
syndrome]) prevent normal menstrual flow despite normal hormonal stimulation.
Etiology
Amenorrhea is usually classified as anovulatory (see
Table 246-1
) or ovulatory (see
Table 246-2
). Each type has many causes, but overall, the most common causes of amenorrhea include
• Pregnancy (the most common cause in women of reproductive age)
• Constitutional delay of puberty
• Functional hypothalamic anovulation (eg, due to excessive exercise, eating disorders, or stress)
===PAGE:2660===
• Use or abuse of drugs (eg, oral contraceptives, depoprogesterone, antidepressants, antipsychotics)
• Breastfeeding
• Polycystic ovary syndrome
Contraceptives can cause the endometrium to thin, sometimes resulting in amenorrhea. Antidepressants
and antipsychotics can elevate prolactin.
Some disorders can cause ovulatory or anovulatory amenorrhea. Congenital anatomic abnormalities
cause only primary amenorrhea.
Anovulatory amenorrhea:
The most common causes (see
Table 246-1
) involve a disruption of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis. Thus, causes include
• Hypothalamic dysfunction (particularly functional hypothalamic anovulation)
• Pituitary dysfunction
• Premature ovarian failure
• Endocrine disorders that cause androgen excess (particularly polycystic ovary syndrome)
[Table 246-1.
Some Causes of Anovulatory Amenorrhea]
Anovulatory amenorrhea is usually secondary but may be primary if ovulation never begins—eg, because
of a genetic disorder. If ovulation never begins, puberty and development of secondary sexual
characteristics are abnormal.
Ovulatory amenorrhea:
The most common causes (see
Table 246-2
) include
• Chromosomal abnormalities
• Other congenital anatomic genital abnormalities that obstruct menstrual flow
Obstructive abnormalities are usually accompanied by normal hormonal function. Such obstruction may
result in hematocolpos (accumulation of menstrual blood in the vagina), which can cause the vagina to
bulge, or in hematometra (accumulation of blood in the uterus), which can cause uterine distention or a
mass. Because ovarian function is normal, external genital organs and other secondary sexual
characteristics develop normally. Some congenital disorders (eg, those accompanied by vaginal aplasia
or a vaginal septum) also cause urinary tract and skeletal abnormalities.
Some acquired anatomic abnormalities, such as endometrial scarring after instrumentation
[Table 246-2.
Some Causes of Ovulatory Amenorrhea]
or postpartum hemorrhage (Asherman's syndrome), cause secondary ovulatory amenorrhea.
Evaluation
Girls are evaluated if
• They have no signs of puberty (eg, breast development, growth spurt) by age 13 1/2.
• Pubic hair is absent at age 14.
• Menarche has not occurred by age 16 or by 2 yr after the onset of puberty (development of secondary
===PAGE:2661===
sexual characteristics).
Women of reproductive age should have a pregnancy test after missing one menses. They are evaluated
for amenorrhea if
• They are not pregnant and have missed menstrual cycles for ≥ 3 mo.
• They have < 9 menses a year.
• They have a sudden change in menstrual pattern.
History: History of present illness
includes whether menses have ever occurred (to distinguish
primary from secondary amenorrhea) and, if so, how old patients were at menarche, whether periods
have ever been regular, and when the last normal menstrual period occurred. History should also include
duration and flow of menses; presence or absence of cyclic breast tenderness and mood changes; and
growth, development, and age at thelarche (development of breasts at puberty).
Review of systems
should cover symptoms suggesting possible causes, including galactorrhea,
headaches, and visual field defects (pituitary disorders); fatigue, weight gain, and cold intolerance
(hypothyroidism); palpitations, nervousness, tremor, and heat intolerance (hyperthyroidism); acne,
hirsutism, and deepening of the voice (androgen excess); and, for patients with secondary amenorrhea,
hot flushes, vaginal dryness, sleep disturbance, fragility fractures, and decreased libido (estrogen
deficiency). Patients with primary amenorrhea are asked about symptoms of puberty (eg, breast
development, growth spurt, presence of axillary and pubic hair) to help determine whether ovulation has
occurred.
Past medical history
should note risk factors for functional hypothalamic anovulation, such as stress;
chronic illness; a recent change in weight, diet, or exercise intensity; and, in patients with secondary
amenorrhea, risk factors for Asherman's syndrome (eg, D & C, endometritis, obstetric injury, uterine
surgery).
Drug history
should include specific questions about use of drugs that affect dopamine (eg,
antihypertensives, antipsychotics, opioids, tricyclic antidepressants) and sex hormones that can cause
virilization (eg, androgens, estrogens, high-dose progestins).
Family history
should include height of family members and any cases of delayed puberty or genetic
disorders in family members.
Physical examination:
Clinicians should note vital signs and body composition and build, including
height and weight, and should calculate body mass index (BMI). Secondary sexual characteristics are
evaluated; breast and pubic hair development are staged using Tanner's method. If axillary and pubic hair
is present, adrenarche has occurred.
With the patient seated, clinicians should check for breast secretion by applying pressure to all sections
of the breast, beginning at the base and moving toward the nipple. Galactorrhea (breast milk secretion
not temporally associated with childbirth) may be observed; it can be distinguished from other types of
nipple discharge by finding fat globules in the fluid using a low-power microscope.
Pelvic examination is done to detect anatomic genital abnormalities; a bulging hymen may be caused by
hematocolpos, which suggests genital outflow obstruction. Pelvic examination findings also help
determine whether estrogen is adequate. In postpubertal females, thin, pale vaginal mucosa without
rugae and pH > 6.0 indicate estrogen deficiency. The presence of cervical mucus with spinnbarkeit (a
stringy, stretchy quality) usually indicates adequate estrogen.
General examination focuses on evidence of virilization, including hirsutism, temporal balding, acne, voice
deepening, increased muscle mass, clitoromegaly (clitoral enlargement), and defeminization (a decrease
in previously normal secondary sexual characteristics, such as decreased breast size and vaginal
atrophy). Hypertrichosis (excessive growth of hair on the extremities, head, and back), which is common
===PAGE:2662===
in some families, is differentiated from true hirsutism, which is characterized by excess hair on the upper
lip and chin and between the breasts. Skin discoloration (eg, yellow of jaundice or carotenemia, black
patches of acanthosis nigricans) should be noted.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Delayed puberty
• Virilization
• Visual field defects
Interpretation of findings:
Pregnancy should not be excluded by history; a pregnancy test is required.
In primary amenorrhea, the presence of normal secondary sexual characteristics usually reflects normal
hormonal function; amenorrhea is usually ovulatory and typically due to a congenital anatomic genital
tract obstruction. Primary amenorrhea accompanied by abnormal secondary sexual characteristics is
usually anovulatory (eg, due to a genetic disorder).
In secondary amenorrhea, clinical findings sometimes suggest a mechanism (see
Table 246-3
).
• Galactorrhea suggests hyperprolactinemia (eg, pituitary dysfunction, use of certain drugs); if visual field
defects and headaches are also present, pituitary tumors should be considered.
• Symptoms and signs of estrogen deficiency (eg, hot flushes, night sweats, vaginal dryness or atrophy)
suggest premature ovarian failure.
• Virilization suggests androgen excess (eg, polycystic ovary syndrome, androgen-secreting tumor,
Cushing's syndrome, use of certain drugs). If patients have a high BMI, acanthosis nigricans, or both,
polycystic ovary syndrome is likely.
Testing:
History and physical examination help direct testing.
If girls have secondary sexual characteristics, a pregnancy test should be done to exclude pregnancy and
gestational trophoblastic disease as a cause of amenorrhea. Women of reproductive
[Table 246-3.
Findings Suggesting Possible Causes of Amenorrhea]
age should have a pregnancy test after missing one menses.
The approach to primary amenorrhea (see
Fig. 246-1
) differs from that to secondary amenorrhea (see
Fig. 246-2
), although no specific general approaches or algorithms are universally accepted.
If symptoms or signs suggest a specific disorder, specific tests may be indicated regardless of what an
algorithm recommends. For example, patients with abdominal striae, moon facies, a buffalo hump, truncal
obesity, and thin extremities should be tested for Cushing's syndrome (. Patients
[Fig. 246-1.
Evaluation of primary amenorrhea.]
[Fig. 246-2.
Evaluation of secondary amenorrhea.]
with headaches and visual field defects or evidence of pituitary dysfunction require brain MRI.
If clinical evaluation suggests a chronic disease, liver and kidney function tests are done, and ESR is
determined.
===PAGE:2663===
Often, testing includes measurement of hormone levels; total serum testosterone or
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) levels are measured only if signs of virilization are present.
Certain hormone levels should be remeasured to confirm the results. For example, if serum prolactin is
high, it should be remeasured; if serum FSH is high, it should be remeasured monthly at least twice.
Amenorrhea with high FSH levels (hypergonadotropic hypogonadism) suggests ovarian dysfunction;
amenorrhea with low FSH levels (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) suggests hypothalamic or pituitary
dysfunction.
If patients have secondary amenorrhea without virilization and have normal prolactin and FSH levels and
normal thyroid function, a trial of estrogen and a progestin to try to stimulate withdrawal bleeding can be
done (progesterone challenge test). The trial begins by giving medroxyprogesterone 5 to 10 mg po
once/day or another progestin for 7 to 10 days.
• If bleeding occurs, amenorrhea is probably not caused by an endometrial lesion (eg, Asherman's
syndrome) or outflow tract obstruction, and the cause is probably hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction,
ovarian failure, or estrogen excess.
• If bleeding does not occur, an estrogen (eg, conjugated equine estrogen 1.25 mg, estradiol 2 mg)
once/day is given for 21 days, followed by medroxyprogesterone 10 mg po once/day or another
progestin for 7 to 10 days. Absence of bleeding suggests an endometrial lesion or outflow tract
obstruction.
However, because this trial takes weeks and results can be inaccurate, diagnosis of some serious
disorders may be delayed significantly; thus, brain MRI should be considered before or during the trial.
Mildly elevated levels of testosterone or DHEAS suggest polycystic ovary syndrome, but levels can be
elevated in women with hypothalamic or pituitary dysfunction and are sometimes normal in hirsute women
with polycystic ovary syndrome. The cause of elevated levels can sometimes be determined by
measuring serum LH. In polycystic ovary syndrome, circulating LH levels are often increased, increasing
the ratio of LH to FSH.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder; with such treatment, menses sometimes resume. For
example, most abnormalities obstructing the genital outflow tract are surgically repaired.
If a Y chromosome is present, bilateral oophorectomy is recommended because risk of ovarian germ cell
cancer is increased.
Problems associated with amenorrhea may also require treatment, including
• Inducing ovulation if pregnancy is desired
• Treating symptoms and long-term effects of estrogen deficiency (eg, osteoporosis)
• Treating symptoms of estrogen excess (eg, prolonged bleeding, persistent or marked breast
tenderness)
• Minimizing hirsutism and long-term effects of androgen excess (eg, cardiovascular disorders,
hypertension)
Key Points
• Pregnancy must always be excluded by testing.
• Primary amenorrhea is evaluated differently from secondary amenorrhea.
• Primary amenorrhea with normal secondary sexual characteristics suggests congenital anatomic genital
===PAGE:2664===
tract obstruction; pelvic ultrasonography is indicated.
• Primary amenorrhea without normal secondary sexual characteristics is usually anovulatory (eg, due to
a genetic disorder).
• Virilization suggests androgen excess (eg, due to polycystic ovary syndrome, an androgen-secreting
tumor, Cushing's syndrome, or use of certain drugs).
• Symptoms and signs of estrogen deficiency (eg, hot flushes, night sweats, vaginal dryness or atrophy)
suggest premature ovarian failure.
• Galactorrhea suggests hyperprolactinemia (eg, due to pituitary dysfunction or use of certain drugs).
Dysfunctional Uterine Bleeding
(Functional Uterine Bleeding)
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is abnormal uterine bleeding that, after examination and
ultrasonography, cannot be attributed to the usual causes (structural gynecologic abnormalities,
cancer, inflammation, systemic disorders, pregnancy, complications of pregnancy, use of oral
contraceptives or certain drugs). Treatment is usually with hormonal therapy, such as oral
contraceptives.
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB), the most common cause of abnormal uterine bleeding, occurs most
often in women > 45 (> 50% of cases) and in adolescents (20% of cases).
About 90% of cases are anovulatory; 10% are ovulatory.
Pathophysiology
During an anovulatory cycle, the corpus luteum does not form. Thus, the normal cyclical secretion of
progesterone does not occur, and estrogen stimulates the endometrium unopposed. Without
progesterone, the endometrium continues to proliferate, eventually outgrowing its blood supply; it then
sloughs and bleeds incompletely, irregularly, and sometimes profusely or for a long time. When this
abnormal process occurs repeatedly, the endometrium can become hyperplastic, sometimes with atypical
or cancerous cells.
In ovulatory DUB, progesterone secretion is prolonged; irregular shedding of the endometrium results,
probably because estrogen levels remain low, near the threshold for bleeding (as occurs during menses).
In obese women, ovulatory DUB can occur if estrogen levels are high, resulting in amenorrhea alternating
with irregular or prolonged bleeding.
Complications:
Chronic bleeding may cause iron deficiency anemia. If DUB is due to chronic
anovulation, infertility may also be present.
Etiology
Anovulatory DUB can result from any disorder or condition that causes anovulation (see
Table 246-1
).
Anovulation is most often secondary to polycystic ovary syndrome or is idiopathic (sometimes occurring
when gonadotropin levels are normal); sometimes anovulation results from hypothyroidism. During
perimenopause, DUB may be an early sign of ovarian failure; follicles are still developing but, despite
increasing levels of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), do not produce enough estrogen to trigger
ovulation. About 20% of women with endometriosis ( have anovulatory DUB due to unknown
mechanisms.
Ovulatory DUB may occur in polycystic ovary syndrome (because progesterone secretion is prolonged) or
in endometriosis, which does not affect ovulation. Other causes are a short follicular phase and luteal
phase dysfunction (due to inadequate progesterone stimulation of the endometrium); a rapid decrease in
===PAGE:2665===
estrogen before ovulation can cause spotting.
Symptoms and Signs
Compared with typical menses, bleeding may occur more frequently (< 21 days apart—polymenorrhea),
last longer or involve more blood loss (> 7 days or > 80 mL—menorrhagia, or hypermenorrhea), or occur
frequently and irregularly between menses (metrorrhagia).
Ovulatory DUB tends to cause excessive bleeding during regular menstrual cycles. Women may have
other symptoms of ovulation, such as premenstrual symptoms, breast tenderness, midcycle cramping
pain (mittelschmerz), a change in basal body temperature with ovulation (, and sometimes
dysmenorrhea. Anovulatory DUB occurs at unpredictable times and in unpredictable patterns and is not
accompanied by cyclic changes in basal body temperature.
Diagnosis
• Exclusion of other potential causes
• CBC, pregnancy test, and hormone measurement (thyroid-stimulating hormone, prolactin)
• Usually transvaginal ultrasonography and endometrial sampling
Women should be evaluated for DUB when the amount or timing of vaginal bleeding is inconsistent with
normal menses. DUB is a diagnosis of exclusion; other conditions that can cause similar bleeding must be
excluded (. Pregnancy should be excluded, even in young adolescents and perimenopausal
women. Coagulation disorders should be considered, particularly in adolescents who have anemia or
require hospitalization for bleeding. Regular cycles with prolonged or excessive bleeding (possible
ovulatory DUB) suggest structural abnormalities.
Laboratory testing:
Several tests are typically done:
• A urine pregnancy test
• CBC
• TSH, prolactin, and progesterone levels
All women of reproductive age should have a pregnancy test. CBC is routinely done. However, Hct may
be normal in women who report heavy bleeding, or anemia may be severe in women who regularly have
heavy periods.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone levels are usually measured, and prolactin levels are measured, even when
galactorrhea is absent, because thyroid disorders and hyperprolactinemia are common causes of
abnormal bleeding. To determine whether bleeding is anovulatory or ovulatory, some clinicians
measure
serum progesterone levels during the luteal phase (after day 14 of a normal menstrual cycle or after basal
body temperature increases, as occurs during this phase). A level of ≥ 3 ng/mL (≥ 9.75 nmol/L) suggests
that ovulation has occurred.
Other tests are done depending on results of the history and physical examination and include the
following:
• Coagulation tests if women have risk factors or bruising or hemorrhage
• Liver function tests if a liver disorder is suspected
• Testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) levels if polycystic ovary syndrome is
suspected
===PAGE:2666===
• Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and estradiol levels if premature ovarian failure is possible
• A cervical cytology test (eg, Papanicolaou [Pap] test) if results are out-of-date
• Testing for
Neisseria gonorrhea
and
Chlamydia
sp if pelvic inflammatory disease or cervicitis is
suspected
If all clinically indicated tests are normal, the diagnosis is DUB.
Additional testing:
Transvaginal ultrasonography is done if women have any of the following:
• Age ≥ 35 or, if unopposed estrogen exposure is prolonged, younger
• Risk factors for endometrial cancer (eg, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, polycystic ovary syndrome,
other conditions associated with prolonged unopposed estrogen)
• Bleeding that continues despite use of empiric hormonal therapy
These criteria include almost all women with DUB.
Transvaginal ultrasonography can detect structural abnormalities, including most masses and focal
thickening of the endometrium. If focal thickening is detected, hysteroscopy or saline-infusion
sonohysterography may be needed to identify smaller intrauterine masses (eg, endometrial polyps,
submucous myomas).
Endometrial sampling is usually recommended to rule out hyperplasia or cancer in women with any of the
following:
• Criteria indicating need for transvaginal ultrasonography
• Bleeding that is persistent, irregular, or heavy
• Irregular cycles that suggest chronic anovulatory bleeding
• Endometrial thickness > 4 mm or focal or irregular areas
• Inconclusive ultrasonography findings
Directed biopsy (with hysteroscopy) may be done to visualize the endometrial cavity directly and target
the abnormal tissue.
Treatment
• Control of bleeding, usually with hormone therapy
• In women with endometrial hyperplasia, prevention of endometrial cancer
Bleeding:
Patients with very heavy bleeding (which is uncommon) are stabilized hemo-dynamically with
IV crystalloid fluid, blood products, and other measures as needed. If bleeding persists, a bladder catheter
is inserted into the uterus and inflated with 30 mL of water to tamponade the bleeding. Once patients are
stable, hormonal therapy is used to control bleeding.
For anovulatory DUB with very heavy bleeding, conjugated estrogens 25 mg IV q 4 to 6 h for a total of 4
doses may be used. Immediately afterward, women are given a combination (estrogen/progestin) oral
contraceptive, which may be continued until bleeding abates. Otherwise, anovulatory DUB is usually
treated with combination oral contraceptives (. Depending on the severity of bleeding, an oral
contraceptive can be given bid or tid for 5 to 6 days, then once/day. After acute bleeding is controlled, a
combination oral contraceptive is given continually for about 3 mo to prevent recurrence.
===PAGE:2667===
Other options include a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (IUD), depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate injections, and cyclic use of a progestin (eg, medroxyprogesterone acetate 5 to 10 mg po
once/day, norethindrone 5 mg po once/day for 10 to 14 days/mo). These treatments may be indicated
when estrogen is contraindicated or when spontaneous cyclic menses do not resume after 3 mo of oral
contraceptive therapy.
If pregnancy is desired and bleeding is not heavy, ovulation induction with clomiphene (50 mg po on days
5 through 9 of the menstrual cycle) can be tried.
Endometrial ablation (eg, using freezing or burning) may help control bleeding (in 60 to 80%). If this
treatment does not control bleeding, bleeding is usually caused by adenomyosis and is thus not DUB.
Hysteroscopy with D & C may be therapeutic as well as diagnostic; it may be the treatment of choice
when anovulatory bleeding
is severe or when hormone therapy is ineffective. Structural causes such as
polyps or fibroids may be identified or removed during hysteroscopy. This procedure may decrease
bleeding but, in some women, causes amenorrhea due to endometrial scarring (Asherman's syndrome).
For ovulatory DUB, oral contraceptives are usually effective. Other options include NSAIDs given during
menses, ovarian suppression with depot leuprolide, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate, and a
levonorgestrel-releasing IUD.
Endometrial hyperplasia:
In postmenopausal women, atypical adenomatous endometrial hyperplasia is
usually treated with hysterectomy. In premenopausal women, it is treated with medroxyprogesterone
acetate 20 to 40 mg po once/day for 3 to 6 mo.
If repeat endometrial sampling indicates resolution of hyperplasia, women may be given cyclic
medroxyprogesterone acetate (5 to 10 mg po once/day for 10 to 14 days each month) or, if pregnancy is
desired, clomiphene. If sampling shows persistent or progressive atypical hyperplasia, hysterectomy is
necessary.
More benign cystic or adenomatous hyperplasia can usually be treated with high-dose cyclic
progesterone therapy (eg, cyclic medroxyprogesterone acetate); sampling is repeated after about 3 mo.
Dysmenorrhea
Dysmenorrhea is uterine pain around the time of menses. Pain may occur with menses or precede
menses by 1 to 3 days. Pain tends to peak 24 h after onset of menses and subside after 2 to 3 days. It is
usually sharp but may be cramping, throbbing, or a dull, constant ache; it may radiate to the legs.
Headache, nausea, constipation or diarrhea, lower back pain, and urinary frequency are common;
vomiting occurs occasionally. Symptoms of premenstrual syndrome may occur during part or all of
menses. Sometimes endometrial clots or casts are expelled.
Etiology
Dysmenorrhea can be
• Primary (more common)
• Secondary (due to pelvic abnormalities)
Primary dysmenorrhea:
Symptoms cannot be explained by structural gynecologic disorders. Pain is
thought to result from uterine contractions and ischemia, probably mediated by prostaglandins and other
inflammatory mediators produced in secretory endometrium and possibly associated with prolonged
uterine contractions and decreased blood flow to the myometrium. Contributing factors may include
passage of menstrual tissue through the cervix, a narrow cervical os, a malpositioned uterus, lack of
exercise, and anxiety about menses. It occurs almost invariably in ovulatory cycles. Risk factors for
severe symptoms include earlier age at menarche, long or heavy menstrual periods, smoking, and a
===PAGE:2668===
family history of dysmenorrhea.
Primary dysmenorrhea usually starts during adolescence and tends to lessen with age and after
pregnancy.
Secondary dysmenorrhea:
Symptoms are due to pelvic abnormalities. Common causes include
• Endometriosis (the most common cause)
• Uterine adenomyosis
• Fibroids
Less common causes include congenital malformations, ovarian cysts and tumors, pelvic inflammatory
disease, pelvic congestion, and copper intrauterine devices (IUDs).
In a few women, pain occurs when the uterus attempts to expel tissue through an extremely tight cervical
os (secondary to conization, loop electrosurgical excision procedure [LEEP], cryocautery, or
thermocautery). Pain occasionally results from a pedunculated submucosal fibroid or an endometrial
polyp extruding through the cervix.
Secondary dysmenorrhea usually begins during adulthood unless caused by congenital malformations.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover complete menstrual history, including age at onset of
menses, duration and amount of flow, time between menses, variability of timing, and relation of menses
to symptoms. Clinicians should also ask about the age at which symptoms began, their nature and
severity, factors that relieve or worsen symptoms, degree of disruption of daily life, and presence of pelvic
pain unrelated to menses.
Review of systems
should include accompanying symptoms such as cyclic nausea, vomiting, bloating,
diarrhea, and fatigue. Sexual history should include effect of contraceptives on pain and prior or current
history of sexual abuse.
Past medical history
should identify known causes, including endometriosis, uterine adenomyosis, or
fibroids. Method of contraception
should be ascertained, specifically asking about IUD use.
Physical examination:
Pelvic examination focuses on detecting causes of secondary dysmenorrhea.
The vagina, vulva, and cervix are inspected for lesions and for masses protruding through the cervical os.
Structures are palpated to check for a tight cervical os, prolapsed polyp or fibroid, uterine masses,
adnexal masses, thickening of the rectovaginal septum, induration of the cul-de-sac, and nodularity of the
uterosacral ligament.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• New or sudden-onset pain
• Unremitting pain
• Fever
• Vaginal discharge
Interpretation of findings:
Red flag findings suggest a cause of pelvic pain other than dysmenorrhea.
Primary dysmenorrhea
is suspected if symptoms begin soon after menarche or during adolescence.
===PAGE:2669===
Secondary dysmenorrhea
is suspected if symptoms begin after adolescence or in patients with known
causes, including uterine adenomyosis, fibroids, a tight cervical os, a mass protruding from the cervical
os, or, particularly, endometriosis.
Endometriosis is considered in patients with adnexal masses, thickening of the rectovaginal septum,
induration of the cul-de-sac, nodularity of the uterosacral ligament, or, occasionally, nonspecific vaginal,
vulvar, or cervical lesions.
Testing:
Testing aims to exclude structural gynecologic disorders. Most patients should have
• Pregnancy testing
• Pelvic ultrasonography
Intrauterine and ectopic pregnancy are ruled out by pregnancy testing. If pelvic inflammatory disease is
suspected, cervical cultures are done.
Pelvic ultrasonography is highly sensitive for pelvic masses such as fibroids, endometriosis, and uterine
adenomyosis.
If these tests are inconclusive and symptoms persist, other tests are done. Hysterosalpingography or
sonohysterography can be used to identify endometrial polyps, submucous fibroids, or congenital
abnormalities. MRI may be used to identify other abnormalities, including congenital abnormalities, or to
further define previously identified abnormalities if surgery is planned. If results of all other tests are
inconclusive, hysteroscopy or laparoscopy can be done.
Treatment
Underlying disorders are treated. Symptomatic treatment begins with adequate rest and sleep and regular
exercise. A low-fat diet and nutritional supplements such as
ω
-3 fatty acids, flaxseed, magnesium, vitamin
E, zinc, and vitamin B
are suggested as potentially effective. Women with primary dysmenorrhea are
reassured about the absence of structural gynecologic disorders.
If pain persists, drugs, typically prostaglandin inhibitors such as NSAIDs, are tried. NSAIDs are usually
started 24 to 48 h before and continued until 1 or 2 days after menses begins. If the NSAID is ineffective,
suppression of ovulation with a low-dose estrogen/progestin oral contraceptive is advisable. Other
hormonal treatments, such as danazol, progestins (eg, levonorgestrel, etonogestrel, depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate), gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists, or a progesterone IUD, may
decrease dysmenorrheal symptoms.
Periodic adjunctive use of analgesics may be needed. Hypnosis is being evaluated as treatment. Other
proposed nondrug therapies, including acupuncture, acupressure, chiropractic therapy, and
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, have not been well studied.
For intractable pain of unknown origin, presacral neurectomy and division of the sacrouterine ligaments to
interrupt uterine nerves may help.
Key Points
• Most dysmenorrhea is primary.
• Underlying structural pelvic lesions need to be excluded.
• Usually, testing begins with ultrasonography.
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
(Hyperandrogenic Chronic Anovulation; Stein-Leventhal Syndrome)
===PAGE:2670===
Polycystic ovary syndrome is a clinical syndrome characterized by mild obesity, irregular
menses or amenorrhea, and signs of androgen excess (eg, hirsutism, acne). In most patients,
the ovaries contain multiple cysts. Diagnosis is by pregnancy testing, hormone measurement,
and imaging to exclude a virilizing tumor. Treatment is symptomatic.
Polycystic ovary syndrome occurs in 5 to 10% of women and involves anovulation or ovulatory
dysfunction and androgen excess of unclear etiology. It is usually defined as a clinical syndrome, not by
the presence of ovarian cysts. Ovaries may be enlarged with smooth, thickened capsules or may be
normal in size. Typically, ovaries contain many 2- to 6-mm follicular cysts and sometimes larger cysts
containing atretic cells. Estrogen levels are elevated, increasing risk of endometrial hyperplasia and,
eventually, endometrial cancer. Androgen levels are often elevated, increasing risk of metabolic syndrome
( and causing hirsutism. Over the long term, androgen excess increases risk of cardiovascular
disorders, including hypertension.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms typically begin during puberty and worsen with time. The typical symptoms are mild obesity,
hirsutism, and irregular menses or amenorrhea. Some women have other signs of virilization, such as
acne and temporal balding. Areas of thickened, darkened skin (acanthosis nigricans) may appear in the
axillae, on the nape of the neck, and in skinfolds; the cause is high insulin levels due to insulin resistance.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Serum testosterone, follicle-stimulating hormone, prolactin, and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels
• Pelvic ultrasonography
Ovulatory dysfunction is usually present at puberty, resulting in primary amenorrhea; thus, this syndrome
is unlikely if regular menses occurred for a time after menarche. Examination usually detects abundant
cervical mucus, reflecting high estrogen levels. The diagnosis is suspected if women have at least 2
typical symptoms.
Testing includes pregnancy testing, pelvic ultrasonography, and measurement of serum total
testosterone, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), prolactin, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Serum
free testosterone level is more sensitive than total testosterone but is technically more difficult to measure
(.
The diagnosis requires at least 2 of the following 3 criteria:
• Ovulatory dysfunction causing menstrual irregularity
• Clinical or biochemical evidence of hyperandrogenism
• More than 10 follicles per ovary (detected by pelvic ultrasonography), usually occurring in the periphery
and resembling a string of pearls
In women meeting criteria, serum cortisol is measured to exclude Cushing's syndrome, and early-morning
serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone is measured to exclude adrenal virilism. Serum dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate (DHEAS) is measured. If DHEAS is abnormal, women are evaluated as for amenorrhea (. Adult women with polycystic ovary syndrome are evaluated for metabolic syndrome by measuring
BP and usually serum glucose.
Treatment
• Intermittent progestins or oral contraceptives
===PAGE:2671===
• Management of hirsutism and, in adult women, long-term effects of androgen excess
• Infertility treatments in women who desire pregnancy
To reduce the risk of endometrial hyperplasia and cancer in women who do not desire pregnancy,
clinicians can use an intermittent progestin (eg, medroxyprogesterone 5 to 10 mg po once/day for 10 to
14 days q 1 to 2 mo) or oral contraceptives. These treatments also reduce circulating androgens.
For hirsutism (, physical measures (eg, bleaching, electrolysis, plucking, waxing, depilation)
can be used. Eflornithine cream 13.9% bid may help remove unwanted facial hair. In adult women who do
not desire pregnancy, hormonal therapy that decreases androgen levels or spironolactone can be tried.
Weight loss is encouraged. It may help induce ovulation, increase insulin sensitivity, and reduce
acanthosis nigricans and hirsutism.
Metformin 500 to 1000 mg bid is used to help increase insulin sensitivity if weight loss is unsuccessful or
menses do not resume. Metformin can also reduce free testosterone levels. When metformin is used,
serum glucose should be measured, and kidney and liver function tests should be done periodically.
Because metformin may induce ovulation, contraception is needed if pregnancy is not desired.
For women who desire pregnancy, infertility treatments (eg, clomiphene, metformin) are used (. Weight loss may also be helpful. Hormonal therapy that may have contraceptive effects is avoided.
Premature Ovarian Failure
(Premature Menopause; Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism)
In premature ovarian failure, ovaries do not produce enough estrogen despite high levels of
circulating gonadotropins (especially follicle-stimulating hormone) in women < 40.
Etiology
Premature ovarian failure has various causes (see
Table 246-4
). Genetic disorders that confer a Y chromosome, which are usually evident by age 35,
increase risk of ovarian cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, amenorrhea or irregular bleeding and symptoms or signs of estrogen deficiency (eg,
osteoporosis, atrophic vaginitis, decreased libido) are present.
Diagnosis
• FSH and estradiol levels
• Sometimes karyotype analysis
Diagnosis is suspected in women < 40 with typical symptoms. A pregnancy test is done, and serum
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and estradiol levels are measured weekly for 2 to 4 wk; if FSH levels
are high (> 20 mIU/mL, but usually > 30 mIU/mL) and estradiol levels are low (usually < 20 pg/mL),
ovarian failure is confirmed. Then, further tests are done based on which cause is suspected. Karyotype
is determined if women with confirmed ovarian failure are < 35.
Treatment
• Estrogen/progesterone therapy
===PAGE:2672===
Women who do not desire pregnancy are given estrogen/progesterone therapy ( until about
age 51.
For women who desire pregnancy, in vitro fertilization of donated oocytes plus exogenous estrogen and a
progestin, which enable the endometrium to support the transferred embryo (, can be tried.
This technique is fairly successful, but even without this technique, 5 to 15% of women with diagnosed
premature ovarian failure become pregnant.
Women with a Y chromosome require laparotomy or laparoscopy and excision of all gonadal tissue.
Premenstrual Syndrome
(Premenstrual Tension)
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is characterized by irritability, anxiety, emotional lability,
depression, edema, breast pain, and headaches, occurring during
[Table 246-4.
Common Causes of Premature Ovarian Failure]
the 7 to 10 days before and usually ending a few hours after onset of menses. Diagnosis is
clinical, often based on the patient's daily recording of symptoms. Treatment is symptomatic
and includes diet, drugs, and counseling.
Etiology
PMS appears to be caused by multiple endocrine factors (eg, hypoglycemia, other changes in
carbohydrate metabolism, hyperprolactinemia, fluctuations in levels of circulating estrogen and
progesterone, abnormal responses to estrogen and progesterone, excessive aldosterone or ADH).
Estrogen and progesterone can cause transitory fluid retention, as can excess aldosterone or ADH.
Symptoms and Signs
Type and intensity of symptoms vary from woman to woman and from cycle to cycle. Symptoms last a few
hours to ≥ 10 days, usually ending when menses begins. In perimenopausal women, symptoms may
persist until after menses.
The most common symptoms are irritability, anxiety, agitation, anger, insomnia, difficulty concentrating,
lethargy, depression, and severe fatigue. Fluid retention causes edema, transient weight gain, and breast
fullness and pain. Pelvic heaviness or pressure and backache may occur. Some women, particularly
younger ones, have dysmenorrhea when menses begins. Other nonspecific symptoms may include
headache, vertigo, paresthesias of the extremities, syncope, palpitations, constipation, nausea, vomiting,
and changes in appetite. Acne and neurodermatitis may also occur. Existing skin disorders may worsen,
as may respiratory problems (eg, allergies, infection) and eye problems (eg, visual disturbances,
conjunctivitis).
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD):
Some women have severe PMS symptoms that occur
regularly and only during the 2nd half of the menstrual cycle; symptoms end with menses or shortly after.
Mood is markedly depressed, and anxiety, irritability, and emotional lability are pronounced. Suicidal
thoughts may be present. Interest in daily activities is greatly decreased. Symptoms are severe enough to
interfere with routine daily activities or overall functioning.
Diagnosis
• For PMS, patient's reporting of symptoms
• For PMDD, clinical criteria
PMS is diagnosed based on physical symptoms (eg, bloating, weight gain, breast tenderness, swelling of
===PAGE:2673===
hands and feet). Women may be asked to record their symptoms daily.
If PMDD is suspected, women are asked to rate their symptoms daily for ≥ 2 cycles to determine whether
severe symptoms occur regularly. For PMDD to be diagnosed, women must have ≥ 5 of the following
symptoms for most of the week before menses and at least one symptom must be from the first 4:
• Feelings of sadness, hopelessness, or self-depreciation
• A tense (on edge) feeling or anxiety
• Emotional lability with frequent tearfulness
• Irritability or anger that persists, leading to increased interpersonal conflicts
• Loss of interest in daily activities, possibly causing withdrawal
• Decreased concentration
• Fatigue, lethargy, or lack of energy
• Changes in eating habits, including bingeing
• Insomnia or hyperinsomnia
• Feelings of being overwhelmed or out of control
• Physical symptoms associated with PMS
Also, the symptom pattern must have occurred for most of the previous 12 mo, and symptoms must be
severe enough to interfere with daily activities and function.
Treatment
• General measures
• Sometimes SSRIs or hormonal manipulation
Treatment is symptomatic, beginning with adequate rest and sleep and regular exercise. Regular exercise
may help alleviate bloating as well as irritability, anxiety, and insomnia. Dietary changes—increasing
protein, decreasing sugar, and taking vitamin B complex (especially pyridoxine, a form of vitamin B
) or
Mg supplements—may help, as may counseling and avoiding stressful activities. Consuming foods high in
Ca and vitamin D and, if needed, Ca and vitamin D supplements may help prevent PMS. Fluid retention
may be relieved by reducing Na intake and taking a diuretic (eg, hydrochlorothiazide 25 to 50 mg po
once/day in the morning) just before symptoms are expected. However, minimizing fluid retention does not
relieve all symptoms and may have no effect.
SSRIs (eg, fluoxetine 20 mg po once/day) may be used to reduce anxiety, irritability, and other emotional
symptoms, particularly
if stress cannot be avoided. SSRIs are effective in relieving symptoms of PMDD.
For some women, hormonal manipulation is effective. Options include
• Oral contraceptives (eg, norethindrone 5 mg once/day)
• Progesterone by vaginal suppository (200 to 400 mg once/day)
• An oral progestin (eg, micronized progesterone 100 mg at bedtime) for 10 to 12 days before menses
• A long-acting progestin (eg, medroxyprogesterone 200 mg IM q 2 to 3 mo)
===PAGE:2674===
Rarely, for very severe or refractory symptoms, a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (eg, leuprolide
3.75 mg IM, goserelin 3.6 mg sc q mo) with low-dose estrogen/progestin (eg, estradiol 0.5 mg once/day
plus micronized progesterone 100 mg at bedtime) is given to minimize cyclic fluctuations.
Spironolactone, bromocriptine, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors are not useful.
===PAGE:2675===
Chapter 247. Menopause
Introduction
Menopause is physiologic or iatrogenic cessation of menses (amenorrhea) due to decreasing
ovarian function. Manifestations may include hot flushes, atrophic vaginitis, and osteoporosis.
Diagnosis is clinical: absence of menses for 1 yr. Manifestations may be treated (eg, with
hormone therapy or SSRIs).
Physiologic menopause is established when menses have been absent for 1 yr. In the US, average age
of physiologic menopause is 51. Perimenopause refers to the years before (duration varies greatly) and
the 1 yr after the last menses. Perimenopause is usually characterized initially by an increase in
frequency of menses, followed by a decrease (oligomenorrhea), but any pattern is possible; conception is
possible during perimenopause. Climacteric refers to a longer phase in which women lose reproductive
capacity; it begins before perimenopause.
As ovaries age, their response to the pituitary gonadotropins follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinizing hormone (LH) decreases, initially causing a shorter follicular phase (with shorter and more
irregular menstrual cycles), fewer ovulations, and thus decreased progesterone production (see
Fig. 245-5
. Eventually, follicles do not respond, producing little estradiol. Some estrogens
(mainly estrone) still circulate; they are produced by peripheral tissues (eg, fat, skin) from androgens (eg,
androstenedione, testosterone). However, the total estrogen level is much lower. Around menopause,
androstenedione levels decrease by half, but the decrease in testosterone levels, which begins gradually
in young adulthood, does not accelerate during menopause because the stroma of the postmenopausal
ovary and adrenal gland continue to secrete substantial amounts. Decreased levels of ovarian inhibin and
estrogen, which inhibit pituitary release of LH and FSH, result in a substantial increase in circulating LH
and FSH levels.
Premature menopause (premature ovarian failure— is cessation of menses due to
noniatrogenic ovarian failure before age 40. Contributory factors may include smoking, living at high
altitude, and undernutrition. Iatrogenic (artificial) menopause results from medical interventions (eg,
oophorectomy, chemotherapy, pelvic irradiation, any intervention that impairs ovarian blood supply).
Symptoms and Signs
Perimenopausal changes in menstruation usually begin during a woman's 40s. Menstrual flow and cycle
length can vary. Menses become irregular, then are skipped.
Large daily fluctuations in estrogen levels usually begin at least 1 yr before menopause and are thought
to cause perimenopausal symptoms. Symptoms can last from 6 mo to over 10 yr and range from
nonexistent to severe.
Vasomotor:
Hot flushes (flashes) and sweating due to vasomotor instability affect 75 to 85% of women
and usually begin before menses stop. Hot flushes continue for > 1 yr in most women and for > 5 yr in
50%. Women feel warm or hot and may perspire, sometimes profusely; core temperature increases. The
skin, especially of the head and neck, may become red and warm. The episodic flush, which may last
from 30 sec to 5 min, may be followed by chills. Flushes may manifest during the
night as night sweats.
The mechanism of hot flushes is unknown, but they may be triggered by cigarette smoking, hot
beverages, foods containing nitrites or sulfites, spicy food, alcohol, and possibly caffeine.
Neuropsychiatric:
Neuropsychiatric changes (eg, poor concentration, memory loss, depression, anxiety)
may accompany menopause but are not directly related to decreased estrogen. Recurrent night sweats,
which can disrupt sleep, can contribute to insomnia, fatigue, irritability, and poor concentration.
Genital:
Decreased estrogen leads to vaginal and vulvar dryness and thinning, which may result in
inflammation of the vaginal mucosa (atrophic vaginitis). Atrophy may cause irritation, dyspareunia, and
dysuria and may increase vaginal pH. The labia minora, clitoris, uterus, and ovaries decrease in size.
===PAGE:2676===
Other:
Although menopause is normal, health problems can occur, and for some, quality of life may
decrease. Risk of osteoporosis increases because estrogen is decreased, increasing bone resorption by
osteoclasts (. The most rapid loss occurs during the first 2 yr after estrogen begins to
decrease.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• FSH levels rarely needed
Diagnosis is clinical. Menopause is likely if menses have gradually decreased in frequency and have
been absent for 6 mo. Women with amenorrhea are examined to exclude pregnancy if they are < 50 and
are always examined to exclude ovarian tumors (for evaluation of amenorrhea, . Abnormal
pelvic masses are evaluated (. If women in their 50s have a history of irregular menses
followed by cessation of menses, with or without symptoms of estrogen deficiency, and no other abnormal
findings, no diagnostic testing is necessary.
FSH levels may be measured, but this test is rarely necessary. Consistently elevated levels predict
menopause, sometimes many months to a year in advance.
Postmenopausal women who have risk factors for osteoporosis and all women > 65 should be screened
for osteoporosis (.
Treatment
• Avoidance of triggers and stress
• Exercise and relaxation techniques
• Possibly SSRIs and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
• Possibly hormone therapy
Discussing the physiologic causes of menopause and possible symptoms and signs with patients helps
them manage the changes that occur. Treatment is symptomatic.
For hot flushes, avoiding triggers and wearing clothing in layers that can be removed as needed may
help. Soy protein has been used, but its efficacy has not been confirmed. Black cohosh, other medicinal
herbs, vitamin E, and acupuncture do not appear helpful. Regular exercise, stress avoidance, and
relaxation techniques may improve sleep and reduce irritability; relaxation techniques can also reduce
vasomotor symptoms. Paced respiration, a type of slow, deep breathing, may also help relieve hot
flushes.
Nonhormonal drug treatments for hot flushes include SSRIs (eg, fluoxetine, sustained-release paroxetine,
sertraline), SNRIs (eg, venlafaxine), and clonidine 0.1 mg transdermally once/day. Dose requirements for
SSRIs and SNRIs vary; starting doses can be lower than those used to treat depression and increased as
needed. It is not clear whether gabapentin is helpful.
OTC vaginal lubricants and moisturizers help relieve vaginal dryness. Measures to prevent and treat
osteoporosis are considered (.
Hormone therapy:
For many women, risks of oral hormone therapy outweigh the benefits.
Hormone therapy may be used to relieve moderate to severe menopausal symptoms. For women who
have had a hysterectomy, estrogen should be used alone. Forms may be oral, transdermal (a patch,
lotions, or gels), or a tablet inserted vaginally. Women who have a uterus, if given estrogen in any form or
===PAGE:2677===
type, are a.lso given a progestin (as combination therapy) because unopposed estrogen increases risk of
endometrial cancer (and possibly ovarian cancer if unopposed estrogen is taken > 10 yr). Oral hormone
therapy also has other risks (see
Table 247-1
). For most women, these risks outweigh benefits. For other forms of hormone therapy, risks
and other effects are not as well known. The risk of venous thromboembolism may be lower with
transdermal estrogen.
Benefits of oral combination therapy include reduction in yearly incidence of osteoporosis and colorectal
cancer, as well as relief of menopausal symptoms. For asymptomatic women, overall effects of therapy
on quality of life are not very meaningful.
Risks of oral combination therapy are reflected in an increased yearly incidence of breast cancer,
ischemic stroke, deep venous thromboembolism, pulmonary embolism, dementia, and coronary artery
disease. Risk of coronary
[Table 247-1.
Effects of Oral Hormone Therapy on Yearly Incidence* of Selected Disorders in
Postmenopausal Women]
artery disease almost doubles during the first year of therapy and is particularly high for women with high
pretreatment low-density lipoprotein levels; aspirin and statins do not prevent the increase in risk. Also,
the breast cancers that develop are larger and more likely to be metastatic, and false-positive
mammograms are more common. Urinary incontinence, particularly stress incontinence, develops more
often, and existing incontinence tends to worsen.
Oral estrogen-only therapy does not affect incidence of coronary artery disease but increases incidence
of ischemic stroke and deep venous thromboembolism. It decreases incidence of hip fractures. Effects on
breast cancer, colorectal cancer, and pulmonary embolism are less clear. Estrogen-only therapy, like
combination therapy, contributes to urinary incontinence. Dementia risk is probably increased with
estrogen-only therapy.
Despite its beneficial effects on bone, hormone therapy (with or without a progestin) is not recommended
for prevention and treatment of osteoporosis because other effective measures (eg, raloxifene,
bisphosphonates), which usually have fewer risks, are available.
Oral estrogen therapy can be used to relieve hot flushes, night sweats (with consequent sleep
disturbance), and vaginal dryness. For vaginal dryness or atrophy, topical forms of estrogen (eg, creams,
vaginal tablets or rings) are as effective as oral forms. Vaginal tablets and rings that contain low doses
(eg, 25
μ
g) deliver less estrogen to the systemic circulation; vaginal estrogen creams usually deliver as
much as oral therapy.
Progestins (eg, megestrol acetate 10 to 20 mg po once/day, medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 mg po
once/day or depot 150 mg IM once/mo) can be used alone to relieve hot flushes, but they do not relieve
vaginal dryness. Progestins may have adverse effects (eg, abdominal bloating, breast tenderness,
increased breast density, headache, increased low-density lipoprotein, decreased high-density
lipoprotein); micronized progesterone appears to have fewer adverse effects but may increase the risk of
venous thromboembolism. There are no long-term safety data about use of progestins.
When prescribing solely for the prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis, clinicians should consider
hormone therapy only for women at significant risk of osteoporosis and for whom nonestrogen drugs are
considered inappropriate.
===PAGE:2678===
Chapter 248. Sexual Dysfunction in Women
Introduction
Most people—men and women—engage in sexual activity because of attraction or a desire for pleasure,
affection, love, romance or intimacy. However, women are more likely to report emotional motivations.
Many women initiate or agree to sexual activity because they want one or more of the following:
• To experience emotional intimacy
• To increase their sense of well-being
• To confirm their desirability
• To please or placate a partner
Especially in established relationships, women often have little or no initial sense of sexual desire but
access sexual desire (responsive desire) once sexual stimulation triggers excitement and pleasure
(subjective arousal) and genital congestion (physical genital arousal). Desire for sexual satisfaction,
which may or may not include one or multiple orgasms, builds as sexual activity and intimacy continue,
and a physically and emotionally rewarding experience fulfills and reinforces the woman's original
motivations.
A woman's sexual response cycle is strongly influenced by her mental health and by the quality of her
relationship with her partner. Initial desire typically lessens with age but increases with a new partner at
any age.
Physiology
Sexual response consists of the following:
• Arousal
• Genital congestion
• Orgasm
Physiology of the female sexual response is incompletely understood but involves hormonal and CNS
factors.
Estrogens and androgens both appear to influence arousal. Androgens probably act via androgen
receptors and estrogen receptors (after intracellular conversion of testosterone to estradiol).
After menopause, ovarian estrogen production ceases, while ovarian androgen production varies.
However, adrenal production of prohormones (eg, DHEAS) that are converted to both androgens and
estrogens in peripheral cells decreases starting in a woman's 30s. Ovarian production of prohormones
also declines after menopause. Whether this decrease plays any role in diminishing sexual desire,
interest, or arousal is unclear.
The brain produces sex hormones (neurosteroids) from cholesterol, and production may increase after
menopause. Whether this documented increase is universal, whether it facilitates arousal as peripheral
production decreases, and whether it is affected by exogenous hormone administration are all unknown.
Arousal:
Brain areas involved in cognition, emotion, motivation, and organization of genital congestion
are activated. Neurotransmitters acting on specific receptors are involved. Based on known actions of
drugs and on animal studies, some neurotransmitters appear to be prosexual; they include dopamine,
norepinephrine, and melanocortin. Serotonin is usually sexually inhibitory, as are prolactin and
γ
-
aminobutyric acid (GABA).
===PAGE:2679===
Genital congestion:
This reflexive autonomic response occurs within seconds of an erotic stimulus and
causes genital engorgement and lubrication. Smooth muscle cells around blood spaces in the vulva,
clitoris, and vaginal arterioles dilate, increasing blood flow (engorgement) and transudation of interstitial
fluid across the vaginal epithelium (lubrication). Women are not always aware of congestion, and it may
occur without subjective arousal. As women age, basal genital blood flow decreases, but genital
congestion in response to erotic stimuli (eg, erotic videos) may not.
Orgasm:
Peak excitement occurs, characterized by contractions of pelvic muscles every 0.8 sec, and is
followed by slow release of genital congestion. Thoracolumbar sympathetic outflow tracts appear to be
involved, but orgasm is possible even after complete spinal cord transection (eg, when a vibrator is used
to stimulate the cervix). Prolactin, ADH, and oxytocin are released at orgasm and may contribute to the
sense of well-being, relaxation, or fatigue that follows. However, many women experience a sense of
well-being and relaxation without experiencing orgasm.
Classification
Female sexual dysfunction may involve decreased or increased sexual responsiveness. Classification is
determined by symptoms. There are 5 major categories of decreased responsiveness and one of
increased responsiveness (persistent genital arousal disorder).
Sexual desire/interest disorder
is absence of or a decrease in sexual interest, desire, sexual thoughts,
and fantasies and an absence of responsive desire.
Sexual arousal disorder
is lack of subjective or genital arousal or both.
Orgasmic disorder
involves orgasm that is absent, markedly diminished in intensity, or markedly delayed
in response to stimulation despite high levels of subjective arousal.
Vaginismus
is reflexive tightening around the vagina when vaginal entry is attempted or completed
despite women's expressed desire for penetration and when no structural or other physical abnormalities
are present.
Dyspareunia
is pain during attempted or completed vaginal penetration or intercourse. Provoked
vestibulodynia (PVD, formerly called vulvar vestibulitis), the most common type of superficial (introital)
dyspareunia, is a chronic pain syndrome associated with altered immune function and sensitization of the
nervous system.
Persistent genital arousal disorder
involves excessive genital arousal.
A disorder is diagnosed when symptoms cause distress. Some women may not be distressed or bothered
by decreased or absent sexual desire, interest, arousal, or orgasm.
Almost all women with sexual dysfunction have features of more than one disorder. For example, the
chronic dyspareunia of PVD often leads to sexual desire/interest and arousal disorders; impaired arousal
may make sex less enjoyable or even painful, decreasing the likelihood of orgasm and subsequent sexual
desire. However, dyspareunia due to impaired lubrication may occur as an isolated symptom in women
with a high level of sexual desire, interest, and subjective arousal.
Female sexual disorders may be secondarily categorized as lifelong or acquired; situation-specific or
generalized; and mild, moderate, or severe based on the degree of distress it causes the woman.
Although research is limited, these disorders probably apply equally to women in heterosexual and
homosexual relationships.
Etiology
The traditional separation of psychologic and physical etiologies is artificial; psychologic distress causes
===PAGE:2680===
changes in hormonal and neurologic physiology, and physical changes may generate psychologic
reactions that compound the dysfunction. There are often several causes of symptoms within and
between categories of dysfunction, and the cause is often unclear.
Primarily psychologic factors:
Mood disorders are closely correlated with low desire and arousal. In up
to 80% of women with major depression and sexual dysfunction, sexual dysfunction becomes less severe
when anti-depressants effectively treat the depression. However, sexual dysfunction persists or worsens
when antidepressants are ineffective. Women with an anxiety disorder are also more likely to have sexual
dysfunction involving desire, arousal, and orgasm. Various fears—of letting go, of being vulnerable, of
being rejected, or of losing control—and low self-esteem can contribute.
Previous experiences can affect a woman's psychosexual development, as in the following:
• Past negative sexual or other experiences may lead to low self-esteem, shame, or guilt.
• Emotional, physical, or sexual abuse during childhood or adolescence can teach children to control and
hide emotions—a useful defense mechanism—but such inhibition can make expressing sexual feelings
difficult later.
• Early traumatic loss of a parent or another loved one may inhibit intimacy with a sex partner for fear of
similar loss.
Concerns about a negative outcome (eg, unwanted pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases [STDs],
inability to have an orgasm, sexual dysfunction in a partner) can also impair sexual response.
Contextual causes (those specific to a woman's current circumstances) include the following:
•
Relationship context:
Lack of trust, negative feelings, or reduced attraction toward a sex partner (eg,
due to the partner's behavior or to a growing awareness of a change in the partner's sexual orientation)
•
Sexual context:
For example, surroundings that are not sufficiently erotic, private, or safe
•
Cultural context:
For example, cultural restrictions on sexual activity
Distractions (eg, from family, work, or finances) can interfere with arousal.
Primarily physical factors:
Various genital lesions, systemic and hormonal factors, and drugs may lead
or contribute to dysfunction (see
Table 248-1
).
SSRIs are a particularly common drug cause. Systemic estrogen therapy (postmenopausal or in hormonal
contraceptives) has mixed effects. It can improve mood and help maintain skin and genital sexual
sensitivity and vaginal lubrication. However, it also increases sex
[Table 248-1.
Some Physical Factors Contributing to Female Sexual Dysfunction]
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), decreasing the amount of free androgens available for tissue receptor
binding. Decreasing free androgens can counteract the other sexual benefits of systemic estrogens,
contributing to sexual dysfunction. Alcohol dependence can cause sexual dysfunction.
Diagnosis
• Interview with both partners, separately and together
• Gentle pelvic examination, primarily to identify causes of dyspareunia
Diagnosis of sexual dysfunction and its causes is based on history and physical examination. Ideally,
history is taken from both partners, interviewed separately and together; it begins by asking the woman to
===PAGE:2681===
describe the problem in her own words and should include specific elements (see
Table 248-2
). Problematic areas (eg, past negative sexual experiences, negative sexual self-image)
identified at the first visit can be investigated more fully at a follow-up visit.
Physical examination is most important for determining causes of dyspareunia; the technique may differ
slightly from that used in a routine gynecologic examination. Explaining what will occur during the
examination helps the woman relax and should be continued throughout the examination. The woman
should be asked whether she wants to sit up and view her genitals in a mirror during the examination;
doing so may impart a sense of control.
Wet-preparation examination of vaginal discharge and Gram stain with culture or DNA probe to detect
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
and chlamydiae are indicated when history or examination suggests vulvitis,
vaginitis, or pelvic inflammatory disease.
Although low estrogen and testosterone activity may contribute to sexual dysfunction, measuring levels is
rarely indicated. Low estrogen and testosterone are detected clinically. If hyperprolactinemia is clinically
suspected, the prolactin level is measured. If hypothyroidism is clinically suspected, the TSH level is
measured and sometimes other thyroid function tests are done.
Treatment
• Explanation of the female sexual response to the couple
• Treatment of the cause
• Substitution of other antidepressants for SSRIs or addition of bupropion
Treatment varies by disorder and cause; often, more than one treatment is required because disorders
overlap. Sympathetic understanding of the patient and careful evaluation may themselves be therapeutic.
Mood disorders are treated. Explaining what is involved in the female sexual response may also help.
Because SSRIs may contribute to several categories of sexual dysfunction, switching to an
antidepressant that has fewer sexual adverse effects (eg, bupropion, moclobemide, mirtazapine,
venlafaxine) may be considered. Alternatively, some evidence suggests that adding bupropion to an SSRI
may help.
Sexual Desire/Interest Disorder
Sexual desire/interest disorder is absence of or a decrease in sexual interest, desire, sexual
thoughts, and fantasies and absence of responsive desire.
[Table 248-2.
Components of the Sexual History for Assessment of Female Sexual Dysfunction]
In sexual desire/interest disorder, motivations to become sexually aroused are scarce or absent. The
decrease is greater than what might be expected based on a woman's age and the relationship duration.
Causes often involve primarily psychologic factors (eg, depression, anxiety, stress, relationship problems).
Use of certain drugs (particularly SSRIs), anticonvulsants, chemotherapy drugs,
β
-blockers, and oral
contraceptives, can reduce sexual desire, as can drinking excessive amounts of alcohol. Fluctuations in
hormone levels (eg, at menopause, during pregnancy, with the menstrual cycle) can affect sexual desire.
Women with sexual desire/interest disorder tend to be anxious, to have a low self-image, and to have
mood lability even if they do not have a clinical mood disorder.
Diagnosis is clinical (.
Treatment
===PAGE:2682===
• Education
• Psychologic therapies
• Hormonal therapy
If factors that limit trust, respect, attraction, and emotional intimacy between partners are the cause, the
couple should be counseled that emotional intimacy is a normal requirement for female sexual response
and needs to be enhanced with or without professional help. Education about sufficient and appropriate
stimuli may help; women may need to remind their partner of their need for nonphysical, physical
nongenital, and nonpenetrative genital stimulation. Recommendations for more intensely erotic stimuli and
fantasies may help eliminate distractions; practical suggestions to improve privacy and a sense of
security can help when fear of unwanted outcomes (eg, discovery, pregnancy, sexually transmitted
diseases) inhibits arousability.
For patient-specific psychologic factors, psychologic therapies (eg, cognitive-behavioral therapy) may be
required, although simple awareness of the importance of these factors may be sufficient for women to
change patterns of thinking and behavior.
Hormonal causes require targeted treatment—eg, topical estrogen for atrophic vaginitis and bromocriptine
for hyperprolactinemia.
Systemic estrogen therapy:
Systemic estrogen therapy ( initiated at menopause or within
the next few years may improve mood and help maintain skin and genital sexual sensitivity and vaginal
lubrication. These benefits may enhance sexual desire and arousal despite decreasing free androgen
levels. Transdermal preparations of estrogen are usually preferred after menopause, but no studies
identify which preparations available in the US are the most beneficial sexually. Progestins or
progesterone are also given to women who have not had a hysterectomy. If oral contraceptives or
estrogen therapy appears to contribute to sexual desire/interest disorder, substituting another drug (eg,
transdermal estrogen or barrier methods for oral contraceptives) may be indicated to increase free
androgens.
Testosterone therapy:
Benefits and risks of testosterone supplementation are under study. When no
interpersonal, contextual, and intrapersonal factors are evident, some experienced clinicians consider
supplementation (eg, with methyltestosterone 1.5 mg po once/day or transdermal testosterone 300
μ
g
daily); preparations formulated for men are used.
Benefit has been shown mostly in women who are taking estrogen and who have had bilateral
oophorectomy, but benefit is expected in some women who are taking estrogen and who have premature
ovarian failure due to other conditions (eg, adrenal or pituitary dysfunction, chemotherapy, idiopathic).
Benefit has been modest, but studies included only relatively sexually healthy women (with 2 to 3 sexually
satisfying experiences/mo at baseline). Among postmenopausal women who are taking estrogen therapy
and who can no longer be aroused by previously effective stimuli and contexts, benefit is conceivable;
however, this group has not been studied.
However, testosterone therapy is not approved for women in the US. Also, the American Endocrine
Society currently recommends against its use. Too little is known about long-term safety; in most studies,
safety as well as efficacy data are limited to 6 mo. If testosterone is prescribed, full explanation of lack of
long-term safety data and careful follow-up are essential. Periodically, the free testosterone level should
be calculated or the bioavailable testosterone level should be measured (, and women
should be checked for signs of hirsutism and for hyperlipidemia and impaired glucose tolerance.
Sexual Arousal Disorders
Sexual arousal disorders involve a lack of response to one or more types of sexual stimulation
—subjective, physical genital, or both.
Sexual arousal disorders can be categorized as subjective, genital, or combined. All definitions are
===PAGE:2683===
clinically based, distinguished in part by the woman's response to genital and nongenital stimulation, as
follows:
•
Subjective:
Women do not feel aroused by any type of sexual genital or nongenital stimulation (eg,
kissing, dancing, watching an erotic video, physical stimulation), despite the occurrence of physical
genital response (eg, genital congestion).
•
Genital:
Subjective arousal occurs in response to nongenital stimulation (eg, an erotic video) but not in
response to genital stimulation. This disorder typically affects postmenopausal women and is often
described as genital deadness. Testing confirms reduced
genital congestion in response to sexual
stimulation in some women; in others, genital congestion is normal, but genital sexual sensitivity seems
reduced.
•
Combined:
Subjective arousal in response to any type of sexual stimulation is absent or low, and
women report absence of physical genital arousal (ie, they report need of external lubricants and may
state they know that swelling of the clitoris no longer occurs).
Etiology
Causes may involve psychologic (eg, depression, low self-esteem, anxiety, stress) or physical factors or
both (. Inadequate sexual stimulation or the wrong setting for sexual activity can also
contribute.
Genital arousal disorder may result from a low level of estrogen or possibly testosterone, as occurs
during or after menopause, or from vulval dystrophy (eg, lichen sclerosus). Certain chronic disorders (eg,
diabetes, multiple sclerosis) can damage autonomic or somatic nerves, leading to decreased congestion
or sensation in the genital area.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical (.
Treatment
Subjective arousal disorder:
See
Sexual Desire/Interest Disorder

Genital arousal disorder:
When estrogen is deficient, initial treatment is local estrogen (or systemic
estrogen if indicated for other postmenopausal symptoms). A phosphodiesterase inhibitor may be tried
empirically if symptoms are refractory to estrogen therapy; it benefits only women with reduced genital
congestion (eg, due to autonomic nerve damage). Other investigational therapy includes a trial of 0.2 mL
topical 2% testosterone prepared by a pharmacist and applied twice weekly to the clitoris.
Orgasmic Disorder
Orgasmic disorder involves orgasm that is absent, markedly diminished in intensity, or
markedly delayed in response to stimulation despite high levels of subjective arousal.
Women with orgasmic disorder often have difficulty relinquishing control in nonsexual circumstances.
Contextual factors (eg, consistently insufficient foreplay, poor communication about sexual preferences),
psychologic factors (eg, anxiety, stress, lack of trust in a partner, fears), physical disorders, and drugs can
contribute to orgasmic disorder (. Lack of knowledge about sexual function may also
contribute.
Damage to genital sensory or autonomic nerves (eg, due to diabetes or multiple sclerosis) or, much more
commonly, use of SSRIs may lead to acquired orgasmic disorder.
Treatment
===PAGE:2684===
• Self-stimulation
• Psychologic therapies
Data support encouraging self-stimulation. A vibrator placed on the mons pubis close to the clitoris may
help, as may increasing the number and intensity of stimuli (mental, visual, tactile, auditory, written),
simultaneously if necessary. Education about sexual function (eg, need to stimulate the clitoris) may help.
Psychologic therapies including cognitive-behavioral therapy and psychotherapy may help women identify
and manage fear of relinquishing control, fear of vulnerability, or issues of trust with a partner.
In women taking an SSRI, symptoms may decrease when bupropion is added. One study supports the
use of sildenafil.
Vaginismus
Vaginismus is reflexive tightening around the vagina when vaginal entry is attempted or
completed (eg, using a penis, finger, or dildo) despite women's expressed desire for
penetration and despite the absence of any structural or other physical abnormalities.
Vaginismus usually results from fear that intercourse will be painful; it usually begins with the first attempt
at sexual intercourse. It may develop later after periods of stress. Women may develop a phobia-like
avoidance of penetration. Most women with vaginismus thus cannot tolerate full or often even partial
penetration. Some cannot tolerate insertion of a tampon or have never wanted to try. However, most
women with vaginismus enjoy nonpenetrative sexual activity.
Reflex muscle tightening can also accompany dyspareunia of any cause, thereby adding to the pain and
difficulty with entry. Women anticipate a recurrence of pain when intercourse is initiated, and muscles
tighten, making attempts at sexual intercourse even more painful.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is suspected based on symptoms. Physical abnormalities that cause pain, such as those that
cause dyspareunia should be excluded by physical examination. However, the condition itself makes
examination difficult. One strategy is to initiate treatment as described below and defer the confirmatory
examination. When the examination is done, the physician can give the patient a sense of control by
having her sit up and view her genitals using a mirror. The woman then spreads her labia and inserts her
or the examiner's gloved finger past the hymen as she bears down. This simple digital examination can
simultaneously confirm a normal vagina and the presumed diagnosis of vaginismus.
Treatment
• Progressive desensitization
Women progressively accustom themselves to self-touch near, on, and then through the introitus.
• The woman first touches herself daily as close to the introitus as possible, separating the labia with her
fingers.
• Once her fear and anxiety due to introital self-touch has diminished, the woman will be more able to
tolerate the physical examination.
• The next stage is to insert her finger past her hymen; pushing or bearing down during insertion enlarges
the opening and eases entry.
===PAGE:2685===
• Once finger insertion causes no discomfort, vaginal cones in gradually increasing sizes are inserted
progressively; leaving a cone inside for 10 to 15 min helps perivaginal muscles become accustomed to
gently increasing pressure without reflex contraction. The woman first inserts a cone herself; when
comfortable with the cone, she then allows her partner to help her insert one during a sexual encounter
to confirm that it can go in comfortably when she is sexually excited.
• Once insertion in this context is comfortable, the couple should include penile vulvar stimulation during
sexual play so that the woman becomes accustomed to feeling the penis on her vulva.
• Ultimately, the woman inserts her partner's penis partially or fully, holding it like an insert. She may feel
more confident in the woman superior position.
Some men experience situational erectile dysfunction in this process and may benefit from a
phosphodiesterase inhibitor.
Dyspareunia
Dyspareunia is pain during attempted or completed vaginal penetration.
Dyspareunia may occur at the moment of penetration (superficial or introital), with deeper entry, with
penile movement, or post-coitally. Some pelvic muscle hypertonicity, manifested as both voluntary
guarding and involuntary high muscle tension, is common in all types of chronic dyspareunia.
Etiology
Causes may involve psychologic and physical factors (.
Superficial dyspareunia may result from provoked vestibulodynia (PVD), atrophic vaginitis, vulvar
disorders (eg, lichen sclerosus, vulvar dystrophies), congenital malformations, genital herpes simplex,
radiation fibrosis, postsurgical introital narrowing, or recurrent tearing of the posterior fourchette.
Deep dyspareunia may result from pelvic muscle hypertonicity or uterine or ovarian disorders (eg,
fibroids, chronic pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriosis).
Penile size and depth of penetration influence presence and severity of symptoms.
A subgroup of women with dyspareunia due to PVD ( have high self-expectations and fear of
negative evaluation by other people, increased somatization, catastrophizing (gross exaggeration of
possible consequences), and hypervigilance to pain.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on symptoms and a pelvic examination.
For superficial dyspareunia, evaluation focuses on inspecting all the vulvar skin, including the creases
between the labia minora and majora (eg, for fissures typical of chronic candidiasis), and the clitoral
hood, urethral meatus, hymen, and openings of major vestibular gland ducts (for atrophy, signs of
inflammation, and skin lesions typical of lichen sclerosus). PVD can be diagnosed using a cotton swab to
elicit allodynia; nonpainful external areas are touched before moving to more typically painful areas (ie,
outer edge of
the hymenal ring, clefts adjacent to the urethral meatus). Pelvic muscle hypertonicity may
be suspected if pain similar to the pain that occurs during intercourse can be elicited by palpating the
deep levator ani muscles, particularly around the ischial spines. Palpating the urethra and bladder may
identify abnormal tenderness.
For deep dyspareunia, evaluation requires a careful bimanual examination to determine whether cervical
motion or uterine or adnexal palpation causes pain and to check for nodules in the cul-de-sac or vaginal
===PAGE:2686===
fornices. A rectovaginal examination is usually indicated to check the rectovaginal septum and posterior
surface of the uterus and adnexa. Suspected uterine and ovarian disorders are evaluated with imaging
studies as clinically indicated.
Treatment
• Treatment of cause (eg, topical estrogen for atrophic vaginitis)
• Education and counseling
• Pelvic muscle physiotherapy
Management should include the following:
• Encouraging and teaching the couple to develop satisfying forms of nonpenetrative sex
• Discussing psychologic issues contributing to and caused by the chronic pain
• When possible, treating the primarily physical abnormality that contributes to pain (eg, endometriosis,
lichen sclerosus, vulvar dystrophies, vaginal infections, congenital malformations, radiation fibrosis
—see elsewhere in THE MANUAL). PVD is also treated (see below).
• Treating coexisting pelvic muscle hypertonicity
• Treating comorbid sexual desire/interest or arousal disorders
Topical estrogen is helpful for atrophic vaginitis ( and recurrent posterior fourchette tearing.
Women with pelvic muscle hypertonicity, including some with PVD, may benefit from pelvic physical
therapy using pelvic floor muscle training, possibly with biofeedback, to teach pelvic muscle relaxation.
Sometimes a change in sexual position helps.
Provoked Vestibulodynia
Provoked vestibulodynia (vulvar vestibulitis, localized vulvar dysesthesia) is the most common
type of superficial (introital) dyspareunia. Pain starts and stops precisely with introital pressure.
Treatment may include measures used in chronic pain syndromes as well as topical lidocaine or
cromoglycate, but efficacy of the latter is unproved.
Provoked vestibulodynia develops when the nervous system—from peripheral receptors to the cerebral
cortex—is sensitized and remodeled. With sensitization, discomfort due to a stimulus that might otherwise
be perceived as mild or trivial (eg, touch) is instead perceived as significant pain (allodynia). This disorder
is probably a form of chronic pain syndrome ( of the vulva. The peripheral sensitization leads
to a neurogenic inflammatory response. Some women also have GU disorders (eg, vulvovaginal
candidiasis, hyperoxaluria), but the etiologic role of these disorders is unproved. Some women also have
other pain disorders (eg, irritable bowel syndrome—see p.
; interstitial cystitis—.
Symptoms and Signs
In vestibulodynia, introital pressure, penile movement, or a man's ejaculation typically causes immediate
pain. Pain typically stops when penile movement stops and resumes when it starts again. Vestibulodynia
may also cause postcoital vulvar burning and dysuria.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on symptoms and confirmed by the Q-tip test for allodynia. Vaginismus causes similar
===PAGE:2687===
pain with introital pressure and penile containment and movement. However, unlike vestibulodynia, there
is no allodynia. Also, pain due to vaginismus continues after penile movement stops but may
progressively fade during intercourse despite continued penile movement.
Treatment
• Psychologic therapies used in chronic pain management
• Sometimes sex therapy
• Pelvic muscle physiotherapy
• Drugs to treat chronic pain
• Possibly topical lidocaine or cromoglycate
Optimal treatment of provoked vestibulodynia is unclear; many approaches are currently
used, and there
are probably still undefined subtypes that require different treatment. Because this disorder involves
chronic pain, treatments are becoming more comprehensive, including management of stress and
emotional reactions to pain.
Commonly used but unproven approaches involve avoiding topical irritants and using systemic drugs (eg,
tricyclic antidepressants, anticonvulsants) or topical drugs (eg, 2% cromoglycate or 2 or 5% lidocaine in
glaxal base) to interrupt chronic pain circuits. Cromoglycate stabilizes WBC membranes, including those
of mast cells, interrupting the neurogenic inflammation thought to underlie vestibulodynia. Cromoglycate
or lidocaine must be placed precisely on the area of allodynia using a 1-mL syringe without a needle.
Physician supervision and use of a mirror (at least initially) are helpful. Psychologic therapies, including
cognitive-behavioral therapy and sex therapy, may also help some women with vestibulodynia. Women
with pelvic muscle hypertonicity may benefit from pelvic physical therapy using pelvic floor muscle
training, possibly with biofeedback. Surgery (eg, excision of the hymen, proximal edge of the lower
vagina, and innermost portion of the labia minora) is sometimes indicated to remove proliferated nerve
endings. However, pain may recur as nerves regenerate. Investigational treatment includes botulinum
toxin type A injection.
Persistent Genital Arousal Disorder
Persistent genital arousal disorder is excessive unwanted unprovoked genital arousal.
Cause is unknown. Anxiety and hypervigilance for recurrence of pain episodes may perpetuate the
syndrome. Symptoms have been thought to sometimes be manifestations of seizure disorders, but in
published series, brain imaging and EEG have not found abnormalities.
Unwanted, intrusive, spontaneous genital arousal (eg, tingling, throbbing) occurs, but sexual interest or
desire is absent; arousal is unrelieved by orgasms. The feelings persist for hours or days. Older women
may be very embarrassed by the symptoms.
Treatment
Treatment is unclear. Self-stimulation may provide relief but usually only temporarily. High-dose SSRI
therapy has been reported effective, but data are few. Simple recognition of the existence of this disorder,
with reassurance that it can spontaneously remit, may help some patients.
===PAGE:2688===
Chapter 249. Pelvic Relaxation Syndromes
Introduction
Pelvic relaxation syndromes result from laxities (similar to hernias) in the ligaments, fascia, and muscles
supporting the pelvic organs (pelvic floor—see
Fig. 249-1
). About 9% of women require surgical repair for a pelvic relaxation syndrome. Common
contributing factors include childbirth (particularly vaginal delivery), obesity, aging, injury (eg, due to pelvic
surgery), and chronic straining. Less common factors include congenital malformations, increased
abdominal pressure (eg, due to ascites, abdominal tumors, or chronic respiratory disorders), sacral nerve
disorders, and connective tissue disorders. Pelvic relaxation syndromes involve various sites of prolapse
and include cystocele, urethrocele, enterocele, rectocele, and uterine and vaginal prolapse. Usually,
prolapse occurs in multiple sites.
Cystoceles, Urethroceles, Enteroceles, and Rectoceles
These disorders involve protrusion of an organ into the vaginal canal: cystoceles (bladder),
urethroceles (urethra), enteroceles (small intestine and peritoneum), and rectoceles (rectum).
Symptoms include pelvic or vaginal fullness or pressure. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment
includes pessaries, pelvic muscle exercises, and surgery.
Cystocele, urethrocele, enterocele, and rectocele are particularly likely to occur together. Urethrocele is
virtually always accompanied by
[Fig. 249-1.
Pelvic relaxation syndromes.]
cystocele (cystourethrocele). Cystocele and cystourethrocele commonly develop when the pubocervical
vesical fascia is weakened. Enterocele usually occurs after a hysterectomy. Weakness in the
pubocervical fascia and rectovaginal fascia allows the apex of the vagina, which contains the peritoneum
and small bowel, to descend. Rectocele results from disruption of the levator ani muscles.
Severity of these disorders can be graded based on level of protrusion:
• 1st degree: To the upper vagina
• 2nd degree: To the introitus
• 3rd degree: External to the introitus
Symptoms and Signs
Pelvic or vaginal fullness, pressure, and a sensation of organs falling out are common. Organs may bulge
into the vaginal canal or introitus, particularly during straining or coughing. Dyspareunia can occur. Stress
incontinence often accompanies cystocele or cystourethrocele. Overflow incontinence or, particularly
when sacral nerves are damaged, urge incontinence may also develop. Enteroceles may cause lower
back pain. Rectoceles may cause constipation and incomplete defecation; patients may have to manually
press the posterior vaginal wall to defecate.
Diagnosis
• Examination of the anterior or posterior vaginal wall while patients strain
Diagnosis is confirmed by examination.
Cystoceles and cystourethroceles are detected by applying a single-bladed speculum against the
posterior vaginal wall while patients are in the lithotomy position. Asking
patients to strain makes
cystoceles or cystourethroceles visible or palpable as soft reducible masses bulging into the anterior
vaginal wall. Inflamed paraurethral (Skene's) glands are differentiated by their more anterior and lateral
===PAGE:2689===
urethral location, tenderness, and occasionally expression of pus during palpation. Enlarged Bartholin's
glands can be differentiated because they develop in the medial labia majora and may be tender if
infected.
Enteroceles and rectoceles are detected by retracting the anterior vaginal wall while patients are in the
lithotomy position. Asking patients to strain can make enteroceles and rectoceles visible and palpable
during rectovaginal examination. Patients are also examined while standing with one knee elevated (eg,
on a stool) and straining; sometimes abnormalities are detected only by rectovaginal examination during
this maneuver.
Urinary incontinence, if present, is also evaluated.
Treatment
• Pessary and Kegel exercises
• Surgical repair of supporting structures if necessary
Treatment may initially consist of a pessary and Kegel exercises.
Pessaries
are prostheses inserted in the vagina to maintain reduction of the prolapsed structures.
Pessaries are of varying shapes and sizes, and some are inflatable. They may cause vaginal ulceration if
they are not correctly sized and routinely cleansed (at least monthly if not more frequently).
Kegel exercises
involve isometric contractions of the pubococcygeus muscle. Isolation of the correct
muscle is difficult (about 50% of patients cannot do it) but important because a Valsalva maneuver is
detrimental and buttock or thigh contraction is unhelpful. Contraction of the correct muscle is best initiated
by asking patients to simulate attempting to hold in urine. Three sets of 8 to 10 contractions are done
daily; contractions are initially held for 1 to 2 sec and increased up to 10 sec each when possible.
Exercises can be facilitated by use of weighted vaginal cones, which help patients focus on contracting
the correct muscle, by biofeedback devices, or by electrical stimulation, which causes the muscle to
contract.
Surgical repair
of supporting structures (anterior and posterior colporrhaphy) can help relieve symptoms
that are severe or do not resolve with nonsurgical treatment. Perineorrhaphy (surgical shortening and
tightening of the perineum) may also be needed. Colporrhaphy (surgical repair of the vagina) is usually
deferred, if possible, until future childbearing is no longer desired because subsequent vaginal birth may
disrupt the repair. Urinary incontinence can be surgically treated at the same time as colporrhaphy. After
surgery, patients should avoid heavy lifting for 3 mo. After surgery to repair a cystocele or
cystourethrocele, a urethral catheter is used for < 24 h.
Uterine and Vaginal Prolapse
Uterine prolapse is descent of the uterus toward or past the introitus. Vaginal prolapse is
descent of the vagina or vaginal cuff after hysterectomy. Symptoms include vaginal pressure
and fullness. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment includes reduction, pessaries, and surgery.
Uterine prolapse is graded based on level of descent:
• 1st degree: To the upper vagina
• 2nd degree: To the introitus
• 3rd degree: Cervix is outside the introitus
• 4th degree (sometimes referred to as procidentia): Uterus and cervix entirely outside the introitus
Vaginal prolapse may be 2nd or 3rd degree.
===PAGE:2690===
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms tend to be minimal with 1st-degree uterine prolapse. In 2nd- or 3rd-degree uterine prolapse,
fullness, pressure, dyspareunia, and a sensation of organs falling out are common. Lower back or
coccygeal pain may develop. Constipation is possible.
Third-degree uterine prolapse manifests as a bulge or protrusion of the cervix or cuff, although
spontaneous reduction may occur before patients present. Vaginal mucosa may become dried, thickened,
chronically inflamed, secondarily infected, and ulcerated. Ulcers may be painful or bleed and may
resemble vaginal cancer. The cervix, if protruding, may also become ulcerated.
Symptoms of vaginal prolapse are similar. Cystocele or rectocele is usually present.
Urinary incontinence is common. The descending pelvic mass may intermittently obstruct urine flow,
causing urinary retention and masking stress or overflow incontinence. Urinary frequency and urge
incontinence may accompany vaginal prolapse.
Diagnosis
• Pelvic examination
Diagnosis is confirmed by speculum or bi-manual pelvic examination. Vaginal ulcers are biopsied to
exclude cancer. Simultaneous urinary incontinence requires evaluation.
Treatment
• Treatment of symptomatic or 3rd-degree prolapse, beginning with pessaries and Kegel exercises
• Surgical repair of supporting structures if necessary, usually with hysterectomy
Asymptomatic 1st- or 2nd-degree uterine prolapse does not require treatment. Symptomatic or 3rd-degree
prolapse can be treated nonsurgically if the perineum can structurally support a pessary. Severe or
persistent symptoms require surgery, usually hysterectomy with surgical repair of the pelvic support
structures (colporrhaphy) and suspension of the vagina (suturing of the upper vagina to a stable structure
nearby). The abdominal approach results in greater structural support than the vaginal approach, but risk
of short-term morbidity and mesh-related complications is greater. Surgery is delayed until all ulcers, if
present, have healed.
Vaginal prolapse is treated similarly to uterine prolapse. Urinary incontinence requires concurrent
treatment.
===PAGE:2691===
Chapter 250. Benign Gynecologic Lesions
Introduction
Benign gynecologic lesions include vulvar and vaginal cysts, cervical stenosis and polyps, uterine
myomas, and benign ovarian masses, which can predispose to adnexal torsion.
Adnexal Torsion
Adnexal torsion is twisting of the ovary and sometimes the fallopian tube, interrupting the
arterial supply and causing ischemia.
Adnexal torsion is uncommon, occurring most often during reproductive years. It usually indicates an
ovarian abnormality. Risk factors include the following:
• Pregnancy
• Induction of ovulation
• Ovarian enlargement to > 4 cm (particularly by benign tumors)
Benign tumors are more likely to cause torsion than malignant ones. Torsion of normal adnexa, which is
rare, is more common among children than adults.
Typically, one ovary is involved, but sometimes the fallopian tube is also involved. Adnexal torsion can
cause peritonitis.
Symptoms
Torsion causes sudden, severe pelvic pain and sometimes nausea and vomiting. For days or occasionally
weeks before the sudden pain, women may have intermittent, colicky pain, presumably resulting from
intermittent torsion that spontaneously resolves. Cervical motion tenderness, a unilateral tender adnexal
mass, and peritoneal signs are usually present.
Diagnosis
• Color Doppler transvaginal ultrasonography
Adnexal torsion is suspected based on typical symptoms and unexplained peritoneal signs plus severe
cervical motion tenderness or an adnexal mass, particularly when criteria for pelvic inflammatory disease
are not met or when symptoms are unilateral. Diagnosis is usually confirmed by color Doppler
transvaginal ultrasonography.
Treatment
• Surgery to untwist the ovary
If torsion is suspected or confirmed by ultrasonography, laparoscopy or laparotomy is done immediately to
attempt to salvage the ovary and fallopian tube by untwisting them. Salpingooophorectomy is required for
nonviable or necrotic tissue. If an ovarian cyst or mass is present, cystectomy or oophorectomy is done.
Bartholin's Gland Cysts
Bartholin's gland cysts are mucus-filled and occur on either side of the vaginal opening (see
Plate 69
). They are the most common large vulvar
cysts. Symptoms of large cysts include
vulvar irritation, dyspareunia, pain during walking, and vulvar asymmetry. Bartholin's cysts may
form abscesses, which are painful and usually red. Diagnosis is by physical examination. Large
cysts and abscesses require drainage and sometimes excision; abscesses sometimes require
===PAGE:2692===
antibiotics.
Bartholin's glands are round, very small, nonpalpable, and located deep in the postero-lateral vaginal
orifice. Obstruction of the Bartholin duct causes the gland to enlarge with mucus, resulting in a cyst.
Cause of obstruction is usually unknown. Rarely, the cysts result from a sexually transmitted disease (eg,
gonorrhea).
These cysts develop in about 2% of women, usually those in their 20s. With aging, cysts are less likely to
develop.
A cyst may become infected, forming an abscess. Vulvar cancers rarely originate in Bartholin's glands
(.
Symptoms and Signs
Most cysts are asymptomatic, but large cysts can be irritating, interfering with sexual intercourse and
walking. Most cysts are non-tender, unilateral, and palpable near the vaginal orifice. Cysts distend the
affected labia majora, causing vulvar asymmetry.
Abscesses cause severe vulvar pain and sometimes fever; they are tender and typically erythematous. A
vaginal discharge may be present. Sexually transmitted diseases may coexist.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is usually by physical examination. A sample of discharge, if present, may be tested for
sexually transmitted diseases. In women > 40, excisional biopsy must be done to exclude vulvar cancer.
Treatment
• Surgery for symptomatic cysts and for all cysts in women > 40
In women < 40, asymptomatic cysts do not require treatment. Symptomatic cysts may require surgery.
Because cysts often recur after simple drainage, surgery aims to produce a permanent opening from the
duct to the exterior. Usually, one of the following is done:
•
Catheter insertion:
A small balloon-tipped catheter may be inserted, inflated, and left in the cyst for 4
to 6 wk; this procedure stimulates fibrosis and produces a permanent opening.
•
Marsupialization:
The everted edges of the cyst are sutured to the exterior.
Recurrent cysts may require excision.
In women > 40, all cysts must be surgically explored and removed by excisional biopsy.
Abscesses are treated with oral broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg, cephalexin 500 mg q 6 h for 7 to 10 days)
and insertion of a balloon-tipped catheter.
Benign Ovarian Masses
Benign ovarian masses include functional cysts and tumors; most are asymptomatic.
Functional cysts:
There are 2 types of functional cysts:
•
Follicular cysts:
These cysts develop from graafian follicles.
•
Corpus luteum cysts:
These cysts develop from the corpus luteum. They may hemorrhage into the
===PAGE:2693===
cyst cavity, distending the ovarian capsule or rupturing into the peritoneum.
Most functional cysts are < 1.5 cm in diameter; few exceed 5 cm. Functional cysts usually resolve
spontaneously over days to weeks. Functional cysts are uncommon after menopause.
Benign tumors:
Benign ovarian tumors usually grow slowly and rarely become malignant. They include
the following:
•
Benign cystic teratomas:
These tumors are also called dermoid cysts because although derived from
all 3 germ cell layers, they consist mainly of ectodermal tissue.
•
Fibromas:
These slow-growing tumors are usually < 7 cm in diameter.
•
Cystadenomas:
These tumors are most commonly serous or mucinous.
Symptoms and Signs
Most functional cysts and benign tumors are asymptomatic. Sometimes they cause menstrual
abnormalities. Hemorrhagic corpus luteum cysts may cause pain or signs of peritonitis, particularly when
they rupture. Occasionally, severe abdominal pain results from adnexal torsion of a cyst or mass, usually
> 4 cm. Ascites and rarely pleural effusion may accompany fibromas.
Diagnosis
• Transvaginal ultrasonography
Masses are usually detected incidentally but may be suggested by symptoms and signs. A pregnancy test
is done to exclude ectopic pregnancy. Transvaginal ultrasonography can usually confirm the diagnosis. If
results are indeterminate, MRI or CT may help.
Masses with radiographic characteristics of cancer (eg, cystic and solid components, surface
excrescences, multilocular appearance, irregular shape) require excision. Tumor markers may help in the
diagnosis of specific tumors (. In women of reproductive age, simple, thin-walled cystic
adnexal masses 5 to 8 cm (usually follicular) without characteristics of cancer do not require further
evaluation unless they persist for > 3 menstrual cycles.
Treatment
• Removal of selected cysts
Most ovarian cysts < 8 cm resolve without treatment; serial ultrasonography is done to document
resolution. If technically feasible, cyst removal from the ovary (ovarian cystectomy) via laparoscopy or
laparotomy may be necessary for the following:
• Most cysts that are ≥ 10 cm and that persist for > 3 menstrual cycles
• Cystic teratomas < 10 cm
• Hemorrhagic corpus luteum cysts with peritonitis
• Fibromas and other solid tumors
Oophorectomy is done for the following:
• Fibromas that cannot be removed by cystectomy
• Cystadenomas
===PAGE:2694===
• Cystic teratomas > 10 cm
• Cysts that cannot be surgically removed separately from the ovary
• Most cysts that are detected in postmenopausal women and that are > 5 cm
Cervical Myomas
Cervical myomas are smooth, benign tumors of the cervix.
Cervical myomas are uncommon. Uterine myomas (fibroids) usually coexist. Large cervical myomas may
partially obstruct the urinary tract or may prolapse into the vagina. Prolapsed myomas sometimes
ulcerate, become infected, bleed, or a combination.
Symptoms and Signs
Most cervical myomas eventually cause symptoms. The most common symptom is bleeding, which may
be irregular or heavy, sometimes causing anemia. Dyspareunia may occur. Infection may cause pain,
bleeding, or discharge. Rarely, prolapse causes a feeling of pressure or a mass in the pelvis. Urinary
outflow obstruction causes hesitancy, dribbling, or urine retention; UTIs may develop.
Diagnosis
• Physical examination
Diagnosis is by physical examination. Cervical myomas, particularly if prolapsed, may be visible with use
of a speculum. Some are palpable during bimanual examination.
Transvaginal ultrasonography is done only for the following:
• To confirm an uncertain diagnosis
• To exclude urinary outflow obstruction
• To identify additional myomas
Hb, Hct, or CBC is measured to exclude anemia. Cervical cytology is done to exclude cervical cancer.
Treatment
• Removal of symptomatic myomas
Treatment is similar to that of fibroids (. Small, asymptomatic myomas are not treated. Most
symptomatic cervical myomas are removed by myomectomy (particularly if childbearing capacity is
important) or, if myomectomy is technically difficult, by hysterectomy. Prolapsed myomas should be
removed transvaginally if possible.
Cervical Polyps
Cervical polyps are common benign growths of the cervix and endocervix.
Cervical polyps occur in about 2 to 5% of women. They usually originate in the endocervical canal.
Endocervical polyps are probably caused by chronic inflammation. They rarely become malignant.
Most cervical polyps are asymptomatic. Endocervical polyps may bleed between menses or after
intercourse or become infected, causing purulent vaginal discharge (leukorrhea). Endocervical polyps are
usually reddish pink, glistening, and < 1 cm in all dimensions; they may be friable.
===PAGE:2695===
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by speculum examination.
Treatment
Polyps that cause bleeding or discharge should be removed. Excision can be done in the office and does
not require anesthetics. Bleeding after excision is rare and can be controlled with chemical cautery.
If bleeding or discharge persists after treatment, cervical cytology and endometrial biopsy are done to
exclude cancer.
Cervical Stenosis
Cervical stenosis is stricture of the internal cervical os.
Cervical stenosis may be congenital or acquired. The most common acquired causes are
• Menopause
• Cervical surgery (eg, conization, cautery)
• Endometrial ablation procedures to treat uterine abnormalities that cause menorrhagia
• Cervical or uterine cancer
• Radiation therapy
Cervical stenosis may be complete or partial. It may result in a hematometra (accumulation of blood in the
uterus) or, in premenopausal women, retrograde flow of menstrual blood into the pelvis, possibly causing
endometriosis. A pyometra (accumulation of pus in the uterus) may also develop, particularly in women
with cervical or uterine cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
Common symptoms in premenopausal women include amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, abnormal bleeding,
and infertility. Postmenopausal women may be asymptomatic for long periods. Hematometra or pyometra
may cause uterine distention or sometimes a palpable mass.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis may be suspected based on symptoms and signs (particularly development of amenorrhea or
dysmenorrhea after cervical surgery) or on inability to obtain endocervical cells or an endometrial sample
for diagnostic tests (eg, for a Papanicolaou [Pap] test). Diagnosis of complete stenosis is established if a
1- to 2-mm diameter probe cannot be passed into the uterine cavity.
If cervical stenosis causes symptoms or uterine abnormalities (eg, hematometra, pyometra), cervical
cytology and endometrial biopsy should be done to exclude cancer. For postmenopausal women with no
history of abnormal Pap tests and for women without symptoms or uterine abnormalities, no further
evaluation is needed.
Treatment
• Dilation and stenting if symptomatic
Treatment is indicated only if symptoms or uterine abnormalities are present and typically involves
===PAGE:2696===
cervical dilation and placement of cervical stent.
Skene's Duct Cyst
Skene's duct cysts develop adjacent to the distal urethra, sometimes causing perineal
discharge, dyspareunia, urinary obstruction, or abscess formation.
Skene's glands (periurethral or paraurethral glands) are located adjacent to the distal urethra. Cysts form
if the duct is obstructed, usually because the gland is infected. They occur mainly in adults. Cysts may
form abscesses or cause urethral obstruction and recurrent UTIs.
Most cysts are < 1 cm and asymptomatic. Some are larger and cause dyspareunia. The first symptoms
may be those of urinary out-flow obstruction (eg, hesitancy, dribbling, retention) or of UTIs. Abscesses
are painful, swollen, tender, and erythematous but usually do not cause fever.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is usually clinical. Most symptomatic cysts and abscesses are palpable adjacent to the distal
urethra; however, a diverticulum of the distal urethra may be clinically indistinguishable, requiring
ultrasonography or cystoscopy for differentiation.
Treatment
• Surgical excision if the cyst causes symptoms
Symptomatic cysts are excised. Abscesses are treated initially with oral broad-spectrum
antibiotics (eg,
cephalexin 500 mg q 6 h for 7 to 10 days) and are excised or marsupialized.
Vulvar Endometriomas
Vulvar endometriomas are rare, painful cysts that result from extrauterine implantation of
functioning endometrial tissue (endometriosis—.
Rarely, endometriosis occurs in the vulva (or the vagina), sometimes producing cysts (endometriomas),
often at the site of previous surgery (eg, episiotomy).
Endometriomas usually develop in the mid-line. They may be painful, particularly during intercourse.
During menstruation, pain increases and endometriomas may enlarge. Endometriomas are tender and
may appear blue. They can rupture, causing severe pain.
Diagnosis is by physical examination and biopsy. Treatment involves excisional biopsy.
Vulvar Inclusion and Epidermal Cysts
Vulvar inclusion cysts contain epithelial tissue; vulvar epidermal cysts develop from sebaceous
glands. Both cysts eventually enlarge with cellular debris and sometimes become infected.
Inclusion cysts are the most common vulvar cysts; they may also occur in the vagina. They may result
from trauma (eg, laceration, episiotomy repair) that entraps viable epithelial tissue below the surface, or
they may develop spontaneously. Epidermal cysts result from obstruction of sebaceous gland ducts.
Uninfected cysts are usually asymptomatic but occasionally cause irritation; they are white or yellow and
usually < 1 cm. Infected cysts may be red and tender and cause dyspareunia.
Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment, indicated only for symptomatic cysts, is excision; a local anesthetic can
be used.
===PAGE:2697===

===PAGE:2698===
Chapter 251. Uterine Fibroids
(Leiomyomas; Myomas; Fibromyomas)
Uterine fibroids are benign uterine tumors of smooth muscle origin. Fibroids frequently cause
abnormal vaginal bleeding (eg, menorrhagia, menometrorrhagia), pelvic pain and pressure,
urinary and intestinal symptoms, and pregnancy complications. Diagnosis is by pelvic
examination and ultrasonography. Treatment of symptomatic patients depends on the patient's
desire for fertility and desire to keep her uterus and may include oral contraceptives, brief
presurgical gonadotropin-releasing hormone therapy to shrink fibroids, and more definitive
surgical procedures (eg, hysterectomy, myomectomy, endometrial ablation).
Uterine fibroids are the most common pelvic tumor, occurring in about 70% of women by age 45.
However, many fibroids are small and asymptomatic. About 25% of white and 50% of black women have
symptomatic fibroids. Fibroids are more common among women who have a high body mass index.
Potentially protective factors include parturition and cigarette smoking.
Most fibroids in the uterus are subserous, followed by intramural, then submucosal. Occasionally, fibroids
occur in the broad ligaments (intraligamentous), fallopian tubes, or cervix. Some fibroids are
pedunculated. Most fibroids are multiple and develop from a single monoclonal smooth muscle cell.
Because they have estrogen receptors, fibroids tend to enlarge during the reproductive years and regress
after menopause.
Large fibroids may outgrow their blood supply and degenerate. Degeneration is described as hyaline,
myxomatous, calcific, cystic, fatty, red (usually only during pregnancy), or necrotic. Although patients are
often concerned about cancer in fibroids, sarcomatous change is extremely rare.
Symptoms and Signs
Fibroids can cause menorrhagia or menometrorrhagia. If fibroids grow, degenerate, or hemorrhage or if
pedunculated fibroids twist, severe acute or chronic pressure or pain can result. Urinary symptoms (eg,
urinary frequency or urgency) can result from bladder compression, and intestinal symptoms (eg,
constipation) can result from intestinal compression.
Fibroids may prevent pregnancy; during pregnancy, they may cause recurrent spontaneous abortion,
premature contractions, or abnormal presentation or make cesarean delivery necessary.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography or sonohysterography
The diagnosis is likely if bimanual pelvic examination detects an enlarged, mobile, irregular uterus that is
palpable above the pelvic symphysis. Confirmation requires imaging, usually with ultrasonography or
sonohysterography. In sonohysterography, saline is instilled into the uterus, enabling the sonographer to
more specifically locate the fibroid in the uterus. If ultrasonography is inconclusive, MRI, the most
accurate imaging test, is done.
Treatment
• Sometimes gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogs or other drugs for temporary relief of
minor symptoms
• Myomectomy (to preserve fertility) or hysterectomy for symptomatic fibroids
Asymptomatic fibroids
do not require treatment. Patients are reevaluated periodically (eg, every 6 to 12
mo).
For
symptomatic fibroids
, medical options, including suppression of ovarian hormones to stop the
===PAGE:2699===
bleeding, are suboptimal and limited. However, menorrhagia or menometrorrhagia should be treated
before surgery is considered. GnRH analogs are commonly given before surgery to shrink fibroid tissues,
often stopping menses and allowing blood counts to increase. In postmenopausal women, expectant
management can be tried because symptoms may resolve as fibroids regress.
Drugs:
Several drugs are used to relieve symptoms, reduce fibroid growth, or both.
GnRH analogs
given IM or sc (eg, leuprolide 3.75 mg IM q mo, goserelin 3.6 mg sc q 28 days), as a
subdermal pellet, or as nasal spray can decrease estrogen production. These drugs are most commonly
used. GnRH analogs are most helpful when given preoperatively to reduce fibroid and uterine volume,
making surgery technically more feasible and reducing blood loss. In general, these drugs should not be
used in the long term because rebound growth to pretreatment size within 6 mo is common and bone
demineralization may occur.
Exogenous progestins
can partially suppress estrogen stimulation of uterine fibroid growth.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate 5 to 10 mg po once/day or megestrol acetate 10 to 20 mg po once/day
given 10 to 14 days each menstrual cycle can limit heavy bleeding, beginning after 1 or 2 treatment
cycles. Alternatively, oral therapy every day of the month (continuous therapy) may be given; it often
reduces bleeding and provides contraception. Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg IM q 3 mo has
effects similar to those of continuous oral therapy. Before IM therapy, oral progestins should be tried to
determine whether patients can tolerate the adverse effects (eg, weight gain, depression, irregular
bleeding). Progestin therapy causes fibroids to grow in some women.
Antiprogestins
(eg, mifepristone) can also help reduce fibroid growth. The dose is 5 to 50 mg (once/day
for 3 to 6 mo), which is lower than the 200-mg dose used for termination of pregnancy; thus, it must be
mixed specially by the pharmacy and may not always be available.
Selective estrogen receptor modulators
(SERMs; eg, raloxifene) may help reduce fibroid growth.
However, whether efficacy in reducing symptoms is comparable to that of other drugs is unclear.
Danazol
, an androgenic agonist, can suppress fibroid growth but has a high rate of adverse effects (eg,
weight gain, acne, hirsutism, edema, hair loss, deepening of the voice, flushing, sweating, vaginal
dryness) and is thus often less acceptable to patients.
NSAIDs
can be used to treat pain but probably do not decrease bleeding.
Surgery:
Surgery is usually reserved for women with any of the following:
• Rapidly enlarging pelvic mass
• Recurrent uterine bleeding refractory to drug therapy
• Persistent or intolerable pain or pressure
• Urinary or intestinal symptoms
• Infertility (if pregnancy is desired)
• Recurrent spontaneous abortions (if pregnancy is desired)
Hysterectomy
or
myomectomy
is traditionally done; both are major surgery and have similar
indications. Hysterectomy is the definitive treatment. After myomectomy, new fibroids may begin another
growth phase, and about 25% of women who have a myomectomy have a hysterectomy about 4 to 8 yr
later. However, if women desire pregnancy or want to keep their uterus, myomectomy is used. In about
55% of women with infertility due to fibroids alone, myomectomy can restore fertility, resulting in
pregnancy after about 15 mo. Multiple myomectomy can be much more difficult to do than hysterectomy.
Patient choice is important but must be based on full information about anticipated difficulties and
sequelae of myomectomy vs hysterectomy.
===PAGE:2700===
Newer procedures
may relieve symptoms, but duration of symptom relief and efficacy of the procedures
in restoring fertility have not been evaluated. Such procedures include laparoscopic and hysteroscopic
myomectomy
(using an instrument with a wide-angle telescope and electrical wire loop for excision), highintensity focused sonography, cryotherapy, and radiofrequency ablation. Complication rates after
laparoscopic myomectomy may be higher, but rates appear to be operator-dependent. Uterine artery
embolization has been used with the aim of causing infarction of fibroids throughout the uterus while
preserving normal uterine tissue. After this procedure, women recover more quickly than after
hysterectomy or myomectomy, but rates of complications and return visits tend to be higher.
Choice of treatment:
Treatment should be individualized, but some factors can help with the decision:
• Asymptomatic fibroids: No treatment
• Postmenopausal women: Trial of expectant management (because symptoms tend to remit as fibroids
regress)
• Surgically accessible symptomatic fibroids, particularly if conception may be desired: Myomectomy
• Symptomatic fibroids that are not clearly surgically accessible: Uterine artery embolization or another
new technique (eg, high-intensity focused sonography)
• Intolerable symptoms when other treatments were ineffective, particularly if conception is not desired:
Hysterectomy, possibly preceded by drug therapy (eg, with GnRH analogs)
===PAGE:2701===
Chapter 252. Endometriosis
Introduction
Endometriosis is a noncancerous disorder in which functioning endometrial tissue is implanted
outside the uterine cavity. Symptoms depend on location of the implants and may include
dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, infertility, dysuria, and pain during defecation. Diagnosis is by
biopsy, usually via laparoscopy. Treatments include anti-inflammatory drugs, drugs to suppress
ovarian function and endometrial tissue growth, surgical ablation and excision of endometriotic
implants, and, if disease is severe and no childbearing is planned, hysterectomy plus
oophorectomy.
Endometriosis is usually confined to the peritoneal or serosal surfaces of pelvic organs, commonly the
ovaries, broad ligaments, posterior cul-de-sac, and uterosacral ligaments. Less common sites include the
serosal surfaces of the small and large intestines, ureters, bladder, vagina, cervix, surgical scars, pleura,
and pericardium. Bleeding from peritoneal implants is thought to initiate inflammation, followed by fibrin
deposition, adhesion formation, and, eventually, scarring, which distorts peritoneal surfaces of organs and
pelvic anatomy.
Etiology and Pathophysiology
The most widely accepted hypothesis is that endometrial cells are transported from the uterine cavity and
subsequently become implanted at ectopic sites. Retrograde flow of menstrual tissue through the
fallopian tubes could transport endometrial cells intraabdominally; the lymphatic or circulatory system
could transport endometrial cells to distant sites (eg, the pleural cavity). Another hypothesis is coelomic
metaplasia: Coelomic epithelium is transformed into endometrium-like glands.
Microscopically, endometriotic implants consist of glands and stroma identical to intrauterine
endometrium. These tissues contain estrogen and progesterone receptors and thus usually grow,
differentiate, and bleed in response to changes in hormone levels during the menstrual cycle.
Incidence of endometriosis is increased in 1st-degree relatives of women with endometriosis, suggesting
that heredity is a factor. Incidence is also increased in women who delay childbearing, who have
shortened menstrual cycles (< 27 days) with menses that are abnormally long (> 8 days), or who have
mullerian duct defects.
Reported incidence varies but is probably about 10 to 15% in actively menstruating women aged 25 to
44. Average age at diagnosis is 27, but endometriosis also occurs among adolescents. About 25 to 50%
of infertile women have endometriosis. In patients with severe endometriosis and distorted pelvic
anatomy, incidence of infertility is high because mechanisms of ovum pickup and tubal transport are
impaired. Some patients with minimal endometriosis and normal pelvic anatomy are also infertile; reasons
for impaired fertility include the following:
• Increased incidence of luteinized unruptured ovarian follicle syndrome (trapped oocyte)
•
Increased peritoneal prostaglandin production or peritoneal macrophage activity (resulting in oocyte
phagocytosis)
• Nonreceptive endometrium (because of luteal phase dysfunction or other abnormalities)
Potential protective factors seem to be multiple pregnancies, use of low-dose oral contraceptives
(continuous or cyclic), and regular exercise (especially if begun before age 15, if done for > 7 h/wk, or
both).
Symptoms and Signs
Pelvic pain, pelvic mass, alteration of menses, and infertility are typical. Some women with extensive
endometriosis are asymptomatic; some with minimal disease have incapacitating pain. Dyspareunia and
===PAGE:2702===
midline pelvic pain before or during menses may develop. Such dysmenorrhea is an important diagnostic
clue, particularly if it begins after several years of pain-free menses.
Symptoms can vary depending on location of implants.
•
Large intestine:
Pain during defecation, abdominal bloating, or rectal bleeding during menses
•
Bladder:
Dysuria, hematuria, suprapubic pain (particularly during urination), or a combination
•
Ovaries:
Formation of an endometrioma (a 2- to 10-cm cystic mass localized to an ovary), which
occasionally ruptures or leaks, causing acute abdominal pain and peritoneal signs
•
Adnexal structures:
Formation of adnexal adhesions, resulting in a pelvic mass
•
Extrapelvic structures:
Vague abdominal pain (sometimes)
Pelvic examination may be normal, or findings may include a retroverted and fixed uterus, enlarged
ovaries, fixed ovarian masses, thickened rectovaginal septum, induration of the cul-de-sac, and nodules
on the uterosacral ligament. Rarely, lesions can be seen on the vulva or cervix or in the vagina, umbilicus,
or surgical scars.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy, usually laparoscopic
• Sometimes imaging tests (to follow progression) but not for diagnosis
Diagnosis is suspected based on typical symptoms but must be confirmed by biopsy, usually via pelvic
laparoscopy but sometimes via laparotomy, vaginal examination, sigmoidoscopy, or cystoscopy.
Macroscopic appearance (eg, clear, red, brown, black) and size of implants vary during the menstrual
cycle. However, typically, areas of endometriosis on the pelvic peritoneum are punctate red, blue, or
purplish brown spots that are > 5 mm, often called powder burn lesions. Microscopically, both endometrial
glands and stroma must be present to diagnose endometriosis.
Imaging tests (eg, ultrasonography, barium enema, IV urography, CT, MRI) are not specific or adequate for
diagnosis. However, if they are done to rule out other disorders, they sometimes show the extent of
endometriosis. They can also be used to monitor the disorder once it is diagnosed. Investigational serum
markers for endometriosis (eg, serum cancer antigen 125 level > 35 units/mL, antiendometrial antibody)
may help monitor the disorder but require further refinement before they are used routinely. Testing for
other infertility disorders may be indicated (.
Staging the disorder helps physicians formulate a treatment plan and evaluate response to therapy.
According to the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, endometriosis may be classified as stage I
(minimal), II (mild), III (moderate), or IV (severe), based on number, location, and depth of implants and
presence of filmy or dense adhesions (see
Table 252-1
).
Another staging system is based primarily on the presence and severity of pelvic pain.
[Table 252-1.
Stages of Endometriosis]
However, because intraobserver and interob-server variability is high in the staging systems, a more
reliable method of staging is being sought.
Treatment
• NSAIDs for discomfort
===PAGE:2703===
• Drugs to suppress ovarian function
• Conservative surgical resection or ablation of endometriotic tissue
• Conservative surgery plus drugs
• Total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy if disease is severe and patient has
completed childbearing
Symptomatic treatment begins with NSAIDs. More definitive treatment must be individualized based on
the patient's age, symptoms, and desire to preserve fertility and on the extent of the disorder.
Drugs and conservative surgery are symptomatic treatments; in most patients, endometriosis recurs after
treatment is stopped unless ovarian function is permanently and completely ablated.
Drugs that suppress ovarian function inhibit the growth and activity of endometriotic implants. These
drugs include continuous oral contraceptives (commonly used), gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
agonists, and danazol (see
Table 252-2
).
GnRH agonists temporarily suppress estrogen production; however, treatment is limited to ≤ 6 mo
because long-term use may result in bone loss. If treatment lasts > 4 to 6 mo, add-back therapy, usually a
low-dose oral contraceptive taken daily, can be given. Danazol, a synthetic androgen and an
antigonadotropin, inhibits ovulation. However, its androgenic adverse effects limit its use. Cyclic or
continuous
[Table 252-2.
Drugs Used to Treat Endometriosis]
oral contraceptives given after danazol or GnRH agonists may slow disease progression and are
warranted for women who wish to delay childbearing. After drug treatment, fertility rates range from 40 to
60%. Whether treating minimal or mild endometriosis improves fertility rates is unclear because the fertility
rate among untreated women is unknown.
Most women with moderate to severe endometriosis are treated most effectively by ablating or excising as
many implants as possible while preserving fertility. Specific indications for surgery include presence of
endometriomas, significant pelvic adhesions, fallopian tube obstruction, incapacitating pelvic pain, and a
desire to preserve fertility. Microsurgical techniques are used to prevent adhesions if women desire to
preserve fertility. Laparoscopy can sometimes be used to remove lesions; peritoneal or ovarian lesions
can sometimes be electrocauterized, excised, or vaporized with a laser. After this treatment, fertility rates
are 40 to 70% and are inversely proportional to severity of the endometriosis. If resection is incomplete,
use of oral contraceptives or GnRH agonists may increase fertility rates. Laparoscopic resection of the
uterosacral ligaments with electrocautery or a laser may reduce midline pelvic pain. Some patients require
presacral neurectomy.
Hysterectomy should usually be reserved for patients who have intractable pelvic pain and who have
completed childbearing. If women < 50 require hysterectomy with oophorectomy, supplemental estrogen
should be considered. Continuous progestin (eg, medroxyprogesterone acetate 2.5 mg po once/day)
should be given with estrogen because if estrogen is given alone, residual tissue may grow. Hormone
replacement can be started postoperatively or, if a substantial amount of endometriotic tissue remains,
may be delayed for 4 to 6 mo; during this interval, progestins to suppress the remaining endometriotic
tissue may be necessary.
===PAGE:2704===
Chapter 253. Vaginitis and Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
Introduction
The lower and upper female genital tracts are separated by the cervix. Inflammation of the lower tract may
involve the vagina (vaginitis), vulva (vulvitis), or both (vulvovaginitis). Pelvic inflammatory disease is
infection of the upper tract: uterus, fallopian tubes, and, if infection is severe, ovaries (one or both).
Vaginitis
Vaginitis is infectious or noninfectious inflammation of the vaginal mucosa, sometimes with
inflammation of the vulva. Symptoms include vaginal discharge, irritation, pruritus, and
erythema. Diagnosis is by in-office testing of vaginal secretions. Treatment is directed at the
cause and at any severe symptoms.
Vaginitis is one of the most common gynecologic disorders. Some of its causes affect the vulva alone
(vulvitis) or in addition (vulvovaginitis).
Etiology
The most common causes vary by patient age.
Children:
In children, vaginitis usually involves infection with GI tract flora (nonspecific vulvovaginitis). A
common contributing factor in girls aged 2 to 6 yr is poor perineal hygiene (eg, wiping from back to front
after bowel movements; not washing hands after bowel movements; fingering, particularly in response to
pruritus). Chemicals in bubble baths or soaps may cause inflammation. Foreign bodies (eg, tissue paper)
may cause nonspecific vaginitis with a bloody discharge. Sometimes childhood vulvovaginitis is due to
infection with a specific pathogen (eg, streptococci, staphylococci,
Candida
sp; occasionally, pinworm).
Women of reproductive age:
In these women, vaginitis is usually infectious. The most common types
are bacterial vaginosis (, candidal vaginitis (, and trichomonal vaginitis (, which is sexually transmitted. Normally in women of reproductive age,
Lactobacillus
sp is the
predominant constituent of normal vaginal flora. Colonization by these bacteria keeps vaginal pH in the
normal range (3.8 to 4.2), thereby preventing overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria. Also, high estrogen
levels maintain vaginal
thickness, bolstering local defenses. Factors that predispose to overgrowth of
bacterial vaginal pathogens may include the following:
• An alkaline vaginal pH due to menstrual blood, semen, or a decrease in lactobacilli
• Poor hygiene
• Frequent douching
Vaginitis may result from foreign bodies (eg, forgotten tampons). Inflammatory vaginitis, which is
noninfectious, is uncommon.
Postmenopausal women:
Usually, a marked decrease in estrogen causes vaginal thinning, increasing
vulnerability to infection and inflammation. Some treatments (eg, oophorectomy, pelvic radiation, certain
chemotherapy drugs) also result in loss of estrogen. Decreased estrogen predisposes to atrophic
vaginitis. Poor hygiene (eg, in patients who are incontinent or bedbound) can lead to chronic vulvar
inflammation due to chemical irritation from urine or feces or due to nonspecific infection. Bacterial
vaginosis, candidal vaginitis, and trichomonal vaginitis are uncommon among postmenopausal women but
may occur in those with risk factors.
Women of all ages:
At any age, conditions that predispose to vaginal or vulvar infection include fistulas
between the intestine and genital tract, which allow intestinal flora to seed the genital tract, and pelvic
radiation or tumors, which break down tissue and thus compromise normal host defenses. Noninfectious
===PAGE:2705===
vulvitis accounts for up to 30% of vulvovaginitis cases. It may result from hypersensitivity or irritant
reactions to hygiene sprays or perfumes, menstrual pads, laundry soaps, bleaches, fabric softeners,
fabric dyes, synthetic fibers, bathwater additives, toilet tissue, or, occasionally, spermicides, vaginal
lubricants or creams, latex condoms, vaginal contraceptive rings, or diaphragms.
Symptoms and Signs
Vaginitis causes vaginal discharge, which must be distinguished from normal discharge. Normal discharge
is common when estrogen levels are high—eg, during the first 2 wk of life because maternal estrogen is
transferred before birth (slight bleeding often occurs when estrogen levels abruptly decrease) and during
the few months before menarche, when estrogen production increases. Normal vaginal discharge is
commonly milky white or mucoid, odorless, and nonirritating; it can result in vaginal wetness that dampens
underwear. Discharge due to vaginitis is accompanied by pruritus, erythema, and sometimes burning,
pain, or mild bleeding. Pruritus may interfere with sleep. Dysuria or dyspareunia may occur. In atrophic
vaginitis, discharge is scant, dyspareunia is common, and vaginal tissue appears thin and dry. Although
symptoms vary among particular types of vaginitis, there is much overlap (see
Table 253-1
).
[Table 253-1.
Common Types of Vaginitis]
Vulvitis can cause erythema, pruritus, and sometimes tenderness and discharge from the vulva.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Vaginal pH and saline and KOH wet mounts
Vaginitis is diagnosed using clinical criteria and in-office testing. First, vaginal secretions are obtained with
a water-lubricated speculum, and pH paper is used to measure pH in 0.2 intervals from 4.0 to 6.0. Then,
secretions are placed on 2 slides with a cotton swab and diluted with 0.9% NaCl on one slide (saline wet
mount) and with 10% K hydroxide on the other (KOH wet mount). The KOH wet mount is checked for a
fishy odor (whiff test), which results from amines produced in trichomonal vaginitis or bacterial vaginosis.
The saline wet mount is examined microscopically as soon as possible to detect trichomonads, which can
become immotile and more difficult to recognize within minutes after slide preparation. The KOH dissolves
most cellular material except for yeast hyphae, making identification easier. If clinical criteria and in-office
test results are inconclusive, the discharge may be cultured for fungi or trichomonads.
Other causes of discharge are ruled out. If children have vaginal discharge, a vaginal foreign body is
suspected. Cervical discharge due to cervicitis (eg, due to pelvic inflammatory disease [PID]) can
resemble that of vaginitis; abdominal pain, cervical motion tenderness, or cervical inflammation suggests
PID. Discharge that is watery, bloody, or both may result from vulvar, vaginal, or cervical cancer; cancers
can be differentiated from vaginitis by examination and Papanicolaou (Pap) tests. Vaginal pruritus and
discharge may result from skin disorders (eg, psoriasis, tinea versicolor), which can usually be
differentiated by history and skin findings.
If children have trichomonal vaginitis, evaluation for sexual abuse is required. If they have unexplained
vaginal discharge, cervicitis, which may be due to a sexually transmitted disease, should be considered. If
women have bacterial vaginosis or trichomonal vaginitis (and thus are at increased risk of sexually
transmitted diseases), cervical tests for
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
and
Chlamydia trachomatis
, common
causes of sexually transmitted PID, are done.
Treatment
• Hygienic measures
• Symptomatic treatment
===PAGE:2706===
• Treatment of cause
The vulva should be kept as clean as possible. Soaps and unnecessary topical preparations (eg,
feminine hygiene sprays) should be avoided. Intermittent use of ice packs or warm sitz baths with or
without baking soda may reduce soreness and pruritus.
If symptoms are moderate or severe or do not respond to other measures, drugs may be needed. For
pruritus, topical corticosteroids (eg, topical 1% hydrocortisone bid prn) can be applied to the vulva but not
in the vagina. Oral antihistamines decrease pruritus and cause drowsiness, helping patients sleep.
Any infection or other cause is treated. Foreign bodies are removed. Prepubertal girls are taught good
perineal hygiene (eg, wiping front to back after bowel movements and voiding, washing hands, avoiding
fingering the perineum). If chronic vulvar inflammation is due to being bedbound or incontinent, better
vulvar hygiene may help.
Bacterial Vaginosis
Bacterial vaginosis is vaginitis due to a complex alteration of vaginal flora in which lactobacilli
decrease and anaerobic pathogens overgrow. Symptoms include a gray, thin, fishy-smelling
vaginal discharge and itching. Diagnosis is confirmed by testing vaginal secretions. Treatment
is usually with oral or topical metronidazole or topical clindamycin.
Bacterial vaginosis is the most common infectious vaginitis. The cause is unknown. Anaerobic pathogens
that overgrow include
Prevotella
sp,
Peptostreptococcus
sp,
Gardnerella vaginalis, Mobiluncus
sp, and
Mycoplasma hominis
, which increase in concentration 10-fold to 100-fold and replace the normally
protective lactobacilli. Risk factors include those for sexually transmitted diseases (.
However, bacterial vaginosis can occur in virgins, and treating the male sex partner does not appear to
affect subsequent incidence in sexually active women. Use of an intrauterine device is also a risk factor.
Bacterial vaginosis, once considered inconsequential, appears to increase risk of pelvic inflammatory
disease, postabortion and postpartum endometritis, posthysterectomy vaginal cuff infection,
chorioamnionitis, premature rupture of membranes, preterm labor, and preterm birth.
Symptoms and Signs
Vaginal discharge is malodorous, gray, and thin. Usually, a fishy odor is present, often becoming stronger
when the discharge is more
alkaline—after coitus and menses. Pruritus and irritation are common.
Erythema and edema are uncommon.
Diagnosis
For the diagnosis, 3 of 4 criteria must be present:
• Gray discharge
• Vaginal secretion pH > 4.5
• Fishy odor on the whiff test
• Clue cells
Clue cells (bacteria adherent to epithelial cells obscuring their cell margins—see
Plate 70
) are identified by microscopic examination of a saline wet mount. Presence of WBCs on a saline
wet mount suggests a concomitant infection (possibly trichomonal, gonorrheal, or chlamydial cervicitis)
and the need for additional testing.
Treatment
===PAGE:2707===
• Topical metronidazole or clindamycin
Metronidazole 0.75% vaginal gel bid for 5 days or 2% clindamycin vaginal cream once/day for 7 days is
the treatment of choice. Oral metronidazole 500 mg bid for 7 days or 2 g po once is effective but can have
systemic adverse effects. Women who use clindamycin cream cannot use latex products (ie, condoms or
diaphragms) for contraception because the drug weakens latex. Treatment of asymptomatic sex partners
is unnecessary.
For vaginitis during the 1st trimester of pregnancy, metronidazole vaginal gel should be used, although
treatment during pregnancy has not been shown to lower the risk of pregnancy complications. To prevent
endometritis, clinicians may give metronidazole prophylactically before elective abortion to all patients or
only to those who test positive for bacterial vaginosis.
Candidal Vaginitis
Candidal vaginitis is vaginal infection with
Candida
sp, usually
C. albicans
.
Most fungal vaginitis is caused by
C. albicans
(see also p.
), which colonizes 15 to 20% of
nonpregnant and 20 to 40% of pregnant women. Risk factors for candidal vaginitis include the following:
• Diabetes
• Use of a broad-spectrum antibiotic or corticosteroids
• Pregnancy
• Constrictive nonporous undergarments
• Immunocompromise
• Use of an intrauterine device
Candidal vaginitis is uncommon among postmenopausal women except among those taking systemic
hormone therapy.
Symptoms and Signs
Vaginal vulvar pruritus, burning, or irritation (which may be worse with intercourse) and dyspareunia are
common, as is a thick, white, cottage cheese-like vaginal discharge that adheres to the vaginal walls.
Symptoms and signs increase the week before menses. Erythema, edema, and excoriation are common.
Infected male sex partners may or may not have symptoms. Recurrences after treatment are uncommon.
Diagnosis
• Vaginal pH and wet mount
Vaginal pH is < 4.5; budding yeast, pseudohyphae, or mycelia are visible on a wet mount, especially with
KOH (see
Plate 71
). If symptoms suggest candidal vaginitis but signs (including vulvar irritation) are absent and
microscopy does not detect fungal elements, fungal culture is done. Women with frequent recurrences
require culture to confirm the diagnosis and to rule out non-albicans
Candida
.
Treatment
• Antifungal drugs
• Avoidance of excess moisture accumulation
===PAGE:2708===
Keeping the vulva clean and wearing loose, absorbent cotton clothing that allows air to circulate can
reduce vulvar moisture and fungal growth. Topical or oral drugs are highly effective (see
Table 253-2
). Adherence to treatment is better when a one-dose oral regimen of fluconazole 150 mg is
used. Topical butoconazole, clotrimazole, miconazole, and tioconazole are available OTC. However,
patients should be warned that topical creams and ointments containing mineral oil or vegetable oil
weaken latex-based condoms. If symptoms persist or worsen during topical therapy, hypersensitivity to
topical antifungals should be considered.
Frequent recurrences require long-term suppression with oral drugs (fluconazole 150 mg weekly to
monthly or ketoconazole 100 mg once/day for 6 mo). Suppression is effective only while the drugs are
being taken. These drugs may be contraindicated in patients with liver disorders. Patients taking
ketoconazole should be monitored periodically with liver function tests.
[Table 253-2.
Drugs for Candidal Vaginitis]
Inflammatory Vaginitis
Inflammatory vaginitis is vaginal inflammation without evidence of the usual infectious causes
of vaginitis.
Etiology may be autoimmune. Vaginal epithelial cells slough superficially, and streptococci overgrow. The
major risk factor is estrogen loss, which can result from menopause or premature ovarian failure (eg, due
to oophorectomy, pelvic radiation, or chemotherapy). Genital atrophy predisposes to inflammatory
vaginitis and increases risk of recurrence.
Symptoms and Signs
Purulent vaginal discharge, dyspareunia, dysuria, and vaginal irritation are common. Vaginal pruritus and
erythema may occur. Burning, pain, or mild bleeding occurs less often. Vaginal tissue may appear thin and
dry. Vaginitis may recur.
Diagnosis
• Vaginal pH and wet mount
Because symptoms overlap with other forms of vaginitis, testing (eg, vaginal fluid pH measurement,
microscopy, whiff test) is necessary. The diagnosis is made if vaginal fluid pH is > 6, whiff test is negative,
and microscopy shows predominantly WBCs and parabasal cells.
Treatment
• Clindamycin vaginal cream
Treatment is with clindamycin vaginal cream 5 g every evening for 1 wk. After treatment with clindamycin,
women are evaluated for genital atrophy. Genital atrophy, if present, can be treated with topical estrogens
(eg, 0.01% estradiol vaginal cream 2 to 4 g once/day for 1 to 2 wk, followed by 1 to 2 g once/day for 1 to
2 wk, then 1 g 1 to 3 times weekly; estradiol hemihydrate vaginal tablets 25
μ
g twice/wk; estradiol rings q
3 mo). Topical therapy is usually preferred because of concerns about the safety of oral hormonal
therapy; topical therapy may have fewer systemic effects.
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is infection of the upper female genital tract: the cervix,
uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries; abscesses may occur. Common symptoms and signs
include lower abdominal pain, cervical discharge, and irregular vaginal bleeding. Long-term
complications include infertility, chronic pelvic pain, and ectopic pregnancy. Diagnosis includes
PCR of cervical specimens for
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
and chlamydiae, microscopic examination
of cervical discharge (usually), and ultrasonography or laparoscopy (occasionally). Treatment is
===PAGE:2709===
with antibiotics.
PID results from microorganisms ascending from the vagina and cervix into the endometrium and fallopian
tubes. Infection of the cervix (cervicitis) causes mucopurulent
discharge. Infection of the fallopian tubes
(salpingitis) and uterus (endometritis) tend to occur together. If severe, infection can spread to the ovaries
(oophoritis) and then the peritoneum (peritonitis). Salpingitis with endometritis and oophoritis, with or
without peritonitis, is often called salpingitis even though other structures are involved.
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
and
Chlamydia trachomatis
are common causes of PID; they are transmitted
sexually. PID usually also involves other aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, including pathogens that cause
bacterial vaginosis (.
PID commonly occurs in women < 35. It is rare before menarche, after menopause, and during pregnancy.
Risk factors include previous PID and presence of bacterial vaginosis or any sexually transmitted
disease. Other risk factors, particularly for gonorrheal or chlamydial PID, include younger age, non-white
race, low socioeconomic status, and multiple or new sex partners.
Symptoms and Signs
Lower abdominal pain, fever, cervical discharge, and abnormal uterine bleeding are common, particularly
during or after menses.
Cervicitis:
The cervix appears red and bleeds easily. Mucopurulent discharge is common; usually, it is
yellow-green and can be seen exuding from the endocervical canal.
Acute salpingitis:
Lower abdominal pain is usually present and bilateral but may be unilateral, even
when both tubes are involved. Pain can also occur in the upper abdomen. Nausea and vomiting are
common when pain is severe. Irregular bleeding and fever each occur in up to one third of patients. In the
early stages, signs may be mild or absent. Later, cervical motion tenderness, guarding, and rebound
tenderness are common. Occasionally, dyspareunia or dysuria occurs. Many women with inflammation
that is severe enough to cause scarring have minimal or no symptoms.
PID due to
N. gonorrhoeae
is usually more acute and causes more severe symptoms than that due to
C.
trachomatis
, which can be indolent.
Complications:
Acute gonococcal or chlamydial salpingitis may lead to the Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome
(perihepatitis that causes upper right quadrant pain). Infection may become chronic, characterized by
intermittent exacerbations and remissions.
A tubo-ovarian abscess (collection of pus in the adnexa) develops in about 15% of women with
salpingitis. It can accompany acute or chronic infection and is more likely if treatment is late or
incomplete. Pain, fever, and peritoneal signs are usually present and may be severe. The abscess may
rupture, causing progressively severe symptoms and possibly septic shock. Hydrosalpinx (fimbrial
obstruction and tubal distention with nonpurulent fluid) is usually asymptomatic but can cause pelvic
pressure, chronic pelvic pain, or dyspareunia. Tubo-ovarian abscess, hydrosalpinx, or pyosalpinx (pus
confined to one or both fallopian tubes) may produce a palpable adnexal mass and may lead to infertility.
Salpingitis may cause tubal scarring and adhesions, which commonly result in chronic pelvic pain,
infertility, and increased risk of ectopic pregnancy. Salpingitis may also result in menstrual irregularities.
Diagnosis
• High index of suspicion
• PCR or culture
• Pregnancy test
===PAGE:2710===
PID is suspected when women of reproductive age, particularly those with risk factors, have lower
abdominal pain or cervical or unexplained vaginal discharge. PID is considered when irregular vaginal
bleeding, dyspareunia, or dysuria is unexplained. PID is more likely if lower abdominal, unilateral or
bilateral adnexal, and cervical motion tenderness are present. A palpable adnexal mass suggests tuboovarian abscess. Because even minimally symptomatic infection may have severe sequelae, index of
suspicion should be high.
If PID is suspected, PCR of cervical specimens for
N. gonorrhoeae
and
C. trachomatis
(which is nearly
100% sensitive and specific) and a pregnancy test are done. If PCR is unavailable, cultures are done. At
the point of care, cervical discharge is usually examined to confirm purulence; a Gram stain or saline wet
mount is used, but these tests are neither sensitive nor specific. If a patient cannot be adequately
examined because of tenderness, ultrasonography is done as soon as possible. WBC count may be
elevated but is not helpful diagnostically.
If the pregnancy test is positive, ectopic pregnancy, which can produce similar findings, should be
considered. Other common causes of pelvic pain include endometriosis, adnexal torsion, ovarian cyst
rupture, and appendicitis. Differentiating features of these disorders are discussed elsewhere (. Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome may mimic acute cholecystitis but can usually be differentiated by
evidence of salpingitis during pelvic examination or, if necessary, with ultrasonography.
[Table 253-3.
Regimens for Treatment of Pelvic Inflammatory Disease*]
If an adnexal or pelvic mass is suspected clinically or if patients do not respond to antibiotics within 48 to
72 h, ultrasonography is done as soon as possible to exclude tubo-ovarian abscess, pyosalpinx, and
disorders unrelated to PID (eg, ectopic pregnancy, adnexal torsion). If the diagnosis is uncertain after
ultrasonography, laparoscopy should be done; purulent peritoneal material obtained by laparoscopy is the
diagnostic gold standard.
Treatment
• Antibiotics to cover
N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis
, and sometimes other organisms
Antibiotics are given empirically to cover
N. gonorrhoeae
and
C. trachomatis
and are modified based on
laboratory test results. Patients with cervicitis or clinically mild to moderate PID do not require
hospitalization. Outpatient treatment regimens (see
Table 253-3
) usually also aim to eradicate bacterial
vaginosis (, which often coexists. Sex partners of patients with
N. gonorrhoeae
or
C.
trachomatis
infection should be treated.
General indications for inpatient treatment include the following:
• Severe illness (eg, peritonitis, dehydration)
• Moderate or severe vomiting
• Pregnancy
• Suspicion of a pelvic mass
• Inability to exclude a surgical emergency (eg, appendicitis)
In these cases, IV antibiotics (see
Table 253-3
) are started as soon as cultures are obtained and are
continued until patients have been afebrile for 24 h.
Tubo-ovarian abscess may require more prolonged IV antibiotics and hospitalization. Treatment with
ultrasound- or CT-guided percutaneous or transvaginal drainage can be considered if response to
antibiotics alone is incomplete. Laparoscopy or laparotomy is sometimes required for drainage. Suspicion
of a ruptured tubo-ovarian abscess requires immediate laparotomy. In women of reproductive age,
===PAGE:2711===
surgery should aim to preserve the pelvic organs (with the hope of preserving fertility).The Merck Manual of Diagnosis & Therapy, 19th Edition Chapter 253. Vaginitis & Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
===PAGE:2712===
Chapter 254. Medical Examination of the Rape Victim
Introduction
Although legal and medical definitions vary, rape is typically defined as oral, anal, or vaginal penetration
that involves threats or force against an unwilling person. Such penetration, whether wanted or not, is
considered statutory rape if victims are younger than the age of consent. Sexual assault is rape or any
other sexual contact that results from coercion, including seduction of a child through offers of affection or
bribes; it also includes being touched, grabbed, kissed, or shown genitals. Rape and sexual assault,
including childhood sexual assault, are common; the lifetime prevalence estimates for both ranges from 2
to 30% but tends to be about 15 to 20%. However, actual prevalence may be higher because rape and
sexual assault tend to be underreported.
Typically, rape is an expression of aggression, anger, or need for power; psychologically, it is more violent
than sexual. Nongenital or genital injury occurs in about 50% of rapes of females.
Females are raped and sexually assaulted more often than males. Male rape is often committed by
another man, often in prison. Males who are raped are more likely than females to be physically injured,
to be unwilling to report the crime, and to have multiple assailants.
Symptoms and Signs
Rape may result in the following:
• Extragenital injury
• Genital injury
• Psychologic symptoms
• Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs—eg, hepatitis, syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydial infection,
trichomoniasis, HIV infection [rarely])
• Pregnancy (uncommonly)
Most physical injuries are relatively minor, but some lacerations of the upper vagina are severe. Additional
injuries may result from being struck, pushed, stabbed, or shot.
Psychologic symptoms of rape are potentially the most prominent. In the short term, most patients
experience fear, nightmares, sleep problems, anger, embarrassment, shame, guilt, or a combination.
Immediately after an assault, patient behavior can range from talkativeness, tenseness, crying, and
trembling to shock and disbelief with dispassion, quiescence, and smiling. The latter responses rarely
indicate lack of concern; rather, they reflect avoidance reactions, physical exhaustion, or coping
mechanisms that require control of emotion. Anger may be displaced onto hospital staff members.
Friends, family members, and officials often react judgmentally, derisively, or in another negative way.
Such reactions can impede recovery after an assault.
Eventually, most patients recover; however, long-range effects of rape may include post-traumatic
stress
disorder (PTSD—, particularly among women. PTSD is an anxiety disorder; symptoms
include re-experiencing (eg, flashbacks, intrusive upsetting thoughts or images), avoidance (eg, of
trauma-related situations, thoughts, and feelings), and hyperarousal (eg, sleep difficulties, irritability,
concentration problems). Symptoms last for > 1 mo and significantly impair social and occupational
functioning.
Evaluation
Goals of rape evaluation are
===PAGE:2713===
• Medical assessment and treatment of injuries and assessment, treatment, and prevention of pregnancy
and STDs
• Collection of forensic evidence
• Psychologic evaluation
• Psychologic support
If patients seek advice before medical evaluation, they are told not to throw out or change clothing, wash,
shower, douche, brush their teeth, or use mouthwash; doing so may destroy evidence.
Whenever possible, all people who are raped are referred to a local rape center, often a hospital
emergency department; such centers are staffed by specially trained practitioners (eg, sexual assault
nurse examiners). Benefits of a rape evaluation are explained, but patients are free to consent to or
decline the evaluation. The police are notified if patients consent. Most patients are greatly traumatized,
and their care requires sensitivity, empathy, and compassion. Females may feel more comfortable with a
female physician; a female staff member should accompany all males evaluating a female. Patients are
provided privacy and quiet whenever possible.
A form (sometimes part of a rape kit) is used to record legal evidence and medical findings (for typical
elements in the form, see
Table 254-1
); it should be adapted to local requirements. Because the medical record may be used in
court, results should be written legibly and in nontechnical language that can be understood by a jury.
History and examination:
Before beginning, the examiner asks the patient's permission. Because
recounting the events often frightens or embarrasses the patient, the examiner must be reassuring,
empathetic, and nonjudgmental and should not rush the patient. Privacy should be ensured. The
examiner elicits specific details, including
• Type of injuries sustained (particularly to the mouth, breasts, vagina, and rectum)
• Any bleeding from or abrasions on the patient or assailant (to help assess the risk of transmission of HIV
and hepatitis)
• Description of the attack (eg, which orifices were penetrated, whether ejaculation occurred or a condom
was used)
• Assailant's use of aggression, threats, weapons, and violent behavior
• Description of the assailant
Many rape forms include most or all of these questions (see
Table 254-1
). The patient should be told why
questions are being asked (eg, information about contraceptive use helps determine risk of pregnancy
after rape; information about previous coitus helps determine validity of sperm testing).
The examination should be explained step by step as it proceeds. Results should be reviewed with the
patient. When feasible, photographs of possible injuries are taken. The mouth, breasts, genitals, and
rectum are examined closely. Common sites of injury include the labia minora and posterior vagina.
Examination using a Wood's lamp may detect semen or foreign debris on the skin. Colposcopy is
particularly sensitive for subtle genital injuries. Some colposcopes have cameras attached, making it
possible to detect and photograph injuries simultaneously. Whether use of toluidine blue to highlight
areas of injury is accepted as evidence varies by jurisdiction.
Testing and evidence collection:
Routine testing includes a pregnancy test and serologic tests for
syphilis, hepatitis B, and HIV; if done within a few hours of rape, these tests provide information about
pregnancy or infections present before the rape but not those that develop after the rape. Vaginal
===PAGE:2714===
discharge is examined to check for trichomonal vaginitis and bacterial vaginosis; samples from every
penetrated orifice (vaginal, oral, or rectal) are obtained for gonorrheal and chlamydial testing. If the
patient has amnesia for events around the time of rape, drug screening for flunitrazepam (the date rape
drug) and gamma hydroxybutyrate should be considered. Testing for drugs of abuse and alcohol is
controversial because evidence of intoxication may be used to discredit the patient.
Follow-up tests for the following are done:
• At 6 wk: Gonorrhea, chlamydial infection, human papillomavirus infection (initially using a cervical
sample from a Papanicolaou test), syphilis, and hepatitis
• At 90 days: HIV infection
• At 6 mo: Syphilis, hepatitis, and HIV infection
However, testing for STDs is controversial because evidence of preexisting STDs may be used to
discredit the patient in court.
If the vagina was penetrated and the pregnancy test was negative at the first visit, the test is repeated
within the next 2 wk. Patients with lacerations of the upper vagina, especially children, may require
laparoscopy to determine depth of the injury.
Evidence that can provide proof of rape is collected; it typically includes clothing; smears of the buccal,
vaginal, and rectal mucosa; combed samples of scalp and pubic hair as well as control samples (pulled
from the patient); fingernail clippings and scrapings; blood and saliva samples; and, if available, semen
(see
Table 254-1
). Many types of evidence collection kits are available commercially, and some states
recommend specific kits. Evidence is often absent or inconclusive after showering, changing clothes, or
activities that involve sites of penetration, such as douching. Evidence becomes weaker or disappears as
time passes, particularly after > 36 h; however, depending on the jurisdiction, evidence may be collected
up to 7 days after rape.
A chain of custody, in which evidence is in the possession of an identified person at all times, must be
maintained. Thus, specimens are placed in individual packages, labeled, dated, sealed, and held until
delivery to another person (typically, law enforcement or laboratory personnel), who signs a receipt. In
some jurisdictions, samples for DNA testing to identify the assailant are collected.
Treatment
• Psychologic support or intervention
• Prophylaxis for STDs and possibly hepatitis B or HIV infection
• Possibly emergency contraception
After the evaluation, the patient is provided with facilities to wash, change clothing, use mouthwash, and
urinate or defecate if needed. A local rape crisis team can provide referrals for medical, psychologic, and
legal support services.
Most injuries are minor and are treated conservatively. Vaginal lacerations may require surgical repair.
Psychologic support:
Sometimes examiners can use commonsense measures (eg, reassurance,
general support, nonjudgmental attitude) to relieve strong emotions of guilt or
[Table 254-1.
Typical Examination for Alleged Rape]
anxiety. Possible psychologic and social effects are explained, and the patient is introduced to a specialist
trained in rape crisis intervention. Because the full psychologic effects cannot always be ascertained at
the first examination, follow-up visits are scheduled at 2-wk intervals. Severe psychologic effects (eg,
===PAGE:2715===
persistent flashbacks, significant sleep disruption, fear leading to significant avoidance) or psychologic
effects still present at follow-up visits warrant psychiatric or psychologic referral.
Family members and friends can provide vital support, but they may need help from rape crisis specialists
in handling their own negative reactions.
PTSD can be effectively treated psychosocially and pharmacologically (.
Prevention of infections:
Routine empiric prophylaxis for STDs consists of ceftriaxone 125 mg IM in a
single dose (for gonorrhea), metronidazole 2 g po in a single dose (for trichomoniasis and bacterial
vaginosis), and either
doxycycline 100 mg po bid for 7 days or azithromycin 1 g po once (for chlamydial
infection). Alternatively, azithromycin 2 g po (which covers gonorrhea and chlamydial infection) can be
given with metronidazole 2 g po, both as a single dose.
Empiric prophylactic treatment of hepatitis B and HIV after rape is controversial. For hepatitis B, the CDC
recommends hepatitis B vaccination unless the patient has been previously vaccinated and has
documented immunity. The vaccine is repeated 1 and 6 mo after the first dose. Hepatitis B immune
globulin (HBIG) is not given. For HIV, most authorities recommend offering prophylaxis; however, the
patient should be told that on average, the risk after rape from an unknown assailant is only about 0.2%.
Risk may be higher with any of the following:
• Anal penetration
• Bleeding (assailant or victim)
• Male-male rape
• Rape by multiple assailants (eg, male victims in prisons)
• Rape in areas with a high prevalence of HIV infection
Treatment is best begun < 4 h after penetration and should not be given after > 72 h. Usually, a fixeddose combination of zidovudine (ZDV) 300 mg and lamivudine (3TC) 150 mg is given bid for 4 wk if
exposure appears low risk. If risk is higher, a protease inhibitor is added (.
Prevention of pregnancy:
Although pregnancy caused by rape is rare (except in the few days before
ovulation), emergency contraception ( should be offered to all women with a negative
pregnancy test. Usually, oral contraceptives are used; if used > 72 h after rape, they are much less likely
to be effective. An antiemetic may help if nausea develops. An intrauterine device may be effective if used
up to 10 days after rape. If pregnancy results from rape, the patient's attitude toward the pregnancy and
abortion should be determined, and if appropriate, the option of elective termination should be discussed.
===PAGE:2716===
Chapter 255. Breast Disorders
Introduction
Breast symptoms (eg, lumps, nipple discharge, pain) are common, accounting for > 15 million physician
visits/yr. Although > 90% of symptoms have benign causes, breast cancer is always a concern. Because
breast cancer is common and may mimic benign disorders, the approach to all breast symptoms and
findings is to conclusively exclude or confirm cancer.
Evaluation
History:
History includes the following:
• Duration of symptoms
• Relation of symptoms to menses and pregnancy
• Presence and type of pain, discharge, and skin changes
• Use of drugs, including hormone therapy
• Personal and family history of breast cancer
• Date and results of last mammogram
Breast examination:
Principles of examination are similar for physician and patient. Breasts are
inspected for asymmetry in shape, nipple inversion, bulging, and dimpling (see
Fig. 255-1A
and
B
for usual positions). Although size differential is common, each breast should have a
regular contour. An underlying cancer is sometimes detected by having the patient press both hands
against the hips or the palms together in front of the forehead (see
Fig. 255-1C
and
D
). In these positions,
the pectoral muscles are contracted, and a subtle dimpling of the skin may appear if a growing tumor has
entrapped a Cooper's ligament. The nipples are squeezed to check for discharge.
The axillary and supraclavicular lymph nodes are most easily examined with the patient seated or
standing (see
Fig. 255-1E
). Supporting the patient's arm during the axillary examination allows the arm to
be fully relaxed so that nodes deep within the axilla can be palpated.
The breast is palpated with the patient seated and again with the patient supine, the ipsilateral arm above
the head, and a pillow under the ipsilateral shoulder (see
Fig. 255-1F
). The latter position is also used for
breast self-examination; the patient examines the breast with her contralateral hand. Having the patient
roll to one side, so that the breast on the examined side falls medially, may help differentiate breast and
chest wall tenderness because the chest wall can be palpated separately from breast tissue.
[Fig. 255-1.
Breast examination.]
The breast should be palpated with the palmar surfaces of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th fingers, moving
systematically in a small circular pattern from the nipple to the outer edges (see
Fig. 255-1G
). Precise
location and size (measured with a caliper) of any abnormality should be noted on a drawing of the
breast, which becomes part of the patient's record. A written description of the consistency of the
abnormality and degree to which it can be distinguished from surrounding breast tissue should also be
included. Detection of abnormalities during physical examination largely determines whether a biopsy is
needed, even if a subsequent mammogram shows no abnormalities.
Testing:
Imaging tests are used for screening and for evaluation of breast abnormalities. Annual
screening mammography is recommended for women ≥ 50 yr and sometimes for women 40 to 50 yr (see
p.
). Mammography is more effective in older women because with aging, fibroglandular tissue in
breasts tends to be replaced with fatty tissue, which can be more easily distinguished from abnormal
tissue. Low-dose x-rays of both breasts are taken in 1 (oblique) or 2 views (oblique and craniocaudal).
===PAGE:2717===
Only about 10% of abnormalities detected result from cancer. Accuracy of mammography depends partly
on the techniques used and experience of the mammographer; false-negative results may exceed 15%.
Some centers use computer analysis of digitized mammography images to help in diagnosis. Such
systems are not recommended for stand-alone diagnosis, but they appear to improve sensitivity for
detecting small cancers by radiologists.
Mammography is also used diagnostically to evaluate lumps, pain, and nipple discharge. It can determine
size and location of a lesion and provide images of surrounding tissues and lymph nodes. Diagnostic
mammography requires more views than screening mammography. For biopsy of a lesion seen on a
mammogram but not detectable during physical examination, 2 needles or wires can be inserted via
radiologic guidance to localize the lesion. The excised specimen should be x-rayed, and the x-ray
compared with the
prebiopsy mammogram to determine whether the lesion has been removed.
Mammography is repeated when the breast is no longer tender, usually 6 to 12 wk after biopsy, to confirm
removal of the lesion.
MRI is thought to be more accurate than clinical breast examination or mammography for screening
women with a high (eg, > 15%) risk of breast cancer, such as those with a
BRCA
gene mutation. It is not
considered appropriate for screening women with average or slightly increased risk. Because MRI can
accurately determine tumor size, chest wall involvement, and presence of multiple tumors, it is often used
in evaluation after breast cancer is diagnosed. Use of MRI to identify axillary node involvement is under
study.
Breast Lumps
A breast lump may be discovered by patients incidentally or during breast self-examination or by the
clinician during routine physical examination. Lumps may be painless or painful and are sometimes
accompanied by nipple discharge or skin changes.
Etiology
Although cancer is the most feared cause, most breast lumps are nonmalignant. The most common
causes include
• Fibrocystic changes
• Fibroadenomas
Fibrocystic changes
(previously, fibrocystic disease) is a catchall term that refers to mastalgia, breast
cysts, and nondescript lumpiness, which may occur in isolation or together; breasts have a nodular and
dense texture and are frequently tender when palpated. Fibrocystic changes cause the most commonly
reported breast symptoms and have many causes. Most causes are not associated with increased risk of
cancer; they include adenosis, ductal ectasia, simple fibroadenoma, fibrosis, mastitis, mild hyperplasia,
cysts, and apocrine or squamous metaplasia. Other causes, particularly if fibrocystic changes require
biopsy, may slightly increase risk of breast cancer. Fibrocystic changes are more common among women
who had early menarche, who had their first live birth at age > 30, or who are nulliparous.
Fibroadenomas
are typically painless lumps that feel like small, slippery marbles. They usually develop
in young women, often in adolescents, and may be mistaken for cancer, although they are benign and
tend to be more circumscribed and mobile. Simple fibroadenoma does not appear to increase risk of
breast cancer; complex fibroadenoma may increase risk slightly.
Breast infections
(mastitis) causes pain, erythema, and swelling; an abscess can produce a discrete
mass. Infections are extremely rare except during the puerperium (postpartum) or after penetrating
trauma. They may occur after breast surgery. Puerperal mastitis, usually due to
Staphylococcus aureus
,
can cause massive inflammation and severe breast pain, sometimes with an abscess. If infection occurs
under other circumstances, an underlying cancer should be sought promptly.
Galactocele
is a round, easily movable milk-filled cyst that usually occurs up to 6 to 10 mo after lactation
===PAGE:2718===
stops. Such cysts rarely become infected.
Cancers
of various types can manifest as a lump. About 5% of patients have pain.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should include how long the lump has been present and whether it
comes and goes or is painful. Previous occurrence of lumps and the outcome of their evaluation should
be queried.
Review of systems
should determine whether nipple discharge is present and, if present, whether it is
clear, milky, or bloody. Symptoms of advanced cancer (eg, weight loss, malaise, bone pain) should be
sought.
Past medical history
should include risk factors for breast cancer, including previous diagnosis of
breast cancer, history of radiation therapy to the chest area before age 30 (eg, for Hodgkin lymphoma).
Family history should note breast cancer in a 1st-degree relative (mother, sister, daughter) and, if family
history is positive, whether the relative carried one of the 2 known breast cancer genes,
BRCA1
or
BRCA2
.
Physical examination:
Examination focuses on the breast and adjacent tissue. The breast is inspected
for skin changes over the area of the lump and the presence of any nipple discharge. Skin changes
include erythema, exaggeration of normal skin markings, and trace edema sometimes termed peau
d'orange (orange peel). The lump is palpated for size, tenderness, consistency (ie, hard or soft, smooth or
irregular), and mobility (whether it feels freely mobile or fixed to the skin or chest wall). The axillary,
supraclavicular, and infraclavicular areas are palpated for masses and adenopathy.
Red flags:
Certain findings are of particular concern:
•
Lump fixed to the skin or chest wall
• Stony hard, irregular lump
• Skin dimpling
• Matted or fixed axillary lymph nodes
• Bloody nipple discharge
Interpretation of findings:
Painful, tender, rubbery lumps in younger women with a history of similar
findings suggest fibrocystic changes.
Red flag findings suggest cancer. However, the characteristics of benign and malignant lesions, including
presence or absence of risk factors, overlap considerably. For this reason and because failure to
recognize cancer has serious consequences, most patients require testing to more conclusively exclude
breast cancer.
Testing:
Initially, physicians try to differentiate solid from cystic lumps because cysts are rarely
cancerous. Typically, ultrasonography is done. Lesions that appear cystic are sometimes aspirated, and
solid lumps are evaluated with mammography followed by imaging-guided biopsy (. Some
physicians evaluate all lumps with needle aspiration; if no fluid is obtained or if aspiration does not
eliminate the lump, mammography followed by imaging-guided biopsy is done.
Fluid aspirated from a cyst is sent for cytology only if it is bloody, if minimal fluid is obtained, or if a mass
remains after aspiration. Patients are reexamined in 4 to 8 wk. If the cyst is no longer palpable, it is
considered benign. If the cyst has recurred, it is reaspirated, and any fluid is sent for cytology regardless
of appearance. A 3rd recurrence or persistence of the mass after initial aspiration (even if cytology was
negative) requires biopsy.
===PAGE:2719===
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause. Fibroadenomas can usually be excised using a local anesthetic, but
they frequently recur. After patients have had several fibroadenomas established as benign, they may
decide against having subsequent ones excised.
Acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and athletic bras (to reduce trauma) can be used to relieve symptoms of
fibrocystic changes. Vitamin E is sometimes used but has not been proved to be effective.
Key Points
• Most breast lumps are not cancer.
• Clinical features of benign and malignant disease overlap so much that testing should usually be done.
Nipple Discharge
Nipple discharge is a common complaint in women who are not pregnant or breastfeeding, especially
during the reproductive years. Nipple discharge is not necessarily abnormal, even among
postmenopausal women, although it is always abnormal in men.
Nipple discharge can be serous (yellow), mucinous (clear and watery), milky, sanguineous (bloody),
purulent, multicolored and sticky, or serosanguineous (pink). It may occur spontaneously or only in
response to breast manipulation.
Pathophysiology
Nipple discharge may be breast milk or an exudate produced by a number of conditions.
Breast milk production in nonpregnant and nonlactating women (galactorrhea) typically involves an
elevated prolactin level, which stimulates glandular tissue of the breast. However, only some patients with
elevated prolactin levels develop galactorrhea.
Etiology
Most frequently, nipple discharge has a benign cause (see
Table 255-1
). Cancer (usually intraductal carcinoma or invasive ductal carcinoma) causes < 10% of
cases. The rest result from benign ductal disorders (eg, intraductal papilloma, mammary duct ectasia,
fibrocystic changes), endocrine disorders, or breast abscesses or infections. Of these causes, intraductal
papilloma is probably the most common; it is also the most common cause of a bloody nipple discharge
without a breast mass.
Endocrine causes involve elevation of prolactin levels, which has numerous causes.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should include whether the current discharge is unilateral or
bilateral, what its color is, how long it has lasted, whether it is spontaneous or occurs only with nipple
stimulation, and whether a lump or pain is present.
Review of symptoms
should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including fever (mastitis or
breast abscess); cold intolerance, constipation, or weight gain (hypothyroidism); amenorrhea, infertility,
headache, or visual disturbances (pituitary tumor); and ascites or jaundice (liver disorders).
Past medical history
should include possible causes of hyperprolactinemia, including chronic renal
failure, pregnancy, liver disorders,
===PAGE:2720===
[Table 255-1.
Some Causes of Nipple Discharge]
and thyroid disorders, as well as history of infertility, hypertension, depression, breastfeeding, menstrual
patterns, and cancer. Clinicians should ask specifically about drugs that can cause prolactin release such
as oral contraceptives, antihypertensive drugs (eg, methyldopa, reserpine, verapamil), H
-antagonists
(eg, cimetidine, ranitidine), opioids, and dopamine D
antagonists (eg, many psychoactive drugs,
including phenothiazines and tricyclic anti-depressants).
Physical examination:
Physical examination focuses on the breasts. The breasts are inspected for
symmetry, dimpling of the skin, erythema, swelling, color changes in the nipple and skin, and crusting,
ulceration, or retraction of the nipple. The breasts are palpated for masses and evidence of
lymphadenopathy in the axillary or supraclavicular region. If there is no spontaneous discharge, the area
around the nipples is systematically palpated to try to stimulate a discharge. A bright light and magnifying
lens can help assess whether the nipple discharge is uniductal or multiductal.
Red flags:
Certain findings are of particular concern:
• Spontaneous discharge
• Age ≥ 40
• Unilateral discharge
• Bloody or guaiac-positive discharge
• Palpable mass
• Male sex
Interpretation of findings:
Important differentiating points are whether a mass is present, whether the
discharge involves one or multiple ducts (either one or more ducts in both breasts or more than one duct
in one breast), and whether the discharge is bloody (including guaiac-positive).
If a mass is present, cancer must be considered. Because cancer rarely involves both breasts or multiple
ducts at presentation, a bilateral, guaiac-negative discharge suggests an endocrine cause, as does
unilateral, multiductal discharge. However, if the discharge is guaiac-positive or involves only one duct,
cancer must be considered.
For other suggestive findings, see
Table 255-1
.
Testing:
If endocrine causes are suspected, the following are done:
• Prolactin level
• Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level
If discharge is guaiac-positive, the following is done:
• Cytology
If there is a palpable mass, evaluation as for breast lump, usually beginning with
• Ultrasonography
Lesions that appear cystic are sometimes aspirated, and solid lumps or any that remain after aspiration
are evaluated with mammography followed by imaging-guided biopsy.
If there is no mass but cancer is otherwise suspected or if other tests are indeterminate
===PAGE:2721===
• Mammography
Abnormal results are evaluated by imaging-guided biopsy. If no lump is palpable and mammogram is
normal, cancer is highly unlikely.
Treatment
Treatment is based on the cause.
If the cause is benign and the discharge is persistent and annoying, a nipple-flap duct resection, usually
done as an outpatient procedure using a local anesthetic, can eliminate the discharge and relieve the
patient's anxiety.
Key Points
• Nipple discharge is most often benign.
• Bilateral, multiductal, guaiac-negative discharge is usually benign and has an endocrine etiology.
• Unilateral, uniductal, bloody (or guaiac-positive) discharge could be cancer, especially in patients ≥ 40.
• Presence of a breast mass, a bloody (or guaiac-positive) discharge, or history of an abnormal
mammogram or abnormal ultrasound requires follow-up with a surgical clinician who is experienced with
breast disorders.
Mastalgia
Mastalgia (breast pain) is common and can be localized or diffuse and unilateral or bilateral.
Etiology
Localized breast pain is usually caused by a focal disorder that causes a lump (, such as a
breast cyst, or an infection (eg, mastitis, abscess). Most breast cancers do not cause pain.
Diffuse, bilateral pain may be caused by fibrocystic changes or, uncommonly, diffuse, bilateral mastitis.
However, diffuse bilateral pain is very common in women without breast abnormalities. The most common
causes are
• Hormonal changes that cause breast tissue proliferation (eg, during the luteal phase or early pregnancy,
in women taking estrogens or progestins)
• Large, pendulous breasts that stretch Cooper's ligaments
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should address the temporal pattern of pain and its nature (focal or
diffuse, unilateral or bilateral). The relation between chronic or recurrent pain and menstrual cycle phase
should be ascertained.
Review of systems
should address other symptoms suggesting pregnancy (eg, abdominal
enlargement, amenorrhea, morning nausea) or fibrocystic changes (eg, lumpiness).
Past medical history
should cover disorders that could cause diffuse pain (eg, fibrocystic changes) and
use of estrogens and progestins.
Physical examination:
Examination focuses on the breast and adjacent tissue, looking for abnormalities
such as skin changes (as for breast lumps— and signs of infection, such as redness,
===PAGE:2722===
warmth, and tenderness.
Red flags:
The following are of particular concern:
• Signs of infection
Interpretation of findings:
Absence of abnormal findings suggests that pain is due to hormonal changes
or large, pendulous breasts.
Abnormal findings may suggest other specific problems.
Testing:
Pregnancy testing should be done if pain is unexplained and has lasted less than several
months, particularly if other symptoms or signs are consistent with pregnancy. Other testing is indicated
infrequently—only if physical findings suggest another problem that requires testing.
Treatment
For menstrual-related mastalgia, acetaminophen or an NSAID is usually effective. If pain is severe, a brief
course of danazol or tamoxifen may be given. These drugs inhibit estrogen and progesterone. If estrogen
or a progestin is being taken, stopping may be necessary. For pregnancy-related breast pain, wearing a
firm, supportive brassiere, taking acetaminophen, or both, can help.
Key Points
• Diffuse, bilateral breast pain is usually caused by hormonal changes or large, pendulous breasts and
causes no abnormal physical findings.
Breast Cancer
Breast cancer most often involves glandular breast cells in the ducts or lobules. Most patients
present with an asymptomatic lump discovered during examination or screening
mammography. Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy. Treatment usually includes surgical excision,
often with radiation therapy, with or without adjuvant chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, or both.
About 213,000 new cases were identified in 2006. It is the 2nd leading cause of cancer death in women
(after lung cancer), with about 41,000 deaths in 2006. Male breast cancer accounts for < 1% of total
cases; manifestations, diagnosis, and management are the same, although men tend to present later.
Risk Factors
In the US, cumulative risk of developing breast cancer is 12% (1 in 8) by age 95, and risk of dying of it is
about 4%. Much of the risk is incurred after age 60 (see
Table 255-2
). These statistics can be misleading because most people die before age 95, and cumulative
risk of developing the cancer in any 20-yr period is considerably lower.
[Table 255-2.
Breast Cancer Risks]
Factors that may affect breast cancer risk include the following:
•
Family history:
Having a 1st-degree relative (mother, sister, daughter) with breast cancer doubles or
triples risk of developing the cancer, but breast cancer in more distant relatives increases risk only
slightly. When ≥ 2 1st-degree relatives have breast cancer, risk may be 5 to 6 times higher.
•
Breast cancer gene:
About 5% of women with breast cancer carry a mutation in one of the 2 known
breast cancer genes,
BRCA1
or
BRCA2
. If relatives of such a woman also carry the gene, they have a
50 to 85% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. Women with
BRCA1
mutations also have a 20 to
40% lifetime risk of developing ovarian cancer; risk among women with
BRCA2
mutations is increased
less. Women without a family history of breast cancer in at least 2 1st-degree relatives are unlikely to
carry this gene and thus do not require screening for
BRCA1
and
BRCA2
mutations. Men who carry a
BRCA2
mutation also have an increased risk of developing breast cancer. The genes are more
===PAGE:2723===
common among Ashkenazi Jews. Women with
BRCA1
or
BRCA2
mutations may require closer
surveillance or preventive measures, such as taking tamoxifen or raloxifene or undergoing double
mastectomy.
•
Personal history:
Having had in situ or invasive breast cancer increases risk. Risk of developing
cancer in the contralateral breast after mastectomy is about 0.5 to 1%/yr of follow-up.
•
Gynecologic history:
Early menarche, late menopause, or late first pregnancy increases risk. Women
who have a first pregnancy after age 30 are at higher risk than those who are nulliparous.
•
Breast changes:
History of fibrocystic changes that require biopsy for diagnosis increases risk slightly.
Women with multiple breast lumps but no histologic confirmation of a high-risk pattern should not be
considered at high risk. Benign lesions that may slightly increase risk of developing invasive breast
cancer include complex fibroadenoma, moderate or florid hyperplasia (with or without atypia), sclerosing
adenosis, and papilloma. Risk is about 4 or 5 times higher than average in patients with atypical ductal
or lobular hyperplasia and about 10 times higher if they also have a family history of invasive breast
cancer in a 1st-degree relative. Increased breast density seen on screening mammography is
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.
•
Use of oral contraceptives:
Oral contraceptive use increases risk very slightly (by about 5 more cases
per 100,000 women). Risk increases primarily during the years of contraceptive use and tapers off
during the 10 yr after stopping. Risk is highest in women who began to use contraceptives before age
20 (although absolute risk is still very low).
•
Hormonal therapy:
Postmenopausal hormone (estrogen plus a progestin) therapy appears to increase
risk modestly after only 3 yr of use (see also p.
). After 5 yr of use, the increased risk is about 7 or
8 more cases per 10,000 women for each year of use (about a 24% increase in relative risk). Use of
estrogen alone does not appear to increase risk of breast cancer. Selective estrogen-receptor
modulators (eg, raloxifene) reduce the risk of developing breast cancer.
•
Radiation therapy:
Exposure to radiation therapy before age 30 increases risk. Mantle-field radiation
therapy for Hodgkin lymphoma about quadruples risk of breast cancer over the next 20 to 30 yr.
•
Diet:
Diet may contribute to development or growth of breast cancers, but conclusive evidence about
the effect of a particular diet (eg, one high in fats) is lacking. Obese postmenopausal women are at
increased risk, but there is no evidence that dietary modification reduces risk. For obese women who
are menstruating later than normal, risk may be decreased.
Pathology
Most breast cancers are epithelial tumors that develop from cells lining ducts or lobules; less common are
nonepithelial cancers of the supporting stroma (eg, angiosarcoma, primary stromal sarcomas, phyllodes
tumor). Cancers are divided into carcinoma in situ and invasive cancer.
Carcinoma in situ is proliferation of cancer cells within ducts or lobules and without invasion of stromal
tissue. Usually, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is detected only by mammography and is localized to one
area; it may become invasive. Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a nonpalpable lesion usually discovered
via biopsy; it is rarely visualized with mammography. LCIS is often multifocal and bilateral. It is not
malignant, but its presence indicates increased risk of subsequent invasive carcinoma in either breast;
about 1 to 2% of patients with LCIS develop cancer annually.
Invasive carcinoma is primarily adenocarcinoma. About 80% is the infiltrating ductal type; most of the
remaining cases are infiltrating lobular. Rare types include medullary, mucinous, and tubular carcinomas.
Paget's disease of the nipple (not to be confused with the metabolic bone disease also called Paget's
disease) is a form of ductal carcinoma in situ that extends into the overlying skin of the nipple and areola,
manifesting with an inflammatory skin lesion (. Characteristic malignant cells called Paget cells
are present in the epidermis. The cancer may become invasive.
===PAGE:2724===
Pathophysiology
Breast cancer invades locally and spreads initially through the regional lymph nodes, bloodstream, or
both. Metastatic breast cancer may affect almost any organ in the body—most commonly, lungs, liver,
bone, brain, and skin.
Most skin metastases occur near the site of breast surgery; scalp metastases are also common.
Metastatic breast cancer frequently appears years or decades after initial diagnosis and treatment.
Estrogen and progesterone receptors, present in some breast cancers, are nuclear hormone receptors
that promote DNA replication and cell division when the appropriate hormones bind to them. Thus, drugs
that block these receptors may be useful in treating tumors with the receptors. About two thirds of
postmenopausal patients have an estrogen-receptor positive (ER+) tumor. Incidence of ER+ tumors is
lower among premenopausal patients.
Another cellular receptor is human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2; also, HER2/neu or ErbB2);
its presence correlates with a poorer prognosis at any given stage of cancer.
Symptoms and Signs
Most breast cancers are discovered as a lump by the patient or during routine physical examination or
mammography. Less commonly, the presenting symptom is breast pain or enlargement or a nondescript
thickening in the breast. Paget's disease of the nipple manifests as skin changes, including erythema,
crusting, scaling, and discharge; these changes usually appear so benign that the patient ignores them,
delaying diagnosis for a year or more. About 50% of patients with Paget's disease of the nipple have a
palpable mass at presentation. A few patients with breast cancer present with signs of metastatic disease
(eg, pathologic fracture, pulmonary dysfunction).
A common finding during physical examination is a dominant mass—a lump distinctly different from the
surrounding breast tissue. Diffuse fibrotic changes in a quadrant of the breast, usually the upper outer
quadrant, are more characteristic of benign disorders; a slightly firmer thickening in one breast but not the
other may be a sign of cancer. More advanced breast cancers are characterized by fixation of the lump to
the chest wall or to overlying skin, by satellite nodules or ulcers in the skin, or by exaggeration of the
usual skin markings resulting from lymphedema (so-called peau d'orange). Matted or fixed axillary lymph
nodes suggest tumor spread, as does supraclavicular or infraclavicular lymphadenopathy. Inflammatory
breast cancer is characterized by diffuse inflammation and enlargement of the breast, often without a
lump, and has a particularly aggressive course.
Diagnosis
• Screening by mammography, breast examination, or sometimes MRI
• Biopsy, including analysis for estrogen and progesterone receptors and for HER2 protein
Testing is required to differentiate benign lesions from cancer. Because early detection and treatment of
breast cancer improves prognosis, this differentiation must be conclusive before evaluation is terminated.
If advanced cancer is suspected based on physical examination, biopsy should be done first; otherwise,
the approach is as for breast lumps (. A prebiopsy bilateral mammogram may help delineate
other areas that should be biopsied and provides a baseline for future reference. However, mammogram
results should not alter the decision to do a biopsy if that decision is based on physical findings. Biopsy
can be needle or incisional biopsy or, if the tumor is small, excisional biopsy. Any skin taken with the
biopsy specimen should be examined because it may show cancer cells in dermal lymphatic vessels.
Routinely, stereotactic biopsy (needle biopsy during mammography) or ultrasound-guided biopsy is being
used to improve accuracy.
Evaluation after cancer diagnosis:
Part of a positive biopsy specimen should be analyzed for estrogen
===PAGE:2725===
and progesterone receptors and for HER2 protein.
WBCs should be tested for
BRCA1
and
BRCA2
genes when
• Family history includes multiple cases of early-onset breast cancer.
• Ovarian cancer develops in patients with a family history of breast or ovarian cancer.
• Breast and ovarian cancers occur in the same patient.
• Patients have an Ashkenazi Jewish heritage.
• Family history includes a single case of male breast cancer.
Chest x-ray, CBC, and liver function tests and serum Ca should be done to check for metastatic disease.
Generally, measuring serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen (CA) 15-3, or CA 27-29 is
not recommended because results have no effect on treatment or outcome.
Bone scanning should be done if patients have any of the following:
• Tumors > 2 cm
• Bone pain
• Lymph node involvement
• Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase or Ca levels
Abdominal CT is done if patients have any of the following:
• Abnormal liver function results
• Hepatomegaly
• Locally advanced cancer with or without axillary lymph node involvement
MRI is often used to evaluate breast cancer after it is diagnosed because MRI can accurately determine
tumor size, chest wall involvement, and presence of multiple tumors. Use of MRI to identify axillary node
involvement is under study.
Grading
is based on histologic examination of the tissue taken during biopsy.
Staging
follows the TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) classification. Staging is refined during surgery, when
regional lymph nodes can be evaluated.
Screening:
Screening includes mammography, clinical breast examination (CBE) by health care
practitioners, MRI (for high-risk patients), and monthly breast self-examination (BSE).
Mammography,
done annually, is recommended for women ≥ 50; it reduces mortality rate by 25 to 35%
in this age group. Mammography is more accurate in older women, partly because with aging,
fibroglandular tissue in breasts tends to be replaced with fatty tissue, which can be more easily
distinguished from abnormal tissue. However, there is considerable disagreement about screening for
women 40 to 50 yr; recommendations include annual mammography (American Cancer Society),
mammography every 1 to 2 yr (National Cancer Institute), and no periodic mammography (American
College of Physicians). Concerns about screening too soon or too often include increased radiation
exposure and overdiagnosis of tumors (eg, DCIS) that may not develop into invasive cancer during the
patient's lifetime. Young age at the time of radiation exposure increases the risk of cancer.
===PAGE:2726===
Only about 10% of abnormalities detected on screening mammography result from cancer, and falsenegative results may exceed 15%. Accuracy depends partly on the techniques used and experience of
the mammographer. Some centers use computer analysis of digitized mammography images (full-field
digital mammography) to help in diagnosis. Such systems may be slightly more sensitive for invasive
cancers in women < 50 when results are interpreted by radiologists, but probably not when interpreted
primarily via computer detection.
CBE
is usually part of routine annual care for women > 35; it can detect 7 to 10% of cancers that cannot
be seen on a mammogram. In the US, CBE augments rather than replaces screening mammography.
However, in some countries where mammography is considered too expensive, CBE is the sole screen;
reports on its effectiveness in this role vary.
MRI
is thought to be better than CBE or mammography for screening women with a high (eg, > 15%) risk
of breast cancer, such as those with a
BRCA
gene mutation. MRI has higher sensitivity but may be less
specific. Because specificity is lower, MRI is not considered appropriate for screening women with
average or slightly increased risk.
BSE
alone has not been shown to reduce mortality rate, but evidence of its usefulness is mixed, and it is
widely practiced. Because a negative BSE may tempt some women to forego mammography or CBE, the
need for these procedures should be reinforced when BSE is taught. Patients should be instructed to do
BSE on the same day each month. For menstruating women, 2 or 3 days after menses ends is
recommended because breasts are less likely to be tender and swollen.
Prognosis
Long-term prognosis depends on tumor stage (see
Table 255-3
). Nodal status (including number and location of nodes) correlates with disease-free and
overall survival better than any other prognostic factor.
Poor prognosis
is associated with the following other factors:
•
Young age:
Prognosis appears worse for patients diagnosed with breast cancer during their 20s and
30s than for patients diagnosed during middle age.
•
Larger primary tumor:
Larger tumors are more likely to be node-positive, but they also confer a worse
prognosis independent of nodal status.
•
High-grade tumor:
Patients with poorly differentiated tumors have a worse prognosis.
•
Absence of estrogen and progesterone receptors:
Patients with ER+ tumors have a somewhat
better prognosis and are more likely to benefit from hormone therapy. Patients with progesterone
receptors on a tumor may also have a better prognosis. Patients with both estrogen and progesterone
receptors on a tumor may have a better prognosis than those who have only one of these receptors,
but this benefit is not clear.
•
Presence of HER2 protein:
When the
HER2
gene (
HER2/neu
[erb-b2]) is amplified, HER2 is
overexpressed, increasing cell growth and reproduction and often resulting in more aggressive tumor
cells. Overexpression of HER2 is an independent risk factor for a poor prognosis; it may also be
associated with high histologic grade, ER-tumors, greater proliferation, and larger tumor size, which are
all poor prognostic factors.
•
Presence of
BRCA
genes:
For any given stage, patients with the
BRCA1
gene appear to have a
worse prognosis than those with sporadic tumors, perhaps because they have a higher proportion of
high-grade, hormone receptor-negative cancers. Patients
[Table 255-3.
Staging and Survival Rates in Breast Cancer]
with the
BRCA2
gene probably have the same prognosis as those without the genes if the tumors have
===PAGE:2727===
similar characteristics. With either gene, risk of a 2nd cancer in remaining breast tissue is increased (to
perhaps as high as 40%)
Treatment
• Surgery
• Usually radiation therapy
• Sometimes hormone therapy, chemotherapy, or both
For most patients, primary treatment is surgery, often with radiation therapy. Chemotherapy, hormone
therapy, or both may also be used, depending on tumor and patient characteristics (see
Table 255-4
).
Surgery:
For patients with invasive cancer, survival rates do not differ significantly whether modified
radical mastectomy (simple mastectomy plus lymph node dissection) or breast-conserving surgery plus
radiation therapy is used. Breast-conserving surgery includes lumpectomy, wide excision, and
quadrantectomy (see
Fig. 255-2
). Thus, patient preference can guide choice of treatment within limits. The main advantage of
breast-conserving surgery plus radiation therapy is cosmetic. In 15% of patients thus treated, cosmetic
results are excellent. However, the need for total removal of the tumor with a tumor-free margin overrides
cosmetic considerations. With both types of surgery, lymph node dissection or node sampling should be
done. Routine use of extensive procedures is not justified because the main value of lymph node removal
is diagnostic, not therapeutic. However, results of frozen section analysis may change the extent of
surgery needed. Some surgeons get prior agreement for more invasive surgery in case nodes are
positive; others wake the patient and do a 2nd procedure if needed.
Some physicians use preoperative chemotherapy to shrink the tumor before removing
[Table 255-4.
Treatment by Cancer Type]
[Fig. 255-2.
Surgery for breast cancer.]
it and applying radiation therapy; thus, some patients who might otherwise have required mastectomy can
have breast-conserving surgery. Early data suggest that this approach does not affect survival.
Radiation therapy after mastectomy significantly reduces incidence of local recurrence on the chest wall
and in regional lymph nodes and may improve overall survival in patients with primary tumors > 5 cm or
with involvement of ≥ 4 axillary nodes. Adverse effects of radiation therapy (eg, fatigue, skin changes) are
usually transient and mild. Late adverse effects (eg, lymphedema, brachial plexopathy, radiation
pneumonitis, rib damage, secondary cancers, cardiac toxicity) are less common.
After axillary dissection (or radiation therapy), lymphatic drainage of the ipsilateral arm can be impaired,
sometimes resulting in substantial swelling due to lymphedema; magnitude of the effect is roughly
proportional to the number of nodes removed.
If lymphedema develops, venipuncture, BP measurement, and IV infusions are usually avoided on the
affected side. A specially trained therapist must treat lymphedema. Special massage techniques once or
twice daily may help drain fluid from congested areas toward functioning lymph basins; low-stretch
bandaging is applied immediately after manual drainage, and patients should exercise daily as
prescribed. After the lymphedema resolves, typically in 1 to 4 wk, patients continue daily exercise and
overnight bandaging of the affected limb indefinitely.
Alternative node sampling methods include selective fine-needle aspiration of abnormalities identified at
the time of breast biopsy (eg, by ultrasonography) and the commonly done sentinel node biopsy. Both
result in less lymphedema than lymph node dissection. With sentinel node biopsy, sensitivity for axillary
node involvement is ≥ 95%. However, the effect on mortality rate has not been established. For this
===PAGE:2728===
biopsy, blue dye or radioactive colloid is injected around the breast, and a scanner is used to locate the
first nodes the substance drains into (ie, sentinel nodes). If the sentinel node is cancerous, lymph node
dissection is necessary.
Reconstructive procedures
include
• Submuscular or subcutaneous (less common) placement of a silicone or saline implant
• Use of a tissue expander with delayed placement of the implant
• Muscle flap transfer using the latissimus dorsi or the lower rectus abdominis
• Creation of a free flap by anastomosing the gluteus maximus to the internal mammary vessels
Free flap transfer is being increasingly used for DCIS.
Adjuvant systemic therapy:
Patients with LCIS are often treated with daily oral tamoxifen. For
postmenopausal women, raloxifene is an alternative.
For patients with invasive cancer, chemotherapy or hormone therapy is usually begun soon after surgery
and continued for months or years; these therapies delay or prevent recurrence in almost all patients and
prolong survival in some. However, some experts believe that these therapies are not necessary for
tumors < 1 cm with no lymph node involvement (particularly in postmenopausal patients) because the
prognosis is already excellent. If tumors are > 5 cm, adjuvant systemic therapy may be started before
surgery.
Relative reduction in risk of recurrence and death with chemotherapy or hormone therapy is the same
regardless of the clinical-pathologic stage of the cancer. Thus, absolute benefit is greater for patients with
a greater risk of recurrence or death (ie, a 20% relative risk reduction reduces a 10% recurrence rate to
8% but a 50% rate to 40%). Adjuvant chemotherapy reduces annual odds of death (relative risk) on
average by 25 to 35% for premenopausal patients; for postmenopausal patients, the reduction is about
half of that (9 to 19%), and the absolute benefit in 10-yr survival is much smaller.
Postmenopausal patients with ER-tumors benefit the most from adjuvant chemotherapy (see
Table 255-5
). However, predictive genomic testing of the primary breast cancer is being used increasingly
to determine whether combination chemotherapy or hormone therapy alone is indicated.
Combination chemotherapy regimens (eg, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, plus 5-fluorouracil;
doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide; docetaxel plus cyclophosphamide) are more effective than a single
drug. Regimens given for 4 to 6 mo are preferred; they are as effective as regimens given for 6 to 24 mo.
Acute adverse effects depend on the regimen but usually include nausea, vomiting, mucositis, fatigue,
alopecia, myelosuppression, and thrombocytopenia. Growth factors that stimulate bone marrow (eg,
filgrastim, pegfilgrastim) are commonly used to reduce risk of fever and infection due to chemotherapy.
Long-term adverse effects are infrequent with most regimens; death due to infection or bleeding is rare (<
0.2%).
High-dose chemotherapy plus bone marrow or stem cell transplantation offers no therapeutic advantage
over standard therapy and should not be used.
If tumors overexpress HER2 (HER2+), adding the humanized monoclonal antibody trastuzumab to
chemotherapy provides substantial benefit. Trastuzumab is usually continued for a year, although the
optimal duration of therapy is unknown. A serious potential side effect is decreased cardiac ejection
fraction.
With hormone therapy (eg, tamoxifen, raloxifene, aromatase inhibitors), benefit is greatest when tumors
have estrogen and progesterone receptors, nearly as great when they have only estrogen receptors,
minimal when they have only progesterone receptors, and absent when they have neither receptor. In
patients with ER+ tumors, particularly low-risk tumors, hormone therapy may be used instead of
===PAGE:2729===
chemotherapy.
•
Tamoxifen:
This drug competitively binds with estrogen receptors. Adjuvant tamoxifen for 5 yr reduces
annual odds of death by about 25% in premenopausal and postmenopausal women regardless of
axillary
[Table 255-5.
Preferred Breast Cancer Adjuvant Systemic Therapy*]

lymph node involvement; treatment for 2 yr is not as effective, but treatment for > 5 yr has no advantage
and may increase the likelihood that any recurrent cancer is tamoxifen-resistant. Tamoxifen can induce
or exacerbate menopausal symptoms but reduces incidence of contralateral breast cancer and lowers
serum cholesterol. Tamoxifen increases bone density in postmenopausal women and may reduce risk
of fractures and ischemic heart disease. However, it significantly increases risk of developing
endometrial cancer; reported incidence is 1% in postmenopausal women after 5 yr of use. Thus, if such
women have spotting or bleeding, they must be evaluated for endometrial cancer (.
Nonetheless, the improved survival for women with breast cancer far outweighs increased risk of death
due to endometrial cancer. Risk of thromboembolism is also increased. Raloxifene, although indicated
for prevention, is not indicated for treatment.
•
Aromatase inhibitors:
These drugs (anastrozole, exemestane, letrozole) block peripheral production
of estrogen in postmenopausal women. More effective than tamoxifen, these drugs are becoming the
preferred treatment for early-stage hormone receptor-positive cancer in postmenopausal patients.
Letrozole may be used in postmenopausal women who have completed 5 yr of daily tamoxifen. Optimal
duration of aromatase inhibitor therapy is uncertain.
Metastatic disease:
Any indication of metastases should prompt immediate evaluation. Treatment of
metastases increases median survival by 6 mo or longer. These treatments (eg, chemotherapy), although
relatively toxic, may palliate symptoms and improve quality of life. Thus, the decision to be treated may be
highly personal.
Choice of therapy depends on the following:
• Hormone-receptor status of the tumor
• Length of the disease-free interval (from remission to manifestation of metastases)
• Number of metastatic sites and organs affected
• Patient's menopausal status
Systemic hormone therapy or chemotherapy is usually used to treat symptomatic metastatic disease.
Initially, patients with multiple metastatic sites outside the CNS should be given systemic therapy. If
metastases are asymptomatic, there is no proof that treatment substantially increases survival, and it may
reduce quality of life.
Hormone therapy is preferred over chemotherapy for patients with ER+ tumors, a disease-free interval of
> 2 yr, or disease that is not immediately life threatening. In premenopausal women, tamoxifen is often
used first. Reasonable alternatives include ovarian ablation by surgery, radiation therapy, and use of a
luteinizing-releasing hormone agonist (eg, buserelin, goserelin, leuprolide). Some experts combine
ovarian ablation with tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor. In postmenopausal women, aromatase
inhibitors are being increasingly used as primary hormone therapy. If the cancer initially responds to
hormone therapy but progresses months or years later, additional forms of hormone therapy (eg,
progestins, the antiestrogen fulvestrant) may be used sequentially until no further response occurs.
The most effective chemotherapy drugs are capecitabine, doxorubicin (including its liposomal
formulation), gemcitabine, the taxanes paclitaxel and docetaxel, and vinorelbine. Response rate to a
combination of drugs is higher than that to a single drug, but survival is not improved and toxicity is
increased. Thus, some oncologists use single drugs sequentially.
===PAGE:2730===
For tumors that overexpress HER2, trastuzumab is effective in treating and controlling visceral metastatic
sites. It is used alone or with hormone therapy or chemotherapy. Lapatinib is being used increasingly. Its
role is evolving.
Radiation therapy alone may be used to treat isolated, symptomatic bone lesions or local skin
recurrences not amenable to surgical resection. Radiation therapy is the most effective treatment for brain
metastases, occasionally providing long-term control.
IV bisphosphonates (eg, pamidronate, zoledronate) decrease bone pain and bone loss and prevent or
delay skeletal complications due to bone metastases. About 10% of patients with bone metastases
eventually develop hypercalcemia, which can also be treated with IV bisphosphonates.
Prevention
Chemoprevention with tamoxifen or raloxifene is indicated for women with the following:
• Age > 60
• Age > 35 and previous LCIS
• Presence of
BRCA1
or
BRCA2
mutations
• 5-yr risk of developing breast cancer > 1.66% based on the multivariable Gail model, which includes the
women's current age, age at menarche, age at first live childbirth, number of 1st-degree relatives with
breast cancer, and results of prior breast biopsies
A computer program to calculate breast cancer risk by the Gail model is available
from the NCI at 1-8004CANCER and online at http://www.cancer.gov/bcrisktool/
. Recommendations of the U. S. Preventive
Services Task Force (USPSTF), Chemoprevention of breast cancer, are available at
http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/uspstf/uspsbrpv.htm
.
Patients should be informed of risks before beginning chemoprevention. Risks of tamoxifen include
uterine cancer, thromboembolic complications, cataracts, and possibly stroke. Risks are higher for older
women. Raloxifene appears to be about as effective as tamoxifen in postmenopausal women and to have
a lower risk of thromboembolic complications and cataracts. Raloxifene, like tamoxifen, may also increase
bone density. Raloxifene should be considered as an alternative to tamoxifen for chemoprevention in
postmenopausal women.
Phyllodes Tumor
Phyllodes tumor (cystosarcoma phyllodes) is a nonepithelial breast tumor that may be benign
or malignant.
Tumors are frequently large (4 to 5 cm) at diagnosis. About half are malignant, accounting for < 1% of
breast cancers. Between 20% and 35% of these tumors recur locally, and distant metastases occur in 10
to 20% of patients.
Usual treatment is wide excision, but a mastectomy may be more appropriate if the mass is large or
histology suggests cancer. Prognosis is good unless metastases are present.
===PAGE:2731===
Chapter 256. Gynecologic Tumors
Introduction
Gynecologic cancers often involve the uterus, ovaries, cervix, vulva, vagina, fallopian tubes, or, usually
secondarily, the peritoneum. The most common gynecologic cancer in the US is endometrial cancer,
followed by ovarian cancer. Cervical cancer is not very common in developed countries because
Papanicolaou (Pap) test screening is widely available and effective. Gestational trophoblastic disease is a
gynecologic tumor that may behave aggressively whether malignant or not.
Many gynecologic cancers manifest as pelvic masses (for diagnostic approach to pelvic masses, .
Ovarian Cancer
Ovarian cancer is often fatal because it is usually advanced when diagnosed. Symptoms are
usually absent in early stages and nonspecific in advanced stages. Evaluation usually includes
ultrasonography, CT or MRI, and measurement of tumor markers (eg, cancer antigen 125).
Diagnosis is by histologic analysis. Staging is surgical. Treatment requires hysterectomy,
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, excision of as much involved tissue as possible, and, unless
cancer is localized, chemotherapy.
In the US, ovarian cancer is the 2nd most common gynecologic cancer (affecting about 1/70) and the
deadliest (1% of all women die of it); it is the 5th leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women,
causing an estimated 15,000 deaths in 2008. Incidence is higher in developed countries.
Etiology
Ovarian cancer affects mainly perimenopausal and postmenopausal women. Nulliparity, delayed
childbearing, early menarche, and delayed menopause increase risk. Oral contraceptive use decreases
risk.
A personal or family history of endometrial, breast, or colon cancer increases risk. Probably 5 to 10% of
ovarian cancer cases are related to mutations in the autosomal dominant
BRCA
gene, which is
associated with a 50 to 85% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. Women with
BRCA1
mutations
have a 20 to 40% lifetime risk of developing ovarian cancer; risk among women with
BRCA2
mutations is
increased less.
XY gonadal dysgenesis predisposes to ovarian germ cell cancer.
Pathology
Ovarian cancers are histologically diverse (see
Table 256-1
). At least 80% originate in the epithelium; 75% of these cancers are serous
cystadenocarcinoma. The remaining 20% of ovarian cancers originate in primary ovarian germ cells or in
sex cord and stromal cells or are metastases to the ovary (most commonly, from the breast or GI tract).
Germ cell cancers usually occur in women < 30.
[Table 256-1.
Types of Ovarian Cancers]
Ovarian cancer spreads by direct extension, exfoliation of cells into the peritoneal cavity (peritoneal
seeding), lymphatic dissemination to the pelvis and around the aorta, or, less often, hematogenously to
the liver or lungs.
Symptoms and Signs
Early cancer is usually asymptomatic; an adnexal mass, often solid, irregular, and fixed, may be
===PAGE:2732===
discovered incidentally. Pelvic and rectovaginal examinations typically detect diffuse nodularity. A few
women present with severe abdominal pain secondary to torsion of the ovarian mass (. Most
women with advanced cancer present with nonspecific symptoms (eg, dyspepsia, bloating, early satiety,
gas pains, backache). Later, pelvic pain, anemia, cachexia, and abdominal swelling due to ovarian
enlargement or ascites usually occur.
Germ cell or stromal tumors may have functional effects (eg, hyperthyroidism, feminization, virilization).
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography (for suspected early cancers) or CT or MRI (for suspected advanced cancers)
• Tumor markers
• Surgical staging
Ovarian cancer is suspected in women with the following:
• Unexplained adnexal masses
• Unexplained abdominal bloating
• Changes in bowel habits
• Unintended weight loss
• Unexplained abdominal pain
An ovarian mass is more likely to be cancer in older women. Benign functional cysts ( can
simulate functional germ cell or stromal tumors in young women.
A pelvic mass plus ascites usually indicates ovarian cancer but sometimes indicates Meigs' syndrome (a
benign fibroma with as-cites and right hydrothorax).
Imaging:
If early cancer is suspected, ultrasonography is done first; the following findings suggest
cancer:
• A solid component
• Surface excrescences
• Size > 6 cm
• Irregular shape
• Low vascular resistance detected by transvaginal Doppler flow studies
If advanced cancer is suspected (eg, based on ascites, abdominal distention, or nodularity or fixation
detected during physical examination), CT or MRI is usually done before surgery to determine extent of
the cancer.
Tumor markers:
Tumor markers, including the
β
subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (
β
-hCG),
LDH,
α
-fetoprotein, inhibin, and cancer antigen (CA) 125, are typically measured in young patients, who
are at higher risk of nonepithelial tumors (eg, germ cell tumors, stromal tumors). In perimenopausal and
postmenopausal patients, only CA 125 is measured because most ovarian cancers in this age group are
epithelial tumors. CA 125 is elevated in 80% of advanced epithelial ovarian cancers but may be mildly
elevated in endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, pregnancy, fibroids, peritoneal inflammation, or
nonovarian peritoneal cancer. A mixed solid and cystic pelvic mass in postmenopausal women, especially
===PAGE:2733===
if CA 125 is elevated, suggests ovarian cancer.
Biopsy:
A biopsy is not routinely recommended unless a patient is not a surgical candidate. In those rare
cases, samples are obtained by needle biopsy for masses or by needle aspiration for ascitic fluid.
For masses that appear benign on ultrasonography, histologic analysis is not required, and
ultrasonography is repeated after 6 wk. Such benign-appearing masses include benign cystic teratomas
(dermoid cysts), follicular cysts, and endometriomas.
Staging:
Suspected or confirmed ovarian cancer is staged surgically (see
Table 256-2
). If early-stage cancer is suspected, staging may be done by laparoscopy. Otherwise, an
abdominal midline incision that allows adequate access to the upper abdomen is required. All peritoneal
surfaces, hemidiaphragms, and abdominal and pelvic viscera are inspected and palpated. Washings from
the pelvis, abdominal gutters, and diaphragmatic recesses are obtained, and multiple biopsies of the
peritoneum in the central and lateral pelvis and in the abdomen are done. For early-stage cancer, the
infracolic omentum is removed, and pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes are sampled.
Cancers are also graded histologically from 1 (least aggressive) to 3 (most aggressive).
Screening:
Screening asymptomatic women using ultrasonography and serum CA 125 measurements
can detect some cases of ovarian cancer but has not been shown to improve outcome, even for high-risk
subgroups (including women with
BRCA
mutations). However, women should be screened for
abnormalities of the
BRCA
gene if their family history includes any of the following:
• Diagnosis of ovarian cancer in a 1st-degree relative before age 40
• Diagnosis of breast and ovarian cancer in only one 1st-degree relative if one of the cancers was
diagnosed before age 50
• Two cases of ovarian cancer among 1st- and 2nd-degree relatives of the same lineage
[Table 256-2.
Surgical Staging of Ovarian Carcinoma*]
•
Two cases of breast cancer and one case of ovarian cancer among 1st- or 2nd-degree relatives of the
same lineage
• One case of breast and one case of ovarian cancer among 1st- or 2nd-degree relatives of the same
lineage if breast cancer was diagnosed before age 40 or if ovarian cancer was diagnosed before age
• Two cases of breast cancer among 1st- or 2nd-degree relatives of the same lineage if both cases were
diagnosed before age 50
• Two cases of breast cancer among 1st- or 2nd-degree relatives of the same lineage if one was
diagnosed before age 40
Also, if Ashkenazi Jewish women have one family member with breast cancer diagnosed before age 50 or
with ovarian cancer, screening should be considered.
Prognosis
The 5-yr survival rates with treatment are
• Stage I: 70 to 100%
• Stage II: 50 to 70%
• Stage III: 20 to 50%
===PAGE:2734===
• Stage IV: 10 to 20%
Prognosis is worse when tumor grade is higher or when surgery cannot remove all visibly involved tissue;
then, prognosis is best when the involved tissue can be reduced to < 1 cm in diameter. With stages III and
IV, recurrence rate is about 70%.
Treatment
• Usually hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy
• Usually postoperative chemotherapy, often with carboplatin and paclitaxel
Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy are usually indicated except for stage I nonepithelial or
low-grade unilateral epithelial cancers in young patients; fertility can be preserved by not removing the
unaffected ovary and uterus. All visibly involved tissue is surgically removed if possible. If it cannot be
removed completely, removing as much as possible (cytoreductive surgery) improves the efficacy of other
therapies. Cytoreductive surgery usually includes supracolic omentectomy, sometimes with rectosigmoid
resection (usually with primary reanastomosis), radical peritoneal stripping, resection of diaphragmatic
peritoneum, or splenectomy.
Postoperative treatment depends on the stage and grade (see
Table 256-3
).
[Table 256-3.
Postoperative Treatment of Ovarian Cancer by Stage and Type]
Even if chemotherapy results in a complete clinical response (ie, normal physical examination, normal
serum CA 125, and negative CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis), about 50% of patients with stage III or
IV cancer have residual tumor. Of patients with persistent elevation of CA 125, 90 to 95% have residual
tumor. Recurrence rate in patients with a clinical complete response after initial chemotherapy (6 courses
of carboplatin and paclitaxel) is 60 to 70%.
If cancer recurs or progresses after effective chemotherapy, chemotherapy is restarted. Other useful
drugs may include topotecan, liposomal doxorubicin, docetaxel, vinorelbine, gemcitabine,
hexamethylmelamine, and oral etoposide. Targeted therapy with biologic agents is under study.
Prevention
For patients with
BRCA1
or
BRCA2
gene mutations, risk of ovarian and, to a lesser degree, breast
cancer is reduced if prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is done after
childbearing is completed.
These patients should be referred to a gynecologic oncologist for evaluation. Other resources include the
National Cancer Institute Cancer Information Service (1-800-4-CANCER) and the Women's Cancer
Network (www.wcn.org
).
Fallopian Tube Cancer
Fallopian tube cancer is usually adenocarcinoma, manifesting as an adnexal mass or as vague
symptoms. Diagnosis, staging, and treatment are surgical.
Primary fallopian tube cancer is rare. Average age at diagnosis is 50 to 60. Risk factors include chronic
salpingitis, other inflammatory disorders (eg, TB), and infertility.
Most (> 95%) fallopian tube cancers are papillary serous adenocarcinomas; a few are sarcomas. Spread,
like that of ovarian cancer, is by direct extension, by peritoneal seeding, or through the lymphatics.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with an adnexal mass or vague abdominal or pelvic symptoms (eg, abdominal
===PAGE:2735===
discomfort, bloating, pain). A few patients present with hydrops tubae profluens (a triad of pelvic pain,
copious watery discharge, and adnexal mass), which is more specific.
Diagnosis
• CT
• Surgery to confirm diagnosis and to stage
Typically, CT is done. A distended solid adnexal mass and normal ovary suggest fallopian tube cancer. A
pregnancy test is done to rule out ectopic pregnancy unless patients are postmenopausal.
If cancer is suspected, surgery is necessary for diagnosis, staging, and treatment. Staging (similar to that
of ovarian cancer) requires the following:
• Washings from the pelvis, abdominal gutters, and diaphragmatic recesses
• Multiple pelvic and abdominal peritoneal biopsies
• Pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection
Treatment
• Total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and supracolic omentectomy
Treatment includes total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and supracolic
omentectomy. If cancer appears advanced, cytoreductive surgery is indicated.
Postoperative treatment is identical to that for ovarian cancer. External beam radiation is rarely indicated.
Endometrial Cancer
Endometrial cancer is usually adenocarcinoma. Typically, postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
occurs. Diagnosis is by biopsy. Staging is surgical. Treatment requires hysterectomy, bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, usually pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection, and excision of
all tissue likely to be involved. For advanced cancer, radiation, hormone, or cytotoxic therapy is
usually indicated.
Endometrial cancer is more common in developed countries where the diet is high in fat. In the US, this
cancer is the 4th most common cancer among women, affecting 1 in 50.
Etiology
Endometrial cancer affects mainly postmenopausal women, particularly those aged 50 to 65. Major risk
factors are
• Obesity
• Diabetes
• Hypertension
Other risk factors include
• Unopposed estrogen
• Tamoxifen use for > 5 yr
===PAGE:2736===
• Previous pelvic radiation therapy
• A personal or family history of breast or ovarian cancer
• Family history of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer or possibly, among 1st-degree relatives,
endometrial cancer
Unopposed estrogen (high circulating levels of estrogen with no or low levels of progesterone) may be
associated with obesity, polycystic ovary syndrome, nulliparity, late menopause, estrogen-producing
tumors, anovulation (ovulatory dysfunction), and estrogen therapy without progesterone. Heredity
contributes to endometrial cancer in about 6% of cases, usually in families with hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome.
Pathology
Endometrial cancer is usually preceded by endometrial hyperplasia. Adenocarcinoma
accounts for > 80%
of endometrial cancers. Other types include papillary serous, clear cell, squamous, mucinous carcinoma,
and sarcomas.
The cancer may spread from the surface of the uterine cavity to the cervical canal; through the
myometrium to the serosa and into the peritoneal cavity; via the lumen of the fallopian tube to the ovary,
broad ligament, and peritoneal surfaces; via the bloodstream, leading to distant metastases; or via the
lymphatics. The higher (more undifferentiated) the grade of the tumor, the greater the likelihood of deep
myometrial invasion, pelvic or para-aortic lymph node metastases, or extra-uterine spread.
Symptoms and Signs
Most (> 90%) women have abnormal uterine bleeding (eg, postmenopausal bleeding, premenopausal
recurrent metrorrhagia); one third of women with postmenopausal bleeding have endometrial cancer. A
vaginal discharge may occur weeks or months before postmenopausal bleeding.
Diagnosis
• Endometrial biopsy
• Surgical staging
The following suggest endometrial cancer:
• Postmenopausal bleeding
• Abnormal bleeding in premenopausal women
• A routine Papanicolaou (Pap) test showing endometrial cells in postmenopausal women
• A routine Pap test showing atypical endometrial cells in any woman
If cancer is suspected, outpatient endometrial biopsy is done; it is > 90% accurate. If results are
inconclusive or suggest cancer, outpatient fractional D & C with hysteroscopy is done. An alternative is
transvaginal ultrasonography; however, a histologic diagnosis is required.
Once cancer is diagnosed, pretreatment evaluation includes serum electrolytes, kidney and liver function
tests, CBC, chest x-ray, and ECG. If an abdominal mass or hepatomegaly is detected during physical
examination or if liver function tests are abnormal, pelvic and abdominal CT are also done to check for
extrauterine or metastatic cancer.
Staging:
Staging is based on histologic differentiation (grade 1 [least aggressive] to 3 [most aggressive])
and extent of spread, including invasion depth, cervical involvement (glandular involvement vs stromal
===PAGE:2737===
invasion), and extrauterine metastases (see
Table 256-4
). Staging is surgical and includes peritoneal fluid cytology, exploration of the abdomen and
pelvis, and biopsy or excision of suspect extrauterine lesions. Pelvic and para-aortic
[Table 256-4.
Staging of Endometrial Carcinoma*]
lymph nodes are removed. During staging, a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy are done. Surgical staging is traditionally done via laparotomy but may be done via
laparoscopy or use of a robotics surgical system.
Prognosis
Prognosis is worse with higher-grade tumors, more extensive spread, and older patient age. Average 5-yr
survival rates are 70 to 95% with stage I or II and 10 to 60% with stage III or IV. Overall, 63% of patients
are cancer-free ≥ 5 yr after treatment.
Treatment
• Usually total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
• Pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy for deep (> 50% myometrial invasion) grade 1 and 2 and for
grade 3
• Pelvic radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy for stage II or III
• Multimodal, individualized therapy for stage IV
If cancer appears to be stage I/grade 1 without deep myometrial invasion, the probability of unrecognized
lymph node metastasis is < 2%. Treatment is usually total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy via laparotomy, laparoscopy, or robotics.
For grade 1 or 2 with ≥ 50% myometrial invasion or grade 3, complete pelvic and paraaortic
lymphadenectomy is also done. Whether the extent of para-aortic node dissection should reach the
inferior mesenteric artery vs the renal vessels remains a topic of debate.
Stage II or III cancer requires pelvic radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy. Treatment of stage III
cancer must be individualized, but surgery is an option; generally, patients who undergo combined
surgery and radiation therapy have a better prognosis. Except in patients with bulky parametrial disease,
a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy should be done.
Treatment of stage IV is variable and patient dependent but typically involves a combination of surgery,
radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Occasionally, hormonal therapy should also be considered.
Hormone therapy with a progestin causes regression for up to 3 yr in 20 to 25% of patients. Pulmonary,
vaginal, and mediastinal metastases may regress. Treatment continues as long as the response is
favorable.
Several cytotoxic drugs (particularly carboplatin plus paclitaxel) are effective. They are given mainly to
women with metastatic or recurrent cancer. With monthly regimens of doxorubicin 60 mg/m
plus cisplatin
60 mg/m
IV, overall response rate may be ≥ 50%.
Treatment of endometrial hyperplasia consists of progestins or surgery (eg, D & C), depending on the
complexity of the lesion and the patient's desire to avoid hysterectomy. If young patients with grade 1
tumors and no myometrial invasion (documented by MRI) wish to preserve fertility, progestin alone is an
option. About 46 to 80% of patients have a complete response within 3 mo on average. After 3 mo,
patients should be evaluated via D & C rather than endometrial biopsy.
===PAGE:2738===
Uterine Sarcomas
Uterine sarcomas are a group of disparate, highly malignant cancers developing from the
uterine corpus.
Sarcomas account for < 5% of uterine cancers. Risk factors are similar to those for endometrial
carcinoma (. The most common types are mixed mesodermal tumors (malignant mixed
mullerian tumor, in which the sarcoma is mixed with adenocarcinoma; recently renamed carcinosarcoma),
leiomyosarcomas, and endometrial stromal tumors.
Symptoms and Signs
Most sarcomas manifest as abnormal vaginal bleeding and, less commonly, as pelvic pain or a palpable
pelvic mass.
Diagnosis
• Transvaginal ultrasonography and endometrial biopsy or fractional D & C
Symptoms usually prompt transvaginal ultrasonography and endometrial biopsy or fractional D & C. If
cancer is identified, CT or MRI is typically done preoperatively.
Staging is done surgically, as follows:
• Stage I: Confined to the corpus
• Stage II: Confined to the corpus and cervix
• Stage III: Spread outside the uterus but confined to the pelvis
• Stage IV: Spread outside the true pelvis or into the mucosa of the bladder or rectum
Prognosis
Prognosis is generally poorer than that with endometrial cancer of similar stage; survival is generally poor
when the cancer has spread beyond the uterus. Histology is not an independent prognostic factor. In one
study,
5-yr survival rates were 51% for stage I, 13% for stage II, 10% for stage III, and 3% for stage IV.
Most commonly, the cancer recurs locally, in the abdomen, and the lungs.
Treatment
• Total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and complete exploration of the
abdomen
Treatment is total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with complete exploration
of the abdomen. Pelvic and para-aortic nodes are dissected in patients with carcinosarcoma. The
usefulness of lymphadenectomy in patients with leiomyosarcoma or endometrial stromal sarcoma is
controversial; no therapeutic value has been shown.
Adjuvant radiation therapy is typically used and appears to delay local recurrence but does not improve
overall survival rate. Chemotherapy drugs vary with tumor type. Overall, response to chemotherapy is
poor, although progestins are frequently effective for endometrial stromal tumors.
Gestational Trophoblastic Disease
Gestational trophoblastic disease is proliferation of trophoblastic tissue in pregnant or recently
pregnant women. Manifestations may include excessive uterine enlargement, vomiting, vaginal
bleeding, and preeclampsia, particularly during early pregnancy. Diagnosis includes
===PAGE:2739===
measurement of the
β
subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin, pelvic ultrasonography, and
confirmation by biopsy. Tumors are removed by suction curettage. If disease persists after
removal, chemotherapy is indicated.
Gestational trophoblastic disease is a tumor originating from the trophoblast, which surrounds the
blastocyst and develops into the chorion and amnion (. This disease can occur during or
after an intrauterine or ectopic pregnancy. If the disease occurs during a pregnancy, spontaneous
abortion, eclampsia, or fetal death typically occurs; the fetus rarely survives. Some forms are malignant;
others are benign but behave aggressively.
Pathology
Classification is morphologic:
•
Hydatidiform mole:
In this abnormal pregnancy, villi become edematous (hydropic), and trophoblastic
tissue proliferates.
•
Chorioadenoma destruens (invasive mole):
The myometrium is invaded locally by a hydatidiform
mole.
•
Choriocarcinoma:
This invasive, usually widely metastatic tumor is composed of malignant
trophoblastic cells and lacks hydropic villi; most of these tumors develop after a hydatidiform mole.
•
Placental site trophoblastic tumor:
This rare tumor consists of intermediate trophoblastic cells that
persist after a term pregnancy; it may invade adjacent tissues or metastasize.
Hydatidiform moles are most common among women < 17 or > 35 and those who have had previous
gestational trophoblastic disease. They occur in about 1/2000 gestations in the US. For unknown
reasons, incidence in Asian countries approaches 1/200. Most (> 80%) hydatidiform moles are benign.
The rest may persist, tending to become invasive; 2 to 3% of hydatidiform moles are followed by
choriocarcinoma.
Symptoms and Signs
Initial manifestations of a hydatidiform mole suggest early pregnancy, but the uterus often becomes larger
than expected within 10 to 16 wk gestation. Commonly, women test positive for pregnancy, have vaginal
bleeding and severe vomiting, and fetal movement and fetal heart sounds are absent. Passage of grapelike tissue strongly suggests the diagnosis. Complications may include uterine infection, sepsis,
hemorrhagic shock, and preeclampsia, which may occur during early pregnancy.
Placental site trophoblastic tumors tend to cause bleeding.
Choriocarcinoma usually manifests with symptoms due to metastases.
Gestational trophoblastic disease does not impair fertility or predispose to prenatal or perinatal
complications (eg, congenital malformations, spontaneous abortions).
Diagnosis
• Serum
β
-hCG
• Pelvic ultrasonography
Gestational trophoblastic disease is suspected in women with a positive pregnancy test and any of the
following:
• Uterine size much larger than expected for dates
===PAGE:2740===
• Symptoms or signs of preeclampsia
• Passage of grapelike tissue
• Suggestive findings (eg, mass containing multiple cysts instead of a fetus) seen during ultrasonography
done to evaluate pregnancy
•
Unexplained metastases in women of child-bearing age
• Unexpectedly high levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (
β
-hCG) detected during pregnancy testing
• Unexplained complications of pregnancy
If gestational trophoblastic disease is suspected, testing includes measurement of serum
β
-hCG and
pelvic ultrasonography. Findings (eg, very high
β
-hCG levels, classic ultrasonographic findings) may
suggest the diagnosis, but biopsy is required. Invasive mole and choriocarcinoma are suspected if biopsy
findings suggest invasive disease or if
β
-hCG levels remain higher than expected after treatment for
hydatidiform mole (see below).
Treatment
• Tumor removal by suction curettage
• Further evaluation for persistent disease and spread of tumor
• Chemotherapy for persistent disease
• Posttreatment contraception for persistent disease
Hydatidiform mole, invasive mole, and placental site trophoblastic tumor are evacuated by suction
curettage. Alternatively, if childbearing is not planned, hysterectomy may be done.
After tumor removal, gestational trophoblastic disease is classified clinically to determine whether
additional treatment is needed. The clinical classification system does not correspond to the morphologic
classification system. Invasive mole and choriocarcinoma are classified clinically as persistent disease.
The clinical classification is used because both are treated similarly and because exact histologic
diagnosis may require hysterectomy.
A chest x-ray is taken, and serum
β
-hCG is measured. If the
β
-hCG level does not normalize within 10 wk,
the disease is classified as persistent. Persistent disease requires CT of the brain, chest, abdomen, and
pelvis. Results dictate whether disease is classified as nonmetastatic or metastatic. In metastatic disease,
prognosis (including risk of death) may be poor or good (see
Table 256-5
). Poor prognosis is suggested by the following (National Institutes of Health [NIH] criteria):
• Urinary hCG excretion > 100,000 IU in 24 h
• Duration of disease > 4 mo (interval since prior pregnancy)
• Brain or liver metastases
• Disease after full-term pregnancy
• Serum hCG > 40,000 mIU/mL
• Unsuccessful prior chemotherapy
• WHO score > 8
===PAGE:2741===
[Table 256-5.
WHO Scoring System in Metastatic Gestational Trophoblastic Disease]
Persistent disease is usually treated with chemotherapy. Treatment is considered successful if at least 3
consecutive serum
β
-hCG measurements at 1-wk intervals are normal. Typically, oral contraceptives (any
is acceptable) are given for 6 to 12 mo; alternatively, any effective contraceptive method can be used.
Nonmetastatic disease can be treated with a single chemotherapy drug (methotrexate or dactinomycin).
Alternatively, hysterectomy is considered for patients > 40 or those desiring
sterilization and may be
required for those with severe infection or uncontrolled bleeding. If single-drug chemotherapy is
ineffective, hysterectomy or multidrug chemotherapy is indicated. Virtually 100% of patients with
nonmetastatic disease can be cured.
Low-risk metastatic disease is treated with single-drug or multidrug chemotherapy. High-risk metastatic
disease requires aggressive multidrug chemotherapy. Cure rates are 90 to 95% for low-risk and 60 to
80% for high-risk disease.
Hydatidiform mole recurs in about 1% of subsequent pregnancies. Patients who have had a mole require
ultrasonography early in subsequent pregnancies, and the placenta should be sent for pathologic
evaluation.
Cervical Cancer
Cervical cancer is usually a squamous cell carcinoma caused by human papillomavirus
infection; less often, it is an adenocarcinoma. Cervical neoplasia is asymptomatic; the first
symptom of early cervical cancer is usually irregular, often postcoital vaginal bleeding.
Diagnosis is by a screening cervical Papanicolaou test and biopsy. Staging is clinical. Treatment
usually involves surgical resection, or radiation therapy plus chemotherapy. If the cancer has
widely metastasized, chemotherapy is often used alone.
Cervical cancer is the 3rd most common gynecologic cancer and the 8th most common cancer among
women in the US. Mean age at diagnosis is about 50, but the cancer can occur as early as age 20.
Cervical cancer results from cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), which appears to be caused by
infection with human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, or 39. Risk factors for cervical cancer
include
• Younger age at first intercourse
• A high lifetime number of sex partners
• Intercourse with men whose previous partners had cervical cancer
Other factors such as cigarette smoking and immunodeficiency also appear to contribute.
Pathology
CIN is graded as 1 (mild cervical dysplasia), 2 (moderate dysplasia), or 3 (severe dysplasia and
carcinoma in situ). CIN 3 is unlikely to regress spontaneously; if untreated, it may, over months or years,
penetrate the basement membrane, becoming invasive carcinoma.
About 80 to 85% of all cervical cancers are squamous cell carcinoma; most of the rest are
adenocarcinomas. Sarcomas and small cell neuroendocrine tumors are rare.
Invasive cervical cancer usually spreads by direct extension into surrounding tissues or via the lymphatics
to the pelvic and paraaortic lymph nodes. Hematogenous spread is possible but rare.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2742===
CIN is usually asymptomatic. Early cervical cancer can be asymptomatic. The first symptom is usually
irregular vaginal bleeding, which is most often postcoital but may occur spontaneously between menses.
Larger cancers are more likely to bleed spontaneously and may cause a foul-smelling vaginal discharge
or pelvic pain. More widespread cancer may cause obstructive uropathy, back pain, and leg swelling due
to venous or lymphatic obstruction; pelvic examination may detect an exophytic necrotic tumor in the
cervix.
Diagnosis
• Papanicolaou (Pap) test
• Biopsy
• Clinical staging, usually by biopsy, pelvic examination, and chest x-ray
Cervical cancer may be diagnosed during a routine gynecologic examination. It is considered in women
with
• Visible cervical lesions
• Abnormal routine Pap test results
• Abnormal vaginal bleeding
CIN is usually evident on Pap tests, but about 50% of patients with cervical cancer have not had a Pap
test for ≥ 10 yr. Patients at highest risk are the least likely to obtain regular preventive health care and to
be tested regularly.
Reporting of cervical cytology results is standardized (see
Table 256-6
). Further evaluation is indicated if atypical or cancerous cells are found, particularly in
women at risk. If cytology does not show any obvious cancer, colposcopy (examination of the vagina and
cervix with a magnifying lens) can be used to identify areas that require biopsy. Colposcopy-directed
biopsy with endocervical curettage is usually diagnostic. If not, cone biopsy (conization) is required; a
cone of tissue is removed using a loop electrical excision procedure (LEEP), laser, or cold knife.
Staging:
Cancers are clinically staged based on biopsy, physical examination, and chest x-ray results
(see
Table 256-7
). If the stage is > IB1, CT or MRI of the abdomen and pelvis is typically done to identify
metastases, although results are not used for staging. If MRI and CT are not available, cystoscopy,
sigmoidoscopy, and IV urography, when clinically indicated, may be used for staging.
[Table 256-6.
Bethesda Classification of Cervical Cytology*]
The purpose of this staging system is to establish a large database for study; thus, the system uses
worldwide uniform diagnostic criteria. The system excludes results of tests that are less likely to be
available worldwide (eg, MRI) because most cases of cervical cancer occur in developing countries.
Because such tests are not used, findings such as parametrial invasion and lymph node metastases are
often missed, and thus understaging is possible.
[Table 256-7.
Clinical Staging of Cervical Carcinoma*]
When imaging tests suggest that pelvic or para-aortic lymph nodes are grossly enlarged (> 2 cm),
surgical exploration, typically with a retroperitoneal approach, is occasionally indicated. Its sole purpose is
to remove enlarged lymph nodes so that radiation therapy can be more precisely targeted and more
effective.
Prognosis
===PAGE:2743===
In squamous cell carcinoma, distant metastases usually occur only when the cancer is advanced or
recurrent. The 5-yr survival rates are as follows:
• Stage I: 80 to 90%
• Stage II: 60 to 75%
• Stage III: 30 to 40%
• Stage IV: 0 to 15%
Nearly 80% of recurrences manifest within 2 yr. Adverse prognostic factors include lymph node
involvement, large tumor size and volume, deep cervical stromal invasion, parametrial invasion, vascular
space invasion, and nonsquamous histology.
Treatment
• Excision or curative radiation therapy if there is no spread to parametria or beyond
• Radiation therapy and chemotherapy if there is spread to the parametria or beyond
• Chemotherapy for metastatic and recurrent cancer
Treatment may include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. If hysterectomy is indicated but
patients cannot tolerate it, radiation therapy plus chemotherapy is used.
CIN and squamous cell carcinoma stage IA1:
Cone biopsy with LEEP, laser, or cold knife is usually
sufficient treatment. Hysterectomy is done for stage IA1 cancer if there are adverse prognostic factors
(nonsquamous histology or lymphatic or vascular invasion). Radical hysterectomy is recommended by
some experts; it includes bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy and removal of all adjacent ligaments (eg,
cardinal, uterosacral) and parametria and the upper 2 cm of the vagina. Hysterectomy can also be done if
women no longer desire fertility. If there are no adverse prognostic factors, simple (extrafascial)
hysterectomy is usually sufficient because risk of recurrence and lymph node metastasis is < 1%. Pelvic
lymph node dissection is not indicated.
Stages IA2 to IIA:
Treatment options include a radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy alone
(stages IA2 to IB1) or a radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy with possible combined
chemotherapy and pelvic radiation (stages IB2 to IIA). Chemotherapy is usually given concurrently. With
either treatment, the 5-yr cure rates in stage IB or IIA are 85 to 90%. Surgery provides additional staging
data and preserves the ovaries. If extracervical spread is noted during surgery, postoperative radiation
therapy may prevent local recurrence.
In some patients who have early-stage cervical cancer and who wish to preserve fertility, a radical
trachelectomy may be done. In this procedure, the cervix, parametria immediately adjacent to the cervix,
upper 2 cm of the vagina, and pelvic lymph nodes are removed. The remaining uterus is reattached to the
upper vagina, preserving the potential for fertility. Ideal candidates for this procedure are patients with the
following:
• Histologic subtypes such as squamous carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or adenosquamous carcinoma
• Stage IA1/grade 2 or 3 with vascular space invasion
• Stage IA2
• Stage IB1 with lesions < 2 cm in size
Invasion of the upper cervix and lower uterine segment should be excluded by MRI. Rates of recurrence
and death are similar to those after radical hysterectomy. If patients who have this procedure plan to have
===PAGE:2744===
children, delivery must be cesarean.
Stages IIB to IVA:
Radiation therapy plus chemotherapy (eg, cisplatin) is more suitable as primary
therapy. Surgical staging should be considered to determine whether paraaortic lymph nodes are involved
and thus whether extended-field radiation therapy is indicated; a retroperitoneal approach is used.
Staging may be done via laparoscopy. External beam radiation therapy shrinks the central tumor and
treats regional lymph nodes. This therapy is followed by brachytherapy (local radioactive implants, usually
using cesium) to the cervix, which destroys the central tumor. Radiation therapy may cause acute
complications (eg, radiation proctitis and cystitis) and, occasionally, late complications (eg, vaginal
stenosis, intestinal obstruction, rectovaginal and vesicovaginal fistula formation).
Chemotherapy is usually given with radiation therapy, often to sensitize the tumor to radiation. Treatment
is often ineffective for bulky and advanced-stage tumors.
Although stage IVA cancers are usually treated with radiation therapy initially, pelvic exenteration (excision
of all pelvic organs)
may be considered. If after radiation therapy, cancer remains but is confined to the
central pelvis, exenteration is indicated and cures up to 50% of patients. The procedure may include a
continent urostomy, low anterior rectal anastomosis without colostomy, omental carpet to close the pelvic
floor (J-flap), and vaginal reconstruction with gracilis or rectus abdominis myocutaneous flaps.
Stage IVB and recurrent cancer:
Chemotherapy is the primary treatment, but only 15 to 25% of
patients respond to it and only briefly. Cisplatin is the most active drug and the current standard, but
adding topotecan appears to improve overall response and survival. Combinations of paclitaxel,
topotecan, gemcitabine, cisplatin, and vinorelbine are under study for treatment of recurrent squamous
cell carcinoma. Paclitaxel is also used to treat recurrent or metastatic nonsquamous cancer. Metastases
outside the radiation field appear to respond better to chemotherapy than does previously irradiated
cancer or metastases in the pelvis.
Prevention
Pap tests:
Routine cervical Pap tests are recommended yearly, starting when patients first begin having
sexual intercourse or reach age 18. Pap test and HPV test can be done simultaneously. If both are normal
or if 3 consecutive Pap tests are normal, some physicians test at 2- to 3-yr intervals. Testing continues
until patients are age 65 to 70, have normal results for 10 yr, or have a hysterectomy. Sexually active
women are advised that condoms should be used during intercourse to prevent spread of HPV. HPV
testing is the preferred method of follow-up evaluation for women ages 20 to 30 with inconclusive Pap
results such as ASCUS (atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance). If testing shows that the
patient does not have HPV, a repeat Pap is recommended in 12 mo. If HPV is present, colposcopy should
be done. Routine HPV testing plus a Pap test is recommended for women ≥ 30.
HPV vaccine:
A newly developed vaccine ( targets the 4 viral subtypes (HPV 6, 11, 16, and
18) most commonly associated with cervical intraepithelial lesions, genital warts, and cervical cancer. The
vaccine aims to prevent cervical cancer but does not treat it. Three doses are given: the first dose is
followed by one 2 mo and one 6 mo later. The vaccine is best given before sexual activity begins, but
women who are sexually active should be vaccinated.
Vaginal Cancer
Vaginal cancer is usually a squamous cell carcinoma, most often occurring in women > 60. The
most common symptom is abnormal vaginal bleeding. Diagnosis is by biopsy. Treatment for
many small localized cancers is hysterectomy plus vaginectomy and lymph node dissection;
for most others, radiation therapy is used.
Vaginal cancer accounts for 1% of gynecologic cancers in the US. Average age at diagnosis is 60 to 65.
Risk factors include human papillomavirus infection and cervical or vulvar cancer. Exposure to
diethylstilbestrol in utero predisposes to clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina, which is rare; mean age
at diagnosis is 19.
===PAGE:2745===
Most (95%) primary vaginal cancers are squamous cell carcinomas; others include primary and
secondary adenocarcinomas, secondary squamous cell carcinomas (in older women), clear cell
adenocarcinomas (in young women), and melanomas. The most common vaginal sarcoma is sarcoma
botryoides (embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma); peak incidence is at age 3.
Most vaginal cancers occur in the upper third of the posterior vaginal wall. They may spread by direct
extension (into the local paravaginal tissues, bladder, or rectum), through inguinal lymph nodes from
lesions in the lower vagina, through pelvic lymph nodes from lesions in the upper vagina, or
hematogenously.
Symptoms and Signs
Most patients present with abnormal vaginal bleeding: postmenopausal, postcoital, or intermenstrual.
Some also present with a watery vaginal discharge or dyspareunia. A few patients are asymptomatic, and
the lesion is discovered during routine pelvic examination or evaluation of an abnormal Papanicolaou
(Pap) test. Vesicovaginal or rectovaginal fistulas are manifestations of advanced disease.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
• Clinical staging
Punch biopsy is usually diagnostic, but wide local excision is occasionally necessary. Cancers are staged
clinically (see
Table 256-8
), based primarily on physical examination, endoscopy (ie, cystoscopy, proctoscopy), chest xray (for pulmonary metastases), and usually CT (for abdominal or pelvic metastases). Survival rates
depend on the stage.
[Table 256-8.
Vaginal Cancer by Stage]
Treatment
• Hysterectomy plus vaginectomy and lymph node dissection for tumors confined to the wall of the upper
third of the vagina
• Radiation therapy for most others
Stage I tumors within the upper third of the vagina can be treated with radical hysterectomy, upper
vaginectomy, and pelvic lymph node dissection. Most other primary tumors are treated with radiation
therapy, usually a combination of external beam radiation therapy and brachytherapy. If radiation therapy
is contraindicated because of vesicovaginal or rectovaginal fistulas, pelvic exenteration is done.
Vulvar Cancer
Vulvar cancer is usually a squamous cell skin cancer, most often occurring in elderly women. It
usually manifests as a palpable lesion. Diagnosis is by biopsy. Treatment includes excision and
inguinal and femoral lymph node dissection.
Vulvar cancer accounts for about 3 to 4% of gynecologic cancers in the US. Average age at diagnosis is
about 70, and incidence increases with age. Risk factors include vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN),
human papillomavirus infection, heavy cigarette smoking, lichen sclerosus, squamous hyperplasia,
squamous carcinoma of the vagina or cervix, and chronic granulomatous diseases.
Pathology
VIN is a precursor to vulvar cancer. VIN may be multifocal. Sometimes adenocarcinoma of the vulva,
breast, or Bartholin's glands also develops.
===PAGE:2746===
About 90% of vulvar cancers are squamous cell carcinomas; about 5% are melanomas. Others include
adenocarcinomas and transitional cell, adenoid cystic, and adenosquamous carcinomas; all may originate
in Bartholin's glands. Sarcomas and basal cell carcinomas with underlying adenocarcinoma also occur.
Vulvar cancer may spread by direct extension (eg, into the urethra, bladder, vagina, perineum, anus, or
rectum), hematogenously, to the inguinal lymph nodes, or from the inguinal lymph nodes to the pelvic and
paraaortic lymph nodes.
Symptoms and Signs
The most common presentation is a palpable vulvar lesion, frequently noticed by the woman or by a
clinician during pelvic examination. Women often have a long history of pruritus. They may not present
until cancer is advanced. The lesion may become necrotic or ulcerated, sometimes resulting in bleeding
or a watery vaginal discharge. Melanomas may appear bluish black, pigmented, or papillary.
Diagnosis
• Biopsy
• Surgical staging
Vulvar cancer may mimic sexually transmitted genital ulcers (, basal cell carcinoma, vulvar
Paget's disease (a pale eczematoid lesion), Bartholin's gland cyst, or condyloma acuminatum. A dermal
punch biopsy using a local anesthetic is usually diagnostic. Occasionally, wide local excision is necessary
to differentiate VIN from cancer. Subtle lesions may be delineated by staining the vulva with toluidine blue
or by using colposcopy.
Staging:
Staging is based on tumor size and location and on regional lymph node spread as determined
by lymph node dissection done as part of initial surgical treatment (see
Table 256-9
).
Prognosis
Overall 5-yr survival rates depend on stage. Risk of lymph node spread is proportional to
[Table 256-9.
Vulvar Cancer by Stage]
the tumor size and invasion depth. Melanomas metastasize frequently, depending mostly on invasion
depth but also on tumor size.
Treatment
• Wide excision and lymph node dissection for all cancers
• Radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or both for stage III or IV cancer
Wide (≥ 2-cm margin) radical excision of the local tumor and a unilateral or bilateral inguinal and femoral
lymph node dissection are necessary for cancers of all stages and are sufficient for stages I and II. For
lateralized lesions ≤ 2 cm, unilateral wide local excision and unilateral lymph node dissection can be used.
Lesions near the midline and most lesions > 2 cm require bilateral lymph node dissection.
For stage III, lymph node dissection followed by postoperative external beam radiation therapy, often with
chemotherapy (eg, 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin), is usually done before wide radical excision. The alternative
is more radical or exenterative surgery.
For stage IV, treatment is some combination of pelvic exenteration, radiation therapy, and systemic
chemotherapy.
===PAGE:2747===

===PAGE:2748===
Chapter 257. Family Planning
Introduction
A couple's decision to begin, prevent, or interrupt a pregnancy may be influenced by many medical
factors, including maternal medical disorders, risks involved in pregnancy, and genetic evaluation. Often,
religious, social, and other factors also affect family planning decisions; health care practitioners must be
sensitive to these factors.
One or both members of a couple can use contraception to prevent pregnancy temporarily or sterilization
to prevent pregnancy permanently. If contraception fails, abortion (termination of pregnancy) can be
induced.
Contraception
The contraceptive methods most commonly used in the US (in order of popularity) are oral
contraceptives, female sterilization, condoms, male sterilization, progestin injections, withdrawal (coitus
interruptus), intrauterine devices (IUDs), periodic abstinence, spermicides, and diaphragms (see
Table 257-1
). Over several years, pregnancy rates are < 1%/yr with methods unrelated to coitus (IUDs,
progestin injections, subdermal progestin implants, and oral contraceptives when taken consistently) and
about 5%/yr with coitus-related methods (eg, condoms, diaphragms, spermicides, withdrawal); pregnancy
rates tend to be higher during the first year, then decrease in later years as users become more facile and
women's fertility decreases. In contrast, the pregnancy rate is 90%/yr with frequent, unprotected
intercourse. Condoms are often preferred despite their relatively high failure rate because they protect
against sexually transmitted diseases, especially HIV. Emergency contraception, done post-coitus, should
not be used as a regular method of contraception.
[Table 257-1.
Comparison of Common Contraceptive Methods]
Oral Contraceptives
Oral contraceptives (OCs) simulate ovarian hormones: They provide negative feedback to the
hypothalamus; its release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone is inhibited, thus inhibiting pituitary release
of gonadotropins that stimulate ovulation. The endometrium becomes thin, and cervical mucus becomes
thick and impervious to sperm.
An OC may be a combination of an estrogen and a progestin or a progestin alone. Most combination
formulations are taken daily for 3 wk, then no pill or a placebo is taken during the 4th wk to allow for
withdrawal bleeding. However, one formulation is taken daily for 12 wk, then not taken during the 13th wk,
so that withdrawal bleeding occurs only 4 times/yr. Two new formulations provide active hormones for 24
days and placebo for 4 days so that a tablet is taken every day.
Progestin alone is taken daily; it often results in irregular bleeding and may be less effective than
combination OCs. Progestin alone is not used unless estrogen is contraindicated—eg, during
breastfeeding.
Combination formulations have similar efficacy; the pregnancy rate after 1 yr is < 0.3% with perfect use
and about 8% with typical (ie, inconsistent) use. Low-dose formulations (20 to 35
μ
g of estrogen) are
usually preferred to higher-dose formulations (50
μ
g of estrogen) because low-dose formulations appear
equally effective and, except for a higher incidence of bleeding during the first few months of use, have
fewer adverse effects.
Intermittently stopping OCs appears to have no benefit, so OCs can be taken continuously until
menopause, which is indicated by an elevated follicle-stimulating hormone level. Combination OCs are
not prescribed for women > 35 who smoke cigarettes or have other contraindications (see
Table 257-2
).
Adverse effects:
OCs may cause breakthrough bleeding (which may resolve with time or when the
===PAGE:2749===
estrogen dose is increased) or amenorrhea (which may resolve when the progestin dose is decreased). In
a few women, ovulation remains inhibited for a few months after they stop taking OCs. OCs do not
adversely affect the outcome of pregnancy when conception occurs during or after their use.
Estrogens increase aldosterone production and cause Na retention, which can produce dose-related,
reversible increases in BP and weight, up to about 2 kg; weight gain may be accompanied by bloating,
edema, and breast tenderness. Most progestins used in OCs are related to 19-nortestosterone and are
androgenic; norgestimate and desogestrel are less androgenic than levonorgestrel, norethindrone,
norethindrone acetate, and ethynodiol diacetate. Androgenic effects may include acne, nervousness, and
an anabolic effect resulting in weight gain. If a woman gains > 4.5 kg/yr, a less androgenic OC should be
used. Drospirenone, a new progestin, is related to spironolactone, not 19-nortestosterone; it is
antiandrogenic and diuretic.
OCs increase the risk of certain disorders and decrease the risk of others (see
Table 257-3
).
[Table 257-2.
Contraindications to Combination Oral Contraceptive Use]
Incidence of deep venous thrombosis and thromboembolism increases in relation to estrogen dose;
formulations with 20 to 35
μ
g increase risk to about 3 to 4 times normal (but risk is still only about half of
that during pregnancy). Formulations containing the less androgenic progestin desogestrel may have a
slightly higher risk than formulations containing levonorgestrel, but this difference has not been
established. Varicose veins do not appear to further increase risk. Hypercoagulability is probably caused
by increases in clotting factors, particularly VII and X, and possibly increased platelet adhesion. If deep
vein thrombophlebitis or pulmonary embolism is suspected, OCs should be stopped, pending results of
diagnostic tests. OCs should be stopped as soon as possible before any major surgery and 1 mo before
elective major surgery; they should not be restarted until 1 mo after the surgery.
Current use of OCs does not increase overall risk of breast cancer, nor does former use in women aged
35 to 65. Also, use does not increase risk in high-risk groups (eg, women with certain benign breast
disorders or a family history of breast cancer). Risk of cervical cancer is increased in women who have
used OCs for > 5 yr; the reason is unknown. OC users should have annual cervical cytology screening
(eg, Papanicolaou [Pap] test).
Although increased stroke risk has been attributed to OCs, low-dose combination OCs do not appear to
increase risk in healthy, normotensive, nonsmoking women. Nonetheless,
[Table 257-3.
Some Risks and Benefits of Combination Oral Contraceptives]
if focal neurologic symptoms, aphasia, or other symptoms that may herald stroke develop, OCs should be
stopped. CNS effects of OCs include nausea, vomiting, headache, depression, and sleep disturbances.
Although progestins may cause reversible, dose-related insulin resistance, use of current OCs, which
have a low progestin dose, rarely results in hyperglycemia. Serum high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol levels may decrease when OCs with a high progestin dose are used but usually increase
when OCs with low progestin and estrogen doses are used. Most alterations in serum levels of other
metabolites are not clinically significant. Thyroxine-binding globulin capacity may increase; free thyroxine
levels, thyroid-stimulating hormone levels, and thyroid function are not affected. Levels of pyridoxine,
folate, most other B vitamins, ascorbic acid, Ca, manganese, and zinc decrease; vitamin A levels
increase.
OCs accelerate growth of existing gallstones but do not cause new stones to form. Thus, incidence of
cholelithiasis increases during the first few years of OC use, then decreases. Women who develop
idiopathic recurrent jaundice of pregnancy (cholestasis of pregnancy) may become jaundiced if they take
OCs; these women should not take OCs.
Rarely, benign hepatic adenomas that can spontaneously rupture develop. Incidence increases as
duration of use and OC dose increase; adenomas usually regress spontaneously after the OC is stopped.
===PAGE:2750===
Melasma occurs in some women; it is accentuated by sunlight and disappears slowly after OCs are
stopped. Because treatment is difficult (, OCs are stopped when melasma first appears. OCs
do not increase risk of malignant melanoma.
Benefits:
OCs decrease risk of endometrial and ovarian cancers by about 50% for at least 20 yr after
OCs are stopped. They also decrease risk of benign ovarian tumors, abnormal uterine bleeding,
dysmenorrhea, premenstrual syndrome, iron deficiency anemia, benign breast disorders, and functional
ovarian cysts. Ectopic pregnancy and salpingitis, which can impair fertility, are also less likely.
Drug interactions:
Although OCs can slow the metabolism of certain drugs (eg, meperidine), the effects
are not clinically important.
Some drugs (eg, cyclophosphamide, rifampin) can induce liver enzymes that accelerate transformation of
OCs to less biologically active metabolites; women who take these drugs should not be given OCs
concurrently. Whether certain antibiotics (eg, penicillin, ampicillin, sulfonamides) and anticonvulsants (eg,
carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, prim-idone, topiramate) reduce the effectiveness of OCs is less
clear. If therapeutic doses of antibiotics are prescribed, using a barrier method in addition to OCs may be
prudent. Women who take anticonvulsants should use a 50μ
g estrogen formulation because a lower
dose often causes breakthrough bleeding.
Administration:
Before OCs are started and annually thereafter, breast and pelvic examinations, liver
palpation, and measurement of BP and weight are necessary. BP is also measured 3 mo after starting
OCs. OC users should have annual cervical cytology screening (eg, Pap test), particularly if they have
taken OCs > 5 yr or if they are young, sexually active women. For women with a history of a liver
disorder, normal liver function must be documented before OCs are prescribed. Women at risk of
diabetes (eg, those who have a family history or who have had high-birth-weight infants or unexplained
fetal deaths in previous pregnancies) require annual plasma glucose screening and a complete serum
lipid profile (repeated annually if results are abnormal). Use of low-dose OCs is not contraindicated by
abnormal glucose or lipid test results, except for triglycerides > 250 mg/dL.
When to start OCs after pregnancy is guided by when ovulation is expected. After an abortion, ovulation
usually occurs after 2 to 4 wk and before the first menses; older gestational age predicts later ovulation.
In women who have a term delivery and are not breastfeeding, ovulation occasionally occurs as early as
4 wk after delivery but usually not until after menses. In women who are breastfeeding, ovulation usually
occurs ≥ 10 wk after delivery and after menses.
After spontaneous or induced abortion of a fetus < 12 wk gestation, OCs are started immediately. If the
fetus is 12 to 28 wk gestation, OCs are delayed 1 wk.
After a term delivery, risk of thromboembolism, which normally increases postpartum, also influences
when OCs are started. If women deliver after 28 wk and are not breast-feeding, combination OCs are
delayed 2 wk because combination OCs may enhance risk of thromboembolism. For women who are
breast-feeding, progestin-only OCs are started a few days after delivery because progestin-only OCs are
not thrombogenic. Progestin-only OCs are used because OCs that contain estrogen reduce the amount
of milk produced as well as the protein and fat concentration in milk.
Barrier Contraceptives
Barrier contraceptives include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, vaginal spermicides
(foams, creams,
suppositories), and the contraceptive sponge.
Condoms:
Condom use is the only reversible male method other than withdrawal, which is probably
much less effective. Condoms decrease risk of sexually transmitted diseases (only latex condoms can
fully protect against HIV) and may prevent precancerous changes in the cervix.
The condom is applied before penetration; the tip should extend about 1 cm beyond the penis to collect
the ejaculate. During removal, care is taken to avoid spilling condom contents. A new condom is used for
===PAGE:2751===
each act of coitus. Pregnancy rates in the 1st yr are 2% with perfect use but 15% with typical (ie,
inconsistent) use. Adding a spermicide, which may be included in the condom's lubricant or inserted into
the vagina, may lower these rates.
Diaphragm:
The diaphragm, a dome-shaped rubber cup with a flexible rim that fits over the cervix, is a
barrier to sperm. Diaphragms are made in various sizes. A health care practitioner fits a diaphragm to a
woman so that it is comfortable for her and her partner. After childbirth or a significant weight change, the
woman is refitted. The diaphragm should remain in place for > 8 h after the last coitus. Spermicides
should be used before each coitus in case the diaphragm is displaced. Pregnancy rates in the 1st yr are
about 6% with perfect use but about 16% with typical use.
Cervical cap:
The cervical cap resembles the diaphragm but is smaller and more rigid. It comes in
several sizes and is fitted by a health care practitioner. It can be left in place for 48 h. For nulliparous
women, pregnancy rates in the 1st yr are 9% with perfect use and about 18% with typical use. Pregnancy
rates for parous women are about twice as high because obtaining a secure fit is difficult.
Vaginal spermicides:
Vaginal foams, creams, and suppositories provide a physical barrier to sperm and
contain a spermicide, usually nonoxynol-9. They are combined with other barrier methods and are placed
in the vagina before each coitus. These products appear to have similar efficacy.
Contraceptive sponge:
The contraceptive sponge, previously off the market, is available again. It
contains nonoxynol-9, does not need to be fitted by a health care practitioner, and can be inserted before
coitus. Its efficacy is less than that of the diaphragm.
Periodic Abstinence
(Natural Family Planning)
Although the ovum can be fertilized for only about 12 h after ovulation, sperm can fertilize an ovum for up
to 5 days after coitus. Thus, periodic abstinence requires abstinence from coitus during the 5 days before
ovulation. Several methods can be used to identify the time of ovulation; they include the calendar
method, basal body temperature, and the characteristics of cervical mucus.
The calendar rhythm method aims to predict ovulation solely by menstrual dates. Ovulation occurs about
14 days before onset of menses; but even when menstrual cycles are regular, this method is often
inaccurate. The interval of abstinence during the menstrual cycle is determined by subtracting 18 days
from the shortest of the previous 12 cycles and 11 days from the longest (see
Fig. 257-1
). For example, if cycles vary between 26 and 29 days, abstinence is required from days 8
through 18 of each cycle. The greater the variance in cycle length, the longer abstinence lasts.
Methods that incorporate better predictors of ovulation are more effective but require training and effort:
•
Basal body temperature:
Women measure their temperature with a basal temperature thermometer
daily for several minutes before they arise in the morning. Temperature increases by about 0.5° C,
usually to > 37° C, after ovulation. Abstinence is required from the onset of menses until > 72 h after the
temperature increase.
•
Cervical mucus:
Cervical mucus may be absent for a few days after menses. After cervical mucus
appears, it tends to be cloudy, thick, and inelastic. A change in cervical mucus indicates ovulation more
accurately than body temperature. The amount of mucus increases, and the mucus becomes thinner,
clearer, and more elastic (stretching between the fingers) than usual. It resembles raw egg whites.
Coitus is avoided completely during menses (because mucus cannot be checked). Coitus is permitted
during the days when mucus is completely absent, but during these days, coitus is restricted to every
other day (so that semen is not confused with mucus). Coitus is avoided from the time mucus first
appears after menses until 4 days after the amount peaks. Coitus is permitted without restriction from 4
days after the amount of mucus peaks until menses begin.
•
Symptothermal method:
This method relies on the combination of increase in temperature,
===PAGE:2752===
appearance of cervical mucus, and calendar rhythm method. Intercourse is avoided from the 1st day
requiring abstinence according to the calendar method until 3 days after the amount of cervical mucus
decreases and the temperature increases.
[Fig. 257-1.
Natural family planning methods.]
The 1-yr pregnancy rates with of any of these methods is 25% with typical use. With perfect use, rates
are 9% for the calendar method, 2% for the temperature method, 3% with the mucus method, and 2%
with the symptothermal method. The symptothermal method is considered the most effective method of
periodic abstinence because achieving perfect use is easier.
Progestin Injections
Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) is a long-acting injectable formulation of
medroxyprogesterone acetate. Pregnancy rates in the 1st yr are 0.3% with perfect use and are slightly
higher with typical use (ie, delays between injections).
The injection must be given during the first 5 days of the menstrual cycle to prevent ovulation. The dose
is 150 mg q 3 mo by deep gluteal or deltoid IM injection. The injection site is not massaged, ensuring slow
absorption. Alternatively, a formulation can be injected sc; the dose is 104 mg sc q 3 mo. Levels are
usually effective starting 24 h after IM or sc injection and are maintained up to 4 mo or more. If the interval
between injections is > 13 wk, a negative pregnancy test is required before giving the next injection.
The most common adverse effect is disruption of the menstrual cycle. In the 3 mo after the first DMPA
injection, about 30% of women have amenorrhea. Another 30% have spotting or irregular bleeding
(usually light) > 11 days/mo; anemia does not usually result. As use continues, bleeding and menses tend
to decrease; after 2 yr, about 70% of women receiving DMPA have amenorrhea. Because DMPA has a
long duration of action, ovulation
may be delayed for up to 1 yr after the last injection; after ovulation
occurs, fertility is usually rapidly restored.
Women typically gain 1.5 to 4 kg during the 1st yr of DMPA use and continue to gain weight thereafter.
Usually, women who want to take DMPA are advised to decrease caloric intake and increase energy
expenditure. Headache is a common reason for stopping DMPA, but severity tends to decrease over time.
Most women using DMPA do not have headaches, and preexisting tension headaches and migraines
usually do not worsen. Mild, reversible, clinically insignificant deterioration of glucose tolerance and lipid
profile may occur. There is no evidence of increased fracture risk. Adolescents and young women using
DMPA should consume 1500 mg of Ca and 400 units of vitamin D daily; supplements should be taken if
necessary. Unlike OCs, DMPA does not contribute to hypertension or thromboembolism.
DMPA does not appear to increase risk of breast, ovarian, or invasive cervical cancer. DMPA reduces risk
of endometrial cancer and pelvic inflammatory disease. By stimulating erythropoiesis, DMPA reduces risk
of iron deficiency anemia and, for women with sickle cell disease, risks of anemia and crises.
Transdermal and Intravaginal Steroid Contraceptives
A 20-cm
transdermal patch can deliver 150
μ
g of the progestin norelgestromin (the active metabolite of
norgestimate) and 20
μ
g of ethinyl estradiol daily into the systemic circulation for 7 days; then, the patch
is removed, and a new patch is applied to a different area of the skin. Steroid blood levels are much more
constant than with OCs. After 3 patches, no patch is used for the 4th wk to allow withdrawal bleeding.
Overall contraceptive efficacy, incidence of bleeding, and adverse effects are similar to those of OCs, but
adherence may be better. The patch may be less effective in overweight women.
Use of a flexible vaginal ring containing ethinyl estradiol and the progestin etonogestrel, which are
absorbed through the vaginal epithelium, provides relatively constant blood levels. The ring is 58 mm in
diameter and 4 mm thick. It is inserted and removed by the woman; it is left in place for 3 wk, then
removed for 1 wk to allow for withdrawal bleeding. Bleeding with the ring in place is uncommon.
Contraceptive efficacy and adverse effects are similar to those of OCs, and adherence may be better.
===PAGE:2753===
Subdermal Implants
Progestin subdermal implants are available as a new, single-rod implant that can be inserted through a
trocar without a skin incision. The implant releases etonogestrel at a rate of 50
μ
g/day. The implant
provides effective contraception for 3 yr.
The most common adverse effects are similar to those of other progestins (uterine bleeding, amenorrhea,
headache). Whether weight gain results is unclear. Removing the implant requires a skin incision. After
implant removal, ovarian activity normalizes immediately.
Intrauterine Devices
Only about 1 million women in the US use intrauterine devices (IUDs), despite their advantages over
OCs:
• IUDs are highly effective.
• IUDs have no systemic effects.
• Only one contraceptive decision every 5 or 10 yr is required.
IUDs induce endometrial inflammation; this inflammation attracts neutrophils, which are toxic to sperm and
prevent fertilization of the ovum.
In the US, 2 types are used: levonorgestrel-releasing IUD (effective for 5 yr; cumulative pregnancy rate of
0.5%) and copper-bearing T380A (effective for ≥ 10 yr; cumulative pregnancy rate of < 2%). IUDs are
inserted high in the fundus at any time during the cycle. Contraindications include pregnancy and
untreated cervicitis or vaginitis. After IUD removal, fertility rate returns to normal after about 1 yr.
Adverse effects:
During the 1st yr, 10 to 15% of women stop use; fewer stop thereafter. Of those who
stop, > 50% do so because of bleeding and pain, which occur in about 15% of users during the 1st yr
and 7% during the 2nd yr. Bleeding stops completely within 1 yr in 20% of women using the
levonorgestrel-releasing IUD.
Spontaneous expulsion occurs in about 5% during the 1st yr (usually within the first few weeks) and in
fewer women thereafter. Expulsion is more common among younger women and among nulligravidas. If
another IUD is inserted, it is usually retained. Because about 20% of expulsions are unnoticed, a plastic
string is attached to the IUD so that the user can check for its presence periodically.
Uterine perforation occurs in about 1/1000. Perforation occurs only during IUD insertion. Sometimes only
the distal portion of the IUD
penetrates; then over the next few months, uterine contractions force the IUD
into the peritoneal cavity. Perforation is considered if a woman cannot feel the string but did not notice
expulsion. If the string is not visible during pelvic examination, the uterine cavity is probed with a sound or
biopsy instrument unless pregnancy is suspected. If the IUD cannot be felt, ultrasonography is done. If
the IUD is not seen, an abdominal x-ray is taken to exclude an intraperitoneal location. Intraperitoneal
IUDs may cause intestinal adhesions. IUDs that have perforated the uterus are removed, often via
laparoscopy.
Occasionally, salpingitis develops during the 1st mo because of contamination during insertion; risk is not
high enough to warrant routine antibiotic prophylaxis. IUD strings do not provide access for bacteria.
Pelvic infections that occur after 1 mo are sexually transmitted; unless severe, they can be treated with
the IUD in place.
Pregnancies that occur with an IUD in place are usually intrauterine (95%). About 5% are an ectopic
pregnancy (, which must be ruled out in any woman who becomes pregnant with an IUD in
place. With intrauterine pregnancies, there is a high risk of spontaneous abortion (about 55%) and
preterm delivery but not of congenital defects, fetal death, or pelvic infection during pregnancy. Risk of
abortion decreases to 20% if the IUD is removed.
===PAGE:2754===
IUDs do not increase and may decrease risk of endometrial adenocarcinoma and cervical cancer.
Emergency Contraception
• Levonorgestrel 0.75 mg po in 2 doses 12 h apart
• Levonorgestrel 1.5 mg po once
Emergency contraception is use of contraceptive hormones within 72 h of unprotected coitus. Emergency
contraception can decrease the pregnancy rate for a single act of unprotected coitus at midcycle, which is
typically about 8%. The most commonly used regimen is 2 doses of levonorgestrel 0.75 mg; one is taken
within 72 h of unprotected intercourse, followed by one 12 h later. If taken within 72 h of one act of
unprotected intercourse, levonorgestrel reduces risk of pregnancy by 89%, but if taken within 24 h, it
reduces risk by 95%. Taking levonorgestrel 1.5 mg once seems to be equally effective. Another regimen
—2 tablets, each containing ethinyl estradiol 50
μ
g and levonorgestrel 0.25 mg, followed by 2 more
tablets 12 h later—has been used, but it is slightly less effective. The high estrogen dose often causes
nausea and may cause vomiting.
Inserting a copper IUD within 10 days of coitus is more expensive but more effective than hormone
tablets; pregnancy rate is 0.1%.
Sterilization
In the US, one third of couples attempting to prevent pregnancy, particularly if the woman is > 30, choose
sterilization with vasectomy or tubal ligation. Sterilization should be assumed to be permanent. However,
if pregnancy is desired, reanastomosis may restore fertility in 45 to 60% of men after vasectomy and in 50
to 80% of women after tubal ligation. Also, in vitro fertilization may be used successfully.
Vasectomy:
The vasa deferentia are cut, and the cut ends are ligated or fulgurated. Vasectomy can be
done in about 20 min; a local anesthetic is used. Sterility requires about 15 to 20 ejaculations after the
operation and should be documented by 2 sperm-free ejaculates. Complications of vasectomy include
hematoma (≤ 5%), sperm granulomas (inflammatory responses to sperm leakage), and spontaneous
reanastomosis, which usually occurs shortly after the procedure.
Tubal ligation:
The fallopian tubes are cut and a segment is excised, or the tubes are closed by ligation,
fulguration, or various mechanical devices (plastic bands, spring-loaded clips). Sterilization using
mechanical devices causes less tissue damage and thus may be more reversible. Via laparoscopy, tubal
ligation can be done using a small periumbilical incision and a general or local anesthetic. Tubal ligation is
often done immediately after or the day after delivery.
Another method is to occlude the lumen of the tubes by inserting microinserts with inner coils via
hysteroscopy. This procedure does not require incisions or cutting, clipping, or burning of the tubes. After
microinserts are placed, tubal occlusion (and thus sterility) is confirmed by hysterosalpingography done
about 3 mo after the procedure.
Pregnancy rates after tubal ligation are < 0.5% during the 1st yr and 1.5 to 2% after 10 yr. Rates are
lower if the tube has been partly excised.
Adverse effects are uncommon: death in a few patients per 100,000, hemorrhage or intestinal injuries in
about 0.5%, and other complications (eg, infarction, failure of occlusion) in up to about 5%. About 30% of
pregnancies that occur after tubal ligation are ectopic.
Induced Abortion
Induced abortion is legally available to about two thirds of women worldwide. In the US, abortion is legal
during the 1st trimester (≤ 12 wk); after that, legality varies by state. In the US, about half of pregnancies
are unintended; about 40% of these are terminated by elective abortion, with 90% during the 1st
===PAGE:2755===
trimester.
Common methods of inducing abortion are instrumental evacuation through the vagina and medical
induction (stimulation of uterine contractions). Uterine surgery (hysterotomy or hysterectomy) is a last
resort, which is usually avoided because mortality rates are higher. Hysterotomy also results in a uterine
scar, which may rupture in subsequent pregnancies.
Typically, gestational age, which usually dictates abortion method, is established by ultrasonography.
Rh
(D) immune globulin, when indicated, is given to women with Rh-negative blood to prevent
sensitization. First-trimester abortions often require only local anesthesia; later abortions sometimes
require general anesthesia.
Instrumental evacuation:
Instrumental evacuation is used in 97% of all abortions.
At 4 to 6 wk, the uterus can be curetted gently via a cannula attached to a vacuum source. Because
failure to terminate the pregnancy is more common in early than in later weeks, instrumental evacuation
should usually not be done until a gestational sac is seen. Before this time, abortion is usually induced
medically.
At 7 to 12 wk, dilation and curettage (D & C) is usually used; large-diameter suction cannulas are usually
required, so the cervix must be dilated. Typically, progressively increasing sizes of tapered dilators are
used. Cervical damage due to dilation can be prevented or minimized by using laminaria (dried seaweed
stems) or other osmotic dilators, which can be inserted into the cervix and left for ≥ 4 h (usually
overnight). They dilate the cervix by expanding or stimulating prostaglandin release.
At 12 to 18 wk, dilation and evacuation (D & E) is usually used. The cervix is dilated, usually with
laminaria or other osmotic dilators and dilating instruments. Forceps are used to dismember and remove
the fetus, and a suction cannula is used to aspirate the amniotic fluid, placenta, and fetal debris. D & E
requires more skill than do other methods of instrumental evacuation.
Medical induction:
Medical induction can be done for pregnancies of < 7 to 9 wk or > 15 wk.
For pregnancies of up to 9 wk, mifepristone (RU 486) 200 to 600 mg po, a progesterone-receptor blocker,
followed by misoprostol 400
μ
g po or 800
μ
g intravaginally, is about 95% effective in terminating
pregnancies.
After 15 wk, prostaglandins are used. They include vaginal prostaglandin E
(dinoprostone) suppositories,
intravaginal prostaglandin E
analog (misoprostol) tablets, and IM injections of prostaglandin F
α
(dinoprost tromethamine). Using two 200μ
g intravaginal tablets of misoprostol q 6 h is nearly 100%
successful within 48 h of treatment.
Adverse effects of prostaglandins include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hyperthermia, facial flushing,
vasovagal symptoms, bronchospasm, and decreased seizure threshold. In women with a severe kidney or
liver disorder, activation of the prostaglandin may be decreased, so dose should be increased.
Complications
Complication rates with abortion (serious complications in < 1%; mortality in < 1 in 100,000) are higher
than those with contraception, although the rates have decreased in the last few decades. Complication
rates increase as gestational age increases.
Serious early complications include perforation of the uterus (0.1%) or, less often, of the intestine or
another organ by an instrument. Major hemorrhage (0.06%) may result from trauma or an atonic uterus.
Laceration of the cervix (0.1 to 1%) ranges from superficial tenaculum tears to cervicovaginal tears, rarely
with fistulas. General or local anesthesia rarely causes serious complications.
The most common delayed complications include bleeding and significant infection (0.1 to 2%), which
===PAGE:2756===
usually occur simultaneously because placental fragments are retained, and thrombophlebitis. If bleeding
occurs or infection is suspected, pelvic ultrasonography is done; retained placental fragments may be
visible on ultrasound scans. Mild inflammation is expected, but if infection is moderate or severe,
peritonitis or sepsis may occur. Sterility may result from synechiae in the endometrial cavity or tubal
fibrosis due to infection. Forceful dilation of the cervix in more advanced pregnancies may contribute to
incompetent cervix. Elective abortion probably does not increase risks for the fetus or woman during
subsequent pregnancies.
Psychologic complications do not typically occur but may occur in women who had psychologic symptoms
before pregnancy, who terminated a desired pregnancy for medical reasons (maternal or fetal), who have
considerable ambivalence about the abortion, who are adolescents, who had a late abortion, or who
obtained an abortion illegally.
===PAGE:2757===
Chapter 258. Infertility
Introduction
Infertility is inability of a couple to conceive after 1 yr of unprotected intercourse.
Frequent, unprotected intercourse results in conception for 50% of couples within 3 mo, for 75% within 6
mo, and for 90% within 1 yr. Infertility can be caused by the following:
• Sperm disorders (35% of couples)
• Decreased ovarian reserve or ovulatory dysfunction (20%)
• Tubal dysfunction and pelvic lesions (30%)
• Abnormal cervical mucus (≤ 5%)
• Unidentified factors (10%)
Inability to conceive often leads to feelings of frustration, anger, guilt, resentment, and inadequacy.
Couples wishing to conceive are encouraged to have frequent intercourse for the few days when
ovulation is most likely, probably midway between menstrual cycles. Measuring morning basal body
temperature (BBT) daily can help determine when ovulation is occurring in women with regular menstrual
cycles. A decrease suggests impending ovulation; an increase of ≥ 0.5°C suggests ovulation has just
occurred. Commercially available luteinizing hormone (LH) prediction test kits, which identify the midcycle
LH surge, can also help determine when ovulation occurs and are less disruptive than measuring BBT.
Use of caffeine and tobacco, which can impair fertility, is discouraged.
If these measures do not result in pregnancy, a diagnostic evaluation is done. It begins with history,
examination, and counseling of both partners. Men are evaluated for sperm disorders, and women for
ovulatory and tubal dysfunction and pelvic lesions.
Support groups for couples (eg, American Fertility Association, RESOLVE) may help. If the likelihood of
conceiving is low (usually after 2 yr of treatment), the clinician should mention adoption.
Sperm Disorders
Sperm disorders include defects in quality or quantity of sperm produced and defects in sperm
emission. Diagnosis is by semen and genetic testing. The most effective treatment is usually in
vitro fertilization via intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
Pathophysiology
Spermatogenesis occurs continuously. Each germ cell requires about 72 to 74 days to mature fully.
Spermatogenesis is most efficient at 34° C. Within the seminiferous tubules, Sertoli cells regulate
maturation, and Leydig cells produce the necessary testosterone. Fructose is normally produced in the
seminal vesicles and secreted through the ejaculatory ducts. Sperm disorders may result in an
inadequate quantity of sperm—too few (oligospermia) or none (azoospermia)—or defects in sperm
quality, such as abnormal motility or structure.
Etiology
Impaired spermatogenesis:
Spermatogenesis can be impaired by heat, disorders (GU, endocrine, or
genetic), drugs, or toxins (see
Table 258-1
), resulting in an inadequate quantity or defective quality of sperm.
Impaired sperm emission:
Sperm emission may be impaired because of retrograde ejaculation into the
===PAGE:2758===
bladder, which is often due to
• Diabetes
• Neurologic dysfunction
• Retroperitoneal dissection (eg, for Hodgkin lymphoma)
• Prostatectomy
Sperm emission can also be impaired by
• Obstruction of the vas deferens
• Congenital absence of both vasa deferentia or epididymides, often in men with mutations of the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (
CFTR
) gene
• Absence of both seminal vesicles
Almost all men with symptomatic cystic fibrosis have congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens.
Other causes:
Men with microdeletions affecting the Y chromosome can develop oligospermia via
various mechanisms, depending on the specific deletion. Another rare mechanism of infertility is
destruction or inactivation of sperm by sperm antibodies, which are usually produced by the man.
Diagnosis
• Semen analysis
• Sometimes genetic testing
When couples are infertile, the man should always be evaluated for sperm disorders. History and physical
examination focus on
[Table 258-1.
Causes of Impaired Spermatogenesis]
potential causes (eg, GU disorders). Normal volume of each testis is 20 to 25 mL. Semen analysis should
be done. If oligospermia or azoospermia is detected, genetic testing, including standard karyotyping, PCR
of tagged chromosomal sites (to detect microdeletions affecting the Y chromosome), and evaluation for
mutations of the
CFTR
gene, should be done. Before a man with a
CFTR
gene mutation and his partner
attempt to conceive, the partner should also be tested to exclude cystic fibrosis carrier status.
Before semen analysis, the man is typically asked to refrain from ejaculation for 2 to 3 days. However,
recent data indicate that daily ejaculation does not reduce the sperm count in men unless there is a
problem. Because sperm count varies, testing requires ≥ 2 specimens obtained ≥ 1 wk apart; each
specimen is obtained by masturbation into a glass jar, preferably at the laboratory site. If this method is
difficult, the man can use a condom at home; the condom must be free of lubricants and chemicals. After
being at room temperature for 20 to 30 min, the ejaculate is evaluated (see
Table 258-2
). Additional computer-assisted measures of sperm motility (eg, linear sperm velocity) are
available; however, their correlation with fertility is unclear.
If a man without hypogonadism or congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens has an ejaculate
volume < 1 mL, urine is analyzed for sperm after ejaculation. A disproportionately large number of sperm
in urine vs semen suggests retrograde ejaculation.
Endocrine evaluation is warranted if the semen analysis is abnormal and especially if the sperm
concentration is < 10 million/mL.
===PAGE:2759===
[Table 258-2.
Semen Analysis]
Minimum initial testing should include serum follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and testosterone levels. If
testosterone is low, serum luteinizing hormone (LH) and prolactin should also be measured. Men with
abnormal spermatogenesis often have normal FSH levels, but any increase in FSH is a clear indication of
abnormal spermatogenesis. Elevations in prolactin require evaluation for a tumor involving or impinging
on the anterior pituitary or may indicate ingestion of various prescription or recreational drugs.
Specialized sperm tests, available at some infertility centers, may be considered if routine tests of both
partners do not explain infertility and in vitro fertilization or gamete intrafallopian tube transfer is being
contemplated. The immunobead test detects sperm antibodies, and the hypo-osmotic swelling test
measures the structural integrity of sperm plasma membranes. The hemizona assay and sperm
penetration assay determine the ability of sperm to fertilize the egg in vitro. The usefulness of these
specialized tests is controversial.
If necessary, testicular biopsy can distinguish between obstructive and nonobstructive azoospermia.
Treatment
• Clomiphene
• Assisted reproductive techniques if clomiphene is ineffective
Underlying GU disorders are treated. For men with sperm counts of 10 to 20 million/mL and no endocrine
disorder, clomiphene citrate (25 to 50 mg po once/day taken 25 days/mo for 3 to 4 mo) can be tried.
Clomiphene, an anti-estrogen, may stimulate sperm production and increase sperm counts. However,
whether it improves sperm motility or morphology is unclear, and it has not been proved to increase
fertility.
If sperm count is < 10 million/mL or clomiphene is unsuccessful in men with normal sperm motility, the
most effective treatment is usually in vitro fertilization with injection of a single sperm into a single egg
(intracytoplasmic sperm injection). Alternatively, intrauterine insemination using washed semen samples
and timed to coincide with ovulation is sometimes tried. If pregnancy is going to occur, it usually occurs by
the 6th treatment cycle.
Decreased number and viability of sperm may not preclude pregnancy. In such cases, fertility may be
enhanced by controlled ovarian hyperstimulation of the woman plus artificial insemination or assisted
reproductive techniques (eg, in vitro fertilization, intracytoplasmic sperm injection).
If the male partner cannot produce enough fertile sperm, a couple may consider insemination using donor
sperm. Risk of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases is minimized by freezing donor sperm for ≥ 6
mo, after which donors are retested for infection before insemination proceeds.
Abnormal Cervical Mucus
Abnormal cervical mucus may impair fertility by inhibiting penetration or increasing destruction
of sperm.
Normally, cervical mucus is stimulated to change from thick and impenetrable to thin and stretchable by
an increase in estradiol levels during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. Abnormal cervical mucus
may
• Remain impenetrable to sperm around the time of ovulation
• Promote sperm destruction by facilitating influx of vaginal bacteria (eg, due to cervicitis)
• Contain antibodies to sperm (occasionally)
===PAGE:2760===
Abnormal mucus rarely impairs fertility significantly, except in women with chronic cervicitis or cervical
stenosis due to prior treatment for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.
Diagnosis
Women are examined to check for cervicitis and cervical stenosis. Unless they have one of these
disorders, postcoital testing of cervical mucus to determine whether viable sperm are present (which used
to be routine during infertility evaluation) is usually unnecessary. Usefulness of postcoital testing has not
been documented.
Treatment
Treatment may include intrauterine insemination or drugs to thin the mucus (eg, guaifenesin). Neither
treatment has been proved effective.
Decreased Ovarian Reserve
Decreased ovarian reserve is a decrease in the quantity or quality of oocytes, leading to
impaired fertility.
Ovarian reserve may begin to decrease at age 30 or even earlier and decreases rapidly after age 40.
Ovarian lesions also decrease reserve. Although older age is a risk factor for decreased ovarian reserve,
age and decreased ovarian reserve are each independent predictors
of infertility and thus of a poorer
response to fertility treatment.
Diagnosis
• FSH and estradiol levels, sometimes after stimulation with clomiphene
Testing for decreased ovarian reserve is considered for women who are ≥ 35, who have had ovarian
surgery, or who have responded poorly to treatments such as ovarian stimulation with exogenous
gonadotropins. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels > 10 mIU/mL or estradiol levels of < 80 pg/mL
on day 3 of the menstrual cycle suggest the diagnosis. Diagnosis can also be made by giving the woman
clomiphene 100 mg po once/day on days 5 to 9 of the menstrual cycle (clomiphene citrate challenge test).
A dramatic increase in FSH and estradiol levels from day 3 to day 10 of the cycle indicates decreased
reserve.
Treatment
If women are > 42 or ovarian reserve is decreased, assisted reproduction using donor oocytes may be
necessary.
Ovulatory Dysfunction
Ovulatory dysfunction is abnormal, irregular, or absent ovulation. Menses are often irregular or
absent. Diagnosis is often possible by history or can be confirmed by measurement of hormone
levels or serial pelvic ultrasonography. Treatment is usually induction of ovulation with
clomiphene or other drugs.
Etiology
Chronic ovulatory dysfunction in premenopausal women is most commonly caused by polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS— but has many other causes, including hyperprolactinemia, hypothalamic
dysfunction (eg, hypothalamic amenorrhea), and other disorders that cause anovulatory amenorrhea (see
Table 246-1
.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2761===
Ovulatory dysfunction is suspected if menses are absent, irregular, or not preceded by symptoms, such
as breast tenderness, lower abdominal bloating, or moodiness.
Diagnosis
• Basal body temperature monitoring
• Measurement of urinary or serum hormones or ultrasonography
Measuring morning body temperature daily can help determine whether and when ovulation is occurring
(. However, this method is often inaccurate and has an error margin of 2 days. More accurate
methods include home testing kits, which detect an increase in urinary luteinizing hormone (LH) excretion
24 to 36 h before ovulation (requiring daily testing for several days around midcycle, usually beginning
about or after cycle day 9), and pelvic ultrasonography, which is used to monitor ovarian follicle diameter
and rupture (and should begin in the late follicular phase as well). Also, serum progesterone levels of ≥ 3
ng/mL (≥ 9.75 nmol/L) or elevated levels of one of its urinary metabolites, pregnanediol glucuronide
(measured, if possible, 1 wk before onset of the next menstrual period), indicate that ovulation has
occurred.
Intermittent or absent ovulation should prompt evaluation for disorders of the pituitary, hypothalamus, or
ovaries (eg, PCOS).
Treatment
• Clomiphene
• Possibly metformin if body mass index is ≥ 35
• Gonadotropins if clomiphene is ineffective
Ovulation can usually be induced with drugs. Commonly, chronic anovulation that is not due to
hyperprolactinemia is initially treated with the antiestrogen clomiphene citrate. Clomiphene is most
effective when the cause is PCOS. First, uterine bleeding, unless it has occurred spontaneously, is
induced with medroxyprogesterone acetate 5 to 10 mg po once/day for 5 to 10 days. Clomiphene 50 mg
po once/day is started between the 3rd and 5th day after bleeding begins; it is continued for 5 days.
Ovulation usually occurs 5 to 10 days (mean 7 days) after the last day of clomiphene; if ovulation occurs,
menses follows within 35 days of the induced bleeding episode. The daily dose can be increased by up
to 50 mg every 2 cycles to a maximum of 200 mg/dose as needed to induce ovulation. Treatment is
continued as needed for up to 4 ovulatory cycles. Ovulation occurs in 75 to 80% of women treated with
clomiphene, but the pregnancy rate is only about 40 to 50%.
Adverse effects of clomiphene include vasomotor flushes (10%), abdominal distention (6%), breast
tenderness (2%), nausea (3%), visual symptoms (1 to 2%), and headaches (1 to 2%). Multifetal
pregnancy (primarily twins) occurs in about 5%, and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome occurs in ≤ 1%.
Ovarian cysts are common. A previously suggested association between clomiphene taken for > 12
cycles and ovarian cancer has not been confirmed.
For women with PCOS, metformin (750 to 1000 mg po bid) may be a useful adjunct in inducing ovulation,
particularly if the patient is insulin resistant, as many patients with PCOS are. However, clomiphene alone
is more effective than metformin and is just as effective as metformin and clomiphene together. Metformin
may be useful for women with a body mass index > 35 and should be considered for women with PCOS
and glucose intolerance.
For all women with ovulatory dysfunction that does not respond to clomiphene, human gonadotropins (ie,
preparations that contain purified or recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH] and variable amounts
of LH) can be used. Several IM and sc preparations with similar efficacy are available; they typically
contain 75 IU of FSH activity with or without LH activity. They are usually given once/day, beginning on
the 3rd to 5th day after induced or spontaneous bleeding; ideally, they stimulate maturation of 1 to 3
===PAGE:2762===
follicles, determined ultrasonographically, within 7 to 14 days. Ovulation is induced with human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) 5,000 to 10,000 IU IM after follicle maturation; criteria for induction may vary, but
typically, at least one follicle should be > 16 mm in diameter. However, ovulation is not induced if women
are at high risk of multifetal pregnancy or ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Risk factors for these
problems include presence of > 3 follicles > 16 mm in diameter and preovulatory serum estradiol levels >
1500 pg/mL (or possibly > 1000 pg/mL) in women with several small ovarian follicles. When exogenous
gonadotropins are used appropriately, > 95% of women treated with them ovulate, but the pregnancy rate
is only 50 to 75%.
After gonadotropin therapy, 10 to 30% of successful pregnancies are multiple. Ovarian hyperstimulation
syndrome occurs in 10 to 20% of patients; ovaries can become massively enlarged, and intravascular
fluid volume shifts into the peritoneal space, causing potentially life-threatening ascites and hypovolemia.
Underlying disorders (eg, hyperprolactinemia— are treated. If the cause is hypothalamic
amenorrhea, gonadorelin acetate, a synthetic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) given as a
pulsatile IV infusion, can induce ovulation. Doses of 2.5 to 5.0
μ
g boluses (pulse doses) regularly q 60 to
90 min are most effective. Gonadorelin acetate is unlikely to cause multifetal pregnancy. Because
gonadorelin is no longer available in the US, clomiphene citrate is the first drug used to treat
hypothalamic amenorrhea, followed by exogenous gonadotropins, if ovulation induction is unsuccessful.
Tubal Dysfunction and Pelvic Lesions
Tubal dysfunction is fallopian tube obstruction or epithelial dysfunction that impairs zygote
motility; pelvic lesions are structural abnormalities that can impede fertilization or implantation.
Etiology
Tubal dysfunction can result from
• Pelvic inflammatory disease
• Use of an intrauterine device (a rare cause of pelvic infection)
• Ruptured appendix
• Lower abdominal surgery leading to pelvic adhesions
• Inflammatory disorders (eg, TB)
• Ectopic pregnancy
Pelvic lesions that can impede fertility include
• Intrauterine adhesions (Asherman's syndrome)
• Fibroids obstructing the fallopian tubes or distorting the uterine cavity
• Certain malformations
• Pelvic adhesions
Endometriosis can cause tubal, uterine, or other lesions that impair fertility.
Diagnosis
• Hysterosalpingography
• Sometimes laparoscopy or sonohysterography
===PAGE:2763===
All infertility evaluations include assessment of the fallopian tubes. Most often, hysterosalpingography
(fluoroscopic imaging of the uterus and fallopian tubes after injection of a radiopaque agent into the
uterus) is done 2 to 5 days after cessation of menstrual flow. Hysterosalpingography rarely indicates tubal
patency falsely but indicates tubal obstruction falsely in about 15% of cases. This test can also detect
some pelvic and intrauterine lesions. For unexplained reasons, fertility appears to be enhanced after
hysterosalpingography if the test result is normal. Thus, if hysterosalpingography results are normal,
additional diagnostic tests of tubal function can be delayed for several cycles.
Tubal lesions can be further evaluated with laparoscopy. Intrauterine and tubal lesions can be detected or
further evaluated by sonohysterography (injection of isotonic fluid through the cervix into the uterus
during ultrasonography)
or hysteroscopy. Diagnosis and treatment are often done simultaneously during
laparoscopy or hysteroscopy.
Treatment
• Laparoscopy or hysteroscopy to restore patency
During laparoscopy, pelvic adhesions can be lysed, or pelvic endometriosis can be fulgurated or ablated
by laser. During hysteroscopy, adhesions can be lysed, and submucous fibroids and intrauterine polyps
can be removed. Success rates are low, so assisted reproductive techniques are often necessary.
Unexplained Infertility
Infertility is considered unexplained when semen in the man and ovulation and fallopian tubes
in the woman are normal.
When infertility remains unexplained after initial evaluation, empiric treatments are instituted.
Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) can be used to make pregnancy more likely and to achieve it
sooner. This procedure stimulates development of multiple follicles; the goal is to induce ovulation of > 1
oocyte (superovulation). However, COH may result in multifetal pregnancy, which has increased risks and
morbidity. COH involves the following:
• Giving clomiphene, with human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) to trigger ovulation, for up to 3 menstrual
cycles
• Intrauterine insemination within 2 days of hCG administration
• If pregnancy does not result, other assisted reproductive techniques
Alternatively, before trying assisted reproduction, some clinicians use gonadotropins (preparations that
contain purified or recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone and variable amounts of luteinizing hormone),
followed by hCG as for ovulatory dysfunction, then intrauterine insemination within 2 days of hCG
administration. A progestin may be needed during the luteal phase to maximize the chance of
implantation. Gonadotropin dosage depends on the patient's age and ovarian reserve.
The pregnancy rate is the same (about 65%) whether in vitro fertilization is used immediately after
unsuccessful treatment with clomiphene plus hCG or whether gonadotropins with intrauterine
insemination are used next before trying in vitro fertilization. However, when in vitro fertilization is done
immediately after treatment with clomiphene plus hCG, women become pregnant more quickly.
Assisted Reproductive Techniques
Assisted reproductive techniques (ARTs) involve manipulation of sperm and ova in vitro with
the goal of producing an embryo.
ARTs may result in multifetal pregnancy, but risk is less than that with controlled ovarian hyperstimulation.
===PAGE:2764===
If risk of genetic defects is high, the embryo can often be tested for defects before transfer and
implantation (preimplantation genetic diagnosis).
In women < 35, > 43% of ART cycles result in pregnancy, and almost 87% of the pregnancies end in live
births in the US (2005 data). The pregnancy rate decreases with increasing age; for women aged 41 to
42, the pregnancy rate is 17.5%, and only about 60% of these pregnancies end in live births. Use of
donor oocytes is usually recommended for women > 42.
In vitro fertilization (IVF):
IVF can be used to treat infertility due to oligospermia, sperm antibodies, tubal
dysfunction, or endometriosis as well as unexplained infertility. The procedure involves the following:
•
Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation:
Clomiphene plus gonadotropins or gonadotropins alone can be
used. A gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist or antagonist is often given to prevent
premature ovulation. After sufficient follicular growth, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is given to
induce final follicular maturation and ovulation.
•
Oocyte retrieval:
About 34 h after hCG is given, oocytes are retrieved by direct needle puncture of the
follicle, usually transvaginally with ultrasound guidance or less commonly laparoscopically.
•
Fertilization:
The oocytes are inseminated in vitro. The semen sample is typically washed several
times with tissue culture medium and concentrated for motile sperm, which are then added.
•
Embryo culture:
After sperm are added, the oocytes are cultured for about 2 to 5 days.
•
Embryo transfer:
Only 1 or a few of the resulting embryos are transferred to the uterine cavity,
minimizing the chance of a multi-fetal pregnancy, the greatest risk of IVF. The number of embryos
transferred is determined by the woman's age and likelihood
of response to IVF. Other embryos may be
frozen in liquid nitrogen for transfer in a subsequent cycle.
Gamete intrafallopian tube transfer (GIFT):
GIFT is an alternative to IVF but is used infrequently,
typically for women with unexplained infertility or with normal tubal function plus endometriosis. Multiple
oocytes and sperm are obtained as for IVF but are transferred—transvaginally with ultrasound guidance
or laparoscopically—to the distal fallopian tubes, where fertilization occurs. Live birth rates per cycle are
about 25 to 35% at most infertility centers.
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection:
This technique is useful when other techniques are not successful
or are unlikely to be so or when a severe sperm disorder is present. Oocytes are obtained as for IVF. A
single sperm is injected into each oocyte to avoid fertilization by abnormal sperm. The embryo is then
cultured and transferred as for IVF. In 2005, about 60% of all ART cycles in the US involved
intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
Other techniques:
A combination of IVF and GIFT, zygote intrafallopian tube transfer, use of donor
oocytes, and transfer of frozen embryos to a surrogate mother are sometimes used. Some of these
techniques raise moral and ethical issues (eg, rightful parentage in surrogate motherhood, selective
reduction of the number of implanted embryos if multi-fetal pregnancy results).
===PAGE:2765===
Chapter 259. Prenatal Genetic Counseling and Evaluation
Introduction
(See also
Chapter 341
)
Prenatal genetic counseling is provided for all prospective parents, ideally before conception, to assess
risk factors for congenital disorders. (Certain precautions to help prevent birth defects (eg, avoiding
teratogens, taking supplemental folate—see p.
.) are recommended for all women who are planning
to become pregnant.) Parents with risk factors are advised about possible outcomes and options for
evaluation. If testing identifies a disorder, reproductive options are discussed.
Preconception
options include
• Contraception
• Artificial insemination if the man is a carrier
• Oocyte donation if the woman is a carrier
Postconception
options include
• Pregnancy termination
• Sometimes treatment (eg, dexamethasone to prevent virilization in a female fetus with 21-hydroxylase
deficiency)
Information presented at genetic counseling should be as simple, nondirective, and jargon-free as
possible to help anxious couples understand it. Frequent repetition may be necessary. Couples should be
given time alone to formulate questions. Couples can be told about information that is available on the
Internet (www.modimes.org
) for many common problems (eg, advanced maternal age, recurrent
spontaneous abortions, previous offspring with neural tube defects, previous offspring with trisomy).
Many couples (eg, those with known or suspected risk factors) benefit from referral to genetic specialists
for presentation of information and testing options.
Risk factors:
Some risk of genetic abnormality exists in all pregnancies. Among live births, incidence is
• 0.5% for numeric or structural chromosomal disorders
• 1% for single-gene (mendelian) disorders
• 1% for multiple-gene (polygenic) disorders
Among stillbirths, rates of abnormalities are higher. Most malformations involving a single organ system
(eg, neural tube defects, most congenital heart defects) result from polygenic or multifactorial (ie, also
influenced by environmental factors) inheritance.
Risk of having a fetus with a chromosomal disorder is increased for most couples who have had a
previous fetus or infant with a chromosomal disorder (recognized or missed), except for a few specific
types (eg, 45,X; triploidy; de novo chromosomal rearrangements). Chromosomal disorders are more likely
to be present in the following:
• Fetuses that spontaneously abort during the 1st trimester (50 to 60%)
• Fetuses with a major malformation (30%)
• Stillborns (5%)
===PAGE:2766===
Rarely, a parent has a chromosomal disorder that increases risk of a chromosomal disorder
in the fetus.
Asymptomatic parental chromosomal disorders (eg, balanced abnormalities such as certain translocations
and inversions) may not be suspected. A balanced parental chromosomal rearrangement should be
suspected if couples have had recurrent spontaneous abortions, infertility, or a child with a malformation.
For unclear reasons, risk of a fetal chromosomal disorder increases as maternal age increases. Among
live births, the rate is about
• 0.2% at age 20
• 0.5% at age 35
• 1.5% at age 40
• 14% at age 49
Most chromosomal disorders due to older maternal age involve an extra chromosome (trisomy),
particularly trisomy 21 (Down syndrome). Paternal age > 50 increases risk of some spontaneous
dominant mutations, such as achondroplasia, in offspring.
An autosomal dominant disorder is suspected if there is a family history in more than one generation;
autosomal disorders affect males and females equally. If one parent has an autosomal dominant disorder,
risk is 50% that the disorder will be transmitted to an offspring.
For an autosomal recessive disorder to be expressed, an offspring must receive a mutant gene for that
disorder from both parents. Parents may be heterozygous (carriers) and, if so, are usually clinically
normal. If both parents are carriers, offspring (male or female) are at a 25% risk of being homozygous for
the mutant gene and thus affected, 50% are likely to be heterozygous, and 25% are likely to be
genetically normal. If only siblings and no other relatives are affected, an autosomal recessive disorder
should be suspected. Likelihood that both parents carry the same autosomal recessive trait is increased if
they are consanguineous.
Because females have 2 X chromosomes and males have only one, X-linked recessive disorders are
expressed in all males who carry the mutation. Such disorders are usually transmitted through clinically
normal, heterozygous (carrier) females. Thus, for each son of a carrier female, risk of having the disorder
is 50%, and for each daughter, risk of being a carrier is 50%. Affected males do not transmit the gene to
their sons, but they transmit it to all their daughters, who thus are carriers. Unaffected males do not
transmit the gene.
Genetic Evaluation
Genetic evaluation is part of routine prenatal care and is ideally done before conception. The extent of
genetic evaluation a woman chooses is related to how the woman weighs factors such as
• The probability of a fetal abnormality based on risk factors and the results of any previous testing
• The probability of a complication from invasive fetal testing
• The importance of knowing the results (eg, would the pregnancy be terminated if an abnormality was
diagnosed, would not knowing the results cause anxiety)
For these reasons, the decision is individual, and recommendations often cannot be generalized to all
women, even those with similar risk.
A screening history is part of the evaluation. The history is summarized as a pedigree (see
Fig. 341-1
. Information should include the health status and presence of genetic disorders or
carrier status of both parents, of 1st-degree relatives (parents, siblings, offspring), and of 2nd-degree
relatives (aunts, uncles, grandparents), as well as ethnic and racial background and consanguineous
===PAGE:2767===
matings. Outcomes of previous pregnancies are noted. If genetic disorders are suspected, relevant
medical records must be reviewed.
Genetic screening tests are best done before conception. Tests are offered to parents at risk of being
asymptomatic carriers for certain common mendelian disorders (see
Table 259-1
). Diagnostic tests for specific abnormalities are offered to parents when appropriate (see
Table 259-2
).
Pregnant women should be offered screening using multiple maternal serum markers (
α
-fetoprotein,
β
-
human chorionic gonadotropin [β
-hCG], estriol, inhibin A— to detect neural tube defects,
Down syndrome (and other chromosomal abnormalities), and some other birth defects. This screening is
done at 15 to 20 wk of pregnancy.
Fetal genetic diagnostic tests:
These tests are usually done via chorionic villus sampling,
amniocentesis, or, rarely, percutaneous umbilical blood sampling. They can detect all trisomies, many
other chromosomal abnormalities, and several hundred mendelian abnormalities. They are usually
recommended if risk of a fetal chromosomal abnormality is increased (see
Table 259-2
). Fetal genetic
diagnostic tests, unlike screening tests, are usually invasive and involve fetal risk. Thus, in the past,
these tests were not routinely recommended for women without risk factors. However, because fetal
genetic diagnostic tests are now more widely available and safety has improved, offering fetal genetic
testing to all pregnant women, regardless of risk, is recommended.
[Table 259-1.
Genetic Screening for Some Ethnic Groups]
Preimplantation diagnosis is not commonly used because the procedure requires technical expertise and
is expensive.
Procedures
All procedures used to diagnose genetic disorders, except ultrasonography, are invasive and involve
slight fetal risk. If testing detects a serious abnormality, the pregnancy can be terminated, or in some
cases, a disorder can be treated (eg, dexamethasone to prevent virilization in a female fetus with 21hydroxylase deficiency). Even if neither of these possibilities is anticipated, some women prefer to know
of fetal abnormalities before birth.
Ultrasonography
Some experts recommend ultrasonography routinely for all pregnant women. Others use ultrasonography
only for specific indications, such as checking for suspected genetic
[Table 259-2.
Indications for Fetal Genetic Diagnostic Tests]
or obstetric abnormalities or helping interpret abnormal maternal serum marker levels. If ultrasonography
is done by skilled operators, sensitivity for major congenital malformations is high. However, some
conditions (eg, oligohydramnios, maternal obesity, fetal position) interfere with obtaining optimal images.
Ultrasonography is noninvasive and has no known risks to the woman or fetus.
Basic ultrasonography
is done to
• Confirm gestational age
• Determine fetal viability
• Detect a multifetal pregnancy
• During the 2nd or 3rd trimester, possibly identify major malformations in the fetal intracranial structures,
spine, heart, bladder, kidneys, stomach, thorax, abdominal wall, long bones, and umbilical cord
===PAGE:2768===
Although ultrasonography provides only structural information, some structural abnormalities strongly
suggest genetic abnormalities. Multiple malformations may suggest a chromosomal disorder.
Targeted ultrasonography
, with high-resolution ultrasonography equipment, is available at certain
referral centers and provides more detailed images than basic ultrasonography. This test may be
indicated for couples with a family history of a congenital malformation (eg, congenital heart defects, cleft
lip and palate, pyloric stenosis), particularly one that may be treated effectively before birth (eg, posterior
urethral valves with megacystis) or at delivery (eg, diaphragmatic hernia). High-resolution
ultrasonography may also be used if maternal serum marker levels are abnormal. High-resolution
ultrasonography may allow detection of the following:
• Renal malformations (eg, renal agenesis [Potter's syndrome], polycystic kidney disease)
• Lethal forms of short-limbed skeletal dysplasias (eg, thanatophoric skeletal dysplasia, achondrogenesis)
• Gut malformations (eg, obstruction)
• Diaphragmatic hernia
• Microcephalus
• Hydrocephalus
During the 2nd trimester, identifying structures that are statistically associated with
increased risk of fetal
chromosomal abnormalities helps refine risk estimate.
Amniocentesis
In amniocentesis, a needle is inserted transabdominally, using ultrasonographic guidance, into the
amniotic sac to withdraw amniotic fluid and fetal cells for testing, including measurement of chemical
markers (eg,
α
-fetoprotein, acetylcholinesterase). The safest time for amniocentesis is after 14 wk
gestation. Immediately before amniocentesis, ultrasonography is done to assess fetal cardiac motion and
determine gestational age, placental position, amniotic fluid location, and fetal number. If the mother has
Rh-negative blood and is unsensitized, Rh
(D) immune globulin 300
μ
g is given after the procedure to
reduce the likelihood of sensitization (.
Amniocentesis has traditionally been offered to pregnant women > 35 because their risk of having an
infant with Down syndrome or another chromosomal abnormality is increased. However, with the
widespread availability and improved safety of amniocentesis, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists recommends all pregnant women be offered amniocentesis to assess the presence of fetal
chromosomal disorders.
Occasionally, the amniotic fluid obtained is bloody. Usually, the blood does not affect amniotic cell growth
and is maternal; however, if the blood is fetal, it may falsely elevate amniotic fluid
α
-fetoprotein level. Dark
red or brown fluid indicates previous intra-amniotic bleeding and an increased risk of fetal loss. Green
fluid, which usually results from meconium staining, does not appear to indicate increased risk of fetal
loss.
Amniocentesis rarely results in significant maternal morbidity (eg, symptomatic amnionitis). With
experienced operators, risk of fetal loss is about 0.1 to 0.2%. Vaginal spotting or amniotic fluid leakage,
usually self-limited, occurs in 1 to 2% of women tested. Amniocentesis done before 14 wk gestation,
particularly before 13 wk, results in a higher rate of fetal loss and an increased risk of talipes equinovarus
(clubbed feet).
Chorionic Villus Sampling
In chorionic villus sampling (CVS), chorionic villi are aspirated into a syringe and cultured. CVS provides
the same information about fetal genetic and chromosomal status as amniocentesis and has similar
===PAGE:2769===
accuracy. However, CVS is done between 10 wk gestation and the end of the 1st trimester and thus
provides earlier results. Therefore, if needed, pregnancy may be terminated earlier (and more safely and
simply), or if results are normal, parental anxiety may be relieved earlier. Unlike amniocentesis, amniotic
fluid is not obtained at the time of CVS, and
α
-fetoprotein cannot be measured. Thus, women who have
CVS should be offered maternal screening for serum
α
-fetoprotein at 16 to 18 wk to assess risk of fetal
neural tube defects (.
Depending on placental location (identified by ultrasonography), CVS can be done by passing a catheter
through the cervix or by inserting a needle through the woman's abdominal wall. After CVS, Rh
(D)
immune globulin 300
μ
g is given to Rh-negative unsensitized women.
Errors in diagnosis due to maternal cell contamination are rare. Detection of certain chromosomal
abnormalities (eg, tetraploidy) may not reflect true fetal status but rather mosaicism confined to the
placenta. Confined placental mosaicism is detected in about 1% of CVS specimens. Consultation with
experts familiar with these abnormalities is advised. Rarely, subsequent amniocentesis is required to
obtain additional information.
Rate of fetal loss due to CVS is similar to that of amniocentesis (ie, about 0.2%). Transverse limb defects
and oromandibular-limb hypogenesis have been attributed to CVS but are exceedingly rare if CVS is done
after 10 wk gestation by an experienced operator.
Percutaneous Umbilical Blood Sampling
Fetal blood samples can be obtained by percutaneous puncture of the umbilical cord vein (funipuncture)
using ultrasound guidance. Chromosome analysis can be completed in 48 to 72 h. For this reason,
percutaneous umbilical blood sampling (PUBS) was formerly often done when results were needed
rapidly. This test was especially useful late in the 3rd trimester, particularly if fetal abnormalities were first
suspected at that time. Now, genetic analysis of amniotic fluid cells or chorionic villi via interphase
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) allows preliminary diagnosis (or exclusion) of more common
chromosomal abnormalities within 24 to 48 h, and PUBS is rarely done for genetic indications.
Procedure-related fetal loss rate with PUBS is about 1%.
Preimplantation Diagnosis
Genetic diagnosis is sometimes possible before implantation when in vitro fertilization is done; polar
bodies from oocytes, blastomeres from 6- to 8-cell embryos, or a trophectoderm sample from the
blastocyst is used. These
tests are available only in specialized centers and are used primarily for
couples with a high risk of certain mendelian disorders (eg, cystic fibrosis) or chromosomal abnormalities.
Newer techniques may reduce costs and make such tests more widely available. Preimplantation genetic
diagnosis to screen embryos from older women does not appear to increase the chance of successful
pregnancy.
Noninvasive Maternal Screening Strategies
Noninvasive maternal screening, unlike invasive testing, has no risk of test-related complications. By
more precisely assessing the risk of fetal abnormalities, particularly for women at otherwise low risk,
noninvasive maternal screening can help women decide whether to have invasive testing. Noninvasive
maternal screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities should be offered to all pregnant women who
have not already decided to have amniocentesis or CVS. However, if CVS is to be done, maternal serum
screening should still be offered for detection of fetal neural tube defects.
Normal values vary with gestational age. Corrections for maternal weight, diabetes mellitus, race, and
other factors may be necessary. Screening can be done during the 1st trimester, 2nd trimester, or both
(called sequential or integrated screening). Any of the 3 approaches are acceptable. Regardless of which
is done, maternal levels of
α
-fetoprotein should be measured during the 2nd trimester.
1st-Trimester Screening
===PAGE:2770===
First-trimester combined screening includes measurement of
• Maternal serum
β
-hCG (total or free)
• Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A)
• Fetal nuchal translucency (by ultrasonography)
Fetal Down syndrome is typically associated with high levels of
β
-hCG, low levels of PAPP-A, and
presence of enlarged fetal nuchal translucency (NT). Although an enlarged NT is associated with
increase in risk for fetal Down syndrome, no threshold NT value is considered diagnostic. In large
prospective US trials involving women of various ages, overall sensitivity for detection of Down syndrome
was about 85%, with a false-positive rate of 5%. Specialized ultrasound training and adherence to
rigorous quality-assurance monitoring of NT measurements are necessary to achieve this level of
screening accuracy. First-trimester screening is being used increasingly in the US, particularly in large
centers. It provides information early so that a definitive diagnosis can be made with CVS. An important
advantage of 1st-trimester screening is that termination of pregnancy is safer during the 1st rather than
the 2nd trimester.
2nd-Trimester Screening
Second-trimester screening may include the multiple marker screening approach, which includes
• Maternal levels of serum
α
-fetoprotein (MSAFP): MSAFP may be used independently as a screen for
neural tube defects only, not for risk of Down syndrome. An elevated level suggests open spina bifida,
anencephaly, abdominal wall defects, increased risk of pregnancy complications (eg, spontaneous
abortion, abruptio placentae), or, occasionally, twins or multifetal pregnancy. Unexplained elevated
MSAFP may be associated with increased risk of later pregnancy complications, such as stillbirth or
intrauterine growth retardation.
• Maternal levels of
β
-hCG, unconjugated estriol,
α
-fetoprotein, and sometimes inhibin A: This screening
may be used as an alternative or adjunct to 1st-trimester screening.
Second-trimester multiple marker screening is used to help assess the risk of Down syndrome, trisomy
18, and a few rarer single-gene syndromes (eg, Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome). Maternal serum tests are
widely available, but detection rates for Down syndrome are not as high as those obtained with 1sttrimester screening. Also, termination of pregnancy is riskier in the 2nd trimester than in the 1st trimester.
Second-trimester screening may also include
• Targed ultrasonography
Maternal serum screening for neural tube defects:
An elevated level of MSAFP may indicate a fetal
malformation such as open spina bifida. Results are most accurate when the initial sample is obtained
between 16 and 18 wk gestation, although screening can be done from about 15 to 20 wk. Designating a
cutoff value to determine whether further testing is warranted involves weighing the risk of missed
abnormalities against the risk of complications from unnecessary testing. Usually, a cutoff value in the
95th to 98th percentile or 2.0 to 2.5 times the normal pregnancy median (multiples of the median, or
MOM) is used. This value is about 80% sensitive for open spina bifida and 90% sensitive for
anencephaly. Closed spina bifida is usually not detected. Amniocentesis is eventually required in 1 to 2%
of women originally screened. Lower
cutoff values of MSAFP increase sensitivity but decrease specificity,
resulting in more amniocenteses.
Ultrasonography
is the next step if further testing is warranted. Targeted ultrasonography (see below)
with or without amniocentesis is done if no explanation can be determined with basic ultrasonography.
Ultrasonography can confirm gestational age (which may be underestimated) or detect multifetal
pregnancy, fetal death, or congenital malformations. In some women, ultrasonography cannot identify a
===PAGE:2771===
cause for elevated
α
-fetoprotein levels. Some experts believe that if high-resolution ultrasonography done
by an experienced operator is normal, further testing is unnecessary. However, because this test
occasionally misses neural tube defects, many experts recommend further testing by amniocentesis
regardless of ultrasonography results.
Amniocentesis
with measurement of
α
-fetoprotein and acetylcholinesterase levels in amniotic fluid is
done if further testing is needed. Elevated
α
-fetoprotein in amniotic fluid suggests
• A neural tube defect
• Another malformation (eg, omphalocele, congenital nephrosis, cystic hygroma, gastroschisis, upper GI
atresia)
• Contamination of the sample with fetal blood
Presence of acetylcholinesterase in amniotic fluid suggests a neural tube defect or another malformation.
Elevated
α
-fetoprotein plus presence of acetylcholinesterase in amniotic fluid is virtually 100% sensitive
for anencephaly and 90 to 95% sensitive for open spina bifida. Abnormal amniotic fluid markers indicate
that a malformation is likely even if high-resolution ultrasonography (which can detect most of these
malformations) does not detect a malformation, and parents should be informed.
Maternal serum screening for chromosomal abnormalities:
During the 2nd trimester, the most
common approach to screening is with multiple serum markers. These markers, adjusted for gestational
age, are used mainly to refine estimates of Down syndrome risk beyond that associated with maternal
age. With triple screening (ie,
α
-fetoprotein, hCG, and unconjugated estriol), sensitivity for Down
syndrome is about 65 to 70%, with a false-positive rate of about 5%.
Quad screening is triple screening plus measurement of inhibin A. Quad screening increases sensitivity to
about 80%, with a 5% false-positive rate.
If maternal serum screening suggests Down syndrome, ultrasonography is done to confirm gestational
age, and risk is recalculated if the presumed gestational age is incorrect. If the original sample was drawn
too early, another one must be drawn at the appropriate time. Amniocentesis is offered particularly if risk
exceeds a specific prespecified threshold (usually 1 in 270, which is about the same as risk when
maternal age is > 35).
Triple screening can also assess risk of trisomy 18, indicated by low levels of all 3 serum markers.
Sensitivity for trisomy 18 is 60 to 70%; the false-positive rate is about 0.5%. Combining ultrasonography
and serum screening increases sensitivity to about 80%.
Targeted ultrasonography:
Targeted ultrasonography is offered at some perinatal centers and is used
to assess risk for chromosomal abnormalities by searching for structural features associated with fetal
aneuploidy (so-called soft markers). However, no structural finding is diagnostic for a given chromosomal
abnormality, and all soft markers may also be seen in fetuses that are chromosomally normal.
Nonetheless, the discovery of such a marker may lead to offering the woman amniocentesis to confirm or
exclude a chromosomal abnormality. If a major structural malformation is present, a fetal chromosomal
abnormality is more likely. Disadvantages include unnecessary anxiety if a soft marker is detected and
unnecessary amniocentesis. Several experienced centers report high sensitivity, but whether a normal
ultrasound indicates a substantially reduced risk of fetal chromosomal abnormalities is unclear.
Sequential 1st- and 2nd-Trimester Screening
Noninvasive 1st-trimester and 2nd-trimester quad screening can be combined sequentially, with invasive
fetal genetic testing withheld until results of 2nd-trimester screening are available—whether 1st-trimester
test results are abnormal or not. Sequential screening followed by amniocentesis for high-risk patterns
increases sensitivity for Down syndrome to 95%, with a false-positive rate of only 5%.
A variation of sequential screening, called contingent sequential screening, is based on the level of risk
===PAGE:2772===
indicated by 1st-trimester screening:
• High risk: Invasive testing is offered without doing 2nd-trimester screening.
• Intermediate risk: 2nd-trimester screening is offered.
• Low risk (eg, < 1 in 1500): 2nd-trimester screening for Down syndrome is not offered because the 1sttrimester risk is so low.
===PAGE:2773===
Chapter 260. Conception and Prenatal Development
Introduction
For conception (fertilization), a live sperm must unite with an ovum in a fallopian tube with normally
functioning epithelium. Conception occurs just after ovulation, about 14 days after a menstrual period. At
ovulation, cervical mucus becomes less viscid, facilitating rapid movement of sperm to the ovum, usually
near the fimbriated end of the tube. Sperm may remain alive in the vagina for about 3 days after
intercourse.
The fertilized egg (zygote) divides repeatedly as it travels to the implantation site in the endometrium
(usually near the fundus) over a period of 5 to 8 days. By the time of implantation, the zygote has become
a layer of cells around a cavity, called a blastocyst. The blastocyst wall is 1 cell thick except for the
embryonic pole, which is 3 or 4 cells thick. The embryonic pole, which becomes the embryo, implants first.
Amniotic sac and placenta:
Within 1 or 2 days of implantation, a layer of cells (trophoblast cells)
develops around the blastocyst. The progenitor villous trophoblast cell, the stem cell of the placenta,
develops along 2 cell lines:
• Nonproliferative extravillous trophoblast: These cells penetrate the endometrium, facilitating implantation
and anchoring of the placenta.
• Syncytiotrophoblast: These cells produce chorionic gonadotropin by day 10 and other trophic hormones
shortly thereafter.
An inner layer (amnion) and outer layer (chorion) of membranes develop from the trophoblast; these
membranes form the amniotic sac (see
Fig. 260-1
), which contains the conceptus (term used for derivatives of the zygote at any stage). When
the sac is formed and the blastocyst cavity closes (by about 10 days), the conceptus is considered an
embryo. The amniotic sac fills with fluid and expands with the growing embryo, filling the endometrial
cavity by about 12 wk after conception; then, the amniotic sac is the only cavity remaining in the uterus.
Trophoblast cells develop into those that form the placenta. The extravillous trophoblast forms villi, which
penetrate the uterus. The syncytiotrophoblast covers the villi. The
[Fig. 260-1.
Placenta and embryo at about 11 4/7 wk gestation.]
syncytiotrophoblast synthesizes trophic hormones and provides arterial and venous exchange between
the circulation of the conceptus and that of the mother.
The placenta is fully formed by wk 18 to 20 but continues to grow, weighing about 500 g by term.
Embryo:
Around day 10, 3 germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, endoderm) are usually distinct in the
embryo. Then the primitive streak, which becomes the neural tube, begins to develop. Around day 16, the
cephalad portion of the mesoderm thickens, forming a central channel that develops into the heart and
great vessels. The heart begins to pump plasma around day 20, and on the next day, fetal RBCs, which
are immature and nucleated, appear. Fetal RBCs are soon replaced by mature RBCs, and blood vessels
develop throughout the embryo. Eventually, the umbilical artery and vein develop, connecting the
embryonic vessels with the placenta.
Most organs form between 21 and 57 days after fertilization (between 5 and 10 wk gestation); however,
the CNS continues to develop throughout pregnancy. Susceptibility to malformations induced by
teratogens is highest when organs are forming.
===PAGE:2774===
Chapter 261. Approach to the Pregnant Woman and Prenatal Care
Introduction
Pregnant women require routine prenatal care to help ensure their health and the health of the fetus.
Also, evaluation is often required for symptoms and signs of illness. Common symptoms that are often
pregnancy-related include vaginal bleeding, pelvic pain, vomiting, and lower-extremity edema (for specific
obstetric disorders, see
Chapter 265
; for nonobstetric disorders in pregnant women, see
Chapter 263
).
Ideally, women who are planning to become pregnant should see a physician before conception, so that
they can be counseled about pregnancy risks and ways to reduce them. The initial routine prenatal visit
should occur between 6 and 8 wk gestation. Follow-up visits should occur at about 4-wk intervals until 28
wk, at 2-wk intervals from 28 to 36 wk, and weekly thereafter until delivery. Prenatal care includes
screening for disorders, taking measures to reduce fetal and maternal risks, and counseling.
History
During the initial visit, clinicians should obtain a full medical history, including
• Previous and current disorders
• Drug use (therapeutic, social, and illicit)
• Risk factors for complications of pregnancy (see
Table 264-1
)
• Obstetric history, with the outcome of all previous pregnancies, including maternal and fetal
complications (eg, gestational diabetes, preeclampsia, congenital malformations, stillbirth)
Family history should include all chronic disorders in family members to identify possible hereditary
disorders (.
During subsequent visits, queries focus on interim developments, particularly vaginal bleeding or fluid
discharge, headache, changes in vision, edema of face or fingers, and changes in frequency or intensity
of fetal movement.
Gravidity and parity:
Gravidity is the number of confirmed pregnancies; a pregnant woman is a gravida.
Parity is the number of deliveries after 20 wk. Multifetal pregnancy is counted as one in terms of gravidity
and parity. Abortus is the number of pregnancy losses (abortions) before 20 wk regardless of cause (eg,
spontaneous, therapeutic, or elective abortion; ectopic pregnancy). Sum of parity and abortus equals
gravidity.
Parity is often recorded as 4 numbers:
• Number of term deliveries (after 37 wk)
• Number of premature deliveries (> 20 and < 37 wk)
• Number of abortions
• Number of living children
Thus, a woman who is pregnant and has had one term delivery, one set of twins born at 32 wk, and 2
abortions is gravida 5, para 1-1-2-3.
Physical Examination
A full general examination, including height and weight, is done first.
===PAGE:2775===
In the initial obstetric examination, speculum and bimanual pelvic examination is done
•
To check for lesions or discharge
• To note the color and consistency of the cervix
• To obtain cervical samples for testing
Also, fetal heart rate and, in patients presenting later in pregnancy, lie of the fetus are assessed (see
Fig. 262-1
.
Pelvic capacity can be estimated clinically by evaluating various measurements with the middle finger
during bimanual examination. If the distance from the underside of the pubic symphysis to the sacral
promontory is > 11.5 cm, the pelvic inlet is almost certainly adequate. Normally, distance between the
ischial spines is ≥ 9 cm, length of the sacrospinous ligaments is 4 to ≥ 5 cm, and the subpubic arch is ≥
90°.
During subsequent visits, BP and weight assessment is important. Obstetric examination focuses on
uterine size, fundal height (in cm above the symphysis pubis), fetal heart rate and activity, and maternal
diet, weight gain, and overall well-being. Speculum and bimanual examination is usually not needed
unless vaginal discharge or bleeding, leakage of fluid, or pain is present.
Testing
Laboratory testing:
For diagnosis of pregnancy, see p.
. Initial laboratory evaluation is thorough;
some components are repeated during follow-up visits (see
Table 261-1
).
If a woman has Rh-negative blood, she may be at risk of developing Rh
(D) antibodies (see
Pretransfusion Testing , and the fetus may be at risk of developing erythroblastosis fetalis.
Rh
(D) antibody levels should be measured in pregnant women at
[Table 261-1.
Components of Routine Prenatal Evaluation]
18 to 20 wk and again at about 26 to 28 wk. Additional measures may be necessary to prevent
development of maternal Rh antibodies (see
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
.
Generally, women are routinely screened for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 wk using a 50-g, 1h glucose tolerance test (. If women have risk factors for gestational diabetes, they are
screened during the 1st trimester. Risk factors include gestational diabetes or a macrosomic neonate
(weight > 4500 g at birth) in a previous pregnancy, unexplained fetal losses, a family history of diabetes in
close relatives, a history of persistent glucosuria, and a body mass index (BMI) > 30 kg/m
.
Ultrasonography:
Most obstetricians recommend at least one ultrasound examination during each
pregnancy, ideally between 16 and 20 wk, when estimated delivery date (EDD) can still be confirmed
fairly accurately and when placental location and fetal anatomy can be evaluated. Estimates of
gestational age are based on measurements of fetal head circumference, biparietal diameter, abdominal
circumference, and femur length. Measurement of fetal crown-rump length during the 1st trimester is
particularly accurate in predicting EDD: to within about 5 days when measurements are made at < 12 wk
gestation and to within about 7 days at 12 to 15 wk. Ultrasonography during the 3rd trimester is accurate
for predicting EDD to within about 2 to 3 wk.
Specific indications
for ultrasonography include
• Investigation of abnormalities during the 1st trimester
===PAGE:2776===
• Need for detailed assessment of fetal anatomy
• Detection of multifetal pregnancy, hydatidiform mole, polyhydramnios, placenta previa, or ectopic
pregnancy
• Determination of placental location, fetal position and size, and size of the uterus in relation to given
gestational dates (too small or too large)
Ultrasonography is also used for needle guidance during chorionic villus sampling, amniocentesis, and
fetal transfusion. High-resolution ultrasonography includes techniques that maximize sensitivity for
detecting fetal malformations.
If ultrasonography is needed during the 1st trimester (eg, to evaluate pain, bleeding, or viability of
pregnancy), use of an endovaginal transducer maximizes diagnostic accuracy; evidence of an intrauterine
pregnancy (gestational sac or fetal pole) can be seen as early as 4 to 5 wk and is seen at 7 to 8 wk in >
95% of cases. With real-time ultrasonography, fetal movements and heart motion can be directly
observed as early as 5 to 6 wk.
Other imaging:
Conventional x-rays can induce spontaneous abortion or congenital malformations,
particularly during early pregnancy. Risk is low (up to about 1/million) with each x-ray of an extremity or of
the neck, head, or chest if the uterus is shielded. Risk is higher with abdominal, pelvic, and lower back xrays. Thus, for all women of childbearing age, an imaging test with less ionizing radiation (eg,
ultrasonography) should be substituted when possible, or if x-rays are needed, the uterus should be
shielded (because pregnancy is possible). Medically necessary x-rays or other imaging should not be
postponed because of pregnancy. However, elective x-rays are postponed until after pregnancy.
Treatment
Problems identified during evaluation are managed. Women are counseled about exercise and diet, and
nutritional supplements are prescribed. What to avoid, what to expect, and when to obtain further
evaluation are explained. Couples are encouraged to attend childbirth classes.
Diet and supplements:
To provide nutrition for the fetus, most women require about 250 kcal extra
daily; most should come from protein. If maternal weight gain is excessive (> 1.4 kg/mo during the early
months) or inadequate (< 0.9 kg/mo), diet must be modified further. Weight-loss dieting during pregnancy
is not recommended, even for morbidly obese women.
Most pregnant women need a daily oral iron supplement of ferrous sulfate 300 mg or ferrous gluconate
450 mg, which may be better tolerated. Woman with anemia should take the supplements bid. All women
should be given oral prenatal vitamins that contain folate 400
μ
g (0.4 mg), taken once/day; folate reduces
risk of neural tube defects. For women who have had a fetus or an infant with a neural tube defect, the
recommended daily dose is 4000
μ
g (4 mg).
Physical activity:
Pregnant women can continue to do moderate physical activities and exercise but
should take care not to injure the abdomen. Sexual intercourse can be continued throughout pregnancy
unless vaginal bleeding, pain, leakage of amniotic fluid, or uterine contractions occur.
Travel:
The safest time to travel during pregnancy is between 14 and 28 wk, but there is no absolute
contraindication to travel at any time during pregnancy. Pregnant women
should wear seat belts
regardless of gestational age and type of vehicle. Travel on airplanes is safe until 36 wk gestation. On
long flights, pregnant patients should walk or stretch every 2 to 3 h to prevent venous stasis.
Immunizations:
Vaccines for measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella should not be used during
pregnancy (. The hepatitis B vaccine can be safely used if indicated, and the influenza
vaccine is strongly recommended for women who are pregnant or postpartum during influenza season.
Pregnant women with Rh-negative blood and thus at risk of developing Rh
(D) antibodies are given
Rh
(D) immune globulin 300
μ
g IM after any significant vaginal bleeding or other sign of placental
===PAGE:2777===
hemorrhage or separation (abruptio placentae), after a spontaneous or therapeutic abortion, after
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling, prophylactically at 28 wk, and, if the neonate has Rh
(D)-
positive blood, after delivery.
Modifiable risk factors:
Women should not use alcohol and tobacco and should avoid exposure to
secondhand smoke. They should also avoid exposure to chemicals or paint fumes, direct handling of cat
litter (due to risk of toxoplasmosis), prolonged temperature elevation (eg, in a hot tub or sauna), and
exposure to people with active viral infections (eg, rubella, parvovirus infection [fifth disease], varicella).
Women with substance abuse problems should be monitored by a specialist in high-risk pregnancy.
Drugs and vitamins that are not medically indicated should be discouraged (see
Drugs in Pregnancy
.
Symptoms requiring evaluation:
Women should be advised to seek evaluation for unusual
headaches, visual disturbances, pelvic pain or cramping, vaginal bleeding, rupture of membranes,
extreme swelling of the hands or face, diminished urine volume, any prolonged illness or infection, or
persistent symptoms of labor. Multiparous women with a history of rapid labor should notify the physician
at the first symptom of labor.
Pelvic Pain During Early Pregnancy
Pelvic pain is common during early pregnancy and may accompany serious or minor disorders. Some
conditions causing pelvic pain also cause vaginal bleeding. In some of these disorders (eg, ruptured
ectopic pregnancy, ruptured hemorrhagic corpus luteum cyst), bleeding may be severe, sometimes
leading to hemorrhagic shock.
Causes of upper and generalized abdominal pain are similar to those in nonpregnant patients.
Etiology
Causes of pelvic pain during early pregnancy (see
Table 261-2
) may be
• Obstetric
• Gynecologic, nonobstetric
• Nongynecologic
Sometimes no particular disorder is identified.
The most common obstetric cause is
• Spontaneous abortion (threatened, inevitable, incomplete, complete, septic, or missed)
The most common serious obstetric cause is
• Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
Nonobstetric gynecologic causes include adnexal torsion, which is more common during pregnancy
because during pregnancy, the corpus luteum causes the ovaries to enlarge, increasing the risk of the
ovary twisting around the pedicle.
Common nongynecologic causes include various common GI and GU disorders:
• Viral gastroenteritis
===PAGE:2778===
• Irritable bowel syndrome
• Appendicitis
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• UTI
• Nephrolithiasis
Pelvic pain during late pregnancy may result from labor or one of the many nonobstetric causes of pelvic
pain.
Evaluation
Evaluation should exclude potentially serious treatable causes (eg, ruptured or un-ruptured ectopic
pregnancy, septic abortion, appendicitis).
History: History of present illness
should include the patient's gravidity and parity as well as the pain's
onset (sudden or gradual), location (localized or diffuse), and character (crampy or colicky). A history of
illicitly attempted termination of pregnancy suggests septic abortion, but absence of this history does not
exclude this diagnosis.
Review of systems
should seek GU and GI symptoms that suggest a cause. Important GU symptoms
include vaginal bleeding (ectopic pregnancy or abortion); syncope or near syncope (ectopic pregnancy);
urinary frequency, urgency, or dysuria (UTI); and vaginal discharge and history of unprotected intercourse
(pelvic inflammatory disease).
[Table 261-2.
Some Causes of Pelvic Pain During Early Pregnancy]
Important GI symptoms include diarrhea (gastroenteritis, inflammatory bowel disease, or irritable bowel
syndrome), vomiting (due to many disorders, including gastroenteritis and bowel obstruction), and
obstipation (bowel obstruction, irritable bowel, or a functional disorder).
Past medical history
should seek disorders known to cause pelvic pain (eg, inflammatory bowel
disease, irritable bowel syndrome, nephrolithiasis, ectopic pregnancy, spontaneous abortion). Risk factors
for these disorders should be identified.
Risk factors for ectopic pregnancy include
• History of sexually transmitted disease or pelvic inflammatory disease
• Cigarette smoking
• Use of intrauterine device
• Age > 35
• Previous abdominal surgery (especially tubal surgery)
• Use of fertility drugs or assisted reproductive techniques
• Previous ectopic pregnancy (the most important)
• Multiple sex partners
• Douching
===PAGE:2779===
Risk factors for spontaneous abortion include
• Age > 35
• History of spontaneous abortion
• Cigarette smoking
• Drugs (eg, cocaine, alcohol, high doses of caffeine)
• Uterine abnormalities (eg, leiomyoma, adhesions)
Risk factors for bowel obstruction include
• Previous abdominal surgery
• Hernia
Physical examination:
Physical examination begins with a review of vital signs, particularly for fever
and signs of hypovolemia (hypotension, tachycardia).
Evaluation focuses on abdominal and pelvic examinations. The abdomen is palpated for tenderness,
peritoneal signs (rebound, rigidity, guarding), and uterine size and is percussed for tympany. Fetal heart
sounds are checked using a Doppler probe.
Pelvic examination includes inspection of the cervix for discharge, dilation, and bleeding. Discharge, if
present, should be sampled and sent for culture. Any blood or clots in the vaginal vault are gently
removed. Bimanual examination should check for cervical motion tenderness, adnexal masses or
tenderness, and uterine size.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Hemodynamic instability (hypotension, tachycardia, or both)
• Syncope or near syncope
• Peritoneal signs (rebound, rigidity, guarding)
• Fever, chills, and purulent vaginal discharge
• Vaginal bleeding
Interpretation of findings:
Certain findings suggest causes of pelvic pain but are not always diagnostic
(see
Table 261-2
).
For all women who present with pelvic pain during early pregnancy, the most serious
cause—ectopic
pregnancy—must be excluded, regardless of any other findings. Nonobstetric causes of pelvic pain (eg,
acute appendicitis) must always be considered and investigated as in nonpregnant women.
As in any patient, findings of peritoneal irritation (eg, focal tenderness, guarding, rebound, rigidity) are a
concern. Common causes include appendicitis, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, and, less often, ruptured
ovarian cyst. However, absence of peritoneal irritation does not rule out such disorders, and index of
suspicion must be high.
Vaginal bleeding accompanying the pain suggests spontaneous abortion or ectopic pregnancy. An open
cervical os or tissue passed through the cervix strongly suggests an inevitable, incomplete, or complete
abortion. The presence of fever, chills, and a purulent vaginal discharge suggests a septic abortion
(particularly in patients with a history of instrumentation of the uterus or illicitly attempted termination of
===PAGE:2780===
pregnancy). Pelvic inflammatory disease is rare during pregnancy but may occur.
Testing:
If an obstetric cause of pelvic pain is suspected, quantitative measurement of
β
-hCG, CBC,
blood type, and Rh typing should be done. If the patient is hemodynamically unstable (with hypotension,
persistent tachycardia, or both), blood should be cross-matched, and fibrinogen level, fibrin split products,
and PT/PTT are determined.
Pelvic ultrasonography is done to confirm an intrauterine pregnancy. However, ultrasonography can and
should be deferred in the hemodynamically unstable patient with a positive pregnancy test, given the very
high likelihood of either ectopic pregnancy or spontaneous abortion with hemorrhage. Both
transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasonography should be used as necessary. If the uterus is empty
and tissue has not been passed, ectopic pregnancy is suspected. If Doppler ultrasonography shows that
blood flow to the adnexa is absent or decreased, adnexal (ovarian) torsion is suspected. However, this
finding is not always present because spontaneous detorsion can occur.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the cause. If ectopic pregnancy is confirmed and is not ruptured, methotrexate
can often be considered, or surgical salpingotomy or salpingectomy may be done. If the ectopic
pregnancy is ruptured or leaking, treatment is immediate laparoscopy or laparotomy.
Treatment of spontaneous abortions depends on the type of abortion and the patient's hemodynamic
stability. Threatened abortions are treated conservatively with oral analgesics. Inevitable, incomplete, or
missed abortions are treated medically with misoprostol or surgically with uterine evacuation via D & C.
Septic abortions are treated with uterine evacuation plus IV antibiotics.
Women who have Rh-negative blood should be given Rh
(D) immune globulin if they have vaginal
bleeding or an ectopic pregnancy.
Ruptured corpus luteum cysts and degeneration of a uterine fibroid are treated conservatively with oral
analgesics.
Treatment of adnexal torsion is surgical: manual detorsion if the ovary is viable; oophorectomy or
salpingectomy if the ovary is infarcted and nonviable.
Key Points
• Clinicians should always be alert for ectopic pregnancy.
• Nonobstetric causes should be considered; acute abdomen may develop during pregnancy.
• If no clear nonobstetric cause is identified, ultrasonography is usually necessary.
• A septic abortion is suspected when there is a history of recent uterine instrumentation or induced
abortion.
• If vaginal bleeding occurred, Rh status is determined, and all women with Rh-negative blood are given
Rh
(D) immune globulin.
Vaginal Bleeding During Early Pregnancy
Vaginal bleeding occurs in 20 to 30% of confirmed pregnancies during the first 20 wk of gestation; about
half of these cases end in spontaneous abortion. Vaginal bleeding is also associated with other adverse
pregnancy outcomes such as low birth weight, preterm birth, stillbirth, and perinatal death.
Etiology
Obstetric or nonobstetric disorders may cause vaginal bleeding during early pregnancy (see
===PAGE:2781===
Table 261-3
).
The most dangerous cause is
• Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
The most common cause is
• Spontaneous abortion (threatened, inevitable, incomplete, complete, septic, missed)
[Table 261-3.
Some Causes of Vaginal Bleeding During Early Pregnancy]
Evaluation
A pregnant woman with vaginal bleeding must be evaluated promptly.
Ectopic pregnancy or other causes of copious vaginal bleeding (eg, inevitable abortion, ruptured
hemorrhagic corpus luteum cyst) can lead to hemorrhagic shock. IV access should be established early
during evaluation in case such complications occur.
History: History of present illness
should include the patient's gravidity (number of confirmed
pregnancies), parity (number of deliveries after 20 wk), and number of abortions (spontaneous or
induced); description and amount of bleeding, including how many pads were soaked and whether clots
or tissue were passed; and presence or absence of pain. If pain is present, onset, location, duration, and
character should be determined.
Review of symptoms
should note fever, chills, abdominal or pelvic pain, vaginal discharge, and
neurologic symptoms such as dizziness, light-headedness, syncope, or near syncope.
Past medical history
should include risk factors for ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion (see
p.
).
Physical examination:
Physical examination includes review of vital signs for fever and signs of
hypovolemia (tachycardia, hypotension).
Evaluation focuses on abdominal and pelvic examinations. The abdomen is palpated for tenderness,
peritoneal signs (rebound, rigidity, guarding), and uterine size. Fetal heart sounds should be checked with
a Doppler ultrasound probe.
Pelvic examination includes inspection of external genitals, speculum examination, and bimanual
examination. Blood or products of conception in the vaginal vault, if present, are removed; products of
conception are sent to a laboratory for confirmation. The cervix should be inspected for discharge,
dilation, lesions, polyps, and tissue in the os. If the pregnancy is < 14 wk, the cervical os may be gently
probed (but no more than fingertip depth) using ringed forceps to determine the integrity of the internal
cervical os. If the pregnancy is ≥ 14 wk, the cervix should not be probed because the vascular placenta
may tear, especially if it covers the internal os (placenta previa). Bimanual examination should check for
cervical motion tenderness, adnexal masses or tenderness, and uterine size.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Hemodynamic instability (hypotension, tachycardia, or both)
• Orthostatic changes in pulse or BP
• Syncope or near syncope
• Peritoneal signs (rebound, rigidity, guarding)
===PAGE:2782===
• Fever, chills, and mucopurulent vaginal discharge
Interpretation of findings:
Clinical findings help suggest a cause but are rarely diagnostic (see
Table
261-3
). However, a dilated cervix plus passage of fetal tissue and crampy abdominal pain strongly
suggests spontaneous abortion, and septic abortion is usually apparent from the circumstances and signs
of severe infection (fever, toxic appearance, purulent or bloody discharge). Even if these classic
manifestations are not present, threatened or missed abortion is possible, and the most serious cause
—ruptured ectopic pregnancy—must be excluded. Although the classic description of ectopic pregnancy
includes severe pain, peritoneal signs, and a tender adnexal mass,
ectopic pregnancy can manifest in
many ways and should always be considered, even when bleeding appears scant and pain appears
minimal.
Testing:
A self-diagnosed pregnancy is verified with a urine test. For women with a documented
pregnancy, several tests are done:
• Quantitative
β
-hCG level
• Blood typing and Rh testing
• Usually ultrasonography
Rh testing is done to determine whether Rh
(D) immune globulin is needed to prevent maternal
sensitization. If bleeding is substantial, testing should also include CBC and either type and screen (for
abnormal antibodies) or cross-matching. For major hemorrhage or shock, PT/PTT is also determined.
Transvaginal pelvic ultrasonography is done to confirm an intrauterine pregnancy unless products of
conception have been obtained intact (indicating completed abortion). If patients are in shock or bleeding
is substantial, ultrasonography should be done at the bedside. The quantitative
β
-hCG level helps
interpret ultrasound results. If the level is ≥ 1500 mIU/mL and ultrasonography does not confirm an
intrauterine pregnancy (a live or dead fetus), ectopic pregnancy is likely. If the level is < 1500 mIU/mL and
no intrauterine pregnancy is seen, intrauterine pregnancy is still possible.
If the patient is stable and clinical suspicion for ectopic pregnancy is low, serial
β
-hCG levels may be
done on an outpatient basis. Normally, the level doubles every 1.4 to 2.1 days up to 41 days gestation; in
ectopic pregnancy (and in abortions), levels may be lower than expected by dates and usually do not
double as rapidly. If clinical suspicion for ectopic pregnancy is moderate or high (eg, because of
substantial blood loss, adnexal tenderness, or both), diagnostic uterine evacuation or D & C and possibly
diagnostic laparoscopy should be done.
Ultrasonography can also help identify a ruptured corpus luteum cyst and gestational trophoblastic
disease. It can show products of conception in the uterus, which are present in patients with incomplete,
septic, or missed abortion.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder:
• Ruptured ectopic pregnancy: Immediate laparoscopy or laparotomy
• Unruptured ectopic pregnancy: Methotrexate or salpingotomy or salpingectomy via laparoscopy or
laparotomy
• Threatened abortion: Expectant management for hemodynamically stable patients
• Inevitable, incomplete, or missed abortions: D & C or uterine evacuation
• Septic abortion: IV antibiotics and urgent uterine evacuation if retained products of conception are
identified during ultrasonography
===PAGE:2783===
• Complete abortion: Obstetric follow-up
Key Points
• Clinicians should always be alert for ectopic pregnancy; symptoms can be mild or severe.
• Spontaneous abortion is the most common cause of bleeding during early pregnancy.
• Rh testing is required for all women who present with vaginal bleeding during early pregnancy to
determine whether Rh
(D) immune globulin is needed.
Nausea and Vomiting During Early Pregnancy
Nausea and vomiting affect up to 80% of pregnant women. Symptoms are most common and most severe
during the 1st trimester. Although common usage refers to morning sickness, nausea, vomiting, or both
typically may occur at any point during the day. Symptoms vary from mild to severe (hyperemesis
gravidarum).
Hyperemesis gravidarum
is persistent, severe pregnancy-induced vomiting that causes significant
dehydration, often with electrolyte abnormalities, ketosis, and weight loss (.
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of nausea and vomiting during early pregnancy is unknown, although metabolic,
endocrine, GI, and psychologic factors probably all play a role. Estrogen may contribute because
estrogen levels are elevated in patients with hyperemesis gravidarum.
Etiology
The most common causes of uncomplicated nausea and vomiting during early pregnancy (see
Table 261-4
) are
• Morning sickness (most common)
• Hyperemesis gravidarum
• Gastroenteritis
Occasionally, prenatal vitamin preparations with iron cause nausea. Rarely, severe, persistent vomiting
results from a hydatidiform mole.
[Table 261-4.
Some Causes of Nausea and Vomiting During Early Pregnancy]
Vomiting can also result from many nonobstetric disorders. Common causes of acute abdomen (eg,
appendicitis, cholecystitis) may occur during pregnancy and may be accompanied by vomiting, but the
chief complaint is typically pain rather than vomiting. Similarly, some CNS disorders (eg, migraine, CNS
hemorrhage, increased intracranial pressure) may be accompanied by vomiting, but headache or other
neurologic symptoms are typically the chief complaint.
Evaluation
Evaluation aims to exclude serious or life-threatening causes of nausea and vomiting. Morning sickness
(uncomplicated nausea and vomiting) and hyperemesis gravidarum are diagnoses of exclusion.
History: History of present illness
should particularly note the following:
• Onset and duration of vomiting
===PAGE:2784===
• Exacerbating and relieving factors
• Type (eg, bloody, watery, bilious) and amount of emesis
• Frequency (intermittent or persistent)
Important associated symptoms include diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal pain. If pain is present, the
location, radiation, and severity should be queried. The examiner should also ask what social effects the
symptoms have had on the patient and her family (eg, whether she is able to work or to care for her
children).
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of nonobstetric causes of nausea and vomiting, including
fever or chills, particularly if accompanied by flank pain or voiding symptoms (UTI or pyelonephritis), and
neurologic symptoms such as headache, weakness, focal deficits, and confusion (migraine or CNS
hemorrhage).
Past medical history
includes questions about morning sickness or hyperemesis in past pregnancies.
Past surgical history should include questions about any prior abdominal surgery, which would predispose
a patient to mechanical bowel obstruction.
Drugs taken by the patient are reviewed for drugs that could contribute (eg, iron-containing compounds,
hormonal therapy) and for safety during pregnancy.
Physical examination:
Examination begins with review of vital signs for fever, tachycardia, and
abnormal BP (too low or too high).
A general assessment is done to look for signs of toxicity (eg, lethargy, confusion, agitation). A complete
physical examination, including pelvic examination, is done to check for findings suggesting serious or
potentially life-threatening causes of nausea and vomiting (see
Table 261-5
).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Abdominal pain
• Signs of dehydration (eg, orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia)
[Table 261-5.
Relevant Physical Examination Findings in a Pregnant Patient with Vomiting]
• Fever
• Bloody or bilious emesis
• No fetal motion or heart sounds
• Abnormal neurologic examination
• Persistent or worsening symptoms
Interpretation of findings:
Distinguishing pregnancy-related vomiting from vomiting due to other causes
is important. Clinical manifestations help (see
Table 261-4
).
Vomiting is less likely to be due to pregnancy if it begins after the 1st trimester or is accompanied by
abdominal pain, diarrhea, or both. Abdominal tenderness may suggest acute abdomen. Meningismus,
neurologic abnormalities, or both suggest a neurologic cause.
Vomiting is more likely to be due to pregnancy if it begins during the 1st trimester, it lasts or recurs over
===PAGE:2785===
several days to weeks, abdominal pain is absent, and there are no symptoms or signs involving other
organ systems.
If vomiting appears to be pregnancy-related and is severe (ie, frequent, prolonged, accompanied by
dehydration), hyperemesis gravidarum and hydatidiform mole should be considered.
Testing:
Patients with significant vomiting, signs of dehydration, or both usually require testing. If
hyperemesis gravidarum is suspected, urine ketones are measured; if symptoms are particularly severe
or persistent, serum electrolytes are measured. If fetal heart sounds are not clearly audible or detected by
fetal Doppler, pelvic ultrasonography should be done to rule out hydatidiform mole. Other tests are done
based on clinically suspected nonobstetric disorders (see
Table 261-4
).
Treatment
Pregnancy-induced vomiting may be relieved by drinking or eating frequently (5 or 6 small meals/day), but
only bland foods (eg, crackers, soft drinks, BRAT diet [bananas, rice, apple-sauce, dry toast]) should be
eaten. Eating before rising may help. If dehydration (eg, due to hyperemesis gravidarum) is suspected, 1
to 2 L of normal saline or Ringer's lactate is given IV, and any identified electrolyte abnormalities are
corrected.
Certain drugs (see
Table 261-6
) can be used to relieve nausea and vomiting during the 1st trimester without evidence of
adverse effects on the fetus.
Vitamin B
is used as monotherapy; other drugs are added if symptoms are not relieved.
Ginger (eg, ginger capsules 250 mg po tid or qid, ginger lollipops), acupuncture, motion sickness bands,
and hypnosis may help, as may switching from prenatal vitamins to a children's chewable vitamin with
folate.
[Table 261-6.
Suggested Drugs for Nausea and Vomiting During Early Pregnancy]
Key Points
• Vomiting during pregnancy is usually self-limited and responds to dietary modification.
• Hyperemesis gravidarum is less common but is severe, leading to dehydration, ketosis, and weight loss.
• Nonobstetric causes should be considered.
Lower-Extremity Edema During Late Pregnancy
Edema is common during late pregnancy. It typically involves the lower extremities but occasionally
appears as swelling or puffiness in the face or hands.
Etiology
The most common cause of edema in pregnancy is
• Physiologic edema
Physiologic edema results from hormone-induced Na retention. Edema may also occur when the enlarged
uterus intermittently compresses the inferior vena cava during recumbency, obstructing outflow from both
femoral veins.
Pathologic causes of edema are less common but often dangerous. They include deep venous
thrombosis (DVT) and preeclampsia (see
Table 261-7
). DVT is more common during pregnancy because pregnancy is a hypercoagulable state,
===PAGE:2786===
and women may be less mobile. Preeclampsia results from pregnancy-induced hypertension; however,
not all women with
[Table 261-7.
Some Causes of Edema During Late Pregnancy]
preeclampsia develop edema. When extensive, cellulitis, which usually causes focal erythema, may
resemble general edema.
Evaluation
Evaluation aims to exclude DVT and preeclampsia. Physiologic edema is a diagnosis of exclusion.
History: History of present illness
should include symptom onset and duration, exacerbating and
relieving factors (physiologic edema is reduced by lying in the left lateral decubitus position), and risk
factors for DVT and preeclampsia. Risk factors for DVT include
• Venous insufficiency
• Trauma
• Hypercoagulability disorder
• Thrombotic disorders
• Cigarette smoking
• Immobility
• Cancer
Risk factors for preeclampsia include
• Chronic hypertension
• Personal or family history of preeclampsia
• Age < 17 or > 35
• First pregnancy
• Multifetal pregnancy
• Diabetes
• Vascular disorders
• Hydatidiform mole
• Abnormal maternal serum screening results
Review of symptoms
should seek symptoms of possible causes, including nausea and vomiting,
abdominal pain, and jaundice (preeclampsia); pain, redness, or warmth in an extremity (DVT or cellulitis);
dyspnea (pulmonary edema or preeclampsia); sudden increase in weight or edema of the hands and face
(preeclampsia); and headache, confusion, mental status changes, blurry vision, or seizures
(preeclampsia).
Past medical history
should include history of DVT, pulmonary embolism, preeclampsia, and
hypertension.
===PAGE:2787===
Physical examination:
Examination begins with review of vital signs, particularly BP.
Areas of edema are evaluated for distribution (ie, whether bilateral and symmetric or unilateral) and
presence of redness, warmth, and tenderness.
General examination focuses on systems that may show findings of preeclampsia. Eye examination
includes testing visual fields for deficits, and funduscopic examination should check for papilledema.
Cardiovascular examination includes auscultation of the heart and lungs for evidence of fluid overload
(eg, audible S
or S
heart sounds, tachypnea, rales, crackles) and inspection of neck veins for jugular
venous distention. The abdomen should be palpated for tenderness, especially in the epigastric or right
upper quadrant region. Neurologic examination should assess mental status for confusion and seek focal
neurologic deficits.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• BP ≥ 140/90 mm Hg
• Unilateral leg or calf warmth, redness, or tenderness, with or without fever
• Hypertension and any systemic symptoms or signs, particularly mental status changes
Interpretation of findings:
Although edema is common during pregnancy, considering and ruling out the
most dangerous causes (preeclampsia and DVT) are important:
• If BP is > 140/90 mm Hg, preeclampsia should be considered.
• If edema involves only one leg, particularly when redness, warmth, and tenderness are present, DVT
and cellulitis should be considered.
• Bilateral leg edema suggests a physiologic process or preeclampsia as the cause.
Clinical findings help suggest a cause (see
Table 261-7
). Additional findings may suggest preeclampsia
(see
Table 261-8
).
Testing:
If preeclampsia is suspected, urine protein is measured; hypertension plus proteinuria indicates
preeclampsia. Urine dipstick testing is used routinely, but if diagnosis is unclear, urine protein may be
measured in a 24-h collection. Many laboratories can more rapidly assess urine protein by measuring and
calculating the urine protein:urine creatinine ratio.
If DVT is suspected, lower-extremity duplex ultrasonography is done.
Treatment
Specific causes are treated.
Physiologic edema can be reduced by intermittently lying on the left side (which moves the uterus off the
inferior vena cava), by intermittently elevating the lower extremities, and by wearing elastic compression
stockings.
Key Points
• Edema is common and usually benign (physiologic) during late pregnancy.
• Physiologic edema is reduced by lying in the left lateral decubitus position, elevating the lower
extremities, and using compression stockings.
===PAGE:2788===
[Table 261-8.
Some Findings that Suggest Preeclampsia]
• Hypertension and proteinuria indicate preeclampsia.
• Unilateral leg edema, redness, warmth, and tenderness require evaluation for DVT.
Vaginal Bleeding During Late Pregnancy
Bleeding during late pregnancy (≥ 20 wk gestation, but before birth) occurs in 3 to 4% of pregnancies.
Pathophysiology
Some disorders can cause substantial blood loss, occasionally enough to cause hemorrhagic shock or
disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Etiology
The most common cause of bleeding during late pregnancy is
• Bloody show of labor
Bloody show
heralds onset of labor, is scant and mixed with mucus, and results from tearing of small
veins as the cervix dilates and effaces at the start of labor.
More serious but less common causes (see
Table 261-9
) include
• Abruptio placentae (placental abruption)
• Placenta previa
• Vasa previa
• Uterine rupture (rare)
Abruptio placentae
is premature separation of a normally implanted placenta from the uterine wall. The
mechanism is unclear, but it is probably a late consequence of chronic uteroplacental vascular
insufficiency. Some cases follow trauma (eg, assault, motor vehicle crash). Because some or most of the
bleeding may be concealed between the placenta and uterine wall, the amount of external (ie, vaginal)
bleeding does not necessarily reflect the extent of blood loss or placental separation. Abruptio placentae
is the most common life-threatening cause of bleeding during late pregnancy, accounting for about 30%
of cases. It may occur at any time but is most common during the 3rd trimester.
Placenta previa
is abnormal implantation of the placenta over or near the internal cervical os. It results
from various risk factors. Bleeding may be spontaneous or triggered by digital examination or by onset of
labor. Placenta previa accounts for about 20% of bleeding during late pregnancy and is most common
during the 3rd trimester.
In
vasa previa
, the fetal blood vessels connecting the cord and placenta overlie the internal cervical os
and are in front of the fetal presenting part. Usually, this abnormal connection occurs when vessels from
the cord run through part of the chorionic membrane rather than directly into the placenta (velamentous
insertion). The mechanical forces of labor can disrupt these small blood vessels, causing them to rupture.
Because of the relatively small fetal blood volume, even a small blood loss due to vasa previa can
represent catastrophic hemorrhage for the fetus and cause fetal death.
Uterine rupture
may occur during labor—almost always in women who have had scarring of the uterus
(eg, due to cesarean delivery, uterine surgery, or uterine infection)—or after severe abdominal trauma.
===PAGE:2789===
[Table 261-9.
Some Causes of Bleeding During Late Pregnancy]
Evaluation
The evaluation aims to exclude potentially serious causes of bleeding (abruptio placentae, placenta
previa, vasa previa, uterine rupture). Bloody show of labor and abruptio placentae are diagnoses of
exclusion.
History: History of present illness
should include the patient's gravidity (number of confirmed
pregnancies), parity (number of deliveries after 20 wk), and number of abortions (spontaneous or
induced); duration of bleeding; and amount and color (bright red vs dark) of blood. Important associated
symptoms include abdominal pain and rupture of membranes. Clinicians should note whether these
symptoms are present or not and describe them (eg, whether pain is intermittent and crampy, as in labor,
or constant and severe, suggesting abruptio placentae or uterine rupture).
Review of systems
should elicit any history of syncope or near syncope (suggesting major
hemorrhage).
Past medical history
should note risk factors for major causes of bleeding (see
Table 261-10
), particularly previous cesarean delivery. Clinicians should determine whether patients have
a history of hypertension, cigarette smoking, in vitro fertilization, or any illicit drug use (particularly
cocaine).
Physical examination:
Examination starts with review of vital signs, particularly BP, for signs of
hypovolemia. Fetal heart rate is assessed, and continuous fetal monitoring is started if possible.
The abdomen is palpated for uterine size, tenderness, and tonicity (normal, increased, or decreased).
A digital cervical examination is contraindicated when bleeding occurs during late pregnancy until
ultrasonography confirms normal placental and vessel location (and excludes placenta previa and vasa
previa). Careful speculum examination can be done. If ultrasonography is normal, clinicians may proceed
with a digital examination to determine cervical dilation and effacement.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Hypotension
• Tense, tender uterus
• Fetal distress (loss of heart sounds, bradycardia, variable or late decelerations detected during
monitoring)
• Cessation of labor and atonic uterus
Interpretation of findings:
If more than a few drops of blood are observed or there are
[Table 261-10.
Some Risk Factors for Major Causes of Bleeding During Late Pregnancy]
signs of fetal distress, the more serious causes must be ruled out: abruptio placentae, placenta previa,
vasa previa, and uterine rupture. However, some patients with abruptio placentae or uterine rupture have
minimal visible bleeding despite major intra-abdominal or intrauterine hemorrhage.
Clinical findings help suggest a cause (see also
Table 261-9
). Light bleeding with mucus suggests bloody
show of labor. Sudden, painless bleeding with bright red blood suggests placenta previa or vasa previa.
Dark red clotted blood suggests abruptio placentae or uterine rupture. A tense, contracted, tender uterus
suggests abruptio placentae; an atonic or abnormally shaped uterus with abdominal tenderness suggests
uterine rupture.
===PAGE:2790===
Testing:
The tests should include the following:
• Ultrasonography
• CBC and type and screen
• Possibly Kleihauer-Betke testing
All women with bleeding during late pregnancy require transvaginal ultrasonography, done at the bedside
if the patient is unstable. A normal placenta and normal cord and vessel insertion exclude placenta previa
and vasa previa. Although ultrasonography sometimes shows abruptio placentae, this test is not
sufficiently reliable to distinguish abruptio placentae from uterine rupture. These diagnoses are made
clinically, based on risk factors and examination findings (a tense uterus is more common in abruptio
placentae; loss of tone is more common in rupture). Rupture is confirmed during laparotomy.
In addition, CBC and type and screen (blood typing and screening for abnormal antibodies) should be
done. If bleeding is severe, if moderate to severe abruptio placentae is suspected, or if maternal
hypotension is present, several units of blood are cross-matched and tests for disseminated intravascular
coagulation (PT/PTT, fibrinogen level, D-dimer level) are done.
The Kleihauer-Betke test can be done to measure the amount of fetal blood in the maternal circulation
and determine the need for additional doses of Rh
(D) immune globulin to prevent maternal sensitization.
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at the specific cause. Patients with signs of hypovolemia require IV fluid resuscitation,
starting with 20 mL/kg of normal saline solution. Blood transfusion should be considered for patients not
responding to 2 L of saline.
Key Points
• All patients require IV access for fluid or blood resuscitation, as well as continuous maternal and fetal
monitoring.
• A digital cervical examination is contraindicated in evaluation of bleeding during late pregnancy until
placenta previa and vasa previa are excluded.
• In abruptio placentae, vaginal bleeding may be absent if blood is concealed between the placenta and
uterine wall.
• Uterine rupture is suspected in women with a history of cesarean delivery or other uterine surgery.
• Vaginal bleeding may be mild despite maternal hypotension.
===PAGE:2791===
Chapter 262. Normal Pregnancy, Labor, and Delivery
Introduction
The earliest sign of pregnancy and the reason most pregnant women initially see a physician is missing a
menstrual period. For sexually active women who are of reproductive age and have regular periods,
missing a period for ≥ 1 wk is presumptive evidence of pregnancy.
Pregnancy is considered to last 266 days from the time of conception or 280 days from the first day of the
last menstrual period if periods occur regularly every 28 days. Delivery date is estimated based on the
last menstrual period. Delivery up to 2 wk earlier or later than the estimated date is normal.
Symptoms and Signs
Pregnancy may cause breasts to be engorged because of increased levels of estrogen (primarily) and
progesterone—an extension of premenstrual breast engorgement. Nausea, occasionally with vomiting,
may occur because of increased secretion of estrogen and the
β
subunit of human chorionic
gonadotropin (
β
-hCG) by syncytial cells of the placenta, beginning 10 days after fertilization (. The corpus luteum in the ovary, stimulated by
β
-hCG, continues secreting large amounts of
estrogen and progesterone to maintain the pregnancy. Many women become fatigued at this time, and a
few women notice abdominal bloating very early. Women usually begin to feel fetal movement between 16
and 20 wk.
Pelvic examination findings include a softer cervix and an irregularly softened, enlarged uterus. The cervix
usually becomes bluish to purple, probably because blood supply to the uterus is increased. Around 12
wk gestation, the uterus extends above the true pelvis into the abdomen; at 20 wk, it reaches the
umbilicus; and by 36 wk, the upper pole almost reaches the xiphoid process.
Diagnosis
Usually urine and occasionally blood tests are used to confirm or exclude pregnancy; results are usually
accurate several days before a missed menstrual period and often as early as several days after
conception. Levels of
β
-hCG, which correlate with gestational age in normal pregnancies, can be used to
determine whether a fetus is growing normally. The best approach is to compare 2 serum
β
-hCG values,
obtained 48 to 72 h apart and measured by the same laboratory. In a normal single pregnancy,
β
-hCG
levels double about every 1.4 to 2.1 days during the first 60 days (7.5 wk), then begin to decrease
between 10 and 18 wk. Regular doubling of the
β
-hCG level during the 1st trimester strongly suggests
normal growth.
Other accepted signs of pregnancy include the following:
• Presence of a gestational sac in the uterus, seen with ultrasonography typically at about 4 to 5 wk and
typically corresponding to a serum
β
-hCG level of about 1500 mIU/mL (a yolk sac can usually be seen
in the gestational sac by 5 wk)
• Fetal heart motion, seen with real-time ultrasonography as early as 5 to 6 wk
• Fetal heart sounds, heard with Doppler ultrasonography as early as 8 to 10 wk if the uterus is
accessible abdominally
• Fetal movements felt by the examining physician after 20 wk
Physiology of Pregnancy
Pregnancy causes physiologic changes in all maternal organ systems; most return to normal after
delivery. In general, the changes are more dramatic in multifetal than in single pregnancies.
Cardiovascular:
Cardiac output (CO) increases 30 to 50%, beginning by 6 wk gestation and peaking
===PAGE:2792===
between 16 and 28 wk (usually at about 24 wk). It remains near peak levels until after 30 wk. Then, CO
becomes sensitive to body position. Positions that cause the enlarging uterus to obstruct the vena cava
the most (eg, the recumbent position) cause CO to decrease the most. On average, CO usually
decreases slightly from 30 wk until labor begins. During labor, CO increases another 30%. After delivery,
the uterus contracts, and CO drops rapidly to about 15 to 25% above normal, then gradually decreases
(mostly over the next 3 to 4 wk) until it reaches the prepregnancy level at about 6 wk postpartum.
The increase in CO during pregnancy is due mainly to demands of the uteroplacental circulation; volume
of the uteroplacental circulation increases markedly, and circulation within the intervillous space acts
partly as an
arteriovenous shunt. As the placenta and fetus develop, blood flow to the uterus must
increase to about 1 L/min (20% of normal CO) at term. Increased needs of the skin (to regulate
temperature) and kidneys (to excrete fetal wastes) account for some of the increased CO.
To increase CO, heart rate increases from the normal 70 to as high as 90 beats/min, and stroke volume
increases. During the 2nd trimester, BP usually drops (and pulse pressure widens), even though CO and
renin and angiotensin levels increase, because uteroplacental circulation expands (the placental
intervillous space develops) and systemic vascular resistance decreases. Resistance decreases because
blood viscosity and sensitivity to angiotensin decrease. During the 3rd trimester, BP may return to normal.
With twins, CO increases more and diastolic BP is lower at 20 wk than with a single fetus.
Exercise increases CO, heart rate, O
consumption, and respiratory volume/min more during pregnancy
than at other times. The hyperdynamic circulation of pregnancy increases frequency of functional
murmurs and accentuates heart sounds. X-ray or ECG may show the heart displaced into a horizontal
position, rotating to the left, with increased transverse diameter. Premature atrial and ventricular beats are
common during pregnancy. All these changes are normal and should not be erroneously diagnosed as a
heart disorder; they can usually be managed with reassurance alone. However, paroxysms of atrial
tachycardia occur more frequently in pregnant women and may require prophylactic digitalization or other
antiarrhythmic drugs. Pregnancy does not affect the indications for or safety of cardioversion.
Hematologic:
Total blood volume increases proportionally with CO, but the increase in plasma volume is
greater (close to 50%, usually by about 1600 mL for a total of 5200 mL) than that in RBC mass (about
25%); thus, Hb is lowered by dilution, from about 13.3 to 12.1 g/dL. This dilutional anemia decreases
blood viscosity. With twins, total maternal blood volume increases more (closer to 60%).
WBC count increases slightly to 9,000 to 12,000/
μ
L. Marked leukocytosis (≥ 20,000/
μ
L) occurs during
labor and the first few days postpartum.
Iron requirements increase by a total of about 1 g during the entire pregnancy and are higher during the
2nd half of pregnancy—6 to 7 mg/day. The fetus and placenta use about 300 mg of iron, and the
increased maternal RBC mass requires an additional 500 mg. Excretion accounts for 200 mg. Iron
supplements are needed to prevent a further decrease in Hb levels because the amount absorbed from
the diet and recruited from iron stores (average total of 300 to 500 mg) is usually insufficient to meet the
demands of pregnancy.
Urinary:
Changes in renal function roughly parallel those in cardiac function. GFR increases 30 to 50%,
peaks between 16 and 24 wk gestation, and remains at that level until nearly term, when it may decrease
slightly because uterine pressure on the vena cava often causes venous stasis in the lower extremities.
Renal plasma flow increases in proportion to GFR. As a result, BUN decreases, usually to < 10 mg/dL (<
3.6 mmol urea/L), and creatinine levels decrease proportionally to 0.5 to 0.7 mg/dL (44 to 62
μ
mol/L).
Marked dilation of the ureters (hydroureter) is caused by hormonal influences (predominantly
progesterone) and by backup due to pressure from the enlarged uterus on the ureters, which can also
cause hydronephrosis. Postpartum, the urinary collecting system may take as long as 12 wk to return to
normal.
Postural changes affect renal function more during pregnancy than at other times; ie, the supine position
increases renal function more, and upright positions decrease renal function more. Renal function also
markedly increases in the lateral position; this position relieves the pressure that the enlarged uterus puts
on the great vessels when pregnant women are supine. This positional increase in renal function is one
===PAGE:2793===
reason pregnant women need to urinate frequently when trying to sleep.
Respiratory:
Lung function changes partly because progesterone increases and partly because the
enlarging uterus interferes with lung expansion. Progesterone signals the brain to lower CO
levels. To
lower CO
levels, tidal and minute volume and respiratory rate increase, thus increasing plasma pH. O
consumption increases by about 20% to meet the increased metabolic needs of the fetus, placenta, and
several maternal organs. Inspiratory and expiratory reserve, residual volume and capacity, and plasma
PCO
decrease. Vital capacity and plasma PO
do not change. Thoracic circumference increases by
about 10 cm. Considerable hyperemia and edema of the respiratory tract occur. Occasionally,
symptomatic nasopharyngeal obstruction and nasal stuffiness occur, eustachian tubes are transiently
blocked, and tone and quality of voice change. Mild dyspnea during exertion is common, and deep
respirations are more frequent.
GI and hepatobiliary:
As pregnancy progresses, pressure from the enlarging uterus on the rectum and
lower portion of the colon may
cause constipation. GI motility decreases because elevated progesterone
levels relax smooth muscle. Heartburn and belching are common, possibly resulting from delayed gastric
emptying and gastroesophageal reflux due to relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter and
diaphragmatic hiatus. HCl production decreases; thus, peptic ulcer disease is uncommon during
pregnancy, and preexisting ulcers often become less severe.
Incidence of gallbladder disorders increases somewhat. Pregnancy subtly affects hepatic function,
especially bile transport. Routine liver function test values are normal, except for alkaline phosphatase
levels, which increase progressively during the 3rd trimester and may be 2 to 3 times normal at term; the
increase is due to placental production of this enzyme rather than hepatic dysfunction.
Endocrine:
Pregnancy alters the function of most endocrine glands, partly because the placenta
produces hormones and partly because most hormones circulate in protein-bound forms and protein
binding increases during pregnancy.
The placenta produces a hormone (similar to thyroid-stimulating hormone) that stimulates the thyroid,
causing hyperplasia, increased vascularity, and moderate enlargement. Estrogen stimulates hepatocytes,
causing increased thyroid-binding globulin levels; thus, although total thyroxine levels may increase,
levels of free thyroid hormones remain normal. Effects of thyroid hormone tend to increase and may
resemble hyperthyroidism, with tachycardia, palpitations, excessive perspiration, and emotional instability.
However, true hyperthyroidism occurs in only 0.08% of pregnancies.
The placenta produces corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which stimulates maternal ACTH
production. Increased ACTH levels increase levels of adrenal hormones, especially aldosterone and
cortisol, and thus contribute to edema. Increased production of corticosteroids and increased placental
production of progesterone lead to insulin resistance and an increased need for insulin, as does the
stress of pregnancy and possibly the increased level of human placental lactogen. Insulinase, produced
by the placenta, may also increase insulin requirements, so that many women with gestational diabetes
develop more overt forms of diabetes (see pp.
and
).
The placenta produces melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), which increases skin pigmentation late in
pregnancy. The placenta also produces the
β
subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (
β
-hCG), a trophic
hormone that, like follicle-stimulating and luteinizing hormones, maintains the corpus luteum and thereby
prevents ovulation.
The pituitary gland enlarges by about 135% during pregnancy. The maternal plasma prolactin level
increases by 10-fold. Increased prolactin is related to an increase in thyrotropin-releasing hormone
production, stimulated by estrogen. The primary function of increased prolactin is to ensure lactation. The
level returns to normal postpartum, even in women who breastfeed.
Dermatologic:
Increased levels of estrogens, progesterone, and MSH contribute to pigmentary changes,
although exact pathogenesis is unknown. These changes include melasma (mask of pregnancy), which is
a blotchy, brownish pigment over the forehead and malar eminences; darkening of the mammary areolae,
===PAGE:2794===
axilla, and genitals; and linea nigra, a dark line that appears down the midabdomen. Melasma due to
pregnancy usually regresses within a year.
Incidence of spider angiomas, usually only above the waist, and thin-walled, dilated capillaries, especially
in the lower legs, increases.
Drugs in Pregnancy
The most commonly used drugs include anti-emetics, antacids, antihistamines, analgesics, antimicrobials,
diuretics, hypnotics, tranquilizers, and social and illicit drugs.
The FDA classifies drugs into 5 categories of safety for use during pregnancy (see
Table 262-1
). However, few well-controlled studies of therapeutic drugs have been conducted in pregnant
women. Most information about drug safety during pregnancy is derived from animal studies and
uncontrolled studies in people (eg, postmarketing reports). During pregnancy, drugs are often required to
treat certain disorders (see
Table 264-2
. Despite widespread concern about drug safety, exposure to therapeutic drugs
accounts for only 2 to 3% of all fetal congenital malformations; most malformations result from genetic,
environmental, or unknown causes.
Not all maternal drugs cross the placenta to the fetus. Those that do can have a direct toxic or teratogenic
effect (for known and suspected teratogens, see
Table 262-2
). Those that do not cross the placenta may still harm the fetus by constricting placental
vessels and thus impairing gas and nutrient exchange, by producing severe uterine hypertonia resulting
in anoxic injury, or by altering maternal physiology (eg, causing hypotension).
[Table 262-1.
FDA Categories of Drug Safety During Pregnancy]
Drugs diffuse across the placenta similarly to the way they cross other epithelial barriers (.
Whether and how quickly a drug crosses the placenta depend on the drug's molecular weight, extent of
its binding to another substance (eg, carrier protein), area available for exchange across the villi, and
amount of drug metabolized by the placenta. Most drugs with a molecular weight < 500 daltons readily
cross the placenta and enter fetal circulation. Substances with a high molecular weight (eg, protein-bound
drugs) usually do not cross the placenta. The exception is immune globulin G, which is occasionally used
to treat disorders such as fetal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. Generally, equilibration between maternal
blood and fetal tissues takes at least 40 min.
A drug's effect on the fetus is determined largely by fetal age at exposure, drug potency, and drug
dosage. Fetal age affects the type of drug effect:
•
Before the 20th day after fertilization:
Drugs given at this time may have an all-or-nothing effect,
killing the embryo or not affecting it at all. Teratogenesis is not likely during this stage.
•
During organogenesis (between 20 and 56 days after fertilization):
Teratogenesis is most likely at
this stage. Drugs reaching the embryo at this stage may result in abortion, a sublethal gross anatomic
defect (true teratogenic effect), or covert embryopathy (a permanent subtle metabolic or functional
defect that may manifest later in life), or the drugs may have no measurable effect.
•
After organogensis (in the 2nd and 3rd trimesters):
Teratogenesis is unlikely, but drugs may alter
growth and function of normally formed fetal organs and tissues.
Vaccines:
Immunization is as effective in women who are pregnant as in those who are not. Influenza
vaccine is recommended for all pregnant women in the 2nd or 3rd trimester during influenza season.
Other vaccines should be reserved for situations in which the woman or fetus is at significant risk of
exposure to a hazardous infection and risk of adverse effects from the vaccine is low. Vaccinations for
cholera, hepatitis A and B, measles, mumps, plague, poliomyelitis, rabies, tetanus-diphtheria, typhoid, and
yellow fever may be given during pregnancy if risk of infection is substantial.
===PAGE:2795===
Live-virus vaccines should not be given to women who are or may be pregnant. Rubella vaccine, an
attenuated live-virus vaccine, may cause subclinical placental and fetal infection. However, no defects in
neonates have been attributed to rubella vaccine, and women vaccinated inadvertently during early
pregnancy need not be advised to terminate pregnancy based solely on theoretical risk from the vaccine.
Varicella is another attenuated live-virus vaccine that can potentially infect the fetus; risk is highest
between 13 wk and
[Table 262-2.
Known or Suspected Teratogens]
22 wk gestation. This vaccine is contraindicated during pregnancy.
Vitamin A:
In the amount typically present in prenatal vitamins (5000 IU/day), vitamin A has not been
associated with teratogenic risk. However, doses > 10,000 IU/day during early pregnancy may increase
risk of congenital malformations.
Social and illicit drugs:
Cigarette smoking and use of alcohol during pregnancy can cause significant
problems in fetuses and neonates (.
Although marijuana's main metabolite can cross the placenta, recreational use of this drug does not
appear to consistently increase risk of congenital malformations, fetal growth restriction, or postnatal
neurobehavioral abnormalities.
Many mothers of children with congenital heart defects used amphetamines during pregnancy, suggesting
a possible teratogenic association.
Women who used cocaine during pregnancy have had perinatal complications, including abruptio
placentae and stillbirth; however, no consistent teratogenic effects have been shown.
Whether consuming large amounts of caffeine can increase risk of perinatal complications is unclear.
Consuming caffeine in small amounts (eg, 1 cup of coffee/day) appears to pose little or no risk to the
fetus, but some data, which did not account for tobacco or alcohol use, suggest that consuming large
amounts (> 7 cups of coffee/day) increases risk of stillbirths, preterm deliveries, low birth weight, and
spontaneous abortions. Decaffeinated beverages theoretically pose little risk to the fetus.
Use of the dietary sugar substitute aspartame during pregnancy is often questioned. The most common
metabolite of aspartame, phenylalanine, is concentrated in the fetus by active placental transport; toxic
levels may cause intellectual disability (mental retardation). However, when ingestion is within the usual
range, fetal phenylalanine levels are far below toxic levels. Thus, moderate ingestion of aspartame (eg,
no more than 1 liter of diet soda per day) during pregnancy appears to pose little risk of fetal toxicity.
However, in pregnant women with phenylketonuria (, intake of phenylalanine and thus
aspartame is prohibited.
Management of Normal Labor
Labor consists of a series of rhythmic, involuntary, progressive contractions of the uterus that cause
effacement (thinning and shortening) and dilation of the uterine cervix. The stimulus for labor is unknown,
but digitally manipulating or mechanically stretching the cervix during examination enhances uterine
contractile activity, most likely by stimulating release of oxytocin by the posterior pituitary gland. Normal
labor usually begins within 2 wk (before or after) the estimated delivery date. In a first pregnancy, labor
usually lasts 12 to 18 h on average; subsequent labors are often shorter, averaging 6 to 8 h. Management
of complications during labor requires additional measures (.
Beginning of labor:
Bloody show (a small amount of blood with mucous discharge from the cervix) may
precede onset of labor by as much as 72 h. Bloody show can be differentiated from abnormal 3rdtrimester vaginal bleeding because the amount is small, bloody show is typically mixed with mucus, and
the pain due to abruptio placentae (premature separation) is absent. In most pregnant women, previous
ultrasonography has been done and ruled out placenta previa. However, if ultrasonography has not ruled
out placenta previa and vaginal bleeding occurs, placenta previa is assumed to be present until it is ruled
===PAGE:2796===
out. Digital vaginal examination is contraindicated, and ultrasonography is done as soon as possible.
Labor begins with irregular uterine contractions of varying intensity; they apparently soften (ripen) the
cervix, which begins to efface and dilate. As labor progresses, contractions increase in duration, intensity,
and frequency.
Stages of labor:
There are 3 stages of labor.
The 1st stage
—from onset of labor to full dilation of the cervix (about 10 cm)—has 2 phases, latent and
active.
During the latent phase, irregular contractions become progressively better coordinated, discomfort is
minimal, and the cervix effaces and dilates to 4 cm. The latent phase is difficult to time precisely, and
duration varies, averaging 8 h in nulliparas and 5 h in multiparas; duration is considered abnormal if it
lasts > 20 h in nulliparas or > 12 h in multiparas.
During the active phase, the cervix becomes fully dilated, and the presenting part descends well into the
midpelvis. On average, the active phase lasts 5 to 7 h in nulliparas and 2 to 4 h in multiparas. The cervix
should dilate 1.2 cm/h in nulliparas and 1.5 cm/h in multiparas. Pelvic examinations are done every 2 to 3
h to evaluate labor progress. Lack of progress in dilation and descent of the presenting part may indicate
dystocia (fetopelvic disproportion). If the membranes have not spontaneously ruptured, some clinicians
routinely use
amniotomy (artificial rupture of membranes) during the active phase. As a result, labor may
progress more rapidly, and meconium-stained amniotic fluid may be detected earlier. Amniotomy during
this stage may be necessary for specific indications, such as facilitating internal fetal monitoring to confirm
fetal well-being. Amniotomy should be avoided in women with HIV infection or hepatitis B or C, so that the
fetus is not exposed to these organisms.
Maternal heart rate and BP and fetal heart rate should be checked continuously by electronic monitoring
or intermittently by auscultation during the 1st stage of labor (. Women may begin to feel the
urge to bear down as the presenting part descends into the pelvis. However, they should be discouraged
from bearing down until the cervix is fully dilated so that they do not tear the cervix or waste energy.
The 2nd stage
is the time from full cervical dilation to delivery of the fetus. On average, it lasts 2 h in
nulliparas (median 50 min) and 1 h in multiparas (median 20 min). It may last another hour or more if
conduction (epidural) analgesia or intense opioid sedation is used. For spontaneous delivery, women
must supplement uterine contractions by expulsively bearing down. In the 2nd stage, women should be
attended constantly, and fetal heart sounds should be checked continuously or after every contraction.
Contractions may be monitored by palpation or electronically.
The 3rd stage
of labor begins after delivery of the infant and ends with delivery of the placenta.
Rupture of membranes:
Occasionally, the membranes (amniotic and chorionic sac) rupture before labor
begins, and amniotic fluid leaks through the cervix and vagina. Rupture of membranes at any stage
before the onset of labor is called premature rupture of membranes (PROM—. Some women
with PROM feel a gush of fluid from the vagina, followed by steady leaking. Further confirmation is not
needed if during examination, fluid is seen leaking from the cervix.
Confirmation of more subtle cases may require testing. For example, the pH of vaginal fluid may be tested
with Nitrazine paper, which turns deep blue at a pH > 6.5 (pH of amniotic fluid: 7.0 to 7.6); false-positive
results can occur if vaginal fluid contains blood or semen or if certain infections are present. A sample of
the secretions from the posterior vaginal fornix or cervix may be obtained, placed on a slide, air dried, and
viewed microscopically for ferning. Ferning (crystallization of NaCl in a palm leaf pattern in amniotic fluid)
usually confirms rupture of membranes. If rupture is still unconfirmed, ultrasonography showing
oligohydramnios (deficient amniotic fluid) provides further evidence suggesting rupture. Rarely,
amniocentesis with instillation of dye is done to confirm rupture; dye detected in the vagina or on a
tampon confirms rupture.
When a woman's membranes rupture, she should contact her physician immediately. About 80 to 90% of
===PAGE:2797===
women with PROM at term and about 50% of women with PROM preterm go into labor spontaneously
within 24 h; > 90% of women with PROM go into labor within 2 wk. The earlier the membranes rupture
before 37 wk, the longer the delay between rupture and labor onset. If membranes rupture at term but
labor does not start within several hours, labor is typically induced to lower risk of maternal and fetal
infection.
Birthing options:
Most women prefer hospital delivery, and most health care practitioners recommend it
because unexpected maternal and fetal complications may occur during labor and delivery or postpartum,
even in women without risk factors. About 30% of hospital deliveries involve an obstetric complication (eg,
laceration, postpartum hemorrhage). Other complications include abruptio placentae, nonreassuring fetal
heart rate pattern, shoulder dystocia, need for emergency cesarean delivery, and neonatal depression or
abnormality. Nonetheless, many women want a more homelike environment for delivery; in response,
some hospitals provide birthing facilities with fewer formalities and rigid regulations but with emergency
equipment and personnel available. Birthing centers may be freestanding or located in hospitals; care at
either site is similar or identical. In some hospitals, certified nurse-midwives provide much of the care for
low-risk pregnancies. Midwives work with a physician, who is continuously available for consultation and
operative deliveries (eg, by forceps, vacuum extractor, or cesarean). All birthing options should be
discussed.
For many women, presence of the father or another support person during labor is helpful and should be
encouraged. Moral support, encouragement, and expressions of affection decrease anxiety and make
labor less frightening and unpleasant. Childbirth education classes can prepare parents for a normal or
complicated labor and delivery. Sharing the stresses of labor and the sight and sound of their own child
tends to create strong bonds between the parents and between parents and child. The parents should be
fully informed of any complications.
Admission:
Typically, pregnant women are advised to go to the hospital if they believe
their membranes
have ruptured or if they are experiencing contractions lasting at least 30 sec and occurring regularly at
intervals of about ≤ 6 min. Within an hour after presentation at a hospital, whether a woman is in labor
can usually be determined based on occurrence of regular and sustained painful uterine contractions,
bloody show, membrane rupture, and complete cervical effacement. If these criteria are not met, false
labor may be tentatively diagnosed, and the pregnant woman is typically observed for a time and, if labor
does not begin within several hours, is sent home.
When pregnant women are admitted, their BP, heart and respiratory rates, temperature, and weight are
recorded, and presence or absence of edema is noted. A urine specimen is collected for protein and
glucose analysis, and blood is drawn for a CBC and blood typing. A physical examination is done. While
examining the abdomen, the clinician estimates size, position, and presentation of the fetus, using
Leopold's maneuvers (see
Fig. 262-1
). The clinician notes the presence and rate of fetal heart sounds, as well as location for
auscultation. Preliminary estimates of the strength, frequency, and duration of contractions are also
recorded. A helpful mnemonic device for evaluation is the 3 Ps: powers (contraction strength, frequency,
and duration), passage (pelvic measurements), and passenger (eg, fetal size, position, heart rate
pattern).
If labor is active and the pregnancy is at term, a clinician examines the vagina with 2 fingers of a gloved
hand to evaluate progress of labor. If bleeding (particularly if heavy) is present, the examination is
delayed until placental location is confirmed by ultrasonography. If bleeding results from placenta previa,
vaginal examination can initiate severe hemorrhage. If labor is not active but membranes are ruptured, a
speculum examination is done initially
[Fig. 262-1.
Leopold maneuver.]
to document cervical dilation and effacement and to estimate station (location of the presenting part);
however, digital examinations are delayed until the active phase of labor or problems (eg, decreased fetal
heart sounds) occur. If the membranes have ruptured, any fetal meconium (producing greenish-brown
discoloration) should be noted because it may be a sign of fetal stress. If labor is preterm (< 37 wk) or
has not begun, only a sterile speculum examination should be done, and a culture should be taken for
===PAGE:2798===
gonococci, chlamydiae, and group B streptococci.
Cervical dilation is recorded in centimeters as the diameter of a circle; 10 cm is considered complete.
Effacement is estimated in percentages, from 0 to 100%. Because effacement involves cervical
shortening as well as thinning, it may be recorded in centimeters using the normal, uneffaced average
cervical length of 3.5 to 4.0 cm as a guide.
Station is expressed in centimeters above or below the level of the maternal ischial spines. Level with the
ischial spines corresponds to 0 station; levels above (+) or below (-) the spines are recorded in cm
increments. Fetal lie, position, and presentation are noted. Lie describes the relationship of the long axis
of the fetus to that of the mother (longitudinal, oblique, transverse); presentation describes the part of the
fetus at the cervical opening (eg, breech, vertex, shoulder). Position describes the relationship of the
presenting part to the maternal pelvis (eg, occiput left anterior [OLA] for cephalic, sacrum right posterior
[SRP] for breech).
Preparation for delivery:
Women are admitted to the labor suite for frequent observation until delivery.
If labor is active, they should receive little or nothing by mouth to prevent possible vomiting and aspiration
during delivery or in case emergency delivery with general anesthesia is necessary. Enemas and shaving
or clipping of vulvar hair are no longer indicated. An IV infusion of Ringer's lactate may be started,
preferably using a large-bore indwelling catheter inserted into a vein in the hand or forearm. During a
normal labor of 6 to 10 h, women should be given 500 to 1000 mL of this solution. The infusion prevents
dehydration during labor and subsequent hemoconcentration and maintains an adequate circulating
blood volume. The catheter also provides immediate access for drugs or blood if needed. Fluid
preloading is valuable if epidural or spinal anesthesia is planned.
Analgesia:
Analgesics may be given during labor as needed, but as little as possible should be given
because they cross the placenta and may depress the neonate's breathing. Neonatal toxicity can occur
because after the umbilical cord is cut, the neonate, whose metabolic and excretory processes are
immature, clears the transferred drug much more slowly, by liver metabolism or by urinary excretion.
Preparation for and education about childbirth lessen anxiety, markedly decreasing the need for
analgesics.
Physicians are increasingly offering epidural injection (providing regional anesthesia) as the first choice
for analgesia during labor. Typically, a local anesthetic (eg, 0.2% ropivacaine, 0.125% bupivacaine) is
continuously infused, often with an opioid (eg, fentanyl, sufentanil), into the lumbar epidural space.
Initially, the anesthetic is given cautiously to avoid masking the awareness of pressure that helps
stimulate pushing and to avoid motor block; both effects can slow labor.
If epidural injection is inadequate or if IV administration is preferred, fentanyl (100
μ
g), meperidine (up to
25 mg), or morphine sulfate (up to 10 mg) given IV q 60 to 90 min is commonly used. These opioids
provide good analgesia with only a small total dose. If toxicity results, respiration is supported, and
naloxone 0.01 mg/kg can be given IM, IV, sc, or endotracheally to the neonate as a specific antagonist.
Naloxone may be repeated in 1 to 2 min as needed based on the neonate's response. Clinicians should
check the neonate 1 to 2 h after the initial dosing with naloxone because the effects of the earlier dose
abate. If fentanyl, meperidine, or morphine provides insufficient analgesia, an additional dose of the
opioid or another analgesic method should be used rather than the so-called synergistic drugs (eg,
promethazine), which have no antidote. (These drugs are actually additive, not synergistic.) Synergistic
drugs are still sometimes used because they lessen nausea due to the opioid; doses should be small.
Fetal Monitoring
Fetal status must be monitored during labor. The main parameters are fetal heart rate (HR) and fetal HR
variability, particularly as it relates to uterine contractions and maternal movement. Several patterns are
recognized. One is considered normal and reassuring; the others are considered abnormal and
nonreassuring. A normal pattern is a baseline HR with the following characteristics:
• 120 to 160 beats/min
===PAGE:2799===
• Varies by 6 to 25 beats with movement or contractions (normal HR variability)
• Accelerates appropriately for gestational age
• Does not decelerate during contractions
Patterns that indicate possible nonreassuring fetal heart status include the following:
• Late decelerations: HR gradually decreases and returns to baseline with contractions, but the decrease
begins late, and most of it occurs (and HR is slowest) after contractions peak.
• Variable decelerations: HR decreases abruptly by ≥ 15 beats/min; the decrease may or may not occur
simultaneously with contractions and varies in onset, depth, and duration (≥ 15 sec but < 2 min).
• Tachycardia
• Severe bradycardia: HR is ≤ 110 beats/min.
• Loss of normal HR variability
Nonreassuring patterns require more intensive monitoring.
Monitoring can be manual and intermittent, using a fetoscope for auscultation of fetal HR. However, in the
US, electronic fetal HR monitoring (external or internal) has become standard of care for high-risk
pregnancies, and many clinicians use it for all pregnancies. Although this practice has been lifesaving, its
value is debated, partly because many apparent abnormalities are false positives, leading to unnecessary
cesarean deliveries. Rate of cesarean delivery is higher among women monitored electronically than
among those monitored by auscultation. Fetal pulse oximetry is being studied as a way to confirm
abnormal or equivocal results of electronic monitoring; fetal oxygenation may help determine whether a
cesarean delivery is needed. For oximetry, an internal sensor must be placed inside the uterus and
against the fetal skin to ensure an accurate reading of fetal oxygenation. However, fetal pulse oximetry
does not appear to change the rate of cesarean delivery from that based on results of fetal HR monitoring
alone.
If manual auscultation of fetal HR is used, it must be done throughout labor according to specific
guidelines, and one-on-one nursing care is needed. For low-risk pregnancies with normal labor, fetal HR
must be checked after each contraction or at least every 30 min during the 1st stage of labor and every
15 min during the 2nd stage. For high-risk pregnancies, fetal HR must be checked every 15 min during
the 1st stage and every 3 to 5 min during the 2nd stage. Listening for at least 1 to 2 min beginning at a
contraction's peak is recommended to check for late deceleration. Periodic auscultation has a lower falsepositive rate for abnormalities and incidence of intervention than continuous electronic monitoring, and it
provides opportunities for more personal contact with women during labor. However, following the
standard guidelines for auscultation is often difficult and may not be cost-effective. Also, unless done
accurately, auscultation may not detect abnormalities.
For external electronic fetal HR monitoring, devices are applied to the maternal abdomen to record fetal
heart sounds and uterine contractions. For internal monitoring, amniotic membranes must be ruptured.
Then, leads are inserted through the cervix; an electrode is attached to the fetal scalp to monitor HR, and
a catheter is placed in the uterine cavity to measure intrauterine pressure. Usually, external and internal
monitoring are similarly reliable. External devices are used for women in normal labor; internal methods
are used when external monitoring does not supply enough information about fetal well-being or uterine
contraction intensity (eg, if the external sensor is not functioning correctly).
External electronic fetal monitoring can be used during labor or electively to continuously record fetal HR
and correlate it with fetal movements (called a nonstress test). A nonstress test is interpreted as
nonreassuring if no accelerations occur during a 40-min period. External monitoring can be used similarly
with a contraction stress test; fetal movements and HR are monitored during contractions induced by
oxytocin (oxytocin challenge test) or breast stimulation or during spontaneous contractions. Nonstress
===PAGE:2800===
and contraction stress tests are frequently used to monitor complicated or high-risk pregnancies (eg,
complicated by maternal diabetes or hypertension or by prior stillbirth or fetal growth restriction).
If a problem (eg, fetal HR decelerations, lack of normal HR variability) is detected during labor,
intrauterine fetal resuscitation is tried; women may be given O
via a tight non-rebreather face mask or
rapid IV fluid infusion or may be positioned laterally. If fetal heart pattern does not improve in a reasonable
period and delivery is not imminent, urgent cesarean delivery is needed.
Management of Normal Delivery
Many obstetric units now use a combined labor, delivery, recovery, and postpartum (LDRP) room, so that
the woman, father or other support person, and neonate remain in the same room throughout their stay.
Some units use a traditional labor room and separate delivery suite, to which the woman is transferred
when delivery is imminent. The support person should be offered the opportunity to accompany her. In the
delivery room, the perineum is washed and draped, and the neonate is delivered. After delivery, the
woman may remain there or be transferred to a postpartum unit. Management of complications during
delivery requires additional measures (.
Anesthesia
Options include regional, local, and general anesthesia. Local anesthetics and opioids are commonly
used. These drugs pass through the placenta; thus, during the hour before delivery, such drugs should be
given in small doses to avoid toxicity (eg, CNS depression, bradycardia) in the neonate. Opioids used
alone do not provide adequate analgesia and so are most often used with anesthetics.
Regional anesthesia:
Several methods are available.
Lumbar epidural injection
of a local anesthetic ( is the most commonly used method.
Epidural injection is being increasingly used for delivery, including cesarean, and has essentially replaced
pudendal and paracervical blocks. The local anesthetics often used for epidural injection (eg,
bupivacaine) have a longer duration of action and slower onset than those used for pudendal block (eg,
lidocaine).
Other methods include caudal injection (into the sacral canal), which is rarely used, and spinal injection
(into the paraspinal subarachnoid space). Spinal injection may be used for cesarean delivery, but it is
used less often for vaginal deliveries because it is short-lasting (preventing its use during labor) and has
a small risk of spinal headache afterward. When spinal injection is used, patients must be constantly
attended, and vital signs must be checked every 5 min to detect and treat possible hypotension.
Local anesthesia:
Methods include pudendal block, perineal infiltration, and paracervical block.
Pudendal block,
rarely used because epidural injections are used instead, involves injecting a local
anesthetic through the vaginal wall so that the anesthetic bathes the pudendal nerve as it crosses the
ischial spine. This block anesthetizes the lower vagina, perineum, and posterior vulva; the anterior vulva,
innervated by lumbar dermatomes, is not anesthetized. Pudendal block is a safe, simple method for
uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal deliveries if women wish to bear down and push or if labor is
advanced and there is no time for epidural injection.
Infiltration of the perineum
with an anesthetic is commonly used, although this method is not as
effective as a well-administered pudendal block.
Paracervical block
is rarely appropriate for delivery because incidence of fetal bradycardia is > 15%. It
is used mainly for 1st- or early 2nd-trimester abortions. The technique involves injecting 5 to 10 mL of 1%
lidocaine at the 3 and 9 o'clock positions; the analgesic response is short-lasting.
General anesthesia:
Because potent and volatile inhalation drugs (eg, isoflurane) can cause marked
depression in mother and fetus, general anesthesia is not recommended for routine delivery. Rarely,
nitrous oxide 40% with O
may be used for analgesia during vaginal delivery as long as verbal contact
===PAGE:2801===
with the woman is maintained. Thiopental, a hypnotic, is commonly given IV with other drugs (eg,
succinylcholine, nitrous oxide plus O
) for induction of general anesthesia during cesarean delivery; used
alone, thiopental provides inadequate analgesia. With thiopental, induction is rapid and recovery is
prompt. It becomes concentrated in the fetal liver, preventing levels from becoming high in the CNS; high
levels in the CNS may cause neonatal depression. Increased interest in preparation for childbirth has
reduced the need for general anesthesia except for cesarean delivery.
Delivery Procedures
A vaginal examination is done to determine position and station of the fetal head; the head is usually the
presenting part (see
Fig. 262-2
). When effacement is complete and the cervix is fully dilated, the woman is told to bear down
and strain with each contraction to move the head through the pelvis and progressively dilate the vaginal
introitus so that more and more of the head appears. When about 3 or 4 cm of the head is visible during a
contraction in nulliparas (somewhat less in multiparas), the following maneuvers can facilitate delivery
and reduce risk of perineal laceration.
• The clinician, if right-handed, places the left palm over the infant's head during a contraction to control
and, if necessary, slightly slow progress.
• Simultaneously, the clinician places the curved fingers of the right hand against the dilating perineum,
through which the infant's brow or chin is felt.
• To advance the head, the clinician can wrap a hand in a towel and, with curved fingers, apply pressure
against the underside of the brow or chin (modified Ritgen maneuver).
[Fig. 262-2.
Sequence of events in delivery for vertex presentations.]
Thus, the clinician controls the progress of the head to effect a slow, safe delivery.
Forceps or a vacuum extractor
( is often used for vaginal delivery when the 2nd stage of
labor is likely to be prolonged (eg, because the mother is too exhausted to bear down adequately or
because regional epidural anesthesia precludes vigorous bearing down). If anesthesia is local (pudendal
block or infiltration of the perineum), forceps or a vacuum extractor is usually not needed unless
complications develop; local anesthesia may not interfere with bearing down. Indications for forceps and
vacuum extractor are essentially the same.
An
episiotomy
is not routine and is done only if the perineum does not stretch adequately and is
obstructing delivery, usually only for first deliveries at term. A local anesthetic can be infiltrated if epidural
analgesia is inadequate. Episiotomy prevents excessive stretching and possible tearing of the perineal
tissues, including anterior tears. The incision is easier to repair than a tear.
The most common type is a midline incision made from the midpoint of the fourchette directly back toward
the rectum. Extension into the rectal sphincter or rectum is a risk, but if recognized promptly, the extension
can be repaired successfully and heals well. Tears or extensions into the rectum can usually be
prevented by keeping the infant's head well flexed until the occipital prominence passes under the
symphysis pubis.
Another type of episiotomy is a mediolateral incision made from the midpoint of the fourchette at a 45°
angle laterally on either side. This type usually does not extend into the sphincter or rectum, but it causes
greater postoperative pain and takes longer to heal than midline episiotomy. Thus, for episiotomy, a
midline cut is preferred. However, use of episiotomy is decreasing because extension or tearing into the
sphincter or rectum is a concern. Episioproctotomy (intentionally cutting into the rectum) is not
recommended because rectovaginal fistula is a risk.
When the head is delivered, the clinician determines whether the umbilical cord is wrapped around the
neck. If it is, the clinician should try to unwrap the cord; if the cord cannot be rapidly removed this way,
the cord may be clamped and cut.
===PAGE:2802===
After delivery of the head, the infant's body rotates so that the shoulders are in an anteroposterior
position; gentle downward pressure on the head delivers the anterior shoulder under the symphysis. The
head is gently lifted, the posterior shoulder slides
over the perineum, and the rest of the body follows
without difficulty. The nose, mouth, and pharynx are aspirated with a bulb syringe to remove mucus and
fluids and help start respirations. The cord should be double-clamped and cut between the clamps, and a
plastic cord clip should be applied about 2 to 3 cm distal from the cord insertion on the infant. If fetal or
neonatal compromise is suspected, a segment of umbilical cord is double-clamped so that arterial blood
gas analysis can be done. An arterial pH > 7.l5 to 7.20 is considered normal. The infant is thoroughly
dried, then placed on the mother's abdomen or, if resuscitation is needed, in a warmed resuscitation
bassinet.
Placenta:
After delivery of the infant, the clinician places a hand gently on the abdomen over the uterine
fundus to detect contractions; placental separation usually occurs during the 1st or 2nd contraction, often
with a gush of blood from behind the separating placenta. The mother can usually help deliver the
placenta by bearing down. If she cannot and if substantial bleeding occurs, the placenta can usually be
evacuated (expressed) by placing a hand on the abdomen and exerting firm downward (caudal) pressure
on the uterus; this procedure is done only if the uterus feels firm because pressure on a flaccid uterus
can cause it to invert. If this procedure is not effective, the clinician holds the umbilical cord taut while
placing the other hand on the abdomen and pushing upward (cephalad) on the firm uterus, away from the
placenta; traction on the umbilical cord is avoided because it may invert the uterus. If the placenta has not
been delivered within 45 to 60 min of delivery, manual removal may be necessary; the clinician inserts an
entire hand into the uterine cavity, separating the placenta from its attachment, then extracts the placenta.
In such cases, an abnormally adherent placenta (placenta accreta— should be suspected.
The placenta should be examined for completeness because fragments left in the uterus can cause
hemorrhage or infection later. If the placenta is incomplete, the uterine cavity should be explored
manually. Some obstetricians routinely explore the uterus after each delivery. However, exploration is
uncomfortable and is not routinely recommended. Immediately after delivery of the placenta, an oxytocic
drug (oxytocin 10 units IM or as an infusion of 20 units/1000 mL saline at 125 mL/h) is given to help the
uterus contract firmly. Oxytocin should not be given as an IV bolus because cardiac arrhythmia may occur.
Postdelivery:
The cervix and vagina are inspected for lacerations, which, if present, are repaired, as is
episiotomy if done. Then if the mother and infant are recovering normally, they can begin bonding. Many
mothers wish to begin breastfeeding soon after delivery, and this activity should be encouraged. Mother,
infant, and father should remain together in a warm, private area for an hour or more to enhance parentinfant bonding. Then, the infant may be taken to the nursery or left with the mother depending on her
wishes.
For the first hour after delivery, the mother should be observed closely to make sure the uterus is
contracting (detected by palpation during abdominal examination) and to check for bleeding, BP
abnormalities, and general well-being. The time from delivery of the placenta to 4 h postpartum has been
called the 4th stage of labor; most complications, especially hemorrhage (, occur at this time,
and frequent observation is mandatory.
===PAGE:2803===
Chapter 263. Pregnancy Complicated by Disease
Introduction
Nonobstetric disorders often complicate pregnancy; management sometimes differs from that for
nonpregnant patients. Coordination of care between the obstetrician and medical specialist often helps.
Anemia in Pregnancy
Normally during pregnancy, erythroid hyperplasia of the marrow occurs, and RBC mass increases.
However, a disproportionate increase in plasma volume results in hemodilution (hydremia of pregnancy):
Hct decreases from between 38 and 45% in healthy women who are not pregnant to about 34% during
late single pregnancy and to 30% during late multifetal pregnancy. Thus during
pregnancy, anemia is
defined as Hb < 10 g/dL (Hct < 30%). If Hb is < 11.5 g/dL at the onset of pregnancy, women may be
treated prophylactically because subsequent hemodilution usually reduces Hb to < 10 g/dL. Despite
hemodilution, O
-carrying capacity remains normal throughout pregnancy. Hct normally increases
immediately after birth.
Anemia occurs in up to one third of women during the 3rd trimester. The most common causes are iron
deficiency and folate deficiency.
Symptoms and Signs
Early symptoms are usually nonexistent or nonspecific (eg, fatigue, weakness, light-headedness, mild
dyspnea during exertion). Other symptoms and signs may include pallor and, if anemia is severe,
tachycardia or hypotension. Anemia increases risk of preterm delivery and postpartum maternal
infections.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis begins with CBC; usually, if women have anemia, subsequent testing is based on whether the
MCV is low (< 79 fL) or high (> 100 fL):
• For microcytic anemias: Evaluation includes testing for iron deficiency (measuring serum ferritin) and
hemoglobinopathies (using hemoglobin electrophoresis). If these tests are nondiagnostic and there is
no response to empiric treatment, consultation with a hematologist is usually warranted.
• For macrocytic anemias: Evaluation includes serum folate and B
levels.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at reversing the anemia. Transfusion is usually indicated for any anemia if severe
constitutional symptoms (eg, light-headedness, weakness, fatigue) or cardiopulmonary symptoms or signs
(eg, dyspnea, tachycardia, tachypnea) are present; the decision is not based on the Hct.
Iron Deficiency Anemia
About 95% of anemia cases during pregnancy are due to iron deficiency (. The cause is
usually inadequate dietary intake (especially in adolescent girls), a previous pregnancy, or the normal
recurrent loss of iron in menstrual blood (which approximates the amount normally ingested each month
and thus prevents iron stores from building up).
Diagnosis
Typically, Hct is ≤ 30%, and MCV is < 79 fL. Decreased serum iron and ferritin and increased serum
transferrin levels confirm the diagnosis.
===PAGE:2804===
Treatment
• Ferrous sulfate 325 mg po once/day
One 325-mg ferrous sulfate tablet taken mid-morning is usually effective. Higher or more frequent doses
increase GI adverse effects, especially constipation, and one dose blocks absorption of the next dose,
thereby reducing percentage intake. About 20% of pregnant women do not absorb enough supplemental
oral iron; a few of them require parenteral therapy, usually iron dextran 100 mg IM every other day for a
total of ≥ 1000 mg over 3 wk. Hct or Hb is measured weekly to determine response. If iron supplements
are ineffective, concomitant folate deficiency should be suspected.
Neonates of mothers with iron deficiency anemia usually have a normal Hct but decreased total iron
stores and a need for early dietary iron supplements.
Prevention
Although the practice is controversial, iron supplements (usually ferrous sulfate 325 mg po once/day) are
usually given routinely to pregnant women to prevent depletion of body iron stores and prevent the
anemia that may result from abnormal bleeding or a subsequent pregnancy.
Folate Deficiency Anemia
Folate deficiency (see pp.
and
) increases risk of neural tube defects and possibly fetal alcohol
syndrome. Deficiency occurs in 0.5 to 1.5% of pregnant women; macrocytic, megaloblastic anemia is
present if deficiency is moderate or severe. Rarely, severe anemia and glossitis occur.
Diagnosis
Folate deficiency is suspected if CBC shows anemia with macrocytic indices or high RBC distribution
width (RDW). Low serum folate levels confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment
Treatment is folate 1 mg po bid. Severe megaloblastic anemia may warrant bone marrow examination and
further treatment in a hospital.
Prevention
For prevention, all pregnant women are given folate 0.4 mg po once/day. Women who have had a fetus
with spina bifida should take 4.0 mg once/day, starting before conception.
Hemoglobinopathies
(See also
Sidebar 106-1

During pregnancy, hemoglobinopathies, particularly sickle cell disease, Hb S-C disease,
β
-thalassemia
disease, and
α
-thalassemia, can worsen maternal and perinatal outcomes (for genetic screening, see
Table 259-1
.
Preexisting
sickle cell disease,
particularly if severe, increases risk of maternal infection (most often,
pneumonia, UTIs, and endometritis), pregnancy-induced hypertension, heart failure, and pulmonary
infarction. Fetal growth restriction, preterm delivery, and low birth weight are common. Anemia almost
always becomes more severe as pregnancy progresses. Sickle cell trait increases the risk of UTIs but is
not associated with severe pregnancy-related complications.
Treatment of sickle cell disease during pregnancy is complex. Painful crises should be treated
aggressively. Prophylactic exchange transfusions to keep Hb A at ≥ 60% reduce risk of hemolytic crises
and pulmonary complications, but they are not routinely recommended because they increase risk of
===PAGE:2805===
transfusion reactions, hepatitis, HIV transmission, and blood group isoimmunization. Prophylactic
transfusion does not appear to decrease perinatal risk. Therapeutic transfusion is indicated for the
following:
• Symptomatic anemia
• Heart failure
• Severe bacterial infection
• Severe complications of labor and delivery (eg, bleeding, sepsis)
Hb S-C disease
may first cause symptoms during pregnancy. The disease increases risk of pulmonary
infarction by occasionally causing bony spicule embolization. Effects on the fetus are uncommon but, if
they occur, often include fetal growth restriction.
Sickle cellβ
-thalassemia
is similar to Hb S-C disease but is less common and more benign.
α
-Thalassemia
does not cause maternal morbidity, but if the fetus is homozygous, hydrops and fetal
death occur during the 2nd or early 3rd trimester.
Asthma in Pregnancy
The effect of pregnancy on asthma varies; deterioration is slightly more common than improvement, but
most pregnant women do not have severe attacks. The effect of asthma on pregnancy also varies, but
risk of preterm delivery and fetal growth restriction is increased.
Treatment
Pregnancy does not usually change treatment of asthma (. Inhaled bronchodilators and
corticosteroid inhalers are first-line maintenance therapy. Theophylline is no longer recommended
routinely during pregnancy. For an acute exacerbation, in addition to bronchodilators, methylprednisolone
60 mg IV q 6 h for 24 to 48 h may be used, followed by oral prednisone in a tapering dose.
Autoimmune Disorders in Pregnancy
Autoimmune disorders are 5 times more common among women, and incidence tends to peak during
reproductive years. Thus, these disorders commonly occur in pregnant women.
Systemic lupus erythematosus:
SLE ( may first appear during pregnancy; women who
have had an unexplained 2ndtrimester stillbirth, a fetus with growth restriction, preterm delivery, or
recurrent spontaneous abortions are often later diagnosed with SLE.
The course of preexisting SLE during pregnancy cannot be predicted, but SLE may worsen, particularly
immediately postpartum. Complications may include fetal growth restriction, preterm delivery due to
preeclampsia, and congenital heart block due to maternal antibodies that cross the placenta. Significant
preexisting renal or cardiac complications increase risk of maternal morbidity and mortality. Diffuse
nephritis, hypertension, or the presence of circulating antiphospholipid antibodies (usually anticardiolipin
antibody or lupus anticoagulant) increases risk of perinatal mortality. Women with antiphospholipid
antibodies also have an increased risk of maternal thromboembolic disorders. Neonates may have
anemia, thrombocytopenia, or leukopenia; these disorders tend to resolve during the first weeks after
birth when maternal antibodies disappear.
Treatment may require prednisone; the lowest possible dose is used. However, 10 to 60 mg po once/day
is often needed. Women with antiphospholipid antibodies are also often treated with aspirin (81 mg po
once/day)
and prophylactic heparin (5,000 to 10,000 units bid sc). For women with severe, refractory
SLE, the need to continue immunosuppressants (eg, hydroxychloroquine) during pregnancy is reviewed
individually.
===PAGE:2806===
Rheumatoid arthritis:
RA ( may begin during pregnancy or, even more often, during the
postpartum period. Preexisting RA generally abates temporarily during pregnancy. The fetus is not
specifically affected, but delivery may be difficult if the woman's hip joints or lumbar spine is affected. If a
woman develops an RA flare during pregnancy, first-line treatment usually begins with prednisone. For
refractory cases, other immunosuppressants may be required.
Myasthenia gravis:
Myasthenia gravis ( varies in its course during pregnancy. Frequent
acute myasthenic episodes may require increasing doses of anticholinesterase drugs (eg, neostigmine),
which may cause symptoms of cholinergic excess (eg, abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, increasing
weakness); atropine may then be required. Sometimes myasthenia becomes refractory to standard
therapy and requires corticosteroids or immunosuppressants. During labor, women may need assisted
ventilation and are extremely sensitive to drugs that depress respiration (eg, sedatives, opioids, Mg
sulfate). Because the IgG responsible for myasthenia crosses the placenta, transient myasthenia occurs
in 20% of neonates, even more if mothers have not had a thymectomy.
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP):
ITP (, mediated by maternal anti-platelet IgG,
tends to worsen during pregnancy and increases risk of maternal morbidity. Corticosteroids reduce IgG
levels and cause remission in most women, but improvement is sustained in only 50%.
Immunosuppressive therapy and plasmapheresis further reduce IgG, increasing platelet counts. Rarely,
splenectomy is required for refractory cases; it is best done during the 2nd trimester, when it causes
sustained remission in about 80%. IV immune globulin increases platelet count significantly but briefly, so
that labor can be induced in women with low platelet counts. Platelet transfusions are indicated only
when cesarean delivery is required and maternal platelet counts are < 50,000/
μ
L.
Although antiplatelet IgG can cross the placenta, it only very rarely causes fetal or neonatal
thrombocytopenia. Maternal anti-platelet antibody levels (measured by direct or indirect assay) cannot
predict fetal involvement. Percutaneous umbilical blood sampling can be diagnostic. If fetal platelet count
is < 50,000/
μ
L, intracranial bleeding can occur during labor or vaginal delivery; cesarean delivery is
necessary.
Cancer in Pregnancy
(See also
Chapter 256
.)
Pregnancy should not delay treatment of cancer. Treatment is similar to that in nonpregnant women
except for rectal and gynecologic cancers.
Because embryonic tissues grow rapidly and have a high DNA turnover rate, they resemble cancer
tissues and are thus very vulnerable to antineoplastic drugs. Many antimetabolites and alkylating drugs
(eg, busulfan, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate) can cause fetal
abnormalities. Methotrexate is particularly problematic; use during the 1st trimester increases risk of
spontaneous abortion and, if the pregnancy continues, multiple congenital malformations. Although
pregnancy often concludes successfully despite cancer treatment, risk of fetal injury due to treatment
leads some women to choose abortion.
Rectal cancer:
Rectal cancers may require hysterectomy to ensure complete tumor removal. Cesarean
delivery may be done as early as 28 wk, followed by hysterectomy so that the infant can be saved and
aggressive cancer treatment started.
Cervical cancer:
Pregnancy does not appear to worsen cervical cancer. Cervical cancer can develop
during pregnancy, and an abnormal Papanicolaou (Pap) test should not be attributed to pregnancy.
Abnormal Pap tests are followed by colposcopy and directed biopsies when indicated. Usually, conization
can be avoided. If biopsy shows mild dysplasia, normal delivery is possible, and follow-up evaluation can
start 6 wk postpartum. Severe dysplasia or carcinoma in situ warrants further evaluation during
pregnancy; colposcopy is usually accurate, but sometimes biopsy is necessary.
For carcinoma in situ (Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO] stage 0—see
===PAGE:2807===
Table 256-7
 and microinvasive cancer (stage IA1), treatment is often deferred until after
delivery because conservative options may be possible then.
If invasive cancer (FIGO stage IA2 or higher) is diagnosed during early pregnancy, immediate therapy
appropriate for the cancer is traditionally recommended. If invasive cancer is diagnosed after 20 wk and if
the
woman accepts the unquantified increase in risk, treatment can be deferred until into the 3rd trimester
(eg, 32 wk) to maximize fetal maturity but not delay treatment too long. When hysterectomy is delayed
until delivery, some experts recommend that it be done immediately after delivery. Others recommend
delaying hysterectomy until 6 wk postpartum because risks due to hysterectomy are thought to be much
greater at delivery because of the increased blood supply to the pelvic organs at that time.
In certain cancers, chemotherapy may induce tumor regression, allowing the fetus to mature to a viable
stage before definitive treatment (surgery or radiation therapy). Delivery is usually cesarean, but vaginal
delivery, although controversial, may be as safe.
Other gynecologic cancers:
After 12 wk gestation, ovarian cancer is easily missed; then, the ovaries,
with the uterus, rise out of the pelvis and are no longer easily palpable. If very advanced, ovarian cancer
during pregnancy may be fatal before completion of the pregnancy. Affected women require bilateral
oophorectomy as soon as possible. Endometrial and fallopian tube cancers rarely occur during
pregnancy.
Leukemia and Hodgkin lymphoma:
These disorders (see
Chs. 117
and
) are uncommon during
pregnancy. Antineoplastic drugs typically used increase risk of fetal loss and congenital malformations.
Because leukemias can become fatal rapidly, treatment is given as soon as possible, without any
significant delay to allow the fetus to mature. If Hodgkin lymphoma is confined to above the diaphragm,
radiation therapy may be used; the abdomen must be shielded. If lymphoma is below the diaphragm,
abortion may be recommended.
Breast cancer:
Breast engorgement during pregnancy may make recognizing breast cancer difficult. Any
solid or cystic breast mass should be evaluated (see
Chapter 255
).
Diabetes Mellitus in Pregnancy
(See also
Chapter 99
)
Pregnancy aggravates preexisting type 1 (insulin-dependent) and type 2 (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes but does not appear to exacerbate diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, or neuropathy.
Gestational diabetes
(diabetes that begins during pregnancy) can develop in overweight,
hyperinsulinemic, insulin-resistant women or in thin, relatively insulin-deficient women. Gestational
diabetes occurs in 1 to 3% of all pregnancies, but the rate may be much higher in certain groups (eg,
Mexican Americans, American Indians, Asians, Indians, Pacific Islanders).
Diabetes during pregnancy increases fetal and maternal morbidity and mortality. Neonates are at risk of
respiratory distress, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hyperbilirubinemia, polycythemia, and hyperviscosity.
Poor control of preexisting or gestational diabetes during organogenesis (up to about 10 wk gestation)
increases risk of major congenital malformations and spontaneous abortion. Poor control of diabetes later
in pregnancy increases risk of fetal macrosomia (usually defined as fetal weight > 4000 or > 4500 g at
birth), preeclampsia, and spontaneous abortion. However, gestational diabetes can result in fetal
macrosomia even if blood glucose is kept nearly normal.
Treatment
• Close monitoring
• Tight control of blood glucose
• Management of complications
===PAGE:2808===
Preconception counseling and optimal control of diabetes before, during, and after pregnancy minimize
maternal and fetal risks, including congenital malformations. Because malformations may develop before
pregnancy is diagnosed, the need for constant, strict control of glucose levels is stressed to women who
have diabetes and who are considering pregnancy (or who are not using contraception).
Most experts recommend that all pregnant women be screened for gestational diabetes (. A
glucose tolerance test is usually recommended, but the diagnosis can probably be made by a fasting
plasma glucose of > 126 mg/dL or a random plasma glucose > 200 mg/dL.
To minimize risks, clinicians should do all of the following:
• Involve a diabetes team (eg, physicians, nurses, nutritionists, social workers) and a pediatrician
• Promptly diagnose and treat complications of pregnancy, no matter how trivial
• Plan for delivery and have an experienced pediatrician present
• Ensure that neonatal intensive care is available
In regional perinatal centers, specialists in management of diabetic complications are available.
During pregnancy:
Treatment can vary, but some general management guidelines are useful (see
Tables 263-1
,
263-2
, and
263-3
).
[Table 263-1.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus* During Pregnancy]
Women with type 1 or 2 should monitor their blood glucose levels at home. During pregnancy, normal
fasting blood glucose levels are about 76 mg/dL (4.2 mmol/L); treatment aims to keep fasting blood
glucose levels at < 95 mg/dL (< 5.3 mmol/L) and 2-h postprandial levels at ≤ 120 mg/dL (≤ 6.6 mmol/L).
The goals are no wide blood glucose fluctuations and glycosylated Hb (Hb A
1c
) levels kept at < 8%.
[Table 263-2.
Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus* During Pregnancy]
Insulin
is the traditional drug of choice because it cannot cross the placenta and provides more
predictable glucose control; it is used for types 1 and 2 diabetes and for some women with gestational
diabetes. Human insulin is used if possible because it minimizes antibody formation. Insulin antibodies
cross the placenta, but their effect on the fetus is unknown. In some women with long-standing type 1
diabetes, hypoglycemia does not trigger the normal release of counterregulatory hormones
(catecholamines, glucagon, cortisol, and growth hormone); thus, too much insulin can trigger
hypoglycemic coma without premonitory symptoms. All pregnant women with type 1 should have glucagon
kits and be instructed (as should family members) in giving glucagon if severe hypoglycemia (indicated by
unconsciousness, confusion, or blood glucose levels < 40 mg/dL [< 2.2 mmol/L]) occurs.
Oral hypoglycemic drugs
(eg, glyburide) are being increasingly used to manage diabetes in pregnant
women because of the ease of administration (pills compared to injections), low cost, and single daily
dosing. Several studies have shown that glyburide is safe during pregnancy and that it provides control
equivalent to that of insulin for women with gestational diabetes. For women with type II diabetes before
pregnancy, data for use of oral drugs during pregnancy are scant; insulin is most often preferred. Oral
hypoglycemics taken during pregnancy may be continued postpartum during breastfeeding, but the infant
should be closely monitored for signs of hypoglycemia.
Management of complications:
Although diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and mild neuropathy are
not contraindications to pregnancy, they require preconception counseling and close management before
and during pregnancy.
===PAGE:2809===
Retinopathy
requires that an ophthalmologic examination be done every trimester. If proliferative
retinopathy is noted at the first prenatal visit, photocoagulation should be used as soon as possible to
prevent progressive deterioration.
Nephropathy
, particularly in women with renal transplants, predisposes to pregnancy-induced
[Table 263-3.
Management of Gestational Diabetes During Pregnancy]
hypertension. Risk of preterm delivery is higher if maternal renal function is impaired or if transplantation
was recent. Prognosis is best if delivery occurs ≥ 2 yr after transplantation.
Congenital malformations
of major organs are predicted by elevated Hb A
1c
levels at conception and
during the first 8 wk of pregnancy. If the level is ≥ 8.5% during the 1st trimester, risk of congenital
malformations is significantly increased, and targeted ultrasonography and fetal echocardiography are
done during the 2nd trimester to check for malformations. If women with type 2 diabetes take oral
hypoglycemic drugs during the 1st trimester, fetal risk of congenital malformations is unknown (see
Table 264-2
).
Labor and delivery:
Certain precautions are required to ensure an optimal outcome.
Timing of delivery
depends on fetal well-being. Women are told to count fetal movements during a 60min period daily (fetal kick count) and to report any sudden decreases to the obstetrician immediately.
Nonstress testing ( is begun at 32 wk and, if results are nonreassuring, is followed by a
biophysical profile (measurement of amniotic fluid and fetal muscle tone, movement, and breathing
pattern). These tests and similar noninvasive prenatal fetal monitoring tests (called antenatal testing) are
initiated earlier if women have severe hypertension or a renal disorder or if fetal growth restriction is
suspected. Amniocentesis to assess fetal lung maturity is often necessary for women with the following:
• Obstetric complications in past pregnancies
• Elective delivery before 39 wk
• Inadequate prenatal care
• Uncertain delivery date
• Poor glucose control
Type of delivery
is usually spontaneous vaginal delivery at term. If labor does not begin spontaneously
by 38 to 40 wk, induction is necessary because of the increasing risk of
stillbirth and shoulder dystocia.
Dysfunctional labor, fetopelvic disproportion, or risk of shoulder dystocia may make cesarean delivery
necessary.
Blood glucose levels
are best controlled during labor and delivery by a continuous low-dose insulin
infusion. If induction is planned, women eat their usual diet the day before and take their usual insulin
dose. On the morning of labor induction, breakfast and insulin are withheld, baseline fasting plasma
glucose is measured, and an IV infusion of 5% dextrose in 0.45% saline solution is started at 125 mL/h,
using an infusion pump. Initial insulin infusion rate is determined by capillary glucose level. Insulin dose is
determined as followed:
• Initially: 0 units for a capillary level of < 80 mg/dL (< 4.4 mmol/L) or 0.5 units/h for a level of 80 to 100
mg/dL (4.4 to 5.5 mmol/L)
• Thereafter: Increased by 0.5 units/h for each 40-mg/dL (2.2-mmol/L) increase in glucose level over 100
mg/dL up to 2.5 units/h for levels > 220 mg/dL (> 12.2 mmol/L)
• Every hour during labor: Measurement of glucose level at bedside and adjustment of dose to keep the
level at 70 to 120 mg/dL (3.8 to 6.6 mmol/L)
===PAGE:2810===
• If the glucose level is significantly elevated: Possibly additional bolus doses
For spontaneous labor, the procedure is the same, except that if intermediate-acting insulin was taken in
the previous 12 h, the insulin dose is decreased. For women who have fever, infection, or other
complications and for obese women who have type 2 and have required > 100 units of insulin/day before
pregnancy, the insulin dose is increased.
Postpartum:
After delivery, loss of the placenta, which synthesizes large amounts of insulin antagonist
hormones throughout pregnancy, decreases the insulin requirement immediately. Thus, women with
gestational diabetes and many of those with type 2 require no insulin postpartum. For women with type 1,
insulin requirements decrease dramatically but then gradually increase after about 72 h.
During the first 6 wk postpartum, the goal is tight glucose control. Glucose levels are checked before
meals and at bedtime. Breast-feeding is not contraindicated but may result in hypoglycemia if oral
hypoglycemics are taken. Women who have had gestational diabetes should have a 2-h oral glucose
tolerance test with 75 g of glucose at 6 to 12 wk postpartum to determine whether diabetes has resolved.
Fever in Pregnancy
A temperature > 39.5° C (> 103° F) during the 1st trimester increases risk of spontaneous abortion and
fetal brain or spinal cord defects. Fever late in pregnancy increases risk of preterm labor.
Treatment is directed at the cause, but anti-pyretics are indicated to decrease maternal temperature. In
women with severe hyperthermia, cooling blankets may be used.
Fibroids in Pregnancy
Fibroids may increase risk of preterm labor, abnormal fetal presentation, placenta previa, and recurrent
spontaneous abortions. Rarely, fibroids partially obstruct the birth canal.
Preconception evaluation is recommended for women who have very large fibroids or who have fibroids
and have had a spontaneous abortion.
Heart Disorders in Pregnancy
Heart disorders account for about 10% of maternal obstetric deaths. In the US, because incidence of
rheumatic heart disease has markedly declined, most heart problems during pregnancy result from
congenital heart disease. Pregnancy is inadvisable for women with certain high-risk disorders (eg,
pulmonary hypertension, severe valvular disorders, prior postpartum cardiomyopathy).
Pathophysiology
Pregnancy stresses the cardiovascular system, often worsening known heart disorders; mild heart
disorders may first become evident during pregnancy. Stresses include decreased Hb and increased
blood volume, stroke volume, and eventually heart rate. Cardiac output increases by 30 to 50%. These
changes become maximal between 28 and 34 wk gestation. During labor, cardiac output increases about
20% with each uterine contraction; other stresses include straining during the 2nd stage of labor and the
increase in venous blood returning to the heart from the contracting uterus. Cardiovascular stresses do
not return to prepregnancy levels until several weeks after delivery.
Symptoms and Signs
Findings resembling heart failure (eg, mild dyspnea, systolic murmurs, jugular venous
distention,
tachycardia, dependent edema, mild cardiomegaly seen on chest x-ray— typically occur during normal pregnancy or may result from a heart disorder. Diastolic or presystolic
murmurs are more specific for heart disorders.
===PAGE:2811===
Heart failure can cause premature labor or arrhythmias. Risk of maternal or fetal death correlates with
New York Heart Association functional classification, which is based on the amount of physical activity
that causes symptoms of heart failure. Risk is not increased if symptoms
• Do not occur during exertion (class I)
• Occur only during significant exertion (class II)
Risk is increased if symptoms
• Occur during mild exertion (class III)
• Occur during minimal or no exertion (class IV)
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually based on clinical evaluation and echocardiography.
Treatment
• Avoidance of warfarin, ACE inhibitors, aldosterone antagonists, and certain anti-arrhythmics (eg,
amiodarone)
• For NYHA class III or IV, activity restriction and possible bed rest after 20 wk
• Most other usual treatments for heart failure and arrhythmias
Frequent prenatal visits, ample rest, avoidance of excessive weight gain and stress, and treatment of
anemia are required. An anesthesiologist familiar with heart disorders in pregnancy should attend the
labor. During labor, pain and anxiety are treated aggressively to minimize tachycardia. Women are closely
monitored immediately postpartum and are followed for several weeks postpartum by a cardiologist.
Before women with NYHA class III or IV status conceive, the disorder should be optimally treated
medically and, if indicated (eg, if due to a valvular heart disorder), treated surgically.
Some women with a heart disorder and poor cardiac function require digoxin 0.25 mg po once/day plus
bed rest, beginning at 20 wk. Cardiac glycosides (eg, digoxin, digitoxin) cross the placenta, but neonates
(and children) are relatively resistant to their toxicity. Women with class IV heart failure may be advised to
obtain early therapeutic abortion. ACE inhibitors are contraindicated because they may cause fetal renal
damage. Aldosterone antagonists (spironolactone, eplerenone) should be avoided because they may
cause feminization of a male fetus. Other treatments for heart failure (eg, diuretics, nitrates, inotropes)
may be continued during pregnancy depending on disease severity and fetal risk, as determined by a
cardiologist and a perinatologist.
Arrhythmias:
Atrial fibrillation may accompany cardiomyopathy or valvular lesions. Rate control is
usually similar to that in nonpregnant patients, with
β
-blockers, Ca channel blockers, or digoxin (. Certain antiarrhythmics (eg, amiodarone) should be avoided. In pregnant patients with new-onset
atrial fibrillation or hemodynamic instability, cardioversion may be used to restore sinus rhythm.
Anticoagulation may be required because the relative hypercoagulability during pregnancy makes atrial
thrombi (and subsequent systemic or pulmonary embolization) more likely. Neither standard heparin nor
low molecular weight heparins cross the placenta, but low molecular weight heparins may have less risk
of thrombocytopenia. Warfarin crosses the placenta and may cause fetal abnormalities (see
Table 264-2
, particularly during the 1st trimester. Warfarin use during the last month of pregnancy has
risks. Rapid reversal of warfarin's anticoagulant effects may be difficult and may be required because of
fetal or neonatal intracranial hemorrhage resulting from birth trauma or because of maternal bleeding (eg,
resulting from trauma or emergency cesarean delivery).
Management of acute supraventricular or ventricular tachycardia is the same as for non-pregnant
===PAGE:2812===
patients.
Endocarditis prophylaxis:
For pregnant patients with a structural heart disorder, indications and use of
endocarditis prophylaxis for nonobstetric events are the same as those for nonpregnant patients (. Although rate of bacteremia with uncomplicated vaginal or caesarean delivery is low and routine
prophylaxis is not recommended by the American College of Cardiology, many obstetricians give patients
with valvular disease prophylactic antibiotics shortly before and after delivery.
Valvular Stenosis and Insufficiency
During pregnancy, stenosis and regurgitation (insufficiency) most often affect the mitral and aortic valves.
Pregnancy amplifies the murmurs of mitral and aortic stenosis but diminishes those of mitral and aortic
regurgitation. During pregnancy, mild mitral or aortic
regurgitation is usually easy to tolerate; stenosis is
more difficult to tolerate and predisposes to maternal and fetal complications. Mitral stenosis is especially
dangerous; the tachycardia, increased blood volume, and increased cardiac output during pregnancy
interact with this disorder to rapidly increase pulmonary capillary pressure, causing pulmonary edema.
Atrial fibrillation is also common.
Treatment
Ideally, valvular disorders are diagnosed and treated medically before conception; surgical correction is
often recommended for severe disorders. Prophylactic antibiotics are required in certain situations (.
Mitral stenosis:
Patients must be closely observed throughout pregnancy because mitral stenosis may
rapidly become more severe. If required, valvotomy is relatively safe during pregnancy; however, open
heart surgery increases fetal risk. During labor, conduction anesthesia (eg, epidural or spinal nerve block
by a local anesthetic) is usually preferred.
Aortic stenosis:
During labor, local anesthesia is preferred, but if necessary, general anesthesia is used.
Conduction anesthesia should be avoided because it decreases filling pressures (preload), which may
already be decreased by aortic stenosis. Straining, which can suddenly reduce filling pressures and
impair cardiac output, is discouraged during the 2nd stage of labor; operative vaginal delivery may be
preferred, if feasible. Cesarean delivery is done if indicated (.
Other Heart Disorders
Mitral valve prolapse:
This disorder occurs more frequently in younger women and tends to be familial.
Mitral valve prolapse is usually an isolated abnormality but may cause some degree of mitral regurgitation
or be accompanied by Marfan syndrome or an atrial septal defect.
Women with mitral valve prolapse generally tolerate pregnancy well. The relative increase in ventricular
size during normal pregnancy reduces the discrepancy between the disproportionately large mitral valve
and the ventricle.
Patients with mitral regurgitation may require prophylactic antibiotics during delivery.
β
-Blockers are
indicated for recurrent arrhythmias. Rarely, thrombi and systemic emboli develop and require
anticoagulation.
Congenital heart disease:
For most asymptomatic patients, risk is not increased during pregnancy.
However, patients with Eisenmenger's syndrome (now rare), primary pulmonary hypertension, or perhaps
isolated pulmonary stenosis are predisposed, for unknown reasons, to sudden death during labor, during
the postpartum period (the 6 wk after delivery), or after abortion at > 20 wk gestation. Thus, pregnancy is
inadvisable. If these patients become pregnant, they should be closely monitored with a pulmonary artery
catheter and an arterial line during delivery. For patients with intracardiac shunts, the goal is to prevent
right-to-left shunting by maintaining peripheral vascular resistance and by minimizing pulmonary vascular
resistance.
===PAGE:2813===
Patients with Marfan syndrome are at increased risk of aortic dissection and rupture of aortic aneurysms
during pregnancy. Bed rest, avoidance of Valsalva maneuvers, and measurement of aortic diameter with
echocardiography are required.
Peripartum cardiomyopathy:
Heart failure with no identifiable cause (eg, MI, valvular disorder) can
develop between the last month of pregnancy and 5 mo postpartum in patients without a previous heart
disorder. Risk factors include multiparity, age ≥ 30, multifetal pregnancy, and preeclampsia. The 5-yr
mortality rate is 50%. Recurrence is likely in subsequent pregnancies, particularly in patients with residual
cardiac dysfunction; future pregnancies are therefore not recommended. Treatment is as for heart failure
(.
Hepatic Disorders in Pregnancy
Jaundice ( may result from nonobstetric or obstetric conditions. Nonobstetric causes include
drugs, acute cholecystitis, and biliary obstruction by gallstones. Gallstones appear to be more common
during pregnancy, probably because bile lithogenicity is increased and gallbladder contractility is
impaired. Obstetric causes include hyperemesis gravidarum (usually causing mild jaundice) and septic
abortion; both cause hepatocellular injury and hemolysis.
Acute viral hepatitis:
The most common cause of jaundice during pregnancy is acute viral hepatitis. It
may predispose to preterm delivery but does not appear to be teratogenic. Acute viral hepatitis is
generally mild, but hepatitis E, common in underdeveloped countries, may be severe. Hepatitis B virus
may be transmitted to the neonate immediately after delivery or, less often, to the fetus transplacentally.
Transmission is particularly
likely if women are e-antigen-positive and are chronic carriers of hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg) or if they contract hepatitis during the 3rd trimester. Affected neonates are more
likely to develop subclinical hepatic dysfunction and become carriers than to develop clinical hepatitis. All
pregnant women are tested for HBsAg to determine whether precautions against vertical transmission are
needed (for prenatal prophylaxis with immune globulin and vaccination for neonates exposed to hepatitis
B virus, .
Chronic active hepatitis:
Chronic active hepatitis, especially with cirrhosis, impairs fertility. When
pregnancy occurs, risk of spontaneous abortion and prematurity is increased, but risk of maternal
mortality is not. Corticosteroids given for chronic active hepatitis can be continued during pregnancy
because fetal risks due to corticosteroids have not been proved to exceed those due to maternal chronic
active hepatitis. Azathioprine and other immunosuppressants, despite fetal risks, are sometimes indicated
for severe disease.
Cholestasis (pruritus) of pregnancy:
This relatively common disorder apparently results from
idiosyncratic exaggeration of normal bile stasis due to hormonal changes. Intense pruritus, the earliest
symptom, develops during the 2nd or 3rd trimester; dark urine and jaundice sometimes follow. Acute pain
and systemic symptoms are absent. The disorder usually resolves after delivery but tends to recur with
each pregnancy or with use of oral contraceptives.
For severe pruritus, oral cholestyramine 4 to 6 g bid or 3 to 4 g tid is usually effective. Bleeding due to
hypoprothrombinemia occasionally develops but is readily reversed by vitamin K (phytonadione) 5 to 10
mg IM once/day for 2 to 3 days.
Fatty liver of pregnancy:
This rare, poorly understood disorder occurs near term, sometimes with
preeclampsia. Symptoms include acute nausea and vomiting, abdominal discomfort, and jaundice,
followed in severe cases by rapidly progressive hepatocellular failure. Maternal and fetal mortality rates
are high in severe cases.
Clinical and laboratory findings resemble those of fulminant viral hepatitis except that aminotransferase
levels may be < 500 units/L and hyperuricemia may be present.
Diagnosis is based on clinical criteria, liver function tests, hepatitis serologic tests, and liver biopsy.
Biopsy shows diffuse small droplets of fat in hepatocytes, usually with minimal apparent necrosis, but in
some cases, findings are indistinguishable from viral hepatitis.
===PAGE:2814===
Depending on gestational age, prompt delivery or termination of pregnancy is usually advised, although
whether either alters maternal outcome is unclear. Survivors recover completely and have no
recurrences. A seemingly identical disorder may develop at any stage of pregnancy if high doses of
tetracyclines are given IV.
Preeclampsia:
Severe preeclampsia ( can cause liver problems with hepatic fibrin
deposition, necrosis, and hemorrhage that can result in abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and mild
jaundice. Subcapsular hematoma with intra-abdominal hemorrhage occasionally occurs, most often in
women with preeclampsia that progresses to the HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes,
and low platelet count). Rarely, the hematoma causes the liver to rupture spontaneously; rupture is life
threatening, and pathogenesis is unknown.
Chronic hepatic disorders:
Pregnancy may temporarily worsen cholestasis in primary biliary cirrhosis
and other chronic cholestatic disorders, and the increased plasma volume during the 3rd trimester slightly
increases risk of variceal hemorrhage in women with cirrhosis. However, pregnancy usually does not
harm women with a chronic hepatic disorder. Cesarean delivery is reserved for the usual obstetric
indications.
Hypertension in Pregnancy
(See also
Chapter 208
.)
Hypertension (BP ≥ 140/90 mm Hg) during pregnancy can be classified as one of the following:
•
Chronic:
BP is high before pregnancy or before 20 wk gestation. Chronic hypertension complicates
about 1 to 5% of all pregnancies.
•
Gestational:
Hypertension develops after 20 wk gestation (typically after 37 wk) and remits by 6 wk
postpartum; it occurs in about 5 to 10% of pregnancies, more commonly in multifetal pregnancy.
Both types of hypertension increase risk of preeclampsia, eclampsia (, and other causes of
maternal mortality or morbidity, including hypertensive encephalopathy, stroke, renal failure, left
ventricular failure, and the HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count).
Risk of fetal mortality or morbidity increases because of decreased uteroplacental blood
flow, which can
cause vasospasm, growth restriction, hypoxia, and abruptio placentae. Outcomes are worse if
hypertension is severe (BP > 180/100 mm Hg) or accompanied by renal insufficiency (eg, creatinine
clearance < 60 mL/min, serum creatinine > 2 mg/dL [> 180
μ
mol/L]).
Diagnosis
BP is measured routinely at prenatal visits. If severe hypertension occurs for the first time in pregnant
women who do not have a multi-fetal pregnancy or gestational trophoblastic disease, tests to rule out
renal artery stenosis, coarctation of the aorta, Cushing's syndrome, SLE, and pheochromocytoma should
be considered (.
Treatment
• For mild hypertension, conservative measures followed by antihypertensives if needed
• Methyldopa,
β
-blockers, or Ca channel blockers tried first
• Avoidance of ACE inhibitors, aldosterone antagonists, and thiazides
• For moderate or severe hypertension, anti-hypertensive therapy, close monitoring, and, if condition
worsens, possibly termination of pregnancy or delivery, depending on gestational age
Treatment of mild to moderate hypertension without renal insufficiency during pregnancy is controversial;
===PAGE:2815===
the issues are whether treatment improves outcome and whether the risks of drug treatment outweigh
risks of untreated disease. Because the uteroplacental circulation is maximally dilated and cannot
autoregulate, decreasing maternal BP with drugs may abruptly decrease uteroplacental blood flow.
Diuretics reduce effective maternal circulating blood volume; consistent reduction increases risk of fetal
growth restriction. However, hypertension with renal insufficiency is treated even if hypertension is mild or
moderate.
Recommendations for chronic and gestational hypertension are similar and depend on severity. However,
chronic hypertension may be more severe, and the BP ranges in gestational diabetes often do not require
treatment.
If hypertension is mild (140/90 to 150/100 mm Hg) and if BP is labile, reduced physical activity may
decrease BP and improve fetal growth, making perinatal risks similar to those for women without
hypertension. However, if these conservative measures do not decrease BP, many experts recommend
drug therapy.
If hypertension is moderate (150/100 to 180/110 mm Hg), drug therapy is indicated. Women who are
taking methyldopa, a
β
-blocker, a Ca channel blocker, or a combination before pregnancy may continue
these drugs. However, ACE inhibitors and diuretics should be stopped once pregnancy is confirmed.
Women must be taught to self-monitor BP and should have renal function testing every trimester. Fetal
growth is monitored with monthly ultrasound examinations; antenatal testing begins at 32 wk. Delivery
should be accomplished at 38 to 39 wk but may be done earlier if severe preeclampsia or fetal growth
restriction is detected or if fetal testing is non-reassuring.
If hypertension is severe (≥ 180/110 mm Hg), immediate evaluation, including BUN and serum creatinine,
creatinine clearance, 24-h urinary protein level, and funduscopy, is indicated. Risk of complications
—maternal (progression of end-organ dysfunction or preeclampsia) and fetal (prematurity, growth
restriction, stillbirth)—is increased significantly. If continuation of pregnancy is strongly desired despite
the risk, several antihypertensives are often required. Hospitalization is also often required for much of
the latter part of pregnancy. If the woman's condition worsens, pregnancy termination may be
recommended.
Drugs:
First-line drugs for hypertension during pregnancy include methyldopa,
β
-blockers, and Ca
channel blockers. Initial methyldopa dose is 250 mg po bid, increased as needed to 2 g/day or sometimes
more unless excessive somnolence, depression, and symptomatic orthostatic hypotension occur. The
most commonly used
β
-blocker is labetalol (a
β
-blocker with some
α
-blocking effects), which can be
used alone or with methyldopa when the maximum daily dose of methyldopa has been reached. Usual
dose of labetalol is 100 mg bid to tid, increased as needed to a total daily dose of 2400 mg. Adverse
effects of
β
-blockers include increased risk of fetal growth restriction, decreased maternal energy levels,
and maternal depression. Extended-release nifedipine, a Ca-channel blocker, may be preferred because
it is given once/day (initial dose of 30 to 60 mg); adverse effects include headaches and pretibial edema.
Several classes of antihypertensives are usually avoided during pregnancy:
•
ACE inhibitors
are contraindicated because risk of fetal urinary tract abnormalities is increased.
•
Thiazide diuretics
can adversely affect the fetus and should be avoided during pregnancy if possible.
•
Aldosterone antagonists
(spironolactone and eplerenone) should be avoided because they may
cause feminization of a male fetus.
Infectious Disease in Pregnancy
Most common maternal infections (eg, UTIs, skin and respiratory tract infections) are usually not serious
problems during pregnancy, although some genital infections (bacterial vaginosis and genital herpes)
affect labor or choice of delivery method. Thus, the main issue is usually use and safety of antimicrobial
drugs. However, certain maternal infections can damage the fetus (for congenital cytomegalovirus or
herpes simplex virus infection, rubella, toxoplasmosis, hepatitis, or syphilis, see
Chapter 279
; for HIV infection,
===PAGE:2816===
.
Listeriosis
is more common during pregnancy. Listeriosis increases risk of spontaneous abortion,
premature labor, and stillbirth. Neonatal transmission is possible.
Bacterial vaginosis
and possibly
genital chlamydial infection
predispose to premature rupture of the
membranes and preterm labor. Tests for these infections are done during routine prenatal evaluations or
if symptoms develop.
Genital herpes
can be transmitted to the neonate during delivery. Risk is high enough that cesarean
delivery is preferred in the following situations:
• When women have visible herpetic lesions
• When women who have a known history of infection develop prodromal symptoms before labor
• When herpes infection first occurs during the late 3rd trimester (when the virus is likely to be excreted
from the cervix at delivery)
If visible lesions or prodrome is absent, even in women with recurrent infections, risk is low, and vaginal
delivery is possible. If women are asymptomatic, serial antepartum cultures do not help identify those at
risk of transmission. If women have recurrent herpes infections during pregnancy but no other risk factors
for transmission, labor can sometimes be induced so that delivery occurs between recurrences. When
delivery is vaginal, cervical and neonatal herpesvirus cultures are done. Acyclovir (oral and topical)
appears to be safe during pregnancy.
Antibacterials:
Not giving antibacterials to pregnant patients without strong evidence of a bacterial
infection is particularly important. Generally, penicillins, cephalosporins, and macrolides are considered
safe. Use of any antibacterial during pregnancy should be based on whether benefits outweigh risk,
which varies by trimester (see
Table 264-2
on p.
for specific adverse effects). Severity of the
infection and other options for treatment are also considered.
Aminoglycosides
may be used during pregnancy to treat pyelonephritis and chorioamnionitis, but
treatment should be carefully monitored to avoid maternal or fetal damage.
Chloramphenicol
, even in large doses, does not harm the fetus; however, neonates cannot adequately
metabolize chloramphenicol, and the resulting high blood levels may lead to circulatory collapse (gray
baby syndrome). Chloramphenicol is rarely used in the US.
Metronidazole
use during the 1st trimester is controversial, but the drug is routinely used to treat
bacterial vaginosis and trichomoniasis during the 2nd and 3rd trimesters.
Fluoroquinolones
are not used during pregnancy; they tend to have a high affinity for bone and
cartilage and thus may have adverse musculoskeletal effects.
Sulfonamides
are usually safe during pregnancy. However, long-acting sulfonamides cross the placenta
and can displace bilirubin from binding sites. These drugs are often avoided after 34 wk gestation
because neonatal kernicterus is a risk.
Tetracyclines
cross the placenta and are concentrated and deposited in fetal bones and teeth, where
they combine with Ca and impair development (see
Table 264-2
; they are not used from the
middle to the end of pregnancy.
Renal Insufficiency in Pregnancy
Pregnancy often does not worsen renal disorders; it seems to exacerbate noninfectious renal disorders
only when uncontrolled hypertension coexists. However, significant renal insufficiency (serum creatinine >
3 mg/dL [> 270
μ
mol/L] or BUN > 30 mg/dL [> 10.5 mmol urea/L]) before pregnancy usually prevents
===PAGE:2817===
women from maintaining a pregnancy to term. Maternal renal insufficiency may cause fetal growth
restriction and stillbirth.
After renal transplantation, full-term, un-complicated pregnancy is often possible if women have all of the
following:
• A transplanted kidney that has been in place for > 2 yr
• Normal renal function
•
No episodes of rejection
• Normal BP
Treatment requires close consultation with a nephrologist. BP and weight are measured every 2 wk; BUN
and creatinine levels plus creatinine clearance are measured often, at intervals dictated by severity and
progression of disease. Furosemide is given only to control BP or excessive edema; some women require
other drugs to control BP. Women with severe renal insufficiency may require hospitalization after 28 wk
gestation for bed rest, BP control, and close fetal monitoring. Which antenatal tests are done depends on
the stage of pregnancy. Nonstress tests are usually done first, followed by an oxytocin challenge test or a
biophysical profile if required. If results remain normal and reassuring, the pregnancy continues.
Delivery is usually required before term because preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction, or uteroplacental
insufficiency develop. Sometimes amniocentesis to check fetal lung maturity can help determine when
delivery should be done; a lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio of > 2:1 or presence of phosphatidylglycerol
indicates maturity. Cesarean delivery is very common, although vaginal delivery may be possible if the
cervix is ripe and no impediments to vaginal delivery are evident.
Seizure Disorders in Pregnancy
Seizure disorders may impair fertility. But certain anticonvulsants may make oral contraceptives less
effective, resulting in unintentional pregnancy.
The dose of anticonvulsant drugs may have to be increased during pregnancy to maintain therapeutic
levels. If women get enough sleep and anticonvulsant levels are kept in the therapeutic range, seizure
frequency does not usually increase during pregnancy, and pregnancy outcome is good; however, risks of
preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction, and stillbirth are slightly increased. Generally, uncontrolled seizures
are more harmful during pregnancy than is use of anticonvulsants; thus, the top priority of treatment
during pregnancy is to control seizures. Preconception consultation with a neurologist is recommended to
stabilize maternal seizures before pregnancy; the lowest possible dose of anticonvulsant should be used.
Anticonvulsants slightly increase risk of congenital malformations and may tend to slightly decrease
intelligence in offspring; risk of intellectual disability may be increased. Risk of hemorrhagic disease of
the newborn (erythroblastosis neonatorum) may be increased by in utero exposure to certain
anticonvulsants (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine, pheno-barbital); however, if prenatal vitamins with
vitamin D are taken and vitamin K is given to the neonate, hemorrhagic disease is rare.
Taken during pregnancy, phenobarbital may reduce the physiologic jaundice neonates commonly have,
perhaps because the drug induces neonatal hepatic conjugating enzymes. Phenytoin is generally
preferred.
All anticonvulsants increase the need for supplemental folate; 1 mg po is given once/day. Ideally, it is
started before conception.
Vaginal delivery is usually preferred, but if women have repeated seizures during labor, cesarean delivery
is indicated. Anticonvulsant levels can rapidly change postpartum and should be closely monitored then.
Disorders Requiring Surgery During Pregnancy
===PAGE:2818===
Certain disorders treated with surgery are difficult to diagnose during pregnancy. A high level of suspicion
is required; assuming that all abdominal symptoms are pregnancy-related is an error.
Major surgery, particularly intra-abdominal, increases risk of preterm labor and fetal death. However,
surgery is tolerated well by pregnant women and the fetus when appropriate supportive care and
anesthesia (maintaining BP and oxygenation at normal levels) are provided, so physicians should not be
reluctant to operate; delaying treatment of an abdominal emergency is far more dangerous.
Appendicitis:
Appendicitis may occur during pregnancy but is more common immediately postpartum.
Because the appendix rises in the abdomen as pregnancy progresses, pain and tenderness may not
occur in the classic right lower quadrant location, and pain may be mild and cramping, mimicking
pregnancy-related symptoms. Also, WBC count is normally somewhat elevated during pregnancy, making
WBC count even less useful than usual. Serial clinical assessment and compression-graded
ultrasonography are useful. Because diagnosis is often delayed, mortality rate from ruptured appendix is
increased during pregnancy and particularly postpartum. Thus, if appendicitis is suspected, surgical
evaluation (laparoscopy or laparotomy depending
on the stage of pregnancy) should proceed without
delay.
Benign ovarian cysts:
These cysts are common during pregnancy. Cysts that occur during the first 14
to 16 wk are often corpus luteal cysts, which spontaneously resolve. Adnexal torsion may occur (. If adnexal torsion does not resolve, surgical therapy to unwind the adnexa or removal may be
required. After 12 wk, cysts become difficult to palpate because the ovaries, with the uterus, rise out of
the pelvis. Ovarian masses are evaluated first by ultrasonography (. Definitive evaluation (eg,
excision) is delayed, if possible, until after 14 wk unless any of the following occur:
• The cyst enlarges continuously.
• The cyst is tender.
• The cyst has radiographic characteristics of cancer (eg, a solid component, surface excrescences, size
> 6 cm, irregular shape).
Gallbladder disease:
This disease occurs occasionally. If possible, treatment is expectant; if women do
not improve, immediate surgery is needed.
Intestinal obstruction:
During pregnancy, intestinal obstruction may cause intestinal gangrene with
peritonitis and maternal or fetal morbidity or mortality. If pregnant women have symptoms and signs of
intestinal obstruction and risk factors (eg, previous abdominal surgery, intra-abdominal infection), prompt
exploratory laparotomy is indicated.
Thromboembolic Disorders in Pregnancy
In the US, thromboembolic disorders—deep venous thrombosis (DVT— or pulmonary
embolism (PE——are a leading cause of maternal mortality. During pregnancy, risk is
increased because venous capacitance and venous pressure in the legs are increased, resulting in
stasis, and because pregnancy causes a degree of hypercoagulability. However, most thromboemboli
develop postpartum and result from vascular trauma during delivery. Cesarean delivery also increases
risk.
Symptoms of thrombophlebitis or their absence does not accurately predict the diagnosis, disease
severity, or risk of embolization. Thromboembolic disorders can occur without symptoms, with only
minimal symptoms, or with significant symptoms. Also, calf edema, cramping, and tenderness, which may
occur normally during pregnancy, may simulate Homans' sign.
Diagnosis
• Doppler ultrasonography or sometimes CT with contrast for DVT
===PAGE:2819===
• Helical CT for PE
Diagnosis of DVT is usually by Doppler ultrasonography. In the postpartum period, if Doppler
ultrasonography and plethysmography are normal but iliac, ovarian, or other pelvic venous thrombosis is
suspected, CT with contrast is used.
Diagnosis of PE is increasingly being made by helical CT rather than ventilation-perfusion scanning
because CT involves less radiation and is equally sensitive. If the diagnosis of PE is uncertain,
pulmonary angiography is required.
Treatment
• Similar to that in nonpregnant patients, except for avoidance of warfarin
If DVT or PE is detected during pregnancy, the anticoagulant of choice is a low molecular weight heparin
(LMWH). LMWH, because of its molecular size, does not cross the placenta. It does not cause maternal
osteoporosis and may be less likely to cause thrombocytopenia, which can result from prolonged (≥ 6 mo)
use of unfractionated heparin. Warfarin crosses the placenta and may cause fetal abnormalities or death
(see
Table 264-2
. Indications for thrombolysis during pregnancy are the same as for patients
who are not pregnant.
If PE recurs despite effective anticoagulation, surgery, usually placement of an inferior vena cava filter
just distal to the renal vessels, is indicated.
If women developed DVT or PE during a previous pregnancy or have an underlying thrombophilic
disorder, they are treated with prophylactic LMWH 5000 units sc bid beginning at the first diagnosis of
pregnancy and continuing until 6 wk postpartum.
Thyroid Disorders in Pregnancy
(See also
Chapter 93
.)
Thyroid disorders may predate or develop during pregnancy. Pregnancy does not change the symptoms
of hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism or the normal values and ranges of free serum thyroxine (T
) and
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).
Fetal effects vary with the disorder and the drugs used for treatment. But generally, hyperthyroidism
causes fetal growth restriction and stillbirth, and hypothyroidism causes
intellectual deficits in offspring
and miscarriage. The most common causes of maternal hypothyroidism are Hashimoto's thyroiditis and
treatment of Graves' disease.
If women have or have had a thyroid disorder, thyroid status should be closely monitored during and after
pregnancy in the women and in the offspring.
Graves' disease:
Maternal Graves' disease is monitored clinically and with free T
and high-sensitivity
TSH assays.
Treatment varies. Usually, pregnant women are given the lowest possible dose of oral propylthiouracil (50
to 100 mg q 8 h). Therapeutic response occurs over 3 to 4 wk; then the dose is changed if needed.
Propylthiouracil crosses the placenta and may cause goiter and hypothyroidism in the fetus.
Simultaneous use of L-thyroxine or L-triiodothyronine is contraindicated because these hormones may
mask the effects of excessive propylthiouracil in pregnant women and result in hypothyroidism in the
fetus. Methimazole is an alternative to propylthiouracil. Graves' disease commonly abates during the 3rd
trimester, often allowing dose reduction or discontinuation of the drug.
In centers with experienced thyroid surgeons, a 2nd-trimester thyroidectomy, although very uncommon,
may be considered after drug treatment restores euthyroidism. After thyroidectomy, women are given full
===PAGE:2820===
replacement of L-thyroxine (0.15 to 0.2 mg/day), beginning 24 h later.
Radioactive iodine (diagnostic or therapeutic) and iodide solutions are contraindicated during pregnancy
because of adverse effects on the fetal thyroid gland.
β
-Blockers are used only for thyroid storm or
severe maternal symptoms.
If pregnant women have or have had Graves' disease, fetal hyperthyroidism may develop. Whether these
women are clinically euthyroid, hyperthyroid, or hypothyroid, thyroidstimulating immunoglobulins (Igs) and
thyroid-blocking Igs (if present) cross the placenta. Fetal thyroid function reflects the relative fetal levels
of these stimulating and blocking Igs. Hyperthyroidism can cause fetal tachycardia (> 160 beats/min),
growth restriction, and goiter, which can lead to decreased fetal swallowing, polyhydramnios, and preterm
labor. Ultrasonography is used to evaluate fetal growth, thyroid gland, and heart.
Congenital Graves' disease:
If pregnant women have taken propylthiouracil, congenital Graves'
disease in the fetus may be masked until 7 to 10 days after birth, when the drug's effect subsides.
Maternal hypothyroidism:
Women with mild to moderate hypothyroidism frequently have normal
menstrual cycles and can become pregnant. During pregnancy, the usual dose of L-thyroxine is
continued. As pregnancy progresses, minor dose adjustments may be necessary, ideally based on TSH
measurement after several weeks. If hypothyroidism is first diagnosed during pregnancy, L-thyroxine is
started at 0.1 mg po once/day.
Hashimoto's thyroiditis:
Maternal immune suppression during pregnancy often ameliorates this
disorder; however, hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism that requires treatment sometimes develops.
Acute (subacute) thyroiditis:
Common during pregnancy, this disorder usually produces a tender goiter
during or after a respiratory infection. Transient, symptomatic hyperthyroidism with elevated T
can occur,
often resulting in misdiagnosis as Graves' disease. Usually, treatment is unnecessary.
Postpartum maternal thyroid dysfunction:
Hypothyroid or hyperthyroid dysfunction occurs in 4 to 7%
of women during the first 6 mo after delivery. Incidence seems to be higher among pregnant women with
any of the following:
• Goiter
• Hashimoto's thyroiditis
• A strong family history of autoimmune thyroid disorders
• Type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus
In women with any of these risk factors, TSH and free serum T
levels should be checked during the 1st
trimester and postpartum. Dysfunction is usually transient but may require treatment. After delivery,
Graves' disease may recur transiently or persistently.
Painless thyroiditis with transient hyperthyroidism is a recently recognized postpartum, probably
autoimmune disorder. It occurs abruptly in the first few weeks postpartum, results in a low radioactive
iodine uptake, and is characterized by lymphocytic infiltration. Diagnosis is based on symptoms, thyroid
function tests, and exclusion of other conditions. This disorder may persist, recur transiently, or progress.
Urinary Tract Infection in Pregnancy
(See also
Chapter 233
.)
UTI is common during pregnancy, apparently because of urinary stasis, which results
from hormonal
ureteral dilation, hormonal ureteral hypoperistalsis, and pressure of the expanding uterus against the
ureters. Asymptomatic bacteriuria occurs in about 15% of pregnancies and sometimes progresses to
symptomatic cystitis or pyelonephritis. Frank UTI is not always preceded by asymptomatic bacteriuria.
===PAGE:2821===
Asymptomatic bacteriuria, UTI, and pyelonephritis increase risk of preterm labor and premature rupture of
the membranes.
Diagnosis
Urinalysis and culture are routinely done at initial evaluation to check for asymptomatic bacteriuria.
Diagnosis of symptomatic UTI is not changed by pregnancy.
Treatment
• Antibacterial drugs such as cephalexin, nitrofurantoin, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
• Proof-of-cure cultures and sometimes suppressive therapy
Treatment of symptomatic UTI is not changed by pregnancy, except drugs that may harm the fetus are
avoided (see
Table 264-2
. Because asymptomatic bacteriuria may lead to pyelonephritis, it
should be treated with antibiotics similar to an acute UTI.
Antibacterial drug selection is based on individual and local susceptibility and resistance patterns, but
good initial empiric choices include the following:
• Cephalexin
• Nitrofurantoin
• Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
After treatment, proof-of-cure cultures are required. Women who have pyelonephritis or have had > 1 UTI
may require suppressive therapy, usually with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (before 34 wk) or
nitrofurantoin, for the rest of the pregnancy. In women who have bacteriuria with or without UTI or
pyelonephritis, urine should be cultured monthly.
===PAGE:2822===
Chapter 264. High-Risk Pregnancy
Introduction
In a high-risk (at-risk) pregnancy, the mother, fetus, or neonate is at increased risk of morbidity
or mortality before or after delivery.
In the US, overall maternal mortality rate is 6/100,000 deliveries; incidence is 3 to 4 times higher in
nonwhite women. The most common causes of death are hemorrhage, preeclampsia, pulmonary
embolism, and infection.
Perinatal mortality rate in offspring is 11.5/1000 deliveries: 6.7/1000 are fetal, and 4.8/1000 are neonatal
(age < 28 days). The most common causes of death are congenital malformations and preterm delivery.
Risk assessment is part of routine prenatal care. Risk is also assessed during or shortly after labor and at
any time that events may modify risk status. Risk factors (see
Table 264-1
) are assessed systematically because each risk factor present increases overall risk. Highrisk pregnancies require close monitoring and sometimes referral to a perinatal center. When referral is
needed, transfer before rather than after delivery results in lower neonatal morbidity and mortality rates.
The most common reasons for referral before delivery are
• Preterm labor (often due to premature rupture of the membranes)
• Preeclampsia
• Hemorrhage
Risk Factors
Risk factors include preexisting maternal disorders (see
Chapter 263
), physical and social characteristics,
age, problems in previous pregnancies (eg, spontaneous abortions), and problems that develop during
pregnancy (see
Chapter 265
) or during labor and delivery (see
Chapter 266
).
Hypertension:
Pregnant women are considered to have chronic hypertension (CHTN) if hypertension
was present before the pregnancy or if it develops before 20 wk of pregnancy. CHTN is differentiated
from gestational hypertension, which develops after 20 wk of pregnancy. In either case, hypertension is
defined as systolic BP > 140 mm Hg or diastolic BP > 90 mm Hg on 2 occasions > 24 h apart.
Hypertension increases risk of fetal growth restriction by decreasing uteroplacental
[Table 264-1.
Pregnancy Risk Assessment]
blood flow and risk of adverse fetal and maternal outcomes (.
Before attempting to conceive, women with hypertension should be counseled about the risks of
pregnancy. If they become pregnant, prenatal care begins as early as possible and includes
measurements of baseline renal function (eg, serum creatinine, BUN), funduscopic examination, and
directed cardiovascular evaluation (auscultation and sometimes ECG, echocardiography, or both). Each
trimester, 24-h urine protein, serum uric acid, serum creatinine, and Hct are measured. Ultrasonography
to monitor fetal growth is done at 28 wk and every 4 wk thereafter. Delayed growth is evaluated with
multivessel Doppler testing by a maternal-fetal medicine specialist (for management of hypertension
during pregnancy, .
Diabetes:
Diabetes mellitus occurs in 3 to 5% of pregnancies, but incidence is increasing as the
incidence of obesity increases.
If pregnant women have preexisting insulin-dependent diabetes, risk is increased for pyelonephritis,
ketoacidosis, preeclampsia, fetal death, major fetal malformations, fetal macrosomia (fetal weight > 4.5
kg), and, if vasculopathy is present, fetal growth restriction. Insulin requirements usually increase during
===PAGE:2823===
pregnancy.
If women have gestational diabetes, risk of hypertensive disorders and fetal macrosomia is increased.
Gestational diabetes is routinely screened for at 24 to 28 wk or, if women have risk factors, also during
the 1st trimester. Risk factors include previous gestational diabetes, a macrosomic infant in a previous
pregnancy, family history of non-insulin-dependent diabetes, unexplained fetal losses, and body mass
index (BMI) > 30 kg/m
. Some clinicians think the diagnosis can be based on a fasting plasma glucose of
≥ 126 mg/dL or a random plasma glucose of ≥ 200 mg/dL. However, most accurate results are obtained
with a glucose tolerance test. A 50-g, 1-h glucose tolerance test is used. If the result is 140 to 199 mg/dL,
a full glucose tolerance test is done (see
Table 99-2
; if glucose is ≥ 200 mg/dL, insulin is begun. If ≥ 2 test results are abnormal, women
are treated for the rest of the pregnancy with diet and, if necessary, insulin or oral hypoglycemic drugs.
Good control of plasma glucose during pregnancy almost eliminates the risk of adverse outcomes
attributable to diabetes (for management of diabetes during pregnancy, .
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs—see
Chapter 156
):
(Fetal syphilis in utero can cause fetal death,
congenital malformations, and severe disability. Risk of transmission of HIV from woman to offspring in
utero or perinatally is 30 to 50% within 6 mo (see pp.
and
). During pregnancy, bacterial
vaginosis, gonorrhea, and genital chlamydial infection increase risk of preterm labor and premature
rupture of the membranes. Routine prenatal care includes screening tests for these infections at the first
prenatal visit. Syphilis testing is repeated during pregnancy if risk continues and at delivery for all women.
Pregnant women who have any of these infections are treated with antimicrobials.
Treatment of bacterial vaginosis, gonorrhea, or chlamydial infection may prolong the interval from rupture
of the membranes to delivery and may improve fetal outcome by decreasing fetal inflammation. Treating
HIV with zidovudine or nevirapine reduces risk of transmission by two thirds; risk is probably lower (< 2%)
with a combination of 2 or 3 antivirals (. These drugs are recommended despite potential
toxic effects in the fetus and woman.
Pyelonephritis:
Pyelonephritis increases risk of premature rupture of the membranes, preterm labor,
and infant respiratory distress syndrome. Pregnant women with pyelonephritis are hospitalized for
evaluation and treatment, primarily with urine culture plus sensitivities, IV antibiotics (eg, a 3rd-generation
cephalosporin with or without an aminoglycoside), antipyretics, and hydration. Pyelonephritis is the most
common nonobstetric cause of hospitalization during pregnancy. Oral antibiotics specific to the causative
organism are begun 24 to 48 h after fever resolves and continued to complete the whole course of
antibiotic therapy, usually 7 to 10 days. Prophylactic antibiotics (eg, nitrofurantoin,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole) with periodic urine cultures are continued for the rest of the pregnancy.
Acute surgical problems:
Major surgery, particularly intra-abdominal, increases risk of preterm labor
and fetal death. However, surgery is usually tolerated well by pregnant women and the fetus when
appropriate supportive care and anesthesia (maintaining BP and oxygenation at normal levels) are
provided, so physicians should not be reluctant to operate; delaying treatment of an abdominal
emergency is far more dangerous.
After surgery, antibiotics and tocolytic drugs are given for 12 to 24 h. If nonemergency surgery is
necessary during pregnancy, it is most safely done during the 2nd trimester.
Genital tract abnormalities:
Structural abnormalities of the uterus and cervix (eg, uterine septum,
bicornuate uterus) make fetal malpresentation, dysfunctional labor, and the need for cesarean delivery
more likely. Although unlikely, uterine fibroids can cause placental abnormalities (eg, placenta previa),
preterm labor, and recurrent spontaneous abortion. Fibroids may grow rapidly or degenerate during
pregnancy; degeneration often causes severe pain and peritoneal signs. Cervical insufficiency
(incompetence— makes preterm delivery more likely. If women have had a myomectomy
before pregnancy in which the uterine cavity was entered, cesarean delivery is required because uterine
rupture is a risk during subsequent vaginal delivery. Uterine abnormalities that lead to poor obstetric
outcomes often require surgical correction, which is done after delivery.
===PAGE:2824===
Maternal age:
Adolescents, who account for 13% of all pregnancies, have an increased incidence of
preeclampsia, preterm labor,
and anemia, which often leads to fetal growth restriction. The cause, at least
in part, is that adolescents tend to neglect prenatal care, frequently smoke, and have higher rates of
STDs.
In women > 35, the incidence of preeclampsia is increased, as is that of gestational diabetes,
dysfunctional labor, abruptio placentae, stillbirth, and placenta previa. These women are also more likely
to have preexisting disorders (eg, CHTN, diabetes). Because risk of fetal chromosomal abnormalities
increases as maternal age increases, genetic testing should be offered (.
Maternal weight:
Pregnant women whose BMI was < 19.8 kg/m
before pregnancy are considered
underweight, which predisposes to low birth weight (< 2.5 kg) in neonates. Such women are encouraged
to gain at least 12.5 kg during pregnancy.
Pregnant women whose BMI was > 29.0 kg/m
before pregnancy are considered overweight, making
maternal hypertension and diabetes, postterm pregnancy, fetal macrosomia, and the need for cesarean
delivery more likely. Such women are encouraged to limit weight gain during pregnancy to < 11.5 kg.
Maternal height:
Short (about < 152 cm) women are more likely to have a small pelvis, which can lead to
dystocia with fetopelvic disproportion or shoulder dystocia. For short women, preterm labor and
intrauterine growth restriction are also more likely.
Exposure to teratogens:
Common teratogens (agents that cause fetal malformation) include infections,
drugs, and physical agents. Malformations are most likely to result if exposure occurs between the 2nd
and 8th wk after conception (the 4th to 10th wk after the last menstrual period), when organs are forming.
Other adverse pregnancy outcomes are also more likely. Pregnant women exposed to teratogens are
counseled about increased risks and referred for detailed ultrasound evaluation to detect malformations.
Common infections that may be teratogenic include herpes simplex, viral hepatitis, rubella, varicella,
syphilis, toxoplasmosis, and cytomegalovirus and coxsackievirus infections.
Commonly used drugs that may be teratogenic include alcohol, tobacco, cocaine, and some prescription
drugs (see
Table 264-2
).
Cigarette smoking is the most common addiction among pregnant women. Also, percentages of women
who smoke and of those who smoke heavily appear to be increasing. Only 20% of smokers quit during
pregnancy. Carbon monoxide and nicotine in cigarettes cause hypoxia and vasoconstriction, increasing
risk of spontaneous abortion (fetal loss or delivery at < 20 wk), fetal growth restriction, abruptio
placentae, placenta previa, premature rupture of the membranes, preterm birth, chorioamnionitis, and
stillbirth. Neonates whose mothers smoke are also more likely to have anencephaly, congenital heart
defects, orofacial clefts, sudden infant death syndrome, deficiencies in physical growth and intelligence,
and behavioral problems. Smoking cessation or limitation reduces risks.
Alcohol is the most commonly used teratogen. Drinking alcohol during pregnancy increases risk of
spontaneous abortion. Risk is probably related to amount of alcohol consumed, but no amount is known
to be risk-free. Regular drinking decreases birth weight by about 1 to 1.3 kg. Binge drinking in particular,
possibly as little as 45 mL of pure alcohol (equivalent to about 3 drinks) a day, can cause fetal alcohol
syndrome. This syndrome occurs in 2.2/1000 live births; it includes fetal growth restriction, facial and
cardiovascular defects, and neurologic dysfunction. It is a leading cause of intellectual disability (mental
retardation) and can cause neonatal death due to failure to thrive.
Cocaine use has indirect fetal risks (eg, maternal stroke or death during pregnancy). It also directly
causes fetal vasoconstriction and hypoxia. Repeated use increases risk of spontaneous abortion, fetal
growth restriction, abruptio placentae, preterm birth, stillbirth, and congenital malformations (eg, CNS,
GU, and skeletal malformations; isolated atresias).
===PAGE:2825===
Although marijuana's main metabolite can cross the placenta, recreational use of marijuana use does not
consistently appear to increase risk of congenital malformations, fetal growth restriction, or postnatal
neurobehavioral abnormalities.
Prior stillbirth:
Causes of stillbirth (fetal death at > 20 wk) may be maternal, placental, or fetal (. Having had a stillbirth or late abortion (ie, at 16 to 20 wk) increases risk of fetal death in
subsequent pregnancies. Fetal surveillance using antepartum testing (eg, nonstress testing, biophysical
profile) is recommended. Treatment of maternal disorders (eg, CHTN, diabetes, infections) may lower risk
of stillbirth in a current pregnancy.
Prior preterm delivery:
Preterm delivery is delivery before 37 wk (. Previous preterm
delivery due to preterm labor increases risk of future preterm deliveries; if the previous preterm neonate
weighed < 1.5 kg, risk of preterm delivery in the next pregnancy is 50%. Women with prior preterm
delivery due to
[Table 264-2.
Drugs with Adverse Effects During Pregnancy]
preterm labor should be closely monitored at 2-wk intervals after 20 wk. Monitoring includes
• Ultrasound evaluation, including measurement of cervical length and shape, at 16 to 18 wk
• Uterine contraction monitoring
• Testing for bacterial vaginosis
• Measurement of fetal fibronectin
Women with prior preterm birth due to preterm labor or with shortening (< 25 mm) or funneling of the
cervix should be given 17
α
-OH-progesterone 250 mg IM once/wk.
Prior neonate with a genetic or congenital disorder:
Risk of having a fetus with a chromosomal
disorder is increased for most couples who have had a fetus or neonate with a chromosomal disorder
(recognized or missed—. Recurrence risk for most genetic disorders is unknown. Most
congenital malformations are multifactorial; risk of having a subsequent fetus with malformations is ≤ 1%.
If couples have had a neonate with a genetic or chromosomal disorder, genetic screening is
recommended. If couples have had a neonate with a congenital malformation, genetic screening, highresolution ultrasonography, and evaluation by a maternal-fetal medicine specialist is recommended.
Polyhydramnios (hydramnios) and oligohydramnios:
Polyhydramnios (excess amniotic fluid) can
lead to severe maternal shortness of breath and preterm labor. Risk factors include uncontrolled maternal
diabetes, multifetal pregnancy, isoimmunization, and fetal malformations (eg, esophageal atresia,
anencephaly, spina bifida).
Oligohydramnios (deficient amniotic fluid) often accompanies congenital malformations of the fetal urinary
tract and severe fetal growth restriction (< 3rd percentile). Also, Potter's syndrome with pulmonary
hypoplasia or fetal surface compression abnormalities may result, usually in the 2nd trimester, and cause
fetal death.
Polyhydramnios and oligohydramnios are suspected if uterine size does not correspond to gestational
date or may be discovered incidentally via ultrasonography, which is diagnostic.
Multifetal (multiple) pregnancy:
Multifetal pregnancy increases risk of fetal growth restriction, preterm
labor, abruptio placentae, congenital malformations, perinatal morbidity and mortality, and, after delivery,
uterine atony and hemorrhage (. Multifetal pregnancy is detected during routine
ultrasonography at 18 to 20 wk.
Prior birth injury:
Most cases of cerebral palsy and developmental delay are caused by factors
unrelated to a birth injury.
===PAGE:2826===
Injuries such as brachial plexus damage can result from procedures such as forceps or vacuum extractor
delivery but often result from intrauterine forces during labor or malposition during the last weeks of
pregnancy. Previous shoulder dystocia is a risk factor for future dystocia, and the delivery records should
be reviewed for potentially modifiable risk factors (eg, fetal macrosomia, operative vaginal delivery) that
may have predisposed to the injury.
===PAGE:2827===
Chapter 265. Abnormalities of Pregnancy
Introduction
Abnormalities that develop during pregnancy may be directly related to the pregnancy or not (for
nonobstetric disorders, see
Chapter 263
). Obstetric abnormalities increase the risk of morbidity or mortality for
the woman, fetus, or neonate, as do such factors as maternal characteristics, problems in previous
pregnancies, and drug use (see
Chapter 264
).
Abruptio Placentae
Abruptio placentae is premature separation of a normally implanted placenta from the uterus
after 20 wk gestation. It is an obstetric emergency. Manifestations may include vaginal bleeding,
uterine pain and tenderness, hemorrhagic shock, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Diagnosis is clinical and sometimes by ultrasonography. Treatment is bed rest for mild
symptoms and prompt delivery for severe or persistent symptoms.
Abruptio placentae occurs in 0.4 to 1.5% of all pregnancies; incidence peaks at 24 to 26 wk gestation.
Abruptio placentae may involve any degree of placental separation, from a few millimeters to complete
detachment. Separation can be acute or chronic. Separation results in bleeding into the decidua basalis
behind the placenta (retroplacentally). Cause is unknown.
Risk factors:
Risk factors include the following:
• Older maternal age
• Hypertension (pregnancy-induced or chronic)
• Placental ischemia (ischemic placental disease) manifesting as intrauterine growth restriction
• Polyhydramnios
• Intra-amniotic infection (chorioamnionitis)
• Vasculitis
• Other vascular disorders
• Prior abruptio placentae
• Abdominal trauma
• Maternal thrombotic disorders
• Tobacco use
• Premature rupture of membranes
• Cocaine use (risk of up to 10%)
Complications:
Complications include the following:
• Maternal blood loss (possibly with shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation [DIC], or both)
• Fetal ischemia (causing fetal distress or death if ischemia is acute or severe growth restriction if
ischemia is chronic and mild)
===PAGE:2828===
• Sometimes fetomaternal transfusion and Rh sensitization
Symptoms and Signs
Acute abruptio placentae may result in bright red blood exiting through the cervix (external hemorrhage).
Blood may also remain behind the placenta (concealed hemorrhage). Severity of symptoms and signs
depends on degree of separation and blood loss. As separation continues, the uterus may be painful,
tender, and irritable to palpation. Hemorrhagic shock may occur, as may signs of DIC. Chronic abruptio
placentae may cause continued or intermittent dark brown spotting.
Abruptio placentae may cause no or minimal symptoms and signs.
Diagnosis
• Combination of clinical, laboratory, and ultrasonographic findings
Diagnosis is suggested if any of the following occur during late pregnancy:
• Vaginal bleeding
• Uterine pain and tenderness
• Fetal distress or death
• Hemorrhagic shock
• DIC
• Tenderness or shock disproportionate to the degree of vaginal bleeding
The diagnosis should also be considered in women who have had abdominal trauma. If bleeding occurs
during late pregnancy, placenta previa, which has similar symptoms, must be ruled out before pelvic
examination is done; if placenta previa is present, examination may increase bleeding.
Evaluation includes the following:
• Fetal heart monitoring
• CBC
• Blood and Rh typing
• PT/PTT
• Serum fibrinogen and fibrin-split products (the most sensitive indicator)
• Transabdominal or pelvic ultrasonography
• Kleihauer-Betke test if the patient has Rh-negative blood—to calculate the dose of Rh
(D) immune
globulin needed
Fetal heart monitoring may detect a nonreassuring pattern or fetal death.
Transvaginal ultrasonography may be done if transabdominal ultrasonography rules out placenta previa.
However, ultrasonography is insensitive; thus, diagnosis may ultimately be clinical.
Treatment
===PAGE:2829===
• Usually prompt delivery and aggressive supportive measures
• Trial of hospitalization and bed rest if the pregnancy is not near term and if mother and fetus are stable
Prompt cesarean delivery is usually indicated if any of the following is present:
• Maternal hemodynamic instability
• Nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern
• Near-term pregnancy
However, oxytocin may be given to accelerate vaginal delivery, depending on the stage of labor and the
rapidity of maternal and fetal deterioration (eg, oxytocin may be given if delivery appears imminent and
the mother and fetus are stable). Amniotomy (deliberate rupture of membranes) is done early because it
may accelerate delivery, preventing DIC.
Hospitalization and bed rest are advised if all of the following are present:
• Bleeding does not threaten the life of the mother or fetus.
• The fetal heart rate pattern is reassuring.
• The pregnancy is not near term.
This approach ensures that mother and fetus can be closely monitored and, if needed, rapidly treated.
Corticosteroids should be considered (to accelerate fetal lung maturity) if gestational age is < 34 wk. If
bleeding resolves and maternal and fetal status remains stable, ambulation and usually hospital
discharge are allowed. If bleeding continues or if status deteriorates, prompt cesarean delivery is
indicated.
Complications (eg, shock, DIC) are managed with aggressive replacement of blood and blood products.
Cervical Insufficiency
Cervical insufficiency (formerly called cervical incompetence) is painless cervical dilation
resulting in delivery of a live fetus during the 2nd trimester. Transvaginal cervical
ultrasonography during the 2nd trimester may help assess risk. Treatment is reinforcement of
the cervical ring with suture material (cerclage).
Cervical insufficiency refers to presumed weakness of cervical tissue that contributes to or causes
premature delivery not explained by another abnormality. Estimated incidence varies greatly (1/100 to
1/2000).
Etiology
The cause is not well understood but seems to involve some combination of structural abnormalities and
biochemical factors (eg, inflammation, infection); these factors may be acquired or genetic.
Risk factors:
Most women with cervical insufficiency do not have risk factors; however, the following risk
factors have been identified:
• Congenital disorders of collagen synthesis (eg, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome)
• Prior cone biopsies (particularly when ≥ 1.7 to 2.0 cm of the cervix was removed)
• Prior deep cervical lacerations (usually secondary to vaginal or cesarean delivery)
===PAGE:2830===
• Prior excessive or rapid dilation with instruments (now uncommon)
• Mullerian duct defects (eg, bicornuate or septate uterus)
• ≥ 3 prior fetal losses during the 2nd trimester
Recurrence:
Overall risk of recurrence of fetal loss due to cervical insufficiency is probably ≤ 30%,
leading to the question of how large a role fixed structural abnormalities have. Risk is greatest for women
with ≥ 3 prior 2nd-trimester fetal losses.
Symptoms and Signs
Cervical insufficiency is often asymptomatic until premature delivery occurs. Some women have earlier
symptoms, such as vaginal pressure, vaginal bleeding or spotting, nonspecific abdominal or lower back
pain, or vaginal discharge. The cervix may be soft, effaced, or dilated.
Diagnosis
• Transvaginal ultrasonography at > 16 wk for women with symptoms or risk factors
The diagnosis is suspected in women with risk factors or characteristic symptoms or signs. Then,
transvaginal ultrasonography is done. Results are most accurate after 16 wk gestation. Suggestive
ultrasonographic findings include cervical shortening to < 2.5 cm, cervical dilation, and protrusion of fetal
membranes into the cervical canal.
Ultrasonography of women without symptoms or risk factors is not recommended because results do not
accurately predict preterm delivery.
Treatment
• Cerclage
Cerclage (reinforcement of the cervical ring with suture material) appears to prevent preterm delivery in
patients with ≥ 3 prior 2nd-trimester fetal losses. For other patients, the procedure should probably be
done only if they have a history strongly suggesting cervical insufficiency and if cervical shortening is
detected by ultrasonography before 22 to 24 wk gestation; restricting cerclage to such patients does not
appear to increase risk of preterm delivery and reduces the number of cerclages currently being done by
two thirds. Evidence does not support use of cerclage simply for ultrasound-detected cervical shortening.
Treatments such as corticosteroids, progesterone, and bed rest are often used when preterm labor is
suspected.
Intra-Amniotic Infection
(Chorioamnionitis)
Intra-amniotic infection (formerly called chorioamnionitis) is infection of the chorion, amnion,
amniotic fluid, placenta, or a combination. Infection increases risk of obstetric complications
and problems in the fetus. Symptoms include fever, uterine tenderness, foul-smelling vaginal
discharge, and maternal and fetal tachycardia. Diagnosis is by specific criteria or, for subclinical
infection, analysis of amniotic fluid. Treatment includes broad-spectrum antibiotics and delivery.
Intra-amniotic infection typically results from an infection that ascends through the genital tract.
Risk factors:
Risk factors include the following:
• Preterm labor
===PAGE:2831===
• Nulliparity
• Meconium-stained amniotic fluid
• Internal fetal or uterine monitoring
• Presence of genital tract pathogens (eg, those that cause sexually transmitted diseases or bacterial
vaginosis, group B streptococci)
• Digital examinations during labor in women with ruptured membranes
• Long labor
• Preterm premature rupture of membranes
Complications:
Intra-amniotic infection can cause as well as result from preterm premature rupture of
membranes or preterm delivery. This infection accounts for 50% of deliveries before 30 wk gestation. It
occurs in 33% of women who have preterm labor with intact membranes, 40% who have premature
rupture of membranes (PROM) and are having contractions when admitted, and 75% who go into labor
after admission for PROM.
Fetal complications
include increased risk of the following:
• Preterm delivery
• Apgar score < 3
• Infection (eg, sepsis, pneumonia, meningitis)
• Seizures
• Cerebral palsy
• Death
Maternal complications
include increased risk of the following:
• Bacteremia
• Need for cesarean delivery
• Uterine atony
• Postpartum hemorrhage
• Pelvic abscess
• Thromboembolism
• Wound complications
Septic shock, coagulopathy, and adult respiratory distress syndrome are also risks but are uncommon if
infection is treated.
Symptoms and Signs
Intra-amniotic infection typically causes fever. Other findings can include maternal tachycardia, fetal
tachycardia, uterine tenderness, and foul-smelling amniotic fluid. However, infection may not cause typical
===PAGE:2832===
symptoms (ie, subclinical infection).
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Amniocentesis for suspected subclinical infection
Diagnosis usually requires a maternal temperature of > 38° C (> 100.4° F) plus ≥ 2 of the following:
• Maternal WBC count > 15,000 cells/
μ
L
• Maternal tachycardia (heart rate > 100 beats/min)
• Fetal tachycardia (heart rate > 160 beats/min)
• Uterine tenderness
• Foul-smelling amniotic fluid
Presence of a single symptom or sign, which may have other causes, is less reliable. For example,
uterine pain and tenderness may
result from abruptio placentae. Maternal tachycardia may be due to
pain, epidural anesthesia, or drugs (eg, ephedrine); fetal tachycardia may be due to maternal use of
drugs or fetal hypoxemia. Maternal and fetal heart rates also increase during fever. However, if intraamniotic infection is absent, heart rates return to baseline as these conditions resolve. If fetal or maternal
tachycardia is disproportionate to or occurs without such conditions or if it persists despite resolution of
these conditions, intra-amniotic infection is suspected.
Subclinical infection:
Refractory preterm labor (persisting despite tocolysis) may suggest subclinical
infection. If membranes rupture prematurely before term, clinicians should also consider subclinical
infection so that they can determine whether induction of labor is indicated.
Amniocentesis with culture of amniotic fluid is the best way to diagnose subclinical infection. The
following fluid findings suggest infection:
• Presence of any bacteria or leukocytes using Gram staining
• Glucose level < 15 mg/dL
• WBC count > 30 cells/
μ
L
• Leukocyte esterase level at trace or higher levels
Other diagnostic tests for subclinical infection are under study.
Treatment
• Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Treatment is broad-spectrum IV antibiotics plus delivery. A typical antibiotic regimen is ampicillin 2 g IV q 6
h plus gentamicin 1.5 mg/kg IV q 8 h. The antibiotics reduce risk of morbidity due to infection for mother
and neonate.
Risk of intra-amniotic infection is decreased by avoiding or minimizing digital pelvic examinations in
patients with preterm PROM (.
Ectopic Pregnancy
===PAGE:2833===
In ectopic pregnancy, implantation occurs in a site other than the endometrial lining of the
uterine cavity—in the fallopian tube, uterine cornua, cervix, ovary, or abdominal or pelvic cavity.
Ectopic pregnancies cannot be carried to term and eventually rupture or involute. Early
symptoms and signs include pelvic pain, vaginal bleeding, and cervical motion tenderness.
Syncope or hemorrhagic shock can occur with rupture. Diagnosis is by measurement of the
β
subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin and ultrasonography. Treatment is with laparoscopic
or open surgical resection or with IM methotrexate.
Incidence of ectopic pregnancy is about 2/100 diagnosed pregnancies.
Etiology
Tubal lesions increase risk. Factors that particularly increase risk include
• Prior ectopic pregnancy (10 to 25% risk of recurrence)
• History of pelvic inflammatory disease (particularly due to
Chlamydia trachomatis
)
• Prior abdominal or particularly tubal surgery, including tubal ligation
Other specific risk factors include
• Intrauterine device (IUD) use
• Infertility
• Multiple sex partners
• Cigarette smoking
• Exposure to diethylstilbestrol
• Prior induced abortion
Pregnancy is less likely to occur when an IUD is in place; however, about 5% of such pregnancies are
ectopic.
Pathophysiology
The most common site of ectopic implantation is a fallopian tube, followed by the uterine cornua.
Pregnancies in the cervix, a cesarean delivery scar, an ovary, the abdomen, or fallopian tube interstitium
are rare.
Heterotopic pregnancy
(simultaneous ectopic and intrauterine pregnancies) occurs in only 1/10,000 to
30,000 pregnancies but may be more common among women who have had ovulation induction or used
assisted reproductive techniques such as in vitro fertilization and gamete intrafallopian tube transfer
(GIFT); in these women, the overall reported ectopic pregnancy rate is ≤ 1%.
The structure containing the fetus usually ruptures after about 6 to 16 wk. Rupture results in bleeding that
can be gradual or rapid enough to cause hemorrhagic shock. Intraperitoneal blood irritates the
peritoneum. The later the rupture, the more rapidly blood is lost and the higher the risk of death.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms vary and are often absent until rupture occurs. Most patients have pelvic
pain (which is
sometimes crampy), vaginal bleeding, or both. Menses may or may not be delayed or missed, and
patients may not be aware that they are pregnant.
===PAGE:2834===
Rupture may be heralded by sudden, severe pain, followed by syncope or by symptoms and signs of
hemorrhagic shock or peritonitis. Rapid hemorrhage is more likely in ruptured cornual pregnancies.
Cervical motion tenderness, unilateral or bilateral adnexal tenderness, or an adnexal mass may be
present. The uterus may be slightly enlarged (but often less than anticipated based on date of the last
menstrual period).
Diagnosis
• Serum
β
-human chorionic gonadotropin (
β
-hCG) levels
• Pelvic ultrasonography
• Sometimes laparoscopy
Ectopic pregnancy is suspected in any female of reproductive age with pelvic pain, vaginal bleeding, or
unexplained syncope or hemorrhagic shock, regardless of sexual, contraceptive, and menstrual history.
Findings of physical (including pelvic) examination are neither sensitive nor specific.
The first step is doing a urine pregnancy test, which is about 99% sensitive for pregnancy (ectopic and
otherwise). If urine
β
-hCG is negative and if clinical findings do not strongly suggest ectopic pregnancy,
further evaluation is unnecessary unless symptoms recur or worsen. If urine
β
-hCG is positive or if clinical
findings strongly suggest ectopic pregnancy, quantitative serum
β
-hCG and pelvic ultrasonography are
indicated.
If quantitative serum
β
-hCG is < 5 mIU/mL, ectopic pregnancy is excluded. If ultrasonography detects an
intrauterine gestational sac, ectopic pregnancy is extremely unlikely except in women who have used
assisted reproductive techniques (which increase risk of heterotopic pregnancy); however, cornual and
intra-abdominal pregnancies may appear to be intrauterine pregnancies. Ultrasonographic findings
suggesting ectopic pregnancy (noted in 16 to 32%) include complex (mixed solid and cystic) masses,
particularly in the adnexa, and free fluid in the cul-de-sac.
If serum
β
-hCG is above a certain level (called the discriminatory zone), ultrasonography should detect a
gestational sac in patients with an intrauterine pregnancy. This level is usually about 2000 mIU/mL. If the
β
-hCG level is higher than the discriminatory zone and an intrauterine gestational sac is not detected, an
ectopic pregnancy is likely. Use of transvaginal and color Doppler ultrasonography may improve detection
rates.
If the
β
-hCG level is below the discriminatory zone and ultrasonography is unremarkable, patients may
have an early intrauterine pregnancy or an ectopic pregnancy. If clinical evaluation suggests ectopic
pregnancy (eg, signs of significant hemorrhage or peritoneal irritation), diagnostic laparoscopy may be
necessary for confirmation. If ectopic pregnancy appears unlikely and patients are stable, serum levels of
β
-hCG can be measured serially on an outpatient basis (typically every 2 days). Normally, the level
doubles every 1.4 to 2.1 days up to 41 days; in ectopic pregnancy (and in abortions), levels may be lower
than expected by dates and usually do not double as rapidly. If
β
-hCG levels do not increase as expected
or if they decrease, the diagnoses of spontaneous abortion and ectopic pregnancy are reconsidered.
Prognosis
Ectopic pregnancy is fatal to the fetus, but if treatment occurs before rupture, maternal death is very rare.
In the US, ectopic pregnancy probably accounts for 9% of pregnancy-related maternal deaths.
Treatment
• Surgical resection (usually)
• Methotrexate for some small, unruptured ectopic pregnancies
===PAGE:2835===
Surgical resection:
Hemodynamically unstable patients require immediate laparotomy and treatment of
hemorrhagic shock (. For stable patients, treatment is usually laparoscopic surgery;
sometimes laparotomy is required. If possible, salpingotomy, usually using cautery, high-frequency
(harmonic) ultrasound devices, or a laser, is done to conserve the tube, and the products of conception
are evacuated.
Salpingectomy is indicated in any of the following cases:
• When ectopic pregnancies recur or are > 5 cm
• When the tubes are severely damaged
• When no future childbearing is planned
Only the irreversibly damaged portion of the tube is removed, maximizing the chance that tubal repair can
restore fertility. The tube may or may not be repaired. After a cornual pregnancy, the tube and ovary
involved can usually be salvaged, but occasionally repair is impossible, making hysterectomy necessary.
Methotrexate:
If unruptured tubal pregnancies are < 3.0 cm in diameter, no fetal heart activity is
detected, and the
β
-hCG level is
< 5,000 mIU/mL ideally but up to 15,000 mIU/mL, women can be given a
single dose of methotrexate 50 mg/m
IM.
β
-hCG measurement and ultrasonography are repeated on
about days 4 and 7. If the
β
-hCG level does not decrease by 15%, a 2nd dose of methotrexate or surgery
is needed. Alternatively, the
β
-hCG level is measured on days 1 and 7, and a 2nd dose of methotrexate is
given if the level does not decrease by 25%. About 15 to 20% of women treated with methotrexate
eventually require a 2nd dose.
The
β
-hCG level is measured weekly until it is undetectable. Success rates with methotrexate are about
87%; 7% of women have serious complications (eg, rupture). Surgery is indicated when methotrexate is
ineffective.
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
Erythroblastosis fetalis is hemolytic anemia in the fetus or neonate caused by transplacental
transmission of maternal antibodies to fetal RBCs. The disorder usually results from
incompatibility between maternal and fetal blood groups, often Rh
(D) antigens. Diagnosis
begins with prenatal maternal antigenic and antibody screening and may require paternal
screening, serial measurement of maternal antibody titers, and fetal testing. Treatment may
involve intrauterine fetal transfusion or neonatal exchange transfusion. Prevention is Rh
(D)
immune globulin injection for women at risk.
Erythroblastosis fetalis classically results from Rh
(D) incompatibility, which may develop when a woman
with Rh-negative blood is impregnated by a man with Rh-positive blood and conceives a fetus with Rhpositive blood (see also p.
). Other fetomaternal incompatibilities that can cause erythroblastosis
fetalis involve the Kell, Duffy, Kidd, MNSs, Lutheran, Diego, Xg, P, Ee, and Cc antigen systems, as well as
other antigens. Incompatibilities of ABO blood types do not cause erythroblastosis fetalis.
Pathophysiology
Fetal RBCs normally move across the placenta to the maternal circulation throughout pregnancy.
Movement is greatest at delivery or termination of pregnancy. Movement of large volumes (eg, 10 to 150
mL) is considered significant fetomaternal hemorrhage; it can occur after trauma and sometimes after
delivery or termination of pregnancy. In women who have Rh-negative blood and who are carrying a fetus
with Rh-positive blood, fetal RBCs stimulate maternal antibody production against the Rh antigens. The
larger the fetomaternal hemorrhage, the more antibodies produced. The mechanism is the same when
other antigen systems are involved; however, Kell antibody incompatibility also directly suppresses RBC
production in bone marrow.
===PAGE:2836===
Other causes of maternal anti-Rh antibody production include injection with needles contaminated with
Rh-positive blood and inadvertent transfusion of Rh-positive blood.
No complications develop during the initial sensitizing pregnancy; however, in subsequent pregnancies,
maternal antibodies cross the placenta and lyse fetal RBCs, causing anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and
possibly high-output heart failure or fetal death. Anemia stimulates fetal bone marrow to produce and
release immature RBCs (erythroblasts) into fetal peripheral circulation (erythroblastosis fetalis).
Hemolysis results in elevated indirect bilirubin levels in neonates, causing kernicterus (.
Usually, isoimmunization does not cause symptoms in pregnant women.
Diagnosis
• Maternal blood and Rh typing and reflex antibody screening
• Serial antibody level measurements and sometimes middle cerebral artery blood flow measurements for
pregnancies at risk
At the first prenatal visit, all women are screened for blood type, Rh type, and anti-Rh
(D) and other
antibodies that are formed in response to antigens and that can cause erythroblastosis fetalis (reflex
antibody screening). If women have Rh-negative blood and test positive for anti-Rh
(D) or they test
positive for another antibody that can cause erythroblastosis fetalis, the father's blood type and zygosity
(if paternity is certain) are determined. If he has Rh-negative blood and is negative for the antigen
corresponding to the antibody identified in the mother, no further testing is necessary. If he has Rhpositive blood or has the antigen, maternal anti-Rh antibody titers are measured. If titers are positive but
less than a laboratory-specific critical value (usually 1:8 to 1:32), they are measured monthly until 24 wk,
then every 2 wk. If the critical value is exceeded, fetal middle cerebral artery blood flow is measured at
intervals of 1 to 2 wk depending on titers and patient history; the purpose is to detect high-output heart
failure, indicating high risk of anemia. Elevated blood flow for gestational age should prompt
percutaneous umbilical blood
sampling to obtain a sample of fetal blood. If paternity is reasonably certain
and the father is likely to be heterozygous for Rh
(D), the fetus's Rh type is determined. If fetal blood is
Rh positive or status is unknown and if middle cerebral artery flow is elevated, fetal anemia is likely.
Treatment
• Fetal blood transfusions
• Delivery at 32 to 34 wk
If fetal blood is Rh negative or if middle cerebral artery blood flow remains normal, pregnancy can
continue to term untreated. If fetal anemia is likely, the fetus can be given intravascular intrauterine blood
transfusions by a specialist at an institution equipped to care for high-risk pregnancies. Transfusions
occur every 1 to 2 wk until fetal lung maturity is confirmed (usually at 32 to 34 wk), when delivery should
be done. Corticosteroids should be given before the first transfusion if the pregnancy is > 24 wk, possibly
> 23 wk.
Neonates with erythroblastosis are immediately evaluated by a pediatrician to determine need for
exchange transfusion (.
Prevention
Prevention involves giving the mother
• Rh
(D) immune globulin at 28 wk gestation and within 72 h of pregnancy termination
Delivery should be as atraumatic as possible. Manual removal of the placenta should be avoided
because it may force fetal cells into maternal circulation.
===PAGE:2837===
Maternal sensitization and antibody production due to Rh incompatibility can be prevented by giving the
woman Rh
(D) immune globulin. This preparation contains high titers of anti-Rh antibodies, which
neutralize Rh-positive fetal RBCs. Because fetomaternal transfer and likelihood of sensitization is
greatest at termination of pregnancy, the preparation is given within 72 h after termination of each
pregnancy, whether by delivery, abortion, or treatment of ectopic pregnancy. The standard dose is 300
μ
g
IM. A rosette test can be used to rule out significant fetomaternal hemorrhage, and if results are positive,
a Kleihauer-Betke (acid elution) test can measure the amount of fetal blood in the maternal circulation. If
test results indicate fetomaternal hemorrhage is massive (> 30 mL whole blood), additional injections (300
μ
g for every 30 mL of fetal whole blood, up to 5 doses within 24 h) are necessary.
Treatment at termination of pregnancy is occasionally ineffective because sensitization occurred earlier
during pregnancy. Therefore, at about 28 wk, all pregnant women with Rh-negative blood and no known
prior sensitization are given a dose. Some experts recommend a 2nd dose if delivery has not occurred by
40 wk. Rh
(D) immune globulin should also be given after any episode of vaginal bleeding and after
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Anti-Rh antibodies persist for > 3 mo after one dose.
Pemphigoid Gestationis
(Herpes Gestationis)
Pemphigoid gestationis is a pruritic papular and vesicobullous eruption that occurs during
pregnancy or postpartum. Diagnosis is clinical or by skin biopsy. Treatment is with topical or
systemic corticosteroids.
Pemphigoid gestationis appears to be an autoimmune phenomenon, probably caused by an IgG antibody
to a 180-kD antigen in the basement membrane zone of the epidermis. Although previously called herpes
gestationis, this disorder is not caused by herpesvirus.
Pemphigoid gestationis occurs in 1/2,000 to 50,000 pregnancies; it usually begins during the 2nd or 3rd
trimester but may begin during the 1st trimester or immediately postpartum. It usually recurs with
subsequent pregnancies and occurs after oral contraceptive use in about 25% of women. Flare-ups can
occur during subsequent menses or ovulation.
Most fetuses are unaffected; however, transient lesions occur in < 5% of neonates born to mothers with
pemphigoid gestationis. Risks are increased after premature delivery and in infants who are small for
gestational age.
Symptoms and Signs
The rash is very pruritic. Lesions often start around the umbilicus, then become widespread. Vesicles and
bullae are the most specific lesions; erythematous plaques may develop. The palms, soles, trunk,
buttocks, and extremities may be affected but usually not the face or mucous membranes.
The rash worsens during labor or immediately postpartum in up to 75% of women, typically remitting
within a few weeks or months.
Neonates may have erythematous plaques or vesicles that resolve spontaneously in a few weeks.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes biopsy with direct immunofluorescence
Pemphigoid gestationis may be confused clinically with several other pruritic eruptions of pregnancy,
particularly pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy. Pemphigoid gestationis can often be
distinguished because it usually begins in the periumbilical area; pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of
pregnancy usually begin in the striae.
===PAGE:2838===
Direct immunofluorescence examination of perilesional skin is diagnostic. It detects a linear band of C3 at
the basement membrane zone.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids topically or, for severe symptoms, orally
For mild symptoms, topical corticosteroids (eg, 0.1% triamcinolone acetonide cream up to 6 times/day)
may be effective. Prednisone (eg, 40 mg po once/day) relieves moderate or severe pruritus and prevents
new lesions; dose is tapered until few new lesions erupt, but it may need to be increased if symptoms
become more severe (eg, during labor). Systemic corticosteroids given late in pregnancy do not seem to
harm the fetus.
Nonsedating oral antihistamines can also be used to relieve pruritus.
Hyperemesis Gravidarum
Hyperemesis gravidarum is uncontrollable vomiting during pregnancy that results in
dehydration, weight loss, and ketosis. Diagnosis is clinical and by measurement of urine
ketones and renal function. Treatment is with temporary suspension of oral intake and with IV
fluids, antiemetics if needed, and vitamin and electrolyte repletion.
Pregnancy frequently causes nausea and vomiting; the cause appears to be rapidly increasing levels of
estrogens or the
β
subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (
β
-hCG). Vomiting usually develops at about
5 wk gestation, peaks at about 9 wk, and disappears by about 16 or 18 wk. It usually occurs in the
morning (as so-called morning sickness), although it can occur any time of day. Women with morning
sickness continue to gain weight and do not become dehydrated. Hyperemesis gravidarum is probably an
extreme form of normal nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. It is distinguished because it causes the
following:
• Weight loss (> 5% of weight)
• Dehydration
• Ketosis
• Electrolyte abnormalities (in many women)
Psychologic factors (eg, ambivalence, anxiety) may trigger hyperemesis gravidarum. Hyperemesis
gravidarum may cause mild, transient hyperthyroidism. Hyperemesis gravidarum that persists past 16 to
18 wk is uncommon but may seriously damage the liver, causing severe centrilobular necrosis or
widespread fatty degeneration, and may cause Wernicke's encephalopathy or esophageal rupture.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation (including serial weights)
• Urine ketones
• Exclusion of other causes (eg, acute abdomen)
If hyperemesis gravidarum is suspected, urine ketones, thyroid-stimulating hormone, serum electrolytes,
BUN, creatinine, AST, ALT, Mg, P, and sometimes body weight are measured. Obstetric ultrasonography
should be done to rule out hydatidiform mole and multifetal pregnancy.
Other disorders that can cause vomiting must be excluded; they include gastroenteritis, hepatitis,
appendicitis, cholecystitis, other biliary tract disorders, peptic ulcer disease, intestinal obstruction,
===PAGE:2839===
hyperthyroidism not caused by hyperemesis gravidarum (eg, caused by Graves' disease), gestational
trophoblastic disease, nephrolithiasis, pyelonephritis, diabetic ketoacidosis or gastroparesis, benign
intracranial hypertension, and migraine headaches. Prominent symptoms in addition to nausea and
vomiting often suggest another cause. Tests for alternative diagnoses are done based on laboratory,
clinical, or ultrasound findings.
Treatment
• Temporary suspension of oral intake, followed by gradual resumption
• Fluids, thiamin, multivitamins, and electrolytes as needed
• Antiemetics if needed
At first, patients are given nothing by mouth. Initial treatment is IV fluid resuscitation, beginning with 2 L of
Ringer's lactate infused over 3 h to maintain a urine output of > 100 mL/h. If dextrose is given, thiamin
100 mg should be given IV first, to prevent Wernicke's encephalopathy. This dose of thiamin should be
given daily for 3 days.
Subsequent fluid requirements vary with patient response but may be as much as 1 L q 4 h or so for up to
3 days. Electrolyte deficiencies are treated; K, Mg, and P are replaced as needed. Care must be taken
not to correct low
plasma Na levels too quickly because too rapid correction can cause osmotic
demyelination syndrome.
Vomiting that persists after initial fluid and electrolyte replacement is treated with an antiemetic taken as
needed; antiemetics include
• Vitamin B
10 to 25 mg po q 8 h or q 6 h
• Doxylamine 12.5 mg po q 8 h or q 6 h (can be taken in addition to vitamin B
)
• Promethazine 12.5 to 25 mg po, IM, or rectally q 4 to 8 h
• Metoclopramide 5 to 10 mg IV or po q 8 h
• Ondansetron 8 mg po or IM q 12 h
• Prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg po or IM q 3 to 4 h
After dehydration and acute vomiting resolve, small amounts of oral liquids are given. Patients who
cannot tolerate any oral fluids after IV rehydration and antiemetics may need to be hospitalized or given IV
therapy at home and take nothing by mouth for a longer period (sometimes several days or more). Once
patients tolerate fluids, they can eat small, bland meals, and diet is expanded as tolerated. IV vitamin
therapy is required initially and until vitamins can be taken by mouth.
If treatment is ineffective, TPN may be necessary, and corticosteroids, although controversial, can be
tried; eg, methylprednisolone 16 mg q 8 h po or IV may be given for 3 days, then tapered over 2 wk to the
lowest effective dose. Corticosteroids should be used for < 6 wk and with extreme caution. They should
not be used during fetal organogenesis (between 20 and 56 days after fertilization); use of these drugs
during the 1st trimester is weakly associated with facial clefting. The mechanism for corticosteroids' effect
on nausea is unclear.
If progressive weight loss, jaundice, or persistent tachycardia occurs despite treatment, termination of the
pregnancy should be considered.
Placenta Previa
Placenta previa is implantation of the placenta over or near the internal os of the cervix.
===PAGE:2840===
Typically, painless vaginal bleeding with bright red blood occurs after 20 wk gestation. Diagnosis
is by transvaginal or abdominal ultrasonography. Treatment is bed rest for minor vaginal
bleeding before 36 wk gestation, with cesarean delivery at 36 wk if fetal lung maturity is
documented. If bleeding is severe or refractory or if fetal status is nonreassuring, immediate
delivery, usually cesarean, is indicated.
Placenta previa may be total (covering the internal os completely), partial (covering part of the os), or
marginal (at the edge of the os), or the placenta may be low-lying (near the os without reaching it).
Incidence of placenta previa is 1/200 deliveries. If placenta previa occurs during early pregnancy, it
usually resolves by 20 wk as the uterus enlarges.
Risk factors:
Risk factors include the following:
• Multiparity
• Prior cesarean delivery
• Uterine abnormalities that inhibit normal implantation (eg, fibroids, prior curettage)
• Smoking
• Multifetal pregnancy
• Older maternal age
Complications:
For patients with placenta previa or a low-lying placenta, risks include fetal
malpresentation, preterm premature rupture of the membranes, fetal growth restriction, vasa previa, and
velamentous insertion of the umbilical cord.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually begin during late pregnancy. Then, sudden, painless vaginal bleeding often begins; the
blood may be bright red, and bleeding may be heavy, sometimes resulting in hemorrhagic shock. In some
patients, uterine contractions accompany bleeding.
Diagnosis
• Transvaginal ultrasonography
Placenta previa is considered in all women with vaginal bleeding after 20 wk. If placenta previa is present,
digital pelvic examination may increase bleeding, sometimes causing sudden, massive bleeding; thus, if
vaginal bleeding occurs after 20 wk, digital pelvic examination is contraindicated unless placenta previa is
first ruled out by ultrasonography. Placenta previa frequently cannot be distinguished from abruptio
placentae except by ultrasonography. Transvaginal ultrasonography is an accurate, safe way to diagnose
placenta previa.
In all women with suspected symptomatic placenta previa, fetal heart rate monitoring is indicated. Unless
the case is an emergency (requiring immediate delivery), amniotic fluid is tested at 36 wk to assess fetal
lung maturity and thus document whether delivery at this time is safe.
Treatment
• Hospitalization and bed rest for a first episode of bleeding before 36 wk
• Delivery if mother or fetus is unstable or if fetal lungs are mature
For a first (sentinel) episode of vaginal bleeding before 36 wk, management consists of hospitalization,
bed rest, and avoidance of sexual intercourse, which can cause bleeding by initiating contractions or
===PAGE:2841===
causing direct trauma. If bleeding stops, ambulation and usually hospital discharge are allowed.
Some experts recommend giving corticosteroids to accelerate fetal lung maturity when early delivery may
become necessary and gestational age is < 34 wk. Typically for a 2nd bleeding episode, patients are
readmitted and kept for observation until delivery.
Delivery is indicated for any of the following:
• Heavy or uncontrolled bleeding
• Nonreassuring results of fetal heart monitoring
• Maternal hemodynamic instability
• Fetal lung maturity (usually at 36 wk)
Delivery is almost always cesarean, but vaginal delivery may be possible for women with a low-lying
placenta if the fetal head effectively compresses the placenta and labor is already advanced or if the
pregnancy is < 23 wk and rapid delivery is expected.
Hemorrhagic shock is treated (. Prophylactic Rh
(D) immune globulin should be given if the
mother has Rh-negative blood.
Placenta Accreta
Placenta accreta is an abnormally adherent placenta, resulting in delayed delivery of the
placenta. Placental function is normal, but trophoblastic invasion extends beyond the normal
boundary (called Nitabuch's layer). In such cases, manual removal of the placenta, unless
scrupulously done, results in massive postpartum hemorrhage. Prenatal diagnosis is by
ultrasonography. Treatment is usually with scheduled cesarean hysterectomy.
In placenta accreta, the placental villi are not contained by uterine decidual cells, as occurs normally, but
extend to the myometrium. Related abnormalities include placenta increta (invasion of chorionic villi into
the myometrium) and placenta percreta (penetration of chorionic villi into or through the uterine serosa).
All 3 abnormalities cause similar problems.
Etiology
The main risk factor for placenta accreta is
• Prior uterine surgery
In the US, placenta accreta most commonly occurs in women who have had placenta previa after
cesarean delivery in a previous pregnancy. Incidence of placenta accreta has increased from about
1/30,000 in the 1950s to about 1/500 to 2000 in the 1980s and 1990s. Risk in women who have had
placenta previa increases from about 10 to 25% if they have had one cesarean delivery to about 50 to
67% if they have had > 4 cesarean deliveries.
Other risk factors include the following:
• Maternal age > 35
• Increasing parity
• Submucosal fibroids
• Smoking
===PAGE:2842===
• Endometrial lesions such as Asherman's syndrome
Symptoms and Signs
Usually, women present with profuse vaginal bleeding during manual separation of the placenta after
delivery of the fetus.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography for women at risk
Thorough evaluation of the uteroplacental interface by ultrasonography (transvaginal or transabdominal)
is warranted in women at risk; it can be done periodically, beginning at 20 to 24 wk gestation. If
ultrasonography is inconclusive, MRI or Doppler flow studies may help.
During delivery, the disorder is suspected if the placenta has not been delivered within 30 min of the
infant's delivery, if no plane of separation can be created with attempts at manual removal, or if placental
traction causes large-volume hemorrhage. When placenta accreta is suspected, laparotomy with
preparation for large-volume hemorrhage is required.
Treatment
• Scheduled cesarean hysterectomy
Preparation for delivery is best. Unless the patient objects, scheduled cesarean hysterectomy is done as
soon as fetal lung maturity is confirmed (usually at about 35 to 36 wk).
If cesarean hysterectomy is done (preferably by an experienced pelvic surgeon), a fundal incision
followed by immediate clamping of the cord after delivery can help minimize blood loss. The placenta is
left in situ while hysterectomy is done. Balloon occlusion of the aorta or internal iliac vessels may be done
preoperatively but requires a skilled angiographer and may cause serious thromboembolic complications.
Preeclampsia and Eclampsia
Preeclampsia is new-onset hypertension and proteinuria after 20 wk gestation. Eclampsia is
unexplained generalized seizures in patients with preeclampsia. Diagnosis is clinical and by
urine protein measurement. Treatment is usually with IV Mg sulfate and delivery at term.
Preeclampsia affects 3 to 7% of pregnant women. Preeclampsia and eclampsia develop after 20 wk
gestation; up to 25% of cases develop postpartum, most often within the first 4 days but sometimes up to
6 wk postpartum.
Untreated preeclampsia usually smolders for a variable time, then suddenly progresses to eclampsia,
which occurs in 1/200 patients with preeclampsia. Untreated eclampsia is usually fatal.
Etiology
Etiology is unknown; however, risk factors include the following:
• Nulliparity
• Preexisting chronic hypertension
• Vascular disorders (eg, renal disorders, diabetic vasculopathy)
• Pregestational or gestational diabetes
• Older (> 35) or very young (eg, < 17) maternal age
===PAGE:2843===
• Family history of preeclampsia
• Preeclampsia or poor outcome in previous pregnancies
• Multifetal pregnancy
• Obesity
• Thrombotic disorders (eg, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome—
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiology of preeclampsia and eclampsia is poorly understood. Factors may include poorly
developed uterine placental spiral arterioles (which decrease uteroplacental blood flow during late
pregnancy), a genetic abnormality on chromosome 13, immunologic abnormalities, and placental ischemia
or infarction. Lipid peroxidation of cell membranes induced by free radicals may contribute to
preeclampsia.
Complications:
Fetal growth restriction may result. Diffuse or multifocal vasospasm can result in
ischemia, eventually damaging multiple organs, particularly the brain, kidneys, and liver. Factors that may
contribute to vasospasm include decreased prostacyclin (an endothelium-derived vasodilator), increased
endothelin (an endothelium-derived vasoconstrictor), and increased soluble Flt-1 (a circulating receptor
for vascular endothelial growth factor).
The coagulation system is activated, possibly secondary to endothelial cell dysfunction, leading to platelet
activation. The HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver function tests, and low platelet count)
develops in 10 to 20% of women with severe preeclampsia or eclampsia; this incidence is about 100
times that for all pregnancies (1 to 2/1000).
Symptoms and Signs
Preeclampsia may be asymptomatic or may cause edema or excessive weight gain. Non-dependent
edema, such as facial or hand swelling (the patient's ring may no longer fit her finger), is more specific
than dependent edema. Reflex reactivity may be increased, indicating neuromuscular irritability, which can
progress to seizures (eclampsia). Petechiae may develop, as may other signs of bleeding.
Severe preeclampsia may cause organ damage; manifestations may include headache, visual
disturbances, confusion, epigastric or right upper quadrant abdominal pain (reflecting hepatic ischemia or
capsular distention), nausea, vomiting, dyspnea (reflecting pulmonary edema or acute respiratory distress
syndrome [ARDS]), stroke (rarely), and oliguria (reflecting decreased plasma volume or ischemic acute
tubular necrosis).
Diagnosis
• New-onset hypertension (BP > 140/90 mm Hg) plus new unexplained proteinuria > 300 mg/24 h after 20
wk
Diagnosis is suggested by symptoms or presence of hypertension, defined as systolic BP > 140 mm Hg,
diastolic BP > 90 mm Hg, or both. Except in emergencies, hypertension should be documented in > 2
measurements taken > 6 h apart. Urine protein excretion is measured in a 24-h collection.
The following points help differentiate among hypertensive disorders in pregnant women:
•
Chronic hypertension
is identified if hypertension precedes pregnancy, is present at < 20 wk
gestation, or persists for > 6 wk (usually > 12 wk) postpartum (even if hypertension is first documented
at > 20 wk gestation). Chronic hypertension may be masked during early pregnancy by the physiologic
decrease in BP.
===PAGE:2844===
•
Gestational hypertension
is hypertension without proteinuria or other findings of preeclampsia; it first
occurs at > 20 wk gestation in women known not to have
hypertension before pregnancy and resolves
by 12 wk (usually by 6 wk) postpartum.
•
Preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension
is diagnosed when a woman with
hypertension develops new-onset proteinuria after 20 wk gestation.
•
Preeclampsia
is diagnosed in women who have known hypertension and proteinuria if BP increases to
≥ 160 mmHg systolic or ≥ 110 mmHg diastolic in the last half of pregnancy even if they do not have
proteinuria, particularly if the increase is accompanied by symptoms, increased liver enzymes
(aminotransferases), or thrombocytopenia.
Further evaluation:
If preeclampsia is diagnosed, tests include urinalysis, CBC, platelet count, uric acid,
liver function tests, and measurement of serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, and creatine clearance. The
fetus is assessed with a nonstress test or biophysical profile.
HELLP syndrome
is suggested by micro-angiopathic findings (eg, schistocytes, helmet cells) on
peripheral blood smears, elevated liver enzymes, and a low platelet count.
Severe preeclampsia
is differentiated from mild by one or more of the following:
• CNS dysfunction (eg, blurred vision, scotomata, altered mental status, severe headache unrelieved by
acetaminophen)
• Symptoms of liver capsule distention (eg, right upper quadrant or epigastric pain)
• Nausea and vomiting
• Serum AST or ALT > 2 times normal
• Systolic BP > 160 mm Hg or diastolic BP > 110 mm Hg on 2 occasions ≥ 6 h apart
• Platelet count < 100,000/
μ
L
• Urine protein > 5 g/24 h
• Urine output < 500 mL/24 h
• Severe fetal growth restriction
• Pulmonary edema or cyanosis
• Stroke
Treatment
• Usually hospitalization and sometimes anti-hypertensive treatment
• Delivery, depending on factors such as fetal maturity and severity of preeclampsia
• Mg sulfate for prevention or treatment of seizures
General approach:
Definitive treatment is delivery. However, risk of early delivery is balanced against
severity of preeclampsia and response to other treatments. Usually, immediate delivery after maternal
stabilization (eg, controlling seizures, beginning to control BP) is indicated for the following:
• Pregnancy of ≥ 37 wk
===PAGE:2845===
• Eclampsia
• Severe preeclampsia if pregnancy is > 34 wk or if fetal lung maturity is documented
• Deteriorating renal or hepatic function
• Nonreassuring results of fetal monitoring
Other treatments aim to optimize maternal health, which usually optimizes fetal health. If delivery can be
delayed in pregnancies of about 32 to 34 wk, corticosteroids are given for 48 h to accelerate fetal lung
maturity.
Most patients are hospitalized. Patients with eclampsia or severe preeclampsia are often admitted to an
ICU.
Mild preeclampsia:
If preeclampsia is mild, outpatient treatment is possible; it includes strict bed rest,
lying on the left side whenever possible, BP evaluation and physician visits 2 to 3 times/wk, a normal salt
intake, and increased fluid intake.
However, most patients with mild eclampsia require hospitalization; some also need drug treatment for a
few hours to stabilize them and to lower systolic BP to 140 to 155 mm Hg and diastolic BP to 90 to 105
mm Hg. Delivery follows unless preeclampsia does not progress and the fetus is very premature.
Monitoring:
Outpatients are usually evaluated once every 2 or 3 days for seizures, symptoms of severe
preeclampsia, and vaginal bleeding. BP, reflexes, and fetal heart status (with nonstress testing or a
biophysical profile) are also checked. Platelet count, serum creatinine, and serum liver enzymes are
measured at least weekly. All hospitalized patients are followed by an obstetrician and evaluated as
described above but more frequently, particularly patients that are in an ICU.
Mg sulfate:
As soon as eclampsia or severe preeclampsia is diagnosed, Mg sulfate must be given to stop
or prevent seizures and reduce reflex reactivity. Whether patients with mild preeclampsia always require
Mg sulfate before delivery is controversial.
Mg sulfate 4 g IV over 20 min is given, followed by a constant IV infusion of about 1 to 3 g/h, with
supplemental doses as necessary. Dose is adjusted based on the patient's reflexes, BP, and serum Mg
levels (therapeutic range, 4 to 7 mEq/L). Patients with excess Mg levels (eg, with Mg levels > 10 mEq/L or
a sudden decrease in reflex reactivity) or hypoventilation are treated with Ca gluconate 1 g IV.
IV Mg sulfate may cause lethargy, hypotonia, and transient respiratory depression in neonates. However,
serious neonatal complications are uncommon.
Supportive treatments:
Hospitalized patients are given IV Ringer's lactate or 0.9% normal saline
solution, beginning at about 125 mL/h (to increase urine output). Persistent oliguria is treated with a fluid
challenge, followed by furosemide 10 to 20 mg IV; diuretics are not used otherwise. If fluids plus
furosemide are ineffective, determining intravascular volume and cardiac output with a pulmonary artery
catheter may be considered. Anuric patients with normovolemia may require renal vasodilators or dialysis.
If seizures occur despite Mg therapy, diazepam or lorazepam can be given IV to stop seizures, and IV
hydralazine or labetalol is given in a dose titrated to lower systolic BP to 140 to 155 mm Hg and diastolic
BP to 90 to 105 mm Hg.
Delivery method:
The most efficient method of delivery should be used. If the cervix is favorable and
rapid vaginal delivery seems feasible, a dilute IV infusion of oxytocin is given to accelerate labor; if labor
is active, the membranes are ruptured. If the cervix is unfavorable and prompt vaginal delivery is unlikely,
cesarean delivery is indicated. Preeclampsia and eclampsia, if not resolved before delivery, usually
resolve rapidly afterward, beginning within 6 to 12 h.
===PAGE:2846===
All patients are typically given Mg sulfate for 24 h postpartum.
Follow-up:
Patients should be evaluated every 1 to 2 wk postpartum with periodic BP measurement. If
BP remains high after 6 wk postpartum, patients may have chronic hypertension.
Pruritic Urticarial Papules and Plaques of Pregnancy
Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy are pruritic eruptions of unknown cause
that develop during pregnancy.
Most cases occur during a first pregnancy. Overall incidence is 1/160 to 300 pregnancies; however, with
multiple gestation, risk is 8 to 12 times higher.
Symptoms and Signs
Lesions are intensely itchy, erythematous, solid, superficial, and elevated; some are surrounded by
blanching, and some have minute vesicles in the center. Itching keeps most patients awake, but
excoriation is uncommon. Lesions begin on the abdomen, frequently on striae atrophicae (stretch marks),
and spread to the thighs, buttocks, and occasionally the arms. The palms, soles, and face are usually
spared. Most patients have hundreds of lesions.
Lesions develop during the 3rd trimester, most often in the last 2 to 3 wk and occasionally in the last few
days or postpartum. They usually resolve within 15 days after delivery. They may recur in up to 5% of
subsequent pregnancies.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical. Differentiation from other pruritic eruptions may be difficult.
Treatment
• Corticosteroids
Mild symptoms are treated with topical corticosteroids (eg, 0.1% triamcinolone acetonide cream up to 6
times/day). Rarely, more severe symptoms require systemic corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 40 mg po
once/day, tapered as tolerated). Systemic corticosteroids given late in pregnancy do not seem to harm the
fetus.
Spontaneous Abortion
(Miscarriage)
Spontaneous abortion is noninduced embryonic or fetal death or passage of products of
conception before 20 wk gestation. Threatened abortion is vaginal bleeding occurring during
this time frame, indicating that spontaneous abortion may occur. Diagnosis is by clinical criteria
and ultrasonography. Treatment is usually observation for threatened abortion and, if
spontaneous abortion has occurred or appears unavoidable, uterine evacuation.
Fetal death and early delivery are classified as follows:
• Abortion: Death of the fetus or passage of products of conception (fetus and placenta) before 20 wk
gestation
• Late fetal death: Fetal death after 20 wk
• Stillbirth: Delivery after late fetal death
• Preterm delivery: Passage of a live fetus between 20 and 37 wk (
===PAGE:2847===
Abortions may be classified as early or late, spontaneous or induced for therapeutic or elective reasons
(, threatened or inevitable, incomplete or complete, recurrent (also called recurrent
pregnancy loss), missed, or septic (see
Table 265-1
).
About 20 to 30% of women with confirmed pregnancies bleed during the first 20 wk of pregnancy; half of
these women spontaneously
[Table 265-1.
Classification of Abortion]
abort. Thus, incidence of spontaneous abortion is about 10 to 15% in confirmed pregnancies. Incidence
in all pregnancies is probably higher because some very early abortions are mistaken for a late menstrual
period.
Etiology
Isolated spontaneous abortions may result from certain viruses—most notably cytomegalovirus,
herpesvirus, parvovirus, and rubella virus—or from disorders that can cause sporadic abortions or
recurrent pregnancy loss (eg, chromosomal or mendelian abnormalities, luteal phase defects). Acquired
and hereditary thrombophilias appear to cause abortions after ≥ 10 wk. Immunologic abnormalities and
major trauma may be causes. Cause is often unknown.
Risk factors include
• Age > 35
• History of spontaneous abortion
• Cigarette smoking
• Use of certain drugs (eg, cocaine, alcohol, high doses of caffeine)
• Uterine abnormalities (eg, leiomyoma, adhesions)
Subclinical thyroid disorders, well-controlled or subclinical diabetes mellitus, retroverted uterus, and minor
trauma have not been shown to cause spontaneous abortions.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include crampy pelvic pain, bleeding, and eventually expulsion of tissue. Late spontaneous
abortion may begin with a gush of fluid when the membranes rupture. Hemorrhage is rarely massive. A
dilated cervix indicates that abortion is inevitable.
If products of conception remain in the uterus after spontaneous abortion, vaginal bleeding may occur,
usually after a delay of hours to days. Infection may also develop, causing fever, pain, and sometimes
sepsis.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Usually ultrasonography and quantitative
β
subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (
β
-hCG)
Diagnosis of threatened, inevitable, incomplete, or complete abortion is often possible based on clinical
criteria (
Table 265-2
) and a positive urine pregnancy test. However, ultrasonography and quantitative
measurement of serum
β
-hCG are usually done to exclude ectopic pregnancy and to determine whether
===PAGE:2848===
products of conception remain in the uterus (suggesting that abortion is incomplete rather than complete).
However, results may be inconclusive, particularly during early pregnancy.
Missed abortion
is suspected if the uterus does not progressively enlarge or if quantitative
β
-hCG is low
for gestational age or does not double within 48 to 72 h. Missed abortion is confirmed if ultrasonography
shows any of the following:
• Disappearance of previously detected embryonic cardiac activity
• Absence of such activity when the fetal crown-rump length is > 5 mm (determined by transvaginal
ultrasonography)
[Table 265-2.
Characteristic Symptoms and Signs in Spontaneous Abortions]
• Absence of a fetal pole (determined by transvaginal ultrasonography) when the mean sac diameter
(average of diameters measured in 3 orthogonal planes) is > 18 mm
For
recurrent pregnancy loss
, testing to determine the cause of abortion is necessary (see below).
Treatment
• Observation for threatened abortion
• Uterine evacuation for inevitable, incomplete, or missed abortions
• Emotional support
For
threatened abortion
, treatment is observation. No evidence suggests that bed rest decreases risk of
subsequent completed abortion. If the cervix is dilated, avoidance of intercourse is often recommended to
prevent infection; however, intercourse has not been shown to cause loss.
For
inevitable, incomplete, or missed abortions,
treatment is uterine evacuation or waiting for
spontaneous passage of the products of conception. Evacuation usually involves suction curettage at <
12 wk, dilation and evacuation at 12 to 23 wk, or medical induction (for women without prior uterine
surgery) at > 16 to 23 wk (for treatment of late fetal death, see
Stillbirth
. The later the uterus
is evacuated, the greater the likelihood of placental bleeding, uterine perforation by long bones of the
fetus, and difficulty dilating the cervix. These complications are reduced by preoperative use of osmotic
cervical dilators (eg, laminaria), misoprostol, or mifepristone (RU 486).
If
complete abortion
is suspected, uterine evacuation is done when bleeding occurs or other signs
indicate that products of conception may be retained. Uterine evacuation need not be done routinely.
After an
induced or spontaneous abortion,
parents commonly feel grief and guilt. They are given
emotional support and, in the case of spontaneous abortions, reassured that their actions were not the
cause. Formal counseling is rarely indicated but should be made available.
Recurrent Pregnancy Loss
(Recurrent or Habitual Abortion)
Recurrent pregnancy loss is ≥ 3 consecutive spontaneous abortions. Determining the cause
may require extensive evaluation of both parents. Some causes can be treated.
Etiology
Recurrent pregnancy loss usually results from disorders that cause intrauterine fetal damage, such as
maternal or paternal chromosomal abnormalities (eg, balanced translocations). Chromosomal
abnormalities may cause 50% of recurrent pregnancy losses, which are more common during early
===PAGE:2849===
pregnancy; aneuploidy is involved in up to 80% of all spontaneous abortions occurring at < 10 wk
gestation but in < 15% of those occurring at 20 wk.
Other common causes may include maternal luteal phase defects (particularly at < 6 wk), overt endocrine
disorders (eg, polycystic ovary syndrome, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, poorly controlled diabetes
mellitus), severe chronic renal disorders, immunologic abnormalities (eg, lupus anticoagulant,
anticardiolipin antibodies, antiβ
glycoprotein I), and, particularly after 10 wk, inherited maternal
thrombotic disorders (eg, activated protein C resistance; factor V Leiden mutation; prothrombin G20210A
gene mutation; hyperhomocysteinemia; deficiencies of antithrombin
or protein Z, C, or S). Cervical
incompetence and structural abnormalities of the uterine cavity (eg, polyps, fibroids, congenital
malformations) may predispose to delivery at < 20 wk but do not necessarily cause intrauterine fetal
damage.
For women who have a history of recurrent pregnancy loss and who become pregnant, risk of fetal
growth restriction and premature delivery may be higher.
Diagnosis
Evaluation should include the following to determine the cause:
• Genetic evaluation (karyotyping) as clinically indicated to exclude possible genetic causes (
• Anticardiolipin antibodies, antiβ
glycoprotein I, and lupus anticoagulant
• Thyroid-stimulating hormone
• Evaluation of ovarian reserve including measuring follicle-stimulating hormone level on day 3 of the
menstrual cycle
• Hysterosalpingography or sonohysterography to check for structural uterine abnormalities
• Screening for activated protein C resistance, factor V Leiden mutation, prothrombin G20210A mutation,
antithrombin activity, protein Z and C deficiencies, and protein S deficiency (if fetal losses occurred at >
9 wk gestation)
Cause cannot be determined in up to 50% of women.
Treatment
Some causes can be treated. If the cause cannot be identified, the chance of a live birth in the next
pregnancy is 35 to 85%.
Septic Abortion
Septic abortion is serious uterine infection during or shortly before or after an abortion.
Septic abortions usually result from induced abortions done by untrained practitioners using nonsterile
techniques; they are much more common when induced abortion is illegal. Typical causative organisms
include
Escherichia coli, Enterobacter aerogenes, Proteus vulgaris
, hemolytic streptococci,
staphylococci, and some anaerobic organisms (eg,
Clostridium perfringens
).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are similar to those of pelvic inflammatory disease (eg, chills, fever, vaginal
discharge, often peritonitis) and often those of threatened or incomplete abortion (eg, vaginal bleeding,
cervical dilation, passage of products of conception). Septic shock may result, causing hypothermia,
hypotension, oliguria, and respiratory distress. Sepsis due to
C. perfringens
may result in
===PAGE:2850===
thrombocytopenia, ecchymoses, and findings of intravascular hemolysis (eg, anuria, anemia, jaundice,
hemoglobinuria, hemosiderinuria).
Diagnosis
Septic abortion is usually obvious clinically but must be confirmed by pregnancy testing and usually
ultrasonography.
Treatment
Treatment is intensive antibiotic therapy plus uterine evacuation as soon as possible. A typical antibiotic
regimen includes clindamycin 900 mg IV q 8 h plus gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV once/day, with or without
ampicillin 2 g IV q 4 h. Alternatively, a combination of ampicillin, gentamicin, and metronidazole 500 mg IV
q 8 h can be used.
Stillbirth
Stillbirth is delivery of a dead fetus at > 20 wk gestation. Maternal and fetal testing is done to
determine the cause. Management is as for routine care after live delivery.
Etiology
Fetal death during late pregnancy may have maternal, placental, or fetal anatomic or genetic causes (see
Table 265-3
). Overall, the most common cause is
• Abruptio placentae
Complications:
If a fetus dies during late pregnancy or near term but remains in the uterus for weeks,
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may occur.
Diagnosis
Tests to determine cause include the following:
• Fetal karyotype and autopsy
• Maternal CBC (for evidence of anemia or leukocytosis)
• Kleihauer-Betke test
• Thrombotic screening (including factor V Leiden mutation; prothrombin G20210A mutation; protein C, S,
and Z levels; activated protein C resistance; antithrombin activity; fasting homocysteine level; antiphospholipid antibody)
• TORCH test (toxoplasmosis [with IgG and IgM], other pathogens [eg, human parvovirus B19, varicellazoster viruses], rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex)
[Table 265-3.
Common Causes of Stillbirth]
• Rapid plasma reagin (RPR)
• Examination of the placenta
Often, cause cannot be determined.
Treatment
• Routine postdelivery care
===PAGE:2851===
• Emotional support
Postdelivery management is similar to that for live birth. If DIC occurs, labor is induced (eg, with IV
oxytocin infusion, sometimes preceded by a prostaglandin to make the cervix favorable—ie, open and
effaced). Any coagulopathy that develops should be promptly and aggressively managed by replacing
blood or blood products as needed while preparations for delivery are being made.
After the products of conception are expelled, curettage may be needed to remove placental fragments.
Alternatively, dilation and extraction (D&E) may be done. In all cases, preabortion osmotic dilator cervical
ripening should be used with or without misoprostol.
Parents typically feel significant grief and require emotional support and sometimes formal counseling.
Risks with future pregnancy should be discussed with patients; risks are based on the stillbirth's cause.
===PAGE:2852===
Chapter 266. Abnormalities and Complications of Labor and Delivery
Introduction
Abnormalities and complications of labor and delivery should be diagnosed and managed as early as
possible. Most (eg, multifetal pregnancy, postterm pregnancy, premature rupture of membranes, abnormal
fetal presentation) are usually evident before onset of labor. Some (eg, amniotic fluid embolism, shoulder
dystocia, fetopelvic disproportion, preterm labor, protracted labor, umbilical cord prolapse) develop or
become evident during labor or the delivery period. Alternatives to spontaneous labor and vaginal delivery
may be needed. Some complications (eg, postpartum hemorrhage, inverted uterus) occur immediately
after delivery of the fetus and around the time the placenta is delivered. Placenta accreta (
may be discovered during pregnancy or only after delivery.
For neonatal resuscitation and disorders of the birth process, see
Chapter 274
; for meconium aspiration
syndrome, see p.
.
Alternatives to Spontaneous Labor and Delivery
Abnormalities or difficulties in pregnancy or during labor and delivery can necessitate alternative delivery
methods.
Operative vaginal delivery
Operative vaginal delivery involves application of forceps or a vacuum extractor to the fetal
head to assist during the 2nd stage of labor and facilitate delivery.
Forceps delivery and vacuum extraction have essentially the same indications:
• Prolonged 2nd stage of labor (from full cervical dilation until delivery of the fetus)
• Suspicion of fetal compromise (eg, abnormal heart rate pattern)
• Need to shorten the 2nd stage for maternal benefit—eg, if maternal cardiac dysfunction (eg, left-to-right
shunting) or neurologic disorders (eg, spinal cord trauma) contraindicate pushing or maternal
exhaustion prevents it
A prolonged 2nd stage is defined in nulliparous women as lack of continuing progress for 3 h with a
regional anesthetic or 2 h without a regional anesthetic or in multiparous women as lack of continuing
progress for 2 h with a regional anesthetic or 1 h without a regional anesthetic.
Choice of device depends largely on user preference and operator experience and varies greatly. These
procedures are used when the station of the fetal head is low (≥ +2 cm); then, minimal traction or rotation
is required to deliver the head.
Before starting an operative vaginal delivery, the clinician should do the following:
• Confirm complete cervical dilation
• Confirm an engaged fetal vertex
• Confirm rupture of membranes
• Confirm that fetal position is compatible with operative vaginal delivery
• Drain the maternal bladder
• Clinically assess pelvic dimensions (clinical pelvimetry) to ensure that the pelvis is adequate
===PAGE:2853===
Also required are informed consent, adequate support and personnel, and adequate analgesia or
anesthesia.
Contraindications
include unengaged fetal head, unknown fetal position, and certain fetal disorders
such as hemophilia. Vacuum extraction is typically considered contraindicated in preterm pregnancies of <
34 wk because risk of intraventricular hemorrhage is increased.
Major complications
are maternal and fetal injuries and hemorrhage, particularly if the operator is
inexperienced or if candidates are not appropriately chosen. Significant perineal trauma and neonatal
bruising are more common with forceps delivery; shoulder dystocia, cephalohematoma, and retinal
bleeding are more common with vacuum-assisted delivery.
Induction of Labor
Induction of labor is stimulation of uterine contractions before spontaneous labor to achieve
vaginal delivery.
Indications:
Induction of labor can be medically indicated (eg, for preeclampsia or fetal compromise) or
elective (to control when delivery occurs). Before elective induction, gestational age and fetal lung
maturity must be assessed; if gestational age is < 39 wk by best obstetric estimates, amniocentesis is
done to determine lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio or other indexes of fetal lung maturity.
Contraindications
to induction include the following:
• Fundal uterine surgery
• Prior classic or vertical cesarean incision in the thickened, muscular portion of the uterus
• Active genital herpes
• Placenta or vasa previa
• Abnormal fetal presentation (eg, transverse lie, umbilical cord presentation, certain types of fetopelvic
disproportion)
Multiple prior uterine scars and breech presentation are relative contraindications.
Technique:
If the cervix is closed, long, and firm (unfavorable), the goal is to cause the cervix to open
and become effaced (favorable). Various pharmacologic or mechanical methods can be used. Misoprostol
μ
g vaginally q 3 to 6 h is effective. Alternatives include prostaglandin E
given intracervically (0.5 mg)
or as an intravaginal pessary (10 mg). Prostaglandins are contraindicated in women with prior cesarean
delivery or uterine surgery because these drugs increase the risk of uterine rupture. Oxytocin in low or
high doses can also be given. Effective mechanical methods include use of laminaria and transcervical
balloon catheters, which may be useful when other methods are ineffective or contraindications exist.
Once the cervix is favorable, labor is induced. Constant IV infusion of oxytocin is the most commonly used
method; it is safe and cost-effective. Low-dose oxytocin is given at 0.5 to 2 milliunits/min, increased by 1
to 2 milliunits/min, usually q 15 to 60 min. High-dose oxytocin is given at 6 milliunits/min, increased by 1 to
6 milliunits/min q 15 to 40 min to a maximum of 40 milliunits/min. With doses > 40 milliunits/min, excessive
water retention may lead to water intoxication. Use of oxytocin must be supervised to prevent hypertonic
uterine contractions, which may compromise the fetus. External fetal monitoring ( is routine;
after amniotomy (deliberate rupture of the membranes), internal monitoring may be indicated if fetal status
cannot be assessed externally. Amniotomy can be done to augment labor when the fetal head is well
applied to a favorable cervix.
Cesarean Delivery
Cesarean delivery is surgical delivery by incision into the uterus.
===PAGE:2854===
Up to 30% of deliveries in the US are cesarean. The rate of cesarean delivery fluctuates. It has recently
increased, partly because of concern about increased risk of uterine rupture in women attempting vaginal
birth after cesarean delivery (VBAC).
Indications:
Although morbidity and mortality rates of cesarean delivery are low, they are still several
times higher than those of vaginal delivery; thus, cesarean delivery should be done only when it is safer
for the woman or fetus than vaginal delivery. The most common specific indications are
• Previous cesarean delivery
• Protracted labor
• Fetal dystocia (particularly breech presentation)
• A nonreassuring fetal heart rate, which requires rapid delivery
Many women are interested in elective cesarean delivery on demand. The rationale includes avoiding
damage to the pelvic floor (and subsequent incontinence) and serious intrapartum fetal complications.
However, such use is controversial, has limited supporting data, and requires discussion between the
woman and her physician; the discussion should include immediate risks and long-term reproductive
planning (eg, how many children the woman intends to have).
Many cesarean deliveries are done in women with previous cesarean deliveries because for them,
vaginal delivery increases risk of uterine rupture; however, risk of rupture with vaginal delivery is only
about 1% overall (risk is higher for women who have had multiple cesarean deliveries or a vertical
incision, particularly if it extends through the thickened, muscular portion of the uterus). Vaginal birth is
successful in about 75% of women who have had a single prior cesarean delivery and should be offered
to those who have had a single prior cesarean delivery by lower uterine transverse incision. Success of
VBAC depends on the indication for the initial cesarean delivery. VBAC should be done in a facility where
an obstetrician, anesthesiologist, and surgical team are immediately available, which makes VBAC
impractical in some situations.
Technique:
During cesarean delivery, practitioners skilled in neonatal resuscitation should be readily
available. The uterine incision can be classic or lower segment.
•
Classic:
The incision is made vertically in the anterior wall of the uterus, ascending to the upper uterine
segment or fundus. This incision typically results in more blood loss than a lower-segment incision and
is usually done only when placenta previa is present, fetal position is transverse with the back down,
presentation is breech, the fetus is preterm, or the lower uterine segment is poorly developed.
•
Lower segment:
Lower-segment incisions are done most often. A low transverse incision is made in
the thinned, elongated lower portion of the uterine body under the bladder reflection. A vertical lowersegment incision is used only for certain abnormal presentations and for excessively large fetuses. In
such cases, a transverse incision is not used because it can extend laterally into the uterine arteries,
sometimes causing excessive blood loss. Women who have had deliveries by a low transverse uterine
incision are advised about the safety of a trial of labor in subsequent pregnancies.
Amniotic Fluid Embolism
Amniotic fluid embolism is entrance of amniotic fluid and fetal cells into the maternal circulation
initiating an abnormal response.
Amniotic fluid embolism is a rare obstetric emergency. It usually occurs during late pregnancy; risk is
increased with cesarean delivery, advanced maternal age, abruptio placentae, abdominal trauma,
placenta previa, and forceps delivery. Amniotic fluid embolizes to the maternal circulation, causing
tachycardia, hypotension, respiratory failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and often rapid
maternal death. Autopsy may show fetal squamous cells and hair in the pulmonary circulation.
===PAGE:2855===
About 20% of affected women die, although mortality estimates often vary widely. Survival depends on
early recognition and immediate institution of treatment.
Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment is supportive. It includes transfusion of RBCs (as needed to replace lost blood), fresh frozen
plasma and clotting factors (as needed to reverse the coagulopathy), and ventilatory and circulatory
support, with inotropic drugs as needed.
Fetal Dystocia
Fetal dystocia is abnormal fetal size or position resulting in difficult delivery. Diagnosis is by
examination, ultrasonography, or response to augmentation of labor. Treatment is with physical
maneuvers to reposition the fetus, operative vaginal delivery, or cesarean delivery.
Fetal dystocia may occur when the fetus is too large for the pelvic opening (fetopelvic disproportion) or is
abnormally positioned (eg, breech presentation). Normal fetal presentation is vertex, with the occiput
anterior.
Fetopelvic disproportion:
Diagnosis is suggested by prenatal clinical estimates of pelvic dimensions
(, ultrasonography, and protracted labor. If augmentation of labor restores normal progress and fetal
weight is < 5000 g in women without diabetes or < 4500 g in women with diabetes, labor can safely
continue. If progress is slower than expected in the 2nd stage of labor, women are evaluated to determine
whether operative vaginal delivery (by forceps or vacuum extractor) is safe and appropriate.
Occiput posterior presentation:
The most common abnormal presentation is occiput posterior. The
fetal neck is usually somewhat deflexed; thus, a larger diameter of the head must pass through the pelvis.
Many occiput posterior presentations require operative vaginal delivery or cesarean delivery.
Face or brow presentation:
In face presentation, the head is hyperextended, and position is designated
by the position of the chin (mentum). When the chin is posterior, the head is less likely to rotate and less
likely to deliver vaginally, necessitating cesarean delivery. Brow presentation usually converts
spontaneously to occiput or face presentation.
Breech presentation:
The 2nd most common abnormal presentation is breech (buttocks before the
head). There are several types:
• Frank breech: The fetal hips are flexed, and the knees extended (pike position).
• Complete breech: The fetus seems to be sitting with hips and knees flexed.
• Single or double footling presentation: One or both legs are completely extended and present before the
buttocks.
Breech presentation is a problem primarily because the presenting part is a poor dilating wedge, which
can cause the head, which follows, to be trapped during delivery, often compressing the umbilical cord.
Umbilical cord compression may cause fetal hypoxemia. The fetal head is probably compressing the
umbilical cord if the fetal umbilicus is visible at the introitus, particularly in primiparas whose pelvic tissues
have not been dilated by previous deliveries.
Predisposing factors for breech presentation include premature labor, uterine abnormalities, and fetal
anomalies. If delivery is vaginal, breech presentation may increase risk of birth trauma, dystocia, and
perinatal death. Preventing complications is more effective and easier than treating them, so abnormal
presentation must be identified before delivery. Cesarean delivery is usually done at 39 wk or when the
patient presents in labor, although external cephalic version can sometimes move the fetus to vertex
===PAGE:2856===
presentation before labor, usually at 37 or 38 wk. This technique involves gently pressing on the maternal
abdomen to reposition the fetus. A dose of a short-acting tocolytic (terbutaline 0.25 mg sc) may help. The
success rate is about 50 to 75%.
Transverse lie:
Fetal position is transverse, with the fetal long axis oblique or perpendicular rather than
parallel to the maternal long axis. Shoulder-first presentation requires cesarean delivery unless the fetus
is a 2nd twin.
Shoulder dystocia:
In this infrequent condition, presentation is vertex, but the anterior fetal shoulder is
lodged behind the symphysis pubis, preventing vaginal delivery. Shoulder dystocia is recognized when
the fetal head is delivered onto the perineum but appears to be pulled back tightly against the perineum
(turtle sign). Risk factors include a large fetus, maternal obesity, diabetes mellitus, prior shoulder dystocia,
operative vaginal delivery, and prolonged labor. Risk of neonatal morbidity (eg, brachial plexus injury,
bone fractures) and mortality is increased.
Once shoulder dystocia is recognized, extra personnel are summoned to the room, and various
maneuvers are tried sequentially to disengage the anterior shoulder:
• The woman's thighs are hyperflexed to widen the pelvic outlet (McRobert's maneuver), and suprapubic
pressure is applied to rotate and dislodge the anterior shoulder. Fundal pressure is avoided because it
may worsen the condition or cause uterine rupture.
• The obstetrician inserts a hand into the posterior vagina and presses the posterior shoulder to rotate the
fetus in whichever direction is easier (Wood's screw maneuver).
• The obstetrician inserts a hand, flexes the posterior elbow, and sweeps the arm and hand across the
fetal chest to deliver the infant's entire posterior arm.
These maneuvers increase risk of fracture of the humerus or clavicle. Sometimes the clavicle is
intentionally fractured in a direction
away from fetal lung to disengage the shoulder. An episiotomy can be
done at any time to facilitate the maneuvers.
If all maneuvers are ineffective, the obstetrician flexes the infant's head and reverses the cardinal
movements of labor, replacing the fetal head back into the vagina or uterus; the infant is then delivered by
cesarean (Zavanelli maneuver).
Inverted Uterus
Inverted uterus is a rare medical emergency in which the corpus turns inside out and protrudes
into the vagina or beyond the introitus.
The uterus is most commonly inverted when too much traction is applied to the umbilical cord in an
attempt to deliver the placenta. Excessive pressure on the fundus during delivery of the placenta, a
flaccid uterus, or placenta accreta (abnormally adherent placenta) can contribute.
Treatment
• Manual reduction
Treatment is immediate manual reduction by pushing up on the fundus until the uterus is returned to its
normal position. If the placenta is still attached, the uterus should be replaced before the placenta is
removed. Because of discomfort, IV analgesics and sedatives or a general anesthetic are sometimes
needed. Terbutaline 0.25 mg IV or nitroglycerin 50
μ
g IV may also be needed.
If attempts to return the uterus are unsuccessful, a laparotomy may be necessary; the fundus is
manipulated vaginally and abdominally to return it to its normal position. Once the uterus is in place, an
oxytocin infusion should be started.
===PAGE:2857===
Multifetal Pregnancy
Multifetal pregnancy is presence of > 1 fetus in the uterus.
Multifetal (multiple) pregnancy occurs in 1 of 70 to 80 deliveries. Risk factors include
• Ovarian stimulation (usually with clomiphene or gonadotropins)
• Assisted reproduction (eg, in vitro fertilization)
• Prior multifetal pregnancy
• Advanced maternal age
The overdistended uterus tends to stimulate early labor, causing preterm delivery (average gestation is
35 to 36 wk with twins, 32 wk with triplets, and 30 wk with quadruplets). Fetal presentation may be
abnormal. The uterus may contract after delivery of the first child, shearing away the placenta and
increasing risk for the remaining fetuses. Sometimes uterine distention impairs postpartum uterine
contraction, leading to atony and maternal hemorrhage. Multifetal pregnancy increases the risk of
preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, postpartum hemorrhage, cesarean delivery, preterm delivery, and
growth restriction.
Multifetal pregnancy is suspected if the uterus is large for dates; it is evident on prenatal ultrasonography.
Cesarean delivery is done when indicated. Cesarean delivery is recommended for twins unless the
presenting twin is in vertex presentation. Higher-order multiples are typically delivered by cesarean
regardless of presentation. (.
Postpartum Hemorrhage
Postpartum hemorrhage is blood loss of > 500 mL during or immediately after the 3rd stage of
labor in a vaginal delivery or > 1000 mL in a cesarean delivery. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment
depends on etiology of the hemorrhage.
Causes of postpartum hemorrhage include
• Uterine atony (the most common)
• Lacerations of the genital tract
• Extension of an episiotomy
• Uterine rupture
• Bleeding disorders
• Retained placental tissues
• Hematoma
• Uterine inversion
• Subinvolution (incomplete involution) of the placental site (which usually occurs early but may occur as
late as 1 mo after delivery)
Risk factors for uterine atony include uterine overdistention (caused by multifetal pregnancy,
polyhydramnios, or an abnormally large fetus), prolonged or dysfunctional labor, grand multi-parity
(delivery of ≥ 5 viable fetuses), relaxant anesthetics, rapid labor, and chorioamnionitis.
===PAGE:2858===
Uterine fibroids may contribute to postpartum hemorrhage. A history of prior postpartum hemorrhage may
indicate increased risk.
Treatment
• Removal of retained placental tissues and repair of genital lacerations
• Uterotonics (eg, oxytocin, prostaglandins)
• Sometimes surgical procedures
Intravascular volume is replenished with 0.9% saline up to 2 L IV; blood transfusion is used if this volume
of saline is inadequate. Hemostasis is attempted by bimanual uterine massage and IV oxytocin infusion,
and the uterus is explored for lacerations and retained placental tissues. The cervix and vagina are also
examined; lacerations are repaired. Bladder drainage via catheter can sometimes reduce uterine atony.
15-Methyl prostaglandin F
α
μ
g IM q 15 to 90 min up to 8 doses or methylergonovine 0.2 mg IM q 2
to 4 h (which may be followed by 0.2 mg po tid to qid for 1 wk) should be tried if excessive bleeding
continues during oxytocin infusion; during cesarean delivery, these drugs may be injected directly into the
myometrium. Prostaglandins should be avoided in women with asthma; methylergonovine should be
avoided in women with hypertension. Sometimes misoprostol 800 to 1000
μ
g rectally can be used to
increase uterine tone.
Uterine packing or placement of a Bakri balloon can sometimes provide tamponade. This silicone balloon
can hold up to 500 mL and withstand internal and external pressures of up to 300 mm Hg. If hemostasis
cannot be achieved, surgical placement of a B-Lynch suture (a suture used to compress the lower uterine
segment via multiple insertions), hypogastric artery ligation, or hysterectomy may be required. Uterine
rupture requires surgical repair.
Blood products are transfused as necessary, depending on the degree of blood loss and clinical evidence
of shock. Infusion of factor VIIa (50 to 100
μ
g/kg, as a slow IV bolus over 2 to 5 min) can produce
hemostasis in women with severe life-threatening hemorrhage. The dose is given q 2 to 3 h until
hemostasis occurs.
Prevention
Predisposing conditions (eg, uterine fibroids, polyhydramnios, multifetal pregnancy, a maternal bleeding
disorder, history of puerperal hemorrhage) are identified antepartum and, when possible, corrected. If
women have an unusual blood type, that blood type is made available. Careful, unhurried delivery with a
minimum of intervention is always wise.
After placental separation, oxytocin 10 units IM or dilute oxytocin infusion (10 or 20 units in 1000 mL of an
IV solution at 125 to 200 mL/h for 1 to 2 h) usually ensures uterine contraction and reduces blood loss.
After the placenta is delivered, it is thoroughly examined for completeness; if it is incomplete, the uterus is
manually explored and retained fragments are removed. Rarely, curettage is required. Uterine contraction
and amount of vaginal bleeding must be observed for 1 h after completion of the 3rd stage of labor.
Postterm Pregnancy
Postterm pregnancy refers to gestation that lasts ≥ 42 wk. Nonstress testing, a full or modified
biophysical profile, and often routine delivery are recommended at 41 wk.
Accurate gestational age estimation is essential in making a diagnosis of postterm pregnancy. In women
with regular, normal menstrual cycles, gestational age can be estimated based on the first day of the last
normal menstrual period. If dating is uncertain or inconsistent with menstrual dating, ultrasonography
early in gestation (up to 20 wk) is the most accurate with accepted variation of +/- 7 days. Later in
gestation, the variation increases to +/- 14 days at 20 to 30 wk gestation and +/- 21 days after 30 wk.
===PAGE:2859===
Postterm pregnancy increases risks for the woman and fetus. Risks include
• Abnormal fetal growth (macrosomia and dysmaturity syndrome)
• Oligohydramnios
• Meconium-stained amniotic fluid
• Nonreassuring fetal test results
• Fetal and neonatal death
• Dystocia (abnormal or difficult labor)
• Cesarean delivery
Most experts recommend that antenatal surveillance be initiated at 41 wk; it involves a modified
biophysical profile (nonstress testing and assessment of amniotic fluid volume) or a full biophysical profile
(assessment of amniotic fluid volume and fetal movement, tone, breathing, and heart rate). If there is
evidence of fetal compromise or oligohydramnios, delivery is required. For many obstetricians, the trend
is to induce labor ( in all pregnancies > 41 wk, particularly in patients with a favorable cervix.
Premature Rupture of Membranes
Rupture of membranes before onset of labor is considered premature. Diagnosis is clinical.
Delivery is sometimes indicated when gestational age is ≥ 34 wk or fetal lungs are mature and is
generally indicated for infection or fetal compromise.
Premature rupture of membranes (PROM) may occur at term (≥ 37 wk) or earlier (called preterm PROM if
< 37 wk). Preterm PROM predisposes to preterm delivery. PROM at any time increases risk of infection in
the woman (chorioamnionitis), neonate (sepsis), or both, as well as risk of abnormal fetal presentation
and abruptio placentae. Group B streptococci and
Escherichia coli
are common causes of infection.
Other organisms in the vagina may also cause infection. Prolonged preterm PROM before viability (at <
24 wk) increases risk of abnormal joint positioning and pulmonary hypoplasia.
The interval between PROM and onset of spontaneous labor (latent period) and delivery varies inversely
with gestational age. At term, > 90% of women with PROM begin labor within 24 h; at 32 to 34 wk, mean
latency period is about 4 days.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, unless complications occur, the only symptom is leakage or a sudden gush of fluid from the
vagina. Fever, heavy vaginal discharge, abdominal pain, and fetal tachycardia, particularly if out of
proportion to maternal temperature, strongly suggest chorioamnionitis.
Diagnosis
• Visible amniotic fluid or meconium
• Evaluation of vaginal fluid showing ferning or alkalinity (blue color) on Nitrazine paper
• Sometimes ultrasonography showing oligohydramnios
Sterile speculum examination is done to verify PROM, estimate cervical dilation, collect amniotic fluid for
fetal maturity tests, and obtain samples for cervical cultures. Digital pelvic examination, particularly
multiple examinations, increases risk of infection and is best avoided unless imminent delivery is
anticipated. Fetal position should be assessed. If subclinical intra-amniotic infection is a concern,
amniocentesis (obtaining amniotic fluid using sterile technique) can confirm this infection.
===PAGE:2860===
Diagnosis is assumed if amniotic fluid appears to be escaping from the cervix or if the vernix or meconium
is visible. Other less accurate indicators include vaginal fluid that ferns when dried on a glass slide or
turns Nitrazine paper blue (indicating alkalinity and hence amniotic fluid; normal vaginal fluid is acidic).
Ultrasonography showing oligohydramnios suggests the diagnosis.
If the diagnosis is questionable, indigo carmine dye can be instilled using ultrasound-guided
amniocentesis. Appearance of the blue dye on a vaginal tampon or peripad confirms the diagnosis.
If the fetus is viable, women are typically admitted to the hospital for daily fetal assessment.
Treatment
• Delivery if there is fetal compromise, infection, or possibly gestational age > 34 wk or fetal lung maturity
• Otherwise, pelvic rest, close monitoring, antibiotics, and sometimes corticosteroids
Management requires balancing risk of infection when delivery is delayed with risks due to fetal
immaturity when delivery is immediate. No one strategy is correct, but generally, signs of fetal compromise
or infection (eg, persistently nonreassuring fetal testing results, uterine tenderness plus fever) should
prompt delivery. Otherwise, delivery can be delayed for a variable period if fetal lungs are still immature or
if labor could start spontaneously (ie, later in the pregnancy). Induction of labor is recommended when
gestational age is > 34 wk. When appropriate management is unclear, amniotic fluid tests can be done to
assess fetal lung maturity and thus guide management; the sample may be obtained from the vagina or
by amniocentesis.
When expectant management is used, the woman's activity is limited to modified bed rest and complete
pelvic rest. BP and temperature must be measured ≥ 3 times/day. Antibiotics (usually 48 h of IV ampicillin
and erythromycin, followed by 5 days of oral amoxicillin and erythromycin) are given; they lengthen the
latency period and reduce risk of neonatal morbidity. In pregnancies of < 32 wk, corticosteroids should be
given to accelerate fetal lung maturity (. Their use between 32 and 34 wk is controversial.
Use of tocolytics (drugs that stop uterine contractions) to manage preterm PROM is controversial; their
use must be determined case by case.
Preterm Labor
Labor (contractions resulting in cervical change) that begins before 37 wk gestation is
considered preterm. Risk factors include premature rupture of membranes, infection, cervical
incompetence, prior preterm birth, multifetal pregnancy, and placental abnormalities. Diagnosis
is clinical. Causes are identified and treated if possible. Management typically includes bed rest,
tocolytics (if labor persists), and corticosteroids (if gestational age is < 34 wk). Antistreptococcal
antibiotics are given pending negative anovaginal culture results.
Preterm labor may be triggered by premature rupture of membranes, chorioamnionitis (, or
another ascending uterine infection; group B streptococci are a common cause of such infections.
Preterm labor may also be due to multifetal pregnancy, fetal or placental abnormalities, uterine
abnormalities, pyelonephritis, or some sexually transmitted diseases; a cause may not be evident. Prior
preterm delivery and cervical incompetence increase the risk.
Cervical cultures are done to check for causes suggested by clinical findings. Anovaginal cultures for
group B streptococci are done, and prophylaxis is appropriately initiated. Most women with a presumptive
diagnosis of preterm labor do not progress to delivery.
Treatment
• Antibiotics for group B streptococci, pending anovaginal culture results
• Tocolytics
===PAGE:2861===
• Corticosteroids if < 34 wk
Bed rest and hydration are commonly used initially.
Antibiotics effective against group B streptococci are given pending negative anovaginal cultures.
Choices include the following:
• For women without penicillin allergy: Penicillin G 5 million units IV followed by 2.5 million units q 4 h or
ampicillin 2 g IV followed by 1 g q 4 h
• For women with penicillin allergy but a low risk of anaphylaxis (eg, maculopapular rash with prior use):
Cefazolin 2 g IV followed by 1 g q 8 h
• For women with penicillin allergy and an increased risk of anaphylaxis (eg, bronchospasm,
angioneurotic edema, or hypotension with prior use, particularly within 30 min of exposure):
Clindamycin 900 mg IV q 8 h or erythromycin 500 mg IV q 6 h if anovaginal cultures show susceptibility;
if cultures document resistance or results are unavailable, vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h
If the cervix dilates, tocolytics (drugs that stop uterine contractions) can usually delay labor for at least 48
h so that corticosteroids can be given to reduce risks to the fetus. Tocolytics include Mg sulfate,
β
-
adrenergic agonists (eg, terbutaline), Ca channel blockers, and prostaglandin inhibitors. No tocolytic is
clearly the first-line choice; choice should be individualized to minimize adverse effects. Mg sulfate is
commonly used and is typically well tolerated (. Prostaglandin inhibitors may cause transient
oligohydramnios. They are contraindicated after 32 wk gestation because they may cause premature
narrowing or closure of the ductus arteriosus.
If the fetus is < 34 wk, women are given corticosteroids: betamethasone 12 mg IM q 24 h for 2 doses or
dexamethasone 6 mg IM q 12 h for 4 doses unless delivery is imminent. These corticosteroids accelerate
maturation of fetal lungs and decrease risk of neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, intracranial
bleeding, and mortality.
A progestin may be recommended in future pregnancies for women who have a preterm delivery to
reduce the risk of recurrence.
Protracted Labor
Protracted labor is abnormally slow cervical dilation or fetal descent during active labor.
Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with oxytocin, operative vaginal delivery, or cesarean
delivery.
Active labor usually occurs after the cervix dilates to ≥ 4 cm. Normally, cervical dilation and descent of the
head into the pelvis proceed at a rate of at least 1 cm/h and more quickly in multiparous women.
Etiology
Protracted labor may result from fetopelvic disproportion (the fetus cannot fit through the maternal pelvis),
which can occur because the maternal pelvis is abnormally small or because the fetus is abnormally large
or abnormally positioned (fetal dystocia).
Another cause is uterine contractions that are too weak or infrequent (hypotonic uterine dysfunction) or,
occasionally, too strong or close together (hypertonic uterine dysfunction).
Diagnosis
• Assessment of pelvic dimensions, fetal size and position, and uterine contractions
• Response to treatment
===PAGE:2862===
Diagnosis is clinical. The cause must be identified because it determines treatment. Assessing fetal and
pelvic dimensions and fetal position ( can sometimes determine whether the cause is
fetopelvic disproportion. For example, fetal weight > 5000 g (> 4500 g in diabetic women) suggests
fetopelvic disproportion. Uterine dysfunction is diagnosed by evaluating the strength and frequency of
contractions via palpation of the uterus or an intrauterine pressure catheter.
Diagnosis is often based on response to treatment.
Treatment
• Oxytocin
• Cesarean delivery for fetopelvic disproportion or intractable hypotonic dysfunction
• Sometimes operative delivery during the 2nd stage of labor
If the 1st or 2nd stage of labor proceeds too slowly and fetal weight is < 5000 g (< 4500 g in diabetic
women), labor can be augmented with oxytocin, which is the treatment for hypotonic dysfunction. If
normal progress is restored, labor can then proceed. If not, fetopelvic disproportion or intractable
hypotonic dysfunction may be present, and cesarean delivery may be required. In the 2nd stage of labor,
forceps or vacuum extraction may be appropriate after evaluation of fetal size, presentation, and station
(≥ +2 cm) and evaluation of the maternal pelvis. Hypertonic uterine dysfunction is difficult to treat, but
repositioning, short-acting tocolytics (eg, terbutaline 0.25 mg IV once), discontinuation of oxytocin if it is
being used, and analgesics may help.
Umbilical Cord Prolapse
Umbilical cord prolapse is abnormal position of the cord in front of the fetal presenting part, so
that the fetus compresses the cord during labor, causing fetal hypoxemia.
The prolapsed umbilical cord may be contained within the uterus (occult) or may protrude into the vagina
(overt). Both are uncommon.
In
occult prolapse,
the cord is often compressed by a shoulder or the head. A fetal heart rate pattern that
suggests cord compression and progression to hypoxemia (eg, severe bradycardia, severe variable
accelerations) may be the only clue. Changing the woman's position may relieve pressure on the cord;
however, if the abnormal fetal heart rate pattern persists, immediate cesarean delivery is necessary.
Overt prolapse
occurs with ruptured membranes and is more common with breech presentation or a
transverse lie. Overt prolapse can also occur with vertex presentation, particularly if membranes rupture
(spontaneously or iatrogenically) before the head is engaged. Treatment begins with gently lifting the
presenting part and continuously holding it off the prolapsed cord to restore fetal blood flow while
immediate cesarean delivery is done. Placing the woman in the knee-to-chest position and giving her
terbutaline 0.25 mg IV once may help by reducing contractions.
Uterine Rupture
Uterine rupture is rare. It occurs most often along healed scar lines in women who have had prior
cesarean deliveries. Other predisposing factors include congenital uterine abnormalities, trauma, and
other uterine surgical procedures such as myomectomies. Uterine rupture can occur before or during
labor.
Causes of uterine rupture include uterine overdistention (multiple gestation, polyhydramnios, fetal
anomalies), external or internal fetal version, iatrogenic perforation, excessive use of uterotonics, and
failure to recognize labor dystocia with excessive uterine contractions against a lower uterine restriction
ring. Use of prostaglandins in women who attempt a trial of labor after cesarean delivery increases the
risk of uterine rupture and is not recommended.
===PAGE:2863===
Symptoms and signs include fetal bradycardia, evidence of hypovolemia, loss of fetal station (detected
during cervical examination), and severe or constant abdominal pain.
Diagnosis is confirmed by laparotomy. If the fetus has been expelled from the uterus and is located within
the peritoneal cavity, morbidity and mortality increase significantly.
Treatment is immediate laparotomy with cesarean delivery and, if necessary, hysterectomy.
===PAGE:2864===
Chapter 267. Postpartum Care
Introduction
Clinical manifestations during the puerperium (6-wk period after delivery) generally reflect reversal of the
physiologic changes that occurred during pregnancy (see
Table 267-1
). These changes are mild and temporary and should not be confused with pathologic
conditions.
Clinical parameters:
Within the first 24 h, the woman's pulse rate begins to drop, and her temperature
may be slightly elevated. Vaginal discharge is grossly bloody (lochia rubra) for 3 to 4 days, then becomes
pale brown (lochia serosa), and after the next 10 to 12 days, it changes to yellowish white (lochia alba).
About 1 to 2 wk after delivery, eschar from the placental site sloughs off and bleeding occurs; bleeding is
usually self-limited. Total blood loss is about 250 mL; comfortably fitting intravaginal tampons (changed
frequently) or external pads may be used to absorb it. Tampons should not be used if they might inhibit
healing of perineal or vaginal lacerations. Prolonged bleeding ( may be a sign of infection or
retained placenta
[Table 267-1.
Normal Postpartum Changes]
and should be investigated. The uterus involutes progressively; after 5 to 7 days, it is firm and no longer
tender, extending midway between the symphysis and umbilicus. By 2 wk, it is no longer palpable
abdominally and typically by 4 to 6 wk returns to a prepregancy size. Contractions of the involuting
uterus, if painful (afterpains), may require analgesics.
Laboratory parameters:
During the first week, urine temporarily increases in volume; care must be
taken when interpreting urinalysis results as lochia can interfere. Because blood volume is redistributed,
Hct may fluctuate, although it tends to remain in the prepregnancy range if women do not hemorrhage.
Because WBC count increases during labor, marked leukocytosis (up to 20,000 to 30,000/
μ
L) occurs in
the first 24 h postpartum; WBC count returns to normal within 1 wk. Plasma fibrinogen and ESR remain
elevated during the first week postpartum.
Initial Management
Risk of infection, hemorrhage, and pain must be minimized. Women are typically observed for at least 1 h
after the 3rd stage of labor and for several hours longer if general anesthesia was used during delivery
(eg, by forceps, vacuum extractor, or cesarean).
Hemorrhage:
Minimizing bleeding is the first priority; measures include
• Uterine massage
• Sometimes parenteral oxytocin
During the first hour after the 3rd stage of labor, the uterus is massaged periodically to ensure that it
contracts, preventing excessive bleeding. If the uterus does not remain contracted after massage alone,
oxytocin 10 units IM or a dilute oxytocin IV infusion (10 or 20 (up to 80) units/1000 mL of IV fluid) at 125 to
200 mL/h is given immediately after delivery of the placenta. The drug is continued until the uterus is firm;
then it is decreased or stopped. Oxytocin should not be given as an IV bolus because severe hypotension
may occur.
For all women, O
, type O-negative blood or blood tested for compatibility, and IV fluids must be available
during the recovery period. If blood loss was excessive, a CBC to verify that women are not anemic is
required before discharge. If blood loss was not excessive, CBC is not required.
Diet and activity:
After the first 24 h, recovery is rapid. A regular diet should be offered as soon as
women desire food. Full ambulation is encouraged as soon as possible.
===PAGE:2865===
Exercise recommendations are individualized depending on presence of other maternal disorders or
complications. Usually, exercises to strengthen abdominal muscles can be started once the discomfort of
delivery has subsided, typically within 1 day for women who deliver vaginally and later for those who
deliver by cesarean. Curl-ups, done in bed with the hips and knees flexed, tighten only abdominal
muscles, usually without causing backache. Whether pelvic floor (eg, Kegel) exercises are helpful is
unclear, but these exercises can begin as soon as the patient is ready.
Perineal care:
If delivery was uncomplicated, showering and bathing are allowed, but vaginal douching
is prohibited in the early puerperium. The vulva should be cleaned from front to back. Immediately after
delivery, ice packs may help reduce pain and edema at the site of an episiotomy or repaired laceration;
later, warm sitz baths can be used several times a day.
Analgesics:
NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen 400 mg po q 4 to 6 h, work effectively on both perineal
discomfort and uterine cramping. Acetaminophen 500 to 1000 mg po q 4 to 6 h can also be used.
Acetaminophen and ibuprofen appear to be relatively safe during breast-feeding. Many other analgesics
are secreted in breast milk. After surgery or repair of significant laceration, women may require opioids to
relieve discomfort.
Bladder and bowel function:
Urine retention, bladder overdistention, and catheterization should be
avoided if possible. Rapid diuresis may occur, especially when oxytocin is stopped. Voiding must be
encouraged and monitored to prevent asymptomatic bladder overfilling. A midline mass palpable in the
suprapubic region or elevation of the uterine fundus above the umbilicus suggests bladder overdistention.
If overdistention occurs, catheterization is necessary to promptly relieve discomfort and to prevent longterm urinary dysfunction.
Women are encouraged to defecate before leaving the hospital, although with early discharge, this
recommendation is often impractical. If defecation has not occurred within 3 days, a mild cathartic (eg,
psyllium, docusate, bisacodyl) can be given. Avoiding constipation can prevent or help relieve existing
hemorrhoids, which can also be treated with warm sitz baths. Women with an extensive perineal
laceration repair involving the rectum or anal sphincter can be given stool softeners (eg, docusate).
Regional (spinal or epidural) anesthesia may delay defecation and spontaneous urination, in part by
delaying ambulation.
Vaccination and Rh desensitization:
Women who are seronegative for rubella should be vaccinated
against rubella on the day of discharge. If women have not yet received tetanus-diphtheria-acellular
pertussis (Tdap) vaccination and have not had a tetanus and diphtheria toxoids (Td) booster in ≥ 2 yr,
they should be given Tdap before discharge from the hospital or birthing center, regardless of their
breast-feeding status.
If women with Rh-negative blood have an infant with Rh-positive blood but are not sensitized, they should
be given Rh
(D) immune globulin 300
μ
g IM within 72 h of delivery to prevent sensitization (.
Breast engorgement:
Milk accumulation may cause painful breast engorgement during early lactation.
Breastfeeding helps reduce engorgement. Expressing milk by hand in a warm shower or using a breast
pump between feedings can relieve pressure temporarily. However, doing so tends to encourage
lactation, so it should be done only when necessary.
For women who are not going to breastfeed, firm support of the breasts is recommended to suppress
lactation; gravity stimulates the let-down reflex and encourages milk flow. For many women, tight binding
of the breasts, cold packs, and analgesics as needed, followed by firm support, effectively control
temporary symptoms while lactation is being suppressed. Suppression of lactation with drugs is not
recommended.
Mental disorders:
Transient depression (baby blues) is very common during the first week after delivery.
Symptoms are typically mild and usually subside by 7 to 10 days. Physicians should ask women about
symptoms of depression before and after delivery and be alert to recognizing symptoms of depression,
which may resemble the normal effects of new motherhood (eg, fatigue, difficulty concentrating). They
===PAGE:2866===
should also advise women to contact them if depressive symptoms continue for > 2 wk or interfere with
daily activities or if women have suicidal or homicidal thoughts. In such cases, postpartum depression
( or another mental disorder may be present. A preexisting mental disorder is likely to recur or
worsen during the puerperium, so affected women should be monitored closely.
Management at Home
The woman and infant can be discharged within 24 to 48 h postpartum; many family-centered obstetric
units discharge them as early as 6 h postpartum if major anesthesia was not used and no complications
occurred. Serious problems are rare, but a home visit, office visit, or phone call within 24 to 48 h is
necessary. A routine postpartum visit is usually scheduled at 6 wk for women with an un-complicated
vaginal delivery. If delivery was cesarean or other complications occurred, follow-up may be scheduled
sooner.
Normal activities may be resumed as soon as the woman feels ready.
Intercourse may be resumed as soon as desired and comfortable; however, a laceration or episiotomy
repair must be allowed to heal first.
Family planning:
Pregnancy must be delayed for 1 mo if women were vaccinated against rubella at
hospital discharge; also, subsequent obstetric outcomes are improved by delaying conception for at least
6 mo but preferably 18 mo after delivery. To minimize the chance of pregnancy, women should start using
contraception as soon as they are discharged. If women are not breastfeeding, ovulation usually occurs
about 4 to 6 wk postpartum, 2 wk before the first menses. However, ovulation can occur earlier; women
have conceived as early as 2 wk postpartum. Women who are breastfeeding tend to ovulate and
menstruate later, usually closer to 6 mo postpartum, although a few ovulate and menstruate (and become
pregnant) as quickly as those who are not breastfeeding.
Women should choose a method of contraception based on the specific risks and benefits of various
options. Breastfeeding status affects choice of contraceptive. For breast-feeding women, nonhormonal
methods are usually preferred; among hormonal methods, progestin-only oral contraceptives, depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate injections, and progestin implants are preferred because they do not affect
milk production. Estrogenprogesterone contraceptives can interfere with milk production and should not
be initiated until milk production is well established. Combined estrogen-progestin vaginal rings can be
used after 4 wk postpartum if women are not breastfeeding.
A diaphragm should be fitted only after complete involution of the uterus, at 6 to 8 wk; meanwhile, foams,
jellies, and condoms should be used. Intrauterine devices are typically best placed after 4 to 6 wk
postpartum to minimize risk of expulsion.
Mastitis
Mastitis is painful inflammation of the breast, usually accompanied by infection.
Fever later in the puerperium is frequently due to mastitis. Staphylococcal species are the most common
causes. Symptoms may include high fever, erythema, induration, tenderness, pain, swelling, and warmth
to the touch. Mastitis is different from the pain and cracking of nipples that frequently accompanies the
start of breastfeeding. Breast abscesses are very rare and occasionally caused by methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
.
Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment
• Antistaphylococcal antibiotics
Treatment includes encouragement of fluid intake and antibiotics aimed at
Staphylococcus aureus
, the
most common causative pathogen. Examples are dicloxacillin 500 mg po q 6 h for 7 to 10 days and, for
===PAGE:2867===
women allergic to penicillin, erythromycin 250 mg po q 6 h. If women do not improve and do not have an
abscess, vancomycin 1 g IV q 12 h or cefotetan 1 to 2 g IV q 12 h to cover resistant organisms should be
considered. Breastfeeding should be continued during treatment because treatment includes emptying
the affected breast.
Breast abscesses are treated mainly with incision and drainage. Antibiotics aimed at
S. aureus
are often
used.
It is not clear whether antibiotics aimed at methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
are necessary for treatment of
mastitis or breast abscess.
Puerperal Endometritis
Puerperal endometritis is uterine infection, typically caused by bacteria ascending from the
lower genital or GI tract. Symptoms are uterine tenderness, abdominal or pelvic pain, fever,
malaise, and sometimes discharge. Diagnosis is clinical, rarely aided by culture. Treatment is
with broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg, clindamycin plus gentamicin).
Incidence of postpartum endometritis is affected mainly by the mode of delivery:
• Vaginal deliveries: 1 to 3%
• Scheduled caesarean deliveries (done before labor starts): 5 to 15%
• Unscheduled caesarean deliveries (done after labor starts): 15 to 20%
Patient characteristics also affect incidence.
Etiology
Endometritis may develop after chorioamnionitis during labor or postpartum. Predisposing conditions
include
• Prolonged rupture of the membranes
• Internal fetal monitoring
• Prolonged labor
• Cesarean delivery
• Repeated digital examination
• Retention of placental fragments in the uterus
• Postpartum hemorrhage
• Colonization of the lower genital tract
• Anemia
• Bacterial vaginosis
• Young maternal age
• Low socioeconomic status
Infection tends to be polymicrobial; the most common pathogens include
===PAGE:2868===
• Gram-positive cocci (predominantly group
B streptococci, Staphylococcus epidermidis
, and
Enterococcus
sp)
• Anaerobes (predominantly peptostreptococci,
Bacteroides
sp, and
Prevotella
sp)
• Gram-negative bacteria (predominantly
Gardnerella vaginalis, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella
pneumoniae
, and
Proteus mirabilis
).
Uncommonly, peritonitis, pelvic abscess, pelvic thrombophlebitis (with risk of pulmonary embolism), or a
combination develop. Rarely, septic shock and its sequelae, including death, occur.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, the first symptoms are lower abdominal pain and uterine tenderness, followed by fever—most
commonly within the first 24 to 72 h postpartum. Chills, headache, malaise, and anorexia are common.
Sometimes the only symptom is a low-grade fever.
Pallor, tachycardia, and leukocytosis usually occur, and the uterus is soft, large, and tender. Discharge
may be decreased or profuse and malodorous, with or without blood. When parametria are affected, pain
and fever are severe; the large, tender uterus is indurated at the base of the broad ligaments, extending
to the pelvic walls or posterior cul-de-sac. Pelvic abscess may manifest as a palpable mass separate from
and adjacent to the uterus.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Usually tests to exclude other causes (eg, urinalysis and urine culture)
Diagnosis within 24 h of delivery is based on clinical findings of pain, tenderness, and temperature > 38°
C after delivery. After the first 24 h, puerperal endometritis is presumed present if no other cause is
apparent in
patients with temperature ≥ 38° C on 2 successive days. Other causes of fever and lower
abdominal symptoms include UTI, wound infection, septic pelvic thrombophlebitis, and perineal infection.
Uterine tenderness is often difficult to distinguish from incisional tenderness in patients who have had a
cesarean delivery.
Patients with low-grade fever and no abdominal pain are evaluated for other occult causes, such as
atelectasis, breast engorgement or infection, UTI, and leg thrombophlebitis. Fever due to breast
engorgement tends to remain ≤ 39° C. If temperature abruptly rises after 2 or 3 days of low-grade fever,
the cause is probably an infection rather than breast engorgement.
Urinalysis and urine culture are usually done.
Endometrial cultures are rarely indicated because specimens collected through the cervix are almost
always contaminated by vaginal and cervical flora. Endometrial cultures should be done only when
endometritis is refractory to routine antibiotic regimens and no other cause of infection is obvious; sterile
technique with a speculum is used to avoid vaginal contamination, and the sample is sent for aerobic and
anaerobic cultures.
Blood cultures are rarely indicated and should be done only when endometritis is refractory to routine
antibiotic regimens or clinical findings suggest septicemia. If fever persists for > 48 h (some clinicians use
a 72-h cutoff) after endometritis is adequately treated, other causes such as pelvic abscess and pelvic
thrombophlebitis should be considered. Abdominal and pelvic imaging, usually by CT, is sensitive for
abscess but detects pelvic thrombophlebitis only if the clots are large. If imaging shows neither
abnormality, a trial of heparin is typically begun to treat presumed pelvic thrombophlebitis, usually a
diagnosis of exclusion. A therapeutic response confirms the diagnosis.
===PAGE:2869===
Treatment
• Clindamycin plus gentamicin, with or without ampicillin
Treatment is a broad-spectrum antibiotic regimen given IV until women are afebrile for 48 h. The first-line
choice is clindamycin 900 mg q 8 h plus gentamicin 1.5 mg/kg q 8 h or 5 mg/kg once/day; ampicillin 1 g q
6 h is added if enterococcal infection is suspected or if no improvement occurs by 48 h. Continuing
treatment with oral antibiotics is not necessary.
Prevention
Preventing or minimizing predisposing factors is essential. Appropriate hand washing should be
encouraged. Vaginal delivery cannot be sterile, but aseptic techniques are used. Prophylactic antibiotics
given when delivery is cesarean can reduce risk of endometritis by up to three fourths.
Postpartum Pyelonephritis
Pyelonephritis is bacterial infection of the renal parenchyma.
Pyelonephritis may occur postpartum if bacteria ascend from the bladder. The infection may begin as
asymptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy and is sometimes associated with bladder catheterization to
relieve urinary distention during or after labor. The causative organism is usually a type of coliform
bacteria (eg,
Escherichia coli
).
Symptoms include fever, flank pain, general malaise, and, occasionally, painful urination.
Diagnosis is by urinalysis and urine culture (.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
Initial treatment is ceftriaxone 1 to 2 g IV q 12 to 24 h alone or ampicillin 1 g IV q 6 h plus gentamicin 1.5
mg/kg IV q 8 h until women are afebrile for 48 h. Sensitivities with culture should be checked. Treatment is
adjusted accordingly and continued for a total of 7 to 14 days; oral antibiotics are used after the initial IV
antibiotics. Women should be encouraged to consume large amounts of liquids.
A urine culture should be repeated 6 to 8 wk after delivery to verify cure. If episodes of pyelonephritis
recur, imaging should be considered to look for calculi or congenital malformations. Imaging during
pregnancy is usually with ultrasonography; imaging after pregnancy is usually with contrast CT.
Postpartum Depression
Postpartum depression is depressive symptoms that last > 2 wk after delivery and that interfere
with activities of daily living.
Postpartum depression occurs in 10 to 15% of women after delivery. Although every woman is at risk,
women with the following are at higher risk:
•
Baby blues
• Prior episode of postpartum depression
• Prior diagnosis of depression
• Family history of depression
• Significant life stressors
===PAGE:2870===
• Lack of support (eg, from partner or family members)
• Perimenstrual mood disorders
• Poor obstetric outcomes
The exact etiology is unknown; however, prior depression is the major risk, and hormonal changes during
the puerperium, sleep deprivation, and genetic susceptibility may contribute.
Unlike the baby blues, which typically lasts 2 to 3 days (up to 2 wk) and is relatively mild, postpartum
depression lasts > 2 wk and is disabling, interfering with activities of daily living.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms may include
• Extreme sadness
• Uncontrollable crying
• Insomnia or increased sleep
• Loss of appetite or overeating
• Irritability
• Headaches and body aches and pains
• Extreme fatigue
• Unrealistic worries about or disinterest in the baby
• Fear of harming the baby
• Suicidal ideation
• Anxiety
Typically, symptoms develop insidiously over 3 mo, but onset can be more sudden. Postpartum
depression interferes with women's ability to care for themselves and the baby.
Psychosis rarely develops, but postpartum depression increases the risk of suicide and infanticide, which
are the most severe complications.
Women may not bond with their infant, resulting in emotional, social, and cognitive problems in the child
later.
Fathers are at increased risk of depression, and marital stress is increased.
Without treatment, postpartum depression can resolve spontaneously or become chronic depression.
Risk of recurrence is about 1 in 3 to 4.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes formal depression scales
===PAGE:2871===
Early diagnosis and treatment substantially improve outcomes for women and their infant. Because of
cultural and social factors, women may not volunteer symptoms of depression, so they should be asked
about such symptoms before and after delivery. They also should be taught to recognize symptoms of
depression, which they may mistake for the normal effects of new motherhood (eg, fatigue, difficulty
concentrating). Women can be screened at the postpartum visit for postpartum depression using various
depression scales (eg, Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale, Postpartum Depression Prediction
Inventory, Postpartum Depression Screening Scale).
Postpartum depression (or other serious mental disorders) should be suspected if women have the
following:
• Symptoms for > 2 wk
• Symptoms that interfere with daily activities
• Suicidal or homicidal thoughts (women should be asked specifically about such thoughts)
• Hallucinations, delusions, or psychotic behavior
Treatment
Treatment includes antidepressants and psychotherapy. Exercise therapy, light therapy, massage therapy,
acupuncture, and
ω
-3 fatty acid supplementation have shown some benefit in small studies.
===PAGE:2872===
19 - Pediatrics
Chapter 268. Approach to the Care of Normal Infants and Children
Introduction
Routine care for infants and children aims to promote healthy development through education, routine
vaccination, and early detection and treatment of disease.
Evaluation and Care of the Normal Neonate
Hand washing is critical for all personnel to prevent transmission of infection.
Active participation in the birth by the mother and her partner helps them adapt to parenting.
The First Few Hours
Immediately at delivery, the neonate's respiratory effort, heart rate, color, tone, and reflex irritability should
be assessed; all are key components of the Apgar score assigned at 1 min and 5 min after birth (see
Table 274-2
. Apgar scores between 8 and 10 indicate that the neonate is making a smooth
transition to extrauterine life; scores ≤ 7 at 5 min (particularly if sustained beyond 10 min) are linked to
higher neonatal morbidity and mortality rates. Many normal neonates have cyanosis 1 min after birth that
clears by 5 min. Cyanosis that does not clear may indicate congenital cardiopulmonary anomalies or CNS
depression.
In addition to Apgar scoring, neonates should be evaluated for gross deformities (eg, clubfoot,
polydactyly) and other important abnormalities (eg, heart murmurs). The evaluation should ideally be
done under a radiant warmer with the family close by.
Preventive interventions include administration into both eyes of an antimicrobial agent (eg, 0.5%
erythromycin 1 cm ribbon, 1% tetracycline 1 cm ribbon, 1% silver nitrate solution 2 drops; in some
countries, 2.5% povidone iodine drops) to prevent gonococcal and chlamydial ophthalmia and
administration of vitamin K 1 mg IM to prevent hemorrhagic disease of the newborn.
Subsequently, the neonate is bathed, wrapped, and brought to the family. The head should be covered
with a cap to prevent heat loss. Rooming-in and early breastfeeding should be encouraged so the family
can get to know the baby and can receive guidance from staff members during the hospital stay.
Breastfeeding is more likely to be successful when the family is given frequent and adequate support.
The First Few Days
Physical Examination
A thorough physical examination should be done within 24 h. Doing the examination with the mother and
other family members present allows them to ask questions and the clinician to point out physical findings
and provide anticipatory guidance.
Basic measurements include length, weight, and head circumference (. Length is measured
from crown to heel; normal values are based on gestational age and should be plotted on a standard
growth chart. When gestational age is uncertain or when the infant seems large or small for age, the
gestational age can be precisely determined using physical and neuromuscular findings (see
Fig. 268-1
). These methods are typically accurate to ± 2 wk.
Many clinicians begin with examination of the heart and lungs, followed by a systematic head-to-toe
examination, looking particularly for signs of birth trauma and congenital abnormalities.
Cardiorespiratory system:
The heart and lungs are evaluated when the infant is quiet.
===PAGE:2873===
The clinician should identify where the heart sounds are loudest to exclude dextrocardia. Heart rate
(normal: 100 to 160 beats/min) and rhythm are checked. Rhythm should be regular, although an irregular
rhythm from premature atrial or ventricular contractions is not uncommon. A murmur heard in the first 24 h
is most commonly caused by a patent ductus arteriosus. Daily heart examination confirms the
disappearance of this murmur, usually within 3 days. Femoral pulses are checked and compared with
brachial pulses. A weak or delayed femoral pulse suggests aortic coarctation or other left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction. Central cyanosis suggests congenital heart disease, pulmonary disease, or
sepsis.
The respiratory system is evaluated by counting respirations over a full minute because breathing in
neonates is irregular; normal rate is 40 to 60 breaths/min. The chest wall should be examined for
symmetry, and lung sounds should be equal throughout. Grunting, nasal flaring, and retractions are signs
of respiratory distress.
[Fig. 268-1.
Assessment of gestational age—new Ballard score.]
Head and neck:
In a vertex delivery, the head is commonly molded with overriding of the cranial bones at
the sutures and some swelling and ecchymosis of the scalp (caput succedaneum). In a breech delivery,
the head has less molding, with swelling and ecchymosis occurring in the presenting part (ie, buttocks,
genitals, or feet). The fontanelles vary in diameter from a fingertip breadth to several centimeters. A large
anterior fontanelle may be a sign of hypothyroidism.
A cephalohematoma is a common finding; blood accumulates between the periosteum and the bone,
producing a swelling that does not cross suture lines. It may occur over one or both parietal bones and
occasionally over
the occiput. Cephalohematomas usually are not evident until soft-tissue edema
subsides; they gradually disappear over several months.
Head size and shape are inspected to detect congenital hydrocephalus.
Numerous genetic syndromes cause craniofacial abnormalities (. The face is inspected for
symmetry and normal development (particularly of the mandible, palate, pinnae, and external auditory
canals).
The eyes may be easier to examine the day after birth because the birth process causes swelling around
the eyelids. Eyes should be examined for the red reflex; its absence may indicate glaucoma, cataracts, or
retinoblastoma. Subconjunctival hemorrhages are common and caused by forces exerted during delivery.
Low-set ears may indicate genetic anomalies, including trisomy 21. Malformed ears, external auditory
canals, or both may be present in many genetic syndromes. Clinicians should look for external ear pits or
tags, which are sometimes associated with hearing loss and kidney abnormalities.
The clinician should inspect and palpate the palate to check for soft or hard palate defects. Orofacial
clefts are among the most common congenital defects. Some neonates are born with an epulis (a benign
hamartoma of the gum), which, if large enough, can cause feeding difficulties and may obstruct the
airway. These lesions can be removed; they do not recur. Some neonates are born with primary or natal
teeth. Natal teeth do not have roots and may need to be removed to prevent them from falling out and
being aspirated. Inclusion cysts called Epstein's pearls may occur on the roof of the mouth.
When examining the neck, the clinician must lift the chin to look for abnormalities such as cystic
hygromas, goiters, and branchial arch remnants. Torticollis can be caused by a sternocleidomastoid
hematoma due to birth trauma.
Abdomen and pelvis:
The abdomen should be round and symmetric. A scaphoid abdomen may indicate
a diaphragmatic hernia, allowing the intestine to migrate through it to the chest cavity in utero; pulmonary
hypoplasia and postnatal respiratory distress may result. An asymmetric abdomen suggests an abdominal
mass. Splenomegaly suggests congenital infection or hemolytic anemia. The kidneys may be palpable
with deep palpation; the left is more easily palpated than the right. Large kidneys may indicate
obstruction, tumor, or cystic disease. The liver is normally palpable 1 to 2 cm below the costal margin. An
===PAGE:2874===
umbilical hernia, due to a weakness of the umbilical ring musculature, is common but rarely significant.
The presence of a normally placed, patent anus should be confirmed.
In boys, the penis should be examined for hypospadias or epispadias. In term boys, the testes should be
in the scrotum. Scrotal swelling may signify hydrocele, inguinal hernia, or, more rarely, testicular torsion.
With hydrocele, the scrotum transilluminates. Torsion, a surgical emergency, causes ecchymosis and
firmness.
In term girls, the labia are prominent. Mucoid vaginal and serosanguineous secretions (pseudomenses)
are normal; they result from exposure to maternal hormones in utero and withdrawal at birth. A small tag
of hymenal tissue at the posterior fourchette, believed to be due to maternal hormonal stimulation, is
sometimes present but disappears over a few weeks.
Ambiguous genitals (intersex) may indicate several uncommon disorders (eg, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia; 5
α
-reductase deficiency; Klinefelter's, Turner's, or Swyer syndrome). Referral to an
endocrinologist is indicated for evaluation and a discussion with the family about benefits and risks of
immediate vs delayed sex assignment.
Musculoskeletal system:
The extremities are examined for deformities, amputations (incomplete or
missing limbs), contractures, and maldevelopment. Brachial nerve palsy due to birth trauma may manifest
as limited or no spontaneous arm movement on the affected side, sometimes with adduction and internal
rotation of the shoulder and pronation of the forearm.
The spine is inspected for signs of spina bifida, particularly exposure of the meninges, spinal cord, or
both (meningomyelocele).
Orthopedic examination includes palpation of long bones for birth trauma (particularly clavicle fracture)
but focuses on detection of hip dysplasia. Risk factors for dysplasia include female sex, breech position in
utero, twin gestation, and family history. The Barlow and Ortolani maneuvers are used to check for
dysplasia. These maneuvers must be done when neonates are quiet. The position is the same for both:
Neonates are placed on their back with their hips and knees flexed to 90° (the feet will be off the bed),
feet facing the clinician, who places an index finger on the greater trochanter and a thumb on the lesser
trochanter.
For the Barlow maneuver, the clinician adducts the hip (ie, the knee is drawn across the body) while
pushing the thigh posteriorly. A
clunk indicates that the head of the femur has moved out of the
acetabulum; the Ortolani maneuver then relocates it and confirms the diagnosis.
For the Ortolani maneuver, the hip is returned to the starting position; then the hip being tested is
abducted (ie, the knee is moved away from the midline toward the examining table into a frog-leg position)
and gently pulled anteriorly. A palpable clunk of the femoral head with abduction signifies movement of an
already dislocated femoral head into the acetabulum and constitutes a positive test for hip dysplasia.
The maneuver may be falsely negative in infants > 3 mo because of tighter hip muscles and ligaments. If
the examination is equivocal or the infant is at high risk (eg, girls who were in the breech position), hip
ultrasonography should be done at 4 to 6 wk; some experts recommend screening ultrasonography at 4
to 6 wk for all infants with risk factors.
Neurologic system:
The neonate's tone, level of alertness, movement of extremities, and reflexes are
evaluated. Typically, neonatal reflexes, including the Moro, suck, and rooting reflexes, are elicited:
•
Moro reflex:
The neonate's response to startle is elicited by pulling the arms slightly off the bed and
releasing suddenly. In response, the neonate extends the arms with fingers extended, flexes the hips,
and cries.
•
Rooting reflex:
Stroking the neonate's cheek or lateral lip prompts the neonate to turn the head toward
the touch and open the mouth.
===PAGE:2875===
•
Suck reflex:
A pacifier or gloved finger is used to elicit this reflex.
These reflexes are present for several months after birth and are markers of a normal peripheral nervous
system.
Skin:
A neonate's skin is usually ruddy; cyanosis of fingers and toes is common in the first few hours.
Vernix caseosa covers most neonates > 24 wk gestation. Dryness and peeling often develop within days,
especially at wrist and ankle creases.
Petechiae may occur in areas traumatized during delivery, such as the face when the face is the
presenting part; however, neonates with diffuse petechiae should be evaluated for thrombocytopenia.
Many neonates have erythema toxicum, a benign rash with an erythematous base and a white or yellow
papule. This rash, which usually appears 24 h after birth, is scattered over the body and can last for up to
2 wk.
Screening
Screening recommendations vary by clinical context and state requirements.
Blood typing is indicated when the mother has type O or Rh-negative blood or when minor blood antigens
are present because hemolytic disease of the newborn ( is a risk.
All neonates are evaluated for jaundice throughout the hospital stay and before discharge. The risk of
hyperbilirubinemia is assessed using risk criteria, measurement of bilirubin, or both (see also p.
).
Bilirubin can be measured transcutaneously or in serum. Many hospitals screen all neonates and use a
predictive nomogram to determine the risk of extreme hyperbilirubinemia. Follow-up is based on age at
discharge, predischarge bilirubin level, and risk of developing jaundice.
Most states test for specific inherited diseases (, including phenylketonuria, tyrosinemia,
biotinidase deficiency, homocystinuria, maple syrup urine disease, galactosemia, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, sickle cell disease, and hypothyroidism. Some states also include testing for cystic fibrosis,
disorders of fatty acid oxidation, and other organic acidemias.
HIV screening is required by some states and is indicated for children of mothers known to be HIVpositive or those engaging in HIV high-risk behaviors.
Toxicology screening is indicated when any of the following are present: maternal history of drug use,
unexplained placental abruption, unexplained premature labor, poor prenatal care, or evidence of drug
withdrawal in the neonate.
Hearing screening
varies by state. Some screen only high-risk neonates (see
Table 268-1
); others screen all. Initial screening often involves using a handheld device to test for echoes
produced by healthy ears in response to soft clicks (otoacoustic emissions); if this test is abnormal,
auditory brain stem response (ABR) testing is done. Some institutions use ABR testing as an initial
screening test. Further testing by an audiologist may be needed.
Routine Care and Observation
Neonates can be bathed (if the parents wish) once their temperature has stabilized at 37° C for 2 h. The
umbilical cord clamp can be removed when the cord appears dry, usually at 24 h. The umbilical stump
should be kept clean and dry to prevent infection. Some centers apply isopropyl alcohol several times a
day or a single dose of triple dye, a bacteriostatic agent believed to decrease bacterial colonization of the
cord. The cord should be observed daily for redness or drainage because it can be a portal for infection.
[Table 268-1.
High-Risk Factors for Hearing Deficits in Neonates]
Circumcision, if desired by the family, can be safely done, using a local anesthetic, within the first few
===PAGE:2876===
days of life. Circumcision should be delayed if the mother has taken anticoagulants or aspirin, if there is a
family history of bleeding disorders, or if the neonate has displacement of the urethral meatus,
hypospadias, or any other abnormality of the glans or penis (because the prepuce may be used later in
plastic surgical repair). Circumcision should not be done if the neonate has hemophilia or another
bleeding disorder.
Most neonates lose 5 to 7% of their birth weight during the first few days of life, primarily because fluid is
lost in urine and insensibly and secondarily because meconium is passed, vernix caseosa is lost, and the
umbilical cord dries.
In the first 2 days, urine may stain the diaper orange or pink because of urate crystals, which are a normal
result of urine concentration. Most neonates void within 24 h after birth; the average time of first void is 7
to 9 h after birth, and most void at least 2 times in the 2nd 24 h of life. A delay in voiding is more common
among male neonates and may result from a tight foreskin; a male neonate's inability to void may indicate
posterior urethral valves. Circumcision is usually delayed until at least after the first void; not voiding
within 12 h of the procedure may indicate a complication.
If meconium has not been passed within 24 h, the clinician should consider evaluating the neonate for
anatomic abnormalities, such as imperforate anus, Hirschsprung's disease, and cystic fibrosis, which can
cause meconium ileus.
Hospital Discharge
Neonates discharged within 48 h should be evaluated within 2 to 3 days to assess feeding success
(breast or formula), hydration, and jaundice (for those at increased risk). Follow-up for neonates
discharged after 48 h should be based on risk factors, including those for jaundice and for breastfeeding
difficulties.
Nutrition in Infants
If the delivery was uncomplicated and the neonate is alert and healthy, the neonate can be brought to the
mother for feeding immediately. Successful breastfeeding is enhanced by putting the neonate to the
breast as soon as possible after delivery. Spitting mucus after feeding is common (because
gastroesophageal smooth muscle is lax) but should subside within 48 h. If spitting mucus or emesis
persists past 48 h or if vomit is bilious, complete evaluation of the upper GI and respiratory tracts is
needed to detect congenital GI anomalies (.
Daily fluid and calorie requirements vary with age and are proportionately greater in neonates and infants
than in older children and adults (see
Tables 268-2
and
268-3
). Relative requirements for protein and energy (g or kcal/kg body weight) decline progressively
from the end of infancy through adolescence (see
Table 1-4
, although absolute requirements increase. For example, protein requirements decrease
from 1.2 g/kg/day at 1 yr to 0.9 g/kg/day at 18 yr, and mean relative energy requirements decrease from
100 kcal/kg at 1 yr to 40 kcal/kg in late adolescence. Nutritional recommendations are generally not
evidence-based. Requirements for vitamins depend on the intake of calories, protein, fat, carbohydrate,
and amino acids.
Feeding problems:
Minor variations in day-to-day food intake are common and, although often of
concern to parents, usually require only reassurance and guidance unless there are signs of disease or
changes in growth parameters, particularly weight (changes in the child's percentile rank on standard
growth curves are more significant than absolute changes).
[Table 268-2.
Range of Average Water Requirements of Children at Different Ages Under Ordinary
Conditions]
Loss of > 5 to 7% of birth weight in the first week indicates undernutrition. Birth weight should be
regained by 2 wk, and a subsequent gain of about 20 to 30 g/day (1 oz/day) is expected for the first few
===PAGE:2877===
months. Infants should double their birth weight by about 6 mo.
Breastfeeding
Breast milk is the nutrition of choice. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends exclusive
breastfeeding for a minimum of 6 mo and introduction of appropriate solid food from 6 mo to 1 yr. Beyond
1 yr, breastfeeding continues for as long as both infant and mother desire, although after 1 yr
breastfeeding should complement a full diet of solid foods and fluids. To encourage breastfeeding,
practitioners should begin discussions prenatally, mentioning the multiple advantages:
•
For the child:
Nutritional and cognitive advantages and protection against infection, allergies, obesity,
Crohn's disease, and diabetes
•
For the mother:
Reduced fertility during lactation, more rapid return to normal prepartum condition (eg,
uterine involution, weight loss), and protection against osteoporosis, obesity, and ovarian and
premenopausal breast cancers
Milk production is fully established in primiparas by 72 to 96 h and in less time in multiparas. The first milk
produced is colostrum, a high-calorie, high-protein, thin yellow fluid that is immunoprotective because it is
rich in antibodies, lymphocytes, and macrophages; colostrum also stimulates passage of meconium.
Subsequent breast milk has the following characteristics:
• Has a high lactose content, providing a readily available energy source compatible with neonatal
enzymes
• Contains large amounts of vitamin E, an important antioxidant that may help prevent anemia by
increasing erythrocyte life span
• Has a Ca:P ratio of 2:1, which prevents Ca-deficiency tetany
• Favorably changes the pH of stools and the intestinal flora, thus protecting against bacterial diarrhea
• Transfers protective antibodies from mother to infant
• Contains cholesterol and taurine, which are important to brain growth, regardless of the mother's diet
• Is a natural source of
ω
-3 and
ω
-6 fatty acids
These fatty acids and their very long-chain polyunsaturated derivatives (LC-PUFAS), arachidonic acid
(ARA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), are believed to contribute to the enhanced visual and cognitive
outcomes of breastfed compared with formula-fed infants.
If the mother's diet is sufficiently diverse, no dietary or vitamin supplementation is needed
[Table 268-3.
Calorie Requirements at Different Ages*]
for the mother or her term breastfed infant, with the exception of vitamin D 200 units once/day beginning
in the first 2 mo for all infants exclusively breastfed. Premature and dark-skinned infants and infants with
limited sunlight exposure (residence in northern climates) are especially at risk. After 6 mo, breastfed
infants in homes where the water does not have adequate fluoride (supplemental or natural) should be
given fluoride drops. Clinicians can obtain information about fluoride content from a local dentist.
Infants < 6 mo should not be given additional water because hyponatremia is a risk.
Technique
The mother should use whatever comfortable, relaxed position works best and should support her breast
with her hand to ensure that it is centered in the infant's mouth, minimizing any soreness. The center of
===PAGE:2878===
the infant's lower lip should be stimulated with the nipple so that rooting occurs and the mouth opens
wide. The infant should be encouraged to take in as much of the breast and areola as possible, placing
the lips 2.5 to 4 cm from the base of the nipple. The infant's tongue then compresses the nipple against
the hard palate. Initially, it takes at least 2 min for the let-down reflex to occur. Volume of milk increases as
the infant grows and stimulation from suckling increases. Feeding duration is usually determined by the
infant. Some mothers require a breast pump to increase or maintain milk production; in most mothers, a
total of 90 min/day of breast pumping divided into 6 to 8 sessions produces enough milk for an infant who
is not directly breastfed.
The infant should nurse on one breast until the breast softens and suckling slows or stops. The mother
can then break suction with a finger before removing the infant from one breast and offering the infant the
second. In the first days after birth, infants may nurse on only one side; then the mother should alternate
sides with each feeding. If the infant tends to fall asleep before adequately nursing, the mother can
remove the infant when suckling slows, burp the infant, and move the infant to the other side. This switch
keeps the infant awake for feedings and stimulates milk production in both breasts.
Mothers should be encouraged to feed on demand or about every 1 1/2 to 3 h (8 to 12 feedings/day), a
frequency that gradually decreases over time; some neonates < 2500 g may need to feed even more
frequently to prevent hypoglycemia. In the first few days, neonates may need to be wakened and
stimulated; small infants and late preterm infants should not be allowed to sleep long periods at night.
Large full-term infants who are feeding well (as evidenced by stooling pattern) can sleep longer.
Eventually, a schedule that allows infants to sleep as long as possible at night is usually best for the infant
and family.
Mothers who work outside the home can pump breast milk to maintain milk production while they are
separated from their infants. Frequency varies but should approximate the infant's feeding schedule.
Pumped breast milk should be immediately refrigerated if it is to be used within 48 h and immediately
frozen if it is to be used after 48 h. Refrigerated milk that is not used within 96 h should be discarded
because risk of bacterial contamination is high. Frozen milk should be thawed by placing it in warm water;
microwaving is not recommended.
Infant Complications
The primary complication is underfeeding, which may lead to dehydration and hyperbilirubinemia. Risk
factors for underfeeding include small or premature infants and mothers who are primiparous, who
become ill, or who have had difficult or operative deliveries. A rough assessment of feeding adequacy can
be made by daily diaper counts. By age 5 days, a normal neonate wets at least 6 diapers/day and soils at
least 4 diapers/day; lower numbers suggest underhydration and undernutrition. Also, stools should have
changed from dark meconium at birth to light brown and then yellow. Weight is also a reasonable
parameter to follow (; not attaining growth landmarks suggests undernutrition. Constant
fussiness before age 6 wk (when colic may develop unrelated to hunger or thirst) may also indicate
underfeeding. Dehydration should be suspected if vigor of the infant's cry decreases or skin becomes
turgid; lethargy and sleepiness are extreme signs of dehydration and should prompt testing for
hypernatremia.
Maternal Complications
Common maternal complications include breast engorgement, sore nipples, plugged ducts, mastitis, and
anxiety.
Breast engorgement
, which occurs during early lactation and may last 24 to 48 h, may be minimized by
early frequent feeding. A comfortable nursing brassiere worn 24 h/day can help, as can applying cool
compresses after breastfeeding and taking a mild analgesic (eg, ibuprofen). Just before breastfeeding,
mothers may have to use massage and warm compresses and express breast milk manually to allow
[Table 268-4.
Some Drugs Contraindicated for Breastfeeding Mothers]
===PAGE:2879===
infants to get the swollen areola into their mouth. Excessive expression of milk between feedings
facilitates engorgement, so expression should be done only enough to relieve discomfort.
For
sore nipples
, the infant's position should be checked; sometimes the infant draws in a lip and sucks
it, which irritates the nipple. The mother can ease the lip out with her thumb.
After feedings, she can
express a little milk, letting the milk dry on the nipples. After breastfeeding, cool compresses reduce
engorgement and provide further relief.
Plugged ducts
manifest as mildly tender lumps in the breasts of lactating women who have no other
systemic signs of illness. The lumps appear in different places and are not tender. Continued
breastfeeding ensures adequate emptying of the breast. Warm compresses and massage of the affected
area before breastfeeding may further aid emptying. Women may also alternate positions because
different areas of the breast empty better depending on the infant's position at the breast. A good nursing
brassiere is helpful because regular brassieres with wire stays or constricting straps may contribute to
milk stasis in a compressed area.
Mastitis
is common and manifests as a tender, warm, swollen, wedge-shaped area of breast. It is caused
by engorgement, blocking, or plugging of an area of the breast; infection may occur secondarily, most
often with penicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
and less commonly with
Streptococcus
sp or
Escherichia coli
. With infection, fever ≥ 38.5° C, chills, and flu-like aching may develop. Diagnosis is by
history and examination. Cell counts (WBCs > 10
/mL) and cultures of breast milk (bacteria > 10
/mL)
may distinguish infectious from noninfectious mastitis. If symptoms are mild and present < 24 h,
conservative management (milk removal via breastfeeding or pumping, compresses, analgesics, a
supportive brassiere, and stress reduction) may be sufficient. If symptoms do not lessen in 12 to 24 h or if
the woman is acutely ill, antibiotics that are safe for breastfeeding infants and effective against
S. aureus
(eg, dicloxacillin, cloxacillin, or cephalexin 500 mg po qid) should be started; duration of treatment is 10 to
14 days. Community-acquired methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
should be considered if cases do not
respond promptly to these measures or if an abscess is present. Complications of delayed treatment are
recurrence and abscess formation. Breastfeeding may continue during treatment.
Maternal anxiety
, frustration, and feelings of inadequacy may result from lack of experience with
breastfeeding, mechanical difficulties holding the infant and getting the infant to latch on and suck,
fatigue, difficulty assessing whether nourishment is adequate, and postpartum physiologic changes.
These factors and emotions are the most common reasons mothers stop breastfeeding. Early follow-up
with a pediatrician or consultation with a lactation specialist is helpful and effective for preventing early
breastfeeding termination.
Drugs
Breastfeeding mothers should avoid taking drugs if possible. When drug therapy is necessary, the mother
should avoid contraindicated drugs and drugs that suppress lactation (eg, bromocriptine, levodopa,
trazodone). The US National Library of Medicine maintains an extensive database regarding drugs and
breastfeeding, which should be consulted regarding use of or exposure to specific drugs or classes of
drugs. For some common drugs contraindicated for breastfeeding mothers, see
Table 268-4
.
When drug treatment is necessary, the safest known alternative should be used; when possible, most
drugs should be taken immediately after breastfeeding or before the infant's longest sleep period,
although this strategy is less helpful with neonates who nurse frequently and exclusively. Knowledge of
the adverse effects of most drugs comes from case reports and small studies. Safety of some (eg,
acetaminophen, ibuprofen, cephalosporins, insulin) has been determined by extensive research, but
others are considered safe only because there are no case reports of adverse effects. Drugs with a long
history of use are generally safer than newer drugs for which few data exist.
Weaning
Weaning can occur whenever the mother and infant mutually desire, although preferably not until the
infant is at least 12 mo old. Gradual weaning over weeks or months during the time solid food is
===PAGE:2880===
introduced is most common; some mothers and infants stop abruptly without problems, but others
continue breastfeeding 1 or 2 times/day for 18 to 24 mo or longer. There is no correct schedule.
Formula Feeding
The only acceptable alternative to breastfeeding during the first year is formula; water can cause
hyponatremia, and whole cow's milk is not nutritionally complete. Advantages of formula feeding include
the ability to quantify the amount of nourishment and the ability of family members to participate in
feedings. But all other factors being equal, these advantages are outweighed by the undisputed health
benefits of breastfeeding.
Commercial infant formulas are available as powders, concentrated liquids, and prediluted (ready-to-feed)
liquids; each contains vitamins, and most are supplemented with iron. Formula should be prepared with
fluoridated water; fluoride drops (0.25 mg/day po) should be given after age 6 mo in areas where
fluoridated water is unavailable and when using prediluted liquid formula, which is prepared with
nonfluoridated water.
Choice of formula is based on infant need. Cow's milk-based formula is the standard choice unless
excessive fussiness, spitting up, or gas suggests sensitivity to cow's milk protein or lactose intolerance
(extremely rare in neonates); then, a soy formula may be recommended. All soy formulas in the US are
lactose free, but some infants allergic to cow's milk protein may also be allergic to soy protein; then, a
hydrolyzed formula is indicated. This formula may be derived from cow's milk but has triglycerides,
proteins, and monosaccharides predigested to smaller, nonallergenic components. True elemental
formulas (proteins broken down to amino acids) are available for the few infants who have allergic
reactions to hydrolyzed formula. Special carbohydrate-free formulas are also available.
Bottle-fed infants are fed on demand, but because formula is digested more slowly than breast milk, they
typically can go longer between feedings, initially every 3 to 4 h. Initial volumes of 15 to 60 mL (0.5 to 2
oz) can be increased gradually during the first week of life up to 90 mL (3 oz) about 6 times/day, which
supplies about 120 kcal/kg at 1 wk for a 3-kg infant.
Solid Foods
The WHO recommends exclusive breastfeeding for about 6 mo, with introduction of solid foods thereafter.
Other organizations suggest introducing solid food between age 4 mo and 6 mo while continuing
breastfeeding or bottle-feeding. Before 4 mo, solid food is not needed nutritionally, and the extrusion
reflex, in which the tongue pushes out anything placed in the mouth, makes feeding of solids difficult.
Initially, solid foods should be introduced after breastfeeding or bottle-feeding to ensure adequate
nourishment. Iron-fortified rice cereal is traditionally the first food introduced because it is nonallergenic,
easily digested, and a needed source of iron. It is generally recommended that one new, single-ingredient
food be introduced per week so that food allergies can be identified. Foods need not be introduced in any
specific order, although in general they can gradually be introduced by increasingly coarser textures—eg,
from rice cereal to soft table food to chopped table food. Meat, pureed to prevent aspiration, is a good
source of iron and zinc (both of which can be limited in the diet of an exclusively breastfed infant) and is
therefore a good early complementary food. Vegetarian infants can get adequate iron from iron-fortified
cereals and grains, peas, and dried beans and adequate zinc from yeast-fermented whole-grain breads
and fortified infant cereals.
Home preparations are equivalent to commercial foods, but commercial preparations of carrots, beets,
turnips, collard greens, and spinach are preferable before 1 yr if available because they are screened for
nitrates. High nitrate levels, which can induce methemoglobinemia in young children, are present when
vegetables are grown using water supplies contaminated by fertilizer.
Foods to avoid include
• Eggs, peanuts, and cow's milk, usually until children are 1 yr to prevent food sensitivities
===PAGE:2881===
• Honey until 1 yr because infant botulism is a risk
• Foods that, if aspirated, could obstruct the child's airway (eg, nuts, round candies, popcorn, hot dogs,
meat unless it is pureed, grapes unless they are cut into small pieces)
Nuts should be avoided until age 2 or 3 because they do not fully dissolve with mastication and small
pieces can be aspirated whether bronchial obstruction is present or not, causing pneumonia and other
complications.
At or after 1 yr, children can begin drinking whole cow's milk; reduced-fat milk is avoided until 2 yr, when
their diet essentially resembles that of the rest of the family. Parents should be advised to limit milk intake
to 16 to 20 oz/day in young children; higher intake can reduce intake of other important sources of
nutrition and contribute to iron deficiency.
Juice is a poor source of nutrition, contributes to dental caries, and should be limited to 4 to 6 oz/day or
avoided altogether.
By about 1 yr, growth rate usually slows. Children require less food and may refuse it at some meals.
Parents should be reassured and advised to assess a child's intake over a week rather than at a single
meal or during a day. Underfeeding of solid food is only a concern when children do not achieve expected
weights at an appropriate rate.
Health Supervision of the Well Child
Well-child visits aim to do the following:
• Promote health
• Prevent disease through routine vaccinations and education
• Detect and treat disease early
• Guide parents to optimize the child's emotional and intellectual development
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has recommended preventive health care schedules (see
Tables 268-5
,
268-6
, and
268-7
) for children who have no significant health problems and who are growing and developing
satisfactorily. Those who do not meet these criteria should have more frequent and intensive visits. If
children come under care for the first time late on the schedule or if any items are not done at the
suggested age, children should be brought up to date as soon as possible. Children who have
developmental, psychosocial, or chronic disease may require more frequent counseling and treatment
visits that are separate from preventive care visits. If parents are high risk, are parents for the first time, or
wish to have a conference, a prenatal visit with the pediatrician is appropriate.
In addition to physical examination, practitioners should evaluate the child's motor, cognitive, and social
development and parent-child interactions. These assessments can be made by taking a thorough history
from parents and child, making direct observations, and sometimes seeking information from outside
sources such as teachers and child care providers. Tools are available for office use to facilitate
evaluation of cognitive and social development (.
Both physical examination and screening are important parts of preventive health care in infants and
children. Most parameters, such as weight, are included for all children; others are applicable to selected
patients, such as lead screening in 1- and 2-yr-olds.
Anticipatory guidance
is also important to preventive health care. It includes
• Obtaining information about the child and parents (eg, via questionnaire, interview, or evaluation)
===PAGE:2882===
• Working with parents to promote health (forming a therapeutic alliance)
• Teaching parents what to expect in their child's development, how they can help enhance development
(eg, by establishing a healthy lifestyle), and what the benefits of a healthy lifestyle are
[Table 268-5.
Recommendations for Preventive Care During Infancy
a]
[Table 268-6.
Recommendations for Preventive Care During Early and Middle Childhood
a]
[Table 268-7.
Recommendations for Preventive Care During Adolescence
a]
Physical Examination
Growth:
Length (crown-heel) or height (once children can stand) and weight should be measured at
each visit. Head circumference should be measured at each visit through 24 mo. Growth rate should be
monitored using a growth curve with percentiles; deviations in these parameters should be evaluated (see
Chapter 271
).
Blood pressure:
Starting at age 3 yr, BP should be routinely checked by using an appropriatesized cuff.
The width of the inflatable rubber bag portion of the BP cuff should be about 40% of the circumference of
the upper arm, and its length should cover 80 to 100% of the circumference. If no available cuff fits the
criteria, using the larger cuff is better.
Systolic and diastolic BPs are considered normal if they are < 90th percentile; actual values for each
percentile vary by sex, age, and size (as height percentile), so reference to published tables is essential.
Systolic and diastolic BP measurements between the 90th and 95th percentiles should prompt continued
observation and assessment of hypertensive risk factors. If measurements are consistently ≥ 95th
percentile, children should be considered hypertensive, and a cause should be determined.
Head:
The most common abnormality is fluid in the middle ear (otitis media with effusion), manifesting as
a change in the appearance of the tympanic membrane. Clinicians should screen for hearing deficits (see
p.
).
Eyes should be assessed at each visit. Clinicians should check for esotropia or exotropia; for
abnormalities in globe size (suggesting congenital glaucoma); for a difference in pupil size, iris color, or
both (suggesting Horner's syndrome, trauma, or neuroblastoma; asymmetric pupils may be normal or
represent an ocular, autonomic, or intracranial disorder); and for absence or distortion of the red reflex
(suggesting cataract or retinoblastoma).
Ptosis and eyelid hemangioma obscure vision and require attention. Infants born at < 32 wk gestation
should be assessed by an ophthalmologist for evidence of retinopathy of prematurity ( and
for refractive errors, which are more common. By age 3 or 4 yr, vision testing by Snellen charts or newer
testing machines can be used. E charts are better than pictures; visual acuity of < 20/30 should be
evaluated by an ophthalmologist.
Detection of dental caries is important, and referral to a dentist should be made if cavities are present,
even in children who have only deciduous teeth. Thrush is common among infants and not usually a sign
of immunosuppression.
Heart:
Auscultation is done to identify new murmurs, heart rate abnormalities, or rhythm disturbances;
benign flow murmurs are common and need to be distinguished from pathologic murmurs. The chest wall
is palpated for the apical impulse to check for cardiomegaly; femoral pulses are palpated to check for
asymmetry, which suggests aortic coarctation.
Abdomen:
Palpation is repeated at every visit because many masses, particularly Wilms' tumor and
neuroblastoma, may be apparent only as children grow. Stool is often palpable in the left lower quadrant.
===PAGE:2883===
Spine and extremities:
Children old enough to stand should be screened for scoliosis by observing
posture, shoulder tip and scapular symmetry, torso list, and especially paraspinal asymmetry when
children bend forward (.
At each visit before children start to walk, they should be checked for developmental dysplasia of the hip.
The Barlow and Ortolani maneuvers ( are used until about age 4 mo. After that, dysplasia
may be suggested by unequal leg length, adductor tightness, or asymmetry of abduction or leg creases.
Toeing-in can result from adduction of the forefoot, tibial torsion, or femoral torsion. Only pronounced
cases require therapy and referral to an orthopedist.
Genital examination:
Girls should be offered a pelvic examination and Papanicolaou (Pap) testing at
age 18 or when they become sexually active—whichever occurs first. All sexually active patients should
be screened for sexually transmitted diseases.
Testicular and inguinal evaluation should be done at every visit, specifically looking for undescended
testes in infants and young boys, testicular masses in older adolescents, and inguinal hernia in boys of all
ages.
Screening
Blood tests:
To detect iron deficiency, clinicians should determine Hct or Hb at age 9 to 12 mo in term
infants, at age 5 to 6 mo in premature infants, and annually in menstruating adolescents. Testing for Hb S
can be done at age 6 to 9 mo ( if not done as part of neonatal screening.
Recommendations for blood testing for lead exposure vary by state. In general, testing should be done
between ages 9 mo and 1 yr in children at risk of exposure (those living in housing built before 1980) and
should be repeated at 24 mo. If the clinician is not sure of a child's risk, testing should be done. Levels >
μ
g/dL (> 0.48
μ
mol/L) pose a risk of neurologic
damage (, although some experts
question this threshold because they believe that any lead in the system can be toxic.
Cholesterol screening is indicated for children > 2 yr who are at high risk because of family history. If
other risk factors are present or family history is uncertain, testing is at the discretion of the physician.
Hearing tests:
(See also
Chapter 47
.) Parents may suspect a hearing deficit if their child ceases responding
appropriately to noises or voices or does not understand or develop speech (see
Table 268-8
). Because hearing deficits impair language development, hearing problems must be
remedied as early as possible. The clinician therefore should seek parental input about hearing at every
visit during early childhood and be prepared to do formal testing or refer to an audiologist whenever there
is any question of the child's ability to hear.
Audiometry can be done in the primary care setting; most other audiologic procedures (eg, otoacoustic
emission testing, brain stem auditory evoked response) should be done by an audiologist. Conventional
audiometry can be used for children beginning at about age 3 yr; young children can also be tested by
observing their responses to sounds made through headphones, watching their attempts to localize the
sound or complete a simple task. Tympanometry, another in-office procedure (, can be used with children of any age and is useful for evaluating middle ear function. Abnormal
tympanograms often denote eustachian tube dysfunction or the presence of middle ear fluid that cannot
be detected during otoscopic examination. Pneumatic otoscopy is helpful in evaluating middle ear status,
but combining it with tympanometry is more informative than either procedure alone.
[Table 268-8.
Normal Hearing in Very Young Children*]
[Table 268-9.
Case Rates of Some Diseases Preventable by Vaccines]
Other screening tests:
Tuberculin testing should be done if children have been exposed to TB (eg, to
===PAGE:2884===
an infected family member or close contact), if they have had a family member with a positive tuberculin
test, if they were born in developing countries, or if their parents are new immigrants from those countries
or have been recently incarcerated.
For sexually active adolescents, dipstick analysis for leukocytes and urinary testing for chlamydial
infection should be done annually. Screening for cervical dysplasia should be begun within 3 yr of onset
of sexual activity.
Prevention
Preventive counseling is part of every well-child visit and covers a broad spectrum of topics, such as
recommendations to have infants sleep on their backs, injury prevention, nutritional and exercise advice,
and discussions of violence, firearms, and substance abuse.
[Table 268-10.
Recommended Immunization Schedule for Ages 0-6 yr]
[Table 268-11.
Recommended Immunization Schedule for Ages 7-18 yr]
Safety:
Recommendations for injury prevention vary by age. Some examples follow.
For infants from birth to 6 mo:
• Using a rear-facing car seat
• Reducing home water temperature to < 49° C (< 120° F)
• Preventing falls
• Using sleeping precautions: Placing infants on their back, not sharing a bed, using a firm mattress, and
not allowing stuffed animals, pillows, and blankets in the crib
• Avoiding foods and objects that children can aspirate
For infants from 6 to 12 mo:
• Continuing to use a rear-facing car seat
• Continuing to place infants on their back to sleep
• Not using baby walkers
• Using safety latches on cabinets
• Preventing falls from changing tables and around stairs
• Vigilantly supervising children when in bathtubs and while learning to walk
For children aged 1 to 4 yr:
• Using an age- and weight-appropriate car seat (infants can face forward when they reach 9 kg [20 lb]
and age 12 mo, but rear-facing is still the safest position)
• Reviewing automobile safety both as passenger and pedestrian
• Tying window cords
===PAGE:2885===
• Using safety caps and latches
• Preventing falls
• Removing handguns from the home
[Table 268-12.
Catch-Up Immunization Schedule for Ages 4 Mo-18 yr]
For children ≥ 5 yr:
• All of the above
• Using a bicycle helmet and protective sports gear
• Instructing children about safe street crossing
• Closely supervising swimming and sometimes requiring the use of life jackets during swimming
Nutrition:
Poor nutrition underlies the epidemic of obesity in children (. Recommendations vary
by age; for children up to
2 yr, see p.
. As children grow older, parents can allow them some
discretion in food choices, while keeping the diet within healthy parameters. Children should be guided
away from frequent snacking and foods that are high in calories, salt, and sugar. Soda has been
implicated as a major contributor to obesity.
Exercise:
Physical inactivity also underlies the epidemic of obesity in children, and the benefits of
exercise in maintaining good physical and emotional health should induce parents to make sure their
children develop good habits early in life. During infancy and early childhood, children should be allowed
to roam and explore in a safe environment under close supervision. Outdoor play should be encouraged
from infancy.
As children grow older, play becomes more complex, often evolving to formal school-based athletics.
Parents should set good examples and encourage both informal and formal play, always keeping safety
issues in mind and promoting healthy attitudes about sportsmanship and competition. Participation in
sports and activities as a family provides children with exercise and has important psychologic and
developmental benefits. Screening of children before sports participation is recommended (.
Limits to television watching, which is linked directly to inactivity and obesity, should start at birth and be
maintained throughout adolescence. Similar limits should be set for video games and noneducational
computer time as children grow older.
Vaccination
Effectiveness of vaccination:
Vaccination has been profoundly effective in preventing serious disease
(see
Table 268-9
). Many health care practitioners currently in practice have seen few or no cases of
diseases that were once extremely common and fatal.
Vaccination schedule:
Vaccination follows a schedule recommended by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the American Academy of Family Physicians
(see
Tables 268-10
,
268-11
, and
268-12
). The latest recommendations can be obtained at
www.cdc.gov/vaccines
; vaccination status should be reassessed at every visit. For adverse effects and
details of administration of specific vaccines, see
Chapter 131
.
Colic
Colic is paroxysms of crying and irritability in an infant.
Although the term colic suggests an intestinal origin, etiology is unknown. Colic often begins at about 6
===PAGE:2886===
wk and spontaneously abates between 3 and 4 mo. Paroxysms of crying and unhappiness develop at
about the same time of day or night and continue for hours for no apparent reason. A few infants cry
almost incessantly. Excessive crying may cause aerophagia, which results in flatulence and abdominal
distention. Typically, colicky infants eat and gain weight well, although vigorous nonnutritive sucking may
suggest excessive hunger. Colic probably has no relation to development of an insistent, impatient
personality.
Evaluation
History and physical examination:
History should establish whether the infant's crying is outside the
normal range (up to 3 h/day in a 6-wk-old infant). Then it must distinguish colic from other causes of
excessive crying (, including fever, UTI, ear infection, and maltreatment. Thorough
questioning may reveal that crying is not the chief concern but a symptom that the parents have used to
justify their visiting the physician to present another problem—eg, concern over the death of a previous
child or over their feelings of inability to cope with a new infant. A thorough physical examination typically
detects no abnormalities but reassures parents. Physicians should also offer reassurance that they
understand how stressful a colicky infant can be for parents.
Testing:
No testing is necessary unless specific abnormalities are detected by history and examination.
Treatment
Parents should be reassured that the infant is healthy, that the irritability is not due to poor parenting, and
that colic will resolve on its own with no long-term adverse effects. The following may help:
• For infants who cry for short periods: Being held, rocked, or patted gently
• For infants who have a strong sucking urge and who fuss soon after a feeding: Opportunity to suck
more (eg, a pacifier)
• If bottle-feeding takes < 15 to 20 min: Nipples with smaller holes, a pacifier, or both
• For very active, restless infants: Paradoxically, being swaddled tightly
An infant swing, music, and white noise (eg, from a vacuum cleaner, car engine, or clothes or hair dryer)
may also be calming.
A milk-substitute formula may be tried briefly to determine whether infants have milk intolerance, but
frequent formula switching should be avoided. Sometimes in breastfed infants, removing milk or another
food from the mother's diet brings relief.
Constipation
Constipation is responsible for up to 5% of pediatric office visits. It is defined as delay or difficulty in the
passing of hard, sometimes large stools for ≥ 2 wk.
The frequency of normal bowel movements varies for infants. In the first year, the average number of
bowel movements ranges from 2 to 4/day. This number also varies depending on whether infants are
breastfed or formula-fed (breastfed infants have more frequent bowel movements). In general, signs of
effort (eg, straining) do not signify constipation; infants only gradually develop the muscles to assist a
bowel movement. After age 1 yr, children average 1 bowel movement/day.
Etiology
Constipation in children is divided into 2 main types:
• Organic (5%)
===PAGE:2887===
• Functional (95%)
Organic:
Organic causes involve specific structural, neurologic, toxic/metabolic, or intestinal disorders.
They are rare but important to recognize (see
Table 268-13
).
The most common cause is
• Hirschsprung's disease
Other organic causes that may manifest in the neonatal period or later include
• Anorectal malformations
• Cystic fibrosis
• Metabolic disorders (eg, hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia, hyperkalemia)
• Spinal cord abnormalities
Functional:
Functional constipation is difficulty passing stools for reasons other than organic causes.
In infants, the use of formula can lead to small, hard stools.
In older children, diets low in fiber and high in dairy lead to hard stools that are uncomfortable to pass and
can cause anal fissures. Children sometimes put off having bowel movements because they have
discomfort caused by fissures or because they do not want to interrupt play. To avoid having a bowel
movement, children may tighten the external sphincter muscles, pushing the stool higher in the rectal
vault. If this behavior is repeated, the rectum stretches to accommodate the retained stool. The urge to
defecate is then decreased, and the stool becomes harder, leading to a vicious circle of painful defecation
and worsened constipation. Occasionally, soft stool passes around the impacted stool and leads to stool
incontinence.
Stress, toilet training, desire for control, and sexual abuse are also some of the functional causes of stool
retention and subsequent constipation.
Evaluation
Evaluation should focus on differentiating functional constipation from constipation with an organic cause.
History: History of present illness
in neonates should determine whether meconium has been passed
at all and, if so, when. For older infants and children, history should note onset and duration of
constipation, frequency and consistency of stools, and timing of symptoms—whether they began after a
specific event, such as introduction of certain foods or a stressor that could lead to stool retention (eg,
introduction of toilet training). Important associated symptoms include soiling (stool incontinence),
discomfort during defecation, and blood on or in the stool. The composition of the diet, especially the
amount of fluids and fiber, should be noted.
Review of systems
should ask about symptoms that suggest an organic cause, including new onset of
poor suck, hypotonia, and ingestion of honey before age 12 mo (infantile botulism); cold intolerance, dry
skin, fatigue, hypotonia, prolonged neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, urinary frequency, and excessive thirst
(endocrinopathies); change in gait, pain or weakness in lower extremities, and urinary incontinence
(spinal cord defects); night sweats, fever, and weight loss (cancer); and vomiting, abdominal pain, poor
growth, intermittent diarrhea, and constipation (intestinal disorders).
Past medical history
should ask about known disorders that can cause constipation, including cystic
fibrosis and celiac sprue. Exposure to constipating drugs or lead paint dust should be noted. Clinicians
should ask about delayed passage of meconium within the first 24 to 48 h of life, as well as previous
===PAGE:2888===
episodes of constipation and family history of constipation.
Physical examination:
The physical examination begins with general assessment of the
[Table 268-13.
Organic Causes of Constipation in Infants and Children]
child's level of comfort or distress and overall appearance (including skin and hair condition). Height and
weight should be measured and plotted on growth charts.
Examination should focus on the abdomen and anus and on the neurologic examination.
The abdomen is inspected for distention, auscultated for bowel sounds, and palpated for masses and
tenderness. The anus is inspected for a fissure (taking care not to spread the buttocks so forcefully as to
cause one). A digital rectal examination is done gently to check stool consistency and to obtain a sample
for occult blood testing. Rectal examination should note the tightness of the rectal opening and presence
or absence of stool in the rectal vault. Examination includes placement of the anus and presence of any
hair tuft or pit superior to the sacrum.
[Table 268-14.
Treatment of Constipation]
In infants, neurologic examination focuses on tone and muscle strength. In older children, the focus is on
gait, deep tendon reflexes, and signs of weakness in the lower extremities.
Interpretation of findings:
A primary finding that suggests an organic cause in neonates is constipation
from birth; those who have had a normal bowel movement are unlikely to have a significant structural
disorder.
In older children, clues to an organic cause include constitutional symptoms (particularly weight loss,
fever, or vomiting), poor growth (decreasing percentile on growth charts), an overall ill appearance, and
any focal abnormalities detected during examination (see
Table 268-13
). A well-appearing child who has
no other complaints besides constipation, who is not on any constipating drugs, and who has a normal
examination likely has a functional disorder.
A distended rectum filled with stool or the presence of an anal fissure is consistent with functional
constipation in an otherwise normal child. Constipation that began after starting a constipating drug or
that coincides with a dietary change can be attributed to that drug or food. Foods that are known to be
constipating include dairy (eg, milk, cheese, yogurt) and starches and processed foods that do not
contain fiber. However, if constipation complaints begin after ingestion of wheat, celiac sprue should be
considered. History of a new stress (eg, a new sibling) or other potential causes of stool retention
behavior, with normal physical findings, support a functional etiology.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Delayed passage of meconium (> 24 to 48 h after birth)
• Hypotonia and poor suck (suggesting infant botulism)
• Abnormal gait and deep tendon reflexes (suggesting spinal cord involvement)
Testing:
For patients whose histories are consistent with functional constipation, no
tests are needed
unless there is no response to conventional treatment. An abdominal x-ray should be done if patients
have been unresponsive to treatment or an organic cause is suspected. Tests for organic causes should
be done based on the history and physical examination (see
Table 268-13
):
• Barium enema, rectal manometry, and biopsy (Hirschsprung's disease)
• Plain x-rays of lumbosacral spine; MRI considered (tethered spinal cord or tumor)
===PAGE:2889===
• Thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroxine (hypothyroidism)
• Blood lead level (lead poisoning)
• Stool for botulinum toxin (infant botulism)
• Sweat test and genetic testing (cystic fibrosis)
• Ca and electrolytes (metabolic derangement)
• IgA and IgG antigliadin antibodies, IgA antiendomysium antibodies, IgA antitissue glutaminase (celiac
disease)
Treatment
Specific organic causes should be treated.
Functional constipation is ideally initially treated with
• Dietary changes
• Behavior modification
Dietary changes
include adding prune juice to formula for infants, increasing fruits and vegetables for
older infants and children, increasing water intake, and decreasing the amount of constipating foods (eg,
milk, cheese).
Behavior modification
for older children involves encouraging regular stool passage after meals if they
are toilet trained and providing a reinforcement chart and encouragement to them. For children who are in
the process of toilet training, it is sometimes worthwhile to give them a break from training until the
constipation concern has passed.
Unresponsive constipation is treated by disimpacting the bowel and maintaining a regular diet and stool
routine. Disimpaction can occur through oral or rectal agents. Oral agents require consumption of large
volumes of liquid. Rectal agents can feel invasive and can be difficult to give. Both methods can be done
by parents under medical supervision; however, disimpaction sometimes requires hospitalization if
outpatient management is unsuccessful. Usually, infants do not require extreme measures, but if
intervention is required, a glycerin suppository is typically adequate. For maintenance of healthy bowels,
some children may require OTC dietary fiber supplements. These supplements require consuming 32 to
64 oz of water/day to be effective (see
Table 268-14
).
Key Points
• Functional constipation accounts for about 95% of cases.
• Organic causes are rare but need to be considered.
• Delayed passage of meconium for > 24 to 48 h after birth raises suspicion of structural disorders,
especially Hirschsprung's disease.
• Early intervention with dietary and behavior changes can successfully treat functional constipation.
Cough
Cough is a reflex that helps clear the airways of secretions, protects the airway from foreign body
aspiration, and can be the manifesting symptom of a disease. Cough is one of the most common
complaints for which parents bring their children to a health care practitioner.
===PAGE:2890===
Etiology
Causes of cough differ depending on whether the symptoms are acute (< 4 wk) or chronic (see
Table 268-15
).
For
acute cough
, the most common cause is
• Viral URI
For
chronic cough
, the most common causes are
• Asthma (most common)
• Gastroesophageal reflux disorder (GERD)
• Postnasal drip
Foreign body aspiration and diseases such as cystic fibrosis and primary ciliary dyskinesia are less
common, although they can all result in persistent cough.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should cover duration and quality of cough (barky, staccato,
paroxysmal) and onset (sudden or indolent). The physician should ask about associated symptoms, some
of which are ubiquitous (eg, runny nose, sore throat, fever). Other associated symptoms suggest a cause;
they include headache, itchy eyes, and sore throat (postnasal drip); wheezing and cough with exertion
(asthma); night sweats (TB); post-tussive emesis, spitting up after feedings, or apparent discomfort or
arching with lying down (GERD). For children 6 mo to 4 yr, the parents should be asked about potential
for foreign body aspiration, including older siblings or visitors with small toys, access to
[Table 268-15.
Some Causes of Cough in Children]
small objects, and consumption of small, smooth foods (eg, peanuts, grapes).
Review of systems
should note symptoms of possible causes, including abdominal pain (some
bacterial pneumonias), weight loss or poor weight gain and foul-smelling stools (cystic fibrosis), and
muscle soreness (possible association with viral illness or atypical pneumonia but usually not with
bacterial pneumonia).
Past medical history
should cover recent respiratory infections, repeated pneumonias, history of known
allergies or asthma, risk factors for TB (eg, exposure to person who has known or suspected TB
infection, exposure to prisons, HIV infection, travel to or immigration from countries that have endemic
infection), and exposure to respiratory irritants.
Physical examination:
Vital signs, including respiratory rate, temperature, and O
saturation, should be
noted. Signs of respiratory distress (eg, nasal flaring, intercostal retractions, cyanosis, grunting, stridor,
marked anxiety) should be noted.
Head and neck examination should focus on presence and amount of nasal discharge and the condition
of the nasal turbinates (pale, boggy, or inflamed). The pharynx should be checked for postnasal drip.
The cervical and supraclavicular areas should be inspected and palpated for lymphadenopathy.
Lung examination focuses on presence of stridor, wheezing, rales, rhonchi, decreased breath sounds,
and signs of consolidation (eg, egophony, E to A change, dullness to percussion).
Abdominal examination should focus on presence of abdominal pain, especially in the upper quadrants
===PAGE:2891===
(indicating possible left or right lower lobe pneumonia).
Examination of extremities should note clubbing or cyanosis of nail beds (cystic fibrosis).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Cyanosis or hypoxia on pulse oximetry
• Stridor
• Respiratory distress
• Toxic appearance
• Abnormal lung examination
Interpretation of findings:
Clinical findings frequently indicate a specific cause (see
Table 268-15
); the
distinction between acute and chronic cough is particularly helpful.
Other characteristics of the cough are helpful but less specific. A barky cough suggests croup or
tracheitis; it can also be characteristic of psychogenic cough or a postrespiratory tract infection cough. A
staccato cough is consistent with a viral or atypical pneumonia. A paroxysmal cough is characteristic of
pertussis or certain viral pneumonias (adenovirus). Failure to thrive or weight loss can occur with TB or
cystic fibrosis. Nighttime cough can indicate postnasal drip or asthma. Coughing at the beginning of sleep
and in the morning with waking usually indicates sinusitis; coughing in the middle of the night is more
consistent with asthma. In young children with sudden cough and no fever or URI symptoms, the
examiner should have a high index of suspicion for foreign body aspiration.
Testing:
Children with red flag findings should have pulse oximetry and chest x-ray, as should those
whose symptoms are prolonged (eg, > 4 wk) or worsening.
Children with stridor, drooling, fever, and marked anxiety need to be evaluated for epiglottitis, typically in
the operating room by an ENT specialist prepared to immediately place an endotracheal or tracheostomy
tube. If foreign body aspiration is suspected, chest x-ray with inspiratory and expiratory views should be
done.
Children with TB risk factors or weight loss should have a chest x-ray and PPD testing for TB.
Children with repeated episodes of pneumonia, poor growth, or foul-smelling stools should have a chest
x-ray and sweat testing for cystic fibrosis.
Acute cough in children with URI symptoms and no red flag findings is usually caused by a viral infection,
and testing is rarely indicated. Many other children without red flag findings have a presumptive diagnosis
after the history and physical examination. Testing is not necessary in such cases; however, if empiric
treatment has been instituted and has not been successful, testing may be necessary. For example, if
allergic sinusitis is suspected and treated with an antihistamine that does not alleviate symptoms, a head
CT may be necessary for further evaluation. Suspected GERD unsuccessfully treated with an H
blocker
may require evaluation with a pH probe and a swallowing study.
Treatment
Treatment is management of the underlying disorder. For example, antibiotics should be given for
bacterial pneumonia; bronchodilators and anti-inflammatory drugs should be given for asthma. Children
with viral infections should receive supportive care, including O
and bronchodilators as needed.
Little evidence exists to support the use of cough suppressants and mucolytic agents.
Coughing is an
important mechanism for clearing secretions from the airways and can assist in recovery from respiratory
infections. Use of nonspecific drugs for cough suppression is discouraged in children.
===PAGE:2892===
Key Points
• Clinical diagnosis is usually adequate.
• A high index of suspicion for foreign body aspiration is needed if children are age 6 mo to 4 yr.
• Antitussives and expectorants lack proof of effect in most cases.
• Chest x-rays should be taken in patients with red flag findings or chronic cough.
Crying
All infants and young children cry as a form of communication; it is the only means they have to express a
need. Thus, most crying is in response to hunger, discomfort (eg, a wet diaper), or separation, and it
ceases when the needs are met (eg, by feeding, changing, cuddling). This crying is normal and tends to
lessen in duration and frequency after 3 mo of age. However, crying that persists after attempts to
address routine needs and efforts to console or that is prolonged in relation to the child's baseline should
be investigated to identify a specific cause.
Etiology
Cause of crying is
• Organic in < 5%
• Functional in 95%
Organic:
Organic causes, although rare, must always be considered. Causes to consider are classified
as cardiac, GI, infectious, and traumatic (see
Table 268-16
). Of these, potential life threats include heart failure, intussusception, volvulus, meningitis,
and intracranial bleeding due to head trauma.
Colic ( is excessive crying that has no identifiable organic cause and that occurs at least 3
h/day > 3 days/wk for > 3 wk.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
focuses on onset of crying, duration, response to attempts to
console, and frequency or uniqueness of episodes. Parents should be asked about associated events or
conditions, including recent immunizations, trauma (eg, falls), interaction with a sibling, infections, drug
use, and relationship of crying with feedings and bowel movements.
Review of systems
focuses on symptoms of causative disorders, including constipation, diarrhea,
vomiting, arching of back, explosive stools, and bloody stools (GI disorders); fever, cough, wheezing,
nasal congestion, and difficulty breathing (respiratory infection); and apparent pain during bathing or
changing (trauma).
Past medical history
should note previous episodes of crying and conditions that can potentially
predispose to crying (eg, history of heart disease, developmental delay).
Physical examination:
Examination begins with a review of vital signs, particularly for fever and
tachypnea. Initial observation assesses the infant or child for signs of lethargy or distress and notes how
the parents are interacting with the child.
The infant or child is undressed and observed for signs of respiratory distress (eg, super-clavicular and
subcostal retractions, cyanosis). The entire body surface is inspected for swelling, bruising, and
abrasions.
===PAGE:2893===
Auscultatory examination focuses on signs of respiratory infection (eg, wheezing, rales, decreased breath
sounds) and cardiac compromise (eg, tachycardia, gallop, holosystolic murmur, systolic click). The
abdomen is palpated for signs of tenderness. The diaper is removed for examination of the genitals and
anus to look for signs of testicular torsion (eg, red-ecchymotic scrotum, pain on palpation), hair tourniquet
on the penis, inguinal hernia (eg, swelling in the inguinal region or scrotum), and anal fissures.
Extremities are examined for signs of fracture (eg, swelling, erythema, tenderness, pain with passive
motion). Fingers and toes are checked for hair tourniquets.
The ears are examined for signs of trauma (eg, blood in the canal or behind the tympanic membrane) or
infection (eg, red, bulging tympanic membrane). The corneas are stained with fluorescein and examined
with a blue light to rule out corneal abrasion, and the fundi are examined with an ophthalmoscope for
signs of hemorrhage. (If retinal hemorrhages are suspected, examination by an ophthalmologist is
advised.) The oropharynx is examined for signs of thrush or oral abrasions. The skull is gently palpated
for signs of fracture.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Respiratory distress
• Bruising and abrasions
• Extreme irritability
• Fever and inconsolability (meningitis)
• Fever in an infant ≤ 6 wk of age
[Table 268-16.
Some Causes of Crying]
Interpretation of findings:
A high index of suspicion is warranted when evaluating crying. Parental
concern is an important variable. When concern is high, the clinician should be wary even when there are
no conclusive findings because the parents may be reacting subconsciously to subtle but significant
changes. Conversely, a very low level of concern, particularly if there is lack of parental interaction with
the infant or child, can indicate a bonding problem or an inability to assess and manage the child's needs.
Inconsistency of the history and the child's clinical presentation should raise concerns about possible
abuse.
It is helpful to distinguish the general area of concern. For example, with fever, the most likely etiology is
infectious; respiratory distress without fever indicates possible cardiac etiology or pain. Abnormalities in
stool history or abdominal pain during examination is consistent with a GI etiology. Specific findings often
suggest certain causes (see
Table 268-16
).
The time frame is also helpful. Crying that has been intermittent over a number of days is of less concern
than sudden, constant crying. Whether the cry is exclusive to a time of day or night is helpful. For
example, recent onset of crying at night in an otherwise happy, healthy infant or child may be consistent
with night terrors or constipation.
The character of the cry is also revealing. Parents frequently can distinguish a cry that is painful in
character from a frantic or scared cry. It is also important to determine the level of acuity. An inconsolable
infant or child is of more concern than an infant or child who is well-appearing and consolable in the
office.
Testing:
Testing is targeted at the suspected cause (see
Table 268-16
) and pays particular attention to
potential life threats, unless the history and physical examination are sufficient for diagnosis. When there
are few or no specific clinical findings and no testing is immediately indicated, close follow-up and
reevaluation are appropriate.
===PAGE:2894===
Treatment
The underlying organic disorder should be treated. Support and encouragement are important for parents
when the infant or child has no apparent underlying disorder. Swaddling an infant in the first month of life
can be helpful. Holding an infant or child and responding to crying as quickly as possible are helpful in
decreasing the duration of crying. It is also valuable to encourage parents, if they are feeling frustrated, to
take a break from a crying baby and put the infant or child down in a safe environment for a few minutes.
Educating parents and "giving permission" to take a break are helpful in preventing abuse. Supplying
resources for support services to parents who seem overwhelmed may prevent future concerns.
Key Points
• Crying is part of normal development and is most prevalent during the first 3 mo of life.
• Excessive crying with organic causes needs to be differentiated from colic.
• Less than 5% of crying has an organic cause.
• When no organic cause is identified, parents may need support.
Diarrhea
Diarrhea is frequent loose or watery bowel movements that deviate from a child's normal
pattern.
However, breastfed infants who are not yet receiving solid food often have frequent loose bowel
movements that are considered normal.
Diarrhea may be accompanied by anorexia, vomiting, acute weight loss, fever, or passage of blood. If
diarrhea is severe or prolonged, dehydration is likely. Even in the absence of dehydration, chronic
diarrhea usually results in weight loss or failure to gain weight.
Diarrhea is a very common pediatric concern and causes 2 to 3 million deaths/yr worldwide. It accounts
for about 9% of hospitalizations in the US among children aged < 5 yr.
For diarrhea in adults, see p.
.
Pathophysiology
Mechanisms of diarrhea may include the following:
• Osmotic
• Secretory
• Inflammatory
• Malabsorptive
Osmotic diarrhea
results from the presence of nonabsorbable solutes in the GI tract, as with lactose
intolerance. Fasting for 2 to 3 days stops osmotic diarrhea.
Secretory diarrhea
results from substances (eg, bacterial toxins) that increase secretion of Cl ions and
water into the intestinal lumen. Secretory diarrhea does not stop with fasting.
Inflammatory diarrhea
is associated with conditions that cause inflammation or ulceration of the
intestinal mucosa (eg, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis). The resultant out-pouring of plasma, serum
proteins, blood, and mucous increases fecal bulk and fluid content.
===PAGE:2895===
Malabsorption
may result from osmotic or secretory mechanisms or conditions that lead to less surface
area in the bowel. Conditions such as short bowel syndrome and conditions that speed up transit time
cause diarrhea due to decreased absorption.
Etiology
The causes and significance of diarrhea (see
Table 268-17
) differ depending on whether it is acute (< 2 wk) or chronic (> 2 wk). Most cases of diarrhea
are acute.
Acute diarrhea
usually is caused by
• Gastroenteritis
• Antibiotic use
• Food allergies
• Food poisoning
Most gastroenteritis is caused by a virus; however, any enteric pathogen can cause acute diarrhea.
Chronic diarrhea
usually is caused by
• Dietary factors
• Infection
• Celiac disease
Chronic diarrhea can also be caused by anatomic disorders and disorders that interfere with absorption
or digestion.
[Table 268-17.
Some Causes of Diarrhea]
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
focuses on quality, frequency, and duration of stools, as well as on
any accompanying fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, or blood in the stool. Parents are asked about current
or recent (within 2 mo) antibiotic use. Elements of the diet should be established; they include amounts of
juice, foods high in sugar, and processed foods. Any history of hard stools or constipation should be
noted.
Risk factors for infection should be assessed; they include recent travel; exposure to questionable
food sources; and recent contact with animals at a petting zoo, reptiles, or someone with similar
symptoms.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of complications and causes. Symptoms of complications
include weight loss and decreased frequency of urination and fluid intake (dehydration). Symptoms of
causes include urticarial rash associated with food intake (food allergy); nasal polyps, sinusitis, and poor
growth (cystic fibrosis); arthritis and anal fissures (inflammatory bowel disease); and anorexia, anemia,
and rash (celiac sprue).
Past medical history
should assess known causative disorders (eg, immunocompromise, cystic fibrosis,
celiac sprue, inflammatory bowel disease) in the patient and family members. Drug history should be
reviewed for current or recent antibiotic use.
Physical examination:
Vital signs should be reviewed for indications of dehydration (eg, tachycardia,
hypotension) and fever.
===PAGE:2896===
General assessment includes checking for signs of lethargy or distress. Growth parameters should be
noted.
Because the abdominal examination may elicit discomfort, it is advisable to begin the examination with the
head. Examination should focus on the mucous membranes to assess whether they are moist or dry.
Nasal polyps; psoriasiform dermatitis around the eyes, nose, and mouth; and oral ulcerations should be
noted.
Examination of the extremities focuses on skin turgor, capillary refill time, and presence of petechiae or
purpura. Other forms of rash and signs of erythematous, swollen joints should be noted.
Abdominal examination focuses on distention, tenderness, and quality of bowel sounds (eg, high-pitched,
normal, absent). Examination of the genitals focuses on presence of rashes and signs of anal fissures or
ulcerative lesions.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Tachycardia, hypotension, and lethargy (significant dehydration)
• Bloody stools and extreme abdominal tenderness (volvulus, intussusception, partial obstruction)
• Bloody stool, fever, petechiae, and purpura (hemolytic-uremic syndrome)
Interpretation of findings:
Antibiotic-related, postinfectious, and anatomic-related causes of diarrhea
are typically clear from the history. Determination of the time frame helps establish whether diarrhea is
acute or chronic. Establishing the level of acuity is also important. Most cases of acute diarrhea have a
viral etiology, are low acuity, and cause fever and nonbloody diarrhea. However, bacterial diarrhea can
lead to serious consequences; manifestations include fever, bloody diarrhea, and possibly a petechial or
purpuric rash.
Symptoms associated with chronic diarrhea can vary and those of different conditions can overlap. For
example, Crohn's disease and celiac sprue can cause oral ulcerations, a number of conditions can cause
rashes, and any condition can lead to a poor growth pattern. If the cause is unclear, further tests are done
based on clinical findings (see
Table 268-17
).
Testing:
Testing is unnecessary in most cases of acute self-limited diarrhea. However, if the evaluation
suggests an etiology other than viral gastroenteritis, testing should be directed by the suspected etiology
(see
Table 268-17
).
If dehydration is suspected, screening laboratory tests should be done (for electrolytes).
Treatment
Specific causes are treated (eg, gluten-free diet for children with celiac disease).
General treatment focuses on hydration, which can usually be done orally; IV hydration is rarely essential.
(CAUTION:
Antidiarrheal drugs [eg, loperamide] are not recommended for infants and young children.
)
Rehydration:
Oral rehydration solution (ORS) should contain complex carbohydrate or 75 mEq/L
glucose and 75 mEq/L Na (total 245 mOsm/L solution). Sports drinks, sodas, juices, and similar drinks do
not meet these criteria and should not be used. They generally have too little Na and too much
carbohydrate to take advantage of Na/glucose cotransport, and the osmotic effect of the excess
carbohydrate may result in additional fluid loss.
ORS is recommended by the WHO and is widely available in the US without a prescription. Premixed
solutions are also available at most pharmacies and supermarkets.
Small, frequent amounts are used, starting with 5 mL q 5 min and increasing gradually as tolerated (see
===PAGE:2897===
also p.
). Generally, 50 mL/kg is given over 4 h for mild dehydration, and 100 mL/kg is given over 4 h for
moderate dehydration. For each diarrheal stool, an additional 10 mL/kg (up to 240 mL) is given. After 4 h,
the patient is reassessed. If signs of dehydration persist, the same volume is repeated.
Diet and nutrition:
Children should eat an age-appropriate diet as soon as they have been rehydrated
and are not vomiting. Infants may resume breast milk or formula.
For chronic diarrhea, adequate nutrition must be maintained, particularly of fat-soluble vitamins.
Key Points
• Diarrhea is a common pediatric concern.
• Gastroenteritis is the most common cause.
• Testing is rarely necessary in acute diarrhea.
• Dehydration is likely if diarrhea is severe or prolonged.
• Oral rehydration is effective in most cases.
• Antidiarrheal drugs (eg, loperamide) are not recommended for infants and young children.
Fever
Normal body temperature varies from person to person and throughout the day, but fever usually is
defined as a core body (rectal) temperature ≥ 38.0° C.
Significance of fever depends on clinical context rather than peak temperature; some minor illnesses
cause high fever, whereas some serious illnesses cause only a mild temperature elevation. Although
parental assessment is frequently clouded by fear of fever, the history of a temperature taken at home
should be considered equivalent to a temperature taken in the office.
Pathophysiology
Normal body temperature varies during the day by as much as 0.5° C and, in a child with a febrile illness,
by as much as 1.0° C.
Fever occurs in response to the release of endogenous pyogenic mediators called cytokines. Cytokines
stimulate the production of prostaglandins by the hypothalamus, which readjust and elevate the
temperature set point (.
Fever plays an integral role in fighting infection and, although it is uncomfortable, does not necessitate
treatment in an otherwise healthy child. Some studies even indicate that lowering the temperature can
prolong some illnesses. However, fever increases the metabolic rate and the demands on the
cardiopulmonary system. Therefore, fever can be detrimental to children with pulmonary or cardiac
compromise or neurologic impairment. It can also be the catalyst for febrile seizures, a typically benign
childhood condition (.
Etiology
Causes of fever (see
Table 268-18
) differ based on whether the fever is acute (≤ 7 days) or chronic (> 7 days). Response to
antipyretics and height of the temperature have no direct relationship to the etiology or its seriousness.
Acute:
Most acute fevers in infants and young children are caused by infection. The most common are
===PAGE:2898===
• Viral respiratory or GI infections (most common causes overall)
• Certain bacterial infections (otitis media, pneumonia, UTIs)
However, potential causes vary with the child's age. Causes vary because neonates (infants < 28 days)
and young infants have decreased immunologic function and are therefore at greater risk of infection and
because neonates may have perinatally acquired infection. Common perinatal infections include those
with group B streptococci,
Escherichia coli, Listeria monocytogenes
, and herpes simplex virus; these
organisms can cause bacteremia, pneumonia, meningitis, or sepsis.
Febrile children < 36 mo are at special risk of occult bacteremia (pathogenic bacteria in the bloodstream
but without focal symptoms or signs). The most common causative organisms of occult bacteremia used
to be
Streptococcus pneumoniae
and
Haemophilus influenzae
; vaccination against both is now
widespread in the US and Europe, making occult bacteremia less common and potentially changing the
common causative organisms.
Rare, noninfectious causes of acute fevers include heatstroke and toxic ingestions (eg, of drugs with
anticholinergic effects). Some vaccinations can cause fever for days (eg, with pertussis vaccination) and
even 1 or 2 wk (eg, with measles vaccination) after administration. These fevers typically last from a few
hours to a day. If the child is otherwise well, no evaluation is necessary. Teething does not cause fever.
Chronic:
Chronic fever suggests various potential causes, including autoimmune disorders, collagen
vascular diseases (eg, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease), cancer (eg, leukemia,
lymphoma), and chronic infections (eg, osteomyelitis, TB). Miscellaneous causes include factitious fever
and cases in which etiology is not identified.
The most common causes include
• Benign infectious causes (prolonged viral illnesses, back-to-back illnesses—especially in young
children)
Collagen vascular diseases, autoimmune disorders, and cancer are much less common.
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should note degree and duration of fever, method of
[Table 268-18.
Some Common Causes of Fever in Children*]
measurement, and the dose and frequency of antipyretics (if any). Important associated symptoms that
suggest serious illness include poor appetite, irritability, lethargy, and change in crying (eg, duration,
character). Associated symptoms that may suggest the cause include vomiting, diarrhea (including
presence of blood or mucus), cough, difficulty breathing, favoring of an extremity or joint, and strong or
foul-smelling urine. Drug history should be reviewed for indications of drug-induced fever.
Factors that predispose to infection are identified. In neonates, these factors include prematurity,
prolonged rupture of membranes, maternal fever, and positive prenatal tests (usually for group B
streptococcal infections, cytomegalovirus infections, or sexually transmitted diseases). For all children,
predisposing factors include recent exposures to infection (including family and caretaker infection), indwelling medical devices (eg, catheters, ventriculoperitoneal shunts), recent surgery, and
travel and
environmental exposures (eg, to ticks, mosquitoes, cats, farm animals, or reptiles).
Review of systems
should note symptoms suggesting possible causes, including runny nose and
congestion (viral URI), headache (sinusitis, Lyme disease, meningitis), ear pain or waking in the night with
signs of discomfort (otitis media), cough or wheezing (pneumonia, bronchiolitis), abdominal pain
(pneumonia, gastroenteritis, UTI, abdominal abscess), back pain (pyelonephritis), and any history of joint
swelling or redness (Lyme disease, osteomyelitis). A history of repeated infections (immunodeficiency) or
symptoms that suggest a chronic illness, such as poor weight gain or weight loss (TB, cancer), is
===PAGE:2899===
identified. Certain symptoms can help direct the evaluation toward noninfectious causes; they include
heart palpitations, sweating, and heat intolerance (hyperthyroidism) and recurrent or cyclic symptoms (a
rheumatoid, inflammatory, or hereditary disorder).
Past medical history
should note previous fevers or infections and known conditions predisposing to
infection (eg, congenital heart disease, sickle cell anemia, cancer, immunodeficiency). A family history of
an autoimmune disorder or other hereditary conditions (eg, familial dysautonomia, familial Mediterranean
fever) is sought. Vaccination history is reviewed to identify patients at risk of infections that can be
prevented by a vaccine.
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed, noting abnormalities in temperature and respiratory
rate. In ill-appearing children, BP should also be measured. Temperature should be measured rectally in
infants for accuracy. Any child with cough, tachypnea, or labored breathing requires pulse oximetry.
The child's overall appearance and response to the examination are important. A febrile child who is
overly compliant or listless is of more concern than one who is unco-operative. However, an irritable
infant or child who is inconsolable is also of concern. The febrile child who looks quite ill, especially when
the temperature has come down, is of great concern and requires in-depth evaluation and continued
observation. However, children who appear more comfortable after antipyretic therapy do not always
have a benign disorder.
The examination seeks signs of causative disorders (see
Table 268-19
).
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Age < 1 mo
• Lethargy, listlessness, or toxic appearance
• Respiratory distress
• Petechiae or purpura
• Inconsolability
Interpretation of findings:
Although serious illness does not always cause high fever, and many high
fevers result from self-limited viral infections, a temperature of ≥ 39° C in children < 3 yr indicates higher
risk of occult bacteremia.
Acute fever
is infectious in most cases, and of these, most are viral. History and examination are
adequate to make a diagnosis in older children who are otherwise well and not toxic-appearing. Typically,
they have a viral respiratory illness (recent ill contact, runny nose, wheeze, or cough) or GI illness (ill
contact, diarrhea, and vomiting). Other findings also suggest specific causes (see
Table 268-19
).
However in infants < 36 mo, the possibility of occult bacteremia, plus the frequent absence of focal
findings in neonates and young infants with serious bacterial infection, necessitates a different approach.
Evaluation varies by age group. Accepted categories are neonates (≤ 28 days), young infants (1 to 3 mo),
and older infants and children (3 to 36 mo). Regardless of clinical findings, a neonate with fever requires
immediate hospitalization and testing to rule out a dangerous infection. Young infants may require
hospitalization depending on screening laboratory results and the likelihood that they will be brought in for
follow-up.
Chronic fever
requires a high index of suspicion for the many potential causes. However, certain
findings can suggest the disorder: erythema chronicum migrans rash, intermittent joint swelling, and neck
pain (Lyme disease); intermittent headaches with runny nose or congestion (sinusitis); weight loss, highrisk exposure, and night sweats (TB); weight loss or difficulty gaining weight, heart palpitations, and
sweating (hyperthyroidism); and weight loss, anorexia, and night sweats (cancer). Certain conditions (eg,
===PAGE:2900===
granulomatous diseases) may manifest with non-specific symptoms and a history that involves repeated
infections (eg, pneumonia, skin infections, abscesses, septicemia).
Testing:
Testing depends on whether fever is acute or chronic.
For
acute fever
, testing for infectious causes is directed by the age of the child (see
Fig. 280-1
on p.
and
Fig. 280-2
.
All febrile children
<
3 mo
require a WBC count with a manual differential, blood cultures, and
urinalysis and urine culture (urine obtained by catheterization, not an external bag). Lumbar puncture is
mandatory for children < 28 days; expert opinion varies about the need for the test in children aged 29
days to
[Table 268-19.
Examination of the Febrile Child]
2 mo. Chest x-ray, stool swabs for WBCs, stool cultures, and acute-phase reactant tests (eg, ESR, Creactive protein) are done depending on symptoms and degree of suspicion.
Febrile children between 3 mo and 36 mo
who look well and can be watched carefully do not require
laboratory testing. If the child has symptoms or signs of specific infections,
clinicians should order
appropriate tests (eg, chest x-ray when there is hypoxemia, dyspnea, or grunting; urinalysis and culture
when there is foul-smelling urine; lumbar puncture when there is abnormal behavior or meningismus). If
the child looks ill or has a temperature > 39° C but has no localizing signs, blood counts and cultures and
urine tests should be considered as well as a lumbar puncture.
For
febrile children
>
36 mo
, testing should be directed by history and examination; screening blood
cultures and WBC counts are not indicated.
For
chronic fever
, testing for noninfectious causes should be directed by history, physical examination,
and suspected disorder (eg, thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] and thyroxine [T] for suspected
hyperthyroidism; antinuclear antibodies and Rh factor for suspected juvenile idiopathic arthritis).
Children without focal findings should have initial screening tests, including
• CBC with differential
• Urinalysis and culture
• ESR (C-reactive protein is also considered, although one is not necessarily better than the other)
• PPD for TB screening
An elevated ESR suggests inflammation (infection, TB, autoimmune disorder, cancer), and further testing
can be done. If the WBC count is normal, indolent infection is less likely; however, if infection is
suspected clinically, serologic testing for possible causes (eg, Lyme disease, cat-scratch disease,
mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus) can be done, as well as blood cultures. Imaging tests can be helpful in
detecting tumors, collections of purulent material, or osteomyelitis. The type of test is determined by the
specific concern. For example, head CT is used for diagnosis of sinusitis; both CT and MRI are used for
identification of a tumor and metastatic lesions, and bone scanning is used for detection of osteomyelitis.
Bone marrow aspiration can be done to detect cancers such as leukemia.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder.
Fever in an otherwise healthy child does not necessarily require treatment. Although antipyretics can
provide comfort, they do not change the course of an infection. In fact, fever is an integral part of the
===PAGE:2901===
inflammatory response to infection and can help the child fight the infection. However, most clinicians use
antipyretics to help alleviate discomfort and to reduce physiologic stresses in children who have
cardiopulmonary disorders, neurologic disorders, or a history of febrile seizures.
Antipyretic drugs
that are typically used include
• Acetaminophen
• Ibuprofen
Acetaminophen tends to be preferred because ibuprofen decreases the protective effect of
prostaglandins in the stomach and, if used chronically, can lead to gastritis. The dosage of
acetaminophen is 10 to 15 mg/kg po or rectally q 4 to 6 h. Ibuprofen dosage is 10 mg/kg po q 6 h. Use of
one antipyretic at a time is preferred; however, some clinicians alternate the 2 drugs to treat high fever
(eg, acetaminophen at 6 AM, 12 PM, and 6 PM and ibuprofen at 9 AM, 3 PM, and 9 PM). This approach
is not encouraged because caregivers may become confused and inadvertently exceed the
recommended daily dose. Aspirin should be avoided because it increases the risk of Reye's syndrome
( if certain viral illnesses such as influenza and varicella are present.
Nondrug approaches
to fever include putting the child in a warm or tepid bath, using cool compresses,
and undressing the child. Caregivers should be cautioned not to use a cold water bath, which is
uncomfortable and, by inducing shivering, may paradoxically elevate body temperature. As long as the
temperature of the water is slightly cooler than the temperature of the child, a bath provides temporary
relief.
Things to avoid:
Wiping the body down with isopropyl alcohol should be strongly discouraged because
alcohol can be absorbed through the skin and cause toxicity. Numerous folk remedies exist, ranging from
the harmless (eg, putting onions or potatoes in socks) to the uncomfortable (eg, coining, cupping).
Key Points
• Most acute fever is caused by viral infections.
• Causes and evaluation of acute fever differ depending on the age of a child.
• Children < 36 mo can have a bacterial bloodstream infection without localizing signs (occult bacteremia).
• Teething does not cause fever.
• Antipyretics do not alter the outcome but may make children feel better.
Nausea and Vomiting
Nausea is the sensation of impending emesis and is frequently accompanied by autonomic changes,
such as increased heart rate and salivation. Nausea and vomiting typically occur in sequence; however,
they can occur separately (eg, vomiting can occur without preceding nausea as a result of increased
intracranial pressure).
Vomiting is uncomfortable and can cause dehydration because fluid is lost and because the ability to
rehydrate by drinking is limited.
Pathophysiology
Vomiting is the final part of a sequence of events coordinated by the emetic center located in the medulla.
The emetic center can be activated by afferent neural pathways from digestive (eg, pharynx, stomach,
small bowel) and nondigestive (eg, heart, testes) organs, the chemoreceptor trigger zone located in the
area postrema on the floor of the 4th ventricle (containing dopamine and serotonin receptors), and other
CNS centers (eg, brain stem, vestibular system).
===PAGE:2902===
Etiology
The causes of vomiting vary with age and range from relatively benign to potentially life threatening (see
Table 268-20
). Vomiting is a protective mechanism that provides a means to expel potential toxins;
however, it can also indicate serious disease (eg, intestinal obstruction). Bilious vomiting indicates a high
intestinal obstruction and, especially in an infant, requires immediate evaluation.
Infants:
Infants normally spit up small amounts (usually < 5 to 10 mL) during or soon after feedings, often
when being burped. Rapid feeding, air swallowing, and overfeeding may be causes, although spitting up
occurs even without these factors. Occasional vomiting may also be normal, but repeated vomiting is
abnormal.
The most common causes of vomiting in infants and neonates include the following:
• Acute viral gastroenteritis
• Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Other important causes in infants and neonates include the following:
• Pyloric stenosis
• Intestinal obstruction (eg, meconium ileus, volvulus, intestinal atresia, stenosis)
• Intussusception (should be considered in an infant ≥ 3 mo)
Less common causes of recurrent vomiting include sepsis and food intolerance. Metabolic disorders (eg,
urea cycle disorders, organic acidemias) are uncommon but can manifest with vomiting.
Older children:
The most common cause is
• Acute viral gastroenteritis
Non-GI infections may cause a few episodes of vomiting. Other causes to consider include serious
infection (eg, meningitis, pyelonephritis), acute abdomen (eg, appendicitis), increased intracranial
pressure secondary to a space-occupying lesion (eg, caused by trauma or tumor), and cyclic vomiting.
In adolescents, causes of vomiting also include pregnancy, eating disorders, and toxic ingestions.
Evaluation
Evaluation includes assessment of severity (eg, presence of dehydration, surgical or other lifethreatening disorder) and diagnosis of cause.
History: History of present illness
should determine when vomiting episodes started, frequency, and
character of episodes (particularly whether vomiting is projectile, bilious, or small in amount and more
consistent with spitting up). Any pattern to the vomiting (eg, after feeding, only with certain foods, primarily
in the morning or in recurrent cyclic episodes) should be established. Important associated symptoms
include diarrhea (with or without blood), fever, anorexia, and abdominal pain, distention, or both. Stool
frequency and consistency and urinary output should be noted.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causative disorders, including weakness, poor suck, and
failure to thrive (metabolic disorders); delay in passage of meconium, abdominal distention, and lethargy
(intestinal obstruction); headache, nuchal rigidity, and vision change (intracranial disorders); food
bingeing or signs of distorted body image (eating disorders); missed periods and breast swelling
(pregnancy); rashes (eczematous suggests food intolerance, petechial suggests CNS infection, urticarial
suggests food allergy); ear pain and sore throat (focal non-GI infection); and fever with headache, back
===PAGE:2903===
pain, or abdominal pain (meningitis, pyelonephritis, or appendicitis).
Past medical history
should note history of travel (possible infectious gastroenteritis), any recent head
trauma, and unprotected sex (pregnancy).
[Table 268-20.
Some Causes of Vomiting in Infants, Children, and Adolescents]
Physical examination:
Vital signs are reviewed for indicators of infection (eg, fever) and volume
depletion (eg, tachycardia, hypotension).
During the general examination, signs of distress (eg, lethargy, irritability, inconsolable crying) and signs
of weight loss (cachexia) or gain are noted.
Because the abdominal examination may cause discomfort, the physical examination should begin with
the head. The head and neck examination should focus on signs of infection (eg, red, bulging tympanic
membrane; bulging anterior fontanelle; erythematous tonsils) and dehydration (eg, dry mucous
membranes, lack of tears). The neck should be passively flexed to detect resistance or discomfort,
suggesting meningeal irritation.
Cardiac examination should note presence of tachycardia (eg, dehydration, fever, distress). Abdominal
examination should note distention; presence and quality of bowel sounds (eg, high-pitched, normal,
absent); tenderness and any associated guarding, rigidity, or rebound (peritoneal signs); and presence of
organomegaly or mass.
The skin and extremities are examined for petechiae or purpura (severe infection) or other rashes
(possible viral infection or signs of atopy), jaundice (possible metabolic disorder), and signs of
dehydration (eg, poor skin turgor, delayed capillary refill).
Growth parameters and signs of developmental progress should be noted.
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Lethargy and listlessness
• Inconsolability and bulging fontanelle in infant
• Nuchal rigidity, photophobia, and fever in older child
•
Peritoneal signs or abdominal distention ("surgical" abdomen)
• Persistent vomiting with poor growth or development
Interpretation of findings:
Initial findings help determine severity of diagnosis and need for immediate
intervention.
• Any neonate or infant with recurrent or bilious (yellow or green) emesis or projectile vomiting most likely
has a GI obstruction and probably requires surgical intervention.
• An infant or young child with colicky abdominal pain, signs of intermittent pain or listlessness, and
absent or bloody stools needs to be evaluated for an intussusception.
• A child or adolescent with fever, nuchal rigidity, and photophobia should be evaluated for meningitis.
• A child or adolescent with fever and abdominal pain followed by vomiting, anorexia, and decreased
bowel sounds should be evaluated for appendicitis.
• Recent history of head trauma or progressive headaches and visual changes indicate intracranial
hypertension.
===PAGE:2904===
Other findings can be interpreted primarily depending on age (see
Table 268-20
).
In
infants
, irritability, choking, and respiratory signs (eg, stridor) may be manifestations of
gastroesophageal reflux. A history of poor development or neurologic manifestations suggests a CNS or
metabolic disorder. Delayed passage of meconium, later onset of vomiting, or both may indicate
Hirschsprung's disease or an intestinal stenosis.
In
children and adolescents
, fever suggests infection; the combination of vomiting and diarrhea
suggests acute gastroenteritis. Lesions on fingers and erosion of tooth enamel or an adolescent
unconcerned about weight loss suggests an eating disorder. Morning nausea and vomiting, amenorrhea,
and possibly weight gain suggest pregnancy. Vomiting that has occurred in the past and is episodic,
short-lived, and has no other accompanying symptoms suggests cyclic vomiting.
Testing:
Testing should be directed by suspected causative disorders (see
Table 268-20
). Imaging
studies are typically done to evaluate abdominal pathology. Various specific blood tests are done to
diagnose inherited metabolic disorders.
If dehydration is suspected, serum electrolytes should be measured.
Treatment
Treatment is targeted at the causative disorder. Drugs frequently used in adults to decrease nausea and
vomiting are rarely used in children because the usefulness of treatment has not been proved and
because they have potential risks of adverse effects and of masking an underlying condition.
Rehydration is important (.
Key Points
• In general, the most common cause of vomiting is acute viral gastroenteritis.
• Not all vomiting is caused by gastroenteritis.
• Diarrhea suggests an infectious GI cause.
• Bloody stools or lack of bowel movements suggests an obstructive cause.
• Persistent vomiting (especially in an infant) requires immediate evaluation.
Separation and Stranger Anxiety
Separation anxiety:
Separation anxiety is crying when a parent leaves the room. It is normal when it
starts at about 8 mo, peaks in intensity between 10 and 18 mo, and generally resolves by 24 mo. It should
be distinguished from separation anxiety disorder (, which occurs at an older age, when such
a reaction is developmentally inappropriate; refusal to go to school (or preschool) is a common
manifestation.
Separation anxiety occurs at a time when infants start to become emotionally attached to their parents.
Because they have no object permanence (incomplete memory and no sense of time), children fear that
the departure of their parents is permanent. Separation anxiety resolves as children develop a sense of
memory; they can keep an image of their parents in mind when the parents are gone and can recall that
in the past, the parents returned.
Parents should be advised not to limit or forego separations in response to separation anxiety; this
response could compromise the child's maturation and development. When parents leave the home (or
leave the child at a child care center), they can try the following strategies:
===PAGE:2905===
• Encouraging the person caring for the child to create distractions
• Leaving without responding at length to a child's crying
• Remaining calm and reassuring
• Establishing routines at separations to ease the child's anxiety
• Feeding the child and letting the child nap before parents leave (because separation anxiety may be
worse when a child is hungry or tired)
If the parents must momentarily go to another room in the home, they should call to the child while in the
other room to reassure the child. This strategy gradually teaches the child that parents are still present
even though the child cannot see them.
Separation anxiety causes no long-term harm to children if it resolves by age 2 yr. If it persists beyond
age 2, separation anxiety may or may not be a problem depending how much it interferes with the child's
development. For children, feeling some fear when they leave for preschool or kindergarten is normal.
This feeling should diminish with time. Rarely, excessive fear of separations inhibits children from
attending child care or preschool or keeps them from playing normally with peers. This anxiety is probably
abnormal (separation anxiety disorder—. In such cases, children require medical attention.
Stranger anxiety:
Stranger anxiety is manifested by crying when an unfamiliar person approaches. It is
normal when it starts at about 8 to 9 mo and usually abates by age 2 yr. Stranger anxiety is linked with the
infant's developmental task of distinguishing the familiar from the unfamiliar. Both the duration and
intensity of the anxiety vary greatly among children.
Some infants and young children show a strong preference for one parent over another at a given age,
and grandparents may suddenly be viewed as strangers. Anticipating these occurrences during well-child
visits helps prevent misinterpretation of the behavior. Comforting the child and avoiding overreaction to
the behavior are usually the only therapy needed.
Common sense should dictate management. If a new sitter is coming, having that person spend some
time with the family before the actual day makes sense. When the event arrives, having parents spend
some time with the child and sitter before they leave is prudent. If grandparents are coming to watch the
child for a few days while parents go away, they should arrive a day or two early. Similar techniques can
be used in anticipation of hospitalization.
Stranger anxiety of pronounced intensity or extended duration may be a sign of more generalized anxiety
and should prompt evaluation of the family situation, parenting techniques, and the child's overall
emotional state.
Sleeping
Sleep behaviors are culturally determined, and problems tend to be defined as behaviors that vary from
accepted customs or norms. In cultures where children sleep separately from their parents in the same
house, sleep problems are among the most common that parents and children face.
Infants usually adapt to a day-night sleep schedule between 4 and 6 mo. Sleep problems beyond these
ages take many forms, including difficulty falling asleep at night, frequent nighttime awakening, atypical
daytime napping, and dependence on feeding or on being held before being able to go to sleep. These
problems are related to parental expectations, the child's temperament and biologic rhythms, and childparent interactions.
Factors that influence sleep patterns vary by age. For infants, inborn biologic patterns are central. At 9 mo
and again around 18 mo, sleep disturbances become common for these reasons:
• Separation anxiety develops.
===PAGE:2906===
• Children can move independently and control their environment.
• They may take long late-afternoon naps.
• They may become overstimulated while playing before bedtime.
• Nightmares tend to become more common.
In toddlers and older children, emotional factors and established habits become more important. Stressful
events (eg, moving, illness) may cause acute sleep problems in older children.
Evaluation
History:
History focuses on the child's sleeping environment, consistency of bedtime, bedtime routines,
and parental expectations. A detailed description of the child's average day can be useful. The history
should probe for stressors in the child's life, such as difficulties in school, as well as exposure to
unsettling television programs and caffeinated beverages (eg, sodas). Reports of inconsistent bedtimes,
a noisy or chaotic environment, or frequent attempts by the child to manipulate parents by using sleep
behaviors suggest the need for lifestyle changes. Extreme parental frustration suggests tension within the
family or parents who are having difficulty being consistent and firm.
A sleep diary compiled over several nights may help identify unusual sleep patterns and sleep disorders
(eg, sleepwalking, night terrors—. Careful questioning of older children and adolescents
about school, friends, anxieties, depressive symptoms, and overall state of mind often reveals a source
for a sleep problem.
Physical examination and testing:
Examination and diagnostic testing generally yield little useful
information.
Treatment
The clinician's role in treatment is to present explanations and options to parents, who must implement
changes to get the child on an acceptable sleep schedule. Approaches vary with age and circumstances.
Infants are often comforted by swaddling, ambient noise, and movement. However, always rocking infants
to sleep does not allow them to learn how to fall asleep on their own, which is an important
developmental task. As a substitute for rocking, the parent can sit quietly by the crib until the infant falls
asleep; the infant eventually learns to be comforted and to fall asleep without being held. All children
awaken during the night, but children who have been taught to fall asleep by themselves usually settle
themselves back to sleep. When children cannot get back to sleep, parents can check on them to make
sure they are safe and to reassure them, but children should then be allowed to settle themselves back to
sleep.
In older children, a period of winding down with quiet activities such as reading at bedtime facilitates
sleep. A consistent bedtime is important, and a fixed ritual is helpful for young children. Asking fully verbal
children to recount the events of the day often eliminates nightmares and waking. Encouraging exercise
in the daytime, avoiding scary television programs and movies, and refusing to allow bedtime to become
an element of manipulation can also help prevent sleep problems.
If stressful events are the cause, reassurance and encouragement are always ultimately effective.
Allowing children to sleep in their parents' bed in such instances almost always prolongs rather than
resolves the problem.
Toilet Training
Toilet training involves recognition of readiness for and implementation of the separate steps of toileting:
discussion, undressing, eliminating, dressing again, flushing, and hand washing. Most children can be
trained for bowel control between age 2 yr and 3 yr and for urinary control between age 3 yr and 4 yr. By
===PAGE:2907===
age 5 yr, the average child can go to the toilet alone. For children ≥ 4 yr, see p.
for incontinence of
urine (enuresis) and p.
for incontinence of stool (encopresis).
The key to successful toilet training is recognizing signs of readiness to train (usually at age 18 to 24 mo):
• Children can remain dry for several hours.
• They show interest in sitting on a potty chair and express visible signs of preparing to urinate or
defecate.
• They want to be changed after either.
• They can place things where they belong and can understand and carry out simple verbal commands.
Approaches to toilet training must be consistent among all caregivers.
The
timing method
is the most common approach. Once children have demonstrated readiness, the
parent discusses with them what will be happening, selecting words that they can readily understand and
say. Children are gradually introduced to the potty chair and briefly sit on it fully clothed; they then
practice taking their pants down, sitting on the potty chair for ≤ 5 or 10 min, and redressing. The purpose
of the exercise is explained repeatedly and emphasized by placing wet or dirty diapers in the potty. Once
this connection between the potty and elimination has been made, the parent should try to anticipate
children's need to eliminate and provide positive reinforcement for successful elimination. Children are
also encouraged to practice using the potty whenever the need to eliminate is sensed. They should be
taught about flushing and hand washing after each elimination. For children with an unpredictable
schedule, this type of plan is difficult, and training must be delayed until they can anticipate elimination
themselves. Anger or punishment for accidents or lack of success is counterproductive.
Children who resist sitting on the potty should try again after a meal. If resistance continues for days,
postponing toilet training for at least several weeks is the best strategy. Behavior modification with a
reward given for successful toileting is one option; once the pattern is established, rewards are gradually
withdrawn. Power struggles must be avoided because they often cause regression from any progress that
has been made and may strain the parent-child relationship. Toilet-trained children may also regress
when they are ill or emotionally upset or when they feel the need for more attention, as when a new
sibling arrives. Refusal to use the potty may also represent manipulation. In these situations, parents are
advised to avoid pressuring children, offer incentives, and, if possible, give children more care and
attention at times other than when toileting is involved.
===PAGE:2908===
Chapter 269. Approach to the Care of Adolescents
Adolescence is a developmental period during which dependent children grow into independent adults.
This period usually begins at about 10 yr and lasts until the late teens or early 20s. During adolescence,
children undergo striking physical, intellectual, and emotional growth. Guiding adolescents through this
period is a challenge for parents as well as clinicians. Preventive care is also important (see
Table 268-7
.
Fortunately, most adolescents enjoy good physical health. Psychosocial adjustment is a hallmark of this
phase of development because even normal individuals struggle with issues of identity, autonomy,
sexuality, and relationships. "Who am I, where am I going, and how do I relate to all of these people in my
life?" are constant preoccupations for most adolescents. Psychosocial disorders are more common during
adolescence than during childhood, and many unhealthy behaviors that begin during adolescence (eg,
smoking, drug use, violence) can lead to acute health problems, chronic disorders, or morbidity later in
life.
Physical Growth
All organ systems and the body as a whole undergo major growth during adolescence; breasts in girls
and genitals and body hair in both sexes undergo the most obvious changes. Even when this process
goes normally, substantial emotional adjustments are required. If the timing is atypical, particularly in a
boy whose physical development is delayed or in a girl whose development occurs early, additional
emotional stress is likely. Most boys who grow slowly have a constitutional delay and catch up eventually.
Evaluation to exclude pathologic causes and reassurance are needed.
Guidance concerning nutrition, fitness, and lifestyle should be given to all adolescents, with special
attention paid to the role of activities such as sports, the arts, social activities, and community service in
the adolescent's life. Relative requirements for protein and energy (g or kcal/kg body weight) decline
progressively from the end of infancy through adolescence (see
Table 1-4
, although absolute requirements increase. Protein requirements are 0.9 g/kg/day in late
adolescence; mean relative energy requirements are 40 kcal/kg.
Sexuality
In addition to adapting to bodily changes, the adolescent must become comfortable with the role of adult
and must put sexual urges, which can be very strong and sometimes frightening, into perspective. Some
adolescents struggle with the issue of sexual identity and may be afraid to reveal their sexual orientation
to friends or family members. Acceptance from a clinician and, if indicated, a referral for supportive
counseling, may help the adolescent adjust to life as a healthy adult.
Few elements of the human experience combine physical, intellectual, and emotional aspects as
thoroughly as sexuality. Helping adolescents put sexuality into a healthy context through honest answers
regarding reproduction and sexually transmitted diseases is extremely important. Adolescents and their
parents should be encouraged to speak openly regarding their attitudes toward sex and sexuality;
parents' opinions remain an important determinant of adolescent behavior.
Intellectual Growth
As adolescents encounter schoolwork that is more complex, they begin to identify areas of interest as well
as relative strengths and weaknesses. Adolescence is a period during which young people begin to
consider career options, although most do not have a clearly defined goal. Parents and clinicians must be
aware of the adolescent's capabilities, help the adolescent formulate realistic expectations, and be
prepared to identify impediments to learning that need remediation, such as learning disabilities, attention
problems, or inappropriate learning environments. Parents and clinicians should facilitate apprenticeships
and experiences that expose older adolescents to potential career opportunities either during school or
during school vacations. These opportunities may help adolescents focus their career choices and future
studies.
===PAGE:2909===
Emotional Growth
The emotional aspect of growth is most trying, often taxing the patience of parents, teachers, and
clinicians. Emotional lability is a direct result of neurologic development during this period, as the parts of
the brain that control emotions mature. Frustration may also arise from growth in multiple domains. A
major area of conflict arises from the adolescent's desire for more freedom, which clashes with the
parents' strong instincts to protect their
children from harm. Parents may need help in renegotiating their
role and slowly allowing their adolescents more privileges as well as expecting them to accept greater
responsibility for themselves and within the family. Communication within even stable families can be
difficult and is worsened when families are divided or parents have emotional problems of their own.
Clinicians can be of great help by offering adolescents and parents sensible, practical, concrete,
supportive help while facilitating communication within the family.
Physical Problems
Although adolescents are susceptible to the same kinds of illness that afflict younger children, generally
they are a healthy group. Adolescents should continue to receive vaccinations according to the
recommended schedule (see
Table 268-11
.
Acne is extremely common and needs to be addressed because of its impact on self-esteem.
Trauma is very common among adolescents, with sports and motor vehicle injuries most frequent.
Violence, sometimes involving weapons, is an everyday threat among certain adolescent groups.
Obesity is one of the most common reasons for visits to adolescent clinics. Most cases of obesity are due
to eating more than is needed, often in conjunction with a sedentary lifestyle. Genetic influences are
common, and responsible genes are now being identified (see also
Chapter 6
). Determination of the body
mass index (BMI) is recognized as an important aspect of physical assessment. Primary endocrine (eg,
hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism) or metabolic causes are uncommon. Hypothyroidism should be
ruled out as a cause and should be suspected if height growth slows significantly. If the child is short and
has hypertension, Cushing's syndrome should be considered. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is occurring with
increasing frequency due to obesity in adolescents. Despite many therapeutic approaches, obesity is one
of the most difficult and discouraging problems to treat, and long-term success rates remain low.
Infectious mononucleosis is particularly prevalent among adolescents. Sexually transmitted diseases
become an important concern, and UTIs are common among girls. Some endocrine disorders, particularly
thyroid disorders, are common among adolescents, as are menstrual abnormalities. Iron deficiency is
relatively common among adolescent girls. Pregnancy also is not a rare occurrence and must be kept in
mind when treating adolescent girls. Although not common, neoplastic diseases such as leukemia,
lymphoma, bone cancers, and brain tumors also occur.
Psychosocial Disorders
Clinicians must be aware of the high frequency of psychosocial disorders that occur during this unsettled
stage of life. Depression is common and should be looked for actively (. Although suicide is a
rare occurrence (5/100,000), suicidal ideation is common (as many as 1 in 10 in some studies). Anxiety
often manifests during adolescence (, as do bipolar disease and problems with anger
management. Adolescence is also a time when some people who will develop a psychotic disorder
experience their first psychotic break. Eating disorders, especially in girls, are common (.
Some patients go to extraordinary lengths to hide an anorexic or bulimic state.
School problems, especially when related to learning or attention difficulties, can be dealt with by
clinicians, who must work closely with school personnel and parents. Learning disorders may manifest for
the first time as school becomes more demanding, particularly among bright children who previously had
been able to accommodate for their areas of weakness. If a learning disorder is suspected, the clinician
should recommend a complete learning evaluation followed by provision of appropriate services.
Environmental changes and sometimes drug therapy can be of great help to struggling students.
===PAGE:2910===
A constant concern is substance use, which begins as a psychosocial problem but may develop into a
physiologic disorder. Alcohol and cigarette use is extremely common, followed by marijuana and a long list
of other substances available in all strata of society. Inhalant use is also a problem, particularly among
young adolescents. Prescription and OTC drugs are now misused by adolescents more than any other
substances other than alcohol and marijuana. All of these psychoactive substances are addictive, and
delaying the onset of substance use from adolescence into adulthood both prevents the acute problems
associated with substance use and decreases the lifetime risk of developing a substance use disorder.
Clinicians should screen for use of alcohol and other drugs at every health maintenance visit and also
should advise both adolescents and parents about safely using and monitoring OTC and prescription
drugs.
The clinician who has developed an open, trusting relationship with an adolescent often can identify
these problems, can supply support and practical advice, and can get the adolescent to accept a referral
to specialized care if necessary.
===PAGE:2911===
Chapter 270. Caring for Sick Children and Their Families
Introduction
Illness and death cause emotional stresses in children and their families.
Sick Neonates
Difficulties arise when a sick or premature infant must be taken away from the family after birth because
of illness. The parents may not be able to see a critically ill infant during stabilization and may be
separated from the infant because of transport to a different hospital. Some infants require prolonged
separation from their families because of lengthy hospitalizations and treatments.
Many hospitals have recognized the importance of encouraging contact between infants and their
families. In most places, parents are encouraged to visit, taking precautions to minimize the risk of
spreading infections. Many hospitals have unlimited visiting hours for parents. Some hospitals have areas
in which parents can stay for prolonged periods to be near their infants.
In most hospitals, parents are encouraged to interact with their sick infant as much as possible.
No infant,
even one on a respirator, is too ill for the parents to see and touch
.
Parents are also encouraged to provide direct care for the infant as a way to get to know the infant and to
prepare for taking the infant home. Some hospitals increase contact between parents and premature or
sick infants by encouraging skin-to-skin contact; this may help parents feel more confident about taking
care of their infant at home. Infants who experience skin-to-skin contact gain weight faster when
compared with those who do not receive such care. Mothers can also provide breast milk directly or
pumped to be given through a feeding tube.
When an infant has a birth defect, the parents should see the infant as soon after birth as possible,
regardless of the medical condition. Otherwise, they may imagine the appearance and condition to be
much worse than the reality. Intensive parental support is essential, with as many counseling sessions as
are needed for parents to understand their infant's condition and recommended treatment and to accept
the infant psychologically. To balance discussion of abnormalities, the physician should emphasize what
is normal about the infant and the infant's potential.
When neonates die without having been seen or touched by their parents, the parents may later feel as
though they never really had a child. Such parents have reported exaggerated feelings of emptiness and
may develop prolonged depression because they could not mourn the loss of a "real" child. Parents who
have not been able to see or hold their infant while alive will usually be helped in the long term if allowed
to do so after the infant has died. In all cases, follow-up visits with the physician and a social worker are
helpful to review the circumstances of the infant's illness and death, answer questions that often arise
later, and assess and alleviate feelings of guilt. The physician can also evaluate the parents' grieving
process and provide appropriate guidance or a referral for more extensive support if necessary.
Children with Chronic Health Conditions
Chronic health conditions (both chronic illnesses and chronic physical disabilities) are generally defined
as those conditions that last > 12 mo and are severe enough to create some limitations in usual activity. It
has been estimated that chronic health conditions affect 10 to 30% of children, depending on the criteria.
Examples of chronic illnesses include asthma, cystic fibrosis, congenital heart disease, diabetes mellitus,
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and depression. Examples of chronic physical disabilities include
meningomyelocele, hearing or visual impairments, cerebral palsy, and loss of limb function.
Effects on the children:
Children with chronic health conditions may experience limitations in some
activities; frequent pain or discomfort; abnormal growth and development; and more hospitalizations,
outpatient visits, and medical treatments. Those with severe disabilities may be unable at times to
participate in school and peer activities.
===PAGE:2912===
Children's response to a chronic health condition largely depends on their developmental stage when the
condition occurs. Children with chronic conditions that appear in infancy will respond differently than
children who develop conditions during adolescence. School-aged
children may be most affected by the
inability to attend school and form relationships with peers. Adolescents may struggle with their inability to
achieve independence if they require assistance from parents and others for many of their daily needs;
parents should encourage self-reliance within the adolescent's capability and avoid overprotection.
Adolescents also find it particularly difficult to be viewed as different from their peers.
Health care practitioners can be advocates for appropriate hospital services for children with chronic
health conditions. Age-appropriate playrooms can be set up and a school program can be initiated with
the oversight of a trained child life specialist. Children can be encouraged to interact with peers whenever
possible. All procedures and plans should be explained to families and children whenever possible so the
families know what to expect during the hospitalization, thus relieving the anxiety that can be created by
uncertainty.
Effects on the family:
For families, having a child who has a chronic health condition can lead to loss of
their hope for an "ideal" child, neglected siblings, major expense and time commitment, confusion caused
by conflicting systems of health care management, lost opportunities (eg, family members providing
primary care to the child are therefore unable to return to work), and social isolation. Siblings may resent
the extra attention the ill child receives. Such stress may cause family breakup, especially when there are
preexisting difficulties with family function.
Conditions that affect the physical appearance of an infant (eg, cleft lip and palate, hydrocephalus) can
affect the bond between the infant and family members or caretakers. Once the diagnosis of abnormality
is made, parents may react with shock, denial, anger, sadness or depression, guilt, and anxiety. These
reactions may occur at any time in the child's development, and each parent may be at a different stage
of acceptance, making communication between them difficult. Parents may express their anger at the
health care practitioner, or their denial may cause them to seek many opinions about their child's
condition.
Care coordination:
Without coordination of services, care is crisis-oriented. Some services will be
duplicated, whereas others will be neglected. Care coordination requires knowledge of the children's
condition, their family and support systems, and the community in which they function.
All professionals who care for children with chronic health conditions must ensure that someone is
coordinating care. Sometimes the coordinator can be the child's parent. However, the systems that must
be negotiated are often so complex that even the most capable parents need assistance. Other possible
coordinators include the primary care physician, the subspecialty program staff, the community health
nurse, and staff of the 3rd-party payer. Regardless of who coordinates services, families and children
must be partners in the process. In general, children from low-income families who have chronic
conditions fare worse than others, in part because of lack of access to health care and care coordination
services. Some children with terminal illness benefit from hospice care.
Death and Dying
Families often have difficulty dealing with an ill and dying child. Children who are trying to make sense of
the death of a friend or family member may have particular difficulty (see also
Chapter 353
).
Death of a child:
Most often the death of a child happens in the hospital or emergency department.
Death can occur after a prolonged illness, such as cancer, or suddenly and unexpectedly, such as
following injury or sudden infant death. The death of a child can be difficult for families to comprehend
and accept. For parents, the death of a child means that they must give up their dreams and hopes for
their child. The grieving process may also mean that they are unable to attend to the needs of other
family members, including other children. Health care practitioners can help in the process by being
available to the family for consultation and to provide comfort whenever possible. In some circumstances,
referral to specialists skilled in working with families who have experienced the death of a child is
appropriate.
===PAGE:2913===
Death of a family member or friend:
Many children experience the death of a loved one. The way
children perceive the event (and hence the best response by parents and health care practitioners) is
affected by their developmental level. Preschool children may have limited understanding of death.
Relating the event to previous experience with a beloved pet may be helpful. Older children may be able
to understand the event more easily. Death should never be equated with going to sleep and never
waking up because children may become fearful of sleeping.
Parents should discuss with health care practitioners whether to have children visit severely ill children or
adults. Some children
may express a specific desire to visit family members or friends who are dying.
Children should be adequately prepared for such a visit so they will know what to expect. In the same
way, adults often wonder whether to bring children to a funeral. This decision should be made individually,
in consultation with the children whenever possible. When children attend a funeral, a close friend or
relative should accompany them to provide support throughout, and children should be allowed to leave if
necessary.
===PAGE:2914===
Chapter 271. Physical Growth and Development
Introduction
Physical growth is an increase in size. Development is growth in function and capability. Both processes
are highly dependent on genetic, nutritional, and environmental factors.
Physical Growth
(See also
Failure to Thrive
)
Physical growth includes attainment of full height and appropriate weight and an increase in size of all
organs (except lymphatic tissue, which decreases in size). Growth from birth to adolescence occurs in 2
distinct phases. The 1st phase (from birth to about age 1 to 2 yr) is one of rapid growth, although the rate
of growth decreases over that period. In the 2nd phase (from about 2 yr to the onset of puberty), growth
occurs in relatively constant annual increments. Puberty is the process of physical maturation from child
to adult. Adolescence defines an age group; puberty occurs during adolescence. At puberty, a 2nd growth
spurt occurs, affecting boys and girls slightly differently. All growth parameters can be charted on standard
growth curves available from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Length:
Length is measured in children too young to stand; height is measured once the child can stand.
In general, length in normal term infants increases about 30% by 5 mo and > 50% by 12 mo; infants grow
25 cm during the 1st yr; and height at 5 yr is about double birth length. In boys, half the adult height is
attained by about age 2; in girls, height at 19 mo is about half the adult height.
Rate of change in height (height velocity) is a more sensitive measure of growth than time-specific height
measures. In general, healthy term infants and children grow about 2.5 cm/mo between birth and 6 mo,
1.3 cm/mo from 7 to 12 mo, and about 7.6 cm/yr between 12 mo and 10 yr. Before 12 mo, height velocity
varies and is due in part to perinatal factors (eg, prematurity). After 12 mo, height is mostly genetically
determined, and height velocity stays constant until puberty; a child's height relative to peers tends to
remain the same. Some small-for-gestationalage infants tend to be shorter throughout life than infants
whose size is appropriate for their gestational age. Boys and girls show little difference in height and
growth rate during infancy and childhood.
Extremities grow faster than the trunk, leading to a gradual change in relative proportions; the crown-topubis/pubis-to-heel ratio is 1.7 at birth, 1.5 at 12 mo, 1.2 at 5 yr, and 1.0 after 7 yr.
A growth spurt in boys occurs sometime between ages 12 and 17, with the peak typically between ages
13 and 15; a gain of > 10 cm can be expected in the year of peak velocity. A growth spurt in girls occurs
sometime between ages 9 1/2 and 14 1/2, with the peak typically between ages 11 and 13 1/2; gain may
reach 9 cm in the year of peak velocity. If puberty is delayed (, growth in height may slow
considerably. If the delay is not pathologic, the adolescent growth spurt occurs later and growth catches
up, with height crossing percentile lines until the child reaches a genetically determined stature. At age
18, almost 2.5 cm of growth remains for boys and slightly less for girls, for whom growth is 99% complete.
In girls with true precocious puberty (prior to age 6 1/2), an early growth spurt occurs along with
menarche at a young age and, ultimately, short stature results because of early closure of growth plates.
Weight:
Weight follows a similar pattern. Normal term neonates generally lose 5 to 8% of birth weight in
the days after delivery but regain their birth weight within 2 wk. They then gain 14 to 28 g/day until 3 mo,
then 4000 g between 3 and 12 mo, doubling their birth
weight by 5 mo, tripling it by 12 mo, and almost
quadrupling it by 2 yr. Between age 2 yr and puberty, weight increases 2 kg/yr. The recent epidemic of
childhood obesity has involved markedly greater weight gain, even among very young children. In
general, boys are heavier and taller than girls when growth is complete because boys have a longer
prepubertal growth period, increased peak velocity during the pubertal growth spurt, and a longer
adolescent growth spurt.
Head circumference:
Head circumference reflects brain size and is routinely measured up to 2 yr. At
birth, the brain is 25% of adult size, and head circumference averages 35 cm. Head circumference
===PAGE:2915===
increases an average 1 cm/mo during the 1st yr; growth is more rapid in the 1st 8 mo, and by 12 mo, the
brain has completed half its postnatal growth and is 75% of adult size. Head circumference increases 3.5
cm over the next 2 yr; the brain is 80% of adult size by age 3 yr and 90% by age 7 yr.
Body composition:
Body composition (proportions of body fat and water) changes and affects volume
of distribution of drugs (. Proportion of fat increases rapidly from 13% at birth to 20 to 25% by 12 mo, accounting for the
chubby appearance of most infants. Subsequently, a slow fall occurs until preadolescence, when body fat
returns to about 13%. There is a slow rise again until the onset of puberty, when body fat may again fall,
especially in boys. After puberty, the percentage generally stays stable in girls, whereas in boys there
tends to be a slight decline.
Body water measured as a percentage of body weight is 70% at birth, dropping to 61% at 12 mo (about
equal to the adult percentage). This change is fundamentally due to a decrease in ECF from 45% to 28%
of body weight. ICF stays relatively constant. After age 12 mo, there is a slow and variable fall in ECF to
adult levels of about 20% and a rise in ICF to adult levels of about 40%. The relatively larger amount of
body water, its high turnover rate, and the comparatively high surface losses (due to a proportionately
large surface area) make infants more susceptible to fluid deprivation than older children and adults.
Tooth eruption:
Tooth eruption is variable (see
Table 271-1
), primarily because of genetic factors. On average, normal infants should have 6 teeth by 12
mo, 12 teeth by 18 mo, 16 teeth by 2 yr, and all teeth (20) by 2 1/2 yr; deciduous teeth are replaced by
permanent teeth between the ages of 5 and 13 yr. Eruption of deciduous teeth is similar in both sexes;
permanent teeth tend to appear earlier in girls. Tooth eruption may be delayed by familial patterns or by
conditions such as rickets, hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, or Down syndrome. Supernumerary teeth and
congenital absence of teeth are probably normal variants.
[Table 271-1.
Tooth Eruption Times]
Development
(See also
Chapter 304
.)
Development is often divided into specific domains, such as gross motor, fine motor, language, cognition,
and social/emotional growth. These designations are useful, but substantial overlap exists. Studies have
established average ages at which specific milestones are reached, as well as ranges of normality. In a
normal child, progress within the different domains varies, as in the toddler who walks late but speaks in
sentences early (see
Table 271-2
).
Environmental influences, ranging from nutrition to stimulation and from the impact of disease to the
effects of psychologic factors, interact with genetic factors to determine the pace and pattern of
development.
Assessment of development occurs constantly as parents, school personnel, and clinicians evaluate
children. Many tools are available for monitoring development more specifically. The Denver
Developmental Screening Test
[Table 271-2.
Developmental Milestones*]
facilitates evaluation in several domains. The scoring sheet indicates the average ages for achieving
certain milestones and nicely shows the critical concept of a range of normality. Other tools can also be
used (see
Table 271-2
).
Motor development:
Motor development includes fine motor (eg, picking up small objects, drawing) and
gross motor (eg, walking, climbing stairs) skills. It is a continuous process that depends on familial
patterns, environmental factors (eg, when activity is limited by prolonged illness), and specific disorders
(eg, cerebral palsy, intellectual disability, muscular dystrophy). Children typically begin to walk at 12 mo,
===PAGE:2916===
can climb stairs at 21 mo, and run well at 2 yr, but the age at which these milestones are achieved by
normal children varies widely. Motor development cannot be significantly accelerated by applying
increased stimulation.
Language development:
The ability to understand language precedes the ability to speak; children with
few words usually can understand a great deal. Although delays in expressive speech are typically not
accompanied by other developmental delays, all children with excessive language delays should be
evaluated for the presence of other delays in development. Children who have delays in both receptive
and expressive speech more often have additional developmental problems. Evaluation of any delay
should start with an assessment of hearing. Most children who experience speech delay have normal
intelligence. In contrast, children with accelerated speech development are often of above-average
intelligence.
Speech progresses from the utterance of vowel sounds (cooing) to the introduction of syllables that start
with consonants (ba-ba-ba). Most children can say "Dada" and "Mama" specifically by 12 mo, use several
words by 18 mo, and combine words into some sentences by 2 yr. The average 3-yr-old can carry on a
conversation. These milestones are highly variable.
Cognitive and social/emotional development:
Cognitive and social/emotional development refers to
the intellectual and psychologic maturation of children as their physical development allows them to
interact more with other people and the external world. There are multiple theories of these forms of
development in children and adolescents; the oldest and most famous are those proposed by Freud,
Piaget, and Erikson. All are based on clinical observations, but none has been tested in large groups of
children. In general, these models are considered useful for describing aspects of development in some
children, but none is universally applicable. Increasingly, appropriate attachments and nurturing in infancy
and early childhood are recognized as critical factors in cognitive growth and emotional health. For
example, reading to children from an early age, providing intellectually stimulating experiences, and
providing warm and nurturing relationships all have a major impact on growth in these domains. Intellect is
appraised in young children by observations of language skills, curiosity, and problem-solving abilities. As
children become more verbal, intellectual functioning becomes easier to assess using a number of
specialized clinical tools. Once children start school, they undergo constant monitoring as part of the
academic process.
Emotional growth and the acquisition of social skills are assessed by watching children interact with
others in everyday situations. When children acquire speech, the understanding of their emotional state
becomes much more accurate. As with intellect, emotional functioning can be delineated more precisely
with specialized tools.
Sexual Development
Sexual maturation generally proceeds in an established sequence in both sexes. The age at onset and
rapidity of sexual development vary and are influenced by genetic and environmental factors. Sexual
maturity begins earlier today than a century ago, probably because of improvements in nutrition, general
health, and living conditions—eg, the average age of menarche has decreased by about 3 yr over the
past 100 yr. The physiologic changes that underlie sexual maturation are discussed in
Chs. 229
and
.
In boys, sexual changes begin with enlargement of the scrotum and testes, followed by lengthening of the
penis and enlargement of the seminal vesicles and prostate. Next, pubic hair appears. Axillary and facial
hair appears about 2 yr after pubic hair. The growth spurt usually begins a year after the testes start
enlarging. The median age for first ejaculation (between 12 1/2 and 14 yr in the US) is affected by
psychologic, cultural, and biologic factors. First ejaculation takes place about 1 yr after penis growth
accelerates. Gynecomastia, usually in the form of breast buds, is common among young adolescent boys
and usually resolves within several years.
In most girls, breast budding is the first visible sign of sexual maturation, followed closely by the initiation
of the growth spurt. Shortly thereafter, pubic and axillary hair appears. Menarche generally occurs about
2 yr after onset of breast development and when growth in height slows after reaching its peak.
Menarche occurs within a wide range, with most girls in the US starting their periods at 12 or 13 yr. The
===PAGE:2917===
stages of breast growth and pubic hair development can be detailed using Tanner's method (see
Figs. 245-2
and
245-3
.
If the order of sexual changes is disturbed, growth may be abnormal, and the physician should consider
pathologic reasons.
===PAGE:2918===
Chapter 272. Principles of Drug Treatment in Children
Introduction
Drug treatment in children differs from that in adults, most obviously because it is usually based on weight
or surface area. Doses (and dosing intervals) differ because of age-related variations in drug absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and elimination. A child cannot safely receive an adult drug dose, nor can it be
assumed that a child's dose is proportional to an adult's dose (ie, that a 7-kg child requires one tenth the
dose of a 70-kg adult). Most drugs have not been adequately studied in children, although federal
legislation (the Best Pharmaceuticals
for Children Act of 2001 and the Pediatric Research Equity Act of
2003 [both renewed in 2007]) provides the statutory and regulatory authority to begin those studies.
Adverse effects and toxicity:
Children are generally subject to the same adverse effects as adults (see
p.
), but they have increased risk with certain drugs because of differences in pharmacokinetics or
because of drug effects on growth and development. Common drugs with unique or higher risk of
adverse effects in children are listed in
Table 272-1
.
Younger children are at especially high risk of accidental poisoning when they discover and take
caregivers' vitamins or drugs. Infants are at risk of toxicity from drugs used by adults; toxicity can occur
prenatally when they are exposed via placental transfer or postnatally when exposed through breast milk
(numerous agents—see p.
and
Table 268-4
 or skin contact with caregivers who have recently applied certain topical drugs
(eg, scopolamine for motion sickness, malathion for lice, diphenhydramine for poison ivy).
Adverse effects, including death, have occurred in children receiving OTC cough and cold preparations
containing some combination of an antihistamine, sympathomimetic decongestant, and the antitussive
dextromethorphan. Current recommendations are that such products should not be given to children < 4
yr.
Pharmacokinetics in Children
Pharmacokinetics refers to the processes of drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination
(.
[Table 272-1.
Drugs Manifesting Unusual Toxicity in Children]
Absorption:
Absorption from the GI tract is affected by
• Gastric acid secretion
• Bile salt formation
• Gastric emptying time
• Intestinal motility
• Bowel length and effective absorptive surface
• Microbial flora
All these factors are reduced in neonates and all may be reduced or increased in an ill child of any age.
Reduced gastric acid secretion increases bioavailability of acid-labile drugs (eg, penicillin) and decreases
bioavailability of weakly acidic drugs (eg, phenobarbital). Reduced bile salt formation decreases bioavailability of lipophilic drugs (eg, diazepam). Reduced gastric emptying and intestinal motility increase
the time it takes to reach therapeutic concentrations when enteral drugs are given to infants < 3 mo.
Drug-metabolizing enzymes present in the intestines of young infants are another cause of reduced drug
absorption. Infants with congenital atretic bowel or surgically removed bowel or who have jejunal feeding
===PAGE:2919===
tubes may have specific absorptive defects depending on the length of bowel lost or bypassed and the
location of the lost segment.
Injected drugs are often erratically absorbed because of
• Variability in their chemical characteristics
• Differences in absorption by site of injection (IM or sc)
• Variability in muscle mass among children
• Illness (eg, compromised circulatory status)
IM injections are generally avoided in children because of pain and the possibility of tissue damage, but,
when needed, water-soluble drugs are best because they do not precipitate at the injection site.
Transdermal absorption may be enhanced in neonates and young infants because the stratum corneum
is thin and because the ratio of surface area to weight is much greater than for older children and adults.
Skin disruptions (eg, abrasions, eczema, burns) increase absorption in children of any age.
Transrectal drug therapy is generally appropriate only for emergencies when an IV route is not available
(eg, use of rectal diazepam for status epilepticus). Site of placement of the drug within the rectal cavity
may influence absorption because of the difference in venous drainage systems. Expulsion of the drug
may also be enhanced in the young infant.
Absorption of drugs from the lungs (eg,
β
-agonists for asthma, pulmonary surfactant for respiratory
distress syndrome) varies less by physiologic parameters and more by reliability of the delivery device
and patient or caregiver technique.
Distribution:
The volume of distribution of drugs changes in children with aging. These age-related
changes are due to changes in body composition (especially the extracellular and total body water
spaces) and plasma protein binding.
Higher doses (per kg of body weight) of water-soluble drugs are required in younger children because a
higher percentage of their body weight is water (see
Fig. 272-1
). Conversely, lower doses are required to avoid toxicity as children grow older because of the
decline in water as a percentage of body weight.
Many drugs bind to proteins (primarily albumin,
α
-acid glycoprotein, and lipoproteins); protein binding
limits distribution of
[Fig. 272-1.
Changes in body proportions of body composition with growth and aging.]
free drug throughout the body. Albumin and total protein concentrations are lower in neonates but
approach adult levels by 10 to 12 mo. Decreased protein binding in neonates is also due to qualitative
differences in binding proteins and to competitive binding by molecules such as bilirubin and free fatty
acids, which circulate in higher concentrations in neonates and infants. The net result may be increased
free drug concentrations, greater drug availability at receptor sites, and both pharmacologic effects and
higher frequency of adverse effects at lower drug concentrations.
Metabolism and elimination:
Drug metabolism and elimination vary with age and depend on the
substrate or drug, but most drugs, and most notably phenytoin, barbiturates, analgesics, and cardiac
glycosides, have plasma half-lives 2 to 3 times longer in neonates than in adults.
The cytochrome P-450 (CYP450) enzyme system in the small bowel and liver is the most important
known system for drug metabolism. CYP450 enzymes inactivate drugs via
• Oxidation, reduction, and hydrolysis (phase I metabolism)
===PAGE:2920===
• Hydroxylation and conjugation (phase II metabolism)
Phase I activity is reduced in neonates, increases progressively during the first 6 mo of life, exceeds adult
rates by the first few years for some drugs, slows during adolescence, and usually attains adult rates by
late puberty. However, adult rates of metabolism may be achieved for some drugs (eg, barbiturates,
phenytoin) 2 to 4 wk postnatally. CYP450 activity can also be induced (reducing drug concentrations and
effect) or inhibited (augmenting concentrations and effect) by coadministered drugs. These drug
interactions may lead to drug toxicity when CYP450 activity is inhibited or an inadequate drug level when
CYP450 activity is induced. Kidneys, lungs, and skin also play a role in the metabolism of some drugs, as
do intestinal drug-metabolizing enzymes in neonates. Phase II metabolism varies considerably by
substrate. Maturation of enzymes responsible for bilirubin and acetaminophen conjugation is delayed;
enzymes responsible for morphine conjugation are fully mature even in preterm infants.
Drug metabolites are eliminated primarily through bile or the kidneys. Renal elimination depends on
• Plasma protein binding
• Renal blood flow
• GFR
• Tubular secretion
All of these factors are altered in the first 2 yr of life. Renal plasma flow is low at birth (12 mL/min) and
reaches adult levels of 140 mL/min by age 1 yr. Similarly, GFR is 2 to 4 mL/min at birth, increases to 8 to
20 mL/min by 2 to 3 days, and reaches adult levels of 120 mL/min by 3 to 5 mo.
Drug dosing:
Because of the above factors, drug dosing in children < 12 yr is always a function of age,
body weight, or both. This approach is practical but not ideal. Even within a population of similar age and
weight, drug requirements may differ because of maturational differences in absorption, metabolism, and
elimination. Thus, when practical, dose adjustments should be based on plasma drug concentration.
Unfortunately, these adjustments are not feasible for most drugs. Studies done as a result of federal
legislation (the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act of 2001 and the Pediatric Research Equity Act of
2003 [both renewed in 2007]) have provided dosing for > 150 drugs that previously did not have pediatric
dosing information.
Nonadherence in Children
Nonadherence with drug recommendations (see also p.
) may occur at any age because of cost;
painful or inconvenient administration; or the need for frequent doses, complex regimens, or both. But
many unique factors contribute to nonadherence in children. Children < 6 yr may have difficulty
swallowing pills and may resist taking forms of drugs that taste bad. Older children often resist drugs or
regimens (eg, insulin, metered-dose inhalers) that require them to leave their classes or activities or that
make them appear different from their peers. Adolescents may express rebellion and assert independence
from parents by not taking their drugs. Parents or caregivers of younger children may only partially
remember or understand the rationale and instructions for taking a drug, and their work schedules may
preclude their being available to give children their scheduled doses. Some may wish to try folk or herbal
remedies initially. Some caregivers have limited incomes and are forced to spend their money on other
priorities, such as food; others have beliefs and attitudes that prevent them from giving children drugs.
To minimize nonadherence, a prescribing provider can do the following:
• Ascertain whether the patient or caregiver agrees with the diagnosis, perceives it as serious, and
believes the treatment will work.
•
Correct misunderstandings and guide the patient or caregiver toward reliable sources of information.
===PAGE:2921===
• Give written as well as oral instructions in a language the patient or caregiver can review and
understand.
• Make early follow-up telephone calls to families to answer residual questions.
• Assess progress and remind the patient or caregiver of follow-up visits.
• Review drug bottles at follow-up office visits for pill counts.
• Educate the patient or caregiver about how to keep a daily symptom or drug diary.
Adolescents in particular need to feel in control of their illness and treatment and should be encouraged
to communicate freely and to take as much responsibility as is possible for their own treatment. Regimens
should be simplified (eg, synchronizing multiple drugs and minimizing the number of daily doses while
maintaining efficacy) and matched to the patient's and caregivers' schedules. Critical aspects of the
treatment should be emphasized (eg, taking the full course of an antibiotic). If lifestyle changes (eg, in diet
or exercise) are also needed, such changes should be introduced incrementally over several visits, and
realistic goals should be set (eg, to lose 1 of 14 kg [2 of 30 lb] by a 2-wk follow-up visit). Success in
achieving a goal should be reinforced with praise, and only then should the next goal be added. For
patients who require expensive long-term regimens, a list of pharmaceutical patient-assistance programs
is available at www.needymeds.org
.
===PAGE:2922===
Chapter 273. Perinatal Physiology
The transition from life in utero to life outside the womb involves multiple changes in physiology and
function.
Bilirubin Metabolism
Aged or damaged fetal RBCs are removed from the circulation by reticuloendothelial cells, which convert
heme to bilirubin (1 g of Hb yields 35 mg of bilirubin). This bilirubin is transported to the liver, where it is
transferred into hepatocytes. Glucuronyl transferase then conjugates the bilirubin with uridine
diphosphoglucuronic acid (UDPGA) to form bilirubin diglucuronide (conjugated bilirubin), which is
secreted actively into the bile ducts. Bilirubin diglucuronide makes its way into meconium in the GI tract
but cannot be eliminated from the body, because the fetus does not normally pass stool. The enzyme
β
-
glucuronidase, present in the fetus' small-bowel luminal brush border, is released into the intestinal lumen,
where it deconjugates bilirubin glucuronide; free (unconjugated) bilirubin is then reabsorbed from the
intestinal tract and reenters the fetal circulation. Fetal bilirubin is cleared from the circulation by placental
transfer into the mother's plasma following a concentration gradient. The maternal liver then conjugates
and excretes the fetal bilirubin.
At birth, the placenta is "lost," and although the neonatal liver continues to take up, conjugate, and
excrete bilirubin into bile so it can be eliminated in the stool, neonates lack proper intestinal bacteria for
oxidizing bilirubin to urobilinogen in the gut; consequently, unaltered bilirubin remains in the stool,
imparting a typical bright-yellow color. Additionally, the neonatal GI tract (like that of the fetus) contains
β
-
glucuronidase, which deconjugates some of the bilirubin. In many neonates, feedings cause the
gastrocolic reflex, and bilirubin is excreted in stool before most of it can be deconjugated and reabsorbed.
However in many other neonates, the unconjugated bilirubin is reabsorbed and returned to the circulation
from the intestinal lumen (enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin), contributing to physiologic
hyperbilirubinemia and jaundice (.
Cardiovascular Function
Fetal circulation is marked by right-to-left shunting of blood around the unventilated lungs through a
patent ductus arteriosus (connecting the pulmonary artery to the aorta) and foramen ovale (connecting
the right and left atria). Shunting is encouraged by high pulmonary arteriolar resistance and relatively low
resistance to blood flow in the systemic (including placental) circulation. About 90 to 95% of the right
heart output bypasses the lungs and goes directly to the systemic circulation. The fetal ductus arteriosus
is kept open by
low fetal systemic PaO
(about 25 mm Hg) along with locally produced prostaglandins.
The foramen ovale is kept open by differences in atrial pressures: left atrial pressure is relatively low
because little blood is returned from the lungs, but right atrial pressure is relatively high because large
volumes of blood return from the placenta.
Profound changes to this system occur after the first few breaths, resulting in increased pulmonary blood
flow and closure of the foramen ovale. Pulmonary arteriolar resistance drops acutely as a result of
vasodilation caused by lung expansion, increased PaO
, and reduced PaCO
. The elastic forces of the
ribs and chest wall decrease pulmonary interstitial pressure, further enhancing blood flow through
pulmonary capillaries. Increased venous return from the lungs raises left atrial pressure, thus reducing the
pressure differential between left and right atria; this effect contributes to closure of the foramen ovale.
As pulmonary blood flow is established, venous return from the lungs increases, raising left atrial
pressure. Air breathing increases the PaO
, which constricts the umbilical arteries. Placental blood flow is
reduced or stops, reducing blood return to the right atrium. Thus, right atrial pressure decreases while left
atrial pressure increases; as a result, the foramen ovale closes.
Soon after birth, systemic resistance becomes higher than pulmonary resistance, a reversal from the fetal
state. Therefore, the direction of blood flow through the patent ductus arteriosus reverses, creating leftto-right shunting of blood (called transitional circulation). This state lasts from moments after birth (when
the pulmonary blood flow increases and functional closure of the foramen ovale occurs) until about 24 to
===PAGE:2923===
72 h of age, when the ductus arteriosus usually closes. Blood entering the ductus and its vasa vasorum
from the aorta has a high PO
, which, along with alterations in prostaglandin metabolism, leads to
constriction and closure of the ductus arteriosus. Once the ductus arteriosus closes, an adult-type
circulation exists. The 2 ventricles now pump in series, and there are no major shunts between the
pulmonary and systemic circulations.
During the days immediately after birth, a stressed neonate may revert to a fetal-type circulation. Asphyxia
with hypoxia and hypercarbia causes the pulmonary arterioles to constrict and the ductus arteriosus to
dilate, reversing the processes described previously and resulting in right-to-left shunting through the
now-patent ductus arteriosus, the reopened foramen ovale, or both. Consequently, the neonate becomes
severely hypoxemic, a condition called persistent pulmonary hypertension or persistent fetal circulation
(although there is no umbilical circulation). The goal of treatment is to reverse the conditions that caused
pulmonary vasoconstriction.
Endocrine Function
The fetus depends completely on the maternal supply of glucose via the placenta and does not contribute
to glucose production. The fetus begins to build a hepatic glycogen supply early in gestation,
accumulating most glycogen stores during the 2nd half of the 3rd trimester. The neonate's glucose supply
terminates when the umbilical cord is cut; concurrently, levels of circulating epinephrine, norepinephrine,
and glucagon surge, while insulin levels decline. These changes stimulate gluconeogenesis and
mobilization of hepatic glycogen stores. In healthy, term neonates, glucose levels reach a nadir 30 to 90
min after birth, after which neonates are typically able to maintain normal glucose homeostasis. Infants at
highest risk of neonatal hypoglycemia include those with reduced glycogen stores (small-forgestationalage and premature infants), critically ill infants with increased glucose catabolism, and infants
of diabetic mothers (secondary to temporary fetal hyperinsulinemia).
Hematopoietic Function
In utero, RBC production is controlled exclusively by fetal erythropoietin produced in the liver; maternal
erythropoietin does not cross the placenta. About 55 to 90% of fetal RBCs contain fetal Hb, which has
high O
affinity. As a result, a high O
concentration gradient is maintained across the placenta, resulting
in abundant O
transfer from the maternal to the fetal circulation. This increased O
affinity is less useful
after birth, because fetal Hb gives up O
to tissues less readily, and it may be deleterious if severe
pulmonary or cardiac disease with hypoxemia exists. The transition from fetal to adult Hb begins before
birth; at delivery, the site of erythropoietin production changes from the liver to the kidney by an unknown
mechanism. The abrupt increase in PaO
from about 25 to 30 mm Hg in the fetus to 90 to 95 mm Hg in
the neonate just after delivery causes serum erythropoietin to fall, and RBC production shuts down
between birth and about 6 to 8 wk, causing physiologic anemia and contributing to anemia of prematurity
(.
Immunologic Function
At term, most immune mechanisms are not fully functional, more so with increasing prematurity. Thus, all
neonates and young infants are immunodeficient relative to adults and are at increased risk of
overwhelming infection. This risk is enhanced by prematurity, maternal illness, neonatal stress, and drugs
(eg, immunosuppressants, anticonvulsants). Neonates' decreased immune response may explain the
absence of localized clinical signs (eg, fever or meningismus) with infection.
In the fetus, phagocytic cells, present at the yolk sac stage of development, are critical for the
inflammatory response that combats bacterial and fungal infection. Granulocytes can be identified in the
2nd mo of gestation and monocytes can be identified in the 4th mo of gestation. Their level of function
increases with gestational age but is still low at term.
At birth, the ultrastructure of neutrophils is normal, but in most neonates, chemotaxis of neutrophils and
monocytes is decreased because of an intrinsic abnormality of cellular locomotion and adherence to
===PAGE:2924===
surfaces. These functional deficits are more pronounced in premature infants.
By about the 14th wk of gestation, the thymus is functioning and producing lymphocytes. Also by 14 wk, T
cells are present in the fetal liver and spleen, indicating that mature T cells are established in the
peripheral lymphoid organs by this age. The thymus is most active during fetal development and in early
postnatal life. It grows rapidly in utero and is readily noted on chest x-ray in a healthy neonate, reaching a
peak size at age 10 yr then involuting gradually over many years.
The number of T cells in the fetal circulation gradually increases during the 2nd trimester and reaches
nearly normal levels by 30 to 32 wk gestation. At birth, neonates have a relative T lymphocytosis
compared to adults. However, neonatal T cells do not function as effectively as adult T cells. For
example, neonatal T cells may not respond adequately to antigens and may not produce cytokines.
B cells are present in fetal bone marrow, blood, liver, and spleen by the 12th wk of gestation. Trace
amounts of IgM and IgG can be detected by the 20th wk and trace amounts of IgA can be detected by the
30th wk; because the fetus is normally in an antigen-free environment, only small amounts of
immunoglobulin (predominantly IgM) are produced in utero. Elevated levels of cord serum IgM indicate in
utero antigen challenge, usually caused by congenital infection. Almost all IgG is acquired maternally from
the placenta. After 22 wk gestation, placental transfer of IgG increases to reach maternal levels or greater
at term. IgG levels at birth in premature infants are decreased relative to gestational age.
The passive transfer of maternal immunity from transplacental IgG and secretory IgA and antimicrobial
factors in breast milk (eg, IgG, secretory IgA, WBCs, complement proteins, lysozyme, lactoferrin)
compensate for the neonate's immature immune system and confer immunity to many bacteria and
viruses. Protective immune factors in breast milk coat the GI and upper respiratory tracts via mucosaassociated lymphoid tissue and prevent invasion of mucous membranes by respiratory and enteric
pathogens.
Over time, passive immunity begins to wane, reaching a nadir when the infant is 3 to 6 mo old. Premature
infants, in particular, may become profoundly hypogammaglobulinemic during the first 6 mo of life. By 1 yr,
the IgG level rises to about 60% of average adult levels. IgA, IgM, IgD, and IgE, which do not cross the
placenta and therefore are detectable only in trace amounts at birth, increase slowly during childhood.
IgG, IgM, and IgA reach adult levels by about age 10 yr.
Pulmonary Function
Fetal lungs develop throughout gestation, and fairly well-developed alveoli are present by the 25th wk.
The lungs continually produce fluid—a transudate from pulmonary capillaries plus surfactant secreted by
type II pneumocytes. For normal gas exchange to occur at birth, pulmonary alveolar fluid and interstitial
fluid must be cleared promptly by compression of the fetal thorax during delivery and by absorption of
fluid into cells in the lung. Transient tachypnea of the newborn ( is probably caused by delay
in this clearance process.
On delivery, when elastic recoil of ribs and strong inspiratory efforts draw air into the pulmonary tree, airfluid interfaces are formed in alveoli. At the first breath, large amounts of surfactant are released into the
air-fluid interfaces of infants ≥ 34 to 35 wk. Surfactant, a mixture of phospholipids (phosphatidylcholine,
phosphatidyl glycerol, phosphatidylinositol), neutral lipids, and 3 surface active proteins all stored in
lamellar inclusions in type II pneumocytes, reduces high surface tension, which would otherwise cause
atelectasis and increase the work of breathing. Surfactant works more effectively in small alveoli
than in
large alveoli, thus opposing the normal tendency of small alveoli to collapse into large alveoli (per
Laplace's law, which states that in an elastic cavity, pressure
decreases
as volume increases).
Before 34 to 35 wk gestation, surfactant is often not produced in sufficient quantities to prevent diffuse
atelectasis, and respiratory distress syndrome develops (.
Renal Function
At birth, renal function is generally reduced, particularly in premature infants. GFR increases
===PAGE:2925===
progressively during gestation, particularly during the 3rd trimester. GFR rapidly increases in the first
months of life; however, GFR, urea clearance, and maximum tubular clearances do not reach adult levels
until age 1 to 2 yr.
===PAGE:2926===
Chapter 274. Perinatal Problems
Introduction
Extensive physiologic changes accompany the birth process, sometimes revealing conditions that posed
no problem during intrauterine life. For that reason, a person with resuscitation skills must attend each
birth. Each neonate is classified as premature, full-term, or postmature to help determine the risk of
various complications.
Gestational age, the primary determinant of organ maturity, can be determined in the days immediately
after birth using the Ballard score (see
Fig. 268-1
. Through plotting of weight vs gestational age (see
Fig. 274-1
), each infant is classified as small, appropriate, or large for gestational age. Head
circumference and length are also plotted against gestational
[Fig. 274-1.
Level of intrauterine growth based on birth weight and gestational age of live-born, single,
white infants.]
age (see
Fig. 274-2
). These parameters are influenced by genetic factors and intrauterine conditions. They also
help to predict subsequent growth and development.
Neonatal Resuscitation
About 10% of neonates require some degree of resuscitation at delivery. Causes are numerous (see
Table 274-1
), but most involve asphyxia or respiratory depression. Incidence rises significantly if birth
weight is < 1500 g.
Assessment:
The Apgar score assigns 0 to 2 points for each of 5 measures of neonatal health
(Appearance, Pulse, Grimace, Activity, Respiration—see
Table 274-2
). Scores depend on physiologic maturity, maternal perinatal therapy, and fetal
cardiorespiratory and neurologic conditions. A score of 7 to 10 at 5 min is considered normal; 4 to 6,
intermediate; and 0 to 3, low. A low Apgar score is not
by itself
diagnostic of perinatal asphyxia but is
associated with a risk of long-term neurologic dysfunction. An unduly prolonged (> 10 min) low Apgar
score predicts increased risk of mortality in the first year of life.
The earliest sign of asphyxia is acral (peripheral) cyanosis, followed by decreases in respiration, muscle
tone, reflex response, and heart rate. Effective resuscitation leads initially to increased heart rate,
followed by improved reflex response, color, respiration, and muscle tone. Evidence of intrapartum fetal
distress, persistence of an Apgar score of 0 to 3 for > 5 min; an umbilical arterial blood pH < 7; and a
sustained neonatal neurologic syndrome that includes hypotonia, coma, seizures, and evidence of
multiorgan dysfunction are manifestations of perinatal asphyxia. The severity and prognosis of
posthypoxic encephalopathy can be estimated with the Sarnat classification (see
Table 274-3
) in conjunction with EEG, neuroradiologic imaging, and brain stem auditory and cortical
evoked responses.
Resuscitation:
Initial measures for all neonates include suctioning and tactile stimulation. Suctioning
requires appropriately sized catheters (see
Table 223-3
 and pressure limits of 100 mm Hg
(136 cm H
O). Tactile stimulation (eg, flicking the soles of the feet, rubbing the back) may be necessary
to encourage regular, spontaneous breathing. Infants not responding with appropriate respirations and
heart rate require O
therapy, bag-mask ventilation, sometimes endo-tracheal intubation, and much less
commonly, chest compressions (see
Fig. 274-3
and
Fig. 223-2
.
[Fig. 274-2.
Level of intrauterine growth based on gestational age, body length (
A
), and head
===PAGE:2927===
circumference (
B
) at birth.]
[Table 274-1.
Problems that may Require Resuscitation]
The infant is quickly dried and placed supine under a preheated overhead warmer in the delivery room.
The neck is supported in the neutral position with a rolled towel under the shoulders.
O
should be given at 10 L/min through a face mask attached to a self-inflatable or anesthesia bag; if no
mask is available, O
tubing may be placed adjacent to the face and set to deliver 5 L/min. If
spontaneous respirations are absent or heart rate is < 100 beats/min, respirations are assisted with the
bag-mask.
Bradycardia in a distressed child is a sign of impending cardiac arrest; neonates tend to
develop bradycardia with hypoxemia.
Advanced resuscitation techniques, including endotracheal
intubation, and selection of equipment size, drugs and dosages, and CPR parameters are discussed
elsewhere (.
Birth Injuries
The forces of labor and delivery occasionally cause physical injury to the infant. The incidence of
neonatal injury from difficult or traumatic deliveries is decreasing due to increasing use of cesarean
section in place of difficult versions, vacuum extractions, or mid- or high-forceps deliveries.
A traumatic delivery is anticipated when the mother has small pelvic measurements, when the infant
seems large for gestational age (often the case with diabetic mothers), or when there is a breech or other
abnormal presentation, especially in a primipara. In such situations, labor and the fetal condition should
be monitored closely. If fetal distress is detected, the mother should be positioned on her side and given
O
. If fetal distress persists, an immediate cesarean section should be done.
Head Injuries
Head molding is common in vaginal delivery due to the high pressure exerted by uterine contractions on
the infant's malleable cranium as it passes through the birth canal. This molding rarely causes problems
or requires treatment.
Caput succedaneum
is edema of the presenting portion of the scalp. It occurs when the area is forced
against the uterine cervix. Subgaleal hemorrhage results from greater trauma and is characterized by a
boggy feeling over the entire scalp, including the temporal regions. Treatment is not required.
Cephalhematoma,
or hemorrhage beneath the periosteum, can be differentiated from subgaleal
hemorrhage because it is sharply limited to the area overlying a single bone, the periosteum being
adherent at the sutures. Cephalhematomas are commonly unilateral and parietal. In a small percentage,
there is a linear fracture of the underlying bone. Treatment is not required, but anemia or
hyperbilirubinemia may result.
Depressed skull fractures
are uncommon. Most result from forceps pressure or rarely from the head
resting on a bony prominence in utero. Infants with depressed skull fractures or other head trauma may
also have subdural bleeding, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or contusion or laceration of the brain itself (see
p.
). Depressed skull fractures cause a palpable (and sometimes visible) step-off deformity,
[Table 274-2.
Apgar Score]
which must be differentiated from the palpable elevated periosteal rim occurring with cephalhematomas.
CT is done to confirm the diagnosis and rule out complications. Neuro-surgical elevation may be needed.
Cranial Nerve Injury
The facial nerve is injured most often. Although frequently attributed to forceps pressure, most injuries
probably result from pressure on the nerve in utero, which may be due to fetal positioning (eg, from the
===PAGE:2928===
head lying against the shoulder, the sacral promontory, or a uterine fibroid).
Facial nerve injury usually occurs at or distal to its exit from the stylomastoid foramen and results in facial
asymmetry, especially during crying. Identifying which side of the face is affected can be confusing, but
the facial muscles on the side of the nerve injury cannot move. Injury can also occur to individual
branches of the nerve, most often the mandibular. Another cause of facial asymmetry is mandibular
asymmetry resulting from intrauterine pressure; in this case, muscle innervation is intact and both sides of
the face can move. In mandibular asymmetry, the maxillary and the mandibular occlusal surfaces are not
parallel, which differentiates it from a facial nerve injury.
Testing or treatment is not needed for peripheral facial nerve injuries or mandibular asymmetry. They
usually resolve by age 2 to 3 mo.
Brachial Plexus Injuries
Brachial plexus injuries follow stretching caused by shoulder dystocia, breech extraction, or
hyperabduction of the neck in cephalic presentations. Injuries can be due to simple stretching,
hemorrhage within a nerve, tearing of the nerve or root, or avulsion of the roots with accompanying
cervical cord injury. Associated injuries (eg, fractures of the clavicle or humerus or subluxations of the
shoulder or cervical spine) may occur.
Injuries of the upper brachial plexus (C5 to C6) affect muscles around the shoulder and elbow, whereas
lesions of the lower plexus (C7 to C8 and T1) primarily affect muscles of the forearm and hand. The site
and type of nerve root injury determine the prognosis.
Erb's palsy is an upper brachial plexus injury causing adduction and internal rotation of the shoulder with
pronation of the forearm. Ipsilateral paralysis of the diaphragm is common. Treatment includes protecting
the shoulder from excessive motion by immobilizing the arm across the upper abdomen and preventing
contractures by passive range-of-motion exercises to involved joints done gently every day starting at 1
wk of age.
Klumpke's palsy is a lower plexus injury resulting in paralysis of the hand and wrist, often with ipsilateral
Horner's syndrome (miosis, ptosis, facial anhidrosis). Passive range-of-motion exercises are the only
treatment needed.
Neither Erb's palsy nor Klumpke's palsy usually causes demonstrable sensory loss, which suggests a tear
or avulsion. These conditions usually improve rapidly, but deficits can persist. If a significant deficit
persists > 3 mo, MRI is done to determine the extent of injury to the plexus, roots, and cervical cord.
Surgical exploration and repair have sometimes been helpful.
[Table 274-3.
Clinical Staging of Posthypoxic Encephalopathy]
When the entire brachial plexus is injured, the involved upper extremity cannot move, and sensory loss is
usually present. Ipsilateral pyramidal signs indicate spinal cord trauma; an MRI should be done. The
involved extremity's subsequent growth may be impaired. The prognosis for recovery is poor.
Management may include neurosurgical exploration. Passive range-of-motion exercises can prevent
contractures.
Other Peripheral Nerve Injuries
Injuries to other peripheral nerves (eg, the radial, sciatic, obturator) are rare in neonates and are usually
not related to labor and delivery. They are usually secondary to a local traumatic event (eg, an injection in
or near the sciatic nerve). Treatment includes placing the muscles antagonistic to those paralyzed at rest
until recovery. Neurosurgical exploration of the nerve is seldom indicated. In most peripheral nerve
injuries, recovery is complete.
Spinal Cord Injury
===PAGE:2929===
Spinal cord injury (see also p.
) is rare and involves variable degrees of cord disruption, often with
hemorrhage. Complete disruption of the cord is very rare. Trauma usually occurs in breech deliveries
after excess longitudinal traction to the spine. It can also follow
[Fig. 274-3.
Algorithm for resuscitation of neonates.]
hyperextension of the fetal neck in utero (the "flying fetus"). Injury usually affects the lower cervical region
(C5 to C7). When the injury is higher, lesions are usually fatal because respiration is completely
compromised. Sometimes a click or snap is heard at delivery.
Spinal shock with flaccidity below the level of injury occurs initially. Usually, there is patchy retention of
sensation or movement below the lesion. Spasticity develops within days or weeks. Breathing is
diaphragmatic because the phrenic nerve remains intact as its origin is higher (at C3 to C5) than the
typical cord lesion. When the spinal cord lesion is complete, the intercostal and abdominal muscles
become paralyzed and rectal and bladder sphincters cannot develop voluntary control. Sensation and
sweating are lost below the involved level, which can cause fluctuations of body temperature with
environmental changes.
An MRI of the cervical cord may show the lesion and excludes surgically treatable lesions, such as
congenital tumors or hematomas pressing on the cord. The CSF is usually bloody.
With appropriate care, most infants survive for many years. The usual causes of death are recurring
pneumonia and progressive loss of renal function. Treatment includes nursing care to prevent skin
ulcerations, prompt treatment of urinary and respiratory infections, and regular evaluations to identify
obstructive uropathy early.
Intracranial Hemorrhage
Hemorrhage in or around the brain can occur in any neonate but is particularly common in those born
prematurely; about 20% of premature infants < 1500 g have intracranial hemorrhage. Hypoxia-ischemia,
variations in BP, and pressures exerted on the head during labor are major causes. The presence of the
germinal matrix (a mass of embryonic cells lying over the caudate nucleus on the lateral wall of the lateral
ventricles and present only in the fetus) makes hemorrhage more likely. Risk also is increased by
hematologic disorders (eg, vitamin K deficiency, hemophilia, disseminated intravascular coagulation).
Hemorrhage can occur in several CNS spaces. Small hemorrhages in the subarachnoid space, falx, and
tentorium are frequent incidental findings at autopsy of neonates that have died from non-CNS causes.
Larger hemorrhages in the subarachnoid or subdural space, brain parenchyma, or ventricles are less
common but more serious.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
probably is the most common type of intracranial hemorrhage. Neonates
may present with apnea, seizures, lethargy, or an abnormal neurologic examination. With large
hemorrhages, the associated meningeal inflammation may lead to a communicating hydrocephalus as the
infant grows.
Subdural hemorrhage,
which is now less common because of improved obstetric techniques, results
from tears in the falx, tentorium, or bridging veins. Such tears tend to occur in neonates of primiparas, in
large neonates, or after difficult deliveries—conditions that can produce unusual pressures on intracranial
vessels. The presenting finding may be seizures; a rapidly enlarging head; or an abnormal neurologic
examination with hypotonia, a poor Moro reflex, or extensive retinal hemorrhages.
Intraventricular and/or intraparenchymal hemorrhage
usually occurs during the 1st 3 days of life and
is the most serious type of intracranial bleeding. Hemorrhages occur most often in premature infants, are
often bilateral, and usually arise in the germinal matrix. Most bleeding episodes are subependymal or
intraventricular and involve a small amount of blood. In severe hemorrhage, there may be bleeding into
the parenchyma or a cast of the ventricular system with large amounts of blood in the cisterna magna and
basal cisterns. Hypoxia-ischemia often precedes intraventricular and subarachnoid bleeding. Hypoxiaischemia damages the capillary endothelium, impairs cerebral vascular autoregulation, and can increase
===PAGE:2930===
cerebral blood flow and venous pressure, all of which make hemorrhage more likely. Most intraventricular
hemorrhages are asymptomatic, but larger hemorrhages may cause apnea, cyanosis, or sudden collapse.
Diagnosis
• CT
Intracranial hemorrhage should be suspected in any neonate with apnea, seizures, lethargy, or an
abnormal neurologic examination; such infants should have head CT. Although cranial ultrasonography is
risk free, requires no sedation, and can readily identify blood within the ventricles or brain substance, CT
is more sensitive for thin layers of blood in the subarachnoid or subdural spaces. However, for screening
of very premature infants (eg, < 30 wk gestation), some clinicians prefer the logistical simplicity of
ultrasonography. If the diagnosis is in doubt, the CSF can be examined for RBCs: it usually contains
gross blood. However, some RBCs are often present in the
CSF of term neonates. In subdural
hemorrhage, transillumination of the skull may reveal the diagnosis after the blood has lysed.
Additionally, clotting studies, a CBC, and metabolic studies to identify other causes of neurologic
dysfunction (eg, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, electrolyte imbalance) should be done. An EEG may help
establish prognosis if the infant survives the acute bleeding episode.
Prognosis
The prognosis for subarachnoid hemorrhage is usually good. The prognosis for subdural hemorrhage is
guarded, but some infants do well. Most infants with small intraventricular hemorrhages survive the acute
bleeding episode and do well. Infants with large intraventricular hemorrhages have a poor prognosis,
especially if the hemorrhage extends into the parenchyma. Preterm infants with a history of severe
intraventricular hemorrhage are at risk of developing posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus and must be
monitored carefully with serial cranial ultrasound examinations and frequent serial head circumference
measurements. Infants with progressive hydrocephalus require neurosurgical evaluation for the
placement of a subcutaneous ventricular reservoir (to aspirate CSF) or for the placement of a
ventriculoperitoneal shunt. The CSF associated with posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus has a very low
glucose concentration known as hypoglycorrhachia. Because many infants will be left with neurologic
deficits, careful follow-up and referral for early intervention services are important.
Treatment
Treatment is mostly supportive unless a hematologic abnormality contributed to the bleeding. All infants
should receive vitamin K if not previously given. If deficient, platelets or clotting factors should be given.
Subdural hematomas should be managed by a neuro-surgeon; evacuation of the hemorrhage may be
needed.
Fractures
Midclavicular fracture, the most common fracture during birth, occurs with shoulder dystocia and with
normal, nontraumatic deliveries. Initially, the neonate is irritable and does not move the arm on the
involved side either spontaneously or when the Moro reflex is elicited. Most clavicular fractures are
greenstick and heal rapidly and uneventfully. A large callus forms at the fracture site within a week, and
remodeling is completed within a month. Treatment consists of making a sling by pinning the shirt sleeve
of the involved side to the opposite side of the infant's shirt.
The humerus and femur may be fractured in difficult deliveries. Most of these are green-stick, mid-shaft
fractures, and excellent remodeling of the bone usually follows, even if moderate angulation occurs
initially. A long bone may be fractured through its epiphysis, but prognosis is excellent.
Soft-Tissue Injuries
All soft tissues are susceptible to injury during birth if they have been the presenting part or the fulcrum
for the forces of uterine contraction. Edema and ecchymosis often follow injury, particularly of the
===PAGE:2931===
periorbital and facial tissues in face presentations and of the scrotum or labia during breech deliveries.
Breakdown of blood within the tissues and conversion of heme to bilirubin result whenever a hematoma
develops. This added burden of bilirubin may cause sufficient neonatal hyperbilirubinemia to require
phototherapy, and rarely, exchange transfusion (. No other treatment is needed.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is a core temperature < 35 to 35.5° C. The condition may be purely environmental
or represent intercurrent illness. Treatment is rewarming.
Thermal equilibrium is affected by relative humidity, air flow, proximity of cold surfaces, and ambient air
temperature. Neonates are particularly prone to rapid heat loss and consequent hypothermia because of
a high surface area to volume ratio, which is particularly high in low-birth-weight neonates. Radiant heat
loss occurs when bare skin is exposed to an environment containing objects of cooler temperature.
Evaporative heat loss occurs when neonates are wet with amniotic fluid. Conductive heat loss occurs
when the neonate is placed in contact with a cool surface or object. Hypothermia also may be caused by
pathologic conditions that impair thermoregulation (eg, sepsis, intracranial hemorrhage).
Pathophysiology
Prolonged, unrecognized cold stress may divert calories to produce heat, impairing
growth. Neonates
respond to cooling by sympathetic nerve discharge of norepinephrine in the brown fat. This specialized
tissue of the neonate, located in the nape of the neck, between the scapulae, and around the kidneys
and adrenals, responds by lipolysis followed by oxidation or re-esterification of the fatty acids that are
released. These reactions produce heat locally, and a rich blood supply to the brown fat helps transfer
this heat to the rest of the neonate's body. This reaction increases the metabolic rate and O
consumption 2- to 3-fold. Thus, in neonates with respiratory insufficiency (eg, the preterm infant with
respiratory distress syndrome), cold stress may also result in tissue hypoxia and neurologic damage.
Additionally, hypothermia can result in hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, and death.
Treatment
Hypothermia is treated by rewarming in an incubator or under a radiant warmer. The neonate should be
monitored and treated as needed for hypoglycemia, hypoxemia, and apnea. Underlying conditions such
as sepsis or intracranial hemorrhage require specific treatment.
Prevention
Hypothermia can be prevented by immediately drying and then swaddling the neonate (including the
head) in a warm blanket. A neonate exposed for resuscitation or observation should be placed under a
radiant warmer. Sick neonates should be maintained in a neutral thermal environment to minimize the
metabolic rate. The proper incubator temperature varies depending on the neonate's birth weight and
postnatal age. Alternatively, heating can be adjusted with a servomechanism set to maintain skin
temperature at 36.5° C.
Large-for-Gestational-Age Infant
Infants whose weight is > the 90th percentile for gestational age are classified as large for
gestational age (LGA). The predominant cause is maternal diabetes. Complications include birth
trauma, hypoglycemia, and hyperbilirubinemia.
Other than genetically determined size, the major cause of an infant's being LGA is maternal diabetes
mellitus. The macrosomia results from the anabolic effects of high fetal insulin levels produced in
response to excessive blood glucose during gestation. The less well controlled the mother's diabetes
during pregnancy, the more severe is the fetal macrosomia. A rare nongenetic cause of macrosomia is
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (characterized by macrosomia, omphalocele, macroglossia, and
hypoglycemia).
===PAGE:2932===
Symptoms, Signs, and Treatment
LGA infants are large, obese, and plethoric. These infants are often listless and limp and may feed poorly.
Delivery complications can occur in any LGA infant. Metabolic and respiratory complications are specific
to LGA infants of diabetic mothers.
Delivery complications:
Because of the infant's large size, vaginal delivery may be difficult and
occasionally results in birth injury. Shoulder dystocia, fractures of the clavicles or limbs, and perinatal
asphyxia may occur. Therefore, cesarean section should be considered when the fetus is thought to be
LGA, especially if the mother's pelvic measurements are at the lower end of normal.
Infants of diabetic mothers:
These infants are very likely to become hypoglycemic in the first 1 to 2 h
after delivery because of the state of hyperinsulinism and the sudden termination of maternal glucose
when the umbilical cord is cut. Neonatal hypoglycemia can be prevented by close prenatal control of the
mother's diabetes and by the prophylactic IV infusion of 10% dextrose in water into the infant until early
frequent feedings can be established. Blood glucose levels should be closely monitored by bedside
testing during the transition period.
Hyperbilirubinemia (see also p.
) is common because of intolerance for oral feedings in the earliest
days of life, which increases the enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin. Hyperbilirubinemia can also result
from the infant's high Hct (another accompanying problem in infants of diabetic mothers).
Because surfactant production (and hence pulmonary maturation) may be delayed until late in gestation,
respiratory distress syndrome may develop even if the infant is delivered only a few weeks prematurely.
The lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio, and especially the presence of phosphatidyl glycerol, in amniotic fluid
obtained by amniocentesis can evaluate fetal lung maturity and help determine the optimal time for safe
delivery. Lung maturity can be assumed only if phosphatidyl glycerol is present. Treatment is discussed

Postmature Infant
A postmature infant is an infant born after 42 wk gestation.
The cause of postmaturity is generally unknown. Very rarely, it may be caused by abnormalities that affect
the fetal pituitary-adrenal axis (eg, anencephaly or adrenal agenesis).
Pathophysiology
Past term, the placenta involutes, and multiple infarcts and villous degeneration cause placental
insufficiency syndrome. In this syndrome, the fetus receives inadequate nutrients from the mother,
resulting in soft-tissue wasting. During labor, postmature infants are prone to develop asphyxia;
meconium aspiration syndrome, which may be unusually severe because post-term amniotic fluid volume
is decreased and the aspirated meconium is less diluted; and neonatal hypoglycemia caused by
insufficient glycogen stores at birth. Because anaerobic metabolism rapidly uses the remaining glycogen
stores, hypoglycemia is exaggerated if perinatal asphyxia has occurred.
Symptoms and Signs
Postmature infants are alert and appear mature but have a decreased amount of soft-tissue mass,
particularly subcutaneous fat. The skin may hang loosely on the extremities and is often dry and peeling.
The fingernails and toenails are long. The nails and umbilical cord may be stained with meconium passed
in utero.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by clinical appearance (see
Fig. 268-1
 and estimated date of delivery.
Treatment
===PAGE:2933===
Prognosis and treatment depend on complications. Neonates with meconium aspiration may have chronic
respiratory insufficiency and secondary pulmonary hypertension if untreated; surfactant replacement
therapy is frequently helpful.
Premature Infant
A premature infant is an infant born before 37 wk gestation.
Full-term gestation is 40 wk. Infants born before 37 wk have an increased incidence of complications and
mortality roughly proportional to the degree of prematurity. Preterm delivery occurs in about 12.5% of
pregnancies in the US and is one of the chief causes of neonatal morbidity and mortality. The rate of
prematurity for black infants is 17.9%.
Previously, any infant weighing < 2.5 kg was termed premature. This definition is inappropriate because
many infants weighing < 2.5 kg are mature or postmature but small for gestational age; they have a
different appearance and different problems. Infants < 2.5 kg at birth are considered low-birth-weight
infants, and those < 1500 g are considered very low-birth-weight infants.
Etiology
The cause of premature labor and delivery, whether preceded by premature rupture of the membranes or
not, is usually unknown. However, maternal history commonly shows low socioeconomic status;
inadequate prenatal care; poor nutrition; poor education; unwed state; previous preterm birth; and
intercurrent, untreated illness or infection (eg, bacterial vaginosis). Other risk factors include placental
abruption, preeclampsia, multiple pregnancies, cervical incompetence, and multiple abortions.
Symptoms and Signs
The premature infant is small, usually weighing < 2.5 kg, and tends to have thin, shiny, pink skin through
which the underlying veins are easily seen. Little subcutaneous fat, hair, or external ear cartilage exists.
Spontaneous activity and tone are reduced, and extremities are not held in the flexed position typical of
term infants. In males, the scrotum may have few rugae, and the testes may be undescended. In females,
the labia majora do not yet cover the labia minora. Reflexes develop at different times during gestation.
The Moro reflex begins by 28 to 32 wk gestation and is well established by 37 wk. The palmar reflex
starts at 28 wk and is well established by 32 wk. The tonic neck reflex starts at 35 wk and is most
prominent at 1 mo postterm.
Diagnosis
Findings on physical examination correlate with gestational age (see
Fig. 268-1
. Estimated
date of delivery and prenatal ultra-sonography, if done, also determine gestational age.
Initial testing:
Along with appropriate testing for any identified problems or disorders, routine evaluations
include pulse oximetry, serum Ca and electrolytes, CBC, bilirubin level, blood culture, hearing evaluation,
cranial ultra-sonography
to screen for intraventricular hemorrhage and periventricular leukomalacia, and
screening by an ophthalmologist for retinopathy of prematurity. Weight, length, and head circumference
should be plotted on an appropriate growth chart at weekly intervals.
Subsequent screening:
Preterm infants must be monitored for apnea and bradycardia until they are
34.5 to 35 wk adjusted age. Before discharge from the hospital, premature infants should undergo a car
seat monitoring evaluation using pulse oximetry to make sure that they can maintain a patent airway and
good O
saturation while positioned in the car seat. After discharge, premature infants should receive
careful neurodevelopmental follow-up and appropriate early referral to intervention programs as needed
for physical, occupational, and language therapy.
Complications
===PAGE:2934===
Most complications relate to dysfunction of immature organ systems. In some cases, complications
resolve completely; in others, there is residual organ dysfunction.
Lungs:
Surfactant production is often inadequate to prevent alveolar collapse and atelectasis, which
result in respiratory distress syndrome (. Surfactant replacement therapy is used to both
prevent and treat respiratory distress syndrome. In spite of this therapy, many premature infants develop
a chronic form of lung disease known as bronchopulmonary dysplasia with a prolonged need for
ventilator therapy and supplemental O
therapy. Palivizumab prophylaxis for respiratory syncytial virus is
important for infants with chronic lung disease (.
CNS:
Infants born before 34 wk gestation have inadequate coordination of sucking and swallowing
reflexes and need to be fed intravenously or by gavage. Immaturity of the respiratory center in the brain
stem results in apneic spells (central apnea—. Apnea may also result from hypopharyngeal
obstruction alone (obstructive apnea). Both may be present (mixed apnea).
The periventricular germinal matrix (a mass of embryonic cells on the lateral wall of the lateral ventricles
and present only in the fetus) is prone to hemorrhage, which may extend into the cerebral ventricles
(intraventricular hemorrhage). Infarction of the periventricular white matter (periventricular leukomalacia)
may also occur for reasons that are incompletely understood. Hypotension, inadequate or unstable brain
perfusion, and BP peaks (as when fluid or colloid is given rapidly IV) may contribute to cerebral infarction
or hemorrhage. Periventricular white matter injury is a major risk factor for cerebral palsy and neurodevelopmental delays.
Premature infants, particularly those with a history of sepsis, hypoxia, and intraventricular or
periventricular hemorrhages, are at risk of developmental and cognitive delays. These infants require
careful follow-up during the first year of life to identify auditory, visual, and neurodevelopmental delays.
Careful attention must be paid to developmental milestones, muscle tone, language skills, and growth
(weight, length, and head circumference). Infants with identified delays in visual skills should be referred
to a pediatric ophthalmologist. Infants with auditory and neurodevelopmental delays (including increased
muscle tone and abnormal protective reflexes) should be referred to early intervention programs that
provide physical, occupational, and speech therapy. Infants with severe neurodevelopmental problems
may need to be referred to a pediatric neurologist.
Infection:
Sepsis ( or meningitis ( is about 4 times more likely in the premature
infant. The increased likelihood results from indwelling intravascular catheters and endotracheal tubes,
areas of skin breakdown, and markedly reduced serum immunoglobulin levels (.
Cardiac:
The ductus arteriosus is more likely to fail to close after birth in premature infant. The incidence
of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA— increases with increasing prematurity; PDA occurs in
almost half of infants < 1750 g birth weight and in about 80% of those < 1200 g. About one third to one
half of those with PDA have some degree of heart failure. Premature infants ≤ 29 wk gestation at birth
who have respiratory distress syndrome have a 65 to 88% risk of a symptomatic PDA.
Temperature regulation:
Premature infants have an exceptionally large body surface area to volume
ratio. Therefore, when exposed to temperatures below the neutral thermal environment (,
they rapidly lose heat and have difficulty maintaining body temperature.
GI tract:
The small stomach and immature sucking and swallowing reflexes hinder oral or NGT feedings
and create a risk of aspiration. Necrotizing enterocolitis ( usually manifests with bloody stool,
feeding intolerance, and a distended, tender abdomen. Necrotizing enterocolitis is the most common
surgical emergency in the premature infant. Complications of neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis include
bowel perforation with pneumoperitoneum, intra-abdominal abscess formation, stricture formation, and
short bowel syndrome.
Kidneys:
Renal function is limited, so the concentrating and diluting limits of urine are decreased. Late
metabolic acidosis and growth failure may result from the immature kidneys' inability to excrete fixed
acids, which accumulate with high-protein formula feedings and as a result of bone growth. Na and HCO
are lost in the urine.
===PAGE:2935===
Eyes:
Retinal vascularization is not complete until near term. Preterm delivery may interfere with this
process, resulting in abnormal vessel development and sometimes defects in vision (retinopathy of
prematurity—(. Incidence of myopia and strabismus increases independently of retinopathy
of prematurity.
Metabolic problems:
Hypoglycemia ( and hyperglycemia ( are discussed
elsewhere.
Hyperbilirubinemia (see also p.
) occurs more commonly in the premature as compared to the term
infant, and kernicterus may occur at serum bilirubin levels as low as 10 mg/dL (170
μ
mol/L) in small, sick,
premature infants. The higher bilirubin levels may be partially due to inadequately developed hepatic
excretion mechanisms, including deficiencies in the uptake of bilirubin from the serum, its hepatic
conjugation to bilirubin diglucuronide, and its excretion into the biliary tree. Decreased intestinal motility
enables more bilirubin diglucuronide to be deconjugated within the intestinal lumen by the luminal enzyme
β
-glucuronidase, thus permitting increased reabsorption of unconjugated bilirubin (enterohepatic
circulation of bilirubin). Conversely, early feedings increase intestinal motility and reduce bilirubin
reabsorption and can thereby significantly decrease the incidence and severity of physiologic jaundice.
Uncommonly, delayed clamping of the umbilical cord increases the risk of significant hyperbilirubinemia
by allowing the transfusion of a large RBC mass, thus increasing RBC breakdown and bilirubin
production.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies with presence and severity of complications, but usually mortality and likelihood of
complications decrease greatly with increasing gestational age and birth weight (see
Table 274-4
).
Treatment
• Supportive care
Specific disorders are treated as discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL. General supportive care of the
premature infant is best provided in a neonatal ICU or special care nursery and involves careful attention
to the thermal environment, using servo-controlled incubators. Scrupulous adherence is paid to
handwashing before and after all patient contact. Infants are continually monitored for apnea,
bradycardia, and hypoxemia until 34.5 or 35 wk gestation.
Parents should be encouraged to visit and interact with the infant as much as possible within the
constraints of the infant's medical condition.
Preterm infants should be transitioned to the supine sleeping position before hospital discharge. Parents
should be instructed to keep cribs free of fluffy materials including blankets, quilts, pillows, and stuffed
toys, which have been associated with an increased risk of SIDS.
Feeding:
Feeding should be by NGT until coordination of sucking, swallowing, and breathing is
established at about 34 wk gestation, at which time breastfeeding is strongly encouraged. Most
premature infants tolerate breast milk, which provides immunologic and nutritional factors that are absent
in cow's milk formulas. However, breast milk does not provide sufficient Ca, phosphorus, and protein for
very low-birth-weight infants (ie, < 1500 g), for whom it should be mixed with a breast milk fortifier.
Alternatively, specific premature infant formulas that contain 20 to 24 kcal/oz (2.8 to 3.3 joules/mL) can be
used.
In the initial 1 or 2 days, if adequate fluids and calories cannot be given by mouth or NGT because of the
infant's condition, a 10% glucose solution with maintenance electrolytes is given IV to prevent dehydration
and undernutrition. Continuous breast milk or formula feeding via NGT or nasojejunal tube can
satisfactorily maintain caloric intake in small, sick, premature infants, especially those with respiratory
distress or recurrent apneic spells. Feedings are begun with small amounts (eg, 1 to 2 mL q 3 to 6 h) to
===PAGE:2936===
stimulate the GI tract. If tolerated, the volume and concentration of feedings are slowly increased over 7
to 10 days. In very small or critically sick infants, total parenteral hyperalimentation via a peripheral IV or a
percutaneously or surgically placed central catheter may be required until full enteral feedings can be
tolerated.
Prevention
The risk of preterm delivery can be reduced by ensuring that all women, especially those in high-risk
groups, have access to early and appropriate prenatal care, including advice on the importance of
avoiding alcohol, tobacco,
[Table 274-4.
Survival Estimates for Premature Infants]
and illicit drugs. The use of tocolytics to arrest premature labor and provide time for prenatal
administration of corticosteroids to hasten lung maturation is discussed elsewhere (.
Retinopathy of Prematurity
(Retrolental Fibroplasia)
Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a bilateral disorder of abnormal retinal vascularization in
premature infants, especially those of lowest birth weight. Outcomes range from normal vision
to blindness. Diagnosis is by ophthalmoscopy. Treatment of severe disease may include
cryotherapy or photocoagulation; other treatment is directed at complications (eg, retinal
detachment).
The inner retinal blood vessels start growing about midpregnancy, but the retina is not fully vascularized
until term. ROP results if these vessels continue their growth in an abnormal pattern, forming a ridge of
tissue between the vascularized central retina and the nonvascularized peripheral retina. In severe ROP,
these new vessels invade the vitreous. Sometimes the entire vasculature of the eye becomes engorged
(plus disease).
Susceptibility to ROP correlates with the proportion of retina that remains avascular at birth. More than
80% of neonates weighing < 1 kg at birth develop ROP. The percentage is higher when many medical
complications exist. Excessive (especially prolonged) O
therapy increases the risk. However,
supplemental O
is often needed to adequately oxygenate the infant even though a safe level and
duration of O
therapy have not been determined.
Diagnosis
• Ophthalmoscopy
Diagnosis is made by ophthalmoscopic examination, which shows a line of demarcation and a ridge in
mild cases and proliferation of retinal vessels in more severe cases. Because significant ROP is rare in
appropriately managed infants weighing > 1500 g at birth, alternative diagnoses should be considered in
these infants (eg, familial exudative retinopathy, Norrie's disease).
Prognosis
Abnormal vessel growth often subsides spontaneously but, in about 4% of survivors weighing < 1 kg at
birth, progresses to produce retinal detachments and vision loss within 2 to 12 mo postpartum. Children
with healed ROP have a higher incidence of myopia, strabismus, and amblyopia. A few children with
moderate, healed ROP are left with cicatricial scars (eg, dragged retina or retinal folds) and are at risk of
retinal detachments later in life; rarely, glaucoma and cataracts can also occur.
Treatment
===PAGE:2937===
• Cryotherapy or laser photocoagulation
In severe ROP, cryotherapy or laser photo-coagulation to ablate the peripheral avascular retina reduces
the incidence of retinal fold and detachment. Therefore, all high-risk infants should be examined by an
ophthalmologist before 6 wk of age. Retinal vascularization must be followed at 1- to 2-wk intervals until
the vessels have matured sufficiently. If retinal detachments occur in infancy, scleral buckling surgery or
vitrectomy with lensectomy may be considered, but these procedures are late rescue efforts with low
benefit.
Patients with residual scarring should be followed at least annually for life. Treatment of amblyopia and
refractive errors in the 1st year optimizes vision. Infants with total retinal detachments should be
monitored for secondary glaucoma and poor eye growth and referred to intervention programs for the
visually impaired.
Prevention
Prevention of premature birth is the best way to prevent ROP. After a preterm birth, O
should be
supplemented only as needed to avoid hypoxia documented by ABG or pulse oximetry. Vitamin E and
restricted light are not effective.
Small-for-Gestational-Age Infant
(Dysmaturity; Intrauterine Growth Restriction)
Infants whose weight is < the 10th percentile for gestational age are classified as small for
gestational age (SGA). Complications include perinatal asphyxia, meconium aspiration, and
hypoglycemia.
Etiology
An infant may be small at birth because of genetic factors. Nongenetic factors that can restrict intrauterine
growth usually are not apparent before 32 to 34 wk gestation; these factors include placental insufficiency
from maternal disease involving the small blood vessels (as in preeclampsia, primary hypertension,
renal
disease, or long-standing diabetes); placental involution accompanying postmaturity; and infectious
agents such as cytomegalo-virus, rubella virus, or
Toxoplasma gondii
. An infant may also be SGA if the
mother is an opioid or cocaine addict or a heavy user of alcohol or, to a lesser degree, if she smoked
cigarettes during pregnancy.
Symptoms and Signs
Despite their size, SGA infants have physical characteristics (eg, skin appearance, ear cartilage, sole
creases) and behavior (eg, alertness, spontaneous activity, zest for feeding) similar to those of normalsized infants of like gestational age.
If growth restriction is caused by placental insufficiency and, therefore, undernutrition, the infant's weight
is most affected, with a relative sparing of growth of the brain, cranium, and long bones (asymmetric
growth restriction). In contrast, many genetic disorders and congenital infections cause symmetric growth
restriction, in which height, weight, and head circumference are about equally affected.
Complications:
Full-term SGA infants do not have the complications related to organ system immaturity
that premature infants of similar size have. They are, however, at risk of perinatal asphyxia, meconium
aspiration, and hypoglycemia.
Perinatal asphyxia
is the most serious potential complication. It is a risk during labor if intrauterine
growth restriction is caused by placental insufficiency (with marginally adequate placental perfusion),
because each uterine contraction slows or stops maternal placental perfusion by compressing the spiral
arteries. Therefore, when placental insufficiency is suspected, the fetus should be assessed before labor
and the fetal heart rate monitored during labor. If fetal compromise is detected, rapid delivery, often by
===PAGE:2938===
cesarean section, is indicated.
Meconium aspiration
may occur during perinatal asphyxia. SGA infants, especially those who are
postmature, may pass meconium into the amniotic sac and begin deep gasping movements. The
consequent aspiration is likely to result in meconium aspiration syndrome (often most severe in growthrestricted or postmature infants, because the meconium is contained in a smaller volume of amniotic fluid
—.
Hypoglycemia
often occurs in the early hours and days of life due to a lack of adequate glycogen stores
(.
Polycythemia
may occur when SGA fetuses experience chronic mild hypoxia caused by placental
insufficiency. Erythropoietin release is increased, leading to an increased rate of erythrocyte production.
The neonate with polycythemia at birth appears ruddy and may be tachypneic or lethargic.
Prognosis
If asphyxia can be avoided, neurologic prognosis is quite good.
Infants who are SGA because of genetic factors, congenital infection, or maternal drug use often have a
worse prognosis, depending on the specific diagnosis. If intrauterine growth restriction is caused by
chronic placental insufficiency, adequate nutrition may allow SGA infants to demonstrate remarkable
"catch-up" growth after delivery.
Treatment
Underlying conditions and complications are treated. There is no specific intervention for the SGA state,
but prevention is aided by prenatal advice on the importance of avoiding alcohol, tobacco, and illicit
drugs.
===PAGE:2939===
Chapter 275. Perinatal Hematologic Disorders
Introduction
Anemia and polycythemia are the most common hematologic disorders diagnosed at birth. Prenatal and
perinatal changes in erythropoiesis are discussed in
Chapter 273
.
Perinatal Anemia
(See also
Chapter 104
.)
Anemia is Hb or Hct > 2 standard deviations below the mean for age. Both Hb and Hct change rapidly as
a neonate matures, so lower limits of normal also change (see
Table 275-1
). Variables such as gestational age, sampling site (capillary vs vein), and position of the
neonate relative to the placenta before
[Table 275-1.
Age-Specific Values for Hemoglobin and Hematocrit]
cord clamping (lower position causes blood to transfer in to the neonate; higher position causes blood to
transfer out of the neonate) also affect test results.
Etiology
Causes of anemia in neonates include
• Physiologic processes
• Blood loss
• Decreased RBC production
• Increased RBC destruction (hemolysis)
Physiologic anemia:
Normal physiologic processes often cause normocytic-normochromic anemia in
term and preterm infants. Physiologic anemias do not generally require extensive evaluation or treatment.
In term infants, the increase in oxygenation that occurs with normal breathing after birth causes an abrupt
rise in tissue O
level, resulting in negative feedback on erythropoietin production and erythropoiesis.
This reduction in erythropoiesis, as well as the shorter life span of neonatal RBCs (60 to 70 days vs 120
days in adults), causes Hb concentration to fall over the first 2 to 3 mo of life, usually to no lower than 9.4
g/dL. Hb remains stable over the next several weeks, and then slowly rises in the 4th to 6th mo secondary
to renewed erythropoietin stimulation.
The same mechanism causes anemia in preterm infants during the first 4 to 12 wk, but lower
erythropoietin production, shorter RBC life span (35 to 50 days), rapid growth, and more frequent
phlebotomy contribute to a faster and lower Hb nadir (8 to 10 g/dL). Infants < 32 wk gestation are most
affected.
Blood loss:
Anemia may develop because of prenatal, perinatal (at delivery), or postpartum hemorrhage.
In neonates, absolute blood volume is low (eg, preterm, 90 to 105 mL/kg; term, 78 to 86 mL/kg); therefore,
acute loss of as little as 15 to 20 mL of blood may result in anemia. An infant with chronic blood loss can
compensate physiologically and is typically more clinically stable than an infant with acute blood loss.
Prenatal hemorrhage
may be caused by
• Fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage
===PAGE:2940===
• Twin-to-twin transfusion
• Cord malformations
• Placental abnormalities
• Diagnostic procedures
Fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage occurs spontaneously or as a result of maternal trauma, amniocentesis,
external cephalic version, or placental tumor. It affects about 50% of pregnancies, although in most cases
the volume of blood lost is extremely small (about 2 mL); "massive" blood loss, defined as > 30 mL,
occurs in 3/1000 pregnancies.
Twin-to-twin transfusion is the unequal sharing of blood supply between twins that affects 13 to 33% of
monozygotic, monochorionic twin pregnancies. When significant blood transfer occurs, the donor twin
may become very anemic and develop heart failure, while the recipient may become polycythemic and
develop hyperviscosity syndrome (.
Cord malformations include velamentous insertion of the umbilical cord, vasa previa, or abdominal or
placental insertion; the mechanism of hemorrhage, which is often massive and rapid, is by cord vessel
shearing or rupture.
The 2 important placental abnormalities causing hemorrhage are placenta previa and abruptio placentae.
Diagnostic procedures causing hemorrhage include amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling, and
umbilical cord blood sampling.
Perinatal hemorrhage
may be caused by
• Precipitous delivery (ie, rapid, spontaneous delivery < 3 h after onset of labor, which causes
hemorrhage due to umbilical cord tearing)
• Obstetric accidents (eg, incision of the placenta during cesarean delivery, birth trauma)
• Coagulopathies
Cephalhematomas resulting from procedures such as vacuum or forceps delivery are usually relatively
harmless, but subgaleal bleeds can extend into soft tissue, sequestering sufficient blood volumes to result
in anemia, hypotension, shock, and death. Far less often, rupture of the liver, spleen, or adrenal gland
during delivery may lead to internal bleeding. Intraventricular hemorrhage, most common among preterm
infants (, as well as subarachnoid and subdural bleeding also can result in a significantly
lowered Hct.
Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn (see also
Vitamin K Deficiency
 is hemorrhage within a few
days of a normal delivery
caused by transient physiologic deficiency in vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factors. Other possible causes of hemorrhage in the first few days of life are other coagulopathies (eg,
hemophilia), disseminated intravascular coagulation caused by sepsis, vascular malformations, or
prenatal maternal use of vitamin K antagonists (eg, phenytoin, warfarin, isoniazid).
Decreased RBC production:
Defects in RBC production may be
• Congenital
• Acquired
Congenital defects
are extremely rare, but Diamond-Blackfan anemia and Fanconi's anemia are the
most common.
===PAGE:2941===
Diamond-Blackfan anemia is characterized by lack of RBC precursors in bone marrow, macrocytic RBCs,
lack of reticulocytes in peripheral blood, and lack of involvement of other blood cell lineages. It is often
part of a syndrome of congenital anomalies including microcephaly, cleft palate, eye anomalies, thumb
deformities, and webbed neck. Up to 25% of affected infants are anemic at birth, and low birth weight
occurs in about 10%. It is thought to be caused by defective stem cell differentiation.
Fanconi's anemia is an autosomal recessive disorder of bone marrow progenitor cells that causes
macrocytosis and reticulocytopenia with progressive failure of all hematopoietic cell lines. It is usually
diagnosed after the neonatal period. The cause is a genetic defect that prevents cells from repairing
damaged DNA or removing toxic free radicals that damage cells.
Other congenital anemias include Pearson's syndrome, a rare, multisystem disease involving
mitochondrial defects that cause refractory sideroblastic anemia, pancytopenia, and variable hepatic,
renal, and pancreatic insufficiency or failure; and congenital dyserythropoietic anemia, in which chronic
anemia (typically macrocytic) results from ineffective or abnormal RBC production, and hemolysis caused
by RBC abnormalities.
Acquired defects
are those that occur after birth. The most common causes are
• Infections
• Nutritional deficiencies
Infections (eg, malaria, rubella, syphilis, HIV, cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, bacterial sepsis) may impair
RBC production in the bone marrow. Congenital parvovirus B19 infection may result in the absence of
RBC production.
Nutritional deficiencies of iron, copper, folate (folic acid), and vitamins E and B
may cause anemia in
the early months of life but not usually at birth. The incidence of iron deficiency, the most common
nutritional deficiency, is higher in less developed countries where it results from dietary insufficiency and
exclusive and prolonged breastfeeding. Iron deficiency is common among neonates whose mothers have
an iron deficit and among premature infants who have not been transfused and whose formula is not
supplemented with iron; premature infants deplete iron stores by 10 to 14 wk if not supplemented.
Hemolysis:
Hemolysis (see also p.
) may be caused by
• Immune-mediated disorders
• RBC membrane disorders
• Enzyme deficiencies
• Hemoglobinopathies
• Infections
All also cause hyperbilirubinemia, which may cause jaundice and kernicterus (.
Immune-mediated hemolysis
may occur when fetal RBCs with surface antigens (most commonly Rh
and ABO blood antigens but also Kell, Duffy, and other minor group antigens) that differ from maternal
RBC antigens enter the maternal circulation and stimulate production of IgG antibody directed against
fetal RBCs. The most common severe scenario is that an Rh (D antigen)-negative mother becomes
sensitized to the D antigen during a previous pregnancy with an Rh-positive fetus; a 2nd Rh-positive
pregnancy may then prompt an IgG response that may result in fetal and neonatal hemolysis (see also
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
. Intrauterine hemolysis may be severe enough to cause hydrops or
death; postpartum, there may be significant anemia and hyperbilirubinemia with ongoing hemolysis
secondary to persistent maternal IgG (half-life about 28 days). With widespread prophylactic use of antiRh D to prevent sensitization (, < 0.11% of pregnancies in Rh-negative women are affected.
===PAGE:2942===
ABO incompatibility may cause hemolysis by a similar mechanism. ABO incompatibility usually occurs in
type O mothers. Mothers with type A, B, or AB blood make anti-A or anti-B antibodies that are
predominantly IgM and are incapable of crossing the placenta. Hemolysis caused by ABO incompatibility
can occur in a first pregnancy because mothers are often sensitized by antigens in foods or bacteria.
RBC membrane disorders
alter RBC shape and deformability, resulting in premature removal
of RBCs
from the circulation. The most common disorders are hereditary spherocytosis and hereditary
elliptocytosis (.
Enzyme deficiencies
of G6PD ( and pyruvate kinase (see also
Embden-Meyerhof Pathway
Defects
 are the most common enzyme disorders causing hemolysis.
Hemoglobinopathies
are caused by deficiencies and structural abnormalities of globin chains. At birth,
55 to 90% of the neonate's Hb is composed of 2
α
and 2
γ
globin chains (fetal Hb or Hb F [α
γ]). After
birth,
γ
-chain production decreases (to < 2% by 2 to 4 yr of age) and
β
-chain production increases until
adult Hb (Hb A [α
β]) becomes predominant.
α
-Thalassemia ( is a genetically inherited
disorder of depressed
α
globin chain production and is the most common hemoglobinopathy causing
anemia in the neonatal period.
β
-Thalassemia is an inherited decrease in
β
-chain production. Because
β
globin is naturally low at birth,
β
-thalassemia and structural abnormalities of the
β
globin chain (eg, Hb S
[sickle cell disease], Hb C) are rarely apparent at birth and symptoms do not appear until fetal Hb levels
have fallen to sufficiently low levels at 3 to 4 mo of age.
Intrauterine infections
by certain bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa (most notably toxoplasmosis and
malaria) also may trigger hemolytic anemia. In malaria, the
Plasmodium
parasite invades and ultimately
ruptures the RBC. Immune-mediated destruction of parasitized RBCs and excess removal of
nonparasitized cells occur. Associated bone marrow dyserythropoiesis results in inadequate
compensatory erythropoiesis. Intravascular hemolysis, extravascular phagocytosis, and dyserythropoiesis
can lead to anemia.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are similar regardless of the cause but vary with severity and rate of onset of the
anemia. Neonates are generally pale and, if anemia is severe, have tachypnea, tachycardia, and
sometimes a flow murmur; hypotension is present with acute blood loss. Jaundice may be present with
hemolysis.
Evaluation
History:
History should focus on maternal factors (eg, bleeding diatheses, hereditary RBC disorders,
nutritional deficiencies, drugs), family history of hereditary disorders that may cause neonatal anemia (eg,
hemoglobinopathies, enzyme deficiencies, red cell membrane disorders, RBC aplasias), and obstetric
factors (eg, infections, vaginal bleeding, obstetric interventions, mode of delivery, blood loss, treatment
and appearance of the cord, placental pathology, fetal distress, number of fetuses).
Nonspecific maternal factors may provide additional clues. Splenectomy would indicate a possible history
of hemolysis, red cell membrane disorder, or autoimmune anemia; cholecystectomy might indicate a
history of hemolysis-induced gallstones. Important neonatal factors include gestational age at delivery,
age at presentation, sex, race, and ethnicity.
Physical examination:
Tachycardia and hypotension suggest acute, significant blood loss. Jaundice
suggests hemolysis, either systemic (caused by ABO incompatibility or G6PD deficiency) or localized
(caused by breakdown of sequestered blood in cephalhematomas). Hepatosplenomegaly suggests
hemolysis, congenital infection, or heart failure. Hematomas, ecchymoses, or petechiae suggest bleeding
diathesis. Congenital anomalies may suggest a bone marrow failure syndrome.
Testing:
Anemia may be suspected prenatally if ultrasonography shows hydrops fetalis, which, by
definition, is abnormal, excessive fluid in 2 or more body compartments (eg, pleura, peritoneum,
===PAGE:2943===
pericardium); cardiac, hepatic, and splenic enlargement may be present.
After birth, if anemia is suspected, initial testing consists of
• Reticulocyte count
• Peripheral smear examination
If the
reticulocyte count is low
, anemia is caused by acquired or congenital bone marrow dysfunction,
and the infant should be evaluated for causes of bone marrow suppression with
• Titers or PCR studies for congenital infection (rubella, syphilis, HIV, cytomegalovirus, adenovirus,
parvovirus)
• Folate and vitamin B
levels
• Iron and copper levels
If these studies do not identify a cause of anemia, a bone marrow biopsy, genetic testing for congenital
disorders of RBC production, or both may be necessary.
If the
reticulocyte count is elevated or normal
(reflecting an appropriate bone marrow response),
anemia is caused by blood loss or hemolysis. If there is no apparent blood loss or if signs of hemolysis
are noted on the peripheral smear, a direct antiglobulin test (DAT [Coombs' test]) should be done.
If the
DAT is positive
, anemia is likely secondary to Rh, ABO, or other blood group incompatibility.
If the
DAT is negative
, the RBC mean corpuscular volume (MCV) may prove helpful. A significantly low
MCV suggests
α
-thalassemia or chronic intrauterine blood loss. With a normal or high MCV, peripheral
blood smear may show abnormal RBC morphology compatible with a membrane disorder,
microangiopathy, disseminated intravascular coagulation, vitamin E deficiency, or hemoglobinopathy. If the
smear is normal, blood loss, enzyme deficiency, or infection should be considered and an appropriate
assessment, including testing for fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage, should ensue.
Fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage can be diagnosed by testing for fetal RBCs in maternal blood. The
Kleihauer-Betke acid elution technique is the most frequently used test, but other tests include fluorescent
antibody techniques and differential or mixed agglutination testing. In the Kleihauer-Betke technique, citric
acid-phosphate buffer of pH 3.5 elutes Hb from adult but not fetal RBCs; thus, fetal RBCs stain with eosin
and are visible on microscopy, whereas adult RBCs appear as red cell ghosts. The Kleihauer-Betke
technique is not useful when the mother has a hemoglobinopathy.
Treatment
Need for treatment varies with degree of anemia and associated medical conditions. Mild anemia in
otherwise healthy term and preterm infants generally does not require specific treatment; treatment is
directed at the underlying diagnosis. Some patients require transfusion or exchange transfusion of
packed RBCs.
Transfusion:
Transfusion is indicated to treat severe anemia. Infants should be considered for
transfusion if symptomatic due to anemia or if a decrease in tissue O
delivery is suspected. The
decision to transfuse should be based on symptoms, patient age, and degree of illness. Hct alone should
not be the deciding factor regarding transfusion because some infants may be asymptomatic with lower
levels and others may be symptomatic with higher levels.
Guidelines for when to transfuse vary, but one accepted set is described in
Table 275-2
.
Before the first transfusion, if not already done, maternal and fetal blood should be screened for ABO and
===PAGE:2944===
Rh types and the presence of atypical RBC antibodies, and a DAT should be done on the infant's RBCs.
Blood for transfusion should be the same as or compatible with the neonate's ABO and Rh group and with
any ABO or RBC antibody present in maternal or neonatal serum. Neonates produce RBC antibodies only
rarely, so in cases where the need for transfusion persists, repeat antibody screening is usually not
necessary until 4 mo of age.
[Table 275-2.
Transfusion Guidelines for Infants < 4 Mo]
Packed RBCs used for transfusion should be filtered (leukocyte depleted), irradiated, and given in
aliquots of 10 to 20 mL/kg derived from a single donation; sequential transfusions from the same unit of
blood minimize recipient exposure and transfusion complications. Blood from cytomegalovirus-negative
donors should be considered for extremely premature infants.
Exchange transfusion:
Exchange transfusion, in which blood from the neonate is removed in aliquots in
sequence with packed RBC transfusion, is indicated for some cases of hemolytic anemia with elevation of
serum bilirubin and some cases of severe anemia with heart failure. This procedure decreases plasma
antibody titers and bilirubin levels and minimizes fluid overload. Serious adverse
effects (eg,
thrombocytopenia; necrotizing enterocolitis; hypoglycemia; hypocalcemia; shock, pulmonary edema, or
both [caused by shifts in fluid balance]) are common, so the procedure should be done by experienced
staff. Guidelines for when to begin exchange transfusion differ and are not evidence based.
Other treatments:
Recombinant human erythropoietin is not routinely recommended, in part because it
has not been shown to reduce transfusion requirements in the first 2 wk of life.
Iron therapy is restricted to cases of repetitive blood loss (eg, hemorrhagic diathesis, GI bleeding,
frequent phlebotomy). Oral iron supplements are preferred; parenteral iron sometimes causes
anaphylaxis, so therapy should be guided by a hematologist.
Treatment of more unusual causes of anemia is disorder specific (eg, corticosteroids in DiamondBlackfan anemia, and vitamin B
for B
deficiency).
Perinatal Polycythemia and Hyperviscosity Syndrome
Polycythemia is an abnormal increase in RBC mass, defined in neonates as a venous Hct ≥
65%; this increase can lead to hyperviscosity with sludging of blood within vessels and
sometimes thrombosis. The main symptoms and signs of neonatal polycythemia are
nonspecific and include ruddy complexion, feeding difficulties, lethargy, hypoglycemia,
hyperbilirubinemia, cyanosis, respiratory distress, and seizures. Diagnosis is made clinically
and with an Hct measurement. Treatment is with partial exchange transfusion.
The terms polycythemia and hyperviscosity are often used interchangeably but are not equivalent.
Polycythemia is significant only because it increases risk of hyperviscosity syndrome. Hyperviscosity is a
clinical syndrome caused by sludging of blood within vessels. Sludging occurs because increased RBC
mass causes a relative decrease in plasma volume and a relative increase in proteins and platelets.
Incidence of polycythemia is about 3 to 4% (range 0.4 to 12%), and about half of infants with
polycythemia have hyperviscosity.
Etiology
Dehydration causing relative hemoconcentration and an elevated Hct mimics polycythemia, but RBC
mass is not increased. Causes of true polycythemia include intrauterine hypoxia, perinatal asphyxia,
placental transfusion (including twin-to-twin transfusion), some congenital abnormalities (eg, cyanotic
congenital heart disease, renovascular malformations, congenital adrenal hyperplasia), certain delivery
procedures (eg, delayed cord clamping, holding neonate below the level of the mother before cord
clamping, stripping the cord toward the neonate at delivery), maternal insulin-dependent diabetes, Down
syndrome, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, and intrauterine growth restriction. Polycythemia is also more
===PAGE:2945===
common when the mother resides at a high altitude. Premature infants rarely develop hyperviscosity
syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of hyperviscosity syndrome are those of heart failure, thrombosis (cerebral and
renal vessels), and CNS dysfunction, including tachypnea, respiratory distress, cyanosis, plethora,
apnea, lethargy, irritability, hypotonia, tremulousness, seizures, and feeding problems. Renal vein
thrombosis may also cause renal tubular damage, proteinuria, or both.
Diagnosis
• Hct
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis of polycythemia is by Hct. Diagnosis of hyperviscosity syndrome is clinical. Capillary samples
often overestimate Hct, so a venous or arterial Hct should be obtained before the diagnosis is made; most
published studies of polycythemia use spun Hcts, which are no longer routinely done and are generally
higher than those done on automated counters. Laboratory measure of viscosity is not readily available.
Other laboratory abnormalities may include low blood glucose and Ca
++
levels, maternal diabetes, or
both; RBC lysis; thrombocytopenia (secondary to consumption with thrombosis); hyperbilirubinemia
(caused by turnover of a higher number of RBCs); and reticulocytosis and increased peripheral nucleated
RBCs (caused by increased erythropoiesis secondary to fetal hypoxia).
Treatment
• IV hydration
• Sometimes phlebotomy plus saline replacement
Asymptomatic infants should be treated with IV hydration (. Symptomatic
infants with Hct > 65
to 70% should undergo an isovolemic hemodilution (sometimes called partial exchange transfusion,
although no blood products are given) to reduce the Hct to ≤ 55% and thereby decrease blood viscosity.
Partial exchange is done by removing blood in aliquots of 5 mL/kg (about 10 to 12 mL) and immediately
replacing it with an equal volume of 0.9% saline. Asymptomatic infants whose Hct remains persistently >
70% despite hydration may also benefit from this procedure.
Although many studies show immediate measurable effects of partial exchange, the long-term benefits
remain in question. Most studies have failed to document differences in long-term growth or
neurodevelopment between children who have received a partial exchange transfusion in the neonatal
period and those who have not.
===PAGE:2946===
Chapter 276. Metabolic, Electrolyte, and Toxic Disorders in Neonates
Introduction
Inherited disorders of metabolism are discussed in
Chapter 301
. Electrolyte disorders also are discussed
elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia
Jaundice is a yellow discoloration of the skin and eyes caused by hyperbilirubinemia (elevated serum
bilirubin concentration). The serum bilirubin level required to cause jaundice varies with skin tone and
body region, but jaundice usually becomes visible on the sclera at a level of 2 to 3 mg/dL (34 to 51
μ
mol/L) and on the face at about 4 to 5 mg/dL (68 to 86
μ
mol/L). With increasing bilirubin levels, jaundice
seems to advance in a head-to-foot direction, appearing at the umbilicus at about 15 mg/dL (258
μ
mol/L)
and at the feet at about 20 mg/dL (340
μ
mol/L). Slightly more than half of all neonates become visibly
jaundiced in the first week of life.
Consequences of hyperbilirubinemia:
Hyperbilirubinemia may be harmless or harmful depending on
its cause and the degree of elevation. Some causes of jaundice are intrinsically dangerous whatever the
bilirubin level. But hyperbilirubinemia of any etiology is a concern once the level is high enough. The
threshold for concern varies by age (see
Fig. 276-1
), degree of prematurity, and health status;
[Fig. 276-1.
Risk of hyperbilirubinemia in neonates ≥ 35 wk gestation.]
however, among term infants, the threshold typically is considered to be a level > 18 mg/dL (> 308
μ
mol/L).
Kernicterus
( is the major consequence of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Although it is now
rare, kernicterus still occurs and can nearly always be prevented. Kernicterus is brain damage caused by
unconjugated bilirubin deposition in basal ganglia and brain stem nuclei, caused by either acute or
chronic hyperbilirubinemia. Normally, bilirubin bound to serum albumin stays in the intravascular space.
However, bilirubin can cross the blood-brain barrier and cause kernicterus in certain situations:
• When serum bilirubin concentration is markedly elevated
• When serum albumin concentration is markedly low (eg, in preterm infants)
• When bilirubin is displaced from albumin by competitive binders
Competitive binders include drugs (eg, sulfisoxazole, ceftriaxone, aspirin) and free fatty acids and
hydrogen ions (eg, in fasting, septic, or acidotic infants).
Pathophysiology
The majority of bilirubin is produced from the breakdown of Hb into unconjugated bilirubin (and other
substances). Unconjugated bilirubin binds to albumin in the blood for transport to the liver, where it is
taken up by hepatocytes and conjugated with glucuronic acid by the enzyme uridine
diphosphogluconurate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) to make it water-soluble. The conjugated bilirubin
is excreted in bile into the duodenum. In adults, conjugated bilirubin is reduced by gut bacteria to urobilin
and excreted. Neonates, however, have sterile digestive tracts. They do have the enzyme
β
-
glucuronidase, which deconjugates the conjugated bilirubin, which is then reabsorbed by the intestines
and recycled into the circulation. This is called enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin (.
Mechanisms of hyperbilirubinemia:
Hyperbilirubinemia can be caused by one or more of the following
processes:
• Increased production
===PAGE:2947===
• Decreased hepatic uptake
• Decreased conjugation
• Impaired excretion
• Impaired bile flow (cholestasis)
• Increased enterohepatic circulation
Etiology
Classification:
There are several ways to classify and discuss causes of hyperbilirubinemia. Because
transient jaundice is common among healthy neonates (unlike adults, in whom jaundice always signifies a
disorder), hyperbilirubinemia can be classified as physiologic or pathologic. It can be classified by
whether the hyperbilirubinemia is unconjugated, conjugated, or both. It also can be classified by
mechanism (see
Table 276-1
).
Causes:
Most cases involve unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Some of the most common causes of
neonatal jaundice include
• Physiologic hyperbilirubinemia
• Breastfeeding jaundice
• Breast milk jaundice
• Pathologic hyperbilirubinemia due to hemolytic disease
Liver dysfunction (eg, caused by parenteral alimentation causing cholestasis, neonatal sepsis, neonatal
hepatitis) may cause a conjugated or mixed hyperbilirubinemia.
Physiologic hyperbilirubinemia
occurs in almost all neonates. Shorter neonatal RBC life span
increases bilirubin production; deficient conjugation due to the deficiency of UGT decreases clearance;
and low bacterial levels in the intestine combined with increased hydrolysis of conjugated bilirubin
increase enterohepatic circulation. Bilirubin levels can rise up to 18 mg/dL by 3 to 4 days of life (7 days in
Asian infants) and fall thereafter.
Breastfeeding jaundice
develops in one sixth of breastfed infants during the first week of life.
Breastfeeding increases enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin in some infants who have decreased milk
intake and who also have dehydration or low caloric intake. The increased enterohepatic circulation also
may result from reduced intestinal bacteria that convert bilirubin to nonresorbed metabolites.
Breast milk jaundice
is different from breastfeeding jaundice. It develops after the first 5 to 7 days of life
and peaks at about 2 wk. It is thought to be caused by an increased concentration of
β
-glucuronidase in
breast milk, causing an increase in the deconjugation and reabsorption of bilirubin.
Pathologic hyperbilirubinemia
in term infants is diagnosed if
• Jaundice appears in the first 24 h, after the first week of life, or lasts > 2 wk
• Total serum bilirubin (TSB) rises by > 5 mg/dL/day
• TSB is > 18 mg/dL
• Infant shows symptoms or signs of a serious illness
===PAGE:2948===
Some of the most common pathologic causes are
[Table 276-1.
Causes of Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia]
•
Immune and nonimmune hemolytic anemia
• G6PD deficiency
• Hematoma resorption
• Sepsis
• Hypothyroidism
Evaluation
History: History of present illness
should note age of onset and duration of jaundice. Important
associated symptoms include lethargy and poor feeding (suggesting possible kernicterus), which may
progress to stupor, hypotonia, or seizures and eventually to hypertonia. Patterns of feeding can be
suggestive of possible breastfeeding failure or underfeeding. Therefore, history should include what the
infant is being fed, how much and how frequently, urine and stool production (possible breastfeeding
failure or underfeeding), how well the infant is latching on to the breast or taking the nipple of the bottle,
whether the mother feels that her milk has come in, and whether the infant is swallowing during feedings
and seems satiated after feedings.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms of causes, including respiratory distress, fever, and
irritability or lethargy (sepsis); hypotonia and poor feeding (hypothyroidism, metabolic disorder); and
repeated episodes of vomiting (intestinal obstruction).
Past medical history
should focus on maternal infections (toxoplasmosis, other pathogens, rubella,
cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex [TORCH] infections), disorders that can cause early
hyperbilirubinemia (maternal diabetes), maternal Rh factor and blood group (maternofetal blood group
incompatibility), and a history of a prolonged or difficult birth (hematoma or forceps trauma).
Family history should note known inherited disorders that can cause jaundice, including G6PD deficiency,
thalassemias, and spherocytosis, and also any history of siblings who have had jaundice.
Drug history should specifically note drugs that may promote jaundice (eg, ceftriaxone, sulfonamides,
antimalarials).
Physical examination:
Overall clinical appearance and vital signs are reviewed.
The skin is inspected for extent of jaundice. Gentle pressure on the skin can help reveal the presence of
jaundice. Also, ecchymoses or petechiae (suggestive of hemolytic anemia) are noted.
The physical examination should focus on signs of causative disorders.
The general appearance is inspected for plethora (maternofetal transfusion); macrosomia (maternal
diabetes); lethargy or extreme irritability (sepsis or infection); and any dysmorphic features such as
macroglossia (hypothyroidism) and flat nasal bridge or bilateral epicanthal folds (Down syndrome).
For the head and neck examination, any bruising and swelling of the scalp consistent with a
cephalohematoma are noted. Lungs are examined for crackles, rhonchi, and decreased breath sounds
(pneumonia). The abdomen is examined for distention, mass (hepatosplenomegaly), or pain (intestinal
obstruction). Neurologic examination should focus on signs of hypotonia or weakness (metabolic disorder,
hypothyroidism, sepsis).
===PAGE:2949===
Red flags:
The following findings are of particular concern:
• Jaundice in the first day of life
• TSB > 18 mg/dL
• Rate of rise of TSB > 0.2 mg/dL/h (> 3.4
μ
mol/L/h) or > 5 mg/dL/day
• Conjugated bilirubin concentration > 1 mg/dL (> 17
μ
mol/L) if TSB is < 5 mg/dL or > 20% of TSB
(suggests neonatal cholestasis)
• Jaundice after 2 wk of age
• Lethargy, irritability, respiratory distress
Interpretation of findings:
Evaluation should focus on distinguishing physiologic from pathologic
jaundice. History, physical examination, and timing can help (see
Table 276-2
), but typically TSB and conjugated serum bilirubin levels are measured.
Timing:
Jaundice that develops in the first 24 to 48 h, or that persists > 2 wk, is most likely pathologic.
Jaundice that does not become evident until after 2 to 3 days is more consistent with physiologic,
breastfeeding, or breast milk jaundice. An exception is undersecretion of bilirubin due to metabolic factors
(eg, Crigler-Najjar syndrome, hypothyroidism, drugs), which may take 2 to 3 days to become evident. In
such cases, bilirubin typically peaks in the first week, accumulates at a rate of < 5 mg/dL/day, and can
remain evident for a prolonged period. Because most neonates are now discharged from the hospital or
nursery within 48 h, many cases of hyperbilirubinemia are detected only after discharge.
Testing:
Diagnosis is suspected by the infant's color and is confirmed by measurement of serum bilirubin.
Noninvasive techniques for transcutaneous measurement of bilirubin levels in infants are being used
increasingly, with good correlation with serum bilirubin measurements. Risk of hyperbilirubinemia is based
on age-specific TSB levels.
A bilirubin concentration > 10 mg/dL (> 170
μ
mol/L) in preterm infants or > 18 mg/dL in term infants
warrants additional testing,
[Table 276-2.
Physical Findings in Neonatal Jaundice]
including Hct, blood smear, reticulocyte count, direct Coombs' test, TSB and direct serum bilirubin
concentrations, and blood type and Rh group of the infant and mother.
Other tests, such as blood, urine, and CSF cultures to detect sepsis and measurement of RBC enzyme
levels to detect unusual causes of hemolysis, may be indicated by the history and physical examination.
Such tests also may be indicated for any neonates with an initial bilirubin level > 25 mg/dL (> 428
μ
mol/L).
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder. In addition, treatment for hyperbilirubinemia itself may be
necessary.
Physiologic jaundice
usually is not clinically significant and resolves within 1 wk. Frequent formula
feedings can reduce the incidence and severity of hyperbilirubinemia by increasing GI motility and
frequency of stools, thereby minimizing the enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin. The type of formula does
not seem important in increasing bilirubin excretion.
Breastfeeding jaundice
may be prevented or reduced by increasing the frequency of feedings. If the
bilirubin level continues to increase > 18 mg/dL in a term infant with early breastfeeding jaundice, a
temporary change from breast milk to formula may be appropriate; phototherapy also may be indicated at
higher levels. Stopping breastfeeding is necessary for only 1 or 2 days, and the mother should be
===PAGE:2950===
encouraged to continue expressing breast milk regularly so she can resume nursing as soon as the
infant's bilirubin level starts to decline. She also should be assured that the hyperbilirubinemia has not
caused any harm and that she may safely resume breastfeeding. It is not advisable to supplement with
water or dextrose because that may disrupt the mother's production of milk.
Definitive treatment
involves
• Phototherapy
• Exchange transfusion
Phototherapy:
This treatment remains the standard of care, most commonly using fluorescent white
light. (Blue light is most effective for intensive phototherapy.) Phototherapy is the use of light to
photoisomerize unconjugated bilirubin into forms that are more water-soluble and can be excreted rapidly
by the liver and kidney without glucuronidation. It provides definitive treatment of neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia and prevention of kernicterus. Photo-therapy is an option when unconjugated bilirubin
is > 12 mg/dL (> 205.2
μ
mol/L) and may be indicated when unconjugated bilirubin is > 15 mg/dL at 25 to
48 h, 18 mg/dL at 49 to 72 h, and 20 mg/dL at > 72 h (see
Fig. 276-1
). Phototherapy is not indicated for
conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Because visible jaundice may disappear during phototherapy though
serum bilirubin remains elevated, skin color cannot be used to evaluate jaundice severity. Blood taken for
bilirubin determinations should be shielded from bright light, because bilirubin in the collection tubes may
rapidly photo-oxidize.
Exchange transfusion:
This treatment can rapidly remove bilirubin from circulation and is indicated for
severe hyperbilirubinemia, which most often occurs with immune-mediated hemolysis. Small amounts of
blood are withdrawn and replaced through an umbilical vein catheter to remove partially hemolyzed and
antibody-coated RBCs as well as circulating Igs. The blood is replaced with uncoated donor RBCs. Only
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can cause kernicterus, so if conjugated bilirubin is elevated, the level of
unconjugated rather than total bilirubin is used to determine the need for exchange transfusion.
Specific indications are serum bilirubin ≥ 20 mg/dL at 24 to 48 h or ≥ 25 mg/dL at > 48 h and failure of
phototherapy to result in a 1- to 2-mg/dL (17- to 34μ
mol/L) decrease within 4 to 6 h of initiation or at the
first clinical signs of kernicterus regardless of bilirubin levels. If the serum bilirubin level is > 25 mg/dL
when the neonate is initially examined, preparation for an exchange transfusion should be made in case
intensive phototherapy fails to lower the bilirubin level. An alternative approach uses the weight of the
neonate in grams divided by 100 to determine the bilirubin level (in mg/dL) at which exchange transfusion
is indicated. Thus, a 1000-g neonate would receive an exchange transfusion at a bilirubin level of ≥ 10
mg/dL, and a 1500-g neonate would receive an exchange transfusion at a bilirubin level of ≥ 15 mg/dL.
Most often, 160 mL/kg (twice the infant's total blood volume) of packed RBCs is exchanged over 2 to 4 h;
an alternative is to give 2 successive exchanges of 80 mL/kg each over 1 to 2 h. To do an exchange, 20
mL of blood is withdrawn and then immediately replaced by 20 mL of transfused blood. This procedure is
repeated until the total desired volume is exchanged. For critically ill or premature infants, aliquots of 5 to
10 mL are used to avoid sudden major changes in blood volume. The goal is to reduce bilirubin by nearly
50%, with the knowledge that hyperbilirubinemia may rebound to about 60% of pretransfusion level within
1 to 2 h. It is also customary to lower the target level by 1 to 2 mg/dL in conditions that increase the risk of
kernicterus (eg, fasting, sepsis, acidosis). Exchange transfusions may need to be repeated if bilirubin
levels remain high. Finally, there are risks and complications with the procedure, and the success of
phototherapy has reduced the frequency of exchange transfusion.
Key Points
• Neonatal jaundice is caused by increased bilirubin production, decreased bilirubin clearance, or
increased enterohepatic circulation.
• Some jaundice is normal in neonates.
• Risk varies with postnatal age, TSB value, prematurity, and health of the neonate.
===PAGE:2951===
• Treatment depends on cause and degree of elevation.
• Definitive treatments include phototherapy and exchange transfusion.
Kernicterus
(Bilirubin Encephalopathy)
Kernicterus is brain damage caused by unconjugated bilirubin deposition in basal ganglia and
brain stem nuclei.
Normally, bilirubin bound to serum albumin stays in the intravascular space. However, bilirubin can cross
the blood-brain barrier and cause kernicterus when serum bilirubin concentration is markedly elevated;
serum albumin concentration is markedly low (eg, in preterm infants); or bilirubin is displaced from
albumin by competitive binders (eg, sulfisoxazole, ceftriaxone, and aspirin; free fatty acids and hydrogen
ions in fasting, septic, or acidotic infants).
In preterm infants, kernicterus may not cause recognizable clinical symptoms or signs. Early symptoms in
term infants are lethargy, poor feeding, and vomiting. Opisthotonos, oculogyric crisis, seizures, and death
may follow. Kernicterus may result in intellectual disability, choreoathetoid cerebral palsy, sensorineural
hearing loss, and paralysis of upward gaze later in childhood. It is unknown whether minor degrees of
kernicterus can cause less severe neurologic impairment (eg, perceptual-motor problems, learning
disorders).
There is no reliable test to determine the risk of kernicterus, and the diagnosis is made presumptively. A
definite diagnosis can be made only by autopsy.
There is no treatment once kernicterus develops; it can be prevented by treating hyperbilirubinemia (see
p.
).
Neonatal Hypercalcemia
Hypercalcemia is total serum Ca > 12 mg/dL (> 3 mmol/L) or ionized Ca > 6 mg/dL (> 1.5
mmol/L). The most common cause is iatrogenic. GI signs may occur (eg, anorexia, vomiting,
constipation) and sometimes lethargy or seizures. Treatment is IV normal saline plus
furosemide and sometimes corticosteroids, calcitonin, and bisphosphonates.
Etiology
The
most common cause
is
• Iatrogenic
Iatrogenic causes usually involve excess Ca or vitamin D, or phosphate deprivation, which can result from
prolonged feeding with incorrectly prepared formula or from dairy milk containing excess vitamin D.
Other causes
include maternal hypoparathyroidism, subcutaneous fat necrosis, parathyroid hyperplasia,
abnormal renal function, Williams syndrome, and idiopathic. Williams syndrome includes supravalvular
aortic stenosis, an elfin facies, and hypercalcemia of unknown pathophysiology; infants may also be small
for gestational age, and hypercalcemia can be noted early in infancy, usually resolving by age 12 mo.
Idiopathic neonatal hypercalcemia is a diagnosis of exclusion and is difficult to differentiate from Williams
syndrome. Neonatal hyperparathyroidism is very rare. Subcutaneous fat necrosis may occur after major
trauma and causes hypercalcemia that usually resolves spontaneously. Maternal hypoparathyroidism or
maternal hypocalcemia may cause secondary fetal hyperparathyroidism, with changes in fetal
mineralization (eg, osteopenia).
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:2952===
Symptoms and signs may be noted when total serum Ca is > 12 mg/dL (> 3 mmol/L). These signs can
include anorexia, GI reflux, nausea, vomiting, lethargy or seizures or generalized irritability, and
hypertension. Other symptoms and signs include constipation, abdominal pain, dehydration, feeding
intolerance, and failure to thrive. Some neonates have vague symptoms of muscle or joint aches and
weakness. With subcutaneous fat necrosis, firm purple nodules may be observed on trunk, buttocks, or
legs.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by measuring total serum Ca concentration.
Treatment
• IV normal saline plus furosemide
• Sometimes corticosteroids, calcitonin, and bisphosphonates
Marked elevation of serum Ca may be treated with normal saline 20 mL/kg IV plus furosemide 2 mg/kg IV
and, when persistent, with corticosteroids and calcitonin. Bisphosphonates are also increasingly used in
this context (eg, etidronate by mouth or pamidronate IV). Treatment of subcutaneous fat necrosis is with a
low-Ca formula; fluids, furosemide, calcitonin, and corticosteroids are used as indicated by the degree of
hypercalcemia. Fetal hypercalcemia caused by maternal hypoparathyroidism can be treated expectantly,
because it usually resolves spontaneously within a few weeks. Treatment of chronic conditions includes a
low-Ca, low-vitamin D formula.
Neonatal Hypocalcemia
Hypocalcemia is a serum total Ca concentration < 8 mg/dL (< 2 mmol/L) in term infants or < 7
mg/dL (< 1.75 mmol/L) in preterm infants. It is also
defined as an ionized Ca level < 3.0 to 4.4
mg/dL (< 0.75 to 1.10 mmol/L), depending on the method (type of electrode) used. Signs are
primarily neurologic and include hypotonia, apnea, and tetany. Treatment is IV or oral Ca
supplementation.
Etiology
Neonatal hypocalcemia occurs in 2 forms:
• Early onset (in the first 2 days of life)
• Late onset (> 3 days), which is rare
Some infants with congenital hypoparathyroidism (eg, caused by DiGeorge syndrome with agenesis or
dysgenesis of the parathyroid glands [see p.]) have both early and late (prolonged) hypocalcemia.
Early-onset hypocalcemia:
Risk factors for early-onset hypocalcemia include prematurity, being small
for gestational age, maternal diabetes, and perinatal asphyxia. Mechanisms vary. Normally, parathyroid
hormone helps maintain normal Ca levels when the constant infusion of ionized Ca across the placenta is
interrupted at birth. A transient, relative hypoparathyroidism may cause hypocalcemia in preterm and
some small-for-gestational-age neonates, who have parathyroid glands that do not yet function
adequately, and in infants of mothers with diabetes or hyperparathyroidism, because these women have
higher-than-normal ionized Ca levels during pregnancy. Perinatal asphyxia may also increase serum
calcitonin, which inhibits Ca release from bone and results in hypocalcemia. In other neonates, the normal
phosphaturic renal response to parathyroid hormone is absent; the elevated phosphate (PO
) level leads
to hypocalcemia.
Late-onset hypocalcemia:
The cause of late-onset hypocalcemia is usually ingestion of cow's milk or
formula with a too-high PO
load; elevated serum PO
leads to hypocalcemia.
===PAGE:2953===
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs rarely occur unless total serum Ca is < 7 mg/dL (< 1.75 mmol/L) or the ionized Ca is
< 3.0 mg/dL (< 0.75 mmol/L). Signs include hypotonia, tachycardia, tachypnea, apnea, poor feeding,
jitteriness, tetany, and seizures. Similar symptoms may occur with hypoglycemia and opioid withdrawal.
Diagnosis
• Total or ionized serum Ca level
Diagnosis is by measurement of serum total or ionized Ca; ionized Ca is the more physiologic
measurement, because it obviates concerns about protein concentration and pH. Prolongation of the
corrected QT interval (QT
c
) on ECG also suggests hypocalcemia.
Treatment
• Early onset: IV 10% Ca gluconate
• Late onset: Oral calcitriol or Ca
Early-onset hypocalcemia ordinarily resolves in a few days, and asymptomatic neonates with serum Ca
levels > 7 mg/dL or ionized Ca > 3.5 mg/dL rarely require treatment. Those term infants with levels < 7
mg/dL and preterm infants with Ca < 6 mg/dL (< 1.5 mmol/L) should be treated with 2 mL/kg of 10% Ca
gluconate (200 mg/kg) by slow IV infusion over 30 min. Too-rapid infusion can cause bradycardia, so
heart rate should be monitored during the infusion. The IV site should also be watched closely because
tissue infiltration by a Ca solution is irritating and may cause local tissue damage or necrosis.
Manifestations of Ca infiltration include skin redness, calcification, and necrosis or slough; there can be
radial nerve damage at the wrist.
After acute correction of hypocalcemia, Ca gluconate may be mixed in the maintenance IV infusion and
given continuously. Starting with 400 mg/kg/day of Ca gluconate, the dose may be increased gradually to
800 mg/kg/day, if needed, to prevent a recurrence. When oral feedings are begun, the formula may be
supplemented with the same daily dose of Ca gluconate, if needed, by adding the 10% Ca gluconate
solution into the day's formula. Supplementation is usually required for only a few days.
Treatment of late-onset hypocalcemia is addition of calcitriol or additional Ca to infant formula to provide
a 4:1 molar ratio of Ca:PO
until normal Ca levels are maintained. Oral Ca preparations have a high
sucrose content, which may lead to diarrhea in preterm infants.
Neonatal Hyperglycemia
Hyperglycemia is a serum glucose concentration > 150 mg/dL (> 8.3 mmol/L).
The
most common cause
of neonatal hyperglycemia is
• Iatrogenic
Iatrogenic causes usually involve too-rapid IV infusions of dextrose during the first few days of life in very
low-birth-weight infants (< 1.5 kg).
The other important cause is physiologic stress caused by surgery, hypoxia, respiratory distress
syndrome, or sepsis; fungal sepsis poses a special risk. In premature infants, partially defective
processing of proinsulin to insulin and relative insulin resistance may cause
hyperglycemia. In addition,
transient neonatal diabetes mellitus is a rare self-limited cause that usually occurs in small-for-gestationalage infants; corticosteroid therapy may also result in transient hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia is less
common than hypoglycemia, but it is important because it increases morbidity and mortality of the
underlying causes.
===PAGE:2954===
Symptoms and signs are those of the underlying disorder; diagnosis is by serum glucose testing.
Additional laboratory findings may include glycosuria and marked serum hyperosmolarity.
Treatment
• Reduction of IV dextrose concentration, rate, or both
• Sometimes IV insulin
Treatment of iatrogenic hyperglycemia is reduction of the IV dextrose concentration (eg, from 10% to 5%)
or of the infusion rate; hyperglycemia persisting at low dextrose infusion rates (eg, 4 mg/kg/min) may
indicate relative insulin deficiency or insulin resistance. Treatment of other causes is fast-acting insulin.
One approach is to add fast-acting insulin to an IV infusion of 10% dextrose at a uniform rate of 0.01 to
0.1 unit/kg/h, then titrate the rate until the glucose level is normalized. Another approach is to add insulin
to a separate IV of 10% D/W given simultaneously with the maintenance IV infusion so that the insulin can
be adjusted without changing the total infusion rate. Responses to insulin are unpredictable, and it is
extremely important to monitor serum glucose levels and to titrate the insulin infusion rate carefully.
In transient neonatal diabetes mellitus, glucose levels and hydration should be carefully maintained until
hyperglycemia resolves spontaneously, usually within a few weeks.
Any fluid or electrolytes lost through osmotic diuresis should be replaced.
Neonatal Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia is a serum glucose concentration < 40 mg/dL (< 2.2 mmol/L) in term neonates or
< 30 mg/dL (< 1.7 mmol/L) in preterm neonates. Risk factors include prematurity, being small for
gestational age, and perinatal asphyxia. The most common causes are deficient glycogen
stores, delayed feeding, and hyperinsulinemia. Signs include tachycardia, cyanosis, seizures,
and apnea. Diagnosis is suspected empirically and is confirmed by glucose testing. Prognosis
depends on the underlying condition. Treatment is enteral feeding or IV dextrose.
Etiology
Neonatal hypoglycemia may be transient or persistent.
Causes of
transient hypoglycemia
are
• Inadequate substrate
• Immature enzyme function leading to deficient glycogen stores
Causes of
persistent hypoglycemia
include
• Hyperinsulinism
• Defective counter-regulatory hormone release
• Inherited disorders of metabolism (eg, glycogen storage diseases, disorders of gluconeogenesis, fatty
acid oxidation disorders—see
Chapter 301
)
Deficiency of glycogen stores at birth is common in very low-birth-weight preterm infants, infants who are
small for gestational age (SGA) because of placental insufficiency, and infants who have perinatal
asphyxia. Anaerobic glycolysis consumes glycogen stores in these infants, and hypoglycemia may
develop at any time in the first few days, especially if there is a prolonged interval between feedings or if
nutritional intake is poor. A sustained input of exogenous glucose is therefore important to prevent
hypoglycemia.
===PAGE:2955===
Transient hyperinsulinism most often occurs in infants of diabetic mothers and is inversely related to the
degree of maternal diabetic control. It also commonly occurs in physiologically stressed infants who are
SGA. Less common causes include congenital hyperinsulinism (genetic conditions transmitted in both
autosomal dominant and recessive fashion), severe erythroblastosis fetalis, and Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome (in which islet cell hyperplasia accompanies features of macroglossia and umbilical hernia).
Hyperinsulinemia characteristically results in a rapid fall in serum glucose in the first 1 to 2 h after birth
when the continuous supply of glucose from the placenta is interrupted.
Hypoglycemia may also occur if an IV infusion of D/W is abruptly interrupted. Finally, hypoglycemia can
be due to malposition of an umbilical catheter or sepsis.
Symptoms and Signs
Many infants remain asymptomatic. Prolonged or severe hypoglycemia causes both adrenergic and
neuroglycopenic signs. Adrenergic signs include diaphoresis, tachycardia, lethargy or weakness, and
shakiness. Neuroglycopenic signs include seizure, coma, cyanotic episodes, apnea, bradycardia or
respiratory
distress, and hypothermia. Listlessness, poor feeding, hypotonia, and tachypnea may occur.
Diagnosis
• Bedside glucose check
All signs are nonspecific and also occur in neonates who have asphyxia, sepsis or hypocalcemia, or
opioid withdrawal (. Therefore, at-risk neonates with or without these signs require an
immediate bedside serum glucose check from a capillary sample. Abnormally low levels are confirmed by
a venous sample.
Treatment
• IV dextrose (for prevention and treatment)
• Enteral feeding
• Sometimes IM glucagon
Most high-risk neonates are treated preventively. For example, infants of diabetic women who have been
using insulin are often started at birth on a 10% D/W infusion IV or given oral glucose, as are those who
are sick, are extremely premature, or have respiratory distress. Other at-risk neonates who are not sick
should be started on early, frequent formula feedings to provide carbohydrates.
Any neonate whose glucose falls to ≤ 50 mg/dL (≤ 2.75 mmol/L) should begin prompt treatment with
enteral feeding or with an IV infusion of up to 12.5% D/W, 2 mL/kg over 10 min; higher concentrations of
dextrose can be infused if necessary through a central catheter. The infusion should then continue at a
rate that provides 4 to 8 mg/kg/min of glucose (ie, 10% D/W at about 2.5 to 5 mL/kg/h). Serum glucose
levels must be monitored to guide adjustments in the infusion rate. Once the neonate's condition has
improved, enteral feedings can gradually replace the IV infusion while the glucose concentration
continues to be monitored. IV dextrose infusion should always be tapered, because sudden
discontinuation can cause hypoglycemia.
If starting an IV infusion promptly in a hypoglycemic neonate is difficult, glucagon 100 to 300
μ
g/kg IM
(maximum, 1 mg) usually raises the serum glucose rapidly, an effect that lasts 2 to 3 h, except in neonates
with depleted glycogen stores. Hypoglycemia refractory to high rates of glucose infusion may be treated
with hydrocortisone 2.5 mg/kg IM bid. If hypoglycemia is refractory to treatment, other causes (eg, sepsis)
and possibly an endocrine evaluation for persistent hyperinsulinism and disorders of defective
gluconeogenesis or glycogenolysis should be considered.
Neonatal Hypernatremia
===PAGE:2956===
(See also p.
.)
Hypernatremia is a serum Na concentration > 150 mEq/L, usually caused by dehydration. Signs
include lethargy and seizures. Treatment is cautious hydration with IV saline solution.
Etiology
Hypernatremia develops when
• Water is lost in excess of Na (hypernatremic dehydration)
• Na intake exceeds Na losses (salt poisoning)
• Both
Water loss in excess of Na intake is most commonly caused by diarrhea, vomiting, or high fever. It may
also be caused by poor feeding in the early days of life (eg, when mother and infant are both learning to
breastfeed) and may occur in very low-birth-weight (VLBW) infants born at 24 to 28 wk. In VLBW infants,
insensible water losses through an immature, water-permeable stratum corneum combine with immature
renal function and a reduced ability to produce concentrated urine to facilitate free water loss. Insensible
water loss through the skin is also significantly increased by radiant warmers and phototherapy lights;
exposed VLBW infants may require up to 250 mL/kg/day of water IV in the first few days, after which the
stratum corneum develops and insensible water loss decreases. A rare cause is central or nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus. Infants with hypernatremia and dehydration are often more dehydrated than is
apparent by physical examination, because the increased osmolality helps maintain the extracellular fluid
space (and hence circulating blood volume).
Solute overload most commonly results from adding too much salt when preparing homemade infant
formula or from giving hyperosmolar solutions. Fresh frozen plasma and human albumin contain Na and
can contribute to hypernatremia when given repeatedly to very premature infants.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs include lethargy, restlessness, hyperreflexia, spasticity, and seizures. Skin texture
may be doughy rather than diminished. Intracranial hemorrhage, venous sinus thrombosis, and acute
renal tubular necrosis are major complications.
Diagnosis
• Serum Na concentration
Diagnosis is suspected by symptoms and signs and is confirmed by measuring serum Na concentration.
Additional laboratory findings may include an increase in BUN, a modest increase in serum glucose, and,
if serum K is low, a depression in the level of serum Ca.
Treatment
• IV 0.9% saline, then hypotonic saline (0.3% or 0.45% saline)
Severely dehydrated infants must have their circulating blood volume restored first, usually with 0.9%
saline in aliquots of 20 mL/kg IV. Treatment is then with 5% D/W/0.3% to 0.45% saline solution IV in
volumes equal to the calculated fluid deficit (, given over 2 to 3 days to avoid a rapid fall in
serum osmolality, which would cause rapid movement of water into cells and potentially lead to cerebral
edema. Maintenance fluids should be provided concurrently. The goal of treatment is to decrease serum
Na by about 10 mEq/L/day. Body weight, serum electrolytes, and urine volume and specific gravity must
be monitored regularly so that fluid therapy can be adjusted appropriately. Once adequate urine output is
===PAGE:2957===
shown, K is added to provide maintenance requirements or replace urinary losses.
Extreme hypernatremia (Na > 200 mEq/L) caused by salt poisoning should be treated with peritoneal
dialysis, especially if poisoning causes a rapid rise in serum Na.
Prevention
Prevention requires attention to the volume and composition of unusual fluid losses and of solutions used
to maintain homeostasis. In neonates and young infants, who are unable to signal thirst effectively and to
replace losses voluntarily, the risk of dehydration is greatest. The composition of feedings whenever
mixing is involved (eg, some infant formulas and concentrated preparations for tube feeding) requires
particular attention, especially when the potential for developing dehydration is high, such as during
episodes of diarrhea, poor fluid intake, vomiting, or high fever.
Neonatal Hyponatremia
(See also p.
.)
Hyponatremia is a serum Na concentration < 135 mEq/L. Significant hyponatremia may cause
seizures or coma. Treatment is cautious Na replacement with IV 0.9% saline solution; rarely, 3%
saline solution is required, particularly if seizures are occurring.
Etiology
The most frequent cause of neonatal hyponatremia is hypovolemic dehydration caused by vomiting,
diarrhea, or both, when large GI losses are replaced with fluids that have little or no Na (eg, some juices).
A less frequent cause is euvolemic hyponatremia caused by inappropriate ADH secretion and consequent
water retention. Possible causes of inappropriate ADH secretion include CNS tumors and infection. Also,
overdilution of infant formula can lead to water intoxication.
Finally, hypervolemic hyponatremia occurs in the setting of water retention and excess Na retention, such
as in heart failure or renal failure.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs include nausea and vomiting, apathy, headache, seizures, and coma; other
symptoms include cramps and weakness. Infants with hyponatremic dehydration may appear quite ill,
because hyponatremia causes disproportionate reductions in ECF volume. Symptoms and signs are
related to duration and degree of hyponatremia.
Diagnosis
• Serum Na concentration
Diagnosis is suspected because of symptoms and signs and confirmed by measuring serum Na
concentration. In dehydration, an increase in BUN may be observed.
Treatment
• IV 5% D/W/0.45% to 0.9% saline solution
• Rarely IV hypertonic (3%) saline solution
Treatment is with 5% D/W/0.45% to 0.9% saline solution IV in volumes equal to the calculated deficit,
given over as many days as it takes to correct the Na concentration by no more than 10 to 12 mEq/L/day
to avoid rapid fluid shifts in the brain. Neonates with hypovolemic hyponatremia need volume expansion,
using a solution containing salt to correct the Na deficit (10 to 12 mEq/kg of body weight or even 15
===PAGE:2958===
mEq/kg in young infants with severe hyponatremia) and include Na maintenance needs (3 mEq/kg/day in
5% D/W solution). Neonates with symptomatic hyponatremia (eg, lethargy, confusion) require emergency
treatment with 3% saline solution IV to prevent seizure or coma. (For prevention, see Prevention in left
column.)
Prenatal Drug Exposure
Alcohol and illicit drugs are toxic to the placenta and developing fetus and can cause congenital
syndromes and withdrawal symptoms. Prescription drugs also may have adverse effects on the fetus (see
Table 262-2
. For effects of cigarette smoking, see p.
.
Although some toxic substances used by the mother are not illegal, many are. In any case, the home
situation should be evaluated to determine whether the infant will be safely cared for after discharge. With
the supportive help of relatives, friends, and visiting nurses, the mother may be able to care for her infant.
If not, foster home care or an alternative care plan may be best.
Alcohol:
Alcohol exposure in utero increases the risk of spontaneous abortion, decreases birth weight,
and can cause fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), a constellation of variable physical and cognitive
abnormalities. At birth, infants with FAS can be identified by small stature and a typical set of facial traits
including microcephaly, microphthalmia, short palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, a small or flat midface,
a flat elongated philtrum, a thin upper lip, and a small chin. Abnormal palmar creases, cardiac defects,
and joint contractures may also be evident. After birth, cognitive deficits become apparent. The most
serious manifestation is severe intellectual disability, thought to be a teratogenic effect of alcohol given
the high number of intellectually disabled infants of alcoholic women; FAS may be the most common
cause of noninherited intellectual disability. No single physical or cognitive finding is pathognomonic;
lesser degrees of alcohol use cause less severe manifestations, and the diagnosis of mild cases can be
difficult because partial expression occurs. It is often difficult to distinguish the effects of alcohol on the
developing fetus from those of other exposures (eg, tobacco, other drugs) and factors (eg, poor nutrition,
lack of health care, violence) that affect women who drink excessively.
Diagnosis is given to infants with characteristic findings born to women who used alcohol excessively
during pregnancy.
Because it is unknown when during pregnancy alcohol is most likely to harm the fetus and whether there
is a lower limit of alcohol use that is completely safe, pregnant women should be advised to avoid all
alcohol intake. Siblings of an infant diagnosed with FAS should be examined for subtle manifestations of
the disorder.
Amphetamines:
Prenatal exposure to amphetamines has lasting subtle effects on neonatal brain
structure and function. Some studies have shown decreased volume of the caudate, putamen, and
globus pallidus (anatomic components of brain) in methamphetamine-exposed children, whereas other
studies have not uniformly confirmed these findings. Other studies indicate that prenatal
methamphetamine exposure may be associated with abnormal neurobehavioral patterns or fetal growth
restriction, but these findings are not yet fully established.
Barbiturates:
Prolonged maternal abuse of barbiturates may cause neonatal drug withdrawal with
jitteriness, irritability, and fussiness that often do not develop until 7 to 10 days postpartum, after the
neonate has been discharged home. Sedation with phenobarbital 0.75 to 1.5 mg/kg po or IM q 6 h may be
required and then tapered over a few days or weeks, depending on the duration of symptoms.
Cocaine:
Cocaine inhibits reuptake of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and epinephrine; it crosses
the placenta and causes vasoconstriction and hypertension in the fetus. Cocaine abuse in pregnancy is
associated with a higher rate of placental abruption and spontaneous abortion, perhaps caused by
reduced maternal blood flow to the placental vascular bed; abruption may also lead to intrauterine fetal
death or to neurologic damage if the infant survives. Neonates born to addicted mothers have low birth
weight, reduced body length and head circumference, and lower Apgar scores. Cerebral infarcts may
occur, and rare anomalies associated with prenatal cocaine use include limb amputations; GU
malformations, including prune-belly syndrome; and intestinal atresia or necrosis. All are caused by
===PAGE:2959===
vascular disruption, presumably secondary to local ischemia caused by the intense vasoconstriction of
fetal arteries caused by cocaine. In addition, a pattern of mild neurobehavioral effects has also been
observed, including decreases in attention and alertness, lower IQ, and impaired gross and fine motor
skills.
Some neonates may show withdrawal symptoms if the mother used cocaine shortly before delivery, but
symptoms are less common and less severe than for opioid withdrawal, and signs and treatment are the
same.
Marijuana:
Marijuana does not consistently seem to increase risk of congenital malformations, fetal
growth restriction, or postnatal neurobehavioral abnormalities. However, women who use marijuana
during pregnancy often also use alcohol, cigarettes, or both, which can cause fetal problems.
Opioids:
Opioid exposure in utero can cause withdrawal on delivery. The neonate of a woman addicted
to opioids should be observed for withdrawal symptoms, which usually occur within 72 h after delivery.
Characteristic signs of withdrawal include irritability, jitteriness, hypertonicity, vomiting, diarrhea, sweating,
seizures, and hyperventilation that causes respiratory alkalosis. Prenatal benzodiazepine exposure may
cause similar effects.
Mild withdrawal symptoms are treated by a few days of swaddling and soothing care to alleviate the
physical overarousal and giving frequent feedings to reduce restlessness. With patience, most problems
resolve in no more than a week. Severe symptoms can be controlled by diluting tincture of opium (which
contains 10 mg morphine/mL) 25-fold with water and giving 2 drops (0.1 mL)/kg po q 4 h. The dose can
be increased by 0.1 mL/kg q 4 h as needed. Phenobarbital 0.75 to 1.5 mg/kg po q 6 h may also control
withdrawal symptoms. Treatment is tapered and stopped over several days or weeks as symptoms
subside.
The incidence of sudden infant death syndrome is greater among infants born to women addicted to
opioids but still is < 10/1000 infants, so routine use of home cardiorespiratory monitors is not
recommended for these infants.
===PAGE:2960===
Chapter 277. Gastrointestinal Disorders in Neonates and Infants
Introduction
Infectious gastroenteritis is the most common pediatric GI disorder. About 1 billion episodes occur
worldwide each year, most commonly in developing countries among children < 5 yr. Death due to
dehydration occurs in 3 to 6 million cases/yr. In the US, 25 to 35 million cases occur annually, resulting in
300 to 400 deaths. In addition, infectious gastroenteritis in the US results in an estimated 200,000
hospitalizations and 1.5 million outpatient visits at a cost in excess of 1 billion dollars. For a full discussion
of causative agents, evaluation, and treatment, see
Chapter 16
. For dehydration and fluid therapy in children,
see
Chapter 278
.
Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis is obstruction of the pyloric lumen due to pyloric muscular
hypertrophy.
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis may cause almost complete gastric outlet obstruction. It affects 1 of 250
infants and is more common among males by a 4:1 ratio, particularly first-born males. It occurs most often
between 3 to 5 wk of age and rarely after 12 wk. The exact etiology is uncertain, but a genetic component
is likely because siblings and offspring of affected people are at increased risk. Proposed mechanisms
include lack of neuronal nitric oxide synthase and abnormal innervation of the muscular layer. Infants
exposed to certain macrolide antibiotics in the first few weeks of life are at significantly increased risk.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms can develop between 2 and 6 wk of life. Projectile vomiting (without bile) occurs shortly after
eating. Until dehydration sets in, the child feeds avidly and otherwise appears well, unlike many of those
with vomiting caused by systemic illness. Gastric peristaltic waves may be visible, crossing the
epigastrium from left to right. A discrete, 2- to 3-cm, firm, movable, and olive-like pyloric mass is
sometimes palpable deep in the right side of the epigastrium. With progression of illness, the child fails to
gain weight, and signs of dehydration ( appear.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by abdominal ultrasonography showing increased thickness of the pylorus (typically to ≥ 4
mm; normal, < 2 mm) along with an elongated pylorus (> 16 mm). If the diagnosis remains uncertain,
ultrasonography can be repeated serially or an upper GI series can be done, which typically shows
delayed gastric emptying and a "string" sign or "railroad track" sign of a markedly narrowed, elongated
pyloric lumen. In rare cases, upper endoscopy is required for confirmation. The classic electrolyte pattern
of an infant with
pyloric stenosis is that of hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis. About 5% of infants are
jaundiced.
Treatment
Initial treatment is directed at hydration and correcting electrolyte abnormalities. Definitive treatment is a
longitudinal pyloromyotomy, which leaves the mucosa intact and separates the incised muscle fibers.
Postoperatively, the infant usually tolerates feeding within a day.
Intussusception
Intussusception is telescoping of one portion of the intestine (intussusceptum) into an adjacent
segment (intussuscipiens), causing intestinal obstruction and sometimes intestinal ischemia.
Intussusception generally occurs between ages 3 mo and 3 yr, with 65% of cases occurring before age 1.
It is the most common cause of intestinal obstruction in this age group. Most cases are idiopathic.
However, there is a slight male predominance as well as a seasonal variation; peak incidence coincides
with the viral enteritis season. In older children, there may be a lead point (ie, a mass or other intestinal
===PAGE:2961===
abnormality that triggers the telescoping). Examples include polyps, lymphoma, Meckel's diverticulum,
and Henoch-Schonlein purpura. Cystic fibrosis is also a risk factor.
The telescoping segment obstructs the intestine and ultimately impairs blood flow (see
Fig. 277-1
), causing ischemia, gangrene, and perforation.
Symptoms and Signs
The initial symptoms are recurrent colicky abdominal pain that occurs every 15 to 20 min, often with
vomiting. The child appears relatively well between episodes. Later, as intestinal ischemia develops, pain
becomes steady, the child becomes lethargic, and mucosal hemorrhage causes heme-positive stool on
rectal examination and sometimes spontaneous passage of a currant-jelly stool. The latter, however, is a
late occurrence, and physicians should not wait for this symptom to occur to suspect intussusception. A
palpable abdominal mass, described as sausage-shaped, is sometimes present. Perforation results in
signs of peritonitis, with significant tenderness, guarding, and rigidity. Pallor, tachycardia, and diaphoresis
indicate shock.
[Fig. 277-1.
Intussusception.]
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography
Studies and intervention must be done urgently, because survival and likelihood of non-operative
reduction decrease significantly with time. Approach depends on clinical findings. Ill children with signs of
peritonitis require fluid resuscitation (, broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg, ampicillin, gentamicin,
clindamycin), nasogastric suction, and surgery. Others require imaging studies to confirm diagnosis and
treat the disorder.
Barium enema was once the preferred initial study because it revealed the classic "coiled spring"
appearance around the intussusceptum. In addition to being diagnostic, barium enema was also usually
therapeutic; the pressure of the barium often reduced the telescoped segments. However, barium
occasionally enters the peritoneum through a clinically unsuspected perforation and causes significant
peritonitis. Currently, ultrasonography is the preferred means of diagnosis; it is easily done, relatively
inexpensive, and safe.
Treatment
If intussusception is confirmed, an air enema is used for reduction, which lessens the likelihood and
consequences of perforation. The intussusceptum can be successfully reduced in 75 to 90% of children.
Children are observed overnight after reduction to rule out occult perforation. If reduction is unsuccessful,
immediate surgery is required. Without surgery, the recurrence rate is 5 to 10%.
Meconium Ileus
Meconium ileus is obstruction of the terminal ileum by abnormally tenacious meconium; it
almost universally occurs in neonates with cystic
fibrosis. Meconium ileus accounts for up to
33% of neonatal small-bowel obstructions. Symptoms include emesis that may be bilious,
abdominal distention, and failure to pass meconium. Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation
and x-rays. Treatment is enemas with dilute contrast under fluoroscopy and surgery if enemas
fail.
Meconium ileus is almost always an early manifestation of cystic fibrosis, which causes GI secretions to
be extremely viscid and adherent to the intestinal mucosa. These secretions are the presenting
manifestation of cystic fibrosis in 10 to 25% of cases. Obstruction occurs at the level of the terminal ileum
(unlike the colonic obstruction caused by meconium plug syndrome) and may be diagnosed by prenatal
ultrasonography. Distal to the obstruction, the colon is narrow and empty or contains small amounts of
desiccated meconium pellets. The relatively empty, small-caliber colon is called a microcolon.
===PAGE:2962===
About 50% of cases are complicated by malrotation, intestinal atresia, or perforation. The distended loops
of small bowel may twist to form a volvulus in utero. If the intestine loses its vascular supply and infarcts,
sterile meconium peritonitis can result. The infarcted intestinal loop may be resorbed, leaving an area or
areas of intestinal atresia.
Symptoms and Signs
After birth, infants fail to pass meconium in the first 12 to 24 h, which is typical for normal neonates. They
have signs of intestinal obstruction, including bilious emesis and abdominal distention. Loops of
distended small bowel sometimes can be palpated through the abdominal wall and may feel
characteristically doughy. Meconium peritonitis with respiratory distress and ascites can occur secondary
to perforation.
Diagnosis
• Plain x-rays
• If positive, tests for cystic fibrosis
Prenatal ultrasonography can detect changes in utero suggestive of cystic fibrosis and meconium ileus,
but these changes are not specific. Diagnosis is suspected in a neonate with signs of intestinal
obstruction, particularly if a family history of cystic fibrosis exists. Patients should undergo abdominal xrays, which show dilated intestinal loops; however, fluid levels are often absent. A "soap bubble" or
"ground glass" appearance due to small air bubbles mixed with the meconium is diagnostic of meconium
ileus. If meconium peritonitis is present, calcified meconium flecks may line the peritoneal surfaces and
even the scrotum. A barium enema reveals a microcolon with an obstruction in the terminal ileum.
Patients diagnosed with meconium ileus should be tested for cystic fibrosis (.
Treatment
• Radiographic contrast enema
• Sometimes surgery
Obstruction may be relieved in uncomplicated cases (eg, without perforation, volvulus, or atresia) by
giving ≥ 1 enema with a dilute radiographic contrast medium plus
N
-acetylcysteine under fluoroscopy;
hypertonic contrast material may cause large GI water losses requiring IV rehydration. If the enema does
not relieve the obstruction, laparotomy is required. A double-barreled ileostomy with repeated
N
-
acetylcysteine lavage of the proximal and distal loops is usually required to liquefy and remove the
abnormal meconium.
Meconium Plug Syndrome
(Small Left Colon Syndrome)
Meconium plug syndrome is colonic obstruction caused by thick meconium.
Meconium plug syndrome usually occurs in infants who are otherwise healthy, but it is more common
among infants of diabetic mothers and toxemic mothers treated with Mg sulfate. It is generally regarded
as a functional immaturity of the colon, resulting in failure to pass the first stool.
Symptoms and Signs
Infants present in the first few days of life with failure to pass stools, abdominal distention, and vomiting.
Thick, inspissated, rubbery meconium forms a cast of the colon, resulting in complete obstruction.
===PAGE:2963===
Diagnosis
• Radiographic contrast enema
• Sometimes testing for Hirschsprung's disease
Diagnosis is of exclusion and should be differentiated primarily from Hirschsprung's disease (.
Plain abdominal x-rays are nonspecific and can show signs of low intestinal obstruction. Conversely,
contrast enema shows the characteristic appearance of the outline of the inspissated meconium against
the wall of the colon, providing a double-contrast impression. Unlike meconium ileus, microcolon is not
typically seen on x-ray with meconium plug syndrome.
Treatment
• Radiographic contrast enema
The water-soluble contrast enema can be therapeutic by separating the plug from the intestinal wall and
expelling it. Occasionally, repeated enemas are required. Rarely, surgical decompression is required.
Although most infants are healthy thereafter, diagnostic studies may be needed to rule out Hirschsprung's
disease ( or cystic fibrosis (.
Necrotizing Enterocolitis
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is an acquired disease, primarily of preterm or sick neonates,
characterized by mucosal or even deeper intestinal necrosis. It is the most common GI
emergency among neonates. Symptoms and signs include feeding intolerance, lethargy,
temperature instability, ileus, bloating, bilious emesis, hematochezia, reducing substances in
the stool, apnea, and sometimes signs of sepsis. Diagnosis is clinical and is confirmed by
imaging studies. Treatment is primarily supportive and includes nasogastric suction, parenteral
fluids, TPN, antibiotics, isolation in cases of infection, and, often, surgery.
Over 85% of cases of NEC occur in premature infants. It occurs in about 1 to 8% of neonatal ICU
admissions. Risk factors include prolonged rupture of the membranes with amnionitis, birth asphyxia,
small-for-gestational-age infants, congenital heart disease, and exchange transfusions. The incidence
may also be higher in infants fed hypertonic formulas.
Etiology
In infants who develop NEC, 3 intestinal factors are usually present: a preceding ischemic insult, bacterial
colonization, and intraluminal substrate (ie, enteral feedings).
The exact etiology is not clear. It is believed that an ischemic insult damages the intestinal lining, leading
to increased intestinal permeability and leaving the intestine susceptible to bacterial invasion. NEC rarely
occurs before enteral feedings and is less common among breastfed infants. However, once feedings are
begun, ample substrate is present for proliferation of luminal bacteria, which can penetrate the damaged
intestinal wall, producing hydrogen gas. The gas may collect within the intestinal wall (pneumatosis
intestinalis) or enter the portal veins.
The initial ischemic insult may result from vasospasm of the mesenteric arteries, which can be caused by
an anoxic insult triggering the primitive diving reflex that markedly diminishes intestinal blood flow.
Intestinal ischemia may also result from low blood flow during an exchange transfusion, during sepsis, or
from the use of hyperosmolar formulas. Similarly, congenital heart disease with reduced systemic blood
flow or arterial O
desaturation may lead to intestinal hypoxia/ischemia and predispose to NEC.
Necrosis begins in the mucosa and may progress to involve the full thickness of the intestinal wall,
===PAGE:2964===
causing perforation with subsequent peritonitis and often free intra-abdominal air. Perforation occurs most
commonly in the terminal ileum; the colon and the proximal small bowel are involved less frequently.
Sepsis occurs in 33% of infants, and death may occur.
NEC may occur as clusters of cases or as outbreaks in neonatal ICUs. Some clusters appear to be
associated with specific organisms (eg,
Klebsiella, Escherichia coli,
coagulase-negative staphylococci),
but often no specific pathogen is identified.
Symptoms and Signs
Infants may present with feeding difficulties, bilious gastric residuals (after feedings) that may progress to
bilious emesis, ileus manifested by abdominal distention, or gross or microscopic blood in stool. Sepsis
may be manifested by lethargy, temperature instability, increased apneic spells, and metabolic acidosis.
Diagnosis
• Detection of blood in stool
• Usually abdominal x-rays
Screening the stools of enterally fed premature infants for occult blood or reducing substances may help
diagnose NEC early. Early x-rays may be nonspecific and reveal only ileus. However, a fixed, dilated
intestinal loop that does not change on repeated x-rays indicates NEC. X-ray signs diagnostic of NEC are
pneumatosis intestinalis and portal vein gas. Pneumoperitoneum indicates bowel perforation and an
urgent need for surgery.
Treatment
• Stoppage of feedings
• NGT
• Fluid resuscitation
• Broad-spectrum antibiotics
• TPN
• Possibly surgery
The mortality rate is 20 to 30%. Aggressive support and judicious timing of surgical intervention maximize
the chance of survival.
Support:
Nonsurgical support is sufficient in over 75% of cases. Feedings must be stopped immediately
if NEC is suspected, and the intestine should be decompressed with a double-lumen NGT attached to
intermittent suction. Appropriate colloid and crystalloid parenteral fluids must be given to support
circulation, because extensive intestinal inflammation and peritonitis may lead to considerable 3rd-space
fluid loss. TPN is needed for 14 to 21 days while the intestine heals. Systemic antibiotics should be
started at once with a
β
-lactam antibiotic (eg, ampicillin, ticarcillin) and an aminoglycoside. Additional
anaerobic coverage (eg, clindamycin, metronidazole) may also be considered and should continue for 10
days (for dosage, see
Table 279-1
. Because some outbreaks may be infectious, patient isolation should be
considered, particularly if several cases occur within a short time.
The infant requires close monitoring; frequent complete reevaluation (eg, at least every 12 h); and serial
abdominal x-rays, CBCs, platelet counts, and blood gases. Intestinal strictures are the most common
long-term complication of NEC, occurring in 10 to 36% of infants who survive the initial event. Strictures
typically manifest within 2 to 3 mo of an NEC episode. Strictures are most commonly noted in the colon,
===PAGE:2965===
especially on the left side. Resection of the stricture is then required.
Surgery:
Surgical intervention is needed in < 25% of infants. Absolute indications are intestinal
perforation (pneumoperitoneum), signs of peritonitis (absent intestinal sounds and diffuse guarding and
tenderness or erythema and edema of the abdominal wall), or aspiration of purulent material from the
peritoneal cavity by paracentesis. Surgery should be considered for an infant with NEC whose clinical
and laboratory condition worsens despite nonsurgical support. During surgery, gangrenous bowel is
resected, and ostomies are created. (Primary reanastomosis may be done if the remaining intestine
shows no signs of ischemia.) With resolution of sepsis and peritonitis, intestinal continuity can be
reestablished several weeks or months later.
Prevention:
Risk may be decreased by delaying feedings for several days to weeks in tiny or sick
premature infants while providing TPN; feedings are slowly advanced over weeks. However, in some
studies this approach was not beneficial. Breast milk seems to offer protection. For this and other
reasons, breast milk should be encouraged for enteral feeding. Hypertonic formula, drugs, or contrast
material should be avoided. Umbilical catheters, if required, should be placed below the renal arteries.
Polycythemia should be treated promptly. Recent evidence suggests that probiotics (eg,
Bifidus infantis,
Lactobacillus acidophilus
) may help prevent NEC, but further studies are required before they can be
recommended routinely.
Neonatal Cholestasis
Cholestasis is failure of bilirubin secretion, resulting in conjugated hyperbilirubinemia and
jaundice. There are numerous causes, which are identified by laboratory testing, hepatobiliary
scan, and, sometimes, liver biopsy and surgery. Treatment depends on cause.
Etiology
Cholestasis (see also p.
) may result from extrahepatic or intrahepatic disorders, although some
conditions overlap. The most common extrahepatic disorder is biliary atresia. There are numerous
intrahepatic disorders, collectively termed the neonatal hepatitis syndrome.
Biliary atresia
is obstruction of the biliary tree due to progressive sclerosis of the extrahepatic bile duct.
In most cases, biliary atresia develops several weeks after birth, probably after inflammation and scarring
of the extrahepatic (and sometimes intrahepatic) bile ducts. It is rarely present in premature infants or in
neonates at birth. The cause of the inflammatory response is unknown, but infectious organisms have
been implicated.
Neonatal hepatitis syndrome
(giant cell hepatitis) is an inflammatory condition of the neonatal liver. It
has numerous metabolic, infectious, and genetic causes; some cases are idiopathic. Metabolic diseases
include
α
-antitrypsin deficiency, cystic fibrosis, neonatal iron storage disease, respiratory chain defects,
and fatty acid oxidation defects. Infectious causes include congenital syphilis, echovirus, and some
herpesviruses (simplex and cytomegalovirus); the classic hepatitis viruses (A, B, and C) are less common
causes. There are also a number of less common genetic defects, such as Alagille syndrome and
progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis.
Pathophysiology
In cholestasis, the primary failure is of bilirubin excretion, resulting in excess conjugated bilirubin in the
bloodstream and decreased bile salts in the GI tract. As a result of inadequate bile in the GI tract, there is
malabsorption of fat and fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K), leading to vitamin deficiency, undernutrition,
and growth failure.
Symptoms and Signs
Cholestasis typically is noted in the first 2 wk of life. Infants are jaundiced and often have dark urine
(containing conjugated bilirubin), acholic stools, and hepatomegaly. If cholestasis persists, chronic
pruritus is common, as are symptoms and signs of fat-soluble vitamin deficiency; progression on growth
===PAGE:2966===
charts may show a decline. If the underlying disorder causes hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, portal
hypertension with subsequent abdominal distention from ascites, dilated abdominal veins, and upper GI
bleeding from esophageal varices may develop.
Diagnosis
• Total and direct bilirubin
• Liver function tests
• Tests for metabolic, infectious, and genetic causes
• Hepatobiliary scan
• Occasionally liver biopsy
Any infant who is jaundiced after age 2 wk should be evaluated for cholestasis. The initial approach
should be directed at diagnosing treatable conditions (eg, extrahepatic biliary atresia, in which early
surgical intervention improves outcome).
Cholestasis is identified by an elevation in both total and direct bilirubin. Tests that are needed to further
evaluate liver function include albumin, fractionated serum bilirubin, liver enzymes, PT, and PTT. Once
cholestasis is confirmed, testing is required to determine etiology (see
Table 277-1
).
A hepatobiliary scan should also be done; excretion of contrast into the intestine rules out biliary atresia,
but lack of excretion can occur with both biliary atresia and severe neonatal hepatitis. An abdominal
ultrasound can aid in assessing liver size and in attempting to visualize the gallbladder and common bile
duct but is nonspecific. When no diagnosis has been made, a liver biopsy is generally performed
relatively early on. Patients with biliary atresia typically have enlarged portal triads, bile duct proliferation,
and increased fibrosis. Neonatal hepatitis is characterized by lobular disarray with multinucleated giant
cells. Sometimes diagnosis remains unclear, and surgical exploration with operative cholangiography is
required.
Prognosis
Biliary atresia is progressive and, if untreated, results in liver failure, cirrhosis with portal hypertension by
several months of age, and death by 1 yr of age.
[Table 277-1.
Diagnostic Evaluation for Neonatal Cholestasis]
Prognosis of cholestasis due to specific disorders (eg, metabolic disease) is variable, ranging from a
completely benign course to a progressive disease resulting in cirrhosis.
Idiopathic neonatal hepatitis syndrome usually resolves slowly, but permanent liver damage may result
and lead to death.
Treatment
• Specific cause treated
• Vitamin A, D, E, and K supplements
• Medium-chain triglycerides
• Sometimes ursodeoxycholic acid
Specific treatment is directed at the cause. If there is no specific therapy, treatment is supportive and
===PAGE:2967===
consists primarily of nutritional therapy, including supplements of vitamins A, D, E, and K. For formula-fed
infants, a formula that is high in medium-chain triglycerides should be used because it is absorbed better
in the presence of bile salt deficiency. Adequate calories are required; infants may need > 130 calories/kg
day. In infants with some bile flow, ursodeoxycholic acid 10 to 15 mg/kg once/day or bid may relieve
itching.
Infants with presumed biliary atresia require surgical exploration with an intraoperative cholangiogram. If
biliary atresia is confirmed, a portoenterostomy (Kasai procedure) should be done. Ideally, this procedure
should be done in the first 1 to 2 mo of life. After this period, the prognosis significantly worsens.
Postoperatively, many patients have significant chronic problems, including persistent cholestasis,
recurrent ascending cholangitis, and failure to thrive. Even with optimal therapy, many infants develop
cirrhosis and require liver transplantation.
Miscellaneous Surgical Emergencies
Inguinal hernia:
Inguinal hernias ( develop most often in male neonates, particularly if they
are premature. About 10% of inguinal hernias are bilateral. Because inguinal hernias can become
incarcerated, repair should be done shortly after diagnosis. For premature infants, repair typically is not
done until they have reached a weight of 2 kg. In contrast, umbilical hernias rarely become incarcerated,
close spontaneously after several years, and do not ordinarily need surgical repair.
Gastric perforation:
In neonates, gastric perforations are often spontaneous and may be due to a
congenital defect in the stomach wall, usually along the greater curvature. The abdomen suddenly
becomes distended, and massive pneumoperitoneum is seen on abdominal x-ray. Treatment with
corticosteroids increases risk of this disorder. Giving an H
blocker raises the gastric pH in premature
infants and may reduce risk by inhibiting HCl production. Prognosis is usually good after surgical repair of
the perforation.
Ileal perforation:
In premature infants, ileal perforation has been reported after indomethacin has been
given to close a patent ductus arteriosis. Ileal perforation is probably related to local ischemia resulting
from vasoconstriction caused by indomethacin.
Mesenteric arterial occlusion:
Mural thrombi or emboli may occlude a mesenteric artery after high
placement of an umbilical artery catheter. Such an occurrence is extremely rare but can cause extensive
intestinal infarction requiring surgery and intestinal resection.
===PAGE:2968===
Chapter 278. Dehydration and Fluid Therapy
Introduction
(See also
Neonatal Hypernatremia
on p.
; and
Neonatal Hyponatremia
)
Unlike in adults, fluid management in children is based on weight and on specific guidelines, because
children are more sensitive to fluid depletion (and excess). All guidelines are approximations;
individualized adjustments based on close monitoring are essential.
Dehydration
Dehydration is significant depletion of body water and, to varying degrees, electrolytes.
Symptoms and signs include thirst, lethargy, dry mucosae, decreased urine output, and, as the
degree of dehydration progresses, tachycardia, hypotension, and shock. Diagnosis is based on
history and physical examination. Treatment is with oral or IV replacement of fluid and
electrolytes.
Dehydration, usually caused by diarrhea, remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality in infants and
young children worldwide. Infants are particularly susceptible to the ill effects of dehydration because of
their greater baseline fluid requirements (due to a higher metabolic rate), higher evaporative losses (due
to a higher ratio of surface area to volume), and inability to communicate thirst or seek fluid.
Etiology
Dehydration results from increased fluid loss, decreased fluid intake, or both.
The most common source of increased fluid loss is the GI tract from vomiting, diarrhea, or both (eg,
gastroenteritis). Other sources are renal (eg, diabetic ketoacidosis), cutaneous (eg, excessive sweating,
burns), and 3rd-space losses (eg, into the intestinal lumen in bowel obstruction). All types of lost fluid
contain electrolytes in varying concentrations, so fluid loss is always accompanied by electrolyte loss.
Decreased fluid intake is common during serious illness of any kind and is particularly problematic when
the child is vomiting and during hot weather. It may also be a sign of neglect.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary according to degree of deficit (see
Table 278-1
) and are affected by serum Na concentration: hemodynamic
findings are exaggerated by
hyponatremia and reduced by hypernatremia.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
In general, dehydration without hemodynamic changes is considered mild (about 5% body wt in infants
and 3% in adolescents); tachycardia defines moderate dehydration (about 10% body wt in infants and 6%
in adolescents); and hypotension with impaired perfusion defines severe dehydration (about 15% body wt
in infants and 9% in adolescents). A more accurate method in children with acute dehydration is change
in body weight; all short-term weight loss > 1%/day is presumed to represent fluid deficit. However, this
method depends on knowing a precise, recent preillness weight. Parental estimates are usually
inadequate; a 1-kg error in a 10-kg child causes a 10% error in the calculated percentage of dehydration
—the difference between mild and severe dehydration.
Laboratory testing is usually reserved for moderately or severely ill children, in whom electrolyte
disturbances (eg, hypernatremia, hypokalemia, metabolic acidosis) are more common. Other laboratory
abnormalities include relative polycythemia from hemoconcentration, elevated BUN, and increased urine
specific gravity.
===PAGE:2969===
Treatment
• Fluid replacement (oral if possible)
Treatment is best approached by considering separately the fluid resuscitation requirements, current
deficit, ongoing losses, and maintenance requirements. The volume (eg, amount of fluid), composition,
and rate of replacement differ for each. Formulas and estimates used to determine treatment parameters
provide a starting place, but treatment requires ongoing monitoring of vital signs, clinical appearance,
urine output and specific gravity, weight, and sometimes serum electrolyte levels. Children with severe
dehydration (eg, evidence of circulatory compromise) should receive fluids IV. Those unable or unwilling
to drink or who have repetitive vomiting can receive fluid replacement IV, through an NGT, or sometimes
orally through frequently repeated small amounts (.
Resuscitation:
Patients with signs of hypoperfusion should receive fluid resuscitation with boluses of
isotonic fluid (eg, 0.9% saline or Ringer's lactate). The goal is to restore adequate circulating volume to
restore BP and perfusion. The resuscitation phase should reduce moderate or severe dehydration to a
deficit of about 8% body wt. If dehydration is moderate, 20 mL/kg (2% body wt) is given IV over 20 to 30
min, reducing a 10% deficit to 8%. If dehydration is severe, 3 boluses of 20 mL/kg (2% body wt) will likely
be required. The end point of the fluid resuscitation phase is restoring peripheral perfusion and BP and
returning increased heart rate toward normal.
Deficit replacement:
Total deficit volume is estimated clinically as described previously. Na deficits are
usually about 80 mEq/L of fluid deficit, and K deficits are usually about 30 mEq/L of fluid deficit. The
resuscitation phase should have reduced moderate or severe dehydration to a deficit of about 8% body
wt;
[Table 278-1.
Clinical Correlates of Dehydration]
this remaining deficit can be replaced by providing 10 mL/kg (1% body wt)/h for 8 h. Because 0.45%
saline has 77 mEq Na per liter, it is usually an appropriate fluid choice. K replacement (usually by adding
20 to 40 mEq K per liter of replacement fluid) should not begin until adequate urine output is established.
Dehydration with significant hypernatremia (eg, serum Na > 160 mEq/L) or hyponatremia (eg, serum Na <
120 mEq/L) requires special consideration to avoid complications (.
Ongoing losses:
Volume of ongoing losses should be measured directly (eg, NGT, catheter, stool
measurements) or estimated (eg, 10 mL/kg per diarrheal stool). Replacement should be milliliter for
milliliter in time intervals appropriate for the rapidity and extent of the loss. Ongoing electrolyte losses can
be estimated by source or cause (see
Table 278-2
). Urinary electrolyte losses vary with intake and disease process but can be measured if
deficits fail to respond to replacement therapy.
Maintenance requirements:
Fluid and electrolyte needs from basal metabolism must also be accounted
for. Maintenance requirements are related to metabolic rate and affected by body temperature. Insensible
losses (evaporative free water losses from the skin and respiratory tract in a ratio of 2:1) account for
about one half of maintenance needs.
Volume rarely must be exactly determined but generally should aim to provide an amount of water that
does not require the kidney to significantly concentrate or dilute the urine. The most common estimate
uses patient weight to calculate metabolic expenditure in kcal/24 h, which approximates fluid needs in
mL/24 h (see
Table 278-3
). A simpler calculation (the Holliday-Segar formula) uses 3 weight classes (see
Table 278-4
). Body surface area derived from a nomogram (see
Fig. 278-2
) also can be used, allowing 1500 to 2000 mL/m
/24 h. More complex calculations are rarely
required. These fluid volumes can be given as a separate simultaneous infusion, so that the infusion rate
for replacing deficits and ongoing losses can be set and adjusted independently of the maintenance
infusion rate.
===PAGE:2970===
[Table 278-2.
Standard Basal Metabolic Rates Used for Calculating Maintenance Fluid Requirements*]
[Table 278-3.
Estimated Electrolyte Deficits by Cause]
Baseline estimates are affected by fever (increasing by 12% for each degree > 37.8° C), hypothermia,
and activity (eg, increased for hyperthyroidism or status epilepticus, decreased for coma).
Composition differs from solutions used to replace deficits and ongoing losses. Patients require Na 3
mEq/100 kcal/24 h (3 mEq/100
[Table 278-4.
Holliday-Segar Formula for Maintenance Fluid Requirements by Weight]
mL/24 h) and K 2 mEq/100 kcal/24 h (2 mEq/100 mL/24 h). This need is met by using 0.2% to 0.3%
saline with 20 mEq/L of K in a 5% dextrose solution. Other electrolytes (eg, Mg, Ca) are not routinely
added. It is inappropriate to replace deficits and ongoing losses solely by increasing the amount or rate of
maintenance fluids.
Practical Example
A 7-mo-old infant has diarrhea for 3 days with weight loss from 10 kg to 9 kg. The infant is currently
producing 1 diarrheal stool every 3 h and refusing to drink. Clinical findings of dry mucous membranes,
poor skin turgor, markedly decreased urine output, and tachycardia with normal BP and capillary refill
suggest 10% fluid deficit. Rectal temperature is 37° C; serum Na, 136 mEq/L; K, 4 mEq/L; Cl, 104 mEq/L;
and HCO
, 20 mEq/L.
Fluid volume
is estimated by deficits, ongoing losses, and maintenance requirements.
The total fluid deficit given 1 kg wt loss = 1 L.
Ongoing diarrheal losses are measured as they occur by weighing the infant's diaper before application
and after the diarrheal stool.
Baseline maintenance requirements by the weight-based Holliday-Segar method are 100 mL/kg × 10 kg =
1000 mL/day = 1000/24 or 40 mL/h.
Electrolyte losses
from diarrhea (see
Table 278-2
) are an estimated 80 mEq of Na and 80 mEq of K.
Procedure
Resuscitation:
The patient is given an initial bolus of Ringer's lactate 200 mL (20 mL/kg × 10 kg) over
30 min. This amount replaces 26 mEq of the estimated 80 mEq Na deficit.
Deficits:
Residual fluid deficit is 800 mL (1000 initial - 200 mL resuscitation), and Na deficit is 54 mEq
(80-26 mEq). This residual amount is given over 8 h as 5% dextrose/0.45% saline at 100 mL/h. This
amount replaces the Na deficit (0.8 L × 77 mEq Na/L = 62 mEq Na). When urine output is established, K
is added at a concentration of 20 mEq/L (for safety reasons, no attempt is made to replace complete K
deficit acutely).
Ongoing losses:
Five percent dextrose/0.45% saline also is used to replace ongoing losses; volume and
rate are determined by the amount of diarrhea.
Maintenance fluid:
Five percent dextrose/0.2% saline is given at 40 mL/h with 20 mEq/L of K added
when urine output is established. Alternatively, the deficit could be replaced during the initial 8 h followed
by the entire day's maintenance fluid in the next 16 h (ie, 60 mL/h); 24 h of maintenance fluid given in 16
h reduces mathematically to a rate of 1.5 times the usual maintenance rate and obviates the need for
simultaneous infusions (which may require 2 rate-controlling pumps).
===PAGE:2971===
Oral Rehydration
Oral fluid therapy is effective, safe, convenient, and inexpensive compared with IV therapy. It should be
used for children with mild to moderate dehydration who are accepting fluids orally unless prohibited by
copious vomiting or underlying disorders (eg, surgical abdomen, intestinal obstruction).
Solutions:
Oral rehydration solution should contain complex carbohydrate or 2% glucose and 50 to 90
mEq/L of Na. Sports drinks, sodas, juices, and similar drinks do not meet these criteria and should not be
used. They generally have too little Na and too much carbohydrate to take advantage of Na/glucose
cotransport, and the osmotic effect of the excess carbohydrate may result in additional fluid loss.
Oral rehydration solution (ORS) is recommended by the WHO and is widely available in the US without
prescription. Most solutions come as powders that are mixed with tap water. Premixed solutions also are
available in most pharmacies and supermarkets. An ORS packet is dissolved in 1 L of water to produce a
solution containing (in mmol/L) Na 90, K 20, Cl 80, citrate 10, and glucose 111 (standard WHO ORS) or
Na 75, K 20, Cl 65, citrate 10, and glucose 75 (WHO reduced-osmolarity
[Fig. 278-2.
Nomogram for calculating the body surface area of children.]
ORS). It can also be made manually by adding 1 L of water to 3.5 g NaCl, 2.9 g trisodium citrate (or 2.5 g
NaHCO
), 1.5 g KCL, and 20 g glucose. ORS is effective in patients with dehydration regardless of age,
cause, or type of electrolyte imbalance (hyponatremia, hypernatremia, or isonatremia) as long as their
kidneys are functioning adequately. After rehydration, this solution must be replaced by a lower-Na fluid to
avoid hypernatremia.
If specific rehydration solutions (powders or premixed) are unavailable, some clinicians advise caretakers
to prepare a homemade solution using sugar and table salt. However, even with written instructions (and
in some cases, dispensing 2 color-coded scoops), errors in preparation have at times caused fatal
hypernatremia. Therefore, if specific rehydration solutions are unavailable, infants with mild to moderate
dehydration should be continued on breast milk or formula, but the threshold for using IV hydration in
those with moderate dehydration should be lower. Clinicians in practice situations where patients may be
unable to obtain appropriate ORS on their own should explore alternative means of making the solution
available.
Administration:
Generally, 50 mL/kg is given over 4 h for mild dehydration and 100 mL/kg for moderate.
For each diarrheal stool, an additional 10 mL/kg (up to 240 mL) is given. After 4 h, the patient is
reassessed. If signs of dehydration persist, the same volume is repeated. Patients with cholera may
require many liters of fluid/day.
Vomiting usually should not deter oral rehydration (unless there is bowel obstruction or other
contraindication). Small, frequent amounts are used, starting with 5 mL q 5 min and increasing gradually
as tolerated.
Once the deficit has been replaced, an oral maintenance solution containing less Na should be used.
Children should eat an age-appropriate diet as soon as they have been rehydrated and are not vomiting.
Infants may resume breastfeeding or formula. Infants with diarrhea who develop signs or symptoms of
malabsorption ( should be given lactose-free formula.
===PAGE:2972===
Chapter 279. Infections in Neonates
Introduction
Neonatal infection can be acquired in utero transplacentally, through the birth canal during delivery
(intrapartum), and from external sources after birth (postpartum).
In utero infection, which can occur any time before birth, results from overt or subclinical maternal
infection. Consequences depend on the agent and timing of infection in gestation and include
spontaneous abortion, intrauterine growth restriction, premature birth, stillbirth, congenital malformation
(eg, rubella), and symptomatic neonatal infection (eg, cytomegalovirus [CMV], toxoplasmosis, syphilis).
Common viral agents include herpes simplex, HIV, CMV, and hepatitis B. Intrapartum infection with HIV or
hepatitis B occurs from passage through an infected birth canal or by ascending infection if delivery is
delayed after rupture of membranes; these viruses can less commonly be transmitted transplacentally.
CMV is commonly transmitted transplacentally. Bacterial agents include group B streptococci, enteric
gram-negative organisms (primarily
Escherichia coli
), gonococci, and chlamydiae.
Postpartum infections are acquired from contact with an infected mother either directly (eg, TB, which
also is sometimes transmitted in utero) or through breastfeeding (eg, HIV, CMV) or from contact with
health care practitioners and the hospital environment (numerous organisms—.
Risk factors:
Risk of contracting intrapartum and postpartum infection is inversely proportional to
gestational age. Neonates are immunologically immature, with decreased polymorphonuclear leukocyte
and monocyte function; premature infants are particularly so (. Maternal IgG antibodies are
actively transported across the placenta, but effective levels for all organisms are not achieved until near
term. IgM antibodies do not cross the placenta. Premature infants have decreased intrinsic antibody
production and reduced complement activity. Premature infants are also more likely to require invasive
procedures (eg, endotracheal intubation, prolonged IV access) that predispose to infection.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs in neonates tend to be nonspecific (eg, vomiting, fever, petechiae, rashes, diarrhea,
fever, hypothermia). Many congenital infections acquired before birth can cause or be accompanied by
various symptoms or abnormalities (eg, growth restriction, deafness, microcephaly, anomalies, failure to
thrive, hepatosplenomegaly, neurologic abnormalities).
Diagnosis
A wide variety of infections should be considered in neonates who are ill, febrile, or hypothermic.
Infections such as congenital rubella, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, and CMV should be considered, particularly
in neonates with abnormalities such as growth restriction, deafness, microcephaly, anomalies, failure to
thrive, hepatosplenomegaly, or neurologic abnormalities.
Treatment
• Antimicrobial therapy
The primary treatment is usually antimicrobial therapy. Drug selection is similar to that in adults, because
infecting organisms and their sensitivities are not specific to neonates. However, numerous factors,
including age and weight, affect dose and frequency (see
Tables 279-1
and
279-2
).
In neonates, the ECF constitutes up to 45% of total body weight, requiring relatively larger doses of
certain antibiotics (eg, aminoglycosides) compared with adults. Lower serum albumin concentrations in
premature infants may reduce antibiotic protein binding. Drugs that displace bilirubin from albumin (eg,
sulfonamides, ceftriaxone) increase the risk of kernicterus.
===PAGE:2973===
sulfonamides, ceftriaxone) increase the risk of kernicterus.
Absence or deficiency of certain enzymes in neonates may prolong the half-life of certain antibiotics (eg,
chloramphenicol) and increase the risk of toxicity. Changes in GFR and renal tubular secretion during the
first month of life necessitate dosing changes for other drugs (eg, penicillins, aminoglycosides,
vancomycin).
Congenital and Perinatal Cytomegalovirus Infection
(See also
Cytomegalovirus Infection
)
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection may be acquired prenatally or perinatally and is the most
common congenital viral infection. Signs at birth, if present, are intrauterine growth restriction,
prematurity,
[Table 279-1.
Recommended Dosages of Selected Parenteral Antibiotics for Neonates]
[Table 279-2.
Recommended Dosages of Selected Oral Antibiotics for Neonates*]
microcephaly, jaundice, petechiae, hepatosplenomegaly, periventricular calcifications,
chorioretinitis, and pneumonitis. If acquired later in infancy, signs may include pneumonia,
hepatosplenomegaly, hepatitis, thrombocytopenia, and atypical lymphocytosis. Diagnosis of
neonatal infection is best made by virus isolation. Treatment is supportive. Parenteral
ganciclovir can prevent hearing deterioration, but its use remains controversial.
CMV is frequently isolated from neonates. Although most infants shedding this virus are asymptomatic,
others have life-threatening illness and devastating long-term sequelae.
It is not known when a woman with primary CMV can safely conceive. Because risk to the fetus is difficult
to assess, women who develop primary CMV during pregnancy should be counseled, but few experts
recommend routine serologic testing for CMV before or during pregnancy in healthy women.
Etiology
Congenital CMV infection
, which occurs in 0.2 to 2.2% of live births worldwide, may result from
transplacental acquisition of either a primary or recurrent maternal infection.
Clinically apparent disease in
the neonate is much more likely to occur after a primary maternal exposure, particularly in the first half of
pregnancy. In some higher socioeconomic groups in the US, 50% of young women lack antibody to CMV,
making them susceptible to primary infection.
Perinatal CMV infection
is acquired by exposure to infected cervical secretions, breast milk, or blood
products. Maternal antibody is thought to be protective, and most exposed term infants are asymptomatic
or not infected. In contrast, preterm infants (who lack antibody to CMV) can develop serious infection or
can die, particularly when transfused with CMV-positive blood. Efforts should be made to transfuse these
infants with only CMV-negative blood or components or to use blood that has been filtered to remove
leukocytes (leukoreduced).
Symptoms and Signs
Many women who become infected with CMV during pregnancy are asymptomatic, but some develop a
mononucleosis-like illness.
About 10% of infants with congenital CMV infection are symptomatic at birth. Manifestations include the
following:
• Intrauterine growth restriction
• Prematurity
===PAGE:2974===
• Microcephaly
• Jaundice
• Petechiae
• Hepatosplenomegaly
• Chorioretinitis
• Pneumonitis
Infants who acquire CMV after birth, especially if they are premature, may develop a sepsis-like
syndrome, pneumonia, hepatosplenomegaly, hepatitis, thrombocytopenia, and atypical lymphocytosis, as
well as sensorineural hearing loss.
Diagnosis
• Viral culture using urine, saliva, or tissue
• PCR using urine, saliva, blood, or tissue
Symptomatic congenital CMV infection must be distinguished from other congenital infections, including
toxoplasmosis, rubella, and syphilis.
In neonates, viral culture of a urine, saliva, or tissue sample is the primary diagnostic tool; maternal
diagnosis can also be made by serologic testing (. Culture specimens should be refrigerated
until inoculation of fibroblast cells. Congenital CMV is diagnosed if the virus is isolated from urine or other
body fluids obtained within the first 3 wk of life. After 3 wk, positive cultures may indicate perinatal or
congenital infection. Infants may shed CMV for several years after either type of infection. A positive PCR
result using neonatal urine, saliva, blood, or tissue is helpful in making a diagnosis, but a negative PCR
result does not rule out an infection. PCR can also establish maternal infection.
A CBC and differential and liver function tests may be helpful but are not specific. Cranial ultrasonography
or CT and an ophthalmologic evaluation should also be done. Periventricular calcifications are commonly
found on CT. Hearing tests should be routinely done at birth in all infected neonates, but close monitoring
is required because hearing loss may be progressive.
Prognosis
Symptomatic neonates have a mortality rate of up to 30%, and 70 to 90% of survivors have some
neurologic impairment, including
• Hearing loss
• Intellectual disability
• Visual disturbances
Among asymptomatic neonates, 10% eventually develop neurologic sequelae.
Treatment
No specific therapy is available. Ganciclovir decreases viral shedding in neonates with congenital CMV
and may prevent hearing deterioration at 6 mo. When therapy stops, the virus is again shed; therefore, its
role in treatment remains controversial.
Prevention
===PAGE:2975===
Nonimmune pregnant women should attempt to limit exposure to the virus. For instance, because CMV
infection is common among children attending day care centers, pregnant women should always wash
their hands thoroughly after exposure to urine and oral or respiratory secretions from children.
Transfusion-associated perinatal CMV disease can be avoided by giving preterm neonates blood
products from CMV-seronegative donors or leukoreduced products.
A vaccine to prevent congenital CMV is being developed. Using CMV hyper immune globulin in pregnant
women with primary CMV infection to prevent or treat congenital infection is also under investigation.
Congenital Rubella
(See also
Rubella
)
Congenital rubella is a viral infection acquired from the mother during pregnancy. Signs are
multiple congenital anomalies that can result in fetal death. Diagnosis is by serology and viral
culture. There is no specific treatment. Prevention is by routine vaccination.
Congenital rubella typically results from a primary maternal infection. Congenital rubella is rare in the US.
Rubella is believed to invade the upper respiratory tract, with subsequent viremia and dissemination of
virus to different sites, including the placenta. The fetus is at highest risk of developmental abnormalities
when infected during the first 16 wk of gestation, particularly the first 8 to 10 wk. Early in gestation, the
virus is thought to establish a chronic intrauterine infection. Its effects include endothelial damage to
blood vessels, direct cytolysis of cells, and disruption of cellular mitosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Rubella in a pregnant woman may be asymptomatic or characterized by upper respiratory tract symptoms,
fever, lymphadenopathy (especially in the suboccipital and posterior auricular areas), and a
maculopapular rash. This illness may be followed by joint symptoms.
In the fetus there may be no effects, multiple anomalies, or death in utero. The most frequent
abnormalities include intrauterine growth restriction, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, cataracts,
retinopathy, hearing loss, cardiac defects (patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary artery stenosis),
hepatosplenomegaly, and bone radiolucencies. Others are thrombocytopenia with purpura, dermal
erythropoiesis resulting in bluish red skin lesions, adenopathy, hemolytic anemia, and interstitial
pneumonia. Close observation is needed to detect subsequent hearing loss, intellectual disability,
abnormal behavior, endocrinopathies (eg, diabetes mellitus), or a rare progressive encephalitis. Infants
with congenital rubella infections may develop immune deficiencies such as hypogammaglobulinemia.
Diagnosis
• Maternal serum rubella titers
• Sometimes viral isolation from amniotic fluid
• Infant antibody titers (measured serially) and viral cultures
Pregnant women routinely have a serum rubella titer measured early in pregnancy. Titer is repeated in
seronegative women who develop symptoms or signs of rubella; diagnosis is made by seroconversion or
a ≥ 4-fold rise between acute and convalescent titers. Virus may be cultured from nasopharyngeal swabs
but grows very slowly, making swabs an inefficient method of diagnosis.
Infants suspected of having congenital rubella should have antibody titers and viral cultures. Persistence
of rubella-specific IgG in the infant after 6 to 12 mo suggests congenital infection. Increased rubellaspecific IgM antibodies also indicate rubella. Specimens from the nasopharynx, urine, CSF, buffy coat,
===PAGE:2976===
and conjunctiva may grow virus; samples from the nasopharynx usually offer the best sensitivity, and the
laboratory should be notified that rubella virus is suspected. In a few centers, diagnoses can be made
prenatally by isolating the virus from amniotic fluid, detecting rubella-specific IgM in fetal blood, or
applying reverse transcriptase-PCR (RTPCR) techniques to fetal blood or chorionic villus biopsy
specimens.
Other tests include a CBC with differential, CSF analysis, and x-ray examination of the bones to detect
characteristic radiolucencies. Thorough ophthalmologic and cardiac evaluations are also useful.
Treatment
• Counseling
• Possibly immune globulin
No specific therapy is available for maternal or congenital rubella infection. Women exposed to rubella
early in pregnancy should be informed of the potential risks to the fetus. Some experts recommend giving
nonspecific immune globulin (0.55 mL/kg IM) for exposure early in pregnancy, but this treatment does not
guarantee prevention, and the use of immune globulin should be considered only in women who decline
termination.
Prevention
Rubella can easily be prevented by vaccination. In the US, infants should receive vaccination for rubella
together with measles and mumps vaccinations at 12 to 15 mo of age and again at entry to grade school
or junior high school (see
Table 268-11
. Postpubertal females who are not known to be immune to rubella should be
vaccinated. (CAUTION:
Rubella vaccination is contraindicated in immunodeficient or pregnant women.
)
After vaccination, women should be advised
not to become pregnant for 28 days. Efforts should also be
made to screen and vaccinate high-risk groups, such as hospital and child care workers, military recruits,
recent immigrants, and college students. Women who are found to be susceptible during prenatal
screening should be vaccinated after delivery and before hospital discharge.
Congenital Syphilis
(See also
Syphilis
)
Congenital syphilis is a multisystem infection caused by
Treponema pallidum
and transmitted to
the fetus via the placenta. Early signs are characteristic skin lesions, lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly, failure to thrive, blood-stained nasal discharge, perioral fissures,
meningitis, choroiditis, hydrocephalus, seizures, intellectual disability, osteochondritis, and
pseudoparalysis (Parrot's atrophy of newborn). Later signs are gummatous ulcers, periosteal
lesions, paresis, tabes, optic atrophy, interstitial keratitis, sensorineural deafness, and dental
deformities. Diagnosis is clinical, confirmed by microscopy or serology. Treatment is penicillin.
Overall risk of transplacental infection of the fetus is about 60 to 80%, and likelihood is increased during
the 2nd half of the pregnancy. Untreated primary or secondary syphilis in the mother usually is
transmitted, but latent or tertiary syphilis usually is not. In neonates, manifestations of syphilis are
classified as early congenital (ie, birth through age 2 yr) and late congenital (ie, after age 2 yr).
Symptoms and Signs
Many patients are asymptomatic, and the infection may remain clinically silent throughout their life.
Early congenital syphilis
commonly manifests during the first 3 mo of life. Manifestations include
characteristic vesiculobullous eruptions or a macular, copper-colored rash on the palms and soles and
papular lesions around the nose and mouth and in the diaper area, as well as petechial lesions.
Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly often occur. The infant may fail to thrive and
===PAGE:2977===
have a characteristic mucopurulent or bloodstained nasal discharge causing snuffles. A few infants
develop meningitis, choroiditis, hydrocephalus, or seizures, and others may be intellectually disabled.
Within the first 8 mo of life, osteochondritis (chondroepiphysitis), especially of the long bones and ribs,
may cause pseudoparalysis of the limbs with characteristic radiologic changes in the bones.
Late congenital syphilis
typically manifests after 2 yr of life and causes gummatous ulcers that tend to
involve the nose, septum, and hard palate and periosteal lesions that result in saber shins and bossing of
the frontal and parietal bones. Neurosyphilis is usually asymptomatic, but juvenile paresis and tabes may
develop. Optic atrophy, sometimes leading to blindness, may occur. Interstitial keratitis, the most common
eye lesion, frequently recurs, often resulting in corneal scarring. Sensorineural deafness, which is often
progressive, may appear at any age. Hutchinson's incisors, mulberry molars, perioral fissures (rhagades),
and maldevelopment of the maxilla resulting in "bulldog" facies are characteristic, if infrequent, sequelae.
Diagnosis
•
Early congenital syphilis:
Clinical evaluation, darkfield microscopy of lesions and placenta or
umbilical cord, infant serum quantitative nontreponemal tests, possibly CSF analysis
•
Late congenital syphilis:
Clinical evaluation, serologic testing
Early congenital syphilis:
Diagnosis is usually suspected based on maternal serologic testing, which is
routinely done early in pregnancy, and often in the 3rd trimester and at delivery. Neonates of mothers with
positive tests should have a thorough examination, darkfield microscopy of any skin or mucosal lesions,
and a quantitative nontreponemal serum test (eg, rapid plasma reagin [RPR], Venereal Disease Research
Laboratory [VDRL]); cord blood is not used for serum testing because results are less sensitive and
specific. The placenta or umbilical cord should be analyzed using darkfield microscopy or fluorescent
antibody staining. Infants with clinical signs of illness or suggestive serologic test results also should have
a lumbar puncture with CSF analysis for cell count, VDRL, and protein; CBC; liver function tests; and
long-bone x-rays.
Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic visualization of spirochetes in samples from the neonate or the
placenta. Diagnosis based on neonatal serologic testing is complicated by the transplacental transfer of
maternal IgG antibodies, which can cause a positive test in the absence of infection. However, a neonatal
titer > 4 times the maternal titer would not generally result from passive transfer, and diagnosis is
considered confirmed or highly
probable. Maternal disease acquired late in pregnancy may be transmitted
before development of antibodies. Thus, in neonates with lower titers but typical clinical manifestations,
syphilis is also considered highly probable. In neonates with no signs of illness and low or (if maternal
infection is diagnosed) negative serologic titers, syphilis is considered possible; subsequent approach
depends on various maternal and neonatal factors (see also Follow up, below). The utility of fluorescent
assays for antitreponemal IgM, which is not transferred across the placenta, is controversial, but such
assays have been used to detect neonatal infection. Any positive nontreponemal test should be confirmed
with a specific treponemal test to exclude false-positive results, but confirmative testing should not delay
treatment in a symptomatic infant or an infant at high risk of infection.
Late congenital syphilis:
Diagnosis is by clinical history, distinctive physical signs, and positive
serologic tests (see also p.
). Hutchinson's triad of interstitial keratitis, Hutchinson's incisors, and 8th
cranial nerve deafness is diagnostic. Sometimes the standard serologic tests for syphilis are negative, but
the fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test (FTA-ABS) is usually positive. The diagnosis should
be considered in cases of unexplained deafness, progressive intellectual deterioration, or keratitis.
Follow up:
All seropositive infants and those whose mothers were seropositive should have VDRL or
RPR titers every 2 to 3 mo until the test is nonreactive or the titer has decreased 4-fold. In uninfected and
successfully treated infants, nontreponemal antibody titers are usually non-reactive by 6 mo. Passively
acquired treponemal antibodies may be present for longer, perhaps 15 mo. It is important to remember to
use the same specific nontreponemal test to monitor titers.
If VDRL or RPR remain reactive past 6 to 12 mo or titers increase, the infant should be reevaluated
(including lumbar puncture for CSF analysis, and CBC with platelet count, long-bone x-rays, and other
===PAGE:2978===
tests as clinically indicated).
Treatment
• Parenteral penicillin
Pregnant women:
Pregnant women in the early stages of syphilis receive one dose of benzathine
penicillin G (1.2 million units IM in each buttock for a total of 2.4 million units). For later stages of syphilis
or neurosyphilis, the appropriate regimen for nonpregnant patients should be followed (.
Occasionally, a severe Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction occurs after such therapy, leading to spontaneous
abortion. Patients allergic to penicillin may be desensitized and then treated with penicillin. RPR and
VDRL tests become negative by 3 mo after adequate treatment in most patients and by 6 mo in nearly all
patients. Erythromycin therapy is inadequate for both the mother and fetus and is not recommended.
Tetracycline is
contraindicated
.
Early congenital syphilis:
In confirmed or highly probable cases, 2006 Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) guidelines recommend aqueous penicillin G 50,000 units/kg IV q 12 h for the first 7
days of life and q 8 h thereafter for a total of 10 days or procaine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg IM once/day
for 10 days. This regimen also is used for infants with possible syphilis if the mother fits any of the
following criteria:
• Untreated
• Treatment status is unknown
• Treated ≤ 4 wk before delivery
• Inadequately treated (a nonpenicillin regimen, or maternal titers did not decrease 4-fold)
In infants with possible syphilis and a negative evaluation, a single dose of benzathine penicillin 50,000
units/kg IM is an alternative treatment choice in selected circumstances, but only if follow-up is assured.
Infants with possible syphilis whose mothers were adequately treated and who are clinically well can also
be given a single dose of benzathine penicillin 50,000 units/kg IM. Alternatively, if close follow-up is
assured, some clinicians defer penicillin and do nontreponemal serologic testing monthly for 3 mo and
then at 6 mo; antibiotics are given if titers rise or are positive at 6 mo.
Older infants and children with newly diagnosed congenital syphilis:
CSF should be examined
before treatment starts. The CDC recommends that any child with late congenital syphilis be treated with
aqueous crystalline penicillin G 50,000 units/kg IV q 4 to 6 h for 10 days. Many patients do not revert to
seronegativity but do have a 4-fold decrease in titer of reagin (eg, VDRL) antibody. Interstitial keratitis is
usually treated with corticosteroid and atropine drops in consultation with an ophthalmologist. Patients
with nerve deafness may benefit from penicillin plus a corticosteroid such as prednisone 0.5 mg/kg po
once/day for 1 wk, followed by 0.3 mg/kg once/day for 4 wk, after which the dose is gradually reduced
over 2 to 3 mo. (Corticosteroids have not been critically evaluated in these conditions.)
Contacts should
be traced, and patients should be kept under long-term surveillance.
Prevention
Pregnant women should be routinely tested for syphilis and retested if they acquire other sexually
transmitted diseases during pregnancy. In 99% of cases, adequate treatment during pregnancy cures
both mother and fetus. However, in some cases, treatment late in pregnancy eliminates the infection but
not some signs of syphilis that appear at birth.
When congenital syphilis is diagnosed, other family members should be examined regularly for physical
and serologic evidence of infection. Retreatment of the mother in subsequent pregnancies is necessary
only if serologic titers remain positive. Women who remain seropositive after adequate treatment may
have been reinfected and should be retreated. A mother without lesions who is seronegative but who has
===PAGE:2979===
had venereal exposure to a known person with syphilis should be treated, because there is a 25 to 50%
chance that she acquired syphilis.
Congenital Toxoplasmosis
(See also
Toxoplasmosis
)
Congenital toxoplasmosis is caused by transplacental acquisition of
Toxoplasma gondii
.
Manifestations, if present, are prematurity, intrauterine growth restriction, jaundice,
hepatosplenomegaly, myocarditis, pneumonitis, rash, chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus,
intracranial calcifications, microcephaly, and seizures. Diagnosis is by serologic testing.
Treatment is with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin.
Toxoplasma gondii
, a parasite found worldwide, causes congenital infection in about 1/10,000 to
80/10,000 births.
Etiology
With rare exception, congenital toxoplasmosis is due to a primary maternal infection during pregnancy.
Infection with
T. gondii
occurs primarily from ingestion of inadequately cooked meat containing cysts or
from ingestion of oocysts derived from cat feces. The rate of transmission to the fetus is higher in women
infected later during pregnancy. However, those infected earlier in gestation generally have more severe
disease. Overall, 30 to 40% of women infected during pregnancy will have a congenitally infected child.
Symptoms and Signs
Pregnant women infected with
T. gondii
generally do not have clinical manifestations, although some may
have a mild mononucleosis-like syndrome, regional lymphadenopathy, or occasionally chorioretinitis.
Similarly, infected neonates are usually asymptomatic at birth, but manifestations may include
• Prematurity
• Intrauterine growth restriction
• Jaundice
• Hepatosplenomegaly
• Myocarditis
• Pneumonitis
• Various rashes
Neurologic involvement, often prominent, includes chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus, intracranial
calcifications, microcephaly, and seizures. The classic triad of findings consists of chorioretinitis,
hydrocephalus, and intracranial calcifications.
Diagnosis
• Serial IgG measurement (for maternal infection)
• Amniotic fluid PCR (for fetal infection)
• Serologic testing, brain imaging, CSF analysis, and ophthalmologic evaluation (for neonatal infection)
Serologic testing is important in diagnosing maternal and congenital infection. Maternal infection should
be suspected if women have a mononucleosis-like syndrome and a negative heterophil antibody test,
===PAGE:2980===
isolated regional adenopathy not due to another cause (eg, HIV), or chorioretinitis. Acute maternal
infection is suggested by seroconversion or a ≥ 4-fold rise between acute and convalescent IgG titers.
However, maternal IgG antibodies may be detectable in the infant through the first year. PCR analysis of
amniotic fluid is emerging as the method of choice for diagnosis of fetal infection. There are numerous
other serologic tests, some of which are done only in reference laboratories. The most reliable are the
Sabin-Feldman dye test, the indirect immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) test, and the direct agglutination
assay. Tests to isolate the organism include inoculation into mice and tissue culture, but these tests are
not usually done because they are expensive, not highly sensitive, and can take weeks before yielding
results.
In suspected congenital toxoplasmosis, serologic tests, MRI or CT imaging of the brain, CSF analysis,
and a thorough eye examination by an ophthalmologist should be done.
CSF abnormalities include
xanthochromia, pleocytosis, and increased protein concentration. The placenta is inspected for
characteristic signs of
T. gondii
infection. Nonspecific laboratory findings include thrombocytopenia,
lymphocytosis, monocytosis, eosinophilia, and elevated transaminases.
Prognosis
Some children have a fulminant course with early death, whereas others have long-term neurologic
sequelae. Occasionally, neurologic manifestations (eg, chorioretinitis, intellectual disability, deafness,
seizures) develop years later in children who appeared normal at birth. Consequently, children with
congenital toxoplasmosis should be closely monitored beyond the neonatal period.
Treatment
• Sometimes spiramycin for pregnant women
• Pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin for neonates
Limited data suggest that treatment of infected women during pregnancy may be beneficial to the fetus.
Spiramycin (available in the US with special permission from the FDA) has been used to prevent
maternofetal transmission. Pyrimethamine and sulfonamides have been used later in gestation to treat the
infected fetus.
Treatment of symptomatic and asymptomatic neonates may improve outcome. Therefore, treatment is
begun with pyrimethamine (initial loading dose of 1 mg/kg po bid for 2 days followed by 1 mg/kg po
once/day, maximum 25 mg), sulfadiazine (50 mg/kg po bid, maximum 4 g), and leucovorin (5 to 10 mg po q
3 days). After the initial 6 mo of treatment, sulfadiazine and leucovorin are continued at the same dose,
but the pyrimethamine is given less frequently (only on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday). This regimen is
continued for at least 6 more mo. All treatment should be over-seen by an expert. The use of
corticosteroids is controversial and should be determined case by case.
Prevention
Pregnant women should avoid contact with cat litter boxes and other areas contaminated with cat feces.
Meat should be thoroughly cooked before consumption, and hands should be washed after handling raw
meat or unwashed produce. Women at risk of primary infection (eg, those frequently exposed to cat
feces) should be screened during pregnancy. Those infected during the 1st or 2nd trimester should be
counseled regarding available treatments.
Neonatal Conjunctivitis
(Ophthalmia Neonatorum)
Neonatal conjunctivitis is purulent ocular drainage due to a chemical irritant or a pathogenic
organism. Prevention with antigonococcal drops at birth is routine. Diagnosis is clinical and
usually confirmed by laboratory testing. Treatment is with organism-specific antimicrobials.
===PAGE:2981===
Etiology
The major causes (in decreasing order) are
• Chemical inflammation
• Bacterial infection
• Viral infection (see also p.
)
Chemical conjunctivitis is generally secondary to the instillation of silver nitrate drops for ocular
prophylaxis. Bacterial infection is acquired from infected mothers during passage through the birth canal.
Chlamydial ophthalmia (caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis
) is the most common bacterial cause,
occurring in 2 to 4% of births; it accounts for about 30 to 50% of conjunctivitis in neonates < 4 wk of age.
The prevalence of maternal chlamydial infection ranges from 2 to 20%. About 30 to 50% of neonates born
to acutely infected women develop conjunctivitis (and 5 to 20% develop pneumonia). Other bacteria,
including
Streptococcus pneumoniae
and nontypeable
Haemophilus influenzae
, account for another 15%
of cases. The incidence of gonorrheal ophthalmia (conjunctivitis due to
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
) in the US
is 2 to 3/10,000 births. Isolation of bacteria other than
H. influenzae, S. pneumoniae
, and
N.
gonorrhoeae
, including
Staphylococcus aureus
, usually represents colonization rather than infection. The
major viral cause is herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 (herpetic keratoconjunctivitis).
Symptoms and Signs
Because they overlap in both manifestation and onset, causes of neonatal conjunctivitis are difficult to
distinguish clinically. Conjunctivae are injected, and discharge (watery or purulent) is present.
Chemical conjunctivitis
secondary to silver nitrate usually appears within 6 to 8 h after instillation
and
disappears spontaneously within 48 to 96 h.
Chlamydial ophthalmia
usually occurs 5 to 14 days after birth. It may range from mild conjunctivitis with
minimal mucopurulent discharge to severe eyelid edema with copious drainage and pseudomembrane
formation. Follicles are not present in the conjunctiva, as they are in older children and adults.
Gonorrheal ophthalmia
causes an acute purulent conjunctivitis that appears 2 to 5 days after birth or
earlier with premature rupture of membranes. The neonate has severe eyelid edema followed by
chemosis and a profuse purulent exudate that may be under pressure. If untreated, corneal ulcerations
and blindness may occur.
Conjunctivitis caused by other bacteria
has a variable onset, ranging from 4 days to several weeks.
Herpetic keratoconjunctivitis
can occur as an isolated infection or with disseminated or CNS infection.
It can be mistaken for bacterial or chemical conjunctivitis, but the presence of dendritic keratitis is
pathognomonic.
Diagnosis
• Testing of conjunctival material for gonorrhea, chlamydia, and, sometimes, herpes
Conjunctival material is Gram stained, cultured for gonorrhea (eg, on modified Thayer-Martin medium),
and tested for chlamydia (eg, by culture, direct immunofluorescence, or enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay [samples must contain cells]). Conjunctival scrapings can also be examined with Giemsa stain; if
blue intracytoplasmic inclusions are identified, chlamydial ophthalmia is confirmed. Viral culture is done
only if viral infection is suspected because of skin lesions or maternal infection.
Treatment
• Systemic, topical, or combined antimicrobial therapy
===PAGE:2982===
Neonates with conjunctivitis and known maternal gonococcal infection or with gram-negative intracellular
diplococci identified in conjunctival exudates should be treated with ceftriaxone before results of
confirmatory tests are available.
In chlamydial ophthalmia, systemic therapy is the treatment of choice, because at least half of affected
neonates also have nasopharyngeal infection and some develop chlamydial pneumonia. Erythromycin
ethylsuccinate 10 mg/kg po q 6 h for 2 wk is recommended. Efficacy of this therapy is only 80%, so a 2nd
treatment course may be needed. Because use of erythromycin in neonates is associated with the
development of hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (HPS—, all neonates treated with erythromycin
should be monitored for symptoms and signs of HPS.
A neonate with gonorrheal ophthalmia is hospitalized to be evaluated for possible systemic gonococcal
infection and given a single dose of ceftriaxone 25 to 50 mg/kg IM to a maximum dose of 125 mg (infants
with hyperbilirubinemia or those receiving Ca-containing fluids may be given cefotaxime 100 mg/kg IV or
IM). Frequent saline irrigation of the eye prevents secretions from adhering. Topical antimicrobial
ointments alone are ineffective.
Conjunctivitis due to other bacteria usually responds to topical ointments containing polymyxin plus
bacitracin, erythromycin, or tetracycline.
Herpetic keratoconjunctivitis should be treated (with an ophthalmologist's consultation) with systemic
acyclovir 20 mg/kg q 8 h for 14 to 21 days and topical 1% trifluridine ophthalmic drops or ointment,
vidarabine 3% ointment, or 0.1% iododeoxyuridine q 2 to 3 h, with a maximum of 9 doses/24 h. Systemic
therapy is important, because dissemination to the CNS and other organs can occur.
Corticosteroid-containing ointments may seriously exacerbate eye infections due to
C. trachomatis
, and
herpes simplex virus and should be avoided.
Prevention
Routine use of 1% silver nitrate drops, 0.5% erythromycin, or 1% tetracycline ophthalmic ointments or
drops instilled into each eye after delivery effectively prevents gonorrheal ophthalmia. However, none of
these agents prevents chlamydial ophthalmia; povidone iodine 2.5% drops may be effective against
chlamydia and is effective against gonococci but is not available in the US. Silver nitrate and tetracycline
ophthalmic ointments are also no longer available in the US.
Neonates of mothers with untreated gonorrhea should receive a single injection of ceftriaxone 25 to 50
mg/kg IM or IV, up to 125 mg, and both mother and neonate should be screened for chlamydia infection,
HIV, and syphilis.
Neonatal Hepatitis B Virus Infection
(See also
Chapter 28
.)
Neonatal hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is usually acquired during delivery. It is usually
asymptomatic but can cause chronic subclinical disease.
Symptomatic infection causes
jaundice, lethargy, failure to thrive, abdominal distention, and clay-colored stools. Diagnosis is
by serology. Rarely, severe illness may cause acute liver failure requiring liver transplantation.
Less severe illness is treated supportively. Active and passive immunization help prevent
vertical transmission.
Of the recognized forms of primary viral hepatitis, only HBV is a major cause of neonatal hepatitis.
Infection with other viruses (eg, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus) may cause liver inflammation
along with other manifestations.
Etiology
===PAGE:2983===
HBV infection occurs during delivery from an infected mother. Maternal acute hepatitis B occurring within
2 to 3 mo of delivery has about a 70% risk of transmission, but disease occurring during the 1st or 2nd
trimester has only about a 5% risk. Risk of transmission is also high from asymptomatic hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg) carriers with the e antigen (HBe—. Carriers without the e antigen or
with anti-HBe are less likely to transmit the disease.
Mother-infant HBV transmission results primarily from maternofetal microtransfusions during labor or
contact with infectious secretions in the birth canal. Transplacental transmission is unusual. Postpartum
transmission occurs rarely through exposure to infectious maternal blood, saliva, stool, urine, or breast
milk. Neonatal HBV infection may be an important viral reservoir in certain communities.
Symptoms and Signs
Most neonates with HBV infection are asymptomatic but develop chronic, subclinical hepatitis
characterized by persistent HBsAg antigenemia and variably elevated transaminase activity. Many
neonates born to women with acute hepatitis B during pregnancy are of low birth weight, regardless of
whether they are infected.
Infrequently, infected neonates develop acute hepatitis B, which is usually mild and self-limited. They
develop jaundice, lethargy, failure to thrive, abdominal distention, and clay-colored stools. Occasionally,
severe infection with hepatomegaly, ascites, and hyperbilirubinemia (primarily conjugated bilirubin)
occurs. Rarely, the disease is fulminant and even fatal. Fulminant disease occurs more often in neonates
whose mothers are chronic carriers of hepatitis B.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by serologic testing (discussed .
Prognosis
Long-term prognosis is unknown, although HBsAg carriage early in life seems to increase the risk of
subsequent liver disease (eg, chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma).
Treatment
• Supportive care
Symptomatic care and adequate nutrition are needed. Neither corticosteroids nor hepatitis B immune
globulin (HBIG) is valuable. No therapy prevents the development of chronic, subclinical hepatitis once
infection is acquired. Because of the risk of developing significant disease, liver function should be
monitored periodically.
Prevention
Pregnant women should be tested for HBsAg during an early prenatal visit. Failing that, they should be
tested when admitted for delivery. Some women who are HBsAg-positive are treated with lamivudine
during the 3rd trimester, which may prevent perinatal transmission of hepatitis B.
Neonates whose mothers are HBsAg- positive should be given 1 dose of HBIG 0.5mL IM within 12 h of
birth. Recombinant hepatitis B virus vaccine should be given IM in a series of 3 doses. (NOTE: Doses
vary among proprietary vaccines.) The first dose is given concurrently with HBIG but at a different site.
The 2nd dose is given at 1 to 2 mo, and the 3rd dose is given 6 mo after the first. If the infant weighs < 2
kg, the first dose of vaccine may be less effective. Subsequent vaccine doses are given at age 30 days
(or when discharged from the hospital), and then 2 other doses are given at 1 to 2 mo and 6 mo after the
30-day dose. Testing for HBsAg and anti-HBs at 9 to 15 mo is recommended.
Particularly where hepatitis B infection is highly endemic or HBsAg screening of mothers is impractical, all
neonates should be vaccinated.
===PAGE:2984===
Separating a neonate from its HBsAg-positive mother is not recommended, and breastfeeding does not
seem to increase the risk of postpartum HBV transmission, particularly if HBIG and hepatitis B virus
vaccine have been given. However, if a mother has cracked nipples, abscesses, or other breast
pathology, breast-feeding could potentially transmit HBV.
Neonatal Herpes Simplex Virus Infection
(See also
Herpes Simplex Virus Infections
)
Neonatal herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection is usually transmitted during delivery. Signs are
typically a vesicular eruption and subsequent disseminated disease. Diagnosis is by viral
culture, PCR, immunofluorescence, or electron microscopy. Treatment is with high-dose
parenteral acyclovir and supportive care.
Neonatal HSV infection has high mortality and significant morbidity. Incidence estimates range from
1/3,000 to 1/20,000 births. HSV type 2 causes more cases than HSV type 1.
HSV is usually transmitted during delivery through an infected maternal genital tract. Transplacental
transmission of virus and hospital-acquired spread from one neonate to another by hospital personnel or
family may account for some cases. Mothers of neonates with HSV infection tend to have newly acquired
genital infection, but many have not yet developed symptoms at the time of delivery.
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations generally occur between the 1st and 2nd wk of life but may not appear until as late as the
4th wk. Patients may present with local or disseminated disease. Skin vesicles are common with either
type, occurring in about 55% overall. Those with no skin vesicles usually present with localized CNS
disease. In patients with isolated skin or mucosal disease, progressive or more serious forms of disease
frequently follow within 7 to 10 days if left untreated.
Localized disease:
Neonates with localized disease can be divided into 2 groups. One group has
encephalitis manifested by neurologic findings, CSF pleocytosis, and elevated protein concentration, with
or without concomitant involvement of the skin, eyes, and mouth. The other group has only skin, eye, and
mouth involvement and no evidence of CNS or organ disease.
Disseminated disease:
Neonates with disseminated disease and visceral organ involvement have
hepatitis, pneumonitis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, or a combination, with or without
encephalitis or skin disease.
Other signs, which can occur singly or in combination, include temperature instability, lethargy, hypotonia,
respiratory distress, apnea, and seizures.
Diagnosis
• HSV culture or PCR
• Sometimes immunofluorescent testing of lesions or electron microscopy
Rapid diagnosis by viral culture or HSV PCR is essential. The most common site of retrieval is skin
vesicles. The mouth, eyes, and CSF are also high-yield sites. In some neonates with encephalitis, virus is
present only in the brain. Diagnosis also can be made by immunofluorescence of lesion scrapings,
particularly with use of monoclonal antibodies; and electron microscopy. If no diagnostic virology facilities
are available, a Tzanck test of the lesion base may show characteristic multinucleated giant cells and
intranuclear inclusions, but this test is less sensitive than culture, and false-positives also occur.
Prognosis
===PAGE:2985===
The mortality rate of untreated disseminated disease is 85%; among those with untreated encephalitis, it
is about 50%. Without treatment, at least 65% of survivors have severe neurologic sequelae.
Death is uncommon in neonates with local disease limited to the skin, eyes, or mouth. However, without
treatment, many of these neonates will progress to disseminated disease or CNS disease that may be
unrecognized; about 30% develop neurologic impairment, which may not manifest until 2 to 3 yr of age.
Treatment
• Parenteral and topical acyclovir
• Supportive therapy
Acyclovir decreases the mortality rate in CNS and disseminated disease by 50% and increases the
percentage of children who develop normally from about 35% to 50 to 80%; the dose is 20 mg/kg IV q 8 h
for 21 days. Vigorous supportive therapy is required, including appropriate IV fluids, alimentation,
respiratory support, correction of clotting abnormalities, and control of seizure disorders.
For localized disease (skin or mouth), treatment is acyclovir 20 mg/kg IV q 8 h for 14 days. Herpetic
keratoconjunctivitis requires concomitant systemic acyclovir for 14 days and topical therapy with a drug
such as trifluridine, iododeoxyuridine, or vidarabine (.
Prevention
Efforts to prevent neonatal transmission have not been very effective. Universal screening has not been
recommended or shown to be effective,
and most maternal infections with risk of transmission are
asymptomatic. However, cesarean delivery for women known to have a high risk of transmission (eg,
active genital lesions present at term) has been shown to decrease transmission and is recommended.
Also, fetal scalp monitors should not be used during labor on infants whose mothers have suspected
active genital herpes.
Neonatal Hospital-Acquired Infection
Some infections are acquired after admission to the nursery rather than from the mother in utero or
intrapartum. For some infections (eg, group B streptococci, herpes simplex virus [HSV]) it may not be
clear whether the source is maternal or the hospital environment.
Hospital-acquired infection is primarily a problem for premature infants and for term infants with medical
disorders requiring prolonged hospitalization. Healthy, term neonates have infection rates < 1%. For those
in special care nurseries, the incidence increases as birth weight decreases. The most common
infections, sepsis and pneumonia, have a combined rate of 6.2 cases per 1000 catheter or ventilator days
for infants weighing 1501 to 2500 g, 8.9 cases for those weighing 1001 to 1500 g, and 13.9 cases for
those weighing ≤ 1000 g.
Overall mortality rates are about 33%; for neonates whose birth weight is < 1000 g, the mortality rate is
16 to 45%, and for those whose birth weight is > 2000 g, the mortality rate is 2 to 12%.
Etiology
In
term neonates
, skin infection due to
Staphylococcus aureus
(both methicillin sensitive and methicillin
resistant) is the most frequent hospital-acquired infection. Although nursery personnel who are
S. aureus
nasal carriers are potential sources of infection, colonized neonates are usually the reservoir. The
umbilical stump and groin are most frequently colonized during the first few days of life, whereas the
nares are more frequently colonized later. Often, infections do not manifest until the neonate is at home.
In
very-low-birth-weight
(VLBW; < 1500 g) infants, gram-positive organisms cause about 70% of
infections, the majority being with coagulase-negative staphylococci. Gram-negative organisms, including
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter
, and
Serratia
, cause about 18%. Fungi
===PAGE:2986===
(
Candida albicans
and
C. parapsilosis
) cause about 12%. Patterns of infection (and antibiotic resistance)
vary among institutions and units and change with time. Intermittent "epidemics" sometimes occur as a
particularly virulent organism colonizes a unit.
Infection is facilitated by the multiple invasive procedures VLBW infants undergo (eg, long-term arterial
and venous catheterization, endotracheal intubation, continuous positive airway pressure, NGTs or
nasojejunal feeding tubes). The longer the stay in special care nurseries and the more procedures done,
the higher is the likelihood of infection.
Prevention
Bathing neonates with 3% hexachlorophene decreases frequency of
S. aureus
colonization, but this
product can cause neurotoxicity, particularly in low-birth-weight infants, and is no longer used. The
American Academy of Pediatrics recommends dry umbilical cord care, but this care may result in high
rates of colonization with
S. aureus
, and epidemics have occurred in some hospitals. During disease
outbreaks, application of triple dye to the cord area or bacitracin or mupirocin ointment to the cord, nares,
and circumcision site reduces colonization. Routine cultures of personnel or of the environment are not
recommended.
Prevention of colonization and infection in special care nurseries requires provision of sufficient space
and personnel. In intensive care, 150 sq ft (about 14 sq m)/infant and 8 ft (about 2.4 m) between
incubators or warmers, edge-to-edge in each direction, and a nurse:patient ratio of 1:1 to 1:2 are
required. In intermediate care, 120 sq ft (about 11.2 sq m)/infant and 4 ft (about 1.2 m) between
incubators or warmers, edge-to-edge in each direction, and a nurse:patient ratio of 1:3 to 1:4 are
required. Proper techniques are required, including placement and care of invasive devices and
meticulous cleaning and disinfection or sterilization of equipment. Active surveillance for infection (not
colonization) and monitoring of techniques are essential.
Other preventive measures include frequent hand washing and wearing gowns and gloves. Washing with
alcohol preparations is more effective than soap and water in decreasing bacterial colony counts on
hands but does not eliminate
Clostridium difficile
spores. Incubators provide limited protective isolation;
the exteriors and interiors of the units rapidly become heavily contaminated, and personnel are likely to
contaminate their hands and forearms. Universal blood and body fluid precautions add further protection.
In an epidemic, establishing a cohort of diseased or colonized infants and assigning them a separate
nursing staff are useful. Continuing surveillance for 1 mo after discharge is necessary to assess the
adequacy of controls instituted to end an epidemic.
Prophylactic antimicrobial therapy is generally not effective, hastens development of resistant bacteria,
and alters the balance of normal flora in the neonate. However, during a confirmed nursery epidemic,
antibiotics against specific pathogens may be considered—eg, penicillin G for prophylaxis against group A
streptococcal infection or oral colistin or neomycin for prophylaxis against enterotoxigenic or
enteropathogenic
E. coli
.
Vaccination according to the routine schedule (see
Table 268-10
 should be given to any infant who is in the hospital at that time.
Neonatal Listeriosis
(See also
Listeriosis
)
Neonatal listeriosis is acquired transplacentally or during or after delivery. Symptoms are those
of sepsis. Diagnosis is by culture of mother and infant. Treatment is antibiotics, initially
ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside.
Transplacental infection with
Listeria monocytogenes
can result in fetal dissemination with granuloma
formation (eg, in the skin, liver, adrenal glands, lymphatic tissue, lungs, and brain). If a rash is present, it
is referred to as granulomatosis infantisepticum. Aspiration or swallowing of amniotic fluid or vaginal
===PAGE:2987===
secretions can lead to perinatal infection of the lungs, manifesting in the first several days of life with
respiratory distress, shock, and a fulminant course.
Symptoms and Signs
Infections in pregnant women may be asymptomatic or characterized by a primary bacteremia manifesting
first as a nonspecific flu-like illness.
In the fetus and neonate, clinical presentation depends on the timing and route of infection. Abortion,
premature delivery with amnionitis (with a characteristic brown, murky amniotic fluid), stillbirth, or neonatal
sepsis is common. Infection may be apparent within hours or days of birth (early onset) or it may be
delayed up to several weeks. Neonates with early-onset disease frequently are of low birth weight, have
associated obstetric complications, and show evidence of sepsis with circulatory or respiratory
insufficiency or both. Those with the delayed-onset form are full-term, previously healthy neonates
presenting with meningitis or sepsis.
Diagnosis
• Culture of blood and cervix of febrile pregnant woman
• Culture of blood, CSF, gastric aspirate, and meconium of sick neonate
Blood and cervix specimens should be obtained from any pregnant woman with an unexplained febrile
disease and cultured for
L. monocytogenes
. A sick neonate whose mother has listeriosis should be
evaluated for sepsis (, including cultures of umbilical cord or peripheral blood; the CSF,
gastric aspirate, and meconium; the mother's lochia and exudates from cervix and vagina; and grossly
diseased parts of the placenta. CSF examination may show a predominance of mononuclear cells. Gramstained smears frequently are negative but may show pleomorphic, gram-variable coccobacillary forms,
which should not be disregarded as diphtheroid contaminants. Laboratory confirmation of the organism
involves biochemical testing and observation of motility using a slide test or showing motility in semisolid
media. To do the slide test, colonies of the organism that have grown on solid media are mixed with saline
and examined under a microscope.
L. monocytogenes
exhibits a distinctive end-over-end "tumbling"
motility due to the presence of flagella at both ends. Serologic tests are not useful.
Prognosis
Mortality, ranging from 10 to 50%, is higher in neonates with early-onset disease.
Treatment
• Initially ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside
Initial treatment is with ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside (see also p.
). After clinical response is observed, the aminoglycoside is stopped. A 14-day course is usually
satisfactory (21 days for meningitis), but the optimal duration is unknown. Other possible drugs include
ampicillin or penicillin with rifampin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and imipenem, but they have not been
well evaluated.
Neonates with sepsis require other measures (. In heavy infection, drainage/secretion
precautions may be considered.
Prevention
Food products that may be contaminated by
L. monocytogenes
(eg, unpasteurized dairy
products or raw
vegetables exposed to cattle or sheep manure) should be avoided by pregnant women. If infection during
pregnancy is recognized, treatment may then be given before delivery or intrapartum to prevent vertical
transmission, but the usefulness of such treatment is unproved.
===PAGE:2988===
Neonatal Bacterial Meningitis
(See also
Chapter 180
.)
Neonatal bacterial meningitis is inflammation of the meninges due to bacterial invasion. Signs
are those of sepsis, CNS irritation (eg, lethargy, seizures, vomiting, irritability [particularly
paradoxical irritability], nuchal rigidity, a bulging or full fontanelle), and cranial nerve
abnormalities. Diagnosis is by lumbar puncture. Treatment is with antibiotics.
Neonatal bacterial meningitis occurs in 2/10,000 full-term and 2/1,000 low-birth-weight (LBW) neonates,
with a male predominance. It occurs in about 15% of neonates with sepsis and occasionally occurs in
isolation.
Etiology
The predominant pathogens are
• Group B streptococcus (GBS—predominantly type III)
•
Escherichia coli
(particularly those strains containing the K1 polysaccharide)
•
Listeria monocytogenes
Enterococci, nonenterococcal group D streptococci,
α
-hemolytic streptococci, and other gram-negative
enteric organisms (eg,
Klebsiella
sp,
Enterobacter
sp,
Citrobacter diversus
) also are common
pathogens.
Haemophilus influenzae
type b,
Neisseria meningitidis
, and
Streptococcus pneumoniae
have been reported as causes.
Neonatal bacterial meningitis most frequently results from the bacteremia that occurs with neonatal
sepsis; the higher the colony count in the blood culture, the higher the risk of meningitis. Neonatal
bacterial meningitis may also result from scalp lesions, particularly when developmental defects lead to
communication between the skin surface and the subarachnoid space, which predisposes to
thrombophlebitis of the diploic veins. Rarely, there is direct extension to the CNS from a contiguous otic
focus (eg, otitis media).
Symptoms and Signs
Frequently, only those findings typical of neonatal sepsis (eg, temperature instability, respiratory distress,
jaundice, apnea) are manifest. CNS signs (eg, lethargy, seizures [particularly focal], vomiting, irritability)
more specifically suggest neonatal bacterial meningitis. So-called paradoxical irritability, in which cuddling
and consoling by a parent irritates rather than comforts the neonate, is more specific for the diagnosis. A
bulging or full fontanelle occurs in about 25% and nuchal rigidity in only 15%. The younger the patient,
the less common are these findings. Cranial nerve abnormalities (particularly those involving the 3rd, 6th,
and 7th nerves) may also be present.
Meningitis due to GBS may occur in the first week of life, accompanying early-onset neonatal sepsis and
frequently manifesting initially as a systemic illness with prominent respiratory signs. Usually, however,
GBS meningitis occurs after this period (most commonly in the first 3 mo of life) as an isolated illness
characterized by absence of antecedent obstetric or perinatal complications and the presence of more
specific signs of meningitis (eg, fever, lethargy, seizures).
Ventriculitis frequently accompanies neonatal bacterial meningitis, particularly when caused by gramnegative enteric bacilli. Organisms that cause meningitis together with severe vasculitis, particularly
C.
diversus
and
Enterobacter sakazakii
, are likely to cause cysts and abscesses.
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
,
E. coli
K1, and
Serratia
sp also may cause brain abscesses. An early clinical sign of brain
abscess is increased intracranial pressure (ICP), commonly manifested by vomiting, a bulging fontanelle,
and sometimes enlarging head size. Deterioration in an otherwise stable neonate with meningitis
suggests progressive increased ICP caused by abscess or hydrocephalus, or rupture of an abscess into
===PAGE:2989===
the ventricular system.
Diagnosis
• CSF glucose and protein levels, Gram stain, and culture
• Sometimes brain CT or MRI
Definitive diagnosis is made by CSF examination via lumbar puncture (LP), which should be done in any
neonate suspected of having sepsis or meningitis. However, LP can be difficult to do in a neonate, and
there is some risk of hypoxia. Poor clinical condition (eg, respiratory distress, shock, thrombocytopenia)
makes LP risky. If LP is delayed, the neonate should be treated as though meningitis is present. Even
when the clinical condition improves, the presence of inflammatory cells
and abnormal electrolytes in CSF
days after illness onset can still suggest the diagnosis. A needle with a trocar should be used for LP to
avoid introducing epithelial rests and subsequent development of epitheliomas. The CSF, even if bloody
or acellular, should be cultured. About 15 to 30% of neonates with negative blood cultures have positive
CSF cultures depending on the population studied. LP should be repeated at 24 to 48 h if clinical
response is questionable and at 72 h when gram-negative organisms are involved (to ensure
sterilization). Repeating the CSF analysis helps guide duration of therapy and predict prognosis. Some
experts believe that a repeat LP at 24 h in neonates with GBS meningitis has prognostic value. LP should
not be repeated at the end of therapy if the neonate is doing well.
Normal CSF values are controversial and in part age-related. In general, both term infants and preterm
infants without meningitis have ≤ 20 WBCs/
μ
L (one fifth of which may be PMNs) in their CSF. CSF protein
levels in the absence of meningitis are more variable; term infants have levels of < 100 mg/dL, whereas
preterm infants have levels up to 150 mg/dL. CSF glucose levels in the absence of meningitis are > 75%
of the serum value measured at the same time. These levels may be as low as 20 to 30 mg/dL (1.1 to 1.7
mmol/L).
Ventriculitis is suspected in a neonate not responding appropriately to antimicrobial therapy. The
diagnosis is made when a ventricular puncture yields a WBC count greater than that from the LP, by a
positive Gram stain or culture, or by increased ventricular pressure. When ventriculitis or brain abscess is
suspected, an MRI or CT with contrast may aid diagnosis; dilated ventricles also confirm ventriculitis.
Prognosis
Without treatment, the mortality rate for neonatal bacterial meningitis approaches 100%. With treatment,
prognosis is determined by birth weight, organism, and clinical severity. Mortality rate for gram-negative
neonatal bacterial meningitis is 15 to 20%, and for gram-positive (eg, GBS) meningitis it is 6 to 10%. For
organisms that cause vasculitis or brain abscess (necrotizing meningitis), the mortality rate may approach
75%. Neurologic sequelae (eg, hydrocephalus, hearing loss, intellectual disability) develop in 20 to 50%
of infants who survive, with a poorer prognosis when gram-negative enteric bacilli are the cause.
Prognosis also depends partly on the number of organisms present in CSF at diagnosis. The duration of
positive CSF cultures correlates directly with the incidence of complications. In general, CSF cultures
from neonates with GBS are usually sterilized within the first 24 h of antimicrobial therapy. Those from
gram-negative bacillary meningitis remain positive longer, with a median of 2 days.
GBS meningitis has a mortality rate significantly lower than that of early-onset GBS sepsis.
Treatment
• Empiric ampicillin plus gentamicin, cefotaxime, or both, followed by culture-specific drugs
Empiric antibiotic therapy:
Initial empiric treatment depends on patient age and is still debated. Most
experts recommend ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside, a 3rd-generation cephalosporin (eg, cefotaxime),
or both. Ampicillin is active against organisms such as GBS, enterococci, and
Listeria
. Gentamicin
provides synergy and added efficacy against these organisms and adequate gram-negative coverage.
===PAGE:2990===
Cephalosporins provide adequate gram-negative coverage but do not provide synergy with ampicillin for
gram-positive organisms and may allow for some resistant organisms. Hospitalized neonates who
previously received antibiotics (eg, for early-onset sepsis) may have resistant organisms; fungal disease
may also be considered in a septic-appearing neonate after prolonged hospitalization. Ill neonates with
hospital-acquired infection should initially receive vancomycin plus an aminoglycoside with or without a
3rd-generation cephalosporin. Antibiotics are adjusted when results of CSF culture and sensitivities are
known. The results of the Gram stain should not change antibiotic therapy.
Organism-specific antibiotic therapy:
The recommended initial treatment for GBS meningitis in
neonates < 1 wk of age is penicillin G 100,000 to 150,000 units/kg IV q 8 h or ampicillin 100 mg/kg IV q 8
h, plus gentamicin 4 mg/kg IV once/day if the infant is 32 to 35 wk gestational age or 5 mg/kg IV once/day
if the infant is > 35 wk gestational age. If clinical improvement occurs or sterilization of CSF is
documented, gentamicin can be stopped.
For enterococci or
L. monocytogenes
, treatment is generally ampicillin plus gentamicin.
In gram-negative bacillary meningitis, treatment is difficult. The traditional regimen of ampicillin plus an
aminoglycoside results in a 15 to 20% mortality rate, with a high rate of sequelae in survivors. A 3rdgeneration cephalosporin (eg, cefotaxime) should be strongly considered in neonates with
proven
gramnegative
meningitis (or sepsis) or those
convincingly
septic. If antibiotic resistance is a concern, both an
aminoglycoside and a 3rd-generation cephalosporin may be used until sensitivities are known. However,
except for initial empiric therapy, 3rd-generation cephalosporins are generally not used routinely, because
certain gram-negative organisms are induced to produce
β
-lactamase, resulting in rapid development of
resistance.
Parenteral therapy for gram-positive meningitis is given for a minimum of 14 days, and for complicated
gram-positive or gram-negative meningitis, a minimum of 21 days.
Adjunctive measures:
Because meningitis may be considered part of the continuum of neonatal sepsis,
the adjunctive measures used in treating neonatal sepsis ( should also be used to treat
neonatal meningitis. Corticosteroids are not used in treatment of neonatal meningitis. Patients should be
closely monitored for neurologic complications during the first 2 yr of life.
Neonatal Pneumonia
Neonatal pneumonia is lung infection in a neonate. Onset may be within hours of birth and part
of a generalized sepsis syndrome or after 7 days and confined to the lungs. Signs may be
limited to respiratory distress or progress to shock and death. Diagnosis is by clinical and
laboratory evaluation for sepsis. Treatment is initial broad-spectrum antibiotics changed to
organism-specific drugs as soon as possible.
Pneumonia is the most common invasive bacterial infection after primary sepsis. Early-onset pneumonia
is part of generalized sepsis that first manifests at or within hours of birth. Late-onset pneumonia usually
occurs after 7 days of age, most commonly in neonatal ICUs among infants who require prolonged
endotracheal intubation because of lung disease.
Etiology
Organisms are acquired from the maternal genital tract or the nursery. These organisms include grampositive cocci (eg, groups A and B streptococci,
Staphylococcus aureus
) and gram-negative bacilli (eg,
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella
sp,
Proteus
sp). Methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
is common in late-onset
hospital-acquired pneumonia. In infants who have received broad-spectrum antibiotics, many other
pathogens may be found, including
Pseudomonas, Citrobacter, Bacillus
, and
Serratia
. Viruses or fungi
cause some cases.
Symptoms and Signs
Late-onset hospital-acquired pneumonia may begin gradually, with more secretions being suctioned from
===PAGE:2991===
the endotracheal tube and higher ventilator settings. Other infants may be acutely ill, with temperature
instability and neutropenia. New infiltrates may be visible on chest x-ray but may be difficult to recognize if
the infant has severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
Diagnosis
Evaluation includes cultures of blood and tracheal aspirate, chest x-ray, and pulse oximetry. Because
bacterial pneumonia in neonates may disseminate, a full evaluation for sepsis, including a lumbar
puncture, should also be done.
Treatment
• Usually vancomycin and cefotaxime
Antimicrobial therapy in early-onset disease is similar to that for neonatal sepsis. Vancomycin and
cefotaxime are the initial treatment of choice for most late-onset hospital-acquired pneumonia. This
regimen treats sepsis as well as pneumonia. More specific antibiotics are substituted after sensitivity
results are available. General treatment is the same as that for neonatal sepsis (.
Chlamydial Pneumonia
Contamination with chlamydial organisms during delivery may result in development of chlamydial
pneumonia at 2 to 12 wk. Infants are tachypneic but usually not critically ill and may also have a history of
conjunctivitis caused by the same organism. Eosinophilia may be present, and x-rays show bilateral
interstitial infiltrates. Treatment with erythromycin leads to rapid resolution. The diagnosis of pneumonia
secondary to
Chlamydia trachomatis
should prompt an evaluation of the mother and her partner because
untreated maternal chlamydial infection may have complications such as pelvic inflammatory disease and
sterility.
Neonatal Sepsis
(Sepsis Neonatorum)
(See also
Chapter 227
.)
Neonatal sepsis is invasive infection, usually bacterial, occurring during the neonatal period.
Signs are
multiple and include diminished spontaneous activity, less vigorous sucking, apnea,
bradycardia, temperature instability, respiratory distress, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal
distention, jitteriness, seizures, and jaundice. Diagnosis is clinical and based on culture results.
Treatment is initially with ampicillin plus either gentamicin or cefotaxime, narrowed to
organism-specific drugs as soon as possible.
Neonatal sepsis occurs in 0.5 to 8.0/1000 births. The highest rates occur in low-birth-weight (LBW)
infants, those with depressed respiratory function at birth, those with maternal perinatal risk factors,
males, and those with congenital anomalies.
Etiology
Neonatal sepsis can be early onset (within 7 days of birth) or late onset (after 7 days).
Early onset:
Early-onset sepsis usually results from organisms acquired intrapartum. Most infants have
symptoms within 6 h of birth, and almost all cases occur within 72 h.
Group B streptococcus (GBS) and gram-negative enteric organisms (predominantly
Escherichia coli
)
account for most cases of early-onset sepsis. Vaginal or rectal cultures of women at term may show GBS
colonization rates of up to 30%. At least 35% of their infants also become colonized. The density of infant
colonization determines the risk of early-onset invasive disease, which is 40 times higher with heavy
colonization. Although only 1/100 of infants colonized develop invasive disease due to GBS, > 50% of
===PAGE:2992===
those present within the first 6 h of life. Nontypeable
Haemophilus influenzae
sepsis has been
increasingly identified in neonates, especially premature neonates.
Other gram-negative enteric bacilli (eg,
Klebsiella
sp) and gram-positive organisms—
Listeria
monocytogenes
, enterococci (eg,
Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium)
, group D streptococci
(eg,
Streptococcus bovis
),
α
-hemolytic streptococci, and staphylococci—account for most other cases.
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
H. influenzae
type b, and, less commonly,
Neisseria meningitidis
have been
isolated. Asymptomatic gonorrhea occurs occasionally in pregnancy, so
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
may be a
pathogen.
Late onset:
Late-onset sepsis is usually acquired from the environment (see also Neonatal HospitalAcquired Infection . Staphylococci account for 30 to 60% of late-onset cases and are most
frequently due to intravascular devices (particularly umbilical artery or vein catheters).
E. coli
is also
becoming increasingly recognized as a significant cause of late-onset sepsis, especially in very LBW
infants. Isolation of
Enterobacter cloacae
or
E. sakazakii
from blood or CSF suggests contaminated
feedings. Contaminated respiratory equipment is suspected in outbreaks of hospital-acquired
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
pneumonia or sepsis. Although universal screening and intrapartum antibiotic
prophylaxis for GBS have significantly decreased the rate of early-onset disease due to this organism, the
rate of late-onset GBS sepsis has remained unchanged, which is consistent with the hypothesis that lateonset disease is usually acquired from the environment.
The role of anaerobes (particularly
Bacteroides fragilis
) in late-onset sepsis remains unclear, although
deaths have been attributed to
Bacteroides
bacteremia. Anaerobes may account for some culturenegative cases in which autopsy findings indicate sepsis.
Candida
sp are increasingly important causes of late-onset sepsis, occurring in 12 to 13% of very LBW
infants.
Early and late onset:
Certain viral infections (eg, disseminated herpes simplex, enterovirus, adenovirus,
respiratory syncytial virus) may manifest as early-onset or late-onset sepsis.
Pathophysiology
Early onset:
Certain maternal perinatal and obstetric factors increase risk, particularly of early-onset
sepsis, such as the following:
• Premature rupture of membranes (PROM— occurring ≥ 18 h before birth
• Maternal bleeding (eg, placenta previa, abruptio placentae)
• Preeclampsia
• Precipitous delivery
• Maternal infection (particularly of the urinary tract or endometrium, most commonly manifests as
maternal fever shortly before or during delivery)
• Heavy colonization with GBS
• Preterm delivery
Hematogenous and transplacental dissemination of maternal infection occurs in the transmission of
certain viral (eg, rubella, cytomegalovirus), protozoal (eg,
Toxoplasma gondii
), and treponemal (eg,
Treponema pallidum
) pathogens. A few bacterial pathogens (eg,
L. monocytogenes, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
) may reach the fetus transplacentally, but most are acquired by the ascending route in utero
or as the fetus passes through the colonized birth canal.
===PAGE:2993===
Though the intensity of maternal colonization is directly related to risk of invasive disease in the neonate,
many mothers with low-density
colonization give birth to infants with high-density colonization who are
therefore at risk. Amniotic fluid contaminated with meconium or vernix caseosa promotes growth of GBS
and
E. coli
. Hence, the few organisms in the vaginal vault are able to proliferate rapidly after PROM,
possibly contributing to this paradox. Organisms usually reach the bloodstream by fetal aspiration or
swallowing of contaminated amniotic fluid, leading to bacteremia. The ascending route of infection helps
to explain such phenomena as the high incidence of PROM in neonatal infections, the significance of
adnexal inflammation (amnionitis is more commonly associated with neonatal sepsis than is central
placentitis), the increased risk of infection in the twin closer to the birth canal, and the bacteriologic
characteristics of neonatal sepsis, which reflect the flora of the maternal vaginal vault.
Late onset:
The most important risk factor in late-onset sepsis is preterm delivery. Others include
• Prolonged use of intravascular catheters
• Associated illnesses (which may, however, be only a marker for the use of invasive procedures)
• Exposure to antibiotics (which selects resistant bacterial strains)
• Prolonged hospitalization
• Contaminated equipment or IV or enteral solutions
Gram-positive organisms (eg, coagulase-negative staphylococci and
Staphylococcus aureus
) may be
introduced from the environment or the patient's skin. Gram-negative enteric bacteria are usually derived
from the patient's endogenous flora, which may have been altered by antecedent antibiotic therapy or
populated by resistant organisms transferred from the hands of personnel (the major means of spread) or
contaminated equipment. Therefore, situations that increase exposure to these bacteria (eg, crowding,
inadequate nurse staffing or provider hand washing) result in higher rates of hospital-acquired infection.
Risk factors for
Candida
sp sepsis include prolonged (> 10 days) use of central IV catheters,
hyperalimentation, use of antecedent antibiotics, necrotizing enterocolitis or other abdominal pathology,
and previous surgery.
Initial foci of infection can be in the urinary tract, paranasal sinuses, middle ear, lungs, or GI tract, and
may later disseminate to meninges, kidneys, bones, joints, peritoneum, and skin.
Symptoms and Signs
Early signs are frequently nonspecific and subtle and do not distinguish among organisms (including
viral). Particularly common early signs include
• Diminished spontaneous activity
• Less vigorous sucking
• Apnea
• Bradycardia
• Temperature instability (hypothermia or hyperthermia)
Fever is present in only 10 to 15% but, when sustained (eg, > 1 h), generally indicates infection. Other
symptoms and signs include respiratory distress, neurologic findings (eg, seizures, jitteriness), jaundice
(especially occurring within the first 24 h without Rh or ABO blood group incompatibility and with a higher
than expected direct bilirubin concentration), vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal distention. Anaerobic
infection is often indicated by foul-smelling amniotic fluid at birth.
Specific signs of an infected organ may pinpoint the primary site or a metastatic site.
===PAGE:2994===
• Most neonates with early-onset GBS (and many with
L. monocytogenes
) infection present with
respiratory distress that is difficult to distinguish from respiratory distress syndrome.
• Periumbilical erythema, discharge, or bleeding without a hemorrhagic diathesis suggests omphalitis
(infection prevents obliteration of the umbilical vessels).
• Coma, seizures, opisthotonos, or a bulging fontanelle suggests meningitis, encephalitis, or brain
abscess.
• Decreased spontaneous movement of an extremity and swelling, warmth, erythema, or tenderness over
a joint indicates osteomyelitis or pyogenic arthritis.
• Unexplained abdominal distention may indicate peritonitis or necrotizing enterocolitis (particularly when
accompanied by bloody diarrhea and fecal leukocytes).
• Cutaneous vesicles, mouth ulcers, and hepatosplenomegaly (particularly with disseminated
intravascular coagulation [DIC]) can identify disseminated herpes simplex.
Early-onset GBS infection may manifest as a fulminating pneumonia. Often, obstetric complications
(particularly prematurity, PROM, or chorioamnionitis) have occurred. In > 50% of neonates, GBS infection
manifests within 6 h of birth; 45% have an Apgar score of < 5. Meningitis may also be present but is not
common. In late-onset GBS infection (at 1 to 12 wk), meningitis is often present. Late-onset GBS infection
is generally not associated with perinatal risk factors or demonstrable maternal cervical colonization and
may be acquired postpartum.
Diagnosis
• High index of suspicion
• Blood, urine, and CSF culture
Early diagnosis is important and requires awareness of risk factors (particularly in LBW neonates) and a
high index of suspicion when any neonate deviates from the norm in the first few weeks of life. Neonates
with suspected sepsis, and those whose mother was thought to have chorioamnionitis, should have a
CBC, differential with smear, platelet count, blood culture, urine culture, and lumbar puncture (LP), if
clinically feasible, as soon as possible. Those with respiratory symptoms require chest x-ray. Diagnosis is
confirmed by isolation of a pathogen in culture. Other tests may have abnormal results but are not
necessarily diagnostic.
For preterm neonates who appear well but whose mother received inadequate intrapartum antibiotics for
GBS, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends a limited evaluation (CBC and blood culture with
at least a 48-h observation).
CBC, differential, and smear:
The normal WBC count in neonates varies, but values < 4,000/
μ
L or >
25,000/
μ
L are abnormal. The absolute band count is not sensitive enough to predict sepsis, but a ratio of
immature:total polymorphonuclear leukocytes of < 0.2 has a high negative predictive value. A precipitous
fall in a known absolute eosinophil count and morphologic changes in neutrophils (eg, toxic granulation,
Dohle bodies, intracytoplasmic vacuolization in noncitrated blood or ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
[EDTA]) suggest sepsis.
The platelet count may fall hours to days before the onset of clinical sepsis but more often remains
elevated until a day or so after the neonate becomes ill. This fall is sometimes accompanied by other
findings of DIC (eg, increased fibrin degradation products, decreased fibrinogen, prolonged INR).
Because of the large numbers of circulating bacteria, organisms can sometimes be seen in or associated
with PMNs by applying Gram stain, methylene blue, or acridine orange to the buffy coat.
===PAGE:2995===
Regardless of the results of the CBC or LP, in all neonates with suspected sepsis (eg, those who look
sick or are febrile or hypothermic), antibiotics should be started after cultures (eg, blood, urine, and CSF
[if possible]) are taken.
Lumbar puncture:
There is a risk of increasing hypoxia during an LP in already hypoxemic neonates.
However, LP should be done in neonates with suspected sepsis as soon as they are able to tolerate the
procedure (see also p.
under Neonatal Bacterial Meningitis). Supplemental O
is given before and
during LP to prevent hypoxia. Because GBS pneumonia manifesting in the first day of life can be
confused with respiratory distress syndrome, LP is often done routinely in neonates suspected of having
these diseases.
Blood cultures:
Umbilical vessels are frequently contaminated by organisms on the umbilical stump,
especially after a number of hours, so blood cultures from umbilical lines may not be reliable. Therefore,
blood for culture should be obtained by venipuncture, preferably at 2 peripheral sites, each meticulously
prepared by applying an iodine-containing liquid, then applying 95% alcohol, and finally allowing the site
to dry. Blood should be cultured for both aerobic and anaerobic organisms. If catheter-associated sepsis
is suspected, a culture specimen should be obtained through the catheter as well as peripherally. In >
90% of positive bacterial blood cultures, growth occurs within 48 h of incubation. Because bacteremia in
neonates is associated with a high density of organisms and delayed clearance, a small amount of blood
(eg, ≥ 1 mL) is usually sufficient for detecting organisms. Data on capillary blood cultures are insufficient
to recommend them.
Candida
sp grow in blood cultures and on blood agar plates, but if other fungi are suspected, a fungal
culture medium should be used. For species other than
Candida
, fungal blood cultures may require 4 to 5
days of incubation before becoming positive and may be negative even in obviously disseminated
disease. Proof of colonization (in mouth or stool or on skin) may be helpful before culture results are
available. If disseminated candidiasis is suspected, indirect ophthalmoscopy with dilation of the pupils is
done to identify retinal candidal lesions. Renal ultrasonography is done to detect renal mycetoma.
Urinalysis and culture:
Urine should be obtained by catheterization or suprapubic aspiration, not by
urine collection bags. Although only culture is diagnostic, a finding of ≥ 5 WBCs/high-power field in the
spun urine or any organisms in a fresh unspun gram-stained sample is presumptive evidence of a UTI.
Absence of pyuria does not rule out UTI.
Other tests for infection and inflammation:
Numerous tests are often abnormal in sepsis and have
been evaluated as possible early markers. In general, however, sensitivities tend to be low until later in
illness, and specificities are suboptimal.
Acute-phase reactants are proteins produced by the liver under the influence of IL-1 when
inflammation is
present. The most valuable of these is quantitative C-reactive protein. A concentration of 1 mg/dL
(measured by nephelometry) has both a false-positive and a false-negative rate of about 10%. Elevated
levels occur within a day, peak at 2 to 3 days, and fall to normal within 5 to 10 days in neonates who
recover.
The ESR is often elevated in sepsis. The micro-ESR correlates well with the standard Wintrobe method
but has the same high false-negative rate (especially early in the course and with DIC) and a slow return
to normal, well beyond the time of clinical cure. IL-6 and other inflammatory cytokines are being
investigated as markers for sepsis.
Prognosis
The fatality rate is 2 to 4 times higher in LBW infants than in full-term infants. The overall mortality rate of
early-onset sepsis is 3 to 40% (that of early-onset GBS infection is 2 to 30%) and of late-onset sepsis is 2
to 20% (that of late-onset GBS is about 2%). More recent studies have shown lower mortality rates.
Neonates who are both septic and granulocytopenic are less likely to survive, particularly if their bone
marrow neutrophil storage pool (NSP) is depleted to < 7% of total nucleated cells (mortality rate, 75%).
Because NSP levels may not be readily available, the peripheral blood immature:total (I:T) neutrophil ratio
===PAGE:2996===
can approximate bone marrow NSP levels. I:T ratios of > 0.80 correlate with NSP depletion and death;
such a ratio may identify neonates who might benefit from granulocyte transfusion.
Treatment
• Antibiotic therapy
• Supportive therapy
Because sepsis may manifest with non-specific clinical signs and its effects may be devastating, rapid
empiric antibiotic therapy is recommended (; drugs are later adjusted according to
sensitivities and the site of infection. If bacterial cultures show no growth by 48 h (although some
pathogens may require 72 h) and the neonate appears well, antibiotics are stopped.
General supportive measures, including respiratory and hemodynamic management, are combined with
antibiotic treatment.
Antimicrobials:
In early-onset sepsis, initial therapy should include ampicillin or penicillin G plus an
aminoglycoside. Cefotaxime may be added to or substituted for the aminoglycoside if meningitis is
suspected. If foul-smelling amniotic fluid is present at birth, therapy for anaerobes (eg, clindamycin,
metronidazole) should be added. Antibiotics may be changed as soon as an organism is identified.
Previously well infants admitted from the community with presumed late-onset sepsis should also receive
therapy with ampicillin plus gentamicin or ampicillin plus cefotaxime. If gram-negative meningitis is
suspected, ampicillin, cefotaxime, and an aminoglycoside may be used. In late-onset hospital-acquired
sepsis, initial therapy should include vancomycin (active against methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
) plus an
aminoglycoside. If
P. aeruginosa
is prevalent in the nursery, ceftazidime may be used instead of an
aminoglycoside. For neonates previously treated with a full 7- to 14-day aminoglycoside course who need
retreatment, a different aminoglycoside or a 3rd-generation cephalosporin should be considered.
If coagulase-negative staphylococci are suspected (eg, an indwelling catheter has been in place for > 72
h) or are isolated from blood or other normally sterile fluid and considered a pathogen, initial therapy for
late-onset sepsis should include vancomycin. However, if the organism is sensitive to nafcillin, cefazolin
or nafcillin should replace vancomycin. Removal of the presumptive source of the organism (usually an
indwelling intravascular catheter) may be necessary to cure the infection because coagulase-negative
staphylococci may be protected by a biofilm (a covering that encourages adherence of organisms to the
catheter).
Because
Candida
may take 2 to 3 days to grow in blood culture, initiation of amphotericin B therapy and
removal of the infected catheter without positive blood or CSF cultures may be life saving.
Other treatment:
Exchange transfusions have been used for severely ill (particularly hypotensive and
metabolically acidotic) neonates. Their purported value is to increase levels of circulating
immunoglobulins, decrease circulating endotoxin, increase Hb levels (with higher 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
levels), and improve perfusion. However, no controlled prospective studies of their use have been
conducted.
Fresh frozen plasma may help reverse the heat-stable and heat-labile opsonin deficiencies that occur in
LBW neonates, but controlled studies of its use are unavailable, and transfusion-associated risks must be
considered.
Granulocyte transfusions ( have been used in septic and granulocytopenic neonates but
have not convincingly improved outcome.
Recombinant colony-stimulating factors (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor [G-CSF]
[Fig. 279-1.
Indications for intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent perinatal group B streptococcal
===PAGE:2997===
disease.]
and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF]) have increased neutrophil number and
function in neonates with presumed sepsis but do not seem to be of routine benefit in neonates with
severe neutropenia; further study is required.
Prevention
IV immune globulin given at birth may prevent sepsis in certain high-risk LBW infants but does not help in
established infection.
Because invasive disease due to GBS often manifests within the first 6 h of life, women who have
previously given birth to an infant with GBS disease should receive intrapartum antibiotics, and women
who have symptomatic or asymptomatic GBS bacteriuria during pregnancy should receive antibiotics at
the time of diagnosis and intrapartum (see
Fig. 279-1
).
Perinatal Tuberculosis
(See also
Tuberculosis
)
Tuberculosis (TB) can be acquired during the perinatal period. Symptoms and signs are
nonspecific. Diagnosis is by culture and sometimes x-ray and biopsy. Treatment is with
isoniazid and other antituberculous drugs.
Infants may acquire TB by the following means:
• Transplacental spread through the umbilical vein to the fetal liver
• Aspiration or ingestion of infected amniotic fluid
• Airborne inoculation from close contacts (family members or nursery personnel)
About 50% of children born to mothers with active pulmonary TB develop the disease during the first year
of life if chemoprophylaxis or BCG vaccine is not given.
Symptoms and Signs
The clinical presentation of neonatal TB is nonspecific but is usually marked by multiple organ
involvement. The neonate may look acutely or chronically ill and may have fever, lethargy, respiratory
distress, hepatosplenomegaly, or failure to thrive.
Diagnosis
• Culture of tracheal aspirate, gastric washings, urine, and CSF
• Chest x-ray
• Sometimes skin testing
All neonates with suspected congenital TB and infants born to mothers who have active TB should have
a chest x-ray and culture of tracheal aspirates, gastric washings, urine, and CSF for acid-fast bacilli; the
placenta should be examined and cultured as well. Skin testing is not extremely sensitive, particularly
initially, but should be done. Biopsy of the liver, lymph nodes, lungs, or pleurae may be needed to confirm
the diagnosis.
Well-appearing neonates whose mothers have a positive skin test but a negative chest x-ray and no
evidence of active disease should have close follow-up and evaluation of all household members. If there
is no exposure to a case of active TB, the neonate does not need treatment or testing. If significant
===PAGE:2998===
exposure to a case of active TB is found in the neonate's environment after birth, the neonate should be
evaluated for suspected congenital TB as described previously. If the neonate is well and active and
disease is reasonably excluded by the chest x-ray and physical examination, the neonate should begin
treatment with isoniazid (INH) 10 mg/kg po once/day. Further follow-up and management is then identical
to that for an asymptomatic neonate born to a woman with active TB (, including a skin test at
age 3 or 4 mo.
Treatment
• INH for positive skin test or high-risk exposure
• Addition of other drugs (eg, rifampin, ethambutol, pyridoxine, pyrazinamide, an aminoglycoside) if TB is
present
Management depends on the whether there is active TB or only a positive skin test (in mother, infant, or
both).
Pregnant women with a positive tuberculin test:
Women are evaluated for active TB. Because the
hepatotoxicity of INH is increased in pregnancy, and because the risk of contracting TB from a mother
with a positive tuberculin test is greater for the neonate than for the fetus, INH use may be deferred until
after the postpartum period unless the woman has active TB or recent contact with a person with
contagious TB (in which case the benefit outweighs the risk). Treatment is given for 9 mo, along with
supplemental pyridoxine. Treatment for a pregnant woman exposed to contagious TB should be deferred
until the 1st trimester is complete.
Neonates with a positive tuberculin test:
If there is no clinical or x-ray evidence of disease,
the infant
should receive INH 10 mg/kg po once/day for 9 mo and should be closely monitored.
Pregnant women with active TB:
INH, ethambutol, and rifampin use in recommended doses during
pregnancy has not been shown to be teratogenic to the human fetus. The recommended initial treatment
regimen in the US includes INH 300 mg po, ethambutol 15 to 25 mg/kg po, and rifampin 600 mg po. All
pregnant and breastfeeding women receiving INH should also receive pyridoxine 25 mg po. All these
drugs can be given once/day. The recommended duration of therapy is at least 9 mo; if the organism is
drug-resistant, an infectious disease consultation is recommended, and therapy may need to be extended
to 18 mo. Streptomycin is potentially ototoxic to the developing fetus and should not be used early in
pregnancy unless rifampin is contraindicated. If possible, other antituberculous drugs should be avoided
because of teratogenicity (eg, ethionamide) or lack of clinical experience during pregnancy. Breastfeeding
is not contraindicated for mothers receiving therapy who are not infective.
Patients with active TB should be reported to the local health department. Mothers with active TB should
be tested for HIV.
Asymptomatic neonates of women with active TB:
The neonate usually is separated from the
mother only until effective treatment of both mother and neonate is under way. Once the neonate is
receiving INH, separation is not necessary unless the mother (or household contact) has possible
multidrug-resistant organisms or poorly adheres to treatment (including not wearing a mask if TB is
active) and directly observed therapy is not possible. Family contacts should be investigated for
undiagnosed TB before the infant goes home.
If adherence can be reasonably assured and the family is nontuberculous (ie, the mother is being treated
and no other transmission risks are present), the neonate is started on a regimen of INH 10 mg/kg po
once/day and sent home at the usual time. Skin testing should be done at age 3 or 4 mo. If the neonate is
tuberculin-negative, INH is stopped. If the skin test is positive, chest x-ray and cultures for acid-fast bacilli
are done as described previously and, if active disease is excluded, treatment with INH is continued for a
total of 9 mo. If cultures become positive for TB at any time, the neonate should be treated for TB.
If adherence in a nontuberculous environment cannot be ensured, BCG vaccine may be considered for
the neonate, and INH therapy should be started as soon as possible. (Although INH inhibits the
===PAGE:2999===
multiplication of BCG organisms, the combination of BCG vaccine and INH is supported by clinical trials
and anecdotal reports.) BCG vaccination does not ensure against exposure to and development of TB,
but offers significant protection against serious and widespread invasion (eg, tuberculous meningitis).
BCG should only be given if skin testing of the neonate is negative. Neonates should be monitored for
development of TB, particularly during the first year. (CAUTION:
BCG vaccine is contraindicated in
immunosuppressed patients and those suspected of being infected with HIV. However, in high-risk
populations, the WHO recommends that asymptomatic HIV-infected neonates receive BCG vaccine at
birth or shortly thereafter.
)
Neonates with active TB:
For congenital TB, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends
treatment once/day with INH 10 to 15 mg/kg po, rifampin 10 to 20 mg/kg po, pyrazinamide 30 to 40 mg/kg
po, and an aminoglycoside (eg, amikacin or streptomycin). This regimen should be modified as indicated
based on results of testing for resistance.
For TB acquired after birth, the suggested regimen is treatment once/day with INH 10 to 15 mg/kg po,
rifampin 10 to 20 mg/kg po, and pyrazinamide 30 to 40 mg/kg. A fourth drug such as ethambutol 20 to 25
mg/kg once/day or an aminoglycoside should be added if drug resistance or tuberculous meningitis is
suspected. After the first 2 mo of treatment, INH and rifampin are continued to complete a 6- to 12-mo
course (depending on disease category) and other drugs are stopped. Breastfed infants should also
receive pyridoxine supplementation.
When the CNS is involved, initial therapy also includes corticosteroids (prednisone 2 mg/kg po once/day
for 4 to 6 wk, then gradually tapered). Other therapy continues until all signs of meningitis have
disappeared and cultures are negative on 2 successive lumbar punctures at least 1 wk apart. Therapy
can then be continued with INH and rifampin once/day or twice/wk for another 10 mo. Corticosteroids may
also be considered for infants and children with severe miliary disease, pleural or pericardial effusions,
endobronchial disease, or those with abdominal TB.
TB in infants and children that is not congenitally acquired or disseminated; does not involve the CNS,
bones, or joints; and results from drug-susceptible organisms can be treated effectively with a 6- to 9-mo
(total) course of therapy. Organisms recovered from the child or mother should be tested for drug
sensitivity.
Hematologic, hepatic, and otologic symptoms should be monitored frequently to determine
response to therapy and drug toxicity. Frequent laboratory analysis is not usually necessary.
Directly observed therapy is used whenever possible to improve adherence and the success of therapy.
Many anti-TB drugs are not available in pediatric dosages. When possible, experienced personnel should
give these drugs to children.
Prevention
Routine neonatal BCG vaccination is not routinely indicated in developed countries but may curb the
incidence of childhood TB or decrease its severity in populations at increased risk of infection.
===PAGE:3000===
Chapter 280. Miscellaneous Infections in Infants and Children
Introduction
Infants and young children develop infections more frequently than do adults and older children.
Infections may be present at birth ( but are more typically contracted afterward. A child's
immune system is neither as mature nor as responsive as an adult's, perhaps because of
hyporesponsiveness to T-cell-independent antigens, lower immunoglobulin concentrations, a greater
proportion of naive T and B cells compared to memory lymphocytes, or other factors. Children also are
exposed to more pathogens from peers in day care centers or school.
Many infectious illnesses that affect infants and children also occur in adults and are discussed
elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Erythema Infectiosum
(Fifth Disease; Parvovirus B19 Infection)
Erythema infectiosum, acute infection with parvovirus B19, causes mild constitutional
symptoms and a blotchy or maculopapular rash beginning on the cheeks and spreading
primarily to exposed extremities. Diagnosis is clinical, and treatment is generally not needed.
The disease is caused by human parvovirus B19. It occurs mostly during the spring, commonly causing
localized outbreaks every few years among children (particularly children 5 to 7 yr). Spread seems to be
by respiratory droplets, with high rates of secondary infection among household contacts; infection can
occur without symptoms or signs.
Pathophysiology
Parvovirus B19 causes transient suppression of erythropoiesis that is mild and asymptomatic except in
children with underlying hemoglobinopathies (eg, sickle cell disease) or other RBC disorders (eg,
hereditary spherocytosis), who may develop transient aplastic crisis. Also, immunocompromised children
can develop protracted viremia (lasting weeks to months), leading to severe anemia (pure RBC aplasia).
Erythema infectiosum can be transmitted transplacentally, sometimes resulting in stillbirth or severe fetal
anemia with widespread edema (hydrops fetalis). However, about half of pregnant women are immune
because of previous infection. The risk of fetal death is 5 to 9% after maternal infection, with risk greatest
during the 2nd trimester.
Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is 4 to 14 days. Typical initial manifestations are nonspecific flu-like symptoms (eg,
low-grade fever, slight malaise). Several days later, an indurated, confluent erythema appears over the
cheeks ("slapped-cheek" appearance) and a symmetric rash appears that is most prominent on the arms,
legs, and trunk, usually sparing the palms and soles. The rash is maculopapular, tending toward
confluence; it forms reticular or lacy patterns of slightly raised, blotchy areas with central clearing, usually
most prominent on exposed areas. The rash, and the entire illness, generally lasts 5 to 10 days. However,
the rash may recur for several weeks, exacerbated by sunlight, exercise, heat, fever, or emotional stress.
Mild joint pain and swelling (nonerosive arthritis) that may persist or recur for weeks to months sometimes
occurs in adults.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
The appearance and pattern of spread of the rash are the only diagnostic features; however, some
enteroviruses may cause similar rashes. Rubella can be ruled out by serologic testing; an exposure
history is also helpful. Serologic testing is not required in otherwise healthy children; however, in children
===PAGE:3001===
with transient aplastic crisis or adults with arthropathy, the presence of IgM-specific antibody to parvovirus
B19 in the late acute or early convalescent phase strongly supports the diagnosis. Parvovirus B19
viremia also can be detected by quantitative PCR techniques, which are generally used for patients with
transient aplastic crisis, immunocompromised patients with pure RBC aplasia, and infants with hydrops
fetalis or congenital infection.
Treatment
Only symptomatic treatment is needed. IV immune globulin has been used to curtail viremia and increase
erythropoiesis in immunocompromised children with pure RBC aplasia.
Occult Bacteremia
Occult bacteremia is the presence of bacteria in the bloodstream of febrile young children who
have no apparent foci of infection and look well. Diagnosis is by blood culture and exclusion of
focal infection. Treatment is with antibiotics, either in the hospital or as outpatients; select
children are treated pending blood culture results.
About 3% (range 2 to 10%) of children aged 1 to 36 mo with a febrile illness (temperature ≥ 39° C) and no
localizing abnormalities have bacteremia, which is hence considered occult. Of these, about 5 to 10%
develop focal bacterial infections (eg, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, meningitis) or sepsis (see pp.
and
), which could be minimized by early identification and treatment of the bacteremia. The
likelihood of progression to serious focal illness depends on the cause: 7 to 25% for
Haemophilus
influenzae
type b (Hib) bacteremia but 4 to 6% for
Streptococcus pneumoniae
bacteremia. For further
discussion of fever in infants and children, see p.
.
Organisms:
In the 1980s, 80% of occult bacteremia cases were caused by
S. pneumoniae
. The
remainder was caused by Hib (10%),
Neisseria meningitidis
(5%), and others (predominantly
Staphylococcus aureus
and
Salmonella
sp). In the US, since the 1990s, routine Hib conjugate
vaccination in infancy essentially eliminated Hib bacteremia. More recent routine use of the
S.
pneumoniae
conjugate vaccine in infancy has reduced invasive pneumococcal disease in young children
by > 66%, and increased use is expected to essentially eliminate the problem. Some meningococcal
conjugate vaccines also have proved effective in this age group, so that in the future occult bacteremia
may be largely preventable.
Symptoms and Signs
The major symptom is fever (temperature ≥ 38° C). By definition, children with apparent focal disease (eg,
cough, dyspnea, and pulmonary crackles suggesting pneumonia; skin erythema suggesting cellulitis or
septic arthritis) are excluded. A toxic appearance (eg, limpness and listlessness, lethargy, signs of poor
perfusion, cyanosis, marked hypoventilation or hyperventilation) suggests sepsis or septic shock;
bacteremia in such children is not classified as occult. However, early sepsis can be difficult to distinguish
from occult bacteremia.
Diagnosis
• Blood culture
Diagnosis requires blood culture. Ideally, two samples are taken (from separate sites, which helps
minimize the problem of false positives due to skin contaminants), with results available within 24 h. CBC,
urinalysis, and examination of the stool for leukocytes (if diarrhea is present) are done in select patients
to identify specific infections and help stratify risk. Lumbar puncture for CSF analysis is done in toxicappearing infants < 3 mo; some experts do lumbar puncture in all febrile infants < 28 days regardless of
their appearance.
Recommendations regarding selection of febrile children for testing and choice of tests vary with age,
temperature, and clinical appearance (see
Figs. 280-1
and
===PAGE:3002===
280-2
); the goal is to minimize testing without missing bacteremia. These algorithms are sensitive but
relatively nonspecific. Thus, given the relatively low incidence of occult bacteremia in the population of
febrile children, the algorithms have high negative predictive value but low positive predictive value (see
p.
), making them much more effective in identifying children at low risk of infection who can be
treated expectantly (bacteremia ruled-out) rather than in identifying children with true bacteremia.
CBC usually shows an elevated WBC count; however, only about 10% of children with WBC counts of >
15,000/
μ
L are bacteremic, so specificity is low. Acute-phase reactants (eg, ESR, C-reactive protein) are
used by some
[Fig. 280-1.
Evaluation and management of the febrile infant aged < 3 mo.]
[Fig. 280-2.
Fever in children aged 3 to 36 mo.]
clinicians but add little information; however, in combination with elevated procalcitonin levels, acutephase reactants may be more specific for serious illness. In children < 3 mo, band counts > 1500/
μ
L and
either low (< 5000/
μ
L) or high (> 15,000/
μ
L) WBC counts may indicate bacteremia.
Treatment
• Antibiotics (for those with positive cultures and for select patients pending culture results)
Children who receive antibiotics before bacteremia is confirmed by blood culture seem less likely to
develop focal infections, although data are inconsistent. However, because of the low overall incidence of
bacteremia, many children would receive unnecessary treatment if all who were tested were empirically
treated. One common system for management before culture results (see
Figs. 280-1
and
280-2
)
minimizes antibiotic use in most febrile infants and children who do not have serious bacterial infection
and provides antibiotics promptly to the few who need them. Nevertheless, some authorities prefer to
hospitalize all febrile infants < 1 to 2 mo of age and give parenteral antibiotics (eg, ceftriaxone) pending
results of blood, urine, and CSF cultures.
All children are reexamined in 24 to 48 h. Those with persistent fever or positive blood or urine cultures
have more cultures done and are hospitalized for evaluation of possible sepsis and parenteral antibiotic
therapy. Children who are afebrile and well but have
S. pneumoniae
in their initial blood culture or an
initial positive urine culture receive appropriate oral antibiotics (see elsewhere in THE MANUAL).
Urinary Tract Infection
Urinary tract infection (UTI) is defined by ≥ 5 × 10
colonies/mL in a catheterized urine specimen
or, in older children, by repeated voided specimens with ≥ 10
colonies/mL. In younger children,
UTIs are frequently caused by anatomic abnormalities. UTI may cause fever, failure to thrive,
flank pain, and signs of sepsis, especially in young children. Treatment is with antibiotics.
Follow-up imaging studies of the urinary tract are done.
UTI may involve the kidneys, bladder, or both. Sexually transmitted infections of the urethra (eg,
gonococcal or chlamydial urethritis), although involving the urinary tract, are not typically termed UTI.
Mechanisms that maintain the normal sterility of the urinary tract include urine acidity and free flow, a
normal emptying mechanism, intact ureterovesical and urethral sphincters, and immunologic and mucosal
barriers. Abnormality of any of these mechanisms predisposes to UTI.
Etiology
By age 6 yr, 3 to 7% of girls and 1 to 2% of boys have had a UTI. The peak age of UTI is bimodal, with
one peak in infancy and the other peak between ages 2 to 4 yr (at the time of toilet training for many
children). The female:male ratio ranges from 1:1 to 1:4 in the first 2 mo of life (estimates vary, likely
because of different proportions of uncircumcised males in study groups and the exclusion of infants with
===PAGE:3003===
urologic anomalies now more commonly diagnosed in utero by prenatal ultrasonography). The
female:male ratio quickly rises with age, being about 2:1 between 2 mo to 1 yr, 4:1 during the 2nd yr, and
> 5:1 after 4 yr. In girls, infections usually are ascending and less often cause bacteremia. The marked
female preponderance beyond infancy is attributed both to the shorter female urethra and male
circumcision.
Predisposing factors
include malformations and obstructions of the urinary tract, prematurity, indwelling
catheters, and lack of circumcision. Other predisposing factors in younger children include constipation
and Hirschsprung's disease. Risk factors in older children include diabetes, trauma, and, in adolescent
females, sexual intercourse.
Urinary tract abnormalities:
UTIs in children are a marker of possible urinary tract abnormalities (eg,
obstruction, neurogenic bladder, ureteral duplication); these abnormalities are particularly likely to result
in infection if vesicoureteral reflux (VUR—see also p.
) is present. The likelihood of VUR varies
inversely with age at the first UTI. About 30 to 40% of infants and toddlers with UTI have VUR. Severity of
reflux may determine the probability of subsequent hypertension and renal failure (caused by repeated
infection and chronic pyelonephritis), but proof is lacking (. VUR is classified by grade (see
Table 280-1
).
Organisms:
Many organisms cause infection in anatomically abnormal urinary tracts.
In relatively normal urinary tracts, the most common pathogens are strains of
Escherichia coli
with
specific attachment factors for transitional epithelium of the bladder and ureters.
E. coli
causes > 75% of
UTIs in all pediatric age groups. The remaining causes are other
[Table 280-1.
Grades of Vesicoureteral Reflux*]
gram-negative enterobacteria, especially
Klebsiella, Proteus mirabilis
, and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
.
Enterococci (group D streptococci) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (eg,
Staphylococcus
saprophyticus
) are the most frequently implicated gram-positive organisms. Fungi and mycobacteria are
rare causes, mainly in immunocompromised hosts. Adenoviruses rarely cause UTIs, and when they do,
the disorder is predominantly hemorrhagic cystitis.
Symptoms and Signs
In neonates, symptoms and signs are non-specific and include poor feeding, diarrhea, failure to thrive,
vomiting, mild jaundice, lethargy, fever, and hypothermia. Neonatal sepsis ( may develop.
Infants and toddlers may also present with poorly localizing signs, such as fever, GI symptoms (eg,
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain), or foul-smelling urine.
In children > 2 yr, the more classic picture of cystitis or pyelonephritis can occur. Symptoms of cystitis
include dysuria, frequency, hematuria, urinary retention, suprapubic pain, urgency, pruritus, incontinence,
foul-smelling urine, and enuresis. Symptoms of pyelonephritis include high fever, chills, and
costovertebral pain and tenderness.
Physical findings suggesting associated urinary tract abnormalities include abdominal masses, enlarged
kidneys, abnormality of the urethral orifice, and signs of lower spinal malformations. Diminished force of
the urinary stream may be the only clue to obstruction or neurogenic bladder.
Diagnosis
• Urine analysis and culture
• Often urinary tract imaging
Urine tests:
Diagnosis requires culture showing significant bacteriuria in properly collected urine. Most
clinicians obtain urine by transurethral catheterization in infants and young children, reserving suprapubic
===PAGE:3004===
aspiration of the bladder for boys with moderate to severe phimosis. Both procedures require technical
expertise, but catheterization is less invasive, slightly safer, and has sensitivity of 95% and specificity of
99% compared with suprapubic aspiration. Bagged specimens are unreliable and should not be used for
diagnosis.
If urine is obtained by suprapubic aspiration, the presence of any bacteria is significant. In a catheterized
specimen, ≥ 5 × 10
colonies/mL commonly defines UTI. Clean-catch, midstream-voided specimens are
significant when colony counts of a single pathogen (ie, not the total count of mixed flora) are ≥ 10
colonies/mL. However, at times symptomatic children may have UTI despite lower colony counts on urine
cultures. Urine should be examined and cultured as soon as possible or stored at 4° C if a delay of > 10
min is expected. Occasionally, UTI may be present despite colony counts lower than the described
guidelines, possibly because of prior antibiotic therapy, very dilute urine (sp gr < 1.003), or obstruction to
the flow of grossly infected urine. Sterile cultures generally rule out UTI unless the child is receiving
antibiotics or the urine is contaminated with antibacterial skin-cleaning agents.
Microscopic examination
of urine is useful but not definitive. Pyuria (> 5 to 10 WBCs/high-power field
in spun urine sediment) is about 70% sensitive for UTI. A WBC count (using a hemocytometer) > 10/
μ
L in
unspun urine has greater sensitivity (90%) but is not used by many laboratories. Presence of bacteria on
Gram stain of spun or unspun urine is about 80% sensitive. Specificity of microscopy also is about 80%.
Dipstick tests
on urine to detect bacteria (nitrite test) or leukocytes (leukocyte esterase test) are typically
done; if either is positive, the diagnostic sensitivity for UTI is about 93%. The specificity of the nitrite test
is quite high; a positive result on a freshly voided specimen is highly predictive of UTI. Specificity of
leukocyte esterase is much lower.
Differentiating an upper UTI from a lower UTI can be difficult. High fever, costovertebral angle
tenderness, and gross pyuria with casts indicate pyelonephritis. However, many children without these
symptoms and signs have an upper UTI. Tests to distinguish upper infection from lower infection are not
indicated in most clinical settings, because treatment is not altered.
Blood tests:
A CBC and tests for inflammation (eg, ESR, C-reactive protein) may help diagnose infection
in children with borderline urine findings. Some authorities measure serum BUN and creatinine during a
first UTI. Blood cultures are appropriate for infants with UTIs and for children > 1 to 2 yr who appear toxic.
Urinary tract imaging:
Many major renal or urologic anomalies now are diagnosed in utero by routine
prenatal ultrasonography. However, the high incidence of anatomic anomalies still warrants imaging the
urinary tracts of all children 2 mo to 2 yr of age after a first UTI. If a first UTI occurs at ≥ 2 yr, most
authorities recommend imaging; however, some physicians postpone imaging until after a second UTI in
girls > 2 yr. Options include voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG), radionuclide cystogram (RNC) with
technetium-99m pertechnetate, and ultrasonography.
VCUG and RNC are better than ultrasonography for detecting VUR and anatomic abnormalities. RNC
delivers about 1% of the gonadal radiation of VCUG; it is sensitive in detecting VUR, and some
recommend it as the initial test. However, most authorities prefer the better anatomic definition of contrast
VCUG as the initial test, using RNC in follow up to determine when VUR has resolved. Low-dose x-ray
equipment has narrowed the gap in radiation between the contrast VCUG and RNC. These tests are
recommended at the earliest convenient time after clinical response, typically toward the end of therapy,
when bladder reactivity has resolved and urine sterility has been regained. If imaging is not scheduled
until after therapy is due to be completed, the child should continue antibiotics at prophylactic doses until
VUR is excluded.
Ultrasonography helps exclude obstruction and hydronephrosis and is typically done within a week of
diagnosing UTI in infants, especially if they do not respond quickly to antimicrobials. Otherwise,
ultrasonography can be delayed until VCUG is done.
Prognosis
===PAGE:3005===
Properly managed children rarely progress to renal failure unless they have uncorrectable urinary tract
abnormalities. However, repeated infection, particularly in the presence of VUR, is thought (but not
proved) to cause renal scarring, which may lead to hypertension and end-stage renal disease. In children
with high-grade VUR, long-term scarring is detected at a 4- to 6-fold greater rate than in children with lowgrade VUR and at an 8- to 10-fold greater rate than in children without VUR.
Treatment
• Antibiotics
• For severe VUR, sometimes antibiotic prophylaxis and surgical repair
Treatment aims to eliminate the acute infection, prevent urosepsis, and preserve renal parenchymal
function. Antibiotics are begun presumptively in all toxic-appearing children and in nontoxic children with
likely UTI (positive leukocyte esterase or nitrite test, or microscopy showing pyuria or bacteriuria). Others
can await culture results.
In infants 2 mo to 2 yr with toxicity, dehydration, or inability to retain oral intake, parenteral antibiotics are
used, typically a 3rd-generation cephalosporin (eg, ceftriaxone 75 mg/kg IV/IM q 24 h, cefotaxime 50
mg/kg IV q 6 h). A 1st-generation cephalosporin (eg, cefazolin) may be used if typical local pathogens are
known to be sensitive. Aminoglycosides (eg, gentamicin), although potentially nephrotoxic, are useful in
complex UTIs (eg, urinary tract abnormalities, presence of indwelling catheters, recurrent UTIs) to treat
potentially resistant gram-negative bacilli such as
Pseudomonas
. If blood cultures are negative and
clinical response is good, an appropriate oral antibiotic (eg, a cephalosporin,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole [TMP/SMX], amoxicillin, or, for selected children such as those > 1 yr with
complicated UTI caused by multidrug-resistant
E. coli, P. aeruginosa
, or other gram-negative bacteria, a
fluoroquinolone) selected on the basis of antimicrobial sensitivities can be used to complete a 10- to 14day course. A poor clinical response suggests a resistant organism or an obstructive lesion and warrants
urgent evaluation with ultrasonography and repeat urine culture.
In nontoxic, nondehydrated infants and children who are able to retain oral intake, oral antibiotics may be
given initially. The drug of choice is TMP/SMX 5 to 6 mg/kg (of TMP component) bid. Alternatives include
cephalosporins such as cefixime 4 mg/kg bid or cephalexin 25 mg/kg qid. Therapy is changed based on
the results of cultures and
antimicrobial sensitivities. Treatment is generally for > 10 days, although many
older children with uncomplicated UTI can be treated for 7 days. Urine culture is repeated 2 to 3 days
after therapy starts if efficacy is not clinically apparent.
Vesicoureteral reflux:
It is generally thought that antibiotic prophylaxis reduces UTI recurrences and
prevents kidney damage. However, few long-term data are available on the actual risks of renal scarring
and the effectiveness of antimicrobial prophylaxis or operative repair in preventing end-stage renal
disease. An ongoing clinical trial is attempting to address these questions, but until results are available,
most clinicians provide long-term antimicrobial prophylaxis to children with VUR, especially those with
grades II through V. For those with grade IV or grade V VUR, open repair or endoscopic injection of
polymeric bulking agents is usually recommended.
Drugs for prophylaxis include nitrofurantoin 2 mg/kg po once/day or TMP/SMX 3 mg/kg po (of TMP
component) once/day, usually given at bedtime.
===PAGE:3006===
Chapter 281. Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection in Infants and Children
Introduction
(See also
Chapter 154
.)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is caused by the retrovirus HIV-1 (and less
commonly by the related retrovirus HIV-2). Infection leads to progressive immunologic
deterioration and opportunistic infections and cancers. The end stage is acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Diagnosis is by viral antibodies in children > 18 mo and
viral PCR assay in children < 18 mo. Treatment is with combinations of antiretroviral drugs.
The general natural history and pathophysiology of pediatric HIV infection is similar to that in adults;
however, the method of infection, clinical presentations, and treatments often differ. HIV-infected children
also have unique social integration issues (see
Sidebar 281-1
).
Epidemiology
In the US, HIV probably occurred in children almost as early as in adults but was not clinically recognized
for several years. Thus far, > 9300 cases have been reported in children and adolescents, representing
only 1% of total cases.
More than 90% of US children acquired the infection from their mother, either before or around the time of
birth (vertical transmission). Most of the remainder (including children with hemophilia or other
coagulation disorders) received contaminated blood or blood products. A few cases are the result of
sexual abuse. Fewer than 5% of cases have no clear source. Vertical transmission now accounts for
almost all new cases in US preadolescents. Cases in adolescents represent survivors of vertically
transmitted infection and newly acquired infection (typically from sexual contact, particularly by young
men who have sex with men).
Worldwide, about 2 million children have HIV infection (6% of the total caseload worldwide), and about
370,000 more children are infected each year (14% of all new infections). In sub-Saharan Africa, where
the epidemic has been present longest, some prenatal clinics report that 25 to 40% of all women of
childbearing age are seropositive for HIV. HIV infection is rapidly increasing in India, China, Southeast
Asia, and some areas of Eastern Europe and Russia. About 270,000 children die of HIV infection
worldwide each year.
Transmission:
Infection risk for an infant born to an HIV-positive mother who did not receive antiretroviral
(ARV) therapy during pregnancy is estimated at 13 to 39%. Risk is greatest for infants born to mothers
who seroconvert during pregnancy and for those with advanced disease, low peripheral CD4+ T-cell
counts, prolonged rupture of membranes, and high plasma viral RNA concentrations. In vaginal deliveries,
a 1st-born twin is at greater risk than a 2nd-born twin, although this relationship may not hold true in
developing countries.
Sidebar 281-1 Integration of HIV-Infected Children
Infection in a child affects the entire family. Serologic testing of siblings and parents is recommended. The
physician must provide education and ongoing counseling.
The infected child should be taught good hygiene and behavior to reduce risk to others. How much and
when the child is told about the illness depends on age and maturity. Older children and adolescents
should be made aware of their diagnosis and the possibility of sexual transmission and should be
counseled appropriately. Families may be unwilling to share the diagnosis with people outside the
immediate family because it can create social isolation. Feelings of guilt are common. Family members,
including children, can become clinically depressed and require counseling.
Because HIV infection is not acquired through the typical types of contact that occur among children (eg,
===PAGE:3007===
through saliva or tears), most HIV-infected children should be allowed to attend school without
restrictions. Similarly, there are no inherent reasons to restrict foster care, adoptive placement, or child
care of HIV-infected children. Conditions that may pose an increased risk to others (eg, aggressive biting
or the presence of exudative, weeping skin lesions that cannot be covered) may require special
precautions.
The number of school personnel aware of the child's condition should be kept to the minimum needed to
ensure proper care. The family has the right to inform the school, but people involved in the care and
education of an infected child must respect the child's right to privacy. Disclosures of information should
be made only with the informed consent of the parents or legal guardians and age-appropriate assent of
the child.
Cesarean delivery before onset of active labor reduces the risk of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT).
However, it is clear that MTCT is reduced most significantly by giving ARV therapy (including zidovudine
[ZDV, AZT]) to the mother and neonate (. ZDV monotherapy reduces MTCT from 25% to
about 8%, and current highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) reduces it to < 2%.
HIV has been detected in both the cellular and cell-free fractions of human breast milk. The incidence of
transmission by breastfeeding is about 6/100 breastfed children/yr. Estimates of the overall risk of
transmission through breastfeeding are 12 to 14%, reflecting varying durations of breastfeeding.
Transmission by breastfeeding is greatest in mothers with high plasma viral concentrations (eg, women
who become infected during pregnancy or during the period of breastfeeding).
The total number of HIV-infected US adolescents continues to increase despite the marked success in
decreasing perinatal HIV infection through comprehensive diagnosis and treatment of infected pregnant
women. This paradoxical increase is a result of both greater survival among perinatally infected children
and the additional acquisition of new cases of HIV infection by sexual transmission among other
adolescents.
Classification:
HIV infection causes a broad spectrum of disease, of which AIDS is the most severe.
Classification schemes established by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) define the
progression of clinical and immunologic decline.
Clinical categories
in children < 13 yr (see
Table 281-1
) are defined by presence or absence of certain common opportunistic infections or cancers.
These categories are
N
=
Not symptomatic
A
=
Mildly symptomatic
B
=
Moderately symptomatic
C
=
Severely symptomatic
Immunologic categories
in children < 13 yr (see
Table 281-2
) reflect the degree of immune suppression based on the CD4+ T-cell count (absolute count
and as percentage of total lymphocyte count):
=
No evidence of immune suppression
=
Moderate suppression
=
Severe suppression
Thus, a child classified in stage B3 would have moderately advanced clinical symptoms and severe
immunocompromise. Clinical and immunologic categories form a unidirectional hierarchy; once classified
at a certain level, children cannot be reclassified at a less severe level, regardless of clinical or
immunologic improvement.
[Table 281-1.
Clinical Categories for Children Aged < 13 yr with HIV Infection]
===PAGE:3008===
These clinical and immunologic categories are becoming less clinically relevant in the era of HAART,
which (when taken as prescribed) almost invariably leads to a decrease in symptoms and an increase in
CD4+ T-cell counts. The categories are most useful for clinical research and for describing the severity of
illness at the time of diagnosis.
Symptoms and Signs
Natural history in untreated children:
Infants infected perinatally usually are asymptomatic during the
first few months of life. Although the median age at symptom onset is about 3 yr, some children remain
asymptomatic for > 5 yr and, with appropriate ARV therapy, are expected to survive to adulthood. In the
pre-ARV therapy era, about 10 to 15% of children had rapid disease progression, with symptoms
occurring in the first year of life and death occurring by 18 to 36 mo; these children were thought to have
acquired HIV infection earlier in utero. However, most children probably acquire infection at or near birth
and have slower disease progression (surviving beyond 5 yr even before ARV therapy was used
routinely).
The most common manifestations of HIV infection in children include generalized lymphadenopathy,
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, failure to thrive, oral candidiasis, CNS disease (including developmental
delay, which can be progressive), lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis, recurrent bacteremia, opportunistic
infections, recurrent diarrhea, parotitis, cardiomyopathy, hepatitis, nephropathy, and cancers.
Complications:

Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia is the most common, serious, opportunistic infection
among HIV-infected children and has high mortality.
Pneumocystis
pneumonia can occur as early as age
4 to 6 wk but occurs mostly in infants aged 3 to 6 mo who acquired infection before or at birth. Infants and
children with
Pneumocystis
pneumonia characteristically develop a subacute, diffuse pneumonitis with
dyspnea at rest, tachypnea, O
desaturation, nonproductive cough, and fever (in contrast to non-HIVinfected immunocompromised children and adults, in whom onset is often more acute and fulminant).
Other common opportunistic infections include
Candida
esophagitis, disseminated cytomegalovirus
infection, and chronic or disseminated herpes simplex and varicella-zoster
[Table 281-2.
Immunologic Categories for Children < 13 yr with HIV Infection Based on Age-Specific
CD4+ T-Cell Counts and Percentages of Total Lymphocyte Counts]
virus infections, and, less commonly,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and
M. avium
complex infections,
chronic enteritis caused by
Cryptosporidium
or other organisms, and disseminated or CNS cryptococcal
or
Toxoplasma gondii
infection.
Cancers in immunocompromised children with HIV infection are relatively uncommon, but
leiomyosarcomas and certain lymphomas, including CNS lymphomas and non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphomas
(Burkitt's type), occur much more often than in immunocompetent children. Kaposi's sarcoma is very rare
in HIV-infected children.
Children receiving combination antiretroviral therapy:
Combination ARV therapy has significantly
changed the clinical manifestations of pediatric HIV infection. Although bacterial pneumonia and other
bacterial infections (eg, bacteremia, recurrent otitis media) still occur more often in HIV-infected children,
opportunistic infections and growth failure are much less frequent than in the pretreatment era. New
problems, such as alterations in serum lipids, hyperglycemia, fat maldistribution (lipodystrophy and
lipoatrophy), nephropathy, and osteonecrosis, are reported, although with lower incidence than in HIVinfected adults. Although combination therapy clearly improves neurodevelopmental outcome, there
seems to be an increased rate of behavioral, developmental, and cognitive problems in treated HIVinfected children. It is unclear whether these problems are caused by HIV infection itself, therapeutic
drugs, or other bio-psychosocial factors among HIV-infected children.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3009===
• Serum antibody tests
• Virologic assay (HIV DNA PCR or HIV RNA assays)
HIV-specific tests:
In children > 18 mo, diagnosis is made using serum antibody tests (enzyme
immunoassay [EIA] and confirmatory Western blot) as in adults. Only very rarely does an older HIVinfected child lack HIV antibody because of significant hypogammaglobulinemia.
Children < 18 mo retain maternal antibody, causing false-positive results on EIA, so diagnosis is made by
HIV virologic assays such as DNA PCR, which can diagnose about 30% of cases at birth and nearly
100% by 4 to 6 mo of age. HIV viral culture has acceptable sensitivity and specificity but is technically
more demanding and hazardous and has been replaced by DNA PCR in most laboratories.
HIV RNA assays (the viral load assays used for monitoring efficacy of treatment) are becoming more
widely used for diagnostic testing of infants. RNA assays are probably as sensitive as DNA PCR in
infants not given ARV therapy, are less expensive, and are more widely available than is DNA PCR.
However, care must be taken when using RNA assays for infant diagnosis because test specificity is
uncertain at very low RNA concentrations (< 10,000 copies/mL) and sensitivity is unknown in infants of
mothers with complete treatment-mediated viral suppression at the time of delivery. The modified p24
antigen assay is less sensitive than either HIV DNA PCR or RNA assays and should be used only if the
latter are unavailable.
An initial virologic test should be done within the first 2 wk of life, at about 1 mo of age, and between 4 mo
and 6 mo. A positive test should be confirmed immediately by using the same or another virologic test. If
the serial HIV virologic tests are all negative, the infant is considered uninfected with > 95% accuracy (in
the absence of any AIDS-defining illness). Follow-up antibody tests (1 EIA at > 18 mo or, alternatively, 2
EIAs done between 6 mo and 18 mo) are done to exclude HIV infection and confirm seroreversion (loss of
passively acquired HIV antibodies). If an infant < 18 mo with a positive antibody test but negative virologic
tests develops an AIDS-defining illness (category C—see
Table 281-1
), HIV infection is diagnosed.
Rapid tests
for HIV antibody are derivatives of EIAs that provide results within minutes to hours. They
can be done as point-of-care tests on oral secretions, whole blood, or serum. In the US, these tests are
perhaps most useful in labor and delivery suites to test women of unknown HIV serostatus, thus allowing
counseling, commencement of ARV therapy to prevent MTCT, and testing of the infant to be arranged
during the birth visit. Similar advantages accrue in other episodic care settings (eg, emergency
departments, adolescent medicine clinics, sexually transmitted disease clinics) and in the developing
world. In the US, rapid assays require confirmatory tests, such as Western blot testing. These
confirmatory tests are especially important because in areas where the expected HIV prevalence is low,
even a specific rapid assay yields mostly false positives (low positive predictive value by Bayes' theorem
—. However, if the expected probability of HIV (or seroprevalence) is high, the positive
predictive value increases.
Before HIV testing of a child is done, the mother or primary caregiver (and the child, if old enough) should
be counseled about the possible psychosocial risks and benefits of testing. Written or oral consent should
be obtained and recorded in the patient's chart, consistent with state, local, and hospital laws and
regulations. Counseling and consent requirements should not deter testing if it is medically indicated;
refusal of a patient or guardian to give consent does not relieve physicians of their professional and legal
responsibilities, and sometimes authorization for testing must be obtained by other means (eg, court
order). Test results should be discussed in person with the family, the primary caregiver, and, if old
enough, the child. If the child is HIV-positive, appropriate counseling and subsequent follow-up care must
be provided. In all cases, maintaining confidentiality is essential.
Children and adolescents meeting the criteria for AIDS must be reported to the appropriate public health
department. In many states, HIV infection (before the development of AIDS) also must be reported.
Other tests:
Once infection is diagnosed, other tests are done:
• CD4+ T-cell count
===PAGE:3010===
• CD8+ T-cell count
• Plasma viral RNA concentration
Infected children require measurement of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell counts and plasma viral RNA
concentration (viral load) to help determine their degree of illness, prognosis, and the effects of therapy.
CD4+ counts may be normal (eg, above the age-specific cutoffs of category 1 in
Table 281-2
) initially but
fall eventually. CD8+ counts usually increase initially and do not fall until late in the infection. These
changes in cell populations result in a decrease in the CD4+:CD8+ cell ratio, a characteristic of HIV
infection (although sometimes occurring in other infections). Plasma viral RNA concentrations in untreated
children < 12 mo are typically very high (mean of about 200,000 RNA copies/mL). By 24 mo, viral
concentrations in untreated children decrease (to a mean of about 40,000 RNA copies/mL). Although the
wide range of HIV RNA concentrations in children make the data less predictive of morbidity and mortality
than in adults, determining plasma viral concentrations in conjunction with CD4+ counts still yields more
accurate prognostic information than does determining either marker alone. Less expensive alternative
surrogate markers such as total lymphocyte counts and serum albumin levels may also predict AIDS
mortality in children, which may be useful in developing nations.
Although not routinely measured, serum immunoglobulin concentrations, particularly IgG and IgA, often
are markedly elevated, but occasionally some children develop panhypogammaglobulinemia. Patients
may be anergic to skin test antigens.
Prognosis
In the pretherapy era, 10 to 15% of children from industrialized countries and perhaps 50 to 80% of
children from developing countries died before age 4 yr; however, with appropriate HAART regimens,
most perinatally infected children survive well beyond 5 yr. Many children are surviving into young
adulthood;
increasing numbers have given birth to or fathered their own children.
Nevertheless, opportunistic infections, particularly
Pneumocystis
pneumonia, progressive neurologic
disease, and severe wasting, are associated with a poor prognosis. Mortality due to
Pneumocystis
pneumonia ranges from 5 to 40% if treated and is almost 100% if untreated. Prognosis is also poor for
children in whom virus is detected early (ie, by 7 days of life) or who develop symptoms in the first year of
life.
Treatment
• ARV drugs: 2 nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase inhibitors plus either a protease inhibitor or a
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
• Supportive care
Because of the success of ARV therapy, much of the current focus is on the management of HIV infection
as a chronic disease, addressing both medical and social issues. Important long-term medical issues
include the need to manage HIV-related and drug-related metabolic complications and to account for agerelated changes in drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Social issues include the need to
cope with peer pressure from non-infected adolescents, ensure school success and appropriate career
choice, and educate children about transmission risk. Adolescents often have difficulty seeking and
following health care advice and need particular help with treatment adherence. Children and adolescents
should be managed in collaboration with specialists who have experience in the management of pediatric
HIV infection.
ARV drugs:
There are > 2 dozen ARV drugs (see
Table 281-3
), including multidrug combination products, available in the US, each of which may have
adverse effects and drug interactions with other ARV drugs or commonly used antibiotics,
anticonvulsants, and sedatives. New ARV drugs, immunomodulators, and vaccines are under evaluation.
===PAGE:3011===
Standard treatment is with combination ARV therapy to maximize viral suppression and minimize selection
of drug-resistant strains. Most commonly, ARV therapy consists of a backbone of 2 nucleoside analog
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (ZDV plus lamivudine or emtricitabine, abacavir plus lamivudine or
emtricitabine, didanosine plus lamivudine or emtricitabine, or, for postpubertal adolescents, tenofovir plus
emtricitabine) given in combination with either a ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitor (lopinavir/ritonavir,
ritonavir-boosted atazanavir, ritonavir-boosted fosamprenavir, or ritonavir-boosted darunavir) or a
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (efavirenz or, in some situations, nevirapine). Other
combinations sometimes are used, but fewer data are available to support their use as first-line regimens.
Monotherapy or dual nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor therapy alone (except for ZDV
chemoprophylaxis in HIV-exposed infants) is strongly discouraged. Because expert opinions on
therapeutic strategies change rapidly, consultation with specialists is strongly advised.
Indications:
Initiation of ARV therapy depends on virologic, immunologic, and clinical criteria; authorities
differ on these criteria. The goal is to suppress HIV replication (as measured by plasma HIV RNA PCR
viral load) and maintain or achieve age-normal CD4
+
counts and percentages with the least amount of
drug toxicity.
For children
≥
12 mo
, ARV therapy is recommended for all children with significant clinical or
immunologic disease (clinical category B or C [Table 281-1] or CD4+ percentage < 25% for children < 5
yr or CD4+ cell count < 350/
μ
L for children ≥ 5 yr), regardless of the plasma HIV RNA viral load. Therapy
is considered for other children who have plasma HIV RNA concentrations ≥ 100,000 copies/mL. Children
who do not meet these criteria may be monitored closely without ARV therapy, but their clinical and
laboratory data should be reevaluated every 3 to 4 mo.
For children
<
12 mo
, ARV therapy should be given to all regardless of clinical symptoms, CD4+ T-cell
percentages or counts, or plasma HIV RNA viral load; clinical trials have shown that early therapy of
infected infants decreases mortality.
Adherence:
Therapy will be successful only if the family and child are able to adhere to a possibly
complex medical regimen. Nonadherence not only leads to failure to control HIV but also selects drugresistant HIV strains, which reduces future therapeutic choices. Barriers to adherence should be
addressed before starting treatment. Barriers include availability and palatability of pills or suspensions,
adverse effects (including those due to drug interactions with current therapy), pharmacokinetic factors
such as need to take some drugs with food or in the fasted state, a child's dependence on others to give
drugs (and HIV-infected parents may have problems with remembering to take their own drugs), and
adolescents' denial or fear of their infection, distrust of the medical establishment, and lack of family
support.
[Table 281-3.
Dosage and Administration of Antiretroviral Drugs for Children
a]
Monitoring:
Clinical and laboratory monitoring are important for identifying drug toxicity and therapeutic
failure.
• Every 3 to 4 mo: Physical examination, CBC, serum chemistry values, including liver and kidney function
tests, amylase and lipase (if taking drugs with pancreatic toxicity, eg, didanosine), HIV RNA viral load,
and lymphocyte subsets
• Every 6 to 12 mo: Lipid profiles, and amylase and lipase (if not taking drugs with pancreatic toxicity)
Vaccination:
Routine pediatric vaccination protocols ( are recommended for children with HIV infection, with several exceptions. The main exception is
that live-virus vaccines and live-bacteria vaccines (eg, BCG) should be avoided or used only in certain
circumstances (see
Table 281-4
). In addition, 1 to 2 mo after the last dose of the hepatitis B vaccine series, HIV-infected
children should be tested to determine whether the level of antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen (antiHBs) is protective (≥ 10 mIU/mL), and children aged ≥ 2 yr should be given pneumococcal polysaccharide
vaccine (PPSV) ≥ 2 mo after their last pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) dose, and a single
===PAGE:3012===
revaccination should be given after 5 yr. Certain postexposure treatment recommendations also differ.
Live oral poliovirus vaccine and live-attenuated influenza vaccine are not recommended.
The live measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) and varicella vaccines should not be given to children with AIDS
or other manifestations of severe immunosuppression. However, the MMR and varicella vaccines
(separately; not combined as MMRV vaccine, which has a higher titer of attenuated varicella virus, the
safety of which has not been shown in this population)
can
be given to asymptomatic patients following
the routine schedule and to symptomatic patients who are not severely immunocompromised (ie, not in
category 3 [see
Table 281-1], including having a CD4+ T-cell percentage of ≥ 15%); if possible, these
vaccines should be given starting at age 12 mo in symptomatic patients to enhance the likelihood of an
immune response, ie, before the immune system deteriorates. The 2nd dose of each may be given as
soon as 4 wk later in an attempt to induce seroconversion as early as possible, although generally a 3-mo
interval between varicella vaccine doses is preferred in noninfected children < 13 yr. If the risk of
exposure to measles is increased, as during an outbreak, the measles vaccine should be given at an
earlier age, such as 6 to 9 mo.
The live oral rotavirus vaccine may be given to HIV-exposed or HIV-infected infants according to the
routine schedule. Safety and efficacy data are limited in symptomatic infants but experts feel that there is
overall benefit to immunization, particularly in areas where rotavirus causes significant mortality.
The BCG vaccine is not recommended in the US, an area of low TB prevalence. However, elsewhere in
the world, especially in developing countries where TB prevalence is high, the WHO recommends that
BCG be given to all infants shortly after birth, unless they have symptoms of HIV infection or already have
been confirmed to have HIV infection (eg, positive virologic assay). Some cases of disseminated BCG
infection in severely immunocompromised AIDS patients have been reported.
Because children with symptomatic HIV infection generally have poor immunologic responses to vaccines,
they should be considered susceptible when they are exposed to a vaccine-preventable disease (eg,
measles, tetanus, varicella) regardless of their vaccination history. Such children should receive passive
immunization with immune globulin. Immune globulin also should be given to any nonimmunized
household member who is exposed to measles.
Seronegative children living with a person with symptomatic HIV infection
should receive
inactivated poliovirus vaccine rather than oral polio vaccine. Influenza (inactivated or live), MMR,
varicella, and rotavirus vaccines may be given normally because these vaccine viruses are not commonly
transmitted by the vaccinee. Adult household contacts should receive annual influenza vaccination
(inactivated or live) to reduce the risk of transmitting influenza to the HIV-infected person.
Prevention
For postexposure prevention, see p.
.
Prevention of perinatal transmission:
Appropriate prenatal ARV therapy attempts to optimize maternal
health, interrupt MTCT, and minimize in utero drug toxicity. In the US and other countries where ARV
drugs and HIV testing are readily available, treatment with ARV drugs is standard for all HIV-infected
pregnant women (. Rapid HIV testing of pregnant women who present in labor without
documentation of their HIV serostatus may allow immediate institution of such measures.
HIV-infected pregnant women who have not received ARV drugs previously and who do not meet adult
criteria ( for HAART are nevertheless recommended to initiate HAART, preferably including
ZDV 300 mg po bid, beginning at 14 to 34 wk gestation. Pregnancy is not a contraindication to HAART
regimens, although the use of efavirenz is generally contraindicated during the 1st trimester. This regimen
is continued throughout the pregnancy. ZDV is given during labor 2 mg/kg IV for the first hour and then 1
mg/kg/h IV until delivery. ZDV 2 mg/kg po qid is given to the neonate for the first 6 wk of life. In the
immediate postpartum period, a decision can be made whether to continue maternal therapy.
Most experts believe that HIV-infected women already receiving combination ARV therapy who become
===PAGE:3013===
pregnant should continue that therapy, even during the 1st trimester. An alternative is to stop all therapy
until the beginning of the 2nd trimester and resume at that time.
[Table 281-4.
Considerations for Use of Live Vaccines in Children with HIV Infection]
For HIV-infected pregnant women who present in labor and have had no prior therapy, clinicians have
used ARV combinations, cesarean delivery, or both; the woman and her infant are given ZDV as
described previously (ie, the woman receives drugs IV during labor and delivery; the infant receives drugs
by mouth). Some authorities give additional antiretrovirals in this situation; an expert in pediatric or
maternal HIV infection should be immediately consulted (see information at www.aidsinfo.nih.gov
or
www.nccc.ucsf.edu
).
Although the final decision to accept ARV therapy remains with the pregnant woman, it should be stressed
that the proven benefits of therapy far outweigh the theoretical risks of fetal toxicity.
Breastfeeding
(or donating to milk banks) is contraindicated for HIV-infected women in the US and other
countries where safe and affordable alternative sources of feeding are readily available. However, in
countries where infectious diseases and undernutrition are major causes of early childhood mortality and
safe, affordable infant formula is not available, the protection breastfeeding offers against the mortality
risks of respiratory and GI infections may counterbalance the risk of HIV transmission. In these
developing countries, the WHO recommends that mothers continue to breastfeed.
Prevention of adolescent transmission:
Because adolescents are at special risk of HIV infection, they
should receive education, have access to HIV testing, and know their serostatus. Education should
include information about transmission, implications of infection, and strategies for prevention, including
abstaining from high-risk behaviors and engaging in safe sex practices (eg, correct and consistent use of
condoms [see p.]) for those who are sexually active. Efforts should especially target adolescents at
high risk of HIV infection, although all adolescents should receive risk-reduction education.
In most US states, informed consent is necessary for testing and the release of information regarding HIV
serostatus. Decisions regarding disclosure of HIV status to a sex partner without the patient's consent
should be based on the possibility of domestic violence to the patient after disclosure to the partner,
likelihood that the partner is at risk, whether the partner has reasonable cause to suspect the risk and to
take precautions, and presence of a legal requirement to withhold or disclose such information.
Prevention of opportunistic infections:
Prophylactic drug treatment is recommended in certain HIVinfected children for prevention of
Pneumocystis
pneumonia and
M. avium
complex infections. Data are
limited on the use of prophylaxis for opportunistic infection by other organisms, such as cytomegalovirus,
fungi, and toxoplasma. Guidance on prophylaxis of these and other opportunistic infections is also
available at www.aidsinfo.nih.gov
.
Prophylaxis against
Pneumocystis
pneumonia
is indicated for
• HIV-infected children > 6 yr of age with CD4+ count < 200 cells/
μ
L or CD4+ percentage < 15%
• HIV-infected children 1 to 5 yr of age with CD4+ count < 500 cells/
μ
L or CD4+ percentage < 15%
• HIV-infected infants < 12 mo of age regardless of CD4+ count or percentage (at 1 yr of age, need for
prophylaxis is reassessed using CD4+ counts and percentages)
• Infants born to HIV-infected women (beginning at 4 to 6 wk of age), until HIV infection is either
presumptively excluded (by documentation of 2 negative virologic test results, 1 at ≥ 2 wk of age and 1
at ≥ 4 wk of age) or definitively excluded (by documentation of 2 negative virologic test results, 1 at ≥ 1
mo of age and 1 at ≥ 4 mo of age). For these definitions of HIV exclusion to be valid, the infant must not
be breastfeeding.
Once immune reconstitution with HAART occurs, discontinuation of
Pneumocystis
pneumonia prophylaxis
may be considered for HIV-infected children who have received HAART for > 6 mo and whose CD4+
===PAGE:3014===
percentage and CD4+ count have remained higher than the previously described treatment thresholds for
> 3 consecutive mo. Subsequently, the CD4+ percentage and count should be reevaluated at least every
3 mo, and prophylaxis should be reinstituted if the original criteria are reached.
The drug of choice for
Pneumocystis
prophylaxis at any age is trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
(TMP/SMX) TMP 75 mg/SMX 375 mg/m
po bid on 3 consecutive days/wk (eg, Monday-TuesdayWednesday); alternative schedules include the same dose bid every day, the same dose bid on alternate
days, or twice the dose (TMP 150 mg/SMX 750 mg/m
) po once/day for 3 consecutive days/wk.
For patients ≥ 5 yr who cannot tolerate TMP/SMX, dapsone 2 mg/kg (not to exceed 100 mg) po once/day
is an alternative, especially for those < 5 yr of age. Oral atovaquone given daily or aerosolized
pentamidine (300 mg via specially designed inhaler) given once/mo is an additional alternative. IV
pentamidine has also been used but is less effective and potentially more toxic.
Prophylaxis against
Mycobacterium avium
complex
infection is indicated in
• Children ≥ 6 yr with CD4+ count < 50/
μ
L
• Children 2 to 6 yr with CD4+ count < 75/
μ
L
• Children 1 to 2 yr with CD4+ count < 500/
μ
L
• Children < 1 yr with CD4+ count < 750/
μ
L
Weekly azithromycin or daily clarithromycin is the drug of choice, and daily rifabutin is an alternative.
===PAGE:3015===
Chapter 282. Rheumatic Fever
Introduction
Rheumatic fever is a nonsuppurative, acute inflammatory complication of group A streptococcal
infection, causing combinations of arthritis, carditis, subcutaneous nodules, erythema
marginatum, and chorea. Diagnosis is based on applying the Jones criteria to information
gleaned from history, examination, and laboratory testing. Treatment includes aspirin or other
NSAIDs, corticosteroids during severe carditis, and antimicrobials to eradicate residual
streptococcal infection and prevent reinfection.
A first episode of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) can occur at any age but occurs most often between 5 yr
and 15 yr and is uncommon before 3 yr and after 21 yr. Therefore, testing for group A streptococcal
(GAS) infection for primary prevention of rheumatic fever is usually not necessary in patients < 3 yr with
pharyngitis.
Worldwide, incidence is 19/100,000 (range, 5 to 51/100,000), with lowest rates (< 10/100,000) in North
America and Western Europe and highest rates (> 10/100,000) in Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Asia,
Australia, and New Zealand. The attack rate (percentage of patients with untreated GAS pharyngitis who
develop ARF) varies from 0.4 to 3.0%. Higher attack rates occur with certain streptococcal M protein
serotypes and a stronger host immune response. In patients with a prior episode of ARF, the attack rate in
untreated GAS pharyngitis approaches 50%, underscoring the importance of long-term antistreptococcal
prophylaxis. Incidence has declined in most developed countries but remains high in less developed parts
of the world. However, recurrent local outbreaks of ARF suggest that more rheumatogenic strains of
streptococci are still present in the US. The prevalence of chronic rheumatic heart disease is uncertain
because criteria are not standardized and autopsy is not done routinely.
Pathophysiology
GAS infection is the etiologic precursor of ARF, but host and environmental factors are important. GAS M
proteins share epitopes (antigenic-determinant sites that are recognized by antibodies) with proteins
found in synovium, heart muscle, and heart valve, suggesting that molecular mimicry contributes to the
arthritis, carditis, and valvular damage. Genetic host risk factors include the D8/17 B-cell antigen and
certain class II histocompatibility antigens. Undernutrition, overcrowding, and lower socioeconomic status
predispose to streptococcal infections and subsequent episodes of rheumatic fever.
The joints, heart, skin, and CNS are most often affected. Pathology varies by site.
Joints:
Joint involvement manifests as non-specific inflammation in a synovial biopsy specimen,
sometimes with small foci resembling Aschoff bodies (granulomatous collections of leukocytes, myocytes,
and interstitial collagen).
Heart:
Cardiac involvement manifests as carditis, typically affecting the heart from the inside out, ie,
valves and endocardium, then myocardium, and finally pericardium. It is sometimes followed years later
by chronic rheumatic heart disease, primarily manifested by valvular stenosis, but also sometimes by
regurgitation, arrhythmias, and ventricular dysfunction. Aschoff bodies often develop in the myocardium
and other parts of the heart. Fibrinous nonspecific pericarditis, sometimes with effusion, occurs only in
patients with endocardial inflammation and usually subsides without permanent damage. Characteristic
and potentially dangerous valve changes may occur. Acute interstitial valvulitis may cause valvular
edema. Left untreated, valve thickening, fusion, and retraction or other destruction of leaflets and cusps
may result, leading to stenosis or insufficiency. Similarly, chordae tendineae can shorten, thicken, or fuse,
adding to regurgitation of damaged valves or causing regurgitation of an otherwise unaffected valve.
Dilation of valve rings may also cause regurgitation. The mitral, aortic, tricuspid, and pulmonic valves are
affected, in order of decreasing frequency. Regurgitation and stenosis are the usual effects on the mitral
and tricuspid valves; the aortic valve generally becomes regurgitant initially and stenotic much later.
Skin:
Subcutaneous nodules appear indistinguishable from those of RA, but biopsy shows features
resembling Aschoff bodies. Erythema marginatum differs histologically from other skin lesions with similar
===PAGE:3016===
macroscopic appearance, eg, the rash of systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), Henoch-Schonlein
purpura, erythema chronicum migrans, and erythema multiforme. Perivascular neutrophilic and
mononuclear infiltrates of the dermis occur.
CNS:
Sydenham's chorea, the form of chorea that occurs with ARF, manifests in the CNS as
hyperperfusion and increased metabolism in the basal ganglia. Increased levels of antineuronal
antibodies have also been shown.
Symptoms and Signs
An initial episode of symptoms occurs typically about 2 to 4 wk after the streptococcal infection.
Manifestations typically involve some combination of the joints, heart, skin, and CNS.
Joints: Migratory polyarthritis
is the most common manifestation, occurring in about 70% of children; it
is often accompanied by fever. Occasionally monarthritis occurs. Joints become extremely painful and
tender and may be red, hot, and swollen. Ankles, knees, elbows, and wrists are usually involved.
Shoulders, hips, and small joints of the hands and feet also may be involved, but almost never alone. If
vertebral joints are affected, another disorder should be suspected.
Arthralgia-like symptoms may be due to nonspecific myalgia or tenodynia in the periarticular zone;
tenosynovitis may develop at the site of muscle insertions. Joint pain and fever usually subside within 2
wk and seldom last > 1 mo.
Heart:
Carditis can occur alone or in combination with pericardial rub, murmurs, cardiac enlargement, or
heart failure. In the first episode of ARF, carditis occurs in about 50%. Patients may have high fever, chest
pain, or both. In about 50% of cases, cardiac damage (ie, valve dysfunction) occurs much later.
Murmurs
are common and, although usually evident early, may not be heard at initial examination; in
such cases, repeated examinations are recommended to determine the presence of carditis. The soft
diastolic blow of aortic regurgitation and the presystolic murmur of mitral stenosis may be difficult to
detect. Murmurs often persist indefinitely. If no worsening occurs during the next 2 to 3 wk, new
manifestations of carditis seldom follow. ARF typically does not cause chronic, smoldering carditis. Scars
left by acute valvular damage may contract and change, and secondary hemodynamic difficulties may
develop in the myocardium without persistence of acute inflammation.
Heart failure
caused by the combination of carditis and valvular dysfunction may cause dyspnea without
rales, nausea and vomiting, a right upper quadrant or epigastric ache, and a hacking, nonproductive
cough. Marked lethargy and fatigue may be early manifestations of heart failure.
Skin:
Cutaneous and subcutaneous features are uncommon and almost never occur alone, usually
developing in a patient who already has carditis, arthritis, or chorea.
Subcutaneous nodules
, which occur most frequently on the extensor surfaces of large joints, usually
coexist with arthritis and carditis. About 2% of children with ARF have nodules. Ordinarily, the nodules are
painless and transitory and respond to treatment of joint or heart inflammation.
Erythema marginatum
is a serpiginous, flat or slightly raised, nonscarring, and painless rash. About 2%
of children have this rash. It sometimes lasts < 1 day. Its appearance is often delayed after the inciting
streptococcal infection; it may appear with or after the other manifestations of rheumatic inflammation.
CNS: Sydenham's chorea
occurs in about 10% of children. It may develop along with other
manifestations but frequently arises after the other manifestations have subsided (often months after the
acute streptococcal infection). Onset of chorea is typically insidious and may be preceded by
inappropriate laughing or crying. Chorea consists of rapid and irregular jerking movements that may begin
in the hands but often becomes generalized, involving the feet and face. Characteristic findings include
fluctuating grip strength (milkmaid's grip), tongue darting (the tongue cannot protrude without darting in
and out), facial grimacing, and explosive speech with or without tongue clucking. Associated motor
symptoms include loss of fine motor control, and weakness and hypotonia (that can be severe enough to
===PAGE:3017===
be mistaken for paralysis).
Obsessive-compulsive behavior develops in many patients.
Other:
Fever and other systemic manifestations such as anorexia and malaise can be prominent but are
not specific. ARF can occasionally manifest as FUO until a more identifiable sign develops. Abdominal
pain and anorexia can occur because of the hepatic involvement in heart failure or because of
concomitant mesenteric adenitis. Because of the fever, elevated WBC count, and abdominal guarding,
the situation may resemble acute appendicitis, particularly when other rheumatic manifestations are
absent. Epistaxis occurs in about 4% of children with an initial episode and in 9% of those with a
recurrence. Both abdominal pain and epistaxis were minor manifestations in earlier versions of the Jones
criteria.
Prolonged episodes of ARF (> 8 mo) occur in about 5% of patients, with spontaneous recurrences of
inflammation (clinical and laboratory
manifestations) unrelated to intervening streptococcal infection or to
cessation of anti-inflammatory therapy. Recurrences usually mimic the initial episode.
Diagnosis
• Jones criteria (for initial diagnosis)
• Testing for GAS (culture, rapid strep test, or antistreptolysin O and anti-DNase B titers)
• ECG
• ESR and C-reactive protein (CRP) level
Diagnosis of a first episode of ARF is based on the modified Jones criteria (see
Table 282-1
); 2 major criteria or 1 major and 2 minor criteria are required, along with evidence of
preceding GAS infection. Sydenham's chorea alone (ie, without minor criteria) fulfills diagnostic criteria if
other causes of movement disorder are ruled out. The Jones criteria should not be used to establish a
recurrence.
A preceding streptococcal infection is suggested by a recent history of pharyngitis and is confirmed by a
positive throat culture, an increase in the antistreptolysin O titer, or a positive rapid GAS antigen test.
Recent scarlet fever is highly suggestive. Throat cultures and rapid antigen tests are often negative by
the time ARF manifests, whereas titers of anti-streptolysin O and other antibodies typically are peaking.
Only 80% of children with a prior infection have a significantly elevated antistreptolysin O titer; therefore,
anti-DNase B antibody level should also be obtained.
Joint aspiration may be needed to exclude other causes of arthritis (eg, infection). The joint fluid is usually
cloudy and yellow, with an elevated WBC count composed primarily of neutrophils; culture is negative.
Complement levels are usually normal or slightly decreased, compared with decreased levels in other
inflammatory arthritides.
ECG is done during the initial evaluation. An echocardiogram and a repeat ECG are done at the time of
diagnosis. Serum cardiac marker levels are obtained; normal cardiac troponin I levels exclude prominent
myocardial damage. ECG abnormalities such as PR prolongation do not correlate with other evidence of
carditis. Only 35% of children with ARF have a prolonged PR interval. Other ECG abnormalities may be
due to pericarditis, enlargement of ventricles or atria, or arrhythmias. Echocardiography can detect
evidence of carditis in many patients. Chest x-rays are not routinely done but can detect cardiomegaly, a
common manifestation of carditis in ARF. Biopsy of a subcutaneous nodule can aid in early diagnosis,
especially when other major clinical manifestations are absent. Rheumatic carditis must be distinguished
from congenital heart disease and endocardial fibroelastosis; echocardiography or coronary angiography
can be used to verify difficult diagnoses.
[Table 282-1.
Modified Jones Criteria for a First Episode of Acute Rheumatic Fever*]
===PAGE:3018===
ESR and serum CRP are sensitive but not specific. The ESR is often > 120 mm/h. CRP is often > 2
mg/dL; because it rises and falls faster than ESR, a normal CRP may confirm that inflammation is
resolving in a patient with prolonged ESR elevation after acute symptoms have subsided. In the absence
of carditis, ESR usually returns to normal within 3 mo. Evidence of acute inflammation, including ESR,
usually subsides within 5 mo in uncomplicated carditis. The WBC count reaches 12,000 to 20,000/
μ
L and
may go higher with corticosteroid therapy.
The differential diagnosis includes JIA (especially systemic JIA and, less so, polyarticular JIA), Lyme
disease, reactive arthritis, arthropathy of sickle cell disease, leukemia or other cancer, SLE, embolic
bacterial endocarditis, serum sickness, Kawasaki disease, drug reactions, and gonococcal arthritis.
These are
frequently distinguished by history or specific laboratory tests. The absence of an antecedent
GAS infection, the diurnal variation of the fever, evanescent skin rash, and prolonged symptomatic joint
inflammation usually distinguish systemic JIA from ARF.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends mostly on the severity of the initial carditis. Patients with severe carditis during the
first episode may have residual heart disease that is often worsened by the rheumatic fever recurrences
to which they are particularly susceptible. Murmurs eventually disappear in about half of patients whose
acute episodes were manifested by mild carditis without major cardiac enlargement or decompensation.
Risk of recurrent inflammation is intermediate, between the low risk of those without carditis and the high
risk of those with a history of severe carditis, but recurrences may cause or worsen permanent cardiac
damage. Patients who did not have carditis are less likely to have recurrences and are unlikely to develop
carditis if ARF recurs. Sydenham's chorea usually lasts several months and resolves completely in most
patients, but about one third of patients have recurrences. All other manifestations subside without
residual effects.
Treatment
• Aspirin or another NSAID
• Sometimes corticosteroids
• Antibiotics
The primary goals are suppression of inflammation and relief of acute symptoms, eradication of GAS
infection, and prophylaxis against future infection to prevent recurrent heart disease.
Patients should generally limit their activities if symptomatic with arthritis, chorea, or heart failure. In the
absence of carditis, no physical restrictions are needed after the initial episode subsides. In asymptomatic
patients with carditis, strict bed rest has no proven value.
Aspirin
controls fever and pain caused by arthritis and carditis. The dose is titrated upward until clinical
effectiveness is attained or toxicity supervenes. The starting dose for children and adolescents is 15
mg/kg po qid. If not effective overnight, the dosage is increased to 22.5 mg/kg qid the next day and 30
mg/kg qid on the next. Salicylate toxicity is manifested by tinnitus, headache, or hyperpnea and may not
appear until after 1 wk. Salicylate levels are measured only to manage toxicity and should not be done
until the patient has been receiving aspirin for 5 days. Enteric-coated, buffered, or complex salicylate
molecules provide no advantage. Other NSAIDs can be used. For example, naproxen 7.5 to 10 mg/kg po
bid is as effective as aspirin.
If a therapeutic effect has not occurred after the 4th day, which is sometimes the case if carditis or arthritis
is severe, NSAIDs should be abandoned in favor of a corticosteroid.
Prednisone
0.25 to 1 mg/kg po bid (or 0.125 to 0.5 mg/kg po qid) up to 60 mg/day is recommended. If
inflammation is not suppressed after 2 days, an IV corticosteroid pulse of methylprednisolone succinate
(30 mg/kg IV once/day, maximum 1 g/day, for 3 successive days) may be given. Oral corticosteroids are
given until ESR has remained normal for 1 wk and then are tapered at the rate of 5 mg every 2 days. To
===PAGE:3019===
prevent worsening of inflammation during the corticosteroid taper, NSAIDs are begun simultaneously and
continued until 2 wk after the corticosteroid has been stopped. Inflammatory markers such as ESR and
CRP are used to monitor disease activity and response to treatment.
Recurrences of cardiac inflammation (indicated by fever or chest pain) may subside spontaneously, but
NSAIDs or corticosteroids should be resumed if recurrent symptoms last longer than a few days or if
heart failure is uncontrolled by standard management (eg, diuretics, ACE inhibitors,
β
-blockers, inotropic
agents). In patients with prolonged, recurrent episodes of carditis, immunosuppressants may be effective.
Although useful in the acute episode, NSAIDs and corticosteroids do not prevent or reduce long-term
valve damage.
Although poststreptococcal inflammation is well developed by the time ARF is detected, antibiotics are
used to eradicate any lingering organisms and to prevent reinfection. Appropriate regimens for the
treatment of acute infection are described under Streptococcal and Enterococcal Infections 
Antibiotic prophylaxis:
Antistreptococcal prophylaxis should be maintained continuously after the initial
episode of ARF to prevent recurrences (see
Table 282-2
). Antibiotics taken orally are just as effective as those given by injection. With the oral route,
painful injections are avoided, and clinic visits and observation for postinjection reactions are not needed.
With the IM route, adherence difficulties of taking a pill once or twice daily are avoided. The IM regimen
has been the standard against which other regimens are measured.
The optimal duration of antistreptococcal prophylaxis is uncertain. Children without carditis should receive
prophylaxis for 5 yr or
[Table 282-2.
Recommended Prophylaxis Against Recurrent Group a Streptococcal Infection]
up to age 21 (if the patient turns 21 before 5 yr of prophylaxis is completed). The American Academy of
Pediatrics recommends that those with carditis without evidence of residual heart damage receive
prophylaxis for 10 yr. Children with carditis and evidence of residual heart damage should receive
prophylaxis for > 10 yr; many experts recommend that such patients continue prophylaxis indefinitely.
Some experts believe prophylaxis should be life long in all patients with chorea and should continue in all
patients who have close contact with young children because of their high rate of GAS carriage.
The American Heart Association no longer recommends that patients with known or suspected rheumatic
valvular disease (
who are not currently taking prophylactic antibiotics
) take short-term antibiotic
prophylaxis against bacterial endocarditis for dental or oral surgical procedures (.
Poststreptococcal Reactive Arthritis
Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis is development of arthritis after group A streptococcal
infection in patients who do not meet the criteria for ARF.
Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis may represent an attenuated variant of ARF. Compared with the
arthritis of ARF, poststreptococcal reactive arthritis typically involves fewer joints, is less migratory but
more protracted, and responds less to aspirin. It can be treated with other NSAIDs (eg, ibuprofen,
naproxen, tolmetin). Although clinical practice for secondary prevention of cardiac involvement varies
greatly, it is reasonable to give antistreptococcal prophylaxis for 1 yr and then to repeat the
echocardiogram. If cardiac lesions are detected by echocardiogram, long-term prophylaxis is indicated.
===PAGE:3020===
Chapter 283. Respiratory Disorders in Neonates, Infants, and Young Children
Introduction
Symptoms and signs of respiratory distress vary and include nasal flaring; intercostal, subcostal, and
suprasternal retractions; weak breathing, irregular breathing, or a combination; tachypnea and apneic
spells; cyanosis, pallor, mottling, delayed capillary refill, or a combination; and hypotension. In neonates,
symptoms and signs may be apparent immediately on delivery or develop minutes or hours afterward.
Etiology
Respiratory distress in neonates and infants has multiple causes (see
Table 283-1
).
Physiology
There are several significant differences in the physiology of the respiratory system in neonates and
infants compared with that of older children and adults. These differences include
[Table 283-1.
Causes of Respiratory Distress in Neonates and Infants]
• A more compliant collapsible chest wall
• More reliance on diaphragmatic excursions over intercostal muscles
• Collapsible extrathoracic airways
Also, infants' smaller airway caliber gives increased airway resistance, and absence of collateral
ventilation increases tendency toward atelectasis. Yet, other principles of respiration are similar in adults
and children.
Evaluation
Evaluation starts with a thorough history and physical examination.
History in the neonate focuses on maternal and prenatal history, particularly gestational age, maternal
infection or bleeding, meconium staining of amniotic fluid, and oligohydramnios or polyhydramnios.
Physical examination focuses on the heart and lungs. Chest wall asymmetry or sunken abdomen
suggests diaphragmatic hernia. Asymmetric breath sounds suggest pneumothorax, pneumonia, or
asthma. A displaced left apical impulse, heart murmur, or both suggest a congenital heart defect.
Assessment of BP and femoral pulses may identify circulatory collapse with or without congenital defects.
Poor capillary refill reflects circulatory compromise.
In both neonates and infants, it is important to assess oxygenation and response to O
therapy by pulse
oximetry or blood gases. Chest x-ray also is recommended.
Respiratory Support in Neonates and Infants
Initial stabilization maneuvers include mild tactile stimulation, head positioning, and suctioning of the
mouth and nose followed as needed by
• Supplemental O
• Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
• Bag and mask ventilation or mechanical ventilation
===PAGE:3021===
Neonates who cannot be oxygenated by any of these means may require a full cardiac evaluation to
exclude congenital heart disease and treatment with high-frequency oscillatory ventilation, nitric oxide,
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or a combination.
Oxygen:
O
may be given using a nasal cannula, face mask, or O
hood, with O
concentration set to
achieve a PaO
of 50 to 70 mm Hg in preterm infants and 50 to 80 mm Hg in term infants or an O
saturation of 84 to 90% in preterm infants and 92 to 96% in term infants. Lower PaO
in preterm infants
provides almost full saturation of Hb, because fetal Hb
has a higher affinity for O
; maintaining higher
PaO
increases the risk of retinopathy of prematurity. No matter how O
is delivered, it should be
warmed (36 to 37° C) and humidified to prevent secretions from cooling and drying and to prevent
bronchospasm. An umbilical artery catheter (UAC) is usually placed for sampling ABGs in neonates who
require fraction of inspired O
(FIO
) ≥ 40%. If a UAC cannot be placed, a percutaneous radial artery
catheter can be used for continuous BP monitoring and blood sampling.
Neonates who are unresponsive to these maneuvers may require fluids to improve cardiac output and are
candidates for CPAP ventilation or bag and mask ventilation (40 to 60 breaths/min). If the infant does not
oxygenate with or requires prolonged bag-and-mask ventilation, endotracheal intubation with mechanical
ventilation is indicated, although very immature neonates (eg, < 28 wk gestation or < 1000 g) are typically
begun on ventilatory support immediately after delivery so that they can receive preventive surfactant
therapy. Because bacterial sepsis is a common cause of respiratory distress in neonates, it is common
practice to draw blood cultures and give antibiotics to neonates with high O
requirements pending
culture results.
Continuous positive airway pressure:
CPAP delivers O
at a positive pressure, usually 5 to 7 cm
H
O, which keeps alveoli open and improves oxygenation by reducing the amount of blood shunted
through atelectatic areas while the infant breathes spontaneously. CPAP can be provided using nasal
prongs and various apparatuses to provide the positive pressure; it also can be given using an
endotracheal tube connected to a conventional ventilator with the rate set to zero. CPAP is indicated
when FIO
≥ 40% is required to maintain acceptable PaO
(50 to 70 mm Hg) in infants with respiratory
disorders that are of limited duration (eg, diffuse atelectasis, mild respiratory distress syndrome, lung
edema). In these infants, CPAP may preempt the need for positive pressure ventilation.
Mechanical ventilation: Endotracheal tubes
are required for mechanical ventilation (see also p.
):
• Endotracheal tubes 2.5 mm in diameter (the smallest) typically used for infants < 1250 g
• 3 mm for infants 1250 to 2500 g
• 3.5 mm for infants > 2500 g
Intubation is safer if O
is insufflated into the infant's airway during the procedure. Orotracheal intubation
is preferred. The tube should be inserted such that the
• 7-cm mark is at the lip for infants who weigh 1 kg
• 8-cm mark for 2 kg
• 9-cm mark for 3 kg
The endotracheal tube is properly placed when its tip can be palpated through the anterior tracheal wall
at the suprasternal notch. It should be positioned about halfway between the clavicles and the carina on
chest x-ray, coinciding roughly with vertebral level T2. If position or patency is in doubt, the tube should
be removed and the infant should be supported by bag-and-mask ventilation until a new tube is inserted.
Acute deterioration of the infant's condition (sudden changes in oxygenation, ABGs, BP, or perfusion)
===PAGE:3022===
should trigger suspicion of changes in the position of the tube, patency of the tube, or both.
Ventilators
can be set to deliver fixed pressures or volumes; can provide assist control (AC, in which the
ventilator is triggered to deliver a full breath with each patient inspiration) or intermittent mandatory
ventilation (IMV, in which the ventilator delivers a set number of breaths within a time period, and patients
can take spontaneous breaths in between without triggering the ventilator); and can be normal or high
frequency (delivering 400 to 900 breaths/min). Optimal mode or type of ventilation depends on the infant's
response. Volume ventilators are considered useful for larger infants with varying pulmonary compliance
or resistance (eg, in bronchopulmonary dysplasia), because delivering a set volume of gas with each
breath ensures adequate ventilation. AC mode is often used for treating less severe pulmonary disease
and for decreasing ventilator dependence while providing a small increase in airway pressure or a small
volume of gas with each spontaneous breath. High-frequency jet, oscillatory, and flow-interrupter
ventilators are used in extremely premature infants (< 28 wk) and in some infants with air leaks,
widespread atelectasis, or pulmonary edema.
Initial ventilator settings
are estimated by judging the severity of respiratory impairment. Typical
settings for an infant in moderate respiratory distress are FIO
= 40%; inspiratory time (IT) = 0.4 sec;
expiratory time = 1.1 sec; IMV or AC rate = 40 breaths/min; peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) = 15 cm H
O
for very low-birth-weight infants and up to 25 cm H
O for near-term infants; and positive end-expiratory
pressure (PEEP) = 5 cm H
O. These settings are adjusted based on the infant's oxygenation, chest wall
movement, breath sounds, and respiratory efforts along with arterial or capillary blood gases.
•
PaCO
is lowered by increasing the minute ventilation through an increase in tidal volume (increasing
PIP or decreasing PEEP) or an increase in rate.
•
PaO
is increased by increasing the FIO
or increasing the mean airway pressure (increasing PIP,
PEEP, or rate or prolonging IT).
Patient-triggered ventilation often is used to synchronize the positive pressure ventilator breaths with the
onset of the patient's own spontaneous respirations. This seems to shorten the time on a ventilator and
may reduce barotrauma. A pressure-sensitive air-filled balloon attached to a pressure transducer
(Graseby capsule) taped to the infant's abdomen just below the xiphoid process can detect the onset of
diaphragmatic contraction, or a flow or temperature sensor placed at the endotracheal tube adapter can
detect the onset of a spontaneous inhalation.
Ventilator pressures or volumes should be as low as possible to prevent barotrauma and
bronchopulmonary dysplasia; an elevated PaCO
is acceptable as long as pH remains ≥ 7.25 (permissive
hypercapnia). Likewise, a PaO
as low as 40 mm Hg is acceptable if BP is normal and metabolic acidosis
is not present.
Adjunctive treatments
used with mechanical ventilation in some patients include
• Paralytics
• Sedation
• Nitric oxide
Paralytics (eg, vecuronium or pancuronium bromide 0.03 to 0.1 mg/kg IV q 1 to 2 h prn [with pancuronium,
a test dose of 0.02 mg/kg is recommended in neonates]) and sedatives (eg, fentanyl 1 to 4
μ
g/kg IV push
q 2 to 4 h or midazolam 0.05 to 0.15 mg/kg IV over 5 min q 2 to 4 h) may facilitate endotracheal intubation
and can help stabilize infants whose movements and spontaneous breathing prevent optimal ventilation.
These drugs should be used selectively, however, because paralyzed infants may need greater ventilator
support, which can increase barotrauma. Inhaled nitric oxide 5 to 20 ppm may be used for refractory
hypoxemia when pulmonary vasoconstriction is a contributor to hypoxia (eg, in idiopathic pulmonary
hypertension, pneumonia, or congenital diaphragmatic hernia) and may prevent the need for
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (see below).
===PAGE:3023===
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (see below).
Weaning
from the ventilator can occur as respiratory status improves. The infant can be weaned by
lowering
• FIO
• Inspiratory pressure
• Rate
Continuous-flow positive pressure ventilators permit the infant to breathe spontaneously against PEEP
while the ventilator rate is progressively slowed. After the rate has been reduced to 10 breaths/min, the
infant usually tolerates extubation. The final steps in ventilator weaning involve extubation, possibly
support with nasal (or nasopharyngeal) CPAP, and, finally, use of a hood or nasal cannula to provide
humidified O
or air.
Very-low-birth-weight infants may benefit from the addition of a methylxanthine (eg, aminophylline,
theophylline, caffeine) during the weaning process. Methylxanthines are CNS-mediated respiratory
stimulants that increase ventilatory effort and may reduce apneic and bradycardic episodes that may
interfere with successful weaning. Caffeine is the preferred agent because it is better tolerated, easier to
give, safer, and requires less monitoring. Corticosteroids, once used routinely for weaning and treatment
of chronic lung disease, are no longer recommended in premature infants because risks (eg, impaired
growth and neurodevelopmental delay) outweigh benefits. A possible exception is as a last resort in nearterminal illness, in which case parents should be fully informed of risks.
Complications:
Mechanical ventilation complications more common among neonates include
• Pneumothorax
• Asphyxia from endotracheal tube obstruction
• Ulceration, erosion, or narrowing of airway structures due to adjacent pressure
• Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO):
ECMO is a form of cardiopulmonary bypass used
for infants who cannot be oxygenated adequately or ventilated with conventional ventilators. Eligibility
criteria vary by center, but in general, infants should have reversible disease (eg, persistent pulmonary
hypertension of the newborn, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, overwhelming pneumonia) and should
have been on mechanical ventilation < 7 days. After systemic heparinization, blood is circulated through
large-diameter catheters from the internal jugular vein into a membrane oxygenator, which serves as an
artificial lung to remove CO
and add O
. Oxygenated blood is then circulated back to the internal jugular
vein (venovenous ECMO) or to the carotid artery (venoarterial ECMO). Venoarterial ECMO is used when
both circulatory support and ventilatory support are needed (eg, in overwhelming sepsis). Flow rates can
be adjusted to obtain desired O
saturation
and BP. ECMO is contraindicated in infants < 34 wk, < 2 kg,
or both because of the risk of intraventricular hemorrhage with systemic heparinization. Complications
include thromboembolism, air embolization, neurologic (eg, stroke, seizures) and hematologic (eg,
hemolysis, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia) problems, and cholestatic jaundice.
Apnea of Prematurity
Apnea of prematurity is defined as respiratory pauses > 20 sec or airflow interruption and
respiratory pauses > 20 sec associated with bradycardia (< 80 beats/min), central cyanosis, or
O
saturation < 85% in neonates born at < 37 wk gestation and with no underlying disorders
causing apnea. Cause may be CNS immaturity (central) or airway obstruction. Diagnosis is by
multichannel respiratory monitoring. Treatment is with respiratory stimulants for central apnea
and head positioning for obstructive apnea. Prognosis is excellent; apnea resolves in most
===PAGE:3024===
neonates by 37 wk.
About 25% of preterm infants have apnea of prematurity, which usually begins 2 to 3 days after birth and
only rarely on the first day. Apnea that develops > 14 days after birth in an otherwise healthy infant
signifies a serious illness other than apnea of prematurity (eg, sepsis). Risk increases with earlier
gestational age.
Pathophysiology
Apnea of prematurity may be
• Central
• Obstructive
• A mixed pattern (most common)
Central apnea
is caused by immaturity of medullary respiratory control centers; insufficient neural
impulses from the respiratory centers in the medulla reach the respiratory muscles, and the infant stops
breathing. Hypoxemia and hypercarbia stimulate respiratory efforts.
Obstructive apnea
is caused by obstructed airflow, neck flexion causing opposition of hypopharyngeal
soft tissues, nasal occlusion, or reflex laryngospasm.
Both types of apnea can cause hypoxemia, cyanosis, and bradycardia if the apnea is prolonged. Among
infants dying of SIDS, 18% have a history of prematurity, but apnea of prematurity does not seem to be a
precursor to SIDS.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Cardiorespiratory monitoring, physiologic parameter recordings
• Other causes (eg, hypoglycemia, sepsis, intracranial hemorrhage, gastroesophageal reflux disease
[GERD]) ruled out
Although frequently attributable to immature respiratory control mechanisms, apnea of prematurity can be
sign of major infectious, metabolic, thermoregulatory, respiratory, cardiac, GI, or CNS dysfunction. Careful
history, physical assessment, and, when necessary, testing should be done before accepting prematurity
as the cause of apnea.
Diagnosis of apnea usually is made by visual observation or by use of impedance-type cardiorespiratory
monitors used continuously during assessment and ongoing care of preterm infants. Multichannel
recordings of multiple physiologic parameters (eg, chest wall movement, airflow, O
saturation, heart rate,
brain electric activity) taken for up to 24 h can be used as adjuncts for diagnosis and planning and
monitoring treatment.
Prognosis
Most preterm infants stop having apneic spells by the time they reach about 37 wk gestation. Apnea may
continue for weeks in infants born at extremely early gestational ages (eg, 23 to 27 wk). Death is rare.
Treatment
• Stimulation
• Treatment of underlying disorder
===PAGE:3025===
• Respiratory stimulants (eg, caffeine)
When apnea is noted, either by observation or monitor alarm, infants are stimulated, which may be all that
is required; if breathing does not resume, bag-valve-mask or mouth-to-mouth-and-nose ventilation is
provided (. For infants at home, the physician is contacted if apnea occurs but ceases after stimulation; if
intervention beyond stimulation is required, the infant should be rehospitalized and evaluated.
Frequent or severe episodes should be quickly and thoroughly evaluated, and identifiable causes should
be treated. If no infectious or other treatable underlying disorder is found, respiratory stimulants are
indicated for treatment of frequent or severe episodes, characterized by hypoxemia, cyanosis,
bradycardia, or a combination. Caffeine is the safest and most commonly used respiratory stimulant drug.
It can be given as caffeine base (loading dose 10 mg/kg followed by a maintenance dose of 2.5 mg/kg po
q 24 h) or caffeine citrate, a caffeine salt that is 50% caffeine (loading dose 20 mg/kg followed by a
maintenance dose of 5 to 10 mg/kg q 24 h). Caffeine is preferred
because of ease of administration,
fewer adverse effects, larger therapeutic window and less need to monitor drug levels. Treatment
continues until the infant is 34 to 35 wk gestation and free from apnea requiring physical intervention for
at least 5 to 7 days. Monitoring continues until the infant is free of apnea requiring intervention for 5 to 10
days.
If apnea continues despite respiratory stimulants, the infant may be given continuous positive airway
pressure starting at 5 to 8 cm H
O pressure. Intractable apneic spells require ventilator support.
Discharge practices vary; some practitioners observe infants for 7 days after treatment has ended to
ensure that apnea or bradycardia does not recur, whereas others discharge with caffeine if treatment
seems effective.
Prevention
Hospitalized high-risk infants who have not had clinically significant cardiopulmonary events (eg, apnea >
20 sec, apnea accompanied by central cyanosis, apnea associated with heart rate < 80 for > 5 sec)
during continuous cardiorespiratory monitoring can be discharged home safely without a monitor. A home
cardiorespiratory monitor may be prescribed to shorten the hospital stay for infants that are otherwise
ready for discharge but are still having clinically significant cardiopulmonary events that reverse without
intervention. Caffeine can be used as an adjunct to a home monitor to achieve this status. Parents should
be taught how to properly use equipment, assess alarm situations, intervene (eg, CPR), and keep a log
of events. Round-the-clock telephone support and triage as well as outpatient follow-up regarding the
decision to stop using the monitor should be provided. Monitors that store event information are preferred.
Infants should sleep on their back. The infant's head should be kept in the midline, and the neck should
be kept in the neutral position or slightly extended to prevent upper airway obstruction. All premature
infants, especially those with apnea of prematurity, are at risk of apnea, bradycardia, and O
desaturation
while in a car seat and should undergo a car seat challenge test before discharge.
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is chronic lung disease of the neonate that typically is
caused by prolonged ventilation and is further defined by age of prematurity and extent of O
requirement.
BPD is considered present when there is need for supplemental O
in premature infants who do not have
other conditions requiring O
(eg, pneumonia, congenital heart disease).
Etiology
BPD has a multifactorial etiology. Significant risk factors include
===PAGE:3026===
• Prolonged mechanical ventilation
• High concentrations of inspired O
• Infection
• Degree of prematurity
Additional risk factors include
• Pulmonary interstitial emphysema
• High peak inspiratory pressures
• Large end-tidal volumes
• Increased airway resistance
• Increased pulmonary artery pressures
• Male sex
The lungs of premature infants are more vulnerable to the inflammatory changes that result from
mechanical ventilation. The development of normal lung architecture is interrupted; fewer and larger
alveoli develop, and the interstitium is thickened.
Diagnosis
• National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) criteria
• Characteristic x-ray findings
BPD typically is suspected when a ventilated infant is unable to wean from O
therapy, mechanical
ventilation, or both. Infants typically develop worsening hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and increasing O
requirements. Additionally, when an infant cannot be weaned within the expected time, possible
underlying disorders, including patent ductus arteriosus and nursery-acquired pneumonia, should be
sought.
For diagnosis, the patient has to have required at least 28 days of > 21% O
. Specific additional
diagnostic criteria (see
Table 283-2
) have been developed by the NICHD.
Chest x-ray initially shows diffuse haziness due to accumulation of exudative fluid; appearance then
becomes multicystic or sponge-like, with alternating areas of emphysema, pulmonary scarring, and
atelectasis. Alveolar epithelium may slough, and macrophages, neutrophils, and inflammatory mediators
may be found in the tracheal aspirate.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies with severity. Infants who still depend on mechanical ventilation at 36 wk gestation have
a 20 to 30% mortality rate
[Table 283-2.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Criteria for Diagnosis of
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia*]
in infancy. Infants with BPD have a 3- to 4-fold increased rate of growth failure and neurodevelopmental
problems. For several years, infants are at increased risk of lower respiratory tract infections (particularly
===PAGE:3027===
viral pneumonia or bronchiolitis) and may quickly develop respiratory decompensation if pulmonary
infection occurs. The threshold for hospitalization should be low if signs of a respiratory infection or
respiratory distress develop.
Treatment
• Nutrition supplementation
• Fluid restriction
• Diuretics
• Inhaled bronchodilators
• O
supplementation as needed
• Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) monoclonal antibody
Treatment is supportive and includes nutritional supplementation, fluid restriction, diuretics, and perhaps
inhaled bronchodilators. Respiratory infections must be diagnosed early and treated aggressively.
Weaning from mechanical ventilation and supplemental O
should be accomplished as early as possible.
Feedings should achieve an intake of 150 calories/kg/day; caloric requirements are increased because of
the increased work of breathing and to aid lung healing and growth.
Because pulmonary congestion and edema may develop, daily fluid intake is often restricted to about 120
to 140 mL/kg/day. Diuretic therapy is sometimes used: chlorothiazide 10 to 20 mg/kg po bid plus
spironolactone 1 to 3 mg/kg po once/day or split into twice-daily doses. Furosemide (1 to 2 mg/kg IV or IM
or 1 to 4 mg/kg po q 12 to 24 h for neonates and q 8 h for older infants) may be used for short periods,
but prolonged use causes hypercalciuria with resultant osteoporosis, fractures, and renal calculi. If longterm diuretic use is required, chlorothiazide is preferred because it has fewer adverse effects. Hydration
and serum electrolytes should be monitored closely during diuretic therapy.
Weeks or months of additional ventilator support, supplemental O
, or both may be required for advanced
BPD. Ventilator pressures and fraction of inspired O
(FIO
) should be reduced as rapidly as tolerated,
but the infant should not be allowed to become hypoxemic. Arterial oxygenation should be continuously
monitored with a pulse oximeter and maintained at ≥ 88% saturation. Respiratory acidosis may occur
during ventilator weaning and treatment and is acceptable as long as the pH remains > 7.25 and the
infant does not develop severe respiratory distress.
Passive immunoprophylaxis with palivizumab, a monoclonal antibody to RSV, decreases RSV-related
hospitalizations and ICU stays but is costly and is indicated primarily in high-risk infants (see p.
for
indications). During RSV season (November through April), children are given 15 mg/kg IM q 30 days until
6 mo after treatment of the acute illness. Infants > 6 mo also should be vaccinated against influenza.
Systemic or inhaled corticosteroids are discouraged except as a last-resort therapy for
established BPD
with rapidly worsening pulmonary status and impending death. Informed parental consent is required.
Prevention
Practices for prevention of BPD include
• Use of antenatal corticosteroids
• Prophylactic use of exogenous surfactant in selected high-risk infants (eg, < 30 wk gestation)
• Early therapeutic continuous positive airway pressure
===PAGE:3028===
• Early use of surfactant for treatment of respiratory distress syndrome
• Prophylactic use of methylxanthines to assist successful early ventilator therapy withdrawal
• Permissive hypercarbia and hypoxemia to achieve low ventilator pressures, volumes, or both
• Prophylactic use of vitamin A (5000 units IM 3 times/wk for a total of 12 doses) for infants with birth
weight < 1000 g
• Avoidance of large volumes of fluid
• Early aggressive management of patent ductus arterious
Inhaled nitric oxide seems to be promising and is under investigation.
Meconium Aspiration Syndrome
Intrapartum meconium aspiration can cause inflammatory pneumonitis and mechanical
bronchial obstruction, causing a syndrome of respiratory distress. Findings include tachypnea,
rales and rhonchi, and cyanosis or desaturation. Diagnosis is suspected when there is
respiratory distress after delivery through meconium-tinged amniotic fluid and is confirmed by
chest x-ray. Treatment is vigorous suction immediately on delivery before neonates take their
first breath, followed by respiratory support as needed. Prognosis depends on the underlying
physiologic stressors.
Etiology
Physiologic stress at the time of labor and delivery (eg, due to hypoxia caused by umbilical cord
compression or placental insufficiency or caused by infection) may cause the fetus to pass meconium into
the amniotic fluid before delivery; meconium passage is noted in about 10 to 15% of births. During
delivery, perhaps 5% of neonates with meconium passage aspirate the meconium, triggering lung injury
and respiratory distress, termed meconium aspiration syndrome. Postterm infants delivered through
reduced amniotic fluid volume are at risk of more severe disease because the less dilute meconium is
more likely to cause airway obstruction.
Pathophysiology
The mechanisms by which aspiration induces the clinical syndrome probably include
• Nonspecific cytokine release
• Airway obstruction
• Surfactant inactivation
• Chemical pneumonitis
Underlying physiologic stressors also may contribute. If complete bronchial obstruction occurs, atelectasis
results; partial blockage leads to air trapping on expiration, resulting in hyperexpansion of the lungs and
possibly pulmonary air leak ( with pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax. Persistent
pulmonary hypertension can be associated with meconium aspiration as a comorbid condition or because
of continuing hypoxia (.
Neonates also may aspirate vernix caseosa, amniotic fluid, or blood of maternal or fetal origin during
delivery, which can cause respiratory distress and signs of aspiration pneumonia on chest x-ray.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:3029===
Signs include tachypnea, nasal flaring, retractions, cyanosis or desaturation, rales, rhonchi, and greenish
yellow staining of the umbilical cord, nail beds, or skin. Meconium staining may be visible in the
oropharynx and (on intubation) in the larynx and trachea. Neonates with air trapping may have a barrelshaped chest and also symptoms and signs of pneumothorax, pulmonary interstitial emphysema, and
pneumomediastinum (.
Diagnosis
• Meconium passage
• Respiratory distress
• Characteristic x-ray findings
Diagnosis is suspected when a neonate shows respiratory distress in the setting of meconium-tinged
amniotic fluid. Diagnosis is confirmed by chest x-ray showing hyperinflation with variable areas of
atelectasis and flattening of the diaphragm. Initial x-ray findings can be confused with the findings of
transient tachypnea of the newborn (. Fluid may be seen in the lung fissures or pleural
spaces, and air may be seen in the soft tissues or mediastinum. Because meconium may enhance
bacterial
growth and meconium aspiration syndrome is difficult to distinguish from bacterial pneumonia,
cultures of blood and tracheal aspirate also should be taken.
Prognosis
Prognosis is generally good, although it varies with the underlying physiologic stressors; overall mortality
is slightly increased. Infants with meconium aspiration syndrome may be at greater risk of asthma in later
life.
Treatment
• Suctioning at birth before the first breath
• Endotracheal intubation as needed
• Mechanical ventilation as needed
• Supplemental O
as needed
• IV antibiotics
Immediate treatment, indicated for all neonates delivered through meconium, is vigorous suctioning of the
mouth and nasopharynx using a DeLee suction apparatus as soon as the head is delivered and before
the neonate breathes and cries. If suction returns no meconium and the neonate appears vigorous,
observation without further intervention is appropriate. If the neonate has labored or depressed
respirations, poor muscle tone, or is bradycardic (< 100 beats/min), the trachea should be intubated with
a 3.5- or 4.0-mm endotracheal tube. A meconium aspirator connected to a suction apparatus is attached
directly to the endotracheal tube, which then serves as the suction catheter. Suction is maintained while
the endotracheal tube is removed. Reintubation and continuous positive airway pressure are indicated for
continued respiratory distress, followed by mechanical ventilation and admission to the neonatal ICU as
needed. Because positive pressure ventilation enhances risk of pulmonary air-leak syndrome, regular
evaluation (including physical examination and chest x-ray) is important to detect this complication, which
should be sought immediately in any intubated neonate whose BP, perfusion, or O
saturation suddenly
worsens. See p.
for treatment of air-leak syndromes.
Additional treatments may include surfactant for mechanically ventilated neonates with high O
requirements, which can decrease the need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and antibiotics
===PAGE:3030===
(usually ampicillin and an aminoglycoside). Inhaled nitric oxide in the range of 5 to 20 ppm and highfrequency ventilation are other therapies that are used if refractory hypoxemia develops; they also may
decrease need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the Newborn
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn is the persistence of or reversion to
pulmonary arteriolar constriction, causing a severe reduction in pulmonary blood flow and rightto-left shunting. Symptoms and signs include tachypnea, retractions, and severe cyanosis or
desaturation unresponsive to O
. Diagnosis is by history, examination, chest x-ray, and
response to O
. Treatment is with O
; alkalinization; high-frequency ventilation; nitric oxide;
pressors, inotropes, or both; and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation if other therapies fail.
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn is a disorder of pulmonary vasculature that affects
term or postterm infants.
Etiology
The most common causes involve
• Perinatal asphyxia or hypoxia
A history of meconium staining of amniotic fluid or meconium in the trachea is common. Hypoxia triggers
reversion to or persistence of intense pulmonary arteriolar constriction, a normal state in the fetus.
Additional causes include
• Premature ductus arteriosus or foramen ovale closure, which increases fetal pulmonary blood flow and
may be triggered by maternal NSAID use
• Polycythemia, which obstructs blood flow
• Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, in which one lung is severely hypoplastic, forcing most of the
pulmonary blood flow through the other lung
• Neonatal sepsis presumably because vasoconstrictive prostaglandins are produced by activation of the
cyclooxygenase pathway by bacterial phospholipids
Pathophysiology
Whatever the cause, elevated pressure in the pulmonary arteries causes abnormal smooth muscle
development and hypertrophy in the walls of the small pulmonary arteries and arterioles and right-to-left
shunting via the ductus arteriosus or a foramen ovale, resulting in intractable systemic hypoxemia. Both
pulmonary and systemic resistances are high, which leads
to an increased load on the heart. This load
increase may result in right heart dilation, tricuspid insufficiency, and right heart failure.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs include tachypnea, retractions, and severe cyanosis or desaturation unresponsive
to supplemental O
. In infants with a right-to-left shunt via a patent ductus arteriosus, oxygenation is
higher in the right brachial artery than in the descending aorta; thus cyanosis may be differential (ie, O
saturation in the lower extremities is ≥ 5% lower than in the right upper extremity).
Diagnosis
• Cyanosis unresponsive to O
therapy
===PAGE:3031===
• Echocardiogram
• X-ray to identify underlying disorders
Diagnosis should be suspected in any near-term infant with arterial hypoxemia, cyanosis, or both,
especially one with a suggestive history whose O
saturation does not improve with administration of
100% O
. Diagnosis is confirmed by echocardiogram, which can confirm the presence of elevated
pressures in the pulmonary artery and simultaneously can exclude congenital heart disease. On x-ray,
lung fields may be normal or may show changes due to the underlying disorder (eg, meconium aspiration
syndrome, neonatal pneumonia, congenital diaphragmatic hernia).
Prognosis
An oxygenation index (mean airway pressure [cm H
O] × fraction of inspired O
[FIO] × 100/PaO
) > 40
predicts mortality of > 50%. Overall mortality ranges from 10 to 80% and is directly related to the
oxygenation index but also varies with the underlying disorder. However, many survivors (perhaps one
third) exhibit developmental delay, hearing deficits, functional disabilities, or a combination. This rate of
disability may be no different from that of other infants with severe illness.
Treatment
• O
to dilate pulmonary vasculature and improve oxygenation
• Mechanical ventilation support
• Use of nitric oxide considered
• Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation as needed
• Circulatory support
Treatment with O
, which is a potent pulmonary vasodilator, is begun immediately to prevent disease
progression. O
is delivered via bag and mask or mechanical ventilation; mechanical distention of alveoli
aids vasodilation. FIO
should initially be 1 but can be titrated downward to maintain PaO
between 50
and 90 mm Hg to minimize lung injury. Once PaO
is stabilized, weaning can be attempted by reducing
FIO
in decrements of 2 to 3%, then reducing ventilator pressures; changes should be gradual, because
a large drop in PaO
can cause recurrent pulmonary artery vasoconstriction. High-frequency oscillatory
ventilation expands and ventilates the lungs while minimizing barotrauma and should be considered for
infants with underlying lung disease in whom atelectasis and ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch may
exacerbate the hypoxemia of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn.
Inhaled nitric oxide relaxes endothelial smooth muscle, dilating pulmonary arterioles, which increases
pulmonary blood flow and rapidly improves oxygenation in as many as half of patients. Initial dose is 20
ppm, titrated downward by effect.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation ( may be used in newborns with severe hypoxic
respiratory failure defined by an oxygenation index > 35 to 40 despite maximum respiratory support.
Normal fluid, electrolyte, glucose, and Ca levels must be maintained. Infants should be kept in a neutral
thermal environment and treated with antibiotics for possible sepsis until culture results are known.
Inotropes and pressors may be required as part of circulatory support.
Pulmonary Air-Leak Syndromes
Pulmonary air-leak syndromes involve dissection of air out of the normal pulmonary airspaces.
===PAGE:3032===
Air-leak syndromes include pulmonary interstitial emphysema, pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax,
pneumopericardium, pneumoperitoneum, and subcutaneous emphysema. Pneumothorax and
pneumomediastinum occur in 1 to 2% of normal neonates, probably because large negative intrathoracic
forces created when the neonate starts breathing occasionally disrupt alveolar epithelium, which allows
air to move from the alveoli into extra-alveolar soft tissues or spaces.
Air leak is more common and severe among neonates with lung disease, who are at risk because of poor
lung compliance and the need for high airway pressures (eg, in respiratory
distress) or because of air
trapping (eg, meconium aspiration syndrome), which leads to alveolar overdistention.
Many affected neonates are asymptomatic; diagnosis is suspected clinically or because of deterioration in
O
status and is confirmed by x-ray. Treatment varies by type of air leak but in ventilated infants always
involves lowering inspiratory pressures to lowest tolerated settings. High-frequency ventilators may be
helpful but are of unproven benefit.
Pulmonary interstitial emphysema:
Pulmonary interstitial emphysema is leakage of air from alveoli
into the pulmonary interstitium, lymphatics, or subpleural space. It usually occurs in infants with poor lung
compliance, such as those with respiratory distress syndrome who are being treated with mechanical
ventilation, but it may occur spontaneously. One or both lungs may be involved, and pathology may be
focal or generalized within each lung. If dissection of air is widespread, respiratory status may acutely
worsen because lung compliance suddenly is reduced.
Chest x-ray shows a variable number of cystic or linear lucencies in the lung fields. Some lucencies are
elongated; others appear as enlarged subpleural cysts ranging from a few millimeters to several
centimeters in diameter.
Pulmonary interstitial emphysema may resolve dramatically over 1 or 2 days or persist on x-ray for weeks.
Some infants with severe respiratory disease and pulmonary interstitial emphysema develop
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD—, and the cystic changes of long-standing pulmonary
interstitial emphysema then merge into the x-ray picture of BPD.
Treatment is mainly supportive. If one lung is significantly more involved than the other, the infant may be
laid down on the side of the lung with the more severe pulmonary interstitial emphysema; this will help to
compress the lung with pulmonary interstitial emphysema, thereby decreasing air leakage and perhaps
improving ventilation of the normal (elevated) lung. If one lung is very severely affected and the other is
mildly affected or uninvolved, differential bronchial intubation and ventilation of the less-involved lung also
may be attempted; total atelectasis of the non-intubated lung soon results. Because only one lung is now
being ventilated, ventilator settings and fraction of inspired O
may need to be altered. After 24 to 48 h,
the endotracheal tube is pulled back into the trachea, at which time the air leak may have stopped.
Pneumomediastinum:
Pneumomediastinum is dissection of air into connective tissue of the
mediastinum (see also p.
); the air may further dissect into the subcutaneous tissues of the neck and
scalp. Pneumomediastinum usually causes no symptoms or signs, though subcutaneous air causes
crepitus. Diagnosis is by x-ray; in an anteroposterior view, air may form a lucency around the heart,
whereas on a lateral view, air lifts the lobes of the thymus away from the cardiac silhouette (spinnaker sail
sign). No treatment is usually needed, and the condition resolves spontaneously.
Pneumopericardium:
Pneumopericardium is dissection of air into the pericardial sac. It affects
mechanically ventilated infants almost exclusively. Most cases are asymptomatic, but if sufficient air
accumulates, it can cause cardiac tamponade (. Diagnosis is suspected if infants experience
acute circulatory collapse and is confirmed by lucency around the heart on x-ray or by return of air on
pericardiocentesis using an angiocatheter and syringe. Treatment is pericardiocentesis followed by
surgical insertion of a pericardial tube.
Pneumoperitoneum:
Pneumoperitoneum is dissection of air into the peritoneum. It is generally not
clinically significant but must be distinguished from pneumoperitoneum due to a ruptured abdominal
viscus, which is a surgical emergency. Diagnosis is made by abdominal x-ray and physical examination.
Clinical symptoms that include abdominal rigidity, absent bowel sounds, and signs of sepsis suggest
===PAGE:3033===
abdominal viscus injury.
Pneumothorax:
Pneumothorax is dissection of air into the pleural space; sufficient accumulation of air
causes tension pneumothorax (. Although sometimes asymptomatic, pneumothorax typically
causes worsening of tachypnea, grunting, and cyanosis. Breath sounds decrease, and the chest
enlarges on the affected side. Tension pneumothorax causes cardiovascular collapse.
Diagnosis is suspected by deterioration of respiratory status, by transillumination of the chest with a
fiberoptic probe, or both. Diagnosis is confirmed by chest x-ray or, in the case of tension pneumothorax,
return of air during thoracentesis.
Most small pneumothoraces resolve spontaneously, but larger and tension pneumothoraces require
evacuation of the air in the pleural cavity. In tension pneumothorax, a scalp vein needle or an
angiocatheter and syringe can be used to temporarily evacuate free air from the pleural space. Definitive
treatment is insertion of an 8 or 10 French chest tube attached to continuous suction. Follow-up
auscultation, transillumination, and x-ray confirm that the tube is functioning properly.
Respiratory Distress Syndrome
(Hyaline Membrane Disease)
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is caused by pulmonary surfactant deficiency in the lungs
of neonates, most commonly in those born at < 37 wk gestation. Risk increases with degree of
prematurity. Symptoms and signs include grunting respirations, use of accessory muscles, and
nasal flaring appearing soon after birth. Diagnosis is clinical; prenatal risk can be assessed with
tests of fetal lung maturity. Treatment is surfactant therapy and supportive care.
Etiology
Surfactant is not produced in adequate amounts until relatively late in gestation; thus, risk of RDS
increases with greater prematurity. Other risk factors include multifetal pregnancies, maternal diabetes,
and being male and white.
Risk decreases with fetal growth restriction, preeclampsia or eclampsia, maternal hypertension,
prolonged rupture of membranes, and maternal corticosteroid use.
Rare cases are hereditary, caused by mutations in surfactant protein (SP-B and SP-C) and ATP-binding
cassette transporter
A3
(
ABCA3
) genes.
Pathophysiology
Pulmonary surfactant is a mixture of phospholipids and lipoproteins secreted by type II pneumocytes (see
p.
). It diminishes the surface tension of the water film that lines alveoli, thereby decreasing the
tendency of alveoli to collapse and the work required to inflate them.
With surfactant deficiency, the lungs become diffusely atelectatic, triggering inflammation and pulmonary
edema. Because blood passing through the atelectatic portions of lung is not oxygenated (forming a rightto-left intrapulmonary shunt), the infant becomes hypoxemic. Lung compliance is decreased, thereby
increasing the work of breathing. In severe cases, the diaphragm and intercostal muscles fatigue, and
CO
retention and respiratory acidosis develop.
Complications:
Complications of RDS include intraventricular hemorrhage, periventricular white matter
injury, tension pneumothorax, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, sepsis, and neonatal death. Intracranial
complications have been linked to hypoxemia, hypercarbia, hypotension, swings in arterial BP, and low
cerebral perfusion (see also Intracranial Hemorrhage on p.
and Hemorrhagic Shock and
Encephalopathy Syndrome .
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:3034===
Symptoms and signs include rapid, labored, grunting respirations appearing immediately or within a few
hours after delivery, with suprasternal and substernal retractions and flaring of the nasal alae. As
atelectasis and respiratory failure progress, symptoms worsen, with cyanosis, lethargy, irregular
breathing, and apnea.
Neonates weighing < 1000 g may have lungs so stiff that they are unable to initiate or sustain respirations
in the delivery room.
On examination, breath sounds are decreased. Peripheral pulses may be decreased with peripheral
extremity edema and decreased urine output.
Diagnosis
• Clinical presentation
• ABG (hypoxemia and hypercapnia)
• Chest x-ray
• Blood, CSF, and tracheal aspirate cultures
Diagnosis is by clinical presentation, including recognition of risk factors; ABGs showing hypoxemia and
hypercapnia; and chest x-ray. Chest x-ray shows diffuse atelectasis classically described as having a
ground-glass appearance with visible air bronchograms; appearance correlates loosely with clinical
severity.
Differential diagnosis includes group B streptococcal pneumonia and sepsis, transient tachypnea of the
newborn, persistent pulmonary hypertension, aspiration, pulmonary edema, and congenital
cardiopulmonary anomalies. Neonates typically require cultures of blood, CSF, and possibly tracheal
aspirate. Clinical diagnosis of group B streptococcal pneumonia is extremely difficult; thus, antibiotics
usually are started pending culture results.
RDS can be anticipated prenatally using tests of fetal lung maturity, which measure surfactant obtained
by amniocentesis or collected from the vagina (if membranes have ruptured) and which can help
determine the optimal timing of delivery. These are indicated for elective deliveries before 39 wk when
fetal heart tones, human chorionic gonadotropin levels, and ultrasound measurements cannot confirm
gestational age and for nonelective deliveries between 34 wk and 36 wk. Risk of RDS is low when
lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio is > 2, phosphatidyl glycerol is present, foam stability index = 47,
surfactant/albumin ratio (measured by fluorescence polarization) is > 55 mg/g, or a combination.
Treatment
• Surfactant
• Supplementary O
as needed
• Mechanical ventilation as needed
Prognosis with treatment is excellent; mortality is < 10%. With adequate ventilatory support alone,
surfactant production eventually begins, and once production begins, RDS resolves within 4 or 5 days.
However, in the meantime, severe hypoxemia can result in multiple organ failure and death.
Specific treatment is intratracheal surfactant therapy. This therapy requires endotracheal intubation,
which also may be necessary to achieve adequate ventilation and oxygenation. Less premature infants
(those > 1 kg) and those with lower O
requirements (fraction of inspired O
[FIO] < 40 to 50%) may
respond well to supplemental O
alone or to treatment with nasal continuous positive airway pressure. A
===PAGE:3035===
treatment strategy of early (within 20 to 30 min after birth) surfactant therapy is associated with significant
decrease in duration of mechanical ventilation, lesser incidence of air leak syndromes, and lower
incidence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
Surfactant hastens recovery and decreases risk of pneumothorax, interstitial emphysema, intraventricular
hemorrhage, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and neonatal mortality in the hospital and at 1 yr. However,
neonates who receive surfactant for established RDS have an increased risk of apnea of prematurity.
Options for surfactant replacement include beractant (a lipid bovine lung extract supplemented with
proteins B and C, colfosceril palmitate, palmitic acid, and tripalmitin) 100 mg/kg q 6 h prn up to 4 doses;
poractant alfa (a modified porcine-derived minced lung extract containing phospholipids, neutral lipids,
fatty acids, and surfactant-associated proteins B and C) 200 mg/kg followed by up to 2 doses of 100
mg/kg 12 h apart prn; and calfactant (a calf lung extract containing phospholipids, neutral lipids, fatty
acids, and surfactant-associated proteins B and C) 105 mg/kg q 12 h up to 3 doses prn. Lung compliance
can improve rapidly after therapy. The ventilator peak inspiratory pressure may need to be lowered
rapidly to reduce risk of a pulmonary air leak. Other ventilator parameters (eg, FIO
, rate) also may need
to be reduced.
Prevention
When a fetus must be delivered between 24 wk and 34 wk, giving the mother 2 doses of betamethasone
12 mg IM 24 h apart or 4 doses of dexamethasone 6 mg IV or IM q 12 h at least 48 h before delivery
induces fetal surfactant production and reduces the risk of RDS or decreases its severity. (See also
Preterm Labor
)
Prophylactic intratracheal surfactant therapy given to neonates that are at high risk of developing RDS
(infants < 30 wk completed gestation especially in absence of antenatal corticosteroid exposure) has
been shown to decrease risk of neonatal death and certain forms of pulmonary morbidity (eg,
pneumothorax).
Transient Tachypnea of the Newborn
(Neonatal Wet Lung Syndrome)
Transient tachypnea of the newborn is respiratory distress caused by delayed resorption of
fetal lung fluid.
Transient tachypnea of the newborn affects premature infants, term infants delivered by cesarean
section, and infants born with respiratory depression, all of whom have delayed clearance of fetal lung
fluid. (Mechanisms for normal resorption of fetal lung fluid are discussed elsewhere.) For unknown
reasons, maternal diabetes and asthma are also risk factors. The disorder can occur in preterm infants
with respiratory distress syndrome and in term infants born through meconium-stained amniotic fluid.
Transient tachypnea of the newborn is suspected when the infant develops respiratory distress shortly
after birth. Symptoms include tachypnea, intracostal and subcostal retractions, grunting, nasal flaring, and
possible cyanosis.
Pneumonia and sepsis may have similar manifestations, so chest x-ray, CBC, and blood cultures usually
are done. Chest x-ray shows hyperinflated lungs with streaky perihilar markings, giving the appearance of
a shaggy heart border while the periphery of the lungs is clear. Fluid is often seen in the lung fissures. If
initial findings are indeterminate or suggest infection, antibiotics (eg, ampicillin, gentamicin) are given
while awaiting culture results.
Recovery usually occurs within 2 to 3 days. Treatment is supportive and involves giving O
by hood and
monitoring ABGs or pulse oximetry. Rarely, extremely premature infants, those with neurologic depression
at birth, or both require continuous positive airway pressure and occasionally even mechanical
ventilation.
Bacterial Tracheitis
===PAGE:3036===
(Pseudomembranous Croup)
Bacterial tracheitis is bacterial infection of the trachea.
Bacterial tracheitis is uncommon and can affect children of any age.
Staphylococcus aureus
and group A
β
-hemolytic streptococci are involved most frequently. Onset is acute and is characterized by respiratory
stridor, high fever, and often copious purulent secretions. Rarely, bacterial tracheitis may develop as a
complication of viral croup or endotracheal intubation. As in patients with epiglottitis, the child may have
marked toxicity and respiratory distress that may progress rapidly and may require intubation.
Diagnosis is suspected clinically and can be confirmed by direct laryngoscopy, which reveals purulent
secretions and inflammation in the subglottic area with a shaggy, purulent membrane or by lateral neck xray, which reveals subglottic narrowing that may be irregular as opposed to the symmetric tapering typical
of croup.
Treatment in severe cases is the same as that of epiglottitis (; whenever possible,
endotracheal intubation should be done in controlled circumstances by a clinician skilled in managing a
pediatric airway (. Initial antibiotics should cover
S. aureus
and streptococcal species;
cefuroxime or an equivalent IV preparation may be appropriate empirically unless methicillin-resistant
staphylococcus is prevalent in the community, in which case vancomycin should be used. Therapy for
critically ill children should be guided by a consultant knowledgeable in local susceptibility patterns. Once
definitive microbial diagnosis is made, coverage is narrowed and continued for ≥ 10 days.
Complications include bronchopneumonia, sepsis, and retropharyngeal cellulitis or abscess. Subglottic
stenosis secondary to prolonged intubation is uncommon. Most children treated appropriately recover
without sequelae.
Bronchiolitis
Bronchiolitis is an acute viral infection of the lower respiratory tract affecting infants < 24 mo
and is characterized by respiratory distress, wheezing, and crackles. Diagnosis is suspected by
history, including presentation during a known epidemic; the primary cause, respiratory
syncytial virus, can be identified with a rapid assay. Treatment is supportive with O
and
hydration. Prognosis is generally excellent, but some patients develop apnea or respiratory
failure.
Bronchiolitis often occurs in epidemics and mostly in children < 24 mo, with a peak incidence in infants <
6 mo. The annual incidence in the first year of life is about 11 cases/100 children. Most cases occur
between November and April, with a peak incidence during January and February.
Etiology
Most cases are caused by
• Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
• Parainfluenza 3 virus
Less frequent causes are influenza A and B, parainfluenza 1 and 2, metapneumovirus, and adenoviruses.
Rhinoviruses, enteroviruses, measles virus, and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
are uncommon causes.
Pathophysiology
The virus spreads from the upper respiratory tract to the medium and small bronchi and bronchioles,
causing epithelial necrosis and initiating an inflammatory response. The developing edema and exudate
result in partial obstruction, which is most pronounced on expiration and leads to alveolar air trapping.
Complete obstruction and absorption of the trapped air may lead to multiple areas of atelectasis.
===PAGE:3037===
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, an affected infant has URI symptoms with progressively increasing respiratory distress
characterized by tachypnea, retractions, and a wheezy or hacking cough. Young infants may present with
recurrent apneic spells followed by more typical symptoms and signs over 24 to 48 h. Signs of distress
may include circumoral cyanosis, deepening retractions, and audible wheezing. Fever is usually but not
always present. Infants initially appear nontoxic and in no distress, despite tachypnea and retractions, but
may become increasingly lethargic as the infection progresses. Hypoxemia is the rule in more severely
affected infants. Dehydration may develop from vomiting and decreased oral intake. With fatigue,
respirations may become more shallow and ineffective, leading to respiratory acidosis. Auscultation
reveals wheezing, prolonged expiration, and, often, fine moist crackles. Many children have
accompanying acute otitis media.
Diagnosis
• Clinical presentation
• Pulse oximetry
• Chest x-ray as needed
• RSV antigen test from nasal swab or washing for seriously ill children
Diagnosis is suspected by history, examination, and occurrence of the illness as part of an epidemic.
Symptoms similar to bronchiolitis can result from asthma, which is more likely in a child > 18 mo of age,
especially if previous episodes of wheezing and a family history of asthma have been documented.
Gastric reflux with aspiration of gastric contents also may cause the clinical picture of bronchiolitis;
multiple episodes in an infant may be clues to this diagnosis. Foreign body aspiration occasionally causes
wheezing and should be considered if the onset is sudden and not associated with manifestations of URI.
Heart failure associated with a left-to-right shunt manifesting at age 2 to 3 mo also can be confused with
bronchiolitis.
Patients suspected of having bronchiolitis should undergo pulse oximetry to evaluate oxygenation. No
further testing is required for mild cases with normal O
levels, but in cases of hypoxemia, a chest x-ray
supports the diagnosis, typically showing hyperinflated lungs, depressed diaphragm, and prominent hilar
markings. Infiltrates may be present from atelectasis as well as RSV pneumonia, which is relatively
common among infants with RSV bronchiolitis. RSV rapid antigen testing done on a nasal swab or
washing is diagnostic but not generally necessary; it may be reserved for patients with illness severe
enough to require hospitalization. Other laboratory testing is nonspecific; about two thirds of the children
have WBC counts of 10,000 to 15,000/
μ
L. Most have 50 to 75% lymphocytes.
Prognosis
Prognosis is excellent. Most children recover in 3 to 5 days without sequelae, although wheezing and
cough may continue for 2 to 4 wk. Mortality is < 1% when medical care is adequate. An increased
incidence of asthma is suspected in children who have had bronchiolitis in early childhood, but the
association is controversial and the incidence seems to decrease as children age.
Treatment
• Supportive therapy
• O
supplementation as needed
• IV hydration as needed
Treatment is supportive, and most children can be managed at home with hydration and comfort
===PAGE:3038===
measures.
Indications for hospitalization
include accelerating respiratory distress, ill appearance (eg, cyanosis,
lethargy, fatigue), apnea by history, hypoxemia, and inadequate oral intake. Children with underlying
disorders such as cardiac disease, immunodeficiency, or bronchopulmonary dysplasia, which put them at
high risk of severe or complicated disease, also should be considered candidates for hospitalization.
In hospitalized children, 30 to 40% O
delivered by tent or face mask is usually sufficient to maintain O
saturation > 90%. Endotracheal intubation is indicated for severe recurrent apnea, hypoxemia
unresponsive to O
therapy, or CO
retention or if the child cannot clear bronchial secretions.
Hydration may be maintained with frequent small feedings of clear liquids. For sicker children, fluids
should be given IV initially, and the level of hydration should be monitored by urine output and specific
gravity and by serum electrolyte determinations.
There is some evidence that systemic corticosteroids are beneficial when given very early in the course
of the illness or in children with underlying corticosteroid-responsive conditions (eg, bronchopulmonary
dysplasia, asthma), but benefit in most hospitalized infants is unproven.
Antibiotics should be withheld unless a secondary bacterial infection (a rare sequela) occurs.
Bronchodilators are not uniformly effective, but a substantial subset of children may respond with shortterm improvement. This is particularly true of infants who have wheezed previously. Hospital stays
probably are not shortened.
Ribavirin, an antiviral drug active in vitro against RSV, influenza, and measles, is probably not effective
clinically and is no longer recommended; it also is potentially toxic to hospital staff. RSV immune globulin
has been tried but is probably ineffective.
Prevention of RSV infection by passive immunoprophylaxis with monoclonal antibody to RSV
(palivizumab) decreases the frequency of hospitalization but is costly and is indicated primarily in high-risk
infants (see p.
for indications and dosage).
Croup
(Laryngotracheobronchitis)
Croup is acute inflammation of the upper and lower respiratory tracts most commonly caused
by parainfluenza virus type 1 infection. It is characterized by
a barking cough and inspiratory
stridor. Diagnosis is usually obvious clinically but can be made by anteroposterior neck x-ray.
Treatment is antipyretics, hydration, nebulized racemic epinephrine, and corticosteroids.
Prognosis is excellent.
Croup affects mainly children aged 6 mo to 3 yr.
Etiology
The parainfluenza viruses, especially type 1, are the most common pathogens. Less common causes are
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and influenza A and B viruses, followed by adenovirus, enterovirus,
rhinovirus, measles virus, and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
. Croup caused by influenza may be particularly
severe and may occur in a broader age range of children.
Seasonal outbreaks are common. Cases caused by parainfluenza viruses tend to occur in the fall; those
caused by RSV and influenza viruses tend to occur in the winter and spring. Spread is usually through the
air or by contact with infected secretions.
Pathophysiology
The infection causes inflammation of the larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and lung parenchyma.
===PAGE:3039===
Obstruction caused by swelling and inflammatory exudates develops and becomes pronounced in the
subglottic region. Obstruction increases the work of breathing; rarely, tiring results in hypercapnia.
Atelectasis may occur concurrently if the bronchioles become obstructed.
Symptoms and Signs
Croup is usually preceded by URI symptoms. A barking, often spasmodic, cough and hoarseness then
occur, commonly at night; inspiratory stridor may be present as well. The child may awaken at night with
respiratory distress, tachypnea, and retractions. In severe cases, cyanosis with increasingly shallow
respirations may develop as the child tires.
The obvious respiratory distress and harsh inspiratory stridor are the most dramatic physical findings.
Auscultation reveals prolonged inspiration and stridor. Rales also may be present, indicating lower airway
involvement. Breath sounds may be diminished with atelectasis. Fever is present in about half of children.
The child's condition may seem to have improved in the morning but worsens again at night.
Recurrent episodes are often called spasmodic croup. Allergy or airway reactivity may play a role in
spasmodic croup, but the clinical manifestations cannot be differentiated from those of viral croup. Also,
spasmodic croup usually is initiated by a viral infection.
Diagnosis
• Clinical presentation (eg, barking cough, inspiratory stridor)
• Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral neck x-rays as needed
Diagnosis is usually obvious by the barking nature of the cough. Similar inspiratory stridor can result from
epiglottitis, bacterial tracheitis, foreign body, diphtheria, and retropharyngeal abscess. Epiglottitis (, retropharyngeal abscess (, and bacterial tracheitis ( have a more rapid
onset and cause a more toxic appearance, odynophagia, and fewer upper respiratory tract symptoms. A
foreign body may cause respiratory distress and a typical croupy cough, but fever and a preceding URI
are absent. Diphtheria is excluded by a history of adequate immunization and is confirmed by
identification of the organism in viral cultures of scrapings from typical grayish diphtheritic membrane.
If the diagnosis is unclear, patients should have AP and lateral x-rays of the neck and chest; subepiglottic
narrowing (steeple sign) seen on AP neck x-ray supports the diagnosis. Seriously ill patients, in whom
epiglottitis is a concern, should be examined in the operating room by appropriate specialists able to
establish an airway (. Patients should have pulse oximetry, and those with respiratory distress
should have ABG measurement.
Treatment
• For outpatients, cool humidified air and possibly a single dose of oral corticosteroids
• For inpatients, humidified O
, racemic epinephrine, and oral corticosteroids
The illness usually lasts 3 to 4 days and resolves spontaneously. A mildly ill child may be cared for at
home with hydration and antipyretics. Keeping the child comfortable is important, because fatigue and
crying can aggravate the condition. Humidification devices (eg, cold-steam vaporizers or humidifiers) may
ameliorate upper airway drying and are frequently used at home by families but have not been shown to
alter the course of the illness. The vast majority of children with croup recover completely.
Increasing or persistent respiratory distress, tachycardia, fatigue, cyanosis or hypoxemia, or dehydration
indicates need for hospitalization. Pulse oximetry is helpful for assessing and
monitoring severe cases. If
O
saturation falls below 92%, humidified O
should be given, and ABGs should be measured to assess
CO
retention. A 30 to 40% inspired O
concentration is usually adequate. CO
retention (PaCO
> 45
mm Hg) generally indicates fatigue and the need for endotracheal intubation, as does inability to maintain
===PAGE:3040===
oxygenation.
Nebulized racemic epinephrine 5 to 10 mg in 3 mL of saline q 2 h offers symptomatic relief and relieves
fatigue. However, the effects are transient; the course of the illness, the underlying viral infection, and the
PaO
are not altered by its use. Tachycardia and other adverse effects may occur.
High-dose dexamethasone 0.6 mg/kg IM or po once (maximum dose 10 mg) may benefit children early in
the first 24 h of the disease. It can help prevent hospitalization or help the child who is hospitalized with
moderate to severe croup. The viruses that most commonly cause croup do not usually predispose to
secondary bacterial infection, and antibiotics are rarely indicated.
===PAGE:3041===
Chapter 284. Cystic Fibrosis
Introduction
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited disease of the exocrine glands affecting primarily the GI and
respiratory systems. It leads to chronic lung disease, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency,
hepatobiliary disease, and abnormally high sweat electrolytes. Diagnosis is by sweat test or
identification of 2 CF-causing mutations in patients with characteristic symptoms or a positive
newborn screening test result. Treatment is supportive through aggressive multidisciplinary
care.
CF is the most common life-threatening genetic disease in the white population. In the US, it occurs in
about 1/3,300 white births, 1/15,300 black births, and 1/32,000 Asian-American births. Because of
improved treatment and life expectancy, 45% of patients are adults.
Etiology
CF is carried as an autosomal recessive trait by about 3% of the white population. The responsible gene
has been localized on the long arm of chromosome 7. It encodes a membrane-associated protein called
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). The most common gene mutation,
Δ
F
, occurs in about 70% of CF alleles; > 1500 less common CFTR mutations have been identified.
CFTR seems to be part of a cAMP-regulated Cl channel, regulating Cl and Na transport across epithelial
membranes. A number of additional functions are considered likely. Disease manifests only in
homozygotes. Heterozygotes may show subtle abnormalities of epithelial electrolyte transport but are
clinically unaffected.
Pathophysiology
Nearly all exocrine glands are affected in varying distribution and degree of severity. Glands may
• Become obstructed by viscid or solid eosinophilic material in the lumen (pancreas, intestinal glands,
intrahepatic bile ducts, gallbladder, and submaxillary glands)
• Appear histologically abnormal and produce excessive secretions (tracheobronchial and Brunner's
glands)
• Appear histologically normal but secrete excessive Na and Cl (sweat, parotid, and small salivary glands)
Respiratory:
Although the lungs are generally histologically normal at birth, most patients develop
pulmonary disease beginning in infancy or early childhood. Mucus plugging and chronic bacterial
infection, accompanied by a pronounced inflammatory response, damage the airways, ultimately leading
to bronchiectasis and respiratory insufficiency. The course is characterized by episodic exacerbations
with infection and progressive decline in pulmonary function.
Pulmonary damage is probably initiated by diffuse obstruction in the small airways by abnormally thick
mucus secretions. Bronchiolitis and mucopurulent plugging of the airways occur secondary to obstruction
and infection. Airway changes are more common than parenchymal changes, and emphysema is not
prominent. About 40% of patients have bronchial hyperreactivity that is responsive to bronchodilators;
however, benefits of bronchodilator therapy may not persist into adulthood. Chronic hypoxemia results in
muscular hypertrophy of the pulmonary arteries, pulmonary hypertension, and right ventricular
hypertrophy. Much
of the pulmonary damage may be caused by inflammation secondary to the release of
proteases by neutrophils in the airways.
The lungs of most patients are colonized by pathogenic bacteria. Early in the course,
Staphylococcus
aureus
is the most common pathogen, but as the disease progresses,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
is most
frequently isolated. A mucoid variant of
P. aeruginosa
is uniquely associated with CF. Colonization with
Burkholderia cepacia
occurs in about 3% of patients and may be associated with rapid pulmonary
===PAGE:3042===
deterioration.
GI:
The pancreas, intestines, and hepatobiliary system are frequently affected. Exocrine pancreatic
function is compromised in 85 to 95% of patients. Exceptions are a subset of patients who have certain
mild CF mutations, in whom pancreatic function is unaffected. Patients with pancreatic insufficiency have
malabsorption of fats (and fat-soluble vitamins) and protein. Duodenal fluid is abnormally viscid and
shows absence or diminution of enzyme activity and decreased HCO
-
concentration; stool trypsin and
chymotrypsin are absent or diminished. Endocrine pancreatic dysfunction is less common, but about 40%
of older patients have abnormal glucose tolerance secondary to reduced and delayed insulin response,
and about 17% develop diabetes.
Bile duct involvement with bile stasis and biliary plugging leads to asymptomatic hepatic fibrosis in 30% of
patients. About 5 to 6% of patients progress to irreversible multi-nodular biliary cirrhosis with varices and
portal hypertension, usually by 12 yr of age. Hepatocellular failure is a rare and late event. There is an
increased incidence of cholelithiasis, which is usually asymptomatic.
Abnormally viscid intestinal secretions often cause meconium ileus in neonates ( and
sometimes meconium plugging of the colon. Older children and adults also may develop intestinal
obstruction.
Other GI problems include intussusception, rectal prolapse, periappendiceal abscess, pancreatitis, an
increased risk of cancer of the hepatobiliary and GI tracts, gastroesophageal reflux, and esophagitis.
Other:
Infertility occurs in 98% of adult men secondary to maldevelopment of the vas deferens or to other
forms of obstructive azoospermia. In women, fertility is decreased secondary to viscid cervical secretions,
although many women with CF have carried pregnancies to term. However, the incidence of maternal
complications and preterm births is increased.
Other complications include osteopenia/osteoporosis, renal stones, iron deficiency anemia, and episodic
arthralgias/arthritis.
Symptoms and Signs
Respiratory:
Fifty percent of patients not diagnosed through newborn screening present with pulmonary
manifestations, often beginning in infancy. Recurrent or chronic infections manifested by cough and
wheezing are common. Cough is the most troublesome complaint, often accompanied by sputum,
gagging, vomiting, and disturbed sleep. Intercostal retractions, use of accessory muscles of respiration, a
barrel-chest deformity, digital clubbing, and cyanosis occur with disease progression. Upper respiratory
tract involvement includes nasal polyposis and chronic or recurrent sinusitis. Adolescents may have
retarded growth, delayed onset of puberty, and a declining tolerance for exercise. Pulmonary
complications in adolescents and adults include pneumothorax, infection with nontuberculous
mycobacteria, hemoptysis, and right heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension.
GI:
Meconium ileus due to obstruction of the ileum by viscid meconium may be the earliest sign and is
present in 15 to 20% of affected neonates. It typically manifests with abdominal distention, vomiting, and
failure to pass meconium. Some infants have intestinal perforation, with signs of peritonitis and shock.
Infants with meconium plug syndrome have a delayed passage of meconium. They can have similar signs
of obstruction or very mild and transient symptoms that go unnoticed. Older patients with CF can have
partial bowel obstruction similar to what is seen in infancy. Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS)
can occur in 10 to 20% of adolescents and adults with CF.
In infants without meconium ileus, disease onset may be heralded by a delay in regaining birth weight and
inadequate weight gain at 4 to 6 wk of age.
Occasionally, infants who are undernourished, especially if on hypoallergenic formula or soy formula,
present with generalized edema secondary to protein malabsorption.
===PAGE:3043===
Pancreatic insufficiency is usually clinically apparent early in life and may be progressive. Manifestations
include the frequent passage of bulky, foul-smelling, oily stools; abdominal protuberance; and poor growth
pattern with decreased subcutaneous tissue and muscle mass despite a normal or voracious appetite.
Clinical manifestations may occur secondary to deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins.
Rectal prolapse occurs in 20% of untreated infants and toddlers. Gastroesophageal reflux is relatively
common among older children and adults.
Other:
Excessive sweating in hot weather or with fever may lead to episodes of hypotonic
dehydration
and circulatory failure. In arid climates, infants may present with chronic metabolic alkalosis. Salt crystal
formation and a salty taste on the skin are highly suggestive of CF.
Diagnosis
• Suggested by a positive prenatal or newborn screening, family history, or symptomatic presentation
• Confirmed by a sweat test showing elevated sweat Cl on ≥ 2 occasions
• Sometimes confirmed by genetic testing or in vivo ion transport abnormalities across nasal epithelium
People are suspected of having CF by prenatal or newborn screening, family history, or symptoms. In all
cases, diagnosis needs to be confirmed by a quantitative pilocarpine iontophoresis sweat test.
Sweat testing:
In this test, localized sweating is stimulated with pilocarpine, the amount of sweat is
measured, and its Cl concentration is determined (see
Table 284-1
). The results are valid after 48 h of life, but an adequate sweat sample (> 75 mg on filter
paper or > 15
μ
L in microbore tubing) may be difficult to obtain before 2 wk of age. False-negative results
are rare but may occur in the presence of edema and hypoproteinemia or an inadequate quantity of
sweat. False-positive results are usually due to technical error. Transient elevation of sweat Cl
concentration can occur from psychosocial deprivation (eg, child abuse, neglect) and in patients with
anorexia nervosa. Although the sweat Cl concentration increases slightly with age, the sweat test is valid
at all ages. A positive sweat test result should be confirmed by a 2nd sweat test or by identification of 2
CF-causing mutations.
Intermediate sweat test results:
A small subset of patients have a mild or partial CF phenotype and
sweat Cl values that are persistently in the intermediate or even normal range. In addition, there are
patients who have single organ manifestations such as pancreatitis, chronic sinusitis, or congenital
bilateral absence of the vas deferens that may be due to partial CFTR protein dysfunction. In some of
these patients, the diagnosis of CF can be confirmed by the identification of 2 CF-causing mutations. If 2
CF-causing mutations are not identified, ancillary evaluations such as pancreatic function testing and
pancreatic imaging, high-resolution chest CT, pulmonary function testing, urogenital evaluation in males,
and bronchoalveolar lavage including assessment of microbial flora may be useful. Additional potentially
helpful tests include expanded CFTR genetic analysis and measurement of nasal transepithelial potential
difference (based on the observation of increased Na reabsorption across epithelium that is relatively
impermeable to Cl in patients with CF).
[Table 284-1.
Sweat Cl Concentration Ranges]
Pancreatic tests:
Pancreatic function should be assessed at the time of diagnosis, usually by measuring
72 h fecal fat excretion or the concentration of human pancreatic elastase in stool. This latter test is valid
even in the presence of exogenous pancreatic enzymes. Infants who are initially pancreatic sufficient and
who carry 2 severe mutations should have serial measurements to detect progression to pancreatic
insufficiency.
Respiratory assessment:
Chest x-rays are done at times of pulmonary deterioration or exacerbations
and routinely every 1 to 2 yr. High-resolution CT may be helpful to more precisely define the extent of
lung damage and to detect subtle airway abnormalities. Both may show hyperinflation and bronchial wall
thickening as the earliest findings. Subsequent changes include areas of infiltrate, atelectasis, and hilar
===PAGE:3044===
adenopathy. With advanced disease, segmental or lobar atelectasis, cyst formation, bronchiectasis, and
pulmonary artery and right ventricular enlargement occur. Branching, fingerlike opacifications that
represent mucoid impaction of dilated bronchi are characteristic.
Sinus CT studies are indicated in patients with significant sinus symptoms or nasal polyps in whom
endoscopic sinus surgery is being considered. These studies almost always show persistent opacification
of the paranasal sinuses.
Pulmonary function tests are the best indicators of clinical status and should be done 2 to 4 times/yr.
Pulmonary function can now be evaluated in infants by using a raised volume rapid thoracoabdominal
compression technique. Pulmonary function tests indicate hypoxemia; reduction in forced vital capacity
(FVC), forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
), forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% expired
volume (FEF
25-75
), and
FEV
/FVC ratio; and an increase in residual volume and the ratio of residual
volume to total lung capacity. Fifty percent of patients have evidence of reversible airway obstruction as
shown by improvement in pulmonary function after aerosol administration of a bronchodilator.
Oropharyngeal or sputum cultures should be done 2 to 4 times/yr, especially in patients not yet colonized
with
P. aeruginosa
. Bronchoscopy/bronchoalveolar lavage is indicated when it is important to precisely
define the patient's lower airway microbial flora (eg, to direct antibiotic selection).
Newborn screening:
Newborn screening for CF is rapidly expanding in the US and should be universal
by 2010. Screening is based on detecting an elevated concentration of immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT)
in the blood. There are two methods of confirming an elevated IRT level. In one method, a second IRT
test is done, which, if also elevated, is followed by a sweat test. In the other method, an elevated IRT
level is followed by CFTR mutation testing and, if 1 or 2 mutations are identified, then a sweat test is
done. Both strategies have about 95% sensitivity.
Carrier screening:
CF carrier screening is available in the US and is recommended for couples who are
planning a pregnancy or seeking prenatal care. If both potential parents carry a CFTR mutation, prenatal
screening of the fetus can be done by chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis. Prenatal counseling in
such cases is complicated by the wide phenotypic variability of CF and incomplete information on the
clinical consequences of many of the CFTR mutations that are identified through screening.
Prognosis
The course is largely determined by the degree of pulmonary involvement. Deterioration is inevitable,
leading to debilitation and eventual death, usually due to a combination of respiratory failure and cor
pulmonale. Prognosis has improved steadily over the past 5 decades, mainly because of aggressive
treatment before the onset of irreversible pulmonary changes. Median survival in the US is to age 37 yr.
Long-term survival is significantly better in patients without pancreatic insufficiency. Outcomes are also
affected by CFTR mutation profile, modifier genes, airway microbiology, exposure to air pollutants
(including tobacco smoke), and socioeconomic status. The FEV
, adjusted for age and sex, is the best
predictor of survival.
Treatment
• Comprehensive, multidisciplinary support
• Antibiotics, aerosol drugs to thin airway secretions, and physical maneuvers to clear airway secretions
• Inhaled bronchodilators and sometimes corticosteroids for responders
• Pancreatic enzyme supplementation
Comprehensive and intensive therapy should be directed by an experienced physician working with a
multidisciplinary team that includes other physicians, nurses, dieticians, physical and respiratory
therapists, counselors, pharmacists, and social workers. The goals of therapy are maintenance of normal
===PAGE:3045===
nutritional status, prevention or aggressive treatment of pulmonary and other complications,
encouragement of physical activity, and provision of psychosocial support. With appropriate support, most
patients can make an age-appropriate adjustment at home and school. Despite myriad problems, the
educational, occupational, and marital successes of patients are impressive.
Respiratory:
Treatment of pulmonary problems centers on prevention of airway obstruction and
prophylaxis against and control of pulmonary infection. Prophylaxis against pulmonary infections includes
maintenance of pertussis,
Haemophilus influenzae
, varicella,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
, and measles
immunity and annual influenza vaccination. In patients exposed to influenza, a neuraminidase inhibitor can
be used prophylactically. Giving palivizumab to infants with CF for prevention of respiratory syncytial virus
infection has been shown to be safe, but efficacy has not been documented.
Chest physical therapy consisting of postural drainage, percussion, vibration, and assisted coughing is
recommended at the first indication of pulmonary involvement (. In older patients, alternative
airway clearance techniques, such as active cycle of breathing, autogenic drainage, positive expiratory
pressure devices, and mechanical vest therapy, may be effective.
For those with reversible airway obstruction, bronchodilators may be given by aerosol. Corticosteroids by
aerosol usually are not effective. O
therapy is indicated for patients with severe pulmonary insufficiency
and hypoxemia.
Mechanical ventilation is generally not indicated for chronic respiratory failure. Its use should be restricted
to patients with good baseline status in whom acute reversible respiratory complications develop, in
association with pulmonary surgery, or to patients in whom lung transplantation is imminent. Noninvasive
positive pressure ventilation nasally or by face mask also can be beneficial. Oral expectorants are widely
used, but few data support their efficacy. Cough suppressants should be discouraged. Long-term daily
aerosol therapy with dornase alfa (recombinant human deoxyribonuclease) as well as 7% hypertonic
saline has been shown to slow the rate of decline in pulmonary function and to decrease the frequency of
severe respiratory tract exacerbations.
Pneumothorax can be treated with closed chest tube thoracostomy drainage. Open thoracotomy or
thoracoscopy with resection of pleural blebs and sponge abrasion of the pleural surfaces is effective in
treating recurrent pneumothoraces.
Massive or recurrent hemoptysis is treated by embolizing involved bronchial arteries.
Oral corticosteroids are indicated in infants with prolonged bronchiolitis and in patients with refractory
bronchospasm, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and inflammatory complications (eg, arthritis,
vasculitis). Long-term use of alternate-day corticosteroid therapy can slow the decline in pulmonary
function, but because of corticosteroid-related complications, it is not recommended for routine use.
Patients receiving corticosteroids must be closely monitored for evidence of diabetes and linear growth
retardation.
Ibuprofen, when given over several years at a dose sufficient to achieve a peak plasma concentration
between 50 and 100
μ
g/mL, has been shown to slow the rate of decline in pulmonary function, especially
in children 5 to 13 yr. The appropriate dose must be individualized based on pharmacokinetic studies.
Antibiotics:
Antibiotics should be used in symptomatic patients according to culture and sensitivity
testing. A penicillinase-resistant penicillin (eg, cloxacillin or dicloxacillin) or a cephalosporin (eg,
cephalexin) is the drug of choice for staphylococci. Erythromycin, amoxicillin/clavulanate, ampicillin,
tetracycline, linezolid, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, or occasionally chloramphenicol may be used
individually or in combination for protracted ambulatory therapy of pulmonary infection due to a variety of
organisms. Fluoroquinolones are effective against sensitive strains of
P. aeruginosa
and have been used
safely in young children.
For severe pulmonary exacerbations, especially in patients colonized with
P. aeruginosa
, parenteral
antibiotic therapy is advised. Patients often require hospital admission, but carefully selected patients can
safely receive the therapy at home. Combinations of an aminoglycoside (eg, tobramycin, gentamicin) and
===PAGE:3046===
an antipseudomonal penicillin are given IV. IV administration of cephalosporins and monobactams with
antipseudomonal activity may also be useful. The usual starting dose of tobramycin or gentamicin is 2.5
to 3.5 mg/kg tid, but higher doses (3.5 to 4 mg/kg tid) may be required to achieve acceptable serum
concentrations (peak level 8 to 10
μ
g/mL [11 to 17
μ
mol/L], trough value of < 2
μ
g/mL [< 4
μ
mol/L]).
Alternatively, tobramycin can be given safely and effectively in one daily dose (10 to 12 mg/kg). Because
of enhanced renal clearance, large doses of some penicillins may be required to achieve adequate serum
levels. The goal of treating pulmonary infections should be to improve the patient's clinical status
sufficiently so that continuous use of antibiotics is unnecessary. However, in patients who are colonized
with
P. aeruginosa
, long-term use of alternate-month aerosol tobramycin therapy and oral azithromycin
given 3 times/wk may be effective in improving or stabilizing pulmonary function and decreasing the
frequency of pulmonary exacerbations.
In symptomatic patients who are chronically colonized with
P. aeruginosa
, the role of antibiotic therapy is
to improve clinical parameters and possibly reduce the bacterial burden in the airways. Eradication of
Pseudomonas
is not usually possible. It has been shown, however, that early antibiotic treatment around
the time of initial airway colonization with nonmucoid strains of
P. aeruginosa
may be effective in
eradicating the organism for some period of time. Treatment strategies vary but usually consist of inhaled
tobramycin or colistin often in association with an oral fluoroquinolone.
GI:
Neonatal intestinal obstruction can sometimes be relieved by enemas containing a hyperosmolar or
iso-osmolar radiopaque contrast material; otherwise, surgical enterostomy to flush out the viscid
meconium in the intestinal lumen may be necessary. After the neonatal period, episodes of partial
intestinal obstruction (distal intestinal obstruction syndrome) can be treated with enemas containing a
hyperosmolar or iso-osmolar radiopaque contrast material or acetylcysteine, or by oral administration of a
balanced intestinal lavage solution. A stool softener such as dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate or lactulose
may help prevent such episodes. Ursodeoxycholic acid, a hydrophilic bile acid, is often used in patients
with liver disease caused by CF, but there is little evidence to support its efficacy.
Pancreatic enzyme replacement
should be given with all meals and snacks. The most
effective
enzyme preparations contain pancrelipase in pH-sensitive, enteric-coated micro-spheres or microtablets.
Infants are usually started at a dose of 2000 to 4000 IU lipase per 120 mL of formula or per breastfeeding
session. After infancy, weight-based dosing is used starting at 1000 IU lipase/kg/meal for children < 4 yr
and at 500 IU lipase/kg/meal for those > 4 yr. Usually, half the standard dose is given with snacks. Doses
> 2500 IU lipase/kg/meal or > 10,000 IU lipase/kg/day should be avoided because high enzyme dosages
have been associated with fibrosing colonopathy. In patients with high enzyme requirements, acid
suppression with an H
blocker or proton pump inhibitor may improve enzyme effectiveness.
Diet
therapy includes sufficient calories and protein to promote normal growth—30 to 50% more than the
usual recommended dietary allowances may be required (see
Table 1-4
 as well as a normal-to-high total fat in-take to increase the caloric density of the diet; a
water-miscible multivitamin supplement in double the recommended daily allowance; and salt
supplementation during infancy and periods of thermal stress and increased sweating. Infants receiving
broad-spectrum antibiotics and patients with liver disease and hemoptysis should be given supplemental
vitamin K. Formulas containing protein hydrolysates and medium-chain triglycerides may be used instead
of modified whole-milk formulas for infants with severe malabsorption. Glucose polymers and mediumchain triglyceride supplements can be used to increase caloric intake. In patients who fail to maintain
adequate nutritional status, enteral supplementation via NGT, gastrostomy, or jejunostomy may restore
normal growth and stabilize pulmonary function (. The use of appetite stimulants to enhance
growth may be helpful in some patients.
Other:
Patients with symptomatic right heart failure should be treated with diuretics, salt restriction, and
O
.
Surgery
may be indicated for localized bronchiectasis or atelectasis that cannot be treated effectively
with drugs, nasal polyps, chronic sinusitis, bleeding from esophageal varices secondary to portal
hypertension, gall-bladder disease, and intestinal obstruction due to a volvulus or an intussusception that
cannot be medically reduced. Liver transplantation has been done successfully in patients with end-stage
===PAGE:3047===
liver disease. Bilateral cadaveric lung and live donor lobar transplantation has been done successfully in
patients with advanced cardiopulmonary disease, as well as combined liver-lung transplantation for
patients with end-stage liver and lung disease. Double lung transplantation for severe lung disease is
becoming more routine and more successful with experience and improved techniques. About 60% of
people are alive 5 yr after transplantation of both lungs, and their condition is much improved.
Gene therapy, in which normal CF genes are delivered directly to the airways, holds promise for treating
CF. However, this therapy is only available in research trials. A number of new drugs to improve chloride
channel function, delivered by mouth or aerosol, are under investigation.
End-of-life care:
The patient and family deserve sensitive discussions of prognosis and preferences for
care throughout the course of illness, especially as the patient's pulmonary reserves become increasingly
limited. Most people facing the end of life with CF will be older adolescents or adults and will be
appropriately responsible for their own choices. Thus, they must know what is in store and what can be
done. One mark of respect for patients living with CF is to ensure that they are given the information and
opportunity to make life choices, including having a substantial hand in determining how and when to
accept dying. Often, discussion of transplantation is needed. In considering transplantation, patients need
to weigh the merits of longer survival with a transplant against the uncertainty of getting a transplant and
the ongoing (but different) illness of living with an organ transplant.
Deteriorating patients need to discuss the eventuality of dying. Patients and their families need to know
that most often dying is actually gentle and not profoundly symptomatic. When appropriate, palliative
care, including sufficient sedation, should be offered to ensure peaceful dying. A useful strategy for the
patient to consider is to accept a time-limited trial of fully aggressive treatment when needed, but to agree
in advance to parameters that indicate when to stop aggressive measures.
===PAGE:3048===
Chapter 285. Endocrine Disorders in Children
Introduction
(See also
Hypopituitarism in Children Resulting in Short Stature
on p.
and see p.
for diabetes in
adults and children.)
Some endocrine disorders occur mostly in children (eg, precocious or delayed puberty); others occur in
children and adults (eg, diabetes, thyroid disorders). Those that affect both adults and children may
cause different symptoms in children.
Congenital Goiter
Congenital goiter is a diffuse or nodular enlargement of the thyroid gland present at birth.
Thyroid hormone secretion may be decreased, increased, or normal. Diagnosis is by confirming
thyroid size with ultrasonography. Treatment is thyroid hormone replacement when
hypothyroidism is the cause. Surgery is indicated when breathing or swallowing is impaired.
Etiology
Congenital goiters may be caused by dyshormonogenesis (abnormal thyroid hormone production),
transplacental passage of maternal antibodies, or transplacental passage of goitrogens. Some causes
are hereditary.
Dyshormonogenesis:
Genetic defects in thyroid hormone production result in increased levels of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which in turn can cause congenital goiter. There are 4 main types of
dyshormonogenesis.
• Type 1 is caused by a defect in iodide transport secondary to altered synthesis of a cell surface protein
necessary for transport.
• Type 2 is caused by one of several defects in thyroid iodination mechanisms. The enzyme peroxidase,
necessary for iodine organification, may be absent (resulting in goitrous cretinism) or dysfunctional.
Another defect may impair hydrogen peroxide generation. Children with Pendred's syndrome have mild
hypothyroidism or euthyroidism, goiter, and sensorineural hearing loss due to an abnormal transport
protein (pendrin) involved in iodine transport and cochlear function.
• Type 3 is caused by complete or partial deiodination defects of monoiodotyrosine and diiodotyrosine in
thyroglobulin.
• Type 4 is caused by one of several defects in thyroglobulin synthesis, usually via X-linked inheritance
and thus commonly occurs in boys. This condition does not cause clinical hypothyroidism. It is,
however, characterized by a very low level of total serum thyroxine (T
) but normal levels of free T
and TSH.
Transplacental passage of maternal antibodies:
Women with an autoimmune thyroid disorder
produce antibodies that may cross the placenta during the 3rd trimester. Depending on the disorder, the
antibodies either block TSH receptors, causing hypothyroidism, or stimulate them, causing
hyperthyroidism. Typically, in affected infants, the changes in hormone secretion and the associated
goiter resolve spontaneously within 3 to 6 mo.
Transplacental passage of goitrogens:
Goitrogens such as amiodarone or antithyroid drugs (eg,
propylthiouracil, methimazole) can cross the placenta, sometimes causing hypothyroidism and rarely
causing goiter.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:3049===
The most common manifestation is firm, nontender enlargement of the thyroid. Enlargement is most often
diffuse but can be nodular. It may be noticeable at birth or detected later. In some patients, enlargement is
not directly observable, but continued growth can cause deviation or compression of the trachea,
compromising breathing and swallowing. Many children with goiters are euthyroid, but some present with
hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
Diagnosis
If the diagnosis is suspected, thyroid size is typically assessed by ultrasonography. T
and TSH are
measured.
Treatment
Hypothyroidism is treated with thyroid hormone. Goiters that compromise breathing and swallowing can
be treated surgically.
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is thyroid hormone deficiency. Symptoms in infants include poor feeding and
growth failure; symptoms in older children and adolescents are similar to those of adults but
also include growth failure, delayed puberty, or both. Diagnosis is by thyroid function testing
(eg, serum thyroxine, thyroid-stimulating hormone). Treatment is thyroid hormone replacement.
Etiology
Hypothyroidism in infants and young children may be congenital or acquired.
Congenital hypothyroidism
occurs in about 1/4000 live births. Most congenital cases are sporadic, but
about 10 to 20% are inherited. The most frequent cause of congenital hypothyroidism is dysgenesis,
either absence (agenesis) or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the thyroid gland. About 10% of
congenital hypothyroidism results from dyshormonogenesis (abnormal thyroid hormone production), of
which there are 4 types (. Rarely in the US but commonly in certain developing countries,
hypothyroidism results from maternal iodine deficiency. Rarely, transplacental transfer of antibodies,
goitrogens (eg, amiodarone), or antithyroid drugs (eg, propylthiouracil, methimazole) causes transient
hypothyroidism.
Acquired hypothyroidism
is typically caused by autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto's thyroiditis) and
occurs during later childhood and adolescence.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs in infants and young children differ from those in older children and adults. If iodine
deficiency occurs very early during pregnancy, infants may present with endemic cretinism (a syndrome
involving deaf-mutism), intellectual disability, and spasticity. Most other hypothyroid infants initially have
few if any symptoms or signs. Symptoms that do occur may be subtle or develop slowly because some
maternal thyroid hormone crosses the placenta. However, after the maternal thyroid hormone is
metabolized, if the underlying cause of hypothyroidism persists and hypothyroidism remains undiagnosed
or untreated, it usually slows CNS development moderately to severely and may be accompanied by low
muscle tone, prolonged hyperbilirubinemia, umbilical hernia, respiratory distress, macroglossia, large
fontanelles, poor feeding, and hoarse crying. Rarely, delayed diagnosis and treatment of severe
hypothyroidism lead to intellectual disability and short stature.
Some symptoms and signs in older children and adolescents are similar to those of adults (eg, weight
gain; constipation; coarse, dry hair; sallow, cool, or mottled coarse skin—. Signs specific to
children are growth retardation, delayed skeletal maturation, and usually delayed puberty.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3050===
• Routine neonatal screening
• Thyroid function tests
Routine neonatal screening detects hypothyroidism before clinical signs are evident. If screening is
positive, confirmation is necessary with thyroid function tests, including measurement of serum thyroxine
(T
), free T
, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). These tests are also done in older children and
adolescents in whom hypothyroidism is suspected.
Severe congenital hypothyroidism, even when treated promptly, may still cause subtle developmental
problems and sensorineural hearing loss. Hearing loss may be so mild that initial screening misses it,
although it may still interfere with language acquisition. Retesting after infancy is advised to detect subtle
hearing loss.
Treatment
• Thyroid hormone replacement
Most cases of congenital hypothyroidism require lifelong thyroid hormone replacement. Treatment with Lthyroxine 10 to 15
μ
g/kg po once/day must be started immediately and be closely monitored. This dosage
is intended to rapidly normalize serum T
and should then be adjusted to maintain the serum T
level
between 10 and 15
μ
g/dL during infancy. After age 1 yr, the usual dosage is 5 to 6
μ
g/kg po once/day,
titrated to maintain serum T
and TSH levels within the normal range for age. This dosing regimen is also
used for acquired hypothyroidism in children and adolescents. In later childhood or adolescence, the
starting dosage may be calculated as 100
μ
g/m
po once/day. In most treated infants, motor and
intellectual development is normal. Thyroxine-binding globulin deficiency, detected by screening that
relies primarily on T
measurement, does not require treatment because affected infants are euthyroid.
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism is excessive thyroid hormone production. Diagnosis is by thyroid function
testing (eg, free serum thyroxine, thyroid-stimulating hormone). Treatment is with
propylthiouracil or methimazole.
Etiology
Hyperthyroidism is rare in infants but potentially life-threatening. It develops in fetuses of women with
current or prior Graves' disease who have elevated titers of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins, which
overstimulate thyroid hormone production by binding to thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptors in
the
thyroid gland. These antibodies cross the placenta and cause thyroid hyperfunction in the fetus
(intrauterine Graves' disease), which can result in fetal death or premature birth. Because infants clear
the antibodies after birth, neonatal Graves' disease is usually transient. However, because the clearance
rate varies, duration of neonatal Graves' disease varies. In children and adolescents, Graves' disease is
the usual cause of hyperthyroidism.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs in infants include irritability, feeding problems, hypertension, tachycardia,
exophthalmos, goiter, frontal bossing, and microcephaly. Other early findings are failure to thrive,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Affected infants almost always recover within 6 mo; the course is rarely longer.
Persistent hyperthyroidism may result in craniosynostosis (premature fusion of the cranial sutures),
impaired intellect, growth failure, short stature, and hyperactivity later in childhood. Mortality rate may
reach 10 to 15%. In children and adolescents, acquired Graves' disease is characterized by diffuse goiter,
thyrotoxicosis, and, rarely, infiltrative ophthalmopathy.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3051===
• Thyroid function tests
Diagnosis is suspected in infants whose mothers have Graves' disease and high titers of stimulatory
antibodies (thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins) and is confirmed by measuring free serum thyroxine (T
)
and TSH. Diagnosis in adolescents is similar to that in adults and also includes thyroid function tests.
Treatment
• Antithyroid drugs
• Radioactive sodium iodine
• Sometimes surgery
Infants are given an antithyroid drug (eg, propylthiouracil 1.7 to 3.3 mg/kg po tid, methimazole 0.17 to 0.33
mg/kg po tid), sometimes with a
β
-blocker (eg, propranolol 0.8 mg/kg po tid) to treat symptoms. Treatment
must be monitored closely and stopped as soon as the disease has run its course (for treatment of
Graves' disease during pregnancy, . For older children and adolescents, treatment is similar
to that for adults ( and includes antithyroid drugs, radioactive sodium iodine, and sometimes
surgery.
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
(Adrenogenital Syndrome; Adrenal Virilism)
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a group of genetic disorders, each characterized by
inadequate synthesis of cortisol, aldosterone, or both. In the most common forms, accumulated
hormone precursors are shunted into androgen production, causing androgen excess; in rarer
forms, synthesis of androgens is also inadequate.
In the various forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, production of cortisol (a glucocorticoid),
aldosterone (a mineralocorticoid), or both is impaired because of an autosomal recessive genetic defect
in one of the adrenal enzymes involved in synthesizing adrenal steroid hormones from cholesterol. The
enzyme may be absent or deficient, completely or partially disabling synthesis of cortisol, aldosterone, or
both. In the forms in which cortisol synthesis is absent or decreased, ACTH (corticotropin) release,
normally suppressed by cortisol, is excessive. In the most common forms, 21-hydroxylase deficiency and
β
-hydroxylase deficiency, precursors proximal to the enzyme block accumulate and are shunted into
adrenal androgens. The consequent excess androgen secretion causes varying degrees of virilization in
external genitals of affected female fetuses; no defects are discernible in external genitals of male
fetuses. In some less common forms affecting enzymes other than 21-hydroxylase and 11
β
-hydroxylase,
the enzyme block impairs androgen synthesis (dehydoepiandrosterone [DHEAS] or androstenedione). As
a result, virilization of male fetuses is inadequate, but no defect is discernible in female fetuses.
21-Hydroxylase Deficiency
21-Hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deficiency causes defective conversion of adrenal precursors to
cortisol and, in some cases, to aldosterone, resulting in virilization and sometimes severe
hyponatremia and hyperkalemia. Diagnosis is by measurement of cortisol, its precursors, and
adrenal androgens, sometimes after ACTH administration. Treatment is with a glucocorticoid
plus, if needed, a mineralocorticoid and, for some female neonates with genital ambiguity,
surgical reconstruction.
21-Hydroxylase deficiency causes 90% of all cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Incidence ranges
from 1/10,000 to 1/15,000 live births. The deficiency completely or partially blocks conversion of adrenal
precursors into
cortisol and aldosterone, resulting in increased levels of progesterone, 17hydroxyprogesterone, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA, a weak androgen that masculinizes affected
female infants), and androstenedione. Plasma deoxycorticosterone, deoxycortisol, cortisol, and
aldosterone levels are low or absent.
===PAGE:3052===
Complete 21-hydroxylase deficiency
, the salt-wasting form, accounts for 70% of 21-hydroxylase
deficiency cases. The salt-wasting form (sometimes called the classic form of congenital adrenal
hyperplasia) is the most severe form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency; aldosterone is not secreted and salt is
lost, leading to hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and increased plasma renin activity.
Partial 21-hydroxylase deficiency
causes a less severe, non-salt-losing form, in which aldosterone
levels are normal or only slightly decreased.
Symptoms and Signs
The salt-wasting form causes hyponatremia (sometimes severe), hyperkalemia, and hypotension as well
as virilization. If undiagnosed and untreated, this form can lead to life-threatening adrenal crisis, with
vomiting, diarrhea, hypoglycemia, hypovolemia, and shock.
Very young female infants with the salt-wasting form have ambiguous external genitals, with clitoral
enlargement, fusion of the labia majora, and a urogenital sinus rather than distinct urethral and vaginal
openings. Male infants typically have normal sexual development. When the enzyme deficiency is much
milder, neonates have little or no virilization, but androgen excess manifests later with early appearance
of pubic hair and increase in growth velocity in both sexes, clitoral enlargement in girls, and penile
enlargement and earlier deepening of voice in boys.
In affected females, especially those with the salt-wasting form, reproductive function may be impaired as
they reach adulthood; they may have labial fusion and anovulatory cycles or amenorrhea. Some males
with the salt-wasting form are fertile as adults, but others have Leydig cell dysfunction, decreased
testosterone, and impaired spermatogenesis. Most affected males with the non-salt-losing form, even if
untreated, are fertile, but in some, spermatogenesis is impaired. Patients with the non-salt-losing form are
normotensive.
Diagnosis
• Blood tests
• Possibly ACTH stimulation test
• Possibly genotyping
Routine neonatal screening typically includes measuring serum levels of 17-hydroxyprogesterone. If
levels are elevated, the diagnosis is confirmed by identifying low blood levels of deoxycortisol, cortisol,
deoxycorticosterone, corticosterone, progesterone, and 17-hydroxyprogesterone and by identifying high
blood levels of DHEA and androstenedione. Rarely, the diagnosis is uncertain, and levels of these
hormones must be measured before and 60 min after ACTH is given (ACTH or cosyntropin stimulation
test). In patients who develop symptoms later, ACTH stimulation testing may help, but genotyping may be
required. In children with the salt-wasting form, deoxycorticosterone, corticosterone, and aldosterone
levels are low, and renin levels are high. Levels of urinary metabolites of cortisol precursors (eg,
pregnanetriol) and androgen precursors (eg, 17-ketosteroids) are also high but rarely necessary for the
diagnosis.
Prenatal screening
and diagnosis (and experimental treatment) are possible;
CYP21
genes are
analyzed if risk is high (eg, the fetus has an affected sibling with the genetic defect). Carrier status
(heterozygosity) can be determined in children and adults.
Treatment
• Corticosteroid replacement
• Mineralocorticoid replacement (salt-wasting form)
===PAGE:3053===
• Possibly reconstructive surgery
For
adrenal crisis
in infants, urgent therapy with IV fluids is needed. Stress doses of hydrocortisone (100
mg/m
/day) are given by continuous IV infusion; the dose is reduced over several weeks to a more
physiologic replacement dose. Stress doses of hydrocortisone are also given to prevent adrenal crisis if
the salt-wasting form is suspected.
Maintenance treatment is corticosteroids as replacement for deficient steroids (typically, oral
hydrocortisone 5 to 8 mg/m
tid or prednisone 1.5 to 2 mg/m
bid). Dexamethasone is used only in
postpubertal adolescents and adults. Cortisone acetate 18 to 36 mg/m
IM q 3 days may be used in
infants when oral therapy is unreliable. Response to therapy is monitored in infants every 3 mo and in
children aged > 12 mo every 3 to 4 mo. Overtreatment with a corticosteroid results in iatrogenic Cushing's
disease, causing obesity, subnormal growth, and delayed skeletal maturation. Under-treatment results in
inability to suppress ACTH with consequent hyperandrogenism, causing virilization and supranormal
growth velocity in children and, eventually, premature termination
of growth and short stature. Monitoring
involves measuring serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone and DHEA or androstenedione, as well as assessing
growth velocity and skeletal maturation each year.
Maintenance treatment for the salt-wasting form, in addition to corticosteroids, is miner-alocorticoid
replacement for restoration of Na and K homeostasis. Oral fludrocortisone (usually 0.1 mg once/day,
range 0.05 to 0.3 mg) is given if salt loss occurs. Infants often require supplemental oral salt for about 1
yr. Close monitoring during therapy is critical.
Affected female infants may require surgical reconstruction with reduction clitoroplasty and construction of
a vaginal opening. Often, further surgery is required during adulthood. With appropriate care and
attention to psychosexual issues, a normal sex life and fertility may be expected.
For prenatal treatment, a corticosteroid (usually dexamethasone) is given to the pregnant mother to
suppress fetal pituitary secretion of ACTH and thus reduce or prevent masculinization of affected female
fetuses. Treatment, which is experimental, must begin in the first several weeks of gestation.
β
-Hydroxylase Deficiency
β
-Hydroxylase (CYP11B1) deficiency involves defective conversion of adrenal precursors to
cortisol, resulting in virilization, hypernatremia, hypokalemia, and hypertension. Diagnosis is by
measurement of cortisol, its precursors, and adrenal androgens and sometimes by measuring
11-deoxycortisol and 11-deoxycorticosterone after ACTH administration. Treatment is with a
corticosteroid.
β
-Hydroxylase deficiency causes about 5% of all cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Conversion
of 11-deoxycortisol to cortisol and 11-deoxycorticosterone to corticosterone is partially blocked, leading to
increased levels of ACTH and overproduction of 11-deoxycortisol, 11-deoxycorticosterone (which has
mineralocorticoid activity), and adrenal androgens.
Symptoms and Signs
Female neonates may present with genital ambiguity, including clitoral enlargement, labial fusion, and a
urogenital sinus. Male neonates usually appear normal, but some present with penile enlargement. Some
children present later, with sexual precocity or, in females, menstrual irregularities and hirsutism. Salt
retention with hypernatremia, hypertension, and hypokalemic alkalosis may result from increased
mineralocorticoid activity.
Diagnosis
Prenatal diagnosis is not available. Plasma levels in neonates are determined for 11-deoxycortisol, 11deoxycorticosterone, adrenal androgens, and renin. Diagnosis is established by increased levels. If the
diagnosis is uncertain, levels of 11-deoxycortisol and 11-deoxycorticosterone are measured before and 60
===PAGE:3054===
min after ACTH stimulation. In affected adolescents, basal plasma levels may be normal, so ACTH
stimulation is recommended.
Treatment
• Corticosteroid replacement
• Possibly mineralocorticoid replacement
• Possibly reconstructive surgery
Treatment is cortisol replacement, typically with hydrocortisone 5 to 8 mg/m
tid, which reduces ACTH
secretion and reduces levels of 11-deoxycorticosterone and adrenal androgens to normal.
Mineralocorticoid replacement is usually not necessary for restoration of Na and K homeostasis but may
be required in the neonate or during severe stress. Response to treatment should be monitored, typically
by measuring serum 11-deoxycortisol, DHEA, and androstenedione and by assessing growth velocity and
skeletal maturation. BP should be monitored in patients who presented with hypertension.
Affected female infants may require surgical reconstruction with reduction clitoroplasty and construction of
a vaginal opening. Often, further surgery is required in adulthood, but with appropriate care and attention
to psychosexual issues, a normal sex life and fertility may be expected.
Male Hypogonadism
(See also p.
.)
Male hypogonadism is decreased production of testosterone, sperm, or both or, rarely,
decreased response to testosterone, resulting in delayed puberty, reproductive insufficiency, or
both. Diagnosis is by measurement of serum testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and folliclestimulating hormone and by stimulation tests with human chorionic gonadotropin or
gonadotropin-releasing hormone. Treatment depends on the cause.
Classification
There are 3 types of hypogonadism: primary, secondary, and a type caused by defective androgen action,
primarily due to defective androgen receptor activity.
Primary:
In primary (hypergonadotropic) hypogonadism, damage to the Leydig cells impairs testosterone
production, damages the seminiferous tubules, or does both; oligospermia or azoospermia and elevated
gonadotropins result. The most common cause is Klinefelter's syndrome; other causes are gonadal
dysgenesis (rare), cryptorchidism, bilateral anorchia, Leydig cell aplasia, Noonan's syndrome, and
myotonic dystrophy. Rare causes include orchitis due to mumps (which is becoming even rarer as
immunization rates increase), testicular torsion, and trauma.
Klinefelter's syndrome
is seminiferous tubule dysgenesis associated with the 47,XXY karyotype, in
which an extra X chromosome is acquired through maternal or, to a lesser extent, paternal meiotic
nondisjunction (see also p.
). The syndrome is usually identified at puberty, when inadequate sexual
development is noted, or later, when infertility is investigated. Diagnosis is based on elevated
gonadotropin levels and low to low-normal testosterone levels.
Gonadal dysgenesis
occurs in hermaphroditism, which is rare.
In
cryptorchidism
, one or both testes are undescended (. Etiology is usually unknown.
Sperm counts may be slightly low if one testis is undescended but are almost always very low if both are
undescended.
In
bilateral anorchia (vanishing testes syndrome)
, the testes were presumably present but were
===PAGE:3055===
resorbed before or after birth. External genitals and wolffian structures are normal, but mullerian duct
structures are lacking. Thus, testicular tissue must have been present during the first 12 wk of
embryogenesis because testicular differentiation occurred and testosterone and mullerian-inhibiting factor
were produced.
Leydig cell aplasia
occurs when congenital absence of Leydig cells causes male pseudohermaphroditism with ambiguous external genitals. Although wolffian ducts develop to some extent,
testosterone production is insufficient to induce normal male differentiation of the external genitals.
Mullerian ducts are absent because of normal production of mullerian-inhibiting hormone by Sertoli cells.
Gonadotropin levels are high with low testosterone levels.
Noonan's syndrome
may occur sporadically or as an autosomal dominant disorder. Phenotypic
abnormalities include hyperelasticity of the skin, hypertelorism, ptosis, low-set ears, short stature,
shortened 4th metacarpals, high-arched palate, and primarily right-sided cardiovascular abnormalities
(eg, pulmonic valve stenosis, atrial septal defect). Testes are often small or cryptorchid. Testosterone
levels may be low with high gonadotropin levels.
Defective androgen synthesis
is caused by enzyme defects that impair androgen synthesis, which may
occur in any of the pathways leading from cholesterol to dihydrotestosterone. These congenital problems
may occur in congenital adrenal hyperplasia when the same enzyme defect occurs in the adrenal glands
and the testes, resulting in defective androgen activity and ambiguous external genitals (ie, male
pseudohermaphroditism) of varying degrees.
Secondary:
Causes of secondary hypogonadism include panhypopituitarism, hypothalamic pituitary
tumors, isolated gonadotropin deficiency, Kallmann syndrome, Laurence-Moon syndrome, constitutional
delay of puberty, isolated luteinizing hormone deficiency, Prader-Willi syndrome, and functional and
acquired disorders of the CNS (eg, trauma, infection). Several acute disorders and chronic systemic
disorders (eg, chronic renal insufficiency, anorexia nervosa) may lead to hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, which resolves after recovery from the underlying disorder. Relative hypogonadism is
becoming more common among long-term survivors of childhood cancers treated with craniospinal
irradiation. Chemotherapy with alkylating drugs may lead to testicular damage and relative
hypogonadism.
Panhypopituitarism
may occur congenitally or anatomically (eg, in septo-optic dysplasia or DandyWalker malformation), causing deficiency of hypothalamic-releasing factors or pituitary hormones.
Acquired hypopituitarism may result from tumors, neoplasia, their treatment, vascular disorders, infiltrative
disorders (eg, sarcoidosis, Langerhans' cell histiocytosis), infections (eg, encephalitis, meningitis), or
trauma. Hypopituitarism in childhood may cause delayed growth, hypothyroidism, diabetes insipidus,
hypoadrenalism, and lack of sexual development when puberty is expected. Hormone deficiencies,
whether originating in the anterior or posterior pituitary, may be varied and multiple.
Kallmann syndrome
is characterized by anosmia due to aplasia or hypoplasia of the olfactory lobes and
by hypogonadism due to deficiency of hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). It occurs
when fetal GnRH neurosecretory neurons do not migrate from the olfactory placode to the hypothalamus.
The genetic defect is known; inheritance is usually X-linked. Other manifestations include microphallus,
cryptorchidism, midline defects, and unilateral kidney agenesis.
Laurence-Moon syndrome
is characterized by obesity, intellectual disability, retinitis pigmentosa, and
polydactyly.
Constitutional delay of puberty
is absence of pubertal development in boys ≥ 14 yr. Many have a
family history of delayed sexual development in a parent or sibling. Most affected boys have some
evidence of sexual maturation by age 18 yr or have a skeletal age of at least 12 yr (the average age at
which testicular enlargement is first noted). Typically, stature is usually short during childhood,
adolescence, or both but ultimately reaches normal range. Growth velocity is nearly normal, and growth
pattern parallels the lower percentile curves of the growth chart; the pubertal growth spurt is delayed.
When skeletal age is plotted on the growth curve, it essentially equals the percentile curve of the genetic
target. Diagnosis is by exclusion of growth hormone deficiency, hypothyroidism, and hypogonadism
===PAGE:3056===
(whether primary or due to gonadotropin deficiency).
Isolated luteinizing hormone (LH) deficiency (fertile eunuch syndrome)
is monotropic loss of LH
secretion in boys; follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels are normal. At puberty, growth of the testes is
normal because most testicular volume consists of seminiferous tubules, which respond to FSH.
Spermatogenesis may occur as tubular development proceeds. However, absence of LH results in Leydig
cell atrophy and testosterone deficiency. Therefore, patients do not develop normal secondary sexual
characteristics, but they continue to grow, reaching eunuchoidal proportions because the epiphyses do
not close.
Prader-Willi syndrome
is characterized by diminished fetal activity, muscular hypotonia, and failure to
thrive during early childhood, obesity from early childhood, intellectual disability, and hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. The syndrome is caused by deletion or disruption of a gene or genes on the proximal long
arm of paternal chromosome 15 or by uniparental disomy of maternal chromosome 15. Failure to thrive
due to hypotonia and feeding difficulties during infancy usually resolves after age 6 to 12 mo. From 12 to
18 mo onward, uncontrollable hyperphagia causes excessive weight gain and psychologic problems;
plethoric obesity becomes the most striking feature. Rapid weight gain continues into adulthood; stature
remains short. Features include emotional lability, poor gross motor skills, facial abnormalities (eg, a
narrow bitemporal dimension, almond-shaped eyes, a mouth with thin upper lips and down-turned
corners), and skeletal abnormalities (eg, scoliosis, kyphosis, osteopenia). Hands and feet are small.
Other features include cryptorchidism and a hypoplastic penis and scrotum.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical presentation depends on whether, when, and how testosterone and sperm production are
affected. (For presentation in adulthood, see p.
.)
If androgen deficiency or defects in androgen activity occur during the 1st trimester (< 12 wk gestation),
differentiation of internal wolffian ducts and external genitals is inadequate. Presentation may range from
ambiguous external genitals (ie, male pseudohermaphroditism) to normal-appearing female external
genitals. Androgen deficiency during the 2nd and 3rd trimesters may cause a microphallus and partially or
completely undescended testes.
Androgen deficiency that develops early in childhood has few consequences, but if it occurs when
puberty is expected, secondary sexual development is impaired. Such patients have poor muscle
development, a high-pitched voice, inadequate phallic and testicular growth, a small scrotum, sparse
pubic and axillary hair, and absent body hair. They may develop gynecomastia and grow to eunuchoidal
body proportions (arm span exceeds height by 5 cm; pubic to floor length exceeds crown to pubic length
by > 5 cm) because fusion of the epiphyses is delayed and long bone growth continues.
Diagnosis
• Measurement of testosterone, LH, FSH
• Karyotyping (for primary hypogonadism)
Diagnosis is often suspected based on developmental abnormalities or delayed puberty but requires
confirmation by testing, including measurement of testosterone, LH, and FSH. LH and FSH levels are
more sensitive than testosterone levels, especially for detecting primary hypogonadism.
LH and FSH levels also help determine whether hypogonadism is primary or secondary:
• High levels, even with low-normal testosterone levels, indicate primary hypogonadism.
• Levels that are low or lower than expected for the testosterone level indicate secondary hypogonadism.
In boys with short stature, delayed pubertal development, low testosterone, and low FSH and LH levels
may indicate constitutional delay. Elevated serum FSH levels with normal serum testosterone and LH
===PAGE:3057===
levels typically
indicate impaired spermatogenesis but not impaired testosterone production. In primary
hypogonadism, it is important to determine the karyotype to investigate for Klinefelter's syndrome.
Measurement of testosterone, FSH, and LH for diagnosis of hypogonadism requires an understanding of
how the levels vary. Before puberty, serum testosterone levels are < 20 ng/dL (< 0.7 nmol/L) and in
adulthood, levels are > 300 to 1200 mg/dL. Serum testosterone secretion is primarily circadian. In the 2nd
half of puberty, levels are higher at night than during the latter part of the day. A single sample obtained in
the morning can establish that circulating testosterone levels are normal. Because 98% of testosterone is
bound to carrier proteins in serum (testosterone-binding globulin), alterations in these protein levels alter
total testosterone levels. Measurement of total serum testosterone (protein bound and free) is usually the
most accurate indicator of testosterone secretion.
For LH and FSH levels, 3 blood samples should be taken at 20-min intervals. This approach maximizes
the likelihood of detecting LH pulsations, which occur at 90- to 120-min intervals. Serum LH and FSH
levels are usually < 5 mIU/mL before puberty and fluctuate between 5 and 20 mIU/mL during the 2nd half
of puberty and into adulthood.
The human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulation test is done to assess the presence and secretory
ability of testicular tissue; hCG 100 IU/kg is given to children. hCG stimulates Leydig cells, as does LH,
with which it shares a structural subunit, and stimulates testicular production of testosterone.
Testosterone levels should double after 3 to 4 days.
The GnRH stimulation test is done in boys to distinguish between hypothalamic dysfunction and pituitary
dysfunction as the cause of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. GnRH 2.5
μ
g/kg or leuprolide acetate 500
μ
g is rapidly injected IV. The injection directly stimulates the pituitary to secrete LH and FSH, which are
measured every 20 to 30 min for 2 h. Throughout childhood and into early puberty, response to GnRH is
predominantly an increase in FSH with little or no increase in LH. During puberty, LH and FSH respond
more or less equally (by doubling or tripling). An inadequate to absent increase in FSH and LH may
indicate hypopituitarism.
Treatment
• Surgery as needed
• Hormone replacement
Cryptorchidism is corrected early to obviate concerns about cancer developing in later adulthood and to
prevent testicular torsion (.
For secondary hypogonadism, any underlying pituitary or hypothalamic disorder is treated. Overall, the
goal is to provide androgen replacement starting with a low dose and progressively increasing the dose
over 18 to 24 mo.
Adolescents with androgen deficiency should be given long-acting injectable testosterone enanthate or
cypionate 50 mg q 2 to 4 wk; the dose is increased up to 200 mg over 18 to 24 mo. A transdermal patch
or gel may be used instead.
Treatment of Kallmann syndrome with hCG can correct cryptorchidism and establish fertility. Pulsatile
GnRH therapy given subcutaneously by a portable pump leads to endogenous sex hormone secretion,
progressive virilization, and even fertility.
In isolated LH deficiency, testosterone, via conversion to estrogen by aromatase, induces normal
epiphyseal closure.
Delayed Puberty
Delayed puberty is absence of sexual maturation at the expected time.
===PAGE:3058===
Delayed puberty may result from constitutional delay (, which often occurs in adolescents
with a family history of delayed growth. Prepubertal growth velocity is normal, but skeletal maturation and
adolescent growth spurt are delayed; sexual maturation is delayed but normal. Other causes include
Turner's syndrome in girls, Klinefelter's syndrome in boys, CNS disorders (eg, pituitary tumors that reduce
gonadotropin secretion), certain chronic disorders (eg, diabetes mellitus, inflammatory bowel disorders,
renal disorders, cystic fibrosis), and excess physical activity, especially in girls.
In girls, delayed puberty is diagnosed if no breast development occurs by age 13, if no pubic hair appears
by age 14, if > 5 yr elapse between the beginning of breast growth and menarche, or if menstruation
does not occur by age 16. In boys, delayed puberty is diagnosed if no testicular enlargement occurs by
age 14, if no pubic hair appears by age 15, or if > 5 yr elapse between initial and complete growth of the
genitals. Short stature may indicate delayed puberty in either sex. Although many children seem to be
starting puberty earlier than in past years, there are no indications that the criteria for delayed puberty
should change.
Constitutional delay of puberty is more prevalent in boys. Girls with severe pubertal delay should be
investigated for primary amenorrhea (. If boys show no sign of pubertal development or of
skeletal maturation beyond 11 to 12 yr by age 15, they may be given a 4- to 8-mo course of IM
testosterone enanthate 50 mg once/mo. These low doses induce puberty with some degree of virilization
and do not jeopardize adult height potential.
Precocious Puberty
Precocious puberty is onset of sexual maturation before age 8 in girls or age 9 in boys.
Diagnosis is by comparison with population standards, x-rays of the left hand and wrist to
assess skeletal maturation and check for accelerated bone growth, and measurement of serum
levels of gonadotropins and gonadal and adrenal steroids. Treatment depends on the cause.
The definition of precocious puberty depends on reliable population standards for onset of puberty (ie,
when pubertal milestones occur); because onset seems to be occurring earlier in the US, these standards
are being reevaluated. Almost 8 to 10% of white girls, almost 30% of black girls, and an intermediate
percentage of Hispanic girls reach early puberty at age 8. The lower limit of normal puberty may be 7 yr
for white girls and 6 yr for black girls. The mean age for early breast development is about 10 yr for white
girls and 9 yr for black girls (range 8 to 13 yr). The mean age for pubic hair growth is 9 to 10.5 yr for both
groups. These findings imply that guidelines for evaluating disorders that cause precocious puberty can
be interpreted more leniently if children are otherwise healthy and are not at risk of not reaching their full
adult height potential.
In girls, the first pubertal milestone is typically breast development (thelarche), followed soon after by
appearance of pubic hair (pubarche) and axillary hair and later by the first menstrual period (menarche).
In boys, the first pubertal milestone is typically testicular growth, followed by penile growth and
appearance of pubic and axillary hair. In both sexes, appearance of pubic and axillary hair is called
adrenarche.
Precocious puberty can be divided into 2 types:
• Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)-dependent
• GnRH-independent
GnRH-dependent precocious puberty is 5 to 10 times more frequent in girls; in boys, GnRH-dependent
and GnRH-independent precocious puberty occur with similar frequency. In GnRH-dependent precocious
puberty, the hypothalamic-pituitary axis is activated, resulting in enlargement and maturation of the
gonads, development of secondary sexual characteristics, and oogenesis or spermatogenesis. In GnRHindependent precocious puberty, secondary sexual characteristics result from high circulating levels of
estrogens or androgens, without activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.
Precocious puberty may also be classified by whether gonadarche or adrenarche occurs. In girls,
===PAGE:3059===
gonadarche includes breast development, change in body habitus, growth of the uterus, and eventually
menarche. In boys, gonadarche includes testicular enlargement; phallic growth; the initial appearance of
pubic, facial, and axillary hair; adult body odor; and facial skin oiliness or acne. Adrenarche for both girls
and boys involves the development of body hair, body odor, and acne.
Premature appearance of only one specific pubertal milestone is generally considered a benign variant of
development. Examples are precocious appearance of pubic and axillary hair before age 8 in girls and
age 9 in boys, and precocious onset of breast development before age 8 in girls.
Etiology
GnRH-dependent precocious puberty:
In most affected girls ≥ 4 yr, a specific cause cannot be
identified. However, many girls < 4 yr have a CNS lesion. Most (60%) affected boys have an identifiable
underlying lesion. Such lesions include intracranial tumors, especially of the hypothalamus (hamartoma,
rarely craniopharyngioma) or pineal gland region (teratoma, pinealoma). Neurofibromatosis and a few
other rare disorders have also been linked to precocious puberty.
GnRH-independent precocious puberty:
Follicular ovarian cysts cause most cases; other causes
include granulosatheca cell tumors, adrenal enzyme defects, and McCune-Albright syndrome (a triad of
follicular cysts, polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, and cafe-au-lait spots). Causes of GnRH-independent
precocious puberty in boys include certain enzyme defects, familial male gonadotropin-independent
precocity (due to an activating mutation of the gene for luteinizing hormone [LH] receptors), testosteroneproducing testicular tumors, and occasionally McCune-Albright syndrome.
Rarely in girls and boys, puberty results from pituitary adenomas (hamartomas) that secrete
gonadotropins.
Symptoms and Signs
In girls, breasts develop, and pubic hair, axillary hair, or both appear. Girls may begin to menstruate. In
boys, facial, axillary, and pubic hair appears and the penis grows, with or without enlargement of testes.
Body odor, acne, and behavior changes may develop in either sex. Height gain is initially rapid in both
sexes, but premature closure of the epiphyses results in short adult stature. Ovarian or testicular
enlargement occurs in precocious puberty but is usually absent in isolated precocious adrenarche.
Diagnosis
• Bone age x-rays
• Serum hormone measurement
• Possibly pelvic ultrasonography and brain MRI or CT
Diagnosis is clinical. X-rays of the left hand and wrist are done to check for accelerated skeletal
maturation as a result of sex hormone effect. Unless history and examination suggest an abnormality, no
further evaluation is required for children with pubertal milestones that are within 1 yr of population
standards. Girls and boys with precocious adrenarche and girls with precocious thelarche also do not
require further evaluation as long as x-rays confirm that skeletal maturation is not accelerated.
When further evaluation is necessary, the following serum hormones may be measured:
β
-human
chorionic gonadotropin, estradiol, testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, LH,
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and prolactin. Pelvic and adrenal ultrasonography and MRI or CT of
the brain may be done.
A GnRH stimulation test ( confirms a diagnosis of GnRH-independent precocious puberty
when gonadotropin responses to exogenous GnRH are prepubertal in boys or girls with no tumor or other
obvious cause of early sexual development. If the response is pubertal, CNS lesions must be excluded.
===PAGE:3060===
Treatment
• GnRH agonist therapy (GnRH-dependant precocious puberty)
• Androgen or estrogen antagonist therapy (GnRH-independent precocious puberty)
• Tumor excision as needed
If pubertal milestones are within 1 yr of population standards, reassurance and regular reexamination are
sufficient. Treatment is not needed for premature adrenarche or thelarche, but regular reexamination is
warranted to check for later development of precocious puberty. For GnRH-dependent precocious
puberty, pituitary LH and FSH secretion can be suppressed until normal puberty begins with the GnRH
agonist leuprolide acetate 0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg (minimum, 7.5 mg) IM q 4 wk. Responses to treatment must be
monitored, and drug dosages modified accordingly.
In girls with McCune-Albright syndrome, testolactone, an aromatase inhibitor, reduces serum estradiol and
effectively treats affected girls; alternatively, tamoxifen, an estrogen antagonist, may be beneficial.
If GnRH-independent precocious puberty in boys is due to familial male gonadotropin-independent
precocity or McCune-Albright syndrome, androgen antagonists (eg, spironolactone) ameliorate the effects
of excess androgen. The antifungal drug ketoconazole reduces testosterone in boys with familial male
gonadotropin-independent precocity.
If GnRH-independent precocious puberty is due to a hormone-producing tumor (eg, granulosatheca cell
tumors in girls, testicular tumors in boys), the tumor should be excised. However, girls require extended
follow-up to check for recurrence in the contralateral ovary.
===PAGE:3061===
Chapter 286. Neurologic Disorders in Children
Introduction
Related topics are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL: see
Chs. 176
,
, and
and p.
.
Cerebral Palsy Syndromes
Cerebral palsy (CP) refers to nonprogressive syndromes characterized by impaired voluntary
movement or posture and resulting from prenatal developmental malformations or perinatal or
postnatal CNS damage. Syndromes manifest
before age 5 yr. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment
may include physical and occupational therapy, braces, drug therapy or botulinum toxin
injections, orthopedic surgery, intrathecal baclofen, or, in certain cases, dorsal rhizotomy.
CP is a group of syndromes that causes non-progressive spasticity, ataxia, or involuntary movements; it is
not a specific disorder or single syndrome. CP syndromes occur in 0.1 to 0.2% of children and affect up
to 15% of premature infants.
Etiology
Etiology is multifactorial, and a specific cause is often hard to establish. Prematurity, in utero disorders,
neonatal encephalopathy, and kernicterus often contribute. Perinatal factors (eg, perinatal asphyxia,
stroke, CNS infections) probably cause 15 to 20% of cases. Spastic diplegia after premature birth, spastic
quadriparesis after perinatal asphyxia, and athetoid and dystonic forms after perinatal asphyxia or
kernicterus are examples of types of CP. CNS trauma or a severe systemic disorder (eg, stroke,
meningitis, sepsis, dehydration) during early childhood may also cause a CP syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
Before a specific syndrome develops, symptoms include lagging motor development and often persistent
infantile reflex patterns, hyperreflexia, and altered muscle tone.
Categories:
Syndromes are categorized mainly as one of the following, depending on which parts of the
CNS are malformed or damaged:
•
Spastic syndromes
occur in > 70% of cases. Spasticity is a state of resistance to passive range of
motion; resistance increases with increasing speed of that motion. It is due to upper motor neuron
involvement and may mildly or severely affect motor function. These syndromes may cause hemiplegia,
quadriplegia, diplegia, or paraplegia. Usually, deep tendon reflexes in affected limbs are increased,
muscles are hypertonic, and voluntary movements are weak and poorly coordinated. Joint contractures
develop, and joints may become misaligned. A scissors gait and toe walking are typical. In mild cases,
impairment may occur only during certain activities (eg, running). Corticobulbar impairment of oral,
lingual, and palatal movement, with consequent dysarthria or dysphagia, commonly occurs with
quadriplegia.
•
Athetoid or dyskinetic syndromes
occur in about 20% of cases and result from basal ganglia
involvement. The syndromes are defined by slow, writhing, involuntary movements of the proximal
extremities and trunk (athetoid movements), often activated by attempts at voluntary movement or by
excitement. Abrupt, jerky, distal (choreic) movements may also occur. Movements increase with
emotional tension and disappear during sleep. Dysarthria occurs and is often severe.
•
Ataxic syndromes
occur in < 5% of cases and result from involvement of the cerebellum or its
pathways. Weakness, incoordination, and intention tremor cause unsteadiness, a wide-based gait, and
difficulty with rapid or fine movements.
•
Mixed syndromes
are common—most often with spasticity and athetosis.
Associated findings:
About 25% of patients, most often those with spasticity, have other manifestations.
===PAGE:3062===
Strabismus and other visual defects may occur. Children with athetosis due to kernicterus commonly have
nerve deafness and upward gaze paralysis. Many children with spastic hemiplegia or paraplegia have
normal intelligence; children with spastic quadriplegia and mixed syndromes may have severe intellectual
disability.
Diagnosis
• Cranial MRI
If CP is suspected, cranial MRI is done; it can detect abnormalities in most cases.
CP can rarely be confirmed during early infancy, and the specific syndrome often cannot be characterized
until age 2 yr. High-risk children (eg, those with evidence of asphyxia, stroke, periventricular abnormalities
seen on cranial ultrasonography in premature infants, jaundice, meningitis, neonatal seizures, hypertonia,
hypotonia, or reflex suppression) should be followed closely.
CP should be differentiated from progressive hereditary neurologic disorders and disorders requiring
surgical or other specific neurologic treatments. Ataxic forms are particularly hard to distinguish, and in
many children with ataxia, a progressive cerebellar degenerative disorder is ultimately identified as the
cause. Athetosis, self-mutilation, and hyperuricemia in boys indicate Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (. Cutaneous or ocular abnormalities may indicate tuberous sclerosis, neurofibromatosis, ataxiatelangiectasia, von Hippel-Lindau disease, or Sturge-Weber syndrome. Infantile spinal muscular atrophy
and muscular dystrophies associated with hypotonia and hyporeflexia usually lack signs of cerebral
disease. Adrenoleukodystrophy begins later in childhood, but other
leukodystrophies begin earlier and
may be mistaken for CP at first.
Laboratory tests can exclude certain progressive storage disorders that involve the motor system (eg,
Tay-Sachs disease, metachromatic leukodystrophy, mucopolysaccharidoses). Other progressive
disorders (eg, infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy) may be suggested by nerve conduction studies and
electromyography but must be diagnosed clinically or pathologically. Children with pronounced intellectual
disability and symmetric motor abnormalities should be evaluated for amino acid and other metabolic
abnormalities (.
Prognosis
Most children survive to adulthood. Severe limitations in sucking and swallowing, which may require
feeding by gastrostomy tube, decrease likelihood of survival. The goal is for children to develop maximal
independence within the limits of their motor and associated deficits. With appropriate management,
many children, especially those with spastic paraplegia or hemiplegia, can lead near-normal lives.
Treatment
• Physical and occupational therapy
• Braces, drugs, or surgery to treat spasticity
• Assistive devices
Physical therapy and occupational therapy for stretching, strengthening, and facilitating good movement
patterns are usually used first. Bracing, drug therapy, and surgery are used to treat spasticity. Botulinum
toxin may be injected into muscles to decrease their uneven pull at joints and to prevent fixed
contractures. Drugs such as baclofen, benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam), tizanidine, and sometimes
dantrolene may diminish spasticity. Intrathecal baclofen (via subcutaneous pump and catheter) is the most
effective treatment for severe spasticity. Orthopedic surgery (eg, muscle-tendon release) may help reduce
restricted joint motion or misalignment. Selective dorsal rhizotomy may help a few children if spasticity
affects primarily the legs and if cognitive abilities are good.
When intellectual and physical limitations are not severe, children should attend mainstream schools.
===PAGE:3063===
However, some children require varying degrees of lifelong supervision and assistance. Speech training
or other forms of facilitated communication may be required. Even severely affected children can benefit
from training in activities of daily living (eg, washing, dressing, feeding), which increases their
independence and self-esteem and greatly reduces the burden for family members or other caregivers.
Assistive devices may increase mobility and communication, help maintain range of motion, and help
children and their caregivers with activities of daily living.
Parents of a child with chronic limitations need assistance and guidance in understanding the child's
status and potential and in dealing with their own feelings of guilt, anger, denial, and sadness (. Such children reach their maximal potential only with stable, sensible parental care and the
assistance of public and private agencies (eg, community health agencies, vocational rehabilitation
organizations, lay health organizations such as the United Cerebral Palsy Association).
Febrile Seizures
Febrile seizures are diagnosed in children < 6 yr with body temperature > 38° C and no previous
afebrile seizures when no cause can be identified. Diagnosis is clinical after exclusion of other
causes. Treatment of seizures lasting < 15 min is supportive. Seizures lasting ≥ 15 min are
treated with IV lorazepam and, if persistent, IV fosphenytoin, phenobarbital, valproate, or
levetiracetam. Maintenance drug therapy is usually not indicated.
Febrile seizures occur in about 2 to 5% of children < 6 yr; most occur at age 6 to 36 mo. Febrile seizures
may be simple or complex:
• Simple febrile seizures last < 15 min and have no focal features, and if they occur in a series, total
duration is < 30 min.
• Complex febrile seizures last 15 min and have focal features or postictal paresis, or occur in a series
with a total duration of > 30 min.
Most (> 90%) febrile seizures are simple.
Febrile seizures occur during bacterial or viral infections. They sometimes occur after certain vaccinations
such as measles, mumps, and rubella. Genetic and familial factors may increase susceptibility to febrile
seizures. Monozygotic twins have a much higher concordance rate than dizygotic twins. Several genes
associated with febrile seizures have been identified.
Symptoms and Signs
Often, febrile seizures occur during the initial rapid rise in body temperature, and most develop within 24 h
of fever onset. Typically, seizures are generalized; most are clonic, but some manifest as periods of atonic
or tonic posturing.
Diagnosis
• Exclusion of other causes
Seizures are diagnosed as febrile after exclusion of other causes. A fever may trigger seizures in children
with previous afebrile seizures; such events are not termed "febrile seizures" because such children have
already shown a tendency to have seizures.
Tests to exclude other disorders are determined clinically:
• CSF analysis to rule out meningitis and encephalitis if children are < 6 mo, have meningeal signs or
signs of CNS depression, or have seizures after several days of febrile illness
• Serum glucose, Na, Ca, Mg, and P and liver and kidney function tests to rule out metabolic disorders if
the history includes recent vomiting, diarrhea, or impaired fluid intake; if there are signs of dehydration
===PAGE:3064===
or edema; or if a complex febrile seizure occurs
• Cranial CT or MRI if examination detects focal features or if there are signs of increased intracranial
pressure
• Consideration of EEG if febrile seizures are complex or recurrent
EEG typically does not identify specific abnormalities or help predict recurrent seizures; it is not
recommended after an initial simple febrile seizure in children with a normal neurologic examination.
Prognosis
Overall recurrence rate is about 35%. Risk of recurrence is higher if children are < 1 yr when the initial
seizure occurs or have 1st-degree relatives who have had febrile seizures. Risk of developing an afebrile
seizure disorder after experiencing febrile seizures is about 2 to 5%, unless children have additional risk
factors (eg, complex febrile seizures, family history of seizures, developmental delay), which increase risk
up to 10%.
Treatment
• Supportive therapy if seizures last < 15 min
• Drugs and sometimes intubation if seizures last ≥ 15 min
Treatment is supportive if seizures last < 15 min.
Seizures lasting ≥ 15 min require drugs to end them, with careful monitoring of circulatory and respiratory
status. Intubation may be necessary if response is not immediate and the seizure persists.
Drug therapy is usually IV, with a short-acting benzodiazepine (eg, lorazepam 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg IV over 2
to 5 min repeated q 5 to 10 min for up to 3 doses). Fosphenytoin 15 to 20 mg PE (phenytoin
equivalents)/kg may be given over 15 min if the seizure persists. In children 2 to 5 yr, diazepam rectal gel
0.5 mg/kg may be given once and repeated in 4 to 12 h if lorazepam cannot be given IV. Phenobarbital,
valproate, or levetiracetam can also be used to treat a persistent seizure.
Maintenance drug therapy to prevent recurrent febrile seizures or development of afebrile seizures is
usually not indicated unless multiple or prolonged episodes have occurred.
Infantile Spasms
Infantile spasms (salaam seizures) are seizures characterized by sudden flexion of the arms,
forward flexion of the trunk, extension of the legs, and hypsarrhythmia on EEG.
Infantile spasms last a few seconds and can recur many times a day. They usually manifest in children <
1 yr; peak incidence is 2 to 3 yr. Seizures may resolve spontaneously by about age 5 yr but can be
replaced by other types of seizures.
Pathophysiology is unknown; however, infantile spasms may reflect abnormal interactions between the
cortex and brain stem and within the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. An immature CNS may also be a
factor.
Malformations of the brain and disorders that damage the brain before a few months of age can cause
infantile spasms; tuberous sclerosis is a common cause (. The cause may be idiopathic.
Symptoms and Signs
Spasms begin with a sudden, rapid, tonic contraction of the trunk and limbs, sometimes for several
seconds. Spasms range from subtle head nodding to contraction of the whole body. They involve flexion,
===PAGE:3065===
extension, or, more often, both (mixed). The spasms usually occur in clusters, often several dozens, in
close succession; they occur typically after children wake up and occasionally during sleep.
Developmental defects (eg, in intellect) are usually present. In the first stages of the disorder,
developmental regression can occur (eg, children may lose the ability to sit up or roll over).
Rate of premature death rate ranges from 5 to 31%; death often occurs before age 10 yr and is related to
the etiology of the infantile spasms.
Diagnosis
• Neuroimaging
• Waking and sleep EEG
• Laboratory testing as clinically indicated
Symptoms suggest the diagnosis. Physical and neurologic examinations are done, but often no
pathognomonic findings are identified except in tuberous sclerosis.
Waking and sleep EEG is done to check for specific abnormalities. Typically, the interictal pattern is
hypsarrhythmic (chaotic, high-voltage polymorphic delta and theta waves with superimposed multifocal
spike discharges). Multiple variations (eg, focal or asymmetric hypsarrhythmia) are possible. The ictal
pattern varies. Usually, electrical activity is markedly attenuated diffusely.
Tests to determine the cause may include
• Laboratory tests (eg, CBC with differential, serum glucose, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, Na, Ca, Mg,
and P, liver function tests) if a metabolic disorder is suspected
• CSF analysis
• Neuroimaging (MRI)
Treatment
Infantile spasms are difficult to treat, and the optimal regimen is controversial. ACTH 20 to 60 units IM
once/day may be used but has become very hard to obtain. Corticosteroids for 8 to 10 wk can also be
effective. Many anticonvulsants are ineffective; valproate is preferred, followed by clonazepam.
Nitrazepam, topiramate, zonisamide, or vigabatrin may help.
A ketogenic diet may help but is difficult to maintain.
In some patients, focal cortical resection can eliminate seizures.
Neonatal Seizure Disorders
(See also
Chapter 176
.)
Neonatal seizures are abnormal electrical discharges in the CNS of neonates and usually
manifest as stereotyped muscular activity or autonomic changes. Diagnosis is confirmed by
EEG; testing for causes is indicated. Treatment depends on the cause.
Seizures occur in up to 1.4% of term infants and 20% of premature infants. Seizures may be related to a
serious neonatal problem and require immediate evaluation. Most neonatal seizures are focal, probably
because generalization of electrical activity is impeded in neonates by lack of myelination and incomplete
formation of dendrites and synapses in the brain.
===PAGE:3066===
Some neonates undergoing EEG to assess seizures or other symptoms of encephalopathy (eg,
hypoactivity, decreased responsiveness) are found to have clinically silent seizures (epileptiform electrical
activity during an EEG but without any visible seizure activity). Occasionally, clinically silent electrical
activity is continuous and persists for > 20 min; at that point, it is defined as electrical status epilepticus.
Etiology
The abnormal CNS electrical discharge may be caused by a
• Primary intracranial process (eg, meningitis, ischemic stroke, encephalitis, intracranial hemorrhage,
tumor, malformation)
• Systemic problem (eg, hypoxia-ischemia, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, other disorders of
metabolism)
Seizures resulting from an intracranial process usually cannot be differentiated from seizures resulting
from a systemic problem by their clinical features (eg, focal vs generalized).
Hypoxia-ischemia,
the most common cause of neonatal seizures, may occur before, during, or after
delivery. Such seizures may be severe and difficult to treat, but they tend to abate after about 3 to 4 days.
Ischemic stroke
is more likely to occur in neonates with polycythemia, with thrombophilia due to a
genetic disorder, or with severe hypotension but may occur in neonates without any risk factors. Stroke
occurs typically in the middle cerebral artery distribution or, if associated with hypotension, in watershed
zones. Seizures resulting from stroke tend to be focal and may cause apnea.
Infections
such as meningitis and sepsis may cause seizures; in such cases, seizures are usually
accompanied by other symptoms and signs. Group B streptococci and gram-negative bacteria are
common causes of such infections in neonates. Encephalitis due to cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex
virus, rubella virus,
Treponema pallidum
, or
Toxoplasma gondii
can also cause seizures.
Hypoglycemia
is common among neonates whose mothers have diabetes, who are small for gestational
age, or who have hypoxiaischemia or other stresses. Seizures due to hypoglycemia tend to be focal and
variable. Prolonged or recurrent hypoglycemia may permanently affect the CNS.
Intracranial hemorrhage,
including subarachnoid, intracerebral, and intraventricular hemorrhage, may
cause seizures. Intraventricular
hemorrhage, which occurs in premature infants, results from bleeding in
the germinal matrix (an area that is adjacent to the ventricles and that gives rise to neurons and glial cells
during development).
Hypernatremia
or
hyponatremia
may cause seizures. Hypernatremia can result from accidental oral or
IV NaCl overload. Hyponatremia can result from dilution (when too much water is given po or IV) or may
follow Na loss in stool or urine.
Hypocalcemia
(serum Ca level < 7.5 mg/dL [< 1.87 mmol/L]) is usually accompanied by a serum P level
of > 3 mg/dL (> 0.95 mmol/L) and can be asymptomatic. Risk factors for hypocalcemia include prematurity
and a difficult birth.
Hypomagnesemia
is a rare cause of seizures, which may occur when the serum Mg level is < 1.4
mEq/L (< 0.7 mmol/L). Hypomagnesemia often occurs with hypocalcemia and should be considered in
neonates with hypocalcemia if seizures continue after adequate Ca therapy.
Inborn errors of metabolism
(eg, amino or organic aciduria) can cause neonatal seizures. Rarely,
pyridoxine deficiency or dependency causes seizures; it is readily treated.
Other causes include CNS malformations. Maternal substance abuse (eg, cocaine, heroin, diazepam) is
an increasingly common problem; seizures can accompany acute withdrawal after birth. Neonatal
seizures may be familial; some have genetic causes.
===PAGE:3067===
Symptoms and Signs
Neonatal seizures are usually focal and may be difficult to recognize. Common manifestations include
migratory clonic jerks of extremities, alternating hemiseizures, and primitive subcortical seizures (which
cause respiratory arrest, chewing movements, persistent eye deviations or nystagmoid movements, and
episodic changes in muscle tone). Generalized tonic-clonic seizures are uncommon.
Clinically silent electrical seizure activity is often present after a hypoxic-ischemic insult (including
perinatal asphyxia or stroke) and in neonates with CNS infections, especially after initial seizure
treatment, which is more likely to stop clinical manifestations than electrical seizure activity.
Diagnosis
• EEG
• Laboratory testing (eg, CSF analysis, electrolytes) as clinically indicated
• Usually cranial imaging
Evaluation begins with a detailed family history and a physical examination. EEG (waking and sleep) is
essential, especially when it is difficult to determine whether the neonate is having seizures; EEG is also
helpful for monitoring response to treatment. EEG should capture periods of active and quiet sleep and
thus may require ≥ 2 h of recording. A normal EEG with expected variation during sleep stages is a good
prognostic sign; an EEG with diffuse severe abnormalities (eg, suppressed voltage or burst suppression
pattern) is a poor one.
Other tests should include pulse oximetry; measurement of serum glucose, Na, K, Cl, HCO
, Ca, and Mg;
and lumbar puncture for CSF analysis (cell count and differential, glucose, protein) and culture. Urine and
blood cultures are obtained. The need for other metabolic tests (eg, arterial pH, blood gases, serum
bilirubin, urine amino or organic acids) or tests for commonly abused drugs (passed to the neonate
transplacentally or by breast-feeding) depends on the clinical situation.
Most infants should have cranial CT because it can detect intracranial bleeding and some brain
malformations. Cranial ultrasonography may detect intraventricular bleeding but not subarachnoid
bleeding; it may be preferred as a bedside test for very sick infants who cannot be moved to radiology.
Diffusion-weighted MRI and magnetic resonance spectroscopy may detect ischemic tissue within a few
hours but cannot be done until infants are stable.
Jitteriness (alternating contraction and relaxation of opposing muscles in the extremities) must be
distinguished from true seizure activity. Jitteriness is usually stimulus-induced and can be stopped by
holding the extremity still. Seizures occur spontaneously, and motor activity is felt even when the extremity
is held still.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the etiology. About 50% of neonates with seizures due to hypoxiaischemia develop
normally. Most neonates with seizures due to subarachnoid hemorrhage, hypocalcemia, or hyponatremia
do well. Those with severe intraventricular hemorrhage have a high morbidity rate. For idiopathic seizures
or seizures due to malformations, earlier onset is associated with higher morbidity and mortality rates.
Whether neonatal seizures cause damage beyond that caused by the underlying disorder is unknown,
although there is concern that the metabolic stress of prolonged nerve cell firing during lengthy seizures
may cause additional brain damage. When caused by hypoxia-ischemia, stroke, or infection, neonates
may have a series of seizures, but seizures typically abate after about 3 to 4 days; they may recur months
to years later if brain damage has occurred. Seizures due to other conditions may be more persistent
during the neonatal period.
===PAGE:3068===
Treatment
• Treatment of cause
• Anticonvulsants
Treatment focuses primarily on the underlying disorder and secondarily on seizures.
For low serum glucose, 10% dextrose 2 mL/kg IV is given, and the serum glucose level is monitored;
additional infusions are given as needed.
For hypocalcemia, 10% Ca gluconate 1 mL/kg IV (9 mg/kg of elemental Ca) is given; this dosage can be
repeated for persistent hypocalcemic seizures. Rate of Ca gluconate infusion should not exceed 0.5
mL/min (50 mg/min); continuous cardiac monitoring is necessary during the infusion. Extravasation should
be avoided because skin may slough.
For hypomagnesemia, 0.2 mL/kg of a 50% Mg sulfate solution is given IM.
Bacterial infections are treated with antibiotics; herpes encephalitis is treated with acyclovir.
Anticonvulsants are used unless seizures stop quickly after correction of reversible disorders such as
hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, hyponatremia, or hypernatremia. Phenobarbital is the
drug of choice; a loading dose of 15 to 20 mg/kg IV is given. If seizures continue, 5 to 10 mg/kg can be
given q 15 to 30 min until seizures cease or until a maximum of 30 mg/kg is given. Maintenance therapy
may be started about 12 h later at 1.5 to 2 mg/kg bid and increased to 2.5 mg/kg bid based on clinical or
EEG response or serum drug levels. Phenobarbital is continued IV, especially if seizures are frequent or
prolonged. When seizures are controlled, phenobarbital can be given orally. Therapeutic serum levels of
phenobarbital are 15 to 40
μ
g/mL (65 to 170
μ
mol/L).
If a 2nd drug is needed, fosphenytoin or phenytoin is used. The loading dose is 20 mg PE (phenytoin
equivalents)/kg IV. It is given over 40 min to avoid hypotension or arrhythmias. A maintenance dose is
then started at 2 to 3 mg/kg q 12 h and adjusted based on clinical response or serum levels. Therapeutic
serum levels for phenytoin are 10 to 20
μ
g/mL (40 to 80
μ
mol/L). Appropriate duration of therapy with any
drug is not known.
Lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg IV may be used for resistant seizures and repeated at 5- to 10-min intervals, up to 3
doses in any 8-h period.
Some of the newer anticonvulsants are being investigated for treatment of neonatal seizures.
Neonates given IV anticonvulsants are closely observed; overmedication may result in respiratory
depression.
Tourette's Syndrome
(Gilles de la Tourette's Syndrome)
Tourette's syndrome is a hereditary tic disorder that begins during childhood. Symptoms
include simple, complex, and vocal tics. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment may include clonidine
and antipsychotics.
Tourette's syndrome is probably autosomal dominant with variable penetrance; the specific genetic
abnormality is unknown. Male:female ratio is 3:1. Simple transient tics, chronic tic disorder, and Tourette's
syndrome form a continuum or spectrum.
Symptoms and Signs
The movement disorder may begin with simple tics (eg, facial grimacing, head jerking, blinking, sniffing)
===PAGE:3069===
that progress to multiple complex tics, including respiratory and vocal ones (eg, loud, irritating
vocalizations; snorting). Vocal tics may begin as grunting or barking noises and evolve into compulsive
utterances that are often loud or shrill. Patients may voluntarily suppress tics for seconds or minutes.
Coprolalia (involuntary scatologic or obscene utterances) occurs in a few patients. Severe tics and
coprolalia are physically and socially disabling. Echolalia (immediate repetition of one's own or another
person's words or phrases) is common. In most children, tics tend to wane during the teenage years.
Comorbid disorders (eg, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, learning
disabilities, anxiety) and poor socialization are common and may be more problematic and more likely to
need intervention than the tics.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is clinical. To differentiate Tourette's syndrome from transient tics, physicians may have to
monitor patients over time.
Treatment
• Clonidine
• Sometimes antipsychotics
Treatment to suppress tics is recommended only if they are significantly interfering with the children's
activities or self-image; treatment does not alter the natural history of the disorder. Clonidine 0.05 to 0.1
mg po tid or qid is effective in some patients. Adverse effects of fatigue may limit dosage; hypotension is
uncommon.
Antipsychotics (eg, risperidone 0.25 to 1.5 mg po bid, haloperidol 0.5 to 2 mg po bid or tid, pimozide 1 to 2
mg po bid, olanzapine 2.5 to 5 mg once/day) may be required. The lowest dose required to make tics
tolerable is used; doses are tapered as tics wane. Adverse effects of dysphoria, parkinsonism, akathisia,
and tardive dyskinesia may limit use of anti-psychotics; using lower daytime doses and higher bedtime
doses may decrease adverse effects.
===PAGE:3070===
Chapter 287. Neurocutaneous Syndromes
Introduction
Neurocutaneous syndromes (eg, neurofibromatosis, Sturge-Weber syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, von
Hippel-Lindau disease) are neurologic syndromes with cutaneous manifestations. These disorders
frequently also cause eye lesions, brain malformations, seizures, and intellectual disability.
Neurofibromatosis
Neurofibromatosis is an autosomal dominant disorder that causes tumors to develop along the
course of peripheral nerves and that occasionally results in marked soft-tissue or bone
deformities. Diagnosis is clinical. There is no specific treatment, but tumors can be removed
surgically.
Neurofibromatosis has 2 types. Type 1 (von Recklinghausen's disease) is most prevalent, causing
neurologic, cutaneous, and sometimes soft-tissue or bone manifestations. Type 2 accounts for 10% of
cases, manifesting primarily as congenital bilateral acoustic neuromas. The gene for type 1 is located on
band 17q11.2, and that for type 2 is located on band 22q11.
Neurofibromas (benign tumors consisting of Schwann cells and neural fibroblasts) may be peripheral or
central.
Peripheral neurofibromas
can develop anywhere along the course of peripheral nerves. Most appear
during adolescence. There are 4 forms:
• Cutaneous neurofibromas are soft and fleshy.
• Subcutaneous neurofibromas are firm and nodular.
• Nodular plexiform neurofibromas may involve spinal nerve roots, typically growing through an
intervertebral foramen to cause intraspinal and extraspinal masses (dumb-bell tumor). The intraspinal
part may compress the spinal cord.
• Diffuse plexiform neurofibromas (subcutaneous nodules or amorphous overgrowth of underlying bone or
Schwann cells) can be disfiguring and may cause deficits distal to the neurofibroma. These
neurofibromas can become malignant.
Central (cranial nerve) neurofibromas
have 2 forms:
• Optic gliomas: These may cause progressive blindness. They may occur in both types 1 and 2.
• Acoustic neuromas (vestibular schwannomas): These may cause dizziness, ataxia, deafness, and
tinnitus. They occur in type 2.
Symptoms and Signs
Type 1:
Most patients are asymptomatic. Some present with neurologic symptoms or bone deformities. In
> 90%, characteristic skin lesions (see
Plate 72
) are apparent at birth or develop during infancy. Lesions are medium-brown (cafe-au-lait),
freckle-like macules, distributed most commonly over the trunk, pelvis, and flexor creases of elbows and
knees. During late childhood, flesh-colored cutaneous tumors of various sizes and shapes appear,
ranging in number from several to thousands. Rarely, plexiform neurofibromas develop, causing an
irregularly thickened, distorted structure with grotesque deformities.
Neurologic symptoms vary, depending on location and number of neurofibromas. Bone abnormalities
include
===PAGE:3071===
• Fibrous dysplasia
• Subperiosteal bone cysts
• Vertebral scalloping
• Scoliosis
• Thinning of the long-bone cortex
•
Pseudarthrosis
• Absence of the greater wing of the sphenoid bone (posterior orbital wall), with consequent pulsating
exophthalmos
An optic glioma and Lisch nodules (iris hamartomas) occur in some patients. Changes in arterial walls
may lead to Moyamoya disease or intracranial artery aneurysms. Some children have learning problems
and slightly larger heads.
Type 2:
Bilateral acoustic neuromas develop and become symptomatic during childhood or early
adulthood. They cause hearing loss, unsteadiness, and sometimes headache or facial weakness.
Bilateral 8th cranial (vestibulocochlear) nerve masses may be present. Family members may have
gliomas, meningiomas, or schwannomas.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• CT or MRI
Most patients with type 1 are identified during routine examination, examination for cosmetic complaints,
or evaluation of a positive family history. Diagnosis is clinical (see
Table 287-1
). CT or MRI is done in patients with neurologic symptoms or signs on presentation and in
those with other examination findings that suggest neurofibromatosis. Neuroimaging may detect 8th
cranial nerve masses in type 2; MRI may show focal density changes in type 1.
Genetic testing exists but is not routinely available.
Treatment
• Possibly surgery or irradiation
No general treatment is available. Neurofibromas that cause severe symptoms may require surgical
removal or irradiation, although surgery may obliterate function of the involved nerve.
Genetic counseling is advisable. If either parent has neurofibromatosis, risk to subsequent offspring is
50%; if neither has it, risk for subsequent children is unclear because new mutations are common.
Sturge-Weber Syndrome
Sturge-Weber syndrome is a rare congenital vascular disorder characterized by a facial portwine stain, a leptomeningeal angioma, and neurologic complications (eg, seizures, focal
neurologic deficits, intellectual disability).
Sturge-Weber syndrome causes a port-wine stain typically on the forehead and upper eyelid in the
distribution of the 1st or 2nd division of the trigeminal nerve. A leptomeningeal angioma occurs in 90% of
patients when the port-wine stain involves upper and lower eyelids on one side but only in 10 to 20%
when only one eyelid is affected. Neurologic complications include seizures, focal neurologic deficits (eg,
===PAGE:3072===
hemiparesis), and intellectual disability. The disorder can also cause glaucoma and vascular
malformations, which may increase risk of vascular events (eg, stroke,
[Table 287-1.
Diagnosing Neurofibromatosis]
thrombosis, venous occlusion, infarction). It is not inherited; etiology is unclear.
Types:
There are 3 types:
• Type I: Port-wine stain and brain angiomas
• Type II: Port-wine stain but no brain angiomas
• Type III: Brain angioma but no port-wine stain
Symptoms and Signs
The port-wine stain can vary in size and color, ranging from light pink to deep purple.
Seizures occur in about 75 to 90% of patients and typically start by age 1 yr. Seizures are usually focal
but can become generalized. Hemiparesis of the side opposite the port-wine stain occurs in 25 to 50% of
patients. About 50% of patients have intellectual disability, and more have some kind of learning difficulty.
Development may be delayed.
Glaucoma may be present at birth or develop later. The eyeball may enlarge and bulge out of its socket
(buphthalmos).
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is suggested by a characteristic port-wine stain. CT and MRI are used to check for a
leptomeningeal angioma. Neurologic examination is done to check for neurologic complications.
Treatment
Treatment focuses on symptoms. Anticonvulsants and drugs to treat glaucoma are used. Low-dose
aspirin is often given to help prevent strokes. Selective photothermolysis can lighten the port-wine stain.
Tuberous Sclerosis
Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is a dominantly inherited genetic disorder in which tumors (usually
hamartomas) develop in multiple organs.
Children with TS or TS complex have tumors in multiple organs, including the heart, eyes, kidneys, lungs,
and skin. Many children have kidney tumors, usually angiomyolipomas, which can cause hypertension
and cystic kidney disease. Renal carcinoma can also occur. Some children also have cardiac
rhabdomyomas. Brain tubers (gyral enlargements) and tumors, usually astrocytomas, can occur.
In families with several affected members, up to 4 separate gene sites have been identified. If either
parent has the disorder, children have a 50% risk of having it. However, new mutations account for most
new cases.
Symptoms and Signs
Affected children may have seizures, intellectual disability, autism, learning disorders, or behavioral
problems. Infants may present with a type of seizure called infantile spasms (. Retinal
patches are common and may be visible with funduscopy.
Skin findings include
===PAGE:3073===
• Initially pale, ash leaf-shaped macules, which develop during infancy or early childhood
• Angiofibromas of the face (adenoma sebaceum), which develop during later childhood
• Congenital shagreen patches (raised lesions resembling an orange peel), usually on the back
• Subcutaneous nodules
• Cafe-au-lait spots
• Subungual fibromas, which can develop any time during childhood or early adulthood
Diagnosis
• Imaging of affected organs
• Genetic testing
Cardiac or cranial manifestations may be visible on prenatal ultrasonography. MRI or ultrasonography of
the affected organs is necessary for confirmation.
Specific genetic testing is available.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on symptom severity. Infants with mild symptoms generally do well and live long,
productive lives; infants with severe symptoms may have serious disabilities. Regardless of severity, most
children show continued developmental progress. Occasionally, neurologic degeneration may occur and
requires investigation.
Treatment
Treatment is symptomatic:
•
For seizures:
Anticonvulsants or even brain surgery
•
For skin lesions:
Dermabrasion or laser techniques
•
For neurobehavioral problems:
Behavior management techniques or drugs
•
For hypertension caused by renal problems:
Antihypertensives or surgery to remove growing
tumors
•
For developmental delays:
Special schooling or occupational therapy
Genetic counseling is indicated for adolescents and adults of childbearing age.
Von Hippel-Lindau Disease
Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is a rare hereditary neurocutaneous disorder characterized by
tumors in multiple organs.
VHL most commonly causes cerebellar hemangioblastomas and retinal angiomas. Tumors, including
pheochromocytomas and cysts (renal, hepatic, or pancreatic), can occur in other organs; risk of
developing renal cell carcinoma increases with age and by age 60 may be as high as 70%.
Manifestations typically appear between ages 10 and 30 but can appear earlier.
===PAGE:3074===
The disorder is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable penetrance. The
VHL
gene is
located on the short arm of chromosome 3.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms depend on the size and location of the tumors. Symptoms may include headaches, dizziness,
weakness, impaired vision, and high BP.
Retinal angiomas, detected by direct ophthalmoscopy, appear as a dilated artery leading from the disk to
a peripheral tumor with an engorged vein. These angiomas are usually asymptomatic, but if they are
centrally located and enlarge, they can result in substantial loss of vision. These tumors increase risk of
retinal detachment, macular edema, and glaucoma.
Untreated, VHL can result in blindness, brain damage, or death. Death usually results from complications
of cerebellar hemangioblastomas or renal cell carcinoma.
Diagnosis
The disorder is diagnosed when typical tumors are detected and one of the following criteria is met:
• More than one tumor in the brain or eye
• Single tumor in the brain or eye and one elsewhere in the body
• Family history of VHL and presence of a tumor
If one cerebellar hemangioblastoma, retinal angioma, or pheochromocytoma is detected, clinicians should
look for other tumors.
Genetic testing is done to check for an abnormal
VHL
gene in at-risk family members. If an abnormal
gene is detected, family members are monitored for tumors for the rest of their life.
Treatment
• Surgery or sometimes radiation therapy
• For retinal angiomas, laser coagulation or cryotherapy
• Regular monitoring
Treatment often involves surgical removal of the tumor before it becomes harmful. Some tumors can be
treated with focused high-dose radiation. Typically, retinal angiomas are treated with laser coagulation or
cryotherapy to preserve vision.
Patients should be monitored regularly for progression of the disorder. Appropriate monitoring and
treatment can improve prognosis.
===PAGE:3075===
Chapter 288. Bone and Connective Tissue Disorders in Children
Introduction
Many bone disorders, particularly those affecting the lower extremities (eg, Osgood-Schlatter disease),
result from the dramatic changes that occur in a growing child's musculoskeletal system. These disorders
may resolve or worsen with continued growth. Other bone disorders may be inherited (eg,
achondroplasia) or acquired (eg, Legg-Calve-Perthes disease).
There are over 200 disorders that involve connective tissue. Certain disorders are characterized by
overactivity of the immune system with resulting inflammation and systemic damage to the tissues (eg,
SLE [see p.] and juvenile idiopathic arthritis [formerly known as juvenile RA—see p.]). Other
disorders involve biochemical abnormalities or structural defects of the connective tissue. Some of these
disorders are inherited, and some are of unknown etiology.
Cutis Laxa
Cutis laxa (CL) is characterized by lax skin hanging in loose folds. Diagnosis is clinical. There is
no specific treatment, but plastic surgery is sometimes done.
CL may be inherited or acquired. There are 4 hereditary forms: autosomal dominant, X-linked recessive,
and 2 autosomal recessive. The autosomal recessive forms tend to be more common. One of the
recessive forms causes potentially lethal cardiovascular, respiratory, and GI complications. The other
inherited forms are relatively benign.
Rarely, infants can acquire CL after a febrile illness or after exposure to a specific drug (eg,
hypersensitivity reaction to penicillin, fetal exposure to penicillamine). In children or adolescents, CL
usually develops after a severe illness involving fever, polyserositis, or erythema multiforme. In adults, it
may develop insidiously. The underlying defect is unknown, but fragmented elastin is present in all forms.
Pathophysiology
CL is caused by abnormal elastin metabolism that results in reduced elasticity of the skin. The precise
cause is unknown. Several factors, such as copper deficiency, elastin quantity and morphology, and
elastases and elastase inhibitors, are implicated in the abnormal elastin degradation.
Symptoms and Signs
In hereditary forms, dermal laxity may be present at birth or develop later; it occurs wherever the skin is
normally loose and hanging in folds, most obviously on the face. Affected children have mournful or
Churchillian facies and a hooked nose. The benign autosomal recessive form also causes developmental
retardation and joint laxity. GI tract hernias and diverticula are common. If the disorder is severe,
progressive pulmonary emphysema may precipitate cor pulmonale. Bronchiectasis, heart failure, and
aortic aneurysms can also occur.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical. There are no specific laboratory findings; however, a skin biopsy may be done.
Certain tests (eg, echocardiography, chest x-ray) may be done to check for associated conditions (eg,
emphysema, cardiomegaly, heart failure). Typical CL can be distinguished from Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
because dermal fragility and articular hypermobility are absent. Other disorders sometimes cause
localized areas of loose skin. In Turner's syndrome, lax skinfolds at the base of an affected girl's neck
tighten and resemble webbing as she ages. In neurofibromatosis, unilateral pendular plexiform neuromas
occasionally develop, but their configuration and texture distinguish them from CL.
Treatment
There is no specific treatment. Plastic surgery considerably improves appearance in patients with
===PAGE:3076===
hereditary CL but is less successful in those with acquired CL. Healing is usually uncomplicated, but
dermal laxity may recur. Extracutaneous complications are treated appropriately.
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a hereditary collagen disorder characterized by articular
hypermobility, dermal hyperelasticity, and widespread tissue fragility. Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment is supportive.
Inheritance is usually autosomal dominant, but Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is heterogeneous. Different gene
mutations affect the amount, structure, or assembly of different collagens. Mutations can exist in the
genes that encode collagens (eg, type I, III, or V) or collagen-modifying enzymes (eg, lysyl hydroxylase, a
collagen cleaving protease). The 6 major types are classic, hypermobility, vascular, kyphoscoliosis,
arthrochalasis, and dermatosparaxis. There are also several rare or hard-to-classify types.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary widely. Predominant symptoms include hypermobile joints, abnormal scar
formation and wound healing, fragile vessels, and velvety, hyperextensible skin. Skin can be stretched
several centimeters but returns to normal when released. Wide papyraceous scars often overlie bony
prominences, particularly elbows, knees, and shins; scarring is less severe in the hypermobility type.
Molluscoid pseudotumors (fleshy outgrowths) frequently form on top of scars or at pressure points. Extent
of joint hypermobility varies but may be marked in the arthrochalasis, classic, and hypermobility types.
Bleeding tendency is rare, although the vascular type is characterized by vascular rupture and bruising.
Subcutaneous calcified spherules may be palpated or seen on x-ray studies.
Complications:
Minor trauma may cause wide gaping wounds but little bleeding; surgical
wound closure
may be difficult because sutures tend to tear out of the fragile tissue. Surgical complications occur
because of deep tissue fragility. Sclera may be fragile, leading to perforation of the globe in the
kyphoscoliosis type.
Bland synovial effusions, sprains, and dislocations occur frequently. Spinal kyphoscoliosis occurs in 25%
of patients (especially those with the kyphoscoliosis type), thoracic deformity in 20%, and talipes
equinovarum in 5%. About 90% of affected adults have pes planus (flat feet). Congenital hip dislocation
occurs in 1% (the arthrochalasis type is characterized by bilateral congenital hip dislocation).
GI hernias and diverticula are common. Rarely, portions of the GI tract spontaneously hemorrhage and
perforate, and dissecting aortic aneurysm and large arteries spontaneously rupture. Valvular prolapse is a
common complication in the most severe type (vascular type). In pregnant women, tissue extensibility may
cause premature birth, cervical incompetence, and possibly uterine rupture; if the fetus is affected, fetal
membrane is fragile, sometimes resulting in early rupture. Maternal tissue fragility may complicate
episiotomy or cesarean delivery. Antenatal, perinatal, and postnatal bleeding may occur. Other potentially
serious complications include arteriovenous fistula, ruptured viscus, and pneumothorax or
pneumohemothorax.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is largely clinical, and specialized genetic and biochemical tests are available at some research
centers for some types. Ultra-structural examination of skin biopsy can help in diagnosing the classic,
hypermobility, and vascular types. Echocardiography is done to check for heart disorders (eg, valvular
prolapse, arterial aneurysm) that are associated with some of the types.
Prognosis
Life span is usually normal with most types. Potentially lethal complications occur in certain types (eg,
arterial rupture in the vascular type).
Treatment
===PAGE:3077===
There is no specific treatment. Trauma should be minimized. Protective clothing and padding may help. If
surgery is done, hemostasis must be meticulous. Wounds are carefully sutured, and tissue tension is
avoided. Obstetric supervision during pregnancy and delivery is mandatory. Genetic counseling should be
provided.
Marfan Syndrome
Marfan syndrome consists of connective tissue anomalies resulting in ocular, skeletal, and
cardiovascular abnormalities (eg, dilation of ascending aorta, which can lead to aortic
dissection). Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment may include prophylactic
β
-blockers to slow dilation
of the ascending aorta and prophylactic aortic surgery.
Inheritance is autosomal dominant. The basic molecular defect results from mutations in the gene
encoding the glycoprotein fibrillin-1 (
FBN1
), which is the main component of microfibrils and helps anchor
cells to the extracellular matrix. The principal structural defect involves the cardiovascular,
musculoskeletal, and ocular systems. The pulmonary system and CNS are also affected. There are many
different manifestations of the genetic mutation that causes Marfan syndrome; however, it is typically
recognized by the constellation of long limbs, aortic root dilation, and dislocated lenses.
Symptoms and Signs
Cardiovascular system:
Findings include valvular prolapse and aortic aneurysm. A diastolic murmur
may be heard over the aortic valve. Those with mitral valve prolapse may have a systolic click and a late
systolic murmur or, in severe cases, a holosystolic murmur. Most severe complications result from
pathologic changes in the aortic root and ascending aorta. The aortic media is affected preferentially in
areas subject to the greatest hemodynamic stress. The aorta progressively dilates or acutely dissects,
beginning in the coronary sinuses, sometimes before age 10 yr. The aortic root dilates in 50% of children
and in 60 to 80% of adults and can cause aortic regurgitation. Bacterial endocarditis may develop.
Redundant cusps and chordae tendineae may lead to mitral valve prolapse or regurgitation.
Musculoskeletal system:
Severity varies greatly. Patients are taller than average for age and family;
arm span exceeds height. Arachnodactyly (disproportionately long, thin digits) is noticeable, often by the
thumb sign (the distal phalanx of the thumb protrudes beyond the edge of the clenched fist). Sternum
deformity—pectus carinatum (outward displacement) or pectus excavatum (inward displacement)—is
common, as are joint hyperextensibility, genu recurvatum (backward curvature of the legs at the knees),
pes planus (flat feet), kyphoscoliosis, and diaphragmatic and inguinal hernias. Subcutaneous fat usually
is sparse. The palate is often high-arched.
[Table 288-1.
Diagnostic Criteria for Marfan Syndrome (Ghent Nosology)]
Ocular system:
Findings include ectopia lentis (subluxation or upward dislocation of the lens) and
iridodonesis (tremulousness of the iris). The margin of the dislocated lens can often be seen through the
undilated pupil. High-grade myopia may be present, and spontaneous retinal detachment sometimes
occurs.
Pulmonary system:
Cystic lung disease and recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax may occur. These
disorders can cause pain and shortness of breath.
CNS:
Dural ectasia is a common finding and most frequently occurs in the lumbosacral spine. It is
widening of the dural sac surrounding the spinal cord and may cause headache, lower back pain, or
neurologic deficits manifested by bowel or bladder weakness.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
===PAGE:3078===
• Echocardiography/MRI (measurement of the aortic root, detection of valve prolapse)
• Slit-lamp examination (lens abnormalities)
• X-rays of skeletal system (hand, spine, pelvis, chest, foot, and skull for characteristic abnormalities)
• MRI (dural ectasia)
Diagnosis can be difficult because many patients have few typical symptoms and signs and no specific
histologic or biochemical changes. Considering this variability, diagnostic criteria are based on
constellations of clinical findings and family and genetic history (see
Table 288-1
). Nonetheless,
diagnosis is uncertain in many partial cases of Marfan syndrome. Homocystinuria can partially mimic
Marfan syndrome but can be differentiated by detecting homocystine in the urine. Prenatal diagnosis by
linkage analysis of the
FBN1
gene mutation is hampered by poor genotype/phenotype correlation.
Standard imaging of the skeletal, cardiovascular, and ocular systems is done to detect any clinically
relevant structural abnormalities and to provide information contributing to the diagnostic criteria (eg,
echocardiography to identify aortic root enlargement). In addition to the criteria established within organ
systems, family history (1st-degree relative with Marfan syndrome) and genetic history (presence of the
FBN1
mutation known to cause Marfan syndrome) are considered major criteria.
Prognosis
Advancements in therapy and regular monitoring have improved quality of life and reduced mortality.
Median life expectancy increased from 48 yr in 1972 to 72 yr as of 1992. However, life expectancy is still
reduced for the average patient, primarily because of the cardiac and vascular complications. This
decreased life expectancy can take an emotional toll on an adolescent and the family.
Treatment
• Induction of precocious puberty in tall girls
•
β
-Blockers
• Elective aortic repair and valve repair
• Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis
• Bracing and surgery for scoliosis
Treatment focuses on prevention and treatment of complications. For very tall girls, inducing precocious
puberty by age 10 with estrogens and progesterone may reduce potential adult height. All patients should
routinely be given
β
-blockers (eg, atenolol, propranolol) to help prevent cardiovascular complications.
These drugs lower myocardial contractility and pulse pressure and reduce progression of aortic root
dilation and risk of dissection. Prophylactic surgery is offered if aortic diameter is > 5 cm (less in children).
Pregnant women are at especially high risk of aortic complications; elective aortic repair before
conception should be discussed. Severe valve regurgitation is also surgically repaired. Bacterial
endocarditis prophylaxis before certain invasive procedures ( is not indicated except in
patients who have prosthetic valves or who previously had infective endocarditis (see
Tables 215-3
and
215-4
). Scoliosis is managed with bracing as long as possible, but surgical intervention is encouraged in
patients with curves of 40 to 50°.
Cardiovascular, skeletal, and ocular findings should be reevaluated annually. Appropriate genetic
counseling is indicated.
Nail-Patella Syndrome
(Osteo-Onychodysplasia; Arthro-Onychodysplasia; Onycho-Osteodysplasia)
===PAGE:3079===
Nail-patella syndrome is a rare inherited disorder of mesenchymal tissue characterized by
abnormalities of bones, joints, fingernails and toenails, and kidneys.
Nail-patella syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by a mutation in the gene for the
transcription factor
LMX1B
, which plays an important role in vertebrate limb and kidney development.
There is bilateral hypoplasia or absence of the patella, subluxation of the radial head at the elbows, and
bilateral accessory iliac horns. Fingernails and toenails are absent or hypoplastic, with pitting and ridges.
Renal dysfunction occurs in up to 50% of patients due to focal segmental glomerular deposits of IgM and
C3. Proteinuria is the most common manifestation, but about 30% of people with renal involvement slowly
progress to renal failure.
Diagnosis is suggested clinically; sometimes renal biopsy is indicated, which is diagnostic.
LMX1B
mutation analysis is possible, including for prenatal diagnosis, but the type of mutation does not usually
predict clinical severity.
There is no specific treatment, but when indicated, kidney transplantation has been successful without
evidence of recurrent disease in the graft.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary collagen disorder causing diffuse abnormal fragility
of bone and is sometimes accompanied by sensorineural hearing loss, blue sclerae,
dentinogenesis imperfecta, and joint hypermobility.
There are 4 main types of OI; types I and IV are autosomal dominant, whereas types II and III are
autosomal recessive. Other types are rare.
Symptoms and Signs
Hearing loss is present in 50 to 65% of all patients with OI and may occur in any of the 4 types.
Type I
is the mildest. Symptoms and signs in some patients are limited to blue sclerae (due to a
deficiency in connective tissue, allowing the underlying vessels to show through) and musculoskeletal
pain due to joint hypermobility. Recurrent fractures in childhood are possible.
Type II
(neonatal lethal type or OI congenita) is the most severe and is lethal. Multiple congenital
fractures result in shortened extremities. Sclerae are blue. The skull is soft and, when palpated, feels like
a bag of bones. Because the skull is soft, trauma during delivery may cause intracranial hemorrhage and
stillbirth, or neonates may die suddenly during the first few days or weeks of life.
Type III
is the most severe nonlethal form of OI. Patients with type III have short stature, spinal curvature,
and multiple, recurrent fractures. Macrocephaly with triangular facies and pectal deformities are common.
Scleral hue varies.
Type IV
is intermediate in severity. Survival rate is high. Bones fracture easily in childhood before
adolescence. Sclera are typically normal in color. Height is moderate-short stature. Accurate diagnosis is
important because these patients may benefit from treatment.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually clinical, but there are no standardized criteria. Analysis of type I pro-collagen (a
structural component of bones, ligaments, and tendons) from cultured fibro-blasts (from a skin biopsy) or
sequence analysis of the
COL1A1
and
COL1A2
genes can be used when clinical diagnosis is unclear.
Severe OI can be detected in utero by level II ultrasonography.
===PAGE:3080===
Treatment
• Growth hormone
• Bisphosphonates
Growth hormone helps growth-responsive children (types I and IV). There is limited experience with the
use of IV bisphosphonates (eg, pamidronate 0.5 to 3 mg/kg once/day for 3 days, repeated as needed q 4
to 6 mo) with children, but they can increase bone density and decrease bone pain and fracture
frequency. Preliminary studies suggest that oral alendronate (1 mg/kg, 20 mg maximum) is also effective.
Orthopedic surgery, physical therapy, and occupational therapy help prevent fractures and improve
function. Cochlear implantation is indicated in selected cases of hearing loss.
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum is a rare genetic disorder characterized by calcification of the
elastic fibers of the skin, retina, and cardiovascular system.
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum is caused by mutations in the
ABCC6
gene that are inherited in both
autosomal dominant and recessive forms. The
ABCC6
gene product is a trans-membrane transporter
protein that probably plays roles in cellular detoxification. Characteristic cutaneous papular lesions begin
in childhood and are primarily of cosmetic concern. They appear as small yellowish papules that typically
occur on the neck and axillae and flexural surfaces. Elastic tissues become calcified and fragmented,
leading to disruption of the involved organ systems. Ocular involvement includes angioid streaks of the
retina, retinal hemorrhages, and gradual vision loss. Cardiovascular manifestations can include
intermittent claudication, premature atherosclerosis with subsequent hypertension, angina, and MI.
Fragility of vessels can lead to GI hemorrhage and small vessel bleeding with subsequent anemia.
Diagnosis is based on clinical and histologic findings. Laboratory and imaging studies are done for
associated conditions (eg, CBC, echocardiography, head CT).
Treatment of retinal angioid streaks with intravitreal injections of the angiogenesis-blocking antibody
bevacizumab shows promise. Otherwise, there is no specific treatment, and the aim is to prevent
complications. People should avoid drugs that may cause stomach or intestinal bleeding, such as aspirin,
other NSAIDs, and anticoagulants. People with pseudoxanthoma elasticum should avoid contact sports
because of the risk of injury to the eye. Complications may limit life span.
Congenital Hypophosphatasia
Congenital hypophosphatasia is absence or low levels of serum alkaline phosphatase due to
mutations in the gene encoding tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphatase.
Because serum alkaline phosphatase is absent or decreased, Ca
++
is not diffusely deposited in bones,
causing low bone density and hypercalcemia. Vomiting, inability to gain weight, and enlargement of the
epiphyses (similar to that in rickets) usually occur. Patients who survive infancy have bony deformities
and short stature, but mental development is normal. No treatment is effective, but infusions of alkaline
phosphatase and bone marrow transplantation have limited roles. NSAIDs reduce bone pain.
Idiopathic Scoliosis
Idiopathic scoliosis is lateral curvature of the spine.
Idiopathic scoliosis is the most common form of scoliosis and is present in 2 to 4% of children aged 10 to
16 yr. Boys and girls are equally affected; however, it is 10 times more likely to progress and require
treatment in girls.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:3081===
Scoliosis may first be suspected when one shoulder seems higher than the other or when clothes do not
hang straight, but it is often detected during routine physical examination. Other findings include
asymmetry in shoulder height, apparent leg-length discrepancy, and asymmetry of the chest wall. Patients
may initially report fatigue in the lumbar region after prolonged sitting or standing. Muscular backaches in
areas of strain (eg, in the lumbosacral angle) may follow.
Diagnosis
• X-ray of the spine
The curve is most pronounced when patients bend forward. Most curves are convex to the right in the
thoracic area and to the left in the lumbar area, so that the right shoulder is higher than the left. X-ray
examination should include standing anteroposterior and lateral views of the spine.
The greater the curve, the greater the likelihood that it will progress after the skeleton matures. Curves >
10° are considered significant. Prognosis depends on site and severity of the curve and age at symptom
onset. Significant intervention is required in < 10% of patients.
Treatment
• Physical therapy and bracing
• Sometimes surgery
Prompt referral to an orthopedist is indicated when progression is of concern or the curve is significant.
Likelihood of progression is greatest around puberty for boys and girls. Moderate curves (20 to 40°) are
treated conservatively (eg, physical therapy and bracing) to prevent further deformity. Severe curves (>
40°) can often be ameliorated surgically (eg, spinal fusion with rod placement). Scoliosis and its treatment
often interfere with an adolescent's self-image and self-esteem. Counseling or psychotherapy may be
needed.
Chondromalacia Patellae
(Patellofemoral Syndrome)
Chondromalacia patellae is softening of the cartilage underneath the patella.
Chondromalacia patellae often causes generalized knee pain, without swelling, especially when climbing
or descending stairs, playing sports that exert an axial load on the knees, or sitting for a long time. This
disorder probably results from angular or rotational changes in the leg that unbalance elements of the
quadriceps and cause patellar misalignment during movement.
Acute pain due to chondromalacia patellae is treated by applying ice and taking analgesics. Children with
chondromalacia patellae should avoid pain-causing activities (typically, those that involve bending the
knee) for several days. Persistent or recurrent pain due to chondromalacia patellae may be relieved by
arthroscopic smoothing of the patella's undersurface.
Osteochondrodysplasias
(Genetic Skeletal Dysplasias)
Osteochondrodysplasias involve abnormal bone or cartilage growth, leading to skeletal
maldevelopment, often short-limbed dwarfism. Diagnosis is by physical examination, x-rays,
and, in some cases, genetic testing. Treatment is surgical.
The basic genetic defects have been identified in most of the osteochondrodysplasias. The mutations
typically cause perturbation of function in proteins involved in growth and development of connective
tissue, bone, or cartilage (see
===PAGE:3082===
Table 288-2
).
Dwarfism is markedly short stature (adult height < 4 ft 10 in) frequently associated with disproportionate
growth of the trunk and extremities. Achondroplasia is the most common and best-known type of shortlimbed dwarfism, but there are many other distinct types, which differ widely in genetic background,
course, and prognosis (see
Table 288-2
). Lethal short-limbed dwarfism (thanatophoric dysplasia, caused
by mutations in the same gene as achondroplasia) causes severe chest wall deformities and respiratory
failure in neonates, resulting in death.
Diagnosis
Characteristic x-ray changes may be diagnostic. A whole-body x-ray of every affected neonate, even if
stillborn, should be taken because diagnostic precision is essential for predicting prognosis. Prenatal
diagnosis by fetoscopy or ultrasonography is possible in some cases (eg, when fetal limb shortening is
severe). Standard laboratory tests do not help, but molecular diagnosis is feasible for chondrodysplasias
with known molecular defects.
Treatment
In achondroplasia, treatment with human growth hormone is generally not effective. An increase in adult
height may be achieved by surgical limb lengthening. In this and other nonlethal osteochondrodysplasias,
surgery (eg, hip replacement) can help improve joint function. Hypoplasia of the odontoid process can
predispose to subluxation of the 1st and 2nd cervical vertebrae and compression of the spinal cord.
Therefore, the odontoid process should be evaluated preoperatively, and if it is abnormal, the patient's
head should be carefully supported when hyperextended for endotracheal intubation during anesthesia.
Because the inheritance pattern in most types is known, genetic counseling can be effective.
Organizations such as Little People of America (www.lpaonline.org
) provide resources for affected people
and act as advocates on their behalf. Similar societies are active in other countries.
Osteochondroses
Osteochondroses are noninflammatory, noninfectious derangements of bony growth at various
ossification centers. These derangements occur during the period of greatest developmental
activity and affect the epiphyses.
Etiology is unknown, and inheritance is complex. Osteochondroses differ in their anatomic distribution,
course, and prognosis; they typically cause pain and have important orthopedic implications. Rare
osteochondroses and the involved bones include Freiberg's disease (head of 2nd metatarsal), Panner's
disease (capitulum), and Blount disease (proximal tibia). Sever's disease is a more common
osteochondrosis.
Infrapatellar Tendinitis
(Jumper's Knee; Sinding-Larsen-Johansson Syndrome)
Infrapatellar tendinitis is an osteochondrosis that is an overuse injury to the patellar tendon at
the attachment to the lower pole of the patella.
Knee pain with infrapatellar tendon tenderness in physically active children is caused by an overuse
syndrome that usually occurs in figure skaters and basketball or volleyball players. It typically affects
children 10 to 13 yr. Pain is the most exaggerated when straightening the knee against force (eg, climbing
stairs, jumping, doing knee bends). Etiology is thought to be trauma due to excessive traction by the
patellar tendon at its site of origin, leading to microavulsion fractures. History and physical examination
are usually sufficient for diagnosis; however, MRI can show the extent of the injury.
Pain is treated with modification of activities, NSAIDs, and physical therapy. Persistent pain may be
treated with surgical repair; however, this is usually not necessary.
===PAGE:3083===
Kohler's Bone Disease
Kohler's bone disease is osteochondrosis of the tarsal navicular bone.
Kohler's bone disease usually affects children aged 3 to 5 yr (more commonly boys) and is
[Table 288-2.
Types of Osteochondrodysplastic Dwarfism]
unilateral. The foot becomes swollen and painful; tenderness is maximal over the medial longitudinal arch.
Weight bearing and walking increase discomfort, and gait is disturbed. On x-ray, the navicular bone is
initially flattened and sclerotic and later becomes fragmented, before reossification. X-rays comparing the
affected side with the unaffected side help assess progression.
The course is chronic, but the disease rarely persists ≥ 2 yr. Rest, pain relief, and avoiding excessive
weight bearing are required. The condition usually resolves spontaneously with no long-term sequelae. In
acute cases, a few weeks of wearing a below-knee walking plaster cast, well molded under the
longitudinal arch, may help.
Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease is idiopathic aseptic necrosis of the femoral capital epiphysis.
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease has a maximum incidence at age 5 to 10 yr, is more common among boys,
and is usually unilateral. About 10% of cases are familial. Characteristic symptoms are pain in the hip joint
and gait disturbance; onset is gradual, and progression is slow. Joint movements are limited, and thigh
muscles may become wasted.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is suspected based on symptoms. Bone scan or MRI should be done to confirm the diagnosis.
X-rays initially may not be useful, because they can be normal or show minimal flattening. Later x-rays
can show fragmentation of the femoral head, which contains areas of lucency and sclerosis.
In bilateral or familial cases, a skeletal survey to exclude hereditary skeletal disorders, particularly multiple
epiphyseal dysplasia, is mandatory because prognosis and optimal management differ. Hypothyroidism,
sickle cell anemia, and trauma must also be excluded.
Treatment
Orthopedic treatment includes prolonged bed rest, mobile traction, slings, and abduction plaster casts
and splints to contain the femoral head. Some experts advocate subtrochanteric osteotomy with internal
fixation and early ambulation. The bisphosphonate alendronate is effective in treating avascular necrosis
of the femur in adults. Therefore, bisphosphonates may prove useful in the nonsurgical treatment of
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease.
Without treatment, the course is usually prolonged but self-limited (usually 2 to 3 yr). When the disease
eventually becomes quiescent, residual distortion of the femoral head and acetabulum predisposes to
secondary degenerative osteoarthritis. With treatment, sequelae are less severe.
Osgood-Schlatter Disease
Osgood-Schlatter disease is osteochondrosis of the tibial tubercle.
Osgood-Schlatter disease occurs between ages 10 yr and 15 yr and is usually unilateral. Although the
disease is more common among boys, this status is changing as girls become more active in sports
programs. Etiology is thought to be trauma due to excessive traction by the patellar tendon on its
immature epiphyseal insertion, leading to microavulsion fractures. Characteristic symptoms are pain,
===PAGE:3084===
swelling, and tenderness over the tibial tubercle at the patellar tendon insertion. There is no systemic
disturbance.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by examination. Lateral knee x-rays show fragmentation of the tibial tubercle. However, xrays are not needed unless pain and swelling extend beyond the area over the tibial tubercle or unless
pain is accompanied by redness and warmth. In such cases, x-rays are useful to rule out injuries or acute
inflammatory conditions.
Treatment
Resolution is usually spontaneous within weeks or months. Usually, taking analgesics and avoiding
excessive exercise, especially deep knee bending, are the only necessary measures. Complete
avoidance of sports is unnecessary. Rarely, immobilization in plaster, intralesional injection of
hydrocortisone, surgical removal of loose bodies (eg, ossicles, avulsed fragments of bone), drilling, and
grafting are required.
Scheuermann's Disease
Scheuermann's disease causes localized changes in vertebral bodies, leading to backache and
kyphosis.
Scheuermann's disease manifests in adolescence and is slightly more common among boys. It probably
represents a group of diseases with similar symptoms, but etiology and pathogenesis are uncertain. It
may result from osteochondritis of the upper and lower cartilaginous
vertebral end plates or trauma. Some
cases are familial.
Most patients present with a round-shouldered posture and they may have persistent low-grade
backache. Some have an appearance similar to people with Marfan syndrome; trunk and limb length are
disproportionate. Normal thoracic kyphosis is increased diffusely or locally.
Diagnosis
Some cases are recognized during routine screening for spinal deformity at school. Lateral spinal x-rays
confirm the diagnosis by showing anterior wedging of the vertebral bodies, usually in the lower thoracic
and upper lumbar regions. Later, the end plates become irregular and sclerotic. Spinal misalignment is
predominantly kyphotic but is sometimes partly scoliotic. In atypical cases, generalized skeletal dysplasia
must be excluded by x-ray skeletal survey, and spinal TB must be excluded by CT or MRI.
Treatment
The course is mild but long, often lasting several years (although duration varies greatly). Trivial spinal
misalignment often persists after the disorder has become quiescent.
Mild, nonprogressive disease can be treated by reducing weight-bearing stress and by avoiding
strenuous activity. Occasionally, when kyphosis is more severe, a spinal brace or rest with recumbency on
a rigid bed is indicated. Rarely, progressive cases require surgical stabilization and correction of
misalignment.
Osteopetroses
(Marble Bones)
Osteopetroses are characterized by increased bone density and skeletal modeling
abnormalities.
Osteopetroses can be categorized based on whether sclerosis or defective skeletal modeling
===PAGE:3085===
predominates. Some types are comparatively benign; others are progressive and fatal. Bony overgrowth
sometimes severely distorts the face. Malocclusion of the teeth may require specialized orthodontic
measures. Surgical decompression may be required to relieve elevated intracranial pressure or to release
a trapped facial or auditory nerve.
Craniotubular Dysplasias
Craniotubular dysplasias involve minor osteosclerosis with normal skeletal modeling.
Metaphyseal dysplasia (Pyle's disease):
This rare, autosomal recessive disorder is often confused
semantically with craniometaphyseal dysplasia. Affected people are clinically normal, apart from genu
valgum, although scoliosis and bone fragility occasionally occur. The diagnosis is usually made when xrays are done for an unrelated reason. X-ray changes are striking. Long bones are undermodeled, and
bony cortices are generally thin. Tubular leg bones have gross Erlenmeyer flask flaring, particularly in the
distal femur. Pelvic bones and thoracic cage are expanded. However, the skull is essentially spared.
Craniometaphyseal dysplasia:
In this autosomal dominant disorder, paranasal bossing develops during
infancy, and progressive expansion and thickening of the skull and mandible distort the jaw and face. The
encroaching bone entraps cranial nerves, causing dysfunction. Malocclusion of the teeth may be
troublesome; partial sinus obliteration predisposes to recurrent nasorespiratory infection. Height and
general health are normal, but progressive elevation of intracranial pressure is a rare, serious
complication.
X-ray changes are age-related and usually evident by age 5 yr. Sclerosis is the main feature in the skull.
Long bones have widened metaphyses, appearing club-shaped, particularly at the distal femur. However,
these changes are much less severe than those in Pyle's disease. The spine and pelvis are unaffected.
Frontometaphyseal dysplasia:
This disorder has distinct autosomal dominant and X-linked forms; it
becomes evident during early childhood. The supraorbital ridge is prominent, resembling a knight's visor.
The mandible is hypoplastic with anterior constriction; dental anomalies are common. Deafness develops
during adulthood because sclerosis narrows the internal acoustic foramina and middle ear. Long leg
bones are moderately bowed. Progressive contractures in the digits may simulate RA. Height and general
health are normal.
On x-ray examination, bony overgrowth of the frontal region is obvious; patchy sclerosis is seen in the
cranial vault. Vertebral bodies are dysplastic but not sclerotic. Iliac crests are abruptly flared, and pelvic
inlet is distorted. Femoral capital epiphyses are flattened, with expansion of the femoral heads and coxa
valga (hip deformity). Finger bones are undermodeled, with erosion and loss of joint space. Corrective
surgery is indicated for severely disfiguring deformities or those causing orthopedic problems.
Craniotubular Hyperostoses
Craniotubular hyperostoses are bony overgrowths that alter contour and increase skeletal
density.
Endosteal hyperostosis (van Buchem's syndrome):
This disorder is usually autosomal recessive.
Overgrowth and distortion of the mandible and brow become evident during mid-childhood. Subsequently,
cranial nerves become entrapped, leading to facial palsy and deafness. Life span is not compromised,
stature is normal, and bones are not fragile. X-rays show widening and sclerosis of the calvaria, cranial
base, and mandible. Diaphyseal endosteum in the tubular bones is thickened. Surgical decompression of
entrapped nerves may be helpful.
Sclerosteosis:
This autosomal recessive disorder is most common among Afrikaners of South Africa.
Overgrowth and sclerosis of the skeleton, particularly of the skull, develop during early childhood. Height
and weight are often excessive. Initial symptoms and signs may include deafness and facial palsy due to
cranial nerve entrapment. Distortion of facies, apparent by age 10 yr, eventually becomes severe.
Cutaneous or bony syndactyly of the 2nd and 3rd fingers distinguishes sclerosteosis from other forms of
craniotubular hyperostoses. Predominant x-ray features are gross widening and sclerosis of the calvaria
===PAGE:3086===
and mandible. Vertebral bodies are spared, although their pedicles are dense. Pelvic bones are sclerotic
but have normal contours. Long bones have sclerosed, hyperostotic cortices and undermodeled shafts.
Surgery to relieve intracranial pressure may help.
Diaphyseal dysplasia (Camurati-Engelmann disease):
This autosomal dominant disorder manifests
during mid-childhood with muscular pain, weakness, and wasting, typically in the legs. These symptoms
usually resolve by age 30. Cranial nerve compression and elevated intracranial pressure occur
occasionally. Some patients are severely handicapped; others are virtually asymptomatic. The
predominant x-ray feature is marked thickening of the periosteal and medullary surfaces of the diaphyseal
cortices of the long bones, but findings vary. Medullary canals and external bone contours are irregular.
The extremities and axial skeleton usually are spared. Rarely, the skull is involved, with calvarial widening
and basal sclerosis. Corticosteroids may help relieve bone pain and improve muscle strength.
Osteosclerosis
Osteosclerosis is abnormal hardening of bone that involves increased skeletal density with
little disturbance of modeling.
Osteopetrosis with delayed manifestations (Albers-Schonberg disease):
This type of
osteopetrosis is autosomal dominant, benign, and delayed (tarda), manifesting during childhood,
adolescence, or young adulthood. The defective
CLCN7
gene encodes a chloride channel that is
apparently important in osteoclast function. This type is relatively common and has a wide geographic
and ethnic distribution. Affected people may be asymptomatic; general health is usually unimpaired.
However, facial palsy, deafness, and anemia (due to bone marrow compromise or hypersplenism) may
occur.
The skeleton usually is radiologically normal at birth. However, bone sclerosis becomes increasingly
apparent as children age, and diagnosis is typically based on x-rays done for unrelated reasons. Bony
involvement is widespread but patchy. The calvaria is dense, and sinuses may be obliterated. Sclerosis of
the vertebral end plate causes the characteristic rugby-shirt appearance (horizontal banding). Bone
marrow can be compromised by bony overgrowth, leading to pancytopenia. Extramedullary
hematopoiesis may occur, resulting in hepatosplenomegaly. Some patients require transfusion or
splenectomy to treat anemia.
Osteopetrosis with precocious manifestations:
This type of osteopetrosis is autosomal recessive,
malignant, and congenital, manifesting during infancy. It is uncommon, frequently lethal, and often due to
a mutation in the osteoclast-associated gene
TCIRG1
. Bony overgrowth causes marrow dysfunction.
Initial symptoms include failure to thrive, spontaneous bruising, abnormal bleeding, and anemia. Palsies
of the 2nd, 3rd, and 7th cranial nerves and hepatosplenomegaly occur later. Death due to bone marrow
failure (anemia, overwhelming infection, or hemorrhage) usually occurs in the first year of life.
General increased bone density is the predominant feature on x-rays. Penetrated x-rays of long bones
show transverse bands in the metaphyseal regions and longitudinal striations in the shafts. As the
disorder progresses, the ends of the long bones, particularly the proximal humerus and distal femur,
become flask-shaped. Characteristic endobones (bone within a bone) form in the vertebrae, pelvis, and
tubular bones. The skull becomes thickened, and the spine has a rugby-shirt appearance.
Bone marrow transplantation with HLA-identical sibling grafts has had excellent results. However,
prognosis is poor with HLA-mismatched grafts. Prednisone, calcitriol, and interferonγ
are effective in
some cases.
Osteopetrosis with renal tubular acidosis:
This type of osteopetrosis is autosomal recessive. It
causes weakness, stunted stature, and failure to thrive. Bones appear dense on x-rays, and cerebral
calcifications are seen; renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is present, and RBC carbonic anhydrase activity is
decreased. The genetic defect involves mutations of the gene encoding carbonic anhydrase II. Bone
marrow transplantation cures the osteopetrosis but has no effect on the RTA. Maintenance therapy
consists of bicarbonate and electrolyte supplementation to correct renal losses.
===PAGE:3087===
Pyknodysostosis:
This autosomal recessive disorder is caused by loss of function mutations in the
gene encoding cathepsin K, an osteoclast-derived protease important in degradation of extracellular
matrix. Short stature becomes evident in early childhood; adult height is ≤ 150 cm (5 ft). Other
manifestations include an enlarged skull, short and broad hands and feet, and dystrophic nails. Blue
sclerae (due to a deficiency in connective tissue, allowing the underlying vessels to show through) are
usually recognized during infancy. Affected people resemble each other closely; they have a small face, a
receding chin, and carious, misplaced teeth. The cranium bulges, and the anterior fontanelle remains
patent. Terminal phalanges are short, and fingernails are dysplastic. Pathologic fractures are a
complication.
Bone sclerosis appears on x-rays during childhood, but neither bone striations nor endobones are seen.
Facial bones and paranasal sinuses are hypoplastic, and the mandibular angle is obtuse. Clavicles may
be gracile, and their lateral portions may be underdeveloped; distal phalanges are rudimentary. Plastic
surgery has been used to correct severe deformities of the face and jaw.
Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) is movement of the femoral neck upward and forward
on the femoral epiphysis.
SCFE usually occurs in early adolescence and preferentially affects boys. Obesity is a significant risk
factor. Genetic factors also contribute. SCFE is bilateral in one fifth of patients, and unilateral SCFE
becomes bilateral in up to two thirds of patients. The exact cause is unknown but probably relates to
weakening of the physis (growth plate), which can result from trauma, hormonal changes, inflammation,
or increased shearing forces due to obesity.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually insidious, and symptoms are associated with stage of slippage. The first symptom may
be hip stiffness that abates with rest; it is followed by a limp, then hip pain that radiates down the
anteromedial thigh to the knee. Up to 15% of patients present with knee or thigh pain, and the true
problem (hip) may be missed until slippage worsens. Early hip examination may detect neither pain nor
limitation of movement. In more advanced stages, findings may include pain during movement of the
affected hip, with limited flexion, abduction, and medial rotation; knee pain without specific knee
abnormalities; and a limp. The affected leg is externally rotated. If blood supply to the area is
compromised, avascular necrosis and collapse of the epiphysis may occur.
Diagnosis
Because treatment of advanced slippage is difficult, early diagnosis is vital. Anteroposterior and frog-leg
lateral x-rays of both hips are taken. X-rays show widening of the epiphyseal line or apparent posterior
and inferior displacement of the femoral head. Ultrasonography and MRI are also useful, especially if xrays are normal.
Treatment
SCFE usually progresses; it requires surgery as soon as it is diagnosed. Patients should not bear weight
on the affected leg until SCFE has been ruled out or treated. Surgical treatment consists of screw fixation
through the physis.
===PAGE:3088===
Chapter 289. Eye Defects and Conditions in Children
Introduction
Defects and conditions can affect any part of the eye. They often affect vision, and some can result in
blindness if not adequately treated. Other defects and conditions that affect vision during childhood are
discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL (see
Chs. 63
,
, and
).
Amblyopia
Amblyopia is functional reduction in visual acuity of an eye caused by disuse during visual
development. Blindness can occur in the affected eye if amblyopia is not detected and treated
before age 8 yr. Diagnosis is based on detecting a difference in visual acuity between the two
eyes. Treatment depends on the cause.
Amblyopia affects about 2 to 3% of children and almost always develops before age 2.
The brain must simultaneously receive a clear, focused, properly aligned, overlapping image from each
eye for the visual system to develop properly. This development takes place mainly in the first 3 yr of life
but is not complete until about 8 yr of age. Amblyopia results when there is persistent interference with
the image from one eye but not the other. The visual cortex suppresses the image from the affected eye.
If suppression persists long enough, vision loss can be permanent.
Etiology
There are 3 causes. Strabismus ( can cause amblyopia because misalignment of the eyes
results in different retinal images being sent to the visual cortex. Because the visual pathways are
developed in adults, presentation of 2 different images results in diplopia rather than suppression of one
image.
Similarly, anisometropia (inequality of refraction in the 2 eyes, most often resulting from astigmatism,
myopia, or hyperopia) results in different focus of the retinal images, with the image from the eye with the
greater refractive error being less well focused.
Obstruction of the visual axis at some point between the surface of the eye and the retina (eg, by a
cataract) interferes with or completely prevents formation of a retinal image in the affected eye.
Symptoms and Signs
Children rarely complain of unilateral vision loss, although they may squint or cover one eye. Very young
children either do not notice or are unable to express awareness that their vision differs in one eye
compared with the other. Some older children may report impaired vision in the affected eye or exhibit
poor depth perception. When strabismus is the cause, deviation of gaze may be noticeable to others. A
cataract causing occlusion of the visual axis may go unnoticed.
Diagnosis
• Early screening
• Photoscreening
• Additional testing (eg, cover test, cover-uncover test, refraction, ophthalmoscopy, slit lamp)
Screening for amblyopia (and strabismus) is recommended for all children before starting school,
optimally around age 3 yr. Photoscreening is one approach for screening very young children and
children with learning and developmental disorders who are unable to undergo subjective testing.
Photoscreening involves use of a camera to record images of pupillary reflexes during fixation on a visual
target and red reflexes in response to light; the images are then compared for symmetry. Screening in
===PAGE:3089===
older children consists of acuity testing with figures (eg, tumbling E figures, Allen cards, HOTV figures or
characters) or Snellen eye charts.
Identifying the underlying cause requires additional testing. Strabismus can be confirmed with the cover
test or the cover-uncover test (. Ophthalmologists can confirm anisometropia by doing a
refraction on each eye. Obstruction of the visual axis can be confirmed by ophthalmoscopy or slit lamp
examination.
Prognosis and Treatment
• Eyeglasses or contact lenses
• Cataract removal
• Patching
Amblyopia may become irreversible if not diagnosed and treated before age 8, at which time the visual
system has matured. Most children identified and treated before age 5 have some vision improvement.
Earlier treatment increases the likelihood of complete vision recovery. Recurrence (recidivism) is possible
in certain cases until the visual system matures. Some patients have a small decrease in visual acuity of
a line or two even after visual maturity has occurred.
Treatment should be directed by an ophthalmologist. Any underlying causes must be treated (eg,
eyeglasses or contact lenses to correct refractive error, removal of a cataract). Use of the amblyopic eye
is then encouraged by patching the better eye or by administering atropine drops into the better eye to
provide a visual advantage to the amblyopic eye. Adherence to treatment is better with drop therapy.
Maintenance treatment for prevention of recurrences may be recommended after improvement has
stabilized, until a child is about 8 to 10.
Congenital Cataract
(Infantile Cataract)
Congenital cataract is a lens opacity that is present at birth or shortly after birth.
Congenital cataracts may be sporadic, or they may be caused by chromosomal anomalies, metabolic
disease (eg, galactosemia), or intrauterine infection (eg, rubella) or other maternal disease during
pregnancy. Cataracts may be located in the center of the lens (nuclear), or they may involve the lens
material underneath the anterior or posterior lens capsule (subcapsular or cortical). They may be
unilateral or bilateral. They may not be noticed unless the red reflex is checked or unless ophthalmoscopy
is done at birth. As with other cataracts, the lens opacity obscures vision. Cataracts may obscure the view
of the optic disk and vessels and should always be evaluated by an ophthalmologist.
Removal of a cataract within 17 wk after birth permits the development of vision and cortical visual
pathways. Cataracts are removed by aspirating them through a small incision. In many children, an
intraocular lens may be implanted. Postoperative visual correction with eyeglasses, contact lenses, or
both is usually required to achieve the best outcome.
After a unilateral cataract is removed, the quality of the image in the treated eye is inferior to that of the
other eye (assuming the other eye is normal). Because the better eye is preferred, the brain suppresses
the poorer-quality image, and amblyopia ( develops. Thus, effective amblyopia therapy is
necessary for the treated eye to develop normal sight. Some children are unable to attain good visual
acuity because of accompanying structural defects. In contrast, children with bilateral cataract removal in
which image quality is similar in both eyes more frequently develop equal vision in both eyes.
Some cataracts are partial (posterior lenticonus) and opacify during the 1st decade of life. Eyes with
partial cataracts have a better visual outcome.
===PAGE:3090===
Primary Infantile Glaucoma
(Infantile Glaucoma; Congenital Glaucoma; Buphthalmos)
Primary infantile glaucoma is a rare developmental defect in the iridocorneal filtration angle of
the anterior chamber that prevents aqueous fluid from properly draining from the eye. This
obstruction can cause increases in the intraocular pressure, which if untreated can damage the
optic nerve.
The disorder occurs in infants and young children and may be unilateral (40%) or bilateral (60%).
Intraocular pressure increases above the normal range (10 to 22 mm Hg). Glaucoma can also occur in
infants after trauma or intraocular surgery (eg, cataract extraction). Glaucoma associated with aniridia or
Lowe syndrome or Sturge-Weber syndrome is called secondary glaucoma.
The eye becomes enlarged because the collagen of the sclera and cornea can stretch from the increased
intraocular pressure. The large-diameter (> 12 mm) cornea is thinned and sometimes cloudy. The infant
may have tearing and photophobia. If untreated, corneal clouding progresses, the optic nerve is damaged
(as evidenced clinically by optic nerve cupping), and blindness may occur. Early surgical intervention (eg,
goniotomy, trabeculotomy, trabeculectomy) is the mainstay of treatment.
Strabismus
Strabismus is misalignment of the eyes, which causes deviation from the parallelism of normal
gaze. Diagnosis is clinical, including observation of the corneal light reflex and use of a cover
test. Treatment may include correction of visual impairment with patching and corrective
lenses, alignment by corrective lenses, and surgical repair.
Strabismus occurs in about 3% of children. Although most strabismus is caused by refractive errors or
muscle imbalance, rare causes include retinoblastoma or other serious ocular defects and neurologic
disease. Left untreated, about 50% of children with strabismus have some visual loss due to amblyopia
(.
Several varieties of strabismus have been described, based on direction of deviation, specific conditions
under which deviation occurs, and whether deviation is constant or intermittent. Description of these
varieties requires the definition of several terms.
The prefix "eso" refers to nasal deviations, and the prefix "exo" refers to temporal deviations. The prefix
"hyper" refers to upward deviations, and the prefix "hypo" refers to downward deviations (see
Fig. 289-1
). Manifest deviations, detectable with both eyes open so that vision is binocular, are
designated as tropia. Tropia can be constant or intermittent and may involve one eye or both eyes. Latent
deviation, detectable only when one eye is covered so that vision is monocular, is designated as phoria.
The deviation in phoria is latent because the brain, using the extraocular muscles, corrects the minor
misalignment. Deviations that are the same (amplitude or degree of misalignment remains the same) in all
gaze directions are designated as comitant, whereas deviations that vary (amplitude or degree of
misalignment changes) depending on gaze direction are referred to as incomitant.
Etiology
Strabismus may be congenital (the term infantile is preferred because detection of strabismus at birth is
uncommon, and infantile permits inclusion of varieties that develop within the first 6 mo of life) or acquired
(includes those that develop after 6 mo).
Risk factors for infantile strabismus include family history (1st- or 2nd-degree relative), genetic disorders
(Down syndrome and Crouzon syndrome), prenatal drug exposure (including alcohol), prematurity or low
birth weight, congenital eye defects, and cerebral palsy.
Acquired strabismus can develop acutely or gradually. Causes of acquired strabismus include tumors (eg,
retinoblastoma), head trauma, neurologic conditions (eg, cerebral palsy; spina bifida; palsy of the 3rd,
===PAGE:3091===
4th, or 5th cranial nerve), viral infections (eg, encephalitis, meningitis), and acquired eye defects. Specific
causes vary depending on the type of deviation.
Esotropia is commonly infantile. Infantile esotropia is considered idiopathic, although an anomaly of fusion
is the suspected cause. Accommodative esotropia, a common variety of acquired esotropia, develops
between 2 yr and 4 yr of age and is associated with hyperopia. Sensory esotropia occurs when severe
visual loss (due to conditions such as cataracts, optic nerve anomalies, or tumors) interferes with the
brain's effort to maintain ocular alignment.
Esotropia can be paralytic, so designated because the cause is a 6th (abducens) cranial nerve palsy, but
it is an uncommon cause. Esotropia can also be a component of a syndrome. Duane's syndrome
(congenital absence of the abducens nucleus with anomalous innervation of the lateral rectus extraocular
muscle by the 3rd [oculomotor] cranial nerve) and Mobius' syndrome (anomalies of multiple cranial
nerves) are specific examples.
[Fig. 289-1.
Ocular deviations in strabismus.]
Exotropia may be intermittent and idiopathic. Less often, exotropia is constant and paralytic, as with 3rd
(oculomotor) cranial nerve palsy.
Hypertropia can be paralytic, caused by 4th (trochlear) cranial nerve palsy that occurs congenitally or
after head trauma or, less commonly, as a result of 3rd cranial nerve palsy.
Hypotropia can be restrictive, caused by mechanical restriction of full movement of the globe rather than
neurologic interference with eye movement. For example, restrictive hypotropia can result from a blowout
fracture of the orbit floor or walls. Less commonly, restrictive hypotropia can be caused by Graves'
ophthalmopathy (thyroid eye disease). Third cranial nerve palsy and Brown syndrome (congenital or
acquired tightness and restriction of the superior oblique muscle tendon) are other uncommon causes.
Symptoms and Signs
Unless severe, phorias rarely cause symptoms.
Tropias sometimes result in symptoms. For example, torticollis may develop to compensate
for the brain's
difficulty in fusing images from misaligned eyes and to reduce diplopia. Some children with tropias have
normal and equal visual acuity. However, amblyopia frequently develops with tropias; it is due to cortical
suppression of the image in the deviating eye to avoid confusion and diplopia.
Diagnosis
• Physical and neurologic examinations at well-child checkups
• Tests (eg, corneal light reflex, alternate cover, cover-uncover)
• Prisms
Strabismus can be detected during well-child checkups. History should include questions about family
history of amblyopia or strabismus and, if family or caregivers have noticed deviation of gaze, questions
about when the deviation began, when or how often it is present, and whether there is a preference for
using one eye for fixation. Physical examination should include an assessment of visual acuity, pupil
reactivity, and the extent of extraocular movements. Neurologic examination, particularly of the cranial
nerves, is important.
The corneal light reflex test is a good screening test, but it is not very sensitive for detecting small
deviations. The child looks at a light and the light reflection (reflex) from the pupil is observed; normally,
the reflex appears symmetric (ie, in the same location on each pupil). The light reflex for an exotropic eye
is nasal to the pupillary center, whereas the reflex for an esotropic eye is temporal to the pupillary center.
Vision screening machines operated by trained personnel are being introduced to identify children at risk.
===PAGE:3092===
When performing the alternate cover test, the child is asked to fixate on an object. One eye is then
covered while the other is observed for movement. No movement should be detected if the eyes are
properly aligned, but strabismus is present if the unoccluded eye shifts to establish fixation once the other
eye, which had fixed on the object, is occluded. The test is then repeated on the other eye.
In a variation of the cover test, called the cover-uncover test, the child is asked to fix on an object while
the examiner alternately covers and uncovers one eye and then the other, back and forth. An eye with a
latent strabismus shifts position when it is uncovered. In exotropia, the eye that was covered turns
in
to
fixate; in esotropia, it turns
out
to fixate. Tropia can be quantified by using prisms positioned such that the
deviating eye need not move to fixate. The power of the prism used to prevent deviation quantifies the
tropia and provides a measurement of the magnitude of misalignment of the visual axes. The unit of
measurement used by ophthalmologists is the prism diopter. One prism diopter is a deviation of the visual
axes of 1 cm at 1 m.
Strabismus should be distinguished from pseudostrabismus, which is the appearance of esotropia in a
child with good visual acuity in both eyes but a wide nasal bridge or broad epicanthal folds that obscure
much of the white sclera nasally when looking laterally. The light reflex and cover tests are normal in a
child with pseudostrabismus.
Prognosis and Treatment
• Patching
• Contact lenses or eyeglasses
• Topical agents
• Eye exercises
• Surgical repair to align eyes
Strabismus should not be ignored on the assumption that it will be outgrown. Permanent vision loss can
occur if strabismus and its attendant amblyopia are not treated before age 4 to 6 yr. As a result, all
children should have formal vision screening in the preschool years.
Treatment aims to equalize vision and then align the eyes. Children with amblyopia require patching or
penalization of the normal eye; improved vision offers a better prognosis for development of binocular
vision and for stability if surgery is done. Patching is not, however, a treatment for strabismus. Eyeglasses
or contact lenses are sometimes used if the amount of refractive error is significant enough to interfere
with fusion, especially in children with accommodative esotropia. Topical miotic agents, such as
echothiophate iodide 0.125%, may facilitate accommodation in children with accommodative esotropia.
Orthoptic eye exercises can help correct intermittent exotropia with convergence insufficiency.
Surgical repair is generally done when non-surgical methods are unsuccessful in aligning the eyes
satisfactorily. Surgical repair consists of loosening (recession) and tightening (resection) procedures,
most often involving the rectus muscles. Surgical repair is typically done in an outpatient setting. Rates for
successful realignment can exceed 80%. The most common complications are overcorrection or
undercorrection and recurrence of the strabismus later in life. Rare complications include infection,
excessive bleeding, and vision loss.
===PAGE:3093===
Chapter 290. Incontinence in Children
Urinary Incontinence
(Enuresis)
Urinary incontinence is defined as involuntary voiding of urine ≥ 2 times/mo during the day or night.
Daytime incontinence (diurnal enuresis) is usually not diagnosed until age 5 or 6. Nighttime incontinence
(nocturnal enuresis, or bed-wetting) is usually not diagnosed until age 7. Before this time, nocturnal
enuresis is typically referred to as nighttime wetting. These age limits are based on children who are
developing typically and so may not be applicable to children with developmental delay. Both nocturnal
and diurnal enuresis are symptoms—not diagnoses—and necessitate consideration of an underlying
cause.
The age at which children attain urinary continence varies, but > 90% are continent during the day by age
5. Nighttime continence takes longer to achieve. Nocturnal enuresis affects about 30% of children at age
4, 10% at age 7, 3% at age 12, and 1% at age 18. About 0.5% of adults continue to have nocturnal
wetting episodes. Nocturnal enuresis is more common among boys and when there is a family history.
In primary enuresis, children have never achieved urinary continence for ≥ 6 mo. In secondary enuresis,
children have developed incontinence after a period of at least 6 mo of urinary control. An organic cause
is more likely in secondary enuresis. Even when there is no organic cause, appropriate treatment and
parental education are essential because of the physical and psychologic impact of urine accidents.
Pathophysiology
Bladder function has a storage phase and a voiding phase. Abnormalities in either phase can cause
primary or secondary enuresis.
In the
storage phase
, the bladder acts as a reservoir for urine. Storage capacity is affected by bladder
size and compliance. Storage capacity increases as children grow. Compliance can be decreased by
repeated infections or by outlet obstruction, with resulting bladder muscle hypertrophy.
In the
voiding phase
, bladder contraction synchronizes with the opening of the bladder neck and the
external urinary sphincter. If there is dysfunction in the coordination or sequence of voiding, enuresis can
occur. There are multiple reasons for dysfunction. One example is bladder irritation, which can lead to
irregular contractions of the bladder and asynchrony of the voiding sequence, resulting in enuresis.
Bladder irritation can result from a UTI or from anything that presses on the bladder (eg, a dilated rectum
caused by constipation).
Etiology
Urinary incontinence in children has different causes and treatments than urinary incontinence in adults.
Although some abnormalities cause both nocturnal and diurnal enuresis, etiology can vary depending on
whether enuresis is nocturnal (see
Table 290-1
) or diurnal (see
Table 290-2
), as well as primary or secondary. Most primary enuresis is nocturnal and not due to an
organic disorder. Nocturnal enuresis can be divided into monosymptomatic (occurring only during sleep)
and complex (other abnormalities are present, such as urgency or diurnal enuresis).
Nocturnal enuresis:
Organic disorders account for about 30% of cases and are more common in
complex compared to monosymptomatic enuresis. The remaining majority are of unclear etiology but are
thought to be due to a combination of factors, including
• Maturational delay
• Functionally small bladder capacity (the bladder is not actually small but contracts before it is completely
full)
===PAGE:3094===
• Increased nighttime urine volume
• Difficulties in arousal from sleep
• Family history (if one parent had nocturnal enuresis, there is a 30% chance offspring will have it,
increasing to 70% if both parents were affected)
The factors contributing to organic causes of nocturnal enuresis include
• Conditions that increase urine volume (eg, diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, renal failure, excessive
water intake, sickle cell disease and sometimes sickle trait [hyposthenuria])
• Conditions that increase bladder irritability (eg, UTI, pressure on the bladder by the rectum and sigmoid
colon [caused by constipation])
• Structural abnormalities (eg, ectopic ureter, which can cause both nocturnal and diurnal enuresis)
[Table 290-1.
Some Factors Contributing to Nocturnal Enuresis]
• Abnormal sphincter weakness (eg, spinal cord abnormalities, which can cause both nocturnal and
diurnal enuresis)
Diurnal enuresis:
Common causes include
• Bladder irritability
• Relative weakness of the detrusor muscle (making it difficult to inhibit incontinence)
• Constipation, urethrovaginal reflux, or vaginal voiding: girls who use an incorrect position during voiding
or have redundant skin folds may have reflux of urine into the vagina, which subsequently leaks out on
standing
• Structural abnormalities (eg, ectopic ureter)
• Abnormal sphincter weakness (eg, spinal cord abnormality, tethered cord)
Evaluation
Evaluation should always include assessment for constipation (which can be a contributing factor to both
nocturnal and diurnal enuresis).
History: History of present illness
inquires about onset of symptoms (ie, primary vs secondary), timing
of symptoms (eg, at night, during the day, only after voiding), and whether symptoms are continuous (ie,
constant dribbling) or intermittent. Recording a voiding schedule, including timing, frequency, and volume
of voids, can be helpful. Important associated symptoms include polydipsia, dysuria, urgency, frequency,
dribbling, and straining. Position during voiding and strength of urine steam should be noted. To prevent
leakage,
[Table 290-2.
Some Organic Causes of Diurnal Enuresis]
children with enuresis may cross their legs or use other postures, which increase their risk of UTIs.
Review of systems
should seek symptoms suggesting a cause, including frequency and consistency of
stools (constipation); fever, abdominal pain, dysuria, and hematuria (UTI); perianal itching and vaginitis
(pinworm infection); polyuria and polydipsia (diabetes insipidus or diabetes mellitus); and snoring or
breathing pauses during sleep (sleep apnea). Children should be screened for the possibility of sexual
abuse, which, although an uncommon cause, is too important to miss.
===PAGE:3095===
Past medical history
should identify known possible causes, including perinatal insults or birth defects
(eg, spina bifida), neurologic disorders, renal disorders, and history of UTIs. Any current or previous
treatments for enuresis and how they were actually instituted should be noted, as well as a list of current
drugs.
Developmental history should note developmental delay or other developmental disorders related to
voiding dysfunction (eg, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, which increases the likelihood of
enuresis).
Family history should note the presence of nocturnal enuresis and any urologic disorders.
Social history should note any stressors occurring near the onset of symptoms, including difficulties at
school, with friends, or at home; although enuresis is not a psychologic disorder, a brief period of wetting
may occur during stress.
Clinicians also should ask about the impact of enuresis on the child because it also affects treatment
decisions.
Physical examination:
Examination begins with review of vital signs for fever (UTI), signs of weight loss
(diabetes), and hypertension (renal disorder). Examination of the head and neck should note enlarged
tonsils, mouth breathing, or poor growth (sleep apnea). Abdominal examination should note any masses
consistent with stool or a full bladder.
In girls, genital examination should note any labial adhesions, scarring, or lesions suspicious of sexual
abuse. An ectopic ureteral orifice is often difficult to see but should be sought. In boys, examination
should check for meatal irritation or any lesions on the glans or around the rectum. In either sex, perianal
excoriations can suggest pinworms.
The spine should be examined for any midline defects (eg, deep sacral dimple, sacral hair patch). A
complete neurologic evaluation is essential and should specifically target lower-extremity strength,
sensation and deep tendon reflexes, sacral reflexes (eg, anal wink), and, in boys, cremasteric reflex to
identify possible spinal dysraphism. A rectal examination may be useful to detect constipation or
decreased rectal tone.
Red flags:
Findings of particular concern are
• Signs or concerns of sexual abuse
• Excessive thirst, polyuria, and weight loss
• Prolonged primary diurnal enuresis (beyond age 6 yr)
• Any neurologic signs, especially in the lower extremities
• Physical signs of spinal disruption
Interpretation of findings:
Usually, primary
nocturnal enuresis
occurs in children with an
otherwise
unremarkable history and examination and probably represents maturational delay. A small percentage of
children have a treatable medical disorder; sometimes findings suggest possible causes (see
Table 290-
).
In
diurnal enuresis
, dysfunctional voiding is suggested by intermittent enuresis preceded by a sense of
urgency, a history of being distracted by play, or a combination. Enuresis after urination (due to lack of
total bladder emptying) can also be part of the history.
Enuresis caused by a UTI is likely a discrete episode rather than a chronic, intermittent problem and may
be accompanied by typical symptoms (eg, urgency, frequency, pain on urination); however, other causes
===PAGE:3096===
of enuresis can result in secondary UTI.
Constipation should be considered in the absence of other findings in children who have hard stools and
difficulty with elimination (and sometimes palpable stool on examination).
Sleep apnea should be considered with a history of excessive daytime sleepiness and disrupted sleep.
Rectal itching (especially at night), vaginitis, urethritis, or a combination can be an indication of pinworms.
Excessive thirst, diurnal and nocturnal enuresis, and weight loss suggest a possible organic cause (eg,
diabetes mellitus). Stress or sexual abuse can be difficult to ascertain but should be considered.
Testing:
Diagnosis is often apparent after history and physical examination. Urinalysis is appropriate for
both sexes, often with addition of urine culture for girls. Further testing is useful mainly when history,
physical examination, or both suggest an organic cause (see
Tables 290-1
and
290-2
).
Treatment
The most important part of treatment is family education about the cause and clinical course of enuresis.
Education helps decrease the negative psychologic impact of urine accidents and results in increased
adherence with treatment.
Treatment should be targeted toward any cause that is identified; however, frequently no cause is found.
In such cases, the following treatments may be useful.
Nocturnal enuresis:
The most effective long-term strategy is a bed-wetting alarm. Although labor
intensive, the success rate can be as high as 70% when children are motivated to end the enuresis, and
the family is able to adhere. It can take up to 4 mo of nightly use for complete resolution of symptoms. It is
essential to avoid punitive approaches because these undermine treatment and lead only to poor selfesteem.
Drugs such as desmopressin (DDAVP) and imipramine (see
Table 290-3
) can decrease nighttime wetting episodes; however, results are not sustained in most
patients when the treatment is stopped. DDAVP is preferable to imipramine because of the rare potential
of sudden death with imipramine use.
Diurnal enuresis:
It is important to treat any underlying constipation. Information from the voiding diary
can help identify opportunities for intervention. General measures may include
• Urgency containment exercises: Children are directed to go to the bathroom as soon as they feel the
urge to urinate. They then hold the urine as long as they can and, when they can hold it no longer, start
to urinate and then stop and start the urine stream. This exercise strengthens the sphincter and gives
children confidence that they can make it to the bathroom before they have an accident.
• Gradual lengthening of voiding intervals (if detrusor instability or dysfunctional voiding is suspected)
• Changes in behaviors (eg, delayed urination) through positive reinforcement and scheduled urination:
Children are reminded to urinate by a clock that vibrates or sounds an alarm (preferable to having a
parent in the reminder role).
• Use of correct voiding methods to discourage retention of urine in the vagina (eg, sitting facing
backward on the toilet or with the knees wide apart)
For labial adhesions, a conjugated estrogen cream may also be used.
Drug treatment (see
Table 290-3
) is sometimes helpful but is not typically first-line therapy. Anticholinergic
drugs may benefit patients with diurnal enuresis due to voiding dysfunction when behavioral therapy or
physiotherapy is unsuccessful. Drugs for nocturnal enuresis may be useful in decreasing nighttime
wetting episodes and are sometimes useful to encourage dryness during overnight events such as
sleepovers.
===PAGE:3097===
Key Points
• Primary urinary incontinence most frequently manifests as nocturnal enuresis.
• Constipation should be considered as a contributing source.
• Most nocturnal enuresis abates with maturation (15%/yr resolve with no intervention), but at least 0.5%
of adults have nighttime wetting episodes.
• Organic causes of enuresis are infrequent but should be considered.
[Table 290-3.
Drugs Used for Enuresis in Children*]
• Alarms are the most effective treatment for nocturnal enuresis.
• Other treatments include behavioral interventions and sometimes drugs.
• Parental education is essential to the child's outcome and well-being.
Stool Incontinence
(Encopresis)
Stool incontinence is the voluntary or involuntary passage of stool in inappropriate places in
children > 4 yr (or developmental equivalent) who do not have an organic defect or illness with
the exception of constipation.
Encopresis is a common childhood problem; it occurs in about 3 to 4% of 4-yr-old children and decreases
in frequency with age.
Etiology
Encopresis is most commonly caused by constipation in children with behavioral and physical
predisposing factors. It rarely occurs without retention or constipation, but when it does, other organic
processes (eg, Hirschsprung's disease, celiac disease) or psychologic problems should be considered.
Pathophysiology
Stool retention and constipation result in dilation of the rectum and sigmoid colon, which leads to changes
in the reactivity of muscles and nerves of the bowel wall. These changes decrease the efficacy of bowel
excretory function and lead to further retention. As stool remains in the bowel, water is absorbed, which
hardens the stool, making passage more difficult and painful. Softer, looser stool may then leak around
the hardened stool bolus, resulting in overflow. Both leakage and ineffective bowel control result in stool
accidents.
Diagnosis
Any organic process that results in constipation ( can result in encopresis and so should be
considered. For most routine cases of encopresis, a thorough history and physical examination can help
identify any physical cause. However, if further concerns arise, additional diagnostic tests (eg, abdominal
x-rays, rarely rectal wall biopsy, and even more rarely bowel motility studies— can be
considered.
Treatment
• Education and demystification (for parents and child)
===PAGE:3098===
• Relief of stool impaction
• Maintenance (eg, behavioral and dietary interventions, laxative therapy)
• Slow withdrawal of laxatives with continued behavioral and dietary intervention (see
Table 268-14
)
Any underlying disorders are treated. If there is no specific underlying pathology, symptoms are
addressed. Initial treatment involves educating the parents and child about the physiology of encopresis,
removing blame from the child, and diffusing the emotional reactions of those involved. Next the goal is to
relieve any stool impaction.
Stool impaction can be relieved by a variety of regimens and drugs (; choice depends on the
age of the child and other factors. A combination of polyethylene glycol (PEG) with electrolytes plus a
stimulant laxative (eg, bisacodyl or senna), or a sequence of Na phosphate enemas plus a 2-wk regimen
of oral drugs (eg, bisacodyl tablets) and suppositories are often used.
After evacuation, a follow-up visit should be held to assess whether the evacuation has been successful,
make sure soiling has resolved, and establish a maintenance plan. This plan includes encouragement of
maintenance of regular bowel movements (usually via ongoing laxative management) and behavioral
interventions to encourage stool evacuation. There are many options for maintenance laxative therapy
(see
Table 268-14
), but PEG without electrolytes is used most often, typically 1 to 2 doses of 17 g/day
titrated to effect. At times a stimulant laxative may also be continued on the weekends to encourage extra
evacuation of stool.
Behavioral strategies include structured toilet sitting times (eg, having children sit on the toilet for 5 to 10
min after each meal to take advantage of the gastrocolic reflex). If children have accidents during certain
times of the day, they also should sit immediately prior to those times. Small rewards are often useful
incentives. For example, giving children stickers to place on a chart each time they sit (even if there is no
stool production) can increase adherence to a plan. Often a stepwise program is used in which children
receive small tokens (eg, stickers) for sitting and larger rewards for consistent adherence. Rewards may
need to be changed over time to maintain children's interest in the plan. In the maintenance phase,
regular toilet sitting sessions still are needed to encourage evacuation of stool before the sensation is felt.
This strategy decreases the likelihood of stool retention and allows the rectum to return to its normal size.
During the maintenance phase, parent and child education about toilet sitting is instrumental to the
success of the regimen.
Regular follow-up visits are necessary for ongoing guidance and support. Bowel retraining is a long
process that may take months to years and includes slow withdrawal of laxatives once symptoms resolve
and continued encouragement of toilet sitting.
Encopresis can recur in times of stress or transition, so family members must be prepared for this
possibility. Success rates are affected by physical and psychosocial factors, but 1-yr cure rates are about
30 to 50% and 5-yr cure rates are about 48 to 75%. The mainstay of treatment is family education, bowel
cleanout and maintenance, and ongoing support.
===PAGE:3099===
Chapter 291. Miscellaneous Disorders in Infants and Children
Apparent Life-Threatening Event
An apparent life-threatening event (ALTE) is the sudden appearance of certain alarming
symptoms (eg, apnea, change in color or muscle tone, coughing, gagging), typically in children
< 1 yr. Causes may be digestive, neurologic, respiratory, cardiac, or metabolic. Treatment is
aimed at specific causes when identified.
An ALTE is not a diagnosis but a group of symptoms that occur acutely in young children.
Etiology
The most common causes include
• Gastroesophageal reflux disease
• Neurologic disorders (eg, seizures, meningitis, brain tumors, abnormal brainstem neuro-regulation of
cardiorespiratory control)
• Infection
Less common causes include
• Cardiac disorders
• Metabolic disorders
• Upper airway obstruction
Causes may be genetic or acquired. About 50% of cases are considered idiopathic. If an
[Table 291-1.
Diagnostic Tests for Causes of Apparent Life-Threatening Event (ALTE)]
infant is under the care of one person and has repeated episodes with no clear etiology, child abuse
should be considered.
Symptoms and Signs
An ALTE usually is characterized by an unexpected, acute change in an infant's breathing that alarms the
parent or caretaker. Features of an event include some or all of the following:
• Apneic episode
• Color change
• Change in muscle tone
• Choking or gagging
Diagnosis
Evaluation initially involves a thorough history, including
• Observations by the caregiver who witnessed the event (including description of changes in breathing,
color, muscle tone, and eyes; noises made; and length of episode)
===PAGE:3100===
• Interventions taken (eg, gentle stimulation, mouth-to-mouth breathing, CPR)
• Prenatal (maternal) and current family use of drugs, tobacco, and alcohol
• Information about the infant's birth (eg, gestational age, perinatal complications)
•
Feeding habits (whether gagging, coughing, vomiting, or poor weight gain has occurred)
• Developmental history (eg, milestones)
• Prior history of ALTE or recent trauma
• Family history of ALTE, early deaths, or possible causative disorders
Physical examination is done to check for obvious malformations, neurologic abnormalities (eg, posturing,
inappropriate head lag), and signs of infection or trauma (particularly including retinal hemorrhage on
funduscopy).
Laboratory and imaging tests (see
Table 291-1
) are done to check for possible causes. Some are
routinely done, and others are done based only on history and physical examination findings.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the cause of ALTE. That is, risk of death is higher if the cause is a serious
neurologic disorder. The relationship of ALTE to SIDS is unclear. About 4 to 10% of infants who die of
SIDS have a history of ALTE, and the risk of SIDS is higher if an infant has had 2 or more ALTEs. Also,
infants who have had an ALTE share many of the same characteristics with infants who die of SIDS.
However, incidence of ALTE, unlike that of SIDS, has not decreased in response to the Back to Sleep
campaign.
There seem to be no long-term effects on development.
Treatment
The cause, if identified, is treated. If infants have required resuscitation or if evaluation has detected any
abnormalities, they are hospitalized for evaluation and monitoring that includes respiratory and cardiac
monitoring and some of the tests listed in
Table 291-1
as indicated.
Parents and caregivers should be trained in CPR for infants and in safe infant care. Home monitoring
devices may be considered depending on risk of recurrent episodes. Monitors should be equipped with
event recorders and used for a predetermined period of time. Parents should be taught how to use the
monitor and be advised that home monitoring has not been shown to reduce the mortality rate. Also,
exposure to tobacco smoke must be eliminated.
Failure to Thrive
Failure to thrive (FTT) is weight consistently below the 3rd to 5th percentile for age, progressive
decrease in weight to below the 3rd to 5th percentile, or a decrease in the percentile rank of 2
major growth parameters in a short period. The cause may be an identified medical condition or
may be related to environmental factors. Both types relate to inadequate nutrition. Treatment
aims to restore proper nutrition.
Etiology
The physiologic basis for FTT of any etiology is inadequate nutrition and is divided into
• Organic FTT
===PAGE:3101===
• Nonorganic FTT
Organic FTT:
Growth failure is due to an acute or chronic disorder that interferes with nutrient intake,
absorption, metabolism, or excretion or that increases energy requirements (see
Table 291-2
). Illness of any organ system can be a cause.
Nonorganic FTT:
Up to 80% of children with growth failure do not have an apparent growth-inhibiting
(organic) disorder; growth failure occurs because of environmental neglect (eg, lack of food), stimulus
deprivation, or both.
Lack of food may be due to
• Impoverishment
• Poor understanding of feeding techniques
• Improperly prepared formula (eg, overdiluting formula to stretch it because of financial difficulties)
• Inadequate supply of breast milk (eg, because the mother is under stress, exhausted, or poorly
nourished)
Nonorganic FTT is often a complex of disordered interaction between a child and caregiver. In some
cases, the psychologic basis of nonorganic FTT seems similar to that of hospitalism, a syndrome
observed in infants who have depression secondary to stimulus deprivation. The unstimulated child
becomes depressed, apathetic, and ultimately anorexic. Stimulation may be lacking because the
caregiver
• Is depressed or apathetic
• Has poor parenting skills
• Is anxious about or unfulfilled by the caregiving role
• Feels hostile toward the child
• Is responding to real or perceived external stresses (eg, demands of other children in large or chaotic
families, marital dysfunction, a significant loss, financial difficulties)
Poor caregiving does not fully account for all cases of nonorganic FTT. The child's temperament,
capacities, and responses help shape caregiver nurturance patterns. Common scenarios involve parentchild mismatches, in which the child's demands, although not pathologic, cannot be adequately met by the
[Table 291-2.
Some Causes of Organic Failure to Thrive]
parents, who might, however, do well with a child who has different needs or even with the same child
under different circumstances.
Mixed FTT:
In mixed FTT, organic and nonorganic causes can overlap; children with organic disorders
also have disturbed environments or dysfunctional parental interactions. Likewise, those with severe
undernutrition caused by nonorganic FTT can develop organic medical problems.
Diagnosis
• Frequent weight monitoring
• Thorough medical, family, and social history
• Diet history
===PAGE:3102===
• Laboratory testing
Children with organic FTT may present at any age depending on the underlying disorder. Most children
with nonorganic FTT manifest growth failure before age 1 yr and many by age 6 mo. Age should be
plotted against weight, height, and head size. Until premature infants reach 2 yr, age should be corrected
for gestation.
Weight is the most sensitive indicator of nutritional status. Reduced linear growth usually indicates more
severe, prolonged undernutrition. Because the brain is preferentially spared in protein-energy
undernutrition (, reduced growth in head circumference occurs late and indicates very severe or longstanding
undernutrition.
Usually, when growth failure is noted, a history (including diet history—see
Table 291-3
) is obtained, diet counseling is provided, and the child's weight is monitored frequently. A
child who does not gain weight satisfactorily in spite of outpatient assessment and intervention usually is
admitted to the hospital so that all necessary observations can be made and diagnostic tests can be done
quickly. Without historic or physical evidence of a specific underlying etiology for growth failure, no single
clinical feature or test can reliably distinguish organic from nonorganic FTT. Because nonorganic FTT is
not a diagnosis of exclusion, the physician should search simultaneously for an underlying physical
problem and for personal, family, and child-family characteristics that support a psychosocial etiology.
Optimally, evaluation is multidisciplinary, involving a physician, a nurse, a social worker, a nutritionist, an
expert in child development, and often a psychiatrist or psychologist. The child's feeding behaviors with
health care practitioners and with the parents must be observed, whether the setting is inpatient or
outpatient.
Engaging the parents as co-investigators is essential. It helps foster their self-esteem and avoids blaming
those who may already feel frustrated or guilty because of a perceived inability to nurture their child. The
family should be encouraged to visit as often and as long as possible. Staff members should make them
feel welcome, support their attempts to feed the child, and provide toys and ideas that promote parentchild play and other interactions. Staff members should avoid any comments implying parental
inadequacy, irresponsibility, or other fault as the cause of FTT. However, parental adequacy and sense of
responsibility should be evaluated. Suspected neglect or abuse must be reported to social services, but in
many instances, referral for preventive services that are targeted to meet the family's needs for support
and education (eg, additional food stamps, more accessible child care, parenting classes) is more
appropriate.
During hospitalization, the child's interaction with people in the environment is closely observed, and
evidence of self-stimulatory behaviors (eg, rocking, head banging) is noted. Some children with
nonorganic FTT have been described as hypervigilant and wary
[Table 291-3.
Essentials of the History for Failure to Thrive]
of close contact with people, preferring interactions with inanimate objects if they interact at all. Although
nonorganic FTT is more consistent with neglectful than abusive parenting, the child should be examined
closely for evidence of abuse (. A screening test of developmental level should be done and,
if indicated, followed with more sophisticated assessment.
Testing:
Extensive laboratory testing is usually nonproductive. If a thorough history or physical
examination does not indicate a particular cause, most experts recommend limiting screening tests to
• CBC with differential
• ESR
• BUN or serum creatinine level
===PAGE:3103===
• Urinalysis (including ability to concentrate and acidify) and culture
• Stool for pH, reducing substances, odor, color, consistency, and fat content
Depending on prevalence of specific disorders in the community, blood lead level, HIV, or TB testing may
be warranted.
Other tests that are sometimes appropriate include electrolyte concentrations if the child has a history of
significant vomiting or diarrhea; a thyroxine level if growth in height is more severely affected than growth
in weight; and a sweat test if the child has a history of recurrent upper or lower respiratory tract disease,
a salty taste when kissed, a ravenous appetite, foul-smelling bulky stools, hepatomegaly, or a family
history of cystic fibrosis. Investigation for infectious diseases should be reserved for children with
evidence of infection (eg, fever, vomiting, cough, diarrhea). Radiologic investigation should be reserved
for children with evidence of anatomic or functional pathology (eg, pyloric stenosis, gastroesophageal
reflux).
Prognosis
Prognosis with organic FTT depends on the cause. With nonorganic FTT, the majority of children age > 1
yr achieve a stable weight above the 3rd percentile. Children who develop FTT before age 1 yr are at
high risk of
cognitive delay, especially verbal and math skills. Children diagnosed at age < 6 mo, when the
rate of postnatal brain growth is maximal, are at highest risk. General behavioral problems, identified by
teachers or mental health practitioners, occur in about 50% of children. Problems specifically related to
eating (eg, pickiness, slowness) or elimination tend to occur in a similar proportion of children, usually
those with other behavioral or personality disturbances.
Treatment
• Sufficient nutrition
• Treatment of underlying disorder
• Long-term social support
Treatment aims to provide sufficient health and environmental resources to promote satisfactory growth. A
nutritious diet containing adequate calories for catch-up growth (about 150% of normal caloric
requirement) and individualized medical and social supports are usually necessary. Ability to gain weight
in the hospital does not always differentiate infants with nonorganic FTT from those with organic FTT; all
children grow when given sufficient nutrition. However, some children with nonorganic FTT lose weight in
the hospital, highlighting the complexity of this condition.
For children with organic or mixed FTT, the underlying disorder should be treated quickly. For children
with apparent nonorganic FTT or mixed FTT, management includes provision of education and emotional
support to correct problems interfering with the parent-child relationship. Because long-term social
support or psychiatric treatment is often required, the evaluation team may be able only to define the
family's needs, provide initial instruction and support, and institute appropriate referrals to community
agencies. The parents should understand why the referrals are being made and, if options exist, should
participate in decisions concerning which agencies will be involved. If the child is hospitalized in a tertiary
care center, the referring physician should be consulted regarding local agencies and the level of
expertise available in the community.
A predischarge planning conference involving hospital-based personnel, representatives from the
community agencies that will provide follow-up services, and the child's primary physician is ideal. Areas
of responsibility and lines of accountability must be clearly defined, preferably in writing, and distributed
to everyone involved. The parents should be invited to a summary session after the conference so that
they can meet the community workers, ask questions, and arrange follow-up appointments.
In some cases, the child must be placed in foster care. If the child is expected to eventually return to the
===PAGE:3104===
biologic parents, parenting skill training and psychologic counseling must be provided for them. Their
child's progress must be monitored scrupulously. Return to the biologic parents should be based on the
parents' demonstrated ability to care for the child adequately, not only on the passage of time.
Hemorrhagic Shock and Encephalopathy Syndrome
Hemorrhagic shock and encephalopathy syndrome (HSES) is an extremely rare disease
characterized by acute onset of severe shock, coagulopathy, encephalopathy, and hepatic and
renal dysfunction in previously healthy children, resulting in death or catastrophic neurologic
outcome.
HSES occurs predominantly in infants aged 3 to 8 mo (median age, 5 mo) but has been reported in a 15
yr old. HSES resembles heatstroke, with extremely high temperature and multiple organ dysfunction, but
the cause is unknown. Overwrapping of infants who have febrile illness has been suggested, but
evidence is slim. Other theories include a reaction to intestinal or environmental toxins, pancreatic release
of trypsin, or an unidentified virus or bacterium. Diffuse cerebral edema with herniation and focal
hemorrhages and infarcts in the cerebral cortex and other organs are common. The lungs and
myocardium are not primarily involved.
Symptoms and Signs
A prodrome of fever, upper respiratory tract symptoms, or vomiting and diarrhea occurs in most patients.
The major features are an acute onset of encephalopathy, cerebral edema (manifested as seizures,
coma, and hypotonia), and severe shock (ie, hypotension and poor perfusion). Other common features
include hyperpyrexia (up to 43.9° C rectally), bloody or watery diarrhea, disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC), myoglobinuria, and rhabdomyolysis.
Diagnosis
• Laboratory testing
Similar symptoms can result from sepsis, Reye's syndrome, and hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Patients
require laboratory evaluation,
including blood and urine culture, ABG, CBC, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine,
PT/PTT, and liver function tests. Multiple abnormalities include metabolic acidosis, elevated liver
transaminases, acute renal failure, thrombocytopenia, falling Hct, leukocytosis, hypoglycemia, and
hyperkalemia. Bacteriologic and viral cultures are negative. Diagnosis is by exclusion.
Prognosis
In all cases, > 60% of patients died, and ≥ 70% of survivors had severe neurologic sequelae.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
Treatment is entirely supportive. Infusions of large volumes of isotonic solutions and blood products
(fresh frozen plasma, albumin, whole blood, packed RBCs) along with inotropic support (eg, dopamine,
epinephrine) are necessary to maintain circulation. Marked temperature elevation (eg, > 39° C) requires
external cooling (. Increased intracranial pressure caused by cerebral edema requires
intubation and hyperventilation. DIC often progresses despite use of fresh frozen plasma.
Kawasaki Disease
Kawasaki disease (KD) is a vasculitis, sometimes involving the coronary arteries, that tends to
occur in infants and children between ages 1 yr and 8 yr. It is characterized by prolonged fever,
exanthem, conjunctivitis, mucous membrane inflammation, and lymphadenopathy. Coronary
artery aneurysms may develop and rupture or cause MI. Diagnosis is by clinical criteria; once
the disease is diagnosed, echocardiography is done. Treatment is aspirin and IV immune
===PAGE:3105===
globulin. Coronary thrombosis may require fibrinolysis or percutaneous interventions.
KD is a vasculitis of medium-sized arteries, most significantly the coronary arteries, which are involved in
about 20% of untreated patients. Early manifestations include acute myocarditis with heart failure,
arrhythmias, endocarditis, and pericarditis. Coronary artery aneurysms may subsequently form. Giant
coronary artery aneurysms (> 8 mm internal diameter on echocardiography), though rare, have the
greatest risk of causing cardiac tamponade, thrombosis, or infarction. KD is the leading cause of acquired
heart disease in children. Extravascular tissue also may become inflamed, including the upper respiratory
tract, pancreas, biliary tract, and kidneys.
Etiology
The etiology is unknown, but the epidemiology and clinical presentation suggest an infection or an
abnormal immunologic response to an infection in genetically predisposed children. Children of Japanese
descent have a particularly high incidence, but KD occurs worldwide. In the US, 3000 to 5000 cases
occur annually. The male:female ratio is about 1.5:1. Eighty percent of patients are < 5 yr (peak, 18 to 24
mo). Cases in adolescents, adults, and infants < 4 mo are rare. Cases occur year-round, but most often in
spring or winter. Clusters have been reported in communities without clear evidence of person-to-person
spread. About 2% of patients have recurrences, typically months to years later.
Symptoms and Signs
The illness tends to progress in stages, beginning with fever lasting at least 5 days, usually remittent and
> 39° C, associated with irritability, occasional lethargy, or intermittent colicky abdominal pain. Usually
within a day or two of fever onset, bilateral bulbar conjunctival injection appears without exudate. Within 5
days, a polymorphous, erythematous macular rash appears, primarily over the trunk, often with
accentuation in the perineal region. The rash may be urticarial, morbilliform, erythema multiforme, or
scarlatiniform. It is accompanied by injected pharynx; reddened, dry, fissured lips; and a red strawberry
tongue (see
Plate 74
). During the first week, pallor of the proximal portion of the fingernails or toenails (leukonychia
partialis) may occur. Erythema or a purple-red discoloration and variable edema of the palms and soles
usually appear on about the 3rd to 5th day. Although edema may be slight, it is often tense, hard, and
nonpitting. Periungual, palmar, and plantar and perineal desquamation begins on about the 10th day. The
superficial layer of the skin sometimes comes off in large casts, revealing new normal skin. Tender,
nonsuppurative cervical lymphadenopathy (≥ 1 node ≥ 1.5 cm in diameter) is present throughout the
course in about 50% of patients. The illness may last from 2 to 12 wk or longer. Incomplete or atypical
cases can occur, especially in younger infants, who have higher risk of developing coronary artery
disease. These findings manifest in about 90% of patients.
Other less specific findings indicate involvement of many systems. Arthritis or arthralgias (mainly involving
large joints) occur in about 33% of patients. Other clinical features include urethritis, aseptic meningitis,
hepatitis, otitis,
vomiting, diarrhea, hydrops of the gallbladder, and anterior uveitis.
Cardiac manifestations usually begin in the subacute phase of the syndrome about 1 to 4 wk after onset
as the rash, fever, and other early acute clinical symptoms begin to subside.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
• Laboratory testing (CBC, ESR, antinuclear antibody [ANA], rheumatoid factor [RF], throat and blood
cultures)
• Serial ECG and echocardiography
Diagnosis is by clinical criteria (see
Table 291-4
). Similar symptoms can result from scarlet fever, staphylococcal exfoliative syndromes,
measles, drug reactions, and juvenile idiopathic arthritis; less common mimics are leptospirosis and
===PAGE:3106===
Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
Laboratory tests are not diagnostic but may be done to exclude other disorders. Patients generally
undergo CBC, ANA, RF, ESR, and throat and blood cultures. Leukocytosis, often with a marked increase
in immature cells, is common acutely. Other hematologic findings include a mild normocytic anemia,
thrombocytosis (≥ 450,000/
μ
L) in the 2nd or 3rd wk of illness, and elevated ESR or C-reactive protein.
ANA, RF, and cultures are negative. Other abnormalities, depending on the organ systems involved,
include sterile pyuria, elevated liver enzymes, proteinuria, and CSF pleocytosis.
Consultation with a pediatric cardiologist is important. At diagnosis, ECG and echocardiography are done;
because abnormalities may not appear until later, these tests are repeated 2 to 3 wk, 6 to 8 wk, and
perhaps 6 to 12 mo after onset. ECG may show arrhythmias, decreased voltage, or left ventricular
hypertrophy. Echocardiography should detect coronary artery aneurysms, valvular regurgitation,
pericarditis, or myocarditis. Coronary arteriography occasionally is useful in patients with aneurysms and
abnormal stress test results.
[Table 291-4.
Criteria for Diagnosis of Kawasaki Disease]
Prognosis
Without therapy, mortality may approach 1%, usually occurring within 6 wk of onset. With adequate
therapy, the mortality rate in the US is 0.17%. Long duration of fever increases cardiac risk. Deaths most
commonly result from cardiac complications and can be sudden and unpredictable: > 50% occur within 1
mo of onset, 75% within 2 mo, and 95% within 6 mo but may occur as long as 10 yr later. Effective
therapy reduces acute symptoms and, more importantly, the incidence of coronary artery aneurysms from
20% to < 5%. In the absence of coronary artery disease, the prognosis for complete recovery is excellent.
About two thirds of coronary aneurysms regress within 1 yr, although it is unknown whether residual
coronary stenosis remains. Giant coronary aneurysms are less likely to regress and require more
intensive follow-up and therapy.
Treatment
• High-dose immune globulin IV (IGIV)
• High-dose aspirin
Children should be treated by or in close consultation with an experienced pediatric cardiologist, pediatric
infectious disease specialist, or both. Therapy is started as soon as possible, optimally within the first 10
days of illness, with a combination of high-dose IGIV (single dose of 2 g/kg given over 10 to 12 h) and
oral high-dose aspirin 20 to 25 mg/kg po qid. The aspirin dose is reduced to 3 to 5 mg/kg once/day after
the child has been afebrile for 4 to 5 days; some authorities prefer to continue high-dose aspirin until the
14th day of illness. Aspirin metabolism is erratic during acute KD, which partially explains the high dose
requirements. Some authorities monitor serum aspirin levels during high-dose therapy, especially if
therapy is given for 14 days.
Most patients have a brisk response over the first 24 h of therapy. A small fraction continues to be ill with
fever for several days and requires repeated dosing with IGIV. An alternative regimen, which may lead to
slightly slower resolution of symptoms but may benefit those with cardiac dysfunction who could not
tolerate the volume of a 2 g/kg IGIV infusion, is IGIV 400 mg/kg once/day for 4 days (again in combination
with high-dose aspirin). The efficacy of IGIV/aspirin therapy when
begun > 10 days after onset of illness
is unknown, but therapy should still be considered.
After the child's symptoms have abated for 4 to 5 days, aspirin 3 to 5 mg/kg/day is continued for at least 8
wk after onset until repeated echocardiographic testing is completed. If there are no coronary artery
aneurysms and signs of inflammation are absent (shown by normalization of ESR and platelets), aspirin
may be stopped. Because of its antithrombotic effect, aspirin is continued indefinitely for children with
coronary artery abnormalities. Children with giant coronary aneurysms may require additional
anticoagulant therapy (eg, warfarin, dipyridamole).
===PAGE:3107===
Children who receive IGIV therapy may have a lower response rate to live viral vaccines. Thus, measlesmumps-rubella vaccine should generally be delayed for 11 mo after IGIV therapy, and varicella vaccine
should be delayed for ≥ 11 mo. If the risk of measles exposure is high, vaccination should proceed, but
revaccination (or serologic testing) should be done 11 mo later.
A small risk of Reye's syndrome exists in children receiving long-term aspirin therapy during outbreaks of
influenza or varicella; thus, annual influenza vaccination is indicated for children (≥ 6 mo of age) receiving
long-term aspirin therapy. Further, parents of children receiving aspirin should be instructed to contact
their child's physician promptly if the child is exposed to or develops symptoms of influenza or varicella.
Temporary interruption of aspirin may be considered (with substitution of dipyridamole for children with
documented aneurysms).
Progeria
(Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome)
Progeria is a rare syndrome of accelerated aging that manifests early in childhood and causes
premature death.
Progeria is caused by a sporadic mutation in the
LMNA
gene that codes for a protein (lamin A) that
provides the molecular scaffolding of cell nuclei. The defective protein leads to nuclear instability from cell
division and early death of every body cell.
Symptoms and signs develop within 2 yr and include
• Growth failure
• Craniofacial abnormalities (eg, craniofacial disproportion, micrognathia, beaked nose)
• Physical changes of aging (eg, wrinkled skin, balding)
Diagnosis is usually obvious by appearance but must be distinguished from segmental progerias (eg,
acrogeria, metageria) and other causes of growth failure. Median age at death is 12 yr; cause is coronary
artery and cerebrovascular disease. Of note is that other problems associated with normal aging (eg,
increased cancer risk, degenerative arthritis) are not present. There is no known treatment.
Other progeroid syndromes:
Premature aging is a feature of other rare progeroid syndromes, including
Werner's syndrome (premature aging after puberty with hair thinning and development of conditions of
old age [eg, cataracts, diabetes, osteoporosis, atherosclerosis]) and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome
(premature aging with increased susceptibility to cancer). Both are caused by gene mutations leading to
defective RecQ DNA helicases, which normally repair DNA. Cockayne's syndrome is an autosomal
recessive disease caused by mutation in the
ERCC8
gene, which is important in DNA excision repair.
Clinical features include severe growth failure, cachectic appearance, retinopathy, hypertension, renal
failure, skin photosensitivity, and intellectual disability. Neonatal progeroid (Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch)
syndrome is a recessively inherited syndrome of aging causing death by 2 yr. Other syndromes (eg,
Down, Ehlers-Danlos) occasionally have progeroid features.
Reye's Syndrome
Reye's syndrome is a rare form of acute encephalopathy and fatty infiltration of the liver that
tends to follow some acute viral infections, particularly when salicylates are used. Diagnosis is
clinical. Treatment is supportive.
The cause of Reye's syndrome is unknown, but many cases seem to follow infection with influenza A or B
or varicella. Using salicylates during such illness increases the risk by as much as 35-fold. This finding
has led to a marked decrease in salicylate use in the US since the mid-1980s (except when specifically
indicated, such as in juvenile idiopathic arthritis and Kawasaki disease) and a corresponding decrease in
===PAGE:3108===
the incidence of Reye's syndrome from several hundred annual cases to < 20. The syndrome occurs
almost exclusively in children < 18 yr. In the US, most cases occur in late fall and winter.
The disease affects mitochondrial function, causing disturbance in fatty acid and carnitine metabolism.
Pathophysiology is similar to a number of inherited metabolic disorders.
Symptoms and Signs
The disease varies greatly in severity but is characteristically biphasic. Initial viral symptoms (URI or
sometimes chickenpox) are followed in 5 to 7 days by pernicious nausea and vomiting and a sudden
change in mental status. The changes in mental status may vary from a mild amnesia and lethargy to
intermittent episodes of disorientation and agitation, which can progress rapidly to deepening stages of
coma manifested by
• Progressive unresponsiveness
• Decorticate and decerebrate posturing
• Seizures
• Flaccidity
• Fixed dilated pupils
• Respiratory arrest
Focal neurologic findings usually are not present. Hepatomegaly occurs in about 40% of cases, but
jaundice is absent.
Complications:
Complications include
• Electrolyte and fluid disturbances
• Increased intracranial pressure (ICP)
• Diabetes insipidus
• Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
• Hypotension
• Arrhythmias
• Bleeding diatheses (especially GI)
• Pancreatitis
• Respiratory insufficiency
• Hyperammonemia
• Aspiration pneumonia
• Poor temperature regulation
Diagnosis
• Clinical findings in association with laboratory testing
===PAGE:3109===
• Liver biopsy
Reye's syndrome should be suspected in any child exhibiting the acute onset of an encephalopathy
(without known heavy metal or toxin exposure) and pernicious vomiting associated with hepatic
dysfunction. Liver biopsy provides the definitive diagnosis, showing microvesicular, fatty changes, and is
especially useful in sporadic cases and in children < 2 yr. The diagnosis may also be made when the
typical clinical findings and history are associated with the following laboratory findings: increased liver
transaminases (AST, ALT > 3 times normal), normal bilirubin, increased blood ammonia level, and
prolonged PT. CSF examination usually shows increased pressure, < 8 to 10 WBCs/
μ
L, and normal
protein levels; the CSF glutamine level may be elevated. Hypoglycemia and hypoglycorrhachia occur in
15% of cases, especially in children < 4 yr; they should be screened for metabolic disease. The condition
is staged from I to V according to severity.
Signs of metabolic derangement include elevated serum amino acid levels, acid-base disturbances
(usually with hyperventilation, mixed respiratory alkalosis-metabolic acidosis), osmolar changes,
hypernatremia, hypokalemia, and hypophosphatemia.
Differential diagnosis:
The differential diagnosis of coma and liver dysfunction includes sepsis or
hyperthermia (especially in infants); potentially treatable inborn abnormalities of urea synthesis (eg,
ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency) or fatty acid oxidation (eg, systemic carnitine deficiency, medium
chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency); phosphorus or carbon tetrachloride intoxication; acute
encephalopathy caused by salicylism, other drugs (eg, valproate), or poisons; viral encephalitis or
meningoencephalitis; and acute hepatitis. Illnesses such as idiopathic steatosis of pregnancy and
tetracycline liver toxicity may show similar light microscopic findings.
Prognosis
Outcome is related to the duration of cerebral dysfunction, severity and rate of progression of coma,
severity of increased ICP, and degree of blood ammonia elevation. Progression from stage I to higher
stages is likely when the initial blood ammonia level is > 100
μ
g/dL (> 60
μ
mol/L) and the PT is ≥ 3 sec
longer than that of the control. In fatal cases, the mean time from hospitalization to death is 4 days.
Fatality rates average 21% but range from < 2% among patients in stage I to > 80% among patients in
stage IV or V. Prognosis for survivors usually is good, and recurrences are rare. However, the incidence
of neurologic sequelae (eg, intellectual disability, seizure disorders, cranial nerve palsies, motor
dysfunction) is as high as 30% among survivors who developed seizures or decerebrate posturing during
illness.
Treatment
• Support measures
Treatment is supportive, with particular attention paid to control of ICP and blood glucose, because
glycogen depletion is common. Treatment of elevated ICP includes intubation, hyperventilation, fluid
restriction of 1500 mL/m
/day, elevating the head of the bed, and osmotic diuretics. Infusion of 10 or 15%
dextrose is common to maintain euglycemia. Coagulopathy may require fresh frozen
plasma or vitamin K.
Other treatments (eg, exchange transfusion, hemodialysis, barbiturate-induced deep coma) have not
been proved effective but are sometimes used.
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is the sudden and unexpected death of an infant or young
child between 2 wk and 1 yr of age in which an examination of the death scene, thorough
postmortem examination, and clinical history fail to show cause.
SIDS is the most common cause of death of infants between 2 wk and 1 yr of age, accounting for 35 to
55% of all deaths in this age group. The rate of SIDS occurrence is 0.5/1000 births in the US; there are
racial and ethnic disparities (African American and Native American children have twice the average risk
===PAGE:3110===
of SIDS). Peak incidence is between the 2nd and 4th mo of life. Almost all SIDS deaths occur when the
infant is thought to be sleeping.
Etiology
The cause is unknown, although it is most likely due to dysfunction of neural cardiorespiratory control
mechanisms. The dysfunction may be intermittent or transient, and multiple mechanisms are probably
involved. Fewer than 5% of infants with SIDS have episodes of prolonged apnea before their death, so
the overlap between the SIDS population and infants with recurrent prolonged apnea is very small.
Risk factors:
The association between a prone (on stomach) sleeping position and an increased risk of
SIDS has been documented strongly. Other risk factors (see
Table 291-5
) include old or unsafe cribs, soft bedding (eg, lamb's wool), waterbed mattresses, smoking in
the home, and an overheated environment. Siblings of infants who die of SIDS are 5 times more likely to
die of SIDS; it is not clear whether this is related to genetics or environment.
Many risk factors for SIDS apply to non-SIDS infant deaths as well.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis, while largely one of exclusion, cannot be made without an adequate autopsy to rule out
other causes of sudden, unexpected death (eg, intracranial hemorrhage, meningitis, myocarditis).
[Table 291-5.
Risk Factors for Sudden Infant Death Syndrome]
Management
Parents who have lost a child to SIDS are grief-stricken and unprepared for the tragedy. Because no
definitive cause can be found for their child's death, they usually have excessive guilt feelings, which may
be aggravated by investigations conducted by police, social workers, or others. Family members require
support not only during the days immediately after the infant's death but for at least several months to
help them with their grief and dispel guilt feelings. Such support includes, whenever possible, an
immediate home visit to observe the circumstances in which SIDS occurred and to inform and counsel the
parents concerning the cause of death.
Autopsy should be done quickly. As soon as the preliminary results are known (usually within 12 h) they
should be communicated to the parents. Some clinicians advise a series of home or office visits over the
first month to continue the earlier discussions, answer questions, and give the family the final
(microscopic)
autopsy results. At the last meeting, it is appropriate to discuss the parents' adjustment to
their loss, especially their attitude toward having other children. Much of the counseling and support can
be complemented by specially trained nurses or by lay people who have themselves experienced the
tragedy of and adjustment to SIDS (visit www.sids.org
for more information and resources).
Prevention
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that infants be placed supine (on their back) for sleep
unless other medical conditions prevent this. The incidence of SIDS increases with overheating (eg,
clothing, blankets, hot room) and in cold weather. Thus, every effort should be made to avoid an overly
hot or an overly cold environment, to avoid over-wrapping the infant, and to remove soft bedding, such as
sheepskin, pillows, stuffed toys/animals, and comforters, from the crib. Mothers should avoid smoking
during pregnancy, and infants should not be exposed to smoke. Parents should not have the infant sleep
in their bed. There is no evidence that home apnea monitors reduce the incidence of SIDS and therefore
are not suggested for prevention.
===PAGE:3111===
Chapter 292. Pediatric Cancers
Introduction
Overall, childhood cancer is relatively rare, with fewer than 11,000 cases and about 1,500 deaths
annually among children aged 0 to 14 yr. In comparison, there are 1.4 million cases and 565,000 deaths
annually among adults. However, cancer is the 2nd leading cause of death among children, following only
injuries.
Childhood cancers include many that also occur in adults. Leukemia ( is by far the most
common, representing about 33% of childhood cancers, brain tumors represent about 21%, lymphomas
( about 8%, and certain bone cancers (osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma—
about 4%. Cancers that are exclusive to children include neuroblastoma (7% of cases), Wilms' tumor
(5%), rhabdomyosarcoma (3 to 4%), and retinoblastoma (3%).
Children who survive cancer have more years than adults to develop long-term consequences of
chemotherapy and radiation therapy, which include
• Infertility
• Poor growth
• Cardiac damage
• Development of second cancers (in 3 to 12% of survivors)
Consensus guidelines on screening for and management of long-term consequences are available from
the Children's Oncology Group at www.survivorshipguidelines.org/
.
Because of the severe consequences and complexity of treatment, children with cancer are best treated
in centers with expertise in childhood cancers.
The impact of being diagnosed with cancer and the intensity of the treatment are overwhelming to the
child and family. Maintaining a sense of normalcy for the child is difficult, especially given the need for
frequent hospitalizations and outpatient visits and potentially painful procedures. Overwhelming stress is
typical, as parents struggle to continue to work, be attentive to siblings, and still attend to the many needs
of the child with cancer. The situation is even more difficult when the child is being treated at a specialty
center far from home.
Brain Tumors
Brain tumors are the most common solid cancer in children < 15 yr and are the 2nd leading
cause of death due to cancer. Diagnosis is typically by imaging (usually MRI) and biopsy.
Treatment may include surgical resection, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy.
Entry into a clinical trial should be considered for all children with a brain tumor. Optimal treatment
requires a multidisciplinary team of oncologists who have experience treating brain tumors in children.
Because radiation therapy for brain tumors is technically demanding, children should be sent to centers
that have experience in this area if possible.
Astrocytomas
Astrocytomas range from low-grade indolent tumors (the most prevalent) to malignant high-grade tumors.
As a group, astrocytomas
are the most common brain tumor in children, representing about 40% of
tumors. Most cases occur between ages 5 yr and 9 yr. These tumors can occur anywhere in the brain or
spinal cord, but are most common in the cerebellum.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:3112===
Most patients have symptoms consistent with increased intracranial pressure (eg, morning headaches,
vomiting, lethargy). Location of the tumor determines other symptoms and signs; for example:
•
Cerebellum:
Weakness, tremor, and ataxia
•
Visual pathway:
Visual loss, proptosis, or nystagmus
•
Spinal cord:
Pain, weakness, and gait disturbance
Diagnosis
Contrast-enhanced MRI is the imaging test of choice for diagnosing the tumor, determining extent of
disease, and detecting recurrence. Contrast-enhanced CT can also be used, although it is less specific
and less sensitive. Biopsy is needed for determining tumor type and grade. These tumors are typically
classified as low-grade (eg, juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma), intermediate-grade, or high-grade (eg,
glioblastoma).
Treatment
Treatment depends on location and grade of tumor. As a general rule, the lower the grade, the less
intensive the therapy and the better the outcome.
•
Low-grade:
Surgical resection is the primary treatment. Radiation therapy is reserved for children who
are > 10 yr and whose tumors cannot be completely excised. For children < 10 yr with incompletely
excised tumors, chemotherapy is used instead because radiation therapy may cause long-term
cognitive impairment. Most children with low-grade astrocytomas are cured.
•
Intermediate-grade:
These tumors are somewhere between low-grade and high-grade lesions. If they
are closer to high-grade tumors, they are treated more aggressively (radiation and chemotherapy); if
they appear more like low-grade tumors, they are treated with surgery alone or surgery followed by
radiation (older children) or chemotherapy (younger children).
•
High-grade:
These tumors are treated with a combination of surgery (unless location precludes it),
radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Prognosis is poor; overall survival is only 20-30%.
Ependymomas
Ependymomas are the 3rd most common CNS tumor in children (after astrocytomas and
medulloblastomas), representing 10% of pediatric brain tumors. Mean age at diagnosis is 6 yr; however,
about 30% of ependymomas occur in children < 3 yr.
Ependymomas are derived from the ependymal lining of the ventricular system. Up to 70% of
ependymomas occur in the posterior fossa; both high-grade and low-grade tumors in the posterior fossae
tend to spread locally to the brain stem.
Initial symptoms are typically related to increased intracranial pressure. Infants may present with
developmental delay and irritability. Changes in mood, personality, or concentration may occur. Seizures,
balance and gait disturbances, or symptoms of spinal cord compression (eg, back pain, loss of bladder
and bowel control) may occur.
Diagnosis is based on MRI and biopsy.
The tumor is surgically removed, followed by MRI to check for residual tumor. Radiation therapy,
chemotherapy, or both are then required.
Overall 5-yr survival rate is about 50% but depends partly on age:
===PAGE:3113===
• < 1 yr: 25%
• 1 to 4 yr: 46%
• ≥ 5 yr: 70%
Survival rate also depends on how much of the tumor can be removed (51 to 80% with total or near-total
removal vs 0 to 26% with < 90% removal). Children who survive are at risk of neurologic deficits.
Medulloblastoma
Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant posterior fossa tumor in children and represents about
20% of all pediatric CNS cancers. It most commonly occurs in children aged 5 to 7 yr but can occur
throughout adolescence. It is more common among boys. Medulloblastoma is a type of primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET).
Etiology is unclear, but medulloblastoma may occur with certain syndromes (eg, Gorlin syndrome, Turcot
syndrome).
Patients present most commonly with vomiting, headache, nausea, visual changes (eg, double vision),
and unsteady walking or clumsiness.
MRI with gadolinium contrast is the imaging test of choice for initial detection. Biopsy confirms diagnosis.
Once the diagnosis is established, MRI of the entire spine along with
lumbar puncture and sampling of
the CSF are done to assess for spread of tumor into the spinal canal.
Treatment includes surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. Children under the age of 3 may be effectively
treated with chemotherapy alone. Combination therapy typically provides the best long-term survival.
Prognosis depends on the extent, histology, and biologic (eg, histologic, cytogenetic, molecular)
parameters of the tumor and patient age:
• > 3 yr: Likelihood of 5-yr disease-free survival is 50 to 60% if the tumor is high-risk (disseminated) and
80% if the tumor is average-risk (no dissemination).
• ≤ 3 yr: Prognosis is more problematic, in part because up to 40% have disseminated disease at
diagnosis. Children who survive are at risk of severe long-term neurocognitive deficits (eg, in memory,
verbal learning, and executive function).
Neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma is a cancer arising in the adrenal gland or less often from the extra-adrenal
sympathetic chain, including the retroperitoneum, chest, and neck. Diagnosis is based on
biopsy. Treatment may include surgical resection, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and highdose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation.
Neuroblastoma is the most common cancer among infants. Almost 90% of neuroblastomas occur in
children < 5 yr. Neuroblastoma can result from numerous different cytogenetic abnormalities on several
chromosomes; in 1 to 2%, abnormalities appear to be inherited. Some markers (eg, Nmyc
oncogene,
hyperdiploidy, histopathology) correlate with progression and prognosis.
Neuroblastomas may begin in the abdomen (about 65%), thorax (15 to 20%), neck, pelvis, or other sites.
Neuroblastoma occurs very rarely as a primary CNS cancer.
Most neuroblastomas produce catecholamines, which can be detected as elevated levels of urinary
catecholamine breakdown products. Ganglioneuroma is a fully differentiated, benign variant of
neuroblastoma.
===PAGE:3114===
About 40 to 50% of children have localized or regional disease at diagnosis; 50 to 60% have metastases
at diagnosis. Neuroblastoma may metastasize to bone marrow, bone, liver, lymph nodes, or, less
commonly, skin or brain.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs depend on the site of the primary cancer and pattern of disease spread. The most
common symptoms are abdominal pain, discomfort, and a sense of fullness due to an abdominal mass.
Certain symptoms may result from metastases. These include bone pain due to widespread bone
metastases, periorbital ecchymosis and proptosis due to retrobulbar metastasis, and abdominal distention
and respiratory problems due to liver metastases, especially in infants. Occasionally, pallor due to anemia
and petechiae due to thrombocytopenia occur in children with bone marrow metastases.
Children occasionally present with focal neurologic deficits or paralysis due to direct extension of the
cancer into the spinal canal. They may also present with paraneoplastic syndromes (, such
as cerebellar ataxia, opsoclonus-myoclonus, watery diarrhea, or hypertension.
Diagnosis
• CT
• Biopsy
• Sometimes bone marrow aspirate or core biopsy plus measurement of urinary catecholamine
intermediates
Routine prenatal ultrasonography occasionally detects neuroblastoma. Patients presenting with
abdominal symptoms or a mass require CT. Diagnosis is then confirmed by biopsy of any identified mass.
Alternatively, diagnosis can be confirmed by finding characteristic cancer cells in a bone marrow aspirate
or core biopsy plus elevated urinary catecholamine intermediates. Urinary vanillylmandelic acid (VMA),
homovanillic acid (HVA), or both are elevated in ≥ 90% of patients. A 24-h urine collection can be used,
although a spot urine test is usually sufficient. Neuroblastomas must be differentiated from Wilms' tumor,
other renal masses, rhabdomyosarcoma, hepatoblastoma, lymphoma, and tumors of genital origin.
The following should be done to evaluate for metastases:
• Bone marrow aspirates and core biopsies from multiple sites (typically, both iliac crests)
• Skeletal survey
• Bone scan or
I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MBIG) scan
• Abdominal, pelvis, and chest CT or MRI
Cranial imaging with CT or MRI is indicated if symptoms or signs suggest brain metastases.
When the cancer is resected, a portion should be analyzed for DNA index (a quantitative measure of
chromosome content) and amplification of the Nmyc
oncogene to determine
prognosis and intensity of
therapy. Risk categorization is complex, but generally classified as
•
Low:
Age < 1 yr, no amplification of the Nmyc
oncogene, and lower-stage (localized) disease
•
Intermediate:
Regional spread but no amplification of the Nmyc
oncogene
•
High:
Age ≥ 1 yr plus metastatic disease, amplification of the Nmyc
oncogene, or both
===PAGE:3115===
Prognosis
Prognosis is better for children with low-risk disease.
Treatment
• Surgical resection
• Chemotherapy
• Sometimes stem cell transplantation
• Sometimes radiation therapy
Surgical resection is important for low-risk and intermediate-risk disease. Chemotherapy (typical drugs
include vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, cisplatin, carboplatin, ifosfamide, and etoposide) is
usually necessary for children with intermediate-risk disease. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell
transplantation and
cis
-retinoic acid are frequently used for children with high-risk disease. Radiation
therapy is sometimes needed for children with intermediate-risk or high-risk disease or for inoperable
tumors.
Retinoblastoma
Retinoblastoma is a cancer arising from the immature retina. Symptoms and signs commonly
include leukocoria (a white reflex in the pupil), strabismus, and, less often, inflammation and
impaired vision. Diagnosis is based on ophthalmoscopic examination and ultrasonography, CT,
or MRI. Treatment of small cancers and bilateral disease may include photocoagulation,
cryotherapy, and radiation therapy. Treatment of larger cancers is enucleation. Chemotherapy is
sometimes used to reduce cancer volume and to treat cancers that have spread beyond the
eye.
Retinoblastoma occurs in 1/15,000 to 1/30,000 live births and represents about 3% of childhood cancers.
It is usually diagnosed in children < 2 yr; < 5% of cases are diagnosed in those > 5 yr. The cancer may
be hereditary. About 25% of patients have bilateral disease, which is always heritable. Another 15% of
patients have heritable unilateral disease, and the remaining 60% have nonhereditary unilateral disease.
The pathogenesis of inheritance appears to involve mutational deactivation of both alleles of a
retinoblastoma suppressor gene located on chromosome 13q14. In the hereditary form, a germline
mutation alters one allele in all cells, and a later somatic mutation alters the other allele in the retinal cells
(the 2nd hit in this 2-hit model), resulting in the cancer. The nonhereditary form probably involves somatic
mutation of both alleles in a retinal cell.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients typically present with leukocoria (a white reflex in the pupil, sometimes referred to as cat's-eye
pupil—see
Plate 73
) or strabismus. Much less often, patients present with inflammation of the eye or impaired vision.
Rarely, the cancer has already spread, via the optic nerve or the choroid or hematogenously, resulting in
an orbital or soft-tissue mass, headache, anorexia, or vomiting.
When the diagnosis is suspected, both fundi must be closely examined by indirect ophthalmoscopy with
the pupils widely dilated and the child under general anesthesia. The cancers appear as single or multiple
gray-white elevations in the retina; cancer seeds may be visible in the vitreous.
Diagnosis
• Orbital ultrasonography, CT, or MRI
===PAGE:3116===
• Sometimes bone scan, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and lumbar puncture
Diagnosis is usually confirmed by orbital ultrasonography or CT. In almost all cancers, calcification can be
detected by CT. However, if the optic nerve appears abnormal during ophthalmoscopy, MRI is better for
finding cancer extension into the optic nerve or choroid. Whenever extraocular spread is suspected,
testing should include a bone scan, a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and lumbar puncture.
Children who have a parent or sibling with a history of retinoblastoma should be evaluated by an
ophthalmologist shortly after birth and then every 4 mo until age 4 yr. Patients with retinoblastoma require
molecular genetic testing, and if a germline mutation is identified, parents should also be tested for the
same mutation. If subsequent offspring of parents have the germline mutation, the same genetic testing
and regular ophthalmologic examination are required. Recombinant DNA probes may be useful for
detecting asymptomatic carriers.
Prognosis
If the cancer is treated when it is intraocular, > 90% of patients can be cured. Prognosis for patients with
metastatic disease is poor.
In patients with hereditary retinoblastoma, incidence of 2nd cancers is increased; about 50% arise within
the irradiated area. These cancers can include sarcomas and malignant melanoma. Within 30 yr of
diagnosis, 70% develop a 2nd cancer.
Treatment
Unilateral retinoblastoma is managed by enucleation with removal of as much of the optic nerve as
possible.
For patients with bilateral cancer, vision can usually be preserved. Options include bilateral
photocoagulation or unilateral enucleation and photocoagulation, cryotherapy, and irradiation of the other
eye. Radiation therapy is by external beam or, for very small cancers, brachytherapy (attachment of a
radioactive plaque to the eye wall near the cancer).
Systemic chemotherapy, such as carboplatin plus etoposide, or cyclophosphamide plus vincristine, may
be helpful to reduce the size of large cancers or to treat cancer that has disseminated beyond the eye.
However, chemotherapy alone can seldom cure this cancer.
Ophthalmologic reexamination of both eyes and retreatment, if necessary, are required at 2-mo to 4-mo
intervals.
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma is a cancer arising from embryonal mesenchymal cells that have potential
to differentiate into skeletal muscle cells. It can arise from almost any type of muscle tissue in
any location, resulting in highly variable clinical manifestations. Cancers are typically detected
by CT or MRI, and diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy. Treatment involves surgery, radiation
therapy, and chemotherapy.
Rhabdomyosarcoma is the 3rd most common extra-CNS solid cancer in children (after Wilms' tumor and
neuroblastoma). Nonetheless, it accounts for only 3 to 4% of all childhood cancers. Incidence of
rhabdomyosarcoma in children is 4.3/million/yr. Two thirds of cancers are diagnosed in children < 7 yr.
The disease is more common among whites than blacks (largely because frequency is lower in black
girls) and is slightly more common among boys than girls.
Histology:
There are 2 major histologic subtypes:
• Embryonal: Characterized by loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 11p15.5
===PAGE:3117===
• Alveolar: Associated with a translocation involving
PAX3
or
PAX7
, regulators of transcription during
neuromuscular development (chromosome 2;13 or 1;13 translocation)
Location:
Although rhabdomyosarcoma can occur almost anywhere in the body, the cancer has
predilection for several sites:
• Head and neck region, usually in the orbit or nasopharyngeal passages: 35 to 40%, most common
among school-aged children
• GU system, usually in the bladder, prostate, or vagina: 25%, usually occurring in infants and toddlers
• Extremities: 20%, most common among adolescents
Fewer than 25% of children present with metastatic disease.
Symptoms and Signs
Children do not typically have systemic symptoms such as fever, night sweats, or weight loss. Usually,
children present with a firm, palpable mass or with organ dysfunction due to impingement on the organ by
the cancer.
Orbital and nasopharyngeal cancers
may cause tearing, eye pain, or proptosis. Nasopharyngeal cavity
cancers may cause nasal congestion, a change in voice, or mucopurulent discharge.
GU cancers
cause abdominal pain, a palpable abdominal mass, difficulty urinating, and hematuria.
Extremity cancers
appear as firm, indiscrete masses anywhere on the arms or legs. Metastases occur
frequently, especially in the lungs, bone marrow, and lymph nodes, and usually do not cause symptoms.
Diagnosis
• CT or MRI
• Biopsy or excision
Masses are evaluated by CT, although head and neck lesions are often better defined by MRI. Diagnosis
is confirmed by biopsy or excision of the mass. The standard metastatic evaluation includes chest CT, a
bone scan, and bone marrow aspiration and biopsy.
Prognosis
Prognosis is based on
• Cancer location (eg, prognosis is better with head and GU cancers)
• Extent of resection
•
Presence of metastasis
• Age (more favorable in younger children)
• Histology (embryonal histology is associated with a better outcome than alveolar histology)
Combinations of these prognostic factors place children at low, intermediate, or high risk. Treatment
intensifies with each risk category, and overall survival ranges from > 90% in children with low-risk
disease to < 50% in children with high-risk disease.
Treatment
===PAGE:3118===
• Surgery and chemotherapy
• Sometimes radiation therapy
Treatment consists of surgery, chemotherapy, and sometimes radiation therapy. Complete excision of the
primary cancer is recommended when it can be done safely. Because the cancer is so sensitive to
chemotherapy and radiation therapy, aggressive resection is discouraged if it may result in organ damage
or dysfunction.
Children in all risk categories are treated with chemotherapy; the most commonly used drugs are
vincristine, actinomycin D, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, ifosfamide, and etoposide. Topotecan and
irinotecan are newer drugs that have activity against this cancer; they are being investigated in some
frontline treatment regimens.
Radiation therapy is generally reserved for children with residual cancer after surgery and for children
with intermediate-risk or high-risk disease.
Wilms' Tumor
(Nephroblastoma)
Wilms' tumor is an embryonal cancer of the kidney composed of blastemal, stromal, and
epithelial elements. Genetic abnormalities have been implicated in the pathogenesis, but
familial inheritance accounts for only 1 to 2% of cases. Diagnosis is by ultrasonography and
abdominal CT and is confirmed by biopsy. Treatment may include surgical resection,
chemotherapy, and radiation therapy.
Wilms' tumor usually manifests in children < 5 yr but occasionally in older children and rarely in adults.
Wilms' tumor accounts for about 6% of cancers in children < 15 yr. Bilateral synchronous tumors occur in
about 5% of patients; bilateral disease is more common among very young children, especially girls.
A chromosomal deletion of
WT1
, the Wilms' tumor suppressor gene, has been identified in some cases.
Other associated genetic abnormalities include deletion of
WT2
(a 2nd Wilms' tumor suppressor gene),
deletion of chromosome 16, and duplication of chromosome 12.
About 10% of cases manifest with other congenital abnormalities, especially GU abnormalities, but also
commonly hemihypertrophy (asymmetry of the body). WAGR syndrome is the combination of Wilms' tumor
(with
WT1
deletion), aniridia, GU malformations (eg, renal hypoplasia, cystic disease, hypospadias,
cryptorchidism), and mental retardation (intellectual disability).
Symptoms and Signs
The most frequent finding is a painless, palpable abdominal mass. Less frequent findings include
abdominal pain, hematuria, fever, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. Hematuria (occurring in 15 to 20%)
indicates invasion of the collecting system. Hypertension may occur if compression of the renal pedicle or
renal parenchyma causes ischemia.
Diagnosis
• Abdominal ultrasonography and CT
• Biopsy
Abdominal ultrasonography determines whether the mass is cystic or solid and whether the renal vein or
vena cava is involved. Abdominal CT is needed to determine the extent of the tumor and check for spread
to regional lymph nodes, the contralateral kidney, or liver. The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of the
mass. Renal arteriography, vena cavography, retrograde urography, or excretory urography is seldom
===PAGE:3119===
required. Chest CT is recommended to detect metastatic pulmonary involvement at initial diagnosis.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on
• Histology (favorable or unfavorable)
• Stage at diagnosis
• Patient's age (younger is better)
The outcome for children with Wilms' tumor is excellent. Cure rates for lower-stage disease (localized to
the kidney) range from 85% to 95%. Even children with more advanced disease fare well; cure rates
range from 60% (unfavorable histology) to 90% (favorable histology).
The cancer may recur, typically within 2 yr of diagnosis. Cure is possible in children with recurrent cancer.
Outcome after recurrence is
better for children who present initially with lower-stage disease, whose
tumors recur at a site that has not been irradiated, who relapse > 1 yr after presentation, and who receive
less intensive treatment initially.
Treatment
• Surgery and chemotherapy
• Sometimes radiation therapy
The National Wilms' Tumor Study Group has established staging criteria and guidelines for treatment.
Prompt surgical exploration of potentially resectable lesions is indicated, with examination of the
contralateral kidney. If the cancer is unilateral and limited to the kidney or if extension is minimal, complete
resection by nephrectomy is done, followed by treatment with vincristine and actinomycin D. If a unilateral
cancer has spread extensively or if the disease is bilateral, chemotherapy with actinomycin D and
vincristine, with or without radiation therapy, is used. Children with more advanced disease also receive
doxorubicin. Other frequently used drugs include cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, and etoposide.
Children with very large nonresectable tumors or bilateral tumors are candidates for chemotherapy
followed by reevaluation and possibly resection.
===PAGE:3120===
Chapter 293. Congenital Cardiovascular Anomalies
Introduction
(See also
Chapter 214
.)
Congenital anomalies of the heart and blood vessels arise during the first 10 wk of embryonic
development and are present at birth. The incidence is 1/120 live births; estimated risk is 2 to 3% in
children with an affected 1st-degree relative.
Etiology
About 5% of patients have a chromosomal abnormality (eg, trisomy 13, 18, or 21; Turner's syndrome);
other anomalies may be part of a genetic syndrome (eg, Holt-Oram, Noonan's, Williams, 22q11 deletion).
Other possible causes are maternal illnesses (eg, diabetes mellitus, SLE, rubella), environmental
exposure (eg, to thalidomide, isotretinoin, lithium [Ebstein's anomaly], or alcohol [fetal alcohol syndrome]),
or a combination. Usually, no specific cause is identified.
Pathophysiology
Congenital heart anomalies are classified (see
Table 293-1
) as
• Cyanotic
• Acyanotic (left-to-right shunts or obstructive lesions)
The physiologic consequences of congenital heart anomalies vary greatly, ranging from an asymptomatic
heart murmur or abnormal pulses to severe cyanosis and heart failure (HF).
Left-to-right shunts:
Oxygenated blood from the left heart (left atrium or left ventricle) or the aorta
shunts to the right heart (right atrium or right ventricle) or the pulmonary artery through an abnormal
opening between
[Table 293-1.
Classification of Congenital Heart Anomalies*]
the 2 sides. Blood flows from left to right initially because systemic pressure and vascular resistance are
higher than pulmonary artery pressure and resistance. The additional blood flow to the right side
increases pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary artery pressure to a varying degree. The greater the
increase, the more severe the symptoms; a small left-to-right shunt is usually asymptomatic.
High-pressure shunts (those at the ventricular or great artery level) become apparent several days to a
few weeks after birth; low-pressure shunts (atrial septal defects) become apparent considerably later. If
untreated, elevated pulmonary artery pressure may lead to Eisenmenger's syndrome (. Large
left-to-right shunts (eg, large ventricular septal defect [VSD], patent ductus arteriosus [PDA]) cause
volume overload, which may lead to HF and during infancy often results in failure to thrive. A large left-toright shunt also decreases lung compliance, leading to frequent lower respiratory tract infections.
Obstructive lesions:
Blood flow is obstructed without shunting, causing a pressure gradient across the
obstruction. The resulting pressure overload proximal to the obstruction may cause ventricular
hypertrophy and HF. The principal manifestation is a heart murmur, which results from turbulent flow
through the obstructed (stenotic) point. Examples are congenital aortic stenosis, which accounts for 3 to
6% of congenital heart anomalies, and congenital pulmonary stenosis, which accounts for 8 to 12% (for
both, see
Chapter 214
).
Cyanotic heart anomalies:
Varying amounts of deoxygenated venous blood are shunted to the left
heart (right-to-left shunt), reducing systemic arterial O
saturation. If there is > 5 g/dL of deoxygenated
===PAGE:3121===
Hb, cyanosis results. Detection of cyanosis may be delayed in infants with dark pigmentation.
Complications of persistent cyanosis include polycythemia, clubbing, thromboembolism (including stroke),
bleeding disorders, brain abscess, and hyperuricemia. Hypercyanotic spells frequently occur in infants
with tetralogy of Fallot (.
Depending on the anomaly, pulmonary blood flow may be increased (often resulting in HF in addition to
cyanosis), normal, or reduced, resulting in cyanosis of variable severity. Heart murmurs are variably
audible and are not specific.
Heart failure:
Some congenital heart anomalies (eg, bicuspid aortic valve, mild aortic stenosis) do not
significantly alter hemodynamics. Others cause pressure or volume overload, sometimes causing HF. HF
occurs when cardiac output is insufficient to meet the body's metabolic needs or when the heart cannot
adequately handle venous return, causing pulmonary congestion (in left ventricular failure), edema
primarily in dependent tissues and abdominal viscera (in right ventricular failure), or both (. HF in infants and children has many causes other than congenital heart anomalies (see
Table 293-2
).
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations of the various heart anomalies are limited to several common ones:
• Murmurs
• Cyanosis
• HF
Less commonly, chest pain, diminished or nonpalpable pulses, circulatory shock, and arrhythmias are
present.
Murmurs:
Most left-to-right shunts and obstructive lesions cause systolic murmurs. Systolic murmurs and
thrills are most prominent at the surface closest to their point of origin, making location diagnostically
helpful. Increased flow across the pulmonary or aortic valve causes a midsystolic (ejection systolic)
murmur. Regurgitant flow through an atrioventricular valve or flow across a VSD causes a holosystolic
(pansystolic) murmur, possibly obscuring heart sounds as its intensity increases.
PDA causes a continuous murmur that is uninterrupted by the 2nd heart sound (S
) because blood flows
through the ductus during systole and diastole. This murmur is 2-toned, having a different sound during
systole (when driven by higher pressure) than during diastole.
Cyanosis:
This manifestation is characterized by bluish discoloration of mucous membranes or nail
beds, clubbing of nail beds, or pulse oximetry < 93 to 95%.
Heart failure:
In infants, symptoms or signs of HF include
• Tachycardia
• Tachypnea
• Dyspnea with feeding
• Diaphoresis
• Restlessness
• Irritability
Dyspnea with feeding causes inadequate intake and poor growth, which may be worsened by increased
===PAGE:3122===
metabolic demands in HF and frequent respiratory tract infections. Hepatomegaly is common. However, in
contrast to adults and older children, most infants do not have distended neck veins and dependent
edema, although they occasionally have edema
[Table 293-2.
Common Causes of Heart Failure in Children]
in the periorbital area. Findings in older children with HF are similar to those in adults (.
Other manifestations:
In neonates, circulatory shock may be the first manifestation of certain anomalies
(eg, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, critical aortic stenosis, interrupted aortic arch, coarctation of the
aorta). Neonates appear extremely ill and have cold extremities, diminished pulses, low BP, and reduced
response to stimuli.
Chest pain may be manifested by unexplained irritability in infants with a coronary artery anomaly. In older
children and adolescents,
chest pain due to a cardiac etiology is usually associated with exertion and may
be caused by severe aortic stenosis, pulmonic stenosis, or Eisenmenger's syndrome.
Diagnosis
• Pulse oximetry, ECG, and chest x-ray
• Echocardiography
• Sometimes cardiac MRI or CT angiography, cardiac catheterization with angiocardiography
Diagnosis is suggested by the presence of heart murmurs, abnormal pulses, cyanosis, or HF. Cyanosis is
usually noticed during the first few months of life. Cyanosis due to heart defects should be distinguished
from that due to other disorders (eg, various respiratory disorders, CNS depression, hypothermia,
hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, sepsis, methemoglobinemia). Pulse oximetry, ECG, and chest x-ray are
required. Echocardiography usually confirms the diagnosis.
Cardiac MRI or CT angiography may clarify important anatomic details. Cardiac catheterization with
angiocardiography is occasionally needed to confirm the diagnosis or to assess severity of the anomaly; it
is done more often for therapeutic purposes.
Treatment
• Medical treatment of HF (eg, with O
, diuretics, ACE inhibitors, digoxin, and salt restriction)
• Surgical repair of anomalies amenable to correction
After medical stabilization of acute HF symptoms or cyanosis, most children require surgical or
transcatheter repair; the exceptions are certain VSDs that are likely to become smaller or close with time.
Transcatheter procedures include balloon atrial septostomy for palliation of severely cyanotic neonates
with transposition of the great arteries, balloon dilation of severe aortic or pulmonary valve stenosis, and
transcatheter closure of cardiac shunts (most often atrial septal defect and PDA).
Heart failure in neonates:
Acute, severe HF or cyanosis in the first week of life is a medical emergency.
Secure vascular access should be established, preferably via an umbilical venous catheter. For HF,
diuretics, inotropic drugs, and drugs to reduce afterload are given. The diuretic furosemide or ethacrynic
acid is given as an initial bolus of 1 mg/kg IV and titrated based on urine output. The inotropic drug
dopamine or dobutamine is given as an IV infusion of 5 to 15
μ
g/kg/min. Milrinone or, less frequently,
nitroprusside is given to reduce afterload. Milrinone is given as a loading dose of 50 to 75
μ
g/kg IV over
10 to 60 min followed by an infusion of 0.5
μ
g/kg/min. Nitroprusside is started at 0.3 to 0.5
μ
g/kg/min and
titrated to desired effect (usual maintenance dose is about 3
μ
g/kg/min).
Once a congenital cardiac lesion is suspected as the cause of the HF or cyanosis, an IV infusion of
prostaglandins should be started (eg, prostaglandin E
0.05 to 0.1
μ
g/kg/min) and titrated to the lowest
===PAGE:3123===
dose that maintains patency of the ductus arteriosus. Keeping the ductus open is important because most
cardiac lesions manifesting at this age are ductal-dependent either for systemic blood flow (eg,
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, critical aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta) or for pulmonary blood
flow (cyanotic lesions such as pulmonary atresia or severe tetralogy of Fallot).
Mechanical ventilation is often necessary; O
should be given judiciously or even withheld because O
can decrease pulmonary vascular resistance, which is harmful to infants with certain defects (eg,
hypoplastic left heart syndrome).
Heart failure in older infants and children:
Standard approaches to acute and chronic heart failure,
similar to those in adults, are used. These approaches may include a diuretic (eg, furosemide 0.5 to 1.0
mg/kg IV or 1 to 3 mg/kg po q 8 to 24 h, titrated upward as needed), an ACE inhibitor (eg, captopril 0.1 to
0.3 mg/kg po tid), digoxin (dose varies by age; see
Table 293-3
), and salt restriction. A potassium-sparing diuretic (spironolactone 1 mg/kg po once/day or
bid, titrated up to 2 mg/kg/dose if needed) may be useful, particularly if high-dose furosemide is required.
A croupette, mask, or nasal prongs with adequate fractional inspired O
(FIO
) should be given to
prevent cyanosis and alleviate respiratory distress; when possible, FIO
should be kept < 40% to prevent
pulmonary epithelial damage. A cardiac chair position may benefit small infants and children; this position
reduces upward pressure into the thorax exerted by abdominal organs and thus reduces work required for
breathing.
Because HF increases metabolic demands and makes feeding more difficult, enhanced caloric content
feedings are recommended; these feedings increase calories supplied and do so with less risk of volume
overload. Some children require nasogastric or gastrostomy feedings to maintain growth. If these
measures do not result in weight gain, surgical repair of the anomaly is indicated.
[Table 293-3.
Oral Digoxin Dosage in Children*]
Endocarditis prophylaxis:
Current guidelines of the American Heart Association for prevention of
endocarditis ( state that antibiotic prophylaxis is required for children with congenital heart
disease (CHD) who have the following:
• Unrepaired cyanotic CHD (including children with palliative shunts and conduits)
• Completely repaired CHD during the first 6 mo after surgery if prosthetic material or a device was used
• Repaired CHD with residual defects at or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device
Atrial Septal Defect
(Ostium Secundum Defect)
An atrial septal defect (ASD) is an opening in the interatrial septum, causing a left-to-right shunt
and volume overload of the right atrium and right ventricle. Children are rarely symptomatic,
but long-term complications after age 20 yr include pulmonary hypertension, heart failure, and
atrial arrhythmias. Adults and, rarely, adolescents may present with exercise intolerance,
dyspnea, fatigue, and atrial arrhythmias. A soft midsystolic murmur at the upper left sternal
border with a prominently split 2nd heart sound (S
) is common. Diagnosis is by
echocardiography. Treatment is transcatheter or surgical repair.
ASDs account for about 6 to 10% of cases of congenital heart disease. Most cases are isolated and
sporadic, but some are part of a genetic syndrome (eg, mutations of chromosome 5, Holt-Oram
syndrome).
Classification:
ASDs can be classified by location:
===PAGE:3124===
• Ostium secundum (defect in the fossa ovalis—in the center [or middle] part of the atrial septum)
• Sinus venosus (defect in the posterior aspect of the septum, near the superior vena cava or inferior
vena cava and frequently associated with anomalous return of the right upper or lower pulmonary veins
to the right atrium or vena cava)
• Ostium primum (defect in the anteroinferior aspect of the septum, a form of atrioventricular septal
[endocardial cushion] defect—.
Pathophysiology
To understand hemodynamic changes seen in ASD (and other anomalies), see
Fig. 293-1
for normal hemodynamic data.
In ASD, shunting is left to right initially (see
Fig. 293-2
). Some small ASDs, often just a stretched patent foramen ovale, close spontaneously during
the first few years of life. Persistent moderate-to-large ASDs result in large shunts, leading to right atrial
and right ventricular volume overload and, over a number of years, pulmonary artery hypertension,
elevated pulmonary vascular resistance, and right ventricular hypertrophy. Atrial fibrillation may also occur
later. Ultimately, the increase in the pulmonary artery pressure and vascular resistance may result in a
bidirectional atrial shunt with cyanosis during adulthood (Eisenmenger's reaction).
Symptoms and Signs
Most small ASDs are asymptomatic. Larger shunts may cause exercise intolerance, dyspnea during
exertion, fatigue, and atrial arrhythmias with palpitations. Passage of microemboli from the venous
circulation across the ASD (paradoxical embolization), often associated with arrhythmias, may lead to
cerebral or systemic thromboembolic disorders. Rarely, when an ASD is undiagnosed or untreated,
Eisenmenger's syndrome develops.
[Fig. 293-1.
Normal circulation with representative right and left cardiac pressures (in mm Hg).]
Auscultation typically reveals a grade 2 to 3/6 midsystolic (ejection systolic) murmur and a widely split,
fixed S
at the upper left sternal border in children. A large left-to-right atrial shunt may produce a lowpitched diastolic murmur (due to increased tricuspid flow) at the left lower sternal border. These findings
may be absent in infants, even those who have a large defect. A prominent right ventricular cardiac
impulse, manifested as a parasternal heave or lift, may be present.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suggested by cardiac examination, chest x-ray, and ECG and is confirmed by 2-dimensional
echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies.
With a significant shunt, ECG may show right axis deviation, right ventricular hypertrophy, or right bundle
branch block (with rSR´ pattern in V
). Chest x-ray shows cardiomegaly with dilation of the right atrium
and right ventricle, a prominent main pulmonary artery segment, and increased pulmonary vascular
markings.
Cardiac catheterization is not usually necessary unless a transcatheter intervention is planned.
Treatment
• Observation, transcatheter closure, or surgical repair
===PAGE:3125===
Most small ostium secundum ASDs (< 3 mm) close spontaneously; many defects between 3 mm and 8
mm close spontaneously by age 18 mo. However, ostium primum and sinus venosus ASDs do not close
spontaneously.
Asymptomatic children with a small shunt require only observation and periodic echocardiography.
Although these children are theoretically at risk of paradoxical systemic embolization, it is not standard
practice to close a small, hemodynamically insignificant defect.
Children with moderate to large defects (eg, pulmonary flow:systemic flow ratio > 1.5:1, or definite
evidence of right ventricular volume
[Fig. 293-2.
Atrial septal defect.]
overload on echocardiography) should have the ASD closed, typically between ages 2 to 6 yr.
Transcatheter closure with various devices (eg, Amplatzer
®
or Gore HELEX
®
septal occluder) is
preferred when appropriate anatomic characteristics, such as adequate rims of septal tissue and distance
from vital structures (eg, aortic root, pulmonary veins, tricuspid annulus), are present. Otherwise, surgical
repair is indicated. Sinus venosus and ostium primum (atrioventricular septal type) defects are not
amenable to device closure. If ASDs are repaired during childhood, perioperative mortality rate
approaches 0, and long-term survival rates approach those of the general population. Before repair,
children with large shunts and heart failure should be treated with diuretics, digoxin, and ACE inhibitors.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is not needed preoperatively and is required only for the first 6 mo after repair or
if there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch.
Ventricular Septal Defect
A ventricular septal defect (VSD) is an opening in the interventricular septum, causing a shunt
between ventricles. Large defects result in a significant left-to-right shunt and cause dyspnea
with feeding and poor growth during infancy. A loud, harsh, holosystolic murmur at the lower
left sternal border is common. Recurrent respiratory infections and heart failure may develop.
Diagnosis is by echocardiography. Defects may close spontaneously during infancy or require
surgical repair.
VSD (see
Fig. 293-3
) is the 2nd most common congenital heart anomaly after bicuspid aortic valve, accounting for
20% of all defects. It can occur alone or with other congenital anomalies (eg, tetralogy of Fallot, complete
atrioventricular septal defects, transposition of the great arteries).
Classification:
VSDs are classified by location:
• Perimembranous
• Trabecular muscular
• Subpulmonary outlet (supracristal or doubly committed subarterial)
• Inlet
Perimembranous defects (70 to 80%) are defects in the membranous septum adjacent to the tricuspid
valve and they extend into a variable amount of surrounding muscular tissue; the most common type of
this defect occurs immediately below the aortic valve.
[Fig. 293-3.
Ventricular septal defect.]
Trabecular muscular defects (5 to 20%) are completely surrounded by muscular tissue and may occur
anywhere in the septum.
===PAGE:3126===
Subpulmonary outlet defects (5 to 7% in the US; about 30% in Far Eastern countries) occur in the
ventricular septum immediately under the pulmonary valve. These defects are often referred to as
supracristal or doubly committed subarterial defects and are frequently associated with aortic leaflet
prolapse into the defect, causing aortic regurgitation.
Inlet defects (5 to 8%) are bordered superiorly by the tricuspid annulus and are located posterior to the
membranous septum. These defects are sometimes referred to as atrioventricular septal-type defects.
Pathophysiology
The magnitude of the shunt depends on defect size and downstream resistance (ie, pulmonary outflow
tract obstruction and pulmonary vascular resistance); larger defects result in a large left-to-right shunt.
Assuming there is no pulmonic stenosis, over time, a large shunt
causes pulmonary artery hypertension,
elevated pulmonary artery vascular resistance, right ventricular pressure overload, and right ventricular
hypertrophy. Ultimately, the increased pulmonary vascular resistance causes shunt direction to reverse
(from the right to the left ventricle), leading to Eisenmenger's syndrome (.
Small defects cause a relatively small left-to-right shunt, and pulmonary artery pressure is normal. Heart
failure (HF), pulmonary hypertension, and Eisenmenger's syndrome do not develop.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms depend on defect size and magnitude of the left-to-right shunt. Children with a small VSD are
typically asymptomatic and grow and develop normally. In those with a larger defect, symptoms of HF (eg,
respiratory distress, poor weight gain, fatigue after feeding) appear at age 4 to 6 wk when pulmonary
vascular resistance falls. Frequent lower respiratory tract infections may occur. Eventually, untreated
patients may develop symptoms of Eisenmenger's syndrome.
Auscultatory findings vary with the size of the defect. Small VSDs typically produce murmurs ranging from
a grade 1 to 2/6 high-pitched, short systolic murmur (due to tiny defects that actually close during late
systole) to a grade 3 to 4/6 holosystolic murmur (with or without thrill) at the lower left sternal border; this
murmur is audible shortly after birth. The precordium is not hyperactive, and the 2nd heart sound (S
) is
normally split and has normal intensity.
Moderate to large VSDs produce a loud holosystolic murmur that is present by age 2 to 3 wk; S
is
usually narrowly split with an accentuated pulmonary component. An apical diastolic rumble (due to
increased flow through the mitral valve) and findings of HF (eg, tachypnea, dyspnea with feeding, failure
to thrive, gallop, crackles, hepatomegaly) may be present. With large defects allowing equalization of left
ventricular and right ventricular pressures, the systolic murmur is often attenuated.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical examination, supported by chest x-ray and ECG, and established by
echocardiography.
If the VSD is large, chest x-ray shows cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascular markings. ECG
shows right ventricular hypertrophy or combined ventricular hypertrophy and, occasionally, left atrial
enlargement. ECG and chest x-ray are typically normal if the VSD is small.
Two-dimensional echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies establishes the diagnosis and
can provide important anatomic and hemodynamic information, including the defect's location and size
and right ventricular pressure. Cardiac catheterization is rarely necessary.
Treatment
===PAGE:3127===
• For HF, medical therapy (eg, diuretics, digoxin, ACE inhibitors)
• Sometimes surgical repair
Small VSDs, particularly muscular septal defects, often close spontaneously during the first few years of
life. A small defect that remains open does not require medical or surgical therapy.
Larger defects are less likely to close spontaneously. Diuretics, digoxin, and ACE inhibitors are indicated
before surgery if HF develops. If infants do not respond to medical treatment or have poor growth,
surgical repair may be done during the first few months of life. Even in asymptomatic children, a large
shunt (pulmonary flow:systemic flow ratio ≥ 2:1) that persists after 2 to 4 yr requires surgical repair.
Current surgical mortality rate is < 2%. Surgical complications may include residual ventricular shunt, right
bundle branch block, and complete heart block.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is not needed preoperatively and is required only for the first 6 mo after repair or
if there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch.
Atrioventricular Septal Defect
(Atrioventricular Canal Defect; Endocardial Cushion Defect; Persistent Ostium Primum)
Atrioventricular (AV) septal defect consists of primum type atrial septal defect with AV valve
malformation, with or without a ventricular septal defect. These defects result from
maldevelopment of the endocardial cushions. Defects may be asymptomatic if small. If large,
they may cause heart failure with dyspnea with feeding, poor growth, tachypnea, diaphoresis,
or arrhythmias. Heart murmurs are common. Diagnosis is by echocardiography. Treatment is
surgical repair for all but the smallest defects.
AV septal defect accounts for about 5% of congenital heart anomalies. The defect may be complete or
partial; 30% of patients with the complete form have Down syndrome. AV septal defect is also common
among patients with asplenia or polysplenia (heterotaxy) syndromes.
Complete AV septal defect:
Complete AV septal defect (see
Fig. 293-4
) consists of a large ostium primum atrial septal defect (ASD) in the anteroinferior aspect of the
septum, an inlet ventricular septal defect (VSD), and a common AV valve orifice. A left-to-right shunt
occurs at the atrial and ventricular levels; AV valve regurgitation may be significant, sometimes causing a
direct left ventricle-to-right atrial shunt. These abnormalities result in enlargement of all 4 cardiac
chambers. Hemodynamic findings are similar to those of a large VSD. Over time, the increase in
pulmonary blood flow, pulmonary artery pressure, and pulmonary vascular resistance may lead to
reversal of shunt direction with cyanosis and Eisenmenger's syndrome (.
Partial AV septal defect:
A partial defect consists of an ostium primum ASD, partitioning of the common
AV valve into 2 separate AV orifices, and a cleft in the mitral valve (left AV orifice). The ventricular septum
is intact, or there may be a small VSD. Hemodynamic abnormalities are similar to those of ostium
secundum ASD with the additional finding of variable degrees of mitral regurgitation.
[Fig. 293-4.
Atrioventricular septal defect (complete form).]
Symptoms and Signs
Complete AV septal defect with a large left-to-right shunt causes signs of heart failure (HF—eg,
tachypnea, dyspnea with feeding, poor weight gain, diaphoresis) by age 4 to 6 wk. Pulmonary vascular
obstructive disease (Eisenmenger's syndrome) is usually a late complication but may occur earlier,
especially in children with Down syndrome.
Partial AV septal defects are asymptomatic during childhood if mitral regurgitation is mild or absent.
However, symptoms (eg, exercise intolerance, fatigue, palpitations) may develop during adolescence or
===PAGE:3128===
early adulthood. Infants with moderate or severe mitral regurgitation often have signs of HF.
Physical examination in children with complete AV septal defects shows an active precordium due to
volume and pressure overload of the right ventricle; a single, loud 2nd heart sound (S
) due to pulmonary
hypertension; a grade 3 to 4/6 systolic murmur; and sometimes a diastolic murmur at the apex and low left
sternal border. Most children with a partial defect have wide splitting of the S
and a midsystolic (eg,
ejection systolic) murmur audible at the upper left sternal border. A mid-diastolic rumble may be present at
the lower left sternal border when the atrial shunt is large. A cleft in the left AV valve results in a blowing
apical systolic murmur of mitral regurgitation. Thus, cardiac findings in children with the partial form are
the same as those described for secundum ASD (; if mitral regurgitation coexists, there will
also be a high-pitched holosystolic murmur at the apex.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical examination, supported by chest x-ray and ECG, and established by 2dimensional echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies.
Chest x-ray shows cardiomegaly with right atrial enlargement, biventricular enlargement, a prominent
main pulmonary artery segment, and increased pulmonary vascular markings.
ECG shows a superiorly directed QRS axis (eg, left axis deviation or northwest axis), frequent
1st-degree
AV block, left or right ventricular hypertrophy or both, and occasional right atrial enlargement and right
bundle branch block.
Two-dimensional echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies establishes the diagnosis and
can provide important anatomic and hemodynamic information. Cardiac catheterization is not usually
necessary unless hemodynamics must be further characterized before surgical repair.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
• For HF, medical therapy (eg, diuretics, digoxin, ACE inhibitors) before surgery
Complete AV septal defect should be repaired by age 2 to 4 mo, because most infants have HF and
failure to thrive. However, even if infants are growing well without significant symptoms, repair should be
done before 6 mo to prevent development of pulmonary vascular disease, especially in infants with Down
syndrome. In patients with 2 adequately sized ventricles and no additional defects, the large central
defect (combination of the primum ASD and inlet VSD) is closed and the common AV valve is
reconstructed into 2 separate valves. For a single-stage complete repair, mortality rate was 5 to 10% in
older series but more recently was as low as 3 to 4%. Surgical complications include complete heart
block (3%) and mitral regurgitation. Pulmonary artery banding is no longer recommended unless
associated abnormalities make complete repair in a small infant high risk. For asymptomatic patients with
a partial defect, elective surgery is done at age 1 to 3 yr. Surgical mortality rate should be very low.
For patients with large shunts and HF, diuretics, digoxin, and ACE inhibitors are indicated before surgery.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is not needed preoperatively and is required only for the first 6 mo after repair or
if there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a persistence of the fetal connection (ductus arteriosus)
between the aorta and pulmonary artery after birth, resulting in a left-to-right shunt. Symptoms
===PAGE:3129===
may include failure to thrive, poor feeding, tachycardia, and tachypnea. A continuous murmur at
the upper left sternal border is common. Diagnosis is by echocardiography. Administration of
indomethacin with or without fluid restriction may be tried in premature infants with a significant
shunt, but this therapy is not effective in term infants or older children with PDA. If the
connection persists, surgical or catheter-based correction is indicated.
PDA accounts for 5 to 10% of congenital heart anomalies; the male:female ratio is 1:3. PDA is very
common among premature infants (in 45% with birth weight < 1750 g; in about 80% with birth weight <
1200 g). A significant PDA causes heart failure (HF) in 15% of premature infants with birth weight < 1750
g and in 40 to 50% of infants with birth weight < 1500 g.
Pathophysiology
The ductus arteriosus is a normal connection between the pulmonary artery and aorta; it is necessary for
proper fetal circulation. At birth, the rise in PaO
and decline in prostaglandin concentration cause closure
of the ductus arteriosus, typically beginning within the first 10 to 15 h of life. If this normal process does
not occur, PDA results (see
Fig. 293-5
).
Physiologic consequences depend on ductal size. A small ductus rarely causes symptoms. A large ductus
causes a large left-to-right shunt. Over time, a large shunt results in pulmonary artery hypertension and
elevated pulmonary vascular resistance, ultimately leading to Eisenmenger's syndrome (.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical presentation depends on PDA size and gestational age at delivery. Infants and children with a
small PDA are generally asymptomatic; infants with a large PDA present with signs
[Fig. 293-5.
Patent ductus arteriosus.]
of HF (eg, failure to thrive, poor feeding, tachypnea, dyspnea with feeding, tachycardia). Premature
infants may present with respiratory distress, apnea, worsening mechanical ventilation requirements, or
other serious complications (eg, necrotizing enterocolitis). Signs of HF occur earlier in premature infants
than in full-term infants and may be more severe. A large ductal shunt in a premature infant often is a
major contributor to the severity of the lung disease of prematurity.
Most children with a small PDA have normal heart sounds and peripheral pulses. A grade 1 to 3/6
continuous murmur is heard best in the upper left sternal border. The murmur extends from systole to
beyond the 2nd heart sound (S
) into diastole and typically has a different pitch in systole and diastole.
Full-term infants with a significant PDA shunt have full or bounding peripheral pulses with a wide pulse
pressure. A grade 1 to 4/6 continuous murmur is characteristic. If the murmur is loud, it has a "machinerysounding" quality. An apical diastolic rumble (due to high flow across the mitral valve) or gallop rhythm
may be audible if there is a large left-to-right shunt or HF develops.
Premature infants with a significant shunt have bounding pulses and a hyperdynamic precordium. A heart
murmur occurs in the pulmonary area; the murmur may be continuous, systolic with a short diastolic
component, or only systolic, depending on the pulmonary artery pressure. Some infants have no audible
heart murmur.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical examination, supported by chest x-ray and ECG, and established by 2dimensional echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies.
===PAGE:3130===
Chest x-ray and ECG are typically normal if the PDA is small. If the shunt is significant, chest x-ray shows
prominence of the left atrium, left ventricle, and ascending aorta and increased pulmonary vascular
markings; ECG may show left ventricular hypertrophy. Cardiac catheterization is not necessary unless
used for therapy.
Treatment
• Prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor therapy (eg, indomethacin, ibuprofen)
• Sometimes transcatheter occlusion devices or surgical repair
[Table 293-4.
Indomethacin Dosing Guidelines (mg/kg)]
In
premature infants
with compromised respiratory status, the PDA can sometimes be closed by using a
prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor (eg, indomethacin [see
Table 293-4
for doses] IV q 12 h for 3 doses or
ibuprofen 10 mg/kg po followed by 2 doses of 5 mg/kg at 24-h intervals) with or without fluid restriction. If
this treatment is ineffective, surgical ligation is indicated.
In
full-term infants
, indomethacin is usually ineffective. Transcatheter closure has become the treatment
of choice in children > 1 yr; a variety of catheter-delivered occlusion devices are available (eg, coils,
Amplatzer
®
duct occluder). In infants < 1 yr or who have certain anatomic varieties of the ductus, surgical
division and ligation may be preferred over the transcatheter approach. For a PDA with a shunt large
enough to cause symptoms of HF or pulmonary hypertension, closure should be done after medical
stabilization. For a persistent PDA without HF or pulmonary hypertension, closure can be done electively
any time after 1 yr. Outcomes after PDA closure are excellent.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is not needed preoperatively and is required only for the first 6 mo after closure
or if there is a residual defect adjacent to a transcatheter-placed device or surgical material.
Coarctation of the Aorta
Coarctation of the aorta is a localized narrowing of the aortic lumen that results in upperextremity hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy, and malperfusion of the abdominal organs
and lower extremities. Symptoms vary with the anomaly's severity and range from headache,
chest pain, cold extremities, fatigue, and leg claudication to fulminant heart failure and shock. A
soft bruit may be heard over the coarctation site. Diagnosis is by echocardiography or by CT or
MR angiography. Treatment is balloon angioplasty with stent placement, or surgical correction.
Coarctation of the aorta accounts for 6 to 8% of congenital heart anomalies. It occurs in 10 to 20% of
patients with Turner's syndrome. The male:female ratio is 2:1.
Pathophysiology
Coarctation of the aorta usually occurs at the proximal thoracic aorta just beyond the left subclavian
artery. It rarely involves the abdominal aorta. Coarctation may occur alone or with various other congenital
anomalies (eg, bicuspid aortic valve, ventricular septal defect, aortic stenosis, patent ductus arteriosus,
mitral valve disorders, intracerebral aneurysms).
Physiologic consequences include left ventricular pressure overload, left ventricular hypertrophy,
hypertension in the upper part of the body including the brain, and malperfusion of the abdominal organs
and lower extremities. Malperfusion of the intestines increases the risk of sepsis due to enteric
organisms.
Untreated coarctation may result in left ventricular failure, rupture of the aorta, intracranial hemorrhage,
hypertensive encephalopathy, and hypertensive cardiovascular disease during adulthood.
===PAGE:3131===
Symptoms and Signs
If coarctation is significant, circulatory shock with renal insufficiency (oliguria or anuria) and metabolic
acidosis may develop in the first 7 to 10 days of life and may mimic findings of other systemic disorders
such as sepsis.
Less severe coarctation may be asymptomatic during infancy. Subtle symptoms (eg, headache; chest
pain, fatigue, and leg claudication during physical activities) may be present as children age.
Hypertension is often present, but heart failure (HF) rarely develops after the neonatal period. Rarely,
intracerebral aneurysms rupture, resulting in subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage.
Typical physical examination findings include hypertension in the upper extremities, diminished or delayed
femoral pulses, and low or unobtainable arterial BP in the lower extremities. A grade 2 to 3/6 ejection
systolic murmur is often present at the upper left sternal border, left axilla, and sometimes most
prominently in the left interscapular area. An apical ejection click is present if a bicuspid aortic valve is
also present. Dilated intercostal collateral arteries may cause a continuous murmur in the intercostal
spaces. Affected females may have Turner's syndrome, a congenital disorder causing lymphedema of the
feet, webbed neck, squarely shaped chest, cubitus valgus, and widely spaced nipples.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography or CT or MR angiography
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical examination (including BP measurement in all 4 extremities), supported
by chest x-ray and ECG, and established by 2-dimensional echocardiography with color flow and Doppler
studies or with CT or MR angiography.
Chest x-ray shows coarctation as a "3" sign in the upper left mediastinal shadow. Heart size is normal
unless HF supervenes. Dilated intercostal collateral arteries may erode the 3rd to 8th ribs, causing rib
notching, but this is seldom seen before age 5 yr.
ECG usually shows left ventricular hypertrophy but may be normal. In neonates and small infants, ECG
usually shows right ventricular hypertrophy rather than left ventricular hypertrophy.
Treatment
• For symptomatic neonates, prostaglandin E
infusion
• For hypertension,
β
-blockers
• Surgical correction or balloon angioplasty (sometimes with stent placement)
Symptomatic neonates require cardio-pulmonary stabilization with infusion of prostaglandin E
(0.05 to
0.10
μ
g/kg/min—may titrate up to 0.4
μ
g/kg/min then back down to lowest effective dose) to reopen the
constricted ductus arteriosus. Opening the ductus and its aortic ampulla provides some relief of the aortic
obstruction and allows pulmonary artery blood to increase perfusion of the descending aorta through the
ductus, improving systemic perfusion and reversing metabolic acidosis. IV cardioactive drugs (eg,
milrinone, dopamine, dobutamine), diuretics, and O
are used to treat HF.
In nonemergent situations, patients with hypertension may be treated with
β
-blockers; ACE inhibitors may
adversely affect renal function. After repair of the coarctation, hypertension may persist or develop years
after repair and can be treated with
β
-blockers, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, or Ca
channel blockers.
The preferred definitive treatment is controversial. Some centers prefer balloon angioplasty with or
===PAGE:3132===
without stent placement, but most prefer surgical correction and reserve the balloon procedure for
recoarctation after surgical correction or for primary treatment of discrete coarctation in older children or
adolescents. Initial success rate after balloon angioplasty is 80 to 90%; subsequent catheterization can
dilate the stent as children grow.
Surgical options include resection and end-to-end anastomosis, patch aortoplasty, and left subclavian flap
aortoplasty. In severe coarctation manifesting early in life, the transverse aorta and isthmus are often
hypoplastic, and this region of the aorta may need to be surgically enlarged. Choice of surgical technique
depends on anatomy and center preference. Surgical mortality rate is < 5% for symptomatic infants and <
1% for older children. Residual coarctation is common (6 to 33%). Rarely, paraplegia results from crossclamping of the aorta during surgery.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is not needed preoperatively and is required only for the first 6 mo after repair or
if there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch.
Tetralogy of Fallot
Tetralogy of Fallot consists of 4 features: a large ventricular septal defect, right ventricular
outflow tract and pulmonary valve obstruction, right ventricular hypertrophy, and over-riding of
the aorta. Symptoms include cyanosis, dyspnea with feeding, poor growth, and tet spells
(sudden, potentially lethal episodes of severe cyanosis). A harsh systolic murmur at the left
upper sternal border with a single 2nd heart sound (S
) is common. Diagnosis is by
echocardiography or cardiac catheterization. Definitive treatment is surgical repair.
Tetralogy of Fallot (see
Fig. 293-6
) accounts for 7 to 10% of congenital heart anomalies. Associated anomalies include right aortic
arch (25%), abnormal coronary artery anatomy (5%), stenosis of the pulmonary artery branches,
presence of aorticopulmonary collateral vessels, patent ductus arteriosus, complete atrioventricular septal
defect, atrial septal defect, additional muscular ventricular septal defects (VSDs), and aortic valve
regurgitation.
Pathophysiology
The VSD is typically large; thus, systolic pressures in the right and left ventricles (and in the aorta) are the
same. Pathophysiology depends on the degree of right ventricular outflow obstruction. A mild obstruction
may result in a left-to-right shunt through the VSD; a severe obstruction causes a right-to-left shunt,
resulting in low systemic arterial saturation (cyanosis) that is unresponsive to supplemental O
.
In some children with tetralogy of Fallot, most often those several months up to 2 yr of age, sudden
episodes of profound cyanosis and hypoxia (tet spell) may occur, which may be lethal. A spell may be
triggered by any event that slightly decreases O
saturation (eg, crying, defecating) or that suddenly
decreases systemic vascular resistance (eg, playing, kicking legs when awakening) or by sudden onset
of tachycardia or hypovolemia. The mechanism of a tet spell remains uncertain, but several factors are
probably important in causing an increase in right to left shunting and a fall in arterial saturation. Factors
include an increase in right ventricular outflow tract obstruction and a decrease in systemic resistance—a
vicious circle caused by the initial fall in arterial PO
, which stimulates the respiratory center and causes
hyperpnea and increased adrenergic tone. The increased circulating catecholamines then stimulate
increased contractility, which increases outflow tract obstruction.
[Fig. 293-6.
Tetralogy of Fallot.]
Symptoms and Signs
Neonates with severe right ventricular outflow obstruction (or atresia) have severe cyanosis and dyspnea
with feeding with poor
weight gain. But those with mild obstruction may not have cyanosis at rest.
Tet spells
may be precipitated by activity and are characterized by paroxysms of hyperpnea (rapid and
===PAGE:3133===
deep respirations), irritability and prolonged crying, increasing cyanosis, and decreasing intensity of the
heart murmur. The spells occur most often in young infants; peak incidence is age 2 to 4 mo. A severe
spell may lead to limpness, seizures, and occasionally death. During play, some toddlers may
intermittently squat, a position that increases systemic vascular resistance and aortic pressure, which
decreases right to left ventricular shunting and thus raises arterial O
saturation.
Auscultation detects a harsh grade 3 to 5/6 systolic ejection murmur at the left mid and upper sternal
border. The murmur in tetralogy is always due to the pulmonary stenosis; the VSD is silent because it is
large and has no pressure gradient. The 2nd heart sound (S
) is often single because the pulmonary
component is markedly reduced. A prominent right ventricular impulse and a systolic thrill may be present.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suggested by history and clinical examination, supported by chest x-ray and ECG, and
established by 2-dimensional echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies. Chest x-ray shows a
boot-shaped heart with a concave main pulmonary artery segment and diminished pulmonary vascular
markings. A right aortic arch is present in 25%. ECG shows right ventricular hypertrophy and may also
show right atrial hypertrophy. Cardiac catheterization is rarely needed, unless there is suspicion of a
coronary anomaly that might affect the surgical approach (eg, anterior descending arising from the right
coronary artery) that cannot be clarified with echocardiography.
Treatment
• For symptomatic neonates, prostaglandin E
infusion
• For tet spells, positioning, calming, O
, and sometimes drugs
• Surgical repair
Neonates with severe cyanosis may be palliated with an infusion of prostaglandin E
(0.05 to 0.1
μ
g/kg/min IV) to open the ductus arteriosus.
Tet spells:
Tet spells are treated by placing infants in a knee-chest position (older children usually squat
spontaneously and do not develop tet spells), establishing a calm environment, and giving O
. If the spell
persists, options (roughly in order of preference) include morphine 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg IV or IM, IV fluids for
volume expansion, NaHCO
1 mEq/kg IV, and propranolol starting at 0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg, titrated up to 0.1
to 0.2 mg/kg IV if needed for effect. If these measures do not control the spell, systemic BP can be
increased with ketamine 0.5 to 3 mg/kg IV or 2 to 3 mg/kg IM (ketamine also has a beneficial sedating
effect) or phenylephrine starting at 5
μ
g/kg and titrating up to 20
μ
g/kg IV for effect. Ultimately, if the
preceding steps do not relieve the spell or if the infant is rapidly deteriorating, intubation with muscle
paralysis and general anesthesia may be necessary. Propranolol 0.25 to 1 mg/kg po q 6 h may prevent
recurrences, but most experts feel that even one significant spell indicates the need for expeditious
surgical repair.
Definitive management:
Complete repair consists of patch closure of the VSD, widening of the right
ventricular outflow tract with muscle resection and pulmonary valvuloplasty, and a limited patch across the
pulmonic annulus or main pulmonary artery if necessary. Surgery is usually done electively at age 3 to 6
mo but can be done at any time if symptoms are present.
In neonates and very small infants with complex anatomy, initial palliation may be preferred to complete
repair; the usual procedure is a modified Blalock-Taussig shunt, in which the subclavian artery is
connected to the ipsilateral pulmonary artery with a synthetic graft.
===PAGE:3134===
Perioperative mortality rate for complete repair is < 5% for uncomplicated tetralogy of Fallot. For
untreated patients, survival rates are 55% at 5 yr and 30% at 10 yr.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended preoperatively but is required only for the first 6 mo after repair
unless there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch or prosthetic material.
Transposition of the Great Arteries
Transposition of the great arteries (TGA) occurs when the aorta arises directly from the right
ventricle and the pulmonary artery arises from the left ventricle, resulting in independent,
parallel pulmonary and systemic circulations; oxygenated blood cannot reach the body except
through openings connecting the right and left sides (eg, patent
foramen ovale, ventricular
septal defect [VSD]). Symptoms are primarily severe neonatal cyanosis and occasionally heart
failure, if there is an associated VSD. Heart sounds and murmurs vary depending on the
presence of associated congenital anomalies. Diagnosis is by echocardiography. Definitive
treatment is surgical repair.
TGA (see
Fig. 293-7
) accounts for 5 to 7% of congenital heart anomalies. About 30 to 40% of patients have a VSD;
5% have subpulmonary stenosis.
Pathophysiology
Systemic and pulmonary circulations are completely separated. After returning to the right heart,
desaturated systemic venous blood is pumped into the systemic circulation without being oxygenated in
the lungs; oxygenated blood entering the left heart goes back to the lungs rather than to the rest of the
body. This anomaly is not compatible with life unless desaturated and oxygenated blood can mix through
openings at one or more levels (eg, atrial, ventricular, or great artery level).
[Fig. 293-7.
Transposition of the great arteries.]
Symptoms and Signs
Severe cyanosis occurs within hours of birth, progressing rapidly to metabolic acidosis secondary to poor
tissue oxygenation. Patients with a large VSD, a patent ductus arteriosus, or both are less cyanotic, but
symptoms and signs of heart failure (eg, tachypnea, dyspnea, tachycardia, diaphoresis, inability to gain
weight) may develop during the first 3 to 6 wk of life.
Except for generalized cyanosis, physical examination is usually unremarkable. Heart murmurs may be
absent unless associated anomalies are present. The 2nd heart sound (S
) is single and loud.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected clinically, supported by chest x-ray and ECG, and established by 2-dimensional
echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies.
On chest x-ray, the cardiac shadow may have the classic egg-on-a-string appearance with a narrow
upper mediastinum. ECG shows right ventricular hypertrophy but may be normal for a neonate.
Cardiac catheterization is not usually necessary for diagnosis but may be done to enlarge the atrial
communication.
Treatment
===PAGE:3135===
• Prostaglandin E
(PGE
) infusion
• Sometimes balloon atrial septostomy
• Surgical repair
Unless arterial O
saturation is only mildly decreased and the atrial communication is adequate, a PGE
infusion (0.05 to 0.1
μ
g/kg/min IV) is used to open and maintain patency of the ductus arteriosus; this
infusion increases pulmonary blood flow, which promotes left to right atrial shunting, leading to improved
systemic oxygenation. Metabolic acidosis is corrected via infusion of NaHCO
. Pulmonary edema and
respiratory failure may require intubation and mechanical ventilation.
For severely hypoxemic neonates who do not immediately respond to PGE
or who have a very
restrictive foramen ovale, cardiac catheterization and balloon atrial septostomy (Rashkind's procedure)
can immediately improve systemic arterial O
saturation. A balloon-tipped catheter is advanced into the
left atrium through the patent foramen ovale. The balloon is inflated with diluted radiopaque dye and
abruptly withdrawn to the right atrium to enlarge
the opening in the atrial septum. As an alternative to
taking the neonate to the catheterization laboratory, the septostomy procedure can be done at the
bedside under echocardiographic guidance.
Definitive repair is the arterial switch (Jatene) operation, typically done during the first week of life. The
proximal portions of the great arteries are transected, the coronary arteries are transplanted to the native
pulmonary root (which will become the neoaortic root), and the aorta is connected to the left ventricle and
the pulmonary artery is connected to the right ventricle. Survival rate after surgery is > 95%. An
associated VSD should be closed at the time of primary repair unless it is small and hemodynamically
insignificant. Pulmonic stenosis is problematic unless it can be addressed surgically at the time of the
arterial switch procedure.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended preoperatively but is required only for the first 6 mo after repair
unless there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch or prosthetic material.
Tricuspid Atresia
Tricuspid atresia is absence of the tricuspid valve accompanied by a hypoplastic right ventricle.
Associated anomalies are common and include atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect,
patent ductus arteriosus, and transposition of the great arteries. Symptoms include cyanosis
and those of heart failure. The 2nd heart sound (S
) is single, and murmurs depend on the
presence of associated anomalies. Diagnosis is by echocardiography or cardiac catheterization.
Definitive treatment is surgical repair.
Tricuspid atresia accounts for 1 to 3% of congenital heart anomalies. The most common type (sometimes
referred to as classic tricuspid atresia) includes a ventricular septal defect (VSD) and pulmonary stenosis,
which results in decreased pulmonary blood flow, elevated right atrial pressure, and an obligatory right-toleft shunt at the atrial level through a stretched patent foramen ovale or an atrial septal defect (ASD),
causing cyanosis (see
Fig. 293-8
). In 12 to 25% of cases, the great arteries are transposed with a VSD and a normal pulmonary
valve, with unrestricted pulmonary blood flow coming directly from the left ventricle, typically resulting in
heart failure (HF) and pulmonary hypertension.
Symptoms and Signs
Infants with decreased pulmonary blood flow usually have mild to moderate cyanosis at birth, which
increases, sometimes dramatically, over the first several months of life. Infants with increased pulmonary
blood flow usually show signs of HF (eg, tachypnea, dyspnea with feeding, poor weight gain,
diaphoresis) by age 4 to 6 wk.
[Fig. 293-8.
Tricuspid atresia.]
===PAGE:3136===
Physical examination usually detects a single 2nd heart sound (S
) and a grade 2 to
holosystolic or
early systolic murmur of a VSD at the lower left sternal border. A systolic ejection murmur of pulmonary
stenosis or a continuous murmur of patent ductus arteriosus may be present in the upper left sternal
border. A systolic thrill is rarely palpable. An apical diastolic rumble may be audible if pulmonary blood
flow is markedly increased. Cyanosis, when present for > 6 mo, may result in clubbing.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
• Usually cardiac catheterization
Diagnosis is suspected clinically, supported by chest x-ray and ECG, and established by 2-dimensional
echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies.
In the most common form, chest x-ray shows normal or slightly increased heart size, right atrial
enlargement, and decreased pulmonary vascular markings. Occasionally, the cardiac silhouette
resembles that of tetralogy of Fallot (with a boot-shaped heart and concave pulmonary artery segment).
Pulmonary vascular markings may be increased and cardiomegaly may be present in infants with
associated transposition of the great arteries. ECG characteristically shows left axis deviation (between
0° and -90°) and left ventricular hypertrophy. Left axis deviation is not usually present if there is
associated transposition of the great arteries. Right atrial or combined atrial enlargement is also common.
Cardiac catheterization may be necessary before the first palliative procedure to define hemodynamics
and pulmonary artery anatomy unless echocardiography or other modalities clearly show the pulmonary
vascular anatomy and confidently predict normal pulmonary artery pressures.
Treatment
• For severely cyanotic neonates, prostaglandin E
infusion
• Sometimes balloon atrial septostomy
• Staged surgical repair
Most neonates with tricuspid atresia, although cyanotic, are well compensated in the first several weeks
of life. In severely cyanotic neonates, prostaglandin E
(beginning at 0.05 to 0.1
μ
g/kg/min IV) is infused
to prevent closure of the ductus arteriosus or to reopen the constricted ductus before cardiac
catheterization or surgical repair.
Although not usually required, balloon atrial septostomy (Rashkind's procedure) may be done as part of
the initial catheterization to decompress the right atrium and facilitate unrestricted right-to-left atrial
shunting when the interatrial communication is inadequate. Some infants with transposition of the great
arteries and signs of HF require medical treatment (eg, diuretics, digoxin, ACE inhibitors—.
Definitive repair requires staged operations. If intervention is needed within the first 4 to 8 wk of life, a
modified Blalock-Taussig shunt (connection of a systemic and a pulmonary artery by a Gore-Tex tube) is
done. Otherwise, if the infant remains stable with good growth, the first procedure would be a
bidirectional Glenn shunt (anastomosis between the superior vena cava and right pulmonary artery) at 3
to 6 mo, then a modified Fontan procedure is done by 2 yr. The Fontan procedure involves diverting the
inferior vena cava flow directly to the pulmonary artery, usually by an extracardiac conduit, completely
bypassing the right atrium. The proximal pulmonary root is ligated, which prevents anterograde flow
across the pulmonary outflow tract, and an adequate interatrial opening is created, if not already present,
to allow equalization of right and left atrial pressures and free communication between these chambers.
===PAGE:3137===
Because the systemic venous and conduit pressure must be at least 3 to 5 mm Hg greater than the left
atrial pressure to provide an adequate transpulmonary pressure gradient for pulmonary blood flow, a
fenestration (small opening) is frequently made between the conduit and the right atrium. Right-to-left
shunting from the conduit to the atria and left ventricle allows decompression of the systemic venous
pressure and improvement in cardiac output, albeit at the expense of mild arterial desaturation. This
approach has increased early survival rates to > 90%, 5-yr survival rates to > 80%, and 10-yr survival
rates to > 70%.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended preoperatively but is required only for the first 6 mo after repair
unless there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch or prosthetic material.
Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome consists of hypoplasia of the left ventricle and ascending aorta,
maldevelopment and hypoplasia of the aortic and mitral valves (frequently aortic atresia is
present), an atrial septal defect, and a large patent ductus arteriosus. Unless normal closure of
the patent ductus arteriosus is prevented with prostaglandin infusion, cardiogenic shock and
death ensue. A loud, single 2nd heart sound (S
) and nonspecific systolic murmur are common.
Diagnosis is by emergency echocardiography. Definitive treatment is staged surgical correction
or heart transplantation.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome accounts for 2% of congenital heart anomalies. Because the mitral valve,
left ventricle, and aortic valve are hypoplastic (often with aortic atresia), oxygenated blood coming into the
left atrium from the lungs is diverted across the atrial communication into the right heart, where it mixes
with desaturated systemic venous return (see
Fig. 293-9
). This relatively desaturated blood exits the right ventricle through the pulmonary artery to the
lungs and through the
[Fig. 293-9.
Hypoplastic left heart.]
ductus arteriosus to the systemic circulation. Systemic blood flow is maintained only through the right-toleft ductal shunt; thus immediate survival depends on patency of the ductus arteriosus.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms appear when the ductus arteriosus begins to close during the first 24 to 48 h of life.
Subsequently, the clinical picture of cardiogenic shock (eg, tachypnea, dyspnea, weak pulse, pallor,
cyanosis, hypothermia, metabolic acidosis, lethargy, oliguria or anuria) rapidly develops. When systemic
circulation is compromised, coronary and cerebral perfusion may be reduced, leading to symptoms of
myocardial or cerebral ischemia. If the ductus arteriosus is not reopened, death rapidly ensues.
Physical examination shows a very active precordium with a marked parasternal lift associated with very
poor peripheral perfusion, cool extremities, bluish gray skin color, and absent or barely palpable pulses.
The 2nd heart sound (S
) is loud and single. Occasionally, a soft, nonspecific systolic murmur is present.
Severe metabolic acidosis out of proportion to the PO
and PCO
is characteristic.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected clinically and confirmed by emergency echocardiography with color flow and
Doppler studies. Cardiac catheterization is rarely required.
Chest x-ray shows cardiomegaly and pulmonary venous congestion or pulmonary edema. ECG shows
right ventricular hypertrophy.
===PAGE:3138===
Treatment
• Prostaglandin E
(PGE
) infusion
• Staged surgical repair
• Sometimes heart transplantation
All affected infants should be stabilized immediately in a neonatal ICU. Vascular access should be
established, usually via an umbilical venous catheter; then PGE
(beginning at 0.05 to 0.1
μ
g/kg/min IV)
is infused to prevent closure of the ductus arteriosus or to reopen a constricted ductus. Neonates usually
require intubation and mechanical ventilation. Metabolic acidosis is corrected via infusion of NaHCO
.
Severely ill neonates with cardiogenic shock may require inotropic drugs (eg, milrinone) and diuretics to
improve cardiac function and control volume status. It is critical to keep pulmonary vascular resistance
relatively high and systemic vascular resistance low in order to prevent marked pulmonary overcirculation
at the expense of systemic perfusion. These resistance ranges are maintained by avoiding hyperoxia,
alkalosis, and hypocarbia, all of which may lead to pulmonary vasodilation. Because O
is one of the
most potent pulmonary vasodilators, infants are ventilated with room air or even hypoxic mixtures to aim
for systemic saturations of 70 to 80%. If the infant requires mechanical ventilation, PCO
can be
controlled in the high normal or mildly elevated range. Systemic vascular resistance is managed by
avoiding, or minimizing, the use of vasoconstricting drugs (eg, epinephrine or high-dose dopamine).
Milrinone may be beneficial because it can cause systemic vasodilation.
Survival ultimately requires staged procedures that enable the right ventricle to function as the systemic
ventricle. Stage 1, done during the first week of life, is the Norwood procedure. The main pulmonary
artery is divided, the distal stump is closed with a patch,
and the ductus arteriosus is ligated. Then, a
right-sided modified Blalock-Taussig shunt ( or right ventricular-pulmonary artery conduit
(Sano modification) is done; the atrial septum is enlarged, and the proximal pulmonary artery and
hypoplastic aorta are connected with an aortic or pulmonary artery allograft to create a neoaorta. Stage 2,
done at 3 to 6 mo of age, consists of a bidirectional Glenn operation (end-to-side connection of the
superior vena cava to the right pulmonary artery). The 3rd stage, done at 18 to 36 mo, is a modified
Fontan procedure (. Survival rate is 75% for stage 1, 95% for stage 2, and 90% for stage 3.
Overall survival rate is 70% at 5 yr after surgical correction. Many survivors have neurodevelopmental
disabilities, which may be due to preexisting developmental abnormalities of the CNS or to overt or occult
CNS hypoperfusion or thromboemboli occurring during the multistage procedures.
In some centers, heart transplantation is the procedure of choice; however, PGE
infusion must be
continued along with careful management of pulmonary and systemic vascular resistance until a donor
heart is available. Because availability of donor hearts is very limited, about 20% of infants die while
waiting for one. The 5-yr survival rates after transplantation and after multistage surgery are similar. After
heart transplantation, immunosuppressants are required. These drugs make patients more susceptible to
infections and cause pathologic changes in the coronary arteries of the transplanted heart in > 50% of
patients over a 5-yr period. The only known treatment for allograft coronary artery disease is
retransplantation.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended preoperatively but is required only for the first 6 mo after repair
unless there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch or prosthetic material.
Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return
In total anomalous pulmonary venous return, the pulmonary veins do not connect to the left
atrium. Instead, the entire pulmonary venous return enters the systemic venous circulation
through a variety of connections. If there is no obstruction to pulmonary venous return,
cyanosis is mild and heart failure develops within the first 2 to 4 wk of life. Severe obstruction
of the pulmonary venous return may occur, resulting in severe neonatal cyanosis, pulmonary
edema, and pulmonary hypertension. Diagnosis is by echocardiography. Surgical repair is
===PAGE:3139===
required.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (see
Fig. 293-10
) accounts for 1 to 2% of congenital heart anomalies. The clinical manifestation depends on
the connection between the pulmonary venous confluence and the right side of the circulation. The most
common types include
• Return via an ascending left vertical vein that drains to the innominate vein
• A descending vein that drains infradiaphragmatically to the portal circulation
• Connection of the confluence to the coronary sinus
The infradiaphragmatic drainage type is invariably severely obstructed, leading to dramatic pulmonary
edema and cyanosis unresponsive to O
. The other 2 types do not typically involve obstruction and lead
to heart failure (HF) and mild cyanosis in the first month of life.
Symptoms and Signs
Neonates with obstructed pulmonary venous return present with severe pulmonary hypertension,
pulmonary edema, and cyanosis. Physical examination usually shows a parasternal
[Fig. 293-10.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return.]
lift and a single, loud 2nd heart sound (S
), with no significant murmur.
If pulmonary venous return is not obstructed, symptoms of HF are prominent and physical examination
detects a hyperdynamic precordium, a loud and split S
, and a grade 2 to 3/6 systolic ejection murmur
audible along the left sternal border. A mid-diastolic tricuspid flow murmur may be audible at the lower left
sternal border.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
Diagnosis is suspected by chest x-ray and established by 2-dimensional echocardiography with color flow
and Doppler studies. Cardiac catheterization is rarely necessary; occasionally, cardiac MRI or CT
angiography may need to be done to better delineate the anatomy of pulmonary venous return.
Chest x-ray shows a small heart and severe diffuse pulmonary edema when there is pulmonary venous
obstruction; otherwise, there is cardiomegaly with increased pulmonary vascular markings. ECG shows
right axis deviation, right ventricular hypertrophy, and occasionally right atrial enlargement.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
• Medical treatment of HF (eg, diuretics, digoxin, ACE inhibitors) before surgery
Neonates with infradiaphragmatic return with obstruction require emergent surgical repair. In older infants,
HF should be treated, followed by surgical repair as soon as the infant is stabilized.
Surgical repair consists of creating a wide anastomosis between the pulmonary venous confluence and
the posterior wall of the left atrium, along with ligation of the vein decompressing the confluence into the
systemic venous circulation. The repair is different for return to the coronary sinus, in which case the
===PAGE:3140===
coronary sinus is unroofed into the left atrium and its opening to the right atrium is closed.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended preoperatively but is required only for the first 6 mo after repair
unless there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch or prosthetic material.
Persistent Truncus Arteriosus
Persistent truncus arteriosus occurs when, during fetal development, the primitive truncus
does not divide into the pulmonary artery and aorta, resulting in a single, large, arterial trunk
that overlies a large, malaligned, perimembranous ventricular septal defect. Consequently, a
mixture of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood enters systemic, pulmonary, and coronary
circulations. Symptoms include cyanosis and heart failure, with poor feeding, diaphoresis, and
tachypnea. A normal 1st heart sound (S
) and a loud, single 2nd heart sound (S
) are common;
murmurs may vary. Diagnosis is by echocardiography or cardiac catheterization. Medical
treatment for heart failure is typically followed by early surgical repair.
Persistent truncus arteriosus (see
Fig. 293-11
) accounts for 1 to 2% of congenital heart anomalies. About 35% of patients have 22q11
deletion syndrome, which includes DiGeorge syndrome and velocardiofacial syndromes.
Classification:
There are 3 types.
• Type I: The main pulmonary artery arises from the truncus and then divides into the right and left
pulmonary arteries.
• Type II: The right and left pulmonary arteries arise separately (but adjacent to each other) from the
posterior aspect of the truncus.
• Type III: The right and left pulmonary arteries arise from the lateral aspects of the truncal root
reasonably distant from each other.
[Fig. 293-11.
Truncus arteriosus.]
Previously, a type IV was defined, in which arteries supplying blood to the lungs arose from the
descending aorta. However, this anomaly is now placed in the category of tetralogy of Fallot with
pulmonary atresia.
Other anomalies (eg, truncal valve insufficiency, right aortic arch, interrupted aortic arch, coronary artery
anomalies, atrioventricular septal defect) may be present and may contribute to the high surgical mortality
rate.
Physiologic consequences of truncus arteriosus include mild cyanosis, significant pulmonary
overcirculation, and heart failure (HF).
Symptoms and Signs
Infants usually present with mild cyanosis and symptoms and signs of HF (eg, tachypnea, poor feeding,
diaphoresis) in the first few weeks of life. Physical examination may detect a hyperdynamic precordium,
increased pulse pressure with bounding pulses, a loud and single 2nd heart sound (S
), and an ejection
click. A grade 2 to 4/6 systolic murmur is audible along the left sternal border. A mid-diastolic mitral flow
murmur may be audible at the apex when pulmonary blood flow is increased. With truncal valve
insufficiency, a high-pitched diastolic decrescendo murmur is audible over the mid left sternal border.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography
===PAGE:3141===
• Occasionally cardiac catheterization, cardiac MRI, or CT angiography
Diagnosis is suspected clinically, supported by chest x-ray and ECG, and established by 2-dimensional
echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies. Cardiac catheterization is occasionally necessary
to delineate associated anomalies before surgery, but cardiac MRI or CT angiography may supplant the
need for catheterization.
Chest x-ray shows varying degrees of cardiomegaly with increased pulmonary vascular markings, right
aortic arch (in about 30%), and relatively high position of pulmonary arteries. ECG commonly shows
combined ventricular hypertrophy. Substantial pulmonary overcirculation may produce evidence of left
atrial enlargement.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
• Medical treatment of HF (eg, diuretics, digoxin, ACE inhibitors) before surgery
HF is treated vigorously with diuretics, digoxin, and ACE inhibitors, followed by early surgical repair.
Prostaglandin infusion is not beneficial.
Surgical management consists of complete repair. The ventricular septal defect is closed so that the left
ventricle ejects into the truncal root. A conduit with or without a valve is placed between the right ventricle
and the confluence of the pulmonary arteries. Surgical mortality rates have decreased to as low as 10%
in recent years. Because the conduit is placed during early infancy, its size becomes inadequate as
children grow, and the conduit must be revised during childhood.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended preoperatively but is required only for the first 6 mo after repair
unless there is a residual defect adjacent to a surgical patch or prosthetic material.
Eisenmenger's Syndrome
(Pulmonary Vascular Obstructive Disease)
Eisenmenger's syndrome is a complication of uncorrected congenital heart anomalies that
cause left-to-right shunting. Increased pulmonary resistance may develop over time, reversing
left-to-right shunting to right-to-left shunting. Deoxygenated blood enters the systemic
circulation, causing symptoms of hypoxia. Murmurs and heart sounds depend on the underlying
anomaly. Diagnosis is by echocardiography or cardiac catheterization. Treatment is generally
supportive, but heart and lung transplantation may be an option when symptoms are severe.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended.
Congenital heart anomalies that, if untreated, result in Eisenmenger's syndrome include
• Ventricular septal defect
• Atrioventricular canal defect
• Atrial septal defect
• Patent ductus arteriosus
• Persistent truncus arteriosus
• Transposition of the great arteries
In the US, the incidence has markedly decreased because of early diagnosis and definitive repair of the
===PAGE:3142===
causative anomaly.
Right-to-left shunting due to Eisenmenger's syndrome results in cyanosis and its complications. Systemic
desaturation leads to clubbing of fingers and toes, secondary polycythemia, hyperviscosity, hemoptysis,
CNS events (eg, brain abscess or cerebrovascular accident), and sequelae of increased RBC turnover
(eg, hyperuricemia causing gout, hyperbilirubinemia causing cholelithiasis, iron deficiency with or without
anemia).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually do not occur until age 20 to 40 yr; they include cyanosis, syncope, dyspnea during
exertion, fatigue, chest pain, palpitations, atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, and rarely right heart failure
(eg, hepatomegaly, peripheral edema, jugular venous distention).
Hemoptysis is a late symptom. Signs of cerebral embolic phenomena, brain abscess, or endocarditis may
develop.
Secondary polycythemia commonly causes symptoms (eg, transient ischemic attacks with slurred speech
or other neurologic symptoms, visual problems, headaches, increased fatigue, signs of
thromboembolism). Abdominal pain may result from cholelithiasis.
Physical examination detects central cyanosis and digital clubbing. Rarely, signs of right ventricular failure
( may be present. A holosystolic murmur of tricuspid regurgitation may be present at the
lower left sternal border. An early diastolic, decrescendo, high-pitched murmur of pulmonary insufficiency
may be audible along the left sternal border. A loud, single 2nd heart sound (S
) is a constant finding; an
ejection click is common. Scoliosis is present in about one third of patients.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and ECG
• Echocardiography or cardiac catheterization
Diagnosis is suspected by history of uncorrected cardiac anomalies, supported by chest x-ray and ECG,
and established by 2-dimensional echocardiography with color flow and Doppler studies or cardiac
catheterization.
Laboratory testing shows polycythemia with Hct > 55%. Increased RBC turnover may be reflected as an
iron deficiency state (eg, microcythemia), hyperuricemia, and hyperbilirubinemia.
Chest x-ray usually shows prominent central pulmonary arteries, peripheral pulmonary vessel pruning,
and right heart enlargement. ECG shows right ventricular hypertrophy, right axis deviation, and,
occasionally, right atrial enlargement.
Treatment
• Drugs to lower pulmonary artery pressure (eg, prostacyclin antagonists, endothelin antagonists, nitric
oxide enhancers)
• Supportive therapy
• Heart and lung transplantation
Ideally, corrective operations should have been done earlier to prevent Eisenmenger's syndrome. There is
no specific treatment once the syndrome develops, other than heart and lung transplantation, but drugs
that may lower pulmonary artery pressure are being studied. They include prostacyclin antagonists (eg,
treprostinil, epoprostenol), endothelin antagonists (eg, bosentan), and nitric oxide enhancers (eg,
sildenafil).
===PAGE:3143===
Supportive treatment includes avoidance of conditions that may exacerbate the syndrome (eg, pregnancy,
volume depletion, isometric exercise, high altitudes) and use of supplemental O
. Symptomatic
polycythemia can be treated by cautious phlebotomy to lower Hct to 55 to 65% plus simultaneous volume
replacement with normal saline. However, compensated and asymptomatic polycythemia does not require
phlebotomy, regardless of Hct; phlebotomy eventually leads to iron deficiency and does not change the
natural history. Hyperuricemia can be treated with allopurinol 300 mg po once/day. Anticoagulation
therapy with warfarin is potentially harmful and its use should be individualized, but aspirin 81 mg po
once/day is indicated to prevent thrombotic complications.
Life expectancy depends on type and severity of the underlying congenital anomaly and ranges from 20
to 50 yr; median age at death is 37 yr. However, low exercise tolerance and secondary complications
severely limit quality of life.
Heart and lung transplantation may be an option but is reserved for patients with severe symptoms and
unacceptable quality of life. Long-term survival after transplantation is not promising.
All patients should be given endocarditis prophylaxis (see
Table 215-4
 before dental or surgical procedures that are likely to cause bacteremia.
Other Less Common Congenital Cardiac Anomalies
Less frequent structural congenital cardiac anomalies include the following:
• Single ventricle with or without pulmonary stenosis
• Pulmonary atresia with an intact ventricular septum
• Double outlet right ventricle
• Ebstein's anomaly
• Congenitally corrected transposition
Single ventricle spectrum:
These anomalies include any complex lesion with only one
functional
ventricle and include hypoplastic right ventricle (RV) and left ventricle (LV) and, less commonly, a true
undifferentiated single ventricular chamber. Surgical management involves ensuring adequate pulmonary
blood flow via a systemic-to-pulmonary artery anastomosis (eg, modified Blalock-Taussig shunt [see p.]) for patients with decreased pulmonary blood flow or protecting the pulmonary vascular bed via
pulmonary artery banding if pulmonary overcirculation exists. Later, the Fontan procedure (
can be used as definitive treatment to make the functioning single ventricle solely a systemic ventricle.
Pulmonary atresia with intact septum:
This anomaly is most frequently associated with a hypoplastic
RV and follows the same treatment algorithm as tricuspid atresia (.
Double outlet right ventricle:
This anomaly is associated with a very wide spectrum of anatomy and
physiology depending on the size and location of the ventricular septal defect (VSD), as well as the
presence and degree of pulmonic stenosis. In the most common variety with a subaortic VSD, a complete
repair is possible with closure of the VSD in such a way as to direct LV outflow to the aorta.
Ebstein's anomaly:
This anomaly consists of variable apical displacement and dysplasia of the septal
and inferior leaflets of the tricuspid valve with dysplasia, but normal origin, of the anterior leaflet as well.
These abnormalities displace the effective valve orifice downward, resulting in compromise of the function
of the RV with an atrialized portion that is proximal to the valve opening. This anomaly has been
associated with maternal use of lithium during pregnancy. Associated abnormalities include atrial septal
defect, pulmonic stenosis, and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.
There is a remarkably wide spectrum of presentation, ranging from severely cyanotic newborns to
===PAGE:3144===
cardiomegaly with mild cyanosis in childhood to a previously asymptomatic adult presenting with atrial
arrhythmias or reentry supraventricular tachycardia. The onset of symptoms depends on the degree of
tricuspid valve anatomic and functional derangement and presence of accessory pathways (eg, WolffParkinson-White syndrome). When symptoms result from a severely dysfunctional tricuspid valve,
surgical repair or replacement should be considered.
Congenitally corrected transposition:
This anomaly is relatively rare and accounts for about 0.5% of
congenital cardiac anomalies. The normal embryologic looping of the fetal heart tube is reversed,
resulting in atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial discordance. The result is the right atrium connects to a
right-sided morphologic LV and the left atrium connects to a left-sided morphologic RV. In almost all cases,
the morphologic LV connects to the pulmonary artery and the morphologic RV connects to the aorta. The
circulation is thus physiologically "corrected," but associated anomalies are invariably present, including
VSD, pulmonic stenosis, Ebstein's anomaly of the tricuspid valve, congenital atrioventricular block,
mesocardia or dextrocardia, and heterotaxy syndromes. These anomalies result in a wide range of clinical
manifestations. As patients reach adulthood, a common concern is development of dysfunction of the
morphologic RV, which serves as the systemic ventricle. This dysfunction may be subclinical or manifest
as severe cardiomyopathy and heart failure, leading to consideration of heart transplantation.
Rare nonstructural cardiac anomalies include
• Congenital complete heart block
• Congenital metabolic errors leading to cardiomyopathy
See p.
for prolonged QT syndrome and other genetic arrhythmia syndromes with risks of severe
and possibly fatal ventricular arrhythmias.
===PAGE:3145===
Chapter 294. Congenital Craniofacial and Musculoskeletal Abnormalities
Introduction
Many craniofacial and musculoskeletal abnormalities occur only at a single, specific site. They may be a
deformity (alteration in shape due to unusual pressure and malpositioning [eg, clubfoot]) or a
malformation (an error in normal organ or tissue development [eg, anencephaly]). Both deformities and
malformations affect function. Some abnormalities (eg, arthrogryposis multiplex congenita) affect multiple
sites.
Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita
(Multiple Congenital Contractures)
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) refers to a variety of conditions that involve
congenital limitation of joint movement. Intelligence is relatively normal except when the
arthrogryposis is caused by a disorder or syndrome that also affects intelligence.
There are two major types of AMC:
•
Amyoplasia (classic arthrogryposis):
Multiple symmetric contractures occur in the limbs.
•
Distal arthrogryposis:
The hands and feet are involved, but the large joints are spared.
Etiology
Any condition that impairs in utero movement for > 3 wk can result in AMC. Causes may involve
• Physical limitation of movement (eg, due to uterine malformations, multiple gestations, or
oligohydramnios)
• Maternal disorders (eg, multiple sclerosis, impaired uterine vascularity)
• Fetal disorders (eg, neuropathies; myopathies, including muscular dystrophies; connective tissue
abnormalities; impaired fetal vascularity; anterior horn cell disease)
More than 35 specific genetic disorders (eg, spinal muscular atrophy type I, trisomy 18) have been linked
to AMC.
Symptoms and Signs
Deformities are prominent at birth. AMC is not progressive; however, the condition that causes it (eg,
muscular dystrophy) may be. Affected joints are contracted in flexion or extension. In classic AMC,
shoulders are sloped, adducted, and internally rotated; the elbows are extended; and the wrists and digits
are flexed. Hips may be dislocated and are usually slightly flexed. Knees are extended; feet are often in
the equinovarus position. Leg muscles are usually hypoplastic, and limbs tend to be tubular and
featureless. Soft-tissue webbing sometimes occurs over ventral aspects of the flexed joints. The spine
may be scoliotic. Except for slenderness of the long bones, the skeleton appears normal on x-rays.
Physical disabilities may be severe. As noted, some children may have primary CNS dysfunction, but
intelligence is usually unimpaired.
Endotracheal intubation during surgery may be difficult because children have small immobile jaws. Other
abnormalities that rarely accompany arthrogryposis include microcephaly, cleft palate, cryptorchidism, and
cardiac and urinary tract abnormalities.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
===PAGE:3146===
• Testing for cause
Evaluation should include a thorough assessment for associated abnormalities. Electromyography and
muscle biopsy are useful to diagnose neuropathic and myopathic disorders. In classic AMC, muscle
biopsy typically shows amyoplasia, with fatty and fibrous replacement of tissues.
Treatment
• Joint manipulation and casting
• Sometimes surgical procedures
Early orthopedic and physical therapy evaluations are indicated. Joint manipulation and casting during
the first few months of life may produce considerable improvement. Orthotics may help. Surgery may be
needed later to align the angle of ankylosis, but mobility is rarely enhanced. Muscle transfers (eg,
surgically moving the triceps so that it can flex the elbow) may improve function. Many children do
remarkably well; two thirds are ambulatory after treatment.
Congenital Amputations
Congenital amputations are missing or incomplete limbs at birth. Mechanism can involve primary
intrauterine growth inhibition or secondary intrauterine destruction of normal embryonic tissues. Etiology
is often unclear, but teratogenic agents (eg, thalidomide) and amniotic bands, which are loose strands of
amnion that entangle or fuse with fetal tissue, are known causes.
Limb deficiencies can be
• Transverse
• Longitudinal
In
transverse deficiencies
, all elements beyond a certain level are absent, and the limb resembles an
amputation stump. Amniotic bands are the most common cause; the degree of deficiency varies based on
the location of the band.
Longitudinal deficiencies
involve specific maldevelopments (eg, complete or partial absence of the
radius, fibula, or tibia). They may result from syndromes or associations such as VACTERL (
v
ertebral
anomalies,
a
nal atresia,
c
ardiac malformations,
t
racheo
e
sophageal fistula,
r
enal anomalies and
r
adial
aplasia, and
l
imb anomalies).
Infants with transverse or longitudinal limb deficiencies may also have hypoplastic or bifid bones,
synostoses, duplications, dislocations, or other bony defects; eg, in proximal femoral focal deficiency, the
proximal femur and acetabulum do not develop. One or more limbs may be affected, and the type of
defect may be different in each limb. CNS abnormalities are rare. X-rays are essential to determine which
bones are involved.
Treatment
• Prosthetic devices
Treatment consists mainly of prosthetic devices, which are most valuable for lower-limb deficiencies and
for completely or almost completely absent upper limbs. If any activity in an arm or hand exists, no matter
how great the malformation, functioning capacity must be thoroughly assessed before a prosthesis or
surgical procedure is recommended. Therapeutic amputation of any limb or portion of a limb should be
considered only after evaluating the functional and psychologic implications of the loss and when
essential for fitting a prosthesis.
===PAGE:3147===
An upper-limb prosthesis should be designed to serve as many needs as possible so that the number of
devices is kept to a minimum. Children use a prosthesis most successfully when it is fitted early and
becomes an integral part of their body and body image during the developmental years. Devices used
during infancy should be as simple and durable as possible; eg, a hook rather than a bioelectric arm. With
effective orthopedic and ancillary support, most children with congenital amputations lead normal lives.
Craniofacial Abnormalities
Various craniofacial abnormalities result from maldevelopment of the 1st and 2nd visceral arches, which
form facial bones and ears during the 2nd mo of gestation. Causes include over 500 genetic syndromes
as well as prenatal factors (eg, inadequate folate [folic acid]).
These deformities include cleft lip and cleft palate, various named syndromes (see
Table 294-1
), hypertelorism (widely spaced eyes), and many other rarer deformities. Most infants with
craniofacial abnormalities have normal intelligence.
Cleft palate and cleft lip:
The most common 1st arch deformities are cleft palate and cleft lip, which
occur in 1/700 to 800 births. Both environmental and genetic factors are thought to contribute. Prenatal
maternal use of tobacco and alcohol may increase risk. Having one affected child increases risk of having
a second one. Folate, taken just before becoming pregnant and through the 1st trimester, decreases the
risk.
The cleft may vary from involvement of only the soft palate to a complete fissure of the soft and hard
palates, the alveolar process of the maxilla, and the lip. The mildest form is a bifid uvula. An isolated cleft
lip can occur.
A cleft palate interferes with feeding and speech development and increases the risk of ear infections.
Goals of treatment are to ensure normal feeding, speech, and maxillofacial growth and to avoid formation
of fistulas.
Early treatment, pending surgical repair, depends on the specific abnormality but may include specially
designed bottle nipples (to facilitate flow), dental appliances (to occlude the cleft so suckling can occur), a
feeder that can be squeezed to deliver formula, taping, and an artificial palate molded to the child's own
palate. The frequent episodes of acute otitis media must be recognized and treated.
Ultimate treatment is surgical closure; however, timing of surgery, which may interfere with growth centers
around the premaxilla, is somewhat controversial. For a cleft palate, a 2-stage procedure is often done.
The
[Table 294-1.
Common Craniofacial Syndromes]
cleft lip, nose, and soft palate are repaired during infancy (at age 3 to 6 mo). Then, the residual hard
palate cleft is repaired at age 15 to 18 mo. Surgery can result in significant improvement, but if deformities
are severe or treatment is inadequate, patients may be left with a nasal voice, compromised appearance,
and a tendency to regurgitate. Dental and orthodontic treatment, speech therapy, and counseling may be
required.
Deformities characterized by a small mandible:
These deformities include
• Pierre Robin sequence
• Treacher Collins syndrome
Pierre Robin sequence
is characterized by glossoptosis (a tongue that falls to the back of the throat)
and respiratory problems. A cleft palate as well as conductive hearing loss may also be present. Feeding
can be difficult, and sometimes cyanosis develops because the tongue is posterior and may obstruct the
pharynx. Prone positioning during feeding may help, but uncoordinated swallowing may require
nasogastric gavage feedings or a gastrostomy tube. If cyanosis or respiratory problems persist,
===PAGE:3148===
tracheostomy or surgery to affix the tongue in a forward position (eg, sewing it to the inner lower lip) may
be required. Otologic evaluation is indicated.
In
Treacher Collins syndrome
, which is associated with Pierre Robin sequence, patients have
downward slant of the eyes, coloboma of the eyelid, malformed pinna (microtia), and hearing loss.
Surgical extension of the mandible can improve appearance and function. In the typical procedure, called
distraction osteogenesis, an osteotomy is done, and a distraction (separator) device is attached to both
pieces. Over time, the distance between the 2 pieces is widened, and new bone grows in between to
enlarge the mandible.
Agenesis of the jaw:
Congenital absence of the condyloid process (and sometimes the coronoid
process, the ramus, and parts of the mandibular body) is a severe malformation. The mandible deviates
to the affected side, resulting in severe malocclusion; the unaffected side is elongated and flattened.
Abnormalities of the external, middle, and inner ears, temporal bone, parotid gland, masticatory muscles,
and facial nerve often coexist.
X-rays of the mandible and temporomandibular joint show the degree of underdevelopment and
distinguish agenesis from other conditions that result in similar facial deformities but do not involve severe
structural loss.
Treatment consists of prompt reconstruction with autogenous bone grafting (costochondral graft) to limit
progression of facial deformity. Often, mentoplasty, onlay grafts of bone and cartilage, and soft-tissue
flaps and grafts further improve facial symmetry. Distraction osteogenesis is being increasingly used.
Orthodontic treatment in early adolescence helps correct malocclusion.
Congenital ear malformations:
Microtia and external auditory canal atresia (which causes conductive
hearing loss) involve the external ear. These malformations, which frequently coexist, are often identified
at or soon after birth. Occasionally, school-based screening tests identify a partially occluded external
auditory canal in children with a normal pinna.
Hearing tests ( and CT of the temporal bone are necessary to evaluate possible additional
bony malformations.
Treatment can include surgery and a bone-conduction hearing aid, depending on whether the
malformation is unilateral or bilateral; whether it affects hearing, learning, and social development; and
whether complications (eg, facial nerve involvement, cholesteatoma, otitis media) are present. Surgery
may include pinna reconstruction and the creation of an external auditory canal, tympanic membrane, and
ossicles.
Hip, Leg, and Foot Abnormalities
Orthopedic abnormalities of the hip, leg, and foot are sometimes not apparent at birth. Causes
include in utero positioning, ligamentous laxity, and skeletal deformities. Some abnormalities
resolve without intervention; however, others require treatment.
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH—formerly congenital dislocation of the hip):
DDH is
abnormal development of the hip joint, leading to subluxation or dislocation; it can be unilateral or
bilateral. It is more common among infants with a breech presentation, especially females, particularly
those with a positive family history. It seems to result from laxity of the ligaments around the joint or from
in utero positioning. Asymmetric skin creases in the thigh and groin are common, but such creases also
occur in infants without DDH. If DDH remains undetected and untreated, the affected leg eventually
becomes shorter, and the hip may become painful. Abduction of the hip is often impaired due to adductor
spasm.
All infants are screened by physical examination. Because physical examination has limited sensitivity,
high-risk infants (and those with abnormalities found during physical examination) typically should have
an imaging study.
===PAGE:3149===
Two screening maneuvers commonly are used. The Ortolani maneuver detects the hip sliding back
into
the acetabulum, and the Barlow maneuver detects the hip sliding
out of
the acetabulum. Each hip is
examined separately. Both maneuvers begin with the infant supine and the hips and knees flexed to 90°
(the feet will be off the bed). To do the Ortolani maneuver, the thigh of the hip being tested is abducted
(ie, the knee is moved away from the midline into a frog-leg position) and gently pulled anteriorly.
Instability is indicated by the palpable, sometimes audible, clunk of the femoral head moving over the
posterior rim of the acetabulum and relocating in the cavity. Next, in the Barlow maneuver, the hip is
returned to the starting position and then slightly adducted (ie, the knee is drawn across the body) and
the thigh is pushed posteriorly. A clunk indicates that the head of the femur is moving out of the
acetabulum. Also, a difference in knee height when the child is supine with hips flexed, knees bent, and
feet on the examining table (Galeazzi sign—see
Fig. 294-1
) suggests dysplasia, especially unilateral. Somewhat later (eg, by 3 or 4 mo of age),
subluxation or dislocation is indicated by inability to completely abduct the thigh when the hip and knee
are flexed; abduction is impeded by adductor spasm, which is often present even if the hip is not actually
dislocated at the time of examination. Minor benign clicks are commonly detected. Although clicks usually
disappear within 1 or 2 mo, they should be checked regularly. Because bilateral dysplasia may be difficult
to detect at birth, periodic testing for limited hip abduction during the first year of life is advised.
Ultrasonography of the hips is recommended at 6 wk of age for infants at high risk, including those with a
breech presentation, those born with other deformities (eg, torticollis, congenital foot deformity), and girls
with a positive family history of DDH.
Imaging is also required when any abnormality is suspected during examination. Hip ultrasonography can
accurately establish the diagnosis earlier in life. Hip x-rays are helpful after the bones have started to
ossify, typically after age 4 mo.
Early treatment is critical. With any delay, the potential for correction without surgery decreases steadily.
The hip usually can be reduced immediately after birth, and with growth, the acetabulum can form a
nearly normal joint. Treatment is with devices, most commonly the Pavlik harness, which hold the affected
hips abducted and externally rotated. The Frejka pillow and other splints may help. Padded diapers and
double or triple diapering are not effective and should not be done to correct DDH.
Femoral torsion (twisting):
The femoral head may be twisted. Torsion may be either internal (femoral
anteversion—knees pointing toward each other with toes in) or external (femoral retroversion—knees
pointing in opposite directions) and is common among neonates. At birth, internal torsion can be as much
as 40° and still be normal. External torsion can also be prominent at birth and still be normal. Torsion is
recognized by laying the child prone on the examining table. The hips are rotated externally and internally.
Limitation
[Fig. 294-1.
Galeazzi sign.]
of internal rotation indicates femoral anteversion, whereas limitation of external rotation indicates femoral
retroversion.
Children with internal torsion may regularly sit in the W position (ie, knees are together and feet are
spread apart) or sleep prone with legs extended or flexed and internally rotated. These children probably
assume this position because it is more comfortable. The W sitting position was thought to worsen
torsion, but there is little evidence that the position should be discouraged or avoided. By adolescence,
internal torsion tends to gradually decrease to about 15° without intervention. Orthopedic referral and
treatment, which includes derotational osteotomy (in which the bone is broken, rotated into normal
alignment, and casted), is reserved for children who have a neurologic deficit such as spina bifida or
those in whom torsion interferes with ambulation.
External torsion may occur if in utero forces result in an abduction or external rotation of the lower
extremity. If external torsion is prominent at birth, a thorough evaluation (including x-rays or
ultrasonography) for hip dislocation is indicated. External torsion typically corrects spontaneously,
especially after children begin to stand and walk, but orthopedic referral is needed when excessive
===PAGE:3150===
torsion persists after 8 yr. Treatment includes derotational osteotomy.
Genu varum and genu valgum:
The 2 major types of knee or femoral-tibial angular deformities are
genu varum (bowlegs) and genu valgum (knock-knees). Untreated, both can cause osteoarthritis of the
knee in adulthood.
Genu varum
is common among toddlers and usually resolves spontaneously by age 18 mo. If it persists
or becomes more severe, Blount disease (tibia vara) should be suspected, and rickets and other
metabolic bone diseases should also be ruled out (. Blount disease is due to a growth
disturbance of the medial aspect of the proximal tibial growth plate; genu varum and tibial torsion may
occur. Blount disease may occur in early childhood or in adolescence (when it is associated with
overweight). Early diagnosis of Blount disease is difficult, because x-rays may be normal; the classic x-ray
finding is angulation (beaking) of the medial metaphysis. Early use of splints or braces can be effective,
but surgery with or without an external fixator is often needed.
Genu valgum
is less common and, even if severe, usually resolves spontaneously by age 9 yr. Skeletal
dysplasia or hypophosphatasia should be excluded. If marked deformity persists after age 10 yr, surgical
stapling of the medial distal femoral epiphysis is indicated.
Knee dislocation:
Anterior knee dislocation with hyperextension is rare at birth but requires emergency
treatment. It may occur with Larsen's syndrome, which consists of multiple congenital dislocations (eg,
elbows, hips, knees), clubfoot, and characteristic facies (eg, prominent forehead, depressed nasal bridge,
wide-spaced eyes), or with arthrogryposis (. The dislocation may be related to muscle
imbalance (if myelodysplasia or arthrogryposis is present) or intrauterine positioning. Ipsilateral hip
dislocation often coexists.
On examination the leg is extended and cannot be flexed more than a few degrees.
If the infant is otherwise normal, immediate treatment with daily passive flexion movements and splinting
in flexion usually results in a functional knee.
Tibial torsion:
Tibial torsion can be external (lateral) or internal (medial) twisting. External torsion occurs
normally with growth: from 0° at birth to 20° by adulthood. External torsion is rarely a problem.
Internal torsion is common at birth, but it typically resolves with growth. However, an excessive degree of
torsion may indicate a neuromuscular problem. Torsion also occurs with Blount disease (.
Persistent, excessive torsion can lead to toeing-in and bowlegs.
To evaluate for tibial torsion, the angle between the axis of the foot and the axis of the thigh is measured
with the child prone and the knees flexed to 90°. Typically the foot axis is 10° lateral relative to the thigh
axis. This angle can also be measured by seating the child and drawing an imaginary line connecting the
lateral and medial malleoli.
Talipes equinovarus:
Sometimes called clubfoot, talipes equinovarus is characterized by plantar flexion,
inward tilting of the heel (from the midline of the leg), and adduction of the forefoot (medial deviation
away from the leg's vertical axis). It results from an abnormality of the talus. It occurs in about 2/1000
births, is bilateral in up to 50% of affected children, and may occur alone or as part of a syndrome.
Developmental dysplasia of the hip is more common among these children. Similar deformities that result
from in utero positioning can be distinguished from talipes equinovarus because they can be easily
corrected passively.
Treatment requires orthopedic care, which consists initially of repeated cast applications, taping, or use
of malleable splints to normalize the foot's position. If casting is not successful and the abnormality is
severe, surgery may be required. Optimally, surgery is done before 12 mo, while the tarsal bones are still
cartilaginous. Talipes equinovarus may recur as children grow.
Talipes calcaneovalgus:
The foot is flat or convex and dorsiflexed with the heel turned outward. The
foot can easily be approximated against the lower tibia. Developmental dysplasia of the hip is more
===PAGE:3151===
common among these children. Early treatment with a cast (to place the foot in the equinovarus position)
or with corrective braces is usually successful.
Metatarsus adductus:
The forefoot turns toward the midline. The foot may be supinated at rest. Usually,
the foot can be passively abducted and everted beyond the neutral position when the sole is stimulated.
Occasionally, an affected foot is rigid, not correcting to neutral. Developmental dysplasia of the hip is
more common among these children.
The deformity usually resolves without treatment during the first year of life. If it does not, casting or
surgery (abductory midfoot osteotomy) is required.
Metatarsus varus:
The plantar surface of the foot is turned inward, so that the arch is raised. This
deformity usually results from in utero positioning. It typically does not resolve after birth and may require
corrective casting.
Muscle Abnormalities
Individual muscles or groups of muscles may be absent at birth. Muscle abnormalities can occur alone or
as part of a syndrome.
Partial or complete agenesis of the pectoralis major is common and occurs alone or with ipsilateral hand
abnormalities and various degrees of breast and nipple aplasia, as in Poland's syndrome. Poland's
syndrome may be associated with Mobius' syndrome (paralysis of the lower cranial nerves, especially the
6th, 7th, and 12th), which has been linked to autism.
In prune-belly syndrome (, ≥ 1 layers of the abdominal musculature are absent at birth; this
often occurs with severe GU abnormalities, particularly hydronephrosis. Incidence is higher in males who
often also have bilateral undescended testes. Malformations involving the feet and rectum also often
coexist. Prognosis is guarded, even with early relief of urinary tract obstruction.
Treatment depends on severity of the condition and can range from minimal intervention to reconstructive
surgery.
Neck and Back Abnormalities
Neck and back abnormalities can be caused by soft-tissue or bony injuries or by vertebral anomalies.
Vertebral anomalies can be singular or part of a syndrome.
Congenital torticollis:
The head becomes tilted at or soon after birth. The most common cause is neck
injury during delivery. Torticollis that develops within the first few days or weeks of life may result from
hematoma, fibrosis, and contracture of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle. A nontender mass may be
noted in the SCM, usually in the midsegment.
Other causes include spinal abnormalities, such as Klippel-Feil syndrome (fusion of the cervical
vertebrae, short neck, and low hairline, often with urinary tract abnormalities) or atlanto-occipital fusion.
CNS tumors, bulbar palsies, and ocular dysfunction are common neurologic causes but are rarely present
at birth
(see also Spasmodic Torticollis . Fractures, dislocations, or subluxations of the cervical
spine (especially C1 and C2) or odontoid abnormalities are rare but serious causes; permanent
neurologic damage may result from spinal cord injury.
Cervical imaging should be done to exclude bony causes, which may require stabilization.
When torticollis is due to birth trauma, frequent passive SCM stretching (rotating the head and stretching
the neck laterally to the opposite side) is indicated. Injections of botulinum toxin into the SCM may help in
refractory cases. Untreated torticollis may lead to plagiocephaly (flattening of one side of the head) and
asymmetrical facies.
Vertebral defects:
Examples are idiopathic scoliosis (, which is rarely apparent at birth, and
===PAGE:3152===
isolated vertebral defects (eg, hemivertebrae, wedge or butterfly vertebrae), which are more likely to be
diagnosed at birth. Vertebral defects should be suspected when posterior midline cutaneous, renal, or
congenital lower-limb abnormalities exist. Some syndromes or associations such as VACTERL (
v
ertebral
anomalies,
a
nal atresia,
c
ardiac malformations,
t
racheo
e
sophageal fistula,
r
enal anomalies and
r
adial
aplasia, and
l
imb anomalies) include vertebral defects.
As children grow, the spinal curve caused by a vertebral defect or defects can progress rapidly; therefore,
the spine should be monitored closely. Braces or body jackets, which may have to be worn 18 h/day, are
often necessary initially. Surgery may be needed if the curvature progresses. Because renal
abnormalities commonly coexist, renal ultrasonography is indicated for initial screening.
===PAGE:3153===
Chapter 295. Congenital Gastrointestinal Anomalies
Introduction
Most congenital GI anomalies result in some type of intestinal obstruction, frequently manifesting with
feeding difficulties, distention, and emesis at birth or within 1 or 2 days. Infants with GI malformations
have a high mortality rate, ranging from 10 to 40%; the highest rate occurs in those with congenital
diaphragmatic hernia.
A common type of anomaly is atresia, in which a segment of the GI tract fails to form or develop normally.
The most common type is esophageal atresia, followed by atresia in the jejunoileal region and in the
duodenum.
Immediate management includes bowel decompression (by continuous nasogastric suction to prevent
emesis, which can lead to aspiration pneumonia or further abdominal distention with respiratory
embarrassment) and referral to a center for neonatal surgery. Also vital are maintenance of body
temperature, prevention of hypoglycemia with IV 10% dextrose and electrolytes, and prevention or
treatment of acidosis and infections so that the infant is in optimal condition for surgery.
Because about one third of infants with a GI malformation have another congenital anomaly (up to 50% in
those with congenital diaphragmatic hernia and 70% in those with omphalocele), they should be
evaluated for malformations of other organ systems, especially of the CNS, heart, and kidneys.
High Alimentary Tract Obstruction
Esophageal, gastric, duodenal, and sometimes jejunal obstruction should be considered when excess
amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios) is diagnosed, because such obstructions prevent the fetus from
swallowing and absorbing amniotic fluid (jejunal obstruction—. An NGT should be passed
into the neonate's stomach immediately after delivery. Finding large amounts of fluid in the stomach,
especially if bile-stained, supports the diagnosis of upper GI obstruction, whereas inability to pass the
NGT into the stomach suggests esophageal atresia (or nasal obstruction [eg, choanal atresia]).
Diaphragmatic hernia sometimes causes high alimentary tract obstruction.
Esophageal Atresia
Esophageal atresia is incomplete formation of the esophagus, frequently associated with
tracheoesophageal fistula. Diagnosis is suspected by failure to pass an NGT. Treatment is
surgical repair.
Esophageal atresia is the most common GI atresia. The estimated incidence is 1 in 3000 live
births. Other
congenital malformations are present in up to 50% of cases.
There are 5 major types of esophageal atresia (see
Fig. 295-1
). Most also involve a fistula between the trachea and esophagus.
Characteristic signs are excessive secretions, coughing and cyanosis after attempts at feeding, and
aspiration pneumonia. Esophageal atresia with a distal fistula leads to abdominal distention because, as
the infant cries, air from the trachea is forced through the fistula into the lower esophagus and stomach.
Diagnosis
• Prenatal: Ultrasonography
• Postnatal: NGT placement and x-ray
Routine prenatal ultrasonography may suggest esophageal atresia. Polyhydramnios may be present but
is not diagnostic because it can occur with many other disorders. The fetal stomach bubble may be
absent but only in < 50% of cases. Less commonly, there is a dilated upper esophageal pouch, but this is
===PAGE:3154===
typically looked for only in fetuses with polyhydramnios and no stomach bubble.
After delivery, an NGT is inserted if esophageal atresia is suspected by prenatal ultra-sonography or
clinical findings; diagnosis is suggested by inability to pass the tube into the stomach. A radiopaque
catheter determines the location of the atresia on x-ray. In atypical cases, a small amount of water-soluble
contrast material may be needed to define the anatomy
[Fig. 295-1.
Types and relative frequencies of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.]
under fluoroscopy. The contrast material should be quickly aspirated back because it can cause a
chemical pneumonitis if it enters the lungs. This procedure should be done only by an experienced
radiologist at the center where neonatal surgery will be done.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
Preoperative management aims to get the infant into optimal condition for surgery and prevent aspiration
pneumonia, which makes surgical correction more hazardous. Oral feedings are withheld. Continuous
suction with a double-lumen catheter in the upper esophageal pouch prevents aspiration of swallowed
saliva. The infant should be positioned prone with the head elevated 30 to 40° and with the right side
down to facilitate gastric emptying and minimize the risk of aspirating gastric acid through the fistula. If
definitive repair must be deferred because of extreme prematurity, aspiration pneumonia, or other
congenital malformations, gastrostomy is done to decompress the stomach. Suction through the
gastrostomy tube then reduces the risk that gastric contents will reflux through the fistula into the
tracheobronchial tree.
When the infant's condition is stable, extrapleural surgical repair of the esophageal atresia and closure of
the tracheoesophageal fistula can be done. Occasionally, interposing a segment of colon between the
esophageal segments may be required.
The most common acute complications are leakage at the anastomosis site and stricture formation.
Feeding difficulties are common after successful surgical repair because of poor motility of the distal
esophageal segment, which occurs in up to 85% of cases. This poor motility predisposes the infant to
gastroesophageal re-flux. If medical management for reflux fails, a Nissen fundoplication may be required.
Diaphragmatic Hernia
Diaphragmatic hernia is protrusion of abdominal contents into the thorax through a defect in the
diaphragm. Lung compression may cause persistent pulmonary hypertension. Diagnosis is by
chest x-ray. Treatment is surgical repair.
Diaphragmatic hernia usually occurs in the posterolateral portion of the diaphragm (Bochdalek's hernia)
and is on the left side in 90% of cases. The estimated incidence is 1 in 2200 live births. Anterior hernias
(Morgagni's hernia) are far less common. Other congenital anomalies are present in about 50% of cases.
Loops of small and large bowel, stomach, liver, and spleen may protrude into the hemithorax on the
involved side. If the hernia is large, the lung on the affected side is hypoplastic. Other pulmonary
consequences include underdevelopment of the pulmonary vasculature, resulting in an elevation of
pulmonary vascular resistance and hence pulmonary hypertension. Persistent pulmonary hypertension
( leads to right-to-left shunting at the level of the foramen ovale or through a patent ductus
arteriosus, which prevents adequate oxygenation even with O
supplementation or mechanical
ventilation. Persistent pulmonary hypertension is the major cause of death among infants with congenital
diaphragmatic hernia.
Symptoms and Signs
After delivery, as the neonate cries and swallows air, the loops of intestine quickly fill with air and rapidly
===PAGE:3155===
enlarge, causing further acute respiratory embarrassment as the heart and mediastinal structures are
pushed to the right, compressing the more normal right lung. Respiratory distress is immediate in severe
cases. A scaphoid abdomen (due to displacement of abdominal viscera into the chest) is likely. Bowel
sounds (and an absence of breath sounds) may be heard over the involved hemithorax. In less severe
cases, mild respiratory difficulty develops a few hours or days later as abdominal contents progressively
herniate through a smaller diaphragmatic defect.
Diagnosis
• Sometimes prenatal ultrasonography
• Chest x-ray
Sometimes diagnosis is by prenatal ultra-sonography. After delivery, diagnosis is by chest x-ray showing
intestine protruding into the chest. In a large defect, there are numerous air-filled loops of intestine filling
the hemithorax and contralateral displacement of the heart and mediastinal structures. If the x-ray is taken
immediately after delivery before the neonate has swallowed air, the abdominal contents appear as an
opaque airless mass in the hemithorax.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
The neonate should be immediately endotracheally intubated and ventilated in the delivery room; bagand-mask ventilation may fill the intrathoracic viscera with air and worsen respiratory compromise.
Continuous nasogastric suction with a double-lumen tube prevents
swallowed air from progressing
through the GI tract and causing further lung compression. Sometimes paralytic drugs are needed to
prevent swallowing of air. Surgery is required to replace the intestine in the abdomen and to close the
diaphragmatic defect after the neonate has had optimal management of pulmonary hypertension.
Severe persistent pulmonary hypertension requires stabilization before surgery with IV NaHCO
and
inhaled nitric oxide, which may help dilate the pulmonary arteries and improve systemic oxygenation.
Recent studies show improved outcome with use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO);
however, neonates with extreme pulmonary hypoplasia still do not survive. Successful transport of a
critically ill neonate with congenital diaphragmatic hernia and persistent pulmonary hypertension is very
difficult. Therefore, if diaphragmatic hernia is diagnosed by prenatal ultrasonography, delivery at a
pediatric center with ECMO facilities is prudent.
Duodenal Obstruction
The duodenum can be obstructed by atresia, stenosis, and pressure due to an extrinsic mass.
Duodenal atresia:
This anomaly is the 3rd most common atresia of the GI tract. The estimated incidence
is 1 in 20,000 live births. Duodenal atresia is due to the failure of canalization of the embryonic
duodenum. About 30% of infants with duodenal atresia have Down syndrome. Other congenital
anomalies, particularly malrotation of the intestine, occur in 50 to 70% of cases.
Diagnosis can be suspected prenatally if there is polyhydramnios, dilated bowel, as-cites, or a
combination. Infants with duodenal atresia present with polyhydramnios, feeding difficulties, and emesis
that may be bilious. The diagnosis is suspected by symptoms and classic double-bubble x-ray findings
—one bubble is in the stomach and the other is in the proximal duodenum; little to no air is in the distal
gut. An upper GI series provides definitive diagnosis but must be done carefully by a radiologist
experienced with doing this procedure on children to avoid aspiration. Once the disorder is suspected,
infants should receive nothing by mouth, and an NGT should be placed to decompress the stomach.
Surgery is the definitive therapy.
Duodenal stenosis:
This anomaly occurs less commonly than duodenal atresia but manifests in a
similar fashion and requires surgery. It too is frequently associated with Down syndrome.
===PAGE:3156===
Choledochal cyst or annular pancreas:
These anomalies may obstruct the duodenum by extrinsic
pressure. Infants with choledochal cyst classically present with a triad of abdominal pain (a very difficult
finding to infer in the neonate), right upper quadrant mass, and jaundice. If the cyst is large, it may also
manifest with variable degrees of duodenal obstruction. Choledochal cyst is most commonly diagnosed
by ultrasonography. Treatment is surgical and requires complete excision of the cyst because of the risk
of developing cancer in the cyst remnants.
Annular pancreas
is a rare congenital anomaly in which pancreatic tissue encircles the 2nd portion of
the duodenum, causing duodenal obstruction; manifestation is usually during the neonatal period but may
be delayed until adulthood. The diagnosis can be suggested by an upper GI series and is more
definitively made with CT. Treatment is surgical.
Jejunoileal and Large-Bowel Obstruction
(See also
Meconium Ileus
on p.
and
Meconium Plug Syndrome
)
Obstruction of the jejunum and ileum can occur as the result of jejunoileal atresia, mal-rotation, intestinal
duplication, or meconium ileus. Large-bowel obstruction is typically caused by Hirschsprung's disease,
meconium plug syndrome, and colonic or anal atresia.
In 75% of cases, no history of maternal polyhydramnios exists because much of the swallowed amniotic
fluid can be absorbed from the intestine proximal to the obstruction. These disorders, other than
malrotation, intestinal duplication, and Hirschsprung's disease, typically manifest in the first few days of
life with feeding problems, abdominal distention, and emesis that may be bilious or fecal. The neonate
may pass a small amount of meconium initially but thereafter does not pass stools. Malrotation, intestinal
duplication, and Hirschsprung's disease can manifest in the first several days of life or years later.
General diagnostic approach and preoperative management include giving nothing by mouth, placing an
NGT to prevent further bowel distention or possible aspiration of vomitus, correcting fluid and electrolyte
disturbances, taking a plain abdominal x-ray, and then doing a contrast enema to delineate the anatomy
(the enema may also relieve obstruction in meconium plug syndrome or meconium ileus). For
Hirschsprung's disease, a rectal biopsy is needed.
Jejunoileal Atresia
Jejunoileal atresia is incomplete formation of the jejunum, usually caused by an ischemic insult.
There are 5 major types of jejunoileal atresia:
• Type I consists of a membrane completely occluding the lumen with the intestine intact.
• Type II is a gap in the intestine with a fibrous cord between the proximal and distal segments of
intestine.
• Type IIIA is a mesenteric gap without any connection between the segments.
• Type IIIB is jejunal atresia with absence of the distal superior mesenteric artery; the distal small bowel is
coiled like an apple peel, and the gut is short.
• Type IV consists of multiple atretic segments.
Neonates with jejunoileal atresia usually present late during day 1 or on day 2 with increasing abdominal
distention, failure to pass stools, and, finally, regurgitated feedings.
Plain abdominal x-rays are done; they may reveal dilated loops of small bowel with air-fluid levels and a
paucity of air in the colon and rectum. Because about 10% of patients also have cystic fibrosis (nearly
100% if meconium ileus is also present), testing for that disease ( should be done.
===PAGE:3157===
Treatment
• Surgical repair
Preoperative management consists of placing an NGT, giving nothing by mouth, and providing IV fluids.
Surgical repair is the definitive therapy. During surgery, the entire intestine should be inspected for
multiple areas of atresia. The atretic portion is resected, usually with a primary anastomosis. If the
proximal portion of the ileum is extremely dilated and difficult to anastomose to the distal, unused part of
the intestine, it is sometimes safer to do a double-barreled ileostomy and defer anastomosis until the
caliber of the distended proximal intestine has diminished.
Prognosis is based on the length of remaining small bowel and the presence of the ileocecal valve.
Infants who subsequently develop short bowel syndrome require TPN for extended periods. They should
be provided continuous enteral feedings to promote gut adaptation, maximize absorption, and minimize
the use of TPN. Infants should also be provided small amounts of nutrition by mouth to maintain sucking
and swallowing.
Malrotation of the Bowel
Malrotation of the bowel is failure of the bowel to assume its normal place in the abdomen
during intrauterine development.
During embryonic development, the primitive bowel protrudes from the abdominal cavity. As it returns to
the abdomen, the large bowel normally rotates counterclockwise, with the cecum coming to rest in the
right lower quadrant. Incomplete rotation, in which the cecum ends up elsewhere (usually in the right
upper quadrant or midepigastrium), may cause bowel obstruction due to retroperito-neal bands (Ladd's
bands) that stretch across the duodenum or due to a volvulus of the small bowel, which, lacking its
normal peritoneal attachment, twists on its narrow, stalk-like mesentery. Other malformations occur in 30
to 60% of patients, most commonly other GI malformations (eg, gastroschisis, omphalocele,
diaphragmatic hernia, intestinal atresia).
Patients with malrotation can present in infancy or in adulthood with acute abdominal pain and bilious
emesis, with an acute volvulus, with typical reflux symptoms, or with chronic abdominal pain. Bilious
emesis in an infant is an emergency and should be evaluated immediately to make sure the infant does
not have malrotation and a midgut volvulus; untreated, the risk of bowel infarction and subsequent short
bowel syndrome or death is high.
Plain films of the abdomen should be done immediately. If they show dilated small bowel, a paucity of
bowel gas distal to the duodenum, or both (suggesting a midgut volvulus), further diagnosis and treatment
must be done emergently. Barium enema typically identifies malrotation by showing the cecum outside the
right lower quadrant. If the diagnosis remains uncertain, an upper GI series can be done cautiously.
The presence of malrotation and midgut volvulus is an emergency requiring immediate surgery, which
consists of Ladd's procedure with lysis of the retroperitoneal bands and relief of the midgut volvulus.
Intestinal Duplication
Intestinal duplications are tubular structures attached to the intestines that share a common
blood supply; their lining resembles that of the GI tract.
Intestinal duplications are uncommon. The most common site of duplication is the jejunum and ileum
followed by the esophagus, stomach, colon, and duodenum. Colonic duplication is often associated with
anomalies of the urogenital system. Intestinal duplications usually manifest in the 1st or 2nd yr of life.
Duplications can be asymptomatic or cause obstructive symptoms, chronic pain, or abdominal mass. If
they are detected, treatment is surgical with complete resection of the duplicated portion.
Hirschsprung's Disease
===PAGE:3158===
(Congenital Megacolon)
Hirschsprung's disease is a congenital anomaly of innervation of the lower intestine, usually
limited to the colon, resulting in partial or total functional obstruction. Symptoms are obstipation
and distention. Diagnosis is by barium enema and biopsy. Treatment is surgical.
Hirschsprung's disease is caused by congenital absence of Meissner's and Auerbach's autonomic plexus
in the intestinal wall. The estimated incidence is 1 in 5000 live births. Disease is usually limited to the
distal colon but can involve the entire colon or even the entire large and small bowel. Males are more
commonly affected unless the entire colon is involved, in which case there is no gender difference.
Peristalsis in the involved segment is absent or abnormal, resulting in continuous smooth muscle spasm
and partial or complete obstruction with accumulation of intestinal contents and massive dilation of the
more proximal, normally innervated intestine. Skip lesions almost never occur.
Symptoms and Signs
Patients most commonly present early in life; 15% in the first month, 60% by age 1 yr, and 85% by age 4
yr. Infants present with failure to pass meconium in the first 24 h of life, obstipation, abdominal distention,
and, finally, vomiting as in other forms of distal bowel obstruction. Occasionally, infants with ultra-short
segment aganglionosis have only mild or intermittent constipation, often with intervening bouts of mild
diarrhea, resulting in delay in diagnosis. In older infants, symptoms and signs may include anorexia, lack
of a physiologic urge to defecate, and, on digital rectal examination, an empty rectum with stool palpable
higher up in the colon and an explosive passage of stool upon withdrawal of the examining finger (blast
sign). The infant may also fail to thrive.
Diagnosis
• Barium enema
• Rectal biopsy
Diagnosis should be made as soon as possible. The longer the disease goes untreated, the greater the
chance of developing Hirschsprung's enterocolitis (toxic megacolon), which may be fulminant and fatal
(see below). Most cases can be diagnosed in early infancy.
Initial approach is typically with barium enema or sometimes rectal suction biopsy. Barium enema may
show a transition in diameter between the dilated, normally innervated colon proximal to the narrowed
distal segment (which lacks normal innervation). Barium enema should be done without prior preparation,
which can dilate the abnormal segment, rendering the test nondiagnostic. Because characteristic findings
may not be present in the neonatal period, a 24-h post-evacuation x-ray should be taken; if the colon is
still filled with barium, Hirschsprung's disease is likely. A rectal suction biopsy can disclose the absence of
ganglion cells. Acetylcholinesterase staining can be done to highlight the enlarged nerve trunks. Some
centers also can do rectal manometrics, which can reveal the dysmotility characteristic of the abnormal
innervation. Definitive diagnosis requires a full-thickness biopsy of the rectum.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
Treatment in the neonate typically involved a colostomy proximal to the aganglionic segment to
decompress the colon and allow the neonate to grow before the 2nd stage of the procedure. Later
resection of the entire aganglionic portion of the colon and a pull-through procedure was done. However,
a number of centers now do a 1-stage procedure in the neonatal period. Results using laparoscopic
technique are similar to those of the open method and are associated with shorter hospitalizations, earlier
initiation of feeding, and less pain.
After definitive repair, the prognosis is good, although a number of infants have chronic dysmotility with
===PAGE:3159===
constipation, obstructive problems, or both.
Hirschsprung's Enterocolitis
(Toxic Megacolon)
Hirschsprung's enterocolitis is a life-threatening complication of Hirschsprung's disease
resulting in a grossly enlarged colon, often followed by sepsis and shock.
The etiology of Hirschsprung's enterocolitis seems to be marked proximal dilatation secondary to
obstruction, with thinning of the colonic wall, bacterial overgrowth, and trans-location of gut bacteria.
Shock can develop, and death can follow rapidly; mortality rate is 10%. Close monitoring of infants with
Hirschsprung's disease is therefore essential.
Hirschsprung's enterocolitis occurs most commonly in the first several months of life before surgical
correction but can occur postoperatively, typically in the first year after surgery. Infants present with fever,
abdominal distention, diarrhea (which may be bloody), and, subsequently, obstipation.
Initial treatment is supportive with fluid resuscitation, decompression with an NGT and rectal tube, and
broad-spectrum antibiotics to include anaerobic coverage (eg, a combination of ampicillin, gentamicin,
and clindamycin). Some experts advocate saline enemas to clean out the colon, but this must be done
carefully so as not to increase colonic pressure and cause perforation. Surgery is the definitive treatment
for infants who have not yet undergone surgical repair, as well as for infants with perforation or necrotic
gut.
Anal Atresia
Anal atresia is an imperforate anus.
A fistula often extends from the anal pouch to the perineum or the urethra in males and to the vagina, the
fourchette, or, rarely, the bladder in females. The blind anus and the skin of the perineum may be several
centimeters apart or separated by just a thin membrane of skin covering the anal opening.
Anal atresia is obvious on routine physical examination of the neonate because the anus is not patent. If
the diagnosis is missed and the neonate is fed, signs of distal bowel obstruction soon develop.
The urine should be filtered and examined for meconium, indicating the presence of a fistula to the
urinary tract. Plain x-rays and fistulograms with the neonate in a lateral prone position can define the level
of the lesion. A cutaneous fistula generally indicates low atresia. In such cases, definitive repair using a
perineal approach is possible. If no perineal fistula exists, a high lesion is likely.
Definitive repair is usually deferred until the infant is older and the structures to be repaired are larger.
Until then, a colostomy is done to relieve the obstruction.
Defects in Abdominal Wall Closure
Several congenital defects involve the abdominal wall, allowing protrusion of the viscera.
Omphalocele
An omphalocele is a protrusion of abdominal viscera from a midline defect at the base of the
umbilicus.
In omphalocele, the herniated viscera are covered by a thin membrane and may be small (only a few
loops of intestine) or may contain most of the abdominal viscera (intestine, stomach, liver). Immediate
dangers are drying of the viscera, hypothermia and dehydration due to evaporation of water from the
exposed viscera, and infection of the peritoneal surfaces. Infants with omphalocele have a very high
incidence of other congenital anomalies (up to 70%), including
===PAGE:3160===
• Bowel atresia
• Chromosomal abnormalities (eg, Down syndrome)
• Cardiac and renal anomalies
Omphalocele can be detected by routine prenatal ultrasonography; if the disorder is present, delivery
should be at a tertiary care center by personnel experienced in dealing with this disorder and the other
associated congenital anomalies.
At delivery, the exposed viscera should be immediately covered with a sterile, moist, nonadherent
dressing (eg, medicated petrolatum gauze) to maintain sterility and prevent evaporation.
The infant is evaluated for associated anomalies before surgical repair of the omphalocele. Primary
closure is done when feasible. With a large omphalocele, the abdominal cavity may be too small to
accommodate the viscera. In this case, the viscera are covered by a pouch or silo of polymeric silicone
sheeting, which is progressively reduced in size over several days as the abdominal capacity slowly
increases, until all of the viscera are enclosed within the abdominal cavity.
Gastroschisis
Gastroschisis is protrusion of the abdominal viscera through an abdominal wall defect, usually
to the right of the umbilical cord insertion.
The estimated incidence is 1 in 2000 live births (more common than omphalocele). In gastroschisis, unlike
omphalocele, there is no membranous covering over the intestine, which is markedly edematous and
erythematous and is often enclosed in a fibrin mat. These findings indicate long-standing inflammation
due to the intestine being directly exposed to amniotic fluid (ie, chemical peritonitis). Infants with
gastroschisis have low incidence of associated congenital anomalies other than malrotation. As in
omphalocele, gastroschisis can be detected by prenatal ultrasonography, and delivery should take place
at a tertiary care center. Surgery is similar to that for omphalocele. It often takes several weeks before GI
function recovers and oral feedings can be given; occasionally, infants have long-term problems caused
by abnormal intestinal motility.
===PAGE:3161===
Chapter 296. Congenital Renal and Genitourinary Anomalies
Introduction
Congenital anatomic anomalies of the GU tract are more common than those of any other organ system.
Urinary tract anomalies predispose to many complications, including infection, obstruction, stasis,
calculus formation, and impaired renal function. Genital anomalies may cause sexual dysfunction or
impaired fertility. Treatment of GU anomalies is often surgical.
Some congenital renal anomalies (eg, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease and medullary cystic
disease [see
Chapter 234], hereditary nephritis [see p.]) typically do not manifest until adulthood.
Renal Anomalies
Renal agenesis:
Bilateral renal agenesis as part of a syndrome of oligohydramnios, pulmonary
hypoplasia, and extremity and facial anomalies (classic Potter syndrome) is fatal within minutes to hours.
Many are stillborn.
Unilateral renal agenesis is not uncommon and accounts for about 5% of renal anomalies. It usually is
accompanied by ureteral agenesis with absence of the ipsilateral trigone and ureteral orifice. No
treatment is necessary; compensatory hypertrophy of the solitary kidney maintains normal renal function.
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease:
Incidence of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney
disease is about 1/10,000 to 1/20,000 births. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease is much more
common, occurring in about 1/500 to 1/1000 live births (.
Autosomal recessive disease affects
• Kidneys
• Liver
Kidneys are usually greatly enlarged and contain small cysts; renal failure is common in childhood.
The liver is enlarged and has periportal fibrosis, bile duct proliferation, and scattered cysts; the remainder
of the hepatic parenchyma is normal. Fibrosis causes portal hypertension by age 5 to 10 yr, but hepatic
function is normal or minimally impaired.
Disease severity and progression vary. Severe disease may manifest prenatally or soon after birth or in
early childhood with renal-related symptoms; less severely affected patients present in late childhood or
adolescence with hepatic-related symptoms.
Affected neonates have a protuberant abdomen with huge, firm, smooth, symmetric kidneys. Severely
affected neonates commonly have pulmonary hypoplasia secondary to the in utero effects of renal
dysfunction and oligohydramnios.
In patients aged 5 to 10 yr, signs of portal hypertension, such as esophageal and gastric varices and
hypersplenism, occur. If the patient presents in adolescence, nephromegaly is less marked, renal
insufficiency may be mild to moderate, and the major symptoms are those related to portal hypertension.
Diagnosis may be difficult, especially without a family history. Ultrasonography may show renal or hepatic
cysts; definitive diagnosis may require biopsy. Ultrasonography in late pregnancy usually allows
presumptive in utero diagnosis.
Many neonates die in the first few days or weeks of life from pulmonary insufficiency. Most who survive
develop progressive renal failure often requiring renal replacement therapy. Experience with renal
transplantation with or without hepatic transplantation is limited. When transplantation is done,
hypersplenism must be controlled ( to obviate difficulty with hypersplenism-induced
===PAGE:3162===
leukopenia, which increases the risk of systemic infection. Portal hypertension may be treated by
portacaval or splenorenal shunts, which reduce morbidity but not mortality.
Duplication anomalies:
Supernumerary collecting systems may be unilateral or bilateral and may
involve the renal pelvis and ureters (accessory renal pelvis, double or triple pelvis and ureter), calyx, or
ureteral orifice. Duplex kidney, a single renal mass with > 1 collecting system, differs from a fused kidney,
which involves fusion of 2 renal parenchymal masses. Some duplication anomalies have ureteral ectopy
with or without ureterocele. Management depends on the anatomy and function of each separately
drained segment. Surgery may be needed to correct obstruction or vesicoureteral reflux.
Fusion anomalies:
With fusion anomalies, the kidneys are joined, but the ureters enter the bladder on
each side. These anomalies increase the risk of ureteropelvic junction obstruction,
vesicoureteral reflux,
congenital renal cystic dysplasia (, and injury caused by anterior abdominal trauma.
Horseshoe kidney, the most common fusion anomaly, occurs when renal parenchyma on each side of the
vertebral column is joined at the corresponding (usually lower) poles; an isthmus of renal parenchyma or
fibrous tissue joins at the midline. The ureters course medially and anteriorly over this isthmus and
generally drain well. Obstruction, if present, is usually secondary to insertion of the ureters high in the
renal pelvis. Pyeloplasty relieves the obstruction and can be done without resecting the isthmus.
Crossed fused renal ectopia is the 2nd most common fusion anomaly. The renal parenchyma
(representing both kidneys) is on one side of the vertebral column. One of the ureters crosses the midline
and enters the bladder on the side opposite the kidneys. When ureteropelvic junction obstruction is
present, pyeloplasty is the treatment of choice.
Fused pelvic kidney (pancake kidney) is much less common. A single pelvic kidney is served by 2
collecting systems and ureters. If obstruction is present, reconstruction is needed.
Malrotation:
Malrotation is usually of little clinical significance. Ultrasonography often shows
hydronephrosis, but diagnosis is best made with IVU, which identifies an axis shift and defines the
collecting system anatomy.
Multicystic dysplastic kidney:
In this condition, a nonfunctioning renal unit consists of
noncommunicating cysts with intervening solid tissue composed of fibrosis, primitive tubules, and foci of
cartilage. Usually, ureteral atresia is also present. Uncommonly, the kidney develops tumors or infection,
and hypertension may develop. Most experts recommend observation unless solid tissue is extensive or
unusual-appearing on ultrasonography, in which case the kidney may be removed.
Renal dysplasia:
In renal dysplasia (a histologic diagnosis), the renal vasculature, tubules, collecting
ducts, or drainage apparatus develops abnormally. Diagnosis is by biopsy. If dysplasia is segmental,
treatment is often unnecessary. If dysplasia is extensive, renal dysfunction may necessitate nephrologic
care, including renal replacement therapy.
Renal ectopia:
Renal ectopia (abnormal renal location) usually results when a kidney fails to ascend
from its origin in the true pelvis; a rare exception occurs with a superiorly ascended (thoracic) kidney.
Pelvic ectopia increases the incidence of ureteropelvic junction obstruction, vesicoureteral reflux, and
multicystic renal dysplasia. Obstruction is corrected surgically. Severe reflux can be corrected surgically
when indicated (if causing hypertension, recurrent infections, or renal growth retardation).
Renal hypoplasia:
Hypoplasia usually occurs because inadequate ureteral bud branching causes an
underdeveloped, small kidney with histologically normal nephrons. If hypoplasia is segmental,
hypertension can occur, and ablative surgery may be needed.
Ureteral Anomalies
Ureteral anomalies frequently occur with renal anomalies but may occur independently. Complications
include
===PAGE:3163===
• Obstruction, infection, and calculus formation (due to urinary stasis)
• Urinary incontinence (due to abnormal termination of the ureter in the urethra, perineum, or vagina)
Diagnosis may be suggested by abnormalities on routine prenatal ultrasonography (eg, hydronephrosis)
and occasionally by physical examination (eg, finding an external ectopic ureteral orifice). However, many
anomalies are first suspected when children develop UTIs. Ureteral anomalies should be suspected in
children with an episode of pyelonephritis or children with recurrent UTIs. Testing typically involves
ultrasonography of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder before and after voiding, and then voiding
cystourethrography.
Treatments are surgical.
Duplication anomalies:
Partial or complete duplication of one or both ureters may occur with duplication
of the ipsilateral renal pelvis. The ureter from the upper pole of the kidney opens at a more caudal
location than the orifice of the lower pole ureter. Ectopia or stenosis of one or both orifices, vesicoureteral
reflux into the lower ureter or both ureters, and ureterocele may occur. Surgery may be necessary if there
is obstruction, vesicoureteral reflux, or urinary incontinence.
Ectopic orifices:
Openings of single or duplicated ureters may be malpositioned on the lateral bladder
wall, distally along the trigone, in the bladder neck, in the female urethra distal to the sphincter (leading to
continuous incontinence despite a normal voiding pattern), in the genital system (prostate and seminal
vesicle in the male, uterus or vagina in the female), or externally. Lateral ectopic orifices frequently lead to
vesicoureteral reflux, whereas distal ectopic orifices more often cause obstruction and incontinence.
Surgery is needed for obstruction and incontinence and sometimes for vesicoureteral reflux.
Retrocaval ureter:
Anomalous development of the vena cava (pre-ureteric vena cava) allows the
infrarenal vena cava to form anterior to the ureter (usually the right); a retrocaval ureter on the left occurs
only with persistence of the left cardinal vein system or with complete situs inversus. Retrocaval ureter
can cause ureteral obstruction. For significant ureteral obstruction, the ureter is surgically divided with
uretero-ureteral anastomosis anterior to the vena cava or iliac vessel.
Stenosis:
Narrowing may occur at any location in the ureter, most frequently at the ureteropelvic junction
and less commonly at the ureterovesical junction (primary megaureter). Consequences include infection,
hematuria, and obstruction. Stenoses often diminish as the child grows.
In primary megaureter, ureteral tapering and reimplantation may be needed when dilation increases or
infection or obstruction occurs. In ureteropelvic junction obstruction, pyeloplasty (excision of the
obstructed segment and reanastomosis) may be done by open, laparoscopic, or robotic techniques.
Ureterocele:
Prolapse of the lower end of the ureter into the bladder with pinpoint obstruction may
cause progressive ureterectasis, hydronephrosis, infection, occasional calculus formation, and impaired
renal function. Treatment options include endoscopic transurethral incision and open repair.
When a ureterocele involves the upper pole of duplex ureters, treatment depends on function in that renal
segment, because of the significant incidence of renal dysplasia. Removal of the affected renal segment
and ureter may be preferable to obstruction repair if no segmental renal function is found or if significant
renal dysplasia is suspected.
Vesicoureteral Reflux
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is retrograde passage of urine from the bladder back into the ureter
and collecting system.
Etiology
VUR is most often due to congenital anomalous development of the ureterovesical junction. Incomplete
development of the intramural ureteral tunnel causes failure of the normal flap valve mechanism at the
===PAGE:3164===
ureterovesical junction that permits reflux of bladder urine into the ureter and renal pelvis. Reflux can
occur even when the tunnel is ordinarily sufficient if bladder outlet obstruction increases intravesical
pressures.
Pathophysiology
Reflux of urine from the bladder into the ureter may damage the upper urinary tract by bacterial infection
and occasionally by increased hydrostatic pressure. Bacteria in the lower urinary tract can easily be
transmitted by reflux to the upper tract, leading to recurrent parenchymal infection with potential scarring
and renal dysfunction. VUR is a common cause of UTI in children; about 30 to 40% of infants and
toddlers with UTI have VUR.
Chronically elevated emptying pressures (> 40 cm H
O) and increased bladder volume and pressure
often cause progressive kidney damage, even without infection or reflux.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs are typically those of UTI; these may include fever, abdominal or flank pain, dysuria
or flank pain with voiding, frequency, and urgency.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography
• Voiding cystourethrography
• Sometimes radioisotope scan
Urinalysis and culture are done to detect infection; pyuria, hematuria, proteinuria, and bacteriuria may be
present.
Children typically should have ultrasonography of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder before and after
voiding, and then voiding cystourethrography. Renal ultrasonography evaluates kidneys for size,
hydronephrosis, and scarring, and voiding cystourethrography is best to diagnose bladder outlet
obstruction. A radioisotope cystogram may be used to monitor reflux. Renal cortical involvement with
acute infection or scarring is precisely delineated with succimer (dimercaptosuccinic acid) nuclear scans
when indicated. Urodynamic studies may show elevated filling and voiding pressures in the bladder.
Reflux findings on voiding cystourethrogram are graded on a scale from I to V (see
Table 280-1
. Clinical severity can be classified based on reflux severity. However, the grades
of reflux can be affected by bladder capacity.
• Mild: Grades I and II
• Moderate: Grade III
• Severe: Grades IV and V
Treatment
• Antibiotic prophylaxis
• Sometimes injection of a bulking agent or ureteral reimplantation
Mild to moderate VUR often resolves spontaneously over months to several years while daily antibacterial
prophylaxis (eg, with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, amoxicillin, nitrofurantoin, a cephalosporin, or
sulfisoxazole) is maintained; it is very important to keep children free of infection.
===PAGE:3165===
Severe reflux accompanied by high-pressure storage of urine in the bladder or high intravesical pressures
with voiding is treated by lowering bladder pressures with drugs (eg, oxybutynin), behavioral modification
using perineal electromyography, or both.
Reflux with complications (eg, infection, impaired renal growth, renal scarring) is treated with endoscopic
subtrigonal injection of a bulking agent (eg, dextranomer/hyaluronic acid) or ureteral reimplantation.
Obstruction is also surgically repaired.
Monitoring:
Reflux is monitored by voiding cystourethrography or radioisotope cystography every 1 or 2
yr depending on severity of the reflux.
Renal growth is monitored by annual ultra-sonography until age 5, then every other year until
spontaneous resolution or for 3 yr after surgical correction.
Bladder Anomalies
Congenital urinary bladder anomalies often occur without other GU abnormalities. They may cause
infection, retention, incontinence, and reflux. Symptomatic anomalies may require surgery.
Bladder diverticula:
Bladder diverticula predispose to UTIs and may coexist with vesicoureteral reflux.
They are usually discovered during evaluation of recurrent UTIs in young children. Diagnosis is by
voiding cystourethrography. Surgical removal of diverticula and reconstruction of the bladder wall may be
needed.
Exstrophy:
The bladder is open suprapubically, and urine drips from the opening rather than through the
urethra. The bladder mucosa is continuous with the abdominal skin, and the pubic bones are separated.
Despite the seriousness of the deformity, normal renal function usually is maintained. The bladder can
usually be reconstructed and returned to the pelvis, although vesicoureteral reflux invariably occurs and is
managed as needed. Continent urinary diversion may be used to treat a bladder reservoir that fails to
expand sufficiently or has sphincter insufficiency. Reconstruction of the genitals is required.
Megacystis syndrome:
In this syndrome, a large, thin-walled, smooth bladder without evident outlet
obstruction develops, usually in girls. Megacystis syndrome is poorly understood. The syndrome may be
a manifestation of a primary myoneural defect, especially when intestinal obstruction (megacystismicrocolon, intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome) is also present. Symptoms are related to UTIs, and
vesicoureteral reflux is common. Ultrasonography with the bladder empty may disclose normal-appearing
upper tracts, but voiding cystourethrography may show reflux with massive upper tract dilation. Ureteral
reim-plantation may be effective, although some patients benefit from antibacterial prophylaxis, timed
voiding with behavioral modification, intermittent catheterization, or a combination.
Penile and Urethral Anomalies
Congenital anomalies of the urethra in boys usually involve anatomic abnormalities of the penis and vice
versa. In girls, urethral anomalies may exist without other external genital abnormalities. Surgical repair is
needed when function is impaired or cosmetic correction is desired.
Chordee:
This anomaly is ventral or rotational curvature of the penis, which is most apparent with
erection and is caused by fibrous tissue along the usual course of the corpus spongiosum. It is often
associated with hypospadias.
Epispadias:
The urethra opens on the dorsum of the glans or penile shaft, or at the penopubic junction.
In girls, the urethra opens between the clitoris and labia or in the abdomen. Epispadias can be partial (in
15%) or complete; the most severe form occurs with bladder exstrophy (see above). Symptoms and signs
are incontinence, reflux, and UTIs. Treatment is surgical. In partial epispadias, prognosis for continence
with treatment is good. In the complete form, surgical reconstruction of the penis alone may lead to
persistent incontinence; bladder outlet reconstruction is required to achieve complete urinary control.
Hypospadias:
This anomaly is caused by failure of tubularization and fusion of the urethral groove. It
===PAGE:3166===
almost always occurs in boys, in whom the urethra opens onto the underside of the penile shaft, at the
penoscrotal junction, between the scrotal folds, or in the perineum. The foreskin fails to become
circumferential and appears as a dorsal hood. Hypospadias is frequently associated with chordee.
Prognosis for functional and cosmetic correction is good. Outpatient surgery at about 6 mo of age
involves construction of a neourethra using penile shaft skin or foreskin and repair of the chordee.
Hypospadias is extremely rare in girls; the urethra opens into the vaginal introitus.
Phimosis and paraphimosis:
Phimosis, the most common penile abnormality, is constriction of the
foreskin with inability to retract over the glans; it may be congenital or acquired. Paraphimosis is inability
of the retracted constricting foreskin to be reduced distally over the glans. (See full discussion )
Phimosis may respond to topical corticosteroids and gentle stretching; some patients require
circumcision.
Paraphimosis should be reduced immediately because the constricting foreskin functions as a tourniquet,
causing edema and pain. Firm circumferential compression of the edematous foreskin with the fingers
may reduce edema sufficiently to allow the foreskin to be restored to its normal position by pushing the
glans back through the tight foreskin using both thumbs. If this technique is ineffective, a dorsal slit done
using a local anesthetic relieves the condition temporarily. Circumcision is then done when edema has
resolved.
Other penile anomalies:
Less common anomalies include penile agenesis, duplication, and
lymphedema. Many anomalies also involve urethral abnormality, or other anomalies, such as exstrophy.
Treatment of most anomalies is surgical and may include complete removal of the genitals with sex
reassignment.
Microphallus results from androgen deficiency or insensitivity; in boys with deficiency, treatment is
testosterone supplementation.
Urethral meatal stenosis:
Most commonly acquired after newborn circumcision in boys, urethral meatal
stenosis is occasionally congenital and associated with hypospadias. Meatotomy is needed for a
significantly deflected stream or for a pinpoint stream.
Urethral stricture:
Urethral stricture causes obstruction along some part of the length of the urethra. It
almost always occurs in boys, is usually acquired, and typically results from a crush injury after straddle
trauma. Congenital urethral stricture may manifest similarly to urethral valves and may be diagnosed by
prenatal ultrasonography, or postnatally by symptoms and signs of outlet obstruction or patent urachus
and is confirmed by retrograde urethrography. Initial management is often with endoscopic urethrotomy,
although open urethroplasty may be necessary.
Urethral valves:
In boys, folds in the posterior urethra may act as valves impairing urine flow. Urethral
valves can cause urinary hesitancy and a weak urinary stream, UTI, overflow incontinence, myogenic
bladder malfunction, vesicoureteral reflux, upper urinary tract damage, and renal insufficiency. They
occasionally occur with a patent urachus. Diagnosis is often made by routine prenatal ultrasonography;
cases suspected postnatally are confirmed by voiding cystourethrography. Surgery (usually via
endoscopy) is done at time of diagnosis to prevent progressive renal deterioration.
A much less common anomaly, diverticulum of the anterior urethra, may act as a valve (anterior urethral
valve) and is also treated endoscopically.
Vaginal Anomalies
Most congenital anomalies of the vagina are rare. Vaginal anomalies include vaginal agenesis,
obstruction, duplication, and fusion. Duplication and fusion anomalies have numerous manifestations (eg,
as 2 uteri, 2 cervices, and 2 vaginas, or 2 uteri with 1 cervix and 1 vagina). Girls may also have urogenital
===PAGE:3167===
sinus anomalies, in which urinary and genital tracts open into a common channel, and cloacal anomalies,
in which urinary, genital, and anorectal tracts open into a common channel.
Imperforate hymen manifests as a bulge at the location of the vaginal opening due to collection of uterine
and vaginal secretions caused by maternal estrogens. Treatment is surgical drainage.
Diagnosis of most is by physical examination, ultrasonography, and retrograde contrast studies.
Duplication and fusion anomalies may not require treatment, but others require surgical correction.
Testicular and Scrotal Anomalies
The most common anomalies are
• Congenital hydrocele
• Undescended testes (cryptorchidism)
• Testicular torsion (
Rare anomalies include scrotal agenesis, hypoplasia, ectopia, or hemangioma; penoscrotal transposition;
and bifid scrotum.
Congenital hydrocele:
A congenital hydrocele is a collection of fluid in the scrotum between layers of
the tunica vaginalis. It may be
isolated or may communicate with the abdominal cavity through a patent
processus vaginalis (a potential hernia space). Hydrocele manifests as a painless, enlarged scrotum. The
condition may resolve spontaneously but usually requires repair if it persists after 6 to 9 mo or if it
enlarges.
Cryptorchidism
(Undescended Testes)
Cryptorchidism is failure of one or both testes to descend into the scrotum; it is typically
accompanied by inguinal hernia. Diagnosis is by examination, sometimes followed by
laparoscopy or a human chorionic gonadotropin stimulation test. Treatment is surgical
orchiopexy.
Cryptorchidism affects about 3% of term infants and up to 30% of preterm infants; two thirds of
undescended testes spontaneously descend within the first 4 mo of life. Thus, about 0.8% of male infants
require treatment.
Pathophysiology
Normally, the testes develop at 7 to 8 wk gestation and remain cephalad to the internal inguinal ring until
about 28 wk, when they begin their descent into the scrotum guided by condensed mesenchyme (the
gubernaculum). Onset of descent is mediated by hormonal (eg, androgens, mullerian-inhibiting factor),
physical (eg, gubernacular regression, intra-abdominal pressure), and environmental (eg, maternal
exposure to estrogenic or antiandrogenic substances) factors.
A true undescended testis remains in the inguinal canal along the path of descent or is less commonly
present in the abdominal cavity or retroperitoneum. An ectopic testis is one that descends normally
through the external ring but diverts to an abnormal location and lies outside the normal course of
descent (eg, suprapubically, in the superficial inguinal pouch, within the perineum, or along the inner
aspect of the thigh).
Complications:
Undescended testes may cause subfertility and are associated with testicular
carcinoma, mainly in the undescended testis and particularly with intra-abdominal malposition. However,
in patients with one undescended testis, 10% of cancers develop on the normal side. In untreated cases
===PAGE:3168===
of intra-abdominal testes, testicular torsion may occur, manifesting as an acute abdomen. Almost all
neonates who present with an undescended testis at birth also have an inguinal hernia (patent
processus).
Etiology
Undescended testes are almost always idiopathic. About 10% of cases are bilateral; suspicion should be
high for female virilization caused by congenital adrenal hyperplasia in phenotypic boys with bilateral,
nonpalpable, undescended testes at birth (especially if associated with hypospadias).
Symptoms and Signs
In about 80% of cases, the scrotum is empty at birth; in the remainder of cases, a testis is palpable in the
scrotum at birth but appears to ascend with linear growth because of an ectopic gubernacular attachment
that restrains it from following the normal "descent" of the scrotum. Inguinal hernia rarely causes a
palpable mass lesion, but the patent process is often detectable, especially in infants (but less commonly
in those with ectopic undescended testes).
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes laparoscopy or a human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulation test
Undescended and ectopic testes must be distinguished from hypermobile (retractile) testes, which are
present in the scrotum but easily retract into the inguinal canal. Diagnosis is by physical examination; a
warm environment, warm examiner's hands, and a relaxed patient are important to avoid stimulating
testicular retraction.
In patients with a unilateral nonpalpable testis, a descended testis that is larger than expected suggests
an atrophic undescended testis; confirmation requires abdominal laparoscopy.
For bilateral nonpalpable testes, an hCG stimulation test is done. Patients receive injections of hCG 2000
IU IM once/day for 3 to 4 days; blood levels of testosterone, luteinizing hormone (LH), and folliclestimulating hormone (FSH) are obtained before and testosterone levels within 24 h of the final injection.
Patients with bilateral cryptorchidism should respond by producing testosterone, whereas those without
testes (including genotypic females) produce none. In addition, basal levels of FSH and possibly LH are
elevated.
Treatment
• Surgical repair
For a palpable undescended testis, treatment is surgical orchiopexy, in which the testis is brought into the
scrotum and sutured
into place; the associated inguinal hernia also is repaired. For nonpalpable
undescended testis, abdominal laparoscopy is done; if the testis is located, it is surgically fixed in place,
or if it is atrophic, the tissue is removed. Surgery should be done at about 6 mo of age because early
intervention improves fertility potential and may reduce cancer risk. Also, the shorter the child, the shorter
the distance necessary to place the testis into the scrotum. Atrophic undescended testes are likely the
result of prenatal testicular torsion.
hCG 250 to 1000 IU IM 2 or 3 times/wk for up to 6 wk may stimulate local testosterone production and
precipitate testicular descent, either complete or enough to make the testis palpable, increase its blood
supply, or both, making surgery easier.
No intervention is needed for a retractile testis as long as the spermatic cord length is sufficient to allow
the testis to rest in a dependent scrotal position without traction when the cremasteric reflex is not
stimulated. Hypermobility usually resolves without treatment by puberty when increased testicular size
===PAGE:3169===
makes retraction more difficult.
Prune-Belly Syndrome
(Triad Syndrome)
Prune-belly syndrome consists of abdominal muscle deficiency, urinary tract abnormalities, and
intra-abdominal undescended testes.
The name "prune-belly syndrome" derives from the characteristic wrinkled appearance of the abdominal
wall in neonates. The cause of this congenital syndrome, which occurs primarily but not exclusively in
males, is unclear. Urinary abnormalities may include hydro-nephrosis, megaureters, vesicoureteral reflux,
and urethral abnormalities. Severe cases may involve renal failure, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and
stillbirth.
Diagnosis is often made during routine prenatal ultrasonography. Further evaluation includes voiding
cystourethrography, ultra-sonography, and isotope renography.
Urinary tract abnormalities may require open surgical reconstruction; orchidopexy can be done at the
same time. If no urinary intervention is necessary, laparoscopic orchidopexy is done in childhood.
===PAGE:3170===
Chapter 297. Congenital Renal Transport Abnormalities
Introduction
Defects in renal tubular transport can lead to a number of metabolic disorders, some of which are serious.
For a discussion of renal transport abnormalities that are not congenital, see
Chapter 237
.
Bartter Syndrome and Gitelman's Syndrome
Bartter syndrome and Gitelman's syndrome are characterized by fluid, electrolyte, and
hormonal abnormalities, including renal K, Na, Cl, and H wasting; hypokalemia;
hyperaldosteronism; hyperreninemia; and normal BP. Findings include electrolyte, growth, and
sometimes neuromuscular abnormalities. Diagnosis is assisted by urine electrolyte
measurements and hormone assays but is typically a diagnosis of exclusion. Treatment
consists of NSAIDs, K-sparing diuretics, low-dose ACE inhibitors, and electrolyte replacement.
Pathophysiology
Bartter syndrome and the more common Gitelman's syndrome result from deranged NaCl transport and
reabsorption. In Bartter syndrome, the defect is in the ascending thick limb of the loop of Henle. In
Gitelman's syndrome, the defect is in the distal tubule. Subsequent K, Na, Cl, and H wasting leads to
increased renin and aldosterone release, metabolic alkalosis, hyperuricemia, and, particularly in Bartter
syndrome, increased prostaglandin secretion. Hypomagnesemia is common, particularly in Gitelman's
syndrome. Urinary Ca excretion is decreased in Gitelman's syndrome and is normal or increased in
Bartter syndrome. In both disorders, Na wasting results in a chronically low plasma volume reflected by a
normal BP despite high renin and angiotensin levels.
The features at clinical presentation vary (see
Table 297-1
).
[Table 297-1.
Some Differences Between Bartter Syndrome and Gitelman's Syndrome]
Etiology
Both syndromes are usually autosomal recessive, although sporadic cases and other types of familial
patterns can occur; there are several genotypes of both syndromes.
Symptoms and Signs
Bartter syndrome tends to manifest prenatally or during infancy or early childhood. Gitelman's syndrome
tends to manifest during late childhood or adulthood. Bartter syndrome can manifest prenatally with
intrauterine growth restriction and polyhydramnios. After birth, affected children with Bartter syndrome and
sometimes those with Gitelman's syndrome have poor growth rates and appear undernourished. Most
patients have low or low-normal BP and may have signs of volume depletion. Inability to retain K, Ca, or
Mg can lead to muscle weakness, spasms, tetany, or palpitations, particularly in Gitelman's syndrome.
Polydipsia, polyuria, and vomiting may also be present. Intellectual disability and nephrocalcinosis
sometimes result, particularly in Bartter syndrome.
Bartter syndrome may result in premature birth and severe electrolyte disorders and symptoms, but
neither Bartter syndrome nor Gitelman's syndrome typically leads to chronic renal insufficiency.
Diagnosis
• Serum and urine electrolyte levels
• Exclusion of similar disorders
===PAGE:3171===
Bartter syndrome and Gitelman's syndrome should be suspected in children with characteristic symptoms
or incidentally noted laboratory abnormalities, such as metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia.
Measurement of urine electrolytes shows high levels of Na, K, and Cl that are inappropriate for the
euvolemic or hypovolemic state of the patient. Diagnosis is by exclusion of other disorders:
• Primary and secondary aldosteronism can often be distinguished by the presence of hypertension and
normal or low plasma levels of renin (see
Table 94-3
.
• Bulimia nervosa and surreptitious vomiting or laxative abuse can often be distinguished by low levels of
urinary Cl (usually < 20 mmol/L).
• Surreptitious diuretic abuse can often be distinguished by low levels of urinary Cl and by a urine assay
for diuretics.
Definitive diagnosis is through genetic testing, which is not commercially available and thus is rarely
done.
Gitelman's syndrome can usually be differentiated from Bartter syndrome by the presence of
hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria.
Treatment
• NSAIDs
• Spironolactone or amiloride
• Low-dose ACE inhibitors
• K, Mg, and Ca supplements
The combination of NSAIDs (eg, indomethacin 1 to 2 mg/kg po once/day) and a K-sparing diuretic (eg,
spironolactone 150 mg po bid or amiloride 10 to 20 mg po bid) helps correct most features. Plasma
electrolyte levels can be further improved by using ACE inhibitors (at low doses to minimize further
hypovolemia and hypotension). However, no therapy can completely eliminate K wasting, and K
supplementation (KCl 20 to 40 mEq po once/day or bid) is often necessary. Mg and Ca supplements may
also be needed.
Exogenous growth hormone is sometimes considered to treat short stature in affected children, but this
treatment is not widely used.
Cystinuria
Cystinuria is an inherited defect of the renal tubules in which resorption of the amino acid
cystine is impaired, urinary excretion is increased, and cystine stones form in the urinary tract.
Symptoms are colic caused by stones and perhaps urinary infection or the sequela of renal
failure. Diagnosis is by measurement of cystine excretion in the urine. Treatment is with
increased fluid intake and alkalinization of the urine.
Cystinuria is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Heterozygotes may excrete increased quantities of
cystine in the urine but seldom enough to form stones. Cystinuria should not be confused with cystinosis
(.
Pathophysiology
The primary defect is in one of several genes responsible for cystine transport in the kidneys and
intestine. Diminished renal tubular resorption of cystine increases cystine concentration in the urine.
Cystine is poorly soluble in acidic urine, so that when its urinary concentration exceeds its solubility,
===PAGE:3172===
crystals precipitate and stones form.
Resorption of dibasic amino acids (lysine, ornithine, arginine) is also impaired but causes no problems
because these amino acids have an alternative transport system separate from that shared with cystine.
Furthermore, they are more soluble than cystine in urine, and their increased excretion does not result in
crystal or stone formation. Their absorption (and that of cystine) is also decreased in the small bowel.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms, most commonly renal colic, may occur in infants but usually appear between ages 10 and 30.
UTI and renal failure due to obstruction may develop.
Diagnosis
• Measurement of urinary cystine excretion
Radiopaque cystine stones form in the renal pelvis or bladder. Staghorn stones are common. Cystine may
appear in the urine as yellow-brown hexagonal crystals. Excessive cystine in the urine may be detected
with the nitroprus-side cyanide test. Diagnosis is confirmed by observing a cystine excretion of > 400
mg/day (normal is < 30 mg/day).
Treatment
• High fluid intake
• Alkalinization of the urine
Eventually, end-stage renal disease usually develops. Decreasing the urinary concentration of cystine
decreases renal toxicity. This decrease is accomplished by increasing urine volume. Fluid intake must be
sufficient to provide a urine flow rate of 3 to 4 L/day. Hydration is particularly important at night when
urinary pH drops. Alkalinization of the urine to pH > 7.0 with K citrate or KHCO
1 mEq/kg po tid to qid
and perhaps acetazolamide 5 mg/kg (up to 250 mg) po at bedtime increases the solubility of cystine
significantly. Mild restrictions of dietary Na (100 mEq/day) and protein (0.8 to 1.0 g/kg/day) may help
reduce cystine excretion.
When high fluid intake and alkalinization do not reduce stone formation, other drugs may be tried.
Penicillamine (7.5 mg/kg po qid in young children and 125 mg to 0.5 g po qid in older children) is
effective, but toxicity limits its usefulness. About half of all patients develop some toxic manifestation, such
as fever, rash, arthralgias, or, less commonly, nephrotic syndrome, pancytopenia, or SLE-like reaction.
Pyridoxine supplements (50 mg po once/day) should be given with penicillamine. Tiopronin (100 mg to
300 mg po qid) is being used instead of penicillamine to treat some children. Captopril (0.3 mg/kg po tid)
is not as effective as penicillamine but is much less toxic. Close monitoring of response to therapy is very
important.
Hartnup Disease
Hartnup disease is a rare disease due to abnormal absorption and excretion of tryptophan and
other amino acids. Symptoms are rash, CNS abnormalities, short stature, headache, and
collapsing or fainting. Diagnosis is by high urinary content of tryptophan and other amino acids.
Prevention is with niacinamide or niacin, and attacks are treated with nicotinamide.
Hartnup disease is caused by a mutation in the Na-dependent neutral amino acid transporter gene that is
expressed in kidney and intestinal epithelia. It is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Small-bowel
malabsorption of tryptophan, phenylalanine, methionine, and other monoaminomonocarboxylic amino
acids occurs. Accumulation of unabsorbed amino acids in the GI tract increases their metabolism by
bacterial flora. Some tryptophan degradation products, including indoles,
kynurenine, and serotonin, are
absorbed by the intestine and appear in the urine. Renal amino acid resorption is also defective, causing
a generalized aminoaciduria involving all neutral amino acids except proline and hydroxyproline.
===PAGE:3173===
Conversion of tryptophan to niacinamide is also defective.
Symptoms and Signs
Although the disorder is present from birth, symptoms may manifest in infancy, childhood, or early
adulthood. Symptoms may be precipitated by sunlight, fever, drugs, or other stresses.
Poor nutritional intake nearly always precedes appearance of symptoms. Symptoms and signs are due to
niacinamide deficiency and resemble those of pellagra (, particularly the rash on parts of the
body exposed to the sun; mucous membrane and neurologic symptoms also occur. Neurologic
manifestations include cerebellar ataxia and mental abnormalities. Intellectual disability, short stature,
headache, and collapsing or fainting are common.
Diagnosis
• Urine testing for amino acids
Diagnosis is made by showing the characteristic amino acid excretion pattern in the urine. Indoles and
other tryptophan degradation products in the urine provide supplementary evidence of the disease.
Treatment
• Niacin or niacinamide supplements
• Nicotinamide for attacks
Prognosis is good, and frequency of attacks usually diminishes with aging. The number and severity of
attacks can be reduced by maintaining good nutrition and supplementing the diet with niacin or
niacinamide 50 to 100 mg po tid. Attacks may be treated with nicotinamide 20 mg po once/day.
Hypophosphatemic Rickets
(Vitamin D-Resistant Rickets)
Hypophosphatemic rickets is a disorder characterized by hypophosphatemia, defective
intestinal absorption of Ca, and rickets or osteomalacia unresponsive to vitamin D. It is usually
hereditary. Symptoms are bone pain, fractures, and growth abnormalities. Diagnosis is by
serum phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
levels. Treatment is oral
phosphate plus calcitriol.
Familial hypophosphatemic rickets is usually inherited as an X-linked dominant trait; other familial patterns
occur but are rarer.
Sporadic acquired cases sometimes are associated with benign small-cell mesenchymal tumors that
produce a humoral factor that decreases proximal renal tubular resorption of phosphate (oncogenic
rickets).
Pathophysiology
The observed abnormality is decreased proximal renal tubular resorption of phosphate, resulting in
hypophosphatemia. This defect is due to a circulating factor or factors and is associated with a primary
abnormality in osteoblast function. Decreased intestinal Ca and phosphate absorption also occurs.
Deficient bone mineralization is due to low phosphate levels and osteoblast dysfunction rather than to the
low Ca and elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels in Ca-deficient rickets (. Because 1,25dihydroxyvitamin D
levels are normal to slightly low, a defect in conversion is presumed;
hypophosphatemia would normally cause elevated 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
levels.
===PAGE:3174===
Symptoms and Signs
The disease manifests as a spectrum of abnormalities, from hypophosphatemia alone to growth
retardation and short stature to severe rickets or osteomalacia. Children usually present after they begin
walking, with bowing of the legs and other bone deformities, pseudofractures, bone pain, and short
stature. Bony outgrowth at muscle attachments may limit motion. Rickets of the spine or pelvis, dental
enamel defects, and tetany that occur in dietary vitamin D deficiency are rarely present in
hypophosphatemic rickets.
Diagnosis
• Serum levels of Ca, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
, and PTH
• Urinary phosphate levels
Serum phosphate levels are depressed, but urinary phosphate excretion is large. Serum Ca and PTH are
normal, and alkaline phosphatase often is elevated. In Ca-deficient rickets, hypocalcemia is present,
hypophosphatemia is mild or absent, and urinary phosphate is not elevated.
Treatment
• Oral phosphate and calcitriol
Treatment consists of neutral phosphate solution or tablets. Starting dose in children is
10 mg/kg (based
on elemental phosphorus) po qid. Because this phosphate may cause hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D is
given as calcitriol, initially 5 to 10 ng/kg po bid. Phosphate dose may need to be increased to achieve
bone growth or relieve bone pain. Diarrhea may limit oral phosphate dosage. Increase in plasma
phosphate and decrease in alkaline phosphatase concentrations, healing of rickets, and improvement of
growth rate occur. Hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis with reduced renal function may
complicate treatment. Patients undergoing treatment need frequent follow-up evaluations.
Adults with oncogenic rickets may dramatically improve once the mesenchymal tumor that causes the
disorder is removed. Otherwise, oncogenic rickets is treated with calcitriol 5 to 10 ng/kg po bid and
elemental phosphorus 250 mg to 1 g po tid or qid.
===PAGE:3175===
Chapter 298. Congenital Neurologic Anomalies
Introduction
Some of the most serious neurologic anomalies (eg, anencephaly, encephalocele, spina bifida) develop in
the first 2 mo of gestation and represent defects in neural tube formation (dysraphism). Others, such as
lissencephaly, result from problems with neuronal migration, which occurs between 9 wk and 24 wk of
gestation. Hydranencephaly and porencephaly are secondary to destructive processes that occur after
the brain has formed. Some anomalies (eg, meningocele) are relatively benign.
Amniocentesis ( and ultra-sonography ( permit accurate in utero detection of many malformations. Parents need psychologic support when
a malformation is detected and also genetic counseling, because the risk of having a subsequent child
with such a malformation is high.
Women who
have
had a fetus or infant with a neural tube defect should take folate (folic acid)
supplementation 4 mg po once/day beginning 3 mo before conception and continuing through the 1st
trimester. Folate supplementation reduces the risk of neural tube defects in future pregnancies by 75%.
All women of childbearing age who
have not
had a fetus or infant with a neural tube defect should
consume at least 400
μ
g/day of folate through diet or by taking a supplement (some experts recommend
μ
g/day to further reduce risk) and continue doing so through the 1st trimester. Although folate
supplementation reduces the risk of having a child with a neural tube defect, risk reduction is less than in
women who previously had a fetus or infant with a neural tube defect (ie, risk reduction is < 75%).
Brain Anomalies
Congenital brain anomalies usually cause severe neurologic deficits; some may be fatal.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus is ventricular enlargement with excessive CSF. Manifestations include an
enlarged head and brain atrophy. Increased cranial pressure causes irritability and a bulging
fontanelle in infants. Diagnosis is by ultrasonography in neonates and young infants with an
open fontanelle and by CT or MRI in older infants and children. Treatment usually is with a
ventricular shunt procedure.
Hydrocephalus is the most common cause of abnormally large heads in neonates. Hydrocephalus that
develops only after the fontanelles have closed does not increase head circumference but can markedly
increase intracranial pressure.
Etiology
Hydrocephalus can result from
• Obstruction of CSF flow (obstructive hydro-cephalus)
• Impaired resorption of CSF (communicating hydrocephalus)
Obstruction
most often occurs in the aqueduct of Sylvius but sometimes at the outlets of the 4th
ventricle (Luschka and Magendie foramina). Obstructive hydrocephalus can be caused by Dandy-Walker
malformation or Chiari II type (formerly Arnold-Chiari) malformation. Dandy-Walker malformation is
progressive cystic enlargement of the 4th ventricle. In Chiari II type malformation, which frequently occurs
with spina bifida ( and syringomyelia (, severe elongation of the cerebellar
tonsils causes them to
protrude through the foramen magnum, with beaking of the colliculi and thickening
of the upper cervical spinal cord.
===PAGE:3176===
Impaired resorption
in the subarachnoid spaces usually results from meningeal inflammation,
secondary either to infection or to blood in the subarachnoid space (eg, in the premature infant who has
intraventricular hemorrhage).
Symptoms and Signs
Neurologic findings depend on whether intracranial pressure is increased, symptoms of which in infants
include irritability, high-pitched cry, vomiting, lethargy, strabismus, and bulging fontanelle. Older, verbal
children may complain of headache, decreased vision, or both. Papilledema is a late sign of increased
intracranial pressure; initial absence is not reassuring.
Consequences of chronic hydrocephalus may include precocious puberty in girls, learning disorders (eg,
difficulties with attention, information processing, and memory), and impaired executive function (eg,
problems with conceptualizing, abstracting, generalizing, reasoning, and organizing and planning
information for problem-solving).
Diagnosis
• Prenatal ultrasonography
• Neonates: Cranial ultrasonography
• Older infants and children: CT or MRI
Diagnosis is often made by routine prenatal ultrasonography. After birth, diagnosis is suspected if routine
examination reveals an increased head circumference; infants may have a bulging fontanelle or widely
separated cranial sutures. Similar findings can result from intracranial, space-occupying lesions (eg,
subdural hematomas, porencephalic cysts, tumors). Macrocephaly may result from an underlying brain
problem (eg, Alexander disease or Canavan disease) or it may be benign, such as when excessive CSF
surrounds a normal brain. Children suspected of having hydro-cephalus require cranial imaging by CT,
MRI, or ultrasonography (if the anterior fontanelle is open). Cranial CT or ultrasonography is used to
monitor progression of hydrocephalus once an anatomic diagnosis has been made. If seizures occur, an
EEG may be helpful.
Treatment
• Usually a ventricular shunt procedure
Treatment depends on etiology, severity, and whether hydrocephalus is progressive (ie, size of the
ventricles increases over time relative to the size of the brain). To temporarily reduce CSF pressure in
infants, ventricular taps or serial lumbar punctures (if the hydro-cephalus is communicating) may be used.
Progressive hydrocephalus usually requires a ventricular shunt. Shunts typically connect the right lateral
ventricle to the peritoneal cavity or, rarely, to the right atrium via a plastic tube with a one-way, pressurerelief valve. When a shunt is first placed in an infant or older child whose fontanelle is closed, rapid
withdrawal of fluid can cause subdural bleeding as the brain shrinks away from the skull. When the
fontanelles are open, the skull can decrease in circumference to match the decrease in brain size; thus,
some clinicians recommend an early decision regarding shunt placement so that it can be done before
fontanelle closure.
In a third ventriculostomy, an opening is created endoscopically between the 3rd ventricle and the
subarachnoid space, allowing CSF to drain. This procedure is often combined with ablation of the choroid
plexus and is becoming more common, particularly in less developed countries where access to
emergency neurosurgical care is often limited. In certain cases (eg, hydrocephalus caused by primary
aqueductal stenosis), third ventriculostomy may be adequate primary treatment.
A ventricular shunt that goes to the subgaleal space may be used in infants as a temporary measure for
patients who may not require a more permanent shunt.
===PAGE:3177===
Although some children do not need the shunt as they age, shunts are rarely removed because of the risk
of bleeding and trauma. Fetal surgery to treat congenital hydrocephalus has not been successful.
Shunt complications:
The type of ventricular shunt used depends on the neurosurgeon's experience,
although ventriculoperitoneal shunts cause fewer complications than ventriculoatrial shunts. Shunt
complications include
• Infection
• Malfunction
Any shunt has a risk of infection. Manifestations include chronic fever, lethargy, irritability, headache, or a
combination and other symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure; sometimes redness
becomes apparent over the shunt tubing. Antibiotics effective against the organism infecting the shunt,
which may include skin flora, are given, and typically the shunt must be removed and replaced.
Shunts can malfunction due to mechanical obstruction (typically blockage at the ventricular
end) or to
fracture of the tubing. In either case, intracranial pressure can increase, which, if sudden, can be a
medical emergency. Children present with headache, vomiting, lethargy, irritability, esotropia, or paralysis
of upward gaze. Seizures may occur. If the obstruction is gradual, more subtle symptoms and signs can
occur, such as irritability, poor school performance, and lethargy, which may be mistaken for depression.
To assess shunt function, a shunt series (x-rays of the shunt tubing) and neuroimaging studies are done.
The ability to compress the bulb that is present on many shunt systems is not a reliable sign of shunt
function.
After the shunt is placed, head circumference and development are assessed, and imaging is done
periodically.
Other Brain Anomalies
Anencephaly:
This anomaly is absence of the cerebral hemispheres. The absent brain is sometimes
replaced by malformed cystic neural tissue, which may be exposed or covered with skin. Parts of the
brain stem and spinal cord may be missing or malformed. Infants are stillborn or die within days or weeks.
Treatment is supportive.
Encephalocele:
This anomaly is a protrusion of nervous tissue and meninges through a skull defect.
The defect is caused by incomplete closure of the cranial vault (cranium bifidum). Encephaloceles usually
occur in the midline and protrude anywhere along a line from the occiput to the nasal passages but can
be present asymmetrically in the frontal or parietal regions. Small encephaloceles may resemble
cephalhematomas, but x-rays show a bony skull defect at their base. Hydrocephalus ( often
occurs with encephalocele. About 50% of affected infants have other congenital anomalies. Symptoms
and signs include the visible defect, seizures, and impaired cognition, including intellectual and
developmental disability.
Prognosis, which depends on the location and size of the lesion, is often good. Most encephaloceles can
be repaired. Even large ones often contain mostly heterotopic nervous tissue, which can be removed
without worsening functional ability. When other serious malformations coexist, the decision to repair may
be more difficult.
Malformed cerebral hemispheres:
Cerebral hemispheres may be large, small, or asymmetric; the gyri
may be absent, unusually large, or multiple and small; and microscopic sections of normal-appearing
brain may show disorganization of the normal laminar neuronal arrangement. Microcephaly, moderate to
severe motor and intellectual disability, and epilepsy often occur with these defects. Treatment is
supportive, including anticonvulsants, if needed.
Holoprosencephaly
occurs when the embryonic prosencephalon does not undergo segmentation and
cleavage. The anterior midline brain, cranium, and face are abnormal. This malformation may be caused
by defects of the
sonic hedgehog
gene. Severely affected fetuses may die before birth. Treatment is
===PAGE:3178===
supportive.
Lissencephaly
consists of an abnormally thick cortex, reduced or abnormal lamination, and diffuse
neuronal heterotopia. It is caused by abnormal neuronal migration, the process by which immature
neurons attach to radial glia and move from their points of origin near the ventricle to the cerebral surface.
Several single-gene defects may cause this anomaly (eg,
LIS1
). Affected infants may have intellectual
disability, muscle spasms, and seizures. Treatment is supportive, but many children die before age 2 yr.
Polymicrogyria,
in which the gyri are small and overabundant, is believed to result from injuries
occurring between 17 wk and 26 wk gestation. It can cause intellectual disability and seizures. Treatment
is supportive.
Porencephaly:
This anomaly is a cyst or cavity in a cerebral hemisphere that communicates with a
ventricle. It may develop prenatally or postnatally. Porencephaly may be caused by a developmental
anomaly, inflammatory disease, or a vascular accident such as intraventricular hemorrhage with
parenchymal extension. Neurologic examination is usually abnormal. Diagnosis is confirmed by cranial
CT, MRI, or ultrasonography. Progressive hydrocephalus occurs rarely with porencephaly. Prognosis is
variable; a few children develop only minor neurologic signs and have normal intelligence. Treatment is
supportive.
Hydranencephaly
is an extreme form of porencephaly in which the cerebral hemispheres are almost
totally absent. Usually, the cerebellum and brain stem are formed normally, and the basal ganglia are
intact. The meninges, bones, and skin over the cranial vault are normal. Often hydranencephaly is
diagnosed by prenatal ultrasonography. Neurologic examination is usually abnormal, and the infant does
not develop normally. Externally, the head may appear normal, but when transilluminated, light shines
completely through. CT or ultrasonography confirms the diagnosis. Children with this condition often have
seizures and intellectual disability. Treatment
is supportive, with shunting if head growth is excessive.
Schizencephaly,
which many classify as a form of porencephaly, results from formation of abnormal slits,
or clefts, in the cerebral hemispheres. Unlike porencephalies, however, which are thought to result from
brain injury, schizencephaly is thought to represent a defect in neuronal migration and is thus a true
malformation. Affected infants often have seizures and developmental delay and, depending on the
location of the defect, may have focal neurologic findings such as weakness. Treatment is supportive.
Septo-optic dysplasia:
This anomaly (also called de Morsier's syndrome) is a malformation of the front
of the brain that occurs toward the end of the first month of gestation and includes optic nerve
hypoplasia, absence of the septum pellucidum (the membranes that separate the front of the 2 lateral
ventricles), and pituitary deficiencies. Although the cause may be multiple, abnormalities of one particular
gene (
HESX1
) have been found in some children with septo-optic dysplasia.
Symptoms may include decreased visual acuity in one or both eyes, nystagmus, strabismus, and
endocrine dysfunction (including growth hormone deficiency, hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency,
diabetes insipidus, and hypogonadism). Seizures may occur. Although some children have normal
intelligence, others have learning disabilities, intellectual disability, cerebral palsy, or other developmental
delay. Diagnosis is by MRI. All children diagnosed with this anomaly should be screened for endocrine
and developmental dysfunction. Treatment is supportive.
Spina Bifida
Spina bifida is defective closure of the vertebral column. Although the cause is not known, low
folate levels during pregnancy increase risk. Some children are asymptomatic, and others have
severe neurologic dysfunction below the lesion. Open spina bifida can be diagnosed prenatally
by ultra-sonography or suggested by elevated

α
-fetoprotein levels in maternal serum and
amniotic fluid. After birth, a lesion is typically visible on the back. Treatment is usually surgical.
Spina bifida is one of the most serious neural tube defects compatible with prolonged life. This defect is
one of the more common congenital anomalies overall, with an incidence in the US of about 1/1500. It is
most common in the lower thoracic, lumbar, or sacral region and usually extends for 3 to 6 vertebral
===PAGE:3179===
segments. Severity ranges from occult, in which there are no apparent anomalies, to protruding sacs
(spina bifida cystica), to a completely open spine (rachischisis) with severe neurologic disability and
death.
In
occult spinal dysraphism
(OSD), anomalies of the skin overlying the lower back (typically in the
lumbosacral area) occur; these include sinus tracts that have no visible bottom, are above the lower
sacral area, or are not in the midline; hyperpigmented areas; and tufts of hair (see
Fig. 298-1
). These children often have anomalies in the underlying portion of the spinal cord, such as
lipomas and tethering (in which the cord has an abnormal attachment).
In
spina bifida cystica
, the protruding sac can contain meninges (meningocele), spinal cord (myelocele),
or both (myelomeningocele). In a myelomeningocele, the sac usually consists of meninges with a central
neural plaque. If not well covered with skin, the sac can easily rupture, increasing the risk of meningitis.
Hydrocephalus
is common because many children have a Chiari II type malformation (.
Other congenital anomalies, such as syringomyelia and soft-tissue masses around the spinal cord, may
be present.
Etiology
Causes seem multifactorial. Folate deficiency is a significant factor, and there seems to be a genetic
component. Other risk factors include maternal use of certain drugs (eg, valproate) and maternal
diabetes.
Symptoms and Signs
Many children with minor defects are asymptomatic.
Neurologic:
When the spinal cord or lumbosacral nerve roots are involved, as is usual, varying degrees
of paralysis and sensory deficits are present below the lesion. Rectal tone is usually decreased.
Hydrocephalus ( may cause minimal symptoms or signs of increased intracranial pressure.
Brainstem involvement may cause manifestations such as stridor, swallowing difficulties, and intermittent
apnea.
Orthopedic:
Lack of muscle innervation leads to atrophy of the legs. Because paralysis occurs in the
fetus, orthopedic problems may be present at birth (eg, clubfoot, arthrogryposis of the legs, dislocated
hip). Kyphosis is sometimes present and can hinder surgical closure and prevent the child from lying
supine.
[Fig. 298-1.
Forms of spina bifida.]
Scoliosis may develop later and is more common among children with higher lesions (ie, above L3).
Urologic:
Paralysis also impairs bladder function, occasionally leading to a neurogenic bladder and,
consequently, urinary reflux, which can cause hydronephrosis, frequent UTIs, and, ultimately, kidney
damage.
Diagnosis
• Ultrasonography or MRI
Spinal cord imaging, with ultrasonography or MRI, is essential in children with OSD; even children with
minimal cutaneous findings may have underlying spinal abnormalities (those with overt defects do not
require spinal cord imaging because the anatomy is known). Plain x-rays of the spine, hips, and, if they
are malformed, lower extremities are done. Cranial imaging using ultrasonography, CT, or MRI is done to
look for hydrocephalus.
===PAGE:3180===
Once the diagnosis of spina bifida is made, urinary tract evaluation is essential and includes urinalysis,
urine culture, BUN and creatinine determination, and ultrasonography. Measurement of bladder capacity
and pressure at which urine exits into the urethra can determine prognosis and intervention. Need for
further testing, such as urodynamics and voiding cystourethrogram, depends on previous findings and
associated anomalies.
Screening:
Prenatal screening can be done by doing fetal ultrasonography and by measuring maternal
serum levels of
α
-fetoprotein (, ideally between 16 and 18 wk gestation; levels can also be
done on amniotic fluid samples if previous testing suggests an increased risk. Elevated levels suggest
increased risk of spina bifida cystica (OSD rarely causes elevated levels).
Prognosis
Prognosis varies by the level of cord involvement and the number and severity of associated anomalies.
Prognosis is worse for children with higher cord level (eg, thoracic) lesions or who have kyphosis,
hydrocephalus, early hydronephrosis, and associated congenital anomalies. With proper care, however,
most children do well. Loss of renal function and ventricular shunt complications are the usual causes of
death in older children.
Treatment
• Surgical repair of the spinal lesion
• Sometimes a ventricular shunt
• Various measures for orthopedic and urologic complications
Without early surgical treatment, neurologic damage can progress in OSD. Treatment for all spina bifida
requires a united effort by specialists from several disciplines; neurosurgical, urologic, orthopedic,
pediatric, and social service evaluations are important. It is important to assess the type, vertebral
segment, and extent of the lesion; the infant's health status; and associated anomalies. Discussion with
the family should ascertain the family's strengths, desires, and resources, and community resources,
including availability of ongoing care.
A meningomyelocele identified at birth is covered immediately with a sterile dressing. If the
meningomyelocele is leaking CSF, antibiotics are started to prevent meningitis. Neurosurgical repair of a
meningomyelocele or an open spine typically is done within the first 72 h after birth to reduce the risk of
meningeal or ventricular infection. If the lesion is large or is in a difficult location, plastic surgeons may be
consulted to ensure adequate closure.
Hydrocephalus may require a shunt procedure in the neonatal period; sometimes a ventricular shunt is
inserted when the back is repaired.
Kidney function must be monitored closely, and UTI should be treated promptly. Obstructive uropathy at
either the bladder outlet or ureteral level must be treated vigorously to prevent infection. When children
are between 2 and 3 yr of age, or at any time if they have elevated pressure in the bladder with
vesicoureteral reflux, clean intermittent catheterization is done to empty the bladder on a regular basis.
Catheterization increases continence and maintains bladder and kidney health.
At around the same time, children are placed on the commode or toilet after meals to encourage fecal
continence. Well-balanced diets are encouraged; stool softeners, laxatives, or a combination may be
helpful to ensure regular bowel movements and to increase continence. In older children, an antegrade
colonic enema procedure, in which a hole is placed through the abdominal wall into the colon to allow
infusion of liquids, can improve continence. The hole is kept open by a tube (eg, a gastrostomy feeding
tube).
Orthopedic care should begin early. If a club-foot is present, a cast is applied; surgery is often necessary
===PAGE:3181===
after casting. Hip joints are checked for dislocation. Affected children should be monitored for
development of scoliosis, pathologic fractures, pressure sores, and muscle weakness and spasm.
Prevention
Folate supplementation (400 to 800
μ
g po once/day) in women beginning 3 mo before conception and
continuing through the 1st trimester reduces the risk of neural tube defects (.
===PAGE:3182===
Chapter 299. Chromosomal Anomalies
Introduction
Chromosomal anomalies cause various disorders. Anomalies that affect autosomes (the 22 paired
chromosomes that are alike in males and females) are more common than those that affect sex
chromosomes (X and Y). Chromosomal abnormalities fit into several major categories:
• Trisomies (extra chromosomes)
• Translocations (anomalies in which segments of chromosomes inappropriately join with other
chromosomes)
• Deletions and duplications of various chromosomes or parts of chromosomes
• Mosaicisms (anomalies in which a person starting from a single fertilized egg develops ≥ 2 cell lines
differing in genotype [genetic constitution])
Some specific terms from the field of genetics are important for describing chromosomal anomalies:
• Karyotype: The full set of chromosomes in a person's cells.
• Genotype: The genetic constitution determined by the karyotype.
• Phenotype: The person's outward appearance—the biochemical, physiologic, and physical makeup as
determined by the genotype and environmental factors (.
Diagnosis
Lymphocytes are used for chromosomal analysis, except prenatally, when amniocytes or cells from
placental chorionic villi are used
(. A karyotype analysis involves blocking cells in mitosis
during metaphase and staining the condensed chromosomes. Chromosomes from single cells are
photographed, and their images are arranged, forming a karyotype.
Several techniques are used to better delineate the chromosomes:
• In classical banding (eg, G [Giemsa]-, Q [fluorescent]-, and C-banding), a dye is used to stain bands on
the chromosomes.
• High-resolution chromosome analysis uses special culture methods to obtain a high percentage of
prophase and prometaphase spreads. The chromosomes are less condensed than in routine
metaphase analysis, and the number of identifiable bands is expanded, allowing a more sensitive
karyotype analysis.
• Spectral karyotyping analysis (also called chromosome painting) uses chromosome-specific multicolor
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) techniques that improve the visibility of certain defects, including
translocations and inversions.
• Comparative genomic hybridization is a single-step technique that allows the entire genome to be
scanned for mutations, including increases (duplications) or decreases (deletions) in DNA and
unbalanced translocations.
Fragile X Syndrome
Fragile X syndrome is a genetic abnormality in an X chromosome that leads to intellectual
disability and behavioral disorders.
Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited cause of intellectual disability. The symptoms of fragile
===PAGE:3183===
X syndrome are caused by abnormalities in DNA on the X chromosome. It affects about 1/4000 males and
1/8000 females. Females with the disorder are typically less impaired than males. Fragile X is inherited in
an X-linked pattern and does not always cause clinical symptoms.
Examination of the karyotype reveals a constriction at the end of the long arm of the X chromosome,
followed by a thin strand of genetic material. The constriction and thin strand give the appearance of a
fragile portion of the X chromosome. Sequencing of the genetic material reveals a repeating base pair
triplet that is responsible for the syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
People with fragile X syndrome have physical, cognitive and behavioral abnormalities. They have large,
protuberant ears; a prominent chin and forehead; a high arched palate; and, in postpubertal males,
macroorchidism. The joints may be hyperextensible, and heart disease (mitral valve prolapse) may occur.
Cognitive abnormalities may include mild to moderate intellectual disability. Features of autism may
develop, including perseverative speech and behavior, poor eye contact, and social anxiety. Women may
experience menopause in their mid-30s.
Diagnosis
Fragile X syndrome is frequently not suspected until school age or adolescence, depending on the
severity of the symptoms. Boys with autism and intellectual disability should be tested for fragile X
syndrome. DNA testing can detect abnormal DNA on the fragile X chromosome. The greater the number
of abnormal repetitions of DNA found, the more likely the child will have symptoms.
Treatment
Early intervention, including speech and language therapy and occupational therapy, can help children
with fragile X syndrome to maximize their abilities. Stimulants, antidepressants, and antianxiety drugs may
be beneficial for some children.
Down Syndrome
(Trisomy 21; Trisomy G)
Down syndrome is an anomaly of chromosome 21 that causes intellectual disability,
microcephaly, short stature, and characteristic facies. Diagnosis is suggested by physical
anomalies and abnormal development and confirmed by karyotype analysis. Treatment
depends on specific manifestations and anomalies.
Overall incidence among live births is about 1/800 but increases as maternal age increases. At 20 yr of
maternal age, the risk is 1/2000 births; at 35, it is 1/365; and at 40, it is 1/100. However, because most
births occur among younger women, just 20% of infants with Down syndrome are born to mothers > 35 yr.
Etiology
In about 95% of cases, there is an extra whole chromosome 21 (trisomy 21), which is almost always
maternally derived. Some people with Down syndrome have the normal 46 chromosomes, but a piece of
an additional chromosome 21 has been translocated to another chromosome. The most common
translocation is
t(14;21), in which a piece of an additional chromosome 21 is attached to chromosome 14.
In about half of the cases, both parents have normal karyotypes, indicating a de novo translocation. In the
other half, one parent (almost always the mother), although phenotypically normal, has only 45
chromosomes, one of which is t(14;21). Theoretically, the chance that a carrier mother will have a child
with Down syndrome is 1:3, but the actual risk is lower (about 1:10). If the father is the carrier, the risk is
only 1:20. The next most common translocation is t(21;22). In these cases, carrier mothers have about a
1:10 risk of having a child with Down syndrome; the risk is smaller for carrier fathers.
Down syndrome mosaicism presumably results from nondisjunction (when chromosomes fail to pass to
===PAGE:3184===
separate cells) during cell division in the embryo. Most affected people have two cell lines, one with 46
chromosomes and one with 47 chromosomes. The prognosis for intelligence probably depends on the
proportion of trisomy 21 cells in the brain. A few people with mosaic Down syndrome have barely
recognizable clinical signs and normal intelligence. If a parent has germ-line mosaicism for trisomy 21, an
increased risk exists for a second affected child.
Pathophysiology
As with most conditions that result from chromosome imbalance, Down syndrome affects multiple systems
and causes both structural and functional defects (see
Table 299-1
). Not all defects are present in each person.
Most people have some degree of cognitive impairment, ranging from severe (IQ 20 to 35) to mild (IQ 50
to 75). Gross motor and language delays also are evident early in life. Height is significantly reduced, and
the person has an increased risk of obesity. About 40 to 50% of affected neonates have congenital heart
disease; ventricular septal defect and atrioventricular canal (endocardial cushion) defect are most
common. About 5% of people have GI anomalies, particularly duodenal atresia, sometimes along with
annular pancreas. Hirschsprung's disease and celiac disease also are more common. Many people
develop endocrinopathies, including thyroid disease (most often hypothyroidism) and diabetes. Atlantooccipital and atlantoaxial hypermobility, as well as bony anomalies of the cervical spine, can cause
atlanto-occipital and cervical instability; weakness and paralysis may result. About 60% of people have
eye problems, including congenital cataracts, glaucoma, strabismus, and refractive errors. Most people
have hearing loss, and ear infections are very common.
[Table 299-1.
Some Complications of Down Syndrome*]
The aging process seems to be accelerated. The median age at death is 49; however, many reach their
50s or 60s. Life expectancy is decreased primarily by heart disease and, to a lesser degree, by increased
susceptibility to infections and acute myelocytic leukemia. Many people develop clinical signs of
Alzheimer's disease at an early age, and at autopsy, brains of adults with Down syndrome show typical
microscopic findings. The results
of recent research indicate that blacks with Down syndrome have a
substantially shorter life span than whites. This finding may be the result of poor access to medical,
educational, and other support services.
Affected women have a 50% chance of having a fetus that also has Down syndrome. However, many
affected fetuses abort spontaneously. Men with Down syndrome are infertile, except for those with
mosaicism.
Symptoms and Signs
Affected neonates tend to be placid, rarely cry, and have hypotonia. Most have a flat facial profile
(particularly flattening of the bridge of the nose), although some appear normal at birth and then develop
characteristic facial features during infancy. A flattened occiput, microcephaly, and extra skin around the
back of the neck are common. The outer sides of the eyes are slanted upward, and epicanthal folds at
the inner corners usually are present. Brushfield's spots (gray to white spots resembling grains of salt
around the periphery of the iris) may be visible. The mouth is often held open because of a large,
protruding, furrowed tongue that lacks the central fissure. The ears are often small and rounded. The
hands are short and broad and often have a simian crease (a single, palmar crease). The fingers are
short, with clinodactyly (incurving) of the 5th digit, which often has only 2 phalanges. The feet may have a
wide gap between the 1st and 2nd toes, and a plantar furrow often extends backward on the foot. Hands
and feet show characteristic dermatoglyphics.
As affected children grow, retardation of physical and mental development quickly becomes apparent.
Stature is short, and the mean IQ is about 50. Behavior suggestive of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder is often present in childhood, and the incidence of autistic behavior is increased (particularly in
those with profound intellectual disability). Depression is common among children and adults.
Symptoms of heart disease are determined by the type and extent of the cardiac anomaly. Infants with
===PAGE:3185===
ventricular septal defects can either be asymptomatic or show signs of heart failure (eg, labored
breathing, fast respiratory rate, difficulty with feeding, sweating, poor weight gain). A high-frequency, 2/6
or louder systolic murmur may be present depending on the size of the defect. Infants with atrioventricular
canal defects can show signs of heart failure or be asymptomatic. Characteristic heart sounds include a
wide fixed splitting of the second sound. Murmurs may not be appreciated; however, a number of different
murmurs are possible.
Infants with Hirschsprung's disease usually have delay in passage of meconium for 48 h after birth.
Severely affected infants may have signs of intestinal obstruction (eg, bilious vomiting, failure to pass
stool, abdominal distention). Duodenal atresia or stenosis can manifest with bilious vomiting or with no
symptoms, depending on the extent of the stenosis.
Diagnosis
• Prenatal amniocentesis with karyotype analysis
• Sometimes neonatal karyotype analysis (if prenatal diagnosis not done)
Diagnosis may be suspected prenatally based on physical anomalies detected by fetal ultra-sonography
(eg, nuchal translucency) or based on abnormal levels of plasma protein A in late 1st trimester and
α
-
fetoprotein,
β
-hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin), unconjugated estriol, and inhibin in early 2nd
trimester (15 to 16 wk gestation) on maternal serum screening. The diagnosis is confirmed by
amniocentesis with karyotyping. Screening and diagnostic testing for Down syndrome are recommended
for all women who present for prenatal care before 20 wk gestation regardless of maternal age. If
diagnosis is not made prenatally, then neonatal diagnosis is based on physical anomalies and confirmed
by karyotype analysis.
Concomitant medical conditions:
Certain routine testing helps identify conditions associated with
Down syndrome:
• Echocardiogram—at prenatal visit or at birth
• Thyroid screening (thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH], or thyroxine [T] with TSH follow-up)—newborn,
6 mo, 12 mo, and annually thereafter
• Hearing evaluations—at birth, every 6 mo thereafter until 3 yr, then annually
• Ophthalmology evaluation—by 6 mo, then annually or more frequently as indicated
• X-ray screening for atlantoaxial instability—once between 3 and 5 yr, then as needed for sports (eg,
Special Olympics) participation
• Celiac sprue screening—at 2 to 3 yr using anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies and IgA antiendomysial antibodies
• Growth—height and weight plotted at each health supervision visit using a Down syndrome growth chart
Treatment
The underlying disorder cannot be treated. Treatment depends on specific manifestations. Some
congenital cardiac anomalies are
repaired surgically. Hypothyroidism is treated with thyroid hormone
replacement. Treatment should also include genetic counseling for the family, social support, and
educational programming appropriate for the level of intellectual functioning (see
Intellectual Disability
on
p.
).
Trisomy 18
(Edwards' Syndrome; Trisomy E)
===PAGE:3186===
Trisomy 18 is caused by an extra chromosome 18 and usually causes intellectual disability,
small birth size, and many developmental anomalies, including severe microcephaly, heart
defects, prominent occiput, low-set malformed ears, and a characteristic pinched facial
appearance.
Trisomy 18 occurs in 1/6000 live births, but spontaneous abortions are common. More than 95% of
affected children have complete trisomy 18. The extra chromosome is almost always maternally derived,
and advanced maternal age increases risk. The female:male ratio is 3:1.
Symptoms and Signs
A history of feeble fetal activity, polyhydramnios, a small placenta, and a single umbilical artery often exist.
Size at birth is markedly small for gestational age, with hypotonia and marked hypoplasia of skeletal
muscle and subcutaneous fat. The cry is weak, and response to sound is decreased. The orbital ridges
are hypoplastic, the palpebral fissures are short, and the mouth and jaw are small; all of these
characteristics give the face a pinched appearance. Microcephaly, prominent occiput, low-set malformed
ears, narrow pelvis, and a short sternum are common. A clenched fist with the index finger overlapping
the 3rd and 4th fingers usually occurs. The distal crease on the 5th finger is often absent, and there is a
low-arch dermal ridge pattern on the fingertips. Redundant skinfolds, especially over the back of the
neck, are common. The fingernails are hypoplastic, and the big toe is shortened and frequently
dorsiflexed. Club-feet and rocker-bottom feet are common. Severe congenital heart disease is common,
especially patent ductus arteriosus and ventricular septal defects. Anomalies of lungs, diaphragm, GI
tract, abdominal wall, kidneys, and ureters are frequent. Boys may have un-descended testes. Common
muscular manifestations include hernias, separation of the rectus muscles of the abdominal wall, or both.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis may be suspected prenatally on ultrasound (eg, with abnormalities of extremities and fetal
growth restriction) or by amniocentesis or chorionic villi sampling or postnatally by appearance.
Confirmation in all cases is by karyotyping.
Treatment
No specific treatment is available. More than 50% die within the first week; < 10% are still alive at 1 yr.
Those who survive have marked developmental delay and disability. Support for the family is critical.
Trisomy 13
(Patau's Syndrome; Trisomy D)
Trisomy 13 is caused by an extra chromosome 13 and causes abnormal forebrain, midface, and
eye development; severe intellectual disability; heart defects; and small birth size.
Trisomy 13 occurs in about 1/10,000 live births; about 80% of cases are complete trisomy 13. Advanced
maternal age increases the likelihood, and the extra chromosome is usually maternally derived.
Infants tend to be small for gestational age. Midline anomalies (eg, scalp defects, dermal sinuses) are
characteristic. Holoprosencephaly (failure of the forebrain to divide properly) is common. Concurrent
facial anomalies can include cleft lip and cleft palate. Microphthalmia, colobomas (fissures) of the iris, and
retinal dysplasia are also common. Supraorbital ridges are shallow, and palpebral fissures usually are
slanted. The ears are abnormally shaped and usually low-set. Deafness is common. Loose folds of skin
often are present over the back of the neck. Simian crease (a single, palmar crease), polydactyly, and
hyperconvex narrow fingernails are also common. About 80% of cases have severe congenital
cardiovascular anomalies; dextrocardia is common. Genitals are frequently abnormal in both sexes;
cryptorchidism and an abnormal scrotum occur in boys, and a bicornuate uterus occurs in girls. Apneic
spells in early infancy are frequent. Intellectual disability is severe.
===PAGE:3187===
Diagnosis
Diagnosis may be suspected prenatally by abnormalities on ultrasound (eg, intrauterine growth
restriction) or by amniocentesis or chorionic villi sampling and may be suspected postnatally by
appearance. Confirmation in all cases is by karyotyping.
Treatment
Most patients (80%) are so severely affected that they die before age 1 mo; < 10% survive longer than 1
yr. Support for the family is critical.
Chromosomal Deletion Syndromes
Chromosomal deletion syndromes result from loss of parts of chromosomes. They tend to
cause severe congenital anomalies and markedly retarded mental and physical development.
Chromosomal deletion syndromes are rarely suspected prenatally but may be incidentally
discovered at that time if karyotyping is done for other reasons. Post-natal diagnosis is
suspected by clinical appearance and is confirmed by karyotyping and other genetic analysis.
5p-Deletion (cri du chat syndrome):
Deletion of the end of the short arm of chromosome 5 (5p
—usually paternal) is characterized by a high-pitched, mewing cry, closely resembling the cry of a kitten,
which is heard in the immediate neonatal period, lasts several weeks, and then disappears. Affected
neonates are hypotonic and have low birth weight, micro-cephaly, a round face with wide-set eyes,
downward slanting of the palpebral fissures (with or without epicanthal folds), strabismus, and a broadbased nose. The ears are low-set, abnormally shaped, and frequently have narrow external auditory
canals and preauricular tags. Syndactyly, hypertelorism, and heart anomalies occur often. Mental and
physical development is markedly retarded. Many affected children survive into adulthood but have
significant disability.
4p-Deletion (Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome):
Deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4 (4p) results in
profound intellectual disability. Manifestations also may include epilepsy, a broad or beaked nose, midline
scalp defects, ptosis and colobomas, cleft palate, delayed bone development, and, in boys, hypospadias
and cryptorchidism. Many affected children die during infancy; those who survive into their 20s have
severe disability.
Contiguous gene syndromes:
These include microscopic and submicroscopic deletions of contiguous
genes on particular parts of many chromosomes; small duplications of chromosomes also occur. The
effects of duplications, however, are usually milder than those of deletions. Almost all cases are sporadic;
however, mildly affected parents, as in some 22q11.21 deletions, can pass on the syndrome. Numerous
syndromes have been identified, with widely varying manifestations (see
Table 299-2
). Deletions and duplications are often detectable with fluorescent probes and other
techniques. Sometimes deletions and duplications cannot be shown cytogenetically, but their presence
can be confirmed by DNA probes specific to the deleted or duplicated area.
Telomeric deletions:
These deletions are small and often submicroscopic and may occur at either
telomere (the end of a chromosome). Phenotypic changes may be minimal. Telomeric deletions may
account for many cases of nonspecific intellectual disability in which the affected person has mildly
dysmorphic features.
Sex Chromosome Anomalies
Sex chromosome anomalies may involve aneuploidy, partial deletions or duplications of sex
chromosomes, or mosaicisms.
Sex chromosome anomalies are common and cause syndromes that include a range of congenital and
developmental anomalies. They are rarely suspected prenatally but may be incidentally discovered if
karyotyping is done for other reasons. They are often hard to recognize at birth and may not be
diagnosed until puberty.
===PAGE:3188===
The effects of X chromosome anomalies are not as severe as those from analogous autosomal
anomalies. Females with 3 X chromosomes often appear normal physically and mentally and are fertile. In
contrast, all known autosomal trisomies have devastating effects. Similarly, whereas the absence of 1 X
chromosome leads to a specific syndrome (Turner's syndrome), the absence of an autosome is invariably
lethal.
Lyon hypothesis (X-inactivation):
By virtue of having 2 X chromosomes, females have 2 loci for every
X-linked gene, as compared with a single locus in males. This imbalance would seem to cause a genetic
"dosage" problem. However, according to the Lyon hypothesis, 1 of the 2 X chromosomes in each female
somatic cell is inactivated genetically early in embryonic life (on or about day 16). In fact, no matter how
many X chromosomes are present, all but 1 are inactivated. However, recent molecular genetic studies
have shown that some genes on the inactivated X chromosome (or chromosomes) remain functional, and
these few are essential to normal female development.
XIST
is the gene responsible for inactivating
[Table 299-2.
Examples of Contiguous Gene Syndromes]
the genes of the X chromosome, producing RNA that triggers inactivation.
Whether the maternal or paternal X is inactivated usually is a random event within each cell at the time of
inactivation; that same X then remains inactive in all descendant cells. Thus, all females are mosaics, with
some cells having an active maternal X and others having an active paternal X.
Sometimes, random statistical distribution of inactivation in the relatively small number of cells present at
the time of inactivation results in a particular descendant tissue having a preponderance of active
maternal or paternal X (skewed inactivation). Skewed inactivation may account for the occasional
manifestation of minor symptoms in females who are heterozygous for X-linked disorders such as
hemophilia and muscular dystrophy (all would presumably be asymptomatic if they had a 50:50
distribution of active X chromosomes). Skewed inactivation also may occur by post-inactivation selection.
Turner's Syndrome
In Turner's syndrome (gonadal dysgenesis), girls are born with 1 of their 2 X chromosomes
partly or completely missing. Diagnosis is based on clinical findings and is confirmed by
karyotype analysis. Treatment depends on manifestations and may include surgery for cardiac
anomalies and often growth hormone therapy for short stature and estrogen replacement for
pubertal failure.
Turner's syndrome occurs in about 1/4000 live female births and is the most common sex
chromosome
anomaly in females. However, 99% of 45,X conceptions abort spontaneously.
About 50% of affected girls have a 45,X karyotype; about 80% have lost the paternal X. Most of the other
50% are mosaics (eg, 45,X/46,XX or 45,X/47,XXX). Among mosaic girls, phenotype may vary from that of
typical Turner's syndrome to normal. Occasionally, affected girls have 1 normal X and 1 X that has formed
a ring chromosome. Some affected girls have 1 normal X and 1 long-arm isochromosome formed by the
loss of short arms and development of a chromosome consisting of 2 long arms of the X chromosome.
These girls tend to have many of the phenotypic features of Turner's syndrome; thus, deletion of the X
chromosome's short arm seems to play an important role in producing the phenotype.
Pathophysiology
Common cardiac anomalies include coarctation of the aorta and bicuspid aortic valve. Hypertension
frequently occurs with aging, even without coarctation. Renal anomalies and hemangiomas are frequent.
Occasionally, telangiectasia occurs in the GI tract, with resultant GI bleeding or protein loss. Hearing loss
occurs; strabismus and hyperopia (farsightedness) are common and increase the risk of amblyopia.
Thyroiditis and celiac disease are more common than among the general population.
Infants are at a higher risk of developmental dysplasia of the hip. Of adolescents, 10% have scoliosis.
===PAGE:3189===
Osteoporosis and fractures are fairly common among women with Turner's syndrome. Gonadal
dysgenesis (ovaries replaced by bilateral streaks of fibrous stroma and devoid of developing ova) occurs
in 90% of females.
Intellectual disability is rare, but many have nonverbal learning disability, attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, or both and thus score poorly on performance tests and in mathematics, even though they score
average or above in the verbal components of intelligence tests.
Symptoms and Signs
Many neonates are very mildly affected; however, some present with marked dorsal lymphedema of the
hands and feet and with lymphedema or loose folds of skin over the back of the neck. Other frequent
anomalies include a webbed neck and a broad chest with widely spaced and inverted nipples. Affected
girls have short stature compared with family members. Less common findings include a low hairline on
the back of the neck, ptosis, multiple pigmented nevi, short 4th metacar-pals and metatarsals, prominent
finger pads with whorls in the dermatoglyphics on the ends of the fingers, and hypoplasia of the nails.
Increased carrying angle at the elbow occurs.
Symptoms of cardiac anomalies depend on severity. Coarctation of the aorta can cause high BP in the
upper extremities, diminished femoral pulses, and low or absent BP in the lower extremities. Gonadal
dysgenesis results in the inability to undergo puberty, develop breast tissue, or begin menses. Other
medical problems that are associated with Turner's syndrome develop with aging and may not be evident
without screening.
Diagnosis
• Clinical appearance
• Karyotype analysis
• Testing for associated conditions
In neonates, diagnosis may be suspected based on the presence of lymphedema or a webbed neck. In
the absence of these findings, some children are diagnosed later, based on short stature, lack of pubertal
development, and amenorrhea. Diagnosis is confirmed by karyotype analysis. Echocardiography or MRI
is indicated to detect cardiac anomalies.
Cytogenetic analysis and Y-specific probe studies are done for all people with gonadal dysgenesis to rule
out mosaicism with a Y-bearing cell line (eg, 45,X/46,XY). These people are usually phenotypic females
who have variable features of Turner's syndrome. They are at high risk of gonadal cancer, especially
gonadoblastoma, and should have the gonads removed prophylactically as soon as the diagnosis is
made.
Concomitant medical conditions:
Certain routine evaluations help identify conditions associated with
Turner's syndrome:
• Cardiovascular evaluation by a specialist; MRI and echocardiography at time of diagnosis to rule out
coarctation and bicuspid aortic valve and every 3 to 5 yr thereafter to evaluate aortic root diameter
• Renal ultrasonography at time of diagnosis, annual urinalysis, BUN, and creatinine for patients with
renal system anomalies
• Hearing evaluation by an audiologist and audiogram every 3 to 5 yr
• Evaluation for scoliosis/kyphosis at yearly examination
• Evaluation for hip dislocation
===PAGE:3190===
• Eye examination by pediatric ophthalmologist
•
Thyroid function tests at diagnosis and every 1 to 2 yr thereafter
• Celiac screen (eg, endomysial antibody levels)
• Glucose tolerance test at diagnosis and fasting blood sugar, lipid profile annually thereafter
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for the underlying genetic condition. Coarctation of the aorta is usually
repaired surgically. Other cardiac anomalies are monitored and repaired as needed. Lymphedema can
usually be controlled with support hosiery.
Treatment with growth hormone can stimulate growth. Estrogen replacement is usually needed to initiate
puberty and is typically given at age 12 to 13. Thereafter, birth control pills with a progestin are given to
maintain secondary sexual characteristics. Growth hormone can be given with estrogen replacement until
epiphyses are fused, at which time growth hormone is stopped. Continuation of estrogen replacement
helps establish optimal bone density and skeletal development.
Klinefelter's Syndrome (47,XXY)
Klinefelter's syndrome is
≥
2 X chromosomes plus 1 Y, resulting in a phenotypic male.
Klinefelter's syndrome is the most common sex chromosome disorder, occurring in about 1/700 live male
births. The extra X chromosome is maternally derived in 60% of cases. Germ cells do not survive in the
testes, leading to decreased sperm and androgens.
Affected boys tend to be tall with disproportionately long arms and legs. They often have small, firm
testes, and about 30% develop gynecomastia. Puberty usually occurs at the normal age, but often facial
hair growth is light. There is a predisposition for verbal learning disorders. Clinical variation is great, and
many 47,XXY males have normal appearance and intellect. Many are diagnosed during an infertility
evaluation (probably all 47,XXY males are sterile). Testicular development varies from hyalinized
nonfunctional tubules to some production of spermatozoa; urinary excretion of follicle-stimulating hormone
is frequently increased.
Mosaicism occurs in 15% of cases. These men may be fertile. Some affected men have 3, 4, and even 5
X chromosomes along with the Y. As the number of X chromosomes increases, the severity of intellectual
disability and of malformations also increases. Each extra X is associated with a 15- to 16-point reduction
in IQ, with language most affected, particularly expressive language skills. Males with Klinefelter's
syndrome should have lifelong testosterone supplementation beginning at puberty to ensure the
development of male sexual characteristics, muscle bulk, bone structure, and better psychosocial
functioning.
47,XYY Syndrome
47,XYY syndrome is 2 Y chromosomes and 1 X, resulting in a phenotypic male.
The 47,XYY syndrome occurs in about 1/1000 live male births. Affected boys tend to be taller than
average and have a 10- to 15-point IQ reduction compared with family members. There are few physical
problems. Minor behavior disorders, hyperactivity, attention-deficit disorder, and learning disorders are
more common.
Other X Chromosome Anomalies
About 1/1000 apparently normal females have 47,XXX (trisomy X) karyotype. Physical anomalies are rare.
Menstrual irregularity and infertility sometimes occur. Affected girls may have mildly impaired intellect and
may have more school problems than siblings. Advanced maternal age increases risk of the triple X
===PAGE:3191===
anomaly, and the extra X chromosome is usually maternally derived.
Although rare, 48,XXXX and 49,XXXXX females exist. There is no consistent pheno-type. The risk of
intellectual disability and congenital anomalies increases markedly when there are > 3 X chromosomes.
The genetic imbalance in early embryonic life may cause anomalous development.
===PAGE:3192===
Chapter 300. Inherited Muscular Disorders
Introduction
Inherited metabolic disorders affecting the muscles, such as disorders of mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation and glycogen storage diseases, are discussed in
Chapter 301
. Only those disorders that
have all or most of their effects on muscle are discussed in this chapter.
Muscular Dystrophies
Muscular dystrophies are inherited, progressive muscle disorders resulting from defects in one
or more genes needed for normal muscle function. They are distinguished by the selective
distribution of weakness and the specific nature of the genetic abnormality involved.
Duchenne dystrophy is the most common and severe form of muscular dystrophy. Becker dystrophy,
although closely related, has a later onset and causes milder symptoms. Other forms include EmeryDreifuss dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, limb-girdle dystrophy, facioscapulohumeral dystrophy, and
congenital dystrophies.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy and Becker Muscular Dystrophy
Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Becker muscular dystrophy are X-linked recessive
disorders characterized by progressive proximal muscle weakness caused by muscle fiber
degeneration. Becker dystrophy has later onset and causes milder symptoms. Diagnosis is
suggested clinically and is confirmed by analysis of the protein product (dystrophin) of the
mutated gene. Treatment focuses on maintaining function through physical therapy and the use
of braces and orthotics; prednisone is given to some patients with severe functional decline.
Duchenne dystrophy and Becker dystrophy are caused by mutations at the Xp21 locus. In Duchenne
dystrophy, this mutation results in the severe absence (< 5%) of dystrophin, a protein in the muscle cell
membrane. In Becker dystrophy, the mutation results in production of abnormal dystrophin or less
dystrophin. Duchenne dystrophy affects 1/3000 live male births. Becker dystrophy affects 1/30,000 live
male births. Female carriers may have asymptomatic elevated CK levels and possibly calf hypertrophy.
Symptoms and Signs
Duchenne dystrophy:
This disorder manifests typically between ages 2 yr and 3 yr. Weakness affects
proximal muscles, typically in the lower limbs initially. Children frequently toe walk and have a waddling
gait and lordosis. They fall frequently and have difficulty running, jumping, climbing stairs, and rising from
the floor. Progression of weakness is steady, and limb flexion contractures and scoliosis develop. Firm
pseudohypertrophy (fatty and fibrous replacement of certain enlarged muscle groups, notably the calves)
develops. Most children are confined to a wheelchair by age 12 and die of respiratory complications by
age 20. Cardiac involvement is usually asymptomatic, although 90% of patients have ECG abnormalities.
One third have mild, nonprogressive intellectual impairment that affects verbal ability more than
performance.
Becker dystrophy:
This disorder typically becomes symptomatic much later and is milder. Ambulation is
usually preserved until at least age 15, and many children remain ambulatory into adulthood. Most
affected children survive into their 30s and 40s.
Diagnosis
• Immunostaining analysis of dystrophin
• DNA mutation analysis
Diagnosis is suspected by characteristic clinical findings, age at onset, and family history suggestive of Xlinked recessive inheritance. Myopathic changes are noted on electromyography (rapidly recruited, short
===PAGE:3193===
duration, low-amplitude motor unit potentials) and muscle biopsy (necrosis and marked variation in
muscle fiber size not segregated by motor unit). CK levels are elevated to up to 100 times normal.
Diagnosis is confirmed by analysis of dystrophin with immunostaining of biopsy samples. Dystrophin is
undetectable in patients with Duchenne dystrophy. In patients with Becker dystrophy, dystrophin is
typically abnormal (lower molecular weight) or present in low concentration. Mutation analysis of DNA
from peripheral blood leukocytes can also confirm the diagnosis by identifying abnormalities in the
dystrophin gene (deletions or duplications in about 65% and point mutations in about 25% of patients).
Carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis are possible by using conventional studies (eg, pedigree
analysis, CK determinations, fetal sex determination) combined with recombinant
DNA analysis and
dystrophin immunostaining of muscle tissue.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
• Sometimes prednisone
• Sometimes corrective surgery
No specific treatment exists. Moderate exercise is encouraged for as long as possible. Passive exercises
may extend the period of ambulation. Ankle-foot orthoses help prevent flexion during sleep. Leg braces
may temporarily help preserve ambulation or standing. Obesity should be avoided; caloric requirements
are likely to be less than normal. Genetic counseling is indicated (.
Daily prednisone does not cause significant long-term clinical improvement, but it possibly slows the
course of the disease. No consensus on long-term effectiveness exists. Gene therapy is not yet available.
Corrective surgery is sometimes needed. Respiratory insufficiency may be treated with noninvasive
ventilatory support (eg, nasal mask—. Elective tracheotomy is gaining acceptance, allowing
children with Duchenne dystrophy to live into their 20s.
Other Forms of Muscular Dystrophy
Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy:
This disorder can be inherited as an autosomal dominant, autosomal
recessive (the rarest), or X-linked recessive disorder. The overall incidence is unknown. Females can be
carriers, but only males are affected clinically by X-linked inheritance. Genes associated with EmeryDreifuss dystrophy encode for the nuclear membrane proteins lamin A/C (autosomal) and emerin (Xlinked).
Muscle weakness and wasting can begin any time before age 20 and commonly affect the biceps and
triceps and, less often, distal leg muscles. The heart is frequently involved, with atrial paralysis,
conduction abnormalities (atrioventricular block), cardiomyopathy, and a high likelihood of sudden death.
Diagnosis is indicated by clinical findings, age at onset, and family history. The diagnosis is supported by
mildly increased serum CK levels and myopathic features on electromyography and muscle biopsy and is
confirmed by DNA testing.
Treatment involves therapy to prevent contractures. Cardiac pacemakers are sometimes lifesaving in
patients with abnormal conduction.
Myotonic dystrophy:
Myotonic dystrophy, the most common form of muscular dystrophy among whites,
affects about 30/100,000 live male and female births. Inheritance is autosomal dominant with variable
penetrance. Two genetic loci—DM 1 and DM 2—cause the abnormality. Symptoms and signs begin
during adolescence or young adulthood and include myotonia (delayed relaxation after muscle
contraction), weakness and wasting of distal limb muscles (especially in the hand) and facial muscles
(ptosis is especially common), and cardiomyopathy. Intellectual disability, cataracts, and endocrine
disorders can also occur.
===PAGE:3194===
Diagnosis is indicated by characteristic clinical findings, age at onset, and family history and is confirmed
by DNA testing. Treatment includes braces for foot drop and drug therapy for myotonia (eg, mexiletine 75
to 150 mg po bid or tid).
Limb-girdle dystrophy:
Limb-girdle dystrophy currently has 21 known subtypes, 15 autosomal
recessive and 6 autosomal dominant. The overall incidence is unknown. Males and females are affected
equally. Several chromosomal loci have been identified for autosomal dominant (5q [no known gene
product]) and recessive (2q, 4q [beta-sarcoglycan], 13q [gamma-sarcoglycan], 15q [calpain, a Caactivated protease], and 17q [alpha-sarcoglycan or adhalin]) forms. Structural (eg, dystrophin-associated
glycoproteins) or nonstructural (eg, proteases) proteins can be affected.
Symptoms involve weakness in a limb girdle and proximal limb distribution. Onset of symptoms ranges
from early childhood to adulthood; onset for autosomal recessive types tends to be during childhood, and
these types primarily have a pelvic girdle distribution.
Diagnosis is indicated by characteristic clinical findings, age at onset, and family history and requires
muscle histology, immunocytochemistry, Western blot analysis, and genetic testing for specific proteins.
Treatment focuses on prevention of contractures.
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy:
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by weakness of the facial muscles and shoulder girdle, usually beginning at age 7 to 20.
Onset is during adolescence or young adulthood and is characterized by slow progression and difficulty
whistling, closing the eyes, and raising the arms (due to weakness of the scapular stabilizer muscles).
Life expectancy is normal. An infantile variety, characterized by facial, shoulder, and hip girdle weakness,
is rapidly progressive.
Diagnosis is indicated by characteristic clinical findings, age at onset, and family history and is confirmed
by DNA testing.
Treatment consists of physical therapy.
Congenital muscular dystrophy:
Congenital muscular dystrophy is not a single disorder but instead
refers to muscular dystrophy evident at birth, occurring from any of several rare forms of muscular
dystrophy. The diagnosis is suspected in any floppy neonate but must be distinguished from congenital
myopathy by muscle biopsy.
Treatment consists of physical therapy, which may help preserve function.
Congenital Myopathies
Congenital myopathy is a term sometimes applied to hundreds of distinct neuromuscular
disorders that may be present at birth, but it is usually reserved for a group of rare, inherited,
primary muscle disorders that cause hypotonia and weakness at birth or during the neonatal
period and, in some cases, delayed motor development later in childhood.
The 4 most common types of congenital myopathy are
• Nemaline myopathy
• Myotubular myopathy
• Core myopathies
• Congenital fiber type disproportion
The 4 types are distinguished primarily by their histologic features, symptoms, and prognosis. Diagnosis
===PAGE:3195===
is indicated by characteristic clinical findings and is confirmed by muscle biopsy. Treatment consists of
physical therapy, which may help preserve function.
Nemaline myopathy:
This myopathy, the most common congenital myopathy, can be autosomal
dominant or recessive; causative mutations have been identified in 6 genes, and all are related to the
production of thin-filament proteins. Nemaline myopathy may be severe, moderate, or mild. Severely
affected patients may experience weakness of respiratory muscles and respiratory failure. Moderate
disease causes progressive weakness in muscles of the face, neck, trunk, and feet, but life expectancy
may be nearly normal. Mild disease is nonprogressive, and life expectancy is normal.
Myotubular myopathy:
This myopathy is X-linked and rare, occurring in about 1/50,000 births. It affects
males primarily and results in severe skeletal muscle weakness and hypotonia, facial weakness, impaired
swallowing, and respiratory muscle weakness and respiratory failure. Children with milder forms survive
to adulthood.
Core myopathies:
Inheritance is usually autosomal dominant, but recessive and sporadic forms exist.
Core myopathies are characterized by regions (cores) on muscle biopsy specimens in which oxidative
enzyme staining is absent; regions may be peripheral or central, focal, multiple, or extensive. Central core
myopathy was the first congenital myopathy to be identified.
Most affected patients develop hypotonia and mild proximal muscle weakness as neonates, but
sometimes symptoms do not manifest until adulthood. Many also have facial weakness. Weakness is
nonprogressive, and life expectancy is normal, but some patients are severely affected and wheelchair
bound. The gene mutation associated with central core myopathy is also associated with increased
susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia.
Congenital fiber type disproportion myopathy:
This myopathy is inherited, but the pattern is poorly
understood. Hypotonia and weakness of the face, neck, trunk, and limbs are often accompanied by
skeletal abnormalities and dysmorphic features. Most affected children improve with age, but a small
percentage develops respiratory failure.
Familial Periodic Paralysis
Familial periodic paralysis is a rare autosomal condition characterized by episodes of flaccid
paralysis with loss of deep tendon reflexes and failure of muscle to respond to electrical
stimulation. There are 3 forms: hypokalemic, hyperkalemic, and normokalemic. Diagnosis is
indicated by history and is confirmed by provoking an episode (eg, by giving dextrose and
insulin to cause hypokalemia or KCl to cause hyperkalemia). Treatment depends on the form.
The hypokalemic form of familial periodic paralysis is due to genetic mutation in the dihydropyridine
receptor-associated Ca channel gene. The hyperkalemic form is due to mutations in the gene that
encodes the
α
-subunit of the skeletal muscle Na channel (SCN4A). The cause of the normokalemic form
is unclear; in some instances it may result from a mutation in a gene that encodes Na channels.
Symptoms and Signs
Hypokalemic:
Episodes usually begin before age 16. The day after vigorous exercise, the patient often
awakens with weakness, which may be mild and limited to certain muscle
groups or may affect all four
limbs. Episodes are also precipitated by carbohydrate-rich meals. Ocular, bulbar, and respiratory muscles
are spared. Consciousness is not altered. Serum and urine K are decreased. Weakness lasts up to 24 h.
Hyperkalemic:
Episodes often begin at an earlier age and usually are shorter, more frequent, and less
severe. Episodes are precipitated by exercise after meals or by fasting. Myotonia (delayed relaxation after
muscle contraction) is common. Eyelid myotonia may be the only symptom.
Normokalemic:
Affected patients are sensitive to K ingestion and have episodes of mild weakness that
occur without any change in serum K.
===PAGE:3196===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Serum K level during symptoms
• Sometimes provocative testing
The best diagnostic indicator is a history of typical episodes. If measured during an episode, serum K
may be abnormal. Episodes can sometimes be provoked by giving dextrose and insulin (to cause the
hypokalemic form) or KCl (to cause the hyperkalemic form), but only experienced physicians should
attempt provocative testing, because respiratory paralysis or cardiac conduction abnormalities may occur
with provoked episodes.
Treatment
• Varies with type and severity
Hypokalemic:
Episodes of paralysis are managed by giving KCl 2 to 10 g in an unsweetened oral
solution or giving K IV. Following a low-carbohydrate, low-Na diet, avoiding strenuous activity or alcohol
after periods of rest, and taking acetazolamide 250 to 2000 mg po once/day may help prevent
hypokalemic episodes.
Hyperkalemic:
Episodes of paralysis, if mild, can be aborted at onset by light exercise and a 2 g/kg oral
carbohydrate load. Established episodes require thiazides, acetazolamide, or inhaled
β
-agonists. Severe
attacks require Ca gluconate or insulin and dextrose IV. Regularly ingesting carbohydrate-rich, low-K
meals and avoiding fasting, strenuous activity after meals, and cold exposure help prevent hyperkalemic
episodes.
Normokalemic:
Large doses of Na alleviate the weakness. Dextrose has no effect. Attacks may be
prevented by avoiding excess alcohol and cold exposure. People should cool down slowly after strenuous
exercise and not immediately rest. Eating some form of carbohydrate (eg, candy bar) may help as well.
===PAGE:3197===
Chapter 301. Inherited Disorders of Metabolism
Introduction
Most inherited disorders (also called inborn errors) of metabolism are caused by mutations in genes that
code for enzymes; enzyme deficiency or inactivity leads to accumulation of substrate precursors or
metabolites or to deficiencies of the enzyme's products. Hundreds of disorders exist, and although most
inherited disorders of metabolism are extremely rare individually, collectively they are not rare. The
disorders are typically grouped by the affected substrate (eg, carbohydrates, amino acids, fatty acids).
Most states routinely test all neonates for specific inherited disorders of metabolism and other conditions
(, including phenylketonuria, tyrosinemia, biotinidase deficiency, homocystinuria, maple syrup
urine disease, and galactosemia. Many states have an expanded screening program that covers many
more inherited disorders of metabolism, including disorders of fatty acid oxidation and other organic
acidemias.
Metabolic defects that primarily cause disease in adults (eg, gout, porphyria), are organ-specific (eg,
Wilson's disease, congenital adrenal hypoplasia), or are common (eg, cystic fibrosis, hemochromatosis)
are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL. For inherited disorders of lipoprotein metabolism, see
Table 100-3

Approach to the Patient with a Suspected Inherited Disorder of Metabolism
Most inherited disorders (inborn errors) of metabolism are rare, and therefore their diagnosis requires a
high index of suspicion.
Timely diagnosis leads to early treatment and may help avoid acute and chronic
complications, developmental compromise, and even death.
Evaluation
Symptoms and signs tend to be nonspecific and are more often caused by something other than an
inherited disorder of metabolism (eg, infection); these more likely causes should also be investigated.
History and physical examination:
Disorders manifesting in the neonatal period tend to be more
serious; manifestations of many of the disorders typically include lethargy, poor feeding, vomiting, and
seizures. Disorders that manifest later tend to affect growth and development, but vomiting, seizures, and
weakness may also appear.
Growth delay
suggests decreased anabolism or increased catabolism and may be due to decreased
availability of energy-generating substrates (eg, in glycogen storage disease [GSD]) or inefficient energy
or protein use (eg, in organic acidemias or urea cycle defects).
Developmental delay
may reflect chronic energy deficit in the brain (eg, oxidative phosphorylation
defects), decreased supply of needed carbohydrates that are non-energy substrates for the brain (eg,
lack of uridine-5´-diphosphate-galactose [UDP-galactose] in untreated galactosemia), or chronic amino
acid deficit in the brain (eg, tyrosine deficiency in phenylketonuria).
Neuromuscular symptoms
, such as seizures, muscle weakness, hypotonia, myoclonus, and muscle
pain, and strokes or coma may suggest acute energy deficit in the brain (eg, hypoglycemic seizures in
GSD type I, strokes in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation defects) or muscle (eg, muscle weakness
in muscle forms of GSD). Neuromuscular symptoms may also reflect accumulation of toxic compounds in
the brain (eg, hyperammonemic coma in urea cycle defects) or tissue breakdown (eg, rhabdomyolysis
and myoglobinuria in patients with long-chain hydroxyacyl dehydrogenase deficiency or muscle forms of
GSD).
Congenital brain malformation
may reflect decreased availability of energy (eg, decreased ATP output
in pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency) or critical precursors (eg, decreased cholesterol in 7dehydrocholestrol reductase deficiency or Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome) during fetal development.
===PAGE:3198===
Autonomic symptoms
can result from hypoglycemia caused by increased glucose consumption or
decreased glucose production (eg, vomiting, diaphoresis, pallor, and tachycardia in GSD or hereditary
fructose intolerance) or from metabolic acidosis (eg, vomiting and Kussmaul respirations in organic
acidemias). Some conditions cause both (ie, in propionic acidemia, accumulation of acyl-CoAs causes
metabolic acidosis and inhibits gluconeogenesis, thus causing hypoglycemia).
Nonphysiologic jaundice
after the neonatal period usually reflects intrinsic hepatic disease, especially
when accompanied by elevation of liver enzymes, but may be due to inherited disorders of metabolism
(eg, untreated galactosemia, hereditary fructose intolerance, tyrosinemia type I).
Unusual odors in body fluids
reflect accumulation of specific compounds (eg, sweaty feet odor in
isovaleric acidemia, smoky-sweet odor in maple syrup urine disease, mousy or musty odor in
phenylketonuria, boiled cabbage odor in tyrosinemia).
Change in urine color
on exposure to air occurs in some disorders (eg, darkish brown in alkaptonuria,
purplish brown in porphyria).
Organomegaly
may reflect a failure in substrate degradation resulting in substrate accumulation within
the organ cells (eg, hepatomegaly in hepatic forms of GSD and many lysosomal storage diseases,
cardiomegaly in GSD type II).
Eye changes
include cataracts in galactokinase deficiency or classic galactosemia, and ophthalmoplegia
and retinal degeneration in oxidative phosphorylation defects.
Testing:
When an inherited disorder of metabolism is suspected, evaluation begins with simple metabolic
screening tests, which typically include the following:
• Glucose
• Electrolytes
• CBC and peripheral smear
• Liver function tests
• Ammonia levels
• Urinalysis
Glucose measurement detects hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia; measurement may have to be timed
relative to meals (eg, fasting hypoglycemia in GSD).
Electrolyte measurement detects metabolic acidosis and presence or absence of an anion gap; metabolic
acidosis may need to be corroborated by ABG measurement. Non-anion gap acidosis occurs in inherited
disorders of metabolism that cause renal tubular damage (eg, galactosemia, tyrosinemia type I). Anion
gap acidosis occurs in inherited disorders of metabolism in which accumulation of titratable acids is
typical, such as methylmalonic and propionic acidemias; it can also be caused
by lactic acidosis (eg, in
pyruvate decarboxylase deficiency or mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation defects). When the anion
gap is elevated, lactate and pyruvate levels should be obtained. An increase in the lactate:pyruvate ratio
distinguishes oxidative phosphorylation defects from disorders of pyruvate metabolism, in which the
lactate:pyruvate ratio remains normal.
CBC and peripheral smear detect hemolysis caused by RBC energy deficits or WBC defects (eg, in some
pentose phosphate pathway disorders and GSD type Ib) and cytopenia caused by metabolite
accumulation (eg, neutropenia in propionic acidemia due to propionyl CoA accumulation).
Liver function tests detect hepatocellular damage, dysfunction, or both (eg, in untreated galactosemia,
hereditary fructose intolerance, or tyrosinemia type I).
===PAGE:3199===
Ammonia levels are elevated in urea cycle defects, organic acidemias, and fatty acid oxidation defects.
Urinalysis detects ketonuria (present in some GSDs and many organic acidemias); absence of ketones in
the presence of acidosis suggests a fatty acid oxidation defect.
More specific tests
may be indicated when ≥ 1 of the previously described simple screening tests
support an inherited disorder of metabolism. Carbohydrate metabolites, mucopolysaccharides, and amino
and organic acids can be measured directly by chromatography and mass spectrometry. Common tests
include quantitative plasma amino acids, urine organic acids, plasma acylcarnitine profile, and urine
acylglycine profile; these have replaced earlier nonspecific screening tests.
Confirmatory tests
may also include biopsy (eg, liver biopsy to distinguish hepatic forms of GSDs from
other disorders associated with hepatomegaly, muscle biopsy to detect ragged red fibers in mitochondrial
myopathy); enzyme studies (eg, using blood and skin cells to diagnose lysosomal storage diseases); and
DNA studies, which identify gene mutations that cause disease. DNA testing can be done on almost all
cells (except RBCs and platelets), thus avoiding the need for tissue biopsies; however, sensitivity for any
given disease is often suboptimal because not all mutations that cause disease have been characterized.
Challenge testing
is used judiciously to detect symptoms, signs, or measurable biochemical
abnormalities not detectable in the normal state. The need for challenge testing has diminished with the
availability of highly sensitive metabolite detection methods, but it is still occasionally used. Examples
include fasting tests (eg, to provoke hypoglycemia in hepatic forms of GSD); provocative tests (eg,
fructose challenge to trigger symptoms in hereditary fructose intolerance, glucagon challenge in hepatic
forms of GSD [failure to observe hyperglycemia suggests disease]); and physiologic challenge (eg,
exercise stress testing to elicit lactic acid production and other deformities in muscle forms of GSD).
Challenge tests are often associated with an element of risk so they must be done under well-controlled
conditions with a clear plan for reversing symptoms and signs.
Amino Acid and Organic Acid Metabolism Disorders
Defects of amino acid transport in the renal tubule are discussed in
Chapter 297
.
Phenylketonuria
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a clinical syndrome of intellectual disability with cognitive and
behavioral abnormalities caused by elevated serum phenylalanine. The primary cause is
deficient phenylalanine hydroxylase activity. Diagnosis is by detecting high phenylalanine
levels and normal or low tyrosine levels. Treatment is lifelong dietary phenylalanine restriction.
Prognosis is excellent with treatment.
PKU is most common among all white populations and relatively less common among Ashkenazi Jews,
Chinese, and blacks. Inheritance is autosomal recessive; incidence is about 1/10,000 births among
whites.
Pathophysiology
Excess dietary phenylalanine (ie, that not used for protein synthesis) is normally converted to tyrosine by
phenylalanine hydroxylase; tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) is an essential cofactor for this reaction. When one
of several gene mutations results in deficiency or absence of phenylalanine hydroxylase, dietary
phenylalanine accumulates; the brain is the main organ affected, possibly due to disturbance of
myelination. Some of the excess phenylalanine is metabolized to phenylketones, which are excreted in
the urine, giving rise to the term phenylketonuria. The degree of enzyme deficiency, and hence severity of
hyperphenylalaninemia, varies among patients depending on the specific mutation.
Variant forms:
Although nearly all cases (98 to 99%) of PKU result from phenylalanine hydroxylase
deficiency, phenylalanine
can also accumulate if BH4 is not synthesized because of deficiencies of
dihydrobiopterin synthase or not regenerated because of deficiencies of dihydropteridine reductase.
===PAGE:3200===
Additionally, because BH4 is also a cofactor for tyrosine hydroxylase, which is involved in the synthesis of
dopamine and serotonin, BH4 deficiency alters synthesis of neurotransmitters, causing neurologic
symptoms independently of phenylalanine accumulation.
Symptoms and Signs
Most children are normal at birth but develop symptoms and signs slowly over several months as
phenylalanine accumulates. The hallmark of untreated PKU is severe intellectual disability. Children also
manifest extreme hyperactivity, gait disturbance, and psychoses and often exhibit an unpleasant, mousy
body odor caused by phenylacetic acid (a breakdown product of phenylalanine) in urine and sweat.
Children also tend to have a lighter skin, hair, and eye color than unaffected family members, and some
may develop a rash similar to infantile eczema.
Diagnosis
• Routine neonatal screening
• Phenylalanine levels
In the US and many developed countries, all neonates are screened for PKU 24 to 48 h after birth with
one of several blood tests; abnormal results are confirmed by directly measuring phenylalanine levels. In
classic PKU, neonates often have phenylalanine levels > 20 mg/dL (1.2 mM/L). Those with partial
deficiencies typically have levels < 8 to 10 mg/dL while on a normal diet (levels > 6 mg/dL require
treatment); distinction from classic PKU requires a liver phenylalanine hydroxylase activity assay showing
activity between 5% and 15% of normal or a mutation analysis identifying mild mutations in the gene.
BH4 deficiency is distinguished from other forms of PKU by elevated concentrations of biopterin or
neopterin in urine, blood, CSF, or all 3; recognition is important, and the urine biopterin profile should be
determined routinely at initial diagnosis because standard PKU treatment does not prevent neurologic
damage.
Children in families with a positive family history can be diagnosed prenatally by using direct mutation
studies after chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis.
Prognosis
Adequate treatment begun in the first days of life prevents all manifestations of disease. Treatment begun
after 2 to 3 yr may be effective only in controlling the extreme hyperactivity and intractable seizures.
Children born to mothers with poorly controlled PKU (ie, they have high phenylalanine levels) during
pregnancy are at high risk of microcephaly and developmental deficit.
Treatment
• Dietary phenylalanine restriction
Treatment is lifelong dietary phenylalanine restriction. All natural protein contains about 4%
phenylalanine. Therefore dietary staples include low-protein natural foods (eg, fruits, vegetables, certain
cereals), protein hydrolysates treated to remove phenylalanine, and phenylalanine-free elemental amino
acid mixtures. Examples of commercially available phenylalanine-free products include XPhe products
(XP Analog for infants, XP Maxamaid for children 1 to 8 yr, XP Maxamum for children > 8 yr); Phenex I and
II; Phenyl-Free I and II; PKU-1, -2, and -3; PhenylAde (varieties); Loflex; and Plexy10. Some
phenylalanine is required for growth and metabolism; this requirement is met by measured quantities of
natural protein from milk or low-protein foods.
Frequent monitoring of plasma phenylalanine levels is required; recommended targets are between 2
mg/dL and 4 mg/dL (120 to 240
μ
mol/L) for children < 12 yr and between 2 mg/dL and 10 mg/dL (120 to
μ
mol/L) for children > 12 yr. Dietary planning and management need to be initiated in women of
childbearing age before pregnancy to ensure a good outcome for the child. Tyrosine supplementation is
===PAGE:3201===
increasingly used because it is an essential amino acid in patients with PKU. In addition, sapropterin
supplementation is increasingly being used.
For those with BH4 deficiency, treatment also includes tetrahydrobiopterin 1 to 5 mg/kg po tid; levodopa,
carbidopa, and 5-OH tryptophan; and folinic acid 10 to 20 mg po once/day in cases of dihydropteridine
reductase deficiency. However, treatment goals and approach are the same as those for PKU.
Disorders of Tyrosine Metabolism
Tyrosine is a precursor of several neurotransmitters (eg, dopamine, norepinephrine,
epinephrine), hormones (eg, thyroxine), and melanin; deficiencies of enzymes involved in its
metabolism lead to a variety of syndromes.
Transient tyrosinemia of the newborn:
Transient immaturity of metabolic enzymes, particularly 4hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid
dioxygenase, sometimes leads to elevated plasma tyrosine levels (usually in
premature infants, particularly those receiving high-protein diets); metabolites may show up on routine
neonatal screening for PKU.
Most infants are asymptomatic, but some have lethargy and poor feeding.
Tyrosinemia is distinguished from PKU by elevated plasma tyrosine levels.
Most cases resolve spontaneously. Symptomatic patients should have dietary tyrosine restriction (2
g/kg/day) and be given vitamin C 200 to 400 mg po once/day.
Tyrosinemia type I:
This disorder is an autosomal recessive trait caused by deficiency of
fumarylacetoacetate hydroxylase, an enzyme important for tyrosine metabolism.
Disease may manifest as fulminant liver failure in the neonatal period or as indolent sub-clinical hepatitis,
painful peripheral neuropathy, and renal tubular disorders (eg, normal anion gap metabolic acidosis,
hypophosphatemia, vitamin D-resistant rickets) in older infants and children. Children who do not die from
associated liver failure in infancy have a significant risk of developing liver cancer.
Diagnosis is suggested by elevated plasma levels of tyrosine; it is confirmed by a high level of
succinylacetone in plasma or urine and by low fumarylacetoacetate hydroxylase activity in blood cells or
liver biopsy specimens. Treatment with 2(2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzoyl)-1,3-cyclo-hexanedione (NTBC)
is effective in acute episodes and slows progression.
A diet low in phenylalanine and tyrosine is recommended. Liver transplantation is effective.
Tyrosinemia type II:
This rare autosomal recessive disorder is caused by tyrosine transaminase
deficiency.
Accumulation of tyrosine causes cutaneous and corneal ulcers. Secondary elevation of phenylalanine,
though mild, may cause neuropsychiatric abnormalities if not treated.
Diagnosis is by elevation of tyrosine in plasma, absence of succinylacetone in plasma or urine, and
measurement of decreased enzyme activity in liver biopsy.
This disorder is easily treated with mild to moderate restriction of dietary phenylalanine and tyrosine.
Alkaptonuria:
This rare autosomal recessive disorder is caused by homogentisic acid oxidase
deficiency; homogentisic acid oxidation products accumulate in and darken skin, and crystals precipitate
in joints.
The condition is usually diagnosed in adults and causes dark skin pigmentation (ochronosis) and arthritis.
Urine turns dark when exposed to air because of oxidation products of homogentisic acid. Diagnosis is by
finding elevated urinary levels of homogentisic acid (> 4 to 8 g/24 h).
===PAGE:3202===
There is no effective treatment, but ascorbic acid 1 g po once/day may diminish pigment deposition by
increasing renal excretion of homogentisic acid.
Oculocutaneous albinism:
Tyrosinase deficiency results in absence of skin and retinal pigmentation,
causing a much increased risk of skin cancer and considerable vision loss. Nystagmus is often present,
and photophobia is common (see also
Albinism
.
Disorders of Branched-Chain Amino Acid Metabolism
Valine, leucine, and isoleucine are branched-chain amino acids; deficiency of enzymes
involved in their metabolism leads to accumulation of organic acids with severe metabolic
acidosis.
Maple syrup urine disease:
This is a group of autosomal recessive disorders caused by deficiency of
one or more subunits of a dehydrogenase active in the 2nd step of branched-chain amino acid
catabolism. Although quite rare, incidence is significant (perhaps 1/200 births) in Amish and Mennonite
populations.
Clinical manifestations include body fluid odor that resembles maple syrup (particularly strong in cerumen)
and overwhelming illness in the first days of life, beginning with vomiting and lethargy, and progressing to
seizures, coma, and death if untreated. Patients with milder forms of the disease may manifest symptoms
only during stress (eg, infection, surgery).
Biochemical findings are profound ketonemia and acidemia. Diagnosis is by finding elevated plasma
levels of branched-chain amino acids (particularly leucine).
Acutely, treatment with peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis may be required, along with IV hydration and
nutrition (including high-dose dextrose). Long-term management is restriction of dietary branched-chain
amino acids; however, small amounts are required for normal metabolic function. Thiamin is a cofactor for
the decarboxylation, and some patients respond favorably to high-dose thiamin (up to 200 mg po
once/day). Liver transplantation is curative.
Isovaleric acidemia:
The 3rd step of leucine metabolism is the conversion of isovaleryl CoA to 3methylcrotonyl CoA, a dehydrogenation step. Deficiency of this dehydrogenase results in isovaleric
acidemia, also known as "sweaty feet" syndrome, because accumulated isovaleric acid emits an odor that
smells like sweat.
Clinical manifestations of the acute form occur in the first few days of life with poor feeding, vomiting, and
respiratory distress as infants develop profound anion gap metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, and
hyperammonemia. Bone marrow suppression often occurs. A chronic intermittent form may not manifest
for several months or years.
Diagnosis is made by detecting elevated levels of isovaleric acid and its metabolites in blood or urine.
Acute treatment is with IV hydration and nutrition (including high-dose dextrose) and measures to increase
renal isovaleric acid excretion by conjugation with glycine. If these measures are insufficient, exchange
transfusion and peritoneal dialysis may be needed. Long-term treatment is with dietary leucine restriction
and continuation of glycine and carnitine supplements. Prognosis is excellent with treatment.
Propionic acidemia:
Deficiency of propionyl CoA carboxylase, the enzyme responsible for metabolizing
propionic acid to methylmalonate, causes propionic acid accumulation.
Illness begins in the first days or weeks of life with poor feeding, vomiting, and respiratory distress due to
profound anion gap metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, and hyperammonemia. Seizures may occur, and
bone marrow suppression is common. Physiologic stresses may trigger recurrent attacks. Survivors may
have tubular nephropathies, intellectual disability, and neurologic abnormalities. Propionic acidemia can
also be seen as part of multiple carboxylase deficiency, biotin deficiency, or biotinidase deficiency.
===PAGE:3203===
Diagnosis is suggested by elevated levels of propionic acid metabolites, including methylcitrate and
tiglate and their glycine conjugates in blood and urine, and confirmed by measuring propionyl CoA
carboxylase activity in WBCs or cultured fibroblasts.
Acute treatment is with IV hydration (including high-dose dextrose) and nutrition; carnitine may be helpful.
If these measures are insufficient, peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis may be needed. Long-term
treatment is dietary restriction of precursor amino acids and odd-chain fatty acids and possibly
continuation of carnitine supplementation. A few patients respond to high-dose biotin because it is a
cofactor for propionyl CoA and other carboxylases.
Methylmalonic acidemia:
This disorder is caused by deficiency of methylmalonyl CoA mutase, which
converts methylmalonyl CoA (a product of the propionyl CoA carboxylation) into succinyl CoA.
Adenosylcobalamin, a metabolite of vitamin B
, is a cofactor; its deficiency also may cause
methylmalonic acidemia (and also homocystinuria and megaloblastic anemia). Methylmalonic acid
accumulates. Age of onset, clinical manifestations, and treatment are similar to those of propionic
acidemia except that cobalamin, instead of biotin, may be helpful for some patients.
Disorders of Methionine Metabolism
A number of defects in methionine metabolism lead to accumulation of homocysteine (and its
dimer, homocystine) with adverse effects including thrombotic tendency, lens dislocation, and
CNS and skeletal abnormalities.
Homocysteine is an intermediate in methionine metabolism; it is either remethylated to regenerate
methionine or combined with serine in a series of transsulfuration reactions to form cystathionine and
then cysteine. Cysteine is then metabolized to sulfite, taurine, and glutathione. Various defects in
remethylation or transsulfuration can cause homocysteine to accumulate, resulting in disease.
The first step in methionine metabolism is its conversion to adenosylmethionine; this conversion requires
the enzyme methionine adenosyltransferase. Deficiency of this enzyme results in methionine elevation,
which is not clinically significant except that it causes false-positive neonatal screening results for
homocystinuria.
Classic homocystinuria:
This disorder is caused by an autosomal recessive deficiency of cystathionine
β
-synthase, which catalyzes cystathionine formation from homocysteine and serine. Homocysteine
accumulates and dimerizes to form the disulfide homocystine, which is excreted in the urine. Because
remethylation is intact, some of the additional homocysteine is converted to methionine, which
accumulates in the blood. Excess homocysteine predisposes to thrombosis and has adverse effects on
connective tissue (perhaps involving fibrillin), particularly the eyes and skeleton; adverse neurologic
effects may be due to thrombosis or a direct effect.
Arterial and venous thromboembolic phenomena can occur at any age. Many patients develop ectopia
lentis (lens subluxation), intellectual disability, and osteoporosis. Patients can have a marfanoid habitus
even though they are not usually tall.
Diagnosis is by neonatal screening for elevated serum methionine; elevated total plasma
homocysteine
levels are confirmatory. Enzymatic assay in skin fibroblasts can also be done.
Treatment is a low-methionine diet, combined with high-dose pyridoxine (a cystathionine synthetase
cofactor) 100 to 500 mg po once/day. Because about half of patients respond to high-dose pyridoxine
alone, some clinicians do not restrict methionine intake in these patients. Betaine (trimethylglycine), which
enhances remethylation, can also help lower homocysteine; dosage is 100 to 125 mg/kg po bid. Folate
500 to 1000
μ
g once/day is also given. With early treatment, intellectual outcome is normal or near
normal.
Other forms of homocystinuria:
Various defects in the remethylation process can result in
homocystinuria. Defects include deficiencies of methionine synthase (MS) and MS reductase (MSR),
===PAGE:3204===
delivery of methylcobalamin and adenosylcobalamin, and deficiency of methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase (MTHFR, which is required to generate the 5-methyltetrahydrofolate needed for the MS
reaction). Because there is no methionine elevation in these forms of homocystinuria, they are not
detected by neonatal screening.
Clinical manifestations are similar to other forms of homocystinuria. In addition, MS and MSR deficiencies
are accompanied by neurologic deficits and megaloblastic anemia. Clinical manifestation of MTHFR
deficiency is variable, including intellectual disability, psychosis, weakness, ataxia, and spasticity.
Diagnosis of MS and MSR deficiencies is suggested by homocystinuria and megaloblastic anemia and
confirmed by DNA testing. Patients with cobalamin defects have megaloblastic anemia and methylmalonic
acidemia. MTHFR deficiency is diagnosed by DNA testing.
Treatment is by replacement of hydroxycobalamin 1 mg IM once/day (for patients with MS, MSR, and
cobalamin defects) and folate in supplementation similar to characteristic homocystinuria.
Cystathioninuria:
This disorder is caused by deficiency of cystathionase, which converts cystathionine
to cysteine. Cystathionine accumulation results in increased urinary excretion but no clinical symptoms.
Sulfite oxidase deficiency:
Sulfite oxidase converts sulfite to sulfate in the last step of cysteine and
methionine degradation; it requires a molybdenum cofactor. Deficiency of either the enzyme or the
cofactor causes similar disease; inheritance for both is autosomal recessive.
In its most severe form, clinical manifestations appear in neonates and include seizures, hypotonia, and
myoclonus, progressing to early death. Patients with milder forms may present similarly to cerebral palsy
( and may have choreiform movements.
Diagnosis is suggested by elevated urinary sulfite and confirmed by measuring enzyme levels in
fibroblasts and cofactor levels in liver biopsy specimens. Treatment is supportive.
Urea Cycle Disorders
Urea cycle disorders (UCDs) are characterized by hyperammonemia under catabolic or proteinloading conditions.
Primary UCDs include carbamoyl phosphate synthase (CPS) deficiency, ornithine transcarbamylase
(OTC) deficiency, argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency (citrullinemia), argininosuccinate lyase
deficiency (argininosuccinic aciduria), and arginase deficiency (argininemia). In addition, Nacetylglutamate synthetase (NAGS) deficiency has been reported. The more "proximal" the enzyme
deficiency is, the more severe the hyperammonemia; thus, disease severity in descending order is NAGS
deficiency, CPS deficiency, OTC deficiency, citrullinemia, argininosuccinic aciduria, and argininemia.
Inheritance for all UCDs is autosomal recessive, except for OTC deficiency, which is X-linked.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical manifestations range from mild (eg, failure to thrive, intellectual disability, episodic
hyperammonemia) to severe (eg, altered mental status, coma, death). Manifestations in females with
OTC deficiency range from growth failure, developmental delay, psychiatric abnormalities, and episodic
(especially postpartum) hyperammonemia to a phenotype similar to that of affected males.
Diagnosis
• Serum amino acid profiles
Diagnosis is based on amino acid profiles. For example, elevated ornithine indicates CPS deficiency or
OTC deficiency, whereas elevated citrulline indicates citrullinemia. To distinguish between CPS deficiency
and OTC deficiency, orotic acid measurement is helpful because accumulation of carbamoyl phosphate in
===PAGE:3205===
OTC deficiency results in its alternative metabolism to orotic acid.
Treatment
• Dietary protein restriction
• Arginine or citrulline supplementation
• Sometimes liver transplantation
Treatment is dietary protein restriction that still provides adequate amino acids for growth, development,
and normal protein turnover. Arginine has become a staple of treatment. It supplies adequate urea cycle
intermediates to encourage the incorporation of more nitrogen moieties into urea cycle intermediates,
each of which is readily excretable. Arginine is also a positive regulator of acetylglutamate synthesis.
Recent studies suggest that oral citrulline is more effective than arginine in patients with OTC deficiency.
Additional treatment is with Na benzoate, phenylbutyrate, or phenylacetate, which by conjugating glycine
(Na benzoate) and glutamine (phenylbutyrate and phenylacetate) provides a "nitrogen sink."
Despite these therapeutic advances, many UCDs remain difficult to treat, and liver transplantation is
eventually required for many patients. Timing of liver transplantation is critical. Optimally, the infant should
grow to an age when transplantation is less risky (> 1 yr), but it is important to not wait so long as to allow
an intercurrent episode of hyperammonemia (often associated with illness) to cause irreparable harm to
the CNS.
Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders
Glycogen Storage Diseases
Glycogen storage diseases (GSDs) are caused by deficiencies of enzymes involved in glycogen
synthesis or breakdown; the deficiencies may occur in the liver or muscles and cause
hypoglycemia or deposition of abnormal amounts or types of glycogen (or its intermediate
metabolites) in tissues.
Inheritance for GSDs is autosomal recessive except for GSD type VIII/IX, which is X-linked. Incidence is
estimated at about 1/25,000 births, which may be an underestimate because milder subclinical forms may
be undiagnosed.
Age of onset, clinical manifestations, and severity vary by type, but symptoms and signs are most
commonly those of hypoglycemia and myopathy. Diagnosis is suspected by history, examination, and
detection of glycogen and intermediate metabolites in tissues by MRI or biopsy.
Diagnosis is confirmed by significant decrease of enzyme activity in liver (types I, III, VI, and VIII/IX),
muscle (types IIb, III, VII, and VIII/IX), skin fibroblasts (types IIa and IV), or RBCs (type VII) or by lack of an
increase in venous lactate with forearm activity/ischemia (types V and VII). Prognosis and treatment vary
by type, but treatment typically includes dietary supplementation with cornstarch to provide a sustained
source of glucose for the hepatic forms of GSD and exercise avoidance for the muscle forms.
Defects in glycolysis
(rare) may cause syndromes similar to GSDs. Deficiencies of phosphoglycerate
kinase, phosphoglycerate mutase, and lactate dehydrogenase mimic the myopathies of GSD types V and
VII; deficiencies of glucose transport protein 2 (Fanconi-Bickel syndrome) mimic the hepatopathy of other
GSD types (eg, I, III, IV, VI).
Galactosemia
Galactosemia is caused by inherited deficiencies in enzymes that convert galactose to glucose.
Symptoms and signs include hepatic and renal dysfunction, cognitive deficits, cataracts, and
premature ovarian failure. Diagnosis is by enzyme analysis of RBCs. Treatment is dietary
elimination of galactose. Physical prognosis is good with treatment, but cognitive and
===PAGE:3206===
performance parameters are often subnormal.
Galactose is found in dairy products, fruits, and vegetables. Autosomal recessive enzyme deficiencies
cause 3 clinical syndromes.
Galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase deficiency:
This deficiency causes classic galactosemia.
Incidence is 1/62,000 births; carrier frequency is 1/125. Infants become anorectic and jaundiced within a
few days or weeks of consuming breast milk or lactose-containing formula. Vomiting, hepatomegaly, poor
growth, lethargy, diarrhea, and septicemia (usually
Escherichia coli
) develop, as does renal dysfunction
(eg, proteinuria, aminoaciduria, Fanconi syndrome), leading to metabolic acidosis and edema. Hemolytic
anemia may also occur. Without treatment, children remain short and develop cognitive, speech, gait, and
balance deficits in their teenage years; many also have cataracts, osteomalacia (caused by
hypercalciuria), and premature ovarian failure. Patients with the Duarte variant have a much milder
phenotype.
Galactokinase deficiency:
Patients develop cataracts from production of galactitol, which osmotically
damages lens fibers; idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri) is rare. Incidence is
1/40,000 births.
Uridine diphosphate galactose 4-epimerase deficiency:
There are benign and severe phenotypes.
Incidence of the benign form is 1/23,000 births in Japan; no incidence data are available for the more
severe form. The benign form is restricted to RBCs and WBCs and causes no clinical abnormalities. The
severe form causes a syndrome indistinguishable from classic galactosemia, although sometimes with
hearing loss.
Diagnosis
• Galactose levels
• Enzyme analysis
Diagnosis is suggested clinically and supported by elevated galactose levels and the presence of
reducing substances other than glucose (eg, galactose, galactose 1-phosphate) in the urine; it is
confirmed by enzyme analysis of RBCs, hepatic tissue, or both. Most states require that neonates be
screened for galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase deficiency.
Treatment
• Dietary galactose restriction
Treatment is elimination of all sources of galactose in the diet, most notably lactose, which is a source of
galactose present in all dairy products, including milk-based infant formulas and a sweetener used in
many foods. A lactose-free diet prevents acute toxicity and reverses some manifestations (eg, cataracts)
but may not prevent neurocognitive deficits. Many patients require supplemental Ca and vitamins. For
patients with epimerase deficiency, some galactose intake is critical to ensure a supply of uridine-5´-
diphosphate-galactose (UDP-galactose) for various metabolic processes.
Disorders of Fructose Metabolism
Deficiency of enzymes that metabolize fructose may be asymptomatic or cause hypoglycemia.
Fructose is a monosaccharide that is present in high concentrations in fruit and honey and is a
constituent of sucrose and sorbitol.
Fructose 1-phosphate aldolase (aldolase B) deficiency:
This deficiency causes the clinical syndrome
of hereditary fructose intolerance. Inheritance is autosomal recessive; incidence is estimated at 1/20,000
births. Infants are healthy until they ingest fructose; fructose 1-phosphate then accumulates, causing
hypoglycemia, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, sweating, tremors, confusion, lethargy, seizures,
===PAGE:3207===
and coma. Prolonged ingestion may cause cirrhosis, mental deterioration, and proximal renal tubular
acidosis with urinary loss of phosphate and glucose.
Diagnosis is suggested by symptoms in relation to recent fructose intake and is confirmed by enzyme
analysis of liver biopsy tissue or by induction of hypoglycemia by fructose infusion 200 mg/kg IV.
Diagnosis and identification of heterozygous carriers of the mutated gene can also be made by direct
DNA analysis.
Short-term treatment is glucose for hypoglycemia; long-term treatment is exclusion of dietary fructose,
sucrose, and sorbitol. Many patients develop a natural aversion to fructose-containing food. Prognosis is
excellent with treatment.
Fructokinase deficiency:
This deficiency causes benign elevation of blood and urine fructose levels
(benign fructosuria). Inheritance is autosomal recessive; incidence is about 1/130,000 births.
The condition is asymptomatic and diagnosed accidentally when a non-glucose reducing substance is
detected in urine.
Deficiency of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase:
This deficiency compromises gluconeogenesis and
results in fasting hypoglycemia, ketosis, and acidosis. This deficiency can be fatal in neonates.
Inheritance is autosomal recessive; incidence is unknown. Febrile illness can trigger episodes.
Acute treatment is oral or IV glucose. Tolerance to fasting generally increases with age.
Disorders of Pyruvate Metabolism
Inability to metabolize pyruvate causes lactic acidosis and a variety of CNS abnormalities.
Pyruvate is an important substrate in carbohydrate metabolism.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency:
Pyruvate dehydrogenase is a multi-enzyme complex responsible
for the generation of acetyl CoA from pyruvate for the Krebs cycle. Deficiency results in elevation of
pyruvate and thus elevation of lactic acid levels. Inheritance is X-linked or autosomal recessive.
Clinical manifestations vary in severity but include lactic acidosis and CNS malformations and other
postnatal changes, including cystic lesions of the cerebral cortex, brain stem, and basal ganglia; ataxia;
and psychomotor retardation.
Diagnosis is confirmed by enzyme analysis of skin fibroblasts, DNA testing, or both.
There is no clearly effective treatment, although a low-carbohydrate or ketogenic diet and dietary thiamin
supplementation have been beneficial for some patients.
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency:
Pyruvate carboxylase is an enzyme important for gluconeogenesis
from pyruvate and alanine generated in muscle. Deficiency may be primary, or secondary to deficiency of
holocarboxylase synthetase, biotin, or biotinidase; inheritance for both is autosomal recessive, and both
result in lactic acidosis.
Primary deficiency incidence is < 1/250,000 births but may be higher in certain American Indian
populations. Psychomotor retardation with seizures and spasticity are the major clinical manifestations.
Laboratory abnormalities include hyperammonemia; lactic acidosis; ketoacidosis; elevated levels of
plasma lysine, citrulline, alanine, and proline; and increased excretion of
α
-ketoglutarate. Diagnosis is
confirmed by enzyme analysis of cultured skin fibroblasts.
Secondary deficiency is clinically similar, with failure to thrive, seizures, and other organic aciduria.
There is no effective treatment, but some patients with primary deficiency and all those with secondary
deficiencies should be given biotin supplementation 5 to 20 mg po once/day.
===PAGE:3208===
Other Disorders of Carbohydrate Metabolism
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency
impairs gluconeogenesis and results in symptoms
and signs similar to the hepatic forms of glycogen storage disease but without hepatic glycogen
accumulation.
Other deficiencies
include those of glycolytic enzymes or enzymes in the pentose phosphate pathway.
Common examples are pyruvate kinase deficiency ( and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(G6PD) deficiency (, both of which may result in hemolytic anemia. Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome ( is caused by a partial deficiency of transketolase, which is an enzyme for the
pentose phosphate pathway that requires thiamin as a cofactor.
Fatty Acid and Glycerol Metabolism Disorders
Fatty acids are the preferred energy source for the heart and an important energy source for skeletal
muscle during prolonged exertion. Also, during fasting, the bulk of the body's energy needs must be
supplied by fat metabolism. Using fat as an energy source requires catabolizing adipose tissue into free
fatty acid and glycerol. The free fatty acid is metabolized in the liver and peripheral tissue via
β
-oxidation
into acetyl CoA; the glycerol is used by the liver for triglyceride synthesis or for gluconeogenesis. Primary
disorders of carnitine are discussed on p.
, but secondary carnitine deficiency is a secondary
biochemical feature of many organic acidemias and fatty acid oxidation defects.
Disorders of the
β
-Oxidation Cycle
In these processes, there are numerous inherited defects, which typically manifest during
fasting with hypoglycemia and acidosis; some cause cardiomyopathy and muscle weakness.
Acetyl CoA is generated from fatty acids through repeated
β
-oxidation cycles. Sets of 4 enzymes (an acyl
dehydrogenase, a hydratase, a hydroxyacyl dehydrogenase, and a lyase) specific for different chain
lengths (very long chain, long chain, medium chain, and short chain) are required to catabolize a longchain fatty acid completely. Inheritance for all fatty acid oxidation defects is autosomal recessive.
Medium-chain acyl dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD):
This deficiency is the most common defect
in the
β
-oxidation cycle and has been incorporated into expanded neonatal screening in many states.
Clinical manifestations typically begin after 2 to 3 mo of age and usually follow fasting (as little as 12 h).
Patients have vomiting and lethargy that may progress rapidly to seizures, coma, and sometimes death
(which can also appear as SIDS). During attacks, patients have hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and
unexpectedly low urinary and serum ketones. Metabolic acidosis is often present but may be a late
manifestation.
Diagnosis is by detecting medium-chain fatty acid conjugates of carnitine in plasma or glycine in urine or
by detecting enzyme deficiency in cultured fibroblasts; however, DNA testing can confirm most cases.
Treatment of acute attacks is with 10% dextrose IV at 1.5 times the fluid maintenance rate (;
some clinicians also advocate carnitine supplementation during acute episodes. Prevention is a low-fat,
high-carbohydrate diet and avoidance of prolonged fasting. Cornstarch therapy is often used to provide a
margin of safety during overnight fasting.
Long-chain hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (LCHADD):
This deficiency is the 2nd
most common fatty acid oxidation defect. It shares many features of MCADD, but patients may also have
cardiomyopathy; rhabdomyolysis, massive creatine kinase elevations, and myoglobinuria with muscle
exertion; peripheral neuropathy; and abnormal liver function. Mothers with an LCHADD fetus often have
HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets— during pregnancy.
Diagnosis is based on the presence of excess long-chain hydroxy acids on organic acid analysis and on
the presence of their carnitine conjugates in an acylcarnitine profile or glycine conjugates in an
===PAGE:3209===
acylglycine profile. LCHADD can be confirmed by enzyme study in skin fibroblasts.
Treatment during acute exacerbations includes hydration, high-dose glucose, bed rest, urine
alkalinization, and carnitine supplementation. Long-term treatment includes a high-carbohydrate diet,
medium-chain triglyceride supplementation, and avoidance of fasting and strenuous exercise.
Very long-chain acyl-coA dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCADD):
This deficiency is similar to
LCHADD but is commonly associated with significant cardiomyopathy.
Glutaric acidemia type II:
A defect in the transfer of electrons from the coenzyme of fatty acyl
dehydrogenases to the electronic transport chain affects reactions involving fatty acids of all chain
lengths (multiple acylcoA dehydrogenase deficiency); oxidation of several amino acids is also affected.
Clinical manifestations thus include fasting hypoglycemia, severe metabolic acidosis, and
hyperammonemia.
Diagnosis is by increased ethylmalonic, glutaric, 2- and 3-hydroxyglutaric, and other dicarboxylic acids in
organic acid analysis, and glutaryl and isovaleryl and other acylcarnitines in tandem mass spectrometry
studies. Enzyme deficiencies in skin fibroblasts can be confirmatory.
Treatment is similar to that for MCADD, except that riboflavin may be effective in some patients.
Disorders of Glycerol Metabolism
Glycerol is converted to glycerol-3-phosphate by the hepatic enzyme glycerol kinase;
deficiency results in episodic vomiting, lethargy, and hypotonia.
Glycerol kinase deficiency is X-linked; many patients with this deficiency also have a chromosomal
deletion that extends beyond the glycerol kinase gene into the contiguous gene region, which contains
the genes for congenital adrenal hypoplasia and Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Thus, patients with
glycerol kinase deficiency may have one or more of these disease entities.
Symptoms begin at any age and are usually accompanied by acidosis, hypoglycemia, and elevated blood
and urine levels of glycerol.
Diagnosis is by detecting an elevated level of glycerol in serum and urine and is confirmed by DNA
analysis.
Treatment is with a low-fat diet, but glucocorticoid replacement is critical for those with adrenal
hypoplasia.
Lysosomal Storage Disorders
Lysosomal enzymes break down macromolecules, either those from the cell itself (eg, when cellular
structural components are being recycled) or those acquired outside the cell. Inherited defects or
deficiencies of lysosomal enzymes (or other lysosomal components) can result in accumulation of
undegraded metabolites. Because there are numerous specific deficiencies, storage diseases are usually
grouped biochemically by the accumulated metabolite. Subgroups include
• Mucopolysaccharidoses
• Sphingolipidoses (lipidoses)
• Mucolipidoses
The most important are the mucopolysaccharidoses and sphingolipidoses. Type 2 glycogenosis is a
lysosomal storage disorder, but most glycogenoses are not.
===PAGE:3210===
Because reticuloendothelial cells (eg, in the spleen) are rich in lysosomes, reticuloendothelial tissues are
involved in a number of lysosomal storage disorders, but generally, tissues richest in the substrate are
most affected. Thus the brain, which is rich in gangliosides, is particularly affected by gangliosidoses,
whereas mucopolysaccharidoses affect many tissues because mucopolysaccharides are present
throughout the body.
Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS):
MPS are inherited deficiencies of enzymes involved in
glycosaminoglycan breakdown. Glycosaminoglycans (previously termed mucopolysaccharides) are
polysaccharides abundant on cell surfaces and in extracellular matrix and structures. Enzyme deficiencies
that prevent glycosaminoglycan breakdown cause accumulation of glycosaminoglycan fragments in
lysosomes and cause extensive bone, soft tissue, and CNS changes. Inheritance is usually autosomal
recessive (except for MPS type II).
Age at presentation, clinical manifestations, and severity vary by type. Common manifestations include
coarse facial features, neurodevelopmental delays and regression, joint contractures, organomegaly, stiff
hair, progressive respiratory insufficiency (caused by airway obstruction and sleep apnea), cardiac
valvular disease, skeletal changes, and cervical vertebral subluxation.
Diagnosis is suggested by history, physical examination, bone abnormalities (eg, dysostosis multiplex)
found during skeletal survey, and elevated total and fractionated urinary glycosaminoglycans. Diagnosis
is confirmed by enzyme analysis of cultured fibroblasts (prenatal) or peripheral WBCs (postnatal).
Additional testing is required to monitor organ-specific changes (eg, echocardiography for valvular
disease, audiometry for hearing changes).
Treatment of MPS type I (Hurler's disease) is enzyme replacement with
α
-l-iduronidase, which effectively
halts progression and reverses all non-CNS complications of the disease. Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
transplantation has also shown promise in early studies but is ineffective for CNS disease. The
combination of enzyme replacement and HSC transplantation is under study.
Sphingolipidoses:
Sphingolipids are normal lipid components of cell membranes; they accumulate in
lysosomes and cause extensive neuronal, bone, and other changes when enzyme deficiencies prevent
their breakdown. Although incidence is low, carrier rate of some forms is high. Gaucher's disease is the
most common sphingolipidosis. Others include Niemann-Pick, Tay-Sachs, Sandhoff's, Fabry's, Krabbe's,
and cholesteryl ester storage diseases and metachromatic leukodystrophy.
Gaucher's Disease
Gaucher's disease is a sphingolipidosis resulting from glucocerebrosidase deficiency, causing
deposition of glucocerebroside and related compounds. Symptoms and signs vary by type but
are most commonly hepatosplenomegaly or CNS changes. Diagnosis is by enzyme analysis of
WBCs.
Glucocerebrosidase normally hydrolyzes glucocerebroside to glucose and ceramide. Genetic defects of
the enzyme cause glucocerebroside accumulation in tissue macrophages through phagocytosis, forming
Gaucher's cells. Accumulation of Gaucher's cells in the perivascular spaces in the brain causes gliosis in
the neuronopathic forms. There are 3 types, which vary in epidemiology, enzyme activity, and
manifestations.
Type I
(nonneuronopathic) is most common (90% of all patients). Residual enzyme activity is highest.
Ashkenazi Jews are at greatest risk; 1/12 is a carrier. Onset ranges from age 2 yr to late adulthood.
Symptoms and signs include splenohepatomegaly, bone disease (eg, osteopenia, pain crises, osteolytic
lesions with fractures), growth failure, delayed puberty, ecchymoses, and pingueculae. Epistaxis and
ecchymoses resulting from thrombocytopenia are common. X-rays show flaring of the ends of the long
bones (Erlenmeyer flask deformity) and cortical thinning.
Type II
(acute neuronopathic) is rarest, and residual enzyme activity in this type is lowest. Onset occurs
during infancy. Symptoms and signs are progressive neurologic deterioration (eg, rigidity, seizures) and
death by age 2 yr.
===PAGE:3211===
Type III
(subacute neuronopathic) falls between types I and II in incidence, enzyme activity, and clinical
severity. Onset occurs at any time during childhood. Clinical manifestations vary by subtype and include
progressive dementia and ataxia (IIIa), bone and visceral involvement (IIIb), and supranuclear palsies with
corneal opacities (IIIc). Patients who survive to adolescence may live for many years.
Diagnosis
• Enzyme analysis
Diagnosis is by enzyme analysis of WBCs. Carriers are detected, and types are distinguished by mutation
analysis. Although biopsy is unnecessary, Gaucher's cells—lipid-laden tissue macrophages in the liver,
spleen, lymph nodes, or bone marrow that have a wrinkled tissue-paper appearance—are diagnostic.
Treatment
• Types I and III: Enzyme replacement with placental or recombinant glucocerebrosidase
• Sometimes miglustat, splenectomy, or stem cell transplantation
Enzyme replacement with placental or recombinant glucocerebrosidase is effective in types I and III; there
is no treatment for type II. The enzyme is modified for efficient delivery to lysosomes. Patients receiving
enzyme replacement require routine Hb and platelet monitoring, routine assessment of spleen and liver
volume by CT or MRI, and routine
assessment of bone disease by skeletal survey, dual-energy x-ray
absorptiometry scanning, or MRI.
Miglustat (100 mg po tid), a glucosylceramide synthase inhibitor, reduces glucocerebroside concentration
(the substrate for glucocerebrosidase) and is an alternative for patients unable to receive enzyme
replacement.
Splenectomy may be helpful for patients with anemia, leukopenia, or thrombocytopenia or when spleen
size causes discomfort. Patients with anemia may also need blood transfusions.
Bone marrow or stem cell transplantation provides a definitive cure but is considered a last resort
because of substantial morbidity and mortality.
Niemann-Pick Disease
Niemann-Pick disease is a sphingolipidosis caused by deficient sphingomyelinase activity,
resulting in accumulation of sphingomyelin (ceramide phosphorylcholine) in reticuloendothelial
cells.
Niemann-Pick disease inheritance is autosomal recessive and appears most often in Ashkenazi Jews; 2
types, A and B, exist. Type C Niemann-Pick disease is an unrelated enzymatic defect involving abnormal
cholesterol storage.
Type A
patients have < 5% of normal sphingomyelinase activity. The disease is characterized by
hepatosplenomegaly, failure to thrive, and rapidly progressive neurodegeneration. Death occurs by age 2
or 3 yr.
Type B
patients have sphingomyelinase activity within 5 to 10% of normal. Type B is more variable
clinically than type A. Hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy may occur. Pancytopenia is common.
Most patients with type B have little or no neurologic involvement and survive into adulthood; they may be
clinically indistinguishable from those with type I Gaucher's disease. In severe cases of type B,
progressive pulmonary infiltrates cause major complications.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3212===
• Prenatal screening
• WBC sphingomyelinase assay
Both types are usually suspected by history and examination, most notably hepatosplenomegaly.
Diagnosis can be confirmed by sphingomyelinase assay on WBCs and can be made prenatally by using
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.
Treatment
Bone marrow or stem cell transplantation is under investigation as a potential treatment option.
Tay-Sachs Disease and Sandhoff's Disease
Tay-Sachs disease and Sandhoff's disease are sphingolipidoses caused by hexosaminidase
deficiency that causes severe neurologic symptoms and early death.
Gangliosides are complex sphingolipids present in the brain. There are 2 major forms, GM
and GM
,
both of which may be involved in lysosomal storage disorders; there are 2 main types of GM
gangliosidosis, each of which can be caused by numerous different mutations.
Tay-Sachs disease:
Deficiency of hexosaminidase A results in accumulation of GM
in the brain.
Inheritance is autosomal recessive; the most common mutations are carried by 1/27 normal adults of
Eastern European (Ashkenazi) Jewish origin, although other mutations cluster in some French-Canadian
and Cajun populations.
Children with Tay-Sachs disease start missing developmental milestones after age 6 mo and develop
progressive cognitive and motor deterioration resulting in seizures, intellectual disability, paralysis, and
death by age 5 yr. A cherry-red macular spot is common.
Diagnosis is clinical and can be confirmed by enzyme assay.
In the absence of effective treatment, management is focused on screening adults of childbearing age in
high-risk populations to identify carriers (by way of enzyme activity and mutation testing) combined with
genetic counseling.
Sandhoff's disease:
There is a combined hexosaminidase A and B deficiency. Clinical manifestations
include progressive cerebral degeneration beginning at 6 mo, accompanied by blindness, cherry-red
macular spot, and hyperacusis. It is almost indistinguishable from Tay-Sachs disease in course,
diagnosis, and management, except that there is visceral involvement (hepatomegaly and bone change)
and no ethnic association.
Krabbe's Disease
Krabbe's disease is a sphingolipidosis that causes intellectual disability, paralysis, blindness,
deafness, and pseudobulbar palsy, progressing to death.
Krabbe's disease (galactosylceramide lipidosis, globoid cell leukodystrophy) is caused
by an autosomal
recessive galactocerebroside
β
-galactosidase deficiency.
It affects infants and is characterized by intellectual disability, paralysis, blindness, deafness, and
pseudobulbar palsy, progressing to death.
Diagnosis is by detecting enzyme deficiency in WBCs or cultured skin fibroblasts.
Because bone marrow transplantation effectively delays onset of symptoms, prenatal testing or neonatal
screening (routine in New York) is sometimes done.
===PAGE:3213===
Metachromatic Leukodystrophy
Metachromatic leukodystrophy is a sphingolipidosis caused by arylsulfatase A deficiency, which
causes progressive paralysis and dementia resulting in death by age 10 yr.
In metachromatic leukodystrophy (sulfatide lipidosis), arylsulfatase A deficiency causes metachromatic
lipids to accumulate in the white matter of the CNS, peripheral nerves, kidney, spleen, and other visceral
organs; accumulation in the nervous system causes central and peripheral demyelination. Numerous
mutations exist; patients vary in age at onset and speed of progression.
The infantile form is characterized by progressive paralysis and dementia usually beginning before age 4
yr and resulting in death about 5 yr after onset of symptoms. The juvenile form manifests between 4 yr
and 16 yr of age with gait disturbance, intellectual impairment, and findings of peripheral neuropathy.
Contrary to the infantile form, deep tendon reflexes are usually brisk. There is also a milder adult form.
Diagnosis is suggested clinically and by findings of decreased nerve conduction velocity; it is confirmed
by detecting enzyme deficiency in WBCs or cultured skin fibroblasts.
There is no effective treatment.
Fabry's Disease
Fabry's disease is a sphingolipidosis caused by deficiency of
α
-galactosidase A, which causes
angiokeratomas, acroparesthesias, corneal opacities, recurrent febrile episodes, and renal or
heart failure.
Fabry's disease (angiokeratoma corporis diffusum) is an X-linked deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme
α
-
galactosidase A, which is needed for normal trihexosylceramide catabolism. Glycolipid
(globotriaosylceramide) accumulates in many tissues (eg, vascular endothelium, lymph vessels, heart,
kidney).
Diagnosis in males is clinical, based on appearance of typical skin lesions (angiokeratomas) over the
lower trunk and by characteristic features of peripheral neuropathy (causing recurrent burning pain in the
extremities), corneal opacities, and recurrent febrile episodes. Death results from renal failure or cardiac
or cerebral complications of hypertension or other vascular disease. Heterozygous females are usually
asymptomatic but may have an attenuated form of disease often characterized by corneal opacities.
Diagnosis is by assay of galactosidase activity—prenatally in amniocytes or chorionic villi and postnatally
in serum or WBCs.
Treatment is enzyme replacement with recombinant
α
-galactosidase A (agalsidase beta) combined with
supportive measures for fever and pain. Kidney transplantation is effective for treating renal failure.
Cholesteryl Ester Storage Disease and Wolman's Disease
Cholesteryl ester storage disease and Wolman's disease are sphingolipidoses caused by
lysosomal acid lipase deficiency resulting in hyperlipidemia and hepatomegaly.
These diseases are rare, autosomal recessive disorders that result in accumulation of cholesteryl esters
and triglycerides, mainly in lysosomes of histiocytes, resulting in foam cells in the liver, spleen, lymph
nodes, and other tissues. Serum low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is usually elevated.
Wolman's disease is the more severe form, manifesting in the first weeks of life with poor feeding,
vomiting, and abdominal distention secondary to hepatosplenomegaly; infants usually die within 6 mo.
Cholesteryl ester storage disease is less severe and may not manifest until later in life, even adulthood, at
which time hepatomegaly may be detected; premature atherosclerosis, often severe, may develop.
===PAGE:3214===
Diagnosis is based on clinical features and detection of acid lipase deficiency in liver biopsy specimens or
cultured skin fibroblasts, lymphocytes, or other tissues. Prenatal diagnosis is based on the absence of
acid lipase activity in cultured chorionic villi.
There is no proven treatment, but statins reduce plasma LDL levels, and cholestyramine combined with a
low-cholesterol diet has reportedly alleviated other signs.
Mitochondrial Oxidative Phosphorylation Disorders
Impairment of oxidative phosphorylation often, but not always, causes lactic acidosis,
particularly affecting the CNS, retina, and muscle.
Cellular respiration (oxidative phosphorylation) occurs in the mitochondria, where a series of enzymes
catalyze the transfer of electrons to molecular oxygen and the generation of energy-storing ATP.
Mitochondrial or nuclear genetic defects involving enzymes used in this process impair cellular
respiration, decreasing the ATP:ADP ratio. Tissues with a high energy demand (eg, brain, nerves, retina,
skeletal and cardiac muscle) are particularly vulnerable. The most common clinical manifestations are
seizures, hypotonia, ophthalmoplegia, stroke-like episodes, muscle weakness, and cardiomyopathy.
Biochemically, there is profound lactic acidosis because the NADH:NAD ratio increases, shifting the
equilibrium of the lactate dehydrogenase reaction toward lactate. The increase in the lactate:pyruvate
ratio distinguishes oxidative phosphorylation defects from other genetic causes of lactic acidosis such as
pyruvate carboxylase or pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, in which the lactate:pyruvate ratio remains
normal. A large number of oxidative phosphorylation defects have been described; only the most common
ones are outlined here, along with their distinguishing features.
Mitochondrial mutations and variants have also been implicated in a number of diseases of aging (eg,
Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, diabetes, deafness, cancer).
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON):
This disease is characterized by acute or sub-acute
bilateral central vision loss caused by retinal degeneration. Onset usually occurs in the patient's 20s or
30s but can occur from childhood to adulthood. Male:female ratio is 4:1. Many mutations have been
defined, but 3 common ones account for 90% of those in European patients. LHON pedigrees usually
show a pattern of maternal inheritance typical of mitochondrial disorders.
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS):
Mutations
in the mitochondrial
tRNA
leu
gene cause this progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by
repeated episodes of "chemical strokes," myopathy, and lactic acidosis. In many cases, cells contain both
wild-type and mutant mitochondrial DNA (heteroplasmy); thus, expression is variable.
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF):
This progressive disorder is characterized by
uncontrolled muscle contractions (myoclonic seizures), dementia, ataxia, and myopathy, which shows
ragged-red fibers (indicating mitochondrial proliferation) with specialized stains when biopsied. Mutations
are in the mitochondrial
tRNA
lys
gene. Heteroplasmy is common; thus, expression is variable.
Kearns-Sayre syndrome and chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO):
These
disorders are characterized by ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, atypical retinitis pigmentosa, ragged-red fiber
myopathy, ataxia, deafness, and cardiomyopathy typically occurring before age 20 yr. Most mutations
involve contiguous deletion/duplication of part of the mitochondrial transfer RNA and other protein-coding
genes.
Neurogenic muscle atrophy and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) and Leigh disease:
Pigmentary
retinopathy in the presence of neuromuscular degeneration and Leigh disease (subacute necrotizing
encephalopathy characterized by ataxias and basal ganglia degeneration) is a genetically heterogeneous
syndrome. Mutations can be seen in the
ATP6
gene of the mitochondrial genomes.
===PAGE:3215===
Peroxisomal Disorders
Peroxisomes are intracellular organelles that contain enzymes for
β
-oxidation. These enzymes overlap in
function with those in mitochondria, with the exception that mitochondria lack enzymes to metabolize very
long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA), those 20 to 26 carbons in length. Therefore, peroxisomal disorders
generally manifest with elevated VLCFA levels (except rhizomelic chondrodysplasia). Although VLCFA
levels may help screen for these disorders, other assays are also required (eg, plasma levels of phytanic,
pristanic, and pipecolic acids; RBC plasmalogen levels).
There are 2 types of peroxisomal disorders: those with defective peroxisome formation and those with
defects in single peroxisomal enzymes. X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is the most common peroxisomal
disorder (incidence 1/17,000 births); all others are autosomal recessive, with a combined incidence of
about 1/50,000 births.
Zellweger syndrome (ZS), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, and infantile Refsum's disease (IRD):
These disorders are 3 expressions of a disease continuum, from most (ZS) to least (IRD) severe. The
responsible genetic
defect occurs in 1 of at least 11 genes involved in peroxisomal formation or protein
import (the
PEX
gene family).
Manifestations include facial dysmorphism, CNS malformations, demyelination, neonatal seizures,
hypotonia, hepatomegaly, cystic kidneys, short limbs with stippled epiphyses (chondrodysplasia
punctata), cataracts, retinopathy, hearing deficit, psychomotor delay, and peripheral neuropathy.
Diagnosis is by detecting elevated blood levels of VLCFA, phytanic acid, bile acid intermediates, and
pipecolic acid. Experimental treatment with docosahexaenoic acid (DHA—levels of which are reduced in
patients with disorders of peroxisome formation) has shown some promise.
Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata:
This defect of peroxisomal biogenesis is caused by
PEX7
gene mutations and characterized by skeletal changes that include midface hypoplasia, strikingly short
proximal limbs, frontal bossing, small nares, cataracts, ichthyosis, and profound psychomotor retardation.
Vertebral clefts are also common. Diagnosis is by x-ray findings, serum elevation of phytanic acid, and
low RBC plasmalogen levels; VLCFA levels are normal. There is no effective treatment.
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy:
This disorder is caused by deficiency of the peroxisomal membrane
transporter ALDP, which is coded for by the gene
ABCD1
.
The cerebral form affects 40% of patients. Onset occurs between age 4 yr and 8 yr, and symptoms of
attention deficit progress over time to severe behavioral problems; dementia; and vision, hearing, and
motor deficits, causing total disability and death 2 to 3 yr after diagnosis. Milder adolescent and adult
forms have also been described.
About 45% of patients have a milder form called adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN); onset occurs in the 20s
or 30s, with progressive paraparesis, and sphincter and sexual disturbance. About one third of these
patients also develop cerebral symptoms.
Patients with any form may also develop adrenal insufficiency; about 15% have isolated Addison's
disease without neurologic involvement.
Diagnosis is confirmed by isolated elevation of VLCFA. Bone marrow or stem cell transplantation may
help stabilize symptoms in some cases. Adrenal steroid replacement is needed for patients with adrenal
insufficiency. Dietary supplement with a 4:1 mixture of glyceryl trioleate and glyceryl trierucate (Lorenzo's
oil) can normalize plasma VLCFA levels and may be beneficial in some cases but is under study.
Classic Refsum's disease:
Genetic deficiency of a single peroxisomal enzyme, phytanoyl-CoA
hydroxylase, which catalyzes metabolism of phytanic acid (a common dietary plant component), causes
phytanic acid accumulation.
Clinical manifestations include progressive peripheral neuropathy, impaired vision caused by retinitis
pigmentosa, hearing deficit, anosmia, cardiomyopathy and conduction defects, and ichthyosis. Onset is
===PAGE:3216===
usually in the 20s. Diagnosis is confirmed by elevation of serum phytanic acid and decreased levels of
pristanic acid (phytanic acid elevation is accompanied by pristanic acid elevation in several other
peroxisomal disorders).
Treatment is dietary restriction of phytanic acid (< 10 mg/day), which can be effective in preventing or
delaying symptoms when started before symptom onset.
Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism Disorders
Purines are key components of cellular energy systems (eg, ATP, NAD), signaling (eg, GTP, cAMP,
cGMP), and, along with pyrimidines, RNA and DNA production. Purines and pyrimidines may be
synthesized de novo or recycled by a salvage pathway from normal catabolism. The end product of
complete catabolism of purines is uric acid; catabolism of pyrimidines produces citric acid cycle
intermediates.
Disorders of Purine Salvage
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome:
This is a rare, X-linked, recessive disorder caused by deficiency of
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT); degree of deficiency (and hence
manifestations) vary with the specific mutation. HPRT deficiency results in failure of the salvage pathway
for hypoxanthine and guanine. These purines are instead degraded to uric acid. Additionally, a decrease
in inositol monophosphate and guanosyl monophosphate leads to an increase in conversion of 5phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) to 5-phosphoribosylamine, which further exacerbates uric acid
overproduction. Hyperuricemia predisposes to gout and its complications. Patients also have a number of
cognitive and behavioral dysfunctions, etiology of which is unclear; they do not seem related to uric acid.
The disease usually manifests between 3 mo and 12 mo of age with the appearance of orange sandy
precipitate (xanthine) in the urine; it progresses to CNS involvement with intellectual disability, spastic
cerebral palsy, involuntary movements, and self-mutilating behavior (particularly biting). Later, chronic
hyperuricemia causes symptoms of gout (eg, urolithiasis, nephropathy, gouty arthritis, tophi).
Diagnosis is suggested by the combination of dystonia, intellectual disability, and self-mutilation. Serum
uric acid levels are usually elevated, but confirmation by HPRT enzyme assay is usually done.
CNS dysfunction has no known treatment; management is supportive. Self-mutilation may require
physical restraint, dental extraction, and sometimes drug therapy; a variety of drugs has been used.
Hyperuricemia is treated with a low-purine diet (eg, avoiding organ meats, beans, sardines) and
allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor (the last enzyme in the purine catabolic pathway). Allopurinol
prevents conversion of accumulated hypoxanthine to uric acid; because hypoxanthine is highly soluble, it
is excreted.
Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency:
This is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that
results in the inability to salvage adenine for purine synthesis. Accumulated adenine is oxidized to 2,8dihyroxyadenine, which precipitates in the urinary tract, causing problems similar to those of uric acid
nephropathy (eg, renal colic, frequent infections, and, if diagnosed late, renal failure). Onset can occur at
any age.
Diagnosis is by detecting elevated levels of 2,8-dihyroxyadenine, 8-hyroxyadenine, and adenine in urine
and confirmed by enzyme assay; serum uric acid is normal.
Treatment is with dietary purine restriction, high fluid intake, and avoidance of urine alkalinization.
Allopurinol can prevent oxidation of adenine; renal transplantation may be needed for end-stage renal
disease.
Disorders of Purine Nucleotide Synthesis
Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity:
This X-linked, recessive disorder causes
purine overproduction. Excess purine is degraded, resulting in hyperuricemia and gout and neurologic
===PAGE:3217===
and developmental abnormalities.
Diagnosis is by enzyme studies on RBCs and cultured skin fibroblasts.
Treatment is with allopurinol and a low-purine diet.
Adenylosuccinase deficiency:
This autosomal recessive disorder causes profound intellectual
disability, autistic behavior, and seizures.
Diagnosis is by identifying elevated levels of succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide ribo-side and
succinyladenosine in CSF and urine.
There is no effective treatment.
Disorders of Purine Catabolism
Myoadenylate deaminase deficiency (or muscle adenosine monophosphate deaminase
deficiency):
The enzyme myoadenylate deaminase converts AMP to inosine and ammonia. Deficiency
may be asymptomatic or it may cause exercise-induced myalgias or cramping; expression seems to be
variable because, despite the high frequency of the mutant allele (10 to 14%), the frequency of the
muscle phenotype is quite low in patients homozygous for the mutant allele. When symptomatic patients
exercise, they do not accumulate ammonia or inosine monophosphate as do unaffected people; this is
how the disorder is diagnosed.
Treatment is exercise modulation as appropriate.
Adenosine deaminase deficiency:
Adenosine deaminase converts adenosine and deoxyadenosine to
inosine and deoxyinosine, which are further broken down and excreted. Enzyme deficiency (from 1 of >
60 known mutations) results in accumulation of adenosine, which is converted to its ribonucleotide and
deoxyribonucleotide (dATP) forms by cellular kinases. The dATP increase results in inhibition of
ribonucleotide reductase and under-production of other deoxyribonucleotides. DNA replication is
compromised as a result. Immune cells are especially sensitive to this defect; adenosine deaminase
deficiency causes one form of severe combined immunodeficiency (.
Diagnosis is by low RBC and WBC enzyme activity.
Treatment is by bone marrow or stem cell transplantation and enzyme replacement therapy. Somatic cell
gene therapy is being evaluated as well.
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency:
This rare, autosomal recessive deficiency is
characterized by immunodeficiency with severe T-cell dysfunction and often neurologic symptoms.
Manifestations are lymphopenia, thymic deficiency, recurrent infections, and hypouricemia. Many patients
have developmental delay, ataxia, or spasticity.
Diagnosis is by low enzyme activity in RBCs.
Treatment is with bone marrow or stem cell transplantation.
Xanthine oxidase deficiency:
Xanthine oxidase is the enzyme that catalyzes uric acid production from
xanthine and hypoxanthine. Deficiency causes buildup of xanthine, which may precipitate in the urine,
causing symptomatic stones with hematuria, urinary colic, and UTIs.
Diagnosis is by low serum uric acid and high urine and plasma hypoxanthine and xanthine. Enzyme
determination requires liver or intestinal mucosal biopsy and is rarely indicated.
Treatment is high fluid intake to minimize likelihood of stone formation and allopurinol in some patients.
Disorders of Pyrimidine Metabolism
===PAGE:3218===
Uridine monophosphate synthase deficiency (hereditary orotic aciduria):
Uridine monophosphate
is the enzyme that catalyzes orotate phosphoribosyltransferase and orotidine-5´-monophosphate
decarboxylase reactions. With deficiency, orotic acid accumulates, causing clinical manifestations of
megaloblastic anemia, orotic crystalluria and nephropathy, cardiac malformations, strabismus, and
recurrent infections.
Diagnosis is by enzyme assay in a variety of tissues.
Treatment is with oral uridine supplementation.
===PAGE:3219===
Chapter 302. Hereditary Periodic Fever Syndromes
Introduction
Hereditary periodic fever syndromes are hereditary disorders characterized by recurrent fever
and other symptoms that are not explained by other causes.
Most patients develop symptoms during childhood; < 10% develop symptoms after age 18. Disorders best
characterized are
• Familial Mediterranean fever
• Hyper-IgD syndrome
• Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated periodic syndrome
Others include
• The hereditary cryopyrinopathies: Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome, Muckle-Wells syndrome,
and neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID)
• PAPA (pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne) syndrome
• PFAPA (periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical adenitis) syndrome
Familial Mediterranean Fever
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by
recurrent bouts of fever and peritonitis, sometimes with pleuritis, skin lesions, arthritis, and,
very rarely, pericarditis. Renal amyloidosis may develop, sometimes leading to renal failure.
People with genetic origins in the Mediterranean basin are most commonly affected. Diagnosis
is largely clinical, although genetic testing is available. Treatment with prophylactic colchicine
prevents acute attacks as well as renal amyloidosis in most patients. Prognosis is excellent
with treatment.
FMF is a disease of people with genetic origins in the Mediterranean basin, predominantly Sephardic
Jews, North African Arabs, Armenians, Turks, Greeks, and Italians. However, cases have occurred among
enough other groups (eg, Ashkenazi Jews, Cubans, Japanese) to caution against excluding the diagnosis
solely on the basis of ancestry. Up to 50% of patients have a family history of the disorder, usually
involving siblings.
Etiology
FMF is caused by mutations in the
MEFV
gene on the short arm of chromosome 16 and is inherited in an
autosomal recessive manner. The
MEFV
gene normally codes a protein (called pyrin or marenostrin)
expressed in circulating neutrophils. Its presumed action is to blunt the inflammatory response, possibly
by inhibiting neutrophil activation and chemotaxis. Gene mutations result in defective pyrin molecules; it is
hypothesized that the altered pyrin cannot suppress minor, unknown triggers to inflammation that are
normally checked by intact pyrin. The clinical consequence is spontaneous bouts of neutrophilpredominant
inflammation in the abdominal cavity as well as in other sites.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually between the ages of 5 and 15 yr but may be much later or earlier, even during infancy.
Attacks have no regular pattern of recurrence and vary in the same patient. They usually last 24 to 72 h,
but some last ≥ 1 wk. Frequency ranges from 2 attacks/wk to 1 attack/yr (most commonly, once every 2 to
6 wk). Severity and frequency tend to decrease during pregnancy and in patients with amyloidosis.
===PAGE:3220===
Spontaneous remissions may last years. In some patients, the attacks have a prodromal phase.
Fever as high as 40° C, usually accompanied by peritonitis, is the major manifestation. Abdominal pain
(usually starting in one quadrant and spreading to the whole abdomen) occurs in about 95% of patients
and can vary in severity with each attack. Decreased bowel sounds, distention, guarding, and rebound
tenderness are likely to occur at the peak of an attack and cannot be differentiated from a perforated
viscus by physical examination. Consequently, many patients undergo urgent laparotomy before the
correct diagnosis is made. With diaphragmatic involvement, splinting of the chest and pain in one or both
shoulders may occur.
Other manifestations include acute pleurisy (in 30%); arthritis (in 25%), usually involving the knee, ankle,
and hip; an erysipelas-like rash of the lower leg; and scrotal swelling and pain caused by inflammation of
the tunica vaginalis of the testis. Pericarditis occurs very rarely. The pleural, synovial, and skin
manifestations of FMF vary in frequency among different populations and are less frequently encountered
in the US than elsewhere.
The most significant long-term complication is chronic renal failure caused by deposition of amyloid
protein in the kidneys. Amyloid may also be deposited in the GI tract, liver, spleen, heart, testes, and
thyroid.
FMF causes infertility or spontaneous abortion in about one third of women because peritoneal pelvic
adhesions form, interfering with conception. In women with FMF, about 20 to 30% of pregnancies end in
fetal loss.
Despite the severity of symptoms during acute attacks, most patients recover swiftly and remain free of
illness until their next attack.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Genetic testing
Diagnosis is mainly clinical, but genetic testing is available and is particularly useful in evaluation of
atypical cases. Nonspecific findings include elevations in WBCs with neutrophil predominance, ESR, Creactive protein, and fibrinogen. Urinary excretion of > 0.5 g protein/24 h suggests renal amyloidosis.
Differential diagnosis includes acute intermittent porphyria, hereditary angioedema with abdominal
attacks, relapsing pancreatitis, and other hereditary relapsing fevers.
Treatment
• Colchicine
Prophylactic colchicine 0.6 mg po bid (some patients require qid dosing; others a single daily dose)
provides complete remission or distinct improvement in about 85% of patients. For patients with
infrequent attacks that involve a prodromal phase, colchicine can be reserved until initial symptoms occur
and then begun at 0.6 mg po q 1 h for 4 h, then q 2 h for 4 h, then q 12 h for 48 h. Initiation of colchicine
at the peak of an attack, even if delivered IV, is unlikely to be beneficial. Children often require adult
dosages for effective prophylaxis. Widespread use of prophylactic colchicine has led to a dramatic
reduction in the incidence of amyloidosis and subsequent renal failure.
Colchicine does not add to the increased risk of infertility and miscarriage among affected women; when
taken during pregnancy, it does not increase the risk of teratogenic events. Lack of response to
colchicine is often caused by poor adherence to the drug regimen, but a correlation has also been noted
between poor response and diminished colchicine concentration in circulating monocytes. Weekly IV
colchicine may reduce attack frequency and severity in patients who do not respond to oral colchicine.
Untested alternatives in nonresponders include interferonα
3 to 10 million units sc, prazosin 3 mg po bid,
infliximab 5 mg/kg IV q 8 wk, and thalidomide initially 100 mg po once/day.
===PAGE:3221===
Opioids are sometimes needed for pain relief but should be used prudently to avoid addiction.
Hyper-IgD Syndrome
Hyper-IgD syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder in which recurring attacks of chills
and fever begin during the first year of life. Episodes usually last 4 to 6 days and may be
triggered by physiologic stress, such as vaccination or minor trauma.
Hyper-IgD syndrome clusters in children of Dutch, French, and other Northern European
ancestry and is
caused by mutations in the gene coding mevalonate kinase, an enzyme important for cholesterol
synthesis. Reduction in the synthesis of anti-inflammatory isoprenylated proteins may account for the
clinical syndrome.
In addition to chills and fever, patients may have abdominal pain, vomiting or diarrhea, headache, and
arthralgias. Signs include cervical lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, arthritis, skin lesions (maculopapular
rash, petechiae, or purpura), and orogenital aphthous ulcers.
Diagnosis is based on history, examination, and a serum IgD level of > 14 mg/mL. Non-specific
abnormalities include leukocytosis and elevated acute-phase reactants during fever; specific but
insensitive findings include elevated urinary mevalonic acid.
There are no proven treatments to prevent attacks. Patients can expect to have recurrent bouts of fever
throughout their life, although episodes tend to become less frequent after adolescence.
TNF Receptor-Associated Periodic Syndrome
(Familial Hibernian Fever)
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated periodic syndrome is an autosomal dominant
disorder causing recurrent fever and painful, migratory myalgias with tender overlying
erythema. Levels of type 1 TNF receptors are low. Treatment is with corticosteroids and
etanercept.
TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome was originally described in a family of Irish and Scottish
pedigree but has been reported in many different ethnic groups. It results from mutations in the gene
coding the TNF receptor. The mutation leads to unchecked TNF signaling, resulting in inflammation,
possibly because shedding of the TNF receptor is defective.
Attacks of this rare disorder usually begin before age 20. They may last from 1 or 2 days to > 1 wk. The
most distinctive features of an attack are migratory myalgia and swelling in the extremities. The overlying
skin is red and tender. Other symptoms may include headache, abdominal pain, diarrhea or constipation,
nausea, painful conjunctivitis, joint pain, rash, and testicular pain. Males are prone to develop inguinal
hernias. Amyloidosis involving the kidneys has been reported in a minority of families.
With treatment, the prognosis is good, but it is more guarded in patients with renal amyloidosis.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history, examination, and low levels of type 1 TNF receptor (< 1 ng/mL) when
measured between attacks. Non-specific findings include neutrophilia, elevated acute-phase reactants,
and polyclonal gammopathy during attacks. Patients should be screened regularly for proteinuria.
Treatment
Attacks can be effectively treated with prednisone (at least 20 mg po once/day). Dosage may need to be
increased over time.
===PAGE:3222===
Early therapeutic experience with etanercept, which binds and inactivates TNF, has been promising.
Recommended dosage is 0.4 mg/kg sc for children and 25 mg sc for adults twice/wk. Anakinra 1.5 mg/kg
sc once/day may be effective in children.
Hereditary Cryopyrinopathies
The hereditary cryopyrinopathies are a group of autoinflammatory conditions triggered by cold
ambient temperatures; they include familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome, Muckle-Wells
syndrome, and neonatal-onset multisystem autoinflammatory disease.
Hereditary cryopyrinopathies represent a spectrum of progressively severe disease. They are due to
mutations in the gene encoding the protein cryopyrin, which mediates inflammation and IL-1
β
processing.
Cryopyrin activity is augmented, triggering increased release of IL-1
β
from inflammasomes; the result is
inflammation and fever.
Typically, familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome causes a cold-induced urticarial rash accompanied by
fever.
Muckle-Wells syndrome causes intermittent fevers, urticarial rash, joint pain, and progressive deafness;
25% of patients develop amyloidosis.
Neonatal-onset multisystem autoinflammatory disease tends to cause joint deformities, meningitis,
delayed development, and amyloidosis, in addition to fever and rash. As many as 20% of patients die by
age 20.
The cryopyrinopathies are inherited as autosomal dominant disorders. They are treated with anakinra or
etanercept.
PAPA Syndrome
PAPA (pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne) syndrome is an autosomal
dominant disorder that affects the skin and joints.
PAPA syndrome is caused by mutations in a gene on chromosome 15q. The mutated gene produces a
hyperphosphorylated protein that binds excessively to pyrin, thus restricting pyrin's anti-inflammatory
activity.
Arthritis begins in the first decade of life and is progressively destructive. Episodes of mild trauma may
trigger the arthritis. Poorly healing ulcers with undermined edges may appear, often at sites of injury (eg,
at vaccination sites). Acne is usually nodulocystic and, if untreated, causes scarring.
Diagnosis is based on clinical findings and a family history. The ulcers may be biopsied. Biopsy shows
superficial ulceration and neutrophilic inflammation.
Treatment with etanercept or anakinra may be useful. Acne is treated with oral tetracycline or isotretinoin.
PFAPA Syndrome
PFAPA (periodic fevers with aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis) syndrome is a
periodic fever syndrome that typically manifests between ages 2 yr and 5 yr; it is characterized
by febrile episodes lasting 3 to 6 days, pharyngitis, aphthous ulcers, and adenopathy. Etiology
and pathophysiology are undefined.
PFAPA syndrome is a relatively common periodic fever among children. Although genetic causes have not
been determined, this syndrome tends to be grouped with hereditary fever syndromes. It typically starts in
early childhood (between ages 2 yr and 5 yr) and tends to be more common among males.
Febrile episodes last 3 to 6 days and recur about every 28 days. The syndrome causes fatigue, chills,
===PAGE:3223===
and occasionally abdominal pain and headache, as well as fever, pharyngitis, aphthous ulcers, and
lymphadenopathy. Patients are healthy between episodes, and growth is normal.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on clinical findings, which include the following:
• ≥ 3 febrile episodes, lasting up to 5 days and occurring at regular intervals
• Pharyngitis plus adenopathy or aphthous ulcers
• Good health between episodes and normal growth
Acute-phase reactants (eg, C-reactive protein, ESR) are elevated during a febrile episode but not
between episodes. Neutropenia or other symptoms (eg, diarrhea, rash, cough) are not present; their
presence suggests a different disorder.
Treatment
Treatment is optional; it can include glucocorticoids, cimetidine, and, rarely, tonsillectomy. Patients tend to
outgrow this syndrome without sequelae.
===PAGE:3224===
Chapter 303. Behavioral Concerns and Problems in Children
Introduction
Many behaviors exhibited by children or adolescents concern parents or other adults. Behaviors or
behavioral patterns become clinically significant if they are frequent or persistent and maladaptive (eg,
interfere with emotional maturation or social and cognitive functioning). Severe behavioral problems may
be classified as mental disorders (eg, oppositional defiant disorder—see p.
—or conduct disorder
—. Prevalence rates vary according to how behavioral problems are defined and measured.
Evaluation
Diagnosis consists of a multistep behavioral assessment. Concerns with infants and young children
generally involve bodily functions (eg, eating, eliminating, sleeping), whereas in older children and
adolescents interpersonal behavioral concerns (eg, activity level, disobedience, aggression) predominate.
Problem identification:
A behavioral problem may manifest alarmingly and abruptly as a single incident
(eg, setting a fire, fighting at school). More often, problems manifest gradually, and identification involves
gathering
information over time. Behavior is best assessed in the context of the child's
• Physical and mental development
• General health
• Temperament (eg, difficult, easygoing)
• Relationships with parents and caregivers
Direct observation of parent-child interaction during an office visit provides valuable clues, including
parental response to behaviors. These observations are supplemented, whenever possible, by
information from others, including relatives, teachers, and school nurses.
Interviewing parents or caregivers provides a chronology of the child's activities during a typical day.
Parents are asked to provide examples of events that precede and follow the specific behavior. Parents
also are asked for their interpretation of
• Typical age-related behaviors
• Expectations for the child
• Level of parenting interest
• Support (eg, social, emotional, financial) for fulfilling their parenting role
• The child's relationship with the rest of their family
Problem interpretation:
The child's history may include factors thought to increase the likelihood of
developing behavioral problems, such as exposure to toxins, complications during pregnancy, or
occurrence of a serious illness in the family.
Some problems may involve the parent-child relationship and can be interpreted in a number of ways:
•
Unrealistic parental expectations:
For example, some parents may expect that a 2-yr-old will pick up
toys without help. Parents may misinterpret other normal, age-related behaviors, such as oppositional
behavior (eg, refusal of a 2-yr old to follow an adult's request or rule) as problematic.
•
Poor quality of parent-child interactions:
For example, children of disinterested parents may have
behavioral problems.
===PAGE:3225===
•
Over-indulgent parenting:
Well-meaning parental reactions to a problem may worsen it (eg,
overprotecting a fearful, clinging child or giving in to a manipulative child).
•
Circular behavioral pattern:
In young children, some problems represent a circular behavioral pattern
in which negative parental reaction to a child's behavior causes an adverse response from the child,
which in turn leads to continued negative parental reaction. In this pattern, children often respond to
stress and emotional discomfort with stubbornness, back talk, aggressiveness, and temper outbursts
rather than with crying. Most commonly, a parent reacts to an aggressive and resistant child by
scolding, yelling, and spanking; the child then escalates the behaviors that led to the parent's initial
response, and the parent reacts more forcefully.
In older children and adolescents, behavioral problems may arise as independence is sought from
parental rules and supervision. Such problems must be distinguished from occasional errors in judgment.
Treatment
Once a behavioral problem has been identified and its etiology has been investigated, early intervention
is desirable because behaviors are more difficult to change the longer they exist.
The clinician reassures parents that the child is physically well (ie, that the child's misbehavior is not a
manifestation of physical illness). By identifying with parental frustrations and pointing out the prevalence
of behavioral problems, the clinician often can allay parental guilt and facilitate exploration of possible
sources and treatment of problems. For simple problems, parental education, reassurance, and a few
specific suggestions often are sufficient. Parents should be reminded of the importance of spending at
least 15 to 20 min/day in a pleasurable activity with the child, "catching the child being good." Parents
also can be encouraged to regularly spend time away from the child.
For some problems, however, parents benefit from additional strategies for disciplining children and
modifying behavior.
• Parents can limit the child's dependency-seeking and manipulative behavior so that mutual respect is
reestablished.
• Desired and undesired behavior should be clearly defined.
• Consistent rules and limits should be established.
• Parents need to track compliance on an ongoing basis and provide appropriate rewards for success and
consequences for inappropriate behavior.
• Parents should try to minimize anger when enforcing rules and increase positive contact with the child.
(NOTE: Positive reinforcement for appropriate behavior is a powerful tool with no adverse effects.)
Helping parents to understand that "discipline" implies structure and not just punishment allows them to
provide the structure and clear expectations that children need. Ineffective discipline may result in
inappropriate behavior. Scolding or physical punishment may briefly control a child's behavior but
eventually may decrease the child's sense of security and self-esteem. Threats to leave or send the child
away are damaging.
A time-out technique (see
Sidebar 303-1
), in which the child must sit alone in a dull place (a corner or
room [other than the child's bedroom] that is not dark or scary and has no television or toys) for a brief
period, is a good approach to altering unacceptable behavior. Time-outs are learning processes for the
child and are best used for one inappropriate behavior or a few at one time. Physical restraint should be
avoided. For children who escalate in the intensity of their reactions when put in time-out, parents may
prefer to move more rapidly to redirection once they recognize the children have registered the reprimand
for inappropriate behavior.
===PAGE:3226===
The circular behavioral pattern may be interrupted if parents ignore behavior that does not disturb others
(eg, refusal to eat) and use distraction or temporary isolation to limit behavior that cannot be ignored
(public tantrums).
A behavioral problem that does not change in 3 to 4 mo should be reevaluated; mental health consultation
may be indicated.
Breath-Holding Spells
A breath-holding spell is an episode in which the child stops breathing involuntarily and loses
consciousness for a short period immediately after a frightening or emotionally upsetting event
or after a painful experience.
Breath-holding spells occur in 5% of otherwise healthy children. They usually begin in the first year of life
and peak at age 2. They disappear by age 4 in 50% of children and by age 8 in about 83% of children.
The remainder may continue to have spells into adulthood. There are 2 forms of breath-holding spells:
•
Cyanotic form:
This form is the most common and often occurs as part of a temper tantrum or in
response to a scolding or other upsetting event.
•
Pallid form:
This form typically follows a painful experience, such as falling and banging the head, but
can follow frightening or startling events.
Both forms are involuntary and readily distinguished from uncommon brief periods of voluntary breathholding by stubborn children, who invariably resume normal breathing after getting what they want or after
becoming uncomfortable when they fail to get what they want.
During a cyanotic breath-holding spell, children hold their breath (without necessarily being aware they
are doing so) until they lose
consciousness. Typically, the child cries out, exhales, and stops breathing.
Shortly afterward, the child begins to turn blue and unconsciousness ensues. A brief seizure may occur.
After a few seconds, breathing resumes and normal skin color and consciousness return. It may be
possible to interrupt a spell by placing a cold rag on the child's face at onset. Despite the spell's
frightening nature, parents must try to avoid reinforcing the initiating behavior. As the child recovers,
parents should continue to enforce household rules. Distracting the child and avoiding situations that lead
to tantrums are good strategies. Cyanotic breath-holding has been found to respond to iron therapy, even
in the absence of anemia, and to treatment for obstructive sleep apnea (when present).
Sidebar 303-1 Time-Out Technique
This disciplinary technique is best used when children are aware that their actions are incorrect or
unacceptable and when they perceive withholding of attention as a punishment; typically this is not the
case until age 2 yr. Care should be taken when this technique is used in group settings like daycare,
because it can result in harmful humiliation.
The technique can be applied when a child misbehaves in a way that is known to result in a time-out.
Usually, verbal reprimands and reminders should precede the time-out.
• The misbehavior is explained to the child, who is told to sit in the time-out chair or is led there if
necessary.
• The child should sit in the chair 1 min for each year of age (maximum, 5 min).
• A child who gets up from the chair before the allotted time is returned to the chair, and the time-out is
restarted. Talking and eye contact are avoided.
• When it is time for the child to get up, the caregiver asks the reason for the time-out without anger and
===PAGE:3227===
nagging. A child who does not recall the correct reason is briefly reminded. The child does not need to
express remorse for the inappropriate behavior as long as it is clear that the child understands the
reason for the time-out.
As soon as possible after the time-out, the caregiver should praise the child's good behavior, which may
be easier to achieve if the child is redirected to a new activity far from the scene of the inappropriate
behavior.
During a pallid breath-holding spell, vagal stimulation severely slows the heart rate. The child stops
breathing, rapidly loses consciousness, and becomes pale and limp. If the spell lasts more than a few
seconds, muscle tone increases, and a seizure and incontinence may occur. After the spell, the heart
speeds up again, breathing restarts, and consciousness returns without any treatment. Because this form
is rare, further diagnostic evaluation and treatment may be needed if the spells occur often. Simultaneous
ECG and EEG can help to differentiate cardiac and neurologic causes.
Eating Problems
Eating problems range from age-appropriate variability in appetite to serious or even life-threatening
eating disorders ( such as anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating. Eating
problems also can result in overeating and obesity (. Parents of young children are often
concerned that a child is not eating enough or eating too much, eating the wrong foods, refusing to eat
certain foods, or engaging in inappropriate mealtime behavior (eg, sneaking food to a pet, throwing or
intentionally dropping food).
Assessment includes problem frequency, duration, and intensity. Height and weight are measured and
plotted on appropriate charts. Often, when parents are shown charts that show the child is growing at a
normal rate, their concerns about eating diminish. Children should be assessed more thoroughly for
serious eating disorders if
• They voice persistent concerns about their appearance or weight
• Their weight decreases
• Their weight begins to increase at a noticeably faster rate than their previous growth rate
However, most eating problems do not persist long enough to interfere with growth and development. If
children appear well and growth is within an acceptable range, parents should be reassured and
encouraged to minimize conflict and coercion related to eating. Prolonged and excessive parental
concern may in fact contribute to subsequent eating disorders. Attempts to force-feed are unlikely to
increase intake; children may hold food in their mouth or vomit. Parents should offer meals while sitting at
a table with the family, without distractions such as television or pets, and show little emotion when
putting the food in front of children. Food should be removed in 20 to 30 min without comment about what
is or is not eaten. Children should participate in cleaning up any food that is thrown or intentionally
dropped on the floor. These techniques, along with restricting between-meal eating to one morning and
one afternoon snack, usually restore the relationship between appetite, the amount eaten, and children's
nutritional needs.
School Avoidance
Avoiding school occurs in about 5% of all school-aged children and affects girls and boys equally. It
usually occurs between ages 5 and 6 and between ages 10 and 11.
The cause is often unclear, but psychologic factors (eg, anxiety, depression) and social factors (eg,
having no friends, feeling rejected by peers, being bullied) may contribute. If school avoidance behaviors
escalate to the point at which a child is missing a lot of school, the behaviors may be an indication of
more serious problems (. A sensitive child may be overreacting with fear to a teacher's
strictness or rebukes. Younger children tend to fake illness or make other excuses to avoid school.
===PAGE:3228===
Children may complain of a stomachache, nausea, or other symptoms that justify staying home. Some
children directly refuse to go to school. Alternatively, children may go to school without difficulty but
become anxious or develop various symptoms during the school day, often going regularly to the nurse's
office. This behavior is unlike that of adolescents, who may decide not to attend school (truancy).
School avoidance tends to result in
• Poor academic performance
• Family difficulties
• Difficulties with peers
Most children recover from school avoidance, although some develop it again after a real illness or a
vacation.
Home tutoring generally is not a solution. Children with school avoidance should return to school
immediately, so that they do not fall behind in their schoolwork. If school avoidance is so intense that it
interferes with the child's activity and if the child does not respond to simple reassurance by parents or
teachers, referral to a mental health practitioner may be warranted.
Treatment should include communication between parents and school personnel, regular attendance at
school, and sometimes therapy involving the family and child with a psychologist. Therapy includes
treatment of underlying disorders as well as behavioral techniques to cope with the stresses at school.
Sleep Problems
For most children, sleep problems are intermittent or temporary and often do not require treatment.
Normal sleep:
Most children sleep for a stretch of at least 5 h by age 3 mo but then experience periods
of night waking later in the first years of life, often associated with illness. With maturation, the amount of
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep increases, with increasingly complex transitions between sleep stages.
For most people, non-REM sleep predominates early in the night, with increasing REM as the night
progresses. Thus, non-REM phenomena cluster early in the night, and REM-related phenomena occur
later. Differentiating between true sleep (REM or non-REM)-related phenomena and awake behaviors
can help to direct treatment.
It is important to determine whether parents view the child sleeping with them as a problem, because
there is much cultural variation among sleep habits.
Nightmares:
Nightmares are frightening dreams that occur during REM sleep. A child having a nightmare
can awaken fully and vividly recall the details of the dream. Nightmares are not a cause for alarm, unless
they occur very often. They can occur more often during times of stress or even when the child has seen
a movie or television program containing frightening content. If nightmares occur often, parents can keep
a diary to see whether they can identify the cause.
Night terrors and sleepwalking:
Night terrors, non-REM episodes of incomplete awakening with
extreme anxiety shortly after falling asleep, are most common between the ages of 3 and 8. The child
screams and appears frightened, with a rapid heart rate and rapid breathing. The child seems unaware of
the parents' presence, may thrash around violently, and does not respond to comforting. The child may
talk but is unable to answer questions. Usually, the child returns to sleep after a few minutes. Unlike with
nightmares, the child cannot recall these episodes. Night terrors are dramatic because the child screams
and is inconsolable during the episode. About one third of children with night terrors also experience
sleepwalking (rising from bed and walking around while apparently asleep, also called somnambulism).
About 15% of children between the ages of 5 and 12 have at least one episode of sleepwalking.
Night terrors and sleepwalking almost always stop on their own, although occasional episodes may occur
for years. Usually, no treatment is needed, but if a disorder persists into adolescence or adulthood and is
===PAGE:3229===
severe, treatment may be necessary. In children who need treatment, night terrors may sometimes
respond to a sedative or certain antidepressants. There is some evidence that disrupted sleep associated
with periodic leg movements often responds to iron supplementation, even in the absence of anemia. If
children snore and thrash, evaluation for obstructive sleep apnea also should be considered.
Resistance to going to bed:
Children, particularly between the ages of 1 and 2, often resist going to
bed due to separation anxiety, whereas older children may be attempting to control more aspects of their
environment. Young children often cry when left alone in their crib, or they climb out and seek their
parents. Another common cause of bedtime resistance is delayed sleep onset time. These situations arise
when children are allowed to stay up later and sleep later than usual for enough nights to reset their
internal clock to a later sleep onset time. It can be difficult to move bedtime earlier, but brief treatment with
an OTC antihistamine or melatonin can help children reset their clock.
Resistance to going to bed is not helped if parents stay in the room at length to provide comfort or let
children get out of bed. In fact, these responses reinforce night waking, in which children attempt to
reproduce the conditions under which they fell asleep. To avoid these problems, a parent may have to sit
quietly in the hallway in sight of the child and make sure the child stays in bed. The child then establishes
a sleep-onset routine of falling asleep alone and learns that getting out of bed is discouraged. The child
also learns that the parents are available but will not provide more stories or play. Eventually, the child
settles
down and goes to sleep. Providing the child with an attachment object (like a teddy bear) often is
helpful. A small night-light, white noise, or both also can be comforting.
Awakening during the night:
Everyone awakens multiple times each night. Most, however, usually fall
back to sleep with no intervention. Children often experience repeated night awakening after a move, an
illness, or another stressful event. Sleeping problems may be worsened when children take long naps late
in the afternoon or are over-stimulated by playing before bedtime.
Allowing the child to sleep with the parents because of the night awakening reinforces the behavior. Also
counterproductive are playing with or feeding the child during the night, spanking, and scolding.
Returning the child to bed with simple reassurance is usually more effective. A bedtime routine that
includes reading a brief story, offering a favorite doll or blanket, and using a small night-light (for children
> 3) is often helpful. To prevent arousal, it is important that the conditions under which the child awakens
during the night are the same as those under which the child falls asleep. Parents and other caregivers
should try to keep to a routine each night, so that the child learns what is expected. If children are
physically healthy, allowing them to cry for a few minutes often allows them to settle down by themselves,
which diminishes the night awakening.
Temper Tantrums
A temper tantrum is a violent emotional outburst, usually in response to frustration.
Temper tantrums usually appear toward the end of the first year, are most common at age 2 (terrible twos)
to 4, and are infrequent after age 5. If tantrums are frequent after age 5, they may persist throughout
childhood.
Causes include frustration, tiredness, and hunger. Children also may have temper tantrums to seek
attention, obtain something, or avoid doing something. Parents often blame themselves (because of
imagined poor parenting) when the actual cause is often a combination of the child's personality,
immediate circumstances, and developmentally normal behavior. An underlying mental, physical, or social
problem rarely may be the cause but is likely only if tantrums last > 15 min or occur multiple times each
day.
Temper tantrums may involve
• Shouting
• Screaming
===PAGE:3230===
• Crying
• Thrashing about
• Rolling on the floor
• Stomping
• Throwing things
The child may become red in the face and hit or kick. Some children may voluntarily hold their breath for a
few seconds and then resume normal breathing (unlike breath-holding spells, which also can follow
crying bouts caused by frustration—.
Although providing a safe setting for children to compose themselves (eg, a time-out—see
Sidebar 303-1
)
is often effective, many children have difficulty stopping tantrums on their own. In most cases, addressing
the source of the tantrum only prolongs it. It is therefore preferable to redirect the child by providing an
alternative activity on which to focus. The child may benefit from being removed physically from the
situation.
Violence
Children and adolescents may engage in occasional physical confrontations, but most do not develop a
sustained pattern of violent behavior or engage in violent crime. Those who become violent before
puberty may be at higher risk of committing crimes.
Violent behavior is increasingly common among children and adolescents. Almost 10% of students in
middle or junior high school and high school report being victims of bullying. In 2005, almost 16% of high
school students in the US reported carrying a weapon at least once during the month before they were
surveyed as part of a study on youth risks.
Despite growing interest in the possibility of a relationship between violent behavior and genetic defects
or chromosomal anomalies, there is minimal evidence for such a relationship. However, several risk
factors have been associated with violent behavior, including
• Violent discipline
• Alcohol and drug abuse
• Gang involvement
• Developmental issues
• Poverty
• Access to firearms
There seems to be a relationship between violence and access to firearms, exposure to violence through
media, and exposure to child abuse and domestic violence. Children who are bullied may reach a
breaking point, at which time they strike back with potentially dangerous or catastrophic results.
Bullying:
Bullying is intentional infliction of psychologic or physical damage on less powerful children.
Bullying can take several forms, including
• Persistent teasing
• Threats
===PAGE:3231===
• Intimidation
• Harassment
• Violent assaults
Cyber-bullying:
This is a newly described form in which bullies use e-mail and instant messaging to
convey threats. Bullies act to inflate their sense of self-worth. Bullies often report that bullying creates
feelings of power and control. Both bullies and their victims are at risk of poor outcomes. Victims often tell
no one about being bullied due to feelings of helplessness, shame, and fear of retaliation. Victims are at
risk of physical injury, poor self-esteem, anxiety, depression, and school absence. Bullies are more likely
to be incarcerated; they are less likely to remain in school, be employed, or have stable relationships as
adults.
Gang involvement:
Participation in gangs has been linked with violent behavior. Youth gangs are selfformed associations of ≥ 3 members, typically ages 13 to 24. Gangs usually adopt a name and identifying
symbols, such as a particular style of clothing, the use of certain hand signs, or graffiti. Some gangs
require prospective members to perform random acts of violence before membership is granted.
Increasing youth gang violence has been blamed at least in part on gang involvement in drug distribution
and drug use, particularly methamphetamines and heroin. Use of firearms is a frequent feature of gang
violence.
Prevention
Violence prevention should begin in early childhood. Strategies include
• Violence-free discipline in young children
• Limiting access to weapons and exposure to violence through media and video games
• Creating and maintaining a safe school environment for school-age children
• Encouraging victims to discuss problems with parents, school authorities, and their doctor
• Teaching older children and adolescents strategies for avoiding high-risk situations (eg, places or
settings where others have weapons or are using alcohol or drugs) and for reacting to or defusing
tense situations
===PAGE:3232===
Chapter 304. Learning and Developmental Disorders
Introduction
Developmental disorders (including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorders,
learning disabilities, and intellectual disability) are neurologically based conditions that can interfere with
the acquisition, retention, or application of specific skills or sets of information. They may involve
dysfunction in attention, memory, perception, language, problem-solving, or social interaction.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a syndrome of inattention, hyperactivity, and
impulsivity. The 3 types of ADHD are predominantly inattentive, predominantly hyperactiveimpulsive, and combined. Diagnosis is made by clinical criteria. Treatment usually includes
drug therapy with stimulant drugs, behavioral therapy, and educational interventions.
ADHD has been classified as a developmental disorder, although increasingly it is considered a disruptive
behavior disorder. ADHD affects an estimated 5 to 15% of school-aged children. However, many experts
think ADHD is overdiagnosed, largely because criteria are applied inaccurately. According to the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth Edition Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), there
are 3 types:
• Predominantly inattentive
• Predominantly hyperactive-impulsive
• Combined
The predominantly hyperactive-impulsive type occurs 2 to 9 times more frequently in boys; the
predominantly inattentive type occurs with about equal frequency in both sexes. ADHD tends to run in
families.
ADHD has no known single, specific cause. Potential causes include genetic, biochemical, sensorimotor,
physiologic, and behavioral factors. Some risk factors include birth weight < 1000 g, head trauma, and
lead exposure, as well as prenatal exposure to alcohol, tobacco, and cocaine. Fewer than 5% of children
with ADHD have other symptoms and signs of neurologic damage. Increasing evidence implicates
abnormalities in dopaminergic and noradrenergic systems with decreased activity or stimulation in upper
brain stem and frontal-midbrain tracts.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset often occurs before age 4 and invariably before age 7. The peak age for diagnosis is between
ages 8 and 10; however, patients with the predominantly inattentive type may not be diagnosed until after
adolescence.
Core symptoms and signs of ADHD involve
• Inattention
• Hyperactivity
• Impulsivity
These symptoms (see
Table 304-1
) must be more pronounced than expected for the child's developmental level; impaired
academic or social function is common.
Inattention tends to appear when a child is involved in tasks that require vigilance, rapid reaction time,
===PAGE:3233===
Inattention tends to appear when a child is involved in tasks that require vigilance, rapid reaction time,
visual and perceptual search, and systematic and sustained listening. Inattention and impulsivity impede
development of academic skills and thinking and reasoning strategies, motivation for school, and
adjustment to social demands. Children who have predominantly inattentive ADHD tend to be hands-on
learners who have difficulty in passive learning situations that require continuous performance and task
completion. Overall, about 20 to 60% of children with ADHD have learning disabilities, but some school
dysfunction occurs in most children with ADHD.
Behavioral history can reveal low frustration tolerance, opposition, temper tantrums, aggressiveness,
poor social skills and peer relationships, sleep disturbances, anxiety, dysphoria, depression, and mood
swings.
Although there are no specific physical examination or laboratory findings associated with ADHD, signs
can include
• Motor incoordination or clumsiness
• Nonlocalized, "soft" neurologic findings
• Perceptual-motor dysfunctions
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
Diagnosis is clinical and is based on comprehensive medical, developmental, educational, and
psychologic evaluations.
DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria include 9 symptoms and signs of inattention, 6 of hyperactivity, and 3 of
impulsivity (see
Table 304-1
); diagnosis using these criteria requires
[Table 304-1.
DSM-IV-TR Symptom Criteria for ADHD*]
that symptoms and signs occur in at least 2 situations (eg, home and school) and be present before age
7. Diagnosis of the predominantly inattentive type requires at least 6 of the 9 possible symptoms and
signs of inattention. Diagnosis of the hyperactive-impulsive type requires at least 6 of the 9 possible
symptoms and signs of hyperactivity and impulsivity. Diagnosis of the combined type requires at least 6
symptoms and signs each of inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity.
Differentiating between ADHD and other conditions can be challenging. Overdiagnosis must be avoided,
and other conditions must be accurately identified. Many ADHD signs expressed during the preschool
years could also indicate communication problems that can occur in other developmental disorders (eg,
autism spectrum [pervasive developmental] disorders) or in certain learning disorders, anxiety,
depression, or behavioral disorders (eg, conduct disorder). Clinicians should consider whether the child is
distracted by external factors (ie, environmental input) or by internal factors (ie, thoughts, anxieties,
worries). However, during later childhood, ADHD signs become more qualitatively distinct; affected
children often exhibit continuous movement of the lower extremities, motor impersistence (eg,
purposeless movement, fidgeting of hands), impulsive talking, and a seeming lack of awareness of their
environment.
Medical assessment focuses on identifying potentially treatable conditions that may contribute to or
worsen symptoms and signs. Developmental assessment focuses on determining the onset and course of
symptoms and signs. Educational assessment focuses on documenting core symptoms and signs; it may
involve reviewing educational records and using rating scales or checklists. However, rating scales and
checklists alone often cannot distinguish ADHD from other developmental disorders or from behavioral
disorders.
Prognosis
===PAGE:3234===
Traditional classrooms and academic activities often exacerbate symptoms and signs in children with
untreated or inadequately treated ADHD. Social and emotional adjustment problems may be persistent.
Poor acceptance by peers and loneliness tend to increase with age and with the obvious display of
symptoms. Substance abuse may result if ADHD is not identified and treated.
Although hyperactivity symptoms and signs tend to diminish with age, adolescents and adults may display
residual difficulties. Predictors of poor outcomes in adolescence and adulthood include
• Coexisting low intelligence
• Aggressiveness
• Social and interpersonal problems
• Parental psychopathology
Problems in adolescence and adulthood manifest predominantly as academic failure, low self-esteem,
and difficulty learning appropriate social behavior. Adolescents and adults who have predominately
impulsive ADHD may have an increased incidence of personality trait disorders and antisocial behavior;
many continue to display impulsivity, restlessness, and poor social skills. People with ADHD seem to
adjust better to work than to academic and home situations.
Treatment
• Behavioral therapy
• Drug therapy, typically with stimulants such as methylphenidate or dextroamphetamine
Randomized, controlled studies show behavioral therapy alone is less effective than therapy with
stimulant drugs alone; combination therapy has mixed results. Although correction of the underlying
neurophysiologic differences of patients with ADHD does not occur with drug therapy, drugs are effective
in alleviating ADHD symptoms, and they permit participation in activities previously inaccessible because
of poor attention and impulsivity. Drugs often interrupt the cycle of inappropriate behavior, enhancing
behavioral and academic interventions, motivation, and self-esteem. Treatment of adults follows similar
principles, but drug selection and dosing are determined on an individual basis, depending on other
medical conditions.
Drugs:
Stimulant preparations that include methylphenidate or dextroamphetamine are most widely used.
Response varies greatly, and dosage depends on the severity of the behavior and the child's ability to
tolerate the drug. Dosing is adjusted in frequency and amount until the optimal response is achieved.
Methylphenidate is usually started at 0.3 mg/kg po once/day (immediate-release form) and increased in
frequency weekly, usually to about tid or q 4 h. If response is inadequate but drug is tolerated, dose can
be increased. Most children find an optimal balance between benefits and adverse effects at individual
doses between 0.3 and 0.6 mg/kg.
Dextroamphetamine is typically started (either alone or in combination with amphetamine)
at 0.15 to 0.2
mg/kg po once/day, which can then be increased to bid, tid, or q 4 h. Individual doses in the range of 0.15
to 0.4 mg/kg are usually effective. Dose titration should balance effectiveness against adverse effects. In
general, dextroamphetamine doses are about two thirds those of methylphenidate doses.
For methylphenidate or dextroamphetamine, once an optimal dosage is reached, an equivalent dosage of
the same drug in a sustained-release form is often substituted to avoid the need for drug administration in
school. Long-acting preparations include wax matrix slow-release tablets, biphasic capsules containing
the equivalent of 2 doses, and osmotic release pills and transdermal patches that provide up to 12 h of
coverage. Learning is often enhanced by low doses, but improvement in behavior often requires higher
doses.
===PAGE:3235===
Dosing schedules of stimulant drugs can be adjusted to cover specific days and times (eg, during school
hours, while doing homework). Drug holidays should be tried on weekends, on holidays, or during
summer vacations. Placebo periods (for 5 to 10 school days to ensure reliability of observations) are
recommended to determine whether the drugs are still needed.
Common adverse effects of stimulant drugs include
• Sleep disturbances (eg, insomnia)
• Depression
• Headache
• Stomachache
• Appetite suppression
• Elevated heart rate and BP
Some studies have shown slowing of growth over 2 yr of stimulant drug use, but whether slowing persists
over longer periods of use remains unclear. Some patients who are sensitive to stimulant drug effects
appear over-focused or dulled; decreasing the stimulant drug dosage or trying a different drug may be
helpful.
Atomoxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, is also used. The drug is effective, but data
are mixed regarding its efficacy compared with stimulant drugs. Many children experience nausea,
sedation, irritability, and temper tantrums; rarely, liver toxicity and suicidal ideation occur. A typical starting
dose is 0.5 mg/kg po once/day, titrated weekly to 1.2 to 1.4 mg/kg once/day. The long half-life allows
once/day dosing but requires continuous use to be effective. The maximum recommended daily dosage is
100 mg.
Antidepressants such as bupropion,
α
-2 agonists such as clonidine and guanfacine, and other
psychoactive drugs are sometimes used in cases of stimulant drug ineffectiveness or unacceptable
adverse effects, but they are less effective and are not recommended as first-line drugs. Pemoline is no
longer recommended. Sometimes these drugs are used in combination with stimulants for synergistic
effects; close monitoring for adverse effects is essential.
Behavioral management:
Counseling, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (eg, goal-setting, selfmonitoring, modeling, role-playing), is often effective and helps children understand ADHD. Structure and
routines are essential.
Classroom behavior is often improved by environmental control of noise and visual stimulation,
appropriate task length, novelty, coaching, and teacher proximity.
When difficulties persist at home, parents should be encouraged to seek additional professional
assistance and training in behavioral management techniques. Adding incentives and token rewards
reinforces behavioral management and is often effective. Children with ADHD in whom hyperactivity and
poor impulse control predominate are often helped at home when structure, consistent parenting
techniques, and well-defined limits are established.
Elimination diets, megavitamin treatments, use of antioxidants or other compounds, and nutritional and
biochemical interventions have had the least consistent effects. Biofeedback can be helpful in some
cases but is not recommended for routine use because evidence of sustained benefit is lacking.
Autism Spectrum Disorders
(Pervasive Developmental Disorders)
===PAGE:3236===
Autism spectrum disorders are neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by impaired social
interaction and communication, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, and uneven
intellectual development often with intellectual disability. Symptoms begin in early childhood.
The cause in most children is unknown, although evidence supports a genetic component; in
some patients, the disorders may be caused by a medical condition. Diagnosis is based on
developmental history and observation. Treatment consists of behavioral management and
sometimes drug therapy.
Autism, a neurodevelopmental disorder, is the most common of the disorders called autism spectrum
disorders (ASD) or pervasive
developmental disorders (PDD)—see
Table 304-2
. Current estimates of prevalence of ASD are in the range of 1/150. Autism is 2 to 4 times
more common among boys. In recent years, there has been a rapid rise in the diagnosis of ASD, partially
because of changes in diagnostic criteria.
Etiology
The specific cause in most cases of ASD remains elusive. However, some cases have occurred with
congenital rubella syndrome, cytomegalic inclusion disease, phenylketonuria, or fragile X syndrome.
Strong evidence supports a genetic component. For parents of one child with an ASD, risk of having a
subsequent child with an ASD is 50 to 100 times greater. The concordance rate of autism is high in
monozygotic twins. Research on families has suggested several potential target gene areas, including
those related to neurotransmitter receptors (gamma-aminobutyric acid [GABA]) and CNS structural control
(
HOX
genes). Environmental causes have been suspected but are unproved. There is strong evidence
that vaccinations do not cause autism.
Abnormalities of brain structure and function probably underlie much of the pathogenesis
[Table 304-2.
Autism Spectrum Disorders]
of autism. Some children with autism have enlarged ventricles, some have hypoplasia of the cerebellar
vermis, and others have abnormalities of brain stem nuclei.
Symptoms and Signs
Classic autistic disorder usually manifests in the first year of life and almost always by age 3. The
disorder is characterized by
• Atypical interaction (ie, lack of attachment, inability to cuddle or to form reciprocal relationships,
avoidance of eye gaze)
• Insistence on sameness (ie, resistance to change, rituals, intense attachment to familiar objects,
repetitive acts)
• Speech and language problems (ranging from total muteness to delayed onset of speech to markedly
idiosyncratic use of language)
• Uneven intellectual performance
Some affected children injure themselves. About 25% of affected children experience a documented loss
of previously acquired skills.
All children with ASD have similar problems with interaction, behavior, and communication; however, the
severity of the problems varies widely. Nevertheless, some characteristic features often point to the
specific diagnosis (see
Table 304-2
). Children with Asperger's syndrome generally have better intellectual
performance than children with classic autistic disorder. They also lack the language delays typical of
children with classic autistic disorder. Children with childhood disintegrative disorder develop normally
until about age 2, and then their skills deteriorate.
===PAGE:3237===
Current theory holds that a fundamental problem in ASD is mind blindness, the inability to imagine what
another person might be thinking. This difficulty is thought to result in interaction abnormalities that, in
turn, lead to abnormal language development. One of the earliest and most sensitive markers for autism
is a 1-yr-old child's inability to point communicatively at objects. It is theorized that the child cannot
imagine that another person would understand what was being indicated; instead, the child indicates
wants only by physically touching the desired object or using the adult's hand as a tool.
Nonfocal neurologic findings include poorly coordinated gait and stereotyped motor movements. Seizures
occur in 20 to 40% of these children (particularly those with an intelligence quotient [IQ] < 50).
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is made clinically and usually requires evidence of impairment of social interaction and
communication and presence of restricted, repetitive, stereotyped behaviors or interests. Screening tests
include the Social Communication Questionnaire and the modified checklist for autism in toddlers (MCHAT). Formal gold standard diagnostic tests such as the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule
(ADOS), based on criteria in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
, Fourth Edition
Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), are usually given by psychologists. Children with ASD are difficult to test;
they usually do better on performance items than verbal items in IQ tests and may show instances of ageappropriate performance despite cognitive limitation in most areas. Nonetheless, an IQ test given by an
experienced examiner often can provide a useful predictor of outcome.
Treatment
• Behavioral therapy
• Speech and language therapy
• Sometimes physical and occupational therapy
• Drug therapy
Treatment is usually multidisciplinary, and recent studies show measurable benefits from intensive,
behaviorally based approaches that encourage interaction and meaningful communication. Psychologists
and educators typically focus on behavioral analysis and then match behavioral management strategies
to specific behavioral problems at home and at school.
Speech and language therapy should begin early and use a range of media, including signing, picture
exchange, and speech. Physical and occupational therapists plan and implement strategies to help
affected children compensate for specific deficits in motor function and motor planning.
SSRIs may improve control of ritualistic behaviors. Antipsychotics and mood stabilizers such as valproate
may help control self-injurious behavior.
Dietary interventions, including some vitamin supplements and a gluten-free and casein-free diet, have
not been fully investigated. Other complementary and investigational approaches to therapy (eg,
facilitated communication) have not yet shown efficacy and require additional study.
Learning Disabilities
Learning disabilities are conditions that cause a discrepancy between potential and actual
levels of academic performance as predicted by the person's intellectual abilities. Learning
disabilities involve impairments or difficulties in concentration
or attention, language
development, or visual and aural information processing. Diagnosis includes cognitive,
educational, speech and language, medical, and psychologic evaluations. Treatment consists
===PAGE:3238===
primarily of educational management and sometimes medical, behavioral, and psychologic
therapy.
Specific learning disabilities affect the ability to understand or use spoken or written language, do
mathematical calculations, coordinate movements, or focus attention on a task. These disabilities include
problems in reading, mathematics, spelling, written expression or handwriting, and understanding or using
verbal and nonverbal language (see
Table 304-3
). Most learning disabilities are complex or mixed, with deficits in more than one system.
Although the number of children with learning disabilities is unknown, about 5% of the school-age
population in the US receives special educational services for learning disabilities. Among affected
children, boys outnumber girls 5:1.
Learning disabilities may be congenital or acquired. No single cause has been defined, but neurologic
deficits are evident or presumed. Genetic influences are often implicated. Other possible causes include
• Maternal illness or use of toxic drugs during pregnancy
• Complications during pregnancy or delivery (eg, spotting, toxemia, prolonged labor, precipitous delivery)
• Neonatal problems (eg, prematurity, low birth weight, severe jaundice, perinatal asphyxia, postmaturity,
respiratory distress)
[Table 304-3.
Common Learning Disabilities]
Potential postnatal factors include exposure to environmental toxins (eg, lead), CNS infections, cancers
and their treatments, trauma, undernutrition, and severe social isolation or deprivation.
Symptoms and Signs
Children with learning disabilities typically have at least average intelligence, although such disabilities
can occur in children with lower cognitive function as well. Symptoms and signs of severe disabilities tend
to manifest at an early age. Mild to moderate learning disabilities are usually not recognized until school
age, when the rigors of academic learning are encountered. Affected children may have trouble learning
the alphabet and may be delayed in paired associative learning (eg, color naming, labeling, counting,
letter naming). Speech perception may be limited, language may be learned at a slower rate, and
vocabulary may be decreased. Affected children may not understand what is read, have very messy
handwriting or hold a pencil awkwardly, have trouble organizing or beginning tasks or retelling a story in
sequential order, or confuse math symbols and misread numbers.
Disturbances or delays in expressive language or listening comprehension are predictors of academic
problems beyond the preschool years. Memory may be defective, including short-term and long-term
memory, memory use (eg, rehearsal), and verbal recall or retrieval. Problems may occur in
conceptualizing, abstracting, generalizing, reasoning, and organizing and planning information for problem
solving. Visual perception and auditory processing problems may occur; they include difficulties in spatial
cognition and orientation (eg, object localization, spatial memory, awareness of position and place), visual
attention and memory, and sound discrimination and analysis.
Some children with learning disabilities have difficulty following social conventions (eg, taking turns,
standing too close to the listener, not understanding jokes); these difficulties are often components of mild
autism spectrum disorders as well (. Short attention span, motor restlessness, fine motor
problems (eg, poor printing and copying),
and variability in performance and behavior over time are other
early signs. Difficulties with impulse control, non-goal-directed behavior and overactivity, discipline
problems, aggressiveness, withdrawal and avoidance behavior, excessive shyness, and excessive fear
may occur. Learning disabilities and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) often occur together.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3239===
• Cognitive, behavioral, medical, and psychologic evaluations
Children with learning disabilities are typically identified when a discrepancy is recognized between
academic potential and academic performance. Speech and language, intellectual, educational, medical,
and psychologic evaluations are necessary for determining deficiencies in skills and cognitive processes.
Social and emotional-behavioral evaluations are also necessary for planning treatment and monitoring
progress.
Cognitive evaluation
typically includes verbal and nonverbal intelligence testing and is usually done by
school personnel. Psychoeducational testing may be helpful in describing the child's preferred manner of
processing information (eg, holistically or analytically, visually or aurally). Neuropsychologic assessment
is particularly useful in children with known CNS injury or illness to map the areas of the brain that
correspond to specific functional strengths and weaknesses. Speech and language evaluations establish
integrity of comprehension and language use, phonologic processing, and verbal memory.
Behavioral assessment
and performance evaluation by teachers' observations of classroom behavior
and determination of academic performance are essential. Reading evaluations measure abilities in word
decoding and recognition, comprehension, and fluency. Writing samples should be obtained to evaluate
spelling, syntax, and fluency of ideas. Mathematical ability should be assessed in terms of computation
skills, knowledge of operations, and understanding of concepts.
Medical evaluation
includes a detailed family history, the child's medical history, a physical examination,
and a neurologic or neurodevelopmental examination to look for underlying disorders. Although
infrequent, physical abnormalities and neurologic signs may indicate medically treatable causes of
learning disabilities. Gross motor coordination problems may indicate neurologic deficits or
neurodevelopmental delays. Developmental level is evaluated according to standardized criteria.
Psychologic evaluation
helps identify ADHD, conduct disorder, anxiety disorders, depression, and poor
self-esteem, which frequently accompany and must be differentiated from learning disabilities. Attitude
toward school, motivation, peer relationships, and self-confidence are assessed.
Treatment
• Educational management
• Medical, behavioral, and psychologic therapy
• Occasionally drug therapy
Treatment centers on educational management but may also involve medical, behavioral, and
psychologic therapy. Effective teaching programs may take a remedial, compensatory, or strategic (ie,
teaching the child how to learn) approach. A mismatch of instructional method and a child's learning
disability and learning preference aggravates the disability.
Some children require specialized instruction in only one area while they continue to attend regular
classes. Other children need separate and intense educational programs. Optimally and as required by
US law, affected children should participate as much as possible in inclusive classes with peers who do
not have learning disabilities.
Drugs minimally affect academic achievement, intelligence, and general learning ability, although certain
drugs (eg, stimulants, such as methylphenidate and several amphetamine preparations—
may enhance attention and concentration, allowing children to respond more efficiently to instruction.
Many popular remedies and therapies (eg, eliminating food additives, using antioxidants or megadoses of
vitamins, patterning by sensory stimulation and passive movement, sensory integrative therapy through
postural exercises, auditory nerve training, optometric training to remedy visual-perceptual and
sensorimotor coordination processes) are unproved.
Dyslexia
===PAGE:3240===
Dyslexia is a general term for primary reading disorder. Diagnosis is based on intellectual,
educational, speech and language, medical, and psychologic evaluations. Treatment is primarily
educational management, consisting of instruction in word recognition and component skills.
No definition of dyslexia is universally accepted; thus, incidence is undetermined. An
estimated 15% of
public school children receive special instruction for reading problems; about one half of these children
may have persistent reading disabilities. Dyslexia is identified more often in boys than girls, but sex is not
a proven risk factor for developing dyslexia.
The inability to learn derivational rules of printed language is often considered part of dyslexia. Affected
children may have difficulty determining root words or word stems and determining which letters in words
follow others.
Reading problems other than dyslexia are usually caused by difficulties in language comprehension or
low cognitive ability. Visual-perceptual problems and abnormal eye movements are not dyslexia. However,
these problems can interfere further with word learning.
Etiology
Phonologic processing problems cause deficits in discrimination, blending, memory, and analysis of
sounds. Dyslexia may affect both production and understanding of written language, which is often
restricted further by problems with auditory memory, speech production, and naming or word finding.
Underlying weaknesses in verbal language are often present.
Pathophysiology
Dyslexia tends to run in families. Children with a family history of reading or learning difficulties are at
higher risk. Because changes have been identified in the brains of people with dyslexia, experts believe
dyslexia results predominantly from cortical dysfunction stemming from congenital neurodevelopmental
abnormalities. Lesions affecting the integration or interactions of specific brain functions are suspected.
Most researchers concur that dyslexia is left hemisphere-related and linked to dysfunctions in brain areas
responsible for language association (Wernicke's motor speech area) and sound and speech production
(Broca's area) and in the interconnection of these areas via the fasciculus arcuatus. Dysfunctions or
defects in the angular gyrus, the medial occipital area, and the right hemisphere cause word recognition
problems. Research suggests some malleability of brain systems in response to training.
Symptoms and Signs
Dyslexia may manifest as
• Delayed language production
• Speech articulation difficulties
• Difficulties remembering the names of letters, numbers, and colors
Children with phonologic processing problems often have difficulty blending sounds, rhyming words,
identifying the positions of sounds in words, and segmenting words into pronounceable components.
They may reverse the order of sounds in words. Delay or hesitation in choosing words, substituting
words, or naming letters and pictures is often an early sign. Short-term auditory memory and auditory
sequencing difficulties are common.
Fewer than 20% of children with dyslexia have difficulties with the visual demands of reading. However,
some children confuse letters and words with similar configurations or have difficulty visually selecting or
identifying letter patterns and clusters (sound-symbol association) in words. Reversals or visual
confusions can occur, most often because of retention or retrieval difficulties that cause affected children
to forget or confuse the names of letters and words that have similar structures; subsequently,
d
becomes
===PAGE:3241===
b
,
m
becomes
w
,
h
becomes
n
,
was
becomes
saw
,
on
becomes
no
. However, such reversals are normal
in children < 8 yr.
Although dyslexia is a lifelong problem, many children develop functional reading skills. However, other
children never reach adequate literacy.
Diagnosis
• Reading evaluation
• Speech, language, and auditory evaluations
• Psychologic evaluations
Most children with dyslexia are not identified until kindergarten or 1st grade, when they encounter
symbolic learning. Children with a history of delayed language acquisition or use, who are not
accelerating in word learning by the end of 1st grade, or who are not reading at the level expected for
their verbal or intellectual abilities at any grade level should be evaluated. Often, the best diagnostic
indicator is the child's inability to respond to traditional or typical reading approaches during 1st grade,
although wide variation in reading skills can still be seen at this level. Demonstration of phonologic
processing problems is essential for diagnosis.
Children suspected of having dyslexia should undergo reading, speech and language, auditory, cognitive,
and psychologic evaluations to identify their functional strengths and weaknesses and their preferred
learning styles. Such evaluations can be requested of school staff by the child's teacher or family based
on the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), a US special education law. Evaluation
findings
then guide the most effective instructional approach.
Comprehensive reading evaluations test word recognition and analysis, fluency, reading or listening
comprehension, and level of understanding of vocabulary and the reading process.
Speech, language, and auditory evaluations assess spoken language and deficits in processing
phonemes (sound elements) of spoken language. Receptive and expressive language functions are also
assessed. Cognitive abilities (eg, attention, memory, reasoning) are tested.
Psychologic evaluations address emotional concerns that can exacerbate a reading disability. A complete
family history of mental disorders and emotional problems is obtained.
Physicians should ensure that children have normal vision and hearing, either through office-based
screening or referral for formal audiologic or vision testing. Neurologic evaluations may help detect
secondary features (eg, neurodevelopmental immaturity or minor neurologic abnormalities) and rule out
other disorders (eg, seizures).
Treatment
• Educational interventions
Treatment consists of educational interventions, including direct and indirect instruction in word
recognition and component skills. Direct instruction includes teaching specific phonics skills separate from
other reading instruction. Indirect instruction includes integrating phonics skills into reading programs.
Instruction may teach reading from a whole-word or whole-language approach or by following a hierarchy
of skills from the sound unit to the word to the sentence. Multisensory approaches that include wholeword learning and the integration of visual, auditory, and tactual procedures to teach sounds, words, and
sentences are then recommended.
Component skills instruction consists of teaching children to blend sounds to form words, segment words
into word parts, and identify the positions of sounds in words. Component skills for reading
comprehension include identifying the main idea, answering questions, isolating facts and details, and
===PAGE:3242===
reading inferentially. Many children benefit from using a computer to help isolate words within text
samples or for word processing of written work.
Other treatments (eg, optometric training, perceptual training, auditory integration training) and drug
therapies are unproved and not recommended.
Intellectual Disability
Intellectual disability (ID, previously called mental retardation) is characterized by significantly
sub-average intellectual functioning (often expressed as an intelligence quotient < 70 to 75)
combined with limitations of > 2 of the following: communication, self-direction, social skills,
self-care, use of community resources, and maintenance of personal safety. Management
consists of education, family counseling, and social support.
Basing severity on intelligence quotient (IQ) alone (eg, mild, 52 to 70 or 75; moderate, 36 to 51; severe,
20 to 35; and profound, < 20) is inadequate. Classification must also account for the level of support
needed, ranging from intermittent to ongoing high-level support for all activities. Such an approach
focuses on a person's strengths and weaknesses, relating them to the demands of the person's
environment and the expectations and attitudes of the family and community.
About 3% of the population functions at an IQ of < 70, which is at least 2 standard deviations below the
mean IQ of the general population (IQ of 100); if the need for support is considered, only about 1% of the
population has severe ID. Severe ID occurs in families from all socioeconomic groups and educational
levels. Less severe ID (requiring intermittent or limited support) occurs most often in lower socioeconomic
groups, paralleling with observations that IQ correlates best with success in school and socioeconomic
status rather than specific organic factors. Nevertheless, recent studies suggest that genetic factors play
roles even in milder cognitive disabilities.
Etiology
Intelligence is both genetically and environmentally determined. Children born to parents with ID are at
increased risk of a range of developmental disabilities, but clear genetic transmission of ID is unusual.
Although advances in genetics, such as chromosomal microarray analysis, have increased the likelihood
of identifying the cause of an ID, a specific cause cannot be identified in 60 to 80% of cases. A cause is
most likely to be identified in severe cases. Deficits in language and personal-social skills may be due to
emotional problems, environmental deprivation, learning disorders, or deafness rather than ID.
Prenatal:
A number of chromosomal anomalies and genetic metabolic and neurologic disorders can
cause ID (see
Table 304-4
).
[Table 304-4.
Chromosomal and Genetic Causes of Intellectual Disability*]
Congenital infections that can cause ID include rubella and those due to cytomegalovirus,
Toxoplasma
gondii
,
Treponema pallidum
, or HIV.
Prenatal drug and toxin exposure ( can cause ID. Fetal alcohol syndrome ( is the
most common of these conditions. Anticonvulsants such as phenytoin or valproate, chemotherapy drugs,
radiation exposure, lead, and methylmercury are also causes. Severe undernutrition during pregnancy
may affect fetal brain development, resulting in ID.
Perinatal:
Complications related to prematurity, CNS bleeding, periventricular leukomalacia, breech or
high forceps delivery, multiple births, placenta previa, preeclampsia, and perinatal asphyxia may increase
the risk of ID. The risk is increased in small-forgestational-age infants; intellectual impairment and
decreased weight share the same cause. Very low- and extremely low-birth-weight infants have variably
increased chances of having ID, depending on gestational age, perinatal events, and quality of care.
Postnatal:
Undernutrition and environmental deprivation (lack of physical, emotional, and cognitive
===PAGE:3243===
support required for growth, development, and social adaptation) during infancy and early childhood may
be the most common causes of ID worldwide. Viral and bacterial encephalitides (including AIDSassociated neuroencephalopathy) and meningitides, poisoning (eg, lead, mercury), and accidents that
cause severe head injuries or asphyxia may result in ID.
Symptoms and Signs
The primary manifestations are
• Delayed intellectual development
• Immature behavior
• Limited self-care skills
Some children with mild ID may not develop recognizable symptoms until preschool age. However, early
identification is common
among children with moderate to severe ID and among children in whom ID is
accompanied by physical abnormalities or signs of a condition (eg, cerebral palsy) that may be
associated with a particular cause of ID (eg, perinatal asphyxia). Delayed development is usually
apparent by preschool age. Among older children, hallmark features are a low IQ combined with
limitations in adaptive behavior skills. Although developmental patterns may vary, it is much more common
for children with ID to experience slow progress than developmental arrest.
Some children may have cerebral palsy or other motor deficits, language delays, or hearing loss. Such
motor or sensory impairments can mimic cognitive impairment but are not in themselves causes of it. As
children mature, some develop anxiety or depression if they are socially rejected by other children or if
they are disturbed by the realization that others see them as different and deficient. Well-managed,
inclusive school programs can help maximize social integration, thereby minimizing such emotional
responses.
Behavioral disorders are the reason for most psychiatric referrals and out-of-home placements for people
with ID. Behavioral problems are often situational, and precipitating factors can usually be identified.
Factors that predispose to unacceptable behavior include
• Lack of training in socially responsible behavior
• Inconsistent discipline
• Reinforcement of faulty behavior
• Impaired ability to communicate
• Discomfort due to coexisting physical problems and mental health disorders such as depression or
anxiety
In institutional settings, overcrowding, understaffing, and lack of activities contribute.
Diagnosis
• Developmental and intelligence assessment
• Imaging testing
• Genetic testing
For suspected cases, development and intelligence are assessed, typically by early intervention or school
staff. Standardized intelligence tests can measure subaverage intellectual ability but are subject to error,
and results should be questioned when they do not match clinical findings; illness, motor or sensory
===PAGE:3244===
impairments, language barriers, or cultural differences may hamper a child's test performance. Such tests
also have a middle-class bias but are generally reasonable in appraising intellectual ability in children,
particularly in older ones. Developmental screening tests such as the Ages and Stages Questionnaire or
the Parents' Evaluation of Developmental Status (PEDS) provide gross assessments of development for
young children and can be given by a physician or others. Such measures should be used only for
screening and not as substitutes for standardized intelligence tests, which should be given by qualified
psychologists. A neurodevelopmental assessment should be initiated as soon as developmental delays
are suspected. A developmental pediatrician or pediatric neurologist should investigate all cases of
• Moderate to severe developmental delays
• Progressive disability
• Neuromuscular deterioration
• Suspected seizure disorders
Establishing ID is followed by efforts to determine a cause. Accurate determination of the cause may
provide a developmental prognosis, suggest plans for educational and training programs, help in genetic
counseling, and relieve parental guilt. History (including perinatal, developmental, neurologic, and familial)
may identify causes. An algorithm for the diagnostic evaluation of the child with ID (global developmental
delay) has been proposed by the Child Neurology Society. Cranial imaging (eg, MRI) can show CNS
malformations (as seen in neurodermatoses such as neurofibromatosis or tuberous sclerosis), treatable
hydrocephalus, or more severe brain malformations such as schizencephaly. Genetic tests may help
identify disorders such as Down syndrome (trisomy 21) via standard karyotyping, 5p-deletion (cri du chat
syndrome) or DiGeorge syndrome (chromosome 22q deletion) via fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH),
or fragile X syndrome via direct DNA studies. Recently, chromosomal microarray analysis has become
more widely available, affording opportunities for identifying otherwise unrecognized chromosome
disruptions.
Genetic metabolic disorders may be suggested by their clinical manifestations (eg, failure to thrive,
lethargy, vomiting, seizures, hypotonia, hepatosplenomegaly, coarse facial features, abnormal urinary
odor, macroglossia). Isolated delays in sitting or walking (gross motor skills) and in pincer grasp, drawing,
or writing (fine motor skills) may indicate a neuromuscular disorder. Specific laboratory tests are done
depending on the suspected cause (see
Table 304-5
). Visual and auditory assessments should be done at an early age, and screening for lead
poisoning is often appropriate.
[Table 304-5.
Tests for Some Causes of Intellectual Disability]
Prognosis
Many people with mild to moderate ID can support themselves, live independently, and be successful at
jobs that require basic intellectual skills. Life expectancy may be shortened, depending on the etiology of
the disability, but health care is improving long-term health outcomes for people with all types of
developmental disabilities. People with severe ID are likely to require life-long support. The more severe
the cognitive disability and the greater the immobility, the higher the mortality risk.
Treatment
• Early intervention program
• Multidisciplinary team support
Treatment and support needs depend on social competence and cognitive function. Referral to an early
intervention program during infancy may prevent or decrease the severity of disability resulting from a
perinatal insult. Realistic methods of caring for affected children must be established.
===PAGE:3245===
Family support and counseling are crucial. As soon as ID is confirmed or strongly suspected, the parents
should be informed and given ample time to discuss causes, effects, prognosis, education and training of
the child, and the importance of balancing known prognostic risks against negative self-fulfilling
prophecies in which diminished expectations result in poor functional outcomes later in life. Sensitive
ongoing counseling is essential for family adaptation. If the family's physician cannot provide coordination
and counseling, the child and family should be referred to a center with a multidisciplinary team that
evaluates and serves children with ID; however, the family's physician should provide continuing medical
care and advice.
A comprehensive, individualized program is developed with the help of appropriate specialists, including
educators.
A multidisciplinary team includes
•
Neurologists or developmental pediatricians
• Orthopedists
• Physical therapists and occupational therapists (who assist in managing comorbidities in children with
motor deficits)
• Speech pathologists and audiologists (who help with language delays or with suspected hearing loss)
• Nutritionists (who help with treatment of undernutrition)
• Social workers (who help reduce environmental deprivation)
Affected children with concomitant mental health disorders such as depression may be given appropriate
psychoactive drugs in dosages similar to those used in children without ID. Use of psychoactive drugs
without behavioral therapy and environmental changes is rarely helpful.
Every effort should be made to have children live at home or in community-based residences. Although
the presence of a child with ID in the home can be disruptive, it can also be extremely rewarding. The
family may benefit from psychologic support and help with daily care provided by day care centers,
homemakers, and respite services. The living environment must encourage independence and reinforce
learning of skills needed to accomplish this goal. Whenever possible, children with ID should attend an
appropriately adapted day care center or school with peers without cognitive disability. The Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), a US special education law, stipulates that all children with
disabilities should receive appropriate educational opportunities and programming in the least restrictive
and most inclusive environments. As people with ID reach adulthood, an array of supportive living and
work settings is available. Large residential institutions are being replaced by small group or individual
residences matched to the affected person's functional abilities and needs.
Prevention
Genetic counseling (see also p.
) may help high-risk couples understand possible risks. If a child has
ID, evaluation of the etiology can provide the family with appropriate risk information for future
pregnancies.
High-risk couples who choose to have children often undergo prenatal testing, which enables couples to
consider pregnancy termination and subsequent family planning. Testing includes
• Amniocentesis
• Ultrasonography
• Maternal serum
α
-fetoprotein
===PAGE:3246===
Amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling may detect inherited metabolic and chromosomal disorders,
carrier states, and CNS malformations (eg, neural tube defects, anencephaly). Amniocentesis is indicated
for all pregnant women > 35 yr (because their risk of having an infant with Down syndrome is increased)
and for women with family histories of inherited metabolic disorders. Ultrasonography may also identify
CNS defects. Maternal serum
α
-fetoprotein is a helpful screen for neural tube defects, Down syndrome,
and other abnormalities.
Rubella vaccine has all but eliminated congenital rubella as a cause. A vaccine for cytomegalovirus
infection is being sought. Continuing improvements in and increased availability of obstetric and neonatal
care and the use of exchange transfusion and Rh
(D) immune globulin to prevent hemolytic disease of
the newborn have reduced the incidence of ID; the increase in survival of very-low-birth-weight infants
has kept the prevalence constant.
===PAGE:3247===
Chapter 305. Mental Disorders in Children and Adolescents
Introduction
Although it is sometimes assumed that childhood and adolescence are times of carefree bliss, as many as
20% of children and adolescents have one or more diagnosable mental disorders. Most of these
disorders may be viewed as exaggerations or distortions of normal behaviors and emotions.
Like adults, children and adolescents vary in temperament. Some are shy and reticent; others are socially
exuberant. Some are methodical and cautious; others are impulsive and careless. Whether a child is
behaving like a typical child or has a disorder is determined by the presence of impairment and the
degree
of distress related to the symptoms. For example, a 12-yr-old girl may be frightened by the
prospect of delivering a book report in front of her class. This fear would be viewed as social phobia only
if her fears were severe enough to cause significant impairments and distress.
There is much overlap between the symptoms of many disorders and the challenging behaviors and
emotions of normal children. Thus, many strategies useful for managing behavioral problems in children
( can also be used in children who have mental disorders. Furthermore, appropriate
management of childhood behavioral problems may prevent temperamentally vulnerable children from
developing a full-blown disorder.
The most common mental disorders of childhood and adolescence fall into 4 broad categories:
• Anxiety disorders
• Schizophrenia
• Mood disorders (primarily depression)
• Disruptive behavioral disorders
However, more often than not, children and adolescents have symptoms and problems that cut across
diagnostic boundaries.
Evaluation
Evaluation of mental complaints or symptoms in children and adolescents differs from that in adults in 3
important ways:
• Developmental context is critically important in children. Behaviors that are normal at a young age may
indicate a serious mental disorder at an older age.
• Children exist in the context of a family system, and that system has a profound effect on children's
symptoms and behaviors; normal children living in a family troubled by domestic violence and
substance abuse may superficially appear to have one or more mental disorders.
• Children often do not have the cognitive and linguistic sophistication needed to accurately describe their
symptoms. Thus, the clinician must rely very heavily on direct observation, corroborated by
observations of other people, such as parents and teachers.
In many cases, developmental and behavioral problems (eg, poor academic progress, delays in language
acquisition, deficits in social skills) are difficult to distinguish from those due to a mental disorder. In such
cases, formal developmental and neuropsychologic testing should be part of the evaluation process.
Because of these factors, evaluation of children with a mental disorder is typically more complex than that
of adults. However, most cases are not severe and can be competently managed by an appropriately
trained primary care practitioner. However, uncertain or severe cases are best managed in consultation
with a child and adolescent psychiatrist.
===PAGE:3248===
Anxiety Disorders in Children and Adolescents
Anxiety disorders are characterized by fear, worry, or dread that greatly impairs the ability to
function normally and that is disproportionate to the circumstances at hand. Anxiety may result
in physical symptoms. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is with behavioral therapy and drugs,
usually SSRIs.
Some anxiety is a normal aspect of development, as in the following:
• Most toddlers become fearful when separated from their mother, especially in unfamiliar surroundings.
• Fears of the dark, monsters, bugs, and spiders are common in 3- to 4-yr-olds.
• Shy children may initially react to new situations with fear or withdrawal.
• Fears of injury and death are more common among older children.
• Older children and adolescents often become anxious when giving a book report in front of their
classmates.
Such difficulties should not be viewed as evidence of a disorder. However, if manifestations of anxiety
become so exaggerated that they greatly impair functioning or cause severe distress, an anxiety disorder
should be considered.
At some point during childhood, about 10 to 15% of children experience an anxiety disorder (eg,
generalized anxiety disorder, social phobia, separation anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder,
specific phobia, panic disorder, acute and posttraumatic stress disorders).
Etiology
Etiology seems to have a genetic basis but is heavily modified by psychosocial experience; heritability is
polygenetic, and only a small number of the specific genes have been characterized thus far.
Anxious parents tend to have anxious children; having such parents may make children's
problems worse
than they otherwise might be. Even normal children have difficulty remaining calm and composed in the
presence of an anxious parent, and children who are genetically predisposed to anxiety have even
greater difficulty. In as many as 30% of cases, treating the parents' anxiety in conjunction with the child's
anxiety is helpful (see p.
for treatment of anxiety in adults).
Symptoms and Signs
Perhaps the most common manifestation is school refusal. "School refusal" has largely supplanted the
term "school phobia." Actual fear of school is exceedingly rare. Most children who refuse to go to school
probably have separation anxiety, social phobia, panic, or a combination. Some have a specific phobia.
The possibility that the child is being bullied at school must also be considered.
Some children complain directly about their anxiety, describing it in terms of worries—eg, "I am worried
that I will never see you again" (separation anxiety) or "I am worried the kids will laugh at me" (social
phobia). However, most children couch their discomfort in terms of somatic complaints: "I cannot go to
school because I have a stomachache." These children are often telling the truth because an upset
stomach, nausea, and headaches often develop in children with anxiety.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical. A thorough psychosocial history can usually confirm it.
===PAGE:3249===
The physical symptoms that anxiety can cause in children can complicate the evaluation. In many
children, considerable testing for physical disorders is done before clinicians consider an anxiety disorder.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on severity, availability of competent treatment, and the child's resiliency. Many
children struggle with anxiety symptoms into adulthood. However, with early treatment, many children
learn how to control their anxiety.
Treatment
• Behavioral therapy
• Drugs, usually SSRIs
Anxiety disorders in children are treated with behavioral therapy (using principles of exposure and
response prevention), sometimes in conjunction with drug therapy.
In behavioral therapy, children are systematically exposed to the anxiety-provoking situation in a graded
fashion. By helping children remain in the anxiety-provoking situation (response prevention), therapists
enable them to gradually become desensitized and feel less anxiety. Behavioral therapy is most effective
when an experienced therapist knowledgeable in child development individualizes these principles.
In mild cases, behavioral therapy alone is usually sufficient, but drug therapy may be needed when cases
are more severe or when access to an experienced child behavior therapist is limited. SSRIs are usually
the first choice (see
Table 305-1
).
Most children tolerate SSRIs without difficulty. Occasionally, upset stomach, diarrhea, or insomnia may
occur. Some children have behavioral side effects (eg, activation, disinhibition—see Depressive
Disorders in Children and Adolescents .
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a persistent state of heightened anxiety and
apprehension characterized by excessive worrying, fear, and dread. Physical symptoms can
include tremor, sweating, multiple somatic complaints, and exhaustion. Diagnosis is by history.
Treatment is often with relaxation therapy, sometimes combined with drug therapy.
Symptoms and Signs
Children have multiple and diffuse worries, which are exacerbated by stress. These children often have
difficulty paying attention and may be hyperactive and restless. They may sleep poorly, sweat excessively,
feel exhausted, and complain of physical discomfort (eg, stomachache, muscle aches, headache).
Diagnosis
GAD is diagnosed in children and adolescents who have prominent and impairing anxiety symptoms that
are not focused enough to meet criteria for a specific disorder such as social phobia or panic disorder.
GAD is also an appropriate diagnosis for children who have a specific anxiety disorder, such as
separation anxiety, but also have other significant anxiety symptoms above and beyond those of the
specific anxiety disorder.
Occasionally, GAD can be confused with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
[Table 305-1.
SSRIs for Treating Children ≥ 12 yr]
(ADHD— because GAD can cause difficulty paying attention and can also result in
===PAGE:3250===
psychomotor agitation (ie, hyperactivity). A key difference is that children with ADHD tend to be no more
prone to worries than children without ADHD, whereas children with GAD have many distressing worries.
Treatment
• Relaxation therapy
• Sometimes anxiolytic drugs, usually SSRIs
Because the focus of symptoms is diffuse, GAD is especially challenging to treat with behavioral therapy.
Relaxation training is often more appropriate.
Patients who have severe GAD or who do not respond to psychotherapeutic interventions may need
anxiolytic drugs. As with other anxiety disorders, SSRIs (see
Table 305-1
) are typically the drugs of
choice. Buspirone is a useful alternative, especially for children who cannot tolerate SSRIs; starting dose
is 5 mg po bid and may be gradually increased to 30 mg bid (or 20 mg tid) as tolerated. GI distress or
headache may be limiting factors in dosage escalation.
Social Phobia
(Social Anxiety Disorder)
Social phobia is a persistent fear of embarrassment, ridicule, or humiliation in social settings.
Typically, affected children avoid situations that might provoke social scrutiny (eg, school).
Diagnosis is by history. Treatment is with behavioral therapy; in severe cases, SSRIs are used.
School refusal is often the initial presentation of social phobia, particularly in adolescents. Complaints
often have a somatic focus (eg, "My stomach hurts," "I have a headache"). Some children have a history
of many medical appointments and evaluations in response to these somatic complaints.
Affected children are terrified that they will humiliate themselves in front of their peers by giving the wrong
answer, saying something inappropriate, becoming embarrassed, or even vomiting. In some cases, social
phobia emerges after an unfortunate and embarrassing incident. In severe cases, children may refuse to
talk on the telephone or even refuse to leave the house.
Treatment
• Behavioral therapy
• Sometimes an anxiolytic
Behavioral therapy is the cornerstone of treatment. Children should not be allowed to miss school.
Absence serves only to make them even more reluctant to attend school.
If children and adolescents are not sufficiently motivated to participate in behavioral therapy or do not
respond adequately to it, an anxiolytic such as an SSRI may help (see
Table 305-1
). Treatment with an
SSRI may reduce anxiety enough to facilitate children's participation in behavioral therapy.
Separation Anxiety Disorder
Separation anxiety disorder is a persistent, intense, and developmentally inappropriate fear of
separation from a major attachment figure (usually the mother). Affected children desperately
attempt to avoid such separations. When separation is forced, these children are distressfully
preoccupied with reunification. Diagnosis is by history. Treatment is with behavioral therapy for
the child and family and, for severe cases, SSRIs.
Separation anxiety is a normal emotion in children between about age 8 mo and 24 mo (; it
typically resolves as children develop a sense of object permanence and realize their parents will return.
===PAGE:3251===
In some children, separation anxiety persists beyond this time or returns later; it may be severe enough to
be considered a disorder. Separation anxiety disorder commonly occurs in younger children and is rare
after puberty.
Symptoms and Signs
Like social phobia, separation anxiety disorder often manifests as school (or preschool) refusal.
Dramatic scenes typically occur at the time of separation. Separation scenes are typically painful for both
the child and attachment figure (usually the mother but can be either parent or a caregiver). Children
often wail and plead with such desperation that the parent cannot leave, resulting in protracted scenes
that are difficult to interrupt. When separated, children fixate on reunification with the attachment figure
and are often worried that this person has been harmed (eg, in a car accident, by a serious illness).
Children may refuse to sleep alone and may even insist on always being in the same room as the
attachment figure.
Children often develop somatic complaints.
The child's demeanor is often normal when the attachment figure is present. This normal demeanor can
sometimes give a false impression that the problem is minor.
Separation anxiety is often compounded by a parent's anxiety, which exacerbates the child's anxiety; the
result is a vicious circle that can be interrupted only by sensitive and appropriate treatment of parent and
child simultaneously.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by history and by observation of separation scenes.
Treatment
• Behavioral therapy
• Rarely anxiolytics
Treatment is with behavioral therapy that systematically enforces regular separations. The goodbye
scenes should be kept as brief as possible, and the attachment figure should be coached to react to
protestations matter-of-factly. Assisting children in forming an attachment to one of the adults in the
preschool or school may be helpful.
In extreme cases, children may benefit from an anxiolytic such as an SSRI (see
Table 305-1
). However,
separation anxiety disorder often affects children as young as 3 yr, and experience with these drugs in the
very young is limited.
Successfully treated children are prone to relapses after holidays and breaks from school. Because of
these relapses, parents are often advised to plan regular separations during these periods to help the
child remain accustomed to being away from the parents.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by obsessions, compulsions, or both.
Obsessions are irresistible, persistent ideas, images, or impulses to do something.
Compulsions are pathologic urges to act on an impulse, which, if resisted, result in excessive
anxiety and distress. The obsessions and compulsions cause great distress and interfere with
academic or social functioning. Diagnosis is by history. Treatment is with behavioral therapy
and SSRIs.
Most cases of OCD have no clear etiology. However, a few cases are thought to be associated with
===PAGE:3252===
group A
β
-hemolytic streptococcal infections. This syndrome is called pediatric autoimmune
neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcus (PANDAS). PANDAS should be considered in all
children with a sudden onset of severe OCD-like symptoms because early antibiotic treatment may
prevent
or attenuate long-lasting impairment. Research in this area is ongoing, and if PANDAS is
suspected, consultation with a specialist is strongly recommended.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, OCD has a gradual, insidious onset. Most children initially hide their symptoms and report
struggling with symptoms years before a definitive diagnosis is made.
Obsessions are typically experienced as worries or fears of harm (eg, contracting a deadly disease,
sinning and going to hell, injuring themselves or others). Compulsions are deliberate volitional acts,
usually done to neutralize or offset obsessional fears; they include checking behaviors, excessive
washing, counting, or arranging, and many more. Obsessions and compulsions may have some logical
connection (eg, hand washing to avoid disease) or may be illogical and idiosyncratic (eg, counting to 50
over and over to prevent grandpa from having a heart attack). If children are prevented from carrying out
their compulsions, they become excessively anxious and concerned.
Most children have some awareness that their obsessions and compulsions are abnormal. Many affected
children are embarrassed and secretive. Common symptoms include
• Having raw, chapped hands (the presenting symptom in children who compulsively wash)
• Spending excessively long periods of time in the bathroom
• Doing schoolwork very slowly (because of an obsession about mistakes)
• Making many corrections in schoolwork
• Engaging in repetitive or odd behaviors such as checking door locks, chewing food a certain number of
times, or avoiding touching certain things
• Making frequent and tedious requests for reassurance, sometimes dozens or even hundreds of times
per day—asking, eg, "Do you think I have a fever? Could we have a tornado? Do you think the car will
start? What if we're late? What if the milk is sour? What if a burglar comes?"
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by history. Once a comfortable relationship with a nonjudgmental therapist is established, the
child with OCD usually discloses many obsessions and related compulsions. However, usually several
appointments are needed to first establish trust. Children with OCD often have symptoms of other anxiety
disorders, including panic attacks, separation problems, and specific phobias. This symptom overlap
sometimes confuses the diagnosis.
Prognosis
In about 5% of children, the disorder remits after a few years, and treatment can be stopped. In the
others, the disorder tends to be chronic, but normal functioning can usually be maintained with ongoing
treatment. About 5% of children do not respond to treatment and remain greatly impaired.
Treatment
If streptococcal infection is not involved, treatment is usually a combination of behavioral therapy and an
SSRI. If appropriate services are available and children are highly motivated, behavioral therapy alone
may be adequate.
PANDAS is treated with antibiotics.
===PAGE:3253===
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Panic disorder is characterized by recurrent, frequent (at least once/wk) panic attacks. Panic
attacks are discrete spells lasting about 20 min; during attacks, children experience somatic
symptoms, cognitive symptoms, or both. Panic disorder can occur with or without agoraphobia.
Agoraphobia is a persistent fear of being trapped in situations or places without a way to escape
easily and without help. Diagnosis is by history. Treatment is with benzodiazepines or SSRIs and
behavioral therapy.
Panic disorder is much less common among prepubertal children than among adolescents. Panic attacks
can occur alone or in other anxiety disorders (eg, OCD, separation anxiety) or certain medical disorders
(eg, asthma). Panic attacks can trigger an asthma attack and vice versa.
Symptoms may be cognitive, somatic, or (usually) both (.
Panic attacks usually develop spontaneously, but over time, children begin to attribute them to certain
situations and environments. Affected children then attempt to avoid those situations, which can lead to
agoraphobia. Avoidance behaviors are considered agoraphobia if they greatly impair normal functioning,
such as going to school, visiting the mall, or doing other typical activities.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Evaluation for other causes
Panic disorder is diagnosed based on history, usually after a physical examination is done to rule out
physical causes of somatic symptoms. Many children undergo considerable diagnostic testing before
panic disorder is suspected. The presence of other disorders, especially asthma, can also complicate the
diagnosis. Thorough screening for other anxiety disorders (eg, OCD, social phobia) is needed because
any one of these disorders may be the primary problem causing panic attacks as a symptom.
In adults, important diagnostic criteria for panic disorder include concerns about future attacks, the
implications of the attacks, and changes in behavior. However, children and younger adolescents usually
lack the insight and forethought needed to develop these features, except they may change behavior to
avoid situations they believe are related to the panic attack. As compared to those in adults, panic attacks
in children and adolescents are often more dramatic in presentation (eg, with screaming, weeping, and
hyperventilation). This display can be alarming to parents and others.
Prognosis
Prognosis for children and adolescents who have panic disorder with or without agoraphobia is good with
treatment. Without treatment, adolescents may drop out of school, withdraw from society, and become
reclusive and suicidal.
Panic disorder often waxes and wanes in severity without any discernible reason. Some patients
experience long periods of spontaneous symptom remission, only to experience a relapse years later.
Treatment
• Usually benzodiazepines or SSRIs plus behavioral therapy
Treatment is usually a combination of drug therapy and behavioral therapy. In children, it is difficult to
even begin behavioral therapy until after the panic attacks have been controlled by drugs.
Benzodiazepines are the most effective drugs, but SSRIs are often preferred because benzodiazepines
are sedating and may greatly impair learning and memory. However, SSRIs do not work quickly, and a
short course of a benzodiazepine (eg, lorazepam 0.5 to 2.0 mg po tid) may be helpful until the SSRI is
===PAGE:3254===
effective.
Behavioral therapy is especially useful for agoraphobia symptoms. Drugs are rarely useful for these
symptoms because children often continue to fear that they may have a panic attack, even long after
attacks have been well controlled by drugs.
Acute and Posttraumatic Stress Disorders
Acute stress disorder (ASD) is a brief period (about 1 mo) of intrusive recollections (eg,
flashbacks and nightmares), dissociation, avoidance, and anxiety occurring within 1 mo of a
traumatic incident. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) causes recurring, intrusive
recollections of an overwhelming traumatic incident that persist > 1 mo, as well as emotional
numbing and hyperarousal. Diagnosis is by history and examination. Treatment is with
behavioral therapy, SSRIs, and antiadrenergic drugs.
Because vulnerability and temperament are different, not all children who are exposed to a severe
traumatic event develop a stress disorder. Traumatic events commonly associated with these disorders
include assaults, sexual assaults, car accidents, dog attacks, and injuries (especially burns). In young
children, domestic violence is the most common cause of PTSD.
Symptoms and Signs
ASD and PTSD are closely related and are distinguished primarily by duration of symptoms. ASD is
diagnosed within 1 mo of the traumatic event, and PTSD is diagnosed only after 1 mo has passed and
symptoms have persisted. In a few cases, onset of PTSD symptoms may be delayed months or even
years after the traumatic event.
Emotional numbing and hyperarousal are common. Emotional numbing includes the following:
• General lack of interest
• Social withdrawal
• A subjective sense of feeling numb
• A foreshortened expectation of the future (eg, thinking "I will not live to see 20")
Hyperarousal symptoms include the following:
• Jitteriness
• Exaggerated startle response
• Difficulty relaxing
• Disrupted sleep, sometimes with frequent nightmares
Typically, children with ASD are in a daze and may seem dissociated from everyday surroundings.
Children with PTSD have intrusive recollections that cause them to reexperience the traumatic event. The
most dramatic kind of recollection is a flashback. Flashbacks may be spontaneous but are most
commonly triggered by something associated with the original trauma. For example, the sight of a dog
may trigger a flashback in children who experienced a dog attack. During a flashback, children may be in
a terrified state and unaware of their current surroundings while desperately searching for a way to hide
or escape; they may temporarily lose touch with reality and believe they are in grave danger. Some
children have nightmares. When children reexperience the event in other ways (eg, in thoughts, mental
images, or recollections), they remain aware of current surroundings, although they may still be greatly
distressed.
===PAGE:3255===
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis of ASD and PTSD is based on a history of severely frightening and horrifying trauma followed
by reexperiencing, emotional numbing, and hyperarousal. These symptoms must be severe enough to
cause impairment or distress.
Prognosis
Prognosis for children with ASD is much better than for those with PTSD, but both benefit from early
treatment. Severity of the trauma, associated physical injuries, and the underlying resiliency of children
and family members affect the final outcome.
Treatment
• SSRIs and sometimes antiadrenergic drugs
• Sometimes psychotherapy
• Behavioral therapy
SSRIs often help reduce emotional numbing and reexperiencing of symptoms but are less effective for
hyperarousal. Antiadrenergic drugs (eg, clonidine, guanfacine, prazosin) may help relieve hyperarousal
symptoms, but supportive data are preliminary.
Supportive psychotherapy may help children who have adjustment issues associated with trauma, as may
result from disfigurement due to burns. Behavioral therapy can be used to systematically desensitize
children to situations that cause them to reexperience the event. Behavioral therapy is clearly effective in
reducing distress and impairment in children and adolescents with PTSD.
Tic Disorders in Children and Adolescents
Tics are defined as sudden, rapid, and repeating muscle movements often associated with
vocalizations.
Tics occur in a wide variety of disorders. Transient tic disorders occur in up to 25% of children—most
commonly in boys. Typically, tics do not occur during sleep and can be controlled voluntarily for short
periods of time. Stress and fatigue can make these tics worse.
Eventually, most tics disappear spontaneously. However, in fewer than 1% of children, tics persist. Such
tics may lead to a diagnosis of Tourette's syndrome (, or they may be associated with
obsessive-compulsive disorder, some infections, or certain drugs (eg, stimulants).
Usually, no treatment is required. If tics persist and are bothersome (eg, as in Tourette's syndrome), drugs
may be used.
Childhood Schizophrenia
(See also p.
.)
Schizophrenia is the presence of hallucinations and delusions causing considerable
psychosocial dysfunction and lasting ≥ 6 mo.
Onset of schizophrenia is typically from mid-adolescence to the mid-20s. Features in adolescents and
young adults are similar. Schizophrenia in prepubertal children is extremely rare; features are usually
similar to those in adolescents and adults, but delusions and visual hallucinations (which may be more
===PAGE:3256===
common among children) may be less elaborate.
Sudden-onset psychosis in young children should always be treated as a medical emergency with a
thorough medical assessment to search for a physiologic cause of the mental status change (eg, Wilson's
disease, porphyrias, HIV infection, brain trauma).
Treatment is complex, and referral to a child and adolescent psychiatrist should be considered.
Depressive Disorders in Children and Adolescents
(See also p.
.)
Depressive disorders in children and adolescents are characterized by a pervasive and
abnormal mood state that consists of sadness or irritability
and that is severe or persistent
enough to interfere with functioning or cause considerable distress. Decreased interest or
pleasure in activities may be as apparent as or even more apparent than mood abnormalities.
Diagnosis is by history and examination. Treatment is with antidepressants, psychotherapy, or
both.
Major depression occurs in as many as 2% of children and 5% of adolescents. Rates for other
depressive disorders are unknown. The exact cause of depression in children and adolescents is
unknown, but in adults, it is believed to result from interactions of genetically determined risk factors and
environmental stress (particularly deprivation and loss early in life).
Symptoms and Signs
Basic manifestations are similar to those in adults but are related to typical concerns of children, such as
schoolwork and play. Children may be unable to explain inner feelings or moods. Depression should be
considered when previously well-performing children do poorly in school, withdraw from society, or
commit delinquent acts.
Common symptoms include
• A sad appearance
• Excessive irritability
• Apathy and withdrawal
• Reduced capacity for pleasure (often expressed as profound boredom)
• Feeling rejected and unloved
• Somatic complaints (eg, headaches, abdominal pain, insomnia)
• Persistent self-blame
In some children with major depressive disorder, the predominant mood is irritability rather than sadness
(an important difference between childhood and adult forms).
Other symptoms include anorexia, weight loss (or failure to achieve expected weight gain), sleep
disruption (including nightmares), despondency, and suicidal ideation. The irritability associated with
childhood depression may manifest as overactivity and aggressive, antisocial behavior.
In children with intellectual disability, depressive or other mood disorders may manifest as somatic
symptoms and behavioral disturbances.
Major depression in adolescents is a risk factor for academic failure, substance abuse, and suicidal
===PAGE:3257===
behavior (. While depressed, children and adolescents tend to fall far behind academically
and lose important peer relationships. Untreated, major depression may remit in 6 to 12 mo, but
recurrences are common.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on symptoms and signs. A careful review of the history and appropriate laboratory
tests are needed to exclude other disorders (eg, infectious mononucleosis, thyroid disorders, drug
abuse). History should include causative factors such as domestic violence, sexual abuse and
exploitation, and drug adverse effects. Questions about suicidal behavior (eg, ideation, gestures,
attempts) should be asked.
Other mental disorders that can cause depressive symptoms (eg, anxiety, bipolar disorders) must be
considered. Some children who eventually develop a bipolar disorder or schizophrenia may present
initially with major depression.
After depression is diagnosed, the family and social setting must be evaluated to identify stresses that
may have precipitated depression.
Treatment
• Concurrent measures directed at the family and school
• For adolescents, usually antidepressants plus psychotherapy
• For preadolescents, psychotherapy followed, if needed, by antidepressants
Appropriate measures directed at the family and school must accompany direct treatment of the child to
enhance continued functioning and provide appropriate educational accommodations. Brief
hospitalization may be necessary in acute crises, especially when suicidal behavior is identified.
For adolescents (as for adults), a combination of psychotherapy and antidepressants usually greatly
outperforms either modality used alone. For preadolescents, the situation is much less clear. Most
clinicians opt for psychotherapy in younger children; however, drugs can be used in younger children
(fluoxetine can be used in children ≥ 8 yr), especially when depression is severe or has not previously
responded to psychotherapy.
Usually, an SSRI (see
Table 305-1
) is the first choice when an antidepressant is indicated. Children
should be closely monitored for the emergence of behavioral side effects (eg, disinhibition, behavioral
activation—see footnote in
Table 305-1
). Adult-based research has suggested that antidepressants that
act on both the serotonergic and adrenergic/dopaminergic systems may be modestly more effective;
however, such drugs (eg, duloxetine, venlafaxine, mirtazapine; certain
tricyclics, particularly clomipramine)
also tend to have more adverse effects. Such drugs may be especially useful in treatment-resistant
cases. Nonserotonergic antidepressants such as bupropion and desipramine may also be used with an
SSRI to enhance efficacy.
There are recent concerns that antidepressants may increase risk of suicidality in a few children and
adolescents. These drugs are now labeled with warnings about suicidality. Paradoxically, several studies
suggest that, overall, use of antidepressants significantly reduces risk of suicide. How to interpret these
contradictory findings is unclear. However, if suicide is a concern, the following should be done to reduce
risk:
• Parents and mental health care practitioners should discuss the issues in depth.
• The child or adolescent should be supervised at an appropriate level.
===PAGE:3258===
• Psychotherapy with regularly scheduled appointments should be included in the treatment plan.
As in adults, relapse and recurrence are common. Children and adolescents should remain in treatment
for at least 1 yr after symptoms have remitted. Most experts recommend that children who have
experienced ≥ 2 episodes of major depression be treated indefinitely.
Bipolar Disorder in Children and Adolescents
Bipolar disorder is characterized by alternating periods of mania, depression, and normal mood,
each lasting for weeks to months at a time. The label "bipolar" has also been applied to
prepubertal children disabled by intense, unstable moods. However, in these young children,
the mood states last from moments to days. In both cases, diagnosis is by history and mental
status examination. Treatment is a combination of mood stabilizers (eg, lithium, certain
anticonvulsants and antipsychotic drugs), psychotherapy, and antidepressants.
Bipolar disorder typically begins during mid-adolescence through the mid-20s. In many children, the initial
manifestation is one or more episodes of depression; about one third of children who have an episode of
severe depression before puberty convert to bipolar disorder during their adolescent or early adult years.
The term "bipolar" has been applied to prepubertal children with unstable, intense moods, but typically,
the moods last only a short time. Thus, whether this condition constitutes bipolar disorder is unclear;
research in this area is ongoing.
Etiology
Etiology is unknown, but heredity is involved. Dysregulation of serotonin and norepinephrine may be
involved, as may a stressful life event. Certain drugs (eg, cocaine, amphetamines, phencyclidines, certain
antidepressants) and environmental toxins (eg, lead) can exacerbate or mimic the disorder. Certain
disorders (eg, thyroid disorders) can cause similar symptoms.
Symptoms and Signs
The hallmark of bipolar disorder is the manic episode. Manic episodes alternate with depressive
episodes, which can be more frequent.
During a manic episode in adolescents, mood may be very positive or hyperirritable and often alternates
between the 2 moods depending on social circumstances. Speech is rapid and pressured, sleep is
decreased, and self-esteem is inflated. Mania may reach psychotic proportions (eg, "I have become one
with God"). Judgment may be severely impaired, and adolescents may engage in risky behaviors (eg,
promiscuous sex, reckless driving). Prepubertal children may experience dramatic moods, but the
duration of these moods is much shorter (often lasting only a few moments) than that in adolescents.
Onset is characteristically insidious, and children typically have a history of always being very
temperamental and difficult to manage.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Testing for toxicologic causes
Diagnosis is based on history and mental status examination. A number of medical disorders (eg, thyroid
disorders, brain infections or tumors) and drug intoxication must be ruled out with appropriate medical
assessment, including a toxicology screen for drugs of abuse and environmental toxins. The interviewer
should also search for precipitating events, such as severe psychologic stress, including sexual abuse or
incest.
Prognosis
Prognosis for adolescents with bipolar disorder varies. Those who have mild to moderate symptoms, who
===PAGE:3259===
have a good response to treatment, and who remain adherent and cooperative with treatment have an
excellent prognosis.
However, treatment response is often incomplete, and adolescents are notoriously
nonadherent to drug regimens. For such adolescents, the long-term prognosis is not as good.
Little is known about the long-term prognosis of prepubertal children diagnosed with bipolar disorder
based on highly unstable and intense moods.
Treatment
• Mood stabilizers and antidepressants
• Psychotherapy
For adolescents and prepubertal children, mood stabilizers are used to treat manic or agitated episodes,
and psychotherapy and anti-depressants treat the depressive episodes.
Mood stabilizers (see
Table 305-2
) roughly fall into 3 categories:
• Mood-stabilizing anticonvulsants
• Mood-stabilizing antipsychotics
• Lithium
All mood stabilizers have a potential for troubling and even dangerous adverse effects. Thus, treatment
must be individualized. Furthermore, drugs that are highly successful during initial stabilization may be
unacceptable for maintenance because of adverse effects, most notably weight gain.
Antidepressants may trigger a switch from depression to mania; therefore, they are usually used with a
mood stabilizer.
Disruptive Behavioral Disorders
Disruptive behavioral disorders are so-named because affected children tend to disrupt people around
them, including family members, school staff, and peers. The most common disruptive behavioral disorder
is attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) is a recurrent or persistent pattern of negative, defiant, or
even hostile behavior directed at authority figures. Diagnosis is by history. Treatment is with
individual psychotherapy combined with family or caretaker therapy. Occasionally, drugs may
be used to reduce irritability.
Prevalence estimates of ODD vary widely because the diagnostic criteria are highly subjective;
prevalence in children and adolescents may be as high as 15%. Before puberty, affected boys greatly
outnumber girls; after puberty, the difference narrows.
Although ODD is sometimes viewed as a mild version of conduct disorder, similarities between the 2
disorders are only superficial. The hallmark of ODD is an interpersonal style characterized by irritability
and defiance. However, children with a conduct disorder seemingly lack a conscience and repeatedly
violate the rights of others (eg, bullying, threatening or causing harm, being cruel to animals), sometimes
without any evidence of irritability.
Etiology of ODD is unknown, but it is probably most common among children from families in which the
adults model loud, argumentative, interpersonal conflicts. This diagnosis should not be viewed as a
circumscribed disorder but rather as an indication of underlying problems that may require further
===PAGE:3260===
investigation and treatment.
Symptoms and Signs
Typically, children with ODD tend to frequently do the following:
• Lose their temper easily and repeatedly
• Argue with adults
• Defy adults
• Refuse to obey rules
• Deliberately annoy people
• Blame others for their own mistakes or misbehavior
• Be easily annoyed and angered
• Be spiteful or vindictive
Many affected children also lack social skills.
Diagnosis
ODD is diagnosed if children have had ≥ 4 of the above symptoms for at least 6 mo. Symptoms must also
be severe and disruptive.
ODD must be distinguished from the following, which may cause similar symptoms:
•
Mild to moderate oppositional behaviors:
Such behaviors occur periodically in nearly all children
and adolescents.
•
Untreated attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD):
The ODD-like symptoms often resolve
when ADHD is adequately treated.
•
Major depressive disorder:
In some children with this disorder, the predominant mood is irritability
rather than sadness. Major depressive disorder with irritability is distinguished from ODD by the
presence of anhedonia and neurovegetative symptoms (eg, sleep and appetite disruption); these
symptoms are easily overlooked in children.
[Table 305-2.
Selected Drugs for Bipolar Disorder*]
Treatment
• Behavior modification therapy
• Sometimes drugs
Underlying problems (eg, family dysfunction) and coexisting disorders (eg, ADHD) should be identified
and corrected. However, even without corrective measures or treatment, most children with ODD
gradually improve over time.
Initially, the treatment of choice is a rewards-based behavior modification program designed
to make the
child's behaviors more socially appropriate. Many children can benefit from group-based therapy that
builds social skills.
===PAGE:3261===
Sometimes drugs used to treat depressive disorders ( may be beneficial.
Conduct Disorder
Conduct disorder (CD) is a recurrent or persistent pattern of behavior that violates the rights of
others or violates major age-appropriate societal norms or rules. Diagnosis is by history.
Treatment of comorbid disorders and psychotherapy may help; however, many children require
considerable supervision.
Prevalence of some level of CD is about 10%. Onset is usually during late childhood or early
adolescence, and the disorder is much more common among boys than girls.
Etiology is likely a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors. Parents of adolescents with
CD often have engaged in substance abuse and antisocial behaviors and frequently have been
diagnosed with ADHD, mood disorders, schizophrenia, or antisocial personality disorder. However, CD
can occur in children from high-functioning, healthy families.
Symptoms and Signs
Children or adolescents with CD lack sensitivity to the feelings and well-being of others and sometimes
misperceive the behavior of others as threatening. They may act aggressively, by bullying and making
threats, brandishing or using a weapon, committing acts of physical cruelty, or forcing someone into
sexual activity, and have few or no feelings of remorse. Sometimes their aggression and cruelty is
directed at animals. These children or adolescents may destroy property, lie, and steal. They tolerate
frustration poorly and are commonly reckless, violating rules and parental prohibitions (eg, by running
away from home, being frequently truant from school).
Aberrant behaviors differ between the sexes: Boys tend to fight, steal, and vandalize; girls are likely to lie,
run away, and engage in prostitution. Both sexes are likely to use and abuse illicit drugs and have
difficulties in school. Suicidal ideation is common, and suicide attempts must be taken seriously.
Diagnosis
CD is diagnosed in children or adolescents who have demonstrated ≥ 3 of the following behaviors in the
previous 12 mo plus at least 1 in the previous 6 mo:
• Aggression toward people and animals
• Destruction of property
• Deceitfulness, lying, or stealing
• Serious violations of parental rules
Symptoms or behaviors must be significant enough to impair functioning in relationships, at school, or at
work.
Prognosis
Usually, disruptive behaviors stop during early adulthood, but in about one third of cases, they persist.
Many of these cases meet the criteria for antisocial personality disorder. Early onset is associated with a
poorer prognosis. Some children and adolescents subsequently develop mood or anxiety disorders,
somatoform and substance-related disorders, or early adult-onset psychotic disorders. Children and
adolescents with CD tend to have higher rates of physical and other mental disorders.
Treatment
• Drugs to treat comorbid disorders
===PAGE:3262===
• Psychotherapy
• Sometimes placement in a residential center
Treating comorbid disorders with drugs and psychotherapy may improve self-esteem and self-control and
ultimately improve control of CD. Drugs may include stimulants, mood stabilizers, and atypical
antipsychotics, especially short-term use of risperidone.
Moralization and dire admonitions are ineffective and should be avoided. Individual psychotherapy,
including cognitive therapy and behavior modification, may help. Often, seriously disturbed children and
adolescents must be placed in residential centers where their behavior can be managed appropriately,
thus separating them from the environment that may contribute to their aberrant behavior.
Suicidal Behavior in Children and Adolescents
(See also p.
.)
Suicidal behavior includes completed suicide, attempted suicide, and suicide gestures; suicidal
ideation is thoughts and plans about suicide. Psychiatric referral is usually required.
Youth suicide rates have declined in recent years after more than a decade of steady increase, only to
have started climbing again. The exact reasons for these fluctuations are unclear. Many experts believe
that the changing rates with which antidepressants are prescribed may be a factor. Some experts
hypothesize that antidepressants
have paradoxical effects, making children and adolescents more vocal
about suicidal feelings but less likely to commit suicide. Nonetheless, suicide is the 2nd or 3rd leading
cause of death in 15- to 19-yr-olds and remains a considerable public health concern.
Etiology
Risk factors vary by age. Predisposing factors include
• Depression (implicated in more than one half of suicidal behaviors in adolescents)
• History of suicide in family members or close friends
• Recent death in the family
• Substance abuse
• Bipolar disorder
• Psychosis
• Conduct disorder, characterized by poor control of aggressive impulses against others, possibly
redirected against self (
More immediate precipitating factors can include
• Loss of self-esteem (eg, resulting from family arguments, a humiliating disciplinary episode, pregnancy,
or school failure)
• Loss of a boyfriend or girlfriend
• Loss of familiar surroundings (eg, school, neighborhood, friends) due to a geographic move
Other contributing factors may include a lack of structure and boundaries, leading to an overwhelming
feeling of lack of direction, and intense parental pressure to succeed accompanied by the feeling of
===PAGE:3263===
falling short of expectations. A frequent motive for a suicide attempt is an effort to manipulate or punish
others with the fantasy "You will be sorry after I am dead."
A rise in suicides is seen after a well-publicized suicide (eg, of a rock star) and among groups (eg, a high
school, a college dormitory) in which a suicide occurred, indicating the power of suggestion. Early
intervention to support youths in such circumstances may be helpful.
Treatment
• Possibly hospitalization
• Possibly drugs to treat underlying disorders
• Psychiatric referral
Every suicide attempt is a serious matter that requires thoughtful and appropriate intervention. Once the
immediate threat to life is removed, a decision regarding the need for hospitalization must be made. The
decision involves balancing the degree of risk with the family's capacity to provide support. Hospitalization
(even in an open medical or pediatric ward with special-duty nursing) is the surest form of short-term
protection and is usually indicated if depression, psychosis, or both are suspected.
Lethality of suicidal intent can be assessed based on the following:
• Degree of forethought evidenced (eg, by writing a suicide note)
• Steps taken to prevent discovery
• Method used (eg, firearms are more lethal than pills)
• Degree of self-injury sustained
• Circumstances or immediate precipitating factors surrounding the attempt
Drugs may be indicated for any underlying disorder (eg, depression, bipolar or conduct disorder,
psychosis) but cannot prevent suicide. Antidepressant use may increase risk of suicide in some
adolescents. Use of drugs should be carefully monitored, and only sub-lethal amounts should be
supplied.
Psychiatric referral is usually needed to provide appropriate drug treatment and psychotherapy; treatment
is most successful if the primary care practitioner continues to be involved.
Rebuilding morale and restoring emotional equilibrium within the family are essential. A negative or
unsupportive parental response is a serious concern and may suggest a need for a more intensive
intervention such as out-of-home placement. A positive outcome is most likely if the family shows love and
concern.
Prevention
Suicidal incidents are often preceded by behavioral changes (eg, despondent mood, low self-esteem,
sleep and appetite disturbances, inability to concentrate, truancy from school, somatic complaints, and
suicidal preoccupation), which often bring the child or adolescent to the physician's office. Statements
such as "I wish I had never been born" or "I would like to go to sleep and never wake up" should be taken
seriously as possible indications of suicidal intent. A suicidal threat or attempt represents an important
communication about the intensity of experienced despair.
Early recognition of the risk factors mentioned above may help prevent a suicide attempt. In response to
these early cues, to threatened or attempted suicide, or to severe risk-taking behavior, vigorous
intervention is appropriate. Adolescents should be directly questioned about their unhappy or self-
===PAGE:3264===
destructive
feelings; such direct questioning may diminish suicide risk. A physician should not provide
unfounded reassurance, which can undermine the physician's credibility and further lower the
adolescent's self-esteem.
The effectiveness of suicide prevention programs is being evaluated. The most effective programs are
those that strive to ensure that the child has a supportive nurturing environment, ready access to mental
health services, and a social setting that is characterized by respect for individual, racial, and cultural
differences.
Self-Injurious Behavior
Self-injurious behaviors that are sometimes confused with suicidal intentions include superficial
scratching and cutting, burning the skin with cigarettes or curling irons, and crude ballpoint pen
tattoos.
In some communities, self-injurious behaviors suddenly sweep through a high school in fad-like fashion
and then gradually diminish over time.
In many adolescents, these behaviors do not indicate suicidality but instead are an effort to establish
autonomy, identify with a peer group, or provocatively gain parental attention. However, even when these
behaviors are not an expression of suicidality, they are serious and warrant intervention. Such behaviors
are often associated with illicit substance abuse and suggest that an adolescent is in great distress.
All self-injurious behaviors should be evaluated by a clinician experienced in working with troubled
adolescents to assess whether suicidality is an issue and to identify the underlying distress leading to the
self-injurious behaviors.
===PAGE:3265===
Chapter 306. Child Maltreatment
Introduction
Child maltreatment is behavior toward a child that is outside the norms of conduct and entails
substantial risk of causing physical or emotional harm. Four types of maltreatment are
generally recognized: physical abuse, sexual abuse, emotional abuse (psychologic abuse), and
neglect. The causes of child maltreatment are varied and not well understood. Abuse and
neglect are often associated with physical injuries, delayed growth and development, and
mental problems. Diagnosis is based on history and physical examination. Management
includes documentation and treatment of any injuries and urgent physical and mental
conditions, mandatory reporting to appropriate state agencies, and sometimes hospitalization or
other steps such as foster care to keep the child safe.
In 2007, 3.2 million cases of child abuse and neglect were reported in the US, and about 750,000 of
these were substantiated. Both sexes are affected equally; the younger the child, the higher the rate of
victimization.
More than half of all reports to Child Protective Services were made by professionals who are mandated
to report maltreatment (eg, educators, law enforcement personnel, social services personnel, legal
professionals, day care providers, medical or mental health personnel, foster care providers).
Of substantiated cases in the US in 2007, 59.9% involved neglect (including medical neglect); 10.8%
involved physical abuse; 7.6% involved sexual abuse; and 4.2% involved psychologic maltreatment. In
addition, 4.2% experienced other types of maltreatment, such as abandonment and congenital drug
addictions. Many children were victims of multiple types of maltreatment.
About 1760 children died in the US from mal-treatment in 2007, about three quarters of whom were < 4 yr.
One third of the deaths were attributed to neglect. In substantiated cases of abuse or neglect in 2007, >
80% of perpetrators were parents; 56.5% of perpetrators were women.
Classification
Different forms of abuse often coexist, and overlap is considerable.
Physical abuse:
Physical abuse is inflicting physical harm or engaging in actions that create a high risk
of harm. Specific forms include shaking, dropping, striking, biting, and burning (eg, by scalding or
touching with cigarettes). Abuse is the most common cause of serious head injury in infants. In toddlers,
abdominal injury is common.
Infants and toddlers are the most vulnerable (perhaps because perpetrators know they cannot complain),
with risk declining in the early school years and increasing again in adolescence.
Medical child abuse (previously called Munchausen syndrome by proxy) is discussed elsewhere.
Sexual abuse:
Any action with a child that is done for the sexual gratification of an adult or significantly
older child constitutes sexual abuse (see also
Pedophilia
. Forms of sexual abuse include
intercourse, which is oral, anal, or vaginal penetration; molestation, which is genital contact without
intercourse; and nonspecific forms, which do not involve physical contact, including exposure, showing
sexual material to a child, and forcing a child to participate in a sex act with another child or to participate
in the making of sexual material.
Sexual abuse does not include sexual play, in which children close in age (typically considered < 4 yr
apart) view or touch each other's genital area without force or coercion.
Emotional abuse:
Emotional abuse is inflicting emotional harm through the use of words or actions.
Specific forms include berating a child by yelling or screaming, spurning by belittling the child's abilities
and achievements, intimidating and terrorizing with threats, and exploiting or corrupting by encouraging
===PAGE:3266===
deviant or criminal behavior. Emotional abuse can also occur when words or actions are omitted or
withheld, in essence becoming emotional neglect (eg, ignoring or rejecting children or isolating them from
interaction with other children or adults).
Neglect:
Neglect is the failure to provide for or meet a child's basic physical, emotional, educational, and
medical needs. Neglect differs from abuse in that it usually occurs without intent to harm. Physical neglect
includes failure to provide adequate food, clothing, shelter, supervision, and protection from potential
harm. Emotional neglect is failure to provide affection or love or other kinds of emotional support.
Educational neglect is failure to enroll a child in school, ensure attendance at school, or provide home
schooling. Medical neglect is failure to ensure that a child receives appropriate preventive care (eg,
vaccinations, routine dental examinations) or needed treatment for injuries or physical or mental
disorders.
Cultural factors:
Severe corporal punishment (eg, whipping, burning, scalding) clearly constitutes
physical abuse, but for lesser degrees of physical and emotional chastisement, the boundary between
socially accepted behavior and abuse varies among different cultures. Likewise, certain cultural practices
(eg, female genital mutilation [see p.]) are so extreme as to constitute abuse. However, certain folk
remedies (eg, coining, cupping, irritant poultices) often create lesions (eg, bruises, minor burns) that can
mimic those caused by abuse; in such cases, the line between acceptable cultural practices and abuse
may be blurred.
Similarly, failing to obtain life-saving treatment (eg, for diabetic ketoacidosis or meningitis) or failing to take
children for any routine medical care is considered neglect whatever the parents' or caregivers' intent.
However, in the US, certain people and cultural groups have increasingly been declining vaccination of
their children, citing safety concerns. It is not clear whether this refusal of vaccination is true medical
neglect; it may be considered similar to refusal of non life-saving treatments for religious reasons. In such
cases, as long as the children are healthy, there is usually no need to ascertain whether the refusal
constitutes medical neglect. However, in the face of illness, refusal of scientifically and medically
accepted treatment often requires further investigation and sometimes legal intervention.
Etiology
Abuse:
Generally, abuse can be attributed to a breakdown of impulse control in the parent or caregiver.
Several factors contribute.
Parental characteristics and personality features can play a role. The parent's own childhood may have
lacked affection and warmth, may not have been conducive to the development of adequate self-esteem
or emotional maturity, and, in most cases, also included other forms of abuse. Abusive parents may see
their children as a source of unlimited and unconditional affection and look to them for the support that
they never received. As a result, they may have unrealistic expectations of what their children can supply
for them; they are frustrated easily and lose control; and they may be unable to give what they never
experienced. Drug or alcohol use may provoke impulsive and uncontrolled behaviors toward their
children. Parental mental disorders may also increase the risk of abuse.
Irritable, demanding, or hyperactive children may provoke parents' tempers, as may developmentally or
physically disabled children, who often are more dependent. Sometimes strong emotional ties do not
develop between parents and premature or sick infants separated from parents early in infancy or with
biologically unrelated children (eg, stepchildren), increasing the risk of abuse.
Situational stress may precipitate abuse, particularly when emotional support of relatives, friends,
neighbors, or peers is unavailable.
Physical abuse, emotional abuse, and neglect are associated with poverty and lower socioeconomic
status. However, all types of abuse, including sexual abuse, occur across the spectrum of socioeconomic
groups. The risk of sexual abuse is increased in children who have several caregivers or a caregiver with
several sex partners.
Neglect:
Neglect usually results from a combination of factors such as poor parenting, poor stress-
===PAGE:3267===
coping skills, unsupportive family systems, and stressful life circumstances. Neglect often occurs in
impoverished families experiencing financial and environmental stresses, particularly those in which
parents also have mental disorders (typically depression or schizophrenia), abuse drugs or alcohol, or
have limited intellectual capacity. Children in single-parent families may be at risk of neglect due to a
lower income and fewer available resources.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs depend on the nature and duration of the abuse or neglect.
Physical abuse:
Skin lesions are common and may include handprints or oval fingertip marks caused by
slapping or grabbing and shaking; long, bandlike ecchymoses caused by belt whipping or narrow arcuate
bruises caused by extension cord whipping; multiple small round burns caused by cigarettes; symmetric
scald burns of upper or lower extremities or buttocks caused by intentional immersion; bite marks; and
thickened skin or scarring at the corners of the mouth caused by being gagged. Patchy alopecia, with
varying hair lengths, can result from hair pulling.
Fractures frequently associated with physical abuse include rib fractures, vertebral fractures, long bone
and digit fractures in nonambulatory children, and metaphyseal fractures; in children < 1 yr, about 75% of
fractures are inflicted by others. Confusion and localizing neurologic abnormalities can occur with CNS
injuries. Lack of visible head lesions does not exclude traumatic brain injury, particularly in infants
subjected to violent shaking. These infants may be comatose or stuporous from brain injury yet lack
visible signs of injury (with the common exception of retinal hemorrhage). Traumatic injury to organs
within the chest or abdominal region may also occur without visible signs.
Children who are frequently abused are often fearful and irritable and sleep poorly. They may have
symptoms of depression, post-traumatic stress reactions (, or anxiety. Violent or suicidal
behavior may occur.
Sexual abuse:
In most cases, children do not freely disclose sexual abuse and rarely exhibit behavioral
or physical signs of sexual abuse. If a disclosure is made, it is generally delayed, sometimes days to
years. In some cases, abrupt or extreme changes in behavior may occur. Aggressiveness or withdrawal
may develop, as may phobias or sleep disturbances. Some sexually abused children act in ways that are
sexually inappropriate for their age. Physical signs of sexual abuse that involves penetration may include
difficulty in walking or sitting; bruises or tears around the genitals, rectum, or mouth; vaginal discharge,
bleeding, or pruritus; or a sexually transmitted disease. Within a few days of the abuse, examination of
the genitals, rectum, or mouth may be normal or may show healed lesions or subtle hymen changes.
Emotional abuse:
In early infancy, emotional abuse may blunt emotional expressiveness and decrease
interest in the environment. Emotional abuse commonly results in failure to thrive and is often
misdiagnosed as intellectual disability or physical illness. Delayed development of social and language
skills often results from inadequate parental stimulation and interaction. Emotionally abused children may
be insecure, anxious, distrustful, superficial in interpersonal relationships, passive, and overly concerned
with pleasing adults. Children who are spurned may have very low self-esteem. Children who are
terrorized or threatened may seem fearful and withdrawn. The emotional effect on children usually
becomes obvious at school age, when difficulties develop in forming relationships with teachers and
peers. Often, emotional effects are appreciated only after the child has been placed in another
environment or after aberrant behaviors abate and are replaced by more acceptable behaviors. Children
who are exploited may commit crimes or abuse alcohol or drugs.
Neglect:
Undernutrition, fatigue, lack of hygiene or appropriate clothing, and failure to thrive are common
signs of inadequate provision of food, clothing, or shelter. Stunted growth and death resulting from
starvation or exposure may occur. Neglect that involves inadequate supervision may result in preventable
illness or injury.
Diagnosis
• High index of suspicion (eg, for history that does not match physical findings or for atypical injury
===PAGE:3268===
patterns)
• Supportive, open-ended questioning
•
Sometimes imaging and laboratory tests
• Reporting to authorities for further investigation
Evaluation of injuries and nutritional deficiencies is discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL. Recognizing
maltreatment as the cause can be difficult, and a high index of suspicion must be maintained. Because of
social biases, abuse is considered less often in children living in a 2-parent household with a medianlevel income; child abuse can occur regardless of family composition or socioeconomic status.
Sometimes direct questions provide answers. Children who have been maltreated may describe the
events and the perpetrator, but some children, particularly those who have been sexually abused, may be
sworn to secrecy, threatened, or so traumatized that they are reluctant to speak (and may even deny
abuse when specifically questioned). Children should be interviewed alone and in a relaxed manner, with
open-ended questions (eg, "Tell me what happened"); yes-or-no questions (eg, "Did daddy do this?", "Did
he touch you here?") can easily sculpt an untrue history in young children.
Examination includes observation of interactions between the child and possible perpetrators whenever
possible. Documentation of the history and physical examination should be as comprehensive and
accurate as possible, including recording of exact quotes from the history and photographs of injuries.
Sometimes it is unclear after the initial evaluation whether abuse occurred. In such cases, the mandatory
reporting requirement of
suspected
abuse allows appropriate authorities and social agencies to
investigate in depth; if their evaluation confirms abuse, appropriate legal and social interventions can be
done.
Physical abuse:
Both history and physical examination provide clues suggestive of mal-treatment.
Features suggestive of abuse in the history are
• Parental reluctance or inability to give a history of injury
• History that is inconsistent with the injury (eg, bruises on the backs of the legs attributed to a fall) or
apparent stage of resolution (eg, old injuries described as recent)
• History that varies depending on the information source
• History of injury that is incompatible with the child's stage of development (eg, injuries ascribed to a fall
down stairs in an infant too young to crawl)
• Inappropriate response by the parents to the severity of the injury—either overly concerned or
unconcerned
• Delay in reporting the injury
Major indicators of abuse on examination are
• Atypical injuries
• Injuries incompatible with stated history
Childhood injuries resulting from falls are typically solitary and occur on the forehead, chin, or mouth or
extensor surfaces of the extremities, particularly elbows, knees, forearms, and shins. Bruises on the back,
buttocks, and the back of the legs are extremely rare from falls. Fractures, apart from clavicular fracture,
tibial (toddler's) fractures, and distal radius (Colles') fracture, are less common in typical falls during play
===PAGE:3269===
or down stairs. No fractures are pathognomonic of abuse, but classic metaphyseal lesions, rib fractures
(especially posterior and 1st rib), and depressed or multiple skull fractures (caused by apparently minor
trauma), scapular fractures, sternal fractures, and spinous processes fractures should raise concern.
Physical abuse should be considered when an infant who is not walking has a serious injury. Young
infants with minor injuries to the face should be further evaluated. The younger infant may appear to be
perfectly normal or sleeping despite significant brain trauma, and inflicted acute head trauma in infants
should be part of the differential diagnosis of every lethargic infant. Other hints are multiple injuries at
different stages of resolution or development; cutaneous lesions specific for particular sources of injury;
and repeated injury, which is suggestive of abuse or inadequate supervision.
A dilated eye examination may be useful in children < 1 yr with suspected abuse. Retinal hemorrhage
occurs in 65 to 95% of cases of abusive head trauma vs < 10% of cases of accidental head trauma. It
also may result from childbirth and persist for up to 4 wk. When retinal hemorrhages result from accidental
trauma, the mechanism is usually obvious and life-threatening (eg, major motor vehicle crash), and the
hemorrhages are typically few in number and confined to the posterior pole.
Children < 2 yr with possible physical abuse should undergo a skeletal survey for evidence of previous
bony injuries (fractures in various stages of healing or subperiosteal elevations in long bones). Surveys
are sometimes done on children aged 2 to 5 yr but are generally not helpful for those > 5 yr. The standard
survey includes anteroposterior (AP) views of the skull and chest, lateral views of the spine and long
bones, AP views of the pelvis, and AP and oblique views of the hands. Physical disorders causing
multiple fractures include osteogenesis imperfecta and congenital syphilis.
Sexual abuse:
Sexually transmitted disease of any sort in a child < 12 yr must be considered
the result
of sexual abuse until proved otherwise. When a child has been sexually abused, behavioral changes (eg,
irritability, fearfulness, insomnia) may be the only clues initially. If sexual abuse is suspected, the perioral
and rectal areas and the external genitals must be examined for evidence of injury. If the suspected abuse
is thought to have occurred recently, hair samples and swabs of body fluids are obtained for legal
evidence (. An examination involving use of a magnifying light source with a camera, such as
with a specially equipped colposcope, may be helpful for documentation for legal purposes.
Emotional abuse and neglect:
Evaluation focuses on general appearance and behavior to determine
whether the child is failing to develop normally. Teachers and social workers are often the first to
recognize neglect. The physician may notice a pattern of missed appointments and vaccinations that are
not up-to-date. Medical neglect of life-threatening, chronic diseases, such as asthma or diabetes, can
lead to a subsequent increase in office or emergency department visits and poor adherence with
recommended drug regimens.
Treatment
• Treatment of injuries
• Assurance of safety
• Family counseling and support
• Sometimes removal from the home
Treatment first addresses urgent medical needs (including possible sexually transmitted diseases) and
the child's immediate safety. Referral to a pediatrician specializing in child abuse should be considered.
Ultimately, treatment is directed at long-standing disturbed patterns of personal interaction. In both abuse
and neglect situations, families should be approached in a helping rather than a punitive manner.
Immediate safety:
Physicians and other professionals in contact with children (eg, nurses, teachers,
day care workers, police) are required by law in all states to report incidents of suspected abuse or
neglect. Every state has its own laws. Members of the general public are encouraged, but not mandated,
to report suspected abuse. Any person who makes a report of abuse based on reasonable cause and in
===PAGE:3270===
good faith is immune from criminal and civil liability. A mandated reporter who fails to make a report can be
subject to criminal and civil penalties. The reports are made to Child Protective Services or another
appropriate child protection agency. In most situations, it is appropriate for professionals to tell parents
that a report is being made pursuant to the law and that they will be contacted, interviewed, and possibly
visited at their home. In some cases, the professional may determine that informing the parent before
police or other agency assistance is available creates greater risk of injury to the child. Under those
circumstances, the professional may choose to delay informing the parent or caregiver.
Representatives of child protective agencies and social workers can help the physician determine
likelihood of subsequent harm and thus identify the best immediate disposition for the child. Options
include
• Protective hospitalization
• Placement with relatives or in temporary housing (sometimes a whole family is moved out of an abusive
partner's home)
• Temporary foster care
• Going home with prompt social service follow-up
The physician plays an important role in working with community agencies to advocate for the best and
safest disposition for the child.
Follow-up:
A source of primary medical care is fundamental. However, the families of abused and
neglected children frequently relocate, making continuity of care difficult. Broken appointments are
common; outreach and home visits by social workers or a public health nurse may be needed to relay the
child's progress to all concerned. A local child advocacy center can help community agencies, health care
practitioners, and the legal system work together as a multidisciplinary team in a more coordinated, childfriendly, and effective manner.
A close review of the family setting, prior contacts with various community service agencies, and the
parents' needs is essential. A social worker can conduct such reviews and help with interviews and family
counseling. Social workers also provide tangible assistance to the parents by helping them obtain public
assistance and day care and homemaker services (which can relieve a parent under stress, allowing a
few hours each day for relaxation) and coordinating mental health services for parents. Periodic or
ongoing social work contact usually is needed.
Parent-aide programs, which employ trained nonprofessionals to relate closely to abusive and negligent
parents, are available in some communities. Other parent support groups also have been successful.
Sexual abuse may have lasting effects on the child's development and sexual adaptation, particularly
among older children and adolescents. Counseling or psychotherapy for the child and the adults
concerned may lessen these effects.
Removal from the home:
Although emergency temporary removal from the home until evaluation is
complete and safety is ensured is not uncommon, the ultimate goal of Child Protective Services is to keep
children with their family in a safe, healthy environment. If the previously described interventions do not
ensure safety, consideration must be made for long-term removal and possibly termination of parental
rights. This significant step requires a court petition, presented by the legal counsel of the appropriate
welfare department. The specific procedure varies from state to state but usually entails family court
testimony by a physician. When the court decides in favor of removing the child from the home, a
disposition is arranged. The family's physician should participate in this disposition planning; if not, the
physician's agreement and consent to the disposition should be sought. While the child is in temporary
placement, the physician should, if possible, maintain contact with the parents and ensure that adequate
efforts are being made to help them. Occasionally, children are re-abused while in foster care. The
physician should be alert to this possibility. The physician's input is integral to the decision for reuniting
the child and parents. As the dynamics of the family setting improve, the child may be able to return to the
===PAGE:3271===
parents' care. However, recurrences of abuse are common.
Prevention
Prevention of maltreatment should be a part of every well-child office visit through education of parents or
caregivers and referrals for appropriate community services of identified at-risk families. Parents who
have been victims of abuse or neglect may be at risk of abusing their own children. Such parents often
verbalize anxiety about their abusive background and are amenable to assistance. First-time parents and
teenage parents as well as parents with several children < 5 yr are also at risk. Often, maternal risk
factors for abuse are identified prenatally, eg, a mother who does not seek prenatal care, smokes, abuses
drugs, or has a history of domestic violence. Medical problems during pregnancy, delivery, or early
infancy that may affect the infant's health can weaken parent-infant bonding (see also p.
). During
such times it is important to elicit the parents' feelings about their own inadequacies and the infant's wellbeing. How well can they tolerate an infant with many needs or health demands? Do the parents give
moral and physical support to each other? Are there relatives or friends to help in times of need? The
health care practitioner who is alert to clues and able to provide support in such settings goes a long way
toward preventing tragic events.
Female Genital Mutilation
Female genital mutilation is practiced routinely in parts of Africa (usually northern or central Africa), where
it is deeply ingrained as part of some cultures. Women who experience sexual pleasure are considered
impossible to control, are shunned, and cannot be married.
The average age of girls who undergo mutilation is 7 yr, and mutilation is done without anesthesia.
Mutilation may be limited to partial clitoral excision. Infibulation, the most extreme form, is removal of the
clitoris and labia, usually followed by suturing the remaining tissue closed except for a 1- to 2-cm opening
for menses and urine. The legs are often bound together for weeks afterward. Traditionally, infibulated
females are cut open on their wedding night.
Sequelae of genital mutilation may include operative or postoperative bleeding and infection (including
tetanus). For infibulated females, recurrent urinary or gynecologic infection and scarring are possible;
they have increased susceptibility to AIDS, and childbirth may result in fatal hemorrhage. Psychologic
sequelae may be severe.
Female genital mutilation may be decreasing due to the influence of religious leaders who have spoken
out against the practice and growing opposition in some communities.
===PAGE:3272===
20 - Geriatrics
Chapter 307. Approach to the Geriatric Patient
Introduction
Geriatrics refers to medical care for the elderly, an age group that is not easy to define precisely. "Older
people" is sometimes preferred but is equally imprecise; > 65 is the age often used. Gerontology is the
study of aging, including biologic, sociologic, and psychologic changes.
Around 1900 in the US, people > 65 accounted for 4% of the population; now, they account for > 13% (38
million, with a net gain of > 1000/day). In 2026, when post-World War II baby boomers begin to reach age
80, estimates suggest that > 20% (almost 80 million) will be > 65. Mean age of those > 65 is now a little
more than 75, and the proportion of those > 85 is predicted to increase.
Life expectancy is an additional 16 yr at age 65 and 9 yr at age 75 for men and an additional 19 yr at age
65 and 12 yr at age 75 for women. Overall, women live about 5 yr longer than men, probably because of
genetic, biologic, and environmental factors. These differences in survival have not changed, despite
changes in women's lifestyle (eg, increased smoking, increased stress).
Changes with Aging
Most age-related biologic functions peak before age 30 and gradually decline linearly
thereafter (see
Table 307-1
); the decline may be critical during stress, but it usually has little or no effect on daily
activities. Therefore, disorders, rather than normal aging, are the primary cause of functional loss during
old age. Also, in many cases, the declines that occur with aging may be due at least partly to lifestyle,
behavior, diet, and environment and thus can be modified. For example, aerobic exercise can prevent or
partially reverse a
[Table 307-1.
Selected Physiologic Age-Related Changes]
decline in maximal exercise capacity (O
consumption per unit time, or Vo
max), muscle strength, and
glucose tolerance in healthy but sedentary older people (see
Sidebar 307-1
).
The unmodifiable effects of aging may be less dramatic than thought, and healthier, more vigorous aging
may be possible for many people. Today, people > 65 are in better health than their predecessors and
remain healthier longer. Because health has improved, decline tends to be most dramatic in the oldest
old.
Evaluation of the Elderly Patient
Evaluation of the elderly usually differs from a standard medical evaluation. For elderly patients,
especially those who are very old or frail, history-taking and physical examination may have to be done at
different times, and physical examination may require 2 sessions because patients become fatigued.
The elderly also have different, often more complicated health care problems, such as
multiple disorders,
which may require use of many drugs (polypharmacy). Diagnosis may be complicated, resulting in delays
or missed diagnoses, and sometimes drugs are used inappropriately. Early detection of problems results
in early intervention, which can prevent deterioration and improve quality of life often through relatively
minor, inexpensive interventions (eg, lifestyle changes). Thus, some elderly patients, particularly the frail
or chronically ill, are best evaluated using a comprehensive geriatric assessment (, which
includes evaluation of function and quality of life, often by an interdisciplinary team.
Sidebar 307-1 Exercise
Only about 20 to 25% of the elderly participate in regular exercise for > 30 min 5 times/wk (a common
===PAGE:3273===
recommendation). About 35 to 45% participate in minimal exercise. The elderly tend to exercise less than
other age groups for many reasons, most commonly because disorders limit their physical activity.
The benefits of exercise for the elderly are many and far exceed its risks (eg, falls, torn ligaments, pulled
muscles). Benefits include
• Reduced mortality rates, even for smokers and the obese
• Preservation of skeletal muscle strength, aerobic capacity, and bone density, contributing to mobility and
independence
• Reduced risk of obesity
• Prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disorders (including rehabilitation after MI), diabetes,
osteoporosis, colon cancer, and psychiatric disorders (especially mood disorders)
• Prevention of falls and fall-related injuries by improving muscle strength, balance, coordination, joint
function, and endurance
• Improved functional ability
• Opportunities for social interaction
• Enhanced sense of well-being
• Possibly improved sleep quality
Exercise is one of the few interventions that can restore physiologic capacity after it has been lost.
All elderly patients starting an exercise program should be screened (by interview or questionnaire) to
identify those with chronic disorders and to determine an appropriate exercise program (.
Exercise is inappropriate for only a few elderly people (eg, those with unstable medical conditions).
Whether those with chronic disorders need a complete preexercise medical examination depends on tests
that have already been done and on clinical judgment. Some experts recommend such an examination,
possibly with an exercise stress test, for patients who have ≥ 2 cardiac risk factors (eg, hypertension,
obesity).
Exercise programs may include any combination of 4 types of exercise: endurance, muscle strengthening,
balance training (eg, tai chi), and flexibility (. The combination of exercises recommended
depends on the patient's medical condition and fitness level. For example, a seated exercise program that
uses cuff weights for strength training and repeated movements for endurance training may be useful for
patients who have difficulty standing and walking. An aquatics exercise program may be suggested for
patients with arthritis. Patients should be able to select activities they enjoy but should be encouraged to
include all 4 types of exercise. Of all types of exercise, endurance exercises (eg, walking, cycling,
dancing, swimming, low-impact aerobics) have the most well-documented health benefits for the elderly.
Some patients, particularly those with a heart disorder (eg, angina, ≥ 2 MIs), require medical supervision
during exercise.
High-intensity muscle-strengthening programs are particularly appropriate for frail or near-frail elderly
patients with sarcopenia. For these patients, machines that use air pressure rather than weights are
useful because the resistance can be set lower and changed in smaller increments. High-intensity
programs are safe even for nursing home residents > 80; in them, strength and mobility can be
substantially improved. However, these programs are time-consuming because participants usually
require close supervision.
Drugs and exercise:
Doses of insulin and oral hypoglycemics in diabetics may need to be adjusted
(according to the amount of anticipated exercise) to prevent hypoglycemia during exercise. Doses of
===PAGE:3274===
drugs that can cause orthostatic hypotension (eg, antidepressants, antihypertensives, hypnotics,
anxiolytics, diuretics) may need to be lowered to avoid exacerbation of orthostasis by fluid loss during
exercise. For patients taking such drugs, adequate fluid intake is essential during exercise.
Some sedative-hypnotics may reduce physical performance by reducing activity levels or by inhibiting
effects on muscles and nerves. These and other psychoactive drugs increase the risk of falls. Stopping
such drugs or reducing their dose may be necessary to make exercise safe and to help patients adhere to
their exercise regimen.
Multiple disorders:
On average, elderly patients have 6 diagnosable disorders, and the primary care
physician is often unaware of some of them. A disorder in one organ system can weaken another system,
exacerbating the deterioration of both and leading to disability, dependence, and, without intervention,
death. Multiple disorders complicate diagnosis and treatment, and effects of the disorders are magnified
by social disadvantage (eg, isolation) and poverty (as patients outlive their resources and supportive
peers) and by functional and financial problems.
Clinicians should also pay particular attention to certain common geriatric symptoms (eg, acute confusion,
dizziness, syncope, falling, mobility problems, weight or appetite loss, urinary incontinence) because they
may result from disorders of multiple organ systems.
If patients have multiple disorders, treatments (eg, bed rest, surgery, drugs) must be well integrated;
treating one disorder without treating associated disorders may accelerate decline. Also, careful
monitoring is needed to avoid iatrogenic consequences. With complete bed rest, elderly patients can lose
5 to 6% of muscle mass and strength each day (causing sarcopenia), and effects of bed rest alone can
ultimately result in death.
Missed or delayed diagnosis:
Disorders that are common among the elderly are frequently missed, or
the diagnosis is delayed. Clinicians should use the history, physical examination, and simple laboratory
tests to actively screen elderly patients for disorders that occur only or commonly in the elderly (see
Table 307-2
); when diagnosed early, these disorders can often be more easily treated. Early diagnosis
frequently depends on the clinician's familiarity with the patient's behavior and history, including mental
status. Commonly, the first signs of a physical disorder are mental or emotional. If clinicians are unaware
of this possibility and attribute these signs to dementia, diagnosis and treatment can be delayed.
[Table 307-2.
Disorders Common Among the Elderly]
Polypharmacy:
Prescription and OTC drug use should be reviewed frequently, particularly for drug
interactions and use of drugs considered inappropriate for the elderly (. When multiple drugs
are used, computer-based management is more efficient.
Caregiver problems:
Occasionally, problems of elderly patients are related to neglect or abuse by their
caregiver (. Clinicians should consider the possibility of patient abuse and drug abuse by the
caregiver if circumstances and findings suggest it. Certain injury patterns are particularly suggestive,
including
• Frequent bruising, especially in difficult-to-reach areas (eg, middle of the back)
•
Grip bruises of the upper arms
• Bruises of the genitals
• Peculiar burns
• Unexplained fearfulness of a caregiver
History
===PAGE:3275===
Often, more time is needed to interview and evaluate elderly patients, partly because they may have
characteristics that interfere with the evaluation:
•
Sensory deficits:
Dentures, eyeglasses, or hearing aids, if normally worn, should be worn to facilitate
communication during the interview. Adequate lighting also helps.
•
Underreporting of symptoms:
Elderly patients may not report symptoms that they consider part of
normal aging (eg, dyspnea, hearing or vision deficits, memory problems, incontinence, gait disturbance,
constipation, dizziness, falls). However, no symptom should be attributed to normal aging unless a
thorough evaluation is done and other causes have been eliminated.
•
Unusual manifestations of a disorder:
In the elderly, typical manifestations of a disorder may be
absent (. Instead, the elderly may present with general symptoms (eg, fatigue, confusion,
weight loss).
•
Functional decline as the only manifestation:
Disorders may manifest solely as functional decline. In
such cases, standard questions may not apply. For example, when asked about joint symptoms,
patients with severe arthritis may not report pain, swelling, or stiffness, but if asked about changes in
activities, they may report that they no longer take walks or no longer volunteer at the hospital.
Questions about duration of functional decline (eg, "How long have you been unable to do your own
shopping?") can elicit useful information. Identifying people when they have just started to have
difficulty doing basic activities of daily living (ADLs) or instrumental ADLs (IADLs) may provide more
opportunities for interventions to restore function or to prevent further decline and thus maintain
independence.
•
Difficulty recalling:
Patients may not accurately remember past illnesses, hospitalizations, operations,
and drug use; clinicians may have to obtain these data elsewhere (eg, from family members, a home
health aide, or medical records).
•
Fear:
The elderly may be reluctant to report symptoms because they fear hospitalization, which they
may associate with dying.
•
Age-related disorders and problems:
Depression (common among the elderly), the cumulative
losses of old age, and discomfort due to a disorder may make the elderly less apt to provide healthrelated information to clinicians. Patients with impaired cognition may have difficulty describing
problems, impeding the physician's evaluation.
Information acquired during the interview and history should be recorded in the patient's medical record.
Interview:
A clinician's knowledge of an elderly patient's everyday concerns, social circumstances,
mental function, emotional state, and sense of well-being helps orient and guide the interview. Asking
patients to describe a typical day elicits information about their quality of life and mental and physical
function. This approach is especially useful during the first meeting. Patients should be given time to
speak about things of personal importance. Clinicians should also ask whether patients have specific
concerns, such as fear of falling. The resulting rapport can help the clinician communicate better with
patients and their family members.
A mental status examination may be necessary early in the interview to determine the patient's reliability;
this examination should be conducted tactfully so that the patient does not become embarrassed,
offended, or defensive.
Often, verbal and nonverbal clues (eg, the way the story is told, tempo of speech, tone of voice, eye
contact) can provide information, as for the following:
•
Depression:
Elderly patients may omit or deny symptoms of anxiety or depression but betray them by a
lowered voice, subdued enthusiasm, or even tears.
•
Physical and mental health:
What patients say about sleep and appetite may be revealing.
===PAGE:3276===
•
Weight gain or loss:
Clinicians should note any change in the fit of clothing or dentures.
Unless mental status is impaired, a patient should be interviewed alone to encourage the discussion of
personal matters. Clinicians often also need to speak with a relative or caregiver—with the patient absent,
present, or both. Such people often give a different perspective on function, mental status, and emotional
state.
The clinician should ask the patient's permission before inviting a relative or caregiver to be present and
should explain that such interviews are routine. When the caregiver is
interviewed alone, the patient
should be kept usefully occupied (eg, filling out a standardized assessment questionnaire, being
interviewed by another member of the interdisciplinary team).
If indicated, clinicians should consider the possibility of drug abuse and patient abuse by the caregiver.
Medical history:
When asking patients about their past medical history, a clinician should ask about
disorders that used to be more common (eg, rheumatic fever, poliomyelitis) and about outdated
treatments (eg, pneumothorax therapy for TB, mercury for syphilis). A history of immunizations (eg,
tetanus, influenza, pneumococcus), adverse reactions to immunizations, and skin test results for TB is
needed. If patients recall having surgery but do not remember the procedure or its purpose, surgical
records should be obtained if possible.
Clinicians should ask questions designed to systematically review each body area or system and thus
check for other disorders and common problems that patients may have forgotten to mention (see
Table 307-3
).
Drug history:
The drug history should be recorded, and a copy should be given to patients or their
caregiver. It should contain
• Drugs used
• Dose
• Dosing schedule
• Prescriber
• Reason for prescribing the drugs
• Precise nature of any drug allergies
All drugs used should be recorded: topical drugs (which may be absorbed systemically), OTC drugs
(which can have serious consequences if overused and may interact with prescription drugs), dietary
supplements, and medicinal herb preparations (because many can interact adversely with prescription
and OTC drugs). Patients or a family member should be asked to bring in all of the above drugs and
supplements at the initial visit and periodically thereafter. Clinicians can make sure patients have the
prescribed drugs, but
[Table 307-3.
Clues to Disorders in Elderly Patients]
possession of these drugs does not guarantee adherence. Counting the number of tablets in each vial
during the first and subsequent visits may be necessary. If someone other than a patient administers the
drugs, that person is interviewed.
Patients should be asked to demonstrate their ability to read labels (often printed in small type), open
containers (especially the child-resistant type), and recognize drugs. Patients should be advised not to
put their drugs into one container.
===PAGE:3277===
Alcohol, tobacco, and recreational drug use history:
Patients who smoke should be counseled to
stop and, if they continue, not to smoke in bed because the elderly are more likely to fall asleep while
doing so.
Patients should be checked for signs of alcohol use disorders, which are underdiagnosed in the elderly.
Such signs include confusion, anger, hostility, alcohol odor on the breath, impaired balance and gait,
tremors, peripheral neuropathy, and nutritional deficiencies. Screening questionnaires (eg, CAGE
questionnaire—see
Table 309-1
 and questions about quantity and frequency of alcohol consumption can help.
Questions about use of other recreational drugs or substances of abuse are appropriate.
Nutrition history:
Type, quantity, and frequency of food eaten are determined. Patients who eat ≤ 2
meals a day are at risk of undernutrition. Clinicians should ask about the following:
•
Any special diets (eg, low-salt, low-carbohydrate) or self-prescribed fad diets
• Intake of dietary fiber and prescribed or OTC vitamins
• Weight loss and change of fit in clothing
• Amount of money patients have to spend on food
• Accessibility of food stores and suitable kitchen facilities
• Variety and freshness of foods
The ability to eat (eg, to chew and swallow) is evaluated. It may be impaired by xerostomia, which is
common among the elderly. Decreased taste or smell may reduce the pleasure of eating, so patients may
eat less. Patients with decreased vision, arthritis, immobility, or tremors may have difficulty preparing
meals and may injure or burn themselves when cooking. Patients who are worried about urinary
incontinence may reduce their fluid intake; as a result, they may eat less food.
Mental health history:
Mental health problems may not be detected easily in elderly patients. Symptoms
that may indicate a mental health disorder in younger patients (eg, insomnia, changes in sleep patterns,
constipation, cognitive dysfunction, anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, preoccupation with bodily functions,
increased alcohol consumption) may have another cause in the elderly. Sadness, hopelessness, and
crying episodes may indicate depression. Irritability may be the primary affective symptom of depression,
or patients may present with cognitive dysfunction. Generalized anxiety is the most common mental
disorder encountered in elderly patients and often accompanies depression.
Patients should be asked about delusions and hallucinations, past mental health care (including
psychotherapy, institutionalization, and electroconvulsive therapy), use of psychoactive drugs, and recent
changes in circumstances. Many circumstances (eg, recent loss of a loved one, hearing loss, a change in
residence or living situation, loss of independence) may contribute to depression.
Patients' spiritual and religious preferences, including their personal interpretation of aging, declining
health, and death, should be clarified.
Functional status:
Whether patients can function independently, need some help with basic activities of
daily living (ADLs) or instrumental ADLs (IADLs), or need total assistance is determined, often as part of
comprehensive geriatric assessment. Patients may be asked open-ended questions about their ability to
do activities, or they may be asked to fill out a standardized assessment instrument with questions about
specific ADLs and IADLs (eg, Katz ADL Scale [see
Table 350-3
on p.], Lawton IADL Scale [see
Table 307-4]).
Social history:
Clinicians should identify patients' living arrangements, particularly where and with whom
===PAGE:3278===
they live (eg, alone in an isolated house, in a busy apartment building), accessibility of their residence
(eg, up stairs or a hill), and what modes of transportation are available to them. Such factors affect the
ability of the elderly to obtain food, health care, and other important resources. A home visit, although
difficult to arrange, can provide critical information. For example, clinicians can gain insight about nutrition
from the refrigerator's contents and about multiple ADLs from the bathroom's condition. The number of
rooms, number and type of phones, presence of smoke and carbon monoxide detectors, and condition of
plumbing and heating system are determined, as is the availability of elevators, stairs, and air
conditioning. Home safety evaluations can identify home features that can lead to falls (eg, poor lighting,
slippery bathtubs, unanchored rugs), and solutions can be suggested.
Having patients describe a typical day, including activities such as reading, television viewing, work,
exercise, hobbies, and interactions with other people, provides valuable information.
Clinicians should ask about the following:
• Frequency and nature of social contacts (eg, friends, senior citizens' groups), family visits, and religious
or spiritual participation
• Driving and availability of other forms of transportation
• Caregivers and support systems (eg, church, senior citizens' groups, friends, neighbors) that are
available to the patient
• The ability of family members to help the patient (eg, their employment status, their health, traveling time
to the patient's home)
• The patient's attitude toward family members and their attitude toward the patient (including their level of
interest in helping and willingness to help)
Marital status of patients is noted. Questions about sexual practices and satisfaction must be sensitive
and tactful but thorough. The number and sex of sex partners are determined, and risk of sexually
transmitted diseases is evaluated. Many sexually active elderly people do not know about safe sex
practices.
Patients should be asked about educational level, jobs held, known exposures to radioactivity or
asbestos, and current and past hobbies.
[Table 307-4.
Lawton Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale*]
Economic difficulties due to retirement, a fixed income, or death of a spouse or partner are discussed.
Financial or health problems may result in loss of a home, social status, or independence. Patients should
be asked about past relationships with physicians; a longtime relationship with a physician may have
been lost because the physician retired or died or because the patient relocated.
Patient wishes regarding measures for prolonging life must be documented. Patients are asked what
provisions for surrogate decision making (advance directives— have been made in case they
become incapacitated, and if none have been made, patients are encouraged to make them.
Key Points
• Unless corrected, sensory deficits, especially hearing deficits, may interfere with history-taking.
• Many disorders in the elderly manifest only as functional decline.
• As part of the drug history, the patient or a family member should be asked to bring in all the patient's
drugs, including OTC drugs, at the initial visit and periodically thereafter.
• Health care practitioners must often interview caregivers to obtain the history of functionally dependent
===PAGE:3279===
elderly patients.
Physical Examination
Observing patients and their movements (eg, walking into the examination room, sitting in or rising from a
chair, getting on and off an examination table, taking off or putting on socks and shoes) can provide
valuable information about their function. Their personal hygiene (eg, state of dress, cleanliness, smell)
may provide information about mental status and the ability to care for themselves.
If patients become fatigued, the physical examination may need to be stopped and continued at another
visit. Elderly patients may require additional time to undress and transfer to the examining table; they
should not be rushed. The examining table should be adjusted to a height that patients can easily access;
a footstool facilitates mounting. Frail patients must not be left alone on the table. Portions of the
examination may be more comfortable if patients sit in a chair.
Clinicians should describe the general appearance of patients (eg, comfortable, restless, undernourished,
inattentive, pale, dyspneic, cyanotic). If they are examined at bedside, use of protective padding or a
protective mattress, bedside rails (partial or full), restraints, a urinary catheter, or an adult diaper should
be noted.
Vital Signs
Weight should be recorded at each visit. During measurement, patients with balance problems may need
to grasp grab bars placed near or on the scale. Height is recorded annually to check for height loss due
to osteoporosis.
Temperature is recorded. Hypothermia can be missed if the thermometer cannot measure temperatures
more than a few degrees lower
than normal. Absence of fever does not exclude infection.
Pulses and BP are checked in both arms. Pulse is taken for 30 sec, and any irregularity is noted.
Because many factors can alter BP, BP is measured several times after patients have rested > 5 min.
BP may be overestimated in elderly patients because their arteries are stiff. This condition, called
pseudohypertension, should be suspected if dizziness develops after antihypertensives are begun or
doses are increased to treat elevated systolic BP.
All elderly patients are checked for orthostatic hypotension because it is common. BP is measured with
patients in the supine position, then after they have been standing for 3 to 5 min. If systolic BP falls ≥ 20
mm Hg after patients stand, orthostatic hypotension is diagnosed. Caution is required when testing
hypovolemic patients.
A normal respiratory rate in elderly patients may be as high as 25 breaths/min. A rate of > 25 breaths/min
may be the first sign of a lower respiratory tract infection, heart failure, or another disorder.
Skin
Initial observation includes color (normal rubor, pale, cyanotic). Examination includes a search for
premalignant and malignant lesions, tissue ischemia, and pressure ulcers. In the elderly, the following
should be considered:
• Ecchymoses may occur readily when skin is traumatized, often on the forearm, because the dermis thins
with aging.
• Uneven tanning may be normal because melanocytes are progressively lost with aging.
• Longitudinal ridges on the nails and absence of the crescent-shaped lunula are normal age-related
findings.
===PAGE:3280===
• Nail plate fractures may occur because with aging, the nail plate thins.
• Black splinter hemorrhages in the middle or distal third of the fingernail are more likely to be due to
trauma than to bacteremia.
• A thickened, yellow toenail indicates onychomycosis, a fungal infection.
• Toenail borders that curve in and down indicate ingrown toenail (onychocryptosis).
• Whitish nails that scale easily, sometimes with a pitted surface, indicate psoriasis.
• Unexplained bruises may indicate abuse.
Head and Neck
Face:
Normal age-related findings may include the following:
• Eyebrows that drop below the superior orbital rim
• Descent of the chin
• Loss of the angle between the submandibular line and neck
• Wrinkles
• Dry skin
• Thick terminal hairs on the ears, nose, upper lip, and chin
The temporal arteries should be palpated for tenderness and thickening, which may indicate giant cell
arteritis.
Nose:
Progressive descent of the nasal tip is a normal age-related finding. It may cause the upper and
lower lateral cartilage to separate, enlarging and lengthening the nose.
Eyes:
Normal age-related findings include the following:
• Loss of orbital fat: It may cause gradual sinking of the eye backward into the orbit (enophthalmos).
Thus, enophthalmos is not necessarily a sign of dehydration in the elderly. Enophthalmos is
accompanied by deepening of the upper eyelid fold and slight obstruction of peripheral vision.
• Pseudoptosis (decreased size of the palpebral aperture)
• Entropion (inversion of lower eyelid margins)
• Ectropion (eversion of lower eyelid margins)
• Arcus senilis (a white ring at the limbus)
With aging, presbyopia develops; the lens becomes less elastic and less able to change shape when
focusing on close objects.
The eye examination should focus on testing visual acuity (eg, using a Snellen chart). Visual fields can be
tested at the bedside by confrontation—ie, patients are asked to stare at the examiner so that the
examiner can determine differences between their and the examiner's visual field. However, such testing
has low sensitivity for most visual disorders. Tonometry is occasionally done in primary care; however, it
is usually done by ophthalmologists or optometrists as part of routine eye examinations or by
ophthalmologists when a patient is referred to them because glaucoma is clinically suspected.
===PAGE:3281===
Ophthalmoscopy is done to check for cataracts, optic nerve or macular degeneration, and evidence of
glaucoma, hypertension, or diabetes. Findings may be unremarkable unless a disorder is present
because the retina's appearance may not change much with aging. In elderly patients, mild to moderate
elevated intracranial pressure may not result in papilledema because cortical atrophy occurs with aging;
papilledema is more likely when pressure is markedly increased. Areas of black
pigment or hemorrhages
in and around the macula indicate macular degeneration.
For all elderly patients, an eye examination by an ophthalmologist or optometrist is recommended every 1
to 2 yr because such an examination may be much more sensitive for certain common eye disorders (eg,
glaucoma, cataracts, retinal disorders).
Ears:
Tophi, a normal age-related finding, may be noted during inspection of the pinna. The external
auditory canal is examined for cerumen, especially if a hearing problem is noted during the interview. If a
patient wears a hearing aid, it is removed and examined. The ear mold and plastic tubing can become
plugged with wax, or the battery may be dead, indicated by absence of a whistle (feedback) when the
volume of the hearing aid is turned up.
To evaluate hearing, examiners, with their face out of the patient's view, whisper 3 to 6 random words or
letters into each of the patient's ears. If a patient correctly repeats at least half of these words for each
ear, hearing is considered functional for one-on-one conversations. Patients with presbycusis (agerelated, gradual, bilateral, symmetric, and predominantly high-frequency hearing deficits) are more likely
to report difficulty in understanding speech than in hearing sounds. Evaluation with a portable
audioscope, if available, is also recommended.
Mouth:
The mouth is examined for bleeding or swollen gums, loose or broken teeth, fungal infections,
and signs of cancer (eg, leukoplakia, erythroplakia, ulceration, mass). Findings may include
• Darkened teeth: Due to extrinsic stains and less translucent enamel, which occur with aging
• Fissures in the mouth and tongue and a tongue that sticks to the buccal mucosa: Due to xerostomia
• Erythematous, edematous gingiva that bleeds easily: Usually indicating a gingival or periodontal
disorder
• Bad breath: Possibly indicating caries, periodontitis, another oral disorder, or sometimes a pulmonary
disorder
The dorsal and ventral surfaces of the tongue are examined. Common age-related changes include
varicose veins on the ventral surface, erythema migrans (geographic tongue), and atrophied papillae on
the sides of the tongue. In edentulous patients, the tongue may enlarge to facilitate chewing; however,
enlargement may also indicate amyloidosis or hypothyroidism. A smooth, painful tongue may indicate
vitamin B
deficiency.
Dentures should be removed before the mouth is examined. Dentures increase risk of oral candidiasis
and resorption of the alveolar ridges. Inflammation of the palatal mucosa and ulcers of the alveolar ridges
may result from poorly fitting dentures.
The interior of the mouth is palpated. A swollen, firm, and tender parotid gland may indicate parotitis,
particularly in dehydrated patients; pus may be expressed from Stensen's duct when bacterial parotitis is
present. The infecting organisms are often staphylococci.
Painful, inflamed, fissured lesions at the lip commissures (angular cheilitis) may be noted in edentulous
patients who do not wear dentures; these lesions are usually accompanied by a fungal infection.
Temporomandibular joint:
This joint should be evaluated for degeneration (osteoarthrosis), a common
age-related change. The joint can degenerate as teeth are lost and compressive forces in the joint
become excessive. Degeneration may be indicated by joint crepitus felt at the head of the condyle as
===PAGE:3282===
patients lower and raise their jaw, by painful jaw movements, or by both.
Neck:
The thyroid gland, which is located low in the neck of elderly people, often beneath the sternum, is
examined for enlargement and nodules.
Carotid bruits due to transmitted heart murmurs can be differentiated from those due to carotid artery
stenosis by moving the stethoscope up the neck: A transmitted heart murmur becomes softer; the bruit of
carotid artery stenosis becomes louder. Bruits due to carotid artery stenosis suggest systemic
atherosclerosis. Whether asymptomatic patients with carotid bruits require evaluation or treatment for
cerebrovascular disease is unclear.
The neck is checked for flexibility. Resistance to passive flexion, extension, and lateral rotation may
indicate a cervical spine disorder. Resistance to flexion and extension can also occur in patients with
meningitis, but unless meningitis is accompanied by a cervical spine disorder, the neck can be rotated
passively from side to side without resistance.
Chest and Back
All areas of the lungs are examined by percussion and auscultation. Basilar rales may be heard in the
lungs of healthy patients but should disappear after patients take a few deep breaths. The extent of
respiratory excursions (movement of the diaphragm and ability to expand the chest) should be noted.
The back is examined for scoliosis and tenderness. Severe low back, hip, and leg pain with marked
sacral tenderness may indicate
spontaneous osteoporotic fractures of the sacrum, which can occur in
elderly patients.
Breasts:
In men and women, the breasts should be examined annually for irregularities and nodules. For
women, monthly self-examinations are also recommended, as is annual screening mammography,
especially for women who have a family history of breast cancer. If nipples are retracted, pressure should
be applied around the nipples; pressure everts the nipples when retraction is due to aging but not when it
is due to an underlying lesion.
Heart:
Heart size can usually be assessed by palpating the apex. However, displacement caused by
kyphoscoliosis may make assessment difficult.
Auscultation should be done systematically. In elderly patients, a systolic murmur most commonly
indicates
•
Aortic valve sclerosis:
Typically, this murmur is not hemodynamically significant. It peaks early during
systole and is rarely heard in the carotid arteries.
However, systolic murmurs may be due to other disorders, which should be identified:
•
Aortic valve stenosis:
This murmur, in contrast to that of aortic valve sclerosis, typically peaks later
during systole, is transmitted to the carotid arteries, and is loud (greater than grade 2); the 2nd heart
sound is dampened, pulse pressure is narrow, and the carotid up-stroke is slowed. However, in elderly
patients, the murmur of aortic valve stenosis may be difficult to identify because it may be softer, a 2nd
heart sound is rarely audible, and narrow pulse pressures are uncommon. Also, in many elderly patients
with aortic valve stenosis, the carotid upstroke does not slow because vascular compliance is
diminished.
•
Mitral regurgitation:
This murmur is usually loudest at the apex and radiates to the axilla.
•
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy:
This murmur intensifies when patients do a Valsalva
maneuver.
Fourth heart sounds are common among elderly people without evidence of a cardiovascular disorder
and are commonly absent among elderly people with evidence of a cardiovascular disorder. Diastolic
===PAGE:3283===
murmurs are abnormal in people of any age. Unexplained and asymptomatic sinus bradycardia in
apparently healthy elderly people may not be clinically important.
If new neurologic or cardiovascular symptoms develop in patients with a pacemaker, evaluation for
variable heart sounds, murmurs, and pulses and for hypotension and heart failure is required. These
symptoms and signs may be due to loss of atrioventricular synchrony.
GI System
The abdomen is palpated to check for weak abdominal muscles, which are common among elderly
people and which may result in hernias. Most abdominal aortic aneurysms are palpable as a pulsatile
mass; however, only their lateral width can be assessed during physical examination. In some patients
(particularly thin ones), a normal aorta is palpable, but the vessel and pulsations do not extend laterally.
The liver and spleen are palpated for enlargement. Frequency and quality of bowel sounds are checked,
and the suprapubic area is percussed for tenderness, discomfort, and evidence of urinary retention.
The anorectal area is examined externally for fissures, hemorrhoids, and other lesions. Sensation and the
anal wink reflex are tested. A digital rectal examination (DRE) to detect a mass, stricture, tenderness, or
fecal impaction is done in men and women. Fecal occult blood testing is also done.
Male GU System
The prostate gland is palpated for nodules, tenderness, and consistency. Estimating prostate size by DRE
is inaccurate, and size does not correlate with urethral obstruction; however, DRE provides a qualitative
evaluation.
Female Reproductive System
Regular pelvic examinations, with a Papa-nicolaou (Pap) test every 2 to 3 yr until age 70, are
recommended. At age 70, testing can be stopped if results of the previous 2 consecutive tests were
normal. If women ≥ 70 have not had regular Pap tests, they should have at least 2 negative tests, 1 yr
apart, before testing is stopped. Once Pap testing has been stopped, it is restarted only if new symptoms
or signs of a possible disorder develop. If women have had a hysterectomy, Pap tests are required only if
cervical tissue remains.
For pelvic examination, patients who lack hip mobility may lie on their left side. Postmenopausal reduction
of estrogen leads to atrophy of the vaginal and urethral mucosa; the vaginal mucosa appears dry and
lacks rugal folds. The ovaries should not be palpable; palpable ovaries suggest cancer. Patients should
be examined for evidence of prolapse of the urethra, vagina, cervix, and uterus.
They are asked to cough
to check for urine leakage and intermittent prolapse.
Musculoskeletal System
Joints are examined for tenderness, swelling, subluxation, crepitus, warmth, redness, and other
abnormalities, which may suggest a disorder:
• Heberden's nodes (bony overgrowths at the distal interphalangeal joints) or Bouchard's nodes (bony
overgrowths at the proximal interphalangeal joints): Osteoarthritis
• Subluxation of the metacarpophalangeal joints with ulnar deviation of the fingers: Chronic RA
• Swan-neck deformity (hyperextension of the proximal interphalangeal joint with flexion of the distal
interphalangeal joint) and boutonniere deformity (hyperextension of the distal interphalangeal joint with
flexion of the proximal interphalangeal joint): RA
These deformities may interfere with functioning or usual activities.
Active and passive range of joint motion should be determined. The presence of contractures should be
===PAGE:3284===
noted. Variable resistance to passive manipulation of the extremities (gegenhalten) sometimes occurs with
aging.
Feet
Diagnosis and treatment of foot problems, which become common with aging, help elderly people
maintain their independence. Common age-related findings include hallux valgus, medial prominence of
the 1st metatarsal head with lateral deviation and rotation of the big toe, and lateral deviation of the 5th
metatarsal head. Hammer toe (hyperflexion of the proximal interphalangeal joint) and claw toe
(hyperflexion of the proximal and distal interphalangeal toe joints) may interfere with functioning and daily
activities. Toe deformities may result from years of wearing poorly fitting shoes or from RA, diabetes, or
neurologic disorders (eg, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease). Occasionally, foot problems indicate other
systemic disorders (see
Table 44-1
.
Patients with foot problems should be referred to a podiatrist for regular evaluation and treatment.
Neurologic System
Neurologic examination for elderly patients is similar to that for any adult. However, nonneurologic
disorders that are common among elderly people may complicate this examination. For example, visual
and hearing deficits may impede evaluation of cranial nerves, and periarthritis (inflammation of tissues
around a joint) in certain joints, especially shoulders and hips, may interfere with evaluation of motor
function.
Signs detected during the examination must be considered in light of the patient's age, history, and other
findings. Symmetric findings unaccompanied by functional loss and other neurologic symptoms and signs
may be noted in elderly patients. Clinicians must decide whether these findings justify a detailed
evaluation to check for a neurologic lesion. Patients should be reevaluated periodically for functional
changes, asymmetry, and new symptoms.
Cranial nerves:
Evaluation may be complex. Elderly people often have small pupils; their pupillary light
reflex may be sluggish, and their pupillary mitotic response to near vision may be diminished. Upward
gaze and, to a lesser extent, downward gaze are slightly limited. Eye movements, when tracking an
examiner's finger during evaluation of visual fields, may appear jerky and irregular. Bell's phenomenon
(reflex upward movement of the eyes during closure) is sometimes absent. These changes occur
normally with aging.
In many elderly people, sense of smell is diminished because they have fewer olfactory neurons, have
had numerous upper respiratory infections, or have chronic rhinitis. However, asymmetric loss (loss of
smell in one nostril) is abnormal. Taste may be altered because the sense of smell is diminished or
because patients take drugs that decrease salivation.
Visual and hearing deficits may result from abnormalities in the eyes and ears rather than in nerve
pathways.
Motor function:
Patients can be evaluated for tremor during handshaking and other simple activities. If
tremor is detected, amplitude, rhythm, distribution, frequency, and time of occurrence (at rest, with action,
or with intention) are noted.
Muscle strength:
Elderly people, particularly those who do not do resistance training regularly, may
appear weak during routine testing. For example, during the physical examination, the clinician may easily
straighten a patient's elbow despite the patient's effort to sustain a contraction. If weakness is symmetric,
does not bother the patient, and has not changed the patient's function or activity level, it is likely to be
clinically insignificant. Increased muscle tone, measured by flexing and extending the elbow or knee, is a
normal finding in elderly people; however, jerky movements during examination and cogwheel rigidity are
abnormal.
===PAGE:3285===
Sarcopenia (a decrease in muscle mass) is a common age-related finding. It is insignificant unless
accompanied by a decline or change in function (eg, patients can no longer rise from a chair without
using chair arms). Sarcopenia affects the hand muscles (eg, interosseous and thenar muscles) in
particular. Weak extensor muscles of the wrist, fingers, and thumb are common among patients who use
wheelchairs because compression of the upper arm against the armrest injures the radial nerve. Arm
function can be tested by having patients pick up an eating utensil or touch the back of their head with
both hands.
Coordination:
Motor reaction time and motor coordination are tested. Reaction time often increases with
aging, partly because conduction of signals along peripheral nerves slows. Coordination decreases
because of changes in central mechanisms, but this decrease is usually subtle and does not impair
function.
Gait and posture:
All components of gait should be assessed; they include initiation of walking; step
length, height, symmetry, continuity, and cadence (rhythm); velocity (speed of walking); stride width; and
walking posture (see
Table 307-5
). Sensation, musculoskeletal and motor control, and attention, which are necessary for
independent, coordinated walking, must also be considered.
Normal age-related findings may include the following:
• Shorter steps, possibly because calf muscles are weak or because balance is poor
• Reduced gait velocity in patients > 70 because steps are shorter
• Increased time in double stance (when both feet are on the ground), which may be due to impaired
balance or fear of falling
• Reduced motion in some joints (eg, ankle plantar flexion just before the back foot lifts off, pelvic motion
in the frontal and transverse planes)
• Slight changes in walking posture (eg, greater downward pelvic rotation, possibly due to a combination
of increased abdominal fat, abdominal muscle weakness, and tight hip flexor muscles; a slightly greater
turn-out of the toes, possibly due to loss of hip internal rotation or to an attempt to increase lateral
stability)
Aging has little effect on walking cadence or posture; typically, the elderly walk upright unless a disorder
is present.
Overall postural control is evaluated using Romberg's test (patients stand with feet together and eyes
closed). With aging, postural control is often impaired, and postural sway (movement in the
anteroposterior plane when patients remain stationary and upright) may increase.
Reflexes:
The deep tendon reflexes are checked. Aging usually has little effect on them. However,
eliciting the Achilles tendon
[Table 307-5.
Some Causes of Gait Dysfunction]
reflex may require special techniques (eg, testing while patients kneel with their feet over the edge of a
bed and with their hands clasped). A diminished or absent reflex, present in nearly half of elderly patients,
may be normal. It occurs because tendon elasticity decreases and nerve conduction in the tendon's long
reflex arc slows. Asymmetric Achilles tendon reflexes may indicate sciatica.
Cortical release reflexes (known as pathologic reflexes), which include snout, sucking, and palmomental
reflexes, occasionally occur in elderly patients who have no detectable brain disorders (eg, dementia).
Babinski's reflex (extensor plantar response) in elderly patients is abnormal; it indicates an upper motor
neuron lesion, often cervical spondylosis with partial cord compression.
===PAGE:3286===
Sensation:
Evaluation of sensation includes touch (using a skin prick test), cortical sensory function,
temperature sense, proprioception (joint position sense), and vibration sense testing. Aging has limited
effects on sensation. Many elderly patients report numbness, especially in the feet. It may result from a
decrease in size of fibers in the peripheral nerves, particularly the large fibers. Nonetheless, patients with
numbness should be checked for peripheral neuropathies. In many patients, no cause of numbness can
be identified.
Many elderly people lose vibratory sensation below the knees. It is lost because small vessels in the
posterior column of the spinal cord change. However, proprioception, which is thought to use a similar
pathway, is unaffected.
Mental status:
A mental status examination is important (see also
Sidebar 168-1
. Patients
who are disturbed by such a test should be reassured that it is routine. The examiner must make sure that
patients can hear; hearing deficits that prevent patients from hearing and understanding questions may
be mistaken for cognitive dysfunction. Evaluating the mental status of patients who have a speech or
language disorder (eg, mutism, dysarthria, speech apraxia, aphasia) can be difficult.
Orientation may be normal in many patients with dementia or other cognitive disorders. Thus, evaluation
may require questions that identify abnormalities in consciousness, judgment, calculations, speech,
language, praxis, executive function, or memory, as well as orientation. Abnormalities in these areas
cannot be attributed solely to age, and if abnormalities are noted, further evaluation, including a formal
test of mental status, is needed.
With aging, information processing and memory retrieval slow but are essentially un-impaired. With extra
time and encouragement, patients do such tasks satisfactorily (unless a neurologic abnormality is
present).
Nutritional Status
Aging changes the interpretation of many measurements that reflect nutritional status in younger people.
For example, aging can alter height. Weight changes can reflect alterations in nutrition, fluid balance, or
both. The proportion of lean body mass and body fat content changes. Despite these age-related
changes, body mass index (BMI) is still useful in elderly patients. If abnormalities in the nutrition history
(eg, weight loss, suspected deficiencies in essential nutrients) or BMI are identified, thorough nutritional
evaluation, including laboratory measurements, is indicated.
Key Points
• Valuable information about a patient's function can be gained by observing the patient.
• Physical examination should include all systems, particularly mental status, and may require 2 sessions.
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment
Comprehensive geriatric assessment is a multidimensional process designed to assess the
functional ability, health (physical, cognitive, and mental), and socioenvironmental situation of
elderly people.
The comprehensive geriatric assessment specifically and thoroughly evaluates functional and cognitive
abilities, social support, financial status, and environmental factors as well as physical and mental health
(see
Table 307-6
). Ideally, a regular examination of elderly patients incorporates many aspects of the
comprehensive geriatric assessment, making the 2 approaches very similar. Assessment results are
coupled with sustained individually tailored interventions (eg, rehabilitation, education, counseling,
supportive services).
The cost of geriatric assessment limits its use. Thus, this assessment may be used mainly in high-risk
elderly patients, such as the frail or chronically ill (eg, identified via mailed health questionnaires or
===PAGE:3287===
interviews in the home or meeting places). Family members may also request a referral for geriatric
assessment.
Assessment can have the following benefits:
• Improved care and clinical outcomes
[Table 307-6.
A Geriatric Assessment Instrument]
• Greater diagnostic accuracy
• Improved functional and mental status
• Reduced mortality
• Decreased use of nursing homes and acute care hospitals
• Greater satisfaction with care
If elderly patients are relatively healthy, a standard medical evaluation may be appropriate.
Comprehensive geriatric assessment is most successful when done by a geriatric interdisciplinary team
(typically, a geriatrician, nurse, social worker, and pharmacist). Usually, assessments are done in an
outpatient setting. However, patients with physical or mental impairments and chronically ill patients may
require inpatient assessment.
Assessment Domains
The principal domains assessed are
•
Functional ability:
Ability to do activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental
ADLs (IADLs) are
assessed. ADLs include eating, dressing, bathing, transferring between the bed and a chair, using the
toilet, and controlling bladder and bowel. IADLs enable people to live independently and include
preparing meals, doing housework, taking drugs, going on errands, managing finances, and using a
telephone.
•
Physical health:
History and physical examination should include problems common among the elderly
(eg, problems with vision, hearing, continence, gait, and balance).
•
Cognition and mental health:
Several validated screening tests for cognitive dysfunction (eg, mental
status examination—see
Sidebar 168-1
 and for depression (eg, Geriatric Depression Scale
[see
Table 307-7], Hamilton Depression Scale) can be used.
•
Socioenvironmental situation:
The patient's social interaction network, available social support
resources, and special needs and the safety and convenience of the patient's environment are
determined, often by a nurse or social worker. Such factors influence the treatment approach used. A
checklist can be used to assess home safety.
Standardized instruments make evaluation of these domains more reliable and efficient (see
Table 307-
). They also facilitate communication of clinical information among health care practitioners and
monitoring of changes in the patient's condition over time.
Unusual Presentations of Illness in the Elderly
In the elderly, many common conditions can exist without their characteristic features. Instead, the elderly
may have ≥ 1 nonspecific geriatric syndromes (eg, acute confusion, dizziness, syncope, falling, weight
loss, incontinence). These syndromes result from multiple disorders and impairments; nonetheless,
===PAGE:3288===
patients may improve when only some of the precipitating factors are corrected. An even better strategy is
to identify risk factors for these syndromes and correct as many as possible, thus reducing the likelihood
of the syndrome's developing at all.
Although virtually any illness or drug intoxication can cause geriatric syndromes, the following disorders
are especially likely to trigger one or more of them, sometimes instead of causing the typical symptoms
and signs.
Acute bowel infarction
may be indicated by acute confusion. Abdominal pain and tenderness may be
absent.
Appendicitis
pain tends to begin in the right lower quadrant rather than periumbilically. Eventually, pain
may be diffuse in the abdomen rather than localized to the right lower quadrant. However, tenderness in
this quadrant is a significant early sign.
Bacteremia
causes a low-grade (at least) fever in most elderly patients, although fever may be absent.
The source of bacteremia may be difficult to identify. Elderly patients may have nonspecific manifestations
(eg, general malaise, anorexia, night sweats, unexplained change in mental status).
Biliary disorders
may result in nonspecific mental and physical deterioration (eg, malaise, confusion,
loss of mobility) without jaundice, fever, or abdominal pain. Abnormal liver function test results may be the
only indication.
Heart failure
may cause confusion, agitation, anorexia, weakness, insomnia, fatigue, weight loss, or
lethargy; patients may not report dyspnea. Orthopnea may cause nocturnal agitation in patients who also
have dementia. Peripheral edema is less specific as a sign of heart failure in elderly than in younger
patients. In bedbound patients, edema may occur in the sacral area rather than in the lower extremities.
Hyperparathyroidism
may cause nonspecific symptoms: fatigue, cognitive dysfunction, emotional
instability, anorexia, constipation, and hypertension. Characteristic symptoms are often absent.
Hyperthyroidism
may not cause the characteristic signs (eg, eye signs, enlarged thyroid gland).
Instead, symptoms and signs may be subtle and may include tachycardia, weight loss, fatigue, weakness,
palpitations, tremor, atrial fibrillation, and heart failure. Patients may appear apathetic rather than
hyperkinetic.
Hypothyroidism
may manifest subtly in elderly patients. The most common symptoms are nonspecific
(eg, fatigue, weakness, falling). Anorexia, weight loss, and arthralgias may occur. Cold intolerance, weight
gain, depression, paresthesias, hair loss, and muscle cramps are less common than among younger
patients; cognitive dysfunction is more common. The most specific sign—delayed tendon reflex relaxation
—may not be detectable in elderly patients because of decreased amplitude or absent reflexes.
Meningitis
may cause fever and a change in mental status without symptoms of meningeal irritation (eg,
headache, nuchal rigidity).
[Table 307-7.
Geriatric Depression Scale (Short Form)]
MI
may manifest as diaphoresis, dyspnea, epigastric distress, syncope, weakness, vomiting, or confusion
rather than as chest pain. After the onset of chest pain or other presenting symptoms of MI, elderly
patients tend to delay longer than younger patients in seeking medical assistance.
Peptic ulcer disease
may not cause characteristic ulcer symptoms; pain may be absent, nonspecific, or
masked by NSAIDs. Dyspepsia (usually epigastric discomfort with bloating, nausea, or early satiety) is
more common among elderly than among younger patients. Elderly patients have more frequent, more
severe GI bleeding, which may be painless. Slow, unrecognized blood loss may occur, resulting in severe
anemia.
Pneumonia
may be indicated by malaise, anorexia, or confusion. Tachycardia and tachypnea are
===PAGE:3289===
common, but fever may be absent. Coughing may be mild and without copious, purulent sputum,
especially in dehydrated patients.
TB
may manifest differently in elderly patients with coexisting disorders. Symptoms may be nonspecific
(eg, fever, weakness, confusion, anorexia). Pulmonary TB may manifest with fewer respiratory symptoms
(eg, cough, excessive sputum production, hemoptysis) than in younger patients.
UTIs
may be present in afebrile elderly patients. These patients may not report dysuria, frequency, or
urgency but may experience dizziness, confusion, anorexia, fatigue, or weakness.
Other problems
that manifest differently in the elderly include alcohol abuse, adverse drug effects,
alcohol abuse, depression, pulmonary embolism, systemic infections, and unstable angina.
===PAGE:3290===
Chapter 308. Drug Therapy in the Elderly
Introduction
Prevalence of prescription drug use among ambulatory adults increases substantially with age. Among
people ≥ 65, 90% use at least 1 drug per week, > 40% use at least 5 different drugs per week, and 12%
use ≥ 10 different drugs per week. Women take more drugs, particularly psychoactive and arthritis drugs.
Drug use is greatest among the frail elderly, hospitalized patients, and nursing home residents; typically, a
nursing home resident is given 7 to 8 different drugs on a regular basis.
Providing safe, effective drug therapy for the elderly is challenging for many reasons:
• They use more drugs than any other age group, increasing risk of adverse effects and making
adherence difficult.
• They are more likely to have chronic disorders that affect drug response.
• Their physiologic reserves are reduced and can be further reduced by acute and chronic disorders.
• Aging alters pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics.
• They may be less able to obtain or afford drugs.
There are 2 main approaches to optimizing drug therapy in the elderly:
• Using appropriate drugs as indicated to maximize effectiveness
• Avoiding adverse drug effects
Because the risk of adverse drug effects is high, overprescribing has been targeted as a major problem in
the treatment of the elderly. However, underprescribing appropriate drugs must also be avoided.
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetics ( is best defined as what the body does to the drug; it includes absorption,
distribution across body compartments, metabolism, and excretion.
With aging, the metabolism and excretion of many drugs decrease, requiring that doses of some drugs be
adjusted. Toxicity may develop slowly because levels of chronically used drugs tend to increase for about
5 to 6 half-lives. For example, certain benzodiazepines (diazepam, flurazepam, chlordiazepoxide) have
half-lives of up to 96 h in many elderly patients; signs of toxicity may not appear until days or weeks after
therapy is started.
Absorption:
Despite an age-related decrease in small-bowel surface area, slowed gastric emptying, and
an increase in gastric pH, changes in drug absorption tend to be clinically inconsequential for most drugs.
Distribution:
With aging, body fat generally increases, and total body water decreases. Increased fat
increases the volume of distribution for highly lipophilic drugs (eg, diazepam) and may increase their
elimination half-lives.
Serum albumin decreases and
α
1-acid glycoprotein increases with age, but the clinical effect of these
changes on serum drug binding is unclear. In patients with an acute disorder or undernutrition, rapid
reductions in serum albumin may enhance drug effects because serum levels of unbound drug may
increase (eg, with phenytoin or warfarin).
Hepatic metabolism:
Overall hepatic metabolism of many drugs through the cytochrome P-450 enzyme
system decreases with age. For drugs with decreased hepatic metabolism (see
Table 308-1
), clearance typically decreases 30 to 40%. Theoretically, maintenance drug doses should be
===PAGE:3291===
decreased by this percentage; however, rate of drug metabolism varies greatly from person to person,
and individual titration is required.
Hepatic clearance of drugs with multistage metabolism (nonsynthetic and synthetic reactions) is more
likely to be prolonged in the elderly (see also Metabolism . Usually, age does not greatly affect
clearance of drugs that are metabolized by conjugation, typically with glucuronic acid.
Renal elimination:
After age 30, creatinine clearance decreases an average of 8 mL/min/1.73
m
/decade; however, the age-related decrease varies substantially from person to person. Serum
creatinine levels often remain within normal limits despite a decrease in GFR because the elderly
generally have less muscle mass and thus produce less creatinine. Decreases in tubular function parallel
those in glomerular function.
These changes decrease renal elimination of some drugs (see
Table 308-1
). Clinical implications depend
on the extent that renal elimination contributes to total systemic elimination and on the drug's therapeutic
index
[Table 308-1.
Effect of Aging on Drug Metabolism* and Elimination]
(ratio of maximum tolerated dose to minimum effective dose). Creatinine clearance (measured or
estimated using computer programs or a formula, such as Cockcroft-Gault— is used to guide
drug dosing. Because renal function is dynamic, maintenance doses of drugs should be adjusted when
patients become ill or dehydrated or have recently recovered from dehydration.
Pharmacodynamics
Pharmacodynamics is defined as what the drug does to the body or the response of the body to the drug;
it is affected by receptor binding, postreceptor effects, and chemical interactions (. In the
elderly, the effects of similar drug concentrations at the site of action (sensitivity) may be greater or
smaller than those in younger people (see
Table 308-2
). Differences may be due to changes in drug-receptor interaction, in post-receptor events, or
in adaptive homeostatic responses and, among frail patients, are often due to pathologic changes in
organs.
Elderly patients are particularly sensitive to anticholinergic drug effects. Many drugs (eg, tricyclic
antidepressants, most nonselective antihistamines, some antipsychotic drugs, antiparkinsonian drugs with
atropine-like activity, many OTC hypnotics and cold preparations) are anticholinergic. The elderly, most
notably those with dementia, are particularly prone to CNS adverse effects of such drugs and may
become more confused and drowsy. Anticholinergic drugs also commonly cause constipation, urinary
retention (especially in elderly men with benign prostatic hyperplasia), blurred vision, orthostatic
hypotension, and dry mouth. Even in low doses, these drugs can increase risk of heat-stroke by inhibiting
diaphoresis.
Drug-Related Problems
Drug-related problems include
• Adverse effects
• Ineffectiveness
Adverse drug effects are effects that are unwanted, uncomfortable, or dangerous. Common examples are
oversedation, confusion, hallucinations, falls, and bleeding. Among ambulatory people ≥ 65, adverse drug
effects occur at a rate of about 50 events per 1000 person-years. Hospitalization rates due to adverse
drug effects are 4 times higher in elderly patients (≈ 17%) than in younger patients (4%).
Reasons for Drug-Related Problems
===PAGE:3292===
Adverse drug effects can occur in any patient, but certain characteristics of the elderly make them more
susceptible. For example, the elderly often take many drugs (polypharmacy) and have age-related
changes in pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics; both increase the risk of adverse effects.
At any age, adverse drug effects may occur when drugs are prescribed and taken appropriately; eg, newonset allergic reactions are not predictable or preventable. However, adverse effects are thought to be
preventable in almost 90% of cases in the elderly (compared with only 24% in younger patients). Certain
drug classes are commonly involved. In nursing home patients, preventable adverse drug effects
commonly result from use of atypical antipsychotics, warfarin, antidepressants, and sedative-hypnotics. In
community-dwelling elderly, the most common causes are hypoglycemic drugs, NSAIDs, and
benzodiazepines.
In the elderly, a number of common reasons for adverse drug effects, ineffectiveness, or both are
preventable (see
Table 308-3
). Several of these reasons involve inadequate communication with patients or among health
care practitioners (particularly during health care transitions).
Inappropriate drugs:
A drug is inappropriate if its potential for harm is greater than its potential for
benefit. Inappropriate use of a drug may involve
• Choice of an unsuitable drug, dose, frequency of dosing, or duration of therapy
• Duplication of therapy
• Failure to consider drug interactions and correct indications for a drug
• Appropriate drugs that are mistakenly continued once an acute condition resolves (as may happen when
patients move from one health care setting to another)
Adverse effects of inappropriate drugs account for about 3% of emergency department visits for patients
≥ 65; anticoagulants, anti-platelet drugs, drugs used to treat diabetes, and drugs with a narrow
therapeutic index account for about half, and 3 drugs—warfarin, digoxin, and insulin—account for about
one third. Thus, some classes of drugs are of special concern in the elderly (. Some are so
problematic that they should be avoided in the elderly; others can be used with increased caution. The
Beers Criteria (see
Table 308-5
) lists inappropriate drugs for the elderly by drug class; other similar lists are available.
However, there is no similar list of drugs that should be used in the elderly; clinicians must weigh benefits
and risks of therapy in each patient.
Despite the Beers and other criteria, inappropriate drugs are still being prescribed for the elderly; typically,
about 20% of community-dwelling elderly use at least one inappropriate drug. In such patients, risk of
hospitalization is increased. In nursing home patients, inappropriate use increases risk of hospitalization
and death. In one study of hospitalized patients, 27.5% were given an inappropriate drug.
Some inappropriate drugs are available OTC; thus, clinicians should specifically question patients about
use of OTC drugs and tell patients about the potential problems such drugs can cause.
The elderly are often given drugs (typically, analgesics, H
blockers, hypnotics, or laxatives) for minor
symptoms (including adverse
[Table 308-2.
Effect of Aging on Drug Response]
[Table 308-3.
Preventable Causes of Drug-Related Problems]
effects of other drugs) that may be better treated nonpharmacologically. Using such drugs is often
inappropriate; benefit is low, and use increases cost and may lead to toxicity.
Solving the problem of inappropriate use in the elderly requires more than avoiding a short list of drugs
===PAGE:3293===
and noting drug categories of concern. A patient's entire drug regimen should also be assessed to
determine its potential benefit vs harm.
Overdosage:
An excessive dose of an appropriate drug may be prescribed for elderly patients if the
prescriber does not consider age-related changes that affect pharmacokinetics ( and
pharmacodynamics (. Doses of renally cleared drugs should be adjusted in patients with
renal impairment, which is common among the elderly.
Generally, doses should be lower in the elderly, although dose requirements vary considerably from
person to person. Typically, starting doses of about one third to one half the usual adult dose are
indicated when a drug has a low therapeutic index or when another condition may be exacerbated by a
drug. The dose is then titrated upward as tolerated to the desired effect. When the dose is increased,
patients should be evaluated for adverse effects, and drug levels should be monitored when possible.
Overdosage can also occur when drug interactions ( increase the amount of drug available
or when different practitioners prescribe a drug and are unaware that another practitioner prescribed the
same or a similar drug.
Underprescribing:
Appropriate drugs may be underprescribed—not used for maximum effectiveness.
Underprescribing may increase morbidity and mortality and reduce quality of life. Clinicians should use
adequate drug doses and, when indicated, multidrug regimens.
Drugs that are often underprescribed in the elderly include those used to treat depression, Alzheimer's
disease, pain (eg, opioids), heart failure, post-MI (
β
-blockers), atrial fibrillation (warfarin), hypertension,
and incontinence and drugs to prevent glaucoma, influenza, and pneumococcal infection.
•
Opioids:
Clinicians are often reluctant to prescribe opioids for elderly patients with cancer or other
types of chronic pain, typically because of concerns about adverse drug effects (eg, sedation,
constipation, delirium) and development of dependence. When opioids are prescribed, the doses are
often inadequate. Underprescribing opioids may mean that some elderly patients have needless pain
and discomfort; elderly patients are more likely to report inadequate pain management than younger
adults.
•
β
-Blockers:
In patients with a history of MI, even in elderly patients at high risk of complications (eg,
those with heart failure, pulmonary disorders, or diabetes mellitus), these drugs reduce mortality rates.
•
Antihypertensives:
Guidelines for treating hypertension (including isolated systolic hypertension) in
the elderly are available, and treatment appears to be beneficial (reducing risk of stroke and major
cardiovascular
events). Nonetheless, studies indicate that hypertension is often not controlled in elderly
patients.
•
Drugs for Alzheimer's disease:
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and NMDA (
Nmethyl-D-aspartate)
antagonists have been shown to benefit patients with Alzheimer's disease. The amount of benefit is
unclear, but patients and family members should be given the opportunity to make an informed decision
about their use.
In elderly patients with a chronic disorder, acute or unrelated disorders may be under-treated (eg,
hypercholesterolemia may be untreated in patients with emphysema). Clinicians may withhold these
treatments because of concern about increasing the risk of adverse effects. Clinicians may think that
treatment of the primary problem is all patients can or want to handle or that patients cannot afford the
additional drugs.
Drug-disease interactions:
A drug given to treat one disease can exacerbate another disease
regardless of patient age, but such interactions are of special concern in the elderly, who are more likely
to have multiple disorders. Distinguishing often subtle adverse drug effects from the effects of disease is
difficult (see
Table 308-4
) and may lead to a prescribing cascade.
===PAGE:3294===
A
prescribing cascade
occurs when the adverse effect of a drug is misinterpreted as a symptom or sign
of a new disorder and a new drug is prescribed to treat it. The new, unnecessary drug may cause
additional adverse effects, which may then be misinterpreted as yet another disorder and treated
unnecessarily, and so on.
Many drugs have adverse effects that resemble symptoms of disorders common among the elderly or
changes due to aging. The following are examples:
•
Antipsychotics
may cause symptoms that resemble Parkinson's disease. In elderly patients, these
symptoms may be diagnosed as Parkinson's disease and treated, possibly leading to adverse effects
from the antiparkinson drugs (eg, orthostatic hypotension, delirium).
•
Cholinesterase inhibitors
(eg, donepezil) may be prescribed for patients with dementia. These drugs
may cause diarrhea or urinary incontinence. Patients may then be prescribed an anticholinergic drug
(eg, oxybutynin). Thus, an unnecessary drug is added, increasing the risk of adverse drug effects and
drug-drug interactions. A better strategy is to reduce the dose of the cholinesterase inhibitor or consider
a different treatment for dementia (eg, memantine) with a different mechanism of action.
In elderly patients, prescribers should always consider the possibility that a new symptom or sign is due
to drug therapy.
Drug-drug interactions:
Because the elderly often take many drugs, they are particularly vulnerable to
drug-drug interactions. The elderly also frequently use medicinal herbs and other dietary supplements
( and may not tell their physician. Medicinal herbs can interact with prescribed drugs and
lead to adverse effects. For example, ginkgo biloba extract taken with warfarin can increase risk of
bleeding, and St. John's wort taken with an SSRI can increase risk of serotonin syndrome. Therefore,
physicians should ask patients specifically about dietary supplements, including medicinal herbs and
vitamin supplements.
Drug-drug interactions in the elderly differ little from those in the general population. However, induction
of cytochrome P-450 drug metabolism by certain drugs (eg, dichloralphenazone, glutethimide, rifampin)
may be decreased in the elderly; therefore, the change (increase) in drug metabolism may be less
pronounced in the elderly. Concurrent use of ≥ 1 drug with similar toxicity can increase risk or severity of
adverse effects.
Inadequate monitoring:
Monitoring drug use involves
• Documenting the indication for a new drug
• Keeping a current list of drugs used by the patient in medical records
• Monitoring for achievement of therapeutic goals and other responses to new drugs
• Monitoring necessary laboratory tests for efficacy or adverse effects
• Periodically reviewing drugs for continued need
Such measures are especially important for elderly patients. Lack of close monitoring, especially after
new drugs are prescribed, increases risk of adverse effects and ineffectiveness. Criteria to facilitate
monitoring have been developed by the Health Care Financing Administration expert consensus panel as
part of drug utilization review criteria. The criteria focus on inappropriate dosage or duration of therapy,
duplication of therapy, and possible drug-drug interactions.
Poor communication:
Poor communication of medical information at transition points (from one health
care setting to another) causes up to 50% of all drug errors and
[Table 308-4.
Drug-Disease Interactions in the Elderly]
===PAGE:3295===
up to 20% of adverse drug effects in the hospital. When patients are discharged from the hospital, drug
regimens that were started and needed only in the hospital (eg, benzodiazepines, stool softeners,
antacids) may be unnecessarily continued by another prescriber, who is reluctant to communicate with
the previous prescriber. Conversely, at admission to a health care facility, lack of communication may
result in unintentional omission of a necessary maintenance drug.
Lack of patient adherence:
Drug effectiveness is often compromised by lack of patient adherence
among the ambulatory elderly. Adherence is affected by many factors but not by age per se. Up to half of
elderly patients do not take drugs as directed, usually taking less than prescribed (underadherence).
Causes are similar to those for younger adults (. In addition, the following contribute:
• Financial and physical constraints, which may make purchasing drugs difficult
• Dementia, which may make taking drugs as instructed difficult
• Use of multiple drugs
• Use of drugs that must be taken several times a day
• Lack of understanding about what a drug is intended to do
A regimen using too frequent dosing, multiple drugs, or both may be too complicated for patients to follow.
Clinicians should assess patients' ability to adhere to a drug regimen (eg, dexterity, hand strength,
cognition, vision) and try to accommodate their limitations—eg, by arranging for or recommending easyaccess containers, drug labels and instructions in large type, containers equipped with reminder alarms,
containers filled based on daily drug needs, or reminder telephone calls. Pharmacists and nurses may
help by providing education and reviewing prescription instructions with elderly patients. Pharmacists may
be able to identify a problem by noting whether patients obtain refills on schedule or whether a
prescription seems illogical or incorrect.
Prevention
Before starting a new drug:
To reduce the risk of adverse drug effects in the elderly, clinicians should
do the following before starting a new drug:
• Consider nondrug treatment
• Document the indication for each new drug (to avoid using unnecessary drugs)
• Consider age-related changes in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and their effect on dosing
requirements
• Choose the safest possible alternative (eg, for noninflammatory arthritis, acetaminophen instead of an
NSAID)
• Check for potential drug-disease and drug-drug interactions
• Start with a low dose
• Use the fewest drugs necessary
• Note coexisting disorders and their likelihood of contributing to adverse drug effects
• Explain the uses and adverse effects of each drug
• Provide clear instructions to patients about how to take their drugs (including generic and brand names,
spelling of each drug name, indication for each drug, and explanation of formulations that contain more
than one drug)
===PAGE:3296===
• Anticipate confusion due to sound-alike drug names and pointing out any names that could be confused
(eg, Glucophage and Glucovance)
After starting a drug:
The following should be done after starting a drug:
• Assume a new symptom may be drug-related until proved otherwise (to prevent a prescribing cascade)
• Monitor patients for signs of adverse drug effects, including measuring drug levels and doing other
laboratory tests as necessary
• Document the response to therapy and increase doses as necessary to achieve the desired effect
Ongoing:
The following should be ongoing:
• Keep a current list of drugs (including OTC and dietary supplements) and periodically review it
• Evaluate the adverse effect profile for each drug
• Encourage patients to be responsible for and involved in adherence to their drug regimen
• At each move to another health care setting, review the drug list with the patient or a family member
• Use multidisciplinary interventions, including a pharmacist, as patients move from one health care
setting to another
• Ensure clear, correct, and complete transfer of information when patients move from one health care
setting to another
Medication reconciliation
is a process that helps ensure transfer of information about drug regimens at
any transition point in the health care system. The process includes identifying and listing all drugs
patients are taking (name, dose, frequency, route) and comparing the resulting list with the physician's
orders at a transition point. Medication reconciliation should occur at each move (admission, transfer, and
discharge).
Computerized physician ordering programs
can alert clinicians to potential problems (eg, allergy,
need for reduced dosage in patients with impaired renal function, drug-drug interactions). These
programs can also cue clinicians to monitor certain patients closely for adverse drug effects.
Drug Categories of Concern
Some drug categories (eg, analgesics, anticoagulants, antihypertensives, antiparkinsonian drugs,
diuretics, hypoglycemic drugs, psychoactive drugs) pose special risks for elderly patients. Some, although
reasonable for use in younger adults, are so risky as to be considered inappropriate for the elderly. The
Beers Criteria are most commonly used to identify such inappropriate drugs (see
Table 308-5
). The Zhan
expert panel further categorized some inappropriate drugs from the Beers Criteria into 3 groups:
• Always to be avoided
• Rarely appropriate
• Sometimes indicated but often misused
Analgesics:
NSAIDs are used by > 30% of people aged 65 to 89, and half of all NSAID prescriptions are
for people > 60. Several NSAIDs are available without prescription.
The elderly may be prone to adverse effects of these drugs, and adverse effects may be more severe
because of the following:
===PAGE:3297===
• NSAIDs are highly soluble in lipids, and because adipose tissue increases with age, distribution of the
drugs is extensive.
• Plasma protein is often decreased, resulting in higher levels of unbound drug and exaggerated
pharmacologic effects.
• Renal function is reduced in many of the elderly, resulting in decreased renal clearance and higher drug
levels.
Serious adverse effects include peptic ulceration and upper GI bleeding; risk is increased when an NSAID
is begun and when dose is increased. Risk of upper GI bleeding increases when NSAIDs are given with
warfarin, aspirin, or other antiplatelet drugs (eg, clopidogrel). NSAIDs may increase risk of cardiovascular
events and can cause fluid retention and, rarely, nephropathy.
NSAIDs can also increase BP; this effect may be unrecognized and lead to intensification of
antihypertensive treatment (a prescribing cascade). Thus, clinicians should keep this effect in mind when
BP increases in elderly patients and ask them about their use of NSAIDs, particularly OTC NSAIDs.
Selective COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2) inhibitors (coxibs) cause less GI irritation and platelet inhibition than
other NSAIDs. Nonetheless, coxibs have a risk of GI bleeding, especially for patients taking warfarin or
aspirin (even at a low dose) and for those who have had GI events. Coxibs, as a class, appear to
increase risk of cardiovascular events, but risk may vary by drug; they should be used cautiously. Coxibs
have renal effects comparable to those of other NSAIDs.
Lower-risk alternatives (eg, acetaminophen) should be used when possible. If NSAIDs are used in the
elderly, the lowest effective dose should be used, and continued need should be reviewed frequently. If
NSAIDs are used long-term, serum creatinine and BP should be monitored closely, especially in patients
with other risk factors (eg, heart failure, renal impairment, cirrhosis with ascites, volume depletion, diuretic
use).
Anticoagulants:
Aging may increase sensitivity to the anticoagulant effect of warfarin. Careful dosing
and scrupulous monitoring can largely overcome the increased risk of bleeding in elderly patients taking
warfarin. Also, because drug interactions with warfarin are common, closer monitoring is necessary when
new drugs are added or old ones are stopped; computer drug interaction programs should be consulted if
patients take multiple drugs.
Antidepressants:
Tricyclic antidepressants are effective but should rarely be used in the elderly. SSRIs
and mixed serotonin/dopamine reuptake inhibitors are as effective as tricyclic antidepressants and cause
less toxicity; however, there are some concerns about some of these drugs:
• Fluoxetine: A possible disadvantage is the long elimination half-life, especially of its active metabolite.
• Paroxetine: This drug is more sedating than other SSRIs, has anticholinergic effects, and, like some
other SSRIs, can inhibit hepatic cytochrome P-450 2D6 enzyme activity, possibly impairing the
metabolism of several drugs, including some antipsychotics, antiarrhythmics, and tricyclic antidepressants.
• Sertraline: This drug is more activating; diarrhea is a common adverse effect.
Doses of these drugs should be reduced by up to 50%. Many SSRIs are available, but data on their use
in the elderly are sparse.
Antihyperglycemics:
Doses of antihyperglycemics should be titrated carefully in patients with diabetes
mellitus. Risk of hypoglycemia due to sulfonylureas may increase with age. Chlorpropamide is not
recommended because elderly patients are at increased risk of hyponatremia due to the syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) and because the drug's long duration of action is
dangerous if adverse effects or hypoglycemia occurs. Risk of hypoglycemia is greater with glyburide than
===PAGE:3298===
with other oral anti-hyperglycemics because like chlorpropamide, it is eliminated by the kidneys, and
clearance can be reduced when renal function is impaired.
Metformin, a biguanide excreted by the kidneys, increases peripheral tissue sensitivity to insulin and can
be effective given alone or with sulfonylureas. Risk of lactic acidosis, a rare but serious complication,
increases with degree of renal impairment and with patient age. Heart failure is a contraindication.
Antihypertensives:
In many elderly patients, lower starting doses of antihypertensives may be
necessary to reduce risk of adverse effects; however, for most elderly patients with hypertension,
achieving BP goals requires standard doses and multidrug
[Table 308-5.
High-Risk Drugs in the Elderly (Based on the Beers Criteria)]
therapy. Initially, a thiazide-type diuretic is usually given alone or with one of the other classes shown to
be beneficial (ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers,
β
-blockers, Ca channel blockers). Shortacting dihydropyridines (eg, nifedipine) may increase mortality risk and should not be used. Sitting and
standing BP can be monitored, particularly when multiple antihypertensives are used, to check for
orthostatic hypotension, which may increase risk of falls and fractures.
Antiparkinsonian drugs:
Levodopa clearance is reduced in elderly patients, who are also more
susceptible to the drug's adverse effects, particularly orthostatic hypotension and confusion. Therefore,
elderly patients should be given a lower starting dose of levodopa and carefully monitored for adverse
effects (see also p.
). Patients who become confused while taking levodopa may also not tolerate
newer dopamine agonists (eg, pramipexole, ropinirole). Because elderly patients with parkinsonism may
be cognitively impaired, anticholinergic drugs should be avoided.
Antipsychotics:
In nonpsychotic, agitated patients, antipsychotics control symptoms only marginally
better than placebos and can have severe adverse effects. Antipsychotics should be reserved for
psychosis.
When an antipsychotic is used, the starting dose should be about one quarter the usual starting adult
dose and should be increased gradually. Clinical trial data relating to dosing, efficacy, and safety of these
drugs in the elderly are limited.
Antipsychotics can reduce paranoia but may worsen confusion (see also p.
). Elderly patients,
especially women, are at increased risk of tardive dyskinesia, which is often irreversible. Sedation,
orthostatic hypotension, anticholinergic effects, and akathisia (subjective motor restlessness) can occur in
up to 20% of elderly patients taking an antipsychotic, and drug-induced parkinsonism can persist for up to
6 to 9 mo after the drug is stopped.
The FDA has issued a warning regarding the use of 2nd-generation (atypical) antipsychotics, once
thought to be safer, in the treatment of behavioral disorders in elderly patients with dementia; a review of
placebo-controlled studies has shown a higher mortality rate associated with their use. Extrapyramidal
dysfunction can develop when 2nd-generation antipsychotics (eg, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone)
are used, especially at higher doses. Risks and benefits of using an antipsychotic should be discussed
with the patient or the person responsible for the patient's care.
Anxiolytics and hypnotics:
Treatable causes of insomnia should be sought and managed before using
hypnotics (see also p.
). Nonpharmacologic measures and sleep hygiene (eg, avoiding caffeinated
beverages, limiting daytime napping, modifying bedtime) should be tried first. If they are ineffective,
nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics (eg, the imidazopyridines, alpidem and zolpidem) are options. These drugs
bind mainly to a benzodiazepine receptor subtype. Imidazopyridines disturb the sleep pattern less than
benzodiazepines and have a more rapid onset, fewer rebound effects, fewer next-day effects, and less
potential for dependence. Short- or intermediate-acting benzodiazepines with half-lives of < 24 h (eg,
alprazolam, lorazepam, oxazepam, temazepam) are preferable to long-acting benzodiazepines but may
have adverse effects, including those that lead to falls and fractures.
Longer-acting benzodiazepines (eg, clonazepam, diazepam, flurazepam) should be avoided because they
===PAGE:3299===
have active metabolites, are likely to accumulate, and have adverse effects (eg, drowsiness, impaired
memory, impaired balance leading to falls and fractures).
Duration of anxiolytic or hypnotic therapy should be limited if possible because tolerance and
dependence may develop; withdrawal may lead to rebound anxiety or insomnia.
Antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine) are not recommended as anxiolytics or hypnotics
because they have anticholinergic effects.
Buspirone, a partial serotonin agonist, can be effective for general anxiety disorder; elderly patients
tolerate doses up to 30 mg/day well. The slow onset of anxiolytic action (up to 2 to 3 wk) can be a
disadvantage in urgent cases.
Digoxin:
Digoxin, a cardiac glycoside, is used to increase the force of myocardial contractions and to
treat supraventricular arrhythmias. However, it must be used with caution in patients with heart failure. In
men with heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction of ≤ 45%, serum digoxin levels > 0.8 ng/mL
are associated with increased mortality risk. Adverse effects are typically related to its narrow therapeutic
index. One study found digoxin to be beneficial in women when serum levels were 0.5 to 0.9 ng/mL but
possibly harmful when levels were ≥ 1.2 ng/mL. A number of factors increase the likelihood of digoxin
toxicity in the elderly. Renal impairment, temporary dehydration, and NSAID use (all common among the
elderly) can reduce renal clearance of digoxin. Furthermore, digoxin clearance decreases an average of
50% in elderly patients with normal serum creatinine levels. Also, if lean body mass is reduced, as may
occur with
aging, volume of distribution for digoxin is reduced. Therefore, starting doses should be low
(0.125 mg/day) and adjusted according to response and serum digoxin levels (normal range 0.8 to 2.0
ng/mL). However, serum digoxin level does not always correlate with likelihood of toxicity.
Diuretics:
Lower doses of thiazide diuretics (eg, hydrochlorothiazide or chlorthalidone 12.5 to 25 mg) can
effectively control hypertension in many elderly patients and have less risk of hypokalemia and
hyperglycemia than other diuretics (see also p.
). Thus, K supplements may be required less often.
K-sparing diuretics should be used with caution in the elderly; the K level must be carefully monitored,
particularly when these diuretics are given with ACE inhibitors.
===PAGE:3300===
Chapter 309. Prevention of Disease and Disability in the Elderly
Introduction
For the elderly, prevention focuses mainly on disease, frailty, accidents (ie, unintentional injury), iatrogenic
complications, and psychosocial problems. Not all elderly patients benefit from every preventive measure.
Choice of preventive measures is guided by the patient's general condition:
• Healthy: These elderly people have minimal or no chronic disease and are functionally independent.
Primary and secondary prevention of disease and prevention of frailty are the most beneficial measures
for this group.
• Chronically ill: These people typically have several noncurable but treatable diseases, are usually
functionally independent or minimally dependent, often take several prescription drugs, and
occasionally are hospitalized for exacerbations of their chronic diseases. Secondary and tertiary
prevention of disease and prevention of frailty are priorities, as are primary prevention of disease and
prevention of iatrogenic complications and accidents.
• Frail: These people typically have many severe chronic diseases, are functionally dependent, and have
lost their physiologic reserve. They are frequently hospitalized and institutionalized. For them,
prevention of accidents and iatrogenic complications is most important.
Some preventive measures apply to all elderly people. For example, exercise can help prevent frailty in
healthy or chronically ill elderly people. In frail elderly people, exercise can help preserve functional ability
and reduce the incidence of accidents. Influenza vaccination (yearly) and pneumococcal vaccination
(needed only once, except for patients at high risk) are effective, inexpensive, and associated with
minimal morbidity.
Patient and caregiver issues:
Healthy elderly people should visit their primary care physician at least
annually to ensure timely completion of primary and secondary disease prevention measures, including
screening (see
Tables 309-1
and
309-2
) and chemoprevention (eg, vaccination, aspirin—see
Table 309-3
). For more information, see recommendations for clinical preventive services from the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).
Medicare covers a comprehensive "Welcome to Medicare" preventive physical examination, which must
occur within 6 mo of Part B enrollment.
Regular exercise ( and a healthy diet (see
Table 309-4
) help prevent or postpone frailty and many diseases, as can other disease prevention
measures (see
Table 309-5
). Chronically ill patients should learn about their diseases and treatment plans, as should
their caregivers. Regular physician visits and prompt reporting of a change in symptoms can help reduce
severe disease exacerbations, which can lead to hospitalization and functional decline.
Caregivers of the frail elderly must work assiduously to prevent accidents by completing a home safety
checklist and correcting any potential problems that are identified. Caregivers should watch for even
subtle functional changes in elderly patients and promptly report any changes to a health care
practitioner. If a patient has multiple unmet needs, especially when coupled with functional decline, a
caregiver should consider seeking the care of a geriatric interdisciplinary team.
Prevention of Disease
Primary and Secondary Prevention
Primary prevention aims to stop disease before it starts, often by reducing or eliminating risk factors.
Primary prevention may include immunoprophylaxis (vaccinations), chemoprophylaxis, and behavioral
===PAGE:3301===
change (eg, via counseling). In secondary prevention, disease is detected and treated at an early stage,
before symptoms or functional losses occur, thereby minimizing morbidity and mortality.
Screening can be a primary or secondary preventive measure; it can be used to detect risk factors, which
may be altered to prevent disease, or to detect disease in asymptomatic people, who can then be treated
early.
[Table 309-1.
Screening Recommendations for Elderly Patients]
Tertiary Prevention
In tertiary prevention, an existing symptomatic, usually chronic disease is appropriately managed to
prevent further functional loss. Disease management is enhanced by using disease-specific practice
guidelines and protocols. Several disease management programs have been developed:
• Disease-specific care management: A specially trained nurse, working with a primary care physician or
geriatrician, coordinates protocol-driven care, arranges support services, and teaches patients.
• Chronic care clinics: Patients with the same chronic disease are taught in groups and are visited by a
health care practitioner; this approach can help patients with diabetes achieve better glucose control.
• Specialists: Patients with a chronic disease that is difficult to stabilize can be referred to a specialist.
This approach works best when the specialist and primary care physician work collaboratively.
Patients with the following chronic disorders, which are common among the elderly, can potentially benefit
from tertiary prevention.
Arthritis:
Arthritis (primarily osteoarthritis; much less commonly, RA) affects about half of people ≥ 65. It
leads to impaired mobility and increases risk of osteoporosis, aerobic and muscular deconditioning, falls,
and pressure ulcers.
Osteoporosis:
Tests to measure bone density can detect osteoporosis before it leads to a fracture. Ca
and vitamin D supplementation, exercise, and, if needed, cessation of cigarette smoking can help prevent
osteoporosis from progressing, and treatment can prevent new fractures.
Diabetes:
Hyperglycemia, especially when the glycosylated hemoglobin (Hb A
1c
) concentration is >
7.9%, increases the risk of retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy, and coronary artery disease. The goal
of treatment is an Hb A
1c
concentration of < 8% for frail diabetic patients and an even lower
[Table 309-2.
Cancer Screening Recommendations for Elderly Patients]
[Table 309-3.
Chemoprevention and Immunization for Elderly Patients]
[Table 309-4.
Nutritional Recommendations for Prevention of Frailty]
concentration (< 7%) for patients who are not frail or who have a remaining life expectancy > 7 yr.
Patient education and foot examinations at each visit can help prevent foot ulcers.
Vascular disorders:
Elderly patients with a history of coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease,
or peripheral vascular disease are at high risk of disabling events. Risk can be reduced by aggressive
management of vascular risk factors (eg, hypertension, smoking, diabetes, obesity, atrial fibrillation,
dyslipidemia).
Heart failure:
Morbidity due to heart failure is significant among the elderly, and the mortality rate is
higher than that of many cancers. Appropriate, aggressive treatment, especially of systolic dysfunction,
reduces functional decline, hospitalization, and mortality rate.
===PAGE:3302===
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD):
Smoking cessation, appropriate use of inhalers and
other drugs, and patient education regarding energy-conserving behavioral techniques can decrease the
number and severity of exacerbations of COPD leading to hospitalization.
Prevention of Frailty
Frailty is loss of physiologic reserve, which makes people susceptible to disability due to minor stresses.
Common features of frailty include weakness, weight loss, muscle wasting (sarcopenia), exercise
intolerance, frequent falls, immobility, incontinence, and frequent exacerbations of chronic diseases.
Exercise ( and a healthy diet (see
Table 309-4
) are recommended for preventing or reducing
frailty. Elderly people who engage in regular aerobic exercise (eg, walking, swimming, running) increase
their life expectancy and have less functional decline than those who are sedentary. Mood and possibly
cognitive function may also be improved. Weight training can help increase bone mass and reduce risk of
falls and fractures. A healthy diet may prevent or reduce risk of many diseases that contribute to frailty,
including breast and colon cancers,
[Table 309-5.
Lifestyle Measures that Help Prevent Common Chronic Diseases]
osteoporosis, obesity, and undernutrition; morbidity and mortality may also be reduced.
Prevention of Injuries
Falls:
The elderly are vulnerable to injury due to falls (. A falls prevention program should be
implemented for people who are at high risk of falls or who have already fallen.
Driving hazards:
All elderly people should be reminded to use lap and shoulder belts and to refrain from
driving when they are under the influence of alcohol or psychoactive drugs.
For the elderly, risk of injuring themselves and others while driving is higher than that for younger adults
because of age-associated changes and conditions common among the elderly. Driving ability should be
investigated with further questions and, if indicated, with formal assessment for any of the following:
• Poor visual acuity
• Dementia
• Functionally significant impairment of neck or trunk movement
• Poor motor coordination
• Bradykinesia
Also, a family member's or friend's concern about the patient's driving ability should prompt further inquiry
and assessment.
Formal assessment of driving ability can be done by an occupational therapist (. Many states
have laws that mandate physician reporting of suspected impaired drivers. Sensitivity is required when a
health care practitioner must recommend cessation of driving because such a recommendation threatens
autonomy.
Home hazards:
The home may have many hazards. For example, people with peripheral neuropathy are
at increased risk of burns from excessively hot water; burns can be prevented
by setting the hot water
heater temperature at < 49° C. For people with dementia, using electrical and gas appliances is
particularly dangerous; use of alarms and automatic shutoff features on appliances can help. Smoke and
carbon monoxide detectors should be installed and maintained. Firearms should be safely stored or
removed from the home.
===PAGE:3303===
All patients or their caregivers can complete a home safety checklist to identify hazards. Physical and
occupational therapists may visit a patient's home to assess its safety.
Prevention of Iatrogenic Complications
Iatrogenic complications are more common and may be more severe among the elderly than among
younger patients. These complications include adverse drug effects (eg, interactions), falls, nosocomial
infections, pressure ulcers, delirium, and complications related to surgery. Prevention is often possible.
Risk Factors
The first step in prevention is to identify patients at high risk. Risk factors include the following.
Multiple chronic diseases:
The greater the number of chronic diseases, the greater the risk that
treatment of one disease will exacerbate others. For example, treatment of arthritis with an NSAID may
exacerbate heart failure, coronary artery disease, or chronic gastritis.
Multiple physicians:
Having multiple physicians can result in uncoordinated care and polypharmacy.
Consultation among multiple physicians every time one of them sees a common patient is difficult. As a
result, a patient's therapeutic regimen is frequently changed without the input of the patient's other
physicians, thereby increasing risk of iatrogenic complications.
Multiple drugs (polypharmacy) and inappropriate drugs:
Taking multiple drugs concurrently and
having multiple chronic diseases markedly increase risk of adverse drug-drug or drug-disease
interactions (. Risk of such interactions is particularly high among patients who are
undernourished or who have renal failure. Also, certain drugs have an especially high risk of adverse
effects in the elderly (.
Hospitalization:
Risks due to hospitalization include hospital-acquired infection, polypharmacy, and
transfusion reactions. Hospitalized patients who have dementia or who are immobilized (eg, after surgery)
are at high risk of iatrogenic complications.
Medical technology may contribute to iatrogenic complications, including sudden death or MI after
valvular replacement surgery, stroke after carotid endarterectomy, fluid overload after transfusions and
infusions, unwanted prolongation of life via artificial life support, and hypoxic encephalopathy after
potentially life-prolonging CPR.
Prevention
Interventions that can prevent iatrogenic complications include the following.
Care management:
Care managers facilitate communication among health care practitioners, ensure
that needed services are provided, and prevent duplication of services. Care managers may be employed
by physician groups, health plans, or community or governmental organizations. The frail elderly benefit
the most from case management.
Geriatric interdisciplinary team:
A geriatric interdisciplinary team ( evaluates all of the
patient's needs, develops a coordinated care plan, and manages (or, along with the primary care
physician, co-manages) care. Because this intervention is resource-intensive, it is best reserved for very
complex cases.
Pharmacist consultation:
A pharmacist can help prevent potential complications caused by
polypharmacy and inappropriate drug use.
Acute Care for the Elderly (ACE) units:
These units are hospital wards with protocols to ensure that
elderly patients are thoroughly evaluated for potential iatrogenic problems before problems occur and that
such problems are identified and appropriately managed.
===PAGE:3304===
Advance directives:
Patients are encouraged to prepare advance directives, including designation of a
proxy to make medical decisions (. These documents can help prevent unwanted treatment
for critically ill patients who cannot speak for themselves.
Prevention of Psychosocial Problems
Depression screening is recommended because depression is common among the elderly. Screening is
relatively easy; several instruments do not require a physician for administration. For patients who feel
lonely or isolated, social worker assistance to increase social contacts may prevent morbidity and
postpone death. For those who are depressed, appropriate
intervention with counseling or drugs is
warranted.
A sense of self-worth may contribute to better health. Patients should be encouraged to remain
productive, engage in leisure activities, and remain or become involved with other people. These actions
can enhance self-worth. Suggesting activities that confirm a sense of social connectedness, such as
obtaining a pet, contributing to household chores, or doing volunteer work, may help prevent
psychosocial problems (and physical disability).
===PAGE:3305===
Chapter 310. Quality of Life and Therapeutic Objectives
Quality of life often depends on health and health care. However, health care practitioners, especially
when establishing therapeutic objectives, may underemphasize its importance to patients.
Health-Related Quality of Life
How health affects quality of life is variable and subjective. Health-related quality of life has multiple
dimensions, including the following:
• Absence of distressing physical symptoms (eg, pain, dyspnea, nausea, constipation)
• Emotional well-being (eg, happiness, absence of anxiety)
• Functional status (eg, capacity to do activities of daily living and higher-order functions, such as
pleasurable activities)
• Quality of close interpersonal relationships (eg, with family members)
• Participation in and enjoyment of social activities
• Satisfaction with medical and financial aspects of treatments
• Sexuality, body image, and intimacy
Influences:
Some of the factors that influence health-related quality of life (eg, institutionalization,
reduced life expectancy, cognitive impairment, disability, chronic pain, social isolation, functional status)
may be obvious to health care practitioners. Practitioners may need to ask about others (eg, nature and
quality of close relationships, cultural influences, religion, personal values, previous experiences with
health care). However, how factors affect quality of life cannot necessarily be predicted, and some factors
that cannot be anticipated may have effects.
Also, perspectives on quality of life can change. For example, after a stroke that caused severe disability,
patients may choose treatment (eg, life-saving surgery) to sustain a quality of life that they would have
considered poor or even unacceptable before the stroke.
Assessment
Barriers to assessment:
Assessing patients' perspectives on quality of life may be difficult for the
following reasons:
• Such an assessment is not always taught or emphasized sufficiently in traditional medical education.
• Quality of life is subjective, so decision models cannot be applied to individual patients.
• Assessing the patient's perspectives on quality of life takes time because it requires thoughtful
conversation between patient and health care practitioner.
Method:
Quality of life is best assessed by a direct interview with patients. During assessment,
practitioners should be careful not to reveal their own biases. Determining a patient's preferences is
usually possible; even patients with mild dementia or cognitive impairment can make their preferences
known when practitioners use simple explanations and questions. Having family members present when
discussing preferences of a patient with cognitive impairment is recommended.
Instruments that measure health-related quality of life can be useful in research studies for assessing
group trends but tend not to be useful clinically for assessing individual patients.
Therapeutic Objectives
===PAGE:3306===
Before a treatment or major diagnostic test is used, potential adverse effects should be weighed against
potential benefits in the context of the patient's individual desires and goals.
Potential adverse effects include the following:
• Complications
• Discomfort
•
Inconvenience
• Cost
• Need for additional tests or treatments
Potential benefits include the following:
• Cure
• Prolongation of life
• Slowing of disease progression
• Functional improvement
• Symptom relief
• Prevention of complications
When treatments are very likely to achieve benefits and very unlikely to have adverse effects, decisions
are relatively easy. However, assessing the relative importance of these quality of life factors to each
patient is important when treatments may have discordant effects. For example, aggressive cancer
therapy may prolong life but have severe adverse effects (eg, chronic nausea and vomiting, mouth ulcers)
that greatly reduce quality of life. In this case, the patient's preference for quality vs duration of life and
tolerance for risk and uncertainty help guide the decision whether to attempt cure, prolongation of life, or
palliation.
The patient's perspective on quality of life may also affect treatment decisions when different treatments
(eg, surgical vs drug treatment of severe angina or osteoarthritis) may have different efficacies, toxicities,
or both. Practitioners can help patients understand the expected consequences of various treatments,
enabling patients to make more informed decisions.
When predicting toxicities and benefits of various treatments, practitioners should use the patient's
individual clinical characteristics, rather than chronologic age alone. In general, the patient's chronologic
age is irrelevant when deciding among different treatments or therapeutic goals. However, life expectancy
may affect treatment choice. For example, patients with a limited life expectancy may not live long enough
to benefit from aggressive treatment of a slowly progressive disorder (eg, radical prostatectomy for a
localized, slow-growing prostate cancer). Nevertheless, quality of life is important regardless of life
expectancy. Thus, invasive treatments that may improve quality of life (eg, joint replacement, coronary
artery bypass surgery) should not be automatically rejected for patients with a limited life expectancy.
Regardless of the overall therapeutic goal, symptom relief should always be offered.
===PAGE:3307===
Chapter 311. Provision of Care
Introduction
Because the elderly tend to have multiple disorders and may have social or functional problems, they use
a disproportionately large amount of health care resources. In the US, they account for
• > 40% of acute hospital bed days
• > 30% of prescription and 40% of OTC drug purchases
• $329 billion or almost 44% of the national health budget
• > 75% of the federal health budget
The elderly are likely to see several health care practitioners and to move from one health care setting to
another. Providing consistent, integrated care across specific care settings, sometimes called continuity
of care, is thus particularly important for elderly patients. Communication among primary care physicians,
specialists, other health care practitioners, and patients and their family members is critical to ensuring
that patients receive appropriate care in all settings.
Health care settings:
Care may be delivered in the following settings:
•
Physician's office:
The most common reasons for visits are routine chronic problems, acute problems,
flare-ups of a chronic problem, preventive care, and presurgical or postsurgical evaluation.
•
Patient's home:
Home care ( is most commonly used after hospital discharge, but
hospitalization is not a prerequisite.
•
Long-term care facilities:
These facilities include assisted-living facilities, board-and-care facilities,
nursing homes, and life-care communities (. Whether patients require care in a long-term
care facility depends partly on the patient's wishes and needs and on the family's ability to meet the
patient's needs.
•
Day care facilities:
These facilities provide medical, rehabilitative, cognitive, and
social services
several hours a day for several days a week.
•
Hospitals:
Only seriously ill elderly patients should be hospitalized (. Hospitalization itself
poses risks to elderly patients because of confinement, immobility, diagnostic testing, and treatments.
•
Hospice:
Hospices provide care for the dying (. The goal is to alleviate symptoms and
keep people comfortable rather than to cure a disorder. Hospice care can be provided in the home, a
nursing home, or a separate inpatient facility.
In general, the lowest, least restrictive level of care suitable to a patient's needs should be used. This
approach conserves financial resources and helps preserve the patient's independence and functioning.
Geriatric Interdisciplinary Teams
Geriatric interdisciplinary teams consist of practitioners from different disciplines who provide coordinated,
integrated care with collectively set goals and shared resources and responsibilities.
Not all elderly patients need a geriatric interdisciplinary team. However, if patients have complex medical,
psychologic, and social needs, such teams are more effective in assessing patient needs and creating an
effective care plan than are practitioners working alone. For these patients, care is often best managed
by a geriatrician. Interdisciplinary care is not available everywhere.
Interdisciplinary teams aim to ensure the following:
===PAGE:3308===
• That patients move safely and easily from one care setting to another and from one practitioner to
another
• That the most qualified practitioner provides care for each problem
• That care is not duplicated
To create, monitor, or revise the care plan, interdisciplinary teams must communicate openly, freely, and
regularly. Core team members must collaborate, with trust and respect for the contributions of others, and
coordinate the care plan (eg, by delegating, sharing accountability, jointly implementing it). Team
members may work together at the same site, making communication informal and expeditious.
A team typically includes physicians, nurses, pharmacists, social workers, and sometimes a dietitian,
physical and occupational therapists, an ethicist, or a hospice physician. Team members should have
knowledge of geriatric medicine, familiarity with the patient, dedication to the team process, and good
communication skills.
To function effectively, teams need a formal structure. Teams should set deadlines for reaching their
goals, have regular meetings (to discuss team structure, process, and communication), and continuously
monitor their progress (using quality improvement measures). In general, team leadership should rotate,
depending on the needs of the patient; the key provider of care reports on the patient's progress. For
example, if the main concern is the patient's medical condition, a physician leads the meeting and
introduces the team to the patient and family members. The physician determines what medical
conditions a patient has, informs the team (including differential diagnoses), and explains how these
conditions affect care. The team's input is incorporated into medical orders. The physician must write
medical orders agreed on through the team process and discusses team decisions with the patient, family
members, and caregivers.
If a formally structured interdisciplinary team is not available or practical, a virtual team can be used. Such
teams are usually led by the primary care physician but can be organized and managed by an advanced
practice nurse, a care coordinator, or a case manager. The virtual team uses information technologies
(eg, handheld devices, email, video conferencing, teleconferencing) to communicate and collaborate with
team members in the community or within a health care system.
Patient and caregiver participation:
Practitioner team members must treat patients and caregivers as
active members of the team—eg, in the following ways:
• Patients and caregivers should be included in team meetings when appropriate.
• Patients should be asked to help the team set goals (eg, advance directives, end-of-life care).
• Patients and caregivers should be included in discussions of drug treatment, rehabilitation, dietary
plans, and other therapies.
• Patients should be asked what their ideas and preferences are; thus, if patients will not take a particular
drug or change certain dietary habits, care can be modified accordingly.
Patients and practitioners must communicate honestly to prevent patients from suppressing an opinion
and agreeing to every suggestion.
Caregivers, including family members, can help by identifying realistic and unrealistic expectations based
on the patient's habits
and lifestyle. Caregivers should also indicate what kind of support they can
provide.
Home Health Care
Usually, home health care is indicated when patients need monitoring, adjustment of drugs, dressing
===PAGE:3309===
changes, and limited physical therapy. Home health care is commonly used
• After hospital discharge (postacute care), although hospitalization is not a prerequisite, particularly for
the elderly
Home health care can also be used for
• Patients with conditions that require many days of hospitalization each year (medically complex care)
• Medically stable patients with severe functional impairment (long-term care)
Home health care is being increasingly used to meet the demand for long-term care. Home health care,
which can reduce nursing home placement of patients by 23%, is less expensive than institutional care
when home health aide and skilled care visits are scheduled appropriately.
Home health care is provided by agencies, which vary in ownership, size, location, and services. Some
are certified. To be certified, an agency must meet state licensing requirements and federal conditions for
participation in Medicare. Such agencies provide skilled nursing care under the direction of referring
physicians. Nurses provide services under the supervision of a physician, who consults with them as
changes in care are needed. Caring for patients at home requires communication among health care
practitioners to ensure that patients are maintaining function and are progressing as expected. The
patients or caregivers need to promptly report changes in the patient's condition to nurses or physicians
to ensure that patients are monitored appropriately.
Home health care may provide medical and nonmedical services (see
Table 311-1
).
Reimbursement:
Few patients with a serious, chronic disorder can afford full home care even though
most would prefer to remain at home. Medicare covers some home care services for patients who are
homebound, but it has certain requirements, which depend on the Medicare option chosen (.
Some private insurance companies cover some home health care services (eg, infusion services) for
patients who are not homebound.
For patients' care to be reimbursed by a third party, physicians must certify that home care is required
and, for Medicare, that patients meet Medicare requirements for home care. Medicare requires that home
health care agencies tell patients which services are reimbursable. Home care services that are delivered
are based on a detailed assessment (Outcome and Assessment Information Set [OASIS]) that is
completed by a registered nurse or therapist when the patient is admitted to Medicare. Third-party payers
are increasingly limiting personal services to control costs. Home health care agencies are directly
reimbursed by Medicare, Medicaid, or private insurers.
[Table 311-1.
Services that May be Provided in Home Health Care]
Day Care
Day care provides medical, rehabilitative, and cognitive support services several hours a day for several
days a week. All day care facilities provide certain core services: transportation, nutrition, and recreational
and social activity programs. In the US, there are only about 2,900 day care programs compared with >
16,000 nursing homes. Most day care programs are small, averaging 20 clients.
There are several models.
•
Day hospital:
This model emphasizes rehabilitation or intensive skilled care. It is designed for patients
recovering from an acute
condition (eg, stroke, amputation, fracture). Programs are usually limited in
duration (6 wk to 6 mo) and are costly because the ratio of staff members to patients is high.
•
Maintenance:
This model combines limited skilled care (screening for and monitoring of chronic
disorders) with physical exercise. Goals are to prevent deterioration, to maintain or improve the patient's
===PAGE:3310===
functional level for as long as possible, to improve self-image, to eliminate the monotony of daily life, to
prevent exacerbation of chronic disorders, and to prevent loneliness, isolation, and withdrawal.
Maintenance programs provide long-term care and are less costly than day hospital programs.
•
Social:
This model provides counseling, group therapy, and cognitive retraining. It may resemble a
typical senior citizens' center, which provides care to elderly people with various psychosocial needs, or
a mental health center, which provides care to elderly people with dementia or psychiatric disorders.
Programs are increasingly accepting patients who are in wheelchairs and those who are incontinent;
however, patients cannot be socially disruptive. Care may be long-term or limited in duration.
In addition to providing needed medical care, these facilities also provide respite care. By doing so, they
may help delay or avoid placement in a nursing home.
Reimbursement:
Medicare does not reimburse for day care services. Funds generally come from the
Older Americans Act, Medicaid waiver programs, long-term care insurance, and private funds. Some
centers use donated funds to subsidize transportation and a sliding-fee scale to match aid with the
patient's financial need.
Respite Care
Respite care is provision of temporary care by a substitute caregiver to provide relief to the regular
caretaker. Over 50% of US states have respite programs. Programs may be provided in different settings:
• In the home by respite care agencies or by home health care agencies
• In the community by adult day care centers, respite care cooperatives, or freestanding respite facilities
• In a long-term care facility (eg, by board-and-care facilities or nursing homes)
• In a hospital
Duration of care may vary (eg, limited to 28 days in a calendar year).
Support comes from Medicaid (almost 50%), grants (25%), and private funds (25%).
Hospital Care
A hospital may provide emergency medical care, diagnostic testing, intensive treatment, or surgery, which
may or may not require admission. The elderly use hospitals more than younger patients; they have more
admissions to the hospital from the emergency department and more and longer hospital stays, and they
use more resources while in the hospital.
Emergency Department Care
In 2006, about 14.5% of emergency department visits were made by people ≥ 65 yr. Elderly patients tend
to be sicker. More than 40% of elderly patients seen in an emergency department are admitted to the
hospital; 6% go to intensive care units. More than 50% are prescribed new drugs. The elderly may use
the emergency department as a substitute for primary care or may come because they are not receiving
adequate care from their primary care physician. However, in most cases, the reasons for coming are true
emergencies.
A visit to an emergency department may create more stress for the elderly because there are typically no
special accommodations for them (eg, quiet rooms, lower beds, extra pillows, indirect lighting).
Evaluation of the elderly usually takes longer and requires more diagnostic tests because many elderly
patients do not present with clear-cut or typical symptoms and signs of a disorder (. For
example, MI manifests as chest pain in < 50% of patients > 80 yr. Instead, elderly patients may complain
===PAGE:3311===
of feeling generally weak or just not feeling themselves.
Factors that are not apparent (eg, polypharmacy, adverse drug effects) may affect an elderly patient's
presentation. For example, a fall may result from elder abuse, an adverse drug effect (eg, oversedation),
hazards in the home, physical problems (eg, poor vision), depression, or chronic alcoholism. Adverse drug
effects account for at least 5% of hospital admissions for the elderly.
About 30 to 40% of elderly patients who come to the emergency department are cognitively impaired but
do not have a diagnosis of dementia; in 10%, cognitive impairment consistent with delirium is
unrecognized.
When indicated (eg, if an elderly patient is having difficulty with orientation to person,
place, or time), a standardized cognitive assessment should be done in the emergency department.
However, a standardized cognitive assessment is appropriate for any elderly patient coming to the
emergency department. Cognitive impairment affects the reliability of the patient history, as well as
diagnosis, and must be considered when planning the patient's disposition. Knowing whether onset of
cognitive impairment is recent helps determine whether the impairment should be fully assessed in the
emergency department. Cognitive impairment of recent onset may indicate sepsis, occult subdural
hemorrhage, or an adverse drug effect.
Suicide risk, incontinence, and nutritional and immunization status should be assessed in the emergency
department so that follow-up care can be arranged.
Communication among practitioners:
Good communication among emergency department physicians
and patients, caregivers, primary care physicians, and staff members of long-term care facilities greatly
enhances the outcome of elderly patients with complicated problems. Advance directives should be
promptly and clearly communicated to emergency medicine practitioners. Baseline information from the
patient's personal physician facilitates assessment and management planning in the emergency
department. Reports to the patient's primary care physician should describe even simple injuries (eg,
ankle sprain, Colles' wrist fracture) because such injuries can dramatically affect functional ability and
independence.
Disposition:
Discharge planning may be complex because acute illness or injury may impair functional
ability more in elderly patients (eg, a simple ankle sprain may be incapacitating unless patients have good
support at home). Discharge planning may be improved when nurses, social workers, and primary care
physicians are involved. It should include the following:
• Functional status assessment (
• Strategies to manage problems (eg, depression, alcoholism, impaired functional status) identified during
the emergency department assessment
• Determination of whether patients can take drugs as directed and can obtain the necessary follow-up
care
• Assessment of caregiver capabilities (eg, whether respite services are needed)
Many elderly patients are hospitalized after they are evaluated in the emergency department.
Occasionally, elderly patients are brought to the emergency department by a caregiver who refuses to
take them home or who leaves, abandoning them in the hospital.
Hospitalization
Almost half of adults who occupy hospital beds are ≥ 65 yr; this proportion is expected to increase as the
population ages. Hospital care costs Medicare > $100 billion/yr, representing 30% of health care
expenditures for hospital care in the US.
Hospitalization can magnify age-related physiologic changes and increase morbidity.
===PAGE:3312===
Only seriously ill elderly patients who cannot be appropriately cared for elsewhere should be hospitalized.
Hospitalization itself poses risks to elderly patients because it involves confinement, immobility, diagnostic
testing, and treatments (particularly changes in drug regimens). When patients are transferred to or from
a hospital, drugs are likely to be added or changed, leading to a higher risk of adverse effects (. Treatment in hospitals can be dehumanizing and impersonal. Acute hospital care should last only
long enough to allow successful transition to home care, a skilled nursing facility, or an out-patient
rehabilitation program.
The outcome of hospitalization appears to be poorer with increasing age, although physiologic age is a
more important predictor of outcome than is chronologic age. Outcome is better for patients hospitalized
because of elective procedures (eg, joint replacement) than for those hospitalized because of serious
disorders (eg, multisystem organ failure).
About 75% of patients who are ≥ 75 and functionally independent at admission are not functionally
independent when they are discharged; 15% of patients ≥ 75 are discharged to skilled nursing facilities.
The trend toward abbreviated acute hospital stays followed by subacute care and rehabilitation in a
skilled nursing facility may explain why these percentages are high. However, even when a disorder is
treatable or appears uncomplicated, patients may not return to prehospital functional status.
Improving outcomes:
The following strategies can help reduce functional decline and improve care of
elderly patients:
•
Geriatric interdisciplinary team:
To identify and meet the complex needs of elderly
patients and to
watch for and prevent problems that are common among the elderly and that may develop or worsen
during hospitalization (
•
Primary care nurse
(one nurse with around-the-clock responsibility for a particular patient): To
administer the team's care plan, to monitor response to nursing and medical care, and to teach and
counsel patients, staff members, and family members
•
Changes in the hospital environment, often made by nurses:
Eg, to move disruptive patients into
the hall near the nursing station or to change roommates for a patient
•
Rooming-in programs for a family member:
To provide better one-on-one care, to relieve staff
members of some caregiving tasks, to allay patient anxiety (particularly if patients have delirium or
dementia), and to enable a family member to participate actively in the patient's recovery
•
Good communication among practitioners:
To prevent errors in and duplication of diagnostic
procedures and treatments (particularly drugs)
•
Documentation of drug regimen:
To state the indication for each new drug, to maintain a daily list of
drugs prescribed and received, and thus to avoid using unnecessary drugs and help prevent drug
interactions
•
Advance directives:
To document the patient's choice of health care proxy and health care decisions
(
•
Consideration of problems common among the elderly:
To anticipate and take steps to prevent
such problems and to treat them promptly
•
Discharge planning:
To ensure that appropriate care is continued
Advance directives, if already prepared, should be brought to the hospital as soon as possible.
Practitioners should reaffirm these choices during acute hospitalization. If directives were not
documented, practitioners should make every effort to determine the patient's wishes.
Problems common among the elderly require specific consideration during hospitalization, particularly
after surgery (; many of them can be remembered using the acronym ELDERSS (see
===PAGE:3313===
Table 311-2
). In the hospital, elderly patients frequently experience nighttime confusion (sundowning),
fracture a bone with no identifiable trauma, fall, or become unable to walk. Hospitalization may precipitate
or worsen undernutrition, pressure ulcers, urinary incontinence, fecal impaction, and urinary retention.
Such problems can prolong convalescence.
[Table 311-2.
Elderss: Some Important Issues for the Hospitalized Elderly]
Adverse Drug Effects
Hospitalization rates due to adverse drug effects are 4 times higher for elderly patients (≈ 17%) than for
younger patients (4%). Reasons for these effects include polypharmacy, age-related changes in
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, and changes in drugs (intentional and unintentional) during
hospitalization and at discharge (see
Chapter 308
).
Prevention:
Maintaining a daily list of drugs prescribed and received can help prevent adverse drug
effects and drug interactions.
Because drug distribution, metabolism, and elimination vary widely among elderly patients, the following
should be done:
• Drug doses should be carefully titrated.
• Creatinine clearance for renally excreted drugs should be calculated when doses are adjusted.
• Serum drug levels should be measured.
• Patient responses should be observed.
Certain drugs or drug categories should be avoided in the elderly (. Use of hypnotic drugs
should be minimized because tachyphylaxis may occur and risk of falls and delirium is increased. Shortacting benzodiazepines are usually the best choice. Antihistamines have anticholinergic effects and
should not be used for sedation.
Bed Rest Effects
Prolonged bed rest, as can occur during hospitalization, causes deconditioning and is seldom warranted.
The resulting inactivity has the following effects:
• With complete inactivity, muscle strength decreases by 5% per day, increasing risk of falls.
• Muscles shorten and periarticular and cartilaginous joint structure changes (most rapidly in the legs),
limiting motion and contributing to development of contractures.
• Aerobic capacity decreases markedly, substantially reducing maximum O
uptake.
• Bone loss (demineralization) is accelerated.
• Risk of deep venous thrombosis is increased.
After even a few days of bed rest, elderly patients who have reduced physiologic reserves but can still
function independently may lose that ability. Even if the loss is reversible, rehabilitation requires
extensive, expensive, and relatively lengthy intervention.
In elderly patients, bed rest can cause vertebral bone loss 50 times faster than in younger patients. The
loss incurred from 10 days of bed rest takes 4 mo to restore.
Prevention:
Unless prohibited for a specific reason, activity (particularly walking) should be encouraged.
If assistance with walking is needed, therapists provide it at scheduled times. However, physicians,
===PAGE:3314===
nurses, and family members should also assist patients with walking throughout the day. Hospital orders
should emphasize the need for activity.
If immobilization is necessary or results from prolonged illness, procedures to prevent deep venous
thrombosis are recommended unless contraindicated.
Rehabilitation is often needed. Realistic goals for rehabilitation at home can be based on the patient's
prehospitalization activity level and current needs.
Falls
Age-related changes (eg, baroreceptor insensitivity, decreased body water and plasma volume) result in a
tendency to develop orthostatic hypotension. These changes plus effects of bed rest and use of
sedatives and certain antihypertensives increase risk of falls (and syncope).
Among hospitalized elderly patients, > 60% of falls occur in the bathroom; often, patients hit hard objects.
Some patients fall while getting out of hospital beds. Patients are in a strange bed and in a strange
environment, and they may easily become confused. The use of bed rails may help remind elderly
patients to call for assistance before attempting to get up, but bed rails may also act as a physical barrier
that contributes to patient falls.
Prevention:
Usually, bed rails should be removed or kept down. The best alternatives to the use of
physical or chemical restraints are to identify, carefully analyze, and modify or correct risk factors for
falling (including agitation) and to closely observe patients at risk.
Incontinence
Urinary or fecal incontinence develops in > 40% of hospitalized patients ≥ 65, often within a day of
admission. Reasons include
• An unfamiliar environment
• A cluttered path to the toilet
• Disorders that impair ambulation
• A bed that is too high
• Bed rails
• Hampering equipment such as IV lines, nasal oxygen lines, cardiac monitors, and catheters
• Psychoactive drugs that may reduce the perception of the need to void, inhibit bladder or bowel
function, or impair ambulation
• Drugs that may result in urinary incontinence (eg, anticholinergic drugs and opioids, causing overflow
urinary incontinence; diuretics, causing urge incontinence)
Bedpans may be uncomfortable, especially for postsurgical patients or patients with chronic arthritis.
Patients with dementia or a neurologic disorder may be unable to use the call bell to request toileting
assistance.
Fecal impaction, GI tract infection (eg,
Clostridium difficile
-induced colitis), adverse effects of drugs, and
liquid nutritional supplements may cause uncontrollable diarrhea.
With appropriate diagnosis and treatment, continence can be reestablished, and nursing home placement
avoided.
===PAGE:3315===
Mental Status Changes
Elderly patients may appear confused because they have dementia, delirium, depression, or a
combination. However, health care practitioners must always remember that confusion may have other
causes, and its presence requires thorough evaluation.
Confusion may be due to a specific disorder (see
Table 175-2
. However, it may develop because the hospital setting exacerbates the effects of
acute illness and age-related changes in cognition. For example, elderly patients who do not have their
eye-glasses
and hearing aids may become disoriented in a quiet, dimly lit hospital room. Patients may
also become confused by hospital procedures, schedules (eg, frequent awakenings in strange settings
and rooms), the effects of psychoactive drugs, and the stress of surgery or illness. In an ICU, the
constant light and noise can result in agitation, paranoid ideation, and mental and physical exhaustion.
Prevention:
Family members can be asked to bring missing eyeglasses and hearing aids. Placing a wall
clock, a calendar, and family photographs in the room can help keep patients oriented. The room should
be lit well enough to enable patients to recognize what and who is in their room and where they are. At
every opportunity, staff and family members should remind patients of the time and place. Procedures
should be explained before and as they are done.
Use of physical restraints is discouraged. For agitated patients, restraints invariably increase the level of
agitation. Identifying and modifying risk factors for agitation and closely observing patients can help
prevent or minimize it.
Pressure Ulcers
Pressure ulcers often develop in elderly hospitalized patients because of age-related changes in the skin.
Direct pressure may cause skin necrosis in as few as 2 h if the pressure is greater than the capillary
perfusion pressure of 32 mm Hg. During a typical emergency department visit, pressure ulcers can start
developing while elderly patients are lying on a hard stretcher waiting to be examined. After short periods
of immobilization, sacral pressures reach 70 mm Hg, and pressure under an unsupported heel averages
45 mm Hg. Shearing forces result when patients sitting in wheelchairs or propped up in beds slide
downward. Incontinence, poor nutrition, and chronic disorders may contribute to pressure ulcer
development.
Prevention:
A protocol to prevent and treat pressure ulcers should be started immediately, at admission
(. It should be followed daily by the patient's primary care nurse and reviewed at least weekly
by an interdisciplinary team. Pressure ulcers may be the only reason patients are discharged to a nursing
home rather than to the community.
Undernutrition
In the hospital, elderly patients can become undernourished quickly, or they may be undernourished when
admitted. Prolonged hospitalization exacerbates preexisting problems and often results in significant
nutritional loss. Undernutrition is particularly serious for hospitalized patients because it makes them less
able to fight off infection, maintain skin integrity, and participate in rehabilitation; surgical wounds may not
heal as well.
Hospitalization contributes to undernutrition in several ways:
• Rigidly scheduled meals, use of drugs, and changes in environment can affect appetite and nutritional
intake.
• Hospital food and therapeutic diets (eg, low-salt diets) are unfamiliar and often unappetizing.
• Eating in a hospital bed with a tray is difficult, particularly when bed rails and restraints limit movement.
• Elderly patients may need help with eating; help may be slow to come, resulting in cold, even less
===PAGE:3316===
appetizing food.
• The elderly may not drink enough water because their thirst perception is decreased, water is difficult to
reach, or both; severe dehydration may develop (sometimes leading to stupor and confusion).
• Dentures may be left at home or misplaced, making chewing difficult; labeling dentures helps prevent
them from being lost or discarded with the food tray.
Prevention:
Patients with preexisting nutritional abnormalities should be identified when admitted and be
treated appropriately. Physicians and staff members should anticipate nutritional deficiencies in elderly
patients.
The following measures can help:
• Rescinding restrictive dietary orders as soon as possible
• Monitoring nutritional intake daily
• Conferring with patients and family members about food preferences and attempting to tailor a
reasonable diet specific to each patient
• Encouraging family members to join the patient at mealtimes because people eat more when they eat
with others
• Making sure patients are fed adequately at all times (eg, temporary or permanent parenteral nutrition or
GI tube feedings for patients too sick to swallow)
• Giving explicit oral fluid orders (eg, providing a fresh and readily accessible bedside water pitcher or
other fluids unless fluids are restricted; advising family members, friends, and staff members to regularly
offer patients a drink)
Discharge Planning and Transfers
Early, effective discharge planning has many benefits:
• Shortening the hospital stay
• Reducing the likelihood of readmission
• Identifying less expensive care alternatives
• Facilitating placement of equipment (eg, hospital bed, O
) in the patient's home
• Helping increase patient satisfaction
• Possibly preventing placement in a nursing home
As soon as a patient is admitted, all members of the interdisciplinary team begin discharge planning. A
social worker or discharge planning coordinator evaluates the patient's needs within 24 h of admission.
Nurses help physicians determine when discharge is safe and which setting is most appropriate.
To home:
Patients being discharged to their home need detailed instructions about follow-up care, and
family members or other care-givers may need training to provide care. If patients and family members are
not taught how to give drugs, implement treatment, and monitor recovery, adverse outcomes and
readmission are more likely. Writing down follow-up appointments and drug schedules may help patients
and family members. At discharge, a copy of a brief discharge summary plan should be given to patients
or family members in case they have questions about care before the primary care physician receives the
official summary plan.
===PAGE:3317===
To another health care facility:
When a patient is discharged to a nursing home or to another facility, a
written summary should be sent with the patient, and a copy should be faxed to the receiving institution.
The summary must include complete, accurate information about the following:
• The patient's mental and functional status
• Times the patient last received drugs
• List of drugs being currently taken and the dosage
• Known drug allergies
• Advance directives, including resuscitation status
• Family contacts and support status
• Follow-up appointments and tests
• Names and phone numbers of a nurse and physician who can provide additional information
A written copy of the patient's medical and social history should accompany the patient during transfer
and may be sent via fax to the receiving facility to ensure that there are no information gaps.
Effective communication between staff members of institutions helps ensure continuity of care. For
example, the patient's nurse can call the receiving institution to review the information shortly before the
patient is transferred and can call the nurse who will care for the patient after discharge.
Long-Term Care
Determining which setting for long-term care is best depends on
• The patient's wishes and medical, social, emotional, and financial needs
• The family's ability to meet the patient's needs
• The setting's capacity for achieving patient goals established by the referring physician
Placement in a nursing home may be unnecessary if community-based long-term care services (eg,
independent housing for the elderly, board-and-care facilities, assisted living, life-care communities) are
available, accessible, and affordable.
Nursing Homes
The term nursing home refers specifically to a skilled nursing facility. Nursing homes, or skilled nursing
facilities (SNFs), provide daily skilled nursing care, skilled rehabilitation services, and other medical
services for people ≥ 65 yr (and for younger disabled people—see
Table 311-3
). Many nursing homes also provide additional community-based services (eg, day care,
respite care). Many provide short-term postacute care (including intensive physical, occupational,
respiratory, and speech therapy) after an injury or illness (eg, hip fracture, MI, stroke). Hospitals (including
rural hospitals with swing-beds) or freestanding facilities that may or may not be affiliated with a hospital
may act as nursing homes.
The percentage of people in nursing homes has declined, partly because assisted-living facilities and
home health care, which depend substantially on informal caregiving, are being used more.
About 45% of people ≥ 65 spend some time in a nursing home; of these, ≥ 50% stay ≥ 1 yr, and a minority
of these die there. The probability of nursing home placement within a person's lifetime is closely related
===PAGE:3318===
to age; for people aged 65 to 74, the probability is 17%, but for those > 85, it is 60%. Projections indicate
that 43% of people who turned 65 in 1990 will spend some time in a nursing home before they die, and >
50% of those admitted will spend at least 1 yr.
[Table 311-3.
Nursing Homes at a Glance]
However, twice as many functionally dependent elderly live in the community as in nursing homes. About
25% of all community-dwelling elderly have no family members to help with their care. Special attention to
health and health care needs of the community-dwelling elderly could add quality and years to their life
and limit costs by preventing institutionalization.
Supervision of care:
Physicians must see nursing home patients as often as medically necessary but
not less than every 30 days for the first 90 days and at least once every 60 days thereafter. During
routine visits, patients should be examined, drug status assessed, and laboratory tests ordered as
needed. Findings must be documented in the patient's chart to keep other staff members informed. Some
physicians limit their practice to nursing homes. They are available to participate in team activities and to
consult with other staff members, thus promoting better care than that given in hurried visits every other
month. Some nurse practitioners and physicians collaborate to manage patients' disorders. By
administering antibiotics and monitoring IV lines, suctioning equipment, and sometimes ventilators, nurse
practitioners may help prevent patients from being hospitalized.
Detecting, stopping, and preventing abuse is a primary function of physicians, nurses, and other health
care practitioners. All practitioners involved in care of the elderly should be familiar with signs of abuse or
neglect and be ready to intervene if elder abuse is suspected. A public advocacy system exists, and
nursing homes can be cited by regulatory agencies.
The federal and state governments are legally responsible for ensuring that a facility is providing good
care; surveyors attempt to assess a facility's performance and to detect deficiencies by monitoring
outcome measures, observing care, interviewing patients and staff members, and reviewing clinical
records.
Hospitalization:
If hospitalization becomes necessary and if possible, the physician who cares for a
patient in the nursing home should treat that patient in the hospital. However, hospitalization is avoided
whenever possible because of its risks (.
When patients are transferred to a hospital, their medical records should accompany them. A phone call
from a nursing home nurse to a hospital nurse is useful to explain the diagnosis and reason for transfer
and to describe the patient's baseline functional and mental status, drugs, and advance directives.
Similarly, when patients are returned to the nursing home from the hospital, a hospital nurse should call a
nursing home nurse.
Costs:
Nursing home care is expensive, averaging $68,280 per year in 2004. In the US, nursing home
care cost $21 billion in 1980, $70 billion in 2000, and $121.9 billion in 2005. About 44% of the cost is paid
by Medicaid, 26.5% by the patient, 16% by Medicare, 7.5% by private insurance, and about 4% by other
private funds.
Problems related to reimbursement:
Critics suggest the following:
• The rate of reimbursement may be too low, limiting patient access to rehabilitation and services that
enhance quality of life, especially for patients with dementia.
• Financial incentives to provide restorative care and rehabilitation for patients with limited functioning
may be insufficient.
• Nursing homes may be motivated to foster dependence or to maintain the need for high-level care so
that reimbursement is maximized.
Nursing home placement:
A patient's preferences and needs can be determined most effectively
===PAGE:3319===
through comprehensive geriatric assessment, including identification and evaluation of all disorders and
evaluation of the patient's functional ability (. Disabling or burdensome disorders—most
commonly dementia, incontinence, and immobility—may trigger consideration of nursing home placement.
However, even modest amelioration of a disorder may forestall the need for a nursing home (see
Table 311-4
).
Selection:
Nursing homes vary in the types of medical, nursing, and social services provided. Some
states set minimum nurse-to-patient ratios that are more stringent than federal requirements; the ratio of
other staff members to patients varies considerably.
Physicians should help families select a nursing home that matches the needs of the patient with the
services of a nursing home. Physicians should consider the following:
• Which clinical care practice model the nursing home uses (eg, private single-physician practices, large
networks of primary care practitioners who routinely visit a certain set of nursing homes)
• Which hospitals have transfer agreements with the nursing home
• Which special therapeutic services, palliative care, hospice, and other services are available
• Whether staff members are employed full-time or part-time
• What the patient's medical coverage is, particularly if it is a Medicare capitated program, which covers
certain aspects of ongoing medical care but does not cover long-term custodial care
Board-and-Care Facilities
Board-and-care facilities provide care for elderly people who cannot live independently but who do not
need the constant supervision provided in nursing homes. Board-and-care facilities (also called rest
homes) typically provide the following:
• A room
• Meals in a communal dining room
• Housekeeping services (eg, laundry, cleaning)
• Minimal assistance with personal care
• Sometimes supervision of drug administration
The number of board-and-care facilities is increasing because they offer an economic, federally funded
means of accommodating the increasing number of elderly people who would otherwise require nursing
home care paid for with state Medicaid funds.
Minimally regulated and sometimes unlicensed, these facilities principally serve 2 groups, often cared for
together—the elderly and the deinstitutionalized mentally ill. Although excellent homes exist, some
facilities tend to warehouse the disabled in substandard buildings and to employ few skilled staff
members.
Physicians should try to ensure that their patients in board-and-care facilities are safe and are receiving
appropriate care. Physicians may need to visit the facility or send a nurse or social worker to evaluate it.
Assisted-Living Programs
Assisted-living programs enable residents who have problems doing activities of daily living to maintain
their independence in
===PAGE:3320===
[Table 311-4.
Strategies for Avoiding Nursing Home Placement]
personalized settings by providing or arranging for the provision of daily meals, personal and other
supportive services, health care, and 24-h oversight as needed.
Assisted-living programs typically provide the following:
• Meals
• Personal care
• Housekeeping services
• Transportation
• 24-h oversight if needed
These programs are paid for by private funds, long-term care insurance, community-based charity
organizations, or church groups.
Life-Care Communities
Life-care communities offer a contract intended to remain in effect for the resident's lifetime and, at a
minimum, to guarantee shelter and access to various health care services.
Life-care communities (continuing care retirement communities) offer different levels of care:
• For people who can live independently
• For those who need assistance
• For those who need skilled nursing care
Generally, people pay a substantial entrance fee ($50,000 to $500,000) when moving to the community
and monthly fees thereafter. In some communities, residents pay only a monthly fee for rent plus service
or health packages. In others, residents can purchase a condominium, cooperative, or membership;
service or health packages are purchased separately.
There are 3 main types of communities:
• Those covered by an all-inclusive contract
• Those covered by a modified contract limiting the amount of long-term care provided before the monthly
fee is increased
• Those covered by a fee-for-service contract with billing for health services as they are used
If well financed and managed, life-care communities provide a broad range of housing, social, supportive,
and health services that enable their residents to live comfortably. However, some communities are not
well regulated; in some, residents' assets have been wiped out because of unscrupulous real estate
dealers or well-intentioned but inept management.
Communities may occupy a single building or be spread across multiacre campuses with housing options
ranging from efficiency apartments to cottages with several rooms. Many have community buildings for
organized social events, dining rooms, clubs, sports facilities, planned outings, and vacation options.
Access to physicians is usually provided, and most programs are affiliated with local acute care facilities.
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly
===PAGE:3321===
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) is designed for elderly people who meet criteria for
nursing home admission but wish to live at home as long as possible. The program involves an
interdisciplinary team that includes physicians, nurses, physical and occupational therapists, social
workers, dieticians, and drivers. The services are typically provided in an adult day health center and are
available every day. The program provides transportation to the center. However, some services may be
provided in the home.
PACE is available only in certain areas of the country. It combines funds from Medicare and Medicaid.
The Department of Health and Human Services web site explains the PACE program and provides an upto-date list of participating health care practitioners.
Pharmacy
For elderly patients, developing a relationship with a pharmacist and using one pharmacy can help
ensure consistency in care. A pharmacist can help prevent drug-related problems, which are a particular
risk for the elderly (see
Chapter 308
).
For elderly patients, pharmacists are often the most accessible health care practitioner. In addition to
dispensing drugs, pharmacists provide drug information to patients, monitor drug use (including
adherence), and liaise between physicians or other health care practitioners and patients to ensure
optimal pharmaceutical care. Pharmacists also provide information about interactions between drugs and
other substances, including OTC drugs, dietary supplements (eg, medicinal herbs), and foods.
Patient adherence:
Pharmacists can help improve patient adherence by doing the following:
• Assessing the patient's ability to adhere to a drug regimen by noticing certain impairments
(eg, poor
dexterity, lack of hand strength, cognitive impairment, loss of vision)
• Teaching patients how to take certain drugs (eg, inhalers, transdermal patches, injectable drugs, eye or
ear drops) or how to measure doses of liquid drugs
• Supplying drugs in ways that are accessible to patients (eg, easy-open bottles, pills without wrappers)
• Making sure that drug labels and take-home printed materials are in large type and in the patient's
native language
• Teaching patients how to use drug calendar reminders, commercially available drug boxes, electronic
drug-dispensing devices, and pill splitters or crushers
• Eliminating unnecessary complexity and duplication from the overall drug regimen
Settings:
Many pharmacists work in a community pharmacy. But they may also work in any health care
setting, including hospitals, long-term care facilities, the home (with a home health care agency), mail
service and online pharmacies, organized health care systems, and hospice settings (see
Table 311-5
).
[Table 311-5.
Various Duties of Pharmacists]
===PAGE:3322===
Chapter 312. Gait Disorders in the Elderly
Introduction
Gait disorders encompass a number of issues, including slowing of gait speed and loss of
smoothness, symmetry, or synchrony of body movement.
For the elderly, walking, standing up from a chair, turning, and leaning are necessary for independent
mobility. Gait speed, chair rise time, and the ability to do tandem stance (standing with one foot in front of
the other—a measure of balance) are independent predictors of the ability to do instrumental activities of
daily living (eg, shopping, traveling, cooking) and of the risk of nursing home admission and death.
Walking without assistance requires adequate attention and muscle strength plus effective motor control
to coordinate sensory input and muscle contraction.
Normal Age-Related Changes in Gait
Some elements of gait normally change with aging; others do not.
Gait velocity
(speed of walking) remains stable until about age 70; it then declines about 15%/decade
for usual gait and 20%/decade for fast walking. Velocity is lower because elderly people take shorter
steps at the same rate (cadence). The most likely reason for shortened step length (the distance from one
heel strike to the next) is weakness of the calf muscles, which propel the body forward; calf muscle
strength is substantially decreased in elderly people. However, elderly people seem to compensate for
lower calf power by using their hip flexor and extensor muscles more than young adults.
Cadence
(reported as steps/min) does not change with aging. Each person has a preferred cadence,
which is related to leg length and usually represents the most energy-efficient rhythm. Tall people take
longer steps at a slower cadence; short people take shorter steps at a faster cadence.
Double stance time
(ie, time with both feet on the ground—a more stable position for moving the center
of mass forward) increases with age. The percentage of time in double stance goes from 18% in young
adults to ≥ 26% in healthy elderly people. Increased time in double stance reduces the time the swing leg
has to advance and shortens step length. Elderly people may increase their double stance time when
they walk on uneven or slippery surfaces, when they have impaired balance, or when they are afraid of
falling. They may appear as if they are walking on slippery ice.
Walking posture
changes only slightly with aging. Elderly people walk upright, with no forward lean.
However, elderly people walk with greater anterior (downward) pelvic rotation and increased lumbar
lordosis. This posture change is usually due to a combination of weak abdominal muscles, tight hip flexor
muscles, and increased abdominal fat. Elderly people also walk with their legs rotated laterally (toes out)
about 5°, possibly due to a loss of hip internal rotation or in order to increase lateral stability. Foot
clearance in swing is unchanged with advancing age.
Joint motion
changes slightly with aging. Ankle plantar flexion is reduced during the late stage of stance
(just before the back foot lifts off). The overall motion of the knee is unchanged. Hip flexion and extension
are unchanged, but the hips have increased adduction. Pelvic motion is reduced in all planes.
Abnormal Changes in Gait
Causes:
A number of disorders can contribute to dysfunctional or unsafe gait. They particularly include
• Neurologic disorders
• Musculoskeletal disorders (eg, spinal stenosis [see p.], significant joint disease)
Causative neurologic disorders include dementias (, movement and cerebellar disorders (see
p.
), and sensory or motor neuropathies (.
===PAGE:3323===
Manifestations:
There are many manifestations of gait abnormality. Some help suggest certain causes.
Loss of symmetry of motion and timing between left and right sides
usually indicates a disorder.
When healthy, the body moves symmetrically; step length, cadence, torso movement, and ankle, knee,
hip, and pelvis motion are equal on the right and left sides. A
regular
asymmetry occurs with unilateral
neurologic or musculoskeletal disorders (eg, a limp caused by a painful ankle). Unpredictable or highly
variable gait cadence, step length, or stride width indicates breakdown of motor control of gait due to a
cerebellar or frontal lobe syndrome.
Difficulty initiating or maintaining gait
may occur. When patients start walking, their feet may appear
stuck to the floor, typically because patients do not shift their weight to one foot to allow the other foot to
move forward. This problem may represent isolated gait initiation failure, Parkinson's disease, or frontal or
subcortical disease. Once gait is initiated, steps should be continuous, with little variability in the timing of
the steps. Freezing, stopping, or almost stopping usually suggests a cautious gait, a fear of falling, or a
frontal gait disorder. Scuffing the feet is not normal (and is a risk factor for tripping).
Retropulsion
is walking backwards when initiating gait or falling backwards while walking. It may occur
with frontal gait disorders, parkinsonism, CNS syphilis, and progressive supranuclear palsy.
Footdrop
causes toe dragging or a stepping gait (ie, exaggerated lift of the leg to avoid catching the toe).
It may be secondary to anterior tibialis weakness (eg, caused by trauma to the peroneal nerve at the
lateral aspect of the knee or a peroneal mononeuropathy usually associated with diabetes), spasticity of
calf muscles (gastrocnemius and soleus), or lowering of the pelvis due to muscle weakness of the
proximal muscles on the stance side (particularly the gluteus medius). Low foot swing (eg, due to reduced
knee flexion) may resemble footdrop.
Short step length
is nonspecific and may represent a fear of falling or a neurologic or musculoskeletal
problem. The side with short step length is usually the healthy side, and the short step is usually due to a
problem during the stance phase of the opposite (problem) leg. For example, a patient with a weak or
painful left leg spends less time in single stance on the left leg and develops less power to move the body
forward, resulting in shorter swing time for the right leg and a shorter right step. The normal right leg has
a normal single stance duration, resulting in a normal swing time for the abnormal left leg and a longer
step length for the left leg than for the right leg.
Wide-based gait
(increased step width) is determined by observing the patient's gait on a floor with 12-in
(30-cm) tiles. The gait is considered wide based if the outside of the patient's feet do not stay within the
width of the tile. As gait speed decreases, step width increases slightly. Wide-based gait can be caused
by cerebellar disease or bilateral knee or hip disease. Variable step width (lurching to one side or the
other) suggests poor motor control, which may be due to frontal or sub-cortical gait disorders.
Circumduction
(moving the foot in an arc rather than a straight line when stepping forward) occurs in
patients with pelvic muscle weakness or difficulty bending the knee.
Forward lean
can occur with kyphosis and with Parkinson's disease or disorders with parkinsonian
features associated with dementia (particularly vascular dementia and Lewy body dementia).
Festination
is a progressive quickening of steps (usually with forward lean), whereby patients may break
into a run to prevent falling forward. Festination can occur with Parkinson's disease and rarely as an
adverse effect of dopamine-blocking drugs (typical and atypical antipsychotics).
Sideward trunk lean
that is consistent or predictable to the side of the stance leg may be a strategy to
reduce joint pain due to hip arthritis or, less commonly, knee arthritis (antalgic gait). In a hemiparetic gait,
the trunk may lean to the strong side. In this pattern, the patient leans to lift the pelvis on the opposite
side to permit the limb with spasticity (inability to flex the knee) to clear the floor during the swing phase.
Irregular and unpredictable trunk instability
can be caused by cerebellar, subcortical, or basal ganglia
dysfunction.
===PAGE:3324===
Deviations from path
are strong indicators of motor control deficits.
Arm swing
may be reduced or absent in Parkinson's disease and vascular dementias. Arm swing
disorders may also be adverse effects of dopamine-blocking drugs (typical and atypical antipsychotics).
Evaluation
The goal is to determine as many potential contributing factors to gait disorders as possible. A
performance-oriented mobility assessment tool may be helpful (see
Table 312-1
), as may other clinical tests (eg, a screening cognitive examination for patients with gait
problems possibly due to frontal lobe syndromes).
Evaluation is best approached in 4 parts:
• Discussing the patient's complaints, fears, and goals related to mobility
• Observing gait with and without an assistive device (if safe)
• Assessing all components of gait (see
Table 312-1
)
• Observing gait again with a knowledge of the patient's gait components
History:
In addition to the standard medical history, elderly patients should be asked about gait-related
issues. First, they are asked
[Table 312-1.
Performance-Oriented Assessment of Mobility]
open-ended questions regarding any difficulty with walking, balance, or both, including whether they have
fallen (or fear they might fall). Then specific capabilities are assessed; they include whether patients can
go up and down stairs; get in and out of a chair, shower, or tub; and walk as needed to buy and prepare
food and do household chores. If they report any difficulties, details of the onset, duration, and
progression are sought. History of neurologic and musculoskeletal symptoms and known disorders is
important.
Physical examination:
A thorough physical examination is done with emphasis on the musculoskeletal
examination ( and the neurologic examination (.
Lower-extremity strength is assessed. Proximal muscle strength is tested by having patients get out of a
chair without using their arms. Calf strength is measured by having patients face a wall, put their palms
on the wall, and rise onto their toes first using both feet and then using one foot at a time. Strength of hip
internal rotation is assessed.
Gait assessment:
Routine gait assessment can be done by a primary care practitioner; an expert may
be needed for complex gait disorders. Assessment requires a straight hallway without distractions or
obstructions and a stopwatch. A measuring tape and a T square or ruler with a right angle may be needed
to accurately measure stride length.
Patients should be prepared for the examination. They should be asked to wear pants or shorts that
reveal the knees and be informed that several observations may be needed but that they will be allowed
to rest if fatigued.
Assistive devices provide stability but also affect gait. Use of walkers often results in a flexed posture and
discontinuous gait, particularly if the walker has no wheels. If safe to do so, the practitioner should have
the patient walk without an assistive device, while remaining close to or walking with the patient with a
gait belt for safety. If patients use a cane, the practitioner can walk with them on the cane side or take
their arm and walk with them. Patients with a suspected peripheral neuropathy should walk touching the
practitioner's forearm. If gait improves with this intervention, proprioception from the arm is being used to
===PAGE:3325===
supplement the missing proprioception from the leg; such patients usually benefit from using a cane,
which transmits information about the type of surface or floor to the cane-holding hand.
Balance is assessed by measuring the time patients can stand on one foot or on both feet in tandem
stance (heel to toe); normal is ≥ 5 sec.
Gait velocity is measured using a stopwatch. Patients are timed while walking a fixed distance (preferably
6 or 8 m) at their preferred speed. The test may need to be repeated with patients walking as quickly as
possible. Normal gait speed in healthy elderly people ranges from 1.1 to 1.5 m/sec.
Cadence is measured as steps/min. Cadence varies with leg length—about 90 steps/min for tall adults
(1.83 m [72 in]) to about 125 steps/min for short adults (1.5 m [60 in]).
Step length can be determined by measuring the distance covered in 10 steps and dividing that number
by 10. Because shorter people take shorter steps and foot size is directly related to height, normal step
length is 3 foot lengths, and abnormal step length is < 2 foot lengths. A rule of thumb is that if at least 1
foot length is visible between the patient's steps, step length is normal.
Step height can be assessed by observing the swing foot; if it touches the floor, particularly in the middle
of the swing phase, patients may trip. Some patients with fear of falling or a cautious gait syndrome
purposefully slide their feet over the floor surface. This gait pattern may be safe on a smooth surface but
is a risky strategy when walking on rugs, because patients may trip.
Asymmetry or variability of gait rhythm can be detected when practitioners whisper "dum...dum...dum" to
themselves with each of the patient's steps. Some practitioners have a better ear than an eye for gait
rhythm.
Testing:
Testing is sometimes required.
CT or MRI of the brain is often done, particularly when there is poor gait initiation, chaotic cadence, or the
appearance of a very stiff gait. These tests help identify lacunar infarcts, white matter disease, and focal
atrophy and can help determine whether normal-pressure hydrocephalus should be considered.
Treatment
• Strength training
• Balance training
• Assistive devices
Although determining why gait is abnormal is important, interventions to alter gait are not always
indicated. A slowed, aesthetically abnormal gait may enable the elderly person to walk safely and without
assistance. However, some treatment interventions can lead to improvement; they include exercise,
balance training, and assistive devices (see
Table 312-2
).
Strength training:
Frail elderly people with mobility problems achieve modest
[Table 312-2.
Treatment of Gait Disorders]
improvements with exercise programs. In elderly people with arthritis, walking or resistance training
reduces knee pain, and gait may improve.
Resistance exercises can improve strength and gait velocity, especially in frail patients with slowed gait.
Two or three training sessions a week are usually needed; resistance exercises consist of 3 sets of 8 to
14 repetitions during each session. The load is increased every week or two until a plateau of strength is
reached.
===PAGE:3326===
Leg press machines train all the large muscle groups of the leg and provide back and pelvic support
during lifting. However, these machines are not always accessible to elderly patients. Chair rises with
weight vests or weights attached to the waist (waist belts) are an alternative. Instructions are required to
reduce the risk of back injury due to excess lumbar lordosis. Step-ups and stair climbing with the same
weights are also useful. Ankle plantar flexion can be done with the same weights.
Using knee extension machines or attaching weights to the ankle strengthens the quadriceps. The usual
starting weight for frail people is 3 kg (7 lb). Resistance for all exercises should be increased every week
until the patient reaches a plateau of strength.
Balance training:
Many patients with balance deficits benefit from balance training. Good standing
posture and static balance are taught first. Patients are then taught to be aware of the location of
pressure on their feet and how the location of pressure moves with slow leaning or turning the torso to
look to the left or right. Leaning forward (using a wall or counter for support), backward (with a wall
directly behind), and to each side is then practiced. The goal is for the patient to be able stand on one leg
for 10 sec.
Dynamic balance training can involve slow movements in single stance, simple tai chi movements,
tandem walking, turns while walking, walking backwards, walking over a virtual object (eg, a 15-cm stripe
on the floor), slow forward lunges, and slow dance movements. Multicomponent balance training is
probably most effective in improving balance.
Assistive devices:
Assistive devices can help maintain mobility and quality of life (. New motor strategies must be learned. Physical therapists should be involved in choice of and
training with assistive devices.
Canes
are particularly helpful for patients with pain caused by knee or hip arthritis or with peripheral
neuropathy of the feet because a cane transmits information about the type of surface or floor to the
cane-holding hand. Quad canes can stabilize the patient but usually slow gait. Canes are usually used on
the side opposite the painful or weak leg. Many store-bought canes are too long but can be adjusted to
the correct height (see
Fig. 350-2
 by cutting (a wooden cane) or moving the pin settings (an adjustable cane). For
maximal support, cane length should be such that patients have their elbow flexed 20 to 30° when holding
the cane.
Walkers
can reduce the force and pain at arthritic joints more than a cane, assuming adequate arm and
shoulder strength. Walkers provide good lateral stability and moderate protection from forward falls but do
little or nothing to help prevent backward falls for patients with balance problems. When prescribing a
walker, the physical therapist should consider the sometimes competing needs of providing stability and
maximizing efficiency (energy efficiency) of walking. Four-wheeled walkers with larger wheels and brakes
maximize gait efficiency but provide less lateral stability. These walkers have the added advantage of a
small seat to sit on if patients become fatigued.
Prevention
Although no large-scale prospective studies have confirmed the effect of increasing physical activity on
gait and independence, prospective cohort studies provide convincing evidence that high levels of
physical activity help maintain mobility, even in patients with disease.
Regular walking or a physically active lifestyle is the most important recommendation. The effects of
deconditioning and of inactivity cannot be overstated. A regular walking program of 30 min/day is the best
single activity for maintaining mobility; however, an active lifestyle that includes multiple shorter walking
episodes is probably equivalent to a single 30-min walk. A safe walking course should be recommended.
The patient should be instructed to increase gait speed and duration over several months.
Prevention also includes resistance and balance training. The effects of an active lifestyle on mood and
confidence are probably as important as their effect on physiology.
===PAGE:3327===

===PAGE:3328===
Chapter 313. Falls in the Elderly
Introduction
A fall results in a person coming to rest on the ground or another lower level; sometimes a body part
strikes against an object that breaks the fall. Typically, events caused by acute disorders (eg, stroke,
seizure) or overwhelming environmental hazards (eg, being struck by a moving object) are not considered
falls.
Annually, 30 to 40% of elderly people living in the community fall; 50% of nursing home residents fall. In
the US, falls are the leading cause of accidental death and the 7th leading cause of death in people ≥ 65;
75% of deaths caused by falls occur in the 12.5% of the population who are ≥ 65. In 2000, direct medical
costs totaled $0.2 billion ($179 million) for fatal falls and $19 billion for nonfatal fall injuries. By 2020, the
costs are projected to reach $44 billion.
Falls threaten the independence of elderly people and cause a cascade of individual and socioeconomic
consequences. However, physicians are often unaware of falls in patients who do not present with an
injury because a routine history and physical examination typically do not include a specific evaluation for
falls. Many elderly people are reluctant to report a fall because they attribute falling to the aging process
or because they fear being subsequently restricted in their activities or institutionalized.
Etiology
The best predictor of falling is a previous fall. However, falls in elderly people rarely have a single cause
or risk factor. A fall is usually caused by a complex interaction among the following:
• Intrinsic factors (age-related decline in function, disorders, and adverse drug effects)
• Extrinsic factors (environmental hazards)
• Situational factors (related to the activity being done—eg, rushing to the bathroom)
Intrinsic factors:
Age-related changes can impair systems involved in maintaining balance and stability
(eg, while standing, walking, or sitting). Visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, depth perception, and dark
adaptation decline. Changes in muscle activation patterns and ability to generate sufficient muscle power
and velocity may impair the ability to maintain or recover balance in response to perturbations (eg,
stepping onto an uneven surface, being bumped).
Chronic and acute disorders (see
Table 313-1
) and use of drugs (see
Table 313-2
) are major risk factors for falls. The risk of falls increases with the number of drugs taken.
Psychoactive drugs are the drugs most commonly reported as increasing the risk of falls and fall-related
injuries.
Extrinsic factors:
Environmental factors can increase the risk of falls independently or, more importantly,
by interacting with intrinsic factors. Risk is highest when the environment requires greater postural control
and mobility (eg, when walking on a slippery surface) and when the environment is unfamiliar (eg, when
relocated to a new home).
Situational factors:
Certain activities or decisions may increase the risk of falls and
[Table 313-1.
Some Disorders that Contribute to Risk of Falls]
[Table 313-2.
Some Drugs that Contribute to Risk of Falls]
fall-related injuries. Examples are walking while talking or being distracted by dual-tasking or multitasking
and then failing to attend to an environmental hazard (eg, a curb or step), rushing to the bathroom
(especially at night when not fully awake or when lighting may be inadequate), and rushing to answer the
===PAGE:3329===
telephone.
Complications:
Falling, particularly falling repeatedly, increases risk of injury, hospitalization, and death,
particularly in elderly people who are frail and have preexisting disease comorbidities and deficits in
activities of daily living. Longer-term complications can include decreased physical function, fear of
falling, and institutionalization; falls reportedly contribute to 40% of nursing home admissions.
Over 50% of falls among elderly people result in an injury. Although most injuries are not serious (eg,
contusions, abrasions), fall-related injuries account for about 5% of hospitalizations in patients ≥ 65.
About 5% of falls result in fractures of the humerus, wrist, or pelvis. About 2% of falls result in a hip
fracture. Other serious injuries (eg, head and internal injuries, lacerations) occur in about 10% of falls.
Some fall-related injuries are fatal. About 5% of elderly people with hip fractures die while hospitalized;
overall mortality in the 12 mo after a hip fracture ranges from 18 to 33%.
About half of elderly people who fall cannot get up without help. Remaining on the floor for > 2 h after a
fall increases risk of dehydration, pressure ulcers, rhabdomyolysis, hypothermia, and pneumonia.
Function and quality of life may deteriorate drastically after a fall; at least 50% of elderly people who were
ambulatory before fracturing a hip do not recover their previous level of mobility. After falling, elderly
people may fear falling again, so mobility is sometimes reduced because confidence is lost. Some people
may even avoid certain activities (eg, shopping, cleaning) because of this fear. Decreased activity can
increase joint stiffness and weakness, further reducing mobility.
Evaluation
• Clinical evaluation
• Performance testing
• Sometimes laboratory testing
After treatment of acute injuries, assessment aims to identify risk factors and appropriate interventions,
thus decreasing the risk of future falls and fall-related injuries.
Some falls are promptly recognized because of an obvious fall-related injury or concern about a possible
injury. However, because elderly people often do not report falls, they should be asked about falls at least
once per year.
Patients who report a single fall should be evaluated for a balance or gait problem using the Get-Up-andGo Test. For the test, patients are observed as they rise from a standard armchair, walk 3 m (about 10 ft)
in a straight line, turn, walk back to the chair, and sit back down. Observation may detect lower-extremity
weakness, imbalance while standing or sitting, or an unsteady gait.
Patients who require a more complete assessment of risk factors for falls include
• Those who have difficulty during the Get-Up-and-Go Test
• Those who report multiple falls during screening
•
Those who are being evaluated after a recent fall (after acute injuries are identified and treated)
History and physical examination:
When a more complete assessment of risk factors is needed, the
focus is on identifying intrinsic, extrinsic, and situational factors that can be reduced by interventions
targeted at them.
Patients are asked open-ended questions about the most recent fall or falls, followed by more specific
questions about when and where a fall occurred and what they were doing. Witnesses are asked the
same questions. Patients should be asked whether they had premonitory or associated symptoms (eg,
===PAGE:3330===
palpitations, shortness of breath, chest pain, vertigo, light-headedness) and whether consciousness was
lost. Patients should also be asked whether any obvious extrinsic or situational factors may have been
involved. The history should include questions about past and present medical problems, use of
prescription and OTC drugs, and use of alcohol. Because eliminating all risk of future falls may be
impossible, patients should be asked whether they were able to get back up without help after falling and
whether any injuries occurred; the goal is reducing the risk of complications due to future falls.
The physical examination should be comprehensive enough to exclude obvious intrinsic causes of falls. If
the fall occurred recently, temperature should be measured to determine whether fever was a factor.
Heart rate and rhythm should be assessed to identify obvious bradycardia, resting tachycardia, or
irregular rhythms. BP should be measured with patients supine and after patients stand for 1 and 5 min to
rule out orthostatic hypotension. Auscultation can detect many types of valvular heart disorders. Visual
acuity should be evaluated with patients wearing their usual corrective lenses if needed. Abnormalities in
visual acuity should trigger a more detailed visual examination by an optometrist or ophthalmologist. The
neck, spine, and extremities (especially the legs and feet) should be evaluated for weakness, deformities,
pain, and limitation in range of motion.
A neurologic examination should be done (; it includes testing muscle strength and tone,
sensation (including proprioception), coordination (including cerebellar function), stationary balance, and
gait. Basic postural control and the proprioceptive and vestibular systems are evaluated using the
Romberg test (in which patients stand with feet together and eyes closed). Tests to establish high-level
balance function include the one-legged stance and tandem gait. If patients can stand on one leg for 10
sec with their eyes open and have an accurate 3-m (10-ft) tandem gait, any intrinsic postural control
deficit is likely to be minimal. Clinicians should evaluate positional vestibular function (eg, with the DixHallpike maneuver—see
Sidebar 46-1
 and mental status (.
Performance tests:
The Performance-Oriented Assessment of Mobility or Get-Up-and-Go Test can
identify problems with balance and stability during walking and other movements that may indicate
increased risk of falls.
Laboratory tests:
There is no standard diagnostic evaluation. Testing should be based on the history
and examination and helps rule out various causes: a CBC for anemia, blood glucose measurement for
hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia, and electrolyte measurement for dehydration. Tests such as ECG,
ambulatory cardiac monitoring, and echocardiography are recommended only when a cardiac cause is
suspected. Carotid massage under controlled conditions (IV access and cardiac monitoring) has been
proposed to determine carotid hypersensitivity and ultimately who might respond to pacemaker treatment.
Spinal x-rays and cranial CT or MRI are indicated only when the history and physical examination detect
new neurologic abnormalities.
Prevention
The focus is on preventing or reducing the number of future falls and fall-related injuries and
complications, while maintaining as much of the patient's function and independence as possible.
Patients who report a single fall and who do not have problems with balance or gait on the Get-Up-andGo Test or a similar test should be given general information about reducing risk of falls. It should include
how to use drugs safely and reduce environmental hazards (see
Table 313-3
).
Exercise:
Patients who have fallen more than once or who have problems during initial balance and gait
testing should be referred to physical therapy or an exercise program. Physical therapy and exercise
programs can be done in the home if patients have limited mobility. Physical therapists customize exercise
programs to improve balance and gait and to correct specific problems contributing to fall risk. More
general exercise programs in health care or community settings can also improve balance and gait. For
example, tai chi may be effective and can be done alone or in
[Table 313-3.
Home Assessment Checklist for Hazards that Increase Risk of Falling]
===PAGE:3331===
groups. The most effective exercise programs to reduce fall risk are those that are tailored to the patient's
deficit, are provided by a trained professional, have a sufficient balance challenge component, and are
provided over the long term (eg, ≥ 4 mo).
Assistive devices:
Some patients benefit from use of an assistive device (eg, cane,
walker). Canes may
be adequate for those with minimal unilateral muscle or joint impairment, but walkers, especially wheeled
walkers, are more appropriate for patients with increased risk of falls attributable to bilateral leg weakness
or impaired coordination (wheeled walkers can be dangerous for patients who cannot control them
properly). Physical therapists can help fit or size the devices and teach patients how to use them (.
Medical management:
Drugs that can increase the risk of falls should be stopped, or the dosage
should be adjusted to the lowest effective dose. Patients should be evaluated for osteoporosis and, if
osteoporosis is diagnosed, treated to reduce risk of fractures from any future falls. If any other specific
disorder is identified as a risk factor, targeted interventions are required. For example, drugs and physical
therapy may reduce risk for patients with Parkinson's disease. Vitamin D, particularly taken with Ca, can
reduce fall risk, especially in those with reduced blood vitamin D levels. Pain management, physical
therapy, and sometimes joint replacement surgery may reduce risk for patients with arthritis. A change to
appropriate lenses (single lenses rather than bifocals or trifocals) or surgery, particularly for removal of
cataracts, may help patients with visual impairment.
Environmental management:
Correcting environmental hazards in the home may reduce the risk of
falls (see
Table 313-3
). Patients should also be advised on how to reduce risk due to situational factors.
For example, footwear should have flat heels, some ankle support, and firm, nonskid midsoles. Many
patients with chronic limited mobility (eg, severe arthritis, paresis) benefit from combined medical,
rehabilitative, and environmental strategies. Wheelchair adaptations (eg, removable foot plates to reduce
tripping during transfers, antitip bars to prevent backward tipping), removable belts, and wedge seating
may prevent falls in people with poor sitting balance or severe weakness when they are sitting or
transferring.
Restraints may lead to more falls and other complications and thus should not be used. Surveillance by a
caregiver is more effective and safer. Motion detectors may be used, but a caregiver must be present to
respond to the triggered alarm.
Hip protectors (padding sewn into special undergarments) may help protect patients who have fallen and
are at risk of a hip injury, but many patients are reluctant to wear protectors indefinitely. Compliant flooring
(eg, firm rubber) can help dissipate the impact force, but a floor that is too compliant (eg, soft foam) may
destabilize patients.
Patients should also be taught what to do if they fall and cannot get up. Useful techniques include turning
from the supine position to the prone position, getting on all fours, crawling to a strong support surface,
and pulling up. Having frequent contact with family members or friends, a phone that can be reached from
the floor, a remote alarm, or a wearable emergency response system device can decrease the likelihood
of lying on the floor for a long time after a fall.
===PAGE:3332===
Chapter 314. Social Issues in the Elderly
Introduction
Social issues influence an elderly person's risk and experience of illness as well as a health care
practitioner's ability to deliver timely and appropriate care.
A social history helps members of the interdisciplinary team evaluate care needs and social supports. It
should include questions about the following:
• Marital or companion status
• Living arrangements
• Financial status
• Work history
• Education
• Typical daily activities (eg, how meals are prepared, what activities add meaning to life, where problems
may be occurring)
• Need for and availability of caregivers (to help plan care)
• Patients' own caregiving responsibilities (which may make patients reluctant to report their own
symptoms lest their symptoms or any resulting interventions interfere with care-giving)
Family Caregiving
Family caregivers play a key role in delaying and possibly preventing institutionalization
of chronically ill
elderly patients. Although neighbors and friends may help, about 80% of home health care services
(physical, emotional, social, economic) are provided by family caregivers. When the patient is mildly or
moderately impaired, a spouse or adult children often provide care, but when the patient is severely
disabled, a spouse (usually a wife) is more likely to be the caregiver.
The amount and type of care provided by family members depend on economic resources, family
structure, quality of relationships, and other demands on the family members' time and energy. Family
caregiving ranges from minimal assistance (eg, periodically checking in) to elaborate full-time care. On
average, family caregiving consumes about 4 hours a day.
Although society tends to view family members as having a responsibility to care for one another, the
limits of filial and spousal obligations vary among families and among individual family members. The
willingness of family members to provide care may be bolstered by supportive services (eg, technical
assistance in learning new skills, counseling services, family mental health services) and supplemental
services (eg, personal care [assistance with grooming, feeding, and dressing], home health care, adult
day care, meals programs). Supplemental services may be provided on a regular schedule or as respite
care for a few hours or days.
Changes in demographics and social values have reduced the number of family members available to
care for impaired elderly relatives because of the following:
• Increased life span: As a result, the population of the very old has been increasing. Thus, their children,
who are potential care-givers, are likely to be old also.
• Delayed procreation: Combined with increased longevity, this delay has created a sandwich generation
of caregivers who care simultaneously for their children and their parents.
===PAGE:3333===
• Increasing mobility of US society and the increased divorce rate: As a result, families are more likely to
be geographically separated, and family ties are more likely to be weakened. Nonetheless, 80% of
people ≥ 65 live within 20 min of one child.
• An increasing number of women entering the workforce: This increase reflects the increased number of
single-parent households, most headed by women, and 2-income households. Previously, such women
may have provided care for elderly parents, but the demands of a job may diminish or eliminate their
ability to do so.
• The number of dependent and very sick elderly people is increasing.
These factors predict an increasing demand for home health care services provided by someone other
than family members, friends, and neighbors.
Effects:
Although caregiving can be very rewarding, it can also have negative effects. Family caregivers
may experience considerable stress (called caregiver burden) and subsequent health problems, isolation,
fatigue, and frustration, sometimes leading to a sense of helplessness and exhaustion (caregiver burnout)
or elder abuse (.
Caregiving may also become a financial burden. Couples in which one partner cares for the other tend to
be disproportionately poor.
Caregivers can often obtain reassurance or learn helpful information or strategies for caregiving from
physicians, nurses, social workers, or case managers. Caregivers can also take the following measures
to prepare themselves for caregiving and to avoid care-giver burnout:
• Not taking the patient's anger, frustration, or difficult behavior personally
• Attending to their own physical, emotional, recreational, and financial needs
• When appropriate, asking for help with care-giving or psychologic support from other family members
and friends
• Investigating outside groups that can offer psychologic support (eg, support groups) or help with
caregiving (eg, counseling, home health care, adult day care, meals programs, respite care)
Living Alone
In the US, about one third of the nearly 30 million community-dwelling elderly live alone. About half of the
community-dwelling oldest old (≥ 85 yr) live alone. About four fifths of elderly people living alone are
women. Men are more likely to die before their wives, and widowed or divorced men are more likely to
remarry than are widowed or divorced women.
The elderly who live alone are more likely to be poor, especially with advancing age. Many report feelings
of loneliness (in 60% of those > 75) and social isolation. In those with health problems or sensory deficits,
new or worsening symptoms may be unnoticed. Many have difficulty complying with prescribed treatment
regimens. Because they
have physical limitations and because eating is a social activity, some elderly
people who live alone do not prepare full, balanced meals, making undernutrition a concern.
Despite these problems, almost 90% of elderly people living alone express a keen desire to maintain their
independence. Many fear being too dependent on others and, despite the loneliness, want to continue to
live alone. To help them maintain their independence, physicians should encourage them to engage in
regular physical activity and social interactions, and social workers should help them do so.
Coordination and delivery of services during convalescence are difficult for patients living alone.
Physicians should ensure that home care is available and recommend additional services as appropriate.
A passive or individually activated emergency response device may reassure patients that help can be
obtained if needed.
===PAGE:3334===
Self-Neglect
Self-neglect implies not caring for self. It can include ignoring personal hygiene, not paying bills, not
obtaining or preparing food (leading to undernutrition), not seeking medical care for potentially serious
symptoms, not filling prescriptions or taking drugs, and skipping follow-up visits.
Risk factors for self-neglect include social isolation, disorders that impair memory or judgment (eg,
dementia), the presence of several chronic disorders, and severe depression. Differentiating between
self-neglect and simply choosing to live in a way that others find undesirable can be difficult. Social
workers are often in the best position to make this determination.
Adult Protective Services or the state unit on aging (whose numbers are available through the Eldercare
Locator at 800-677-1116) can help by coordinating in-home safety assessments and helping the elderly
obtain counseling services, emergency response systems, referrals to additional support services, and, if
necessary, hospitalization.
Alternative Living Arrangements
Living arrangements and relationships that do not involve living with a spouse, with an adult child, or
alone are fairly common among the elderly. For example, a substantial proportion of elderly people who
never married, are divorced, or are widowed have longstanding and close relationships with siblings,
friends, and partners. Understanding the nature of these relationships helps practitioners plan care that is
in keeping with a patient's wishes.
About 6 to 10% of the US population are estimated to be homosexual adults, including as many as 3
million of the elderly. Elderly people in a homosexual relationship face special challenges. The health care
system may not be aware of their sexual preference, may not recognize their partner as having a role in
caregiving decisions or as being part of the patient's family, and may not provide services that are
appropriate for their circumstances. For example, a partner may not have legal standing in decision
making for a cognitively impaired patient and may not be able to share a room in a nursing home or other
congregate living setting. Health care practitioners should ask questions about partners and living
arrangements and try to accommodate patient preferences.
Effects of Life Transitions
Late life is commonly a period of transitions (eg, retirement, relocation) and adjustment to losses.
Retirement
is often the first major transition faced by the elderly. Its effects on physical and mental health
differ from person to person, depending on attitude toward and reason for retiring. About one third of
retirees have difficulty adjusting to certain aspects of retirement, such as reduced income and altered
social role and entitlements. Some people choose to retire, having looked forward to quitting unpleasant
work; others are forced to retire (eg, because of health problems or job loss). Appropriate preparation for
retirement and counseling for retirees and families who experience difficulties may help.
Relocation
may occur several times during old age—eg, to smaller quarters after selling the family home,
to retirement housing to reduce the burden of upkeep, or to a nursing home. Some experts contend that
such moves cause relocation trauma; however, recent studies find little or no evidence of increased
mortality or other indications of trauma, especially among people prepared for the move. Physical and
mental status are significant predictors of relocation adjustment, as is thoughtful and adequate
preparation. People
who respond poorly to relocation are more likely to be living alone, socially isolated,
poor, and depressed. Men respond less well than women.
The less control people perceive they have over the move and the less predictable the new environment
seems, the greater the stress of relocation. People should become acquainted with the new setting well
in advance. For the cognitively impaired, a move away from familiar surroundings may exacerbate
functional dependence and disruptive behavior.
===PAGE:3335===
Bereavement
affects many aspects of an elderly person's life. For example, social interaction and
companionship decrease, and social status may change. The death of a spouse affects men and women
differently. In the 2 yr after death of a wife, the mortality rate in men tends to increase, especially if the
wife's death was unexpected. For women who lose a husband, data are less clear but generally do not
indicate an increased mortality rate.
With bereavement, some sleep disturbance and anxiety are normal; these effects usually resolve in
months without drug treatment. In contrast, prolonged, pathologic grief is characterized by the following:
• Symptoms that are typical of a major depressive episode and that last > 2 mo
• Feelings of guilt about things not directly related to the loss
• Thoughts of death unrelated to survivorship
• Morbid preoccupation with worthlessness
• Hallucinations other than hearing and seeing the decedent
Caregivers and health care practitioners should look for such symptoms and be aware that bereaved
patients are at high risk of suicide and declining health status.
Counseling and supportive services (eg, support groups for widows) may facilitate difficult transitions.
Short-term use of anxiolytic drugs can help patients with excessive anxiety. However, excessive or
prolonged use should be avoided because it may interfere with the process of grieving and adjustment.
Prolonged, pathologic grief usually requires psychiatric evaluation and treatment.
Intimacy
Intimacy refers to a close feeling shared between 2 people, based on knowledge of and
familiarity with the other person. It includes emotional, social (based on shared experiences),
and physical intimacy (eg, touching, cuddling, sexual intercourse).
The desire for intimacy does not decrease with age, and there is no age at which intimacy, including
physical intimacy, is inappropriate. However, the disorders and emotional changes that often occur with
aging can interfere with developing and maintaining an intimate relationship. Aging can also change the
way intimacy is expressed.
Intimacy, particularly physical intimacy, may be lost because of the following:
•
Loss of a partner:
Loss or absence of a partner is probably the most common age-related barrier to
intimacy.
•
Disorders:
Various disorders that become more common with aging can interfere with physical intimacy.
Vascular disorders and diabetes can cause erectile dysfunction; arthritis can limit movements and make
them painful. The pain, discomfort, drugs, and worry associated with a disorder can dampen the desire
for intimacy. For the partner, the stress and demands of care-giving may interfere with intimacy.
•
Use of drugs:
The elderly are more likely to take drugs (eg, antihypertensives, psychoactive drugs)
that can cause problems affecting intimacy (eg, erectile dysfunction, reduced libido).
•
Age-related changes:
Levels of sex hormones decrease, causing changes (eg, vaginal atrophy,
reduced vaginal lubrication) that make sexual intercourse uncomfortable or difficult. Libido may
decrease.
•
Reluctance to discuss effects of aging:
If elderly people develop problems that interfere with
physical intimacy or if they feel embarrassed about changes in their body (eg, wrinkles, sagging flesh),
they may not want to discuss these changes with their partner or with a health care practitioner, who
===PAGE:3336===
may be able to suggest solutions.
•
Negative stereotypes about sexuality in the elderly:
Even healthy elderly people may have
internalized negative stereotypes and think sexuality is inappropriate or abnormal after a certain age.
•
Discrepancy in expectations of partners:
One partner may want certain physical expressions of
intimacy, but the other does not.
•
Lack of privacy:
Elderly people who live with family members or in a long-term care facility have fewer
opportunities for privacy, which are necessary for physical intimacy.
•
Shift to other forms of intimacy:
Passions may mellow after years of living together. Sexual
intercourse may become less frequent
or stop. Many couples—most without paying much attention to it
—grow comfortable with other forms of intimacy (eg, touching, massaging, kissing, verbal expressions
of affection) that express familiarity, caring, or engagement with their partner.
Nonetheless, many elderly people continue to have a healthy sexual relationship. Intimacy, particularly
physical intimacy, can help prevent depression and improve self-esteem and physical health. If elderly
people have a new sex partner, they should practice safe sex. Acquiring sexually transmitted diseases,
including AIDS, is a risk, regardless of age.
Many elderly people, especially those that live alone, find satisfaction and a sense of companionship in
interactions with a pet. Caring for a pet can give people a sense of purpose and connectedness.
Religion and Spirituality
Religion and spirituality are similar but not identical concepts. Religion is often viewed as more
institutionally based, more structured, and more traditional and may be associated with organized, wellestablished beliefs. Spirituality refers to the intangible and immaterial and thus may be considered a more
general term, not associated with a particular group or organization, It can refer to feelings, thoughts,
experiences, and behaviors related to the soul or to a search for the sacred (eg, a Divine Being, Ultimate
Reality, Ultimate Truth).
Traditional religion involves accountability and responsibility; spirituality has fewer requirements. People
may reject traditional religion but consider themselves spiritual. In the US, > 90% of elderly people
consider themselves religious and spiritual; about 5% consider themselves spiritual but not religious. Most
research assesses religion, not spirituality, using measures such as attendance at religious services,
frequency of private religious practices, use of religious coping mechanisms (eg, praying, trusting in God,
turning problems over to God, receiving support from the clergy), and intrinsic religiosity (internalized
religious commitment).
For most of the elderly in the US, religion has a major role in their life:
• 96% believe in God or a universal spirit
• > 90% pray
• > 50% attend religious services weekly or more often
The elderly's level of religious participation is greater than that in any other age group. For the elderly, the
religious community is the largest source of social support outside of the family, and involvement in
religious organizations is the most common type of voluntary social activity—more common than all other
forms of voluntary social activity combined.
Benefits
Religion correlates with improved physical and mental health. However, experts cannot determine
whether religion contributes to health or whether psychologically or physically healthier people are
===PAGE:3337===
attracted to religious groups. If religion is helpful, the reason—whether it is the religious beliefs
themselves or other factors—is not clear. Many such factors (eg, psychologic benefits, encouragement of
healthful practices, social support) have been proposed.
Psychologic benefits:
Religion may provide the following psychologic benefits:
• A positive and hopeful attitude about life and illness, which predicts improved health outcomes and lower
mortality rates
• A sense of meaning and purpose in life, which affects health behaviors and social and family
relationships
• A greater ability to cope with illness and disability
Many elderly people report that religion is the most important factor enabling them to cope with physical
health problems and life stresses (eg, declining financial resources, loss of a spouse or partner). In one
study, > 90% of elderly patients relied on religion, at least to a moderate degree, when coping with health
problems and difficult social circumstances. For example, having a hopeful, positive attitude about the
future helps people with physical problems remain motivated to recover.
People who use religious coping mechanisms are less likely to develop depression and anxiety than
those who do not; this inverse association is strongest among people with greater physical disability.
Even the perception of disability appears to be altered by the degree of religiousness. Of elderly women
with hip fractures, the most religious had the lowest rates of depression and were able to walk
significantly further when discharged from the hospital than those who were less religious. Religious
people also tend to recover from depression more quickly.
In the elderly, active involvement in a religious community correlates with better maintained
physical
functioning and health. Elderly people who attend religious services are more likely to stop smoking,
exercise more, increase social contacts, stay married, and live longer. In one study, the mortality rate of
patients with low levels of comfort from religion and of social support was 14 times that of patients with
higher levels of both. Also, better mental health may improve physical health because depression and
anxiety may aggravate coronary artery disease, hypertension, stroke, and psychosomatic disorders.
Levels of IL-6 are significantly lower among people who attend religious services regularly than among
those who do not.
Health-promoting practices:
Some religious groups (eg, Mormons, Seventh-Day Adventists) advocate
behaviors that enhance health, such as avoidance of tobacco and heavy alcohol use. Members of these
groups are less likely to develop substance-related disorders, and they live longer than the general
population.
Social benefits:
Religious beliefs and practices often foster the development of community and broad
social support networks. Increased social contact for the elderly increases the likelihood that disease will
be detected early and that elderly people will comply with treatment regimens because members of their
community interact with them and ask them questions about their health and medical care. Elderly people
who have such community networks are less likely to neglect themselves.
Caregivers:
Religious faith also benefits caregivers. In a study of caregivers of patients with Alzheimer's
disease or terminal cancer, caregivers with a strong personal religious faith and many social contacts
were better able to cope with the stresses of caregiving during a 2-yr period.
Harmful Effects
Religion is not always beneficial to the elderly. Religious devotion may promote excessive guilt, narrowmindedness, inflexibility, and anxiety. Religious preoccupations and delusions may develop in patients
with obsessive-compulsive disorder, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or psychoses.
Certain religious groups discourage necessary mental and physical health care, including lifesaving
===PAGE:3338===
therapies (eg, blood transfusions, treatment of life-threatening infections, insulin therapy), and may
substitute religious rituals (eg, praying, chanting, lighting candles). Religious cults may isolate and
alienate elderly people from family members and the broader social community; some cults sometimes
encourage self-destruction.
Role of the Health Care Practitioner
Talking to elderly patients about their religious beliefs and practices helps health care practitioners
provide care because these beliefs can affect the patients' mental and physical health. Inquiring about
religious issues during a medical visit is appropriate under certain circumstances, including the following:
• When patients are severely ill, under substantial stress, or near death and ask or suggest that a
practitioner talk about religious issues
• When patients tell a practitioner that they are religious and that religion helps them cope with illness
• When religious needs are evident and may be affecting patients' health or health behaviors
The elderly often have distinct spiritual needs that may overlap with but are not the same as psychologic
needs. Ascertaining a patient's spiritual needs can help mobilize the necessary resources (eg, spiritual
counseling or support groups, participation in religious activities, social contacts from members of a
religious community).
Spiritual history:
Taking a spiritual history shows elderly patients that the health care practitioner is
willing to discuss spiritual topics. Practitioners may ask patients whether their spiritual beliefs are an
important part of their life, how these beliefs influence the way they take care of themselves, whether
they are a part of a religious or spiritual community, and how they would like the health care practitioner
to handle their spiritual needs.
Alternatively, a practitioner may ask patients to describe their most important coping mechanism. If the
response is not a religious one, patients may be asked whether religious or spiritual resources are of any
help. If the response is no, patients may be sensitively asked about barriers to those activities (eg,
transportation problems, hearing difficulties, lack of financial resources, depression, lack of motivation,
unresolved conflicts) to determine whether the reason is circumstances or their choice. However,
practitioners should not force religious beliefs or opinions on patients or intrude if patients do not want
help.
Referral to clergy:
Many clergy members provide counseling services to the elderly at home and in the
hospital, often free of charge. Many elderly patients prefer such counseling to that from a mental health
care practitioner because they are more satisfied with the results and because they believe such
counseling does not have the stigma that mental health
care does. However, many clergy members do
not have extensive training in mental health counseling and may not recognize when elderly patients need
professional mental health care. In contrast, many hospital clergy have extensive training in the mental,
social, and spiritual needs of the elderly. Thus, including hospital clergy as part of the health care team
can be helpful. They can often bridge the gap between hospital care and care in the community by
communicating with clergy in the community. For example, when a patient is discharged from the hospital,
the hospital clergy may call the patient's clergy, so that support teams in the patient's religious community
can be mobilized to help during the patient's convalescence (eg, by providing housekeeping services,
meals, or transportation, by visiting the patient or caregiver).
Support of patients' religious beliefs and practices:
Health care practitioners should support the
patient's religious involvement as long as it does not interfere with necessary medical care because such
involvement may contribute to good health. People who are actively involved in religious groups,
particularly those in major religious traditions, tend to be healthier.
Religious interventions:
Some practitioners pray with patients, read religious scriptures to them, or
make sure patients have the religious materials (eg, large-print scriptures, religious audiotapes) they
want. However, practitioners should not feel obligated to do anything that violates their own beliefs.
===PAGE:3339===
Recommendation of religious activities:
Health care practitioners may suggest that patients consider
religious activities if patients seem receptive and may benefit from such activities, which can provide
social contact, reduce alienation and isolation, and increase a sense of belonging, of meaning, and of life
purpose. These activities may also help the elderly focus on positive activities rather than on their own
problems. However, some activities are appropriate only for more religious patients. If patients are not
already involved in religious activities, suggesting such activities requires sensitivity. Patients seek
medical care for health-related reasons, not religious ones.
Patient and family information:
Health care practitioners can provide information about the health
benefits of religious beliefs and practices for the elderly and about local religious resources (eg, support
groups at local churches, health promotion programs, volunteer activity programs).
Elder Abuse
Elder abuse is physical or psychologic mistreatment, neglect, or financial exploitation of the
elderly.
Common types of elder abuse include physical abuse, psychologic abuse, neglect, and financial abuse.
Each type may be intentional or unintentional. The perpetrators are usually a spouse or adult children but
may be other family members or paid or informal caregivers. Abuse usually becomes more frequent and
severe over time.
Physical abuse
is use of force resulting in physical or psychologic injury or discomfort. It includes
striking, shoving, shaking, beating, restraining, and forceful or improper feeding. It may include sexual
assault (any form of sexual intimacy without consent or by force or threat of force).
Psychologic abuse
is use of words, acts, or other means to cause emotional stress or anguish. It
includes issuing threats (eg, of institutionalization), insults, and harsh commands, as well as remaining
silent and ignoring the person. It also includes infantilization (a patronizing form of ageism in which the
perpetrator treats the elderly person as a child), which encourages the elderly person to become
dependent on the perpetrator.
Neglect
is the failure to provide food, medicine, personal care, or other necessities. Neglect that results
in physical or psychologic harm is considered abuse.
Financial abuse
is exploitation of or inattention to a person's possessions or funds. It includes swindling,
pressuring a person to distribute assets, and managing a person's money irresponsibly.
Although the true incidence is unclear, elder abuse appears to be a growing public health problem in the
US. In a large US urban study of people ≥ 65, 3.2% were victims of physical abuse, psychologic abuse,
or neglect. Because certain forms of abuse (eg, financial exploitation) were not included, the actual
incidence of mistreatment was probably higher. In Canadian and western European studies, incidence of
abuse was comparable to that in the US.
Risk Factors
For the victim, risk factors for abuse include impairment (chronic disorders, functional impairment,
cognitive impairment) and social isolation. For the perpetrator, risk factors include substance abuse,
psychiatric disorders, a history of violence, stress, and dependence
on the victim (including shared living
arrangements—see
Table 314-1
).
Diagnosis
Abuse is difficult to detect because many of the signs are subtle and the victim is often unwilling or unable
to discuss the abuse. Victims may hide abuse because of shame, fear of retaliation, or a desire to protect
the perpetrator. Sometimes when abuse victims seek help, they encounter ageist responses from health
===PAGE:3340===
care practitioners, who may, for example, dismiss complaints of abuse as confusion, paranoia, or
dementia.
Social isolation of the elderly victim often makes detection difficult. Abuse tends to increase the isolation
because the perpetrator often limits the victim's access to the outside world (eg, denies the victim visitors
and telephone calls).
[Table 314-1.
Risk Factors for Elder Abuse]
Symptoms and signs of abuse may erroneously be attributed to a chronic disorder (eg, a hip fracture
attributed to osteoporosis). However, certain clinical situations are particularly suggestive of abuse (see
Table 314-2
).
History:
If abuse is suspected, the patient should be interviewed alone, at least for part of the time.
Other involved people may also be interviewed separately. The patient interview may start with general
questions about feelings of safety but should also include direct questions about possible mistreatment
(eg, physical violence, restraints, neglect). If abuse is confirmed, the nature, frequency, and severity of
events should be elicited. The circumstances precipitating the abuse (eg, alcohol intoxication) should also
be sought.
Social and financial resources of the patient should be assessed because they affect management
decisions (eg, living arrangements, hiring of a professional caregiver). The examiner should inquire
whether the patient has family members or friends able and willing to nurture, listen, and assist. If
financial resources are adequate but basic needs are not being met, the examiner should determine why.
Assessing these resources can also help identify risk factors for abuse (eg, financial stress, financial
exploitation of the patient).
In the interview with the family caregiver, confrontation should be avoided. The interviewer should explore
whether caregiving responsibilities are burdensome for the family member and, if appropriate,
acknowledge the caregiver's difficult role. The caregiver is asked about recent stressful events (eg,
bereavement, financial stresses), the patient's illness (eg, care needs, prognosis), and the reported cause
of any recent injuries.
Physical examination:
The patient should be thoroughly examined, preferably at the first visit, for signs
of abuse (see
Table 314-3
). The physician may need help from a trusted family member or friend of the patient, state
adult protective services, or, occasionally, law enforcement agencies to persuade the care-giver or patient
to permit the evaluation. If abuse is identified, a referral to Adult Protective Services is mandatory in most
states.
Cognitive status should be assessed, eg, using the Mini-Mental State Examination. Cognitive impairment
is a risk factor for elder abuse and may affect the reliability of the history and the patient's ability to make
management decisions.
Mood and emotional status should be assessed. If the patient feels depressed, ashamed, guilty, anxious,
fearful, or angry, the beliefs underlying the emotion should be explored. If the patient minimizes or
rationalizes family tension or conflict or is reluctant to discuss abuse, the examiner should determine
whether these attitudes are interfering with recognition or admission of abuse.
[Table 314-2.
Clinical Situations Suggesting Elder Abuse]
Functional status, including the ability to do activities of daily living (ADLs), should be assessed and any
physical limitations that impair self-protection noted. If help with ADLs is needed, the examiner should
determine whether the current caregiver has sufficient emotional, financial, and intellectual ability for the
task. Otherwise, a new caregiver needs to be identified.
Coexisting disorders caused or exacerbated by the abuse should be sought.
===PAGE:3341===
Laboratory tests:
Imaging and laboratory tests (eg, electrolytes to determine hydration, albumin to
determine nutritional status, drug levels to document compliance with prescribed regimens) are done as
necessary to identify and document the abuse.
Documentation:
The medical record should contain a complete report of the actual or suspected abuse,
preferably in the patient's own words. A detailed description of any injuries should be included, supported
by photographs, drawings, x-rays, and other objective documentation (eg, laboratory test results) when
possible. Specific examples of how needs are not being met, despite an agreed-on care plan and
adequate resources, should be documented.
Prognosis
Abused elderly people are at high risk of death. In a large 13-yr longitudinal study, the
[Table 314-3.
Signs of Elder Abuse]
survival rate was 9% for abuse victims compared with 40% for nonabused controls. Multivariate analysis
to determine the independent effect of abuse indicated that risk of mortality for abused patients over a 3yr period after abuse was 3 times higher than that for controls over a similar period.
Treatment
An interdisciplinary team approach (involving physicians, nurses, social workers, lawyers, law
enforcement officials, psychiatrists, and other practitioners) is essential. Any previous intervention (eg,
court orders of protection) and the reason for its failure should be investigated to avoid repeating any
mistakes.
Intervention:
If the patient is in immediate danger, the physician, in consultation with the patient, should
consider hospital admission, law enforcement intervention, or relocation to a safe home. The patient
should be informed of the risks and consequences of each option.
If the patient is not in immediate danger, steps to reduce risk should be taken but are less urgent. The
choice of intervention depends on the perpetrator's intent to harm. For example, if a family member
administers too much of a drug because the physician's directions are misunderstood, the only
intervention needed may be to give clearer instructions. A deliberate overdose requires more intensive
intervention.
In general, interventions need to be tailored to each situation. Interventions may include
• Medical assistance
• Education (eg, teaching victims about abuse and available options, helping them devise safety plans)
• Psychologic support (eg, psychotherapy, support groups)
• Law enforcement and legal intervention (eg, arrest of the perpetrator, orders of protection, legal
advocacy including asset protection)
• Alternative housing (eg, sheltered senior housing, nursing home placement)
• Counseling the victim, which usually requires many sessions (progress may be slow)
If victims have decision-making capacity, they should help determine their own intervention. If they do not,
the interdisciplinary
team, ideally with a guardian or objective conservator, should make most decisions.
Decisions are based on the severity of the violence, the victim's previous lifestyle choices, and legal
ramifications. Often, there is no single correct decision; each case must be carefully monitored.
Nursing and social work issues:
As members of the interdisciplinary team, nurses and social workers
===PAGE:3342===
can help prevent elder abuse and monitor the results of interventions. A nurse, social worker, or both can
be appointed as coordinator to ensure that pertinent information is accurately recorded, that relevant
parties are contacted and kept informed, and that necessary care is available 24 h/day.
In-service education about elder abuse should be offered to all nurses and social workers annually. In
some states (eg, New York), education about child abuse (but not yet about elder abuse) is mandatory for
physician, nursing, and social work licensure.
Reporting:
All states require that suspected or confirmed abuse in an institution be reported, and most
states require that abuse in the home also be reported. All US states have laws protecting and providing
services for vulnerable, incapacitated, or disabled adults.
In > 75% of US states, the agency designated to receive abuse reports is the state social service
department (Adult Protective Services). In the remaining states, the designated agency is the state unit on
aging. For abuse within an institution, the local long-term care ombudsman office should be contacted.
Telephone numbers for these agencies and offices in any part of the US can be found by calling the
Eldercare Locator (800-677-1116) or the National Center on Elder Abuse (202-682-2470) and giving the
patient's county and city of residence or zip code. Health care practitioners should know reporting laws
and procedures for their own states.
Caregiver issues:
Caregivers of a physically or cognitively impaired elderly person may not be able to
provide adequate care or may not realize that their behavior sometimes borders on abuse. These
caregivers may be so immersed in their caregiving roles that they become socially isolated and lack an
objective frame of reference for what constitutes normal caregiving. The deleterious effects of caregiver
burden, including depression, an increase in stress-related disorders, and a shrinking social network, are
well documented (. Physicians need to point out these effects to caregivers. Services to help
caregivers include adult day care, respite programs, and home health care.
Prevention
A physician or other health care practitioner may be the only person an abuse victim has contact with
other than the perpetrator and should therefore be vigilant for risk factors and signs of abuse.
Recognizing high-risk situations can prevent elder abuse—eg, when a frail or cognitively impaired elderly
person is being cared for by someone with a history of substance abuse, violence, a psychiatric disorder,
or caregiver burden. Physicians should pay particular attention when a frail elderly person (eg, a person
with a recent history of stroke or a newly diagnosed condition) is discharged into a precarious home
environment. Physicians should also remember that perpetrators and victims may not fit stereotypes.
Elderly people often agree to share their homes with family members who have drug or alcohol problems
or serious psychiatric disorders. A family member may have been discharged from a mental or other
institution to an elderly person's home without having been screened for risk of causing abuse.
Physicians should therefore counsel elderly patients considering such living arrangements, especially if
the relationship was fraught with tension in the past.
Patients can also actively decrease their risk of abuse (eg, by maintaining social relationships, by
increasing social and community contacts). They should seek legal advice before signing any documents
related to where they live or who makes financial decisions for them.
===PAGE:3343===
Chapter 315. The Older Driver
Introduction
Driving is essential for most older adults to maintain their autonomy. In the US, about 20 million drivers are
≥ 65. This number is expected to more than double by 2020.
Safe driving requires the integration of complex visual, physical, and cognitive tasks, and older drivers
may have mild to moderate deficits in these domains. Many older drivers successfully self-regulate their
behavior and compensate for deficits by
avoiding rush hour, driving fewer miles per year, limiting trips to
shorter distances, and avoiding driving during twilight, nighttime, or bad weather. Also, older drivers tend
to be more cautious, drive more slowly, and take fewer risks. However, some older adults, whether
because of denial, dementia, or a strong desire to maintain independence, continue to drive despite
significant impairments in driving ability.
Older drivers on average have a lower annual incidence of crashes with injury (rates per 1000 licensed
drivers—see
Fig. 315-1
) than drivers of all other ages. However, because the number of miles driven per year also
declines with aging (see
Fig. 315-2
), the crash rate per mile for drivers ≥ 70 is higher than that for drivers of all other ages except
those < 20.
Most crashes involving older drivers occur during the daytime and on weekdays.
[Fig. 315-1.
Number of crashes per licensed driver by age (2003).]
[Fig. 315-2.
Annual mileage by age and sex (2001).]
These crashes often result from failure to yield the right-of-way or heed a stop sign or red light and tend
to occur while going through intersections, making left turns, or merging into traffic. Crashes are more
likely to involve multiple vehicles and to result in serious injuries and fatalities. Unlike in younger drivers,
alcohol and speeding rarely play a role.
When crashes do occur, older adults seem to be more vulnerable to injury because
• They have less capacity to withstand trauma.
• They often have more comorbidities.
• Many crashes are driver-side impact (eg, occur while making left turns), making the driver more likely to
be injured.
• They are more likely than younger drivers to drive very old cars without air bags or other improvements
in crash protection.
However, as cars have become more crash-worthy and other efforts have improved traffic safety, the
crash fatality rate of older adults has decreased over the past decade.
Assessment:
Health care practitioners become involved in driving decisions when deficits are identified
during routine examination, when family members express concern, when law enforcement cites unsafe
driving behaviors, or when patients solicit advice. The role of practitioners is to do detailed functional and
medical assessments related to driving safety.
Driving history should be reviewed; details of driving habits and past violations, accidents, close calls, or
getting lost may point to general or specific impairments. Some impairments may obligate practitioners to
refer a patient to the state Department of Motor Vehicles for additional testing or driving restrictions. (See
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's [NHTSA] Physician's Guide to Assessing and
Counseling Older Drivers for state licensing requirements and reporting regulations at
===PAGE:3344===
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/olddrive/OlderDriversBook/
.)
Key Points
• The number of older adults is growing rapidly.
• Driving cessation is inevitable for many and can have negative outcomes (eg, social isolation,
depression, fewer driving destinations).
• Age-related and disease-related changes in physical and cognitive function can impair driving ability and
account for some of the increased crash rate per miles driven.
• Many older drivers successfully self-regulate their behavior.
• Older adults are more vulnerable to injury in a crash than younger adults.
• The role of practitioners is to do functional and medical assessments, which determine overall driving
safety, and to communicate recommendations effectively to older drivers and their family members.
• State licensing requirements and reporting regulations that pertain to older drivers are available from the
NHTSA.
Functional Assessment
Functional assessment involves assessment of a patient's visual, physical, and cognitive abilities. (See
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration web site for an Assessment of Driving-Related Skills
[ADReS].) Adequate function in these areas is required to drive safely. Much of the assessment can be
done by primary health care practitioners, but specialists (eg, ophthalmologists, occupational and physical
therapists, driving rehabilitation specialists) may need to be consulted. Identified deficits may require
interventions (, including driving rehabilitation, assistive devices, driving cessation, and
reporting to the state Department of Motor Vehicles. Some complicated cases may be referred to state
medical advisory boards.
Visual function:
Visual function is vital to safe driving. Age-related and pathologic changes in vision are
common and can contribute to driving impairment. Changes with aging include
• Decreased retinal illuminance (amount of light reaching the retina), visual acuity, and peripheral vision
• Presbyopia (decreased ability to accommodate), which impairs depth perception
• Decreased ability to adapt to changes in light and heightened sensitivity to glare, which impair night
driving
In many states, central visual acuity and peripheral vision are routinely tested by the Department of Motor
Vehicles when a license is renewed. Most states require 20/40 visual acuity in at least one eye for
unrestricted licensing (glasses or contacts are allowed). However, in some states, practitioners can
extend the requirement pending medical justification. Additionally, some states have approved use of
bioptics (a lens system with a telescope attached to a pair of glasses) for people with severely reduced
vision. For horizontal peripheral vision, safe driving thresholds
vary widely among states from no
requirement to about 140°.
Tests of useful field of view (spatial area from which visual stimuli can be acquired during a single fixed
glance) provide integrated measures of visual performance (eg, visual-processing speeds, visual-spatial
attention, visual memory) and can be used to predict a higher risk of crash. For example, the incidence of
crashes is 6 times higher when useful field of view is reduced by > 40%. However, field-of-view tests are
not yet widely available.
Older drivers often require referral to an ophthalmologist for comprehensive testing.
===PAGE:3345===
Physical function:
Various parameters of physical function can be assessed in the office.
• Motor speed, balance, and coordination can be assessed with the rapid-pace walk test. The patient is
asked to walk a 3-m (10-ft) path, turn around, and walk back to the starting point as quickly as possible.
If the patient normally walks with a walker or cane, it should be used during the test. A time of > 9 sec
may indicate an increased risk of a motor vehicle crash.
• Range of motion should be tested in the cervical region and in all joints of the upper and lower
extremities. Decreased cervical range of motion impairs ability to turn the head and scan for traffic
(particularly in the blind spot). Decreased range of motion in the extremities impairs ability to operate
car controls.
• Strength in upper and lower extremities should be assessed qualitatively (in terms of meeting the needs
of driving a vehicle). Grip strength should be measured with a dynamometer. A grip strength of < 16 kg
for men or < 14 kg for women may reflect decreased ability to manipulate the steering wheel.
• Proprioception and peripheral sensory function should be tested. Decreased peripheral sensation can
impair ability to modulate pressure on foot controls.
Physical and occupational therapists who specialize in driving rehabilitation can provide comprehensive
testing of physical function related to driving ability. A rehabilitation driving assessment sometimes also
involves the specialist going out in a car with the patient to evaluate actual driving skills. The car used
during the evaluation should be equipped with features that allow the specialist to maintain safe control
(eg, passenger-side brake). Driving rehabilitation specialists can be located by contacting local
rehabilitation facilities or going to www.driver-ed.org
. However, in most states, the cost of a rehabilitation
driving assessment is not covered by insurance (Medicare or private).
Cognitive function:
Cognition is moderately impaired in about 3% of community-dwelling people aged
65 to 74, 14% of those aged 75 to 84, and > 20% of those > 85. People with cognitive impairment often
do not recognize their limitations and are at higher risk of crashes; risk increases with severity of
impairment. Tests that may predict driving performance include the following:
• The Clock Drawing Test: This test assesses long-term memory, short-term memory, visual perception,
visuospatial skills, selective attention, and executive skills.
• The Trail Making Test (Part B): This easily given test assesses divided attention and visual scanning
and can be found at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration web site. Drivers with an
abnormal score on this test (eg, > 180 sec) may be candidates for more specialized testing by a driving
rehabilitation specialist.
• The Mini-Mental State Examination: Examination of mental status (see
Sidebar 168-1

screens for cognitive impairments.
Drivers with mild cognitive impairment should be considered for referral for more precise
neuropsychologic testing.
Medical Assessment
Medical assessment involves a review of medical conditions and drugs that could impair driving ability. In
general, any condition or drug that can impair consciousness should raise concern about driving safety.
Falls:
Falls and motor vehicle crashes share common causative factors (eg, impaired vision, muscle
strength, cognition). A history of falls in the past 1 to 2 yr indicates increased risk of crashes and should
prompt further evaluation of physical functioning (see above).
Cardiac disorders:
Cardiac disorders may increase driving risk. General guidelines include refraining
from driving for
===PAGE:3346===
• 1 mo after MI, coronary artery bypass surgery, or stabilization of unstable angina symptoms
• 3 mo after arrhythmia with syncope
• 6 mo after internal cardioverter defibrillator placement or after resuscitation required because of
sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation
Patients with severe heart failure (eg, class IV heart failure, dyspnea at rest or while driving) should
refrain from driving until they can be evaluated with on-road testing.
Neurologic disorders:
Neurologic disorders also increase driving risk. Specific disorders include
• Stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA): Drivers with a single TIA should wait 1 mo before resuming
driving; those with recurrent TIAs or stroke should be event-free for at least 3 mo before resuming
driving. Physical examination should be done to assess how residual disability due to stroke may affect
driving ability.
• Seizures: Regulations for drivers who have seizures are state-specific, but most states require a seizurefree interval (often 6 mo) before they reinstate driving privileges. Anticonvulsants can adequately control
seizures in about 70% of patients, although relapses may occur when these drugs are withdrawn.
Many other neurologic disorders (eg, Parkinson's disease) cause disability and should be monitored by
functional assessment and possibly an on-road test.
Diabetes mellitus:
Diabetes mellitus poses a risk because patients may become hypoglycemic while
driving. Patients who have had a recent hypoglycemic episode affecting awareness should not drive for 3
mo or until factors contributing to the episode (eg, diet, activity, timing and dose of insulin or
antihyperglycemic drug) have been assessed and managed. Sensory changes in the extremities due to
diabetes can also impair driving ability.
Sleep disorders:
Sleep disorders, most notably obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, can cause
drowsiness leading to crashes, and patients should refrain from driving until they are adequately treated.
Drugs:
When starting a new drug that could affect visual, physical, or cognitive function, patients should
refrain from driving for 1 to 2 days to be sure no adverse effects occur. Drugs that increase driving risk
include
• Antihistamines, benzodiazepines, opioids, anticholinergics, hypnotics, antihypertensives, or tricyclic
antidepressants: These drugs increase driving risk because they can cause drowsiness; some can also
cause hypotension or arrhythmias.
• Antiparkinsonian dopamine agonists (eg, pergolide, pramipexole, ropinirole): These drugs occasionally
cause acute sleep attacks, which pose an especially high risk of crashes.
• Antiemetics (eg, prochlorperazine) and muscle relaxants (eg, cyclobenzaprine): These drugs are cause
for concern because of their potential for altering sensory perception.
Instructing patients to bring all drug containers to the office can help identify drugs that increase risk.
Older adults are involved in fewer alcohol-related fatal crashes. Fewer older adults consume alcohol, but
limiting alcohol consumption is still important because blood alcohol level per amount of alcohol
consumed is higher in older adults. Also, concurrent use of alcohol and other drugs, particularly multiple
drugs, further impairs cognition, increasing the risk of crashes.
Interventions
If older drivers with significant functional deficits decide to limit or stop driving, the role of health care
===PAGE:3347===
practitioners is largely supportive. If the medical evaluation identifies potentially correctable deficits and
older drivers acknowledge these deficits but still wish to continue driving, practitioners can offer treatment
to help correct the deficits or impairments. However, aside from treating medical conditions that impair
driving ability, most practitioners are ill-equipped to formulate or execute a driving rehabilitation plan;
referral to specialists is often helpful.
Driving rehabilitation programs:
Although some older drivers can benefit from driving refresher
courses (eg, American Association of Retired Persons Driver Safety Program available at www.aarp.org
),
most should be referred to occupational therapists that specialize in driving rehabilitation. Driving
rehabilitation specialists can help by
• Clinically assessing skills related to driving and accompanying drivers on a road test for direct
evaluation of driving skills and deficits
• Instituting a tailored rehabilitation plan to increase motor skills or cognition and perception in the driver's
daily life
• Providing adaptive equipment, such as a spinner knob to help with one-handed steering or more
complicated devices such as hand controls
• Evaluating the response to the rehabilitation plan and providing feedback to the drivers as well as their
relatives and physician as to whether the driver's abilities are adequate to continue driving
However, in most states, the costs of a rehabilitation driving assessment and the adaptive equipment are
not covered by insurance (Medicare or private).
Driving cessation:
If older drivers deny or are unaware of their limitations or if deficits do not respond to
treatment, practitioners may need to be more proactive. In these situations, practitioners should discuss
issues relevant to driving safety, potential driving cessation, patient transportation needs, and alternative
transportation resources with the patient and family members.
The practitioner should balance the benefits of safety to the patient, pedestrians, and other drivers
against the costs of social isolation, worsening functional status, impaired quality of life, and clinical
depression. For some patients (eg, those with severe dementia), the benefits of driving restriction clearly
outweigh the costs.
Alternative transportation options should be discussed; they vary from community to community, and
contact with local resources such as the Alzheimer's Association (www.alz.org
) or American Automobile
Association Foundation for Traffic Safety (www.seniordrivers.org
) may prove beneficial. Family members
can find information about having conversations with older drivers at
www.thehartford.com/talkwitholderdrivers/
.
The loss of driving privileges can be relatively devastating in terms of maintaining independence. If
alternative transportation cannot be arranged and the ability to maintain activities of daily living is
adversely affected, loss of driving privileges sometimes prompts the need to move in with a family
member or transition to an assisted-living facility.
Reporting:
If the driver's functional limitations or medical status seems to warrant driving cessation,
practitioners should follow the reporting requirements of their state Department of Motor Vehicles. States
vary in their reporting laws. All states have voluntary reporting laws, but some states have mandatory
reporting laws. In most states, statutes protect the practitioner's anonymity or provide immunity to the
practitioner. Legal consultation may be beneficial when an office or institution is developing a reporting
policy and procedure.
Before making a report, practitioners should discuss recommendations for driving cessation directly with
the patient and family rather than simply filing a report. Practitioners should make every attempt to
persuade the patient to cooperate with driving restrictions. Such discussion should include why the
patient's limitations make driving unsafe and why the practitioner is obligated to report.
===PAGE:3348===
In some situations, practitioners must report functional limitations or medical status to state agencies
against the wishes of their patients; this action often has a negative impact on the practitioner-patient
relationship. Regardless, medical information can be legally disclosed if a patient's driving impairment
might jeopardize public safety; practitioners who do not notify appropriate authorities may be legally liable
for subsequent injuries.
===PAGE:3349===
Chapter 316. Funding Health Care for the Elderly
Introduction
In the US, health care services for the elderly are funded mainly by Medicare, Medicaid, the Veterans
Health Administration, private insurance, and out-of-pocket payments. In addition, many states offer
health-related benefits and programs, such as subsidies for transportation, housing, utilities, telephone,
and food expenses, as well as help at home and nutrition services. Health care workers should help
elderly patients learn about health benefits and programs they are entitled to.
Medicare
Medicare, administered by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), is primarily a health
insurance program for the elderly. (Medicare funds are also used to support certain components of
postgraduate medical training and programs that regulate and monitor quality of care.) The following
groups are eligible for Medicare:
• US citizens who are ≥ 65 and are eligible for benefits under Social Security, Civil Service Retirement, or
Railroad Retirement
• People of all ages with end-stage renal disease requiring dialysis or transplantation
•
Some people who are < 65 and have certain disabilities
The type and range of services that Medicare covers change regularly with new statutory and regulatory
amendments (current information is available at www.medicare.gov
). Each state has a State Health
Insurance Assistance Program, which patients can call for assistance in understanding and choosing
Medicare plans, understanding bills, and dealing with payment denials or appeals.
Physicians should understand basic Medicare rules, supply documentation used to determine whether
patients are eligible for benefits, and make referrals to legal and social services for counseling and
support.
If a patient's claim is denied, a Medicare Summary Notice is issued to the patient to provide information
about services or supplies that Medicare does not cover. The denial of coverage may be reversed by a
challenge made within 120 days of the notice. The challenge must be supported by an appeal in a fair
hearing administrative forum, in which the insurance company handling Medicare claims reviews the
case. If unsatisfied with the outcome of that review, the patient has the right to a hearing before a judge.
The original Medicare Plan (sometimes referred to as the fee-for-service plan) has 2 parts:
• Part A (hospital insurance)
• Part B (medical insurance)
The original Medicare Plan is available nationwide. A complete description of Part A and B services and
other provisions (called
Medicare & You 2010
) is available at www.medicare.gov
or by calling 800-6334227.
In 2003, the Medicare Modernization Act was enacted to provide reimbursement for health care in models
other than traditional fee-for-service and to provide reimbursement for prescription drugs. The results
were
• Part C (Medicare Advantage Plans), which includes managed care plans, preferred provider
organization plans, and private fee-for-service plans
• Part D (for prescription drugs)
===PAGE:3350===
Each part covers specific health care services (see
Table 316-1
). Medicare does not cover intermediate or long-term nursing care (except for the Part A
services noted below), nor does it cover routine eye, foot, or dental examinations.
Part A
More than 95% of people ≥ 65 are enrolled in Part A. Part A is supported by a payroll tax collected from
people who are working; it represents prepaid hospital insurance for Medicare-qualified retirees.
Generally, only people who receive monthly Social Security payments are eligible, and most of those who
are eligible do not pay premiums. However, people may be required to pay premiums if they or their
spouses have worked < 40 quarters at a job that is considered Medicare eligible (ie, if they or their
employer paid the payroll tax required by the Federal Insurance Contributions Act [FICA]). Premiums in
2010 were $254/mo for people with 7.5 to 10 yr of eligible employment and $461/mo for those with < 7.5
yr of eligible employment. People whose income and assets are below certain thresholds are eligible for
financial assistance from the Medicare Savings Programs (.
Part A covers the following under the circumstances outlined below:
• Inpatient hospital care
• Posthospital care in a skilled nursing facility or a rehabilitation facility
• Hospice care
• Limited custodial care
• Limited home health care
Care in a hospital or a skilled nursing facility is paid for based on benefit periods. A benefit period begins
when a person is admitted to a facility and ends when the person has been out of the facility for 60
consecutive days. If a person is readmitted after the 60 days, a new benefit period begins, and another
deductible must be paid. If a person is readmitted in < 60 days, an additional deductible is not paid, but
the hospital or facility may not receive full payment for the 2nd admission. There is no limit to the number
of benefit periods.
Medicare Prospective Payment Systems determine what Medicare will pay for each aspect of care it
covers (eg, for hospital inpatient care, skilled nursing facility care, or home health care).
Inpatient hospital care:
Under Part A, the beneficiary pays only a deductible for the first 60 full coverage
days of the benefit period; the deductible is established annually ($1100 in 2010). If the hospital stay
exceeds 60 days, the beneficiary pays a daily co-payment equal to one fourth of the deductible (in 2010,
$275 per day for days 61 to 90). If the hospital stay exceeds 90 days, the beneficiary pays a daily copayment equal to half of the deductible (in 2010, $550 per day for days 91 to 150). Days 91 to 150 during
a hospital stay are designated as reserve days. Part A benefits include 60 lifetime reserve days for use
after a 90-day benefit period has exhausted.
[Table 316-1.
Funding Sources by Type of Care]
The 60 days are not renewable and can be used only once during a beneficiary's lifetime. Payment is
automatically made for such additional days of hospital care after the 90 days of benefits have been
exhausted unless the beneficiary chooses not to have such payment made (thus saving the reserve days
for a later time). Beyond 150 days, the beneficiary is responsible for all charges.
Part A covers virtually all medically necessary hospital services, except it provides only limited coverage
for inpatient mental health care services. Part A pays for a semiprivate room or, if medically necessary, a
private room, but not for amenities. Other covered services include discharge planning and medical social
services, such as identification of eligibility for public programs and referrals to community agencies.
===PAGE:3351===
The prospective payment system determines payment for inpatient hospital care based on the diagnosisrelated group (DRG). The DRG is determined by the beneficiary's principal diagnosis with some
adjustment for age, severity, sex, comorbidities, and complications. Hospitals are reimbursed a set
amount for a given DRG regardless of their actual expenses in providing care. Thus, a hospital's financial
profit or loss depends partly on length of stay and costs of diagnosis and therapy for each patient. Under
the prospective payment system, the financial pressure for early discharge and limited intervention may
conflict with medical judgment. When a
patient cannot be discharged home safely or to a nursing home
because no bed is available, Medicare typically pays a relatively low per diem cost for an alternative level
of care.
Inpatient care in a skilled nursing facility:
Coverage of skilled nursing care and skilled rehabilitation
services is complex and can change every year. These services are covered only if initiated immediately
or shortly after discharge from a hospital. The period of coverage is usually < 1 mo (specific duration of
coverage depends on documented improvement in the patient's condition or level of function). In 2010,
the first 20 days were covered completely; the next 80 days were covered but required a co-payment of
$137.50/day. Benefits are limited to 100 days per benefit period.
Medicare's prospective payment system assigns patients in skilled nursing facilities to a resource
utilization group system (RUGS III) based on 7 categories:
• Special care
• Rehabilitation
• Clinically complex problems
• Severe behavioral problems
• Impaired cognition
• Reduced physical functioning
• Need for extensive services
These categories reflect the types and amounts of resources a patient's care is expected to cost. They
are subdivided based primarily on the patient's functional dependence. This system is updated annually.
The goal is to increase efficiency and avoid excessive payment for patients who require little care.
Prospective per diem rates cover routine, ancillary, and capital costs of care for a patient in a skilled
nursing facility.
RUGS III uses data from the Minimum Data Set (MDS), the mandated uniform assessment instrument for
patients in skilled nursing facilities. The MDS requires ongoing review of patients, making it possible to
link patient outcomes with RUGS categories.
Home health care:
Generally, part A covers certain medical services provided in the home (eg, part-time
or intermittent skilled nursing care; home health aide services incidental to skilled care; physical, speech,
and occupational therapy) if they are part of a physician-approved care plan for a home-bound patient.
However, amount and duration of coverage is limited. The recent implementation of a prospective
payment system now limits the amount of coverage. Medical supplies are covered when billed by a home
health agency.
Hospice services:
Medical and support services for a terminal illness are generally covered if a
physician certifies that the patient is terminally ill (estimated life expectancy of 6 mo). However, the patient
must choose to receive hospice care instead of standard Medicare benefits.
Custodial care:
Assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs), such as eating, dressing, toileting, and
bathing, is covered in the home only when skilled care (services of a professional nurse or therapist
under a physician-authorized plan of home care) is also required. Such custodial care in a skilled nursing
===PAGE:3352===
facility is covered when it is part of posthospital acute or rehabilitation care.
Part B
The federal government pays an average of about 75% of Part B costs, and beneficiaries pay 25%. Part
B is optional; although Social Security beneficiaries are automatically enrolled in Part B at age 65, they
may decline coverage (95% elect to keep Part B coverage). All beneficiaries pay a monthly premium,
which varies by income—$110.50 in 2010 for new beneficiaries whose income in 2008 was < $85,000
($170,000 if they were married and filing a joint return); premiums are higher for people with a higher
income. Premiums are automatically deducted from monthly Social Security checks. People who decline
coverage but later change their minds must pay a surcharge based on how long they delayed enrollment.
Premiums generally increase by 10% for each year's delay in enrollment, except for people who delay
because they are covered by group insurance through their, their spouse's, or a family member's
employer; such people do not pay the surcharge if they enroll when employment or health care coverage
ends (whichever comes first). Most states have Medicare Savings Programs ( that pay Part B
premiums for people who meet certain financial qualifications.
Participants may stop coverage at any time but must pay a surcharge on the premium if they reenroll.
Covered services:
Part B covers a percentage of the following: cost of physician services; outpatient
hospital care (eg, emergency department care, outpatient surgery, dialysis), with certain restrictions;
outpatient physical, speech, and occupational therapy; diagnostic tests, including portable x-ray services
in the home; prosthetics and orthotics; and durable medical equipment for home use. If surgery is
recommended, Part B covers part of the cost of an optional 2nd opinion and, if these opinions differ, a 3rd
opinion.
Part B also covers medically necessary ambulance services, certain services and supplies not covered by
Part A (eg, colostomy bags, prostheses), spinal manipulation by a licensed chiropractor for subluxation
shown on x-ray, drugs and dental services if deemed necessary for medical treatment, optometry services
related to lenses for cataracts, smoking cessation counseling, and the services of physician assistants,
nurse practitioners, clinical psychologists, and clinical social workers. Outpatient mental health care, with
certain limitations, is covered.
Drugs and biologicals that cannot be administered by the patient (eg, drugs given IV), some oral
anticancer drugs, and certain drugs for hospice patients are covered by Part B. However, unless the
patient is enrolled in a managed care program, Part B generally does not cover outpatient drugs.
Part B covers several preventive services, including bone mass measurement, serum cholesterol
screening, abdominal aortic aneurysm screening, diabetes services (screening, supplies, self-care
training, and eye and foot examinations), colorectal cancer screening, prostate cancer screening and
prostate-specific antigen tests, an initial physical examination (the "Welcome to Medicare" examination),
glaucoma screening, vaccinations (influenza, pneumococcal, hepatitis B), mammograms, and
Papanicolaou (Pap) tests. Part B does not cover routine eye, foot, or dental examinations.
Physician reimbursement:
Under Part B, physicians may elect to be paid directly by Medicare
(assignment), receiving 80% of the allowable charge directly from the program, once the deductible has
been met. If physicians accept assignment, their patients are responsible for paying only the deductible.
Physicians who do not accept assignment of Medicare payments (or do so selectively) may bill patients
up to 115% of the allowable charge; the patient receives reimbursement (80% of the allowable charge)
from Medicare. Physicians are subject to fines if their charges exceed the maximum allowable Medicare
fees. Physicians who do not accept assignment from Medicare must give patients a written estimate for
elective surgery if it is > $500. Otherwise, patients can later claim a refund from physicians for any
amount paid over the allowable charge.
Medicare payments to physicians have been criticized as inadequate for the time involved in giving
physical and mental status examinations and obtaining the patient history from family members. A
Medicare fee schedule based on a resource-based relative value scale for physician services became
effective in January 1992 in an attempt to correct this problem. The effects of the fee schedule on patient
===PAGE:3353===
care and on medical practice remain to be determined, but few physicians are satisfied. The paperwork
and time involved in documentation have increased.
Part C (Medicare Advantage Plans)
This program (formerly called Medicare + Choice) offers several alternatives to the traditional fee-forservice programs. The alternatives are provided by private insurance companies; Medicare pays these
companies a fixed amount for each beneficiary. Several different types of plans are available; they include
managed care, preferred provider organizations, private fee-for-service, medical savings accounts, and
special needs plans.
Medicare Advantage plans must cover at least the same level and types of benefits covered by Medicare
A and B. However, Medicare Advantage plans may include additional benefits (eg, coverage for dentures,
prescription drugs, or routine eyeglasses), although participants may pay an additional monthly premium
for the additional benefits. Plans differ on whether participants are free to choose any physician and
hospital they want, whether they can keep coverage from an employer or union, and what costs are paid
out-of-pocket, including how much (if at all) they charge for a premium, whether they pay any of the Part
B premium, and how much their deductible and co-payments are. Medicare Advantage plans are
available in many but not all areas of the country.
Part D
Medicare Part D helps cover costs of prescription drugs. It is optional. Plans are provided by insurance or
other private companies working with Medicare. There are over 1600 plans available nationwide.
Premiums generally increase by an additional 1% for each month that people delay enrolling after they
first become eligible for Medicare.
Covered drugs:
Plans vary in the drugs they cover (formulary) as well as in pharmacies that can be
used. However, formularies must include ≥ 2 effective drugs in the categories and classes of drugs most
commonly prescribed for people who use Medicare. Formularies must also cover all available drugs for
the following 6 classes: anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antiretroviral drugs, antineoplastics,
antipsychotics, and immunosuppressants.
Formularies may change over time (often annually).
Formularies must also have an appeals process by which nonformulary drugs can be approved if
necessary.
Benefits and costs:
Costs are expected to increase annually until at least 2013. Costs in 2010 are as
follows for the basic benefits (see
Fig. 316-1
):
•
Premiums:
Premiums vary by plan but average about $31 yearly.
•
Annual deductible:
Patients pay the first $310 of drug costs.
•
Co-payments:
For the next $2520 of drug costs (after the $310 deductible), patients pay 25% of drug
costs (co-payment). Thus, the co-payment for the first $2830 of drug costs is $630 in addition to the
$310 deductible.
•
Coverage gap (doughnut hole):
After the first $2830 of drug costs, people must pay 100% of the next
$3610 of drug costs—that is, until total drug costs equal $6440 (total cost, including deductible and copayments, is $4550 out-of-pocket).
•
Reduced co-payments:
Once total annual drugs costs are > $6440, Medicare pays about 95% of
additional drug costs until the end of the year.
Many companies also offer enhanced plans that provide more coverage (eg, lower deductibles or copayments), although these plans have higher monthly premiums.
[Fig. 316-1.
Medicare Part D drug costs in 2010.]
===PAGE:3354===
People with low income and minimal assets (eg, those who have full Medicaid coverage, who belong to a
Medicare Savings Program, or who get Supplemental Security Income) may be eligible for financial
assistance with premiums, deductibles, and co-payments. In addition to providing insurance assistance,
many states have state pharmacy assistance programs that help pay for prescription drugs, based on
some combination of the person's need, age, and medical disorders; information about these programs is
available from the State Health Insurance Assistance Program.
Medicaid
Funded by a federal-state partnership, Medicaid pays for health services for certain categories of the
poor (including the aged poor, the blind or disabled, and low-income families with dependent children).
The federal government contributes between 50% and about 76% of the payments made under each
state's program; the state pays the remainder. Federal reimbursement is higher for states where incomes
are lower. About 10% of the elderly receive services under Medicaid, accounting for about 40% of all
Medicaid expenditures. Medicaid is the major public payer for long-term care; it contributed about 40% of
the $177.6 billion spent for long-term care services in 2006.
Covered services:
Services covered under federal guidelines include inpatient and out-patient hospital
care, laboratory and x-ray services, physician services, skilled nursing care, nursing home care not
covered by Medicare, and many home health services for people > 21 yr.
States may cover certain other services and items, including prescription drugs (or the premiums for
Medicare Part D if patients are eligible for Part D), dental services, physical therapy, rehabilitation
services, and eyeglasses. Each state determines eligibility requirements, which therefore vary, but people
receiving funds from cash-assistance programs (eg, the Supplemental Security Income program) must be
included. Several states offer enriched packages of Medicaid services under waiver programs, which are
intended to delay or prevent nursing home admission by providing additional home and community-based
services (eg, day care, personal care, respite care).
Eligibility:
Eligibility depends on income, assets, and personal characteristics. In 2009, people who are
eligible include the following:
• All pregnant women and women with children if income is < 133% of the poverty level
• Children aged 6 to 19 yr if family income is < 100% of the poverty level
• Elderly and disabled people whose income makes them eligible for Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
• Institutionalized patients whose income is < 300% of the SSI income threshold
Most states have other criteria that allow people to qualify for Medicaid.
Assets, excluding equity in a home and certain other assets, are also considered. If the remaining assets
exceed the limit, people are not eligible for Medicaid, even if their income is low. Thus, the elderly may
have to spend down (ie, pay for care from personal savings and sale of assets until stringent state
eligibility requirements are met) to qualify for Medicaid. How much of monthly income and of the couple's
assets that the spouse of a nursing home resident may keep varies by state. Divestment of assets at
below fair-market value during the 3 yr before entrance into a nursing home may delay eligibility for
Medicaid benefits. Medicaid denies coverage for a period of time that is determined by the amount of
inappropriately divested funds divided by the average monthly cost of nursing home care in the state. For
example, if a person gives away $10,000 in a state where the average monthly cost of care is $3,500,
Medicaid coverage is delayed by about 3 mo.
Medicaid estate recovery:
Under certain circumstances, Medicaid is entitled (and sometimes required)
to recover expenditures from the estates of deceased Medicaid recipients. Typically, recovery may be
made only from estates of recipients who were ≥ 55 yr when they received Medicaid benefits or were
permanently institutionalized regardless of age. The definition of estate varies by state. Some states
===PAGE:3355===
include only property that passes through probate; others include assets that pass directly (eg, through
joint tenancy with right of survivorship, living trusts, or life insurance payouts). Some states protect the
family home from Medicaid claims. The vigor with which claims are pursued varies by state and by case.
Medicare Savings Programs:
People who are currently eligible for Medicare and whose income and
assets are below certain thresholds are eligible for Medicare Savings Programs. These programs are run
by individual state Medicaid programs and cover certain out-of-pocket expenses not covered by
Medicare. There are several programs. The Qualified Medicare Beneficiary program covers Part A and
Part B premiums, deductibles, and co-insurance; the Specified Low-income Medicare Beneficiary
program and the Qualified Disabled Working Individual program pay part B premiums.
The federal government has set eligibility requirements based on income and asset value. States are free
to adopt less restrictive requirements (eg, permitting enrollment at a higher income level). People enroll
through state Medicaid offices.
Other Federal Programs
Veterans Health Administration:
This Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) program provides health
care to eligible veterans. Determining eligibility for VA benefits can be complex, and care is not always
free. The VA operates > 160 hospitals, 43 domiciliary facilities, and > 130 nursing homes. It also contracts
to provide care in community hospitals and nursing homes. Several innovative geriatric programs
(including geriatric assessment units; Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Centers; and hospitalbased home health care programs) have been developed within the VA system.
Tricare:
This healthcare program is for active-duty service members, retired service members, and their
families.
Older Americans Act (OAA):
Enacted in 1965, the OAA has evolved from a program of small grants and
research projects into a network of 57 state, territorial, and Indian tribal units on aging; 670 area agencies
on aging; and thousands of community agencies. The primary purpose of the OAA is to develop,
coordinate, and deliver a comprehensive system of services for elderly people at the community level;
services include information and referral, outreach, transportation, senior centers, nutritional programs,
advocacy, protective services, senior employment, ombudsman programs, and supportive services. The
OAA also funds research and training. People > 60 are eligible regardless of income level.
Social Security:
Although not usually considered a health program, Social Security provides basic
pension payments that the elderly use for health care services. The elderly receive 2 types of payments:
•
Old Age and Survivors Insurance, which is financed by Social Security trust funds and provides
payments to retirees, surviving spouses, or qualified dependents
• Supplementary Security Income, which is financed from general revenues and provides a guaranteed
minimum income to aged, blind, and disabled people
Title XX of the Social Security Act:
This program authorizes reimbursements to states for social
services, including various home health services and homemaker services (eg, meal preparation, laundry,
light housekeeping, grocery shopping) for the frail elderly. These funds have shifted to the Social
Services Block Grant program, which was designed to prevent or reduce inappropriate institutional care
by providing for community-based care and other assistance that enables the elderly to maintain
autonomy in the community. The program is defined, administered, and implemented by states; it does not
support institutional care or any service covered by Medicare or Medicaid. The program covers health
services only when they are an "integral but subordinate" component of an overall social service program.
Private Insurance
Medigap:
About 87% of beneficiaries enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare programs have Medicare
supplemental insurance policies (most are a form of Medigap insurance), which pay for some or all of
Medicare deductibles and co-payments, typically in Parts A and B. People must be enrolled in Parts A and
===PAGE:3356===
B to be eligible to purchase Medigap insurance. People enrolled in Part C (Medicare Advantage Plan
— cannot purchase a Medigap policy unless they leave the Part C plan and return to original
Medicare. Most Medigap insurance is purchased individually from private insurers, although employers
may provide it to retirees.
There are 12 different types of Medigap insurance available, labeled A through L. Benefits are the same
for all plans with the same letter, regardless of insurance carrier. No plan may duplicate Medicare
benefits. The basic plan (Plan A) covers
• Hospital co-payments
• 100% of expenses eligible for coverage by Medicare Part A after Medicare hospital benefits are
exhausted
• Part B co-payments
The other plans, which have higher premiums than Plan A, may provide additional coverage in a skilled
nursing facility and may cover Part A and Part B deductibles, preventive medical services, and short-term
home-based help with activities of daily living (ADLs) during recovery from an illness, injury, or surgery.
Some of these plans, if purchased before Medicare Part D took effect, covered a percentage of the cost
of outpatient prescribed drugs.
The Medigap open enrollment period begins the month people turn 65 and lasts 6 mo. During this period,
people who have preexisting conditions cannot be denied coverage or charged more; however, they may
be made to wait up to 6 mo before preexisting conditions are covered.
Long-term care insurance:
Very few private medical insurance policies cover services such as longterm home health care or long-term nursing home care. However, some private insurers offer long-term
care insurance. Such plans are useful for people who want to preserve their assets and who can afford to
pay the premiums until care is needed, possibly for an extended period of time. This insurance is not
recommended for people with few assets and may not be worthwhile for people who can easily pay for
long-term care.
Benefits usually begin when a person can no longer do a certain number of ADLs.
Some plans, called tax-qualified plans, offer tax advantages (eg, deduction of premiums from taxable
income as medical expenses).
For all long-term care services, private insurance pays for only 9%, and people pay for 22% out-ofpocket. A large proportion of out-of-pocket spending occurs as the elderly spend down to qualify for
Medicaid.
Models for Comprehensive Coverage
Individually, Medicare, Medicaid, Medigap, and private long-term care insurance have shortcomings in
providing comprehensive geriatric care:
• Medicare excludes long-term custodial care, some preventive services, and large amounts of
prescription drug costs.
• Medicaid belatedly intervenes after the patient is impoverished.
• Medigap, like Medicare, excludes long-term care.
• Private insurance is too expensive for most of the elderly, leaves them vulnerable to financial
catastrophe, and supports only fragments of long-term care.
Collectively, these programs rarely promote integration of acute and long-term care or coordination of
===PAGE:3357===
health and social services. However, several model projects have demonstrated that with organized
delivery of services using combinations of public funding and private insurance, comprehensive geriatric
care, including some long-term care, can be adequately financed.
Social health maintenance organizations (SHMOs):
SHMOs are demonstration programs financed by
Medicare. They use Medicare, Medicaid, and private patient payments to cover a wide range of care
benefits managed by nurses, social workers, and physicians. Patients not eligible for Medicaid benefits
use private payments to cover a limited amount of long-term care, principally in the home. Like an HMO,
an SHMO is at financial risk for the cost of services and therefore has an incentive to manage resources
carefully.
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE):
PACE is designed to keep patients in the
community as long as medically, socially, and financially possible. A PACE interdisciplinary team assesses
patient needs and develops and implements a care plan.
PACE includes medical and dental care, adult day care (including transportation to and from the facility),
health and personal care at home, prescription drugs, social services, rehabilitation, meals, nutritional
counseling, and hospital and long-term care when needed. PACE programs provide social and medical
services primarily in an adult day health center, supplemented by in-home and referral services. The
PACE service package must include all Medicare and Medicaid covered services, and other services
determined necessary by the interdisciplinary team for the care of the PACE participant. PACE may
require a monthly fee.
As of 2010, 30 states have approved PACE providers.
Extended care communities:
A life-care community or continuing care retirement community provides
housing, health care, and other services under packaged financing and management. These communities
may have a clinic, an infirmary, or even a nursing home on the site, and housing is designed to
accommodate disabled people. Many of these communities serve wealthy retirees willing to sign longterm contracts for their housing and care.
Some life-care communities fail because inflation and an aging population cause costs for services to
exceed income. Some communities keep costs down by providing housing and minimal services with
options to purchase additional services.
===PAGE:3358===
21 - Clinical Pharmacology
Chapter 317. Concepts in Pharmacotherapy
Introduction
Drugs are selected based on characteristics of the drug (eg, efficacy, safety profile, route of
administration, route of elimination, dosing frequency, cost) and of the patient (eg, age, sex, likelihood of
pregnancy, ethnicity, other genetic determinants). Risks and benefits of the drug are also assessed; every
drug poses some risk.
Response to a drug depends partly on the patient's characteristics and behaviors (eg, consumption of
foods or supplements; adherence to a dosing regimen; differences in metabolism due to age, sex, race,
genetic polymorphisms, or hepatic or renal insufficiency), coexistence of other disorders, and use of other
drugs. Drug errors (eg, prescribing an inappropriate drug, misreading a prescription, administering a drug
incorrectly) can also affect response.
Adherence to a Drug Regimen
Adherence (compliance) is the degree to which a patient follows a treatment regimen. For drugs,
adherence requires that the prescription is obtained promptly and the drug is taken as prescribed in terms
of dose, dosing interval, and duration of treatment. Patients should be told to alert their physician if they
stop or alter the way they take a drug, but they rarely do so.
Only about half of patients who leave a physician's office with a prescription take the drug as directed.
The most common reasons for nonadherence are
• Frequent dosing
• Denial of illness
• Poor comprehension of the benefits of taking the drug
• Cost
Many other reasons contribute to nonadherence (see
Table 317-1
).
Children are less likely than adults to adhere to a treatment regimen. Adherence is worst with chronic
disorders requiring complex, long-term treatment (eg, juvenile diabetes, asthma). Parents may not clearly
understand prescription instructions and, within 15 min, forget about half the information given by the
physician.
[Table 317-1.
Causes of Nonadherence]
The elderly adhere to treatment regimens as well as other adults. However, factors that decrease
adherence (eg, inadequate finances, use of multiple drugs or drugs that must be taken several times a
day) are more common among the elderly (. Cognitive impairment may further decrease
adherence. Sometimes a prescriber must be creative by picking a drug that is easier to use even though it
may not be the first choice. For example, a clonidine patch applied weekly by a visiting nurse or family
member may be tried for hypertension in patients who cannot adhere to a more preferable daily regimen
of oral drugs.
The most obvious result of nonadherence is that the disorder may not be relieved or cured.
Nonadherence is estimated to result in 125,000 deaths due to cardiovascular disorders each year in the
US. If patients took their drugs as directed, up to 23% of nursing home admissions, 10% of hospital
admissions, many physician visits, many diagnostic tests, and many unnecessary treatments could be
avoided. In some cases, nonadherence can actually lead to worsening of disease. For example, missed
===PAGE:3359===
doses or early cessation of antibiotic or antiviral therapy may lead to resistant organisms.
Pharmacists and nurses may detect and help solve adherence problems. For example, a pharmacist may
note that a patient does not obtain refills or that a prescription is being refilled too soon. In reviewing
prescription directions with the patient, a pharmacist or nurse may uncover a patient's misunderstandings
or fears and alleviate them. Physicians can alter complicated or frequent dosing or substitute safe,
effective, but less expensive drugs. Communication among all health care practitioners that provide care
for a patient is important.
Drug Errors
Drug errors contribute to morbidity. They are estimated to cost the US health care system up to $177
billion (depending on definitions) annually. Drug errors may involve
• The wrong choice of a drug or a prescription for the wrong dose, frequency, or duration
• An error in reading the prescription by the pharmacist so that the wrong drug or dose is dispensed
• An error in reading the label of the drug container by the caregiver so that the wrong drug or dose is
given
• Incorrect instructions to the patient
• Incorrect administration by a clinician, caregiver, or patient
•
Incorrect storage of a drug by the pharmacist or patient, altering the drug's potency
• Use of outdated drug, altering the drug's potency
• Confusion of the patient so that the drug is taken incorrectly
Errors in prescribing are common, especially for certain populations. The elderly (see
Chapter 308
, especially
Table 308-3
, women of childbearing age, and children are particularly at risk. Drug
interactions particularly affect those taking many drugs. To minimize risk, clinicians should know all drugs
being taken—including those prescribed by others and OTC drugs—and keep a complete problem list.
Patients should be encouraged to write and update a list of their current drugs and dosages and bring the
list to every health care appointment or emergency department visit. If there is any doubt as to which
drugs are being used, patients should be instructed to bring all their drugs to their health care
appointments for review.
Prescriptions must be written as clearly as possible. The names of some drugs are similar and, if not
written clearly, cause confusion. Changing some traditional but easily confused notations may also help
reduce errors. For example, "qd" (once/day) may be confused with "qid" (4 times/day). Writing "once/day"
or "once a day" is preferred. Electronically transmitted or computer-printed prescriptions can avoid
problems with illegible handwriting or inappropriate abbreviations.
Drugs may be given incorrectly, especially in institutions. A drug may be given to the wrong patient, at the
wrong time, or by the wrong route. Certain drugs must be given slowly when given IV, and some drugs
cannot be given simultaneously. When an error is recognized, it should be reported immediately to a
clinician, and a pharmacist should be consulted. Bar codes and computerized pharmacy systems may
help decrease the incidence of drug errors.
A pharmacist should store drugs in a manner that ensures their potency. Mail-order pharmacies should
follow procedures to ensure proper transportation. Storage by patients is often suboptimal. If stored
incorrectly, drugs are likely to decrease in potency long before the stated expiration date. Labeling should
clearly state whether a drug needs to be stored in the refrigerator or kept cool, needs to be kept out of
excessive heat or sun, or otherwise requires special storage. On the other hand, unnecessary
precautions decrease adherence and waste the patient's time. For example, unopened insulin should be
===PAGE:3360===
refrigerated, but a bottle in use can be stored safely outside the refrigerator for a relatively long time if not
exposed to excessive heat and sun.
Use of outdated drugs is common. Outdated drugs are likely to be ineffective and some (eg, aspirin,
tetracycline) can be harmful if used when outdated.
Most commonly, drug error results from a patient's confusion about how to take drugs. Patients may take
the wrong drug or dose. Dosing instructions for each drug, including why the drug has been prescribed,
should be completely explained to patients and given in writing when possible. They should be advised to
ask their pharmacist for additional advice about taking their drugs. Packaging should be convenient but
safe. If children will not have access to the drug and patients may have difficulty opening the container,
drugs do not need to be provided in childproof containers.
Drug Interactions
Drug interactions are changes in a drug's effects due to recent or concurrent use of another
drug or drugs (drug-drug interactions) or due to ingestion of food (drug-nutrient interactions
—.
A drug interaction may increase or decrease the effects of one or both drugs. Clinically significant
interactions are often predictable and usually undesired (see
Table 317-2
). Adverse effects or therapeutic failure may result. Rarely, clinicians can use predictable
drug-drug interactions to produce a desired therapeutic effect. For example, coadministration of lopinavir
and ritonavir to patients with HIV infection results in altered metabolism of lopinavir and increases serum
lopinavir concentrations and effectiveness.
In therapeutic duplication, 2 drugs with similar properties are taken at the same time and have additive
effects. For example, taking a benzodiazepine for anxiety and another benzodiazepine at bedtime for
insomnia may have a cumulative effect, leading to toxicity.
Drug interactions involve
• Pharmacodynamics
• Pharmacokinetics
In
pharmacodynamic interactions
, one drug alters the sensitivity or responsiveness of tissues to
another drug by having the same (agonistic) or a blocking (antagonistic) effect. These effects usually
occur at the receptor level but may occur intracellularly.
In
pharmacokinetic interactions
, a drug usually alters absorption, distribution, protein binding,
metabolism, or excretion of another
[Table 317-2.
Some Drugs with Potentially Serious Drug Interactions*]
drug. Thus, the amount and persistence of available drug at receptor sites change. Pharmacokinetic
interactions alter magnitude and duration, not type, of effect. They are often predicted based on
knowledge of the individual drugs or detected by monitoring drug concentrations or clinical signs.
Minimizing drug interactions:
Clinicians should know all of their patients' current drugs, including drugs
prescribed by other clinicians and all OTC drugs, herbal products, and nutritional supplements. Asking
patients relevant questions about diet and alcohol consumption is recommended. The fewest drugs in the
lowest doses for the shortest possible time should be prescribed. The effects, desired and undesired, of
all drugs taken should be determined because these effects usually include the spectrum of drug
interactions. If possible, drugs with a wide safety margin should be used so that any unforeseen
interactions do not cause toxicity.
===PAGE:3361===
Patients should be observed and monitored for adverse effects, particularly after a change in treatment;
some interactions (eg, effects that are influenced by enzyme induction) may take ≥ 1 wk to appear. Drug
interactions should be considered as a possible cause of any unexpected problems. When unexpected
clinical responses occur, prescribers should determine serum concentrations of selected drugs being
taken, consult the literature or an expert in drug interactions, and adjust the dosage until the desired
effect is produced. If dosage adjustment is ineffective, the drug should be replaced by one that does not
interact with other drugs being taken.
Pharmacogenetics
Pharmacogenetics involves variations in drug response due to genetic makeup.
The activity of drug-metabolizing enzymes often varies widely among healthy people, making metabolism
highly variable. Drug elimination rates vary up to 40-fold. Genetic factors and aging seem to account for
most of these variations.
Pharmacogenetic variation (eg, in acetylation, hydrolysis, oxidation, or drug-metabolizing enzymes) can
have clinical consequences (see
Table 317-3
). For example, if patients metabolize certain drugs rapidly, they may require higher, more
frequent doses to achieve therapeutic concentrations; if patients metabolize certain drugs slowly, they
may need lower, less frequent doses to avoid toxicity, particularly of drugs with a narrow margin of safety.
For example, patients with inflammatory bowel disease
who require azathioprine therapy are now
routinely tested for thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) genotype to determine the most appropriate
starting dose for drug therapy. Most genetic differences cannot be predicted before drug therapy, but for
an increasing number of drugs (eg, carbamazepine, clopidogrel, warfarin), changes in effectiveness and
risk of toxicity have been specifically associated with certain genetic variations. Also, many environmental
and developmental factors can interact with each other and with genetic factors to affect drug response
(see
Fig. 317-1
).
Placebos
Placebos are inactive substances or interventions, most often used in controlled studies for
comparison with potentially active drugs.
The term placebo (Latin for "I will please") initially referred to an inactive, harmless substance given to
patients to make them feel better by the power of suggestion. More recently, sham interventions (eg,
mock electrical stimulation or simulated surgical procedures in clinical trials) have also been considered
placebos. The term is sometimes used for an active drug that is given solely for its placebo effect on a
disorder in which the drug is inactive (eg, an antibiotic for patients with viral illness).
Effects:
Placebos, although physiologically inactive, may have substantial effects—good and bad. These
effects seem to be related to anticipation that the drug will work; anticipation of
adverse
effects is
sometimes called the nocebo effect. The placebo effect typically occurs with subjective responses (eg,
pain, nausea) rather than objective ones (eg, rate of healing of leg ulcers, infection rate of burn wounds).
The magnitude of the response varies with many factors, including the
• Expressed confidence of the clinician ("this is going to make you feel a lot better" vs "there is a chance
this might help")
• Certainty of the patient's beliefs (effect is larger when patients are sure they are receiving an active drug
than when they know there is a chance they are getting a placebo)
• Type of placebo (eg, injectable drugs have a larger effect than oral ones)
[Fig. 317-1.
Genetic, environmental, and developmental factors that can interact, causing variations in
drug response among patients.]
===PAGE:3362===
[Table 317-3.
Examples of Pharmacogenetic Variations]
Not everyone responds to placebos, and it is not possible to predict who will respond; correlations
between personality characteristics and response to placebos have been theorized but not well
established. However, people who have dependent personalities and who want to please their clinicians
may be more likely to report beneficial effects; those with histrionic personalities may be more likely to
report any effect, good or bad.
Use in clinical trials:
Many clinical trials compare an active treatment with a placebo. The apparent
effects of the placebo are then subtracted from the apparent effects of the active treatment to identify the
true treatment effect; to be meaningful, a clinically and statistically significant difference is required. In
some studies, the placebo relieves the disorder in a high percentage of patients, making it more difficult to
show the active treatment's efficacy.
Use in clinical practice:
Rarely today, when a clinician determines that patients have a mild, self-limited
disorder for which an active
drug does not exist or is not indicated (eg, for nonspecific malaise or
tiredness), a placebo may be prescribed. The reasoning is that the placebo satisfies patients' demands
for treatment without exposing them to potential adverse effects and often makes them feel better—due to
the placebo effect or spontaneous improvement.
Ethical considerations:
In clinical studies, the ethical consideration is whether a placebo should be
given at all. When effective treatment exists (eg, opioid analgesics for severe pain), it is typically
considered unethical to deprive study participants of treatment by giving a placebo; in such cases, control
groups are given an active treatment. Because participants acknowledge in advance that they may be
given a placebo, there is no concern about deception.
However, when a placebo is given in medical practice, patients are not told they are receiving an inactive
treatment. This deception is controversial. Some clinicians argue that it is prima facie (Latin for "at first
view") unethical and, if discovered, may damage the clinician-patient relationship. Others suggest that it is
more unethical to not give something that may make patients feel better. Giving an active treatment solely
for placebo effect may be further considered unethical because it exposes patients to actual adverse
effects (as opposed to nocebo adverse effects).
Drug Development
Promising compounds can be identified by mass screening of hundreds or thousands of molecules for
biologic activity. In other cases, knowledge of the specific molecular pathophysiology of various diseases
allows for rational drug design via computer modeling or modification of existing pharmaceutical agents.
During
early development
, potentially useful compounds are studied in animals to evaluate desired
effects and toxicity. Compounds that seem effective and safe are candidates for human studies. A protocol
describing the clinical study must be approved by an appropriate institutional research board (IRB) and
the FDA, which then issues an investigational new drug (IND) exemption permit. At this point, the patent
time period for the compound begins, which usually provides the owner with exclusive rights for the next
20 yr; however, the drug cannot be sold until it is approved by the FDA.
Phase 1
evaluates safety and toxicity in humans. Different amounts of the compound are given to a small
number (often 20 to 80) of healthy, young, usually male volunteers to determine the dose at which toxicity
first appears.
Phase 2
determines whether the compound is active against the target disorder. The compound is given
to up to about 100 patients for treatment or prevention of the target disorder. An additional goal is to
determine an optimal dose-response range.
Phase 3
evaluates the drug's effect in larger (often hundreds to thousands of people), more
heterogeneous populations in an attempt to duplicate the drug's proposed clinical use. This phase also
compares the drug with existing treatments, a placebo, or both. Studies may involve many practicing
===PAGE:3363===
physicians and multiple research sites. The purpose is to verify efficacy and detect effects—good and
bad—that may not have been observed during phases 1 and 2.
When sufficient data have been collected to justify and request approval of the drug, a new drug
application (NDA) is submitted to the FDA. The process from early development to approval of a drug
may sometimes take up to 10 yr.
Phase 4
studies occur after the drug is approved and marketed. They are ongoing and involve large
populations. Often, special subpopulations (eg, pregnant women, children, the elderly) are studied. Phase
4 also includes ongoing reporting of adverse effects. Some drugs approved by the FDA after phase 3
have been withdrawn from the market after newly recognized and serious adverse effects have occurred
in phase 4.
===PAGE:3364===
Chapter 318. Pharmacokinetics
Introduction
Pharmacokinetics, sometimes described as what the body does to a drug, refers to the movement of drug
into, through, and out of the body—the time course of its absorption, bioavailability, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion. Pharmacodynamics (, described as what a drug does to the body,
involves receptor binding, postreceptor effects, and chemical interactions. Drug pharmacokinetics
determines the onset, duration, and intensity of a drug's effect. Formulas relating these processes
summarize the pharmacokinetic behavior of most drugs (see
Table 318-1
).
Pharmacokinetics of a drug depends on patient-related factors as well as on the drug's chemical
properties. Some patient-related factors (eg, genetic makeup, sex, age) can be used to predict
pharmacologic response of populations. For example, the half-life of some drugs, especially those that
require both metabolism and excretion, may be remarkably long in the elderly (see
Fig. 318-1
). In fact, physiologic changes that occur with aging affect many aspects of pharmacokinetics
(. Other factors are related to individual physiology. The effects of some individual factors
(eg, renal failure, obesity, hepatic failure, dehydration) can be reasonably predicted, but other factors are
idiosyncratic and thus have unpredictable effects. Because of individual differences, drug administration
must be based on each patient's needs—traditionally, by empirically adjusting dosage until the therapeutic
objective is met. This approach is frequently inadequate because it can delay optimal response or result
in adverse effects. Knowledge of pharmacokinetic principles helps prescribers adjust dosage more
accurately and rapidly.
Absorption
Drug absorption is determined by the drug's physicochemical properties, formulation, and route of
administration. Dosage forms (eg, tablets, capsules, solutions), consisting of the drug plus other
ingredients, are formulated to be given by various routes (eg, oral, buccal, sublingual, rectal, parenteral,
topical, inhalational).
[Table 318-1.
Formulas Defining Basic Pharmacokinetic Parameters]
[Fig. 318-1.
Comparison of pharmacokinetic outcomes for diazepam in a younger man (A) and an older
man (B).]
Regardless of the route of administration, drugs must be in solution to be absorbed. Thus, solid forms
(eg, tablets) must be able to disintegrate and deaggregate.
Unless given IV, a drug must cross several semipermeable cell membranes before it reaches the systemic
circulation. Cell membranes are biologic barriers that selectively inhibit passage of drug molecules. The
membranes are composed primarily of a bimolecular lipid matrix, which determines membrane
permeability characteristics. Drugs may cross cell membranes by passive diffusion, facilitated passive
diffusion, active transport, or pinocytosis. Sometimes various globular proteins embedded in the matrix
function as receptors and help transport molecules across the membrane.
Passive diffusion:
Drugs diffuse across a cell membrane from a region of high concentration (eg, GI
fluids) to one of low concentration (eg, blood). Diffusion rate is directly proportional to the gradient but
also depends on the molecule's lipid solubility, size, degree of ionization, and the area of absorptive
surface. Because the cell membrane is lipoid, lipid-soluble drugs diffuse most rapidly. Small molecules
tend to penetrate membranes more rapidly than larger ones.
Most drugs are weak organic acids or bases, existing in un-ionized and ionized forms in an aqueous
environment. The un-ionized form is usually lipid soluble (lipophilic) and diffuses readily across cell
membranes. The ionized form has low lipid solubility (but high water solubility—ie, hydrophilic) and high
electrical resistance and thus cannot penetrate cell membranes easily. The proportion of the unionized
form present (and thus the drug's ability to cross a membrane) is determined by the pH and the drug's
===PAGE:3365===
p
K
a
(acid dissociation constant). The p
K
a
is the pH at which concentrations of ionized and un-ionized
forms are equal. When the pH is lower than the p
K
a
, the un-ionized form of a weak acid predominates,
but the ionized form of a weak base predominates. Thus, in plasma (pH 7.4), the ratio of un-ionized to
ionized forms for a weak acid (eg, with a p
K
a
of 4.4) is 1:1000; in gastric fluid (pH 1.4), the ratio is
reversed (1000:1). Therefore, when a weak acid is given orally, most of the drug in the stomach is unionized, favoring diffusion through the gastric mucosa. For a weak base with a p
K
a
of 4.4, the outcome is
reversed; most of the drug in the stomach is ionized. Theoretically, weakly acidic drugs (eg, aspirin) are
more readily absorbed from an acid medium (stomach) than are weakly basic drugs (eg, quinidine).
However, whether a drug is acidic or basic, most absorption occurs in the small intestine because the
surface area is larger and membranes are more permeable (see
Oral Administration
.
Facilitated passive diffusion:
Certain molecules with low lipid solubility (eg, glucose) penetrate
membranes more rapidly than expected. One theory is facilitated passive diffusion: A carrier molecule in
the membrane combines reversibly with the substrate molecule outside the cell membrane, and the
carrier-substrate complex diffuses rapidly across the membrane, releasing the substrate at the interior
surface. In such cases, the membrane transports only substrates with a relatively specific molecular
configuration, and the availability of carriers limits the process. The process does not require energy
expenditure, and transport against a concentration gradient cannot occur.
Active transport:
Active transport is selective, requires energy expenditure, and may
involve transport
against a concentration gradient. Active transport seems to be limited to drugs structurally similar to
endogenous substances (eg, ions, vitamins, sugars, amino acids). These drugs are usually absorbed
from specific sites in the small intestine.
Pinocytosis:
In pinocytosis, fluid or particles are engulfed by a cell. The cell membrane invaginates,
encloses the fluid or particles, then fuses again, forming a vesicle that later detaches and moves to the
cell interior. Energy expenditure is required. Pinocytosis probably plays a small role in drug transport,
except for protein drugs.
Oral Administration
To be absorbed, a drug given orally must survive encounters with low pH and numerous GI secretions,
including potentially degrading enzymes. Peptide drugs (eg, insulin) are particularly susceptible to
degradation and are not given orally. Absorption of oral drugs involves transport across membranes of the
epithelial cells in the GI tract. Absorption is affected by
• Differences in luminal pH along the GI tract
• Surface area per luminal volume
• Blood perfusion
• Presence of bile and mucus
• The nature of epithelial membranes
The oral mucosa has a thin epithelium and rich vascularity, which favor absorption; however, contact is
usually too brief for substantial absorption. A drug placed between the gums and cheek (buccal
administration) or under the tongue (sublingual administration) is retained longer, enhancing absorption.
The stomach has a relatively large epithelial surface, but its thick mucous layer and short transit time limit
absorption. Because most absorption occurs in the small intestine, gastric emptying is often the ratelimiting step. Food, especially fatty food, slows gastric emptying (and rate of drug absorption), explaining
why taking some drugs on an empty stomach speeds absorption. Drugs that affect gastric emptying (eg,
parasympatholytic drugs) affect the absorption rate of other drugs. Food may enhance the extent of
absorption for poorly soluble drugs (eg, griseofulvin), reduce it for drugs degraded in the stomach (eg,
penicillin G), or have little or no effect.
===PAGE:3366===
The small intestine has the largest surface area for drug absorption in the GI tract, and its membranes are
more permeable than those in the stomach. For these reasons, most drugs are absorbed primarily in the
small intestine, and acids, despite their ability as un-ionized drugs to readily cross membranes, are
absorbed faster in the intestine than in the stomach. The intraluminal pH is 4 to 5 in the duodenum but
becomes progressively more alkaline, approaching 8 in the lower ileum. GI microflora may reduce
absorption. Decreased blood flow (eg, in shock) may lower the concentration gradient across the
intestinal mucosa and reduce absorption by passive diffusion.
Intestinal transit time can influence drug absorption, particularly for drugs that are absorbed by active
transport (eg, B vitamins), that dissolve slowly (eg, griseofulvin), or that are polar (ie, with low lipid
solubility; eg, many antibiotics).
Most drugs are given orally as tablets or capsules primarily for convenience, economy, stability, and
patient acceptance. Because solid drug forms must dissolve before absorption can occur, dissolution rate
determines availability of the drug for absorption. Dissolution, if slower than absorption, becomes the
rate-limiting step. Manipulating the formulation (ie, the drug's form as salt, crystal, or hydrate) can change
the dissolution rate and thus control overall absorption.
Parenteral Administration
Drugs given IV enter the systemic circulation directly. However, drugs injected IM or sc must cross one or
more biologic membranes to reach the systemic circulation. If protein drugs with a molecular mass >
20,000 g/mole are injected IM or sc, movement across capillary membranes is so slow that most
absorption occurs via the lymphatic system. In such cases, drug delivery to systemic circulation is slow
and often incomplete because of 1st-pass metabolism (metabolism of a drug before it reaches systemic
circulation) by proteolytic enzymes in the lymphatics.
Perfusion (blood flow/gram of tissue) greatly affects capillary absorption of small molecules injected IM or
sc. Thus, injection site can affect absorption rate. Absorption after IM or sc injection may be delayed or
erratic for salts of poorly soluble bases and acids (eg, parenteral form of phenytoin) and in patients with
poor peripheral perfusion (eg, during hypotension or shock).
Controlled-Release Forms
Controlled-release forms are designed to reduce dosing frequency for drugs with a short elimination halflife and duration of
effect. These forms also limit fluctuation in plasma drug concentration, providing a
more uniform therapeutic effect. Absorption rate is slowed by coating drug particles with wax or other
water-insoluble material, by embedding the drug in a matrix that releases it slowly during transit through
the GI tract, or by complexing the drug with ion-exchange resins. Most absorption of these forms occurs in
the large intestine. Crushing or otherwise disturbing a controlled-release tablet or capsule can often be
dangerous.
Transdermal controlled-release forms are designed to release the drug for extended periods, sometimes
for several days. Drugs for transdermal delivery must have suitable skin penetration characteristics and
high potency because the penetration rate and area of application are limited.
Many non-IV parenteral forms are designed to sustain plasma drug concentrations. Absorption of
antimicrobials can be extended by using their relatively insoluble salt form (eg, penicillin G benzathine)
injected IM. For other drugs, suspensions or solutions in non-aqueous vehicles (eg, crystalline
suspensions for insulin) are designed to delay absorption.
Bioavailability
Bioavailability refers to the extent to and rate at which the active moiety (drug or metabolite) enters
systemic circulation, thereby accessing the site of action.
Bioavailability of a drug is largely determined by the properties of the dosage form (which depend partly
===PAGE:3367===
on its design and manufacture), rather than by the drug's physicochemical properties, which determine
absorption potential. Differences in bioavailability among formulations of a given drug can have clinical
significance; thus, knowing whether drug formulations are equivalent is essential.
Chemical equivalence
indicates that drug products contain the same compound in the same amount
and meet current official standards; however, inactive ingredients in drug products may differ.
Bioequivalence
indicates that the drug products, when given to the same patient in the same dosage
regimen, result in equivalent concentrations of drug in plasma and tissues.
Therapeutic equivalence
indicates that drug products, when given to the same patient in the same
dosage regimen, have the same therapeutic and adverse effects.
Bioequivalent products are expected to be therapeutically equivalent. Therapeutic non-equivalence (eg,
more adverse effects, less efficacy) is usually discovered during long-term treatment when patients who
are stabilized on one formulation are given a nonequivalent substitute.
Sometimes therapeutic equivalence is possible despite differences in bioavailability. For example, the
therapeutic index (ratio of the minimum toxic concentration to the median effective concentration) of
penicillin is so wide that efficacy and safety are usually not affected by the moderate differences in
plasma concentration due to bioavailability differences in penicillin products. In contrast, for drugs with a
relatively narrow therapeutic index, bioavailability differences may cause substantial therapeutic
nonequivalence.
Causes of low bioavailability:
Orally administered drugs must pass through the intestinal wall and then
through the portal circulation to the liver; both are common sites of 1st-pass metabolism (metabolism of a
drug before it reaches systemic circulation). Thus, many drugs may be metabolized before adequate
plasma concentrations are reached. Low bio-availability is most common with oral dosage forms of poorly
water-soluble, slowly absorbed drugs.
Insufficient time for absorption in the GI tract is a common cause of low bioavailability. If the drug does not
dissolve readily or cannot penetrate the epithelial membrane (eg, if it is highly ionized and polar), time at
the absorption site may be insufficient. In such cases, bioavailability tends to be highly variable as well as
low.
Age, sex, physical activity, genetic pheno-type, stress, disorders (eg, achlorhydria, mal-absorption
syndromes), or previous GI surgery (eg, bariatric surgery) can also affect drug bioavailability.
Chemical reactions that reduce absorption can reduce bioavailability. They include formation of a complex
(eg, between tetracycline and polyvalent metal ions), hydrolysis by gastric acid or digestive enzymes (eg,
penicillin and chloramphenicol palmitate hydrolysis), conjugation in the intestinal wall (eg,
sulfoconjugation of isoproterenol), adsorption to other drugs (eg, digoxin to cholestyramine), and
metabolism by luminal microflora.
Assessing bioavailability:
Bioavailability is usually assessed by determining the
• Maximum (peak) plasma drug concentration
• Peak time (when maximum plasma drug concentration occurs)
• Area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC—see
Fig. 318-2
)
[Fig. 318-2.
Representative plasma concentration-time relationship after a single oral dose of a
hypothetical drug.]
Plasma drug concentration increases with extent of absorption; the peak is reached when drug
elimination rate equals absorption rate. Bioavailability determinations based on the peak plasma
===PAGE:3368===
concentration can be misleading because drug elimination begins as soon as the drug enters the
bloodstream. Peak time is the most widely used general index of absorption rate; the slower the
absorption, the later the peak time. The most reliable measure of a drug's bioavailability is AUC. AUC is
directly proportional to the total amount of unchanged drug that reaches systemic circulation. Drug
products may be considered bio-equivalent in extent and rate of absorption if their plasma concentration
curves are essentially superimposable.
For drugs excreted primarily unchanged in urine, bioavailability can be estimated by measuring the total
amount of drug excreted after a single dose. Ideally, urine is collected over a period of 7 to 10 elimination
half-lives for complete urinary recovery of the absorbed drug. After multiple dosing, bioavailability may be
estimated by measuring unchanged drug recovered from urine over a 24-h period under steady-state
conditions.
Distribution
After a drug enters the systemic circulation, it is distributed to the body's tissues. Distribution is generally
uneven because of differences in blood perfusion, tissue binding (eg, because of lipid content), regional
pH, and permeability of cell membranes.
The entry rate of a drug into a tissue depends on the rate of blood flow to the tissue, tissue mass, and
partition characteristics between blood and tissue. Distribution equilibrium (when entry and exit rates are
the same) between blood and tissue is reached more rapidly in richly vascularized areas, unless diffusion
across cell membranes is the rate-limiting step. After equilibrium, drug concentrations in tissues and in
extracellular fluids are reflected by the plasma concentration. Metabolism and excretion occur
simultaneously with distribution, making the process dynamic and complex.
For interstitial fluids of most tissues, drug distribution rate is determined primarily by perfusion. For poorly
perfused tissues (eg, muscle, fat), distribution is very slow, especially if the tissue has a high affinity for
the drug.
Volume of distribution:
The apparent volume of distribution is the theoretical volume of fluid into which
the total drug administered would have to be diluted to produce the concentration in plasma. For example,
if 1000 mg of a drug is given and the subsequent plasma concentration is 10 mg/L, that 1000 mg seems
to be distributed in 100 L (dose/volume = concentration; 1000 mg/
x
L = 10 mg/L; therefore,
x
= 1000
mg/10 mg/L = 100 L). Volume of distribution has nothing to do with the actual volume of the body or its
fluid compartments but rather involves the distribution of the drug within the body. For drugs that are
highly tissue-bound, comparatively little of a dose remains in the circulation to be measured; thus, plasma
concentration is low and volume of distribution is high. Drugs that remain in the circulation tend to have a
low volume of distribution. Volume of distribution provides a reference for the plasma concentration
expected for a given dose but provides little information about the specific pattern of distribution. Each
drug is uniquely distributed in the body. Some drugs distribute mostly into fat, others remain in ECF, and
others are bound extensively to specific tissues.
Many acidic drugs (eg, warfarin, aspirin) are highly protein-bound and thus have a small apparent volume
of distribution. Many basic drugs (eg, amphetamine, meperidine) are extensively taken up by tissues and
thus have an apparent volume of distribution larger than the volume of the entire body.
Binding:
The extent of drug distribution into tissues depends on the extent of plasma protein and tissue
binding. In the bloodstream, drugs are transported partly in solution as free (unbound) drug and partly as
reversibly bound to blood components (eg, plasma proteins, blood cells). Of the many plasma proteins
that can interact with drugs, the most important are albumin,
α
1-acid glycoprotein, and lipoproteins. Acidic
drugs are usually bound more
extensively to albumin; basic drugs are usually bound more extensively to
α
1-acid glyco-protein, lipoproteins, or both.
Only unbound drug is available for passive diffusion to extravascular or tissue sites where the
pharmacologic effects of the drug occur. Therefore, the unbound drug concentration in systemic
circulation typically determines drug concentration at the active site and thus efficacy.
===PAGE:3369===
At high drug concentrations, the amount of bound drug approaches an upper limit determined by the
number of available binding sites. Saturation of binding sites is the basis of displacement interactions
among drugs (see
Drug-Receptor Interactions
.
Drugs bind to many substances other than proteins. Binding usually occurs when a drug associates with
a macromolecule in an aqueous environment but may occur when a drug is partitioned into body fat.
Because fat is poorly perfused, equilibration time is long, especially if the drug is highly lipophilic.
Accumulation of drugs in tissues or body compartments can prolong drug action because the tissues
release the accumulated drug as plasma drug concentration decreases. For example, thiopental is highly
lipid soluble, rapidly enters the brain after a single IV injection, and has a marked and rapid anesthetic
effect; the effect ends within a few minutes as the drug is redistributed to more slowly perfused fatty
tissues. Thiopental is then slowly released from fat storage, maintaining subanesthetic plasma levels;
these levels may become significant if doses of thiopental are repeated, causing large amounts to be
stored in fat. Thus, storage in fat initially shortens the drug's effect but then prolongs it.
Some drugs accumulate within cells because they bind with proteins, phospholipids, or nucleic acids. For
example, chloroquine concentrations in WBCs and liver cells can be thousands of times higher than those
in plasma. Drug in cells is in equilibrium with drug in plasma and moves into plasma as the drug is
eliminated from the body.
Blood-brain barrier:
Drugs reach the CNS via brain capillaries and CSF. Although the brain receives
about one sixth of cardiac output, distribution of drugs to brain tissue is restricted because the brain's
permeability characteristics differ from those of other tissues. Although some lipid-soluble drugs (eg,
thiopental) enter the brain readily, polar compounds do not. The reason is the blood-brain barrier, which
consists of the endothelium of brain capillaries and the astrocytic sheath. The endothelial cells of brain
capillaries, which appear to be more tightly joined to one another than those of most capillaries, slow the
diffusion of water-soluble drugs. The astrocytic sheath consists of a layer of glial connective tissue cells
(astrocytes) close to the basement membrane of the capillary endothelium. With aging, the blood-brain
barrier may become less effective, allowing increased passage of compounds into the brain.
Drugs may enter ventricular CSF directly via the choroid plexus, then passively diffuse into brain tissue
from CSF. Also in the choroid plexus, organic acids (eg, penicillin) are actively transported from CSF to
blood.
The drug penetration rate into CSF, as for other tissue cells, is determined mainly by the extent of protein
binding, degree of ionization, and lipid-water partition coefficient of the drug. The penetration rate into the
brain is slow for highly protein-bound drugs and nearly nonexistent for the ionized form of weak acids and
bases. Because the CNS is so well perfused, the drug distribution rate is determined primarily by
permeability.
Metabolism
The liver is the principal site of drug metabolism. Although metabolism typically inactivates drugs, some
drug metabolites are pharmacologically active—sometimes even more so than the parent compound. An
inactive or weakly active substance that has an active metabolite is called a prodrug, especially if
designed to deliver the active moiety more effectively.
Drugs can be metabolized by oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, hydration, conjugation, condensation, or
isomerization; whatever the process, the goal is to make the drug easier to excrete. The enzymes
involved in metabolism are present in many tissues but generally are more concentrated in the liver. Drug
metabolism rates vary among patients. Some patients metabolize a drug so rapidly that therapeutically
effective blood and tissue concentrations are not reached; in others, metabolism may be so slow that
usual doses have toxic effects. Individual drug metabolism rates are influenced by genetic factors,
coexisting disorders (particularly chronic liver disorders and advanced heart failure), and drug interactions
(especially those involving induction or inhibition of metabolism).
For many drugs, metabolism occurs in 2 phases. Phase I reactions involve formation of a new or modified
===PAGE:3370===
functional group or cleavage (oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis); these reactions are nonsynthetic. Phase II
reactions
involve conjugation with an endogenous substance (eg, glucuronic acid, sulfate, glycine); these
reactions are synthetic. Metabolites formed in synthetic reactions are more polar and more readily
excreted by the kidneys (in urine) and the liver (in bile) than those formed in nonsynthetic reactions. Some
drugs undergo only phase I or phase II reactions; thus, phase numbers reflect functional rather than
sequential classification.
Rate:
For almost all drugs, the metabolism rate in any given pathway has an upper limit (capacity
limitation). However, at therapeutic concentrations of most drugs, usually only a small fraction of the
metabolizing enzyme's sites are occupied, and the metabolism rate increases with drug concentration. In
such cases, called first-order elimination (or kinetics), the metabolism rate of the drug is a constant
fraction of the drug remaining in the body (rather than a constant amount of drug per hour); ie, the drug
has a specific half-life. For example, if 500 mg is present in the body at time zero, after metabolism, 250
mg may be present at 1 h and 125 mg at 2 h (illustrating a half-life of 1 h). However, when most of the
enzyme sites are occupied, metabolism occurs at its maximal rate and does not change in proportion to
drug concentration; ie, a fixed amount of drug is metabolized per unit time (zero-order kinetics). In this
case, if 500 mg is present in the body at time zero, after metabolism, 450 mg may be present at 1 h and
400 mg at 2 h (illustrating a maximal clearance of 50 mg/h and no specific half-life). As drug concentration
increases, metabolism shifts from first-order to zero-order kinetics.
Cytochrome P-450:
The most important enzyme system of phase I metabolism is cytochrome P-450
(CYP450), a microsomal superfamily of isoenzymes that catalyze the oxidation of many drugs. The
electrons are supplied by NADPH-CYP450 reductase, a flavo-protein that transfers electrons from
NADPH (the reduced form of nicotinamide adenosine dinucleotide phosphate) to CYP450. CYP450
enzymes can be induced or inhibited by any drugs and substances, helping explain many drug
interactions in which one drug enhances the toxicity or reduces the therapeutic effect of another drug. For
examples of drugs that interact with specific enzymes, see
Table 318-2
(see also
Drug Interactions
.
With aging, the liver's capacity for metabolism through the CYP450 enzyme system is reduced by ≥ 30%
because liver volume and hepatic blood flow are decreased. Thus, drugs that are metabolized through
this system reach higher levels and have prolonged half-lives in the elderly (see
Fig. 318-1
). Because
neonates have partially developed liver microsomal enzyme systems, they also have difficulty
metabolizing many drugs.
Conjugation:
Glucuronidation, the most common phase II reaction, is the only one that occurs in the liver
microsomal enzyme system. Glucuronides are secreted in bile and eliminated in urine. Thus, conjugation
makes most drugs more soluble and easily excreted by the kidneys. Amino acid conjugation with
glutamine or glycine produces conjugates that are readily excreted in urine but not extensively secreted in
bile. Aging does not affect glucuronidation. However, in neonates, conversion to glucuronide is slower,
sometimes with serious effects.
Conjugation may also occur through acetylation or sulfoconjugation. Sulfate esters are polar and readily
excreted in urine. Aging does not affect these processes.
Excretion
The kidneys, which excrete water-soluble substances, are the principal organs of excretion. The biliary
system contributes to excretion to the degree that drug is not reabsorbed from the GI tract. Generally, the
contribution of intestine, saliva, sweat, breast milk, and lungs to excretion is small, except for exhalation of
volatile anesthetics. Excretion via breast milk, although not important to the mother, may affect the
breastfeeding infant (see
Table 268-4
.
Hepatic metabolism often makes drugs more polar and thus more water soluble. The resulting metabolites
are then more readily excreted.
Renal excretion:
Renal filtration accounts for most drug excretion. About one fifth of the plasma
===PAGE:3371===
reaching the glomerulus is filtered through pores in the glomerular endothelium; nearly all water and most
electrolytes are passively and actively reabsorbed from the renal tubules back into the circulation.
However, polar compounds, which include most drug metabolites, cannot diffuse back into the circulation
and are excreted unless a specific transport mechanism exists for their reabsorption (eg, as for glucose,
ascorbic acid, and B vitamins). With aging, renal drug excretion decreases (see
Chapter 308
, especially
Table 308-1
; at age 80, clearance is typically reduced to half of what it was at age 30.
The principles of transmembrane passage govern renal handling of drugs. Drugs bound to plasma
proteins remain in the circulation;
[Table 318-2.
Common Substances that Interact with Cytochrome P-450 Enzymes]
only unbound drug is contained in the glomerular filtrate. Un-ionized forms of drugs and their metabolites
tend to be reabsorbed readily from tubular fluids.
Urine pH, which varies from 4.5 to 8.0, may markedly affect drug reabsorption and excretion by
determining whether a weak acid or base is in an un-ionized or ionized form (. Acidification of
urine increases reabsorption and decreases excretion of weak acids and decreases reabsorption of weak
bases. Alkalinization of urine has the opposite effect. In some cases of overdose, these principles are
used to enhance the excretion of weak bases or acids; eg, urine is alkalinized to enhance excretion of
acetylsalicylic acid. The extent to which changes in urinary pH alter the rate of drug elimination depends
on the contribution of the renal route to total elimination, the polarity of the unionized form, and the
molecule's degree of ionization.
Active tubular secretion in the proximal tubule is important in the elimination of many drugs. This energydependent process may be blocked by metabolic inhibitors. When drug concentration is high, secretory
transport can reach an upper limit (transport maximum); each substance has a characteristic transport
maximum.
Anions and cations are handled by separate transport mechanisms. Normally, the anion secretory system
eliminates metabolites conjugated with glycine, sulfate, or glucuronic acid. Anions compete with each
other for secretion. This competition can be used therapeutically; eg, probenecid blocks the normally
rapid tubular secretion of penicillin, resulting
in higher plasma penicillin concentrations for a longer time.
In the cation transport system, cations or organic bases (eg, pramipexole, dofetilide) are secreted by the
renal tubules; this process can be inhibited by cimetidine, trimethoprim, prochlorperazine, megestrol, or
ketoconazole.
Biliary excretion:
Some drugs and their metabolites are extensively excreted in bile. Because they are
transported across the biliary epithelium against a concentration gradient, active secretory transport is
required. When plasma drug concentrations are high, secretory transport may approach an upper limit
(transport maximum). Substances with similar physicochemical properties may compete for excretion.
Drugs with a molecular weight of > 300 g/mole and with both polar and lipophilic groups are more likely to
be excreted in bile; smaller molecules are generally excreted only in negligible amounts. Conjugation,
particularly with glucuronic acid, facilitates biliary excretion.
In the enterohepatic cycle, a drug secreted in bile is reabsorbed into the circulation from the intestine.
Biliary excretion eliminates substances from the body only to the extent that enterohepatic cycling is
incomplete—when some of the secreted drug is not reabsorbed from the intestine.
===PAGE:3372===
Chapter 319. Pharmacodynamics
Introduction
Pharmacodynamics, sometimes described as what a drug does to the body, involves receptor binding
(including receptor sensitivity), postreceptor effects, and chemical interactions. Pharmacodynamics, with
pharmacokinetics (what the body does to a drug—, helps explain the relationship between
the dose and response, ie, the drug's effects. The pharmacologic response depends on the drug's
binding to its target. The concentration of the drug at the receptor site influences the drug's effect.
A drug's pharmacodynamics can be affected by physiologic changes due to disorders, aging, or other
drugs. Disorders that affect pharmacodynamic responses include genetic mutations, thyrotoxicosis,
malnutrition, myasthenia gravis, Parkinson's disease, and some forms of insulin-resistant diabetes
mellitus. These disorders can change receptor binding, alter the level of binding proteins, or decrease
receptor sensitivity. Aging tends to affect pharmacodynamic responses through alterations in receptor
binding or in postreceptor response (see
Table 308-2
. Pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions result in competition for receptor
binding sites or alter postreceptor response.
Drug-Receptor Interactions
Receptors are macromolecules involved in chemical signaling between and within cells; they may be
located on the cell surface membrane or within the cytoplasm (see
Table 319-1
). Activated receptors directly or indirectly regulate cellular biochemical processes (eg, ion
conductance, protein phosphorylation, DNA transcription, enzymatic activity). Molecules (eg, drugs,
hormones, neurotransmitters) that bind to a receptor are called ligands. A ligand may activate or inactivate
a receptor; activation may increase or decrease a particular cell function. Each ligand may interact with
multiple receptor subtypes. Few if any drugs are absolutely specific for one receptor or subtype, but most
have relative selectivity. Selectivity is the degree to which a drug acts on a given site relative to other
sites; selectivity relates largely to physicochemical binding of the drug to cellular receptors.
A drug's ability to affect a given receptor is related to the drug's affinity (probability of the drug occupying
a receptor at any given instant) and intrinsic efficacy (intrinsic activity—degree to which a ligand activates
receptors and leads to cellular response). A drug's affinity and activity are determined by its chemical
structure.
Physiologic functions (eg, contraction, secretion) are usually regulated by multiple receptor-mediated
mechanisms, and several steps (eg, receptor-coupling, multiple intracellular 2nd messenger substances)
may be interposed between the initial molecular drug-receptor interaction and ultimate tissue or organ
response. Thus, several dissimilar drug molecules can often be used to produce a desired response.
Ability to bind to a receptor is influenced by external factors as well as by intracellular regulatory
mechanisms. Baseline receptor
[Table 319-1.
Some Types of Physiologic and Drug-Receptor Proteins]
density and the efficiency of stimulus-response mechanisms vary from tissue to tissue. Drugs, aging,
genetic mutations, and disorders can increase (up-regulate) or decrease (down-regulate) the number and
binding affinity of receptors. For example, clonidine down-regulates
α
-receptors; thus, rapid withdrawal
of clonidine can cause hypertensive crisis. Chronic therapy with
β
-blockers up-regulates
β
-receptor
density; thus, severe hypertension or tachycardia can result from abrupt withdrawal. Receptor upregulation and down-regulation affect adaptation to drugs (eg, desensitization, tachyphylaxis, tolerance,
acquired resistance, postwithdrawal supersensitivity).
Ligands bind to precise molecular regions, called recognition sites, on receptor macromolecules. The
binding site for a drug may be the same as or different from that of an endogenous agonist (hormone or
neurotransmitter). Agonists that bind to an adjacent site or a different site on a receptor are sometimes
===PAGE:3373===
called allosteric agonists. Nonspecific drug binding also occurs—ie, at molecular sites not designated as
receptors (eg, plasma proteins). Drug binding to such nonspecific sites prohibits the drug from binding to
the receptor and thus inactivates the drug. Unbound drug is available to bind to receptors and thus have
an effect.
Agonists and antagonists:
Agonist drugs activate receptors to produce the desired response.
Conventional agonists increase the proportion of activated receptors. Inverse agonists stabilize the
receptor in its inactive conformation and act similarly to competitive antagonists (. Many
hormones, neurotransmitters (eg, acetylcholine, histamine, norepinephrine), and drugs (eg, morphine,
phenylephrine, isoproterenol) act as agonists.
Antagonists prevent receptor activation. Preventing activation has many effects. Antagonist drugs
increase cellular function if they block the action of a substance that normally decreases cellular function.
Antagonist drugs decrease cellular function if they block the action of a substance that normally increases
cellular function.
Receptor antagonists can be classified as reversible or irreversible. Reversible antagonists readily
dissociate from their receptor; irreversible antagonists form a stable, permanent or nearly permanent
chemical bond with their receptor (eg, by alkylation). Pseudo-irreversible antagonists slowly dissociate
from their receptor.
In competitive antagonism, binding of the antagonist to the receptor prevents binding of the agonist to the
receptor. In noncompetitive antagonism, agonist and antagonist can be bound simultaneously, but
antagonist binding reduces or prevents the action of the agonist. In reversible competitive antagonism,
agonist and antagonist form short-lasting bonds with the receptor, and a steady state among agonist,
antagonist, and receptor is reached. Such antagonism can be overcome by increasing the concentration
of the agonist. For example, naloxone (an opioid receptor antagonist that is structurally similar to
morphine), when given shortly before or after morphine, blocks morphine's effects. However, competitive
antagonism by naloxone can be overcome by giving more morphine.
Structural analogs of agonist molecules frequently have agonist and antagonist properties; such drugs
are called partial (low-efficacy) agonists, or agonist-antagonists. For example, pentazocine activates
opioid receptors but blocks their activation by other opioids. Thus, pentazocine provides opioid effects but
blunts the effects of another opioid if the opioid is given while pentazocine is still bound. A drug that acts
as a partial agonist in one tissue may act as a full agonist in another.
Chemical Interactions
Some drugs produce effects without altering cellular function and without binding to a receptor. For
example, most antacids decrease gastric acidity through simple chemical reactions; antacids are bases
that chemically interact with acids to produce neutral salts. The primary action of cholestyramine, a bile
acid sequestrant, is to bind bile acids in the GI tract.
Dose-Response Relationships
Regardless of how a drug effect occurs—through binding or chemical interaction—the concentration of
the drug at the site of action controls the effect. However, response to concentration may be complex and
is often nonlinear. The relationship between the drug dose, regardless of route used, and the drug
concentration at the cellular level is even more complex (see
Chapter 318
).
Dose-response data are typically graphed with the dose or dose function (eg, log
dose) on the x-axis
and the measured effect (response) on the y-axis. Because a drug effect is a function of dose and time,
such a graph depicts the dose-response relationship independent of time. Measured effects are
frequently recorded as maxima at time of peak effect or under steady-state conditions (eg, during
continuous IV infusion). Drug effects may be quantified at the level of molecule, cell, tissue, organ, organ
system, or organism.
[
===PAGE:3374===
Fig. 319-1.
Hypothetical dose-response curve.]
A hypothetical dose-response curve has features that vary (see
Fig. 319-1
): potency (location of curve
along the dose axis), maximal efficacy or ceiling effect (greatest attainable response), and slope (change
in response per unit dose). Biologic variation (variation
[Fig. 319-2.
Comparison of dose-response curves.]
in magnitude of response among test subjects in the same population given the same dose of drug) also
occurs. Graphing dose-response curves of drugs studied under identical conditions can help compare the
pharmacologic profiles of the drugs (see
Fig. 319-2
). This information helps determine the dose
necessary to achieve the desired effect.
Dose-response, which involves the principles of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, determines
the required dose and frequency as well as the therapeutic index for a drug in a population. The
therapeutic index (ratio of the minimum toxic concentration to the median effective concentration) helps
determine the efficacy and safety of a drug. Increasing the dose of a drug with a small therapeutic index
increases the probability of toxicity or ineffectiveness of the drug. However, these features differ by
population and are affected by patient-related factors (eg, pregnancy [see p.], age [see p.]).
===PAGE:3375===
Chapter 320. Adverse Drug Reactions
Introduction
Adverse drug reaction (ADR, or adverse drug effect) is a broad term referring to unwanted,
uncomfortable, or dangerous effects that a drug may have. ADRs can be considered a form of toxicity;
however, toxicity is most commonly applied to effects of overingestion (accidental or intentional— or to elevated blood levels or enhanced drug effects that occur during appropriate use (eg, when
drug metabolism is temporarily inhibited by a disorder or another drug).
Side effect
is an imprecise term
often used to refer to a drug's unintended effects that occur within the therapeutic range. Because all
drugs have the potential for ADRs, risk-benefit analysis (analyzing the likelihood of benefit vs risk of
ADRs) is necessary whenever a drug is prescribed.
In the US, 3 to 7% of all hospitalizations are due to ADRs. ADRs occur during 10 to 20% of
hospitalizations; about 10 to 20% of these ADRs are severe. Incidence of death due to ADRs is unknown;
suggested rates of 0.5 to 0.9% may be falsely high because many of the patients included had serious
and complex disorders.
Incidence and severity of ADRs vary by patient characteristics (eg, age, sex, ethnicity, coexisting
disorders, genetic or geographic factors) and by drug factors (eg, type of drug, administration route,
treatment duration, dosage, bioavailability). Incidence is probably higher and ADRs are more severe
among the elderly (, although age per se may not be the primary cause. The contribution of
prescribing and adherence errors to the incidence of ADRs is unclear (.
Etiology
Most ADRs are dose-related; others are allergic or idiosyncratic. Dose-related ADRs are usually
predictable; ADRs unrelated to dose are usually unpredictable.
Dose-related ADRs are particularly a concern when drugs have a narrow therapeutic index (eg,
hemorrhage with oral anticoagulants). ADRs may result from decreased drug clearance in patients with
impaired renal or hepatic function or from drug-drug interactions.
Allergic ADRs are not dose-related and require prior exposure. Allergies develop when a drug acts as an
antigen or allergen. After a patient is sensitized, subsequent exposure to the drug produces one of
several different types of allergic reaction (. Clinical history and appropriate skin tests can
sometimes help predict allergic ADRs.
Idiosyncrasy is an imprecise term used to classify unexpected ADRs that are not dose-related or allergic.
They occur in a small percentage of patients given a drug. Idiosyncrasy has been defined as a genetically
determined abnormal response to a drug, but not all idiosyncratic reactions have a pharmacogenetic
cause. The term may become obsolete as specific mechanisms of ADRs become known.
Symptoms and Signs
ADRs are usually classified as mild, moderate, severe, or lethal (see
Table 320-1
). Symptoms and signs may manifest soon after the first dose or only after chronic use. They
may obviously result from drug use or be too subtle to identify as drug-related. In the elderly, subtle ADRs
can cause functional deterioration, changes in mental status, failure to thrive, loss of appetite, confusion,
and depression.
[Table 320-1.
Classification of Adverse Drug Reactions]
Allergic ADRs typically occur soon after a drug is taken but generally do not occur after the first dose;
typically, they occur when the drug is given after an initial exposure. Symptoms include itching, rash,
fixed-drug eruption, upper or lower airway edema with difficulty breathing, and hypotension.
Idiosyncratic ADRs can produce almost any symptom or sign and usually cannot be predicted.
===PAGE:3376===
Idiosyncratic ADRs can produce almost any symptom or sign and usually cannot be predicted.
Diagnosis
• Consideration of rechallenge
• Reporting of suspected ADRs to MedWatch
Symptoms that occur soon after a drug is taken are often easily connected with use of a drug. However,
diagnosing symptoms due to chronic drug use requires a significant level of suspicion and is often
complicated. Stopping a drug is sometimes necessary but is difficult if the drug is essential and does not
have an acceptable substitute. When proof of the relationship between drug and symptoms is important,
rechallenge should be considered, except in the case of serious allergic reactions.
Physicians should report most suspected ADRs to MedWatch (the FDA's ADR monitoring program), which
is an early alert system. Only through such reporting can unexpected ADRs be identified and investigated.
Med-Watch also monitors changes in the nature and frequency of ADRs. Forms for and information about
reporting ADRs are available in the Physicians' Desk Reference, AMA Drug Evaluations, and FDA Drug
Bulletin (mailed to all physicians at least yearly) and at www.fda.gov/medwatch
; forms may also be
obtained by calling 800-FDA-1088. Nurses, pharmacists, and other health care practitioners should also
report ADRs.
Treatment
• Modification of dosage
• Discontinuation of drug if necessary
• Switching to a different drug
For dose-related ADRs, modifying the dose or eliminating or reducing precipitating factors may suffice.
Increasing the rate of drug elimination is rarely necessary. For allergic and idiosyncratic ADRs, the drug
usually should be withdrawn and not tried again. Switching to a different drug class is often required for
allergic ADRs and sometimes required for dose-related ADRs.
Prevention
Prevention of ADRs requires familiarity with the drug and potential reactions to it. Computer-based
analysis should be used to check for potential drug interactions; analysis should be repeated whenever
drugs are changed or added. Drugs and initial dosage must be carefully selected for the elderly (see
Ch.
). If patients develop nonspecific symptoms, ADRs should always be considered before beginning
symptomatic treatment.
===PAGE:3377===
22 - Injuries; Poisoning
Chapter 321. Approach to the Trauma Patient
Injury is the number one cause of death for people aged 1 to 44. In the US, there were 175,000 trauma
deaths in 2006, about two thirds being accidental. Of intentional injury deaths, about 60% were due to
self-harm. In addition to deaths, injury results in about 40 million emergency department visits annually.
Patients whose injuries are serious but not immediately fatal benefit the most from treatment in
designated trauma centers, hospitals that have special staffing and protocols to provide immediate care to
critically injured patients. Criteria for such designation (and for the necessity of transport to them) vary by
state but usually follow guidelines of the American College of Surgeons' Committee on Trauma.
Many traumatic injuries are discussed elsewhere in THE MANUAL; for bone and joint injuries, see p.
; for spinal cord injury, see p.
; for head injury, see p.
; for facial injury, see p.
; for eye
injury, see p.
; for genitourinary injury, see p.
; for lacerations, see p.
.
Etiology
Of the myriad ways people are injured, most can be categorized as blunt or penetrating. Blunt injury
involves a forceful impact (eg, blow, kick, strike with object, fall, motor vehicle crash, blast). Penetrating
injury involves breach of the skin by an object (eg, knife, broken glass) or projectile (eg, bullet, shrapnel
from an explosion).
Other injury types include thermal and chemical burns, toxic inhalations or ingestions, and radiation injury.
Pathophysiology
All injuries, by definition, cause
direct
tissue damage, the nature and extent depending on the anatomic
site, mechanism, and intensity of trauma. Severe direct tissue damage to critical organs (eg, to the heart,
brain, spinal cord) is responsible for most immediate trauma deaths.
Additionally, patients surviving the initial insult may develop
indirect
injury effects. Disruption of blood
vessels causes hemorrhage, which may be external (and hence visible) or internal, either confined within
an organ as a contusion or hematoma, or as free hemorrhage into a body compartment (eg, peritoneal
cavity, thorax). Small amounts of hemorrhage (ie, < 10% of blood volume) are tolerated well by most
patients. Larger amounts cause progressive declines in BP and organ perfusion (shock—,
leading to cellular dysfunction, organ failure, and eventually death. Hemorrhagic shock causes most
short-term (ie, within hours) deaths, and multiple organ failure from prolonged shock causes many of the
near-term (ie, first 14 days) deaths. Additional near-term deaths result from infection because of
disruption of normal anatomic barriers and immune system dysfunction.
Evaluation and Treatment
• A, B, C, D, E evaluation and stabilization of
A
irway,
B
reathing,
C
irculation,
D
isability (neurologic status),
and
E
xposure/
e
nvironmental control
• After stabilization, head-to-toe examination
• Liberal use of CT and other imaging studies
Care in the emergency department rather than emergency care delivered at the accident site is discussed
here. Evaluation and treatment are done simultaneously, beginning with systems that pose the most
immediate threat to life if damaged.
Attending to dramatic but not deadly injuries (eg, open lowerextremity fracture, finger amputations) before evaluating immediate life threats can be a fatal mistake
.
A helpful mnemonic is A, B, C, D, E. Systems are rapidly examined for serious abnormalities (primary
survey); a more detailed examination (secondary survey) is done after the patient is stable.
===PAGE:3378===
Airway:
Airway patency is threatened by blood clots, teeth, or foreign bodies in the oropharynx; softtissue laxity and posterior retraction of the tongue caused by obtundation (eg, from head injury, shock,
intoxication); and edema or hematoma due to direct neck trauma. These obstructions are readily visible
on direct inspection of the mouth or neck; having the patient speak can rapidly confirm that the airway is
not likely in immediate danger.
Blood and foreign material are removed by suction or manually. Obtunded patients whose airway patency
is in doubt and patients with significant oropharyngeal injury require endotracheal intubation; usually
drugs are given for paralysis and sedation before intubation is done (. If patients require an artificial airway and endotracheal intubation is not possible (eg, due to edema
of the airway caused by a thermal burn) or contraindicated (eg, due to severe maxillofacial injury),
surgical cricothyrotomy is indicated
(. NOTE: When evaluating or manipulating a patient's
airway, cervical spine immobilization should be maintained (eg, by rigid collar, inline immobilization
techniques) until cervical spine injury has been excluded by examination, imaging, or both.
Breathing:
Adequate ventilation is threatened by decreased central respiratory drive (usually from head
injury, intoxication, or nearly fatal shock) or by chest injury (eg, hemothorax or pneumothorax, multiple rib
fractures, pulmonary contusion).
Adequacy of air exchange is usually apparent on auscultation. Tension pneumothorax ( may
cause the trachea to deviate to the side opposite the injury, as well as decreased breath sounds and
sometimes distended neck veins. The chest wall is fully exposed to look for ample chest wall expansion
and is palpated for obvious rib fractures and presence of subcutaneous air (sometimes the only finding in
pneumothorax).
Pneumothorax is decompressed by chest tube ( and must be excluded before initiating
positive-pressure ventilation (which may markedly enlarge a pneumothorax and convert it to a tension
pneumothorax). Suspected tension pneumothorax can be decompressed with needle thoracostomy (eg, a
14-gauge needle inserted in the midclavicular line, 2nd intercostal space) to stabilize the patient if a chest
tube cannot be inserted immediately. Inadequate ventilation is treated with endotracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation.
Circulation:
Significant external hemorrhage can occur from any major vessel but is always apparent.
Life-threatening internal hemorrhage is often less obvious. However, this volume of hemorrhage can
occur in only a few body compartments: the chest, abdomen, and soft tissues of the pelvis or thigh (eg,
from a pelvic or femoral fracture).
Pulse and BP are assessed, and signs of shock are noted (eg, tachypnea, dusky color, diaphoresis,
altered mental status). Abdominal distention and tenderness, pelvis instability, and thigh deformity and
instability are often present when internal hemorrhage in those areas is large enough to be life
threatening.
External hemorrhage is controlled by direct pressure. Two large-bore (eg, 14- or 16-gauge) IVs are
started with 0.9% saline or Ringer's lactate; rapid infusion of 1 to 2 L (20 mL/kg for children) is given for
signs of shock and hypovolemia. Subsequently, additional fluids and, if necessary, blood component
therapy is given as indicated (. Patients in whom there is strong clinical suspicion of serious
intra-abdominal hemorrhage may require immediate laparotomy. Patients with massive intrathoracic
hemorrhage may require immediate thoracotomy and possibly autotransfusion of blood recovered via
tube thoracostomy.
Disability:
Neurologic function is evaluated for serious deficits involving the brain and spinal cord. The
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS—see
Table 324-2
on p.
and, for infants and children, see
Table 324-3
 and pupillary response to light are used to screen for serious intracranial injury.
Gross motor movement and sensation in each extremity are evaluated to screen for serious spinal cord
injury. The cervical spine is palpated for tenderness and deformity and stabilized in a rigid collar until
cervical spine injury is excluded. With careful manual stabilization of the head and neck, the patient is
===PAGE:3379===
logrolled onto a side to allow palpation of the thoracic and lumbar spine, inspection of the back, and
rectal examination to check tone (decreased tone indicates possible spinal cord injury), the prostate (a
high-riding prostate suggests urethral injury), and presence of blood. In the US, most patients arriving by
ambulance are immobilized on a long, rigid board for ease of transport and to stabilize possible spinal
fractures. If examination reveals no sign of spinal injury, patients are taken off the board because it is
quite uncomfortable and pressure ulcers may occur within a few hours.
Patients with severe traumatic brain injury (GCS < 9) require endotracheal intubation, neurosurgical
evaluation, and therapy to prevent secondary brain injury (eg, osmotic diuresis, sometimes
hyperventilation for patients with signs of impending brain herniation—see
Fig. 174-1
.
Exposure/environmental control:
To ensure injuries are not missed, patients are completely
undressed (by cutting off garments) and the entire body surface is examined for signs of occult trauma.
The patient is kept warm (eg, with heated blankets and by using only warmed IV fluids) to prevent
hypothermia.
Secondary survey:
After immediate life threats are assessed and the patient is stable, a more thorough
evaluation is done, and a focused history is obtained. If only limited conversation is possible, an "AMPLE"
history covers essential information:
•
A
llergies
•
M
edications
•
P
ast medical history
•
L
ast meal
•
E
vents of the injury
After the patient is completely undressed, the examination generally proceeds from head to toe; it
includes all orifices and a more detailed
look at areas examined in the initial survey. All soft tissues are
inspected for lesions and swelling, all bones are palpated for tenderness, and range of motion is
assessed in joints (unless there is obvious fracture or deformity).
A urinary catheter is usually placed in seriously injured and obtunded patients provided there is no
evidence of urethral injury (eg, blood at the meatus, ecchymosis of the perineum, high-riding prostate).
Seriously injured patients often also have a nasogastric tube placed, provided there is no serious midface
trauma (rare reports exist of intracranial tube insertion through a cribriform plate fracture).
Open wounds are covered with sterile dressings, but cleansing and repair are deferred until completion of
evaluation and treatment of more serious injuries. Serious clinically apparent dislocations with marked
deformity or neurovascular compromise are imaged and reduced as soon as immediate life threats have
been addressed. Obvious or suspected fractures are splinted pending full assessment of serious injuries
and appropriate imaging studies.
Testing:
Imaging tests are the cornerstone; laboratory tests are generally ancillary. Patients with
penetrating trauma typically have focal injuries that can limit necessary imaging to the obviously involved
region or regions. Blunt trauma, particularly when significant deceleration is involved (eg, serious fall,
motor vehicle crash), can affect any part of the body, and imaging is used more liberally. Such patients
traditionally have x-rays of the chest, cervical spine, and pelvis unless they are awake and alert,
completely lacking in symptoms or findings suggesting injury to those areas, and have no distracting
injuries (eg, femur fracture) that might keep them from complaining about injuries elsewhere. These
imaging tests are directed at life threats that may not be clinically obvious.
Chest x-ray can identify airway disruption, lung injury, and pneumothorax and can suggest thoracic aorta
tears (eg, by mediastinal widening).
===PAGE:3380===
CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis, spine, head, or, particularly, combinations of these is increasingly
being used instead of plain x-rays for patients who require imaging after severe multiple blunt trauma.
Identification of intra-abdominal injury is essential. Bedside ultrasonography (FAST examination:
f
ocused
a
ssessment with
s
onography in
t
rauma) is being used increasingly, particularly for unstable patients; it is
sensitive for significant volumes of intraperitoneal blood and thus the need for immediate laparotomy. If
patients are stable, CT has the advantages of high accuracy, imaging of the retroperitoneal structures
and bones, and showing the volume and sometimes the origin of hemorrhage. For unstable patients in
whom bedside ultrasonography is not feasible, diagnostic peritoneal aspiration can be used, in which a
peritoneal dialysis catheter is inserted through the abdominal wall into the peritoneal cavity. If > 10 mL of
blood is aspirated, immediate laparotomy is indicated.
Head CT is typically done in patients with altered mental status or focal neurologic abnormalities and in
patients who sustained loss of consciousness (some clinicians feel that patients with a brief loss of
consciousness who are completely alert and neurologically intact do not require CT). Imaging is obtained
more liberally in children < 2 yr with scalp hematoma, the elderly, patients taking anticoagulants, and
patients who are alcoholics.
Aortic injury should be considered in patients with severe deceleration chest injury or suggestive signs
(eg, pulse deficits or asymmetric BP measurements, end-organ ischemia, suggestive findings on chest xray); these patients may require CT angiography or other aortic imaging. All patients suspected of having
significant blunt chest injury have an ECG to diagnose myocardial injury and cardiac monitoring for
subsequent arrhythmias. Patients with abnormalities on ECG usually have blood levels of cardiac
markers measured and sometimes echocardiography (.
Plain x-rays are obtained of any suspected fractures and dislocations. Other imaging tests are obtained
for specific indications (eg, angiography to diagnose and sometimes embolize vascular injury; CT to
better delineate spinal, pelvic, or complex joint fractures).
Laboratory tests that may be useful include ABGs for PO
, PCO
, and base deficit; urine examination for
blood; CBC to establish a baseline to monitor ongoing hemorrhage; glucose to evaluate for hypoglycemia;
and type and cross-match for possible blood transfusion. Measures of perfusion (serum lactate, base
deficit on ABG measurement, and, in patients with a catheterized central vein, central venous O
saturation) may help identify early or partially treated shock. Other reflexively obtained tests (eg,
electrolytes and other chemistries, coagulation studies) are unlikely to be helpful unless suggested by
relevant medical history (eg, renal insufficiency, diuretic use). Toxicology screening (eg, blood alcohol,
urine drug screen) is often done; results of this testing rarely change immediate management but can
help identify substance abuse causative of injury, allowing intervention to prevent subsequent trauma.
===PAGE:3381===
Chapter 322. Lacerations
Introduction
Care of lacerations enables prompt healing, minimizes risk of infection, and optimizes cosmetic result.
Physiology
Healing begins immediately after injury with coagulation and introduction of WBCs; neutrophils and
macrophages remove debris (including devitalized tissue) and bacteria. Macrophages also encourage
fibroblast replication and neovascularization. Fibroblasts deposit collagen, typically beginning within 48 h
and reaching a maximum in about 7 days. Collagen deposition is essentially complete in 1 mo, but
collagen fiber strength builds more slowly as fibers undergo crosslinking. Wound tensile strength is only
about 20% of ultimate by 3 wk, 60% by 4 mo, and maximum at 1 yr; strength never becomes equivalent to
the undamaged state.
Epithelial cells from the wound edge migrate across the wound shortly after injury. In a surgically repaired
wound (healing by primary intention), they form an effective protective barrier to water and bacteria in 12
to 24 h and resemble normal epidermis within 5 days. In a wound that is not repaired (ie, heals by
secondary intention), epithelialization is prolonged proportionally to the defect size.
There are static forces on the skin because of its natural elasticity and the underlying muscles (see
Fig. 322-1
). Because scar tissue is not as strong as adjacent undamaged skin, these forces tend to widen
scars, sometimes resulting in a cosmetically unacceptable appearance after apparently adequate wound
closure. Scar widening is particularly likely when the forces are perpendicular to the wound edge. This
tendency (and resultant wound stress) is readily observed in the fresh wound; gaping edges indicate
perpendicular tension, and relatively well approximated edges indicate parallel forces.
Scars tend to be red and prominent for about 8 wk. As collagen remodeling occurs, the scar becomes
thinner and loses its erythema. In some patients, however, the scar hypertrophies, becoming unsightly
and raised. Keloids are exuberant scars that extend beyond the limits of the original wound (.
The most common factors that interfere with wound healing involve tissue ischemia, infection, or both
(see
Table 322-1
); tissue ischemia predisposes to infection.
[Fig. 322-1.
Representative minimal skin tension lines.]
Lower extremities are usually at greatest risk of poor healing due to impaired circulation. The scalp and
face are at lowest risk. Certain drugs and disorders can also interfere with wound healing.
Bite wounds ( are usually heavily contaminated.
Evaluation
Sequential steps in evaluation include the following:
• Finding and treating serious injuries
• Obtaining hemostasis
• Looking for damage to underlying structures
Clinicians must find and treat serious injuries ( before focusing on skin lacerations, however
dramatic. Actively bleeding wounds require hemostasis before evaluation. Hemostasis is best obtained by
direct pressure and, when possible, elevation; clamping bleeding vessels with instruments is generally
avoided because of the possibility of damaging adjacent nerves. Use of topical anesthetics containing
epinephrine may also help reduce bleeding. Wound evaluation also requires good lighting. Magnification
===PAGE:3382===
(eg, with magnifying glasses) can help, particularly for examiners with imperfect near-vision.
[Table 322-1.
Factors that Interfere with Wound Healing]
Full wound evaluation may require probing or manipulation, and thus local anesthesia, but sensory
examination should precede administration of a local anesthetic.
The wound is evaluated for damage to underlying structures, including nerves, tendons, vessels, joints,
and bones, as well as the presence of foreign bodies or body cavity penetration (eg, peritoneum, thorax).
Failure to recognize these complications is one of the most significant errors in wound management.
Nerve injury
is suggested by sensory abnormality distal to the wound; suspicion is increased for
lacerations near the course of significant nerves. Examination should test light touch and motor function.
Two-point discrimination is useful for hand and finger injuries; the clinician touches the skin with 2 ends of
a bent paper clip simultaneously to determine the minimum separation that allows perception of 2 points
(usually 2 to 3 mm). Normal varies among patients and by location on the hand; the identical site on the
uninjured side is the best control.
Tendon injury
is suspected in any laceration over the course of a tendon. Complete tendon laceration
usually causes a resting deformity (eg, foot drop from Achilles tendon laceration, loss of normal resting
finger flexion with digital flexor laceration) because forces from antagonist muscles are unopposed.
Resting deformity does not occur with partial tendon laceration, which may manifest with only pain or
relative weakness on strength testing or be discovered only on exploration of the wound. The injured
area should be examined through the full range of motion; the injured tendon may sometimes retract and
not be visible on inspection or wound exploration when the injured area is in the resting position.
Vascular injury
is suggested by signs of ischemia, such as pallor, decreased pulses, or perhaps delayed
capillary refill distal to the laceration (all compared with the uninjured side). Vascular injury is occasionally
suspected in the absence of ischemia when a laceration traverses the territory of a major artery and is
deep or complex or results from penetrating trauma. Other signs of vascular injury can include a rapidly
expanding or pulsatile mass or a bruit.
Bone injury
is possible, particularly after penetrating trauma or when injury occurs over a bony
prominence. If the mechanism or location of injury is concerning, plain x-rays are taken to rule out
fracture.
Foreign bodies
are sometimes present in wounds, depending on the mechanism. Wounds involving
glass are likely to have foreign bodies, lacerations from sharp metal rarely do, and wounds involving other
substances are of intermediate risk. Although not very sensitive, a patient's complaint of feeling a foreign
body is fairly specific and should not be ignored. Localized pain or tenderness in a high-risk wound also is
suggestive, particularly if pain worsens with active or passive motion. Wound examination and exploration
are not sensitive for small foreign bodies unless the wound is superficial and its full depth is visible.
Imaging studies are recommended for all wounds involving glass and for other wounds if a foreign body is
suspected because of the mechanism, the symptoms, or an inability to examine the wound's full depth. If
glass or inorganic material (eg, stones, metal fragments) is involved, plain x-rays are taken; glass bits as
small as
1 mm are usually visible. Organic materials (eg, wood splinters, plastic) are rarely detected with
plain x-rays (although the outline of larger objects may be visible because of their displacement of normal
tissue); various other modalities have been used, including xerography, ultrasonography, CT, and MRI.
None of these is 100% sensitive, but CT may offer the best balance between accuracy and practicality. A
high index of suspicion and careful exploration of all wounds are always appropriate.
Joint penetration
should be suspected when wounds near a joint are deep or involve penetrating
trauma.
Penetration of the abdominal or thoracic cavity
should be considered in any wound over those
locations in which the bottom of the laceration is not clearly visible. Wounds should not be blindly probed;
blind probing is unreliable and may cause further injury. Patients with suspected thoracic lacerations
require a chest x-ray initially, with a repeat film after 4 to 6 h of observation; any slowly developing
===PAGE:3383===
pneumothorax should be visible by that time. In patients with abdominal lacerations, local anesthesia
facilitates exploration (lacerations can be extended horizontally if necessary). Patients with wounds
penetrating the fascia should be observed in the hospital; sometimes abdominal CT is used to identify
hemoperitoneum.
Treatment
Treatment involves
• Cleansing and local anesthesia (sequence can vary)
• Exploration
• Debridement
• Closure
Tissue should be handled as gently as possible.
Cleansing:
Both the wound and the surrounding skin are cleaned. Subepidermal tissue in the wound is
relatively delicate and should not be exposed to harsh substances (eg, full-strength povidone iodine,
chlorhexidine, hydrogen peroxide) and vigorous scrubbing.
Removing hair from laceration edges is not necessary for wound hygiene but can make markedly hairy
areas (eg, scalp) easier to work on. If necessary, hair is removed by clipping with scissors, not shaving;
razors create microtrauma, allowing skin pathogens to enter and increasing risk of infection. Hair is
clipped before wound irrigation so that any clipped hair entering the wound is removed. Eyebrows are
never trimmed because the hair-skin border is needed for proper alignment of wound edges.
Furthermore, eyebrows may grow back abnormally or not at all.
Although wound cleansing is not particularly painful, local anesthesia is usually administered first, except
for heavily contaminated wounds; these wounds are best initially cleansed with running tap water and
mild soap before a local anesthetic is administered. Tap water is clean and free of typical wound
pathogens, and, used in this manner, does not seem to increase risk of infection. Wounds are then
cleansed by a high-velocity stream of liquid and sometimes scrubbed with a fine-pore sponge; brushes
and rough materials are avoided. An appropriate irrigation stream can be created using a 20-, 35-, or 50mL syringe with a 20-gauge needle or IV catheter; commercially available devices incorporating a splash
guard help limit splatter. Sterile 0.9% saline is an effective irrigant; specialized surfactant irrigants are
costly and of doubtful additional benefit. If bacterial contamination is of particular concern (eg, bites, old
wounds, organic debris), povidone iodine solution diluted 1:10 in 0.9% saline may be beneficial and is not
harmful to tissues at this concentration. The volume necessary varies. Irrigation continues until visible
contamination is removed and at least 100 to 300 mL has been applied (more for large wounds).
Painting the skin with povidone iodine before suturing may reduce skin flora, but the substance should
not be introduced into the wound.
Local anesthesia:
Generally, injectable local anesthetics are used. Topical anesthetics are beneficial in
certain cases, especially for wounds of the face and scalp and when topical skin adhesives are used to
close wounds.
Common injectable agents are lidocaine 0.5%, 1%, and 2%, and bupivacaine 0.25% and 0.5%, both from
the amide group of local anesthetics; the ester group includes procaine, tetracaine, and benzocaine.
Lidocaine is most commonly used. Bupivacaine has a slightly slower onset (several minutes vs almost
immediate) and a significantly longer duration (2 to 4 h vs 30 to 60 min). Duration of action of both can be
prolonged by adding epinephrine 1:100,000, a vasoconstrictor. Because vasoconstriction may impair
wound vascularity (and thus defenses), epinephrine is mostly used for wounds in highly vascular areas
(eg, face, scalp). Although traditional teaching has been to avoid using epinephrine in distal parts (eg,
nose, ears, fingers, penis) to prevent tissue ischemia, complications from use on distal parts are rare, and
===PAGE:3384===
such use is now considered
safe. Epinephrine can be particularly helpful in achieving hemostasis in
wounds that are bleeding heavily.
The maximum dose of lidocaine is 3 to 5 mg/kg (1% solution = 1 g/100 mL = 10 mg/mL), and that of
bupivacaine is 2.5 mg/kg. Addition of epinephrine increases the allowable dose of lidocaine to 7 mg/kg,
and of bupivacaine to 3.5 mg/kg.
Adverse reactions to local anesthetics include allergic reactions (hives and, occasionally, anaphylaxis
— and sympathomimetic effects from epinephrine (eg, palpitations, tachycardia). True allergic reaction
is rare, particularly to amide anesthetics; many patient-reported events represent anxiety or vagal
reactions. Furthermore, allergic reactions are often due to methylparaben, the preservative used in
multidose vials of anesthetic. If the offending agent can be identified, a drug from another class (eg, ester
instead of amide) can be used. Otherwise, a test dose of 0.1 mL preservative-free (single-dose vial)
lidocaine can be given intradermally; if there is no reaction within 30 min, that anesthetic can be used.
Techniques recommended to minimize the pain of injection include the following:
• Using a small needle (a 27-gauge needle is best, and a 25-gauge is acceptable; a 30-gauge may be too
flimsy)
• Giving the injection slowly
• Giving the injection into the subcutaneous plane instead of intradermally
• Buffering lidocaine with 1 mL of NaHCO
(concentration from 4.2 to 7.4%) for every 9 to 10 mL of
lidocaine solution (NOTE: Buffering decreases the shelf life of multidose lidocaine vials, and buffering
is ineffective for bupivacaine.)
• Warming the anesthetic solution to body temperature
Local or occasionally regional nerve blocks are sometimes preferred to wound injection. Nerve blocks
cause less distortion of wound edges by injected anesthetic; this decreased distortion is important when
alignment of wound edges must be particularly precise (eg, infraorbital nerve block for lacerations through
the vermilion border of the lip) or when wound injection would be difficult because the space for injection
is small (eg, digital nerve block for finger lacerations). Also, large areas can be anesthetized without using
toxic doses of anesthetic. Slight disadvantages of nerve blocks are slower onset of anesthesia and
sometimes < 100% effectiveness with the first injection.
Use of
topical anesthesia
makes injection unnecessary and is completely painless—factors particularly
desirable in children and fearful adults. The most common solution is LET, which consists of lidocaine 2
to 4%, epinephrine 1:2000, and tetracaine 0.5 to 2%. A cotton dental pledget (or cotton ball) the length of
the wound soaked in several milliliters of the solution and placed within the wound for 30 min usually
provides adequate anesthesia; sometimes supplemental injectable anesthetic is required. If anesthesia is
incomplete after application of a topical anesthetic, supplementary local anesthetic can be injected,
usually with minimal pain.
Exploration:
The full extent of the wound is explored to look for foreign material and possible tendon
injury. Foreign material may also often be discerned by palpating gently with the tip of a blunt forceps,
feeling for a discrete object and listening for a click characteristic of glass or metal foreign bodies.
Occasionally, contaminated puncture wounds (eg, human bite wounds near the metacarpophalangeal
joint) must be extended so that they can be adequately explored and cleansed. Deep wounds near a
major artery should be explored in the operating room by a surgeon.
Debridement:
Debridement uses a scalpel, scissors, or both to remove dead tissue, devitalized tissue
(eg, tissue with a narrow base and no viable blood supply), and sometimes firmly adherent wound
contaminants (eg, grease, paint). Macerated or ragged wound edges are excised; usually 1 to 2 mm is
sufficient. Otherwise, debridement is not used to convert irregular wounds into straight lines. Sharply
===PAGE:3385===
beveled wound edges are sometimes trimmed so that they are perpendicular.
Closure:
Decision to close a wound depends on the wound's location, age, cause, and degree of
contamination and on patient risk factors.
Most wounds can be closed immediately (primary closure). Primary closure is usually appropriate for
uninfected and relatively un-contaminated wounds < 6 to 8 h old (< 12 to 24 h for face and scalp
wounds).
Many other wounds can be closed after several days (delayed primary closure). Delayed primary closure
is appropriate for wounds too old for primary closure, particularly if signs of infection have begun to
appear, and for wounds of any age with significant contamination, particularly if organic debris is
involved. The threshold for using delayed primary closure is lowered for patients with risk factors for poor
healing. At initial presentation, anesthesia, exploration, and debridement are done at least as thoroughly
as for other wounds,
but the wound is loosely packed with moist gauze. The dressing is changed at least
daily and evaluated for closure after 3 to 5 days. If there are no signs of infection, the laceration is closed
by standard techniques. Loosely closing such wounds initially is ineffective and inappropriate because
the wound edges nonetheless seal shut within 12 to 24 h.
Some wounds should not be closed. These wounds include the following:
• Cat bites
• Small bites to hands or feet (see also p.
)
• Puncture wounds
• High-velocity missile wounds
Materials and methods:
Traditionally, sutures have been used for laceration repair, but metal staples,
adhesive strips, and liquid topical skin adhesives are now used for certain wounds, mainly linear
lacerations subject to only small amounts of tension. Whatever the material used, preliminary wound care
is the same; a common error is to do cursory exploration and no debridement because a noninvasive
closure not requiring local anesthesia is planned.
Staples
are quick and easy to apply and, because there is minimal foreign material in the skin, are less
likely to cause infection than sutures. However, they are suited mainly for straight, smooth cuts with
perpendicular edges in areas of low skin tension. Improper wound edge apposition (sometimes causing
wound edges to overlap) is the most common error.
Topical skin adhesives
usually contain octylcyanoacrylate, butylcyanoacrylate, or both. They harden
within a minute; are strong, nontoxic, and waterproof; form a microbial barrier; and have some
antibacterial properties. However, adhesive should not be allowed into the wound. Infections are very
unlikely, and cosmetic results are generally good. Adhesive is best for simple, regular lacerations; it
should not be used for wounds under tension unless tension is relieved with deep dermal sutures,
immobilization, or both. In wounds requiring debridement, deep dermal suturing, or exploration under local
anesthesia, the advantages of decreased pain and time are minimized. However, patients do not require
follow up for suture or staple removal. With long lacerations, skin edges can be held together by a 2nd
person or with skin tapes while the adhesive is applied. One or 2 layers are applied as recommended by
the manufacturer. The adhesive sloughs spontaneously in about a week. Excess or inadvertently applied
adhesive can be removed with any petrolatum-based ointment or, in areas away from the eyes or open
wounds, acetone.
Adhesive strips
are probably the quickest repair method and have a very low infection rate. They are
useful for wounds not subject to tension. Use on lax tissue (eg, dorsum of hand) is difficult because
edges tend to invert. Adhesive strips cannot be used on hairy areas. Adhesive strips are particularly
advantageous for lacerations in an extremity that is to be casted (thus blocking appropriate suture
removal). Adhesive strips can also be used to reinforce wounds after suture or staple removal. Skin must
===PAGE:3386===
be dry before application. Many clinicians apply tincture of benzoin to boost adhesion. Improper
application may result in blister formation. Adhesive strips may be removed by the patient.
Sutures
are the best choice for irregular or complex lacerations, areas of loose skin, areas under
tension, and other wounds requiring deep dermal closure. Because sutures can serve as an entry site for
bacteria and there is a significant amount of foreign material under the skin, they have the highest rate of
infection. Suture materials can be monofilament or braided and absorbable or nonabsorbable.
Characteristics and uses vary (see
Table 322-2
); generally, absorbable material is used for deep dermal sutures, and nonabsorbable material
is used for cutaneous ones. Braided material generally has higher tissue reactivity and thus poses a
slightly higher risk of infection than does monofilament but is soft and easy to handle and has good knot
security.
Suture technique:
General goals include the following:
• Closely approximating skin margins
• Everting wound edges
• Eliminating dead space
• Minimizing tension in the wound and of individual sutures
• Minimizing the amount of subcutaneous material
The relative importance of minimizing wound tension and minimizing the amount of material buried under
the skin (eg, deep dermal sutures) vary by wound location. For example, in facial wounds, cosmetic result
is very important and, because of the excellent vascular supply, infection risk is low. Thus, for gaping
wounds, deep dermal sutures, which decrease wound tension and improve cosmetic result, are desired;
infection risk is low even if they are used. In areas where vascular supply or cosmetic result is less
important, deep dermal sutures are less desirable.
Sutures may be placed and tied individually (interrupted sutures) or be continuous
[Table 322-2.
Suture Materials]
(running suture). They may be completely buried under the skin (subcuticular or deep dermal sutures) or
enter and exit the skin to be tied externally (percutaneous sutures).
If the wound is gaping, deep dermal suturing tends to be used initially (see
Fig. 322-2
); the resultant narrow epidermal gap is then closed by percutaneous sutures. For wounds on
the face, any gaping > 5 to 10 mm may benefit from deep dermal suturing (not used on nose and eyelids);
in other body areas, a wider gap is acceptable. Interrupted sutures using size 4-0 or 5-0 (smaller numbers
indicate thicker material) braided absorbable material (eg, polyglactic acid) are most common. They are
placed with the knot at the bottom of the wound to avoid a palpable lump and must not be too tight. A
running subcuticular suture is sometimes used, especially for cosmetic repairs.
[Fig. 322-2.
Simple deep dermal suture.]
Epidermal closure is typically with simple, interrupted sutures (see
Fig. 322-3
) of nonabsorbable monofilament (eg, nylon, polypropylene). In areas over large joints and the
scalp, size 3-0 or 4-0 sutures are used; size 6-0 sutures are used for repairing face wounds; in most other
areas, size 4-0 or 5-0 sutures are used. Suture size can vary slightly depending on how much static and
dynamic tension is predicted (eg, for facial lacerations subject to frequent movement or high tension, size
5-0 sutures may be used). Sutures are placed about as deep as they are wide and are spaced as far
apart as the distance from the needle entry point to wound edge (see
Fig. 322-4
). Small bites (suture typically inserted 1 to 3 mm from the wound edge) are used for repairs in
areas where cosmetic results are of particular concern and when tissues are thin. For other repairs, wider
===PAGE:3387===
bites are used, varying with the tissue thickness. Wound edges can be everted by making the width of the
bite greater at the deepest part of the wound than at the surface. Eversion is more easily obtained when
the skin is entered with the needle at a 90° angle and angled slightly away from the skin edge.
A vertical mattress suture (see
Fig. 322-5
) is sometimes used instead of a layered closure, provided skin tension is not marked; it also
helps ensure proper edge eversion in loose tissue. A running suture (see
Fig. 322-6
) is quicker to place than interrupted sutures and can be used when wound edges are well
aligned.
[Fig. 322-3.
Simple cutaneous suture.]
[Fig. 322-4.
Suture spacing.]
In all cases, epidermal closure must precisely realign edges horizontally using natural skin landmarks (eg,
folds, creases, lip margins) when available. Vertical alignment is equally important to avoid a step-off
deformity. Excess tension after closure is evidenced by indenting of the skin or a sausage link
appearance. Such a repair should be redone, adding deep dermal sutures, additional percutaneous
sutures, or both as needed. Adjustments to suture technique are needed to achieve optimal alignment
when wound edges are beveled. For example, edges may be debrided or suture bite size may differ from
one side of the wound to the other.
Aftercare: Tetanus immunization
is given if necessary (see
Table 140-1
.
[Fig. 322-5.
Vertical mattress suture.]
[Fig. 322-6.
Running suture.]
Topical antibiotic ointment
is applied daily; it can reduce risk of infection and help maintain a moist
wound environment that optimizes healing. However, ointment is not used over tissue adhesives or
adhesive strips.
Prophylactic systemic antibiotics
are not indicated except for the following cases:
• Bite wounds on the extremities (
• Human bites
• Wounds involving tendons, bones, or joints
• Possibly intraoral lacerations
• Some heavily contaminated wounds
If deemed necessary, antibiotics are given as early as possible; the first dose may be given parenterally.
Wounds are immobilized
because excess movement of the affected area may interfere with healing.
Wounds near joints should be immobilized with splints. Bulky dressings are used to immobilize fingers and
hands. Wounds should be elevated, above heart level when feasible, for the first 48 h after suturing. A
sling may help maintain some degree of elevation of an upper extremity wound. Patients with distal lower
extremity lacerations (other than minor) should probably stay off their feet for several days (eg, by using
crutches); restrictions on walking probably result in better healing.
Wound care
is meticulous. The wound is kept clean and dry; dressings that are nonadherent and
impermeable to bacteria are usually applied. Antibiotic ointment is applied daily until the wound closure
device is removed. A reliable patient may inspect minor, clean lacerations, but early physician examination
is preferable for higher risk wounds and wounds in unreliable patients. After 12 h, well-healing wounds
===PAGE:3388===
can be cleansed gently of residual secretions with water, half-strength hydrogen peroxide, or soap and
water. Brief wetting in the shower is safe, but prolonged soaking should be avoided.
Wound infection
occurs in 2 to 5% of lacerations; steadily increasing pain ≥ 12 h after closure is often
the earliest manifestation, and initial signs are redness more than about 0.5 cm from the wound edge,
swelling, tenderness, and warmth. Later signs may include fever, purulent drainage, and ascending
lymphangitis. Systemic antibiotics effective against skin flora are begun; a 1st-generation cephalosporin
(eg, cephalexin 500 mg po qid) or, for intraoral infection, penicillin 500 mg po qid, is typically used.
Infection beginning > 5 to 7 days after injury suggests retained foreign body.
Closure material
(except for tissue adhesive) is removed after various intervals depending on location.
For facial lacerations, sutures are removed in 3 to 5 days to prevent cross-hatching and visible needle
entrance marks; some clinicians apply adhesive strips to bolster the wound for a few more days. Sutures
and staples on the torso and upper extremities are removed in 7 to 10 days. Sutures and staples on the
extensor surface of the elbow, knee, and anywhere below the knee should remain for 10 to 12 days.
Abrasions
Abrasions are skin scrapes that may involve epidermis or part or all of the dermis.
Abrasions are evaluated, cleansed, and debrided similarly to lacerations. They are harder to anesthetize,
however, which is particularly problematic when large amounts of dirt, stones, or glass are embedded as
is frequently the case, particularly with deep, scraping wounds; a regional nerve block or IV sedation may
be needed. After thoroughly removing all debris (vigorous scrubbing may be needed), antibiotic ointment
(eg, bacitracin) and a nonadherent gauze dressing that is impermeable to bacteria can be applied. Other
commercial wound dressings may be used; the goals are to keep the wound from drying out, because
drying interferes with re-epithelialization, and to keep the dressing from adhering.
===PAGE:3389===
Chapter 323. Fractures, Dislocations, and Sprains
Introduction
Fractures, joint dislocations, ligament sprains, muscle strains, and tendon injuries are common injuries
that vary greatly in severity and treatment. Limbs are most often affected, although any part of the body
can be. Injuries may be open (in communication with a skin wound) or closed.
Complications may be serious. Some are potentially life threatening:
•
Rapid blood loss:
Bleeding can be external or internal. Sometimes transfusion is required.
•
Fat embolism (
see
Sidebar 194-1
:
This rare, possibly preventable, complication may occur
when a long bone is fractured.
Complications may also threaten limb viability or cause permanent limb dysfunction. Such complications
occur in only a small percentage of limb injuries. The greatest threats come from open injuries that
predispose to infection and injuries that disrupt the vascular supply (causing ischemia), primarily by
directly injuring arteries or occasionally veins. However, some closed injuries (eg, posterior knee
dislocations, hip dislocations, displaced supracondylar humeral fractures) can also disrupt the vascular
supply, causing ischemia. The following can threaten a limb:
•
Compartment syndrome:
Tissue pressure increases in a closed fascial space, disrupting the vascular
supply and reducing tissue perfusion. Crush injuries or markedly comminuted fractures are a common
cause. Compartment syndrome can lead to rhabdomyolysis and thus infection, which threatens limb
viability and, if untreated, survival.
•
Nerve or spinal cord injuries:
A penetrating injury may sever a peripheral nerve (. A
blunt, closed injury may result in neuropraxia (bruised peripheral nerve) or axonotmesis (crushed
nerve), which is more severe.
•
Dislocations:
The bones in a joint are completely separated, sometimes disrupting the vascular supply
and injuring nerves. Vascular and nerve injuries are more likely when reduction (realignment of fracture
fragments or dislocated joints) is delayed. Partial dislocation, termed subluxation, can also result in
significant sequelae.
•
Infection:
Open injuries can become infected, potentially leading to osteomyelitis, which can be difficult
to cure.
Closed injuries that do not involve blood vessels or nerves, including fractures, sprains, strains, and
tendon tears, are least likely to result in serious complications.
Evaluation
In the emergency department, if the mechanism suggests potentially severe or multiple injuries (as in a
high-speed motor vehicle crash or fall from a height), patients are first evaluated from head to toe for
serious injuries to all organ systems and are resuscitated (. Patients, especially those with
pelvic or femoral fractures, are evaluated for hemorrhagic shock due to occult blood loss. If the limb is
injured, patients are immediately evaluated for symptoms or signs of ischemia (eg, absent pulses, marked
pallor, coolness distal to the injury, severe pain).
History:
The mechanism (eg, the direction of force, or torque, applied to a bone or joint) often suggests
the type of injury. However, many patients do not remember, or cannot describe, the exact mechanism.
Fractures and serious ligamentous injuries usually cause immediate pain; pain that begins hours to days
after the injury suggests minor injury. Pain out of proportion to the apparent severity of the injury or pain
that steadily worsens in the first hours to days immediately after injury suggests compartment syndrome
or ischemia; compartmental pressure is then measured (. If a patient reports a deformity that
has resolved before the patient is medically evaluated, the deformity should be assumed to be a true
===PAGE:3390===
deformity that spontaneously reduced. A perceived snap or pop at the time of injury may signal a fracture
or a ligament or tendon injury.
Physical examination:
Examination includes vascular and neurologic assessment, inspection for
deformity, swelling, ecchymoses, and decreased or abnormal motion and palpation for tenderness,
crepitation, and gross instability. Motor or sensory deficits suggest neurologic injury. Paresthesias or
sensory deficits alone suggest neuropraxia; motor plus sensory deficits suggest axonotmesis. Deformity
suggests dislocation, subluxation (partial separation of bones in a joint), or fracture. Swelling commonly
indicates a significant musculoskeletal injury but may require several hours to develop. If no swelling
occurs within this time, fracture or severe
ligament disruption is unlikely. With some fractures (eg, buckle
fractures, small fractures without displacement), swelling may be subtle but is rarely absent.
Nearly all injuries are tender, and for many patients, palpation anywhere around the injured area causes
discomfort. However, a noticeable increase in tenderness in one localized area (point tenderness)
suggests a fracture or sprain. Localized ligamentous tenderness and pain with stressing the joint are
consistent with sprain.
Crepitation (a characteristic cracking or popping sound) may be a sign of fracture. Gross joint instability
suggests dislocation or severe ligamentous disruption. Stability of an injured joint is evaluated by stress
testing (; however, if fracture is suspected, stress testing is deferred until x-rays exclude
fracture.
Some partial tendon injuries escape initial clinical detection since function appears intact. Tendon
tenderness, dysfunction, weakness, or palpable defects suggest partial tendon tears. Partial tendon tears
may be impossible to detect initially; they may progress to complete tears with continued use. If the
mechanism or examination suggests partial tendon injury, or if the examination is inconclusive, a splint
that limits further injury is applied. Subsequent examination, occasionally supplemented with MRI, may
further delineate the extent of injury. A partial tendon tear generally heals well if the joint is immobilized for
3 wk to prevent progression,
Attention to certain areas during examination can help detect commonly missed injuries (see
Table 323-1
).
If muscle spasm and pain limit physical examination (particularly stress testing), examination is sometimes
easier after the patient is given a systemic or local anesthetic with or without sedation. Alternatively, the
injury can be immobilized for a few days, and then the patient can be reexamined.
Imaging:
Evaluation of suspected vascular injury, typically by arteriography, takes precedence over bone
imaging.
Not all limb injuries require imaging. Some fractures are minor and are treated similarly to soft-tissue
injuries. For example, most injuries of toes 2 through 5 are treated symptomatically whether a fracture is
present or not. Many ankle sprains do not require x-rays during the initial evaluation because the
probability of finding a fracture that would require a change in treatment is low. There are explicit,
generally accepted criteria for obtaining certain kinds of x-rays; eg, if ankle sprain is suspected, x-rays
are unnecessary unless specific criteria suggest fracture.
Plain x-rays show primarily bone (also joint effusion secondary to bleeding or occult fracture) and thus are
useful for diagnosing most fractures as well as dislocations and subluxations that have not spontaneously
reduced. X-rays are usually indicated for a suspected fracture or dislocation that requires treatment. Plain
x-rays and other imaging studies should include at least 2 views taken in different planes (usually 1
anteroposterior and 1 lateral view). Additional views (such as oblique) may be obtained when the
evaluation suggests fracture and 2 projections are negative.
CT or MRI can be used to better delineate fractures (eg, complex pelvic fractures) identified on plain xrays and to check for fractures that require treatment and that are suspected even though plain x-rays do
not show them (common with scaphoid fractures and impacted subcapital hip fractures). MRI can also be
done to diagnose complex sprains (including complete rupture of a ligament) and other soft-tissue injuries
===PAGE:3391===
(eg, meniscal tears, cartilaginous injuries). Arteriography may be necessary for suspected arterial injuries
(eg, some popliteal artery injuries). Nerve conduction studies may be indicated for nerve injuries.
Treatment
• Treatment of life- or limb-threatening injuries
• Splinting
• Definitive treatment (eg, reduction) for certain injuries
• Rest, ice, compression, and elevation (RICE)
• Usually immobilization
In the emergency department, hemorrhagic shock is treated. Injuries to arteries are repaired surgically
unless they affect only small arteries with good collateral circulation. Severed nerves are surgically
repaired; for neuropraxia and axonotmesis, initial treatment is usually observation, supportive measures,
and sometimes physical therapy.
Most injuries, particularly grossly unstable ones, are immobilized immediately by splinting (immobilization
with a nonrigid or noncircumferential device) to prevent further injury to soft tissues by unstable injuries
and to decrease pain. In patients with long-bone fractures, splinting may prevent fat embolism. Pain is
treated, typically with opioids (. Definitive treatment often involves reduction, which usually
requires analgesia or sedation. Closed reduction (without skin incision) is done when possible; if not,
open reduction (with skin incision) is done. Closed reduction
[Table 323-1.
Examination for Some Commonly Missed Injuries]
of fractures is usually maintained by casting; some dislocations require only a splint or sling. Open
reduction is usually maintained by various surgical hardware (eg, pins, screws, plates, external fixators).
RICE:
Patients who have soft-tissue injuries, with or without musculoskeletal injuries, benefit from RICE
(rest, ice, compression, elevation). Rest prevents further injury and may speed healing. Ice and
compression minimize swelling and pain. Ice is enclosed in a plastic bag or towel and applied
intermittently during the first 24 to 48 h (for 15 to 20 min, as often as possible). Injuries can be
compressed by a splint, an elastic bandage, or, for certain injuries likely to cause severe swelling, a
Jones compression dressing. The Jones dressing is 4 layers; layers 1 (the innermost) and 3 are cotton
batting, and layers 2 and 4 are elastic bandages. The injured limb is elevated above the heart for the first
2 days in a position that allows gravity to help drain edema fluid and thus minimize swelling. After 48 h,
periodic application of warmth (eg, a heating pad) for 15 to 20 min may relieve pain and speed healing.
Immobilization:
Immobilization decreases pain and facilitates healing by preventing further injury and is
helpful except for very rapidly healing injuries. Joints proximal and distal to the injury should be
immobilized.
A cast is usually used for fractures or other injuries that require weeks of immobilization. Rarely, swelling
under a cast is severe enough to contribute to compartment syndrome (. Sometimes, if
severe swelling is likely, a cast (and all padding) is cut open from end to end medially and laterally
(bivalved). Patients with casts should be given written instructions:
• To keep the cast dry
• Never to put an object inside the cast
• To inspect the cast's edges and skin around the cast every day and apply lotion to any red or sore areas
• To pad any rough edges with soft adhesive tape, cloth, or other soft material to prevent the cast's edges
===PAGE:3392===
from injuring the skin
•
To seek medical care at once if an odor emanates from within the cast or if a fever, which may indicate
infection, develops
Good hygiene is important.
A splint (see
Fig. 323-1
) can be used to immobilize some stable injuries, including some suspected but unproven
fractures, sprains, and other injuries that require immobilization for several days or less. A splint allows
patients to apply ice and to move more and does not contribute to compartment syndrome.
Immobilization with bed rest, which is occasionally required for fractures (eg, some vertebral or pelvic
fractures), can cause problems (eg, deep venous thrombosis, UTI).
Prolonged immobilization (more than 3 to 4 wk) of a joint can cause stiffness, contractures, and muscle
atrophy. These complications may develop rapidly and may be permanent, particularly in the elderly.
Some rapidly healing injuries are best treated with resumption of active motion within the first few days or
weeks (early mobilization); this approach may minimize contractures and muscle atrophy, thus
accelerating functional recovery.
Fractures
(For vertebral compression fractures, see p.
; for dental fractures, see p.
;
[Fig. 323-1.
Joint immobilization as acute treatment: some commonly used techniques.]
for spinal fractures, see p.
; for fractures of the temporal bone, jaw and contiguous structures, and
nose, see pp.
-3334; for metatarsal stress fractures, see p.
; for orbital fractures, 
and for fractures that occur during birth, see p.
.)
Fractures are cracks in bones. Symptoms include pain, swelling, ecchymosis, crepitation,
deformity, and abnormal motion. Occasional complications include fat embolism, arterial injury,
compartment syndrome, nerve injuries, and infection. Diagnosis is by clinical criteria and
usually plain x-rays. Treatment involves analgesics, immobilization, and sometimes surgery.
Most fractures result from a single application of significant force to otherwise normal bone. Pathologic
fractures result from application of mild or minimal force to a bone weakened by a disorder such as
cancer, cysts, or osteoporosis. Stress fractures (eg, metatarsal stress fracture— result from
repetitive application of force.
Pathophysiology
If Ca and vitamin D levels are adequate and bone tissue is healthy and the fracture edges are kept
reasonably close to each other and with little or no relative motion, most fractures heal within weeks or
months via remodeling. New tissue (callus) is produced within weeks, and bone reshapes at variable
rates during the first weeks or months. Ultimately, optimal remodeling requires gradual resumption of
normal motion and load-bearing stress. However, remodeling can be disrupted and refracture can occur if
force is applied or the joint moves prematurely; thus, immobilization is usually needed.
Serious complications are unusual. Arteries are injured occasionally in closed supracondylar fractures of
the humerus and femur but rarely in other closed fractures. Compartment syndrome or nerve injury may
occur. Open fractures predispose to bone infection (, which can be intractable. Fractures of
long bones may release fat (and other marrow contents) that embolizes to the lungs and causes
respiratory complications (see
Sidebar 194-1
. Fractures that extend into joints usually disrupt
articular cartilage; misaligned articular cartilage tends to scar, causing osteoarthritis and impairing joint
motion. Occasionally, fractures do not heal (called nonunion); rarely, nonunion occurs even when
treatment is expeditious and correct. If the vascular supply is injured by the initial injury (such as a
===PAGE:3393===
scaphoid fracture), aseptic necrosis may ensue even if the fracture was properly immobilized.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain is usually immediate. Swelling increases for several hours. Children may not exhibit significant softtissue swelling in the presence of a fracture (buckle [torus] fracture or greenstick fracture). Pain and
swelling usually begin to resolve after 12 to 24 h; worsening pain after this period suggests compartment
syndrome. Other symptoms and signs may include bone tenderness, ecchymosis, decreased or abnormal
motion, deformity, and crepitation. With some fractures (eg, rib fractures), motion can be sensed by the
patient and is described as a popping or cracking sensation.
Diagnosis
• Clinical assessment for complicating injuries
• Plain x-rays
• Sometimes CT or MRI
Patients with findings that suggest fracture are examined for ischemia, compartment syndrome, and nerve
injury. If a wound is close to a fracture, open fracture is assumed. Fractures are diagnosed by imaging,
beginning with plain x-rays. If no fracture line is obvious, bone density, trabecular pattern, and cortical
margins are examined for subtle clues to fracture. If a fracture is not visible on plain x-rays but is strongly
suspected or if more detail is needed to guide treatment, MRI or CT is done. Some experts recommend
imaging the joints proximal and distal to the fracture.
A fracture's appearance on x-rays can be described precisely using 5 terms:
• Type of fracture line (see
Fig. 323-2
)
• Location of fracture line
• Angulation
• Displacement (see
Fig. 323-3
)
• Open or closed
Location may be the bone's head (sometimes involving the articular surface), neck, or shaft (proximal,
middle, or distal third).
Treatment
• Analgesia, splinting, and reduction as indicated
• Treatment of complicating injuries
• Immobilization
• Sometimes surgery
Immediate treatment includes analgesics and, for suspected unstable fractures or fractures of long bones,
splinting. Suspected open fractures require sterile wound dressings, tetanus prophylaxis, and broadspectrum antibiotics (eg, a 2nd-generation cephalosporin plus an aminoglycoside).
[Fig. 323-2.
Common types of fracture lines.]
===PAGE:3394===
Rotational malalignment or significant angulation or displacement is corrected with reduction (realignment
of bone fragments by manipulation). Exceptions include some diaphyseal fractures in children. In these
fractures, remodeling gradually corrects some types of significant angulation, and end-to-end realignment
of fractured bone fragments can stimulate bone growth, which may then be excessive.
Closed reduction (without skin incision) is done when possible; if not, open reduction (with skin incision)
is done.
In open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), fracture fragments are aligned and held in place using
hardware. ORIF is usually indicated for the following:
• When an intra-articular fracture is displaced (to precisely align the joint cartilage)
• When ORIF has been shown to have better results for a particular type of fracture
• When closed reduction was ineffective
• When the fracture traverses a cancerous lesion (because normal bone healing does not occur)
• When prolonged immobility (required for callus formation and remodeling) is undesirable (eg, for hip
fractures), because ORIF provides early structural stability, which facilitates mobilization
Surgery is required when injury to a major vessel is suspected (for vessel repair) or when the fracture is
open (for irrigation and debridement to prevent infection). Open reduction may be done without using
hardware when closed reduction is ineffective.
Fractures, whether they require reduction, surgery, or neither, are typically immobilized, as are the
proximal and distal joints. Usually, a cast is applied for weeks or months, but a splint may be used instead,
particularly for fractures that heal faster when mobilized early. Home care for fractures includes supportive
measures such as RICE (rest, ice, compression, elevation—.
[Fig. 323-3.
Spatial relationship between fracture fragments.]
Patients are told to seek care immediately if symptoms of compartment syndrome occur (.
Geriatrics Essentials
The elderly are predisposed to fractures because of osteoporosis, a tendency to fall frequently, drug
adverse effects, and impaired protective reflexes during falls. Age-related fractures tend to affect the
metaphysis (the flared area between the end and shaft). They include fractures of the distal radius,
proximal humerus, proximal tibia, proximal femur, pubic ramus, and vertebrae.
The goal of treatment is rapid return to activities of daily living rather than restoration of perfect limb
alignment and length. Because immobilization (joint immobilization or bed rest) is more likely to cause
adverse effects in the elderly, use of ORIF is increasing. Early
mobilization and physical therapy are
essential to recovery of function. Coexisting disorders (eg, arthritis) can interfere with recovery.
Specific Fractures
Stress fractures:
Stress fractures are small and result from repetitive force (eg, from overuse); they
occur most often in the metatarsals (usually in runners—, followed by the fibula and tibia.
Symptoms include gradual onset of intermittent pain that worsens with weight bearing and eventually
becomes constant. Sometimes swelling occurs.
Examination detects localized bone tenderness. Plain x-rays are done but may not show the fracture at
first. Thus, many such fractures are treated presumptively, and plain x-ray is repeated 2 to 3 wk later
when callus may be visible. Treatment is rest, elevation, analgesics, and sometimes immobilization. CT or
===PAGE:3395===
MRI is rarely needed.
Growth plate fractures:
Bone grows as tissue is added proximally by the epiphyseal disk (growth plate),
which is bordered by the metaphysis proximally and the epiphysis distally (see
Fig. 323-4
). The age at which the growth plate closes and bone growth stops varies by bone, but the
growth plate is closed in all bones by the end of puberty. If there is question about a growth plate injury or
if a fracture is suspected, opposite side comparison x-rays may be helpful.
The growth plate is the most fragile part of the bone and thus is usually the first structure disrupted when
force is applied. Growth plate fractures are classified by the Salter-Harris system (see
Fig. 323-5
). Disruption of future bone growth is common with types III, IV, and V but uncommon with types
I and II.
Growth plate fractures are suspected in children with tenderness localized over the growth plate. These
fractures cause circumferential tenderness and thus can be clinically
[Fig. 323-4.
Epiphyseal disks (growth plates).]
[Fig. 323-5.
Salter-Harris classification of epiphyseal disk (growth plate) fractures.]
differentiated from contusions. In fracture types I and V, x-rays may appear normal. If so, these fractures
can sometimes be differentiated from each other by injury mechanism—eg, distraction (separation in
longitudinal axis) vs compression.
Closed treatment is usually sufficient for types I and II; ORIF is often required for types III and IV. Patients
with type V injuries should be referred to a pediatric orthopedist because such injuries almost always lead
to growth abnormalities.
Rib fractures:
Typically, rib fractures result from blunt injury to the chest wall, usually involving a strong
force (eg, from high-speed deceleration, a baseball bat, a major fall); however, sometimes in the elderly,
only mild or moderate force (eg, in a minor fall) is required. Concomitant injuries may include
• Aortic, subclavian, or cardiac injuries (uncommon but can occur with high-speed deceleration,
particularly if rib 1 or 2 is fractured)
•
Splenic or abdominal injuries (with fractures of any of ribs 7 through 12)
• Pulmonary laceration or contusion
• Pneumothorax
• Other tracheobronchial injuries (uncommon)
Pain is severe, is aggravated by movement of the trunk (including coughing or deep breathing), and lasts
for several weeks. Inspiratory splinting (incomplete inspiration due to pain) can cause atelectasis and
pneumonia, especially in the elderly or those with multiple fractures. Young, healthy patients and those
with 1 or 2 rib fractures rarely develop these complications.
Palpation of the chest wall may identify some fractures, and sometimes the patient and the examining
clinician can feel the broken ribs move when the lungs are expanded. A chest x-ray is taken routinely to
check for concomitant injuries (eg, pneumothorax, pulmonary contusion). Many rib fractures are not
visible on a chest x-ray; specific rib views may be needed, but identifying all rib fractures by x-rays is not
always necessary. Other tests are done to check for concomitant injuries that are clinically suspected.
Treatment requires opioid analgesics, which can depress respiration and worsen atelectasis. To minimize
pulmonary complications, patients should consciously and frequently (eg, hourly) breathe deeply or cough
while awake. Holding (essentially splinting) the affected area with the flat palm of the hand or a pillow can
help minimize the pain during deep breathing or coughing. Patients are hospitalized if they have ≥ 3
===PAGE:3396===
fractures or underlying cardiopulmonary insufficiency. Immobilization (eg, by strapping or taping) should
usually be avoided; it constricts respiration and may predispose to atelectasis and pneumonia.
Clavicle fractures:
The usual injury mechanism is a fall on an outstretched arm or a direct blow. About
80% involve the middle one third of the bone and are immobilized with a sling. Previously used figure-ofeight braces are no more helpful (and are more uncomfortable) than a simple sling. Reduction is not
necessary even for greatly angulated fractures. Clavicle fractures that significantly tent the skin or that
involve areas other than the middle one third of the bone may require additional intervention.
Proximal humeral fractures:
The usual injury mechanism is direct force or a fall on an outstretched
arm. Usually, displacement and angulation are minimal. Contractures may develop after only a few days
of immobilization, particularly in the elderly. Minimally displaced or angulated fractures are treated with
immobilization in a sling and swathe (see
Fig. 323-1
) and early range-of-motion exercises. More severe
fracture may require ORIF or surgery to insert a prosthetic joint (shoulder replacement).
Distal humeral fractures:
The usual injury mechanism is direct force or a fall on an outstretched arm.
The brachial artery or radial nerve may be damaged. Angulation, if present, must be corrected. Casting
with closed reduction may be tried, but ORIF may be necessary.
Radial head fractures:
The usual injury mechanism is a fall on an outstretched arm. The radial head is
palpated on the lateral elbow as a structure that rotates during pronation and supination. Routine
anteroposterior and lateral x-rays usually show a joint effusion or a displaced anterior fat pad (sail sign)
but often do not show the fracture. Patients with localized radial head tenderness and effusion require
oblique views (which are more sensitive for fracture) or presumptive treatment of a fracture. For fractures
with only minimal angulation and displacement, treatment is a splint with the elbow flexed 90° or a sling.
Arthrocentesis to remove blood from the joint often helps relieve pain and facilitate recovery. Starting
range-of-motion exercises 10 days after the injury maximizes joint flexibility.
Distal radial fractures:
The usual injury mechanism is wrist hyperextension, usually during a fall.
Dorsally displaced or angulated fractures (sometimes called Colles' fractures) are common. Treatment is
reduction and immobilization at 15 to 30° of wrist extension. ORIF may be necessary if the joint is
disrupted or if there is excessive impaction or shortening.
Metacarpal neck fractures (except thumb):
The usual injury mechanism is an axial load (eg, from
punching with a clenched fist). If wounds are near the metacarpophalangeal joint, contamination with
human oral flora should be considered, and measures to prevent infection are often required (. Reduction is necessary for fractures of the 2nd and 3rd metacarpals but is unnecessary for dorsal
or volar angulation of < 35° for the 4th metacarpal or of 45° for the 5th metacarpal. Treatment is a splint
(eg, an ulnar gutter splint for fractures of the 4th or 5th metacarpal—see
Fig. 323-1
).
Scaphoid (navicular) fractures:
The usual injury mechanism is wrist hyperextension, usually during a
fall on the outstretched hand. Avascular necrosis is a common complication, even when initial care is
ideal, and can cause disabling, degenerative arthritis of the wrist. Fracture signs include pain with axial
compression of the thumb, pain with wrist supination against resistance, and, particularly, tenderness in
the anatomic snuffbox with ulnar wrist deviation. The anatomic snuffbox is palpated just distal to the
radius between the extensor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis, and abductor pollicis longus tendons.
The initial plain x-ray is often normal. If a fracture is still suspected, MRI, which is more sensitive than xrays, is done, or fracture is presumed and treated with a thumb spica splint (see
Fig. 323-1
), with a followup plain x-ray taken in 1 to 2 wk. Rarely, this subsequent x-ray is falsely normal.
Fingertip (tuft of the distal phalanx) fractures:
The usual mechanism is a crush injury. Subungual
(beneath the nail) hematoma usually occurs and produces a blue-black, tender bruise, which may elevate
the nail; hematoma indicates a nail bed laceration. Most fingertip fractures are treated symptomatically
with a protective covering (eg, commercially available aluminum and foam splint material) wrapped around
the fingertip. Subungual hematomas can be drained to relieve pain by puncturing the nail (trephination),
usually with an 18-gauge needle in a rotatory motion or, if no nail polish is on the nail, with an
electrocautery device. If trephination is done gently and rapidly, anesthesia is often unnecessary. Large
displaced fractures are rarely repaired surgically. Markedly disrupted nail beds are repaired with sutures
===PAGE:3397===
but are best left alone if the nail is closely adherent to the nail bed. Hyperesthesia frequently persists long
after a large fracture has healed and requires desensitization therapy.
Pelvic fractures:
Pelvic fractures may be stable or unstable. Compression of the pubic symphysis or
simultaneous compression of both anterior superior iliac spines is often painful, particularly in severe
fractures. For pelvic fractures, CT is more sensitive than plain x-rays.
Stable fractures do not disrupt the pelvic ring. Some (eg, symphyseal or pubic ramus fractures) result
from minor injuries (eg, falls at home), especially in patients with osteoporosis. Treatment is often
symptomatic, particularly if patients can walk unaided.
Unstable fractures disrupt the pelvic ring in ≥ 2 places; disruptions can be fractures within bones or
separations between the fibrous joints (syndesmoses) between bones. Unstable fractures usually result
from substantial forces (eg, high-speed motor vehicle crashes). Intestinal injuries may occur. Concomitant
GU injuries (eg, urethral or bladder tears) are common, particularly with anterior pelvic fractures. Vascular
injuries may occur and cause hemorrhagic shock, especially with posterior pelvic fractures. Mortality rate
is high. Initial evaluation and treatment are directed at associated injuries. The fracture often requires
surgical repair.
Hip fractures:
Hip fractures are most common among the elderly, particularly those with osteoporosis
(mostly women—. Most fractures result from falls, but in the elderly, seemingly minimal force
(eg, rolling over in bed, getting up from a chair, walking) can result in hip fracture, usually because
osteoporosis has weakened bone. Subcapital femoral neck and intertrochanteric fractures are the most
common types. Hip fractures often cause referred pain in the knee and thus may be misinterpreted as a
knee abnormality. Pubic ramus fractures can cause hip pain.
Subcapital fractures
may result from a single injury but often result from repeated stress or minimal
force, resulting in a small or large stress fracture. A fall after the initial fracture may worsen or displace the
fracture. Patients with small fractures may be ambulatory and have only mild pain. However, such patients
may be unable to flex the entire lower limb against resistance with the knee extended. Passive hip
rotation with the knee flexed aggravates the pain, helping to differentiate hip fracture from extra-articular
disorders such as trochanteric bursitis. Large or displaced fractures tend to limit hip motion more, shorten
the leg, and cause the leg to rotate externally. Displacement predisposes to osteonecrosis of the femoral
head and fracture nonunion.
Plain x-rays are occasionally normal when fractures are small or impacted or when osteoporosis is
severe. If a fracture is still suspected, MRI is done; if MRI is unavailable or contraindicated, CT is done. If
patients are expected to resume walking and have no contraindication to surgery, treatment is usually
surgical repair (typically ORIF—see
Fig. 323-6
) and early ambulation.
If patients are elderly, are not active, and have displaced fractures, treatment is often prosthetic
replacement of the femoral head, typically with a Moore prosthesis, or total hip replacement. Occasionally,
the femoral head must be replaced when the fracture is displaced in younger adults, particularly those
who are inactive. Usually, prolonged bed rest should be avoided in elderly patients. Bed rest increases
the risk of deep venous thrombosis, a common complication of hip fractures. Prophylactic anticoagulation
may reduce the incidence of post-hip fracture venous thrombosis.
[Fig. 323-6.
Open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF).]
Intertrochanteric fractures
usually result from falls or direct blows. Patients have tenderness,
ecchymosis, and swelling over the hip; usually, the leg is shortened and rotates externally. Plain x-rays
are usually diagnostic. Treatment is usually ORIF and early mobilization.
Femoral shaft fractures:
The usual injury mechanism is severe direct force or an axial load to the flexed
knee. Fracture due to trauma causes obvious swelling, deformity, and instability. Up to 1.5 L of blood for
each fracture may be lost. Treatment is immediate splinting, then ORIF.
===PAGE:3398===
Ankle fractures:
The ankle bones and ligaments form a ring that connects the tibia and fibula to the
talus and calcaneus. Within the ring, stability is provided by 2 bones (the medial malleolus of the tibia and
lateral malleolus of the fibula) and 2 ligament complexes (medially, the deltoid ligament; laterally, mainly
the anterior and posterior talofibular ligaments and calcaneofibular ligament—see
Fig. 323-7
). Ankle fractures are common and can result from multiple injury mechanisms. Fractures that
disrupt the ring in one place often disrupt it in another (eg, if only one bone is fractured, a ligament is
often simultaneously and severely torn). If fractures disrupt ≥ 2 of the structures stabilizing the ankle ring,
the ankle is unstable. Disruption of the medial deltoid ligament also causes instability. For unstable
injuries, surgery may be required, and prognosis is guarded. Most stable ankle fractures without other
indications for surgery can be treated with a cast for 6 wk; prognosis is good.
Fractures of the 2nd metatarsal bone base with dislocation (Lisfranc's fracture-dislocation):
The
usual mechanism is a fall on a foot in plantar flexion. Usually there is significant soft-tissue swelling.
These rare fractures are difficult to appreciate on plain x-rays and are often misdiagnosed, leading to
sometimes serious complications, such as osteoarthritis and rarely compartment syndrome. A plain x-ray
can show a fracture at the base of the 2nd metatarsal
[Fig. 323-7.
Ligaments of the ankle.]
or chip fractures of the cuneiform but may not show disruption of the tarsometatarsal joint, which should
be suspected even if it is not visible on plain x-rays. Dislocations often spontaneously reduce, but
immediate referral, usually for closed reduction, which requires general anesthesia, may be warranted.
Fractures of the 5th metatarsal bone base (dancer's fracture):
The usual injury mechanism is a twist
(typically, inversion) or crush injury. These fractures usually heal relatively quickly; nonunion is
uncommon. Treatment is a protective walking shoe.
Fractures of the 5th metatarsal bone diaphysis (Jones fracture):
The usual injury mechanism is a
crush injury. These fractures are less common than those of the metatarsal bone base, and delayed
union or nonunion occurs more commonly. Treatment is a cast that immobilizes the ankle. Avulsion
fractures of the base of the fifth metatarsal can occur with inversion ankle injuries and are less significant
than a true Jones fracture, the latter being predisposed to nonunion.
Toe fractures:
The usual injury mechanism is a crush injury. Unless rotational deformity or joint
involvement is suspected or the proximal phalanx of the great toe is injured, x-rays are usually
unnecessary. Treatment is taping the injured toe to an adjacent toe (dynamic splinting or buddy taping).
Markedly displaced toe fractures should be reduced to restore alignment.
Compartment Syndrome
Compartment syndrome is increased tissue pressure within a closed fascial space, resulting in
tissue ischemia. The earliest symptom is pain out of proportion to the severity of injury.
Diagnosis is by measuring compartmental pressure. Treatment is fasciotomy.
Compartment syndrome is a self-perpetuating cascade of events. It begins with the tissue edema that
normally occurs after injury (eg, because of soft-tissue swelling or a hematoma). If edema develops within
a closed fascial compartment, typically in the anterior or posterior compartments of the leg, there is little
room for tissue expansion, so interstitial (compartmental) pressure increases. As compartmental pressure
exceeds about 20 mm Hg, cellular perfusion slows and may ultimately stop. (NOTE: Because 20 mm Hg
is much lower than arterial pressure, cellular perfusion can stop long before pulses disappear.) Resultant
tissue ischemia further worsens edema in a vicious circle. As ischemia progresses, muscles necrose,
sometimes leading to rhabdomyolysis and infections; these complications can cause loss of limb and, if
untreated, death. If arteries are injured, arterial pressure can drop below even mildly elevated
compartmental pressures, causing or worsening compartment syndrome.
Etiology
Common causes include fractures and severe contusions. Rare causes include snakebites, severe
===PAGE:3399===
exertion, drug overdose (heroin, cocaine), casts, tight bandages, and other rigid circumferential devices
that limit swelling and thus increase compartmental pressure. Prolonged pressure on a muscle during
coma may cause rhabdomyolysis.
Symptoms and Signs
Compartment syndrome usually occurs in the anterior lower leg. The earliest symptom is worsening pain.
It is typically out of proportion to the severity of the apparent injury and is exacerbated by passive
stretching of the muscles within the compartment (eg, for the anterior leg compartment, by passive toe
flexion, which stretches the toe extensor muscles). Pain, one of the 5 P's of tissue ischemia, is followed
by the other 4: paresthesias, paralysis, pallor, and pulselessness. Compartments may feel tense when
palpated.
Diagnosis
• Measurement of compartmental pressure
Diagnosis must be made and treatment started before pallor or pulselessness develop, indicating
necrosis. Diagnosis is by measuring compartmental pressure (normal ≤ 20 mm Hg), usually with a
commercially available wick catheter.
Treatment
• Often fasciotomy
Pressures of 20 to 40 mm Hg can sometimes be treated conservatively with analgesics, elevation, and
splinting; casts, if present, are removed or bivalved. Pressures > 40 mm Hg usually require immediate
fasciotomy to relieve pressure. If necrosis occurs, amputation may be needed.
Dislocations
(For spinal dislocations, see p.
; for atlantoaxial subluxation, see p.
; and for mandibular
dislocation, see p.
.)
Dislocation is a complete separation of the bone ends that normally articulate to form a joint;
subluxation is a partial separation.
The most commonly dislocated limb joint is the glenohumeral (shoulder). Arterial and nerve injuries,
although uncommon, are a risk with dislocations (eg, of the knee, elbow, or hip), particularly those that
are not rapidly reduced.
Symptoms and signs include pain, swelling, deformity, and inability to move. Diagnosis is by plain x-rays.
Treatment is usually closed reduction as soon as possible; it requires sedation and analgesia or,
occasionally, general anesthesia. Neurovascular assessment is done before and after reduction. If closed
reduction is ineffective, open reduction is necessary.
Specific Dislocations
Glenohumeral (shoulder) dislocations:
Glenohumeral dislocations are anterior in ≥ 95% of patients;
the cause is abduction and external rotation of the humerus. Occasionally, the axillary nerve is injured, or
the greater tuberosity is fractured, particularly in patients > 45. The acromion is prominent; the humeral
head is displaced anteriorly and inferiorly and cannot be palpated in its usual position. Sensation over the
lateral deltoid is tested to check for axillary nerve injury. Treatment is usually closed reduction with using
conscious sedation. The traction-countertraction technique is one of many commonly used methods of
reduction (see
Fig. 323-8
). After reduction, the joint is immobilized immediately with a sling and swathe (see
Fig. 323-1
).
Occasionally, dislocation is posterior—a commonly missed injury—or inferior (luxatio erecta). In patients
===PAGE:3400===
with luxatio erecta, the brachial artery or brachial plexus is often also injured.
Elbow dislocations:
Most elbow dislocations result from a fall on an extended, abducted arm. They are
common and usually posterior. Associated injuries may include fractures, injuries to the ulnar or median
nerve, and possibly injury to the brachial artery. The joint is usually flexed about 45°, and the olecranon is
prominent and posterior to the humeral epicondyles; however, these anatomic relationships may be
difficult to determine because of swelling. Reduction is usually with sustained, gentle traction after
sedation and analgesia.
Radial head subluxations (nursemaid's elbow):
In adults, the radial head is wider than the radial
neck; consequently, the head cannot fit through ligaments that tightly surround the neck. However, in
toddlers (about 2 to 3 yr old), the radial head is no wider than the radial neck and can easily slip through
these ligaments (radial head subluxation). Subluxation results from traction on the forearm as when a
caregiver pulls a reluctant toddler forward or catches the toddler by the wrist during a fall—actions many
caregivers do not remember. Symptoms may include pain and tenderness; however, many toddlers
cannot describe their symptoms and simply avoid moving the affected elbow (pseudoparalysis).
[Fig. 323-8.
Traction-countertraction technique for reducing anterior shoulder dislocations.]
Plain x-rays are normal and considered unnecessary by some experts unless an alternate diagnosis is
clinically suspected. Reduction may be diagnostic and therapeutic. The elbow is completely extended and
supinated, then flexed, usually without sedation or analgesia. Reduction is often marked by a subtle
palpable pop or click as the radial head resumes normal position. Children may start to move the elbow
after about 20 min. Immobilization is unnecessary. If pain or dysfunction lasts longer than 24 h, incomplete
reduction or an occult fracture should be suspected.
Proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint dislocations:
PIP joint dislocations are common. Dorsal
dislocations, which are more common than volar, are usually due to hyperextension, sometimes displacing
the volar joint structures intra-articularly. Volar dislocations can rupture the central slip of the extensor
tendon, causing boutonniere deformity (.
Dislocations usually cause obvious deformities. A lateral x-ray should be taken with the affected
digit visibly separated from the others.
For most dislocations, closed reduction using digital block anesthesia is done. Axial traction and volar
force are used for dorsal dislocations, and dorsal force is used for volar dislocations. Dorsal dislocations
are splinted at 15° of flexion for 3 wk. Volar dislocations are splinted at extension for 1 to 2 wk. Some
dorsal dislocations require open reduction.
Hip dislocations:
Most hip dislocations are posterior and result from a severe posteriorly directed force
to the knee with the knee and hip flexed (eg, against a car dashboard). Complications may include arterial
injury (particularly if the dislocation is anterior) with subsequent avascular necrosis of the femoral head
and sciatic nerve injury. Treatment is reduction as soon as possible, followed by bed rest or joint
immobilization.
Knee (tibiofemoral) dislocations:
Most anterior dislocations result from hyperextension; most posterior
dislocations result from a posteriorly directed force to the proximal tibia with the knee slightly flexed. Most
knee dislocations result from severe trauma (eg, high-speed motor vehicle collisions), but seemingly slight
trauma, such as stepping in a hole, coupled with a twisting movement, can dislocate the knee. Some
dislocations spontaneously reduce before medical evaluation, resulting in a large hemarthrosis and gross
instability of the knee. Concomitant arterial injury may be seen with a spontaneously reduced knee
dislocation.
Popliteal artery injury is a serious complication, but it is often a subtle injury in the early stages. The
popliteal artery may be injured, even if ischemia is not initially evident. When the intima is torn, occlusion
of the artery may be delayed. Thus, some experts believe that serial clinical evaluations of the distal
pulse can rule out a popliteal artery injury if the pulse is normal over a period of time. However, some
experts believe that angiography is indicated for every patient with a knee dislocation or with gross
instability.
===PAGE:3401===
Treatment is immediate reduction and surgical repair.
Lateral patellar dislocations:
The usual injury mechanism is quadriceps contraction plus flexion and
external tibial rotation. Most patients have an underlying chronic patellofemoral abnormality. Many
dislocations spontaneously reduce before medical evaluation. Treatment is reduction; with the hip flexed,
the patella is gently moved medially while the knee is extended. Reduction is followed by a cylindrical leg
cast or surgical repair.
Sprains, Strains, and Tendon Tears
Tears may occur in ligaments (sprains), in muscles (strains), or in tendons. Tears may be graded
as minimal (1st degree), moderate to severe (2nd degree), or complete (3rd degree). Thirddegree sprains may result in joint instability and are differentiated from 2nd-degree sprains by
stress testing. Third-degree tendon tears disrupt muscle function. Treatment of all tears
includes analgesics, immobilization, and, for some 3rd-degree sprains and tendon tears,
surgical repair.
Sprains commonly involve the acromioclavicular joint, proximal interphalangeal joint, knee (,
or ankle. Tendon tears commonly involve the knee extensor mechanism or Achilles tendon. Various
muscles are commonly strained. Sprains, strains, and tendon tears cause pain, tenderness, and usually
swelling. Second-degree sprains are very painful when stretched. Third-degree sprains often cause joint
instability because ligaments that stabilize joints may be disrupted. In 3rd-degree tendon tears, the muscle
cannot move the bone normally attached to it by the tendon; a tendon defect may be palpable.
Diagnosis
• Bedside stress testing
Bedside stress testing involves passively opening the joint in a direction other than the normal range of
motion (stressing) to check for joint instability; this test helps differentiate between 2nd- and 3rd-degree
sprains. Because muscle spasm during acutely painful injuries may mask joint instability, the surrounding
muscles are relaxed as much as possible, and examinations are begun gently, then repeated, with slightly
more force each time. Findings are compared with those for the opposite, normal side. With 2nd-degree
sprains, stress is painful, and joint opening is limited. With 3rd-degree sprains, stress is less painful
because the ligament is completely torn and is not being stretched, and joint opening is less limited. If
muscle spasm is severe, the examination should be repeated after injection of a local anesthetic, after
use of systemic analgesia or sedation, or after a few days, when the spasm has subsided.
Treatment
• Rest, ice, compression, and elevation (RICE)
• Immobilization and repair as indicated based on injury location and severity
Treatment of all tears includes RICE ( and, if necessary, analgesics. For 1st-degree tears,
early mobilization is usually best. Mild 2nd-degree tears are often immobilized with a sling or splint for a
few days. Severe 2nd-degree and some 3rd-degree sprains and tendon tears are immobilized for days or
weeks, sometimes with a cast. Many 3rd-degree sprains and tendon tears require surgical repair.
Specific Sprains and Tendon Tears
Acromioclavicular joint sprains (separation):
The usual injury mechanism is a fall on the point of a
shoulder or on an outstretched arm. Severe sprains tear the coracoclavicular ligament, displacing the
clavicle upward from the acromion. Treatment is immobilization (eg, with a sling) and early mobility
exercises. Some severe sprains are surgically repaired. This injury is often termed a shoulder separation.
Ulnar collateral ligament sprains (gamekeeper's thumb):
The ulnar collateral ligament connects the
===PAGE:3402===
base of the thumb's proximal phalanx to the thumb's metacarpal bone on the ulnar aspect of the joint. The
usual injury mechanism is lateral deviation of the thumb. Falling on the hand while holding a ski pole is a
common mechanism. Diagnosis is by stress testing to check for radial deviation of the thumb; digital
nerve block anesthesia is required. Treatment is immobilization with a thumb spica splint; if maximum
possible radial deviation is > 20° more than that in the opposite thumb, surgical repair is necessary.
Quadriceps tendon injuries:
The quadriceps tendon can be partially or completely disrupted. The
elderly and people who have osteoarthritis or who are taking corticosteroids are especially at risk. The
mechanism can seem minor, but includes forceful flexion of the knee, often while descending stairs.
Patients with complete tears cannot stand, do a straight leg raise while lying on their back, or extend the
knee while seated. An examiner can sometimes feel a rent in the tendon. X-rays may be normal or show a
high-riding patella. Swelling in the area is diffuse and may be misinterpreted as a ligamentous knee joint
injury with hemarthrosis. MRI confirms the diagnosis. Treatment is surgical repair as soon as possible, but
long-term complications (eg, loss of motion and weakness) are common.
Ankle sprains:
The most important ankle ligaments are the deltoid (the strong, medial ligament) and the
anterior and posterior talofibular and calcaneofibular (lateral—see
Fig. 323-7
). Ankle sprains are very
common, typically resulting from turning the foot inward (inversion); inversion tears the lateral ligaments,
usually beginning with the anterior talofibular ligament. Severe 2nd- and 3rd-degree sprains often cause
chronic joint buckling and instability and predispose to additional sprains. Ankle sprains cause pain and
swelling, which are usually maximal at the anterolateral ankle. Third-degree sprains often cause more
diffuse pain and swelling (sometimes egg-shaped). Forcefully turning the foot outward (eversion) may tear
the syndesmotic ligaments between the tibia and fibula proximal to the ankle (high ankle sprain).
Occasionally, the deltoid ligament is sprained during eversion, often with simultaneous fracture of the
fibular head.
Diagnosis is primarily clinical. The ankle anterior drawer test assesses stability of the anterior talofibular
ligament, helping differentiate between 2nd- and 3rd-degree lateral sprains. For this test, patients sit or lie
supine with the knee at least slightly flexed; one of the examiner's hands prevents forward movement of
the anterior distal tibia while the other hand cups the heel, pulling it anteriorly. Avulsion fractures of the
base of the 5th metatarsal and Achilles tendon injuries may be misdiagnosed as ankle sprains. High ankle
sprains are considered when eversion is the mechanism and when eversion reproduces pain. Routine
ankle x-rays are done to exclude significant fractures in patients with any of the following:
• Age > 55
• Inability to bear weight immediately after the injury and inability to take 4 steps when first examined
• Bone tenderness at the posterior edge or tip of either malleolus
Complex ligamentous injuries to the ankle may require additional testing, such as MRI.
Most ankle sprains do well with minimal intervention and early immobilization. Splinting alleviates pain but
does not appear to affect final outcome. First-degree sprains are treated with RICE and early weight
bearing. Second-degree sprains are treated with RICE and immobilization of the ankle in a neutral
position with a posterior splint, followed by mobilization; for mild sprains, mobilization can occur within a
few days. Third-degree sprains may require casting or surgical repair. If clinical evaluation or
determination of the extent of injury is impossible (eg, due to muscle spasm or pain), the injury may be
immobilized and reexamined after a few days. Rarely MRI is used. High ankle sprains usually require a
cast for several weeks.
Achilles tendon tears:
The usual injury mechanism is ankle dorsiflexion, particularly if the tendon is
taut. The calf is squeezed while the patient is prone (Thompson test); decreased passive ankle plantar
flexion indicates a tear. Most tears are complete. Partial tears are often missed. Treatment of incomplete
tears and some complete tears is a posterior ankle splint with the ankle in plantar flexion for 4 wk.
Treatment of complete tears is usually immediate surgical repair. Spontaneous Achilles tendon rupture
has been associated with the use of fluoroquinolone antibiotics.
===PAGE:3403===
Knee Sprains and Meniscal Injuries
Sprains of the external (medial and lateral collateral) or internal (anterior and posterior cruciate)
ligaments or injuries of the menisci commonly result from knee trauma. Symptoms include
pain, effusion, instability (with severe sprains), and locking (with some meniscal injuries).
Diagnosis is by physical examination and sometimes MRI or arthroscopy. Treatment is RICE
(rest, ice, compression, elevation) and, for severe injuries, casting or surgical repair.
Many structures that help stabilize the knee are located mainly outside the joint muscles (eg, quadriceps,
semimembranosus), their insertions (eg, pes anserinus), and extracapsular ligaments. The lateral
collateral ligament is extracapsular; the medial (tibial) collateral ligament has a superficial extracapsular
portion and a deep portion that is part of the joint capsule.
Inside the knee, the joint capsule and the posterior and highly vascular anterior cruciate ligaments help
stabilize the joint. The medial and lateral menisci are intra-articular cartilaginous structures that act mainly
as shock absorbers but provide some stabilization (
Fig. 323-9
).
The most commonly injured knee structures are the medial collateral and anterior cruciate ligaments. The
most common mechanism for ligamentous knee injuries is an inward, medial force usually accompanied
by some external rotation and flexion (as when being tackled in football). In such cases, the medial
collateral ligament is usually injured first, followed by the anterior cruciate ligament, then the medial
meniscus. The next most common mechanism is an outward force, often injuring the lateral collateral
ligament, anterior cruciate ligament, or both. Anterior or posterior forces and hyperextension typically
injure the cruciate ligaments. Weight bearing and rotation at the time of injury tend to cause meniscal
injuries.
[Fig. 323-9.
Ligaments of the knee.]
Symptoms and Signs
Swelling and muscle spasm progress over the first few hours. With 2nd-degree sprains, pain is typically
moderate or severe. With 3rd-degree sprains, pain may be mild, and surprisingly, some patients can walk
unaided. An audible pop suggests an anterior cruciate tear but is uncommon. An effusion suggests injury
to the anterior cruciate and possibly other intra-articular structures. However, with severe 3rd-degree
tears of the medial collateral ligament or anterior cruciate, no effusion may be apparent because these
tears can result in an open joint capsule, allowing blood to exit the joint. Tenderness is often maximal over
the injured structure: Medial meniscal injuries cause tenderness in the joint plane (joint line tenderness)
medially, and lateral meniscal injuries cause tenderness in the joint plane laterally. These injuries also
cause swelling and sometimes restrict passive motion (called locking).
Diagnosis
• Bedside testing for specific injuries
• Imaging (eg, MRI) or arthroscopy as indicated
A spontaneously reduced knee dislocation should be suspected in patients with a large
hemarthrosis,
gross instability, or both; serial evaluation of distal pulses or immediate angiography should be
considered. Otherwise, the knee is fully examined first. Knee extension is assessed to check for
disruption of the extensor mechanism (eg, tears of the quadriceps muscle or patellar tendon, which can
be missed on x-rays; fracture of the patella or tibial tubercle). Knee pain and effusion may indicate
disruption of the extensor mechanism.
Other bedside testing is done to check for specific injuries. For the Apley compression test, the patient is
prone, and the examiner stabilizes the patient's thigh. The examiner flexes the patient's knee 90° and
rotates the lower leg while pressing the lower leg downward toward the knee (compression), then rotates
the lower leg while pulling it away from the knee (distraction). Pain during compression and knee rotation
===PAGE:3404===
suggests a meniscal injury; pain during distraction and knee rotation suggests a ligamentous or joint
capsule injury.
For assessment of the medial and lateral collateral ligaments, the patient is examined supine, with the
knee flexed about 20° and the hamstring muscles relaxed. The examiner puts one hand over the side of
the knee opposite the ligament being tested. With the other hand, the examiner cups the heel and pulls
the lower leg outward to test the medial collateral ligament or inward to test the lateral collateral ligament.
Moderate instability after acute injury suggests that a meniscus or cruciate ligament is torn as well as the
collateral ligament.
Lachman's test is the most sensitive physical test for acute anterior cruciate ligament tears. With the
patient supine, the examiner supports the patient's thigh and calf, and the patient's knee is flexed 20°.
The lower leg is moved anteriorly. Excessive passive anterior motion of the lower leg from the femur
suggests a significant tear.
If patients cannot tolerate stress testing (eg, because of pain or muscle spasm), they should be
reexamined after injection of a local anesthetic, after use of systemic analgesia and sedation, or at a
follow-up examination 2 to 3 days later (after swelling and spasm have subsided); alternatively, MRI or
arthroscopy can be done. MRI or arthroscopy is also done when severe injury cannot be excluded
clinically.
Treatment
• Rest, ice, compression, and elevation (RICE)
• Immobilization and repair as indicated based on injury location and severity
Draining large effusions (see
Fig. 32-3
 may decrease pain and spasm. Most 1st-degree and mild or moderate 2nd-degree injuries can be
treated initially with RICE and immobilization of the knee at 20° of flexion with a commercially available
knee immobilizer or splint. Severe 2nd-degree and most 3rd-degree sprains and most meniscal injuries
require casting for ≥ 6 wk. However, some 3rd-degree injuries of the medial collateral ligament, anterior
cruciate ligament, and menisci require arthroscopic surgical repair.
===PAGE:3405===
Chapter 324. Traumatic Brain Injury
Introduction
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is physical injury to brain tissue that temporarily or permanently
impairs brain function. Diagnosis is suspected clinically and confirmed by imaging (primarily
CT). Initial treatment consists of ensuring a reliable airway and maintaining adequate
ventilation, oxygenation, and blood pressure. Surgery is often needed in patients with more
severe injury to place monitors to track and treat intracranial pressure, decompress the brain if
intracranial pressure is increased, or remove intracranial hematomas. In the first few days after
the injury, maintaining adequate brain perfusion and oxygenation and preventing complications
of altered sensorium are important. Subsequently, many patients require rehabilitation.
In the US, as in much of the world, TBI is a common cause of death and disability. Causes include motor
vehicle crashes and other transportation-related causes (eg, bicycle crashes, collisions with pedestrians),
falls (especially in older adults and young children), assaults, and sports activities.
Pathology
Structural changes from head injury may be gross or microscopic, depending on the mechanism and
forces involved. Patients with less severe injuries may have no gross structural damage. Clinical
manifestations vary markedly in severity and consequences. Injuries are commonly categorized as open
or closed.
Open injuries involve penetration of the scalp and skull (and usually the meninges and underlying brain
tissue). They typically involve
bullets or sharp objects, but a skull fracture with overlying laceration due to
severe blunt force is also considered an open injury.
Closed injuries typically occur when the head is struck, strikes an object, or is shaken violently, causing
rapid brain acceleration and deceleration. Acceleration or deceleration can injure tissue at the point of
impact (coup), at its opposite pole (contrecoup), or diffusely; the frontal and temporal lobes are
particularly vulnerable. Axons, blood vessels, or both can be sheared or torn. Disrupted blood vessels
leak, causing contusions, intracerebral or subarachnoid hemorrhage, and epidural or subdural
hematomas (see
Table 324-1
).
Concussion:
Concussion is defined as a transient and reversible posttraumatic alteration in mental
status (eg, loss of consciousness or memory) lasting from seconds to minutes and, by arbitrary definition,
< 6 h. Gross structural brain lesions and serious neurologic residua are not part of concussion, although
temporary disability can occur due to symptoms, such as nausea, headache, dizziness, and memory
disturbance (postconcussion syndrome).
Brain contusions:
Contusions (bruises of the brain) can occur with open or closed injuries and can
impair a wide range of brain functions, depending on contusion size and location. Larger contusions may
cause brain edema and
[Table 324-1.
Common Types of Traumatic Brain Injury]
increased intracranial pressure (ICP). Contusions may enlarge in the hours and days following the initial
injury and cause neurologic deterioration.
Diffuse axonal injury:
Diffuse axonal injury (DAI) occurs when deceleration causes shear-type forces
that result in generalized, widespread disruption of axonal fibers and myelin sheaths. A few DAI lesions
may also result from minor head injury. Gross structural lesions are not part of DAI, but small petechial
hemorrhages in the white matter are often observed on CT and on histopathologic examination. DAI is
sometimes defined clinically as a loss of consciousness lasting > 6 h in the absence of a specific focal
lesion. Edema from the injury often increases ICP, leading to various manifestations (see below). DAI is
typically the underlying injury in shaken baby syndrome.
===PAGE:3406===
Hematomas:
Hematomas (collections of blood in or around the brain) can occur with open or closed
injuries and may be epidural, subdural, or intracerebral. Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH—bleeding into
the subarachnoid space— is common in TBI, although the appearance on CT is not usually
the same as aneurysmal SAH.
Subdural hematomas
are collections of blood between the dura mater and the piaarachnoid mater.
Acute subdural hematomas arise from laceration of cortical veins or avulsion of bridging veins between
the cortex and dural sinuses. They often occur with head trauma from falls and motor vehicle crashes.
Compression of the brain by the hematoma and swelling of the brain due to edema or hyperemia
(increased blood flow due to engorged blood vessels) can increase ICP. When these processes both
occur, mortality and morbidity can be high. A chronic subdural hematoma may appear and cause
symptoms gradually over several weeks after trauma. These hematomas occur more often in elderly
patients (especially in those taking antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs, or in those with brain atrophy).
Elderly patients may consider the head injury relatively trivial or may have even forgotten it. In contrast to
acute subdural hematomas, edema and increased ICP are unusual.
Epidural hematomas
are collections of blood between the skull and dura mater and are less common
than subdural hematomas. Epidural hematomas that are large or rapidly expanding are usually caused by
arterial bleeding, classically due to damage to the middle meningeal artery by a temporal bone fracture.
Without intervention, patients with arterial epidural hematomas may rapidly deteriorate and die. Small,
venous epidural hematomas are rarely lethal.
Intracerebral hematomas
are collections of blood within the brain itself. In the traumatic setting, they
result from coalescence of contusions. Exactly when one or more contusions become a hematoma is not
well defined. Increased ICP, herniation, and brain stem failure can subsequently develop, particularly with
contusions in the temporal lobes.
Skull fractures:
Penetrating injuries by definition involve fractures. Closed injuries may also cause skull
fractures, which may be linear, depressed, or comminuted. The presence of a fracture suggests that
significant force was involved in the injury. However, most patients with simple linear fractures and no
neurologic impairment are not at high risk of brain injuries. Fractures that involve special risks include
• Fractures in patients with neurologic impairment: Such patients are at increased risk of intracranial
hematomas.
• Depressed fractures: These fractures have the highest risk of tearing the dura, damaging the underlying
brain, or both.
• Temporal bone fractures that cross the area of the middle meningeal artery: In these fractures, an
epidural hematoma is a risk.
• Fractures that cross one of the major dural sinuses: These fractures may cause significant hemorrhage
and venous epidural or venous subdural hematoma. Injured venous sinuses can later thrombose and
cause cerebral infarction.
• Fractures that involve the carotid canal: These fractures can result in carotid artery dissection.
• Fractures of the occipital bone and base of the skull (basilar bones): These bones are thick and strong,
so fractures in these areas indicate a high-intensity impact and meaningfully increase risk of brain
injury. Basilar skull fractures that extend into the petrous part of the temporal bone often damage middle
and inner ear structures and can impair facial, acoustic, and vestibular nerve function.
• Fractures in infants: The meninges may become trapped in a linear skull fracture with subsequent
development of a leptomeningeal cyst and expansion of the original fracture (growing fracture).
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:3407===
Brain function may be immediately impaired by direct damage (eg, crush, laceration) of brain tissue.
Further damage may occur shortly thereafter from the cascade of events triggered by the initial injury.
TBI of any sort can cause cerebral edema and decrease brain blood flow. The cranial vault is fixed in size
(constrained by the skull) and filled by noncompressible CSF and minimally compressible brain tissue;
consequently, any swelling from edema or an intracranial hematoma has nowhere to expand and thus
increases ICP. Cerebral blood flow is proportional to the cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), which is the
difference between mean arterial pressure (MAP) and mean ICP. Thus, as ICP increases (or MAP
decreases), CPP decreases. When CCP falls below 50 mm Hg, the brain may become ischemic.
Ischemia and edema may trigger various secondary mechanisms of injury (eg, release of excitatory
neurotransmitters, intracellular Ca, free radicals, and cytokines), causing further cell damage, further
edema, and further increases in ICP. Systemic complications from trauma (eg, hypotension, hypoxia) can
also contribute to cerebral ischemia and are often called secondary brain insults.
Excessive ICP initially causes global cerebral dysfunction. If excessive ICP is unrelieved, it can push brain
tissue across the tentorium or through the foramen magnum, causing herniation (see
Fig. 174-1
 and increased morbidity and mortality. If ICP increases to equal MAP, CPP
becomes zero, resulting in complete brain ischemia and brain death; absent cranial blood flow is objective
evidence of brain death (.
Hyperemia and increased brain blood flow may result from concussive injury in adolescents or children.
Second impact syndrome is a rare and debated entity defined by sudden increased ICP and death after a
second traumatic insult that follows a minor head injury. It is attributed to loss of autoregulation of cerebral
blood flow that leads to vascular engorgement, increased ICP, and herniation.
Symptoms and Signs
Initially, most patients with moderate or severe TBI lose consciousness (usually for seconds or minutes),
although some patients with minor injuries have only confusion or amnesia (amnesia is usually retrograde
and lasts for seconds to a few hours). Young children may simply become irritable. Some patients have
seizures, often within the first hour or day. After these initial symptoms, patients may be fully awake and
alert, or consciousness and function may be altered to some degree, from mild confusion to stupor to
coma. Duration of unconsciousness and severity of obtundation are roughly proportional to injury severity
but are not specific.
The
Glasgow Coma Scale
(GCS—see
Table 324-2
) is a quick, reproducible scoring system to be used during the initial examination to estimate
severity of TBI. It is based on eye opening, verbal response, and the best motor response. The lowest
total score (3) indicates
[Table 324-2.
Glasgow Coma Scale*]
likely fatal damage, especially if both pupils fail to respond to light and oculovestibular responses are
absent. Higher initial scores tend to predict better recovery. By convention, the severity of head injury is
initially defined by the GCS:
• 14 or 15 is mild TBI
• 9 to 13 is moderate TBI
• 3 to 8 is severe TBI
However, the severity and prognosis are predicted more accurately by also considering CT findings and
other factors. Some patients with initially moderate TBI and a few patients with initially mild TBI
deteriorate. For infants and young children, the Modified Glasgow Coma Scale for Infants and Children is
used (see
Table 324-3
). Because hypoxia and hypotension can decrease the GCS, GCS values after resuscitation
from cardiopulmonary insults are more specific for brain dysfunction than values determined before
===PAGE:3408===
resuscitation. Similarly, sedating drugs can decrease GCS values and should be avoided before full
neurologic evaluation.
Symptoms of various types of TBI may overlap considerably. Symptoms of epidural hematoma usually
develop within minutes to several hours after the injury (the period without symptoms is the so-called lucid
interval) and consist of increasing headache, decreased level of consciousness, and focal neurologic
deficits (eg, hemiparesis). Pupillary dilation with loss of light reactivity usually indicates herniation. Some
patients lose consciousness, then have a transient lucid interval, and then gradual neurologic
deterioration. Most patients with subdural hematomas have immediate loss of consciousness.
Intracerebral hematoma and subdural hematoma can cause focal neurologic deficits such as hemiparesis,
progressive decrease in consciousness, or both. Progressive decrease in consciousness may result from
anything that increases ICP (eg, hematoma, edema, hyperemia).
[Table 324-3.
Modified Glasgow Coma Scale for Infants and Children]
Vomiting may indicate increased ICP but is nonspecific. Markedly increased ICP classically manifests as a
combination of hypertension (usually with increased pulse pressure), bradycardia, and respiratory
depression (Cushing's triad); respirations are usually slow and irregular. Severe diffuse brain injury or
markedly increased ICP may cause decorticate or decerebrate posturing. Both are poor prognostic signs.
Transtentorial herniation (see
Fig. 174-1
 may result in coma, unilaterally or bilaterally dilated
and unreactive pupils, hemiplegia (usually on the side opposite a unilaterally dilated pupil), and Cushing's
triad.
Basilar skull fracture may result in leakage of CSF from the nose (CSF rhinorrhea) or ear (CSF otorrhea),
blood behind the tympanic membrane (hemotympanum) or in the external ear canal if the tympanic
membrane has ruptured, and ecchymosis behind the ear (Battle's sign) or in the periorbital area (raccoon
eyes). Loss of smell and hearing is usually immediate, although these losses may not be noticed until the
patient regains consciousness. Facial nerve function may be impaired immediately or after a delay. Other
fractures of the cranial vault are sometimes palpable, particularly through a scalp laceration, as a
depression or step-off deformity. However, blood under the galea aponeurotica may mimic such a step-off
deformity.
Patients with chronic subdural hematomas may present with increasing daily headache, fluctuating
drowsiness or confusion (which may mimic early dementia), and mild-to-moderate hemiparesis or other
focal neurologic deficits.
Long-term symptoms:
Amnesia may persist and be both retrograde and anterograde. Post-concussion
syndrome, which commonly follows a moderate or severe concussion, includes headache, dizziness,
fatigue, difficulty concentrating, variable amnesia, depression, apathy, and anxiety. Commonly smell (and
thus taste), sometimes hearing, or rarely vision is altered or lost. Symptoms usually resolve
spontaneously over weeks to months.
A range of cognitive and neuropsychiatric deficits can persist after severe and even moderate TBI,
particularly if structural damage was significant. Common problems include amnesia, behavioral changes
(eg, agitation, impulsivity, disinhibition, lack of motivation), emotional lability, sleep disturbances, and
decreased intellectual function.
Late seizures (> 7 days after the injury) develop in a small percentage of patients, often weeks, months,
or even years later. Spastic motor impairment, gait and balance disturbances, ataxia, and sensory losses
may occur.
A persistent vegetative state ( can result from a TBI that destroys forebrain cognitive
functions but spares the brain stem. The capacity for self-awareness and other mental activity is absent;
however, autonomic and motor reflexes are preserved, and sleep-wake cycles are normal. Few patients
recover normal neurologic function when a persistent vegetative state lasts for 3 mo after injury, and
almost none recover after 6 mo.
===PAGE:3409===
Neurologic function may continue to improve for a few years after TBI, most rapidly during the initial 6 mo.
Diagnosis
• Initial rapid trauma assessment
• Glasgow coma scale and neurologic examination
• CT
Initial measures:
An initial overall assessment of injuries should be done (. Diagnosis and
treatment occur simultaneously in seriously injured patients.
A rapid, focused neurologic evaluation is part of the initial assessment, including assessment of the
components of the GCS, adequacy of the airway and breathing, and pupillary light response. Patients are
ideally assessed before paralytics and sedatives are given. Patients are reassessed at frequent intervals
(eg, q 15 to 30 min initially, then q 1 h after stabilization). Subsequent improvement or deterioration helps
estimate injury severity and prognosis.
Complete clinical evaluation:
Complete neurologic examination is done as soon as the patient is
sufficiently stable. Infants and children should be examined carefully for retinal hemorrhages, which may
indicate shaken baby syndrome. Funduscopic examination in adults may disclose traumatic retinal
detachment and absence of retinal venous pulsations due to elevated ICP, but examination may be
normal despite brain injury. Concussion is diagnosed when loss of consciousness or memory lasts < 6 h
and symptoms are not explained by brain injury seen on neuroimaging. DAI is suspected when loss of
consciousness exceeds 6 h and microhemorrhages are seen on CT. Diagnosis of other types of TBI is
made by CT or MRI.
Neuroimaging:
Imaging should always be done in patients with more than transiently impaired
consciousness, GCS score < 15, focal neurologic findings, persistent vomiting, seizures, a history of loss
of consciousness, or clinically suspected fractures. However, a case can be made for obtaining a CT
scan of the head in all patients with more than a trivial head injury, because the clinical and medicolegal
consequences of missing a hematoma are severe.
Although plain x-rays can detect some skull fractures, they cannot help assess the brain and they delay
more definitive brain imaging; thus, plain x-rays are usually not done. CT is the best choice for initial
imaging, because it can detect hematomas, contusions, skull fractures (thin cuts are obtained to reveal
clinically suspected basilar skull fractures, which may otherwise not be visible), and sometimes DAI. On
CT, contusions and acute bleeding appear opaque (dense) compared with brain tissue. Arterial epidural
hematomas classically appear as lenticular-shaped opacities over brain tissue, often in the territory of the
middle meningeal artery. Subdural hematomas classically appear as crescent-shaped opacities overlying
brain tissue. A chronic subdural hematoma appears hypodense compared with brain tissue, whereas a
subacute subdural hematoma may have a similar radiopacity as brain tissue (isodense). Isodense
subdural hematoma, particularly if bilateral and symmetric, may appear only subtly abnormal. In patients
with severe anemia, an acute subdural hematoma may appear isodense with brain tissue. Among
individual patients, findings may differ from these classic appearances. Signs of mass effect include
sulcal effacement, ventricular and cisternal compression, and midline shift. Absence of these findings
does not exclude increased ICP, and mass effect may be present with normal ICP. A shift of > 5 mm from
the midline is generally considered to be an indication for surgical evacuation of the hematoma.
MRI may be useful later in the clinical course to detect more subtle contusions and DAI. It is usually more
sensitive than CT for the diagnosis of very small acute or isodense subacute and isodense chronic
subdural hematomas. Preliminary, unconfirmed evidence suggests that certain MRI findings predict
prognosis. Angiography, CT angiography, and magnetic resonance angiography are all useful for the
evaluation of vascular injury. For example, vascular injury is suspected when CT findings are inconsistent
with the physical examination findings (eg, hemiparesis with a normal or nondiagnostic CT due to
suspected evolving ischemia secondary to vascular thrombosis or embolism from a carotid artery
dissection).
===PAGE:3410===
Prognosis
In the US, adults with severe TBI who are treated have a mortality rate of about 25 to 33%. Mortality is
lower with higher GCS scores. Mortality rates are lower in children ≥ 5 yr (≤ 10% with a GCS score of 5 to
7). Children overall do better than adults with a comparable injury.
The vast majority of patients with mild TBI retain good neurologic function. With moderate or severe TBI,
the prognosis is not as good but is much better than is generally believed. The most commonly used
scale to assess outcome in TBI patients is the Glasgow Outcome Scale. On this scale the possible
outcomes are:
• Good recovery (return to previous level of function)
• Moderate disability (capable of self-care)
• Severe disability (incapable of self-care)
• Vegetative (no cognitive function)
• Death
Over 50% of adults with severe TBI have a good recovery or moderate disability. Occurrence and
duration of coma after a TBI are strong predictors of disability. Of patients whose coma exceeds 24 h,
50% have major persistent neurologic sequelae, and 2 to 6% remain in a persistent vegetative state at 6
mo. In adults with severe TBI, recovery occurs most rapidly within the initial 6 mo. Smaller improvements
continue for perhaps as long as several years. Children have a better immediate recovery from TBI
regardless of severity and continue to improve for a longer period of time.
Cognitive deficits, with impaired concentration, attention, and memory, and various personality changes
are a more common cause of disability in social relations and employment than are focal motor or sensory
impairments. Posttraumatic anosmia and acute traumatic blindness seldom resolve after 3 to 4 mo.
Hemiparesis and aphasia usually resolve at least partially, except in the elderly.
Treatment
• For mild injuries discharge and observation
• For moderate and severe injuries optimization of ventilation, oxygenation, and brain perfusion; treatment
of complications (eg, increased ICP, seizures, hematomas); and rehabilitation
Multiple noncranial injuries, which are likely with motor vehicle crashes and falls, often require
simultaneous treatment. Initial resuscitation of trauma patients is discussed elsewhere (.
At the injury scene, a clear airway is secured and external bleeding is controlled before the patient is
moved. Particular care is taken to avoid displacement of the spine or other bones to protect the spinal
cord and blood vessels. Proper immobilization should be maintained with a cervical collar and long spine
board until stability of the entire spine has been established by appropriate examination and imaging
(see
p.
). After the initial rapid neurologic assessment, pain should be relieved with a short-acting opioid
(eg, fentanyl).
In the hospital, after quick initial evaluation, neurologic findings (GCS and pupillary reaction), BP, pulse,
and temperature should be recorded frequently for several hours because any deterioration demands
prompt attention. Serial GCS and CT results stratify injury severity, which helps guide treatment (see
Table 324-4
).
The cornerstone of management for all patients is maintenance of adequate ventilation, oxygenation, and
brain perfusion to avoid secondary brain insult. Aggressive early management of hypoxia, hypercapnia,
===PAGE:3411===
hypotension, and increased ICP helps avoid secondary complications. Bleeding from injuries (external
and internal) is rapidly controlled, and intravascular volume is promptly replaced with crystalloid (eg, 0.9%
saline) or sometimes blood transfusion to maintain cerebral perfusion. Hypotonic fluids (especially 5%
D/W) are contraindicated because they contain excess free water, which can increase brain edema and
ICP.
Other complications to check for and to prevent include hyperthermia, hyponatremia, hyperglycemia, and
fluid imbalance.
Mild injury:
Injury is mild (by GCS score) in 80% of patients who have TBI and present to an emergency
department. If there is brief or no loss of consciousness and if patients have stable vital signs, a normal
head CT scan, and normal mental and neurologic function, they may be discharged home provided family
members or friends can observe them closely for an additional 24 h. These observers are instructed to
return patients to the hospital if any of the following develop: decreased level of consciousness, focal
neurologic deficits, worsening headache, vomiting, or deterioration of mental function.
[Table 324-4.
Management of Traumatic Brain Injury Based on Severity of Injury]
Patients who have had loss of consciousness or have any abnormalities in mental or neurologic function
and cannot be observed closely after discharge are generally observed in the emergency department or
overnight in the hospital, and follow-up CT is done in 4 to 8 h. Patients who have no neurologic changes
but minor abnormalities on head CT (eg, small contusions, small subdural hematomas with no mass
effect, or punctuate or small traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage) may need only a follow-up CT within 24
h. With a stable CT and normal neurologic examination results, these patients may be discharged home.
Moderate and severe injury:
Injury is moderate in 10% of patients who have TBI and present to an
emergency department. They often do not require intubation and mechanical ventilation (unless other
injuries are present) or ICP monitoring. However, because deterioration is possible, these patients should
be admitted and observed even if head CT is normal.
Injury is severe in 10% of patients who have TBI and present to an emergency department. They are
admitted to a critical care unit. Because airway protective reflexes are usually impaired and ICP may be
increased, patients are intubated endotracheally while measures are taken to avoid increasing ICP. Close
monitoring using the GCS and pupillary response should continue, and CT is repeated, particularly if
there is an unexplained ICP rise.
Increased intracranial pressure:
Treatment principles for patients with increased ICP include
• Rapid sequence orotracheal intubation
• Mechanical ventilation
• Monitoring of ICP and CCP
• Ongoing sedation as needed
• Maintaining euvolemia and serum osmolality of 295 to 320 mOsm/kg
• For intractable increased ICP, possibly CSF drainage, temporary hyperventilation, decompressive
craniotomy, or pentobarbital coma
Patients with TBI who require airway support or mechanical ventilation undergo rapid sequence oral
intubation (using paralysis) rather than awake nasotracheal intubation (see
Chapter 225
), which can cause
coughing and gagging and thereby raise the ICP. Drugs are used to minimize the ICP increase when the
airway is manipulated—eg, lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg IV 1 to 2 min before giving the paralytic. Etomidate is an
excellent induction agent because it has minimal effects on BP; IV dose in
adults is 0.3 mg/kg (or 20 mg
for an average-sized adult) and in children is 0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg. An alternative, if hypotension is absent and
unlikely, is propofol 0.2 to 1.5 mg/kg IV. Succinylcholine 1.5 mg/kg IV is typically used as a paralytic.
===PAGE:3412===
Pulse oximetry and ABGs (if possible, end-tidal CO
) should be used to assess adequacy of oxygenation
and ventilation. The goal is a normal PaCO
level (38 to 42 mm Hg). Prophylactic hyperventilation
(PaCO
25 to 35 mm Hg) is no longer recommended. The lower PaCO
reduces ICP by causing cerebral
vasoconstriction, but this vasoconstriction also decreases cerebral perfusion, thus potentiating ischemia.
Therefore, hyperventilation (target PaCO
of 30 to 35 mm Hg) is used only during the first several hours
and if ICP is unresponsive to other measures.
In patients with severe TBI who cannot follow simple commands, especially those with an abnormal head
CT scan, ICP and CPP monitoring ( and control are recommended. The goal is to maintain
ICP at < 20 mm Hg and CPP as close as possible to 60 mm Hg. Cerebral venous drainage can be
enhanced (thus lowering ICP) by elevating the head of the bed to 30° and by keeping the patient's head
in a midline position. If needed, a ventricular catheter can be inserted for CSF drainage to lower the ICP.
Preventing agitation, excessive muscular activity (eg, from delirium), and pain can also help prevent
increases in ICP. For sedation, propofol is often used in adults (contraindicated in children) because it has
quick onset and very brief duration of action; dose is 0.3 mg/kg/h continuous IV infusion, titrated gradually
upward as needed (up to 3 mg/kg/h). An initial bolus is not used. The most common adverse effect is
hypotension. Prolonged use at high doses can cause pancreatitis. Benzodiazepines (eg, midazolam,
lorazepam) can also be used for sedation, but they are not as rapidly acting as propofol and individual
dose-response can be hard to predict. Antipsychotics can delay recovery and should be avoided if
possible. Rarely, paralytics may be needed; if so, adequate sedation must be ensured. Opioids are often
needed for adequate pain control.
Patients should be kept euvolemic and normosmolar or slightly hyperosmolar (target serum osmolality 295
to 320 mOsm/kg). Osmotic diuretics (eg, mannitol) may be given IV to lower ICP and maintain serum
osmolality. However, they should be reserved for patients whose condition is deteriorating or used
preoperatively for patients with hematomas. Mannitol 20% solution is given 0.5 to 1 g/kg IV (2.5 to 5
mL/kg) over 15 to 30 min and repeated in a dose ranging from 0.25 to 0.5 g/kg (1.25 to 2.5 mL/kg) given
as often as needed (usually q 6 to 8 h); it lowers ICP for a few hours. Mannitol must be used cautiously in
patients with severe coronary artery disease, heart failure, renal insufficiency, or pulmonary vascular
congestion because mannitol rapidly expands intravascular volume. Because osmotic diuretics increase
renal excretion of water relative to Na, prolonged use of mannitol may also result in water depletion and
hypernatremia. Furosemide 1 mg/kg IV is also helpful to decrease total body water, particularly when the
transient hypervolemia associated with mannitol is to be avoided. Fluid and electrolyte balance should be
monitored closely while osmotic diuretics are used. A hypertonic saline solution (usually 2% to 3%) is
being studied as another potential osmotic agent to control ICP.
When increased ICP is refractory to other interventions, decompressive craniotomy can be considered.
For this procedure, a bone flap is removed (to be replaced later), and duraplasty is done to allow outward
brain swelling.
A more involved and currently less popular option for intractable increased ICP is pentobarbital coma.
Coma is induced by giving pentobarbital 10 mg/kg over 30 min, 5 mg/kg/h for 3 h, then 1 mg/kg/h
maintenance infusion. The dose may be adjusted to suppress bursts of EEG activity, which is
continuously monitored. Hypotension is common and managed by giving fluids and, if necessary,
vasopressors.
Therapeutic systemic hypothermia has not proved helpful. Corticosteroids are not useful to control ICP
and are not recommended; they were associated with a worse outcome in a recent multinational study. A
variety of neuroprotective agents are being studied, but thus far, none has demonstrated efficacy in
clinical trials.
Seizures:
Seizures can worsen brain damage and increase ICP and therefore should be treated
promptly. In patients with significant structural injury (eg, larger contusions or hematomas, brain
laceration, depressed skull fracture) or a GCS score < 10, a prophylactic anticonvulsant should be
considered. If phenytoin is used, a loading dose of 20 mg/kg IV is given (at a maximum rate of 50 mg/min
===PAGE:3413===
to prevent cardiovascular adverse effects such as hypotension and bradycardia). The starting
maintenance IV dose for adults is 2 to 2.7 mg/kg tid; children require higher doses (up to 5 mg/kg bid for
children < 4 yr). Serum levels should be measured to adjust the dose.
Duration of treatment depends on
the type of injury and EEG results. If no seizures develop within 1 wk, anticonvulsants should be stopped
because their value in preventing future seizures is not established. Newer anticonvulsants are under
study. Fosphenytoin, a form of phenytoin that has better water solubility, is being used in some patients
without central venous access because it decreases the risk of thrombophlebitis when given through a
peripheral IV. Dosing is the same as for phenytoin.
Skull fractures:
Aligned closed fractures require no specific treatment. Depressed fractures sometimes
require surgery to elevate fragments, manage lacerated cortical vessels, repair dura mater, and debride
injured brain. Open fractures require debridement. Use of antibiotic prophylaxis is controversial because
of limited data on its efficacy and the concern that it promotes drug-resistant strains.
Surgery:
Intracranial hematomas may require urgent surgical evacuation to prevent or treat brain shift,
compression, and herniation; hence, early neurosurgical consultation is mandatory. However, not all
hematomas require surgical removal. Small intracerebral hematomas rarely require surgery. Patients with
small subdural hematomas can often be treated without surgery. Factors that suggest a need for surgery
include a midline brain shift of > 5 mm, compression of the basal cisterns, and worsening neurologic
examination findings. Chronic subdural hematomas may require surgical drainage but much less urgently
than acute subdural hematomas. Large or arterial epidural hematomas are treated surgically, but small
epidural hematomas that are thought to be venous in origin can be followed with serial CT.
Rehabilitation:
When neurologic deficits persist, rehabilitation is needed. Rehabilitation is best provided
through a team approach that combines physical, occupational, and speech therapy, skill-building
activities, and counseling to meet the patient's social and emotional needs (see also p.
). Brain injury
support groups may provide assistance to the families of brain-injured patients.
For patients whose coma exceeds 24 h, 50% of whom have major persistent neurologic sequelae, a
prolonged period of rehabilitation, particularly in cognitive and emotional areas, is often required.
Rehabilitation services should be planned early.
===PAGE:3414===
Chapter 325. Spinal Trauma
Introduction
Trauma to the spine may cause injuries involving the spinal cord, vertebrae, or both. Occasionally, the
spinal nerves are affected (. The anatomy of the spinal column is reviewed in
Chapter 186
(.
Etiology
Cord injury:
During a typical year, there are about 11,000 spinal cord injuries in the US. Nearly 48%
occur in motor vehicle crashes, and 23% result from falls. The remainder are attributed to violence (14%),
sports (9%), and work-related accidents. About 80% of patients are male.
Spinal cord injuries occur when blunt physical force damages the vertebrae, ligaments, or disks of the
spinal column, causing bruising, crushing, or tearing of spinal cord tissue, and when the spinal cord is
penetrated (eg, by a gunshot or a knife wound). Such injuries can also cause vascular injury with
resultant ischemia or hematoma (typically extradural), leading to further damage. All forms of injury can
cause spinal cord edema, further decreasing blood flow and oxygenation. Damage may be mediated by
excessive release of neurotransmitters from damaged cells, an inflammatory immune response with
release of cytokines, accumulation of free radicals, and apoptosis.
Vertebral injury:
Fractures may involve the vertebral body, lamina, and pedicles as well as the spinous,
articular, articular, and transverse processes. Dislocations typically involve the facets. Subluxation
involves ligament rupture without bony injury. In the neck, fractures of the posterior elements and
dislocations can damage the vertebral arteries, causing a stroke-like syndrome.
Unstable vertebral injuries are those in which bony and ligamentous integrity is disrupted sufficiently that
free movement can occur, potentially compressing the spinal cord or its vascular supply and resulting in
marked worsening of neurologic function or pain. Such vertebral movement may occur even with a shift in
patient position (eg, for ambulance transport, during initial evaluation). Stable fractures are able to resist
such movement.
Specific injuries typically vary with mechanism of trauma. Flexion injuries can cause
wedge fractures of
the vertebral body or spinous process fractures. Greater flexion force may cause bilateral cervical cervical
facet dislocation, or if the force occurs at the level of C1 or C2, odontoid fracture, atlantooccipital or
atlantoaxial subluxation, or both fracture and subluxation. Rotational injury can cause unilateral facet
dislocation. Extension injury most often causes posterior neural arch fracture. Compression injuries can
cause burst fractures of vertebral bodies.
Cauda equina injury:
The lower tip of the spinal cord (conus medullaris) is usually at the level of the L1
vertebra. Spinal nerves below this level comprise the cauda equina. Findings in spinal injuries below this
level may mimic those of spinal cord injury, particularly conus medullaris syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs
The cardinal sign of cord injury is a discrete injury level in which neurologic function above the injury is
intact, and function below the injury is absent or markedly diminished. Specific manifestations depend on
the exact level (see
Table 325-1
) and whether cord injury is complete or partial. Priapism may occur in the acute phase of
spinal cord injury.
Vertebral injury, as with other fractures and dislocations, typically is painful, but patients who are
distracted by other painful injuries (eg, long bone fractures) or whose level of consciousness is altered by
intoxicants or head injury may not complain of pain.
Complete cord injury:
Transection leads to immediate, complete, flaccid paralysis (including loss of
anal sphincter tone), loss of all sensation and reflex activity, and autonomic dysfunction below the level of
===PAGE:3415===
the injury.
High cervical injury (at or above C5) affects the muscles controlling respiration, causing respiratory
insufficiency; ventilator dependence may occur, especially in patients with injuries at or above C3.
Autonomic dysfunction from cervical injury can result in bradycardia and hypotension, termed neurogenic
shock; unlike in other forms of shock, the skin remains warm and dry. Arrhythmias and BP instability may
develop. Pneumonia is a frequent cause of death in people with a high spinal cord injury, especially in
those who are ventilator dependent.
Flaccid paralysis gradually changes over hours or days to spastic paralysis with increased deep tendon
reflexes due to loss of descending inhibition. Later, if the lumbosacral cord is intact, flexor muscle spasms
appear and autonomic reflexes return.
Partial cord injury:
Partial motor and sensory loss occurs, and deep tendon reflexes may be exuberant.
Motor and sensory loss may be permanent or temporary depending on the etiology; function may be lost
briefly due to concussion or more lastingly due to a contusion
[Table 325-1.
Effects of Spinal Cord Injury by Location]
or laceration. Sometimes, however, rapid swelling of the cord results in total neurologic dysfunction
resembling complete cord injury. Termed spinal shock (not to be confused with neurogenic shock),
symptoms resolve over one to several days; residual disability often remains.
Manifestations depend on which portion of the cord is involved; several discrete syndromes are
recognized.
Brown-Sequard syndrome
results from unilateral hemisection of the cord. Patients have ipsilateral
spastic paralysis and loss of postural sense below the lesion, and contralateral loss of pain and
temperature sensation.
Anterior cord syndrome
results from direct injury to the anterior spinal cord or to the anterior spinal
artery. Patients lose motor and pain sensation bilaterally below the lesion. Posterior cord function
(vibration, proprioception) is intact.
Central cord syndrome
usually occurs in patients with a narrowed spinal canal (congenital or
degenerative) after a hyperextension injury. Motor function in the arms is impaired to a greater extent than
that in the legs. If the posterior columns are affected, posture, vibration, and light touch are lost. If the
spinothalamic tracts are affected, pain, temperature, and, often, light or deep touch are lost. Hemorrhage
in the spinal cord from trauma (hematomyelia) is usually confined to the cervical central gray matter,
resulting in signs of lower motor neuron damage (muscle weakness and wasting, fasciculations, and
diminished tendon reflexes in the arms), which is usually permanent. Motor weakness is often proximal
and accompanied by selective impairment of pain and temperature sensation.
Cauda equina lesions:
Motor or sensory loss, or both, usually partial, occurs in the distal legs.
Sensation is usually diminished in the perineal region (saddle anesthesia). Bowel and bladder
dysfunction, either incontinence or retention, may occur. Men may have erectile dysfunction, and women
diminished sexual response. Anal sphincter tone is lax, and bulbocavernosus and anal wink reflexes are
abnormal. These findings may be similar to those of conus medullaris syndrome, a spinal cord injury.
Complications:
Sequelae depend on the severity and level of the injury. Breathing may be impaired if
the injury is at or above the C5 segment. Reduced mobility increases the risk of blood clots, UTIs,
contractures, atelectasis and pneumonia, and pressure ulcers. Disabling spasticity may develop.
Autonomic dysreflexia may occur in response to triggering events such as pain or pressure on the body.
Chronic neurogenic pain may manifest as burning or stinging.
Diagnosis
• Consideration of injury in high-risk patients, even those without symptoms
===PAGE:3416===
• CT
Spinal cord injuries with trauma are not always obvious. Injury to the spine and spinal cord must be
considered in patients with injuries that involve the head, pelvic fractures, penetrating injuries in the area
of the spine, in most motor vehicle crashes, in any kind of major blunt injury, and in any injuries related to
falling from heights or diving into water.
Injury should also be considered in patients with altered sensorium, localized spinal tenderness, painful
distracting injuries, or compatible neurologic deficits. Motor function is tested in all extremities. Sensation
testing should involve both light touch (posterior column function), pinprick (anterior spinothalamic tract),
and position sense. Identification of the sensory level is best done by testing from distal to proximal and
by testing thoracic roots on the back to avoid being misled by the cervical cape. Priapism indicates spinal
cord damage. Rectal tone may be decreased, and deep tendon reflexes may be exuberant or absent.
When spinal cord injury is suspected, the spine is immediately immobilized. Traditionally, plain x-rays are
taken of any possibly injured areas. CT is done of areas that appear abnormal on x-rays and areas at risk
of injury based on clinical findings. However, CT is being used increasingly as the primary imaging study
for spinal trauma because it has better diagnostic accuracy and, at many trauma centers, can be obtained
rapidly. MRI helps identify the type and location of cord injury; it is the most accurate study for imaging the
spinal cord and other soft tissues but may not be immediately available. Manifestations of injury may be
characterized using the ASIA (American Spinal Injury Association) Impairment Scale or a similar instrument
(see
Table 325-2
).
Prognosis
Transected or degenerated nerves in the cord do not recover, and functional damage is permanent.
Compressed nerve tissue can recover its function. Return of a movement or sensation during the first
week after injury heralds a favorable recovery. Dysfunction remaining after 6 mo is likely to be permanent.
[Table 325-2.
Spinal Injury Impairment Scale*]
Treatment
• Immobilization
• Maintenance of oxygenation and perfusion
• Supportive care
• Sometimes surgical stabilization
• Possibly methylprednisolone for blunt injuries
• Long-term symptomatic care and rehabilitation
Immediate care:
An important goal is to prevent secondary injury to the spine or spinal cord. In unstable
injuries, flexion or extension of the spine can contuse or transect the cord. Thus, when injured people are
moved, inappropriate handling can precipitate paraplegia, quadriplegia, or even death from spinal injury.
Patients who may have a spinal injury should have the spine immobilized immediately; the neck is held
straight manually (in line stabilization) during endotracheal intubation. As soon as possible, the spine is
fully immobilized on a firm, flat, padded backboard or similar surface to stabilize the position without
excessive pressure. A rigid collar should be used to immobilize the cervical spine. Patients with thoracic or
lumbar spine injuries can be carried prone or supine. Those with cervical cord damage that could induce
respiratory difficulties should be carried supine, with attention to maintaining a patent airway and avoiding
chest constriction. Transfer to a trauma center is desirable.
===PAGE:3417===
Medical care should be directed at avoiding hypoxia and hypotension, both of which can further stress
the injured cord. In cervical injuries higher than C5, intubation and respiratory support are usually needed.
Large doses of corticosteroids, started within 8 h after spinal cord injury, may improve the outcome in
blunt injuries, but this finding has not been firmly established. Methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg IV over 1 h,
followed by 5.4 mg/kg/h for the next 23 h is the recommended regimen. Injuries are treated with rest,
analgesics, and muscle-relaxing drugs with or without surgery until swelling and local pain have subsided.
Additional general treatment for trauma patients is discussed elsewhere (.
Unstable injuries are immobilized until bone and soft tissues have healed to ensure proper alignment;
surgery with fusion and internal fixation is sometimes needed. Patients with incomplete cord injuries can
have significant neurologic improvement after decompression. In contrast, in complete injury, return of
useful neurologic function below the level of the injury is unlikely. Thus, surgery aims to stabilize the spine
to allow early mobilization. The timing of surgery in incomplete lesions is debatable. Early surgery (eg,
within 24 h) may have a better neurologic outcome and allows for earlier mobilization and rehabilitation.
For complete injuries, surgery is sometimes done in the first few days, but it is not clear that this is
necessary.
Nursing care includes preventing urinary and pulmonary infections and pressure ulcers—eg, by turning
the immobile patient every 2 h (on a Stryker frame when necessary). Deep venous thrombosis
prophylaxis is required. An inferior vena cava filter could be considered in immobile patients.
Long-term care:
Drugs effectively control spasticity in some patients. Oral agents such as baclofen 5 mg
po tid (maximum, 80 mg during a 24-h period) and tizanidine 4 mg po tid (maximum, 36 mg during a 24-h
period) are typically used for spasticity occurring after spinal cord injury. Intrathecal baclofen 50 to 100
μ
g
once/day may be considered in patients in whom oral drugs are ineffective.
Rehabilitation is needed to help people recover as fully as possible (. Rehabilitation, best
provided through a team approach, combines physical therapies, skill-building activities, and counseling
to meet social and emotional needs. The rehabilitation team is best directed by a physician with
training
and expertise in rehabilitation (physiatrist); it usually includes nurses, social workers, nutritionists,
psychologists, physical and occupational therapists, recreational therapists, and vocational counselors
(see also
Chapter 350
).
Physical therapy focuses on exercises for muscle strengthening, passive stretch exercises to prevent
contractures, and appropriate use of assistive devices such as braces, a walker, or a wheelchair that may
be needed to improve mobility. Strategies for controlling spasticity, autonomic dysreflexia, and neurogenic
pain are taught. Occupational therapy focuses on redeveloping fine motor skills. Bladder and bowel
management programs teach toileting techniques, which may require intermittent catheterization. A bowel
regimen, involving timed stimulation with laxatives, is often needed.
Vocational rehabilitation involves assessing both fine and gross motor skills, as well as cognitive
capabilities, to determine the likelihood for meaningful employment. The vocational specialist then helps
identify possible work sites and determines need for assistive equipment and workplace modifications.
Recreation therapists use a similar approach in identifying and facilitating participation in hobbies,
athletics, and other activities.
Emotional care aims to combat the depersonalization and the almost unavoidable depression that occur
after losing control of the body. Emotional care is fundamental to the success of all other components of
rehabilitation and must be accompanied by efforts to educate the patient and encourage active
involvement of family and friends.
Treatments to promote nerve regeneration are under study. Such treatments include injections of
autologous, incubated macrophages; epidural administration of BA-210, an experimental drug that may be
neuroprotective and may stimulate nerve growth; and oral administration of HP-184 for treatment of
chronic spinal cord injury. Also, one trial aims to determine optimal timing of surgery. Stem cell research is
in its infancy; some early animal studies have shown promising results.
===PAGE:3418===
Spinal Cord Injury in Children
Although children < 10 yr have the lowest rate of spinal cord injuries, such injuries are not rare. In
children < 8 yr, cervical spine injuries occur most commonly above C4; in those > 8 yr, injuries at C5 to C8
are more common. Of increasing importance has been the recognition of spinal cord injury without
evidence of radiologic abnormality (SCIWORA). This type of injury occurs almost exclusively in children
and is related to direct spinal cord traction, spinal cord concussion, and vascular injury.
Diagnosis
Spinal cord injury should be suspected in any child that has been in a motor vehicle crash, has fallen from
a height ≥ 3 m, or has had a submersion injury. SCIWORA is suspected in children who have even
transient symptoms of neurologic dysfunction or lancinating pains down the spine or extremities and a
mechanism of injury compatible with spinal cord injury.
Treatment
Treatment is similar to that in adults, with immobilization and attention to the adequacy of oxygenation,
ventilation, and circulation. Treatment may also include high-dose corticosteroids (same weight-based
dose as for adults). Children with significant spinal cord trauma should be transferred to a pediatric
trauma center as soon as possible.
===PAGE:3419===
Chapter 326. Facial Trauma
Introduction
Patients with trauma to the face and head require evaluation of all structures; injuries often occur in
combination (for dental trauma, see p.
; for tympanic membrane trauma, see p.
; and for eye
trauma, .
External Ear Trauma
Trauma to the external ear may result in hematoma, laceration, avulsion, or fracture.
Subperichondral hematomas:
Blunt trauma to the pinna may cause a subperichondrial hematoma; the
accumulation of blood between the perichondrium and cartilage renders all or part of the pinna a
shapeless, reddish purple mass. Because the perichondrium supplies blood to the cartilage, infection,
abscess formation, or avascular necrosis of the cartilage may follow. The resultant destruction causes the
cauliflower ear characteristic of wrestlers and boxers.
Treatment consists of evacuating the clot through an incision and preventing reaccumulation of the
hematoma with through-and-through
ear sutures over dental gauze rolls or insertion of a Penrose drain
plus a pressure dressing. Because these injuries are prone to infection, an oral antibiotic effective against
staphylococci (eg, cephalexin 500 mg tid) is given for 5 days.
Lacerations:
If lacerations of the pinna penetrate the cartilage and skin on both sides, the skin margins
are sutured; then the cartilage is splinted externally with benzoin-impregnated cotton, and a protective
dressing is applied. If there is sufficient skin to fully cover the cartilage, the cartilage should be repaired.
Otherwise, external splinting suffices. Oral antibiotics are given as for a hematoma.
Avulsions:
Complete or partial avulsions are repaired by an otolaryngologist, facial plastic surgeon, or
plastic surgeon.
Trauma secondary to mandibular fractures:
Forceful blows to the mandible may be transmitted to the
anterior wall of the ear canal (posterior wall of the glenoid fossa). Displaced fragments from a fractured
anterior wall may cause stenosis of the canal and must be reduced or removed surgically after a general
anesthetic is given.
Fractures of the Jaw and Contiguous Structures
Blunt facial trauma can fracture the jaw and other bones of the midface. Symptoms depend on
the location of the fracture. A dental x-ray or CT scan is diagnostic. Treatment may include
surgery and/or external fixation.
Fractures of the lower jaw (mandible) are suspected in patients with post-traumatic malocclusion or focal
swelling and tenderness over a segment of the mandible. Other clues include defects (stepoff) of the
dental occlusal surface, alveolar ridge disruptions, and anesthesia in the distribution of the inferior
alveolar or mental nerve. Some fractures result in palpable instability. Fractures of the mandibular condyle
usually cause preauricular pain, swelling, and limited opening of the mouth (trismus). With a unilateral
condylar fracture, the jaw deviates to the affected side when the mouth is opened.
Fractures of the midface, which includes the area from the superior orbital rim to the maxillary teeth, can
cause irregularity in the smooth contour of the cheeks, malar eminences, zygomatic arch, or orbital rims.
Infraorbital nerve anesthesia, enophthalmos, or diplopia suggests an orbital floor fracture. An injury near
the orbit requires an eye examination, including, at least, assessment of visual acuity, pupils, and
extraocular movements. Trismus and a defect on palpation of the zygomatic arch suggest zygomatic arch
fracture. The Le Fort classification (see
Fig. 326-1
) can be used to describe midface fractures. Traumatic malocclusion and upper alveolar ridge
fractures may suggest a maxillary fracture that involves the occlusal surface. Brain injury and fractured
cervical vertebrae are possible when trauma has been severe enough to fracture facial bones. In major
===PAGE:3420===
impact injuries, hemorrhage and edema due to a facial fracture may compromise the airway.
A panoramic dental x-ray is preferred for an isolated mandibular fracture. Fine-cut CT (1-mm slices) is
done in axial and coronal planes to diagnose facial fractures.
Treatment
An oral endotracheal airway may be required to maintain airway patency in patients with hemorrhage,
edema, or significant tissue
[Fig. 326-1.
Le Fort classification of midface fractures.]
disruption. Definitive facial fracture management is complex and may include internal fixation.
Tooth socket fractures:
Fractures through a tooth socket are open fractures. They require antibiotic
prophylaxis (typically with a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is particularly effective against anaerobes,
such as penicillin) given orally as a liquid or parenterally.
Mandible fractures:
For a fractured mandible, treatment ranges from soft diet alone to maxillomandibular
fixation (wiring the jaw shut), rigid open fixation, or both. If fixation is available within the first few hours
after injury, closure of any lip or oral lacerations should be delayed until the fracture has been reduced.
For maxillomandibular fixation, metal bars (arch bars) are attached to the buccal surface of the upper and
lower teeth and then wired to each other after correct occlusion has been established. Patients with
maxillomandibular fixation should always carry wire cutters in case of vomiting. Fixation may need to last
several weeks. Eating is restricted to liquids, pureed foods, and supplements. Because only part of the
teeth surfaces can be brushed, control of plaque formation, infection, and halitosis is accomplished using
a 60-sec rinse with 30 mL of chlorhexidine 0.12% every morning and evening. Jaw-opening exercises
usually help restore function after fixation is discontinued.
Condylar fractures may require only 2 to 3 wk of maxillomandibular fixation, followed by a soft diet.
However, severely displaced, bilaterally fractured condyles may require open reduction and fixation.
Condylar fractures in children should not be rigidly immobilized because ankylosis and abnormal facial
development may result. Flexible (elastic) fixation for 5 to 10 days is usually sufficient.
Midface fractures:
Fractures of the midface are treated surgically if they cause malocclusion,
enophthalmos, diplopia, infraorbital nerve anesthesia, or unacceptable cosmetic deformity. Surgical
treatment usually consists of internal stabilization using fine screws and plates. Surgery can often be
delayed until swelling subsides, particularly if the indication for surgery is not clear.
Fractures of the Nose
Fractures of the nasal bones or cartilaginous injury may result in swelling, point tenderness,
hypermobility, crepitus, epistaxis, and periorbital bruising. Diagnosis is usually clinical.
Treatment may include reduction, stabilization through internal packing, and splinting. A septal
hematoma is drained without delay.
The nasal bones are the most frequently fractured facial bones because of their central location and
protrusion. Depending on the mechanism of injury, fractures of the maxilla, orbit, or cribriform plate and
injury to the nasolacrimal ducts may also occur.
Complications include cosmetic deformity and functional obstruction. Septal hematoma may lead to
avascular or septic necrosis of the cartilage with resultant deformity. Cribriform plate fracture may cause a
CSF leak, with increased risk of meningitis or brain abscess.
Symptoms and Signs
Facial trauma resulting in epistaxis may indicate a nasal fracture. Other symptoms and signs include
obvious or subtle nasal deformity, swelling, point tenderness, crepitus, and instability. Lacerations,
===PAGE:3421===
ecchymosis (nasal and periorbital), septal deviation, and nasal obstruction may be present. Septal
hematoma appears as a purplish bulge on the septum. CSF rhinorrhea appears as clear drainage but
may be mixed with blood, making it difficult to identify.
Diagnosis
• Examination
Diagnosis is based on physical examination. Plain x-rays of an uncomplicated nasal fracture are not
helpful because their sensitivity and specificity are poor. If other facial fractures or complications are
suspected, CT of facial bones is done.
Treatment
• Symptomatic care
• For deformities, delayed reduction
• For septal hematomas, immediate drainage
Immediate treatment includes symptomatic control with ice and analgesics. Reduction is needed only for
fractures causing clinically visible deformity or nasal airway obstruction. The end-point of reduction is
determined by clinical appearance or improved airway. Reduction is usually deferred for 3 to 5 days after
injury to allow swelling to subside but should take place within 2 to 3 wk of the injury, before bony callous
formation. Nasal fractures in adults may be reduced after a local anesthetic is given; children require
general anesthesia. A blunt elevator is passed through the nares and placed under the depressed nasal
bone, which is lifted anteriorly and laterally while pressure is applied to the other side of the nose to bring
the nasal dorsum to the midline. The nose may be stabilized with internal packing (consisting of antibioticimpregnated strip
gauze) placed high within the nasal vestibule, as well as with external splinting. Internal
packing is left in place for 4 to 7 days; external splinting is left for 7 to 14 days. Antibiotic prophylaxis
effective against staphylococci is required for the duration of nasal packing, to decrease the risk of toxic
shock syndrome.
Cartilaginous injuries often do not require reduction. In the rare circumstance that a deformity persists
after swelling subsides, reduction and splinting after a local anesthetic is given are usually sufficient.
Septal hematomas must be immediately incised and drained to prevent infection and cartilage necrosis.
Septal fractures are difficult to hold in position and often require septal surgery later. Patients with
cribriform plate fractures and CSF leak require hospital admission with bedrest and placement of a lumbar
drain for 5 days. If the CSF leak does not resolve, surgical repair of the skull base may be required.
Temporal Bone Fractures
Temporal bone fractures can occur after severe blunt trauma to the head and sometimes
involve structures of the ear, causing hearing loss, vertigo, balance disturbance, or facial
paralysis.
Temporal bone fractures are suggested by Battle's sign (postauricular ecchymosis) and bleeding from the
ear. Bleeding may come from the middle ear (hemotympanum) through a ruptured tympanic membrane or
from a fracture line in the ear canal. A hemotympanum makes the tympanic membrane appear blue-black.
CSF otorrhea indicates a communication between the middle ear and the subarachnoid space.
Temporal bone fractures have been classified by orientation with respect to the long axis of the petrous
portion of the temporal bone. Longitudinal fractures make up 70 to 90% of temporal bone fractures, and
transverse fractures make up 10 to 30%. Some fractures may have characteristics of both patterns.
Longitudinal fractures can extend through the middle ear and rupture the tympanic membrane; they cause
facial paralysis in 20% of cases and may cause hearing loss (usually conductive). Transverse fractures
cross the fallopian canal and otic capsule, causing facial paralysis in about 40% of patients and
===PAGE:3422===
sometimes hearing loss (usually sensorineural) and vestibular dysfunction (eg, vertigo, balance
disturbance). Rarely, fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction occur with temporal
bone fracture and may be due to a perilymph fistula. Immediate complete facial paralysis may indicate a
severed or crushed facial nerve, whereas delayed-onset complete facial paralysis usually indicates
edema within an intact nerve.
Diagnosis
• CT
• Assessment of hearing and facial nerve function
If a temporal bone fracture is suspected, immediate CT of the head with special attention to the temporal
bone is recommended. The Weber and Rinne tuning fork tests can be done during the initial physical
examination in conscious patients to help differentiate between conductive and sensorineural hearing
loss. However, formal audiometric examination is required for all patients with temporal bone fractures. If
facial paralysis is present, electrical testing of the facial nerve is warranted.
Treatment
• Management of facial nerve injury, hearing loss, vestibular dysfunction, and CSF leakage
If immediate facial nerve paralysis occurs with loss of electrical response, surgical exploration may be
warranted. Delayed-onset or incomplete facial paralysis almost always resolves with conservative
management, including use of corticosteroids, which are gradually tapered.
Conductive hearing loss requires ossicular chain reconstruction several weeks to months after the injury.
Good results can be expected. When sensorineural hearing loss occurs, it is typically permanent, and
there are no medical or surgical therapies available to improve hearing. However, in the rare case of
fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss, an exploratory tympanotomy to search for a perilymph fistula may
be indicated.
When vestibular dysfunction results from perilymph fistula, repair may reduce severity and frequency of
vertiginous episodes. When dysfunction results from injury to the vestibular nerve or vestibular labyrinth,
few interventions can improve outcome. Symptoms may subside when benzodiazepines are used. More
lasting improvement may occur with vestibular rehabilitation.
Patients who have a temporal bone fracture and CSF otorrhea should be hospitalized because meningitis
is a risk. The leak usually stops spontaneously within a few days, although a lumbar drain or surgical
closure of the defect is occasionally required.
===PAGE:3423===
Chapter 327. Eye Injuries
Introduction
(See also
Retinal Detachment
)
Common causes of eye injury include domestic accidents (eg, during hammering or exposure to
household chemicals or cleaners), assault, car battery explosions, sporting injuries (including air- or paint
pellet-gun injuries), and motor vehicle crashes (including air-bag injuries). Injury may be to the eyeball
(globe), surrounding soft tissues (including muscles, nerves, and tendons), or bones of the orbit.
General evaluation should include the following:
• Tests of visual acuity
• Range of extraocular motion
• Pupillary appearance and responses
• Intraocular pressure determination
• Visual fields to confrontation
• Depth of anterior chamber
• Location and depth of lid and conjunctival lacerations and of foreign bodies
• Presence of anterior chamber or vitreous hemorrhage, cataract, or red reflex
• Retinal examination
Detailed examination of the anterior segment, lens, and anterior vitreous is best done with a slit lamp.
Detailed examination of the posterior vitreous and the retina is best done with indirect ophthalmoscopy,
usually by an ophthalmologist. Indications include clinical suspicion of traumatic cataracts, vitreous
abnormalities (eg, hemorrhage, foreign body), and retinal abnormalities; clinical suspicion may be based
on injury mechanism, absence of the red reflex, or retinal abnormalities visible with direct
ophthalmoscopy. About 15 to 30 min before this examination, the pupil is usually dilated with 1 drop of
cyclopentolate 1% and 1 drop of phenylephrine 2.5%. If an intraocular or orbital foreign body or an orbital
fracture is suspected, CT is done.
Use of eye guards, goggles, or special eyeglasses, such as those constructed of polycarbonate lenses in
a wrap-around polyamide frame, is a simple precaution that greatly reduces the risk of injury.
When eye drops are prescribed, each dose includes only one drop.
Ocular Burns
Thermal burns:
The blink reflex usually causes the eye to close in response to a thermal stimulus. Thus,
thermal burns tend to affect the eyelid rather than the conjunctiva or cornea. Eyelid burns should be
cleansed thoroughly with sterile isotonic saline solution followed by application of an antimicrobial
ointment (eg, bacitracin bid). Most thermal burns affecting the conjunctiva or cornea are mild and heal
without significant sequellae. They are treated with topical antibiotics and corticosteroids.
Chemical burns:
Burns of the cornea and conjunctiva can be serious, particularly when strong acid or
alkali is involved. They are a true emergency; treatment must begin immediately.
Burns should be irrigated with copious amounts of water or with 0.9% saline if available. The eye may be
anesthetized with one drop of proparacaine 0.5%, but irrigation should not be delayed and should last for
===PAGE:3424===
at least 30 min. In acid and alkali burns, some experts suggest 1 to 2 h of irrigation; others recommend
that the pH of the conjunctiva be measured with expanded pH paper (which measures over a wide range
of pH) and irrigation continued until pH is normal.
After irrigation, the conjunctival fornices should be examined for chemical embedded in the tissue and
swept with a swab to remove trapped particles. The superior fornices are exposed by using double eyelid
eversion (ie, pushing the fornix downward until its mucosal surface is visible using a swab inserted under
the everted eyelid).
Chemical iritis
is suspected in a patient with photophobia (deep eye pain with exposure to light) that
develops hours or days after a chemical burn and is diagnosed by finding flare and WBCs in the anterior
chamber on slit-lamp examination. Chemical iritis is treated by instilling a long-acting cycloplegic (eg, a
single dose of homatropine 2% or 5% or scopolamine 0.25% solution). Corticosteroid drops (eg,
prednisolone 1% qid) may be given by an ophthalmologist. Used inappropriately, topical corticosteroids
can result in corneal perforation after chemical burns and should be used only by an ophthalmologist.
Corneal epithelial defects are treated by applying an antibiotic ointment (eg, erythromycin 0.5%). Topical
anesthetics should be avoided after initial irrigation; significant pain may be treated with acetaminophen
with or without oxycodone.
Severe chemical burns
require treatment by an ophthalmologist to save vision and prevent
complications such as uveitis, perforation of the globe, and lid deformities. Patients with severe
conjunctival hyperemia, ciliary flush
(prominent conjunctival injection around the limbus), true photophobia
(ie, not just sensitivity to light), avascular areas of conjunctiva, or loss of conjunctival or corneal
epithelium as demonstrated by fluorescein staining should be examined by an ophthalmologist within 24
h.
Corneal Abrasions and Foreign Bodies
Corneal abrasions are self-limited, superficial epithelial defects.
The most common conjunctival and corneal injuries are foreign bodies and abrasions. Improper use of
contact lenses can damage the cornea. Superficial foreign bodies often spontaneously exit the cornea in
the tear film, occasionally leaving a residual abrasion, but other foreign bodies remain on or within the
cornea. Sometimes, a foreign body trapped under the upper lid causes a vertical corneal abrasion that
worsens with blinking. Intraocular penetration can occur with seemingly minor trauma, particularly with
foreign bodies resulting from high-speed machines (eg, drills, saws, anything with a metal-on-metal
mechanism), hammering, or explosions. Infection generally does not develop from a corneal injury.
However, if intraocular penetration is not recognized, infection within the eye (endophthalmitis), although
somewhat rare, may develop.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of abrasion or foreign body include foreign body sensation, tearing, redness, and
occasionally discharge. Vision is rarely affected (other than by tearing).
Diagnosis
• Slit-lamp examination, usually with fluorescein staining
After an anesthetic (eg, 2 drops of proparacaine 0.5%) is instilled into the conjunctiva, each lid is everted,
and the entire conjunctiva and cornea are inspected with a binocular lens (loupe) or a slit lamp.
Fluorescein staining ( with cobalt light illumination renders abrasions and nonmetallic foreign
bodies more apparent. Patients with a high-risk intraocular injury or (more rarely) visible globe perforation
undergo CT to rule out intraocular foreign body and complete examination by an ophthalmologist,
including slit-lamp examination and indirect ophthalmoscopy with eye dilation.
Treatment
===PAGE:3425===
• For surface foreign bodies, irrigation or removal with a small needle
• For corneal abrasions, antibiotic ointment and pupillary dilation
• For intraocular foreign bodies, surgical removal
After an anesthetic is instilled into the conjunctiva, clinicians can remove conjunctival foreign bodies by
irrigation or lift them out with a moist sterile cotton applicator. A corneal foreign body that cannot be
dislodged by irrigation may be lifted out carefully on the point of a sterile spud or of a 25- or 27-gauge
hypodermic needle under loupe or, preferably, slit-lamp magnification; the patient must be able to stare
without moving the eye during removal. Steel or iron foreign bodies remaining on the cornea for more
than a few hours may leave a rust ring on the cornea that also requires removal under slit-lamp
magnification by scraping or using a low-speed rotary burr; removal is usually done by an
ophthalmologist.
Abrasions:
For all abrasions, an antibiotic ointment (eg, bacitracin/polymyxin B or ciprofloxacin 0.3% qid
for 3 to 5 days) is used. Contact lens wearers with corneal abrasions require an antibiotic with optimal
antipseudomonal coverage (eg, ciprofloxacin 0.3% ointment qid). For symptomatic relief of larger
abrasions (eg, area > 10 mm
), the pupil is also dilated with a short-acting cycloplegic (eg, one drop
cyclopentolate 1% or homatropine 5%). Eye patches may increase risk of infection and are usually not
used, particularly for an abrasion caused by a contact lens or an object that may be contaminated with
soil or vegetation. Ophthalmic corticosteroids tend to promote the growth of fungi and reactivation of
herpes simplex virus and are contraindicated. Continued use of topical anesthetics can impair healing
and is thus contraindicated.
The corneal epithelium regenerates rapidly; even large abrasions heal within 1 to 3 days. A contact lens
should not be worn for 5 to 7 days. Follow-up examination by an ophthalmologist 1 or 2 days after injury is
wise, especially if a foreign body was removed with a needle or spud.
Intraocular foreign bodies:
Intraocular foreign bodies require immediate surgical removal by an
ophthalmologist. Systemic and topical antimicrobials (effective against
Bacillus cereus
if the injury
involved contamination with soil or vegetation) are indicated; they include ceftazidime 1 g IV q 12 h, in
combination with vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV q 12 h and moxifloxacin 0.5% ophthalmic solution
q 1 to 2 h.
Ointment should be avoided if the globe is lacerated. A protective shield (such as a Fox shield or the
bottom third of a paper cup) is placed and taped over the eye to avoid inadvertent pressure that could
extrude ocular contents through the penetration site. Tetanus prophylaxis is indicated after open globe
injuries. As with any laceration of the globe, vomiting, which can increase intraocular pressure, should be
prevented. If nausea occurs, an antiemetic is given.
Eye Contusions and Lacerations
Consequences of blunt trauma to the eye range from eyelid to orbital injury.
Eyelids:
Eyelid contusions (which result in black eyes) are more cosmetically than clinically significant,
although more serious injuries may sometimes accompany them and should not be overlooked.
Uncomplicated contusions are treated with ice packs to inhibit swelling during the first 24 to 48 h, followed
by hot compresses to aid absorption of the hematoma.
Minor lid lacerations not involving the lid margin or tarsal plate may be repaired with nylon (or, in children,
plain gut) 6-0 or 7-0 sutures. Lid-margin lacerations are best repaired by an ophthalmic surgeon to ensure
accurate apposition and to avoid a notch in the contour. Major lid lacerations, which include those of the
medial portion of the lower or upper eyelid (possibly involving the lacrimal canaliculus), through-andthrough lacerations, those in which the patient has ptosis, and those that expose orbital fat or involve the
tarsal plate, should also be repaired by an ophthalmic surgeon.
Globe:
Trauma may cause the following:
• Conjunctival, anterior chamber, and vitreous hemorrhage
===PAGE:3426===
• Retinal hemorrhage, edema, or detachment
• Laceration of the iris
• Cataract
• Dislocated lens
• Glaucoma
• Globe rupture (laceration)
Evaluation can be difficult when massive lid edema or laceration is present. Even so, unless the need for
immediate eye surgery is obvious (necessitating evaluation by an ophthalmologist as soon as possible),
the lid is opened, taking care not to exert inward pressure, and as complete an examination as possible is
conducted. At a minimum, the following are noted:
• Visual acuity
• Pupillary responses
• Extraocular movements
• Anterior chamber depth or hemorrhage
• Presence of red reflex
An analgesic or, after obtaining any surgical consent, an anxiolytic may be given to facilitate examination.
Gentle and careful use of eyelid retractors or an eyelid speculum makes it possible to open the lids. If a
commercial instrument is not available, the eyelids can be separated with makeshift retractors fashioned
by bending the ends of paper clips 180°. Globe laceration should be suspected with any of the following:
• A corneal or scleral laceration is visible.
• Aqueous humor is leaking.
• The anterior chamber is very shallow (eg, making the cornea appear to have folds) or very deep (due to
rupture posterior to the lens).
• The pupil is irregular.
If globe laceration is suspected, measures that can be taken before an ophthalmologist is available
consist of applying a protective shield (see above) and combating possible infection with systemic
antimicrobials as for intraocular foreign bodies (. Topical antibiotics are avoided. Vomiting,
which can increase intraocular pressure (IOP) and contribute to extravasation of ocular contents, is
suppressed using antiemetics as needed. Because fungal contamination of open wounds is dangerous,
corticosteroids are contraindicated until after wounds are closed surgically. Tetanus prophylaxis is
indicated after open globe injuries. Very rarely, after laceration of the globe, the uninjured, contralateral
eye becomes inflamed (sympathetic ophthalmia— and may lose vision to the point of
blindness unless treated. The mechanism is an autoimmune reaction; corticosteroid drops can prevent
the process.
Anterior chamber hemorrhage (hyphema):
This injury may be followed by recurrent bleeding,
glaucoma, and blood staining of the cornea, any of which may result in permanent vision loss. Symptoms
are of associated injuries unless the hyphema is large enough to obstruct vision. Direct inspection
typically reveals layering of blood or the presence of clot or both in the anterior chamber. Layering is seen
as a meniscus-like blood level in the lower part of the anterior chamber. Microhyphema, a less severe
===PAGE:3427===
form, may be detectable by direct inspection as haziness in the anterior chamber or by slit-lamp
examination as suspended RBCs.
An ophthalmologist should attend to the patient as soon as possible. The patient is placed on bed rest
with the head elevated 30° and is given an eye shield to protect the eye from further trauma (. Patients who are at high risk of recurrent bleeding (eg, those with large hyphemas, bleeding
diatheses, anticoagulant use, or sickle cell disease), who have IOP that is difficult to control, or who are
not likely to adhere to recommended treatment may be hospitalized. Oral and topical NSAIDs are
contraindicated because they may contribute to recurrent bleeding.
IOP can rise acutely (within hours, usually in patients with sickle cell disease or trait) or months to years
later. Thus, IOP is monitored daily for several days and then regularly over subsequent weeks and
months and if symptoms develop (eg, eye ache, decreased vision, nausea—similar to symptoms of acute
angle-closure glaucoma). If pressure rises, timolol 0.5% bid, brimonidine 0.2% or 0.15% bid, or both are
given. Response to treatment is determined by pressure, often checked every 1 or 2 h until controlled or
until a significant rate of reduction is demonstrated; thereafter, it is usually checked once or twice daily.
Mydriatic drops (eg, scopolamine 0.25% tid or atropine 1% tid for 5 days) and topical corticosteroids (eg,
prednisolone acetate 1% 4 to 8 times/day for 2 to 3 wk are often given. Administration of aminocaproic
acid 50 to 100 mg/kg po q 4 h (not exceeding 30 g/day) for 5 days may reduce recurrent bleeding. In
these cases, miotic or mydriatic drugs must be given by an ophthalmologist. Rarely, recurrent bleeding
with secondary glaucoma requires surgical evacuation of the blood.
Blowout fracture:
Blowout fracture occurs when blunt trauma forces the orbital contents through the
most fragile portion of the orbital wall, typically the floor. Medial and roof fractures also can occur.
Symptoms include diplopia, enophthalmos, inferiorly displaced globe, hypesthesia of the cheek and upper
lip (from infraorbital nerve injury), and subcutaneous emphysema. Epistaxis, lid edema, and ecchymosis
may occur. Diagnosis is best made using CT. If diplopia or cosmetically unacceptable enophthalmos
persists beyond 2 wk, surgical repair is indicated. Patients should be told to avoid blowing the nose.
Using a topical vasoconstrictor for 2 to 3 days may alleviate epistaxis.
Posttraumatic Iridocyclitis
(Traumatic Anterior Uveitis; Traumatic Iritis)
Posttraumatic iridocyclitis is an inflammatory reaction of the uvea and iris, typically developing
within 3 days of blunt eye trauma.
Symptoms of posttraumatic iridocyclitis include tearing, throbbing ache and redness of the eye,
photophobia, and blurred vision. Diagnosis is by history, symptoms, and slit-lamp examination, which
typically reveals flare (due to an increase in protein content of the aqueous humor from the inflammatory
exudate) and WBCs in the anterior chamber. Treatment involves a cycloplegic (usually scopolamine
0.25% tid, or homatropine 5% tid). Topical corticosteroids (eg, prednisolone acetate 1% 4 to 8 times/day)
are often used to shorten symptom duration.
===PAGE:3428===
Chapter 328. Genitourinary Tract Trauma
Introduction
The GU tract can be injured by blunt trauma (eg, motor vehicle crashes, falls) or penetrating trauma (eg,
gunshot or stab wounds). Some injuries are caused during surgical procedures. Symptoms and signs are
often subtle or nonspecific; therefore, diagnosis requires a high level of suspicion. Whenever urinalysis
shows any hematuria in a patient with trauma, GU injury should be presumed until proved otherwise.
Depending on the suspected site of injury, imaging studies, most often contrast-enhanced CT, are
typically used to make a diagnosis. General evaluation of the trauma patient is discussed elsewhere (see
p.
).
Bladder Trauma
Bladder injuries are caused by either blunt or penetrating trauma to the lower abdomen, pelvis, or
perineum. Blunt trauma is the more common mechanism, usually by a sudden deceleration, such as in a
high-speed motor vehicle crash or fall, or from an external blow to the lower abdomen. The most
frequently accompanying
injury is a pelvic fracture, occurring in > 95% of bladder ruptures caused by
blunt trauma. Other concomitant injuries include long bone fractures and CNS and chest injuries.
Penetrating injuries, most often gunshot wounds, account for about 25% of bladder injuries.
The bladder is the most frequently injured organ during pelvic surgery. Such injuries can occur during
transurethral surgery, colon resection, or gynecologic procedures (most commonly abdominal
hysterectomy, cesarean section, pelvic mass excision). Predisposing factors include scarring from prior
surgery or radiation therapy, inflammation, and extensive tumor burden.
Bladder injuries are classified as contusions or ruptures based on the extent of injury seen
radiographically. Bladder ruptures can be extraperitoneal, intraperitoneal, or both.
Complications of bladder injuries include infection, fistula, incontinence, and bladder instability. Mortality
with bladder rupture approaches 20% from the concomitant organ injuries rather than the bladder injury.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms may include suprapubic pain and inability to void; signs may include suprapubic tenderness,
distention, and, in the case of intraperitoneal rupture, peritoneal signs.
Diagnosis
• Retrograde cystography
Diagnosis is suspected on the basis of history and physical examination findings and hematuria (gross or
microscopic). Confirmation is by retrograde cystography using plain film x-rays or CT. Plain film x-rays are
accurate, but CT also helps delineate concomitant intra-abdominal injuries. If urethral disruption is
suspected in a male, retrograde catheter placement is avoided, pending results of urethrography.
Treatment
• Catheter drainage
• Sometimes surgical repair
All penetrating trauma and intraperitoneal ruptures from blunt trauma require surgical exploration and
repair. Contusions require only catheter drainage until gross hematuria resolves. Extraperitoneal ruptures
require only catheter drainage if urine is draining freely and the bladder neck is spared. If the bladder
neck is involved, surgical exploration and repair are required.
Genital Trauma
===PAGE:3429===
Most genital trauma occurs in men and includes injury to the testes, scrotum, and penis. Genital mutilation
of women by removing the clitoris, which is done in some cultures, is a form of genital trauma and child
abuse (.
Most
testicular injuries
result from blunt trauma; penetrating testicular injuries are less common.
Testicular injuries are classified as contusions or, if the tunica albuginea is disrupted, as ruptures.
Scrotal injury
may be caused by penetrating trauma, burns, and avulsions.
Penile injuries
have diverse mechanisms. Zipper injuries are common. Penile fractures, which are
ruptures of the corpus cavernosum, occur most often when the penis is forcibly bent during sexual
activity; urethral injury may also be present. Amputations (usually self-inflicted or from clothing trapped by
heavy machinery) and strangulations (usually from constricting penile rings used to enhance erections)
are additional mechanisms. Penetrating injuries, including animal bites and gunshot wounds, are less
common and may also involve the urethra.
Complications of genital injuries include erectile dysfunction, hypogonadism, infection, tissue loss, and
urethral scarring.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms after a direct scrotal blow are usually scrotal pain and swelling. Signs may include scrotal
discoloration and a tender, firm scrotal mass that fails to transilluminate, suggesting a hematocele. Scrotal
penetration suggests the possibility of testicular involvement. Often the examination is limited by patient
discomfort. Penile fracture typically results in a cracking sound, immediate pain, marked swelling and
ecchymosis, and usually visible deformity.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes ultrasonography or retrograde urethrography
Diagnosis of external scrotal and penile injury is made clinically. Clinical diagnosis of testicular contusion
and rupture can be difficult because the degree of injury may be out of proportion to the physical findings,
so patients with blunt testicular injury typically require scrotal ultrasonography. Most penile injuries are
evident on physical examination. An x-ray with urethral contrast (retrograde urethrogram)
[Fig. 328-1.
Zipper removal from penile skin.]
should be done for any patient with penile fracture or penetrating penile injury because of the high
incidence of coexisting urethral injury.
Treatment
• Sometimes surgical repair
Patients with penetrating testicular injuries or clinical or sonographic characteristics that suggest
testicular rupture require surgical exploration and repair. Similarly, all penile fractures and penetrating
injuries should be surgically explored and the defects repaired. Penile amputations should be repaired by
microsurgical reimplantation if the amputated segment is viable. Strangulation injuries can usually be
managed simply by removing the constricting agent. Zippers should be removed (see
Fig. 328-1
).
Renal Trauma
The kidney is injured in up to 10% of patients who sustain significant abdominal trauma. About 65% of
===PAGE:3430===
GU injuries involve the kidney.
Most renal injuries (85 to 90% of cases) occur from blunt trauma, typically due to motor vehicle crashes,
falls, or assaults. Most injuries are low grade. The most common accompanying injuries are to the head,
CNS, spleen, and liver. Penetrating injuries usually result from gunshot wounds. Such patients usually
have multiple intra-abdominal injuries, most commonly to the liver, intestine, and spleen.
Renal injuries are classified according to severity into 5 grades (see
Table 328-1
).
Diagnosis
• Urinalysis and Hct
• If moderate or severe injury is suspected, contrast-enhanced CT
Diagnosis should be suspected in any patient with the following:
• Penetrating injury between the mid chest and lower abdomen
• Significant deceleration injury
• Direct blow to the flank
In such patients, hematuria strongly suggests renal injury; other indicators include the following:
• Seat belt marks
• Diffuse abdominal tenderness
• Flank contusions
• Lower rib fractures
Patients who develop hematuria after relatively minor trauma may have a previously undiagnosed
congenital renal anomaly.
Laboratory testing should include Hct and urinalysis. When imaging is indicated, contrast-enhanced CT is
usually used to determine the grade of renal injury and identify accompanying intra-abdominal trauma and
complications, including retroperitoneal hemorrhage and urinary extravasation. Patients with blunt trauma
and microscopic hematuria usually have minor renal injuries that almost never require surgical repair;
thus, CT is usually unnecessary. CT is indicated in blunt trauma with any of the following:
• The mechanism involves a fall from a significant height or a high-speed motor vehicle crash
• Gross hematuria
• Microscopic hematuria with hypotension (systolic pressure < 90 mm Hg)
• Clinical signs potentially suggesting severe renal injury (eg, flank contusion, seat belt marks, lower rib or
vertebral transverse process fractures)
For
penetrating trauma
, CT is indicated for all patients with microscopic or gross hematuria. Rarely,
angiography is indicated to assess persistent or delayed bleeding and may be combined with selective
arterial embolization.
Pediatric renal injuries
are evaluated similarly, except that all children with blunt trauma in whom
urinalysis shows > 50 RBCs/high-power field require imaging.
===PAGE:3431===
[Table 328-1.
Grades of Renal Injury]
Treatment
• Strict bed rest
• Surgical repair for moderate or severe injuries and some penetrating injuries
Most blunt renal injuries, including all grade 1 and 2 and most grade 3 and 4 injuries, can be safely
treated without surgery. Patients require strict bed rest until gross hematuria has resolved. Surgical repair
is required for patients with the following:
• Persistent bleeding (ie, enough to necessitate treatment for hypovolemia)
• Expanding perinephric hematoma
• Renal pedicle avulsion
Penetrating trauma usually requires surgical exploration, although observation may be appropriate for
patients in whom the renal injury has been accurately staged by CT, BP is stable, and no associated
intra-abdominal injuries require surgery.
Ureteral Trauma
Most ureteral injuries are iatrogenic. Procedures that most often injure a ureter include ureteroscopy,
hysterectomy, low anterior colon resection, and abdominal aneurysm repair. Noniatrogenic ureteral injury
accounts for only about 1 to 3% of all GU trauma. It usually results from gunshot wounds and rarely from
stab wounds. In children, avulsion injuries are more common. Complications include ureteral stricture,
obstruction, or both; peritoneal or retroperitoneal urinary leakage; and fistula (eg, ureterovaginal,
ureterocutaneous) formation.
Diagnosis
• Imaging, exploratory surgery, or both
Diagnosis is suspected on the basis of history and requires a high index of suspicion, because symptoms
are nonspecific and hematuria is absent in > 30% of patients. Diagnosis is confirmed by imaging (eg, CT
with contrast, IVU), exploratory surgery, or both. Flank pain and fever are the main symptoms of otherwise
occult injuries.
Treatment
• For minor, nephrostomy tube or ureteral stent
• For major, surgical repair
All injuries require intervention. A diverting percutaneous nephrostomy tube or cystoscopic placement of a
ureteral stent is often sufficient for minor injuries (eg, contusions or partial transections). Complete
transection or avulsion injuries typically require reconstructive techniques, including ureteral
reimplantation, primary ureteral anastomosis, anterior bladder flap, ileal interposition, and, as a last resort,
autotransplantation.
Urethral Trauma
Urethral injury usually occurs in men. Most major urethral injury is due to blunt trauma. Penetrating
urethral trauma is less common, occurring mainly from gunshot wounds, or, alternatively, from inserting
objects into the urethra during sexual activity or because of psychiatric illness.
===PAGE:3432===
Urethral injuries are classified as contusions, partial disruptions, or complete disruptions, and they may
involve the posterior or anterior urethral segments. Posterior urethral injuries occur almost exclusively
with pelvic fractures. Anterior urethral injuries are often consequences of a perineal straddle injury from a
fall, perineal blow, or motor vehicle crash.
Complications include stricture formation, infection, erectile dysfunction, and incontinence.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include pain with voiding and inability to void. Blood at the urethral meatus is the most
important sign of a urethral injury. Additional signs include perineal, scrotal, and penile ecchymosis,
edema, or both, and a high-riding prostate on rectal examination.
Diagnosis
• Retrograde urethrography
In any patient with suggestive symptoms or signs, the diagnosis is confirmed by retrograde urethrography,
which should be done before catheterization. Urethral catheterization in a patient with an undetected
significant urethral injury may potentiate urethral disruption (eg, convert a partial disruption to a complete
disruption).
Treatment
• Usually urethral catheterization or suprapubic cystostomy
Contusions can be safely treated with an indwelling transurethral catheter for 10 days. Partial disruptions
are best treated with bladder drainage via suprapubic cystostomy. In selected cases of posterior partial
disruptions, primary urethral realignment using catheterization may be attempted; if successful, this
approach limits subsequent urethral strictures.
Complete disruptions are treated with bladder drainage via suprapubic cystostomy. This option is simplest
and can be used safely in all patients. Definitive surgery is deferred for about 8 to 12 wk until the urethral
scar tissue has stabilized and the patient has recovered from any accompanying injuries.
Selected penetrating urethral injuries and blunt urethral injuries that occur with penile fractures may be
sutured primarily.
===PAGE:3433===
Chapter 329. Burns
Introduction
(See also
Ocular Burns
on p.
and
Caustic Ingestion
)
Burns are injuries of skin or other tissue caused by thermal, radiation, chemical, or electrical
contact. Burns are classified by depth (1st-degree, superficial and deep partial-thickness, and
full-thickness) and percentage of total body surface area (BSA) involved. Complications and
associated problems include hypovolemic shock, inhalation injury, infection, scarring, and
contractures. Patients with large burns (> 20% BSA) require fluid resuscitation. Treatment for
burn wounds includes topical antibacterials, regular cleaning, elevation, and sometimes skin
grafting. Intensive rehabilitation, consisting of range-of-motion exercises and splinting, is often
necessary.
Burns cause between 3000 and 4000 deaths/yr in the US and about 2 million physician visits.
Etiology
Thermal burns
may result from any external heat source (flame, hot liquids, hot solid objects, or,
occasionally, steam). Fires may also result in toxic smoke inhalation (see
Sidebar 329-1
and p.
).
Radiation burns
most commonly result from prolonged exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation (sunburn
— but may result from prolonged or intense exposure to other sources of ultraviolet radiation
(eg, tanning beds) or from exposure to sources of x-ray or other nonsolar radiation (see also p.
).
Chemical burns
may result from strong acids, strong alkalis (eg, lye, cement), phenols, cresols, mustard
gas, phosphorus, and certain petroleum products (eg, gasoline, paint thinner). Skin and deeper tissue
necrosis caused by these agents may progress over several hours.
Electrical burns
(see also p.
) result from heat generation and electroporation of cell membranes
associated with massive current of electrons. Electrical burns may cause extensive deep tissue damage
to electrically conductive tissues, such as muscles and nerves, despite minimal apparent cutaneous
injury.
Events associated with a burn (eg, jumping from a burning building, being struck by debris, motor vehicle
crash) may cause other injuries. Abuse should be considered in young children and elderly patients with
burns.
Pathophysiology
Burns cause protein denaturation and thus coagulative necrosis. Around the coagulated tissue, platelets
aggregate, vessels constrict, and marginally perfused tissue (known as the zone of stasis) can extend the
injury. Around the zone of stasis, tissue is hyperemic and inflamed.
Damage to the normal epidermal barrier allows bacterial invasion and external fluid loss; damaged tissues
often become edematous, further enhancing volume loss. Heat loss can be significant because
thermoregulation of the damaged dermis is absent, particularly in wounds that are exposed.
Sidebar 329-1 Smoke Inhalation
Burns and smoke inhalation often occur together but may occur separately. When smoke is inhaled, toxic
products of combustion injure airway tissues. Hot smoke usually burns only the pharynx because the
incoming gas cools quickly. A common exception is steam, which carries much more heat energy than
smoke and thus can also burn the lower airways (below the glottis). Many toxic chemicals produced in
routine house fires (eg, hydrogen chloride, phosgene, sulfur dioxide, toxic aldehydes, ammonia) injure
lower airways chemically. Some toxic products of combustion, such as carbon monoxide ( or
===PAGE:3434===
cyanide, impair cellular respiration systemically.
Upper airway injury usually causes symptoms within minutes but occasionally over several hours; upper
airway edema may cause stridor. Lower airway injury may also occur with upper airway injury and usually
causes symptoms (eg, oxygenation problems highlighted by increasing O
requirements or decreases in
lung compliance) 24 h or later.
Smoke inhalation is suspected in patients with respiratory symptoms, a history of confinement in a
burning environment, or carbonaceous sputum. Perioral burns and singed nasal hair may also be clues.
Diagnosis of upper airway injury is by endoscopy (laryngoscopy or bronchoscopy) that is adequate to see
the upper airways and trachea fully and that shows edema or soot in the airways; however, injury
occasionally develops after an early normal study. Endoscopy is done as soon as possible, usually with a
flexible fiberoptic scope typically followed by endotracheal intubation in patients with significant findings.
Diagnosis of lower airway injury is by chest x-ray and oximetry or ABGs, but abnormalities may develop
only days later. Cyanide and carbon monoxide toxicity should be considered; carboxyhemoglobin levels
are measured in patients with significant smoke inhalation.
All patients at risk of smoke inhalation injury are given 100% O
by face mask initially. Patients with
airway obstruction or respiratory distress require endotracheal intubation or another artificial airway and
mechanical ventilation (. Patients with edema or significant soot in the upper airways require
intubation as soon as possible because intubation becomes more difficult as edema increases.
Bronchoscopy is usually done at the same time as intubation. Patients with lower airway injury may
require supplemental O
, bronchodilators, and other supportive measures.
Burn depth:
First-degree burns are limited to the epidermis.
Partial-thickness
(also called 2nd-degree) burns involve part of the dermis (see
Plate 76
) and can be superficial or deep.
Superficial partial-thickness burns involve the papillary (more superficial) dermis. These burns heal within
1 to 2 wk and rarely scar. Healing occurs from epidermal cells lining sweat gland ducts and hair follicles;
these cells grow to the surface, then migrate across the surface to meet cells from neighboring glands
and follicles.
Deep partial-thickness burns involve the deeper dermis and take ≥ 2 wk to heal. Healing occurs only from
hair follicles, and scarring is common and may be severe.
Full-thickness
(3rd-degree) burns extend through the entire dermis and into the underlying fat (see
Plate 75
). Healing occurs only from the periphery; these burns, unless small, require excision and skin
grafting.
Complications
Burns cause both systemic and local complications. The major factors contributing to systemic
complications are breakdown of skin integrity and fluid loss. Local complications include eschars and
contractures and scarring.
Systemic:
The greater the percentage of BSA involved, the greater the risk of developing systemic
complications. Risk factors for severe systemic complications and mortality include all of the following:
• Burns of > 40% of BSA
• Age > 60 yr or < 2 yr
• Presence of simultaneous major trauma or smoke inhalation
===PAGE:3435===
The most common systemic complications are hypovolemia and infection.
Hypovolemia
, causing hypoperfusion of burned tissue and sometimes shock, can result from fluid losses
due to burns that are deep or that involve large parts of the body
surface; whole-body edema from
escape of intravascular volume into the interstitium and cells also develops. Hypoperfusion of burned
tissue also may result from direct damage to blood vessels or from vasoconstriction secondary to
hypovolemia.
Infection
, even in small burns, is a common cause of sepsis and mortality, as well as local complications.
Impaired host defenses and devitalized tissue enhance bacterial invasion and growth. The most common
pathogens are streptococci and staphylococci during the first few days and gram-negative bacteria after 5
to 7 days; however, flora are almost always mixed.
Metabolic abnormalities
may include hypoalbuminemia that is partly due to hemodilution (secondary to
replacement fluids) and partly due to protein loss into the extravascular space through damaged
capillaries. Dilutional electrolyte deficiencies can develop; they include hypomagnesemia,
hypophosphatemia, and hypokalemia. Metabolic acidosis may result from shock. Rhabdomyolysis or
hemolysis can result from deep thermal or electrical burns of muscle or from muscle ischemia due to
constricting eschars. Rhabdomyolysis causing myoglobinuria or hemolysis causing hemoglobinuria can
lead to acute tubular necrosis and renal failure.
Hypothermia
may result from large volumes of cool IV fluids and extensive exposure of body surfaces to
a cool emergency department environment, particularly in patients with extensive burns.
Ileus
is common after extensive burns.
Local: Eschar
is stiff, dead tissue caused by deep burns. A circumferential eschar, which completely
encircles a limb (or sometimes the torso), is constricting. A constricting eschar limits tissue expansion in
response to edema; instead, tissue pressure increases, eventually causing local ischemia. The ischemia
threatens viability of limbs and digits, and an eschar around the thorax can compromise respiration.
Scarring and contractures
result from spontaneous healing of deep burns; if the burn is located near
joints or in the hands, feet, or perineum, function can be severely impaired. Infection can increase
scarring. Keloids form in some patients with burns, especially in patients with darker skin.
Symptoms and Signs
Wound symptoms and signs depend on burn depth:
•
First-degree burns:
These burns are red, blanch markedly and widely with light pressure, and are
painful and tender. Vesicles or bullae do not develop.
•
Superficial partial-thickness burns:
These burns blanch with pressure and are painful and tender.
Vesicles or bullae develop within 24 h. The bases of vesicles and bullae are pink and subsequently
develop a fibrinous exudate.
•
Deep partial-thickness burns:
These burns may be white, red, or mottled red and white. They do not
blanch and are less painful and tender than more superficial burns. A pinprick is often interpreted as
pressure rather than sharp. Vesicles or bullae may develop; these burns are usually dry.
•
Full-thickness burns:
These burns may be white and pliable, black and charred, brown and leathery,
or bright red because of fixed Hb in the subdermal region. Pale full-thickness burns may simulate
normal skin except the skin does not blanch to pressure. Full-thickness burns are usually anesthetic or
hypoesthetic. Hairs can be pulled easily from their follicles. Vesicles and bullae usually do not develop.
Sometimes features that differentiate full-thickness from deep partial-thickness burns take a few days to
develop.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3436===
• Clinical assessment of burn extent and depth
• Laboratory testing and chest x-ray in admitted patients
Location and depth of burned areas are recorded on a burn diagram. Burns with an appearance
compatible with either deep partial-thickness or full-thickness are presumed to be full-thickness until
differentiation is possible.
The percentage of BSA involved is calculated; only partial-thickness and full-thickness burns are included
in this calculation. For adults, the percentage BSA for parts of the body is estimated by the rule of nines
(see
Fig. 329-1
); for smaller scattered burns, estimates can be based on the size of the patient's entire hand
(not the palm only), which is about 1% of BSA. Children have proportionally larger heads and smaller
lower extremities, so the percentage BSA is more accurately estimated using the Lund-Browder chart
(see
Fig. 329-1
).
In patients who require hospitalization, Hb and Hct, serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, albumin, protein,
phosphate, and ionized Ca should be measured. ECG, urinalysis for myoglobin, and a chest x-ray are
also required. Myoglobinuria (suggesting hemolysis or
[Fig. 329-1.
(A) Rule of nines (for adults) and (B) Lund-Browder chart (for children) for estimating extent
of burns.]
rhabdomyolysis) is suggested by urine that is grossly dark or that tests positive for blood on dipstick in the
absence of microscopic RBCs. These tests are repeated as needed. Muscle compartments are evaluated
in patients with myoglobinuria.
Infection is suggested by wound exudate, impaired wound healing, or systemic evidence of infection (eg,
feeding intolerance, decrease in platelet count, increase in serum glucose level). Fever and WBC count
elevation are common in burns without infection, and therefore are unreliable signs of developing sepsis.
If the diagnosis is unclear, infection can be confirmed by biopsy; cultures from the wound surface or
exudate are unreliable.
Treatment
• IV fluids for burns > 10% BSA
• Wound cleaning, dressing, and serial assessment
• Supportive measures
• Transfer or referral of selected patients to burn centers
• Surgery and physical therapy for deep partial-thickness and full-thickness burns
Initial treatment:
Treatment begins in the prehospital setting. The first priorities are the same as for any
injured patient: ABC (airway, breathing, and circulation). An airway is provided, ventilation is supported,
and possible associated smoke inhalation is treated with 100% O
(see
Sidebar 329-1
). Ongoing burning
is extinguished, and smoldering and hot material is removed. All clothing is removed. Chemicals, except
powders, are flushed with water; powders should be brushed off before wetting. Burns caused by acids,
alkalis, or organic compounds (eg, phenols, cresols, petrochemicals) are flushed with copious amounts of
water continuing for at least 20 min after nothing of the original solution seems to remain.
Intravenous fluids:
IV fluids are given to patients in shock or with burns > 10% BSA.
A 14- to 16-gauge
venous cannula is placed in 1 or 2 peripheral veins through unburned skin if possible. Venous cutdown,
which has a high risk of infection, is avoided.
===PAGE:3437===
Initial fluid volume is guided by treatment of clinically evident shock (. If shock is absent, fluid
administration aims to replace the predicted deficit and supply maintenance fluids. The Brooke formula (2
mL/kg/%BSA burned) or Parkland formula (4 mL/kg/%BSA burned) is used to estimate the fluid volume
needs in the first 24 h after the burn (not after presentation to the hospital). Both formulas use lactated
Ringers' solution.
For example, in a 100-kg man with a 50% total BSA burn, fluid volume by the Brooke formula would be 2
× 100 × 50 = 10,000 mL. Half of the volume, 5 L, is given in the first 8 h after injury as a constant
infusion, and the remaining 5 L is given over the following 16 h. In practice, these formulas are only a
starting point, and infusion rates are adjusted based on clinical response. Urine output, typically
measured with an indwelling catheter, is the usual indicator of clinical response; the goal is to maintain
output at ≥ 30 mL/h in adults and between 0.5 and 1.0 mL/kg/h in children. When giving typical large
volumes of fluid, it is also important to avoid fluid overload and consequent heart failure. Clinical
parameters, including urine output and signs of shock or heart failure, are recorded at least hourly on a
flow chart.
Some clinicians give colloid after 12 h to patients who have larger burns, are very young or very old, or
have heart disease and require large fluid volumes.
If urine output is inadequate despite administration of a large volume of crystalloid, consultation with a
burn center is necessary. Such patients may respond to an infusion of colloid or other measures. Patients
with inadequate urine output despite administration of a large volume of crystalloid are at risk of
resuscitation complications including compartment syndromes.
For patients of any age with rhabdomyolysis, fluid should be given to maintain urine output between 0.5
and 1 mL/kg/h. Some authorities recommend alkalinizing the urine by adding 50 mEq NaHCO
(one 50mL ampule of 8.4% solution) to a liter of IV fluid.
Initial wound care:
After analgesia, the wound is cleaned with soap and water, and all loose debris is
removed. Water should be room temperature or warmer to avoid inducing hypothermia. Blisters, except
for small ones on palms, fingers, and soles, are debrided. In patients who are to be transferred to a burn
center, clean dry dressings can be applied (burn creams interfere with burn wound assessment at the
receiving facility), and patients are kept warm and relatively comfortable with IV opioids.
After the wound is cleaned and is assessed by the final treatment provider, burns can be treated topically.
For shallow partial-thickness burns, topical treatment alone is usually adequate. All deep partial-thickness
burns and full-thickness burns should ultimately be treated with excision and grafting, but in the interim,
topical treatments are appropriate.
Topical treatment may be with antimicrobial salves (eg, 1% silver sulfadiazine), commercial dressings
incorporating silver (eg, sustained-release nanocrystalline silver dressings), or biosynthetic wound
dressings (also called artificial skin products). Topical salves must be changed daily, and silver
sulfadiazine may induce transient leukopenia. Silver-impregnated dressings must be kept moist but can
be changed only every 3 days. Artificial skin products are not changed routinely but can result in
underlying purulence necessitating removal, particularly with deeper wounds. Burned extremities should
be elevated.
A tetanus toxoid booster (0.5 mL sc or IM) is given to patients with all but minor burns who have been
previously fully vaccinated and who have not received a booster within the past 5 yr. Patients whose
booster was more remote or who had not received a full vaccine series are given tetanus immune globulin
250 units IM and concomitant active vaccination (.
Escharotomy (incision of the eschar) of constricting eschars may be necessary to allow adequate
expansion of the thorax or perfusion of an extremity. However, constricting eschars rarely threaten
extremity viability during the first few hours, so if transfer to a burn center can occur within that time,
escharotomy can typically be deferred until then.
Supportive measures:
Hypothermia is treated (, and pain is relieved. Opioids (eg,
===PAGE:3438===
morphine, fentanyl) are always given IV. Treatment of electrolyte deficits may require supplemental Ca,
Mg, K, or phosphate (PO
).
Nutritional support ( is indicated for patients with burns > 20% BSA or preexisting
undernutrition. Support with a feeding tube begins as soon as possible. Parenteral support is rarely
necessary.
Hospitalization and referral:
After initial treatment and stabilization, the need for hospitalization is
assessed. Inpatient treatment, optimally at a burn center, is required for
•
Full-thickness burns > 1% BSA
• Partial-thickness burns > 5% BSA
• Burns of the hands, face, feet, or perineum (partial-thickness or deeper)
In addition, hospitalization may be necessary if
• Patients are < 2 yr or > 60 yr.
• Adherence to home care measures is likely to be poor or difficult (eg, if continuous elevation of the
hands or feet, usually difficult at home, is required).
Many experts recommend that all burns, except for 1st-degree burns < 1% BSA, be treated by
experienced physicians and that brief inpatient care be strongly considered for all burns > 2% BSA.
Maintaining adequate analgesia and exercise can be difficult for many patients and caregivers.
Infection:
Prophylactic antibiotics are not given.
Initial empiric antibiotic treatment for apparent infection during the first 5 days should target staphylococci
and streptococci (eg, with vancomycin for inpatients). Infections that develop after 5 days are treated with
broad-spectrum antibiotics that are effective against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Antibiotic
selection is subsequently adjusted based on culture and sensitivity results.
Surgery:
Surgery is indicated for burns that are not expected to heal within 2 wk, which includes most
deep partial-thickness burns and all full-thickness burns. Eschars are removed as soon as possible,
ideally within 3 days to prevent sepsis and facilitate early wound grafting, which shortens hospitalization
and improves the functional result. If burns are extensive and life threatening, the largest eschars are
removed first to close as much burn area as early as possible.
After excision, grafting proceeds ideally using partial-thickness autografts (the patient's skin), which are
permanent. Autografts can be transplanted as sheets (solid pieces of skin) or meshed grafts (sheets of
donor skin that are stretched to cover a larger area by making multiple, regularly spaced, small incisions).
Meshed grafts are used in areas where appearance is less of a concern when burns are > 20% BSA and
donor skin is scarce. Meshed grafts heal with an uneven gridlike appearance, sometimes with excessive
hypertrophic scarring.
When burns are > 40% BSA and the supply of autograft material appears insufficient, an artificial dermal
regeneration template can be used as temporary coverage. Allografts (viable skin usually from cadaver
donors) or xenografts (eg, pig skin) can also be used temporarily; they are rejected, sometimes within 10
to 14 days. Both types of temporary coverage must ultimately be replaced with autografts.
Fasciotomy is done when edema within a muscle compartment elevates compartment pressure > 30 mm
Hg.
Physical and occupational therapy:
Physical and occupational therapy are begun at admission to help
minimize scarring and contractures, particularly for body surfaces with high skin tension and frequent
movement (eg, face, hands), and to optimize function. Active and passive range-of-motion exercises
===PAGE:3439===
become easier as the initial edema subsides; they are done once or twice daily. After grafting, exercises
are usually suspended for 3 days, then resumed. Extremities affected by deep partial-thickness burns or
full-thickness burns are splinted in functional positions as soon as possible and kept splinted continuously
(except during exercise) until the graft has been placed, healing has occurred, or both.
Outpatient treatment:
Outpatient treatment includes keeping burns clean and, to the extent possible,
keeping the affected body part elevated. Dressings should be changed daily for burns treated with topical
salves. The salve is applied and then covered with a dry nonadherent gauze dressing and compression
wraps. Silver dressings should be changed every 3 to 7 days. Dressing change simply involves removing
the older dressing and replacing it with new one. Biosynthetic wound dressings should not be changed in
the absence of purulence. Biosynthetic dressings should simply be covered with dry gauze, which is
changed daily.
Outpatient follow-up visits are scheduled as needed depending on burn severity (eg, for very minor burns,
initial visit within 24 h, then subsequent visits every 5 to 7 days). Visits include debridement if indicated,
reassessment of burn depth, and evaluation of the need for physical therapy and grafting. Patients
should return earlier if they note signs of infection, such as increasing redness extending from the wound
edges, increasing purulence and pain, or a change in the appearance of the wound with development of
black or red spots. Should these signs occur, medical evaluation should ensue urgently. Outpatient
treatment is acceptable for minor burn-wound cellulitis in healthy patients aged 2 to 60 yr; hospitalization
is indicated for other infections.
===PAGE:3440===
Chapter 330. Electrical and Lightning Injuries
Introduction
Electricity may be from generated sources (eg, from high- or low-voltage power lines) or atmospheric
(lightning).
Electrical Injuries
Electrical injury is damage caused by generated electrical current passing through the body.
Symptoms may include skin burns, damage to internal organs and other soft tissues, cardiac
arrhythmias, and respiratory arrest. Diagnosis is by history, clinical criteria and selective
laboratory testing. Treatment is supportive, with aggressive care for severe injuries.
Although accidental electrical injuries encountered in the home (eg, touching an electrical outlet or getting
shocked by a small appliance) rarely result in significant injury or sequelae, accidental exposure to high
voltage causes about 400 deaths annually in the US.
Pathophysiology
Traditional teaching is that the severity of electrical injury depends on Kouwenhoven's factors:
• Type of current (direct [DC] or alternating [AC])
• Voltage and amperage (measures of current strength)
• Duration of exposure (longer exposure increases injury severity)
• Body resistance
• Pathway of current (which determines the specific tissue damaged)
However, electrical field strength, a newer concept, seems to predict injury severity more accurately.
Kouwenhoven's factors:
AC changes direction frequently; it is the current usually supplied by
household electrical outlets in the US and Europe. DC flows in the same direction constantly; it is the
current supplied by batteries. Defibrillators and cardioverters usually deliver DC current. How AC affects
the body depends largely on frequency. Low-frequency (50- to 60-Hz) AC is used in US (60 Hz) and
European (50 Hz) households; it can be more dangerous than high-frequency AC and is 3 to 5 times more
dangerous than DC of the same voltage and amperage. Low-frequency AC causes extended muscle
contraction (tetany), which may freeze the hand to the current's source, prolonging exposure. DC is most
likely to cause a single convulsive contraction, which often forces the person away from the current's
source.
Usually, for both AC and DC, the higher the voltage (V) and amperage, the greater the ensuing electrical
injury (for the same duration of exposure). Household current in the US is 110 V (standard electrical
outlet) to 220 V (large appliance, such as a dryer). High-voltage (> 500 V) currents tend to cause deep
burns, and low-voltage (110 to 220 V) currents tend to cause muscle tetany and freezing to the current's
source. The threshold for perceiving DC current entering the hand is about 5 to 10 milliamperes (mA); for
AC at 60 Hz, the threshold is about 1 to 10 mA. The maximum amperage that can cause flexors of the arm
to contract but that allows release of the hand from the current's source is called the let-go current. Let-go
current varies with weight and muscle mass. For an average 70-kg man, let-go current is about 75 mA for
DC and about 15 mA for AC.
Low-voltage 60-Hz AC traveling through the chest for a fraction of a second can cause ventricular
fibrillation at amperage as low as 60 to 100 mA; for DC, about 300 to 500 mA are required. If current has
a direct pathway to the heart (eg, via a cardiac catheter or pacemaker electrodes), < 1 mA (AC or DC)
can cause ventricular fibrillation.
===PAGE:3441===
Amount of dissipated heat energy equals amperage
× resistance × time; thus, for any given current and
duration, tissue with the highest resistance tends to suffer the most damage. Body resistance (measured
in ohms/cm
) is provided primarily by the skin. Skin thickness and dryness increase resistance; dry, wellkeratinized, intact skin averages 20,000 to 30,000 ohms/cm
. For a thickly calloused palm or sole,
resistance may be 2 to 3 million ohms/cm
; for moist, thin skin, resistance is about 500 ohms/cm
.
Resistance for punctured skin (eg, cut, abrasion, needle puncture) or moist mucous membranes (eg,
mouth, rectum, vagina) may be as low as 200 to 300 ohms/cm
. If skin resistance is high, much electrical
energy may be dissipated at the skin, resulting in large skin burns where the energy contacts the skin but
less internal damage. If skin resistance is low, skin burns are less extensive or absent, with more
electrical energy transmitted to internal structures. Thus, the absence of external burns does not
predict
the absence of electrical injury, and the severity of external burns does not predict the severity of
electrical injury.
Damage to internal tissues depends also on their resistance and additionally on current density (current
per unit area; energy is concentrated when the same current flows through a smaller area). For example,
as electrical energy flows in an arm (primarily through lower-resistance tissues, eg, muscle, vessels,
nerves), current density increases at joints because a significant proportion of the joint's cross-sectional
area consists of higher-resistance tissues (eg, bone, tendon), which decreases the area of lowerresistance tissue; thus, damage to the lower-resistance tissues tends to be most severe at joints.
The current's pathway through the body determines which structures are injured. Because AC current
continually reverses direction, the commonly used terms "entry" and "exit" are inappropriate; "source" and
"ground" are more precise. The hand is the most common source point, followed by the head. The foot is
the most common ground point. Current traveling between arm and arm or between arm and foot is likely
to traverse the heart, possibly causing arrhythmia. This current tends to be more dangerous than current
traveling from one foot to the other. Current to the head may damage the CNS.
Electrical field strength:
Electrical field strength determines the degree of tissue injury. For instance,
20,000 volts (20 kV) distributed across the body of a man who is about 2 m (6 ft) tall result in a field
strength of about 10 kV/m. Similarly, 110 volts, if applied only to 1 cm (eg, across a young child's lip),
result in a similar field strength of 11 kV/m; this relationship is why such a low-voltage injury can cause the
same severity of tissue injury as some high-voltage injuries applied to a larger area. Conversely, when
considering voltage rather than electrical field strength, minor or trivial electrical injuries technically could
be classified as high voltage. For example, the shock received from shuffling across a carpet in the winter
involves thousands of volts but produces inconsequential injury.
The electrical field effect can cause cell membrane damage (electroporation) even when the energy is
insufficient to cause any thermal damage.
Pathology:
Application of low electrical field strength causes an immediate, unpleasant feeling (being
"shocked") but seldom results in serious or permanent injury. Application of high electrical field strength
may cause thermal or electrochemical damage to internal tissues. Damage may include hemolysis,
protein coagulation, coagulation necrosis of muscle and other tissues, vascular thrombosis, dehydration,
and muscle and tendon avulsion. High electrical field strength injuries may result in massive edema,
which, as veins coagulate and muscles swell, results in compartment syndromes. Massive edema may
also cause hypovolemia and hypotension. Muscle destruction may result in rhabdomyolysis and
myoglobinuria. Myoglobinuria, hypovolemia, and hypotension increase risk of acute renal failure.
Electrolyte disturbances can also occur. The consequences of organ dysfunction do not always correlate
with the amount of tissue destroyed (eg, ventricular fibrillation may occur with relatively little tissue
destruction).
Symptoms and Signs
Burns may be sharply demarcated on the skin even when current penetrates irregularly into deeper
tissues. Severe involuntary muscular contractions, seizures, ventricular fibrillation, or respiratory arrest
===PAGE:3442===
due to CNS damage or muscle paralysis may occur. Brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerve damage may
result in various neurologic deficits. Cardiac arrest may occur without burns in bathtub accidents (when a
wet [grounded] person contacts a 110-V circuit—eg, from a hair dryer or radio).
Young children who bite or suck on extension cords can burn their mouth and lips. Such burns may cause
cosmetic deformities and impair growth of the teeth, mandible, and maxilla. Labial artery hemorrhage,
which results when the eschar separates 5 to 10 days after injury, occurs in up to 10% of these young
children.
An electrical shock can cause powerful muscle contractions or falls (eg, from a ladder or roof), resulting in
dislocations (electrical shock is one of the few causes of posterior shoulder dislocation), vertebral or
other fractures, injuries to internal organs, and other blunt force injuries.
Diagnosis
• Head to toe examination
• Sometimes ECG, cardiac enzyme measurement, and urinalysis
The person, once away from current, is assessed for cardiac arrest ( and respiratory arrest
(. Necessary resuscitation is done. After initial resuscitation, patients are examined from head
to toe.
Asymptomatic patients who are not pregnant, have no known heart disorders, and who
have had only
brief exposure to household current usually have no significant acute internal or external injuries and do
not require testing or monitoring. For other patients, ECG, CBC, measurement of cardiac enzymes, and
urinalysis (especially to check for myoglobin) should be considered. Patients with impaired consciousness
may require CT or MRI.
Treatment
• Shutting off current
• Resuscitation
• Analgesia
• Sometimes cardiac monitoring for 6 to 12 h
• Wound care
Prehospital care:
The first priority is to break contact between the person and the current source by
shutting off the current (eg, by throwing a circuit breaker or switch, by disconnecting the device from its
electrical outlet). High- and low-voltage power lines are not always easily differentiated, particularly
outdoors. CAUTION:
If power lines could be high voltage, no attempts to disengage the person should
be made until the power is shut off
.
Resuscitation:
Patients are resuscitated while being assessed. Shock, which may result from trauma or
massive burns, is treated (. Standard burn fluid resuscitation formulas, which are based on the extent of skin burns, may
underestimate the fluid requirement in electrical burns; thus, such formulas are not used. Instead, fluids
are titrated to maintain adequate urine output (about 100 mL/h in adults and 1.5 mL/kg/h in children). For
myoglobinuria, alkalinizing the urine and maintaining adequate urine output decrease the risk of renal
failure. Surgical debridement of large amounts of muscle tissue may also help to decrease myoglobinuric
renal failure.
Severe pain due to an electrical burn is treated by the judicious titration of IV opioids.
===PAGE:3443===
Other measures:
Asymptomatic patients who are not pregnant, have no known heart disorders, and who
have had only brief exposure to household current usually have no significant acute internal or external
injuries that can be mitigated by admission and can be discharged. Cardiac monitoring for 6 to 12 h is
indicated for patients with the following conditions:
• Arrhythmias
• Chest pain
• Any suggestion of cardiac damage
• Pregnancy (possibly)
• Known heart disorders (possibly)
Appropriate tetanus prophylaxis ( and topical burn wound care ( are required.
Pain is treated with NSAIDs or other analgesics.
All patients with significant electrical burns should be referred to a specialized burn unit. Young children
with lip burns should be referred to a pediatric orthodontist or oral surgeon familiar with such injuries.
Prevention
Electrical devices that touch or may be touched by the body should be properly insulated, grounded, and
incorporated into circuits containing protective circuit-breaking equipment. Ground-fault circuit breakers,
which trip when as little as 5 mA of current leaks to ground, are effective and readily available. Outlet
guards reduce risk in homes with infants or young children.
Lightning Injuries
Lightning injuries include cardiac arrest, loss of consciousness, and temporary or permanent
neurologic deficits; serious burns and internal tissue injury are rare. Diagnosis is clinical;
evaluation requires ECG and cardiac monitoring. Treatment is supportive.
Lightning strikes cause about 30 to 50 deaths and several times more injuries annually in the US.
Lightning tends to strike tall or isolated objects, including trees, towers, shelters, flagpoles, bleachers,
and fences. A person may be the tallest object in an open field. Metal objects and water do not attract
lightning but easily transmit electricity once they are hit. Lightning can strike a person directly, or the
current can be transferred to the person through the ground or a nearby object. Lightning can also travel
from outdoor power or electrical lines to indoor electrical equipment or telephone lines. The force may
throw the person several yards.
Because the physics of lightning injury is different from that of generated electrical energy, knowledge of
the effects of exposure to household current or high voltage cannot be extrapolated to lightning injuries.
For example, damage from lightning injury is not determined by voltage or amperage. Although lightning
current contains a large amount of energy, it flows for an extremely brief period (1/10,000 to 1/1000 sec).
It rarely, if ever, causes serious skin wounds and seldom causes rhabdomyolysis or serious internal tissue
damage,
unlike high-voltage and high-current electrical injury from generated sources. Patients may have
intracranial hemorrhage resulting from secondary injury or, rarely, from lightning itself.
Lightning can affect the heart but primarily affects the nervous system, damaging the brain, autonomic
nervous system, and peripheral nerves.
Symptoms and Signs
The electrical charge can cause asystole or other arrhythmias or cause symptoms of brain dysfunction,
such as loss of consciousness, confusion, or amnesia.
===PAGE:3444===
Keraunoparalysis is paralysis and mottling, coldness, and pulselessness of the lower and sometimes
upper extremities with sensory deficits; the cause is probably sympathetic nervous system injury.
Keraunoparalysis is common and usually resolves within several hours, although some degree of
permanent paresis occasionally results. Other manifestations of lightning injury may include minor skin
burns in a punctate or feathered, branched pattern, tympanic membrane perforation, and, within days,
cataracts. Neurologic problems may include confusion, cognitive deficits, and peripheral neuropathy.
Neuropsychologic problems (eg, sleep disturbances, attention deficit, memory problems) may occur.
Cardiopulmonary arrest at the time of the strike is the most common cause of death. Cognitive deficits,
pain syndromes, and sympathetic nervous system damage are the most common long-term sequelae.
Diagnosis
• Recognition of cardiac and brain complications
Lightning injuries may be witnessed or unwitnessed. Unwitnessed injuries should be suspected when
people found outside during or after storms have amnesia or are unconscious.
ECG may be done if injury is severe. Cardiac enzymes are measured for patients with the following:
• Chest pain
• Abnormal ECG
• Altered mental status
Patients with initially abnormal or deteriorating mental status or focal neurologic deficits compatible with a
brain lesion require a head CT or MRI.
Treatment
• Supportive care
CPR is initiated for cardiac or respiratory arrest or both. If an automated external defibrillator is available,
it should be used.
Supportive care is provided. Fluids are usually restricted to minimize potential brain edema. Most people
who have been injured by lightning can be safely discharged unless cardiac effects or brain lesions are
suspected.
Prevention
Most lightning injuries can be prevented by following lightning safety guidelines. People should know the
weather forecast and have backup plans if a storm is predicted. They should have an escape plan
involving evacuation to a safer area (ideally a large habitable building) and pay attention to the weather
while outdoors so they can implement the escape plan if an unexpected storm comes up. By the time
thunder is heard, people are already in danger and should seek shelter (eg, in a building or fully enclosed
metal vehicle). Small, open structures, such as gazebos, are not safe. People should not go outdoors until
30 min after the last lightning is seen or thunder is heard. When indoors during an electrical storm, people
should avoid plumbing and electrical appliances, stay away from windows and doors, and not use hardwired telephones, video game consoles, or computers. Cellular phones, personal digital assistants
(PDAs), and MP3 players are safe because they do not attract lightning.
===PAGE:3445===
Chapter 331. Radiation Exposure and Contamination
Introduction
Ionizing radiation injures tissues variably, depending on factors such as radiation dose, rate of
exposure, type of radiation, and part of the body exposed. Symptoms may be local (eg, burns)
or systemic (eg, acute radiation sickness). Diagnosis is by history of exposure, symptoms and
signs, and sometimes use of radiation detection equipment to localize and identify radionuclide
contamination. Management focuses on associated traumatic injuries, decontamination,
supportive measures, and minimizing exposure of health care workers. Patients with severe
acute radiation sickness receive reverse isolation and bone marrow support. Patients internally
contaminated with certain specific radionuclides may receive uptake inhibitors or chelating
agents. Prognosis is initially estimated by the time between exposure and symptoms, the
severity of those symptoms, and by the lymphocyte count during the initial 24 to 72 h.
Ionizing radiation is emitted by radioactive elements and by equipment such as x-ray and radiation
therapy machines.
Types of radiation:
Radiation includes
• High-energy electromagnetic waves (x-rays, gamma rays)
• Particles (alpha particles, beta particles, neutrons)
Alpha particles
are energetic helium nuclei emitted by some radionuclides with high atomic numbers (eg,
plutonium, radium, uranium); they cannot penetrate skin beyond a shallow depth (< 0.1 mm).
Beta particles
are high-energy electrons that are emitted from the nuclei of unstable atoms (eg, cesium137, iodine-131). These particles can penetrate more deeply into skin (1 to 2 cm) and cause both
epithelial and subepithelial damage.
Neutrons
are electrically neutral particles emitted by a few radionuclides (eg, californium-252) and
produced in nuclear fission reactions (eg, in nuclear reactors); they can penetrate deeply into tissues (> 2
cm), where they collide with the nuclei of stable atoms, resulting in emission of energetic protons, alpha
and beta particles, and gamma radiation.
Gamma radiation and x-rays
are electromagnetic radiation (ie, photons) of very short wavelength that
can penetrate deeply into tissue (many centimeters). While some photons deposit all their energy in the
body, other photons of the same energy may only deposit a fraction of their energy and others may pass
completely through the body without interacting.
Because of these characteristics, alpha and beta particles cause the most damage when the radioactive
atoms that emit them are
within
the body (internal contamination) or, in the case of beta-emitters, directly
on
the body; only tissue in close proximity to the radionuclide is affected. Gamma rays and x-rays can
cause damage distant from their source and are typically responsible for acute radiation syndromes (ARS
—.
Measurement of radiation:
Conventional units of measurement include the roentgen, rad, and rem. The
roentgen (R) is a unit of exposure measuring the ionizing ability of x- or gamma radiation in air. The
radiation absorbed dose (rad) is the amount of that radiation energy absorbed per unit of mass. Because
biologic damage per rad varies with radiation type (eg, it is higher for neutrons than for x- or gamma
radiation), the dose in rad is corrected by a quality factor; the resulting effective dose unit is the roentgen
equivalent in man (rem). Outside the US and in the scientific literature, SI units are used, in which the rad
is replaced by the gray (Gy) and the rem by the sievert (Sv); 1 Gy = 100 rad and 1 Sv = 100 rem. The rad
and rem (and hence Gy and Sv) are essentially equal (ie, the quality factor equals 1) when describing
gamma or beta radiation.
===PAGE:3446===
Types of exposure:
Radiation exposure may involve
• Contamination
• Irradiation
Radioactive contamination
is the unintended contact with and retention of radioactive material, usually
as a dust or liquid. Contamination may be
• External
• Internal
External contamination is that on skin or clothing, from which some can fall or be rubbed off,
contaminating other people and objects. Internal contamination is unintended radioactive material within
the body, which it may enter by ingestion, inhalation, or through breaks in the skin. Once in the body,
radioactive material may be transported to various
sites (eg, bone marrow), where it continues to emit
radiation until it is removed or decays. Internal contamination is more difficult to remove. Although internal
contamination with any radionuclide is possible, historically, most cases in which contamination posed a
significant risk to the patient involved a relatively small number of radionuclides: hydrogen-3, cobalt-60,
strontium-90, cesium-137, iodine-131, radium-226, uranium-235, uranium-238, plutonium-238, plutonium239, polonium-210, and americium-241.
Irradiation
is exposure to radiation but not radioactive material (ie, no contamination is involved).
Radiation exposure can occur without the source of radiation (eg radioactive material, x-ray machine)
being in contact with the person. When the source of the radiation is removed or turned off, exposure
ends. Irradiation can involve the whole body, which, if the dose is high enough, can result in systemic
symptoms and radiation syndromes (, or a small part of the body (eg, from radiation therapy),
which can result in local effects. People do not emit radiation (ie, become radioactive) following
irradiation.
Sources of exposure:
Sources may be naturally occurring or man-made (see
Table 331-1
).
People are constantly exposed to low levels of naturally occurring radiation called background radiation.
Background radiation comes from cosmic radiation and from radioactive elements in the air, water, and
earth. Cosmic radiation is concentrated at the poles by the earth's magnetic field and attenuated by the
atmosphere. Thus, exposure is greater for people living at high latitudes, at high altitudes, or both and
during airplane flights. Radioactive elements, particularly uranium and its radioactive progeny and
potassium-40, are present in many rocks and minerals. These elements end up in various substances,
including food, water, and construction materials. Radon, a radioactive gas resulting from the decay of
uranium, typically accounts for about two thirds of naturally occurring radiation dose to the US population.
In the US, people receive an average effective dose of about 3 millisieverts (mSv)/yr from natural
sources. However, in some parts of the world, people receive between 5 and 10 mSv/yr. The doses from
natural background radiation are far too low to cause radiation injuries, although they may increase the
risk of cancer.
In the US, people receive on the average about 3 mSv/yr from man-made sources, the vast majority of
which involve medical imaging. Imaging exposure tends to be highest from CT and nuclear cardiology
procedures. However, medical diagnostic procedures rarely impart doses sufficient to cause radiation
injury, although they may increase the risk of cancer. Exceptions may include certain prolonged
fluoroscopically guided interventional procedures (eg, endovascular reconstruction, vascular
embolization, cardiac radiofrequency ablation); these procedures have caused injuries to skin and
underlying tissues. Radiation therapy commonly causes injury to some normal tissues near the target
tissue.
[Table 331-1.
Average Annual Radiation Exposure in the Us]
===PAGE:3447===
A small portion of public exposure results from radiation accidents and fallout from nuclear weapons
testing. Accidents may involve industrial irradiators, industrial radiography sources, and nuclear reactors.
These accidents commonly result from failure to follow
safety procedures (eg, interlocks being bypassed).
Radiation injuries have also been caused by lost or stolen medical or industrial sources containing
radionuclides. People seeking medical care for these injuries may be unaware that they were exposed to
radiation.
Radioactive material has escaped from nuclear power plants, including the Three Mile Island plant in
Pennsylvania in 1979 and at Chernobyl in Ukraine in 1986. Exposure from Three Mile Island was minimal;
people living within 1.6 km of the plant received only about 0.08 mSv. However, people living in 2 villages
near the Chernobyl plant received an average dose of about 300 mSv, and people at the Chernobyl plant
itself received significantly higher doses. More than 30 workers and emergency responders died, and
many more were injured. Low-level contamination from that accident was detected as far away as
Europe, Asia, and even the US. The average cumulative exposure for the general population in various
affected regions of Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine over a 20-yr period after the accident is estimated to be
between 10 and 30 mSv.
Another significant radiation event was the detonation of 2 atomic bombs over Japan in August 1945,
which caused about 110,000 deaths from the immediate trauma of the blast and heat. A much smaller
number of deaths resulted later from radiation-induced illnesses.
While several criminal cases of intentional contamination of individuals have been reported, radiation
exposure to a population through terrorist activities has not occurred but is a concern. A possible scenario
involves the use of a device to contaminate an area by dispersing radioactive material (a radiation
dispersal device that uses conventional explosives is referred to as a dirty bomb). Other terrorist
scenarios include using a hidden radiation source to expose unsuspecting people to large doses of
radiation, attacking a nuclear reactor or radioactive material storage facility, and detonating a nuclear
weapon.
Pathophysiology
Ionizing radiation can damage DNA, RNA, and proteins directly, but more often the damage to these
molecules is indirect, caused by highly reactive free radicals generated by radiation's interaction with
intracellular water molecules. Large doses of radiation can cause cell death, and lower doses may
interfere with cellular proliferation. Damage to other cellular components can result in progressive tissue
hypoplasia, atrophy, and eventually fibrosis.
Factors affecting response:
Biologic response to radiation varies with
• Tissue radiosensitivity
• Dose
• Duration of exposure
Cells and tissues differ in their radiosensitivity. In general, cells that are undifferentiated and those that
have high mitotic rates (eg, stem cells) are particularly vulnerable to radiation. Because radiation
preferentially depletes rapidly dividing stem cells over the more resistant mature cells, there is typically a
latent period between radiation exposure and overt radiation injury. Injury does not manifest until a
significant fraction of the mature cells die of natural senescence and, due to loss of stem cells, are not
replaced.
Cellular sensitivities in approximate descending order from most to least sensitive are
• Lymphoid cells
• Germ cells
===PAGE:3448===
• Proliferating bone marrow cells
• Intestinal epithelial cells
• Epidermal stem cells
• Hepatic cells
• Epithelium of lung alveoli and biliary passages
• Kidney epithelial cells
• Endothelial cells (pleura and peritoneum)
• Nerve cells
• Bone cells
• Muscle and connective tissue cells
The severity of radiation injury depends on the dose and the length of time over which it is delivered. A
single rapid dose is more damaging than the same dose given over weeks or months. Dose response
also depends on the fraction of the body exposed. Significant illness is certain, and death is possible,
after a whole-body dose > 4.5 Gy delivered over a short time interval; however, 10s of Gy can be well
tolerated when delivered over a long period to a small area of tissue (eg, for cancer therapy).
Other factors can increase the sensitivity to radiation injury. Children are more susceptible to radiation
injury because they have a higher rate of cellular proliferation. People who are homozygous for the
ataxia-telangiectasia gene exhibit greatly increased sensitivity to radiation injury. Disorders, such as
connective tissue disorders and diabetes, may increase the sensitivity to radiation injury.
Chemotherapeutic agents also increase the sensitivity to radiation injury.
Cancer and teratogenicity:
Genetic damage to somatic cells may result in malignant transformation,
and damage to germ cells raises the possibility of transmissible genetic defects.
Ionizing radiation can cause cancer; whole-body exposure to 1 Gy increases the average adult's lifetime
risk of cancer death from 25% to about 30%, a 20% relative risk increase but only a 5% absolute risk
increase. The cancer risk due to commonly encountered doses (ie, from background radiation and typical
imaging tests—see
Table 343-1
 is much less. Children are more susceptible because they have a higher number
of future cell divisions and a longer life span during which cancer may manifest; CT of the abdomen done
in a 1-yr-old child is estimated to increase the estimated lifetime absolute risk of developing cancer by
0.18%. Radionuclides that are incorporated into specific tissues are potentially carcinogenic at those sites
(eg, radioactive iodine increases risk of thyroid cancer).
The fetus is exceptionally susceptible to high-dose radiation injury. However, at doses < 100 mGy,
teratogenic effects are unlikely; the fetal risk from radiation at doses from imaging tests that pregnant
women might typically undergo is small compared with the overall risk of birth defects and the potential
diagnostic benefit of the examination.
Damage to reproductive cells has been shown to cause birth defects in progeny of severely irradiated
animals. However, hereditary effects have not been found in children of radiation-exposed humans,
including survivors of the atomic bomb attacks in Japan.
Symptoms and Signs
Clinical manifestations depend on whether radiation exposure involves the whole body (acute radiation
syndrome) or is limited to a small portion of the body (focal radiation injury).
===PAGE:3449===
Acute radiation syndromes (ARS):
After the whole body, or a large portion of the body, receives a high
dose of radiation, several distinct syndromes may occur:
• Cerebrovascular syndrome
• GI syndrome
• Hematopoietic syndrome
These syndromes have 3 different phases:
• Prodromal phase (0 to 2 days after exposure): Lethargy and GI symptoms (nausea, anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea) are possible.
• Latent asymptomatic phase (0 to 31 days after exposure)
• Overt systemic illness phase: Illness is classified by the main organ system affected.
Which syndrome develops, how severe it is, and how quickly it progresses depend on radiation dose
(see
Table 331-2
). The symptoms and time course are fairly consistent for a given dose of radiation and thus
can help estimate radiation exposure.
The
cerebrovascular syndrome
, the dominant manifestation of extremely high whole-body doses of
radiation (> 30 Gy), is always fatal. The prodrome develops within minutes to 1 h after exposure. There is
little or no latent phase. Patients develop tremors, seizures, ataxia, and cerebral edema and die within
hours to 1 or 2 days.
The
GI syndrome
is the dominant manifestation after whole-body doses of about 6 to 30 Gy. Prodromal
symptoms, often marked, develop within about 1 h and resolve within 2 days. During the latent period of 4
to 5 days, GI mucosal cells die. Cell death is followed by intractable nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea,
which lead to severe dehydration and electrolyte imbalances, diminished plasma volume, and vascular
collapse. Necrosis of intestine may also occur, predisposing to bacteremia and sepsis. Death is common.
Patients receiving > 10 Gy may have cerebrovascular symptoms (suggesting a lethal dose). Survivors
also have the hematopoietic syndrome.
The
hematopoietic syndrome
is the dominant manifestation after whole-body doses of about 1 to 6 Gy
and consists of a generalized pancytopenia. A mild prodrome may begin after 1 to 6 h, lasting 24 to 48 h.
Bone marrow stem cells are significantly depleted, but mature blood cells in circulation are largely
unaffected (circulating lymphocytes are an exception, and lymphopenia may be evident within hours to
days after exposure). As the cells in circulation die by senescence, they are not replaced in sufficient
numbers, resulting in pancytopenia. Thus, patients remain asymptomatic during a latent period of up to 4
1/2 wk after a 1-Gy dose as marrow production falls. Risk of various infections is increased as a result of
the neutropenia (most prominent at 2 to 4 wk) and decreased antibody production. Petechiae and
mucosal bleeding result from thrombocytopenia, which develops within 3 to 4 wk and may persist for
months. Anemia develops slowly, because preexisting RBCs have a longer life span than WBCs and
platelets. Survivors have an increased incidence of radiation-induced cancer, including leukemia.
Cutaneous radiation injury
(CRI) is injury to the skin and underlying tissues from acute radiation doses
as low as 3 Gy (see
Table 331-3
). CRI can occur with ARS or with focal radiation exposure and ranges from mild transient
erythema to necrosis. Delayed effects (> 6 mo after exposure) include hyperpigmentation and
hypopigmentation, progressive fibrosis,
[Table 331-2.
Effects of Whole-Body Irradiation from External Radiation or Internal Absorption]
[Table 331-3.
Focal Radiation Injury*]
===PAGE:3450===
and diffuse telangiectasia. Thin atrophic skin can be easily damaged by mild mechanical trauma. Exposed
skin is at increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma. In particular, the possibility of radiation exposure
should be considered when patients present with a painful nonhealing skin burn without a history of
thermal injury.
Focal injury:
Radiation to almost any organ can have both acute and chronic adverse effects (see
Table
331-3
). In most patients, these adverse effects result from radiation therapy (. Other common
sources of exposure include inadvertent contact with unsecured food irradiators, radiotherapy equipment,
x-ray diffraction equipment, and other industrial or medical radiation sources capable of producing high
dose rates. Also, overexposure to x-rays during medical fluoroscopy is a source of exposure and of CRI in
particular. Radiation-induced sores or ulcers may take months or years to fully develop. Patients with
these injuries often have severe pain.
Diagnosis
• Symptoms, severity, and symptom latency
• Serial absolute lymphocyte counts
Diagnosis is by history of exposure, symptoms and signs, and laboratory testing. The onset, time course,
and severity of symptoms can help determine radiation dose and thus also help triage patients relative to
their likely consequences. However, some prodromal symptoms (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, tremors)
are nonspecific, and causes other than radiation should be considered. Many patients
without
enough
exposure to cause acute radiation sickness may present with similar, nonspecific symptoms, particularly
after a terrorist attack or reactor accident, when anxiety is high.
After acute radiation exposure, CBC with differential and calculation of absolute lymphocyte count is done
and repeated 24, 48, and 72 h after exposure to estimate the initial radiation dose and prognosis (see
Table 331-4
). The relationship between dose and lymphocyte counts can be altered by physical trauma,
which can shift lymphocytes from the interstitial spaces into the vasculature, raising the lymphocyte count.
This stress-related increase is transient and typically resolves within 24 to 48 h after the physical insult.
CBC is repeated weekly to monitor marrow activity and as needed based on the clinical course.
Contamination:
When contamination is suspected, the entire body should be surveyed with a thin
window Geiger-Muller probe
[Table 331-4.
Relationship Between Absolute Lymphocyte Count in Adults at 48 H, Radiation Dose,* and
Prognosis]
attached to a survey meter (Geiger counter) to identify the location and extent of external contamination.
Additionally, to detect possible internal contamination, the nares, ears, mouth, and wounds are wiped with
moistened swabs that are then tested with the counter. Urine, feces, and emesis should also be tested for
radioactivity if internal contamination is suspected.
Prognosis
Without medical care
, the LD
50/60
(dose expected to be fatal to 50% of patients within 60 days) for
whole-body radiation is about 3 Gy; 6 Gy exposure is nearly always fatal. When exposure is < 6 Gy,
survival is possible and is inversely related to total dose. Time to death decreases as the dose increases.
Death may occur within hours to a few days in patients with the cerebral syndrome and usually within 2
days to several weeks in patients with the GI syndrome. In patients with the hematopoietic syndrome,
death may occur within 4 to 8 wk because of a supervening infection or massive hemorrhage. Patients
exposed to whole-body doses < 2 Gy should fully recover within 1 mo, although long-term sequelae (eg,
cancer) may occur.
With medical care
, the LD
50/60
is 6 Gy and occasional patients have survived exposures of up to 10
Gy. Significant comorbidities, injuries, and burns worsen prognosis.
===PAGE:3451===
Treatment
• Treatment of severe traumatic injuries or life-threatening medical conditions first
• Minimization of health care worker radiation exposure and contamination
• Treatment of external and internal contamination
• Sometimes specific measures for particular radionuclides
• Supportive care
Radiation exposure may be accompanied by physical injuries (eg, from burn, blast, fall);
associated
trauma is more immediately life threatening than radiation exposure and must be treated expeditiously
(. Trauma resuscitation of the seriously injured takes priority over decontamination efforts
and must not be delayed awaiting special radiation management equipment and personnel. Standard
universal precautions, as routinely used in trauma care, adequately protect the critical care team.
Extensive, reliable information about principles of radiation injuries, including management, is available at
the US Department of Health and Human Services Radiation Event Medical Management web site
(http://remm.nlm.gov
). This information can be downloaded to a personal computer or personal digital
assistant (PDA) in case Internet connectivity is lost during a radiation incident.
Preparation:
The Joint Commission mandates that all hospitals have protocols and that personnel have
training to deal with patients contaminated with hazardous material, including radioactive material.
Identification of radioactive contamination on patients should prompt their isolation in a designated area
(if practical), decontamination, and notification of the hospital radiation safety officer, public health
officials, hazardous material teams, and law enforcement agencies as appropriate to investigate the
source of radioactivity.
Treatment area surfaces may be covered with plastic sheeting to aid in facility decontamination; this
preparation should never take precedence over provision of medical stabilization. Waste receptacles
(labeled "Caution, Radioactive Material"), sample containers, and Geiger counters should be readily
available. All equipment that has come into contact with the room or with the patient (including ambulance
equipment) should remain isolated until lack of contamination has been verified. An exception is a mass
casualty situation, during which lightly contaminated critical
equipment such as helicopters, ambulances,
trauma rooms, and x-ray, CT, and surgical facilities, should be quickly decontaminated to the extent
possible and returned to service.
Personnel involved in treating or transporting the patient should follow standard precautions, wearing
caps, masks, gowns, gloves, and shoe covers. Used gear should be placed in specially marked bags or
containers. Dosimeter badges should be worn to monitor radiation exposure. Personnel may be rotated to
minimize exposure, and pregnant personnel should be excluded from the treatment area.
Due to the low exposure rates anticipated from most contaminated patients, medical staff members caring
for typical patients are unlikely to receive doses in excess of the occupational limit of 0.05 Gy/yr. Even in
the extreme case of radiation casualties from the Chernobyl nuclear reactor accident, medical personnel
who treated patients in the hospital received < 0.01 Sv. Several authoritative sources suggest that a dose
of up to at least 0.5 Gy may be considered an acceptable risk for lifesaving activity.
External decontamination:
Typical sequence and priorities are
• Removing clothing and external debris
• Decontaminating wounds before intact skin
• Cleaning the most contaminated areas first
===PAGE:3452===
• Using radiation survey meter to monitor progress of decontamination
• Continuing decontamination until areas are at < 2 to 3 times background radiation levels or there is no
significant reduction between decontamination efforts
Clothes are removed carefully to minimize the spread of contamination and placed in labeled containers.
Clothing removal eliminates about 90% of external contamination. Foreign objects should be considered
contaminated until cleared by a radiation survey meter.
Contaminated wounds are decontaminated before intact skin; they are irrigated with saline and gently
scrubbed with a surgical sponge. Minimal debridement of wound edges may be done if there is residual
contamination after multiple attempts at cleaning. Debridement beyond the wound margin is not required,
although embedded radioactive shrapnel should be removed and placed in a lead container.
If necessary, consultation is available 24 h/day from the Department of Energy Radiation Emergency
Assistance Center/Training Site (REAC/TS) at (865) 576-1005 and www.orau.gov/reacts
or the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) at (888) 246-2675 and www.bt.cdc.gov/radiation/
.
Contaminated skin and hair are washed with lukewarm water and mild detergent until radiation survey
meter measurements indicate < 2 to 3 times normal background radiation levels or until successive
washings do not significantly reduce contamination levels. All wounds are covered during washing to
prevent the introduction of radioactive material. Scrubbing may be firm but should not abrade the skin.
Special attention is usually required for fingernails and skinfolds. Hair that remains contaminated is
removed with scissors or electric clippers; shaving is avoided. Inducing sweating (eg, placing a rubber
glove over a contaminated hand) may help remove residual skin contamination.
Burns are rinsed gently because scrubbing may increase injury severity; subsequent dressing changes
help remove residual contamination.
Decontamination is not necessary for patients who have been irradiated by an external source and are
not contaminated.
Internal decontamination:
Ingested radioactive material should be removed promptly by induced
vomiting or lavage if exposure is recent. Frequent mouth rinsing with saline or dilute hydrogen peroxide is
indicated for oral contamination. Exposed eyes should be decontaminated by directing a stream of water
or saline laterally to avoid contaminating the nasolacrimal duct.
The urgency and importance of using more specific treatment measures depend on the type and amount
of the radionuclide, its chemical form and metabolic characteristics (eg, solubility, affinity for specific target
organs), the route of contamination (eg, inhalation, ingestion, contaminated wounds), and the efficacy of
the therapeutic method. The decision to treat internal contamination requires knowledge of the potential
risks; consultation with a specialist (eg, CDC or REAC/TS) is recommended.
Current methods to remove radioactive contaminants from the body (decorporation) include
• Saturation of the target organ (eg, potassium iodide [KI] for iodine isotopes)
• Chelation at the site of entry or in body fluids followed by rapid excretion (eg, Ca or zinc
diethylenetriamine penta-acetate [DTPA] for americium, californium, plutonium, and yttrium)
• Acceleration of the metabolic cycle of the radionuclide by isotope dilution, (eg, water for hydrogen-3)
• Precipitation of the radionuclide in the intestinal lumen followed by fecal excretion
(eg, oral Ca or
aluminum phosphate solutions for strontium-90)
• Ion exchange in the GI tract, (eg, Prussian blue for cesium-137, rubidium-82, thallium-201)
===PAGE:3453===
Because a serious nuclear power reactor accident that released fission products into the environment
could expose large groups of people to radioiodine, decorporation using oral KI has been studied in great
detail. KI is > 95% effective when given at the optimal time (shortly before or immediately after exposure)
and dose. However, effectiveness diminishes significantly within several hours after exposure. KI can be
given either in tablet form or as a supersaturated solution (dosage: adult, 130 mg; age 3 to 18 yr, 65 mg;
age 1 to 36 mo, 32 mg; age < 1 mo, 16 mg). KI is effective only for internal contamination with radioactive
iodides and has no benefit in internal contamination with other radioactive elements. Most other drugs
used for decorporation are much less effective than KI and reduce the dose to the patient only by 25 to
75%.
Specific management:
Symptomatic treatment is given as needed and includes managing shock and
hypoxia, relieving pain and anxiety, and giving sedatives (lorazepam 1 to 2 mg IV prn) to control seizures,
antiemetics (metoclopramide 10 to 20 mg IV q 4 to 6 h; prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg IV q 4 to 6 h;
ondansetron 4 to 8 mg IV q 8 to 12 h) to control vomiting, and antidiarrheal agents (kaolin/pectin 30 to 60
mL po with each loose stool; loperamide 4 mg po initially, then 2 mg po with each loose stool) for diarrhea.
There is no specific treatment for the cerebrovascular syndrome. It is universally fatal; care should
address patient comfort.
The GI syndrome is treated with aggressive fluid resuscitation and electrolyte replacement. Parenteral
nutrition should be initiated to promote bowel rest. In febrile patients, broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg,
imipenem 500 mg IV q 6 h) should be initiated immediately. Septic shock from overwhelming infection
remains the most likely cause of death.
Management of the hematopoietic syndrome is similar to that of bone marrow hypoplasia and
pancytopenia of any cause. Blood products should be transfused to treat anemia and thrombocytopenia,
and hematopoietic growth factors (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor) and broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given to treat neutropenia and
neutropenic fever, respectively (. Patients with neutropenia should also be placed in reverse
isolation. With a whole-body radiation dose > 4 Gy, the probability of bone marrow recovery is poor, and
hematopoietic growth factors should be given as soon as possible. Stem cell transplantation has had
limited success but should be considered for exposure > 7 to 10 Gy (.
Radiation-induced sores or ulcers that fail to heal satisfactorily may be repaired by skin grafting or other
surgical procedures.
Aside from regular monitoring for signs of certain disorders (eg, ophthalmic examination for cataracts,
thyroid function studies for thyroid disorders), there is no specific monitoring, screening, or treatment for
specific organ injury or cancer.
Prevention
Protection from radiation exposure is accomplished by avoiding contamination with radioactive material
and minimizing the duration of exposure, maximizing the distance from the source of radiation, and
shielding the source. During imaging procedures that involve ionizing radiation and especially during
radiation therapy for cancer, the most susceptible parts of the body (eg, female breasts, gonads, thyroid)
that are not being treated or imaged are shielded by lead aprons or blocks.
Although shielding of personnel with lead aprons or commercially available transparent shields effectively
reduces exposure to low-energy scattered x-rays from diagnostic imaging studies, these aprons and
shields are almost useless in reducing exposure to the high-energy gamma rays produced by radionuclides that would likely be used in a terrorist incident or be released in a nuclear power plant accident.
In such cases, measures that can minimize exposure include using standard precautions, undergoing
decontamination efforts, and maintaining distance from contaminated patients when not actively providing
care. All personnel working around radiation sources should wear dosimeter badges if they are at risk for
exposures > 10% of the maximum permissible occupational dose (0.05 Sv).
Public response:
After widespread high-level environmental contamination from a nuclear power plant
===PAGE:3454===
accident or intentional release of radioactive material, exposure can be reduced either by
• Sheltering in place
• Evacuating the contaminated area
The better approach depends on many event-specific variables, including the elapsed time since initial
release, whether release has stopped or is ongoing, weather conditions,
availability and type of shelter,
and evacuation conditions (eg, traffic, transportation availability). The public should follow the advice of
local public health officials as broadcast on TV or radio as to which response option is best. If sheltering
is recommended, a concrete or metal structure, particularly one below grade (eg, in a basement) is best.
Consistent and concise messages from public health officials can help reduce unnecessary panic and
reduce the number of emergency department visits from people at low risk, thus keeping the emergency
department from being overwhelmed. Such a communication plan should be developed prior to any event.
A plan to counsel distressed people is also recommended.
People living within 16 km (10 miles) of a nuclear power plant should have ready access to KI tablets.
These tablets can be obtained from local pharmacies and some public health agencies.
Preventive drugs:
Radioprotective drugs, such as thiol compounds with radical scavenging properties,
have been shown to reduce mortality when given before or at the time of irradiation. Amifostine is a
powerful injectable radioprotective agent in this category; it prevents xerostomia in patients undergoing
radiation therapy. Although thiol compounds have good efficacy in radioprotection, these compounds
cause adverse effects, such as hypotension, nausea, vomiting, and allergic reactions. Other experimental
drugs and chemicals have also been shown to increase survival rates in animals if given before or during
irradiation. However, these drugs can be very toxic at doses necessary to provide substantial protection,
and none currently are recommended.
===PAGE:3455===
Chapter 332. Heat Illness
Introduction
Exposure to warm environments affects many physiologic functions and may cause dehydration. Most
people experience mild but uncomfortable symptoms; however, effects may range from cramps and
edema to syncope, heat exhaustion, and heatstroke. Core temperature is elevated in some types of heat
illness. People with dehydration (see pp.
and
) may have tachycardia, tachypnea, and
orthostatic hypotension. CNS dysfunction suggests heatstroke, the most serious disorder; confusion and
lethargy may further impair the ability to escape the heat and rehydrate.
Pathophysiology
Heat input comes from
• The environment
• Metabolism
Heat output occurs through the skin via the following:
• Radiation
• Evaporation (eg, via sweat)
• Convection
The contribution of each of these mechanisms varies with environmental temperature and humidity.
Radiation predominates at room temperature, but as environmental temperature approaches body
temperature, evaporation becomes more important, providing essentially 100% of cooling at > 35° C.
However, high humidity greatly limits evaporative cooling (see
Heatstroke
.
Heat output is modulated by changes in cutaneous blood flow and sweat production. Cutaneous blood
flow is 200 to 250 mL/min at normal temperatures but increases to 7 to 8 L/min with heat stress, requiring
a marked increase in cardiac output. Also, heat stress increases sweat production from negligible to > 2
L/h; thus, significant dehydration can occur rapidly. Because sweat contains electrolytes, electrolyte loss
may be substantial. However, prolonged exposure triggers physiologic changes to accommodate heat
load (acclimatization); eg, sweat Na levels are 40 to 100 mEq/L in people who are not acclimatized but
decrease to 10 to 70 mEq/L in acclimatized people.
The body can compensate for large variations in heat load, but significant or prolonged exposure to heat
increases core temperature. Modest, transient core temperature elevations are tolerable, but severe
elevations (typically > 41° C) lead to protein denaturation and, especially during hard work in the heat,
release of inflammatory cytokines (eg, tumor necrosis factorα
, IL-1b). As a result, cellular dysfunction
occurs and the inflammatory cascade is activated, leading to dysfunction of most organs and activation of
the coagulation cascade. These pathophysiologic processes are
similar to those of multiple organ
dysfunction syndrome (, which follows prolonged shock.
Compensatory mechanisms include an acute-phase response by other cytokines that moderate the
inflammatory response (eg, by stimulating production of proteins that decrease production of free radicals
and inhibit release of proteolytic enzymes). Also, increased core temperature triggers expression of heatshock proteins. These proteins transiently enhance heat tolerance by poorly understood mechanisms (eg,
possibly by preventing protein denaturation) and by regulation of cardiovascular responses. With
prolonged or extreme temperature elevation, compensatory mechanisms are overwhelmed or malfunction,
allowing inflammation and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome to occur.
Etiology
===PAGE:3456===
Heat disorders are caused by some combination of increased heat input and decreased output (see
Table 332-1
).
Excess heat input typically results from strenuous exertion, high environmental temperatures, or both.
Medical disorders and use of stimulant drugs can increase heat production.
Impaired cooling can result from obesity, high humidity, wearing heavy clothing, and anything that impairs
sweating or evaporation of sweat.
Clinical effects of heat illnesses are exacerbated by the following:
• Inability to tolerate increased cardiovascular demands (eg, due to aging, heart failure, chronic kidney
disease, respiratory disorders, or liver failure)
• Dehydration
• Electrolyte disturbance
• Use of certain drugs (see
Table 332-1
)
The elderly and the very young and people with cardiovascular disorders or electrolyte depletion (eg, due
to diuretic use) are at highest risk.
Prevention
Common sense is the best prevention. Physicians should recommend the following measures:
• During excessively hot weather, the elderly and the young should not remain in unventilated residences
without air-conditioning.
• Children should not be left in automobiles in the hot sun.
[Table 332-1.
Common Factors Contributing to Heat Disorders]
• If possible, strenuous exertion in a very hot environment or an inadequately ventilated space should be
avoided, and heavy, insulating clothing should not be worn.
• Weight loss after exercise or work can be used to monitor dehydration; people who
lose 2 to 3% of their
body weight should be reminded to drink extra fluids and should be within 1 kg of starting weight before
the next day's exposure. If people lose > 4%, activity should be limited for 1 day.
• If exertion in the heat is unavoidable, fluid (often lost imperceptibly in very hot, very dry air) should be
replaced by drinking water frequently, and evaporation should be facilitated by wearing open-mesh
clothing or by using fans.
Thirst is a poor indicator of dehydration during exertion; fluids should be drunk every few hours
regardless of thirst. However, over-hydration must be avoided; significant hyponatremia ( has
occurred in endurance athletes who drink very frequently during exercise. Plain water is adequate for
hydration during most activity; cool water is absorbed more readily. Special hydrating solutions (eg, sports
drinks) are not required, but their flavoring enhances consumption, and their modest salt content is helpful
if fluid requirements are high.
Drinking fluids and consuming generously salted foods should be encouraged. Laborers or others who
sweat heavily can lose ≥ 20 g of salt/day, making heat cramps more likely; such people need to replace
the Na loss with drink and food. A palatable drink providing about 20 mmol of salt/L may be prepared by
adding about 5 g (a rounded teaspoon) of table salt to 20 L (about 5 gallons) of any sweetened beverage
prepared from a powdered mix. People on low-salt diets should increase salt intake.
===PAGE:3457===
Successively and incrementally increasing the level and amount of work done in the heat eventually
results in acclimatization, which enables people to work safely at temperatures that were previously
intolerable or life threatening. Progressing from 15 min/day of moderate activity (enough to stimulate
sweating) during a hot time of day to 90 min of vigorous activity over 10 to 14 days is typically adequate.
Acclimatization markedly increases the amount of sweat (and hence cooling) produced at a given level of
exertion and markedly decreases the electrolyte content of sweat. Acclimatization significantly decreases
risk of a heat illness.
Heat Cramps
Heat cramps are exertion-induced muscle contractions that occur during or after exertion in the
heat.
Although exertion may induce cramps during cool weather, such cramps are not heat related and probably
reflect lack of fitness. In contrast, heat cramps can occur in physically fit people who sweat profusely and
replace lost water but not salt, thereby causing hyponatremia. Heat cramps are common among the
following:
• Manual laborers (eg, engine room personnel, steel workers, roofers, miners)
• Military trainees
• Athletes
Cramping is abrupt, usually occurring in muscles of the extremities. Severe pain and carpopedal spasm
may incapacitate the hands and feet. Temperature is normal, and other findings are unremarkable. The
cramp usually lasts minutes to hours. Diagnosis is by history and clinical evaluation.
Treatment
Cramps may be relieved immediately by firm passive stretching of the involved muscle (eg, plantar
dorsiflexion for a calf cramp). Fluids and electrolytes should be replenished orally (1 to 2 L water
containing 10 g [2 level tsp] salt or sufficient amounts of a commercial sports drink) or IV (1 to 2 L 0.9%
saline solution). Adequate conditioning, acclimatization, and appropriate management of salt balance help
prevent cramps.
Heat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion is a non-life-threatening clinical syndrome of weakness, malaise, nausea,
syncope, and other nonspecific symptoms caused by heat exposure. Thermoregulation is not
impaired. IV fluids and electrolyte replacement are needed.
Heat exhaustion is caused by water and electrolyte imbalance due to heat exposure, with or without
exertion.
Rarely, severe heat exhaustion after hard work may be complicated by rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria,
acute renal failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are often vague, and patients may not realize that heat is the cause. Symptoms may include
weakness, dizziness, headache, nausea, and sometimes vomiting. Syncope due to standing for long
periods in the heat (heat syncope) is common and may mimic cardiovascular disorders. On examination,
patients appear tired and are usually sweaty and tachycardic. Mental status is typically normal, unlike in
heatstroke. Temperature is usually normal and, when elevated, usually does not exceed 40° C.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3458===
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is clinical and requires exclusion of other possible causes (eg, hypoglycemia, acute coronary
syndrome, various infections). Laboratory testing is required only if needed to rule out such disorders.
Treatment
• IV fluid and electrolyte replacement
Treatment involves removing patients to a cool environment, having them lie flat, and giving IV fluid and
electrolyte replacement therapy, typically using 0.9% saline solution; oral rehydration does not provide
sufficient electrolytes. Rate and volume of rehydration are guided by age, underlying disorders, and
clinical response. Replacement of 1 to 2 L at 500 mL/h is often adequate. Elderly patients and patients
with heart disorders may require only slightly lower rates; patients with suspected hypovolemia may
require higher rates initially. External cooling measures ( are usually not required. However, if
patients with heat exhaustion have a core temperature of ≥ 40° C, measures may be taken to reduce it.
Heatstroke
Heatstroke is hyperthermia accompanied by a systemic inflammatory response causing
multiple organ dysfunction and often death. Symptoms include temperature > 40° C and altered
mental status; sweating is often absent. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment is rapid external
cooling, IV fluid resuscitation, and support as needed for organ dysfunction.
Heatstroke occurs when thermoregulatory mechanisms do not function and core temperature increases
substantially. Inflammatory cytokines are activated, and multiple organ dysfunction may develop.
Endotoxin from GI flora may also play a role. Organ dysfunction may occur in the CNS, skeletal muscle
(rhabdomyolysis), liver, kidneys, lungs (acute respiratory distress syndrome), and heart. The coagulation
cascade is activated, sometimes causing disseminated intravascular coagulation. Hyperkalemia and
hypoglycemia may occur.
There are 2 variants (see
Table 332-2
):
• Classic
• Exertional
Classic heatstroke takes 2 to 3 days of exposure to develop. It occurs during summer heat waves,
typically in elderly, sedentary people with no air-conditioning and often with limited access to fluids.
Exertional heatstroke occurs abruptly in healthy active people (eg, athletes, military recruits, factory
workers). Intense exertion in a hot environment causes a sudden massive heat load that the body cannot
modulate. Rhabdomyolysis is common; renal failure and coagulopathy are somewhat more likely and
severe.
A syndrome similar to heatstroke may occur after using certain drugs (eg, cocaine, phencyclidine [PCP],
amphetamines, monoamine oxide inhibitors). Usually, an overdose is required, but exertion and
environmental conditions can be additive.
Malignant hyperthermia ( can result from exposure to some anesthetics in genetically
predisposed patients. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome ( can develop in patients taking
antipsychotics. These disorders are life threatening; malignant hyperthermia has a high mortality rate.
Symptoms and Signs
Global CNS dysfunction, ranging from confusion to delirium, seizures, and coma, is the hallmark.
Tachycardia, even when the patient is supine, and tachypnea are common. In classic
===PAGE:3459===
[Table 332-2.
Some Differences Between Classic and Exertional Heatstroke]
heatstroke, the skin is hot and dry. In exertional heatstroke, sweating is relatively common. In both,
temperature is > 40° C and may be > 46° C.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation, including core temperature measurement
• Laboratory testing for organ dysfunction
Diagnosis is usually clear from a history of exertion and environmental heat. Heatstroke is differentiated
from heat exhaustion by presence of the following:
• CNS dysfunction
• Temperature > 40° C
When the diagnosis of heatstroke is not obvious, other disorders that can cause CNS dysfunction and
hyperthermia should be considered. These disorders include the following:
• Acute infection (eg, sepsis, malaria, meningitis, toxic shock syndrome)
• Drugs
• Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
• Serotonin syndrome
• Status epilepticus (interictal)
• Stroke
• Thyroid storm
Laboratory testing includes CBC, PT, PTT, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, Ca, CK, and hepatic profile to
evaluate organ function. A urethral catheter is placed to obtain urine, which is checked for occult blood by
dipstick, and to monitor output. Tests to detect myoglobin are unnecessary. If a urine sample contains no
RBCs but has a positive reaction for blood and if serum CK is elevated, myoglobinuria is likely. A urine
drug screen may be helpful. Continual monitoring of core temperature, usually by rectal or esophageal
probe, is desired.
Prognosis
Mortality rate is significant but varies markedly with age, underlying disorders, maximum temperature,
and, most importantly, duration of hyperthermia and promptness of cooling. About 20% of survivors have
residual brain damage, regardless of intervention. In some patients, renal insufficiency persists.
Temperature may be labile for weeks.
Treatment
• Aggressive cooling
• IV cooled normal saline
The importance of rapid recognition and effective, aggressive cooling cannot be overemphasized.
Cooling methods that do not cause shivering or cutaneous vasoconstriction are preferred, although ice-
===PAGE:3460===
soaked towels and ice water immersion are effective.
Cooling techniques:
Evaporative cooling is comfortable and convenient and considered the most rapid
method by some experts. During the process, patients are continually wetted with water, and the skin is
fanned and vigorously massaged to promote blood flow. A spray hose and larger fans are best and may
be used for large groups of people in the field. Comfortable, tepid (eg, 30° C) water is adequate because
evaporation causes cooling; cold or ice water is not needed. Cool water immersion in a pond or stream
can also be used in the field.
Ice packs applied to the axillae and groin can be used but not as the sole cooling method. In lifethreatening cases, packing a patient in ice, with close monitoring, has been advocated to rapidly reduce
core temperature.
Other measures:
The patient is admitted to an ICU, and IV hydration with 0.9% saline solution is begun
as in heat exhaustion (. Theoretically, 1 to 2 L of IV 0.9% saline cooled to 4° C, as used in
protocols to induce hypothermia after cardiac arrest, may also help cooling. Organ dysfunction and
rhabdomyolysis are treated (see elsewhere in THE MANUAL). An injectable benzodiazepine (eg,
lorazepam, diazepam) may be used aggressively to prevent agitation and seizures (which increase heat
production); seizures may occur during cooling. Because vomiting and aspiration of gastric contents are
possible, measures to protect the airway may be required. Severely agitated patients may require
paralysis and mechanical ventilation.
Platelets and fresh frozen plasma may be required for severe disseminated intravascular coagulation. IV
NaHCO
to alkalinize the urine may help prevent nephrotoxicity if myoglobinuria is present. IV Ca salts
may be necessary to treat hyperkalemic cardiotoxicity. Vasoconstrictors used to treat hypotension may
reduce cutaneous blood flow and decrease heat loss. Hemodialysis may be required. Antipyretics (eg,
acetaminophen) are of no value. Dantrolene is used to treat anesthetic-induced malignant hyperthermia
but has no proven benefit for other causes of severe hyperthermia.
Malignant Hyperthermia
Malignant hyperthermia is a life-threatening elevation in body temperature usually resulting
from a hypermetabolic response to concurrent use of a
depolarizing muscle relaxant and a
potent, volatile inhalational general anesthetic. Manifestations can include muscle rigidity,
hyperthermia, tachycardia, tachypnea, rhabdomyolysis, and respiratory and metabolic acidosis.
Diagnosis is clinical; patients at risk can be tested for their susceptibility. The highest priority
treatments are rapid cooling and aggressive supportive measures.
The muscle relaxant involved is usually succinylcholine; the inhalational anesthetic is most often
halothane, but other anesthetics (eg, isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane) may also be involved. This drug
combination causes a similar reaction in some patients with muscular dystrophy and myotonia.
Pathophysiology
Malignant hyperthermia affects about 1/20,000 people. Susceptibility is inherited, with autosomal
dominant inheritance and variable penetrance. Most often, the causative mutation affects the ryanodine
receptor of skeletal muscle; however, > 22 other causative mutations have been identified.
The mechanism may involve anesthetic-induced potentiation of Ca exit from the sarcoplasmic reticulum of
skeletal muscle in susceptible patients. As a result, Ca-induced biochemical reactions are accelerated,
causing severe muscle contractions and elevation of the metabolic rate.
Complications:
Hyperkalemia, respiratory and metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, and rhabdomyolysis
with CK elevation and myoglobinemia may occur, as may coagulation abnormalities (particularly
disseminated intravascular coagulation [DIC]). In older patients and patients with comorbidities, DIC may
increase the risk of death.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:3461===
Malignant hyperthermia may develop during anesthesia or the early postoperative period. Clinical
presentation varies, depending on the drugs used and the patient's susceptibility. Muscular rigidity,
especially in the jaw, is often the first sign, followed by tachycardia, other arrhythmias, tachypnea,
acidosis, shock, and hyperthermia. Temperature is usually ≥ 40° C and may be extremely high (ie, > 43°
C). Urine may appear brown or bloody if rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria have occurred.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Testing for complications
• Susceptibility testing for people at risk
The diagnosis is suspected by the appearance of typical symptoms and signs within 10 min to,
occasionally, several hours after inhalational anesthesia is begun. Early diagnosis can be facilitated by
prompt recognition of jaw rigidity, tachypnea, tachycardia, and increased end-tidal CO
.
There are no immediately confirmatory tests, but patients should have testing for complications, including
ECG, blood tests (CBC with platelets, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, CK, Ca, PT, PTT, fibrinogen, Ddimer), and urine testing for myoglobinuria.
Other diagnoses must be excluded. Peri-operative sepsis may cause hyperthermia but rarely as soon
after induction. Inadequate anesthesia can cause increased muscle tone and tachycardia but not
elevated temperature. Thyroid storm and pheochromocytoma rarely manifest immediately after anesthetic
induction.
Susceptibility testing:
Testing for susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia is recommended for people at
risk based on a family history of the disorder or a personal history of a severe or incompletely
characterized previous adverse reaction to general anesthesia. The caffeine halothane contracture test
(CHCT) is the most accurate. It measures the response of a muscle tissue sample to caffeine and
halothane. This test can be done only at certain referral centers and requires excision of about 2 g of
muscle tissue. Genetic testing has limited sensitivity (about 30%) but is quite specific; patients in whom a
mutation is identified do not require the CHCT.
Treatment
• Rapid cooling and supportive measures
• Dantrolene
It is critical to cool patients as quickly and effectively as possible ( to prevent damage to the
CNS and also to give patients supportive treatment to correct metabolic abnormalities. Outcome is best
when treatment begins before muscular rigidity becomes generalized and before development of
rhabdomyolysis, severe hyperthermia, and DIC. Dantrolene (2.5 mg/kg IV q 5 min as needed, up to a total
dose of 10 mg/kg) should be given in addition to the usual physical cooling measures. In some patients,
tracheal intubation, paralysis, and induced coma are required to control symptoms and provide support.
Benzodiazepines given IV, often in high doses, can be used to control agitation. Malignant hyperthermia
has a high mortality and may not respond to even early and aggressive therapy.
Prevention
Local or regional anesthesia is preferred to general anesthesia when possible. Potent inhalational
anesthetics and depolarizing muscular relaxants should be avoided in patients who are susceptible.
Nondepolarizing muscular blockers are the preferred preanesthetic drugs. Preferred anesthetics include
barbiturates (eg, thiopental), etomidate, and propofol. Dantrolene should be available at the bedside.
===PAGE:3462===
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is characterized by altered mental status, muscle rigidity,
hyperthermia, and autonomic hyperactivity that occur when certain neuroleptic drugs are used.
Clinically, neuroleptic malignant syndrome resembles malignant hyperthermia. Diagnosis is
clinical. Treatment is aggressive supportive care.
Among patients taking neuroleptic drugs, about 0.02 to 3% develop neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Patients of all ages can be affected.
Etiology
Many antipsychotics and antiemetics can be causative (see
Table 332-3
). The factor common to all drug causes is a decrease in dopaminergic transmission;
however, the reaction is not allergic but rather idiosyncratic. Etiology and mechanism are unknown. Risk
factors appear to include high drug doses, rapid dose increases, parenteral administration, and switching
from one potentially causative drug to another.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome can also occur in patients withdrawing from levodopa or dopamine
agonists.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms begin most often during the first 2 wk of treatment but may occur earlier or after many years.
The 4 characteristic symptoms usually develop over a few days and often in the following order:
• Altered mental status: Usually the earliest manifestation is a change in mental status, often an agitated
delirium, and may progress to lethargy or unresponsiveness (reflecting encephalopathy).
• Motor abnormalities: Patients may have generalized, severe muscle rigidity (sometimes with
simultaneous tremor, leading to cog-wheel rigidity), or, less often, dystonias, chorea, or other
abnormalities. Reflex responses tend to be decreased.
[Table 332-3.
Drugs that Can Cause Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome]
• Hyperthermia: Temperature is usually > 38° C and often > 40° C.
• Autonomic hyperactivity: Autonomic activity is increased, tending to cause tachycardia, arrhythmias,
tachypnea, and labile hypertension.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Exclusion of other disorders and complications
The diagnosis should be suspected based on clinical findings. Early manifestations can be missed
because mental status changes may be overlooked or dismissed in patients with psychosis.
Other disorders can cause similar findings. For example:
• Serotonin syndrome ( tends to cause rigidity, hyperthermia, and autonomic hyperactivity, but
it is usually caused by SSRIs, and patients typically have hyperreflexia. Also, temperature elevations
and
muscle rigidity are usually less severe than in neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and nausea and
diarrhea may precede serotonin syndrome.
• Malignant hyperthermia ( and withdrawal of intrathecal baclofen can cause findings similar
===PAGE:3463===
to those of neuroleptic malignant syndrome, but they are usually easily differentiated by history.
• Systemic infections, including sepsis (, pneumonia, and CNS infection, can cause altered
mental status, hyperthermia, and tachypnea and tachycardia, but generalized motor abnormalities are
not expected. Also, in neuroleptic malignant syndrome, unlike most infections, altered mental status and
motor abnormalities tend to precede hyperthermia.
There are no confirmatory tests, but patients should have testing for complications, including serum
electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose, Ca, Mg, and CK, urine myoglobin, and usually neuroimaging and
CSF analysis. EEG may be done to exclude nonconvulsive status epilepticus.
Treatment
• Rapid cooling, control of agitation, and other aggressive supportive measures
The causative drug is stopped and complications are treated supportively, usually in an ICU. Severe
hyperthermia is treated very aggressively, mainly with physical cooling (. Some patients may
require tracheal intubation and induced coma. Benzodiazepines, given IV in high doses, can be used to
control agitation. Adjunctive drug therapy can be used, although efficacy has not been shown in clinical
trials. Dantrolene (0.25 to 2 mg/kg IV q 6 to 12 h; maximum of 10 mg/kg/24 h) can be given for
hyperthermia. Bromocriptine (2.5 mg q 6 to 8 h) or, alternatively, amantadine (100 to 200 mg q 12 h) can
be given po or via NGT to help restore some dopaminergic activity. This condition may not respond to
even rapid and aggressive therapy, and mortality in treated cases is about 10 to 20%.
Serotonin Syndrome
Serotonin syndrome is a potentially life-threatening condition resulting from increased CNS
serotonergic activity that is usually drug related. Symptoms may include mental status
changes, hyperthermia, and autonomic and neuromuscular hyperactivity. Diagnosis is clinical.
Treatment is supportive.
Serotonin syndrome can occur with therapeutic drug use, self-poisoning, or, most commonly, unintended
drug interactions when 2 serotonergic drugs are used (see
Table 332-4
). It can occur in all age groups.
Complications
in severe serotonin syndrome can include metabolic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, seizures,
acute renal failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Causes probably include severe
hyperthermia and muscle activity.
Symptoms and Signs
Manifestations can range widely in severity. They can be grouped into the following categories:
• Mental status alterations: Anxiety, agitation and restlessness, easy startling, delirium
• Autonomic hyperactivity: Tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, diaphoresis, shivering, vomiting,
diarrhea
• Neuromuscular hyperactivity: Tremor, muscle hypertonia or rigidity, myoclonus, hyperreflexia, clonus
(including ocular clonus), extensor plantar responses
Neuromuscular hyperactivity may be more pronounced in the lower than the upper extremities.
Symptoms usually resolve in 24 h, but symptoms may last longer after use of drugs that have a long halflife or active metabolites (eg, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, SSRIs).
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3464===
• Clinical criteria
Diagnosis is clinical. Various explicit criteria have been proposed.
The
Hunter criteria
are currently preferred because of ease of use and high accuracy (almost 85%
sensitivity and > 95% specificity compared with diagnosis by a toxicologist). These criteria require that
patients have taken a serotonergic drug and have one of the following:
• Muscle hypertonia
• Spontaneous clonus
• Tremor plus hyperreflexia
• Ocular or inducible clonus, plus either agitation, diaphoresis, or temperature > 38° C
Systemic infections, drug or alcohol withdrawal syndromes, and toxicity caused by sympathomimetic or
anticholinergic drugs should also be considered in the differential diagnosis. Differentiation of serotonin
syndrome from neuroleptic malignant syndrome
[Table 332-4.
Drugs that Can Cause Serotonin Syndrome]
( may be difficult because symptoms (eg, muscle rigidity, hyperthermia, autonomic
hyperactivity, altered mental status) overlap. Clues to serotonin syndrome include use of serotonergic
drugs, rapid onset (eg, within 24 h), and hyperreflexia, in contrast to the often decreased reflex responses
in neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
There are no confirmatory tests, but patients should have testing to exclude other disorders (eg, CSF
analysis for possible CNS infection, urine testing for drugs of abuse). Also, some tests (eg, serum
electrolytes, platelet count, renal function tests, CK, PT, testing for urine myoglobin) may be necessary to
identify complications in severe serotonin syndrome.
Treatment
• Supportive measures
• Sometimes cyproheptadine
All serotonergic drugs should be stopped. Mild symptoms are often relieved with sedation using a
benzodiazepine. If symptoms rapidly resolve, patients should be observed for at least several hours. Most
will require
hospitalization for further testing, treatment, and monitoring.
In severe cases, admission to an ICU is required. Hyperthermia is treated by cooling (.
Neuromuscular blockade with appropriate sedation, muscle paralysis, and other supportive measures
may be necessary. Drug treatment of autonomic abnormalities (eg, hypertension, tachycardia) should be
with shorter-acting drugs (eg, nitroprusside, esmolol) because autonomic effects can change rapidly.
If symptoms persist despite supportive measures, the serotonin antagonist cyproheptadine can be given
orally or, after crushing, via NGT (12 mg, then 2 mg q 2 h until response occurs). Dantrolene is not
recommended.
Consultation with a toxicologist is encouraged and can be accomplished by calling the United States
Poison Control Network (1-800-222-1222) or accessing the WHO's list of international poison centers
(www.who.int/ipcs/poisons/centre/directory/en
).
===PAGE:3465===
Chapter 333. Cold Injury
Introduction
Exposure to cold may cause decreased body temperature (hypothermia) and focal soft-tissue injury.
Tissue injury with freezing is frostbite. Tissue injury without freezing includes frostnip, immersion foot, and
chilblains. Treatment is rewarming and selective, usually delayed, surgical treatment for injured tissues.
Susceptibility to all cold injury is increased by exhaustion, undernutrition, dehydration, hypoxia, impaired
cardiovascular function, and contact with moisture or metal.
Prevention
Prevention is crucial. Several layers of warm clothing and protection against moisture and wind are
important even when the weather does not seem to threaten cold injury. Clothing that remains insulating
when wet (eg, made of wool or polypropylene) should be worn. Gloves and socks should be kept as dry
as possible; insulated boots that do not impede circulation should be worn in very cold weather. A warm
head covering is also important. Consuming ample fluids and food helps sustain metabolic heat
production. Paying attention to when body parts become cold or numb and immediately warming them
may prevent cold injury.
Nonfreezing Tissue Injuries
Acute or chronic injuries without freezing of tissue may result from cold exposure.
Frostnip:
The mildest cold injury is frostnip. Affected areas are numb, swollen, and red. Treatment is
rewarming, which causes pain and itching. Rarely, mild hypersensitivity to cold persists for months to
years.
Immersion (trench) foot:
Prolonged exposure to wet cold can cause immersion foot. Peripheral nerves
and the vasculature are usually injured; muscle and skin tissue may be injured in severe cases.
Initially, the foot is pale, edematous, clammy, cold, and numb. Tissue maceration may occur if patients
walk extensively. Rewarming causes hyperemia, pain, and often hypersensitivity to light touch, which
persist for 6 to 10 wk. Skin may ulcerate, or a black eschar may develop. Autonomic dysfunction is
common, with increased or decreased sweating, vasomotor changes, and local hypersensitivity to
temperature change. Muscle atrophy and dysesthesia or anesthesia may occur and become chronic.
Immersion foot can be prevented by not wearing tight-fitting boots, keeping feet and boots dry, and
changing socks frequently. Immediate treatment is rewarming by immersing the affected area in warm (40
to 42° C) water, followed by sterile dressings. Chronic neuropathic symptoms are difficult to treat;
amitriptyline may be tried (.
Chilblains (pernio):
Localized areas of erythema, swelling, pain, and pruritus result from repeated
exposure to dry cold; the mechanism is unclear. Blistering or ulceration may occur. Chilblains most
commonly affects the fingers and pretibial area and is self-limited. Occasionally, symptoms recur.
Pernio is often used to refer to a vasculitic disorder most common among young females with a history of
Raynaud's syndrome. Endothelial and neuronal damage results in vasospasm and exaggerated
sympathetic response when exposed to cold. Nifedipine 20 mg po tid may be effective for refractory
pernio. Sympatholytic drugs may also help.
Frostbite
Frostbite is injury due to freezing of tissue. Initial presentation may be deceptively benign. Skin
may appear white or blistered and is numb; rewarming causes substantial pain. Gangrene may
develop. Severely damaged tissue may autoamputate. Treatment is rewarming in warm (40 to
42° C) water and local care. Surgical amputation is occasionally necessary, but a decision, often
===PAGE:3466===
guided by imaging results, should usually be delayed until after definitive demarcation of
necrotic tissue.
Frostbite usually occurs in extreme cold, especially at high altitude, and is aggravated by hypothermia.
Distal extremities and exposed skin are affected most often.
Ice crystals form within or between tissue cells, essentially freezing the tissue and causing cell death.
Adjacent unfrozen areas are at risk because local vasoconstriction and thrombosis can cause endothelial
and ischemic damage. With reperfusion during rewarming, inflammatory cytokines (eg, thromboxanes,
prostaglandins) are released, exacerbating tissue injury.
Symptoms and Signs
The affected area is cold, hard, white, and numb. When warmed, the area becomes blotchy red, swollen,
and painful. Blisters form within 4 to 6 h, but the full extent of injury may not be apparent for several days.
Blisters filled with clear serum indicate superficial damage; blood-filled, proximal blisters indicate deep
damage and likely tissue loss. Superficial damage heals without residual tissue loss. Freezing of deep
tissue causes dry gangrene with a hard black carapace over healthy tissue. Wet gangrene, which is gray,
edematous, and soft, is less common. Wet gangrene is characterized by infection, but dry gangrene is
less likely to become infected. Depth of tissue loss depends on duration and depth of freezing. Severely
damaged tissue may autoamputate. Compartment syndrome may develop. All degrees of frostbite may
cause long-term neuropathic symptoms: sensitivity to cold, excessive sweating, faulty nail growth, and
numbness (symptoms resembling those of complex regional pain syndrome—see p.
—although any
relationship is speculative).
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is based on clinical findings. However, because many of the early characteristics of frostbite
(eg, coldness, numbness, white or red color, blisters) are also characteristic of nonfreezing cold injuries,
differentiation of frostbite may require repeated observation until more specific characteristics (eg, black
carapace, gangrene) develop.
Treatment
• Rewarming in warm (40 to 42° C) water
• Supportive measures
• Local wound care
• Sometimes delayed surgery
Prehospital care:
In the field, frostbitten extremities should be rewarmed rapidly by totally immersing the
affected area in water that is tolerably warm to the touch (40 to 42° C, ideally about 40.5° C). Because the
area is numb, rewarming with an uncontrolled dry heat source (eg, fire, heating pad) risks burns. Rubbing
may further damage tissue and is avoided. The longer an area remains frozen, the greater the ultimate
damage may be. However, thawing the feet is inadvisable if a patient must walk any distance to receive
care because thawed tissue is particularly sensitive to the trauma of walking and, if refrozen, will be more
severely damaged than if left frozen. If thawing must be delayed, the frozen area is gently cleaned, dried,
and protected in sterile compresses. Patients are given analgesics, if available, and the whole body is
kept warm.
Acute care:
Once the patient is in the hospital, core temperature is stabilized and extremities are rapidly
rewarmed in large containers of circulating water kept at about 40.5° C; 15 to 30 min is usually adequate.
Thawing is often mistakenly ended prematurely because pain may be severe during rewarming.
Parenteral analgesics, including opioids, may be used. Patients are encouraged to move the affected part
===PAGE:3467===
gently during thawing. Large, clear blisters are left intact or aspirated using sterile technique.
Hemorrhagic blisters are left intact to avoid secondary desiccation of deep dermal layers. Broken vesicles
are debrided. If there is no perfusion after thawing, thrombolytic (fibrinolytic) therapy is considered.
Anti-inflammatory measures (eg, topical aloe vera q 6 h, ibuprofen 400 mg po q 8 h, ketorolac 30 to 60 mg
IV) probably help. Affected areas are left open to warm air, and extremities are elevated to decrease
edema. Anticoagulants, IV low molecular weight dextran, and intra-arterial vasodilators (eg, reserpine,
tolazoline) have no proven clinical benefit. Phenoxybenzamine (10 to 60 mg po
once/day), a long-acting
α
-blocker, may theoretically decrease vasospasm and improve blood flow.
Preventing infection is fundamental; streptococcal prophylaxis (eg, with penicillin) is sometimes provided.
If wet gangrene is present, broad-spectrum antibiotics are used. Tetanus toxoid is given if vaccination is
not up to date. If tissue damage is severe, tissue pressure is monitored.
Ongoing care:
Adequate nutrition is important to sustain metabolic heat production.
Imaging tests (eg, radionuclide scanning, MRI, microwave thermography, laser-Doppler flowmetry) can
help assess circulation, determine tissue viability, and thus guide treatment. MRI and particularly magnetic
resonance angiography may establish the line of demarcation before clinical demarcation and thus make
earlier surgical debridement or amputation possible. However, whether earlier surgery improves long-term
outcome is unclear. Usually, surgery is delayed as long as possible because the black carapace is often
shed, leaving viable tissue. Patients with severe frostbite are warned that many weeks of observation
may be required before demarcation and the extent of tissue loss become apparent.
Whirlpool baths at 37° C 3 times/day followed by gentle drying, rest, and time are the best long-term
management. No totally effective treatment for the long-lasting symptoms of frostbite (eg, numbness,
hypersensitivity to cold) is known, although chemical or surgical sympathectomy may be useful for late
neuropathic symptoms.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is a core body temperature < 35°C. Symptoms progress from shivering and
lethargy to confusion, coma, and death. Mild hypothermia requires a warm environment and
insulating blankets (passive rewarming). Severe hypothermia requires active rewarming of the
body surface (eg, with forced-air warming systems, radiant sources) or core (eg, inhalation,
heated infusion and lavage, extracorporeal blood rewarming).
Primary hypothermia causes about 600 deaths each year in the US. Hypothermia also has a significant
and underrecognized effect on mortality risk in cardiovascular and neurologic disorders.
Etiology
Hypothermia results when body heat loss exceeds body heat production. Hypothermia is most common
during cold weather or immersion in cold water, but it may occur in warm climates when people lie
immobile on a cool surface (eg, when they are intoxicated) or after very prolonged immersion in
swimming-temperature water (eg, 20 to 24° C). Wet clothing and wind chill increase risk of hypothermia.
Conditions that cause loss of consciousness, immobility, or both (eg, trauma, hypoglycemia, seizure
disorders, stroke, drug or alcohol intoxication) are common predisposing factors. The elderly and the very
young also are at high risk. The elderly often have diminished temperature sensation and impaired
mobility and communication, resulting in a tendency to remain in an overly cool environment. These
impairments, combined with diminished subcutaneous fat, contribute to hypothermia in the elderly
—sometimes even indoors in cool rooms. The very young have similarly diminished mobility and
communication and have an increased surface area/mass ratio, which enhances heat loss. Intoxicated
people who lose consciousness in a cold environment are likely to become hypothermic.
Pathophysiology
===PAGE:3468===
Hypothermia slows all physiologic functions, including cardiovascular and respiratory systems, nerve
conduction, mental acuity, neuromuscular reaction time, and metabolic rate. Thermoregulation ceases
below about 30° C; the body must then depend on an external heat source for rewarming. Renal cell
dysfunction and decreased levels of ADH lead to production of a large volume of dilute urine (cold
diuresis). Diuresis plus fluid leakage into the interstitial tissues causes hypovolemia. Vasoconstriction,
which occurs with hypothermia, may mask hypovolemia, which then manifests as sudden shock or
cardiac arrest during rewarming (rewarming collapse) when peripheral vasculature dilates.
Immersion in cold water can trigger the diving reflex, which involves reflex vasoconstriction in visceral
muscles; blood is shunted to essential organs (eg, heart, brain). The reflex is most pronounced in small
children and may help protect them. Also, hypothermia due to total immersion in near-freezing water may
protect the brain from hypoxia by decreasing metabolic demands. The decreased demand probably
accounts for the occasional survival after prolonged cardiac arrest due to extreme hypothermia.
Symptoms and Signs
Intense shivering occurs initially, but it ceases below about 31° C, allowing body temperature
to drop
more precipitously. CNS dysfunction progresses as body temperature decreases; people do not sense
the cold. Lethargy and clumsiness are followed by confusion, irritability, sometimes hallucinations, and
eventually coma. Pupils may become unreactive. Respirations and heartbeat slow and ultimately cease.
Initially, sinus bradycardia is followed by slow atrial fibrillation; the terminal rhythm is ventricular fibrillation
or asystole. However, these rhythms are potentially less ominous than in normothermia.
Diagnosis
• Core temperature measurement
• Consideration of intoxication, myxedema, sepsis, and trauma
Diagnosis is by core temperature, not oral temperature. Electronic thermometers are preferred; many
standard mercury thermometers have a lower limit of 34° C. Rectal and esophageal probes are most
accurate.
Laboratory tests include CBC, glucose, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, and ABGs. ABGs are not corrected
for low temperature. ECG typically shows J (Osborn) waves (see
Fig. 333-1
) and interval prolongation (PR, QRS, QT), although these findings are not always present.
Causes are sought. If the cause is unclear, alcohol level is measured, and drug screening and thyroid
function tests are done. Sepsis and occult head or skeletal trauma must be considered.
Prognosis
Patients who have been immersed in icy water for 1 h or (rarely) longer have sometimes been
successfully rewarmed without permanent brain damage (, even when core temperature was
13.7° C or when pupils were unreactive. Outcome is difficult to predict and cannot be based on the
Glasgow Coma Scale. Grave prognostic markers include evidence of cell lysis (hyperkalemia > 10
mEq/L), intravascular thrombosis (fibrinogen < 50 mg/dL), and presence of a nonperfusing cardiac rhythm
(ventricular fibrillation or asystole). For a given degree and duration of hypothermia, children are more
likely to recover than adults.
Treatment
• Drying and insulation
• Fluid resuscitation
• Active rewarming unless hypothermia is mild, accidental, and uncomplicated
The first priority is to prevent further heat loss by removing wet clothing and insulating the patient.
===PAGE:3469===
Subsequent measures depend on how severe hypothermia is and whether cardiovascular instability or
cardiac arrest is present. Returning patients to a normal temperature is less urgent in hypothermia than in
severe hyperthermia. For stable patients, elevation of core temperature by 1° C/h is acceptable.
If hypothermia is mild and thermoregulation is present (indicated by shivering and temperature typically 31
to 35° C), insulation with heated blankets and warm fluids to drink are adequate.
Fluid resuscitation is essential for hypovolemia. Patients are given 1 to 2 L of 0.9% saline solution (20
mL/kg for children) IV; the solution is heated if possible to 45° C. More is given as needed to maintain
perfusion.
Active rewarming is required if patients have cardiovascular instability, temperature < 32.2° C, hormone
insufficiency (such as hypoadrenalism or hypothyroidism), or hypothermia secondary to trauma, toxins, or
predisposing disorders. If body temperature is at the warmer end of the range, external rewarming with
forced hot air enclosures may be used. Patients with lower temperatures, particularly those with low BP
or cardiac arrest, require core rewarming.
[Fig. 333-1.
Abnormal ECG showing J (Osborn) waves (V4).]
Core rewarming options include
• Inhalation
• IV infusion
• Lavage
• Extracorporeal core rewarming (ECR)
Inhalation of heated (40 to 45° C), humidified O
via mask or endotracheal tube eliminates respiratory
heat loss and can add 1 to 2° C/h to the rewarming rate.
IV crystalloids or blood should be heated to 40 to 42° C, especially with massive volume resuscitations.
Heated lavage of the bladder or GI tract transfers minimal heat, although closed thoracic lavage through 2
thoracostomy tubes is very efficient in severe cases. Peritoneal lavage with 40 to 45° C dialysate requires
2 catheters with outflow suction and is especially useful with severely hypothermic patients who have
rhabdomyolysis, toxin ingestions, or electrolyte abnormalities.
There are 4 types of ECR: hemodialysis, venovenous, arteriovenous, and cardiopulmonary bypass. ECR
measures require a prearranged protocol with appropriate specialists. Although they are intuitively
attractive and heroic, these measures are not routinely available, and they are not commonly used in
most hospitals.
CPR is not done if patients have a perfusing rhythm, even if pulses are not palpable. Fluids are given,
and active rewarming is done. Hypotension and bradycardia are expected when core temperature is low
and, if due solely to hypothermia, need not be aggressively treated. Patients with a nonperfusing rhythm
require cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Chest compressions and endotracheal intubation are done.
Defibrillation is difficult if body temperature is low; one attempt may be made, but if ineffective, further
attempts are deferred until temperature reaches > 28° C. Advanced life support should be continued until
temperature reaches 32° C unless obviously lethal injuries or disorders are present. However, advanced
cardiac life-support drugs (eg, antiarrhythmics, vasopressors, inotropes) are usually not given. Low-dose
dopamine (1 to 5
μ
g/kg/min) or other catecholamine infusions are typically reserved for patients who have
disproportionately severe hypotension and who do not respond to fluid resuscitation and rewarming.
Severe hyperkalemia (> 10 mEq/L) during resuscitation typically indicates a fatal outcome and can guide
resuscitation efforts.
===PAGE:3470===
Chapter 334. Altitude Sickness
Altitude sickness (AS) includes several related syndromes caused by decreased O
availability
at high altitudes. Acute mountain sickness (AMS), the mildest form, is headache plus one or
more systemic manifestations. High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE) is encephalopathy in
people with AMS. High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) is a form of noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema causing severe dyspnea and hypoxemia. AMS may occur in recreational
hikers and skiers in mountains. Diagnosis is clinical. Treatment of mild AMS is with analgesics
and acetazolamide. Severe syndromes require descent and supplemental O
if available. In
addition, dexamethasone may be useful for HACE, and nifedipine may be useful for HAPE.
As altitude increases, atmospheric pressure decreases while the percentage of O
in air remains
constant; thus, the partial pressure of O
decreases with altitude and, at 5800 m (19,000 ft), is about one
half that at sea level.
Most people can ascend to 1500 to 2000 m (5000 to 6500 ft) in one day without problems, but about 20%
of those who ascend to 2500 m (8000 ft) and 40% of those who ascend to 3000 m (10,000 ft) develop
some form of AS. Rate of ascent, maximum altitude reached, and sleeping altitude influence the likelihood
of developing the disorder.
Risk factors:
Effects of high altitude vary greatly among individuals. But generally, risk is increased by
• Going too high too fast
• Exertion
Risk is greater in people who have had previous AS and in those who live at low altitude (< 900 m [<
3000 ft]). Young children and young adults are probably more susceptible. Disorders such as diabetes,
coronary artery disease, and mild COPD are not risk factors for AS, but hypoxia may adversely affect
these disorders. Physical fitness is not protective.
Pathophysiology
Acute hypoxia (eg, as occurs during rapid ascent to high altitude in an unpressurized aircraft) alters CNS
function within minutes. However, AS results from the body's neurohumoral and hemodynamic responses
to hypoxia and develops over hours to days.
The CNS and lungs are primarily affected. In both, elevated capillary pressure, capillary leakage, and
consequent edema formation probably occur.
In the lungs, hypoxia-induced elevation of pulmonary artery pressure causes interstitial and alveolar
pulmonary edema, resulting in impaired oxygenation. Small-vessel hypoxic vasoconstriction is patchy,
causing overperfusion with elevated pressure, capillary wall damage, and capillary leakage in less
constricted areas. Various additional mechanisms have been proposed; they include sympathetic
overactivity, endothelial dysfunction, decreased alveolar nitric oxide (perhaps due to decreased nitric
oxide synthase), and a defect in the amiloride-sensitive Na channel. Some of these factors may have a
genetic component.
Pathophysiology in the CNS is less clear but may involve a combination of hypoxia-induced cerebral
vasodilation, alteration of the blood-brain barrier, and Na and water retention causing cerebral edema.
One hypothesis is that patients with a low ratio of CSF to brain volume are less able to tolerate swelling
(ie, by displacement of CSF) and thus are more likely to develop AS. The roles of atrial natriuretic
peptide, aldosterone, renin, and angiotensin are unclear.
Acclimatization:
Acclimatization is an integrated series of responses that gradually restores tissue
oxygenation toward normal in people exposed to altitude. However, in spite of acclimatization, all people
at high altitude have tissue hypoxia. Most people acclimatize to altitudes of up to 3000 m (10,000 ft) in a
===PAGE:3471===
few days. The higher the altitude, the longer full acclimatization takes. However, no one can fully
acclimatize to long-term residence at altitudes > 5100 m (> 17,000 ft).
Features of acclimatization include sustained hyperventilation, which increases tissue oxygenation but
also causes respiratory alkalosis. Blood pH tends to normalize within days as HCO
is excreted in urine;
as pH normalizes, ventilation can increase further. Cardiac output increases initially; RBC mass and
tolerance for aerobic work also increase. After many generations at altitude, some ethnic groups have
adapted in slightly different ways.
Symptoms and Signs
The clinical forms of AS are not separate entities but parts of a spectrum in which one or more forms may
be present in different degrees.
Acute mountain sickness (AMS):
This form is by far the most common and may develop at altitudes as
low as 2000 m (6500 ft). It may be due to mild cerebral edema and is characterized by headache plus at
least one of the following: fatigue, GI symptoms (anorexia, nausea, vomiting), dizziness, and sleep
disturbance. Exertion aggravates the symptoms. Symptoms typically develop 6 to 10 h after ascent and
subside in 24 to 48 h, but they occasionally evolve into HAPE, HACE, or both. AMS is common at ski
resorts, and some people affected by it mistakenly attribute it to excessive alcohol intake (hangover) or a
viral illness.
High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE):
Marked cerebral edema manifests as headache and diffuse
encephalopathy with confusion, drowsiness, stupor, and coma. Gait ataxia is a reliable early warning sign.
Seizures and focal deficits (eg, cranial nerve palsy, hemiplegia) are less common. Papilledema and retinal
hemorrhage may be present but are not necessary for diagnosis. Coma and death may occur within a few
hours.
High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE):
HAPE usually develops 24 to 96 h after rapid ascent to >
2500 m (> 8000 ft) and is responsible for most deaths due to AS. Respiratory infections, even minor ones,
appear to increase risk. HAPE is more common among men (unlike other forms of AS). Long-time highaltitude residents can develop HAPE when they return after a brief stay at low altitude.
Initially, patients have dyspnea, decreased exertion tolerance, and dry cough. Pink or bloody sputum and
respiratory distress are later findings. On examination, cyanosis, tachycardia, tachypnea, and low-grade
fever (< 38.5° C) are common. Focal or diffuse rales (sometimes audible without a stethoscope) are
usually present. HAPE may worsen rapidly; coma and death may occur within hours.
Other disorders: Peripheral and facial edema
is common at high altitude.
Headache,
without other symptoms of AMS, is also common.
Retinal hemorrhages
may develop at altitudes as low as 2700 m (9000 ft) and are common at > 5000 m
(> 16,000 ft). They are usually asymptomatic unless they occur in the macular region; they resolve rapidly
without sequelae.
People who have had radial keratotomy may have significant visual disturbances at altitudes > 5000 m (>
16,000 ft) or even as low
as 3000 m (10,000 ft). These alarming symptoms disappear rapidly after
descent.
Chronic mountain sickness
(Monge's disease) is a disorder that affects long-time high-altitude
residents; it is characterized by fatigue, dyspnea, aches and pains, cyanosis, excessive polycythemia,
and occasionally thromboembolism. The disorder often involves alveolar hypoventilation. Patients should
descend to low altitude; recovery is slow, and return to high altitude may cause recurrence. Repeated
phlebotomy can reduce polycythemia, but polycythemia may recur.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3472===
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis of most forms of AS is clinical; laboratory tests are nonspecific and usually unnecessary. HACE
can usually be differentiated from other causes of coma (eg, infection, ketoacidosis) by the history and by
absence of fever and nuchal rigidity. If done, blood and CSF studies are normal. In HAPE, hypoxemia is
often severe, with pulse oximetry showing 40 to 70% saturation. If obtained, chest x-ray shows a normalsized heart and patchy lung edema (often middle or lower lobes), unlike what is seen in heart failure.
Treatment
• For mild or moderate AMS, halting of ascent and treatment with fluids, analgesics, and sometimes
acetazolamide
• For severe symptoms, immediate descent and treatment with O
, drugs, and pressurization
AMS:
Patients should halt ascent and reduce exertion until symptoms resolve. Other treatment includes
fluids and analgesics for headache. For severe symptoms, descent of 500 to 1000 m (1650 to 3200 ft) is
usually rapidly effective. Acetazolamide 250 mg po bid may relieve symptoms and improve sleep.
HAPE and HACE:
Patients should descend to low altitude immediately. If descent is delayed, patients
should rest and be given O
. If descent is impossible, O
, drugs, and pressurization in a portable
hyperbaric bag help buy time but are not substitutes for descent.
For HAPE, nifedipine 10 mg sublingually followed by a 30-mg slow-release tablet lowers pulmonary artery
pressure and is beneficial. Diuretics (eg, furosemide) are contraindicated. The heart is normal in HAPE,
and digitalis is of no value. When promptly treated by descent, patients usually recover from HAPE within
24 to 48 h. People who have had one episode of HAPE are likely to have another and should be so
warned.
For HACE (and severe AMS), dexamethasone 4 to 8 mg initially, followed by 4 mg q 6 h, may help. It may
be given po, sc, IM, or IV. Acetazolamide 250 mg po bid may be added.
Prevention
The most important measure is a slow ascent. Drinking extra water is important because breathing large
volumes of dry air at altitude greatly increases water loss, and dehydration with some degree of
hypovolemia aggravates symptoms. Alcohol seems to worsen AMS and reduces nocturnal ventilation,
thus accentuating sleep disturbance. Although physical fitness enables greater exertion at altitude, it does
not protect against any form of AS.
Ascent:
Graded ascent is essential for activity at > 2500 m (> 8000 ft). Sleeping on the first night should
be at < 2500 to 3000 m (8,000 to 10,000 ft), and climbers should sleep at that altitude for 2 to 3 nights if
subsequent higher sleeping altitudes are planned. Each day thereafter, sleeping altitude can be
increased by about 300 m (1000 ft), although higher day hikes are acceptable with return to the lower
level for sleep. Climbers vary in ability to ascend without developing symptoms; a climbing party should
be paced for its slowest member.
Acclimatization reverses quickly. After descent to low levels for more than a few days, acclimatized
climbers should once more follow a graded ascent.
Drugs:
Acetazolamide 125 to 250 mg po q 12 h reduces the incidence of AMS. Sustained-release
capsules (500 mg once/day) are also available. Acetazolamide can be started on the day of the ascent; it
acts by inhibiting carbonic anhydrase and thus increasing ventilation. Acetazolamide 125 mg po at
bedtime reduces the amount of periodic breathing (almost universal during sleep at high altitude), thus
limiting sharp falls in blood O
. Acetazolamide should not be given to patients allergic to sulfa drugs.
Analogs of acetazolamide offer no advantage. Acetazolamide may cause numbness and paresthesias of
the fingers; these symptoms are benign but can be annoying. Carbonated drinks taste flat to people
===PAGE:3473===
taking acetazolamide. Dexamethasone 2 mg po q 6 h is an alternative to acetazolamide.
Low-flow O
during sleep at altitude is effective but inconvenient and may pose logistic difficulties.
Patients who have had a previous episode of HAPE should consider prophylaxis with sustained-release
nifedipine 20 to 30 mg po bid. Inhaled
β
-agonists may also be effective.
Analgesics may prevent high-altitude headache.
===PAGE:3474===
Chapter 335. Motion Sickness
Motion sickness is a symptom complex that usually includes nausea, often accompanied by
vague abdominal discomfort, vomiting, dizziness, and related symptoms; it is caused by
repetitive angular and linear acceleration and deceleration. Behavioral change and drug therapy
can help prevent or control symptoms.
Individual susceptibility to motion sickness varies greatly. However, motion sickness is more common
among women, and incidence ranges from < 1% on airplanes to nearly 100% on ships in rough seas and
upon becoming weightless during space travel.
Etiology
Excessive stimulation of the vestibular apparatus by motion is the primary cause. Afferent pathways from
the labyrinth to the vomiting center in the medulla are undefined, but motion sickness occurs only when
the 8th cranial nerve and cerebellar vestibular tracts are intact. Movement via any form of transportation,
including ship, motor vehicle, train, plane, spacecraft, and playground or amusement park ride, can cause
excessive vestibular stimulation.
The trigger may involve conflicting vestibular, visual, and proprioceptive inputs. For example, visual input
that indicates being stationary may conflict with the sensation of movement (eg, looking at an apparently
unmoving ship cabin wall while sensing the ship rolling). Alternatively, moving visual input may conflict
with lack of perception of movement (eg, viewing a rapidly moving slide with a microscope or watching a
virtual reality game while sitting still). Another possible trigger is a pattern of motion that differs from the
expected pattern (eg, in a zero gravity environment, floating instead of falling).
Risk factors:
Factors that may increase the risk of developing motion sickness or increase the severity
of symptoms include the following:
• Poor ventilation (eg, with fumes, smoke, or carbon monoxide)
• Emotional factors (eg, fear, anxiety)
• Migraine headaches
• Labyrynthitis
• Hormonal factors (eg, pregnancy, use of hormonal contraceptives)
In
space adaptation syndrome
(motion sickness during space travel), weightlessness (zero gravity) is
an etiologic factor. This syndrome reduces the efficiency of astronauts during the first few days of space
flight, but adaptation occurs over several days.
Symptoms and Signs
Nausea and vague abdominal discomfort are characteristic. Vomiting may also occur. These symptoms
may be preceded by yawning, hyperventilation, salivation, pallor, profuse cold sweating, and somnolence.
Other symptoms include aerophagia, dizziness, headache, fatigue, weakness, and inability to
concentrate. Pain, shortness of breath, and visual and speech disturbances are absent. With prolonged
exposure to motion, patients often adapt. However, symptoms may recur if motion increases or if motion
resumes after a short respite from the inciting trigger.
Prolonged vomiting due to motion sickness may rarely lead to dehydration with hypotension, inanition,
and depression.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
===PAGE:3475===
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with compatible symptoms who have been exposed to typical
triggers. Diagnosis is clinical and usually straightforward. However, the possibility of another diagnosis
(eg, CNS hemorrhage or infarction) should be considered in some people, particularly the elderly and
patients with no prior history of motion sickness or those with risk factors for CNS hemorrhage or
infarction, who develop acute dizziness and vomiting during travel. Patients with focal neurologic
symptoms or signs, significant headache, or other findings atypical of motion sickness should be further
evaluated.
Treatment
• Scopolamine, antihistamines, or antidopaminergic drugs
• Positioning
• Avoidance of alcoholic beverages and over-eating
People prone to motion sickness should take prophylactic drugs and use other preventive measures
before symptoms start; interventions are less effective after symptoms develop. If vomiting occurs, an
antiemetic, given rectally or parenterally, can be effective. If vomiting is prolonged, IV fluids and
electrolytes may be required for replacement and maintenance.
Scopolamine:
Scopolamine, an anticholinergic drug, is effective for prevention, but efficacy in treatment
is uncertain. Scopolamine is available as a prescription transdermal patch or in oral form. The patch is a
good choice for longer trips because after being applied behind the ear at least 4 h before travel
(optimally 8 to 12 h), it is effective for up to 72 h as it releases about 1 mg. The oral form of scopolamine
is given as 0.4 mg to 0.8 mg 1 h before travel and then q 8 h as needed.
Adverse effects, which include drowsiness, blurred vision, dry mouth, and bradycardia, occur less
commonly with patches. Inadvertent contamination of the eye with patch residue may cause a fixed and
widely dilated pupil. Additional adverse effects of scopolamine in the elderly can include confusion,
hallucinations, and urinary retention. Scopolamine is contraindicated in people who are at risk of angleclosure glaucoma.
Scopolamine can be used by children > 12 yr in the same dosages as for adults. Use in children ≤ 12 yr
may be safe but is not recommended due to the higher risk of adverse effects.
Antihistamines:
The mechanism of action for antihistamines is probably anticholinergic. These drugs
can be effective for prevention and possibly treatment. Beginning 1 h before departure, susceptible
people may be given nonprescription dimenhydrinate, diphenhydramine, or meclizine 25 to 50 mg po qid
(dimenhydrinate for children 2 to 6 yr, 12.5 to 25 mg po q 6 to 8 h, maximum 75 mg/day; for children 6 to
12 yr, 25 to 50 mg po q 6 to 8 h, maximum 150 mg/day), or cyclizine 50 mg po qid (for children 6 to 12 yr,
25 mg tid) to minimize vagally mediated GI symptoms. However, anticholinergic adverse effects may be
troublesome, especially in the elderly. Nonsedating antihistamines do not appear to be effective.
Antidopaminergic drugs:
Promethazine (25 to 50 mg po 1 h before departure and then bid; for children
< 12 yr, 0.5 mg/kg po 1 h before departure and then bid) appears to be effective for prevention and
treatment; adding caffeine may increase efficacy. Metoclopramide may also be effective, but evidence
suggests it is less so than promethazine.
Nondrug measures:
Susceptible people should minimize exposure by positioning themselves where
motion is the least (eg, in the middle of a ship close to water level, over the wings in an airplane). Also,
they should try to minimize the discrepancy between visual and vestibular stimuli. If traveling in a motor
vehicle, driving or riding in the front passenger seat, where vehicle motion is most evident, is best. When
traveling on a ship, viewing the horizon or land masses is usually better than viewing a cabin wall.
Whatever the form of transportation, reading and rear-facing seats should be avoided. A supine or
semirecumbent position with the head supported is best.
===PAGE:3476===
Adequate ventilation helps prevent symptoms. Consuming alcoholic beverages and overeating before or
during travel increase the likelihood of motion sickness. Small amounts of fluids and bland food
consumed frequently are preferred to large meals during extended travel; some people find that dry
crackers and carbonated beverages, especially ginger ale, are best. If travel time is short, food and fluids
should be avoided.
In space adaptation syndrome, movement, which aggravates the symptoms, should be avoided.
Alternative therapies:
Some alternative therapies are unproved but may be helpful. These alternative
therapies include wrist-bands that apply acupressure and wristbands that apply electrical stimulation.
Both can be safely used by people of all ages. Ginger (0.5- to 1-g dose, which can be repeated but
should be limited to 4 g/day) may help prevent motion sickness.
===PAGE:3477===
Chapter 336. Drowning
Drowning is respiratory impairment resulting from submersion in a liquid medium. It can be
nonfatal (previously called near drowning) or fatal. Drowning results in hypoxia, which can
damage multiple organs, including the lungs and brain. Treatment is supportive, including
reversal of respiratory and cardiac arrest, hypoxia, hypoventilation, and hypothermia.
Drowning is one of the leading causes of accidental death in the US. It is the 2nd most common cause of
death in children ages 1 to 14 yr. Rates are higher for the following:
• Children < 4 yr
• Children from African American, immigrant, or impoverished families
• Males
• People who have used alcohol or sedatives
•
People with conditions that cause temporary incapacitation (eg, seizure, hypoglycemia, stroke, MI,
cardiac arrhythmia)
• People with a long QT syndrome (swimming can trigger arrhythmias that cause unexplained drowning in
people with a long QT syndrome, particularly LQT1)
Drowning is common in pools, hot tubs, natural water settings, and, among infants and toddlers, in toilets,
bathtubs, buckets of water, and cleaning fluids. About 4 times as many people are hospitalized for
nonfatal drowning as for fatal drowning.
Pathophysiology
Hypoxia:
Hypoxia is the major insult in drowning, affecting the brain, heart, and other tissues; respiratory
arrest followed by cardiac arrest may occur. Brain hypoxia may cause cerebral edema and, occasionally,
permanent neurologic sequelae. Generalized tissue hypoxia may cause metabolic acidosis. Immediate
hypoxia results from aspiration of fluid or gastric contents, acute reflex laryngospasm, or both. Lung injury
due to aspiration or hypoxia itself may cause delayed hypoxia. Aspiration, particularly with particulate
matter or chemicals, may cause chemical pneumonitis or secondary bacterial pneumonia and may impair
alveolar secretion of surfactant, resulting in patchy atelectasis. Extensive atelectasis may make the
affected areas of the lungs stiff, noncompliant, and poorly ventilated, potentially causing respiratory
failure ( with hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis. Perfusion of poorly ventilated areas of the
lungs (V/Q mismatch) worsens hypoxia. Alveolar hypoxia may cause noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Hypothermia:
Exposure to cold water induces systemic hypothermia (, which can be a
significant problem. However, hypothermia can be protective by stimulating the mammalian diving reflex,
slowing the heartbeat, and constricting the peripheral arteries, shunting oxygenated blood away from the
extremities and the gut to the heart and brain. Also, hypothermia decreases the O
needs of tissues,
possibly prolonging survival and delaying the onset of hypoxic tissue damage. The diving reflex and
overall clinically protective effects of cold water are usually greatest in young children.
Fluid aspiration:
Laryngospasm often limits the volume of fluid aspirated; however, large volumes of
water are occasionally aspirated, rarely enough to change electrolyte concentrations and blood volume.
Seawater may increase Na and Cl slightly. In contrast, large quantities of fresh water can decrease
electrolyte concentration significantly, increase blood volume, and cause hemolysis.
Associated injuries:
Skeletal, soft-tissue, head, and internal injuries may occur. People who dive into
shallow water may sustain cervical and other spine injuries (which may be the cause of drowning).
Rarely, drowning occurs when people develop carbon monoxide poisoning when they are swimming near
===PAGE:3478===
an exhaust port of a boat. Only a few breaths may cause unconsciousness.
Symptoms and Signs
Panic and air hunger occur. Children who are unable to swim may become submerged in < 1 min, more
rapidly than adults. After rescue, anxiety, vomiting, wheezing, and altered consciousness are common.
Patients may have respiratory failure with tachypnea, retractions, or cyanosis. Sometimes respiratory
symptoms are delayed until several hours after submersion.
Diagnosis
• For concomitant injuries, clinical evaluation and sometimes imaging studies
• Pulse oximetry and, if results are abnormal or if respiratory symptoms and signs are present, ABG and
chest x-ray
• Core temperature measurement to rule out hypothermia
• Possibly evaluation for causative disorders (eg, hypoglycemia, MI)
• Ongoing monitoring as indicated for delayed respiratory complications
Most people are found in or near water, making the diagnosis obvious clinically. Resuscitation may need
to precede completion of the diagnostic assessment. Cervical spine injury is assumed, and the spine is
immobilized in patients who have altered consciousness or whose mechanism of injury involves diving.
Procedures to remove water from the lungs are generally not helpful. Secondary head injury and
conditions that may have contributed to drowning (eg, hypoglycemia, stroke, MI) are considered.
All patients undergo assessment of oxygenation by oximetry or, if results are abnormal or if there are
respiratory symptoms or signs, ABG and chest x-ray. Because respiratory symptoms may be delayed,
even asymptomatic patients are transported to the hospital and observed for several hours.
In patients with symptoms or a history of prolonged submersion, core body temperature
is measured,
ECG and serum electrolytes are obtained, and continuous oximetry and cardiac monitoring are done.
Patients with possible cervical spine injury undergo cervical spine imaging (.
Patients with altered consciousness undergo head CT. Any other suspected predisposing or secondary
conditions are evaluated with appropriate testing (eg, fingerstick glucose for hypoglycemia, ECG for MI).
Patients who drown without apparent risk factors are evaluated for long QT syndrome. In patients with
pulmonary infiltrates, bacterial pneumonia is differentiated from chemical pneumonitis using blood cultures
and sputum Gram stain and culture.
Prognosis
Factors that increase the chance of surviving submersion without permanent injury include the following:
• Brief duration of submersion
• Cold water temperature
• Young age
• Absence of underlying medical conditions, secondary trauma, and aspiration of particulate matter or
chemicals
• Rapid institution of resuscitation (most important)
Survival may be possible in cold water submersion that lasts > 1 h, especially among children; thus, even
===PAGE:3479===
patients with prolonged submersion are vigorously resuscitated.
Treatment
• Resuscitation
• Correction of physiologic abnormalities
• Intensive respiratory support
Treatment aims to correct cardiac arrest, hypoxia, hypoventilation, hypothermia, and other physiologic
insults.
Resuscitation:
In apneic patients, rescue breathing is started immediately—in the water, if necessary. If
spinal immobilization is necessary, it is done in a neutral position, and rescue breathing is done using a
jaw thrust without head tilt or chin lift. Emergency medical services are called. If necessary, cardiac
compression is started, followed by advanced cardiac life support (. Oxygenation,
endotracheal intubation, or both are done as soon as possible. Hypothermic patients are warmed as soon
as possible (.
Hospital care:
All hypoxic or moderately symptomatic patients are hospitalized. In the hospital, supportive
treatment continues, aimed primarily at achieving acceptable arterial O
and CO
levels. Mechanical
ventilation may be necessary. Patients are given 100% O
; the concentration is titrated lower based on
ABG results. Positive end-expiratory pressure ( or intermittent positive pressure ventilation
may be necessary to help expand or maintain patency of alveoli to maintain adequate oxygenation;
pulmonary support may be necessary for hours or days. Nebulized
β
-agonists may help reduce
bronchospasm and wheezing. Patients with bacterial pneumonia are treated with antibiotics directed at
organisms identified or suspected based on results of sputum analysis or blood cultures. Corticosteroids
are not used.
Fluids or electrolytes are rarely required to correct significant electrolyte imbalances. Fluid restriction is
rarely indicated, even if pulmonary or cerebral edema occurs. For prolonged brain hypoxia, treatment is
similar to that for brain hypoxia after cardiac arrest (. Concomitant disorders (eg, head or
cervical injury, carbon monoxide poisoning) require treatment.
Discharge:
Patients with mild symptoms and normal oxygenation can be observed in the emergency
department for several hours. If symptoms resolve and oxygenation remains normal, they can be
discharged with instructions to return if symptoms recur.
Prevention
Use of alcohol or drugs, a major risk factor, should be avoided before and during swimming and boating
and when supervising children around water.
Swimmers should be accompanied by an experienced swimmer or swim only in guarded areas. Swimming
should stop if the swimmer looks or feels very cold, because hypothermia may impair judgment. Ocean
swimmers should learn to escape rip currents by swimming parallel to the beach rather than toward the
beach. Swimmers should avoid swimming near a boat exhaust port, which can cause carbon monoxide
poisoning.
Children must wear flotation devices when in or near water. They must be supervised by an adult when
around water, including beaches, pools, and ponds. Infants and toddlers should also be supervised,
ideally within arm's length, when near toilets and bathtubs. Swimming lessons are not recommended for
children < 4 yr. Young children who have
taken swim lessons or infant water safety classes still require
supervision because these classes have not been proved to reduce drowning. Adults should remove
water from containers such as pails and buckets immediately after use. Swimming pools should be
surrounded with a locked fence ≥ 1.5 m in height.
===PAGE:3480===
Boaters are encouraged to wear flotation devices. Nonswimmers and small children are required to wear
these devices.
People who are debilitated or elderly or have seizure disorders or other medical conditions that can alter
consciousness require particular care when they are boating or swimming.
People with a personal and family history of unexplained drowning not attributable to alcohol, drug use, or
a seizure disorder merit evaluation for long QT syndrome.
Community swimming areas should be supervised by trained lifeguards. Comprehensive community
prevention programs should target high-risk groups, teach children to swim as early as possible, and
teach CPR to as many adolescents and adults as possible.
===PAGE:3481===
Chapter 337. Injury During Diving or Work in Compressed Air
Introduction
More than 1000 diving-related injuries occur annually in the US; > 10% are fatal. Similar injuries can
befall workers in tunnels or caissons (watertight retaining structures used for construction), in which
pressurized air is used to exclude water from work sites. Many injuries are related to high pressure,
which, at depth or in a caisson, results from the water weight above plus the atmospheric pressure at the
surface. At a depth of 10 m (33 ft), seawater exerts a pressure equivalent to standard sea level
atmospheric pressure, which is 0.1 kg/cm
(14.7 lb/sq in), 760 mm Hg, or 1 atmosphere absolute (atm
abs); thus, the total pressure at that depth is 2 atm abs. Every additional 10 m of descent adds 1 atm.
The volume of gases in body compartments is inversely related to external pressure; an increase or a
decrease in gas volume due to pressure change exerts direct physical forces that can disrupt various
body tissues (barotrauma). The amount of gas dissolved in the bloodstream increases as ambient
pressure increases. Increased gas content can cause injury directly (eg, N
narcosis, O
toxicity) or
indirectly during ascent when decompression of the super-saturated blood or tissues releases N
bubbles (decompression sickness). Arterial gas embolism can result from barotrauma or decompression.
For other diving-related injuries (eg, drowning, hypothermia, trauma), see elsewhere in THE MANUAL.
Physicians caring for patients with diving or compressed air injuries may contact the Divers Alert Network
(919-684-8111; www.diversalertnetwork.org
).
Barotrauma
Barotrauma is tissue injury caused by a pressure-related change in body compartment gas
volume; it affects air-containing areas, including lungs, ears, sinuses, GI tract, air spaces in
tooth fillings, and space contained by the diving face mask. Symptoms may include ear pain,
vertigo, hearing loss, sinus pain, epistaxis, and abdominal pain. Dyspnea and loss of
consciousness are life threatening and may result from alveolar rupture and pneumothorax.
Diagnosis is clinical but sometimes requires imaging tests. Treatment generally is supportive
but may include decongestants and analgesics for ear and sinus barotrauma or O
and chest
tube placement for pneumothorax. If arterial gas embolism accompanies lung barotrauma,
recompression therapy (in a hyperbaric chamber) is needed. Proper diving safety techniques
and prophylactic use of decongestants may reduce incidence of barotrauma.
Risk of barotrauma (often called squeeze by divers) is greatest from the surface to 10 m (33 ft); risk is
increased by any condition that can interfere with equilibration of pressure (eg, sinus congestion,
eustachian tube blockage, structural anomaly, infection) in the air-containing spaces of the body. Ear
barotrauma constitutes about two thirds of all diving injuries. In divers who inspire even a single breath of
air or other gas at depth and do not let it escape freely during ascent, or when ascent is rapid, the
expanding gas may overinflate the lungs. Lung overinflation occurs mostly in divers breathing
compressed air but can occur even in swimming pools when compressed air is inspired at the bottom of
the pool (eg, when scuba gear is used there) and, rarely, from an inverted bucket.
Manifestations depend on the affected area; all occur almost immediately when pressure
changes. Some
nonfatal disorders, if they occur at depth, may be disabling or disorienting and thus lead to drowning.
Secondary infection is sometimes a late complication.
Diagnosis is primarily clinical; imaging tests can sometimes confirm barotrauma. Sometimes patients are
evaluated for other problems or organ dysfunction.
Treatment
• Symptomatic treatment
• Other treatment depending on specific injury
===PAGE:3482===
Most barotrauma injuries resolve spontaneously and require only symptomatic treatment and outpatient
follow-up; however, some injuries are life-threatening. Potentially life-threatening barotrauma emergencies
are those involving alveolar or GI rupture, particularly in patients who present with any of the following:
• Neurologic symptoms
• Pneumothorax
• Peritoneal signs
• Abnormal vital signs
Initial stabilizing treatment includes high-flow 100% O
and, if respiratory failure appears imminent,
endotracheal intubation. Positive pressure ventilation may cause or exacerbate pneumothorax.
Patients with suspected pneumothorax who are hemodynamically unstable or have signs of tension
pneumothorax require immediate chest decompression ( with a large-bore (eg, 14-gauge)
needle placed into the 2nd inter-costal space in the midclavicular line, followed by tube thoracostomy.
Patients with neurologic symptoms or other evidence of arterial gas embolism are transported to a
recompression chamber ( for treatment as soon as transportation can be arranged.
When stable, patients are treated for the specific type of barotrauma sustained.
Patients treated for severe or recurrent diving-related injuries should not return to diving until they have
consulted with a diving medicine specialist.
Prevention of other diving injuries is discussed elsewhere (.
Pulmonary Barotrauma
During very deep breath-hold diving, compression of the lungs during descent may rarely lead to a
decrease in volume below residual volume, causing mucosal edema, vascular engorgement, and
hemorrhage, which manifest clinically as dyspnea and hemoptysis on ascent.
Overexpansion and alveolar rupture can occur when breathing compressed air during ascent, particularly
rapid ascent. The result can be pneumothorax (causing dyspnea, chest pain, and unilateral decrease in
breath sounds) or pneumomediastinum (causing sensation of fullness in the chest, neck pain, pleuritic
chest pain that may radiate to the shoulders, dyspnea, coughing, hoarseness, and dysphagia).
Pneumomediastinum may cause crepitation in the neck, due to associated subcutaneous emphysema,
and a crackling sound may rarely be heard over the heart during systole (Hamman's sign). Tension
pneumothorax, although rare with barotrauma, can cause hypotension, distended neck veins,
hyperresonance to percussion, and tracheal deviation. Alveolar rupture often allows air into the pulmonary
venous circulation with subsequent arterial gas embolism (.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray
Patients require a neurologic examination for signs of brain dysfunction due to arterial gas embolism.
Chest x-ray is done to look for signs of pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum (radiolucent band along the
cardiac border). If chest x-ray is negative but there is strong clinical suspicion, then helical CT, which may
be more sensitive than plain film x-rays, may be diagnostic.
Treatment
• 100% O
===PAGE:3483===
• Sometimes tube thoracostomy
Suspected tension pneumothorax is treated with needle decompression followed by tube thoracostomy
(. If a smaller (eg, 10 to 20%) pneumothorax is present and there is no sign of hemodynamic
or respiratory instability, the pneumothorax may resolve when high-flow 100% O
is given for 24 to 48 h.
If this treatment is ineffective or if a larger pneumothorax is present, tube thoracostomy is done.
No specific treatment is required for pneumomediastinum; symptoms usually resolve spontaneously within
hours to days. After a few hours of observation, most patients can be treated as outpatients; high-flow
100% O
is recommended to hasten resorption of extra-alveolar gas in these patients. Rarely,
mediastinotomy is required to relieve tension pneumomediastinum.
Prevention
Prevention of pulmonary barotrauma is usually the top priority. Proper ascent timing
and techniques are
essential. Patients with pulmonary blebs, Marfan syndrome, or COPD are at very high risk of
pneumothorax and should not dive or work in areas of compressed air. Patients with asthma may be at
risk of pulmonary barotrauma, although many people with asthma can dive safely after they are evaluated
and treated appropriately.
Gastrointestinal Barotrauma
Breathing improperly from a regulator or using ear and sinus pressure-equalization techniques may cause
divers to swallow small amounts of air during a dive. This air expands during ascent, causing abdominal
fullness, cramps, pain, belching, and flatulence; these symptoms are self-limited. GI rupture rarely occurs,
manifesting with severe abdominal pain and tenderness with rebound and guarding.
If signs of GI rupture are present, immediate upright chest x-ray or CT is done to detect free air. Milder
symptoms require no testing.
Patients with GI rupture require aggressive fluid resuscitation, broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy (eg,
imipenem 500 mg IV q 6 h), and immediate surgical consultation for possible exploratory laparotomy.
Ear and Sinus Barotrauma
Diving can affect the external, middle, and inner ear. Typically, divers experience ear fullness and pain
during descent; if pressure is not quickly equilibrated, middle ear hemorrhage or tympanic membrane
rupture may occur. Inflow of cold water to the inner ear may result in vertigo, nausea, and disorientation
while submerged. On examination of the ear canal, the tympanic membrane may show congestion,
hemotympanum, and lack of mobility during air insufflation with a pneumatic otoscope; conduction hearing
loss is usually present.
Inner ear barotrauma often involves rupture of the round or oval window, which causes tinnitus,
sensorineural hearing loss, vertigo, nausea, and vomiting. The resulting labyrinthine fistula and perilymph
leakage can permanently damage the inner ear.
Sinus barotrauma most often affects the frontal sinuses, followed by the ethmoid and maxillary sinuses.
Divers experience mild pressure to severe pain, with a feeling of congestion in the involved sinus
compartments during ascent or descent and sometimes epistaxis. Pain can be severe, sometimes
accompanied by facial tenderness on palpation. Rarely, the sinus may rupture and cause
pneumocephalus with facial or oral pain, nausea, vertigo, or headache. Physical examination may detect
tenderness in the sinuses or nasal hemorrhage.
Diagnosis
• Audiometry and vestibular testing
Patients with symptoms of inner ear trauma should be examined for signs of vestibular dysfunction and
===PAGE:3484===
referred for formal audiometry and vestibular testing (.
Imaging (eg, plain x-rays, CT) is not necessary for diagnosis of uncomplicated sinus barotrauma, but CT
is useful if sinus rupture is suspected.
Treatment
• Decongestants and analgesics
• Sometimes oral corticosteroids, surgical repair, or both
Most ear and sinus barotrauma injuries resolve spontaneously and require only symptomatic treatment
and outpatient follow-up.
Drug treatment for sinus and middle ear barotrauma is identical. Decongestants (oxymetazoline 0.05%, 2
sprays each nostril bid for 3 to 5 days; pseudoephedrine 60 to 120 mg po bid to qid up to a maximum of
240 mg/day for 3 to 5 days) can help open occluded chambers. Severe cases can be treated with nasal
corticosteroids. Doing the Valsalva maneuver immediately after nasal spray therapy may help distribute
the decongestant into the occluded chamber. Pain can be controlled with NSAIDs or opioids. If bleeding
or evidence of effusion is present, antibiotics are given (eg, amoxicillin 500 mg po q 12 h for 10 days,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 1 double-strength tablet po bid for 10 days). For middle ear barotrauma,
some physicians also advocate a short course of oral corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 60 mg po once/day
for 6 days, then tapered over 7 to 10 days).
Referral to an otorhinolaryngologist is indicated for severe or persistent symptoms. Surgery (eg,
tympanotomy for direct repair of a ruptured round or oval window, myringotomy to drain fluid from the
middle ear, sinus decompression) may be necessary for serious inner or middle ear or sinus injuries.
Prevention
Ear barotrauma may be avoided by frequently swallowing or exhaling against pinched nostrils to open the
eustachian tubes and equalize pressure between the middle ear and the environment. Pressure behind
ear plugs cannot be equalized, so they should not be used for diving. Prophylaxis with pseudoephedrine
(60 to 120 mg po bid or qid up to a maximum of 240 mg/day), beginning 12 to 24 h before a dive, can
reduce the incidence of ear and sinus barotrauma. Diving should not be done if congestion does not
resolve or if a URI or uncontrolled allergic rhinitis is present.
Other Types of Barotrauma
Dental barotrauma
can occur during descent or ascent, when pressure in the air spaces at the roots of
infected teeth or adjacent to fillings changes rapidly and causes pain or tooth damage. The affected tooth
may be tender when percussed with a tongue blade.
Mask barotrauma
occurs when the pressure in the space behind the face mask is not equalized during
descent. The resulting relative vacuum can lead to local pain, conjunctival hemorrhage, and ecchymosis
of the skin enclosed by the mask. Retro-orbital hemorrhage is possible but rare. If retro-orbital
hemorrhage is suspected, head CT is done. Mask barotrauma may be avoided when pressures are
equalized within the face mask by exhaling from the nose into the mask.
Eye barotrauma
occurs when small air bubbles are trapped behind hard contact lenses. The air bubbles
can damage the eye and cause soreness, decreased visual acuity, and halos around lights. A screening
ophthalmic examination should be done to rule out other causes. Pressure behind goggles cannot be
equalized, so they should not be used for diving.
Arterial Gas Embolism
(Air Embolism)
===PAGE:3485===
Arterial gas embolism is a potentially catastrophic event that occurs when gas bubbles enter or
form in the arterial vasculature and occlude blood flow, causing organ ischemia. Arterial gas
embolism can cause CNS ischemia with rapid loss of consciousness, other CNS manifestations,
or both; it also may affect other organs. Diagnosis is clinical and may be corroborated by
imaging tests. Treatment is immediate recompression.
Gas emboli may enter the arterial circulation in any of the following ways:
• From ruptured alveoli after lung barotrauma
• From within the arterial circulation itself in severe decompression sickness
• Via migration from the venous circulation (venous gas embolism) either via a right-to-left shunt (patent
foramen ovale, atrial septal defect) or by overwhelming the filtering capacity of the lungs
Even asymptomatic venous gas embolism can cause serious manifestations (eg, stroke) in the presence
of a right-to-left shunt. Venous gas embolism that does not enter the arterial circulation is less serious.
Although cerebral embolism is considered the most serious manifestation, arterial gas embolism can
cause significant ischemia in other organs (eg, spinal cord, heart, skin, kidneys, spleen, GI tract).
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms occur within a few minutes of surfacing and may include altered mental status, hemiparesis,
focal motor or sensory deficits, seizures, loss of consciousness, apnea, and shock; death may follow.
Signs of pulmonary barotrauma ( or type II decompression sickness ( may also
be present.
Other symptoms may result from arterial gas embolism in any of the following:
• Coronary arteries (eg, arrhythmias, MI, cardiac arrest)
• Skin (eg, cyanotic marbling of the skin, focal pallor of the tongue)
• Kidneys (eg, hematuria, proteinuria, renal failure)
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Sometimes confirmation by imaging
Diagnosis is primarily clinical. A high level of suspicion is necessary when divers lose consciousness
during or immediately after ascent. Confirming the diagnosis is difficult because air may be reabsorbed
from the affected artery before testing. However, imaging techniques that may support the diagnosis
(each with limited sensitivity) include the following:
• Echocardiography (showing air in the cardiac chambers)
• Ventilation-perfusion scan (showing results consistent with pulmonary emboli)
• Chest CT (showing local lung injury or hemorrhage)
• Head CT (showing intravascular gas and diffuse edema)
Sometimes decompression sickness can cause similar symptoms and signs (for a comparison of features,
see
Table 337-1
).
===PAGE:3486===
Treatment
• Immediate 100% O
• Recompression therapy
[Table 337-1.
Comparison of Gas Embolism and Decompression Sickness]
Divers thought to have gas embolism should be recompressed promptly (. Transport to a
recompression chamber takes precedence over nonessential procedures. Transport by air may be
justified if it saves significant time, but exposure to reduced pressure at altitude must be minimized (.
Before transport, high-flow 100% O
enhances N
washout by widening the N
pressure gradient
between the lungs and the circulation, thus accelerating reabsorption of embolic bubbles. Patients should
remain in a supine position to decrease the risk of brain embolism. Mechanical ventilation, vasopressors,
and volume resuscitation are used as needed. Placing patients in the left lateral decubitus position
(Durant's maneuver) or Trendelenburg position is no longer recommended.
Immersion Pulmonary Edema
Immersion pulmonary edema is sudden-onset noncardiogenic pulmonary edema that typically
occurs early during a dive while at depth.
Immersion pulmonary edema has become more common over the past 2 decades. This disorder is similar
to negative pressure pulmonary edema encountered during induction of anesthesia when a patient with
laryngo-spasm attempts to take deep breaths against a closed larynx, thereby causing negative intraalveolar pressure. Immersion pulmonary edema is not related to lung barotrauma or decompression
sickness. Cold water and a history of hypertension are risk factors.
Severe dyspnea develops. Divers usually ascend rapidly and have cough, frothy sputum, scattered
crackles throughout both lung fields, and sometimes cyanosis. Hypoxia is present. Chest x-ray shows
typical pulmonary edema. Cardiac evaluation usually shows normal right and left ventricular function and
normal coronary arteries. Diuretic therapy and O
by positive pressure mask are usually sufficient
therapy. Mechanical ventilation may be necessary. Recompression therapy is not indicated.
Decompression Sickness
(Caisson Disease; The Bends)
Decompression sickness occurs when rapid pressure reduction (eg, during ascent from a dive,
exit from a caisson or hyperbaric chamber, or ascent to altitude) causes gas previously
dissolved in blood or tissues to form bubbles in blood vessels. Symptoms typically include
pain, neurologic symptoms, or both. Severe cases can be fatal. Diagnosis is clinical. Definitive
treatment is recompression therapy. Proper diving techniques are essential for prevention.
Henry's law states that the solubility of a gas in a liquid is directly proportional to the pressure exerted on
the gas and liquid. Thus, the amount of inert gases (eg, N
, helium) dissolved in the blood and tissues
increases at higher pressure. During ascent, when the surrounding pressure decreases, bubbles may
form. The liberated gas bubbles can arise in any tissue and cause local symptoms, or they can travel via
the blood to distant organs. Bubbles cause symptoms by blocking vessels, rupturing or compressing
tissue, or activating clotting and inflammatory cascades. Because N
dissolves readily in fat, tissues with
a high lipid content (eg, in the CNS) are particularly susceptible.
Risk factors:
Decompression sickness occurs in about 2 to 4/10,000 dives. Risk factors include all of the
following:
===PAGE:3487===
• Cold-temperature dives
• Dehydration
• Exercise after diving
• Fatigue
• Flying after diving
• Obesity
• Older age
• Prolonged or deep dives
• Rapid ascents
• Right-to-left cardiac shunts
Because excess N
remains dissolved in body tissues for at least 12 h after each dive, repeated dives
within 1 day are most likely to cause decompression sickness. Decompression sickness can also develop
if pressure suddenly decreases after recompression therapy (eg, after exposure to altitude).
Classification:
Generally, there are 2 types of decompression sickness. Type I, which involves muscles,
skin, and lymphatics, is milder and not typically life threatening. Type II is serious, is sometimes life
threatening, and affects various organ systems. The spinal cord is especially vulnerable; other vulnerable
areas include the brain, respiratory system (eg, pulmonary emboli), and circulatory system (eg, heart
failure, cardiogenic shock). "The bends" refers to local joint or muscle pain due to decompression
sickness but is often used as a synonym for any component of the disorder.
Symptoms and Signs
Severe symptoms may manifest within minutes of surfacing, but in most patients, symptoms begin
gradually, sometimes with a prodrome of malaise, fatigue, anorexia, and headache. Symptoms occur
within 1 h of surfacing in about 50% of patients and by 6 h in 90%. Rarely, symptoms can manifest 24 to
48 h after surfacing, particularly after exposure to altitude after diving.
Type I decompression sickness
typically causes progressively worsening pain in the joints (typically
elbows and shoulders), back, and muscles; the pain intensifies during movement and is described as
"deep" and "boring." Other manifestations include lymphadenopathy, skin mottling, itching, and rash.
Type II decompression sickness
tends to cause neurologic and sometimes respiratory symptoms. It
typically manifests with paresis, numbness and tingling, difficulty urinating, and loss of bowel or bladder
control. Headache and fatigue may be present but are non-specific. Dizziness, tinnitus, and hearing loss
may result if the inner ear is affected. Severe symptoms include seizures, slurred speech, vision loss,
confusion, and coma. Death can occur. The chokes (respiratory decompression sickness) is a rare but
grave manifestation; symptoms include shortness of breath, chest
pain, and cough. Massive bubble
embolization of the pulmonary vascular tree can result in rapid circulatory collapse and death.
Dysbaric osteonecrosis
is a late manifestation of decompression sickness. It is an insidious form of
aseptic bone necrosis caused by prolonged or closely repeated exposures to pressurized areas (typically
in people working in compressed air and in deep commercial rather than recreational divers).
Deterioration of shoulder and hip articular surfaces can cause chronic pain and severe disability.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3488===
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is clinical. CT and MRI may be helpful to rule out other disorders that cause similar symptoms
(eg, herniated intervertebral disk, ischemic stroke, CNS hemorrhage). Although these studies may show
brain or spinal cord abnormalities, they are not sensitive for decompression sickness, and treatment
should usually begin based on clinical suspicion. Sometimes arterial gas embolism is similar (for a
comparison of features, see
Table 337-1
).
For dysbaric osteonecrosis, plain x-rays may show joint degeneration, which cannot be distinguished
from that caused by other joint disorders; MRI is usually diagnostic.
Treatment
• 100% O
• Recompression therapy
About 80% of patients recover completely.
Initially, high-flow 100% O
enhances N
washout by widening the N
pressure gradient between the
lungs and the circulation, thus accelerating reabsorption of embolic bubbles.
Recompression therapy ( is indicated for all patients except perhaps those whose symptoms
are limited to itching, skin mottling, and fatigue; they should be observed for deterioration. Other patients
are transported to a suitable recompression facility. Because time to treatment is a main determinant of
outcome, transport should not be delayed even in cases that appear mild or for performance of
nonessential procedures. If air evacuation is required, an aircraft capable of 1 atmosphere internal
pressure is preferred. In unpressurized aircraft, low altitude (< 609 m [< 2000 ft]) must be maintained.
Commercial aircraft, although pressurized, typically have a cabin pressure equivalent to 2438 m (8000 ft)
at normal cruise altitude, which may exacerbate symptoms. Flying in commercial aircraft shortly after a
dive can precipitate symptoms.
Prevention
Significant bubble formation can usually be avoided by limiting the depth and duration of dives to a range
that does not need decompression stops during ascent (called no-stop limits) or by ascending with
decompression stops as specified in published guidelines (eg, the decompression table in the US Navy
Diving Manual). Many divers wear a portable dive computer that continually tracks depth and time at
depth and calculates a decompression schedule. In addition to following published and computergenerated guidelines, many divers make a safety stop for a few minutes at about 4.6 m (15 ft) below the
surface. However, a few cases develop after appropriately identified no-stop dives, and the incidence of
decompression sickness has not decreased despite widespread use of dive computers. The reason may
be that published tables and computer programs do not completely account for the variation in risk factors
among divers or that people do not obey the recommendations precisely.
Dives < 24 h apart (repetitive dives) require special techniques to determine proper decompression
procedures.
Gas Toxicity
Various physiologic (eg, O
, N
, CO
) and nonphysiologic (eg, carbon monoxide) gases can
cause symptoms during diving.
Oxygen toxicity:
O
toxicity typically occurs when the partial pressure of O
exceeds 1.4 atmospheres
(atm), equivalent to about 57 m (187 ft) depth when air is breathed. Symptoms include paresthesias, focal
seizures, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and constricted vision. About 10% of patients have generalized
seizures or syncope, which typically results in drowning. Risk is increased when divers breathe mixtures
===PAGE:3489===
of O
and N
(nitrox) that have an increased percentage of O
.
Nitrogen narcosis:
When compressed air is breathed at depths of > 30 m (> 100 ft), the elevated partial
pressure of N
can exert an anesthetic-like effect similar to that of nitrous oxide. N
narcosis (rapture of
the deep) causes symptoms and signs similar to those of alcohol intoxication (eg, impaired intellectual
and neuromuscular performance, changes in behavior and personality). Impairment of judgment can lead
to drowning. Hallucinations
and loss of consciousness can occur at depths of > 91 m (> 300 ft).
Because divers recover rapidly during ascent, diagnosis is clinical. Treatment entails immediate but
controlled ascent. N
narcosis can be prevented by using helium to dilute O
for deep diving because
helium lacks the anesthetic properties of N
. However, using pure helium/O
mixtures in very deep dives
(> 180 m [> 600 ft]) increases the risk of developing high-pressure neurologic syndrome (see below).
Carbon dioxide poisoning:
CO
poisoning may be caused by any of the following:
• Inadequate respiratory effort (hypoventilation)
• A tight wetsuit
• Overexertion
• Regulator malfunction
• Deep diving
• Air supply contamination by exhaled gases
Hypoventilation can increase blood CO
levels and cause shortness of breath and sedation. Severe CO
poisoning can cause nausea, vomiting, dizziness, headache, rapid breathing, flushing, confusion,
seizures, and loss of consciousness. Mild CO
poisoning is suspected if divers frequently have diverelated headaches or low air-use rates.
CO
intoxication usually resolves during ascent; thus, ABG testing after a dive typically does not detect
any increase in CO
levels.
Treatment is gradual ascent and termination of the diving exercise or correction of the precipitating
cause.
Carbon monoxide poisoning:
Carbon monoxide can enter a diver's air if the air compressor intake
valve is placed too close to engine exhaust or if the lubricating oil in a malfunctioning compressor
becomes hot enough to partially combust (flashing), producing carbon monoxide.
Symptoms include nausea, headache, weakness, clumsiness, and mental changes. Severe carbon
monoxide poisoning can cause seizures, syncope, or coma. Diagnosis is by detecting an elevated
carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) level in blood; pulse oximetry readings are nondiagnostic and usually normal
because pulse oximeters cannot distinguish between oxyhemoglobin and COHb. The diver's air supply
can be tested for carbon monoxide.
Treatment is with high-flow 100% O
, best given via a nonrebreather mask, which decreases the half-life
of COHb from 4 to 8 h in room air to 40 to 80 min. For severe cases, hyperbaric O
therapy may be
considered if readily available. COHb levels will drop quickly in the hyperbaric chamber (half-life 15 to 30
min); however, the benefit of hyperbaric O
therapy is controversial. Some studies indicate that
hyperbaric O
therapy lessens neurologic sequelae, but others do not support this finding.
High-pressure neurologic syndrome:
A poorly understood syndrome of neuromuscular and cerebral
abnormalities can develop at ≥ 180 m (≥ 600 ft), particularly when divers are compressed rapidly while
===PAGE:3490===
breathing helium/O
mixtures. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, fine tremors, incoordination,
dizziness, fatigue, somnolence, myoclonic jerking, stomach cramps, and decrements in intellectual and
psychomotor performance. Diagnosis is clinical. Prevention is usually accomplished by slowing the rate of
compression.
Recompression Therapy
(Hyperbaric O
Therapy)
Recompression therapy is administration of 100% O
for several hours in a sealed chamber
pressurized to > 1 atmosphere, gradually lowered to atmospheric pressure. In divers, this
therapy is used primarily for decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism. A shorter time
to start of therapy is associated with a better patient outcome. Untreated pneumothorax
requires chest tube placement before or during recompression therapy.
The goals of recompression therapy in diving injuries include all of the following:
• Increasing O
solubility and delivery
• Increasing N
washout
• Decreasing gas bubble size
For carbon monoxide poisoning, mechanisms include decreasing the half-life of carboxyhemoglobin,
reducing ischemia, and possibly improving mitochondrial function.
Hyperbaric O
therapy is also used for several disorders unrelated to diving (see
Table 337-2
).
Because recompression is relatively well tolerated, it should be started if there is any likelihood that it
would promote recovery; recompression may help even if started up to 48 h after surfacing.
Recompression chambers are either multi-place, with space for one or more patients on a gurney and for
a medical attendant, or mono-place, with space for only one patient. Although monoplace chambers are
less expensive, because patients cannot be accessed during recompression, their use for critically ill
patients, who may require intervention, can be risky.
[Table 337-2.
Hyperbaric O
Therapy*]
Information regarding the location of the nearest recompression chamber, the most rapid means of
reaching it, and the most appropriate source to consult by telephone should be known by most divers,
medical staff members, and rescue and police personnel in popular diving areas. Such information is also
available from the Divers Alert Network (919-684-8111; www.diversalertnetwork.org
) 24 h/day; the
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (www.uhms.org
) is another invaluable source of general
information about recompression.
Recompression protocols:
Pressure and duration of treatment are usually decided by a hyperbaric
medicine specialist at the recompression facility. Treatments are given once or twice/day for 45 to 300 min
until symptoms abate; 5- to 10-min air breaks are added to reduce risk of O
toxicity. Chamber pressure is
usually maintained between 2.5 and 3.0 atmospheres (atm), but patients with life-threatening neurologic
symptoms due to gas embolism may begin with an excursion to 6 atm to rapidly compress cerebral gas
bubbles.
Although recompression therapy is usually done with 100% O
or compressed air, special gas mixtures
(eg, helium/O
or N
/O
in nonatmospheric proportions) may be indicated if the diver used an unusual
gas mixture or if depth or duration of the dive was extraordinary. Specific protocol tables for treatment are
===PAGE:3491===
included in the US Navy Diving Manual.
Patients with residual neurologic deficits should be given repetitive, intermittent hyperbaric treatments and
may require several days to reach maximum improvement.
Complications and contraindications:
Recompression therapy can cause problems similar to those
that occur with barotrauma (, including ear and sinus barotrauma. O
toxicity can cause
reversible myopia. Rarely, pulmonary barotrauma, pulmonary O
toxicity, hypoglycemia, or seizures result.
Sedatives and opioids may obscure symptoms and cause respiratory insufficiency; they should be
avoided or used only in the lowest effective doses.
Relative contraindications include
• Obstructive lung disorders
• Upper respiratory or sinus infections
• Severe heart failure
• Recent ear surgery or injury
• Fever
• Claustrophobia
• Seizure disorder
• Chest surgery
• Pneumothorax
Patients with pneumothorax require tube thoracostomy before recompression therapy.
Diving Precautions and Prevention of Diving Injuries
Diving is a relatively safe recreational activity for healthy people who have been appropriately trained and
educated. Diving safety courses offered by national diving organizations are widely available.
Diving safety:
Incidence of barotrauma can be decreased through active equalization of various air
spaces, including the face mask (by blowing out air from the nose into the mask)
[Table 337-3.
Specific Medical Contraindications to Diving]
and the middle ear (by yawning, swallowing, or performing a Valsalva maneuver). Divers should avoid
holding their breath and breathe normally during ascent, which should be no faster than 0.15 to 0.3 m/sec
(0.5 to 1 ft/sec), a rate that allows for gradual offloading of N
and emptying of air-filled spaces (eg,
lungs, sinuses). Divers should ascend with decompression stops as specified in published guidelines (eg,
the decompression table in the US Navy Diving Manual). Current recommendations also include a 3- to 5min safety stop at 4.6 m (15 ft) for further equilibration. Also, divers should not fly for 15 to 18 h after
diving.
Divers should be aware of and avoid certain diving conditions (eg, poor visibility, currents requiring
excessive effort). Cold temperatures are a particular hazard because hypothermia can develop rapidly
and affect judgment and dexterity or induce fatal cardiac arrhythmias in susceptible people. Diving alone
is not recommended.
===PAGE:3492===
Recreational or sedative drugs and alcohol in any amount may have unpredictable or unanticipated
effects at depth and should be strictly avoided. Otherwise, prescription drugs rarely interfere with
recreational diving, but if the disorder being treated is a contraindication to diving, the dive should not be
pursued.
Contraindications to diving:
Because diving can involve heavy exertion, divers should not have a
functionally significant cardiovascular or pulmonary disorder and should have above-average aerobic
capacity. Disorders that can impair consciousness, alertness, or judgment generally prohibit diving. If
there is any doubt as to whether diving is contraindicated by a specific disorder, a recognized expert
should be consulted. For specific diving contraindications, see
Table 337-3
.
===PAGE:3493===
Chapter 338. Exercise and Sports Injury
Introduction
Regular exercise enhances health and a sense of well-being. However, injury, particularly over-use injury,
is a risk for people who exercise regularly. (For musculoskeletal injuries not particularly associated with
sports, see p.
.)
Exercise
Exercise stimulates tissue change and adaptation, whereas rest and recovery allow such change and
adaptation to occur. Recovery from exercise is as important as the exercise stimulus. Regular physical
activity decreases the incidence of the major causes of death, improves functional status for sports and
activities of daily living, and protects against injury. Specific exercise programs are also commonly
prescribed to rehabilitate patients after MI, major surgery, and musculoskeletal injury. Regardless of
indication, recommendations for exercise should be based on 2 principles:
• Goals for activity should be specific to the patient, accounting for motivation, needs, physical ability, and
psychology, to maximize the likelihood of patient participation and desired outcome.
• Activity should be prescribed in a proper dose to achieve a desired effect. An exercise stimulus should
be sufficient for the body to adapt to a higher state of function but not so great that it causes injury.
More activity is not always better; too little or too much activity may prevent achievement of desired
outcomes.
A prescription for exercise should specify intensity (level of exertion), volume (amount of activity in a
session), frequency (number of exercise sessions), and progressive overload (either the amount of
increase in one or more of these elements over time, or the actual load). The balance of these elements
depends on individual tolerance and physiologic principles (ie, as intensity increases, volume and
frequency may need to decrease, whereas as volume increases, intensity may need to decrease).
Intensity, volume, and frequency can be increased concurrently but only to a point because human
tolerance to strain is finite. The objective is to discover the appropriate amount of exercise for optimal
benefit in the context of the patient's goals. Fixed and traditional recommendations (eg, 3 sets of 10 to 12
repetitions, running 30 min 3 times/wk) may be suboptimal because they do not address a person's
specific requirements.
Exercise programs should encompass multiple dimensions of fitness:
• Stretching and flexibility
• Aerobic capacity
• Strength
• Balance
Stretching and flexibility:
Flexibility is important for safe, comfortable performance of physical activities.
Stretching may be beneficial in strength training to improve range of motion and help relax muscles.
Specific flexibility exercises involve slowly and steadily stretching muscle groups without jerking or
bouncing. These exercises can be done before or after other forms of training or as a regimen itself, as
occurs in yoga and Pilates sessions. Although stretching before exercise enhances mental preparedness,
there is no evidence that stretching decreases risk of injury. However, there is no need to discourage
preactivity stretching if patients enjoy it. General warming-up (eg, with low-intensity simulation of the
exercise to be done, jogging on the spot, calisthenics, or other light activities that increase core
temperature) seems to be more effective than stretching for facilitating safe exercise. Stretching after
exercise may be preferred because tissues stretch more effectively when warmed.
Aerobic exercise:
Aerobic exercise is continuous, rhythmic physical activity. Exertion occurs at a level
===PAGE:3494===
that can be supported by aerobic metabolism (although brief periods of more intense exertion triggering
anaerobic metabolism may be interspersed) continuously for at least 5 min as a starting point and
increased slowly over time. Aerobic conditioning increases maximal O
uptake and cardiac output (mainly
an increase in stroke volume), decreases resting heart rate, and reduces cardiac and all-cause mortality;
however, too much activity causes excessive wear on the body and increases cellular oxidation.
Examples of aerobic exercise include running, jogging, fast walking, swimming, bicycling, rowing,
kayaking, skating, cross-country skiing, and using aerobic exercise machines (eg, tread-mill, stairclimbing, or elliptical machines).
Aerobic metabolism starts within 2 min of beginning activity, but more sustained effort is needed to
achieve health benefits. The usual
recommendation is to exercise ≥ 30 min/day at least 3 times/wk with a
5-min warm-up and a 5-min cool-down period, but this recommendation is based on convenience as much
as evidence. Optimal aerobic conditioning can occur with as little as 10 to 15 min of activity per session 2
to 3 times/wk if interval cycling is used. In interval cycling, short periods of moderate activity are
alternated with intense exertion. In one regimen, about 90 sec of moderate activity (60 to 80% maximum
heart rate [HR
max]) is alternated with about 20 to 30 sec of all-out sprint-type work (85 to 95% HR
max
or
as hard as the person can exert for that time). This regimen is more stressful on joints and tissues and so
should be done infrequently or alternated with more conventional low- to moderate-intensity training.
Resistance training machines or free weights can be used for aerobic exercise as long as a sufficient
number of repetitions are done per set, rest between sets is minimal (20 to 60 sec), and intensity of effort
is relatively high. In circuit training, the large muscles (of the legs, hips, back, and chest) are exercised
followed by the smaller muscles (of the shoulders, arms, abdomen, and neck). Circuit training for only 15
to 20 min can benefit the cardiovascular system more than jogging or using aerobic exercise machines for
the same amount of time because the workout is often more intense and heart rate increases more as a
result.
Volume of aerobic exercise is graded simply by duration. Intensity is guided by heart rate. Target heart
rate for appropriate intensity is 60 to 85% of a person's HR
max
(the heart rate at peak O
consumption
[VO
2peak], or the rate beyond which aerobic metabolism can no longer be sustained because O
is
lacking and anaerobic metabolism begins). HR
max
can be directly measured, or calculated as
HR
max
= 220 - age
Alternatively, the Karvonen formula can be used to calculate target heart rate:
Target heart rate = [(0.50 to 0.85) × (HR
max
- HR
resting
)] + HR
resting
However, the more athletic or deconditioned the person is compared to average, the less accurate these
formulas are, thus making metabolic or VO
testing more valuable.
Chronologic age should be distinguished from biologic age. People of any age who are less accustomed
to aerobic exercise (less conditioned) reach the target heart rate much sooner and with less effort,
necessitating briefer exercise periods, at least initially. Obese people may be deconditioned and must
move a larger body weight, causing heart rate to increase much faster and to a greater extent with less
vigorous activity than in thinner people. Disorders and some drugs (eg,
β
-blockers) also modify the
relationship between age and heart rate. For people who have a disorder or take certain drugs, a target
of 50 to 60% of HR
max
is probably sufficient, at least initially.
Strength training:
Strength (resistance) training involves forceful muscular contraction against a load
—typically provided by free or machine weights or sometimes body weight (eg, push-ups, abdominal
crunches, chin-ups). Such training increases muscle strength, endurance, and size and improves
functional ability and aerobic performance. Cardiovascular endurance and flexibility increase concurrently.
Volume
typically is categorized in terms of amount of weight lifted and number of sets and number of
repetitions per set. However, an equally important parameter is tension time, which is the total duration of
===PAGE:3495===
lifting and lowering the weight in one set. Appropriate tension time may be about 60 sec for moderate
conditioning (a good balance in developing muscle mass and strength) and 90 to 120 sec for injury
rehabilitation and muscular endurance. For increasing strength, tension time is more important than
number of repetitions, which can vary within tension time by technique and set duration. When a person
can achieve at least a 60-sec tension time with good technique, resistance (weight) can be increased so
that a tension time of at least 60 sec is tolerable at the next weight level. Number of sets is determined by
intensity of the training.
Intensity
is generally a subjective measure of perceived effort and how close a person comes to
muscular fatigue in a given set (or exhaustion in a workout). Intensity may be characterized objectively by
the amount of weight lifted expressed as a percentage of the person's maximum for one repetition (1 RM)
of a given exercise; ie, for a person who can deadlift at most 100 kg one time, 75 kg is 75% RM. A
general guideline is to exercise with a load at 70 to 85% RM. Heavier loads increase risk of injury and are
appropriate mainly for competitive strength athletes. Lifting < 30 to 40% RM provides minimal strength
gain, although aerobic conditioning and muscular endurance may occur with sufficient tension time and
effort.
Intensity is limited by motivation and tolerance; for many people undergoing rehabilitation, discomfort,
pain, and exercise inexperience result in less effort than may be
possible or tolerated, so that more sets
are required to derive equal benefit. Intensity should vary on a regular basis to provide both a mental and
physical hiatus. If exercise is done at the highest intensity level, it should occur no more often than in
about half of the sets and workouts should be avoided for 1 to 2 wk every 3 mo. Continual high-intensity
training is counterproductive, even for trained athletes. Symptoms such as fatigue or muscle heaviness
when not exercising, lack of motivation to exercise, reduced exercise performance, joint and tendon
pains, and increased resting heart rate suggest that exercise has been too intense; exercise should be
avoided for 1.5 to 2 wk.
Good technique
is important for safety and involves avoidance of jerking or dropping weights, which can
cause minor tissue injury due to sudden force, and controlled breathing, which prevents dizziness (and in
extreme cases, fainting) that can occur with the Valsalva maneuver. People should exhale while lifting a
weight and inhale while lowering a weight. If a movement is slow, such as lowering a weight for ≥ 5 sec,
people may need to breathe in and out more than once, but breathing should still be coordinated so that a
final breath is taken in just before the lifting phase and released during lifting. BP increases during
resistance training and tends to be highest when gripping excessively (common with the leg press
exercise when working the large lower body muscles and clenching the machines hand grips very tightly).
However, BP returns to normal quickly after exercise; the increase is minimal when breathing technique is
correct, no matter how hard a person exerts.
Balance training:
Balance training involves challenging the center of gravity by undertaking exercises in
unstable environments, such as standing on one leg or using balance or wobble boards. Balance training
can help some people with impaired proprioception and is often used in an attempt to prevent falls in the
elderly (.
Hydration:
Proper hydration is important, particularly when exertion is prolonged or occurs in a hot
environment. People should be well-hydrated before activity, drink fluids regularly during extended
exertion, and replace any deficit remaining after activity. During exertion, about 120 to 240 mL (1/2 to 1
cup) every 15 to 20 min is reasonable depending on heat and exertion level; however,
overhydration,
which can cause hyponatremia and consequent seizures, is to be avoided
.
Fluid deficit after exertion is calculated by comparing preexercise and postexercise body weight and is
replaced on a one-for-one basis (ie, 1 L for each kg lost, or 2 cups/lb). In most cases, plain water is
acceptable. Electrolyte-containing sports drinks may be preferred. However, fluids with a carbohydrate
content of > 8% (8 g/100 mL, or 20 g in a typical 250-mL serving) decrease gastric emptying and slow
fluid absorption. Often it is best to mix plain water with sports drinks at a 50:50 ratio to allow faster
absorption of the glucose and electrolytes. People with findings suggesting heat illness ( or
dehydration may require oral or IV electrolyte replacement immediately.
Exercise in the Elderly
===PAGE:3496===
At least 75% of people age > 65 yr do not exercise at recommended levels, despite the known health
benefits:
• Longer survival
• Improved quality of life (eg, endurance, strength, mood, flexibility, possibly cognitive function)
Exercise has proven benefits when begun as old as 75 yr. Because of the effects of aging and agerelated disorders, the relative benefits of exercise may even be greater in the elderly (see also
Sidebar
307-1
. In addition, exercise is one of the safest ways to improve health.
The largest health benefits occur, particularly with aerobic exercise, when changing from being sedentary
to exercising. Progressively less benefit occurs as the intensity of exercise increases.
Strength decreases with age and can compromise function. For example, almost half of women > 65 and
more than half of women > 75 cannot lift 4.5 kg. Strength training can increase muscle mass by 25 to
100% or more, meaningfully improving function. The same degree of muscle work demands less
cardiovascular exertion; increasing leg muscle strength improves walking speed and stair climbing. Also,
institutionalized elderly with more muscle mass have better nitrogen balance and a better prognosis and
less deconditioning during critical illness.
Contraindications:
Absolute contraindications to exercise include
• Suspected acute coronary syndrome
• 3rd-degree heart block
• Uncontrolled hypertension
• Acute heart failure
• Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
Relative contraindications include
• Cardiomyopathy
• Valvular heart disease
• Complex ventricular ectopy
Most patients with relative contraindications can exercise, although at lower levels of intensity than other
patients (. Other factors mandate modification of the exercise program (eg, arthritic disorders, particularly
those involving major weight-bearing joints, such as the knees, ankles, and hips).
Patients should be told to stop exercising and seek medical attention if they develop chest pain, lightheadedness, or palpitations.
Screening:
Before beginning an exercise program, elderly patients should undergo clinical evaluation
aimed at detecting cardiac disorders and physical limitations to exercise. Routine ECG is unnecessary.
Exercise stress testing is usually unnecessary for elderly patients who plan to begin exercising slowly and
increase intensity only gradually. For sedentary patients who plan to begin intense exercise, stress testing
is indicated if they have any of the following:
• Known coronary artery disease
===PAGE:3497===
• Symptoms of coronary artery disease
• ≥ 2 cardiac risk factors (eg, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, obesity, sedentary lifestyle, smoking,
family history of early coronary artery disease)
• Suspected lung disease
• Suspected diabetes
Exercise program:
Exercise should ideally include
• Aerobic activity
• Strength training
• Flexibility and balance
Time spent doing
aerobic activity
is similar to that for younger adults, but exercise should be less
intense. Usually during exercise, the person should be able to comfortably converse, and intensity should
be ≤ 6/10 on a perceived scale of exertion. Elderly people who have no contraindications can gradually
increase their target heart rate to the one calculated by use of age-based formulas. Some deconditioned
elderly people need to improve their functional abilities (eg, by strength training) before they are capable
of aerobic exercise.
Strength training
is done according to the same principles and techniques as in younger adults. When
beginning, forces may need to be small (eg, using bands or weights as light as 1 kg or arising from a
chair).
To help increase
flexibility
, major muscle groups should be stretched once daily, ideally after exercise
when muscles are most compliant.
Balance training
involves challenging the center of gravity by undertaking exercises in unstable
environments, such as standing on one leg or using balance or wobble boards. Balance training can help
some people with impaired proprioception and is often used in an attempt to prevent falls in the elderly.
However, it is often ineffective because any balance activity is skill specific (eg, good balance while
standing on a balance board does not improve balance in dissimilar activities). For most elderly people,
flexibility and strengthening exercises prevent falls more effectively. Such a program develops strength
around the joints and helps people hold body positions more effectively while standing and walking. In
people who have difficulty standing and walking because of poor balance, more challenging balance
tasks (eg, standing on a wobble board) are simply likely to facilitate injury and are contraindicated.
Screening for Sports Participation
(See also
Chapter 220
.)
Cardiovascular screening:
Screening for all children and adults should include a thorough
cardiovascular history, with questions about
• Known hypertension or heart murmur
• Chest pain
• Exercise-induced syncope, near-syncope, chest pain, or palpitations
• Family history of sudden cardiac death at age < 50 yr, arrhythmias, dilated or hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, long QT syndrome, or Marfan syndrome
• Risk factors for coronary artery disease in adults
===PAGE:3498===
Physical examination should routinely include BP, supine and standing cardiac auscultation, and
inspection for features of Marfan syndrome. These measures aim to identify adults as well as rare,
apparently healthy young people at high risk of life-threatening cardiac events (eg, people with
arrhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or other structural heart disorders). Testing is directed at
clinically suspected disorders (eg, exercise stress testing for coronary artery disease, echocardiography
for structural heart disease, ECG for long QT syndrome).
Other screening measures:
Noncardiovascular risk factors are more common than cardiovascular risk
factors. Adults are asked about arthritic disorders, particularly those involving major weight-bearing joints
(eg, knees, ankles, hips).
Two at-risk populations are commonly overlooked:
• Boys who physically mature late or are short are at greater risk of injury in contact sports with larger and
stronger children.
• Overweight or obese people who participate in activities that require high agility are at greater risk of
injury due to sudden stops and starts because of excess body weight and associated forces on the
joints and tissues.
Adolescents and young adults should be asked about use of illicit and performance-enhancing drugs. In
girls and young women, screening should detect delayed onset of menarche. Girls and young women
should be screened for the presence of the female athlete triad (eating disorders, amenorrhea or other
menstrual dysfunction, and diminished bone mineral density), which is becoming more common as more
adolescent and young women engage in overly intensive physical activity and overly zealous loss of body
fat.
Contraindications:
There are almost no absolute contraindications to sports participation. Exceptions in
children include
• Myocarditis, which increases the risk of sudden cardiac death
• Acute splenic enlargement because splenic rupture is a risk
• Fever, which decreases exercise tolerance, increases risk of heat-related disorders, and may be a sign
of serious illness
• Possibly diarrhea and recent vomiting because dehydration is a risk
Exceptions in adults include angina pectoris and recent (within 6 wk) MI. Contraindications are more
commonly relative and lead to recommendations for precautions or for participation in some sports rather
than others. For example, people with a history of multiple concussions should participate in noncollision
sports; males with a single testis should wear a protective cup for most contact sports; people at risk of
heat intolerance and dehydration (eg, those with diabetes or cystic fibrosis) should hydrate frequently
during activity; and people with suboptimal seizure control should avoid swimming, weight lifting, and
sports such as archery and riflery because of risk to others.
Approach to Sports Injuries
Sports participation always has a risk of injury.
Generally, sports injury can be divided into
• Overuse injuries
• Blunt trauma
===PAGE:3499===
• Fractures and dislocations (
• Acute soft-tissue sprains and strains
Many injuries (eg, fractures, dislocations, soft-tissue contusions, blunt trauma, sprains and strains) are
not unique to sports participation and can result from activities that are not athletic or from accidents (see
also p.
). However, athletes may need to learn how to modify faulty techniques that predispose to
injuries or may resist taking an adequate period of rest to recover from a sports injury (working through
the pain).
Overuse:
Overuse is one of the most common causes of athletic injury and is the cumulative effect of
excessive, repetitive stress on anatomic structures. It results in trauma to muscles, tendons, cartilage,
ligaments, bursae, fascia, and bone in any combination. Risk of overuse injury depends on complex
interactions between individual and extrinsic factors. Individual factors include muscle weakness and
inflexibility, joint laxity, previous injury, bone malalignment, and limb asymmetries. Extrinsic factors include
training errors (eg, exercise without sufficient recovery time, excess load, building one group of muscles
without training the opposing group, and extensive use of the same movement patterns), environmental
conditions (eg, excessive running on banked tracks or crowned roads—which stresses the limbs
asymmetrically), and training equipment characteristics (eg, unusual or unaccustomed motions, such as
those made while on an elliptical trainer). Runners most often sustain injury after too rapidly increasing
their intensity or length of workouts. Swimmers may be least prone to overuse injuries because buoyancy
has protective effects, although they still are at risk, particularly in the shoulders, from which most
movement occurs.
Blunt trauma:
Blunt athletic trauma can result in injuries such as soft-tissue contusions, concussions,
and fractures. The mechanism of injury usually involves high-impact collisions with other athletes or
objects (eg, being tackled in football or checked into the sideboards in hockey), falls, and direct blows
(eg, in boxing or the martial arts).
Sprains and strains:
Sprains are injuries to ligaments, and strains are injuries to muscles. They typically
occur with sudden, forceful exertion, most commonly during running, particularly with sudden changes of
direction (eg, dodging and avoiding competitors in
football). Such injuries also are common in strength
training, when a person quickly drops or yanks at the load rather than moving slowly and smoothly with
constant controlled tension.
Symptoms and Signs
Injury always results in pain, which ranges from mild to severe. Physical signs may be absent or may
include any combination of soft-tissue edema, erythema, warmth, point tenderness, ecchymosis,
instability, and loss of mobility.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis should include a thorough history and physical examination. History should focus on the
mechanism of injury, physical stresses of the activity, past injuries, timing of pain onset, and extent and
duration of pain before, during, and after activity. Diagnostic testing (eg, x-rays, ultrasonography, CT, MRI,
bone scans, electromyography) and referral to a specialist may be required.
Treatment
• Rest, ice, compression, elevation (RICE)
• Analgesics
• Cross training
• Gradual return to activity
===PAGE:3500===
RICE:
Immediate treatment of most acute sports injuries is RICE.
Rest prevents further injury and helps to reduce swelling.
Ice (or a commercial cold pack) causes vasoconstriction and reduces soft-tissue swelling, inflammation,
and pain. Ice and cold packs should not be applied directly to the skin. They should be enclosed in plastic
or a towel. They should be left in place for no more than 20 min at a time. An elastic bandage can be
wrapped around a tightly closed plastic bag containing ice to keep it in place.
Wrapping an injured extremity with an elastic bandage for compression reduces edema and pain. The
bandage should not be wrapped too firmly because doing so may cause swelling in the distal extremity.
The injured area should be elevated above heart level so that gravity can facilitate drainage of fluid,
which reduces swelling and thus pain. Ideally, fluid should drain on an entirely downhill path from the
injured area to the heart (eg, for a hand injury, the elbow, as well as the hand, should be elevated). Ice
and elevation should be used periodically throughout the initial 24 h after an acute injury.
Pain control:
Pain control usually involves use of analgesics, typically acetaminophen or NSAIDs.
However, if pain persists for > 72 h after a seemingly minor injury, referral to a specialist is recommended.
For persistent pain, evaluation for additional or more severe injuries is indicated. These injuries are
treated as appropriate (eg, with immobilization, sometimes with oral or injectable corticosteroids).
Corticosteroids should be given only by a specialist and when necessary because corticosteroids can
delay soft-tissue healing and sometimes weaken injured tendons and muscles. The frequency of
corticosteroid injections should be monitored by a specialist because too-frequent injections may increase
the risk of tissue degeneration and ligament or tendon rupture.
Activity:
In general, injured athletes should avoid the specific activity that caused the injury until after
healing occurs. To minimize deconditioning, athletes can cross-train (ie, do different or related exercises
that do not cause reinjury or pain). Injury may also necessitate reducing exercise range-of-motion if there
is intolerable pain at certain points of movement. Initially, exercise of previously injured areas should be
low in intensity to gradually strengthen weak muscles, tendons, and ligaments without risking reinjury. It is
more important to maintain a good range-of-motion, which helps direct blood to the injured area to
accelerate healing, than to rapidly resume full intensity training for fear of losing conditioning. Resumption
of full activity should be gradual once pain subsides. Competitive athletes should consider consultation
with a professional (eg, physical therapist).
Athletes should be placed in a graduated program of exercises and physical therapy to restore flexibility,
strength, and endurance. They also need to feel psychologically ready before re-engaging in an activity
at full capacity. Competitive athletes may benefit from motivational counseling.
Prevention
Exercise itself helps prevent injuries because tissues become more resilient and tolerant of the forces
they experience during vigorous activities.
General warming up raises muscle temperature and makes muscles more pliable, stronger, and more
resistant to injury; it also improves workout performance by enhancing mental and physical preparedness.
Cooling down is sometimes thought to prevent dizziness and syncope after aerobic exercise and helps
remove metabolic byproducts of exercise, such as lactic acid, from muscles and the bloodstream.
Removing lactic acid may help decrease muscle soreness. Cooling down also helps decrease heart rate
slowly and gradually to near-resting levels—an important effect for patients with heart disorders.
Injury due to excessive pronation (turning in or inversion of the foot during weight bearing) can be
prevented with use of shoe inserts or orthotics (flexible or semirigid).
Rotator Cuff Injury
Rotator cuff injury includes tendinitis and partial or complete tears. Symptoms are shoulder
===PAGE:3501===
pain and, with severe tears, weakness. Diagnosis is by examination and, sometimes, diagnostic
testing. Treatment includes NSAIDs, maintenance of range of motion, and rotator cuff
strengthening exercises.
The rotator cuff, consisting of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis (SITS)
muscles, helps stabilize the humeral head in the glenoid fossa of the scapula during overhead arm
motions (eg, pitching, swimming, weightlifting, serving in racket sports).
Etiology
Rotator cuff injury can be a sports injury, but it commonly occurs for reasons unrelated to sports activities
and in people with no history of overuse.
A strain of the rotator cuff is a single acute, traumatic injury to the muscles. Tendinitis typically results
from chronic impingement of the supraspinatus tendon between the humeral head and coracoacromial
arch (the acromion, acromioclavicular joint, coracoid process, and coracoacromial ligament). Activities that
require the arm to be moved over the head repeatedly, such as pitching in baseball, lifting heavy weights
over the shoulder, serving the ball in racket sports, and swimming freestyle, butterfly, or backstroke,
increase the risk. The supraspinatus tendon is thought to be particularly susceptible because it has an
under-vascularized region near its insertion on the greater tuberosity. The resultant inflammatory reaction
and edema further narrow the subacromial space, accelerating tendon irritation or damage. If the process
is not interrupted, the resulting inflammation can lead to partial or complete tear of the rotator cuff.
Degenerative rotator cuff tendinitis is common among older (> 40 yr) people who are not athletes for the
same reason. Subacromial bursitis (inflammation, swelling, and fibrosis of the bursal area above the
rotator cuff) commonly results from tendinitis of the cuff.
Symptoms and Signs
Subacromial bursitis, rotator cuff tendinitis, and partial rotator cuff tears cause shoulder pain, especially
when the arm is moved overhead. The pain usually is worse between 60° and 120° (painful arc of motion)
of shoulder abduction or flexion and is usually minimal or absent at < 60° or > 120°. The pain may be
described as a dull ache that is poorly localized. Complete rotator cuff tears result in acute pain and
weakness of the shoulder. In larger tears of the rotator cuff, weakness of external rotation is particularly
apparent.
Diagnosis
• Physical examination
• Sometimes MRI or arthroscopy
Diagnosis is by history and physical examination, including provocative maneuvers. The rotator cuff
cannot be palpated directly, but it can be assessed indirectly by provocative maneuvers that test its
individual components; significant pain or weakness is considered a positive result.
The
supraspinatus
is assessed by having the patient resist downward pressure on the arms held in
forward flexion with the thumbs pointing downward (empty can, or Jobe's test).
The
infraspinatus
and
teres minor
are assessed by having the patient resist external rotation pressure
with the arms held at the sides with elbows flexed to 90°; this position isolates rotator cuff muscle function
from that of other muscles such as the deltoid. Weakness during this test suggests significant rotator cuff
dysfunction (eg, a complete tear).
The
subscapularis
is assessed by having the patient place the hand behind the back with the back of
the hand resting on the lower back. The examiner lifts the hand off the lower back. The patient should be
able to keep the hand off the skin of the back (Gerber lift-off test).
The
Neer test
checks for impingement of the rotator cuff tendons under the coracoacromial arch. It is
===PAGE:3502===
done by placing the arm in forced forward flexion (arm lifted overhead) with the arm fully pronated.
The
Hawkins test
also checks for impingement. It is done by elevating the arm to 90°, flexing the elbow
90°, and then forcibly rotating the shoulder internally.
The
Apley scratch test
assesses combined shoulder range of motion by having the patient attempt to
touch the opposite scapula: Reaching overhead, behind the neck, and to the opposite scapula with the
tips of the fingers tests abduction and external rotation; reaching under, behind the back, and across to
the opposite scapula with the back of the hand tests adduction and internal rotation.
Other areas that may be the source of shoulder pain include the acromioclavicular and sternoclavicular
joints, cervical spine, biceps tendon, and scapula. These areas should be assessed for any tenderness
or deformity indicating a problem in those areas.
The
neck
is examined as part of any shoulder evaluation because pain can be referred to the shoulder
from the cervical spine (particularly with C5 radiculopathy).
Suspected rotator cuff injury can be further evaluated with MRI, arthroscopy, or both.
Treatment
• NSAIDs
• Exercises
• Sometimes surgery
In most cases of tendinitis and bursitis, rest, NSAIDs, and rotator cuff strengthening exercises (see
Sidebar 338-1
) are sufficient. Injections of corticosteroids into the subacromial bursa are occasionally
indicated (eg, when symptoms are acute and severe or when prior treatment has been ineffective).
Surgery may be necessary in chronic bursitis that is resistant to conservative management to remove
excess bone and decrease impingement. Surgical repair may be recommended if a rotator cuff injury is
severe (eg, a complete tear).
Glenoid Labral Tear
The glenoid labrum usually tears as a result of a specific trauma, such as a fall onto an
outstretched arm. Tears can also result from chronic overhead movement, as occurs in pitching.
A glenoid labral tear causes pain during motion. Treatment is with physical therapy and
sometimes surgery.
The shoulder (unlike the hip or elbow) is an inherently unstable joint; it has been likened to a golf ball
sitting on a tee. To enhance structural stability, the glenoid (anatomically, a
very shallow socket) is
deepened by the labrum, which is a rubbery, fibrocartilaginous material attached around the lip of the
glenoid. This structure can tear during athletics, especially during throwing sports, or as a result of blunt
trauma when falling and landing on an outstretched upper extremity.
Sidebar 338-1 Exercises to Strengthen the Shoulders
Rotator Cuff Exercises
External Rotation
• Lying on the left side, grasp a light dumbbell in the right hand with the elbow bent 90°. Maintain this
position throughout the set.
• Using the right elbow as a pivot point against the side of the waist, externally rotate the arm upward until
===PAGE:3503===
it is as vertical as possible.
• Do 3 sets of 10 repetitions with 1 min of rest between each set.
• Repeat with the opposite arm.
• As strength improves, increase the weight.
Internal Rotation
• Lying on the right side, grasp a light dumbbell in the right hand with the right elbow bent at 90°. Maintain
this position throughout the set.
• Using the right elbow as a pivot point against the side of the waist, internally rotate the arm upward
(inward) until it is vertical against the abdomen.
• Do 3 sets of 10 repetitions with 1 min of rest between each set.
• Repeat with the opposite arm.
• As strength improves, increase the weight.
Deltoid Exercises
Anterior Deltoid
• In the standing position, grasp a light dumbbell with the right hand and with the palm facing down, raise
the hand and arm away and in front of the body to shoulder level, keeping the elbow straight.
• Do 3 sets of 10 repetitions with 1 min of rest between each set.
• Repeat with the opposite arm.
Middle Deltoid
• In the standing position, grasp a light dumbbell with the right hand and with the palm facing down, raise
the hand and arm away and out to the side from the body to shoulder level, keeping the elbow straight.
• Do 3 sets of 10 repetitions with 1 min of rest between each set.
• Repeat with the opposite arm.
Symptoms and Signs
A glenoid labral tear results in deep shoulder pain during motion, especially when pitching a baseball.
This discomfort may be accompanied by a painful clicking or clunking sensation and a feeling of catching
in the shoulder.
Diagnosis
A thorough shoulder and neck physical examination should be done initially, but referral to a specialist is
frequently needed because more sophisticated diagnostic tests (eg, contrast-enhanced MRI) are often
the only way to definitively identify the pathology.
Treatment
Physical therapy is the initial treatment. If symptoms do not subside with physical therapy, and the
===PAGE:3504===
diagnosis has been confirmed by MRI, surgical debridement or repair is the treatment of choice. Surgery
is usually done arthroscopically.
Lateral Epicondylitis
(Tennis Elbow)
Lateral epicondylitis results from inflammation and microtearing of fibers in the extensor
tendons of the forearm. Symptoms include pain at the lateral epicondyle of the elbow, which
can radiate into the forearm. Diagnosis is by examination and provocative testing. Treatment is
with rest, NSAIDs, and physical therapy.
Theories about the pathophysiology of lateral epicondylitis include nonathletic and occupational activities
that require repetitive and forceful forearm supination and pronation, as well as overuse or weakness (or
both) of the extensor carpi radialis brevis and longus muscles of the forearm, which originate from the
lateral epicondyle of the elbow. For example, during a backhand return in racket sports such as tennis,
the elbow and wrist are extended, and the extensor tendons, particularly the extensor carpi radialis
brevis, can be damaged when they roll over the lateral epicondyle and radial head. Contributing factors
include weak shoulder and wrist muscles, a racket strung too tightly, an undersized grip, hitting heavy wet
balls, and hitting off-center on the racket.
In resistance trainees, injuries often are caused by overuse (too much activity or doing the same
movements too often) or by muscle imbalance between the forearm extensors and flexors. Nonathletic
activities that can cause or contribute to lateral epicondylitis include those involving grasping and twisting
the elbow (eg, turning a screwdriver).
With time, subperiosteal hemorrhage, calcification, spur formation on the lateral epicondyle, and, most
importantly, tendon degeneration can occur.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain initially occurs in the extensor tendons of the forearm and around the lateral elbow when the wrist is
extended against resistance (eg, as in using a manual screw driver or hitting a backhand shot with a
racket). In resistance trainees, lateral epicondylitis is most noticeable during various rowing and chin-up
exercises for the back muscles, particularly when the hands are pronated. Pain can extend from the
lateral epicondyle to the mid forearm.
Diagnosis
• Provocative testing
Pain along the common extensor tendon when the fingers are extended against resistance and the elbow
is held straight is diagnostic. Alternatively, the diagnosis is confirmed if the same pain occurs during the
following maneuver: The patient sits on a chair with the forearm on the examination table and the elbow
held flexed (bent) and the hand held palm downward; the examiner places a hand firmly on top of that of
the patient, who tries to raise the hand by extending the wrist.
Treatment
• Rest, ice, NSAIDs, extensor muscle stretches
• Modification of activity
• Later, resistive exercises
Treatment involves a 2-phased approach. Initially, rest, ice, NSAIDs, and stretching of the extensor
muscles are used. Occasionally a corticosteroid injection into the painful area around the tendon is
needed. When the pain subsides, gentle resistive exercises of the extensor (see
Sidebar 338-2
) and
===PAGE:3505===
flexor (see
Sidebar 338-3
) muscles in the forearm are done followed by eccentric and concentric resistive
exercises. Activity that hurts when the wrist is extended or pronated should be
avoided. Use of a tennis
elbow brace is often advised. Adjusting the fit and type of racket used can also help prevent further injury.
Sidebar 338-2 Exercises to Strengthen the Wrist Extensors
These exercises should be done only after the pain has subsided.
• Sit on a chair next to a table.
• Place the forearm on the table, palm facing down and elbow bent, with the wrist and hand hanging over
the edge.
• Hold a light weight in the hand.
• Slowly raise and lower the hand by bending and straightening the wrist, keeping the forearm planted
firmly on the table.
• Do 3 sets of 10 repetitions with 1 min of rest between repetitions.
• As the exercise becomes easier, increase the weight.
Next,
• While standing and with both arms held out in front of the body palms downward, wind up a 450-g (1-lb)
weight that is attached by a rope to a piece of wood with the diameter of a broomstick (the rope will be
attached to the center of the device with the hands grasping on either side). The weight should almost
touch the ground when the rope is unrolled.
• Roll the weight up and down 5 or 6 times by using the strength of the forearm extensor muscles (ie, the
rotation of the stick is upward and toward the body); stop if pain is felt. Repeat the exercise every other
day.
• Gradually increase the weight. Do not increase the number of times that the weight is rolled up. As
heavier weights are used and as tissues become stronger, frequency should decrease to once every 7
to 10 days.
Adapted from Mirkin G, Shangold M:
The Complete Sports Medicine Book for Women
. New York, Simon
& Schuster, 1985, p. 109; used by permission of The Miller Press.
Although surgery is not usually needed, surgical techniques to treat lateral epicondylitis involve removing
scar and degenerative tissue from the involved extensor tendons at the elbow. Surgery is usually
considered only after at least 9 to 12 mo of unsuccessful conservative treatment.
Medial Epicondylitis
(Golfer's Elbow)
Medial epicondylitis is inflammation of the flexor pronator muscle mass originating at the
medial epicondyle of the elbow. Diagnosis is with provocative testing. Treatment is rest and ice
and then exercises and gradual return to activity.
Medial epicondylitis is caused by any activity that places a valgus force on the elbow or that involves
forcefully flexing the volar forearm muscles, as occurs during pitching, golfing with improper technique,
serving a tennis ball (particularly with top spin, with a racket that is too heavy or too tightly strung or has
an undersized grip, or with heavy balls), and throwing a javelin. Nonathletic activities that may cause
===PAGE:3506===
medial epicondylitis include bricklaying, hammering, and typing.
Symptoms and Signs
Pain occurs in the flexor pronator tendons (attached to the medial epicondyle) and in the medial
epicondyle when the wrist is flexed or pronated against resistance.
Diagnosis
• Provocative testing
To confirm the diagnosis, the examiner has the patient sit in a chair with the forearm resting on a table
and the hand supinated. The patient tries to raise the fist by bending the wrist while the examiner holds it
down. Pain around the medial epicondyle and in the flexor tendon origin confirms the diagnosis.
Treatment
• Rest, ice, and muscle stretches
• Modification of activity
• Later, resistive exercises
Treatment is symptomatic and similar to that of lateral epicondylitis (. Patients should avoid
any activity that causes pain. Initially, rest, ice, NSAIDs, and stretching are used, occasionally with a
corticosteroid injection into the painful area around the tendon. When pain subsides, gentle resistive
exercises of the extensor and flexor muscles of the forearm are done, followed by eccentric
and
concentric resistive exercises. In general, surgery is considered only after at least 9 to 12 mo of failed
conservative management. Surgical techniques to treat medial epicondylitis involve removing scar tissue
and reattaching damaged tissues.
Sidebar 338-3 Exercises to Strengthen the Wrist Flexors
• Sit on a chair next to a table.
• Place the forearm on the table, palm facing up, with the wrist and hand hanging over the edge.
• Hold a light weight in the hand.
• Slowly raise and lower the hand by bending and straightening the wrist.
• The set should last about 90 to 120 sec for rehabilitation and about 50 to 70 sec for general strength
and conditioning. Rest 1 min, then do additional sets until the forearms feel fatigued and worked.
Repeat every 2 days while rehabilitating but only once every 7to10 days with normal or strong forearms
and when using heavier weights and greater intensity of effort. If pain is felt, stop the exercise
immediately, and try it again the next day.
• As the exercise becomes easier, increase the weight. For rehabilitation, frequency should decrease as
the muscles become stronger and heavier weights are used.
Piriformis Syndrome
Piriformis syndrome is compression of the sciatic nerve by the piriformis muscle in the
posterior pelvis, causing pain in the buttocks and occasionally sciatica. Diagnosis is by
examination. Treatment is symptomatic.
===PAGE:3507===
The piriformis muscle extends from the pelvic surface of the sacrum to the upper border of the greater
trochanter of the femur. During running or sitting, this muscle can compress the sciatic nerve at the site
where it emerges from under the piriformis to pass over the hip rotator muscles. Piriformis syndrome is
uncommon.
Symptoms and Signs
A chronic nagging ache, pain, tingling, or numbness starts in the buttocks and can extend along the
course of the sciatic nerve, down the entire back of the thigh and calf, and sometimes into the foot. Pain
worsens when the piriformis is pressed against the sciatic nerve (eg, while sitting on a toilet, a car seat, or
a narrow bicycle seat or while running).
Diagnosis
• Physical examination and provocative testing
Diagnosis is by physical examination. Pain with forceful internal rotation of the flexed thigh (Freiberg's
maneuver), abduction of the affected leg while sitting (Pace's maneuver), raising of the knee several
centimeters off the table while lying on a table on the side of the unaffected leg (Beatty's maneuver), or
pressure into the buttocks where the sciatic nerve crosses the piriformis muscle while the patient slowly
bends to the floor (Mirkin test) is diagnostic. Imaging is not useful except to rule out other causes of
sciatic compression. Unlike piriformis pain, lumbar disk compression of the sciatic nerve (sciatica— usually causes low back pain in addition to sciatic pain down the lower extremity. However,
differentiation from a lumbar disk disorder is sometimes difficult, and referral to a specialist may be
needed.
Treatment
• Modification of activity
• Stretches
Patients should temporarily stop running, bicycling, or doing any activity that elicits pain. Patients whose
pain is aggravated by sitting should stand or, if unable to do so, change positions to remove the source of
pressure around the buttock. Specific stretching exercises for the posterior hip and piriformis can be
beneficial. Surgery is rarely warranted. A carefully directed corticosteroid injection near the site where the
piriformis muscle crosses the sciatic nerve often helps temporarily. NSAIDs can also provide temporary
pain relief.
Knee Pain
Etiology
There are many causes of pain in or around the knee in athletes, particularly runners, including
• Subluxation of the patella when bending the knee
• Chondromalacia of the undersurface of the patella (runner's knee, which is softening of the knee cap
cartilage—
•
Intra-articular pathology, such as meniscal tears and plicae (infolding of the normal synovial lining of the
knee)
• Fat pad inflammation
• Stress fractures of the tibia
• Malalignment of the lower extremities
===PAGE:3508===
• Patellar (or infrapatellar) tendinitis (jumper's knee, which is an overuse injury to the patellar tendon at
the attachment to the lower pole of the patella—
Knee pain may be referred from the lumbar spine or hip or result from foot problems (eg, excessive
pronation or rolling inward of the foot during walking or running).
Evaluation
Diagnosis requires a thorough review of the injured athlete's training program, including a history of
symptom onset and aggravating factors, and a complete lower-extremity examination (for knee
examination, see pp.
and
).
Mechanical symptoms, such as locking or catching, suggest an internal derangement of the knee such as
a meniscal tear. Instability symptoms, such as giving way and loss of confidence in the extremity when
twisting or turning on the knee, suggest ligamentous injury or subluxation of the patella.
Chondromalacia is suggested by anterior knee pain after running, especially on hills, as well as pain and
stiffness after sitting for any length of time (positive movie sign). On examination, pain is typically
reproduced by compression of the patella against the femur.
Pain that becomes worse with weight-bearing suggests a stress fracture.
Treatment
Treatment is tailored to the specific cause of the pain.
Treatment of chondromalacia includes quad-riceps strengthening exercises with balanced strengthening
exercises for the hamstrings, use of arch supports if excessive pronation is a possible contributor, and
use of NSAIDs.
For patellar subluxation, use of patella-stabilizing pads or braces may be necessary, especially in sports
that require rapid, agile movements in various planes (eg, basketball, tennis).
If there is excessive pronation of the foot, and all other possible causes of knee pain have been excluded,
use of an orthotic insert is sometimes useful.
Stress fractures require rest and cessation of weight-bearing activity.
Intra-articular pathology often requires surgery.
Shin Splints
The term shin splints refers to nonspecific pain that occurs in the lower legs during running
sports.
Repetitive impact forces during jogging, running, or vigorous walking (eg, hiking) can overload the
musculotendinous unit and cause shin pain. Such pain sometimes results from a specific injury (eg, tibial
stress fracture, exercise-induced compartment syndrome, tibial periostitis, excessive foot pronation), but
often an exact cause cannot be identified. In such cases, the term shin splints is used.
Symptoms and Signs
Shin pain can occur in the anterior or posterior aspect of the leg and typically begins at the start of
activity but then lessens as activity continues. Pain that persists during rest suggests another cause, such
as stress fracture of the tibia.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3509===
• Usually clinical
On examination, severe localized tenderness is usually present over the anterior compartment muscles,
and sometimes there is palpable bone pain.
X-ray findings are usually unremarkable, regardless of the cause. If a stress fracture is suspected, a bone
scan may be necessary.
Exercise-induced compartment syndrome is diagnosed by using a specialized manometer to document
increased intra-compartmental pressure during exercise.
Treatment
• Modification of activity
• Stretches, NSAIDs
Running must be stopped until it causes no pain. Early treatment is ice, NSAIDs, and stretching of the
anterior and posterior calf muscles (see
Sidebar 338-4
). During the rest phase of treatment,
deconditioning can be minimized by encouraging cross-training techniques that do not require repetitive
weight-bearing activity, such as swimming.
Once symptoms have resolved, it is advised that a return to running be gradual. Wearing supportive
shoes with rigid heel counters and arch supports helps support the foot and ankle during running and can
aid recovery and prevent further symptoms. Avoiding running on hard surfaces (eg, cement roads) can
also help. Exercising the front of the calves by dorsiflexing the ankle against resistance (eg, rubber bands
or a dorsiflexion machine) increases leg muscle strength and can help prevent shin pain.
Sidebar 338-4 Strengthening the Calf and Shin Muscles
Calf
Toe raises
• Stand up. Slowly rise up on the toes, then slowly lower the heels to the floor.
• Do 3 sets of 10 repetitions with 1 min of rest between repetitions.
• When this exercise becomes easy, do it while holding progressively heavier weights.
Shin
Heel raises
• Stand on the heels and walk 3 to 4.5 m (10 to 15 ft).
• Do this exercise 3 times.
Achilles Tendinitis
Achilles tendon injuries include inflammation of the paratenon and partial or complete tears.
Achilles tendinitis is very common among running athletes. The calf muscles attach to the calcaneus via
the Achilles tendon. During running, the calf muscles help with the lift-off phase of gait. Repetitive forces
from running combined with insufficient recovery time can initially cause inflammation in the tendon
===PAGE:3510===
paratenon (fatty areolar tissue that surrounds the tendon). A complete tear of the Achilles tendon is a
serious injury, usually resulting from sudden, forceful stress (. Tendon tears can occur with
minimal exertion in people who have taken fluoroquinolone antibiotics.
Symptoms and Signs
The primary symptom of Achilles tendon inflammation is pain in the back of the heel, which initially
increases when exercise is begun and often lessens as exercise continues. A complete tear of the
Achilles tendon typically occurs with a sudden forceful change in direction when running or playing tennis
and is often accompanied by a sensation of having been struck in the back of the ankle and calf with an
object such as a baseball bat.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
On examination, an inflamed or partially torn Achilles tendon is tender when squeezed between the
fingers. Complete tears are differentiated by
• Sudden, severe pain and inability to walk on the extremity
• A palpable defect along the course of the tendon
• A positive Thompson test (while the patient lies prone on the examination table, the examiner squeezes
the calf muscle; this maneuver by the examiner does not cause the normally expected plantar flexion of
the foot)
Treatment
• Ice, NSAIDs, and stretches
• Modification of activities
Tendon inflammation should initially be treated with ice, gentle calf muscle stretching, and use of NSAIDs.
A heel lift can be placed in the shoes to take tension off the tendon. Athletes should be instructed to avoid
uphill and downhill running until the tendon is not painful and to engage in cross-training aerobic
conditioning. Complete tears of the Achilles tendon usually require surgical repair.
Stress Fractures
Stress fractures are small incomplete fractures that often involve the metatarsal shafts. They
are caused by repetitive weight-bearing stress.
Stress fractures do not usually result from a discrete injury (eg, fall, blow) but occur instead following
repeated stress and overuse that exceeds the ability of the supporting muscles to absorb the stress.
Stress fractures can involve the proximal femur, pelvis, or lower extremity. Over 50% involve the lower leg
and, in particular, the metatarsal shafts of the foot. Metatarsal stress fractures (march fractures) usually
occur in
• Runners who too quickly change intensity of workouts, time of workouts, or both
• Poorly conditioned people who walk long distances carrying a load (eg, newly recruited soldiers)
They most commonly occur in the 2nd metatarsal. Other risk factors include the following:
• Cavus foot (a foot with a high arch)
• Shoes with inadequate shock-absorbing qualities
===PAGE:3511===
• Osteoporosis
Stress fractures also may be a sign of the female athlete triad (amenorrhea, eating disorder, and
osteoporosis).
Symptoms and Signs
Forefoot pain that occurs after a long or intense workout and then disappears shortly after stopping
exercise is the typical initial manifestation of a metatarsal stress fracture. With subsequent exercise, onset
of pain is progressively earlier, and pain may become so severe that it prohibits exercise and persists
even when patients are not bearing weight.
Patients who have groin pain with weight bearing must be evaluated for a proximal femur stress fracture.
Patients with such fractures should be referred to a specialist.
Diagnosis
• X-ray or bone scan
Standard x-rays are recommended but may be normal until a callus forms 2 to 3 wk after the injury. Often,
technetium diphosphonate bone scanning is necessary for early diagnosis. Women with stress fractures
may have osteoporosis and should undergo dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (.
Treatment
• Restriction of weight-bearing activity
Treatment includes cessation of weight bearing on the involved foot (in case patients have a metatarsal
stress fracture) and use of crutches. Although casting is sometimes used, a wooden shoe or other
commercially available supportive shoe or boot is preferable to casting to avoid muscle atrophy. Healing
can take anywhere from 6 to 12 wk.
Popliteus Tendinitis
Popliteus tendinitis is inflammation in the popliteus tendon, which extends from the outer
surface of the bottom of the femur diagonally across the posterior knee to the medial superior
tibia.
The popliteus tendon prevents the lower leg from twisting outward during running as well as helping to
prevent forward movement of the femur on the tibia. Excessive running downhill tends to put excessive
stress on this tendon.
Pain and soreness, particularly when running downhill, develop along the posterolateral knee. Diagnosis
is by physical examination. The patient sits with the involved extremity in a cross-legged position (ie, the
hip flexed, abducted, and externally rotated and the knee flexed with the leg crossed over the opposite
extremity). The examiner then palpates the posterior lateral corner for tenderness.
Treatment includes rest, NSAIDs, ice, and occasionally physical therapy. Patients should not run until the
area is free of pain and then should limit their workouts and downhill running for at least 6 wk. Bicycling is
a good alternative exercise during healing.
Hamstring Strain
A hamstring strain is a partial tear of the hamstring muscles most commonly at the
musculotendinous junction.
===PAGE:3512===
Hamstring strains are common among runners. Athletes at risk include those with poor flexibility of the
hamstring muscles, inadequate pre-participation stretching and warm up, and previous injury. Older
athletes are also at higher risk. As with any muscle strain, the amount of force that caused the muscle to
tear determines the degree of injury.
Symptoms and Signs
Strains of the hamstring muscles can manifest as an acute painful area in the posterior thigh when
sprinting or running or develop more slowly, usually because of inadequate flexibility training.
Sidebar 338-5 Strengthening the Hamstrings
Upper part of the hamstrings
• Attach a 2-kg (5-lb) weight to the foot on the injured side. Lie face down on a bed with the lower part of
the body (from the waist down) off the bed and the toes touching the floor.
• Keeping the knee straight, slowly raise and lower the leg.
• Do 3 sets of 10 repetitions with 1 min of rest between repetitions.
• As strength returns, use increasingly heavier weights.
• Do this exercise every other day.
Lower part of the hamstrings
• Attach a 2-kg (5-lb) weight to the foot on the injured side. Stand on the other leg.
• Without bending the hip, slowly raise the weighted foot toward the buttocks by bending the knee, and
lower it toward the floor by straightening the knee.
• Do 3 sets of 10 repetitions with 1 min of rest between repetitions.
• As strength returns, use increasingly heavier weights.
• Do this exercise every other day.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
The diagnosis is confirmed by finding ham-string pain with knee flexion against resistance as well as on
palpation of the posterior thigh. In mild strains, tenderness and mild swelling are present. In more severe
strains, ecchymosis, moderate to severe swelling, and poor muscle function caused by pain and
weakness are present.
Treatment
• Rest, ice, and compression
• Stretching, then strengthening exercises
Ice and compression with use of a thigh sleeve should begin as soon as possible. NSAIDs and analgesics
are prescribed as necessary, and crutches may be required initially if walking is painful.
===PAGE:3513===
Once pain begins to resolve, patients should begin gentle hamstring stretching. When the pain has
completely resolved, gradual strengthening of the quadriceps and hamstrings is begun (see
Sidebar 338-
).
Only when satisfactory strength has been achieved should patients resume running. Athletes must be
made aware that recovery from hamstring injury can often take up to several months, depending on the
severity.
===PAGE:3514===
Chapter 339. Bites and Stings
Introduction
More than 90,000 bites and stings are reported to poison control centers each year; many more occur but
are not reported. Bites and stings result in about 100 deaths/yr in the US. All patients with bites and stings
should receive appropriate tetanus prophylaxis (see
Table 140-1
.
Centipede and Millipede Bites
Some larger centipedes can inflict a painful bite, causing swelling and redness. Symptoms rarely persist
for more than 48 h. Millipedes do not bite but may secrete a toxin that is irritating, particularly when
accidentally rubbed into the eye.
An ice cube placed on a centipede bite usually relieves the pain. Toxic secretions of millipedes should be
washed from the skin with large amounts of soap and water. If a skin reaction develops, a corticosteroid
cream should be applied. Eye injuries should be irrigated immediately.
Human and Mammal Bites
(See also
Rat-Bite Fever
)
Human and other mammal (mostly dog and cat, but also squirrel, gerbil, rabbit, guinea pig, and monkey)
bites are common and occasionally cause significant morbidity and disability. The hands, extremities, and
face are most frequently affected, although human bites can occasionally involve breasts and genitals.
Bites by large animals sometimes cause significant tissue trauma; about 10 to 20 people, mostly children,
die from dog bites each year. However, most bites involve relatively minor wounds.
Infection:
In addition to tissue trauma, infection from the biting organism's oral flora is a major concern.
Human bites can theoretically transmit viral hepatitis and HIV. However, HIV transmission is unlikely
because the concentration of HIV in saliva is much lower than in blood and salivary inhibitors render the
virus ineffective.
Rabies is a risk with certain mammal bites (. Monkey bites, usually restricted in the US to
animal laboratory workers, carry a small risk of herpesvirus simiae infection, which causes vesicular skin
lesions at the inoculation site and can progress to encephalitis, which is often fatal.
Bites to the hand
(see also p.
) carry a higher risk of infection, specifically cellulitis, tenosynovitis,
septic arthritis, and osteomyelitis, than other bite sites; this higher risk is a particular concern in human
bites resulting from a clenched-fist strike to the mouth (fight bite), the most common human bite wound. In
fight bites, the skin wound moves away from the underlying damaged structures when the hand is
opened, trapping bacteria inside, and patients often delay seeking treatment, allowing bacteria to multiply.
Human bites to sites other than the hand have not been proved to carry a greater risk of infection than
bites from other mammals. Cat bites to the hand
also have a high risk of infection because cats' long,
slender teeth often penetrate deep structures, such as joints and tendons, and the small punctures are
then sealed off.
Diagnosis
• Evaluation in the position in which the bite was inflicted
• Assessment for damage to underlying nerve, tendon, bone, and vasculature and for presence of foreign
bodies
Human bites sustained in an altercation are often attributed to other causes to avoid involvement of the
authorities or to ensure insurance coverage. Domestic violence is often denied.
===PAGE:3515===
Wounds are evaluated for damage to underlying structures (eg, nerves, vasculature, tendons, bone) and
for foreign bodies (. Evaluation should focus on careful assessment of function and the
extent of the bite. Wounds over or near joints should be examined in the position in which they were
inflicted (eg, with fist clenched) and explored under sterile conditions to assess tendon, bone, and joint
involvement and to detect retained foreign bodies. Wounds inflicted by chomping may appear to be minor
abrasions but should be examined to rule out deep injury.
Culturing fresh wounds is not valuable for targeting antimicrobial therapy, but infected wounds should be
cultured. For patients with human bites, screening for hepatitis or HIV is recommended only if the attacker
is known or suspected to be seropositive.
Treatment
• Meticulous wound care
• Selective wound closure
• Selective use of prophylactic antibiotics
Hospitalization is indicated if complications mandate very close monitoring, particularly when patient
characteristics predict a high risk of nonadherence with outpatient follow-up. Hospitalization should be
considered in the following circumstances:
• When a human bite is infected (including clenched-fist injuries)
• When a nonhuman bite is moderately or severely infected
• When loss of function is evident
• When the wound threatens or has damaged deep structures
• When a wound is disabling or difficult to care for at home (eg, significant wounds to both hands or both
feet, hand wounds that require continuous elevation)
Priorities of treatment include wound cleaning, debridement, closure, and infection prophylaxis.
Wound care:
Wounds should first be cleaned with a mild antibacterial soap and water (tap water is
sufficient), then pressure irrigated with copious volumes of saline solution using a syringe and IV catheter.
A dilute povidoneiodine solution (10:1 with 0.9% saline) may also be used. A local anesthetic should be
used as needed. Dead and devitalized tissue should be debrided.
Wound closure
is done only for select wounds. Many wounds should initially be left open, including the
following:
• Puncture wounds
• Wounds to the hands, feet, perineum, or genitals
• Wounds more than several hours old
• Wounds that are heavily contaminated
• Wounds that are markedly edematous
• Wounds that show signs of inflammation
• Wounds that involve deeper structures (eg, tendon, cartilage, bone)
===PAGE:3516===
• Wounds due to human bites
• Wounds sustained in a contaminated environment (eg, marine, field, sewers)
In addition, wound resolution in immunocompromised patients may be better with delayed closure. Other
wounds (ie, fresh, cutaneous lacerations) can usually be closed after appropriate wound hygiene. Results
with delayed primary closure are comparable to those with primary closure, so little is lost by leaving the
wound open initially if there is any question.
Hand bites should be wrapped in sterile gauze, splinted in position of function (slight wrist extension,
metacarpophalangeal and both interphalangeal joints in flexion). If wounds are moderate or severe, the
hand should be continuously elevated (eg, hanging from a pole).
Facial bites may require reconstructive surgery given the cosmetic sensitivity of the area and the potential
for scarring.
Infected wounds
may require debridement, suture removal, soaking, splinting, elevation, and IV
antibiotics, depending on the specific infection and clinical scenario. Joint infections and osteomyelitis
may require prolonged IV antibiotic therapy and orthopedic consultation.
Antimicrobials:
Thorough wound cleaning is the most effective and essential way to prevent infection
and often suffices. There is no consensus on indications for prophylactic antibiotics. Studies have not
confirmed a definite benefit, and widespread use of prophylactic antibiotics has the potential to select
resistant
organisms. Drugs do not prevent infection in heavily contaminated or inadequately cleaned
wounds. However, many practitioners prescribe prophylactic antibiotics for bites to the hand and some
other bites (eg, cat bites, monkey bites).
Infections are treated with antimicrobials initially chosen based on animal species. Culture results, when
available, guide subsequent therapy.
•
Human and dog bites:
For outpatients, the preferred drug is amoxicillin/clavulanate 500 to 875 mg po
bid for 3 days for prophylaxis or 5 to 7 days for treatment. Ampicillin/sulbactam 1.5 to 3.0 g IV q 6 h is a
reasonable empiric choice for inpatients; it covers
α
-hemolytic streptococci,
Staphylococcus aureus,
and
Eikenella corrodens,
the organisms most commonly cultured from human bites, as well as
Pasteurella
species (
P. canis
and
P. multocida
) and
Capnocytophaga canimorsus
, present in dog bites.
Penicillin-allergic patients with human bites can be treated with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 160/800
mg IV q 12 h plus clindamycin 150 to 300 mg IV q 6 h. For penicillin-allergic patients with infected dog
bites, doxycycline is an acceptable alternative, except for children > 8 yr and pregnant women.
Erythromycin can be used, but the risk of treatment failure is higher because of antimicrobial
resistance. Other acceptable combinations include clindamycin and a fluoroquinolone for adults or
clindamycin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole for children.
•
Cat bites:
A fluoroquinolone (eg, ciprofloxacin 500 mg po bid for 5 to 7 days) for prophylaxis and
treatment is recommended because of the prevalence of
P. multocida
. (
Bartonella henselae
—see p.
—is also transmitted by cat bites.) Alternatives for penicillin-allergic patients are clarithromycin 500
mg po bid for 7 to 10 days or clindamycin 150 to 300 mg po qid for 7 to 10 days.
•
Squirrel, gerbil, rabbit, and guinea pig bites:
These bites rarely become infected, but when they do,
they can be treated with the same drugs as infected cat bites.
•
Monkey bites:
Monkey bites should be treated prophylactically with IV acyclovir 800 mg 5 times/day for
14 days.
Patients with human bites should receive postexposure prophylaxis for viral hepatitis ( and HIV
( as indicated by patient and attacker serostatus. If status is unknown, prophylaxis is not
indicated.
===PAGE:3517===
Insect Stings
Stinging insects are members of the order Hymenoptera of the class Insecta. Hymenoptera venoms
cause local toxic reactions in all people and allergic reactions only in those previously sensitized. Severity
depends on the dose of venom and degree of previous sensitization. Patients exposed to swarm attacks
and patients with high venom-specific IgE levels are most at risk of anaphylaxis; many children never
outgrow the risk. The average unsensitized person can safely tolerate 22 stings/kg body weight; thus, the
average adult can withstand > 1000 stings, whereas 500 stings can kill a child.
Unexpectedly large numbers of people seek medical attention for stings and their complications after
hurricanes and possibly other environmental disasters.
Major Hymenoptera subgroups are
• Apids (eg, honeybees, bumblebees)
• Vespids (eg, wasps, yellow jackets, hornets)
• Formicids (eg, nonwinged fire ants)
Apids
usually do not sting unless provoked; however, Africanized honeybees (killer bees), migrants from
South America that reside in some southern and southwestern US states, are especially aggressive when
agitated. Apids typically sting once and dislodge their barbed stinger into the wound, introducing venom
and killing the insect. Melittin is thought to be the main pain-inducing component of the venom. The
venom of Africanized honeybees is no more potent than that of other honeybees but causes more severe
consequences because these insects attack in swarms and inflict multiple stings, increasing the dose of
venom. In the US, bee stings cause 3 to 4 times more deaths than do venomous snakebites.
Vespid
stingers have few barbs and do not stay in the skin, so these insects can inflict multiple stings.
The venom contains phospholipase, hyaluronidases, and a protein termed antigen 5, which is the most
allergenic. Although vespids also avoid stinging unless provoked, they nest close to humans, so
provocative encounters are more frequent. Yellow jackets are the major cause of allergic reactions to
insect stings in the US.
Fire ants
are present in the southern US, particularly in the Gulf region, where in urban areas, they may
sting as many as 40% of the population, causing at least 30 deaths/yr. There are several species, but
Solenopsis invicta
predominates and is responsible for an increasing number of allergic reactions. The
ant bites to anchor itself to the person and stings
repeatedly as it rotates its body in an arc around the
bite, producing a characteristic central bite partially encircled by a reddened sting line. The venom has
hemolytic, cytolytic, antimicrobial, and insecticidal properties; 3 or 4 small aqueous protein fractions are
probably responsible for allergic reactions.
Symptoms and Signs
Local apid and vespid reactions are immediate burning, transient pain, and itching, with an area of
erythema, swelling, and induration up to a few centimeters across. Swelling and erythema usually peak at
48 h, can persist for a week, and can involve an entire extremity. This local chemical cellulitis is often
confused with secondary bacterial cellulitis, which is more painful and uncommon after envenomation.
Allergic reactions may manifest with urticaria, angioedema, bronchospasm, refractory hypotension, or a
combination; swelling alone is not a manifestation of allergic reaction.
Symptoms and signs of a fire ant sting are immediate pain followed by a wheal and flare lesion, which
often resolves within 45 min and gives rise to a sterile pustule, which breaks down within 30 to 70 h. The
lesion sometimes becomes infected and can lead to sepsis. In some cases, an edematous, erythematous,
and pruritic lesion, rather than a pustule, develops. Anaphylaxis due to fire ant stings probably occurs in <
1% of patients. Mononeuritis and seizures have been reported.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3518===
Diagnosis is clinical. Apid stings are checked for the stinger. Upper and lower airways are assessed for
signs of allergic reaction. Secondary bacterial cellulitis is rare but is considered when erythema and
swelling begin a day or two after the sting (rather than immediately) and pain is significant.
Treatment
• Parenteral epinephrine and antihistamines for systemic allergic reactions
• Removal of any apid stingers
• Analgesics and antihistamines for local reactions
Stingers, if present, should be removed as quickly as possible. Suggested methods include scraping with
a thin dull edge (eg, edge of a credit card, dull side of a scalpel, thin table knife).
Pain, burning, and itching can be reduced by placing an ice cube over the sting as soon as possible and
giving oral H
blockers, NSAIDs, or both. Other possibly effective local measures include antihistamine
lotion (eg, with diphenhydramine or tripelennamine), lidocaine patches, eutectic mixture of local
anesthetic cream, intradermal injection of 1% lidocaine (with or without 1:100,000 epinephrine), and midpotency corticosteroid creams or ointments (eg, triamcinolone 0.1%). Most folk remedies (eg, application
of meat tenderizer) are of limited effectiveness.
Allergic reactions are treated with IV antihistamines; anaphylaxis is treated with parenteral epinephrine
and IV fluids and vasopressors if necessary (.
People with known hypersensitivity to stings should carry a kit containing a prefilled syringe of
epinephrine. They should use it as soon as possible after a sting and seek medical care immediately.
People who have a history of anaphylaxis or a known allergy to insect bites should wear identification
such as an alert bracelet.
Prevention
People who have had anaphylaxis are at risk from subsequent stings. Desensitization immunotherapy can
be considered. Venom immunotherapy (see also p.
) is highly effective, reducing the chance of
recurrent anaphylaxis from 50% to about 10% after 2 yr of therapy and to about 2% after 3 to 5 yr of
therapy. Children who receive venom immunotherapy have a significantly lower risk of systemic reaction
to stings 10 to 20 yr after treatment. Venom immunotherapy seems to be safe for use during pregnancy.
Single-venom therapy is adequate. After initial immunotherapy, maintenance doses may be needed for up
to 5 yr.
Puss Moth Caterpillar (ASP) Stings
Puss moth caterpillars (
Megalopyge opercularis
), of the order Lepidoptera, are also known as asps.
They are one of the most toxic caterpillars in North America. Puss moth caterpillars are endemic to the
southern US and live in shade trees and shrubbery around homes and schools and in parks. They are
teardrop shaped and, because they have long silky hair, resemble a tuft of cotton or fur. Their color varies
from yellow or gray to reddish brown. When a puss moth caterpillar rubs or is pressed against skin,
venomous hairs become embedded.
Envenomation causes intense throbbing pain, burning, and a rash with erythematous spots. More
susceptible patients can experience swelling, nausea, abdominal pain, headache, lymphadenopathy,
lymphadenitis, shock, and respiratory distress. Wound pain usually subsides within an hour, and the
erythematous spots disappear in a day.
Treatments for local reactions can include putting tape on the site and pulling it off to remove embedded
hairs. Applying a baking soda slurry or calamine lotion can be soothing, and putting an ice pack on the
site can ease pain. Treatment of systemic reactions is symptomatic. Treatment of severe reactions is like
===PAGE:3519===
that for insect stings.
Marine Bites and Stings
(For fish poisonings [eg, scombroid, ciguatera, fugu] and paralytic shellfish poisoning, see p.
.)
Some marine bites and stings are toxic; all create wounds at risk of infection with marine organisms, most
notably
Vibrio
sp,
Aeromonas
sp, and
Mycobacterium marinum
.
Shark bites result in jagged lacerations with near-total or total amputations and should be treated in the
same way as other major traumas (.
Cnidaria (Coelenterates)
Cnidaria include the following:
• Corals
• Sea anemones
• Jellyfish (including sea nettles)
• Hydroids (eg, Portuguese man-of-war)
Cnidaria are responsible for more envenomations than any other marine animal. However, of the 9000
species, only about 100 are toxic to humans. The multiple, highly developed stinging units (nematocysts)
on cnidaria tentacles can penetrate human skin; one tentacle may fire thousands of nematocysts into the
skin on contact.
Symptoms and Signs
Lesions vary with the type of cnidaria. Usually, lesions initially appear as small, linear, papular eruptions
that develop rapidly in one or several discontinuous lines, at times surrounded by a raised erythematous
zone. Pain is immediate and may be severe; itching is common. The papules may vesiculate and proceed
to pustulation, hemorrhage, and desquamation. Systemic manifestations include weakness, nausea,
headache, muscle pain and spasms, lacrimation and nasal discharge, increased perspiration, changes in
pulse rate, and pleuritic chest pain. Uncommonly, fatal injuries have been inflicted by the Portuguese
man-of-war in North American waters and by members of the Cubomedusae order, particularly the box
jellyfish (sea wasp,
Chironex fleckeri
), in Indo-Pacific waters.
Treatment
• Removal of tentacles
• Symptomatic treatment
• Various rinses, depending on the specific animal
Cnidaria sting treatment includes removal of adherent tentacles with a forceps (preferably) or fingers
(double-gloved if possible) and liberal rinsing to remove invisible stinging cells. The type of rinse varies
by the stinging animal:
• For jellyfish stings sustained in nontropical waters and for coral stings, seawater rinse can be used.
• For jellyfish stings sustained in tropical waters, vinegar rinse followed by seawater rinse can be used.
Fresh water should not be used because it can activate undischarged nematocysts.
• For box jellyfish stings, vinegar inhibits nematocyst firing and is used as the initial rinse if available,
===PAGE:3520===
followed by seawater rinse. Fresh water should not be used because it can activate undischarged
nematocysts.
• For Portuguese man-of-war stings, saltwater rinse can be used. Vinegar should not be used because it
can activate undischarged nematocysts.
Any difficulty breathing or alteration in level of consciousness, no matter how mild, is a medical
emergency, requiring transport to a medical center and possibly injection of epinephrine.
Symptoms are treated supportively. Pain caused by sea nettle stings, usually short-lived, can be relieved
with baking soda in a 50:50 slurry applied to the skin. For other stings, hot water or cold packs, whichever
feels better, can help relieve pain, as can an NSAID or other analgesic. For severe pain, opioids are
preferred. Painful muscle spasms may be treated with benzodiazepines. IV fluids and epinephrine can be
given if shock develops. Antivenom is available for the stings of the box jellyfish
C. fleckeri
but not for the
stings of North American species.
Seabather's eruption:
This stinging, pruritic, maculopapular rash affects swimmers in
some Atlantic
locales (eg, Florida, Caribbean, Long Island). It is caused by hypersensitivity to stings from the larvae of
the sea anemone (eg,
Edwardsiella lineate
) or the thimble jellyfish (
Linuche unguiculata
). The rash
appears where the bathing suit contacts the skin. People exposed to these larvae should shower after
taking off their bathing suit. Cutaneous manifestations can be treated with hydrocortisone lotion and, if
needed, an oral antihistamine. More severe reactions may require the addition of oral or IV prednisone.
Stingrays
Stingrays once caused about 750 stings/yr along North American coasts; the present incidence is
unknown, and most cases are not reported. Venom is contained in the one or more spines on the dorsum
of the animal's tail. Injuries usually occur when an unwary swimmer wading in ocean surf, bay, or
backwater steps on a stingray buried in the sand and provokes it to thrust its tail upward and forward,
driving the dorsal spine (or spines) into the patient's foot or leg. The integumentary sheath surrounding
the spine ruptures, and the venom escapes into the patient's tissues.
Symptoms and Signs
The main symptom is immediate severe pain. Although often limited to the injured area, the pain may
spread rapidly, reaching its greatest intensity in < 90 min; in most cases, pain gradually diminishes over 6
to 48 h but occasionally lasts days or weeks. Syncope, weakness, nausea, and anxiety are common and
may be due, in part, to peripheral vasodilation. Lymphangitis, vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, generalized
cramps, inguinal or axillary pain, respiratory distress, and death have been reported.
The wound is usually jagged, bleeds freely, and is often contaminated with parts of the integumentary
sheath. The edges of the wound are often discolored, and some localized tissue destruction may occur.
Generally, some swelling and edema are present. Open wounds are subject to infection.
Treatment
• Irrigation and debridement
Injuries to an extremity should be gently irrigated with salt water in an attempt to remove fragments of
spine, glandular tissue, and integument. The spine should be removed in the field only if it is superficially
embedded and is not penetrating the neck, thorax, or abdomen or creating a through-and-through injury
of a limb. Significant bleeding should be staunched with local pressure. Warm water immersion, although
recommended by some experts, has not been verified as an effective early treatment for stingray injuries.
In the emergency department, the wound should be reexamined for remnants of the sheath and debrided;
a local anesthetic may be given as needed. Embedded spines are treated similarly to other foreign
bodies. Patients stung on the trunk should be evaluated closely for puncture of viscera. Treatment of
systemic manifestations is supportive. Tetanus prophylaxis should be given, and an injured extremity
===PAGE:3521===
should be elevated for several days. Use of antibiotics and surgical wound closure may be necessary.
Mollusks
Mollusks include cones (including cone snails), cephalopods (including octopi and squids), and bivalves.
Conus californicus:
This type is the only known dangerous cone in North American waters. Its sting
causes localized pain, swelling, redness, and numbness that rarely progresses to paralysis or shock.
Treatment is largely supportive. Local measures seem to be of little value, and reports that local injection
of epinephrine and neostigmine are helpful are unproved. Severe
Conus
stings may require mechanical
ventilation and measures to reverse shock.
Cone snails:
These snails are a rare cause of marine envenomation among divers and shell collectors in
the Indian and Pacific Oceans. When the snail is aggressively handled (eg, during shell cleaning, when
placed in a pocket), it injects its venom through a harpoon-like tooth. Multiple neurotoxins in the venom
block ion channels and neurotransmitter receptors, resulting in paralysis, which is usually reversible but
has resulted in some deaths.
Treatment is supportive and may include local pressure immobilization (eg, by wrapping wide crepe or
other fabric bandages around the limb), immersion in hot water, and tetanus prophylaxis. Severe cases
may require respiratory support.
Octopi:
The bites of North American octopi are rarely serious.
Bites from the blue-ringed octopus, most common in Australian waters, cause tetrodotoxin envenomation,
with local anesthesia, neuromuscular paralysis, and respiratory failure; treatment is supportive.
Squid:
The large (up to 1.5 m), aggressive Humboldt squid is present off the west coast of the Americas;
it has reportedly bitten fishermen and divers. Other squid species are of less concern.
Sea Urchins
Sea urchins are present worldwide. Most sea urchin injuries result when spines break off in the skin and
cause local tissue reactions. Without treatment, the spines can migrate into deeper tissues, causing a
granulomatous nodular lesion, or they may wedge against bone or nerve. Joint and muscle pain and
dermatitis may also occur. A few sea urchins (eg,
Globiferous pedicellariae
) have calcareous jaws with
venom organs, enabling them to inject venom, but injuries are rare.
Diagnosis is usually obvious by history. A bluish discoloration at the entry site may help locate the spine.
X-rays can help when the location is not obvious during examination.
Treatment is immediate removal. Vinegar dissolves most superficial spines; soaking the wound in vinegar
several times a day or applying a wet vinegar compress may be sufficient. Hot soaks may help relieve
pain. Rarely, a small incision must be made to extract the spine; care must be taken because the spine is
very fragile. A spine that has migrated into deeper tissues may require surgical removal. Once spines are
removed, pain may continue for days; pain beyond 5 to 7 days should trigger suspicion of infection or a
retained foreign body.
G. pedicellariae
stings are treated by washing the area and applying a mentholated balm.
Mite Bites
There are multiple kinds of biting mites. Chiggers are probably the most common. Chiggers are mite
larvae that are ubiquitous outdoors except in arid regions; they bite, feed in the skin, then fall off. Outside
the US, chiggers may carry
Rickettsia tsutsugamushi
(. They do not burrow into the skin, but
because they are small, they are not readily seen on the skin surface.
===PAGE:3522===
Common mite species that bite and burrow into the skin include
Sarcoptes scabiei
, which causes scabies
(, and
Demodex
mites, which cause a scabies-like dermatitis (sometimes referred to as
mange) and are a possible etiologic agent in rosacea.
Dermatitis is caused by mites that occasionally bite humans but are ordinarily ectoparasites of birds,
rodents, or pets and by mites associated with plant materials or stored food or feed.
• Bird mites may bite people who handle live poultry or pet birds or who have birds' nests on their homes.
• Rodent mites from cats, dogs (especially puppies), and rabbits may bite people.
• Swine mange mites (
S. scabiei var suis
) from pig farms or pet pigs may also bite humans.
• The straw itch mite (
Pyemotes tritici
) is often associated with seeds, straw, hay, and other plant
material; it is a parasite of soft-bodied insects that are or have been present in such materials. These
mites often bite people who handle the infested items. Granary workers, people who handle grass
seeds or grass hay, and people who make dried plant arrangements are most at risk.
Allergic dermatitis or grocer's itch is caused by several species of mites associated with stored grain
products, cheese, and other foods. These mites do not bite but cause allergic dermatitis because people
become sensitized to allergens on the mites or their waste products.
House dust mites do not bite but feed on sloughed skin cells in pillows and mattresses and on floors
(especially on carpets). They are significant because many people develop pulmonary hypersensitivity to
allergens in the exoskeletons and feces of house dust mites.
Symptoms and Signs
Most bites cause some version of pruritic dermatitis; pruritus due to chigger bites is especially intense.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis of nonburrowing mite bites is presumptive based on the patient's history (eg, living, working,
and recreational environments) and physical examination. The mites themselves are rarely found
because they fall off after biting, the skin reaction is usually delayed, and most patients seek a physician's
assistance only after several days. Lesions caused by different mites are usually indistinguishable and
may superficially resemble other skin conditions (eg, other insect bites, contact dermatitis, folliculitis).
Diagnosis of burrowing mites can often be made presumptively based on history and a scabies-like
pattern of skin lesions. If the diagnosis is unclear or if treatment is ineffective, the diagnosis can be
confirmed by skin biopsy.
Treatment
• Topical corticosteroids or oral antihistamines
• Antimicrobial therapy for burrowing mites
Treatment of nonburrowing mite bites is symptomatic. Topical corticosteroids or oral antihistamines are
used as needed to control pruritus until the hypersensitivity reaction resolves. Through discussion of
possible sources, the physician can help patients avoid repeated exposure to mites. For
Demodex
bites,
veterinary consultation is needed. For treatment of scabies, see p.
.
Scorpion Stings
Although all scorpions in North America sting, most are relatively harmless. The stings usually cause only
===PAGE:3523===
localized pain with minimal swelling, some lymphangitis with regional lymphadenopathy, increased skin
temperature, and tenderness around the wound.
A significant exception in North America is the bark scorpion (
Centruroides sculpturatus
, also known as
C.
exilicauda
), present in Arizona, in New Mexico, and on the California side of the Colorado River. This
species is venomous and can cause more serious injury and illness. Initial symptoms are immediate pain
and sometimes numbness or tingling over the involved part. Swelling is usually absent, and there are few
skin changes. Serious symptoms, most common among children, include restlessness; muscle spasms;
abnormal and random head, neck, and eye movements; anxiety and agitation; and sialorrhea and
diaphoresis. In adults, tachycardia, hypertension, increased respirations, weakness, muscle spasms, and
fasciculations may predominate. Respiratory difficulties are rare in both age groups.
C. sculpturatus
stings have resulted in death in children < 6 yr and in hypersensitive people.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
Diagnosis is obvious from the history. Determining the scorpion species is usually not. Several species of
scorpions kept as exotic pets in the US (known by names that falsely suggest toxicity, such as yellow
death stalker and black death scorpion) are similar in appearance to foreign species with dangerously
toxic venom. However, the actual species of pet scorpion is seldom known by the patient or, if provided,
may be unreliable. Stings should be treated as potentially dangerous until signs or lack of signs indicates
otherwise.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Antivenom for severe cases in North America
Treatment of nonvenomous scorpion stings is based on symptoms. An ice pack over the wound and oral
NSAIDs reduce pain. Treatment of venomous
Centruroides
stings consists of bedrest, benzodiazepines
for muscle spasms, and IV drugs as needed to control hypertension, agitation, and pain. Patients should
be kept npo for 8 to 12 h after the bite. Antivenom, available only in Arizona, should be given in an ICU
setting to all patients with severe cases and to patients who are unresponsive to supportive care,
particularly children. Information about availability and dosing may be obtained by contacting a regional
poison control center.
Snakebites
Of about 3000 snake species throughout the world, only about 15% worldwide and 20% in the US are
dangerous to humans because of venom or toxic salivary secretions (see
Table 339-1
). At least one species of venomous snake is native to every state in the US except Alaska,
Maine, and Hawaii. Almost all are crotalines (also called pit vipers because of pitlike depressions on
either side of the head, which are heat-sensing organs):
• Rattlesnakes
• Copperheads
• Cottonmouths (water moccasins)
About 45,000 snakebites (of which 7000 to 8000 are venomous) occur annually in the US. Rattlesnakes
account for the majority of bites and almost all deaths. Copperheads and, to a lesser extent,
cottonmouths account for most other venomous bites. Coral snakes (elapids) and imported species (in
zoos, schools, snake farms, and amateur and professional collections) account for < 1% of all bites. Most
patients are males between 17 and 27 yr; 50% of them are intoxicated and deliberately handled or
===PAGE:3524===
molested the snake. Most bites occur on the upper extremities. Five or 6 deaths occur annually in the US.
Risk factors for death include age extremes, handling of captive snakes (rather than wild encounters),
delay in treatment, and undertreatment.
Outside the US, fatal snakebites are much more common, accounting for > 100,000 deaths yearly.
[Table 339-1.
Significant Venomous Snakes by Region]
Pathophysiology
Snake venoms are complex substances, chiefly proteins, with enzymatic activity. Although enzymes play
an important role, the lethal properties of venom are caused by certain smaller polypeptides. Most venom
components appear to bind to multiple physiologic receptors, and attempts to classify venom as toxic to a
specific system (eg, neurotoxin, hemotoxin, cardiotoxin, myotoxin) are misleading and can lead to errors in
clinical judgment.
Pit vipers:
The complex venom of most North American pit vipers has local effects as well as systemic
effects such as coagulopathy. Effects may include
• Local tissue damage
• Vascular defects
• Hemolysis
• A disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)-like (defibrination) syndrome
• Pulmonary, cardiac, renal, and neurologic defects
Venom alters capillary membrane permeability, causing extravasation of electrolytes, albumin, and RBCs
through vessel walls into the envenomated site. This process may occur in the lungs, myocardium,
kidneys, peritoneum, and, rarely, the CNS. Common clinical syndromes secondary to severe pit viper
envenomation include the following:
•
Edema:
Initially, edema, hypoalbuminemia, and hemoconcentration occur.
•
Hypovolemia:
Later, blood and fluids pool in the microcirculation, causing hypotension, lactic acidemia,
shock, and, in severe cases, multisystem organ failure. Effective circulating blood volume falls and may
contribute to cardiac and renal failure.
•
Bleeding:
Clinically significant thrombocytopenia (platelet count < 20,000/
μ
L) is common in severe
rattlesnake bites and may occur alone or with other coagulopathies. Venom-induced intravascular
clotting may trigger DIC-like syndrome, resulting in bleeding.
•
Renal failure:
Renal failure may result from severe hypotension, hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis,
nephrotoxic venom effects, or a DIC-like syndrome. Proteinuria, hemoglobinuria, and myoglobinuria may
occur in reaction to severe rattlesnake bites.
The venom of most North American pit vipers causes very minor changes in neuromuscular conduction,
except for Mojave and eastern diamondback rattlesnake venom, which may cause serious neurologic
deficits.
Coral snakes:
Venom of these snakes contains primarily neurotoxic components, which cause a
presynaptic neuromuscular blockade, potentially causing respiratory paralysis. The lack of significant
proteolytic enzyme activity
accounts for the paucity of symptoms and signs at the bite site.
Symptoms and Signs
===PAGE:3525===
A snakebite, whether from a venomous or nonvenomous snake, usually causes terror, often with
autonomic manifestations (eg, nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, diarrhea, diaphoresis), which may be
difficult to distinguish from systemic manifestations of envenomation.
Nonvenomous snakebites cause only local injury, usually pain and 2 to 4 rows of scratches from the
snake's upper jaw at the bite site.
Symptoms and signs of envenomation may be local, systemic, or a combination, depending on degree of
envenomation and species of snake. Anaphylaxis can occur, particularly in snake handlers who have
been previously sensitized.
Pit vipers:
About 25% of pit viper bites are dry (venom is not deposited), and no systemic symptoms or
signs develop.
Local signs
include ≥ 1 fang marks and scratches. If envenomation has occurred, edema and erythema
at the bite site and in adjacent tissues occur, usually within 30 to 60 min. Edema can progress rapidly and
may involve the entire extremity within hours. Lymphangitis and enlarged, tender regional lymph nodes
may develop; temperature increases over the bite area. In moderate or severe envenomations (see
Diagnosis, below), ecchymosis is common and may appear at and around the bite site within 3 to 6 h.
Ecchymosis is most severe after bites by eastern and western diamondbacks, cottonmouths, and prairie,
Pacific, and timber rattlesnakes. Ecchymosis is less common after copperhead and Mojave rattlesnake
bites. The skin around the bite may appear tense and discolored. Bullae—serous, hemorrhagic, or both
—usually appear at the bite site within 8 h. Edema resulting from North American rattlesnake
envenomations is usually limited to dermal and subcutaneous tissues, although severe envenomation
rarely causes edema in subfascial tissue, causing compartment syndrome (defined as compartment
pressures ≥ 30 mm Hg over 1 h). Necrosis around the bite site is common after rattlesnake
envenomations. Most venom effects on soft tissues peak within 2 to 4 days.
Systemic manifestations
of envenomation can include nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, anxiety,
confusion, spontaneous bleeding, fever, hypotension, and shock. Some patients with rattlesnake bites
develop a rubbery, minty, or metallic taste in their mouth. The venom of most North American pit vipers
causes minor neuromuscular conduction changes, including generalized weakness and paresthesias and
muscle fasciculations. Some patients have alterations in mental status. Venom of Mojave and eastern
diamondback rattlesnakes may cause serious neurologic deficits, including respiratory depression.
Rattlesnake envenomations may induce various coagulation abnormalities, including thrombocytopenia,
prolongation of PT (measured by the INR) or activated PTT, hypofibrinogenemia, elevated fibrin
degradation products, or a combination of these disorders, resembling a DIC-like syndrome.
Thrombocytopenia is usually the first manifestation and may be asymptomatic or, in the presence of a
multicomponent coagulopathy, cause spontaneous bleeding. Patients with coagulopathy typically
hemorrhage from the bite site or from venipuncture sites or mucous membranes, with epistaxis, gingival
bleeding, hematemesis, hematochezia, hematuria, or a combination. A rise in Hct is an early finding
secondary to edema and hemoconcentration. Later, Hct may fall as a result of fluid replacement and
blood loss due to DIC-like syndrome. In severe cases, hemolysis may cause a rapid fall in Hct.
Anaphylaxis can cause systemic symptoms immediately.
Coral snakes:
Pain and swelling may be minimal or absent and are often transitory. The absence of local
symptoms and signs may erroneously suggest a dry bite, producing a false sense of security for both
patient and clinician. Weakness of the bitten extremity may become evident within several hours.
Systemic neuromuscular manifestations may be delayed for 12 h and include weakness and lethargy;
altered sensorium (eg, euphoria, drowsiness); cranial nerve palsies causing ptosis, diplopia, blurred
vision, dysarthria, and dysphagia; increased salivation; muscle flaccidity; and respiratory distress or
failure. Once the neurotoxic venom effects manifest, they are difficult to reverse and may last 3 to 6 days.
Untreated, respiratory muscle paralysis may be fatal.
Diagnosis
• Identification of the snake
===PAGE:3526===
• Grading severity of envenomation
Definitive diagnosis requires positive identification of the snake and clinical manifestations of
envenomation. History should include the time of bite, description of the snake, type of field therapy,
underlying medical conditions, allergy to horse or sheep products, and history of previous venomous
snakebites and therapy. A complete physical examination, including baseline measurements of limb
circumference proximal and distal to the bite site, should be done.
Snakebites should be assumed to be venomous until proved otherwise by clear identification of the
species or by a period of observation.
Snake identification:
Patients often cannot recall details of the snake's appearance; however, pit vipers
differ from nonvenomous snakes (see
Fig. 339-1
). Consultation with a zoo, an aquarium, or a poison control center can help in the identification
of snake species.
Coral snakes in the US have round pupils and black snouts but lack facial pits. They have blunt or cigarshaped heads and alternating bands of red, yellow (cream), and black, often causing them to be mistaken
for the common nonvenomous scarlet king snake, which has alternating bands of red, black, and yellow.
The distinguishing feature in the coral snake is that the red bands are adjacent to only yellow bands, not
black bands. ("red on yellow, kill a fellow; red on black, venom lack"). Coral snakes have short, fixed
fangs and inject venom through successive chewing movements.
Fang marks are suggestive but not conclusive; rattlesnakes may leave single or double fang marks or
other teeth marks, whereas bites by nonvenomous snakes usually leave multiple superficial teeth marks.
However, the number of teeth marks and bite sites may vary because snakes may strike and bite multiple
times.
A dry pit viper bite is diagnosed when no symptoms or signs of envenomation appear over 8 h.
Severity of envenomation:
Severity of envenomation depends on the following:
• Size and species of the snake (rattlesnakes > cottonmouths > copperheads)
• Amount of venom injected per bite (cannot be determined by history)
[Fig. 339-1.
Identifying pit vipers.]
•
Number of bites
• Location and depth of the bite (eg, envenomation in bites to the head and trunk tends to be more severe
than in bites to the extremities)
• Age, size, and health of the patient
• Time elapsed before treatment
• Patient's susceptibility (response) to the venom
Severity of envenomation can be graded as minimal, moderate, or severe based on local findings,
systemic symptoms and signs, coagulation parameters, and laboratory results (see
Table 339-2
). Grading should be determined by the most severe symptom, sign, or laboratory finding.
Envenomation may progress rapidly from minimal to severe and must be continually reassessed.
If systemic symptoms begin immediately, anaphylaxis should be assumed.
Treatment
===PAGE:3527===
• First aid
• Supportive care
• Antivenom
• Wound care
General approach:
Treatment begins immediately, before patients are moved to a medical facility.
In the field
, patients should move or be moved beyond the snake's striking distance. They should avoid
exertion and be reassured, kept warm, and rapidly transported to the nearest medical facility. A bitten
extremity should be loosely immobilized in a functional position just below heart level, and all rings,
watches, and constrictive clothing should be removed. Pressure immobilization to delay systemic
absorption of venom (eg, by wrapping wide crepe or other fabric bandages around the limb) may be
appropriate for coral snake bites but is not recommended in the US, where most bites are from pit vipers;
pressure immobilization may cause arterial insufficiency and necrosis. First responders should support
airway and breathing, administer O
, and establish IV access in an unaffected extremity while
transporting patients. All other out-of-hospital interventions (eg, tourniquets, topical preparations, wound
suction by mouth or with a device with or without incision, cryotherapy, electrical shock) are of no proven
benefit, may be harmful, and may delay appropriate treatment. However, tourniquets that are already
placed, unless causing limb-threatening ischemia, should remain in place until patients are transported to
the hospital and envenomation is excluded or definitive treatment is initiated.
Serial assessment and testing
begin in the emergency department. Extremity circumference should be
measured on arrival and every 15 to 20 min until local progression subsides; outlining the margins of local
edema with an indelible marker can help clinicians assess progression of local envenomation. All but
trivial pit viper bites require a baseline CBC (including platelets), coagulation profile (eg, PT, PTT,
fibrinogen), measurement of fibrin degradation products, and urinalysis, as well as measurement of serum
electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine. For moderate and severe envenomations, patients require blood typing
and cross-matching, ECG, chest x-ray, and CK tests, as governed by the patient's status, often as
frequently as every 4 h for the first 12 h and then daily. In coral snake bites, neurotoxic venom effects
require monitoring of O
saturation and baseline and serial pulmonary function tests (eg, peak flow, vital
capacity).
[Table 339-2.
Severity of Pit Viper Envenomation]
Duration of close observation
for all patients with pit viper bites should be > 8 h in the emergency
department or ICU. Patients without evidence of envenomation after 8 h may be sent home after
adequate wound care (. Coral snake bite patients should be monitored for at least 12 h in an
intensive care setting in case respiratory paralysis develops. Envenomation initially assessed as mild may
progress to severe within several hours.
Supportive care
may include respiratory support, benzodiazepines for anxiety and sedation, opioids for
pain, and fluid replacement and vasopressor support for shock. Transfusions (eg, packed RBCs, fresh
frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate, platelets) may be required but should not be given before patients have
received adequate quantities of neutralizing antivenom because most coagulopathies respond to
sufficient quantities of neutralizing antivenom. Suspected anaphylaxis (eg, with immediate onset of
systemic symptoms) is treated with standard measures, including epinephrine. Tracheostomy may be
needed if trismus, laryngeal spasm, or excessive salivation is present.
Antivenom:
Along with aggressive supportive care, antivenom is the mainstay of treatment for patients
with moderate to severe envenomation.
For pit viper envenomation
, equine-derived antivenom has been largely replaced by ovine-derived
Crotalidae polyvalent immune FAb antivenom (purified FAb fragments of IgG harvested from pit viper
venom-immunized sheep). The effectiveness of the equine-derived antivenom is time and dose related; it
===PAGE:3528===
is most effective within 4 h after the envenomation and less effective after 12 h, although it may reverse
coagulopathies after 24 h. Case reports suggest that Crotalidae polyvalent immune FAb may not be
affected by time and dose and may be effective even when started 24 h after envenomation. Crotalidae
polyvalent immune FAb is also safer than equine-derived antivenom, although it can still cause acute
(cutaneous or anaphylactic) reactions and delayed hypersensitivity reactions (serum sickness). Serum
sickness develops in up to 16% of patients 1 to 3 wk after administration of the FAb product. A loading
dose of 4 to 6 vials of reconstituted Crotalidae polyvalent immune FAb diluted in 250 mL of normal saline
should be infused slowly at 20 to 50 mL/h for the first 10 min; then if no adverse reactions occur, the
remainder is infused over the next hour. The same dose can be repeated 2 times as needed to control
symptoms, reverse coagulopathies, and correct physiologic parameters. In children, the dose is not
decreased (eg, based on weight or size). Measuring the circumference of the involved extremity at 3
points proximal to the bite and measuring the advancing border of edema every 15 to 30 min can guide
decisions about the need for additional doses. Once control is achieved, a 2-vial dose in 250 mL saline is
given at 6, 12, and 18 h to prevent recurrence of limb swelling and other venom effects.
Pit viper species
can affect dose. Cottonmouth envenomation may require smaller doses. Antivenom is
usually unnecessary for copperhead and pygmy rattlesnake bites, except in children, the elderly, and
patients with other medical conditions (eg, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease).
For
coral snake envenomation
, equine-derived polyvalent coral snake antivenom is given at a dose of
5 vials for suspected envenomation and an additional 10 to 15 vials if symptoms develop. Dose is similar
for adults and children.
Equine-derived antivenom
can cause hypersensitivity reactions and serum sickness. When equinederived antivenom is required, skin testing for sensitivity to horse serum is controversial. Skin testing has
no predictive value for development of acute hypersensitivity reactions, and a negative result does not
completely preclude an immediate hypersensitivity reaction. However, if the skin test result is positive and
the envenomation is considered life or limb threatening, H
and H
blockers should be given before
antivenom administration in a critical care setting equipped to treat anaphylaxis. Early anaphylactoid
reactions to antivenom are common and usually result from too-rapid infusion; treatment is temporary
discontinuation of the infusion and treatment with epinephrine, H
and H
blockers, and IV fluid
depending on severity. Usually, antivenom can be resumed after diluting the antivenom further and
infusing it at a slower rate. Serum sickness is common and manifests 7 to 21 days after treatment as
fever, rash, malaise, urticaria, arthralgia, and lymphadenopathy (. Treatment is H
blockers
and a tapering course of oral corticosteroids.
Adjunctive measures:
Patients should receive tetanus prophylaxis (toxoid and sometimes Ig) as
suggested by history (see
Table 140-1
. Snakebites rarely become infected, and antibiotics
are indicated only for clinical evidence of infection. If necessary, options include a 1st-generation
cephalosporin (eg, oral cephalexin, IV cefazolin) or a broad-spectrum penicillin (eg, oral
amoxicillin/clavulanate, IV ampicillin/sulbactam). Subsequent
antibiotic choices should be based on
culture and sensitivity results from wound cultures.
Wound care
for bites is similar to that for other puncture wounds. The area is cleaned and dressed. For
limb bites, the extremity is splinted in a functional position and elevated. Wounds should be examined and
cleaned daily and covered with a sterile dressing. Blebs, bloody vesicles, or superficial necrosis should
be surgically debrided between days 3 and 10, in stages if needed. Sterile whirlpool may be indicated for
wound debridement and physical therapy. Fasciotomy for compartment syndrome is rarely necessary but
is an option when compartment pressure rises ≥ 30 mm Hg over 1 h, causes severe vascular
compromise, and is unresponsive to limb elevation, mannitol 1 to 2 g/kg IV, and antivenom. Joint motion,
muscle strength, sensation, and limb girth should be evaluated within 2 days after the bite. Contractures
can be prevented by interrupting immobilization with frequent periods of gentle exercise, progressing from
passive to active.
Regional poison control centers and zoos
are excellent resources when dealing with snakebites,
including those by nonnative snakes. These facilities maintain a list of physicians trained in snake
identification and snakebite care as well as the Antivenin Index, published and periodically updated by the
===PAGE:3529===
American Zoo and Aquarium Association and the American Association of Poison Control Centers; this
index catalogs the location and number of vials of antivenom available for all native venomous snakes
and most exotic species. A national help line is available at 800-222-1222.
Other Reptile Bites
Other reptile bites of significance include those of venomous lizards, alligators and crocodiles, and
iguanas.
Venomous lizards:
These lizards include the following:
• Gila monster (
Heloderma suspectum
), present in the southwestern US and Mexico
• Beaded lizard (
H. horridum
) of Mexico
The complex venom of these lizards contains serotonin, arginine esterase, hyaluronidase, phospholipase
A
, and ≥ 1 salivary kallikreins but lacks neurotoxic components or coagulopathic enzymes. Bites are
rarely fatal. When venomous lizards bite, they clamp on firmly and chew the venom into the person.
Symptoms and signs include intense pain, swelling, ecchymosis, lymphangitis, and lymphadenopathy.
Systemic manifestations, including weakness, sweating, thirst, headache, and tinnitus, may develop in
moderate or severe cases. Cardiovascular collapse occurs rarely. The clinical course is similar to that of a
minimal to moderate envenomation by a larger species of rattlesnake.
Treatment in the field involves removing the lizard's jaws by using pliers, by applying a flame to the lizard's
chin, or by immersing the animal entirely underwater. In a hospital, treatment is supportive and similar to
that for pit viper envenomation; no antivenom is available. The wound should be probed with a small
needle for broken or shed teeth and then cleaned. If the wound is deep, an x-ray can be taken to rule out
a retained foreign body or bone fracture. Prophylactic antibiotics are usually not recommended.
Alligators and crocodiles:
Bites usually result from handling; however, rarely, native encounters occur.
Bites are not venomous, are notable for a high frequency of soft-tissue infections by
Aeromonas
sp, and
are generally treated as major trauma.
Wounds are irrigated and debrided; then delayed primary closure is done or the wounds are allowed to
heal by secondary intention. Patients are treated preventively with clindamycin and
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (first choice) or tetracycline.
Iguanas:
Bites and claw injuries are becoming more frequent as more are kept as pets. Wounds are
superficial, and treatment is local. Soft-tissue infection is uncommon, but when infection occurs,
Salmonella
is a common cause; infection can be treated with a fluoroquinolone.
Spider Bites
Almost all of the 30,000 species of spiders are venomous. However, the fangs of most species are too
short or too fragile to penetrate the skin. Serious systemic reactions most frequently occur with bites from
brown spiders (eg, violin, fiddleback, brown recluse—
Loxosceles
sp) and widow spiders (black widow
—
Latrodectus
sp). Brown spiders are present in the Midwest and south central US, not in the coastal and
Canadian border states, except when imported through clothing or luggage. Widow spiders are present
throughout the US. Several venomous species (eg,
Pamphobeteus
,
Cupiennius
,
Phoneutria
) are not
native to the US but may be imported on
produce or other materials or through commercial trade in
spiders as novelty pets. Spider bites cause < 3 deaths/yr in the US, usually in children.
Only a few spider venoms have been studied in detail. Of greatest significance are those having
necrotizing venom components (in brown and some house spiders) and neurotoxic venom components (in
widow spiders). The most toxic component of widow spider venom seems to be a peptide that affects
neuromuscular transmission. The specific fraction of brown spider venom that causes the characteristic
===PAGE:3530===
necrotic lesion has not been isolated.
Symptoms and Signs
Brown spider
bites are most common in the US. Some bites are painless initially, but pain, which can be
severe and involve the entire extremity, develops within 30 to 60 min in all cases. The bite area becomes
erythematous and ecchymotic and may be pruritic. Generalized pruritus may also be present. A central
bleb forms at the bite site, often surrounded by an irregular ecchymotic area (bull's eye lesion). The lesion
may mimic pyoderma gangrenosum. The central bleb becomes larger, fills with blood, ruptures, and
leaves an ulcer; a black eschar forms over the ulcer and eventually sloughs.
Most bites leave minimal residual scarring but some can leave a large tissue defect, which may involve
muscle. Loxoscelism, a venom-induced systemic syndrome, may not be detected until 24 to 72 h after the
bite and is uncommon. Systemic effects (eg, fever, chills, nausea and vomiting, arthralgias, myalgias,
generalized rash, seizures, hypotension, disseminated intravascular coagulation, thrombocytopenia,
hemolysis, renal failure) are responsible for all reported fatalities.
Widow spider
bites usually cause an immediate, sharp, stinging sensation. Within 1 h after
envenomation, there may be progression to persistent local pain, diaphoresis, erythema, and piloerection
at the bite site. The pain may be described as dull and numbing and may be disproportionate to the
clinical signs. Latrodectism, a systemic syndrome caused by neurotoxic venom components, manifests as
restlessness, anxiety, sweating, headache, dizziness, nausea and vomiting, hypertension, salivation,
weakness, diffuse erythematous rash, pruritus, ptosis, eyelid and extremity edema, respiratory distress,
increased skin temperature over the affected area, and cramping pain and muscular rigidity in the
abdomen, shoulders, chest, and back. Abdominal pain may be severe and mimic acute surgical abdomen,
rabies, or tetanus. Latrodectism is very uncommon and most commonly develops in patients at age
extremes and those with other medical conditions. Death is extremely rare. Symptoms lessen over 1 to 3
days, but residual spasms, paresthesias, agitation, and weakness may persist for weeks to months.
Tarantula
bites are extremely rare and nonvenomous, but agitation of the spider may cause it to throw
needle-like hairs. The hairs act as foreign bodies in skin or eyes and can trigger mast cell degranulation
and an anaphylactoid reaction (eg, urticaria, angioedema, bronchospasm, hypotension) in sensitized
people, usually pet owners who handle the spider daily.
Diagnosis
• Clinical evaluation
• Careful consideration of alternative diagnoses
Spider bites are often falsely suspected by patients. Diagnosis is typically suspected based on history
and physical signs, but confirmation is rare because it requires witnessed biting, identification of the
spider (the spider is rarely recovered intact), and exclusion of other causes. In nonendemic areas, a
brown spider bite should not be diagnosed without identifying the spider. Many patients incorrectly
attribute much more common methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) skin infections to brown
recluse spiders bites. Such infections should be excluded, as should other conditions that mimic spider
bites (see
Table 339-3
). Severe cases of latrodectism should be distinguished from acute abdomen, rabies, or
tetanus.
Spiders are identified by location and markings. Widow spiders live outdoors in protected spaces (eg,
rock piles, firewood cords, hay bales, outhouses) and have a red or orange hourglass marking on the
ventral abdomen. Brown spiders live indoors in protected spaces (eg, in clothing, behind furniture, under
baseboards) and have a fiddle- or violin-like marking on the dorsal cephalothorax, ranging from the eyes
to the abdomen. This marking may be difficult to recognize even in the intact spider.
Treatment
===PAGE:3531===
• Routine wound care
• Delayed excision for necrotic brown spider bites
• Ca gluconate and possibly antivenom for latrodectism
Treatment common to all spider bites includes wound cleaning, ice to reduce pain, extremity elevation,
tetanus prophylaxis, and
[Table 339-3.
Disorders that Mimic Spider Bites]
observation. Most local reactions respond to these measures alone.
For
brown spider bites
, limiting intervention to standard wound care and measures that minimize
infection risk is usually most prudent:
• Ulcerating lesions should be cleaned daily and debrided as needed; topical antibiotic ointment (eg,
polymyxin/bacitracin/neomycin) may be used.
• Urticarial lesions can be treated with antihistamines, topical corticosteroids, or both.
• Necrotic lesions caused by brown recluse spider bites should be cleaned and bandaged. Surgical
excision, if necessary, should be delayed until the area of necrosis is fully demarcated, a process that
may take weeks.
No intervention has been proved to reduce morbidity or improve outcome after a brown spider bite.
Commonly touted or poorly studied treatment options are controversial or potentially harmful. Dapsone
(eg, 100 mg po once/day until inflammation subsides) is often considered for ulcers > 2 cm, but its benefit
is unproved. Benefit is variable, and dose-related hemolysis almost always develops; agranulocytosis,
aplastic anemia, and methemoglobinemia have been documented. Local injection of corticosteroids into
necrotic lesions has no value.
Latrodectism
is initially treated supportively. Myalgias and muscle spasms due to widow spider bites
respond poorly to muscle relaxants and opioid analgesics. A 10% Ca gluconate bolus given slowly IV in
increments of 2 to 3 mL as needed may relieve pain briefly but requires continuous cardiac monitoring.
Patients < 16 yr or > 60 yr, those with hypertension, and those with symptoms of severe envenomation
should be hospitalized. Equine-derived antivenom is available for patients with severe latrodectism. It may
be considered early in the course if symptoms are severe but can be effective up to 36 h after the bite.
Clinical response can be dramatic. The dose for children and adults is 1 vial (6000 units) IV in 10 to 50
mL of normal saline usually over 3 to 15 min. The manufacturer recommends skin testing before
administering the antivenom; however, skin testing does not always predict adverse reactions such as
acute anaphylaxis.
Tick Bites
(See also
Lyme Disease

Chapter 139
on p.
, and
Babesiosis
)
Most tick bites in the US are from various species of Ixodidae, which attach and feed for several days if
not removed. Disease transmission becomes more likely if ticks are attached for a longer duration.
Tick bites most often occur in spring and summer and are painless. The vast majority are uncomplicated
and do not transmit disease; they often cause a red papule at the bite site and may induce
hypersensitivity or granulomatous foreign body reactions. The bites of
Ornithodoros coriaceus
ticks
(pajaroello) cause local vesiculation, pustulation with rupture, ulceration, and eschar, with varying
degrees of local swelling and pain. Similar reactions have resulted from bites of other ticks.
Diagnosis
===PAGE:3532===
Diagnosis is by clinical evaluation and identification of the attached tick.
Treatment
• Tick removal with blunt, curved forceps
Ticks should be removed as soon as possible to reduce the cutaneous immune response and the
likelihood of disease transmission. If the patient presents with the tick still attached, the best method of
extracting the tick and all of its mouth parts from the skin is by using a blunt forceps with medium-sized,
curved tips. The forceps should be placed parallel to
the skin to grasp the tick's mouth parts firmly as
close to the skin as possible. Care should be taken to avoid puncturing the patient's skin and the tick's
body. The forceps should be pulled slowly and steadily, directly away from the skin without twisting.
Curved-tip forceps are best because the outer curve can be laid against the skin while the handle
remains far enough from the skin to grasp easily. Tick mouth parts that remain in the skin and are readily
visible should be carefully removed. However, if the presence of mouth parts is questionable, attempts at
surgical removal may cause more tissue trauma than would occur if the parts are left in the skin; leaving
mouth parts in the skin does not affect disease transmission and, at most, prolongs irritation. Other
methods of tick removal, such as burning it with a match (which can damage the patient's tissues) or
covering it with petroleum jelly (which is ineffective), are not recommended.
After tick removal, an antiseptic should be applied. If local swelling and discoloration are present, an oral
antihistamine may be helpful. Although rarely practical, the tick may be saved for laboratory analysis to
check for etiologic agents of tick-borne disease in the geographic area where the patient acquired the
tick.
A single dose of doxycycline (200 mg for adults and 4 mg/kg to a maximum of 200 mg for children ≥ 8 yr)
should be considered when all of the following criteria are met:
• The tick is an adult or nymphal
Ixodes scapularis
.
• The tick is estimated to have been attached for ≥ 36 h based on degree of engorgement or certainty
about time of exposure.
• Prophylaxis can be started within 72 h after the tick was removed.
• The local rate of infection of ticks with
Borrelia burgdorferi
is ≥ 20%.
• Doxycycline is not contraindicated.
Pajaroello tick lesions should be cleaned, soaked in 1:20 Burow's solution, and debrided when necessary.
Corticosteroids are helpful in severe cases. Infections are common during the ulcer stage but rarely
require more than local antiseptic measures.
Tick Paralysis
Tick paralysis is a rare, ascending, flaccid paralysis that occurs when toxin-secreting Ixodidae
ticks bite and remain attached for several days.
In North America, some species of
Dermacentor
and
Amblyomma
cause tick paralysis due to a
neurotoxin secreted in tick saliva. The toxin is not present in tick saliva during early stages of feeding, so
paralysis occurs only when a tick has fed for several days or more. A single tick can cause paralysis,
especially if it is attached to the back of the skull or near the spine, but multiple ticks should be sought
over the entire body surface.
Symptoms and signs include anorexia, lethargy, muscle weakness, impaired coordination, nystagmus,
and ascending flaccid paralysis. Bulbar or respiratory paralysis may develop.
Tick paralysis should be considered in North American patients with acute ascending flaccid paralysis or
===PAGE:3533===
bulbar paralysis. Differential diagnosis includes Guillain-Barre syndrome, botulism, myasthenia gravis,
hypokalemia, and spinal cord tumor.
The paralysis is rapidly reversible with removal of the tick or ticks. If breathing is impaired, O
therapy or
respiratory assistance may be needed.
Other Arthropod Bites
The more common biting non-tick arthropods in the US include sand flies, horseflies, deerflies, blackflies,
stable flies, mosquitoes, fleas, kissing bugs, lice (, bedbugs, wheel bugs, and certain water
bugs. All of these arthropods, except wheel bugs and water bugs, also suck blood, but none are
venomous.
Arthropod saliva composition varies considerably, and the lesions caused by bites vary from small
papules to large ulcers with swelling and acute pain. Dermatitis may also occur. Most serious
consequences result from hypersensitivity reactions or infection; in sensitized people, they can be fatal.
Flea allergens may trigger respiratory allergy even without a bite in some people.
The location and pattern of wheals and lesions is sometimes diagnostic of the bite source. For example,
blackfly bites are usually on the neck, ears, and face; flea bites may be numerous, mostly on the feet and
legs; and bedbug bites often occur in linear patterns, most commonly on the torso.
The bite should be cleaned, and an antihistamine or corticosteroid cream or ointment should be applied
for itching. Severe hypersensitivity reactions should be treated (.
===PAGE:3534===
Chapter 340. Poisoning
Introduction
Accidental poisoning and intentional self-poisoning result in many emergency department visits and a few
deaths. (For effects of alcohol and illicit drug use, see
Chapter 160
.)
General Principles of Poisoning
Poisoning is contact with a substance that results in toxicity. Symptoms vary, but certain
common syndromes may suggest particular classes of poisons. Diagnosis is primarily clinical,
but for some poisonings, blood and urine tests can help. Treatment is supportive for most
poisonings; specific antidotes are necessary for a few. Prevention includes labeling drug
containers clearly and keeping poisons out of the reach of children.
Most poisonings are dose-related. Toxicity may result from exposure to excess amounts of normally
nontoxic substances. Some poisonings result from exposure to substances that are poisonous at all
doses. Poisoning is distinguished from hypersensitivity and idiosyncratic reactions, which are
unpredictable and not dose-related, and from intolerance, which is a toxic reaction to a usually nontoxic
dose of a substance.
Poisoning is commonly due to ingestion but can result from injection, inhalation, or exposure of body
surfaces (eg, skin, eye, mucous membranes). Many commonly ingested non-food substances are
generally nontoxic (see
Table 340-1
); however, almost any substance can be toxic if ingested in excessive amounts.
Accidental poisoning is common among young children, who are curious and ingest items indiscriminately
despite noxious tastes and odors; usually, only a single substance is involved. Poisoning is also common
among older children, adolescents, and adults attempting suicide; multiple drugs, including alcohol,
acetaminophen, and other OTC drugs, may be involved. Accidental poisoning may occur
[Table 340-1.
Substances Usually not Dangerous when Ingested*]
in the elderly because of confusion, poor eyesight, mental impairment, or multiple prescriptions of the
same drug by different physicians.
Occasionally, people are poisoned by someone who intends to kill or disable them (eg, to rape or rob
them). Drugs used to disable (eg, scopolamine, benzodiazepines,
γ
-hydroxy-butyrate) tend to have
sedative or amnestic properties or both. Rarely, parents, who may have some medical knowledge, poison
their children because of unclear psychiatric reasons or a desire to cause illness and thus gain medical
attention (a disorder called
Munchausen syndrome by proxy
—.
Most poisons are metabolized, pass through the GI tract, or are excreted. Occasionally, tablets (eg,
aspirin, iron, enteric-coated drugs) form large concretions (bezoars) in the GI tract, where they tend to
remain, continuing to be absorbed and causing toxicity.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs vary depending on the substance (see
Table 340-8
. Also, different patients poisoned with the same substance may present with very
different symptoms. However, 6 clusters of symptoms (toxic syndromes, or toxidromes) occur commonly
and may suggest particular classes of substances (see
Table 340-2
). Patients who ingest multiple substances are less likely to have symptoms characteristic of a
single substance.
Symptoms typically begin soon after contact but, with certain poisons, are delayed. The delay may occur
because only a metabolite is toxic rather than the parent substance (eg, methanol, ethylene glycol,
hepatotoxins). Ingestion of hepatotoxins (eg, acetaminophen, iron,
Amanita phalloides
mushrooms) may
===PAGE:3535===
hepatotoxins). Ingestion of hepatotoxins (eg, acetaminophen, iron,
Amanita phalloides
mushrooms) may
cause acute liver failure that occurs one to a few days later. With metals or hydrocarbon solvents,
symptoms typically occur only after chronic exposure to the toxin.
Ingested toxins generally cause systemic symptoms. Caustics and corrosive liquids damage mainly the
mucous membranes of the GI tract, causing stomatitis, enteritis, or perforation. Some toxins (eg, alcohol,
hydrocarbons) cause characteristic breath odors. Skin contact with toxins can cause various acute
cutaneous symptoms (eg, rashes, pain, blistering); chronic exposure may cause dermatitis. Inhaled toxins
are likely to cause symptoms of upper airway injury if they are water-soluble and symptoms of lower
airway (lung parenchyma) injury and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema if they are less water-soluble.
Inhalation of carbon monoxide, cyanide, or hydrogen sulfide gas can cause organ ischemia or cardiac or
respiratory arrest. Eye contact with toxins (solid, liquid, or vapor) may damage the cornea and lens,
causing eye pain, redness, and loss of vision.
Some substances (eg, cocaine, phencyclidine, amphetamine) can cause severe agitation, which can
result in hyperthermia, acidosis, and rhabdomyolysis.
Diagnosis
• Consideration of poisoning in patients with altered consciousness or unexplained symptoms
• History from all available sources
• Selective, directed testing
The first step of diagnosis is to assess the overall status of the patient. Severe poisoning may require
rapid intervention to treat cardiopulmonary collapse.
Poisoning may be known at presentation. It should be suspected if patients have unexplained symptoms,
especially altered consciousness. If purposeful self-poisoning occurs in adults, multiple substances
should be suspected.
History is often the most valuable tool. Because many patients (eg, preverbal children, suicidal or
psychotic adults, patients with altered consciousness) cannot provide reliable information, friends,
relatives, and rescue personnel should be questioned. Even seemingly reliable patients may incorrectly
report the amount or time of ingestion. When possible, the patient's living quarters should be inspected
for clues (eg, partially empty pill containers, evidence of recreational drug use). Pharmacy and medical
records may provide useful information. In potential workplace poisonings, coworkers and supervisors
should be questioned. All industrial chemicals must have a material safety data sheet (MSDS) readily
available at the workplace; the MSDS provides detailed information about toxicity and any specific
treatment.
In the US, Europe, and parts of Asia and South America, information about household and industrial
chemicals can be obtained from poison control centers. Consultation with the centers is encouraged
because ingredients, first-aid measures, and antidotes printed on product containers are occasionally
inaccurate or outdated. Also, the container may have been replaced, or the package may have been
tampered with. Poison control centers may be able to help identify unknown pills based on their
appearance. The centers have ready access to toxicologists. The telephone number of the nearest
center is often listed with other emergency numbers in the front of the local
[Table 340-2.
Common Toxic Syndromes (Toxidromes)]
telephone book; the number is also available from the telephone operator or, in the US, by dialing 1-800222-1222. More information is available at the American Association of Poison Control Centers web site
(www.aapcc.org
).
Physical examination sometimes detects signs suggesting particular types of substances (eg, toxidromes,
breath odor, needle tracks suggesting IV drug use, stigmas of chronic alcohol use).
===PAGE:3536===
Even if a patient is known to be poisoned, altered consciousness may have other causes (eg, CNS
infection, head trauma, hypoglycemia, stroke, hepatic encephalopathy, Wernicke's encephalopathy),
which should also be considered. Attempted suicide must always be considered in older children,
adolescents, and adults who have ingested a drug. After such patients are stabilized, psychiatric
intervention should be considered.
Testing:
In most cases, laboratory testing provides limited help. Standard, readily available tests to
identify common drugs of abuse (often called toxic screens) are qualitative, not quantitative. These tests
may provide false results and they check for only a limited number of substances. Also, the presence of a
drug of abuse does not necessarily indicate that the drug caused the patient's symptoms or signs. Urine
drug screening is used most often but has limited value and usually detects classes of drugs or
metabolites rather than specific drugs. For example, an opioid urine immunoassay test does not detect
fentanyl or methadone but does react with very small amounts of morphine or codeine analogues. The
test used to identify cocaine detects a metabolite rather than cocaine itself.
For most substances, blood levels cannot be easily determined or do not help guide treatment. For a few
substances (eg, acetaminophen, aspirin, carbon monoxide, digoxin, ethylene glycol, iron, lithium,
methanol, phenobarbital, phenytoin, theophylline), blood levels may help guide treatment. Many
authorities recommend measuring acetaminophen levels in all patients with mixed ingestions because
acetaminophen ingestion is common, is often asymptomatic during the early stages, and can cause
serious delayed toxicity that can be prevented by an antidote. For some substances, other blood tests
(eg, PT for warfarin overdose, methemoglobin levels for certain substances) may help guide treatment.
For patients who have altered consciousness or abnormal vital signs or who have ingested certain
substances, tests should include serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, osmolality, glucose, and ABGs.
Other tests may be indicated for specific substances.
For certain poisonings (eg, due to iron, lead, arsenic, other metals, or to packets of cocaine or other illicit
drugs ingested by so-called body packers), plain abdominal x-rays may show the presence and location
of ingested substances.
For poisonings with drugs that have cardiovascular effects or with an unknown substance, ECG and
cardiac monitoring are indicated.
If blood levels of a substance or symptoms of toxicity increase after initially decreasing or persist for an
unusually long time, a bezoar, a sustained-release preparation, or reexposure (ie, repeated covert
exposure to a recreationally used drug) should be suspected.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Activated charcoal for serious oral poisonings
• Occasional use of specific antidotes or dialysis
• Only rare use of gastric emptying
Seriously poisoned patients may require assisted ventilation or treatment of cardiovascular collapse.
Those with impaired consciousness may require continuous monitoring or restraints. The discussion of
treatment for specific poisonings, below and in
Tables 340-3
,
340-4
, and
340-8
, is general and does not include specific complexities and details. Consultation with a
poison control center is recommended for any poisonings except the mildest and most routine.
Initial stabilization:
Treatment of any systemic poisoning begins with airway, breathing, and circulatory
stabilization (.
If patients have apnea or compromised airways (eg, foreign material in the oropharynx, decreased gag
===PAGE:3537===
reflex), an endotracheal tube should be inserted. If patients have respiratory depression or hypoxia,
supplemental O
or mechanical ventilation should be provided as needed.
In patients with apnea, IV naloxone (2 mg in adults; 0.1 mg/kg in children) should be tried while airway
support is maintained. In opioid addicts, naloxone may precipitate withdrawal, but withdrawal is preferable
to apnea. If respiratory depression persists despite use of naloxone, endotracheal intubation and
continuous mechanical ventilation are required. If naloxone relieves respiratory depression, patients are
monitored; if respiratory depression recurs, patients can be treated with another bolus of IV naloxone or
mechanical ventilation. Using a low-dose continuous naloxone infusion to maintain respiratory drive
without precipitating withdrawal has been suggested but in reality is very difficult to accomplish.
If patients have altered consciousness, blood glucose should be measured immediately at bedside, or IV
dextrose (50 mL of a 50% solution for adults; 2 to 4 mL/kg of a 25% solution for children) should be given
empirically. For adults with suspected thiamin deficiency (eg, alcoholics, undernourished patients), thiamin
100 mg IV is given with or before glucose.
Hypotension is treated with IV fluids. If fluids are ineffective, invasive hemodynamic monitoring may be
necessary to guide fluid and vasopressor therapy. The first-choice vasopressor for most poison-induced
hypotension is norepinephrine 0.5 to 1 mg/min IV infusion, but treatment should not be delayed if another
vasopressor is more immediately available.
Topical decontamination:
Any body surface (including the eyes) exposed to a toxin is
[Table 340-3.
Common Specific Antidotes]
flushed with large amounts of water or saline. Contaminated clothing, including shoes and socks, and
jewelry should be removed.
Activated charcoal:
Charcoal is usually given, particularly when multiple or unknown substances have
been ingested. Use of charcoal adds little risk, unless patients are at risk of vomiting and aspiration, but
has not been proved to reduce overall morbidity or mortality. When used, charcoal is given as soon as
possible. Activated charcoal adsorbs most toxins because of its molecular configuration and large surface
area. Multiple doses of activated charcoal may be effective for substances that undergo enterohepatic
recirculation (eg, phenobarbital, theophylline) and for sustained-release preparations. Charcoal may be
given at 4- to 6-h intervals for serious poisoning with such substances unless bowel sounds are
hypoactive. Charcoal is ineffective for caustics, alcohols, and simple ions (eg, cyanide, iron, other metals,
lithium). The recommended dose is 5 to 10 times that of the suspected toxin ingested. However, because
the amount of toxin ingested is usually unknown, the usual dose is 1 to 2 g/kg, which is about 10 to 25 g
for children < 5 yr and 50 to 100 g for older children and adults. Charcoal is given as a slurry in water or
soft drinks. It may be unpalatable and results in vomiting in 30% of patients. Administration via a gastric
tube may be considered, but caution should be used to prevent trauma caused by tube insertion or
aspiration of charcoal. Activated charcoal should probably be used without sorbitol or other cathartics,
which have no clear benefit and can cause dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities.
Gastric emptying:
Gastric emptying, which used to be well-accepted and seems intuitively beneficial, is
not routinely done. It does not clearly reduce overall morbidity or mortality and has risks. Gastric emptying
is considered if it can be done within 1 h of a life-threatening ingestion. However, many poisonings
manifest too late, and whether a poisoning is life threatening is not always clear. Thus, gastric emptying is
seldom indicated and, if a caustic substance has been ingested, is contraindicated (.
If gastric emptying is used, gastric lavage is the preferred method. Gastric lavage may cause
complications such as epistaxis, aspiration, or, rarely, oropharyngeal or esophageal injury. Syrup of
ipecac has unpredictable effects, often causes prolonged vomiting, and may not remove substantial
amounts of poison from the stomach. Syrup of ipecac may be warranted if the ingested agent is highly
toxic and transport time to the emergency department is unusually long, but this is uncommon in the US.
For gastric lavage, tap water is instilled and withdrawn from the stomach with a tube. The largest tube
possible (usually > 36 French for adults or 24 French for children) is used so that tablet fragments can be
===PAGE:3538===
retrieved. If patients
[Table 340-4.
Guidelines for Chelation Therapy]
have altered consciousness or a weak gag reflex, endotracheal intubation should be done before lavage
to prevent aspiration. Patients are placed in the left lateral decubitus position to prevent aspiration, and
the tube is inserted orally. Because lavage sometimes forces substances farther into the GI tract, a 25-g
dose of charcoal is instilled through the tube first. Then aliquots (about 3 mL/kg) of tap water are instilled,
and the gastric contents are withdrawn by gravity or syringe. Lavage continues until the withdrawn fluids
appear free of the substance; usually, 500 to 3000 mL of fluid must be instilled. After lavage, a 2nd 25-g
dose of charcoal is instilled.
Whole-bowel irrigation:
This procedure flushes the GI tract and theoretically decreases GI transit time
for pills and tablets. Irrigation has not been proved to reduce morbidity or mortality. Irrigation is indicated
for any of the following:
• Some serious poisonings due to sustained-release preparations or substances that are not adsorbed by
charcoal (eg, heavy metals)
• Drug packets (eg, latex-coated packets of heroin or cocaine ingested by body packers)
• A suspected bezoar
A commercially prepared solution of polyethylene glycol (which is nonabsorbable) and electrolytes is
given at a rate of 1 to 2 L/h for adults or at 25 to 40 mL/kg/h for children until the rectal effluent is clear;
this process may require many hours or even days. The solution
is usually given via a gastric tube,
although some motivated patients can drink these large volumes.
Alkaline diuresis:
Alkaline diuresis enhances elimination of weak acids (eg, salicylates, phenobarbital).
A solution made by combining 1 L of 5% D/W with 3 50-mEq ampules of NaHCO
and 20 to 40 mEq of K
can be given at a rate of 250 mL/h in adults and 2 to 3 mL/kg/h in children. Urine pH is kept at > 8.
Hypernatremia, alkalemia, and fluid overload may occur but are usually not serious. However, alkaline
diuresis is contraindicated in patients with renal insufficiency.
Dialysis:
Common toxins that may require dialysis or hemoperfusion include
• Ethylene glycol
• Lithium
• Methanol
• Salicylates
• Theophylline
These therapies are less useful if the poison is a large or charged (polar) molecule, has a large volume of
distribution (ie, if it is stored in fatty tissue), or is extensively bound to tissue protein (as with digoxin,
phencyclidine, phenothiazines, or tricyclic antidepressants). The need for dialysis is usually determined
by both laboratory values and clinical status. Methods of dialysis include hemodialysis, peritoneal
dialysis, and lipid dialysis (which removes lipid-soluble substances from the blood), as well as
hemoperfusion (which more rapidly and efficiently clears specific poisons—see
Chapter 240
).
Specific antidotes:
For the most commonly used antidotes, see
Table 340-3
. Chelating drugs are used
for poisoning with heavy metals and occasionally with other drugs (see
Table 340-4
). IV fat emulsions
have been used in 10% and 20% concentrations to successfully treat several different cardiac toxins (eg,
bupivacaine, verapamil).
===PAGE:3539===
Ongoing supportive measures:
Most symptoms (eg, agitation, sedation, coma, cerebral edema,
hypertension, arrhythmias, renal failure, hypoglycemia) are treated with the usual supportive measures
(see elsewhere in THE MANUAL).
Drug-induced hypotension and arrhythmias may not respond to the usual drug treatments. For refractory
hypotension, dopamine, epinephrine, other vasopressors, an intra-aortic balloon pump, or even
extracorporeal circulatory support may be considered.
For refractory arrhythmias, cardiac pacing may be necessary. Often, torsades de pointes can be treated
with Mg sulfate 2 to 4 g IV, overdrive pacing, or a titrated isoproterenol infusion.
Seizures are first treated with benzodiazepines. Phenobarbital or phenytoin can also be used. Severe
agitation must be controlled; benzodiazepines in large doses, other potent sedatives (eg, propofol), or, in
extreme cases, induction of paralysis and mechanical ventilation may be required.
Hyperthermia is treated with aggressive sedation and physical cooling measures rather than with
antipyretics. Organ failure may ultimately require kidney or liver transplantation.
Hospital admission:
General indications for hospital admission include altered consciousness,
persistently abnormal vital signs, and predicted delayed toxicity. For example, admission is considered if
patients have ingested sustained-release preparations, particularly of drugs with potentially serious
effects (eg, cardiovascular drugs). If there are no other reasons for admission and if symptoms are gone
after patients have been observed for 4 to 6 h, most patients can be discharged. However, if ingestion
was intentional, patients require a psychiatric evaluation.
Prevention
In the US, widespread use of child-resistant containers with safety caps has greatly reduced the number
of poisoning deaths in children < 5 yr. Limiting the amount of OTC analgesics in a single container
reduces the severity of poisonings, particularly with acetaminophen, aspirin, or ibuprofen. Preventive
measures also include clearly labeling household products and prescription drugs, storing drugs and toxic
substances in cabinets that are locked and inaccessible to children, promptly disposing of expired drugs
by mixing them in cat litter or some other nontempting substance and putting them in a trash container
that is inaccessible to children, and using carbon monoxide detectors. Public education measures to
encourage storage of substances in their original containers (eg, not placing insecticide in drink bottles)
are important. Use of imprint identifications on solid drugs helps prevent confusion and errors by patients,
pharmacists, and health care practitioners.
Acetaminophen Poisoning
Acetaminophen poisoning can cause gastroenteritis within hours and hepatotoxicity 1 to 3 days
after ingestion. Severity of hepatotoxicity after a single
acute overdose is predicted by serum
acetaminophen levels. Treatment is with
N
-acetylcysteine to prevent or minimize
hepatotoxicity.
Acetaminophen is contained in > 100 products sold OTC. Products include many children's preparations
in liquid, tablet, and capsule form and many cough and cold preparations. Many prescription drugs also
contain acetaminophen. Consequently, acetaminophen overdose is common.
Pathophysiology
The principal toxic metabolite of acetaminophen,
N
-acetylp
-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), is produced by
the hepatic cytochrome P-450 enzyme system; glutathione stores in the liver detoxify this metabolite. An
acute overdose depletes glutathione stores in the liver. As a result, NAPQI accumulates, causing
hepatocellular necrosis and possibly damage to other organs (eg, kidneys, pancreas). Theoretically,
alcoholic liver disease or undernutrition could increase risk of toxicity because hepatic enzyme
preconditioning may increase formation of NAPQI and because undernutrition (also common among
alcoholics) reduces hepatic glutathione stores. However, whether the risk is actually increased is unclear.
===PAGE:3540===
Acute alcohol ingestion may be protective because hepatic P-450 enzymes preferentially metabolize
ethanol and thus cannot produce toxic NAPQI.
Acute Acetaminophen Poisoning
To cause toxicity, an acute overdose must total ≥ 150 mg/kg (about 7.5 g in adults) within 24 h.
Symptoms and Signs
Mild poisoning may not cause symptoms, and when present, symptoms are usually minor until ≥ 48 h after
ingestion. Symptoms, which occur in 4 stages (see
Table 340-5
), include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Renal failure
and pancreatitis may occur, occasionally without liver failure. After > 5 days, hepatotoxicity resolves or
progresses to multiple organ failure, which can be fatal.
Diagnosis
• Diagnosis considered in all patients with nonaccidental ingestions
• Serum acetaminophen levels
• Rumack-Matthew nomogram
Acetaminophen overdose should be considered in all patients with nonaccidental ingestions that may be
suicide attempts because formulations containing acetaminophen are frequently ingested in such
overdoses and are not reported. Also, acetaminophen often causes minimal symptoms during the early
stages and is potentially lethal but treatable.
Likelihood and severity of hepatotoxicity caused by an acute ingestion can be predicted by the amount
ingested or, more accurately, by the serum acetaminophen level. If the time of ingestion is known, the
Rumack-Matthew nomogram (see
Fig. 340-1
) is used to estimate likelihood of hepatotoxicity; if the time of ingestion is unknown, the
nomogram cannot be used. For a single acute overdose of traditional acetaminophen or rapid-relief
acetaminophen (which is absorbed 7 to 8 min faster), levels are measured ≥ 4 h after ingestion and
plotted on the nomogram. A level ≤ 150
μ
g/mL (≤ 990
μ
mol/L) and absence of toxic symptoms indicate
that hepatotoxicity is very
[Table 340-5.
Stages of Acute Acetaminophen Poisoning]
[Fig. 340-1.
Rumack-Matthew nomogram for single acute acetaminophen poisoning.]
unlikely. Higher levels indicate possible hepatotoxicity. For a single acute overdose with extended-relief
acetaminophen (which has 2 peak serum levels about 4 h apart), acetaminophen levels are measured ≥ 4
h after ingestion and 4 h later; if either level is above the Rumack-Matthew line of toxicity, treatment is
required.
If poisoning is confirmed or strongly suspected, other tests are done. Liver function tests are done and, in
suspected severe poisoning, PT is measured. AST and ALT results correlate with the stage of poisoning
(see
Table 340-5
). AST levels > 1000 IU/L are more likely to result from acetaminophen poisoning than
from chronic hepatitis or
alcoholic liver disease. If poisoning is severe, bilirubin and INR may be elevated.
Prognosis
With appropriate treatment, mortality is uncommon.
Poor prognostic indicators
at 24 to 48 h postingestion include all of the following:
• pH < 7.3 after adequate resuscitation
===PAGE:3541===
• INR > 3
• Serum creatinine > 2.6
• Hepatic encephalopathy grade III (confusion and somnolence) or grade IV (stupor and coma)
• Hypoglycemia
• Thrombocytopenia
Acute acetaminophen toxicity does not predispose patients to cirrhosis.
Treatment
• Oral or IV
N
-acetylcysteine
• Possibly activated charcoal
Activated charcoal may be given if acetaminophen is likely to still remain in the GI tract.
N
-Acetylcysteine is an antidote for acetaminophen poisoning. This drug is a glutathione precursor that
decreases acetaminophen toxicity by increasing hepatic glutathione stores and possibly via other
mechanisms. It helps prevent hepatic toxicity by inactivating the toxic acetaminophen metabolite NAPQI
before it can injure liver cells. However, it does not reverse damage to liver cells that has already
occurred.
For acute poisoning,
N
-acetylcysteine is given if hepatotoxicity is likely based on acetaminophen dose or
serum level. The drug is most effective if given within 8 h of acetaminophen ingestion. After 24 h, the
benefit of the antidote is questionable.
N
-Acetylcysteine is equally effective given IV or orally. IV therapy is given as a continuous infusion. A
loading dose of 150 mg/kg in 200 mL of 5% D/W given over 15 min is followed by maintenance doses of
50 mg/kg in 500 mL of 5% D/W given over 4 h, then 100 mg/kg in 1000 mL of 5% D/W given over 16 h.
For children, dosing may need to be adjusted to decrease the total volume of fluid delivered; consultation
with a poison control center is recommended.
The oral loading dose of
N
-acetylcysteine is 140 mg/kg. This dose is followed by 17 additional doses of
70 mg/kg q 4 h. Oral acetylcysteine is unpalatable; it is given diluted 1:4 in a carbonated beverage or fruit
juice and may still cause vomiting. If vomiting occurs, an antiemetic can be used; if vomiting occurs within
1 h of a dose, the dose is repeated. However, vomiting may be protracted and may limit oral use. Allergic
reactions are unusual but have occurred with oral and IV use.
Liver failure is treated supportively. Patients with fulminant liver failure may require liver transplantation.
Chronic Acetaminophen Poisoning
Chronic excessive use or repeated overdoses cause hepatotoxicity in a few patients. Usually, chronic
overdose is not an attempt at self-injury but instead results from taking inappropriately high doses to treat
pain. Symptoms may be absent or may include any of those that occur with acute overdose.
Diagnosis
• AST, ALT, and serum acetaminophen levels
The Rumack-Matthew nomogram cannot be used, but likelihood of clinically significant hepatotoxicity can
be estimated based on AST, ALT, and serum acetaminophen levels.
===PAGE:3542===
• If AST and ALT levels are normal (< 50 IU/L) and the acetaminophen level is < 10
μ
g/mL, significant
hepatotoxicity is very unlikely.
• If AST and ALT levels are normal but the acetaminophen level is ≥ 10
μ
g/mL, significant hepatotoxicity is
possible; AST and ALT levels are remeasured after 24 h. If repeat AST and ALT levels are normal,
significant hepatotoxicity is unlikely; if the levels are high, significant hepatotoxicity is assumed.
• If initial AST and ALT levels are high, regardless of the acetaminophen level, significant hepatotoxicity is
assumed.
Treatment
• Sometimes
N
-acetylcysteine
The role of
N
-acetylcysteine in treatment of chronic acetaminophen toxicity or in the presence of
established acute hepatotoxicity is unclear. Theoretically, the antidote may have some benefit if given >
24 h after an ingestion if residual (unmetabolized) acetaminophen is present. The following approach has
not been proved effective but may be used:
• If hepatotoxicity is possible (if AST and ALT levels are normal and acetaminophen level is initially
elevated),
N
-acetylcysteine is given 140 mg/kg po loading dose and 70 mg/kg po q 4 h for the first 24 h.
If repeat AST and ALT levels (after 24 h) are normal,
N
-acetylcysteine is stopped; if repeat
levels are
high, they are remeasured daily, and
N
-acetylcysteine is continued until levels are normal.
• If hepatotoxicity is likely (especially if initial AST and ALT levels are high), a full course of
N
-
acetylcysteine is given.
Prognostic factors are similar to those in acute acetaminophen poisoning.
Aspirin and Other Salicylate Poisoning
(Salicylism)
Salicylate poisoning can cause vomiting, tinnitus, confusion, hyperthermia, respiratory
alkalosis, metabolic acidosis, and multiple organ failure. Diagnosis is clinical, supplemented by
measurement of the anion gap, ABGs, and serum salicylate levels. Treatment is with activated
charcoal and alkaline diuresis or hemodialysis.
Acute ingestion of > 150 mg/kg can cause severe toxicity. Salicylate tablets may form bezoars, prolonging
absorption and toxicity. Chronic toxicity can occur after several days of high therapeutic doses; it is
common, often undiagnosed, and often more serious than acute toxicity. Chronic toxicity tends to occur in
elderly patients.
The most concentrated and toxic form of salicylate is oil of wintergreen (methyl salicylate, a component of
some liniments and solutions used in hot vaporizers); ingestion of < 5 mL can kill a young child. Any
exposure should be considered serious. Bismuth subsalicylate (8.7 mg salicylate/mL) is another
potentially unexpected source of large amounts of salicylate.
Pathophysiology
Salicylates impair cellular respiration by uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation. They stimulate respiratory
centers in the medulla, causing primary respiratory alkalosis, which is often unrecognized in young
children. Salicylates simultaneously and independently cause primary metabolic acidosis. Eventually, as
salicylates disappear from the blood, enter the cells, and poison mitochondria, metabolic acidosis
becomes the primary acid-base abnormality.
Salicylate poisoning also causes ketosis, fever, and, even when systemic hypoglycemia is absent, low
brain glucose levels. Renal Na, K, and water loss and increased but imperceptible respiratory water loss
===PAGE:3543===
due to hyperventilation lead to dehydration.
Salicylates are weak acids that cross cell membranes relatively easily; thus, they are more toxic when
blood pH is low. Dehydration, hyperthermia, and chronic ingestion increase salicylate toxicity because
they result in greater distribution of salicylate to tissues. Excretion of salicylates increases when urine pH
increases.
Symptoms and Signs
With acute overdose, early symptoms include nausea, vomiting, tinnitus, and hyperventilation. Later
symptoms include hyperactivity, fever, confusion, and seizures. Rhabdomyolysis, acute renal failure, and
respiratory failure may eventually develop. Hyperactivity may quickly turn to lethargy; hyperventilation
(with respiratory alkalosis) progresses to hypoventilation (with mixed respiratory and metabolic acidosis)
and respiratory failure.
With chronic overdose, symptoms and signs tend to be nonspecific and vary greatly. They include subtle
confusion, changes in mental status, fever, hypoxia, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, dehydration, lactic
acidosis, and hypotension.
Diagnosis
• Serum salicylate level
• ABGs
Salicylate poisoning is suspected in patients with any of the following:
• History of a single acute overdose
• Repeated ingestions of therapeutic doses (particularly in patients with fever and dehydration)
• Unexplained metabolic acidosis
• Unexplained confusion and fever (in elderly patients)
If poisoning is suspected, serum salicylate (drawn at least a few hours after ingestion), urine pH, ABGs,
serum electrolytes, serum creatinine, plasma glucose, and BUN are measured. If rhabdomyolysis is
suspected, serum CK and urine myoglobin are measured.
Significant salicylate toxicity is suggested by serum levels much higher than therapeutic (therapeutic
range, 10 to 20 mg/dL), particularly 6 h after ingestion (when absorption is usually almost complete), and
by acidemia plus ABG results compatible with salicylate poisoning. Serum levels are helpful in confirming
the diagnosis and may help guide therapy, but levels may be misleading and should be clinically
correlated.
Usually, ABGs suggest primary respiratory alkalosis during the first few hours after ingestion; later, they
suggest compensated metabolic acidosis or mixed metabolic acidosis/respiratory alkalosis. Eventually,
usually as salicylate levels decrease, poorly compensated or uncompensated metabolic acidosis is the
primary finding. If respiratory failure occurs, ABGs suggest combined metabolic and respiratory acidosis,
and chest x-ray shows diffuse pulmonary infiltrates. Plasma glucose levels may be normal, low, or high.
Serial salicylate levels help determine whether absorption is continuing; ABGs or serum electrolytes
should always be determined simultaneously. Increased serum CK and urine myoglobin levels suggest
rhabdomyolysis.
Treatment
• Activated charcoal
===PAGE:3544===
• Alkaline diuresis with extra KCl
Activated charcoal is given as soon as possible and, if bowel sounds are present, may be repeated every
4 h until charcoal appears in the stool.
After volume and electrolyte abnormalities are corrected, alkaline diuresis can be used to increase urine
pH, ideally to ≥ 8. Alkaline diuresis is indicated for patients with any symptoms of poisoning and should
not be delayed until salicylate levels are determined. This intervention is safe and exponentially increases
salicylate excretion. Because hypokalemia may interfere with alkaline diuresis, patients are given a
solution consisting of 1 L of 5% D/W, 3 50-mEq ampules of NaHCO
, and 40 mEq of KCl at 1.5 to 2
times the maintenance IV fluid rate. Serum K is monitored.
Drugs that increase urinary HCO
(eg, acetazolamide) should be avoided because they worsen metabolic
acidosis and decrease blood pH. Drugs that decrease respiratory drive should be avoided if possible
because they may impair hyperventilation and respiratory alkalosis, decreasing blood pH.
Fever can be treated with physical measures such as external cooling (. Seizures are treated
with benzodiazepines. In patients with rhabdomyolysis, alkaline diuresis may help prevent renal failure.
Hemodialysis may be required to enhance salicylate elimination in patients with severe neurologic
impairment, renal or respiratory insufficiency, acidemia despite other measures, or very high serum
salicylate levels (> 100 mg/dL [> 7.25 mmol/L] with acute overdose or > 60 mg/dL [> 4.35 mmol/L] with
chronic overdose).
Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning causes acute symptoms such as headache, nausea,
weakness, angina, dyspnea, loss of consciousness, and coma. Neuropsychiatric symptoms
may develop weeks later. Diagnosis is by carboxyhemoglobin levels and ABGs, including
measured O
saturation. Treatment is with supplemental O
. Prevention is often possible with
household carbon monoxide detectors.
CO poisoning, one of the most common fatal poisonings, occurs by inhalation. CO is a colorless, odorless
gas that results from incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons. Common sources of CO in poisonings
include house fires and improperly vented automobiles, gas heaters, furnaces, hot water heaters, woodor charcoal-burning stoves, and kerosene heaters. CO is produced when natural gas (methane or
propane) burns. Inhaling tobacco smoke results in CO in the blood but not enough to cause poisoning.
Pathophysiology
The elimination half-life of CO is about 4.5 h with inhalation of room air, 1.5 h with 100% O
, and 20 min
with 3 atmospheres (pressure) of O
(as in a hyperbaric chamber—.
Mechanisms of CO toxicity are not completely understood. They appear to involve
• Displacement of O
from Hb (because CO has greater affinity for Hb than does O
)
• Shifting of the O
-Hb dissociation curve to the left (decreasing release of O
from Hb to tissues—see
Fig. 189-4

• Inhibition of mitochondrial respiration
• Possibly direct toxic effects on brain tissue
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms tend to correlate well with the patient's peak blood carboxyhemoglobin levels. Many symptoms
===PAGE:3545===
are nonspecific.
• Headache and nausea can begin when levels are 10 to 20%.
• Levels > 20% commonly cause vague dizziness, generalized weakness, difficulty concentrating, and
impaired judgment.
• Levels > 30% commonly cause dyspnea during exertion, chest pain (in patients with coronary artery
disease), and confusion.
• Higher levels can cause syncope, seizures, and obtundation.
Hypotension, coma, respiratory failure, and death may occur, usually when levels are > 60%.
Patients may also have many other symptoms, including visual deficits, abdominal pain, and focal
neurologic deficits. If poisoning is severe, neuropsychiatric symptoms and signs (eg, dementia, psychosis,
parkinsonism, chorea, amnestic syndromes) can develop days to weeks after exposure and become
permanent. Because CO poisoning often results from house fires, patients may have concomitant airway
injuries (see
Sidebar 329-1
, which may increase risk of respiratory failure.
Diagnosis
• Diagnosis considered when patients at risk have nonspecific symptoms or metabolic acidosis
• Venous carboxyhemoglobin level
Because symptoms can be vague, nonspecific, and variable, the diagnosis is easily missed. Many cases
of mild poisoning with nonspecific symptoms are mistaken for viral syndromes. Physicians must maintain
a high level of suspicion. If people from the same dwelling, particularly a heated dwelling, experience
nonspecific symptoms, CO exposure should be considered.
If CO poisoning is suspected, the carboxy-hemoglobin level is measured with a COoximeter; venous
samples can be used because arteriovenous differences are trivial. ABGs are not measured routinely.
ABGs and pulse oximetry, alone or combined, are inadequate for diagnosis of CO poisoning because O
saturation reported in ABGs represents dissolved O
and is thus unaffected by carboxy-hemoglobin
concentration; furthermore, the pulse oximeter cannot differentiate normal Hb from carboxyhemoglobin
and thus provides a falsely elevated oxyhemoglobin reading. Although elevated carboxyhemoglobin levels
are clear evidence of poisoning, levels may be falsely low because they decrease rapidly after CO
exposure ends, particularly in patients treated with supplemental O
(eg, in an ambulance). Metabolic
acidosis can be a clue to the diagnosis. Other tests may help evaluate specific symptoms (eg, ECG for
chest pain, CT for neurologic symptoms).
Treatment
• 100% O
• Possibly hyperbaric O
Patients should be removed from the source of CO and stabilized as necessary. They are given 100% O
(by nonrebreather mask) and treated supportively. Hyperbaric O
therapy typically should be considered
for patients who have any of the following:
• Life-threatening cardiopulmonary complications
• Ongoing chest pain
• Altered consciousness
===PAGE:3546===
• Loss of consciousness (no matter how brief)
• A carboxyhemoglobin level > 25%
Hyperbaric O
therapy should also be considered for pregnant patients.
Patients are placed in a chamber at 2 to 3 atmospheres of O
. Hyperbaric O
therapy may decrease the
incidence of delayed neuropsychiatric symptoms. However, this therapy may cause barotrauma and,
because therapy is not available at most hospitals, may require transfer of patients, who may not be
stable; also, a chamber may not be available locally, and evidence for the efficacy of hyperbaric O
therapy is somewhat inconclusive.
Prevention
Prevention involves checking sources of indoor combustion to make sure they are correctly installed and
vented to the outdoors. Exhaust pipes should be inspected periodically for leaks. CO detectors should be
installed because they provide early warning that CO is free in a dwelling's atmosphere. If CO is
suspected in a dwelling, windows should be opened, and the dwelling should be evacuated and
evaluated for the source of CO.
Caustic Ingestion
Caustics (strong acids and alkalis), when ingested, burn upper GI tract tissues, sometimes
resulting in esophageal or gastric perforation. Symptoms may include drooling, dysphagia, and
pain in the mouth, chest, or stomach; strictures may develop later. Diagnostic endoscopy may
be required. Treatment is supportive. Gastric emptying and activated charcoal are
contraindicated. Perforation is treated surgically.
Common sources of caustics include solid and liquid drain and toilet bowl cleaners. Industrial products
are usually more concentrated than household products and thus tend to be more damaging.
Pathophysiology
Acids cause coagulation necrosis; an eschar forms, limiting further damage. Acids tend to affect the
stomach more than the esophagus. Alkalis cause rapid liquefaction
necrosis; no eschar forms, and
damage continues until the alkali is neutralized or diluted. Alkalis tend to affect the esophagus more than
the stomach, but ingestion of large quantities severely affects both.
Solid products tend to leave particles that stick to and burn tissues, discouraging further ingestion and
causing localized damage. Because liquid preparations do not stick, larger quantities are easily ingested,
and damage may be widespread. Liquids may also be aspirated, leading to upper airway injury.
Symptoms and Signs
Initial symptoms include drooling and dysphagia. In severe cases, pain, vomiting, and sometimes bleeding
develop immediately in the mouth, throat, chest, or abdomen. Airway burns may cause coughing,
tachypnea, or stridor.
Swollen, erythematous tissue may be visible intraorally; however, caustic liquids may cause no intraoral
burns despite serious injury farther down the GI tract. Esophageal perforation may result in mediastinitis,
with severe chest pain, tachycardia, fever, tachypnea, and shock. Gastric perforation may result in
peritonitis. Esophageal or gastric perforation may occur within hours, after weeks, or any time in between.
Esophageal strictures can develop over weeks, even if initial symptoms had been mild and treatment had
been adequate.
===PAGE:3547===
Diagnosis
• Endoscopy
Because the presence or absence of intraoral burns does not reliably indicate whether the esophagus
and stomach are burned, meticulous endoscopy is indicated to check for the presence and severity of
esophageal and gastric burns when symptoms or history suggests more than trivial ingestion.
Treatment
• Avoidance of gastric emptying
• Oral fluids
Treatment is supportive. (CAUTION:
Gastric emptying by emesis or lavage is contraindicated because
it can reexpose the upper GI tract to the caustic. Attempts to neutralize a caustic acid by correcting pH
with an alkaline substance [and vice versa] are contraindicated because severe exothermic reactions
may result. Activated charcoal is contraindicated because it may infiltrate burned tissue and interfere
with endoscopic evaluation
.)
Oral fluids are started when they can be tolerated. Esophageal or gastric perforation is treated with
antibiotics and surgery (. IV corticosteroids and prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended.
Strictures are treated with bougienage or, if they are severe or unresponsive, with esophageal bypass by
colonic interposition.
Mushroom Poisoning
Numerous mushroom species cause toxicity when ingested. Symptoms vary by species.
Identification of specific species is difficult, so treatment usually is guided by symptoms.
Differentiating toxic and nontoxic species in the wild is difficult, even for highly knowledgeable people.
Folklore rules are unreliable, and the same species may have varying degrees of toxicity depending on
where they are harvested. If patients have eaten an unidentified mushroom, identifying the species can
help determine specific treatment. However, because an experienced mycologist is seldom available for
immediate consultation, treatment of patients who become ill after mushroom ingestion is usually guided
by symptoms. If a sample of the mushroom, uningested or from the patient's emesis, is available, it can be
sent to a mycologist for analysis.
All toxic mushrooms cause vomiting and abdominal pain; other manifestations vary significantly by
mushroom type. Generally, mushrooms that cause symptoms early (within 2 h) are less dangerous than
those that cause symptoms later (usually after 6 h). Activated charcoal may be useful.
Early GI symptoms:
Mushrooms that cause early GI symptoms (eg,
Chlorophyllum molybdites
, the little
brown mushrooms that often grow in lawns) cause gastroenteritis, sometimes with headaches or
myalgias. Diarrhea is occasionally bloody. Symptoms usually resolve within 24 h. Treatment is supportive.
Early neurologic symptoms:
Mushrooms that cause early neurologic symptoms include hallucinogenic
mushrooms, which are usually ingested recreationally because they contain psilocybin, a hallucinogen.
The most common are members of the
Psilocybe
genus, but some other genera contain psilocybin.
Symptoms begin within 15 to 30 min and include euphoria, enhanced imagination, and hallucinations.
Tachycardia and hypertension are common, and hyperpyrexia occurs in some children; however, serious
consequences are rare.
Treatment occasionally involves sedation (eg, with benzodiazepines).
Early muscarinic symptoms:
Mushrooms that cause early muscarinic symptoms include members of
the
Inocybe
and
Clitocybe
genera.
===PAGE:3548===
Symptoms may include SLUDGE syndrome (see
Table 340-2
, including miosis, bronchorrhea,
bradycardia, diaphoresis, wheezing, and fasciculations. Symptoms are usually mild, begin within 30 min,
and resolve within 12 h.
Atropine may be given to treat severe muscarinic symptoms (eg, wheezing, bradycardia).
Delayed GI symptoms:
Mushrooms that cause delayed GI symptoms include members of the
Amanita
,
Gyromitra
, and
Cortinarius
genera.
The most toxic
Amanita
mushroom is
Amanita phalloides
, which causes 95% of mushroom poisoning
deaths. Initial gastroenteritis, which may occur 6 to 12 h after ingestion, can be severe; hypoglycemia can
occur. Initial symptoms abate for a few days; then liver failure and sometimes renal failure develop. Initial
care involves close monitoring for hypoglycemia and possibly repeated doses of activated charcoal.
Treatment of liver failure may require liver transplantation; other specific treatments (eg,
N
-acetylcysteine,
highdose penicillin, silibinin, IV fat emulsion) are unproved.
Gyromitra
mushrooms can cause hypoglycemia simultaneously with or shortly after gastroenteritis. Other
manifestations may include CNS toxicity (eg, seizures) and, after a few days, hepatorenal syndrome.
Initial care involves close monitoring for hypoglycemia and possibly repeated doses of activated charcoal.
Neurologic symptoms are treated with pyridoxine 70 mg/kg slow IV infusion over 4 to 6 h (maximum daily
dose of 5 g); liver failure is treated supportively.
Most
Cortinarius
mushrooms are endogenous to Europe. Gastroenteritis may last for 3 days. Renal
failure, with symptoms of flank pain and decreased urine output, may occur 3 to 20 days after ingestion.
Renal failure often resolves spontaneously.
Plant Poisoning
A few commonly grown plants are highly poisonous, and many are moderately poisonous (see
Table 340-6
). Few plant poisonings have specific antidotes. Most plant ingestions, including the plants
listed in
Table 340-6
, result in minimal symptoms unless the leaves and other components are
concentrated into a paste or brewed into a tea.
Highly toxic
and potentially fatal plants include the following:
• Castor beans and jequirity beans
• Oleander and foxglove
• Hemlock
Castor beans and jequirity beans:
Castor beans contain ricin, an extremely concentrated cellular
poison. Jequirity beans contain abrin, a related and even more potent toxin. In both, the beans have a
relatively impervious shell; thus, the bean must be chewed to release the toxin. However, the seed
coating of the jequirity bean is often not intact, and simple bacterial digestion can release the abrin toxin.
Symptoms of either poisoning may include delayed gastroenteritis, sometimes severe and hemorrhagic,
followed by delirium, seizures, coma, and death. Whole-bowel irrigation should be considered because it
aims to remove all beans ingested.
Oleander and foxglove:
These plants and lily of the valley (which is similar but less toxic) contain
digitalis glycosides. Toxicity includes gastroenteritis, confusion, hyperkalemia, and arrhythmias. The
serum digoxin level can confirm ingestion but is not useful as quantitative information.
K levels are closely monitored. Hyperkalemia may respond only to hemodialysis. Ca is not recommended
for arrhythmias. Digoxin-specific fractionated antibody (Fab) fragments have been used to treat
ventricular arrhythmias.
===PAGE:3549===
Hemlock:
Hemlock poisoning (poison hemlock and water hemlock) can cause symptoms within 15 min.
Poison hemlock has nicotinic effects, beginning with dry mouth and progressing to tachycardia, tremors,
diaphoresis, mydriasis, seizures, and muscle paresis. Rhabdomyolysis and bradycardia may occur.
Water hemlock seems to enhance
γ
-aminobutyric acid (GABA) activity. Symptoms may include
gastroenteritis, delirium, refractory seizures, and coma.
Fish and Shellfish Poisoning
Fish and shellfish poisoning commonly causes GI, neurologic, or histamine-mediated
manifestations.
Ciguatera poisoning:
Ciguatera poisoning may result from eating any of > 400 species of fish from the
tropical reefs of Florida, the West Indies, or the Pacific, where a dinoflagellate produces a toxin that
accumulates in the flesh of the fish. Older fish and large fish (eg,
[Table 340-6.
Moderately Poisonous Plants]
grouper, snapper, kingfish) contain more toxin. No known processing procedures, including cooking, are
protective, and flavor is unaffected. A commercial product is available to test for ciguatoxin in fish.
Symptoms may begin 2 to 8 h after eating. Abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea last 6 to 17
h; then, pruritus, paresthesias, headache, myalgia, reversal of hot and cold sensation, and face pain may
occur. For months afterward, unusual sensory phenomena and nervousness may cause debilitation.
IV mannitol has been suggested as a treatment, but no clear benefit has been shown.
Scombroid poisoning:
Scombroid poisoning is caused by high histamine levels in fish flesh due to
bacterial decomposition after the fish is caught. Commonly affected species include
• Tuna
• Mackerel
• Bonito
• Skipjack
• Mahi mahi
The fish may taste peppery or bitter. Facial flushing and possibly nausea, vomiting, epigastric pain, and
urticaria occur within a few minutes of eating and resolve within 24 h. Symptoms are often mistaken for
those of a seafood allergy. Unlike other fish poisonings, this poisoning can be prevented by properly
storing the fish after it is caught.
Treatment may include H
and H
blockers.
Tetrodotoxin poisoning:
Tetrodotoxin poisoning is most commonly due to eating the puffer fish (fugu), a
sushi delicacy, but > 100 fresh and salt water species contain tetrodotoxin. Symptoms are similar to those
of ciguatera poisoning; potentially fatal respiratory paralysis can also occur. Treatment is supportive care
with attention to ventilatory assistance until the toxin is metabolized, which may take days.
The toxin cannot be destroyed by cooking or freezing.
Shellfish poisoning:
Paralytic shellfish poisoning can occur from June to October, especially on the
Pacific and New England coasts, when mussels, clams, oysters, and scallops are contaminated by the
===PAGE:3550===
poisonous dinoflagellate responsible for red tide. This dinoflagellate produces the neurotoxin saxitoxin,
which is resistant to cooking. Circumoral paresthesias occur 5 to 30 min after eating. Nausea, vomiting,
and abdominal cramps then develop, followed by muscle weakness. Untreated respiratory paralysis may
be fatal; for survivors, recovery is usually complete.
Hydrocarbon Poisoning
Hydrocarbon poisoning may result from ingestion or inhalation. Ingestion, most common among
children < 5 yr, can result in aspiration pneumonitis. Inhalation, most common among
adolescents, can result in ventricular fibrillation, usually without warning symptoms. Diagnosis
of pneumonitis is by clinical evaluation, chest x-ray, and oximetry. Gastric emptying is
contraindicated because aspiration is a risk. Treatment is supportive.
Ingestion of hydrocarbons, such as petroleum distillates (eg, gasoline, kerosene, mineral oil, lamp oil,
paint thinners), results in minimal systemic effects but can cause severe aspiration pneumonitis. Toxic
potential mainly depends on viscosity, measured in Saybolt seconds universal (SSU). Hydrocarbon liquids
with low viscosity (SSU < 60), such as gasoline and mineral oil, can spread rapidly over large surface
areas and are more likely to cause aspiration pneumonitis than are hydro-carbons with SSU > 60, such
as tar. Hydro-carbons, if ingested in large amounts, may be absorbed systemically and cause CNS or
hepatic toxicity, which is more likely with halogenated hydrocarbons (eg, carbon tetrachloride,
trichloroethylene).
Recreational inhalation of halogenated hydrocarbons (eg, glues, paint, solvents, cleaning sprays,
gasoline, fluorocarbons used as refrigerants or propellants in aerosols—, called huffing or
bagging, is common among adolescents. It can cause euphoria and mental status changes and can
sensitize the heart to endogenous catecholamines. Fatal ventricular arrhythmias may result; they usually
occur without premonitory palpitations or other warning, often when patients are startled or chased.
Symptoms and Signs
After ingestion of even a very small amount of liquid hydrocarbon, patients initially cough, choke, and may
vomit. Young children may have cyanosis, hold their breath, and cough persistently. Older children and
adults may report burning in the stomach. Aspiration pneumonitis causes hypoxia and respiratory distress.
Symptoms and signs of pneumonitis may develop a few hours before infiltrates are visible on x-ray.
Substantial systemic absorption, particularly of a halogenated hydrocarbon, may cause lethargy, coma,
and seizures. Nonfatal pneumonitis usually resolves in about 1 wk; mineral or lamp oil ingestion usually
resolves in 5 to 6 wk. Arrhythmias usually occur before presentation and are
unlikely to recur after
presentation unless patients have excessive agitation.
Diagnosis
• Chest x-ray and oximetry done about 6 h after ingestion
If patients are too obtunded to provide a history, hydrocarbon exposure may be suspected if their breath
or clothing has an odor or if a container is found near them. Paint residue on the hands or around the
mouth may suggest recent paint sniffing.
Diagnosis of aspiration pneumonitis is by symptoms and signs as well as by chest x-ray and oximetry,
which are done about 6 h after ingestion or sooner if symptoms are severe. If respiratory failure is
suspected, ABGs are measured.
Treatment
• Supportive care
• Avoidance of gastric emptying
Any contaminated clothing is removed, and the skin is washed. (CAUTION:
Gastric emptying, which
===PAGE:3551===
increases risk of aspiration, is contraindicated
.) Charcoal is not recommended. Patients who do not
have aspiration pneumonitis or other symptoms after 4 to 6 h are discharged. Patients who have
symptoms are admitted and treated supportively; antibiotics and corticosteroids are not indicated.
Organophosphate and Carbamate Poisoning
Organophosphates and carbamates are common insecticides that inhibit cholinesterase activity,
causing acute muscarinic manifestations (eg, salivation, lacrimation, urination, diarrhea, emesis,
bronchorrhea, bronchospasm, bradycardia, miosis) and some nicotinic symptoms, including
muscle fasciculations and weakness. Neuropathy can develop days to weeks after exposure.
Diagnosis is clinical and sometimes with a trial of atropine, measurement of RBC
acetylcholinesterase level, or both. Bronchorrhea and bronchospasm are treated with titrated
highdose atropine. Neuro-muscular toxicity is treated with IV pralidoxime.
Organophosphates and carbamates, although different structurally, both inhibit cholinesterase activity.
Some are used medically to reverse neuromuscular blockade (eg, neostigmine, pyridostigmine,
edrophonium) or to treat glaucoma, myasthenia gravis, and Alzheimer's disease (eg, echothiophate,
pyridostigmine, tacrine, donepezil).
Some organophosphates were developed as nerve gases. One, sarin, has been used by terrorists.
Organophosphates and carbamates are commonly used as insecticides (see
Table 340-8
). Those most
often implicated in human poisoning include
• Carbamates: Aldicarb and methomyl
• Organophosphates: Chlorpyrifos, diazinon, dursban, fenthion, malathion, and parathion
Organophosphates and carbamates are common causes of poisoning and poison-related deaths
worldwide.
Pathophysiology
Organophosphates and carbamates are absorbed through the GI tract, lungs, and skin. They inhibit
plasma and RBC cholinesterase, preventing breakdown of acetylcholine, which then accumulates in
synapses. Carbamates are cleared spontaneously within about 48 h after exposure. Organophosphates,
however, can irreversibly bind to cholinesterase.
Symptoms and Signs
Acute:
Organophosphates and carbamates cause acute muscarinic and nicotinic cholinergic toxidromes
(see
Table 340-2
). Muscle fasciculations and weakness are typical. Most patients have bradycardia and,
if poisoning is severe, hypotension. CNS toxicity is common, sometimes with seizures and excitability and
often with lethargy and coma. Pancreatitis is possible, and organophosphates may cause arrhythmias
such as heart block and QTc interval prolongation.
Delayed:
Weakness, particularly of proximal, cranial, and respiratory muscles, may develop 1 to 3 days
after exposure to organo-phosphates or rarely carbamates despite treatment (the intermediate syndrome);
these symptoms resolve in 2 to 3 wk. A few organ-ophosphates (eg, chlorpyrifos, triorthocresyl
phosphate) may cause an axonal neuropathy that begins 1 to 3 wk after exposure. The mechanism may
be independent of RBC cholinesterase, and the risk is independent of the severity of poisoning. Longterm, persistent sequelae of organophosphate poisoning may include cognitive deficits or parkinsonism.
Diagnosis
• Muscarinic toxidrome with muscle fasciculations and weakness
• Sometimes RBC cholinesterase levels
===PAGE:3552===
The diagnosis is usually based on the characteristic muscarinic toxidrome in patients with neuromuscular
findings, particularly in patients at risk. If findings are equivocal, reversal or abatement of muscarinic
symptoms after 1 mg of atropine (0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg in children) supports the diagnosis. The specific
toxin should be identified if possible. Many organophosphates have characteristic garlic-like or petroleum
odors.
RBC cholinesterase activity, which can be measured by some laboratories, indicates the severity of
poisoning. If it can be measured rapidly, values can be used to monitor the effectiveness of treatment.
Treatment
• Supportive therapy
• Atropine for respiratory manifestations
• Decontamination
• Pralidoxime for neuromuscular manifestations
In-hospital treatment:
Supportive therapy is key. Patients should be closely monitored for respiratory
failure due to weakness of respiratory muscles.
Atropine
is given in amounts sufficient to relieve bronchospasm and bronchorrhea rather than to
normalize pupil size or heart rate. Initial dosage is 2 to 5 mg IV (0.05 mg/kg in children); the dose can be
doubled every 3 to 5 min prn. Grams of atropine may be necessary for severely poisoned patients.
Decontamination
is pursued as soon as possible after stabilization. Caregivers should avoid selfcontamination while providing care. For topical exposure, clothes are removed, and the body surface is
flushed thoroughly. For ingestion within 1 h of presentation, activated charcoal can be used. Gastric
emptying is usually avoided. If done, the trachea is intubated beforehand to prevent aspiration.
Pralidoxime
(2-PAM) is given after atropine to relieve neuromuscular symptoms. Pralidoxime (1 to 2 g in
adults; 20 to 40 mg/kg in children) is given over 15 to 30 min IV after exposure to an organophosphate or
carbamate because, frequently, whether the poison is an organophosphate or carbamate is unknown at
the time of treatment. An infusion can be used after the bolus (8 mg/kg/h in adults; 10 to 20 mg/kg/h in
children).
Benzodiazepines
are used for seizures. Prophylactic diazepam may help prevent neurocognitive
sequelae after moderate to severe organophosphate poisoning.
Out-of-hospital exposure:
People exposed to these toxins away from a hospital can give themselves
low doses of atropine using commercially prepared autoinjectors (2 mg for adults and for children > 41
kg; 1 mg for children19 to 41 kg; 0.5 mg for children < 19 kg). Autoinjection of 10 mg diazepam has been
recommended for people exposed to a chemical attack.
Iron Poisoning
Iron poisoning is the leading cause of poisoning deaths in children. Symptoms begin with acute
gastroenteritis, followed by a quiescent period, then shock and liver failure. Diagnosis is by
measuring serum iron, detecting radiopaque iron tablets in the GI tract, or detecting
unexplained metabolic acidosis in patients with other findings suggesting iron poisoning.
Treatment of a substantial ingestion is usually whole-bowel irrigation and chelation therapy with
IV deferoxamine.
Many commonly used OTC preparations contain iron. Of the many iron compounds used in OTC and
prescription preparations, the most common are
• Ferrous sulfate (20% elemental iron)
===PAGE:3553===
• Ferrous gluconate (12% elemental iron)
• Ferrous fumarate (33% elemental iron)
To children, iron tablets may look like candy. Prenatal multivitamins are the source of iron in most lethal
ingestions among children. Children's chewable multivitamins with iron usually have such small amounts
that toxicity rarely occurs.
Pathophysiology
Iron is toxic to the GI system, cardiovascular system, and CNS. Specific mechanisms are unclear, but
excess free iron is inserted into enzymatic processes and interferes with oxidative phosphorylation,
causing metabolic acidosis. Iron also catalyzes free radical formation, acts as an oxidizer, and, when
plasma protein binding is saturated, combines with water to form iron hydroxide and free H
+
ions,
compounding the metabolic acidosis. Coagulopathy may appear early because of interference with the
coagulation cascade and later because of liver injury.
Toxicity depends on the amount of elemental iron that has been ingested. Up to 20 mg/kg of elemental
iron is not toxic, 20 to 60 mg/kg is mildly to moderately toxic, and > 60 mg/kg can cause severe symptoms
and morbidity.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms occur in 5 stages (see
Table 340-7
); however, symptoms and their progression vary significantly. The severity of
[Table 340-7.
Stages of Iron Poisoning]
stage 1 symptoms usually reflects the overall severity of poisoning; late-stage symptoms develop only if
stage 1 symptoms are moderate or severe. If no symptoms develop within the first 6 h after ingestion, risk
of serious toxicity is minimal. If shock and coma develop within the first 6 h, the mortality rate is about
10%.
Diagnosis
• Abdominal x-ray
• Determination of serum iron, electrolytes, and pH 3 to 4 h after ingestion
Iron poisoning should be considered in mixed ingestions (because iron is ubiquitous) and in small children
with access to iron and unexplained metabolic acidosis or severe or hemorrhagic gastroenteritis. Because
children often share, siblings and playmates of small children who have ingested iron should be
evaluated.
Abdominal x-ray is usually recommended to confirm ingestion; it detects intact iron tablets or iron
concretions but misses chewed and dissolved tablets, liquid iron preparations, and iron in multivitamin
preparations. Serum iron, electrolytes, and pH are determined 3 to 4 h after ingestion. Toxicity is assumed
if suspected ingestion is accompanied by any of the following:
• Vomiting and abdominal pain
• Serum iron levels > 350
μ
g/dL (63
μ
mol/L)
• Iron visible on x-ray
• Unexplained metabolic acidosis
===PAGE:3554===
These iron levels may indicate toxicity; however, iron levels alone do not predict toxicity accurately. Total
iron binding capacity (TIBC) is often inaccurate and not helpful in diagnosing serious poisoning and is not
recommended. The most accurate approach is to serially measure levels of serum iron, HCO
, and pH
(with calculation of the anion gap); these findings are then evaluated together, and results are correlated
with the patient's clinical status. For example, toxicity is suggested by increasing iron levels, metabolic
acidosis, worsening symptoms, or, more typically, some combination of these findings.
Treatment
• Whole-bowel irrigation
• For severe toxicity, IV deferoxamine
If radiopaque tablets are visible on abdominal x-ray, whole-bowel irrigation with polyethylene glycol 1 to 2
L/h for adults or 25 to 40 mL/kg/h for children is done until no iron is visible on repeat abdominal x-ray.
Gastric lavage is usually not helpful because vomiting tends to empty the stomach more efficiently.
Activated charcoal does not adsorb iron and should be used only if other toxins also were ingested.
All patients with more than mild gastroenteritis are hospitalized. Patients with severe toxicity (metabolic
acidosis, shock, severe gastroenteritis, or serum iron level > 500
μ
g/dL) are treated with IV deferoxamine
to chelate free serum iron. Deferoxamine is infused at rates up to 15 mg/kg/h IV, titrated until hypotension
occurs. Because both deferoxamine and iron poisoning can decrease BP, patients receiving deferoxamine
require IV hydration.
Lead Poisoning
(Plumbism)
Lead poisoning often causes minimal symptoms at first but can cause acute encephalopathy or
irreversible organ damage, commonly resulting in cognitive deficits in children. Diagnosis is by
whole blood lead level. Treatment involves stopping lead exposure and sometimes using
chelation therapy with succimer or edetate Ca disodium, with or without dimercaprol.
Leaded paint was commonly used until 1960, used to some degree until the early 1970s, and mostly
eliminated in 1978. Thus, for a significant number of older housing units, leaded paint still poses some
hazard. Lead poisoning is usually caused by direct ingestion of leaded paint chips (from cracked, peeling
paint). During home remodeling, patients may be exposed to significant amounts of aerosolized lead in
the form of particles scraped or sanded off during surface preparation for repainting.
Some ceramic glazes contain lead; ceramic ware (eg, pitchers, cups, plates) that is made with these
glazes (common outside the US) can leach lead, particularly when in contact with acidic substances (eg,
fruits, cola drinks, tomatoes, wine, cider). Lead-contaminated moonshine whiskey and folk remedies are
possible sources, as are occasional lead foreign objects in the stomach or tissues (eg, bullets, curtain or
fishing weights). Bullets lodged in soft tissues near synovial fluid or CSF may increase blood lead levels,
but that process takes years.
Occupational exposure can occur during battery manufacture and recycling, bronzing, brass making,
glass making, pipe cutting, soldering and welding, smelting, or working with pottery or pigments. Certain
ethnic cosmetic products and imported herbal products and medicinal herbs contain lead and have
caused cluster outbreaks of lead poisoning in immigrant communities. Fumes of leaded gasoline (in
countries other than the US) recreationally inhaled for CNS effects may cause lead poisoning.
Symptoms and Signs
Lead poisoning is most often a chronic disorder and may not cause acute symptoms. With or without
acute symptoms, poisoning eventually has irreversible effects (eg, cognitive deficits, peripheral
neuropathy, progressive renal dysfunction).
===PAGE:3555===
Risk of cognitive deficits increases when the whole blood lead level (PbB) is ≥ 10 mg/dL (≥ 0.48 mmol/L)
for an extended period, although the cutoff may be even lower. Other symptoms (eg, abdominal cramping,
constipation, tremors, mood changes) may occur if PbB is > 50 mg/dL (> 2.4 mmol/L). Encephalopathy is
likely if PbB is > 100 mg/dL (> 4.8 mmol/L).
In children:
Acute lead poisoning may cause irritability, decreased attentiveness, and acute
encephalopathy. Cerebral edema develops over 1 to 5 days, causing persistent and forceful vomiting,
ataxic gait, seizures, altered consciousness, and, finally, intractable seizures and coma. Encephalopathy
may be preceded by several weeks of irritability and decreased play activity.
Chronic lead poisoning in children may cause intellectual disability, seizure disorders, aggressive
behavior disorders, developmental regression, chronic abdominal pain, and anemia.
In adults:
Adults with occupational exposure characteristically develop symptoms (eg, personality
changes, headache, abdominal pain, neuropathy) over several weeks or longer. Encephalopathy is
unusual. Adults may develop loss of sex drive, infertility, and, in men, erectile dysfunction.
In children and adults:
Anemia may develop because lead interferes with the normal formation of Hb.
Children and adults who inhale tetra-ethyl or tetra-methyl lead (in leaded gasoline) may develop toxic
psychosis in addition to more characteristic symptoms of lead poisoning.
Diagnosis
• Lead levels in capillary or whole blood
Lead poisoning is suspected in patients with characteristic symptoms. However, because symptoms are
often nonspecific, diagnosis is often delayed. Evaluation includes CBC and measurement of serum
electrolytes, BUN, serum creatinine, plasma glucose, and PbB levels. An abdominal x-ray should be taken
to look for lead particles, which are radiopaque. X-rays of long bones are taken in children. Horizontal,
metaphyseal lead bands representing lack of RBC remodeling and increased Ca deposition in the zones
of provisional calcification in children's long bones are somewhat specific for poisoning with lead or other
heavy metals but are insensitive. Normocytic or microcytic anemia suggests lead toxicity, particularly
when the reticulocyte count is elevated or RBC basophilic stippling occurs; however, sensitivity and
specificity are limited. Diagnosis is definitive if the PbB level is ≥ 10
μ
g/dL.
Because measuring PbB is not always possible and can be expensive, other preliminary or screening
tests for lead poisoning can be used. Capillary blood testing for lead is accurate, inexpensive, and quick.
All positive tests should be confirmed with PbB. The erythrocyte protoporphyrin (also called zinc
protoporphyrin or free erythrocyte protoporphyrin) test is often inaccurate and now is seldom used.
The edetate Ca disodium (CaNa
EDTA) mobilization test, previously used for diagnosis and treatment, is
considered obsolete by most toxicologists and is usually not done.
Treatment
• Source of lead eliminated (eg, whole-bowel irrigation if lead in GI tract)
• Chelation for adults with symptoms of poisoning plus PbB > 70 mg/dL
• Chelation for children with encephalopathy or PbB > 45 mg/dL (> 2.15 mmol/L)
For all patients, the source of lead is eliminated. If lead chips are visible on abdominal x-ray, whole-bowel
irrigation with a polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution at 1 to 2 L/h for adults or 25 to 40 mL/kg/h for
children is done until repeat x-ray shows no lead. If the cause is bullets, surgical removal should be
considered. Children with PbB > 70
μ
g/dL (> 3.40
μ
mol/L) and all patients with neurologic symptoms
should be hospitalized. Patients with acute encephalopathy are admitted to an ICU.
Chelating drugs (eg, succimer [meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid], CaNa
EDTA, dimercaprol [British
===PAGE:3556===
antilewisite, or BAL]) can be given to bind lead into forms that can be excreted (see also
Table 340-4
).
Chelation should be supervised by an experienced toxicologist. Chelation is indicated for adults with
symptoms of poisoning plus PbB > 70 mg/dL and for children with encephalopathy or PbB > 45 mg/dL (>
2.15 mmol/L). Liver and kidney disorders are relative contraindications for chelating drugs. Chelating
drugs should not be given to any patient with ongoing exposure to lead because chelation can increase
GI absorption of lead. Chelation removes only relatively small amounts of metal. If total body burden of
lead is very large, multiple chelations over many years may be required.
Regimens:
Patients with encephalopathy are treated with dimercaprol 75 mg/m
(or 4 mg/kg) IM q 4 h
and CaNa
EDTA 1000 to 1500 mg/m
IV (infusion) once/day. The first dose of dimercaprol should
precede the first dose of CaNa
EDTA by at least 4 h to prevent redistribution of lead into the brain.
Dimercaprol may be stopped after the first few doses depending on lead levels and symptom severity.
Dimercaprol-CaNa
EDTA combination therapy is given for 5 days, followed by a 3-day washout period;
then the need for continued chelation is reassessed.
Patients without encephalopathy are usually treated with succimer 10 mg/kg po q 8 h for 5 days, followed
by 10 mg/kg po q 12 h for 14 days. If these patients have symptoms, they can alternatively be treated for
5 days with dimercaprol 50 mg/m
needed deep IM injection q 4 h plus CaNa
EDTA 1000 mg/m
IV
once/day.
Drugs:
Dimercaprol, which can cause vomiting, is given with parenteral or oral fluids. Dimercaprol can
also cause pain at the injection site, numerous systemic symptoms, and, in patients with G6PD deficiency,
moderate to severe acute intravascular hemolysis. This drug should not be given concurrently with iron
supplements. Dimercaprol is formulated with peanut derivatives and thus is contraindicated in patients
with known or suspected peanut allergy.
CaNa
EDTA can cause thrombophlebitis, which can be prevented by giving the drug IM, not IV, and by
using an IV concentration of < 0.5%. Before beginning treatment with CaNa
EDTA, adequate urine flow
must be confirmed. Serious reactions to CaNa
EDTA include renal insufficiency, proteinuria, microscopic
hematuria, fever, and diarrhea. Renal toxicity, which is dose-related, is usually reversible. Adverse effects
of CaNa
EDTA are probably due to zinc depletion.
Succimer may cause rash, GI symptoms (eg, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, metallic taste), and
transient elevations of liver enzymes.
Lower lead levels:
Patients with PbB > 10
μ
g/dL should be monitored closely, and they or their parents
should be taught how to reduce their exposure to lead.
Prevention
Patients at risk should be screened by measuring PbB. Measures that reduce risk of household poisoning
include regular hand washing, regular washing of children's toys and pacifiers, and regular cleaning of
household surfaces; drinking water, household paint (except in houses built after 1978), and ceramic
ware made outside the US should be tested for lead. Adults exposed to lead dust at work should use
appropriate personal protective equipment, change their clothing and shoes before going home, and
shower before going to bed.
Specific Poisons
Symptoms and treatment of specific poisons vary (see
Table 340-8
); including all the specific complexities
and details is impossible. Consultation with a poison control center is recommended for any poisonings
except the mildest and most routine.
[Table 340-8.
Symptoms and Treatment of Specific Poisons]
===PAGE:3557===
23 - Special Subjects
Chapter 341. General Principles of Medical Genetics
Introduction
A gene, the basic unit of heredity, is a segment of DNA containing all the information necessary to
synthesize a polypeptide (protein). Protein synthesis determines much of the body's structure and
function.
Structure
Humans have about 20,000 genes. Genes are contained in chromosomes in the cell nucleus and
mitochondria. In humans, somatic (nongerm) cell nuclei, with certain exceptions (eg, RBCs), normally
have 46 chromosomes in 23 pairs. Each pair consists of one chromosome from the mother and one from
the father. Twenty-two of the pairs, the autosomes, are usually homologous (identical in size, shape, and
position and number of genes). The 23rd pair, the sex chromosomes (X and Y), determines a person's
sex. Women have 2 X chromosomes (which are homologous) in somatic cell nuclei; men have one X and
one Y chromosome (which are heterologous). The X chromosome carries genes responsible for many
hereditary traits; the small, differently shaped Y chromosome carries genes that initiate male sex
differentiation, as well as a few other genes. Because the X chromosome has many more genes than the
Y chromosome, many X chromosome genes in males are not paired. A karyotype is the full set of
chromosomes in a person's cells.
Germ cells (egg and sperm) undergo meiosis, which reduces the number of chromosomes to 23—half the
number in somatic cells. In meiosis, the genetic information inherited from a person's mother and father is
recombined through crossing over (exchange between homologous chromosomes). When
an egg is
fertilized by a sperm at conception, the normal number of 46 chromosomes is reconstituted.
Genes are arranged linearly along the DNA of chromosomes. Each gene has a specific location (locus),
which is typically the same on each of the 2 homologous chromosomes. The genes that occupy the same
locus on each chromosome of a pair (one inherited from the mother and one from the father) are called
alleles. Each gene consists of a specific DNA sequence; 2 alleles may have slightly different or the same
DNA sequences. Having a pair of identical alleles for a particular gene is homozygosity; having a pair of
nonidentical alleles is heterozygosity.
Gene Function
Genes consist of DNA. The length of the gene depends on the length of the protein the gene codes for.
DNA is a double helix in which nucleotides (bases) are paired; adenine (A) is paired with thymine (T) and
guanine (G) is paired with cytosine (C). DNA is transcribed during protein synthesis. When DNA
replicates itself during cell division, one strand of DNA is used as a template against which messenger
RNA (mRNA) is made. RNA has the same base pairs as DNA, except that uracil (U) replaces thymine (T).
Parts of mRNA travel from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and then to the ribosome, where protein
synthesis occurs. Transfer RNA (tRNA) brings each amino acid back to the ribosome where it is added to
the growing polypeptide chain in a sequence determined by the mRNA. As a chain of amino acids is
assembled, it folds upon itself to create a complex 3-dimensional structure under the influence of nearby
chaperone molecules.
The code in DNA is written in triplets of the 4 possible nucleotides. Specific amino acids are coded by
specific triplets. Because there are 4 nucleotides, the number of possible triplets is 4
(64). Because
there are only 20 amino acids, there are extra triplet combinations. Some triplets code for the same amino
acids as other triplets. Other triplets may code for things such as instructions to start or stop protein
synthesis and the order in which to combine and assemble amino acids.
Genes consist of exons and introns. Exons code for amino acid components of the final protein. Introns
contain other information that affects control and speed of protein production. Exons and introns together
===PAGE:3558===
are transcribed onto mRNA, but the segments transcribed from introns are later spliced out. Transcription
is also controlled by antisense RNA, which is synthesized from the DNA strand that is not transcribed into
mRNA. Chromosomes consist of histones and other proteins that affect gene expression (which proteins
and how many proteins are synthesized from a given gene).
Genotype refers to genetic composition; it determines which proteins are coded for production.
Phenotype refers to the entire physical, biochemical, and physiologic makeup of a person—ie, how the
cell (and thus the body) functions. Phenotype is determined by the types and amounts of proteins actually
synthesized, ie, how the genes are actually expressed. Gene expression depends on factors such as
whether a trait is dominant or recessive, the penetrance and expressivity of the gene (,
degree of tissue differentiation (determined by tissue type and age), environmental factors, unknown
factors, and whether expression is sex-limited or subject to chromosomal inactivation or genomic
imprinting. Factors that affect gene expression without changing the genome are epigenetic factors.
Knowledge of the biochemical mechanisms that mediate gene expression is growing rapidly. One
mechanism is variability in intron splicing (also called alternative splicing). Because introns are spliced
out, the exons may also be spliced out, and then the exons can be assembled in many combinations,
resulting in many different mRNAs capable of coding for similar but different proteins. The number of
proteins that can be synthesized by humans is > 100,000 even though the human genome has only about
20,000 genes. Other mechanisms mediating gene expression include DNA methylation and histone
reactions such as methylation and acetylation. DNA methylation tends to silence a gene. Histones
resemble spools around which DNA winds. Histone modifications such as methylation can increase or
decrease the quantity of proteins synthesized from a particular gene. Histone acetylation is associated
with decreased gene expression. The strand of DNA that is not transcribed to form mRNA may also be
used as a template for synthesis of RNA that controls transcription of the opposite strand.
Traits and Inheritance Patterns
A trait may be as simple as the color of the eyes or as complex as susceptibility to diabetes. Expression of
a trait may involve one gene or many genes. Some single-gene defects cause abnormalities in multiple
tissues, an effect called pleiotropy. For example, osteogenesis imperfecta (a connective tissue disorder
that often results from abnormalities
in a single collagen gene) may cause fragile bones, deafness, bluecolored sclerae, dys-plastic teeth, hypermobile joints, and heart valve abnormalities (see also p.
).
Construction of a family pedigree:
The family pedigree (family tree) can be used to diagram
inheritance patterns. It is also commonly used in genetic counseling. The pedigree uses conventional
symbols to represent family members and pertinent health information about them (see
Fig. 341-1
). Some familial disorders with identical phenotypes have several patterns of inheritance.
Single-Gene Defects
Genetic disorders determined by a single gene (Mendelian disorders) are easiest to analyze and the most
well understood. If expression of a trait requires only one copy of a gene (one allele), that trait is
considered dominant. If expression of a trait requires 2 copies of a gene (2 alleles), that trait is
considered recessive. An exception is X-linked disorders. Because males usually have no paired allele to
offset the effects of most alleles on the X chromosome, the X chromosome allele is expressed in males
even if the trait is recessive.
Many specific disorders have been described (see
Table 341-1
).
Autosomal Dominant
Only one abnormal allele of a gene is needed to express an autosomal dominant trait; ie, heterozygotes
and homozygotes for the abnormal gene are affected. A typical pedigree of an autosomal dominant trait is
shown in
Fig. 341-2
.
===PAGE:3559===
In general, the following rules apply:
• An affected person has an affected parent.
• A heterozygous affected parent and an unaffected parent have, on average, an equal number of
affected and unaffected children; ie, risk of occurrence for each child of an affected parent is 50%.
• Unaffected children of an affected parent do not transmit the trait to their descendents.
• Males and females are equally likely to be affected.
[Fig. 341-1.
Symbols for constructing a family pedigree.]
[Table 341-1.
Examples of Genetic Disorders with Mendelian Inheritance]
Autosomal Recessive
Two copies of an abnormal allele are needed to express an autosomal recessive trait. An example of a
pedigree is shown in
Fig. 341-3
.
In general, the following rules of inheritance apply:
• If normal parents have an affected child, both parents are heterozygotes. On average, one fourth of their
children are affected, half are heterozygotes, and one fourth are normal. Therefore, among the children,
the chance of not developing the disorder (that is, of being normal or a carrier) is three fourths, and
among the unaffected children, the chance of being a carrier is two thirds.
• All children of an affected parent and a genotypically normal parent are phenotypically normal
heterozygotes.
• On average, half the children of an affected parent and a heterozygote are affected, and half are
heterozygotes.
• All children of 2 affected parents are affected.
• Males and females are equally likely to be affected.
• Heterozygotes are phenotypically normal but carry the abnormal gene.
Relatives are more likely to carry the same mutant allele, so mating between close relatives
(consanguinity) increases the likelihood of having affected children. In parent-child or brother-sister
unions (incest), the risk of having abnormal children is increased because so much of their genetic
material is the same. In certain populations, the percentage of heterozygotes (carriers) is high because of
a founder effect (ie, the group started with few members, one of whom was a carrier) or because carriers
have a selective advantage (eg, heterozygosity for sickle cell anemia protects against malaria).
[Fig. 341-2.
Autosomal dominant inheritance.]
If the trait results in a defect of a specific protein (eg, an enzyme), heterozygotes usually have a reduced
amount of that protein. If the mutation is known, molecular genetic techniques can identify heterozygous
pheno-typically normal people (eg, those with cystic fibrosis most of the time).
X-Linked Dominant
X-linked dominant traits are carried on the X chromosome. Most are rare. Usually, males are more
severely affected; some X-linked dominant disorders are often lethal in males. Females who carry only
one abnormal allele are affected, but less severely. A typical pedigree is shown in
===PAGE:3560===
Fig. 341-4
.
In general, the following rules of inheritance apply:
• Affected males transmit the trait to all of their daughters but to none of their sons.
• Affected heterozygous females transmit the trait to half of their children, regardless of sex.
• Affected homozygous females transmit the trait to all of their children.
• Because females can be heterozygous or homozygous, more females have the trait than males. The
difference between the sexes is even larger if the disorder is lethal in males.
X-linked dominant inheritance may be difficult to differentiate from autosomal dominant inheritance by
studying only inheritance patterns. Large pedigrees are required, with
[Fig. 341-3.
Autosomal recessive inheritance.]
[Fig. 341-4.
X-linked dominant inheritance.]
particular attention to children of affected males because male-to-male transmission rules out X-linkage
(males pass only their Y chromosomes to their sons).
X-Linked Recessive
X-linked recessive traits are carried on the X chromosome. Thus, nearly all affected people are male
because most females have one normal copy of the involved gene (ie, they are heterozygous). A typical
pedigree is shown in
Fig. 341-5
.
In general, the following rules of inheritance apply:
• Nearly all affected people are male.
• Heterozygous females are usually pheno-typically normal but, as carriers, transmit the abnormal gene to
half of their children.
• Half the sons of a carrier female are affected, and half the daughters are carriers.
• An affected male never transmits the trait to his sons.
• All daughters of an affected male are carriers.
• No daughters of a carrier female and a normal father are affected, but half are carriers.
Occasionally, females who are heterozygous for X-linked mutations show some expression, but they are
rarely affected as severely as affected males.
Factors Affecting Gene Expression
Many factors can affect gene expression. Some cause the expression of traits to deviate from the
patterns predicted by Mendelian inheritance.
Penetrance and expressivity:
Penetrance is how often a gene is expressed. It is defined as the
percentage of people who have the gene and who develop the corresponding pheno-type (see
Fig. 341-6
). A gene with incomplete (low) penetrance may not be expressed even when the trait is
dominant or when it is recessive and the gene responsible for that trait is present on both chromosomes.
Penetrance of the same gene may vary from person to person and may depend on a person's age. Even
===PAGE:3561===
when an abnormal allele is not expressed (nonpenetrance), the unaffected carrier of the abnormal allele
can pass it to children, who may have the clinical abnormality. In such cases, the pedigree appears to skip
a generation. However, some cases of apparent nonpenetrance are due to the examiner's unfamiliarity
with or inability to recognize minor manifestations of the disorder. Patients with minimal expression are
sometimes considered to have a forme fruste of the disorder.
[Fig. 341-5.
X-linked recessive inheritance.]
Expressivity is the extent to which a gene is expressed in one person. It can be graded as a percentage;
eg, when a gene has 50% expressivity, only half the features are present or the severity is only half of
what can occur with full expression. Expressivity may be influenced by the environment and by other
genes, so people with the same gene may vary in phenotype. Expressivity can vary even among
members of the same family.
Sex-limited inheritance:
A trait that appears in only one sex is called sex-limited. Sex-limited inheritance
is distinct from X-linked inheritance, which refers to traits carried on the X chromosome. Sex-limited
inheritance, perhaps more correctly called sex-influenced inheritance, refers to special cases in which sex
hormones and other physiologic differences between males and females alter the expressivity and
penetrance of a gene. For example, premature baldness (known as male-pattern baldness) is an
autosomal dominant trait, but such baldness is rarely expressed in females and then usually only after
menopause.
Genomic imprinting:
Genomic imprinting is the differential expression of genetic material depending on
whether it has been inherited from the father or mother. For most
[Fig. 341-6.
Penetrance and expressivity.]
autosomes, both the parental and maternal alleles are expressed. However, in < 1% of alleles, expression
is possible only from the paternal or maternal allele. For example, expression of the gene for insulin-like
growth factor 2 is normally expressed only from the paternal allele. Genomic imprinting is usually
determined by effects that occur normally in the development of gametes. Changes such as methylation
of DNA may cause certain maternal or paternal alleles to be expressed to different degrees. A disorder
may appear to skip a generation if genomic imprinting prevents the causative allele from being expressed.
Defective imprinting, such as abnormal activation or silencing of alleles, can result in disorders (eg,
Prader-Willi syndrome, Angelman syndrome).
Codominance:
Codominant alleles are both observed. Thus, the phenotype of heterozygotes is distinct
from that of either homozygote. For example, if a person has one allele coding for blood type A and one
allele coding for blood type B, the person has both blood types (blood type AB).
Chromosomal inactivation:
In females, who have more than one X chromosome (except in eggs), all
but one of the X chromosomes is inactivated; ie, most of the alleles on that chromosome are not
expressed. Inactivation occurs individually in each cell early in fetal life; sometimes it is the X from the
mother that is inactivated, and sometimes it is the X from the father. Sometimes most of the X
chromosome inactivation comes from one parent—called skewed X inactivation. Either
way, once
inactivation has taken place in a cell, all descendants of that cell have the same X inactivation.
However, some alleles on the inactive X chromosome do express. Many of these alleles are on
chromosomal regions corresponding to regions of the Y chromosomes (and are thus called
pseudoautosomal regions, because both males and females receive 2 copies of these regions).
Multifactorial (Complex) Inheritance
Expression of many traits may involve multiple genes. Many such traits (eg, height) are distributed along
a bell-shaped curve (normal distribution). Normally, each gene adds to or subtracts from the trait
independently of other genes. In this distribution, few people are at the extremes and many are in the
middle because people are unlikely to inherit multiple factors acting in the same direction. Environmental
factors also add to or subtract from the final result.
===PAGE:3562===
Many relatively common congenital anomalies and familial disorders result from multifactorial inheritance.
In an affected person, the disorder represents the sum of genetic and environmental influences. Risk of
the occurrence of such a trait is much higher in 1st-degree relatives (siblings, parents, or children who
share, on average, 50% of the affected person's genes) than in more distant relatives, who are likely to
have inherited only a few high-liability genes.
Common disorders with multifactorial inheritance include hypertension, coronary artery disease, diabetes
mellitus, cancer, cleft palate, and arthritis. Many specific genes contributing to these traits are being
identified. Genetically determined predisposing factors, including a family history and specific biochemical
pathways often identified by molecular markers (eg, high cholesterol), can sometimes identify people who
are at risk and are likely to benefit from preventive measures.
Multigenic, multifactorial traits seldom produce clear patterns of inheritance; however, these traits tend to
occur more often among certain ethnic and geographic groups or among one sex or the other.
Unusual Aspects of Inheritance
Certain situations represent aberrant inheritance, often because genes or chromosomes are altered.
However, some of these alterations, such as mosaicism, are very common; others, such as
polymorphisms, are so common that they may be considered normal variants.
Mutations and polymorphisms:
Variations in DNA can occur spontaneously or in response to cellular
insults (eg, radiation, mutagenic drugs, viruses). Some are repaired by the cell's DNA error correction
mechanisms. Others are not and can be passed on to subsequently replicated cells; in such cases, the
variation is termed a mutation. However, offspring can inherit the mutation only if germ cells are affected.
Mutations may be unique to an individual or family. Most mutations are rare. Polymorphisms begin as
mutations. They are variations in DNA that have become common in a population (prevalence of ≥ 1%)
through sufficient propagation or other mechanisms. Most are stable and inconsequential. A common
example is human blood groups (A, B, AB, and O).
Mutations (and polymorphisms) involve random changes in DNA. Most have little effect on cell function.
Some change cell function, usually in a detrimental way, and some are lethal to the cell. Examples of
detrimental changes in cell function are mutations that cause cancer by creating oncogenes or altering
tumor suppressor genes (. Rarely, a change in cell function confers a survival advantage.
These mutations are more likely to be propagated. The mutation causing sickle cell anemia confers
resistance to malaria. This resistance conferred a survival advantage in areas where malaria was
endemic and often fatal. However, by causing symptoms and complications of sickle cell anemia, the
mutation also has harmful effects usually when present in the homozygous state.
When and in what cell type mutations occur can explain certain abnormalities in inheritance patterns.
Typically, an autosomal dominant disorder is expected to be present in one or both parents of an affected
person. However, some disorders with autosomal dominant inheritance can appear de novo (in people
whose parents have a normal phenotype). For example, about 80% of people with achondroplastic
dwarfism have no family history of dwarfism and thus represent new (de novo) mutations. In many of
these people, the mechanism is a spontaneous mutation occurring early in their embryonic life. Thus,
other off-spring have no increased risk of the disorder. However, in some of them, the disorder develops
because of a germ cell mutation in their parents (eg, an autosomal dominant gene in a
phenotypically
normal parent). If so, other offspring have an increased risk of inheriting the mutation.
Mosaicism:
Mosaicism occurs when a person starting from a single fertilized egg develops ≥ 2 cell lines
differing in genotype. Mosaicism is a normal consequence of X inactivation in females (; in
most females, some cells have an inactive maternal X, and other cells have an inactive paternal X.
Mosaicism can also result from mutations. Mutations are likely to occur during cell division in any large
multicellular organism; each time a cell divides, 4 or 5 changes are estimated to occur in the DNA.
Because these changes can be passed on to subsequently produced cells, large multicellular organisms
have subclones of cells that have slightly different genotypes.
===PAGE:3563===
Mosaicism may be recognized as the cause of disorders in which patchy changes occur. For example,
McCune-Albright syndrome is associated with patchy dysplastic changes in the bone, endocrine gland
abnormalities, patchy pigmentary changes, and occasionally heart or liver abnormalities. Occurrence of
the McCune-Albright mutation in all cells would cause early death; however, people with mosaicism
survive because normal tissue supports the abnormal tissue. Occasionally, a parent with a single-gene
disorder seems to have a mild form but actually represents a mosaic; the parent's offspring is more
severely affected if they receive a germ cell with the mutant allele and thus have the abnormality in every
cell.
Chromosomal abnormalities are most often fatal to the fetus. However, chromosomal mosaicism occurs in
some embryos, resulting in some chromosomally normal cells, which can allow offspring to be born alive.
Chromosomal mosaicism can be detected with prenatal genetic testing, particularly chorionic villus
sampling.
Extra or missing chromosomes:
Abnormal numbers of autosomes usually result in severe
abnormalities. For example, extra autosomes typically cause abnormalities such as Down syndrome and
other severe syndromes or can be fatal to the fetus. Absence of an autosome is always fatal to the fetus.
Chromosomal abnormalities ( can usually be diagnosed before birth.
Because of X chromosomal inactivation, having an abnormal number of X chromosomes is usually much
less severe than having an abnormal number of autosomes. For example, the abnormalities resulting from
the absence of one X chromosome are usually relatively minor (eg, in Turner's syndrome, . Also, females with 3 X chromosomes (triple X syndrome,  are often physically and
mentally normal; only one X chromosome of genetic material is fully active even if a female has > 2 X
chromosomes (the extra X chromosomes are also partly inactivated).
Uniparental disomy:
Uniparental disomy occurs when both chromosomes have been inherited from only
one parent. It is very rare and is thought to involve trisomy rescue; ie, the zygote started off as a trisomy
(having 3 instead of 2 of a particular chromosome) and one of the 3 was lost, a process that leads to
uniparental disomy when the 2 chromosomes that remain are from the same parent (in about one third of
cases). Uniparental disomy may cause abnormal inheritance patterns. For example, if duplicates of the
same chromosome (isodisomy) are present and carry an abnormal allele for an autosomal recessive
disorder, affected people can have an autosomal recessive disorder even though only one parent is a
carrier.
Chromosomal translocation:
Chromosomal translocation is exchange of chromosomal parts between
nonpaired (nonhomologous) chromosomes. If chromosomes exchange equal parts of genetic material, the
translocation is described as balanced. Unbalanced translocations result in loss of chromosomal material,
usually the short arms of 2 fused chromosomes, leaving only 45 chromosomes remaining. Most people
with translocations are phenotypically normal. However, translocations may cause or contribute to
leukemia (acute myelocytic leukemia [AML] or chronic myelocytic leukemia [CML]) or Down syndrome.
Translocations may increase risk of chromosomal abnormalities in offspring, particularly unbalanced
translocations. Because chromosomal abnormalities are often fatal to an embryo or a fetus, a parental
translocation may result in unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortions or infertility.
Triplet (trinucleotide) repeat disorders:
A triplet repeat disorder results when a triplet of nucleotides is
repeated an abnormal number of times within a gene. The number of triplets may increase when the gene
is transmitted from one generation to the next or as cells divide within the body. When triplets increase
enough, genes stop functioning normally. Triplet repeat disorders are infrequent but cause several
neurologic disorders (eg, myotonic dystrophy, fragile X mental retardation), particularly those involving the
CNS (eg, Huntington's disease). Triplet repeat disorders can be detected by techniques that analyze
DNA.
Anticipation:
Anticipation occurs when a disorder has an earlier age of onset and is expressed more
severely in each successive generation. Anticipation may occur when a parent is a mosaic and the child
has the full mutation in all cells. It may also occur in triplet repeat disorders when the number of repeats
and thus the severity of gene dysfunction increase with each generation.
===PAGE:3564===
Mitochondrial DNA Abnormalities
Each cell has several hundred mitochondria in its cytoplasm. Mitochondria contain DNA in a single
circular chromosome that codes for 13 proteins, various RNAs, and several regulating enzymes. However,
> 90% of mitochondrial proteins are coded by nuclear genes. For practical purposes, all mitochondria are
inherited from the cytoplasm of the egg; thus, mitochondrial DNA comes only from the mother.
Mitochondrial disorders (see also p.
) can be due to mitochondrial or nuclear DNA abnormalities (eg,
deletions, duplications, mutations). High-energy tissues (eg, muscle, heart, brain) are particularly at risk
of malfunction due to mitochondrial abnormalities. Particular mitochondrial DNA abnormalities result in
characteristic manifestations (see
Table 341-2
). Mitochondrial disorders are equally common among males and females.
Mitochondrial abnormalities may occur in many common disorders such as some types of Parkinson's
disease (which may involve large mitochondrial deletions in the cells of the basal ganglia) and many
types of muscle disorders.
Maternal inheritance patterns characterize abnormalities of mitochondrial DNA. Thus, all offspring of an
affected female are at risk of inheriting the abnormality, but no offspring of an affected male are at risk.
Variability in clinical manifestations is the rule and may be due in part to variable mixtures of inherited
mutant and normal mitochondrial genomes within cells and tissues.
Genetic Diagnostic Technologies
Genetic diagnostic technology is rapidly improving. DNA or RNA can be amplified, producing many copies
of a gene or gene segment, using PCR.
Gene probes can be used to locate specific segments of normal or mutated DNA. A known DNA segment
may be cloned and then radioactively or fluorescently tagged; this segment is then combined with a test
specimen. The tagged DNA binds to its complementary DNA segment and can be detected by measuring
the radioactivity or the amount and type of fluorescence. Gene probes can detect a number of disorders
before and after birth. In the future, gene probes will probably be used to test people for many major
genetic disorders simultaneously.
[Table 341-2.
Mitochondrial Disorders]
Microchips are powerful new tools that can be used to identify DNA mutations, pieces of RNA, or
proteins. A single chip can test for 30,000 different DNA changes using only one sample.
Clinical Uses of Genetics
Disease Understanding
Genetics has advanced understanding of many disorders, sometimes allowing them to
be reclassified.
For example, classification of many spinocerebellar ataxias has been changed from one based on clinical
criteria to one based on genetic criteria (. The Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
database is a searchable catalog of human genes and genetic disorders.
Diagnosis
Genetic testing is used to diagnose many disorders (eg, Turner's syndrome, Klinefelter's syndrome,
hemochromatosis). Diagnosis of a genetic disorder often indicates that relatives of the affected person
should be screened for the genetic defect or for carrier status.
Genetic Screening
Genetic screening may be indicated in populations at risk of a particular genetic disorder. The usual
criteria for genetic screening are
===PAGE:3565===
• Genetic inheritance patterns are known.
• Effective therapy is available.
• Screening tests are sufficiently valid, reliable, sensitive and specific, noninvasive, and safe.
Prevalence in a defined population must be high enough to justify the cost of screening.
One aim of prenatal genetic screening ( is to identify asymptomatic parental heterozygotes
carrying a gene for a recessive disorder. For example, Ashkenazi Jews are screened for Tay-Sachs
disease, blacks are screened for sickle cell anemia, and several ethnic groups are screened for
thalassemia (see
Table 259-1
. If a heterozygote's mate is also a heterozygote, the couple is at risk of having an
affected child. If the risk is high enough, prenatal diagnosis can be pursued (eg, with amniocentesis,
chorionic villus sampling, umbilical cord blood sampling, maternal blood sampling, or fetal imaging). In
some cases, genetic disorders diagnosed prenatally can be treated, preventing complications. For
instance, special diet or replacement therapy can minimize or eliminate the effects of phenylketonuria,
galactosemia, and hypothyroidism. Corticosteroids given to the mother before birth may decrease the
severity of congenital virilizing adrenal hypoplasia.
Screening may be appropriate for people with a family history of a dominantly inherited disorder that
manifests later in life, such as Huntington's disease or cancers associated with abnormalities of the
BRCA1
or
BRCA2
genes. Screening clarifies the risk of developing the condition for that person, who can
then make appropriate plans, such as for more frequent screening or preventive therapy.
Screening may also be indicated when a family member is diagnosed with a genetic disorder. A person
who is identified as a carrier can make informed decisions about reproduction.
Treatment
Understanding the genetic and molecular basis of disorders may help guide therapy. For example, dietary
restriction can eliminate compounds toxic to patients with certain genetic defects, such as
phenylketonuria or homocystinuria. Vitamins or other agents can modify a biochemical pathway and thus
reduce toxic levels of a compound; eg, folate (folic acid) reduces homocysteine levels in people with 5,10methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase polymorphism. Therapy may involve replacing a deficient
compound or blocking an overactive pathway.
Pharmacogenomics:
Pharmacogenomics is the science of how genetic characteristics affect the
response to drugs. One aspect of pharmacogenomics is how genes affect pharmacokinetics. Genetic
characteristics of a person may help predict response to treatments. For example, metabolism of warfarin
is determined partly by variants in genes for the CYP2C9 enzyme and for the vitamin K epoxide reductase
complex protein 1. Genetic variations (eg, in production of UDP [uridine diphosphate]-
glucoronosyltransferase 1A1) also help predict whether the anticancer drug irinotecan will have
intolerable adverse effects.
Another aspect of pharmacogenomics is pharmacodynamics (how drugs interact with cell receptors—see
p.
). Genetic and thus receptor characteristics of disordered tissue can help provide more precise
targets when developing drugs (eg, anticancer drugs). For example, trastuzumab can target specific
cancer cell receptors in metastatic breast cancers that amplify the
HER2/neu
gene. Presence of the
Philadelphia chromosome in patients with chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML) helps guide chemotherapy.
Gene therapy:
Gene therapy can broadly be considered any treatment that changes gene function.
However, gene therapy is often considered specifically the insertion of normal genes into the cells of a
person who lacks such normal genes because of a specific genetic disorder. The normal genes can be
manufactured, using PCR, from normal DNA donated by another person. Because most genetic disorders
are recessive, usually a dominant normal gene is inserted. Currently, such insertion gene therapy is most
likely to be effective in the prevention or cure of single-gene defects, such as cystic fibrosis.
===PAGE:3566===
One way to transfer DNA into host cells is by viral transfection. The normal DNA is inserted into a virus,
which then transfects the host cells, thereby transmitting the DNA into the cell nucleus. Some important
concerns about insertion using a virus include reactions to the virus, rapid loss of (failure to propagate)
the new normal DNA, and damage to the virus by antibodies developed against the transfected protein,
which the immune system recognizes as foreign. Another way to transfer DNA uses liposomes, which are
absorbed by the host cells and thereby deliver their DNA to the cell nucleus. Potential problems with
liposome insertion methods include failure to absorb the liposomes into the cells, rapid degradation of the
new normal DNA, and rapid loss of integration of the DNA.
With antisense technology, rather than inserting normal genes, gene expression can be altered; eg, drugs
can combine with specific parts of the DNA, preventing or decreasing gene expression. Antisense
technology is currently being tried for cancer therapy but is still very experimental. However, it seems to
hold more promise than gene insertion therapy because the success rates may be higher and
complications may be fewer.
Another approach to gene therapy is to modify gene expression chemically (eg, by modifying DNA
methylation). Such methods have been tried experimentally in treating cancer. Chemical modification may
also affect genomic imprinting, although this effect is not clear.
Gene therapy is also being studied experimentally in transplantation surgery. Altering the genes of the
transplanted organs to make them more compatible with the recipient's genes makes rejection (and thus
the need for immunosuppressive drugs) less likely. However, this process works only rarely.
Ethical Controversies
With new genetic diagnostic and therapeutic capabilities come many controversies about how they
should be used. For example, there are concerns that genetic information might be used improperly to
discriminate (eg, by denying health insurance coverage or employment) against people with genetic risk
factors for particular disorders. Issues include the privacy of a person's own genetic information and the
question of whether testing should be compulsory.
Prenatal screening for genetic abnormalities that cause serious disorders is widely supported; however,
there is concern that screening could also be used to select for traits that are aesthetically desirable (eg,
physical appearance, intelligence).
Cloning is highly controversial. Animal studies suggest cloning is much more likely than natural methods
to result in defects that are lethal or cause serious health problems. Creating a human by cloning is
widely seen as unethical, is usually illegal, and is technically difficult.
===PAGE:3567===
Chapter 342. Clinical Decision Making
Introduction
Clinicians must integrate a huge variety of clinical data while facing conflicting pressures to decrease
diagnostic uncertainty, risks to patients, and costs. Deciding what information to gather, which tests to
order, how to interpret and integrate this information to draw diagnostic conclusions, and which
treatments to give is known as clinical decision making.
When presented with a patient, clinicians usually must answer the following questions:
• What disease does this patient have?
• Should this patient be treated?
• Should testing be done?
In straightforward or common situations, clinicians often make such decisions informally; diagnoses are
made by recognizing disease patterns, and testing and treatment are initiated based on customary
practice. For example, during a flu epidemic, a healthy adult who has had fever, aches, and harsh cough
for 2 days is likely to be recognized as another case of influenza and provided only appropriate
symptomatic relief. Such pattern recognition is efficient and easy to use but may be subject to error
because other diagnostic and therapeutic possibilities are not seriously or systematically considered. For
example, a patient with that flu pattern and decreased O
saturation might instead have bacterial
pneumonia and require antibiotics. In more complex cases, a structured, quantitative, analytical
methodology may be a better approach to decision making. Even when pattern recognition provides the
most likely diagnostic possibility, analytic decision making is often used to confirm the diagnosis. Analytic
methods may include application of the principles of evidence-based medicine, use of clinical guidelines,
and use of various specific quantitative techniques (eg, Bayes' theorem).
Evidence-Based Medicine and Clinical Guidelines
Physicians have always felt that their decisions were based on evidence; thus, the current term
"evidence-based medicine" is somewhat of a misnomer. However, for many clinicians, the "evidence" is
often a vague combination of recollected strategies effective in previous patients, advice given by
mentors and colleagues, and a general impression of "what is being done" based on random journal
articles, abstracts, symposia, and advertisements. This kind of practice results in wide variations in
strategies for diagnosing and managing similar conditions, even when strong evidence exists for favoring
one particular strategy over another. Variations exist among different countries, different regions, different
hospitals, and even within individual group practices. These variations have led to a call for a more
systematic approach to identifying the most appropriate strategy for an individual patient; this approach is
called evidence-based medicine (EBM). EBM is built on reviews of relevant medical literature and follows
a discrete series of steps.
Evidence-Based Medicine
EBM is not the blind application of advice gleaned from recently published literature to individual patient
problems. Rather, EBM requires the use of a series of steps to gather sufficiently useful information to
answer a carefully crafted question for an individual patient. Fully integrating the principles of EBM also
incorporates the patient's value system, which includes such things as costs incurred, the patient's
religious or moral beliefs, and patient autonomy. Applying the principles of EBM typically involves the
following steps:
• Formulating a clinical question
• Gathering evidence to answer the question
===PAGE:3568===
• Evaluating the quality and validity of the evidence
• Deciding how to apply the evidence to the care of a given patient
Formulating a clinical question:
Questions must be specific. Specific questions are most likely to be
addressed in the medical literature. A well-designed question specifies the population, intervention
(diagnostic test, treatment), comparison (treatment A vs treatment B), and outcome. "What is the best way
to evaluate someone with abdominal pain?" is not a good question. A better, more specific question may
be "Is CT or ultrasonography preferable for diagnosing acute appendicitis in a 30-yr-old male with acute
lower abdominal pain?"
Gathering evidence to answer the question:
A broad selection of relevant studies is obtained from a
review of the literature. Standard resources are consulted (eg, MEDLINE, the Cochrane Collaboration
[treatment options], the National Guideline Clearinghouse, ACP Journal Club).
Evaluating the quality and validity of the evidence:
Not all scientific studies are of equal value.
Different types of studies have different scientific strengths and legitimacy, and for any given type of
study, individual examples often vary in quality of the methodology, internal validity, and generalizability of
results (external validity).
Levels of evidence
are graded 1 through 5 in decreasing order of quality. Types of studies at each level
vary somewhat with the clinical question (eg, of diagnosis, treatment, or economic analysis), but typically
level 1 evidence (the highest quality) consists of systematic reviews or meta-analyses of randomized
controlled trials and high-quality, single, randomized controlled trials. Level 2 evidence is well-designed
cohort studies. Level 3 evidence is case-control studies. Level 4 evidence is case series and poor-quality
cohort and case-control studies. Level 5 evidence is expert opinion not based on critical appraisal but is
based on reasoning from physiology, bench research, or underlying principles.
For EBM analysis, the highest level of evidence available is selected. Ideally, a significant number of
large, well-conducted level 1 studies are available. However, because the number of high-quality,
randomized, controlled trials is vanishingly small compared with the number of possible clinical questions,
less reliable level 4 or 5 evidence is very often all that is available. Lower-quality evidence does not mean
that the EBM process cannot be followed, just that the strength of the conclusion is weaker.
Deciding how to apply the evidence to the care of a given patient:
Because the best available
evidence may have come from patient populations with different characteristics
from those of the patient
in question, some judgment is required. Additionally, patients' wishes regarding aggressive or invasive
tests and treatment must be taken into account as well as their tolerance for discomfort, risk, and
uncertainty. For example, even though an EBM review may definitively show a 3-mo survival advantage
from an aggressive chemotherapy regimen in a certain form of cancer, patients may differ on whether
they prefer to gain the extra time or avoid the extra discomfort.
Limitations:
Dozens of clinical questions are faced during the course of even one day in a busy practice.
Although some of them may be the subject of an existing EBM review available for reference, most are
not, and preparing an EBM analysis is too time-consuming to be useful in answering an immediate clinical
question. Even when time is not a consideration, many clinical questions do not have any relevant studies
in the literature.
Clinical Guidelines
Clinical guidelines have become common in the practice of medicine; many specialty societies have
published such guidelines. Most well-conceived clinical guidelines are developed using a specified
method that incorporates principles of EBM and consensus recommendations made by a panel of
experts.
Some clinical guidelines follow "if, then" rules (eg, if a patient is febrile and neutropenic, then institute
broad-spectrum antibiotics). More complex, multistep rules may be formalized as algorithms. Guidelines
and algorithms are generally straightforward and easy to use but should be applied only to patients
===PAGE:3569===
whose clinical characteristics (eg, demographics, comorbidities, clinical features) are similar to those of
the patient group used to create the guideline. Furthermore, guidelines do not take into account the
degree of uncertainty inherent in test results, the likelihood of treatment success, and the relative risks
and benefits of each course of action. To incorporate uncertainty and the value of outcomes into clinical
decision making, clinicians must often apply the principles of quantitative or analytical medical decision
making.
Clinical Decision-Making Strategies
One of the most commonly used strategies for medical decision making mirrors the scientific method of
hypothesis generation followed by hypothesis testing. Diagnostic hypotheses are accepted or rejected
based on testing.
Hypothesis generation:
Hypothesis generation involves the identification of the main diagnostic
possibilities (differential diagnosis) that might account for the patient's clinical problem. The patient's chief
complaint (eg, chest pain) and basic demographic data (age, sex, race) are the starting points for the
differential diagnosis, which is usually generated by pattern recognition. Each element on the list of
possibilities is ideally assigned an estimated probability (see
Sidebar 342-1
), or likelihood, of its being the
correct diagnosis (pre-test probability—see
Table 342-1
).
Clinicians often use vague terms such as "highly likely," "improbable," and "cannot rule out" to describe
the likelihood of disease. Both clinicians and patients often misinterpret such semiquantitative terms;
explicit statistical terminology should be used instead when available. Mathematical computations assist
clinical decision making and, even when exact numbers are unavailable, can better define clinical
probabilities and narrow the list of hypothetical diseases further.
Hypothesis testing:
The initial differential diagnosis based on chief complaint and demographics is
usually very large, so the clinician first tests the hypothetical possibilities during the history and physical
examination, asking
questions or doing specific examinations that support or refute a suspected
diagnosis. For instance, in a patient with chest pain, a history of leg pain and a swollen, tender leg
detected during examination increases the probability of pulmonary embolism.
Sidebar 342-1 Probability and Odds
The
probability
of a disease (or event) occurring in a patient whose clinical information is unknown is the
frequency with which that disease or event occurs in a population. Probabilities range from 0.0
(impossible) to 1.0 (certain) and are often expressed as percentages (from 0 to 100). A disease that
occurs in 2 of 10 patients has a probability of 2/10 (0.2 or 20%). Rounding very small probabilities to 0,
thus excluding all possibility of disease (sometimes done in implicit clinical reasoning), can lead to
erroneous conclusions when quantitative methods are used.
Odds
represent the ratio of affected to unaffected patients (ie, the ratio of disease to no disease). Thus,
a disease that occurs in 2 of 10 patients (probability of 2/10) has odds of 2/8 (0.25, often expressed as 1
to 4). Odds (
Ω
) and probabilities (p) can be converted one to the other, as in
Ω
= p/(1 - p) or p =
Ω
/(1 +
Ω
).
When the history and physical examination form a clear-cut pattern, a presumptive diagnosis is made.
Diagnostic testing is used when uncertainties persist after the history and physical examination,
particularly when the diseases remaining under consideration are serious or have dangerous or costly
treatment. Test results further modify the probabilities of different diagnoses (post-test probability). For
example,
Table 342-1
shows how the additional findings that the hypothetical patient had leg pain and
swelling and a normal ECG and chest x-ray modify diagnostic probabilities—the probability of acute
coronary syndrome, dissecting aneurysm, and pneumothorax decreases, and the probability of
pulmonary, embolism increases. These changes in probability may lead to additional testing (in this
example, probably chest CT angiography) that further modifies post-test probability (see
Table 342-1
)
===PAGE:3570===
and, in some cases, confirms or refutes a diagnosis.
Probability Estimations and the Treatment Threshold
The disease probability at and above which treatment is given and no further testing is warranted is
termed the treatment threshold (TT).
The above hypothetical example of a patient with chest pain converged on a near-certain diagnosis (98%
probability). When diagnosis of a disease is certain, the decision to treat is a straightforward
determination that there is a benefit of treatment (compared with no treatment and taking into account
adverse effects of treatment). When the diagnosis has some degree of uncertainty, as is almost always
the case, the decision to treat also must balance the benefit of treating a sick person against the risk of
erroneously treating a well person or a person with a different disorder; benefit and risk encompass both
financial and medical consequences. This balance must take into account both the likelihood of disease
and the magnitude of the benefit and risk. This balance determines where the clinician sets the TT.
Conceptually, if the benefit of treatment is very high and the risk is very low (as when giving a safe
antibiotic to a patient with diabetes who possibly has a life-threatening infection), clinicians tend to accept
high diagnostic uncertainty and might initiate treatment even if probability of infection is fairly low (eg,
30%—see
Fig. 342-1
). However, when the risk of treatment is very high (as when doing a pneumonectomy for
possible lung cancer), clinicians want to be extremely sure of the diagnosis and might recommend
treatment only when the probability of cancer is very high, perhaps > 95% (see
Fig. 342-1
). Note that the
TT does not necessarily correspond to the probability at which a disease might be considered
[Table 342-1.
Hypothetical Differential Diagnosis and Pre-Test and Post-Test Probabilities for a 50-yr-old
Hypertensive, Diabetic Cigarette Smoker with Chest Pain]
[Fig. 342-1.
Variation of treatment threshold (TT) with risk of treatment.]
confirmed or ruled in. It is simply the point at which the risk of not treating is greater than the risk of
treating.
Quantitatively, the TT can be described as the point at which probability of disease (p) times benefit of
treating a person with disease (B) equals probability of no disease (1 - p) times risk of treating a person
without disease (R). Thus, at the TT
p × B = (1 - p) × R
Solving for p, this equation reduces to
p = R/(B + R).
From this equation, it is apparent that if B (benefit) and R (risk) are the same, the TT becomes 1/(1 + 1) =
0.5, which means that when the probability of disease is > 50%, clinicians would treat, and when
probability is < 50%, clinicians would not treat.
For a clinical example, a patient with chest pain can be considered. How high should the clinical
likelihood of acute MI be before thrombolytic therapy should be given, assuming the only risk considered
is short-term mortality? If it is postulated (for illustration) that mortality due to intracranial hemorrhage with
thrombolytic therapy is 1%, then 1% is R, the fatality rate of mistakenly treating a patient who does not
have an MI. If net mortality in patients with MI is decreased by 3% with thrombolytic therapy, then 3% is B.
Then, TT is 1/(3 + 1), or 25%; thus, treatment should be given if the probability of acute MI is > 25%.
Alternatively, the TT equation can be rearranged to show that the TT is the point at which the odds of
disease p/(1 - p) equal the risk:benefit ratio (R/B). The same numerical result is obtained as in the
previously described example, with the TT occurring at the odds of the risk:benefit ratio (1/3); 1/3 odds
===PAGE:3571===
corresponds to the previously obtained probability of 25% (see
Sidebar 342-1
).
Limitations:
Quantitative clinical decision making seems precise, but because many elements in the
calculations are often imprecisely known (if they are known at all), this methodology is difficult to use in all
but the most well-defined and studied clinical situations.
Cognitive Errors in Clinical Decision Making
Although quantitative mathematical models can guide clinical decision making, clinicians rarely use formal
computations to make patient care decisions in day-to-day practice. Rather, an intuitive understanding of
probabilities is combined with cognitive processes called heuristics to guide clinical judgment. Heuristics
are often referred to as rules of thumb, educated guesses, or mental shortcuts. Heuristics usually involve
pattern recognition and rely on a subconscious integration of somewhat haphazardly gathered patient
data with prior experience rather than on a conscious generation of a rigorous differential diagnosis that
is formally evaluated using specific data from the literature.
Such informal reasoning is often fallible because heuristics may cause several types of unconscious
errors (cognitive errors). Studies suggest that more medical errors involve cognitive error than lack of
knowledge or information.
Types of cognitive error:
There are many types of cognitive errors, and although it is obviously more
important to avoid errors than to properly classify them once made, being aware of common types of
cognitive errors can help clinicians recognize and avoid them.
Cognitive errors may roughly be classified as those involving
• Faulty assessment of pre-test probability (overestimating or underestimating disease likelihood)
• Failure to seriously consider all relevant possibilities
Both types of error can easily lead to improper testing (too much or too little) and missed diagnoses.
Availability error
occurs when clinicians misestimate the prior probability of disease because of recent
experience. Experience often leads to overestimation of probability when there is memory of a case that
was dramatic or that involved a patient who fared poorly or a lawsuit. For example, a clinician who
recently missed the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism in a healthy young woman who had vague chest
discomfort but no other findings or apparent risk factors might then overestimate the risk in similar
patients and become more likely to do chest CT angiography for similar patients despite the very small
probability of disease. Experience can also lead to underestimation. For example, a junior resident who
has seen only a few patients with chest pain, all of whom turned out to have benign causes, may begin to
do cursory evaluations of that complaint even among populations in which disease prevalence is high.
Representation error
occurs when clinicians judge the probability of disease based on how closely the
patient's findings fit classic manifestations of a disease without taking into account disease prevalence.
For example, although several hours of vague chest discomfort in a thin, athletic, healthy-appearing 60yr-old man who has no known medical problems and who now looks and feels well does not match the
typical profile of an MI, it would be unwise to dismiss that possibility because MI is common among men
of that age and has highly variable manifestations. Conversely, a 20-yr-old healthy man with sudden
onset of severe, sharp chest pain and back pain may be suspected of having a dissecting thoracic aortic
aneurysm because those clinical features are common in aortic dissection. The cognitive error is not
taking into account the fact that aortic dissections are exceptionally rare in a 20-yr-old, otherwise healthy
patient; that disorder can be dismissed out of hand and other, more likely causes (eg, pneumothorax,
pleuritis) should be considered. Representation error is also involved when clinicians fail to recognize that
positive test results in a population where the tested disease is rare are more likely to be false positive
than true positive.
Premature closure
is one of the most common errors; clinicians make a quick diagnosis (often based on
pattern recognition), fail to consider other possible diagnoses, and stop collecting data (jump to
===PAGE:3572===
conclusions); often, even the suspected diagnosis is not confirmed by appropriate testing. Premature
closure errors may occur in any case but are particularly common when patients seem to be having an
exacerbation of a known disorder—eg, if a woman with a long history of migraine presents with a severe
headache (and actually has a new subarachnoid hemorrhage), the headache may be mistakenly
assumed to be another attack of migraine. A variation of premature closure occurs when subsequent
clinicians (eg, consultants on a complicated case) unquestioningly accept a previous working diagnosis
without independently collecting and reviewing relevant data.
Anchoring errors
occur when clinicians steadfastly cling to an initial impression even as conflicting and
contradictory data accumulate. For example, a working diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is quite reasonable
in a 60-yr-old man who has epigastric pain and nausea, who is sitting forward clutching his abdomen, and
who has a history of several bouts of alcoholic pancreatitis that he states have felt similar to what he is
currently feeling. However, if the patient states that he has had no alcohol in many years and has normal
blood levels of pancreatic enzymes, clinicians who simply dismiss or excuse (eg, the patient is lying, his
pancreas is burned out, the laboratory made a mistake) these conflicting data are committing an
anchoring error. Clinicians should regard conflicting data as evidence of the need to continue to seek the
true diagnosis (acute MI) rather than as anomalies to be disregarded. There may be no supporting
evidence (ie, for the misdiagnosis) in some cases in which anchoring errors are committed.
Confirmation bias
occurs when clinicians selectively accept clinical data that support a desired
hypothesis and ignore data that do not (cherry-picking). Confirmation bias often compounds an anchoring
error when the clinician uses confirmatory data to support the anchored hypothesis even when clearly
contradictory evidence is also available. For example, a clinician may steadfastly cling to patient history
elements suggesting acute coronary syndrome (ACS) to confirm the original suspicion of ACS even when
serial ECGs and cardiac enzymes are normal.
Attribution errors
involve negative stereotypes that lead clinicians to ignore or minimize the possibility of
serious disease. For example, clinicians might assume that an unconscious patient with an odor of
alcohol is "just another drunk" and miss hypoglycemia or intracranial injury, or they might assume that a
known drug abuser with back pain is simply seeking drugs and miss an epidural
abscess caused by use
of dirty needles. Psychiatric patients who develop a physical disorder are particularly likely to be subject
to attribution errors because not only may they be subject to negative stereotyping but they often describe
their symptoms in unclear, inconsistent, or confusing ways, leading unwary clinicians to assume their
complaints are of mental origin.
Affective error
involves avoiding unpleasant but necessary tests or examinations because of fondness
or sympathy for the patient (eg, avoiding a pelvic examination on a modest patient or blood cultures on a
seriously ill patient who has poor veins).
Minimizing cognitive errors:
Some specific strategies can help minimize cognitive errors. Typically,
after history and physical examination are done, clinicians often form a working diagnosis based on
heuristics. At this point, it is relatively easy to insert a formal pause for reflection, asking several
questions:
• If it is
not
the working diagnosis, what else could it be?
• What are the most dangerous things it could be?
• Is there any evidence that is at odds with the working diagnosis?
These questions can help expand the differential diagnosis to include things that may have been left out
because of cognitive errors and thus trigger clinicians to obtain further necessary information.
Testing
Test results may help make a diagnosis in symptomatic patients (diagnostic testing) or identify occult
disease in asymptomatic patients (screening). However, test results may interfere with clinical decision
making if the test poorly discriminates between patients with and without disease, if the result is
===PAGE:3573===
inconsistent with the clinical picture, or if the test result is improperly integrated into the clinical context.
Laboratory tests are imperfect and may mistakenly identify some healthy people as diseased (a falsepositive result) or may mistakenly identify some affected people as disease-free (a false-negative result).
A test's ability to correctly include or exclude disease depends on how likely a person is to have a disease
(prior probability) and on the test's intrinsic operating characteristics.
Although diagnostic testing is often a critical contributor to clinical decision making, testing can have
undesired or unintended consequences. Testing must be done with deliberation and purpose and with the
expectation that the test result will reduce ambiguity surrounding patient problems and contribute to their
health. In addition to the risk of providing incorrect information (thereby delaying initiation of treatment or
inducing unnecessary treatment), laboratory tests consume limited resources and may themselves have
adverse effects (eg, pneumothorax caused by lung biopsy) or may prompt additional unnecessary testing.
Defining a Positive Test Result
Among the most common tests are those that provide results along a continuous, quantitative scale (eg,
blood glucose, WBC count). Such tests may provide useful clinical information throughout their ranges,
but clinicians often use them to diagnose a condition by requiring that the result be classified as positive
or negative (ie, disease present or absent) based on comparison to some established criterion or cutoff
point. Such cutoff points are usually selected based on statistical and conceptual analysis that attempts
to balance the rate of false-positive results (prompting unnecessary, expensive, and possibly dangerous
tests or treatments) and false-negative results (failing to diagnose a treatable disease). Identifying a cutoff
point also depends on having a gold standard to identify the disease in question.
Typically, such quantitative test results (eg, WBC count in cases of suspected appendicitis) follow some
type of distribution curve (not necessarily a normal curve, although commonly depicted as such). The
distribution of test results for patients with disease is centered on a different point than that for patients
without disease. Some patients with disease have a very high or very low result, but most have a result
centered on a mean. Conversely, some disease-free patients have a very high or very low result, but most
have a result centered on a different mean from that for patients with disease. For most tests, the
distributions overlap such that many of the possible test results occur in patients with and without
disease; such results are more clearly illustrated when the curves are depicted on the same graph (see
Fig. 342-2
). Some patients above and below the selected cutoff point will be incorrectly characterized.
Adjusting a cutoff point to identify more patients with disease (increase test sensitivity) also increases the
number of false positives (poor specificity), and moving the cutoff point the other way to avoid falsely
diagnosing patients
[Fig. 342-2.
Distributions of test results.]
as having disease increases the number of false negatives. Each cutoff point is associated with a specific
probability of true-positive and false-positive results.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves:
Graphing the fraction of true-positive results
(number of true positives/number with disease) against the fraction of false-positive results (number of
false positives/number without disease) for a series of cutoff points generates what is known as an ROC
curve. The ROC curve graphically depicts the tradeoff between the sensitivity and specificity when the
cut off point is adjusted (see
Fig. 342-3
).
[Fig. 342-3.
Typical receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve.]
By convention, the true-positive fraction is placed on the y-axis, and the false-positive fraction is placed
on the x-axis. The greater the area under the ROC curve, the better the test discriminates between
patients with or without disease.
ROC curves allow tests to be compared over a variety of cutoff points. In the example, Test A performs
better than Test B over all ranges. ROC curves also assist in the selection of the cutoff point designed to
===PAGE:3574===
maximize a test's utility. If a test is designed to confirm a disease, a cutoff point with greater specificity and
lower sensitivity is selected. If a test is designed to screen for occult disease, a cutoff point with greater
sensitivity and lower specificity is selected.
Test Characteristics
Some clinical variables have only 2 possible results (eg, alive/dead, pregnant/not pregnant); such
variables are termed categorical and dichotomous. Other categorical results may have many discrete
values (eg, blood type, Glasgow Coma Scale) and are termed nominal or ordinal. Nominal variables such
as blood type have no particular order. Ordinal variables such as the Glasgow Coma Scale have discrete
values that are arranged in a particular order. Other clinical variables, including many typical diagnostic
tests, are continuous and have an infinite number of possible results (eg, WBC count, blood glucose
level). Many clinicians select a cutoff point that can cause a continuous variable to be treated as a
dichotomous variable (eg, patients with a fasting blood glucose level > 126 mg/dL are considered to have
diabetes). Other continuous diagnostic tests have diagnostic utility when they have multiple cutoff points
or when ranges of results have different diagnostic value.
When test results can be defined as positive or negative, all possible outcomes can be recorded in a
simple 2×2 table (see
Table 342-2
) from which important discriminatory test characteristics, including sensitivity, specificity,
positive and negative predictive value, and likelihood ratio (LR), can be calculated (see
Table 342-3
).
Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values:
Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values are
typically considered characteristics of the test itself, independent of the patient population.
Sensitivity
is the likelihood of a positive test result in patients with disease (true-positive rate); a test that
is positive in 8 of 10 patients with a disease has a sensitivity of 0.8 (also expressed as 80%). Sensitivity
represents how well a test detects the disease; a test with low sensitivity does not identify many patients
with disease, and a test with high sensitivity is useful to exclude a diagnosis when results are negative.
Sensitivity is the complement of the false-negative rate (ie, the false-negative rate plus the sensitivity =
100%).
[Table 342-2.
Distribution of Hypothetical Test Results]
Specificity
is the likelihood of a negative test result in patients without disease (true-negative rate); a
test that is negative in 9 of 10 patients without disease has a specificity of 0.9 (or 90%). Specificity
represents how well a test correctly identifies patients with disease because tests with high specificity
have a low false-positive rate. A test with low specificity diagnoses many patients without disease as
having disease. It is the complement of the false-positive rate.
Positive predictive value (PPV)
is the proportion of patients with a positive test that actually have
disease; if 9 of 10 positive test results are correct (true positive), the PPV is 90%. Because all positive
test results have some number of true positives and some false positives, the PPV describes how likely it
is that a positive test result in a given patient population represents a true positive.
Negative predictive value (NPV)
is the proportion of patients with a negative test result that are
actually disease free; if 8 of 10 negative test results are correct (true negative), the NPV is 80%. Because
not all negative test results are true negatives, some patients with a negative test result actually have
disease. The NPV describes how likely it is that a negative test result in a given patient population
represents a true negative.
Likelihood ratios (LRs):
Unlike sensitivity and specificity, which do not apply to specific patient
probabilities, the LR allows clinicians to interpret test results in a specific patient provided there is a
known (albeit often estimated) pre-test probability of disease.
The LR describes the change in pre-test probability of disease when the test result is known and answers
the question, "How much has the post-test probability changed now that the test result is known?" Many
===PAGE:3575===
clinical
[Table 342-3.
Distribution of Test Results of a Hypothetical Leukocyte Esterase Test in a Cohort of 1000
Women with an Assumed 30% Prevalence of UTI]
tests are dichotomous; they are either above the cutoff point (positive) or below the cutoff point (negative)
and there are only 2 possible results. Other tests give results that are continuous or occur over a range
where multiple cutoff points are selected. The actual post-test probability depends on the magnitude of
the LR (which depends on test operating characteristics) and the pre-test probability estimation of
disease. When the test being done is dichotomous and the result is either positive or negative, the
sensitivity and specificity can be used to calculate positive LR (LR+) or negative LR (LR-).
•
LR+:
The ratio of the likelihood of a positive test result occurring in patients with disease (true positive)
to the likelihood of a positive test result in patients without disease (false positive)
•
LR-:
The ratio of the likelihood of a negative test result in patients with disease (false negative) to the
likelihood of a negative test result in patients without disease (true negative)
When the result is continuous or has multiple cutoff points, the ROC curve, not sensitivity and specificity,
is used to calculate an LR that is no longer described as LR+ or LR-.
Because the LR is a ratio of mutually exclusive events rather than a proportion of a total, it represents
odds (see
Sidebar 342-1
) rather than probability. For a given test, the LR is different for positive and
negative results.
For example, given a positive test result, an LR of 2.0 indicates the odds are 2:1 (true positives:false
positives) that a positive test result represents a patient with disease. Of 3 positive tests, 2 would occur in
patients with disease (true positive) and 1 would occur in a patient without disease (false positive).
Because true positives and false positives are components of sensitivity and specificity calculations, the
LR+ can also be calculated as sensitivity/(1 - specificity). The greater the LR+, the more information a
positive test result provides; a positive result on a test with an LR+ > 10 is considered strong evidence in
favor of a diagnosis. In other words, the pre-test probability estimation moves strongly toward 100% when
a positive test has a high LR+.
For a negative test result, an LR- of 0.25 indicates that the odds are 1:4 (false negatives:true negatives)
that a negative test result represents a patient with disease. Of 5 negative test results, 1 would occur in a
patient with disease (false negative) and 4 would occur in patients without disease (true negative). The
LR- can also be calculated as (1 - sensitivity)/specificity. The smaller the LR-, the more information a
negative test result provides; a negative result on a test with an LR < 0.1 is considered strong evidence
against a diagnosis. In other words, the pre-test probability estimation moves strongly toward 0%
probability when a negative test has a low LR-.
Test results with LRs of 1.0 carry no information and do not affect the post-test probability of disease.
LRs are convenient for comparing tests and are also used in Bayesian analysis ( to interpret
test results. Just as sensitivity and specificity change as cutoff points change, so do LRs. As a
hypothetical example, a high cutoff for WBC count (eg, 20,000/
μ
L) in a possible case of acute
appendicitis is more specific and
would have a high LR+ but also a high (and thus not very informative)
LR-; choosing a much lower and very sensitive cutoff (eg, 10,000/
μ
L) would have a low LR- but also a
low LR+.
Dichotomous Tests
An ideal dichotomous test would have no false positives or false negatives; all patients with a positive test
result would have disease (100% PPV), and all patients with a negative test result would not have
disease (100% NPV).
In reality, all tests have false positives and false negatives, some tests more than others. To illustrate the
===PAGE:3576===
consequences of imperfect sensitivity and specificity on test results, consider hypothetical results (
Table
342-3
) of urine dipstick leukocyte esterase testing in a group of 1000 women, 300 (30%) of whom have a
UTI (as determined by a gold-standard test such as urine culture). This scenario assumes for illustrative
purposes that the dipstick test has sensitivity of 71% and specificity of 85%.
Sensitivity of 71% means that only 213 (71% of 300) women
with
UTI would have a positive test result.
The remaining 87 would have a negative test result. Specificity of 85% means that 595 (85% of 700)
women
without
UTI would have a negative test result. The remaining 105 would have a positive test
result. Thus, of 318 positive test results, only 213 would be correct (213/318 = 67% PPV); a positive test
result makes the diagnosis of UTI more likely than not but not certain. There would also be 682 negative
tests, of which 595 are correct (595/682 = 87% NPV), making the diagnosis of UTI much less likely but
still possible; 13% of patients with a negative test result would actually have a UTI.
However, the PPVs and NPVs derived in this patient cohort cannot be used to interpret results of the
same test when the underlying incidence of disease (pre-test or prior probability) is different. Note the
effects of changing disease incidence to 5% (see
Table 342-4
). Now most positive test results are false, and the PPV is only 20%; a patient with a positive
test result is actually more likely to
not
have a UTI. However, the NPV is now very high (98%); a negative
result essentially rules out UTI.
Note that in both patient cohorts, even though the PPV and NPV are very different, the LRs do not
change because the LRs are determined only by test sensitivity and specificity.
Clearly, a test result does not provide a definitive diagnosis but only estimates the probability of a disease
being present or absent, and this post-test probability (likelihood of disease given a specific test result)
varies greatly based on the pre-test probability of disease as well as the test's sensitivity and specificity
(and thus its LR).
Pre-test probability
is not a precise measurement; it is based on clinical judgment of how strongly the
symptoms and signs suggest the disease is present, what factors in the patient's history support the
diagnosis, and how common the disease is in a representative population. Many clinical scoring systems
are designed to estimate pre-test probability; adding points for various clinical features facilitates the
calculation of a score. For example, there are criteria for predicting pre-test probability of pulmonary
embolism (. Higher calculated scores yield higher estimated probabilities.
[Table 342-4.
Distribution of Test Results of a Hypothetical Leukocyte Esterase Test in a Cohort of 1000
Women with an Assumed 5% Prevalence of UTI]
Continuous Tests
Many test results are continuous and may provide useful clinical information over a wide range of results.
Clinicians often select a certain cutoff point to maximize the test's utility. For example, a WBC count >
15,000 may be characterized as positive; values < 15,000 as negative. When a test yields continuous
results but a certain cutoff point is selected, the test operates like a dichotomous test. Multiple cutoff
points can also be selected. Sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, LR+, and LR- can be calculated for single
or multiple cutoff points.
Table 342-5
illustrates the effect of changing the cutoff point of the WBC count in patients suspected of
having appendicitis.
Alternatively, it can be useful to group continuous test results into levels. In this case, results are not
characterized as positive or negative because there are multiple possible results, so although an LR can
be determined for each level of results, there is no longer a distinct LR+ or LR-. For example,
Table 342-6
illustrates the relationship between WBC count and bacteremia in febrile children. Because
the LR is the probability of a given result in patients with disease divided by the probability of that result in
patients without the disease, the LR for each grouping of WBC count is the probability of bacteremia in
that group divided by the probability of no bacteremia.
Grouping continuous variables allows for much greater use of the test result than when a single cutoff
===PAGE:3577===
point is established. Using Bayesian analyses, the LRs in
Table 342-6
can be used to calculate the posttest probability.
For continuous test results, if an ROC curve is known, calculations as shown in
Table 342-6
do not have
to be done; LRs can be found for various points over the range of results using the slope of the ROC
curve at the desired point.
Bayes' Theorem
The process of using the pre-test probability of disease and the test characteristics to calculate the posttest probability is referred to as Bayes' theorem or Bayesian revision. For routine clinical use, Bayesian
methodology typically takes several forms:
• Odds-likelihood formulation (calculation or nomogram)
• Tabular approach
Odds-likelihood calculation:
If the pre-test probability of disease is expressed as its odds and because
a test's LR represents odds, the product of the 2 represents the post-test odds of disease (analogous to
multiplying 2 probabilities together to calculate the probability of simultaneous occurrence of 2 events):
Pre-test odds × LR = post-test odds
Because clinicians typically think in terms of probabilities rather than odds, probability can be converted
to odds (and vice versa) with these formulas:
Odds = probability/1 - probability
Probability = odds/odds + 1
Consider the example of UTI as given in
Table 342-3
, in which the pre-test probability of UTI is 0.3, and
the test being used has an LR+ of 4.73 and an LR- of 0.34. A pre-test probability of 0.3 corresponds to
odds of 0.3/(1 - 0.3) = 0.43. Thus, the post-test odds that a
[Table 342-5.
Effect of Changing the Cutoff Point of the WBC Count in Patients Suspected of Having
Appendicitis]
[Table 342-6.
Using WBC Count Groups to Determine Likelihood Ratio of Bacteremia in Febrile
Children*]
UTI is present in a patient with a positive test result equals the product of the pre-test odds and the LR+;
4.73 × 0.43 = 2.03, which represents a post-test probability of 2.03/(1 + 2.03) = 0.67. Thus, Bayesian
calculations show that a positive test result increases the pre-test probability from 30% to 67%, the same
result obtained in the PPV calculation in
Table 342-3
.
A similar calculation is done for a negative test; post-test odds = 0.34 × 0.43 = 0.15, corresponding to a
probability of 0.15/(1 + 0.15) = 0.13. Thus, a negative test result decreases the pre-test probability from
30% to 13%, again the same result obtained in the NPV calculation in
Table 342-3
.
Many medical calculator programs that run on handheld devices are available to calculate post-test
probability from pre-test probability and LRs.
Odds-likelihood nomogram:
Using a nomogram is particularly convenient because it avoids the need
to convert between odds and probabilities or create 2×2 tables.
The Fagan nomogram is depicted in
Fig. 342-4
. To use the nomogram, a line is drawn from the pre-test probability through the LR. The posttest probability is the point at which this line intersects the post-test probability line. Sample lines in the
===PAGE:3578===
figure are drawn using data from the UTI test in
Table 342-3
. Line A represents a positive test result; it is
drawn from pre-test probability of 0.3 through the LR+ of 4.73 and gives a post-test value of slightly <
0.7, similar to the calculated probability of 0.67. Line B represents a negative test result; it is drawn from
pre-test probability of 0.3 through the LR- value of 0.34 and gives a post-test value slightly > 0.1, similar
to the calculated probability of 13%.
Although the nomogram appears less precise than calculations, typical values for pre-test probability are
often estimates, so the apparent precision of calculations is usually misleading.
Tabular approach:
Often, LRs of a test are not known, but sensitivity and specificity are known, and pretest probability can be estimated. In this case, Bayesian methodology can be done using a 2×2 table
illustrated in
Table 342-7
using the example from
Table 342-3
. Note that this method shows that a positive test result
increases the probability of a UTI to 67%, and a negative result decreases it to 13%, the same results
obtained by calculation using LRs.
Sequential Testing
Clinicians often do tests in sequence during many diagnostic evaluations. If the pre-test odds before
sequential testing are known and the LR for each of the tests in sequence is known, post-test odds can
be calculated using the following formula:
Pre-test odds × LR1 × LR2 × LR3 = post-test odds
This method is limited by the important assumption that each of the tests is conditionally independent of
each other.
Screening Tests
Patients often must consider whether to be screened for occult disease. The premises of a
[Fig. 342-4.
Fagan nomogram.]
screening program are that early detection improves outcome in patients with occult disease and that the
false-positive results that often occur in screening do not create a burden (eg, costs and adverse effects
of confirmatory testing, unwarranted treatment) that exceeds such benefit. To minimize these possible
burdens, clinicians must choose the proper
[Table 342-7.
Interpretation of a Hypothetical Leukocyte Esterase (LE) Test Result in a Cohort of 1000
Women Assuming a 30% Prevalence of UTI (Pre-Test Probability), Test Sensitivity 71%, and Specificity
85%*]
screening test. Screening is not appropriate when treatments are ineffective or the disease is very
uncommon (unless a subpopulation can be identified in which prevalence is higher).
Theoretically, the best test for both screening and diagnosis is the one with the highest sensitivity
and
specificity. However, such highly accurate tests are often complex, expensive, and invasive (eg, coronary
angiography) and are thus not practical for screening large numbers of asymptomatic people. Typically,
some tradeoff in sensitivity, specificity, or both must be made when selecting a screening test.
Whether a clinician chooses a test that optimizes sensitivity or specificity depends on the consequences
of a false-positive or false-negative test result as well as the pre-test probability of disease. An ideal
screening test is one that is always positive in nearly every patient with disease so that a negative result
confidently excludes disease in healthy patients. For example, in testing for a serious disease for which
an effective treatment is available (eg, coronary artery disease), clinicians would be willing to tolerate
more false positives than false negatives (lower specificity and high sensitivity). Although high sensitivity
is a very important attribute for screening tests, specificity also is important in certain screening
strategies. Among populations with a higher prevalence of disease, the PPV of a screening test
===PAGE:3579===
increases; as prevalence decreases, the post-test or posterior probability of a positive result decreases.
Therefore, when screening for disease in high-risk populations, tests with a higher sensitivity are
preferred over those with a higher specificity because they are better at ruling out disease (fewer false
negatives). On the other hand, in low-risk populations or for uncommon diseases for which therapy has
lower benefit or higher risk, tests with a higher specificity are preferred.
Multiple screening tests:
With the expanding array of available screening tests, clinicians must
consider the implications of a panel of such tests. For example, test panels containing 8, 12, or
sometimes 20 blood tests are often done when a patient is admitted to the hospital or is first examined by
a new clinician. Although this type of testing may be helpful in screening patients for certain diseases,
using the large panel of tests has potentially negative consequences. By definition, a test with a
specificity of 95% gives false-positive results in 5% of healthy, normal patients. If 2 different tests with
such characteristics are done, each for a different occult disease, in a patient who actually does not have
either disease, the chance that both tests will be negative is 95% × 95%, or about 90%; thus, there is a
10% chance of at least one false-positive result. For 3 such tests, the chance that all 3 would be negative
is 95% × 95% × 95%, or 86%, corresponding to a 14% chance of at least one false-positive result. If 12
different tests for 12 different diseases are done, the chance of obtaining at least one false-positive result
is 46%. This high probability underscores the need for caution when deciding to do a screening test panel
and when interpreting its results.
Testing Thresholds
A laboratory test should be done only if its results will affect management; otherwise the expense and risk
to the patient are for naught. Clinicians can sometimes make the determination of when to test by
comparing pre-test and post-test probability estimations with
certain thresholds. Above a certain
probability threshold, benefits of treatment outweigh risks (including the risk of mistakenly treating a
patient without disease), and treatment is indicated. This point is termed the treatment threshold (TT) and
is determined as described previously (. By definition, testing is unnecessary when pre-test
probability is already above the TT. But testing is indicated if pre-test probability is below the TT
as long
as a positive test result could raise the post-test probability above the TT
. The lowest pre-test
probability at which this can occur depends on test characteristics (eg, LR+) and is termed the testing
threshold.
Conceptually, if the best test for a serious disorder has a low LR+, and the TT is high, it is
understandable that a positive test result might not move the post-test probability above the TT in a
patient with a low but worrisome pre-test probability (eg, perhaps 10% or 20%).
For a numerical illustration, consider the previously described case of a possible acute MI (
in which the balance between risk and benefit determined a TT of 25%. When the probability of MI
exceeds 25%, thrombolytic therapy is given. When should a rapid echocardiogram be done before giving
thrombolytic therapy? Assume a hypothetical sensitivity of 60% and a specificity of 70% for
echocardiography in diagnosing an MI; these percentages correspond to an LR+ of 60/(100 - 70) = 2 and
an LR- of (100 - 60)/70 = 0.57.
The issue can be addressed mathematically (pre-test odds × LR = post-test odds) or more intuitively
graphically by using the Fagan nomogram (see
Fig. 342-5
). On the nomogram, a line connecting the TT (25%) on the post-test probability line through
the LR+ (2.0) on the middle LR line intersects a pre-test probability of about 0.14. Clearly, a positive test
in a patient with any pre-test probability < 14% would still result in a post-test probability less than the TT.
In this case, echocardiography would be useless because even a positive result would not lead to a
decision to treat; thus, 14% pre-test probability is the testing threshold
for this particular test
(see
Fig. 342-6
). Another test with a different LR+ would have a different testing threshold.
Because 14% still represents a significant risk of MI, it is clear that a disease probability below the testing
threshold (eg, a 10% pre-test probability) does not necessarily mean disease is ruled out, just that a
positive test result on the particular test in question would not change management and thus
that
test is
not indicated. In this situation, the clinician would observe the patient for further findings that might
elevate the pre-test probability above the testing threshold. In practice, because multiple tests are often
===PAGE:3580===
available for a given disease, sequential testing ( might be used.
This example considers a test that of itself poses no risk to the patient. If a test has serious risks (eg,
cardiac catheterization), the testing threshold should be higher; quantitative calculations can be done but
are complex. Thus, decreasing a test's sensitivity and specificity or increasing its risk narrows the range
of probabilities of disease over which testing is the best strategy. Improving the test's ability to
discriminate or decreasing its risk broadens the range of probabilities over which testing is the best
strategy.
A possible exception to the proscription against testing when pre-test probability is below the testing
threshold (but is still worrisome) might be if a negative test result could
reduce
post-test probability below
the point at which disease could be considered ruled out. This determination requires a subjective
judgment of the degree of certainty required to say a disease is ruled out and, because low probabilities
are involved, particular attention to any risks of testing.
Economic Analyses
Given limited societal and personal resources and restrictions under health insurance, cost
considerations have become more relevant in clinical decision making. Limited resources should not be
wasted; their allocation depends on an understanding of the various costs and outcomes resulting from
strategies of care.
Cost
The elements included in cost analysis are determined by the perspective of the analysis. Different
perspectives often result in different conclusions based on which costs and outcomes are considered.
•
Providers
(eg, health care practitioners, institutions) typically consider only costs within the
organization (eg, personnel, supplies, overhead).
•
Payors
(eg, insurance companies) consider only the reimbursements they have to make.
•
Patients
consider out-of-pocket expenses (eg, cost of insurance, deductibles, transportation, parking)
and lost income (for themselves and their family).
[Fig. 342-5.
Fagan nomogram used to determine need to test.]
[Fig. 342-6.
Depiction of testing and treatment thresholds.]
From a societal perspective, all such costs are taken into account along with the costs of lost productivity
and costs of treating other diseases (iatrogenic and naturally occurring) that may develop in patients who
recover from the disease being treated. For example, a young man cured of lymphoma may develop
leukemia or coronary artery disease years later. Cost analysis of a screening program needs to include
the costs of pursuing false-positive results, which in a screening test for a disease with a low prevalence
often exceed the costs of evaluating and treating patients who actually have the disease.
Marginal cost:
The marginal cost is the cost of providing (or withholding) an additional unit of service.
This cost is often one of the most relevant for an individual clinician's medical decision making and is
typically quite different from the overall cost allocated to that service. For example, a hospital may have
determined that $50 is the cost of providing a chest x-ray. However, a clinical protocol to better identify
patients requiring x-rays that resulted in one fewer chest x-ray a day (with no change in outcome) would
not "save" the hospital $50 because personnel and overhead expenses would be unchanged; only the
expense of x-ray film would be eliminated. Hence the marginal cost to the hospital of one chest x-ray is
essentially the cost of one piece of x-ray film (even less if digital capture techniques are used). Note that
marginal cost varies with volume in a quantum fashion; adding or withholding a larger number of x-rays
would at some point dictate a change in personnel and perhaps x-ray equipment, resulting in a different
marginal cost. Additionally, the marginal cost is different for the payors; withholding one chest x-ray would
save the payors the entire amount they typically reimburse for that x-ray, a figure far higher than the
===PAGE:3581===
hospital's marginal cost.
Outcome
The effectiveness of medical care is measured by change in outcome. Outcomes can be
• Patient oriented
• Process oriented
• Disease oriented
Patient-oriented outcomes
can be reduced to one of the three Ds:
• Death
• Disability
• Discomfort
Patient-oriented outcomes are arguably the most important. Improvements in process (eg, reducing the
time to antibiotic administration or to operating room) or disease manifestations (eg, shrinking tumor size,
improving O
saturation) that do
not
reduce mortality, disability, or discomfort at all can hardly be said to
benefit the patient. For example, lidocaine was once routinely given to patients with MI because it was
known to reduce the incidence of ventricular fibrillation (improved disease outcome). Lidocaine treatment
continued for many years before studies showed it did not decrease mortality (no change in patient
outcome), and so the practice was stopped.
Change in raw mortality is the most common way to evaluate effect on death. In more complex analysis,
death and disability are often evaluated in combination as the quality-adjusted life year (QALY); treatment
that results in an additional year of life at 100% of normal functioning is credited with 1 QALY; treatment
that results in an additional year of life at only 75% functioning is credited with 0.75 QALY. QALY is more
difficult to apply to discomfort, but some believe it can be estimated by the time tradeoff method: A person
estimates how many years of discomfort would be acceptable vs a shorter period of perfect health. For
example, if a person would prefer 9 yr of health to 10 yr of chronic pain (but would prefer the 10 yr of pain
to only 8 yr of life), then each year of life with pain is credited with 9/10 = 0.9 QALY. All such QALY
estimates are somewhat problematic because people vary widely in risk tolerance and acceptance for
various outcomes.
The
number needed to treat
(NNT) or harm is another way to quantify patient outcome; NNT is the
reciprocal of the absolute change in a dichotomous outcome (death, disability). Thus, if a drug causes a
3% net decrease in mortality, 1/0.03 = 33.3 patients need to be treated to prevent 1 death. Similarly, for a
drug
that causes leukopenia in 8% of patients, 1/0.08 or 12.5 need to be treated to harm 1 person.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Simple analysis of the economic consequences of outcomes (cost-benefit analysis) depends on
assumptions about the perceived dollar value of prolonged life and improved health. Such assumptions
are often arguable and rarely straightforward. Furthermore, although such analyses determine whether a
given strategy saves costs or requires the net expenditure of resources, they do not indicate whether the
expenditures are worthwhile.
Cost-effectiveness analysis
tracks medical costs and health outcomes separately. Both outcome
measures can be strongly affected by the perspective and duration of the analysis and by the underlying
assumptions. Comparison of the costs and health outcomes of 2 management strategies results in 1 of 9
pairings (see
Table 342-8
). When health outcomes are equivalent (center column), the choice should be based on cost;
when costs are equivalent (center row), the choice should be based on outcome. When one strategy has
===PAGE:3582===
better outcomes
and
lower costs (upper right and lower left cells), the choice is clear. The decision is
difficult only when the strategy that is more expensive also produces better outcomes (upper left and
lower right cells); in such cases, the marginal cost-effectiveness ratio should be determined.
Marginal cost-effectiveness ratio:
The marginal cost-effectiveness ratio is the additional cost of a
strategy divided by the additional health outcome it achieves and thus pertains to the situation in which
there is a choice between ≥ 2 effective management strategies. Greater health improvement for a given
resource expenditure is derived when the ratio is lower.
For policy analysis, the most common measure of effectiveness is the QALY, making the units of the
corresponding marginal cost-effectiveness ratio "additional dollars spent per QALY gained." However, the
marginal cost-effectiveness ratio has been criticized because elderly patients or patients with life-limiting
comorbidities have a smaller potential gain in survival from a treatment and therefore have a higher (less
advantageous) cost-effectiveness ratio.
For example (see
Table 342-9
), consider no antiarrhythmic therapy vs prophylactic use of an implantable cardioverterdefibrillator (ICD) for patients who have survived several months after an acute anterior MI and who have
a mildly depressed ejection fraction (between 0.3 and 0.4). (All figures and costs in this example are
hypothetical.) Both strategies assume similar baseline costs for routine care ($78,300), but the ICD has
an additional (marginal) cost of $53,100, based on the cost of the device and professional fees, initial
hospitalization, and ongoing therapy (including extra physician visits, laboratory tests, drugs,
rehospitalizations for ICD-related complications, and replacement of ICD generator or leads). If patients
with an ICD have a slightly increased life expectancy (7.87 vs 7.42 QALY), the marginal effectiveness of
ICD therapy is 7.87 - 7.42 = 0.45 QALY. Thus, prophylactic ICD enhances survival compared to no
antiarrhythmic therapy at a cost of $53,100/0.45 QALY, or $118,000/QALY.
Now assume that a third strategy, prophylactic amiodarone therapy, is available. This therapy is less
expensive but also less effective than ICD. The effect of adding this third intermediate strategy is
noteworthy because marginal cost-effectiveness ratios are calculated sequentially when there are
multiple strategies (
Table 342-9
, Analysis 2). The marginal cost-effectiveness ratio of amiodarone is lower
[Table 342-8.
Cost-Effectiveness Comparison of Management Strategies A and B]
[Table 342-9.
Calculating a Marginal Cost-Effectiveness Ratio]
($68,519/QALY gained) than that for an ICD calculated in the previous example, and furthermore,
because the effectiveness of an ICD is now compared to amiodarone rather than to no therapy, the
addition of this intermediate cost strategy with partial effectiveness increases the ICD's marginal costeffectiveness ratio from $118,000 to $192,222/QALY gained. This analysis suggests that for an expensive
therapy such as an ICD, an attempt should be made to identify subpopulations expected to reap the
greatest benefit.
===PAGE:3583===
Chapter 343. Principles of Radiologic Imaging
Introduction
Continuing improvements in radiologic imaging make it increasingly useful in diagnostic evaluation.
Primary care and referring physicians work with radiologists who specialize in diagnostic imaging to
choose the best imaging test for each evaluation. Many imaging tests use ionizing radiation (x-rays and
radionuclides) and radiographic contrast agents; the associated risks to patients are usually small but
should be considered.
Risks of Ionizing Radiation
Most diagnostic tests that use ionizing radiation (eg, x-rays, CT, radionuclide scanning) expose patients to
relatively low doses of radiation that are generally considered safe. However, all ionizing radiation is
harmful, and there is no threshold below which no harmful effect occurs, so every effort is made to
minimize radiation exposure. Doses vary by type of imaging test (see
Table 343-1
).
There are various ways to measure radiation exposure:
• The
absorbed dose
is the amount of radiation absorbed per unit mass. It is expressed in special units
of gray (Gy) and mGy. It was previously expressed as rad (1 mGy = 0.1 rad).
• The
equivalent dose
is the absorbed dose multiplied by a radiation weighting factor that adjusts for
tissue effects based on the type of radiation delivered (eg, x-rays, gamma rays, electrons). It is
expressed in sieverts (Sv) and mSv. It was previously expressed in rem (1 mSv = 0.1 rem). For x-rays,
including CT, the radiation weighting factor is 1.
• The
effective dose
is a measure of cancer risk; it adjusts the equivalent dose based on the
susceptibility of the tissue exposed to radiation (eg, gonads are most susceptible). It is expressed in Sv
and mSv. In the US, the average yearly effective dose of environmental
[Table 343-1.
Typical Radiation Doses*]
background radiation (from cosmic radiation and natural isotopes) is 3 mSv. The effective dose is higher
in young people.
Radiation may be harmful if the total accumulated dose for a person is high, as when multiple scans are
done, because most scans require a high dose. Radiation dose is also a concern in certain high-risk
situations (eg, during early pregnancy, infancy, or early childhood; in young women who require
mammography).
In the US, CT accounts for > 15% of all imaging tests but for about 70% of total radiation delivered during
diagnostic imaging. Multidetector CT scanners, which are usually used now, deliver about 40 to 70%
more radiation per scan than do older single detector CT scanners.
Estimated risk of cancer due to radiation exposure in diagnostic imaging has been extrapolated from
studies of people exposed to very high radiation doses (eg, survivors of the atomic bomb explosions at
Hiroshima and Nagasaki). This analysis suggests a small but real risk of cancer if radiation doses are in
the tens of mGy (as used in CT). A CT pulmonary angiogram, routinely done to detect pulmonary
embolism, delivers about as much radiation to the breasts as about 10 to 25 two-view mammograms.
Risk is higher in young patients because they live longer, giving cancers more time to develop, and
because more cellular growth (and thus susceptibility to DNA damage) occurs in the young. For a 1-yr-old
who has a CT scan of the abdomen, estimated lifetime risk of developing cancer is increased by 0.18%. If
an elderly patient has this test, risk is lower.
Risk also depends on the tissue being irradiated; for example, risk is higher for breast and abdominal
===PAGE:3584===
tissue than for brain tissue.
Radiation during pregnancy:
Risks of radiation depend on dose, type of test, and area being
examined. The fetus may be exposed to much less radiation than the mother; exposure to the fetus is
negligible during head, cervical spine, and extremity x-rays and during mammography when the uterus is
shielded. The extent of uterine exposure depends on gestational age and thus uterine size. The effects of
radiation depend on the age of the conceptus (the time from conception).
Recommendations:
Diagnostic imaging using ionizing radiation, especially CT, should be done only
when clearly required. Alternatives should be considered. For example, in young children, minor head
injury can often be diagnosed and treated based on clinical findings, and appendicitis can often be
diagnosed by ultrasonography. However, necessary tests should not be withheld, even if risk is high, as
long as the benefit outweighs the potential risk.
Before diagnostic tests are done in women of child-bearing age, pregnancy should be considered,
particularly because risks of radiation exposure are highest during early, often unrecognized pregnancy.
The uterus should be shielded in such women when possible.
Radiographic Contrast Agents and Contrast Reactions
Radiopaque contrast agents are often used in radiography and fluoroscopy to help delineate borders
between tissues with similar radiodensity. Most contrast agents are iodine-based. Iodinated contrast
agents may be ionic or nonionic. Ionic contrast agents, which are salts, are hyperosmolar to blood. These
agents should not be used for myelography or in injections that may enter the spinal canal (because
neurotoxicity is a risk) or the bronchial tree (because pulmonary edema is a risk). Nonionic contrast
agents may be low-osmolar (which is
still hyperosmolar relative to blood) or iso-osmolar (with the same
osmolarity as blood). Newer nonionic contrast agents are now routinely used at many institutions
because they have fewer adverse effects.
The most serious contrast reactions are allergic-type reactions and contrast nephropathy (renal damage
after intravascular injection of a contrast agent).
Allergic-type contrast reactions:
Reactions vary in severity:
• Mild (eg, cough, itching, nasal congestion)
• Moderate (eg, dyspnea, wheezing, slight changes in pulse or BP)
• Severe (eg, respiratory distress, arrhythmias such as bradycardia, seizures, shock, cardiopulmonary
arrest)
The mechanism is anaphylactoid (; risk factors include a previous reaction to injected contrast agents, asthma, and allergies.
Treatment begins by stopping contrast infusion. For mild or moderate reactions, diphenhydramine 25 to
50 mg IV is usually effective. Treatment of severe reactions depends on the type of reaction and may
include oxygen, epinephrine, IV fluids, and possibly atropine (for bradycardia).
In patients at high risk of contrast reactions, imaging tests that do not require iodinated contrast should be
used. If contrast is necessary, a nonionic agent should be used, and patients should be premedicated
with prednisone (50 mg po 13 h, 7 h, and 1 h before injection of contrast) and diphenhydramine (50 mg
po or IM 1 h before the injection). If patients require imaging immediately, they can be given
diphenhydramine 50 mg po or IM 1 h before injection of contrast and hydrocortisone 200 mg IV q 4 h until
imaging is completed.
Contrast nephropathy:
In some patients, intravascular injection of an iodinated contrast agent causes
serum creatinine to increase transiently. Most of these patients have no symptoms, and nearly all recover
normal function within 1 wk. However, < 1% of patients require dialysis or develop chronic kidney
===PAGE:3585===
disease, indicating contrast nephropathy. Common risk factors include the following:
• Preexisting renal insufficiency (elevated creatinine)
• Diabetes mellitus
• Hypertension
• Heart failure
• Multiple myeloma
• Age > 70
• Use of other nephrotoxic drugs
• Solitary kidney (with elevated creatinine)
In patients at risk of developing acute renal failure after receiving iodinated intravascular contrast,
reduced dose of contrast, use of iso-osmolality agent, and hydration should be considered. Many
hydration regimens exist; one example is IV administration of 0.9% normal saline at 1 mL/kg for 24 h
beginning a few hours before the procedure. Acetylcysteine may be given as premedication for patients at
risk of developing nephrotoxicity, but its efficacy is uncertain. Oral antihyperglycemic drugs, such as
metformin, should be withheld for 48 h after IV contrast administration to avoid drug accumulation if
contrast-induced nephrotoxicity occurs. Because many protocols dealing with contrast agents and
reactions are specific and continually updated, it is important to discuss such details with the imaging
department.
Angiography
Angiography is sometimes called conventional angiography to distinguish it from CT angiography (CTA)
and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). Angiography provides detailed images of blood vessels,
commonly those in the heart, lungs, brain, and legs. Angiography can provide still images or motion
pictures (called cineangiography).
IV contrast is injected through a catheter inserted into a blood vessel that connects with the vessel to be
imaged. A local anesthetic or a sedative may be used. If the catheter is inserted into an artery, the
insertion site must be steadily compressed for 10 to 20 min after all instruments are removed. Patients
may need to lie flat for several hours or be hospitalized to reduce risk of bleeding at the puncture site.
Angiography, although invasive, is relatively safe.
Uses
Angiography is the traditional gold standard for evaluating vascular lesions (eg, stenosis, obstruction,
arteriovenous or other vascular malformations, aneurysms, dissections, sometimes vasculitis).
•
Coronary angiography
is usually done before percutaneous or surgical interventions involving the
coronary arteries or heart valves. It is usually done with cardiac catheterization (.
•
Pulmonary angiography
is the gold standard for diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.
•
Cerebral angiography
may be indicated after stroke or transient ischemic attack
(TIA)—eg, if stenting
or carotid endarterectomy is being considered.
•
Iliac and femoral angiography
may be indicated before interventions to treat peripheral arterial
disease.
•
Aortography
is sometimes done to diagnose and provide anatomic detail about aortic aneurysms,
===PAGE:3586===
aortic dissection, and aortic regurgitation.
•
Angiography of the eye arteries
can be done using fluorescein dye.
Angioplasty, stenting, and sometimes vascular repair can be done during angiography.
Variations
Digital subtraction angiography:
Images of arteries are taken before and after contrast injection; then a
computer subtracts one image from the other. Images of structures other than arteries are thus eliminated,
enabling the arteries to be seen more clearly.
Disadvantages
Contrast reactions occasionally occur (.
The injection site may become infected or bleed, sometimes forming a painful hematoma. Rarely, an
artery is injured by the catheter. Very rarely, shock, seizures, renal failure, and cardiac arrest occur. Risk
of complications is higher in the elderly, although it is still low. The radiation dose used in angiography
can vary and be significant (eg, coronary angiography is associated with an effective radiation dose of
4.6 to 15.8 mSv). Angiography must be done by highly skilled physicians, usually interventional
radiologists.
Computed Tomography
In CT, an x-ray source and x-ray detector housed in a doughnut-shaped assembly move circularly around
a patient who lies on a motorized table that is moved through the machine. Usually, multidetector
scanners with 4 to 64 or more rows of detectors are used because more detectors allow quicker scanning
and higher-resolution images.
Data from the detectors essentially represent a series of x-ray images taken from multiple angles all
around the patient. However, the images are not viewed directly but are sent to a computer, which quickly
reconstructs them into 2-dimensional images (tomograms) representing a slice of the body in any plane
desired. Data can also be used to construct detailed 3-dimensional images. For some CT scans, the table
moves incrementally and stops when each scan (slice) is taken. For other CT scans, the table moves
continuously during scanning; because the patient is moving in a straight line and the detectors are
moving in a circle, the series of images appear to be taken in a spiral fashion around the patient—hence
the term helical (spiral) CT.
These same principles of tomographic imaging can also be applied to radionuclide scanning, in which the
sensors for emitted radiation encircle the patient and computer techniques convert the sensor data into
tomographic images; examples include single-photon emission CT (SPECT) and positron-emission
tomography (PET).
Uses
Compared with plain x-rays, the tomo-graphic slices of CT provide more spatial detail and can better
differentiate between various soft-tissue densities. Because it provides so much more information, CT is
preferred to plain x-rays for imaging most intracranial, head and neck, spinal, intrathoracic, and intraabdominal structures. Three-dimensional images of lesions can help surgeons plan surgery. CT is the
most accurate study for detecting and localizing urinary calculi.
CT may be done with or without IV contrast. Noncontrast CT is used to detect acute hemorrhage in the
brain, urinary calculi, and lung nodules, as well as to characterize bone fractures and other skeletal
abnormalities. IV contrast is used to improve imaging of tumors, infection, inflammation, and trauma in soft
tissues and to assess the vascular system, as when pulmonary embolism, aortic aneurysm, or aortic
dissection is suspected.
===PAGE:3587===
Oral or occasionally rectal contrast is used for abdominal imaging; sometimes gas is used to distend the
lower GI tract and make it visible. Contrast in the GI tract helps distinguish the GI tract from surrounding
structures. Standard oral contrast is barium-based, but low-osmolar iodinated contrast should be used
when intestinal perforation is suspected or when risk of aspiration is high.
Variations
Virtual colonoscopy:
After gas is introduced into the rectum via a flexible, thin-diameter rubber catheter,
CT of the entire colon is done. Virtual colonoscopy produces high-resolution 3-dimensional images of the
colon that somewhat simulate the appearance of optical colonoscopy. This technique can show colon
polyps and colon mucosal lesions as small as 5 mm. It is an alternative to conventional colonoscopy.
CT IV pyelography (CT IVP) or urography:
IV contrast is injected. The procedure produces detailed
images of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder. It is an alternative to conventional IV urography.
CT angiography:
After a rapid bolus injection of IV contrast, thin-slice images are rapidly taken as the
contrast opacifies arteries and veins. Advanced computer graphics techniques are used to remove
images of surrounding soft tissues and to provide highly detailed images of blood vessels similar to those
of conventional angiography. CT angiography is a less invasive alternative to conventional angiography.
Disadvantages
CT accounts for most diagnostic radiation exposure to patients collectively. If multiple scans are done, the
total radiation dose may be high, placing the patient at potential risk (. Patients who have
recurrent urinary tract stones or who have had major trauma are most likely to have multiple CT scans.
The risk of radiation exposure vs benefit of the examination must always be considered because the
effective radiation dose of one abdomen CT is equal to 500 chest x-rays.
Some CT scans use IV contrast, which has certain risks (. If barium extrava-sates outside the
GI tract lumen, it can induce severe inflammation; if aspirated, barium can induce severe pneumonia.
Barium can also become hard and inspissated, potentially precipitating intestinal obstruction. Gastrografin
is safer, but the contrast and images of the GI tract it provides are not as good.
The CT table may not be able to accommodate very obese patients.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI uses magnetic fields and radio waves to produce images of thin slices of tissues (tomographic
images). Normally, protons within tissues spin to produce tiny magnetic fields that are randomly aligned.
When surrounded by the strong magnetic field of an MRI device, the magnetic axes align along that field.
A radiofrequency pulse is then applied, causing the axes of all protons to momentarily align against the
field in a high-energy state. After the pulse, some protons relax and resume their baseline alignment
within the magnetic field of the MRI device. The magnitude and rate of energy release that occurs as the
protons resume this alignment (T1 relaxation) and as they wobble (precess) during the process (T2
relaxation) are recorded as spatially localized signal intensities by a coil (antenna). Computer algorithms
analyze these signals and produce anatomic images.
The relative signal intensity (brightness) of tissues in an MRI image is determined by factors such as the
radiofrequency pulse and gradient waveforms used to obtain the image, intrinsic T1 and T2 tissue
characteristics, and tissue proton density.
By controlling the radiofrequency pulse and gradient waveforms, computer programs produce specific
pulse sequences that determine how an image is obtained (weighted) and how various tissues appear.
Images can be T1-weighted, T2-weighted, or proton density-weighted. For example, fat appears bright
(high signal intensity) on T1-weighted images and relatively dark (low signal intensity) on T2-weighted
images; water and fluids appear relatively dark on T1-weighted images and bright on T2-weighted
images. T1-weighted images optimally show normal soft-tissue anatomy and fat (eg, to confirm a fatcontaining mass). T2-weighted images optimally show fluid and abnormalities (eg, tumors, inflammation,
===PAGE:3588===
trauma). In practice, T1- and T2-weighted images provide complementary information, so both are
important for characterizing abnormalities.
Uses
MRI is preferred to CT when soft-tissue contrast resolution must be highly detailed (eg, to evaluate
intracranial or spinal cord abnormalities, inflammation, trauma, suspected musculoskeletal tumors, internal
joint derangement). MRI is also useful for evaluating the following:
•
Vascular imaging:
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is used to image arteries with good
diagnostic accuracy and is less invasive than conventional angiography. Gadolinium contrast is
sometimes used. MRA can be used to image the thoracic and abdominal aorta and arteries of the brain,
neck, kidneys, and lower extremities. Venous imaging (magnetic resonance venography) can also be
done.
•
Hepatic and biliary tract abnormalities:
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is
particularly valuable as a noninvasive, highly accurate method of imaging the biliary and pancreatic
duct systems.
•
Masses in the female reproductive organs:
MRI is used to characterize adnexal masses and to
stage uterine tumors.
•
Certain fractures:
For example, MRI can provide accurate images of hip fractures in patients with
osteopenia.
•
Lytic bone metastases
MRI can also be substituted for CT with contrast in patients with a high risk of contrast reactions.
Contrast:
With MRI, contrast agents may be used to highlight vascular structures (for MRA) and to help
characterize inflammation and tumors. The most commonly used agents are gadolinium derivatives, which
have magnetic properties that affect proton relaxation times. MRI of intra-articular structures may include
injection of a gadolinium derivative into a joint.
Variations
Diffusion (diffusion-weighted) MRI:
Signal intensities are related to diffusion of water molecules in
tissue. This type of MRI can be used to detect early cerebral ischemia and infarction and to differentiate
intracranial cysts from solid masses.
Echo planar imaging:
This ultrafast technique (images obtained in > 1 sec) is used for diffusion,
perfusion, and functional imaging of the brain and heart. Its potential advantages include showing brain
and heart activity and reducing motion artifacts. However, its use is limited because it requires special
technical hardware and it is susceptible to other artifacts.
Functional MRI:
Functional MRI is used to assess brain activity by location. In the most common type,
the brain is scanned at low resolution very frequently (eg, every 2 to 3 sec). The change in oxygenated
Hb can be discerned and used to estimate metabolic activity. Mechanisms of various neural mechanisms
can be studied in research settings.
Gradient echo imaging:
Gradient echo is a pulse sequence that can be used for fast imaging of moving
blood and CSF (eg, in MRA). Because this technique is fast, it can reduce motion artifacts (eg, blurring)
during imaging that requires patients to hold their breath (eg, during imaging of cardiac and abdominal
structures).
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS):
MRS combines the information obtained by MRI (mainly
based on water and fat content of tissues) with that of nuclear magnetic resonance, or NMR; NMR
provides information about tissue metabolites. Such information can help differentiate certain
===PAGE:3589===
abnormalities (eg, certain types of tumors).
Perfusion MRI:
Perfusion MRI is a method of assessing relative cerebral blood flow. It can be used to
detect an area of ischemia during imaging for stroke.
Disadvantages
MRI is relatively expensive and may not be available or available immediately.
Magnetic field:
MRI is relatively contraindicated in patients with implanted materials that can be affected
by powerful magnetic fields. These materials include ferromagnetic metal (containing iron), magnetically
activated or electronically controlled medical devices (eg, pacemakers, implantable cardioverter
defibrillators, cochlear implants), and nonferromagnetic metal electronically conductive wires or materials
(eg, pacemaker wires, certain pulmonary artery catheters). Ferromagnetic material may be moved by the
strong magnetic field and injure a nearby organ; movement is more likely if the material has been in place
< 6 wk (before scar tissue forms). Ferromagnetic material can also cause imaging artifacts. Magnetically
activated medical devices may malfunction when exposed to magnetic fields. Magnetic fields may induce
current in conductive materials; this current may produce enough heat to burn tissues. Whether a specific
device is compatible with MRI depends on the type of device, its components, and its manufacturer (see
the MRI safety web site). Also, MRI machines with different magnetic field strengths have different effects
on materials, so safety in one machine does not ensure safety in another.
The MRI magnetic field is very strong and always on. Thus, a ferromagnetic object (eg, an O
tank, a
metal pole) at the entrance of the scanning room may be pulled into the magnet bore at high velocity and
injure anyone in its path. The only way to separate the object from the magnet may be to turn off the
magnetic field.
Claustrophobia:
The imaging tube of an MRI machine is a tight, enclosed space that can trigger
claustrophobia even in patients without preexisting phobias or anxiety. Also, some obese patients do not
fit on the table or within the machine. Premedication with an anxiolytic (eg, alprazolam or lorazepam 1 to 2
mg po) 15 to 30 min before scanning is effective for most anxious patients. MRI scanners with an open
side can be used. Its images may be inferior to those of enclosed scanners depending on the field
strength of the magnet, but they are usually sufficient for making a diagnosis. Patients should be warned
that the MRI machine makes loud, banging noises.
Contrast reactions:
Gadolinium derivatives, if used, can cause headache, nausea, and pain,
as well as
sensation of cold at the injection site. However, serious contrast reactions are rare and much less
common than with iodinated contrast agents. However, in patients with impaired renal function,
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis is a risk. Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis is a rare but life-threatening
disorder that involves the skin and probably internal organs, resulting in severe disability or death. For
patients with impaired renal function, the following is recommended:
• Gadolinium should be used only when necessary.
• Before this agent is used, renal function should be checked (eg, based on patient history or laboratory
tests such as GFR).
• The dose should be as small as possible, and the number of tests done should be limited if possible. If a
second test is required, it should be delayed about 1 wk.
Radiography
Radiography involves the use of x-rays; the term "plain x-rays" is sometimes used to distinguish x-rays
used alone from x-rays combined with other techniques (eg, CT). For plain x-rays, an x-ray beam is
generated and passed through a patient to a piece of film or a radiation detector, producing an image.
Different soft tissues attenuate x-ray photons differently, depending on tissue density; the denser the
tissue, the whiter (more radiopaque) the image. The range of densities, from most to least dense, is
represented by metal (white, or radiopaque), bone cortex (less white), muscle and fluid (gray), fat (darker
===PAGE:3590===
gray), and air or gas (black, or radiolucent).
Radiography is usually the most readily available imaging method. Typically, it is the first imaging method
indicated to evaluate the extremities, chest, and sometimes the spine and abdomen. These areas contain
important structures with densities that may differ from those of adjacent tissues. For example,
radiography is a first-line test for detecting the following:
•
Fractures:
White bone is well seen because it is adjacent to gray soft tissues.
•
Pneumonia:
Inflammatory exudate that fills the lungs is well seen because it contrasts with adjacent air
spaces.
•
Intestinal obstruction:
Dilated, air-filled loops of intestine are well seen amidst the surrounding soft
tissue.
Variations
Contrast studies:
When the density of adjacent tissues is similar, a radiopaque contrast agent ( is often added to one tissue or structure to differentiate it from its surroundings. Structures typically
requiring a contrast agent include blood vessels (for angiography) and the lumina of the GI, biliary, and
GU tracts. Gas may be used to distend the lower GI tract and make it visible. Other imaging tests (eg, CT,
MRI) have largely replaced contrast studies because their tomographic images provide better anatomic
localization of an abnormality.
Fluoroscopy:
A continuous x-ray beam is used to produce images of moving structures or objects.
Fluoroscopy is most often used with contrast agents (eg, in swallowing studies or coronary artery
catheterization) or during medical procedures to guide placement of a lead, catheter, or needle (eg, in
electro-physiologic testing or percutaneous coronary interventions).
Disadvantages
Diagnostic accuracy is limited in many situations. Other imaging tests may provide better image detail, be
safer or faster, or have other advantages.
Contrast agents such as barium and gastrografin, if used, have disadvantages (, and IV
contrast agents have risks (. Fluoroscopy may involve high doses of radiation.
Radionuclide Scanning
Radionuclide scanning uses the radiation released by radionuclides (called nuclear decay) to produce
images. A radionuclide is an unstable isotope that becomes more stable by releasing energy as radiation.
This radiation can include gamma-ray photons or particulate emission (such as positrons, used in PET).
Radiation produced by radionuclides may be used for imaging or for treatment of certain disorders (eg,
thyroid disorders).
A radionuclide, usually technetium-99m, is combined with different stable, metabolically active compounds
to form a radiopharmaceutical that localizes to a particular anatomic or diseased structure (target tissue).
The radiopharmaceutical is given by mouth or by injection. After the radionuclide has had time to reach
the target tissue, images are taken with a gamma camera. Gamma rays emitted by the radionuclide
interact with scintillation crystals in the camera, creating light
photons that are converted into electrical
signals by photomultiplier tubes. A computer summarizes and analyzes the signals and integrates them
into 2-dimensional images. However, only signals near the camera's face can be accurately analyzed;
thus, imaging is limited by the range of the camera.
Portable gamma cameras can provide radionuclide imaging at bedside. Generally, radionuclide scanning
is considered safe (see
Table 343-1
).
Uses
===PAGE:3591===
The compound labeled with the radionuclide depends on the target tissue or indication:
• For imaging the skeleton, technetium-99m is combined with diphosphonate and used to check for bone
metastasis or infection.
• For identifying inflammation, WBCs are labeled and used to identify inflammation.
• For localizing GI bleeding, RBCs are labeled.
• For imaging the liver, spleen, or bone marrow, sulfur colloid is labeled.
• For imaging the biliary tract, iminodiacetic acid derivatives are labeled and used to check for biliary
obstruction, bile leaks, and gallbladder disorders.
Radionuclide scanning is also used to image the thyroid gland and the cerebrovascular, cardiovascular,
respiratory, and GU systems. For example, in myocardial perfusion imaging, heart tissue takes up
radionuclides (eg, thallium) in proportion to perfusion. This technique can be combined with stress
testing. Radionuclide scanning is also used to evaluate tumors.
Variations
Single-photon emission CT (SPECT):
SPECT uses a gamma camera that rotates around the patient.
The resultant series of images are reconstructed by computer into 2-dimensional tomographic slices in a
similar manner to that done in conventional CT. The 2-dimensional images can be used for tomographic
reconstruction to yield a 3-dimensional image.
Disadvantages
Radiation exposure depends on the radio-nuclide and dose used. Effective doses tend to range from 1.5
to 17 mSv—eg, about 1.5 mSv for lung scans, about 3.5 to 4.5 mSv for bone and hepatobiliary scans,
and about 17 mSv for technetium sestimibi heart scans. Reactions to radionuclides are rare.
The area that can be imaged accurately is limited because only signals near the gamma camera's face
can be accurately localized. Image detail may also be limited.
Often, imaging must be delayed for up to several hours to give the radionuclide time to reach the target
tissue.
Positron Emission Tomography
PET, a type of radionuclide scanning, uses compounds containing radionuclides that decay by releasing
a positron (the positively charged antimatter equivalent of an electron). The released positron combines
with an electron and produces 2 photons whose paths are 180° apart. Ring detector systems encircling
the positron-emitting source simultaneously detect the 2 photons to localize the source. Because PET
incorporates positron-emitting radionuclides into metabolically active compounds, it can provide
information about tissue function.
Fluorine-18 [F]-labeled deoxyglucose (FDG) is used most commonly in clinical PET. FDG is an analog
of glucose, and its uptake is proportional to glucose metabolic rates. A patient's relative glucose metabolic
rate (called the standardized uptake value [SUV]) is calculated: The amount of FDG taken up from the
injected dose is divided by the patient's body weight.
Uses
PET has several clinical indications, such as
• Cancer (eg, staging and evaluating specific types of cancer and evaluating response to treatment),
===PAGE:3592===
which accounts for about 80% of PET usage
• Cardiac function (eg, evaluating myocardial viability, detecting hibernating myocardium)
• Neurologic function (eg, evaluation of dementia and seizures)
PET applications continue to be investigated, although it is important to determine which applications are
reimbursable.
Variations
PET-CT:
Functional information provided by PET is superimposed on anatomic information provided by
CT.
Disadvantages
The typical effective radiation dose during PET is about 7 mSv. The effective radiation dose with PET-CT
is 5 to 18 mSv.
Production of FDG requires a cyclotron. FDG has a short half-life (110 min); thus, shipment from the
manufacturer and completion of the scan must occur very rapidly. The resulting expense, inconvenience,
and impracticality greatly limit the availability of PET.
Ultrasonography
In ultrasonography, a signal generator is combined with a transducer. Piezoelectric crystals in the signal
generator convert electricity into high-frequency sound waves, which are sent into tissues. The tissues
scatter, reflect, and absorb the sound waves to various degrees. The sound waves that are reflected
back (echoes) are converted into electric signals. A computer analyzes the signals and displays the
information on a screen.
Ultrasonography is portable, widely available, and safe. No radiation is used.
Variations
Ultrasound information can be displayed in several ways.
A-mode:
This display mode is the simplest; signals are recorded as spikes on a graph. The vertical (Y)
axis of the display shows the echo amplitude, and the horizontal (X) axis shows depth or distance into the
patient. This type of ultrasonography is used for ophthalmologic scanning.
B-mode (gray-scale):
This mode is most often used in diagnostic imaging; signals are displayed as a 2dimensional anatomic image. B-mode is commonly used to evaluate the developing fetus and to evaluate
organs, including the liver, spleen, kidneys, thyroid gland, testes, breasts, and prostate gland. B-mode
ultrasonography is fast enough to show real-time motion, such as the motion of the beating heart or
pulsating blood vessels. Real-time imaging provides anatomic and functional information.
M-mode:
This mode is used to image moving structures; signals reflected by the moving structures are
converted into waves that are displayed continuously across a vertical axis. M-mode is used primarily for
assessment of fetal heartbeat and in cardiac imaging, most notably to evaluate valvular disorders.
Doppler:
This type of ultrasonography is used to assess blood flow. Doppler ultra-sonography uses the
Doppler effect (alteration of sound frequency by reflection off a moving object). The moving objects are
RBCs in blood.
Direction and velocity of blood flow can be determined by analyzing changes in the frequency of sound
waves:
===PAGE:3593===
• If a reflected sound wave is lower in frequency than the transmitted sound wave, blood flow is away
from the transducer.
• If a reflected sound wave is higher in frequency than the transmitted sound wave, blood flow is toward
the transducer.
• The magnitude of the change in frequency is proportional to blood flow velocity.
Changes in frequency of the reflected sound waves are converted into images showing blood flow
direction and velocity.
Duplex Doppler ultrasonography combines the graphic display of spectral ultra-sonography with the
images of B-mode. For color Doppler ultrasonography, color is superimposed on a gray-scale anatomic
image. The color indicates direction of blood flow. By convention, red indicates flow toward and blue
indicates flow away from the transducer.
Doppler ultrasonography is also used to evaluate vascularity of tumors and organs, to evaluate heart
function (eg, as for echocardiography), to detect occlusion and stenosis of blood vessels, and to detect
blood clots in blood vessels (eg, in deep venous thrombosis).
Disadvantages
Quality of images depends on the skills of the operator. Obtaining clear images of the target structures
can be technically difficult in overweight patients.
Ultrasonography cannot be used to image through bone or gas, so certain images may be difficult to
obtain.
===PAGE:3594===
Chapter 344. Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Introduction
(See also
Chapter 345
.)
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) refers to healing approaches and therapies that are not
based on principles of mainstream, conventional medicine.
•
Complementary medicine
refers to unconventional practices used with mainstream medicine.
•
Alternative medicine
refers to unconventional practices used instead of mainstream medicine.
•
Integrative medicine
is health care that uses all appropriate therapeutic approaches—conventional
and alternative—within a framework that focuses on the therapeutic relationship and the whole person.
CAM has been widely used in the US for decades. Almost 40% of adults use some form of CAM, most
often to treat pain or anxiety or to modify cholesterol levels. Use is also common among patients with
chronic pain, cancer, hepatitis C, or other intractable conditions. The most frequently used therapies
include medicinal herbs and other plant-derived supplements (botanicals), mind-body practices, and
massage therapy.
Some CAM therapies are now offered in hospitals and are sometimes reimbursed by insurance
companies. Some traditional medical schools, including 45 North American medical schools in the
Consortium of Academic Health Centers for Integrative Medicine, provide education about CAM and
integrative medicine.
Broad, philosophic differences distinguish conventional and alternative approaches to healing (see
Table 344-1
).
Because patients worry about being criticized, they do not always volunteer information about their use of
CAM to physicians. Therefore, it is very important for physicians to specifically ask their patients about
CAM use in an open, nonjudgmental way. Learning about patients' use of CAM can strengthen rapport,
build trust, and provide an opportunity to discuss CAM's benefits and risks. Physicians may also identify
and avoid potentially harmful interactions between drugs and CAM therapies or nutritional supplements,
monitor patient progress, guide patients to certified or licensed CAM practitioners, and learn from patients'
experiences with CAM.
Efficacy
In 1992, the Office of Alternative Medicine in the National Institutes of Health (NIH) was formed to study
the efficacy and safety of alternative therapies. In 1998, this office became the National Center for
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM; see www.nccam.nih.gov/
). Other NIH offices (eg,
National Cancer Institute) also fund some CAM research.
There are 3 types of support for CAM therapies:
• Use over periods of time ranging from decades to centuries
• Evidence of established physiologic mechanisms of action (eg, modification of
γ
-aminobutyric acid
[GABA] activity in the brain by valerian)
• Efficacy as shown in clinical trials
A substantial amount of information about CAM is available in peer-reviewed publications, evidencebased reviews, expert panel consensus documents, and authoritative text-books; much of it has been
published in languages other than English (eg, German, Chinese). However, most CAM therapies have
not been tested in definitive clinical trials and probably will not be for the following reasons:
===PAGE:3595===
• Industry has no financial incentive to fund research.
• CAM therapies may be difficult to study using conventional methodology.
• Manufacturers of CAM products do not have to prove disease-specific efficacy.
Thus, the FDA allows marketing of dietary supplements and use of CAM devices but significantly restricts
efficacy claims. Generally, manufacturers of dietary supplements can claim benefit to the body's structure
or function (eg, improves cardiovascular health) but not benefit for treating disease (eg, treats
hypertension).
Research:
Designing studies of CAM therapies poses challenges beyond those faced by researchers of
conventional therapies:
• Therapies may not be standardized. For example, there are different systems of acupuncture, and the
contents and biologic activity of extracts made from the same plant species vary widely (chemical
identification
[Table 344-1.
Differences Between Conventional and Alternative Medicine]
and standardization of active ingredients is not considered part of CAM).
• Diagnoses may not be standardized; use of many CAM therapies (eg, traditional herbal medicine,
homeopathy, acupuncture) is based on the patient's unique characteristics rather than on a specific
disease or disorder.
• Double- or single-blinding is often difficult or impossible. For example, patients cannot be blinded as to
whether they are practicing meditation. Reiki practitioners cannot be blinded as to whether or not they
are using energy healing.
• Outcomes are difficult to standardize because they are often specific to the individual rather than
objective and uniform (as mean arterial pressure, Hb A
1C
level, and mortality are).
• Placebos may be difficult to devise because identifying the effective component of a CAM therapy may
be difficult. For example, in massage, the effective component could be touching, the specific area of
the body massaged, the particular massage technique used, or time spent with the patient.
From a conventional research perspective, use of a placebo control is particularly important when
subjective outcomes (eg, pain, nausea, indigestion) are used and when disorders that are intermittent,
self-limited, or both (eg, headaches) are being studied; such end points and disorders are often the
targets of CAM therapies. However, CAM systems interpret placebo effects as nonspecific healing effects
that arise out of the therapeutic interaction and are inseparable from specific treatments. In practice,
alternative therapies are intended to optimize the patient's capacity for self-healing (placebo response) as
well as treatment-specific effects. Thus, many CAM practitioners strive to enhance the quality of the
healing environment and therapeutic relationship. Studying the effective components of a CAM therapy
without undermining the integrity of that therapy in a research setting remains a methodologic challenge.
Safety
Although the safety of most CAM therapies has not been studied in clinical trials, many of these therapies
have a good safety record. Many CAM therapies (eg, nontoxic botanicals, mind-body techniques such as
meditation and yoga, body-based practices such as massage) have been used for thousands of years
with no evidence of harm, and many seem to have no potential for harm. However, there are some safety
considerations, including the following:
• Use of an alternative approach to treat a life-threatening disorder that can be effectively treated
conventionally (eg, meningitis, diabetic ketoacidosis, acute leukemia)—perhaps the greatest risk of
===PAGE:3596===
CAM, rather than the risk of direct harm from a CAM therapy
• Toxicity from certain herbal preparations (eg, hepatotoxicity from pyrrolizidine alkaloids,
Atractylis
gummifera
, chaparral, germander, greater celandine, Jin Bu Huan, kava, pennyroyal, or others;
nephrotoxicity from
Aristolochia
; adrenergic stimulation from ephedra)
•
Contamination (eg, heavy metal contamination of some Chinese and Ayurvedic herbal preparations;
contamination of other products, such as PC-SPES and some Chinese herbs, with other drugs)
• Interactions between CAM therapies (eg, botanicals, micronutrients, other dietary supplements) and
other drugs (eg, induction of cytochrome P-450 [CYP3A4] enzymes by St. John's wort, resulting in
reduced activity of antiretrovirals, immunosuppressants, and other drugs), particularly when the drug
has a narrow therapeutic index
• As with any physical manipulation of the body (including mainstream techniques such as physical
therapy), injury (eg, nerve or cord damage due to spinal manipulation in patients at risk, bruising in
patients with bleeding disorders)
Current alerts about harmful dietary supplements are available at the FDA web site. Historically, the FDA
did not tightly regulate the production of dietary supplements. However, new FDA regulations now require
compliance with manufacturing practices that guarantee quality and safety of supplements.
To help prevent injuries due to physical manipulations, patients should look for CAM practitioners who
graduated from accredited schools and are professionally licensed. Rates of complications are very low
when chiropractic or acupuncture is provided by practitioners with full credentials.
Categories
Five categories of alternative medicine are generally recognized (see
Table 344-2
):
• Alternative whole medical systems
• Mind-body medicine
• Biologically based practices
• Manipulative and body-based practices
• Energy medicine
The name of many therapies only partially describes their components.
Alternative Whole Medical Systems
Alternative medical systems are complete systems with explanation of disease, diagnosis, and therapy.
Ayurveda
Ayurveda, the traditional medical system of India, originated > 4000 yr ago. It is based on the theory that
disease results from an imbalance of the body's life force (prana). The balance of prana is determined by
equilibrium of the 3 bodily qualities (doshas): vata, pitta, and kapha. Most people have a dominant dosha;
the specific balance is unique to each person.
Evidence:
Few well-designed studies of Ayurvedic practices have been done. Use of Ayurvedic herbal
combinations to relieve symptoms in patients with RA and to treat diabetes is being studied.
Uses:
After determining the balance of doshas, practitioners design a treatment specifically tailored to
===PAGE:3597===
each patient. Ayurveda uses diet, herbs, massage, meditation, yoga, and therapeutic detoxification
(panchakarma)—typically with enemas, oil massages, or nasal lavage—to restore balance within the
body and with nature.
Possible adverse effects:
In some of the herbal combinations used, heavy metals (mainly lead,
mercury, and arsenic) are included because they are thought to have therapeutic effects. Cases of heavy
metal toxicity have been reported.
Homeopathy
Developed in Germany in the late 1700s, homeopathy is based on the principle that like cures like. A
substance that, when given in large doses, causes a certain set of symptoms is believed to cure the same
symptoms when it is given in minute doses. The minute dose is thought to stimulate the body's healing
mechanisms. Treatments are based on the patient's unique characteristics, including personality and
lifestyle, as well as symptoms and general health.
Remedies used in homeopathy are derived from naturally occurring substances, such as plant extracts
and minerals. Extremely low concentrations are prepared in a specific way. The more dilute the
homeopathic remedy, the stronger it is considered to be.
Some solutions are so dilute that they contain no molecules of the active ingredient. There is no
compelling, scientific explanation for how these dilutions could work.
Evidence:
Efficacy of homeopathic remedies for various disorders has been studied. No study has
clearly shown efficacy for any specific homeopathic remedy, although some studies have shown positive
results (eg, one well-conducted, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical study showed a therapeutic
benefit greater than placebo in the treatment of diarrhea in children). Homeopathy is commonly
incorporated into health care practices in Europe and India.
[Table 344-2.
Types of Alternative Medicine]
Uses:
Homeopathy has been used to treat various disorders, such as allergies, rhinitis, digestive
problems, musculoskeletal pain, and vertigo. The effect of homeopathic solutions on joint pain and
tenderness and quality of life in fibromyalgia is being studied.
Possible adverse effects:
Homeopathy is well-tolerated and has few risks; rarely, an allergic or toxic
reaction occurs.
Unlike herbal and nutritional supplements, homeopathic remedies are regulated by the FDA as drugs;
they are available over the counter or by prescription. Because so little active ingredient is left after
dilution, active ingredients are tested before dilution. Homeopathic remedies have been temporarily
exempted from limits on the amount of alcohol (the usual diluent) that they can contain. However, the
label is required to list the following:
• Manufacturer
• The label "homeopathic"
• At least one indication
• Instructions for safe use
• Unless specifically exempted, the active ingredient and degree of dilution
Conventional clinicians should not assume that a homeopathic remedy taken by a patient is biologically
inactive. Patients often use the term homeopathic erroneously in reference to a dietary supplement they
are taking. Also, the FDA allows many medicinal herbs to be registered and labeled as homeopathic if
they undergo a particular pharmaceutical process.
===PAGE:3598===
Naturopathy
This therapy began as a formal health care system in the US during the early 1900s. Founded on the
healing power of nature, naturopathy emphasizes prevention and treatment of disease through a healthy
lifestyle, treatment of the whole patient, and use of the body's natural healing abilities. This system also
focuses on finding the cause of a disease rather than merely treating symptoms. Some of this system's
principles are not that different from those of traditional healing systems such as Ayurveda and traditional
Chinese medicine.
Naturopathy uses a combination of therapies, including acupuncture, counseling, exercise therapy,
medicinal herbs, homeopathy, hydrotherapy, natural childbirth, nutrition, physical therapies (eg, heat or
cold therapy, ultrasound, massage), guided imagery, and stress management.
Traditional Chinese Medicine
Originating > 2000 yr ago, traditional Chinese medicine is based on the theory that disease results from
improper flow of the life force (qi). The movement of qi is restored by balancing the opposing forces of yin
and yang, which manifest in the body as heat and cold, external and internal, and deficiency and excess.
Various practices (eg, acupuncture, diet, massage, medicinal herbs, meditative exercise called qi gong)
are used to preserve and restore qi and thus health.
Evidence:
Chinese medicine traditionally uses formulas containing mixtures of herbs to treat various
disorders. Traditional formulas can be studied; for example, efficacy in the treatment of irritable bowel
syndrome has been shown. One herb, used by itself, may not be as effective and may have side effects.
Nevertheless, current conventional research favors study of single herbs. For example,
Tripterygium
wilfordii
(thunder god vine) has demonstrated anti-inflammatory properties and clinical efficacy in treating
RA, and
Astragalus
may benefit patients with lung cancer. Various Chinese herbs have been studied as
treatments for hepatitis and hepatic fibrosis. Some studies suggest efficacy, but data are limited.
Possible adverse effects:
One problem is the standardization and quality control of Chinese herbs.
Many are unregulated in Asia; they may be contaminated with heavy metals from polluted ground water or
may be adulterated with drugs such as antibiotics or corticosteroids. However, high-quality products are
available through certain manufacturers that comply with FDA Good Manufacturing Practices.
Mind-Body Medicine
Mind-body medicine is based on the theory that mental and emotional factors influence physical health
through a system of neuronal, hormonal, and immunologic connections throughout the body. Behavioral,
psychologic, social, and spiritual techniques are used to preserve health and to prevent or cure disease.
Because scientific evidence supporting the benefits of mind-body medicine is abundant, many of these
approaches are now considered mainstream, although they remain underused. Techniques such as
biofeedback, guided imagery, hypnotherapy, meditation, and relaxation are used in the treatment of
chronic pain, coronary artery disease, headaches, insomnia, and incontinence and as aids during
childbirth. These techniques are also used to help patients cope with disease-related and treatmentrelated symptoms of cancer and to prepare patients for surgery. Efficacy of
mind-body medicine in
patients with asthma, hypertension, or tinnitus is not as clear.
Biofeedback
For this technique, electronic devices are used to provide information to patients about biologic functions
(eg, heart rate, BP, muscle activity, skin temperature, skin resistance, brain surface electrical activity).
Uses:
With the help of a therapist or with training, patients can then use information from biofeedback to
modify the function or to relax, thereby lessening the effects of conditions such as pain, stress, insomnia,
and headaches. Biofeedback is also used in patients with fecal or urinary incontinence, chronic
abdominal pain, tinnitus, Raynaud's syndrome, or attention or memory disorders (eg, attention-
===PAGE:3599===
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, traumatic brain injury). Generally, biofeedback does not seem to be useful in
asthma; a possible exception is heart rate variability biofeedback, which may help reduce asthma
symptoms and drug use and improve pulmonary function.
Guided imagery
Mental images, self-directed or guided by a practitioner, are used to help patients relax (eg, before a
procedure) and to promote wellness and healing (to try to effect physical changes—eg, by mobilizing the
immune system). The images can involve any of the senses.
Uses:
Imagery used with relaxation techniques (muscle relaxation and deep breathing) may help reduce
pain and improve quality of life in patients with cancer. Imagery has also been used in patients with
psychologic trauma.
Hypnotherapy
Hypnotherapy is derived from western psychotherapeutic practice. Patients are put into an advanced
state of relaxation. They become absorbed in the images presented by the hypnotherapist and are
relatively distracted from but not unconscious of their surroundings and the experiences they are
undergoing. Some patients learn to hypnotize themselves.
Uses:
Hypnotherapy is used to treat pain syndromes, phobias, and conversion disorders and has been
used with some success to manage smoking cessation and weight loss. It can reduce pain and anxiety
during medical procedures in adults and children. It may be useful in irritable bowel syndrome,
headaches, asthma, and some skin disorders (eg, warts, psoriasis). It may help lower BP. Hypnotherapy
helps control nausea and vomiting (particularly anticipatory) related to chemotherapy and is useful in
palliative cancer care. Some evidence suggests that hypnotherapy helps lessen anxiety and improve
quality of life in patients with cancer.
Meditation
In meditation, patients regulate their attention or systematically focus on particular aspects of inner or
outer experience. The most highly studied forms of meditation are transcendental meditation (TM) and
mindfulness meditation. Although research is incomplete, results to date suggest that meditation could
work via at least 2 mechanisms:
• Producing a relaxed state that counters excessive activation of neurohormonal pathways resulting from
repeated stress
• Developing the capacity for metacognitive awareness (the ability to stand back from and witness the
contents of consciousness), thus theoretically helping patients not react to stress automatically (with
highly conditioned, learned patterns of behavior) and helping them tolerate and regulate emotional
distress better
Most meditation practices were developed in a religious or spiritual context; their ultimate goal was some
type of spiritual growth, personal transformation, or transcendental experience. However, studies suggest
that as a health care intervention, meditation can often be beneficial regardless of a person's cultural or
religious background.
Uses:
Meditation has been used to relieve anxiety, pain, depression, stress, insomnia, and symptoms of
chronic disorders such as cancer or cardiovascular disorders. It is also used to promote wellness.
Relaxation Techniques
Relaxation techniques are practices specifically designed to relieve tension and strain. The specific
technique may be aimed at
• Reducing activity of the sympathetic nervous system
===PAGE:3600===
• Lowering BP
• Easing muscle tension
• Slowing metabolic processes
• Altering brain wave activity
Relaxation techniques may be used with other techniques, such as meditation, guided imagery, or
hypnotherapy.
Biologically Based Practices
Biologically based practices use naturally occurring substances and include biologic
therapies (eg, shark
cartilage to treat cancer, glucosamine to treat osteoarthritis), diet therapies, herbalism (,
orthomolecular medicine, and chelation therapy.
Diet Therapy
Diet therapy uses specialized dietary regimens (eg, Gerson therapy, macrobiotic diets, Pritikin diet) to
treat or prevent a specific disorder (eg, cancer, cardiovascular disorders) or generally promote wellness.
Some diets (eg, Mediterranean diet) are widely accepted and encouraged in traditional western medicine.
The Ornish diet, a very low-fat vegetarian diet, can help reverse arterial blockages that cause coronary
artery disease and may help prevent or slow the progression of prostate and other cancers. Some people
following a macrobiotic diet have reported cancer remission, but a well-controlled clinical study has not
been conducted. Because it usually takes months or years for benefits to be realized, diet therapy is more
likely to be effective if started early.
Orthomolecular Medicine
Orthomolecular medicine, also called nutritional medicine, aims to provide the body with optimal amounts
of substances that naturally occur in the body. Nutrition is the focus in diagnosis and treatment.
This therapy differs from diet therapy because it uses supradietary doses of individual micronutrients.
High doses of vitamins, minerals, enzymes, hormones (eg, melatonin), amino acids, or various
combinations may be used. Practitioners believe that people's nutritional needs far exceed the
recommended daily allowances and that nutritional therapy must be individualized based on each
patient's medical profile. High doses of micro-nutrients are also used as biologic response modifiers in an
attempt to modulate inflammation and other disease processes. Doses may be administered orally or, far
less often, intravenously.
Evidence and uses:
Treatment claims include benefit for a wide range of disorders (eg, cancer,
cardiovascular disease, chronic fatigue, chronic pain, autism, psychiatric disorders). These treatments
are widely used, and many patients report clinical improvement. However, no clinical study data support
the usefulness of most of these practices. Exceptions include use of high-dose fish oils to treat
hypertriglyceridemia (and possibly inflammatory and mood disorders), use of high-dose antioxidants to
prevent macular degeneration, and possibly high-dose melatonin to prevent or treat cancer. If sufficient
evidence of usefulness is shown, treatments (eg, high-dose fish oils to treat hypertriglyceridemia, highdose antioxidants to prevent macular degeneration) become part of conventional medicine.
Possible adverse effects:
Clinicians should be aware that high-dose micronutrients may cause harm;
eg, some micronutrients may increase the risk of developing prostate cancer or blunt the effects of certain
cancer treatments.
Chelation Therapy
In chelation therapy, a drug is used to bind with and remove hypothesized excess or toxic amounts of a
===PAGE:3601===
metal or mineral (eg, lead, copper, iron, calcium) from the bloodstream. In conventional medicine,
chelation therapy is a widely accepted way to treat lead and other heavy metal poisoning (.
Chelation therapy with EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid) has also been suggested as a way to
remove calcium and thus treat atherosclerosis; whether this use is safe and effective has not been proved
but is under study.
Manipulative and Body-Based Practices
Manipulative and body-based practices include chiropractic, massage therapy, postural reeducation,
reflexology, and structural integration.
Chiropractic
In chiropractic, the relationship between the structure of the spine and function of the nervous system is
thought to be the key to maintaining or restoring health. The main method for restoring this relationship is
spinal manipulation. Chiropractors may also provide physical therapies (eg, heat and cold, electrical
stimulation, rehabilitation strategies), massage, or acupressure and may recommend exercises or lifestyle
changes.
Uses:
Chiropractic provides short-term relief of low back pain, but continuing adjustments may not
provide additional benefit. Thus, the usefulness of chiropractic for chronic back pain is unclear.
Chiropractic is sometimes useful in treating headache disorders (although data are inconsistent) and
nerve impingement syndromes; it has also been used to treat neck pain. The usefulness of manipulation
for conditions not directly related to the musculoskeletal system has not been established.
Possible adverse effects:
Serious complications resulting from spinal manipulation (eg, low back pain,
damage to cervical nerves, damage to arteries in the neck) are rare. Spinal manipulation is not
recommended for patients with osteoporosis or symptoms of neuropathy (eg, paresthesias, loss of
strength in a limb). Whether it is safe for patients who have had spinal surgery or stroke or who have a
vascular disorder is unclear.
Massage Therapy
In massage therapy, body tissues are manipulated to promote wellness and reduce pain and stress. The
therapeutic value of massage for many musculoskeletal symptoms and stress is widely accepted.
Massage has been shown to help relieve the following:
• Muscle soreness
• Pain due to back injuries
• Fibromyalgia
• Anxiety, fatigue, pain, nausea, and vomiting in cancer patients
Massage therapy is reported to be effective in treating low birth weight infants, preventing injury to the
mother's genitals during childbirth, relieving chronic constipation, and controlling asthma.
Massage can cause bruising and bleeding in patients with thrombocytopenia or bleeding disorders.
Therapists must avoid putting pressure on bones affected by osteoporosis or metastatic cancer.
Reflexology:
This variant of massage therapy relies on manual pressure applied to specific areas of the
foot; these areas are believed to correspond to different organs or body systems via meridians.
Stimulation of these areas is believed to eliminate the blockage of energy responsible for pain or disease
in the corresponding body part. Reflexology may help relieve anxiety in patients with cancer.
Structural integration:
Structural integration is based on the theory that good health depends on correct
body alignment. It is a form of deep tissue manipulation that is typically done over a series of sessions.
===PAGE:3602===
Correct alignment of bone and muscle is achieved by manipulating and stretching muscles and fascia.
The efficacy has not been proved.
Other Therapies
Several lesser known therapies are used in various cultures. They include cupping, scraping (eg, coining,
spooning), and moxibustion. Some of these therapies result in lesions that may be mistaken for signs of
child abuse. These therapies are thought to stimulate the body's energy and to enable toxins to leave the
body.
Cupping:
This therapy is used in traditional Chinese medicine and in Middle Eastern, Asian, Latin
American, and Eastern European cultures. The air inside a cup is heated, often using a cotton ball
soaked in alcohol, then ignited. The heated cup is immediately inverted and placed on the skin. The
resulting vacuum sucks the skin partway into the cup, which may be left in place for several minutes.
Cupping has been used to treat bronchitis, asthma, digestive disorders, and certain types of pain;
however, no research has verified its efficacy. Cupping may redden or burn the skin.
Scraping:
This therapy involves rubbing an implement across lubricated (oiled or wet) skin, usually on
the back, neck, and shoulders. Coining uses a coin; spooning uses a spoon. These therapies are used to
treat the common cold, influenza, muscle pain and stiffness, and other disorders. Coining results in linear
red marks; spooning results in ecchymosis.
Moxibustion:
Dried moxa herb (a mugwort) is burned usually just above but sometimes directly on the
skin over acupuncture points. The herb may be in the form of incense sticks. This therapy is used to treat
fever, digestive problems, and pain due to injury or arthritis. Moxibustion can result in circular burns
(which resemble burns from cigarette tips) and vesicobullous lesions.
Energy Medicine
Energy medicine intends to manipulate subtle energy fields (also called biofields) thought to exist in and
around the body. All energy therapies are based on the belief that a universal life force or subtle energy
resides in and around the body. Qi gong, which is used in traditional Chinese medicine, is an energy
therapy.
Acupuncture
Acupuncture, a therapy within traditional Chinese medicine, is one of the most widely accepted alternative
therapies in the western world. Specific points on the body are stimulated, usually by inserting thin
needles into the skin and underlying tissues. Stimulating these specific points is believed to unblock the
flow of qi along energy pathways (meridians) and thus restore balance; > 350 defined points are located
along the meridians. The procedure is generally not painful but may cause a tingling sensation.
Sometimes stimulation is increased by twisting or warming the
needle. Acupuncture points may also be
stimulated by pressure (called acupressure), lasers, ultrasound, or a very low voltage electrical current
(called electroacupuncture) applied to the needle.
Evidence and uses:
Research has shown that acupuncture releases various neurotransmitters (eg,
endorphins) that act as natural painkillers. Reasonable evidence supports the efficacy of acupuncture as
a pain reliever, an antinauseant, and an antiemetic. However, in many studies, results of sham
acupuncture are comparable to those of actual acupuncture; the relative efficacy of sham and actual
acupuncture is still not clear.
Acupuncture relieves nausea and vomiting related to surgery and chemotherapy. When used with
antiemetic drugs, acupuncture has an additive effect. Acupuncture also helps relieve nausea and vomiting
during pregnancy. Acupuncture has been used to relieve pain after surgical or dental procedures. As part
of a comprehensive treatment plan (sometimes as adjunctive treatment), acupuncture may be useful in
treating addiction, carpal tunnel syndrome, fibromyalgia, headache, low back pain, osteoarthritis, and
xerostomia (in patients with advanced cancer) and in stroke rehabilitation.
===PAGE:3603===
Preliminary evidence suggests that acupuncture may relieve vasomotor symptoms in men taking
gonadotropin analogs for prostate cancer. The evidence for relieving symptoms and improving pulmonary
function in patients with asthma and for relieving pain or improving function in patients with RA is mixed.
Acupuncture is ineffective for smoking cessation and weight loss.
Possible adverse effects and contraindications:
Adverse effects are rare if the procedure is done
correctly. Worsening of symptoms (usually temporary) and vasovagal symptoms are the most common.
Because acupuncture can cause fainting and drowsiness (although rarely), patients should be supine at
least for their first treatment and should not drive or do any tasks that require alertness after treatment
until they know how it affects them. Infection is extremely rare; most practitioners use disposable needles.
Acupuncture is contraindicated in patients with severe bleeding disorders. Electroacupuncture is
contraindicated in patients with a pacemaker or an implanted defibrillator. Acupuncture at certain points
may stimulate uterine contractions, and in traditional Chinese medicine, it is used to modulate labor. Only
specially trained practitioners should use acupuncture in pregnant women.
Magnets
Energy therapy may rely on magnetic (alternating- or direct-current) fields.
Evidence and uses:
Magnets, in particular, are a popular treatment for various musculoskeletal
disorders, although multiple studies have shown no effectiveness, especially for pain relief, one of their
most common applications.
Preliminary evidence suggests that static (permanent) magnets may help relieve pain in patients with
osteoarthritis. However, the evidence that electromagnets may reduce pain and improve physical function
is more consistent than that for static magnets. Using pulsating electromagnetic fields to speed healing of
nonunion fractures is well-established.
Possible contraindications:
Possible contraindications for magnets include pregnancy (effects on the
fetus are unknown) and use of implanted cardiac devices, an insulin pump, or a drug given by patch.
Therapeutic Touch
Therapeutic touch, sometimes referred to as laying on of hands, uses the therapist's healing energy to
identify and repair imbalances in a patient's biofield. Usually, practitioners do not touch the patient;
instead, they move their hands back and forth over the patient. Therapeutic touch has been used to
lessen anxiety and improve the sense of well-being in patients with cancer, but these effects have not
been rigorously studied. In the US, nurses have introduced therapeutic touch into ICUs and other hospital
settings.
Reiki:
Reiki, which originated in Japan, is a similar technique; in Reiki, practitioners channel energy
through their hands and transfer it into the patient's body to promote healing. Practitioners are thought to
have special healing powers, which are required for these treatments.
===PAGE:3604===
Chapter 345. Dietary Supplements
Introduction
(See also
Chapter 344
.)
Dietary supplements are the most commonly used of all complementary and alternative therapies,
primarily because they are widely available and can be bought without consulting a health care
practitioner.
The FDA regulates dietary supplements differently from drugs. The FDA regulates only quality control and
good manufacturing processes but does not ensure standardization of the active ingredients or efficacy.
Definition:
The Dietary Supplement Health Education Act (DSHEA) of 1994 defines a dietary supplement
as
• Any product (except tobacco)—in pill, capsule, tablet, or liquid form—containing a vitamin, mineral, herb
or other plant product, amino acid, or other known dietary substance that is intended as a supplement
to the normal diet
In addition, certain hormones, such as dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA, a precursor to androgens and
estrogens) and melatonin, are regulated as dietary supplements and not as prescription drugs.
Labeling:
The DSHEA requires that the product label identify the product as a dietary supplement and
notify the consumer that the claims for the supplement have not been evaluated by the FDA. The label
must also list each ingredient by name, quantity, and total weight and identify plant parts from which
ingredients are derived . Manufacturers are permitted to make claims about the product's structure and
function (eg, good for urinary tract health) but cannot make or imply claims for the product as a drug or
therapy (eg, treats UTIs).
Safety and efficacy:
Most people who use dietary supplements assume that they are good for health
generally, are safe and effective for treating specific conditions, or both because dietary supplements are
natural (ie, derived from plants or animals) and because some are supported by centuries of use in
traditional systems of medicine. However, the FDA does not require manufacturers of dietary
supplements to prove safety or efficacy (although supplements must have a history of safety). Most
supplements have not been rigorously studied. For most, evidence suggesting safety or efficacy comes
from traditional use, in vitro studies, certain case reports, and animal studies. However, manufacturers
and distributors of supplements now must report serious adverse events to the FDA through the
MedWatch system. There are a few supplements (eg, fish oil, chondroitin/glucosamine, saw palmetto)
now proved to be safe and useful complements to standard drugs.
Evidence concerning the safety and efficacy of dietary supplements is increasing rapidly as more and
more clinically based studies are being done. Information about such studies is available at the National
Institutes of Health's National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) web site
(www.nccam.nih.gov/research/clinicaltrials/
).
Purity and standardization:
Lack of regulation and government monitoring also means that
supplements are not monitored to ensure that they contain the ingredients or amount of active ingredient
the manufacturer claims they contain. The supplement may have un-listed ingredients, which may be inert
or harmful (eg, natural toxins, bacteria, pesticides, lead or other heavy metals), or it may contain variable
amounts of active ingredients, especially when whole herbs are ground or made into extracts. Consumers
are at risk of getting less, more, or, in some cases, none of the active ingredient, if the active ingredient is
even known. Most herbal products are mixtures of several substances, and which ingredient is the most
active is not always known. The lack of standardization means not only that products from different
manufacturers may vary, but also that different batches produced by the same manufacturer may differ.
This product variability is a particular source of difficulty in conducting rigorous scientific trials and
comparing the results among different trials. However, some supplements have been standardized and
may include a designation of standardization on the label.
===PAGE:3605===
New regulations governing supplement production in the US include rules for Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMPs). These rules strengthen standards for keeping manufacturing facilities and equipment
clean and raw materials pure and uncontaminated. GMPs also ensure proper labeling, packaging, and
storage of the finished product.
Other concerns:
Additional areas of concern include
• Use of dietary supplements instead of conventional drugs
•
Stability of supplements (especially herbal products) once manufactured
• Toxicity
• Interactions between supplements and drugs
Most information about these concerns comes from sporadic individual reports (see
Table 345-1
) and some references.
Despite these concerns, many patients strongly believe in the benefits of supplements and continue to
use them with or without a physician's involvement. Patients may not think to disclose or may wish to
conceal their use of dietary supplements. For this reason, the outpatient history should periodically
include explicit questions about past
[Table 345-1.
Some Possible Dietary Supplement-Drug Interactions*]
and new use of complementary and alternative therapies, including dietary supplements. Many
physicians incorporate some supplement use into their practice; their reasons include proven benefit of
the supplement, a desire to ensure that supplements are used safely by patients who will use
supplements anyway, and the physician's belief that the supplements are safe and effective. There are
few data to guide patient counseling regarding supplement safety. But some experts believe that the
overall number of problems due to dietary supplements is rare compared with the overall number of
doses taken and that the supplement, if correctly manufactured, is likely to be safe. As a result, these
experts advise purchase of supplements from a well-known manufacturer, and many recommend buying
supplements made in Germany because there they are regulated as drugs and thus oversight is stricter
than in the US.
The following supplements are ones that are most popular, are effective, or have some questions about
their safety. More complete information is available through the NCCAM web site (www.nccam.nih.gov/
).
Black Cohosh
Black cohosh is the underground stem of a plant that can be ingested directly in powdered form or
extracted into tablet or liquid form. It should be standardized to contain certain triterpenes. Black cohosh
contains no phytoestrogens that can account for its purported estrogen-like effects, but it contains small
amounts of anti-inflammatory compounds, including salicylic acid.
Claims:
Black cohosh is said to be useful for menopausal symptoms (eg, hot flushes, mood lability,
tachycardia, vaginal dryness), for menstrual symptoms, and for arthralgias in RA or osteoarthritis.
Scientific evidence regarding benefit in relieving menstrual symptoms is conflicting. There are few reliable
data on its effectiveness for other disorders and symptoms.
Adverse effects:
Adverse effects are uncommon. The most likely are headache and GI distress.
Dizziness, diaphoresis, and hypotension (if high doses are taken) may occur.
There is no evidence that black cohosh interferes with any drugs. Theoretically, black cohosh is
contraindicated in patients with aspirin sensitivity, liver disease, hormone-sensitive cancers (eg, certain
===PAGE:3606===
kinds of breast cancer), stroke, or high BP. The US Pharmacopeia (USP) has recommended that black
cohosh products be labeled with a warning declaring that they may be hepatotoxic.
Chamomile
The flower of chamomile is dried and drunk as a tea or used topically as an extract.
Claims:
Chamomile tea is said to reduce inflammation and fever, to act as a mild sedative, to relieve
stomach cramps and indigestion, and to promote healing of gastric ulcers. Chamomile extract applied
topically in a compress is said to soothe irritated skin. Mechanism is due to essential oil containing
bisabolol constituents.
Adverse effects:
Chamomile is generally safe. It may interact with alcohol and sedatives (eg,
barbiturates). Some people are allergic to pollen in chamomile products.
Chamomile may reduce the absorption of oral drugs. Chamomile may also increase the effects of
anticoagulants and sedatives (including alcohol) and decrease the absorption of iron supplements.
Chondroitin Sulfate
Chondroitin sulfate is a glycosaminoglycan, a natural component of cartilage. It is extracted from shark or
cow cartilage or manufactured synthetically. It is frequently combined with glucosamine.
Claims:
Chondroitin sulfate is used to treat osteoarthritis. Scientific evidence shows no benefit when
chondroitin sulfate is taken by itself. However, evidence suggests that in combination with glucosamine, it
may reduce joint pain, improve joint mobility, and allow reduction of the doses of conventional antiinflammatory drugs when it is taken for 6 to 24 mo. Effects over longer periods are unclear. Mechanism is
unknown. Dose is 600 mg po once/day to 400 mg po tid.
Adverse effects:
No serious adverse effects have been reported. Among the most common adverse
effects are stomach pain, nausea, and other GI symptoms.
Chondroitin sulfate may also affect the action of warfarin. Chondroitin sulfate is safe for most people, but
people who have asthma, blood-clotting disorders, or prostate cancer should use caution when taking it.
Chromium
Chromium, a trace mineral, potentiates the action of insulin. Sources include carrots, potatoes, broccoli,
whole grains, and molasses. Picolinate is a by-product of tryptophan that is paired with chromium in
supplements because it is said to help the body absorb chromium more efficiently.
Claims:
Chromium picolinate is said to promote weight loss, build muscle, reduce body fat, lower
cholesterol and triglyceride levels, and enhance insulin function. Although chromium deficiency impairs
insulin function, there is no evidence that supplementation helps patients with diabetes, nor is there
evidence that it benefits body composition or lipid levels.
Adverse effects:
Some evidence suggests that chromium picolinate damages chromosomes and may
cause cancer. Some forms of chromium may contribute to GI irritation and ulcers. Chromium supplements
interfere with iron absorption.
Coenzyme Q10
Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone) is an antioxidant that is also a cofactor for mitochondrial ATP generation.
The levels of coenzyme Q10 seem to be lower in older people and in people with chronic diseases, such
as cardiac problems, cancer, Parkinson's disease, diabetes, HIV/AIDS, and muscular dystrophies.
However, it is not known whether these low levels contribute to these disorders.
Claims:
Coenzyme Q10 is said to be useful because of its antioxidant effect and role in energy
===PAGE:3607===
metabolism. Specific claims include an anticancer effect mediated by immune stimulation, decreased
insulin requirements in patients with diabetes, slowed progression of Parkinson's disease, efficacy in
treatment of heart failure, and protection against anthracycline cardiotoxicity. Although some preliminary
studies suggest coenzyme Q10 may be useful in treating these disorders, results are unclear and more
testing is needed.
Adverse effects:
Coenzyme Q10 may decrease response to warfarin. There are case reports of GI
symptoms (eg, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting) and CNS symptoms (eg, dizziness,
photophobia, irritability, headache). Other adverse effects include itching, rash, fatigue, and flu-like
symptoms. Coenzyme Q10 is not recommended for people who exercise vigorously.
Cranberry
Cranberries are fruit that can be consumed whole or made into food products such as jellies and juices.
Claims:
People most often take cranberries to help prevent and relieve the symptoms of UTIs. The
effectiveness of cranberries in preventing UTIs has been documented. Natural unprocessed cranberry
juice contains anthocyanidins, which prevent
Escherichia coli
from attaching to the urinary tract wall.
Some people take cranberry juice to reduce fever and treat certain cancers; however, there is no
scientific proof that it is effective for these uses.
Adverse effects:
No adverse effects are known. However, because most cranberry juice is highly
sweetened to offset its tart taste, people with diabetes should not consume cranberry juice unless it is
artificially sweetened. Because cranberry increases urinary acidity, it may promote stone formation in
patients with uric acid kidney stones. Cranberry products may increase the effects of warfarin.
Creatine
Phosphocreatine is a compound stored in muscle; it donates phosphate to ADP and thereby rapidly
replenishes ATP during anaerobic muscle contraction. It is synthesized endogenously in the liver from
arginine, glycine, and methionine. Dietary sources are milk, steak, and some fish.
Claims:
Creatine is said to improve physical and athletic performance and to reduce muscle fatigue.
Some evidence suggests creatine is effective at increasing work done in a short maximal effort (eg,
sprinting, weightlifting). It has proven therapeutic use in muscle phosphorylase deficiency (glycogen
storage disease type V [McArdle disease]) and gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina; early data also
suggest possible effects in Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Adverse effects:
Creatine may cause weight gain (possibly because of an increase in muscle mass)
and spurious increases in serum creatinine levels. Minor GI symptoms, dehydration, electrolyte
imbalance, and muscle cramps have been reported anecdotally.
Dehydroepiandrosterone
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a steroid produced by the adrenal gland and is a precursor of
estrogens and androgens. Effects on the body are similar to those of testosterone. DHEA can also be
synthesized from precursors in the Mexican yam; this form is the most commonly available.
Claims:
DHEA supplements are said to improve mood, energy, sense of well-being, and the ability to
function well under stress. They
are also said to improve athletic performance, stimulate the immune
system, deepen nightly sleep, lower cholesterol levels, decrease body fat, build muscles, reverse aging,
improve brain function in patients with Alzheimer's disease, and increase libido. The medicinal claims of
DHEA have not been proved.
Adverse effects:
Adverse effects are unknown. There are theoretical risks of gynecomastia in men,
hirsutism in women, and stimulation of prostate and breast cancer. There is a case report of mania and
one of seizure.
===PAGE:3608===
Echinacea
Echinacea, a North American wildflower, contains a variety of biologically active substances.
Claims:
Echinacea is said to stimulate the immune system. When taken at the start of a cold, it is said to
shorten the duration of cold symptoms. Well-designed studies have not supported this effect. Topical
preparations are used to promote wound healing.
Adverse effects:
Most adverse effects are mild and transitory; they include dizziness, fatigue,
headache, and GI symptoms. No other adverse effects are known. Theoretically, echinacea is
contraindicated in patients with autoimmune disorders, multiple sclerosis, AIDS, TB, and organ
transplants because it may stimulate T cells. Echinacea inhibits some cytochrome P-450 enzymes and
stimulates others; it can therefore potentially interact with drugs metabolized by the same enzymes (eg,
anabolic steroids, azole antifungals, methotrexate). Allergic reactions are possible in patients with pollen
allergies.
Feverfew
Feverfew is a bushy perennial herb. The dried leaves are used in capsules, tablets, and liquid extracts.
Parthenolides and glycosides are thought to be the components responsible for its purported antiinflammatory effects and relaxant effects on smooth muscle.
Claims:
Feverfew is said to be effective in the prevention of migraine headaches. Evidence from 3 of 4
relatively small but well-designed studies supports these claims, but the largest and best designed of
these studies does not. Differences among study findings may reflect the different formulations of
feverfew used.
Feverfew is also said to be useful for relieving menstrual pain, asthma, and arthritis. In vitro, feverfew
inhibits platelet aggregation.
Adverse effects:
Mouth ulcers, contact dermatitis, dysgeusia, and mild GI symptoms may occur. Abrupt
discontinuation may worsen migraines and cause nervousness and insomnia. Feverfew is contraindicated
in pregnant women; theoretically, it is contraindicated in patients taking other antimigraine drugs, iron
supplements, NSAIDs, antiplatelet drugs, or warfarin.
Fish Oil
Fish oil may be extracted directly or concentrated and put in capsule form. Active ingredients are
ω
-3 fatty
acids (eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA] and docosahexaenoic acid [DHA]). Western diets typically are low in
ω
-3 fatty acids.
Claims:
Fish oil is used for prevention and treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Strong
scientific evidence suggests that EPA/DHA 800 to 1500 mg/day reduces risk of MI and death due to
arrhythmia in patients who have preexisting coronary artery disease and are taking conventional drugs. It
also reduces triglycerides in a dose-dependent way (25 to 40% with EPA/DHA 4 g/day) and slightly
lowers BP (2 to 4 mm Hg with EPA/DHA > 3 g/day). Mechanisms are probably multiple but unknown.
Benefits are suspected but not yet proved for primary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease, treatment of RA, and prevention of cyclosporine nephrotoxicity.
Adverse effects:
Fishy eructation, nausea, and diarrhea may occur. Risk of bleeding increases with
EPA/DHA > 3 g/day. Concerns about mercury contamination are not substantiated in laboratory testing.
Even so, pregnant or breastfeeding women should not take
ω
-3 fatty acid supplements extracted from fish
and should limit consumption of certain types and amounts of fish because of the potential risk of
mercury contamination.
Garlic
===PAGE:3609===
Garlic bulbs are extracted and made into tablet form; the major active ingredient is allicin, an amino acid
by-product.
Claims:
Garlic is said to have favorable effects on several cardiac risk factors, including reduction of BP
and serum lipid and glucose levels; garlic inhibits platelets in vitro. Garlic is also said to protect against
laryngeal, gastric, colorectal, and endometrial cancer and adenomatous colorectal polyps. Scientific
evidence shows limited to no protection against
cancer. Garlic consumed in high doses has general
antimicrobial effects.
Adverse effects:
Breath and body smell and nausea may occur; high doses may cause burning in the
mouth, esophagus, and stomach. Theoretically, garlic is contraindicated in patients who have bleeding
diatheses or who take antihypertensives, antiplatelet drugs, or warfarin. Garlic can reduce serum
saquinavir levels.
Ginger
Ginger root is extracted and made into tablet form. Active ingredients include gingerols (which give ginger
its flavor and odor) and shogaols.
Claims:
Ginger is said to be an effective antiemetic and antinauseant, especially for nausea caused by
motion sickness or pregnancy, and to relieve intestinal cramps. Ginger is also used as an antiinflammatory and analgesic. It may have antibacterial properties and antiplatelet effects in vitro, but data
are inconsistent. Scientific studies are consistent with a beneficial effect in pregnancy-related nausea and
vomiting.
Adverse effects:
Ginger is usually not harmful, although some people have a burning sensation when
they eat it. Nausea, dyspepsia, and dysgeusia are possible. Theoretically, ginger is contraindicated in
patients who have bleeding diatheses or who take anti-platelet drugs or warfarin.
Ginkgo
Ginkgo (
Ginkgo biloba
) is prepared from leaves of the ginkgo tree (commonly planted in the US for
ornamental purposes). Active ingredients are believed to be terpene ginkgolides and flavonoids.
The fruit of the gingko tree, which is quite malodorous, is not used in ginkgo products. Contact with the
fruit pulp, which may be present under female ginkgo trees, can cause severe skin inflammation
(dermatitis). The raw seeds of the fruit are toxic and can cause seizures and, in large amounts, death.
Cooked ginkgo seeds are eaten in Asia and are available in Asian food shops in the US; because the
seeds do not contain ginkgolides and flavonoids, they do not have therapeutic effects.
Claims:
Strong scientific evidence supports use of ginkgo for symptomatic relief of claudication, although
exercise and cilostazol may be more effective. Gingko increases the distance that affected people can
walk without pain.
Ginkgo has long been used in people with dementia. Benefit in dementia seems unlikely based on a
recent large clinical trial in which ginkgo was not effective in reducing the development of dementia and
Alzheimer's disease in older people. However, a previous large US clinical trial indicated that ginkgo
temporarily stabilized mental and social function in people with mild to moderate dementia. Although data
are conflicting, any real effect is likely to be modest.
Studies show gingko does not seem to alleviate memory loss, tinnitus, or altitude sickness. Gingko may
prevent damage to the kidneys caused by the immunosuppressant cyclosporine.
Adverse effects:
Nausea, dyspepsia, headache, dizziness, and heart palpitations may occur. Ginkgo
may interact with aspirin, other NSAIDs (, and warfarin and may reduce the efficacy of
anticonvulsants.
Ginseng
===PAGE:3610===
Ginseng is a family of plants. Dietary supplements are derived from American ginseng (
Panax
quinquefolius
) or Asian ginseng. Siberian ginseng is a different genus and does not contain the
ingredients believed to be active in the 2 forms used in supplements. Ginseng can be taken as fresh or
dried roots, extracts, solutions, capsules, tablets, sodas, and teas or used as cosmetics. Active
ingredients in American ginseng are panaxosides (saponin glycosides). Active ingredients in Asian
ginseng are ginsenosides (triterpenoid glycosides).
Ginseng products vary considerably in quality because many contain little or no detectable active
ingredient. In very few cases, some ginseng products from Asia have been purposefully mixed with
mandrake root, which has been used to induce vomiting, or with the drugs phenylbutazone or
aminopyrine. These drugs have been removed from the US market because of significant adverse
effects.
Claims:
Ginseng is said to enhance physical (including sexual) and mental performance and to have
adaptogenic effects (ie, to increase energy and resistance to the harmful effects of stress and aging).
Other claims include reduction in plasma glucose levels; increases in high density lipoprotein (HDL), Hb,
and protein levels; stimulation of the immune system; and anticancer, cardiotonic, endocrine, CNS, and
estrogenic effects. Some studies have shown that Asian ginseng may lower plasma
glucose and have
possible beneficial effects on immune function, but there is no evidence for other health claims. Recent
Canadian studies show that a polysaccharide extract of
P. quinquefolius
is useful in helping prevent
colds.
Adverse effects:
Nervousness and excitability may occur but decrease after the first few days. Ability to
concentrate may decrease, and plasma glucose may become abnormally low (causing hypoglycemia).
Because ginseng has an estrogen-like effect, women who are pregnant or breastfeeding should not take
it, nor should children. Occasionally, there are reports of more serious effects, such as asthma attacks,
increased BP, palpitations, and, in postmenopausal women, uterine bleeding. To many people, ginseng
tastes unpleasant.
Ginseng can interact with antihyperglycemic drugs, aspirin, other NSAIDs, corticosteroids, digoxin,
estrogens, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and warfarin.
Glucosamine
Glucosamine is a precursor of multiple cartilage constituents. It is extracted from chitin (in shells of crabs,
oysters, and shrimp) and is taken in tablet or capsule form, usually as glucosamine sulfate, but sometimes
as glucosamine hydrochloride. Glucosamine is often taken with chondroitin sulfate (.
Claims:
Strong scientific evidence supports use of glucosamine sulfate for treatment of mild to moderate
osteoarthritis of the knee. Its role in the treatment of more severe knee osteoarthritis and osteoarthritis in
other locations is less well-defined. Some evidence suggests it has both analgesic and disease-modifying
effects, whereas evidence from other large and well-designed studies shows it to be of no benefit. One
very large study showed that glucosamine hydrochloride is beneficial only when combined with
chondroitin sulfate. Mechanism is unknown but may be related to improved glycosaminoglycan synthesis
as a result of the sulfate moiety. Dose is 500 mg po tid.
Adverse effects:
Allergy (in patients who have shellfish allergy and take forms extracted from shellfish),
dyspepsia, fatigue, insomnia, headache, photosensitivity, and nail changes may occur.
Goldenseal
Goldenseal, an endangered US plant, is related to the buttercup. Its active components are hydrastine
and berberine, which have antiseptic activity. Berberine also has antidiarrheal properties.
Claims:
Goldenseal is used as an antiseptic wash for mouth sores, inflamed and sore eyes, and irritated
skin and as a douche for vaginal infections. It has been combined with echinacea as a cold remedy, but
the efficacy of goldenseal as a cold remedy has not been proved. Goldenseal is also used as a remedy
===PAGE:3611===
for indigestion and diarrhea. In 2 relatively well-designed studies, berberine isolated from goldenseal
reduced diarrhea.
Adverse effects:
Goldenseal can have many adverse effects, including nausea, anxiety, dyspepsia,
uterine contractions, jaundice in neonates, and worsening of hypertension. If taken in large amounts,
goldenseal can cause seizures and respiratory failure and may affect contraction of the heart. Goldenseal
may interact with warfarin. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, neonates, and people who have
seizure disorders or problems with blood clotting should not take goldenseal. Berberine may reduce the
anticoagulant effect of heparin.
Green Tea
Green tea is made from the dried leaves of the same plant as traditional tea, an evergreen shrub native to
Asia. However, traditional tea leaves are fermented, and green tea leaves are steamed but unfermented.
Green tea may be brewed and drunk or ingested in extracted tablet or capsule form. It has multiple
components that are thought to have antioxidant and anticancer effects. Green tea contains polyphenols
and catechins as well as caffeine, but many extracts have been decaffeinated.
Claims:
Green tea is said to have multiple health benefits, none of which are supported by strong
scientific evidence. It has been used for cancer prevention, weight loss, serum lipid reduction, prevention
of coronary artery disease, memory enhancement, relief of osteoarthritis pain, treatment of menopausal
symptoms, and longevity.
Adverse effects:
Adverse effects are related to effects of caffeine. They include insomnia, anxiety,
tachycardia, and mild tremor. Pregnant women should avoid excessive caffeine.
Kava
Kava comes from the root of a shrub (
Piper methysticum
) that grows in the South Pacific.
It is ingested
as a tea or in capsule form. Active ingredients are thought to be kavalactones.
Claims:
Strong scientific evidence supports use of kava as an anxiolytic and sleep aid. Mechanism is
unknown. Some people use kava for asthma, menopausal symptoms, and UTIs. Dose is 100 mg of
standardized extract tid.
Adverse effects:
Over 20 people in Europe developed liver toxicity (including liver failure) after taking
kava, which prompted the FDA to mandate a warning label on kava products. Safety is under continuing
surveillance.
When kava is prepared traditionally (as tea) and used in high doses (> 6 to 12 g/day of dried root) or over
long periods (up to 6 wk), there have been reports of scaly skin rash (kava dermopathy), blood changes
(eg, macrocytosis, leukopenia), and neurologic changes (eg, torticollis, oculogyric crisis, worsening of
Parkinson's disease, movement disorders). Also, kava may prolong the effect of other sedatives (eg,
barbiturates) and affect driving or other activities requiring alertness.
Licorice
Natural licorice, which has a very sweet taste, is extracted from the root of a shrub and used medicinally
as a capsule, tablet, or liquid extract. Most licorice candy made in the US is flavored artificially and does
not contain natural licorice. Glycyrrhizin is the active ingredient in natural licorice. For people who are
particularly sensitive to the effects of glycyrrhizin, specially treated licorice products that contain a much
lower amount of glycyrrhizin (about one tenth) are available. These products are called deglycyrrhizinated
licorice.
Claims:
People most often take licorice to suppress coughs, to soothe a sore throat, and to relieve
stomach upset. Applied externally, it is said to soothe skin irritation (eg, eczema). There are not enough
data to determine whether licorice is effective for stomach ulcers or complications caused by hepatitis C.
===PAGE:3612===
Adverse effects:
High doses of real licorice (> 1 oz/day) and glycyrrhizin cause renal Na and water
retention, possibly leading to high BP, and K excretion, possibly causing low K levels. Increased K
excretion can be a particular problem for people who have heart disease and for those who take digoxin
or diuretics that also increase K excretion. Such people and those who have high BP should avoid taking
licorice.
Licorice may increase the risk of premature delivery; thus, pregnant women should avoid licorice.
Melatonin
Melatonin, a hormone produced by the pineal gland, regulates circadian rhythms. It is derived from
animals or can be manufactured synthetically. In some countries, melatonin is considered a drug and is
regulated as such.
Claims:
Some scientific evidence supports use of melatonin to minimize the effects of jet lag, especially
in people traveling eastward over 2 to 5 time zones. However, in one large well-designed study, melatonin
supplements did not relieve symptoms of jet lag, and only a few small studies suggest that these
supplements can treat insomnia.
Standard dosage is not established and ranges from 0.5 to 5 mg po taken 1 h before usual bedtime on
the day of travel and 2 to 4 nights after arrival. Evidence supporting use of melatonin as a sleep aid in
adults and children with neuropsychiatric disorders (eg, pervasive developmental disorders) is less
strong.
Adverse effects:
Hangover drowsiness, headache, and transient depression may occur. Melatonin may
worsen depression. Theoretically, prion infection caused by products derived from neurologic tissues of
animals is a risk.
Milk Thistle
Milk thistle is a purple-flowered plant. Its sap and seeds contain the active ingredient silymarin, a potent
antioxidant.
Claims:
Milk thistle is said to treat cirrhosis and to protect the liver from viral hepatitis, the damaging
effects of alcohol, and hepatotoxic drugs. In vitro, silymarin increases levels of intrahepatic glutathione,
an antioxidant important for detoxification. Well-designed studies do not show that milk thistle significantly
benefits people with liver disease, although individual case reports claim fatality reduction in mushroom
poisoning.
Adverse effects:
No serious adverse effects have been reported. Milk thistle may intensify the effects of
antihyperglycemic drugs and may interfere with indinavir therapy. Women who have hormone-sensitive
conditions (eg, breast, uterine, and ovarian cancer; endometriosis; and uterine fibroids) should avoid the
above-ground parts of milk thistle.
S
-Adenosyl-L-Methionine
S
-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe) is a derivative of methionine and a cofactor for multiple
synthetic
pathways. It is produced naturally in the body and is manufactured synthetically in supplement form.
Claims:
SAMe is said to be effective for treatment of depression, osteoarthritis, and liver disorders, but
scientific studies so far do not confirm this claim. More research is needed to verify its efficacy. It is a
platelet inhibitor in vitro.
Adverse effects:
No serious adverse effects have been reported. SAMe is contraindicated in patients
with bipolar disorder because SAMe can precipitate manic episodes.
Saw Palmetto
===PAGE:3613===
Saw palmetto berries contain the plant's active ingredients. The active ingredients, thought to be fatty
acids, are unidentified but seem to inhibit 5
α
-reductase, thus opposing the conversion of testosterone to
dihydrotestosterone. The berries can be used to make a tea, or they can be extracted into tablets,
capsules, or a liquid preparation. Most formulations evaluated in clinical studies are hexane extracts of
saw palmetto berries, which are 80 to 90% essential fatty acids and phytosterols.
Claims:
Strong scientific evidence supports use of saw palmetto to treat symptoms of benign prostatic
hyperplasia (eg, frequent urination); no evidence suggests it reverses the hyperplasia. Also, one large,
well-designed study did not show any benefit.
Claims that it increases sperm production, breast size, or sexual vigor are unproved. Dose is 320 mg
once/day or 160 mg bid.
Adverse effects:
Headache and diarrhea may occur, but no other serious adverse effects have been
reported. Saw palmetto may interact with estrogens; thus, women who are pregnant or who may become
pregnant should not take it.
St. John's Wort
The flowers of St. John's wort contain its biologically active ingredients hypericin and hyperforin. St.
John's wort may increase CNS serotonin and, in very high doses, acts like a monoamine oxidase inhibitor
(MAOI).
Claims:
Study findings are variable, but St. John's wort may benefit patients with mild to moderate
depression who have no suicidal ideation. A large, well-designed study found it ineffective in treating
major depression.
Dose is 300 to 600 mg po once/day of a preparation standardized to 0.2 to 0.3% hypericin, to 1 to 4%
hyperforin, or to both (usually). St. John's wort is also said to be useful for treating HIV infection but has
proven adverse interactions with protease inhibitors and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
(NNRTIs). A small trial showed St. John's wort (standardized to hypericin but not hyperforin) did not
relieve symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children.
Adverse effects:
Photosensitivity, dry mouth, constipation, dizziness, confusion, and mania (in patients
with bipolar disorder) may occur. St. John's wort is contraindicated in pregnant women. Potential adverse
interactions occur with cyclosporine, digoxin, iron supplements, MAOIs, NNRTIs, oral contraceptives,
protease inhibitors, SSRIs, tricyclic antidepressants, and warfarin.
Valerian
Valerian's root and rhizomes (underground stems) contain its active ingredients, including valepotriates
and pungent odiferous oils.
Claims:
Valerian is used as a sedative and sleep aid and is especially popular in Europe. In 2 relatively
well-designed studies, valerian improved sleep quality and shortened the time needed to fall asleep.
However, there is still insufficient clinical data to confirm whether valerian is effective for insomnia.
Some people take valerian for headaches, depression, irregular heartbeat, and trembling. There is not
enough scientific evidence to determine whether valerian works for these conditions. It is usually used for
short periods of time (4 to 6 wk), and studies suggest that it is generally safe to do so.
Adverse effects:
Valerian may prolong the effect of other sedatives (eg, barbiturates) and affect driving
or other activities requiring alertness.
Zinc
Zinc, a mineral, is required in small quantities for multiple metabolic processes. Dietary sources include
oysters, beef, and fortified cereals.
===PAGE:3614===
Claims:
Some experts believe that when taken soon after cold symptoms develop, zinc taken as zinc
gluconate or acetate lozenges can shorten the course of the common cold. Scientific studies are
inconsistent, but if zinc has an effect, it probably is small and occurs only when it is taken very soon after
cold symptoms develop.
There is stronger evidence that in developing countries, supplements containing zinc
20 mg and iron
taken once/wk reduce mortality in infants who have diarrhea and respiratory infection. There is also
strong evidence that supplements containing zinc 80 mg and antioxidants taken once/day slow
progression of moderate to severe atrophic (dry form) age-related maculopathy in elderly people.
Adverse effects:
Zinc is generally safe, but toxicity can develop if high doses are used (.
Common adverse effects of zinc lozenges include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, mouth irritation, mouth
sores, and bad taste. Because zinc is a trace metal and can remove other necessary metals from the
body, zinc lozenges should not be taken for more than 14 days. Zinc sprays may cause nose and throat
irritation. The effects of certain antibiotics may be lowered by the consumption of zinc supplements.
===PAGE:3615===
Chapter 346. Smoking Cessation
Introduction
Nicotine is a highly addictive drug present in tobacco and is a major component of cigarette smoke. This
drug stimulates the brain reward system activated during pleasurable activities in a manner similar to that
of most other addictive drugs (. People smoke to feed their nicotine addiction but
simultaneously inhale thousands of other components, including carcinogens, noxious gases, and
chemical additives that are a part of cigarette smoke. These toxic components, rather than nicotine, are
responsible for the multiple health consequences of smoking.
Epidemiology
Smoking:
The percentage of people in the US who smoke cigarettes has declined since 1964, when the
Surgeon General first publicized the link between smoking and ill health. Nevertheless, about 20% of
adults still smoke. Smoking is most prevalent among men, people with less than a high school education,
people living at or below the poverty income level, people with psychiatric disorders (including alcohol
and substance use), American Indians, and Alaska natives. Smoking is less common among Hispanics
and least common among Asian Americans.
Most smokers start during childhood. Children as young as 10 yr experiment with cigarettes. About 31%
become addicted before age 16 and over half before age 18, and age of initiation continues to decrease.
The younger the age at which smoking starts, the more likely smoking is to continue. Risk factors for
childhood initiation include
• Parental, peer, and role model (eg, celebrity) smoking
• Poor school performance
• A poor relationship with parents or a single-parent home
• High-risk behavior (eg, excessive dieting, particularly among girls; physical fighting and drunk driving,
particularly among boys)
• Availability of cigarettes
• Poor problem-solving abilities
Complications:
Smoking harms nearly every organ in the body and is the leading cause of preventable
mortality in the US, accounting for an estimated 435,000 deaths/yr, or about 20% of all deaths. About half
of all current smokers die prematurely of a disease directly caused by smoking, losing 10 to 14 yr of life
(7 min/cigarette) on average. Most (65%) smoking-attributable deaths are caused by ischemic heart
disease, lung cancer, and chronic lung disease; the rest are caused by noncardiac vascular diseases (eg,
stroke, aortic aneurysm), other cancers (eg, bladder, cervical, esophageal, kidney, laryngeal,
oropharyngeal, pancreatic, stomach, throat), pneumonia, and perinatal conditions (eg, preterm birth, low
birth weight, SIDS). In addition, smoking is a risk factor for other conditions that convey significant
morbidity and disability, such as acute myelocytic leukemia, frequent URIs, cataracts, reproductive effects
(eg, infertility, spontaneous abortion, ectopic pregnancy, premature menopause), peptic ulcer disease,
osteoporosis, and periodontitis.
Quitting:
About 70% of US smokers say they want to quit and have already tried to quit at least once.
More than 70% of smokers present in a primary care setting every year; yet only a minority receive
counseling and drugs to help them quit. Most smokers < 18 yr believe they will not be smoking in 5 yr,
and 40 to 50% report having tried to quit in the previous year. However, longitudinal studies show that
73% of daily smokers in high school remain daily smokers 5 to 6 yr later.
Passive smoking:
Passive exposure to cigarette smoke (secondhand smoke, environmental tobacco
smoke) has grave health implications for children and adults. Risks to neonates, infants, and children
===PAGE:3616===
include low birth weight, SIDS, asthma and related respiratory illnesses, and otitis media. Children
exposed to cigarette smoke lose more school days because of illness than nonexposed children.
Smoking-related fires kill 80 children each year and injure almost 300 more; such fires are the leading
cause of deaths resulting from unintentional fires in the US. Treating children for smoking-related
illnesses is estimated to cost $4.6 billion/yr. In addition, each year, 43,000 children lose one or more
caregivers who die from smoking-related diseases.
For adults, passive exposure is linked to the same neoplastic, respiratory, and cardiovascular diseases
that threaten active smokers. Overall, secondhand smoke is estimated to be responsible for 50,000 to
60,000 deaths each year in the US (between 2% and 3% of all deaths). These findings have led states
and municipalities across the US to ban smoking within workplaces in an effort to protect the health of
workers and others from the substantive risks of environmental tobacco smoke. Currently, > 50% of the
US population live in a state that has implemented a comprehensive indoor smoke-free ordinance.
Symptoms and Signs
Smoking cessation often causes intense withdrawal symptoms, primarily a craving for cigarettes but also
anxiety, depression (mostly mild, sometimes major), inability to concentrate, irritability, restlessness,
insomnia, drowsiness, impatience, hunger, tremor, sweating, dizziness, headaches, and digestive
disturbances. These symptoms are worst in the first week (when most smokers trying to quit relapse) and
subside within 3 to 4 wk in most patients but may continue for months. An average weight gain of 4 to 5
kg is common and is another reason for recidivism. Coughing and oral ulcers may develop temporarily
after quitting. Smokers with ulcerative colitis often experience an exacerbation soon after quitting.
Treatment
• Cessation counseling
• Drug treatment (varenicline, bupropion, or a nicotine replacement product) when not contraindicated
Evidence-based counseling and drug treatment are both effective treatments for tobacco dependence;
combining counseling and drug treatment is more effective than either intervention alone.
The addiction and withdrawal symptoms are often powerful enough that even with knowledge of the many
health risks, many smokers are unwilling to try quitting, and those attempting to quit are often
unsuccessful. Only a minority of smokers achieve long-term remission after their initial attempts to quit;
many continue to smoke for many years, cycling through multiple periods of relapse and remission.
Overall, counseling, drug treatment, or both can boost success rates up to 4 times that achieved by
smokers who try to quit on their own (cold turkey) without these treatments.
Smoking has many characteristics of a chronic disorder. Thus, the optimal evidence-based approach to
patients, particularly those unwilling to quit or those who have not yet considered quitting, should be
guided by the same principles that guide chronic disease management, namely
• Continually assessing and monitoring smoking status
• Using different evidence-based interventions (or combinations) for different patients and building on
their prior experiences and treatment preferences
• Although emphasizing that abstinence is the essential goal, encouraging temporary abstinence and
reduction in consumption for patients who fall short of total smoking cessation
Although reduction in consumption can increase motivation to quit (particularly when combined with
nicotine replacement therapy), smokers should be reminded that reducing the number of cigarettes
smoked may not improve health because smokers often inhale more smoke (and thus more toxins) per
cigarette to maintain nicotine intake when they reduce the number of cigarettes smoked per day.
Identifying smokers:
Effective interventions require first that smokers be consistently identified (eg, by
===PAGE:3617===
expanding the vital signs to include smoking status for all patients at every visit).
Evidence-based counseling:
Counseling efforts begin with the 5 A's:
• Ask at every visit whether a patient smokes and document the response.
• Advise all smokers to quit in clear, strong, personalized language they will understand.
• Assess a smoker's willingness to try quitting within the next 30 days.
• Assist those willing to make a quit attempt by providing brief counseling and drugs.
•
Arrange a follow-up, preferably within the first week of the quit date.
For smokers willing to quit, clinicians should establish a quit date, preferably within 2 wk, and stress that
total abstinence is better than reduction. Past quitting experiences can be reviewed to identify what
helped and what did not, and smoking triggers or challenges to quitting should be planned for in advance.
For example, alcohol use is associated with relapse, so alcohol restriction or abstinence should be
discussed. In addition, quitting is more difficult with another smoker in the household; spouses and
housemates can be encouraged to quit together. In general, smokers should be instructed to develop
social support among family and friends for their quit attempt, and clinicians should reinforce their
availability and assistance in support of the attempt.
In addition to the brief counseling provided by the patient's clinician, in-person counseling programs can
help. They usually use cognitive-behavioral techniques and are offered by various commercial and
voluntary health programs. Success rates are higher than with self-help programs. All states in the US
have telephone quit lines that can provide counseling support (and sometimes nicotine replacement
therapy) to smokers trying to quit. People can call 1-800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) toll-free anywhere
in the US.
Drugs:
Effective and safe drugs for smoking cessation include varenicline, bupropion SR, and 5 types of
nicotine replacement therapy (in the form of gum, lozenge, patch, inhaler, and nasal spray—see
Table 346-1
). Bupropion's mechanism may be to increase the brain's release of norepinephrine and
dopamine. Varenicline works at the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (the
α
-4
β
-2 subunit), where it acts as a
partial agonist, having some nicotinic effects, and as a partial antagonist, blocking the effects of nicotine.
Some evidence suggests varenicline is the most effective monotherapy available for smoking cessation.
All 7 recommended drugs for smoking cessation are effective as monotherapies, but new research
suggests that combination therapy is even more effective; for example, combining the nicotine patch with
a shorter-acting nicotine drug (eg, lozenge, gum, nasal spray, inhaler), bupropion, or both is more
effective than monotherapy. When used in combination, the patch helps maintain continuous levels, and
use of gum, lozenge, inhaler, or nasal spray enables the patient to rapidly increase nicotine levels in
response to immediate cravings. In addition, the combination of bupropion with nicotine products may be
more effective than any one therapy alone, particularly the combination of bupropion with a nicotine patch
and a short-acting nicotine drug.
Smokers may worry that they may remain dependent on nicotine after using nicotine products for smoking
cessation; however, such dependence rarely persists. Drug choice is guided by the clinician's familiarity
with the drug, patient preference and previous experience (positive or negative), and contraindications.
Despite their proven efficacy, smoking cessation drugs are used by < 25% of smokers attempting to quit.
Reasons include low rates of insurance coverage, clinician concerns about the safety of simultaneous
smoking and nicotine replacement, and discouragement because of past unsuccessful quit attempts.
Therapies under investigation for smoking cessation include a vaccine that causes nicotine to be
intercepted before the nicotine reaches the brain and the drugs selegiline, bromocriptine, and topiramate.
Drug safety:
Contraindications to bupropion include a history of seizures, an eating disorder, and
===PAGE:3618===
monoamine oxidase inhibitor use within 2 wk.
Whether bupropion and varenicline increase risk of suicide is not clear. Varenicline and bupropion may
increase risk of serious neuropsychiatric effects and accidents. In 2009, the FDA released a boxed
warning for both drugs regarding these possible adverse effects. However, most experts recommend
varenicline for most smokers because risks of smoking substantially exceed any possible risks of taking
the drug. But varenicline should be avoided in smokers with suicidal risk, unstable psychiatric disorders,
and possibly major depression.
Nicotine replacement should be used cautiously in patients with certain cardiovascular risks (those within
2 wk of an MI, with serious arrhythmias, or with serious angina); however, most data suggest that such
use is safe. Nicotine gum is contraindicated in patients with temporomandibular joint syndrome, and
nicotine patches are contraindicated in patients with severe topical sensitization.
Because of safety concerns, inadequate efficacy data, or both, drugs are not recommended for the
following:
• Pregnant smokers
• Light smokers (< 10 cigarettes/day)
[Table 346-1.
Drugs for Smoking Cessation]
• Adolescents (< age 18)
• Users of smokeless tobacco
Cessation in children:
The counseling approach for children is similar to that for adults; however, drugs
are not recommended for patients under the age of 18.
Children should be screened for smoking and risk factors by age 10. Parents should be advised to
maintain smoke-free households and to communicate the expectation to their children that the children
will remain nonsmokers.
For children who smoke, cognitive-behavioral therapy that involves establishing awareness of tobacco
use, providing motivations to quit, preparing to quit, and providing strategies to maintain abstinence after
cessation are effective in treating nicotine-dependent patients. Alternative approaches to smoking
cessation, such as hypnosis and acupuncture, have not proved to be effective and cannot be
recommended for routine use.
Prognosis
About 20 million smokers in the US try to quit each year (almost half of all smokers), usually by using a
cold turkey or other nonevidence-based approach, resulting in relapse within days, weeks, or months and
a long-term success rate of about 5%. In contrast, success rates of up to 20 to 30% are achieved among
smokers who use evidence-based cessation counseling and recommended drugs.
Other Kinds of Tobacco
Cigarette smoking is the most harmful form of tobacco use. However, all tobacco products contain toxins
and possible carcinogens and even smokeless tobacco products are not safe alternatives to smoking.
Exclusive pipe smoking is relatively rare in the US (< 1% of people ≥ 12 yr), although it has increased
among middle and high school students since 1999. In 2008, about 5.3% of people > 12 yr smoked
cigars; this percentage has declined since 2000, people < 18 yr comprise the largest group of new cigar
smokers. Risks of pipe and cigar smoking include cardiovascular disease; COPD; cancers of the oral
cavity, lung, larynx, esophagus, colon, and pancreas; and periodontal disease and tooth loss.
===PAGE:3619===
About 3.3% of people ≥ 18 yr and about 7.9% of high school students use smokeless tobacco (chewing
tobacco and snuff). Toxicity of smokeless tobacco varies by brand. Risks include cardiovascular disease,
oral disorders (eg, cancers, gum recession, gingivitis, periodontitis and its consequences), and
teratogenicity.
Cessation:
Cessation counseling for smokeless tobacco users, as for cigarette smokers, has been
shown to be effective. However, drugs have not proved effective among smokeless tobacco users.
Effectiveness of cessation treatments for pipe and cigar smokers is not well documented. Also, cessation
may be affected by whether cigarettes are smoked concurrently and whether smokers inhale.
===PAGE:3620===
Chapter 347. Medical Aspects of Travel
Introduction
Planning and preparation reduce medical risks of travel. Travelers should carry their drugs, extra
eyeglasses or other corrective lenses (as well as a current written prescription for either), and hearing-aid
batteries in a carry-on bag in case their checked baggage is delayed, lost, or stolen. Drugs should be
kept in their original labeled containers. Travelers who need to carry opioids, syringes, or large amounts
of drugs should have a prescription or verifying letter from a physician to avoid possible security or
customs complications. A medical record summary (including ECG for those with significant cardiac
history) is invaluable if a traveler becomes ill. Travelers subject to disabling illness (eg, epilepsy) or those
with chronic disease should wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace.
Air Travel
Air travel can cause or worsen certain medical problems; some are considered a contraindication to flight
(see
Table 347-1
), and others may cause discomfort. Serious complications are rare.
During a flight, any health care practitioner among the passengers may be asked to help fellow
passengers who become ill. Additionally, most commercial aircrafts carry first-aid equipment, including an
automatic external cardioverter defibrillator and limited medical supplies. Airline personnel are receiving
more first-aid training now than in the past. Although physicians aiding ill or injured passengers are
usually protected from litigation by the Good Samaritan concept, they should avoid practicing beyond
their training or expertise.
Further information about air travel may be obtained from the medical department of major airlines, the
Federal Aviation Administration (www.faa.gov
), online travel information sources, or local travel clinics.
Barometric pressure changes:
Commercial airplanes and jet aircraft are pressurized only to the
equivalent of an altitude of 6000 to 8000 ft (1830 to 2440 m), not to sea level pressure. Thus, air in body
cavities or other closed spaces expands by about 25%; this expansion may aggravate certain medical
conditions.
Untreated dental problems or recent dental procedures may become painful when air pressure changes.
People with upper respiratory inflammation or allergic rhinitis may develop obstructed eustachian tubes,
which may cause barotitis media, or obstructed sinus ostia, which may cause barosinusitis. Frequent
yawning or closed-nose swallowing during descent, use of decongestant nasal
[Table 347-1.
Contraindications to Flying]
sprays, or use of antihistamines before or during flight often prevents or relieves these conditions. Some
people suck on hard candies during descent.
Air travel is contraindicated for patients who have or are likely to develop pneumothorax (eg, those who
have large pulmonary blebs or cavities) and for those in whom air or gas is trapped (eg, those who have
an incarcerated bowel, those traveling < 10 days after chest or abdominal surgery, those who have
intraocular gas injection) because even modest expansion may cause pain or tissue damage.
Water should be substituted for air in devices secured by air-filled cuffs or balloons (eg, feeding tubes,
urinary catheters). Patients with a colostomy should wear a large bag and expect frequent filling due to
expansion of intestinal gas.
Children:
Children are particularly susceptible to barotitis media and should be given fluids or food
during descent to encourage swallowing, which can equalize pressures. Infants can be breastfed or given
a bottle or pacifier. Precautions for children with chronic disease (eg, congenital heart disease, chronic
lung disease, anemia) are the same as those for adults.
===PAGE:3621===
Circadian dysrhythmia (jet lag):
Rapid travel across multiple time zones disrupts the normal circadian
rhythm (see also p.
). Bright sunlight resets the internal clock. Exposure to bright late-afternoon or
evening light delays the onset of normal sleep time, and exposure to early-morning light advances the
biologic clock, so that sleep time is earlier than usual. Thus, managing exposure to light can help
adaptation, particularly on the days after arrival in a new time zone. For example, people traveling
westward could maximize exposure to bright afternoon light to help delay sleep time. People traveling
eastward could maximize exposure to bright light in the early morning to help awakening and promote
earlier sleep.
Short-acting hypnotics (see
Table 177-6
 may help people fall asleep at the appropriate local time after eastward travel.
However, hypnotics may have adverse effects, such as daytime drowsiness, amnesia, and nighttime
insomnia. Long-acting hypnotics increase the likelihood of confusion and falls among the elderly and
should be avoided. Melatonin, a hormone secreted by the pineal gland, may provide a time-of-night cue;
however, large placebo-controlled trials showing melatonin's safety and efficacy are lacking (.
Taking melatonin (0.5 to 5 mg po before the desired sleep time) may help those who need to go to sleep
earlier because they have traveled east across several time zones. Some therapeutic regimens must be
altered to compensate for circadian dysrhythmia. For example, insulin dosage and timing may require
modification depending on the number of time zones traversed, time spent at destination, available food,
and activity; glucose must be monitored frequently. Target plasma glucose levels should be increased;
because so many changes affect levels, tight control is more difficult, and the risk of hypoglycemia is
increased. Regimens may require modification based on elapsed rather than local time.
Decreased O
tension:
In passenger jets at cruising altitude, with a typical 8000 ft (2440 m) cabin
altitude, the partial pressure of O
is about 25% less than at sea level, which, because of the O
-Hb
dissociation curve, represents a drop in arterial O
saturation of only about 4.4%. This decrease may be
significant for people with severe heart or lung disease (see
Table 347-1
) but is harmless to most people;
however, after 3 to 9 h at that altitude equivalent, some people report discomfort (eg, headache, malaise).
In general, anyone who can walk 50 m or climb one flight of stairs and whose disease is stable can
tolerate normal passenger jet cabin conditions without additional O
. However, problems may arise for
travelers with moderate or severe pulmonary disease (eg, asthma, COPD, cystic fibrosis), heart failure,
anemia with Hb < 8.5 g/dL, severe angina pectoris, sickle cell disease (but not trait), and some congenital
heart diseases. When flying is essential, such patients can usually fly safely with specially designed
continuous O
equipment, which must be provided by the airline. Mild ankle edema due to venous stasis
commonly develops during long flights and should not be confused with heart failure.
Smoking can aggravate mild hypoxia and should be avoided before flying. Hypoxia and fatigue may
increase the effects of alcohol.
Low cabin humidity:
Dehydration may develop because of very low cabin humidity. It can be avoided
with adequate fluid intake and alcohol avoidance. Contact lens wearers and people with dry eyes should
instill artificial tears frequently to avoid corneal irritation resulting from low cabin humidity.
Motion sickness:
Motion sickness is often triggered by turbulence and vibration and is made worse by
warmth, anxiety, hunger, or overeating (see also p.
). Symptoms may include nausea, vomiting,
sweating, and vertigo.
Motion sickness can be minimized before and during travel by moderating intake of food,
fluids, and
alcohol. Fixing the eyes on a stationary object or on the horizon can help, as can lying down and keeping
the eyes closed. Other measures include choosing a seat where motion is felt least (eg, in the center of
an airplane, over the wing), refraining from reading, and using an air vent. A scopolamine patch or an
OTC or prescription antihistamine is often useful, especially if taken before travel. However, these drugs
can cause drowsiness, dry mouth, confusion, falls, and other problems in the elderly.
Pregnancy:
Uncomplicated pregnancy through 36 wk is not a contraindication to air travel; high-risk
pregnancies must be individually evaluated. Flight during the 9th mo usually requires a physician's written
===PAGE:3622===
approval dated within 72 h of departure and indicating expected delivery date. However, policies may
vary by airline. Seat belts should be worn below the abdomen, across the hips.
To prevent effects on development of the fetal thyroid, pregnant women should avoid prolonged use of
water purification tablets that contain iodine. If possible, pregnant women should avoid travel to areas
where malaria is endemic because malaria can be more virulent in pregnant women, and the safety of all
antimalarial prophylactic drugs during pregnancy has not been fully studied. When traveling, pregnant
women should be particularly careful about following safe food guidelines and hand washing.
Psychologic stress:
Hypnosis and behavior modification benefit some people with fear of flying or
claustrophobia. Fearful passengers may also benefit from a short-acting anxiolytic (eg, zolpidem,
alprazolam) taken before and, depending on duration, during flight. Hyperventilation commonly simulates
heart disease and may cause tetany-like symptoms; anxiety and hyperventilation can cause panic,
paranoia, and a sense of impending death. Psychotic tendencies may become more acute and
troublesome during flight. Patients with violent or unpredictable tendencies must be accompanied by an
attendant and appropriately sedated.
Restricted mobility:
Deep venous thrombosis may develop in anyone sitting for long periods and may
result in a pulmonary embolus. Risk factors include those for non-altitude-related deep venous thrombosis
(eg, prior deep venous thrombosis, pregnancy, use of oral contraceptives). Frequent (every 1 to 2 h)
ambulation, short-movement exercises while seated, and adequate hydration are recommended;
however, studies showing benefit from these measures are lacking.
Turbulence:
Turbulence may cause motion sickness or injury. While seated, passengers should keep
their seat belts fastened at all times.
Other issues:
Most implanted cardiac devices, including pacemakers and cardioverter defibrillators, are
effectively shielded from interference from security devices. However, the metal content of some of these
devices, as well as certain orthopedic prostheses and braces, may trigger a security alarm. A physician's
letter should be carried to avoid security difficulties.
People with specific dietary and medical needs should plan carefully and carry their own food and
supplies. With several days' notice, all airlines departing from or arriving in the US (and most others) can
make reasonable efforts to accommodate passengers with physical handicaps and special needs,
including those who require O
therapy. Wheelchairs can be accommodated on all US airlines and most
foreign ones, but advance notice is advisable. Some airlines accept passengers requiring more highly
specialized equipment (eg, IV fluids, respirators) provided that appropriate personnel accompany the
passenger and arrangements have been made in advance. If travelers cannot be accommodated on a
commercial aircraft because of severe illness, air ambulance service is necessary.
Foreign Travel
About 1 in 30 people traveling abroad requires emergency care. Illness in a foreign country may involve
significant difficulties. Many insurance plans, including Medicare, are not valid in foreign countries;
overseas hospitals often require a substantial cash deposit for nonresidents, regardless of insurance.
Travel insurance plans, including some that arrange for emergency evacuation, are available through
commercial insurance agents, travel agencies, and some major credit card companies. Directories listing
English-speaking physicians in foreign countries, US consulates who may assist in obtaining emergency
medical services, and information about foreign travel risks are available (see
Table 347-2
). Patients with serious disorders should consider pretravel contact or arrangements with an
organization that offers medically supervised evacuation from foreign countries. Certain infections are
common when traveling to certain areas.
Vaccinations:
Some countries require specific vaccinations (see
Table 347-3
). General
[Table 347-2.
Useful Contacts for People Traveling Abroad]
===PAGE:3623===
travel and up-to-date immunization information and malaria chemoprophylaxis requirements are available
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) malaria hotline and web site (see also the
CDC recommendations, Travelers' Health: Vaccinations and Malaria: Malaria and Travelers).
Injury and death:
Road traffic accidents are the most frequent cause of death of nonelderly international
travelers. Travelers should use seat belts in vehicles and a helmet when cycling. Travelers should avoid
motorcycles and mopeds and avoid riding on bus roofs or in open truck beds. To prevent drowning
(another common cause of death while abroad), travelers should avoid beaches with turbulent surf and
avoid swimming after drinking alcoholic beverages.
Traveler's diarrhea:
Traveler's diarrhea (TD—see also p.
) is the most common health problem among international travelers. TD is usually self-limited, typically
resolving in 5 days; however, 3 to 10% of travelers with TD may have symptoms lasting > 2 wk, and up to
3% of travelers have TD lasting > 30 days. TD lasting < 1 wk requires no testing. For persistent TD,
laboratory testing is done (.
Self-initiated treatment is indicated for moderate to severe symptoms (≥ 3 unformed stools over 8 h),
especially if vomiting, fever, abdominal cramps, or blood in the stool are present. Treatment is with an
appropriate antibiotic (eg, a fluoroquinolone for most destinations, a macrolide such as azithromycin for
Southeast Asia). Additional measures include loperamide (except in patients with fever, bloody stools, or
abdominal pain and in children < 2 yr); replacement of fluids; and, in the elderly and small children,
electrolytes (eg, oral rehydration solution).
Measures that may decrease the risk of TD include
• Drinking and brushing teeth with bottled, filtered, boiled, or chlorinated water
• Avoiding ice
• Eating freshly prepared foods only if they have been heated to steaming temperatures
• Eating only fruits and vegetables that travelers peel or shell themselves
• Avoiding food from street vendors
• Washing hands frequently
• Avoiding all foods likely to have been exposed to flies
Prophylactic antibiotics (eg, fluoroquinolones) are effective in preventing diarrhea, but because of
concerns about adverse effects and development of resistance, they should probably be reserved for
immunocompromised patients.
Schistosomiasis:
Schistosomiasis is common and is caused by exposure to still water in Africa,
Southeast Asia, China, and eastern South America. Schistosomiasis can be prevented by wearing
footwear and socks when walking through water and by avoiding freshwater activities in areas where
schistosomiasis is common (.
Problems after returning home:
Persistent TD is the most common medical problem after
[Table 347-3.
Vaccines for International Travel*
,]
travel. Malaria (, hepatitis A and B (, typhoid fever (, sexually
transmitted diseases (, including HIV infection (, amebiasis (, and
meningitis ( are the most commonly acquired potentially serious diseases. People can also
acquire lice ( and scabies ( after being in crowded living conditions or places where
hygienic measures are poor.
===PAGE:3624===
Some diseases become evident months after a traveler has returned home; a travel history with exposure
risks is a useful diagnostic clue when patients present with a puzzling illness. The International Society of
Travel Medicine (www.istm.org
) and the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
(www.astmh.org
) have lists of travel clinics on their web sites. Many of these clinics specialize in assisting
travelers who are ill after their return home.
===PAGE:3625===
Chapter 348. Syndromes of Uncertain Origin
Introduction
Many patients have syndromes for which no specific cause has been identified. Some physicians think
that some of these syndromes have psychologic causes, but many physicians and most patients with one
of these syndromes reject that idea. Some data—often incomplete, inconsistent, or contradictory
—suggest a physical cause, although the exact cause remains uncertain. The causative or contributory
role of psychologic factors is also uncertain.
Some patients have scattered, apparently unrelated symptoms that do not form a recognizable syndrome.
With better definitions, case recognition may improve; further study of patients with such symptoms is
needed to clarify symptom etiology and the clinical significance of these syndromes, to develop
appropriate diagnostic strategies, and to define optimum care.
The evaluating physician's first responsibility is to obtain a thorough history, including history of exposure
to potentially noxious substances, and to exclude specific, potentially treatable alternative diagnoses.
Early stages of known disorders and atypically manifesting common disorders should be considered first.
Often, there is little guidance as to what testing is appropriate, but the physician must avoid tests that are
inappropriate or not clearly indicated. If no treatable cause is identified after the evaluation, supportive,
empathic follow-up is required. A physician should be aware that many patients with such syndromes turn
to complementary and alternative medical practices ( in their search for relief.
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is defined as longstanding, severe, disabling fatigue without
demonstrable muscle weakness. Underlying disorders that could explain the fatigue are absent.
Depression, anxiety, and other psychologic diagnoses are typically absent. Treatment is
psychologic support, often including antidepressants, and limited rest.
This definition of CFS has several variants, and heterogeneity among patients who meet the criteria of
this definition is considerable. Prevalence is impossible to state precisely; it is usually estimated to be
between 7 and 38/100,000 people. However, a recent telephone survey found the prevalence to be many
times higher. Prevalence estimates may vary because of differences in diagnostic evaluation, physicianpatient attitudes, social acceptability, risk of exposure to an infectious or toxic agent, or definition and
case finding. CFS occurs slightly more often in women. In office-based studies, prevalence is highest
among whites. However, community surveys indicate a higher prevalence among blacks, Hispanics, and
American Indians than among whites.
Etiology
Etiology is controversial, and the precise cause remains unknown. Psychologic factors may be the cause
in an unknown percentage of cases; however, CFS seems to be distinct from typical depression, anxiety,
or other psychologic disorders. A chronic viral infection has been proposed as a cause because many
patients relate onset of CFS to an acute bout of Lyme disease, mononucleosis, influenza, Q fever, Ross
River virus, parvovirus, and other infectious diseases. Epstein-Barr virus has also been proposed as a
cause, but immunologic markers of exposure do not appear to be sensitive or specific. Other possible but
unproven viral causes include rubella, HIV, enteroviruses, human herpesvirus 6, and human T-cell
lymphotropic virus. Allergic reactions have also been proposed; about 65% of patients report previous
allergies, and the rate of cutaneous reactivity to inhalants or foods is 25 to 50% higher in this group than
in the general population.
Various immunologic abnormalities have been reported. They include low levels of IgG, decreased
lymphocytic proliferation, low interferonγ
levels in response to mitogens, and poor cytotoxicity of natural
killer cells. Some patients have abnormal IgG, with circulating autoantibodies and immune complexes.
Many other immunologic abnormalities have been studied; none provides adequate sensitivity and
specificity for defining CFS. Additionally, no consistent or readily reproducible pattern of immunologic
abnormalities has been identified.
===PAGE:3626===
Other proposed mechanisms include neuroendocrine abnormalities, abnormal levels of neurotransmitters,
inadequate cerebral circulation, prolonged bed rest, undernutrition, and elevated levels of ACE.
Data indicate that relatives of patients with CFS have an increased risk of developing the
syndrome,
suggesting a familial or genetic component.
Some researchers believe the syndrome ultimately will prove to have multiple causes, including genetic
predisposition and exposure to microbial agents, toxins, and other physical and emotional traumas.
Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually abrupt, and many patients report an initial viral-like illness with swollen lymph nodes,
extreme fatigue, fever, and upper respiratory symptoms. The main symptom is severe fatigue (usually for
≥ 6 mo) that interferes with daily activities (see
Table 348-1
for usual symptoms and signs).
Usually, no signs of muscle weakness, arthritis, neuropathy, or organomegaly are present. However,
some definitions require the presence of low-grade fever, nonexudative pharyngitis, or palpable or tender
lymph nodes.
Diagnosis
• Clinical criteria
[Table 348-1.
Diagnostic Criteria for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome]
Because there is no definitive diagnostic test, diagnosis is by clinical criteria (see
Table 348-1
). However,
because multiple definitions exist, the criteria are not agreed on universally and should not always be
strictly applied to individual patients. The criteria are more useful for epidemiologic and clinical studies
than for excluding the diagnosis in individual patients. Further evaluation aims to exclude treatable
disorders. A reasonable assessment includes CBC and measurement of electrolytes, ESR, and thyroidstimulating hormone. In some cases, chest x-ray and tests for antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor,
hepatitis, and HIV should be added. Other viral antibody and other expensive tests are unlikely to shed
light on the diagnosis or cause. Obvious depression or severe anxiety excludes the diagnosis of CFS.
Treatment
• Sometimes nonsedating antidepressants
• Sometimes psychologic intervention, physical rehabilitation, and/or regular exercise
• Avoidance of prolonged rest
Nonsedating antidepressants are commonly prescribed, although their value is undetermined. Antiviral
treatments with acyclovir and amantadine do not seem effective. Valganciclovir is under study. Studies of
immunologic treatments, including high-dose immune globulins, dialyzable WBC extract, amphigen,
interferons, isoprinosine, and corticosteroids, have been inconclusive and mostly disappointing. Dietary
supplements and high-dose vitamins are commonly used, but their usefulness has not been
substantiated.
Psychologic intervention (eg, individual or group therapy) may help some patients, as may formal,
structured physical rehabilitation programs. Regular aerobic exercise (eg, walking, swimming, cycling,
jogging) under close medical supervision may reduce fatigue and improve physical function.
Persistent or prolonged rest should be firmly discouraged because it can worsen deconditioning and
promote progressive frailty.
===PAGE:3627===
Symptoms tend to lessen over time.
Multiple Chemical Sensitivity Syndrome
(Idiopathic Environmental Intolerance)
Multiple chemical sensitivity syndrome is characterized by recurrent, nonspecific symptoms
attributed to low-level exposure to chemically unrelated substances commonly occurring in the
environment.
Symptoms are numerous, often involving multiple organ systems, but physical
findings are unremarkable. Diagnosis is by exclusion. Treatment is psychologic support and
avoidance of perceived triggers, although triggers rarely can be defined.
No universally accepted definition exists, but multiple chemical sensitivity syndrome is generally defined
as the development of multiple symptoms attributed to exposure to any number of identifiable or
unidentifiable chemical substances (inhaled, touched, or ingested) in the absence of clinically detectable
organ dysfunction or related physical signs.
Etiology
Triggers:
Reported triggers for multiple chemical sensitivity include
• Alcohol and drugs
• Caffeine and food additives
• Carpet and furniture odors
• Fuel odors and engine exhaust
• Painting materials
• Perfume and other scented products
• Pesticides and herbicides
Mechanism:
Many theories—immunologic and nonimmunologic—have been proposed. These theories
are all hampered by lack of a consistent dose response to proposed causative substances; ie, symptoms
may not be replicated after exposure to high levels of a substance that previously, at much lower levels,
seemed to provoke a reaction. Similarly, consistent objective evidence of systemic inflammation, cytokine
excess, or immune system activation in relation to symptoms is lacking. Many physicians consider the
etiology to be psychologic, probably a form of somatization disorder (. Others suggest that
the syndrome is a type of panic attack ( or agoraphobia. Some facets of the syndrome resemble the no-longer-used psychologic diagnosis
of neurasthenia.
Multiple chemical sensitivity syndrome develops in 40% of people with chronic fatigue syndrome and in
16% of people with fibromyalgia.
Although measurable biologic abnormalities (eg, decreased levels of B cells, elevated levels of IgE) are
rare, some patients have such abnormalities. However, these abnormalities appear without a consistent
pattern, and their significance is uncertain.
Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms (eg, palpitations, chest pain, sweating, shortness of breath, fatigue, flushing, dizziness,
nausea, choking, trembling, numbness, coughing, hoarseness, difficulty concentrating) are numerous and
usually involve more than one organ system. Most patients present with a long list of suspected agents,
self-identified or identified by a physician during previous testing. Such patients often go to great lengths
===PAGE:3628===
to avoid these agents by changing residence and employment, avoiding all foods containing "chemicals,"
sometimes wearing masks in public, or avoiding public settings altogether. Physical examination is
characteristically unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis initially involves exclusion of demonstrable allergies and other known disorders with similar
manifestation (eg, atopic disorders such as asthma, allergic rhinitis, food allergies, and angioedema).
Atopic disorders are excluded based on a typical clinical history, skin-prick testing, serum assays of
specific IgE, or all 3. Consultation with an allergy specialist may be necessary. Building-related illnesses,
including sick building syndrome, in which many people who spend time in the same building develop
symptoms (, should be considered.
Treatment
Despite an uncertain cause-and-effect relationship, treatment is usually aimed at avoiding the suspected
precipitating agents, which may be difficult because many are ubiquitous. However, social isolation and
costly and highly disruptive avoidance behaviors should be discouraged.
Psychologic evaluation and intervention may help, but characteristically many patients resist this
approach. However, the point of this approach is not to show that the cause is psychologic but rather to
help patients cope with their symptoms.
Gulf War Syndrome
Gulf War syndrome is a group of symptoms experienced by > 100,000 American, British, and
Canadian veterans of the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
Within a few months of returning from the Persian Gulf, veterans from different military units in the US,
Britain, and Canada began reporting various unexplained symptoms, including headache, fatigue,
difficulty sleeping, joint pain, chest pain, rashes, and diarrhea. In most cases, however, objective
evidence of abnormalities was lacking. Even when symptoms
such as a rash, could be confirmed, no
specific cause could be identified.
The cause of Gulf War syndrome is unknown. Gulf War veterans often have been exposed to a number
of potentially toxic substances, including chemical weapons, depleted uranium weapons, insecticides,
and smoke from burning oil wells. Veterans may also have been exposed to irritant petroleum products,
decontamination solutions, and a variety of airborne substances that may have caused allergies.
Vaccination with the anthrax vaccine, which was given to US military personnel involved in the Gulf War
as protection against biological warfare, has also been proposed as a cause, although this vaccine has
not caused symptoms in other recipients. The use of pyridostigmine tablets to help prevent the lethal
effects of chemical weapons has been suggested as a possible cause as well. However, none of these
agents has been linked convincingly to Gulf War syndrome; many exposed people have been
asymptomatic, and many symptomatic people have had no identifiable exposure.
Symptoms predominantly involve the nervous system. They include problems with memory, reasoning,
concentration, and attention; difficulty falling asleep; depression; fatigue; and headache. Other symptoms
may include disorientation, dizziness, erectile dysfunction (impotence), myalgias, fatigue, weakness,
paresthesias, diarrhea, rashes, cough, and chest pain.
Diagnosis and treatment have not been established; therefore, the aim is to relieve symptoms.
Veterans who have Gulf War syndrome do not have a higher hospitalization or death rate than anyone
else of the same age.
===PAGE:3629===
Chapter 349. Care of the Surgical Patient
Introduction
Care of surgical patients often involves nonsurgical consultants (eg, primary care physicians, specialists),
who may be asked to provide preoperative risk assessment (sometimes requested as medical clearance),
suggest ways to minimize perioperative risks (eg, deep venous thrombosis, endocarditis), and manage
complex medical conditions. Psychiatric consultation may be needed to assess capacity or help deal with
underlying psychiatric problems that can interfere with recovery. Elderly patients may benefit from
involvement of an interdisciplinary geriatric team (, which may need to involve social workers,
therapists, ethicists, and other practitioners.
Preoperative Evaluation
If an emergency procedure is required, preoperative evaluation must be rapid and is thus limited. In other
cases, the surgical team may consult an internist to obtain a formal preoperative evaluation, which helps
minimize risk by identifying correctable abnormalities and by determining whether additional monitoring is
needed or whether a procedure should be delayed so that an underlying disorder (eg, hypertension,
hyperglycemia, hematologic abnormalities) can be controlled optimally.
Routine preoperative evaluation varies substantially from patient to patient, depending on the patient's
age, general health, and risks of the procedure.
History:
A relevant preoperative history includes information about all of the following:
• Current symptoms suggesting an active cardiopulmonary disorder (eg, cough, chest pain, dyspnea
during exertion, ankle swelling) or infection (eg, fever, dysuria)
• Risk factors for thromboembolism (, excessive bleeding (, or infection
• Known disorders that increase risk of complications, particularly hypertension, heart disease, kidney
disease, liver disease, diabetes, asthma, COPD, and bleeding disorders
• Previous surgery, anesthesia, or both, particularly their complications
• Allergies
• Tobacco and alcohol use
• Current prescription and nonprescription drug and supplement use
If an indwelling catheter may be needed, patients should be asked about prior urinary retention and
prostate surgery.
Physical examination:
Physical examination should include not only areas affected by
the surgical
procedure but also the cardiopulmonary system and a search for any signs of ongoing infection (eg,
upper respiratory tract, skin). When spinal anesthesia is likely, patients should be evaluated for scoliosis
and other anatomic abnormalities that may complicate lumbar puncture. Any cognitive dysfunction,
especially in elderly patients who will be given a general anesthetic, should be noted. Preexisting
dysfunction may become more apparent postoperatively and, if undetected beforehand, may be
misinterpreted as a surgical complication.
Testing:
No preoperative tests are required in healthy patients undergoing operations with very low risk
of significant bleeding or other complications; abnormal results are more likely to be false positives than in
patients with symptoms or risk factors. In symptomatic patients or in patients undergoing operations with a
higher risk of significant bleeding or other complications, laboratory evaluation may include the following
tests:
===PAGE:3630===
• CBC and urinalysis (glucose, protein, and cells) usually are done.
• Serum electrolytes and creatinine and plasma glucose are measured unless patients are extremely
healthy and < 50, the procedure is considered very low risk, and use of nephrotoxic drugs is not
expected.
• Liver enzymes are measured if abnormalities are suspected based on the patient's history or
examination.
• Coagulation studies and bleeding time are needed only if patients have a history of bleeding diathesis
or a disorder associated with bleeding.
• ECG is done for patients at risk of coronary artery disease, including all men > 45 and women > 55.
• If a general anesthetic is to be used, a chest x-ray typically is done (or a recent x-ray is reviewed),
although its usefulness is limited, particularly in younger patients and in patients without suspicion of
heart or lung disease.
• Pulmonary function testing may be done if patients have a known chronic pulmonary disorder or
symptoms or signs of pulmonary disease.
Patients with symptomatic coronary artery disease need additional tests (eg, stress testing, coronary
angiography) before surgery.
Surgical risk factors:
Surgical risk varies with patient risk factors and the procedure.
Procedural risk
is highest with the following:
• Heart or lung surgery
• Prostatectomy
• Major orthopedic procedures (eg, hip replacement)
Patients undergoing elective surgery that has a significant risk of hemorrhage should consider autologous
transfusion (. Autologous transfusion decreases the risks of infection and transfusion
reactions. Emergency surgery also has a higher risk of morbidity and mortality.
Patient risk factors
are stratified by some clinicians using published criteria (see
Table 349-1
). Older age is associated with decreased physiologic reserve and greater morbidity if a
complication occurs. However, chronic disorders are more closely associated with increased
postoperative morbidity and mortality than is age alone. Older age is not an absolute contraindication to
surgery.
Cardiac risk factors
dramatically increase surgical risk. Among the most serious are the following:
• Unstable angina
• Recent MI
• Poorly controlled heart failure
When a heart disorder cannot be corrected before surgery, intraoperative and sometimes preoperative
monitoring with pulmonary artery catheterization may be advised.
Incidental infections
(eg, UTIs) should be treated with antibiotics but should not delay surgery unless
prosthetic material is being implanted; in such cases, incidental infections should be controlled or
eliminated before surgery if possible.
===PAGE:3631===
Fluid and electrolyte imbalance
should be corrected before surgery if possible. Dehydration should be
treated with IV normal saline because BP tends to fall when anesthesia is induced. K deficiencies should
be corrected to reduce risk of arrhythmias.
Undernutrition
( increases surgical risk. For example, serum albumin < 2.8 g/dL is associated
with increased morbidity and mortality. If surgery can be delayed for several weeks, sometimes nutritional
deficiencies are correctable. Usually, the patient's calorie and protein intake should be increased during
the perioperative period. Obesity is unlikely to be correctable in the time available.
Perioperative Management
Usually, an anesthesiologist reviews a patient's drugs and stipulates which ones should be taken on the
day of surgery. Such a review
[Table 349-1.
Cardiac Risk Index in Noncardiac Surgery]
is necessary because some drugs interact with general anesthetics.
Diabetes:
On the day of surgery, patients with insulin-dependent diabetes are typically given one third of
their usual insulin dose in the morning. Those who take oral drugs are given half of their usual dose. If
possible, surgery is done early in the day. The anesthesiologist monitors plasma glucose during surgery
and gives additional insulin or dextrose as needed. Close monitoring with fingerstick testing continues
throughout the perioperative period.
Corticosteroids:
Patients who are taking corticosteroids (mineralocorticoids or glucocorticoids) or have
taken them within the previous 3 to 6 mo should be given supplemental doses of these drugs in case
perioperative stress (eg, fluid shifts, hypotension) causes adrenal suppression.
Anticoagulants and antiplatelets:
Anticoagulants (eg, warfarin) and antiplatelet drugs (eg, aspirin) are
usually stopped 5 to 7 days before surgery. However, if the procedure has a low risk of bleeding, an
anticoagulant may be continued even on the day of the procedure, although the risk of postoperative
bleeding slightly increases.
Other drugs that control chronic disorders:
Most drugs taken to control chronic disorders, especially
cardiovascular drugs (including antihypertensives), should be continued throughout the perioperative
period. Most oral drugs can be given with a small sip of water on the day of surgery. Others may have to
be given parenterally or delayed until after surgery. Anticonvulsant levels should be measured
preoperatively in patients with a seizure disorder.
Drug dependence:
Patients who are dependent on drugs or alcohol may experience withdrawal during
the perioperative period. Alcoholics should be given prophylactic benzodiazepines (eg, chlordiazepoxide,
diazepam, lorazepam) starting at admission. Opioid addicts may be given opioid analgesics to prevent
withdrawal; for pain relief, they may require larger doses than patients who are not addicted. Rarely,
opioid addicts require methadone to prevent withdrawal during the perioperative period.
Smoking:
Smokers are advised to stop smoking as early as possible before any procedure involving the
chest or abdomen. Several weeks of smoking cessation are required for ciliary mechanisms to recover.
An incentive
inspirometer should be used before and after surgery.
Upper airway:
Before intubation, dentures must be removed. Ideally, before patients are moved from the
preanesthetic holding area, they should give dentures to a family member. Patients with a deviated
septum or another airway abnormality should be evaluated by an anesthesiologist before surgery
requiring intubation.
Preprocedural checklist:
In the operating room, before the procedure begins, a time out is held during
which the team confirms several important factors:
===PAGE:3632===
• Patient identity
• Correct procedure and operative site (if applicable)
• Availability of all needed equipment
• Completion of indicated prophylaxis (eg, antibiotics, anticoagulants)
Outpatient Procedures
Many surgical procedures are done in outpatient settings. Patients are evaluated (eg, with laboratory
tests— one to several days before the procedure.
Preparation:
The general rule is for patients to have no oral intake after midnight the night before
surgery. For certain GI procedures, cleansing enemas or oral solutions must be started 1 to 2 days before
surgery. When prophylactic antibiotics are needed before a procedure, the initial dose must be given
within 1 h before the surgical incision.
Discharge precautions:
Before discharge, patients should be free of severe pain and should be able to
think clearly, breathe normally, drink, walk, and urinate.
If sedatives (eg, opioids, benzodiazepines) were used during an outpatient procedure, patients should not
leave the hospital unaccompanied. Even after anesthetic effects have apparently worn off and patients
feel fine, they are likely to be weak and have subtle residual effects that make driving inadvisable; many
patients require opioids for pain. Elderly patients may be temporarily disoriented because of the combined
effects of anesthesia and surgical stress and may develop urinary retention caused by immobility and
anticholinergic drug effects.
Antibiotic Prophylaxis
Most surgical procedures do not require prophylactic or postoperative antibiotics. However, certain
patient-related and procedure-related factors alter the risk-benefit ratio in favor of prophylactic use.
Patient-related factors include certain valvular heart disorders and immunosuppression. Procedures with
higher risk involve areas where bacterial seeding is likely:
• Mouth
• GI tract
• Respiratory tract
• GU tract
In so-called clean (likely to be sterile) procedures, prophylaxis generally is beneficial only when prosthetic
material or devices are being inserted or when the consequence of infection is known to be serious (eg,
mediastinitis after coronary artery bypass grafting).
Drug choice is based on the bacteria most likely to contaminate the wound during a specific procedure.
For commonly recommended regimens by procedure, see
Table 349-2
. Prophylaxis requires that the appropriate antibiotic is given within 1 h before the procedure.
Antibiotics may be given orally or IV, depending on the procedure. The need for additional doses after the
procedure is controversial, but for clean operations, no additional doses are needed. Postoperative
antibiotics are continued > 24 h only when an active infection is detected during surgery; antibiotics are
then considered treatment, not prophylaxis.
Postoperative Care
===PAGE:3633===
Postoperative care begins in the recovery room and continues throughout the recovery period. Critical
concerns are airway clearance, pain control, mental status, and wound healing. Other important concerns
are preventing urinary retention, constipation, deep venous thrombosis, and BP variability (high or low).
For patients with diabetes, plasma glucose levels are monitored closely by fingerstick testing every 1 to 4
h until patients are awake and eating because better glycemic control improves outcome.
Airway:
Most patients are extubated before leaving the operating room and soon become able to clear
secretions from their airway. Patients should not leave the recovery room until they can clear and protect
their airway (unless they are going to an ICU). After intubation, patients with normal lungs and trachea
may have a mild cough for 24 h after extubation; for smokers and patients with a history of bronchitis,
postextubation coughing lasts longer. Most patients who have been
[Table 349-2.
Antimicrobial Preoperative Prophylaxis Guidelines]
intubated, especially smokers and patients with a lung disorder, benefit from an incentive inspirometer.
Postoperative dyspnea may be caused by pain secondary to chest or abdominal incisions (nonhypoxic
dyspnea) or by hypoxemia
(hypoxic dyspnea—see also p.
). Hypoxemia secondary to pulmonary
dysfunction is usually accompanied by dyspnea, tachypnea, or both; however, oversedation may cause
hypoxemia but blunt dyspnea, tachypnea, or both. Thus, sedated patients should be monitored with pulse
oximetry or capnometry. Hypoxic dyspnea may result from atelectasis or, especially in patients with a
history of heart failure or chronic kidney disease, fluid overload. Whether dyspnea is hypoxic or
nonhypoxic must be determined by pulse oximetry and sometimes ABGs; chest x-ray can help differentiate
fluid overload from atelectasis.
Hypoxic dyspnea is treated with oxygen. Nonhypoxic dyspnea may be treated with anxiolytics or
analgesics.
Pain:
Pain control may be necessary as soon as patients are conscious (. Opioids are
typically the first-line choice and can be given orally or parenterally. Often, oxycodone/acetaminophen 1
or 2 tablets (each tablet can contain 2.5 to 10 mg oxycodone and 325 to 650 mg acetaminophen) po q 4
to 6 h or morphine 2 to 4 mg IV q 3 h is given as a starting dose, which is subsequently adjusted as
needed; individual needs and tolerances can vary several-fold. With less frequent dosing, breakthrough
pain, which should be avoided, is possible. For more severe pain, IV patient-controlled, on-demand
dosing is best (. If patients do not have a renal disorder or a history of GI bleeding, giving NSAIDs at regular
intervals may reduce breakthrough pain, allowing the opioid dosage to be reduced.
Mental status:
All patients are briefly confused when they come out of anesthesia. The elderly,
especially those with dementia, are at risk of postoperative delirium, which can delay discharge and
increase risk of death. Risk of delirium is high when anticholinergics are used. These drugs are
sometimes used before or during surgery to decrease upper airway secretions, but they should be
avoided whenever possible. Opioids, given postoperatively, may also cause delirium, as can high doses
of H
blockers. The mental status of elderly patients should be assessed frequently during the
postoperative period. If delirium occurs, oxygenation should be assessed, and all nonessential drugs
should be stopped. Patients should be mobilized as they are able, and any electrolyte or fluid imbalances
should be corrected.
Wound care:
The surgeon must individualize care of each wound, but the sterile dressing placed in the
operating room is generally left intact for 24 h unless signs of infection (eg, increasing pain, erythema,
drainage) develop. After 24 h, the site should be checked twice/day, if possible, for signs of infection. If
they occur, wound exploration and drainage of abscesses, systemic antibiotics, or both may be required.
Topical antibiotics are usually not helpful. A drain tube, if present, must be monitored for quantity and
quality of the fluid collected. Sutures, skin staples, and other closures are usually left in place 7 days or
longer depending on the site and the patient. Face and neck wounds may be superficially healed in 3
days; wounds on the lower extremities may take weeks to heal to a similar degree.
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis:
Risk of DVT after surgery is small, but because
===PAGE:3634===
consequences can be severe and risk is still higher than that in the general population, prophylaxis is
often warranted. Surgery itself increases coagulability and often requires prolonged immobility, another
risk factor for DVT (see
Chs. 194
and
). Prophylaxis for DVT usually begins in the operating room
(see
Table 194-5
. Alternatively, heparin may be started shortly after surgery, when risk of bleeding
has decreased. Patients should begin moving their limbs as soon as it is safe for them to do so.
Fever:
A common cause of fever is a high metabolic rate that occurs with the stress of an operation.
Other causes include pneumonia, UTIs, and wound infections. Incentive spirometry and periodic coughing
can help decrease risk of pneumonia.
Other issues:
Certain types of surgery require additional precautions. For example, hip surgery requires
that patients be moved and positioned so that the hip does not dislocate. Any physician moving such
patients for any reason, including auscultating the lungs, must know the positioning protocol to avoid
doing harm; often, a nurse is the best instructor.
Urinary retention and constipation
are common after surgery. Causes include use of anticholinergics
or opioids, immobility, and decreased oral intake. Patients must be monitored for urinary retention.
Straight catheterization is typically necessary for patients who have a distended bladder and are
uncomfortable or who have not urinated for 6 to 8 h after surgery; Crede's maneuver sometimes helps
and may make catheterization unnecessary. Chronic retention is best treated by avoiding causative drugs
and by having patients sit up as often as possible. Bethanechol 5 to 10 mg can be tried in patients
unlikely to have any bladder obstruction and who have not had a laparotomy; doses can be repeated
every hour up to a maximum of 50 mg/day. Sometimes an indwelling bladder catheter is needed,
especially if patients have a history of retention or a large initial output after straight catheterization.
Constipation is treated by avoiding causative drugs and, if patients have not had GI surgery, by giving
stimulant laxatives (eg, bisacodyl, senna, cascara). Stool softeners (eg, docusate) do not alleviate
postoperative constipation.
Loss of muscle mass (sarcopenia)
and strength occur in all patients who require prolonged bed rest.
With complete bed rest, young adults lose about 1% of muscle mass/day, but the elderly lose up to
5%/day because growth hormone levels decrease with aging. Avoiding sarcopenia is essential to
recovery. Thus, patients should sit up in bed, transfer to a chair, stand, and exercise as much as and as
soon as is safe for their surgical and medical condition. Nutritional deficiencies may also contribute to
sarcopenia. Thus, nutritional intake of patients on complete bed rest should be optimized. Tube feeding
or, rarely, parenteral feeding may be necessary.
===PAGE:3635===
Chapter 350. Rehabilitation
Introduction
Rehabilitation aims to facilitate recovery from loss of function. Loss may be due to fracture, amputation,
stroke or another neurologic disorder, arthritis, cardiac impairment, or prolonged deconditioning (eg, after
some disorders and surgical procedures). Rehabilitation may involve physical, occupational, and speech
therapy; psychologic counseling; and social services. For some patients, the goal is complete recovery
with full, unrestricted function; for others, it is recovery of the ability to do as many activities of daily living
(ADLs) as possible. Results of rehabilitation depend on the nature of the loss and the patient's motivation.
Progress may be slow for elderly patients and for patients who lack muscle strength or motivation.
Rehabilitation may begin in an acute care hospital. Rehabilitation hospitals or units usually provide the
most extensive and intensive care; they should be considered for patients who have good potential for
recovery and can participate in and tolerate aggressive therapy (generally, ≥ 3 h/day). Many nursing
homes have less intensive programs (generally, 1 to 3 h/day, up to 5 days/wk) and thus are better suited
to patients less able to tolerate therapy (eg, frail or elderly patients). Less varied and less frequent
rehabilitation programs may be offered in outpatient settings or at home and are appropriate for many
patients. However, outpatient rehabilitation can be relatively intensive (several hours/day up to 5
days/wk).
An interdisciplinary approach is best because disability can lead to various problems (eg, depression, lack
of motivation to regain lost function, financial problems). Thus, patients may require psychologic
intervention and help from social workers or mental health practitioners. Also, family members may need
help learning how to adjust to the patient's disability and how to help the patient.
Referral:
To initiate formal rehabilitation therapy, a physician must write a referral/prescription to a
physiatrist, therapist, or rehabilitation center. The referral/prescription should state the diagnosis and goal
of therapy. The diagnosis may be specific (eg, after left-sided stroke, residual right-sided deficits in upper
and lower extremities) or functional (eg, generalized weakness due to bed rest). Goals should be as
specific as possible (eg, training to use a prosthetic limb, maximizing general muscle strength and overall
endurance). Although vague instructions (eg, physical therapy to evaluate and treat) are sometimes
accepted, they are not in the patients' best interests and may be rejected with a request for more specific
instructions. Physicians unfamiliar with writing referrals for rehabilitation can consult a physiatrist.
Goals of therapy:
Initial evaluation sets goals for restoring mobility and functions needed to do ADLs,
which include caring for self (eg, grooming, bathing, dressing, feeding, toileting), cooking, cleaning,
shopping, managing drugs, managing finances, using the telephone, and traveling. The referring
physician and rehabilitation team determine which activities are achievable and which are essential for
the patient's independence. Once ADL function is maximized, goals that can help improve quality of life
are added.
Patients improve at different rates. Some courses of therapy last only a few weeks; others last longer.
Some patients who have completed initial therapy need additional therapy.
Patient and caregiver issues:
Patient and family education is an important part of the rehabilitation
process, particularly when the patient is discharged into the community. Often,
the nurse is the team
member primarily responsible for this education. Patients are taught how to maintain newly regained
functions and how to reduce the risk of accidents (eg, falls, cuts, burns) and secondary disabilities.
Family members are taught how to help the patient be as independent as possible, so that they do not
overprotect the patient (leading to decreased functional status and increased dependence) or neglect the
patient's primary needs (leading to feelings of rejection, which may cause depression or interfere with
physical functioning).
Emotional support from family members and friends is essential. It may take many forms. Spiritual support
and counseling by peers or by religious advisors can be indispensable for some patients.
Geriatric Rehabilitation
===PAGE:3636===
Disorders requiring rehabilitation (eg, stroke, MI, hip fracture, limb amputation) are common among the
elderly. The elderly are also more likely to have become deconditioned before the acute problem that
necessitates rehabilitation.
The elderly, even if cognitively impaired, can benefit from rehabilitation. Age alone is not a reason to
postpone or deny rehabilitation. However, the elderly may recover slowly because of a reduced ability to
adapt to a changing environment, including
• Physical inactivity
• Lack of endurance
• Depression or dementia
• Decreased muscle strength, joint mobility, coordination, or agility
• Impaired balance
Programs designed specifically for the elderly are preferable because the elderly often have different
goals, require less intensive rehabilitation, and need different types of care than do younger patients. In
age-segregated programs, elderly patients are less likely to compare their progress with that of younger
patients and to become discouraged, and the social work aspects of postdischarge care can be more
readily integrated. Some programs are designed for specific clinical situations (eg, recovery from hip
fracture surgery); patients with similar conditions can work together toward common goals by encouraging
each other and reinforcing the rehabilitation training.
Physical Therapy
Physical therapy aims to improve joint and muscle function (eg, range of motion, strength) and thus
improve the patient's ability to stand, balance, walk, and climb stairs. For example, physical therapy is
usually used to train lower-extremity amputees. On the other hand, occupational therapy (
focuses on self-care activities and improvement of fine motor coordination of muscles and joints,
particularly in the upper extremities.
Range of motion:
Limited range of motion impairs function and tends to cause pain and to predispose
patients to pressure ulcers. Range of motion should be evaluated with a goniometer before therapy and
regularly thereafter (for normal values, see
Table 350-1
).
Range-of-motion exercises stretch stiff joints. Stretching is usually most effective and least painful when
tissue temperature is raised to about 43° C (. There are several types:
•
Active:
This type is used when patients can exercise without assistance; patients must move their limbs
themselves.
•
Active assistive:
This type is used when muscles are weak or when joint movement causes
discomfort; patients must move their limbs, but a therapist helps them do so.
•
Passive:
This type is used when patients cannot actively participate in exercise; no effort is required
from them.
Strength and conditioning:
Many exercises aim to improve muscle strength (for grading muscle
strength, see
Table 350-2
). Muscle strength may be increased with progressive resistive exercise. When a muscle is
very weak, gravity alone is sufficient resistance. When muscle strength becomes fair, additional manual or
mechanical resistance (eg, weights, spring tension) is added.
===PAGE:3637===
General conditioning exercises combine various exercises to treat the effects of debilitation, prolonged
bed rest, or immobilization. The goals are to reestablish hemodynamic balance, increase
cardiorespiratory capacity and endurance, and maintain range of motion and muscle strength.
For the elderly, the purpose of these exercises is both to strengthen muscles enough to function normally
and possibly to regain normal strength for age.
Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation:
This technique helps promote neuromuscular activity in
patients who have upper motor neuron damage with spasticity; it enables them to feel muscle contraction
and helps maintain the affected joint's range of motion. For example, applying strong resistance to the left
elbow flexor (biceps) of patients with right hemiplegia causes the hemiplegic biceps to contract, flexing
the right elbow.
[Table 350-1.
Normal Values for Range of Motion of Joints*]
[Table 350-2.
Grades of Muscle Strength]
Coordination exercises:
These task-oriented exercises improve motor skills by repeating a movement
that works more than one joint and muscle simultaneously (eg, picking up an object, touching a body
part).
Ambulation exercises:
Before proceeding to ambulation exercises, patients must be able to balance in
a standing position. Balancing exercise is usually done using parallel bars with a therapist standing in
front of or directly behind a patient. While holding the bars, patients shift weight from side to side and
from forward to backward. Once patients can balance safely, they can proceed to ambulation exercises.
Ambulation is often a major goal of rehabilitation. If individual muscles are weak or spastic, an orthosis
(eg, a brace) may be used (. Ambulation exercises are commonly started using parallel bars; as patients progress, they use a
walker, crutches, or cane and then walk without devices. Some patients wear an assistive belt used by
the therapist to help prevent falls. Anyone assisting patients with ambulation should know how to correctly
support them (see
Fig. 350-1
).
As soon as patients can walk safely on level surfaces, they can start training to climb stairs or to step over
curbs if either skill is needed. Patients who use walkers must learn special techniques for climbing stairs
and stepping over curbs. When climbing stairs, ascent starts with the better leg, and descent starts with
the affected leg (ie, good leads up; bad leads down). Before patients are discharged, the social worker or
physical therapist should arrange to have secure handrails installed along all stairs in the patients' home.
Transfer training:
Patients who cannot transfer independently from bed to chair, chair to commode, or
chair to a standing position usually require attendants 24 h/day. Adjusting the heights of commodes and
chairs may help. Sometimes assistive devices are useful; eg, people who have difficulty standing from a
seated position may benefit from a chair with a raised seat or a self-lifting chair.
[Fig. 350-1.
Supporting a patient during ambulation.]
Occupational Therapy
Occupational therapy (OT) focuses on self-care activities and improvement of fine motor coordination of
muscles and joints, particularly in the upper extremities. Unlike physical therapy, which focuses on muscle
strength and joint range of motion, OT focuses on activities of daily living (ADLs) because they are the
cornerstone of independent living. Basic ADLs (BADLs) include eating, dressing, bathing, grooming,
toileting, and transferring (ie, moving between surfaces such as the bed, chair, and bathtub or shower).
Instrumental ADLs (IADLs) require more complex cognitive functioning than BADLs. IADLs include
preparing meals; communicating by telephone, writing, or computer; managing finances and daily drug
regimens; cleaning; doing laundry, food shopping, and other errands; managing finances; traveling as a
pedestrian or by public transportation; and driving. Driving is particularly complex, requiring integration of
===PAGE:3638===
visual, physical, and cognitive tasks.
Evaluation:
OT can be initiated when a physician writes a referral for rehabilitation, which is similar to
writing a prescription. The referral should be detailed, including a brief history of the problem (eg, type
and duration of the disorder or injury) and establishing the goals of therapy (eg, training in IADLs). Lists
of occupational therapists may be obtained from a patient's insurance carrier, a local hospital, the
telephone book, state occupational training organizations, or the web site of the American Occupational
Therapy Association.
Patients are evaluated for limitations that require intervention and for strengths that can be used to
compensate for weaknesses. Limitations may involve motor function, sensation, cognition, or
psychosocial function. Examiners determine which activities (eg, work, leisure, social, learning) patients
want or need help with. Patients may need help with a general type of activity (eg, social) or a specific
activity (eg, attending church), or they may need to be motivated to do an activity. Therapists may use an
assessment instrument to help in the evaluation. One of the many functional assessment instruments is
described in
Table 350-3
. Patients are asked about their social and family roles, habits, and social
support systems. The availability of resources (eg, community programs and services, private attendants)
should be determined.
Occupational therapists may also assess the home for hazards and make recommendations to ensure
home safety (eg, removing throw rugs, increasing hallway and kitchen lighting, moving a night table within
reach of the bed, placing a family picture on a door to help patients recognize their room).
Determining when driving is a risk and whether driver retraining is indicated is best done by occupational
therapists with specialized training. Information that can help elderly drivers and their caregivers in coping
with changing driving abilities is available from the American Occupational Therapy Association and the
American Association for Retired Persons.
Interventions:
OT may consist of one consultation or frequent sessions of varying intensity. Sessions
may occur in various settings:
• Acute care, rehabilitation, outpatient, adult day care, skilled nursing, or long-term care facilities
• The home (as part of home health care)
• Senior housing developments
• Life-care or assisted-living communities
Occupational therapists develop an individualized program to enhance patients' motor, cognitive,
communication, and interaction capabilities. The goal is not only to help patients do ADLs but also to do
appropriate preferred leisure activities and to foster and maintain social integration and participation.
Before developing a program, a therapist observes patients doing each activity of the daily routine to
learn what is needed to ensure safe, successful completion of the activities. Therapists can then
recommend ways to eliminate or reduce maladaptive patterns and to establish routines that promote
function and health. Specific performance-oriented exercises are also recommended. Therapists
emphasize that exercises must be practiced and motivate patients to do so by focusing on exercise as a
means of becoming more active at home and in the community.
Patients are taught creative ways to facilitate social activities (eg, how to get to museums or church
without driving, how to use hearing aids or other assistive communication devices in different settings,
how to travel safely with or without a cane or walker). Therapists may suggest new activities (eg,
volunteering in foster grandparent programs, schools, or hospitals).
Patients are taught strategies to compensate for their limitations (eg, to sit when gardening). The
therapist may identify various assistive devices that can help patients do many activities of daily living
(see
===PAGE:3639===
Table 350-4
). Most occupational therapists can select wheelchairs appropriate for patients' needs and
provide training for upper-extremity amputees.
[Table 350-3.
Katz Activities of Daily Living Scale]
Occupational therapists may construct and fit devices to prevent contractures and treat other functional
disorders.
Speech Therapy
Speech therapists can identify the most effective methods of communication for patients who have
aphasia, dysarthria, or verbal apraxia or who have had a laryngectomy:
• Expressive aphasia: A letter or picture board
• Mild to moderate dysarthria or apraxia: Breathing and muscle control plus repetition exercises
• Severe dysarthria or apraxia: An electronic device with a keyboard and message display (print or
screen)
• Postlaryngectomy: A new way to produce a voice (eg, by an electrolarynx—
Therapeutic and Assistive Devices
Orthoses
provide support for damaged joints, ligaments, tendons, muscles, and bones. Most are
customized to a patient's needs and anatomy. Orthoses designed to fit into shoes may shift the patient's
weight to different parts of the foot to compensate for lost function, prevent deformity or injury, help bear
weight, or relieve pain, as well as provide support. Orthoses are often very expensive and not covered by
insurance.
Walking aids
include walkers, crutches, and canes (see
Fig. 350-2
). They help with weight
[Table 350-4.
Assistive Devices]
bearing, balance, or both. Each device has advantages and disadvantages, and each is available in
many models. After evaluation, a therapist should choose the one that provides the best combination of
stability and freedom for the patient (see
Table 350-5
). Physicians should know how to fit crutches (see
Fig. 350-3
). Prescriptions for assistive devices should be as specific as possible.
Wheelchairs
provide mobility to patients who cannot walk. Some models are designed to be selfpropelled and to provide stability for traveling over uneven ground and up and down curbs. Other models
are designed to be pushed by an assistant; they provide less stability and speed. Wheelchairs are
available with various features. For athletic patients with impaired lower extremities but good upper body
strength, racing wheelchairs are available. A one-arm-drive or hemi-height wheelchair may be suitable for
hemiplegic patients with good coordination. If patients have little or no arm function, a motorized
wheelchair is prescribed. Wheelchairs for quadriplegics may have chin or mouth (sip and puff) controls
and built-in ventilators.
Prostheses
are artificial body parts, most commonly limbs designed to replace lower or upper extremities
after amputation (. Technical innovations have greatly improved the comfort and functionality
of prostheses. Many prostheses can be cosmetically altered to appear natural. A prosthetist should be
involved early to help patients understand the many options in prosthetic design, which should meet the
patients' needs and safety requirements. Many patients can expect to regain considerable function.
Physical therapy
[Table 350-5.
Ambulation Aids]
===PAGE:3640===
should be started even before the prosthesis is fitted; therapy should continue until patients can function
with the new limb. Some patients seem unable to tolerate a prosthesis or complete the physical
rehabilitation required to successfully use it.
Treatment of Pain and Inflammation
(See also
Chapter 171
)
Treatment of pain and inflammation aims to facilitate movement and improve coordination of muscles and
joints. Nondrug treatments include therapeutic exercise, heat, cold, electrical stimulation, cervical traction,
massage, and acupuncture. These treatments are used for many disorders of muscles, tendons, and
ligaments (see
Table 350-6
). Prescribers should include the following:
• Diagnosis
• Type of treatment (eg, ultrasound, hot pack)
• Location of application (eg, right shoulder, low back)
• Frequency (eg, once/day, every other day)
• Duration (eg, 10 days, 1 wk)
Heat:
Heat provides temporary relief in subacute and chronic traumatic and inflammatory disorders (eg,
sprains, strains, fibrositis, tenosynovitis, muscle spasm, myositis, back pain, whiplash injuries, various
forms of arthritis, arthralgia, neuralgia). Heat increases blood flow and the extensibility of connective
tissue; heat also decreases joint stiffness, pain, and muscle spasm and helps relieve inflammation,
edema, and exudates. Heat application may be superficial (infrared heat, hot packs, paraffin bath,
hydrotherapy) or deep (ultrasound). Intensity and duration of the physiologic effects depend mainly on
tissue temperature, rate of temperature elevation, and area treated.
Infrared heat
is applied with a heat lamp, usually for 20 min/day. Contraindications include any advanced
heart disorder, peripheral vascular disease, impaired skin sensation (particularly to temperature and
pain), and significant hepatic or renal insufficiency. Precautions must be taken to avoid burns.
Hot packs
are cotton cloth containers filled with silicate gel; they are boiled in water or
[Fig. 350-2.
Correct cane height.]
warmed in a microwave oven, then applied to the skin. The packs must not be too hot. Wrapping the
packs in several layers of towels helps protect the skin from burns. Contraindications are the same as
those for infrared heat.
For a
paraffin bath,
the affected area is dipped in, immersed in, or painted with melted wax that has been
heated to 49° C. The heat can be retained by wrapping the affected area with towels for 20 min. Paraffin
is usually applied to small joints—typically, by dipping or immersion for a hand and by painting for a knee
or an elbow. Paraffin should not be applied to open wounds or used on patients allergic to it. A paraffin
bath is particularly useful for finger arthritis.
Hydrotherapy
may be used to enhance wound healing. Agitated warm water stimulates blood flow and
debrides burns and wounds. This treatment is often given in a Hubbard tank (a large industrial whirlpool)
with water heated to 35.5 to 37.7° C. Total immersion in water heated to 37.7 to 40° C may also help relax
muscles and relieve pain. Hydrotherapy is particularly useful with range-of-motion exercises.
[Fig. 350-3.
Fitting crutches.]
===PAGE:3641===
Diathermy
is therapeutic heating of tissues using oscillating high-frequency electromagnetic fields, either
short-wave or microwave. These modalities do not seem superior to simpler forms of heating and are now
seldom used.
Ultrasound
uses high-frequency sound waves to penetrate deep (4 to 10 cm) into the tissue; its effects
are thermal, mechanical, chemical, and biologic. It is indicated for tendinitis, bursitis, contractures,
osteoarthritis, bone injuries, and complex regional pain syndrome. Ultrasound should not be applied to
ischemic tissue, anesthetized areas, or areas of acute infection nor be used to treat hemorrhagic
diathesis or cancer. Also, it should not be applied over the eyes, brain, spinal cord, ears, heart,
reproductive organs, brachial plexus, or bones that are healing.
Cold:
The choice between heat and cold therapies is often empiric. When heat does not work, cold is
applied. However, for acute injury or pain, cold seems to be better than heat. Cold may help relieve
muscle spasm, myofascial or traumatic pain, acute low back pain, and acute inflammation; cold may also
help induce some local anesthesia. Cold is usually used during the first few hours or the day after an
injury; consequently, it is seldom used in physical therapy.
Cold may be applied locally using an ice bag, a cold pack, or volatile fluids (eg, ethyl chloride,
vapocoolant spray), which cool by evaporation. Spread of cold on the skin depends on the thickness of
the epidermis, underlying fat and muscle, water content of the tissue, and rate of blood flow. Care must
be taken to avoid tissue damage and hypothermia. Cold should not be applied over poorly perfused
areas.
Electrical stimulation:
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) uses low current at lowfrequency oscillation to relieve pain. Patients feel a gentle tingling sensation without increased muscle
tension. Depending on the severity of pain, 20 min to a few hours of stimulation may be applied several
times daily. Often, patients are taught to use the TENS device and decide when to apply treatment.
Because TENS may cause arrhythmia, it is contraindicated in patients with any advanced heart disorder
or a pacemaker. It should not be applied over the eyes.
[Table 350-6.
Indications for Nondrug Pain Treatments]
Cervical traction:
Cervical traction is often indicated for chronic neck pain due to cervical spondylosis,
disk prolapse, whiplash injuries, or torticollis. Vertical traction (with patients in a sitting position) is more
effective than horizontal traction (with patients lying in bed). Motorized intermittent rhythmic traction with
7.5 to 10 kg is most effective. For best results, traction should be applied with the patient's neck flexed 15
to 20°. Generally, hyperextension of the neck should be avoided because it may increase nerve root
compression in the intervertebral foramina. Traction is usually combined with other physical therapy,
including exercises and manual stretching.
Massage:
Massage may mobilize contracted tissues, relieve pain, and reduce swelling and induration
associated with trauma (eg, fracture, joint injury, sprain, strain, bruise, peripheral nerve injury). Massage
should be considered for low back pain, arthritis, periarthritis, bursitis, neuritis, fibromyalgia, fibrositis,
hemiplegia, paraplegia, quadriplegia, multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, and certain types of cancer.
Massage should not be used to treat infections or thrombophlebitis. It is not advised for patients with
severe allergies because it causes histamine to be released throughout the body. Only a licensed or
certified massage therapist should use massage for treatment of an injury because of variability in
therapists' training and skills.
Acupuncture:
Thin needles are inserted through the skin at specific body sites, frequently far from the
site of pain (. Acupuncture is sometimes used with other treatments to manage acute and
chronic pain.
Cardiovascular Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation may benefit some patients who have coronary artery disease or heart failure or who have
had a recent MI or coronary artery bypass surgery, particularly those who could do activities of daily living
independently and walk before the event. Cardiac rehabilitation aims to help patients maintain or regain
===PAGE:3642===
independence (.
Typically, rehabilitation begins with light activities and progresses on an individualized basis; ECG
monitoring is often used. High-risk patients should exercise only in a well-equipped cardiovascular
rehabilitation facility under the supervision of a trained attendant.
When patients are able, they are taken by wheelchair to a physical therapy gym in the hospital. Exercise
may involve walking, a treadmill, or a stationary bicycle. When patients tolerate these exercises well, they
progress to stair-climbing. If shortness of breath, light-headedness, or chest pain occurs during exercise,
the exercise should be stopped immediately, and cardiac status should be reassessed. Before hospital
discharge, patients are assessed so that an appropriate postdischarge rehabilitation program or exercise
regimen can be recommended.
Physical activity is measured in metabolic equivalents (METs), which are multiples of the resting rate of
O
consumption; 1 MET (the resting rate) equals about 3.5 mL/kg/min of O
(see
Tables 350-7
). Normal working and living activities (excluding recreational activities) rarely exceed 6
METs. Light to moderate housework is about 2 to 4 METs; heavy housework or yard work is about 5 to 6
METs.
For hospitalized patients, physical activity should be controlled so that heart rate remains < 60% of
maximum for that age (eg, about 160 beats/min for people aged 60); for patients recovering at home,
heart rate should remain < 70% of maximum.
For patients who have had an uncomplicated MI, a 2-MET exercise test may be done to evaluate
responses as soon as patients are stable. A 4- to 5-MET exercise test done before discharge helps guide
physical activity at home. Patients who can tolerate a 5-MET exercise test for 6 min can safely do lowintensity activities (eg, light housework) after discharge if they rest sufficiently between each activity.
Unnecessary restriction of activity is detrimental to recovery. The physician and other members of the
rehabilitation team should explain which activities can be done and which cannot and should provide
psychologic support. When discharged, patients can be given a detailed home activity program. Most
elderly patients can be encouraged to resume sexual activity, but they need to stop and rest if necessary
to avoid overexertion. Young couples expend 5 to 6 METs during intercourse; whether elderly couples
expend more or less is unknown.
Stroke Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation after stroke aims to preserve or improve range of motion, muscle strength, bowel and
bladder function, and functional and cognitive abilities. Specific programs are based on the patient's
social situation (eg, prospects of returning to home or work), ability
[Table 350-7.
Endurance Exercises and Their Metabolic Requirement]
to participate in a rehabilitation program supervised by nurses and therapists, learning ability, motivation,
and coping skills. A stroke that impairs comprehension often makes rehabilitation very difficult.
To prevent secondary disabilities (eg, contractures) and help prevent depression, rehabilitation should
begin as soon as patients are medically stable. Preventive measures for pressure ulcers must be started
even before patients are medically stable. Patients can safely begin sitting up once they are fully
conscious and neurologic deficits are no longer progressing, usually ≤ 48 h after the stroke. Early in the
rehabilitation period, when the affected extremities are flaccid, each joint is passively exercised through
the normal range of motion (see
Table 350-1
) 3 to 4 times/day.
Regaining the ability to get out of bed and to transfer to a chair or wheelchair safely and independently is
important for the patient's psychologic and physical well-being. Ambulation problems, spasticity, visual
field defects (eg, hemianopia), incoordination, and aphasia require specific therapy.
Hemiplegia:
For patients with hemiplegia, placing 1 or 2 pillows under the affected arm can prevent
===PAGE:3643===
dislocation of the shoulder. If the arm is flaccid, a well-constructed sling can prevent the weight of the arm
and hand from overstretching the deltoid muscle and subluxating the shoulder. A posterior foot splint
applied with the ankle in a 90° position can prevent equinus deformity (talipes equinus) and footdrop.
Resistive exercise for hemiplegic extremities may increase spasticity and thus is controversial. However,
reeducation and coordination exercises of the affected extremities are added as soon as tolerated, often
within 1 wk. Active and active-assistive range-of-motion exercises are started shortly afterward to maintain
range of motion. Active exercise of the unaffected extremities must be encouraged, as long as it does not
cause fatigue. Various activities of daily living (eg, moving in bed, turning, changing position, sitting up)
should be practiced. For hemiplegic patients, the most important muscle for ambulation is the unaffected
quadriceps. If weak, this muscle must be strengthened to assist the hemiplegic side.
A gait abnormality in hemiplegic patients is caused by many factors (eg, muscle weakness, spasticity,
distorted body image) and is thus difficult to correct. Also, attempts to correct gait often increase
spasticity, may result in muscle fatigue, and may increase the already high risk of falls, which often result
in a hip fracture; functional prognosis of hemiplegic patients with a hip fracture is very poor.
Consequently, as long as hemiplegic patients can walk safely and comfortably, gait correction should not
be tried.
Novel treatments for hemiplegia include the following:
•
Constraint-induced movement therapy:
The functional limb is restrained during waking hours,
except during specific activities, and patients are forced to do tasks mainly with the affected extremity.
•
Robotic therapy:
Robotic devices are used to provide intensive repetition of the therapeutic
movement, guide an affected extremity in executing the movement, provide feedback (eg, on a
computer screen) for patients, and measure patient progress.
•
Partial weight-supported ambulation:
A device (eg, treadmill) that bears part of a patient's weight is
used during ambulation. The amount of weight borne and speed of ambulation can be adjusted. This
approach is often used with robotics, which allows patients to contribute to ambulation but provides
force as needed for ambulation.
•
Total body vibration:
Patients stand on an exercise machine with a platform that vibrates by rapidly
shifting weight from one foot to the other. The movement stimulates reflexive muscle contraction.
Ambulation problems:
Before ambulation exercises can be started, patients must be able to stand.
Patients first learn to stand from the sitting position. The height of the seat may need to be adjusted.
Patients must stand with the hips and knees fully extended, leaning slightly forward and toward the
unaffected side. Using the parallel bars is the safest way to practice standing.
The goal of ambulation exercises is to establish and maintain a safe gait, not to restore a normal gait.
Most hemiplegic patients have a gait abnormality, which is caused by many factors (eg, muscle
weakness, spasticity, distorted body image) and is thus difficult to correct. Also, attempts to correct gait
often increase spasticity, may result in muscle fatigue, and may increase the already high risk of falls.
During ambulation exercises, patients place the feet > 15 cm (6 in) apart and grasp the parallel bars with
the unaffected hand. Patients take a shorter step with the hemiplegic leg and a longer step with the
unaffected leg. Patients who begin walking without the parallel bars may need physical assistance from
and later close supervision by the therapist. Generally,
patients use a cane or walker when first walking
without the parallel bars. The diameter of the cane handle should be large enough to accommodate an
arthritic hand.
For stair-climbing, ascent starts with the better leg, and descent with the affected leg (good leads up; bad
leads down). If possible, patients ascend and descend with the railing on the unaffected side, so that they
can grasp the railing. Looking up the staircase may cause vertigo and should be avoided. During descent,
patients should use a cane. The cane should be moved to the lower step shortly before descending with
the bad leg.
===PAGE:3644===
Patients must learn to prevent falls, which are the most common accident among stroke patients and
which often result in hip fracture. Usually, patients explain the fall by saying that their knees gave way. For
hemiplegic patients, who almost always fall on their hemiplegic side, leaning their affected side against a
railing (when standing or climbing stairs) can help prevent falls. Doing strengthening exercises for weak
muscles, particularly in the trunk and legs, can also help.
For patients with symptomatic orthostatic hypotension, treatment includes support stockings, drugs, and
tilt table training. Because hemiplegic patients are prone to vertigo, they should change body position
slowly and take a moment after standing to establish equilibrium before walking. Comfortable, supportive
shoes with rubber soles and with heels ≤ 2 cm (3/4 in) should be worn.
Spasticity:
In some stroke patients, spasticity develops. Spasticity may be painful and debilitating.
Slightly spastic knee extensors can lock the knee during standing or cause hyperextension (genu
recurvatum), which may require a knee brace with an extension stop. Resistance applied to spastic
plantar flexors causes ankle clonus; a short leg brace without a spring mechanism minimizes this problem.
Flexor spasticity develops in most hemiplegic hands and wrists. Unless patients with flexor spasticity do
range-of-motion exercises several times a day, flexion contracture may develop rapidly, resulting in pain
and difficulty maintaining personal hygiene. Patients and family members are taught to do these
exercises, which are strongly encouraged. A hand or wrist splint may also be useful, particularly at night.
One that is easy to apply and clean is best.
Heat or cold therapy can temporarily decrease spasticity and allow the muscle to be stretched.
Hemiplegic patients may be given benzodiazepines to minimize apprehension and anxiety, particularly
during the initial stage of rehabilitation, but not to reduce spasticity. The effectiveness of long-term
benzodiazepine therapy for reducing spasticity is questionable. Methocarbamol has limited value in
relieving spasticity and causes sedation.
Hemianopia:
Patients with hemianopia (defective vision or blindness in half the visual field of one or
both eyes) should be made aware of it and taught to move their heads toward the hemiplegic side when
scanning. Family members can help by placing important objects and by approaching the patient on the
patient's unaffected side. Repositioning the bed so that patients can see a person entering the room
through the doorway may be useful. While walking, patients with hemianopia tend to bump into the door
frame or obstacles on the hemiplegic side; they may need special training to avoid this problem.
When reading, patients who have difficulty looking to the left may benefit from drawing a red line on the
left side of the newspaper column. When they reach the end of a line of text, they scan to the left of the
column until they see the red line, cueing them to begin reading the next line. Using a rule to keep
focused on each line of text may also help.
Occupational therapy:
After a stroke, fine coordination may be absent, causing patients to become
frustrated. Occupational therapists may need to modify patients' activities and recommend assistive
devices (see
Table 350-4
).
Occupational therapists should also evaluate the home for safety and determine the extent of social
support. They can help obtain any necessary devices and equipment (eg, bathtub bench, grab bars by
the bathtub or toilet). Occupational therapists can also recommend modifications that enable patients to
do activities of daily living (ADLs) as safely and independently as possible—for example, rearranging the
furniture in living areas and removing clutter. Patients and caretakers are taught how to transfer between
surfaces (eg, shower, toilet, bed, chair) and, if necessary, how to modify ways of doing ADLs. For
example, patients may be taught to dress or shave using only one hand and to eliminate unnecessary
motion while preparing food or shopping for groceries. Therapists may suggest using clothing and shoes
with touch fasteners (eg, Velcro) or dinner plates with rims and rubber grips (to facilitate handling).
Patients with impairments in cognition and perception are taught ways to compensate. For example, they
can use drug organizers (eg, containers marked for each day of the week).
Leg Amputation Rehabilitation
===PAGE:3645===
Before amputation, the physician describes to the patient the extensive postsurgical rehabilitation
program that is needed. Psychologic counseling may be indicated. The rehabilitation team and the patient
decide whether a prosthesis or a wheelchair is needed.
Rehabilitation teaches ambulation skills; it includes exercises to improve general conditioning and
balance, to stretch the hip and knee, to strengthen all extremities, and to help patients tolerate the
prosthesis. Because ambulation requires a 10 to 40% increase in energy expenditure after below-theknee amputation and a 60 to 100% increase after above-the-knee amputation, endurance exercises may
be indicated. As soon as patients are medically stable, rehabilitation should be started to help prevent
secondary disabilities. Elderly patients should begin standing and doing balancing exercises with parallel
bars as soon as possible.
Flexion contracture of the hip or knee may develop rapidly, making fitting and using the prosthesis
difficult; contractures can be prevented with extension braces made by occupational therapists.
Physical therapists teach patients how to care for the stump and how to recognize the earliest signs of
skin breakdown.
Stump Conditioning and Prostheses
Stump conditioning promotes the natural process of stump shrinking that must occur before a prosthesis
can be used. After only a few days of conditioning, the stump may have shrunk greatly. An elastic stump
shrinker or elastic bandages worn 24 h/day can help taper the stump and prevent edema. The stump
shrinker is easy to apply, but bandages may be preferred because they better control the amount and
location of pressure. However, application of elastic bandages requires skill, and bandages must be
reapplied whenever they become loose.
Early ambulation with a temporary prosthesis helps in the following ways:
• Enables the amputee to be active
• Accelerates stump shrinkage
• Prevents flexion contracture
• Reduces phantom limb pain
The socket of the pylon (the internal framework or skeleton of a prosthesis) is made of plaster of paris
(calcium sulfate hemihydrate); it should fit the stump snugly. Various temporary prostheses with adjustable
sockets are available. Patients with a temporary prosthesis can start ambulation exercises on the parallel
bars and progress to walking with crutches or canes until a permanent prosthesis is made.
The permanent prosthesis should be lightweight and meet the needs and safety requirements of the
patient. If the prosthesis is made before the stump stops shrinking, adjustments may be needed.
Therefore, manufacture of a permanent prosthesis is generally delayed a few weeks to allow shrinkage
of the stump. For most elderly patients with a below-the-knee amputation, a patellar tendon-bearing
prosthesis with a solid-ankle, cushion-heel foot, and suprapatellar cuff suspension is best. Unless
patients have special needs, a below-the-knee prosthesis with thigh corset and waist belt is not
prescribed because it is heavy and bulky. For above-the-knee amputees, several knee-locking options
are available according to the patient's skills and activity level.
Care of the stump and prosthesis:
Patients must learn to care for their stump. Because a leg
prosthesis is intended only for ambulation, patients should remove it before going to sleep. At bedtime,
the stump should be inspected thoroughly (with a mirror if inspected by the patient), washed with mild
soap and warm water, dried thoroughly, then dusted with talcum powder. Patients should treat the
following possible problems:
===PAGE:3646===
• Dry skin: Lanolin or petrolatum may be applied to the stump.
• Excessive sweating: An unscented antiperspirant may be applied.
• Inflamed skin: The irritant must be removed immediately, and talcum powder or a lowpotency
corticosteroid cream or ointment should be applied.
• Broken skin: The prosthesis should not be worn until the wound has healed.
The stump sock should be changed daily, and mild soap may be used to clean the inside of the socket.
Standard prostheses are neither waterproof nor water-resistant. Therefore, if even part of the prosthesis
becomes wet, it must be dried immediately and thoroughly; heat should not be applied. For patients who
swim or prefer to shower with a prosthesis, a prosthesis that can tolerate immersion can be made.
Complications
Stump pain
is the most common complaint. Common causes include
• A poorly fitted prosthetic socket: This cause is the most common.
•
Neuroma: An amputation neuroma is usually palpable. Daily ultrasound treatment for 5 to 10 sessions
may be most effective. Other treatments include injection of corticosteroids or analgesics into the
neuroma or the surrounding area, cryotherapy, and continuous tight bandaging of the stump. Surgical
resection often has disappointing results.
• Spur formation at the amputated end of the bone: Spurs may be diagnosed by palpation and x-ray. The
only effective treatment is surgical resection.
Phantom limb sensation
(a painless awareness of the amputated limb possibly accompanied by
tingling) is experienced by some new amputees. This sensation may last several months or years but
usually disappears without treatment. Frequently, patients sense only part of the missing limb, often the
foot, which is the last phantom sensation to disappear. Phantom limb sensation is not harmful; however,
patients, without thinking, commonly attempt to stand with both legs and fall, particularly when they wake
at night to go to the bathroom.
Phantom limb pain
is less common and can be severe and difficult to control. Some experts think it is
more likely to occur if patients had a painful condition before amputation or if pain was not adequately
controlled intraoperatively and postoperatively. Various treatments, such as simultaneous exercise of
amputated and contralateral limbs, massage of the stump, finger percussion of the stump, use of
mechanical devices (eg, a vibrator), and ultrasound, are reportedly effective. Drugs (eg, gabapentin) may
help.
Skin breakdown
tends to occur because the prosthesis presses on and rubs the skin and because
moisture collects between the stump and prosthetic socket. Skin breakdown may be the first indication
that the prosthesis needs adjustment and needs to be managed immediately. The first sign of skin
breakdown is redness; then cuts, blisters, and sores may develop, the prosthesis is often painful or
impossible to wear for long periods of time, and infection can develop. Several measures can help
prevent or delay skin breakdown:
• Having an interface that fits well
• Maintaining a stable body weight (even small changes in weight can affect fit)
• Eating a healthy diet and drinking lots of water (to control body weight and maintain healthy skin)
• For patients with diabetes, monitoring and controlling their blood sugar level (to help prevent vascular
disease and thus maintain blood flow to the skin)
===PAGE:3647===
• For patients with a lower-limb prosthesis, maintaining body alignment (eg, wearing only shoes with a
similar heel height)
However, even with a good fit, problems can occur. The stump changes in shape and size throughout a
day, depending on activity level, diet, and the weather. Thus, there are times when the interface fits well
and times when it fits less well. In response to such ongoing changes, people can help maintain a good fit
by switching to a thicker or thinner liner or sock, by using a liner and a sock, or by adding or removing
thin-ply socks. But even so, the stump's size may vary enough to cause skin breakdown. If there are signs
of skin breakdown, patients should promptly see a health care practitioner and a prosthetist; when
possible they should also avoid wearing the prosthesis until it can be adjusted.
Hip Surgery Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is started as soon as possible after hip fracture surgery. The first goals may be to increase
strength and to prevent atrophy on the unaffected side. Initially, only isometric exercise of the affected
limb while it is fully extended is permitted. Placement of a pillow under the knee is contraindicated
because it may lead to flexion contracture of the hip and knee.
Gradual mobilization of the affected limb usually results in full ambulation. Speed of rehabilitation
depends partly on the type of surgery done. For example, after prosthetic hip replacement, rehabilitation
usually progresses more rapidly, less rehabilitation is needed, and the functional outcome is better than
after nail-and-plate or pin-and-plate fixation. Ideally, full weight bearing starts on the 2nd day after surgery.
Ambulation exercises are started after 4 to 8 days (assuming that patients can bear their full weight and
can balance), and stair-climbing exercises are started after about 11 days.
Patients are taught to do daily exercises to strengthen the trunk muscles and quadriceps of the affected
leg. Prolonged lifting or pushing of heavy items, stooping, reaching, or jumping can be harmful. During
ambulation, the amount of mechanical stress is about the same whether patients use 1 or 2 canes, but
using 2 may interfere with certain activities of daily living (ADLs). Patients should not sit on a chair,
particularly a low one, for a long period and should use the chair arm for support
when standing up. While
sitting, they should keep their legs uncrossed.
Occupational therapists teach patients how to modify ways of doing basic ADLs (BADLs) and
instrumental ADLs (IADLs) safely after hip replacement, thus promoting healing and improving mobility.
For example, patients may learn the following:
• To keep their hip correctly aligned
• To wash dishes and iron while sitting on a high stool
• To use a pillow to raise the seat of the car while transferring in and out
• To use long-handled devices (eg, reachers, shoe horns) to minimize bending over
This instruction may occur in the hospital, in longer-term rehabilitation settings, in the patient's home
immediately after discharge, or in outpatient settings.
Rehabilitation for Other Disorders
Arthritis:
Patients with arthritis can benefit from activities and exercises to increase joint range of motion
and strength and from strategies to protect the joints. For example, patients may be advised
• To slide a pot of boiling water containing pasta rather than carry it from the stove to the sink (to avoid
undue pain and strain to joints)
• How to get in and out of the bathtub safely
• To get a raised toilet seat, a bathtub bench, or both (to reduce pain and stress on the lower-extremity
===PAGE:3648===
joints)
• To wrap foam, cloth, or tape around the handles of objects (eg, knives, cooking pots and pans) to
cushion the grip
• To use tools with larger, ergonomically designed handles
Such instruction may occur in outpatient settings, in the home via a home health care agency, or in private
practice.
Blindness:
Patients are taught to rely more on the other senses, to develop specific skills, and to use
devices for the blind (eg, Braille, cane, reading machine). Therapy aims to help patients function to their
maximum and become independent, to restore psychologic security, and to help patients deal with and
influence the attitudes of other people. Therapy varies depending on the way vision was lost (suddenly or
slowly and progressively), extent of vision loss, the patient's functional needs, and coexisting deficits. For
example, patients with peripheral neuropathy and diminished tactile sensation in the fingers may have
difficulty reading Braille. Many blind people need psychologic counseling (usually cognitive-behavioral
therapy) to help them better cope with their condition.
For ambulation, therapy may involve learning to use a cane; canes used by the blind are usually white
and longer and thinner than ordinary canes. People who use a wheelchair are taught to use one arm to
operate the wheelchair and the other to use a cane. People who prefer to use a trained dog instead of a
cane are taught to handle and care for the dog. When walking with a sighted person, a blind person can
hold onto the bent elbow of the sighted person, rather than use an ambulation aid. The sighted person
should not lead the blind person by the hand because some blind people perceive this action as dominant
and controlling.
COPD:
Patients with COPD can benefit from exercises to increase endurance and from strategies to
simplify activities and thus conserve energy. Activities and exercises that encourage use of the upper and
lower extremities are used to increase muscle aerobic capacity, which decreases overall oxygen
requirement and eases breathing. Supervising patients while they engage in activity helps motivate them
and makes them feel more secure. Such instruction may occur in medical facilities or in the patient's
home.
Head injury:
The term head injury is often used interchangeably with traumatic brain injury (TBI—. Abnormalities vary and may include muscle weakness, spasticity, incoordination, and ataxia;
cognitive dysfunction (eg, memory loss, loss of problem-solving skills, language and visual disturbances)
is common.
Early intervention by rehabilitation specialists is indispensable for maximal functional recovery (see also
p.
). Such intervention includes prevention of secondary disabilities (eg, pressure ulcers, joint
contractures), prevention of pneumonia, and family education. As early as possible, rehabilitation
specialists should evaluate patients to establish baseline findings. Later, before starting rehabilitation
therapy, patients should be reevaluated; these findings are compared with baseline findings to help
prioritize treatment. Patients with severe cognitive dysfunction require extensive cognitive therapy, which
is often begun immediately after injury and continued for months or years.
Spinal cord injury:
Specific rehabilitation therapy varies depending on the patient's abnormalities, which
depend on the level and
extent (partial or complete) of the injury (see
Chapter 325
, particularly
Table 325-1
. Complete transsection causes flaccid paralysis; partial transsection causes
spastic paralysis of muscles innervated by the affected segment. A patient's functional capacity depends
on the level of injury ( and the development of complications (eg, joint contractures, pressure ulcers, pneumonia).
The affected area must be immobilized surgically or nonsurgically as soon as possible and throughout the
acute phase. During the acute phase, daily routine care should include measures to prevent contractures,
pressure ulcers, and pneumonia; all measures needed to prevent other complications (eg, orthostatic
hypotension, atelectasis, deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism) should also be taken. Placing
===PAGE:3649===
patients on a tilt table and increasing the angle gradually toward the upright position may help reestablish
hemodynamic balance. Compression stockings, an elastic bandage, or an abdominal binder may prevent
orthostatic hypotension.
===PAGE:3650===
Chapter 351. Medicolegal Issues
Introduction
Medicine is practiced within an expanding and evolving system of legal rights and obligations, patient
protections, health care financing regulation, and standards of care. Thus, health care can involve
significant legal issues, including capacity of patients to make health care decisions, confidentiality of
medical information, advance directives, and malpractice liability.
Capacity (Competence) and Incapacity
Historically, "incapacity" was considered primarily a clinical finding, and "incompetency" was considered a
legal finding. That distinction is no longer firmly recognized; most state laws now use "incapacity" rather
than "incompetency," although the terms are frequently used interchangeably. The key distinction now is
between clinical incapacity and legal incapacity to make a health care decision.
Patients who have clinical and legal capacity have the right to make health care decisions, including
refusal of medically necessary care, even if death may result from refusal. Patients who lack either
capacity cannot make health care decisions. However, if a patient deemed by a physician to lack clinical
capacity expresses a preference, the physician is not entitled to override that preference unless the
patient is also found by a court to lack legal capacity to make that decision.
Clinical capacity:
Clinical capacity to make health care decisions is the ability to understand the benefits
and risks of the proposed health care, to understand possible alternatives, and to make and communicate
a health care decision. Health care practitioners determine this type of capacity clinically and document
the determination process. The courts become involved only when the determination itself or another
aspect of the process is challenged.
Clinical capacity is specific to a particular health care decision and thus is limited to that decision. The
level of clinical capacity needed to make a health care decision depends on the complexity of that
decision. Patients with some decrease in capacity, even those with fairly severe cognitive deficits, may
still have enough capacity to make simple health care decisions, such as whether to allow a rectal
examination or placement of an IV. The same patient may lack the capacity to decide whether to
participate in a clinical trial. All feasible attempts should be made to involve the patient in decision making.
Ignoring the decision of patients with capacity or accepting the decision of patients without capacity is
unethical and risks civil liability. A patient's ability to carry out a decision is also important for physicians to
assess. For example, a patient with a broken leg may be able to make decisions but be unable to carry
them out. Providing the necessary support to carry out a decision becomes an important goal of care.
Capacity may be intermittent, variable, and affected by the environment. Patients who lack capacity due
to intoxication, delirium, coma, severe depression, agitation, or other impairment may regain capacity
when their impairment resolves. To obtain consent to treat a patient who lacks clinical capacity, health
care practitioners must contact an agent or proxy designated in the patient's durable power
of attorney for
health care or another legally authorized surrogate (see below). If urgent or emergency care is needed
(eg, for an unconscious patient after an acute event) and there is no designated surrogate or the
surrogate is unavailable, the doctrine of presumed consent applies: Patients are presumed to consent to
any necessary treatment.
Legal capacity:
Legal capacity (also called competency) is a legal status; it cannot be determined by
health care practitioners. In the US, people aged ≥ 18 yr are automatically considered legally capable of
making health care decisions for themselves. Emancipated minors are people below the age of majority
(usually 18) who are also considered legally capable. The definition of this group varies by state but
generally includes minors who are married, who are in the armed forces, or who have obtained a court
decree of emancipation.
People remain legally capable until a judge with appropriate jurisdiction declares them legally
incapacitated with respect to some or all areas of functioning. The legal requirements for declaring legal
incapacity vary by state. However, substantiation of all of the following is typically required:
===PAGE:3651===
• A disabling condition (eg, intellectual disability [mental retardation], a mental disorder, dementia, altered
consciousness, chronic use of drugs)
• Inability to receive and evaluate information or to make or communicate decisions
• Inability to meet essential requirements of physical health, safety, or self-care without protective
intervention
If physicians question a person's legal capacity, they may seek a court's determination. Physicians may
be asked to testify at or provide documentation for a hearing to determine legal capacity.
When the court declares a person legally incapacitated, it appoints a guardian or conservator to make
legally binding decisions for the person in a specific range of matters. Courts can also make decisions
about disputed issues (eg, the meaning of a particular instruction in the patient's living will about which
parties disagree).
Informed Consent
Consent of the patient is a prerequisite for any medical intervention. However, that consent often does
not need to be expressed. For emergency care, consent is normally presumed. For interventions
considered routine and unlikely to cause harm (eg, routine phlebotomy, placement of an IV line),
circumstances are typically considered to imply consent. For example, by holding out their arm, patients
are presumed to indicate consent to receive certain routine interventions. For more invasive or risky
interventions, express informed consent is always required.
To give informed consent, patients must have legal and clinical capacity (. Health care
practitioners obtaining informed consent must be qualified to explain the risks and benefits of the
intervention and to answer appropriate questions. The law requires that health care practitioners take
reasonable steps to communicate adequately with patients who do not speak English or who have other
communication barriers.
Ethical and legal authorities generally agree that health care practitioners are obligated to ensure, at a
minimum, that patients understand
• Their current medical status, including its likely course if no treatment is pursued
• Potentially helpful treatments, including a description and explanation of potential risks and benefits
• Usually, the practitioner's professional opinion as to the best alternative
• Uncertainties associated with each of these elements
Generally, these discussions are noted in the medical record, and a document describing the discussion
is signed by the patient.
Although practitioners are ethically bound to provide sufficient information and to encourage decisions
judged to be in the patient's best interest, patients still have the right to refuse treatment. A patient's
refusal of treatment is not considered to be attempted suicide, nor is the health care practitioner's
compliance with the patient's wishes legally considered physician-assisted suicide. Rather, the
subsequent death is considered legally to be a natural consequence of the disease process itself.
A refusal of care, if puzzling, should prompt the health care practitioner to initiate further discussion. If
refusal of treatment will hurt other people, such as a minor child or other dependent, ethical and legal
consultation should be sought.
Consent and Surrogate Decision Making
===PAGE:3652===
When immediate decisions are medically required, the doctrine of presumed consent applies (see above).
In other circumstances, consent must be obtained.
Children:
For most nonemergency medical decisions affecting minors, medical care cannot proceed
without a parent's or guardian's consent. The parent's or guardian's decision can be overridden only if a
court determines that the decision constitutes neglect or abuse of the minor. In some states, minors can
consent to certain medical treatments (eg, treatment of sexually transmitted diseases, prescriptions for
birth control, abortion) without parental permission. Individual state law must be consulted.
Adults:
When adult patients lack capacity to consent to or refuse medical treatment, health care
practitioners must rely on an authorized surrogate for consent and decision making. All surrogates
—whether appointed by the individual, by default, or by the court—have an obligation to follow the
expressed wishes of the patient and to act in the patient's best interests, taking into account the patient's
personal values to the extent known.
If adult patients already have a court-appointed guardian with authority to make health care decisions, the
guardian is the authorized surrogate. If patients who lack capacity have a durable power of attorney for
health care, the agent or proxy appointed by that document is authorized to make health care decisions
within the scope of authority granted by the document. Generally, specific instructions that are given in a
living will, health care declaration, or other advance directive executed by patients while capacitated can
be relied on.
If the decision of an authorized agent or proxy seems to conflict directly with instructions in a living will,
the outcome depends on the scope of discretion given to the agent or proxy. Normally, the durable power
of attorney for health care confers broad decision-making discretion on the agent. Nevertheless, the
health care practitioner should determine whether the document gives the agent broad discretion beyond
the written instructions or limits the agent to the written instructions. Legal advice may be needed.
If patients have no authorized surrogate, health care practitioners usually rely on the next of kin or even a
close friend. However, the exact scope of authority and the priority of permissible surrogates vary by
state. Typically, the order of priority is a spouse (or domestic partner in jurisdictions that recognize this
status), an adult child, a parent, a sibling, then possibly other relatives or a close friend. If more than one
person has the same priority (eg, several adult children), consensus is preferred, but some states allow
health care practitioners to rely on a majority decision.
If a patient's decision-making capacity, a surrogate's authority, or the ethical or legal appropriateness of a
particular treatment decision is disputed, consultation with an institutional ethics committee or similar body
is advisable. If agreement on an ethically and legally sound resolution cannot be reached, health care
practitioners may need to request court review. Many institutions make the ethics committee available on
short notice (eg, in 1 or 2 days); judicial review is typically more time-consuming.
Scope:
Patient choice is not limitless. For example, health care practitioners are not required to provide
treatments that are medically inappropriate, such as those that are against generally accepted health care
standards. However, sometimes there are legitimate differences of opinion regarding what is
inappropriate. Labeling a treatment as "futile" does not generally help if said treatment may affect
outcomes other than mortality or morbidity that are important to the patient. Physicians do not have to act
against their conscience, but if they cannot comply with a requested course of action, they may have a
responsibility to try to transfer a patient to another physician or institution of the patient's choice.
Confidentiality and HIPAA
Traditionally, ethical health care has always included the need to keep patients' medical information
confidential. However, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA—see
www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa
) has codified the responsibility of health care providers. In HIPAA, "health care
providers" include health plans, health care clearing-houses, and health care practitioners who
electronically conduct financial and administrative transactions (eg, enrollment, billing, eligibility
verification). Key provisions of HIPAA involve the following areas.
===PAGE:3653===
Access to medical records:
Generally, patients should be able to see and obtain copies of their
medical records and request corrections if they identify errors.
Notice of privacy practices:
Health care providers must provide a notice about their possible uses of
personal medical information and about patient rights under HIPAA regulations.
Limits on use of personal medical information:
HIPAA limits how health care providers may use
individually identifiable (protected) health information. The act does not restrict physicians, nurses, and
other practitioners from sharing information needed to treat their
patients. However, practitioners may use
or share only the minimum amount of protected information needed for a particular purpose. In most
situations, personal health information may not be used for purposes unrelated to health care. For
example, a patient must sign a specific authorization before a health care provider can release medical
information to a life insurer, a bank, a marketing firm, or another outside business for purposes unrelated
to the patient's current health care needs.
Marketing:
Marketing is communication designed to encourage people to purchase a particular product
or service. HIPAA requires that the patient's specific authorization must be obtained before disclosing
information for marketing. The health care practitioner must disclose any payments that will be received
as a result of marketing. However, health care practitioners can freely communicate with patients about
treatment options, products, and other health-related services, including disease-management programs.
Confidential communications:
A patient can request that health care practitioners take reasonable
steps to ensure that their communications with the patient are confidential. For example, patients could
ask a physician to call their office rather than home. Nonetheless, unless the patient objects, practitioners
can share medical information with a patient's immediate family members or someone known to be a close
personal friend if the information relates directly to that person's involvement with the patient's care or
payment for care. Practitioners are expected to exercise professional judgment.
For purposes of the privacy rule, an authorized personal representative of the patient (eg, a proxy
appointed in a power of attorney for health care or a state-authorized decision-making surrogate) should
be treated the same as the patient. Thus, the representative has the same access to information and may
exercise the same rights regarding confidentiality of information. Nevertheless, practitioners may restrict
information or access if there are reasonable concerns about domestic violence, abuse, or neglect by the
representative.
Some communication cannot remain confidential. Health care practitioners are sometimes required by law
to disclose certain information, usually because the condition may present a danger to other people. For
example, certain infectious diseases (eg, HIV, syphilis, TB) must be reported to state or local public health
agencies. Conditions that might seriously impair a patient's ability to drive, such as dementia or recent
seizures, must be reported to the Department of Motor Vehicles in some states.
Complaints:
Patients may file complaints about compliance with these privacy practices. Complaints can
be made directly to the health care practitioner or to the Office for Civil Rights in the US Department of
Health and Human Services. Patients do not have a right to file a private lawsuit under HIPAA. There are
civil and criminal penalties for misuse of personal health information; however, such penalties should not
worry health care practitioners who, in good faith, make reasonable attempts to comply.
Advance Directives
Advance directives are legal documents that extend a person's control over health care decisions in the
event that the person becomes incapacitated. They are called advance directives because they direct
preferences before incapacitation occurs. There are 2 primary types:
• Living will: Expresses preferences for end-of-life care
• Durable power of attorney for health care: Designates a surrogate decision maker
Every state in the US recognizes and has defined these documents by statute to provide a simple legal
===PAGE:3654===
tool by which people can express their wishes and have them honored. However, advance directives are
not the only means of expressing such wishes. Any authentic expression of patient's wishes should be
honored.
An advance directive cannot be completed after a patient becomes mentally incapacitated, and in most
states, it does not become effective until after incapacity has been determined. If no advance directive
has been prepared, an authorized surrogate ( must be identified or appointed to make health
care decisions.
Living will:
A living will expresses a patient's preferences for end-of-life health care (it is called a "living"
will because it is in effect while the person is still alive). In some states, the document is called a directive
to doctors or a declaration. State laws vary greatly regarding scope and applicability of living wills.
A living will allows people to express preferences for the amount and nature of their health care, from no
interventions to maximum care. Detailed treatment preferences are desirable because they provide more
specific guidance to practitioners. A living will cannot compel health care practitioners to provide health
care that is medically or ethically unwarranted.
To be valid, a living will must comply with state law. Some states require that living wills
be written in a
fairly standardized way. Others are more flexible, permitting any language as long as the document is
appropriately signed and witnessed. In most states, a health care practitioner involved in the patient's
care cannot be a witness. A document that does not comply with state law requirements for statutory
living wills may still serve as a valid communication of a patient's wishes as long as it is an authentic
expression of the patient's wishes.
Living wills go into effect upon the loss of ability to make health care decisions or the existence of a
medical condition specified in the directive—typically a terminal condition, permanent vegetative state, or
the end-stage of a chronic condition. Often, state law provides a process for confirming and documenting
the loss of decisional capacity and the medical condition.
Durable power of attorney for health care:
In this document, one person (the principal) names
another person (the agent, proxy, or the attorney-in-fact) to make decisions about health care and
only
health care. In most states, these documents become legally effective when the principal loses clinical
capacity to make health care decisions. Some states recognize
immediately
effective durable powers of
attorney for health care, but as a practical matter, the principal retains decision-making authority until
incapacity regardless, so there is little practical difference. Like the living will, the durable power of
attorney for health care may be referred to by different terms in different states.
While a living will states a person's specific preferences regarding medical treatment, a durable power of
attorney for health care designates an agent to make health care decisions. People who have both a
living will and a durable power of attorney for health care should stipulate which should be followed if the
documents seem to conflict. Because predicting future circumstances in all of their complexity is virtually
impossible and because the durable power of attorney for health care designates a decision maker who
can respond to here-and-now circumstances, a durable power of attorney is far more practical and
flexible than a living will. The agent is granted the power to discuss medical alternatives with the
physicians and make decisions if an accident or illness incapacitates the person. In most states, a health
care practitioner involved in the care of the patient cannot serve as agent for health care matters, unless
the practitioner is a close relative. The durable power of attorney for health care can include a living will
provision or any other specific instructions but, preferably, should do so only as guidance for the agent,
rather than as a binding instruction.
The durable power of attorney for health care should name an alternate or successor in case the firstnamed person is unable or unwilling to serve as agent. Two or more people may be named to serve
together (jointly) or alone (severally), although reliance on multiple concurrent agents can be problematic.
A
jointly held power
requires that all agents agree and act together. In this arrangement, all named
agents must be contacted and must agree on every decision. However, this arrangement can be unwieldy
because agreement may be difficult to achieve and because one of the agents may be unreachable when
a critical decision must be made. A
severally held power
may be more functional because it allows any
===PAGE:3655===
named agent to act alone. However, this arrangement can also lead to disagreement, and the courts may
eventually have to become involved. For example, if ≥ 2 people serve jointly in severally held power and
they absolutely cannot agree, the parties are likely to end up in court.
The use of the durable power of attorney for health care is valuable for adults of all ages. It is especially
critical for unmarried couples, same-sex partners, friends, or other individuals who are considered legally
unrelated and who wish to grant each other the legal authority to make health care decisions and to
ensure rights of visitation and access to medical information.
Ideally, physicians should obtain a copy of a patient's living will and durable power of attorney for health
care, review the contents with the patient while the patient is still capable, and make it part of the medical
record. A copy of the durable power of attorney for health care should also be given to the patient's
appointed agent and another copy placed with important papers. The patient's attorney should hold a
copy of all documents. An increasing number of states offer optional electronic registries for recording
advance directives.
Do-Not-Resuscitate Orders
The do-not-resuscitate (DNR) order placed in a patient's medical record by a physician informs the
medical staff that CPR ( should not be done. This order has been useful
in preventing
unnecessary and unwanted invasive treatment at the end of life.
Physicians discuss with patients the possibility of cardiopulmonary arrest, describe CPR procedures, and
ask patients about treatment preferences. If the patient is incapable of making a decision about CPR, a
surrogate may make the decision based on the patient's previously expressed preferences or, if such
preferences are unknown, in accordance with the patient's best interests.
Almost all states have specialized DNR protocols for patients who are living at home or in any nonhospital
setting. These protocols typically require the signing of an out-of-hospital DNR order by both the
physician and patient (or the patient's surrogate) and the use of a special identifier (eg, a bracelet or
brightly colored form) that is worn by or kept near the patient. If emergency medical personnel are called
in case of emergency and see an intact identifier, they will provide comfort care only and not attempt
resuscitation. These protocols are important to know because normally, emergency medical technicians
are not expected to read or rely upon a living will or durable power of attorney for health care.
A DNR order does not mean "do not treat." Rather, it means only that CPR will not be done. Other
treatments (eg, antibiotic therapy, transfusions, dialysis, use of a ventilator) that may prolong life can still
be provided. CPR itself usually does not result in long-term, neurologically intact survival, but other
treatments, including aggressive or critical care that prevents cardiac arrest, can. Thus, whether to
pursue other treatments is a more important decision than whether to resuscitate. A person with a DNR
order can still be treated aggressively in an intensive care unit if their condition warrants.
Medical Malpractice
Patients can sue health care practitioners if they feel they have been injured. However, successful
medical malpractice lawsuits require proof of the following:
• The care provided was below the ordinary standard of care that would be provided by similar health
care practitioners under similar circumstances.
• A professional relationship existed between the health care practitioner and the injured party.
• The patient was harmed because of the deviation from the standard of care.
Concern about lawsuits sometimes puts pressure on physicians to act in ways that are not necessarily in
the best interest of their patients. For example, physicians may order tests or treatments that are not
clearly medically necessary just because patients request them or to avoid even a remote possibility of
missing something and thus leaving themselves open to a lawsuit. However, such an approach is not
===PAGE:3656===
required by law, may not protect against lawsuits, and is generally considered excessive and
inappropriate. Also, explaining why a requested test or treatment is not recommended usually satisfies
patients. The best defense against malpractice lawsuits is providing excellent health care and building
close, trusting, collaborative relationships with patients.
===PAGE:3657===
Chapter 352. Financial Issues in Health Care
Introduction
Health care in the US is technologically advanced but expensive, costing about $2.2 trillion dollars in
2007. For decades, health care spending in the US has increased more than the rate of growth for the
overall economy; it increased from about 6% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in the 1960s to 16.2%
in 2007. The percentage of GDP spent on health care in the US is significantly higher than that in any
other nation. The next highest are 11.6% for Switzerland and 11.1% for France; the percentage is 9.8%
for Canada and 8.0% for Japan. Also, the amount of money spent per capita on health care in relation to
GDP per capita is also higher than that in other countries (see
Fig. 352-1
). The absolute amount and the rate of increase in the US are widely regarded as
unsustainable. Consequently, US health care is currently in flux, as the government attempts to find ways
to provide universal health care and reduce its costs.
Consequences of increased US spending on health care include the following:
• Increased government spending (resulting in higher national debt, decreased funding for other
programs, or both)
• Slowed growth or a real decline in workers' earnings due to higher payments for health insurance
premiums
• Increased costs to employers (resulting in increased product cost and movement of jobs to countries
with lower health care costs)
• Increased numbers of people without health insurance (resulting in large increases in un-compensated
health care, shifting of cost burden, and poor health outcomes)
Even though US health care spending per capita is the highest in the world, about 46 million people in the
US do not have health insurance, whereas other developed countries, despite lower per capita
expenditures, ensure universal access to health care. Furthermore, the high spending may not lead to
correspondingly superior outcomes; the US ranks comparatively low on many health care outcome
measures, such as the following:
• Infant mortality: 30th
• Life expectancy at birth: 23rd for males and 25th for females
• Healthy life expectancy: 24th
Funding
Health care providers in the US are paid by the following:
• Private insurance
• Government insurance programs
• Individual out-of-pocket funds
[Fig. 352-1.
2006 health care spending per capita compared to gross domestic product (GDP) per capita.]
In addition, the government directly provides some health care in government hospitals and clinics staffed
by government employees. Examples are the Veteran's Health Administration and the Indian Health
Service.
Private insurance:
Private insurance is purchased from for-profit and not-for-profit insurance
===PAGE:3658===
companies, which are accredited separately in each state. Thus, although there are many health
insurance companies in the US, a given state tends to have a limited number.
Most private insurance is purchased by corporations as a benefit for employees. Premiums are typically
shared by employers and employees. But because the cost of employer-provided health insurance is not
considered taxable income for the employee, the government in effect provides some subsidization.
People may also purchase private health insurance themselves. However, unlike in employer-provided
policies, applicants for privately purchased policies typically undergo extensive evaluation (underwriting)
to identify and reject applicants likely to require costly care, including those with preexisting conditions or
a high likelihood of developing disorders. Many applicants are denied policies. Some cannot purchase
private insurance at any price. For applicants who do qualify, costs can be much higher for a given policy
than when it is purchased through a company or another large group, partly because of administrative
costs (often > 30% of the total).
Government insurance programs:
The main government insurance programs include
• Medicare (, which funds the elderly, the disabled, and people receiving long-term dialysis
therapy
• Medicaid (, which funds certain people living below the poverty level
Other government programs include
• State Children's Health Insurance Program, which provides matching federal funds to states for health
insurance for families with children and which was designed to help ensure coverage for uninsured
children when family income was below average but too high to qualify for Medicaid
• Tricare, which covers about 9 million active duty and retired military personnel and their families (some
Tricare subscribers use government-provided care)
• Veterans Health Administration (VHA), which is a government-operated health care system that provides
comprehensive health services to eligible military veterans (about 8 million veterans are enrolled)
• Indian Health Service, which is a system of government hospitals and clinics providing health services to
almost 2 million American Indians and Alaskan natives living on or near a reservation
Overall about 30% of the population is covered by government insurance or government-provided care.
Out of pocket:
People pay for care not covered by other sources out of their own funds, often using their
savings for small expenditures and borrowing (including using credit cards) for large expenditures.
Flexible spending accounts
(FSAs) are offered by some employers. Through these accounts,
employees can choose to have a limited amount of money deducted from their paychecks to pay for outof-pocket health care expenses. The money deducted is not subject to federal income taxes. However,
the account does not earn interest, and any unused money is forfeited at the end of the year.
Health savings accounts
can also be used to pay out-of-pocket expenses; these accounts earn
interest, and unused balances need not be forfeited. Most people who are eligible for these accounts are
eligible because their health insurance plans limit their reimbursements enough to be classified as highdeductible health plans.
About 17% of health care costs in the US are funded out-of-pocket. Out-of-pocket expenditures for health
care contribute significantly to a large number of bankruptcies in the US.
Causes of High Health Care Costs
Health care costs in the US are disproportionately high for many reasons.
===PAGE:3659===
Use of costly new technologies and drugs:
Such use may be the largest single factor increasing
health care costs. Use may be appropriate or inappropriate, but in either case, cost is increased. An
example of appropriate but costly treatment is the use of fibrinolysis or angioplasty to treat an MI; before
the 1980s, when these treatments began to be used commonly, treating an MI was much less costly (but
also less effective). On the other hand, many new and costly treatments, including some in popular use,
are ineffective, offer only marginal advantages, or are used inappropriately for patients unlikely to benefit.
An example is use of lower lumbar spinal
fusion to treat chronic low back pain; many experts think this
treatment is ineffective or grossly overused.
Use of many such costly treatments tends to vary considerably among geographic areas and among
physician practices within a geographic area (termed practice variation). For some specific disorders (eg,
coronary artery disease), health outcomes are no better in areas where adjusted health spending is high
than in areas where it is low.
Increased costs of health care goods and services:
Drug costs have increased. One reason is the
increasing cost of developing a new drug, often in the vicinity of $1 billion. The cost of drug development
decreases the economic incentive to develop drugs with lower profit potentials, even those that could
substantially benefit particular groups (eg, drugs to treat rare diseases) or public health in general (eg,
vaccines, antibiotics).
Marketing of new drugs and devices:
Intensive marketing to physicians and consumers (with direct-toconsumer advertising) has been suggested as a cause of overuse of costly new technologies and drugs.
Some of these new measures may be no more effective than older, less costly ones.
Overuse of specialty care:
Specialists are increasingly providing more care; reasons may include a
decreasing number of primary care physicians and an increased desire by patients to see a specialist.
Specialty care is often more expensive than primary care; specialists have higher fees and may do more
testing (often pursuing less common diagnoses) than primary care physicians. Also, evaluation and
treatment of a patient who could have been managed by a single primary care physician may require
more than one specialist.
High administrative costs:
The percentage of health care dollars spent on administration is estimated
to be 20 to > 30%. Most administrative costs are generated by private insurance, and most of those costs
are generated by marketing and underwriting, processes that do not improve medical care. Also, the
existence of numerous private insurance plans in the same geographic area typically increases health
care providers' costs by making processing (eg, claim submission, coding) complicated and timeconsuming.
Physician fees:
Physicians in the US are more highly compensated relative to other professionals than
physicians in many other countries. This disparity occurs partly because physicians in other countries
typically spend far less on their medical education and malpractice insurance than those in the US and
have lower office overhead. Because physician fees account for only about 20% of total health care
costs, even a significant reduction in physician fees would have only a modest effect on overall costs.
Malpractice costs:
The issue of malpractice adds to the cost of medicine directly and indirectly (by
triggering defensive medicine).
The direct cost is the malpractice insurance premiums paid by physicians, other providers, health care
institutions, and medical drug and device manufacturers. These premiums, which cover claim settlements
and malpractice insurance company overhead and profits, must ultimately be paid from health care
revenues.
As onerous as premiums and the threat of lawsuits can be for individual physicians (particularly in certain
high-risk specialties and geographic areas), the total annual malpractice premium amount paid in 2008 by
physicians and institutions was about $12 billion, representing only about 0.6% of total annual health care
costs. Actual malpractice settlements paid out in 2008 were $3.6 billion (< 0.2% of health care costs).
===PAGE:3660===
Thus, even a major reduction in malpractice settlements would not lower total health care costs
significantly, although it could greatly affect certain physicians' practices.
Defensive medicine:
Defensive medicine refers to diagnostic or treatment procedures that providers do
to guard against the possibility of malpractice litigation, even though such procedures may not be
warranted clinically. For example, a physician may hospitalize a patient who is likely to do well with
outpatient treatment to avoid a lawsuit in the unlikely event of an adverse outcome.
The actual costs attributable to defensive medicine are difficult to measure. Few rigorous studies have
assessed this cost, and estimates from these studies vary greatly, ranging from negligible to substantial
(some experts believe that these costs are larger than direct malpractice costs). Some of the uncertainty
lies in the fact that defensive medicine is defined subjectively (ie, it is the clinician's reason for doing a
test, not how unlikely or uncommon the disorder being tested for is). A clinician's motivation is hard to
determine, and different clinicians can reasonably vary in their assessment of the need for testing in a
given case (except for a relatively few situations that have clear, sensitive, and specific guidelines for
testing). In some survey studies of defensive medicine, physicians were asked whether and when they
practice defensive medicine. However, such self-reporting may be unreliable, and such surveys often
have a
low response rate. Thus, the extent of defensive medicine is unknown.
Furthermore, even when defensive testing can be identified, calculating potential cost savings is not
straightforward. Decreasing the amount of defensive testing involves a change in marginal costs (the cost
of providing or withholding an additional unit of service), which are different from actual charges or
reimbursements. In addition, studies of states that have enacted tort reforms to limit compensation to
patients for iatropic injuries have had conflicting results about whether such reforms lower health care
expenditures.
Aging of the population:
Although often cited as a factor, population aging is probably not responsible
for recent increased costs because the generation now in old age has not yet increased
disproportionately; also, more effective health care has tended to delay serious illness in this generation.
However, the aging of baby boomers may affect costs more as the proportion of the population > 65
increases from about 12% currently to about 20% after 2030.
Containing Health Care Costs
Conceptually, total health care costs can be contained or decreased only by some combination of the
following:
• Decreasing use of health care services
• Decreasing reimbursement for services that are used
• Decreasing overhead (payor, provider, or both)
Some strategies adversely affect access to care or outcomes; others may improve care. Evaluating
different strategies is difficult, partly because accurately measuring patient-centered health outcomes (eg,
morbidity and mortality, quality-adjusted life years [QALY]) tends to be expensive and to require large
numbers of patients and long follow-up periods. As a result, most measures used to assess health care
quality reflect processes (how care was delivered) rather than outcome. How well these process
measures predict ultimate health outcomes is not always clear.
Decreasing Use of Health Care Services
Many strategies can decrease the use of health care services. Many involve limiting access to care
(aimed at unnecessary care but sometimes affecting necessary care), but some limit need by improving
health.
Limiting access to health care:
Traditionally, limiting access has been the strategy used to limit health
care costs.
===PAGE:3661===
Insurance companies may limit access to care by denying coverage to people likely to need care (eg,
those with preexisting conditions) and by dropping coverage of heavy users (rescission).
Government may tighten eligibility criteria for medical assistance programs.
Payors may increase out-of-pocket costs, providing an economic incentive for patients to limit their own
health care use. For example, payors may
• Limit the type and number of visits that are reimbursed (eg, mental health care, physical therapy)
• Increase deductibles and co-payments
• Decrease allowable amounts for covered procedures
• Establish or decrease lifetime maximum expenditures
These strategies probably affect outcomes because evidence indicates that many patients avoid
necessary as well as unnecessary care. For example, women may avoid screening (eg, Papanicolaou
testing, mammography) and subsequently present with late-stage cancer; at-risk patients may avoid
influenza vaccination.
By erecting administrative hurdles to care (eg, requiring approval for tests, referrals, and procedures;
having complex enrollment procedures and regulations), payors, although not technically denying care,
decrease use by a small amount.
State agencies may limit issuance of construction permits for new facilities and laboratories (called
certificates of need).
Limiting access to health care can cause problems. For example, when people denied access become
seriously ill (which is more likely when routine care is lacking), they are often treated in a hospital on an
emergency basis. This care is largely uncompensated (not paid for by patient, insurance, or other
source), increasing the burden on people who pay into the health care system, and may be more
expensive than if routine care had been provided.
Eliminating unnecessary care:
Unnecessary care is easy to define (care that does not improve patient
outcome) but often difficult to recognize and still more difficult to eliminate. First steps include conducting
more and better studies of comparative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness, so that best practices can
be identified. Comparative effectiveness studies can evaluate areas other than drugs, such as effects of
exercise, of physical therapy,
and of different providers, systems, settings of medical care, and
reimbursement systems. Education and monitoring of providers may decrease practice variation and
increase cost-effectiveness. Eliminating the economic incentive for providing more intensive care (fee-forservice model) by using prospective payment systems (see below) and pay-for-performance models may
encourage providers to eliminate cost-ineffective care processes.
Better coordination of services among providers (eg, by closer communication and use of universally
readable electronic medical records) may make evaluation and treatment more efficient (eg, by eliminating
duplication of tests).
Encouraging palliative hospice care, when appropriate, may help decrease use of costly, often
technology-intensive, cure-directed care.
Improving health:
Increased use of relatively inexpensive preventive services (eg, screening, diagnosis,
and treatment of diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia; screening for breast and colon cancer) may
decrease the subsequent need for expensive treatments (eg, for MI, stroke, or late-stage cancer).
However, preventive measures may not decrease costs for a given private insurance company because
savings are often not realized for many years; by that time, many patients have switched insurance plans.
In the US, people stay with a given insurance company for an average of about 6 yr (usually determined
===PAGE:3662===
by how often they change jobs)—too short to realize a savings via preventive care.
Strategies to increase preventive care include
• Incentives to increase the number of primary care physicians (who can often provide appropriate
screening measures and help prevent complications)
• Pay-for-performance measures that financially reward adherence to preventive care guidelines
• Elimination of co-payments for preventive services
• Free preventive services, particularly for needy people
Whether care management programs that attempt to improve patient adherence to treatment plans and
clinician adherence to guidelines can improve outcomes or reduce costs (eg, of potentially avoidable
hospitalization or complications) is unclear; some studies do not show a benefit.
Decreasing Reimbursement for Care Used
Even when health care is provided, strategies can be used to limit payments.
Lower fees:
Payors (government and private) may negotiate lower fees with institutions and providers or
simply dictate such fees. In the US, reimbursement rates established by Medicare and Medicaid tend to
influence rates paid by other plans, sometimes decreasing reimbursement.
Increased use of primary care:
Measures may help increase the use of less costly primary care vs
specialty care. For example, in the patient-centered medical home model, primary care practitioners
coordinate and integrate all aspects of medical care, including specialty and interdisciplinary care, in
various settings (eg, home, hospital, long-term care facility). Many authorities think that this model can
decrease unnecessary specialty care, duplicative care, and care that may be inappropriate for the
individual's health goals (eg, palliation rather than diagnosis).
Measures to increase the supply of primary care physicians have been proposed. They include
increasing reimbursement for primary care, shifting more government funding of residency programs to
primary care training, and enhancing the attractiveness of primary care among medical students, although
how the last strategy could be implemented is unclear.
Prospective payment systems:
In these systems, providers are paid a fixed amount regardless of how
much care is provided. The amount may be based on a specified episode of care or be a fixed annual
reimbursement per patient. For example, some Medicare reimbursement is based on diagnosis-related
groups (DRGs); in such cases, Medicare pays a fixed amount based on the diagnosis. In capitated
systems, providers are paid a fixed annual amount to provide health care for patients regardless of the
services used.
Prospective payment systems reward less expensive care (and thus usually use of fewer services), in
contrast to fee-for-service systems, which reward use of more services. However, prospective payment
creates an economic disincentive to care for complex patients (eg, those who have multiple disorders or
who are seriously ill) and may inhibit provision of necessary care. Because a decrease in the amount of
care provided has the potential to decrease quality of care, quality control systems (eg, professional
review organizations) are often also established.
Denial of claims:
In the US, unlike in most of the developed world, insurance carriers routinely deny a
significant percentage of claims for services delivered to patients. In one study in California, the denial
rate averaged about 30% in 2009; some of the claims were paid after appeal, but appealing a claim
is
quite costly in time and effort for patients, providers, and payors alike.
Competition:
Competition among providers for patients and among insurance companies for subscribers
is thought to encourage lowering of charges (eg, by those who charge more than their competitors for a
===PAGE:3663===
similar service). However, the ultimate consumers (ie, patients) usually do not know providers' charges in
advance, and if they know, they often cannot act on this knowledge (eg, because patients are often
limited to certain providers and limited in their ability to judge quality of care). Also, because the cost of
medical care is subsidized for most consumers (eg, through employer-paid health insurance, tax
deductions, and flexible spending accounts or medical savings accounts), consumers have less incentive
to price shop than for most other purchases. Thus, competition is most effective in lowering costs and
maintaining quality when it is among large organizations. For example, insurance companies can compete
for contracts from employers such as corporations or the government; providers such as practitioner
organizations and hospitals can compete for contracts with insurance companies.
Competition has some disadvantages. It results in multiple systems of claim submission and evaluation,
which require more time from providers, their clerical staff, or both. Also, processes such as eligibility
determination, referrals, co-payments, and coding must be coordinated between a large number of
incompatible insurance company systems. Thus, competition increases the clerical (administrative)
burden of the overall health care system.
Decreased drug costs:
Using generic drugs or, when appropriate, more cost-effective brand-name
drugs can help decrease drug costs. Strategies include
• Educating providers about cost-effective drug use
• Restricting drug marketing
• Establishing formularies and using pharmacy benefit managers
• Allowing the government to negotiate drug prices for patients covered by government insurance
• Allowing importation of drugs purchased from other countries to the US
Negative effects on medical research:
In many academic medical centers, income from clinical
practice has enabled physicians and institutions to participate in medical research. Similarly, income from
drug sales supports pharmaceutical research. Thus, decreased reimbursement for care and drug sales
may cause a decline in medical research. If other sources (eg, government or private grants) are used to
fund research, these funds must be considered as health care costs and thus may offset savings realized
from decreasing reimbursement.
Decreasing Overhead
Overhead is health care payments that do not go to health care providers (eg, administrative costs,
malpractice insurance, corporate profits in for-profit hospitals and insurance companies).
Decreasing payor overhead:
Government health care plans in developed countries (including the US)
and private health plans outside the US have overhead costs that usually represent 3 to 5% of total costs
(ie, ≥ 95% of all health care funds go to the delivery of health care). However, in the US, private insurers
have overhead costs of about 20 to 30%, partly because these insurers need staff to do extensive
underwriting (identifying and rejecting applicants likely to require costly care, including those with
preexisting conditions or a high likelihood of developing disorders), to evaluate claims for denial, and to
adjudicate appeals by providers; they also typically need to show a profit. No evidence indicates that
these activities and their higher administrative costs improve clinical care or outcomes.
Strategies that may help minimize overhead costs include
• Increased use of standardized electronic health records
• Increased use of government plans and possibly not-for-profit plans, which have lower overhead than
for-profit plans
Competition among payors is thought to encourage increased administrative efficiency, but it also
===PAGE:3664===
increases the incentives to deny claims and coverage (which itself requires an extensive bureaucracy).
Decreasing provider overhead:
Any payor reform that eliminates the need for the many billing and
claims personnel who manage the billing of multiple payors and negotiate appeals and justify claims will
decrease provider overhead. For example, some countries that have multiple insurance companies vying
for business (eg, Germany, Japan) require the following:
• The payment amounts and rules are the same for all insurance companies.
• In many cases, payors are required to pay all provider bills.
•
The cost of the same service is the same throughout the country.
Although malpractice costs are a small fraction of overall costs, malpractice costs for certain physicians
can consume a considerable part of their annual income. Reforms that significantly decrease the number
of suits and settlements should eventually lower premiums and greatly benefit these physicians; such
reforms may also decrease the use of unnecessary, defensive medicine.
===PAGE:3665===
Chapter 353. The Dying Patient
Introduction
(See also pp.
and
.)
The traditional medical approach emphasizes goals such as the following:
• Testing until diagnoses are well-established
• Correcting all physiologic abnormalities, even asymptomatic ones
• Pursuing a cure, even when cure is unlikely and therapy is toxic, invasive, or uncomfortable
However, to many patients facing a fatal illness, these goals may be less important than avoiding
suffering and (with their family and friends) finding comfort and meaningfulness during the experience of
dying. Thus, care of the dying patient should be guided by a realistic assessment of the situation and the
merits of various interventions in light of the patient's values and wishes.
People's priorities differ, especially when facing death. Some prefer life to be prolonged, even at the cost
of pain, marked confusion, or severe respiratory distress. They may cherish every moment of life,
regardless of its quality. For others, quality of life is the overarching concern. They may fear pain or
confusion more than death and prefer comfort measures and shorter survival to prolonged disability and
struggle. However, to say that a patient's care has changed from curative to supportive or from treatment
to palliation is an oversimplification of a complex decision process. Most patients need a customized mix
of treatment to correct, prevent, and mitigate the effects of various illnesses and disabilities.
Some people search for closure: They reach out to friends and family to share time and to express love;
they complete projects important to their lives and tie up loose ends. Often, with appropriate support,
people die at a time and in a way that allows them to experience a satisfying close. Other people cannot
accept their imminent mortality and avoid such closure.
Effective care for dying patients usually involves a clinical team because no one caregiver is available 24
h/day and because comprehensive, reliable care requires the skills and perspectives of several
disciplines. Palliative care or hospice teams anticipate potential problems and make appropriate
arrangements, such as obtaining supplies or opioids in anticipation of a potential emergency. Certain
team members can help dying patients who have spiritual needs; such needs should be recognized,
acknowledged, and addressed. When death is imminent, an experienced team member can comfort family
members and may prevent an inappropriate call to the emergency medical system.
When Death Is Near
The physician and the clinical team should prepare patients and family members for death whenever
patients have a condition likely to worsen and cause death, even if death may be a few years in the
future. Preparation includes discussion of the likely course and possible complications. Patients should
also be advised when death becomes imminent. A health care practitioner must not assume that patients
or family members understand the fatal nature of certain disorders (even metastatic cancer) or that they
can recognize from a patient's appearance that death is near. Initial discussions should be honest and
sensitive to the language and culture of patients and family members. The physician should not delay full
disclosure too long because doing so can provide false hope and distort decision making—for example,
by reducing the opportunity to attend to spiritual and family concerns. Many patients and family members
benefit from making plans based on their priorities and preferences for end-of-life treatments (.
Many patients ask whether the clinician can predict the time until death. Such estimates are ordinarily
incorrect, both for slowly progressive disorders and for disorders in which
death tends to come suddenly,
without reliable warning signs (eg, heart failure, emphysema). For some cancers, recognizable warning
signs may presage death by several weeks or months. In contrast, many people live for months or years
===PAGE:3666===
in an unchanging but very fragile state of health. Clinicians tend to give inaccurately optimistic estimates
and often are reluctant to predict life expectancy. Some models, such as the Acute Physiologic
Assessment and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) used to predict in-hospital mortality for ICU
patients, are accurate for groups but not for individuals. If a clinician notes that a patient is sick enough
that it would be "no surprise" for the patient to die in the coming year, the patient could die with the next
complication, which could develop at any time. In such cases, clinicians, patients, and family members
should consider prioritizing comfort and life closure over at least the burdensome elements in
conventional medical treatment, as well as many preventive services. Family support, advance care
planning, focus on relieving symptoms and maximizing function, and attention to spiritual issues are
appropriate for patients who are in such fragile health. Clinicians lose many opportunities to help patients
and their families live well and meaningfully by postponing the recognition of fragile health until death is
clearly imminent.
At some point, virtually every dying patient should have a do-not-resuscitate (DNR) order or a do-notattempt-resuscitation (DNAR) order written in the medical record. All clinicians in every setting should
abide by that decision. Patients, family members, and the clinical team should also make and record other
important decisions about medical care (eg, whether patients are to be hospitalized or use a ventilator).
Often, implementing these decisions requires specific actions (eg, to have the needed drugs at home).
Family members should know about the changes that may occur in the patient's body shortly before and
after death. They should not be surprised by irregular breathing, cool extremities, confusion, a purplish
skin color, or somnolence in the last hours.
Some patients close to death develop noisy bronchial congestion or palatal relaxation, commonly known
as the death rattle. If this symptom distresses family members, scopolamine or diphenhydramine ( can dry the patient's secretions and reduce the noise. Also, CNS irritability, with agitation and
restlessness, may develop. If these symptoms, after review, are judged not to be caused by a drug or
untreated disorder, they can be relieved by a sedative.
If a patient is expected to die at home, family members should rehearse whom to call (eg, physician,
hospice nurse, clergy) and know whom not to call (eg, ambulance service, 911). They should also have
help in obtaining legal advice and arranging burial or cremation services. Religious practices that may
affect after-death care of the body should be discussed before death with the patient, family members, or
both.
The last moments of a patient's life can have a lasting effect on family members, friends, and caregivers.
The patient should be in an area that is peaceful, quiet, and physically comfortable. Any stains or tubes
on the bed should be covered, and odors should be masked. Family members should be encouraged to
maintain physical contact, such as holding hands, with the patient. If desired by the patient and family
members, the presence of friends and clergy should be encouraged. Accommodation should be made for
spiritual, cultural, ethnic, or personal rites of passage desired by the patient and family members.
When resuscitation is attempted, family members often appreciate being present during the resuscitation.
After Death Occurs
A physician, nurse, or other authorized person should pronounce the patient dead in a timely way to
reduce the family's anxiety and uncertainty. The physician should complete the death certificate as soon
as possible because funeral directors need a completed death certificate to make final arrangements.
Even when death is expected, physicians may need to report the death to the coroner or police;
knowledge of local law is important.
Telling family members about death, particularly unexpected death, requires effort. The physician should
use clear language when informing the family that death has occurred (eg, using the word "died").
Euphemisms (eg, "passed on") should not be used because they are easily misinterpreted. If the family
was not present during resuscitation, any events near death, including resuscitative efforts, should be
described and the patient's absence of pain and distress mentioned (if true). It is usually wise to be sure
that the closest kin is not alone. When told about death, particularly unexpected death, family members
===PAGE:3667===
may be overwhelmed and unable to process information given to them or to formulate questions.
Physicians, nurses, and other health care practitioners should respond to the psychologic needs of family
members and provide appropriate counseling, a comfortable environment where family members can
grieve together,
and adequate time for them to be with the body. When feasible, it may help for a clinician
to be with the family members as they enter the room with a newly dead body because that situation is so
unfamiliar to most people. Sometimes it is best then to leave family members alone for a while, then return
and offer explanations of treatments provided and give the family a chance to ask questions. Friends,
neighbors, and clergy may be able to help provide support. Health care practitioners should be sensitive
to cultural differences in behavior at the time of death.
The patient or family members and the clinical care team should discuss organ and tissue donation, if
appropriate, before death or immediately after death; such discussions are ordinarily mandated by law.
The attending physician should know how to arrange for organ donation and autopsy, even for patients
who die at home or in a nursing home. Autopsy should be readily available regardless of where the death
occurred, and decisions about autopsies can be made before death or just after death. A substantial
minority of families welcome an autopsy to clear up uncertainties, and clinicians should appreciate the
role of autopsy in quality assessment and improvement.
Hospice Care
• Emphasis on symptom relief and comfort care
• Decreased emphasis on prolonging life
• Little diagnostic testing
Hospice is a concept and program of care that is specifically designed to minimize suffering for dying
patients and their family members. In the US, hospice is the only widely available comprehensive program
to support very sick people at home. Philosophically, hospice programs forgo most diagnostic testing and
life-prolonging treatments in favor of symptom relief, education of patients and family members about
appropriate care, and comfort care.
Hospice is always interdisciplinary, relying on a core team of physicians, nurses, social workers, and
attendants (eg, home health aides). Pharmacists, nutritionists, and therapists may also be involved.
Hospice program personnel care for patients at home, in nursing homes, or in other care facilities.
Although hospice program personnel do not usually care for patients in hospitals and rehabilitation
centers, many hospitals are establishing palliative care programs to address the same care issues.
Hospice programs differ substantially in the services they provide and in treatments and devices they use.
Whether a particular patient and family should participate in a given program depends on their needs and
wishes, on their financial considerations, and on the skills and capacity of the local programs.
Hospice care can provide most necessary medical treatments. Nurses ordinarily oversee and implement
the general plan of care, including drug use, O
therapy, and IV lines or other special equipment. Nurses
are usually the first ones to assess and address patient needs. They can usually adjust drug doses and
help obtain any new drugs or treatments. Hospice physicians see patients when needed and share in
shaping the plan of care. Social workers, chaplains, and volunteers help with interpersonal, spiritual, and
financial issues. Bereavement counselors support survivors through the grieving process. Hospice plans
of care help family members prepare for the challenges of facing the death of a loved one and dealing
with the situation at the time of death, including their role and how to obtain needed help.
Most patients ill enough to require hospice also require some assistance with daily activities (eg,
dressing, bathing, preparing food), and some may be completely dependent. Family members and friends
often provide this care, but additional help from home health aides and volunteers may be necessary.
Medicare or insurance mostly pays a per diem rate that is intended to cover all hospice services,
including a negotiated amount of help from home health aides, but only after a physician certifies that the
patient has a fatal disorder with life expectancy < 6 mo.
===PAGE:3668===
Physicians may be reluctant to use hospice because a treatable condition could develop. However, this
reluctance is not justified because many treatable conditions are within the scope of hospice care, and
patients can leave hospice at any time and re-enroll later.
Other Concerns
Patient, family members, and clinicians should consider the following:
• They should plan for increasing disability.
• Obtaining payment for end-of-life care may be difficult.
• Emphasis should be on improving quality of end-of-life, not on hastening death.
Managing disability:
Progressive disability often accompanies fatal illnesses. Patients
may gradually
become unable to tend to a house or an apartment, prepare food, handle financial matters, walk, or care
for themselves. Most dying patients need help during their last weeks. Disability should be anticipated
and appropriate preparations made (eg, choosing housing that is wheelchair-accessible and close to
family caregivers). Services such as occupational or physical therapy and hospice care may help a
patient remain at home, even when the disability progresses.
Financial concerns:
Financial coverage for care of dying patients is problematic. Medicare regulations
restrict payment for many aspects of supportive care. Not all patients qualify for hospice care, and
physicians are often reluctant to certify the 6-mo prognosis required for hospice coverage. Sometimes the
need for skilled nursing care can justify Medicare payment to a nursing home for short-term, complex
medical and nursing needs for dying patients. One study has shown that one third of families deplete
most of their savings when caring for a dying relative. The clinical care team should know the financial
effects of choices and discuss these issues with patients or family members. Some attorneys specialize in
elder care and can help patients and their family members deal with these issues.
Legal and ethical concerns:
Health care practitioners should know local laws and institutional policy
governing living wills, durable powers of attorney, and procedures for forgoing resuscitation and
hospitalization. This knowledge helps them ensure that the patient's wishes guide care, even when the
patient can no longer make decisions (.
Many health care practitioners worry that medical treatments intended to relieve pain or other suffering
can hasten death, but this effect is actually quite uncommon. With thoughtful and skillful medical care,
accusations of assisted suicide or other wrongdoing are almost nonexistent. Even if dyspnea requires
doses of opioids that may also hasten death, the resulting death is not considered wrongful.
However, actually assisting with suicide (eg, by directly providing a dying patient with lethal drugs and
instructions for using them) could be grounds for prosecution in most states but is authorized under
specific conditions in Oregon. Charges of homicide are plausible if the patient's interests are not carefully
advocated, if the patient lacks capacity or is severely functionally impaired when decisions are made, if
decisions and their rationales are not documented, or if the prosecutor's electoral base is expected to
approve of such charges. Physicians who manage symptoms vigorously and forgo life-sustaining
treatment need to document decision making carefully, provide care in a reputable setting, and discuss
these issues willingly, honestly, and sensitively with patients, other practitioners, and the public. A
physician should not provide an intervention that is conventionally considered a means of homicide (eg,
lethal injection) even if the intention is to relieve suffering.
Symptom Control in the Dying
Patients need reassurance that symptoms will not be overwhelming.
Physical and mental distress is common while living with fatal illness, but much distress can be prevented
or relieved. Patients commonly fear protracted and unrelieved suffering. Knowing they can count on living
===PAGE:3669===
reasonably comfortably enables patients to focus on living as fully as possible and on confronting the
issues presented by fragile health and the approach of death.
Symptom control should be based on etiology when possible. For example, vomiting due to
hypercalcemia requires different treatment from that due to elevated intracranial pressure. However,
diagnosing the cause of a symptom may be inappropriate if testing is burdensome or risky or if specific
treatment (eg, major surgery) has already been ruled out. For dying patients, comfort measures, including
nonspecific treatment or a short sequential trial of empiric treatments, are often better than an exhaustive
diagnostic evaluation.
Because one symptom can have many causes and may respond differently to treatment as the patient's
condition deteriorates, the clinical team must monitor and reevaluate the situation frequently. Drug
overdosage or under-dosage is harmful, and both become more likely as worsening physiology causes
changes in drug disposition.
When survival is likely to be brief, symptom severity frequently dictates initial treatment. Sometimes the
fear that a symptom will worsen can be more crippling than the symptom itself, and reassurance that
effective treatment is available may be all a patient needs. When a symptom is quite severe or the
diagnostic alternatives do not affect treatment, the physician should quickly relieve suffering by treating
the symptom.
Pain
About half of patients dying of cancer have severe pain. Yet, only half of these patients receive reliable
pain relief. Many patients dying of organ system failure and dementia also have severe pain. Sometimes
pain can be controlled but persists because patients, family members, and physicians have
misconceptions about pain and the drugs (especially opioids) that can control it, resulting in significant
underdosing.
Patients perceive pain differently, depending partly on whether other factors (eg, fatigue, insomnia,
anxiety, depression, nausea) are present. Analgesic choice depends largely on pain intensity and cause,
which can be determined only by talking with and observing patients. Patients and physicians must
recognize that all pain can be relieved by an appropriately potent drug at sufficient dosage, although
aggressive treatment may also cause sedation or confusion. Commonly used drugs are aspirin,
acetaminophen, or NSAIDs for mild pain; oxycodone for moderate pain; and hydromorphone, morphine, or
fentanyl for severe pain (.
In dying patients, oral opioid therapy is most convenient and cost-effective. Rectal opioid therapy provides
more uneven absorption; however, 1st-pass effect is often minimal. Morphine suppositories or pills may
be given rectally at the same dosage used for oral forms and then titrated as needed. IV or sc opioid
therapy is better than IM injections, which are painful and result in variable absorption. Long-acting
opioids are best for long-lasting pain. When giving opioids, the physician should prescribe them in
adequate dosage and on a continuous basis to prevent pain. Unreasonable concerns by the public and
by health care practitioners about addiction often tragically limit appropriate use of opioids.
Pharmacologic dependence may result from regular use but causes no problems in dying patients except
the need to avoid inadvertent withdrawal. Addictive behaviors are rare and usually easy to control.
Adverse effects of opioids include nausea, sedation, confusion, constipation, and respiratory depression.
Constipation should be treated prophylactically (. Patients usually develop substantial
tolerance to the respiratory depressant and sedative effects of morphine but have much less tolerance for
the analgesic and constipating effects. Opioids may also cause myoclonus, agitated delirium,
hyperalgesia, and seizures. These effects may result from accumulation of toxic metabolites and usually
resolve when another opioid is substituted. Patients with these adverse effects and serious pain often
warrant consultation with a palliative care specialist or pain specialist.
When a stable opioid dose becomes inadequate, increasing the dose by 1 1/2 to 2 times the previous
dose is reasonable. Usually, serious respiratory depression does not occur unless the new dose is much
more than twice the previously tolerated dose. Clinicians often are unfamiliar and thus uncomfortable with
===PAGE:3670===
such large dosage increases. Increasing the dose over 1 to 2 h with constant observation and having
opioid antagonists immediately available can overcome that reluctance.
Use of adjunctive drugs for pain control often increases comfort and reduces the opioid dosage and
consequent adverse effects. Corticosteroids can reduce the pain of inflammation and swelling. Tricyclic
antidepressants (eg, nortriptyline, doxepin) help manage neuropathic pain (; doxepin can
provide bedtime sedation as well. Gabapentin 300 to 1200 mg po tid helps relieve neuropathic pain.
Methadone is effective for refractory or neuropathic pain; however, its kinetics vary and it requires close
monitoring. Benzodiazepines are useful for patients whose pain is worsened by anxiety.
For severe localized pain, regional nerve blocks given by an anesthesiologist experienced in pain
management may provide relief with few adverse effects. Various nerve-blocking techniques may be
used. Indwelling epidural or intrathecal catheters can provide continuous infusion of analgesics, often
mixed with anesthetic drugs.
Pain-modification techniques (eg, guided mental imagery, hypnosis, acupuncture, relaxation, biofeedback)
help some patients (. Counseling for stress and anxiety may be very helpful, as may spiritual
support from a chaplain.
Dyspnea
Dyspnea is one of the most feared symptoms and is extremely frightening to dying patients.
Quickly reversible causes should be treated specifically. For example, placing a chest tube for tension
pneumothorax or doing thoracentesis for a pleural effusion provides quick and definitive relief. However, if
death is imminent or a definitive treatment for the cause of dyspnea is not available, proper symptomatic
treatment assures patients they will be comfortable, regardless of the cause.
As a first intervention, O
helps correct hypoxemia. Even when its oxygenating benefit is no longer
certain, O
may continue to be
psychologically comforting to patients and family members. O
therapy is
most comfortable by nasal cannula, so this route is preferred unless higher concentrations are critically
important.
Morphine 2 to 10 mg sublingually or 2 to 4 mg sc q 2 to 4 h prn helps reduce breathlessness in an opioidnaive patient. Such a low dosage of morphine may blunt the medullary response to CO
retention or O
decline, reducing dyspnea and decreasing anxiety without causing harmful respiratory depression. If
patients are already taking opioids for pain, dosages that relieve dyspnea must often be more than double
the patient's usual dosages.
Airway congestion is best managed with drugs that dry secretions (eg, topical scopolamine gel 0.25 to 0.5
mg q 8 to 12 h applied to the skin behind the ear or on the chest, hyoscyamine 0.125 mg sublingually q 8
h, diphenhydramine 10 to 50 mg IM q 4 to 6 h prn).
Nebulized saline may help patients with viscous secretions. Nebulized albuterol and oral or injectable
corticosteroids may relieve bronchospasm and bronchial inflammation.
Benzodiazepines often help relieve anxiety associated with dyspnea and with the fear of a return of
dyspnea. Useful nondrug measures include providing a cool draft from an open window or fan and
maintaining a calming presence.
Anorexia
Anorexia and marked weight loss are common among dying patients. For family members, accepting the
patient's poor oral intake is often difficult because it means accepting that the patient is dying. Patients
should be offered their favorite foods whenever possible. Conditions that may cause poor intake and that
can be easily treated—gastritis, constipation, toothache, oral candidiasis, pain, and nausea—should be
treated. Some patients benefit from appetite stimulants such as oral corticosteroids (dexamethasone 2 to
===PAGE:3671===
8 mg bid or prednisone 10 to 30 mg once/day) or megestrol 160 to 480 mg po once/day. However, if a
patient is close to death, family members should understand that neither food nor hydration is necessary
to maintain the patient's comfort.
IV fluids, TPN, and tube feedings do not prolong the life of dying patients. All of these measures seem to
increase discomfort and may hasten death. Pulmonary congestion and pneumonia are more common
among dying patients who are fed artificially. Artificial hydration may worsen edema and pain associated
with inflammation. Conversely, dehydration and ketosis due to caloric restriction correlate with analgesic
effects and absence of discomfort. The only reported discomfort due to dehydration near death is
xerostomia, which is easily relieved with oral swabs or ice chips.
Family members should be gently told that the patient is dying and that food does not help the patient's
strength nor substantially delay death; they should be reassured that the patient does not suffer from
having little or no intake. Having family members and friends take on specific tasks (eg, providing favorite
foods, small portions, and foods that are easy to swallow) provides other ways to show caring and love,
which can help family members.
Even debilitated and cachectic patients may live for several weeks with no food and minimal hydration.
Family members should understand that stopping fluids does not result in the patient's immediate death
and ordinarily does not hasten death. Supportive care, including good oral hygiene, is imperative for
patient comfort during this time.
Nausea and Vomiting
Many seriously ill patients experience nausea, frequently without vomiting. Nausea may arise with GI
problems (eg, constipation, gastritis), metabolic abnormalities (eg, hypercalcemia, uremia), drug adverse
effects, increased intracranial pressure secondary to cerebral cancer, and psychosocial stress. When
possible, treatment should match the likely cause—eg, stopping NSAIDs, treating gastritis with H
blockers, and trying corticosteroids for patients with known or suspected brain metastases. If nausea is
due to gastric distention and reflux, metoclopramide (eg, 10 to 20 mg po or sc qid prn or given on a
scheduled basis) is useful because it increases gastric tone and contractions while relaxing the pyloric
sphincter.
Patients with no specific cause of nausea may benefit from treatment with a phenothiazine (eg,
promethazine 25 mg po qid; prochlorperazine 10 mg po before meals or, for patients who cannot take oral
drugs, 25 mg rectally bid). Anticholinergic drugs such as scopolamine and the antihistamines meclizine
and diphenhydramine prevent recurrent nausea in many patients. Combining lower doses of the
previously mentioned drugs often improves efficacy. Second-line drugs for intractable nausea include
haloperidol (started at 1 mg po or sc q 6 to 8 h, then titrated to as much as 15 mg/day). The 5-HT
antagonists ondansetron and granisetron often dramatically relieve chemotherapy-induced nausea. Cost
often makes
these antagonists 2nd-line drugs for more complex causes of nausea in dying patients.
Nausea and pain due to intestinal obstruction are common among patients with widespread abdominal
cancer. Generally, IV fluids and nasogastric suction are more burdensome than useful. Symptoms of
nausea, pain, and intestinal spasm respond to hyoscyamine (0.125 to 0.25 mg q 4 h sublingually or sc),
scopolamine (1.5 mg topically), morphine (given sc or rectally), or any of the other previously mentioned
antiemetics. Octreotide 150
μ
g sc or IV q 12 h inhibits GI secretions and dramatically reduces nausea and
painful distention. Given with antiemetics, octreotide usually eliminates the need for nasogastric
suctioning. Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone 4 to 6 mg IV, IM, or rectally tid) may decrease obstructive
inflammation at the tumor site and temporarily relieve the obstruction. IV fluids may exacerbate obstructive
edema.
Constipation
Constipation is common among dying patients because of inactivity, use of opioids and drugs with
anticholinergic effects, and decreased intake of fluids and dietary fiber. Regular bowel movements are
essential to the comfort of dying patients, at least until the last day or two of life. Laxatives help prevent
fecal impaction, especially in patients receiving opioids. Monitoring bowel function regularly is essential.
===PAGE:3672===
Most patients do well on a twice/day regimen of stool softener (eg, docusate) plus a mild stimulant
laxative (eg, casanthranol, senna). If stimulant laxatives cause cramping discomfort, patients may respond
to increased doses of docusate alone or an osmotic laxative, such as lactulose or sorbitol started at 15 to
30 mL po bid and titrated to effect.
Soft fecal impaction may be treated with a bisacodyl suppository or saline enema. For a hard fecal
impaction, a mineral oil enema may be given, possibly with an oral benzodiazepine (eg, lorazepam) or an
analgesic, followed by digital disimpaction. After disimpaction, patients should be placed on a more
aggressive bowel regimen to avoid recurrence.
Pressure Ulcers
Many dying patients are immobile, poorly nourished, incontinent, and cachectic and thus are at risk of
pressure ulcers (see also p.
). Prevention requires relieving pressure by rotating the patient or shifting
the patient's weight every 2 h; a specialized mattress or continuously inflated air-suspension bed may
also help. Incontinent patients should be kept as dry as possible. Generally, use of an indwelling catheter,
with its inconvenience and risk of infection, is justified only when bedding changes cause pain or when
patients or family members strongly prefer it.
Confusion
Mental changes that can accompany the terminal stage of a disorder may distress patients and family
members; however, patients are often unaware of them. Confusion (delirium) is common; causes include
drugs, hypoxia, metabolic disturbances, and intrinsic CNS disorders. If the cause can be determined,
simple treatment may enable patients to communicate more meaningfully with family members and
friends. Patients who are comfortable and less aware of their surroundings may do better with no
treatment. When possible, the physician should ascertain the preferences of patients and family members
and use them to guide treatment.
Simple causes of confusion and agitation should be sought. Agitation and restlessness often result from
urinary retention, which resolves promptly with urinary catheterization. Confusion in debilitated patients is
worsened by sleep deprivation. Agitated patients may benefit from benzodiazepines; however,
benzodiazepines may also cause confusion. Poorly controlled pain may cause insomnia or agitation. If
pain has been appropriately controlled, a nighttime sedative may help.
Family members and visitors may help lessen confusion by frequently holding the patient's hand and
repeating where the patient is and what is happening. Patients with severe terminal agitation resistant to
other measures may respond best to barbiturates; family members should be made aware that when near
death, patients do not usually wake up much after starting these drugs. Pentobarbital, a rapid-onset,
short-acting barbiturate, may be given as 100 to 200 mg IM q 4 h prn. Phenobarbital, which is longeracting, may be given po, sc, or rectally. Midazolam, a short-acting benzodiazepine, also is often effective.
Depression
Most dying patients experience some depressive symptoms. Providing psychologic support and allowing
patients to express concerns and feelings are usually the best approach. A skilled social worker,
physician, nurse, or chaplain can help with these concerns.
A trial of antidepressants is often appropriate for patients who have persistent, clinically significant
depression. SSRIs are useful for
patients likely to live beyond the 4 wk usually needed for onset of the
antidepressant effect. Depressed patients with anxiety and insomnia may benefit from a sedating tricyclic
antidepressant given at bedtime. For patients who are withdrawn or who have vegetative signs (, methylphenidate may be started at 2.5 mg po once/day and increased to 2.5 to 5 mg bid (given at
breakfast and lunch) as necessary. Methylphenidate (same dosage) can provide a few days or weeks of
increased energy for patients who are fatigued or somnolent because of analgesics. Methylphenidate has
a rapid effect but may precipitate agitation. Although its duration of action is short, adverse effects are
also short-lived.
===PAGE:3673===
Stress
A few people approach death peacefully, but more patients and family members experience stressful
periods. Death is particularly stressful when interpersonal conflicts keep patients and family members
from sharing their last moments together in peace. Such conflicts can lead to excessive guilt or inability to
grieve in survivors and can cause anguish in patients. A family member who is caring for a dying relative
at home may experience physical and emotional stress. Usually, stress in patients and family members
responds to compassion, information, counseling, and sometimes brief psychotherapy. Community
services may be available to help relieve care-giver burden. Sedatives should be used sparingly and
briefly.
When a partner dies, the survivor may be overwhelmed by having to make decisions about legal or
financial matters or household management. For an elderly couple, the death of one may reveal the
survivor's cognitive impairment, for which the deceased partner had compensated. The clinical team
should identify such high-risk situations so that they can mobilize the resources needed to prevent undue
suffering and dysfunction.
Grief
Grieving is a normal process that usually begins before an anticipated death. For patients, grief often
starts with denial caused by fears about loss of control, separation, suffering, an uncertain future, and
loss of self. Traditionally, the stages after grief were thought to occur in the following order: denial, anger,
bargaining, depression, and acceptance. However, the stages that patients go through and their order of
occurrence vary. Members of the clinical team can help patients accept their prognosis by listening to
their concerns, helping them understand that they can control important elements of their life, explaining
how the disorder will worsen and how death will come, and assuring them that their physical symptoms
will be controlled. If grief is still very severe or causes psychosis or suicidal ideation or if the patient has a
previous severe mental disorder, referral for professional evaluation and grief counseling may be needed.
Family members may need support in expressing grief. Any clinical team member who has come to know
the patient and family members can help them through this process and direct them to professional
services if needed. Physicians and other clinical team members need to develop regular procedures that
ensure follow-up of grieving family members.
===PAGE:3674===
Appendix I: Ready Reference Guides
In the US, most laboratory test results are reported in what are termed conventional units; the rest of the
world reports results in
Systeme International d'Unites
(SI) or international units (IU). The unit basis for SI
is updated periodically by a panel.
Many SI units are the same as those used in the US system; however, those for concentrations are not.
SI concentrations are reported as moles (mol) or decimal fractions of a mole (eg, millimole, micromole) per
unit volume in liters (L). Conventional units are reported as mass (eg, grams, milligrams) or chemical
equivalency (eg, milliequivalents) per unit volume, which may be in liters or decimal fractions of liters (eg,
deciliters, milliliters). Results reported in amount per 100 mL (1 dL) are sometimes expressed as percent
(eg, 10 mg/dL may be written 10 mg%).
Moles, milligrams, and milliequivalents:
A mole is an Avogadro's number (6.023 × 10
) of
elementary entities (eg, atoms, ions, molecules); the mass of 1 mole of a substance is its atomic weight in
grams (eg, 1 mole of sodium = 23 g, 1 mole of calcium = 40 g). Similarly, the mass of a given quantity of
substance divided by its atomic weight gives the number of moles (eg, 20 g sodium = 20/23, or 0.87,
mole).
An equivalent is a unit that integrates charge and moles; 1 equivalent represents 1 mole of charges and is
calculated by multiplying the number of moles of charged particles in a substance times the valence of
that substance. Thus, for ions with a +1 or -1 charge (eg, Na
+
, K
+
, Cl
-
), 1 mole is 1 equivalent (1 × 1 =
1); for ions with a +2 or -2 charge (eg, Ca
2+
), 1/2 mole is 1 equivalent (1/2 × 2 = 1), and so forth for other
valence values. A milliequivalent (mEq) is 1/1000 of an equivalent.
The following can be used to convert between mEq, mg, and mmol:
mEq = mg/formula wt × valence = mmol × valence
mg = mEq × formula wt/valence = mmol × formula wt
mmol = mg/formula wt = mEq/valence
(NOTE: formula wt = atomic or molecular wt.)
Alternatively, conversion tables are available in print and on the Internet.
METRIC SYSTEM
UNIT
EQUIVALENT SUBUNIT
Mass

1 kilogram (kg)
1000 grams (10
g)
1 gram (g)
1000 milligrams (10
mg)
1 milligram (mg)
1000 micrograms (10
-3
g)
1 microgram (
μ
g)
1000 nanograms (10
-6
g)
1 nanogram (ng)
1000 picograms (pg; 10
-9
g)
Volume

1 liter (L)
1000 milliliters (mL)
1 liter (L)
1000 cubic centimeters (cc)
METRIC-NONMETRIC EQUIVALENTS
METRIC UNIT
EQUIVALENT NONMETRIC UNIT
*
Liquid

30 milliliters (mL)
1 fluid ounce (oz)
===PAGE:3675===
250 mL
8+ fluid oz
500 mL
1+ pint
1000 mL (1 liter)
1+ quart
Weight

65 milligrams (mg)
1 grain (gr)
28.35 grams (g)
1 oz
1 kilogram (kg)
2.2 pounds (lb)
Linear

1 millimeter (mm)
0.04 inch (in)
1 centimeter (cm)
0.4 in
2.54 cm
1 in
1 meter (m)
39.37 in
Household

4 mL
1 teaspoon (tsp)
5 mL
1 teaspoon, medical
8 mL
1 dessert spoon
15 mL
1 tablespoon (tbsp — 1/2 fluid oz)
240 mL
1 cup (8 fluid oz)
*Approximate.
ATOMIC WEIGHT OF SOME ELEMENTS IMPORTANT IN MEDICINE
ELEMENT
SYMBOL
ATOMIC WEIGHT
*
Hydrogen
H
Carbon
C
Nitrogen
N
Oxygen
O
Sodium
Na
Magnesium
Mg
Phosphorus
P
Chlorine
Cl
35.5
Potassium
K
Calcium
Ca
*Approximate.
CENTIGRADE-FAHRENHEIT EQUIVALENTS
*
APPLICATION
°C
°F
Freezing for water at sea level
Clinical range
36.0
96.8

36.5
97.7

37.0
98.6

37.5
99.5

38.0
100.4

38.5
101.3

39.0
102.2

39.5
103.1

40.0
104.0

40.5
104.9

41.0
105.8

41.5
106.7
===PAGE:3676===
42.0
107.6
Pasteurization (holding),
30 min at
62.8
145.0
Pasteurization (flash),
15 sec at
71.7
161.0
Boiling for water at sea level
100.0
212.0
*Conversion:
To convert °F to °C, subtract 32, then multiply by 5/9 or 0.555.
To convert °C to °F, multiply by 9/5 or 1.8, then add 32.
According to the FDA Code of Federal Regulations, 1991.
===PAGE:3677===
Appendix II: Normal Laboratory Values
Introduction
Following are 5 tables with reference values (intervals) for blood, urine, CSF, stool, and other fluids (eg,
gastric acid).
Table 6
lists commonly used panels. (NOTE: The reference values provided in these tables should be
used as guidelines only.) Reference values vary based on several factors, including the demographics of
the healthy population from which specimens were obtained and the specific methods and/or instruments
used to assay these specimens. Laboratories that are accredited by the College of American Pathologists
(CAP) are required to establish and/or validate their own reference values at least annually. Thus, any
given result should be interpreted based on the reference value of the laboratory in which the test was
done; the laboratory typically provides these values with the test result.
===PAGE:3678===
Appendix III: Trade Names of Some Commonly Used Drugs
Throughout THE MANUAL, generic (nonproprietary) names for drugs are used whenever possible. Most
prescription drugs have trade names (also called proprietary, brand, or specialty names) to distinguish
them as being produced and marketed by a particular manufacturer. In the US, these names are usually
registered as trademarks with the Patent Office, which confers certain legal rights with respect to their
use. A trade name may be registered for a product containing a single active ingredient (with or without
additives) or ≥ 2 active ingredients (combination drugs). A chemical substance marketed by several
manufacturers may have several trade names. A drug may be marketed under different trade names in
different countries.
Trade names are found in many publications and are used extensively in clinical medicine. For
convenience, the following table lists trade names for most drugs mentioned in THE MANUAL, primarily
those marketed in the US. The table is not all-inclusive and does not list every trade name for each drug.
A few drugs in the table are investigational and may subsequently be approved by the FDA. Inclusion of a
drug does not indicate approval of its use for any indication, nor does it imply efficacy or safety of its
action. Inclusion of a trade name indicates neither endorsement nor preference by THE MANUAL.
TRADE NAMES OF SOME COMMONLY USED DRUGS
*
GENERIC NAME
TRADE NAMES
Abacavir
ZIAGEN
Abatacept
ORENCIA
Abciximab
REOPRO
Acamprosate
CAMPRAL
Acarbose
PRECOSE
Acebutolol
SECTRAL
Acetaminophen
TYLENOL
Acetazolamide
DIAMOX
Acetohydroxamic acid
LITHOSTAT
Acetylcysteine
ACETADOTE
N
-Acetylprocainamide
ACECAINIDE
Acitretin
SORIATANE
Acrivastine/pseudoephedrine
SEMPREX-D
ACTH
See Corticotropin
Actinomycin
See Dactinomycin
Acyclovir
ZOVIRAX
Adalimumab
HUMIRA
Adapalene
DIFFERIN
Adefovir
HEPSERA
Adenosine
ADENOCARD
Agalsidase beta
FABRAZYME
Albendazole
ALBENZA
Albuterol
PROVENTIL-HFA
VENTOLIN HFA
Alclometasone
ACLOVATE
Alefacept
AMEVIVE
Alemtuzumab
CAMPATH
Alendronate
FOSAMAX
Alfentanil
ALFENTA
Alfuzosin
UROXATRAL
Alimemazine
See Trimeprazine
===PAGE:3679===
Aliskiren
TEKTURNA
Allopurinol
LOPURIN
ZYLOPRIM
Alltrans
-retinoic acid
See Tretinoin
Almotriptan
AXERT
Alosetron
LOTRONEX
Alprazolam
XANAX
Alprostadil
CAVERJECT
PROSTIN VR
Altretamine
See Hexamethylmelamine
Alteplase
ACTIVASE
Aluminum chloride
CERTAIN DRI
Aluminum chloride hexahydrate
DRYSOL
XERAC AC
Aluminum hydroxide
GAVISCON
Amantadine
SYMMETREL
Ambrisentan
LETAIRIS
Amifostine
ETHYOL
Amikacin
AMIKIN
Amiloride
MIDAMOR
Aminocaproic acid
AMICAR
5-Aminosalicylic acid
PASER
Amiodarone
CORDARONE
Amlexanox
APHTHASOL
Amlodipine
NORVASC
Amobarbital
AMYTAL
Amorolfine
LOCERYL
Amoxicillin
AMOXIL
TRIMOX
Amoxicillin/clavulanate
AUGMENTIN
Amphetamine
ADDERALL
Amphotericin B
FUNGIZONE
Ampicillin
PRINCIPEN
Ampicillin/sulbactam
UNASYN
Amprenavir
AGENERASE
Anagrelide
AGRYLIN
Anakinra
KINERET
Anastrozole
ARIMIDEX
Anidulafungin
ERAXIS
Anistreplase (anisoylated plasminogen activator complex
—APSAC)
EMINASE
Antazoline
VASOCON-A
Anthralin
ANTHRA-DERM
Antithymocyte globulin
ATGAM
THYMOGLOBULIN
===PAGE:3680===
Apomorphine
APOKYN
Apraclonidine
IOPIDINE
Aprepitant
EMEND
Aprotinin
TRASYLOL
L-Arginine
R-GENE 10
Aripiprazole
ABILIFY
Arsenic trioxide
TRISENOX
Artemether-lumefantrine
COARTEM
Articaine
SEPTOCAINE
Asparaginase
ELSPAR
Aspirin
BAYER
Atenolol
TENORMIN
Atomoxetine
STRATTERA
Atorvastatin
LIPITOR
Atovaquone
MEPRON
Atovaquoneproguanil
MALARONE
Atracurium
TRACRIUM
Atropine
ATROPEN
Attapulgite
DONNAGEL
Auranofin
RIDAURA
Azacitidine
VIDAZA
Azathioprine
IMURAN
Azelaic acid
AZELEX
FINACEA
Azelastine
OPTIVAR
Azithromycin
ZITHROMAX
Aztreonam
AZACTAM
Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG)
THERACYS
TICE BCG
Bacitracin
BACIIM
Baclofen
LIORESAL
Balsalazide
COLAZAL
Bambuterol
BAMBEC
Basiliximab
SIMULECT
Beclomethasone
BECONASE AQ
Benazepril
LOTENSIN
Bendamustine
TREANDA
Benzathine penicillin G
BICILLIN L-A
Benznidazole
RADANIL
Benzocaine
ANBESOL
CEPACOL
LANACANE
Benzafibrate
BEZALIP
Benzonatate
TESSALON
Benzoyl peroxide
BENZAC
===PAGE:3681===
Benzphetamine
DIDREX
Bepridil
VASCOR
Benztropine
COGENTIN
Beractant
SURVANTA
Betaine
CYSTADANE
Betamethasone
CELESTONE
Betaxolol
KERLONE
Bethanechol
URECHOLINE
Bevacizumab
AVASTIN
Bicalutamide
CASODEX
Bimatoprost
LUMIGAN
Biperiden
AKINETON
Bisacodyl
DULCOLAX
Bismuth subsalicylate
PEPTO-BISMOL
Bisoprolol
ZEBETA
Bithionol
BITIN
LOROTHIDOL
Bivalirudin
ANGIOMAX
Bleomycin
BLENOXANE
Bortezomib
VELCADE
Bosentan
TRACLEER
Botulinum toxin
BOTOX
Brimonidine
ALPHAGAN P
Brinzolamide
AZOPT
Bromocriptine
PARLODEL
Brompheniramine
VELTANE
Budesonide
ENTOCORT EC
RHINOCORT
Bumetanide
BUMEX
Bupivacaine
MARCAINE
Buprenorphine
BUPRENEX
Bupropion
WELLBUTRIN
Buserelin
ETILAMIDE
Buspirone
BUSPAR
Busulfan
MYLERAN
Butenafine
MENTAX
Butoconazole
GYNAZOLE-1
Butorphanol
STADOL
Calcitonin
MIACALCIN
Calcipotriene
DOVONEX
Calcitriol
ROCALTROL
Calcium acetate
ELIPHOS
Calcium carbonate
CALTRATE
OS-CAL
TUMS
Calcium polycarbophil
FIBERCON
===PAGE:3682===
Calfactant
INFASURF PRESERVATIVE FREE
Candesartan
ATACAND
Cantharidin
CANTHARONE
Capecitabine
XELODA
Capreomycin
CAPASTAT
Capsaicin
CAPSIN
CAPZASIN
ZOSTRIX
Captopril
CAPOTEN
Carbachol
MIOSTAT
Carbamazepine
TEGRETOL
Carbenicillin
GEOCILLIN
Carbidopa
LODOSYN
Carbimazole
NEOMERCAZOLE
Carboplatin
PARAPLATIN
Carisoprodol
SOMA
Carmustine
BiCNU
Carteolol
OCUPRESS
Carvedilol
COREG
Caspofungin
CANCIDAS
Cefaclor
RANICLOR
Cefadroxil
DURICEF
Cefazolin
ANCEF
KEFZOL
Cefdinir
OMNICEF
Cefditoren
SPECTRACEF
Cefepime
MAXIPIME
Cefixime
SUPRAX
Cefoperazone
CEFOBID
Cefotaxime
CLAFORAN
Cefoxitin
MEFOXIN
Cefpodoxime
VANTIN
Cefprozil
CEFZIL
Ceftazidime
FORTAZ
TAZICEF
Ceftibuten
CEDAX
Ceftizoxime
CEFIZOX
Ceftobiprole
ZEFTERA
ZEVTERA
Ceftriaxone
ROCEPHIN
Cefuroxime
CEFTIN
ZINACEF
Celecoxib
CELEBREX
Celiprolol
CELECTOL
Cephalexin
KEFLEX
===PAGE:3683===
Cephradine
VELOSEF
Certolizumab
CIMZIA
Cetirizine
ZYRTEC
Cetuximab
ERBITUX
Cevimeline
EVOXAC
Chlorambucil
LEUKERAN
Chloramphenicol
CHLOROMYCETIN
Chlordiazepoxide/amitriptyline
LIMBITROL DS
Chlorhexidine
HIBICLENS
2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine
LEUSTATIN
Chloroquine
ARALEN
Chlorothiazide
DIURIL
Chlorpheniramine
CHLORTRIMETON
Chlorpropamide
DIABINESE
Chlorthalidone
THALITONE
Chlorzoxazone
PARAFON FORTE
Cholestyramine
QUESTRAN
Choline Mg trisalicylate
TRICOSAL
Chorionic gonadotropin
NOVAREL
Ciclopirox
LOPROX
Cidofovir
VISTIDE
Cilostazol
PLETAL
Cimetidine
TAGAMET
Cinacalcet
SENSIPAR
Ciprofibrate
MODALIM
Ciprofloxacin
CILOXAN
CIPRO
Cisapride
PROPULSID
Cisatracurium
NIMBEX
Cisplatin
PLATINOL
Citalopram
CELEXA
Cladribine
See 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine
Clarithromycin
BIAXIN
Clemastine
TAVIST-1
Clindamycin
CLEOCIN
Clioquinol
IODO PLAIN
Clobetasol
CLOBEX
TEMOVATE
Clocortolone
CLODERM
Clofarabine
CLOLAR
Clofazimine
LAMPRENE
Clomiphene
CLOMID
SEROPHENE
Clomipramine
ANAFRANIL
Clonazepam
KLONOPIN
Clonidine
CATAPRES
Clopidogrel
PLAVIX
===PAGE:3684===
Clorazepate
TRANXENE
Clotrimazole
LOTRIMIN AF
MYCELEX
Cloxacillin
CLOXAPEN
Clozapine
CLOZARIL
Coal tar
DENOREX
NEUTROGENA T/GEL
Colchicine
COLCRYS
Colesevelam
WELCHOL
Colestipol
COLESTID
Colistimethate
COLY-MYCIN M
Colistin
COLY-MYCIN S
Corticotropin (ACTH)
H. P. ACTHAR GEL
Cortisol
CORTEF
Cotrimoxazole
See Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
Cromoglycic acid
See Cromolyn
Cromolyn
CROLOM
INTAL
Crotamiton
EURAX
Cyanocobalamin
CALOMIST
Cyclandelate
CYCLOSPASMOL
Cyclizine
MAREZINE
Cyclobenzaprine
FLEXERIL
Cyclopentolate
CYCLOGYL
Cyclophosphamide
LYOPHILIZED CYTOXAN
Cycloserine
SEROMYCIN
Cyclosporine
NEORAL
RESTASIS
SANDIMMUNE
Cyproterone
ANDROCUR
Cysteine
See Acetylcysteine
Cytarabine (cytosine arabinoside)
CYTOSAR-U
DEPOCYT
Dabigatran
PRADAXA
Dacarbazine
DTIC-DOME
Daclizumab
ZENAPAX
Dactinomycin
COSMEGEN
Dalfopristin
See Quinupristin
Dalteparin
FRAGMIN
Danaparoid
ORGARAN
Dantrolene
DANTRIUM
Dapsone
ACZONE
Daptomycin
CUBICIN
Darbepoetin
ARANESP
===PAGE:3685===
Darifenacin
ENABLEX
Darunavir
PREZISTA
Dasatinib
SPRYCEL
Daunorubicin
CERUBIDINE
Deferasirox
EXJADE
Deferoxamine
DESFERAL
Delavirdine
RESCRIPTOR
Demeclocycline
DECLOMYCIN
Denileukin diftitox
ONTAK
Deoxycoformycin
See Pentostatin
Desflurane
SUPRANE
Desipramine
NORPRAMIN
Desirudin
IPRIVASK
Desloratadine
CLARINEX
Desmopressin
DDAVP
STIMATE
Desonide
DESOWEN
Desoximetasone
TOPICORT
Dexamethasone
OZURDEX
Dexbrompheniramine
DRIXORAL
Dexmedetomidine
PRECEDEX
Dextroamphetamine
DEXEDRINE
Dextromethorphan
DELSYM
Diazepam
DIASTAT
VALIUM
Diazoxide
PROGLYCEM
Dibromopropamidine
BROLENE
Dibucaine
NUPERCAINAL
Diclofenac
CATAFLAM
VOLTAREN
Dicyclomine
BENTYL
Didanosine (ddI)
VIDEX
Diethylpropion
TENUATE
Diflorasone
PSORCON
Digitoxin
DIGITALINE
Digoxin
LANOXIN
Dihydroergotamine
D.H.E. 45
MIGRANAL
Dihydrotachysterol
DHT
HYTAKEROL
Diloxanide
ENTAMIDE
Diltiazem
CARDIZEM
DILACOR XR
Dimercaprol
BAL
===PAGE:3686===
Dimethyl sulfoxide
RIMSO-50
Dinoprost
DINOLYTIC
PROSTIN F2 ALPHA
Dinoprostone (prostaglandin E2)
CERVIDIL
Diphenhydramine
BENADRYL
Diphenoxylate/atropine
LOMOTIL
Dipivefrin
AKPRO
PROPINE
Dipyridamole
PERSANTINE
Dirithromycin
DYNABAC
Disopyramide
NORPACE
Disulfiram
ANTABUSE
Divalproex
DEPAKOTE
Docetaxel
TAXOTERE
Docosanol
ABREVA
Docusate
COLACE
Dofetilide
TIKOSYN
Dolasetron
ANZEMET
Donepezil
ARICEPT
Dopexamine
DOPACARD
Doripenem
DORIBAX
Dornase alfa
PULMOZYME
Dorzolamide
TRUSOPT
Doxapram
DOPRAM
Doxazosin
CARDURA
Doxercalciferol
HECTOROL
Doxepin
SINEQUAN
ZONALON
Doxorubicin
ADRIAMYCIN
Doxorubicin, liposomal
DOXIL
Doxycycline
VIBRAMYCIN
Doxylamine
UNISOM
Dronabinol
MARINOL
Droperidol
INAPSINE
Drotrecogin alfa (activated protein C)
XIGRIS
Duloxetine
CYMBALTA
Dutasteride
AVODART
Dyclonine
SUCRETS
Dyphylline
LUFYLLIN
Echothiophate
PHOSPHOLINE
Eculizumab
SOLIRIS
Edetate calcium disodium
CALCIUM DISODIUM VERSENATE
Edrophonium
TENSILON
Efalizumab
RAPTIVA
Efavirenz
SUSTIVA
Eflornithine
VANIQA
===PAGE:3687===
Eletriptan
RELPAX
Eltrombopag
PROMACTA
Emedastine
EMADINE
Emtricitabine
EMTRIVA
Enalapril
VASOTEC
Enflurane
ETHRANE
Enfuvirtide
FUZEON
Enoxacin
ALMITIL
Enoxaparin
LOVENOX
Entacapone
COMTAN
Entecavir
BARACLUDE
Epirubicin
ELLENCE
Eplerenone
INSPRA
Epoetin alfa
See Erythropoietin
Epoprostenol
FLOLAN
Eprosartan
TEVETEN
Eptifibatide
INTEGRILIN
Ergocalciferol
DRISDOL
Ergonovine (methylergonovine)
METHERGINE
Ergotamine
ERGOMAR
Ergot mesylates
HYDERGINE
Erlotinib
TARCEVA
Ertapenem
INVANZ
Erythromycin
E-MYCIN
ERYTHROCIN
Erythromycin/sulfisoxazole
ERYZOLE
PEDIAZOLE
Erythropoietin
EPOGEN
PROCRIT
Escitalopram
LEXAPRO
Esmolol
BREVIBLOC
Esomeprazole
NEXIUM
Estradiol
CLIMARA
MENOSTAR
Estramustine
EMCYT
Estrogens
PREMARIN
Eszopiclone
LUNESTA
Etanercept
ENBREL
Ethacrynic acid
EDECRIN
Ethambutol
MYAMBUTOL
Ethionamide
TRECATOR
Ethinyl estradiol
ESTINYL
Ethinyl estradiol/etonogestrel
NUVARING
Ethosuximide
ZARONTIN
Ethylmorphine
INDALGIN
Etidronate
DIDRONEL
===PAGE:3688===
Etodolac
LODINE
Etomidate
AMIDATE
Etonogestrel
IMPLANON
Etoposide
VEPESID
Etravirine
INTELENCE
Etretinate
TEGISON
Everolimus
CERTICAN
Exemestane
AROMASIN
Exenatide
BYETTA
Ezetimibe
ZETIA
Famciclovir
FAMVIR
Famotidine
PEPCID
Felbamate
FELBATOL
Felodipine
PLENDIL
Fenofibrate
FENOGLIDE
LIPOFEN
Fenoldopam
CORLOPAM
Fenoprofen
NALFON
Fenoterol
BEROTEC
Fentanyl
SUBLIMAZE
Ferric gluconate
FERRLECIT
Fexofenadine
ALLEGRA
Filgrastim
NEUPOGEN
Finasteride
PROSCAR
5-Fluorouracil
EFUDEX
Flavoxate
URISPAS
Flecainide
TAMBOCOR
Fluconazole
DIFLUCAN
Flucytosine
ANCOBON
Fludarabine
FLUDARA
Flumazenil
ROMAZICON
Flunisolide
AEROBID
Fluocinolone
SYNALAR
Fluocinonide
LIDEX
Fluorescein sodium
FLUORESCITE
Fluorometholone
FML
Fluorouracil
CARAC
EFUDEX
Fluoxetine
PROZAC
Flurandrenolide
CORDRAN
Flurazepam
DALMANE
Flurbiprofen
ANSAID
OCUFEN
Fluticasone
CUTIVATE
FLONASE
===PAGE:3689===
FLOVENT
Fluvastatin
LESCOL
Fluvoxamine
LUVOX
Fomepizole
ANTIZOL
Fomivirsen
VITRAVENE
Fondaparinux
ARIXTRA
Formoterol
FORADIL
Fosamprenavir
LEXIVA
Foscarnet
FOSCAVIR
Fosfomycin
MONUROL
Fosinopril
MONOPRIL
Fosphenytoin
CEREBYX
Frovatriptan
FROVA
Fulvestrant
FASLODEX
Furazolidone
FUROXONE
Furosemide
LASIX
Fusidic acid
FUSIDIN
Gabapentin
NEURONTIN
Galantamine
RAZADYNE
Gallium nitrate
GANITE
Ganciclovir
CYTOVENE
Gatifloxacin
ZYMAR
Gefitinib
IRESSA
Gemcitabine
GEMZAR
Gemfibrozil
LOPID
Gemifloxacin
FACTIVE
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin
MYLOTARG
Gentamicin
GENOPTIC
Glatiramer
COPAXONE
Glimepiride
AMARYL
Glipizide
GLUCOTROL
Glucagon
GLUCAGEN
Glyburide
DIABETA
Glycopyrrolate
ROBINUL
Gold/gold sodium thiomalate
See Auranofin
Gonadorelin
FACTREL
Goserelin
ZOLADEX
Granisetron
KYTRIL
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(sargramostim)
LEUKINE
Griseofulvin
GRIS-PEG
Growth hormone (somatropin)
GENOTROPIN
NUTROPIN
Guaifenesin
MUCINEX
Guanethidine
ISMELIN
Guanfacine
TENEX
Halcinonide
HALOG
Halobetasol
ULTRAVATE
===PAGE:3690===
Halobetasol
ULTRAVATE
Halofantrine
HALFAN
Haloperidol
HALDOL
Hemin
PANHEMATIN
Heparin
HEPARIN LOCK FLUSH
Hepatitis B immune globulin
BAYHEP B
Hexachlorophene
PHISOHEX
Hexamethylmelamine
HEXALEN
Histrelin
SUPPRELIN LA
Homatropine
TUSSIGON
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
See Chorionic gonadotropin
Hyaluronate
HYALGAN
SYNVISC
Hydrochlorothiazide
ORETIC
Hydrocodone/acetaminophen
ANEXSIA
VICODIN
Hydrocodone/ibuprofen
VICOPROFEN
Hydrocortisone
See Cortisol
Hydroflumethiazide
SALURON
Hydromorphone
DILAUDID
Hydroquinone
TRI-LUMA
Hydroxocobalamin
CYANOKIT
Hydroxychloroquine
PLAQUENIL
Hydroxyethyl starch
HESPAN
Hydroxyurea
HYDREA
Hydroxyzine
VISTARIL
Hyoscyamine
ANASPAZ
LEVBID
LEVSIN
Ibandronate
BONIVA
Ibritumomab
ZEVALIN
Ibuprofen
ADVIL
MOTRIN
Ibutilide
CORVERT
Idarubicin
IDAMYCIN PFS
Idebenone
PREVAGE MD
Ifosfamide
IFEX
Iloprost
VENTAVIS
Imatinib
GLEEVEC
Imipenem/cilastatin
PRIMAXIN
Imipramine
TOFRANIL
Imiquimod
ALDARA
Indinavir
CRIXIVAN
Indomethacin
INDOCIN
Infliximab
REMICADE
Interferon alfacon-1
INFERGEN
===PAGE:3691===
Interferon alfa-2A
ROFERON A
Interferon alfa-2B
INTRON A
Interferon alfa-2A, pegylated
PEGASYS
Interferon alfa-2B, pegylated
See Peginterferon alfa-2B
Interferon alfa-N3
ALFERON N
Interferon beta-1A
AVONEX
REBIF
Interferon beta-1B
BETASERON
Interferon gamma-1B
ACTIMMUNE
IL-2 (interleukin 2, aldesleukin)
PROLEUKIN
IL-11 (interleukin 11, oprelvekin)
NEUMEGA
Iodoquinol
YODOXIN
Ipratropium
ATROVENT
Irbesartan
AVAPRO
Irinotecan
CAMPTOSAR
Isocarboxazid
MARPLAN
Isoflurane
FORANE
Isoproterenol
ISUPREL
Isosorbide
ISMOTIC
Isosorbide dinitrate
ISORDIL
Isosorbide mononitrate
ISMO
Isotretinoin
ACCUTANE
Isoxsuprine
VASODILAN
Isradipine
DYNACIRC CR
Itraconazole
SPORANOX
Ivermectin
STROMECTOL
Kaolin/pectin
KAPECTOLIN
Ketamine
KETALAR
Ketobemidone
KETOGAN
Ketoconazole
NIZORAL
Ketorolac
ACULAR
Ketotifen
ALAWAY
ZADITOR
Labetalol
TRANDATE
Lactulose
CONSTULOSE
Lamivudine (3TC)
EPIVIR
Lamotrigine
LAMICTAL
Lanreotide
SOMATULINE DEPOT
Lansoprazole
PREVACID
Lanthanum carbonate
FOSRENOL
Lapatinib
TYKERB
Latanoprost
XALATAN
Leflunomide
ARAVA
Lenalidomide
REVLIMID
Lepirudin
REFLUDAN
Letrozole
FEMARA
Leuprolide
LUPRON
Levalbuterol
XOPENEX
===PAGE:3692===
Levarterenol
See Norepinephrine
Levetiracetam
KEPPRA
Levobunolol
BETAGAN
Levocabastine
LIVOSTIN
Levocetirizine
XYZAL
Levodopa/carbidopa
SINEMET
Levofloxacin
LEVAQUIN
QUIXIN
Levonorgestrel
NORPLANT
PLAN B
Levorphanol
LEVODROMORAN
Levothyroxine sodium
SYNTHROID
Lidocaine
XYLOCAINE
Linezolid
ZYVOX
Liothyronine
CYTOMEL
Liraglutide
VICTOZA
Lisinopril
PRINIVIL
Lithium
LITHOBID
Lodoxamide
ALOMIDE
Lomefloxacin
MAXAQUIN
Lomustine
CEENU
Loperamide
IMODIUM
Lopinavir/ritonavir
KALETRA
Loracarbef
LORABID
Loratadine
CLARITIN
Lorazepam
ATIVAN
Losartan
COZAAR
Loteprednol
ALREX
Lovastatin
MEVACOR
Lubiprostone
AMITIZA
Mafenide
SULFAMYLON
Magnesium carbonate
RENACIDIN
Magnesium citrate
CITROMA
Magnesium hydroxide
PHILLIPS' MILK OF MAGNESIA
Magnesium salicylate
DOAN'S PILLS
Malathion
OVIDE
Maraviroc
SELZENTRY
α
-Mecaptopropionylglycine
TIOPRONIN
Mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustard)
MUSTARGEN
Mecillinam
COACTIN
Meclizine
ANTIVERT
Meclofenamate
MECLOMEN
Medroxyprogesterone acetate
PROVERA
Mefenamic acid
PONSTEL
Megestrol
MEGACE
Meglumine antimonate
GLUCANTIME
===PAGE:3693===
Melarsoprol
ARSOBAL
Meloxicam
MOBIC
Melphalan
ALKERAN
Memantine
NAMENDA
Menotropic gonadotropin
See Menotropins
Menotropins
REPRONEX
Mephenytoin
MESANTOIN
Mepolizumab
BOSATRIA
6-Mercaptopurine
PURINETHOL
Meropenem
MERREM
Meperidine
DEMEROL
Mesalamine
ASACOL
CANASA
PENTASA
Mesoridazine
SERENTIL
Metaxalone
SKELAXIN
Metformin
GLUCOPHAGE
GLUCOVANCE
Methadone
DOLOPHINE
Methamphetamine
DESOXYN
Methenamine
HIPREX
Methicillin
STAPHCILLIN
Methimazole
TAPAZOLE
Methocarbamol
ROBAXIN
Methohexital
BREVITAL SODIUM
Methotrexate
TREXALL
Methoxsalen
OXSORALEN
Methsuximide
CELONTIN
Methylcellulose
CITRUCEL
Methyclothiazide
ENDURON
Methylene blue
UROLENE BLUE
Methylergonovine
METHERGINE
Methylphenidate
CONCERTA
METHYLIN
RITALIN
Methylprednisolone
MEDROL
Methyltestosterone
VIRILON
Metipranolol
OPTIPRANOLOL
Metoclopramide
REGLAN
Metolazone
ZAROXOLYN
Metoprolol
LOPRESSOR
TOPROL-XL
Metronidazole
FLAGYL
Metyrapone
METOPIRONE
===PAGE:3694===
Micafungin
MYCAMINE
Miconazole
MONISTAT
Midodrine
PROAMATINE
Mifepristone
MIFEPREX
Miglitol
GLYSET
Miglustat
ZAVESCA
Miltefosine
IMPAVIDO
MILTEX
Minocycline
MINOCIN
Minoxidil
ROGAINE
Mirtazapine
REMERON
Misoprostol
CYTOTEC
Mitomycin
MUTAMYCIN
Mitotane
LYSODREN
Mitoxantrone
NOVANTRONE
Mizolastine
MIZOLLEN
Moclobemide
AURORIX
Modafinil
PROVIGIL
Moexipril
UNIVASC
Molindone
MOBAN
Mometasone
ELOCON
NASONEX
Montelukast
SINGULAIR
Moricizine
ETHMOZINE
Morphine
MS CONTIN
ORAMORPH
Moxifloxacin
AVELOX
Mupirocin
BACTROBAN
Muromonab (OKT3)
ORTHOCLONE OKT3
Mycophenolate mofetil
CELLCEPT
Nabumetone
RELAFEN
Nadolol
CORGARD
Nadroparin
FRAXIPARINE
Nafarelin
SYNAREL
Nafcillin
NALLPEN
Naftifine
NAFTIN
Nalbuphine
NUBAIN
Nalmefene
REVEX
Naltrexone
REVIA
Naphazoline
ALBALON
Naphazoline/pheniramine
NAPHCON-A
Naproxen
ALEVE
ANAPROX
NAPROSYN
===PAGE:3695===
Naratriptan
AMERGE
Natalizumab
TYSABRI
Natamycin
NATACYN
Nateglinide
STARLIX
Nedocromil
ALOCRIL
Nelarabine
ARRANON
Nelfinavir
VIRACEPT
Neoloid
EX-LAX
Neomycin
NEO-RX
Neostigmine
PROSTIGMIN
Netilmicin
NETROMYCIN
Nevirapine
VIRAMUNE
Niacin
NIASPAN
Niacinamide
See Niacin
Nicardipine
CARDENE
Nicotine
NICORETTE
NICOTROL
Nicotinic acid
See Niacin
Nifedipine
PROCARDIA
Nifurtimox
LAMPIT
Nilotinib
TASIGNA
Nilutamide
NILANDRON
Nisoldipine
SULAR
Nitazoxanide
ALINIA
Nitrazepam
MOGADON
Nitrofurantoin
FURADANTIN
MACROBID
MACRODANTIN
Nitrogen mustard
See Mechlorethamine
Nitroglycerin
NITRO-DUR
NITROLINGUAL
Nitroprusside
NITROPRESS
Nizatidine
AXID
Norelgestromin/ethinyl estradiol
ORTHO EVRA
Norepinephrine
LEVOPHED
Norethindrone
MICRONOR
Norfloxacin
NOROXIN
Nortriptyline
AVENTYL
Nystatin
MYCOSTATIN
NILSTAT
Octreotide
SANDOSTATIN
SANDOSTATIN LAR
Ofloxacin
FLOXIN
===PAGE:3696===
OCUFLOX
Olanzapine
ZYPREXA
Olmesartan
BENICAR
Olopatadine
PATANOL
Olsalazine
DIPENTUM
Omalizumab
XOLAIR
Omeprazole
PRILOSEC
Ondansetron
ZOFRAN
Orlistat
ALLI
XENICAL
Orphenadrine
INVAGESIC
Oseltamivir
TAMIFLU
Oxacillin
BACTOCILL
Oxaliplatin
ELOXATIN
Oxaprozin
DAYPRO
Oxcarbazepine
TRILEPTAL
Oxiconazole
OXISTAT
Oxybutynin
DITROPAN
Oxycodone
OXYCONTIN
Oxycodone/acetaminophen
PERCOCET
ROXICET
TYLOX
Oxymetazoline
AFRIN
DRISTAN 12-HR NASAL SPRAY
OCUCLEAR
Oxymetholone
ANADROL
Oxymorphone
OPANA
Oxytocin
PITOCIN
Paclitaxel
ABRAXANE
TAXOL
Paliperidone
INVEGA
Palivizumab
SYNAGIS
Palonosetron
ALOXI
Pamidronate
AREDIA
Pancrelipase
CREON
Panitumumab
VECTIBIX
Pantoprazole
PROTONIX
Papaverine
PAVABID
Para-aminobenzoate
POTABA
Paramethadione
PARADIONE
Parecoxib
DYNASTAT
Paricalcitol
ZEMPLAR
Paroxetine
PAXIL
Pegaptanib
MACUGEN
===PAGE:3697===
Pegfilgrastim
NEULASTA
Peginterferon alfa-2B
PEG-INTRON
Pegvisomant
SOMAVERT
Pemetrexed
ALIMTA
Pemirolast
ALAMAST
Penbutolol
LEVATOL
Penciclovir
DENAVIR
Penicillamine
CUPRIMINE
Penicillin G benzathine
BICILLIN L-A
Penicillin V
VEETIDS
Pentamidine
NEBUPENT
Pentazocine
TALWIN
Pentobarbital
NEMBUTAL
Pentosan polysulfate
ELMIRON
Pentostatin
NIPENT
Pentoxifylline
TRENTAL
Pergolide
PERMAX
Perindopril
ACEON
Permethrin
NIX
Phenazopyridine
PYRIDIUM PLUS
Phendimetrazine
BONTRIL
Phenelzine
NARDIL
Phenformin
DEBEONE
Pheniramine
TUSSIONEX PENNKINETIC
Phenobarbital
LUMINAL
Phenol
CHLORASEPTIC
Phenoxybenzamine
DIBENZYLINE
Phentermine
ADIPEX-P
Phentolamine
REGITINE
Phenylbutazone
BUTAZOLIDINE
Phenylephrine
PROMETH VC PLAIN
Phenytoin
DILANTIN
Phosphomycin
See Fosfomycin
Phospholipid surfactant
See Beractant, Calfactant, Poractant
alfa
Physostigmine
ANTILIRIUM
Pilocarpine
SALAGEN
Pimecrolimus
ELIDEL
Pimozide
ORAP
Pioglitazone
ACTOS
Piperacillin/tazobactam
ZOSYN
Piperazine
ENTACYL
Piracetam
NOOTROPIL
Pirbuterol
MAXAIR
Piroxicam
FELDENE
Pivampicillin
PONDOCILLIN
Pivmecillinam
SELEXID
===PAGE:3698===
Plicamycin
MITHRACIN
Podophyllin
PODOFIN
Polidocanol
AETHOXY-SKLEROL
Polycarbophil
FIBERCON
Polyethylene glycol
TRILYTE
Polymyxin B
POLY-RX
Polymyxin B/bacitracin/neomycin
NEOSPORIN
Poractant alfa
CUROSURF
Porfimer sodium
PHOTOFRIN
Posaconazole
NOXAFIL
Potassium chloride
KLOR-CON
Potassium citrate
UROCIT-K
Potassium iodide
THYROSAFE
Practolol
ERALDIN
Pralidoxime
PROTOPAM CHLORIDE
Pramipexole
MIRAPEX
Pramlintide
SYMLIN
Pramoxine/hydrocortisone
ITCH-X
PROCTOFOAM HC
Pravastatin
PRAVACHOL
Praziquantel
BILTRICIDE
Prazosin
MINIPRESS
Prednisolone acetate
OMNIPRED
Pregabalin
LYRICA
Prilocaine/lidocaine
EMLA
Primidone
MYSOLINE
Pristinamycin
PYOSTACINE
Probenecid
PROBALAN
Procarbazine
MATULANE
Prochlorperazine
COMPRO
Procyclidine
KEMADRIN
Progesterone
CRINONE
ENDOMETRIN
Promethazine
PROMETHACON
Propafenone
RYTHMOL
Propamidine
BROLENE
Propantheline
PRO-BANTHINE
Proparacaine
OPHTHAINE
Propofol
DIPRIVAN
Propoxyphene
DARVON
Propranolol
INDERAL
Prostaglandin E
See Alprostadil
Protriptyline
VIVACTIL
Prussian blue
RADIOGARDASE
Pseudoephedrine
AFRINOL
===PAGE:3699===
SUDAFED
Psyllium
METAMUCIL
Pyrantel pamoate
PIN-X
REESE'S PINWORM MEDICINE
Pyrazinamide
RIFATER
Pyridostigmine
MESTINON
Pyrimethamine
DARAPRIM
Quazepam
DORAL
Quetiapine
SEROQUEL
Quinacrine
ATABRINE
Quinagolide
NORPROLAC
Quinapril
ACCUPRIL
Quinine
QUALAQUIN
Quinupristin/dalfopristin
SYNERCID
Rabeprazole
ACIPHEX
Raloxifene
EVISTA
Raltegravir
ISENTRESS
Ramelteon
ROZEREM
Ramipril
ALTACE
Ranibizumab
LUCENTIS
Ranitidine
ZANTAC
Rasagiline
AZILECT
Rasburicase
ELITEK
Reboxetine
EDRONAX
Remifentanil
ULTIVA
Repaglinide
PRANDIN
Reserpine
SERPALAN
Retapamulin
ALTABAX
Reteplase
RETAVASE
Retinoic acid
See Tretinoin
Ribavirin
VIRAZOLE
Rifabutin
MYCOBUTIN
Rifampin
RIFADIN
RIMACTANE
Rifapentine
PRIFTIN
Rifaximin
XIFAXAN
Riluzole
RILUTEK
Rimantadine
FLUMADINE
Risedronate
ACTONEL
Risperidone
RISPERDAL
Ritonavir
NORVIR
Rituximab
RITUXAN
Rivaroxaban
XARELTO
Rivastigmine
EXELON
Rizatriptan
MAXALT
Rocuronium
ZEMURON
Romiplostim
NPLATE
===PAGE:3700===
Ropinirole
REQUIP
Ropivacaine
NAROPIN
Rosiglitazone
AVANDIA
Rosuvastatin
CRESTOR
Rotigotine
NEUPRO
Roxithromycin
ROXAR
SURLID
Salicylic acid
COMPOUND W
Salmeterol
SEREVENT
Salmeterol/fluticasone
ADVAIR
Salsalate
DISALCID
SALFLEX
Saquinavir
INVIRASE
Scopolamine
ISOPTO HYOSCINE
TRANSDERM SCOP
Secobarbital
SECONAL
Selegiline
ELDEPRYL
Selenium sulfide
SELSUN
Senna
SENOKOT
Sertraline
ZOLOFT
Sevelamer
RENAGEL
Sevoflurane
SOJOURN
Sibutramine
MERIDIA
Sildenafil
VIAGRA
Silver sulfadiazine
SILVADENE
Simethicone
MYLICON
PHAZYME
Simvastatin
ZOCOR
Sirolimus
RAPAMUNE
Sitagliptin
JANUVIA
Sodium citrate
ORACIT
Sodium oxybate
XYREM
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate
KAYEXALATE
Sodium tetradecyl
SOTRADECOL
Solifenacin
VESICARE
Sorafenib
NEXAVAR
Sotalol
BETAPACE
Spectinomycin
TROBICIN
Spiramycin
ROVAMYCINE
Spironolactone
ALDACTONE
Stavudine (d4T)
ZERIT
Streptokinase
STREPTASE
Streptozocin
ZANOSAR
Succimer
CHEMET
Succinylcholine
QUELICIN
Sucralfate
CARAFATE
===PAGE:3701===
Sufentanil
SUFENTA
Sulconazole
EXELDERM
Sulfacetamide
BLEPH-10
Sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine
FANSIDAR
Sulfamethizole
THIOSULFIL
Sulfamethoxazole
See Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
Sulfasalazine
AZULFIDINE
Sulfinpyrazone
APOSULFINPYRAZONE
Sulfisoxazole
LIPO GANTRISIN
Sulindac
CLINORIL
Sulpiride
MERESA
Sumatriptan
IMITREX
Sunitinib
SUTENT
Suramin
ANTRYPOL
Tacrine
COGNEX
Tacrolimus
PROGRAF
Tadalafil
CIALIS
Tamsulosin
FLOMAX
Tazarotene
TAZORAC
Tegaserod
ZELNORM
Teicoplanin
TARGOCID
Telbivudine
TYZEKA
Telithromycin
KETEK
Telmisartan
MICARDIS
Temazepam
RESTORIL
Temozolomide
TEMODAR
Temsirolimus
TORISEL
Tenecteplase
TNKASE
Teniposide
VUMON
Tenofovir
VIREAD
Tenoxicam
MOBIFLEX
Terazosin
HYTRIN
Terbinafine
LAMISIL AT
Terconazole
TERAZOL
Teriparatide
FORTEO
Terlipressin
HAEMOPRESSIN
Testosterone cypionate
DEPOTESTOSTERONE
Testosterone enanthate
ANDRODERM
DELATESTRYL
Testosterone undecanoate
ANDRIOL
Tetrabenazine
XENAZINE
Tetracaine
PONTOCAINE
Tetracaine/lidocaine
SYNERA
Tetracycline
SUMYCIN
Tetrahydrozoline
TYZINE
Thalidomide
THALOMID
Theophylline
THEOLAIR
===PAGE:3702===
Thiabendazole
MINTEZOL
Thioguanine
TABLOID
Thiopental
PENTOTHAL
Thiothixene
NAVANE
Thyroid hormone, synthetic
See Levothyroxine sodium
Thyrotropin
THYROGEN
L-Thyroxine
See Levothyroxine sodium
Tiagabine
GABITRIL
Ticarcillin/clavulanate
TIMENTIN
Ticlopidine
TICLID
Tigecycline
TYGACIL
Tiludronate
SKELID
Timolol
TIMOPTIC
Tinidazole
TINDAMAX
Tinzaparin
INNOHEP
Tioconazole
VAGISTAT-1
Tiopronin (
α
-mercaptopropionylglycine)
THIOLA
Tiotropium
SPIRIVA
Tipranavir
APTIVUS
Tirofiban
AGGRASTAT
Tissue plasminogen activator (alteplase)
ACTIVASE
Tizanidine
ZANAFLEX
Tobramycin
TOBREX
Tocainide
TONOCARD
Tolazoline
PRISCOLINE
Tolcapone
TASMAR
Tolmetin
TOLECTIN
Tolnaftate
TINACTIN
Tolterodine
DETROL
Topiramate
TOPAMAX
Topotecan
HYCAMTIN
Torsemide
DEMADEX
Tositumomab
BEXXAR
Tramadol
RYZOLT
ULTRAM
Trandolapril
MAVIK
Tranexamic acid
LYSTEDA
Tranylcypromine
PARNATE
Trastuzumab
HERCEPTIN
Travoprost
TRAVATAN
Treprostinil
REMODULIN
Tretinoin
AVITA
RENOVA
RETIN-A
Triamcinolone
KENALOG
ORACORT
===PAGE:3703===
Triamcinolone hexacetonide
ARISTOSPAN
Triamterene
DYRENIUM
Triazolam
HALCION
Trichloroacetic acid
TRI-CHLOR
Triclabendazole
FASINEX
Trientine
SYPRINE
Trifluridine
VIROPTIC
Triiodothyronine
THYROLAR
Trimeprazine
NEDELTRAN
Trimethadione
TRIDIONE
Trimethobenzamide
TIGAN
Trimethoprim
PRIMSOL
Trimethoprim/polymyxin B
POLYTRIM
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
BACTRIM
SEPTRA
Trimipramine
SURMONTIL
Triptorelin
TRELSTAR DEPOT
Tromethamine
THAM
Tropicamide
MYDRIACYL
Tropisetron
NAVOBAN
Trospium
SANCTURA
Ubiquinone
COENZYME Q10
Undecylenate
DESENEX
Urokinase
ABBOKINASE
KINLYTIC
Unoprostone
RESCULA
Ursodeoxycholic acid
ACTIGALL
Ursodiol
See Ursodeoxycholic acid
Valacyclovir
VALTREX
Valganciclovir
VALCYTE
Valproate
DEPACON
Valsartan
DIOVAN
Vancomycin
VANCOCIN
Vardenafil
LEVITRA
Varenicline
CHANTIX
Vasopressin
PITRESSIN
Venlafaxine
EFFEXOR
Verapamil
CALAN
ISOPTIN SR
Vigabatrin
SABRIL
Vildagliptin
GALVUS
Vindesine
ELDISINE
Vinorelbine
NAVELBINE
Vitamin A
AQUASOL A
Vitamin B
See Niacin
===PAGE:3704===
Vitamin B
(pyridoxine)
NESTREX
Vitamin B
See Cyanocobalamin
Vitamin D
See Ergocalciferol
Vitamin D (synthetic)
See Dihydrotachysterol (DHT)
Vitamin D
See Doxercalciferol
Vitamin K (phytonadione)
MEPHYTON
Voriconazole
VFEND
Warfarin
COUMADIN
Xylometazoline
OTRIVIN
Yohimbine
YOCON
Zafirlukast
ACCOLATE
Zalcitabine
HIVID
Zaleplon
SONATA
Zanamivir
RELENZA
Ziconotide
PRIALT
Zidovudine (AZT)
RETROVIR
Zileuton
ZYFLO
Zinc oxide
DESITIN
Ziprasidone
GEODON
Zoledronic acid
ZOMETA
Zoledronate
See Zoledronic acid
Zolmitriptan
ZOMIG
Zolpidem
AMBIEN
Zonisamide
ZONEGRAN
*Some drugs mentioned in this book are manufactured only as generics and therefore have no trade
name and are not included in this table.
Not available in the US.
===PAGE:3705===
Index
Note
Page numbers in
italics
refer to illustrations, tables, or sidebars.
===PAGE:3706===
A
Abacavir
,
in pediatric HIV infection
Abatacept
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
Abciximab
in coronary artery disease
in myocardial infarction
Abdomen
abscess of
117-119
,
actinomycosis of
acute
105-119
ascites of
206-211
(
see also
Ascites)
Clostridium perfringens
infection of
1293-1294
congenital defects of
,
examination of
,
,
in children
in elderly
in infant
in irritable bowel syndrome
in neonate
hernia of
113-114
laparoscopy of
pain in
acute
105-109
,
,
biliary colic and
,
275-276
in children
chronic
70-74
,
72-73
Crohn's disease and
dyspepsia and
74-76
,
,
extra-abdominal causes of
functional
,
gastrointestinal tract perforation and
111-112
,
intestinal obstruction and
irritable bowel syndrome and
liver disease and
mesenteric ischemia and
109-111
,
pancreatitis and
,
recurrent
70-74
ulcer-related perforation and
paracentesis of
,
,
trauma to
,
Abdominal aortic aneursym
2208-2210
,
screening for
Abdominal reflex
Abdominojugular reflux
Abducens nerve (6th cranial nerve)
disorders of
,
,
1753-1754
examination of
Abetalipoproteinemia
vitamin E deficiency and
44-45
ABL-BCR
gene
ABO blood group
incompatibility of
isoimmunization
transplantation and
===PAGE:3707===
typing of
,
,
Abortion
induced
recurrent (habitual)
2674-2675
septic
,
spontaneous
,
,
2672-2675
,
,
cocaine abuse and
intrauterine device and
Abortus
Abrasions
corneal
3236-3237
Abruptio placentae
,
,
,
2660-2661
,
Abscess
1162-1163
(
see also
Empyema
and under specific organs
)
Actinomyces israelii

1289-1290
anorectal
Bezold
brain
,
,
,
breast
Crohn's disease and
cutaneous
696-697
,
1162-1163
,
,
,
deep
1162-1163
epidural

eyelid
fever and
hepatic
,
,
infradiaphragmatic, pleural effusion with
intra-abdominal
117-119
,
metastatic
myocardial
oral
ovarian
,
palmar
389-390
pancreatic
parapharyngeal
Pautrier's
pelvic
pericolic
perinephric
peritonsillar (quinsy)
474-475
pharyngeal
prostatic
pulmonary
1937-1939
,
rectal
,
retroperitoneal
117-119
,
retropharyngeal
471-472
,
sacrococcygeal (pilonidal disease)
spinal
splenic
subcutaneous
1162-1163
,
submandibular space
470-471
,
subphrenic
,
tubo-ovarian
,
urethral
visceral
117-119
,
Absidia
infection
Absorption
of drugs (
see
Drugs, absorption of)
===PAGE:3708===
gastrointestinal (
see
Malabsorption syndromes)
Absorption rate constant, of drugs
Abstinence, periodic
,
2587-2588
,
Abulia
Abuse
child
3062-3067
Munchausen syndrome by proxy and
1576-1577
report of
sexual
1572-1573
,
,
,
,
domestic
drug
1507-1534
(
see also
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
elder
3146-3150
,
,
,
sexual
2548-2552
,
in children
1572-1573
,
,
,
,
Acacitidine
Acamprosate
Acanthamoeba
infection
,
corneal
Acanthocytes
Acanthosis nigricans
Acarbose
Accessory nerve (11th cranial nerve)
,
Accessory pathway reentrant tachycardia
Acclimatization
high altitude
hot weather
Acebutolol
in arrhythmias
during breastfeeding
in hypertension
ACE inhibitors (
see
Angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors)
Acephate poisoning
Aceruloplasminemia
Acetaldehyde
Acetaminophen
in children
for fever
hepatotoxicity of
3329-3333
nephrotoxicity of
for pain
,
poisoning with
,
,
3329-3333
,
,
Acetanilid poisoning
Acetazolamide
in acute mountain sickness
in glaucoma
,
in gout
in metabolic alkalosis
in seizures
Acetic acid poisoning
Acetoacetate, reference values for
Acetoacetic acid
Acetohexamide
Acetone poisoning
Acetonitrile poisoning
Acetophenetidin poisoning
Acetylcholine
,
Acetylcholine receptor antibodies
===PAGE:3709===
Acetylcholinesterase
in amniotic fluid
reference values for
Acetylcysteine
in acetaminophen poisoning
,
before contrast administration
Acetylene gas poisoning
N
-Acetylglutamate synthetase deficiency
N
-Acetylprocainamide, in elderly
Acetylsalicylic acid (
see
Aspirin)
N
-Acetyltransferase
Achalasia
123-124
Achilles tendon
bursitis of
,
401-402
enthesopathy of
,
sports-related injury to
tear of
,
Achlorhydria
Achondroplasia
,
,
,
Acid
burns with
,
,
,
3335-3336
gastric
128-129
drug reduction of
136-138
reflux of (
see
Gastroesophageal reflux disease)
in short bowel syndrome
tests for
ingestion of
3335-3336
Acid-base disorders
854-865
,
,
,
,
,
(
see also
Acidosis; Alkalosis)
Acidemia
,
,
glutaric
isovaleric
methylmalonic
propionic
ventilatory failure and
Acid-fast stains
,
α
-Acid glycoprotein
Acid hemolysis test (Ham's test)
Acidosis
(
see also
Ketoacidosis)
gastroenteritis and
hyperchloremic
,
lactic
861-862
metabolic
,
,
859-862
acute renal failure and
,
anion gap in
,
,
,
chronic renal failure and
inborn errors of metabolism and
potassium levels and
in premature infant
septic shock and
renal tubular
,
,
2426-2428
,
(
see also
Renal tubular acidosis)
respiratory
,
,
,
864-865
ARDS and
ventilatory failure and
Acid phosphatase
,
Acid steatocrit
Aciduria
argininosuccinic
===PAGE:3710===
orotic
Acinetobacter
infection
1274-1275
,
pneumonia
,
Acinic cell carcinoma
Acitretin
in ichthyosis
in lichen planus
in psoriasis
Acne
649-655
corticosteroid-induced
,
differential diagnosis of
drug treatment of
650-654
,
,
652-653
severity of
Acne conglobata
,
Acne fulminans
,
Acneiform eruptions
Acne rosacea
654-655
Acoustic nerve (
see
Cranial nerves,
th [auditory, vestibulocochlear])
Acoustic neuroma
,
,
441-442
,
in neurofibromatosis
Acoustic reflex
Acoustic trauma
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) (
see
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection)
Acridine orange stain
Acrivastine
Acrochordons
Acrocyanosis
,
Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans
,
Acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
Acromegaly
768-770
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type

teeth in
Acromioclavicular joint sprain
Acrophobia
ACTH (
see
Adrenocorticotropic hormone)
ACTHoma
Actin, antibody to
Acting out
Actinic atrophy, of lips
Actinic keratoses
Actinic prurigo
Actinomycin, in pregnancy
Actinomycosis
1289-1290
cervicofacial
hepatic disease in
Action potential
cardiac
neuronal
,
Activated charcoal
in flatulence
in poisoning
Activated partial thromboplastin time
Activated protein C
,
in septic shock
Activities of daily living
,
,
,
ACTN4
gene
===PAGE:3711===
Acupuncture
,
3419-3420
,
,
Acute abdomen
105-109
Acute bacterial endocarditis
Acute chest syndrome
Acute coronary syndromes
,
2099-2118
(
see also
Myocardial infarction)
atherosclerosis and
Acute hypoxemic respiratory failure
2284-2288
,
Acute interstitial pneumonia
Acute kidney injury
2436-2442
,
,
,
Acute lung injury
,
,
,
mechanical ventilation in
,
Acute mountain sickness
,
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
,
Acute phase reactants
in neonatal sepsis
Acute posterior ganglionitis
1420-1421
Acute radiation syndromes
,
3256-3257
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
2284-2288
,
,
,
idiopathic
mechanical ventilation in
,
thrombocytopenia in
tuberculosis and
Acute retroviral syndrome
Acute stress disorder
,
in children and adolescents
3054-3055
Acute tubular necrosis
2412-2414
,
Acute urethral syndrome
,
Acyclovir
in chickenpox
crystal formation and
in eczema herpeticum
in erythema multiforme
in herpes simplex encephalitis
in herpes simplex keratitis
in herpes simplex virus infection
1419-1420
in herpetic whitlow
in neonate
in varicella
Adalimumab
,
,
,
Adam (methylenedioxymethamphetamine)
1529-1530
ADAM33
gene
ADAMTS13
Adapalene
,
,
Addiction
,
(
see also
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
Addison's disease
,
,
792-795
,
adrenal crisis in
,
cutaneous manifestations of
,
idiopathic
Adefovir
,
Adenine arabinoside
Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency
Adenocarcinoma
anorectal
195-196
cervical
,
,
2576-2580
colorectal
193-196
,
endometrial
2571-2573
,
esophageal
186-189
,
===PAGE:3712===
fallopian tube
gastric
,
189-190
lung
ovarian
2567-2571
,
,
,
pancreatic
196-198
prostatic
2470-2473
renal
2473-2475
small-bowel
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
,
2012-2013
Adenoidectomy
Adenoids
hypertrophy of
Adenolymphangitis
Adenoma
adrenal
799-801
,
,
803-804
(
see also
Cushing's syndrome [disease])
in MEN-1 syndrome
virilism and
796-797
bile duct
hepatic
oral contraceptives and
in MEN syndromes
,
pancreatic
parathyroid
,
in MEN syndromes
,
,
pituitary
,
1820-1821
ACTH-secreting
,
,
growth hormone-secreting
768-770
in MEN-1 syndrome
,
prolactin-secreting
770-772
removal of
,
TSH-secreting
salivary gland
thyroid
,
villous
Adenomatosis
909-914
,
Adenomatous polyposis, familial
192-193
Adenosine
in arrhythmias
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in elderly
stress test with
in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Adenosine deaminase
assay of
deficiency of
Adenosine diphosphate, platelet deficiency of
,
S
-Adenosyl-L-methionine
3430-3431
Adenovirus
infection
,
,
,
1403-1404
,
,
conjunctival
581-582
corneal
Adenylosuccinase deficiency
ADH (
see
Antidiuretic hormone)
Adhesins
Adhesives, tissue
Adie's pupil
,
,
Adjustment sleep disorder
,
Adnexa (
see
Fallopian tubes; Ovary[ies])
===PAGE:3713===
Adolescents
behavioral disorders in
3058-3060
care of
2714-2715
,
2752-2753
chronic illness in
communication with
diabetes mellitus in
drug nonadherence in
growth of
,
HIV infection in
,
mental disorders in
3048-3062
,
,
nausea and vomiting in
2747-2748
pregnancy in
preventive care for
2714-2715
sports screening for
3295-3296
substance use disorders in
suicide in
,
3060-3062
vaccines for
,
2722-2724
violence and
3034-3035
Adrenal crisis
,
Adrenalectomy, in Cushing's syndrome
Adrenal gland
791-804
adenoma of
799-801
,
,
803-804
in MEN-1 syndrome
virilism and
796-797
carcinoma of
congenital hyperplasia of
796-797
,
2889-2891
cysts of
hemorrhage of
hyperfunction of
796-797
,
,
(
see also
Aldosteronism; Cushing's syndrome [disease])
hypofunction of
792-795
,
(
see also
Addison's disease)
in MEN syndromes
,
metastases to
nonfunctional masses of
803-804
pheochromocytoma of
,
801-803
in MEN syndromes
removal of, in Cushing's syndrome
transplantation of
tuberculosis of
,
Adrenal insufficiency (
see also
Addison's disease)
primary
792-795
,
secondary
,
795-796
sepsis and
Adrenal virilism
796-797
Adrenarche
2339-2340
,
α
-Adrenergic agonists
in elderly
in hypertension
,
in pain
β
-Adrenergic agonists
in asthma
,

in COPD
,
in hyperkalemia
α
-Adrenergic blocking agents
,
in elderly
β
-Adrenergic blocking agents (
see
Beta-blockers)
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
in adrenal insufficiency
===PAGE:3714===
blood levels of
,
,
deficiency of
,
,
795-796
ectopic
,
,
,
in gout
hypersecretion of (
see
Cushing's syndrome [disease])
pancreatic tumor secretion of
during pregnancy
stimulation test with
,
Adrenogenital syndrome
796-797
,
2889-2891
Adrenoleukodystrophy
,
Adrenomyeloneuropathy
Adult respiratory distress syndrome (
see
Acute respiratory distress syndrome)
Adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma
Advance directive
3471-3472
Advanced sleep phase syndrome
Adverse drug reactions
3184-3185
,
(
see also
Hypersensitivity reactions)
in children
,
in elderly
3092-3098
,
,
,
Adynamic ileus
114-115
Aeromonas
infection
Aerophagia
,
in infant
Aerotitis media
Affective disorders
1538-1553
(
see also specific disorders
)
in children and adolescents
3055-3057
,
psychosis and
1558-1559
suicide and
,
,
,
3060-3062
African sleeping sickness
,
,
1373-1375
African tick bite fever
,
African tick typhus
Agammaglobulinemia (
see also
Immunodeficiency)
acquired
,
,
pneumonia with
X-linked (Bruton's)
,
,
1107-1108
Ageometria
Age-related macular degeneration
,
,
612-613
Ageusia
Agglutination tests
Aggression
against self
(
see also
Suicide)
in children and adolescents
,
3034-3035
as psychiatric emergency
,
schizophrenia and
Aging (
see also
Elderly patient; Geriatric medicine)
anemia and
arrhythmias and
chest pain and
common disorders with
driving and
,
3150-3155
,
drugs and
3090-3104
,
,
,
,
,
edema and
exercise and
,
3294-3295
gait changes and
hearing loss and
heart changes with
hormonal changes with
immune system changes and
,
===PAGE:3715===
muscle weakness and
obesity and
orthostatic hypotension and
physiologic changes with
3070-3072
,
3071-3072
premature
preventive care and
3104-3113
,
,
,
,
,
rehabilitation and
syncope and
tuberculosis and
,
undernutrition and
Agitation
,
,
in critical care patient
2253-2255
,
,
delirium and
in dementia
1684-1686
in dying patient
poisoning and
SSRIs and
Agnogenic myeloid metaplasia
,
999-1000
,
Agnosia
,
Agonist drug
Agoraphobia
,
in children and adolescents
3053-3054
Agouti-related peptide
Agranulocytosis
948-952
Agraphia
AIDS (
see
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection)
AIHA (autoimmune hemolytic anemia)
936-939
,
,
Air
compressed, injury and
3282-3291
,
mediastinal
,
2001-2002
in infant
pericardial, in infant
peritoneal, in infant
pleural
2002-2004
,
in infant
swallowing of
,
in urine
,
Air embolism
,
3285-3286
,
recompression therapy in
3289-3290
,
Air enema, in intussusception
Air leak
Air-leak syndromes
2874-2875
Air mattress
,
Air pollution-related illness
1971-1972
Air travel
3437-3439
contraindications to
,
COPD and
motion sickness with
pregnancy and
,
Airway
in brain injury
for cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in adults
,
,
in children
-
,
in trauma
clearance of
2271-2272
,
,
esophageal/tracheal
===PAGE:3716===
establishment of
,
,
2270-2279
,
,
,
,
,
foreign body in (
see
Foreign bodies, airway)
host defenses of
hyperreactivity of
in asthma
in COPD
obstructive disorders of
1868-1888
,
(
see also
Asthma; Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
[COPD])
respiratory arrest with
sleep-related
1903-1907
pediatric
postoperative care for
pressures in
2280-2281
,
reactive dysfunction of
,
smoke inhalation injury to
in trauma evaluation
tumors of
2012-2013
Airway (artificial) (
see also
Intubation, endotracheal)
esophageal/tracheal (Combitube)
laryngeal mask
,
oropharyngeal
surgical
2277-2278
,
in jaw fracture
Akathisia
,
,
Akinesia
,
Alagille syndrome
,
Alanine aminotransferase
,
,
in acute viral hepatitis
in alcoholic liver disease
,
in chronic viral hepatitis
Albendazole
,
in neurocysticercosis
Albers-Schonberg disease
Albert's disease
401-402
Albinism
,
719-720
tyrosine deficiency and
Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy
,
Albright's syndrome
Albumin
blood levels of
,
,
(
see also
Hypoalbuminemia)
in ascites
in chronic viral hepatitis
in cirrhosis
dialysis and
in elderly
malabsorption and
protein-energy undernutrition and
,
undernutrition and
creatinine ratio
,
drug binding to
reduced synthesis of
thyroid hormone binding of
urinary
,
,
,
,
(
see also
Proteinuria)
in atherosclerosis
in hypertension
Albuterol
in asthma
,
,
===PAGE:3717===
in COPD
,
in elderly
in hyperkalemia
Alcohol
abuse of (
see
Alcohol abuse)
atherosclerosis and
blood levels of
during breastfeeding
hepatic metabolism of
235-236
overdose of
poisoning with
3345-3346
pregnancy and
,
sleep disorders and
vitamin interactions with
,
,
Alcohol abuse
1516-1524
benign transient amnesia and
by elderly
,
,
fetal effects of
hypomagnesemia and
hypophosphatemia and
hypopituitarism vs
ketoacidosis and
886-887
Korsakoff's psychosis with
liver disease and
,
235-239
,
macrocytosis and
Marchiafava-Bignami disease with
1523-1524
oral cancer and
pancreatitis and
peptic ulcer disease and
,
rehabilitation for
1519-1522
screening for
,
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis with
210-211
suicide and
surgery and
thiamin deficiency and
treatment of
1518-1519
,
1521-1522
,
undernutrition and
Wernicke's encephalopathy with
1522-1523
withdrawal from
,
,
Alcohol dehydrogenase
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
886-887
Alcoholics Anonymous
Alcoholism (
see
Alcohol abuse)
Aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 deficiency
Aldicarb poisoning
Aldolase B deficiency
Aldosterone
blood levels of
deficiency of
heart failure and
hypertension and
urine levels of
Aldosterone receptor blockers
Aldosteronism
primary
799-801
,
,
secondary
,
,
Aldrin poisoning
===PAGE:3718===
Alefacept
Alemtuzumab
,
,
Alendronate
,
in osteogenesis imperfecta
Aleppo boil
Alexia
Alfuzosin
Alginates
,
Alimentary tract (
see
Gastrointestinal tract)
Aliskiren
Alkalemia
,
,
Alkali, burns with
,
,
,
3335-3336
Alkaline diuresis
,
Alkaline phosphatase
,
,
in acute viral hepatitis
in chronic viral hepatitis
deficiency of
disease-related alterations in
in jaundice
during pregnancy
reference values for
in vitamin D deficiency
Alkali sulfide poisoning
Alkalosis
metabolic
,
,
,
862-864
,
gastroenteritis and
pseudorespiratory
respiratory
,
,
,
heart failure and
infection and
septic shock and
ticarcillin and
Alkaptonuria
Alkylating agents
,
,
(
see also
Cancer chemotherapy)
Allen's test
,
,
Allergens
desensitization for
removal of
,
Allergic alveolitis
1956-1960
,
1956-1957
,
Allergic angiitis (Churg-Strauss syndrome)
317-318
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
1887-1888
,
,
Allergic rhinitis
1117-1118
Allergy
1113-1121
(
see also
Anaphylaxis; Asthma; Hypersensitivity reactions)
anaphylaxis in
,
,
1120-1121
anesthetic
antihistamines in
,
asthma and
,
,
1979-1980
bee sting
blood transfusion and
bronchial challenge for
cardiac catheterization and
chronic fatigue syndrome and
conjunctivitis and
563-566
,
,
584-585
contrast media
,
diphtheria antitoxin
drug
1122-1124
,
anaphylaxis and
1120-1121
===PAGE:3719===
dust mite
egg
eosinophilia and
,
,
eyelid swelling and
553-556
,
554-555
food
1118-1120
,
insulin
latex
,
methylparaben
multiple chemical sensitivity syndrome vs
patch testing in
penicillin
,
1205-1206
(
see also
Penicillin, allergy to)
prevention of
provocative testing for
radioallergosorbent test for
,
rhinitis and
1117-1118
,
stomatitis and
sunlight
,
sunscreen
tests for
,
treatment of
,
1115-1117
,
vaccination and
Alligator bite
Allodynia
Allograft
(
see also
Transplantation)
Allopurinol
in gout
in polycythemia vera
in tumor lysis syndrome
Almond oil poisoning
Almotriptan
Aloe
sp poisoning
Alopecia
723-728
,
724-725
,
cancer-related
Alopecia areata
Alpha
-acid glycoprotein
Alpha
-antitrypsin
Alpha-adrenergic agonists
in elderly
in hypertension
,
in pain
Alpha-adrenergic blocking agents
,
in elderly
Alpha-chain disease
1025-1026
Alpha-fetoprotein (
see

α
-Fetoprotein)
Alphaprodine poisoning
Alphavirus infection
,
1398-1399
,
Alport's syndrome
2387-2390
Alprazolam
drug interactions of
in elderly
,
Alprostadil
ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis)
,
Alstrom syndrome
ALTE (apparent life-threatening event)
2929-2931
,
Alteplase
,
in myocardial infarction
,
===PAGE:3720===
in pulmonary embolism
Altered sleep phase syndromes
Alternative medicine
3411-3420
,
,
3414-3415
dietary supplements in
3421-3432
,
Altitude sickness
3275-3277
hypoxemia and
Altitudinal field defect
Aluminum
phosphate depletion and
toxicity of
,
Aluminum acetate
Aluminum chloride
,
,
Aluminum hydroxide
Aluminum sulfate and calcium acetate
Alveolar-arterial (A-a) O
gradient
,
Alveolar hemorrhage
diffuse
1989-1990
glomerulonephritis with
1990-1992
,
Alveolar proteinosis
1962-1963
Alveolar ridge
atrophy of
,
Alveolitis
allergic
1956-1960
,
1956-1957
,
fibrosing
1948-1950
postextraction
Alzheimer's disease
,
,
1677-1680
,
,
,
Down syndrome and
Amanita
poisoning
,
Amantadine
in elderly
,
in influenza
in Parkinson's disease
,
,
Amaurosis fugax
,
Amblyopia
2919-2920
Ambrisentan
Ambulation
aids for
,
,
exercise for
after stroke
support for
Amebiasis
,
,
,
1367-1369
corneal
1378-1379
diagnostic tests for
,
drugs for
encephalitic
meningoencephalitic
1377-1378
,
,
sexual transmission of
Ameloblastoma
Amelogenesis imperfecta
Amenorrhea
2501-2510
,
-
,
2505-2507
,
,
hypogonadotropic
hypothalamic
malnutrition and
medroxyprogesterone acetate and
physiologic (
see
Menopause)
American Sign Language
Amifostine
===PAGE:3721===
Amikacin
,
1198-1201
,
,
in elderly
in meningitis
,
neonatal dosage of
ototoxicity of
in tuberculosis
Amiloride
in elderly
Amines, cancer and
Amino acids
,
formula-based
,
malabsorption of (Hartnup disease)
2990-2991
metabolic defects of
18-19
,
3011-3016
renal transport defects of
urinary
,
γ
-Aminobutyric acid
,
ε
-Aminocaproic acid
Aminoglycosides
,
1198-1201
,
(
see also specific drugs
)
dosing for
1185-1186
,
in elderly
in meningitis
in pregnancy
,
topical
toxicity of
1199-1201
δ
-Aminolevulinic acid
,
,
δ
-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency
,
809-815
δ
-Aminolevulinic acid synthase deficiency
Aminophylline
in pediatric ventilation
pharmacologic stress testing and
poisoning with
5-Aminosalicylic acid
during breastfeeding
in inflammatory bowel disease
Aminotransferases
,
,
in acute viral hepatitis
in alcoholic liver disease
,
in chronic viral hepatitis
in infectious mononucleosis
in jaundice
reference values for
Amiodarone
in arrhythmias
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
during breastfeeding
in elderly
hyperpigmentation and
hyperthyroidism and
tremors and
Amitriptyline
in depression
,
drug interactions of
in elderly
in migraine
in pain
in Parkinson's disease
===PAGE:3722===
poisoning with
tremors and
in trigeminal neuralgia
Amlodipine
in elderly
in heart failure
in hypertension
Ammonia
blood levels of
inhalation of
,
1983-1984
poisoning with
in portal-systemic encephalopathy
,
total parenteral nutrition and
Ammonium fluoride poisoning
Amnesia
1638-1640
brain injury and
dissociative
1503-1504
Amnestic mild cognitive impairment
Amniocentesis
,
,
Amnionitis
,
Amniotic fluid
acetylcholinesterase in
deficiency of
embolism of
,
excess of
,
ferning of
α
-fetoprotein in
infection of
2662-2663
pH of
Amniotic membrane, premature rupture of
,
,
,
Amniotic sac
,
Amniotomy
Amobarbital poisoning
Amorolfine
Amoxapine
Amoxicillin
,
,
in endocarditis prophylaxis
,
in Lyme disease
neonatal dosage of
in otitis media
Amoxicillin-clavulanate
1188-1189
in otitis media
Amphetamines
abuse of
1528-1530
during breastfeeding
in pregnancy
,
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
in elderly
,
overdose of
,
poisoning with
withdrawal from
Amphotericin B
,
1321-1322
neonatal dosage of
tremors and
Ampicillin
,
,
crystal formation and
in endocarditis prophylaxis
===PAGE:3723===
in infective endocarditis
2197-2198
in meningitis
,
,
neonatal dosage of
Ampicillin-sulbactam
AMPLE history
Amprenavir
Ampulla of Vater
Amputation
congenital
penile
in peripheral arterial disease
rehabilitation after
3465-3466
Amputation neuroma
,
Amrinone
,
Amsler grid
Amusia
Amylase
,
creatinine clearance ratio
urinary
Amylin analogs
,
Amyl nitrite
heart murmur with
poisoning with
β
-Amyloid
Amyloidosis
905-907
,
cancer-related
dialysis and
familial Hibernian fever and
familial Mediterranean fever and
gastritis in
glomerular
neuropathy and
purpura and
Amyloid P component
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
,
Amyotrophy, diabetic
Anabolic steroids
1532-1534
,
in protein-energy undernutrition
Anaerobic bacterial infection
,
,
1288-1301
Anagen effluvium
,
Anagrelide
Anakinra
,
,
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
Anal canal
(
see also
Anus)
Analgesia (
see also
Pain)
adjuvant
1628-1629
,
in critical care patient
in dying patient
in elderly
,
,
,
,
epidural
during labor
nephrotoxicity of
neural blockade for
nonopioid
,
NSAIDs for
,
opioid
1623-1628
,
1625-1626
,
patient-controlled
===PAGE:3724===
topical
,
warfarin interactions with
Anal sphincters
,
,
Anal stenosis
Anaphylactoid reactions
Anaphylaxis
,
1120-1121
,
,
(
see also
Allergy; Hypersensitivity reactions, type I)
antivenom-induced
blood transfusion and
drug-induced
food allergy and
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma
,
Anarithmia
Anasarca
Anastrozole
,
Ancylostoma
infestation
,
,
1348-1349
Andes virus infection
Andosterone, urinary
Androgen receptor blockers
Androgens (
see also
Steroids; Testosterone)
adrenal
excess of
796-797
deficiency of
,
,
in endometriosis
,
excess of, hirsutism and
at puberty
Anemia
918-924
,
,
922-923
air travel and
aplastic
929-931
chloramphenicol-induced
pneumonia with
blood loss
,
,
,
924-927
blood transfusion in
bone marrow failure and
bone marrow replacement (myelophthisis) and
,
931-932
cancer therapy and
1074-1075
chronic disease and
928-929
classification of
Cooley's
946-947
Diamond-Blackfan
,
dyserythropoietic
dyspnea in
evaluation of
920-923
Fanconi's
,
folate deficiency and
,
932-933
in pregnancy
2635-2636
genitourinary disorders and
hemolytic
,
934-948
,
(
see also
Hemolytic anemia)
HIV infection and
Hodgkin lymphoma and
hypoproliferative
hypothyroidism and
immunodeficiency and
infection and
,
928-929
,
inflammation and
,
928-929
intrinsic
,
iron deficiency
,
924-927
,
(
see also
Iron, deficiency of)
iron-reutilization
,
928-929
===PAGE:3725===
iron-transport deficiency
,
iron-utilization
,
laboratory testing for
921-923
,
922-923
leukemia and
liver disease and
,
macrocytic
,
,
,
,
932-933
,
malabsorption and
,
,
Mediterranean
946-947
megaloblastic
932-933
folate deficiency and
,
29-31
,
,
932-933
oral lesions in
vitamin B
deficiency and
,
,
,
932-933
microcytic
,
,
924-927
,
myelodysplastic
myelophthisic
non-Hodgkin lymphoma and
normochromic-normocytic
,
,
,
,
paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria and
,
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and
,
Pearson's
perinatal
2782-2787
,
,
physiologic
,
pernicious
,
932-933
,
autoimmune metaplastic atrophic gastritis and
tongue in
postgastrectomy
posthemorrhagic
,
,
,
924-927
pregnancy and
,
,
,
2634-2636
protein depletion and
radiation injury and
,
refractory
1014-1015
,
renal disease and
acute renal failure and
chronic renal failure and
,
,
rheumatoid arthritis and
risk factors for
sarcoidosis and
sickle cell
,
,
942-945
(
see also
Sickle cell disease)
sideroblastic
,
,
SLE and
spherocytic
,
940-941
spur cell
thalassemic
,
946-947
treatment of
vitamin B
deficiency and
,
932-933
vitamin C deficiency and
Anencephaly
prenatal diagnosis of
Anesthesia/anesthetics
adverse reactions to
,
3266-3268
in children
in endotracheal intubation
for labor
,
in pain
,
porphyria and
in seizures
===PAGE:3726===
in wound treatment
Aneurysm
aortic
2207-2212
,
screening for
syphilitic
,
brain (intracranial)
,
1654-1655
polycystic kidney disease and
coronary artery, in Kawasaki disease
femoral artery
2217-2218
fibromuscular dysplasia and
hepatic artery
,
iliac artery
2217-2218
mycotic
,
,
,
,
peripheral artery
2217-2218
splanchnic artery
subclavian artery
syphilitic
,
ventricular
Aneurysmal bone cyst
Angel dust (PCP, phencyclidine)
,
during breastfeeding
Angelman's syndrome
Angiitis, allergic (Churg-Strauss syndrome)
317-318
Angina decubitus
,
Angina pectoris
2089-2099
,
,
2095-2098
air travel and
atypical
crescendo
,
microvascular (syndrome X)
nocturnal
pain in
unstable
,
,
,
,
(
see also
Myocardial infarction)
approach to
atherosclerosis and
variant
2098-2099
Angiodysplasia
Angioedema
,
,
1109-1113
ACE inhibitor-induced
edema and
hereditary
1112-1113
of lips
in loiasis
Angiofibroma, penile
Angiogenesis
in cirrhosis
drug inhibition of
Angiography
3404-3405
aortic
cerebral
,
computed tomography
,
,
coronary
,
,
(
see also
Cardiac catheterization)
in acute coronary syndromes
multidector row CT
in diverticulosis
fluorescein
in gastrointestinal bleeding
in hepatocellular carcinoma
===PAGE:3727===
magnetic resonance (MRA)
,
(
see also
Magnetic resonance angiography)
in cardiovascular disorders
in neurologic disorders
in renal disorders
2315-2316
in peripheral arterial disease
pulmonary
,
in pulmonary embolism
,
,
,
renal
,
,
in Takayasu's arteritis
Angiokeratoma corporis diffusum
Angioma
brain
gastrointestinal
retinal
spider
,
,
Angiomatosis, bacillary
,
Angiomyolipoma
Angioneurotic edema (
see
Angioedema)
Angioplasty
in abdominal aortic branch occlusion
in coarctation of aorta
coronary
2059-2060
,
,
in acute coronary syndromes
2111-2114
in peripheral arterial disease
in renal artery occlusion
in renovascular hypertension
Angiosarcoma
cardiac
hepatic
Angiostrongyliasis
1342-1343
Angiotensin
,
,
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
in atherosclerosis
in coronary artery disease
cough and
creatinine levels and
in diabetes mellitus
in diabetic nephropathy
in heart failure
in hypertension
,
,
,
in IgA nephropathy
after myocardial infarction
,
poisoning with
in pregnancy
,
sarcoidosis and
in tetanus
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin II receptor blockers
in coronary artery disease
creatinine levels and
in diabetic nephropathy
,
in elderly
in heart failure
in hypertension
,
,
,
in myocardial infarction
Angular cheilitis
Anhedonia
===PAGE:3728===
Anhidrosis
Anidulafungin
,
Aniline dye poisoning
Anion gap
,
,
,
Anisakiasis
Aniseikonia
Anisocoria
545-547
,
,
Anisocytosis
Anisometropia
,
Anistreplase (anisolylated plasminogen activator)
,
Ankle
fracture of
ligaments of
range of motion of
sprain of
tibial nerve compression at
,
Ankle-brachial index
,
Ankle jerk reflex
Ankyloglossia
Ankylosing spondylitis
341-343
HLA in
inflammatory bowel disease and
rheumatoid arthritis vs
uveitis and
Ankylosis, temporomandibular joint
Annular pancreas
Annuloaortic ectasia
Annuloplasty, in tricuspid regurgitation
Anogenital warts
1470-1471
Anomalies (
see
Congenital anomalies; Congenital heart disease)
Anomia
Anonychia
Anorchia
Anorectum (
see
Anus; Rectum)
Anorexia
aging and
cancer therapy and
dronabinol for
in dying patient
nutritional support for
21-23
Anorexia nervosa
,
1535-1536
hypopituitarism vs
Anorexia tardive
Anorexics, in elderly
Anorgasmia
female
male
Anoscopy
98-99
,
,
Anosmia
466-468
,
,
in Kallmann syndrome
Anosognosia
,
Anovulation
,
,
chronic
2514-2515
uterine bleeding and
Antacids
,
diarrhea with
overingestion of
,
,
===PAGE:3729===
vitamin B
deficiency and
Antagonist drug
Antegonial notching
Anterior chamber hemorrhage
Anterior cord syndrome
,
Anterior cruciate ligament injury
,
Anterior drawer test
Anthracosis
1977-1979
Anthracyclines
Anthralin
Anthraquinones
,
Anthrax
1236-1238
,
terrorist use of
vaccine against
,
Antiandrogens
in acne
,
in hirsutism
Antiangiogenesis drugs
Antianxiety drugs (
see
Anxiolytics)
Antiarrhythmics
2147-2153
,
2148-2152
(
see also specific drugs
)
drug interactions of
licorice interactions with
porphyria and
Antibiotics
1180-1225
(
see also specific drugs and diseases
)
bacterial overgrowth and
,
1292-1293
in bacterial overgrowth syndrome
in cancer therapy
Clostridium difficile
overgrowth with
1292-1293
colitis with
1292-1293
complications of
in COPD exacerbations
dental discoloration with
digoxin interaction with
dosages for
,
1185-1197
drug interactions of
,
in elderly
in endocarditis
,
2197-2198
intravenous
metabolic alkalosis and
minimum inhibitory concentration of
in neonate
,
2812-2817
,
nutrient interactions with
oral contraceptive interactions with
,
ototoxicity of
phenytoin interaction with
porphyria and
in pregnancy
,
prophylactic
in appendectomy
in bacteremia prevention
in endocarditis
,
,
,
,
in
Haemophilus influenzae
exposure
in meningococcal exposure
,
in neonate
,
in neutropenia
in pancreatitis
===PAGE:3730===
preoperative
,
3449-3450
after rape
in rheumatic fever
,
,
in traveler's diarrhea
in urinary tract infection
resistance to
1150-1151
,
1184-1198
,
,
selection of
1182-1184
susceptibility testing for
synergism of
theophylline interaction with
topical
vitamin K deficiency and
warfarin interaction with
,
1917-1918
Antibodies
1083-1084
,
,
1149-1150
(
see also
Immunoglobulins)
agglutination tests for
anti-acetylcholine receptor
anti-actin
anti-cardiolipin
anti-citrullinated peptide
anticoagulant
anticoccidioidal
anti-double-stranded DNA
anti-endomysial
anti-Epstein-Barr virus
anti-extractable nuclear antigen
anti-factor VIII
,
antifilarial
anti-GBM
1991-1992
,
,
antigen interaction with
,
,
1083-1084
,
anti-gliadin
anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase
anti-GM-CSF
antiHelicobacter pylori

anti-HIV
anti-idiotype
anti-IgA
anti-Jo
antiLegionella

anti-LKM1
antilymphocyte
antimitochondrial
,
,
antiMycobacterium leprae

antineutrophil cytoplasmic (
see
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies)
antinuclear (
see
Antinuclear antibodies)
anti-parietal cell
antiphospholipid
,
SLE and
anti-PLA
anti-RBC
,
anti-Ro
antiSaccharomyces cerevisiae

anti-smooth muscle
antistreptococcal
antiStrongyloides stercoralis

antisynthetase
antithyroid
,
,
,
,
antitoxoplasmic
===PAGE:3731===
antitreponemal
antitumor
,
anti-tumor necrosis factor
anti-Yo
complement-fixing
cytotoxic
enhancing (blocking)
extractable nuclear antigen (AENA)
fluorescent tests for
hepatitis viruses and
heterophil
juvenile idiopathic arthritis and
liver disease and
,
,
maternal
,
mixed connective tissue disease and
monoclonal (
see
Monoclonal antibodies)
myeloperoxidase
precipitation tests for
primary sclerosing cholangitis and
rheumatoid arthritis and
SCL-70
Sjogren's syndrome and
Western blot test for
Anticholinergic drugs
antidote for
in asthma
,
,
,
in COPD
,
in elderly
,
3096-3097
,
in Parkinson's disease
,
,
Anticholinesterases
,
Anticholinesterase test
Anticoagulants (
see also
Heparin; Warfarin)
in acute coronary syndromes
in atrial fibrillation
in atrial flutter
bleeding with
during breastfeeding
in coronary artery disease
in deep venous thrombosis
dietary supplement interactions with
in elderly
,
,
endoscopy and
with mechanical heart valves
in mitral regurgitation
in mural thrombosis
in nephrotic syndrome
in percutaneous coronary interventions
poisoning with
in pregnancy
,
,
preoperative
prophylactic
in pulmonary embolism
,
,
in pulmonary embolism prevention
1920-1922
,
,
in renal artery occlusion
in renal vein thrombosis
in stroke
vitamin K interaction with
===PAGE:3732===
Anticonvulsants
,
,
1695-1701
adverse effects of
in bipolar disorder
in children
in brain injury-related seizures
in dementia
in elderly
ginkgo interactions with
hypocalcemia and
in neonatal seizures
in pain
,
,
porphyria and
in pregnancy
,
,
,
vitamin interactions with
Anticytokines
Antideoxyribonuclease test
Antidepressants
,
1545-1547
(
see also specific classes and drugs
)
administration of
in agoraphobia
for children and adolescents
during breastfeeding
choice of
in dying patient
in elderly
3096-3097
,
,
in fibromyalgia
in generalized anxiety
in irritable bowel syndrome
in multiple sclerosis
in narcolepsy
in neuropathic pain
,
,
in obsessive-compulsive disorder
in panic attacks
in Parkinson's disease
poisoning with
,
porphyria and
St. John's wort interaction with
serotonin syndrome with
in sleep disorders
suicide and
Antidiarrheals
in gastroenteritis
,
in irritable bowel syndrome
porphyria and
in short bowel syndrome
in ulcerative colitis
Antidiuretic hormone
,
blood levels of
body water regulation and
heart failure and
reference values for
syndrome of inappropriate secretion of
,
,
in neonate
Antidiuretic hormone blockers
Antidotes
Antiemetics
,
in cancer chemotherapy
in children
===PAGE:3733===
in elderly
in gastroenteritis
in pancreatitis
porphyria and
in pregnancy
,
Antifibrinolytics
Antifreeze poisoning
Antifungals
,
1319-1323
,
1320-1321
(
see also specific drugs and infections
)
in chronic granulomatous disease
porphyria and
topical
704-705
,
Antigen(s)
agglutination tests for
anaphylactic reaction to
1120-1121
antibody interaction with
,
,
1083-1084
(
see also
Immune complexes)
Aspergillus

auto1121-1122
B-cell receptor for
,
B-cell response to
cryptococcal
of hepatitis B virus
,
Histoplasma capsulatum

HLA (
see
Human leukocyte antigens [HLA system])
in hypersensitivity pneumonitis
,
1956-1957
,
,
immune response to
precipitation tests for
for skin testing
T-cell receptor for
T-cell response to
tumor-associated
,
,
1058-1059
typhoid
Antigen-presenting cells
1079-1080
Antiglobulin test
for blood transfusion
in perinatal anemia
Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody disease
,
,
,
Antigravity suit
Antihemophilic globulin (
see
Coagulation factors, factor VIII)
Antihistamines
in allergy
,
in anaphylaxis
in atopic dermatitis
in elderly
,
,
in mastocytosis
in Parkinson's disease
poisoning with
in pruritus
,
in rhinorrhea
in sleep disorders
topical
in transfusion-related allergic reaction
in urticaria
Antihyaluronidase test
Antihyperglycemics
,
877-879
,
,
in elderly
,
ginseng interactions with
milk thistle interactions with
===PAGE:3734===
poisoning with
porphyria and
in pregnancy
,
Antihypertensives
2069-2070
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
(
see also specific classes and
drugs
)
in acute hemolytic transfusion reaction
in aortic dissection
combinations of
,
in elderly
,
3096-3097
,
garlic interactions with
licorice interactions with
perioperative
porphyria and
in pregnancy
,
Antilymphocyte globulin
Antilymphocyte serum
Antimalarials
1384-1389
in discoid lupus erythematosus
hyperpigmentation and
in SLE
Antimetabolites
in cancer therapy
,
(
see also
Cancer chemotherapy)
in transplantation
Antimicrobials (
see
Antibiotics
and specific drugs
)
Antimitochondrial antibodies
,
,
Antimony poisoning
,
Antineoplastic drugs (
see
Cancer chemotherapy)
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
in Churg-Strauss syndrome
inflammatory bowel disease and
in microscopic polyangiitis
reference values for
in vasculitic disorders
Wegener's granulomatosis and
Antinuclear antibodies
autoimmune hepatitis and
mixed connective tissue disease and
reference values for
SLE and
systemic sclerosis and
Antiphospholipid antibodies
hypoprothrombinemia and
SLE and
Antiphospholipid syndrome
nephropathy and
,
noninfective endocarditis and
α
-Antiplasmin
assay for
deficiency of
,
Antiplatelet drugs
in atherosclerosis
in coronary artery disease
,
dietary supplement interactions with
3422-3423
in myocardial infarction
in peripheral arterial disease
preoperative
in stroke
===PAGE:3735===
in stroke prevention
Antipruritics
Antipsychotics
,
,
,
1612-1613
adverse effects of
,
,
,
,
in agitation
in anorexia nervosa
in bipolar disorder
during breastfeeding
in children
in delirium
in dementia
in elderly
,
3096-3097
,
,
neuroleptic malignant syndrome with
,
3268-3269
,
poisoning with
porphyria and
in schizophrenia
1562-1567
in Tourette's syndrome
Antiretrovirals
1450-1454
,
1451-1452
adverse effects of
1451-1452
,
in children
2853-2858
,
2854-2857
drug interactions of
in mother and infant
,
prophylactic
,
Antisense technology
Antiseptics
Antisocial personality disorder
,
Antispasmodics, in elderly
,
Antistreptolysin O
,
,
Antisynthetase antibodies
Antithrombin
,
deficiency of
974-975
Antithrombotics
in coronary artery disease
in myocardial infarction
Antithymocyte globulin
in aplastic anemia
in transplantation
Antitoxin (
see also
Antivenom)
botulinum
,
diphtheria
,
tetanus
α
-Antitrypsin deficiency
,
,
1901-1902
,
,
Antitussives
Antivenom
,
Antivirals
,
1413-1414
(
see also specific drugs and infections
)
porphyria and
prophylactic
in influenza
in transplantation
Anton's syndrome
Antrectomy
Anuria
,
Anus (
see also
Rectum)
abscess of
anoscopy of
98-99
,
atresia of
cancer of
195-196
===PAGE:3736===
HIV infection and
examination of
,
,
fissure of
180-181
,
fistula of
181-182
HIV-related disease of
imperforate
,
pruritus of
184-185
,
,
stenosis of
Anxiety
1493-1502
,
in adolescents
,
3049-3055
,
air travel and
anticipatory
antipsychotics and
asthma and
in children
3049-3055
,
depression and
,
drugs for (
see
Anxiolytics)
fear vs
gastrointestinal illness and
generalized
1494-1495
,
,
in children and adolescents
3050-3051
hyperventilation and
1836-1837
irritable bowel syndrome and
obsessive-compulsive disorder and
1495-1496
panic attacks and
1496-1498
,
phobic disorders and
1498-1500
,
physical disorders and
posttraumatic
1500-1502
,
separation
in infant
2749-2750
social
,
in children and adolescents
3051-3052
stranger
stress disorders and
1500-1502
,
Anxiolytics
,
(
see also specific drugs
)
abuse of
1524-1525
during breastfeeding
for children and adolescents
in elderly
overdose of
porphyria and
in pregnancy
withdrawal from
Aorta
age-related fibrosis of
aneurysm of
2207-2212
,
screening for
syphilitic
,
coarctation of
,
in infant
2956-2958
dissection of
,
,
2212-2215
,
infection of
,
inflammation of
326-329
,
,
in Marfan syndrome
,
occlusion of
2215-2216
right ventricle origin of
2959-2961
,
Aortic arch, congenital abnormality of
===PAGE:3737===
Aortic arch syndrome
326-329
,
Aorticopulmonary window murmurs
Aortic valve
bicuspid
closure of
papilloma of
regurgitation (insufficiency)
2179-2181
aortic dissection and
murmur in
polycystic kidney disease and
radionuclide imaging in
rheumatic fever and
sclerosis
stenosis
2181-2183
clicks in
,
pregnancy and
2643-2644
syncope in
Aortitis
syphilitic
Aortography
in aortic dissection
APACHE II score
,
,
Apatite crystal deposition disease
APC gene
Apgar score
,
,
Aphasia
1640-1642
,
,
Broca's
,
,
frontotemporal dementia and
pain assessment in
Wernicke's
,
Apheresis
1044-1046
,
1044-1045
of low-density lipoproteins
Aphthae (
see
Ulcer[s], oral)
Aplastic anemia
929-931
chloramphenicol-induced
pneumonia with
Apley scratch test
Apley test
Apnea
of prematurity
,
2869-2870
sleep
,
,
1903-1907
(
see also
Sleep apnea)
Apnea-hypopnea index
Apnea test
Apocrine glands
inflammation of
698-699
Apo C-II deficiency,
Apo E proteins
Apomorphine
,
Apoplexy
,
Apoproteins
889-905
,
,
,
deficiency of
,
reference values for
Apoptosis
shock and
Apparent life-threatening event (ALTE)
2929-2931
,
Appendectomy
Appendicitis
112-113
===PAGE:3738===
in children
in elderly patient
pregnancy and
,
rheumatic fever vs
WBC count in
Appetite (
see also
Anorexia)
cancer therapy and
in dying patient
Apraclonidine
,
Apraxia
1642-1643
,
Aprepitant
,
Aprotinin
Aqueous humor
597-606
,
Arachnodactyly
Arboviruses
1428-1438
,
1429-1431
encephalitis with
ARDS (
see
Acute respiratory distress syndrome)
Arenavirus infection
,
,
,
1429-1431
,
1434-1435
Arformoterol
Argatroban
,
,
Argentinian hemorrhagic fever
Arginase deficiency
Arginine
Arginine infusion test
Argininemia
Arginine vasopressin (
see
Antidiuretic hormone)
Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency
Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency
Argon laser trabeculoplasty
Argyll Robertson pupil
,
,
Argyria
,
Aripiprazole
in children
in dementia
Arm
fracture of
prosthetic
,
3465-3466
Aromatase inhibitors
,
Aromatic oils
Arousal, persistent
Arousal index
Arrhythmias
2142-2178
(
see also specific arrhythmias
)
atrial fibrillation (
see
Atrial fibrillation)
bradycardia (
see
Bradycardia)
cardiac arrest and
,
in children
,
,
COPD and
in diphtheria
drug interactions with
drugs for (
see
Antiarrhythmics)
electrocardiogram in
2144-2146
fluoroquinolone-induced
heart failure and
hydrocarbon inhalation and
hypercalcemia and
hyperkalemia and
myocardial infarction and
2114-2117
===PAGE:3739===
palpitations with
2038-2041
,
poisoning and
pregnancy and
reentry and
,
syncope and
tachycardia (
see
Tachycardia)
treatment of
,
2146-2147
,
2148-2152
,
2154-2158
,
,
ventricular fibrillation (
see
Ventricular fibrillation)
Arsenic compounds
in cancer
cancer and
nail discoloration and
nephrotoxicity of
poisoning with
,
Arsine gas poisoning
Artemether
,
,
Arterial blood gas
1856-1859
(
see also
Blood gases)
Arterial catheterization (
see
Catheterization)
Arterial gas embolism
3285-3286
,
recompression therapy in
3289-3290
,
Arterial switch operation
Arteriography (
see
Angiography)
Arteriolar nephrosclerosis
2429-2430
Arteriolitis, necrotizing
Arteriolosclerosis, hypertension and
Arteriosclerosis
2081-2087
(
see also
Atherosclerosis
and specific arteries
)
Monckeberg's
nonatheromatous
retinal
Arteriovenous fistula
,
,
2234-2235
for dialysis
Arteriovenous malformation
cerebral
,
gastrointestinal
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia and
,
murmur in
spinal
Arteriovenous nicking, retinal
,
Arteritis (
see also
Vasculitis)
Takayasu's
326-329
,
temporal (giant cell)
319-321
Artery (
see specific arteries
)
Artesunate
,
,
Arthralgia
,
288-292
,
,
292-297
,
293-294
,
myositis and
rheumatic fever and
SLE and
Arthritis
cricoarytenoid
crystal-induced
,
349-355
,
degenerative (
see
Osteoarthritis)
enteropathic
gouty
infectious
,
,
,
,
366-367
,
chronic
369-370
Erysipelothrix
in
gonococcal
,
,
,
===PAGE:3740===
Kingella
in
neurogenic arthropathy and
of temporomandibular joint
inflammatory bowel disease and
Jaccoud's
Lyme
,
mixed connective tissue disease and
myositis and
obesity and
osteoarthritis
345-348
(
see also
Osteoarthritis)
paraneoplastic
psoriatic
,
344-345
,
reactive arthritis vs
rheumatoid arthritis vs
uveitis and
reactive
343-344
,
,
,
HLA in
poststreptococcal
rheumatoid arthritis vs
uveitis and
rehabilitation for
rheumatic fever and
rheumatoid
332-339
,
,
,
338-339
,
(
see also
Rheumatoid arthritis)
SLE and
spondylitis with
341-343
temporomandibular joint
530-532
Arthritis-dermatitis syndrome
Arthritis mutilans
Arthrocentesis
,
,
in gonococcal infection
in gout
in infectious arthritis
in rheumatic fever
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
Arthro-onychodysplasia
2910-2911
Arthropathy, neurogenic
348-349
,
(
see also
Joint[s])
Arthroplasty
infection with
in osteonecrosis
in rheumatoid arthritis
Artificial respiration (
see
Ventilation)
Arylsulfatase A deficiency
Arytenoidectomy
Asacol
,
Asbestosis
1972-1973
,
cancer and
pleural effusion with
silicosis vs
Asboe-Hansen sign
Ascariasis
,
1343-1344
bile duct disease in
hepatic inflammation in
Loffler's syndrome and
Ascending arousal system
Aschoff bodies
Ascites
206-211
,
cirrhosis and
===PAGE:3741===
paracentesis for
,
pleural effusion and
portal hypertension and
Ascorbic acid (
see
Vitamin C)
Aseptic meningitis
,
,
,
1741-1744
,
Aseptic necrosis
362-365
,
Asherman's syndrome
Ashman phenomenon
Askin's tumor
Asociality
Asparaginase
Aspartame, during pregnancy
Aspartate
Aspartate transaminase
,
,
in acute viral hepatitis
in alcoholic liver disease
,
in chronic viral hepatitis
Asperger's syndrome
Aspergilloma
,
,
Aspergillosis
1323-1325
bronchopulmonary
,
1887-1888
,
in cystic fibrosis
invasive
paranasal sinus
,
pneumonia
voriconazole in
Aspergillus niger
infection
Asphyxia, in neonate
,
2768-2769
,
Aspiration
achalasia and
of blood
chest compressions and
infant foods and
meconium
,
2872-2873
near drowning and
pneumonia and
,
pneumonitis and
1936-1937
Aspiration (diagnostic)
bone marrow (
see
Bone marrow, aspiration of)
of breast cyst
in bursitis
endometrial
joint
,
,
(
see also
Arthrocentesis)
nasogastric, in gastrointestinal bleeding
pulmonary
,
thyroid
transbronchial
Aspirin
asthma and
,
,
in atherosclerosis
in atrial fibrillation
in atrial flutter
during breastfeeding
in coronary artery disease
,
,
dental procedures and
in elderly
,
ginkgo interactions with
===PAGE:3742===
ginseng interactions with
in hypertension
in Kawasaki disease
mucosal burn and
after myocardial infarction
in myocardial infarction
nephrotoxicity of
niacin deficiency and
ototoxicity of
in pain
,
in peripheral arterial disease
platelet dysfunction and
poisoning with
3333-3334
in polycythemia vera
in pregnancy
Reye's syndrome and
2937-2939
in rheumatic fever
sensitivity to
in stroke
in stroke prevention
Asplenia
chemoprophylaxis in
congenital
vaccination in
Asp stings
3309-3310
Assist-control ventilation
in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure
in ARDS
in COPD
Assisted living
3125-3126
funding for
Assisted reproduction techniques
2597-2598
Assisted suicide
,
Assistive devices
,
3457-3459
,
,
,
AST (
see
Aspartate transaminase)
Astereognosis
Asterixis
,
,
Asthma
,
1868-1888
,
(
see also
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD])
in adolescents
adrenergic drug resistance in
air travel and
aspergillosis in
1887-1888
,
aspirin-sensitive
,
,
breath sounds in
bronchiolitis vs
bronchitis and
chronic
,
classification of
1869-1870
,
COPD vs
,
,
cough-variant
,
,
death from
diving and
drug-induced
drugs for
1874-1880
,
1882-1884
exacerbations of
,
,
1882-1884
exercise-induced
in infants and children
===PAGE:3743===
occupational
,
1979-1980
pregnancy and
,
pulmonary function tests in
rhinitis and
status
treatment of
1873-1886
,
1874-1880
,
1882-1884
,
triggers of
,
ventilatory failure in
2288-2291
Astigmatic keratotomy
Astigmatism
,
surgery for
Astraphobia
Astringents
Astrocytoma
1814-1815
,
1817-1818
in children
2940-2941
Astrovirus infection
,
Asystole
,
Ataxia
acquired
cerebellar
,
,
,
in cerebral palsy syndromes
chickenpox and
episodic
in fragile X syndrome
1762-1763
Friedreich's
locomotor
,
spinocerebellar
vitamin E deficiency and
tumor-related
Ataxia-telangiectasia
,
,
Atazanavir
in children
Atelectasis
asbestosis and
near drowning and
pleural effusion and
postoperative
respiratory failure and
Atenolol
in arrhythmias
during breastfeeding
in coronary artery disease
in hypertension
in migraine
Atheroma
,
,
,
2099-2100
(
see also
Stroke)
in cerebral ischemia
1646-1652
Atherosclerosis
2081-2086
diabetes mellitus and
erectile dysfunction and
fat intake and
,
,
fish oil and
low-density lipoproteins and
lower extremity
2218-2221
posttransplantation
renal
,
2432-2433
renovascular hypertension and
,
risk factors for
,
2082-2084
,
===PAGE:3744===
thrombosis and
Athetosis
,
,
1759-1760
,
in cerebral palsy syndromes
Athlete
anabolic steroid use by
1532-1534
,
sudden death in
2236-2237
,
Athlete's foot
Athlete's heart syndrome
2238-2239
,
Atlantoaxial subluxation
,
Atlas, disorders of
Atmospheric pressure
Atomoxetine
Atopic dermatitis
,
663-666
,
,
food allergy vs
Atopic disorders
1113-1121
(
see also
Allergy; Hypersensitivity reactions)
Atorvastatin
drug interactions of
Atovaquone
Atovaquone-proguanil
1384-1385
,
,
,
ATP-binding cassette transporter A1
,
Atransferrinemia
,
,
Atresia
anal
biliary
,
duodenal
esophageal
2975-2976
,
GI tract
jejunoileal
tricuspid
2961-2962
,
Atrial ectopic beats
Atrial escape beats
Atrial fibrillation
,
2165-2168
,
heart failure and
myocardial infarction and
pregnancy and
radiofrequency ablation in
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and
,
2172-2173
,
Atrial flutter
,
2168-2169
,
myocardial infarction and
Atrial hypertrophy
Atrial natriuretic peptide
,
Atrial premature beats
,
Atrial septal defect
2950-2952
,
Atrial septostomy (Rashkind's procedure)
,
Atrial tachycardia
,
,
COPD and
multifocal (chaotic)
paroxysmal, myocardial infarction and
pregnancy and
Atrioventricular block
2163-2165
,
,
athlete's heart syndrome and
jugular venous pulse in
pacemaker in
,
,
Atrioventricular dissociation
,
Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia
,
,
,
Atrioventricular node
Atrioventricular septal defect
2953-2955
,
===PAGE:3745===
Atrophy
actinic
alveolar ridge
,
cerebellar, cancer-related
cutaneous
fat
gastric
,
lip
macular
multiple system
1618-1619
muscular
,
neurogenic
peroneal
spinal
olivopontocerebellar
1618-1619
optic nerve
,
vaginal
,
,
incontinence and
,
Atropine
in carbamate poisoning
,
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
in elderly
in endotracheal intubation
in organophosphate poisoning
,
poisoning with
in shock-related bradycardia
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
3035-3038
,
Audiometry
,
in acoustic neuroma
in children
in temporal bone fracture
Auditory brain stem response
,
,
in neonate
Auditory nerve (
see
Cranial nerves,
th [auditory, vestibulocochlear])
Aura
Auramine O stain
Auramine-rhodamine stain
Auscultation
,
,
2020-2025
in children
for fetal heart rate
Auspitz sign
Austin Flint murmur
,
Autism
,
3038-3040
,
vaccination and
Autoantibodies
1121-1122
(
see also
Antibodies; Autoimmune disorders)
thyroid
,
,
Autoantigens
1121-1122
in diabetes mellitus
Autoerythrocyte sensitization
981-982
Autograft
(
see also
Transplantation)
Autohemolysis test
Autoimmune disorders
,
1121-1122
(
see also specific disorders
)
autonomic neuropathy
hearing loss in
IV immune globulin in
lymphoid interstitial pneumonia and
neutropenia in
,
===PAGE:3746===
polyglandular
,
804-807
,
pregnancy and
2636-2637
pulmonary-renal syndrome in
1990-1992
,
rheumatic
297-312
seizures in
Autoimmune (Hashimoto's) thyroiditis
,
,
779-780
,
hypothyroidism in
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
936-939
,
,
(
see also
Hemolytic anemia)
Autoimmune metaplastic atrophic gastritis
Automated external defibrillator
for children
Automobile safety
Autonomic dysreflexia
Autonomic nervous system
1615-1620
,
,
in diabetes mellitus
evaluation of
,
in Guillain-Barre syndrome
in impaired consciousness
Autosomes
Avascular necrosis
362-365
,
antiretrovirals and
dysbaric
femoral capital epiphysis
lunate bone
390-391
of metatarsal head
397-398
scaphoid bone
Avastin
Avian influenza
vaccine against
Avoidant personality disorder
Axon
,
diffuse injury to
,
Axonopathy
,
,
Axonotmesis
Ayurveda
,
Azacytidine
Azathioprine
in atopic dermatitis
in Behcet's syndrome
in diabetes mellitus
in inflammatory bowel disease
,
in lupus nephritis
in myasthenia gravis
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
in SLE
in transplantation
Azelaic acid
,
Azimilide
Azithromycin
,
1212-1215
,
,
in babesiosis
in endocarditis prophylaxis
in HIV infection
in Lyme disease
neonatal dosage of
in otitis media
Azoospermia
Azotemia (
see also
Renal failure)
===PAGE:3747===
postrenal
,
,
,
prerenal
,
,
,
,
,
,
AZT (
see
Zidovudine)
Aztreonam
,
neonatal dosage of
===PAGE:3748===
B
Babesiosis
,
,
1375-1376
Babinski's reflex
Bacillary angiomatosis
,
Bacillary dysentery
1263-1264
Bacille Calmette-Guerin
in bladder cancer
in cancer
,
in infant
in tuberculosis
in neonate
,
Bacilli
gram-negative
,
1243-1266
,
1299-1300
gram-positive
,
1236-1243
Bacillus anthracis
infection
,
1236-1238
vaccine against
,
Bacillus cereus
infection
,
Bacitracin
,
,
,
Back pain
378-385
,
,
ankylosing spondylitis and
osteoporosis and
,
Baclofen
in hiccups
in pain
in spinal cord injury
in tetanus
in trigeminal neuralgia
Bacteremia
1163-1164
(
see also
Sepsis)
Bacteroides

in children, occult
2841-2844
,
,
,
in elderly patient
Haemophilus

listerial
meningococcal
pneumococcal
pseudomonal
Salmonella

staphylococcal
,
Bacterial infections
1180-1225
(
see also
Abscess
and specific infections
)
aerobic pathogens in
anaerobic pathogens in
,
,
1288-1301
Chlamydia
in
1278-1279
classification of
1181-1182
culture in
1166-1168
,
gram-negative bacilli in
1243-1266
,
1299-1300
gram-negative cocci in
,
1274-1278
gram-positive bacilli in
,
1236-1243
gram-positive cocci in
,
1225-1236
,
1299-1300
immunologic tests in
1168-1169
malabsorption and
measles and
mixed anaerobic pathogens in
1299-1301
,
mycobacteria in
,
1302-1318
mycoplasmas in
rickettsiae in
1279-1287
,
1280-1281
===PAGE:3749===
spirochetes in
1266-1273
susceptibility testing in
Bacterial overgrowth syndrome
156-157
Bacteriuria, asymptomatic
,
(
see also
Urinary tract, infection of)
Bacteroides
infection
bacteremic
B. fragilis
infection
,
1299-1300
antibiotic resistance in
neonatal
Bagassosis
Bag-valve-mask device
Baker's cyst
,
Balamuthia
infection
,
Balance disorders (
see
Ataxia; Vertigo)
Balance training
,
,
,
Balanitis
Balanitis xerotica obliterans
Balanoposthitis
Baldness
723-728
,
724-725
,
,
Ballard score
Balloon fenestration
Balloon valvotomy
,
Balsalazide
Bamboo spine
Bancroftian lymphatic filariasis
,
1346-1347
Barany maneuver
Barber's itch
Barbiturates
abuse of
1524-1525
dietary supplement interactions with
3422-3424
drug interactions of
in elderly
,
poisoning with
during pregnancy
vitamin interactions with
withdrawal from
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Bariatric surgery
61-64
,
,
Barium poisoning
Barium study
in gastrointestinal disorders
97-98
in Hirschsprung's disease
in intussusception
Barlow maneuver
,
Barmah Forest virus infection
Baroreceptors
Barostat
Barotitis media
,
Barotrauma
3282-3285
,
,
air travel and
ear problems and
,
,
3284-3285
pulmonary embolism and
,
3283-3284
Barrett's esophagus
,
Bartholin's gland
cysts of
2532-2533
enlargement of
Bartonella
infection
,
1244-1246
,
===PAGE:3750===
HIV infection and
Barton's bandage
Bartter syndrome
,
,
,
2988-2990
,
aldosteronism vs
Basal body temperature (
see
Temperature, body)
Basal cell carcinoma
cutaneous
,
eyelid
otic
Basal cell nevus syndrome
Basic calcium phosphate crystals
Basilar artery
,
Basilar artery migraine
Basilar artery stroke (
see
Vertebrobasilar stroke syndrome)
Basilar invagination
Basiliximab
,
Basophils
,
Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome
vitamin E deficiency and
44-45
Battle's sign
,
,
Bayes' theorem
3394-3395
Baylisascariasis
Bayou virus infection
B cells (
see
Lymphocytes, B)
BCG (
see
Bacille Calmette-Gurin)
BCL-2 gene
Beatty's maneuver
Becker dystrophy
Becker's sign
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
,
Beclomethasone
in allergy
in asthma
in COPD
Bedbug bites
Bed rest
elderly patient and
hypercalcemia and
hypotension and
in myocardial infarction
postoperative
in rheumatoid arthritis
syncope and
Bedsores
736-742
Bed-wetting
2923-2928
,
,
,
,
Beef tapeworm infection
Beers criteria
,
3100-3102
Bee stings
3308-3309
Behavioral therapy (
see also
Cognitive-behavioral therapy)
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
in autism
in childhood anxiety disorders
in chronic pain
in constipation
in functional abdominal pain
in oppositional defiant disorder
in separation anxiety
===PAGE:3751===
in social phobia
in toilet training
weight loss and
Behavior disorders (
see also
Behavior problems)
dementia and
1684-1686
disruptive
3058-3060
during sleep
1713-1714
self-injurious
Behavior problems
3029-3035
,
(
see also
Behavior disorders)
aggressive and violent
,
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
3035-3038
discipline for
3030-3031
,
with eating
learning disorders and
mental retardation and
parent-child interactions and
with school
,
with separation
2749-2750
,
with sleep
2750-2751
with toileting
,
2923-2928
,
,
,
vicious circle patterns in
with violence
3034-3035
Behcet's syndrome
315-317
oral involvement in
uveitis in
Bejel
1266-1267
Belching
,
,
Belladonna alkaloids
in elderly
poisoning with
Bell's palsy
1755-1756
Lyme disease and
,
Belonephobia
Benazepril
Bence Jones protein
,
,
,
2421-2422
Bendamustin
Bendiocarb poisoning
Bendroflumethiazide
Bends
,
3287-3288
Benign intracranial hypertension
1720-1722
,
Benign lymphoepithelial cyst
Benign lymphoepithelial lesion
,
Benign migratory glossitis
Benign mucous membrane pemphigoid
579-580
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
442-443
,
,
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
2459-2462
,
Benign senescent forgetfulness
Benign transient amnesia
Benomyl poisoning
Bentiromide test
Benzafibrate
Benzene
cancer and
poisoning with
Benzene hexachloride poisoning
Benzine poisoning
Benzisothiazolyl-piperazine
===PAGE:3752===
Benzisoxazole
Benznidazole
Benzocaine
Benzodiazepines
abuse of
1524-1525
adverse effects of
for agitated patient
,
in alcohol withdrawal
in anxiety
during breastfeeding
with cancer therapy
for critical care patient
in delirium
in dying patient
in elderly
3096-3097
,
,
kava interactions with
overdose of
in panic attacks
in phobic disorders
poisoning with
,
in sleep disorders
,
,
in tetanus
valerian interactions with
withdrawal from
,
Benzol poisoning
Benzonatate
Benzoyl peroxide
in acne
,
,
in warts
Benztropine
,
Beractant
Bereavement
,
Beriberi
,
,
33-34
Bernard-Soulier syndrome
,
Berylliosis
1974-1976
Beta-adrenergic agonists
in asthma
,
1874-1875
,
,
1882-1883
,
in COPD
,
in hyperkalemia
tremors and
Beta-blockers
in acute coronary syndromes
in aortic dissection
in arrhythmias
,
2149-2150
asthma and
in coronary artery disease
,
2096-2097
in elderly
,
in glaucoma
in heart failure
in hypertension
,
,
,
,
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
in migraine
in mitral valve prolapse
after myocardial infarction
in orthostatic hypotension
poisoning with
,
in portal hypertension
===PAGE:3753===
in pregnancy
,
SSRI interactions with
in tetanus
withdrawal of
Beta-carotene (
see
Carotene [β
-carotene])
Betaine
Beta-lactams (
see

β
-Lactam antibiotics)
Betamethasone
Betaxolol
in arrhythmias
in glaucoma
in hypertension
Betel nuts
Bethanechol
,
Bevacizumab
,
,
,
,
Bezoars
,
138-139
Bezold abscess
Bicalutamide
Bicarbonate (
see
Sodium bicarbonate)
Biceps reflex
Bichromate poisoning
Bicipital tendinitis
BiCNU (carmustine)
BiCROS hearing aid
Bidrin poisoning
Bifascicular block
Bifenthrin poisoning
Biguanides
,
,
in elderly
Bile
drug excretion in
Bile acid sequestrants
,
Bile ducts
,
,
(
see also
Biliary tract)
calculi in
276-278
cholangiography of
cirrhosis of
,
244-246
fibrosing inflammation of
278-279
obstruction of
276-278
,
(
see also
Cholestasis)
posttransplantation stricture of
tumors of
,
,
ultrasonography of
Bile salts (bile acids)
therapeutic
Bilevel positive airway pressure ventilation
in mechanical ventilation
Bilharziasis
1358-1360
,
(
see also
Schistosomiasis)
Biliary atresia
,
Biliary colic
acalculous
275-276
Biliary sludge
,
Biliary tract (
see also
Bile ducts)
air in
carcinoma of
congenital disorders of
2804-2806
,
fluke infection of
imaging studies of
229-231
Bilirubin (
see also
Jaundice)
===PAGE:3754===
blood levels of
in anemia
in cholestasis
in cirrhosis
conjugated (direct-reacting)
,
,
,
excess of
(
see also
Hyperbilirubinemia)
fetal
metabolism of
,
unconjugated (indirect-reacting)
,
,
,
urinary
,
Bilirubinuria
,
Billroth procedures
Bimatoprost
Binasal field defect
Binge eating disorder
,
1537-1538
Binswanger's disease
Bioavailability
,
3175-3176
,
Bioelectrical impedance analysis
Biofeedback
,
in fecal incontinence
in functional abdominal pain
Biofilm
Bioimpedance, thoracic
Biological warfare
1164-1165
Biologic response modifiers, in cancer
,
(
see also
Immunotherapy)
Biologic therapy
3414-3415
,
3417-3418
Biopsy (
see at specific organs
)
Bioterrorism
1164-1165
Biotin
drug interactions with
Biot's respiration
,
Bipolar disorders
1548-1552
in children and adolescents
3057-3058
,
physical disorders and
1540-1541
pregnancy and
Bird fancier's lung
Bird flu
Bird mite bites
Birth
2627-2631
,
2631-2634
,
(
see also
Labor and delivery)
Apgar score at
,
,
asphyxia at
2768-2769
breech
cardiopulmonary resuscitation at
2768-2769
,
,
,
cephalhematoma at
,
,
congenital anomalies at (
see
Birth defects; Congenital anomalies; Congenital heart disease)
control of (
see
Contraception)
fractures at
gestational age estimate at
,
,
head molding at
initial care after
injury at
,
2769-2774
intracranial hemorrhage at
neonatal death at
oxygen therapy at
parent-infant interactions after
,
physical examination after
2699-2702
,
problems during
2767-2782
===PAGE:3755===
suctioning after
trauma during
2769-2774
Birth defects
2946-2968
(
see also
Congenital anomalies)
risk factors for
screening for
2599-2604
(
see also
Genetic disorders, screening for)
Birthing centers
Birthmarks
Bisacodyl
,
in children
in elderly
Bishydroxycoumarin poisoning
Bismuth
hyperpigmentation and
nephrotoxicity of
poisoning with
,
,
Bisoprolol
in arrhythmias
in coronary artery disease
in hypertension
Bisphosphonates
in hypercalcemia
in multiple myeloma
in neonatal hypercalcemia
in osteogenesis imperfecta
osteonecrosis of the jaw and
,
,
in osteoporosis
in Paget's disease
,
Bite cells
,
Bites and stings
3306-3322
bee
3308-3309
centipede
Cnidaria
3310-3311
coelenterate
3310-3311
desensitization for
,
fire ant
,
to hand
388-389
human
3306-3308
insect
3308-3309
joint infection with
mammal
3306-3308
marine
3310-3312
millipede
mite
3312-3313
mollusk
3311-3312
puss moth caterpillar (asp)
3309-3310
rabies and
1732-1733
,
reptile
scorpion
sea urchin
snake
,
3313-3319
,
,
,
disseminated intravascular coagulation and
spider
3319-3321
,
stingray
tick
,
3321-3322
(
see also
Tick bites)
Bithionol
Bitolterol
Bitot's spots
,
===PAGE:3756===
Bivalirudin
,
Black cohosh
,
Black Creek Canal virus infection
,
Black death
1256-1257
Black eye
Blackfly bites
Black light (Wood's light)
Black lung disease
1977-1979
Black tongue
Blackwater fever
Black widow spider bite
Bladder
biopsy of
in schistosomiasis
cancer of
,
,
2464-2469
Schistosoma haematobium
and
staging of
2466-2468
catheter decompression of
catheterization of
2316-2317
(
see also
Catheterization, bladder)
congenital anomalies of
cystocele of
2529-2531
,
cystoscopic examination of
diverticula of
enlargement of
exstrophy of
imaging of
2314-2316
infection of (
see
Urinary tract, infection of)
inflammation of
2364-2365
neurogenic
2363-2364
obstruction of
,
orthotopic
pain in
palpation of
removal of
training for
trauma to
3238-3239
Bladder outlet
incompetence of
,
obstruction of
drug interactions with
incontinence and
,
,
Blalock-Taussig shunt
,
Blastomycosis
European
1329-1330
North American
1325-1326
South American
1333-1334
Blastoschizomyces capitatus
infection
Bleach poisoning
Bleeding
(
see also
Hemorrhage)
anemia and
,
,
924-927
anovulatory
auricular
chronic renal failure and
dental
diverticular
,
excessive
968-972
,
gastrointestinal
99-105
,
===PAGE:3757===
gastritis and
Mallory-Weiss syndrome and
mechanical ventilation and
nuclear scan in
gingival
heparin-related
,
malabsorption and
nasal
457-460
,
peptic ulcer disease and
platelet count and
pleural
postextraction
pulmonary
1837-1841
,
1838-1839
,
1989-1990
,
rectal
,
shock and
,
,
tonsillectomy and
uremia and
uterine
cyclic
2499-2500
,
(
see also
Menstruation)
dysfunctional
2510-2513
postpartum
2680-2681
vaginal
,
2490-2493
,
,
in children
during pregnancy
2612-2615
,
2620-2622
,
,
2613-2614
,
,
variceal
vitamin E toxicity and
vitamin K deficiency and
warfarin-related
,
Bleeding disorders
981-983
abnormal blood vessels and
981-983
coagulation disorders and
975-981
,
980-981
dental care and
platelet disorders and
954-963
testing for
,
970-971
Bleeding time
aspirin and
Bleomycin
in cancer
hyperpigmentation and
in warts
Blepharitis
,
575-576
Blepharospasm
Blepharospasm-oromandibular dystonia
Blind loop syndrome
Blindness (
see also
Vision, loss of)
amblyopia
2919-2920
congenital cataract and
diabetic retinopathy and
615-616
hypertensive retinopathy and
macular degeneration and
nutritional
623-624
optic neuritis and
optic neuropathy and
,
,
rehabilitation for
retinal artery occlusion and
retinal vein occlusion and
river
,
1347-1348
===PAGE:3758===
toxic
623-624
,
transient (monocular)
,
vitamin A deficiency and
,
Blind spot
,
Blink reflex
involuntary (blepharospasm)
Bloating
,
,
β
-Blockers (
see
Beta-blockers)
Blood
ABO typing of
,
in neonate
in amniotic fluid
antibody screening of
antiglobulin testing of
aspiration of
collection of
,
1036-1037
,
donor deferral or denial of
1036-1037
compatibility testing of
,
cytapheresis of
,
1044-1045
,
hyperviscosity of
,
IgM-related
perinatal
2787-2788
loss of (
see
Bleeding; Hemorrhage)
plasmapheresis of
1044-1046
,
1044-1045
point-of-care testing of
in pregnancy
Rh typing of
,
in semen
2320-2321
in sputum
1837-1841
(
see also
Hemoptysis)
in stool
,
storage-related changes in
substitutes for
,
tests of
3491-3499
commonly used panels
transfusion of (
see
Blood transfusion; Exchange transfusion)
in urine
2321-2324
,
(
see also
Hematuria)
volume of, reference values for
vomiting of
Blood-brain barrier, drug penetration of
Blood cells (
see
Platelets; Red blood cells; White blood cells)
Blood gases
1856-1859
(
see also
Hypercapnia; Hypoxemia; Oxygen)
in acid-base disorders
in asthma
in brain injury
in hypoxia
in salicylate poisoning
in ventilatory failure
Blood pressure (
see also
Hypertension; Hypotension)
adrenergic testing of
after cardiopulmonary resuscitation
cardiovascular disorders and
catheter measurement of
2249-2250
in children
,
intracranial pressure and
measurement of
,
,
in elderly
,
in premature infant
===PAGE:3759===
pulsus paradoxus and
shock and
,
Blood transfusion
ABO incompatibility in
allergic reaction to
autologous
blood collection for
,
1036-1037
,
blood substitutes for
citrate toxicity in
complications of
1040-1044
cryoprecipitate for
disease transmission during
,
,
,
donor blood testing for
1036-1037
,
,
donor deferral or denial of
1036-1037
emergency
in erythropoietic protoporphyria
febrile reaction to
fresh frozen plasma for
in gastrointestinal bleeding
graft-vs-host disease in
granulocytes for
hemolytic reaction to
hypocalcemia with
hypothermia with
in immunodeficient patient
irradiated products for
,
leukocyte depletion for
lung injury and
in neonatal anemia
,
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
in perinatal anemia
platelets for
potassium toxicity in
products for
1038-1040
Rh immune globulin for
in shock
,
technique of
thrombocytopenia with
,
twin-to-twin
typing for
,
urticarial reaction to
volume overload and
Blood type
ABO
,
,
,
Rh
,
,
,
2665-2666
,
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
acute renal failure and
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)/creatinine ratio
,
,
Blood vessels, inflammation of (
see
Vasculitis)
Blount disease
,
Blue toe syndrome
B lymphocytes (
see
Lymphocytes, B)
BMI (body mass index)
,
,
,
in obesity
,
Board-and-care facilities
Bochdalek's hernia
BODE index
===PAGE:3760===
Body-box plethysmography
Body composition
aging-related changes in
in children
,
Body dysmorphic disorder
Body mass index (BMI)
,
,
,
amenorrhea and
maternal
in obesity
,
Body packing (drug)
1511-1512
Body surface area (BSA)
in burns
,
in pediatric fluid therapy
,
Boerhaave's syndrome
,
Boils
697-698
Bolivian hemorrhagic fever
Bone(s) (
see also
Bone marrow
and at Osteo-
)
aneurysmal cyst of
avascular (ischemic) necrosis of
362-365
,
biopsy of
(
see also
Bone marrow, biopsy of)
in osteomyelitis
calcium in
congenital disorders of
2910-2911
,
,
,
2916-2918
cyst of
DEXA scan of
fibrous dysplasia of
fluorine toxicity effects on
growth plate of
infection of
370-372
(
see also
Osteomyelitis)
infusion into
injury to
(
see also
Fracture)
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis of
,
loss of
(
see also
Osteoporosis)
marble
2916-2918
mass of
,
in multiple myeloma
,
osteoporosis of
356-360
(
see also
Osteoporosis)
Paget's disease of
360-362
,
radiation effects on
sarcoidosis of
scan of (
see
Bone scan)
spotted (osteopoikilosis)
syphilitic lesions of
transplantation of
tuberculosis of
tumors of
405-410
,
vitamin C and
vitamin D and
,
,
Bone marrow
aspiration of
in acute leukemia
in anemia
,
in cancer
in HIV infection
in multiple myeloma
in myelophthisic anemia
in neutropenia
===PAGE:3761===
biopsy of
in anemia
,
in cancer
in HIV infection
in multiple myeloma
in neutropenia
chloramphenicol toxicity to
embolism of
failure of
,
radiation effects on
,
replacement of (myelophthisis)
,
931-932
transplantation of
,
1132-1133
(
see also
Stem cell transplantation)
hepatic veno-occlusive disease and
Bone scan
in breast cancer
in cancer
in infectious arthritis
in osteomyelitis
Bonnevie-Ullrich syndrome
3003-3005
Borborygmi
Borderline personality disorder
,
Bordetella pertussis
infection
,
1254-1256
,
vaccine against
,
Boric acid poisoning
Bornholm disease
,
,
Borrelia
infection (
see
Lyme disease)
Bortezomib
,
Bosentan
Bottle-feeding
2708-2709
(
see also
Feeding, infant)
Botulinum toxin
in achalasia
in anal fissure
antitoxin against
,
in dystonia
in hyperhidrosis
in myofascial pain syndrome
in spasmodic dysphonia
in spasmodic torticollis
terrorist use of
Botulism
,
1290-1292
,
,
antitoxin in
,
infant
,
,
wound
1290-1292
Bouchard's nodes
Boutonneuse fever
,
Boutonniere deformity
,
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
1729-1730
blood transfusion and
Bowel (
see also
Intestine)
cancer of
193-196
inflammation of
166-176
(
see also
Inflammatory bowel disease)
bleeding in
irrigation of, for poisoning
,
irritable
162-165
large (
see
Colon)
malrotation of
obstruction of
115-117
,
===PAGE:3762===
congenital
2978-2981
pregnancy and
,
perforation of
preoperative preparation of
,
resection of
160-161
undernutrition and
short
160-161
vitamin E deficiency and
44-45
small (
see
Small intestine)
Bowel movements (
see
Defecation)
Bowenoid papulosis
,
Bowen's disease
749-750
,
,
Bow legs
Brachial plexus
,
birth-related injury to
2770-2771
Brachytherapy
in prostate cancer
Bradbury-Eggleston syndrome
1619-1620
Braden scale
Bradyarrhythmias
Bradycardia
athlete's heart syndrome and
cardiac catheterization and
in children
,
myocardial infarction and
in neonate
shock and
sinus
,
,
Bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome
Bradykinesia
,
Bradykinin
Brain (
see also
Cerebral)
abscess of
,
,
,
anatomy of
,
,
aneurysm of
,
1654-1655
polycystic kidney disease and
arteries of
congenital anomalies of
2992-2995
,
contusion of
,
cysticercosis of
1364-1365
drug penetration of
dysfunction of
1635-1643
edema of (
see
Cerebral edema)
electrical stimulation of
helminthic infections of
1728-1729
hemorrhage in
1652-1654
in neonate
herniation of
,
,
,
1658-1659
,
,
,
,
infection of
1726-1734
(
see also
Encephalitis; Meningitis)
injury to
,
,
(
see also
Brain, trauma to)
rehabilitation after
seizures and
vegetative state and
1665-1667
ischemia of
1646-1652
(
see also
Stroke)
cardiac arrest and
,
metastatic tumors of
mucormycosis of
===PAGE:3763===
paragonimiasis of
plasticity of
prion diseases of
1729-1731
radiation toxicity to
1816-1817
subacute combined degeneration of
trauma to
3218-3227
,
,
,
,
tumors of
,
1813-1822
,
1814-1815
in children
2940-2942
CSF in
HIV infection and
seizures and
upper motor neuron lesions of
vascular lesions of
Brain death
1667-1668
,
Brain natriuretic peptide
heart failure and
,
in pulmonary embolism
reference values for
sodium excretion and
Brain stem evoked potentials
Brainstem implant
Bran
in constipation
in irritable bowel syndrome
Branched-chain amino acids, metabolic defects of
3013-3014
Brass-founders' ague
Brazilian purpuric fever
BRCA
genes
,
,
,
Breakbone fever
1431-1433
Breast
abscess of
biopsy of
,
cancer of
2558-2567
cure of
ductal
,
family history of
Hodgkin lymphoma treatment and
,
hormone replacement therapy and
,
,
,
hypercalcemia in
in situ
,
,
lobar
,
,
metastatic
,
oral contraceptives and
,
pain and
pregnancy and
prevention of
2566-2567
risk for
2558-2559
,
screening for
,
staging of
treatment of
2562-2566
,
,
cyst of
development of
,
discharge from
2555-2557
,
engorgement of
,
enlargement of, in male
2348-2351
,
,
,
examination of
,
,
in elderly
===PAGE:3764===
fibroadenoma of
,
fibrocystic changes in
,
infection of
,
2687-2688
,
inflammation of
,
2687-2688
,
lumps in
2554-2555
,
breastfeeding and
magnetic resonance imaging of
male
,
,
mammography of
,
,
pain in
2554-2555
,
2557-2558
phyllodes of
reconstruction of
secretions of
Breastfeeding
2704-2708
adequacy of
complications of
drug use and
2706-2707
,
HIV infection and
infantile beriberi and
jaundice and
,
marijuana use and
mineral requirements during
oxytocin in
recommended dietary allowances in
,
technique of
undernutrition and
vitamin A in
vitamin D in
vitamin K deficiency and
weaning from
Breast milk
antimicrobial factors in
composition of
drugs in
2706-2707
,
jaundice and
maternal antibodies in
for premature infant
storage of
Breath-holding spells
3031-3032
Breathing (
see also
Dyspnea; Respiration; Tachypnea)
accessory muscle use in
apneustic
mechanical ventilation discontinuation and
paradoxical
periodic
pursed-lip
rescue
,
,
sleep-related disorders of
1903-1907
stridor with
1844-1847
,
1844-1845
in trauma evaluation
wheezing with
1847-1850
,
Breath odor
506-508
,
Breath sounds
Breath test
C-xylose
hydrogen
,
urea
===PAGE:3765===
Breech presentation
,
Bretylium
Bridge, dental
Brief psychotic disorder
Brill-Zinsser disease
,
1283-1284
Brimonidine
B ring
Brinzolamide
Bromate poisoning
Bromhidrosis
Bromide poisoning
Bromine poisoning
Bromocriptine
during breastfeeding
in hyperprolactinemia
in hypersomatotropism
in Parkinson's disease
,
Brompheniramine
Bronchial challenge test
Bronchial stenosis, posttransplantation
Bronchiectasis
1939-1943
,
1940-1941
Bronchiolitis
,
2878-2879
Acinetobacter

in cystic fibrosis
parainfluenza
respiratory syncytial virus
Bronchiolitis-associated interstitial disease
,
,
Bronchiolitis obliterans
Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia
,
,
1950-1951
,
Bronchitis
acute
1922-1923
asthmatic
bronchiectasis vs
chronic
,
(
see also
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD])
industrial
Bronchoalveolar lavage
(
see also
Lavage, bronchoalveolar)
Bronchodilators
in asthma
,
in bronchiolitis
in COPD
,
in cough
in elderly
Bronchophony
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
2870-2872
,
Bronchoscopy
1862-1863
Bronchospasm, in cystic fibrosis
(
see also
Asthma)
Bronchus(i)
biopsy of
,
carcinoid of
Brontophobia
Bronze diabetes
Brown fat
Brown lung
Brown-Sequard syndrome
,
,
Brown spider bite
Brown syndrome
Brucellosis
1246-1247
===PAGE:3766===
terrorist use of
Brudzinski's sign
Brugada syndrome
2177-2178
,
Brugian lymphatic filariasis
,
1346-1347
Bruise (
see
Contusion; Ecchymoses)
Bruising, easy
Bruit
carotid
over cranium
Brushfield's spots
Bruton's disease
,
,
1107-1108
Bruxism
,
,
BSA (
see
Body surface area)
Bubonic plague
1256-1257
Buccal mucosa
,
Budd-Chiari syndrome
261-262
,
Budesonide
in allergy
in asthma
in inflammatory bowel disease
Buerger's disease
2223-2224
Buffy coat, removal of (leukapheresis)
Building-related illnesses
1976-1977
Bulbar palsy
Bulbocavernosus reflex
,
Bulbospongiosus reflex
Bulge sign
Bulimia nervosa
,
1536-1537
Bullae
,
656-660
,
,
COPD and
,
rupture of
Bullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma
,
Bullous keratopathy
587-588
Bullous myringitis
Bullous pemphigoid
656-657
,
,
Bullying
Bumetanide, in elderly
BUN, acute renal failure and
BUN/creatinine ratio
,
,
Bundle branch block
2173-2174
,
,
Bundle of His
Bungarus multicinctus
poisoning
Bunion
403-404
,
Bunyavirus infection
,
,
Buphthalmos
Bupivacaine
Buprenorphine
in opioid withdrawal
,
in pain
Bupropion
,
in elderly
poisoning with
for smoking cessation
,
Burkholderia
infection
,
Burkitt's lymphoma
1023-1024
Burning mouth syndrome
Burns
3242-3247
,
===PAGE:3767===
aspirin
caustic
3335-3336
depth of
electrical
,
3248-3250
immunodeficiency with
ocular
3235-3236
Pseudomonas
infection with
surface area estimation for
Burow's solution
Bursitis
372-373
Achilles
401-402
,
calcaneal
metatarsal
Buschke Lowenstein tumor
Buserelin
Buspirone
in children
in elderly
Busulfan, in pregnancy
Butcher's wart
Butenafine
Butoconazole
in candidal vaginitis
,
Butorphanol
,
Butterfly rash
Button battery ingestion
Buttonhole deformity
,
Butyl nitrite
poisoning with
Butyrophenones
Byssinosis
,
===PAGE:3768===
C
CA 15-3
CA 19-9
,
CA 125
,
,
CA 15-3
CA 27-29
Cabergoline
Cachexia
,
(
see also
Undernutrition)
cardiac
,
Cadmium
hypocalcemia and
nephrotoxicity of
poisoning with
,
Cafe-au-lait spots
,
Caffeine
in apnea of prematurity
diarrhea and
pharmacologic stress testing and
poisoning with
during pregnancy
tremors and
Caisson disease
,
3287-3288
Calabar swellings
Calcaneal spur syndrome
,
400-401
Calcaneus
bursitis of
epiphysitis of
,
Calciferol (
see
Vitamin D)
Calcification(s)
in pancreatitis
,
pleural
in silicosis
Calcineurin inhibitors
Calciphylaxis
Calcipotriol
in ichthyosis
in psoriasis
Calcitonin
blood levels of
,
calcium regulation and
hypocalcemia and
Calcitonin (salmon)
,
in hypercalcemia
tremors and
Calcitriol
in chronic hypocalcemia
in psoriasis
in renal failure
Calcium
837-850
blood levels of
,
,
,
,
decrease in
838-843
,
(
see also
Hypocalcemia)
increase in
843-850
,
,
(
see also
Hypercalcemia)
parathyroid hormone effects on
sarcoidosis and
vitamin D deficiency and
in calcium channel blocker poisoning
===PAGE:3769===
dietary
deficiency of
ionized
recommended dietary allowance for
supplemental
in neonatal hypocalcemia
urinary
,
,
Calcium bilirubinate stones
Calcium carbonate
in hypocalcemia
Calcium carbonate stones
Calcium channel
Calcium channel blockers
in arrhythmias
,
in coronary artery disease
,
in diabetic nephropathy
in elderly
in hypertension
,
,
,
,
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
poisoning with
,
in pregnancy
in pulmonary hypertension
in Raynaud's phenomenon
Calcium chloride
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
in hyperkalemia
Calcium gluceptate
Calcium gluconate
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in chronic hypocalcemia
in hyperkalemia
in hypermagnesemia
in neonatal hypocalcemia
,
in tetany
Calcium oxalate crystals
,
,
Calcium palmitate stones
Calcium phosphate crystals
,
Calcium phosphate stones
Calcium polycarbophil
,
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals
deposition of
354-355
gout vs
Calcium stearate stones
Calcofluor white stain
Calculus (tartar)
Calculus(i)
bile duct
276-278
gallbladder
271-273
(
see also
Gallstones)
salivary gland
469-470
urinary
2369-2372
,
in cystinuria
Calf, strengthening exercises for
Calfactant
Calicivirus infection
,
California encephalitis
,
California virus
Calluses
660-661
===PAGE:3770===
Calomel poisoning
Caloric testing
,
Calories (
see
Energy)
Calorimetry, indirect
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
infection
Camphor poisoning
Camptothecins
Campylobacter
infection
,
,
,
1247-1248
sexual transmission of
Camurati-Engelmann disease
Canaliculus
infection of (canaliculitis)
,
Canaloplasty
Canavan disease
Cancer
1046-1056
(
see also names and sites of specific cancers
)
acute
anemia and
928-929
ataxia and
bone marrow biopsy in
bone scan in
cachexia in
cellular immunity in
1057-1058
cellular kinetics of
1046-1050
,
chemical carcinogens in
,
chemotherapy for (
see
Cancer chemotherapy)
in children
2940-2946
chromosomal abnormalities in
,
clinical manifestations of
1052-1053
complications of
1073-1076
cutaneous manifestations of
644-645
,
,
683-684
depression in
diagnosis of
1050-1052
disseminated intravascular coagulation and
embolism and
environmental factors in
,
eosinophilia and
,
erythrocytosis and
febrile neutrophilic dermatosis and
683-684
fever in
gene mutations in
1047-1048
growth of
HIV infection and
1457-1458
host response to
1057-1058
hypercalcemia in
,
imaging studies in
immunodiagnosis of
1058-1059
immunologic disorders and
,
,
immunology of
1057-1061
incurable
ionizing radiation in
,
itching in
laboratory tests in
lymph node biopsy in
meningitis and
metastatic
(
see also
Metastases)
molecular abnormalities in
1047-1048
myositis and
===PAGE:3771===
neutropenia and
,
occult
oncogenes in
pain in
,
paraneoplastic syndromes in
1054-1056
pleural effusion with
,
,
posttransplantation
pregnancy and
2637-2638
prevention of
radiation and
retina
screening for
,
,
skin lesions in
,
spinal cord compression in
,
staging of
1051-1052
superior vena cava syndrome in
thrombosis in
treatment of
1061-1076
,
1062-1063
adjuvant
1072-1073
adverse effects of
1073-1076
biologic response modifiers in
,
bone marrow transplantation in
(
see also
Stem cell transplantation)
chemotherapy in (
see
Cancer chemotherapy)
cytopenia with
1074-1075
gene therapy in
hormonal
,
immunotherapy in
1059-1061
monoclonal antibodies in
1068-1069
,
multimodality
1072-1073
neoadjuvant
palliative
radiation therapy in
1062-1063
,
1064-1065
response to
surgery in
1062-1064
,
1062-1063
tumor antigens (markers) in
,
,
1058-1059
tumor lysis syndrome in
1075-1076
tumor suppressor genes in
ultraviolet radiation in
of unknown primary origin
1053-1054
viruses in
,
,
Cancer chemotherapy
1062-1063
,
1065-1072
,
1066-1071
(
see also specific cancers
)
adjuvant
1072-1073
adverse effects of
1073-1076
during breastfeeding
carcinogenicity of
cutaneous reactions to
,
,
cytopenia with
1074-1075
drug interactions of
hyperpigmentation and
hypogonadism with
nausea with
neoadjuvant
in neuroblastoma
oral
2584-2586
ototoxicity of
pneumonia with
poisoning with
===PAGE:3772===
in pregnancy
stomatitis and
teratogenicity of
,
vomiting with
Candesartan
Candida albicans
extract testing
Candida-endocrinopathy syndrome
Candidemia
Candidiasis
aural
cutaneous
703-704
,
704-705
denture-related
esophageal
fluconazole in
HIV infection and
,
hypocalcemia and
intertriginous
invasive
1326-1327
mucocutaneous
,
,
,
chronic
1102-1103
nail
in neonatal sepsis
,
oral
,
,
,
,
paranasal sinus
perianal
renal
,
subungual
urinary tract
2380-2381
vulvovaginal
,
704-705
,
,
,
acne treatment and
HIV infection and
Candiduria
2380-2381
Canes
,
,
in blindness
Canker sores
,
512-513
Cannabis (
see
Marijuana)
Cannon waves
,
Cannulation (
see
Catheterization)
Cantharidin
in molluscum contagiosum
poisoning with
in warts
Capacity
3468-3469
Capecitabine
Capillaritis
Capillary leak syndrome
Caplan's syndrome
Capnometry, sublingual
Capreomycin, in tuberculosis
Capsaicin
in itching
in pain
,
in urge incontinence
Captopril
in elderly
Caput medusae
Caput succedaneum
,
===PAGE:3773===
Carbachol
Carbamate poisoning
,
3340-3341
,
Carbamazepine
in alcohol withdrawal
in bipolar disorder
,
in central diabetes insipidus
drug interactions of
in pain
poisoning with
in pregnancy
in seizures
,
in trigeminal neuralgia
Carbamoyl phosphate synthase deficiency
Carbapenems
Carbaryl poisoning
Carbenicillin
Carbicarb
Carbidopa
in multiple system atrophy
in Parkinson's disease
,
Carbimazole
Carbofuran poisoning
Carbohydrates
in atherosclerosis
digestion of
glycemic index of
,
in hyperkalemic paralysis
intolerance to
157-158
metabolic disorders of
3016-3018
Carbolfuchsin
Carbolic acid poisoning
Carbon bisulfide poisoning
Carbon dioxide
blood levels of
end-tidal
gastrointestinal production of
partial pressure of
,
poisoning with
,
sublingual
ventilatory failure and
Carbon disulfide poisoning
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Carbon-11-labeled acetate imaging
Carbon monoxide
diffusing capacity for
,
,
poisoning with
,
,
3334-3335
,
Carbon tetrachloride poisoning
Carbonyl iron poisoning
Carboplatin
ototoxicity of
Carboxyhemoglobin, reference values for
Carboxyhemoglobinemia
,
Carbuncles
697-698
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
,
in colorectal cancer
Carcinogens
1046-1050
,
Carcinoid syndrome
,
908-909
===PAGE:3774===
mastocytosis vs
Carcinoid tumors
907-909
bronchial
small-bowel
Carcinoma (
see
Cancer
and specific sites and types
)
Carcinoma ex mixed tumor
,
Cardiac (
see also
Heart)
Cardiac allograft vasculopathy
Cardiac arrest
2255-2256
(
see also
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation)
in children
,
2264-2265
,
2266-2269
,
,
Cardiac cachexia
Cardiac catheterization
2048-2052
,
,
complications of
left-heart
right-heart
,
,
Cardiac cycle
Cardiac index
,
,
Cardiac output
,
,
in critical care patient
heart failure and
,
hypertension and
2066-2067
pregnancy and
,
syncope and
,
Cardiac reserve
Cardiac tamponade
in cancer
in pericarditis
,
pulseless electrical activity and
Cardiogenic shock
,
,
Cardiolipin antibodies
Cardiomyopathy
,
2134-2142
,
,
(
see also
Myocarditis)
athlete's heart syndrome vs
,
Chagas disease and
diabetic
dilated
2134-2138
,
,
,
,
HIV infection and
hypertrophic
,
,
2138-2141
,
obstructive
ischemic
peripartum
restrictive
,
,
2141-2142
,
amyloidosis and
constrictive pericarditis vs
Cardiopulmonary bypass
platelet dysfunction and
procedure for
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
2256-2269
,
,
,
2261-2262
care after
2263-2266
death after
drugs for
2260-2262
,
2261-2262
in infants and children
-
,
2266-2269
,
,
in neonate
2768-2769
,
,
,
order against
in trauma
3190-3192
Cardiospasm
123-124
Cardiotomy syndrome
===PAGE:3775===
Cardiovagal testing
Cardiovascular disorders (
see also specific disorders
)
angiography in
auscultation in
2020-2025
,
,
,
,
cardiac catheterization in
2048-2052
,
,
chest examination in
,
chest pain in
2025-2031
,
congenital
2946-2968
(
see also
Congenital heart disease)
dental procedures in
echocardiography in
2053-2054
,
edema in
2031-2035
electrocardiography in
2054-2058
,
,
electrophysiologic studies in
heart sounds in
imaging in
2058-2059
invasive procedures in
2048-2052
,
murmurs in
2020-2025
,
,
,
,
,
noninvasive procedures in
orthostatic hypotension in
2035-2038
,
palpitations in
2038-2041
,
,
patient history in
percutaneous coronary interventions in
2059-2060
physical examination in
,
,
,
,
,
,
pulsus paradoxus in
radionuclide imaging in
2061-2063
,
,
syncope in
2041-2048
,
venous examination in
2019-2020
,
vital signs in
Cardioversion
in atrial fibrillation
in atrial flutter
in children
,
direct-current
in torsades de pointes
in ventricular fibrillation
,
in ventricular tachycardia
Carditis (
see
Myocarditis)
Caregiving
3140-3141
elder abuse and
Caries
,
516-518
,
in children
prevention of
,
,
517-518
radiation-induced
Carisoprodol
Carminatives
Carmustine
Carney complex
Carnitine deficiency
18-19
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency
Caroli's disease
Carotene (
β
-carotene)
cutaneous deposition of
malabsorption and
reference values for
Carotenemia
,
Carotenodermia
Carotid artery
===PAGE:3776===
auscultation over
endarterectomy of
,
inflammation of
319-321
obstruction of
,
stenosis of
Carotid pulse
in cardiovascular disorders
examination of
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Carotid sinus, pressure on
Carotid sinus syndrome, pacemaker in
Carpal tunnel syndrome
,
,
,
Carpopedal spasms
Carrion's disease
Carteolol
in glaucoma
in hypertension
Cartilage
transplantation of
tumors of
Cartilage-hair hypoplasia
Carvallo's sign
Carvedilol
in arrhythmias
in coronary artery disease
in hypertension
Casal's necklace
Cascara
in elderly
Caspofungin
,
Cast
Castleman disease
Castor bean poisoning
Castor oil
Casts, urinary
,
,
Cataplexy
,
Cataracts
606-607
congenital
Catatonia
,
Catecholamines
(
see also
Epinephrine; Norepinephrine)
in MEN 2A syndrome
pheochromocytoma secretion of
801-803
,
urinary
,
Catechol
O
-methyltransferase inhibitors
,
Catheterization
arterial
2249-2250
bladder
2316-2317
in children
for incontinence
,
,
in-dwelling
infection and
oliguria with
2252-2253
,
in trauma
cardiac
2048-2052
,
,
complications of
2051-2052
left-heart
right-heart
,
,
===PAGE:3777===
central venous
2247-2249
,
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
for dialysis
infection and
pleural effusion and
intra-abdominal abscess drainage with
intracranial
peripheral vein
peritoneal
pleural
,
pulmonary artery
,
2244-2246
,
,
in shock
,
urinary (
see
Catheterization, bladder)
CAT scan (
see
Computed tomography)
Cat-scratch disease
,
,
1244-1245
,
Cauda equina
Cauda equina syndrome
,
,
,
Cauliflower ear
Causalgia (complex regional pain syndrome)
1633-1634
Caustic ingestion
3335-3336
gastritis with
Cavernous hemangioma
Cavernous lymphangioma
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
,
,
624-625
CEA (
see
Carcinoembryonic antigen)
Cecum
ameboma of
volvulus of
Cefaclor
in otitis media
Cefadroxil
in endocarditis prophylaxis
Cefazolin
in endocarditis prophylaxis
in infective endocarditis
neonatal dosage of
as preoperative prophylaxis
3349-3350
Cefepime
,
in infective endocarditis
in meningitis
,
,
neonatal dosage of
Cefoperazone
Cefotaxime
,
in meningitis
,
,
neonatal dosage of
Cefotetan
Cefoxitin
Cefpodoxime
,
Cefprozil
Ceftazidime
,
in infective endocarditis
in meningitis
,
neonatal dosage of
Ceftibuten
Ceftizoxime
Ceftobiprole
===PAGE:3778===
Ceftriaxone
,
,
in children
in infective endocarditis
-
in Lyme disease
,
in meningitis
,
,
neonatal dosage of
in otitis media
Cefuroxime
in Lyme disease
in otitis media
Celecoxib
,
Celiac axis occlusion
Celiac sprue
,
158-159
dermatitis herpetiformis and
lymphoma and
Cell cycle
Cellophane maculopathy
Cellulase
Cellulitis
694-696
bursitis vs
clostridial
1295-1296
deep venous thrombosis vs
edema and
erysipeloid
necrotizing subcutaneous infection vs
noncholera
Vibrio

orbital
,
,
,
625-627
peritonsillar
474-475
pregnancy and
preseptal
,
625-627
streptococcal
,
submandibular space
470-471
supraglottic
Cementoma
Centipede bites
Central cord syndrome
,
Central core myopathy
Central nervous system (
see also
Brain; Spinal cord)
aging-related changes in
in altitude sickness
drug penetration of
of premature infant
Central pontine myelinolysis
Central retinal artery occlusion
613-614
Central retinal vein occlusion
614-615
Central sleep apnea
Central venous catheterization
2247-2249
,
(
see also
Catheterization, central venous)
Central venous pressure
,
,
Cephalexin
in endocarditis prophylaxis
Cephalhematoma
,
,
Cephalosporins
1201-1204
,
1st generation
,
,
2nd generation
,
,
3rd generation
1187-1188
,
,
,
4th generation
,
,
,
5th generation
===PAGE:3779===
in meningitis
,
,
Cephamycins
Cercarial dermatitis
Cerclage
Cerebellar ataxia
,
,
,
chickenpox and
Cerebellar degeneration, paraneoplastic
Cerebellum
disorders of
1777-1779
,
tremor in
Cerebral arteries
aneurysm of
,
malformation of
obstruction of
,
1646-1652
,
,
Cerebral cortex
,
Cerebral edema
brain injury and
cardiac arrest and
diabetic ketoacidosis and
high-altitude
hyponatremia and
seizures and
in stroke
Cerebral hemispheres
malformation of
Cerebral hemorrhage
1652-1654
Cerebral palsy syndromes
2896-2898
Cerebral perfusion pressure
2246-2247
,
Cerebral syndrome
Cerebritis, paraneoplastic
Cerebrohepatorenal syndrome
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
,
in brain lymphoma
drug penetration of
in encephalitis
leakage of
,
1724-1725
,
,
,
in meningitis
,
,
,
,
in neonate
in multiple sclerosis
in neonatal sepsis
in neonate
in neurologic disorders
,
in neurosyphilis
,
in polyneuropathy
in portal-systemic encephalopathy
reference values for
in Reye's syndrome
in stupor and coma
in subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
in tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-associated myelopathy
xanthochromic
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis
Cerebrovascular disease
1643-1655
(
see also
Stroke)
dementia and
,
1680-1681
Cerebrovascular examination
Cerebrum, dysfunction of
1635-1643
(
see also
Brain
and at Cerebral
)
===PAGE:3780===
Certolizumab
,
Ceruloplasmin
deficiency of
reference values for
Wilson's disease and
Cerumen
,
,
455-456
Ceruminoma
Cervical cap
,
Cervical mucus
abnormal
examination of
,
ovulation timing with
,
Cervical plexus
Cervical spine
abnormalities of
1757-1759
,
spondylosis of
1808-1809
subluxation of
,
trauma to
Cervicitis
dysuria and
gonococcal
1471-1474
infertility and
nongonococcal
1468-1470
pregnancy and
reactive arthritis and
vaginitis vs
Cervix
abnormalities of
biopsy of
cancer of
2576-2580
,
2577-2578
HIV infection and
human papillomavirus infection and
,
,
pregnancy and
screening for
,
cyclic changes in
dilation of
,
,
premature
2661-2662
examination of
incompetence of
,
2661-2662
infection of (
see
Sexually transmitted diseases)
inflammation of (
see
Cervicitis)
mucus of (
see
Cervical mucus)
polyps of
2534-2535
,
stenosis of
infertility and
tumors (myomas) of
Cesarean section
Cestode infections
,
,
1360-1365
Cetirizine
Cetuximab
Cevimeline, in xerostomia
CFTR
gene
,
Chaddock's reflex
Chagas disease
,
,
1376-1377
achalasia and
Chalazion
,
576-577
Chamberlain procedure
===PAGE:3781===
Chamomile
,
Chancre
genital
oral
,
trypanosomal
Chancroid
Channelopathy
,
Chaotic atrial tachycardia
Charcoal, activated
in flatulence
in poisoning
Charcot-Leyden crystals
,
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
Charcot's joints
348-349
,
,
,
Charcot's syndrome
Charcot's triad
,
Charley horse
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
,
,
,
,
1101-1102
Cheese washer's lung
Cheilitis
Cheilosis
riboflavin deficiency and
Chelation
,
,
in alternative medicine
,
Chemicals
carcinogenic
,
caustic
,
3335-3336
ocular injury from
pulmonary disease from
,
-
,
1983-1984
sensitivity to
3443-3444
stomatitis and
Chemical worker's lung
Chemodectoma
Chemokines
Chemotherapy (
see
Cancer chemotherapy)
Cherry-red spot
Chest
auscultation of
deformities of
examination of
,
opening (thoracotomy) of
1865-1866
pain in
,
,
2025-2031
,
2026-2028
cocaine-related
in coronary artery disease
,
,
,
in infant
in pericarditis
palpation of
percussion of
,
puncture (thoracentesis) of
1864-1865
,
,
x-ray of
Chest compressions
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
,
,
Chest physiotherapy
in cystic fibrosis
Chest tube
1866-1867
Chest wall
===PAGE:3782===
chest pain and
palpation of
in children
in trauma
tumors of
2013-2014
Cheyne-Stokes respiration
,
,
,
Chiari malformation
,
,
Chickenpox (varicella)
,
,
1412-1416
pulmonary
,
vaccine against
,
Chiclero ulcer
Chigger bites
3312-3313
Chikungunya disease
,
,
Chilblains
Child abuse
3062-3067
(
see also
Abuse, child)
Childhood disintegrative disorder
Child-Turcotte-Pugh scoring system
,
Chinese medicine
,
Chinese restaurant syndrome
Chiropractic
,
3418-3419
Chlamydia pneumoniae
infection
,
,
,
1926-1927
,
Chlamydia psittaci
infection
,
Chlamydia trachomatis
infection
1278-1279
conjunctival
583-584
genital
1468-1470
,
1474-1475
,
in neonate
conjunctivitis
,
pneumonia
pelvic inflammatory disease and
pulmonary
urethral
Chloasma
Chloral amide poisoning
Chloral hydrate poisoning
Chlorambucil
in minimal change disease
in pregnancy
Chloramphenicol
,
during breastfeeding
in meningitis
neonatal dosage of
,
in pregnancy
,
Chlorate poisoning
Chlordane poisoning
Chlordiazepoxide
(
see also
Benzodiazepines)
in alcohol withdrawal
in elderly
,
poisoning with
Chlorethoxyfos poisoning
Chloride
blood
in body fluids
dietary
urinary
,
,
Chloridorrhea
Chlorine
===PAGE:3783===
inhalation of
,
1983-1984
poisoning with
Chloroaniline poisoning
Chloroform poisoning
Chlorophenothane (DDT) poisoning
Chloroquine
distribution of
in hypercalcemia
in malaria
,
,
in malaria prevention
in porphyria
in SLE
Chlorosis
924-927
Chlorothalonil poisoning
Chlorothiazide
in bronchopulmonary dysplasia
in hypertension
Chlorothion poisoning
Chlorpheniramine
in elderly
Chlorpromazine
in carcinoid syndrome
in children
in elderly
in hiccups
hyperpigmentation and
in MAOI-induced hypertensive reaction
poisoning with
in schizophrenia
Chlorpropamide
in central diabetes insipidus
in diabetes mellitus
,
in elderly
,
,
poisoning with
in pregnancy
Chlorpyrifos poisoning
Chlorthalidone
in elderly
Chlorzoxazone, in elderly
Chokes
Choking, Heimlich maneuver for
,
Cholangiocarcinoma
,
Cholangiography
(
see also
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography)
Cholangiopathy
AIDS-associated
ischemic
259-260
Cholangitis
276-278
autoimmune
,
emphysematous
fluke infection and
HIV infection and
,
posttransplantation
primary sclerosing
,
,
278-279
Cholecalciferol
,
(
see also
Vitamin D)
Cholecystectomy
in acalculous biliary pain
in bile duct stones
===PAGE:3784===
in cholecystitis
in cholelithiasis
cholescintigraphy after
pain after
Cholecystitis
273-275
chronic
HIV infection and
imaging in
total parenteral nutrition and
Cholecystokinin
Choledochal cyst
Choledochocele
Choledocholithiasis
276-278
Cholelithiasis
271-273
acute cholecystitis and
273-275
imaging of
oral contraceptives and
pancreatitis and
,
total parenteral nutrition and
Cholera
,
,
1248-1250
pancreatic (
see
Vipoma)
vaccine against
Cholescintigraphy
,
,
Cholestasis
,
bilirubin in
neonatal
2804-2806
,
postoperative
223-224
posttransplantation
of pregnancy
Cholesteatoma
,
Cholesterol
,
(
see also
Lipoproteins; Triglycerides)
atherosclerosis and
decrease in
904-905
dietary modification of
diuretic effects on
in familial hypercholesterolemia
gallstones of
,
in hypothyroidism
interpretation of
,
measurement of
,
metabolism of
,
niacin effects on
oral contraceptives and
pharmacologic modification of
,
pleural
reference values for
screening tests for
in children
in elderly
total
,
urinary
Cholesterolosis
Cholesteryl ester storage disease
,
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein
,
deficiency of
Cholestyramine
,
,
in cholestasis
===PAGE:3785===
in polycythemia vera
in primary biliary cirrhosis
vitamin deficiencies and
Choline Mg trisalicylate
Cholinergic crisis
Cholinergic syndrome
Cholinesterase inhibitors
,
,
,
Chondroblastoma
Chondrocalcinosis
354-355
Chondrocytes
Chondrodysplasia punctata
,
Chondrodystrophy, rickets vs
Chondroectodermal dysplasia
Chondroitin sulfate
,
Chondromalacia patellae
,
Chondromatosis, synovial
Chondromyxofibroma
Chondrosarcoma
,
Chordae tendineae, rheumatic disease of
Chordee
Chordoma
Chorea
,
1759-1760
,
Huntington's
,
1763-1764
Sydenham
,
Chorioamnionitis
Choriocarcinoma
,
2574-2576
,
human chorionic gonadotropin in
hyperthyroidism with
Choriomeningitis, lymphocytic
,
,
1435-1436
Chorionic gonadotropin (
see
Human chorionic gonadotropin)
Chorionic villus sampling
,
,
Choroid
inflammation of
608-612
,
melanoma of
metastases to
neovascularization of
Choroiditis, toxoplasmic
Christmas factor (factor IX)
,
deficiency of
977-979
,
Chromaffin cells
Chromate poisoning
,
Chromatography
Chromic acid poisoning
,
Chromium
,
adequate intake allowances for
nephrotoxicity of
poisoning with
Chromium picolinate
3425-3426
Chromium trioxide poisoning
,
Chromoblastomycosis
1334-1335
Chromogranin A
Chromomycosis
1334-1335
Chromosome(s)
abnormalities of
2997-3005
,
(
see also specific abnormalities
)
abortion and
autosomal dominant
,
,
autosomal recessive
,
,
===PAGE:3786===
cancer and
,
disomic
maternal age and
mental retardation and
prenatal screening for
2598-2604
,
recurrence risk for
X-linked
,
3002-3005
,
3376-3377
,
analysis of
2997-2998
deletions of
,
,
duplications of
,
inactivation of
,
Philadelphia
translocations of
Chronic fatigue syndrome
3442-3443
,
fibromyalgia vs.
Chronic granulomatous disease
,
,
aspergillosis in
bronchiectasis in
pneumonia with
Chronic illness, in children
2754-2755
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
1889-1902
,
air travel and
α
-antitrypsin deficiency and
,
,
1901-1902
,
asthma vs
,
,
breath sounds in
cigarette smoking and
,
,
cor pulmonale and
cough in
drug interactions with
dyspnea in
electrocardiogram in
exacerbations of
,
1899-1900
oxygen therapy in
,
,
,
pneumothorax in
pulmonary edema vs
pulmonary function testing in
,
rehabilitation for
respiratory failure in
,
staging of
,
ventilatory failure in
2288-2291
Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania
Chronic pelvic pain syndrome
Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia
,
Chronic venous insufficiency (
see
Venous insufficiency)
Chrysiasis
Churg-Strauss syndrome
317-318
Chvostek's sign
,
Chyliform effusion
Chylomicron retention disease
Chylomicrons
Chylothorax
Cicatricial pemphigoid
,
579-580
Ciclopirox
Cidofovir
in cytomegalovirus infection
Cigarette smoking
===PAGE:3787===
asbestosis and
atherosclerosis and
cancer and
cessation of
3432-3436
,
3435-3436
in disease prevention
preoperative
COPD and
,
,
desquamative interstitial pneumonia and
inflammatory bowel disease and
Langerhans' cell granulomatosis and
lung cancer and
oral cancer and
in patient assessment
peptic ulcer disease and
,
pregnancy and
screening CT and
thromboangiitis obliterans and
2223-2224
Cigar smoking
Ciguatera poisoning
Ciliary body, inflammation of
608-612
,
Ciliary dyskinesia
,
Ciliary flush
Cilostazol
Cimetidine
,
drug interactions of
in elderly
,
poisoning with
in polycythemia vera
in warts
Cinacalcet
,
Cineangiography
Cingulate gyrus, herniation of
,
Ciprofibrate
Ciprofloxacin
1191-1192
,
1208-1210
,
,
in anthrax infection
in Crohn's disease
drug interactions of
in elderly
Circadian rhythms
air travel and
sleep disorders and
,
1709-1710
Circulation
cardiac, normal
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
fetal
transitional
in trauma evaluation
Circumcision
Cirrhosis
240-246
,
,
,
alcoholic
,
(
see also
Alcohol abuse)
α
-antitrypsin deficiency and
ascites in
206-211
cardiac
childhood
circulatory abnormalities in
cryptogenic
,
endocrine abnormalities in
===PAGE:3788===
fever in
histopathologic classification of
physical findings in
pleural effusion and
portal hypertension and
218-220
,
posttransplantation
pregnancy and
primary biliary
,
244-246
,
sarcoidal
skin disorders in
varices with
103-104
Cisplatin
ototoxicity of
Citalopram
,
in children and adolescents
poisoning with
Citirizine
Citrate
toxicity of
urinary
Citrullinated peptide, antibodies to
Citrullinemia
Cladribine
Clam diggers' itch
Clarithromycin
,
1212-1215
,
,
drug interactions of
in endocarditis prophylaxis
in otitis media
prophylactic, in HIV infection
Clasp-knife phenomenon
,
Claudication
,
Claustrophobia
air travel and
magnetic resonance imaging and
Clavi
660-661
Clavicle
birth-related fracture of
fracture of
Cleft lip
Cleft palate
Clemastine
during breastfeeding
Clicks, cardiac
Clidinium/chlordiazepoxide, in elderly
Climacteric
(
see also
Menopause)
Clindamycin
,
1210-1211
in acne
in babesiosis
in endocarditis prophylaxis
in inflammatory vaginitis
in lung abscess
in malaria
,
,
neonatal dosage of
,
in
Pneumocystis
pneumonia
as preoperative prophylaxis
3449-3450
in streptococcal pharyngitis
topical
===PAGE:3789===
Clinical decision making
3383-3402
,
,
,
,
,
Bayes' theorem in
3394-3395
cognitive errors in
3387-3389
economic analyses and
3398-3402
,
,
evidence-based medicine in
3384-3385
laboratory tests in
3389-3398
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
strategies for
3385-3387
Clioquinol
,
Clitocybe
poisoning
,
Clitoromegaly
Clofarabine
Clofazimine
during breastfeeding
Clofibrate, in central diabetes insipidus
Clomiphene
,
Clomipramine
,
in narcolepsy
Clonazepam
in elderly
in seizures
Clonidine
in elderly
in hypertension
,
hypertensive crisis with
in opioid withdrawal
in pain
poisoning with
in Tourette's syndrome
Cloning
Clonorchiasis
,
,
1355-1356
Clonus
Clopidogrel
in angioplasty
in atherosclerosis
in coronary artery disease
,
dental procedures and
in elderly
in myocardial infarction
pharmacogenetics of
in stroke prevention
Clorazepate
in elderly
Clostridial infections
,
1290-1299
Clostridium botulinum
infection
,
1290-1292
,
,
Clostridium difficile
infection
,
,
antibiotic-associated
1288-1289
,
1292-1293
metronidazole in
Clostridium perfringens
infection
,
,
1288-1289
enteric
intra-abdominal
1293-1294
gastrointestinal
1294-1295
necrotizing subcutaneous infection vs
soft-tissue
1295-1296
Clostridium septicum
infection
intra-abdominal
1293-1294
neutropenia and
soft-tissue
===PAGE:3790===
Clostridium tetani
infection
1296-1299
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
Clotrimazole
in candidal vaginitis
,
Clot stability test
Clotting (
see
Coagulation)
Clozapine
,
,
drug interactions of
in elderly
in Parkinson's disease
poisoning with
Clubbing
,
,
Clubfoot
Clue cells
Cluster headache
,
,
CMV (
see
Cytomegalovirus infection)
Cnidaria stings
3310-3311
Coagulation
964-967
,
,
965-966
disorders of (
see
Coagulation disorders)
regulation of
967-968
,
testing of
Coagulation disorders
970-971
,
975-981
,
980-981
acquired
975-981
dental care and
drug interactions with
hereditary
977-979
,
liver disease-related
,
,
snakebite-induced
Coagulation factors
964-967
,
,
deficiencies of
977-979
,
980-981
factor I
,
,
factor II
,
20210 gene mutation of
factor V
,
,
activated protein C resistance of
factor V Leiden
factor VII
,
factor VIII
,
antibodies to
,
deficiency of
977-979
replacement of
in von Willebrand's disease
in disseminated intravascular coagulation
factor IX
,
deficiency of
replacement of
factor X
,
,
factor XI
,
,
,
factor XII
,
factor XIII
,
,
inactivation of
reference values for
testing of
970-971
vitamin K-dependent
warfarin effects on
Coagulopathy, consumption
976-977
,
===PAGE:3791===
Coal tar
,
Coal workers' pneumoconiosis
1977-1979
Coarctation of aorta
,
in children
2956-2958
Cobalamin (
see
Vitamin B
)
Cobaltous chloride poisoning
Cobalt poisoning
Cocaine
abuse of
1526-1528
breastfeeding and
enamel defects and
neonatal effects of
overdose of
poisoning with
pregnancy and
,
,
tremors and
withdrawal from
Cocci
gram-negative
,
1274-1278
gram-positive
,
1225-1236
,
1299-1300
Coccidioidin
Coccidioidomycosis
1327-1329
,
Coccydynia
Coccyx, abscess of
Cochlea (
see
Ear, inner)
Cochlear implant
,
magnetic resonance imaging and
Cockayne syndrome
Cockcroft and Gault formula
Codeine
,
,
antitussive use of
poisoning with
Coelenterate stings
3310-3311
Coenurosis
1363-1364
,
Coenzyme Q10
,
Coffee-ground emesis
Coffee worker's lung
Cogan's syndrome
,
591-592
,
Cognition
amnestic mild impairment of
assessment of
,
,
,
brain injury and
,
development of
driving and
failure of (
see
Delirium; Dementia)
failure to thrive and
lead poisoning and
menopause and
mild impairment of
in Turner's syndrome
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (
see also
Behavioral therapy)
in anorexia nervosa
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
in bulimia nervosa
in chronic pain
in depression
in functional abdominal pain
===PAGE:3792===
in panic disorder
in phobic disorders
Cogwheel rigidity
Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory
Coining
Coin ingestion
Coitus (
see at Sexual
)
COL4A5
gene
Colchicine
in Behcet's syndrome
in calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal deposition disease
in familial Mediterranean fever
in gout
poisoning with
in pregnancy
Cold agglutinin disease
,
936-939
Cold autoinflammatory syndrome
Cold caloric (oculovestibular) testing
Cold, common
,
,
1404-1405
zinc and
Cold hemoglobinuria, paroxysmal
,
Cold injury
3271-3275
,
Cold sores
,
,
,
Cold therapy
,
Cole-Cecil murmur
Colectomy (
see
Colon, resection of)
Colesevelam
,
Colestipol
,
Colic
biliary
,
275-276
infant
2725-2726
underfeeding and
renal
Colistin
,
,
Colitis
antibiotic-associated
,
1288-1289
,
1292-1293
Clostridium difficile
,
1288-1289
,
1292-1293
fulminant
,
,
hemorrhagic
1250-1251
infectious
ischemic
microscopic
spastic
toxic
,
ulcerative
,
172-176
(
see also
Ulcerative colitis)
Colles' fracture
Collodion baby (lamellar ichthyosis)
Colloidal carbon (India ink) stain
Colloid solutions
Colon
bleeding from
99-105
,
cancer of
193-196
,
Crohn's disease and
hormone replacement therapy and
obstruction and
polyps and
screening for
,
===PAGE:3793===
ulcerative colitis and
cathartic ("pipe stem")
cleansing of
Crohn's disease of
169-172
diverticulitis of
177-178
diverticulosis of
176-177
hereditary nonpolyposis carcinoma of
inflammation of
146-151
,
166-176
,
(
see also
Colitis)
irritable
162-165
ischemia of
meconium plug of
2802-2803
megacolon
congenital
toxic
2980-2981
obstruction of
115-117
,
congenital
2978-2981
polyps of
,
191-193
postoperative motility of
114-115
resection of
in diverticulitis
in familial adenomatous polyposis
in ulcerative colitis
spastic
162-165
toxic dilation of (toxic megacolon)
,
,
2980-2981
tumors of
193-196
ulcerative colitis of
172-176
Colonography
Colonoscopy
air instillation during
in colorectal cancer
,
in gastrointestinal bleeding
in intestinal polyps
screening
,
,
in ulcerative colitis
,
virtual
,
Colorado tick fever
,
Colorblindness
Colostrum
Colporrhaphy
Colposcopy
Coltivirus infection
,
Coma
1656-1668
,
,
,
,
hepatic
220-222
,
myxedema
,
nonketotic hyperosmolar
885-886
pentobarbital-induced
sequelae of
Combitube
Comedones
extraction of
Commissurotomy
Common variable immunodeficiency
,
,
IgA deficiency and
Commotio cordis
Compartment syndrome
,
exercise-induced
snakebite and
Competency
3468-3469
===PAGE:3794===
Complement
1085-1086
,
,
alternative pathway of
,
,
classical pathway of
,
,
deficiencies of
,
1093-1094
,
,
,
mannose-binding lectin pathway of
,
,
in membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
N. gonorrhoeae
resistance to
postinfectious glomerulonephritis and
receptors for
deficiency of
reference values for
Complementary and alternative medicine
3411-3420
,
,
3414-3415
dietary supplements in
3421-3432
,
Complement fixation test
Complex regional pain syndrome
1633-1634
Compost lung
Compressed air injury
3282-3291
recompression therapy in
3289-3290
,
Compression stockings (
see
Elastic stockings)
Compromised host (
see also
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection; Immunodeficiency)
bacteremia in
bronchiectasis in
cryptosporidiosis in
cytomegalovirus infection in
,
dental procedures in
esophageal infection in
fungal infections in
gastritis in
gastroenteritis in
human T-lymphotropic virus infection in
measles prevention in
oral candidiasis in
pneumonia in
1933-1936
,
Pseudomonas
infection in
,
sinusitis in
toxoplasmosis in
vaccination in
Vibrio vulnificus
infection in
Compulsion
Computed tomography (CT, CAT scan)
3405-3406
in cardiovascular disorders
chest
electron beam
in gastrointestinal disorders
in genitourinary disorders
of liver
in musculoskeletal evaluation
in neurologic disorders
ocular
Conception
2605-2606
Concussion
brain
,
,
spinal
Condom
,
,
,
2586-2587
Condom catheter
Conduct disorder
Conduction disorders (
see
Arrhythmias; Heart block)
===PAGE:3795===
Conductive hearing loss (
see
Hearing, loss of)
Condyle, mandibular
(
see also
Temporomandibular joint)
fracture of
Condylectomy
Condyloid process, congenital absence of
Condyloma acuminatum
,
1470-1471
Condyloma lata
Cone snail sting
3311-3312
Confabulation
Confidentiality
3470-3471
Confusion (
see also
Dementia)
acute
1669-1673
,
(
see also
Delirium)
in critical care patient
2253-2255
,
in dying patient
physical disorders and
vitamin B
deficiency and
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
796-797
,
2889-2891
Congenital anomalies (
see also specific anomalies
)
alcohol-related
biliary
2804-2806
,
bladder
bone
2910-2913
,
,
2916-2918
cardiovascular
2946-2968
,
(
see also
Congenital heart disease)
chromosomal
2997-3005
,
cocaine-related
craniofacial
2970-2972
,
examination for
gastrointestinal
2975-2981
genitourinary
2982-2988
metabolic
3009-3026
musculoskeletal
2969-2975
,
3006-3009
neurologic
2992-2997
ocular
parental response to
,
penile
2985-2986
portal vein
263-264
recurrence risk for
renal
2982-2983
screening for
2598-2604
,
testicular and scrotal
2986-2988
ureteral
2983-2985
urethral
2985-2986
vaginal
Congenital fiber type disproportion myopathy
Congenital heart disease
2946-2968
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
air travel and
cyanosis in
,
in Down syndrome
Eisenmenger's syndrome with
2966-2967
heart failure in
,
,
left-to-right shunt in
,
murmurs in
obstructive lesions in
,
pacemaker in
pregnancy and
Congestion, nasal
460-461
,
Congestive heart failure (
see
Heart failure)
===PAGE:3796===
Conivaptan
Conjunctiva
chemical burns of
cicatricial pemphigoid of
579-580
desiccation of
592-593
edema of
examination of
foreign bodies in
hemorrhage beneath
563-566
,
,
hyperemia of
inflammation and infection of (
see
Conjunctivitis)
lymphoid hyperplasia of
pinguecula of
pterygium of
red (pink)
563-566
,
564-565
Conjunctivitis
,
580-585
,
adenoviral
581-582
,
allergic
563-566
,
,
584-585
atopic
584-585
bacterial
582-583
chemical
chlamydial
,
in infant
in neonate
gonococcal
,
2824-2825
granular (trachoma)
583-584
hemorrhagic
,
,
inclusion
,
infectious
,
563-566
,
neonatal
,
2824-2825
phlyctenular
594-595
reactive arthritis and
swimming pool
vernal
,
584-585
viral
563-566
,
581-582
in neonate
Connective tissue disease
bronchiectasis in
in children
2906-2918
eosinophilia in
fever and
keratitis in
mixed
298-299
,
scleritis in
thrombocytopenia in
uveitis in
609-610
Conn's syndrome
799-801
Consciousness, loss of (
see
Coma; Syncope)
Consent, informed
incapacity and
3469-3470
Constipation
83-88
,
causes of
in children
2726-2731
,
2727-2728
,
2729-2730
dialysis and
drug interactions with
in dying patient
irritable bowel syndrome and
===PAGE:3797===
multiple system atrophy and
opioid-related
,
Parkinson's disease and
pellagra and
postoperative
pregnancy and
Consumption caogulopathy
976-977
Contact dermatitis
,
,
666-668
,
ear
penile
Contact factor (factor XII)
,
Contact lenses
571-573
amebic keratitis and
1378-1379
corneal abrasion and
corneal response and
Contagious ecthyma
Contiguous gene syndromes
,
Continuity of care
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
in mechanical ventilation
in neonate
in sleep apnea
in status asthmaticus
Contraception
2582-2590
,
2583-2584
barrier
,
2586-2587
emergency
intrauterine devices for
,
2589-2590
oral
,
2584-2586
,
postpartum
,
progestin injections for
,
2588-2589
sterilization for
subdermal implants for
,
transdermal patch for
,
vaginal bleeding and
vaginal ring for
,
Contracture
congenital
Dupuytren's
,
387-388
Contrast media
3403-3404
allergic reaction to
,
,
computed tomography with
in elderly
gastrointestinal studies
97-98
magnetic resonance imaging with
nephrotoxicity of
,
,
,
radiography with
Controlled substances
Contusion
bladder
brain
,
ocular
3237-3238
urethral
Conus medullaris syndrome
Conversion disorder
1574-1575
gastrointestinal illness in
Convulsions (
see
Seizures)
Cooley's anemia
946-947
===PAGE:3798===
Cooling therapy
Coombs' test (
see
Antiglobulin test)
Coordination
evaluation of
,
exercise for
COPD (
see
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
Copeptin
Copper
47-52
,
blood levels of
deficiency of
,
nephrotoxicity of
poisoning with
,
recommended dietary allowances for
toxicity of
,
49-51
urinary
Copperhead snake bite
,
Copper wiring (retinal)
,
Coprolalia
Coproporphyria
,
809-815
Coproporphyrin
Coproporphyrinogen oxidase deficiency
,
809-815
Coral snake bite
Coral sting
3310-3311
Cordectomy
Core decompression surgery
Core myopathies
Corkscrew esophagus
124-125
Cornea
abrasion of
,
3236-3237
in Bell's palsy
bulging of
593-594
chemical burns of
in Cogan's syndrome
591-592
desiccation of
592-593
ectasia of
593-594
edema of
587-588
epithelial bullae of
587-588
examination of
foreign bodies in
,
3236-3237
herpes simplex virus infection of
589-590
,
,
herpes zoster virus infection of
590-591
Kayser-Fleischer rings of
in malnutrition
microsporidiosis of
opacities of
phlyctenules of
594-595
Pseudomonas
infection of
punctate damage to
slit-lamp examination of
stem cells of
596-597
transplantation of
595-597
ulcer of
,
588-589
,
,
acute vision loss and
contact lens-related
in vitamin A deficiency
Corneal reflex
,
in strabismus
===PAGE:3799===
Cornification
660-663
,
Corns
660-661
Cornstarch
Coronary arteries
anatomy of
aneurysm of, in Kawasaki disease
spasm of
,
2098-2099
Coronary artery bypass surgery
2052-2053
,
,
in acute coronary syndromes
2111-2114
pleural effusion with
Coronary artery disease
2087-2118
(
see also
Myocardial infarction)
angina pectoris in
2089-2099
,
chemoprevention of
dialysis and
drug treatment of
,
2095-2098
hormone replacement therapy and
,
prevention of
,
rehabilitation in
3461-3462
risk factors for
stable
Coronavirus infection
,
,
Cor pulmonale
,
,
2132-2134
,
COPD and
mitral stenosis and
Corpus callosum, demyelination of (Machiafava-Bignami disease)
1523-1524
Corpus luteum
,
cysts of
,
Corrigan's sign
,
Corrosive ingestion (
see
Caustic ingestion)
Corticosteroids (
see also specific agents and diseases
)
during breastfeeding
dental procedures and
drug interactions of
in elderly
3096-3097
eosinophil effects of
ginseng interactions with
injection of
intracranial pressure and
in myositis
osteonecrosis and
osteoporosis and
pneumonia and
preoperative
scabies with
in spinal cord injury
topical
,
vitamin interactions with
Corticospinal tracts, lesions of
Corticotropic hormone
Corticotropin (
see
Adrenocorticotropic hormone)
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
placental production of
test with
in adrenal insufficiency
in Cushing's disease
,
in hypopituitarism
Cortisol (
see also
Corticosteroids)
===PAGE:3800===
in Addison's disease
794-795
blood levels of
,
,
,
cosyntropin test of
in Cushing's syndrome
,
deficiency of
,
,
excess of
797-799
,
(
see also
Cushing's syndrome [disease])
sepsis and
in short stature
urinary
,
,
Cortisone (
see
Corticosteroids; Cortisol)
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
infection
,
1239-1241
antitoxin in
,
vaccine against
,
,
Corynebacterium minutissimum
infection
Coryza
1404-1405
Cost-effectiveness analysis
3398-3402
,
Costovertebral angle, ecchymoses of
,
Cosyntropin test
,
Cotrimoxazole (
see
Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole)
Cotton dust-related disease
Cottonmouth snake bite
,
Cotton-wool spots
Cough
1828-1832
,
1829-1830
acute bronchitis and
blood with (hemoptysis)
1837-1841
,
1838-1839
in children
2731-2735
,
2732-2733
COPD and
in cystic fibrosis
pertussis and
psychogenic
Coumaphos poisoning
Coumarin (
see
Warfarin)
Counterimmunoelectrophoresis
Courvoisier's sign
Cover-uncover test
COX-2 inhibitors (coxibs)
in elderly
,
in gout
nephrotoxicity of
in osteoarthritis
in pain
in rheumatoid arthritis
Coxiella burnetii
infection
,
1286-1287
Coxsackievirus infection
,
,
,
pleural
CPAP (
see
Continuous positive airway pressure)
CPEO (chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia)
,
C-peptide, reference values for
C-peptide suppression test
CPET (cardiopulmonary exercise testing)
CPR (
see
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation)
Crabs (pubic lice)
,
Crackles
Cradle cap
Cramps
heat
intestinal obstruction and
===PAGE:3801===
muscle
nocturnal, of legs
writer's
Cranberry
Cranial arteritis
319-321
Cranial nerves
1st (olfactory)
examination of
2nd (optic)
atrophy of
,
examination of
,
infarction of
621-622
inflammation of (neuritis)
541-545
,
,
,
lesions of
619-624
,
swelling of
622-623
toxin injury to
623-624
,
3rd (oculomotor)
,
,
,
1752-1753
examination of
4th (trochlear)
,
,
,
examination of
5th (trigeminal)
,
,
1754-1755
examination of
herpesvirus infection of
6th (abducens)
,
,
1753-1754
examination of
7th (facial)
,
,
1755-1756
birth-related injury to
examination of
,
injury to
testing of
8th (auditory, vestibulocochlear)
,
,
1747-1748
(
see also
Hearing, loss of; Vertigo)
acoustic neuroma of
441-442
examination of
herpes zoster virus infection of
444-445
testing of
9th (glossopharyngeal)
,
,
,
,
1756-1757
10th (vagus)
,
stimulation of, in seizures
11th (accessory)
,
12th (hypoglossal)
,
,
in elderly patient
examination of
in multiple sclerosis
Craniocervical junction
1757-1759
,
Craniofacial anomalies
2970-2972
,
Craniometaphyseal dysplasia
Craniopharyngioma
,
Craniosynostosis
Craniotabes
Craniotomy, decompressive
Craniotubular dysplasias
Craniotubular hyperostoses
Cranium
bruit over
congenital abnormalities of
,
2970-2972
,
C-reactive protein
atherosclerosis and
,
===PAGE:3802===
coronary artery disease and
joint disease and
in neonatal sepsis
osteomyelitis and
protein-energy undernutrition and
reference values for
in rheumatic fever
Creatine
,
as dietary supplement
urinary reference values for
Creatine kinase
,
as cardiac enzyme
as skeletal muscle enzyme
reference values for
Creatinine
blood levels of
,
,
,
in hypertension
urinary
Creatinine clearance
dialysis and
drug dosage and
Creatorrhea
Crede's method
Creeping eruption (cutaneous larva migrans)
Cremasteric reflex
,
Creosote poisoning
Crepitus
Crescentic glomerulonephritis
2393-2396
,
Cresol poisoning
CREST syndrome
310-311
Cretinism, endemic
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
1729-1730
blood transfusion and
CRH (
see
Corticotropin-releasing hormone)
Cribriform plate, fracture of
Cricoid cartilage, pressure on
Cricopharyngeal incoordination
Cricothyrotomy
,
Cri du chat syndrome
Crigler-Najjar syndrome
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever
,
,
Critically ill patient
approach to
2243-2255
monitoring for
2244-2247
,
,
scoring systems for
,
Crocodile bites
Crohn's disease
169-172
adenocarcinoma in
anorectal abscess in
extraintestinal manifestations of
gingiva in
hepatic inflammation in
primary sclerosing cholangitis and
treatment of
167-169
,
171-172
ulcerative colitis vs
uveitis and
Cromoglycate
===PAGE:3803===
Cromolyn
,
in asthma
in mastocytosis
Cronkhite-Canada syndrome
CROS hearing aid
Cross-dressing
Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab antivenom
Crotamiton
Croup
,
,
,
2879-2881
epiglottitis vs
pseudomembranous
spasmodic
Crow-Fukase syndrome
Cruciate ligaments
injury to
Crutches
,
,
Crying
2735-2737
,
2736-2737
paroxysmal (
see
Colic)
in stranger anxiety
Cryoglobulinemia
,
hepatitis C and
,
Cryoprecipitate
Cryopyrinopathies
Cryotherapy
in actinic keratoses
in prostate cancer
in warts
Cryptococcosis
1329-1330
HIV infection and
India ink stain for
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia
,
,
1950-1951
,
Cryptorchidism
,
,
,
2987-2988
Cryptosporidiosis
,
,
,
,
,
1369-1370
Crystalloid solutions
Crystals
calcium oxalate
,
calcium phosphate
,
calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate
,
,
354-355
Charcot-Leyden
monosodium urate
349-354
,
,
synovial fluid examination for
,
urinary
,
,
,
CSF (
see
Cerebrospinal fluid)
CT (
see
Computed tomography)
C-type natriuretic peptide
Cubital tunnel syndrome
Culdocentesis
Cullen's sign
,
Culture
,
1166-1168
,
,
Cupping
Cuprous chloride poisoning
Cushing's reflex
Cushing's syndrome (disease)
797-799
,
cancer-related
cutaneous manifestations of
dental procedures in
Cushing's triad
===PAGE:3804===
Cutaneous larva migrans
,
Cutaneous myiasis
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
Cutis anserina
Cutis laxa
C-xylose breath test
,
Cyanide toxicity
,
nitroprusside use and
Cyanocobalamin (
see
Vitamin B
)
Cyanopsia
Cyanosis
acral
breath-holding spells and
congenital heart disease and
,
,
2958-2959
,
drug-induced
of hands and feet
heart failure and
neonatal
of toe
Cyber-bullying
Cyclandelate, in elderly
Cyclic vomiting syndrome
Cyclizine, in motion sickness
Cyclobenzaprine, in elderly
Cyclooxygenase
Cyclophosphamide
during breastfeeding
in cancer therapy
in Goodpasture's syndrome
in lupus nephritis
in minimal change disease
in pregnancy
in rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
in SLE
,
in vasculitic disorders
Cycloserine
in tuberculosis
vitamin B
deficiency and
Cyclosporiasis
,
,
,
,
Cyclosporine
in aplastic anemia
in asthma
in atopic dermatitis
in Behcet's syndrome
during breastfeeding
in diabetes mellitus
drug interactions of
in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
in inflammatory bowel disease
,
in lichen planus
in membranous nephropathy
in minimal change disease
in myasthenia gravis
nephrotoxicity of
in psoriasis
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
===PAGE:3805===
St. John's wort interaction with
in transplantation
tremors and
Cyclothymic disorder
1552-1553
Cyclothymic personality disorder
Cyfluthrin poisoning
Cylindroma (papillary cystadenoma lymphomatosum)
Cylindruria
Cypermethrin poisoning
Cyproheptadine
,
in elderly
neuroleptic malignant syndrome and
in polycythemia vera
Cyproterone acetate
Cyst(s)
acne
,
adnexal
,
adrenal
Baker's
,
Bartholin's gland
2532-2533
bone
aneurysmal
breast
choledochal
corpus luteum
,
dermoid
,
epidermal
,
follicular
ganglion
hepatic
,
hydatid
,
,
1362-1363
,
inclusion
keratinous
leptomeningeal
lymphoepithelial
mucous retention
ovarian
,
,
2514-2515
functional
,
2533-2534
pregnancy and
pericardial
pilar
popliteal
renal
2381-2387
,
2382-2383
sebaceous
,
Skene's duct
2535-2536
thyroglossal duct
Tornwaldt's
vulvar
Cystadenocarcinoma, pancreatic
Cystadenoma, ovarian
Cystathionine
β
-synthase deficiency
,
Cystathioninuria
Cystatin C
Cystectomy
Cysteine
Cystic duct
gallstone obstruction of
273-275
===PAGE:3806===
Cysticercosis
,
1364-1365
,
CNS
Cystic fibrosis
,
,
,
2881-2886
adrenergic drug resistance in
air travel and
aspergillosis in
1887-1888
bronchiectasis in
,
end-of-life care in
meconium ileus in
prenatal testing for
protussives in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection in
,
vitamin E deficiency and
44-45
Cystic hygroma
Cystic medial necrosis
Cystine
urinary
,
,
Cystinosis
Cystinuria
Cystitis
,
(
see also
Urinary tract, infection of)
Candida

in children
dysuria and
interstitial
2364-2365
Cystocele
,
,
2529-2531
,
examination for
Cystography
in children
Cystoisosporiasis
,
,
Cystometrography
,
Cystometry
Cystoplasty
Cystosarcoma phyllodes
Cystoscopy
,
Cystourethrocele
Cystourethrography
,
in children
Cystourethroscopy
Cytapheresis
,
1044-1045
,
Cytarabine
,
Cytidine deaminase deficiency
Cytochrome P-450
diet and
drug metabolism and
,
,
3179-3180
echinacea interaction with
,
H
blocker interaction with
protease inhibitor interaction with
Cytokines
in heat illness
immune function of
,
,
,
in neutropenia
recombinant
,
therapeutic blockade of
,
,
Cytomegalovirus immune globulin
Cytomegalovirus infection
,
,
1416-1417
congenital
1416-1417
,
esophageal
===PAGE:3807===
fever and
hepatic
,
1416-1417
HIV infection and
infectious mononucleosis vs
in neonate
1416-1417
,
,
2811-2819
perinatal
retinal
,
HIV infection and
,
transfusion-transmitted
,
Cytoreduction
===PAGE:3808===
D
Dacarbazine
Daclizumab
,
Dacryocystitis
,
577-578
canaliculitis vs
chalazion vs
Dacryostenosis
,
Dalfopristin
,
Dalteparin
,
Danaparoid
Danazol
in angioedema
in breast pain
in endometriosis
,
in pregnancy
in uterine fibroids
Dancer's fracture
Dandruff
Dandy fever
1431-1433
Dandy-Walker malformation
Dantrolene, in tetanus
Dapsone
in dermatitis herpetiformis
in leprosy
in
Pneumocystis
pneumonia
Daptomycin
,
,
1207-1208
Darier's disease
Darier's sign
,
Darifenacin
Darkfield microscopy
Darunavir
in children
Daunorubicin
Dawn phenomenon
Day care, for elderly patient
3116-3117
Daytop Village
DDAVP (
see
Desmopressin acetate)
DDD (2-dichlorethane) poisoning
D-Dimer test
,
,
,
,
reference values for
DDT (chlorophenothane) poisoning
Deafness (
see
Hearing, loss of)
1-Deamino-8-arginine vasopressin (
see
Desmopressin acetate)
Death (
see also
Dying patient)
after cardiopulmonary resuscitation
of child
2755-2756
child's experience of
during foreign travel
of infant
sudden
in athlete
2236-2237
,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
,
of infant (SIDS)
,
2939-2940
,
Death and dying
3480-3487
(
see also
End-of-life care)
Debridement, wound
===PAGE:3809===
Decay accelerating factor, deficiency of
Decerebrate posturing
Decibels (dB)
Decompression sickness
,
,
3287-3288
Decongestants
,
,
in elderly
in sinus barotrauma
Decorticate posturing
Decubitus ulcers
736-742
,
,
,
in dying patient
Deep brain stimulation
Deep venous thrombosis
2224-2231
,
,
,
air travel and
cellulitis vs
edema and
fever in
hormone replacement therapy and
,
mechanical ventilation and
oral contraceptives and
postoperative
pregnancy and
,
prophylaxis against
1920-1922
,
,
,
2230-2231
pulmonary embolism and
,
risk for
,
,
Deer fly bites
Deer fly fever
1264-1266
,
DEET
Defecation
(
see also
Constipation; Diarrhea)
in children
difficulty in
in infant
irritable bowel syndrome and
postpartum
training for
Defenses (mental)
,
Deferasirox
Deferoxamine
in iron poisoning
,
Defibrillation
,
,
in arrhythmias
in children
,
,
Defibrillator (implantable)
,
,
,
Defibrination syndrome (disseminated intravascular coagulation)
976-977
Degenerative joint disease (
see
Osteoarthritis)
Dehydration
822-823
,
(
see also
Hypernatremia)
air travel and
in cholera
diarrhea and
in dying patient
gastroenteritis and
heat illness and
in infants and children
2806-2809
,
,
,
,
in neonates
,
2797-2798
oral rehydration for
2809-2810
preoperative
total parenteral nutrition and
Dehydroepiandrosterone
,
3426-3427
===PAGE:3810===
aging-related changes in
puberty-related changes in, in males
reference values for
Dejerine-Sottas disease
Delavirdine
in children
Delayed hypersensitivity (
see
Hypersensitivity reactions, type IV)
Delayed hypersensitivity index
Delayed sexual maturation
,
2894-2895
constitutional
Delayed sleep phase syndrome
Delhi boil
Delirium
1669-1673
,
in critical care patient
2253-2255
,
dementia vs
,
in dying patient
physical disorders and
postoperative
Delirium tremens
,
Delivery (
see
Labor and delivery)
Delta gap
,
Deltoid, exercises for
Deltoid ligament sprain
Delusional disorder
1557-1558
Delusional parasitosis
710-711
Delusions
dementia and
Lewy body dementia and
physical disorders and
in schizophrenia
Demecarium
Demeclocycline
Dementia
1673-1684
,
Alzheimer's
1677-1680
,
,
,
anticholinergic effects in
behavior disorders in
1684-1686
Binswanger's
caregiver in
,
delirium vs
,
,
depression and
,
,
drug interactions with
environment and
,
frontal lobe lesions and
frontotemporal
1683-1684
ginkgo and
HIV-associated
,
1682-1683
hormone replacement therapy and
,
Huntington's disease and
hypothyroidism and
Lewy body
,
1681-1682
multi-infarct
,
nutrition in
25-26
pain assessment in
Parkinson's disease and
pellagra and
physical disorders and
Pick's disease
1683-1684
===PAGE:3811===
progressive supranuclear palsy and
reversible
screening for
semantic
urinary incontinence and
vascular
,
1680-1681
Dementia paralytica
Demeton poisoning
Demoralization
De Morsier syndrome
Demulcents
Demyelinating diseases
1779-1783
,
,
,
,
of corpus callosum (Marchiafava-Bignami disease)
1523-1524
Demyelination
Dendritic cells
,
Dengue fever
,
,
1431-1433
Dengue shock syndrome
,
1432-1433
Denileukin diftitox
,
Dental (oral) appliances
seizures and
in sleep apnea
Dental examination
497-503
in children
Dental implant
Dental procedures (
see also
Teeth)
in cancer patient
in cardiovascular disorders
complications of
525-526
in compromised host
emergency
524-529
endocarditis prophylaxis for
,
in endocrine disorders
endodontic
522-523
in hematologic disorders
in neurologic disorders
submandibular space infection and
470-471
Dentinogenesis imperfecta
Dentures
,
Deny-Drash syndrome
Deoxyazacytidine
11-Deoxycortisol
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
laboratory copying of
mitochondrial abnormalities of
variations in
viral transfection and
Dependency (psychologic)
drug
1507-1534
(
see also
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
in somatization disorder
Dependent personality disorder
Depersonalization disorder
1502-1503
Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate
,
2588-2589
L-Deprenyl (
see
Selegiline)
Depression
1538-1548
,
1540-1541
(
see also
Bipolar disorders)
amphetamine withdrawal and
anxiety and
,
atypical
===PAGE:3812===
bipolar
1548-1552
cancer and
catatonic
in children and adolescents
,
3055-3057
,
chronic pain and
dementia and
,
dementia vs
,
drug interactions with
drug-related
drugs for
,
(
see also
Antidepressants)
in dying patient
3486-3487
in elderly
,
,
erectile dysfunction and
hospitalization for
major (unipolar)
manifestations of
1539-1542
melancholic
myocardial infarction and
,
neurotransmitters in
oral contraceptives and
physical disorders and
,
,
1540-1541
,
postpartum
,
,
2689-2690
psychotic manifestations in
,
,
1558-1559
refractory
sleep disorders and
after spinal injury
St. John's wort and
suicide and
,
,
vitamin B
deficiency and
Depressive personality disorder
De Quervain's syndrome
De Quervain's thyroiditis
788-789
Derealization
Dermatitis
663-672
(
see also
Skin)
atopic
,
663-666
,
,
food allergy vs
cancer-related
cercarial
contact
,
,
666-668
,
penile
corticosteroid-induced
discoid
670-671
drug-induced
,
666-668
,
,
,
,
684-686
,
dyshidrotic
of ear
eosinophilia in
essential fatty acid deficiency and
exfoliative
,
hand and foot
668-669
,
immunodeficiency with
mite-related
nummular
,
670-671
onchocercal
patch testing in
perioral
,
photoallergic
,
(
see also
Photosensitivity)
phototoxic
,
,
===PAGE:3813===
psoriasiform
pustular, contagious
schistosome
scratch
669-670
seborrheic
,
riboflavin deficiency and
stasis
671-672
,
syphilitic
verrucous
1334-1335
zinc malabsorption and
Dermatitis herpetiformis
657-658
celiac sprue and
Dermatofibroma
Dermatographism
Dermatoheliosis
Dermatologic disorders (
see
Dermatitis; Skin;
specific disorders
)
Dermatomes, sensory
,
Dermatomyositis
299-302
,
cancer-related
,
rheumatoid arthritis vs
Dermatophytid reaction
708-709
Dermatophytoses
,
704-705
,
705-709
Dermatoscope
Dermatosis, febrile neutrophilic
,
683-684
Dermatosis papulosa nigra
Dermoid cyst
,
Dermopathy, infiltrative
,
Desensitization
in allergy
in drug hypersensitivity
in drug-induced serum sickness
in seasonal rhinitis
Desipramine
,
in elderly
hyperpigmentation and
in pain
poisoning with
Desloratadine
Desmopressin
in hemophilia
in Von Willebrand's disease
Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP)
in central diabetes insipidus
in nocturnal enuresis
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia
,
,
1951-1952
Detergent worker's lung
Detrusor overactivity
,
,
Detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia
,
Detrusor underactivity
,
,
,
Development
2757-2760
,
2758-2759
disorders of
3035-3048
,
inborn errors of metabolism and
mental disorder vs
mental retardation and
Devic disease
,
Dexamethasone
in croup
===PAGE:3814===
in high-altitude cerebral edema
in meningitis
in meningococcal infection
in neurocysticercosis
in pain
in surfactant induction
in tuberculosis
in typhoid fever
Dexamethasone test
,
DEXA scan
,
Dexchlorpheniramine
in elderly
Dexmedetomidine
Dextroamphetamine
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
in elderly
poisoning with
Dextromethorphan
Dextropropoxyphene, in elderly
Dextrose
in hypoglycemia
in neonatal hypoglycemia
in neonatal seizures
in poisoning
in porphyria
DHEA (
see
Dehydroepiandrosterone)
Diabetes insipidus
central
,
772-775
,
,
dipsogenic
Hand-Schuller-Christian disease and
nephrogenic
,
,
,
2424-2425
Diabetes mellitus
866-883
,
in adolescents
atherosclerosis and
,
autoimmune
cardiomyopathy in
in children
chronic pancreatitis and
complications of
868-870
,
cutaneous manifestations of
dental procedures in
dermatologic disease in
driving and
drug interactions with
dyslipidemia in
,
fasting plasma glucose in
,
flexor tendon disorders in
foot care in
,
,
foot evaluation in
,
,
fructosamine monitoring in
gestational
,
,
(
see also
Diabetes mellitus, in pregnancy)
gingivitis in
glucose monitoring in
glucose tolerance test in
,
HbA
1c
in
,
,
HLA phenotype in
hospitalization for
===PAGE:3815===
hyaline arteriolosclerosis in
hyperglycemia in
,
,
,
hypernatremia in
,
hypertension and
,
hypoglycemia in
,
hypokalemia in
,
,
infection in
insulin for
,
ketoacidosis in
883-885
electrolyte loss and
hyperkalemia in
hypokalemia in
macrovascular disease in
microalbuminuria in
mucormycosis in
neonatal
nephropathy in
,
2401-2403
,
neurogenic arthropathy in
neuropathy in
,
,
nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome in
885-886
ophthalmologic disease in
pneumonia with
in pregnancy
,
2638-2642
,
,
,
(
see also
Diabetes mellitus, gestational)
large infants and
prevention of
,
,
radiculopathy in
retinopathy in
615-616
,
,
rheumatologic disease in
risk factors for
screening for
surgery and
,
treatment of
871-881
adjunctive
diet in
in elderly
,
,
,
exercise in
insulin in
,
oral antihyperglycemics in
,
877-879
,
,
patient education in
type 1
,
,
type 2
,
undernutrition in
urine ketones in
Dialectical behavioral therapy
Dialysis
2447-2449
,
in acute renal failure
complications of
,
continuous
2449-2451
creatinine clearance and
cysts with
drug administration and
erythropoiesis during
in hypercalcemia
in hyperkalemia
in hypermagnesemia
intermittent
2447-2449
,
medical aspects of
2452-2453
===PAGE:3816===
β
-microglobulin amyloidosis in
in metabolic alkalosis
peritoneal
,
,
2451-2452
pleural effusion and
in poisoning
,
vascular access for
Diamond-Blackfan anemia
,
Diaper rash
Diaphragm
abscess of
paralysis of
spasms of (hiccups)
76-78
,
Diaphragm (contraceptive)
,
Diaphragmatic hernia
126-127
congenital
2977-2978
Diaphyseal dysplasia
DIAPPERS
Diarrhea
88-91
(
see also
Dysentery; Gastroenteritis)
acute
bloody
,
Campylobacter
in
1247-1248
cancer-related
carcinoid syndrome and
causes of
in children
2737-2741
,
2738-2739
chronic
Clostridium difficile
in
,
1292-1293
Clostridium perfringens
in
1294-1295
Crohn's disease and
Cryptosporidium
in
1369-1370
Cyclospora cayetanensis
in
Cystoisospora belli
in
decreased absorption time and
diet and
electrolyte loss and
Escherichia coli
in
1250-1251
in infant
,
2737-2741
,
2738-2739
irritable bowel syndrome and
magnesium hydroxide-related
,
malabsorption-related
,
MEN-1 syndrome and
osmotic
,
pellagra and
peptic ulcer surgery and
protein-energy undernutrition and
,
radiation-induced
secretory
,
short bowel syndrome and
sorbitol and
traveler's
150-151
,
,
tropical sprue and
tumor-related
typhoid fever and
ulcerative colitis and
Vibrio
in
1248-1250
vipoma and
Diascopy
===PAGE:3817===
Diastolic knock
Diastrophic dysplasia
Diathermy
,
gas-related hazard with
Diazepam
in alcohol withdrawal
in anxiety
drug interactions of
in elderly
,
,
,
metabolism of
poisoning with
in pregnancy
in tetanus
in vertigo
Diazinon poisoning
Diazoxide, in insulinoma
Dibenzodiazepine
Dibenzothiazepine
Dibenzoxazepines
DIC (
see
Disseminated intravascular coagulation)
Dichloralphenazone, in elderly
Dichlorethane (DDD) poisoning
Dichloroacetate
Dichlorvos poisoning
Diclofenac
Dicloxacillin
,
Dicofol poisoning
Dicumarol
during breastfeeding
poisoning with
,
Dicyclomine
in elderly
Didanosine
in children
Dieldrin poisoning
Dienochlor poisoning
Diet (
see also
Feeding; Food[s]; Malnutrition; Nutrition; Undernutrition)
in atherosclerosis
cancer risk and
colorectal cancer and
coronary artery disease and
in cystic fibrosis
in dermatitis herpetiformis
in diabetes mellitus
,
in diabetic nephropathy
in dialysis
diarrhea and
in dyslipidemia
in elderly
elimination
,
fad
fiber in
,
food groups and
,
gluten-free
in homocystinuria
in hypertension
in intestinal lymphangiectasia
===PAGE:3818===
iron in
in irritable bowel syndrome
lactose-free
in lactose intolerance
lung cancer and
macronutrients in
,
,
,
,
micronutrients in
after myocardial infarction
nutritional pyramid for
nutritional requirements for
,
,
,
in phenylketonuria
in porphyria
in portal-systemic encephalopathy
in pregnancy
,
in protein-energy undernutrition
in renal failure
acute
chronic
in rheumatoid arthritis
in secondary immunodeficiency
therapeutic
,
in ulcerative colitis
in urea cycle disorders
vegetarian
in vitamin A deficiency
in weight loss
Dietary supplements
3421-3432
drug interactions with
3422-3424
in elderly
Diethylcarbamazine
,
Diethylene glycol poisoning
Diethylstilbestrol, cancer and
,
Diethyltoluamide (DEET)
Dieulafoy's lesion
Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndrome,
1989-1990
Diffuse axonal injury
,
Diffuse esophageal spasm
124-125
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
Diffuse mesangial sclerosis
Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases
1943-1964
,
Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide
,
,
Diflunisal
DiGeorge syndrome
,
,
,
1103-1104
,
,
Digital flexor tenosynovitis
Digital subtraction angiography
,
Digital tendinitis
Digitoxin
antidote for
Digoxin
antibiotic interaction with
antidote for
in arrhythmias
calcium gluconate interaction with
in children
in cor pulmonale
dietary supplement interactions with
3423-3424
drug interactions of
===PAGE:3819===
in elderly
,
,
,
in heart failure
toxicity of
Digoxin-specific Fab fragments
Dihydrocarostyril
Dihydroergotamine
,
Dihydroindolones
Dihydrotachysterol
Dihydrotestosterone
Dihydroxyacetone-3
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25(OH)
D)
(
see also
Vitamin D)
blood levels of
receptor for
resistance to
L-Dihydroxyphenylserine
Dilan poisoning
Dilation and curettage (D & C)
Dilation and evacuation (D & E)
Diloxanide furoate
Diltiazem
in arrhythmias
in diabetic nephropathy
drug interactions of
in elderly
,
,
in hypertension
poisoning with
Dimenhydrinate
,
Dimercaprol
in copper toxicity
in lead poisoning
Dimethoate poisoning
Dimethyl sulfoxide
Dinitro-
-cresol poisoning
Dinitrobenzene poisoning
Dinoprostone
Dinoprost tromethamine
Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors
Dipetalonema perstans
infection
Diphenhydramine
in dying patient
in elderly
,
in motion sickness
in Parkinson's disease
in pruritus
topical
Diphenoxylate
,
,
in children
poisoning with
Diphenylbutylpiperidines
Diphenylhydantoin (
see
Phenytoin)
2,3-Diphosphoglycerate deficiency
Diphosphonates (
see
Bisphosphonates)
Diphtheria
,
,
1239-1241
antitoxin for
,
vaccine against
,
,
,
Diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine
,
,
,
,
2722-2723
===PAGE:3820===
Diphtheria-tetanus vaccine
1173-1176
,
,
,
Diphyllobothriasis
1361-1362
Dipivefrin
Diplopia
550-553
,
-
,
Dipylidium caninum
infection
Dipyridamole
in elderly
,
stress test with
in stroke prevention
Diquat poisoning
Direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test
Direct thrombin inhibitors
Dirithromycin
,
1212-1215
,
,
Dirofilariasis
,
Disaccharidase deficiencies
157-158
Discharge planning
Disclosure
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs
,
,
Disk, herniation (rupture, prolapse) of
1796-1797
Disk diffusion test
Diskectomy
Dislocation, joint
,
,
3213-3215
,
Disomy
Disopyramide
in elderly
,
Dissection, aortic
,
2212-2215
,
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
976-977
acute myelocytic leukemia and
infection and
Dissociative amnesia
1503-1504
Dissociative disorders
1502-1507
Dissociative fugue
1504-1505
Dissociative identity disorder
1505-1507
Distention, abdominal
,
Distichiasis
Distributive shock
,
,
Disulfiram
Disulfoton poisoning
Diuresis, alkaline, in poisoning
,
Diuresis renography
Diuretics (
see also specific drugs, drug classes, and diseases
)
in edema
in elderly
,
,
,
in heart failure
hypernatremia and
in hypertension
,
,
,
,
hypokalemia and
,
hyponatremia and
hypovolemic hyponatremia with
intracranial pressure and
licorice interactions with
metabolic alkalosis and
poisoning with
polyuria and
in pregnancy
,
renal failure and
===PAGE:3821===
Divalproex
,
in seizures
Diverticulitis
,
177-178
,
abscess in
Meckel's
Diverticulosis
176-177
Diverticulum
bladder
bleeding from
duodenal
esophageal
inflammation of (
see
Diverticulitis)
jejunal
Meckel's
,
178-179
urethral
2458-2459
,
Zenker's
Diving
contraindications to
,
,
injury with
3282-3291
,
,
Diving reflex
,
Dix-Hallpike maneuver
Dizziness (
see
Vertigo)
DNA (
see
Deoxyribonucleic acid)
DNR (do-not-resuscitate) order
,
Dobrava virus infection
1433-1434
Dobutamine
in cardiogenic shock
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
in shock
,
stress test with
Docetaxel
Docosahexaenoic acid
Docusate sodium
,
Dofetilide
Dolasetron
Doll's eye maneuver
Domeboro's solution
Domestic violence
Donath-Landsteiner syndrome
Donepezil
,
,
Do-not-resuscitate (DNR) order
,
Donovanosis
Donovan's solution, poisoning with
L-Dopa (
see
Levodopa)
Dopamine
,
in cardiogenic shock
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
drug dependence and
in elderly
MAOI interaction with
pheochromocytoma secretion of
in septic shock
in shock
,
Dopamine-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
,
Doppler echocardiography
(
see also
Echocardiography)
Doppler ultrasonography
of liver
===PAGE:3822===
in neurologic disorders
in obstructive uropathy
in peripheral arterial disease
in renovascular hypertension
Doripenem
Dornase alfa
Dorzolamide
Double-bubble sign
Double vision
550-553
,
Douglas' cul-de-sac, abscess of
Dowager's hump
(
see also
Kyphosis)
Down syndrome
2998-3001
Alzheimer's disease in
complications of
Eisenmenger's syndrome in
prenatal diagnosis of
,
selenium supplements in
teeth in
Doxazosin
in elderly
in hypertension
,
in incontinence
Doxepin
in atopic dermatitis
in depression
in elderly
poisoning with
in pruritus
,
in sleep disorders
Doxorubicin
during breastfeeding
Doxycycline
,
1222-1223
,
in acne
,
in anthrax infection
in deer tick bite prophylaxis
in Lyme disease
in malaria
1384-1385
,
,
in malaria prevention
in perioral dermatitis
in reactive arthritis
Doxylamine, in pregnancy
Dracunculiasis
1344-1345
Drainage
abscess
postural
Dressings
for burns
Jones
for pressure ulcers
,
Dressler's syndrome
,
,
,
,
Driving
,
3150-3155
,
Dronabinol
,
in anorexia
Drop-arm test
Dropfoot
Drospirenone
Drotrecogin alfa
===PAGE:3823===
Drowning
3279-3282
Drug dependence (abuse, addiction, habituation)
1507-1534
benign transient amnesia and
breastfeeding and
in children and adolescents
,
depression and
,
development of
in elderly
neonatal withdrawal and
2799-2800
pregnancy and
,
2799-2800
psychosis and
schizophrenia and
screening for
1510-1511
seizures and
surgery and
testing for
1510-1511
undernutrition and
Drugs
3165-3171
absorption of
3172-3175
,
in children
rate of
,
,
abuse of
(
see also
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
active transport of
addiction to
(
see also
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
adherence to
,
in children
,
in elderly
,
administration of
oral
parenteral
adverse reactions to
3184-3185
,
in children
,
in elderly
3092-3098
,
,
,
allergy to
1122-1124
,
antidotes for
apparent volume of distribution of
,
area under concentration curve for
,
bezoars with
138-139
bioavailability of
,
3175-3176
,
low
bioequivalence of
blood-brain barrier and
body packing and
1511-1512
breastfeeding and
2706-2707
,
carcinogenicity of
chemical equivalence of
chemical interactions of
in children
2760-2764
,
,
,
clearance of
,
(
see also
Drugs, excretion of)
conjugation of
controlled
,
controlled-release forms of
3174-3175
cutaneous reactions to
684-686
,
684-686
,
1122-1124
dermatitis and
,
666-668
,
erythema multiforme and
,
686-687
hyperpigmentation and
,
ichthyosis and
===PAGE:3824===
lichen planus and
,
photosensitivity and
,
,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and
689-691
toxic epidermal necrolysis and
689-691
,
cytochrome P-450 enzyme interaction with
,
3179-3180
delirium and
dementia and
,
dental discoloration with
depression and
,
desensitization to
development of
dietary supplement interactions with
3422-3424
diffusion of
disease interactions with
,
,
dissolution rate of
distribution of
,
3176-3177
in children
,
in elderly
dose-response relationships of
3183-3184
,
dosing for, in children
driving and
in elderly
3090-3104
,
,
adherence in
drug-disease interactions in
3096-3097
drug history in
3076-3078
excretion in
3090-3091
,
,
exercise and
funding for
3160-3161
,
high-risk drugs in
3100-3102
metabolism in
,
,
pharmacokinetics in
3090-3091
,
,
elimination of (
see
Drugs, excretion of)
elimination rate constant of
equilibrium state of
errors in
3166-3167
excretion of
,
3178-3181
biliary
bioavailability and
in children
in elderly
,
hepatic
renal
,
,
,
,
falls and
gastroenteritis and
glucuronidation of
gynecomastia and
half-life of
,
,
,
heatstroke-like syndrome with
hemolysis and
hepatic metabolism of (
see
Drugs, metabolism of)
hepatotoxicity of
233-234
,
hypersensitivity reactions to
1122-1124
,
anaphylaxis and
1120-1121
idiosyncratic reactions to
,
immunodeficiency with
inhalational forms of, in children
interactions of
3167-3168
,
,
3179-3180
(
see also specific drugs
)
===PAGE:3825===
antagonistic
chemical
in elderly
3092-3098
receptor-related
malignant hyperthermia with
3266-3268
maximum (peak) concentration of
,
MedWatch for
membrane transport of
,
metabolism of
,
,
,
3177-3178
,
3179-3180
biologic variation in
in children
,
conjugation in
cytochrome P-450 and
,
3179-3180
in elderly
,
,
,
,
glucuronidation in
hepatic
232-233
liver disease and
232-233
rate of
,
,
nail discoloration and
nephrotoxicity of
2412-2414
,
,
,
,
nonadherence to
,
in children
2763-2764
,
in elderly
,
nutrient interactions with
7-9
,
,
,
oral administration of
oral contraceptive interactions with
ototoxicity of
,
,
443-444
,
outdated
parenteral administration of
peak time of
,
perioperative
pharmacodynamics of
3181-3184
,
in elderly
3091-3092
,
pharmacogenetics of
3168-3169
,
,
pharmacokinetics of
3172-3181
,
,
in children
2761-2763
,
in elderly
3090-3091
,
genetic factors in
3168-3169
,
,
pharmacologic profile of
,
pH effects on
,
physical dependence on
,
(
see also
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
pinocytosis of
p
K
a
of
placebos and
3169-3171
plasma concentration of
,
porphyria and
,
810-813
during pregnancy
2625-2627
,
,
,
,
2656-2659
prescriptions for
3166-3167
protein binding of
in elderly
provocation testing of
psychologic dependence on
(
see also
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
pulmonary toxicity of
1952-1953
,
receptor affinity of
receptor interactions with
3181-3183
,
recreational use of
renal excretion of (
see
Drugs, excretion of)
===PAGE:3826===
risk-benefit analysis of
side effects of (
see
Drugs, adverse reactions to)
skin testing of
storage of
syncope and
teratogenicity of
2625-2627
,
,
,
,
,
therapeutic equivalence of
therapeutic index of
,
thrombocytopenia and
thyroxine levels and
,
tissue accumulation of
tolerance to
topical
645-649
,
dermatitis with
toxicity of
toxidromes with
trade names for
-
transdermal forms of
,
transrectal forms of
volume of distribution of
,
withdrawal from
,
insomnia and
,
Drusen
,
Dry eyes
592-593
Drying agents
Dry skin
,
661-662
Dry socket
DTH (
see
Hypersensitivity reactions, type IV)
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)
,
Duane's syndrome
Dubin-Johnson syndrome
Duchenne dystrophy
Duck bill deformity
Ductus arteriosus, patent
,
2955-2956
,
Duloxetine
,
in stress incontinence
,
Dumdum fever
Dumping syndrome
Duncan's syndrome
,
,
Duodenum
atresia of
diverticular disease of
gastrinoma of
200-201
obstruction of
,
congenital
perforation of
stenosis of
ulcers of
133-136
(
see also
Peptic ulcer disease)
Dupuytren's contracture
,
387-388
Durable power of attorney for health care
,
Durant's maneuver
Duroziez's murmur
Dusts, pulmonary disease with
,
1971-1984
Dutasteride
DVT (
see
Deep venous thrombosis)
Dwarfism (
see also
Short stature)
achondroplastic
===PAGE:3827===
osteochondrodysplastic
,
pituitary
,
767-768
Dwarf tapeworm infection
Dyclonine
Dying patient
3480-3487
(
see also
End-of-life care)
advance directives for
3471-3472
anorexia in
communication with
confusion in
constipation in
depression in
3486-3487
dyspnea in
3484-3485
financial concerns of
hospice care for
legal and ethical concerns of
nausea and vomiting in
3485-3486
nutrition for
25-26
pain control in
pediatric
2755-2756
pressure ulcers in
stress in
symptom control in
3483-3487
Dysarthria
,
Dysbetalipoproteinemia
,
Dyscalculia
Dyschezia
Dysdiadochokinesia
,
Dysentery (
see also
Diarrhea; Gastroenteritis)
amebic
bacillary
1263-1264
Dysesthesias
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding
2510-2513
Dysgeusia
Dysgraphia
Dyshidrotic dermatitis
Dyskeratosis
Dyskinesia
1759-1779
in cerebral palsy syndromes
Dyslexia
,
3042-3044
Dyslipidemia
890-904
,
in children
classification of
,
diabetic
,
primary
,
892-895
screening for, in elderly
secondary
,
,
treatment of
896-904
,
,
,
,
,
901-902
Dysmaturity
2781-2782
Dysmenorrhea
,
2513-2514
Dysmetria
cerebellar
ocular
Dysnomia
Dysosmia
Dyspareunia
2527-2529
Dyspepsia
74-76
,
,
Dysphagia
120-122
,
,
===PAGE:3828===
achalasia and
diffuse esophageal spasm and
esophageal cancer and
,
lower esophageal ring and
sideropenic
122-123
in systemic sclerosis
vagus nerve lesions and
Dysphagia lusoria
Dysphonia
spasmodic
vagus nerve lesions and
Dysplasia
craniotubular
fibromuscular
hip
,
,
,
renal
skeletal
,
Dyspnea
1832-1836
,
1832-1834
(
see also
Respiration; Tachypnea)
angina pectoris vs
anxiety-related
1836-1837
COPD and
in dying patient
3484-3485
heart failure and
,
postoperative
pulmonary hypertension and
ventilatory failure and
Dysproteinemias
,
1025-1032
,
Dysraphism
Dysreflexia, autonomic
Dysrhythmias (
see
Arrhythmias)
Dyssynergia (dyschezia)
detrusor-sphincter
,
Dysthymia
Dystocia
,
2678-2680
Dystonia
382-383
,
1760-1762
,
drug-induced
,
,
Dystonia musculorum deformans
Dystrophin
Dystrophy
muscular
,
,
3006-3008
myotonic
Dysuria
,
2318-2320
,
Dysuria-pyuria syndrome
===PAGE:3829===
E
E. coli
infection (
see Escherichia coli
infection)
Eagle-Barrett syndrome
Ear (
see also
Hearing)
aging-related changes in
,
air travel-related changes in
barotrauma of
3284-3285
bleeding from
caloric testing of
,
cauliflower
drainage from
417-419
,
418-419
drug toxicity to
,
,
443-444
,
,
1199-1201
,
ecchymosis of
external
congenital malformations of
disorders of
454-456
infection of
454-455
(
see also
Otitis externa)
trauma to
3231-3232
foreign body in
,
,
,
455-456
infection of
external ear
hearing loss and
inner ear
444-445
,
middle ear
,
,
447-448
(
see also
Otitis media)
inner
in Cogan's syndrome
591-592
disorders of
441-446
,
hearing loss and
432-433
irrigation of
,
,
low-set
middle
disorders of
447-453
,
,
,
(
see also
Tympanic membrane)
hearing loss and
of neonate
,
,
noise in
419-423
,
422-423
pain in
414-417
,
referred pain to
trauma to
,
3231-3232
tumors of
,
,
in Wegener's granulomatosis
Earache
414-417
,
Eardrum (
see
Tympanic membrane)
Earwax
,
,
455-456
Eastern equine encephalitis
,
,
Eating disorders
,
1535-1538
in adolescent
in children
Eaton-Lambert syndrome
,
,
Ebola virus infection
,
,
terrorist use of
Ebstein's anomaly
EBV (
see
Epstein-Barr virus)
Ecchymoses
costovertebral angle
,
in neonate
===PAGE:3830===
periorbital
postauricular
,
Eccrine glands
Echinacea
,
Echinocandins
Echinococcosis
,
,
,
1362-1363
,
Echocardiography
2053-2054
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
in endocarditis
in heart failure
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
in mitral valve stenosis
in pulmonary embolism
stress testing with
,
transesophageal (
see
Transesophageal echocardiography)
Echoencephalography
Echolalia
,
Echo planar imaging
Echopraxia
Echothiophate
Echovirus infection
,
,
Eclampsia
2670-2672
ECMO (
see
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation)
Econazole
Economic analyses
3398-3402
,
,
Ecstasy (methylenedioxymethamphetamine)
1529-1530
Ectasias
annuloaortic
vascular
Ecthyma
contagious
Ecthyma gangrenosum
Ectodermal dysplasia
Ectopia lentis
Ectopic atrial rhythm
Ectopic pregnancy
,
,
,
2663-2665
Ectopic supraventricular rhythms
2162-2163
,
,
Ectropion
Eculizumab
Eczema
663-672
(
see also
Dermatitis)
of ear
housewives'
hyperkeratotic
Eczema herpeticum
,
,
Eczema vaccinatum
Edema
2031-2035
,
2032-2033
angioneurotic (
see
Angioedema)
cerebral (
see
Cerebral edema)
conjunctival
corneal
587-588
cutaneous (
see
Urticaria)
electrical injury and
eyelid
553-556
,
554-555
foot and leg
,
heart failure and
,
malabsorption and
===PAGE:3831===
nephrotic syndrome and
optic disk
622-623
preeclampsia and
during pregnancy
2618-2620
,
,
,
pulmonary
2131-2132
(
see also
Pulmonary edema)
diving and
3286-3287
high-altitude
Reinke's
scleral
Edetate Ca disodium
,
Edrophonium test
Edwards' syndrome
Efalizumab
Efavirenz
in children
Effusion
pericardial
,
,
,
,
pleural
1995-2001
,
,
1996-1997
,
(
see also
Pleural effusion)
synovial, examination of
,
,
(
see also
Synovial fluid)
Eflornithine
EGFR
gene
Egg allergy
Egophony
Egyptian ophthalmia
583-584
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
2907-2908
cutis laxa vs
thoracic aortic aneurysm and
Ehrlichiosis
,
,
Lyme disease vs
EIA (enzyme immunoassay)
Eicosapentaenoic acid
,
Eighth nerve (
see
Cranial nerves,
th [auditory, vestibulocochlear])
Eisenmenger's reaction
Eisenmenger's syndrome
,
,
,
2966-2967
Ejaculation
Ejection fraction
Elastic pressure, in mechanical ventilation
,
Elastic stockings
in chronic venous insufficiency
in deep venous thrombosis prevention
in orthostatic hypotension
in pulmonary embolism prevention
,
Elbow
arthrocentesis of
bursitis of
dislocation of
evaluation of
golfer's
3301-3302
miner's
nursemaid's
radial nerve compression at
range of motion of
tennis
3300-3301
ulnar nerve compression at
Elderly patient (
see also
Aging; Geriatric medicine)
abuse in
3146-3150
,
,
,
adverse drug reactions in
===PAGE:3832===
analgesia in
,
,
,
,
anticholinergic drugs in
,
3096-3097
,
common disorders in
driving and
,
3150-3155
,
drugs in
3090-3104
,
,
,
3100-3102
(
see also
Drugs, in elderly)
evaluation of
3072-3088
,
3076-3078
,
falls in
3134-3140
,
,
,
family caregiving in
3140-3141
fever in
frailty prevention in
3110-3111
,
functional status of
,
,
,
gait disorders in
3128-3134
,
,
health care delivery and
3114-3127
health care funding for
3155-3164
,
hearing loss in
438-439
hospitalization and
3117-3122
,
iatrogenic complications in
intimacy in
3143-3144
life transitions in
3142-3143
muscle weakness in
preventive care for
3104-3113
,
,
,
,
,
quality of life and
3113-3114
screening tests in,
3105-3107
sexual activity in
3143-3144
social issues in
3112-3113
,
3140-3150
spirituality in
3144-3146
therapeutic objectives in
3113-3114
tuberculosis and
unusual presentations in
3088-3089
Electrical current
Electrical field strength
Electrical field therapy
Electrical impedance testing
Electrical injury
,
3248-3250
Electrical stimulation
in incontinence
,
transcutaneous
in complex regional pain syndrome
in rehabilitation
,
Electrocardiogram
,
2054-2058
,
,
,
(
see also specific diseases
)
in acute coronary syndromes
,
,
,
,
in angina pectoris
components of
2054-2056
,
esophageal leads in
in malaria treatment
precordial leads in
in pulmonary disease
stress testing with
in syncope evaluation
Electrocochleography
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
Electrodiagnostic testing
in mononeuropathy
in polyneuropathy
1800-1801
in radicolopathy
in thoracic outlet syndromes
Electroencephalogram
===PAGE:3833===
in neonatal seizures
in neurologic disorders
in portal-systemic encephalopathy
in seizures
,
during sleep
,
in stupor and coma
Electrogastrography
Electrolarynx
Electrolytes (
see also
Bicarbonate; Chloride; Fluids; Potassium; Sodium; Water)
disorders of
820-854
Addison's disease and
,
aldosteronism and
burns and
in children
2806-2810
,
,
inborn errors of metabolism and
liver disease and
222-223
in neonates
2788-2800
total parenteral nutrition and
in renal disease
urinary
Electromyography
,
in botulism
in Guillain-Barre syndrome
in motor neuron disorders
in myasthenia gravis
perineal
in plexus disorders
in polyneuropathy
in spinal muscular atrophies
Electronystagmography
Electrophoresis
in multiple myeloma
in sickle cell disease
in splenomegaly
Electrophysiologic studies
in syncope
Electroretinography
Elephantiasis
Eletriptan
Elimination rate constant
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay)
for HIV infection
Elliptocytosis
940-941
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome
,
Eltrombopag
Embden-Meyerhof pathway
Embolectomy
Embolism (
see also
Thrombosis; Venous thrombosis)
abdominal
air
,
3285-3286
,
recompression therapy in
3289-3290
,
amniotic fluid
,
arterial gas (
see
Embolism, air)
bone marrow
cerebral
(
see also
Stroke)
endocarditis and
fat
===PAGE:3834===
foreign body
gas
mesenteric
,
paradoxical
in peripheral arterial occlusion
pulmonary
1908-1922
,
,
,
,
,
(
see also
Pulmonary embolism)
cough in
dyspnea in
nonthrombotic
risk factors for
renal
2432-2433
retinal
septic
tumor
Embolization, in gastrointestinal bleeding
Embryo
,
(
see also
Fetus)
Embryonal carcinoma
Emergency (
see specific emergency
)
Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy
Emesis (
see
Vomiting)
EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics)
,
Emmetropia
,
Emollients, in constipation
,
Emotional development
in adolescents
2752-2753
Emotional expression, assessment of
Emotional numbing
Emphysema
(
see also
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD])
interstitial, pulmonary
Empty can test
Empty sella syndrome
Empyema
pleural
subdural
1733-1734
tuberculosis and
Empyema necessitatis
Emtricitabine
in children
Enalapril
in elderly
,
Enalaprilat
Encephalitis
1726-1728
amebic
California
,
,
Eastern equine
,
,
Epstein-Barr virus
herpes simplex virus
,
,
in children
HIV infection and
immunization for
influenza and
Japanese
,
vaccine against
La Crosse
,
,
limbic
measles
meningitis vs
===PAGE:3835===
mumps vaccine and
Murray Valley
,
paraneoplastic
postvaccinial
Powassan
,
rabies
1732-1733
,
Rasmussen's
rubella
,
St. Louis
,
,
tick-borne
,
,
toxoplasmic
Venezuelan equine
,
,
Western equine
,
West Nile
,
,
Encephalitozoon intestinalis
infection
Encephalocele
Encephalomyelitis, disseminated
Encephalopathy
bilirubin
,
2793-2794
chickenpox and
HIV-related, dementia and
1682-1683
hypertensive
hypocalcemia and
infection and
lead
,
,
loiasis and
pellagra and
portal-systemic (hepatic)
,
220-222
,
,
,
posthypoxic
,
radiation-related
in Reye's syndrome
2937-2939
spongiform
1729-1731
Wernicke's
,
,
1522-1523
Enchondroma
Encopresis
2928-2929
End-expiratory pressure
,
Endocardial cushion defect
2953-2955
,
Endocarditis
infective
2193-2199
,
,
2197-2198
antibiotic resistance in
bacteremia and
Coxiella burnetii
in
Erysipelothrix
in
gentamicin in
,
HACEK organisms in
1252-1253
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
Kingella
in
meningitis vs
pneumococcal
pregnancy and
prophylactic antibiotics in
,
,
,
,
pseudomonal
staphylococcal
streptomycin in
,
vancomycin in
marantic
noninfective
2200-2201
===PAGE:3836===
rheumatic fever and
,
right-sided
,
fever of unknown origin and
Endocrine system
757-761
(
see also specific disorders, glands, and hormones
)
Endodermal sinus tumor (yolk sac tumor)
End-of-life care
3480-3487
(
see also
Dying patient)
in cancer
in COPD
in cystic fibrosis
in dementia
in esophageal cancer
in heart failure
in HIV infection
in lung cancer
in multiple myeloma
Endograft, in aneurysm repair
,
Endolymphatic hydrops
445-446
Endometrioma
Endometriosis
,
,
2538-2541
,
,
intrathoracic
vulvar
Endometritis, puerperal
2688-2689
Endometrium
ablation of
aspiration of
atypical adenomatous hyperplasia of
biopsy of
cancer of
2571-2573
,
estrogen replacement therapy and
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma and
cyclic changes in
2500-2501
,
hyperplasia of
infection of
,
2688-2689
Endomyocardium, biopsy of
,
Endomysium, antibody to
Endophthalmitis
,
acute vision loss and
candidal
Endorphins
,
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
,
in bile duct stones
in cholangiocarcinoma
in postcholecystectomy syndrome
Endoscopy
anoscopy
98-99
,
,
bronchoscopy
1862-1863
colonoscopy
95-96
esophageal rupture with
gastrointestinal
95-96
sigmoidoscopy
98-99
thoracoscopy
Endosteal hyperostosis
Endosulfan poisoning
Endothelin
Endotoxins
,
Endotracheal tube (
see
Intubation, endotracheal)
Endrin poisoning
===PAGE:3837===
Enema
barium
in Hirschsprung's disease
in intussusception
in constipation
,
small bowel
Energy (
see also
Nutrition; Undernutrition)
deficiency of
,
14-18
,
nutrient sources of
recommended dietary allowance for
requirements for
in adolescents
in children
,
resting expenditure of
total expenditure of
total parenteral nutrition and
Energy therapy
,
3419-3420
Enfuvirtide
in children
Enkephalins
,
Enoxaparin
in acute coronary syndromes
in coronary artery disease
in deep venous thrombosis
Entacapone
,
Entamebiasis
,
,
,
1367-1369
,
(
see also
Amebiasis)
Entecavir
,
Enteral tube nutrition
21-23
,
(
see also
Nutrition)
in mechanical ventilation
in protein-energy undernutrition
Enteric fever
(
see also
Typhoid fever)
Enteritis
eosinophilic
regional
,
169-172
sexually transmitted
Enteritis necroticans
Enterobacteriaceae infection
Enterobacter
infection
pneumonia
Enterobiasis
1349-1350
,
Enterocele
,
2529-2531
,
Enteroclysis
Enterococcal infection
antibiotic-resistant
,
endocardial
,
Enterocolitis
Hirschsprung's
2980-2981
necrotizing, neonatal
,
2803-2804
neutropenic
Enterocytozoon bieneusi
infection
Enterography
Enterokinase
Enteropathy
eosinophilic
gluten (celiac sprue)
,
158-159
immunodeficiency with
protein-losing
===PAGE:3838===
Enterovirus infection
,
1424-1428
,
Entropion
Entry inhibitors
,
in children
Enuresis
nocturnal
2923-2928
,
,
Environmental intolerance
3443-3444
Environmental pulmonary diseases
1971-1984
Enzyme(s)
bacterial
in bezoar treatment
in cancer therapy
cardiac
,
deficiency of
157-158
inborn errors of metabolism and
hepatic
,
,
drug metabolism and
,
,
,
3179-3180
lipid-processing
,
pancreatic
in chronic pancreatitis
in cystic fibrosis
in pancreatic cancer
Enzyme immunoassay (EIA)
in HIV infection
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
for HIV infection
Eosinophilia
987-993
,
988-989
,
,
in allergy
in ascariasis
in asthma
nonallergic rhinitis with
pulmonary, tropical
pulmonary infiltrates with
,
Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome
Eosinophilic enteritis
Eosinophilic fasciitis
297-298
Eosinophilic gastritis
Eosinophilic gastroenteropathy
Eosinophilic granuloma
,
,
1963-1964
(
see also
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis [granulomatosis])
Eosinophilic pneumonia
1954-1955
Eosinophils
,
defects in
pulmonary
1953-1955
,
urinary
,
Ependymoma
,
1817-1818
in children
Ephedra
Epiblepharon
Epicondylitis
lateral
3300-3301
medial
3301-3302
Epidermal cyst
,
vulvar
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Epidermophyton
infection
705-709
Epididymitis
,
2455-2456
===PAGE:3839===
chlamydial
1468-1470
gonococcal
1471-1474
Epididymo-orchitis
,
2455-2456
Epidural abscess, spinal
Epidural bolt
Epidural hematoma
1811-1812
,
,
,
,
Epiglottitis
,
475-477
,
,
Epilation
Epilepsia partialis continua
,
Epilepsy
1686-1702
,
,
,
(
see also
Seizures)
alcoholic
uncinate
Epinephrine
in anaphylaxis
in asthma
,
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
,
in croup
in dental anesthesia
in glaucoma
pheochromocytoma secretion of
,
reference values for
tremors and
urinary
Epiphora
566-570
Epiphysis, femoral, capital
aseptic necrosis of
slipped
Epiphysitis, calcaneal
,
Epiretinal membrane
Epirubicin
Episclera
Episcleritis
,
,
Episiotomy
Epispadias
Epistaxis
457-460
,
Epithelioid angiomatosis
,
Epitrochlear nodes
Eplerenone
in heart failure
in hypertension
Epley maneuver
,
Epoprostenol
Eprosartan
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection
,
,
1421-1423
Burkitt's lymphoma and
,
cancer and
,
fever and
hepatic inflammation in
HIV infection and
rubella vs
splenic rupture and
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome and
Epstein pearls
Eptifibatide
in myocardial infarction
Epulis
Epworth Sleepiness Scale
,
===PAGE:3840===
Equine encephalitis
Eastern
,
,
Venezuelan
,
Western
,
Erb's palsy
ERCP (
see
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography)
Erectile dysfunction
2345-2348
aortic branch occlusion and
drug-related
psychogenic
Ergocalciferol
,
(
see also
Vitamin D)
Ergotamine
during breastfeeding
feverfew interactions with
Ergot mesylates, in elderly
Ergots
poisoning with
porphyria and
Erlotinib
,
Erosion
Erotomania
Ertapenem
,
Eructation
,
Erysipelas
,
Erysipelothricosis
Erythema gyratum repens
Erythema infectiosum (fifth disease)
2840-2841
Erythema marginatum
,
Erythema migrans
,
Erythema multiforme
,
686-687
,
Erythema nodosum
,
drug-induced
sarcoidosis and
,
Erythema nodosum leprosum
,
Erythema toxicum
Erythrasma
,
Erythroblastopenia
Erythroblastosis fetalis
,
2665-2666
,
Erythrocytes (
see
Red blood cells)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
joint disease and
neonatal sepsis and
osteomyelitis and
polymyalgia rheumatica and
in rheumatic fever
Erythrocythemia, COPD and
Erythrocytosis
1000-1004
,
cancer-related
secondary
1003-1004
testosterone therapy and
Erythroderma
Erythrodysesthesia
Erythromelalgia
,
2216-2217
Erythromycin
,
1212-1215
,
,
in acne
,
at birth
,
drug interactions of
,
===PAGE:3841===
neonatal dosage of
in otitis media
in streptococcal pharyngitis
topical
Erythroplakia
,
Erythroplasia of Queyrat
,
Erythropoiesis
(
see also
Anemia)
Erythropoietin
in cancer therapy
in chronic renal failure
,
deficiency of
fetal
in multiple myeloma
in myelofibrosis
neonatal
in perinatal anemia
in polycythemia vera
recombinant
,
,
reference values for
Eschar
,
,
Escherichia coli
infection
enterohemorrhagic
,
gastrointestinal
,
,
,
1250-1251
intestine
meningeal
O157:H7 infection
1250-1251
pulmonary
urinary tract
Escitalopram
,
in children and adolescents
poisoning with
Eserine poisoning
Esfenvalerate poisoning
Esmolol
in aortic dissection
in arrhythmias
in hypertensive emergency
Esomeprazole
,
,
in gastrinoma
in gastroesophageal reflux disease
Esophageal Doppler monitor
Esophageal speech
Esophageal/tracheal double-lumen airway (Combitube)
Esophagectomy
Esophagitis
Candida

,
,
gastroesophageal reflux disease and
HIV infection and
Esophagoscopy
esophageal perforation with
Esophagus
119-128
achalasia of
123-124
aperistalsis of
123-124
atresia of
2975-2976
,
Barrett's
,
benign tumors of
burn injury to
3335-3336
===PAGE:3842===
cancer of
186-189
,
Candida
infection of
,
,
in Chagas disease
congenital vascular abnormality of
diverticula of
electrical impedance testing of
endoscopy of
95-96
foreign bodies in
gastric reflux into
125-126
infection of
inflammation of (
see
Esophagitis)
intubation of
laceration of
,
Mallory-Weiss tear of
,
manometry of
metastases to
motility disorders of
123-125
,
obstruction of
122-123
cancer-related
perforation of
pH of
resection of
ringlike narrowing of
rupture of
,
pleural effusion with
spasm of
124-125
squamous cell cancer of
186-189
,
in systemic sclerosis
varices of
103-104
,
web of
122-123
x-ray of
97-98
Esotropia
,
,
Espundia
Essential amino acids
,
,
Essential fatty acids
deficiency of
Essential hypertension (
see
Hypertension)
Essential trace minerals
(
see also
Trace minerals)
Estazolam
Estimated delivery date
Estradiol
during breastfeeding
in males
reference values for
in stress incontinence
Estriol
Estrogen
in acne
in elderly
in female sexual dysfunction
ginseng interactions with
in inflammatory vaginitis
liver disease and
for menopausal symptoms
,
migraine and
in oral contraceptives
in osteoporosis
===PAGE:3843===
at puberty
replacement of (
see
Hormone replacement therapy)
saw palmetto interactions with
in stress incontinence
in Turner's syndrome
Estrogen receptors
,
,
Eszopiclone
Etanercept
,
in Behcet's syndrome
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
in TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome
Ethacrynic acid
in elderly
ototoxicity of
Ethambutol
,
in pregnancy
Ethanol (
see also
Alcohol)
in ethylene glycol poisoning
in methanol poisoning
poisoning with
tremors and
vitamin interactions with
Ether poisoning
Ethical issues
3468-3473
dying patient and
in genetics
Ethionamide, in tuberculosis
Ethion poisoning
Ethmoidectomy
Ethmoid sinus
,
inflammation of
479-481
Ethosuximide
Ethyl biscoumacetate poisoning
Ethylene glycol poisoning
,
Etidronate disodium
,
Etodolac
Etomidate
,
Etoposide
Etravirine
in children
European blastomycosis
1329-1330
Eustachian tube
dysfunction of
obstruction of
,
Eutectic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA)
,
Euthyroid sick syndrome
,
Euvolemia
hypernatremia and
,
,
hyponatremia and
,
,
,
,
Event recorder
Everolimus
Evidence-based medicine
3384-3385
Evoked responses (potentials)
in multiple sclerosis
Ewing's tumor
,
Exanthem (
see
Rash)
===PAGE:3844===
Exanthem subitum
,
Excessive daytime sleepiness
,
,
1710-1713
Exchange transfusion
in hyperviscosity syndrome
in malaria
in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia
in neonatal sepsis
in perinatal anemia
Excoriation
Excretion, drug (
see
Drugs, excretion of)
Exemestane
,
Exenatide
,
Exercise
3292-3294
(
see also
Sports)
in Achilles tendon enthesopathy
aerobic
ambulation
angina pectoris and
,
asthma with
in atherosclerosis
athlete's heart syndrome and
2238-2239
,
balance
,
,
bronchospasm with
in children
coordination
in COPD
in diabetes mellitus
,
in elderly
,
,
,
3110-3111
,
3294-3295
in fall prevention
flexibility
in heart failure
heart rate during
,
heatstroke and
,
hydration for
injury prevention with
Kegel
,
metabolic requirements for
after myocardial infarction
,
,
in osteoarthritis
perineal
in peripheral arterial disease
after pregnancy
during pregnancy
prescription for
in pulmonary rehabilitation
range-of-motion
,
in rheumatoid arthritis
shoulder
in sickle cell heterozygotes
strength training
,
,
stretching
sudden death and
2236-2237
,
warming up for
in weight loss
wrist
,
Exercise stress testing
2063-2065
in acute coronary syndromes
athlete's heart syndrome and
===PAGE:3845===
contraindications to
in coronary artery disease
in pulmonary disease
,
1859-1860
in syncope
Exfoliatins
Exfoliative cheilitis
Exfoliative dermatitis
,
Exhibitionism
1571-1572
Exophthalmometry
Exophthalmos
560-561
,
,
,
Exotoxins
Exotropia
,
,
Expectorants
Exposure therapy
in obsessive-compulsive disorders
in panic disorder
in phobic disorders
in posttraumatic stress disorder
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
in persistent pulmonary hypertension of newborn
Extractable nuclear antigen, antibody to
Extraocular muscles, examination of
,
Eye(s)
(
see also
Vision
and specific parts of eye
)
aging-related changes in
,
,
in albinism
719-720
amblyopia of
2919-2920
anisometropia of
in ankylosing spondylitis
,
barotrauma to
in Behcet's syndrome
black
burns of
3235-3236
cancer of
cataracts of
606-607
congenital
conjunctival disorders of
579-587
(
see also
Conjunctiva; Conjunctivitis)
contact lenses for
571-573
contusion of
3237-3238
corneal disorders of
587-597
discharge from
,
dry
592-593
in Sjogren's syndrome
examination of
537-540
,
,
in infants and children
,
in neonate
in stupor and coma
,
exophthalmos of
560-561
,
floaters before
,
561-563
foreign bodies in
3236-3237
gaze palsies of
1749-1752
,
1750-1751
halos of
hemorrhage from
563-566
,
,
,
in hyperthyroidism
,
,
in hypertriglyceridemia
in impaired consciousness
infections of
bacterial
===PAGE:3846===
candidal
gonococcal
herpes simplex virus
589-590
,
,
,
herpes zoster virus
590-591
,
,
onchocercal
1347-1348
orbital
625-627
pseudomonal
intraocular pressure-related injury to
597-606
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
laceration of
3237-3238
lacrimal disorders of
566-570
,
,
,
575-579
lens opacity of
606-607
lid disorders of
575-579
(
see also
Eyelids)
microsporidiosis of
motility of
,
disorders of
1749-1752
,
1750-1751
neurologic disorders of
1745-1757
nystagmus of
,
,
,
electronystagmography in
multiple sclerosis and
optic nerve disorders of
619-624
,
(
see also
Cranial nerves,
nd [optic])
orbital disorders of
624-627
pain in
,
556-560
,
558-559
in premature infant
radiation effects on
red (pink)
563-566
,
564-565
refractive errors of
,
570-574
,
contact lenses for
571-573
surgery for
573-574
retinal disorders of
612-619
(
see also
Retina)
rosacea and
sarcoidosis of
Schirmer test of
scleral disorders of
scotomata of
,
silver nitrate in
,
,
slit-lamp examination of
strabismus of
,
2920-2922
,
stye in
576-577
sympathetic ophthalmia of
tearing of
566-570
,
,
toxoplasmosis of
trauma to
,
,
,
3235-3238
tularemia of
,
tumors of
,
uveal tract disorders of
608-612
visual field testing of
,
vitamin A deficiency and
,
,
in Wegener's granulomatosis
xerophthalmia of
Eyeball
protrusion of
560-561
,
trauma to
,
Eyelashes
infection of
576-577
lice infestation of
,
misalignment of
578-579
===PAGE:3847===
Eyelids
burns of
chalazion of
576-577
contusion of
edema of
553-556
,
554-555
,
eversion of
examination of
hordeolum of
576-577
infection of
625-627
inflammation of
575-576
inversion of
lacerations of
lilac color of
ptosis of
spasms of
tumors of
Ezetimibe
,
,
===PAGE:3848===
F
Fabry's disease
Face
aging-related changes in
barotrauma to
congenital anomalies of
2970-2972
,
numbness of
pain in
sensation in
skin tension lines of
trauma to
,
weakness in
Facial nerve (7th cranial nerve)
,
,
,
1755-1756
(
see also
Cranial nerves,
th [facial])
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy
Factitious disorder
,
1576-1577
Factitious fever
Factor (
see
Coagulation factors)
Factor B deficiency
Factor D deficiency
Factor H deficiency
Factor I deficiency
Fad diet
Fagan nomogram
,
,
Faget's sign
Failure to thrive
2931-2934
,
,
Fainting
2041-2048
,
,
(
see also
Syncope)
Fallopian tubes
abscess of
,
cancer of
dysfunction of
2596-2597
inflammation of
intrauterine device and
ligation of
pregnancy in
2663-2665
torsion of
tuberculosis of
Fallot, tetralogy of
2958-2959
,
Falls
drugs and
in elderly
3134-3140
,
,
,
3138-3139
screening for
exercise prevention of
,
hospitalization and
prevention of
,
3137-3140
Famciclovir
in chickenpox
in erythema multiforme
in herpes simplex virus infection
1419-1420
Familial (
see also
Genes; Genetic disorders)
Familial adenomatous polyposis
192-193
,
Familial dysautonomia
Familial HDL deficiency
Familial Hibernian fever
Familial hyperalphalipoproteinemia
Familial hypercholesterolemia
,
,
===PAGE:3849===
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
,
,
,
Familial Mediterranean fever
3026-3027
Familial periodic paralysis
,
3008-3009
Family caregiving
3140-3141
Family planning
2582-2591
,
,
,
Family relationships, childhood illness and
Famine fever
1272-1273
Famotidine
,
Famphur poisoning
Fanconi-Bickel syndrome
Fanconi's anemia
,
Fanconi syndrome
2422-2423
Farmer's lung
,
Farsightedness (hyperopia)
,
surgery for
573-574
Fascicular block
2173-2174
Fasciculations
endotracheal intubation and
Fasciitis
eosinophilic
297-298
necrotizing
700-701
,
,
Fascioliasis
,
Fasciolopsiasis
Fasciosis (fasciitis), plantar
,
400-401
Fat (
see also
Lipoproteins; Triglycerides)
body
age-related increase in
antiretroviral effects on
brown
in children
,
distribution of
excess (
see
Obesity)
measurement of
,
in metabolic syndrome
dietary
,
in atherosclerosis
digestion of
emulsion formulation of
malabsorption of, vitamin E deficiency and
44-45
fecal
,
(
see also
Steatorrhea)
Fatal insomnia
Fat embolism
Fatigue
,
chronic
3442-3443
,
sleep apnea and
Fatty acids
in breast milk
deficiency of
in diabetic ketoacidosis
essential
metabolic disorders of
3018-3019
omega-3
,
trans
Fatty liver
211-212
in alcoholic liver disease
of pregnancy
Fava bean poisoning
===PAGE:3850===
Fears
,
1498-1500
(
see also specific phobias
)
exaggerated (phobia)
hypochondriacal
1575-1576
Febrile neutrophilic dermatosis
,
683-684
Febrile seizures
,
,
2898-2899
Fecal occult blood test
,
,
Feces (
see also
Constipation; Diarrhea; Stool)
examination of
in parasitic infection
1338-1340
fat in
,
(
see also
Steatorrhea)
impaction of
,
,
in dying patient
incontinence of
in children
2928-2929
porphyrins in
Feeding (
see also
Diet; Food[s]; Malnutrition; Nutrition; Undernutrition)
infant
2703-2709
,
colic with
2725-2726
hypernatremia and
for premature infant
,
problems in
solid foods for
water intoxication and
intravenous (
see
Parenteral nutrition)
tube (
see
Enteral tube nutrition)
Feeding tube
21-23
(
see also
Enteral tube nutrition)
pleural effusion and
Feet (
see
Foot)
Felbamate
Felodipine
in elderly
in heart failure
in hypertension
Felon
Felty's syndrome
Female athlete triad
Female genital mutilation
Femoral artery, aneurysm of
2217-2218
Femoral head
aseptic necrosis of
slipped
torsion of
Femoral pulses
,
Femur, fracture of
birth-related
Fenamates
Fenofibrate
Fenoldopam
,
Fenoprofen
Fenothiocarb poisoning
Fentanyl
,
in critical care patient
in endotracheal intubation
labor and delivery
in pediatric ventilation
poisoning with
Fenthion poisoning
===PAGE:3851===
Ferric salt poisoning
Ferritin
blood levels of
,
,
,
Ferrochelatase deficiency
,
818-819
Ferroportin disease
Ferrous salts
in elderly
poisoning with
in pregnancy
,
Fertile eunuch syndrome
Fertility (
see
Conception; Infertility)
Fertilization
2605-2606
Festination
Fetal alcohol syndrome
,
Fetal antiepileptic drug syndrome
Fetal cell transplantation
Fetishism
α
-Fetoprotein (AFP)
in amniotic fluid
in cancer diagnosis
hepatocellular carcinoma and
reference values for
Fetor hepaticus
Fetor oris
506-508
,
Fetus (
see also
Neonate; Pregnancy)
abnormal presentations of
alcohol effects on
anticonvulsant effects on
bilirubin of
blood circulation of
death of
,
2675-2676
,
delivery of (
see
Labor and delivery)
drug effects on
2625-2627
,
,
,
,
,
,
dystocia and
2678-2680
erythroblastosis in
,
2665-2666
genetic screening of
2598-2604
,
,
(
see also
Genetic screening)
gestational age of
glucose supply to
growth of
,
heart sounds of
hemoglobin of
hemolytic anemia in
2665-2666
hyperextension in (flying fetus)
2771-2773
hyperparathyroidism in
hyperthyroidism in
immune system of
intrauterine resuscitation of
loss of (
see
Abortion)
lungs of
,
,
monitoring of
2630-2631
,
nonstress test for
oximetry for
position of
,
radiation effects on
rubella infection in
syphilis in
thrombocytopenia in
===PAGE:3852===
thyroid disease in
,
ultrasonography of
2600-2602
,
,
,
vitamin D deficiency in
Fever
1152-1157
(
see also
Heat; Hyperthermia)
acute
,
,
in Addison's disease
blood transfusion and
boutonneuse
,
cancer therapy and
cardiovascular disorders and
cat-scratch
1244-1245
,
in children
2741-2745
,
,
,
,
,
dumdum
enteric
factitious
hemorrhagic
,
inhalational
neutropenia and
neutrophilic dermatosis with
683-684
Oroya
,
Pel-Ebstein
periodic
3026-3029
postoperative
postpartum
posttransplantation
during pregnancy
rabbit
1264-1266
,
rat-bite
relapsing
1272-1273
San Joaquin
1327-1329
seizures and
,
,
,
2898-2899
tick
1272-1273
,
1284-1285
trench
,
1245-1246
typhoid
,
1259-1261
undulant
1246-1247
of unknown origin
1157-1162
,
1158-1160
in children
2841-2844
,
,
,
uveoparotid
viral infection and
,
Feverfew
,
Fexofenadine
in pruritus
Fiber
in atherosclerosis
in constipation
,
in irritable bowel syndrome
Fibrates
,
Fibrillary glomerulopathy
2407-2408
Fibrillin
Fibrin
,
abnormal generation of
976-977
Fibrin degradation products
,
,
Fibrinogen (factor I)
,
assay for
deficiency of
reference values for
Fibrinolysis
,
,
===PAGE:3853===
Fibrinolytics
,
in acute coronary syndromes
2111-2114
,
Fibrin stabilizing factor (factor XIII)
,
,
Fibroadenoma, of breast
,
Fibrocystic changes, in breast
,
Fibroelastoma, papillary
,
,
Fibroids (leiomyomas)
cervical
uterine
,
,
2536-2538
,
pregnancy and
,
Fibrolamellar carcinoma
Fibroma
cardiac
,
oral
ovarian
small-bowel
Fibromatosis
palmar
387-388
plantar
Fibromuscular dysplasia
,
renovascular hypertension and
,
Fibromyalgia
375-377
,
Fibromyositis
375-377
,
Fibrosarcoma
Fibrosing mediastinitis
Fibrosis
aortic
cystic
2881-2886
(
see also
Cystic fibrosis)
hepatic
,
239-240
,
nephrogenic
pleural
premacular (macular pucker)
pulmonary
,
1948-1950
,
(
see also
Pulmonary fibrosis)
Fibrositis
375-377
,
Fibrous dysplasia, of bone
Fibrous histiocytoma
,
Fick technique
,
Fiery serpent
1344-1345
Fievre boutonneuse
,
Fifth day fits
Fifth disease
2840-2841
Fight-or-flight response
Filariasis
,
,
1345-1348
,
Filovirus infection
,
,
Financing health care
3473-3480
,
for elderly
3157-3158
Finasteride
in alopecia
in incontinence
Finger(s) (
see also
Nail[s])
Bouchard's nodes of
boutonniere deformity of
,
clubbing of
,
,
deformities of
386-388
,
,
felon of
fracture of
Heberden's nodes of
===PAGE:3854===
herpes simplex virus infection of (whitlow)
,
infections of
388-390
inflammation of
mallet
,
range of motion of
in rheumatoid arthritis
swan-neck deformity of
386-387
,
tendon sheath of
,
trigger
,
Fingernails (
see
Nail[s])
Fingertip
fracture of
infection of
Finkelstein test
Finnish-type nephrotic syndrome
Fire ant sting
,
Fisheye disease
Fish food lung
Fish oil
Fish poisoning
3337-3339
Fish tapeworm infestation
1361-1362
vitamin B
deficiency and
Fissure, anal
180-181
in children
Fistula
anorectal
181-182
in children
arteriovenous
,
2234-2235
for dialysis
murmur in
cholecystoenteric
Crohn's disease and
enteric
perilymphatic
,
tracheoesophageal
,
urinary
,
Fitzgerald factor
Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome
,
,
Fixed drug eruption
,
Flashbacks
,
Flatus (flatulence)
91-94
Flavivirus infection
,
,
,
1431-1433
,
Flavonoids
Flavoxate
in elderly
Flea bites
in murine typhus
,
Flecainide
Flesh-eating bacteria
Fletcher factor
Flexibility exercise
Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy, in epiglottitis
Flexor tenosynovitis
,
Flight or fight response
Floaters
561-563
,
Flow cytometry
,
,
Flu (
see
Influenza)
===PAGE:3855===
Fluconazole
,
,
in candidal vaginitis
,
drug interactions of
neonatal dosage of
prophylactic, in HIV infection
Flucytosine
,
neonatal dosage of
Fludarabine
Fludrocortisone
in Addison's disease
in hydroxylase deficiency
in orthostatic hypotension
Fluids (
see also
Water)
body, composition of
extracellular
,
,
,
2032-2033
contraction of
822-823
,
expansion of
intracellular
,
Fluid therapy (
see also
Parenteral nutrition)
in cholera
before contrast administration
in pancreatitis
143-144
in pediatric dehydration
2806-2810
,
,
,
oral
2809-2810
preoperative
in shock
,
2297-2299
in volume depletion
in vomiting
Fluke infections
,
,
1355-1360
,
(
see also specific infections
)
Flumazenil
in benzodiazepine poisoning
Flunisolide
in allergy
in asthma
Fluorescein angiography
Fluorescein drops
Fluorescein staining
Fluorescent antibody test
Fluorescent stains
Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test
Fluoridation
Fluoride
adequate intake allowances for
caries prevention with
in infant feeding
poisoning with
Fluorine
,
52-53
poisoning with
Fluorine-18 (18F)-labeled deoxyglucose (FDG) imaging
,
Fluoroquinolones
,
1191-1192
,
1208-1210
,
,
in children
in pregnancy
,
Fluoroscopy
chest
Fluorosis
,
,
5-Fluorouracil
in actinic keratoses
===PAGE:3856===
folate deficiency and
,
in warts
Fluoxetine
,
in anorexia nervosa
in children and adolescents
drug interactions of
in elderly
,
,
poisoning with
Fluphenazine
depot preparations of
poisoning with
Flurazepam
in elderly
,
poisoning with
in sleep disorders
Flurbiprofen
Flushing
cancer-related
carcinoid-related
differential diagnosis of
niacin-induced
postmenopausal
,
Flutamide
Fluticasone
in allergy
in asthma
in COPD
Flutter (
see
Atrial flutter)
Fluvalinate poisoning
Fluvastatin
Fluvoxamine
,
in children and adolescents
drug interactions of
poisoning with
Foam cells
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
,
2403-2404
Folate (folic acid)
26-31
,
antagonists of
deficiency of
,
,
29-31
,
anemia and
,
932-933
,
2635-2636
hyperhomocysteinemia and
malabsorption and
,
sulfonamide-induced
vitamin B
deficiency vs
,
drug interactions with
,
,
in hyperhomocysteinemia
in pregnancy
,
recommended dietary allowance of
reference values for
in sickle cell disease
sources of
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
,
blood levels of
,
,
deficiency of
,
in infertility treatment
male hypogonadism and
,
===PAGE:3857===
menopause and
in menstrual cycle
,
in ovulation disorders
at puberty
,
,
Folliculitis
acne treatment and
Fomepizole
Fomivirsen
Fondaparinux
,
,
,
,
,
Fontanelles
Fontan procedure
,
Food(s) (
see also
Diet; Feeding; Malnutrition; Nutrition; Undernutrition)
additives to
5-6
,
allergy to
1118-1120
,
for children
contaminants of
(
see also
Food poisoning)
diarrhea with
,
drug interactions with
7-9
,
,
,
elimination of
,
fiber in
flatulence and
,
glycemic index of
,
for infant
intake of
irritable bowel syndrome and
MAOI interaction with
methane production with
nutritional pyramid for
nutritional requirements and
regurgitation of
81-83
,
rheumatoid arthritis and
thiamin deficiency and
warfarin interactions with
Food Guide Pyramid
Food poisoning (
see also
Gastroenteritis)
botulism
,
1290-1292
,
,
clostridial
1294-1295
E. coli

Salmonella

,
1261-1263
staphylococcal
,
Foot
394-404
,
,
,
abnormalities of, in children
athlete's
ball of
397-400
bones of
calluses and corns of
660-661
corticosteroid injection into
cyanosis of
dermatitis of
668-669
,
in diabetes mellitus
,
,
,
,
,
,
in elderly patient
erythromelalgia of
2216-2217
fibromatosis of
fracture of
,
3304-3305
immersion (trench)
ischemia of
Madura
1332-1333
===PAGE:3858===
overpronation of
pain in
,
,
,
range of motion of
rubor of
in syphilis
warts on
,
Footdrop
Foramen magnum, abnormalities of
1757-1759
Forceps delivery
,
2676-2677
Fordyce's granules
,
Foreign bodies
airway
,
,
,
,
,
bronchiolitis vs
croup vs
in infant
,
removal of
2271-2272
,
corneal
3236-3237
ear canal
,
,
,
455-456
embolism with
esophageal
gastrointestinal
139-140
mycobacterial infection and
nasal
ocular
3236-3237
rectal
vaginal
wound
,
Foreign travel
3439-3441
,
Foreskin
Formaldehyde
cancer and
poisoning with
Formalin poisoning
Formoterol
in asthma
in COPD
Formulas
enteral feeding
infant
2708-2709
calcium supplementation for
essential fatty acid deficiency and
hypocalcemia and
in protein-energy undernutrition
total parenteral nutrition
,
Fosamprenavir
in children
Foscarnet
in cytomegalovirus infection
in herpes simplex virus infection
1419-1420
Fosinopril
Fosphenytoin
,
in neonatal seizures
Foster care
,
Four Corners virus infection
Fournier's gangrene
,
,
Fowler's solution poisoning
Foxglove poisoning
,
===PAGE:3859===
Fracture
3204-3213
,
ankle
arterial injury with
basilar bone
,
,
birth-related
,
blowout
cast for
child abuse and
clavicle
Colles'
complications of
condylar
cribriform plate
dancer's
distal radius
femoral
birth-related
fingertip
foot
,
3304-3305
growing
growth plate
,
healing of
hip
,
subcapital
,
humeral (
see
Humerus, fracture of)
intertrochanteric
Jones
Le Fort
,
Lisfranc's
lunate
mandibular
3232-3233
march
3304-3305
maxillary
3232-3233
metacarpal neck
metatarsal
,
3304-3305
midclavicular
birth-related
nasal
3233-3234
orbital
3232-3233
,
osteomalacia and
osteoporosis and
,
pelvic
penile
radial head
reduction of
,
,
rib
chest compressions and
scaphoid
,
sesamoid
skull
,
,
,
birth-related
spine
stress
,
3304-3305
talar tubercle
,
temporal bone
,
toe
tooth
,
===PAGE:3860===
types of
vertebral
,
,
wrist
Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome
1762-1763
Fragile X syndrome
Frailty, prevention of
3110-3111
,
Francisella tularensis
infection
,
1264-1266
,
Frank-Starling principle
,
Freckles
Freiberg's disease
397-398
,
Freiberg's maneuver
Fresh frozen plasma
in hemophilia
in neonatal sepsis
Frey's syndrome
Friction rub
,
pericardial
,
,
splenic
Friedreich's ataxia
Frontal lobes
,
Frontal sinus
,
barotrauma of
3284-3285
inflammation of
479-481
Frontometaphyseal dysplasia
Frontotemporal dementia
1683-1684
Frostbite
3272-3273
Frostnip
Frovatriptan
Fructokinase deficiency
Fructosamine
,
Fructose
diarrhea with
intolerance to
,
irritable bowel syndrome and
metabolic disorders of
Fructose-1,6-biphosphatase deficiency
Fructose 1-phosphate aldolase deficiency
FSH (
see
Follicle-stimulating hormone)
FTA-ABS (fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption) test
Fuchs' corneal endothelial dystrophy
Fugu
Fugue
1504-1505
Fukada stepping test
Fulvestrant
Fumagillin
Fumarylacetoacetate hydroxylase deficiency
Functional abdominal pain syndrome
Functional pain scale
Fungal infection (
see also specific infections
)
arthritis and
369-370
corneal
culture in
cutaneous
,
703-709
,
704-705
drugs for
1319-1323
,
1320-1321
hepatic
,
meningeal
,
nail
734-735
===PAGE:3861===
in neonatal sepsis
neutropenia and
oral
paranasal sinus
pulmonary
1887-1888
,
,
,
1926-1927
susceptibility testing in
systemic
1318-1335
urinary tract
2380-2381
Fungus balls
Funipuncture
Furosemide
in ascites
in brain injury
in bronchopulmonary dysplasia
in elderly
,
in heart failure
in hypercalcemia
in hypermagnesemia
ototoxicity of
Furrier's lung
Furuncle
697-698
aural
,
nasal
Fusion inhibitors
,
in children
Fusion proteins
,
Fusobacterium
infection
1299-1300
Fusospirochetosis
===PAGE:3862===
G
GABA
,
Gabapentin
in dying patient
in multiple sclerosis
in pain
,
,
in pruritus
in sciatica
in seizures
in trigeminal neuralgia
Gadolinium
Gag reflex
Gait
age-related changes in
assessment of
in cerebral palsy syndromes
disorders of
3128-3134
,
,
3132-3133
evaluation of
,
,
in elderly patient
,
in Parkinson's disease
rheumatic
Galactocele
Galactocerebroside
β
-galactosidase deficiency
3021-3022
Galactokinase deficiency
Galactomannans
Galactorrhea
,
770-772
,
Galactosemia
3016-3017
Galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase deficiency
α
-Galactosidase A deficiency
Galactosylceramide lipidosis
3021-3022
Galantamine
,
,
Galeazzi sign
,
,
Gallavardin's phenomenon
Gallbladder
calculi of (
see
Gallstones)
carcinoma of
fistula of
inflammation of
273-275
imaging in
total parenteral nutrition and
polyps of
porcelain
in pregnancy
tumors of
Gallium nitrate
Gallium scan
in cardiovascular disorders
in sarcoidosis
Gallstones
271-273
acute cholecystitis and
273-275
imaging of
oral contraceptives and
pancreatitis and
,
total parenteral nutrition and
Gamekeeper's thumb
Gamete intrafallopian tube transfer
===PAGE:3863===
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
,
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
Gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB)
Ganciclovir
in cytomegalovirus infection
Ganglia
parasympathetic
sympathetic
Ganglia (ganglion cysts)
Ganglioneuroma
Ganglionitis, posterior (shingles)
1420-1421
Gangrene
Fournier's
,
,
gas
1295-1296
necrotizing subcutaneous infection and
wet
Gangs
Gardner-Diamond syndrome
981-982
Gardner's syndrome
192-193
,
,
Garlic
3422-3423
,
3427-3428
Garrod's pads, fibromatosis of
Gas(es)
blood
1856-1859
(
see also
Blood gases)
diathermy-related hazard of
diving-related toxicity of
3288-3289
intestinal
91-94
,
,
toxic
1983-1984
Gas chromatography
Gas embolism
,
3285-3286
,
recompression therapy in
3289-3290
,
Gas exchange
impairment of (
see
Hypercapnia; Hypoxemia)
measurement of
1855-1859
(
see also
Blood gases)
Gasoline poisoning
Gastrectomy
bezoars after
gastritis after
in peptic ulcer disease
Gastric acid
128-129
drug reduction of
136-138
pneumonitis from
in short bowel syndrome
tests of
,
Gastric adenocarcinoma
189-190
postgastrectomy
Gastric analysis
Gastric antral vascular ectasia
Gastric banding
,
Gastric bypass
61-64
,
Gastric emptying
drug absorption and
in poisoning
Gastric glands
atrophy of
metaplasia of
Gastric lavage, in poisoning
Gastric outlet obstruction, peptic ulcer disease and
===PAGE:3864===
Gastric ulcer
133-136
(
see also
Peptic ulcer disease)
Gastric washing, in tuberculosis
Gastrin
in autoimmune metaplastic atrophic gastritis
blood levels of
,
,
in MEN 1 syndrome
proton pump inhibitor effects on
Gastrinoma
,
200-201
peptic ulcer disease vs
Gastritis
130-133
autoimmune
eosinophilic
erosive
130-131
granulomatous disease and
infectious (septic)
Menetrier's disease and
nonerosive
131-132
postgastrectomy
radiation-induced
Gastroduodenal manometry
Gastroduodenostomy
Gastroenteritis
146-151
,
(
see also
Food poisoning)
bacterial
Campylobacter

1247-1248
in children
Clostridium perfringens

1294-1295
drug-related
Enterobacteriaceae
Escherichia coli

1250-1251
HIV infection and
in neonates
parasitic
,
pregnancy and
,
prevention of
Salmonella

1261-1263
sexually transmitted
travel-related
150-151
Vibrio cholerae

1248-1250
viral
,
,
Yersinia

Gastroenteropathy, eosinophilic
Gastroesophageal junction, cancer of
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
,
125-126
asthma and
bronchiolitis vs
chest pain in
cough in
,
enamel defects in
in infants
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors
Gastrointestinal tract (
see also specific organs
)
aging-related changes in
,
amyloid of
barotrauma to
bezoars of
138-139
bleeding from
99-105
,
(
see also
Bleeding, gastrointestinal)
nuclear scan
===PAGE:3865===
caustic burns to
3335-3336
congenital anomalies of
2975-2981
diagnostic and therapeutic procedures for
94-99
diseases of
approach to
70-83
HIV infection and
1445-1446
in neonate and infant
2800-2806
pain with
diverticular disease of
176-179
endoscopy of
95-96
,
98-99
foreign bodies in
139-140
functional illness of
gas in
91-94
,
infection of
146-151
,
(
see also
Food poisoning; Gastroenteritis)
Bacteroides fragilis

barriers to
Oligella

inflammation of
146-151
,
166-176
,
(
see also
Crohn's disease; Gastroenteritis; Ulcerative colitis)
malabsorption syndromes of
152-162
,
,
mucosa of
normal flora of
obstruction of
115-117
,
congenital
2975-2981
Crohn's disease and
cystic fibrosis and
in dying patient
ileus vs
Meckel's diverticulum and
pregnancy and
pseudo-obstruction
perforation of
111-112
,
,
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
pH of
during pregnancy
of premature infant
radiation effects on
,
sarcoidosis of
shock-related injury to
tuberculosis of
tumors of
186-202
,
,
,
ulcers of
133-136
(
see also
Peptic ulcer disease)
varices of
103-104
vascular lesions of
104-105
Gastrojejunostomy
Gastroparesis
,
Gastroplasty
Gastroschisis
Gastroscopy
Gastrostomy tube
21-23
,
Gaucher's cells
Gaucher's disease
3020-3021
Gaze palsies
1749-1752
Gefitinib
,
Gels
Gemcitabine
Gemfibrozil
Gemifloxacin
,
1208-1210
,
,
===PAGE:3866===
Gemtuzumab
,
Gender identity
disorder of
1568-1570
intersex states and
Gender role
Gene probes
Generalized anxiety disorder
1494-1495
,
in children and adolescents
3050-3051
Generic and trade names of drugs
3505-3519
Genes
,
abnormalities of
expressivity of
,
mutations in
in cancer
1047-1048
germline
screening for (
see
Genetic disorders, screening for)
triplet repeat
penetrance of
,
pleiotropic
radioactive labeling of
therapy with
in cancer
in cystic fibrosis
in severe combined immunodeficiency
Genetic disorders
2997-3005
,
,
3373-3383
,
(
see also
Congenital anomalies)
autosomal dominant
,
autosomal recessive
,
codominant
family pedigree in
,
genomic imprinting in
intellectual disability in
maternal inheritance of
of metabolism
3009-3026
mitochondrial DNA abnormalities in
mosaicism in
multifactorial
of muscles
3006-3009
prenatal screening for
2598-2604
,
,
recurrence risk for
screening for
prenatal
2598-2604
,
,
,
,
sex-limited (sex-influenced)
single-gene
3375-3377
triplet repeat mutation in
uniparental disomy in
X-linked dominant
3376-3377
,
X-linked recessive
,
Genetics
disorders of (
see
Genetic disorders)
drug metabolism and
3168-3169
,
,
Geniculate zoster (Ramsay Hunt syndrome)
444-445
,
Genital arousal disorders
,
Genitals (
see also specific organs and disorders
)
ambiguous
,
,
in 11
β
-hydroxylase deficiency
in 21-hydroxylase deficiency
,
in Leydig cell dysplasia
===PAGE:3867===
chancre on
development of
examination of
in children
in neonate
herpes infection of
mutilation of
,
,
puberty and
trauma to
3239-3240
ulcers on
,
warts on
,
1470-1471
Genitourinary tract (
see also specific organs and disorders
)
calculi of
2369-2372
,
cancer of
2464-2478
,
2466-2468
congenital disorders of
2982-2988
evaluation of
2306-2339
,
,
,
,
,
imaging of
2314-2316
infection of
2373-2381
(
see also
Urinary tract, infection of)
barriers to
parasite
sexually transmitted
,
,
,
1466-1482
,
obstruction of
2365-2369
,
trauma to
3238-3242
Genomic imprinting
Genotype
Gentamicin
,
1198-1201
,
,
in elderly
in endocarditis
2197-2198
in Meniere's disease
in meningitis
,
neonatal dosage of
ototoxicity of
,
1199-1201
Gentian violet
,
Genu recurvatum
Genu valgum
Genu varum
Geographic tongue
GERD (
see
Gastroesophageal reflux disease)
Gerhard's sign
Geriatric interdisciplinary team
3115-3116
Geriatric medicine
3070-3089
,
,
,
(
see also
Aging; Elderly patient)
comprehensive geriatric assessment and
3086-3088
,
day care and
3116-3117
drugs and
3090-3104
,
,
,
3100-3102
(
see also
Drugs, in elderly)
funding for
3160-3161
,
exercise and
3294-3295
funding for
3155-3164
,
health care delivery and
3114-3127
home care and
,
hospice care and
hospitalization and
3117-3122
,
long-term care and
multiple disorders and
nursing home care and
3122-3126
,
,
preventive care and
3104-3113
,
,
,
,
,
respite care and
social issues in
3140-3150
===PAGE:3868===
rehabitation and
German measles (
see
Rubella)
Germ cell tumor
mediastinal
ovarian
pineal
,
testicular
Gerstmann's syndrome
Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease
1730-1731
Gestational age
,
Ballard score for
,
head circumference vs
infection and
length vs
weight vs
Gestational trophoblastic disease
2574-2576
,
Getuzumab
GH (
see
Growth hormone)
GHB (gamma hydroxybutyrate)
Ghon foci
Ghrelin
,
GHRH (
see
Growth hormone-releasing hormone)
Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis)
319-321
,
Giant cell (neonatal) hepatitis
Giant cell (subacute) thyroiditis
788-789
Giant cell tumor
,
Giardiasis
,
,
,
,
,
1371-1372
sexual transmission of
Gibraltar fever
1246-1247
Giemsa stain
GIFT (gamete intrafallopian tube transfer)
Gigantism
768-770
teeth in
Gila monster bite
Gilbert syndrome
217-218
,
Gilchrist's disease
1325-1326
Gilles de la Tourette's syndrome
2902-2903
Ginger
,
in motion sickness
Gingiva
,
bleeding from
fusospirochetosis of
hyperplasia of
inflammation of (
see
Gingivitis; Stomatitis)
lead line of
vitamin C deficiency and
Gingivitis
518-520
(
see also
Stomatitis)
ulcerative, necrotizing
,
Gingivostomatitis
herpetic
,
,
,
Ginkgo
,
Ginseng
,
3428-3429
Gitelman's syndrome
,
,
,
2988-2990
,
Glabellar sign
Glanzmann's disease
,
Glasgow Coma Scale
,
,
,
,
,
,
for infants and children
===PAGE:3869===
Glatiramer acetate
Glaucoma
,
,
597-606
,
,
603-604
closed-angle
,
,
,
,
602-606
congenital
,
drug effects on
drug therapy in
,
603-604
,
infantile
open-angle
,
,
,
600-602
screening for
visual field testing in
,
Gleason score
Gleich's syndrome
Glenn shunt
,
Glenohumeral joint
dislocation of
,
,
effusion of
Glenoid labral tear
3299-3300
Gliadin, antibody to
Glimepiride
Glioblastoma
Glioma
1817-1818
,
Glipizide
,
poisoning with
Globe (
see
Eyeball)
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
3021-3022
Globulins, blood levels of
(
see also
Antibodies; Immune globulin; Immunoglobulin[s])
Globus sensation
Glomerular basement membrane
antibodies to
1991-1992
rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis and
,
,
,
familial thinning of
in membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
,
2408-2409
Glomerular filtration rate
in chronic renal failure
,
in hypertension
posttransplantation
in pregnancy
Glomerulonephritis
,
,
,
(
see also
Nephritis; Nephropathy; Nephrotic syndromes)
acute
,
alveolar hemorrhage with
1990-1992
,
anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody-mediated
,
,
,
crescentic (rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis)
2393-2396
,
hepatitis C and
membranoproliferative
,
2408-2409
membranous
2404-2406
,
postinfectious
,
2392-2393
poststreptococcal
,
,
2392-2393
rapidly progressive
2393-2396
,
SLE and
,
2409-2411
,
Glomerulopathy
fibrillary
2407-2408
immunotactoid
2407-2408
myeloma
Glomerulosclerosis
in diabetic nephropathy
focal segmental
,
2403-2404
Glomus jugulare tumor
===PAGE:3870===
Glomus tympanicum tumor
Glossectomy
Glossitis
benign migratory
in iron deficiency
malabsorption and
median rhomboid
pellagra and
scarlet
Glossopharyngeal nerve (9th cranial nerve)
,
,
,
1756-1757
testing of
Glossoptosis
Glottis (
see
Vocal cords)
Glucagon
in
β
-blocker poisoning
in esophageal foreign body
in hypoglycemia
infection-related production of
in neonatal hypoglycemia
Glucagon-like peptide 1
Glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists
,
Glucagonoma
,
,
Glucagon test
Gluceptate
Glucocerebrosidase deficiency
3020-3021
Glucocorticoids
(
see also
Corticosteroids)
preoperative
Glucosamine sulfate
,
Glucose
blood levels of
,
,
,
decrease in
887-888
(
see also
Hypoglycemia)
drug effects on
fasting
,
,
,
increase in (
see
Diabetes mellitus; Hyperglycemia)
monitoring of
poisoning and
during pregnancy
random
in septic shock
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CSF
,
fetal
in hypoglycemia
metabolism of (
see
Hyperglycemia; Hypoglycemia)
neonatal
for premature infant
regulation of, impaired
thiamin deficiency and
urinary
,
,
,
2425-2426
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency of
941-942
,
,
,
reference values of
Glucosephosphate dehydrogenase (GPD) deficiency
Glucose tolerance
impaired
,
test of
in diabetic mellitus
,
normal value for
,
===PAGE:3871===
in pregnancy
α
-Glucosidase inhibitors
,
Glucosuria
2425-2426
Glucuronidation
Glucuronyl transferase deficiency
Glutamate
,
Glutamic acid decarboxylase
antibodies to
γ
-Glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
,
,
Glutaric acidemia
Gluten enteropathy
,
158-159
dermatitis herpetiformis and
Glutethimide
in elderly
poisoning with
Gluteus medius tendinitis
Glyburide
,
in elderly
,
,
in pregnancy
,
Glycemic index
,
Glycerin
in constipation
,
in glaucoma
Glycerol, metabolic disorders of
3018-3019
Glycerol kinase deficiency
Glycine
Glycogen storage diseases
Glycolic acid
,
Glycolysis, defects in
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors
,
Glycosides, cardiac (
see
Digoxin)
Glycosuria
2425-2426
Glycyrrhizin
,
Glycyrriza glabra
,
Gnathostomiasis
GnRH (
see
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone)
Goeckerman regimen
Goiter
amyloid
colloid
congenital
diffuse (Graves' disease)
,
780-785
(
see also
Hyperthyroidism)
endemic
,
pregnancy and
simple nontoxic (euthyroid)
solitary or multinodular (Plummer's disease)
Gold compounds
in asthma
hyperpigmentation and
nephrotoxicity of
poisoning with
Goldenhar's syndrome
Goldenseal
,
Goldmann applanation tonometry
Goldmann perimetry
Goldston syndrome
Golfer's elbow
3301-3302
===PAGE:3872===
Gomori-Wheatley stain
Gonadal dysgenesis
in Turner's syndrome
3003-3005
Gonadarche
Gonadorelin acetate
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
,
agonists of
in endometriosis
,
in uterine fibroids
deficiency of
in Kallmann syndrome
in prostate cancer
at puberty
,
,
,
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) test
in hypopituitarism
in male hypogonadism
,
in precocious puberty
Gonads (
see
Ovary[ies]; Testis [testes])
Gonioscopy
,
Gonococcal infection
1471-1474
arthritis and
,
conjunctival
neonatal
,
2824-2825
reactive arthritis vs
Gonorrhea
1471-1474
(
see also Neisseria gonorrhoeae
infection)
neonatal ophthalmia and
oral lesions and
Goodpasture's syndrome
,
,
1991-1992
,
,
Gorlin's syndrome
Goserelin
,
Gottron's papules
Gout
349-354
,
,
diuretic-induced
nephropathy and
synovial fluid examination on
,
Gower's sign
Gradient echo imaging
Graft (
see also
Transplantation)
bone, in osteonecrosis
skin
,
vascular
in aneurysm repair
,
in aortic dissection
in coronary artery disease
,
in peripheral arterial disease
Graft-vs-host disease
blood transfusion and
stem cell transplantation and
transplantation and
,
Graham Steell's murmur
,
Grain fever
,
Gram-negative bacteria
bacilli
,
1243-1266
,
1299-1300
cocci
,
1274-1278
Gram-positive bacteria
bacilli
1236-1243
cocci
,
1225-1236
,
1299-1300
===PAGE:3873===
Gram stain
,
Granisetron
,
Granules, Fordyce's
,
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)
in neonatal sepsis
in neutropenia
,
recombinant
,
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
immune function of
in neonatal sepsis
in neutropenia
,
pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and
recombinant
,
Granulocyte transfusion
in neonatal sepsis
Granulocytic leukemia, chronic
,
1012-1014
Granulocytopenia (
see
Neutropenia)
Granuloma
in Crohn's disease
eosinophilic
,
1963-1964
(
see also
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis [granulomatosis])
hepatic
268-270
,
pyogenic
sarcoid
1965-1971
,
1966-1967
,
,
swimming pool
in tuberculosis
Granuloma annulare
688-689
Granuloma inguinale
Granulomatosis
allergic (Churg-Strauss syndrome)
317-318
Langerhans' cell
993-995
,
1963-1964
Wegener's
329-331
Granulomatosis infantisepticum
Granulomatous disease
chronic
,
,
,
(
see also
Chronic granulomatous disease)
eosinophilia in
hypercalcemia and
,
Granulomatous ileitis (ileocolitis)
,
169-172
Granulomatous (subacute) thyroiditis
788-789
Graphesthesia
Grasp reflex
Graves' disease
,
780-785
,
(
see also
Hyperthyroidism)
congenital
,
in infants and children
ophthalmopathy of
,
,
pregnancy and
thyroid autoantibodies in
Gravidity
Gray (Gy)
Gray baby syndrome
,
,
Gray matter
Great arteries
pressures in
,
transposition of
2959-2961
,
Greaving
Green-nail syndrome
Green tea
,
Grey Turner's sign
,
===PAGE:3874===
GRFoma
Grieving
,
after infant's death
Grippe (
see
Influenza)
Griseofulvin
in dermatophytoses
,
in lichen planus
Groin, hernia of
Growth
in adolescents
,
in children
2756-2757
failure of (
see
Dwarfism; Growth hormone, deficiency of; Short stature)
failure to thrive and
2931-2934
,
,
fetal
,
in hypopituitarism
in inborn errors of metabolism
in infant
posttransplantation
in premature infant
radiation effects on
Growth hormone (GH)
aging-related changes in
blood levels of
,
,
,
deficiency of
,
,
,
767-768
excess of
768-770
indirect measurement of
,
in short stature
in Turner's syndrome
Growth hormone releasing factor, pancreatic tumor secretion of
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH)
testing with
Growth plate
fracture of
,
Guaiacol poisoning
Guaifenesin
Guanabenz
,
Guanadrel
in elderly
in hypertension
,
Guanaritovirus infection
Guanethidine
,
in elderly
Guanfacine
,
Guanidine
Guarding, abdominal
Guided imagery
Guillain-Barre syndrome
,
,
1788-1790
Campylobacter jejuni
and
cancer-related
HIV infection and
vaccination and
Guinea worm disease
1344-1345
Gulf war syndrome
3444-3445
Gumma
,
Gums (
see
Gingiva)
Gunther disease
,
Gustatory sweating
===PAGE:3875===
Gynecologic examination
2483-2485
in elderly patient
Gynecomastia
,
,
,
Gyromitra
poisoning
===PAGE:3876===
H
H
blockers (
see
Histamine
blockers)
H1N1 swine influenza
H
blockers (
see
Histamine
blockers)
HAART (highly active antiretroviral therapy)
1450-1454
,
Habituation, drug (
see
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
HACEK infection
1252-1253
endocardial
,
Hachinski Ischemic Score
,
Haemophilus ducreyi
infection
Haemophilus influenzae
infection
1251-1252
,
1926-1927
,
COPD and
meningeal
in neonatal sepsis
pneumonia
,
rifampin prophylaxis in
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
Hageman factor (factor XII)
,
Hair
bezoars of
138-139
dyes for, cancer and
excessive
728-731
,
,
,
,
follicles of
bacterial infection of
inflammation and obstruction of
649-655
keratosis pilaris of
662-663
ingrown (beard)
731-732
in kwashiorkor
lice in
,
712-713
loss of
723-728
,
724-725
,
,
nutritional deficiency and
patchy loss of
pubic
,
,
removal of
for wound care
Hairy leukoplakia, HIV and
Hairy tongue
Halazepam
Haldane effect
Half-and-half nails
Half-life, of drugs
,
,
,
Halitosis
506-508
,
Hallopeau, acrodermatitis continua of
Hallucinations
alcohol discontinuation and
dementia and
hypnagogic
,
Lewy body dementia and
physical disorders and
schizophrenia and
Hallucinogens
1530-1531
,
Halofantrine
,
Haloperidol
in agitation
in dementia
===PAGE:3877===
in elderly
poisoning with
in schizophrenia
,
,
tremors and
Halos
Halothane
223-224
,
Hamartoma
hepatic
iris
Hamman-Rich syndrome
,
,
Hamman's sign
,
,
Hammer toe
,
Hampton's hump
Ham's test (acid hemolysis test)
Hamstring
strain of
3305-3306
strengthening exercises for
Hand(s)
385-393
bite injury to
388-389
,
cyanosis of
deformities of
,
386-388
in rheumatoid arthritis
dermatitis of
668-669
,
erythromelalgia of
2216-2217
fracture of
ganglia of
infection of
388-390
mixed connective tissue disease of
nerve compression syndromes of
391-392
,
osteoarthritis of
,
,
Raynaud's syndrome of
2221-2223
,
rheumatoid arthritis of
,
tendon disorders of
,
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease
,
,
Hand-foot syndrome
Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
,
Hansen's disease
,
1316-1318
Hantaan virus infection
,
,
1433-1434
Hantavirus infection
,
,
1433-1434
,
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
Hapten
Haptoglobin
Haptoglobulin
Hartnup disease
2990-2991
Hashimoto's thyroiditis
,
779-780
,
autoantibodies in
hypothyroidism in
pregnancy and
Haverhill fever
Hawkins test
Hay fever
1117-1118
conjunctivitis with
584-585
HDL (
see
Lipoprotein[s], high-density)
Head
circumference of
gestational age and
in infant
,
===PAGE:3878===
injury to
3218-3227
,
,
,
,
at birth
2769-2770
computed tomography in
rehabilitation after
molding of, at birth
radiation effects on
trauma to (
see
Head, injury to)
tumors of
486-494
,
Headache
1715-1725
,
1716-1717
,
brain tumor and
bruxism and
cluster
,
,
depot medroxyprogesterone acetate and
eye pain and
low-pressure
1724-1725
migraine
,
,
1722-1724
post-lumbar puncture
1724-1725
secondary
tension-type
,
Health care
costs of
3475-3477
,
3477-3480
funding for
3473-3480
for elderly
3155-3164
,
3157-3158
spending for
Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
3470-3471
Hearing
aminoglycoside effects on
1199-1201
erythromycin effects on
loss of
429-441
,
432-433
age-related
,
in children
conductive
,
,
congenital
,
,
,
in elderly patient
438-439
,
hereditary nephritis and
mixed
in neonate
neural (eighth nerve)
,
,
1747-1748
noise-induced
,
osteogenesis imperfecta and
prevention of
sensorineural
,
,
,
432-433
,
439-441
,
sudden
439-441
,
temporal bone fracture and
testing for
,
in children
,
tumor-related
in neonate
,
Hearing aids
Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly
Heart (
see also
Arrhythmias; Cardiac; Cardiovascular disorders; Coronary artery disease; Heart disease;
Heart failure; Myocardial infarction)
aging-related changes in
,
,
anatomy of
2142-2144
arrhythmias of
2142-2178
(
see also
Arrhythmias)
athlete's
2236-2239
,
,
auscultation of
,
2020-2025
,
,
,
,
===PAGE:3879===
in children
biopsy of
,
catheterization of
2048-2052
,
,
(
see also
Cardiac catheterization)
circulation in
conduction defects of (
see
Arrhythmias)
congenital anomalies of
2946-2968
,
(
see also
Congenital heart disease)
contractility of
disease of (
see
Heart disease
and specific conditions
)
electrophysiology of
failure of (
see
Heart failure)
fetal
,
hyperkalemia effects on
,
hypokalemia effects on
,
infection of (endocarditis)
monitoring of
(
see also
Electrocardiogram)
murmurs in (
see
Heart murmur[s])
neonatal
neurohumoral receptors of
output of
(
see also
Cardiac output)
palpitations of
2038-2041
,
,
in pregnancy
in premature infant
pressures in
,
,
,
radiation effects on
sarcoidosis of
shock-related injury to
sounds of (
see
Heart sounds)
transplantation of
1131-1132
,
in heart failure
in hypoplastic left heart syndrome
pacemaker after
rejection of
,
tumors of
2239-2242
,
murmur with
valvular disease of
2179-2193
(
see also specific valvular diseases
)
Heart block (
see also
Arrhythmias)
atrioventricular (
see
Atrioventricular block)
bundle branch and fascicular
2173-2174
,
,
complete
,
congenital
Lyme disease and
,
myocardial infarction and
Heartburn
Heart disease (
see also
Arrhythmias; Cardiovascular disease; Coronary artery disease; Heart failure;
Myocardial infarction)
congenital
,
2946-2968
(
see also
Congenital heart disease)
driving and
in Kawasaki disease
rheumatic
,
valvular
2179-2193
(
see also specific valvular diseases
)
Heart failure
,
2118-2131
air travel and
antihypertensives in
arrhythmias in
biventricular
cachexia with
cardiomyopathy and
2134-2142
===PAGE:3880===
causes of
in children
,
,
classification of
2122-2123
,
congestive hepatopathy in
cough in
diabetes mellitus and
diastolic
digoxin in
dyspnea in
,
,
,
edema and
,
in elderly
,
end-of-life care in
Frank-Starling principle and
,
hemodynamic response to
hepatic response to
,
high-output
left ventricular
,
,
myocardial infarction and
,
neurohumoral response to
pancreatitis and
peripartum
pleural effusion and
pregnancy and
pulmonary edema in
2131-2132
refractory
rehabilitation in
3461-3462
renal failure and
renal response to
right ventricular
,
,
severity of
systolic
,
thiamin deficiency and
treatment of
2126-2128
in children
,
Heart murmur(s)
,
,
,
,
,
angina pectoris and
aortic dissection and
aortic regurgitation and
aortic stenosis and
athlete's heart syndrome and
atrial septal defect and
atrioventricular septal defect and
bronchial carcinoid and
bruit vs
,
in children
coarctation of aorta and
congenital heart disease and
cor pulmonale and
crescendo-decrescendo
Eisenmenger's syndrome and
in elderly patient
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
mitral regurgitation and
mitral stenosis and
,
mitral valve prolapse and
myocardial infarction and
myxoma and
===PAGE:3881===
in neonate
patent ductus arteriosus and
,
persistent truncus arteriosus and
pulmonic regurgitation and
pulmonic stenosis and
restrictive cardiomyopathy and
rheumatic fever and
tetralogy of Fallot and
tricuspid atresia and
tricuspid regurgitation and
tricuspid stenosis and
,
ventricular septal defect and
Heart rate
in children
,
exercise and
,
fetal
measurement of
in neonate
orthostatic hypotension and
pregnancy and
resting
testing of
Heart sounds
,
,
(
see also
Heart murmur[s])
fetal
heart failure and
Heartworm infection
Heat cramps
Heat exhaustion
3264-3265
Heat illness
3262-3271
,
Heat-shock proteins
Heatstroke
,
3265-3266
,
Heat therapy
,
Heavy chain diseases
1025-1027
,
Heavy metals
gingivitis and
hyperpigmentation and
hypocalcemia and
nephrotoxicity of
2419-2420
poisoning with
,
,
Heberden's nodes
,
350-351
Heck's disease
Heel
pain in
,
400-401
plantar nerve compression at
402-403
spur of
,
400-401
Heerfordt's syndrome
Height
in children
pregnancy and
Heimlich maneuver
,
Heinz bodies
,
Helicobacter pylori
infection
129-130
dyspepsia and
gastritis and
,
131-132
peptic ulcer disease and
stomach cancer and
Heliotropic rash
,
===PAGE:3882===
Heliox, in asthma
Helium, in nitrogen narcosis
Heller myotomy
HELLP (hemolysis, elevated Iiver enzymes, and Iow platelet count) syndrome
,
Helminthiasis
,
1337-1340
,
,
1342-1355
(
see also
Cestode infections; Nematode infections;
and
specific diseases
)
CNS
1728-1729
liver
248-249
Helomas
660-661
Hemagglutinin
Hemangioblastoma
Hemangioma
cardiac
,
cavernous
,
gastrointestinal
hepatic
265-267
infantile
oral
Hemapheresis
1044-1046
,
1044-1045
Hemarthrosis
Hematemesis
(
see also
Bleeding, gastrointestinal)
Hematocele
Hematochezia
,
Hematocolpos
,
Hematocrit
in neonate
reference values for
Hematoma (
see also
Hemorrhage)
adrenal
cerebellar
epidural
1811-1812
,
,
,
,
intracerebral
,
,
septal
spinal
1811-1812
subdural
1811-1812
,
,
,
,
subperichondrial
subungual
,
Hematometra
,
Hematomyelia
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (
see
Stem cell transplantation)
Hematospermia
2320-2321
Hematuria
,
,
2321-2324
,
benign familial
hypertension and
IgA nephropathy and
renal trauma and
in sickle cell heterozygotes
Heme
in porphyria
Hemianopia
bitemporal
homonymous
after stroke
Hemiballismus
1759-1760
,
Hemiblock
Hemicolectomy
Hemicrania continua
===PAGE:3883===
Hemifacial spasm
,
Hemi-Fontan procedure
,
Hemineglect
Hemiplegia
Hemizona assay
Hemlock poisoning
Hemochromatosis
,
,
1032-1035
,
hyperpigmentation in
hypogonadism and
hypopituitarism vs
juvenile
Hemodiafiltration
Hemodialysis (
see
Dialysis)
Hemodilution
Hemofiltration
2449-2451
(
see also
Hemoperfusion)
in metabolic alkalosis
Hemoglobin
Bart's
blood levels of
in children
decrease in (
see
Anemia)
fetal
in neonate
,
pregnancy and
,
urinary
Hemoglobin A
,
Hemoglobin A
1c

,
,
,
Hemoglobin C disease
945-946
Hemoglobin E disease
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
Hemoglobin F
,
,
Hemoglobin H disease
Hemoglobinopathy
,
942-945
,
,
in neonate
pregnancy and
Hemoglobin S
Hemoglobin Sβ
-thalassemia disease
,
Hemoglobin S-C disease
,
Hemoglobin S disease
,
942-945
(
see also
Sickle cell disease)
Hemoglobinuria
in hemolytic anemia
paroxysmal
,
,
Hemolysis
,
,
,
,
934-948
(
see also
Hemolytic anemia)
blood transfusion and
burns and
in neonate
pseudohyperkalemia and
traumatic
Hemolytic anemia
934-948
,
acquired red cell membrane disorders in
,
,
autoimmune
936-939
,
cold antibody
936-939
congenital red cell membrane disorders in
,
940-941
drug-induced
941-942
,
Embden-Meyerhof pathway defects and
extrinsic
fetal
2665-2666
===PAGE:3884===
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and
941-942
hemoglobinopathy and
942-945
hereditary elliptocytosis and
940-941
hereditary spherocytosis and
940-941
hexose monophosphate shunt defects and
941-942
hypophosphatemia and
immunologic abnormalities and
936-939
infectious mononucleosis and
intrinsic
,
microangiopathic
939-940
,
in neonate
red blood cell morphology in
,
red cell membrane disorders and
,
red cell metabolic disorders and
,
splenomegaly in
stomatocytosis and
thalassemic
,
946-947
traumatic
,
939-940
warm antibody
936-939
,
Hemolytic crisis
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
,
961-962
E. coli
infection and
,
,
,
Hemoperfusion
,
Hemopericardium
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
995-996
Hemophilia
977-979
,
980-981
dental procedures in
Hemophobia
Hemoptysis
1837-1841
,
1838-1839
in cystic fibrosis
endemic
in mitral stenosis
Hemorrhage (
see also
Bleeding; Hematoma)
adrenal
alveolar
1989-1990
glomerulonephritis with
1990-1992
,
anemia and
,
,
,
924-927
anterior chamber
anticoagulant-related
bursitis vs
fetomaternal
,
,
,
gastrointestinal
99-105
,
(
see also
Bleeding, gastrointestinal)
intracerebral
,
,
1652-1654
intracranial
blood pressure in
in neonate
,
intraorbital
intraparenchymal, in neonate
intraventricular
in neonate
in premature infant
labial artery
Mallory-Weiss syndrome and
peptic ulcer disease and
perinatal
pertussis and
postpartum
2680-2681
===PAGE:3885===
prenatal
retinal
altitude sickness and
child abuse and
shock and
,
,
(
see also
Shock, hemorrhagic)
spinal cord
subarachnoid
1654-1655
,
,
,
in neonate
subconjunctival
563-566
,
,
in neonate
subdural, in neonate
subgaleal
trauma-related
vaginal
2490-2493
in early pregnancy
2612-2615
in late pregnancy
2620-2622
variceal
103-104
,
pregnancy and
Hemorrhagic colitis
1250-1251
Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn
,
Hemorrhagic fever
,
,
dengue
,
1432-1433
with renal syndrome
1433-1434
Hemorrhagic shock and encephalopathy syndrome
2934-2935
Hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome)
,
,
,
982-983
Hemorrhoids
182-183
Hemosiderin
in pigmented villonodular synovitis
urinary
Hemosiderosis
pulmonary
Hemostasis
963-972
gastrointestinal bleeding and
laboratory tests of
,
970-971
plasma factors in
964-967
,
,
965-966
platelet factors in
regulation of
967-968
,
in trauma
vascular factors in
Hemothorax
Hemotympanum
,
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
Hennekam syndrome
Henoch-Schonlein purpura
321-322
,
,
Henry's law
Heparin
complications of
in coronary artery disease
in deep venous thrombosis
in disseminated intravascular coagulation
in elderly
goldenseal interactions with
in myocardial infarction
in pregnancy
,
,
preoperative
in pulmonary embolism
,
,
in pulmonary embolism prevention
,
===PAGE:3886===
in stroke
thrombocytopenia and
Hepatic (
see also
Liver)
Hepatic artery
aneurysm of
,
occlusion of
Hepatic coma (hepatic encephalopathy)
,
220-222
,
,
,
,
Hepatic ducts
,
Hepatic lipase deficiency
Hepatic veins
disorders of
261-263
Hepatitis
246-258
,
248-249
,
,
(
see also specific virus
)
alcoholic
,
anicteric
autoimmune
,
cholestatic
chronic
,
255-258
,
,
cytomegalovirus
drug-induced
drugs for
α
-fetoprotein in
fulminant
254-255
giant cell (neonatal)
granulomatous
,
,
halothane-related
223-224
hypoxic
immunization for
infectious mononucleosis and
ischemic
IV drug abuse and
neonatal
,
2825-2826
postoperative
223-224
pregnancy and
prevention of
Q fever
recrudescent
rifampin-induced
risk factors for
,
viral
,
,
acute
Wilson's disease and
Hepatitis A
,
,
,
,
detection of
prevention of
sexual transmission of
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
2720-2721
,
Hepatitis B
,
,
,
,
chronic
255-258
core antigen (HBcAg) of
detection of
DNA of
drugs for
e antigen (HBeAg) of
fulminant
hepatocellular carcinoma and
,
neonatal
2825-2826
polyarteritis nodosa and
===PAGE:3887===
posttransplantation
in pregnancy
prevention of
rape and
sexual transmission of
surface antigen (HBsAg) of
transfusion-transmitted
,
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
2720-2721
,
2722-2723
,
Hepatitis B immune globulin
,
Hepatitis C
,
,
,
,
alcoholic liver disease and
chronic
,
255-258
cutaneous manifestations of
detection of
drugs for
posttransplantation
sexual transmission of
transfusion-transmitted
,
Hepatitis D
,
,
,
Hepatitis E
,
,
Hepatoblastoma
Hepatocavopathy, obliterative
Hepatocellular adenoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
,
,
,
265-267
,
,
Hepatocytes
ground-glass
lipid accumulation in
211-212
,
Hepatojugular reflux
Hepatolithiasis
Hepatoma
,
,
265-267
,
Hepatomegaly
total parenteral nutrition and
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
Hepatorenal syndrome
Hepcidin
Heptachlor poisoning
Herbalism
,
3421-3432
Herbicide poisoning
Hereditary (
see
Familial; Genetic disorders;
and specific hereditary disorders
)
Hereditary angioedema
1112-1113
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
,
,
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome
,
Hereditary spastic paraparesis
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome
Hermaphroditism
HER2/neu
gene
Hernia
abdominal
113-114
diaphragmatic
,
2977-2978
groin
hiatus
126-127
inguinal
,
,
,
umbilical
Herniation
brain
,
,
,
1658-1659
,
1663-1665
,
,
meningitis and
,
tumors and
===PAGE:3888===
intervertebral disk
,
,
,
1796-1797
Heroin (
see also
Opioids)
abuse of
1512-1516
,
breastfeeding and
poisoning with
Herpangina
,
,
Herpes gestationis
2666-2667
Herpes simplex virus infection
,
,
1417-1420
in atopic dermatitis
in children
congenital
corneal
,
589-590
,
,
cutaneous
,
686-687
,
,
1419-1420
encephalitic
,
,
esophageal
eyelid swelling and
facial nerve
finger (whitlow)
,
genital
,
,
HIV infection and
labial
,
,
,
meningeal
,
neonatal
1418-1419
,
,
,
2827-2828
conjunctivitis
oral
,
,
,
,
,
1419-1420
uveal
Herpesvirus 6
,
,
Herpesvirus 8
,
Herpesvirus infections
1412-1423
,
,
1413-1414
(
see also
Herpes simplex virus infection; Herpes
zoster virus infection; Varicella-zoster virus infection)
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus
,
,
590-591
,
Herpes zoster virus infection
1420-1421
cancer-related
chest pain and
corneal
,
590-591
cutaneous
eyelid swelling and
HIV infection and
otic
,
444-445
vaccine against
,
,
Herpetic whitlow
,
Herpetiform ulcers
Heterocyclic antidepressants
,
1545-1546
Heterograft
(
see also
Transplantation)
Heterophil antibody test
Heterophyiasis
Heterotopic ossification (myositis ossificans)
Heterozygosity
Hexachlorocyclohexane poisoning
Hexachlorophene
,
Hexaethyltetraphosphate poisoning
Hexitol ingestion
,
Hexosaminidase A deficiency
Hexosaminidase B deficiency
Hexosaminidase deficiency
Hexose monophosphate shunt
941-942
Heyde's syndrome
===PAGE:3889===
HFE
gene
Hiatus hernia
126-127
Hibernian fever, familial
Hiccups
76-78
,
Hidradenitis suppurativa
,
698-699
High-altitude sickness
3275-3277
cerebral edema and
hypoxemia and
pulmonary edema and
High-density lipoprotein (
see
Lipoprotein[s], high-density)
Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART)
1450-1454
,
High molecular weight kininogen
deficiency of
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
High-pressure neurologic syndrome
Hill's sign
Hip
bursitis of
dislocation of
dysplasia of
,
,
,
evaluation of
fracture of
,
rehabilitation after
3466-3467
subcapital
,
Ortolani maneuver
osteoarthritis of
osteonecrosis of
pain in
in slipped capital femoral epiphysis
range of motion of
surgical positioning of
HIPAA (Health Information Portability and Accountability Act)
3470-3471
Hirschsprung's disease
,
,
,
Hirsutism
728-731
,
,
,
(
see also
Virilism/virilization)
amenorrhea and
hypertrichosis vs
Hirudin
,
Histamine
antagonists of (
see
Antihistamines)
in elderly
in pruritus
Histamine
blockers
1111-1112
,
in anaphylaxis
in mastocytosis
Histamine
blockers
in anaphylaxis
in carcinoid syndrome
in dyspepsia
in gastroesophageal reflux disease
in mastocytosis
poisoning with
Histidine
Histiocytic syndromes
993-996
,
Histiocytoma, fibrous
,
Histiocytosis, sinus
Histiocytosis X (
see
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis [granulomatosis])
Histoplasmosis
1330-1332
===PAGE:3890===
hepatic inflammation in
mediastinitis with
pulmonary
Histrionic personality disorder
Hives
,
639-644
,
642-643
(
see also
Urticaria)
HIV infection (
see
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection)
HLA (
see
Human leukocyte antigens [HLA system])
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
,
in acute coronary syndromes
in atherosclerosis
in coronary artery disease
hepatotoxicity of
after myocardial infarction
Hoarseness
pulmonary hypertension and
Hodgkin lymphoma
1016-1019
,
,
,
breast cancer and
eosinophilia in
,
hepatic
mediastinal
pneumonia and
pregnancy and
staging of
,
Hoffman's sign
,
Hollenhorst plaques
Holliday-Segar formula
,
Holoprosencephaly
Holotranscobalamin II
Holter monitoring
Homans' sign
Home care
,
Home health care, for elderly, funding for
3157-3158
,
Homeopathy
3413-3416
,
Home safety
,
3138-3139
Homocysteine
,
Homocystinuria
Marfan syndrome vs
Homogentisic acid oxidase deficiency
Homograft
(
see also
Transplantation)
Homosexuality
Homovanillic acid (HVA)
in neuroblastoma
Homozygosity
Homunculus
Hookworm infestation
,
1348-1349
cutaneous
Hoover's sign
Hordeolum
,
576-577
Hormonal therapy
in breast cancer
,
in cancer
,
in endometrial cancer
in pregnant patient
in prostate cancer
vaginal bleeding and
Hormone replacement therapy
breast cancer and
===PAGE:3891===
in menopause
,
in osteoporosis
Hormones (
see also specific hormones
)
aging-related changes in
,
food intake and
measurement of
760-761
overproduction of
,
pulsatile rhythms of
,
tumor production of
underproduction of
,
Horner's syndrome
,
,
Horse fly bites
Horton's disease
319-321
Hospice
funding for
,
HIV infection and
Hospitalism
Hospitalization
delirum and
discharge planning and
of elderly
,
3117-3122
,
funding for
3156-3159
,
failure to thrive and
hypercalcemia and
of neonate
infection and
2828-2829
Host, compromised (
see
Compromised host)
Host receptors
Hot flushes (flashes)
,
Hot packs
,
Hot-potato voice
Hot tub folliculitis
Hot tub lung
House dust mites
Housewives' eczema
Howell-Jolly bodies
,
,
HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography)
5-HT
blockers
,
HTLV-1 (
see
Human T-cell lymphotropic [leukemia-lymphoma] virus)
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
in cancer diagnosis
,
in ectopic pregnancy
in gestational trophoblastic disease
in hyperemesis gravidarum
in infertility treatment
in male hypogonadism diagnosis
in molar pregnancy
in ovulation disorders
in pregnancy
,
reference values for
in undescended testis evaluation
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
,
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
1438-1458
,
,
,
,
1444-1448
acute retinal necrosis in
babesiosis in
cancers and
1457-1458
cardiomyopathy in
===PAGE:3892===
CD4+ count in
in children
,
Chagas disease in
in children (
see
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, pediatric)
cholangiopathy in
cholangitis in
coccidioidomycosis in
cryptococcosis in
,
cutaneous disorders in
cyclosporiasis in
cystoisosporiasis in
cytomegalovirus infection in
,
,
,
dementia in
1682-1683
drugs for
1450-1454
,
1451-1452
(
see also
Antiretrovirals)
in children
2854-2857
fever and
gastrointestinal tract disorders in
1445-1446
gynecologic diseases in
hematologic disorders in
in hemophilia patients
histoplasmosis in
,
hyponatremia in
Kaposi's sarcoma and
,
753-754
,
,
lymphocytopenia in
lymphoid interstitial pneumonia in
1961-1962
microsporidiosis in
Mycobacterium avium
complex infection in
,
nephropathy in
neurologic disorders in
1444-1445
neutropenia in
non-Hodgkin lymphoma and
,
opportunistic infections in
,
,
1444-1448
in children
,
prevention of
oral lesions in
,
,
pediatric
,
2847-2860
BCG vaccine in
clinical classifications of
,
2849-2850
,
drugs for
2854-2857
prevention of
,
,
social concerns in
testing for
periodontitis in
pleural effusion in
pneumonia in
,
,
,
1935-1936
in children
,
postexposure prophylaxis in
,
prevention of
1454-1457
,
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in
Pseudomonas
infection in
pulmonary disease in
renal disorders in
RNA assay for
staging of
symptoms and signs of
,
1444-1448
testing for
in children
2851-2852
===PAGE:3893===
in neonate
thrombocytopenia in
toxoplasmosis in
,
,
transmission of
,
in adolescence
,
mother-to-child
,
prevention of
rape and
transfusion-related
,
,
treatment of
1450-1454
,
1451-1452
in children
2853-2858
,
2854-2857
tuberculosis in
,
uveitis in
610-611
,
vaccination and
,
,
,
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA system)
1084-1085
ankylosing spondylitis and
diabetes mellitus and
immunodeficiency and
juvenile idiopathic arthritis and
reactive arthritis and
rheumatoid arthritis and
transplantation and
1126-1127
Human metapneumovirus infection
1410-1411
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection
anorectal cancer and
cervical cancer and
,
,
cutaneous
715-718
,
genital
1470-1471
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
Human parvovirus B
virus infection
Human T-lymphotropic viruses (HTLV)
cancer and
,
,
myelopathy and
1812-1813
transfusion-transmitted
,
Humerus, fracture of
birth-related
distal
proximal
Humidifier lung
,
Hungry bone syndrome
Huntington's disease
,
1763-1764
Hurler's disease
Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome
Hutchinson's incisors
Hutchinson's sign
,
Hutchinson's triad
Hyaline casts
Hyaline membrane disease
2876-2877
Hyaluronans, in osteoarthritis
Hydatid disease
,
,
1362-1363
of brain
Hydatidiform mole
2574-2576
,
Hydralazine
in heart failure
in hypertension
,
in hypertensive emergency
SLE-like syndrome with
===PAGE:3894===
vitamin B
deficiency and
Hydramnios
Hydranencephaly
Hydremia, of pregnancy
Hydride poisoning
Hydrocarbons, poisoning with
3339-3340
,
Hydrocele
,
congenital
,
Hydrocephalus
congenital
2992-2994
normal-pressure
obstructive
Hydrochloric acid, in metabolic alkalosis
Hydrochlorothiazide
in elderly
,
Hydrocodone
poisoning with
Hydrocolloids
,
,
Hydrocortisone
in 11
β
-hydroxylase deficiency
in 21-hydroxylase deficiency
in inflammatory bowel disease
in neonatal hypoglycemia
Hydrocyanic acid poisoning
Hydroflumethiazide
Hydrofluoric acid poisoning
Hydrogen, intestinal production of
Hydrogen breath test
,
Hydrogen chloride
occupational exposure to
1983-1984
poisoning with
Hydrogen fluoride poisoning
Hydrogen sulfide poisoning
Hydromediastinum
Hydromorphone
,
Hydronephrosis
,
pleural effusion and
pregnancy and
Hydrophobia
Hydrops fetalis
Hydroquinone
,
Hydrosalpinges
,
Hydrostatic (underwater) weighing
Hydrotherapy
,
Hydrothorax
central venous catheterization and
hepatic
Hydroureter, pregnancy and
Hydroxychloroquine
in discoid lupus erythematosus
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
in porphyria
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
in sarcoidosis
in SLE
Hydroxychloroquine sulfate
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA)
,
===PAGE:3895===
β
-Hydroxylase deficiency
21-Hydroxylase deficiency
2889-2891
4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid dioxygenase
Hydroxyprogesterone
β
-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
5-Hydroxytryptamine (
see
Serotonin)
Hydroxyurea
in chronic myelocytic leukemia
in essential thrombocythemia
in myelophthisic anemia
in polycythemia vera
in sickle cell disease
25-Hydroxyvitamin D
,
(
see also
Vitamin D)
Hydroxyzine
,
in elderly
Hygroma, cystic
Hymenolepis diminuta
infection
Hymenolepis nana
infection
Hyoscyamine
in dying patient
in elderly
poisoning with
in urinary incontinence
Hyperactivity
3035-3038
,
Hyperacusis
Hyperaldosteronism (
see
Aldosteronism)
Hyperalimentation (
see
Parenteral nutrition)
Hyperalphalipoproteinemia
Hyperammonemia, total parenteral nutrition and
Hyperarousal
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
,
3289-3290
,
in carbon monoxide poisoning
Hyperbilirubinemia
,
(
see also
Bilirubin; Jaundice)
conjugated
dental discoloration in
in large-for-gestational-age infant
neonatal
,
,
,
2788-2794
,
,
,
cholestasis and
2804-2806
,
physiologic
,
in premature infant
shunt
unconjugated
Hypercalcemia
843-850
,
,
acute renal failure and
breast cancer and
familial
,
,
,
hypocalciuric
,
,
,
idiopathic
immobilization and
,
of infancy
of malignancy
,
,
neonatal
nephropathy and
in Paget's disease
vitamin D toxicity and
Hypercalciuria
,
Hypercapnia
,
2288-2291
,
(
see also
Respiratory failure)
===PAGE:3896===
central sleep apnea and
COPD and
metabolic alkalosis and
permissive
respiratory acidosis and
864-865
Hypercarotenemia
Hyperchlorhydria
Hypercholesterolemia (
see also
Dyslipidemia)
chronic renal failure and
familial
,
,
polygenic
Hypercoagulability disorders (
see also
Thrombotic disorders)
deep venous thrombosis and
,
pulmonary embolism and
Hyperemesis gravidarum
,
,
2667-2668
human chorionic gonadotropin in
hyperthyroidism in
Hyperemia, conjunctival
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
990-993
,
,
Hypergammaglobulinemic purpura
Hypergastrinemia
Hyperglycemia (
see also
Diabetes mellitus)
antiretrovirals and
dental caries and
diabetes mellitus and
,
,
,
,
hypernatremia and
,
neonatal
2795-2796
oral contraceptives and
pancreatitis and
pheochromocytoma and
protein-energy undernutrition treatment and
total parenteral nutrition and
Hyperhidrosis
,
692-693
,
Hyperhomocysteinemia
,
,
atherosclerosis and
Hyper-IgD syndrome
3027-3028
Hyper-IgE syndrome
,
,
Hyper-IgM syndrome
,
Hyperimmune globulin
Hyperinsulinemia
insulinoma and
198-200
neonatal
Hyperkalemia
,
835-837
,
acute renal failure and
,
chronic renal failure and
diabetic ketoacidosis and
periodic paralysis and
,
Hyperkeratosis
660-661
epidermolytic
,
tinea pedis and
Hyperkeratotic eczema
Hyperkinesia
,
,
Hyperkinesis (
see
Hyperactivity)
Hyperlipidemia
890-904
,
(
see also
Dyslipidemia)
antiretrovirals and
total parenteral nutrition and
Hypermagnesemia
===PAGE:3897===
Hypermenorrhea
2490-2493
,
Hypernatremia
829-831
,
(
see also
Fluids; Sodium; Water)
in elderly
essential
neonatal
2797-2798
,
Hypernephroma
2473-2475
Hyperopia (farsightedness)
,
surgery for
573-574
Hyperosmia
Hyperostoses
Hyperoxaluria
,
,
Hyperparathyroidism
,
,
,
,
(
see also
Hypercalcemia)
dialysis and
in elderly patient
fetal
in MEN syndromes
,
neonatal
osteoporosis vs
,
vitamin D deficiency and
Hyperpathia
Hyperphosphatemia
851-852
dialysis and
hypocalcemia and
Hyperpigmentation
721-722
,
in Addison's disease
differential diagnosis of
Hyperpituitarism
(
see also
Acromegaly; Hyperprolactinemia)
Hyperpnea, in tetralogy of Fallot
,
Hyperprolactinemia
,
770-772
,
,
Hyperpyrexia (
see
Fever; Heat; Hyperthermia)
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
,
1956-1960
,
,
beryllium-induced
Hypersensitivity reactions
1108-1125
,
(
see also
Allergy; Immune complexes)
cutaneous
683-691
drug-induced
1122-1124
anaphylactic
1120-1121
cutaneous
666-668
,
,
,
,
689-691
neutropenia and
penicillin and
1205-1206
(
see also
Penicillin, allergy to)
eosinophils in
987-993
light-induced
674-676
,
type I (atopic, reaginic, anaphylactic, IgE-mediated)
,
,
1113-1121
type II (cytotoxic, cell-stimulating)
type III (soluble complex, immune complex)
type IV (cell-mediated, delayed)
cutaneous
666-668
,
tuberculosis and
vaginal
vasculitic
318-319
Hypersomatotropism
768-770
Hypersomnia
1711-1713
(
see also
Sleep)
Hypersplenism
985-986
,
thrombocytopenia and
Hypertension
2065-2081
,
aldosteronism and
,
atherosclerosis and
cancer-related
===PAGE:3898===
gestational
hyperplastic arteriolosclerosis in
intracerebral hemorrhage and
intracranial, idiopathic (pseudotumor cerebri)
,
1720-1722
,
in MEN 2A syndrome
nephrosclerosis in
2429-2430
ocular
,
(
see also
Glaucoma)
pheochromocytoma and
,
portal
218-220
,
(
see also
Portal hypertension)
portopulmonary
1987-1988
posttransplantation
pregnancy and
2645-2647
,
,
2670-2672
prevention of
primary
pulmonary
1984-1988
,
(
see also
Pulmonary hypertension)
renoprival
renovascular
,
2077-2078
,
retinopathy in
,
616-617
screening for
secondary
severe
,
2078-2081
,
subarachnoid hemorrhage and
treatment of
2069-2070
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
in elderly
,
,
white coat
Hypertensive emergency
,
2078-2081
,
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Hypertensive urgency
Hyperthermia
3262-3271
,
malignant
3266-3268
poisoning and
Hyperthyroidism
,
780-785
,
autosomal dominant
in children
2888-2889
choriocarcinoma and
congenital
cutaneous manifestations of
dental procedures in
dermopathy in
,
drug-induced
in elderly
,
,
eyelid swelling and
factitious
,
fetal
Graves' disease and (
see
Graves' disease)
hyperemesis gravidarum and
inappropriate TSH secretion in
,
in infant
,
iodine-123 uptake test in
iodine ingestion and
,
iodine toxicity and
metastatic thyroid cancer and
molar pregnancy and
ophthalmopathy in
,
,
,
postpartum
pregnancy and
struma ovarii and
===PAGE:3899===
subclinical
,
784-785
thyroiditis and
thyroid storm in
,
,
toxic solitary or multinodular goiter and
Hypertrichosis
728-731
(
see also
Virilism/virilization)
cancer-related
hirsutism vs
Hypertriglyceridemia
,
atherosclerosis and
familial
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
2800-2801
Hypertrophy, muscle
Hypertropia
,
Hyperuricemia
349-354
,
(
see also
Uric acid [urate])
acute leukemia and
asymptomatic
diuretic-induced
in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
nephropathy and
polycythemia vera and
Hyperuricosuria
Hyperventilation
in brain injury
high-altitude acclimatization and
infection and
intracranial pressure and
neurogenic
respiratory alkalosis and
septic shock and
syncope and
Hyperventilation syndrome
1836-1837
Hyperviscosity syndrome
,
perinatal
2787-2788
Hypervolemia
hypernatremia and
,
,
hyponatremia and
,
,
,
,
Hyphema
Hypnagogic phenomena
Hypnosis (hypnotherapy)
,
in dissociative amnesia
in dissociative identity disorder
in functional abdominal pain
Hypnotics (
see
Sedatives)
Hypoalbuminemia
burns and
calcium levels in
pleural effusion with
Hypoalphalipoproteinemia
Hypobetalipoproteinemia
Hypocalcemia
838-843
,
acute renal failure and
blood transfusion and
celiac sprue and
dialysis and
malabsorption and
neonatal
2794-2795
,
,
pancreatitis and
,
===PAGE:3900===
in pregnancy
seizures and
vitamin D deficiency and
Hypocapnia
central sleep apnea and
respiratory alkalosis and
Hypochlorhydria
Hypochlorite poisoning
Hypochondriasis
,
1575-1576
gastrointestinal illness in
Hypochondroplasia
Hypochromia
Hypocitruria
,
Hypogammaglobulinemia (
see also
Immunodeficiency)
acquired (adult-onset)
,
,
bronchiectasis in
non-Hodgkin lymphoma and
pneumonia with
in premature infant
transient, of infancy
,
Hypogeusia
Hypoglossal nerve (12th cranial nerve)
,
,
Hypoglycemia
887-888
Addison's disease and
cancer-related
diabetes mellitus and
,
drug-induced
887-888
factitious
inborn errors of metabolism and
infection and
insulinoma and
neonatal
,
2796-2797
in infant of diabetic mother
seizures and
in small-for-gestational-age infant
pheochromocytoma and
reactive
887-888
postgastrectomy
seizures and
syncope and
total parenteral nutrition and
tumor-induced
Hypoglycemics, oral (
see
Antihyperglycemics)
Hypogonadism
hypergonadotropic
,
isolated gonadotropin deficiency vs
male
2340-2345
,
,
,
,
alcoholic liver disease and
,
in children
2891-2894
secondary
,
Hypohidrosis
Hypokalemia
832-835
,
diabetes mellitus and
,
,
diarrhea and
drug-induced
drug interactions with
gastroenteritis and
===PAGE:3901===
liver disease and
metabolic acidosis and
metabolic alkalosis and
nephropathy and
periodic paralysis and
,
,
Hypokinesia
in Parkinson's disease
Hypolipidemia
904-905
Hypomagnesemia
,
,
852-854
,
diarrhea and
hypokalemia and
malabsorption and
metabolic alkalosis and
neonatal
,
pancreatitis and
Hypomania
,
Hyponatremia
823-829
,
(
see also
Electrolytes; Fluids; Water)
acute renal failure and
in AIDS
cancer-related
cerebral edema in
diuretic-induced
,
gastroenteritis and
liver disease and
neonatal
,
osmotic demyelination syndrome in
seizures and
translational
Hypo-osmotic swelling test
Hypoparathyroidism
,
,
congenital
teeth in
hypocalcemia in
idiopathic
in pregnancy
Hypophosphatasia, congenital
Hypophosphatemia
850-851
hemolytic anemia in
protein-energy undernutrition treatment and
of vitamin D-resistant rickets
2991-2992
Hypophysectomy
Hypopigmentation
Hypopituitarism
apoplexy and
in children
767-768
,
empty sella syndrome and
generalized
762-766
,
secondary
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
2962-2964
,
Hypoproteinemia
cystic fibrosis and
hypocalcalcemia and
idiopathic
159-160
Hypoprothrombinemia
Hypopyon
Hyposensitization, in allergy
Hyposmia
===PAGE:3902===
Hypospadias
Hypotension (
see also
Shock; Syncope)
dialysis and
infection and
liver disease and
mechanical ventilation and
myocardial infarction and
orthostatic
2035-2038
,
(
see also
Orthostatic hypotension)
poisoning and
,
postprandial
,
in premature infant
relative tolerance for
status asthmaticus and
vertigo and
Hypothalamus
disorders of
,
,
772-775
neurohormones of
,
pituitary gland interaction with
757-758
sarcoidosis of
Hypothermia
3271-3275
,
blood transfusion and
burns and
in children
near drowning and
in neonate
2774-2775
post-resuscitation
in premature infant
prevention of
Hypothyroidism
,
,
,
785-787
in children
2887-2888
cutaneous manifestations of
depression and
dyslipidemia in
in elderly
,
euthyroid sick syndrome vs
,
eyelid swelling and
Hashimoto's thyroiditis and
779-780
hyperprolactinemia and
iodine deficiency and
,
lithium use and
polymyalgia rheumatica vs
postpartum
in pregnancy
radiation-induced
,
secondary
subacute thyroiditis and
subclinical
,
tertiary
Hypotransferrinemia
Hypotropia
,
Hypoventilation
carbon dioxide poisoning and
central sleep apnea and
respiratory acidosis and
864-865
Hypovitaminosis (
see at specific vitamins
)
Hypovolemia (
see also
Dehydration)
aldosteronism and
===PAGE:3903===
burns and
hypernatremia and
,
,
hyponatremia and
,
,
,
myocardial infarction and
shock and
,
,
2297-2298
Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase deficiency
3024-3025
Hypoxemia
1856-1858
,
(
see also
Asphyxia)
acute respiratory failure and
2284-2288
,
COPD and
erythrocytosis in
neonatal
,
pancreatitis and
postoperative
sickle cell disease and
Hypoxia
altitude sickness and
cirrhosis and
in critical care patient
2250-2252
,
near drowning and
neonatal
Hypoxia-ischemia, neonatal
,
,
Hysterectomy
in cervical cancer
,
in dysfunctional uterine bleeding
in endometrial cancer
in endometriosis
in ovarian cancer
in placenta accreta
in uterine fibroids
in uterine sarcoma
Hysterosalpingography
===PAGE:3904===
I
Ibandronate
,
Ibritumomab tiuxetan
,
Ibuprofen
aspirin interaction with
in children
in cystic fibrosis
in elderly
for fever
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
poisoning with
Ibutilide
Ichthyosis
661-662
,
Icteric leptospirosis
Icterus (
see
Jaundice)
Ideal body weight, tidal volume calculation and
Ideas of reference
Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome
990-993
,
,
Idiopathic hypersomnia
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia
1945-1952
,
1946-1947
,
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
1720-1722
,
Idiopathic orthostatic hypotension
1619-1620
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
,
1948-1950
,
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
Idiopathic (immune) thrombocytopenic purpura
958-960
,
in pregnancy
Idiosyncratic drug reactions
,
Idoxuridine
Id reaction
,
708-709
I:E ratio
Ifosfamide
,
Ig (
see
Immunoglobulin[s])
Iguana bites
Ileitis (ileocolitis), granulomatous
,
169-172
Ileum
atresia of
clostridial necrotizing enteritis of
lymphoma of
Meckel's diverticulum of
178-179
obstruction of
congenital
2978-2981
perforation of, in neonate
Ileus
114-115
meconium
2801-2803
,
Iliac artery, aneurysm of
2217-2218
Iliopectineal (iliopsoas) bursitis
Imatinib
,
,
,
,
Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome
Imipenem
,
in infective endocarditis
neonatal dosage of
Imipramine
,
drug interactions of
in elderly
hyperpigmentation and
===PAGE:3905===
in nocturnal enuresis
poisoning with
in urinary incontinence
,
Imiquimod cream
in molluscum contagiosum
in sun reaction
in warts
Immersion (trench) foot
Immobilization
in ankle sprain
in brain injury
hypercalcemia and
,
in knee sprain
in musculoskeletal trauma
,
,
in snakebite
in spinal trauma
in sprains and tears
urinary incontinence and
Immune complexes
in IgA nephropathy
2390-2392
in loiasis
in lupus nephritis
in membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
,
in membranous nephropathy
in postinfectious glomerulonephritis
in rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
,
,
,
in rheumatoid arthritis
in SLE
Immune globulin
,
cytomegalovirus
in Guillain-Barre syndrome
in hepatitis A
in hepatitis B
,
in neonate
in immune thrombocytopenic purpura
in IgA nephropathy
in immunodeficiency
intravenous
,
in Kawasaki disease
in lymphocytopenia
in measles prevention
in multiple myeloma
in myasthenia gravis
prophylactic
in low-birth-weight infant
rabies
,
respiratory syncytial virus
Rh
(D)
,
,
,
in severe combined immunodeficiency
tetanus
,
,
in toxic epidermal necrolysis
vaccination and
vaccinia
,
varicella vaccination and
varicella-zoster
,
in virus infections
Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndromes
===PAGE:3906===
Immune response
primary
secondary (anamnestic, booster)
Immune system
1078-1090
,
,
,
(
see also
Antibodies; Antigens; Immunity;
Immunodeficiency; Immunoglobulins; Lymphocytes)
aging-related changes in
,
in cancer
1057-1061
in chronic fatigue syndrome
neonatal
in pulmonary infection
in rheumatoid arthritis
Immune (idiopathic) thrombocytopenic purpura
958-960
,
in pregnancy
Immunity
acquired (adaptive)
acquired (specific)
1149-1150
cellular
1057-1058
complement in
1085-1086
,
disorders of (
see
Allergy; Compromised host; Hypersensitivity reactions; Immunodeficiency)
human leukocyte antigens in
1084-1085
humoral
innate (natural)
innate (nonspecific)
nutritional support response and
protein-energy undernutrition and
,
vitamin D effects on
Immunization (
see also
Vaccination
and specific infections
)
passive
,
1178-1180
,
for travelers
,
Immunobead test
Immunocompromised host (
see
Compromised host; Immunodeficiency)
Immunodeficiency
1090-1108
B-cell
,
,
,
bronchiectasis and
cancer and
,
,
combined
,
common variable
,
,
eosinophilia and
HIV infection and
1438-1458
,
(
see also
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection)
iatrogenic
,
in infant
,
infections in
,
,
laboratory tests in
,
,
1099-1100
mucocutaneous candidiasis
1102-1103
physical examination in
,
physiologic
pneumonia and
1933-1936
,
prenatal diagnosis of
primary
,
1092-1094
,
,
secondary
,
,
severe combined
,
,
,
,
T-cell
,
,
,
,
,
Immunoelectrophoresis
Immunofluorescence
Immunoglobulin(s)
,
,
1083-1084
,
1149-1150
(
see also
Antibodies
and specific
immunoglobulins
)
in amyloidosis
===PAGE:3907===
blood levels of
classes of
fetal
in heavy chain diseases
1025-1027
,
infection prevention and
liver disease and
in multiple myeloma
,
1029-1032
structure of
,
Immunoglobulin A (IgA)
antibodies to
deficiency of
,
,
,
1104-1105
pneumonia with
deposition of
cutaneous
renal
2390-2392
heavy chain disease of
1025-1026
,
in pediatric HIV infection
secretory
,
bacterial inactivation of
Immunoglobulin D (IgD)
excessive
3027-3028
heavy chain disease of
Immunoglobulin E (IgE)
angioedema and
assessment of
in asthma
,
in bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
excessive
,
,
in food allergy
receptors for
serum
in type I hypersensitivity reactions
Immunoglobulin G (IgG)
assessment of
complement fixation test of
deficiency of
bronchiectasis and
pneumonia and
heavy chain disease of
1026-1027
,
in hemolytic anemia
infection prevention and
in multiple sclerosis
in pediatric HIV infection
subclasses of
Immunoglobulin M (IgM)
assessment of
complement fixation test of
deficiency of
pneumonia and
heavy chain disease of
,
in hepatitis A
immunodeficiency and
,
Immunomodulating drugs (
see also
Immunosuppressants; Immunotherapy)
in asthma
in atopic dermatitis
in inflammatory bowel disease
,
in myasthenia gravis
===PAGE:3908===
Immunoreactive trypsinogen
Immunosuppressants (
see also
Immunomodulating drugs)
cancer and
echinacea interactions with
in multiple sclerosis
in myositis
in pemphigus vulgaris
in red blood cell aplasia
in relapsing polychondritis
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
in SLE
,
in systemic sclerosis
in transplantation
1127-1128
vaccination and
Immunosuppression (
see
Compromised host; Immunodeficiency)
Immunotactoid glomerulopathy
2407-2408
Immunotherapy
1086-1090
,
1087-1089
in allergic rhinitis
in allergy
in asthma
in bee sting allergy
in cancer
1059-1061
in drug hypersensitivity
in drug-induced serum sickness
Imperforate anus
Impetigo
,
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator
,
,
,
magnetic resonance imaging and
after resuscitation
Impotence
2345-2348
(
see also
Erectile Dysfunction)
Inborn errors of metabolism
3009-3026
challenge testing in
evaluation of
3009-3011
myocardial dysfunction and
seizures and
Incapacity
3468-3469
Incest
Inclusion body myositis
Inclusion conjunctivitis
,
Inclusion cyst
vulvar
Incontinence
fecal
in children
2928-2929
hospitalization and
urinary
2352-2362
,
2355-2356
,
,
2360-2361
in children
2923-2928
,
,
-
,
drug interactions with
multiple system atrophy and
nocturnal
2923-2924
,
,
Indapamide
India ink stain
Indian childhood cirrhosis
Indigestion
74-76
,
Indinavir
in children
crystal formation and
===PAGE:3909===
milk thistle interactions with
Indium-111-labeled antibody imaging
Indium-111-labeled granulocyte imaging
Indoles
Indomethacin
in central diabetes insipidus
in elderly
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
in orthostatic hypotension
in patent ductus arteriosus
,
in reactive arthritis
Induration
Infant (
see also
Neonate)
airway clearance in
,
apparent life-threatening event in
2929-2931
,
birth defects in (
see
Congenital anomalies)
body surface area of
botulism in
,
,
,
chronic illness in
2754-2755
colic in
2725-2726
constipation in
2726-2731
,
2727-2728
,
2729-2730
crying by
2735-2737
,
-
death of
development in
2757-2760
,
2758-2759
of diabetic mother
diarrhea in
,
2737-2741
,
2738-2739
exercise for
fever in
2741-2745
,
,
,
gastrointestinal disorders in
2800-2806
glaucoma in
growth of
2756-2757
health supervision of
2710-2725
,
2710-2711
hearing evaluation in
,
immunodeficiency in
,
infection in
,
2840-2847
(
see also specific infections
)
large-for-gestational age
necrotizing enterocolitis in
nutrition in
2703-2709
,
physical examination for
postmature
premature
2776-2781
,
2779-2780
(
see also
Premature infant)
respiratory arrest in
respiratory disorders in
2865-2881
,
respiratory system of
resuscitation of
-
,
2266-2269
,
safety for
screening tests for
2710-2711
,
seizures in
,
2898-2900
separation anxiety in
2749-2750
sleeping problems in
2750-2751
sleep position for
small-for-gestational-age
2781-2782
stranger anxiety in
sudden death of
,
2939-2940
,
tetanus in
tooth eruption in
,
transient hypogammaglobulinemia in
,
===PAGE:3910===
vaccination for
2718-2719
,
2722-2724
,
vomiting by
2746-2749
,
well-child follow-up visits for
2710-2725
,
2710-2711
Infantile spasms (salaam seizures)
,
,
2899-2900
Infarct avid imaging
Infarction (
see also
Ischemia)
biliary
259-260
bone
362-365
,
,
390-391
cerebral
1646-1652
(
see also
Stroke)
hemiballismus and
hepatic
intestinal
myocardial
2099-2118
(
see also
Myocardial infarction)
optic
621-622
pulmonary
renal
retinal
613-614
spinal
1809-1810
Infection (
see also
Abscess; Sepsis;
and under specific organs and organisms
)
bacterial
1180-1225
(
see also
Bacterial infections)
biology of
1148-1165
burns and
,
,
central venous catheterization and
in children
2840-2847
(
see also specific infections
)
chromatography in
congenital
2811-2840
hemolytic anemia and
diabetes mellitus and
disseminated intravascular coagulation and
embolism and
eosinophilia and
facilitation of
1150-1151
fungal
1318-1335
(
see also
Fungal infection)
hospital-acquired
neonatal
2828-2829
pneumonia
1929-1932
,
host defenses against
1149-1150
defects in
immunodeficiency and
,
,
immunologic tests in
1168-1169
IV drug abuse and
IV immune globulin in
laboratory diagnosis of
,
1165-1170
lymphocytopenia and
manifestations of
1151-1152
neonatal
2811-2840
(
see also specific infections
)
hospital-acquired
2828-2829
seizures and
neutropenia and
,
,
,
non-nucleic acid-based identification tests in
1169-1170
nucleic acid-based identification tests in
parasite
1336-1342
,
1337-1340
,
(
see also
Parasite infections)
postpartum
maternal
2687-2688
neonatal
pregnancy and
,
2650-2651
,
,
2687-2688
,
in premature infant
===PAGE:3911===
protein-energy undernutrition and
,
radiation injury and
secondary immunodeficiency and
sexually transmitted
1466-1482
,
(
see also specific infections
)
splenectomy and
985-986
splenomegaly and
,
susceptibility testing in
terrorism and
1164-1165
transfusion-transmitted
,
,
transplantation and
,
in utero
viral
1394-1400
,
,
,
,
1401-1402
,
1402-1403
(
see also
Viral infection)
Infectious mononucleosis
,
,
1421-1423
(
see also
Mononucleosis, infectious)
Inferior vena cava filter
,
Infertility
2592-2598
,
autoimmune
male hypogonadism-related
unexplained
Infibulation
,
Inflammatory bowel disease
166-176
,
(
see also
Crohn's disease; Ulcerative colitis)
abscess in
adenocarcinoma in
amebic infection vs
bleeding in
bronchiectasis in
fever in
hepatic inflammation in
pregnancy and
primary sclerosing cholangitis and
pyoderma gangrenosum in
uveitis and
Inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (Guillain-Barre syndrome)
1788-1790
Inflammatory papillary hyperplasia
Inflammatory response
Infliximab
,
,
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
Influenza
,
1405-1408
,
avian (bird flu)
1408-1409
COPD and
drugs for
swine
1409-1410
vaccine against
,
1174-1175
,
1176-1177
,
,
,
,
,
,
in Kawasaki disease
in pediatric HIV infection
Informed consent
Infrapatellar tendinitis
Infrared heat therapy
,
Ingestion
Ingrown toenail
Inhalational fever
Inhalation challenge test
Inheritance (
see
Chromosome[s]; Genes)
Inherited disorders (
see
Genetic disorders)
Inherited disorders of metabolism
3009-3026
Inhibin B
Injury (
see also
Fracture; Trauma)
birth
2769-2774
===PAGE:3912===
head
3218-3227
,
,
,
,
overuse
spinal cord
3227-3231
,
,
spleen
Inocybe
poisoning
,
INR (international normalized ratio)
,
,
Insect
in ear canal
stings by
3308-3309
(
see also
Bites and stings)
Insecticides
poisoning with
3340-3341
,
Insemination, intrauterine
Insomnia
1703-1715
,
,
drugs and
,
in elderly
fatal
physical disorders and
psychophysiologic
SSRIs and
Inspiratory flow rate
Insufficient sleep syndrome
Insula
Insulin (
see also
Diabetes mellitus)
allergic reaction to
blood levels of
,
in calcium channel blocker poisoning
in chronic pancreatitis
dawn phenomenon with
in diabetes mellitus
,
,
in diabetic ketoacidosis
growth factor effects on
infection-related production of
in neonatal hyperglycemia
in nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome
in pheochromocytoma
potassium levels and
in pregnancy
,
preoperative
preparations of
,
regimens for type 1 diabetes mellitus
regimens for type 2 diabetes mellitus
resistance to
,
,
,
,
antiretrovirals and
pregnancy and
in septic shock
Somogyi phenomenon with
for surgical procedures
surreptitious administration of
for total parenteral nutrition
Insulinase
Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)
measurement of
,
,
in children
Insulin-like growth factor binding protein type 3 (IGFBP-3)
Insulinoma
198-200
,
hypoglycemia and
in MEN syndromes
,
===PAGE:3913===
Insulin resistance syndrome
64-65
,
Insulin tolerance test
,
Insurance, medical
,
3473-3480
Medicaid
3161-3162
Medicare
3155-3161
private
,
INTACS (intracorneal ring segments)
Integrase inhibitors
,
in children
Intellectual disability (mental retardation)
3044-3048
,
,
chromosomal abnormalities and
diagnosis of
,
in Down syndrome
in fetal alcohol syndrome
in fragile X syndrome
prevention of
Intelligence quotient (IQ)
Intensive care (
see
Critically ill patient)
Intention tremor
,
Intercostal retractions
Intercourse, sexual (
see
Sexual activity)
Interdisciplinary team
3115-3116
Interferon(s)
in cancer
,
,
in chronic hepatitis
,
in hepatitis C
in viral infection
Interferonα
in essential thrombocythemia
in genital warts
hyperthyroidism and
immune function of
therapeutic use of
,
tremors and
in warts
Interferonα
2b
in mastocytosis
in polycythemia vera
Interferonβ
immune function of
in multiple sclerosis
therapeutic use of
,
Interferonγ
in atopic dermatitis
in chronic granulomatous disease
fever and
immune function of
,
,
receptor defects of
therapeutic use of
,
Interleukin(s)
in cancer
,
immune function of
Interleukin-1
fever and
immune function of
Interleukin-2
receptor for, protein-energy undernutrition and
===PAGE:3914===
Interleukin-6
Interleukin-11
Interleukin-12
deficiency of
receptor
β
1 defect of
Intermittent pneumatic compression (
see
Pneumatic compression)
International normalized ratio (INR)
,
,
International prognostic index (IPI)
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
,
,
Interphalangeal joints
deformities of
dislocation of
range of motion of
Intersex states
,
Interstitial cystitis
2364-2365
Interstitial keratitis
591-592
Interstitial lung diseases
,
1943-1964
,
Interstitial pneumonia
,
1945-1952
,
1946-1947
,
drug-induced
lymphoid
,
,
1961-1962
Interstitial pneumonitis, lymphoid
,
,
1961-1962
Intertrigo
Intertrochanteric fracture
Interventricular septal rupture
Intervertebral disk herniation
,
,
1796-1797
ankylosing spondylitis vs
Intestinal lipodystrophy (Whipple's disease)
,
161-162
Intestine (
see also
Gastrointestinal tract)
congenital obstruction of
2978-2981
drug absorption in
duplication of
foreign bodies in
gas in
91-94
,
gastric mucosa transformation and
inflammatory disease of
166-176
intubation of
intussusception of
,
ischemia of
large (
see
Colon)
lymphangiectasia of
,
159-160
malrotation of
small (
see
Small intestine)
vitamin D effects on
Intimacy, in elderly
3143-3144
Intoxication
Intra-amniotic infection
2662-2663
Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation
,
Intracerebral hematoma
,
Intracorneal ring segments (INTACS)
Intracranial pressure
benign increase in
,
1720-1722
,
brain injury and
,
,
brain tumor and
hydrocephalus and
monitoring of
2246-2247
neonatal meningitis and
neurologic disorders and
===PAGE:3915===
papilledema and
622-623
,
,
Reye's syndrome and
stroke and
in stupor and coma
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection
,
Intradermal test
Intraductal papillary-mucinous tumor
Intraocular pressure
glaucoma and
,
hyphema and
screening of
Intraosseous infusion
Intraparenchymal monitor
Intraperitoneal abscess
117-119
,
Intrauterine devices (IUDs)
,
2589-2590
Intrauterine growth restriction
2781-2782
diabetes mellitus and
Intrauterine insemination
Intubation
endotracheal (orotracheal)
2273-2277
,
,
complications of
,
drugs for
2278-2279
in infant
,
pneumonia and
1929-1932
in stupor and coma
esophageal
intestinal
nasogastric
,
nasotracheal
Intussusception
,
,
In vitro fertilization
Iodide
during breastfeeding
in iodine deficiency
in pregnancy
in radiation exposure
Iodine
,
,
during breastfeeding
deficiency of
,
,
,
,
,
in hyperthyroidism
overingestion of
,
poisoning with
recommended dietary allowances for
in simple nontoxic goiter
toxicity of
,
Iodine-123 imaging
Iodine-123 uptake test
,
,
Iodine-131
in pregnancy
,
Iodine-131 tositumomab
Iodoform poisoning
Iodoquinol
Ion channels
,
in pharmacodynamics
Iontophoresis, tap water
Ipecac
IPEX (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked) syndrome
806-807
===PAGE:3916===
Ipratropium
as antitussive
in asthma
,
,
,
in COPD
,
in elderly
Irbesartan
Iridocorneal angle
Iridocyclitis
608-612
in Behcet's syndrome
juvenile idiopathic arthritis and
posttraumatic
Iridodonesis
Iridotomy
Irinotecan
Iris
blue-grey
hamartomas of
neovascularization of
Iritis
608-612
,
chemical
traumatic
Iron
,
53-54
(
see also
Ferrous)
absorption of
antidote for
blood levels of
,
,
chloramphenicol effects on
deficiency of
,
,
anemia and
,
924-927
,
in children
esophageal web in
glossitis in
malabsorption and
in neonate
pregnancy and
,
,
vegetarian diet and
dietary
hepatic accumulation of (hemochromatosis)
,
,
1032-1034
nephrotoxicity of
overload disease
,
1032-1035
,
(
see also
Hemochromatosis)
secondary
1034-1035
parenteral
poisoning with
3341-3342
,
,
in protein-energy undernutrition
recommended dietary allowances for
removal of (phlebotomy), in porphyria
requirement for
supplementation with
chamomile interactions with
dialysis and
endoscopy and
feverfew interactions with
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
in perinatal anemia
in pregnancy
,
,
St. John's wort interactions with
total body
transport deficiency of
,
===PAGE:3917===
Iron-binding capacity
Iron dextran, in pregnancy
Iron hematoxylin stain
Irradiation (
see
Radiation)
Irrigation
in chemical eye injury
in ocular foreign body
whole-bowel, in poisoning
,
,
wound
Irritable bowel syndrome
162-165
Isaacs' syndrome
Ischemia (
see also
Infarction)
biliary
259-260
bone
362-365
,
,
390-391
cerebral
1646-1652
(
see also
Stroke)
colonic
coronary (
see
Ischemia, myocardial)
foot
hepatic
259-260
mesenteric
109-111
,
myocardial
2099-2118
(
see also
Myocardial infarction)
dipyridamole-induced
silent
,
optic nerve
621-622
retinal
613-614
spinal
1809-1810
Ishihara color plates
Islet cell transplantation
,
1139-1140
Islet cell tumor (
see
Insulinoma)
Isobutyl nitrite
Isocarboxazid
,
poisoning with
Isodisomy
Isofenfos poisoning
Isoflurophate
Isograft
(
see also
Transplantation)
Isoimmunization
ABO
Rh
,
,
2665-2666
,
Isoleucine, requirement for
Isoniazid
antidote for
in infant
poisoning with
in pregnancy
pyridoxine with
in tuberculosis
,
vitamin interactions with
Isopropyl alcohol poisoning
Isoproterenol
in elderly
Isosorbide
in coronary artery disease
,
in heart failure
in portal hypertension
Isosporiasis
,
Isotretinoin
===PAGE:3918===
in acne
,
,
in ichthyosis
in pregnancy
in psoriasis
Isovaleric acidemia
Isoxsuprine, in elderly
Isradipine
Itching (
see
Pruritus)
ITP (
see
Immune [idiopathic] thrombocytopenic purpura)
Itraconazole
,
,
in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
drug interactions of
,
in onychomycosis
in tinea capitis
Ivemark's syndrome
Ivermectin
in lice infestation
in onchocerciasis
in scabies
,
in strongyloidiasis
IVF (in vitro fertilization)
===PAGE:3919===
J
Jaccoud's arthritis
Jacksonian seizures
Jail fever
1282-1284
Janeway lesions
Jantene operation
Japanese encephalitis
,
vaccine against
,
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction
,
,
Jaundice
212-217
,
,
,
(
see also
Bilirubin; Kernicterus)
erythromycin-induced
inborn errors of metabolism and
infection and
leptospirosis and
neonatal
,
,
,
2788-2794
,
,
,
α
-antitrypsin deficiency and
cholestasis and
2804-2806
,
obstructive (
see
Cholestasis)
postoperative
223-224
in premature infant
viral hepatitis and
Jaw (
see also
Mandible; Maxilla; Temporomandibular joint)
claudication of
fractures of
3232-3233
lock1296-1299
,
lumpy
osteonecrosis of
,
,
tumors of
Jaw lift
JC virus
Jejunostomy tube
21-23
,
Jejunum
atresia of
clostridial necrotizing enteritis of
diverticular disease of
in malabsorption syndromes
obstruction of
congenital
2978-2981
Jellyfish sting
3310-3311
Jendrassik's maneuver
,
Jequirity bean poisoning
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome
Jet lag
,
melatonin and
Jeune's syndrome
Jo-1 antibodies
Jock itch
707-708
Jod-Basedow phenomenon
Joint(s) (
see also
Arthritis
and specific disorders and joints
)
aging-related changes in
aspiration of (
see
Arthrocentesis)
Charcot's
348-349
,
,
,
crystal deposition in
349-355
(
see also
Gout)
degenerative disease of
345-348
(
see also
Osteoarthritis)
dislocation of
,
3213-3215
===PAGE:3920===
disorders of
332-349
evaluation of
283-297
,
,
,
,
293-294
,
,
immobilization of
,
infections of
365-372
,
,
366-367
,
chronic
369-370
neurogenic disease of
348-349
,
pain in
,
,
288-292
,
,
292-297
,
293-294
,
,
rubella vaccine and
palpation of
prosthetic
infection of
in osteonecrosis
in rheumatoid arthritis
range of motion of
,
,
in rheumatic fever
,
rheumatoid disease of
332-339
,
,
,
338-339
(
see also
Rheumatoid arthritis)
sarcoidosis of
sprain of
tuberculosis of
tumors of
Jones compression dressing
Jones criteria
,
Jones fracture
Jugular veins
,
,
in atrioventricular block
distention of
,
,
in heart failure
infection of
in tricuspid regurgitation
in tricuspid stenosis
Jumper's knee
,
Junctional tachycardia, nonparoxysmal
Junin virus infection
,
Juvenile hemochromatosis
Juvenile idiopathic (rheumatoid) arthritis
,
339-341
gout vs
uveitis in
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
,
Juvenile-onset spondyloarthropathy
===PAGE:3921===
K
Kala-azar
KALIG-1
gene
Kallmann syndrome
,
,
,
Kanamycin
1198-1201
,
neonatal dosage of
ototoxicity of
in tuberculosis
Kanavel's signs
Kaposi's sarcoma
753-754
,
of gastrointestinal tract
of heart
of palate
,
Kaposi's varicelliform eruption
Karelian fever
Karotype
2997-3005
Kartagener's syndrome
Karyotype
Kasabach-Merritt syndrome
Kasai procedure
Kashin-Beck disease
Kassirer-Bleich equation
Katayama fever
Kava
,
3429-3430
Kawasaki disease
,
2935-2937
,
toxic shock syndrome vs
Kayser-Fleischer rings
Kearns-Sayre syndrome
,
Kegel exercises
,
Keloid
,
,
,
Keratectomy, photorefractive
573-574
Keratinization, vitamin A deficiency and
Keratinous cyst
Keratitis
amebic
,
1378-1379
contact lens-related
,
dendritic
disciform
herpes simplex
589-590
,
,
herpes zoster
590-591
,
interstitial
591-592
microsporidial
onchocercal
parenchymatous
591-592
punctate
ulcerative
ultraviolet
,
xerotic
Keratitis filiformis
Keratoacanthoma
,
,
743-744
Keratoconjunctivitis
adenoviral
581-582
,
,
atopic
584-585
epidemic
,
,
herpes simplex
589-590
in neonate
===PAGE:3922===
phlyctenular
594-595
vernal
584-585
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
,
592-593
in Sjogren's syndrome
Keratoconus
593-594
Keratoderma blennorrhagicum
Keratolysis
Keratolysis exfoliativa
Keratolytics
Keratomalacia
,
Keratomileusis
Keratopathy, bullous
587-588
Keratoplasty
,
595-597
Keratoses
actinic
seborrheic
,
cancer-related
Keratosis pilaris
662-663
Keratotomy
Keraunoparalysis
Kerion
,
Kerley B lines
,
Kernicterus
,
2793-2794
Kernig's sign
Kerosene poisoning
Keshan disease
Ketamine
abuse of
in endotracheal intubation
Ketoacidosis
alcoholic
886-887
diabetic
883-885
electrolyte loss and
hyperkalemia and
hypokalemia and
Ketoconazole
,
in Cushing's syndrome
drug interactions of
in ectopic ACTH syndrome
in precocious puberty
Ketolides
,
1214-1215
Ketones
poisoning with
urinary
,
,
Ketoprofen
Ketorolac
in elderly
17-Ketosteroids, urinary
Ketotifen
Kidney(s) (
see also
Renal)
abscess of
acute injury to
2436-2442
,
,
,
agenesis of
2982-2983
aging-related changes in
aminoglycoside toxicity to
1199-1201
amphotericin B toxicity to
amyloidosis of
,
,
===PAGE:3923===
angiomyolipoma of
biopsy of
in IgA nephropathy
in lupus nephritis
in nephrotic syndrome
in postinfectious glomerulonephritis
in rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
in SLE
in tubulointerstitial disease
blood supply to
calculi in
2369-2372
,
cancer of
2473-2475
cystic disease and
metastatic
staging of
2466-2468
Candida
infection of
congenital anomalies of
2982-2983
,
2988-2992
,
contrast toxicity to
,
,
,
2441-2442
cyclosporine effects on
cystic disease of
2381-2387
,
2382-2383
autosomal recessive
disease of
ACE inhibitors and
acute
alveolar hemorrhage with
1990-1992
,
anemia and
antihypertensives and
atherosclerosis and
chronic
2442-2446
,
,
,
diagnostic approach to
2306-2313
drug interactions with
heart failure and
Henoch-Schonlein purpura and
hypocalcemia and
infection and
inflammatory bowel disease and
liver disease and
222-223
paraneoplastic
pregnancy and
2647-2648
Sjogren's syndrome and
SLE and
,
systemic sclerosis and
Wegener's granulomatosis and
drug excretion by
,
,
,
in elderly
,
drug toxicity to
2412-2414
,
,
,
,
duplex
dysplasia of
congenital cystic
2381-2383
,
multicystic
ectopic
failure of (
see
Renal failure)
function of, evaluation of
2312-2313
fusion of
glomerular diseases of
2387-2411
,
heavy metal toxicity to
2419-2420
horseshoe
===PAGE:3924===
in hypertension
,
2429-2430
,
hypoplasia of
imaging of
2314-2316
in tubulointerstitial disease
infection of (
see
Pyelonephritis)
inflammation of (
see
Glomerulonephritis; Nephritis)
lithium toxicity to
malrotation of
medullary cystic disease of
,
2384-2385
myeloma-related disease of
2421-2422
neonatal
,
,
obstruction of
2365-2369
,
pancake
pH regulation by
in polyarteritis nodosa
polycystic disease of
,
2385-2387
autosomal recessive
potassium excretion by
,
in pregnancy
of premature infant
radiation effects on
removal of (nephrectomy)
sarcoidosis of
shock-related injury to
sodium excretion by
,
sponge
2383-2384
stones in
2369-2372
,
transplantation of
1133-1134
in amyloidosis
in autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease
in diabetic nephropathy
in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
in rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
rejection of
,
warts and
transport disorders of
2422-2428
congenital
2988-2992
,
trauma to
3240-3241
,
tuberculosis of
tubulointerstitial diseases of
2412-2422
vascular disorders of
2429-2435
(
see also
Hypertension)
vitamin D effects on
Kienbock's disease
390-391
Kingella
infection
1275-1276
Kinky-hair syndrome
,
Kirby-Bauer test
Klatskin tumor
Klebsiella
infection
,
meningeal
Kleihauer-Betke test
,
,
Kleine-Levin syndrome
Klinefelter's syndrome
,
,
,
Klippel-Feil malformation
Klippel-Feil syndrome
Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome
Klumpke's palsy
Kluver-Bucy syndrome
===PAGE:3925===
Knee
arthrocentesis of
bursitis of
dislocation of
,
,
in neonate
effusion of
evaluation of
housemaid's
instability (buckling) of
jumper's
,
ligaments of
,
osteoarthritis of
osteonecrosis of
pain in
,
3302-3303
in infrapatellar tendinitis
range of motion of
runner's
sprains of
3217-3218
Knee jerk reflex
Knock-knees
Koebner phenomenon
,
,
Kohler's bone disease
2913-2915
Koilonychia
Koplik's spots
,
Korean hemorrhagic fever
1433-1434
Korotkoff sounds
Korsakoff's psychosis
,
,
Kostmann's syndrome (severe congenital neutropenia)
,
Kouwenhoven's factors
Krabbe's disease
3021-3022
K-ras
gene
Kuru
Kussmaul's respiration
,
,
Kussmaul's sign
,
,
Kwashiorkor
14-18
,
Kyasanur Forest disease
,
,
Kyphoplasty
Kyphoscoliosis
,
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Kyphosis
ankylosing spondylitis and
osteoporosis and
in Scheuermann's disease
===PAGE:3926===
L
LAAM (levomethadyl acetate)
Labetalol
in aortic dissection
in hypertensive emergency
,
in pregnancy
Labor and delivery
2627-2634
,
(
see also
Birth)
abnormal presentations during
,
analgesia for
anesthesia for
,
breech presentation during
cardiac output during
care after
2685-2690
,
complications of
,
2676-2684
diabetes mellitus and
dystocia in
2678-2680
fetal monitoring during
2630-2631
,
fetopelvic disproportion during
forceps for
head molding during
hemorrhage after
2680-2681
,
induction of
infection with
inverted uterus and
Leopold maneuvers for
,
meconium aspiration during
2872-2873
occiput posterior presentation during
premature rupture of membranes and
,
preterm
,
(
see also
Premature infant)
protracted
2683-2684
Ringer's lactate during
shoulder dystocia during
stages of
transverse lie during
umbilical cord prolapse and
uterine rupture and
Laboratory tests (
see also specific tests
)
in acute renal failure
blood, reference values for
3491-3499
cerebrospinal fluid
in clinical decision making
3389-3398
,
,
,
,
commonly used panels
false-negative
false-positive
gastric acid
likelihood ratio in
odds-likelihood formulation for
,
predictive values in
preoperative
sensitivity of
,
specificity of
,
stool
threshold for
3386-3387
urine, reference values for
3500-3501
Laboratory worker's lung
Labyrinthitis
,
===PAGE:3927===
Lacerations
3193-3200
,
,
,
ocular
3237-3238
Lachman's test
Lacrimal apparatus
obstruction of
566-570
,
,
palpation of
Lacrimal sac
infection of
577-578
Lacrimal system, disorders of
575-579
La Crosse encephalitis
,
β
-Lactam antibiotics
,
1185-1191
,
1201-1206
(
see also
Penicillin; Cephalosporins)
Lactase deficiency
,
157-158
Lactate, serum, in shock
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
in anemia
blood levels of
disease-related alterations in
Lactation
(
see also
Breastfeeding; Breast milk)
abnormal
770-772
suppression of
Lactic acid, blood levels of
Lactic acidosis
861-862
Lactobacillus
Lactobionate
Lactose-H
breath test
,
Lactose intolerance
157-158
diarrhea with
,
irritable bowel syndrome and
protein-energy undernutrition and
test for
157-158
,
Lactose tolerance test
,
Lactotrophs
Lactulose
constipation and
,
,
diarrhea and
in portal-systemic encephalopathy
Lacunar infarct
,
,
Laguna Negra virus infection
Lambert-Eaton syndrome
Lamin A
Laminaria
Lamivudine
,
in children
in chronic hepatitis B
,
Lamotrigine
in bipolar disorder
,
during breastfeeding
in seizures
Langer-Giedion syndrome
Langerhans' cell
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis (granulomatosis)
,
993-995
pulmonary
1963-1964
Language
development of
autism and
dyslexia and
loss of
1640-1642
,
===PAGE:3928===
Lanreotide
Lansoprazole
,
,
in gastroesophageal reflux disease
in
Helicobacter pylori
infection
Lanthanum carbonate
Laparoscopy
in appendicitis
in gynecologic evaluation
Laparotomy
Lapatinib
Large-for-gestational-age infant
,
Large intestine (
see
Colon)
Larsen's syndrome
Larva migrans
,
ocular
1352-1353
visceral
1352-1353
Laryngeal mask airway
,
Laryngectomy
Laryngitis
482-483
Laryngoceles
483-484
Laryngoscopy
in airway control
,
in epiglottitis
in smoke inhalation
Laryngospasm
Laryngotracheobronchitis
,
2879-2881
Larynx
cancer of
489-491
evaginations of
483-484
inflammation of
482-483
spastic dystonia of
tumors of
ulcers of
,
visualization of
,
Laser peripheral iridotomy
Laser trabeculoplasty
LASIK (laser in situ keratomileusis)
Lassa fever
,
,
,
1434-1435
Latanoprost
Lateral epicondylitis
3300-3301
Lateral sclerosis
Latetalol
Latex agglutination test
Latex allergy
,
Latrodectism
,
Laurence-Moon syndrome
Lavage
bronchoalveolar
in hypersensitivity pneumonitis
in pneumonia
in pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
in sarcoidosis
gastric, in poisoning
nasogastric
whole lung
in pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
in silicosis
===PAGE:3929===
Laxatives
,
abuse of
,
,
,
for children,
-
for dying patient
for elderly
porphyria and
Lazarus sign
LCAT deficiency
Lead
blood levels of
,
nephrotoxicity of
poisoning with
,
,
3342-3344
,
Lead encephalopathy
Lead-pipe rigidity
Learning disabilities
3040-3044
,
in adolescents
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy
,
,
Lecithin-cholesterol acyl transferase
,
deficiency of
Leflunomide, in rheumatoid arthritis
,
Le Fort classification
Left bundle branch block
,
Left ventricular assist device
Left ventricular dysfunction (
see
Heart failure)
Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure
,
,
,
Leg(s)
amputation of
,
3465-3466
cellulitis of
694-696
,
claudication in
,
cutaneous nerves of
edema of
,
,
,
during pregnancy
2618-2620
,
,
examination of
hereditary spastic paraparesis of
nocturnal cramps of
pain in
383-384
peripheral vascular disease in (
see
Peripheral vascular disorders)
prosthetic
,
3465-3466
restless
,
1714-1715
shin splints in
stasis dermatitis of
671-672
Legal issues
3468-3473
disclosure
do-not-resuscitate order
dying patient and
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
,
Legionella
infection
,
1253-1254
,
,
,
1926-1927
,
phagocytosis in
Legionnaires' disease
Leigh disease
Leiomyoma
esophageal
small-bowel
Leishmaniasis
,
,
,
1379-1381
Lemierre syndrome
,
Lenalidomide
===PAGE:3930===
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
Lens (
see also
Contact lenses)
examination of
implant of
opacity of
606-607
subluxation of
Lensectomy
Lenticulostriate arteries
Lentigines
,
Lentigo maligna melanoma
,
Leopard syndrome
Leopold maneuvers
,
Lepirudin
,
Leprosy
,
1316-1318
Leptin
Leptophos poisoning
Leptospirosis
,
,
1267-1268
Leriche syndrome
,
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
,
,
3024-3025
Leser-Trelat sign
,
LET (lidocaine, epinephrine, tetracaine)
Letdown reflex
Letrozole
,
Letterer-Siwe disease
,
(
see also
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis [granulomatosis])
Leucine
Leucovorin
Leu-enkephalin
Leukapheresis
Leukemia
1004-1015
acute
1005-1010
,
antilymphocyte serum in
chronic
,
1010-1014
,
classification of
1004-1005
,
cytapheresis in
dental procedures in
fever in
gingivitis in
granulocytic
,
1012-1014
hairy cell
liver in
lymphocytic (lymphoblastic)
acute
,
,
1007-1009
,
chronic
1010-1012
,
lymphoma
,
mast cell
myeloblastic
myelocytic (myelogenous, myeloid)
acute
,
1009-1010
chronic
1012-1014
pseudohypokalemia in
myelomonocytic
1014-1015
,
non-Hodgkin lymphoma vs
orbital extension of
pneumonia with
pregnancy and
promyelocytic
Leukemoid reaction
===PAGE:3931===
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
,
,
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase score
,
,
Leukocyte esterase test
,
,
,
in children
Leukocytes (
see
White blood cells)
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
318-319
Leukocytosis
Leukodystrophy, metachromatic
Leukoencephalopathy, multifocal
1731-1732
Leukomalacia
Leukonychia partialis
Leukopenia
(
see also
Neutropenia)
cancer therapy and
1074-1075
sarcoidosis and
SLE and
Leukoplakia
,
HIV and
Leukotriene modifiers
,
1879-1880
,
Leuprolide acetate
in endometriosis
in prostate cancer
in uterine fibroids
Levalbuterol
,
Levator syndrome
183-184
Levetiracetam
Levin tube
Levobetaxolol
Levobunolol
Levocetirizine
Levodopa
in elderly
,
,
3096-3097
,
in multiple system atrophy
in Parkinson's disease
,
vitamin B
deficiency and
Levodopa test
Levofloxacin
,
1208-1210
,
,
in tuberculosis
Levomethadyl acetate (LAAM)
Levonordefrin
Levonorgestrel
Levorphanol
,
Lewy bodies, Parkinson's disease and
,
Lewy body dementia
,
1681-1682
Leydig cells
aplasia of
LH (
see
Luteinizing hormone)
Lhermitte's sign
,
,
LIA (line immunoassay)
Libido
female
male
Libman-Sacks lesions
Lice
711-713
,
712-713
relapsing fever and
1272-1273
typhus and
,
1282-1284
Lichenification
Lichen planopilaris
===PAGE:3932===
Lichen planus
,
,
,
681-683
,
nail deformities in
penile
Lichen sclerosus
Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus
Lichen simplex chronicus
,
669-670
Licorice
,
,
,
Liddle syndrome
,
2423-2424
Lidocaine
in arrhythmias
2148-2149
in elderly
in endotracheal intubation
in herpetic gingivostomatitis
topical
,
in wound treatment
Life-care communities
,
Life expectancy
Lifestyle, disease prevention and
Lift-off test
Ligand
Light
sensitivity to, cutaneous
672-676
,
,
therapy with
in atopic dermatitis
in depression
in psoriasis
in vitiligo
Light chain deposition disease
Lightning injury
3250-3251
Light's criteria
,
Likelihood ratio
,
,
Limb
missing (congenital)
prosthetic
,
3465-3466
Limb-girdle dystrophy
Limp
Limulus amebocyte lysate test
Lincosamides
1210-1211
Lindane
in lice
712-713
poisoning with
in scabies
,
toxicity of
Linea alba
,
Linear immunoglobulin A disease
Line immunoassay (LIA)
Linezolid
,
,
1211-1212
Linitis plastica
Linoleic acid
deficiency of
Linolenic acid
deficiency of
Liothyronine
Lip(s)
cancer of
,
,
491-492
cleft
cold sores of
,
,
===PAGE:3933===
disorders of
herpes simplex virus infection of
,
,
riboflavin deficiency and
Lipase, serum
in pancreatitis
Lipedema
Lipemia retinalis
Lipid emulsions
Lipid-lowering drugs
901-902
Lipidoses
3020-3021
Lipid profile
Lipids
889-905
(
see also
Dyslipidemia; Fat; Lipoprotein[s]; Triglycerides)
Lipid storage diseases (
see
Lipidoses)
Lipiduria
Lipodermatosclerosis
Lipodystrophy, intestinal
,
161-162
Lipohyalinosis
Lipoid nephrosis
2406-2407
,
Lipoid pneumonia
Lipoma
,
cardiac
Lipoprotein(a)
,
atherosclerosis and
elevation of
Lipoprotein(s)
(
see also
Dyslipidemia)
cigarette smoking and
drug binding to
drug effects on
high-density
atherosclerosis and
deficiency of
elevation of
low levels of
oral contraceptives and
recombinant
intermediate-density
low-density
apheresis of
atherosclerosis and
in children
decrease of
904-905
diuretic effects on
elevation of
,
,
901-902
measurement of
,
niacin effects on
very-low-density
Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A

Lipoprotein lipase, deficiency of
β
-Lipotropin
5-Lipoxygenase
Lip reading
Liraglutide
,

Lisch nodules
Lisfranc's fracture
Lisinopril
in elderly
in hypertension
===PAGE:3934===
Lissencephaly
Listeremia
Listeriosis
,
meningeal
,
,
neonatal
,
2829-2830
phagocytosis in
in pregnancy
Lithium
adverse effects of
in bipolar disorder
,
during breastfeeding
drug interactions of
in elderly
hypothyroidism and
in mania
in migraine
poisoning with
in pregnancy
tremors and
Lithostatin deficiency
Lithotripsy
Liver (
see also
Hepatic)
abscess of
,
,
acetaminophen-induced disease of
3329-3333
,
,
adenoma of
oral contraceptives and
aging-related changes in
alcohol-induced disease of
,
235-239
,
amebiasis of
amyloidosis and
angiosarcoma of
benign tumors of
bilirubin metabolism in
biopsy of
231-232
,
in hepatitis
,
blood supply of
cancer of
,
,
265-267
,
hepatitis B and
cellular organization of
cirrhosis of
240-246
,
,
,
(
see also
Cirrhosis)
congestion of
copper accumulation in (Wilson's disease)
,
cysts of
,
,
disease of
α
-antitrypsin deficiency and
approach to
205-224
,
,
208-209
ascites and
206-211
circulatory abnormalities in
coagulation disorders and
cutaneous abnormalities in
drug metabolism and
232-233
electrolyte abnormalities in
222-223
encephalopathy in
220-222
,
,
endocrine abnormalities in
hematologic abnormalities in
hepatopulmonary syndrome in
infection and
===PAGE:3935===
jaundice in
212-217
,
,
,
macrocytosis in
pleural effusion and
portal hypertension in
218-220
,
pregnancy and
2644-2645
renal abnormalities in
222-223
risk factors for
systemic abnormalities in
222-223
total parenteral nutrition and
undernutrition with
drug-induced disease of
233-234
,
drug metabolism by
232-233
,
,
,
,
3177-3178
,
3179-3180
in elderly
,
enlargement of (
see
Hepatomegaly)
fatty
211-212
,
of pregnancy
tetracycline and
fibrolamellar carcinoma of
fibrosis of
,
239-240
,
focal nodular hyperplasia of
granulomas of
268-270
,
heart failure and
,
,
hemangioma of
hepatitis of
246-258
(
see also
Hepatitis)
hepatoblastoma of
HIV infection and
hydatid disease of
,
,
1362-1363
imaging studies of
229-231
inborn errors of metabolism and
infarction of
inflammatory bowel disease and
inflammatory disease of
246-258
,
248-249
,
,
,
(
see also
Hepatitis)
ischemic disease of
259-260
jaundice in (
see
Jaundice)
in kidney disease
222-223
laboratory tests of
,
224-229
,
laceration of
in leukemia
lymphoma of
masses of
265-270
metastases to
in colorectal cancer
in lung cancer
neonatal
nodular hyperplasia of
polycystic disease of
polycystic kidney disease and
porphyria and
postoperative disorders of
223-224
Q fever and
regeneration of
sarcoidosis of
schistosomiasis and
shock-related injury to
tenderness of
transplantation of
1134-1136
in alcoholic liver disease
===PAGE:3936===
in amyloidosis
complications of
contraindications to
donor for
hepatitis recurrence after
ischemic cholangiopathy and
in primary biliary cirrhosis
in primary sclerosing cholangitis
rejection of
,
tuberculosis of
tumors of
,
ultrasonography of
vascular disease of
259-264
venous congestion of
Liver fluke infection
1355-1356
,
1356-1357
Liver function tests
Liver spots
Living alone
3141-3142
Living arrangements
Living will
,
Lizard bite
Loa loa
infection
,
1345-1346
Lobular glomerulonephritis
,
2408-2409
Locked-in syndrome
Lockjaw
1296-1299
,
Locomotor ataxia
,
Loffler's syndrome (pneumonia)
,
nematode infection and
,
,
Lofgren's syndrome
,
Loiasis
,
1345-1346
Lomustine
Long-chain hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Long QT interval syndrome
2176-2177
anorexia nervosa and
antipsychotic-induced
Long-term care
funding for
insurance for
Loop diuretics (
see
Diuretics)
Looser's lines
Loperamide
in Crohn's disease
in gastroenteritis
,
in ulcerative colitis
Lopinavir
in children
Loracarbef
Loratadine
,
Lorazepam
in agitation
in alcohol withdrawal
in anxiety
for critical care patient
in elderly
in neonatal seizures
in seizures
Losartan
===PAGE:3937===
Lotions
Lou Gehrig disease
Louse-borne relapsing fever
1272-1273
Louse-borne typhus
1282-1284
Lovastatin
drug interactions of
Low back pain
378-385
,
Low-density Lipoprotein (
see
Lipoprotein[s], low-density)
Loxapine
poisoning with
Loxoscelism
β
-LPH (
β
-lipotropin)
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide)
1530-1531
,
Lubiprostone
Ludwig's angina
470-471
,
Lues (
see
Syphilis)
Lumbago (
see
Low back pain)
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
,
headache after
1724-1725
Lumbar spine
stenosis of
subluxation of
Lumbosacral plexus
Lumbosacral plexus disorders
Lumefantrine
,
Lumpectomy
,
Lumpy jaw
Lunate bone
avascular necrosis of
390-391
fracture of
Lung fluke infection
Lungs (
see also
Pulmonary; Respiratory)
α
-antitrypsin deficiency and
abscess of
1937-1939
,
acid-base balance and
acute injury to
,
,
,
aging-related changes in
air pollution-related illness of
1971-1972
in altitude sickness
amyloidosis of
auscultation of
barotrauma to
3283-3284
,
biopsy of
black
1977-1979
bleeding from
1837-1841
,
1838-1839
,
1989-1990
,
brown
building-related diseases of
1976-1977
bullae of
,
,
cancer of
2004-2012
,
,
asbestosis and
non-small cell
,
,
,
positron emission tomography in
small cell
,
,
,
solitary nodule and
staging for
2008-2009
carcinoid tumor of
chemical-induced disease of
===PAGE:3938===
chronic obstructive disorders of
1868-1888
(
see also
Asthma; Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
[COPD])
coal workers'
1977-1979
collapsed (
see
Pneumothorax)
compost
in COPD
cotton-induced disease of
in cystic fibrosis
,
dead space of
disorders of, symptoms of
1826-1850
drug-induced disease of
1952-1953
,
during pregnancy
dust-induced disease of
,
1971-1982
eosinophilic disease of
1953-1955
,
eosinophilic granuloma of
1963-1964
examination of
1860-1868
fetal
maturity of
,
fibrosis of
,
1948-1950
,
,
asbestos-induced
1972-1973
coal-induced
silica-induced
function of (
see
Pulmonary function testing)
gas-induced injury to
1983-1984
hemoptysis from
1837-1841
,
1838-1839
hemorrhage in
1989-1990
hemosiderosis of
histiocyte proliferation in
1963-1964
host defenses of
hot tub
humidifier
hypersensitivity diseases of
occupation-related
1956-1960
,
1956-1957
,
idiopathic fibrosis of
,
1948-1950
,
infection of (
see also
Pneumonia)
bacterial
1923-1937
barriers to
fungal
1323-1325
,
1330-1332
,
1887-1888
,
,
interstitial diseases of
1943-1964
,
irritant gas-induced injury to
1983-1984
in Langerhans' cell granulomatosis
lavage of (
see
Lavage)
lymphangioleiomyomatosis of
1960-1961
lymphocyte proliferation in
1946-1947
,
,
1961-1962
marijuana effects on
near drowning injury to
needle aspiration of
neonatal
nocardiosis of
1242-1243
obstructive disorders of
,
,
occupation-related diseases of
1956-1960
,
1956-1957
,
,
1971-1984
postural drainage of
proteinosis of
1962-1963
radiation effects on
rehabilitation for
1867-1868
resection of, in COPD
restrictive disorders of
,
,
===PAGE:3939===
silicosis of
1980-1983
in SLE
smoke inhalation injury to
solitary nodule of
1841-1844
,
,
in systemic sclerosis
tap water
toxic gas-induced injury to
1983-1984
transfusion-related injury to
transplantation of
1136-1138
,
,
in COPD
in Langerhans' cell granulomatosis
in pulmonary hypertension
rejection of
,
trapped
,
,
tumors of
2004-2014
,
vascular disease of
ventilation/perfusion scan of
,
,
ventilator-associated injury to
in Wegener's granulomatosis
Lupus nephritis
Lupus anticoagulant
Lupus erythematosus
discoid
drug-induced
nephritis in
2409-2411
,
subacute cutaneous
systemic
305-309
,
,
(
see also
Systemic lupus erythematosus)
Lupus nephritis
2409-2411
Lupus pernio
Lupus pneumonitis
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
,
blood levels of
,
,
deficiency of
,
isolated
in infertility treatment
in male hypogonadism
,
in menstrual cycle
,
in ovulation disorders
at puberty
,
,
Luxatio erecta
Lycoperdonosis
Lyme disease
1268-1272
,
,
arthritis and
,
,
,
fever in
Lymphadenitis
mycobacterial
tuberculous
Lymphadenopathy
in breast cancer
in Hodgkin lymphoma
in non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in sarcoidosis
,
Lymphangiectasia, intestinal
159-160
Lymphangiography
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
1960-1961
Lymphangioma
Lymphangioma circumscriptum
===PAGE:3940===
Lymphangiosarcoma
Lymphangitis
,
Lymphatic channels, infection of
Lymphatic malformations
Lymphedema
,
2235-2236
axillary dissection and
filariasis and
lymphogranuloma venereum and
Lymphedema praecox
Lymphedema tarda
Lymph nodes
biopsy of
in immunodeficiency
filariasis of
,
1346-1347
,
infection of
listeriosis of
obstruction of, edema and
Lymphoblastic leukemia
,
,
1007-1009
Lymphocytapheresis
Lymphocytes
1081-1083
B
,
(
see also
Immunoglobulins)
defects of, in immunodeficiency
,
,

memory
receptor of
fetal
normal blood value for
phenotyping of
,
radiation effects on
,
in rheumatoid arthritis
T
,
,
defects of, in immunodeficiency
apoptosis of
CD4+
berylliosis and
HIV infection and
,
,
1457-1458
,
,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis and
Pneumocystis
pneumonia and
reference values for
sarcoidosis and
undernutrition and
,
CD8+
in chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
1102-1103
cytotoxic
,
,
,
defects of, in immunodeficiency
,
in delayed hypersensitivity reactions
in food allergy
helper
,
,
,
mitogen-induced proliferation of
,
receptors of
regulatory
,
,
,
tumor-infiltrating
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
,
,
1435-1436
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis
,
,
1961-1962
Lymphocytic leukemia
acute
,
,
1007-1009
chronic
,
1010-1012
,
Lymphocytic thyroiditis
,
,
779-780
===PAGE:3941===
hypothyroidism in
silent
,
787-788
Lymphocytopenia
,
952-954
,
,
radiation injury and
sarcoidosis and
SLE and
Lymphoepithelial cyst
Lymphogranuloma venereum
1474-1475
Lymphohistiocytosis
995-996
Lymphoid hyperplasia, conjunctival
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia
,
,
1961-1962
Lymphokine-activated killer cells
,
Lymphokines
Lymphoma
1016-1024
,
in AIDS
bone
brain
Burkitt's
1023-1024
cardiac
,
CNS
cyclosporine and
eosinophilia in
,
fever in
hepatic
Hodgkin
1016-1019
,
,
,
(
see also
Hodgkin lymphoma)
hypercalcemia and
,
large cell, anaplastic
,
MALT
,
,
mediastinal
Menetrier's disease vs
mycosis fungoides
non-Hodgkin
,
1020-1024
,
staging of
,
orbital
small-bowel
,
T-cell, cutaneous
Lymphopenia (
see
Lymphocytopenia)
Lymphoproliferative disorders
cyclosporine and
splenomegaly in
,
tacrolimus and
Lymphoproliferative syndrome, X-linked
,
,
Lyon hypothesis
Lypressin (lysine-8-vasopressin)
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
1530-1531
,
Lysine
Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency
Lysosomal storage disorders
3019-3022
===PAGE:3942===
M
Machado-Joseph disease
Machupo virus infection
,
Macroamylasemia
Macrocephaly
Macrocytosis
alcoholic liver disease and
nonmegaloblastic
Macroglobulinemia
,
1027-1028
Macroglossia
,
Macrolides
1192-1193
,
1212-1215
,
,
Macrominerals
,
,
,
deficiency of
47-55
,
recommended dietary allowances for
toxicity of
47-55
,
Macronutrients
,
requirements for
,
,
Macrophages
in atherosclerosis
in cancer
defects in
in rheumatoid arthritis
in silicosis
Macular degeneration, age-related
,
,
,
612-613
Macular pucker
Macule
Maculopapular rash
Maculopathy, cellophane
Mad cow disease
1729-1730
blood transfusion and
Maduromycosis (Madura foot)
1332-1333
Mafenide acetate
Magnesium
852-854
blood levels of
,
deficiency of
,
,
,
852-854
,
diarrhea and
malabsorption and
metabolic alkalosis and
pancreatitis and
protein-energy undernutrition treatment and
dietary
,
852-854
excess of
recommended dietary allowance for
in torsades de pointes
Magnesium ammonium phosphate crystals
,
Magnesium chloride
Magnesium citrate
Magnesium gluconate
,
Magnesium hydroxide
,
Magnesium sulfate
in asthma
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
in constipation
in hypomagnesemia
in neonatal seizures
in preeclampsia
===PAGE:3943===
in preeclampsia
in preterm labor
in tetanus
Magnetic resonance angiography
,
in cardiovascular disorders
in neurologic disorders
in renal disorders
2315-2316
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
in bile duct stones
in biliary tract disease
in pancreatic cancer
Magnetic resonance imaging
3406-3408
in cardiovascular disorders
contraindications to
in eye disease
in genitourinary disorders
2315-2316
in liver disease
in musculoskeletal evaluation
,
in neurologic disorders
pacemaker interaction with
in pulmonary disease
spinal cord
,
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Magnet therapy
,
Major basic protein
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
1084-1085
(
see also
Human leukocyte antigens [HLA system])
deficiencies of
Malabsorption syndromes
152-162
,
,
,
copper deficiency and
diarrhea and
H
production and
infection and
inflammatory bowel disease and
undernutrition and
,
vitamin and mineral deficiencies and
,
,
,
,
Malaria
,
,
1381-1390
,
,
atypical
drugs for
-
,
-
(
see also
Antimalarials)
fever in
hepatic inflammation in
in neonate
pregnancy and
prevention of
,
,
1389-1390
transfusion-transmitted
Malassezia furfur
infection
,
Malathion
in lice infestation
poisoning with
Malaya, urban typhus of
Malignancy (
see
Cancer
and specific sites and types of cancer
)
Malignant hyperthermia
3266-3268
Malignant otitis externa
,
Malingering
,
chronic pain vs
fugue vs
Mallet finger
,
Mallory bodies
Mallory-Weiss syndrome
,
===PAGE:3944===
Malnutrition (
see
Undernutrition)
Malocclusion
508-509
Malodor
cutaneous
inborn errors of metabolism and
oral
506-508
,
Malpractice
,
Malta fever
1246-1247
MALT lymphoma
,
,
Malt worker's lung
Mammary souffle
Mammography
,
,
,
Mandible (
see also
Jaw; Maxilla; Temporomandibular joint)
agenesis of
birth-related asymmetry of
dislocation of
524-525
,
fracture of
3232-3233
hyperplasia of
hypoplasia of
innervation of
osteonecrosis of
,
osteoradionecrosis of
,
reduction of
,
small
,
tumors of
Mandibulomaxillary advancement
Manganese
,
,
blood levels of
Mange
Mania
1548-1552
,
in adolescents
3057-3058
,
dysphoric
etiology of
1540-1541
,
physical disorders and
,
1540-1541
psychosis and
1558-1559
Manic-depressive disorder
1548-1552
(
see also
Bipolar disorders)
Manipulation
,
3418-3419
Mannitol
in brain injury
diarrhea with
in glaucoma
intracranial pressure and
irritable bowel syndrome and
Mannose-binding lectin
deficiency of
Mannose-binding lectin-associated serine protease-2 deficiency
Manometry
96-97
in achalasia
in esophageal spasm
Mansonella ozzardi
infection
Mantle cell lymphoma
Mantoux test
MAOI (
see
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors)
Maple syrup urine disease
Maprotiline
,
Marantic endocarditis
Marasmus
,
===PAGE:3945===
Maraviroc
in children
Marble bones
2916-2918
Marburg virus infection
,
,
terrorist use of
March fracture
3304-3305
March hemoglobinuria
Marchiafava-Bignami disease
1523-1524
Marcus Gunn pupil
,
Marenostrin
Marfan syndrome
,
2908-2910
,
pregnancy and
thoracic aortic aneurysm and
Marginal cost-effectiveness ratio
,
Marijuana (cannabis)
1525-1526
,
breastfeeding and
in cancer therapy
pregnancy and
,
,
withdrawal from
Marjolin's ulcer
Markers
cardiac
tumor
,
,
1058-1059
Marshall-Bonney test
Marsh gas poisoning
Mask of pregnancy
Masochism
Massage
,
,
,
Masseter muscle
spasm of (lockjaw)
1296-1299
Mastalgia
2554-2555
,
2557-2558
Mast cells
,
Mast cell stabilizers
,
in asthma
,
Mastectomy
,
Mastication, fatigue with
Masticatory muscles
533-534
Mastitis
,
2687-2688
,
Mastocytosis
,
1124-1125
Mastoidectomy
Mastoiditis
,
,
447-448
Masturbation
Maxilla (
see also
Mandible; Temporomandibular joint)
fracture of
3232-3233
,
innervation of
tumors of
Maxillary sinus
,
inflammation of
479-481
Maximal expiratory pressure
Maximal inspiratory pressure
Mayaro disease
,
,
May-Hegglin anomaly
Mayne's sign
McCune-Albright syndrome
,
McRobert's maneuver
Mean arterial pressure
post-resuscitation
===PAGE:3946===
shock and
,
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
,
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin content (MCHC)
,
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
,
in perinatal anemia
Measles (rubeola)
,
1458-1460
(
see also
Rubella)
atypical
rickettsial disease vs
rubella vs
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis after
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
,
Measles-mumps-rubella vaccine
,
,
in Kawasaki disease
in pediatric HIV infection
,
schedule for
,
,
Measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccine
,
Meat handler's wart
mecA
gene
Mechanical ventilation (
see
Ventilation)
Mechlorethamine
Meckel's diverticulum
,
178-179
Meckel-Gruber syndrome
Meckel scan
Meclizine
in motion sickness
in pregnancy
in vertigo
Meclofenamate
Meclofenamic acid
Meclopramide, in vomiting
Meconium
passage of
suctioning of
Meconium aspiration syndrome
,
2872-2873
Meconium ileus
2801-2803
,
Meconium plug syndrome
2802-2803
Medial calcific sclerosis
Medial collateral ligament injury
,
Medial epicondylitis
3301-3302
Median nerve compression
,
,
Median rhomboid glossitis
Mediastinitis
1994-1995
fibrosing
Mediastinoscopy
Mediastinotomy
Mediastinum
air in
,
2001-2002
in infant
biopsy of
carcinoma of
Chamberlain procedure on
inflammation of
1994-1995
masses of
1993-1994
,
in children
widened
,
Medicaid
3161-3162
Medical insurance
,
3473-3480
===PAGE:3947===
private insurance
,
Medical malpractice
Medicare
3155-3161
,
Part A
3156-3159
Part B
3159-3160
Part C
Part D
3160-3161
,
Medicare Advantage Plans
Medicolegal issues
3468-3473
Medigap
Meditation
,
Mediterranean anemia
946-947
Mediterranean fever
1246-1247
familial
3026-3027
Mediterranean spotted fever
,
Medium-chain acyl dehydrogenase deficiency
Medoidioplasty
Medroxyprogesterone
for contraception
,
2588-2589
in dysfunctional uterine bleeding
in endometriosis
in hot flushes
in pedophilia
in protein-energy undernutrition
tremors and
in uterine fibroids
Medullary cystic disease
,
2384-2385
Medullary sponge kidney
2383-2384
Medulloblastoma
,
1817-1818
in children
2941-2942
MedWatch
Mees' lines
Mefloquine
,
,
,
Megacolon
congenital
toxic
,
,
2980-2981
Megacystis-microcolon, intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome
Megacystis syndrome
Megaesophagus
123-124
Chagas
Megaloblastic anemia
932-933
(
see also
Anemia, megaloblastic)
oral lesions in
vitamin B
deficiency and
,
,
,
Megestrol acetate
in cancer chemotherapy
in hot flushes
in protein-energy undernutrition
in uterine fibroids
Meglumine antimonate
Meibomian glands
dysfunction of
infection of
576-577
occlusion of
576-577
Meige's disease
,
,
Meigs' syndrome
Meiosis
Melancholy
===PAGE:3948===
Melanin-concentrating hormone
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone
,
,
Melanoma
,
,
750-753
,
atypical nevi and
choroid
vulvar
Melanonychia striata
Melanoptysis
Melanosis coli
Melarsoprol
MELAS
,
Melasma
,
oral contraceptives and
Melatonin
aging-related changes in
in jet lag
in sleep disorders
Melena
Melioidosis
Melnick-Fraser syndrome
Melphalan
,
Memantine
,
,
,
,
Membrane attack complex (C5-C9) deficiency
,
Membrane-stabilizing drugs, in arrhythmias
,
2150-2151
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
,
2408-2409
Membranous nephropathy
2404-2406
,
Memory
age-associated impairment of
,
disorders of
1638-1640
(
see also
Amnesia)
evaluation of
loss of (
see also
Amnesia)
in dementia (
see
Dementia)
physical disorders and
Menadione
(
see also
Vitamin K)
Menaquinones
Menarche
,
Mendelian disorders (
see
Genetic disorders)
Menetrier's disease
Meniere's disease
,
,
445-446
Meningioma
,
1818-1820
,
orbital
Meningitis
1734-1745
Angiostrongylus

aseptic
,
,
,
1741-1744
,
bacterial
,
1735-1741
,
,
,
vs aseptic meningitis
in children
,
listerial
,
,
,
meningococcal
1276-1277
,
,
,
,
in neonate
2830-2832
pneumococcal
,
,
staphylococcal
,
streptococcal
,
,
cancer and
chemical
chronic
,
1744-1745
crytococcal
,
===PAGE:3949===
in elderly
fungal
,
herpes simplex virus
HIV infection and
lumbar puncture in
,
,
,
,
Lyme
meningococcal, immunization for
Mollaret's
mumps
neoplastic
in premature infant
prevention of
subacute
,
1744-1745
syphilitic
tuberculous
,
,
,
viral
,
,
Meningocele
Meningococcal infection
,
1276-1277
,
,
drotrecogin alfa in
meningeal
rickettsial infection vs
rifampin prophylaxis in
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
,
Meningoencephalitis (
see also
Encephalitis; Meningitis)
amebic
1377-1378
,
,
syphilitic
Meningomyelocele
,
Meniscus
injury to
3217-3218
Menkes' syndrome
,
Menopause
2518-2520
black cohosh and
premature
,
,
vaginal bleeding after
2490-2493
vaginitis after
Menorrhagia
2490-2493
,
Menstruation
2499-2500
,
abnormalities of
2490-2493
,
2501-2518
absence of (amenorrhea)
2501-2510
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
cessation of (
see
Menopause)
hematocolpos with
,
history of
iron loss with
onset of (menarche)
2497-2498
,
,
pain with
2513-2514
pneumothorax and
porphyria and
premenstrual syndrome and
2516-2518
toxic shock syndrome with
1235-1236
Mental retardation (
see
Intellectual disability)
Mental status
brain tumor and
deterioration of (
see
Delirium; Dementia)
examination of
1485-1487
,
,
,
(
see also
Neurologic examination)
in delirium
in dementia
hospitalization and
3120-3121
===PAGE:3950===
postoperative
Meperidine
,
in elderly
,
,
in labor and delivery
poisoning with
in pregnancy
Mepolizumab
Meprobamate
in elderly
poisoning with
6-Mercaptopurine
in cancer therapy
in inflammatory bowel disease
,
poisoning with
in pregnancy
Mercury
hyperpigmentation and
nephrotoxicity of
poisoning with
,
Meropenem
,
in meningitis
,
,
Merphos poisoning
MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers)
,
Merthiolate poisoning
Mesalamine
,
,
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
,
2408-2409
Mescaline
1530-1531
Mesenteric artery occlusion
109-111
,
,
in neonate
Mesna
cyclophosphamide and
Mesomelic dysplasia
Mesoridazine
in elderly
poisoning with
Mesothelioma
1973-1974
,
,
Metabolic acidosis (
see
Acidosis, metabolic)
Metabolic alkalosis (
see
Alkalosis, metabolic)
Metabolic equivalents
,
Metabolic syndrome
64-65
,
,
,
Metabolism, inherited disorders of
3009-3026
(
see also specific disorders
)
Metacarpal fracture
Metacarpophalangeal joints, range of motion of
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Metaldehyde poisoning
Metal fume fever
Metals
contact dermatitis and
hyperpigmentation and
,
Metamorphopsia
Metanephrines
,
,
3500-3501
Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia
Metaphyseal dysplasia
Metaplasia
gastric
intestinal
===PAGE:3951===
Metapneumovirus infection
,
Metastases
(
see also names and sites of specific cancers
)
adrenal
bone
409-410
,
brain
cardiac
,
to choroid
esophageal
hepatic
,
,
neutropenia with
orbital
pain with
renal
resection of
spinal cord compression with
of unknown primary origin
1053-1054
Metatarsal fracture
,
3304-3305
Metatarsalgia
397-400
Metatarsophalangeal joints
pain in
398-399
range of motion of
Metatarsus adductus
Metatarsus varus
Metaxalone
Met-enkephalin
Metformin
,
,
,
in elderly
folate deficiency and
nutrient interactions with
in ovulation induction
poisoning with
in polycystic ovary syndrome
vitamin B
deficiency and
Methacholine challenge test
,
,
Methadone
,
,
in dying patient
poisoning with
withdrawal from
Methamphetamines
abuse of
1528-1530
in elderly
in narcolepsy
overdose of
,
poisoning with
tooth decay and
withdrawal from
Methane, intestinal production of
Methanol
antidote for
poisoning with
Methazolamide
Methemoglobin
antidote for
blood levels of
Methemoglobinemia
1858-1859
Methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureas
(MRSA)
,
,
Methidathion poisoning
===PAGE:3952===
Methimazole
in hyperthyroidism
in pregnancy
,
Methiocarb poisoning
Methionine
metabolic disorders of
3014-3015
Methocarbamol, in elderly
Methohexital
Methomyl poisoning
Methotrexate
in ankylosing spondylitis
in asthma
in atopic dermatitis
during breastfeeding
in cancer therapy
in ectopic pregnancy
folate deficiency and
,
in inflammatory bowel disease
,
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
in myositis
poisoning with
in psoriasis
in relapsing polychondritis
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
in sarcoidosis
in Takayasu's arteritis
teratogenicity of
,
Methoxychlor poisoning
Methyclothiazide
Methyl alcohol poisoning
Methylcellulose, in constipation
,
,
Methyldopa
,
in elderly
Methylene blue
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, Ecstasy)
1529-1530
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency
Methylergonovine
Methylmalonic acid
excess levels of
reference values for
Methylxanthines, in asthma
N´-Methylnicotinamide
Methylparaben, allergy to
Methyl parathion poisoning
Methylphenidate
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
in dying patient
in elderly
in narcolepsy
Methylprednisolone
in asthma
,
,
,
in COPD
in Goodpasture's syndrome
in IgA nephropathy
in inflammatory bowel disease
in membranous nephropathy
in rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
===PAGE:3953===
in SLE
in spinal trauma
in vasculitic disorders
Methyl salicylate poisoning
Methyltestosterone, in elderly
Methylxanthines
in asthma
,
in COPD
in pediatric ventilation
Metipranolol
Metoclopramide
during breastfeeding
in elderly
,
,
in hiccups
in migraine
in nausea and vomiting
,
in pregnancy
tremors and
Metolazone
Metoprolol
in aortic dissection
in arrhythmias
in coronary artery disease
in hypertension
in migraine
Metronidazole
,
1215-1216
,
in amebiasis
during breastfeeding
in
Clostridium difficile
-induced diarrhea
in Crohn's disease
in giardiasis
neonatal dosage of
in pregnancy
in trichomoniasis
Metrorrhagia
2490-2493
,
Metyrapone
Meunier-Kuhn syndrome
Mexiletine
in arrhythmias
in pain
tremors and
Micafungin
,
Miconazole
in candidal vaginitis
,
Microalbumin, urinary reference value for
Microalbuminuria
,
,
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia
939-940
,
Microcephaly
Microcolon
β
-Microglobulin
amyloidosis and
Micrognathia
,
,
Micrographia
Microlaryngoscopy
Microlithiasis, pancreatitis and
Microminerals (
see
Trace minerals)
Micronutrients
(
see also specific minerals and vitamins
)
===PAGE:3954===
Microphallus
Microscopic polyangiitis
322-323
Microscopy
1165-1166
Microsporidiosis
,
,
,
,
1372-1373
Microsporum
infection
,
705-709
Microtia
Microwave diathermy
Micturition
,
(
see also
Urination)
Midazolam
drug interactions of
in elderly
in pediatric ventilation
in tetanus
Midodrine
Mid upper arm muscle area
,
Mifepristone (RU 486)
,
,
Mifflin-St. Joer equation
Miglitol
Miglustat
Migraine
,
,
1722-1724
food-induced
ocular
,
vertigo and
vomiting and
Migratory superficial venous thrombosis
Mikulicz's disease
,
Mikulicz's syndrome
Milia
Miliaria
693-694
Milk
cow's
human
2704-2708
(
see also
Breastfeeding)
antimicrobial factors in
drugs in
2706-2707
,
maternal antibodies in
intolerance to
157-158
soy
Milk-alkali syndrome
,
,
,
Milker's nodules
Milkman's syndrome
Milk thistle
,
Miller-Dieker syndrome
Miller's lung
Millipede bites
Milrinone
,
Milroy's disease
,
Miltefosine
Milwaukee shoulder syndrome
Mind-body techniques
,
3416-3417
Mineralocorticoids
deficiency of, in Addison's disease
excess of (primary aldosteronism)
in 11
β
-hydroxylase deficiency
in 21-hydroxylase deficiency
preoperative
Mineral oil
,
aspiration of
===PAGE:3955===
in elderly
enema
,
vitamin deficiencies and
Minerals
,
body
deficiency of
47-55
,
48-49
malabsorption and
,
drug interaction with
in protein-energy undernutrition
recommended dietary allowances for
total parenteral nutrition and
toxicity of
47-55
,
48-49
Mineral spirits poisoning
Minimal change disease
2406-2407
,
Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
Mini Nutritional Assessment
,
Minnesota tube
Minocycline
,
1222-1223
,
in acne
,
bone discoloration with
hyperpigmentation with
in perioral dermatitis
Minoxidil
in alopecia
in hypertension
,
Miosis
Miotics
Mipafox poisoning
Mirizzi's syndrome
Mirkin test
Mirtazapine
,
poisoning with
Miscarriage (
see
Abortion, spontaneous)
Misoprostol
,
Mistletoe poisoning
Mite bites
,
3312-3313
(
see also
Scabies)
scrub typhus and
,
1285-1286
Mitochondria
antibodies to, biliary cirrhosis and
,
antiretroviral toxicity to
oxidative phosphorylation disorders of
Mitochondrial DNA abnormalities
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS)
,
Mitomycin
Mitotane
Mitoxantrone
in cancer therapy
in multiple sclerosis
Mitral valve
papilloma of
prolapse
2183-2185
clicks in
polycystic kidney disease and
pregnancy and
regurgitation (insufficiency)
2185-2187
mitral valve prolapse and
murmur in
,
===PAGE:3956===
precordial lift in
rheumatic fever and
stenosis
2187-2189
,
chest palpation in
murmur in
opening snap in
,
pregnancy and
2643-2644
Mittelschmerz
Mixed connective tissue disease
298-299
,
Mizolastine
Mobility, assessment of
Mobitz heart block
,
myocardial infarction and
Mobius' syndrome
,
Modafinil
in narcolepsy
Moexipril
Moisturizers
Molar pregnancy
2574-2576
,
human chorionic gonadotropin in
hyperthyroidism in
Molars (
see
Teeth)
Molds
705-709
,
1323-1325
,
Moles
744-746
,
,
Molindone
poisoning with
Mollaret's meningitis
Molluscum contagiosum
,
HIV infection and
Mollusk stings
3311-3312
Molybdenum
,
,
Mometasone
Monckeberg's arteriosclerosis
,
Mondor's disease
Monge's disease
Moniliasis (
see
Candidiasis)
Monkeypox
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
,
dietary supplement interactions with
3422-3424
in Parkinson's disease
,
poisoning with
tyramine interaction with
,
Monoclonal antibodies
,
,
1087-1088
in cancer
,
1068-1069
,
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
in diabetes mellitus
respiratory syncytial virus
,
,
in transplantation
Monoclonal gammopathies
1025-1032
,
,
of undetermined significance
1028-1029
Monocytes
defects in
Mononeuritis multiplex
Mononeuropathy
1798-1799
diabetic
Mononucleosis
cytomegalovirus
,
===PAGE:3957===
infectious
,
,
1421-1423
hepatic inflammation in
oral involvement in
rubella vs
splenic rupture and
toxoplasmosis vs
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome and
Monosodium glutamate poisoning
Montelukast
in allergic rhinitis
in asthma
Mood disorders
1538-1553
(
see also specific disorders
)
in children and adolescents
3055-3057
,
psychosis and
1558-1559
suicide and
,
,
,
3060-3062
vitamin B
deficiency and
Moraxella catarrhalis
infection
1277-1278
,
,
Morganella
infection
1257-1258
Moro reflex
,
Morphine
,
(
see also
Opioids)
in coronary artery disease
in dying patient
in elderly
,
in labor and delivery
intraspinal
in myocardial infarction
poisoning with
in pregnancy
in shock
in tetanus
Morton's neuroma
Mosaicism
Mosquito bite
malaria and (
see
Malaria)
prevention of
viral disease transmission by
1398-1399
,
,
in yellow fever
Moth repellent poisoning
,
Motion sickness
3278-3279
,
Motor neuron disorders
,
,
,
,
,
1791-1793
,
Motor system
development of
2758-2759
,
examination of
,
Motor unit disorders
1783-1804
Mountain sickness
,
Mouth
(
see also
Teeth)
aging-related changes in
503-504
,
appliances for, in sleep apnea
burn injury to
,
3335-3336
cancer of
,
491-492
in cancer patient
,
in cardiovascular disorders
in compromised host
,
dermatitis around
,
drug-induced lesions of
dryness of (xerostomia)
,
513-516
radiation-induced
,
,
===PAGE:3958===
in Sjogren's syndrome
in endocrine disorders
focal epithelial hyperplasia of
in hematologic disorders
infection of
anthrax
Candida

,
,
,
,
,
viral
,
inflammation of
509-513
,
lesions of
499-501
in Behcet's syndrome
,
,
in elderly patient
3076-3077
HIV infection and
malabsorption and
neutropenia and
nutritional deficiency and
pellagra and
riboflavin deficiency and
in systemic disease
,
lichen planus of
,
malodor of
506-508
,
mucosa of
,
of neonate
in neurologic disorders
radiation-induced disorders of
,
,
,
taste disorders of
466-468
trench
ulcers of
509-513
,
(
see also
Ulcer[s], oral)
xerostomia of (
see
Mouth, dryness of)
Mouth-to-mouth (-and nose) rescue breathing
,
,
Movement disorders
1759-1779
,
,
(
see also
Tremor)
antipsychotic drugs and
athetotic
1759-1760
in cerebellar disorders
1777-1779
,
in cerebral palsy syndromes
chorea
1759-1760
,
1763-1764
in corticospinal tract lesions
differential diagnosis of
drug-induced
,
dystonic
1760-1762
in fragile X syndrome
1762-1763
hemiballismus
1759-1760
myoclonic
1764-1765
,
in Parkinson's disease
1765-1771
in progressive supranuclear palsy
1771-1772
sleep-related
,
1714-1715
Moxibustion
Moxifloxacin
,
1208-1210
,
,
in tuberculosis
M-proteins
MRI (
see
Magnetic resonance imaging)
MRSA (methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
)
,
,
MS (
see
Multiple sclerosis)
MSH (
see
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone)
Muckle-Wells syndrome
Mucocele
orbital
===PAGE:3959===
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma
,
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Mucormycosis (phycomycosis)
,
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma
,
Mucosal neuroma syndrome
,
913-914
Mucositis
Mucous hypersecretion syndrome
Mucous retention cyst
Mucus
antimicrobial properties of
cervical (
see
Cervical mucus)
gastrointestinal
Muehrcke's lines
Muerto Canyon virus infection
Mulberry molar
,
Muller's sign
Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis
Multiceps
infection
1363-1364
Multifocal atrial tachycardia
Multifocal leukoencephalopathy
1731-1732
Multi-infarct dementia
Multiple chemical sensitivity syndrome
3443-3444
Multiple congenital contractures
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes
,
909-914
,
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
Multiple myeloma
,
,
,
,
1029-1032
,
hypercalcemia in
kidney disease in
2421-2422
pneumonia with
polymyalgia rheumatica vs
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
Multiple personality disorder
1505-1507
Multiple sclerosis
,
,
1779-1783
HLA in
vertigo and,
Multiple sleep latency testing
,
Multiple system atrophy
1618-1619
Mummy handler's lung
Mumps
,
,
1461-1462
testicular
2456-2457
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
,
Munchausen syndrome
1576-1577
,
Mupirocin
topical
Murmurs (
see
Heart murmur[s])
Murphy's sign
ultrasonographic
Murray Valley encephalitis
,
Muscle(s)
aminoglycoside effects on
atrophy of
,
,
,
,
neurogenic
spinal
biopsy of
congenital anomalies of
,
3006-3009
cramps of
daptomycin toxicity to
===PAGE:3960===
denervation of
disorders of
electromyography of
heat cramps of
hypertrophy of
inflammation of
299-302
mid upper arm area of
,
nutritional deficiency and
radiation effects on
sarcoidosis of
strength of
,
in elderly patient
loss of
1597-1606
,
1599-1600
,
nutritional support and
tone of
weakness of
1597-1606
,
1599-1600
,
Muscle adenosine monophosphate deaminase deficiency
Muscle dysmorphia
Muscle relaxants
in elderly
,
in neck or back pain
in osteoarthritis
porphyria and
Muscular dystrophy
,
,
3006-3008
congenital
Musculoskeletal system
anomalies of
2969-2975
evaluation of
283-297
,
,
,
293-294
in elderly patient
in neonate
trauma to
3201-3218
,
,
(
see also
Dislocation; Fracture; Sprain)
Mushroom poisoning
,
3336-3337
Mushroom worker's lung
Musset's sign
Myalgia, paraneoplastic
Myasthenia gravis
,
,
1793-1795
diplopia and
in neonate
pregnancy and
Mycetoma
1332-1333
MYC
gene
Mycobacterial infections
1302-1318
arthritis and
369-370
atypical
culture in
M. avium-intracellulare
infection
1314-1316
disseminated
,
in pediatric HIV infection
superinfection
M. chelonei
infection
1314-1316
M. fortuitum
infection
1314-1316
M. kansasii
infection
1314-1316
M. leprae
infection
1316-1318
M. marinum
infection
1314-1316
M. tuberculosis
(
see
Tuberculosis)
M. ulcerans
infection
1314-1316
M. xenopi
infection
1314-1316
===PAGE:3961===
stains for
vaccine against
Mycophenolate mofetil
in atopic dermatitis
in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
in lupus nephritis
in SLE
in Takayasu's arteritis
in transplantation
Mycoplasma genitalium
infection
1468-1470
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
infection
,
,
,
1926-1927
,
Mycoplasmas
Mycoses
systemic (
see
Fungal infection)
vaginal (
see
Candidiasis, vulvovaginal)
Mycosis fungoides
Mycotoxicosis, pulmonary
,
Mydriasis
Mydriatics
Myelin
,
dysfunction of
Myelitis
HIV infection and
transverse
Myeloblastic leukemia
Myelocele
Myelocytic leukemia
acute
,
,
1009-1010
chronic
,
,
1012-1014
pseudohypokalemia in
Myelodysplastic syndromes
1014-1015
,
anemia in
macrocytosis in
neutropenia in
sideroblastic anemia and
Myelofibrosis
,
,
,
Myelogenous leukemia (
see
Myelocytic leukemia)
Myelography
Myeloid metaplasia
,
999-1000
,
Myeloma, multiple (
see
Multiple myeloma)
Myelomatosis
1029-1032
Myelomatosis (
see
Multiple myeloma)
Myelomeningocele
,
Myelomonocytic leukemia
1014-1015
,
Myelopathy
cancer-related
cervical
1808-1809
HTLV-1-associated
1812-1813
ischemic
1809-1810
muscle weakness and
,
progressive
radiation-related
transverse
Myeloperoxidase antibodies
Myelophthisis
,
931-932
Myeloproliferative disorders
997-1004
,
,
,
(
see also specific disorders
)
eosinophilia in
===PAGE:3962===
fever in
splenomegaly in
,
Myelosclerosis
,
Myerson's sign
Myiasis
Myoadenylate deaminase deficiency
Myocardial infarction
,
2099-2118
adverse events after
air travel and
anterior
antihypertensives after
approach to
,
arrhythmias in
2114-2117
cardiogenic shock in
complications of
,
2114-2117
deep venous thrombosis prevention in
dental procedures after
depression and
Dressler's syndrome after
drug treatment of
2108-2111
,
,
,
in elderly
electrocardiogram in
,
,
,
,
enzyme markers in
,
exercise after
heart failure in
,
heart sounds in
hypotension in
mortality in
2105-2106
,
,
mural thrombosis in
myocardial rupture in
pacemaker after
pain in
,
papillary muscle disorders in
pericarditis and
,
post-resuscitation
pulmonary edema and
2131-2132
radionuclide imaging in
rehabilitation after
2117-2118
,
3461-3462
right ventricular
,
,
shock after
stress testing after
subendocardial
,
transmural
ventricular aneurysm in
Myocardial ischemia
,
2099-2118
(
see also
Myocardial infarction)
dipyridamole-induced
silent
,
Myocardial perfusion imaging
2061-2062
,
Myocarditis
diphtheria and
influenza and
Lyme disease and
,
rheumatic fever and
Myocarditis (
see
Cardiomyopathy)
Myocarditis neonatorum
Myocardium
abscess of
===PAGE:3963===
rupture of
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF)
,
Myoclonus
,
,
,
1764-1765
,
Myofascial pain syndrome
375-377
,
,
,
533-534
Myoglobin, blood levels of
Myoglobinuria
burns and
influenza and
Myoglobulin
,
Myokymia
Myomectomy
,
Myonecrosis (gas gangrene)
1295-1296
anaerobic
necrotizing subcutaneous infection vs
Myopathy (
see also
Muscle[s]; Muscular dystrophy)
congenital
daptomycin-induced
neuropathy vs
weakness and
,
Myopericarditis
,
Myopia (nearsightedness)
,
surgery for
573-574
Myositis
299-302
clostridial
1295-1296
inclusion body
orbital
rheumatoid arthritis vs
Myositis ossificans
Myotonia
Myotonia dystrophica, hypopituitarism vs
Myotonic dystrophy
,
Myotubular myopathy
Myringitis
,
Myringotomy
Myxedema
785-787
(
see also
Hypothyroidism)
endemic
pleural effusion and
pretibial
,
Myxedema coma
,
Myxoma
,
===PAGE:3964===
N
Nabumetone
Nadolol
in arrhythmias
in hypertension
in migraine
in portal hypertension
Naegleria
infection
,
1377-1378
,
Nafarelin
Nafcillin
,
in infective endocarditis
2197-2198
in meningitis
,
neonatal dosage of
Naftifine
NaHCO
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
in tricyclic antidepressant poisoning
Nail(s)
deformities of
732-733
discoloration of
green
,
hematoma beneath
infection of
,
,
ingrown
lichen planus of
Muehrcke's lines of
nutritional deficiency and
psoriasis of
,
spoon
telangiectasia of
tumors of
warts around
,
yellow
Nail-patella syndrome
,
2910-2911
Nairovirus infection
,
Nalbuphine
,
Naled poisoning
Nalmefene
Naloxone
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in opioid overdosage
,
,
in opioid withdrawal
Naltrexone
in alcohol abuse
in opioid overdosage
in opioid withdrawal
in pruritus
Naphthalene
poisoning with
in pregnancy
Naphtha poisoning
Naphthol poisoning
Naproxen
in elderly
,
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
===PAGE:3965===
Naphthylalkanones
Naratriptan
Narcissistic personality disorder
Narcoanalysis
Narcolepsy
,
,
1711-1713
HLA in
Narcosis, nitrogen
Narcotics (
see
Opioids)
NARP (neurogenic muscle atrophy and retinitis pigmentosa)
Nasal congestion
460-461
,
Nasal septum
deviation of
hematoma of
perforation of
Nasal trumpet
Nasal vestibulitis
Nasogastric suction, metabolic alkalosis and
Nasogastric tube
21-23
,
in botulism
for gastrointestinal bleeding
for neonate
placement of
,
Nasolacrimal duct
obstruction of
,
,
,
Nasopharyngoscopy
Nasopharynx (
see
Nose; Pharynx)
Nasotracheal intubation
Natalizumab
,
,
Nateglinide
,
Natural family planning
,
2587-2588
,
Natural killer cells
in cancer
defects in
Naturopathy
,
Nausea
79-81
cancer therapy and
causes of
80-81
in children
2746-2749
,
2747-2748
in dying patient
3485-3486
in motion sickness
opioid-related
pregnancy and
2615-2618
,
,
,
Navicular bone
fracture of
,
osteochondrosis of
2913-2915
Near drowning
3279-3282
cardiopulmonary resuscitation in
Nearsightedness (myopia)
,
surgery for
573-574
Necator americanus
infection
1348-1349
Neck (
see also
Cervical spine)
abnormalities of
1757-1759
aging-related changes in
evaluation of
mass in
461-464
,
of neonate
pain in
378-385
,
,
===PAGE:3966===
radiation effects on
spasms of
382-383
torticollis of
congenital
tumors of
486-494
,
Neck veins
,
(
see also
Jugular veins)
Necrosis (
see also
Infarction; Ischemia)
acute tubular
2412-2414
,
avascular (aseptic)
362-365
,
antiretrovirals and
dysbaric
femoral capital epiphysis
lunate bone
390-391
metatarsal head
397-398
scaphoid bone
burn-related
compartment syndrome and
cutaneous
,
,
700-701
,
pituitary (Sheehan's syndrome)
renal cortical
2433-2434
,
Necrotic myelopathy, cancer-related
Necrotizing arteriolitis
Necrotizing enteritis
Necrotizing enterocolitis, neonatal
,
2803-2804
Necrotizing migrating erythema
Necrotizing otitis externa
Necrotizing sialometaplasia
Necrotizing subcutaneous infection (necrotizing fasciitis)
700-701
,
,
Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
,
Nedocromil, in asthma
Neer test
Nefazodone
,
poisoning with
Negativistic (passive-aggressive) personality disorder
Neglect
child
3062-3067
elder
self
,
Neisseriaceae
1274-1278
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
infection
,
,
1471-1474
arthritis and
,
,
,
complement resistance in
conjunctival
in neonate
,
2824-2825
disseminated
,
neonatal
oral
pelvic inflammatory disease and
,
,
reactive arthritis vs
Neisseria meningitidis
infection
,
,
1276-1277
Nelarabine
Nelfinavir
in children
Nelson syndrome
,
Nemaline myopathy
Nematode infections
,
1342-1355
filarial
1345-1348
===PAGE:3967===
Neobladder
Neoloid, in elderly
Neomycin
,
1198-1201
,
1198-1199
neonatal dosage of
ototoxicity of
topical
Neonatal hepatitis syndrome
Neonatal-onset multisystem autoinflammatory disease
Neonate (
see also
Infant)
abdomen of
anemia in
2782-2787
,
,
physiologic
Apgar score in
,
,
benign seizures in
birth defects in (
see
Congenital anomalies)
birth injury in
,
2769-2774
blood loss in
cardiovascular system of
death of
drug metabolism in
drug withdrawal in
2799-2800
,
electrolyte and metabolic disorders in
2788-2800
enteroviral infection in
evaluation of
2699-2703
,
feeding of
2703-2709
(
see also
Breastfeeding; Feeding, infant)
fractures in, birth-related
gastrointestinal disorders in
2800-2806
gestational age of
,
,
,
,
goiter in
gray baby syndrome in
,
head molding in
hematologic problems in
2782-2788
hemoglobin of
hemorrhagic disease of
,
herpes simplex virus infection in
,
,
hospital discharge of
hyperbilirubinemia in
,
,
,
2788-2794
,
,
,
,
2804-2806
,
hyperthyroidism in
,
hypothermia in
2774-2775
illness in
immune system of
immunodeficiency in
,
infections in
2811-2840
(
see also specific infections
)
initial care of
2699-2703
,
intracranial hemorrhage in
jaundice in
,
large-for-gestational age
measurements of
metabolic disorders in
2788-2800
myasthenia gravis in
oxygen therapy for
passive immunity in
persistent pulmonary hypertension of
,
2873-2874
,
physical examination of
2699-2702
physiology of
2764-2767
postmature
premature
,
,
2776-2781
,
2779-2780
(
see also
Premature infant)
===PAGE:3968===
reflexes in
respiratory disorders in
2865-2881
,
resuscitation of
2768-2769
,
,
,
retinopathy in
screening tests for
,
2710-2711
seborrheic dermatitis in
seizures in
,
2900-2902
small-for-gestational-age
2781-2782
spinal cord injury in
2771-2773
suctioning of
,
toxoplasmosis in
,
transient hypogammaglobulinemia in
transient tachypnea of
,
warming of
weight of
,
well-child follow-up visits for
2710-2725
,
2710-2711
wet lung syndrome of
Neophallus
Neostigmine
in glaucoma
in myasthenia gravis
poisoning with
Nephrectomy
Nephritic syndromes
2387-2396
,
,
2407-2411
Nephritis (
see also
Glomerulonephritis; Nephropathy; Nephrotic syndromes)
hereditary (Alport's syndrome)
2387-2390
lupus
2409-2411
,
tubulointerstitial
2414-2422
,
acute
,
chronic
,
drug-induced
heavy metal-induced
2419-2420
infective
2378-2379
metabolic
2418-2419
myeloma-related
2421-2422
reflux
2420-2421
Nephroblastoma
2945-2946
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
,
,
2424-2425
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
,
Nephrolithiasis
2369-2372
Nephronophthisis
,
2384-2385
Nephropathia epidemica
,
1433-1434
Nephropathy (
see also
Glomerulonephritis; Nephropathy; Nephrotic syndromes)
analgesic
antiphospholipid syndrome
,
contrast
,
,
cystic
2381-2387
,
2382-2383
diabetic
,
2401-2403
,
graft
heavy metal
2419-2420
HIV-associated
IgA
2390-2392
loiasis and
membranous
2404-2406
,
obstructive
reflux
2420-2421
toxic
2412-2414
,
,
,
,
2419-2420
===PAGE:3969===
urate
2418-2419
vascular
2429-2435
,
Nephrosclerosis, hypertension and
2429-2430
Nephrosis
lipoid
2406-2407
,
pleural effusion and
Nephrosonephritis, epidemic
1433-1434
(
see also
Nephritis; Nephrotic syndromes)
Nephrotic syndromes
,
2396-2407
,
2397-2398
,
amyloidosis and
congenital
2400-2401
corticosteroid-resistant
diabetic nephropathy and
2401-2403
edema and
fibrillary glomerulopathy and
2407-2408
Finnish-type
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and
2403-2404
heroin abuse and
HIV infection and
hyponatremia in
immunodeficiency in
immunotactoid glomerulopathy and
2407-2408
lipiduria in
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and
2408-2409
membranous nephropathy and
2404-2406
,
minimal change disease and
,
2406-2407
SLE and
2409-2411
Nephroureterectomy
Nerve(s) (
see also
Neurologic disorders)
cranial (
see
Cranial nerves)
cutaneous
in leprosy
1316-1318
peripheral (
see
Peripheral nerves)
regeneration of
,
spinal
,
Nerve conduction testing
,
,
,
Nerve gas poisoning
Nerve roots
,
,
1795-1797
,
Nervous system
autonomic
1615-1620
,
,
central (
see
Central nervous system)
Nettle stings
Neural blockade
Neuralgia (
see also
Neuritis; Neuropathy)
amyotrophic
glossopharyngeal
,
1756-1757
interdigital nerve
Morton's
posterior tibial nerve
postherpetic
,
,
trigeminal
,
1754-1755
Neural tube defects
2995-2997
folate prevention of
prenatal diagnosis of
Neuraminidase
Neurectomy, vestibular
Neurilemoma
Neurinoma, acoustic (
see
Neuroma, acoustic)
===PAGE:3970===
Neuritis (
see also
Neuralgia; Neuropathy)
brachial
optic
,
,
,
acute vision loss and
blurred vision and
ethambutol-induced
Neuroablation
in trigeminal neuralgia
Neuroaugmentation
Neuroblastoma
2942-2943
Neurocysticercosis
1364-1365
,
,
Neurodermatitis
669-670
Neurofibroma
in children
small-bowel
Neurofibromatosis
,
,
2903-2904
,
Neurogenic (neuropathic) arthropathy
348-349
,
Neurogenic bladder
2363-2364
Neurogenic muscle atrophy and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP)
Neurogenic shock
Neurogenic tumors, mediastinal
Neurohormones
,
Neurohypophysis (
see
Pituitary gland, posterior)
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
,
,
,
3268-3269
,
Neuroleptics (
see
Antipsychotics)
Neurologic disorders (
see also
Neuropathy
and specific disorders
)
aminoglycoside-associated
arthropathy with
348-349
,
Bartonella
infection and
chickenpox and
in children
2896-2903
congenital
2992-2997
diagnostic procedures in
1594-1597
,
diphtheria and
in elderly
evaluation of
1586-1606
HIV infection and
1444-1445
inborn errors of metabolism and
infectious mononucleosis and
Lyme disease and
,
nutritional deficiency and
ocular
1745-1757
patient history in
1586-1587
penicillin-induced
pertussis and
polymyxin-induced
SLE and
vaccination and
vitamin B
deficiency and
vitamin E deficiency and
Wilson's disease and
Neurologic examination
1587-1593
autonomic nervous system
in brain injury
in brain tumor
cerebrovascular system
cranial nerve
===PAGE:3971===
in elderly patient
3084-3086
gait
mental status
,
motor system
muscle strength
in neonate
reflexes
sensory system
,
,
in stupor and coma
in trauma
in voiding disorders
Neuroma
acoustic
,
,
441-442
,
,
amputation
,
Morton's
mucosal
,
913-914
Neuromodulation
Neuromuscular blockade
in endotracheal intubation
pain assessment in
in tetanus
Neuromuscular junction disorders
,
,
1787-1788
,
Neuromyelitis optica
Neuron
Neuronitis
vestibular
,
viral (herpes zoster oticus)
444-445
Neuronopathy, subacute motor
Neuropathy
(
see also
Neuralgia; Neuritis)
amyloidosis and
,
autonomic
cancer-related
compression
391-392
conduction velocity study of
cranial
diabetic
,
,
diphtheria and
glossopharyngeal
hereditary
1790-1791
HIV infection and
hypertrophic interstitial
isoniazid-associated
malabsorption and
motor
1791-1793
optic
,
619-621
peripheral
,
,
,
1797-1801
amyloidosis and
sarcoid-related
sensorimotor
sensory
thiamin deficiency and
,
toxic
trigeminal
ulnar
vitamin B
excess and
Neuropeptide Y
Neuropraxia
===PAGE:3972===
Neurosyphilis
,
,
,
in neonate
Neurotoxicity, radiation-induced
1816-1817
Neurotransmission
1606-1609
,
disorders of
1610-1614
glutamate and asparate
Neutropenia
948-952
,
autoimmune
,
cancer therapy and
cellulitis and
chronic
,
,
congenital (Kostmann's syndrome)
,
,
cyclic
,
drug-induced
enterocolitis and
fever and
HIV infection and
in immunodeficiency disorders
infection and
,
,
,
infectious mononucleosis and
mold infection and
pneumonia and
radiation injury and
,
rheumatoid arthritis and
secondary
,
Neutrophilic dermatosis, febrile
683-684
Neutrophils
defects in
,
infection and
neonatal
in sepsis
,
Nevirapine
in children
Nevus(i)
atypical (dysplastic)
744-746
,
compound
halo
intradermal
junctional
melanocytic (nevus cell, pigmented)
744-746
,
spider
white sponge
,
Nevus araneus
Nevus flammeus
747-748
Newborn (
see
Neonate)
Niacin (nicotinic acid)
,
31-32
deficiency of
,
,
,
31-32
gingivitis in
malabsorption and
dietary allowance of
in dyslipidemia
,
toxicity of
,
Nicardipine
,
,
Nickel
cancer and
poisoning with
,
Nickel carbonyl poisoning
===PAGE:3973===
Niclosamide
Nicotine (
see also
Cigarette smoking)
poisoning with
in smoking cessation
,
tremors and
Nicotine stomatitis
Nicotinic acid (
see
Niacin)
Niemann-Pick disease
Nifedipine
in elderly
,
gingival hyperplasia and
in high-altitude pulmonary edema
in hypertension
poisoning with
in pregnancy
Nifurtimox
Night blindness
Night-eating syndrome
Nightmares
,
Nightshade poisoning
Night terrors
,
Nikolsky's sign
,
,
,
,
Nil disease
2406-2407
,
Nipples
breastfeeding-related irritation of
discharge from
2555-2557
,
Paget's disease of
,
,
Nisoldipine
Nitazoxanide
,
Nitrates
in coronary artery disease
,
2097-2098
in heart failure
in myocardial infarction
PDE5 inhibitors and
poisoning with
Nitrazepam, in elderly
Nitric oxide
hypertension and
in pediatric hypoxemia
in persistent pulmonary hypertension of newborn
Nitrites
in food
poisoning with
urinary
,
volatile
Nitrite test, in pediatric urinary tract infection
Nitrobenzene poisoning
Nitrofurantoin
,
during breastfeeding
in elderly
,
Nitrogen
diving-related toxicity of
liquid
Nitrogen balance
,
Nitrogen dioxide
inhalation of
occupational exposure to
1983-1984
===PAGE:3974===
Nitrogen mustard
Nitrogen oxides
inhalation of
poisoning with
Nitroglycerin (
see also
Nitrates)
in coronary artery disease
,
2097-2098
in elderly
in hypertensive emergency
,
in myocardial infarction
,
poisoning with
Nitroprusside
in aortic dissection
in aortic stenosis
in hypertensive emergency
,
poisoning with
Nitrosamines
Nitrosoureas
Nitrous oxide
for labor
poisoning with
vitamin B
deficiency and
Nizatidine
,
Nocardiosis
1242-1243
,
1332-1333
No code (do-not-resuscitate order)
Nocturnal enuresis
2923-2928
,
,
Nocturnal leg cramps
Nodes
Bouchard's
epitrochlear
Heberden's
,
Nodules
cutaneous
,
,
in rheumatic fever
,
hepatic
Lisch
milker's
pulmonary
1841-1844
,
,
in coal workers' pneumoconiosis
in hypersensitivity pneumonitis
rheumatoid
,
,
silicotic
thyroid
778-779
vocal cord
,
485-486
Noise
in ear
419-423
,
422-423
hearing loss with
Noma
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
211-212
Nonallergic rhinitis with eosinophilia
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
,
1020-1024
,
HIV infection and
staging of
,
Noninvasive near infrared (NIR) monitoring
Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV)
in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure
in COPD
in status asthmaticus
===PAGE:3975===
Nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome
885-886
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
,
in children
,
St. John's wort interaction with
Nonoxynol-9
Nonparoxysmal junctional tachycardia
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
,
,
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
adverse effects of
dental procedures and
dietary supplement interactions with
3422-3423
in elderly
,
3096-3097
,
,
endoscopy and
gastrointestinal effects of
nephrotoxicity of
peptic ulcer disease and
,
platelet dysfunction and
poisoning with
porphyria and
in rheumatoid arthritis
Nonstress test, fetal
Nontoxic substances
Nontropical sprue
158-159
Noonan's syndrome
Norepinephrine
,
,
blood levels of
,
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in depression
in elderly
heart failure and
in mania
pheochromocytoma secretion of
in septic shock
in shock
,
urinary
Norfloxacin
,
1208-1210
,
,
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
Normochromia
Norovirus infection
,
Norrie's disease
North American blastomycosis
1325-1326
North Asian rickettsiosis
,
Nortriptyline
,
in elderly
poisoning with
Norwood procedure
Nose
(
see also
Nasal)
aging-related changes in
,
bleeding from
457-460
,
cancer of
congestion of
460-461
,
,
deviated septum of
evaluation of
foreign body in
fracture of
3233-3234
herpes zoster virus infection of
hyperplasia of (rhinophyma)
===PAGE:3976===
infection of
inflammation of
478-479
mucormycosis of
polyps of
477-478
runny
460-461
sensory disorders of
466-468
,
tumors of
vascular engorgement of
478-479
in Wegener's granulomatosis
NPS2
gene
NSAIDs (
see
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Nuclear power plants
,
Nucleic acid amplification tests
Nucleic acid-based assays, in infection
,
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
,
in children
,
5´-Nucleotidase
,
Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
,
Nucleus pulposus, herniation of
1796-1797
Number needed to treat (harm)
Numbness, in leprosy
Nummular dermatitis
,
670-671
Nursemaid's elbow
Nursing homes
3122-3126
,
3123-3124
,
care in, funding for
,
pneumonia and
1932-1933
,
Nutcracker syndrome
Nutraceuticals (
see
Dietary supplements)
Nutrition
2-9
(
see also
Diet; Feeding; Food; Undernutrition)
in anorexia nervosa
in children
in COPD
for dementia patient
25-26
disorders of
2-9
drug interactions with
7-9
,
,
for dying patient
25-26
in elderly
enteral
21-23
,
in protein-energy undernutrition
in esophageal cancer
evaluation of
6-7
,
,
,
in elderly patient
,
food additives and
food contaminants and
in infant
2703-2709
,
(
see also
Feeding, infant)
macronutrients in
,
,
,
,
mechanical ventilation and
micronutrients in
in neonate
2703-2709
(
see also
Breastfeeding; Feeding, infant)
failure to thrive and
2931-2934
,
,
parenteral
23-25
,
(
see also
Parenteral nutrition)
in pregnancy
recommended dietary allowances in
,
,
,
requirements for
,
,
,
Nystagmus
,
,
,
,
electronystagmography in
pendular
===PAGE:3977===
Nystatin
,
,
2545The Merck Manual of Diagnosis & Therapy, 19th Edition N
===PAGE:3978===
O
Obesity
6-7
,
56-61
,
,
adolescent
binge eating disorders and
1537-1538
childhood
,
,
diabetes mellitus and
drug interactions with
in elderly
,
insulin resistance and
sleep apnea and
surgery for
61-64
,
,
Obesity-hypoventilation syndrome
Obsession
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
1495-1496
in children and adolescents
3052-3053
constipation in
,
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
Obstructive airway disorders
1868-1888
(
see also
Asthma; Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
[COPD])
pulmonary function tests in
,
,
sleep-related
1903-1906
in children
1906-1907
Obstructive shock
,
,
Obturator sign
Occipital bone, abnormalities of
1757-1759
Occipital lobe
,
,
Occlusive thromboaortopathy
326-329
,
Occupation, lung diseases and
1956-1960
,
1956-1957
,
,
1971-1984
,
Occupational therapy
3456-3457
after stroke
Ockelbo disease
Octamethyl pyrophosphoramide poisoning
Octopus bite
3311-3312
Octreotide
in carcinoid syndrome
in gastrinoma
in glucagonoma
in hypersomatotropism
in hypoglycemia
in hypoglycemic drug overuse
in islet cell tumor
in insulinoma
in MEN 1 syndrome
in variceal bleeding
in vipoma
Ocular (
see also
Eye[s]; Vision)
Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid
579-580
Ocular larva migrans
1352-1353
Ocular migraine
Ocular motility
disorders of
1749-1752
,
1750-1751
Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia
Oculocephalic reflex
Oculocutaneous albinism
719-720
,
Oculoglandular listeriosis
Oculoglandular syndrome, Parinaud's
===PAGE:3979===
Oculogyric crisis, antipsychotic-induced
Oculomotor nerve (3rd cranial nerve)
disorders of
,
,
,
1752-1753
examination of
Oculovestibular (caloric) testing
Odds ratio
Odontoid process, hypoplasia of
Odontoma
Ofloxacin
,
1208-1210
,
,
Ogilvie's syndrome
Oil of wintergreen poisoning
Ointments
OKT3
,
Olanzapine
,
,
,
in anorexia nervosa
in children
in dementia
drug interactions of
in elderly
poisoning with
Older Americans Act
Oleander poisoning
,
Olecranon bursa, swelling of
,
Olfactory nerve (1st cranial nerve)
disorders of
examination of
Oligella
infection
Oligodendroglioma
1814-1815
,
1817-1818
Oligohydramnios
Oligomenorrhea
Oligospermia
Oliguria
2252-2253
,
,
Olivopontocerebellar atrophy
1618-1619
Olmesartan
Olsalazine
Omalizumab
,
,
Omega-3 acid ethyl esters
Omega-3 fatty acids
,
Omenn's syndrome
Omeprazole
,
,
in gastrinoma
in gastroesophageal reflux disease
in
Helicobacter pylori
infection
Omphalocele
Omsk hemorrhagic fever
,
,
Onchocerciasis
,
1347-1348
Oncocytoma
Oncogenes
Ondansetron
,
in pregnancy
Ondine's curse
One-and-a-half syndrome
,
Onychocryptosis
Onychogryphosis
Onycholysis
Onychomycosis
734-735
Onycho-osteodysplasia
2910-2911
===PAGE:3980===
Onychophagia
Onychotillomania
Oocytes
decreased reserve of
2594-2595
development of
2498-2499
Oophoritis, mumps
Ophiasis
Ophidiophobia
Ophthalmia neonatorum
,
2824-2825
chlamydial
,
prevention of
Ophthalmic disorders (
see
Eye[s]; Vision)
Ophthalmic herpes zoster
590-591
Ophthalmitis, listerial
Ophthalmopathy
Graves'
,
,
in hyperthyroidism
560-561
,
Ophthalmoplegia
external
internuclear
,
,
,
Ophthalmoscopy
in retinoblastoma
in retinopathy of prematurity
Opiates (
see
Morphine; Opioids)
Opioids
1623-1628
,
1625-1626
abuse of
1512-1516
rehabilitation for
1515-1516
administration routes for
adverse effects of
antagonists of
,
,
in cancer pain
constipation with
in coronary artery disease
dependence on
for dying patient
in elderly
,
endogenous
equianalgesic doses of
mechanical ventilation and
neonatal effects of
overdose of
,
pregnancy and
,
receptors for
serotonin syndrome with
in shock
tolerance to
,
withdrawal from
,
Opisthorchiasis
1356-1357
Opisthorchis sinensis
infection
Opium (
see also
Opioids)
poisoning with
tincture of
in neonatal opioid withdrawal
Oppenheim reflex
Oppositional defiant disorder
3058-3060
Opsoclonus
cancer-related
===PAGE:3981===
Opsonins
Optic glioma
Optic nerve (2nd cranial nerve)
619-624
,
,
(
see also
Cranial nerve,
nd [optic])
Optic neuritis (
see
Neuritis, optic)
Optic neuromyelitis
Oral cavity (
see
Mouth)
Oral contraceptives
,
2584-2586
in acne
adverse effects of
,
antibiotic interactions with
breast cancer and
,
contraindications to
depression and
drug interactions with
in dysfunctional uterine bleeding
in endometriosis
,
in hirsutism
migraine and
nutrient interactions with
after pregnancy
St. John's wort interactions with
saw palmetto interactions with
thrombotic disorders and
,
Oral-facial-digital syndrome
Oral rehydration therapy
,
2809-2810
Orbit
fracture of
3232-3233
,
hemorrhage in
560-561
,
infection of
625-627
inflammation of
tumors of
Orbivirus infection
Orchiectomy
,
Orchiopexy
Orchitis
,
,
2456-2457
Orexin
Orf virus infection
Organ donation
Organic acids, metabolic defects of
3011-3016
Organic brain disorders (
see
Delirium; Dementia)
Organic dust toxic syndrome
,
Organomegaly, in inborn errors of metabolism
Organophosphate poisoning
,
3340-3341
,
antidote for
Orgasm
female
,
male
Oriental cholangiohepatitis
Oriental liver fluke infection
1355-1356
Oriental lung fluke infection
Oriental sore
Orlistat
in diabetes mellitus
in obesity
Ornish diet
Ornithine transcarbamoylase deficiency
Oropharyngeal airway
===PAGE:3982===
Orotic aciduria
Oroya fever
,
Orphenadrine
in elderly
Orthodromic reciprocating tachycardia
Orthomolecular therapy
,
Orthopnea, heart failure and
Orthoses
Orthostatic hypotension
2035-2038
drug interactions with
idiopathic
1619-1620
syncope and
Orthotopic neobladder
Ortner's syndrome
,
Ortolani maneuver
Oseltamivir
in influenza
Osgood-Schlatter disease
Osler's nodes
Osmolality
,
U/P
urinary
,
,
,
,
,
Osmolar gap
Osmolarity
Osmotic demyelination syndrome
Osmotic fragility test
,
Osmotic gap, stool
Os odontoideum
Ossification, heterotopic (myositis ossificans)
Osteitis, syphilitic
Osteitis deformans
360-362
,
Osteitis fibrosa
Osteitis fibrosa cystica
,
Osteoarthritis (degenerative joint disease)
345-348
cervical
1808-1809
chondroitin and
glucosamine and
hand in
,
,
prevention of
,
rheumatoid arthritis vs
temporomandibular joint in
Osteoarthropathy
cancer-related
selenium deficiency and
Osteoblasts
Osteocalcin
Osteochondrodysplasias
,
Osteochondroma (osteocartilaginous exostoses)
Osteochondromatosis, synovial
Osteochondroses
2913-2916
Osteoclasts
Osteodystrophy
Albright's
,
renal
,
Osteogenesis imperfecta
,
Osteoma
jaw
===PAGE:3983===
osteoid
otic
Osteomalacia
,
,
41-43
,
osteoporosis vs
renal failure and
total parenteral nutrition and
vitamin D-resistant
Osteomyelitis
370-372
fever and
Kingella
in
postextraction
staphylococcal
Osteonecrosis
362-365
,
dysbaric
of jaw
,
Osteo-onychodysplasia
2910-2911
Osteopenia
antiretrovirals and
drug interactions with
Osteopetroses
2916-2918
Osteopoikilosis
Osteoporosis
356-360
antiretrovirals and
DEXA scan in
,
osteomalacia vs
postmenopausal
,
posttransplantation
prevention of
,
secondary
,
,
total parenteral nutrition and
Osteoradionecrosis, mandibular
,
Osteosarcoma (osteogenic sarcoma)
Osteosclerosis
2917-2918
Osteotomy
Ostium secundum defect
2950-2952
Otalgia
414-417
,
Otitis externa
,
,
454-455
in Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
malignant
,
necrotizing
Pseudomonas

Otitis media
,
,
acute
448-450
,
,
hearing loss and
chronic
451-452
in Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
Moraxella catarrhalis

1277-1278
pneumococcal
secretory
450-451
hearing loss and
Otoacoustic emission testing
Otolith
Otomycosis
Otorrhea
417-419
,
418-419
in head trauma
,
Otosclerosis
452-453
Ouchterlony double diffusion test
===PAGE:3984===
Ovalocytes
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome
pleural effusion with
Ovary(ies)
abscess of
,
cancer of
,
2567-2571
,
,
,
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma and
pleural effusion and
pregnancy and
cystadenoma of
cysts of
,
,
2514-2515
functional
,
2533-2534
pregnancy and
dysfunction of
dysgenesis of
fibroma of
follicular development of
2498-2499
hyperstimulation of
controlled
polycystic disease of
,
2514-2515
,
premature failure of
,
,
radiation effects on
teratoma of
,
torsion of
,
,
pregnancy and
tumors of
benign
2533-2534
malignant (
see
Ovary[ies], cancer of)
Overflow incontinence
,
,
,
Overnutrition
6-7
(
see also
Nutrition; Obesity)
Overuse injury
Ovulation
,
detection of
,
,
dysfunction of
2595-2596
induction of
2595-2596
postpartum
Oxacillin
,
in infective endocarditis
2197-2198
in meningitis
,
neonatal dosage of
Oxalates
poisoning with
urinary
,
,
,
Oxalic acid poisoning
Oxaliplatin
Oxamniquine
Oxamyl poisoning
Oxaprozin
in elderly
Oxazepam
in alcohol withdrawal
in elderly
Oxazolidinones
,
1211-1212
Oxcarbazepine
in seizures
in trigeminal neuralgia
Oxicams
===PAGE:3985===
Oxiconazole
β
-Oxidation cycle disorders
3018-3019
Oxidative phosphorylation disorders
Oximetry
in brain injury
in carbon monoxide poisoning
fetal
in hyperventilation syndrome
in pulmonary embolism
in sarcoidosis
in syncope
transcutaneous
Oxybutynin
in elderly
,
in urinary incontinence
,
,
Oxycodone
,
poisoning with
Oxydemeton-methyl poisoning
Oxygen (
see also
Oxygen therapy)
arterial (
see
Blood gases)
arteriovenous difference in
blood
desaturation of
2250-2252
,
measurement of
partial pressure of
blood affinity for
Hb-based carriers of
impaired diffusion of
inspired fraction (FIO
) of
,
,
PEEP and
myocardial uptake of
toxicity of
diving-related
hyperbaric therapy and
,
uptake of
Oxygenation
1856-1858
,
fetal
Oxygenation index
Oxygen therapy (
see also
Ventilation)
bronchopulmonary dysplasia with
2870-2872
,
in COPD
,
,
,
in critical care patient
in croup
2880-2881
in dying patient
hyperbaric
,
3289-3290
,
,
in hypoxemic respiratory failure
-
in neonate
,
,
neonate
Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve
,
heart failure and
Oxymetazoline
Oxymetholone
Oxymorphone
,
Oxytocin
after delivery
,
in labor
Oxytocin challenge test
===PAGE:3986===
Oxyuriasis
,
1349-1350
Ozone
occupational exposure to
1983-1984
===PAGE:3987===
P
PACE (Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly)
,
Pacemaker
,
2154-2158
,
magnetic resonance imaging and
Pace's maneuver
Pachydermoperiostosis
Pachymetry, ultrasound
Pachyonychia congenita
Paclitaxel
Paget Schroetter syndrome
Paget's disease of bone
360-362
,
craniocervical junction abnormalities and
hypercalcemia and
Paget's disease of nipple
,
,
,
Pain
1620-1634
(
see also
Neuralgia
and specific sites
)
abdominal (
see
Abdomen, pain in)
acute
cancer
,
chest (
see
Chest, pain in)
chronic
,
1629-1632
in elderly
deafferentation
in elderly
etiology of
1620-1621
evaluation of
1621-1623
,
gastrointestinal (
see
Abdomen, pain in)
modulation of
musculoskeletal
myofascial
,
533-534
neuropathic
1628-1629
,
,
1632-1634
neurotransmitters in
nociceptive
pelvic (
see
Pelvic pain)
perception of
,
phantom
,
pleuritic
,
postoperative
psychogenic
psychophysiologic
radicular
referred
,
,
severity of
,
somatic
,
treatment of
1623-1629
adjuvant drugs in
1628-1629
,
in dying patient
nerve stimulation in
neural blockade in
nonopioid analgesics in
,
opioid analgesics in
1623-1628
,
1625-1626
,
for rehabilitation
3459-3461
,
topical
with urination
2318-2320
,
visceral
Pain disorder
Paint solvent, poisoning with
,
===PAGE:3988===
Pajaroello tick bites
Palate
cleft
disorders of
499-500
herpes simplex virus infection of
,
hyperplasia of
of neonate
Paliperidone
in children
Palivizumab
,
in children
,
Palla's sign
Palm
abscess of
389-390
fibromatosis of (Dupuytren's contracture)
387-388
erythema of
Palmar reflex
Palmomental reflex
Palonosetron
Palpitations
2038-2041
,
,
Palsy (
see also
Paralysis)
3rd (oculomotor) cranial nerve
,
,
,
1752-1753
4th (trochlear) cranial nerve
,
,
6th (abducens) cranial nerve
,
,
1753-1754
7th (facial) cranial nerve
,
1755-1756
,
Bell's
1755-1756
bulbar
Erb's
gaze
1749-1752
,
1750-1751
Klumpke's
peroneal nerve
pressure
pseudobulbar
,
radial nerve
supranuclear, progressive
1771-1772
,
ulnar nerve
Pamidronate
,
in hypercalcemia
in osteogenesis imperfecta
in pain
Pancoast's tumor
Pancreas
abscess of
adenoma of, in MEN syndromes
annular
cancer of
196-198
chronic pancreatitis and
cystadenocarcinoma
intraductal papillary-mucinous
migratory superficial venous thrombosis and
Opisthorchis sinensis
and
endocrine tumors of
198-202
,
gastrinoma of
,
200-201
glucagonoma of
,
infection of
,
,
inflammation of
140-146
,
(
see also
Pancreatitis)
insulinoma of
198-200
,
===PAGE:3989===
hypoglycemia and
in MEN syndromes
,
pseudocyst of
,
,
transplantation of
,
1138-1140
rejection of
,
vipoma of
,
Pancreatectomy
in chronic pancreatitis
in insulinoma
199-200
Pancreatic duct
Pancreatic enzymes
in chronic pancreatitis
in cystic fibrosis
in digestion
pancreatitis and
Pancreatic insufficiency
in cystic fibrosis
,
,
malabsorption and
,
pancreatic cancer and
tests for
Pancreaticoduodenectomy
199-200
Pancreaticojejunostomy
Pancreatitis
140-146
acute
141-144
,
chest pain in
chronic
144-146
hemorrhagic
hypocalcemia in
mumps
pleural effusion with
pseudocyst with
,
,
Ranson's prognostic signs for
tropical
vitamin E deficiency and
44-45
Pancrelipase
Pancreolauryl test
Pancuronium
PANDAS syndrome
,
Panencephalitis
rubella
sclerosing, subacute
Panhypopituitarism
,
(
see also
Hypopituitarism)
secondary adrenal insufficiency and
Panic attacks
1496-1498
,
in children and adolescents
3053-3054
hyperventilation syndrome vs
Panitumumab
Panner's disease
Panniculitis
687-688
,
Pantoprazole
,
,
Pantothenic acid
PAO

1856-1857
Papain
PAPA syndrome
Papaverine infusion
Papillae, of tongue
Papillary cystadenoma lymphomatosum
===PAGE:3990===
Papillary inflammatory hyperplasia
Papillary-mucinous pancreatic tumor
Papillary muscle
insufficiency of
myocardial infarction and
rupture of
Papilledema
622-623
,
,
brain tumor and
Papillitis
Papillomas, cardiac
Pap test
,
,
,
,
in elderly
during pregnancy
Papule(s)
,
Gottron's
penile
in pregnancy
Papulosis, bowenoid
,
Para-aminosalicylic acid
Paracentesis
,
Paracervical block
Paracoccidioidomycosis
1333-1334
,
Paradichlorobenzene poisoning
Paradoxical breathing
Paraffin bath
,
Paraganglioma
cardiac
nonchromaffin
Paragonimiasis
,
,
,
Parainfluenza infection
,
,
in infant
2879-2881
Paraldehyde poisoning
Paralysis (
see also
Palsy)
drug-induced
in critical care patient
in pediatric ventilation
facial, in Bell's palsy
1755-1756
in Guillain-Barre syndrome
in locked-in syndrome
parietal lobe lesion and
periodic
familial
,
3008-3009
hyperkalemic
,
hypokalemic
,
polio and
1426-1428
sleep
spinal cord injury and
,
,
tick
vocal cord
,
484-485
Paralytic ileus
114-115
Paralytic shellfish poisoning
Paramyotonia congenita
Paramyxovirus
1461-1462
Paranasal sinuses (
see
Sinuses)
Paraneoplastic syndromes
1054-1056
bronchial carcinoid and
cutaneous
644-645
,
,
683-684
===PAGE:3991===
endocrine
gastrointestinal
hematologic
lung cancer and
neurologic
renal
Paranoid personality disorder
Paraparesis, spastic
hereditary
HTLV-1-associated myelopathy and
1812-1813
Parapertussis
Parapharyngeal abscess
Paraphilias
1570-1573
Paraphimosis
,
Paraphrenia
,
Parapneumonic effusion
,
Parapoxvirus infection
Paraproteinemias
1025-1032
,
Parapsoriasis
Paraquat poisoning
Parasite infections
1336-1342
,
1337-1340
,
,
(
see also specific infections
)
cancer and
cestode
1360-1365
CNS
1728-1729
cutaneous
709-714
delusional
710-711
eosinophilia in
,
gastrointestinal
malabsorption and
Loffler's syndrome and
nematode
1342-1355
prevention of
protozoa
1367-1373
pulmonary
specimen collection for
1337-1340
,
trematode
1355-1360
Parasomnias
1713-1714
Parasympathetic nervous system
1615-1620
,
,
Parasympatholytic drugs (
see
Anticholinergic drugs)
Parathion poisoning
Parathyroid glands (
see also
Hyperparathyroidism; Hypoparathyroidism)
absence of
adenoma of
,
in MEN syndromes
,
,
hypoplasia of
,
,
1103-1104
imaging of
removal of
hypocalcemia after
vitamin D effects on
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
blood levels of
,
in chronic renal failure
,
deficiency of
,
,
excess of
,
,
,
in osteoporosis
resistance to
vitamin D deficiency and
,
===PAGE:3992===
Paravaccinia virus infection
Paregoric
Parenchymatous keratitis
591-592
Parenteral nutrition
23-25
,
(
see also
Fluid therapy)
chromium deficiency and
essential fatty acid deficiency and
molybdenum deficiency and
selenium deficiency and
short bowel syndrome and
Paresis
114-115
syphilitic
Paresthesias
facial
in peripheral neuropathy
,
Parietal lobes
,
Parinaud's syndrome
,
,
,
Paris green poisoning
Parity
Parkinsonism
,
1770-1771
,
1770-1771
multiple system atrophy and
Parkinson's disease
,
1765-1771
,
,
adrenal autografting in
depression vs
drug interactions with
fetal cell transplantation in
Lewy body dementia vs
tremor in
,
,
Parkland formula
Paromomycin
Paronychia
,
Parotid ducts
Parotid glands
,
infection of
inflammation of (parotitis)
epidemic (mumps)
1461-1462
,
radiation injury to
sarcoidosis of
in Sjogren's syndrome
stones of
469-470
testing of
tumors of
493-494
Paroxetine
,
in children and adolescents
drug interactions of
in elderly
in pain
poisoning with
in polycythemia vera
in sleep disorders
Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, myocardial infarction and
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria
,
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, heart failure and
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
,
Pars interarticularis
Parsonage-Turner syndrome
Partial-exchange transfusion, in sickle cell disease
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
,
,
980-981
,
===PAGE:3993===
factor VIII antibody and
prolongation of
Parvovirus B
infection
,
,
2840-2841
Passive-aggressive (negativistic) personality disorder
Patau's syndrome
3001-3002
Patch testing
Patella (
see also
Knee)
chondromalacia of
,
dislocation of
subluxation of
,
tendinitis of
Patellar tendon
rupture of
Patellofemoral syndrome
Patent ductus arteriosus
,
,
2955-2956
,
,
fetal
murmur in
Paterson-Kelly syndrome
122-123
Pauci-immune pulmonary capillaritis
Pauci-immune rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
,
,
,
Pautrier's microabscess
Pavlik harness
PCO

(
see also
Acidosis; Alkalosis)
PCP (phencyclidine, angel dust)
,
during breastfeeding
PCR (polymerase chain reaction)
,
Peak airway pressure
,
status asthmaticus and
Peak expiratory flow monitoring
,
Peak urinary flow rate
Pearson's syndrome
,
Pectoralis major, agenesis of
Pectus carinatum
,
Pectus excavatum
,
,
Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with
Streptococcus
(PANDAS)
Pediculosis
,
711-713
Pedigree
,
,
Pedophilia
1572-1573
PEEP (
see
Positive end-expiratory pressure)
Pegaptanib
Pegvisomant
Pel-Ebstein fever
Peliosis hepatis
Pellagra
,
,
31-32
oral problems and
Pelvic examination
,
2483-2484
in dyspareunia
in elderly patient
in pregnancy
in urinary incontinence
Pelvic floor muscles, dysfunction of
2529-2532
,
difficult defecation and
in pelvic relaxation syndromes
Pelvic inflammatory disease
,
,
2545-2548
,
abscess in
HIV infection and
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
infection and
===PAGE:3994===
Pelvic mass
2485-2486
Pelvic pain
2486-2490
,
,
adnexal torsion and
menstruation and
2513-2514
pregnancy and
2609-2612
,
2610-2611
prostatitis and
,
Pelvic relaxation syndromes
2529-2532
Pelvis (
see also
Pelvic examination)
abscess of
fracture of
pain in (
see
Pelvic pain)
Pemetrexed
Pemoline, in elderly
Pemphigoid
bullous
656-657
,
,
cicatricial
,
579-580
oral
,
Pemphigoid gestationis
2666-2667
Pemphigus erythematosus
Pemphigus foliaceous
659-660
Pemphigus vulgaris
658-659
,
oral
,
paraneoplastic
,
pemphigoid vs
Penbutolol
Penciclovir
Pendred's syndrome
Penicillamine
autoimmune disorders with
in chelation therapy
in copper toxicity
,
in cystinuria
vitamin B
deficiency and
Penicillin
1188-1190
,
1204-1206
,
adverse effects of
1205-1206
allergy to
,
1205-1206
antibiotic alternatives for
2197-2198
,
cephalosporin use and
desensitization in
skin test for
in staphylococcal infection
broad-spectrum
,
in Lyme disease
metabolic alkalosis and
neonatal dosage of
penicillinase-resistant
,
pneumococcus resistance to
staphylococcus resistance to
Penicillium marneffei
infection
Penile pressure-brachial pressure index
Penis
amputation of
anomalies of
2985-2986
cancer of
2466-2468
,
2469-2470
cutaneous lesions of
2454-2455
,
,
in Behcet's syndrome
erectile dysfunction of
2345-2348
===PAGE:3995===
prosthesis for
erection of
deviated (Peyronie's disease)
persistent (priapism)
2327-2330
,
examination of
inflammation of
,
of neonate
trauma to
,
Pentamidine
in African trypanosomiasis
in
Pneumocystis
pneumonia
Pentasa
,
Pentazocine
,
in elderly
,
Pentobarbital
in coma induction
,
in dying patient
poisoning with
in seizures
Pentosan
Pentostatin
Pentoxifylline
Peppermint oil
Peptic ulcer disease
133-136
,
bleeding in
,
drug interactions with
in elderly
esophageal
hemorrhage in
MEN 1 syndrome and
perforation in
recurrence of
,
treatment of
135-136
,
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and
Peptococcal infection
1299-1300
Peptostreptococcal infection
1299-1300
Perchlordecone poisoning
Percussion, chest
Percutaneous anterograde urography
Percutaneous coronary interventions
2059-2060
,
,
in acute coronary syndromes
2111-2114
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty
2059-2060
(
see also
Angioplasty)
in peripheral arterial disease
Percutaneous umbilical blood sampling
Perennial allergic conjunctivitis
584-585
Perennial rhinitis
1117-1118
Perfluorocarbons
,
Pergolide, in multiple system atrophy
Periadenitis mucosa necrotica recurrens
Periapical abscess
,
Periarteritis nodosa
323-325
Pericardial cyst
Pericardial effusion
,
,
,
,
Pericardial knock
Pericardial rub
,
,
,
Pericardial sac, air dissection into
===PAGE:3996===
Pericardiocentesis
,
in cancer
Pericardiotomy
,
,
Pericarditis
,
,
,
,
acute
constrictive
,
,
,
2206-2207
myocardial infarction and
pain in
,
pleural effusion and
rheumatic fever and
tuberculous
Pericardium
inflammation of (
see
Pericarditis)
mesothelioma of
,
resection of
teratoma of
,
,
Perichondritis
Pericoronitis
,
Perihepatitis
,
Perilymphatic fistula
,
Perimenopause
Perimetry
Perineum
anesthetic infiltration of
gangrene of
Periodic breathing (Cheyne-Stokes respiration)
Periodic fever syndromes
3026-3029
Periodic limb movement disorder
,
1714-1715
Periodic paralysis
,
familial
3008-3009
Periodontitis
,
520-522
HIV infection and
Periodontium
Periostitis, syphilitic
Peripheral arterial disease
2218-2221
Peripheral nerves
1783-1804
,
,
(
see also
Cranial nerves
and specific disorders
)
aging-related changes in
compression of
391-392
conduction velocity study of
injury to
1632-1634
,
,
lower limb
stimulation of
upper limb
Peripheral neuropathy (
see
Neuropathy)
Peripheral vascular disorders
arterial
2216-2224
Buerger's disease
2223-2224
chronic venous insufficiency
2231-2233
,
claudication in
,
deep venous thrombosis
2224-2231
,
,
foot ischemia in
superficial venous thrombosis
2231-2233
varicose veins
2233-2234
venous
2224-2236
Peripheral vascular resistance
2066-2067
Peristalsis
abdominal pain and
===PAGE:3997===
arrest of
114-115
infection and
Peritoneal dialysis
,
,
2451-2452
pleural effusion and
Peritoneum
abscess of
117-119
,
air dissection into
ascites in
disseminated cancer of
fluid in
206-211
(
see also
Ascites)
inflammation (infection) of (
see
Peritonitis)
Peritonitis
,
bacterial, spontaneous
210-211
familial Mediterranean fever and
gonococcal
meconium
peritoneal dialysis and
pneumococcal
pregnancy and
tuberculous
ulcerative colitis and
Peritonsillar abscess (quinsy)
474-475
Periventricular leukomalacia
Perleche
Permethrin
in lice infestation
712-713
poisoning with
in scabies
,
Pernicious anemia
,
,
932-933
,
autoimmune metaplastic atrophic gastritis and
Pernio
Peroneal muscular atrophy
Peroneal nerve compression
Peroxidase deficiency
Peroxisomal disorders
3023-3024
Perphenazine
poisoning with
in vomiting
Persistent ostium primum
2953-2955
,
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of newborn
,
2873-2874
diaphragmatic hernia and
Persistent truncus arteriosus
2965-2966
,
Personality
addictive
disorders of
1553-1557
,
suicide and
multiple
1505-1507
placebo response and
Pertussis
,
1254-1256
,
,
,
vaccine against
,
,
schedule for
,
,
2722-2723
Pervasive developmental disorders
3038-3040
,
Pessary
,
Pesticides
cancer and
poisoning with
,
Pestis
1256-1257
===PAGE:3998===
PET (
see
Positron emission tomography)
Petechiae
endocarditis and
of neonate
Petroleum jelly
aspiration of
in lice infestation
Petroleum poisoning
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
,
,
,
,
,
Pexelizumab
Peyronie's disease
,
PFAPA syndrome
p53
gene
,
pH
,
in acidosis
in alkalosis
amniotic fluid
in diabetic ketoacidosis
esophageal
gastric
pharmacokinetics and
,
urinary
,
vaginal fluid
,
Phacoemulsification
Phaeohyphomycosis
1334-1335
Phagocytosis
,
bacterial resistance to
complement components in
defects in
,
,
,
,
,
1101-1102
,
Phakic intraocular lenses
Phalanges (
see
Finger[s]; Thumb; Toe[s])
Phalen's sign
Phalloplasty
Phantom limb sensation
Phantom pain
,
Pharmacists
Pharmacobezoars
138-139
Pharmacodynamics
3181-3184
,
in elderly
3091-3092
,
genetic factors in
Pharmacogenetics
3168-3169
,
,
Pharmacogenomics
Pharmacokinetics
3172-3181
,
,
(
see also
Drugs, Pharmacokinetics of)
in children
2761-2763
,
in elderly
3090-3091
genetic factors in
3168-3169
,
,
,
Pharmacy, elderly patient and
3126-3127
funding for
3160-3161
,
Pharyngeal bursa
Pharyngitis
464-466
,
473-474
gonococcal
1471-1474
lymphonodular
nongonococcal
1468-1470
streptococcal
,
,
Pharynx (
see also
Nose)
abscess of
cancer of
===PAGE:3999===
evaluation of
infection of (
see
Pharyngitis)
Tornwaldt's cyst of
Phenacetin poisoning
Phenazopyridine
Phencyclidine (PCP, angel dust)
,
,
during breastfeeding
Phenelzine
,
poisoning with
Phenmetrazine poisoning
Phenobarbital (
see also
Barbiturates)
in barbiturate withdrawal
during breastfeeding
drug interactions of
folate deficiency and
,
in neonatal opioid withdrawal
in neonatal seizures
poisoning with
in pregnancy
,
in seizures
,
Phenolphthalein
Phenols, poisoning with
Phenothiazines
in cancer therapy
in carcinoid syndrome
hyperpigmentation and
poisoning with
riboflavin deficiency and
Phenotype
Phentolamine
in carcinoid syndrome
in hypertensive emergency
Phentolamine infusion test
Phenylacetamide poisoning
Phenylalanine
fetal levels of
phenylketonuria and
3011-3012
requirement for
Phenylbutazone
Phenylbutyrate
Phenylephrine
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in elderly
in ischemic priapism
Phenylketonuria
3011-3012
Phenylpropanolamine
in elderly
poisoning with
Phenytoin
antibiotic interaction with
in brain injury-related seizures
during breastfeeding
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
drug interactions of
folate deficiency and
,
gingival hyperplasia and
in neonatal seizures
===PAGE:4000===
in pain
in pregnancy
in seizures
,
in trigeminal neuralgia
vitamin D deficiency and
Pheochromocytoma
,
801-803
,
cardiac
in MEN syndromes
,
,
Philadelphia chromosome
Philippine hemorrhagic fever
1432-1433
Philocarpus
poisoning
Phimosis
,
,
Phlebitis (
see
Thrombophlebitis; Thrombosis)
Phlebotomus (sandfly) fever
,
Phlebotomy
in cor pulmonale
in iron overload
in polycythemia vera
in porphyria
Phlegmasia alba dolens
,
Phlegmasia cerulea dolens
,
Phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis
594-595
Phlyctenulosis
594-595
Phobia
school
social
,
in children and adolescents
3051-3052
Phobic disorders
1498-1500
,
Phoenix House
Phorate poisoning
Phosdrin poisoning
,
Phosgene, occupational exposure to
1983-1984
Phosmet poisoning
Phosphate
850-852
aluminum hydroxide-induced depletion of
blood levels of
,
in chronic renal failure
,
depletion of
850-851
(
see also
Hypophosphatemia)
excess of
851-852
(
see also
Hyperphosphatemia)
in hypercalcemia
,
in hypophosphatemic rickets
transcellular shift of
urinary
vitamin D deficiency and
Phosphate enema
,
Phosphine poisoning
Phosphocreatine
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency
Phospholipid procoagulant
Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity
Phosphorus
blood levels of
deficiency of, protein-energy undernutrition treatment and
dietary
poisoning with
radioactive, in polycythemia vera
recommended dietary allowance for
===PAGE:4001===
Photoallergic dermatitis
,
Photopsia
Photorefractive keratectomy
573-574
Photoscreening
Photosensitivity
674-676
,
drug-induced
,
,
porphyria and
,
,
,
Phototherapy
in atopic dermatitis
in depression
in bipolar disorder
in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia
in psoriasis
,
in vitiligo
Phototoxic dermatitis
,
,
Phycomycosis (mucormycosis)
,
Phyllodes tumor
Phylloquinone
Physical examination
of adolescent
2714-2715
in autonomic nervous system disorders
cardiovascular
dental
of elderly patient
3080-3086
in gastrointestinal disorders
,
in genitourinary tract disorders
2306-2307
gynecologic
2483-2497
in hepatic disorders
of infant and child
2710-2711
,
2712-2713
,
of joints
284-286
of neonate
2699-2702
,
2710-2711
neurologic
1587-1593
ocular
537-540
oronasopharyngeal
of pregnant woman
2606-2607
,
,
,
preoperative
in pulmonary disorders
1826-1828
in trauma
3190-3192
in urologic disorders
2313-2314
Physical therapy
3453-3455
,
,
after burns
after spinal injury
Physiotherapy, chest
Physostigmine
in anticholinergic reaction
in glaucoma
,
poisoning with
Phytanic acid, accumulation of
Phytobezoars
138-139
Phytochemicals, in atherosclerosis
Phytonadione
Pica
,
,
Pick's disease
1683-1684
Pickwickian syndrome
Pierre Robin syndrome
,
Pigbel
Pigmented fungi
1334-1335
===PAGE:4002===
Pigmented villonodular synovitis
Pilar cyst
Piles
182-183
Pilocarpine
in glaucoma
,
poisoning with
in xerostomia
Pilonidal disease
Pimecrolimus
,
in psoriasis
Pimozide
poisoning with
Pincer-nail deformity
Pindolol
Pineal tumors
,
Pineoblastoma
Pineocytoma
Pinguecula
585-586
,
Pink eye
563-566
,
564-565
Pinna (
see
Ear, external)
Pinocytosis
Pinta
1266-1267
Pinworm infestation
,
1349-1350
Pioglitazone
Piperacillin
,
,
neonatal dosage of
Piperacillin-tazobactam
Piperazines
Piperidines
Pipe smoker's palate
Pipe smoking
Pirbuterol
,
Piriformis syndrome
Pirimiphos-methyl poisoning
Piroxicam
in elderly
Pitressin (
see
Antidiuretic hormone)
Pituitary apoplexy
,
Pituitary gland
762-775
adenoma of
,
1820-1821
ACTH-secreting (
see
Cushing's syndrome [disease])
growth hormone-secreting
768-770
in MEN 1 syndrome
,
prolactin-secreting
770-772
removal of
,
,
TSH-secreting
anterior
disorders of
762-766
,
,
(
see also
Hyperpituitarism; Hypopituitarism)
apoplexy with
,
gigantism with
function of
758-759
hypothalamus interaction with
carcinoma of
,
1820-1821
hormones of (
see specific hormones
)
hypothalamus interaction with
757-758
imaging of
postadrenalectomy changes in
===PAGE:4003===
posterior
disorders of
,
772-775
(
see also
Diabetes insipidus)
function of
759-760
hypothalamus interaction with
postpartum necrosis of
pregnancy effects on
sarcoidosis of
tumor of
,
,
(
see also
Pituitary gland, adenoma of)
Pit viper bite
,
,
Pityriasis lichenoides
Pityriasis rosea
680-681
Pityriasis rubra pilaris
p
K
a
, of drugs
PKD
genes
PKU (phenylketonuria)
3011-3012
PLA-1 antibodies
Placebos
3169-3171
Placenta
abnormal implantation of (
see
Placenta previa)
delivery of
development of
,
drug transport across
hormone production by
premature separation of (abruptio placentae)
2620-2622
,
,
,
2660-2661
Placenta accreta
Placental insufficiency syndrome
,
Placental lactogen (
see
Chorionic somatomammotropin)
Placenta previa
2620-2622
,
,
,
,
2668-2669
,
Plague
1256-1257
,
terrorist use of
Plantar fasciosis (fasciitis)
,
400-401
Plantar fibromatosis
Plantar nerve compression
,
402-403
Plantar warts
,
corn vs
Plants
occupational exposure to
poisoning with
,
,
Plaque(s)
asbestotic
,
atherosclerotic
,
,
,
2099-2100
cutaneous
in pregnancy
dental
,
Hollenhorst
retinal
Plasma cell disorders (dyscrasias)
1025-1032
,
Plasma cell myeloma
1029-1032
Plasmacytoma
,
Plasma factors (
see
Coagulation factors)
Plasmapheresis
,
1044-1045
in essential thrombocythemia
in Goodpasture's syndrome
in Guillain-Barre syndrome
in macroglobulinemia
in rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
in thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura-hemolytic-uremic syndrome
===PAGE:4004===
Plasma thromboplastin antecedent (factor XI)
,
deficiency of
,
Plasmin
,
inhibitors of
,
Plasminogen
,
assay for
Plasminogen activators
,
inhibitors of
,
in myocardial infarction
Plasmodium
infection (
see
Malaria)
Platelet factors
Platelets
aggregation of
,
count of
,
fetal
in neonatal sepsis
pseudohyperkalemia and
reference value for
deficiency of (
see
Thrombocytopenia)
dysfunction of
954-963
,
,
,
acquired
hereditary
,
957-958
,
,
962-963
excess of (
see
Thrombocythemia; Thrombocytosis)
life span of
splenic sequestration of
transfusion of
in acute leukemia
in cancer patient
in gastrointestinal bleeding
in thrombocytopenia
Platinum complexes
Platybasia
Pleiotropy
Plesiomonas shigelloides infection

Plethysmography, body-box
Pleura
air in
2002-2004
,
in infant
asbestos-related disease of
,
biopsy of
1863-1864
bleeding in
calcification of
cancer of (mesothelioma)
1973-1974
fibrosis of
friction rub of
pain from
,
thoracoscopy for
tube drainage of
1866-1867
viral infection of
Pleural effusion
1995-2001
,
,
1996-1997
,
asbestos-related
cancer and
,
,
,
drug-induced
heart failure and
pneumococcal pneumonia and
thoracentesis for
1864-1865
thoracoscopy for
===PAGE:4005===
tuberculosis and
tube thoracostomy for
1866-1867
Pleuritis
,
Pleurodesis
Pleurodynia, epidemic
,
,
Pleuropericardial rub
Pleuroperitoneal shunt
Pleuroscopy
Plexopathy
,
,
,
Plicamycin (mithramycin)
Plumbism
3342-3344
Plummer's disease
Plummer-Vinson syndrome
122-123
,
Pneumatic compression
in chronic venous insufficiency
in deep venous thrombosis prevention
in peripheral arterial disease
in pulmonary embolism prevention
,
Pneumatosis intestinalis
Pneumaturia
,
Pneumococcal infection
1225-1228
endocardial
meningeal
,
pulmonary (pneumonia)
,
,
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
schedule for
,
,
Pneumoconioses
asbestos
1972-1974
beryllium
1974-1976
coal-workers'
1977-1979
cotton
Pneumocystis
pneumonia
,
,
,
,
,
1935-1936
in children
,
Pneumomediastinum
2001-2002
in asthma
barotrauma and
in infant
Pneumonia
,
1923-1937
(
see also
Pneumonitis)
Acinetobacter

acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and
antibiotic resistance in
Aspergillus

,
aspiration
,
1936-1937
bronchiolitis obliterans with
,
,
1950-1951
,
chest x-ray in
,
,
,
,
chickenpox and
in children
,
chlamydial
,
,
,
1926-1927
,
in infant
in neonate
community-acquired
1924-1929
,
,
1926-1927
,
,
cough in
in elderly
eosinophilic
1954-1955
fungal
,
,
1926-1927
Haemophilus influenzae

1251-1252
,
HIV infection and
===PAGE:4006===
hospital-acquired
1929-1932
,
ICU admission for
,
in immunocompromised host
1933-1936
,
influenza-related
interstitial
,
1945-1952
,
1946-1947
,
,
1961-1962
Klebsiella

lipoid
Loffler's
,
,
mechanical ventilation and
Moraxella catarrhalis

1277-1278
mycoplasmal
neonatal
nursing home-acquired
1932-1933
,
parainfluenza
plague
pleural effusion with
,
pneumococcal
,
,
,
,
,
Pneumocystis
(
see Pneumocystis
pneumonia)
prevention of
,
pulmonary embolism vs
respiratory syncytial virus
staphylococcal
,
,
,
streptococcal
,
1926-1927
,
typhoid fever and
ventilator-associated
viral
,
,
1926-1927
,
Pneumonitis
acute leukemia and
aspiration
1936-1937
hydrocarbon ingestion and
chemical
hypersensitivity
,
1956-1960
,
1956-1957
,
beryllium-induced
interstitial, lymphoid
,
,
1961-1962
radiation
,
toxoplasmic
Pneumopericardium, in infant
Pneumoperitoneum, in infant
Pneumothorax
,
2002-2004
,
,
barotrauma and
central venous catheterization and
COPD and
in cystic fibrosis
in infant
lymphangioleiomyomatosis and
mechanical ventilation and
status asthmaticus and
tension
2002-2004
transbronchial biopsy and
trauma-related
tuberculosis and
tube thoracostomy for
1866-1867
,
Podagra
,
Podophyllotoxins
1070-1071
Podophyllum
POEMS syndrome
,
Poikilocytosis
===PAGE:4007===
Poisoning
3323-3344
,
,
3345-3369
(
see also specific poisons
)
activated charcoal in
alkaline diuresis in
antidotes for
chelation therapy in
decontamination in
dialysis in
food (
see
Food poisoning)
gastric emptying in
neurotransmitters in
nontoxic substances vs
plant
,
,
prevention of
venomous
3313-3319
,
,
,
whole-bowel irrigation in
Poison ivy
,
,
Pokeweed poisoning
Poland's syndrome
Poliovirus infection
,
,
1426-1428
vaccine against
,
1177-1178
,
in pediatric HIV infection
schedule for
,
,
2722-2723
Politzerization
Polyangiitis, microscopic
322-323
Polyarteritis nodosa
323-325
,
,
rheumatoid arthritis vs
Polychondritis, relapsing
302-303
Polycystic kidney disease
2382-2383
,
2385-2387
autosomal recessive
Polycystic ovary (Stein-Leventhal) syndrome
,
2514-2515
,
Polycythemia
Eisenmenger's syndrome and
perinatal
2787-2788
primary
1000-1004
,
secondary
1003-1004
in small-for-gestational-age infant
Polycythemia vera
,
1000-1004
,
Polydipsia
hyponatremia and
psychogenic
,
,
Polyethylene glycol
in constipation
,
,
in iron poisoning
,
in poisoning
Polyglandular autoimmune disease
Polyglandular deficiency syndromes
804-807
,
Polyhydramnios
,
Polymenorrhea
2490-2493
,
,
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
,
in HIV infection
in pneumonia
Polymicrogyria
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes
defects in
,
,
,
,
,
1101-1102
,
Polymorphous light eruptions
Polymyalgia rheumatica
325-326
,
fibromyalgia vs.
===PAGE:4008===
Polymyositis
299-302
,
cancer-related
polymyalgia rheumatica vs
rheumatoid arthritis vs
Polymyxin B
,
,
topical
Polyneuritis, acute idiopathic
1788-1790
Polyneuropathy
1799-1801
,
(
see also
Neuritis; Neuropathy)
demyelinating
diabetic
,
weakness and
Polyp(s)
cervical
2534-2535
colonic
,
191-193
gallbladder
gastric
nasal
477-478
rectal
191-193
vocal cord
,
485-486
Polypeptide antibiotics
,
,
Polyposis, familial
192-193
,
Polyradiculopathy
Polysiloxane capsules
Polysomnography
,
in sleep apnea
Polyuria
,
,
2324-2327
,
(
see also
Diabetes insipidus)
obstructive uropathy and
POMC (pro-opiomelanocortin)
Pompholyx
Pontiac fever
Popcorn workers' lung
Popliteal artery
aneurysm of
2217-2218
injury to
Popliteal cyst
Popliteus tendinitis
Poppers
Poractant alfa
Porencephaly
Pork tapeworm infection
1364-1365
,
,
Porphobilinogen, urinary
,
,
Porphobilinogen deaminase deficiency
,
809-815
Porphyria
807-819
,
acute intermittent
,
809-815
,
congenital erythropoietic
cutaneous (porphyria cutanea tarda)
,
,
,
,
815-818
δ
-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase-deficient
,
809-815
dental discoloration in
drug precipitation of
,
810-813
dual
erythropoietic
,
hepatoerythropoietic
,
neurovisceral abnormalities in
,
photosensitivity in
,
,
,
screening for
,
variegate
,
809-815
Porphyrins
,
,
===PAGE:4009===
fecal
reference values for
Portal hypertension
218-220
,
ascites in
206-211
hepatopulmonary syndrome and
portal vein thrombosis and
263-264
varices and
,
Portal-systemic encephalopathy
,
220-222
,
,
,
Portal triads
,
,
Portal veins
(
see also
Portal hypertension)
disorders of
263-264
thrombosis of
263-264
,
Portopulmonary hypertension
1987-1988
Portuguese man-of-war sting
3310-3311
Port-wine stain
747-748
,
Posaconazole
1320-1321
,
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP)
,
,
in ARDS
in COPD
intrinsic (autoPEEP)
Positron emission tomography (PET)
3409-3410
in cardiovascular disorders
in Lewy body dementia
in lung cancer
,
,
in solitary pulmonary nodule
in Takayasu's arteritis
Postcholecystectomy syndrome
Postconcussion syndrome
Postdatism
Posterior interosseous nerve syndrome
Postherpetic neuralgia
,
Posthitis
Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
,
2392-2393
Postmature infant
(
see also
Neonate)
Post-myocardial infarction syndrome
,
,
,
,
,
Postnasal drip syndrome
Postoperative care
3448-3452
Postpartum care
2685-2690
,
Postpartum depression
,
2689-2690
Postpericardiotomy syndrome
,
,
Postphlebitic syndrome
,
2231-2233
Postpoliomyelitis syndrome
1427-1428
Postseptal cellulitis
625-627
Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis
Posttraumatic stress disorder
1500-1502
,
in children and adolescents
3054-3055
rape and
Postural drainage
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
,
Postural reeducation
Postural tremor
,
Postvoid residual volume
,
,
Potassium
831-837
blood levels of
,
,
,
in elderly
reference values for
in body fluids
===PAGE:4010===
in chronic renal failure
deficiency of
832-835
,
(
see also
Hypokalemia)
protein-energy undernutrition treatment and
in diabetic ketoacidosis
dietary
,
drug interactions with
excess of
,
835-837
,
(
see also
Hyperkalemia)
in hypokalemic paralysis
in nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome
replacement of
in cholera
supplements of
toxicity of
transtubular gradient of
urinary
,
,
,
Potassium channel blockers
,
2150-2151
Potassium citrate
Potassium cyanide poisoning
Potassium hydroxide (KOH) test
,
706-707
,
,
Potassium iodide
in pregnancy
Potassium nitrite poisoning
Potassium permanganate poisoning
Potassium phosphate
Potato poisoning
Potato riddler's lung
Pothos poisoning
POTS (postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome)
,
Potter's syndrome
,
2982-2983
Pott's disease
,
,
Pouchitis
Povidone iodine
,
Powassan virus infection
,
Power of attorney for health care
,
Poxvirus infection
,
PPD (purified protein derivative) test
Prader-Willi syndrome
,
Pralidoxime
,
Pramipexole
in Parkinson's disease
,
in periodic limb movement disorder
Pramlintide
,
Pramoxine
Prasugrel
Pravastatin
Praxis
Praziquantel
,
,
,
Prazosin
in elderly
in hypertension
,
in Raynaud's syndrome
in urinary incontinence
Prealbumin levels
undernutrition and
Precipitation tests
Precocious puberty
,
2895-2896
Precordial heave
===PAGE:4011===
Precordial thump
Predictive values
Prednisolone
in asthma
,
,
in Crohn's disease
Prednisone
in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
in asthma
,
,
in autoimmune hepatitis
in berylliosis
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
in COPD
in Crohn's disease
in eosinophilic fasciitis
in eosinophilic pneumonia
in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
in Goodpasture's syndrome
in Henoch-Schonlein purpura
in hypercalcemia
in hypersensitivity pneumonitis
in IgA nephropathy
in leprosy
in lupus nephritis
in membranous nephropathy
in middle ear barotrauma
in minimal change disease
in multiple myeloma
in myositis
in pain
in perinatal tuberculosis
in
Pneumocystis
pneumonia
in relapsing polychondritis
in rheumatic fever
in sarcoidosis
in SLE
in typhoid fever
in ulcerative colitis
in vasculitic disorders
Preeclampsia
,
,
2670-2672
Pregabalin
,
in seizures
Preganglionic cell bodies
Pregnancy
,
2623-2634
(
see also
Abortion; Birth; Labor and delivery; Neonate)
abnormalities of
2660-2676
abruptio placentae in
2660-2661
adolescent
air travel and
alcohol use during
,
amniocentesis in
,
,
anemia in
,
,
,
2634-2636
asthma in
,
autoimmune disorders in
2636-2637
bipolar disorder during
bleeding after
2680-2681
bleeding during
,
2612-2615
,
2613-2614
,
2620-2622
,
,
,
cancer in
2637-2638
cholestasis of
chorea during
===PAGE:4012===
chorea during
chorionic villus sampling in
,
contraception after
,
dating of
delivery management for
2627-2631
,
2631-2634
,
(
see also
Labor and delivery)
depression after
,
diabetes mellitus in
,
,
,
2638-2642
,
,
disseminated intravascular coagulation and
drug use during
2625-2627
,
,
,
,
,
2656-2659
,
2799-2800
ectopic
,
,
2663-2665
edema during
2618-2620
,
,
fatty liver of
fetal monitoring during
2630-2631
fever during
folate in
,
,
genetic screening in
2598-2604
,
,
gingival disorders in
group B streptococcal infection in
,
heart disorders in
,
2642-2644
hemorrhage after
2680-2681
herpes gestationis in
2666-2667
high-risk
2651-2659
,
HIV infection in
,
,
(
see also
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, pediatric)
hydremia of
hypertension during
2645-2647
,
,
2670-2672
infection after
2687-2688
infection during
,
2650-2651
,
,
intrauterine device and
inverted uterus after
iron requirement in
,
,
,
labor of
2627-2631
(
see also
Labor and delivery)
loss of (
see
Abortion; Stillbirth)
malaria during
malignancy during
2637-2638
mask of
maternal age and
maternal weight and
melasma of
mineral requirements during
molar
2574-2576
,
human chorionic gonadotropin in
hyperthyroidism in
multiple
,
myasthenia gravis in
nausea in
2615-2618
,
,
,
opioid abuse during
,
oral contraceptives after
pelvic pain during
2609-2612
,
2610-2611
pemphigoid gestationis in
2666-2667
physical examination in
2606-2607
,
physiology of
2623-2625
phytonadione in
pituitary necrosis after (Sheehan's syndrome)
placenta previa in
2668-2669
postdated
postnatal care for
2685-2690
postpartum care for
premature rupture of membranes in
===PAGE:4013===
prenatal care for
2606-2622
,
genetic screening and
2598-2604
,
,
prolactin in
prosthetic heart valves and
pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of
pruritus of
radiation during
radiography during
,
rape and
recommended dietary allowances in
,
renal cortical necrosis and
,
renal disease in
2647-2648
retinoid contraindication in
risk assessment for
2651-2659
,
2652-2653
rubella vaccination during
,
seizures in
,
2670-2672
serum screening in
2603-2604
sexual activity during
silent lymphocytic thyroiditis after
787-788
SLE and
,
,
surgery during
2648-2649
,
syncope during
syphilis during
,
testing for
thrombocytopenia in
thyroid disorders in
2649-2650
,
toxoplasmosis during
,
travel during
tuberculosis during
ultrasonography during
2600-2602
,
,
,
umbilical blood sampling in
umbilical cord prolapse in
undernutrition in
urinary tract infection during
,
2650-2651
uterine fibroids in
,
vaccination during
,
,
,
vaginitis during
venous hum during
vesicobullous eruption during
2666-2667
vitamin A in
vitamin D deficiency in
vomiting in
2615-2618
,
,
,
,
2667-2668
Pregnanetriol, urinary
Pregnenolone, aging-related changes in
Prekallikrein
deficiency of
Preload
,
,
,
Premacular fibrosis
Premature beats
atrial
,
ventricular
Premature ejaculation
Premature infant
,
,
2776-2781
,
2779-2780
(
see also
Neonate)
anemia in
apnea in
2869-2870
bronchopulmonary dysplasia in
2870-2872
,
hypogammaglobulinemia in
===PAGE:4014===
intracranial hemorrhage in
necrotizing enterocolitis in
2803-2804
respiratory distress syndrome in
2876-2877
retinopathy in
vitamin E deficiency and
Premature ovarian failure
,
,
Premature rupture of membranes
,
,
neonatal sepsis and
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
,
Premenstrual syndrome
2516-2518
Prenatal care
2606-2622
,
,
(
see also
Pregnancy)
genetic screening in
2598-2604
,
,
,
,
(
see also
Genetic disorders, screening for)
Prenatal diagnosis
of anemia
of genetic disorders
2598-2604
,
,
,
,
of 21-hydroxylase deficiency
of immunodeficiency
Preoperative evaluation
3445-3446
,
Prepuce, inflammation of
Presbycusis
,
Presbyopia
,
Presenilin
Preseptal cellulitis
625-627
Pressure
airway
2280-2281
,
atmospheric
blood (
see
Blood pressure; Hypertension; Hypotension)
cardiac
,
,
central venous
septic shock and
shock and
,
compartment
cutaneous ulcers and (
see
Pressure ulcers)
intracranial (
see
Intracranial pressure)
intraocular
glaucoma and
,
hyphema and
mean arterial, shock and
,
pleural
portal
pulmonary artery
,
,
Pressure control ventilation
in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure
Pressure-cycled ventilation
Pressure-flow video study, in urinary incontinence
Pressure support ventilation
Pressure ulcers
736-742
,
,
,
,
in dying patient
hospitalization and
Pretibial myxedema
,
Preventive care
for adolescents
-
for elderly
3104-3113
,
,
,
,
,
funding for
in infants and children
-
,
2717-2725
,
Prevotella melaninogenica
infection
1299-1300
Priapism
2327-2330
,
,
,
===PAGE:4015===
Prickly heat
Prick (percutaneous) test
Primaquine
,
,
,
in pregnancy
Primary biliary cirrhosis
,
244-246
,
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Primary myelofibrosis
999-1000
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
,
278-279
inflammatory bowel disease and
Primary shunt hyperbilirubinemia
Primidone
during breastfeeding
folate deficiency and
in seizures
vitamin D deficiency and
PR interval
,
,
,
Prinzmetal's angina
2098-2099
Prion diseases
1729-1731
PRL (
see
Prolactin)
Proaccelerin (factor V)
,
,
activated protein C resistance of
Proarrhythmia
Probabilities, in clinical decision making
,
3386-3387
,
,
,
,
,
Probenecid
Probiotics
in Crohn's disease
in gastroenteritis
irritable bowel syndrome and
Procainamide
in arrhythmias
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
in elderly
SLE-like syndrome with
tremors and
Procarbazine
Prochlorperazine
in cancer therapy
in carcinoid syndrome
in children
in gastroenteritis
in migraine
poisoning with
in vomiting
Procidentia
185-186
,
,
Procoagulant phospholipid
Proconvertin (factor VII)
,
,
Proctalgia fugax
Proctitis
gonococcal
1471-1474
nongonococcal
1468-1470
ulcerative
,
Proctocolectomy
in familial adenomatous polyposis
in ulcerative colitis
Proctoscopy
in amebiasis
in proctitis
===PAGE:4016===
Proctosigmoidoscopy
Progeria
Progesterone
reference values for
Progesterone challenge test
Progesterone receptors
,
,
Progestins
for contraception
2588-2589
in endometrial cancer
in endometriosis
in menopause
,
in oral contraceptives
in pregnancy
subdermal
,
in uterine fibroids
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE)
,
Progressive bulbar palsy
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
1731-1732
HIV infection and
Progressive muscular atrophy
Progressive pseudobulbar palsy
Progressive rubella panencephalitis
Progressive supranuclear palsy
1771-1772
tremor in
Projection (mental)
,
Prolactin
(
see also
Galactorrhea; Hyperprolactinemia)
blood levels of
,
,
deficiency of
excess of
770-772
,
in pregnancy
tumor secretion of
,
770-772
,
Prolactinoma
,
770-772
,
Prolactin-releasing hormone
Prolan poisoning
Prolapse
bladder
mitral valve (
see
Mitral valve, prolapse)
rectal
185-186
,
small intestine
urethra
uterine
2531-2532
,
examination for
vaginal
2531-2532
,
Proliferative glomerulonephritis
Promazine poisoning
Promethazine
in cancer therapy
in elderly
in gastroenteritis
in hypersensitivity disorders
in motion sickness
in pregnancy
Promiscuity
Promyelocytic leukemia
Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC)
Propafenone
Propamidine
===PAGE:4017===
Propantheline
in elderly
Properdin deficiency
Propionibacterium acnes
infection
Propionic acids
excess
Propofol
in brain injury
in seizures
Propoxur poisoning
Propoxyphene
in elderly
poisoning with
Propranolol (
see also
Beta-blockers)
in aortic dissection
in arrhythmias
in elderly
,
,
in hypertension
in migraine
in orthostatic hypotension
in portal hypertension
Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation
Proptosis
560-561
,
Propylene glycol
Propylthiouracil
adverse effects of
in hyperthyroidism
in pregnancy
,
Prosody
Prosopagnosia
,
Prostaglandin E
in coarctation of aorta
in hypoplastic left heart syndrome
in tetralogy of Fallot
in transposition of the great arteries
in tricuspid atresia
Prostaglandins
for induced abortion
in induced labor
in peptic ulcer disease
in postpartum hemorrhage
Prostatectomy
disseminated intravascular coagulation and
Prostate gland
abscess of
benign hyperplasia of
2459-2462
,
biopsy of
cancer of
2470-2473
hyperplasia vs
prostate-specific antigen in
screening for
,
,
staging of
2466-2468
testosterone therapy and
drug effects on
infection of
2462-2464
,
inflammation of (
see
Prostatitis)
pain in
===PAGE:4018===
removal of (
see
Prostatectomy)
transurethral resection of
erectile dysfunction and
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
,
,
in benign prostatic hyperplasia
in prostate cancer
,
testosterone therapy and
Prostatitis
,
2462-2464
,
Candida

chronic
,
,
Prostatodynia
2462-2464
Prostheses
,
3465-3466
cardiovascular (
see
Valvular prostheses)
joint (
see
Joint[s], prosthetic)
limb
,
3465-3466
in congenital amputation
penile
testicular
Prosthetic valvular endocarditis
Protamine sulfate
Protease inhibitors
,
in children
,
2855-2856
drug interactions of
garlic interactions with
milk thistle interactions with
St. John's wort interactions with
Protein(s)
blood levels of
disease-related alterations in
nutritional support response and
protein-energy undernutrition and
,
undernutrition and
body
CSF
,
dietary
deficiency of
dialysis and
digestion of
drug effects on
formula-based
in pregnancy
recommended dietary allowance for
requirements for
,
,
,
,
in adolescents
restriction of
,
drug binding to
in elderly
fusion
,
heat illness and
pleural
prion
urinary
,
,
,
2330-2331
,
,
(
see also
Proteinuria)
excretion of
vitamin K-dependent
β
-Protein amyloidosis
Protein C
,
,
activated, in septic shock
===PAGE:4019===
deficiency of
Protein:creatinine ratio
Protein-energy undernutrition (malnutrition)
14-18
,
aging and
,
in children
lymphocytopenia and
nutritional support for
21-23
,
Protein kinases
Proteinosis, alveolar
1962-1963
Protein S
,
deficiency of
reference values for
Proteinuria
,
,
2330-2331
,
atherosclerosis and
Bence Jones
2421-2422
chronic renal failure and
diabetic nephropathy and
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and
hypertension and
infection and
nephrotic syndrome and
preeclampsia and
tubulointerstitial nephritis and
Protein Z deficiency
Proteus
infection
1257-1258
,
,
Prothrombin (factor II)
,
20210 gene mutation of
deficiency of
Prothrombin time (PT)
,
,
chronic viral hepatitis and
cirrhosis and
disease-related alterations in
,
reference values for
vitamin K deficiency and
Proton pump inhibitors
,
in dyspepsia
in gastrinoma
in gastroesophageal reflux disease
in
Helicobacter pylori
infection
Proto-oncogenes
Protopam
Protoporphyria, erythropoietic
,
818-819
,
,
Protoporphyrinogen oxidase deficiency
,
809-815
Protozoal infections
,
1337-1340
,
(
see also specific organisms
)
extraintestinal
,
1373-1393
hepatic inflammation in
intestinal
1367-1373
Protriptyline
poisoning with
Protussives
Providencia
infection
1257-1258
Provoked vestibulodynia
2528-2529
Prune-belly syndrome
,
Pruritus
,
635-639
,
636-637
,
,
anal (pruritus ani)
184-185
,
,
cancer-related
,
conjunctival
,
===PAGE:4020===
pancreatic cancer and
in pregnancy
primary biliary cirrhosis and
schistosome lesions and
urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy and
vaginal
2493-2497
,
2494-2495
vulvar
Prussic acid poisoning
PSA (
see
Prostate-specific antigen)
Pseudoachondroplasia
Pseudoaneurysm
,
,
Pseudoathetosis
Pseudobulbar palsy
,
Pseudocasts
Pseudocholinesterase deficiency
Pseudochylous effusion
Pseudoclaudication
Pseudocyst, pancreatic
,
,
Pseudodementia
,
Pseudodiverticulosis
124-125
Pseudoephedrine
in elderly
in sinus barotrauma
in stress incontinence
,
Pseudofolliculitis barbae
731-732
Pseudofracture, vitamin D deficiency and
Pseudogout
354-355
Pseudohermaphroditism
Pseudohyperkalemia
Pseudohypertrophy
Pseudohypoglycemia
Pseudohypokalemia
Pseudohyponatremia
,
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
,
Pseudolymphoma
Pseudomembranous colitis
,
1292-1293
Pseudomembranous croup
Pseudomenses
Pseudomonas
infection
1258-1259
COPD and
cutaneous
,
cystic fibrosis and
,
,
endocardial
meningeal
of nails
,
pneumonia
,
,
of temporal bone
Pseudoporphyria
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
Pseudopyloric metaplasia
Pseudorespiratory alkalosis
Pseudorubella (roseola infantum)
,
Pseudoseizures
,
Pseudostrabismus
Pseudoterranova decipiens
infection
Pseudotumor
orbital
===PAGE:4021===
pleural effusion vs
Pseudotumor cerebri
,
1720-1722
,
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
2911-2912
Psilocybe
poisoning
Psilocybin
1530-1531
Psittacosis
,
Psoas sign
Psoralen plus ultraviolet A radiation (PUVA) therapy
in atopic dermatitis
in lichen planus
in psoriasis
,
in vitiligo
Psoriasis
,
,
,
676-680
arthritis with
,
344-345
,
(
see also
Arthritis, psoriatic)
differential diagnosis of
HLA in
nail deformities in
plaque
,
subtypes of
Psychiatric disorders (
see also
Psychosis
and specific disorders
)
assessment of
1485-1487
,
in children and adolescents
3048-3062
delirium vs
emergency
1489-1493
,
,
,
hospitalization for
1492-1493
interview for
,
in elderly
neurologic disorder vs
physical disorders and
,
1487-1489
,
physical restraints in
somatoform
1573-1578
urinary incontinence and
Psychoactive drugs (
see also specific agents and classes
)
breastfeeding and
in elderly
,
,
Psychodynamic therapy, in personality disorders
Psychogenic pain
Psychogenic polydipsia
,
Psychogenic syncope
Psychogenic unresponsiveness
Psychophysiologic insomnia
Psychophysiologic pain
Psychosis (
see also
Schizophrenia)
in adolescent
air travel and
amphetamine-induced
brief
in children
corticosteroid therapy and
dementia and
,
depression and
,
dissociative identity disorder vs
drugs for (
see
Antipsychotics)
ICU
2253-2255
,
Korsakoff's
,
,
manic
mood symptoms in (schizoaffective disorder)
1558-1559
===PAGE:4022===
organic (
see
Delirium; Dementia)
paranoid, amphetamine use and
substance-induced
Psychotherapy
in anorexia nervosa
in bipolar disorder
in bulimia nervosa
in depression
in dissociative identity disorder
in personality disorders
in posttraumatic stress disorder
in schizophrenia
Psyllium
in constipation
,
,
in irritable bowel syndrome
Pterygium
585-586
,
,
PTH (
see
Parathyroid hormone)
Ptosis (eyelid)
Puberty
,
delayed
,
,
2894-2895
constitutional
female
2497-2498
,
,
,
,
male
,
,
constitutional delay of
precocious
,
2895-2896
Pubic symphysis, diastasis of
Pudendal block
Puestow procedure
Puffer fish poisoning
Pulmonary (
see also
Lungs; Respiration)
Pulmonary air-leak syndromes
2874-2875
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
1962-1963
Pulmonary arteriolar resistance
Pulmonary artery
atresia of
banding of
catheterization of
,
2244-2246
,
,
in shock
,
embolism of (
see
Pulmonary embolism)
left ventricle origin of
2959-2961
,
pressure in
,
,
rupture of
Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
,
septic shock and
shock and
Pulmonary edema
2131-2132
acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and
diving and
3286-3287
drug-induced
heart failure and
high-altitude
re-expansion
Pulmonary embolism
1908-1922
,
,
,
,
angiography in
chest pain in
CT angiography in
deep venous thrombosis and
===PAGE:4023===
electrocardiogram in
,
endocarditis and
hormone replacement therapy and
,
hyperventilation syndrome vs
magnetic resonance imaging in
nonthrombotic
oral contraceptives and
pleural effusion with
pneumonia vs
pregnancy and
prevention of
pulmonary hypertension and
risk factors for
risk for
ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan in
Pulmonary emphysema (
see
Emphysema)
Pulmonary eosinophilia, tropical
Pulmonary failure (
see
Respiratory failure)
Pulmonary fibrosis
,
1948-1950
,
asbestos-induced
1972-1973
coal-induced
drug-induced
silica-induced
Pulmonary function testing
1851-1860
expiratory reserve volume (ERV)
flow rates
flow-volume loop
,
1854-1855
forced expiratory flow during expiration of 15 to 75% of FVC (FEF
25-75%
)
,
forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV
)
,
,
,
,
,
forced vital capacity (FVC)
,
,
,
,
functional residual capacity (FRC)
,
inspiratory capacity (IC)
inspiratory reserve volume (IRV)
lung volumes
,
maximal expiratory pressure (MEP)
maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP)
maximal voluntary ventilation (MVV)
peak expiratory flow (PEF)
residual volume (RV)
,
,
respiratory muscle tests
sniff test in
tidal volume (VT)
total lung capacity (TLC)
,
,
vital capacity (VC)
Pulmonary hypertension
1984-1988
,
chest palpation in
cor pulmonale and
2132-2134
electrocardiogram in
persistent, of newborn
,
2873-2874
,
pregnancy and
pulmonary embolism and
Pulmonary infarction
Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia
Pulmonary interstitial emphysema
Pulmonary Langerhans' cell granulomatosis
1963-1964
Pulmonary nodule
1841-1844
,
,
Pulmonary-renal syndrome
1990-1992
,
===PAGE:4024===
Pulmonary-renal syndrome
,
Pulmonary vascular obstructive disease
2966-2967
Pulmonary vascular resistance
Pulmonic valve
closure of
regurgitation (insufficiency)
2189-2190
murmur in
rheumatic fever and
stenosis
2190-2191
clicks in
pregnancy and
Pulpitis
522-523
,
,
Pulse(s)
in aortic dissection
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
in atrial fibrillation
carotid
in cardiovascular disorders
,
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Corrigan's
,
examination of
2018-2019
,
femoral
,
in hypertension
in infection
in peripheral arterial disease
in thromboangiitis obliterans
water-hammer
Pulsed electrical field therapy
Pulseless disease
326-329
,
Pulseless electrical activity
,
(
see
Cardiac arrest)
Pulseless ventricular tachycardia
,
in children
Pulse oximetry
(
see also
Oximetry)
Pulsus paradoxus
,
,
Pulsus parvus et tardus
Punctate keratitis
Pupil(s)
Adie's
,
Argyll Robertson
,
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
constriction of
dilation of
,
,
examination of
,
,
in stupor and coma
,
in impaired consciousness
Marcus Gunn
,
unequal
545-547
,
,
Pure autonomic failure
1619-1620
Purified protein derivative (PPD) test
Purine, metabolic disorders of
3024-3026
Purine antagonists
Purine metabolism inhibitors
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase
assay of
deficiency of
Purpura
allergic/anaphylactoid
321-322
===PAGE:4025===
drug-induced
dysproteinemia and
Henoch-Schonlein
321-322
,
hypergammaglobulinemic
senile
thrombocytopenic (
see
Thrombocytopenic purpura)
Purpura fulminans, neonatal
Purpura simplex
Pursed-lip breathing
Puss moth caterpillar stings
3309-3310
Pustules
,
Puumala virus infection
,
1433-1434
PUVA therapy (
see
Psoralen plus ultraviolet A radiation therapy)
P wave
,
,
,
blocked
Pyelography (
see
Urography)
Pyelonephritis
,
in children
chronic
2378-2379
postpartum
pregnancy and
,
tuberculous
xanthogranulomatous
Pyknodysostosis
Pyle's disease
Pyloric stenosis
,
2800-2801
electrolyte loss and
Pyloroplasty
Pyoderma faciale
,
Pyoderma gangrenosum
,
Pyogenic granuloma
Pyometra
Pyosalpinx
Pyrazinamide
in neonate
in tuberculosis
,
Pyrazoles
Pyrethrins
712-713
poisoning with
Pyrethroid poisoning
Pyridostigmine
Pyridoxine (
see
Vitamin B
)
Pyrimethamine
in congenital toxoplasmosis
in malaria
in toxoplasmosis
Pyrimidine
antagonists of
1066-1067
metabolic disorders of
Pyrin
Pyrogens
Pyrrole-pyrrole derivatives
Pyruvate, blood levels of
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
,
Pyuria
,
(
see also
Urinary tract, infection of)
===PAGE:4026===
in children
2845The Merck Manual of Diagnosis & Therapy, 19th Edition P
===PAGE:4027===
Q
Q fever
,
1286-1287
,
Qi gong
QRS complex
,
,
,
,
in malaria treatment
narrow
wide
QT interval
,
,
,
,
in malaria treatment
prolongation of
2176-2177
anorexia nervosa and
fluoroquinolones and
Quadrantectomy
Quadriceps tendon, injury to
,
Quality-adjusted life year
Quality of life
3113-3114
Quazepam
in elderly
Queensland tick typhus
,
Quetiapine
,
in children
in dementia
poisoning with
Queyrat, erythroplasia of
Quinacrine
Quinapril
in elderly
Quincke's sign
Quinidine
in arrhythmias
in elderly
in malaria
,
Quinine
in babesiosis
in malaria
-
,
,
Quinsy (peritonsillar abscess)
474-475
Quintan fever
,
1245-1246
Quinupristin/dalfopristin
,
===PAGE:4028===
R
Rabbit fever
1264-1266
,
Rabeprazole
,
,
Rabies
,
1732-1733
,
vaccine against
,
,
,
Rabies immune globulin
,
Raccoon eyes
Radial brachialis reflex
Radial head
fracture of
subluxation of
Radial keratotomy
Radial nerve compression
Radiation
3252-3262
,
-
(
see also
Radiation therapy)
burns from
cancer and
,
in cancer development
contamination with
doses of
from computed tomography
injury from
3254-3255
,
-
,
,
,
3402-3403
ionizing
3402-3403
LD50 of
measurement of
,
in pregnancy
protection from
3261-3262
sources of
,
Radiation therapy
-
,
1064-1065
complications of
diarrhea with
dry mouth and
gastritis and
growth and
hypothyroidism and
mucositis with
neoadjuvant
neurotoxicity of
1816-1817
pneumonitis after
proctitis and
stereotactic
thyroid carcinoma after
in transplantation
types of
xerostomia and
Radiculopathy
,
,
1795-1797
,
cervical
1808-1809
diabetic
Radioallergosorbent testing
,
,
Radiofrequency ablation
in atrial fibrillation
in ventricular tachycardia
Radiography
chest
,
dental
of gastrointestinal tract
97-98
in genitourinary tract disorders
,
2314-2315
===PAGE:4029===
in joint evaluation
during pregnancy
Radioiodine
environmental exposure to
in hyperthyroidism
thyroid uptake of
,
,
Radioisotopes, cancer therapy with
Radionuclide imaging
3408-3410
in cardiovascular disorders
2061-2063
,
of gastrointestinal tract
of genitourinary tract
of kidney
of liver
in pulmonary disorders
1861-1862
stress testing with
of thyroid gland
,
,
Radius, fracture of
Radon
,
Rales
Raloxifene
in breast cancer prevention
Raltegravir
in children
Ramelteon
Ramipril
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
,
444-445
,
Range of motion
,
,
Ranibizumab
,
Ranitidine
,
in elderly
poisoning with
Ranson's prognostic signs
Ranula
Rapamycins
Rape
2548-2552
,
-
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
2393-2396
,
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test
1478-1480
,
Rapid shallow breathing (RSB) index
Rapid urease test
Rasagiline
,
Rasburicase
in tumor lysis syndrome
ras
gene
Rash
(
see also
Skin)
anticonvulsant-related
butterfly
in chickenpox
in congenital syphilis
in enterovirus infection
,
in erysipelothricosis
in erythema infectiosum
gemifloxacin-induced
heliotropic
,
in herpes gestationis
in Kawasaki disease
in leprosy
in Lyme disease
===PAGE:4030===
in measles
in neonate
penicillin-induced
in rickettsialpox
in Rocky Mountain spotted fever
,
in roseola infantum
in rubella
in scarlet fever
seabather's
in smallpox
in toxic shock syndrome
in typhus
,
varicella vaccination and
viral infection and
Rashkind's procedure
,
Rasmussen's encephalitis
Rat-bite fever
Rat-flea typhus
,
Rat poison
,
,
Rattlesnake bite
,
Rauwolfia alkaloids
Raynaud's syndrome
,
2221-2223
,
pernio and
in systemic sclerosis
RB
gene
Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome
,
Reactive arthritis
343-344
,
,
,
(
see also
Arthritis, reactive)
Reactive upper airways syndrome
Reading disorders (dyslexia)
,
3042-3044
Receptor(s)
adrenergic
cholinergic
dopaminergic
drug interactions with
3181-3183
,
endorphin-enkephalin (opioid)
estrogen
,
,
GABA
,
glutamate
hormone
host
neurohumoral, in heart failure
neurotransmitter
,
pain
progesterone
,
,
G-protein-coupled
recognition sites of
serotoninergic
Recombinant immunoblot assay
Recompression therapy
3289-3290
,
in arterial gas embolism
3285-3286
in decompression sickness
Rectocele
,
2529-2531
,
examination for
Rectovaginal septum
Rectum
(
see also
Anus)
abscess of
,
bleeding from
,
===PAGE:4031===
cancer of
193-196
,
during pregnancy
screening for
examination of
,
digital
,
,
,
,
in urinary incontinence
fistula of
181-182
foreign bodies in
gonorrhea of
hemorrhoids of
182-183
HIV-related disease of
inflammation of
levator syndrome of
183-184
manometry of
polyps of
191-193
prolapse of
185-186
rectocele of
2529-2531
,
sigmoidoscopy of
98-99
spasm of
183-184
varices of
Recurrent aphthous stomatitis
,
512-513
Recurrent fever
1272-1273
Red blood cells
adenosine deaminase assay of
antibody typing of
,
aplasia of
929-931
autohemolysis of
autosensitization to
981-982
congenital defects in
count of
,
in CSF
,
crescent-shaped
decrease in (
see
Anemia)
2,3-diphosphoglycerate of
distribution width of
fragility of
in hemolytic anemia
,
macrocytic
membrane of, disorders of
940-941
microcytic
in myelofibrosis
osmotic fragility of
poikilocytosis of
production of
shape variations in
sickled
splenic processing of
survival rate of
temperature-related antibodies to
936-939
,
in thrombocytopenia
,
for transfusion
(
see also
Blood transfusion)
urinary
,
(
see also
Hematuria)
volume distribution of
Red eye
563-566
,
-
Red glass testing
Red-person syndrome
Red reflex
,
===PAGE:4032===
Reed-Sternberg cells
Reentrant supraventricular tachycardias
2170-2172
,
,
Reentry
,
Refeeding syndrome
Referred pain
Reflex(es)
abdominal
acoustic
anal wink
,
ankle jerk
Babinski's
biceps
blink
bulbocavernosus
,
bulbospongiosus
Chaddock's
Clonus
corneal
,
,
cremasteric
,
Cushing's
diving
,
in elderly patient
gag
glabellar
grasp
knee jerk
Moro
,
in neonate
oculocephalic
Oppenheim
palmar
palmomental
pupillary
radial brachialis
rectal
red
,
rooting
,
snout
sphincteric
,
suck
testing of
tonic neck
triceps
testing of
Reflexology
,
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy
1633-1634
Reflux
gastroesophageal
,
125-126
(
see also
Gastroesophageal reflux disease)
enamel defects in
vesicoureteral
,
,
2420-2421
,
2984-2985
urinary tract infection with
,
,
Reflux nephropathy
2420-2421
Refractive error
,
570-574
,
contact lenses for
571-573
surgery for
573-574
Refsum's disease
,
infantile
Regional enteritis
,
169-172
===PAGE:4033===
Regurgitation
81-83
(
see also
Vomiting)
achalasia and
Zenker's diverticulum and
Rehabilitation
3452-3468
for alcohol dependence
1519-1522
ambulation exercises in
after amputation
3465-3466
for arthritis
assistive devices in
3457-3459
,
,
,
after blindness
after brain injury
in cardiovascular disease
3461-3462
for COPD
conditioning exercises in
coordination exercises in
driving
,
after head injury
after hip surgery
3466-3467
after laryngectomy
muscle strengthening in
,
after myocardial infarction
2117-2118
,
3461-3462
occupational therapy in
3456-3457
for opioid dependence
1515-1516
orthotics in
pain treatment in
3459-3461
,
physical therapy in
3453-3455
,
,
prostheses in
,
3465-3466
pulmonary
1867-1868
,
range of motion in
3453-3455
,
for schizophrenic patient
after spinal injury
,
after stroke
3462-3464
transfer training in
Rehydration therapy (
see
Fluid therapy)
Reiki
,
Reiter's cells
Reiter's syndrome (
see
Arthritis, reactive)
Relapsing fever
1272-1273
hepatic inflammation in
Relapsing polychondritis
302-303
Relapsing symmetric seronegative synovitis
Relaxation training
,
in functional abdominal pain
Religion, in elderly patient
3144-3146
REM sleep
,
REM sleep behavior disorder
Renal (
see also
Genitourinary tract; Kidney[s])
Renal arterioles
atheroembolism of
2432-2433
necrosis of
2433-2434
,
Renal artery
occlusion of
2077-2078
,
,
2430-2432
,
stenosis of
aldosteronism and
Renal cell carcinoma
2473-2475
cystic disease vs
staging of
-
===PAGE:4034===
Renal concentrating capacity
Renal cortical necrosis
2433-2434
,
Renal failure (
see also
Uremia)
acute
2436-2442
,
acute tubular necrosis and
chronic vs
,
laboratory tests in
2438-2440
,
,
prevention of
2441-2442
urate nephropathy and
acute hemolytic transfusion reaction and
anemia in
,
,
,
antibiotic doses in
-
Bence Jones proteinuria and
cancer chemotherapy and
in children
chronic
2442-2446
,
,
acute vs
,
cysts and
stages of
diabetes and
dialysis for
2447-2453
,
(
see also
Dialysis)
drug administration and
familial Mediterranean fever and
hemorrhagic fever and
1433-1434
HIV infection and
hypercalcemia in
,
,
hyperkalemia in
,
,
,
hypermagnesemia in
hyperparathyroidism in
hyperphosphatemia in
hypocalcemia in
hyponatremia in
infection and
liver disease and
metabolic acidosis in
,
,
,
β
-microglobulin amyloidosis in
multiple myeloma and
nail-patella syndrome and
nitrofurantoin contraindication in
non-Hodgkin lymphoma and
osteomalacia in
pancreatitis and
pregnancy and
2647-2648
undernutrition with
Renal failure index
Renal-ocular syndrome
Renal pelvis, cancer of
2475-2476
Renal replacement therapy
2447-2453
,
,
(
see also
Dialysis)
Renal tubular acidosis
,
,
2426-2428
,
distal (type 1)
,
generalized (type 4)
,
osteopetrosis and
pH in
proximal (type 2)
,
Renal vein
renin activity ratio of
thrombosis of
2434-2435
===PAGE:4035===
Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome
,
,
,
982-983
Renin
,
,
blood levels of
,
in hypertension
inhibitors of
in renovascular hypertension
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
heart failure and
hypertension and
sodium excretion and
Renography, diuresis
Renshaw cells
Repaglinide
,
Reperfusion injury
Reproduction (
see also
Infertility; Pregnancy)
assisted
2597-2598
endocrinology of
female
2497-2501
male
Reptilase time
Reptile bites
Rescue breathing
,
,
Reserpine
,
in elderly
tremors and
Resiniferatoxin
Resin therapy
Resistance training
Resistive pressure
,
Resmethrin poisoning
Resorcinol poisoning
Respiration (
see also
Breathing; Dyspnea; Lungs; Tachypnea)
artificial
2279-2284
,
(
see also
Ventilation)
Biot's
,
Cheyne-Stokes
,
,
,
CNS impairment and
during pregnancy
I:E ratio in
Kussmaul's
,
,
in neonate
opioid effects on
rate of
in stupor and coma
Respirator
(
see also
Ventilation)
Respiratory acidosis (
see
Acidosis, respiratory)
Respiratory alkalosis (
see
Alkalosis, respiratory)
Respiratory arrest
2269-2279
,
,
,
,
,
(
see also
Respiratory failure)
Respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial lung disease
,
,
Respiratory burst assay
,
Respiratory disease (
see
Lungs; Pulmonary)
Respiratory distress, in neonates and infants
2865-2881
,
Respiratory distress syndrome
,
2876-2877
acute (
see
Acute respiratory distress syndrome)
in large-for-gestational-age infant
Respiratory disturbance index
Respiratory failure
2279-2292
acidosis and
864-865
===PAGE:4036===
acute-on-chronic
COPD and
,
hypercapnia and
2288-2291
,
hypoperfusion and
hypoxemic, acute
2284-2288
,
mechanical ventilation in
2279-2284
,
pancreatitis and
perioperative
septic shock and
Respiratory muscles
testing of
weakness of
Respiratory rate
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia
Respiratory syncytial virus immune globulin
Respiratory syncytial virus infection
,
1410-1411
,
,
,
in infant
2878-2879
IV immune globulin in
,
monoclonal antibodies in
,
,
Respiratory tract (
see
Lungs; Pulmonary)
Respite care
Resting energy expenditure
Resting tremor
,
Restless legs syndrome
,
1714-1715
Restraints
,
,
Resuscitation
cardiopulmonary
2256-2269
(
see also
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation)
order against
drugs for
2260-2262
,
-
fluid
2297-2299
in infants and children
in infants and children
-
,
2266-2269
,
neonatal
2768-2769
,
,
post-resuscitative care
2263-2266
Reteplase
,
Reticular activating system
Reticulocytes
,
blood levels of
in perinatal anemia
Reticulohistiocytosis, multicentric
Reticulum cell sarcoma
Retina (
see also
Retinitis; Retinopathy)
acute necrosis of
cancer of
detachment of
,
,
617-618
drusen of
electrical activity in
embolism of
examination of
fluorescein angiography of
hemorrhage from
altitude sickness and
child abuse and
inflammation of (
see
Retinitis)
membrane over
plaques of
Retinal artery occlusion
,
613-614
===PAGE:4037===
Retinal vein occlusion
,
614-615
Retinitis
acute necrotic
cytomegalovirus
,
,
HIV infection and
in toxoplasmosis
,
Retinitis pigmentosa
,
618-619
,
Retinoblastoma
,
2943-2944
Retinochoroiditis, toxoplasmic
Retinoic acid
Retinoids
in acne
,
,
in ichthyosis
in lichen planus
in pregnancy
in psoriasis
Retinol (
see
Vitamin A)
Retinol-binding protein levels, undernutrition and
Retinopathy
blurred vision and
diabetic
615-616
,
,
hypertensive
,
616-617
,
,
of prematurity (retrolental fibroplasia)
-
,
vitamin E deficiency and
Retirement
Retrobulbar neuritis
,
Retrograde ejaculation
,
Retrolental fibroplasia
-
,
vitamin E deficiency and
Retroperitoneum
abscess of
117-119
,
carcinoma of
Retropharyngeal abscess
471-472
,
Retroviral vector gene therapy
Retroviruses
1438-1458
,
,
Rett syndrome
Reverse transcriptase inhibitors
,
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
for HIV infection
Rewarming therapy
,
Reye's syndrome
,
2937-2939
chickenpox and
influenza and
Rh
(D) immune globulin
,
,
Rhabdomyolysis
burns and
compartment syndrome and
,
itraconazole and
metabolic acidosis and
in sickle cell heterozygotes
Rhabdomyoma
,
,
Rhabdomyosarcoma
,
2944-2945
embryonal
Rh blood type
,
,
Rheumatic disorders, autoimmune
297-312
(
see also specific disorders
)
Rheumatic fever
,
,
,
,
,
2861-2865
,
antibiotic prophylaxis in
,
,
===PAGE:4038===
gout vs
Lyme disease vs
rheumatoid arthritis vs
Rheumatism, palindromic
Rheumatoid arthritis
,
332-339
,
,
-
,
,
bronchiectasis in
coal workers' pneumoconiosis and
criteria for
,
differential diagnosis of
extra-articular manifestations of
flexor tendon disorders in
ganglion in
hand in
idiopathic (juvenile)
339-341
uveitis in
joint examination for
284-286
metatarsophalangeal joint in
pleural effusion in
polymyalgia rheumatica vs
pregnancy and
temporomandibular joint in
treatment of
334-335
Rheumatoid factor
hepatitis C and
rheumatoid arthritis and
Rhinitis
478-479
acute
allergic
1117-1118
,
atrophic
chronic
vasomotor
Rhinolith
Rhinophyma
Rhinorrhea
460-461
,
CSF and
,
Rhinoscleroma
Rhinosporidiosis
Rhinovirus infection
,
,
Rh isoimmunization
,
,
2665-2666
,
Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata
Rhizomucor infection
Rhizopus infection
Rhizotomy
Rhonchi
RIBA (recombinant immunoblot assay)
Ribavirin
in chronic hepatitis C
in Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever
in hemorrhagic fever
in Lassa fever
,
in respiratory syncytial virus infection
in Rift Valley fever
Rib fracture
chest compressions and
Riboflavin (
see
Vitamin B
)
Ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor
RICE (rest, ice, compression, elevation) therapy
,
===PAGE:4039===
Ricin poisoning
Rickets
,
,
41-43
vitamin D-dependent
vitamin D-resistant
hypophosphatemic
2991-2992
Rickettsialpox
,
,
Rickettsioses
1279-1287
,
-
Eastern tick-borne
,
vesicular
Rifabutin
1217-1220
drug interactions of
in HIV infection
in tuberculosis
,
Rifampin
,
1217-1220
drug interactions of
,
,
in elderly
in infective endocarditis
in leprosy
in meningitis
,
in neonate
,
in pregnancy
in tuberculosis
,
Rifamycins
,
1217-1220
Rifapentine
,
Rifaximin
1217-1220
Rift Valley fever
,
,
,
Right bundle branch block
,
Riker Sedation-Agitation Scale
,
Riluzole
,
Rimantadine
Ringer's lactate
during labor
Ringworm
706-707
Rinne's test
Rio Mamore virus infection
Risedronate
,
Risperidone
,
in children
in dementia
in elderly
microsphere
poisoning with
Ristocetin
Ritgen maneuver
Ritonavir
,
in children
drug interactions of
Rituximab
,
,
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
Rivastigmine
,
,
,
River blindness
,
1347-1348
Rizatriptan
RNA assay
Roach poison
,
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
,
,
1284-1285
Rodent ulcer
===PAGE:4040===
Roentgen
Romano-Ward syndrome
Romberg test
Rome criteria
Romiplostim
Root canal therapy
522-523
Rooting reflex
,
Ropinirole
,
,
Rosacea
654-655
Rosacea fulminans
Rosai-Dorfman disease
Rosary bead esophagus
124-125
Rosenbach's sign
Roseola infantum
,
,
Rose spots
Rosette test
Rosiglitazone
Ross procedure
Ross River virus infection
Rosuvastatin
Rotator cuff
evaluation of
exercises for
tear of
,
3298-3299
tendinitis in
,
Rotavirus infection
,
immunization against
,
,
2718-2719
,
2722-2723
in pediatric HIV infection
Rothmund-Thomson syndrome
Roth's spots
Rotigotine
Rotor's syndrome
Roundworm infection
,
1342-1355
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
61-64
,
Rovsing's sign
Rowell's syndrome
RPR (rapid plasma reagin) test
1478-1480
,
R-R interval
RSV (
see
Respiratory syncytial virus infection)
RT-PCR (reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction)
RU

Rub
pericardial
,
,
,
pleural
Rubber band ligation
Rubbing alcohol poisoning
Rubella (German measles)
,
1462-1464
congenital
,
2820-2821
measles vs
progressive panencephalitis
rickettsial infection vs
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
Rubeola (
see
Measles)
Rubeosis iridis
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
Rubor
Rule of nines
,
===PAGE:4041===
Rumack-Matthew nomogram
,
Rum fits
Rumination
81-83
Runner's knee
===PAGE:4042===
S
Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
antibodies to
Sacral nerve stimulation
Sacrum, abscess of
Sadism
Safe sex
,
St. John's wort
,
,
drug interactions of
St. Louis encephalitis
,
,
Salaam seizures (infantile spasms)
2899-2900
Salem sump tube
Salicylates
(
see also
Aspirin)
ototoxicity of
,
poisoning with
3333-3334
in pregnancy
Reye's syndrome and
2937-2939
Salicylic acid
in acne
,
in psoriasis
in warts
Salicylism
3333-3334
Saline
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in fluid resuscitation
in hypercalcemia
in hypernatremia
in hyponatremia
in metabolic alkalosis
in nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome
Saline wet mount
Salivary glands
aging-related changes in
503-504
biopsy of
disorders of
-
enlargement of
infection of
mumps of
1461-1462
radiation injury to
in Sjogren's syndrome
,
stones of
469-470
testing of
tumors of
493-494
Salmeterol
in asthma
,
in COPD
Salmon calcitonin
,
,
Salmonella
infection
,
,
,
,
,
1259-1263
focal
sexual transmission of
terrorist use of
Salpingectomy
Salpingitis
chlamydial
1468-1470
gonococcal
intrauterine device and
===PAGE:4043===
Salpingo-oophorectomy
in endometrial cancer
in ovarian cancer
in uterine sarcoma
Salpingo-oophoritis, tuberculous
Salsalate
Salter-Harris classification
,
SAMe (
S
-adenosyl-L-methionine)
3430-3431
Sand fly bites
Sandfly fever
Sandhoff's disease
San Joaquin fever
1327-1329
Saquinavir
in children
Sarcoidosis
1965-1971
,
-
,
,
gastritis in
hepatic granulomas in
,
,
,
hypercalcemia in
,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis vs
mediastinitis with
pleural effusion with
rheumatoid arthritis vs
uveitis in
Sarcoma
cardiac
,
chest wall
Ewing's
,
Kaposi's
753-754
(
see also
Kaposi's sarcoma)
osteogenic (osteosarcoma)
reticulum cell
uterine
2573-2574
vaginal
Sarcoma botryoides
Sarcopenia
,
,
exercise and
Sarin poisoning
SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome)
,
Saturday night palsy
Sauna taker's lung
Sausage worker's lung
Saw palmetto
,
Saxagliptin
Saxitoxin
Scabies
,
,
-
,
713-714
,
HIV infection and
Scabs (crusts)
Scales
Scalp
dermatophyte infection of (ringworm)
706-707
lice of
lichen planus of
psoriasis of
scabies of
Scans (
see
Computed tomography; Magnetic resonance imaging; Positron emission tomography;
Ultrasonography)
Scaphoid bone fracture
,
Scar(s)
===PAGE:4044===
acne
,
burn
formation of
Scarlet fever
Scedosporium
infection
Schatzki's ring
Scheuermann's disease
2915-2916
Schilling test
,
Schirmer's test
,
,
Schistocytes
,
,
Schistosomiasis
,
,
1358-1360
,
,
bladder cancer and
hepatic granulomas in
,
,
portal hypertension and
218-220
,
in traveler
Schizencephaly
Schizoaffective disorder
1558-1559
Schizoid personality disorder
Schizophrenia
1559-1567
,
-
antipsychotics for
,
,
childhood
deficit vs nondeficit
delusional disorder vs
drug-induced movement disorders in
,
,
substance abuse and
suicide and
,
violence and
Schizophreniform disorder
Schizotypal personality disorder
Schmidt's syndrome
,
,
School avoidance
3032-3033
School refusal
,
Schwannoma
vestibular
441-442
Sciatica
383-384
,
Sciatic nerve, compression of (piriformis syndrome)
SCIWORA (
s
pinal
c
ord
i
njury
w
ithout evidence
o
f
r
adiologic
a
bnormality)
SCL-70 antibodies
Sclera
blue
edema of
Scleritis
,
,
,
,
Scleroderma (
see
Systemic sclerosis)
Sclerosing cholangitis
inflammatory bowel disease and
primary
,
278-279
Sclerosis
lateral
systemic (
see
Systemic sclerosis)
tuberous
,
,
2905-2906
Sclerostenosis
Sclerotherapy, in varicose veins
Scoliosis
congenital
idiopathic
,
screening for
Scombroid poisoning
===PAGE:4045===
Scopolamine
in dying patient
in motion sickness
poisoning with
in vomiting
Scorpion stings
Scotoma
arcuate
central
in toxic amblyopia
Scratch dermatitis
669-670
Scratching (
see
Pruritus)
Screening tests
3395-3397
(
see also under individual diseases
)
in adolescents
-
alcohol abuse
cancer
,
in children
-
,
-
,
2716-2717
for cystic fibrosis
in elderly
3105-3107
genetic
2599-2604
,
,
(
see also
Genetic disorders, screening for)
in infant
-
in neonate
,
2710-2711
strabismus
thyroid function
vision
Scrotum
anomalies of
2986-2988
mass in
2332-2333
,
,

of neonate
pain in
2334-2337
,
2335-2336
,
trauma to
ulcers of
Scrub typhus
1285-1286
Scurvy
,
,
40-41
,
Sea anemone sting
3310-3311
Seabather's eruption
Seasonal affective disorder
,
Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis
584-585
Seasonal rhinitis
1117-1118
Sea urchin injury
Sebaceous cyst
otic
Sebaceous glands, inflammation and obstruction of
649-655
Seborrheic blepharitis
Seborrheic dermatitis
,
riboflavin deficiency and
Seborrheic keratoses
,
cancer-related
Secobarbital poisoning
Second impact syndrome
Second messengers
Secretin provocative test
Secretin test
Sedatives (hypnotics)
abuse of
1524-1525
in ARDS
in brain injury
===PAGE:4046===
chamomile interactions with
in critical care patient
in elderly
-
in endotracheal intubation
kava interactions with
intracranial pressure and
in mechanical ventilation
,
overdose of
porphyria and
in sleep disorders
,
,
in status asthmaticus
withdrawal from
Seizures
,
1686-1702
,
,
,
absence
alcohol withdrawal and
,
atonic
,
barbiturate withdrawal and
brain injury and
,
in children
complex partial
driving and
drug interactions with
drugs for
-
(
see also
Anticonvulsants)
EEG in
febrile
,
,
2898-2899
generalized
,
heatstroke and
hypomagnesemia and
jacksonian
myoclonic
,
neonatal
2900-2902
benign
nonconvulsive
occipital lobe
partial
,
petit mal
poisoning and
posttraumatic
pregnancy and
,
2670-2672
psychogenic (pseudoseizures)
,
refractory
salaam
2899-2900
simple partial
syncope vs
temporal lobe
,
tonic
tonic-clonic
Selective estrogen receptor modulator
Selective laser trabeculoplasty
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
adverse effects of
in childhood anxiety disorders
,
for children and adolescents
,
,
in depression
,
drug interactions of
in elderly
MAOI contraindication with
===PAGE:4047===
in obsessive-compulsive disorder
in phobic disorders
poisoning with
St. John's wort interactions with
suicide risk with
tremors and
Selegiline
,
,
in depression
poisoning with
Selenium
,
54-55
deficiency of
,
,
poisoning with
,
recommended dietary allowances for
toxicity of
,
Self-mutilation
,
Self-neglect
,
Sella turcica
Sellick maneuver
Semantic dementia
Semen (
see also
Sperm)
analysis of
,
,
blood in
2320-2321
insufficiency of
Seminoma
Semont maneuver
Sengstaken-Blakemore tube
,
Senile macular degeneration
612-613
Senile purpura
Senna
Sensation
dermatomes of
,
evaluation of
,
,
,
,
,
in elderly patient
in multiple sclerosis
Sensitivity, of tests
Sensorineural hearing loss (
see
Hearing, loss of)
Sentinel node biopsy
Seoul virus infection
,
1433-1434
Separation anxiety, in infant
2749-2750
Separation anxiety disorder
,
Sepsis
2299-2302
,
(
see also
Shock, septic)
burns and
central venous catheterization and
edema and
HIV infection and
meningitis vs
neonatal
2832-2838
,
in premature infant
shock in
,
,
2299-2302
,
thrombocytopenia in
Septic arthritis (
see
Arthritis, infectious)
Septicemia (
see
Sepsis)
Septo-optic dysplasia
Septostomy
,
Septum, nasal
deviation of
hematoma of
===PAGE:4048===
perforation of
Sequoiosis
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine,
-HT)
in autism
carcinoid secretion of
in depression
in mania
Serotonin modulators
,
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
,
-
Serotonin-receptor antagonists
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (
see
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors)
Serotonin syndrome
,
3269-3271
,
Serratia marcescens
infection
,
Sertoli cells
Sertraline
,
in children and adolescents
in elderly
poisoning with
Serum sickness
antivenom-induced
drug-induced
,
,
joint pain and
Sesamoiditis
399-400
Sestamibi
Sevelamer
,
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
,
Severe combined immunodeficiency
,
,
,
,
gene therapy in
Sever's disease
,
Sewer gas poisoning
Sewer worker's lung
Sex chromosomes
anomalies of
3002-3005
Sex hormone-binding globulin
,
Sex-limited (sex-influenced) inheritance
Sex reassignment surgery
Sexual abuse
2548-2552
,
of children
1572-1573
,
,
,
,
Sexual activity
1567-1573
by adolescent
arousal disorders of, in women
2525-2526
with children (pedophilia)
1572-1573
dysfunction of
female
2521-2529
,
,
male
2345-2348
SSRIs and
,
in elderly
3143-3144
extramarital
HIV infection and
,
,
after myocardial infarction
orgasmic disorder of
paraphilic
1570-1573
after pregnancy
during pregnancy
response cycle of, female
Sexual desire/interest disorder
2523-2525
Sexual development
(
see also
Puberty)
===PAGE:4049===
Sexual history
Sexual identity
Sexually transmitted diseases
1466-1482
,
,
(
see also specific diseases
)
in children
pregnancy and
rape and
,
reactive arthritis and
343-344
,
vaginitis and
Sezary syndrome
,
Shaken baby syndrome
Shampoo
in seborrheic dermatitis
Sheehan's syndrome
Shellfish poisoning
Shift work sleep disorder
Shiga toxin
,
,
,
Shigella
infection
,
,
1263-1264
gastrointestinal
,
sexual transmission of
Shigellosis (
see Shigella
infection)
Shin, strengthening exercises for
Shin bone fever
,
1245-1246
Shingles
1420-1421
Shin splints
Shock
2292-2297
(
see also
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation)
anaphylactic
,
cardiogenic
,
,
,
dengue shock syndrome and
,
1432-1433
disseminated intravascular coagulation and
distributive
,
,
fluid therapy in
2297-2299
hemorrhagic
,
,
encephalopathy and
2934-2935
trauma and
hypovolemic
,
after myocardial infarction
in neonate
,
neurogenic
obstructive
,
,
pancreatitis and
septic
,
,
2299-2302
,
bacteremia and
hypocalcemia in
spinal
warm
Shock (electrical)
3248-3250
Shock liver (ischemic hepatitis)
Shock (electroconvulsive) therapy
Shock wave lithotripsy
Shohl's solution
Short bowel syndrome
160-161
vitamin E deficiency and
44-45
Short stature, hypopituitarism and
767-768
(
see also
Dwarfism)
Short synacthen test
Short wave diathermy
,
Shoulder
arthrocentesis of
===PAGE:4050===
bursitis of
dislocation of
,
,
dystocia and
evaluation of
,
exercises for
glenoid labral tear of
3299-3300
osteonecrosis of
pain in
range of motion of
rotator cuff tear of
,
3298-3299
Shunt
cardiac
,
murmurs in
radionuclide ventriculography in
pleuroperitoneal
right-to-left
ventricular
Shunt hyperbilirubinemia
Shy-Drager syndrome
1618-1619
SIADH
,
,
Sialadenitis
,
Sialography
Sialolithiasis
469-470
,
Sialometaplasia, necrotizing
Sialometry
Sibutramine
,
Sick building syndrome
Sickle cellβ
-thalassemia disease
Sickle cell disease
,
,
942-945
acute chest syndrome in
air travel and
cytapheresis in
painful crisis in
,
pneumonia in
pregnancy and
prenatal testing for
Sick sinus syndrome
2161-2162
pacemaker in
Sideroblastic anemia
,
,
Sideropenic dysphagia
122-123
SIDS (sudden infant death syndrome)
,
2939-2940
,
Sigmoid
diverticulitis of
177-178
volvulus of
Sigmoidoscopy
98-99
,
,
in hemorrhoidal bleeding
in parasite infection
,
in proctitis
rectal foreign body removal and
screening
,
in ulcerative colitis
Signal transduction inhibitors
Sildenafil
drug interactions of
Silicosis
1980-1983
hypercalcemia and
mediastinitis with
===PAGE:4051===
Silo filler's disease
Silver
hyperpigmentation and
poisoning with
,
Silver nitrate
at birth
,
,
poisoning with
Silver salts poisoning
Silver sulfadiazine
,
Silver wiring (retinal)
,
Simon foci
Simvastatin
drug interactions of
Sinbis virus disease
Sindling-Larsen-Johansson syndrome
Singing voice
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
in cardiovascular disorders
in Lewy body dementia
Singultus
76-78
,
Sin Nombre virus infection
,
Sinoatrial exit block
Sinoatrial node
Sinus arrest
,
Sinus arrhythmia
Sinus bradycardia
,
,
myocardial infarction and
Sinuses
,
barotrauma of
3284-3285
inflammation of (
see
Sinusitis)
sarcoidosis of
Sinus histiocytosis
Sinusitis
479-481
Aspergillus
in
cavernous sinus thrombosis and
624-625
eye pain and
fever and
Moraxella catarrhalis
in
1277-1278
orbital cellulitis and
pneumococcal
Sinus node
dysfunction of
,
2161-2162
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
262-263
Sinusotomy
Sinus pause
Sinus rhythm
Sinus tachycardia
,
heart failure and
myocardial infarction and
Sipple's syndrome
,
912-913
Sirolimus
Sitagliptin
,
Sitosterolemia
Sjaastad syndrome
Sjogren-Larsson syndrome
Sjogren's syndrome
303-305
,
,
,
,
bronchiectasis in
===PAGE:4052===
lymphoid interstitial pneumonia and
Skene's duct, cyst of
2535-2536
Skene's gland, inflammation of
Skin
632-645
abrasions of
abscess of
696-697
,
1162-1163
,
,
,
acneiform eruptions of
acrocyanosis of
aging of
,
annular lesions of
anti-infective agents for
anti-inflammatory agents for
astringents for
atrophy of
barrier function of
biopsy of
black discoloration of
blue
(
see also
Cyanosis)
breakdown of (
see also
Pressure ulcers)
prostheses and
bullae (blisters) of
cancer of
748-754
,
cancer-related lesions of
644-645
,
,
683-684
classification of
cleansing agents for
corticosteroids for
,
creams for
culture of
debridement of
dermatitis of (
see
Dermatitis)
diascopy of
diphtheria infection of
dressings for
,
,
drug reactions of
,
684-686
(
see also
Drugs, cutaneous reactions to)
dry
,
661-662
drying agents for
ecchymoses of
edema of
erosions of
erythema of
eschar of
excoriation of
gels for
gray
herpetiform lesions of
,
657-658
,
hyperpigmentation of
721-722
,
in Addison's disease
hypersensitivity reactions of
683-691
hypopigmentation of
immune function of
,
,
induration of
infection of
bacterial
694-702
,
,
fungal
,
703-709
,
-
necrotizing
700-701
obesity and
parasitic
709-714
===PAGE:4053===
pressure ulcers and
staphylococcal
694-696
,
,
697-698
,
,
701-702
,
streptococcal
694-696
,
,

,
700-701
viral
,
715-718
,
inflammation of (
see
Dermatitis)
keratinization of, vitamin A deficiency and
keratolytics for
lacerations of
3193-3200
,
,
,
laxity of (cutis laxa)
lentigines of
,
in leprosy
1316-1318
in liver disease,
lichenification of
linear lesions of
lotions for
lupus erythematosus of
,
macules of
malodor of
mast cell infiltration of
1124-1125
metal-related disorders of
,
moisturizers for
morbilliform eruption of
necrosis of
,
of neonate
neoplasms of
748-754
benign
743-748
malignant
748-754
,
nodules of
,
nutritional deficiency and
occlusive therapy for
ointments for
orange
papules of
,
paraneoplastic lesions of
644-645
,
,
683-684
,
patch testing of
petechiae of
,
photosensitivity of
674-676
,
drug-induced
,
pigmentation disorders of
719-722
,
in liver disease
plaques of
in polyarteritis nodosa
pompholyx of
powders for
,
pregnancy-related disorders of
,
,
2666-2667
,
protective agents for
645-649
,
purpura of
,
pustules of
,
radiation effects on
,
rash on
(
see also
Rash)
red
reticulated lesions of
scabs of
scales of
scars of
,
scrapings of
serpiginous lesions of
===PAGE:4054===
silver
stiffness of, in pseudoxanthoma elasticum
2911-2912
sun exposure of
672-676
,
,
tags of
target lesions of
tar preparations for
,
telangiectasia of
tension lines of
topical therapies for
645-649
,
dermatitis with
types of
Tzanck testing of
ulcers of (
see
Ulcers, cutaneous)
umbilicated lesions of
vascular lesions of
746-748
vasculitis and
318-319
verrucous lesions of
,
715-718
,
vesicles of
violet
vitiligo of
,
,
,
720-721
,
wheals (hives) of
,
639-644
,
-
Wood's light examination of
yellow
(
see also
Jaundice)
zoonotic diseases of
zosteriform lesions of
Skinfold thickness
Skin graft
,
Skin tags
Skin tests
in allergy
in asthma
,
in bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
in contact dermatitis
in diphtheria antitoxin treatment
in drug hypersensitivity
in food allergy
in nutritional support response
in penicillin allergy
in protein-energy undernutrition
in tuberculosis
in xenogenic serum hypersensitivity
Skull fracture
,
,
in neonate
SLE (
see
Systemic lupus erythematosus)
Sleep
1703-1715
,
,
,
apnea in (
see
Sleep apnea)
behavior disturbances during
1713-1714
in children
2750-2751
,
3033-3034
COPD and
drugs and
,
in elderly
in fibromyalgia
hypnotics in
,
,
infant position for
in Parkinson's disease
REM vs NREM
,
snoring and
===PAGE:4055===
Sleep apnea
,
1903-1907
in children
1906-1907
dental procedures in
heart failure and
obesity and
Sleep deprivation
Sleepiness
daytime
,
,
1710-1711
,
1711-1713
Epworth scale of
,
Sleeping sickness, African
,
,
1373-1375
Sleep latency testing
,
Sleep paralysis
Sleepwalking
Sling
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
,
Slit-lamp examination
Slow virus infection
1731-1732
SLUDGE syndrome
Small-bowel meal
Small-for-gestational-age infant
,
2781-2782
Small intestine
bacterial overgrowth syndrome of
156-157
biopsy of
,
,
,
,
clostridial necrotizing enteritis of
drug absorption in
enterocele of
2529-2531
,
lymphoma of
obstruction of
115-117
,
resection of
160-161
in systemic sclerosis
transplantation of
,
rejection of
,
tumors of
190-191
Small left colon syndrome
2802-2803
Small-molecule mimetics
Smallpox
,
1464-1465
terrorist use of
vaccine against
,
Smell
disorders of
466-468
,
in elderly patients
evaluation of
Smith-Magenis syndrome
Smog
Smoke inhalation
Smokeless tobacco lesion
Smoking (
see also
Cigarette smoking; Tobacco)
cessation of
3432-3436
,
-
Snakebites
,
,
3313-3319
,
,
,
Sniff test
,
Snoring
Snout reflex
Snuff taker's lung
Soaks
Soapsuds enema
Social health maintenance organizations (SHMOs)
Social phobia (social anxiety disorder)
,
===PAGE:4056===
in children
3051-3052
Social Security
Sodium
balance of
820-821
blood levels of
,
,
in Addison's disease
,
decrease in
823-829
,
(
see also
Hyponatremia)
increase in
829-831
,
(
see also
Hypernatremia)
in body fluids
in chronic renal failure
dietary
,
in heart failure
in heat illness
in orthostatic hypotension
restriction of
drug interaction with
fractional excretion of
,
,
,
,
renal excretion of
replacement of
827-829
total body
decrease in
822-823
,
increase in
transport of, hypertension and
urinary
,
,
,
,
in ascites
in oliguria
reference value for
Sodium arsenate poisoning
Sodium bicarbonate
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in hyperkalemia
in metabolic acidosis
reference values for
in respiratory acidosis
Sodium channel blockers, in arrhythmias
Sodium chloride (
see also
Sodium, dietary)
in metabolic alkalosis
Sodium cyanide poisoning
Sodium fluoride poisoning
Sodium nitrite poisoning
Sodium oxybate
Sodium phosphate
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate
in acute renal failure
in hyperkalemia
Sodium stibogluconate
Sodium valproate
Sodoku
Solar urticaria
Solder poisoning
Solifenacin
Solvents
inhalation of
poisoning with
volatile
1531-1532
Somatization disorder
1577-1578
===PAGE:4057===
Somatoform disorders
1573-1578
Somatoform pain disorder
Somatomedin-C (
see
Insulin-like growth factor 1)
Somatosensory evoked responses
,
Somatostatin
in carcinoid syndrome
Somatostatinoma
Somnambulism
Somogyi phenomenon
Sonohysterography
Sorafenib
,
Sorbitol
in constipation
,
,
diarrhea and
,
irritable bowel syndrome and
Sores, cold
,
,
,
Sotalol
South American blastomycosis
1333-1334
Southeast Asian hemorrhagic fever
1432-1433
Space adaptation syndrome
Spanish fly poisoning
Sparganosis
Spasmodic torticollis
382-383
Spasms
carpopedal
coronary artery
,
2098-2099
corticospinal tract lesions and
diaphragmatic (hiccups)
76-78
,
esophageal
124-125
eyelid
hemifacial
,
infantile
,
,
2899-2900
laryngeal
multiple sclerosis and
neck
382-383
rectal
183-184
temporomandibular joint
533-534
in tetanus
vocal cord
Spastic colon
162-165
Spasticity
in cerebral palsy syndromes
,
in spinal cord injury
after stroke
Spastic paraparesis
hereditary
HTLV-1-associated myelopathy and
1812-1813
Specific gravity, urinary
Specificity, of tests
Spectacle blur
Spectinomycin
,
Spectroscopy, tissue
Speech
assessment of
development of
dysfunction of
1640-1642
,
esophageal
===PAGE:4058===
poverty of
rehabilitation for
scanning
in velopharyngeal insufficiency
Speech audiometry
Speech reading
Speech reception threshold
Speech therapy
Sperm
count of
,
disorders of
2592-2594
,
donor
intracytoplasmic injection of
,
Spermatocele
Spermatogenesis
impairment of
2592-2594
,
Spermicide
Sperm penetration assay
Sphenoid sinus
,
inflammation of
479-481
Spherocytes
Spherocytosis
hereditary
,
940-941
Spherulin
Sphincter
anal
,
,
,
lower esophageal
in gastroesophageal reflux
in motility disorders
123-125
urethral
,
artificial
Sphincter of Oddi
,
Sphincterotomy
in bile duct stones
in postcholecystectomy syndrome
Sphingolipidoses
Sphingomyelinase deficiency
Spider bites
3319-3321
,
Spider nevus (angioma)
,
,
Spider veins
Spigelian hernia
Spina bifida
2995-2997
prenatal diagnosis of
Spinal column (
see also
Spinal cord)
congenital abnormalities of
1757-1759
,
2995-2997
defects of
fracture of
herniated disk of
idiopathic scoliosis of
infection of
manipulation of
osteoarthritis of
osteoporosis of
356-360
pain in (
see
Low back pain)
Scheuermann's disease of
2915-2916
stenosis of
,
subluxation of
384-385
===PAGE:4059===
trauma to
,
3227-3231
,
,
tuberculosis of
,
Spinal cord
,
(
see also
Spinal column)
abscess of
arteriovenous malformations of
birth-related injury to
2771-2773
compression of
,
,
1795-1797
,
,
1810-1811
disorders of
1804-1813
,
,
hematoma of
1811-1812
human T-lymphotropic virus infection of
1812-1813
infarction of
1809-1810
inflammation of
radiation effects on
subacute combined degeneration of
syphilis of
syrinx of
transection of
trauma to
3227-3231
,
,
in children
rehabilitation after
tumors of
,
1821-1822
Spinal fluid (
see
Cerebrospinal fluid)
Spinal muscular atrophy
Spinal nerves
,
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
,
headache after
1724-1725
Spine (
see
Spinal column; Spinal cord)
Spinocerebellar ataxia
vitamin E deficiency and
Spiramycin
,
Spirillum minus
infection
Spirituality
3144-3146
Spirochetal infections
1266-1273
(
see also specific diseases
)
hepatic inflammation in
Spirometry
,
(
see also
Pulmonary function testing)
in asthma
in pulmonary hypertension
Spironolactone
in acne
,
in ascites
in bronchopulmonary dysplasia
in heart failure
in hypertension
Splanchnic artery
aneurysm of
occlusion of
Spleen
abscess of
absence of (
see
Asplenia)
disorders of
983-986
,
,
enlargement of
984-986
,
,
infectious mononucleosis and
malaria and
myelophthisic anemia and
in neonate
platelet sequestration and
portal hypertension and
===PAGE:4060===
rheumatoid arthritis and
thalassemia and
thrombocytopenia and
hematopoiesis in
platelet sequestration in
red pulp of
removal of (
see
Splenectomy)
rupture of
,
sarcoidosis of
white pulp of
Splenectomy
in Gaucher's disease
in hypersplenism
985-986
,
in neutropenia
after splenic injury
Splenic flexure, obstruction of
Splenomegaly (
see
Spleen, enlargement of)
Splint
,
in carpal tunnel syndrome
,
in plantar fasciosis
in rheumatoid arthritis
temporomandibular joint
,
wrist
,
Splitting
of heart sounds
2021-2022
mental
Spondylitis, ankylosing
341-343
rheumatoid arthritis vs
uveitis and
Spondyloarthropathy
341-345
juvenile-onset
undifferentiated
uveitis and
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
Spondylolisthesis
Spondylolysis
Spondylosis, cervical
1808-1809
Sponge, contraceptive
,
Spongiform encephalopathies
1729-1731
Spooning
Sporotrichosis
Sports (
see also
Exercise)
cardiac disorders and
2236-2239
contraindications to
injury with
3296-3298
screening for
3295-3296
Spotted bones (osteopoikilosis)
Spotted fever
,
,
1284-1285
Sprain
,
3215-3217
sports-related
washerwoman's
Sprue
celiac (nontropical) (
see
Celiac sprue)
tropical
Spur
amputation
calcaneal
,
400-401
===PAGE:4061===
Spur cell anemia
Sputum
black
blood-streaked
1837-1841
,
-
Squamous cell carcinoma
anorectal
195-196
,
cervical
2576-2580
,
,
cutaneous
,
,
749-750
esophageal
186-189
,
head and neck
,
HIV infection and
laryngeal
489-491
lung
2004-2012
,
nasopharyngeal
oral
491-492
orbital
otic
penile
-
,
2469-2470
tracheal
2012-2013
urethral
2477-2478
vaginal
2580-2581
,
vulvar
2581-2582
,
SRRIs (
see
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors)
Stable fly bites
Stains
,
Stance, evaluation of
Stanozolol
Staphylococcal infection
1228-1230
,
abscess
1162-1163
,
antibiotic-resistant
,
,
bacteremic
,
biofilm in
bone
,
chickenpox and
cutaneous
694-696
,
,

697-698
,
,
701-702
,
,
endocardial
,
,
,
eyelid
fingertip
food poisoning and
,
gastrointestinal
,
hair follicle
hyper-IgE syndrome and
joint
lung (pneumonia)
,
,
,
meningeal
,
methicillin-resistant
,
nasal
neonatal
,
,
ocular
palmar
389-390
periungual
toxins in
vancomycin-resistant
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
701-702
,
,
Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome
,
1235-1236
Staples, for wound closure
Startle disease
===PAGE:4062===
Starvation
,
,
(
see also
Undernutrition)
Stasis dermatitis
671-672
Statins
,
,
in acute coronary syndromes
in atherosclerosis
in chronic renal failure
in coronary artery disease
after myocardial infarction
toxicity of
Status asthmaticus
,
Status epilepticus
,
nonconvulsive
Stavudine
in children
Steatocystoma
Steatohepatitis
nonalcoholic
211-212
Steatonecrosis
211-212
Steatorrhea
celiac sprue and
chronic pancreatitis and
liver disease and
malabsorption and
,
postgastrectomy
Steatosis
211-212
in alcoholic liver disease
Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome
1771-1772
Stein-Leventhal (polycystic ovary) syndrome
,
2514-2515
,
Stem cell transplantation
1132-1133
in acute lymphocytic leukemia
in aplastic anemia
corneal
596-597
hepatic veno-occlusive disease and
in immunodeficiency
in multiple myeloma
in non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in severe combined immunodeficiency
in sickle cell disease
in thalassemia
Stenosis
anal
aortic
2181-2183
(
see also
Aortic valve, stenosis)
bronchial, posttransplantation
cervical
infertility and
duodenal
mitral
2187-2189
,
(
see also
Mitral valve, stenosis)
pulmonic
2190-2191
(
see also
Pulmonic valve, stenosis)
pyloric
electrolyte loss and
hypertrophic
2800-2801
renal artery
aldosteronism and
spinal
,
subglottic
tricuspid
2192-2193
,
murmur in
===PAGE:4063===
ureteral
urethral
Stensen's duct
blockage of
469-470
Steppage gait
Stereognosis
Stereotactic radiation therapy
Sterilization
Sternoclavicular joint, injury to
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Sternotomy, mediastinitis with
Steroids, anabolic
1532-1534
,
(
see also
Corticosteroids
and specific steroids
)
in protein-energy undernutrition
Stevens-Johnson syndrome
,
,
689-691
Stewart-Treves syndrome
Stibophen poisoning
Stiff baby syndrome
Stiffness
,
,
Stiff-person syndrome
Stillbirth
,
2675-2676
,
Still's disease
,
Stingray injury
Stings (
see
Bites and stings)
St. John's wort
,
,
drug interactions of
St. Louis encephalitis
,
,
Stockings
elastic
in chronic venous insufficiency
in deep venous thrombosis prevention
2230-2231
in orthostatic hypotension
in pulmonary embolism prevention
,
pneumatic
in deep venous thrombosis prevention
2230-2231
in peripheral arterial disease
Stomach (
see also
Gastric; Gastritis; Gastrointestinal tract)
bezoars in
,
138-139
bypass surgery on
61-64
,
cancer of
189-190
Helicobacter pylori
infection and
,
postgastrectomy
ulcer vs
caustic injury to
3335-3336
decompression of
diverticular disease of
drug absorption in
emptying of, measurement of
foreign bodies in
gastric acid output of
,
128-129
Helicobacter pylori
infection of
inflammation of
130-133
leather bottle
manometry of
obstruction of
perforation of
in neonate
polyps of
===PAGE:4064===
resection of
rupture of
ulcers of
133-136
(
see also
Peptic ulcer disease)
varices of
103-104
,
watermelon
Stomatitis
,
509-513
,
aphthous
,
512-513
gangrenous
herpetic
,
,
neutropenia and
nicotine
pellagra and
riboflavin deficiency and
Stomatocytosis
Stones
bile duct
276-278
gallbladder
271-273
(
see also
Gallstones)
kidney
2369-2372
,
salivary gland
469-470
urinary
2369-2372
,
,
Stool
,
(
see also
Constipation; Diarrhea; Feces)
black
blood in
,
examination of
,
in gastroenteritis
in parasite infection
-
,
in protein-energy undernutrition
reference values for
in ulcerative colitis
fatty
,
(
see also
Steatorrhea)
inappropriate deposition of (encopresis)
2928-2929
osmotic gap of
in ulcerative colitis
Strabismus
,
2920-2922
,
Strachan's syndrome
Straight leg raising
,
Strains
3215-3217
hamstring
3305-3306
sports-related
Stramonium poisoning
Stranger anxiety
Strawberry mark
Strawberry tongue
Straw itch mite bites
Strength testing
,
Strength training
,
,
,
Streptobacillus moniliformis
infection
Streptococcal infection
1225-1228
,
1230-1235
,
(
see also specific sites
)
chickenpox and
cutaneous
694-696
,
,

,
,
,
endocardial
,
,
,
fingertip
glomerular
,
,
2392-2393
lung (pneumonia)
,
,
,
-
,
lymphatic channel
maternal
,
meningeal
,
,
,
===PAGE:4065===
in neonatal sepsis
,
,
obsessive-compulsive disorders and
otic
palmar
389-390
peritoneal
periungual
pharyngeal
,
,
prophylaxis against
,
rheumatic fever with
2861-2865
,
,
tonsillopharyngeal
uterine
vaccine against
,
,
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
,
1235-1236
Streptogramins
,
Streptokinase
in myocardial infarction
,
in pulmonary embolism
Streptomycin
,
1198-1201
,
in elderly
ototoxicity of
in perinatal tuberculosis
in tuberculosis
,
Stress
1500-1502
,
caregiver
in children and adolescents
3054-3055
depersonalization disorder and
1502-1503
depression and
in dying patient and family
family, in childhood illness
gastritis with
schizophrenia and
sleep disorders and
Stress echocardiography
Stress fracture
Stress incontinence
,
,
,
,
,
2360-2361
Stress testing
2063-2065
,
(
see also
Exercise stress testing)
in angina pectoris
bedside
pharmacologic
Stretching exercise
Striatonigral degeneration
1618-1619
Stridor
,
,
1844-1847
,
-
String sign
Stroke
1643-1655
,
acute vision loss and
atrial fibrillation and
blood pressure in
chemoprevention of
complications of
deep venous thrombosis prevention in
dementia and
,
1680-1681
evolving
hemorrhagic
1652-1654
hypertension and
ischemic
,
1646-1652
,
,
hormone replacement therapy and
,
in neonate
===PAGE:4066===
oral contraceptives and
prevention of
rehabilitation after
3462-3464
risk factors for
seizures and
severity of
Stroke index
Strongyloidiasis
,
,
,
1350-1352
Structural integration
,
Struma ovarii
Strychnine poisoning
ST segment
,
,
,
Stuart-Prower factor (factor X)
,
,
Stump
care of
conditioning of
pain in
Stupor
1656-1668
,
,
,
(
see also
Coma)
Sturge-Weber syndrome
2904-2905
Stye
576-577
Subacute bacterial endocarditis
Subacute cerebellar degeneration
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
,
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
1654-1655
,
,
,
in neonate
Subclavian artery
aneurysm of
congenital abnormality of
Subclavian steal syndrome
Subclavian vein compression
Subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy
Subcutaneous fat necrosis, in neonate
Subdural empyema
1733-1734
Subdural hematoma
1811-1812
,
,
,
,
Subdural hemorrhage, in neonate
Subglottic stenosis
Subjective Global Assessment
Sublingual capnometry
Sublingual glands
,
(
see also
Salivary glands)
Subluxation, spinal
384-385
,
Submandibular glands
,
(
see also
Salivary glands)
Submandibular space, infection of
470-471
,
Subphrenic abscess
,
Substance abuse disorders
1507-1534
(
see also
Drug dependence [abuse, addiction, habituation])
Substance P
Succimer
,
Succinylcholine
in endotracheal intubation
malignant hyperthermia with
pharmacogenetics of
Suck reflex
Sucralfate
Sucrose, diarrhea and
Sudden death
in athlete
2236-2237
,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
,
===PAGE:4067===
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
2939-2940
,
opioid exposure and
Sudomotor axon-reflex test
Sugar-water test
Suicide
,
1579-1582
assisted
,
attempted
in children and adolescents
,
,
3060-3062
depression and
,
prevention of
1580-1582
risk of
,
schizophrenia and
,
Sulconazole
Sulcrafate
Sulfa, crystal formation and
Sulfacetamide
1220-1222
,
Sulfadiazine
1220-1222
,
in congenital toxoplasmosis
in toxoplasmosis
Sulfadoxine
1220-1222
,
in malaria
Sulfamethizole
,
1220-1222
,
Sulfamethoxazole
,
1220-1222
,
Sulfanilamide
1220-1222
,
Sulfapyridine
during breastfeeding
in dermatitis herpetiformis
Sulfasalazine
1220-1222
,
in ankylosing spondylitis
during breastfeeding
folate deficiency and
,
in inflammatory bowel disease
,
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
in reactive arthritis
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
Sulfatide lipidosis
Sulfides
occupational exposure to
1983-1984
poisoning with
Sulfinpyrazone
Sulfisoxazole
,
1220-1222
,
during breastfeeding
in otitis media
Sulfite oxidase deficiency
,
Sulfonamides
-
,
1220-1222
,
in pregnancy
,
Sulfonylureas
,
,
in elderly
Sulfosalicylic acid test
Sulfur dioxide
occupational exposure to
1983-1984
poisoning with
Sulfur ointment
,
Sulfur oxides
Sulindac
Sumatriptan
Sumithrin poisoning
===PAGE:4068===
Summation gallop
Sundowning
Sun exposure
672-676
,
,
allergy to
drug reactions and
,
,
,
,
pellagra-related skin lesions with
porphyria and
,
,
skin cancer and
,
sunburn with
,
,
sunscreens for
vitamin D deficiency and
,
Sunitinib
,
Sun-tanning lamps
Superficial venous thrombosis
Superior vena cava syndrome (superior mediastinal syndrome)
lung cancer and
,
non-Hodgkin lymphoma and
pleural effusion and
Superwarfarins, poisoning with
Supplements, dietary
3421-3432
,
Supraglottitis
,
475-477
Supraventricular rhythms, ectopic
2162-2163
,
,
Supraventricular tachycardia
post-resuscitation
reentrant
2170-2172
,
,
Suramin
Surfactant
,
deficiency of
2876-2877
induction of
pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and
in respiratory distress syndrome
for ventilated infant
Surgery
3445-3452
in cancer
1062-1064
,
-
deep venous thrombosis prevention in
in diabetes mellitus
liver dysfunction after
223-224
outpatient
pneumonia after
1929-1932
pregnancy and
2648-2649
,
prophylactic antibiotics for
,
,
-
prophylactic anticoagulants for
respiratory failure after
risk factors with
,
Surrogate decision making
3469-3470
Sutton's disease
Sutures
,
,
,
Swallowing
air
,
difficulty in
120-122
,
,
(
see also
Dysphagia)
disorders of
119-128
syncope and
Swan-Ganz catheterization
Swan-neck deformity
386-387
,
Sweating
691-694
,
in cystic fibrosis
menopause-related
===PAGE:4069===
Sweat test
axon-reflex
in cystic fibrosis
,
Sweet's syndrome
683-684
Swimmer's ear
454-455
Swimmer's itch
Swimming pool conjunctivitis
Swimming pool granuloma
Swine flu
Swine confinement fever
Sydenham chorea
,
Symblepharon
Sympathetic nervous system
1615-1620
,
,
blood pressure and
in complex regional pain syndrome
Sympathetic ophthalmia
Symptothermal method, for ovulation
,
Synacthen test
Synapse
,
Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation
Syncope
2041-2048
,
-
aortic stenosis and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
neurocardiogenic, pacemaker in
psychogenic
tilt table testing in
vasovagal
,
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
,
,
in neonate
Syndrome X
64-65
,
,

Synkinesia
Synovial chondromatosis
Synovial fluid
in calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal deposition disease
collection of
,
,
examination of
,
,
in gout
in infectious arthritis
,
in osteoarthritis
in rheumatoid arthritis
Synovial sarcoma
Synovitis (
see also
Tenosynovitis)
pigmented villonodular
Syphilis
,
1475-1481
cardiovascular
classification of
congenital
,
,
2821-2823
craniotabes in
endemic
1266-1267
false-positive test for
fetal
hepatic inflammation in
latent
,
,
maternal
,
meningeal
neurologic (neurosyphilis)
,
,
,
oral involvement in
,
,
,
===PAGE:4070===
primary
,
,
secondary
,
,
tertiary
,
,
transfusion-transmitted
,
Syringobulbia
Syringomyelia
,
,
Syrinx
Syrup of ipecac
Systemic lupus erythematosus
305-309
,
,
,
bronchiectasis in
cancer-related
drug-induced
fever and
nephritis in
2409-2411
,
pleural effusion in
pregnancy and
rheumatoid arthritis vs
skin manifestations of
,
Systemic resistance
Systemic sclerosis
309-312
,
achalasia in
eosinophilic fasciitis vs
paraneoplastic
rheumatoid arthritis vs
===PAGE:4071===
T
T
(
see
Triiodothyronine)
T
(
see
Thyroxine)
TA-90
Tabes dorsalis
,
,
Tachyarrhythmias
pacemaker in
radiofrequency ablation in
Tachycardia
antidromic reciprocating
atrial
,
,
(
see also
Atrial tachycardia)
broad complex
junctional, nonparoxysmal
narrow complex
orthodromic reciprocating
,
pacemaker-mediated
sinus
,
,
,
supraventricular (
see
Supraventricular tachycardia)
ventricular
,
2175-2177
,
,
(
see also
Ventricular tachycardia)
Tachypnea
hypercapnia and
transient, of the newborn
,
Tacrine, in elderly
Tacrolimus
in atopic dermatitis
drug interactions of
in inflammatory bowel disease
in lichen planus
in psoriasis
in transplantation
tremors and
Tactile fremitus
Tadalafil
drug interactions of
Taeniasis saginata
,
Taeniasis solium
,
1364-1365
,
,
Takayasu's arteritis
326-329
,
Talar tubercle fracture
,
Talc
Talipes calcaneovalgus
Talipes equinovarus
Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein
,
,
,
Tamoxifen
,
in breast cancer prevention
in breast pain
in gynecomastia
tremors and
Tamponade, cardiac
,
,
in cancer
Tamsulosin
Tangent screen testing
Tangier disease
Tanning
Tapeworm infections
,
,
1360-1365
,
Tap water enema
===PAGE:4072===
Tap water iontophoresis
Tar
poisoning with
in skin disorders
,
Tarantula bite
Tardive dyskinesia
,
,
,
Target cells
,
Tarsal navicular bone, osteochondrosis of
2913-2915
Tarsal tunnel syndrome
,
Tartar (dental calculus)
Tartar emetic poisoning
Taste
aging-related changes in
disorders of
466-468
,
Tau protein
,
Taxanes
-
Tay-Sachs disease
prenatal testing for
Tazarotene
in acne
,
,
in psoriasis
Tazobactam, neonatal dosage of
T-cell receptors
assay of
T cells (
see
Lymphocytes, T)
TCH (tetrahydrocannabinol) (
see
Marijuana)
Tear gas poisoning
Tears
artificial
,
deficiency of
592-593
excess of
566-570
,
,
,
,
Schirmer test of
,
Teboroxime
Technetium-99m imaging
,
Teeth
494-516
,
,
(
see also
Dental procedures; Mouth)
abscess of
,
absence of
aging-related changes in
,
503-504
attrition of
avulsion of
barotrauma to
calculus deposits on
caries of
,
,
516-518
in children
prevention of
,
517-518
clenching of
,
,
deciduous
deformities of
discoloration of
,
,
emergency procedures on
524-529
enamel defects of
eruption of
,
extraction of
522-523
complications of
525-526
in oral cancer
radiation-associated complications of
fluorosis of
,
,
===PAGE:4073===
fracture of
grinding of
,
,
Hutchinson's
identification of
,
infection of
470-471
,
,
,
526-529
,
loose
malocclusion of
508-509
natal
painful
,
,
526-529
,
,
periapical abscess of
,
radiation-induced disease of
supernumerary
in syphilis
tetracycline effects on
,
whitening of
Tefluthrin poisoning
Tegaserod
,
Teicoplanin
Telangiectasia
gastrointestinal
hemorrhagic, hereditary
,
,
,
982-983
idiopathic (spider veins)
Telbivudine
Telithromycin
,
1212-1215
,
,
drug interactions of
Telmisartan
Telogen effluvium
,
Telomeres
deletions of
Temazepam
in elderly
,
in sleep disorders
Temefos poisoning
Temozolomide
,
Temperature
body
, (
see also
Fever; Hyperthermia; Hypothermia)
core
in hypothermia
measurement of
for ovulation
,
in premature infant
environmental
cold
3271-3275
hot
3262-3271
,
sensation for
Temper tantrums
Temporal arteritis
319-321
,
Temporal bone
fracture of
,
paraganglioma of
Pseudomonas
infection of
Temporal lobes
,
herniation of
,
Temporomandibular joint
,
529-534
,
,
(
see also
Mandible; Maxilla)
aging-related changes in
ankylosis of
arthritis of
530-532
===PAGE:4074===
evaluation of
,
529-530
hyperplasia of
hypoplasia of
internal derangement of
532-533
muscle spasm around
533-534
splint for
,
Temsirolimus
Tendinitis
374-375
Achilles
digital
patellar
popliteus
rotator cuff
Tendinopathy, fluoroquinolone-induced
Tendinosis, tibialis
394-396
,
Tendon
Achilles, inflammation of
401-402
injury to
,
,
tears of
3215-3217
Tendon sheath
ganglion of
infection of
inflammation of
374-375
Tenecteplase
,
Teniposide
Tennis elbow
3300-3301
Tenofovir
in children
Tenosynovitis
374-375
flexor
,
noninfectious
pollicis tendon
TENS (
see
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation)
Tension headache
,
Tension pneumomediastinum
Tension pneumothorax
,
(
see also
Pneumothorax)
barotrauma and
in infant
mechanical ventilation and
trauma and
Teratogens
2625-2627
,
,
,
,
radiation and
Teratoma
ovarian
,
pericardial
,
,
testicular
Terazosin
in hypertension
,
in incontinence
Terbinafine
in onychomycosis
in tinea capitis
Terbufos poisoning
Terbutaline, in asthma
,
Terconazole
in candidal vaginitis
Teriparatide
===PAGE:4075===
Terminal illness (
see
Dying patient; End-of-life care)
Terrorism
1164-1165
,
Testing
Testis (testes)
acute lymphocytic leukemia of
anomalies of
2986-2988
biopsy of
cancer of
,
-
,
2476-2477
development of
ectopic
examination of
in children
in neonate
infection of
2456-2457
Leydig cells of
mumps of
pain in
2334-2337
,
prosthetic
radiation effects on
Sertoli cells of
torsion of
,
2457-2458
,
in neonate
trauma to
undescended
,
,
,
2987-2988
vanishing
Testolactone
Testosterone
,
(
see also
Anabolic steroids)
in androgen deficiency
blood levels of
aging-related changes in
hypogonadism and
,
liver disease and
normal
,
deficiency of
2340-2345
,
,
,
in female sexual dysfunction
in luteinizing hormone deficiency
in male hypogonadism
in protein-energy undernutrition
replacement therapy with
,
Tests (
see
Laboratory tests)
Tetanospasmin
Tetanus
1296-1299
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
,
schedule for
,
,
-
Tetanus immune globulin
Tetany
,
,
rachitic
,
Tetrabenazine
Tetrachlorvinphos poisoning
Tetrachydrocannabinol (
see
Marijuana)
Tetracycline
,
1222-1223
,
in acne
,
at birth
,
dental discoloration with
,
,
hepatotoxicity of
hyperpigmentation and
in malaria
===PAGE:4076===
in perioral dermatitis
in pregnancy
,
Tetraethyl lead poisoning
Tetralogy of Fallot
2958-2959
,
Tetramethrin poisoning
Tetrodotoxin poisoning
Tetrofosmin
Tet spells
,
Thai hemorrhagic fever
1432-1433
Thalassemias
,
,
946-947
,
pregnancy and
prenatal testing for
Thalidomide
in Behcet's syndrome
in erythema nodosum leprosum
in multiple myeloma
in myelophthisic anemia
Thallium-201 imaging
Thallium salts poisoning
Thanatophoric dysplasia
Thatched-roof worker's disease
Theophylline
antibiotic interaction with
in asthma
,
ciprofloxacin interaction with
in COPD
drug interactions of
in elderly
in pediatric ventilation
pharmacologic stress testing and
poisoning with
tremors and
Therapeutic index, of drugs
,
Therapeutic objectives
3113-3114
Therapeutic touch
,
Thermodilution technique
,
Thermography
Thiamin (
see
Vitamin B
)
Thiazides
,
,
in elderly
hyponatremia and
hypovolemic hyponatremia and
metabolic alkalosis and
in pregnancy
,
Thiazolidinediones
,
,
,
Thienobenzodiazepine
Thiersch's procedure
Thimerosal
Thin basement membrane disease
Thinking
Thin-layer rapid use epicutaneous (T.R.U.E.) patch testing
Thiol compounds
Thiopental
distribution of
in elderly
in endotracheal intubation
for labor
===PAGE:4077===
Thioridazine
in elderly
,
poisoning with
tremors and
Thiothixene
in elderly
poisoning with
Thioxanthenes
Thirst
in hypernatremia
Thompson test
Thoracentesis
1864-1865
,
,
Thoracic aortic aneurysm
2210-2211
Thoracic bioimpedance system
Thoracic outlet compression syndrome
1803-1804
,
Thoracoscopy
Thoracostomy, tube
1866-1867
,
Thoracotomy
1865-1866
Thorax, trauma to
Thought disorder, in schizophrenia
Threadworm infection
,
,
1350-1352
Three-day German measles (
see
Rubella)
Threonine
Thrills
,
Throat
(
see also
Mouth; Pharynx)
disorders of, in elderly,
examination of
infection of (
see
Pharyngitis)
"lump" in (globus sensation)
sore
464-466
Thrombasthenia
,
Thrombin
,
Thrombin time
,
Thromboangiitis obliterans
2223-2224
Thromboaortopathy, occlusive
326-329
,
Thrombocythemia
essential
997-999
,
secondary
Thrombocytopenia
954-963
,
acute respiratory distress syndrome and
aplastic anemia and
cancer therapy and
1074-1075
classification of
connective tissue disease and
dental procedures in
dilutional
drug-induced
gestational
hemolytic-uremic syndrome and
961-962
heparin-induced
HIV infection and
,
infectious mononucleosis and
megaloblastic anemia and
nonimmunologic
960-961
peripheral smear in
,
platelet transfusion in
posttransfusion
===PAGE:4078===
radiation injury and
sarcoidosis and
sepsis and
SLE and
,
splenic sequestration and
in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Thrombocytopenic purpura
autoimmune
immune (idiopathic)
958-960
,
measles and
thrombotic
961-962
Thrombocytosis
,
Thromboembolism (
see
Embolism; Thrombosis)
Thromboendarterectomy
Thrombolytic therapy
in deep venous thrombosis
in myocardial infarction
,
in peripheral arterial occlusion
in pleural effusion
in pulmonary embolism
in renal artery occlusion
in stroke
,
Thrombomodulin
Thrombophlebitis
Thromboplastin
Thromboplastin time, partial (PTT)
,
,
-
,
factor VIII antibody and
prolongation of
Thrombosis
973-975
,
,

,
(
see also
Embolism; Stroke; Thrombophlebitis)
arterial
,
renal
2430-2432
,
cardiac, murmur with
cavernous sinus
624-625
cerebral
,
1646-1652
,
coronary artery
2099-2100
(
see also
Myocardial infarction)
deep venous
2224-2231
,
,
,
(
see also
Deep Venous Thrombosis)
effort
hepatic vein
261-262
hypercoagulable states and (
see
Thrombotic disorders)
mesenteric
,
mural
polycythemia vera and
portal vein
263-264
,
renal
2430-2432
,
renal vein
2434-2435
SLE and
superficial venous
Thrombotic disorders
973-975
,
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura-hemolytic-uremic syndrome
961-962
Thrush
in esophageal infection
oral
,
,
,
,
Thumb
duck bill deformity of
gamekeeper's
range of motion of
stenosing tenosynovitis of
===PAGE:4079===
Thymectomy
Thymoma
,
red blood cell aplasia and
Thymus
aplasia of
fetal
,
hypoplasia of
,
,
1103-1104
mumps-related inflammation of
in myasthenia gravis
removal of
Thyrocalcitonin (
see
Calcitonin)
Thyroglobulin
,
blood levels of
congenital defects in
Thyroglossal duct cyst
Thyroidectomy
blood thyroglobulin after
in hyperthyroidism
hypoparathyroidism after
,
in pregnancy
in thyroid cancer
,
Thyroid gland
775-791
(
see also
Hyperthyroidism; Hypothyroidism; Thyroiditis)
adenoma of, in MEN syndromes
amyloidosis of
aspiration biopsy of
carcinoma of
,
789-791
anaplastic
follicular
medullary
790-791
in MEN syndromes
,
,
metastases from
papillary
radiation-induced
risk factors for
congenital absence of
fetal
hormones of
775-776
,
,

(
see also
Hyperthyroidism; Hypothyroidism; Triiodothyronine [T];
Thyroxine [T])
disorders of
775-791
,
congenital
screening for
in pregnancy
2649-2650
,
inflammation of (
see
Thyroiditis)
iodine-123 uptake test of
,
,
mumps-related inflammation of
nodules of
778-779
pregnancy effects on
,
2649-2650
,
radionuclide scanning of
,
,
removal of (
see
Thyroidectomy)
sarcoidosis of
Thyroiditis
de Quervain's
788-789
granulomatous, subacute
Hashimoto's (autoimmune)
,
779-780
,
(
see also
Hashimoto's thyroiditis)
lymphocytic
,
,
779-780
postpartum
silent
,
787-788
===PAGE:4080===
subacute
788-789
pregnancy and
Thyroid peroxidase, autoantibodies to
,
,
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
,
,
blood levels of
,
,
776-778
,
,
deficiency of
,
,
(
see also
Hypothyroidism)
excess of
,
(
see also
Hyperthyroidism)
function of
in hypopituitarism
,
inappropriate secretion of
,
infection-related production of
measurement of
receptor for, antibodies to
,
screening test for
secretion of
thyrotropin-releasing hormone test of
Thyroid storm
,
,
Thyrotoxicosis factitia
,
Thyrotoxicosis (Graves' disease)
,
780-785
(
see also
Hyperthyroidism)
Thyrotropin (
see
Thyroid-stimulating hormone)
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
deficiency of
testing with, in hypopituitarism
L-Thyroxine
in hypothyroidism
in iodine deficiency
in neonatal hypothyroidism
overingestion of
,
in pregnancy
in short stature
in simple nontoxic goiter
tremors and
Thyroxine (T
)
antibodies to
blood levels of
,
free
,
in euthyroid sick syndrome
,
in hyperthyroidism
in hypothyroidism
,

,
synthesis of
,
,
Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG)
,
deficiency of
Thyroxine-binding prealbumin
TIA (transient ischemic attack)
,
1651-1652
Tiagabine
Tibia, torsion of
Tibialis posterior tendinosis
394-396
,
Tibial nerve compression
,
Tibial tubercle, osteochondrosis of
Tibiofemoral joint, dislocation of
Ticarcillin
,
,
Ticarcillin-clavulanate
Tic douloureux
1754-1755
Tick bites
3321-3322
babesiosis and
1375-1376
eastern rickettsioses and
,
ehrlichioses and
,
===PAGE:4081===
Lyme disease and
1268-1272
prevention of
,
relapsing fever and
1272-1273
Rocky Mountain spotted fever and
,
1284-1285
tularemia and
,
Tick-borne encephalitis
,
,
Tick fever
1272-1273
,
1284-1285
Tick paralysis
Tick removal
3321-3322
Ticlopidine
in atherosclerosis
in coronary artery disease
in elderly
,
in myocardial infarction
Ticonazole
Tics
in children and adolescents
in Tourette's syndrome
2902-2903
Tigecycline
,
1223-1224
Tilt table testing
,
,
Tiludronate
Time-out procedure
Time zone change (jet lag) syndrome
Timolol
in arrhythmias
in elderly
in glaucoma
in hypertension
in migraine
Tinea infections
,
,
-
,
705-709
versicolor
Tinel's sign
,
Tinidazole
in amebiasis
during breastfeeding
in giardiasis
in trichomoniasis
Tinnitus
419-423
,
-
Tinzaparin
Tioconazole,
,
,
Tiotropium
in asthma
in COPD
Tipranavir
in children
TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting)
,
in portal hypertension
Tirofiban
in myocardial infarction
Tissue adhesives
Tissue factor
Tissue plasminogen activator
in pulmonary embolism
in stroke
,
Tissue transplantation
1140-1141
Tizanidine
in spinal cord injury
===PAGE:4082===
T lymphocytes (
see
Lymphocytes, T)
TMP/SMX (
see
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole)
Tobacco (
see also
Cigarette smoking)
poisoning with
Tobacco grower's lung
Tobramycin
,
1198-1201
,
,
in elderly
in infective endocarditis
in meningitis
,
neonatal dosage of
ototoxicity of
Tocopherol (
see
Vitamin E)
Toe(s)
basic calcium phosphate crystal deposition in
blue
bunion and
403-404
,
C-shaped deformity of (hammer toe)
,
fracture of
gout of
Toenail, ingrown
Togavirus infection
Toileting problems, in children
2923-2929
Toilet training
Tolazamide
Tolbutamide
in elderly
in pregnancy
Tolcapone
Tolmetin
Tolnaftate
Tolterodine
,
in elderly
Toluene poisoning
Toluol poisoning
Tomography (
see
Computed tomography; Positron emission tomography)
Tongue (
see also
Mouth)
black
cancer of
491-492
cysts of
disorders of
,
enlargement of
evaluation of
,
fissured (scrotal)
geographic
hairy
in iron deficiency
magenta
papillae of
in pellagra
strawberry
thyroid nodule of
Tonic neck reflex
Tonometry, ocular
Tonsillectomy
,
Tonsillopharyngitis
,
473-474
Tonsils
,
===PAGE:4083===
cancer of
491-492
Tooth (
see
Teeth)
Toothache
526-529
,
,
Tooth socket fracture
Tophi
,
,
Topiramate
in migraine
in seizures
Topoisomerase inhibitors
-
Topotecan
Tornwaldt's cyst
Torsades de pointes
2176-2177
,
poisoning and
Torsion
femoral head
ovarian
,
testicular
2457-2458
,
in neonate
tibial
Torticollis
antipsychotic-induced
congenital
,
spasmodic
382-383
Torulosis
1329-1330
Torus mandibularis
Torus palatinus
,
Tositumomab
,
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return
2964-2965
,
Total energy expenditure
Total parenteral nutrition
23-25
,
(
see also
Parenteral nutrition)
Tourette's syndrome
2902-2903
Toxaphene poisoning
Toxemia of pregnancy (
see
Preeclampsia)
Toxic amblyopia
623-624
,
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
,
689-691
,
,
Toxic gases
1983-1984
Toxic megacolon
,
,
2980-2981
Toxic-metabolic dysfunction
Toxic shock syndrome
,
,
1235-1236
Toxidromes
,
Toxins (
see also
Poisoning)
bacterial
,
,
nephrotoxicity of
2412-2414
,
,
,
2419-2420
neuromuscular junction disorders and
neuropathy and
screening for, in neonate
Toxocariasis
,
,
1352-1353
,
Toxoplasmosis
,
1390-1393
,
CNS
,
congenital
,
,
2823-2824
hepatic inflammation in
HIV infection and
,
ocular
in pregnancy
,
retinal
TPN (
see
Total parenteral nutrition)
Trabeculectomy
===PAGE:4084===
Trabeculoplasty
Trace minerals
,
-
deficiency of
47-55
,
-
recommended dietary allowances for
toxicity of
47-55
,
-
Trachea
bacterial infection of
,
intubation of (
see
Intubation, endotracheal)
stenosis of
tube-related injury to
tumors of
2012-2013
Tracheitis
,
Tracheobronchitis (
see also
Bronchitis)
Acinetobacter
in
HIV infection and
Tracheobronchomegaly
Tracheoesophageal fistula
,
Tracheomalacia
-
Tracheostomy
in sleep apnea
Trachoma
583-584
,
Trachyonychia
,
Traction, cervical
,
Trade and generic names of drugs
3505-3519
Trandolapril
Tranexamic acid
Tranquilizers (
see
Anxiolytics)
Transcobalamin
Transcription factors, in pharmacodynamics
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
in complex regional pain syndrome
in rehabilitation
,
Transesophageal echocardiography
in aortic dissection
in mitral regurgitation
in mitral stenosis
in thoracic aortic aneurysm
Trans fatty acids
,
,
Transferrin
blood levels of
,
undernutrition and
,
deficiency of
in iron deficiency anemia
,
receptor 2 mutation
Transfer training
Transfusion
,
-
(
see also
Blood transfusion; Exchange transfusion)
Transient global amnesia
1639-1640
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy
,
Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
,
,
1651-1652
driving and
Transient tachypnea of the newborn
,
Transitional cell carcinoma
2464-2469
,
-
,
2475-2476
,
2477-2478
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting (TIPS)
,
,
,
,
,
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
1729-1731
Transplantation
1126-1141
adrenal
bone
===PAGE:4085===
bone marrow
,
1132-1133
(
see also
Stem cell transplantation)
in aplastic anemia
hepatic veno-occlusive disease and
bronchiectasis and
cartilage
complications of
1129-1131
contraindications to
corneal
595-597
fetal cell
gene therapy in
graft-vs-host disease and
heart
1131-1132
,
(
see also
Heart, transplantation of)
heart-lung
,
immunosuppression for
1127-1128
infection after
islet cell
1139-1140
kidney
1133-1134
(
see also
Kidney[s], transplantation of)
liver
1134-1136
(
see also
Liver, transplantation of)
lung
1136-1138
,
(
see also
Lungs, transplantation of)
organs for
pancreas
1138-1140
rejection of
,
screening for
1126-1127
small-bowel
,
stem cell
1132-1133
(
see also
Stem cell transplantation)
tissue
1140-1141
vaccination and
Transposition of the great arteries
2959-2961
,
Transsexualism
1568-1570
Transthoracic echocardiography
in endocarditis
Transthyretin
,
Transurethral resection of prostate (TURP)
erectile dysfunction and
Transverse myelitis
Transverse myelopathy
Transvestic fetishism
Tranylcypromine
,
poisoning with
Trapezius muscle
Trash syndrome
Trastuzumab
,
,
Traube's sign
Trauma
3190-3192
(
see also
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation; Fracture; Injury;
and specific sites
)
in adolescent
birth
2769-2774
blunt
,
cardiac arrest and
disseminated intravascular coagulation and
diving-related
3282-3291
,
electrical
3248-3250
evaluation of
3190-3192
during foreign travel
hemorrhagic shock and
lightning-related
3250-3251
measurement of
osteonecrosis and
===PAGE:4086===
penetrating
,
pregnancy and
radiation
3252-3262
,
,
3256-3257
,
self-inflicted
sports-related
thermal
3242-3247
,
(
see also
Burns)
Traumatophobia
Travel
3437-3441
,
,
immunization for
infection prevention for
during pregnancy
vaccination for
Traveler's diarrhea
150-151
,
,
Travoprost
Trazodone
,
in elderly
poisoning with
Treacher Collins syndrome
,
Treatment threshold
3386-3387
,
,

,
Trematode infections
,
,
1355-1360
,
(
see also specific infections
)
Tremor
,
,
1772-1777
,
(
see also
Movement disorders)
antipsychotic-induced
causes of
1773-1774
,
in cerebellar disease
flapping (asterixis)
in fragile X syndrome
1762-1763
Holmes'
intention
,
,
in multiple sclerosis
in Parkinson's disease
,
,
postural
,
,
resting
,
,
syphilitic
Trench fever
,
1245-1246
Trench (immersion) foot
Trench mouth
Trendelenburg's test
Trephination
Treponema pallidum
infection (
see
Syphilis)
Tretinoin
in acne
,
,
in ichthyosis
in warts
TRH (
see
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone)
Triad syndrome
Triamcinolone
in allergy
in asthma
in cystic acne
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
Triamterene
in elderly
folate deficiency and
Triazolam
drug interactions of
in elderly
,
,
===PAGE:4087===
Triceps reflex
Triceps skinfold thickness
Trichiasis
578-579
Trichinellosis
Trichinosis
1353-1354
Trichlorfon poisoning
Trichloromethane poisoning
Trichobezoars
138-139
Trichocephaliasis
1354-1355
Trichomoniasis
,
,
1481-1482
vaginitis and
Trichophyton
infection
705-709
Trichosporon beigelii
infection
Trichrome stain
Trichuriasis
,
1354-1355
Tricuspid valve
atresia of
2961-2962
,
prolapse
regurgitation (insufficiency)
,
2191-2192
rheumatic fever and
stenosis
,
2192-2193
,
Tricyclic antidepressants
,
in dying patient
in elderly
-
,
in irritable bowel syndrome
in multiple sclerosis
in Parkinson's disease
poisoning with
,
St. John's wort interactions with
Trientine hydrochloride
Trifascicular block
Trifluoperazine
poisoning with
Triflupromazine poisoning
Trifluridine
Trigeminal nerve (5th cranial nerve)
examination of
disorders of
,
1754-1755
Trigger finger
,
Triglycerides
,
(
see also
Hyperlipidemia; Hypertriglyceridemia; Lipoprotein[s])
atherosclerosis and
in chronic pancreatitis
diuretic effects on
elevation of
,
,
screening for
hepatocyte accumulation of
211-212
,
measurement of
,
metabolism of
,
Trihexyphenidyl
,
Triiodomethane poisoning
Triiodothyronine (T
)
antibodies to
blood levels of
,
,
in euthyroid sick syndrome
,
in hyperthyroidism
,
,
in hypothyroidism
,
===PAGE:4088===
in pregnancy
,
in subacute thyroiditis
synthesis of
,
,
toxicosis with
,
(
see also
Hyperthyroidism)
Trimethadione, in pregnancy
Trimethobenzamide, in elderly
Trimethoprim
,
1221-1222
,
folate deficiency and
,
as preoperative prophylaxis
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
-
,
1221-1222
,
in HIV infection
in neutropenia
in nocardiosis
in otitis media
in pediatric HIV infection
in
Pneumocystis
pneumonia
,
Trimipramine
in sleep disorders
Triorthocresyl phosphate poisoning
Tripelennamine, in elderly
Triplet (trinucleotide) repeat disorders
Triple X syndrome
Triptans
,
Trismus
,
Trisomy 13 (trisomy D)
3001-3002
Trisomy 18 (trisomy E)
,
prenatal diagnosis of
Trisomy 21 (trisomy G)
2998-3001
,
(
see also
Down syndrome)
Trochanteric bursitis
Trochlear nerve (4th cranial nerve)
disorders of
,
,
examination of
Tromethamine
Tropheryma whippelii
infection
161-162
Trophoblast
Tropia, in children
,
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
Tropical sore
Tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-1-associated myelopathy
1812-1813
Tropical sprue
,
Troponins
,
blood levels of
in pulmonary embolism
Trospium
Trousseau's sign
,
Trousseau's syndrome
,
Trovafloxacin
,
1208-1210
T.R.U.E. (thin-layer rapid use epicutaneous) patch testing
Truncus arteriosus
2965-2966
,
Trypanophobia
Trypanosoma brucei
infection
Trypanosomiasis
African
,
,
,
1373-1375
American
,
,
1376-1377
Trypsinogen
gene for, pancreatitis and
urinary
===PAGE:4089===
Tryptophan
eosinophilia and
malabsorption of
2990-2991
requirement for
TSC
-
gene
TSH (
see
Thyroid-stimulating hormone)
Tsutsugamushi disease
,
,
1285-1286
Tubal ligation
Tube feeding
21-23
,
pleural effusion and
in protein-energy undernutrition
Tuberculin skin test
in children
Tuberculosis
1302-1314
,
adrenal
,
case management of
chest x-ray in
in children
,
drugs for
,
,
,
in elderly
extrapulmonary
,
1312-1314
fever and
gastritis in
hepatic
,
,
HIV infection and
,
hypercalcemia and
latent
lymphatic
,
maternal
measles and
mediastinitis with
meningeal
,
,
,
,
miliary
,
multidrug-resistant
,
,
,
oral involvement in
perinatal
2838-2840
pleural effusion with
prevention of
screening for
1310-1311
silicosis and
,
skin tests for
in children
vaccination against
Tuberous sclerosis
,
,
2905-2906
Tube thoracostomy
1866-1867
,
Tubular necrosis
2412-2414
,
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
2414-2422
,
acute
2414-2416
,
chronic
,
heavy metal-induced
2419-2420
infective
2378-2379
metabolic
2418-2419
myeloma-related
2421-2422
reflux
2420-2421
Tularemia
,
1264-1266
,
,

terrorist use of
Tumor (
see
Cancer
and specific tumors
)
===PAGE:4090===
Tumor antigens (markers)
,
,
1058-1059
Tumor lysis syndrome
1075-1076
in acute leukemia
in Burkitt's lymphoma
Tumor necrosis factor
antibodies to
fever and
Tumor necrosis factorα
heart failure and
immune function of
,
Tumor necrosis factorα
antagonists
in ankylosing spondylitis
in rheumatoid arthritis
,
Tumor necrosis factorβ

Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome
Tumor suppressor genes
Tungsten poisoning
Turista
150-151
Turner's syndrome
coarctation of the aorta in
skin laxity in
Turner's syndrome
3003-3005
,
TURP (
see
Transurethral resection of prostate)
Turpentine poisoning
Turtle sign
T wave
,
,
,
Two-point discrimination test
Tylomas
660-661
Tympanic membrane
barotrauma to
,
infection of
rupture of
traumatic perforation of
Tympanocentesis
Tympanometry
in children
Tympanoplasty
Tympanostomy tube
Typhoid fever
1259-1261
vaccine against
,
,
Typhus
epidemic
,
,
1282-1284
murine (endemic)
,
,
Queensland
,
rash in
,
scrub
1280-1281
,
,
1285-1286
tick
,
1284-1285
tropical
1285-1286
Tyramine, MAOI interaction with
,
Tyrosine
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors
Tyrosinemia
3012-3013
Tyrosine transaminase deficiency
Tzanck testing
,
===PAGE:4091===
U
Ubiquinone
Ulcer(s)
anal
180-181
in Behcet's syndrome
chiclero
corneal
588-589
,
,
acute vision loss and
contact lens-related
cutaneous
in dying patient
pressure (decubitus)
736-742
,
,
,
,
in pyoderma gangrenosum
rodent
venous stasis
,
,
,
eyelid
foot
in diabetes mellitus
,
,
in syphilis
genital
,
,
herpetiform
laryngeal
,
Marjolin's
nasal
oral
509-513
,
in Behcet's syndrome
,
,
in herpangina
in HIV infection
pellagra-related
peptic
133-136
(
see also
Peptic ulcer disease)
syphilitic
,
,
,
venous stasis
,
,
,
vocal cord
Ulcerative colitis
,
172-176
Crohn's disease vs
extraintestinal manifestations of
hepatic inflammation in
primary sclerosing cholangitis and
treatment of
167-169
,
175-176
uveitis and
Ulnar collateral ligament, sprain of
Ulnar nerve compression
,
Ultrasonography
Doppler (
see
Doppler ultrasonography)
in genitourinary disorders
intravascular
in liver disorders
in neurologic disorders
ophthalmologic
pelvic
,
prenatal
2600-2602
,
,
,
,
in pulmonary procedures
of thyroid gland
Ultrasound scan (
see
Ultrasonography)
Ultrasound therapy
,
Ultraviolet keratitis
===PAGE:4092===
Ultraviolet radiation
burns with
cancer and
sun exposure and
Ultraviolet therapy
in atopic dermatitis
in itching
in psoriasis
in vitiligo
Umbilical cord
care of
clamping of
compression of
malformations of
prolapse of
Umbilical cord vein, percutaneous sampling from
Umbilicus, hernia of
Unconsciousness (
see
Coma; Stupor)
Undecylenate/undecylenate acid
Undernutrition
9-19
(
see also
Nutrition)
aging and
,
alcohol use and
blindness (toxic amblyopia) and
623-624
carnitine deficiency and
18-19
in children
diagnosis of
11-13
,
,
,
,
drug interactions with
,
,
fad diets and
hospitalization and
in infant
,
keratomalacia and
laboratory tests in
nutritional support for
20-26
pregnancy and
preoperative
pressure ulcers and
protein-energy
14-18
,
risk factors for
9-11
vegetarian diet and
Undulant fever
1246-1247
Uniparental disomy
Unna boot
,
,
,
Unoprostone
Upper airway resistance syndrome
Upper arm circumference
,
Upper respiratory infection (URI)
,
1404-1405
bronchitis with
1922-1923
cough
,
enteroviral
,
sinusitis and
Uranium
Urate oxidase
Urea, topical
Urea breath test
Urea cycle disorders
3015-3016
Ureaplasma urealyticum
infection
1468-1470
Urease test
===PAGE:4093===
Uremia
anemia and
bleeding and
neurologic manifestations of (uremic flap)
pericarditis and
pleural effusion and
skin manifestations of (uremic frost)
Ureter
cancer of
2475-2476
congenital anomalies of
2983-2985
dilation of, pregnancy and
duplication of
ectopic orifices of
obstruction of
,
pain in
prolapse of
removal of
retrocaval
scoping of
stenosis of
trauma to
Ureterocele
Ureteroscopy
Ureterosigmoidostomy
Urethra
abscess of
anomalies of
2985-2986
cancer of
-
,
2477-2478
dilation of
2317-2318
diverticulum of
2458-2459
infection of (
see
Urethritis)
obstruction of
2365-2369
,
prolapse of
2529-2531
stenosis of
stricture of
2317-2318
,
2458-2459
,
trauma to
,
3241-3242
valves of
Urethritis
,
,
gonococcal
1471-1474
nongonococcal
,
1468-1470
reactive arthritis and
Urethrocele
2529-2531
Urge incontinence
,
,
-
Urgency
URI (
see
Upper respiratory infection)
Uric acid (urate) (
see also
Hyperuricemia)
crystals of
,
,
,
renal deposition of
2418-2419
in gout
,
,
normal
,
,
Uricase
Uridine diphosphate galactose 4-epimerase deficiency
Uridine monophosphate synthase deficiency
Urinalysis
,
in inborn errors of metabolism
in nephrotic syndrome
in postinfectious glomerulonephritis
===PAGE:4094===
routine
in urinary calculi
Urinary incontinence
2352-2362
,
-
in children
2923-2928
,
,
,
established
,
nocturnal
2923-2928
,
,
reflex (unconscious)
refractory
transient
,
-
Urinary retention
2362-2363
postoperative
Urinary tract (
see also
Urination; Urine)
calculi of
2369-2372
,
cancer of
2464-2478
,
-
congenital anomalies of
2982-2988
duplication of
infection of
2373-2381
asymptomatic
bacterial
2373-2379
in children
2844-2847
,
complicated
cranberry and
dysuria and
2318-2320
,
in elderly
fungal
2380-2381
indwelling catheter and
localization of
neonatal
neurogenic bladder and
nitrofurantoin in
pregnancy and
,
,
,
2650-2651
prevention of
2377-2378
TMP/SMX in
transient incontinence and
uncomplicated
urine testing for
,
,
,
obstruction of
2365-2369
,
Urination
,
in benign prostatic hyperplasia
,
frequency of
2337-2339
,
incontinence and (
see
Urinary incontinence)
by neonate
pain with
2318-2320
,
postpartum
training for
,
Urine
acidification of
air in
,
albumin in
,
,
,
alkalinization of
,
,
,
,
,
amino acids in
bilirubin in
blood in
,
,
2321-2324
,
(
see also
Hematuria)
calcium in
casts in
,
,
cells in
,
,
collection of
,
2316-2317
,
===PAGE:4095===
in children
color of
,
,
,
inborn errors of metabolism and
concentration of
continent cutaneous diversion of
crystals in
,
,
culture of
,
cytologic analysis of
,
,
dark
electrolytes in
eosinophils in
,
epithelial cells in
examination of (
see
Urinalysis)
glucose in
,
2425-2426
involuntary loss of (
see
Urinary incontinence)
ketones in
microscopic analysis of
,
,
,
neonatal
odor of
inborn errors of metabolism and
osmolality of
,
,
,
,
output of
decreased
2252-2253
,
high (polyuria)
2324-2327
,
renal failure and
in shock
peak flow rate of
pH of
,
protein in
,
,
2330-2331
,
(
see also
Proteinuria)
excretion of
pseudocasts in
red blood cells in
,
retention of
2362-2363
,
postoperative
sediment of
,
semen in
sodium in
,
,
,
in ascites
specific gravity of
tests of, reference values for
3502-3503
vesicoureteral reflux of
,
,
2420-2421
volume of
excessive
2324-2327
,
obstructive uropathy and
residual
,
,
white blood cells in
Urinothorax
Urobilinogen
,
Urocortin
Urodynamic testing
,
Urogenital sinus
Urography
anterograde
computed tomography
intravenous
,
retrograde
Urokinase
===PAGE:4096===
in pulmonary embolism
Urolithiasis
,
2369-2372
Uropathy, obstructive
2365-2369
,
Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase deficiency
,
816-818
,
Uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase deficiency
,
Ursodeoxycholic acid
in cholesterol gallstones
in primary biliary cirrhosis
Urticaria
,
,
639-644
in angioedema
causes of
-
drug-induced
solar
Urticaria pigmentosa
,
Uta
Uterus
abnormalities of
blood accumulation in
cancer of
,
2573-2574
screening for
cyclic bleeding from
2499-2500
,
(
see also
Menstruation)
dysfunctional bleeding from
2510-2513
examination of
fibroids (leiomyomas) of
,
,
2536-2538
,
in pregnancy
infection of
,
,
2688-2689
intrauterine device perforation of
inverted
oxytocin effects on
postpartum hemorrhage from
2680-2681
postpartum involution of
prolapse of
,
2531-2532
examination for
removal of (
see
Hysterectomy)
rupture of
,
,
,
sarcoma of
2573-2574
trophoblastic disease of
2574-2576
,
Uveitis
,
,
,
608-612
ankylosing spondylitis and
,
infectious
610-611
,
traumatic
tubulointerstitial nephritis with
Uveoparotid fever
Uvula
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
Uvuloplasty
U wave
,
,
===PAGE:4097===
V
Vaccination
1170-1180
,
-
,
-
(
see also specific infections
)
for adults
1170-1180
,
-
,
-
against cancer
for children
,
-
,
2720-2721
,
-
,
combination
in compromised host
contraindications to
,
-
,
in COPD
in diabetes mellitus
during pregnancy
,
,
egg allergy and
in elderly
encephalitis and
for foreign travel
,
HIV infection and
,
,
,
human papillomavirus infection and
,
in Kawasaki disease
postpartum
posttransplantation
risks of
schedule for
2718-2719
,
2720-2721
,
-
after splenectomy
985-986
for travel
in tuberculosis
viral
Vaccinia
Vaccinia immune globulin
,
VACTERL syndrome
,
Vacuum extractor, for delivery
,
2676-2677
Vagina
abnormal bleeding from
,
2490-2493
,
,
in children
during pregnancy
,
-
,
,
2620-2622
,
,
,
anomalies of
atrophy of
,
,
incontinence and
,
Bartholin's gland cyst of
2532-2533
cancer of
2580-2581
,
Candida
infection of
,
-
,
,
,
cyclic changes in
discharge from
2493-2497
,
-
,
,
,
postpartum
foreign body in,
-
infection of
,
2541-2545
,
,
(
see also
Vaginitis)
pH of
prolapse of
,
2531-2532
pruritus of
2493-2497
,
-
trichomonal infection of
,
ulcers of
Vaginal cones
Vaginal foam
Vaginal ring
,
Vaginismus
2526-2527
,
Vaginitis
2541-2545
,
===PAGE:4098===
atrophic
,
,
incontinence and
,
candidal
,
,
inflammatory
,
postmenopausal
pregnancy and
trichomonal
,
urinary tract infection vs
Vaginosis, bacterial
,
2543-2544
in pregnancy
Vagotomy
Vagus nerve (10th cranial nerve)
disorders of
,
stimulation of, in seizures
Valacyclovir
in chickenpox
in erythema multiforme
in herpes simplex virus infection
1419-1420
Valerian
,
Valganciclovir
in cytomegalovirus infection
Valine
Valley fever
1327-1329
Valproate
in bipolar disorder
in migraine
in pain
poisoning with
in pregnancy
in seizures
,
,
tremors and
Valsalva maneuver
blood pressure with
heart murmur with
heart rate with
middle ear ventilation with
Valsalva ratio
Valsartan
Valvitis, rheumatic
Valvotomy
,
Valvular heart disease
2179-2193
(
see also specific valvular diseases
)
in Marfan syndrome
rheumatic
,
,
Valvular prostheses
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
endocarditis with
in mitral regurgitation
in tricuspid regurgitation
Van Buchem's syndrome
Vancomycin
,
,
1224-1225
enterococcus resistance to
in infective endocarditis
-
in meningitis
,
,
,
,
in methicillin-resistant staphylococcal infection
,
neonatal dosage of
ototoxicity of
===PAGE:4099===
as preoperative prophylaxis
-
Vanillylmandelic acid
,
in neuroblastoma
Vanishing bile duct syndrome
Vanishing testes syndrome
Vardenafil
drug interactions of
Varenicline, for smoking cessation
,
Varicella-zoster immune globulin
,
Varicella-zoster virus infection
,
,
1412-1416
,
(
see also
Herpes zoster virus infection)
herpes simplex virus infection vs
HIV infection and
ophthalmic
590-591
oral
pulmonary
,
shingles
1420-1421
uveal
vaccine against
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
in herpes zoster
in pediatric HIV infection
,
Varices
bleeding from
,
pregnancy and
esophageal
103-104
,
gastric
portal hypertension and
rectal
Varicocele
,
Varicose veins
2233-2234
Variola (
see
Smallpox)
Vasa nervorum
Vasa previa
,
,
Vascular access
2247-2250
Vascular ectasia
Vascular injury
Vascular resistance
aging-related changes in
Vascular spider
Vasculitis
312-331
,
,
,
(
see also
Arteritis)
cerebral
cutaneous (leukocytoclastic)
318-319
joint pain in,
syphilitic
Vasectomy
pain after
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
,
Vasodilators
in heart failure
in hypertension
,
,
in shock
Vasomotor instability
,
Vasopressin (
see also
Antidiuretic hormone)
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
,
in central diabetes insipidus
deficiency of
772-775
,
in gastrointestinal bleeding
infection-related production of
===PAGE:4100===
Vasospasm
cerebral
,
of hands (Raynaud's syndrome)
2221-2223
,
Vasovagal syncope
,
,
,
VATS (video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery)
,
Vaughan-Williams classification
-
VDRL (Venereal Disease Research Laboratory) test
1478-1480
,
Vecuronium
in pediatric ventilation
in tetanus
Vegetarian diet
,
Vegetative state
1665-1667
,
(
see also
Coma)
Veins (
see also
Venous)
clotting in (
see
Venous thrombosis)
deep
inflammation of (
see
Phlebitis; Thrombophlebitis)
insufficiency of (
see
Venous insufficiency)
jugular
,
(
see also
Jugular veins)
physical examination of
2019-2020
spider
varicose
2233-2234
Velocardiofacial syndrome
Velopharyngeal insufficiency
472-473
Vena cava filter
,
Vena cava syndrome
Venereal disease (
see
Sexually transmitted diseases
and specific diseases
)
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test
1478-1480
,
Venereal warts
1470-1471
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
,
,
Venlafaxine
,
poisoning with
Venography
in deep venous thrombosis
magnetic resonance
,
in renal vein thrombosis
Venom
insect
,
,
snake
3314-3319
spider
Veno-occlusive disease, hepatic
262-263
Venous cutdown
Venous hum
,
Venous insufficiency
,
2231-2233
,
cutaneous ulcers in
edema and
stasis dermatitis in
671-672
Venous stasis dermatitis
671-672
,
Venous stasis ulcers
,
,
,
Venous thrombosis
2224-2231
,
,
,
(
see also
Pulmonary embolism; Thrombophlebitis)
genetic disorders and
mesenteric
,
superficial
Ventilation
2279-2284
,
(
see also
Pulmonary function testing)
in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure
in ARDS
in asthma
bag-valve-mask
===PAGE:4101===
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
,
in COPD
,
in cystic fibrosis
discontinuation of
2291-2292
in near drowning
lung injury and
minute
neonatal
2866-2869
,
in meconium aspiration syndrome
in persistent pulmonary hypertension of newborn
pneumonia and
,
1929-1932
pressure-cycled
in shock
in status asthmaticus
in trauma
volume-controlled
Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch
,
Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan
in pulmonary embolism
,
Ventilatory failure
2288-2291
,
Ventricle(s)
left
aneurysm of
failure of (
see
Heart failure)
in heart failure
,
in hypertension
hypertrophy of
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
electrocardiogram in
,
in mitral regurgitation
palpation in
hypoplasia of
2962-2964
,
infarction of (
see
Myocardial infarction)
pressure in
pulmonary artery origin from
2959-2961
,
radionuclide imaging of
2062-2063
,
right
double
in heart failure
,
hypertrophy of
,
,
2132-2134
,
,
infarction of
,
,
pressure in
,
single
Ventricular ectopic beats, myocardial infarction and
Ventricular failure (
see
Heart failure)
Ventricular fibrillation
,
,
,
in children
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator in
,
myocardial infarction and
post-resuscitation
Ventricular premature beats (contractions)
heart failure and
Ventricular septal defect
,
2952-2953
,
in tetralogy of Fallot
2958-2959
Ventricular shunt
Ventricular tachycardia
,
2175-2177
,
,
,
,
===PAGE:4102===
heart failure and
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator in
,
myocardial infarction and
post-resuscitation
pulseless
,
in children
radiofrequency ablation in
Ventriculitis, neonatal
,
Ventriculography
radionuclide
2062-2063
,
Ventriculostomy
Verapamil
in arrhythmias
in diabetic nephropathy
in elderly
,
,
in hypertension
in migraine
poisoning with
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis
584-585
Vernix caseosa
Verruca vulgaris
715-718
of lips
Verrucous carcinoma, oral
Verrucous dermatitis
1334-1335
Verruga peruana
,
Vertebrae (
see
Spinal column)
Vertebral arteries
,
Vertebrobasilar insufficiency
Vertebrobasilar stroke syndrome
Vertebroplasty
Vertigo
423-429
,
-
in Meniere's disease
445-446
positional
442-443
,
,
Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Vesicle
Vesicoureteral reflux
,
,
2420-2421
in children
2984-2985
urinary tract infection with
,
,
Vestibular apparatus
aminoglycoside toxicity to
1199-1201
caloric testing of,
,
function of
minocycline toxicity to
rehabilitation of
Vestibular neurectomy
Vestibular neuronitis
,
Vestibular schwannoma
441-442
Vestibulitis
nasal
vulvar
2527-2529
Vestibulocochlear nerve (8th cranial nerve)
,
,
,
1747-1748
(
see also
Cranial nerves,
th
[auditory, vestibulocochlear])
Vestibulodynia
2528-2529
Veterans Health Administration
Vibration sense
Vibrio
, noncholera
1249-1250
Vibrio alginolyticus
infection
===PAGE:4103===
Vibrio cholerae
infection
,
,
,
1248-1250
vaccine against
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
infection
,
Vibrio vulnificus
infection
Vidarabine
,
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
,
Video capsule endoscopy
Vigabatrin
Vildagliptin
Vinblastine
in pregnancy
Vincent's infection (angina)
Vincristine
poisoning with
in pregnancy
Vineyard sprayer's lung
Vinorelbine
Vinyl chloride, cancer and
Violence (
see also
Aggression)
in children and adolescents
,
3034-3035
domestic
as psychiatric emergency
,
schizophrenia and
Viomycin, ototoxicity of
VIP (
see
Vasoactive intestinal peptide)
Vipoma
,
Viral infection
1394-1400
,
,
-
,
(
see also specific viruses and sites
)
arthritis and
,
cancer and
,
,
chronic fatigue syndrome and
CSF in
culture in
cutaneous
,
hepatic
,
neurologic
,
-
neutropenia and
respiratory
,

1402-1411
,
,
Reye's syndrome and
,
,
2937-2939
susceptibility testing in
terrorist use of
transfusion-transmitted
,
Western blot test for
Virilism/virilization (
see also
Hirsutism)
adrenal
796-797
,
2889-2891
amenorrhea and
,
hirsutism and
ovarian tumor and
Virulence factors
Viruses (
see
Viral infection
and specific viruses
)
Visceral abscess
117-119
,
Visceral hypersensitivity
Visceral larva migrans
1352-1353
,
Viscocanalostomy
Vision
acuity of
aging-related changes in
blind spot in
===PAGE:4104===
blurred
547-550
,
,
,
color
double
550-553
,
-
examination of
,
in children
,
driving and
at high altitude
loss of
(
see also
Blindness)
acute
541-545
,
542-543
,
glaucoma and
scleritis and
screening for
refractive errors of
,
570-574
,
contact lenses for
571-573
surgery for
573-574
Visual evoked responses
Visual fields
defects of
in glaucoma
in pituitary lesions
testing of
Vitamin(s)
(
see also specific vitamins
)
in alcoholic liver disease
drug interactions with
,
fat-soluble
,
poisoning with
in protein-energy undernutrition
recommended daily intakes of
sources of
-
total parenteral nutrition and
water-soluble
,
Vitamin A (retinol)
deficiency of
,
,
,
34-35
keratomalacia and
malabsorption and
measles and
prenatal
recommended dietary allowance of
sources of
toxicity of
,
35-36
Vitamin B
(thiamin)
deficiency of
,
,
,
33-34
malabsorption and
Wernicke's encephalopathy with
1522-1523
in hyperemesis gravidarum
recommended dietary allowance of
sources of
Vitamin B
(riboflavin)
deficiency of
,
,
,
,
malabsorption and
recommended dietary allowance of
sources of
Vitamin B
(pyridoxine)
deficiency of
,
,
,
36-37
,
hyperhomocysteinemia and
isoniazid-associated
===PAGE:4105===
malabsorption and
in homocystinuria
in isoniazid poisoning
in pregnancy
recommended dietary allowance of
sources of
in tetanus
toxicity of
,
Vitamin B
(cobalamin)
blood levels of
deficiency of
,
,
,
37-39
,
anemia and
,
932-933
autoimmune metaplastic atrophic gastritis and
bacterial overgrowth syndrome and
hyperhomocysteinemia and
in infant
malabsorption and
,
postgastrectomy
Schilling test for
vegetarian diet and
malabsorption of
recommended dietary allowance of
sources of
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
blood levels of
deficiency of
,
,
40-41
gingivitis in
iron deficiency anemia and
malabsorption and
drug interactions with
in iron replacement therapy
recommended dietary allowance of
sources of
toxicity of
Vitamin D (calciferol)
blood levels of
for breastfed infant
calcium metabolism and
,
in chronic hypocalcemia
in chronic renal failure
deficiency of
,
,
41-43
celiac sprue and
drug-induced
hypocalcemia and
malabsorption and
drug interactions with
in hypophosphatemic rickets
in osteoporosis
recommended adequate intake of
sources of
toxicity of
,
,
hypercalcemia and
Vitamin E (tocopherol)
in Alzheimer's disease
in breast milk
deficiency of
,
44-45
abetalipoproteinemia and
===PAGE:4106===
drug interactions with
lung cancer and
recommended dietary allowance of
sources of
toxicity of
,
Vitamin K (menaquinone, phylloquinone)
anticoagulant reversal with
at birth
blood levels of
deficiency of
,
,
,
,
malabsorption and
in pregnancy
recommended adequate intake of
sources of
toxicity of
Vitiligo
,
,
,
720-721
,
in Addison's disease
Vitreous
aminoglycoside injection of
detachment of
examination of
hemorrhage from
,
inflammation of
Vocal cords
cancer of
contact ulcers of
dysfunction of
,
-
examination of
irritant-associated dysfunction of
medialization of
nodules of
,
485-486
paralysis of
,
484-485
polyps of
,
485-486
spasms of
translaryngeal tube injury to
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
Voice
change in
,
hot-potato
professional
vocal cord problems and
Voiding (
see
Urination; Urine)
Voiding cystourethrography
in children
Volar flexor tenosynovitis
,
Volatile hydride poisoning
Volatile nitrites
Volatile solvents
1531-1532
Volume-controlled ventilation
Volume depletion
822-823
,
Volume overload
blood transfusion and
protein-energy undernutrition treatment and
total parenteral nutrition and
Volvulus
,
Vomiting
79-81
aspiration and (
see
Pneumonia, aspiration)
===PAGE:4107===
bilious, in infant
blood with
(
see also
Bleeding, gastrointestinal)
in bulimia nervosa
cancer therapy and
causes of
-
in children
2746-2749
,
2747-2748
drugs for
in dying patient
3485-3486
enamel defects with
esophageal perforation with
Mallory-Weiss syndrome with
metabolic alkalosis and
migraine and
pregnancy and
2615-2618
,
,
,
,
2667-2668
Von Hippel-Lindau disease
,
,
Von Recklinghausen's disease
,
,
2903-2904
,
Von Willebrand's disease
962-963
,
Von Willebrand's factor
,
,
in hemophilia
in thrombocytopenia
Voriconazole
,
Voyeurism
Vulva
cancer of
2581-2582
,
HIV infection and
Candida
infection of
,
-
cysts of
endometriomas of
inflammation of (
see
Vulvitis)
pain in
2527-2529
pruritus of
ulcers of
Vulvar vestibulitis
2528-2529
Vulvitis
chemical
noninfectious
Vulvovaginitis
,
===PAGE:4108===
W
Waardenburg's syndrome
Waist circumference, obesity and
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia
,
1027-1028
Waldeyer's ring
Walker
,
,
Walking (
see also
Gait)
aids for
,
,
exercises for
support for
Wandering atrial pacemaker
Warfare, biological
1164-1165
Warfarin
antibiotic interaction with
during breastfeeding
in coronary artery disease
in deep venous thrombosis
dental procedures and
dietary supplement interactions with
-
,
-
drug interactions with
-
1919,
in elderly
,
food interactions with
pharmacogenetics of
poisoning with
in pregnancy
,
,
in pulmonary embolism
,
in stroke
vitamin E deficiency and
vitamin K interaction with
Warm antibody hemolytic anemia
936-939
,
Warming therapy
,
Warm shock
Warts
715-718
,
,
callus and corn vs
filiform
,
flat
,
genital
,
1470-1471
of lips
periungual
plantar
,
Washerwoman's sprain
Wasting disorders
(
see also
Undernutrition)
Water
body
820-821
,
,
,
,
,
,
(
see also
Fluids)
in children
,
deficit of
829-831
,
(
see also
Dehydration; Hyponatremia)
excess of
823-829
,
(
see also
Hyponatremia)
homeostasis of
loss of
osmolality of
total
chlorination of
dietary
in acute renal failure
in central diabetes insipidus
===PAGE:4109===
for children
,
in chronic renal failure
exercise and
at high altitude
in hot weather
intake of
,
psychogenic drinking of
,
requirements for
environmental, contamination of
fluoridation of
replacement of (
see
Fluid therapy)
Water bug bites
Water deprivation test
,
,
,
Water-hammer pulse
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
,
Watermelon stomach
Waxy casts
WBCs (
see
White blood cells)
WDHA (watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and achlorhydria) syndrome
,
Weakness
1597-1606
,
1599-1600
,
Weber-Christian disease
Weber's test
Wegener's granulomatosis
329-331
,
,
,
Weight
(
see also
Obesity)
contraceptive-related gain in
,
failure to gain
2931-2934
,
,
ideal, tidal volume calculation and
loss of
dental problems and
in diabetes prevention
in hypertension
in neonate
,
maternal
of neonate
,
postgastrectomy
protein-energy undernutrition and
,
undernutrition and
Weil's syndrome
Wen
Wenckebach phenomenon
Werdnig-Hoffman disease
Wermer's syndrome
909-912
,
Werner's syndrome
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
,
,
,
Wernicke's encephalopathy
1522-1523
Westermark's sign
Western blot test
Western equine encephalitis
,
West Nile virus infection
,
,
,
transfusion-transmitted
Wet lung syndrome
Wharton's duct
blockage of
469-470
Wheals
,
639-644
,
-
(
see also
Urticaria)
Wheel bug bites
Wheelchairs
Wheezing
,
1847-1850
,
,
===PAGE:4110===
Whiff test
Whipple's disease
,
161-162
rheumatoid arthritis vs
Whipple's operation
,
199-200
Whipple's triad
Whipworm infection
1354-1355
White blood cells (
see also specific cell types
)
count of
in ascites
in CSF
,
in myelofibrosis
in neonatal sepsis
in occult bacteremia
in pediatric urinary tract infection
in pregnancy
reduction in
948-954
,
(
see also
Lymphocytopenia; Neutropenia)
in septic shock
esterase of
immune function of
therapeutic removal of
in thrombocytopenia
,
urinary
,
White matter
White sponge nevus
,
Whitlow, herpetic
,
Whole-bowel irrigation, in poisoning
,
,
Whooping cough
1254-1256
vaccine against
,
,
Wickham's striae
Wide excision surgery, in breast cancer
Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome
Wild cherry syrup, poisoning with
Williams-Campbell syndrome
Williams syndrome
,
,
,
Wilms' tumor
2945-2946
Wilson's disease
,
,
Wind-up phenomenon
Wine grower's lung
Winterbottom's sign
Winter's formula
,
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
,
,
,
Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome
from drugs
,
in neonate
2799-2800
,
perioperative
Withdrawal, as contraception
Wohlfart-Kugelberg-Welander disease
Wolff-Chaikoff effect
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
,
,
,
accessory AV pathway in
atrial fibrillation and
2172-2173
,
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome
Wolhynia fever
,
1245-1246
Wolman's disease
,
Wood alcohol poisoning
Wood pulp worker's disease
Wood's light
===PAGE:4111===
Wood's screw maneuver
Wood trimmer's disease
Woodworker's lung
Word recognition score
Worms
,
,
1342-1355
CNS infection with
1728-1729
Wounds
bite
cleansing of
closure of
,
,
,
debridement of
evaluation of
3193-3195
healing of
,
infection of
,
(
see also specific organisms
)
irrigation of
myiasis of
postoperative
Wright's stain
Wrist
avascular necrosis of
390-391
exercises for
,
fracture of
ganglion cyst of
median nerve compression at
,
pain in
range of motion of
splints for
,
ulnar nerve compression at
Writer's cramp
WT1
gene
Wuchereria bancrofti
infection
,
1346-1347
===PAGE:4112===
X
Xanthelasma
Xanthine oxidase deficiency
Xanthines
Xanthochromia
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis
Xanthomas
,
,
Xanthomatosis, cerebrotendinous
X chromosome
,
(
see also
Genetic)
abnormalities of
3002-3005
,
3376-3377
,
inactivation of
,
47,XXX syndrome
48,XXXX syndrome
49,XXXXX syndrome
47,XYY syndrome
Xenograft
(
see also
Transplantation)
Xeroderma (xerosis)
Xerophthalmia
vitamin A deficiency and
Xerosis
Xerostomia
,
513-516
radiation-induced
,
in Sjogren's syndrome
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy
X-linked agammaglobulinemia
,
,
1107-1108
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome
,
,
X-rays
(
see also
Radiation; Radiation therapy; Radiography)
Xylene poisoning
Xylitol
Xylose absorption test
,
,
Xylose breath test
,
===PAGE:4113===
Y
Yaws
1266-1267
forest
Y chromosome
(
see also
Genetic)
abnormalities of
Yeast infection (
see also
Fungal infection)
vaginal
,
,
Yellow fever
,
,
hepatic inflammation in
vaccine against
,
,
Yellow nail syndrome
,
pleural effusion in
Yellow skin (
see
Jaundice)
Yersinia
infection
,
1256-1257
Y. enterocolitica
infection
Y. pestis
infection
Yew poisoning
Yips
Yo, antibodies to
Yolk sac tumor
===PAGE:4114===
Z
Zafirlukast
Zalcitabine
in children
Zaleplon
Zanamivir
in influenza
,
ZAP-70 (zeta-associated protein 70) deficiency
,
Zavanelli maneuver
Zellweger syndrome
,
Zenker's diverticulum
Zidovudine
,
in children
Zileuton
in asthma
Zinc
,
,
3431-3432
in common cold
deficiency of
,
,
in dermatophytoses
poisoning with
,
recommended dietary allowances for
reference values for
toxicity of
,
copper deficiency and
in Wilson's disease
Zinc oxide
gelatin formulation of
,
Zinc pyrithione
Zinc shakes
Zipper injury
,
Ziprasidone
in agitation
in bipolar disorder
poisoning with
in schizophrenia
Zoledronate
,
,
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
,
,
200-201
,
mastocytosis vs
Menetrier's disease vs
peptic ulcer disease vs
Zolmitriptan
Zolpidem
,
Zonisamide
Zoonotic diseases, cutaneous
Zoophobia
Zoster (
see
Herpes zoster virus infection)
Zygomycosis
